Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/003462/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In memory of Sw. Pujya Gurudev Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj SDRAMA Coordinator and
Chief Editor Yuvacharya Shri Madhukar Muni Nishimitra (Containing Mil Chalva -
Discussion - Commentary - Appendix) in Education International
Foceroyalesponding indibraryars

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sva0pUjya gurudeva zrI jorAvaramala jI mahArAja kI smRti meM Ayojita SDRAMA
saMyojaka evaM pradhAna sampAdaka yuvAcArya zrI madhukara muni nizImitra mila
calavA-vivecana-TippaNa-paziSTa yukta) in Education International
Foceroyalesponding indibraryars

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first part of the *Jivajivaabhigam Sutra*, published by the Abhimat Agam
Prakashan Samiti, Byawar, has been received. The present edition is a voluminous
one. Studying it has brought immense joy.  Firstly, there is the pure original
text, followed by an authentic interpretation based on commentaries and
annotations. This helps the reader understand the original meaning clearly. By
studying it, even an ordinary student can easily understand the profound secrets
of *dravyaanuyoag*. The present edition has a special feature. The research-
oriented introduction and the editor's deep thinking, Agamic scholarship, and
editing skills are evident everywhere. Hearty congratulations for this
delightful endeavor.  Dr. Suvratamuni Shastri, M.A. (Hindi, Sanskrit) Ph.D. Jain
Sabha Matlauda (Haryana) Frivateaspersonaturonly www.jainelibrary

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 abhimata Agama prakAzana samiti byAvara dvArA prakAzita jIvAjIvAbhigama sUtra
kA prathama bhAga prApta huaa| prastuta saMskaraNa eka vizAlakAya saMskaraNa
hai| isakA adhyayana karane para hArdika AnandAnubhUti huii| sarvaprathama
zuddha mUla pATha hai, tatpazcAt vRtti evaM TIkAoM para prAdhArita prAmANika
vyAkhyA kI gaI hai| jisase pAThaka ko mUla kA spaSTa arthabodha ho jAtA hai|
isake adhyayana se sAdhAraNa adhyetA bhI dravyAnuyoga ke gambhIra rahasya
sugamatA se samajha sakatA hai  /  prastuta saMskaraNa kI apanI eka vizeSatA hai
/  gaveSaNAtmaka prastAvanA aura sampAdaka kA gahana cintana, Agama-vaidRSya
evaM sampAdanakauzala sarvatra prasphuTita ho rahA hai| isa manorama udyama hetu
hArdika vardhApanA svIkRta ho| DaoN. suvratamuni zAstrI, ema0 e0 (hindI,
saMskRta) pI-eca0 DI0 jaina sabhA matalauDA (hari0) Frivateaspersonaturonly
www.jainelibrary

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
ॐ Aham Jinagam-Granthamala: Pratha-32 A [Organized in the auspicious memory of
Paramashraddhey Gurudev Pujya Shri Joravarmalji Maharaj] Nishisuthra [Original
Text, Hindi Translation-Commentary-Notes] Inspiration (Self) Up-Promoter
Shasanasevi Swami Shri Brajlalji Maharaj Primary Organizer and Chief Editor
(Self) Yuvacharya Shri Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar' Translator-Commentator-
Editor Anuyog-Pravartak Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji M. 'Kamal' _ Geetarth Shri Tilok
Muniji M. Publisher Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar (Rajasthan)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 OM ahaM jinAgama-granthamAlA : prathA-32 a [paramazraddhaya gurudeva pUjya zrI
jorAvaramalajI mahArAja kI puNyasmRti meM Ayojita] nizIthasUtra [mUlapATha,
hindI anuvAda-vivecana-TippaNa yukta] preraNA (sva.) upapravartaka zAsanasevI
svAmI zrI brajalAlajI mahArAja prAdya saMyojaka tathA pradhAna sampAdaka (sva0)
yuvAcArya zrI mizrImalajI mahArAja 'madhukara' anuvAdaka-vivecaka-sampAdaka
anuyoga-pravartaka muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma0 'kamala' _ gItArtha zrI tiloka
munijI ma. prakAzaka zrI AgamaprakAzana samiti, byAvara (rAjasthAna)

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam-Prasthamala: Granthank 32 A Jinagam-Pranthamala: Granthank 32 A -
Direction Sadhvi Shri Umravakuvar 'Archana' 0 Editorial Board Anuyogapravartka
Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' Upadhyay Shri Devendramuni Shastri Shri
Ratnamuni 0 Motivator Muni Shri Vinaykumar 'Bheem' Shri Mahendramuni 'Dinakar' 0
First Edition Veer Nirvan San. 2517 Vikram San. 2048 July 1991 AD Publisher Shri
Agam Prakashan Samiti Shri Braj-Madhukar Smriti Bhavan, Pipaliya Bazaar, Byaver
(Rajasthan) Pin-305901 - Printer Satyachandra Shukla Vaidik Yantraalaya,
Kesargunj, Ajmer-305001 Price Peace Price 74 )

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jinAgama-prasthamAlA : granthAGka 32 a jinAgama-pranthamAlA: granthAGka 32 a -
nirdezana sAdhvI zrI umarAvakuvara 'arcanA' 0 sampAdakamaNDala anuyogapravartaka
muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI 'kamala' upAcArya zrI devendramuni zAstrI zrI ratanamuni
0 sampreraka muni zrI vinayakumAra 'bhIma' zrI mahendramuni 'dinakara' 0
prathama saMskaraNa vIra nirvANa saM0 2517 vikrama saM0 2048 julAI 1991 I0
prakAzaka zrI AgamaprakAzana samiti zrI braja-madhukara smRti bhavana, pIpaliyA
bAjAra, byAvara (rAjasthAna) pina-305901 - mudraka satIzacandra zukla vaidika
yaMtrAlaya, kesaragaMja, ajamera-305001 mUlya pIsakca mUlya 74 )

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Published at the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj NISHITHA SUTRA [ Original Text with Variant Readings, Hindi Version,
Notes, and Annotations etc. ] Proximity (Late) Up-pravartaka Shasansevi Rev.
Swami Sri Brijlalji Maharaj Convener & Founder Editor (Late) Yuvacharya Sri
Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar' Translator-Annotator-Editor Anuyoga Pravartaka
Muni Shri Kanhaiya lalji 'Kamal' Geetarth Shri Tilokmuniji Publishers Shri Agam
Prakashan Samiti Beawar (Raj.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Pablished at the Holy Remembrance occasion of Rev. Guru Shri Joravarmalji
Maharaj NISHITHA SUTRA [ Original Text with Variant Readings, Hindi Version,
Notes, and Annotations etc. ] Proximity (Late) Up-pravartaka Shasansevi Rev.
Swami Sri Brijlalji Maharaj Convener & Founder Editor (Late) Yuvacharya Sri
Mishrimalji Maharaj 'Madhukar' Translator-Annotator-Editor Anuyoga Pravartaka
Muni Shri Kanhaiya lalji 'Kamal' Geetarth Shri Tilokmuniji Publishers Shri Agam
Prakashan Samiti Beawar (Raj.)

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 32 A Direction Sadhwi Shri Umrav Kunwar
'Archana' Board of Editors Anuyoga-pravartaka Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal'
Upacharya Sri Devendra Muni Shastri Sri Ratan Muni Promotor Muni Sri Vinayakumar
'Bhima Sri Mahendra Muni 'Dinakar First Edition Vir-Nirvana Samvat 2517 Vikram
Samvat 2048, July 1991. Publishers Sri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Brij-Madhukar
Smriti Bhawan, Pipalia Bazar, Beawar (Raj.) Pin 305 901 O Printer Satish Chandra
Shukla Vedic Yantralaya Kaiserganj, Ajmer Price f Rs:1843 gra 751

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Jinagam Granthmala Publication No. 32 A Direction Sadhwi Shri Umrav Kunwar
'Archana' Board of Editors Anuyoga-pravartaka Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal'
Upacharya Sri Devendra Muni Shastri Sri Ratan Muni Promotor Muni Sri Vinayakumar
'Bhima Sri Mahendra Muni 'Dinakar First Edition Vir-Nirvana Samvat 2517 Vikram
Samvat 2048, July 1991. Publishers Sri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Brij-Madhukar
Smriti Bhawan, Pipalia Bazar, Beawar (Raj.) Pin 305 901 O Printer Satish Chandra
Shukla Vedic Yantralaya Kaiserganj, Ajmer Price f Rs:1843 gra 751

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dedication**  To the lotus hands of all the Shrutadhara Sthaviras, who are
constantly engaged in the practice of Niratichar Samyama Sadhana, in the past,
present, and future,  This Anuyoga-Pravartaka Muni Kanhaiyalal 'Kamal' offers
this Gitārtha Tilokamuni.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samarpaNa niraticAra saMyama sAdhanA meM satata saMlagna rahane vAle atIta
anAgata aura vartamAna ke sabhI zrRtadhara sthaviroM ke kara kamaloM meM
samarpaka anuyoga-pravartaka muni kanhaiyAlAla 'kamala' gItArtha tilokamuni

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Prakashkiy**  The teachings of the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira, known as
**Deshana**, have been classified into four divisions: 1. **Ang**, 2. **Upang**,
3. **Mul**, 4. **Chhed**. These **Agamas** are concisely written in the form of
**Sutras** due to their detailed exposition of theoretical, philosophical ideas
and the practices of the Shraman and Shramanopasak communities.  Following the
vision of the late **Sarvatobhadra Shraddhey Yuvacharya Shri Madhukaramuni Ji
Maharaj**, all the **Agamas** of the first three divisions have been published
under the guidance of **Sadhviratna Shri Umravkuvarji Maharaj 'Archana'**, with
the cooperation of various learned Shramans, other scholars, and supporting
Shravaks. Now, we are beginning the publication of the **Agamas** of the fourth
division, starting with the **Nishith Sutra**.  The **Nishith Sutra** is
considered to be a **Chulika** (supplement) to the **Acharaang Sutra**. This
belief is justified because the **Acharaang** provides a comprehensive and
multi-faceted discussion of the conduct of the Shraman community, while the
**Nishith Sutra** outlines the methods for rectifying any unintentional lapses
in that conduct. It serves as a guide for maintaining the purity and reputation
of the **Charya**. This description is so extensive that it has been recognized
as a separate text. Further details on this subject are provided in the
introduction.  The **Nishith Sutra** has been published by various institutions.
However, it is not easily accessible or understandable to everyone. In
accordance with its established policy, the committee has presented the essence
of the text in simple Hindi along with the original text, making it useful for
the general public.  The translation, commentary, and editing of this **Sutra**
have been done by **Agammanishi Anuyogpravartak Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji Maharaj
'Kamal'** and **Geetarth Shri Tilokmuniji Maharaj**. The critical introduction
has been written by **Upadhyay Shri Devendramuni Ji Maharaj Shastri**. The
committee expresses its gratitude and congratulations to these esteemed
Shramans.  Finally, we are pleased to announce that the printing of the
remaining three **Chhed Sutras**, namely **Dashaashrutaskandha** and others, is
almost complete. We are working diligently to complete the remaining tasks as
soon as possible. We hope that the committee will achieve its goal of publishing
the entire **Agambattisi** in a short time. The first editions of some of the
previously published **Pragamas** have become unavailable. Second editions of
some of these have already been published, and the printing of the rest is
underway. This will ensure that the entire **Pragam** literature is available to
readers.  We express our heartfelt gratitude to all our collaborators.
**Ratanchand Modi** **Acting President**  **Sayaramal Chordia** **General
Secretary**  **Amarchand Modi** **Secretary**  **Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti,
Byawar**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzakIya zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra dvArA arthataH bhASita dezanA kA cAra
vibhAgoM meM vargIkaraNa kiyA gayA hai1. aMga, 2. upAMga, 3. mUla, 4. cheda  /
saiddhAntika, dArzanika vicAroM evaM zramaNa, zramaNopAsaka varga ke prAcAra kA
vistAra se pratipAdana kiye jAne se ye Agama aura arthagAMbhIrya se samanvita
saMkSepa meM lipibaddha hone se sUtra kahe jAte haiN| svargIya sarvatobhadra
zraddheya yuvAcArya zrI madhukaramuni jI ma. kI bhAvanAnusAra abhI taka
sAdhvIratna zrI umarAvakuvarajI ma. 'arcanA' ke nirdezana meM vibhinna vijJa
mahAmanA zramaNoM aura anyAnya vidvAnoM va arthasahayogI zrAvakoM ke sahakAra se
Adi ke tIna vibhAgoM ke sabhI AgamoM kA prakAzana ho gayA hai| aba caturtha
vibhAga ke AgamoM kA prakAzana nizIthasUtra se prArambha kara rahe haiN|
nizIthasUtra ko AcArAMgasUtra kI cUlikA rUpa mAne jAne kI mAnyatA hai| yaha
mAnyatA ucita bhI hai| kyoMki prAcArAMga meM zramaNavarga kI vidheyacaryA kA
bahu AyAmI vistRta vivecana hai aura nizIthasUtra meM usa caryA meM pramAdavaza
hone vAlI skhalanAoM ke pramArjana-vidhAna kA prarUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| jo caryA
kI pavitratA, pratiSThA sthApita karane ke lie mArgadarzaka hai  /  yaha varNana
itanA vistRta hai ki eka pRthak grantha ke rUpa meM mAnya ho gayA  /
etadviSayaka vizeSa vicAra prastAvanA meM kiyA gayA hai| vibhinna saMsthAoM kI
ora se nizIthasUtra kA prakAzana huA hai| kintu vaha sarvajanasugama bodhagamya
nahIM hai| samiti ne apanI nirdhArita nIti ke anusAra mUlapATha ke sAtha sarala
hindI bhASA meM usake hArda ko spaSTa kiyA hai| jo sarvasAdhAraNa ke liye
upayogI siddha hogaa| isa sUtra kA anuvAda-vivecana-sampAdana AgamamanISI
anuyogapravartaka muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. 'kamala' evaM gItArtha zrI
tilokamunijI ma. ne kiyA hai tathA samIkSAtmaka prastAvanA upAcArya zrI
devendramunijI ma. zAstrI ne likhI hai| samiti ina zramaNazreSThoM kA kRtajJatA
jJApita karane ke sAtha abhinandana karatI hai| anta meM yaha sUcita karate hue
prasannatA hai ki zeSa dazAzrutaskandha Adi tIna chedasUtroM kA mudraNakArya
prAyaH pUrNa ho cukA hai| zeSa kArya yathAzIghra pUrNa karane ke lie
prayatnazIla haiN| AzA hai sampUrNa AgamabattIsI ke prakAzana kA nirdhArita
lakSya samiti alpa samaya meM prApta kara legii| pUrva prakAzita jina prAgamoM
kA prathama saMskaraNa aprApya ho gayA hai, unameM se kuchaeka ke dvitIya
saMskaraNa prakAzita ho cuke haiM aura zeSa kA bhI mudraNa ho rahA hai| jisase
sampUrNa prAgama sAhitya pAThakoM ko upalabdha ho skegaa| hama apane sabhI
sahayogiyoM kA sadhanyavAda AbhAra mAnate haiN| ratanacanda modI sAyaramala
coraDiyA amaracanda modI kAryavAhaka adhyakSa mahAmaMtrI maMtrI zrI Agama
prakAzana samiti, byAvara

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byaver (Executive Committee) President Acting
President Vice President Madras Byaver Byaver Madras Jodhpur Madras Durg Madras
Byaver Pali Byaver Byaver Maha Mantri Mantri Saha Mantri Treasurer Madras Shri
Kishnalalji Baitala Shri Ratanchandji Modi Shri Dhanrajji Vinayakiya Shri
Parsamalji Chordia Shri Hukmichandji Parakh Shri S. Kishanchandji Chordia Shri
Jasrajji Parakh Shri G. Sayramalji Chordia Shri Amarchandji Modi Shri Gyanrajji
Mootha Shri Gyanchandji Vinayakiya Shri Janvarilalji Shishodiya Shri Amarchandji
Bothra Shri S. Badalchandji Chordia Shri Mulchandji Surana Shri Dulichandji
Chordia Shri Prakashchandji Chopra Shri Mohansinghji Lodha Shri Sagarmalji
Baitala Shri Jatanrajji Mehta Shri Bhanvarlalji Shrisrimal Shri Chandanmalji
Chordia Shri Sumermalji Medtiya Shri Asulalji Bohra Shri Jalamsinghji Medtawal
Shri Prakashchandji Jain Member Madras Nagaur Madras Byaver Byaver Indore
Medtacity Madras Jodhpur Jodhpur Byaver Nagaur Advisor

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI Agama prakAzana samiti, byAvara (kAryakAriNI samiti) adhyakSa kAryavAhaka
adhyakSa upAdhyakSa madrAsa byAvara byAvara madrAsa jodhapura madrAsa durga
madrAsa byAvara pAlI byAvara byAvara mahAmaMtrI maMtrI sahamaMtrI koSAdhyakSa
madrAsa zrI kizanalAlajI baitAlA zrI ratanacandajI modI zrI dhanarAjajI
vinAyakiyA zrI pArasamalajI corar3iyA zrI hukmIcandajI pArakha zrI esa.
kizanacandajI coraDiyA zrI jasarAjajI pArakha zrI jI. sAyaramalajI corar3iyA zrI
amaracandajI modI zrI jJAnarAjajI mUthA zrI jJAnacandajI vinAyakiyA zrI
jaMvarIlAlajI zizodiyA zrI amaracandajI botharA zrI esa. bAdalacandajI corar3iyA
zrI mUlacandajI surANA zrI dulIcandajI coraDiyA zrI prakAzacandajI caupar3A zrI
mohanasiMhajI lor3hA zrI sAgaramalajI baitAlA zrI jatanarAjajI mehatA zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI zrIzrImAla zrI candanamalajI corar3iyA zrI sumeramalajI mer3atiyA
zrI AsUlAlajI boharA zrI jAlamasiMhajI mer3atavAla zrI prakAzacandajI jaina
sadasya madrAsa nAgaura madrAsa byAvara byAvara indaura mer3atAsiTI madrAsa
jodhapura jodhapura byAvara nAgaura parAmarzadAtA

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Publication of the Arhammas (Aprakashyas)  The primary reason for
considering and keeping the Praayashchitta Praaroopak Praagamas as Aprakashyas
was to prevent the ineligible or unqualified from reading them, as they might
misuse or abuse them. Therefore, keeping them Aprakashya was entirely
appropriate.  As long as the Shruta-Parampara (oral tradition) prevailed in the
exchange of knowledge of the Agamas, all Agamas remained Aprakashya.  Chanakya,
in his self-composed Sutra, states, "Na Lekhya Guptvaarta," meaning, "Do not
write what you want to keep secret." The implication is that what is written as
a secret does not remain secret and is revealed in some way or another.
"Shatakon Bhidyate Mantra" - what is spoken to six ears spreads everywhere. When
there is one speaker and one listener, the matter remains confidential. When
there is one speaker and two or more listeners, the speaker's words do not
remain confidential, no matter how hard they try to keep them secret.  As long
as the Shruta Parampara prevailed, both among the Jains and the Vaidik, the
Aprakashya Agamas did not remain Aprakashya. Because even then, there were those
who knew their own doctrines and those of others.  Jains studied Jain and non-
Jain philosophies, and non-Jains studied Jain philosophy. Therefore, it is clear
that the Shruta Parampara existed among both Jains and non-Jains. Even then, the
Agamas did not remain Aprakashya.  Due to the influence of the Avasarpini Kala
(period of decline), the power of perception or memory gradually weakened,
leading to the writing of Agamas and scriptures. As the writing of Agamas
progressed, the Praayashchitta-proponent Agamas were also written, making the
Aprakashya Agamas Prakashya (published). With the advancement of the printing
era, the Aprakashya Agamas became even more Prakashya.  The main reason for not
publishing Hindi translations of the Praayashchitta-related Agamas written in
Sanskrit or Prakrit is to keep them secret from the general public. However,
those who are intensely curious will try their best to satisfy their curiosity.
Since the Hindi translations of the four Agamas, including Nishitthadi, are
currently unavailable, the Praagam Prakashan Samiti, sponsored by the late
Yuvaacharya Shri Mishrimalji M. Sa. "Madhukarji," has published all four Agamas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 arham aprakAzyoM kA prakAzana prAyazcitta prarUpaka prAgamoM ko aprakAzya
mAnane kA evaM rakhane kA pramukha kAraNa thA, unheM apAtra yA kupAtra na
par3he, kyoMki ve usakA anucita upayoga yA durupayoga karate haiN| ataH unheM
aprakAzya rakhanA sarvathA ucita thaa| AgamoM kI vAcanA ke AdAna-pradAna meM
jaba taka zruta-paramparA pracalita rahI taba taka sabhI Agama aprakAzya rhe|
cANakya ne svaracita sUtra meM kahA hai-"na lekhyA guptavArtA' jisa bAta ko
gupta rakhanA cAhate ho use likho mata  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki jo rahasya likhA
jAtA hai vaha rahasya nahIM rahatA, kisI na kisI prakAra se prakaTa ho hI jAtA
hai| SaTakoM bhidyate maMtra-jo bAta chaH kAnoM meM calI jAtI hai vaha bAta bhI
saba jagaha phaila jAtI hai| kahane vAlA eka aura sunane vAlA bhI eka ho, isa
prakAra jaba bAta do taka sImita rahatI hai taba taka vaha gupta rahatI hai|
jaba kahane vAlA eka ho aura sunane vAle do hoM yA do se adhika hoM taba kahane
vAle kI bAta gupta nahIM raha pAtI hai, gupta rakhane ke liye cAhe jitane
prayAsa kareM saphala nahIM hote| jainoM meM aura vaidikoM meM jaba taka zruta
paramparA pracalita rahI taba taka bhI aprakAzya Agama aprakAzya nahIM rahe the|
kyoMki usa samaya bhI sva-siddhAnta aura para (anya)  /  siddhAnta ke jJAtA hote
the| jaina, jainetara darzanoM kA adhyayana karate the aura jainetara,
jainadarzana kA adhyayana karate the| ataH yaha spaSTa hai ki jainoM aura
janetaroM meM zruta paramparA pracalita thii| usa samaya bhI Agama aprakAzya
nahIM rahe the| avasarpiNI kAla ke prabhAva se dhAraNA zakti yA smaraNa zakti
zanaiH zanaiH kSINa hone lagI to AgamoM aura granthoM kA lekhana prArambha ho
gayA  /  jyoM-jyoM AgamoM kA lekhana kArya pragati karane lagA to prAyazcitta
pratipAdaka Agama bhI likhe jAne lage, isa prakAra aprakAzya Agama prakAzya ho
gae  /  mudraNa yuga kI pragati hone para to aprakAzya Agama aura adhika
prakAzya ho ge| saMskRta yA prAkRta meM racita prAyazcitta viSayaka AgamoM kA
hindI anuvAda prakAzita na karavAne kA pramukha kAraNa yahI hai ki unheM sarva
sAdhAraNa se gupta rakhA jAe  /  kintu jisakI jijJAsA utkaTa hotI hai vaha to
prayatna karake apanI jijJAsA jaise-taise pUrI kara hI letA hai| adyAvadhi
prakAzita nizIthAdi cAroM AgamoM ke hindI anuvAda sahita saMskaraNa vartamAna
meM anupalabdha hone se svargIya yuvAcArya zrI mizrImalajI ma. sA. "madhukarajI"
kI preraNA se prAyojita prAgama prakAzana samiti dvArA cAroM Agama prakAzita kie
gae haiN|

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Yuvacharya Shri, after reviewing the Dasha and Kapp व्यवहार edited by me, sent a
message to re-edit the four Dhagamas, Nishochadi, etc. However, due to my poor
health for a long time, I requested Shri Tilokamuni Ji M. to translate and write
a commentary on the four Agamas. You, with a generous heart, have written the
translation and commentary in your own language - even ordinary literate people
can easily understand the Prāyaścitta vidhānas by studying them.  Upāśrāya Shri
Pushkaramuni Ji, despite being constantly engaged in the physical service of
Upāchārya Shri, has performed an unparalleled Shruta Seva by writing the role of
Nishītha. For this, all knowledgeable readers and all the workers of the Agama
Committee are deeply grateful.  In the work of revision and editing of Nishītha
and the other four Agamas, I have continuously received ample cooperation from
Shri Vinayamuni Ji and Mahasati Ji Shri Mukti Prabhaji, etc. Therefore, I am
deeply grateful to all of them. Akshaya Tritiya, 2048 - Anuyog Pravartak Muni
Kanhaiyalal "Kamal" Abu Parvat

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1 yuvAcAryazrI ne mere dvArA sampAdita dasA, kappa vyavahAra ko dekhakara
nizaucAdi cAroM dhAgamoM kA punaH sampAdana karane ke lie sandeza bhejA thA
kintu bahuta lambe samaya se merA svAsthya anukUla na rahane se maiMne zrI
tilokamunijI ma. se cAroM AgamoM kA anuvAda evaM vivecana likhane ke lie kahA
Apane udAra hRdaya se anuvAda evaM vivecana svayaM kI bhASA meM likhA hai-
sAdhAraNa par3he likhe bhI inakA svAdhyAya karake prAyazcitta vidhAnoM ko AsAnI
se samajha sakate haiN| upAspAya zrI puSkAramunijI kI zArIrika sevA meM aharniza
vyasta rahate hue bhI upAcArya zrI ne nizItha kI bhUmikA likhakara ke jo anupama
zrutasevA kI hai, usake lie sabhI sujJa pAThaka tathA Agama samiti ke sabhI
kAryakartA hRdaya se bhArI haiM  /  nizItha Adi cAroM AgamoM ke saMzodhana,
sampAdana kAryoM meM zrI vinayamunijI tathA mahAsatIjI zrI muktiprabhAjI Adi kA
nirantara yatheSTa sahayoga prApta hotA rhaa| ataH ina sabakA maiM hRdaya se
kRtajJa hU~  /  akSaya tRtIyA, 2048 -anuyoga pravartaka muni kanhaiyAlAla
"kamala" AbU parvata - ( 10 )

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Praakchhan  The location of the Nishīthasūtra in the Prāgamas  Among the
available Āgamas, four Āgamas are designated as Chhedasūtras. This designation
is not Āgama-era, meaning it is not found in any Āgama like the Nandī Sūtra,
etc. Therefore, this designation was given after Devaddiggani Kṣamāśramaṇa,
i.e., a thousand years after the Vīra Nirvāṇa, and has been passed down through
tradition until today.  There are many variations in the order of these
Chhedasūtras. In some places, the Daśāśruta-skandha is given the first place,
while in others, the Vyavahārasūtra is given the first place.  The study of the
Vyavahārasūtra makes it clear that among these four Chhedasūtras, the
Nishīthasūtra holds the first place in terms of study, followed by the Daśā-
Kappa-Vyavahāra in order.  The Prāgama-puruṣa-creating Pūrvaāchāryas and the
scholars who wrote a concise introduction to the 45 Āgamas have also given the
Nishīthasūtra the first place among the Chhedasūtras.  **Determining the origin
of the Nishīthasūtra based on the Āgamas**  The creators (Niyūṇḍhakartā) of the
Daśāśruta-skandha, Bṛhatkalpa, and Vyavahārasūtra are the fourteen Pūrva-
bhādrābāhusvāmi, but there are many options regarding the creation of the
Nishīthasūtra. This is a result of the confusing atmosphere of historians and
thinkers. Based on that historical material, even today, investigative scholars
do not have the right to definitively say, "The Nishīthasūtra is the creation of
such and such an Āchārya."  The reality is something else. If we decide based on
the contemplation of the Āgama texts, separate from historical tradition, then
it can be a solid and authentic decision.  The tradition of calling this sūtra
"quoted from the Pūrva" is not in accordance with the sūtra. The reason for this
is that the fourteen Pūrva-bhādrābāhusvāmi created the Vyavahārasūtra, which is
undisputed. In that sūtra, he has not mentioned the name "Nishīthasūtra" even
once. He has mentioned the name "Āchāraprakalpa" or "Āchāraprakalpa-adhyayana"
sixteen times. Studying and memorizing this is essential for every qualified
sādhū-sādhvī. Sādhū-sādhvī who do not memorize this are prohibited from
attaining the positions of Sanghāḍā-pramukh or Āchārya, Upādhyāya, etc., and
young sādhū-sādhvī who forget it are considered worthy of atonement.  From the
many descriptions of the Prāgama, it is clear that sādhvī are not taught the
Pūrvaśruta. While Āchārya Bhādrābāhusvāmi has clearly stated in the
Vyavahārasūtra that sādhvī should memorize and remember the Āchāraprakalpa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prAkkazana nizIthasUtra kA sthAna prAgamoM meM upalabdha AgamoM meM cAra AgamoM
ko chedasUtra kI saMjJA dI gaI hai| yaha saMjJA AgamakAlIna nahIM hai arthAt
nandIsUtra Adi kisI bhI Agama meM yaha saMjJA, yaha nAmakaraNa nahIM milatA hai|
ata: yaha saMjJA devaddhigaNI kSamAzramaNa ke bAda arthAt vIra nirvANa ke hajAra
varSa bAda dI gaI hai, jo paramparA se Aja taka calI pA rahI hai| ina
chedasUtroM ke krama meM kaI vibhinnatAeM pracalita haiM  /  kahIM
dazAzrutaskaMdha ko to kahIM vyavahArasUtra ko prathama sthAna diyA jAtA hai|
vyavahArasUtra ke adhyayana se yaha spaSTa hotA hai ki ina cAra chedasUtroM meM
nizIthasUtra kA sthAna adhyayana kI apekSA prathama hai, usake bAda krama se
dasA-kappa-vavahAra kA sthAna hai| prAgama puruSa kI racanA karane vAle
pUrvAcAryoM ne evaM 45 AgamoM kA saMkSipta paricaya likhane vAle vidvAnoM ne bhI
nizIthasUtra ko chedasUtra meM prathama sthAna diyA hai| nizIthasUtra kI utpatti
kA nirNaya-AgamAdhAra se racanAkAla yA racanAkAra kI apekSA dazAzrutaskaMdha,
bRhatkalpa aura vyavahArasUtra ke racayitA (niyU~DhakartA) caturdazapUrvI
bhadrabAhusvAmI haiM, kintu nizIthasatra kI racanA ke viSaya meM aneka vikalpa
haiN| jo itihAsajJoM aura ciMtakoM ke bhramakAraka vAtAvaraNa kA pariNAma hai|
usa aitihAsika sAmagrI ke AdhAra para Aja taka bhI anveSaka vidvAn nizcita rUpa
se kahane kA adhikAra nahIM rakhate ki "nizIthasUtra amuka prAcArya kI hI racanA
hai|" vastusthiti kucha aura hI hai| itihAsa-paraMparA se alaga hokara yadi
AgamapAThoM ke citana se nirNaya kiyA jAya to vaha Thosa evaM prAmANika nirNaya
ho sakatA hai  /  _ isa sUtra ko pUrvo se uddhRta kahane kI paraMparA
sUtrAnukUla nahIM hai  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki caudaha pUrvI bhadrabAhusvAmI
ne vyavahArasUtra kI racanA kI hai, yaha nirvivAda hai  /  usa sUtra meM unhoMne
eka bAra bhI 'nizIthasUtra' yaha nAma nahIM diyA hai| AcAraprakalpa yA
AcAraprakalpa-adhyayana yaha nAma solaha bAra diyA hai| jisakA adhyayana karanA
evaM kaNThastha dhAraNa karanA pratyeka yogya sAdhu-sAdhvI ke lie Avazyaka hai|
ise kaMThastha dhAraNa nahIM karane vAle sAdhu-sAdhvI ko saMghADApramukha yA
AcArya, upAdhyAya prAdi padoM kI prApti kA niSedha kiyA hai aura use bhUla jAne
vAle yUvaka saMta-satiyoM ko prAyazcitta kA pAtra batAyA hai| prAgama ke aneka
varNanoM se yaha spaSTa hai ki sAdhviyoM ko pUrvazruta kA adhyayana nahIM karAyA
jAtA hai| jaba ki AcAraprakalpa sAdhviyoM ko kaMThastha dhAraNa karane kA evaM
yAda rakhane kA AcArya bhadrabAhusvAmI ne vyavahArasUtra meM spaSTa vidhAna kiyA
hai|

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This clearly shows that even before the fourteenth century, the "Acharaprakalpa"
or Pracharaprakalpa-study existed, which was not in the Purvas but in the
Angasutras and it was also necessary for the Sadhvis to memorize it. If they
forgot, they also had to do penance. Therefore, it is appropriate to consider as
true the description of this session as the study of the Acharanga, written by
the Ganadhar, which is found in the Sutras, their commentaries and in the
scriptures. It is not in accordance with the Agamas to give importance to other
historical alternatives. Acharaprakalpa in the Agamas Even before the fourteenth
century, the study of Pracharaprakalpa was essential for every Sadhu-Sadhvi of
the Jinasasana, the introduction of which is found in the Sutras and their
commentaries, which is the indicator of the present available Nishitasutra, such
as (1) Panchvihe Ayarapakappe Pannatte, Tam Jaha-1. Masie Uggahie, 2. Masie
Anuggahie, 3. Chaumasie Uggahie, 4. Chaumasie Anuggahie, 5. Arovana. Commentary-
Acharasya Prathamaangasya Padavibhagasamachari
Lakshnaprakrushtakalpaabhidhayakatvatprakalpa Acharaprakalpa Nishitadhyayanam.
Sa cha Panchvidhah, Panchvidhapraayashchittabhidhayakatvat. Sthana.5 2. Acharah
Prathamaangah Tasyaprakalpo Adhyayanavishesho, Nishitam iti Aparabhidhanasya....
-Samavayanga 28 3. Ashtaavinshati Vidhah Pracharaprakalpa, Nishitadhyayanam
Acharangam, ity arthah. Sa cha evam-(1) Satthaparinna Java (25) Vimutti (26)
Uggahi (27) Anuggahi (28) Arovana tivihamo Nisiham tu, iti Atthavaisiho
Ayarapakappanaamotthi. -Rajendra Kosh Bha. 2 P. 349 “Ayarapakapp Shabd
-Prashnavyakaran Sutra A. 10 (4) Acharah Acharangam, Prakalpo-Nishitadhyayanam,
Tasyav Panchamachala. Acharena Sahit: Prakalpah Acharaprakalpa, Panchvimshati
Adhyayanatmatkatvat Panchvimshati Vidhah Pracharah 1. Udghatim 2. Anudghatim 3.
Arovana iti Trihdha Prakalpo Milane Ashtaavinshati Vidhah. -Abhi. Ra. Ko. Bhag
2, P. 350 Ayarapakapp Shabd Yahan Samavayangasutra Evam Prashnavyakaranasutra Ke
Mul Path Mein Atthais Prakar Ke Prachar Prakalpa Ka Kathana Kiya Gaya Hai,
Jismein Sampurn Acharangasutra Ke 25 Adhyayan Aur Nishitasatra Ke Tin Vibhag Ka
Samavesh Karke Atthais Ka Yog Bataya Hai. Isse Spashta Hai Ki Pragamon Mein
Nishit Ko Acharangasutra Ka Hi Vibhag Ya Adhyayan Bataya Gaya Hai. The
conclusion is that if we give prominence to the Agamic descriptions and make the
historical references secondary, then it can be easily understood that "Nishit-
adhyayan" was the name of a study of the Acharangasutra. In it, twenty Uddeshak
1. In matters where the decision is clear from the Agamic description, it is not
legal to get entangled with history or tradition. It is appropriate to resolve
the matter with the supporting elements of the Pragamanit subject. (12)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 isase spaSTa hai ki caturdazapUrvI bhadrabAhusvAmI ke pahale bhI yaha
"AcAraprakalpa" yA prAcAraprakalpa-adhyayana vidyamAna thA, jo pUrvo meM nahIM
kintu aMgasUtroM meM thA aura sAdhviyoM ko kaMThastha rakhanA bhI Avazyaka thA
/  bhUla jAne para unheM bhI prAyazcitta AtA thA  /  ataH isa satra kA
gaNadharagrathita AcArAMga ke adhyayana hone kA jo-jo varNana sUtroM meM, unakI
vyAkhyAoM meM aura granthoM meM milatA hai, use hI satya samajhanA ucita hai|
anya aitihAsika vikalpoM ko mahattva denA Agamasammata nahIM hai| AgamoM meM
AcAraprakalpa caturdazapUrvI bhadrabAhusvAmI se pUrva bhI jinazAsana ke pratyeka
sAdhu-sAdhvI ke lie prAcAraprakalpaadhyayana ko kaMThastha dhAraNa karanA
Avazyaka thA, usa AcAraprakalpa-adhyayana kA paricaya sUtroM evaM unakI
vyAkhyAoM meM jo milatA hai, vaha vartamAna meM upalabdha isa nizIthasUtra kA hI
paricAyaka hai, yathA (1) paMcavihe aAyArapakappe paNNatte, taM jahA-1. mAsie
ugghAie, 2. mAsie aNugghAie, 3. cAumAsie ugghAie, 4. cAumAsie aNugghAie, 5.
ArovaNA  /  TIkA-AcArasya prathamAMgasya padavibhAgasamAcArI
lakSaNaprakRSTakalpA'bhidhAyakatvAtprakalpa AcAraprakalpa nizIthAdhyayanam  /
sa ca paMcavidhaH, paMcavidhaprAyazcittAbhidhAyakatvAt  /  sthAnA.5 2. AcAraH
prathamAMgaH tasya prakalpo adhyayanavizeSo, nizItham iti aparAbhidhAnasya....
-samavAyAMga 28 3. aSTAviMzatividhaH prAcAraprakalpaH, nizIthAdhyayanam
AcArAMgama, ityarthaH  /  sa ca evaM-(1) satthapariNNA jAva (25) vimuttI (26)
ugghAi (27) aNugghAi (28) ArovaNA tivihamo nisIhaM tu, iti aTThAvIsaviho
AyArapakappanAmotti  /  -rAjendra koza bhA. 2 pR. 349 "AyArapakappa zabda
-praznavyAkaraNa sUtra a. 10 (4) AcAraH AcArAMgama, prakalpo-nizIthAdhyayanama,
tasyeva pNcmclaa| AcAreNa sahita: prakalpaH AcAraprakalpa, paMcaviMzati
adhyayanAtmakatvAta paMcaviMzati vidhaH prAcAraH 1. udghAtimaM 2. anudghAtimaM
3. ArovaNA iti tridhA prakalpomIlane aSTAviMzatividhaH  /  -Abhi. rA. ko. bhAga
2, pR. 350 AyArapakappa zabda yahAM samavAyAMgasUtra evaM praznavyAkaraNasUtra
ke mUla pATha meM aTThAIsa prakAra ke prAcAra prakalpa kA kathana kiyA gayA hai,
jisameM saMpUrNa AcArAMgasUtra ke 25 adhyayana aura nizIthasatra ke tIna vibhAga
kA samAveza karake aTThAIsa kA yoga batAyA hai| isase spaSTa hai ki prAgamoM meM
nizItha ko AcArAMgasUtra kA hI vibhAga yA adhyayana batAyA gayA hai| niSkarSa
yaha hai ki Agamika varNanoM ko pramukhatA dekara aitihAsika ullekhoM ko gauNa'
kiyA jAya to yaha sahaja samajha meM A sakatA hai-"nizItha-adhyayana"
AcArAMgasUtra ke eka adhyayana kA nAma thA  /  usameM bIsa uddezaka 1. Agama
varNana se jo nirNaya spaSTa ho jAtA ho, usa viSaya meM itihAsa yA paramparA se
ulajhanA vaidhAnika nahIM hotA hai| prAgamaNita viSaya ke poSaka tattvoM se
sulajhanA hI upayukta hotA hai| ( 12 )

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are many objectives available in the study of Acharanga even today. There
were three divisions of those 20 objectives - (1) Laghu (2) Guru (3) Aroopana.
These three are combined with the 25 studies of Pracharanga and are called 28
Acharaprakalp in Samavayangasutra. When it was separated, it was separated from
Pracharanga, so it was named Acharaprakalp. This name was famous during the time
of Acharya Bhadrabahu, so he has made many provisions in Vyavaharsutra in the
name of Acharaprakalp. In Anga Agamas like Samavayanga, Prashnavyakaran etc.,
description is available in the name of "Acharaprakalp". Acharaprakalp and
Nishoth: Name Change The Agam calculation given in Nandi Sutra does not have the
name Acharaprakalp, but it has the name Nisheeth, and in Vyavaharsutra, there is
no name Nisheeth, but the name Acharaprakalp is many times. Vyavaharsutra was
composed earlier and Nandi Sutra was composed hundreds (800) years later. This
makes it clear that this Sutra was in the name of Acharaprakalp in front of
Bhadrabahu Swami and after him, till Devadhigani, the name Acharaprakalp of that
Sutra could not remain famous, but the original name of the study of Acharanga,
which was Nisheeth study, got fame in the form of Nisheeth Sutra and Sri
Devavachka Pavibhushith Devadhigani Kshamasraman, the creator of Nandi, gave
place to that famous name. The implication is that in the beginning, this study
of Pracharanga was in the name of "Nisheeth-study". In front of Bhadrabahu
Swami, it was in the name of Pracharaprakalp or Acharaprakalp-study and after
him, it got fame in the name of Nisheeth Sutra. Even then, many provisions made
in the name of Pracharaprakalp in the original text of Vyavaharsutra are still
present in the same form and on the basis of that, appointment, commentary, and
commentary are also present. Appointment, commentary, commentary, etc.
commentators have accepted Nisheeth Sutra or Nisheeth-study including Acharanga
in the name of "Pracharaprakalp". Alternative Five Names Call it the study of
Acharangasutra, call it Pracharaprakalp or Acharaprakalp-study or Nisheeth
Sutra, all are synonyms of Nisheeth Sutra. Their number is five, namely 1. Study
of Acharangasutra - "Nisihajzhayana", 2. Acharaprakalp-study, 3. Acharaprakalp
(Sutra), 4. Nisheeth Sutra, 5. Panchama Chala of Acharangasutra. Thus, this
scripture has a changing name from time to time. After the creation of Nandi
Sutra, its name "Nisheeth Sutra" became certain, which is still going on.
Explanations - Explainer and Explanation Time The second Bhadrabahu Swami has
done an explanation called appointment on this Sutra. On the basis of Sutra and
appointment, Acharya Siddhasenagani did an explanation called commentary, this
has been directed many times by Charnikar. According to another opinion, Acharya
Sanghadasagani is also said, but this statement is not so important according to
Chani. (13)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 the| Aja bhI AcArAMga ke adhyayanoM meM aneka uddezaka upalabdha haiN| una 20
uddezaka ke bhI viSayavarNana kI apekSA tIna vibhAga the-(1) laghu (2) guru (3)
AropaNA  /  ina tIna ko prAcArAMga ke 25 adhyayana ke sAtha jor3akara hI
samavAyAMgasUtra meM 28 AcAraprakalpa kahe haiN| jaba ise alaga kiyA gayA taba
prAcArAMga se alaga kiyA huaA hone se isakA nAma AcAraprakalpa rakhA gayA  /
yahI nAma AcArya bhadrabAhu ke samaya prasiddha thA, isIlie unhoMne
vyavahArasUtra meM anekoM vidhAna AcAraprakalpa ke nAma se kie haiM  /
samavAyAMga, praznavyAkaraNa Adi aMga AgamoM meM bhI "AcAraprakalpa" ke nAma se
varNana upalabdha hai| AcAraprakalpa aura nizothaH nAmaparivartana _ naMdIsUtra
meM jo Agama gaNanA dI gaI hai, usameM AcAraprakalpa kA nAma nahIM hai, kintu
nizItha kA nAma hai aura vyavahArasUtra meM nizItha kA nAma hI nahIM kintu
AcAraprakalpa nAma aneka bAra hai  /  vyavahArasUtra kI racanA pahale huI hai
aura naMdIsUtra kI saikar3oM (800) varSa bAda racanA huI hai| isase yaha spaSTa
hotA hai ki bhadrabAhusvAmI ke sAmane yaha sUtra AcAraprakalpa nAma se thA aura
unake bAda devadhigaNI taka usa satra kA AcAraprakalpa nAma prasiddhi meM nahIM
raha sakA kintu AcArAMga ke adhyayana kA jo maulika nAma nizItha adhyayana thA,
vahI nAma nizIthasatra isa rUpa se prasiddhi meM pAyA aura naMdI-racanAkAra zrI
devavAcaka pavibhUSita devadhigaNI kSamAzramaNa ne usI prasiddha nAma ko sthAna
diyA  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki prArambha meM yaha prAcArAMga kA adhyayana
"nizItha-adhyayana" isa nAma se thA  /  bhadrabAhusvAmI ke sAmane
prAcAraprakalpa yA AcAraprakalpa-adhyayana ke nAma se thA aura unake bAda kabhI
yaha nizIthasUtra ke nAma se prasiddhi paayaa| phira bhI vyavahArasUtra ke
mUlapATha meM Aja bhI prAcAraprakalpa ke nAma se kiye gaye aneka vidhAna usI
rUpa meM vidyamAna haiM aura usI ke AdhAra para niyukti, bhASya, TIkA bhI
vidyamAna haiN| niyukti, bhASya, TIkA Adi vyAkhyAkAroM ne nizIthasUtra ko athavA
AcArAMga sahita nizItha-adhyayana ko "prAcAraprakalpa" nAma se grahaNa kiyA hai|
vaikalpika pAMca nAma ise AcArAMgasUtra kA adhyayana kaho, prAcAraprakalpa kaho
yA AcAraprakalpa-adhyayana athavA nizIthasUtra kaho, sabhI nizIthasUtra ke
paryAyavAcI nAma haiN| inakI saMkhyA pAMca hai, yathA 1. AcArAMgasUtra kA
adhyayana-"nisIhajjhayaNa," 2. AcAraprakalpa-adhyayana, 3. AcAraprakalpa
(sUtra), 4. nizIthasUtra, 5. AcArAMgasUtra kI paMcama claa| isa prakAra samaya-
samaya para parivartita nAma vAlA yaha zAstra hai| nandIsUtra kI racanA ke bAda
isakA nAma "nizIthasUtra" yaha nizcita ho gayA, jo Aja taka cala rahA hai|
vyAkhyAeM-vyAkhyAkAra aura vyAkhyAkAla isa sUtra para dvitIya bhadrabAhusvAmI ne
niyukti nAmaka vyAkhyA kI hai| sUtra aura niyukti ke AdhAra para bhASya nAmaka
vyAkhyA AcArya siddhasenagaNI ne kI, aisA carNikAra ne aneka bAra nirdeza kiyA
hai| matAMtara se AcArya saMghadAsagaNI bhI kahe jAte haiM, kintu yaha kathana
caNi ke anusAra itanA mahattvapUrNa nahIM hai| ( 13 )

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Based on the Sutras, the Niyukti, and the Bhashya verses, a commentary called
Chani was written by Acharya Jinadasagani Mahattar. This commentary, along with
the Bhashya and the Niyukti, was published from Agra. The authors of this
publication are Kavi Pandit Ratna Shri Amarmuniji M. Sa. and Pandit Ratna Shri
Kanhaiyalalji M. Sa. "Kamal". All three commentaries are in Prakrit language.
The Chani is a prose commentary, while the Bhashya and the Niyukti are verse
commentaries.  The Niyuktikar lived in the eleventh century after the Nirvan of
the Tirthankaras. His brother was Varahamihira, who wrote the "Varahi Samhita"
text, which mentions the time of its composition. Based on the same era, the
time of Bhadrabahu Swami and Varahamihira is known, which is the sixth century
of the Vikram era and the eleventh century after the Nirvan of the Tirthankaras,
i.e., 30-40 years after the time of Devadhigani Kshamashraman, which is the year
562 of the Vikram era. Subsequently, the Bhashyakar lived in the seventh century
of the Vikram era and the Chunikar lived around the eighth century.  Thus, the
commentary literature of this Sutra is at least 1300 years old.  A Sanskrit
commentary on this Sutra was written in this 21st century by Shrimad Jainacharya
Agamoddhara Pandit Ratna Shri Ghasilalji M. Sa.  The original text has been
translated into Hindi and Gujarati by Shrimad Jainacharya Pragamoddhara Pandit
Ratna Shri Amolkrishiji M. Sa. and other scholars from time to time. However,
this is the first attempt to edit the original text and its translation with
commentary and explanation in Hindi. The basis of the commentary and additional
statements  This edition of the Nishisutra is primarily based on the Niyukti,
Bhashya, and Chani. In editing the original text and interpreting the meaning of
the Sutra, many available manuscripts have been considered secondary, and the
Niyukti, Bhashya, and Chani have been given priority. The commentaries have also
been given priority in the commentary, however, in some places, the Agam
Prashayas have been given priority, and the commentary has been made different
or contrary to these commentaries. This has also been done in some places in the
Vyavahar Sutra in addition to the Nishisutra, all of which are as follows:  (1)
Nishisutra U. 2 Su. 1 "Padaponchan" (2) Nishisutra U. 2 Su. 8 "Visuyavei" (3)
Nishisutra U. 3 Su. 73 "Golehaniasu" (4) Nishisutra U. 3 Su. 80 "Anuggae Suriye"
(5-6) Nishisutra U. 19 Su. 1 and 6 "Viyad" and "Galei" (7) Vyavahar U. 2
"Atthajay" (8) Vyavahar U. 3 Su. 1-2 "Ganadharan" (9) Vyavahar U. "Sodiyasala"
(10) Vyavahar U. "Tivasa Pariyae" (11) Vyavahar U. "Palasgansi" (12-13) Vyavahar
U. Su. 9-10 "Niruddha Pariyae, Niruddhavas Pariyae" " "

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtra aura niyukti evaM bhASya gAthAoM ke AdhAra para caNi nAmaka vyAkhyA
prAcArya jinadAsagaNI mahattara ne kI hai| isa nizIthasatra kA caNi sahita
bhASya, niryakti kA prakAzana AgarA se huA, jisameM kavi paM. ratna zrI
amaramunijI ma. sA. evaM paM. ratna zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. sA. "kamala" haiN|
ukta tInoM vyAkhyAeM prAkRta bhASA meM haiN| jisameM caNi gadyamaya vyAkhyA hai
aura bhASya, niyukti gAthAmaya vyAkhyA haiN| niyuktikAra vIra nirvANa kI
gyArahavIM zatAbdI meM hae haiN| ina niyuktikAra ke bhAI varAhamihira the|
unhoMne "varAhIsaMhitA" grantha kI racanA kI, jisameM usakA racanA samaya aMkita
hai| usI saMvat ke AdhAra se ina bhadrabAhusvAmI aura varAhamihira kA samaya
jJAta hotA hai, jo vikrama kI chaThI zatAbdI kA aura vIra nirvANa kI gyArahavIM
zatAbdI kA arthAt devadhigaNI kSamAzramaNa ke 30-40 varSa bAda kA samaya thA, jo
ki vikrama saMvat 562 kA samaya hai| tadanantara vikrama kI sAtavIM sadI meM
bhASyakAra evaM karIba pAThavIM sadI meM cuNikAra ke hone kA samaya hai| isa
prakAra isa sUtra kA vyAkhyAsAhitya bhI kama se kama 1300 varSa prAcIna hai| isa
sUtra para saMskRta vyAkhyA isI ikkIsavIM zatAbdI meM zrImajjainAcArya
AgamoddhAraka paM. rala zrI ghAsIlAlajI ma. sA. ne kI hai| mUlasparzI hindI,
gujarAtI anuvAda zrImajjainAcArya prAgamoddhAraka paM. ratna zrI amolakaRSijI
ma. sA. prAdi aneka vidvAnoM dvArA samaya-samaya para haA hai| kintu hindI bhASA
meM vyAkhyA-vivecana sahita mUla evaM anuvAda ke sampAdana kA yaha prathama
prayAsa hai| vivecana kA AdhAra evaM usase atirikta kathana nizIthasUtra kA yaha
saMpAdana niyukti, bhASya, caNi ke AdhAra se yA pramukhatA se kiyA gayA hai|
mUlapATha ke saMpAdana meM evaM sUtra kI artharacanA meM upalabdha aneka
pratiyoM ko gauNa karake niryakti, bhASya, caNi ke Adha ko pramukhatA dI gaI
hai| vivecana karane meM bhI ukta vyAkhyAnoM ko pramukhatA dI gaI hai, tathApi
kucha sthAnoM meM AgamaprAzayoM ko pramukhatA dekara ina vyAkhyAoM se bhinna yA
viparIta vivecana bhI kiyA gayA hai| isa nizIthasUtra ke atirikta vyavahArasUtra
meM bhI kucha sthAnoM meM aisA kiyA gayA hai, ve sabhI sthala nimna haiM (1)
nizIthasUtra u. 2 sU. 1 "pAdapoMchana" (2) nizIthasUtra u. 2 sU. 8 "visUyAvei"
(3) nizIthasUtra u. 3 sU. 73 "golehaNiyAsu" (4) nizIthasUtra u. 3 sU. 80
"aNuggae sUrie" (5-6) nizIthasUtra u. 19 sU. 1aura 6 "viyaDa" aura "gAlei" (7)
vyavahAra u. 2 "aTThajAya" (8) vyavahAra u. 3 sU. 1-2 "gaNadhAraNa" (9)
vyavahAra u. "soDiyasAlA" (10) vyavahAra u. "tivAsapariyAe" (11) vyavahAra u.
"palAsagaMsi" (12-13) vyavahAra u. sU. 9-10 "niruddha pariyAe, niruddhavAsa
pariyAe" " " m

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The primary reason for differentiating the meaning and interpretation of these
words from ancient commentaries is to correctly understand the intent of the
Agamas. For specific information, one should carefully study the marked
passages. There, an attempt has been made to clarify the subject and intent with
reasons and Agamic evidence.  **The Imposition of Ācāra-prakalpa and
Prāyaścitta**  In the Samavāyāṅgasūtra, twenty-eight types of Prāyaścitta
imposition are also called Ācāra-prakalpa. The reason for this is that these 28
Prāyaścitta impositions are also related to the study of Ācāra-prakalpa, hence
they are called Ācāra-prakalpa.  There is some distortion in the original text
of the 28 types of imposition due to a scribal error, which even the
commentators have not discussed.  There, the imposition begins with one month
and five days and ends with four months and twenty-five days. This way of
starting in the middle and ending in the middle does not seem appropriate.  In
reality, one should start with the Prāyaścitta-imposition of five nights and
then perform six options for one month and twenty-four options for four months.
This method and order of giving Prāyaścitta is also clearly evident from the
Bhāṣya and other commentaries. However, there is no basis for starting with one
month and five days and going up to four months and twenty-five days, and then
performing twenty-four bhangas. There is also no explanation for the reason
behind it. Therefore, it is appropriate to perform twenty-four options from five
days to four months. Even in the Niśīth, Prāyaścitta-sthāna are mentioned for
four months, and in the commentaries, the imposition begins from five days. The
last four options after twenty-four options are undisputed - (1) Laghu (2) Guru
(3) Saṃpūrṇa (4) Apūrṇa. Thus, a total of twenty-eight Ācāra-prakalpa are
mentioned. In expectation, the study and divisions of the Ācārāṅga and
Niśīthasūtra are also called twenty-eight Ācāra-prakalpa.  **The Main Subject of
the Niśīthasūtra**  This Chhedasūtra primarily deals with the amount of
Prāyaścitta for each fault if someone criticizes themselves for violating the
limits of restraint due to unavoidable reasons or without any reason. It is
divided into twenty sections as follows:  The first section outlines the faults
that are eligible for Guru-māsika Prāyaścitta. Sections 2 to 5 outline the
faults that are eligible for Laghu-māsika Prāyaścitta. Sections 6 to 11 outline
the faults that are eligible for Guru-cāumāsika Prāyaścitta. Sections 12 to 19
outline the faults that are eligible for Laghu-cāumāsika Prāyaścitta. The
twentieth section describes the method of giving and bearing Prāyaścitta.  The
purification of Atikrama, Vyatikrama, and Atichāra is achieved through the minor
Prāyaścitta of Ālocanā and Micchāmi Dukkadam. The Niśīthasūtra-prescribed
Prāyaścitta is for the consumption of Anācāra-doṣa. This is the limit for
ordinary Sādhu who are Sthavira-kalpi.  Those who are Jinakalpī or Pratimādhārī,
etc., who are special Sādhu, also have to perform the Guru Prāyaścitta
prescribed by the Niśīthasūtra for Atikrama, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ina zabdoM ke artha evaM vivecana ko prAcIna vyAkhyAnoM se bhinna karane kA
pramukha kAraNa Agama-Azaya ko sahI samajhAnA hI rahA hai| vizeSa jAnakArI ke
lie aMkita sthaloM kA dhyAnapUrvaka adhyayana karanA caahie| vahAM viSaya aura
Azaya ko hetu evaM Agama-pramANoM se spaSTa karane kA prayatna kiyA gayA hai|
AcAraprakalpa evaM prAyazcitta kI AropaNA samavAyAMgasUtra meM aTThAIsa prakAra
kI prAyazcitta AropaNA ko bhI AcAraprakalpa kahA gayA hai| usakA kAraNa bhI yahI
hai ki vaha 28 prAyazcitta prAropaNA bhI prAcAraprakalpa-adhyayana se hI
sambandhita hai, ataH use AcAraprakalpa kaha diyA gayA hai| 28 prakAra kI
AropaNA ke mUlapATha meM vahAM lipidoSa se kucha vikRti huI hai, jisakI
vyAkhyAkAroM ne bhI carcA nahIM kI hai| vahAM AropaNA kA prArambha eka mAsa aura
pAca dina se karake cAra mAsa 25 dina para usakA aMta kiyA gayA hai. isa taraha
bIca se prArambha kara bIca hI meM pUrNa karanA saMgata pratIta nahIM hotA hai|
vAstava meM pAMca rAtri ke prAyazcitta-AropaNA se prArambha kara eka mAsa taka 6
vikalpa aura cAra mAsa taka 24 vikalpa karane cAhie  /  yahI prAyazcitta dene kI
AropaNA kI vidhi evaM krama bhASyAdi se bhI spaSTa siddha hotA hai| kintu eka
mAsa pAMca dina se prArambha karake 4 mAsa 25 dina taka hI le jAkara 24 bhaMga
karane kI saMgati kA koI bhI AdhAra nahIM hai evaM usake kAraNa kA spaSTIkaraNa
bhI nahIM ho sakatA hai| ataH pAMca dina se lekara cAra mAsa taka ke 24 vikalpa
karanA hI ucita hai| nizItha meM bhI cAra mAsa taka ke hI prAyazcittasthAna kahe
gaye haiM aura vyAkhyAoM meM pAMca dina se hI AropaNA prArambha kI jAtI hai| 24
vikalpa ke bAda ke aMtima cAra vikalpa to nirvivAda haiM- (1) laghu (2) guru (3)
saMpUrNa (4) apUrNa  /  yoM kula aTThAIsa prAcAraprakalpa kahe haiN| apekSA se
AcArAMga aura nizIthasUtra ke adhyayana evaM vibhAgoM kI jor3a ko bhI aTThAIsa
prAcAraprakalpa kahA jAtA hai| nizIthasUtra kA pramukha viSaya anivArya kAraNoM
se yA kAraNoM ke binA saMyama kI maryAdAoM ko bhaMga karake yadi koI svayaM
AlocanA kare taba kisa doSa kA kitanA prAyazcitta hotA hai, yaha isa chedasUtra
kA pramukha viSaya hai| jo bIsa uddezoM meM isa prakAra vibhakta hai pahale
uddezaka meM gurumAsika prAyazcitta yogya doSoM kA prarUpaNa hai| uddezaka 2 se
5 taka meM laghumAsika prAyazcitta yogya doSoM kA prarUpaNa hai| uddezaka 6 se
11 taka meM gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta yogya doSoM kA prarUpaNa hai| uddezaka 12 se
19 taka meM laghacaumAsI prAyazcitta yogya doSoM kA prarUpaNa hai| bIsaveM
uddezaka meM prAyazcitta dene evaM use vahana karane kI vidhi kahI gaI hai|
atikrama, vyatikrama, aticAra kI zUddhi AlocanA aura micchAmi dukkaDaM ke alpa
prAyazcitta se ho jAtI hai| anAcAra doSa ke sevana kA hI nizIthasUtrokta
prAyazcitta hotA hai| yaha sthavirakalpI sAmAnya sAdhunoM kI maryAdA hai|
jinakalpI yA pratimAdhArI Adi viziSTa sAdhanAvAloM ko atikrama Adi kA bhI
nizIthasUtrokta guru prAyazcitta aAtA hai| ( 15 )

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1. The **Lahu-masik** penance for minor offenses is one **ekasana** (fasting for
one day) for the least severe and 27 **upavasas** (fasting days) for the most
severe. 2. The **Guru-masik** penance for minor offenses is one **nivi** (two
**ekasanas**) for the least severe and 3 **upavasas** for the most severe. 3.
The **Lahu-chaumasik** penance for minor offenses is one **ayambil** (or one
**ekasana**) for the least severe and 108 **upavasas** for the most severe. 4.
The **Guru-chaumasik** penance for minor offenses is one **upavasa** (four
**ekasanas**) for the least severe and 120 **upavasas** for the most severe. 5.
Repeatedly performing the penances for these offenses or performing them for a
long time increases the severity of the **tapa-prayaschitta** (penance), which
can even be increased to **diksha-ched** (excommunication). 6. If a practitioner
hides a major offense by secretly performing it and another person reveals the
offense and proves it, then the practitioner receives the penance of **diksha-
ched**. 7. If someone else proves the offense and the practitioner, through
excessive deceit and hypocrisy, acts contrary to the truth or even accuses the
accuser falsely, but then, when forced, admits to the offense and agrees to
perform the penance, then they are given the penance of **new diksha**
(initiation). 8. If they remain in their stubbornness and refuse to admit to the
offense, then they are expelled from the **gachch** (community). 9. The secrecy
of the **sutras** (texts): No knowledge or **agama** (scripture) is completely
secret, but there are limits to its disclosure. 10. The **mala agamas**
(secondary scriptures) do not mention any **sutra** as being secret. They only
state that a qualified disciple should be taught the **sutras** and their
meaning (**paramarth**) in a sequential manner. 11. An unqualified or unprepared
person should not study any scripture, because according to **Nishita-sutra** (a
scripture) **uddeshak 19**, the teacher who teaches them will receive penance.
Similarly, if qualified and virtuous disciples are not taught in a sequential
manner, then they also receive the penance mentioned in the **sutras**. 12.
Thus, it is clear that no **agama** is secret except for qualified **sadhus**
(monks) and **sadhvis** (nuns). 13. The **agamas** mention that **sadhvis**
should study eleven **anga-sutras** (canonical texts) out of the twelve, while
**sadhus** should study all twelve **angas**. **Shravakas** (laymen) are also
mentioned as studying the **shruta** (scripture) and its **upadhan**
(application). 14. During the time of the **tirthankaras** (liberated souls),
only the **dwadasangi shruta** (twelve-part scripture) existed. The compilation
of the remaining **sutras** occurred over time, which is undeniable. 15. Thus,
even though the **agamas** are considered secret, during the time of the
**tirthankaras**, the **anga shastras** (canonical texts) were studied by the
**sadhu**, **sadhvi**, **shravaka**, and **shravika** (fourfold community). 16.
The **Vyavahar Sutra** (a scripture) written by **Bhadra-bahu** (a Jain scholar)
in the **Chaudas-purvi** (fourteenth century) also emphasizes the importance of
studying and teaching **prachar-prakalpa** (practical conduct). It states that
every young **sant** (saint) and **sati** (saintly woman) must memorize it,
which suggests that its secrecy is not absolute. Thus, the study of **Nishita-
sutra** or other **sutras** was also prevalent in the fourfold community in
ancient times. 17. Over time, the era of **agama-lekhan** (scriptural writing)
came, followed by the era of **vyakhya-lekhan** (scriptural commentary), and now
the era of **prakasha-yug** (publication). The writing and publication of
**agamas** has occurred and continues to occur over time. Written and published
copies of these scriptures exist in India and abroad.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1. laghumAsika prAyazcitta jaghanya eka ekAsanA, utkRSTa 27 upavAsa hai|
gurumAsika prAyazcitta jaghanya eka nivI (do ekAsanA), utkRSTa 3. upavAsa hai|
3. laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta jaghanya eka Ayambila (yA eka ekAsanA), utkRSTa 108
upavAsa hai| gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta jaghanya eka upavAsa (cAra ekAsanA),
utkRSTa 120 upavAsa hai| 5. ukta doSoM ke prAyazcittasthAnoM kA bArambAra sevana
karane para athavA unakA sevana lambe samaya taka calatA rahane para tapa-
prAyazcitta kI sImA bar3ha jAtI hai, jo kabhI dIkSAcheda taka bhI bar3hA dI jA
sakatI hai| 6. koI sAdhaka bar3e doSa ko gupta rUpa meM sevana karake chipAnA
cAhe aura dUsarA vyakti usa doSa ko prakaTa kara siddha karake prAyazcitta
dilavAve to use dIkSAcheda kA hI prAyazcitta AtA hai| dUsare ke dvArA siddha
karane para bhI atyadhika jhaTha-kapaTa karake viparIta AcaraNa kare athavA ulTA
cora kotavAla ko DAMTane kA kAma kare kintu majabUra karane para phira saralatA
svIkAra karake prAyazcitta lene ke lie taiyAra hove to use naI dIkSA kA
prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai  /  8. yadi usa durAgraha meM hI rahe evaM saralatA
svIkAra kare hI nahIM to use gaccha se nikAla diyA jAtA hai| sUtroM kI
gopanIyatA koI bhI jJAna yA Agama ekAnta gopanIya nahIM hotA hai, kintu usakI
bhI apanI koI sImA avazya hotI hai| mala AgamoM meM kahIM bhI kisI bhI sUtra ko
gopanIya nahIM kahA gayA hai| kevala itanA avazya kahA gayA hai ki yogyatAprApta
ziSya ko krama se hI sUtra evaM unake artha paramArtha kA adhyayana karAnA
caahie| prayogya ko yA krama-aprApta ko kisI bhI zAstra kA adhyayana nahIM
karanA cAhie, kyoMki use adhyayana karAne para adhyApana karAne vAle ko
nizIthasUtra uddezaka 19 ke anusAra prAyazcitta AtA hai, sAtha hI yogyatAprApta
aura vinIta ziSyoM ko yathAkrama se adhyayana nahIM karAne para bhI unheM
sUtrokta prAyazcitta pAtA hai| isa prakAra yaha sahaja hI spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki
yogya sAdhu-sAdhviyoM kI apekSA koI bhI Agama gopanIya nahIM hotA hai| AgamoM
meM 12 aMgasUtroM meM se sAdhviyoM ko gyAraha aMgasUtroM kA adhyayana karane kA
varNana AtA hai| sAdhuoM ko 12 hI aMgoM kA adhyayana karane kA varNana AtA hai
evaM zrAvakoM ko bhI zruta kA adhyayana evaM zruta ke upadhAna kA varNana pAtA
hai| tIrthaMkaroM kI maujUdagI meM dvAdazAMgI zruta hI thA, zeSa sUtroM kI
saMkalanA kAlAMtara meM huI yaha nirvivAda hai| isa prakAra Agama gopanIya hote
hue bhI tIrthaMkaroM ke samaya bhI aMga zAstroM kA sAdhu, sAdhvI, zrAvaka,
zrAvikA caturvidha saMgha adhyayana karatA thA  /  caudahapUrvI bhadrabAhu-
racita vyavahArasUtra meM bhI prAcAraprakalpa ke adhyayana-adhyApana ko
atyadhika mahattva diyA gayA hai  /  pratyeka yuvaka saMta satI ko isakA
kaMThastha honA Avazyaka kahA hai, isase isakI atigopanIyatA kA jo vAtAvaraNa
hai, vaha Avazyaka pratIta nahIM hotA hai  /  isa prakAra nizIthasUtra yA anya
sUtroM kA adhyayana bhI caturvidha saMgha meM prAcInakAla se pracalita thaa|
kAlAMtara meM Agamalekhana-yuga evaM phira vyAkhyAlekhana-yaga aura aba
prakAzanayaga AyA hai| prAgamoM kA lekhana aura prakAzana samaya-samaya para huA
aura ho rahA hai  /  deza-videza meM bhI inakI likhita aura prakAzita pratiyoM (
16 )

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The propagation of [the secret] has taken place. Therefore, the statement that
has been prevalent about confidentiality has now become merely a statement. For
a worthy Sadhu-Sadhvi, even the Cheda Sutra, let alone other Agamas, are not
confidential; rather, it is no exaggeration to say that without studying the
Cheda Sutras or understanding their ultimate meaning, the Sadhaka's practice is
incomplete, crippled, and dependent, and without their most subtle study, the
Sangha system is completely dark. Without studying the ultimate meaning of the
Cheda Sutras, Shraman Shramani cannot become even a lowly Bahushruta, and
without being a lowly Bahushruta, they can always wander in dependence. They
cannot hold any kind of prominence, cannot wander freely and roam, and always
live their lives based on the decisions and foundations of others. For those who
bear the burden of the Sangha system, it is absolutely necessary to understand
these Cheda Sutras and their ultimate meaning. Keeping these many perspectives
in mind, this Hindi edition of the Cheda Sutras with commentary has been
prepared. It is hoped that this will provide multifaceted guidance to ordinary
Sadhakas and especially to those holding the position of Singhada and other such
dignitaries. Param Pujya Shraddhey Shri Kanhaiyalalji M. Sa. "Kamal" took my
help in this important work of editing the Cheda Sutras and gave me the
unparalleled opportunity of serving the Agamas, for which I am deeply grateful
to him. His kindness cannot be forgotten in my lifetime. Finally, if any kind of
linguistic or typographical error has occurred in this editing collaboration due
to ignorance or misunderstanding, I offer "Micchami Dukkadam" from the heart. I
also hope that learned readers will forgive me for these mistakes, considering
that "only the hidden is prone to error," and will accept the correct truth as
per the Agamas. Shri Marudhar Kesari Pavan Dham Jaitaran -Tilock Muni

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kA pracAra huA hai  /  ataH gopanIyatA kA pracalita huA kathana aba kevala
kathanamAtra raha gayA hai| yogya sAdhu-sAdhvI ke lie anya prAgama to kyA
chedasUtra bhI gopanIya nahIM haiM; apitu yaha kahA jAya to koI atizayokti nahIM
hai ki chedasUtroM kA adhyayana kie binA yA unake artha paramArtha ko samajhe
binA sAdhaka kI sAdhanA adhUrI hai, paMgu hai, paravaza hai tathA inake
sUkSmatama adhyayana ke binA saMghavyavasthA to paripUrNa aMdhakAramaya hI hotI
hai| chedasUtroM ke artha paramArtha ke adhyayana ke binA zramaNa zramaNI
jaghanya bahuzruta bhI nahIM bana sakate aura jaghanya bahuzruta ke binA ve
hamezA paravaza hI vicaraNa kara sakate haiM  /  ve kisI bhI prakAra kI
pramukhatA dhAraNa nahIM kara sakate haiM, svatantra vicaraNa evaM gocarI bhI
nahIM kara sakate, sadA dUsaroM ke nirNaya aura AdhAra para hI jIvana jIte haiN|
saMghavyavasthA kA bhAra vahana karane vAloM ke lie to ye chedasUtra aura inakA
artha paramArtha samajhanA nitAnta Avazyaka hai| inhIM aneka dRSTikoNoM ko
najara meM rakhate hue chedasUtroM kA yaha hindI vivecanayukta saMpAdana kArya
kiyA gayA hai| AzA hai isase sAmAnya sAdhakoM ko aura vizeSa kara
siMghADApramukha Adi padavIdharoM ko bahumukhI mArgadarzana prApta hogaa| parama
pUjya zraddheya zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. sA. "kamala" ne apane isa mahattvazIla
chedasatroM ke sampAdanakArya meM merA sahayoga liyA aura mujhe AgamasevA kA
anupama avasara diyA, usake lie maiM aMtaHkaraNa se unakA mahAna upakAra mAnatA
hUM  /  unake isa upakAra ko jIvana bhara nahIM bhulAyA jA sakatA hai| aMta meM
isa saMpAdana-sahayoga meM anajAna meM yA samajhabhrama se kisI bhI prakAra kI
bhASA yA prarUpaNA kI skhalanA huI ho to antaHkaraNa se "micchAmi dukkaDaM" detA
huuN| vidvAn pAThakoM se bhI AzA karatA hUM ki ve "chadmasthamAtra bhUla kA
pAtra hai" yaha mAna kara una bhUloM ke liye mujhe kSamA pradAna kareMge evaM
sahI tattva kA prAgamAnusAra nirNaya kara use hI svIkAra kreNge| zrI
marudharakesarI pAvanadhAma jaitAraNa -tilokamuni

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Nishishasa: A Critical Study -Upadhyay Shri Devendramuni  Jain Agam literature
holds a unique place in Indian literature. The word Agam is derived from the
prefix 'A' and the root 'Gam'. 'A' means complete and 'Gam' means motion or
attainment. In Acharang Sutra, the word Agam is used in the sense of knowing. In
Bhagavati Anuyogdwar and Stananga, the word Pragam is used in the sense of
scripture. The great Mahamanishis have written various definitions of the word
Agam. It is not possible to quote all those definitions here. In the commentary
of Syadvadamanjari5, the definition of Agam is as follows: 'Aaptvakan is Agam.
By treatment, Aaptvakan-born knowledge is also Pragam.' Acharya Malayagiri has
written: 'That which gives complete knowledge of objects with limitations is
Agam.' In Ratnakaraavtarika Vritti, the definition of Agam is: 'That which gives
true knowledge of objects is Agam.'8 Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman has written
while defining Agam: 'That which gives the right education is called scripture
Agam or Shrutajnana.'  Pragam literature is the nectar of the thoughts of
omniscient-all-seeing great men. This Agam literature is as vast and vast as the
body of letters, it is even more adorned with the dignity of meaning. Where
there is a predominance of philosophical thought, a profound analysis of
Dravyanuyog, there is also a detailed description of the conduct and thoughts of
Shramans and Shravaks, vows-restraint, renunciation-penance, fasting, atonement,
etc. There is also proper use of stories to clarify the guru-serious secrets of
religion and philosophy. In addition to these, the living 1. (a) "Agametta
Pranavejja"-Acharang Sutra 115.4 (b) "Laghavam Agammane"-Acharang Sutra 116.3 2.
Bhagavati Sutra 5.3.192 3. Anuyogdwar Sutra 42 4. Stananga Sutra 338 5.
"Aaptvakanadaavibhrutamarthasanvedanamaagam, upachaaradaaptvakanam cha."
-Syadvadamanjari Tika Shlok 38 "Pa abhividhina sakalashratavishayavyaaptirūpena,
maryādāyā vā yathāvasthitaprarūpaṇārūpayā gamyanteparicchidyante arthāḥ yena saḥ
āgamaḥ." -Aavashyak (Vritti) Malayagiri "Pagamyante
maryādāyā'vabuddhyante'arthāḥ anenetyāgamaḥ -Ratnakaraavtarikavritti "Sasijjai
jeṇa tayaṁ satthaṁ taṁ vā vivesiyaṁ nāṇaṁ. Pragam eva ya satthaṁ āgama satthaṁ
tu sūyanāṇaṁ.। -Visheshaavashyakbhaashya Ga.559

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nizIzasA : eka samIkSAtmaka adhyayana -upAcArya zrI devendramuni bhAratIya
sAhitya meM jaina Agama sAhitya kA apanA viziSTa sthAna hai| Agama zabda 'A'
upasarga evaM gam dhAtu se nirmita huA hai| 'A' kA artha pUrNa aura gama kA
artha gati yA prApti hai| AcArAMgasUtra meM Agama zabda jAnane ke artha meM
vyavahRta huA hai  /  bhagavatI anuyogadvAra aura sthAnAMga meM prAgama zabda
zAstra ke artha meM prayu huA hai  /  mUrdhanya mahAmanISiyoM ne Agama zabda kI
vividha paribhASAe~ likhI haiN| una sabhI paribhASAnoM ko yahAM para uddhRta
karanA sambhava nahIM hai| syAdvAdamaJjarI5 kI TIkA meM Agama kI paribhASA isa
prakAra kI hai'Aptavacana Agama hai  /  upacAra se Aptavacana-samutpanna
arthajJAna bhI pAgama hai|' AcArya malayagiri ne likhA hai-'jisase padArthoM kA
paripUrNatA ke sAtha maryAdita jJAna ho vaha Agama hai|' ratnAkarAvatArikA vRtti
meM Agama kI paribhASA yaha hai-'jisase padArthoM kA yathArtha jJAna ho vaha
Agama hai|'8 jinabhadragaNi kSamAzramaNa ne Agama kI paribhASA dete hue likhA
hai jisase sahI zikSA prApta hotI hai, vaha zAstra Agama yA zrutajJAna kahalAtA
hai| prAgama sAhitya sarvajJa-sarvadarzI mahApuruSoM ke vicAroM kA navanIta hai|
yaha AgamasAhitya akSaradeha se jitanA vizAla aura virATa hai usase bhI adhika
arthagarimA se maNDita hai| usameM jahAM dArzanika cintana kA prAdhAnya hai,
dravyAnuyoga kA gambhIra vizleSaNa hai vahA~ usameM zramaNoM aura zrAvakoM ke
prAcAra-vicAra, vrata-saMyama, tyAgatapasyA, upavAsa, prAyazcitta Adi kA bhI
vistAra se nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| dharma aura darzana ke guru-gambhIra rahasyoM
ko spaSTa karane hetu kathAoM kA bhI samUcita upayoga hayA hai| inake atirikta
AdhyAtmika jIvana ke jIte-jAgate 1. (ka) "AgamettA prANavejjA"-AcArAMgasUtra 115
/ 4 (kha) "lAghavaM AgamamANe"-AcArAMgasUtra 116 / 3 2. bhagavatIsUtra 5 / 3 /
192 3. anuyogadvArasUtra 42 4. sthAnAMgasUtra 338 5.
"AptavacanAdAvirbhUtamarthasaMvedanamAgamaH, upacArAdAptavacanaM c|"
-syAdvAdamaJjarI TIkA zloka 38 "pAabhividhinA sakalazrataviSayavyAptirUpeNa,
maryAdayA vA yathAvasthitaprarUpaNArUpayA gamyanteparicchidyante arthAH yena saH
AgamaH  / " -Avazyaka (vRtti) malayagiri "pAgamyante
maryAdayA'vabuddhayante'rthAH anenetyAgamaH -ratnAkarAvatArikAvRtti "sAsijjai
jeNa tayaM satthaM taM vA vivesiyaM nANaM  /  prAgama eva ya satthaM Agama
satthaM tu sUyanANaM  /  /  -vizeSAvazyakabhASya gA.559

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This text is a detailed description of the Jain scriptures known as "Cheda
Sutras". Here's a translation preserving the Jain terms:  **The Symbolism**
This text is a detailed account of the birth, austerities, teachings, and
travels of the Tirthankaras, starting with Lord Mahavira. It also describes the
lineage of disciples, the boundaries of the Arya and Anarya regions, and the
contemporary kings, princes, and other religious sects. The ancient Jain
scriptures (Agamas) infused a new consciousness into every aspect of life. They
presented a vibrant and realistic perspective on life, stating that the goal of
life is not to get entangled in worldly desires, but to illuminate life through
renunciation, detachment, and self-control. This is why the Jain Agamas
constantly inspire the seeker to practice self-control, austerities, devotional
practices, and introspection.  **The Cheda Sutras**  Acharya Devavachana, in the
Nandi Sutra, divided the Agamas into two parts: Anga-Pravesht and Anga-Bahya.
The Cheda Sutras are part of the Anga-Bahya Agamas. The Cheda Sutras provide a
detailed analysis of the rules of conduct for Jain monks and nuns. This analysis
was originally presented by Lord Mahavira himself, making it unique and
extraordinary.  Later Acharyas further developed these rules. The Cheda Sutras
analyze various methods of atonement that monks and nuns must follow when they
break the rules. The Cheda Sutras were created to maintain the purity and
integrity of monastic life. Therefore, studying the Cheda Sutras is not only
necessary but also mandatory for the proper conduct of monastic life.  **The
Origin and Classification of Cheda Sutras**  The term "Cheda Sutra" first
appears in the "Aavashyak Niyukti". It is not found in any earlier ancient
literature. Later, Acharya Jinabhadragani Kshamashraman mentioned the Cheda
Sutras in the "Vishesh Aavashyak Bhashya", and Sanghadasagana mentioned them in
the "Nishith Bhashya". The reason for classifying the Cheda Sutras separately
and including the "Nishith" and other texts under them is not explicitly
explained. It is clear that the texts we call Cheda Sutras are primarily
atonement scriptures. The terms "Vyavahar", "Aalocana", "Shodhi", and
"Prayashchitta" are considered synonyms in the "Vyavahar Bhashya". Based on
this, the Cheda Sutras can be called "Vyavahar Sutras", "Aalocana Sutras",
"Shodhi Sutras", and "Prayashchitta Sutras". Acharya Malayagiri used the terms
"Padavibhag" and "Samachari" for the Sutras in the "Aavashyak Niyukti"
commentary. Both "Padavibhag" and "Cheda" convey the same meaning. It is
possible that the Cheda Sutras were named after this concept.  **The Structure
of Cheda Sutras**  The Cheda Sutras are independent of each other. Each Sutra is
self-contained. The interpretation of these Sutras is also done from the
perspective of "Cheda" or "Vibhag".  **References**  1. Nandi Sutra 72 2.
Vyavahar Bhashya 2.90 3. Aavashyak Niyukti 777 4. Vishesh Aavashyak Bhashya 2295
5. Nishith Bhashya 5947 6. Aavashyak Niyukti 665, Malayagiri Vritti

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pratIka zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra prabhRti tIrthaMkaroM ke janma, tapasyA,
upadeza aura vihAracaryA, ziSyaparamparAyeM, prA aura anArya kSetra kI sImAe~,
tAtkAlika rAjA, rAjakumAra aura mata-matAntaroM kA vizeSa nirUpaNa hai  /
prAgamasAhitya ne jIvana ke pratyeka kSetra meM abhinava cetanA kA saMcAra kiyA
/  jIvana kA sajIva aura yathArtha dRSTikoNa prastuta karate hue kahA ki jIvana
kA lakSya viSayavAsanA ke dala-dala meM phaMsane kA nahIM, apitu tyAga, vairAgya
aura saMyama se jIvana ko camakAnA hai  /  yahI kAraNa hai jaina AgamasAhitya
meM sarvatra sAdhaka ko saMyama sAdhanA tapa:zrArAdhanA aura manomanthana kI
pAvana preraNA pradAna kI gaI hai  /  AcArya devavAcaka ne nandIsUtra meM
AgamasAhitya ko do bhAgoM meM vibhakta kiyA hai' - aMgapraviSTa aura aMgabAhya
/  chedasUtra aMgabAhya Agama haiM  /  chedasUtroM meM jaina zramaNa aura
zramaNiyoM ke jIvana se sambandhita AcAra viSayaka niyamoniyama kA vizada
vizleSaNa hai  /  yaha vizleSaNa svayaM bha. mahAvIra ke dvArA nirUpita hai| jo
bahuta hI adbhuta aura anUThA hai  /  usake pazcAt uttaravartI AcAryoM ne bhI
usako vikasita kiyA  /  chedasUtroM meM niyama bhaMga ho jAne para zramaNa-
zramaNiyoM dvArA anusaraNIya vividha prAyazcitta vidhiyoM kA vizleSaNa huA hai
/  zramaNajIvana kI pavitratAnirmalatA banAye rakhane hetu hI chedasUtroM kA
nirmANa huA  /  yahI kAraNa hai zramaNajIvana ke samyak saMcAlana ke lie
chedasUtroM kA adhyayana Avazyaka hI nahIM, apitu anivArya mAnA gayA 1
sarvaprathama chedasUtra zabda kA prayoga hameM Avazyaka niyukti meM milatA hai|
isake pUrva kisI bhI prAcIna sAhitya meM 'chedasUtra' yaha nAma nahIM AyA hai  /
usake pazcAt AcArya jinabhadragaNi kSamAzramaNa ne vizeSAvazyaka a bhASya meM
tathA saMghadAsagaNa ne nizIthabhASya 4 meM chedasUtra kA ullekha kiyA hai  /
chedasUtroM kA pRthak vargIkaraNa kyoM kiyA gayA ? kyoM nizItha Adi ko
chedasUtra ke antargata rakhA gayA ? isakA spaSTa samAdhAna vahIM para nahIM
kiyA gayA hai  /  yaha spaSTa hai ki hama jina AgamoM ko chedasUtra kI saMjJA
pradAna karate haiM, ve Agama mUlataH prAyazcitta sUtra haiM  /  vyavahAra,
AlocanA, zodhi aura prAyazcitta ye cAra zabda vyavahArabhASya meM paryAyavAcI
mAne gaye haiM  /  prastuta AdhAra se chedasUtroM ko vyavahArasUtra,
AlocanAsUtra, zodhisUtra aura prAyazcittasUtra kaha sakate haiN| sUtroM ke lie
'padavibhAga', 'samAcArI' zabda kA prayoga prAcArya malayagiri ne Avazyaka
niyukti kI vRtti meM kiyA hai  /  padavibhAga aura cheda ye donoM zabda samAna
artha ko vyakta karate haiM  /  sambhava hai isa dRSTi se chedasUtra yaha nAma
rakhA gayA ho  /  chedasUtroM meM eka sUtra kA dUsare sUtra se sambandha nahIM
hai  /  chedasUtra ke sabhI sUtra svatantra haiN| una sUtroM kI vyAkhyA bhI
chedadRSTi se yA vibhAgadRSTi se kI jAtI hai  /  1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. nandIsUtra 72
jaM ca mahAkappa suyaM, jANi prasesANi cheasuttANi  /  caraNakaraNANuogo tti
kAliyatthe uvagayANi  //  jaM ca mahAkappa suyaM, jANi asesANi cheasuttANi  /
caraNakaraNANuogo tti kAliyatthe uvagayANi || chedattaNisahAdI prattho ya gato
ya chedasuttAdI  /  tanimittosa hipAhuDe, ya gArhati aNNattha 11 vyavahArabhASya
2 / 90 padavibhAga, samAcArI chedasUtrANi  /  20 - Avazyakaniryukti 777 -
vizeSAvazyakabhASya 2295 nizIthabhASya 5947 Avazyakaniyukti 665 malayagiri vRtti

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
We have already written in the previous lines that the Chhed-Sutras are called
Prayashchitta-Sutras. In the Sthananga, five characters are mentioned for the
Shramans - 1. Samayik, 2. Chhedopasthapanik, 3. Pariharavishuddhi, 4.
Sukshmasampray, 5. Yathakyat'. Of these, the last three characters have become
extinct in the present time. The Samayik character is short-lived, the
Chhedopasthapanik character lasts for life. The Prayashchitta is also related to
this character. It is possible that the Prayashchitta-Sutras were given the name
Chhed-Sutras keeping this character in mind. The Dasha-Shruta-Skandha, Vyavahar
and Brihatkalpa Sutras are mentioned in the ninth Pratyakhyan. It is also
possible that they were given the name Chhed-Sutras because they were cut off
from the ninth Pratyakhyan, i.e., separated. In the seventeenth Sutra of the
nineteenth Uddeshak of the Nisihtha-Sutra, the Chhed-Sutra is called
'Uttamashrut'. Sanghadasagani has considered the Chhed-Sutra as Uttamashrut in
the Nisihtha-Bhashya. Jinadasagani Mahttar has raised this question in the
Nisihtha-Churni and again he himself has solved the question by writing that the
Chhed-Sutra clarifies the character by describing the Prayashchitta-vidhi,
therefore the Chhed-Sutras are called Uttamashrut. Thinking about the word
Uttamashrut, a curiosity arises in the mind that is the Chhed-Sutra not 'Chhek'
Sutra? Chhekshrut means Kalyanashrut and Uttamashrut. In the Churni of the
Dasha-Shruta-Skandha, the Dasha-Shruta-Skandha is considered the main text of
the 'Chhek' Sutra. The Dasha-Shruta-Skandha is not a Prayashchitta-Sutra. It is
an Achar-Sutra. Therefore, the Dasha-Shruta-Skandha is taken in the Charan-
Karan-Anuyog in the Dasha-Shruta-Skandha-Churni. Even if the Chhed-Sutra is
considered as the Chhek-Sutra, there can be no objection. In the Dashavaikalik-
Sutra of Acharya Shayambhav - "Jan Chheyan Tam Samayare" 7 words are obtained.
Here, the word Chhey confirms the existence of Chhek. In the Digambar tradition,
two divisions of Agam literature have been made in the Shatkhandagam, 6 Sarvarth
Siddhi, 10 Tattvarth Rajavartika, 11 Gommatsar Jivakand 12 etc. - Angabahy and
Angapravesh. But in these, Chhed is this 1. 2. 6. 7. (a) Sthananga Sutra 5,
Uddeshak 2, Sutra 428 (b) Visheshavashak Bhashya Ga. 1260-70 Kataram Suttam?
Dasaukappo Vavharo Ya. Kataraato Uddhritam? Uchyate Pacchakkhanapuvao. 3.
Nisihtha. 19.17 4. Chheyamuttamasu. - Nisihtha-Bhashya, 6184 5. Chhedsuyam Kamha
Uttamasutan? Bhannati - Jamha Ettham Sapayachchitto Vidhi Bhannati, Jamha Ye
Tenacharanavishuddhi Kareti Tamha Tam Uttamasutan. - Nisihtha-Bhashya, 6184 ki
Churni. - Dasha-Shruta-Skandha-Churni Patra 2 Imam Punachheyasuttapamuhabhuttam.
Dashavaikalik 4|11 - Acharya Tulasi Nisihhajjanam Prastavana | Shatkhandagam,
Bhag 1. Pr. 96 Sarvarth Siddhi: Pujyapad, 1-20 Tattvarth Rajavartika: Akalank,
1-20 Gommatsar Jivakand: Nemichandra, Pr. 134 8. 9. 10. 11. 12.  21 - Dasha-
Shruta-Skandha-Churni, Patra 2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hama pUrva paMktiyoM meM likha cuke haiM cheda-sUtroM ko prAyazcittasUtra kahA
gayA hai| sthAnAMga meM zramaNoM ke lie pAMca cAritroM kA ullekha hai - 1.
sAmAyika, 2. chedopasthApanIya, 3. parihAravizuddhi, 4. sUkSmasaMparAya, 5.
yathAkhyAta'  /  inameM se vartamAna meM antima tIna cAritra vicchinna ho gaye
haiM  /  sAmAyika cAritra svalpakAlIna hotA hai, chedopasthApanika cAritra hI
jIvanaparyanta rahatA hai  /  prAyazcitta kA sambandha bhI isI cAritra se hai  /
sambhavataH isI cAritra ko lakSya meM rakhakara prAyazcittasUtroM ko chedasUtra
kI saMjJA dI gaI ho  /  uddhRta kiye gaye haiM  /  usase dazAzrutaskandha,
vyavahAra aura bRhatkalpa ye sUtra nauveM pratyAkhyAna pUrva chinna arthAt
pRthak karane se unheM chedasUtra kI saMjJA dI gaI ho, yaha bhI sambhava hai  /
3 nizIthasUtra ke unnIsaveM uddezaka ke satrahaveM sUtra meM chedasUtra ko
'uttamazruta' kahA gayA hai  /  saMghadAsagaNi nizIthabhASya meM chedasUtra ko
uttamazruta mAnA hai  /  jinadAsagaNi mahattara ne nizIthacUrNi meM yaha prazna
upasthita kiyA hai aura punaH unhoMne hI prazna kA samAdhAna karate hue likhA
hai ki chedasUtra meM prAyazcittavidhi kA nirUpaNa hone se vaha cAritra kI
vizuddhi karatA hai, tadarthaM hI chedasUtroM ko uttamazruta kahA gayA hai  /  "
uttamazruta zabda para cintana karate hue eka jijJAsA antarmAnasa meM udbuddha
hotI hai ki chedasUtra kahIM 'cheka' sUtra to nahIM hai ? chekazruta kA artha
hai kalyANazruta aura uttamazruta  /  dazAzrutaskandha kI cUrNi meM
dazAzrutaskandha ko 'cheka' sUtra kA pramukha grantha mAnA hai  /
dazAzrutaskandha prAyazcittasUtra nahIM hai  /  vaha to zrAcArasUtra hai  /
isIlie dazAzrutaskandhacUrNa meM dazAzrutaskandha ko caraNakaraNAnuyoga meM liyA
gayA hai  /  yadi chedasUtra ko chekasUtra mAna bhI liyA jAya to kisI prakAra kI
Apatti nahIM ho sakatI  /  AcArya zayyaMbhava ke dazavaikAlikasUtra meM-- jaM
cheyaM taM samAyare 7 pada prApta hai  /  yahA~ para cheya zabda se cheka hone
kI puSTi hotI hai|5 SaTkhaNDAgama, 6 sarvArthasiddhi, 10 tattvArtha
rAjavArtika,' , 11 gommaTasAra jIvakANDa 12 prabhRti digambara paramparA ke
granthoM meM AgamasAhitya ke do vibhAga kiye gaye haiM-- aMgabAhya aura
aMgapraviSTa  /  para inameM cheda isa 1. 2. 6. 7. (ka) sthAnAMgasUtra 5,
uddezaka 2, sUtra 428 (kha) vizeSAvazyaka bhASya gA. 1260-70 kataraM suttaM ?
dasAukappo vavahAro ya  /  katarAto uddhRtaM ? ucyate paccakkhANapuvAo  /  3.
nizItha. 19 / 17 4. cheyamuttamasu  /  - nizIthabhASya, 6184 5. chedasuyaM kamhA
uttamasutaM ? bhaNNati - jamhA etthaM sapAyacchitto vidhi bhaNNati, jamhA ye
teNaccaraNavisuddhi kareti tamhA taM uttamasutaM  /  - nizItha bhASya, 6184 kI
cUrNi  /  - dazAzrutaskandhacUrNi patra 2 imaM puNaccheyasuttapamuhabhUtaM  /
dazavaikAlika 4|11 - AcArya tulasI nisIhajjhayaNaM prastAvanA | SaTkhaNDAgama,
bhAga 1. pR. 96 sarvArthasiddhiH pUjyapAda, 1-20 tattvArtharAjavArtika:
akalaMka, 1-20 gommaTasAra jIvakANDa : nemIcandra, pR. 134 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 21
- dazAzrutaskandhacUrNa, patra 2

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The type of division is not available. But in later texts, the names
Chhedashastra and Chhedapinda are found. It is possible that the word Chhed was
used in the Digambar tradition in the sense of atonement. Both Chhedashastra and
Chhedapinda are texts that describe atonement. Chhedapinda mentions eight
synonyms for atonement (1) Prayashchitta, (2) Chhed, (3) Malaharan, (4)
Papnashan, (5) Bodhi, (6) Puny, (7) Pavitra, (8) Pavan. Chhedashastra also
accepts both Prayashchitta and Chhed as synonyms. In short, Chhedasutra are
Prayashchittasutra.  In Samachari Shatak, Acharya Samaysundaragani has mentioned
six Chhedasutras - (1) Dasha Shruta Skandha, (2) Vyavahar, (3) Brihatkalpa, (4)
Nishita, (5) Mahanishita, (6) Jitakalpa. Out of these, the names of five or six
Sutras have been mentioned by Acharya Devavachka in Nandi Sutra. Scholars
believe that Jitakalpa is the work of Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman. The time of
Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman is around 650 CE. Its creation is after the creation
of Nandi Sutra. Therefore, it cannot be given a place in the category of Agam.
Mahanishita Sutra was destroyed by termites. Therefore, its original copy is not
available at present. Acharya Haribhadrasuri had restored it. Therefore, the
Mahanishita available at present does not come under the category of Pragam.
Thus, there are four original Chhedasutras - (1) Dasha Shruta Skandha, (2)
Vyavahar, (3) Brihatkalpa, (4) Nishita.  Nishita has a prominent place in
Chhedasutras. Nishita means unilluminated. This Sutra is full of exceptions.
Therefore, it was not taught to everyone. Jindasagani Mahत्तर has mentioned
three types of readers - (1) Aparinamka, (2) Parinamka, (3) Atiparinamka.
Aparinamka means whose intellect is immature. Parinamka means whose intellect is
mature. Atiparinamka means whose intellect is full of fallacies. Both Aparinamka
and Atiparinamka are not eligible to read Nishita. The reader who can hold the
secret for life is the enlightened reader who is eligible to read Nishita. The
word secret here reveals its confidentiality. Only the sadhu who has been
initiated for three years and has qualities like seriousness can study Nishita.
A sixteen-year-old sadhu with hair on the side of his eyes can be the reader of
Nishita.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAra kA vibhAga prApta nahIM hai  /  para bAda ke granthoM meM chedazAstra
aura chedapiNDa ye nAma prApta hote haiM  /  sambhava hai digambara paramparA
meM bhI prAyazcitta ke artha meM hI cheda zabda vyavahata rahA ho| chedazAstra
aura chedapiNDa donoM hI granthoM meM prAyazcitta kA nirUpaNa hai| chedapiNDa
meM prAyazcitta ke ATha paryAyavAcI nAmoM kA ullekha hai'(1) prAyazcitta, (2)
cheda, (3) malaharaNa, (4) pApanAzana, (5) bodhi, (6) puNya, (7) pavitra, (8)
pAvana  /  chedazAstra meM bhI prAyazcitta aura cheda ina donoM zabdoM ko
paryAyavAcI svIkAra kiyA hai| sArAMza yaha hai ki chedasUtra prAyazcittasUtra
haiN| _ samAcArIzataka meM AcArya samayasundaragaNi ne chedasUtroM kI saMkhyA
chaha batalAI hai3 -(1) dazAzrutaskandha, (2) vyavahAra, (3) bRhatkalpa, (4)
nizItha, (5) mahAnizItha, (6) jItakalpa  /  inameM se pAMca-chaha sUtroM ke nAma
kA ullekha prAcArya devavAcaka ne nandIsUtra meM kiyA hai|4 vijJoM kA mantavya
hai ki jItakalpa jinabhadragaNi kSamAzramaNa kI kRti hai| jinabhadragaNi
kSamAzramaNa kA samaya vi. saM. 650 ke lagabhaga hai| jisakA nirmANa nandIsUtra
kI racanA ke pazcAta hA hai| ataH use Agama kI koTi meM sthAna nahIM diyA jA
sakatA  /  mahAnizIthasUtra ko dImaka ne khAkara naSTa kara diyA thaa| ataH
vartamAna meM usakI mUla prati anupalabdha hai| prAcArya haribhadrasUri ne punaH
usakA uddhAra kiyA thaa| ata: vartamAna meM upalabdha mahAnizItha bhI prAgama kI
koTi meM nahIM aataa| isa prakAra maulika chedasUtra cAra haiM-(1)
dazAzrutaskandha, (2) vyavahAra, (3) bRhatkalpa, (4) nizItha  /  chedasUtroM meM
nizItha kA pramukha sthAna hai  /  nizItha kA artha aprakAzya hai| yaha sUtra
apavAdabahula hai| ata: hara kisI vyakti ko nahIM par3hAyA jAtA thaa|
jinadAsagaNi mahattara ne tIna prakAra ke pAThaka batAye haiM-(1) apariNAmaka,
(2) pariNAmaka, (3) atipariNAmaka  /  apariNAmaka kA artha hai jisakI buddhi
aparipakva hai| pariNAmaka kA artha hai jisakI buddhi paripakva hai|
atipariNAmaka kA artha hai jisakI buddhi kutarka pUrNa hai  /  apariNAmaka aura
atipariNAmaka ye donoM pAThaka nizItha par3hane ke anadhikArI haiN| jo pAThaka
AjIvana rahasya ko dhAraNa kara sakatA hai vahI prabuddha pAThaka nizItha
par3hane kA adhikArI haiM  /  yahAM para jo rahasya zabda hai vaha isakI
gopanIyatA ko prakaTa karatA hai| nizItha kA adhyayana vahI sAdhu kara sakatA
hai jo tIna varSa kA dIkSita ho aura gAmbhIrya Adi guNoM se dRSTi se bagala meM
bAla vAlA solaha varSa kA sAdhu hI nizItha kA vAcaka ho sakatA hai| 1.
pAyacchittaM chedo malaharaNaM pAvaNAsaNaM sohii| puNNa pavittaM pAvaNAmidi
pAyAchittanAmAiM-chedapiNDa, gAthA 3 chedazAstra gAthA 2 samAcArI zataka : Agama
sthApanAdhikAra  /  4. kAliyaM aNegavihaM paNNattaM, taM jahA-dasAo, kappo,
vavahAro, nisIhaM, mahAnisIhaM  /  -nandIsUtra 70 5. mahAnizItha adhyayana 3 jaM
hoti appagAsaM taM tu NisIhaM ti loga saMsiddhaM  /  jaM appagAsadhamma aNNe pi
tayaM nisIdhaM ti  //  -nizIthabhASya, zloka 64 puriso tiviho pariNAmago,
apariNAmago, pratipariNAmago, to ettha apariNAmaga pratipariNAmagANaM paDiseho
/  -nizIthacUrNi, pR. 165 nizIthabhASya 6702-3 9. (ka) nizIthacUNi, gAthA 6165
(kha) vyavahArabhASya, uddezaka 7, gA. 202-3 (ga) vyavahArasUtra, uddezaka 10,
gAthA 20-21 22

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
No Shraman can go to his relatives for alms without knowing the Nishītha, nor
can he be considered worthy of the position of Upadhyaya, etc. Knowledge of
Nishītha is also essential for leading the Shraman community and for independent
travel. Because without knowing Nishītha, no Sadhu can be entitled to perform
atonement. Therefore, Nishītha has been presented as a standard in the
Vyavahārasūtra. There are two types of Chhedasūtras. Some Chhedasūtras come
under the Anga, while others come under the Angabāhya. Nishīthasūtra is under
the Anga and other Chhedasūtras are under the Angabāhya. Although Āchārya
Devavāchak has not mentioned the mutual relationship between Āchārānga and
Nishītha. There is only mention of the twenty-five chapters of Āchārānga.4 In
the Samavāyāngasūtra, nine chapters of Prāchārānga and sixteen chapters of
Āchārchūla have been described as twenty-five chapters of Āchārānga.5 In the
Nandīsūtra, Nishītha has been described as an independent Kālikasūtra. But it
has not been counted in the twenty-five chapters of Prāchārānga.6 It is possible
that Āchārya Devavāchak may not have had the notion that Nishītha is a Chūla of
Prāchārānga. In the Samavāyāngasūtra, 85 Uddeshanakālas of Āchārāngasūtra have
been mentioned along with Chūlikā. Āchārya Abhaydeva, the commentator of
Navāṅgī, has indicated the fulfillment of the number presented up to the fourth
Āchārchūla. It is as follows Āchārānga Uddeshan-Kāla Āchār-Chūla Uddeshan-Kāla
Gmam pur»»urxu09 mar " x 9 ormrrrrrrrrroronaroron 22002 Vīsan Abhiyarāṇā Piḍesan
Samavāya 25 1. Vyavahārasūtra, Uddeshak 6, Sū. 2, 3 Vyavahārasūtra, Uddeshak 3,
Sū. 3 Vyavahārasūtra, Uddeshak 3, Sū. 1 Paṇavīsan Ajjhayāṇā. -Nandī, Sūtra 80
Āyarass ṇam Bhagavāo Sachūliyāyass Paṇavīsan Ajjhayāṇā Paṇṇattā, Tam Jahā-
Saththaparinnā Logavijano Sīosaniā Sammattam. Āvanti Dhūya Vimoh Uvahāṇasuya
Mahparinnā Piṇḍesan Sijjiriā Bhāsajjhayāṇā Ya Vathth Pāesā. Ugghapaḍimā
Sattikkasattayā Bhāvaṇ Vimutti. -Samavāyānga, Samavāya 25. Nandīsūtra 77
Pāyarass ṇam Bhagavāo Sach Liyāgass Pañcāsīṁ Uddesanakālā Paṇṇattā.
-Samavāyānga, Samavāya 85 Vṛtti 8. Tiṇhgaṇipidgaṇāṁ Āyārchaliyāvajjaṇāṁ Sattavān
Ajjhayāṇā Paṇṇattā, Tam Jahā-Āyare Sūyagaḍe Thāṇe. -Samavāyānga, Samavāya 57 23

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nizItha kA jJAtA hae binA koI bhI zramaNa apane sambandhiyoM ke yahAM bhikSA ke
lie nahIM jA sakatA aura na vaha upAdhyAya Adi pada ke yogya hI mAnA jA sakatA
hai| zramaNa-maNDalI kA aguA hone meM aura svatantra vihAra karane meM bhI
nizItha kA jJAna Avazyaka hai| kyoMki nizItha kA jJAtA hue binA koI sAdhu
prAyazcitta dene kA adhikArI nahIM ho sakatA  /  isIlie vyavahArasUtra meM
nizItha ko eka mAnadaNDa ke rUpa meM prastuta kiyA gayA hai  /  chedasUtra do
prakAra ke haiN| kucha chedasUtra aMga ke antargata Ate haiM to aura kucha
chedasUtra aMgabAhya ke antargata Ate haiN| nizIthasUtra aMga ke antargata hai
aura anya chedasUtra aMgabAhya ke antargata haiN| AcArya devavAcaka ne yadyapi
AcArAMga aura nizItha ke pArasparika sambandha kA ullekha nahIM kiyA hai| vahAM
para to kevala AcArAMga ke paccIsa adhyayanoM kA hI ullekha hai|4
samavAyAMgasUtra meM prAcArAMga ke nau adhyayana aura AcAracUlA ke solaha
adhyayana isa prakAra AcArAMga ke paccIsa adhyayanoM kA varNana kiyA hai|5
nandIsUtra meM nizItha kA eka svatantra kAlikasUtra ke rUpa meM varNana kiyA
gayA hai| kintu prAcArAMga ke paccIsa adhyayanoM meM usakI gaNanA nahIM gaI kI
hai|6 sambhava hai AcArya devavAcaka ke sAmane nizItha prAcArAMga kI hI eka cUlA
hai, isa prakAra kI dhAraNA na rahI ho  /  samavAyAMgasUtra meM cUlikA ke sAtha
AcArAMgasUtra ke 85 uddezanakAla batalAye haiN| navAGgI TIkAkAra AcArya
abhayadeva ne caturtha AcAracUlA taka kI prastuta saMkhyApUrti kA saMketa kiyA
hai| vaha isa prakAra hai AcArAMga uddezana-kAla AcAra-cUlA uddezana-kAla Gmam
pur>>>>urxu09 mar " x 9 ormrrrrrrrrroronaroron 22002 vIsaM abhayAraNA piDesaNa
samavAya 25 1. vyavahArasUtra, uddezaka 6, sU. 2, 3 vyavahArasUtra, uddezaka 3,
sU. 3 vyavahArasUtra, uddezaka 3, sU. 1 paNavIsaM ajjhayaNA  /  -nandI, sUtra 80
AyArassa NaM bhagavao sacUliyAyassa paNavIsaM ajjhayaNA paNNattA, taM jahA-
satthapariNNA logavijano sIosaNIa sammattaM  /  AvaMti dhUya vimoha uvahANasuyaM
mahapariNNA piMDesaNa sijjiriA bhAsajjhayaNA ya vattha pAesA  /  uggahapaDimA
sattikkasattayA bhAvaNa vimutti  //  -samavAyAMga, samavAya 25  /  nandIsUtra 77
pAyArassa NaM bhagavao saca liyAgassa paMcAsIiM uddesaNakAlA pnnnnttaa|
-samavAyAMga, samavAya 85 vRtti 8. tiNhagaNipiDagANaM AyAracaliyAvajjANaM
sattAvana ajjhayaNA paNNattA, taM jahA-AyAre sUyagaDe tthaanne| -samavAyAMga,
samavAya 57 23

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This excerpt clearly shows that there is no connection between the Acharaanga
and the Nisiitha. The 57 studies of the Samavayanga have established the 57
studies of the Praacharaanga, Sutra-krtaanga, and Staanaanga. Nisiitha is not
included there either. The Acharaanga-niyukti first gives us information about
the connection between the Acharaanga and the Nisiitha. By creating a joint
appointment of the Acharaanga and the five Chulaas, a relationship has been
established between the Praacharaanga and the Nisiitha. The Niyaktkaara has
established the Nisiitha as the fifth Chulaa of the Acharaanga, proving that
both the Praacharaanga and the Nisiitha are Angas. In short, the summary is that
the Nisiitha was established as the fifth Chulaa of the Praacharaanga after the
Nandi-sutra and before the creation of the Niyukti. Pandit Dalasukh Bhai
Malvaniya has elaborated on this question in his book 'Nisiitha: A Study' and
has presented the view that 'Nisiitha' would have been part of the Acharaanga at
some point. But there was a time when the Nisiitha was separated from the
available Acharaanga-sutra. It should also be remembered that the Nisiitha was
the last Chulaa of the Acharaanga, not the original. It is possible that it was
added to the Praacharaanga as a Chulaa at some point and, due to special
circumstances, the Nisiitha, which was not originally part of the Praacharaanga,
remained an appendix. The Nisiitha was included in the Cheda Anga-baahya.
Including the Nisiitha in the Anga-baahya did not diminish its importance. Here
too, it must be remembered that only the Shvetambara tradition considers the
Nisiitha-sutra to be part of the Praacharaanga, not the Digambara tradition.
From the Digambara tradition's perspective, the Nisiitha is an Anga-baahya Agama
text.2 The Digambara tradition has considered fourteen texts to be Anga-baahya.
Of these, six are studies of the Aavashyak-sutra. This also makes it clear how
ancient the Nisiitha Agama is. It is self-evident that the Nisiitha-sutra
existed before the division of the Shvetambara and Digambara traditions. The
following verse appears in the Acharaanga-niyukti: Navabambachearamaio
attaraaspayasahaassiyo veo. Havai ya sapanchchulo bahu-bahutaro payaggen. ||3
This verse makes it clear that earlier there were only nine Brahmacharya studies
in the first Skandha of the Acharaanga. After that, it increased and became the
first Bahu and then Bahutara. Based on the Acharaanga, the first four Chulaas
were created and these Chulaas were added to the Acharaanga. The introduction of
the Acharaanga in both the Samavayanga and the Nandi Agamas mentions twenty-five
studies, but the Nisiitha is not included with it. When the Nisiitha was added
to the Acharaanga, it became Bahutara from Bahu. The Nisiitha was added to the
Acharaanga between the time of the creation of the Agama-soochi mentioned in the
Nandi and the time of the creation of the Acharaanga-niyukti. 1. Havai
sapanchchulo. - Acharaanga-niyukti 11 2. (a) Shatkhandagaam Bhaag 1 p. 96. (b)
Kashayap-ahun Bhaag 1, p. 25121 Acharaanga-niyukti verse 11 24

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastuta avataraNa se yaha spaSTa hai AcArAMga aura nizItha meM kisI bhI
prakAra kA sambandha pratIta nahIM hotaa| samavAyAMga ke 57 adhyayana meM
prAcArAMga, sUtrakRtAMga, sthAnAMga ke 57 adhyayana pratipAdita kiye gaye haiN|
vahAM para bhI nizItha kI parigaNanA nahIM kI gaI hai| AcArAMganiyukti se
sarvaprathama hameM yaha jAnakArI prApta hotI hai ki AcArAMga kA nizItha ke
sAtha sambandha hai| AcArAMga aura pAMca calAoM kI saMyukta niyukti banAkara
prAcArAMga aura nizItha meM paraspara sambandha sthApita kiyA gayA hai|
niryaktikAra ne AcArAMga kI pAMcavIM calA ke rUpa meM nizItha kI sthApanA kara
prAcArAMga aura nizItha donoM aMga haiM yaha siddha kiyA hai| saMkSepa meM
sArAMza yaha hai ki nizItha kI racanA prAcArAMga kI pAMcavIM cUlA ke rUpa meM
sthApanA nandIsUtra ke pazcAt huI hai aura niyukti kI racanA ke pUrva huI hai  /
paNDita dalasukhabhAI mAlavaNiyA ne 'nizItha : eka adhyayana' grantha meM
prastuta prazna para vistAra se UhA-poha kiyA hai aura unhoMne yaha vicAra
prastuta kiyA hai ki 'nizItha' kisI samaya AcArAMga ke antargata rahA hogaa|
kintu eka samaya aisA bhI AyA ki upalabdha AcArAMgasUtra se nizItha ko pRthak
kara diyA gyaa| yaha bhI smaraNa rakhanA cAhie ki nizItha AcArAMga kI antima
cUlA ke rUpa meM thA, mUla meM nhiiN| sambhava hai, kabhI calA ke rUpa meM
prAcArAMga meM jor3A gayA ho aura vizeSa kAraNa upasthita hone para, jo nizItha
maulika rUpa meM prAcArAMga kA aMza nahIM thA, vaha eka pariziSTa raha gayA ho
jo cheda aMgabAhya thA, usameM nizItha ko sammilita kara diyA gayA  /  aMgabAhya
meM nizItha ko sammilita karane se nizItha kA mahattva kama nahIM haa| yahAM
para bhI yaha smaraNa rakhanA hogA ki nizIthasUtra ko prAcArAMga kA aMza
zvetAmbara paramparA hI mAnatI hai, digambara paramparA nhiiN| digambara
paramparA kI dRSTi se nizItha aMgabAhya Agama grantha hI hai|2 digambara
paramparA ne caudaha granthoM ko aMgabAhya mAnA hai| unameM chaha to
AvazyakasUtra ke adhyayana hI haiN| isase bhI yaha spaSTa hai ki nizItha kitanA
prAcIna Agama hai| zvetAmbara aura digambara donoM paramparA ke bheda hone ke
pUrva nizIthasUtra thA yaha svata: siddha hotA hai| AcArAMganiyukti meM nimna
gAthA AI hai NavabaMbhaceramaio aTThArasapayasahassio veo| havai ya sapaMcacUlo
bahu-bahutarao payaggeNa  // 3 prastuta gAthA se yaha spaSTa hotA hai ki pahale
AcArAMga ke prathama skandha ke nau brahmacarya adhyayana hI the| usake pazcAt
usameM vRddhi huI aura vaha prathama bahu huA aura tadanantara bahutara  /
prAcArAMga ke AdhAra para hI prathama cAra calAeM banIM aura una calAoM ko
AcArAMga ke sAtha jor3a diyA gyaa| samavAyAMga aura nandI ina donoM AgamoM meM
AcArAMga kA jo paricaya diyA gayA hai usameM paccIsa adhyayana kahe gaye haiM
para nizItha ko usake sAtha nahIM jor3A gayA hai| jaba nizItha ko AcArAMga ke
sAtha jor3A gayA to vaha bahu se bahutara ho gayA  /  nandI meM kathita
AgamasUcI ke nirmANa kAla aura prAcArAMganiyukti kI racanA ke kAla, ina donoM ke
bIca ke kAla meM hI nizItha ko AcArAMga meM jor3A gayA hai| 1. havai spNccuulo|
-prAcArAMganiyukti 11 2. (ka) SaTakhaNDAgama bhAga 1 pR. 96  /  (kha)
kaSAyapAhuNa bhAga 1, pR. 25121 AcArAMganiyukti gAthA 11 24

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This natural curiosity may arise - based on the object called "Purvagata Achar",
Nishita was created or established, its name was "Acharprakalp". Due to the
similarity of the subject matter, it may have been added to the Acharang. Since
Acharprakalp has the provision of atonement, it was highly essential that it be
considered as authoritative as the words of the Tirthankara. From this
perspective, it may have been established as a Chula of Acharang. Based on
Acharangniyukti, it is clear that the first four Chulas of Acharang were created
based on Acharang, but the fifth Chula, Nishita, was created from the "Purva"
called Pratyakhyan. Nishita also has a name called Achar.  In Acharangniyukti,
it is clearly written about the Chulika of Acharang, "The subject of the Chulika
was taken from Achar by the Sthaviras for the benefit of the disciples."  In
Acharangniyukti Gatha 287, the word "Therhi" is used. While explaining the word
Sthavir, Acharya Sheelank has written, "Who established Acharang and who were
they? Were they Sthaviras or Chaturdashapurvadhar?" But in Acharangchurni, the
word Sthavir is interpreted as Gandhar. In Nishitchurni, it is clearly mentioned
that the author of Nishitasutra is the Tirthankara from the perspective of
meaning and Gandhar from the perspective of Sutra. According to Nishitchurni,
the author of Nishita is also considered to be Gandhar. The main reason for this
is that Nishita is included under Angasahitya. Here, there is a difference of
opinion regarding the meaning of the word Sthavir. Acharya Sheelank has
interpreted the word Sthavir as Chaturdashapurvi but not as Gandhar. While in
Acharangchurni and Nishitchurni, the meaning of Sthavir is interpreted as
Gandhar. The main reason for this could be that Nishita is a part of Acharang.
Acharang is Ang-Agam. The Tirthankaras are the meaning-interpreters of the Angas
and the Sutra-creators are the Gandharas. From this perspective, they may have
considered Nishita to be created by Gandhar.  Here, this question may naturally
arise that the Niyukti was created before the Churni. The Niyuktikar has written
Nishita as Sthavir and the Churnikar has written it as Gandhar. The main reason
for this could be that the creators of the Angas are Gandharas, therefore it may
have been written as Gandhar.  1. (a) "Ayarako Pun Pacchakkhanass Taiyavatyoo.
Shrayarnam Adhijjya Visesima Pahudchcheya || (b) Vyavaharbhshya Ga. 200 2. "
Therhi Anuggahatta Sisahiam Hou Pagadtham Cha. Shrayaramro Aththo Ayaragesu
Pavibhatto || " Sthaviras Shrutavruddha Chaturdasha Purviddhi. 3. 4. Eyani Pun
Ayaaegaani Ayar Chev Nijjudhani. Ken Nijjudhani 2 Therhi 287 Thera - Gandharaha
||  25 Is Acharang divided into Achar Chulika? - Acharangniyukti Ga. 281 -
Acharangniyukti Ga. 287 - Acharangniruyukti Ga. 287 - Acharangchurni P. 336

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yaha sahaja jijJAsA udbhUta ho sakatI hai - pUrvagata AcAra nAmaka vastu ke
AdhAra para nizItha kA nirmANa yA niryUDha huA, usakA nAma AcAraprakalpa thA  /
viSayasAmya hone ke kAraNa use AcArAMga meM jor3a diyA gayA ho  /  AcAraprakalpa
meM prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hone se yaha atyadhika prAvazyaka thA ki tIrthaMkara
kI vANI ke samAna hI vaha bhI pramANabhUta mAnA jAya  /  isI dRSTi se AcArAMga
kI cUlA ke rUpa meM usakI sthApanA kI gaI ho| AcArAMganiyukti ke AdhAra se yaha
spaSTa hai ki AcArAMga kI prathama cAra cUlAeM to zrAcArAMga ke AdhAra para
nirmita huI haiM, kintu pAMcavIM cUlA nizItha kA nirmANa pratyAkhyAna nAmaka
'pUrva' se huA thA  /  nizItha kA eka nAma AcAra bhI hai  /  AcArAMganiyukti meM
AcArAMga kI cUlikAoM ke viSaya meM spaSTa rUpa se likhA cUlikAoM ke viSaya ko
sthaviroM ne AcAra meM se ho lekara ziSyoM ke hita ke lie kiyA  /  AcArAMga
niyukti gAthA 287 meM 'therehi' zabda kA prayoga huA | sthavira zabda kI vyAkhyA
karate hue prAcArya zIlAGka ne likhA hai ki AcArAMga ko kisane niyU~Dha kiyA
aura ve kauna the ? sthavira the yA caturdazapUrvadhara the ? 3 kintu
AcArAMgacUrNi meM sthavira zabda kA artha gaNadhara kiyA hai| nizIthacUrNi meM
spaSTa rUpa se yaha ullekha hai ki nizIthasUtra ke kartA artha kI dRSTi se
tIrthaMkara haiM aura sUtra kI dRSTi se gaNadhara haiN| nizIthacUrNi ke anusAra
bhI nizItha ke kartA gaNadhara mAne gaye  /  isakA mUla kAraNa nizItha ko
aMgasAhitya ke antargata ginA hai  /  yahAM para sthavira zabda ke artha ko
lekara paraspara meM matabheda | AcArya zIlAGka ne sthavira zabda kA artha
caturdazapUrvI to kiyA hai kintu gaNadhara nahIM kiyaa| jabaki AcArAMgacUrNi
aura nizIthacUrNi meM sthavira kA artha gaNadhara kiyA hai  /  isakA mUla kAraNa
yaha ho sakatA hai ki nizItha AcArAMga kA hI aMza hai  /  AcArAMga aMga-Agama
hai  /  aMgoM ke arthaprarUpaka tIrthaMkara hote haiM aura sUtraracayitA
gaNadhara hote haiM  /  isa dRSTi se unhoMne nizItha ko gaNadharakRta mAnA ho  /
yahAM yaha prazna sahaja hI samutpanna ho sakatA hai ki niyukti to cUrNi ke
pUrva banI hai| niyuktikAra ne nizItha ko sthavirakRta aura cUrNikAra ne
gaNadharakRta likhA hai  /  usakA pramukha kAraNa yahI ho sakatA hai ki aMgoM ke
racayitA gaNadhara hote haiM, isalie gaNadharakRta likhA ho  /  1. (ka) "AyArako
puNa paccakkhANassa taiyavatyo  /  zrAyAranAmadhijjA vIsaimA pAhuDaccheyA ||
(kha) vyavahArabhASya gA. 200 2. " therehi'NuggahaTThA sIsahiaM hou pAgaDatthaM
ca  /  zrAyArAmro attho AyAragesu pavibhatto  //  " sthaviraiH zrutavRddha
zcaturdaza pUrvaviddhi  /  3. 4. eyANi puNa AyAegANi AyAra ceva nijjUDhANi  /
keNa NijjUDhANi 2 therehi 287 therA - gaNadharAH  //  25 ki AcArAMga
AcAracUlikAoM meM vibhakta - AcArAMga niyukti gA. 281 - AcArAMga niyukti gA. 287
- AcArAMganiryukti gA. 287 - AcArAMgacUrNi pR. 336

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishitha  This Agam is named Nishitha. In the Pravaranganniyukti, it is found
as "Avarparushpa" and "Nisiha". These two names appear in many other places. In
the Nandi Sutra, Ghora Pakkhiyamut Granth, the word "Nisiha" is used for this
Agam. In the Dhavala and Jayadhavala, "Nisihiy" and "Nisihiy" are used
respectively. In the Anga Prajnapti Chulika, the word "Nisehiy" is used.  The
Sanskrit form of the word "Nisiha" is "Nishitha". The Sanskrit meaning of
"Nisihiy" and "Nisihiy" is "Nidhik". Weber 6, while contemplating the word
"Nisiha", wrote that the meaning of the word "Nisiha" should be "Nishedha". To
prove his point, he presented the words "Nisihiya" and "Naishadhiki" in the
Samachari Prakaran used in Uttaradhyayana. And by defining those words, he tried
to prove that the meaning of the word "Nisiha" is not "Nishiv" but "Nishedha".
In Digambar texts, the word "Nisihiya" is used in place of "Nisiha". The same
word is found in Gommatasar. The Sanskrit form of "Nisihiya" is "Nishidhika" in
the commentary of Gommatasar. Acharya Jinsen used the word "Nishidyaka" for
"Nishitha" in the Harivansh Purana. In the Tattvarthabhashya, the Sanskrit form
of the word "Nisiha" is considered to be "Nishitha". The same meaning is
intended by the Niyuktikar. Thus, according to the opinion of the Svetambar
literature, the Sanskrit form of "Nisiha" is "Nishitha" and its meaning is
"Aprakashya". From the perspective of Digambar literature, the Sanskrit form of
"Nisihiya" is "Nishidhika" and its meaning is the science of atonement or the
science that prohibits the fault of negligence.  If we contemplate the word
"Nisiha" from a scriptural perspective, then both Sanskrit forms of the word
"Nisiha" are possible, because both "th" and "gh" are given the order of
"hakara" in the Prakrit language. If we contemplate the Sanskrit meaning of the
word "Siihiya" as "Nishidhika" and "Nishithika", then the meaning "Nishiy" or
"Nishithika" seems more appropriate than "Nishid" or "Nishidhika".  Nishitha and
Nishidha, therefore, Nisihiya or...  Because this Agam expounds the prohibition
of rules...  1. Acharanganniyukti Ga. 291-347 2. Nandi Sutra, p. 44. 3. Pavit,
p. 66 4. Shatkhandagam Part 1 p. 96 Kasavpahudu Part 1 p. 25,121 See with notes.
5. Anga Prajnaptibhullika Gatha 34 | 6. Indian Antiquary Part 21.97. 7. This
Name (free) is Explained Strangely Enough By Nishitha Though the Character of
the Contents would lead us to Expect Nishitha (निषेध) 8. Shatkhandagam, First
Part, p. 96. 9. Gommatasar Jivakand 367 10. Nishedhanam Pramadadoshanirakaranam
Nishiddih Sanjnayam 'K' Pratyaye Nishidhika Tatch Pramadadoshavishuddhaparva
Bahuprakara Prayaschitta Varnayati. -Gommatasar Jivakand 367 Harivansh Purana
101138 11. Nishidyakaakhyamaakhyati Prayaschituvidhi Param.  26

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nizItha 2 prastuta Agama kA nAma nizISa hai| prAvArAGganiyukti meM
'AvAraparUSpa' aura 'nisIha' ye do nAma prApta hote hai| anya kaI sthaloM para
ve do nAma Aye haiN| nandIsUtra ghora pakkhiyamuta grantha meM 'nisIha' zabda kA
prayoga prastuta Agama ke lie huA hai| dhavalA aura jayadhavalA meM kramaza:
'Nisihiya' aura 'NisIhIya' kA prayoga huA hai  /  aMga prajJapticUlikA meM
'Nisehiya' zabda prAyA hai  /  " nisIha zabda kA saMskRta rUpa nizISa hai|
NisIhiya aura NisIhIya kA saMskRta artha nidhika hai| vevara 6 ne nisIha zabda
para cintana karate hue likhA hai ki nisIha zabda kA artha niSedha honA caahie|
unhoMne apane mantabya ko siddha karane hetu uttarAdhyayana meM vyavahRte
samAcArI prakaraNa meM 'nisIhiyA' 'naiSedhikI' zabda samupasthita kiyA hai| aura
una zabdoM kI paribhASA dekara yaha siddha karane kA prayAsa kiyA hai ki nisIha
zabda kA artha 'nizIva' nahIM 'niSedha' hai  /  digambara granthoM meM nisIha ke
sthAna meM nisIhiyA zabda kA vyavahAra kiyA gayA  /  gommaTasAra meM bhI yahI
zabda prApta hotA hai 15 gommaTasAra kI TIkA meM nisIhiyA kA saMskRta rUpa
niSIdhikA kiyA hai| AcArya jinasena ne harivaMzapurANa meM nizItha ke lie
'niSadyaka' zabda kA vyavahAra kiyA hai  /  tattvArthabhASya meM nisIha zabda kA
saMskRta rUpa nizISa mAnA hai| niyuktikAra ko bhI yahI artha abhipreta hai| isa
prakAra zvetAmbara sAhitya ke abhimatAnusAra nisIha kA saMskRta rUpa nizItha
aura usakA artha aprakAzya hai  /  digambara sAhitya kI dRSTi se nisIhiyA kA
saMskRta rUpa nizIdhikA hai aura usakA artha prAyazcitta zAstra yA pramAdadoSa
kA niSedha karane vAlA zAstra hai  /  zAstradRSTi se nisIha zabda para cintana
kiyA jAya to nisIha zabda ke saMskRta rUpa donoM ho sakate haiM, kyoMki 'tha'
aura 'gha' donoM ko prAkRta bhASA meM hakAra Adeza hotA hai| sIhiyA zabda ke
saMskRta niSidhikA aura nizIthikA artha kI dRSTi se cintana kareM to niSidha yA
niSidhikA kI apekSA nizIya yA nizIthikA artha adhika saMgata pratIta hotA hai
nizItha aura nizIdha ataH NisihiyA yA kyoMki yaha dhAgama vidhiniSedha kA
pratipAdana 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 5. 9. AcArAMganiyukti gA. 291-347 nandI sUtra,
pR. 44  /  pavita, pR. 66 SaTkhaNDAgama bhAga 1 pR. 96 kasAvapAhuDa bhAga 1 pR.
25,121 TippaNoM ke sAtha dekheM  /  , aMgaprajJaptibhUlikA gAthA 34 | 1 iNDiyana
eNTIkverI bhAga 21.97  /  This Name (free) is Explained Strangely Enough By
Nishitha Though the Character of the Contents would lead us to Expect Nishitha
(niSedha) SaTkhaNDAgama, prathama khaNDa, pR. 96  /  gommaTasAra jIvakANDa 367
niSedhanaM pramAdadoSanirAkaraNaM niSiddhiH saMjJAyAM 'ka' pratyaye niSiddhikA
tacca pramAdadoSavizuddhaparva bahuprakAraM prAyazcittaM varNayati  /
-gommaTasAra jIvakANDa 367 harivaMzapurANa 101138 10. niSadyakAkhyamAkhyAti
prAyazcituvidhi param  /  26

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The one who does not do, but the one who advocates atonement. Both the
Svetambara and Digambara Acharyas agree on this statement.  Nishith is described
as the proponent of the Pratisedha Sutra or the Pratikshetra Sutra in the
Churni.2 In the Nishith Bhashya, it is written that the atonement that comes
from violating the action prescribed in the Payarchala is described in the
Nishith.3 The Nishith Sutra has exceptions. Therefore, it should not be read in
assemblies etc. It should not be published to the unauthorized. Therefore, the
meaning of Nishith is appropriate because it is to be read at night or in
solitude. The prohibitive meaning of Nishith can also be reconciled in this way
that it is forbidden to read to the unauthorized and also forbidden to read in a
place crowded with people. It is only to be read in the place of self-study.
The word 'Nishedyak' is found in the Harivansh Purana. It is possible that this
Sutra was taught in a special type of Nishedya. Therefore, it may have been
named Nishedyak. When criticizing, the critic would arrange for the Nishedya for
the Acharya.4 It is possible that the Nishedya was also arranged during the time
of the present study. Therefore, it is mentioned in the Nishith Bhashya.  The
synonyms of Nishith are Achar, Agra, Prakalpa, and Chalika. The Pratikshetra
Sutra is related to the Charan Karananuyog. Therefore, its name is Achar. The
Acharang Sutra has five Agra. There are four Pracharchalas and Nishith, these
are the five Agra, therefore the name of Nishith is Agra. Nishith is created
from the ninth Purva Prachar Prabhat, therefore its name is Prakalpa. The second
meaning of Prakalpan is also the one who cuts. In the Agam literature, the name
of Nishith is 'Ayar Pakapp'. Agra and Chula are words with the same meaning.  In
short, the essence is that the meaning of Nishith is mysterious or confidential.
Just as mysterious knowledge, mantras, tantras, yoga etc. are not told to the
unauthorized or those with immature minds. They are kept secret from them.
Similarly, the Nishith Sutra is also confidential. It cannot be revealed to
everyone. The place of Nishith -  The Charan Karananuyog has a glorious place in
the four Anuyogs. The meaning of Charan Anuyog is the explanation of the rules
related to conduct, limits, etc. The subject matter of all the Chhed Sutras can
be included in the Charan Karananuyog.1 (a) Payar Pakappass U Imain Gonai
Namdhijjain. . Ayar Maiyaain Paychhitten Uhigaro || - Nishith Bhashya Gatha 2
(b) Nisihiyam Bahuvihappaychhitta Vihanavanan Kunai. - Shatkhandagam, Bha. 1 p.
98 2. There, the prohibition is in the fourth Chuda-atmaka Prachar, whatever is
prohibited, the one who follows it becomes atoned. Nishith Churni, Bha. 1, p. 3
3. Payare Chausu Ya, Chuliyaasu Uvaesavitahakariassa. Pachchhitta Mihajjanane
Bhaniyan Anneasu Ya Padesu. - Nishith Bhashya 71 Ayare Chausu Ya, Chuliyaasu
Uvaesavitahakariassa. Pachchhitta Mihajjanane Bhaniyan Anneasu Ya Padesu.
Nishith Bhashya 6389 Suttatthata Dubhayaan Gamhan Bahumanavinayam Achcharam.
Ukkud-Nisejj-Anjali-Gahithagahyaammi Ya Panamo || - Nishith Bhashya Sutra 6673
27

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 karane vAlA nahIM apitu prAyazcitta kA pratipAdana karane vAlA hai| isa kathana
meM zvetAmbara aura digambara donoM AcArya ekamata haiN|' caNi meM nizItha ko
pratiSedhasUtra yA prAyazcittasUtra kA pratipAdaka batAyA hai  / 2 nizIthabhASya
meM likhA hai ki pAyAracalA meM upadiSTa kriyA kA atikramaNa karane para jo
prAyazcitta AtA hai usakA nizItha meM varNana hai| 3 nizIthasUtra meM apavAdoM
kA bAhalya hai| isalie sabhA Adi meM isakA vAcana nahIM karanA cAhie  /
anadhikArI ke prakAzana na ho| ata: rAtri yA ekAnta meM paThanIya hone se
nizItha kA artha saMgata hotA hai| nisihiyA kA jo niSedhaparaka artha hai usakI
saMgati bhI isa prakAra ho sakatI hai ki jo anadhikArI haiM unako par3hAnA
niSedha hai aura jana se Akula sthAna meM bhI par3hanA niSiddha hai  /  yaha
kevala svAdhyAyabhUmi meM hI paThanIya hai| harivaMzapurANa meM 'niSadyaka'
zabda pAyA hai| sambhava hai ki yaha sUtra vizeSa prakAra kI niSadyA meM
par3hAyA jAtA hogaa| isalie isakA nAma niSadyaka rakhA gayA ho| AlocanA karate
samaya Alocaka prAcArya ke lie niSadyA kI vyavasthA karatA thA  / 4 sambhava hai
prastuta adhyayana ke samaya meM bhI niSadyA kI vyavasthA kI jAtI hogii| isalie
nizIthabhASya meM isakA ullekha milatA hai|" nizItha ke AcAra, agra, prakalpa,
calikA ye paryAya haiN| prAyazcittasUtra kA sambandha caraNakaraNAnuyoga ke
sAtha hai  /  ata: isakA nAma AcAra hai| AcArAMgasUtra ke pAMca agra haiN| cAra
prAcAracalAe~ aura nizItha ye pA~ca agra haiM isalie nizItha kA nAma agra hai|
nizItha kA nauveM pUrva prAcAraprAbhata se racanA kI gaI hai isalie isakA nAma
prakalpa hai| prakalpana kA dvitIya artha chedana karane vAlA bhI hai| Agama
sAhitya meM nizItha kA 'AyArapakappa' yaha nAma milatA hai  /  agra aura cUlA
samAna artha vAle zabda haiN| saMkSepa meM sAra yaha hai ki nizItha kA artha
rahasyamaya yA gopanIya hai  /  jaise rahasyamaya vidyA, mantra, tantra, yoga
Adi anadhikArI yA aparipakva buddhi vAle vyaktiyoM ko nahIM batAte  /  unase
chipAkara gopya rakhA jAtA hai| vaise hI nizIthasUtra bhI gopya hai  /  vaha bhI
hara kisI ke samakSa udghATita nahIM kiyA jA sakatA  /  nizItha kA sthAna - cAra
anuyogoM meM caraNakaraNAnuyoga kA gauravapUrNa sthAna hai| caraNAnuyoga kA
artha hai AcAra sambandhI niyamAvalI, maryAdA prabhRti kI vyAkhyA  /  sabhI
chedasUtroM ke viSaya kA samAveza caraNakaraNAnuyoga meM kiyA jA sakatA 1. (ka)
pAyArapakrappassa u imAiM goNNAI nnaamdhijjaaiN| . AyAramAiyAiM
pAyacchitteNauhIgAro  //  -nizIthabhASya gAthA 2 (kha) NisihiyaM
bahuvihapAyacchittavihANavaNNaNaM kuNai  /  -SaTkhaNDAgama, bhA. 1 pR. 98 2.
tatra pratisedhaH caturthacuDAtmake prAcAre yat pratiSiddhaM taM sevaMtassa
pacchitaM bhavati tti kAuM  /  nizIthacUNi, bhA. 1, pR. 3 3. pAyAre causu ya,
culiyAsU uvaesavitahakArissa  /  pAcchitta mihajjhayaNe bhaNiyaM aNNesu ya
padesu  /  /  -nizIthabhASya 71 AyAre causu ya, cUliyAsu uvaesavitahakArissa  /
pacchitta mihajjhayaNe bhaNiyaM aNNesu ya padesu  /  /  nizIthabhASya 6389
suttatthatadubhayANaM gahaNaM bahumANaviNayamaccharaM  /  ukkuDa-Nisejja-aMjali-
gahitAgahiyAmmi ya pnnaamo|| -nizIthabhASya sUtra 6673 27

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"The Jina, the Lord Mahavira, being omniscient and all-seeing, knew well the
weaknesses of the human mind. He wanted to protect his order of ascetics from
these weaknesses, so he emphasized the strong code of conduct of the ascetic
order. Sometimes in a known state and sometimes in an unknown state, a fault is
incurred. The accepted vows are broken. To purify oneself after a vow is broken
or a fault is committed, a code of atonement was created. The Chhedasutras
prohibit those events that tarnish the life of a restrained person and some
atonements are also based on immediate events. But when we study the
Chhedasutras in depth, it seems that all the prohibitions are presented with
ahimsa and aparigraha as the center. From a historical perspective, it is also
easily known that such tendencies would have prevailed in the monastic orders of
India at that time. To prevent the tendencies from being adopted by the ascetics
and ascetics, they were prohibited and perhaps if they were adopted, their
atonement was also ordained. Thus, prohibitions and atonement methods have been
propounded from various perspectives.  The Nishītha has its own unique place in
the Chhedasutras. The Vyavahārasūtra clearly states that the one who is well-
versed in the scriptures must study the Āchāraprakalpa at least. The one who is
knowledgeable about the Āchāraprakalpa can be given the position of Upādhyāya.
The ascetic who has studied the Āchāraprakalpa from the mouth of the guru and
has a firm resolve in his mind to study it from the point of view of meaning,
can be given the position of Ācharya or Upādhyāya if the Ācharya and Upādhyāya
die suddenly. If a young ascetic has forgotten the Āchāraprakalpa for some
reason, he can be given the position of Ācharya etc. again after remembering it.
But if an elder saint forgets the Āchāraprakalpa and does not have the ability
to remember it, he can still be given the position of Ācharya. The ascetic who
remembers the Āchāraprakalpa can be given the position of Pravartinī. If by
mistake, the ascetic has forgotten the Āchāraprakalpa but is trying to remember
it again, she can be given the position of Pravartinī.  The ascetics and
ascetics who are elders. If they forget the Āchāraprakalpa due to special
circumstances, they can ask questions about the Āchāraprakalpa in any state,
whether they are asleep or sitting, and they can remember it again.  1. 2. 3. 4.
5. 6.  "Jāṇa se ṇāṇi chheya sutthāṇi. Caraṇa karaṇāṇuogoti, kāliyatthe
uvagayāī." - Āvaśyakanīyukti, 778 Nishīthabhāṣya 6190 Tivāsa pariyāe samaṇe
nigganye prāyārakusale sañjama kusale pavayaṇa kusale paṇati kusale saṅgaha
kusale uvaggaha kusale avayavāre abhinnāvāre asaṁ kilitthāyārachitte bahussuē
babhāgame jahannēṇam śrāyāraprakappa dhare kappaī uvajzhāyatāe uddhisittie va
vyavahāra 3.3 Niruddhavāsa pariyāe samaṇe nigganthē kappaī āyaria uppajjhāyatāe
uddhisattae, samuccheyakappamsi. Tassa ṇam āyāraprakkapa sa dese vattie, se ya
ahijjesāmitti ahijjesjā evaṁ se kappaī āyaria uvajzhāyatāe uddhisittie, se ya
ahijjirasāmitti no mahijjesjā evaṁ se no kappaṛ sāmaria uvajzhāyatāe
uddhisittie. - Vyavahāra 3.10 Vyavahāra 515 Vyavahāra, 5317 Vyavahāra, 5.16 1
28 "

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hai  / ' zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra prabhu sarvajJa sarvadarzI hone ke kAraNa
mAnava mana kI kamajoriyoM ko acchI taraha se jAnate the  /  ve apane
zramaNasaMgha ko una kamajoriyoM se bacAkara rakhanA cAhate the, isalie unhoMne
zramaNa saMgha kI sudRr3ha AcAra saMhitA para bala diyaa| kabhI jJAta avasthA
meM aura kabhI ajJAtAvasthA meM doSa laga jAtA hai  /  svIkRta vrata bhaMga ho
jAtA hai  /  vrata bhaMga hone para yA doSa kA sevana hone para usakI zuddhi
hetu prAyazcitta saMhitA kA nirmANa kiyaa| chedasUtroM meM una ghaTanAoM kA
niSedha kiyA hai, jo saMyamI jIvana ko dhUmila banAne vAlI haiM tathA kucha
prAyazcita tAtkAlika ghaTanAoM para bhI AdhArita haiN| para hama gaharAI se
chedasUtroM kA adhyayana karate haiM to lagatA hai ki ve sAre niSedha ahiMsA
aura aparigraha ko kendra banAkara samupasthita kiye gaye haiN| aitihAsika dRSTi
se paryavekSaNa karane para yaha bhI sahaja jJAta hotA hai ki bhAratavarSa meM
usa samaya jo bhikSu saMgha the unameM isa prakAra kI pravRttiyAM pracalita rahI
hoNgii| pravRttiyAM zramaNasaMgha ke bhramaNa aura zramaNiyAM dekhAdekhI na
apanA leveM isa dRSTi se zramaNazramaNiyoM ko niSedha kiyA aura kadAcita apanA
leM to unake prAyazcitta kA bhI vidhAna kiyaa| isa prakAra vividha dRSTiyoM se
niSedha aura prAyazcita vidhiyA~ pratipAdita kI gaI haiN| chedasUtroM meM
nizItha kA apanA maulika sthAna hai| vyavahArasUtra meM yaha spaSTa varNana hai
ki jo bhramaNa bahuzruta ho, use kama se kama zrAcAraprakalpa kA adhyayana
Avazyaka hai  /  jo AcAraprakalpa kA parijJAtA ho use hI upAdhyAya pada pradAna
kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  jisa bhikSu ne guru ke mukhAravinda se AcAraprakalpa kA
mUla adhyayana kiyA ho aura artha kI dRSTi se adhyayana karane kA mana meM
dRr3ha saMkalpa ho to AcArya aura upAdhyAya kA Akasmika svargavAsa ho jAne para
usa zramaNa ko AcAryapada yA upAdhyAyapada pradAna kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  3 yadi
yuvaka zramaNa kisI kAraNa se AcAraprakalpa ko vismRta ho gayA hai to punaH
smaraNa karane para use prAcArya Adi pada diyA jA sakatA hai  /  para koI
sthavira santa zrAcAraprakalpa vismRta ho jAya aura usakI smaraNa karane kI
zakti nahIM hai to bhI use prAcArya pada diyA jA sakatA hai| jisa zramaNI ko
AcAraprakalpa yAda hai use pravartinI pada diyA jA sakatA hai| yadi pramAdavaza
jo zramaNI AcAraprakalpa vismRta ho gaI hai kintu yaha punaH smaraNa karane kA
prayatna kara rahI ho to use pravartinI pada diyA jA sakatA hai  /  6 jo zramaNa
aura zramaNiyAM sthavira haiN| avasthAvizeSa ke kAraNa yadi ve AcAraprakalpa
vismRta ho gaye to ve soye hue yA baiThe hue kisI bhI avasthA meM AcAraprakalpa
ke sambandha meM pratiprazna kara sakate haiM aura pratismRti 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6.
jaM ca mahAkappasuyaM, jANiya se NANi cheyasuttANi  /  caraNakaraNANuogotti,
kAliyatthe uvagayAI  //  - Avazyakaniyukti, 778 nizIthabhASya 6190 tivAsapariyAe
samaNe nigganye prAyArakusale saMjamakusale pavayaNakusale paNatikusale
saMgahakusale uvaggahakusale avayAvAre abhinnAvAre asaM kiliTThAyAracitte
bahussue babhAgame jahanneNaM zrAyArapakappadhare kappai uvajjhAyatAe
uddhisittie va vyavahAra 3 / 3 niruddhavAsapariyAe samaNe nigganthe kappai
AyariyaupajjhAyattAe uddisattae, samuccheyakappaMsi  /  tassa NaM AyArapakappasa
dese vaTTie, se ya ahijjissAmitti ahijjejjA evaM se kappai Ayariya uvajjhAyattAe
uddittie, se ya ahijjirasAmitti no mahijjejjA evaM se no kappara sAmariya
uvajjhAyattAe uddittie  /  - vyavahAra 3 / 10 vyavahAra 515 vyavahAra, 5317
vyavahAra, 5 / 16 1 28

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They can also do this, it is a special permission for them. From all these
provisions, it is clear how important the Ācāra-prakalpa is. The Ācāra-prakalpa-
dhara is multi-learned, he can move freely. There are three types of Ācāra-
prakalpa-dhara - (1) Some only hold the sūtra. (2) Some only hold the meaning.
(3) Some hold both the sūtra and the meaning. The one who is only a sūtra-dhara
is not entitled to give atonement. The right person to give atonement is the
śramaṇa who holds both the sūtra and the meaning. If he does not hold the sūtra
and the meaning, then atonement can also be taken from those who only hold the
meaning. In the past, this question was very much discussed that when the
Kevala-jñānī, Manaḥ-paryāya-jñānī and Avadhi-jñānī, Caturdaśa-pūrva, Daśa-pūrva,
Nava-pūrva are not there, then who gives atonement? 2 In answer to this
question, Ācārya Jinabhadragaṇi Kṣamāśramaṇa has written that today there is a
lack of Kevala-jñānī etc. direct knowers. But the atonement method bound by the
previous śruta by the direct knowers is revealed in the Ācāra-prakalpa.
Therefore, the Ācāra-prakalpa-dhara Ācārya is entitled to give atonement. From
the present discussion, it is clear that the Niśītha has its own glorious place
in Jain Āgama literature. The author of Niśītha The creations of Jain Āgamas
have been done in two ways - (1) Kṛta (2) Niyuhaṇa. Those Āgamas which have been
created independently and independently are called Kṛta Āgamas. For example, the
Dvādaśāṅgī was created by the Gaṇadharas and the Upāṅga literature was created
by different sthaviras. They are all Kṛta Āgamas. Niyuhaṇa Āgamas are considered
to be (1) Daśavakālika (2) Ācāra-cūla (3) Niśītha (4) Daśaśruta-skandha (5)
Bṛhat-kalpa (6) Vyavahāra. In these six Āgamas, the Daśavakālika Āgama was
niyuhaṇa by the Caturdaśa-pūrva-dhara Śayyambhavasūri and the remaining five
Āgamas were niyuhaṇa by Bhadra-bāhu Svāmī. According to the Ācārāṅga-niyukti,
the Ācāra-cūla is created by the sthaviras. 5 In the Ācārāṅga-vṛtti, Ācārya
Śīlāṅka has defined the meaning of sthavira as Caturdaśa-pūrva. -Niśītha-bhāṣya
6667 -Niśītha-bhāṣya 6675 1. Tiviho ya pakappa-dhara, sutte prathe ya tadubhae
ceva. Suttadharavajjiyaṇam, tigadugpariyattana gacche. 2. Niśītha-cūrṇi bhāga 4,
p. 403 Ugghayamanugghāyā, māsacaumāsiyā u pācchittā. Puvvagate ccia ete, nijjḍhā
je pakappammi.  Prāyappavāyapuvā nijjḍhā hoi dhammapannatti. Kammappavāyapuvā
piṇḍass u esanā tivihā.  Saccappavāyapuvā nijjūḍhā hoi vakkasuddhi u. Avasesā
nijjūḍhā navamass u taiyavattūpro. "Therehi'nuggahatthā sīsahi hou pāgadattham
ca. Āyārāo attho āyārāggēsū pavi-bhatto." Ācārāṅga-vatti, patra 210
-Daśavakālika-niyukti gāthā 16-17 -Ācārāṅga-niyukti 287 29

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhI kara sakate haiM, yaha unake lie vizeSa anujJA hai| ina sabhI vidhAnoM se
yaha spaSTa hai ki AcAraprakalpa kA kitanA adhika mahattva hai  /
AcAraprakalpadhara bahuzruta hotA hai, vaha svatantra vihAra kara sakatA hai  /
AcAraprakalpadhara ke tIna prakAra haiM-(1) kitane hI kevala sUtra ko hI dhAraNa
karane vAle hote haiN| (2) kitane hI kevala artha ko dhAraNa karane vAle hote
haiM  /  (3) kitane hI sUtra aura artha donoM ko dhAraNa karane vAle hote haiM
/  jo kevala sUtradhara hai vaha prAyazcitta dene kA adhikArI nahIM  /
prAyazcitta dene kA sahI adhikArI vaha zramaNa hotA hai jo sUtra aura artha
donoM kA dhAraka ho| sUtra aura artha kA dhAraka na ho to jo kevala artha ke
dhAraka haiM unase bhI prAyazcitta liyA jA sakatA hai| atItakAla meM yaha prazna
bahuta hI cacita rahA ki kevalajJAnI, manaH paryAyajJAnI aura avadhijJAnI,
caturdazapUrvI, dasapUrvI, naupUrvI jaba nahIM hote haiM taba prAyazcitta kauna
de ? 2 isa prazna ke uttara meM AcArya jinabhadragaNi kSamAzramaNa ne likhA hai
ki Aja kevalajJAnI Adi pratyakSajJAniyoM kA abhAva hai| para pratyakSajJAniyoM
ke dvArA pUrvazruta se nibaddha prAyazcittavidhi AcAraprakalpa meM udghata hai|
ata: AcAraprakalpadhara AcArya prAyazcitta dene kA adhikArI hai| prastuta
vivecana se yaha spaSTa hai ki jaina Agama sAhitya meM nizItha kA apanA
gauravapUrNa sthAna rahA hai  /  nizItha ke kartA jaina AgamoM kI racanAe~ do
prakAra se huI haiM-(1) kRta (2) niyuhaNa  /  jina AgamoM kA nirmANa sarvatantra
svatantra rUpa se haA hai ve Agama kRta kahalAte haiN| jaise-gaNadharoM ke dvArA
dvAdazAGgI kI racanA kI gaI hai aura bhinna-bhinna sthaviroM ke dvArA upAGga
sAhitya kA nirmANa kiyA gayA hai| ve saba kRta pAgama haiN| ni!haNa Agama ye
mAne gaye haiM (1) dazavakAlika (2) AcAracUlA (3) nizItha (4) dazAzrutaskandha
(5) bRhatkalpa (6) vyavahAra  /  ina chaha AgamoM meM dazavakAlika Agama kA
niryahaNa caturdazapUrvadhara zayyaMbhavasUri ne kiyA aura zeSa pAMca AgamoM kA
ni!haNa bhadrabAhu svAmI ne kiyA  /  AcArAMganiyukti ke mantavyAnusAra AcAra-
cUlA sthaviroM ke dvArA nirmUDha hai  / 5 AcArAMgavRtti meM prAcArya zIlAMka ne
sthavira kA artha caturdazapUrvI kiyA hai| -nizIthabhASya 6667 -nizIthabhASya
6675 1. tiviho ya pakappadharo, sutte pratthe ya tadubhae ceva  /
suttadharavajjiyANaM, tigadugapariyaTTaNA gacche  /  /  2. nizIthacUrNi bhAga 4,
pR. 403 ugghAyamaNugghAyA, mAsacaumAsiyA u pAcchittA  /  puvvagate cciya ete,
NijjaDhA je pakappammi  /  /  prAyappavAyapuvA nijjaDhA hoi dhammapannattI  /
kammappavAyapuvA piMDassa u esaNA tivihA  /  /  saccappavAyapuvA nijjUDhA hoi
vakkasuddhi u  /  avasesA nijjUDhA navamassa u taiyavatthUpro  /
"therehi'NuggahaTThA sIsahi hou pAgaDatthaM ca  /  AyArAo attho AyAraggesU
pavibhatto  // " AcArAMgavatti, patra 210 -dazavakAlikaniyukti gAthA 16-17
-AcArAMganiyukti 287 29

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The ninth *purva* called *pratyakhyana* has been *nishith* *niryahana*. There
are twenty items in that *purva*, meaning twenty *arthaadhikars*. The name of
the third item is *ayara*. *Ayara* also has twenty *praabhutcchheda*, meaning
subdivisions. The *nishith* *niryahana* has been done from the twentieth
*praabhutcchheda*.  According to the opinion of *Dasaashrutaskandha* *chuni*,
*Dasaashrutaskandha*, *kalpa* and *vyavahar* these three *agamas* are
*nishoodha* from the *purva* called *pratyakhyana* and the *nirduhaka* of those
three *agamas* is *Chaturdashapurvi* *Bhadrabahu* *Swami*. This is clearly
mentioned. In *Panchakalapa* *mahaabhashya* also, *Bhadrabahu* is mentioned as
the *niryahana* of *dasa*, *kalpa* and *vyavahar* and in *Panchakalapa*
*churni*, *Pracharaprakalpa* (*nishith*) is considered as the *niryahana* of
these four *agamas* - *dasa*, *kalpa*, *vyavahar* and *pracharaprakalpa*. Here,
this question is worth pondering that the name of *acharaprakalpa* is not
mentioned in *niyukti* and *bhashya*. But how did the name of *acharaprakalpa*
come in *Panchakalapa* *churni*? It is also possible that the word 'kalpa' may
be understood by the *niyuktikara* and *bhashyakara* as both *brahatkalpa* and
*acharaprakalpa*. Just like in *nishith* *bhashya*, they have taken
*dasaashrutaskandha*, *brahatkalpa* and *vyavahar* these three *agamas* from the
word 'k appa'. It is possible that the creator of *acharchula* and *chedasutra*
is *Chaturdashapurvi* *Bhadrabahu*.  Previous *acharyas* have mentioned three
types of *agamas* - *suttaagama*, *atthaagama* and *tadubhayaagama*. From
another perspective, there are three more types of *agamas* - *aatmaagama*,
*anantaaraagama* and *paramparaagama*. The discussion of this is found in the
commentary texts. For the *tirthankara*, the meaning is *aatmaagama*. The same
meaning is *anantaaraagama* for the *ganadharas*. For the *ganadharas*, the
*sutra* is *aatmaagama* and for the *ganadharashiṣyas*, the *sutra* is
*anantaaraagama* and the meaning is *paramparaagama*. For the *ganadharashiṣya*
and after that for the *shiṣya* *parampara*, both the meaning and the *sutra*
are *paramparaagama*. In these, the original source of the *agama*, the first
attainment and the traditional attainment have been considered from these three
perspectives. From the perspective of *acharya* *Jinadasagani* *mahattar*, the
*tirthankara* is the *nishith* of the meaning *prarupa*. The first attainment of
his meaning happened to the *ganadharas* and the traditional attainment of that
meaning happened to his *shiṣya* and *prashishyas* and is happening in the
present.  1. *Sthavira* *shrutavruddha* *chaturdashapurvi* *vidbhih*. -
*Acharanga* *vrutti*, page 210 2. *Nisiham* *navam* *puvva* *pacchakanassa*
*tatiyavathuo*. *Ayara* *namadhejjha*, *visatima* *pahuḍacchedā*. - *Nishith*
*bhashya*, 6500 3. *Katara* *sutta* ? *Dasaukappa* *vavaharo* *ya*. *Kataraato*
*udgha* *tam* ? *Uchyate* *pacchakanapuvao*. *Dasaashrutaskandha* *chuni*, page
2 *Vandami* *Bhaddabahum*, *paina* *charimasayalasuyanaani*. *Suttassa*
*karagamisan*, *dasasu* *kappe* *ya* *vavahāre*. *Dasaashrutaskandha* *niyukti*
111 *Tattocchiya* *nijjuḍham*, *anuggahatthāe* *sapayajatiṇam*. *To*
*suttakarato* *khalu*, *sa* *bhavathi* *dasakappavavaharo*. - *Panchakalapa*
*mahaabhashya* 11; *Brahatkalpasutra* *shastha* *vi*. *pra*. *pa*. 2 *Teṇa*
*bhagavata* *ayarapakappa-dasa-kappa-vyavahārā* *ya* *navam* *puvvani*
*sandabhūta* *nijjuḍhā*. - *Panchakalapa* *churni*, page 1, *Brahatkalpasutra*
*shastha* *vi*. *pra*. *pa*. 3 *K appa* *pakappa* *tu* *sute...............*.
*Chuni* - 'k appa' *tti* *dasakappavavahārā*. - *Nishith* *bhashya*, 6395 30

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pratyAkhyAna nAmaka nauveM pUrva se nizItha kA ni!haNa huA hai| usa pUrva meM
bIsa vastu haiM  /  arthAt bIsa arthAdhikAra haiN| unameM tIsare vastu kA nAma
AyAra hai| AyAra ke bhI bIsa prAbhataccheda haiN| arthAta upavibhAga haiN|
bIsaveM prAbhUtaccheda se nizItha niryahaNa kiyA gayA hai|' dazAzrutaskandhacUNi
ke matAnusAra dazAzruskandha, kalpa aura vyavahAra ye tInoM Agama pratyAkhyAna
nAmaka pUrva se niSUDha haiM aura una tInoM AgamoM ke nirdUhakaH caturdazapUrvI
bhadrabAhusvAmI haiM ? yaha spaSTa ullekha prApta hai|3 paJcakalpa mahAbhASya
meM bhI dazA, kalpa aura vyavahAra ke niryahaka bhadrabAha batalAye gaye haiM
aura paJcakalpacUrNi meM prAcAraprakalpa (nizItha) dazA, kalpa aura vyavahAra
inacAroM AgamoM ke ni_haka bhadrabAhusvAmI mAne gaye haiN| yahAM para yaha
prazna cintanIya hai ki niyukti aura bhASya meM AcAraprakalpa kA nAma nahIM
aayaa| para paJcakalpacaNi meM AcAraprakalpa kA nAma kaise AyA ? yaha bhI
sambhava hai ki 'kalpa' zabda se niyuktikAra aura bhASyakAra ko bahatkalpa aura
AcAraprakalpa ye donoM hI gAhya hoM  /  jaise nizIthabhASya meM 'kappa' zabda se
unhoMne dazAzrutaskandha, bRhatkalpa aura vyavahAra ina tInoM AgamoM ko grahaNa
kiyA hai| sambhava hai AcAracUlA aura chedasUtroM ke nirmAtA caturdazapUrvI
bhadrabAhu hoN| pUrvavartI AcAryoM ne Agama ke tIna prakAra batAye haiM-
suttAgama, atthAgama aura tadubhayAgama  /  anya dRSTi se Agama ke tIna prakAra
aura bhI haiM-AtmAgama, anantarAgama aura paramparAgama  /  vyAkhyA granthoM meM
isakA vivecana isa prakAra prApta hotA hai| tIrthaMkara ke lie artha AtmAgama
hai| vahI artha gaNadharoM ke lie anantarAgama hai  /  gaNadharoM ke lie sUtra
aAtmAgama haiM aura gaNadharaziSyoM ke lie sUtra anantarAgama aura artha
paramparAgama haiN| gaNadhara ziSya ke lie aura usake pazcAt ziSyaparamparA ke
lie artha aura sUtra donoM hI Agama paramparAgama haiN| inameM Agama kA mUla
srota, prathama upalabdhi aura pAramparika upalabdhi ina tIna dRSTiyoM se
cintana kiyA hai| prAcArya jinadAsagaNi mahattara kI dRSTi se tIrthaMkara
nizItha ke arthaprarUpaka haiN| unake artha kI prathama upalabdhi gaNadharoM ko
haI aura usa artha kI pAramparika upalabdhi unake ziSya aura praziSyoM ko huI
aura vartamAna meM ho rahI hai| 1. sthaviraH zrutavRddha zcaturdazapUrva vidbhiH
/  -AcArAMgavRtti, pR. 210 2. NisIhaM NavamA puvvA paccakhANassa ttiyvtthuuo|
AyAra nAmadhejjA, vIsatimA pAhuDacchedA  /  /  -nizIthabhASya, 6500 3. kataraM
suttaM ? dasAukappo vavahAro ya  /  katarAto udgha taM ? ucyate pckkhaannpuvaao|
dazAzrutaskandhacUNi, patra 2 vaMdAmi bhaddabAhuM, pAiNaM carimasayalasuyanANi
/  suttassa kAragamisaM, dasAsu kappe ya vavahAre  /  /  dazAzrutaskandhaniyukti
111 tattocciya NijjUDhaM, aNuggahaTThAe sapayajatINaM  /  to suttakArato khalu,
sa bhavati dasakappavavahAro  /  /  -paMcakalpamahAbhASya 11; bRhatkalpasUtram
SaSTha vi. pra. pa. 2 teNa bhagavatA AyArapakappa-dasA-kappa-vyavahArA ya
navamapuvvanIsaMdabhUtA nijjUDhA  /  -paMcakalpacUrNi, patra 1, bRhatkalpa
sUtram SaSTha vi. pra. pR 3 kappa pakappA tu sute...............| cuNi-'kappo'
tti dasAkappavavahArA  /  /  -nizIthabhASya, 6395 30

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
From the perspective of the Sutra Agama, the author of the Nisitha Sutra is
Ganadhara. The first attainment of that Sutra was by the disciples of Ganadhara,
and the traditional attainment was by the students of Ganadhara.  Thus,
according to Acharya Jinadasagani Mahttar, the author of the Nisitha is the
Tirthankara from the perspective of meaning, and Ganadhara from the perspective
of the Sutra. Then, the question naturally arises as to how Bhadrabahu was
considered the author of the Nisitha by the Panchakल्पणिकार. When we ponder
deeply on this question, we find its solution in the Dashaśrutaskandhaniyukti.
There, the Niyuktikar, while contemplating the Dashaśrutaskandha, has written
that the present ten categories are smaller than the ten categories obtained in
the Angapravesht Agamas. The elders (sthaviras) made these smaller categories
for the benefit of the disciples. According to the Panchakल्पभाष्य चणि, those
elders were Bhadrabahu. In short, we can say that the Tirthankara is the
formulator of the meaning, Ganadhara is the author of the Sutra, and Bhadrabahu
Swami is the creator of the present concise form.  At the end of the Nisitha
Sutra, three verses are found in the praise (prasasti). Based on these, there is
a belief among scholars that the author of the Nisitha is Vishakhacharaya. In
all the available pattavalis of the Shvetambar tradition, there is no mention of
Vishakhacharaya. In the pattavali of the Digambar tradition, the name of
Vishakhacharaya is found after Bhadrabahu. Vishakhacharaya was a knower of the
ten previous births. Bhadrabahu Swami lived for one hundred and sixty-two years
after the nirvana of the Veer. Only after him did the era of Vishakhacharaya
begin. In the praise verses, for Vishakhacharaya, "Tass Lihiyam Nisīham" - here,
the meaning of "लिखित" can be both "author" and "writer". There is no mention of
any other Vishakhacharaya in the pattavalis. When the name of Vishakhacharaya
was clearly mentioned as the author of the Nisitha in the praise, why did the
Chanikara write the Nisitha as being authored by Ganadhara, and why did Acharya
Sheelank write the author of the Nisitha as being a knower of fourteen previous
births? It is not possible to say anything definitively in response to this.
Another question arises: were these praise verses present before the Niyuktikar,
the Bhashyakar, and the Churnikar? If it is assumed that the author of the
Nisitha was Vishakhacharaya, then the second question is: did Vishakhacharaya
compose the praise verses? From the study of the verses, it is clear that
Vishakhacharaya himself could not introduce himself in this way; how could he
praise his own qualities? If Vishakhacharaya had given these verses at the end
of the main text, what objection could the Niyuktikar have had in mentioning
Vishakhacharaya? Why would he then refer to him with the word "sthavir"?
Therefore, it is clear that these three praise verses were not present before
the Niyuktikar.  1. "Nisīhachuljhayaṇassa Tittthagaraṇam Athassa Attāgame,
Gaṇaharaṇam Suttasssa Attāgame, Gaṇāṇam Athassa Aṇam Tarāgame. Gaṇaharasisāṇam
Suttasssa Aṇantarāgame, Athassa Paramparāgame. Teṇa Param Sesāṇam Suttasssa Vi
Athassa Vi ṇo Attāgame, ṇo Aṇantarāgame, Paramparāgame." - Nisitha Churni Part 1
Page 4 Dasanacharitajuo Jutto Guttisū Sajjanahīesu. Nāmena Visāhagani Mahttarō
Guṇāṇ Manjūsā || Kīttīkati Piṇāddhō Jasapattō Paḍahō Tisāgar Niruddho.
Puṇaruttam Bhamai Sahi Sasivva Gagaṇam Guṇam Tassa. || Tassa Lihiyam Nisīham
Dhammadhurādharaṇapavar Pujjassa. Prārōggam Dhāraṇijja Sissapasissōva Bhojjam
Cha. || - Nisitha Sutra Part 4 Page 395

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAgama kI dRSTi se nizItha ke sUtra racayitA gaNadhara haiN| usa sUtra kI
prathama upalabdhi gaNadhara ke ziSyoM ko haI aura pAramparika upalabdhi
gaNadhara ke praziSyoM ko huii|' isa prakAra AcArya jinadAsagaNi mahattara ke
anusAra nizItha ke kartA artha kI dRSTi se tIrthaMkara aura sUtra kI dRSTi se
gaNadhara siddha hote haiN| phira sahaja hI yaha prazna ubuddha hotA hai ki
bhadrabAhu ko paJcakalpaNikAra ne nizItha kA kartA kisa prakAra mAnA  /
prastuta prazna para jaba hama gaharAI se cintana karate haiM to hameM
dazAzrataskandhaniyukti meM isakA samAdhAna milatA hai  /  vahAM para
niyuktikAra ne dazAzrutaskandha ke sambandha meM cintana karate hae likhA hai ki
prastata dazAe~ aMgapraviSTa AgamoM meM prApta dazAoM se lagha haiN| ziSyoM ke
anugraha heta ina lagha dazAoM kA niryahaNa sthaviroM ne kiyaa| paJcakalpabhASya
caNi ke anusAra ve sthavira bhadrabAhu haiM  /  saMkSepa meM ya hama kahanA
cAheM to yoM kaha sakate haiM ki artha ke prarUpaka tIrthakara haiN| sUtra ke
racayitA gaNadhara haiM aura vartamAna saMkSipta rUpa ke nirmAtA bhadrabAha
svAmI haiN| nizIthasUtra ke anta meM prazasti meM tIna gAthAeM prApta hotI haiN|
2 jinake AdhAra para vijJoM meM eka dhAraNA yaha pracalita hai ki nizItha ke
kartA vizAkhAcArya haiM  /  zvetAmbara paramparA kI jitanI bhI paTTAvaliyAM
upalabdha haiM unameM kahIM para bhI vizAkhAcArya kA ullekha nahIM hai|
digambara paramparA kI paTTAvalI meM bhadrabAha ke pazcAta vizAkhAcArya kA nAma
pAyA hai  /  vizAkhAcArya dasa pUrvo ke jJAtA the| vIra nirvANa ke eka sau
bAsaTha varSa taka bhadrabAhu svAmI the| usake pazcAt hI vizAkhAcArya kA yuga
prArambha huaa| prazastigAthAoM meM vizAkhAcArya ke lie-tassa lihiyaM nisIhaM'
yahAM para likhita kA artha racayitA aura lekhaka ye donoM artha nikala sakate
haiN| paTTAvaliyoM meM anya kisI vizAkhAcArya kA ullekha nahIM hai| jaba
prazasti meM nizItha ke lekhaka ke rUpa meM vizAkhAcArya kA nAma spaSTa rUpa se
ullikhita thA, phira caNikAra ne nizItha ko gaNadharakRta kyoM likhA aura
prAcArya zIlAMka ne nizItha ke racayitA sthavira ko catardaza pUrvavida kyoM
likhA? isake uttara meM spaSTa rUpa se kucha bhI kahanA sambhava nahIM  /  eka
prazna yaha bhI samutpanna hotA hai ki niyuktikAra, bhASyakAra aura cUrNikAra ke
samakSa ye prazasti gAthAe~ thIM yA nahIM? yadi yaha mAnA jAya ki nizItha ke
lekhaka vizAkhAcArya the to dUsarA prazna yaha hai ki kyA prazasti kI gAthAeM
vizAkhAcArya ne banAIM ? gAthAoM ke adhyayana se yaha spaSTa hai ki svayaM
vizAkhAcArya apanA paricaya isa prakAra nahIM de sakate, ve apane guNoM kA
utkIrtana kaise kara sakate haiN| yadi vizAkhAcArya ne ye gAthAe~ mala grantha
ke anta meM dI hotI to niyaMktikAra ko vizAkhAcArya kA ullekha karane meM kyA
Apatti ho sakatI thI? ve phira sthavira zabda se kyoM ullekha karate ? ata: yaha
spaSTa hai ki niyuktikAra ke samakSa prazasti kI ye tIna 1.
"nisIhaculajhayaNassa titthagarANaM atthassa attAgame, gaNaharANaM suttassa
attAgame, gaNANaM atthassa aNaM traagme| gaNaharasissANaM suttassa aNaMtarAgame,
atthassa paraMparAgame  /  teNa paraM sesANaM suttassa vi atthassavi No
attAgame, No aNantarAgame, paraMparAgame  / " -nizIthacUNi bhAga 1 pR. 4
dasaNacaritajuo jutto guttIsu sajjaNahiesu  /  nAmeNa visAhagaNI mahattarao
guNANa maMjUsA  //  kittIkati piNAddho jasapatto paDaho tisAgara niruddho|
puNaruttaM bhamai sahi sasivva gagaNaM guNaM tassa  /  /  tassa lihiyaM nisIhaM
dhammadhurAdharaNapavara pujjassa  /  prAroggaM dhAraNijja sissapasissova
bhojjaM ca  /  /  -nizIthasUtra bhAga 4 pR. 395

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There were no verses. If these verses were by Vishakhacharaya, then Churnikar
would have definitely written a commentary on these verses and there would have
been a hint of it in the Sanskrit commentary of the twentieth Uddeshak.
Therefore, it seems clear that these verses were not written by Vishakhacharaya.
If it is imagined that these verses were written by Vishakhacharaya, then the
meaning of the word 'lihiyam' here is not composition but book writing. If it is
assumed that Bhadrabahu composed Nishita and Vishakhacharaya wrote it down, it
also does not seem possible. If Vishakhacharaya of the Digambara tradition had
written down Nishita, then Nishita would have been accepted in the Digambara
tradition, but the acceptance of Nishita in the Svetambara tradition is not in
the Digambara tradition. Therefore, it seems that the scribe of Nishita,
Vishakhacharaya, must have been an Acharya of the Svetambara tradition, not the
Digambara tradition. It is investigable who they were? Where were they from?
What were their lines of introduction?' Who created these three verses of the
eulogy and who wrote them at the end of Nishita. There is no correct evidence.
In such a situation, it is not appropriate to decide the act of Nishita on the
basis of these verses. These verses are not created by Vishakhacharaya because
of the inscription of Vishakhacharaya's qualities. Some disciple-disciple of
Vishakhacharaya may have inscribed it at the end of the book. We have been able
to indicate in the previous lines that according to Panchakalapa Churni, the one
who composed Nishita is Bhadrabahu Swami. This opinion has also been supported
by Punyavijayaji, the influencer of Agam. It has become clear after this
investigation that Acharachula Chaturdashapurvi was composed by Bhadrabahu. The
style of composition of Acharachula is completely different from Acharang. It
was composed after Acharang. A question arose in the mind of a disciple that
there is no Tirthankara Prabhu at present, nor is there a Shrutakevali, nor a
Dashapurvi or a Navapurvi. In such a situation, if a fault is committed, how
will it be purified? In the absence of a special knower, who will purify the
practice by giving atonement. The Acharya saw the disciple's worried face. He
listened to his words. The Acharya said in very sweet words - 'Vats! Your
thinking is appropriate. Today Tirthankara and Chaturdashapurvi are not in front
of us, but the Acharyas who are holding the study of Acharaprakalpa composed by
Chaturdashapurvadhar are present. They can purify by giving atonement.'
Jindasagani Mahttar has given two meanings of the word 'Chaudaspuvvani-badho' -
'composed by Chaturdashapurvi or composed by Chaturdashapurva'. We have written
in the previous lines that Nishita was composed by the ninth Purva. Therefore,
no special meaning is revealed from Chaturdashapurvi's composition. Therefore,
Jindasagani Mahttar has considered Chaturdashapurvi Bhadrabahu as the author of
Nishita. This seems consistent. Mahamahishi Pandit Dalsukh Bhai Malvaniya has
thought about it from various perspectives in detail in his introduction. But he
himself could not reach the conclusion of who the author of Nishita is. His
opinion was definitely that Nishita should not be composed by Bhadrabahu or
Vishakhacharaya. The composition of Nishita should be before the Svetambara and
Digambara differences of opinion. After Bhadrabahu, there has been a difference
in both the Svetambara and Digambara traditions. Nishita's -p. 18-24 1. Nishita:
A Study: Essence from Pt. Dalsukh Malvaniya 2. Kamam Jinpuvvadhara, Karisu Sodim
Taha Vi Khalu Enhi. Chaudasavvini Badho, Ganpariyatti Pakappadharo ||
-Nishithabhashya, 6674

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gAthAeM nahIM thiiN| ye gAthAeM vizAkhAcArya kI hotI to cUrNikAra bhI ina
gAthAoM para cUNi avazya likhate aura bIsaveM uddezaka kI saMskRta vyAkhyA meM
bhI isakA saMketa avazya krte| isalie yaha spaSTa lagatA hai ki ye gAthAe~
khAcArya ke dvArA likhI huI nahIM haiN| yadi yaha kalpanA kI jAya ki ye gAthAe~
vizAkhAcArya ke dvArA hI likhita haiM to yahA~ para 'lihiyaM' zabda kA artha
racanA nahIM apitu pustaka lekhana hai  /  yadi yaha mAnA jAya ki bhadrabAhu ne
nizItha kI racanA kI aura usa racanA ko vizAkhAcArya ne lipibaddha kiyA, yaha
bhI sambhava nahIM lgtaa| yadi digambara paramparA ke vizAkhAcArya ne nizItha ko
lipibaddha kiyA hotA to digambara paramparA meM nizItha ko mAnyatA prApta hotI,
para nizItha kI jo mAnyatA zvetAmbara paramparA meM hai vaha digambara paramparA
meM nahIM hai| isalie aisA lagatA hai ki nizItha ke lipikartA vizAkhAcArya
digambara paramparA ke nahIM, apitu zvetAmbara paramparA ke AcArya hone caahie|
yaha anveSaNIya hai ki ve kauna the? kahAM ke the? unakI paricaya rekhAe~ kyA
thIM?' prazasti kI ina tIna gAthAoM ko kisane banAyA aura kisane nizItha ke anta
meM likhaa| yaha sahI pramANa prApta nahIM hai| aisI sthiti meM ina gAthAnoM ke
prAdhAra para nizItha ke kartutya kA nirNaya karanA upayukta nahIM hai|
vizAkhAcArya ke guNoM kA utkIrtana hone se ye gAthAe~ vizAkhAcArya ke dvArA
nirmita nahIM haiN| vizAkhAcArya ke kisI ziSya-praziSya ne hI grantha ke anta
meM aMkita kiyA ho| hama pUrva paMktiyoM meM yaha aMkita kara pAye haiM ki
paJcakalpacUNi ke anusAra niyU haka bhadrabAhu svAmI haiM  /  isa mata kA
samarthana Agama-prabhAvaka puNya vijayajI ne bhI kiyA hai| yaha Aja anveSaNa ke
pazcAt spaSTa ho cukA hai ki AcAracUlA caturdazapUrvI bhadrabAhu ke dvArA
ni!haNa kI gaI hai| AcArAMga se prAcAracUlA kI racanAzailI sarvathA pRthak hai
/  usakI racanA AcArAMga ke pazcAt huI hai| eka ziSya ke antarmAnasa meM yaha
prazna udbhUta huA ki vartamAna meM tIrthaMkara prabhu nahIM haiM, na
zrutakevalI hI haiM na dasapUrvI yA naupUrvI hI haiN| aisI sthiti meM yadi
kadAcitta doSa laga jAya to usakA zuddhikaraNa kaise hogA? viziSTa jJAnI ke
abhAva meM kauna prAyazcitta dekara sAdhanA ko nirmala bnaaegaa| AcArya ne ziSya
ke muAye hae cehare ko dekhaa| usakI bAta sunii| prAcArya ne bahuta hI madhura
zabdoM meM kahA-'vatsa ! tumhArA cintana upayukta hai| Aja tIrthaMkara aura
caturdaza pUrvI hamAre sAmane nahIM haiM kintu caturdazapUrvadhara dvArA
nibaddha AcAraprakalpa adhyayana ko dhAraNa karane vAle prAcArya vidyamAna haiM
/  ve prAyazcitta dekara zuddhikaraNa kara sakate haiN|' jinadAsagaNi mahattara
ne 'coddasapuvvaNibaddho' zabda ke do artha kiye haiM-'caturdazapUrvI dvArA
nibaddha athavA caturdaza pUrvo se ni'Dha'  /  hama pUrva paMktiyoM meM yaha
likha cuke haiM ki nizItha nauveM pUrva se nihU~Dha kiyA gayA hai| ataH
caturdaza pUrvI niyUMDha se koI vizeSa artha prakaTa nahIM hotaa| isalie
jinadAsagaNi mahattara ne nizitha ke kartA caturdazapUrvI bhadrabAha ko mAnA
hai| yaha saMgata pratIta hotA hai| mahAmanISI paNDita dalasukhabhAI mAlavaNiyA
ne vistAra se apanI prastAvanA meM vividha daSTiyoM se cintana kiyaa| para ve
svayaM isa niSkarSa para nahIM pahu~ca sake ki nizItha ke kartA kauna haiN|
unakA yaha mata avazya rahA ki hone cAhie aura na vizAkhAcArya hii| nizItha kI
racanA zvetAmbara aura digambara matabheda ke pUrva honI caahie| bhadrabAha ke
pazcAt hI zvetAmbara aura digambara donoM paramparAoM meM pArthakya haA hai|
nizItha kA -pR. 18-24 1. nizItha eka adhyayana : paM. dalasukha mAlavaNiyA se
sAra grahaNa 2. kAmaM jiNapuvvadharA, karisuM sodhiM tahA vi khalu eNhi  /
coddasavviNi baddho, gaNapariyaTTI pkppdhro|| -nizIthabhASya, 6674

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Both traditions mention it, so it must have been created before the schism. The
*Vyavaharsutra*, which is considered to be the work of Acharya Bhadrabahu,
mentions *Acharaprakalpa* many times. This clearly shows that Bhadrabahu was
aware of *Nishith*. Even if the current form of *Nishith* is not the same, it is
logical to assume that *fate* was composed before Bhadrabahu's time. *Nishith*
was created within 150 years of the Nirvana of Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira.
According to *Panchakalapachurni*, Acharya Bhadrabahu composed *Nishith*, and
his time is the same. If we follow the other tradition, then Vishakacharya came
after Bhadrabahu. Even then, it can be said without a doubt that *Nishith* was
created within 175 years of the Nirvana of Vira.  Pandit Muni Shri Kalyanvijayji
Gani's clear opinion is that Bhadrabahu Swami is the one who established the
*Brihatkalpa* and *Vyavahar* from the *Purvasruta*, and that the one who
established *Nishithadhyayan* is not Bhadrabahu but Aryarakshitasuri. Bhadrabahu
Swami's provision of atonement in *Kalpa* and *Vyavahar* was sufficient for the
Shraman-Shramanis of that time, but by the time of Aryarakshitasuri, the
situation had changed drastically. The situation of famine etc. during the
Maurya period had ended. The number of Shraman-Shramanis had increased
significantly during the time of King Samprati Maurya. With the increase in the
number of Shramans, many new problems had also arisen. Therefore, the atonement
provision of *Kalpa* and *Vyavahar* seemed insufficient. To control these new
situations, it was necessary to create a detailed atonement provision.
Therefore, Aryarakshita did not do it from the previous literature. There were
six *uddeshakas* in *Kalpadhyayan*, ten *uddeshakas* in *Vyavahar*, twenty
*uddeshakas* in *Nishithadhyayan*, and atonement provisions in about 1426
sutras.  The *Panchakalapabhashya Churnikar* has stated that *Nishithadhyayan*
was also quoted from *Shruthadhar Bhadrabahu Swami* along with *Kalpa*,
*Vyavahar*, etc., but this is not the truth. There is a clear difference in the
language and the topics discussed in the *Brihatkalpa* and the sutras of
*Nishithadhyayan* and the topics discussed in them. It is true that there is a
difference in the language of *Brihatkalpa* and *Vyavahar*, but this difference
is due to the changes made later in *Vyavahar*. This is why *Nishithadhyayan* is
called *Prakalpaadhyayan* in *Vyavaharsutra*. This change may have happened
after Aryarakshitasuri.  **Basis and Subject Matter of Nishith**  *Nishith* is
the fifth *chula* of *Shracharang*. It is also called *Nishithadhyayan*. It has
twenty *uddeshakas*. The twentieth *uddeshaka* describes the process of giving
atonement.  The first *uddeshaka* mentions the monthly *anudghatik* (guru masa)
atonement. The second to fifth *uddeshakas* mention the monthly *udghatik*
(laghu masa) atonement. The sixth to eleventh *uddeshakas* mention the
*chaturmasik* *anudghatik* (guru chaturmas) atonement. The twelfth to twentieth
*uddeshakas* mention the *chaturmasik* *udghatik* (laghu chaturmas) atonement.
1. It is also called an independent study. Therefore, its atonement provision is
in the previous nineteen *uddeshakas* and 2. 3. *Vy. Udd. 3. 10; Udd. 5, Sutra
15; Udd. 6, Sutra 4-5 etc.* *Nishith: Ek Adhyayan* pp. 24-25 *Prabandh Parijat*
in the article 'Nishithsutra ka Nirman aur Nirmata'.  33

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 donoM hI paramparAoM meM ullekha hai, isalie saMghabheda ke pUrva hI isakA
nirmANa ho gayA hogA  /  vyavahArasUtra jo AcArya bhadrabAhu kI hI kRti mAnI
jAtI hai, usameM AcAraprakalpa kA aneka bAra ullekha huA hai|' isase spaSTa hai
ki bhadrabAhu ke samakSa nizItha avazya thA  /  bhale hI Aja jo nizItha kA rUpa
hai vaha na bhI ho  /  isa AdhAra se fate ko bhadrabAhu ke samaya se pUrva kI
racanA mAnanA tarkasaMgata hai  /  zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke nirvANa se 150
varSa ke antargata hI nizItha kA nirmANa ho cukA thA  /  paJcakalpacUrNi ke
anusAra AcArya bhadrabAhu ne nizItha kI racanA kI, unakA bhI samaya yahI hai  /
dUsarI paramparA ke anusAra yadi mAnate haiM to bhadrabAhu ke pazcAt hI
vizAkhAcArya hote haiM  /  to bhI vIra nirvANa se 175 varSa ke bIca nizItha kA
nirmANa ho cukA thA, aisA asaMdigdha rUpa se kahA jA sakatA hai | paNDita muni
zrI kalyANavijayajI gaNi kA spaSTa mantavya hai ki bRhatkalpa aura vyavahAra ina
donoM AgamoM ko pUrvazruta se niryUDha karane vAle bhadrabAhu svAmI haiM aura
nizIthAdhyayana ke niryU DhakartA bhadrabAhu na hokara AryarakSitasUri haiM  /
bhadrabAhu svAmI ne kalpa aura vyavahAra meM jo prAyazcitta kA vidhAna kiyA hai
vaha tatkAlIna zramaNazramaNiyoM ke lie paryApta thA kintu AryarakSitasUri ke
samaya taka paristhiti meM pratyadhika parivartana ho cukA thA  /  mauryakAlIna
durbhikSAdi kI sthiti samApta ho cukI thii| rAjA samprati maurya ke samaya
zramaNa - zramaNiyoM kI saMkhyA meM atyadhika vRddhi ho cukI thI  /  zramaNoM kI
saMkhyA kI abhivRddhi ke sAtha aneka navIna samasyAe~ bhI upasthita ho cukI thIM
/  ataH kalpa aura vyavahAra kA prAyazcittavidhAna paryApta pratIta huA  /
etadarthaM navIna sthitiyoM para niyantraNa karane ke lie vistAra se
prAyazcittavidhAna banAnA Avazyaka thA, ataH zrAryarakSita ne pUrva sAhitya se
vaha na kiyA  /  kalpAdhyayana meM chaha uddezaka the, vyavahAra meM dasa
uddezaka the to nizIthAdhyayana meM bIsa uddezaka haiM aura lagabhaga 1426
sUtroM meM prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai  /  paJcakalpabhASya cUrNikAra ne kalpa,
vyavahAra Adi ke sAtha nizIthAdhyayana bhI zrutadhara bhadrabAhu svAmI dvArA
pUrvazruta se uddhRta batAyA hai kintu satya tathya yaha nahIM hai  /
bRhatkalpa kI bhASA aura pratipAdita viSayoM tathA nizIthAdhyayana ke sUtroM kI
bhASA aura usameM pratipAdita viSayoM meM spaSTa rUpa se bhinnatA pratIta hotI
hai  /  yaha satya hai ki bRhatkalpa kI bhASA aura vyavahAra kI bhASA meM bhI
bhinnatA hai para vaha bhinnatA vyavahAra meM bAda meM kiye gaye parivartanoM ke
kAraNa hai  /  yahI kAraNa hai ki vyavahArasUtra meM nizIthAdhyayana kA
prakalpAdhyayana yaha nAma prApta hotA hai  /  yaha parivartana sambhava hai
AryarakSitasUri ke pazcAt huA ho  /  3 nizItha kA AdhAra aura viSaya varNana
nizItha zrAcArAMga kI pAMcavIM cUlA hai  /  nAma nizIthAdhyayana bhI hai  /
isameM bIsa uddezaka haiN| bIsaveM uddezaka meM prAyazcitta dene kI prakriyA
pratipAdita kI gaI hai  /  uddezaka prathama meM mAsika anudghAtika ( guru mAsa)
prAyazcitta kA ullekha hai  /  uddezaka dUsare se lekara pAMcaveM taka mAsika
udghAtika (laghu mAsa ) prAyazcitta kA ullekha hai  /  uddezaka chaha se lekara
gyAraha taka cAturmAsika anudghAtika (guru cAturmAsa ) prAyazcitta kA ullekha
hai  /  uddezaka bAraha se lekara bIsa taka cAturmAsika udghA 1. 2. 3. ise eka
svatantra adhyayana bhI kahate haiM  /  isIlie isakA apara pUrva ke unnIsa
uddezakoM meM prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai aura vya. uddeza 3. 10; uddeza 5, sUtra
15; uddeza 6, sUtra 4-5 ityAdi  /  nizItha : eka adhyayana pR. 24-25 prabandha
pArijAta meM 'nizIthasUtra kA nirmANa aura nirmAtA' lekha  /  33

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This text discusses the concept of *prāyaścitta* (penance) in Jainism,
specifically focusing on the types of *prāyaścitta* and their duration.   It
mentions that there are five types of *prāyaścitta* based on their duration:   *
**Māsika Udghatika:** Monthly with initiation * **Māsika Anudghātika:** Monthly
without initiation * **Caturmāsika Udghatika:** Four-month with initiation *
**Caturmāsika Anudghātika:** Four-month without initiation * **Āropaṇā:**  A
type of penance that involves applying the penance for one offense to another.
The text then delves into the concept of *Āropaṇā*, explaining that it is a way
to combine different types of penance. It outlines five types of *Āropaṇā*:  1.
**Prasthāpita:**  Starting a specific penance from among many obtained through
*prāyaścitta*. 2. **Sthāpita:** Maintaining the penance obtained through
*prāyaścitta* without interruption due to any reason like *vaiyāvṛtya*
(hindrance). 3. **Kṛtsnā:**  A type of *Āropaṇā* where the penance is completed
within its designated duration, especially when the maximum duration of penance
is six months. 4. **Akṛtsnā:**  A type of *Āropaṇā* where the penance is not
completed within its designated duration, especially when the penance exceeds
six months. 5. **Hāḍahada:**  A type of *Āropaṇā* where the penance is completed
quickly.  The text further clarifies that while there are two main types of
*prāyaścitta* (monthly and four-monthly), other durations like bi-monthly, tri-
monthly, five-monthly, and six-monthly are created through *Āropaṇā*. It also
mentions that the 20th *uddeśaka* (chapter) of the *Nīśītha* text focuses on
*Āropaṇā*.  Finally, the text highlights that while the *Sthānāṅgasūtra*
mentions five types of *Āropaṇā*, the *Samvāyāṅga* text lists 28 types, ranging
from one month to four months in duration.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tika (laghu cAturmAsa) prAyazcitta kA ullekha hai  /  ina uddezakoM kA jo
vibhAjana kiyA gayA hai usakA AdhAra hai mAsika udghAtika, mAsika anudghAtikA,
cAturmAsika udghAtika, cAturmAsika anudghAtika aura prAropaNA, ye pAMca vikalpa
haiM  /  sthAnAMgasUtra ke pAMcaveM sthAna meM AcArakalpa ke pAMca prakAra
batAye haiM  / ' yadi hama gaharAI se cintana kareM to prAyazcitta ke do hI
prakAra haiM-mAsika aura cAturmAsika  /  zeSa dvimAsika, trimAsika, paJcamAsika
aura chaha mAsika, ye prAyazcitta AropaNA ke dvArA banate haiN| bIsaveM uddezaka
kA pramukha viSaya AropaNA hI hai| sthAnAMgasUtra ke pAMcaveM sthAna meM AropaNA
ke pAMca prakAra batAye haiN| prAropaNA kA artha hai eka doSa se prApta
prAyazcitta meM dUsare doSa ke sevana se prApta prAyazcitta kA AropaNa krnaa|
usake pAMca prakAra haiM 1. prasthApitA-prAyazcitta meM prApta aneka tapoM meM
se kisI eka tapa ko prArambha krnaa| 2. sthApitA-prAyazcitta rUpa se prApta
tapoM ko sthApita kiye rakhanA, vaiyAvRtya prAdi kisI prayojana se prArambha na
kara pAnA  /  3. kRtsnA -vartamAna jaina zAsana meM tapa kI utkRSTa avadhi chaha
mAsa kI hai| jise isa avadhi se adhika tapa (prAyazcitta rUpa meM) prApta na ho
usakI AropaNA ko apanI avadhi meM paripUrNa hone ke kAraNa kRtsnA kahA jAtA hai|
4. akRtsnA-jise chaha mAsa se adhika tapa prApta ho, usakI AropaNA apanI avadhi
se pUrNa nahIM hotii| prAyazcitta ke rUpa meM chaha mAsa se adhika tapa nahIM
kiyA jaataa| use usI avadhi meM samAhita karanA hotA hai| isalie apUrNa hone ke
kAraNa ise prakRtsnA kahA jAtA hai| 5. hADahaDA-jo prAyazcitta prApta ho use
zIghra hI de denA  /  prAyazcitta ke (1) mAsika aura (2) cAturmAsika ye do
prakAra haiN| zeSa dvimAsikA, trimAsika, paJcamAsika aura pANmAsika prAyazcitta
prAropaNA se banate haiM  /  nizItha ke bIsaveM uddezaka kA mukhya viSaya
AropaNA hI hai| sthAnAMga meM kevala AropaNA ke pA~ca prakAra hI pratipAdita
haiN| vahA~ para samavAyAMga meM aTThAIsa prAropaNA ke prakAra batalAye haiN| ve
isa prakAra haiM-(1) eka mAsa kI (2) paitIsa dina kI (3) cAlIsa dina kI (4)
paitAlIsa dina kI (5) pacAsa dina kI (6) sattAvana dina kI (7) do mAsa kI (8)
paisaTha dina kI (9) sattara dina kI (10) pacahattara dina kI (11) assI dina kI
(12) pacAsI dina kI (13) tIna mAsa kI (14) sattAnavai dina kI (15) sau dina kI
(16) eka sau pA~ca dina kI (17) eka sau dasa dina kI (18) eka sau pandraha dina
kI (19) cAra mAsa kI (20) eka sau paccIsa dina kI (21) eka sau tIsa dina kI (22)
eka sau paitIsa dina kI 1. paMcavihe AyArakappe paNNatte, taM jahA mAsie
ugghAtie mAsie aNugdhAtie caumAsie ugghAtie caumAsie aNugghAtie ArovaNA  /
-ThANaM 5,145 pR. 588 pArovaNA paMcavihA paNNattA, taM jahApaTTaviyA, ThaviyA,
kasiNA, akasiNA, hADahaDA  /  -ThANaM 5,149. pR. 589 samavAyAMga, samavAya 28 |

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(23) One hundred and forty days (24) One hundred and forty-five days (25)
Udvatiki Aroopana (26) Anudghatiki Shraaropana (27) Kritsna Shraaropana (28)
Prakritna Aroopana.  In the reign of a Tirthankara, the Tirthankara himself
performs the highest penance, and no other person in his reign can perform more
penance than that. The first Tirthankara, Bhagwan Rishabhdev, performed penance
for one year. In his reign, there was no provision for penance for more than one
year. From Bhagwan Ajitnath to Bhagwan Parshvanath's reign, a seeker could
perform penance for eight months. Bhagwan Mahavira performed the highest penance
for six months, so in his reign, the provision for penance is six months, no
more. Therefore, in Bhagwan Mahavira's reign, the provision for Aroopana-
obtained atonement is also not more than six months. The atonement of Chhed is
also the highest for six months. It can be given a maximum of three times. After
that, the original atonement is given.  The style of composition of Nishita is
different from the Dasha Shruta Skandha, Vyavahar, Brihatkalpa, etc. Chhed
Sutras. Up to nineteen Uddeshak, each Sutra is complete with Saizjad and the
Uddeshak is complete with the provision of atonement, but the style of
composition of the twentieth Uddeshak is completely different from the nineteen
Uddeshak. Many facts are given in the twentieth Uddeshak. But the style of the
Sutra is very concise. Therefore, it is very difficult to understand the Guru's
profound secret that remains in the Sutra without Gurugama or without
explanatory literature. This is the reason why commentaries, Churnis, etc. have
been created on the present Sutra in great detail. There is a detailed
discussion of Utsarg and Apavad Marg in Niyukti, Bhashya, Churni, Subodh
Vyakhya, etc.  Two paths of Sadhana: Utsarg and Apavad  :  Sadhana has a
glorious place in Jain culture. The pages of ancient Jain literature are
illuminated by the bright light of Sadhana. Sadhana is called the lifeblood of
life. Only through proper Sadhana does a seeker attain his goal. The every
particle of a seeker's life is filled with the sweet stream of renunciation,
penance, self-study, and meditation.  Utsarg and Apavad Marg  There are two
banks of the Jain Sadhana river - one is 'Utsarg' and the other is 'Apavad'. The
word Utsarg means 'main' and the word Apavad means 'secondary'. Utsarg Marg
means the provision of major rules for the protection, purification, and growth
of inner life, character, and virtues, and Apavad means the protection of inner
life, etc.  1. Subahuhi Vimasehi Chanhm Maasaana Param Cha Dayavvam. || 6524
Churnitvarihehi Bahuhi Maasehi Chhammasa Param Na Dijjai Samvassev Es Niyamo,
Ettha Karanam Jamha Brahmam Vaddhamanasamino Evam Chaiva Param Pamanam Thavitam.
(Kh) Chhammasovarai Jai Puno Avajjai To Tini Vara Lahhu Chev Chhedo Dayavvo. Es
Pravisitti Va Tishn Vara Chalahu Chhedo.  ,  Ahavajam Chaiva Tava Tiyam Tam
Chhedatiya Pi-Maasamantaram Chaumasamantaram Chhammasa Sambhantaram Cha Jamha
Evam Tamha Bhinnamaasadi Jav Chhammasan, Tesu Chhinnesu Chhey Tiyam Pratikkatam
Bhavati. Tato Vi Jati Param Pravajjati To Tini Vara Mulam Dijjati. - Nishita
Churni Bhag 4, 5, 351-52.  (35)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 (23) eka sau cAlIsa dina kI (24) eka sau paiMtAlIsa dina kI (25) udvAtikI
AropaNA (26) anudghAtikI zrAropaNA (27) kRtsnA zrAropaNA ( 28 ) prakRtsnA
AropaNA  /  jisa tIrthaMkara ke zAsana meM tIrthaMkara svayaM utkRSTa tapa kI
jitanI ArAdhanA karate haiM, usase adhika tapa kI ArAdhanA usake zAsana meM anya
vyakti nahIM kara pAte  /  prathama tIrthaMkara bhagavAn RSabhadeva ne eka
saMvatsara taka tapa kI ArAdhanA kii| unake zAsana meM eka saMvatsara se adhika
tapasyA kA vidhAna nahIM thaa| bhagavAn ajitanAtha se lekara bhagavAn
pArzvanAtha ke zAsana taka ATha mAsa ke tapa kI ArAdhanA sAdhaka kara sakatA
thaa| bhagavAn mahAvIra ne utkRSTa tapa kI ArAdhanA chaha mAsa kI kI thI, isalie
unake zAsana meM tapasyA kA vidhAna chaha mAsa kA hai, usase adhika nahIM isalie
bha. mahAvIra ke zAsana meM AropaNA prApta prAyazcitta kA vidhAna bhI chaha
mAsika se adhika nahIM hai  / ' cheda prAyazcitta bhI utkRSTa chaha mAsa kA hotA
hai  /  vaha adhika se adhika tIna bAra taka diyA jA sakatA hai  /  usake pazcAt
mUla prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai  /  dazAzrutaskandha, vyavahAra, bRhatkalpa Adi
chedasUtroM se nizItha kI racanA zailI pRthak hai  /  unnIsa uddezakoM taka
pratyeka sUtra sAijjada se pUrNa hotA hai aura prAyazcita vidhAna ke sAtha
uddezaka pUrNa hotA hai kintu bIsaveM uddezaka kI racanAzailI unnIsa uddezakoM
se bilkula alaga-thalaga hai| bIsaveM uddezaka meM aneka tathya diye gaye haiN|
kintu sUtra kI zailI bahuta hI saMkSipta hai| ataH sUtra meM rahe hue guru
gambhIra rahasya ko binA gurugama ke yA binA vyAkhyA sAhitya ke samajhanA bahuta
hI kaThina hai  /  yahI kAraNa hai prastuta sUtra para atyadhika vistAra se
bhASya cUrNi Adi kA nirmANa huA hai| niyukti, bhASya, cUrNi, subodha vyAkhyA Adi
meM utsarva aura apavAda mArga kI vistAra se carcA hai| sAdhanA ke do mArga
utsarga aura apavAda : jainasaMskRti meM sAdhanA kA gauravapUrNa sthAna hai  /
prAcIna jaina sAhitya ke pRSTha sAdhanA ke ujjvala samujjvala Aloka se jagamagA
rahe haiM  /  sAdhanA ko jIvana kA prANa kahA hai| samyak sAdhanA se hI sAdhaka
apane sAdhya ko prApta karatA hai| sAdhaka ke jIvana ke kaNa-kaNa meM tyAga,
tapa, svAdhyAya aura dhyAna kI sarasa saritA bahatI hai| utsarga aura apavAda
mArga jaina sAdhanA rUpI saritA ke do taTa haiM--eka 'utsarga' hai aura dUsarA
'apavAda'  /  utsarga zabda kA artha 'mukhya' aura apavAda zabda kA artha
'gauNa' hai utsarga mArga kA artha hai Antarika jIvana, cAritra aura sadguNoM kI
rakSA, zuddhi aura abhivRddhi ke lie pramukha niyamoM kA vidhAna aura dhapavAda
kA artha hai Antarika jIvana Adi kI rakSA 1. subahuhi vimAsehi chanhaM mAsANa
paraM ca dAyavvaM  /  /  6524 cUrNitavArihehi bahuhi mAsehi chammAsA paraM Na
dijjai samvasseva esa niyamo, ettha kAraNaM jamhA bhramhaM vaddhamANasAmiNo evaM
caiva paraM pamANaM ThavitaM  /  (kha) chammAsovari jai puNo Avajjai to tiNi
vArA lahu ceva chedo dAyavvo  /  esa pravisiTThI vA tiSNa vArA chalahu chedo  /
, ahavAjaM caiva tava tiyaM taM chedatiya pi-mAsammaMtaraM caumAsambhaMtaraM
chammA sambhaMtaraM ca jamhA evaM tamhA bhiNNamAsAdi jAva chammAsaM, tesu
chiNNesu cheya tiyaM pratikkataM bhavati  /  tato vi jati paraM prAvajjati to
tiNi vArA mUlaM dijjati  /  - nizIya cUrNi bhAga 4, 5, 351-52. ( 35 )

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The purpose of the rules for restrictions (utsarga) and exceptions (apavada) is
to purify and enhance the path of spiritual practice. Both utsarga and apavada
have the same goal: to guide the practitioner towards the path of worship. A
common practitioner might wonder why there are two forms when both utsarga and
apavada have the same goal.  In response, it is important to understand that the
wise Jain sages, deeply knowledgeable about Jain culture, have established the
paths of utsarga and apavada, taking into account the physical and mental
weaknesses of humans and the overall progress of the community. The commentator
of the Nisitha Bhashya writes, "For a capable practitioner, the substances
prohibited in the utsarga state may become acceptable due to special
circumstances." Utsarga and apavada are not contradictory.  Acharya
Jinasagargani Mahत्तर२ writes, "Things prohibited in the utsarga path become
conceivable and acceptable when a reason arises." This is because both utsarga
and apavada have the same goal and are complementary to each other. The
practitioner can progress on the path of spiritual practice only by harmonizing
both. If utsarga and apavada were contradictory, they would not be utsarga and
apavada, but rather promoters of free will. Both are referred to as paths in the
Agamic literature. One path is straight like a highway, while the other is
slightly winding.  **General Method: Utsarga**  Walking on the utsarga path is
the normal practice of a practitioner's life. A person walks on a highway, but
if there is an obstacle on the highway, they leave the highway and take a nearby
path. When it becomes convenient after walking a short distance, they return to
the highway. This is the situation with a practitioner taking the apavada path
from the utsarga path, and the same method applies to returning from apavada to
utsarga.  The utsarga path is the general method. The practitioner continuously
walks on this path. The utsarga path should not be abandoned without a special
circumstance. A practitioner who abandons the utsarga path and adopts the
apavada path without reason is not a paraadhak (one who transgresses the rules),
but a viraadhak (one who opposes the rules). A perfectly healthy person who
takes medicine or pretends to be sick and takes medicine even after the illness
has gone is failing in their duty. Apavada should not be used in the absence of
a special reason. When the reason for using apavada is gone, the practitioner
should return to the utsarga path.  **Specific Method: Apavada**  We have
already explained that apavada is a specific path. Like utsarga, it is a path of
restraint and spiritual practice. However, apavada must be a real exception. If
the intention behind apavada is to indulge the senses, it is not the apavada
path. Therefore, the practitioner needs to be constantly aware on the apavada
path. Apavada should be used only as much as absolutely necessary, not
continuously. The apavada path is for a special situation.  १. उस्सग्गेण
णिसिद्धाणि जाणि दव्वाणि संथरे मूणिणो। कारणजाए जाते, सव्वाणि वि ताणि कप्पंति ॥
-Nisitha Bhashya 5245 जाणि उस्सग्गे पडिसिद्धाणि उप्पणे कारणे सव्वाणि वि ताणि
कप्पंति । ण दोषो....।-Nisitha Chani 5245

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hetu usakI zuddhi vRddhi ke lie bAdhaka niyamoM kA vidhAna  /  utsarga aura
apavAda donoM kA lakSya eka hai aura vaha hai sAdhaka ko upAsanA ke patha para
Age bar3hAnA  /  sAmAnya sAdhaka ke mAnasa meM yaha vicAra udabhata ho sa meM
yaha vicAra udbhUta ho sakate haiM ki jaba utsarga aura apavAda ina donoM kA
lakSya eka hai to phira do rUpa kyoM haiM ? uttara meM nivedana hai ki jaina
saMskRti ke marmajJa mahAmanISiyoM ne mAnava kI zArIrika aura mAnasika durbalatA
ko lakSya meM rakhakara tathA saMgha ke samutkarSa ko dhyAna meM rakhakara
utsarga aura apavAda mArga kA nirUpaNa kiyA hai| nizIthabhASyakAra ne likhA hai
ki samartha sAdhaka ke lie utsarga sthiti meM jina dravyoM kA niSedha kiyA gayA
hai, paristhiti meM vizeSa kAraNa se vaha vastu grAhya bhI ho jAtI hai|' utsarga
aura apavAda, virodhI nahIM prAcArya jinadAsagaNi mahattara2 ne likhA hai ki jo
bAteM utsarga mArga meM niSiddha kI gaI haiM ve sabhI bAteM kAraNa sanmukha hone
para kalpanIya va grAhya ho jAtI haiN| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki utsarga aura
apavAda donoM kA lakSya eka hai, ve eka-dUsare ke pUraka haiM  /  sAdhaka donoM
ke sumela se hI sAdhanA patha para samyak prakAra se bar3ha sakatA hai| yadi
utsarga aura apavAda donoM eka-dUsare ke virodhI hoM to ve utsarga aura apavAda
nahIM haiM kintu svacchandatA kA poSaNa karane vAle haiM  /  Agama sAhitya meM
donoM ko mArga kahA hai| eka mArga rAjamArga kI taraha sIdhA hai to dUsarA jarA
ghumAvadAra hai| sAmAnya vidhi : utsaga utsarga mArga para calanA yaha sAdhaka
ke jIvana kI sAmAnya paddhati hai  /  eka vyakti rAjamArga para cala rahA hai,
kintu rAjamArga para pratirodha-vizeSa utpanna hone para vaha rAjamArga ko
chor3akara sannikaTa kI pagaDaNDI ko grahaNa karatA hai  /  kucha dUra calane
para jaba anukUlatA hotI hai to punaH rAjamArga para loTa prAtA hai| yahI sthiti
sAdhaka kI utsarga mArga se apavAda mArga ko grahaNa karane ke sambandha meM hai
aura puna: yahI vidhi apavAda se utsarga meM Ane kI hai| utsarga mArga sAmAnya
vidhi hai| isa vidhi para vaha nirantara calatA hai| binA vizeSa paristhiti ke
utsarga mArga nahIM chor3anA cAhiye  /  jo sAdhaka binA kAraNa hI utsarga mArga
ko chor3akara apavAda mArga ko apanAtA hai vaha pArAdhaka nahIM, apitu virAdhaka
hai| pUrNa svastha vyakti yadi auSadhi grahaNa karatA hai yA roga miTa jAne para
bhI bImArI kA abhinaya kara auSadhi Adi grahaNa karatA hai to vaha apane
kartavya se cyuta hotA hai  /  vizeSa kAraNa ke abhAva meM apavAda kA sevana
nahIM karanA caahie| sAtha hai jisa kAraNa se apavAda kA sevana kiyA hai, usa
kAraNa ke samApta hote hI use punaH utsarga mArga ko apanAnA cAhie  /  viziSTa
vidhi : apavAda hama pUrva meM batA cuke haiM ki apavAda eka viziSTa mAgaM hai
/  utsarga ke samAna hI vaha saMyama sAdhanA kA hI mArga hai| para apavAda
vAstavika apavAda honA caahie| yadi apavAda ke pIche indriyapoSaNa kI bhAvanA
hai to vaha apavAda mArga nahIM hai| ataH sAdhaka ko apavAda mArga meM satata
jAgarUka rahane kI AvazyakatA hai| jitanA ati prAvazyaka ho, utanA hI apavAda kA
sevana kiyA jA sakatA hai, nirantara nhiiN| apavAda mArga para to kisI vizeSa
sthiti 1. ussaggeNa NisiddhANi jANi davvANi saMthare muunninno| kAraNajAe jAte,
savvANi vi tANi kappaMti  //  -nizIthabhASya 5245 jANi ussagge paDisiddhANi
uppaNe kAraNe savvANi vi tANi kappaMti  /  Na dosso....|-nishiithcnni 5245

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The path of exception is like the sharp edge of a gleaming sword. Not every
seeker can walk on it. The seeker who has deeply studied the Acharaanga and
other Agam literature, understood the profound secrets of the Cheda Sutras, and
has clear knowledge of the Utsarga and Apavada paths, only such a great seeker
can adopt the exception. If a seeker who does not have knowledge of the country,
time, and situation, adopts the path of exception, then he may deviate from his
practice. A skilled merchant understands income and expenditure properly and
conducts business, he makes maximum profit with minimal expenditure. Similarly,
a seeker, in a particular situation, increases his virtues by consuming the
fault. Acharya Bhadrabahu has written about the virtues of the seeker - he has
knowledge of income-expenditure, cause-non-cause, deep (glance)-non-deep,
object-non-object, appropriate-inappropriate, capable-incapable, effort-non-
effort, and he also knows the result of duty and work. The seeker has the
responsibility to consume the exception himself or allow others to consume the
exception. A non-seeker cannot decide on his own to consume the exception. The
seeker has knowledge of substance, field, time, and emotion, which allows him to
progress on the path of practice. Pracharaya Sanghadasagani has explained the
Utsarga and Apavada paths through a beautiful metaphor. A traveler is moving
towards his destination at a fast pace. Sometimes he takes fast steps, sometimes
he runs to reach quickly. But when he is very tired and sees a difficult path
ahead, he sits for a few moments to rest, because without rest, it is difficult
for him to take even a single step. But the traveler's rest is for moving
forward. His rest is not for rest, but for progress. The seeker also walks on
the path of Utsarga. But due to some reason, he has to take recourse to the path
of exception. That exception is only for the protection of Utsarga, not for its
destruction. Imagine - there is a terrible poisonous boil in the body. To
protect the body, the boil is surgically removed. The cutting and piercing of
the body is not for the destruction of the body, but for the protection of the
body. If the seeker is fully capable and can willingly embrace death in a
specific situation, then he should embrace it with equanimity. If equanimity is
disturbed in embracing death, then he should strive to protect his vows to save
his life. In the commentary of Proghaniryakti, Acharya Drona has written that
the results of the seeker who consumes the exception are completely pure, and
completely pure results are the cause of liberation, not of the world. The
seeker's body is for vows. 1. Ayan karan gaadhan vatthu juttan sasatti jayanan
cha. Savvan cha sapadivakkhan phalan cha vidhivan viyanah.
-Brihatkalpaniyuktibhashya 951 Dhavanto uvvao maggantu kim na gachchai kamanam.
Kim va maui kiriya, na kirae asahuoo tikkhan. -Brihatkalpabhashya Peethika, 320
3. Na yavirai kim karanam? Tasyashayashuddhataya vishuddhaparinamasyacha
mokshahetutvat. -Opanyukti Teeka Ga. 46 ( 37 )

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paristhiti meM hI calA jAtA hai  /  apavAda kA mArga camacamAtI huI talavAra kI
tIkSNa dhAra ke sadRza hai| usa para pratyeka sAdhaka nahIM cala sakatA  /  jisa
sAdhaka ne AcArAMga Adi Agama sAhitya kA gaharAI se adhyayana kiyA hai,
chedasUtroM ke gambhIra rahasyoM ko samajhA hai, utsarga mArga aura apavAda
mArga kA jise spaSTa parijJAna hai, vaha gItArtha mahAn sAdhaka hI apavAda ko
apanA sakatA hai| jise deza, kAla aura sthiti kA parijJAna nahIM hai, aisA
agItArtha yadi apavAda mArga ko apanAtA hai to yaha sAdhanA se cyuta ho sakatA
hai  /  kuzala vyApArI Aya aura vyaya ko samyaka prakAra se samajhakara hI
vyApAra karatA hai, vaha alpa vyaya kara adhikAdhika lAbha uThAtA hai| vaise hI
gItArtha zramaNa paristhiti vizeSa meM doSa kA sevana karake bhI adhika sadguNoM
kI vRddhi karatA hai| AcArya bhadrabAhu' ne gItArtha ke sadguNoM kA vivecana
karate hue likhA hai-Aya-vyaya, kAraNa-akAraNa, prAgAr3ha (glAna)-anAgAr3ha,
vastu-avastu, yukta-ayukta, samartha-asamartha, yatanA-ayatanA kA samyaka jJAna
gItArtha ko rahatA hai aura vaha kartavya aura kArya kA pariNAma bhI jAnatA hai
/  gItArtha para jimmedArI hotI hai ki vaha apavAda svayaM sevana kare yA
dUsaroM ko apavAda sevana kI anumati de| agItArthaM zramaNa apavAda sevana
karane kA svayaM nirNaya nahIM le sakatA  /  gItArtha ko dravya, kSetra, kAla,
bhAva kA parijJAna hotA hai, jisase vaha sAdhanA ke patha para bar3ha sakatA
hai| prAcArya saMghadAsagaNi2 ne sundara rUpaka ke dvArA utsarga aura apavAda
mArga ko batAyA hai| eka yAtrI apane lakSya kI aora drata gati se cala rahA hai
/  vaha kabhI tejI se kadama bar3hAtA hai to kabhI jaldI pahu~cane ke lie vaha
daur3atA bhI hai| para jaba vaha bahuta hI thaka jAtA hai aura Age use viSama
mArga dikhAI detA hai, taba vizrAnti ke lie kucha kSaNoM taka baiThatA hai,
kyoMki binA vizrAma kiye eka kadama bhI calanA usake lie kaThina hai| lekina usa
yAtrI kA vizrAma Age bar3hane ke lie hai| usakI vizrAnti, vizrAnti ke lie nahIM;
apitu pragati ke lie hai| sAdhaka bhI usI taraha utsarga mArga para calatA hai|
kintu kAraNavazAt use apavAda mArga kA avalambana lenA par3atA hai| vaha apavAda
utsarga kI rakSA ke lie hI hai, usake dhvaMsa ke lie nahIM hai  /  kalpanA
kIjie-zarIra meM eka' bhayaMkara jaharIlA phor3A ho cukA hai| zarIra kI rakSA ke
lie usa phor3e kI zalyacikitsA kI jAtI hai| zarIra kA jo chedana-bhedana hotA
hai vaha zarIra ke vinAza ke lie nahIM, apitu zarIra kI rakSA ke lie hai| yadi
sAdhaka pUrNa samartha hai aura viziSTa sthiti utpanna hone para vaha saharSa
bhAva se mRtyu kA varaNa kara sakatA ho to vaha samAdhipUrvaka varaNa kre| yadi
mRtyu ko varaNa karane meM samAdhibhAva bhaMga hotA hai to vaha jIvana ko bacAne
hetu saMyama kI rakSA ke lie prayatna kre| proghaniryakti kI TIkA meM prAcArya
droNa ne likhA haiapavAda sevana karane vAle sAdhaka ke pariNAma pUrNa vizuddha
haiM aura pUrNa vizuddha pariNAma mokSa kA kAraNa hai, saMsAra kA nhiiN| sAdhaka
kA zarIra saMyama ke lie hai| 1. AyaM kAraNa gADhaM vatthu juttaM sasatti
jayaNaM ca  /  savvaM ca sapaDivakkhaM phalaM ca vidhivaM viyANAha  /  /
-bRhatkalpaniyuktibhASya 951 dhAvaMto uvvAo maggantU kiM na gacchai kameNaM  /
kiM vA mauI kiriyA, na kIrae asahuo tikkhaM  //  -bRhatkalpabhASya pIThikA, 320
3. na yAviraI kiM kAraNaM ? tasyAzayazuddhatayA vizuddhapariNAmasya ca
mokSahetutvAt  /  /  -opaniyukti TIkA gA. 46 ( 37 )

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"If the body is not there, how can it practice restraint? The body is essential
for the practice of restraint." The goal of the seeker is neither to live nor to
die. He does not desire to live nor does he desire to die. He wants to live so
that knowledge, vision, and character can grow. He prefers to do the work that
leads to the attainment and growth of knowledge, vision, and character, and
brings purity to the practice of restraint. When he sees that the body is
becoming an obstacle to the growth of knowledge, vision, and character, he
accepts death with affection.  A disciple asked with curiosity, "O Lord! Tell
me, is *utsarga* the *svasthāna* for the seeker or is it an exception?"  It was
said that for a seeker whose body is perfectly healthy and strong, the path of
*utsarga* is the *svasthāna* and the exception is the *parastthāna*. But for one
whose body is diseased and weak, the exception is the *svasthāna* and *utsarga*
is the *parastthāna*.  Where there is zeal for restraint in the seeker, there is
also awareness of discretion. The description of the path of exception has been
made only from the perspective of the *sthavirakalpa*. The *jinkalpi* *śramaṇa*
walk only on the path of *utsarga*. Exception is a secret.  In the
*Nishithachurni*, the word "prohibition" is used for *utsarga* and "permission"
for exception. *Utsarga* is prohibition and exception is a rule. All the
forbidden actions that have been told for the restrained *śramaṇa* come under
prohibition, and when permission is given to perform those forbidden actions in
special circumstances, then those forbidden actions become rules. Due to special
circumstances, even an improper action sometimes becomes proper. An ordinary
seeker does not have the power to transform prohibition into a rule. He cannot
even test the propriety or impropriety. That is why exception, permission, or
rule is not told to every seeker. For this reason, the synonym of exception in
the *Nishithachurni* is also a secret.  Just as following prohibition
(*utsarga*) keeps conduct pure, so too should the acceptance of the path of
exception be considered pure conduct. Why and for what purpose is there an
exception?  Many conditions have been laid down before accepting the path of
exception. If those conditions are not taken into account, the path of exception
will become a cause of downfall. For this reason, there are two types of
*pratisevana*: the use of exception without reason is called "arrogant
*pratisevana*."  - *Oghanuyukti* 47 - *Brihatkalpabhāṣya* Pīṭhikā 324 1.
*Sanjamaheun* *deho* *dhārijjai* *so* *kao* *utadbhāve*. *Sanjama*
*phāinimittam*, *deha* *paripālana* *itthā*. *Santharo* *saṭṭhānaṁ* *ussaggo*
*asa* *huṇo* *paraṭṭhānaṁ*. *Iya* *saṭṭhāna* *paraṁ* *vā*, *na* *hoi* *vatthu-
vinā* *kinchi*. - *Nishithabhāṣya* Gā. 87 - *Nishithabhāṣya* Gā. 6698 -
*Uthānachaurni* - *Nishithabhāṣya* Gā. 5245 - *Nishithachurni* Gā. 495 7.
*Nishithachurni* Gā. 287, 1022, 1068, 4103 (38)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yadi zarIra hI nahIM rahA to vaha saMyama kI ArAdhanA kisa prakAra kara sakegA?
saMyama kI sAdhanA ke lie zarIra kA pAlana Avazyaka hai|' sAdhaka kA lakSya na
jIvita rahanA hai aura na maranA hai| na vaha jIvita rahane kI icchA karatA hai
aura na marane kI icchA karatA hai| vaha jIvita isalie rahanA cAhatA hai ki
jJAna, darzana, cAritra kI vRddhi ho sake  /  jisa kArya se jJAna, darzana,
cAritra kI siddhi aura vRddhi ho, saMyama-sAdhanA meM nirmalatA Aye, usa kArya
ko vaha karanA pasanda karatA hai| jaba dekhatA hai ki zarIra jJAna-darzana-
cAritra kI vRddhi meM bAdhaka bana rahA hai to vaha sasneha maraNa ko svIkAra
kara letA hai| svasthAna aura parasthAna eka ziSya ne jijJAsA prastuta kI-
bhagavan ! batAie, sAdhaka ke lie utsarga svasthAna hai yA apavAda ? yA gayA ki
jisa sAdhaka kA zarIra pUrNa svastha hai aura samartha hai usake lie utsarga
mArga hI svasthAna hai aura apavAda parasthAna hai| para jisakA zarIra rugNa
hai, asamartha hai, usake lie apavAda svasthAna hai aura utsarga parasthAna hai|
_ sAdhaka meM jahA~ saMyama kA joza hotA hai vahA~ usameM viveka kA hoza bhI
hotA hai  /  apavAda mArga kA nirUpaNa sirpha sthavirakalpa kI daSTi se kiyA
gayA hai| jinakalpI zramaNa to kevala utsarga mArga para hI calate haiN| apavAda
yAnI rahasya nizIthacaNi meM utsarga ke lie 'pratiSedha' zabda kA prayoga huA
hai aura apavAda ke lie 'anujnyaa'| utsarga pratiSedha hai aura apavAda vidhi
hai| saMyamI zramaNa ke lie jitane bhI niSiddha kArya batAye gaye haiM, ve
pratiSedha ke antargata A jAte haiM aura paristhiti-vizeSa meM jaba una niSiddha
kAryoM ke karane kI anujJA dI jAtI hai taba ve niSiddha kArya vidhi bana jAte
haiN| paristhiti vizeSa se akartavya bhI kabhI kartavya bana jAtA hai| sAdhAraNa
sAdhaka pratiSedha ko vidhi meM pariNata karane kI zakti nahIM rkhtaa| vaha
aucitya-anaucitya kA parIkSaNa bhI nahIM kara sktaa| isIlie apavAda, anujJA yA
vidhi pratyeka sAdhaka ko nahIM batAI jaatii| etadartha hI nizIthacaNi meM
apavAda kA paryAyavAcI rahasya bhI hai| jaise pratiSedha (utsarga) kA pAlana
karane se AcAra vizuddha rahatA hai, usI taraha apavAda mArga kA avalambana
karane para bhI AcaraNa vizuddha hI mAnanA caahie| apavAda kyoM aura kisalie?
apavAda mArga grahaNa karane ke pUrva aneka zarte rakhI gaI haiM  /  una zartoM
kI ora lakSya na diyA gayA to apavAda mArga patana kA kAraNa bana jAegA  /
etadartha hI pratisevanA ke do bheda haiM-akAraNa apavAda kA sevana
'darpapratisevanA' -oghaniyukti 47 -bRhatkalpabhASya pIThikA 324 1. saMjamaheuM
deho dhArijjai so kao utadabhAve  /  saMjama phAinimittaM, deha paripAlanA iTThA
/  saMtharao saTThANaM ussaggo asa huNo paraTThANaM  /  iya saTThANa paraM vA,
na hoi vatthu-viNA kiMci  /  /  nizIthabhASya gA0 87 nizIthabhASya gA0 6698
utthAnacUrNi nizIthabhASya gA0 5245 nizIthacaNi gA0 495 7. nizIthacUNi gA0 287,
1022, 1068, 4103 ( 38 )

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  The reason for
"Kalpapratisevana" is that the sadhaka (aspirant) who practices Jnana
(knowledge), Darshana (right perception) and Charitra (right conduct) progresses
towards the path of Moksha (liberation). The practice of Charitra is for the
enhancement of Jnana and Darshana. The Charitra which leads to the diminution of
Jnana and Darshana is not Charitra. Charitra is that which strengthens Jnana and
Darshana. Due to Jnana and Darshana, the sadhaka has to resort to certain
Apavadas (exceptions) in Charitra. All those Apavadas are included in
Kalpapratisevana because they do not deter the sadhaka from his spiritual
practice. Whatever Apavada is resorted to, the two main objectives should be
Jnana and Darshana. If neither of these two is the reason, then it is
Darpapratisevana (practice with pride). It is the duty of the sadhaka to
renounce Darp (pride) and adopt Kalpa (the right path).  There could be a query
that the Nishitha Bhashya and Chani etc. mention the practice of Apavadas even
in the situations of famine etc. How then can it be said that Jnana and Darshana
are the only reasons? The solution is that Jnana and Darshana are the two main
reasons. In famines etc., there is no direct loss of Jnana and Darshana, but
they are resorted to due to the indirect loss of Jnana and Darshana.  In famine,
food cannot be obtained, and without food, Svadhyaya (self-study) etc. cannot be
performed. Therefore, it is included among the reasons for Apavada.  The
Nishitha Bhashya has also described Darpapratisevana and Kalpapratisevana as
Pramada-pratisevana and Apramada-pratisevana, respectively. Because Pramada
(negligence) is Darp, and Apramada (vigilance) is Kalpa. The conduct with
Pramada is Darpapratisevana, and the conduct with Apramada is Kalpapratisevana.
The fundamental basis of Jain conduct is Ahimsa (non-violence). The other four
major vows are the extensions of Ahimsa. The act with Pramada is Himsa
(violence). In the life of a disciplined sadhaka, Apramada (vigilance)
predominates. Two types of Apramada-pratisevana have also been mentioned -
Anabhoga and Sahasaakara. Even in Apramada, if the mindfulness of Irya-samiti
(carefulness in walking) etc. is forgotten for a short duration due to some
reason, it is Anabhoga. There is no Pranaatipaata (killing of living beings) in
it, but there is forgetfulness. If, after the activity has commenced, it is
known that there is a possibility of Himsa, then it is Sahasaakara-pratisevana.
For example, a disciplined sadhaka is walking mindfully. Initially, no living
being was visible, but as soon as he took a step, a living being came into his
sight. Despite the effort to save it, the living being was accidentally crushed
under his foot - this is Sahasaakara-pratisevana. Due to Apramada, it is not
Karmabandha (binding of karmas).  The practice of Ahimsa is the renunciation
path of the ascetic. He does not commit any kind of violence to living beings
through mind, speech, or body. The detailed analysis of the Ahimsa Mahavrta
(great vow of non-violence) is found in the Acharanga, Dashavaikalika, and other
Agama literature. A Shramana (ascetic) cannot touch any animate object. However,
the Acharanga Sutra's second Shruta-skandha (section) has clearly stated this.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hai ora kAraNa se pratisevanA "kalpa" hai  /  hama pUrva meM batA cuke haiM ki
jJAna, darzana, cAritra kI sAdhanA va ArAdhanA karatA huA sAdhaka mokSamArga kI
ora bar3hatA hai| cAritra kA pAlana jJAna aura darzana kI vRddhi ke lie hai  /
jisa cAritra kI ArAdhanA se jJAna-darzana kI hAni hotI ho, vaha cAritra nhiiN|
cAritra vahI hai jo jJAna-darzana ko puSTa karatA ho| jJAna-darzana ke kAraNa
cAritra meM apavAda sevana karane ke lie bAdhya honA par3atA hai| ve sabhI
apavAda kalpapratisevanA meM isalie lie jAte haiM ki ve sAdhaka ko sAdhanA se
cyuta nahIM karate  /  jo bhI apavAda sevana kiyA jAya usameM jJAna aura darzana
ye do mukhya lakSya hone caahie| yadi una donoM meM se koI bhI kAraNa nahIM hai
to vaha pratisevanAdarpa hai| sAdhaka kA kartavya hai ki darpa kA parityAga kara
kalpa ko grahaNa kre| kyoMki darpa sAdhaka ke lie niSiddha mAnA gayA hai|' eka
jijJAsA ho sakatI hai-nizItha bhASya va caNi Adi meM durbhikSa Adi kI sthiti meM
bhI apavAda sevana kiye jAte rahe haiM, aisA ullekha hai| phira jJAna aura
darzana se hI apavAda sevana kI bAta kaise kahI gayI ? samAdhAna hai-jJAna aura
darzana ye do mukhya kAraNa haiM hii| dubhikSa Adi meM sAkSAt jJAna aura darzana
kI hAni nahIM hotI, kintu paramparA se jJAna aura darzana kI hAni hone se unheM
liyA gayA hai| dubhikSa meM AhAra kI prApti nahIM ho sakatI aura binA AhAra
svAdhyAya Adi nahIM ho sktaa| isalie use apavAda ke kAraNoM meM ginA hai|
nizIthabhASya meM darpapratisevanA aura kalpapratisevanA ko pramAda-pratisevanA
aura apramAda-pratisevanA bhI batAyA gayA hai| kyoMki pramAda darpa hai aura
apramAda kalpa hai| jisa prAcaraNa meM pramAda hai vaha darpapratisevanA hai
aura apramAda hai vaha kalpapratisevanA hai| ahiMsA ko dRSTi se utsarga va
apavAda jaina AcAra kI mUla bhitti ahiMsA para AdhRta hai| anya cAroM mahAvrata
ahiMsA ke vistAra haiN| jisa kArya meM pramAda hai, vaha hiMsA hai| saMyamI
sAdhaka ke jIvana meM apramAda kA prAdhAnya hotA hai| apramAda-pratisevanA ke
bhI do bheda kiye gaye haiM-anAbhoga aura shsaakaar| apramAdI hone para bhI IryA
Adi samiti kI vismRti ho jAya, kisI kAraNa se svalpa kAla ke lie upayoga na rahe
to vaha anAbhoga hai| usameM prANAtipAta nahIM hai, para vismRti hai  /
pravRtti ho jAne ke pazcAt yaha jJAta ho ki hiMsA kI sambhAvanA hai to vaha
pratisevanA sahasAkAra hai| jaise saMyamI sAdhaka vivekapUrvaka gamana kara rahA
hai| pahale jIva dikhAI na diyA ho para jyoM hI kadama uThAyA ki jIva para dRSTi
pdd'ii| bacAne kA prayatna karane para bhI sahasA jIva ke Upara paira par3a gayA
aura vaha prANI mara gayA to yaha 'sahasA-pratisevanA' hai| apramAda hone ke
kAraNa vaha karmabandhana nahIM hai| ahiMsA kA ArAdhana karanA zramaNa kA
utsarga mArga hai| vaha mana, vacana, kAyA se kisI bhI prakAra kI jIva-hiMsA
nahIM krtaa| AcArAMga, dazavakAlikA tathA anya Agama sAhitya meM ahiMsA
mahAvrata kA sUkSma vizleSaNa hai| zramaNa kisI bhI sacitta vastu kA sparza
nahIM kara sktaa| para AcArAMga ke dvitIya zrutaskandha meM yaha spaSTa batAyA
hai| eka zramaNa anya rAste ke abhAva meM kisI 1. nizIthabhASya gA0 88 usakI
cUrNi tathA gA0 144, 363, 463  /  2. nizIthabhASya gA0 175, 162, 188, 220, 221,
244, 253, 321, 342, 384, 391, 419, 425, 453, 458, 481484, 485, Adi  /  3.
nizIthabhASya gA0 91 /  4. nizIthabhASya gA0 90-95 ( 39 )

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A श्रमण should not travel on high, low, uneven, rough paths, or where there are
military camps, chariots, carts, or piles of grain. If it is absolutely
necessary to travel on such a path due to unavoidable circumstances, they may
take the support of a plant or a traveler's hand.  A श्रमण cannot touch green
vegetation on an उत्सर्ग path. However, the exception of holding green
vegetation, etc., is not for the purpose of harming the living beings in the
plant kingdom, but for the sake of non-violence. If a श्रमण falls, they may
suffer a broken limb or experience mental fluctuations. They may also harm other
living beings by falling. Therefore, the exception in non-violence is mentioned
keeping in mind both self and other forms of violence.  Similarly, a श्रमण
cannot touch water with consciousness. However, they may go out for urination
and defecation when the water is flowing rapidly and there is heavy rainfall. It
is forbidden to forcibly restrain oneself from defecation and urination. This is
because restraining oneself from defecation and urination can cause mental and
physical distress, lead to diseases, and harm health, body, and self-control.
Just like the महाव्रत of non-violence, truth is also a life-vow for a श्रमण. The
आचारांग also states that if a श्रमण is traveling and encounters a hunter, etc.,
and the hunter asks the श्रमण if they have seen any animals, etc., the श्रमण
should remain silent in such a situation. If silence is not possible, they
should say, "I don't know," even if they know. This is the exception path of
truth.  In the वृत्ति of the सूत्रकृतांगसूत्र, Acharya शीलांक has clearly
written that untruth spoken with a benevolent intention for self-control and
secrecy is not a fault, but untruth spoken deceitfully to deceive others is a
fault and therefore, despicable.  Like truth, in the practice of the महाव्रत of
non-stealing, a श्रमण does not accept anything that is not given. However, if a
situation arises where a श्रमण reaches a place where there are no facilities,
and there is severe cold and rain, the श्रमण should first stay there without
permission. They should then try to obtain permission afterwards.  Similarly, a
श्रमण cannot touch a newborn girl to protect the महाव्रत of celibacy. However,
the same श्रमण can save a drowning nun by catching her.  1. प्राचारांग 2 श्रुत०
ईर्याध्ययन उ० 2. योगशास्त्र स्वोपज्ञवृत्ति, third प्रकाश, 87th श्लोक. (a)
आचारांग 2-1-3-3-129 वृत्ति also see. (b) निशीथ चूर्णि भाष्य, गाथा 322 4.
सूत्रकृतांग वृत्ति 1-8-19. 5. सादियं णो मुसं बूया, एसधम्मे बुसीमनो. -सूत्रकृतांग
1-8-19 व्यवहारसूत्र 9-11 बृहत्कल्पसूत्र, उ. 6 सूत्र-7-12 (40)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 U~ce-nIce, Ter3he-mer3he, Ubar3a-khAbar3a mArga yA jahA~ para senA ke par3Ava
par3e hoM, ratha aura gAr3iyAM par3I hoM, dhAnya ke Dhera par3e hoM, prathama to
aise viSama aura saMkaTApanna mArga se zramaNa ko nahIM jAnA caahie| yadi
anivArya kAraNavaza U~ce-nIce mArga se Avazyaka hI ho to vanaspati athavA kisI
pathika ke hAtha kA sahArA le sakatA hai| utsarga mArga meM zramaNa harita
vanaspati ko sparza nahIM kara sakatA, para jo yahAM para apavAda meM harita
vanaspati Adi pakar3ane kA vidhAna hai, vaha vidhAna vanaspatikAya ke jIvoM kI
virAdhanA karane ke lie nahIM hai, apitu ahiMsA ke lie hI yaha vidhAna hai| yadi
zramaNa gira jAtA hai to usakA aMga bhaMga bhI ho sakatA hai aura mana meM
saMkalpa-vikalpa bhI ho sakatA hai| sAtha hI girane se dUsare jIvoM kI virAdhanA
bhI ho sakatI hai  /  ataH sva aura para donoM prakAra kI hiMsA ko lakSya meM
rakhakara hI ahiMsA meM apavAda kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai| _ isI taraha sacitta
pAnI ko zramaNa sparza nahIM kara sakatA para umar3a-ghumar3akara ghaTAyeM A
rahI hoM aura jora se varSA ho rahI ho, usa samaya uccAra-prasravaNa ke lie vaha
bAhara jA sakatA hai| balAt mala-mUtra kA nirodha karanA niSiddha hai| kyoMki
mala-mUtra ke nirodha se zarIra meM AkulatA-vyAkulatA paidA ho sakatI hai, roga
bhI utpanna ho sakate haiM, jo svAsthya aura zarIra tathA saMyama ke lie
hAniprada hai  /  satya va anya mahAvatoM kI daSTi se utsarga-apavAda ahiMsA
mahAvrata kI bhAMti hI satya bhI zramaNa kA jIvanavrata hai| AcArAMga meM yaha
bhI vidhAna hai ki eka zramaNa vihAra karake jA rahA hai, sAmane se vyAdha Adi A
jAya aura vaha zramaNa se pUche kyA tumane idhara kisI pazu Adi ko jAte dekhA
hai ? zramaNa aise prasaMga meM mauna rahe  /  yadi mauna rahane kI sthiti na ho
to jAnatA huA bhI nahIM jAnatA hU~, isa prakAra kahe  /  yaha satya kA apavAda
mArga hai  /  sUtrakRtAMgasUtra kI vRtti meM AcArya zIlAMka ne spaSTa likhA hai
ki jisameM para-vaMcanA kI buddhi nahIM hai, kevala saMyama-gupti ke lie kalyANa
bhAvanA se bolA gayA asatya doSa rUpa nahIM hai kintu jo mRSAvAda kapaTapUrvaka
dUsaroM ko Thagane ke lie bolA jAtA hai vaha doSa rUpa hai| ataH heya hai| satya
kI taraha asteya mahAvrata kI sAdhanA meM binA dI huI vastu ko zramaNa grahaNa
nahIM krtaa| para isa prakAra kI paristhiti utpanna ho ki zramaNa kisI aise
sthAna para pahuMcA hai jahA~ para sthAna kI suvidhA nahIM hai, bhayaMkara zIta
aura varSA hai, aisI sthiti meM zramaNa pahale binA AjJA grahaNa kiye Thahara
jAya  /  usake pazcAt AjJA prApta karane kA prayAsa kre|6 isI taraha zramaNa
brahmacarya mahAvrata kI rakSA ke lie navajAta kanyA ko bhI sparza nahIM kara
sakatA para vahI zramaNa nadI meM DUba rahI bhikSuNI ko pakar3akara nikAla
sakatA hai  /  1. prAcArAMga 2 zruta0 IryAdhyayana u0 2 /  yogazAstra
svopajJavRtti, tIsarA prakAza, 87 vAM shlok| (ka) AcArAMga 2-1-3-3-129 vRtti bhI
dekheN| (kha) nizItha cUrNi bhASya, gAthA 322 4. sUtrakRtAMga vRtti 1-8-19  /  /
5. sAdiyaM No musaM bUyA, esadhamme busiimno| -sUtrakRtAMga 1-8-19
vyavahArasUtra 9-11 bRhatkalpasUtra, u. 6 sUtra-7-12 ( 40 )

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Similarly, in the great vow of non-possession, keeping extra tools in addition
to the fourteen tools is also considered possession. But books, writing
materials, etc. are accepted as means of knowledge. Therefore, they are not
considered possession. In the Dashavakalik, etc., there is a clear provision
that a Shraman should not sit at the house of a householder, because sitting is
considered improper, but the Dashavakalik also states that a Shraman who is very
old, unhealthy, or who is an ascetic can sit at the house of a householder. He
is not considered guilty of house-prohibition. In the Agam literature, while
discussing the food of a Shraman, it is clearly stated that he cannot take food
prepared by others. He should follow the rules of Pindeshana properly. Acharya
Sheelank has written in the Sutra Kritanga Vritti that in exceptional
circumstances, if a Sadhak takes food prepared by others according to the
scriptures, he is pure. He is not tainted by karma. There are many instances in
the Nisihtha Bhashya where it is stated that in situations like famine, etc., a
Shraman can take food prepared by others, etc., through the path of exception.
It is a provision for a Jain Shraman that he should not desire medical
treatment. If he falls ill, he should bear it with a calm mind. But when it was
seen that a Shraman could not remain in samadhi when he was ill, there was also
contemplation regarding his treatment. How should a Shraman go to the doctors,
how should he take medicine, etc., how should he be treated in case of severe
leprosy, etc., all these are discussed in detail in the Niyukti, Chuni, and
Bhashya. It is also clarified that the opponents should not get an opportunity
to criticize by taking advantage of those exceptions. If the opponents criticize
and counter-criticize, it will be an insult to the Jain religion. Therefore, it
has also been hinted that it should be kept secret. Excess and Exception: One
thing to understand here is that there is a difference between excess and
exception. Although excess and exception appear similar in external view, there
is a lot of difference between excess and exception. In excess, there is an
emergence of attachment, and due to the emergence of attachment or desire, and
due to the feeling of passion, the act of going against restraint, leaving the
path of discharge, is excess, and restraint is corrupted by excess. 1. Nisihtha
Chuni Bhashya 3, Introduction - Upadhyay Amarmuniji. 2. Dashavakalik 3-4-6, 8 3.
Tinham Annayaragassa, Nisijja Jassa Kappae. Jarae Abhibhueyassa Vahiassa
Tavassine. - Dasha. 6-60 Sutra Kritanga 2-5, 8-9 Nisihtha Bhashya Ga. 2684 6.
(a) Uttaraadhyayana 2-23 (b) Dashavakalik 3-4 (c) Nisihtha Sutra 3-28-40;
13.42-45 7. Nisihtha Chuni Ga. 345-47 8. Nisihtha Chuni Bha. 3 Introduction
(Upadhyay Amarmuni)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 isI taraha aparigraha mahAvrata meM caudaha upakaraNoM ke atirikta upakaraNa
rakhanA Adi bhI parigraha meM hI hai| kintu pustaka, lekhana-sAmagrI Adi jJAna
ke sAdhana rUpa samajhakara grahaNa kiye jAte haiN|' ataH unheM parigraha nahIM
mAnA jaataa| dazavakAlika Adi meM yaha spaSTa vidhAna hai ki zramaNa kisI
gRhastha ke yahA~ para na baiThe, kyoMki baiThanA anAcAra mAnA gayA hai, kintu
dazavakAlika meM yaha bhI batAyA hai ki jo zramaNa atyanta vRddha ho cukA hai,
asvastha hai yA jo tapasvI hai vaha gRhastha ke ghara para baiTha sakatA hai  /
use gRha-niSidyA kA doSa nahIM lgtaa| Agama sAhitya meM zramaNa ke AhAra kI
carcA karate hue yaha spaSTa vidhAna kiyA hai ki vaha prAdhAkarmI AhAra grahaNa
nahIM kara sktaa| vaha piNDaiSaNA ke niyamoM kA samyaka prakAra se pAlana kre|
prAcArya zIlAMka ne sUtrakRtAMgavRtti meM likhA hai ki apavAda sthiti meM zAstra
ke anusAra AdhAkarma AhAra kA sevana karatA hai to vaha sAdhaka zuddha hai  /
vaha karma se lipta nahIM hotaa| nizIthabhASya meM aise aneka prasaMga haiM
jinameM yaha batAyA gayA hai ki dubhikSa Adi kI sthiti meM apavAda mArga se
zramaNa AdhAkarma Adi AhAra grahaNa kara sakatA hai|" jaina zramaNa ke lie yaha
vidhAna hai ki vaha cikitsA kI icchA na kare  /  roga ho jAne para use zAnta
bhAva se sahana kre| kintu jaba dekhA gayA ki zramaNa roga hone para samAdhistha
nahIM raha sakatA to usakI cikitsA ke sambandha meM bhI cintana huaa| zramaNa
kisa prakAra vaidyoM ke vahAM para jAye, kisa prakAra auSadhi Adi grahaNa kare,
bhayaMkara kuSTha Adi roga hone para kisa taraha unakA upacAra kiyA jAye Adi
para niyukti, caNi aura bhASya meM vistAra se vivecana hai| sAtha hI yaha bhI
spaSTa kiyA hai ki una apavAdoM kA sevana karane para virodhiyoM ko TIkA-TippaNI
karane kA avasara na mile, yadi virodhI AlocanA-pratyAlocana kareMge to usase
jinadharma kI avahelanA hogii| ataH use gupta rakhane kA bhI saMketa kiyA gayA
hai| aticAra aura apavAda: eka bAta yahAM samajhanI cAhie ki aticAra aura
apavAda meM antara hai| yadyapi aticAra aura apavAda meM bAhya daSTi se doSa
sevana eka sadRza pratIta hotA hai, para aticAra va apavAda meM bahuta antara
hai| aticAra meM moha kA udaya hotA hai aura moha ke udaya se yA vAsanA se
utprerita hokara tathA kaSAyabhAva ke kAraNa utsarga mArga ko chor3akara jo
saMyamaviruddha pravatti kI jAtI hai vaha aticAra hai aura aticAra se saMyama
duSita hotA hai| 1. nizIthacUNi bhASya 3, prastAvanA-upAdhyAya amrmunijii| 2.
dazavakAlika 3-4-6, 8 3. tiNhamannayarAgassa, nissijjA jassa kappai  /  jarAe
abhibhUyassa vAhissa tavassiNe  /  /  -daza. 6-60 sUtrakRtAMga 2-5, 8-9
nizIthabhASya gA. 2684 6. (ka) uttarAdhyayana 2-23 (kha) dazavakAlika 3-4 (ga)
nizIthasUtra 3-28-40; 13 / 42-45 7. nizIthacUNi gA. 345-47 8. nizIthacUNi bhA. 3
prastAvanA (upA. amaramuni)

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Therefore, the seeker should know that if he has consumed a fault that was
permissible, he should immediately perform atonement and purify himself from
that fault. He who does not purify himself from that fault is a violator of the
path of a monk.  In the case of an exception, there is consumption of a fault,
but that consumption is due to compulsion. At the time of consumption, the
seeker knows very well that if he does not consume the exception, his knowledge
and other qualities will not be able to develop. With that view, he consumes the
exception. In the consumption of the exception, the acquisition and preservation
of virtues is paramount. There is no passion in the exception, but restraint is
paramount. Therefore, that exception is not a pollution like transgression. In
transgression, there is a predominance of passion, which leads to more karmic
bondage.  Discretion is essential in both Utsarga and Apavada Both the Utsarga
path and the Apavada path are beneficial for the seeker as long as the light of
'discretion' shines in him. In the original Agam literature, the Utsarga path
was given prominence, the Apavada path was mentioned but in a very small amount,
but as the circumstances changed, the Acharyas elaborated on the exceptions in
the commentary literature of the Agam literature. In the elaboration of
exceptions, there has been some exaggeration, which is the effect of the
situation of that era.  We have presented our thoughts on Utsarga and Apavada in
a very brief manner. It is very difficult to understand the essence of Utsarga
and Apavada. When the resultant effect and pure activity are destroyed in
Utsarga and Apavada, it becomes misconduct. For this reason, the commentator has
described the disciples as resultant, non-resultant and over-resultant. Only he
who understands the situation correctly can worship the Utsarga and Apavada
paths and inspire his followers to move towards the right goal. When the
resultant feeling is destroyed, the tendency of selfishness starts to grow,
freedom starts to increase, due to which the seeker cannot worship the path of
non-attachment properly.  In the Brihatkalpa Bhashya, Acharya Sanghdasmani has
written that there are as many rules of Utsarga as there are rules of Apavada.
For the one who is entitled to the Utsarga path, Utsarga is Utsarga and Apavada
is Apavada, but for the one who is entitled to the Apavada path, Apavada is
Utsarga and Utsarga is Apavada. Thus, Utsarga and Apavada are beneficial,
effective and powerful due to their own situation and circumstances.  This
harmonious and subtle perspective of the Utsarga and Apavada paths is a special
feature of Jainism's Anekanta. The Utsarga path is a symbol of the strength of
life, while the Apavada path is a symbol of the weakness of life. The seeker
should be very alert in both paths. The Acharyas have clearly said that the one
who consumes the Apavada path is like a boil that has festered, the rope has
been tied in it, then how does the person reduce the pain, keeping this in mind,
he squeezes out the pus and in the same way, while consuming it with caution, he
will have to keep in mind that there is no other way in restraint and vows, then
the exception should be consumed, otherwise not. He is considered to be entitled
to consume the exception, not the rest.  The Apavada path should be consumed.
Less fault should be incurred. In special circumstances, for this purpose, the
mention of the song is: (42)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ataH sAdhaka ko yaha jJAta ho jAya ki maiMne doSa kA sevana kiyA hai jo
prayogya thA, to use yathAzIghra prAyazcitta lekara usa doSa kI vizuddhi karanI
cAhie jo usa doSa kI vizuddhi nahIM karatA hai vaha zramaNa virAdhaka hotA hai
/  apavAda meM doSa kA sevana hotA hai, para vaha sevana vivazatA ke kAraNa hotA
hai| sevana karate samaya sAdhakA yaha acchI taraha se jAnatA hai ki yadi maiM
apavAda kA sevana nahIM karUMgA to mere jJAna Adi guNa vikasita nahIM ho skeNge|
usI dRSTi se vaha apavAda kA sevana karatA hai| apavAda ke sevana karane meM
sadguNoM kA arjana aura saMrakSaNa pramukha hotA hai| apavAda meM kaSAyabhAva
nahIM hotA, kintu saMyamabhAva pramukha hotA hai| isalie vaha apavAda aticAra kI
taraha dUSaNa nahIM hai  /  aticAra meM kaSAya kA prAdhAnya hone se adhika
karmabandhana hotA hai  /  utsarga aura apavAda meM viveka Avazyaka utsarga
mArga aura apavAda mArga donoM hI mArga sAdhaka ke lie taba taka zreyaskara haiM
jaba taka usameM viveka' kI jyoti jagamagAtI ho  /  mUla Agama sAhitya meM
utsarga mArga kI pradhAnatA rahI apavAda mArga kA varNana AyA kintu bahuta hI
svalpa mAtrA meM lekina jyoM-jyoM paristhitiyoM meM parivartana hotA gayA tyoM-
tyoM prAcAryoM ne Agama sAhitya ke vyAkhyA sAhitya meM apavAdoM kA vistAra se
nirUpaNa kiyA hai| apavAdoM ke nirUpaNa meM kahIM para ati bhI ho gaI hai jo usa
yuga kI sthiti kA prabhAva hai  /  1 hamane bahuta hI saMkSepa meM utsarga va
apavAda ke sambandha meM vicAra prastuta kiyA hai  /  utsarga aura apavAda ke
marma ko samajhanA atyanta kaThina hai| jaba utsarga aura apavAda meM
pariNAmIpanA aura zuddha vRtti naSTa ho jAtI hai to vaha anAcAra bana jAtA hai
/  etadartha hI bhASyakAra ne pariNAmI, apariNAmI aura atipariNAmI ziSyoM kA
nirUpaNa kiyA hai  /  jo vastusthiti ko samyak prakAra se samajhatA hai vahI
sAdhaka utsarga va apavAda mArga kI ArAdhanA kara sakatA hai aura apane anuyAyI
varga ko bhI sahI lakSya para bar3hane ke lie utprerita kara sakatA hai| jaba
pariNAmI bhAva naSTa ho jAtA hai to svArtha kI vRtti panapane lagatI hai
svacchandatA bar3hane lagatI hai, jisase sAdhaka vItarAgadharma kI ArAdhanA
samyak prakAra se nahIM kara sakatA  /  . bRhatkalpabhASya meM AcArya
saMghadAsamaNi ne likhA hai ki jitane utsarga ke niyama haiM utane hI apavAda ke
bhI niyama haiM  /  utsarga mArga ke adhikArI ke lie utsarga, utsarga hai aura
apavAda, apavAda hai, kintu apavAda mArga ke adhikArI ke lie apavAda utsagaM hai
aura utsagaM apavAda hai| isa prakAra utsarga aura apavAda apanI-apanI sthiti
aura paristhiti ke kAraNa zreyaskara, kAryasAdhaka aura balavAna haiN| utsarga
aura apavAda mArga kA itanA samanvayaparaka sUkSma dRSTikoNa jainadarzana ke
anekAnta kI apanI vizeSatA hai  /  utsarga mArga jIvana kI sabalatA kA pratIka
hai to apavAda mArga jIvana kI nirbalatA kA pratIka hai  /  donoM hI mAgoM meM
sAdhaka ko atyanta jAgarUkatA rakhanI caahie| AcAyoM ne spaSTa kahA hai ki
apavAda mArga kA sevana karane vAlA jaise koI phor3A paka gayA hai, usameM rassI
par3ha cukI hai to vyakti kisa taraha se kama kaSTa ho yaha dhyAna rakhakara
dabAkara mavAda nikAlatA hai aura usI taraha sAvadhAnIpUrvaka sevana karate
samaya use yaha dhyAna rakhanA hogA ki saMyama aura vrata meM kama se aura koI
mArga na ho to apavAda kA sevana kiyA jAya, anyathA nhiiN| vahI apavAda kA
sevana karane kA adhikArI mAnA gayA hai, zeSa nahIM  /  apavAda mArga kA sevana
kiyA jAya  /  kama doSa lage  /  vizeSa paristhiti meM etadartha hI gItArtha kA
ullekha hai dhora ( 42 )

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Penance and Punishment  The Chhedasutra is a Sutra on Penance. Penance means
purification of sin. The act of purifying sin is called penance. The offense is
called 'praayah' and 'chitt' means purification. The process by which the
offense is purified is penance. In the Prakrit language, the word "paayachchitt"
is found for penance. 'Paay' means 'sin'. That which cuts sin is 'paayachchitt'.
The seeker is in a state of 'chhadmasth', therefore, mistakes happen from him in
known and unknown forms. Sins cling to his life. It is not as bad to make a
mistake as it is to not recognize the mistake. Recognizing the mistake, making
efforts for its purification, and making a firm resolve to not repeat the same
fault in the future, and the process for the purification of the mistake, is
penance.  There is a difference between penance and punishment. In penance, the
seeker reveals his fault of his own accord and accepts it. If a fault has been
committed inadvertently, then the seeker reveals that fault to the gurus and
requests them to provide penance. The gurus tell the method to be free from that
fault. On the contrary, a person accepts punishment not of his own accord but
out of compulsion. He has no remorse for his wrongdoing. The offender accepts
the crime not willingly but out of fear of others. Thus, punishment is imposed
from above, but penance is accepted from within the heart. This is why there is
a provision for punishment in politics and a provision for penance in religious
ethics.  The one whose inner mind is simple, who is afraid of sin, whose heart
has a strong desire for self-purification, in his mind the feeling of taking
penance arises. If there is a kingdom of Maya in the mind, then purification
cannot be achieved through penance. Mistakes are of many kinds. Many mistakes
are common and many are extraordinary. Even common mistakes become uncommon due
to country, time, and circumstances. Therefore, the penance for all types of
mistakes is not the same. According to the mistakes and circumstances, different
types of penance have been described.  In the texts like Stananga, Nishiya,
Brihatkalpa, Vyavahar, Jitkalpa, etc., various types of penances are mentioned.
While Samvayanga, etc., mention the types of penance, Nishith, etc., Agamas also
describe in detail the offenses worthy of penance. Brihatkalpa Bhashya, Nishith
Bhashya, Vyavahar Bhashya, Nishith Chuni, Jitkalpa Bhashya, etc., have a precise
discussion of various principles and problems related to penance. The Digambar
tradition's texts Mulachar, Jayadhwala, and the commentaries on Tattvarth Sutra,
have expounded various types of penance. All types of penance are included in
ten types of penance: (1) Palochana, (2) Pratikraman, (3) Ubhay, (4) Vivek, (5)
Vyutsarg, (6) Tap, (7) Chhed, (8) Mul, (9) Anvasthapy, and (10) Paranchik. In
Mulachar, the first eight names are the same, but instead of Anvasthapy, Parihar
is used, and instead of Paranchik, Shraddhan is used. In Tattvarth Sutra, there
is no mention of Paranchik penance, instead of Mul penance, Upasthapan is
mentioned, and instead of Anvasthapy penance, Parihar penance is mentioned.
Stananga and Jit 1. (a) Stananga 1073 (b) Jitkalpa Sutra 4 (c) Dhwala 1315,
23163.1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prAyazcitta aura daNDa chedasUtra prAyazcittasUtra hai| prAyazcitta kA artha
hai pApa kA vizodhana karanA  /  pApa ko zuddha karane kI kriyA kA nAma
prAyazcitta hai| aparAdha 'prAyaH' kahalAtA hai aura 'citta' kA artha zodhana
hai, jisa prakriyA se aparAdha kI zuddhi ho vaha prAyazcitta hai  /  prAkRta
bhASA meM prAyazcitta ke lie "pAyacchitta" zabda pAyA hai| 'pAya' kA artha
'pApa' hai| jo pApa kA chedana karatA hai vaha 'pAyacchitta' hai| sAdhaka
chadmastha hai, isalie jJAta aura ajJAta rUpa meM usase bhUla ho jAtI hai  /
pApa usake jIvana meM laga jAte haiN| bhUla honA jitanA burA nahIM hai, utanA
burA hai bhUla ko bhUla na samajhanA  /  bhUla ko bhUla samajhakara usakI zuddhi
ke lie prayAsa karanA aura bhaviSya meM puna: usa prakAra kA doSa na lage, usake
lie dRr3hasaMkalpa karanA tathA bhUla kI zuddhi ke lie jo prakriyA hai, vaha
prAyazcitta hai| prAyazcitta aura daNDa meM antara hai| prAyazcitta meM sAdhaka
apane doSa ko apanI icchA se prakaTa kara use svIkAra karatA hai| pramAdavaza
yadi doSa laga gayA hai to vaha sAdhaka usa doSa ko gurujanoM ke samakSa prakaTa
kara detA hai aura unase prAyazcitta pradAna karane ke lie prArthanA karatA hai
/  gurujana usa doSa se mukta hone ke lie vidhi batAte haiN| isake viparIta
vyakti svayaM daNDa ko apanI icchA se nahIM kintu vivazatA se svIkAra karatA
hai| usake mana meM duSkRtya ke prati kisI bhI prakAra kI glAni nahIM hotii|
aparAdhI aparAdha ko svecchA se nahIM kintu dUsaroM ke bhaya se svIkAra karatA
hai| isa taraha daNDa Upara se thopA jAtA hai, kintu prAyazcitta antarhadaya se
svIkAra kiyA jAtA hai| isI kAraNa rAjanIti meM daNDa kA vidhAna hai to
dharmanIti meM prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai| jisakA antarmAnasa sarala ho, jo
pApabhIru ho, jisake hRdaya meM Atma-zuddhi kI tIvra bhAvanA ho usI ke mana meM
prAyazcitta lene kI bhAvanA jAgRta hotI hai| yadi mana meM mAyA kA sAmrAjya hogA
to prAyazcitta se zuddhikaraNa nahIM ho sakatA  /  bhUleM aneka prakAra kI hotI
haiN| kitanI hI bhUleM sAmAnya hotI haiM aura kitanI hI asAdhAraNa hotI haiN|
sAmAnya bhUleM bhI deza-kAla aura paristhiti ke kAraNa asAmAnya ho jAtI haiM  /
ataH sabhI prakAra kI bhUloM kA prAyazcitta eka-sA nahIM hotaa| bhUloM aura
paristhitiyoM ke anusAra prAyazcitta ke bhI vividha prakAra batAye gae haiN|
sthAnAMga, nizIya, bRhatkalpa, vyavahAra, jItakalpa prabhRti granthoM meM
vividha prakAra ke prAyazcittoM kA ullekha hai| samavAyAMga Adi meM prAyazcitta
ke prakAroM kA ullekha hai to nizItha Adi AgamoM meM prAyazcitta yogya aparAdhoM
kA bhI vistAra se nirUpaNa hai| bRhatkalpabhASya, nizIthabhASya,
vyavahArabhASya, nizIthacUNi, jItakalpabhASya Adi meM prAyazcitta sambandhI
vividha siddhAnta aura samasyAoM kA saTIka vivecana hai  /  digambara paramparA
ke grantha mUlAcAra, jayadhavalA tathA tattvArthasUtra kI TIkAyoM meM
prAyazcitta ke vividha prakAra pratipAdita haiN| sabhI prakAra ke prAyazcittoM
kA samAveza dasa prakAra ke prAyazcittoM meM ho jAtA hai|'-(1) pAlocanA, (2)
pratikramaNa, (3) ubhaya, (4) viveka, (5) vyutsarga, (6) tapa, (7) cheda, (8)
mUla, (9) anavasthApya aura (10) pArAMcika  /  mUlAcAra meM prathama ATha nAma
ye hI haiM, kintu anavasthApya ke sthAna para parihAra aura pArAMcika ke sthAna
para zraddhAna zabda vyavahRta huyA hai| tattvArthasUtra meM pArAMcika
prAyazcitta kA ullekha nahIM hai, usameM mUla nAmaka prAyazcitta ke sthAna para
upasthApana aura anavasthApya prAyazcitta ke sthAna para parihAra-prAyazcitta kA
ullekha kiyA hai| sthAnAMga aura jIta 1. (ka) sthAnAMga 1073 (kha) jItakalpa
sUtra 4 (ga) dhavalA 1315, 23163 / 1

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The text describes the ten types of atonement mentioned in the Kalpa, which are
also described in the Digambar text Jayadhwala. The first form of atonement
involves the practitioner experiencing remorse for their transgression. They
acknowledge their wrongdoing and, with a pure heart, confess their transgression
and violation of the rules to the Acharya or the Geetarth Shraman, seeking
atonement to be freed from the fault. The text explains why and how to perform
self-criticism and before whom it should be done, elaborating on it in the
Stananga and other texts. I have written extensively about this in the book
"Jain Achar Siddhant aur Swaroop," so those who are particularly curious should
refer to it.  For specific transgressions, the text mentions the atonement of
Tapas. The Nishita, Bahutkalpa, Jeetkalpa, and their commentaries explain the
type of atonement to be undertaken for consuming specific types of food. The
present Agam provides a detailed list of transgressions that warrant Tapas
atonement and discusses various types of Tapas atonement, including Mas Laghoo,
Mas Guru, Chaturmas Laghoo, Chaturmas Guru, Shatmas Laghoo, and Shatmas Guru
atonement. The Bahutkalpa Bhashya discusses the atonement for the number of
Tapas performed in months, days, etc., as follows:  Yathaguru - Six months of
continuous fasting for five days each Gurutar - Four months of continuous
fasting for four days each Guru - One month of continuous fasting for three days
each (with oil) Laghoo - 10 days of fasting for 10 days (one month of continuous
fasting for two days each) Laghootar - 25 days of continuous fasting for one day
and eating for one day Yathalaghoo - 20 days of continuous Ayambil (dry food)
Laghooshwak - 15 days of continuous Ekasan (one meal a day) Laghoovaktar - 10
days of continuous two Porsi, meaning eating after 12 noon Yathalaghooshwak -
Five days of continuous Nirvikruti (food without ghee, milk, etc.)  **Brief
Summary of the First Uddeshak**  The first Uddeshak contains 55 sutras and a
detailed commentary spanning verses 497-815. It first prohibits manual labor for
monks. It forbids the use of wood, fingers, or rods to manipulate the Angadan.
It also prohibits massaging the Angadan with oil, ghee, butter, washing it with
cold or hot water, removing the skin from the top and smelling it, etc.
Reflecting on the reason for this prohibition, Acharya Sanghadasgani uses the
example of a lion, a poisonous snake, a tiger, and a python to explain that just
as a sleeping lion, when awakened, destroys the one who woke it, similarly,
manipulating the Angadan, etc., can lead to the rise of intense attachment,
causing the practitioner to deviate from their practice. The text also prohibits
extracting Shukra Pudgal, using fragrant substances, placing stones, etc., to
avoid mud on the path, placing ladders to climb high places, building drains to
remove water, sharpening tools, cleaning scissors, nail clippers, ear cleaners,
etc., requesting these things without purpose, requesting needles, etc.,
unlawfully, giving others from the things brought for oneself, removing thorns
from needles, etc., brought for sewing clothes, getting utensils repaired by
householders, getting embroidery done on clothes by householders, and getting
more than three embroideries done on clothes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kalpa meM jina dasa prAyazcittoM kA varNana hai. vaisA hI varNana digambara
grantha jayadhavalA meM bhI hai| prAyazcitta kA jo sarvaprathama rUpa hai usameM
sAdhaka ke antarmAnasa meM aparAdha ke kAraNa AtmaglAni samutpanna hotI hai  /
aparAdha ko aparAdha ke rUpa meM svIkAra kara letA hai| vaha vizuddha hRdaya se
apane dvArA kiye gaye aparAdha va niyamabhaMga ko prAcArya yA gItArtha zramaNa
ke samakSa nivedana kara usa doSa se mukta hone ke lie prAyazcitta svIkAra
karatA hai  /  pAlocanA kyoM aura kaise karanI cAhie aura kinake samakSa karanI
cAhie, sthAnAMga Adi meM vistAra se nirUpaNa hai| "jaina AcAra siddhAnta aura
svarUpa" grantha meM maiMne vistAra se likhA hai, ata: vizeSa jijJAsu usakA
avalokana kreN| viziSTa doSoM kI vizaddhi ke lie tapa prAyazcitta kA ullekha
hai| nizItha, bahatkalpa, jItakalpa aura unake bhASyoM meM kisa prakAra kA doSa
sevana karane para kisa prakAra kA prAyazcitta grahaNa karanA cAhie, yaha batAyA
gayA hai| prastuta Agama meM tapa prAyazcitta ke yogya savistRta sUcI dI gaI
hai, aura tapa prAyazcitta ke vividha prakAroM kI carcA karate hue mAsa laghu,
mAsa guru, cAturmAsa laghu, cAturmAsa guru se lekara SaTmAsa laghu aura SaTmAsa
guru prAyazcittoM kA ullekha hai| bahatkalpabhASya meM mAsa, divasa Adi tapoM kI
saMkhyA ke prAyazcitta kA vivecana milatA hai, vaha isa prakAra hai yathAguru-
chaha mAsa taka nirantara pAMca-pAMca upavAsa gurutara-cAra mAsa taka nirantara
cAra-cAra upavAsa guru-eka mAsa taka nirantara tIna-tIna upavAsa (tele) laghu-10
bele 10 dina pAraNe (eka mAsa taka nirantara do-do upavAsa) laghutara-25 dina
taka nirantara eka dina upavAsa aura eka dina bhojana yathAlaghu-20 dina
nirantara Ayambila (rUkhA-sUkhA bhojana) laghuSvaka-15 dina taka nirantara
ekAsana (eka samaya bhojana) laghuvakatara-10 dina taka nirantara do porasI
arthAt 12 baje ke bAda bhojana grahaNa yathAlaghuSvaka-pAMca dina nirantara
nirvikRti (ghI, dUdha Adi rahita bhojana) saMkSipta sArAMza prathama uddezaka
prathama uddezaka meM 55 sUtra haiM  /  497-815 gAthAoM taka kA savistRta bhASya
bhI hai| sarvaprathama bhikSu ke lie hastakarma kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai|
kASTha, aMgulI athavA zalAkA prAdi se aMgAdAna ke saMcAlana kA niSedha hai|
aMgAdAna ko tela, ghRta, navanIta prabhRti se mardana karane, zIta yA uSNa jala
se prakSAlana karane aura Upara se tvacA haTAkara use sUMghane Adi kA niSedha
kiyA gayA hai| isa niSedha ke kAraNa para cintana karate hue AcArya
saMghadAsagaNi ne siMha, pAsIviSa-sarpa, vyAghra aura ajagara Adi ke dRSTAnta
dekara yaha batAne kA prayAsa kiyA hai ki jaise prasupta siMha jAgRta hone para
jagAne vAle ko hI samApta kara detA hai, vaise hI aMgAdAna Adi ko saMcAlita
karane se tIvra moha kA udaya ho jAne para vaha sAdhaka bhI sAdhanA se cyuta ho
sakatA hai| zukra pudgala nikAlanA, sugandhita padArthoM ko saMghanA, mArga meM
kIcar3a Adi se bacane hetu patthara Adi rakhavAnA, U~ce sthAna para car3hane ke
lie sIr3hI rakhavAnA pAnI ko nikAlane ke lie nAlI prAdi banavAnA, saI Adi ko
teja karavAnA, kaiMcI, nakhachedaka, karNazodhaka Adi ko sApha karanA,
niSprayojana ina vastuoM kI yAcanA karanA, avidhi pUrvaka sUI Adi kI yAcanA
karanA, svayaM ke lie lAI huI vastu meM se dUsaroM ko denA, vastra sIne ke lie
lAI huI sUI Adi se kAMTA nikaalnaa| pAtroM ko gRhasthoM se ThIka krvaanaa|
vastra para gRhasthoM se kArI lagavAnA  /  vastra para tIna se adhika kArI
lagavAnA  /  ( 44 )

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is forbidden to consume food that is mixed with impure food, even if it is
mostly pure. This first principle emphasizes the need for constant vigilance on
the part of the seeker. At every moment, the seeker should act in a way that is
guided by wisdom. Even the smallest act done without wisdom can lead to karmic
bondage. Therefore, even small objects like needles are forbidden to be kept
without proper care. Dharma lies in wisdom. This is clear from these statements.
It is true that celibacy is ranked fourth in the enumeration of great vows. But
due to its greatness and dignity, it is the first among all vows. In the
*Prashnavyakarana Sutra*, while describing the greatness of celibacy, it is
written that just as the Tirthankara is the best among the ascetics, so is
celibacy among the vows. One who practices the vow of celibacy has practiced all
the rules and regulations. Celibacy is the foundation of all vows. It is the
crown jewel of vows. Therefore, it is very important for the seeker practicing
celibacy to remain vigilant at all times and strictly follow this rule. This is
the first instruction given at the beginning of the present *Agam*.  The second
principle  The second principle has 57 sutras. In some copies, 59 sutras are
also found. The commentary on it extends from 816 to 1437 verses. The first
eight sutras discuss the *padaponshan*. A piece of old and torn blanket, one
hand long and wide, is called *padaponshan*. The commentator, Pandit Muni Shri,
has written extensively on this and in his commentary, he has clarified that
*padaponshan* and *rajoharan* are two separate instruments. *Rajoharan* is used
for cleaning, while *padaponshan* is only used for wiping the feet, etc. The
meaning and utility of both are different. In addition to wiping the feet,
*padaponshan* can be used for defecation if necessary. One can also sit on it if
necessary, but *rajoharan*, etc., are not used in this way. If *padaponshan* is
not available, the ascetic can take it from someone else. But *rajoharan* is
only for oneself. Even *Jinkalpi* ascetics are considered to need *rajoharan*.
*Rajoharan* is a technical instrument made from a group of pods, while
*padaponshan* is a piece of cloth. It is sometimes tied to a wooden stick. It is
an auxiliary instrument. The *padaponshan* with a wooden stick can be kept for
as long as it is needed and in the area where it is needed. In the absence of
need, the *padaponshan* with the wooden stick should be untied and kept. Only
the *padaponshan* that is tied according to the method is considered to be well-
made. It can be kept for a maximum of one and a half months. If it is necessary
to keep it longer, it can be untied and changed.  After that, it is forbidden to
use fragrant substances like perfumes. It is forbidden to make paths, etc. It is
forbidden to make drains for water, sneeze covers, and *chilmili*, etc. The
ascetic should not use harsh language. The use of harsh language creates
distress in the mind of the listener. Language should be both truthful and
beautiful. Language that causes distress to others is a form of violence. The
use of even a little untruthful language is forbidden for the ascetic. It is
also forbidden to accept unoffered things. It is forbidden to adorn and decorate
the body, to wear precious and excellent things, etc. Monks are forbidden to
keep leather. However, the commentator has mentioned the wearing of leather in
exceptional circumstances.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nirdoSa AhAra meM sadoSa AhAra milA ho, use grahaNa karanA  /  isa prakAra
prathama uddezaka meM sAdhaka ko satata jAgarUka rahane kA sandeza diyA hai|
pratipala-pratikSaNa sAdhaka ko usa prakAra kI pravRtti karanI cAhiye jo viveka
se maNDita ho  /  avivekayukta kI gaI choTI-sI-choTI pravatti bhI karmabandhana
kA kAraNa hai| isalie sUI Adi nanhI-sI vastu bhI pravidhi se rakhane kA niSedha
kiyA hai| viveka meM hI dharma hai  /  yaha ina ullekhoM se spaSTa hai| yaha
satya hai ki mahAvratoM kI parigaNanA meM brahmacarya kA caturtha sthAna hai|
para vaha apanI mahimA aura garimA ke kAraNa sabhI vratoM meM prathama hai|
praznavyAkaraNasUtra meM brahmacarya ke mahimA kA varNana karate hue likhA hai
ki jaise zramaNoM meM tIrthaMkara zreSTha hai vaise vratoM meM brahmacarya  /
eka brahmacarya vrata kI jo ArAdhanA kara letA hai vaha samasta niyamopaniyama
kI ArAdhanA kara letA hai| jitane bhI vrata niyama haiM, unakA mUla prAdhAra
brahmacarya hai| vaha vratoM kA saratAja hai| mukuTamaNi hai| ataH brahmacarya
kI sAdhanA karane vAle sAdhaka ko hara kSaNa jAgarUka rahakara usa niyama kA
dRr3hatA se pAlana karanA bahuta hI Avazyaka hai| prastuta Agama ke prArambha
meM sarvaprathama yaha sUcana kiyA gayA hai| dUsarA uddezaka dUsare uddezaka meM
57 sUtra haiN| kisI-kisI prati meM 59 sUtra bhI milate haiN| jisa para 816 se
1437 gAthAoM taka kA bhASya hai| pAdapoMchana ke sambandha meM prathama ATha
sUtroM meM cintana kiyA gayA hai| purAnA aura phaTe hue kambala kA eka hAtha
lambA-caur3A khaNDa pAdapoMchana kahA jAtA hai| vivecanakAra paNDita muni zrI ne
isa para vistAra se vivecana likhA hai aura usa vivecana meM unhoMne spaSTa kiyA
hai ki pAdapoMchana aura rajoharaNa ye donoM pRthakapRthak upakaraNa haiN|
rajoharaNa se parimArjana hotA hai aura pAdapoMchana se kevala paira Adi poMche
jAte haiN| donoM ke artha aura upayogitA bhinna-bhinna haiM  /  pAdapoMchana se
paira poMchane ke atirikta AvazyakatA par3ane para malavisarjana hetu usa vastra
kA upayoga kiyA jA sakatA hai| AvazyakatA hone para usa para baiThA bhI jA
sakatA hai, para rajoharaNa Adi kA upayoga isa prakAra nahIM hotA  /
pAdapoMchana AvazyakatA hone para svayaM ke pAsa na ho to zramaNa dUsare se le
sakatA hai| para rajoharaNa to svayaM kA hI hotA hai| jinakalpI zramaNoM ko bhI
rajoharaNa rakhanA Avazyaka mAnA gayA hai| rajoharaNa phaliyoM ke samUha se banA
huA eka prodhika upakaraNa hai jabaki pAdapoMchana vastra kA eka Tukar3A hotA
hai| use kabhI kASThadaMDa meM bAMdha kara bhI rakhA jAtA hai| yaha aupagrahika
upakaraNa hai| usa kASThadaMDa yukta pAdapoMchana aupagrahika upakaraNa kI jisa
kSetra meM aura jitane samaya ke lie AvazyakatA ho, utane samaya taka rakha
sakate haiN| AvazyakatA ke abhAva meM kASThadaNDa yukta pAdapoMchana ko
kholakara rakha lenA caahie| jo vidhi yukta bAMdhA gayA ho vahI pAdapoMchana
supratilekhya hotA hai| vaha pAdapoMchana DeDha mAsa taka adhika se adhika rakha
sakate haiN| yadi rakhanA Avazyaka ho to kholakara aura parivartana kara rakha
sakate haiN| usake pazcAt itrAdi sugandhita padArthoM ko saMghane kA niSedha
hai| padamArga Adi banAne kA niSedha hai| pAnI nikAlane kI nAlI, chIMke kA
Dhakkana, cilamilI Adi banAne kA niSedha hai| zramaNa ko kaThora bhASA kA
upayoga nahIM karanA cAhie  /  kaThora bhASA ke upayoga se sunane vAle ke
antarmAnasa meM saMkleza paidA hotA hai| bhASA satya bhI ho aura sundara bhI ho
/  jisa bhASA ke prayoga se dUsaroM kA hRdaya vyathita ho to usa prakAra kI
bhASA eka prakAra se hiMsA hai| alpa-asatya bhASA kA prayoga bhI zramaNa ke lie
niSiddha hai| adattavastu grahaNa karanA bhI niSiddha hai| zarIra ko sajAnA va
saMvAranA bahamUlyavAna zreSThatama vastuoM ko dhAraNa karanA prAdi niSiddha
hai| bhikSuoM ko carma rakhane kA niSedha hai| tathApi bhASyakAra ne ApavAdika
sthiti meM carma dhAraNa karane kA jo ullekha kiyA hai

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The path is full of thorns. In special circumstances, leather equipment can be
used if there are snakes, severe cold, illness, or if one is suffering from a
disease, is delicate, or has wounds on their feet. But not in the excretory
passage.  The daily offering of food, donations, etc. is prohibited. Praising
the donor before or after receiving alms. Going to the houses of householders
before the time for alms. Going for alms with a non-Jain, with a householder,
with a necessary and unnecessary person. Entering the study ground and the
recitation-listening ground with them. Traveling from village to village with
them. Using pleasing food and water, eating unpleasing food, eating leftover
food without asking the ascetic who owns it. Accepting and using food from a
Sagarika. Going for alms to a Sagarika's house without going inside. Violating
the remaining time of the bed-stretcher period and the rainy season. Not keeping
the bed-stretcher in the shade while getting wet in the rain. Taking it
elsewhere a second time without permission. Traveling without returning the bed-
stretcher to the one who gave it. Not searching for the bed-stretcher if it is
lost. Not even copying a small portion of the text. Thus, the minor monthly
atonement for various activities in the second chapter has been explained.  The
prohibition of the things prohibited in this chapter is also mentioned in the
Brihatkalpa, Pracharanga, Dashavalika, Pindaniyukti, etc. The description of the
minor monthly atonement for all these atonement-worthy places has been done in
the second chapter. This also sheds light on all these topics in a concise and
meaningful way. The third chapter  The third chapter has 80 sutras. There are
1438-1554 verses of commentary on them. From the first to the twelfth sutra, it
prohibits asking for food, etc. in a loud voice in a rest house, a traveler's
inn, a resting place, or a householder's house, etc., going back to the
householder's house again and again for food, etc. if he refuses, eating and
drinking in a communal feast, cleaning, massaging, and washing the feet, and
cleaning, massaging, and rubbing the body. It prohibits cutting overgrown hair
and nails, covering the head while traveling, defecating in a cremation ground,
in a mine, where coal, etc. is produced, in a fruit-gathering place, in a place
where vegetables, etc. are kept, in a grove, and in a place where sunlight does
not reach. It also describes the minor monthly atonement for the ascetic who
performs these activities.  In addition to the present Pragama, it is found that
many things are relevant for the Shramanas in the Aavashyakasutra,
Acharangasutra, Dashavaikalikasutra, Prashnavyakarana, etc.  The fourth chapter
The fourth chapter has 128 sutras. There are 1555-1894 verses of commentary on
these sutras. This chapter describes how to subdue the king, the king's
protector, the city protector, the all-protector, the village protector, the
state protector, the country protector, and the border protector, and how to
praise their qualities to subdue them. Eating grain, etc. with awareness.
Consuming milk, etc. without the permission of the Acharya, etc. Going for alms
without going to the establishment. Entering the shelter of the non-ordained
without proper procedure. Placing a stick, etc. in the path of the non-ordained.
Creating new strife. Rekindling extinguished strife. Laughing out loud. The one
sitting next to,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mArga kaNTakAkIrNa ho| sarpa, bhayaMkara sardI, rugNa avasthA, asaM kI vyAdhi
se pIr3ita, sukumAla Adi ho yA pairoM meM jakhama Adi ho to vizeSa paristhiti
meM carma upakaraNoM kA upayoga kiyA jA sakatA hai| para utsarga mArga meM
nhiiN| nitya agra-piNDa, dAna-piNDa Adi kA niSedha hai| bhikSA ke pUrva yA bAda
meM dAtA kI prazaMsA karanA  /  bhikSA ke lie samaya se pUrva gRhasthoM ke
gharoM meM jAnA  /  anyatIthika ke sAtha, gRhastha ke sAtha, pArihArika va
apArihArika ke sAtha bhikSA ke lie jaanaa| inake sAtha svAdhyAya bhUmi aura
uccAra-prazravaNa bhUmi meM praveza krnaa| ina tInoM ke sAtha grAmAnugrAma
vihAra krnaa| manojJa AhAra pAnI kA upayoga karanA, amanojJa ko paraThanA, bacA
huA AhAra sAmbhogika sAdhuoM ko pUche binA hI prtthnaa| sAgArika-piNDa grahaNa
karanA va usakA upayoga karanA  /  sAgArika ke yahA~-binA ghara jAne bhikSA ke
lie jAnA  /  zayyA saMstAraka kI avadhi kA zeSakAla aura varSAkAla meM
ullaMghana krnaa| varSA se bhIgate hue zayyA saMstAraka ko chAyA meM na rkhnaa|
dUsarI bAra binA AjJA liye anyatra le jAnA  /  prAtyahArika zayyA saMstAraka ko
binA lauTAye vihAra krnaa| zayyA saMstAraka guma ho jAne para usakI anveSaNA na
krnaa| alpa upadhi kI bhI pratilekhanA na krnaa| isa prakAra dUsare uddezaka meM
vividha pravRttiyoM kA laghumAsika prAyazcitta batalAyA hai| isa uddezaka meM
jina bAtoM kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai una bAtoM ke niSedha kA varNana bRhatkalpa,
prAcArAMga, dazavakAlika, piNDaniyukti Adi meM bhI hai| ina saba prAyazcitta ke
yogya sthAnoM kA laghamAsa prAyazcitta kA nirUpaNa dvitIya uddezaka meM huA hai|
vivecana meM ina sabhI viSayoM para saMkSipta aura sAragarbhita prakAza bhI DAlA
hai| tRtIya uddezaka tRtIya uddezaka meM 80 sUtra haiN| jina para 1438-1554 taka
bhASya kI gAthAe~ haiM  /  eka sUtra se lekara bAraha sUtra taka dharmazAlA,
musAphirakhAnA, ArAmagAra yA gahapati ke kula Adi meM ucca svara se AhAra Adi
mAMgane kA, gRhasvAmI ke manA karane para punaH puna: usake ghara AhArAdi ke lie
jAne kA, sAmUhika bhoja meM jAkara azana pAna grahaNa karane kA, pairoM ke
parimArjana, parimardana, prakSAlana Adi kA va zarIra ke parimArjana,
parimardana, saMvAhana Adi kA niSedha hai  /  bar3he hue bAla, nAkhUna Adi
kATane kA, vihAra karate hue mastaka DhakanA, zmazAna bhUmi meM, khadAna meM,
jahA~ koyale Adi nirmita hote hoM usa sthAna meM, phala saMgraha ke sthAna meM,
sabjI Adi rakhane ke sthAna meM, upavana, dhUpa na Ane ke sthAna meM
malavisarjana kA niSedha hai aura ina pravRttiyoM ko karane vAle sAdhaka ke lie
laghamAsika prAyazcitta kA varNana hai| prastuta prAgama ke atirikta
AvazyakasUtra, AcArAMgasUtra, dazavaikAlikasUtra, praznavyAkaraNa Adi meM bhI
aneka kArya zramaNoM ke lie prakaraNIya haiM aisA varNana prApta hotA hai|
caturtha uddezaka caturtha uddezaka meM 128 sUtra haiN| ina sUtroM para
1555-1894 gAthAoM taka kA bhASya hai| isa uddezaka meM rAjA ko, rAjA ke rakSaka'
ko, nagararakSaka ko, sarvarakSaka ko, grAmarakSaka ko, rAjyarakSaka ko,
dezarakSaka ko, sImArakSaka ko vaza meM karanA aura vaza meM karane ke lie unake
guNAnuvAda krnaa| sacitta dhAnya Adi kA AhAra krnaa| AcArya Adi kI anumati ke
binA dUdha Adi vikRtiyA~ grahaNa krnaa| sthApanAkula jAne binA bhikSA ke lie
jaanaa| avidhi se nirgranthiyoM ke upAzraya meM praveza krnaa| nirgranthiyoM ke
Ane ke rAste meM daNDa Adi rakha denaa| navIna kalaha utpanna krnaa| upazAnta
kalaha ko puna: jAgRta karanA  /  ThahAkA mArakara hNsnaa| pArzvastha,

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Giving and taking from one's own saint, the five types of श्रमणs: अवसन्न, कुशील,
संसक्त, नित्यक. Taking food, etc., with hands contaminated by सचित्त substances
like अपकाय, पृथ्वीकाय, etc. Performing bodily functions. Not transcribing the
three उच्चार-प्रश्रवण भूमि at dusk. Disposing of excrement in a narrow place.
Not purifying oneself after excreting. Contemplating on the प्रायश्चित्त for
going for alms with someone who is undergoing प्रायश्चित्त, etc. These are the
subjects on which प्रायश्चित्त has been contemplated and these actions are
prohibited. For this, the monthly उद्घातिक परिहारस्थान, i.e., लघमासिका (मास-लघु)
प्रायश्चित्त is prescribed. श्रमणs and श्रमणīs should be engrossed in their
practice. If they forget their practice and try to subdue kings, etc., obstacles
will arise in their practice. Kings, etc., are easily angered even when they are
pleased. Therefore, they may also give उपसर्ग when they are displeased.
Therefore, in this आगम, they are prohibited from pleasing and attracting them.
The practitioner should practice in their own state of mind.  This उद्देशक
indicates that the practitioner should act with discernment. The essence of
श्रामण्य life is क्षमा. In anger, the ability to think and reason often becomes
weak. Anger is a mental outburst. From that outburst, enmity is born, and from
that, the intention to take revenge arises. कषाय is at the root of conflict.
Therefore, engaging in conflict and rekindling old conflicts is prohibited. A
matchstick burns itself before burning others. Whether it burns another or not,
it burns itself. Similarly, the one who engages in conflict binds himself with
karma. Conflict is a sin, therefore, the practitioner should avoid it.  श्रमणs
are also prohibited from engaging in अट्टहास. The precious time of a श्रमण is to
be spent in स्वाध्याय and meditation. Laughter, jokes, and अट्टहास often lead to
conflict. The result of Draupadi's laughter was the Mahabharata war. Thus, the
fourth उद्देशक states that श्रमणs should not engage in activities that obscure
the path of practice. Excrement should not be disposed of in a place where there
is a possibility of harming living beings. Also, there should be no possibility
of public censure.  The fifth उद्देशक  The fifth उद्देशक has 52 सूत्रs. In some
copies, 77 सूत्रs are also found. On these, there is a detailed commentary in
18952194 गाथाs. First, it is prohibited to sit near the root of a सचित्त tree,
to sit, stand, sleep, eat, urinate, defecate, etc., and to engage in स्वाध्याय,
etc. It is also prohibited to have one's cloth sewn by another तीथिक or
householder, and to keep a cloth that is longer than the prescribed limit.  It
is prohibited to wash neem leaves, etc., with अचित्त water or cold water. There
is a provision for returning foot-wipers, staffs, sticks, needles, and
returnable items within a specified period. It is prohibited to cut flax,
cotton, etc., to make and keep attractive staffs of सचित्त colors and various
colors, and to play the mouth, teeth, lips, nose, etc., like a veena. It is
prohibited to use a bed that is not intended for the purpose, to make a
menstrual cloth larger than the prescribed size, to make the menstrual cloth
fine, to connect the menstrual cloths together, to tie them together illegally,
to make even one unnecessary tie, and to make more than three ties even if
necessary. It is prohibited to keep away menstrual cloths of other types besides
the five types. Pressing with feet, etc., placing under the head, etc., all
these activities attract लघुमासिक प्रायश्चित्त. Therefore, the practitioner
should avoid all these activities.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 avasanna, kuzIla, saMsakta, nityaka ina pAMca prakAra ke zramaNoM ko apane
santa ko denA aura lenA  /  apakAya, pRthvIkAya prabhati sacitta padArthoM se
lipta hAthoM dvArA AhAra Adi lenaa| zarIra parikarma karanA  /  sandhyA ke
samaya tIna uccAra-prazravaNa bhUmi kA pratilekhana na krnaa| saMkIrNa sthAna
meM mala-mUtra kA visarjana karanA  /  mala-mUtra ke tyAga karane ke pazcAt
usakA zuddhikaraNa na krnaa| prAyazcitta vahana karane vAle ke sAtha bhikSA ke
lie jAnA ityAdi viSayoM para prAyazcitta kA cintana kiyA gayA hai aura yaha
kArya na karane ke lie niSedha kiyA gayA hai| usake lie mAsika udghAtika
parihArasthAna arthAt laghamAsikA (mAsa-laghu) prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai|
zramaNa aura zramaNiyoM ko apanI sAdhanA ke prati tallIna rahanA caahie| sAdhanA
ko vismRta kara yadi rAjA Adi ko vaza meM karane ke lie prayAsa karegA to
sAdhanA meM bAdhAe~ upasthita hoNgii| rAjA Adi jahA~ prasanna hote haiM vahA~ ve
zIghra hI nArAja bhI ho jAte haiM  /  isalie pratikUla hone para upasarga bhI de
sakate haiN| ata: prastuta Agama meM unheM prasanna karane ke lie aura
prAkarSita karane ke lie niSedha kiyA gayA hai  /  sAdhaka ko apanI mastI meM hI
rahakara ke sAdhanA karanI caahie| prastuta udde zaka meM sAdhaka ko vivekayukta
pravRtti karane kA saMketa kiyA hai| zrAmaNya jIvana kA sAra kSamA hai| krodha
meM vicArakSamatA aura tarkazakti prAyaH zithila ho jAtI hai| krodha mAnasika
Aveza hai| usa Aveza se zatrutA janma letI hai aura usase anujJA grahaNa karane
kA saMkalpa hotA hai| kalaha ke mUla meM kaSAya hai| ata: kalaha karane kA aura
purAne kalaha ko punaH jagAne kA niSedha kiyA hai| diyAsalAI dUsaroM ko jalAne
ke pUrva svayaM jala jAtI hai  /  dUsarA jale yA na jale para vaha svayaM to
jalatI hI hai| vaise hI kalaha karane vAlA svayaM karmabandhana karatA hI hai  /
kalaha pApa hai ataH usase sAdhaka ko bacanA caahie| zramaNoM ko aTTahAsa karane
kA bhI niSedha kiyA gayA hai  /  zramaNa kA anamola samaya svAdhyAya aura dhyAna
meM lagAne kA hai| haMsI-majAka aura aTTahAsa se kaI bAra bAta-bAta meM kalaha
ho jAtA hai| draupadI ke khila-khilAkara haMsane kA pariNAma hI mahAbhArata kA
yuddha hai| isa prakAra caturtha uddezaka meM batAyA hai ki zramaNoM ko ve
pravRttiyAM nahIM karanI cAhie jisase sAdhanA kA mArga dhUmila ho| mala-mUtra kA
visarjana bhI aise sthAna para nahIM karanA cAhie jahA~ para jIvoM kI virAdhanA
hone kI sambhAvanA ho| sAtha hI lokApavAda hone kI sambhAvanA ho| . pAMcavAM
uddezaka pAMcaveM uddezaka meM 52 sUtra haiN| kinhIM-kinhIM pratiyoM meM 77
sUtra bhI prApta hote haiN| jina para 18952194 gAthAoM meM savistRta bhASya hai|
sarvaprathama sacitta vRkSa ke mUla ke nikaTa baiThakara kAyotsarga karanA,
baiThanA, khar3A rahanA, zayana karanA, AhAra karanA, laghuzaMkA karanA, zauca
Adi karanA aura svAdhyAya Adi karane kA niSedha hai| apanI cAdara anya tIthika
yA gRhastha se silAne kA, maryAdA se adhika lambI cAdara rakhane kA bhI niSedha
hai| nIma Adi ke pattoM ko acitta pAnI yA zIta pAnI se dhokara rakhane kA
niSedha hai| pAdapoMchana, daNDa, yaSTi, sUI, lauTAne yogya vastuoM ko niyata
avadhi ke bhItara lauTA dene kA vidhAna hai| sana, kapAsa Adi kATane kA, sacitta
raMgIna aura vividha raMgoM se AkarSaka daNDa banAne aura rakhane kA, mukha,
danta, oSTha, nAsikA Adi ko vINA ke samAna bajAne kA niSedha hai| auddezika
uddiSTa zayyA kA upayoga karane kA, rajoharaNa pramANa se adhika bar3A banAnA,
phaliyA~ sUkSma banAnA, phaliyoM ko Apasa meM sambaddha krnaa| avidhi se
bAMdhakara rkhnaa| anAvazyaka eka bhI bandhana karAnA aura Avazyaka bhI tIna
bandhana se adhika bandhana karanA  /  pA~ca prakAra ke atirikta anya jAti ke
rajoharaNa banAnA dUra rakhanA  /  pAMva Adi se dabAnA, sira ke nIce rakhanA
ityAdi sabhI pravRttiyoM kA laghumAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai| ataH sAdhaka ko
ina saba pravattiyoM se bacanA caahie| ( 47 )

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Uddesa The Sixth Uddesa contains 78 sutras. It has a detailed commentary
spanning from Gatha 2195 to 2286. It discusses the following activities that are
prohibited for a sadhaka (spiritual aspirant) due to the sentiment of kama-iccha
(desire):  - Entreating or persuading any woman - Engaging in manual work -
Conducting organ donation procedures - Engaging in disputes, etc. - Keeping or
wearing colorful/fancy clothes - Consuming nourishing foods The text prescribes
the Gurucaramasi prayascitta (major penance) for engaging in such activities. To
protect brahmacarya (celibacy), the sadhaka is prohibited from all such
activities. The psychological description of the various tendencies arising from
kama-iccha (desire) is presented in this chapter.  Seventh Uddesa The Seventh
Uddesa contains 92 sutras with a commentary from Gatha 2287 to 2340. This
chapter also discusses the prohibitions related to sexual activities. Driven by
kama-iccha, the following activities are prohibited: - Making and wearing
various types of garlands, ornaments, leather goods, etc. - Touching the limbs
of a woman - Performing body massage - Sitting or lying on animate earth -
Mutual healing practices, etc. Touching the limbs of animals is also prohibited.
Those who engage in these activities must undergo the Gurucaramasi penance.
Both the Sixth and Seventh Uddesas prescribe penance for activities driven by
kama-iccha. Some activities are prohibited even without the presence of desire,
such as sitting on animate earth.  Eighth Uddesa The Eighth Uddesa contains 18
sutras with a commentary from Gatha 2341 to 2495. It prohibits the following
activities for a sadhaka: - Staying alone in a dharmasala, garden, tower, road,
empty house, grass hut, water house, shop, or cowshed - Staying alone with a
solitary woman, eating, studying, or engaging in bodily functions together -
Engaging in unwholesome conversations - Delivering unlimited talks in a
gathering of women or mixed company at night - Allowing women to stay in the
upasraya (residential hall) at night without objection - Going out with them
The prohibition of contact with women is also found in other agamas like
Dasavaikālika Uttarādhyayana, etc. The sadhaka is urged to minimize contact with
women, as excessive contact can lead to their downfall.  This chapter also
prohibits the sadhaka from accepting food at various royal festivities and in
the presence of the crowned king, even in the royal chambers, stables, elephant
stables, council halls, or private discussion rooms. Accepting the royal morsel
(rajapinda) is prohibited in five sutras, with the penalty of Gurucaramasi
penance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chaThA uddezaka chaThe uddezaka meM 78 sUtra haiN| jina para 2195-2286 gAthAoM
taka kA savistRta bhASya hai  /  kuzIlasevana kI bhAvanA se kisI bhI strI kA
anunaya-vinaya karanA, hastakarma karanA, aMgAdAna saMcAlana tathA kalaha Adi
krnaa| citra-vicitra vastra rakhanA, dhAraNa krnaa| pauSTika AhAra karanA prAdi
kArya karane para gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /  brahmacarya kI surakSA ke
lie sAdhaka ko sabhI pravRttiyoM ke lie niSedha kiyA gayA hai  /  dila meM jaba
vikAra bhAvanAe~ jAgRta hotI haiM taba kAmecchA se vyakti kisa-kisa prakAra kI
pravRttiyA~ karatA hai, usakA manovaijJAnika varNana prastuta adhyAya meM kiyA
gayA hai| sAtavAM uddezaka sAtaveM uddezaka meM 92 sUtra haiN| jisa para
2287-2340 gAthAoM meM bhASya likhA gayA hai  /  prastuta adhyAya meM bhI
maithuna sambandhI niSedha batAyA gayA hai| kAmecchA ke saMkalpa se utprerita
hokara vividha prakAra kI mAlAe~, vividha prakAra ke kar3e, vividha prakAra ke
AbhUSaNa, vividha prakAra ke carmavastra banAnA rakhanA aura pahananA, kAmecchA
se strI ke aMgopAMga kA saMcAlana karanA, zarIra-parikarma karanA, sacitta
pRthvI para sonA baiThanA, paraspara cikitsA Adi karanA  /  pazu-pakSI ke
aMgopAMga ko sparza karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| ina pravRttiyoM ko karane
vAloM ko gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| chaThe aura sAtaveM donoM uddezakoM
meM kAmecchA se kie gaye kAryoM ke lie prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai| inameM kucha
bAteM aisI bhI haiM jo binA kAmecchA ke bhI karanI nahIM kalpatI. jaise sacitta
bhami Adi para baiThanA  /  /  AThavAM uddezaka pAThaveM uddezaka meM 18 sUtra
haiN| jina para 2341-2495 gAthAoM taka bhASya hai  /  dharmazAlA, udyAna,
aTTAlikA, dagamArga, zUnyagRha, tRNagRha, pAnazAlA, dukAna, gozAlA meM ekAkI
zramaNa, ekAkI mahilA ke sAtha rahe, AhAra Adi kare, svAdhyAya kare, zaucAdi
sAtha jAye, vikArotpAdaka vArtAlApa kare  /  rAtri ke samaya strIpariSad yA
strI-puruSayukta pariSad meM aparimita kathA kare tathA zramaNiyoM ke sAtha
vihArAdi kare  /  upAzraya meM rAtri ke samaya meM mahilAoM ko rahane deve, manA
na kare  /  unake sAtha bAhara AnA-jAnA kare Adi pravRttiyoM kA niSedha hai  /
strI saMsarga kA niSedha dazavakAlika uttarAdhyayana Adi anya AgamoM meM bhI
yatra-tatra hai| sarvatra sAdhaka ko yahI preraNA dI gaI hai ki vaha mahilAoM kA
adhika samparka na rakhe  /  adhika samparka se sAdhaka cyuta ho sakatA hai|
prastuta adhyAya meM mUrddhAbhiSikta rAjA ke aneka prakAra ke mahotsavoM meM
AhAra grahaNa karane kA niSedha hai  /  mUrdhAbhiSikta rAjA jaba uttarazAlA yAnI
maNDapa meM rahatA ho taba bhI AhAra grahaNa karane kA niSedha hai| isI prakAra
azvazAlA, hastizAlA, mantraNAgRha, guptavicAragRha Adi meM rahe hue rAjA ke
AhAra grahaNa kA niSedha hai| pAMca sUtroM meM rAjapiNDa grahaNa karane kA
niSedha kiyA hai aura grahaNa karane para gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai|
Agama sAhitya meM aneka sthaloM para rAjapiNDa grahaNa karane kA niSedha hai|
jisakA rAjyAbhiSeka huA ho vaha rAjA kahalAtA hai| usakA bhojana rAjapiNDa hai|'
jinadAsagaNi mahattara ke abhimatAnusAra senApati, 1. (ka) dazavakAlika
agastyasiMhacaNi (kha) dazavaikAlika jinadAsacUNi 112-13 (ga) kalpadarzanam gA.
9 pR. 1. (gha) kalpasUtra kalpalatA 4 pR. 2 samayasundara (Ga) kalpArthabodhinI
4 pR. 2 ( 48 )

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A king should not accept *rajapinda* (royal food) even if it is offered by his
ministers, priests, merchants, and caravan leaders. There is no such rule for
other kings. If there is a possibility of fault, then it should not be accepted,
but if it is innocent, then it can be accepted.  *Rajapinda* refers to royal
food. Royal food is delicious, sweet, and intoxicating, which can increase the
desire for taste. Such delicious food is not readily available everywhere.
Therefore, to prevent a monk from becoming a gourmand and consuming unacceptable
food, *rajapinda* is prohibited. The essence of this rule is the purity of
desire. If someone forgets this rule and accepts or uses *rajapinda*, then the
monk has to undergo a four-month penance.  There are other reasons behind the
prohibition of *rajapinda*, which are mentioned in the *Nishithabhashya* and
*Chuni*. In the royal palace, there is often a lot of movement of commanders and
others. Sometimes, due to haste or other reasons, the monk may get injured or
his bowl may break. These are also considered bad omens, so *rajapinda* is
considered unacceptable.  The prohibition of *rajapinda* applies only to the
monks of Lord Mahavira and Rishabhdeva, not to the monks of the twenty-two
Tirthankaras. *Rajapinda* includes four types of food, clothing, bowls,
blankets, and cleaning materials - these eight items are considered
unacceptable. The ninth *uddeshaka* (chapter) has 25 sutras (aphorisms) on which
a commentary has been written in 2496-2605 verses. This *uddeshaka* also
prohibits the acceptance of *rajapinda*.  A monk should not enter the king's
inner quarters. The commentator has mentioned three types of inner quarters:
*jirna antahpur* (old inner quarters), *nava antahpur* (new inner quarters), and
*kanya antahpur* (women's inner quarters). There were beautiful women in the
inner quarters. The king tried to make the inner quarters as rich and beautiful
as possible. Kautilya, in his *Arthashastra*, has laid down the rule that women
and eunuchs should be deployed to protect the inner quarters. No one except
relatives or servants was allowed to enter the inner quarters. The king guarded
the inner quarters with utmost care. It was natural for the king to have
suspicions if a monk entered the inner quarters, so monks were prohibited from
entering the inner quarters.  A monk should not enter the inner quarters
himself, but it is also forbidden to receive and accept food etc. from the woman
who is appointed at the gate of the inner quarters. It is forbidden to accept
food etc. from the king's gatekeepers, other attendants, soldiers, slaves,
maids, for horses and elephants, for travelers in the forest, for people
suffering from famine and drought, and for poor people.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 amAtya, purohita, zreSThI aura sArthavAha sahita jo rAjA rAjya kA upabhoga
karatA hai, usakA piNDa grahaNa nahIM karanA caahie| anya rAjAoM ke lie niyama
nahIM hai| yadi doSa kI saMbhAvanA hai to grahaNa nahIM karanA cAhie aura
nirdoSa hai to grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai|' rAjapiNDa kA tAtparya rAjakIya
bhojana se hai| rAjakIya bhojana sarasa, madhura va mAdaka hotA hai, jisake
sevana se rasalolupatA bar3hane kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai| aisA sarasa AhAra
sarvatra sulabha nahIM hotA  /  ataH rasalolupa banakara muni kahIM aneSaNIya
AhAra grahaNa na kare isIlie rAjapiNDa kA niSedha kiyA hai| eSaNAzuddhi hI
prastuta vidhAna kI AtmA hai| yadi koI isa vidhAna ko vismRta karake rAjapiNDa
ko grahaNa karatA hai yA rAjapiNDa kA upayoga karatA hai to zramaNa ko
cAtarmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|2 rAjapiNDa ke niSedha ke pIche anya tathya bhI
rahe hue haiN| jinakA ullekha nizIthabhASya aura caNi meM kiyA gayA hai|
rAjabhavana meM prAyaH senApati Adi kA AvAgamana rahatA hai| kabhI zIghratA Adi
ke kAraNa zramaNa ke coTa lagane kI aura pAtrAdi phUTane kI bhI vanA rahatI
hai|4 ve apazakana bhI samajha sakate haiM ataH rAjapiNDa ko anAcIrNa mAnA hai|"
bhagavAn mahAvIra aura RSabhadeva ke zramaNoM ke lie hI rAjapiNDa kA niSedha hai
para bAvIsa tIrthaMkaroM ke zramaNoM ke lie nhiiN|6 rAjapiNDa meM cAra prakAra
ke AhAra, vastra , pAtra, kambala, rajoharaNa-ye ATha vastueM parigaNita kI gaI
haiM aura pAThoM hI agrAhya mAnI haiN| nauvAM uddezaka nauveM uddezaka meM 25
sUtra haiN| jina para 2496-2605 gAthAoM meM bhASya likhA hai| isa uddezaka meM
bhI rAjapiNDa grahaNa karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| zramaNa ko rAjA ke
antaHpura meM praveza nahIM karanA cAhie  /  bhASyakAra ne tIna antaHpUroM kA
ullekha kiyA hai-jIrNa antaHpura, navaantaHpura aura kanyA-anta:pura  /
anta:pura meM eka se eka sundara striyA~ rahatI thiiN| rAjA anta:pura ko adhika
se adhika samRddha aura sundara banAne ke lie prayatnazIla rahate the| kauTilya
ne apane arthazAstra grantha meM vaddhA striyoM ko aura napusakoM ko antaHpura
kI rakSA ke lie tainAta rakheM aisA vidhAna kiyA hai  /  antaHpura meM sage-
sambandhI yA naukara-cAkara ke atirikta koI bhI vyakti praveza nahIM karatA
thaa| rAjA antaHpura kI surakSA atyadhika sAvadhAnI se karatA thaa| zramaNa ke
anta:pura meM jAne se rAjA ke antarmAnasa meM kuzaMkAe~ utpanna honA svAbhAvika
thA, ataH zramaNa ke lie antaHpura meM jAne kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| svayaM
zramaNa to anta:pura meM praveza na kare kintu anta:pura ke dvAra para jo mahilA
niyukta kI gaI ho usase bhI AhArAdi maMgavAnA aura grahaNa karanA niSiddha hai|
rAjA ke dvArapAla, anya anucara, sainika, dAsa, dAsI, ghor3oM va hAthI ke
nimitta, aTavI ke yAtriyoM ke lie, durbhikSa aura duSkAla pIr3ita vyaktiyoM ke
lie, garIba vyaktiyoM ke lie, 1. nizIthabhASya gA. 2487 cUNi 2. nishiith9|12 3.
(ka) kalpArthabodhinI, kalpa 4, pR. 2 (kha) kalpa samarthana 10 / 1
nizIthabhASya, gA. 2503-2510 5. dazavakAlika 3 / 3 6. (ka) kalpalatA TIkA (kha)
kalpadrumakalikA, pR. 2 kalpasamarthana, gA. 11, pa. 2 ( 49 )

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
For patients, those suffering from rain, and guests, it is forbidden to take
food prepared in royal kitchens, and doing so incurs the penance of Guru
Chaumasī. Danda-dhara, Danda-rakshaka, Dovārika, Varsha-dhara, Kancha-kipurusha,
and Mahāttara, etc., were appointed for the protection of the inner apartments.
It is also forbidden to take food for the king and queen. Do not take food from
a king who has gone hunting, etc. Do not go for alms where the king has gone to
eat. One should not even think of looking at the feet of the king's women
adorned with all ornaments. One should not search for food, etc., before the
royal assembly is dissolved. One should not study near the king's residence. In
ancient times, Champa, Mathura, Vārāṇasī, Śrāvastī, Sāketa, Kampila, Kośāmbī,
Mithilā, Hastināpura, and Rājagṛha were considered to be the ten capitals. Where
there were always royal festivals. Therefore, Śramaṇas have been forbidden to go
there repeatedly in the present Uddeshaka. If the prohibition is violated, there
is a provision for the penance of Guru Chaturmasī. Due to fear of expansion, we
are not introducing those capitals here. Where was their location in the past?
Where is their location in the present? In the present Uddeshaka, besides
Rājapinda, the penance for many incidents related to the king has also been
described. The reason for this is that along with the violation of the order,
many other harms can also occur. The tenth Uddeshaka. The tenth Uddeshaka has 41
sūtras. In some copies, 47 sūtras are also found. On which there are 2606-3275
gāthās of commentary. Ācārya is the disciplinarian of the Śramaṇa Sangha. He is
the center of infinite faith. In the absence of the Tīrthankara, the Ācārya
conducts the Tīrtha. Therefore, it is the supreme duty of every sādhaka to have
the utmost respect for him. Only respectful words should be used towards the
Ācārya. One who speaks angry words to the Ācārya, etc., speaks harsh words
without affection, and commits Āsātana, incurs the penance of Guru Chaumasī. In
Daśāśrutaskandha, 33 Āsātanas have been instructed. The commentary also mentions
exceptions to Āsātanas. Which are based on dravya, kṣetra, kāla, and bhāva
viveka. For example, if there are too many thorns on the way, and the disciple
walks ahead of the Guru to remove those thorns, then it is not Āsātana. In the
present Uddeshaka, it is forbidden to take food together with Ananta-kāya. It is
forbidden to take food with Ādhā-karmī. The title of Ādhā-karma is also
forbidden. Śramaṇas should not tell about profit and loss. One should not seduce
any Nirgrantha or Nirgranthī, nor should one abduct them. One should not seduce
a dīkṣārthī, a gahaṣṭha, or a gahaṣṭhinī. After knowing the reason for the
arrival of a Śramaṇa coming from outside, give him shelter. Because he may have
come from somewhere after fighting, etc., do not eat with someone who does not
pacify the quarrel or does not do penance. Eating with them and doing the
opposite of penance, eating in the doubtful situation of sunrise or sunset,
swallowing the udgāla that has come into the mouth at night, not serving the
glāna according to the rules, wandering in the Varsha-vāsa, not doing Paryuṣaṇa
on a fixed day, doing Paryuṣaṇa on an uncertain day, not doing Chauvihāra fast
on the day of Paryuṣaṇa, not doing Loca, taking clothes in Varsha-vāsa, there is
a description of Chaturmasik penance. In Daśāśrutaskandha, Uttarādhyayana,
Daśavakālika, and other Prāgamas, it is also forbidden to commit Āsātana. 1.
Daśāśrutaskandha Daśa 1 and 3 2. Uttarādhyayana A. 1 and 7 3. Daśavakālika in
Adhyayana 9 (50)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 rogiyoM ke lie, varSA se pIr3ita vyaktiyoM ke lie va mahamAnoM ke lie jo
bhojana rAjakuloM meM banatA hai use lene ke lie niSedha kiyA hai aura lene para
guru caumAsI kA prAyazcitta batAyA hai| daNDadhara, daNDarakSaka, dovArika,
varSadhara, kaMca kipuruSa aura mahattara prabhati vyakti antaHpUra kI surakSA
ke lie niyukta rahate the| rAjA-rAnI ko lie jAne kA bhI niSedha hai| zikAra Adi
ke lie gaye haye rAjA kA AhAra grahaNa na kreN| jahAM rAjA bhojana karane gaye
hoM vahAM bhikSA ke lie bhI na jaayeN| rAjA kI sarvAlaMkAra vibhUSita striyoM ke
pAMva taka bhI dekhane kA vicAra nahIM karanA caahie| rAjyasabhA ke visarjita
hone ke pUrva AhAra Adi ke lie gaveSaNA nahIM karanA caahie| rAjA ke
nivAsasthAna ke pAsa svAdhyAya nahIM karanA cAhie  /  prAcIna kAla meM campA,
mathurA, vArANasI, zrAvastI, sAketa, kampila, kozAmbI, mithilA, hastinApura aura
rAjagRha ye dasa rAjadhAniyA~ mAnI jAtI thiiN| jahAM para sadaiva rAjyotsava
hote rahate the| isalie zramaNoM ko bAra-bAra vahAM jAne ke liye prastuta
uddezaka meM niSedha kiyA gayA hai| niSedha kI avahelanA karane para guru
cAturmAsI prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai| vistArabhaya se hama una rAjadhAniyoM kA
paricaya yahAM nahIM de rahe haiN| pratIta kAla meM unakI avasthiti kahAM thI ?
vartamAna meM unakI avasthiti kahA~ hai, prastuta uddezaka meM rAjapiNDa ke
atirikta rAjA se sambandhita aneka prasaMgoM kA bhI prAyazcitta batAyA gayA hai|
isakA mala kAraNa yahI hai ki AjJA kI avahelanA ke sAtha hI anya aneka hAniyA~
bhI ho sakatI haiN| dasavAM uddezaka dasaveM uddezaka meM 41 sUtra haiM  /
kinhIM-kinhIM pratiyoM meM 47 sUtra bhI milate haiN| jina para 2606-3275 gAthAoM
kA bhASya hai  /  AcArya zramaNa saMgha kA anuzAstA hai| ananta AsthA kA kendra
hai| tIrthaMkara ke abhAva meM AcArya hI tIrtha kA saMcAlana karatA hai  /  ata:
usake prati atyadhika bahumAna rakhanA pratyeka sAdhaka kA parama kartavya vArya
ke prati bahamAna yakta zabdoM kA hI prayoga honA caahie| jo bhikSa AcArya Adi
ko roSa yukta vacana bolatA hai, sneha rahita rUkSa vacana bolatA hai, AsAtanA
karatA hai, use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai| dazAzrutaskandha meM 33
AsAtanAoM kA nirdeza kiyA gayA hai| bhASya meM AsAtanAoM ke apavAda kA bhI
ullekha hai  /  jo dravya kSetra kAla' bhAva viveka para AdhArita haiN| apavAda
meM jaise mArga meM atyadhika kAMTe biche hue hoM, una kAMToM ko alagathalaga
karane ke lie ziSya guru se bhI Age calatA hai to pAsAtanA nahIM hai| prastuta
uddezaka meM anantakAya saMyukta AhAra grahaNa karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai|
AdhAkarmI AhAra kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| prAdhAkarma upadhi kA bhI niSedha hai|
zramaNoM ko lAbhAlAbha nimitta nahIM batAnA caahie| kisI bhI nirgrantha
nirgranthI ko bahakAnA bhI nahIM cAhie aura na unakA apaharaNa karanA cAhie  /
na dIkSArthI, gahastha, gahasthinI ko bahakAnA caahie| bAhara se Ane vAle
zramaNa ko Ane kA kAraNa jAnane ke pazcAta hI Azraya de| kyoMki kahIM se vaha
lar3AI-jhagar3A Adi karake to nahIM AyA hai, kalaha ko upazAnta na karane vAle
yA prAyazcitta na karane vAle ke sAtha AhAra na kre| unake sAtha AhAra karane
para tathA prAyazcitta ke sambandha meM viparIta prarUpaNA karane para,
sUryodaya yA sUryAsta kI saMdigdha sthiti meM bhI pAhAra karane para, rAtri ke
samaya mukha meM Aye hue udgAla ko nigala jAne para, glAna kI vidhipUrvaka sevA
na karane para, varSAvAsa meM vihAra karane para, nizcita dina paryuSaNa na
karane para, anizcitta dina payurSaNa karane para, paryuSaNa ke dina cauvihAra
upavAsa na karane para, loca na karane para, varSAvAsa meM vastra grahaNa karane
para cAturmAsika prAyazcitta kA varNana hai| dazAzrutaskandha,' uttarAdhyayana,2
dazavakAlika aura anya prAgamoM meM bhI prAsAtanA karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA
hai| 1. dazAzrutaskandha dazA 1 va 3 2. uttarAdhyayana a. 1 va 7 3. dazavakAlika
meM adhyayana 9 ( 50 )

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The second Shruta Skandha of the Acharanga states that if food containing an
infinite body is found, it should be replaced. The Agam literature, including
the Acharanga Sutra and the Sutra Kritanga, states in many places that a Shraman
should not consume food that is contaminated with Adhakarma dosha. The statement
of the cause is also justified because there is a possibility of it being false.
These are two main characteristics of Mahavira's teachings. He emphasized the
avoidance of nighttime meals and also placed great emphasis on the practice of
celibacy. In the Vedic tradition, wives lived with their husbands in the
Vanaprastha Ashram, but Mahavira completely prohibited it. The root of this lies
in the noble practice of non-violence. Modern scientists have also mentioned the
harms caused by nighttime meals. We have elaborated on the Jain code of conduct
and its analysis in detail in the book "Jain Achar Siddhant Swaroop aur
Vishleshan". The Brihatkalpa prohibits wandering and wearing clothes during the
rainy season. Special emphasis is placed on serving sick Shramans, and there is
a provision for atonement if it is not done. Special provisions and atonement
have been presented in the context of the Paryushana Mahaparva. The four-month
atonement is mentioned for all of these. Eleventh Uddeshak The eleventh Uddeshak
has 91 sutras with a commentary of 3276-3975 gathas. This Uddeshak prohibits
keeping vessels made of iron, copper, glass, horn, leather, cloth, etc., and
eating from them. It prohibits criticizing religion and praising irreligion. It
prohibits performing bodily functions of a householder, scaring oneself or
others, forgetting oneself or others, showing oneself or others in a different
way. It prohibits praising the principles of the Dharma leader of the person in
front of them, including their conduct, etc. It prohibits going back and forth
between two opposing kingdoms, criticizing daytime meals, praising nighttime
meals. It prohibits consuming alcohol, meat, etc. It prohibits praising the
free-willed. It prohibits giving initiation to ineligible individuals. It
prohibits serving ineligible individuals. It prohibits an Achel or Sachal Sadhu
from staying with Achel or Sachal Sadhvis. It prohibits keeping powder, incense,
etc., at night, praising those who commit suicide, etc. Those who consume these
vices are subject to Guru Chaumasi atonement. The topics discussed in this
Uddeshak are also mentioned in other Agams. The learned Muni has pointed out
these places in his commentary. We are not writing about all these topics due to
fear of expansion. Twelfth Uddeshak The twelfth Uddeshak has 44 sutras and a
commentary of 3976-4225 gathas, elaborating on each sutra. The first sutra
states that a Shraman should not tie or untie living beings with a rope out of
compassion. This natural curiosity may arise: compassion is a characteristic of
Samyaktva, then why is it prohibited? The main reason is that he has to practice
restraint with detachment. If he practices restraint 1. 2. 3. 4. Acharanga 2,
111 Acharanga 2.1.9 Sutra Kritanga 1.1016-17 Jain Achar Siddhant Swaroop aur
Vishleshan, p. 866 ( 51 )

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AcArAMga ke dvitIya zrutaskandha meM anantakAya yukta AhAra A jAya to use
'paristhApana kara diyA jAya aisA kathana hai  /  Agama sAhitya meM AcArAMga
sUtrakRtAMga Adi meM aneka sthAnoM para AdhAkarma doSayukta AhAra zramaNa
grahaNa na kare, aisA vidhAna hai| nimitta kathana bhI isIlie vajyaM hai ki
usameM asatya lagane kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai| mahAvIra ke zAsana kI aneka
vizeSatAoM meM ye do mukhya vizeSatAe~ haiM  /  rAtribhojanavirati para unhoMne
atyadhika bala diyA aura brahmacarya kI sAdhanA para bhI unakA atyadhika bala
thaa| vaidika paramparA meM vAnaprasthAzrama Adi meM patniyAM sAtha rahatI thIM
para mahAvIra ne pUrNa niSedha kiyA thA  /  isakA mUla ahiMsA kI udAtta sAdhanA
meM rahA huA hai  /  Adhunika vaijJAnikoM ne bhI rAtribhojana se hone vAlI
hAniyoM kA ullekha kiyA hai| hamane vistAra ke sAtha jaina grAcAra siddhAnta
svarUpa aura vizleSaNa grantha meM prakAza DAlA hai| bRhatkalpa meM varSAvAsa
meM vihAra karane kA aura vastra grahaNa karane kA niSedha kiyA hai  /  glAna
zramaNoM kI sevA para vizeSa bala diyA gayA hai aura na karane para prAyazcitta
kA vidhAna hai| paryuSaNa mahAparva ke sambandha meM bhI vizeSa vidhAna aura
prAyazcitta prastuta uddezaka meM kiye gaye haiM  /  ina sabake lie caumAsI
prAyazcitta kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai  /  gyArahavAM udde zaka gyArahaveM udde
zaka meM 91 sUtra hai jina para 3276 3975 gAthAoM kA bhASya hai| prastuta udde
zaka meM loha, tAMbe, zIze, sIMga, carma, vastra prabhRti ke pAtra rakhane,
usameM AhAra karane kA niSedha hai  /  dharma kI nindA aura adharma kI prazaMsA
karane kA niSedha hai| gRhastha ke zarIra kA parikarma karanA svayaM ko yA anya
ko DarAnA, svayaM yA anya ko vismRta karanA, svayaM ko vA anya ko viparIta
dikhaanaa| jo vyakti sAmane hai usake dharma pramukha ke siddhAntoM kI AcArAdi
kI mithyA prazaMsA krnaa| do virodhI rAjyoM ke madhya punaH punaH gamanAgamana
karanA divasabhojana kI nindA, rAtribhojana kI prazaMsA  /  madya-mAMsa Adi ke
grahaNa kA niSedha | svacchandAcArI kI prazaMsA karane kA niSedha  /  ayogya
vyaktiyoM ko dIkSA dene kA niSedha  /  ayogya se sevA karAne kA niSedha  /
acela yA sacela sAdhu kA acela yA sacela sAdhviyoM ke sAtha rahanA niSiddha hai|
cUrNa namasa Adi ko rAtri meM rakhanA, AtmaghAta karane bAloM kI prazaMsA karanA
Adi doSoM ke sevana karane vAloM ko gurucaumAsI prAyazcita AtA hai| prastuta
uddezaka meM jina-jina viSayoM kI carcAeM huI haiM, anya AgamoM meM usakA
nirdeza hai| vivecaka munipravara ne apane vivecana meM yatratatra una sthaloM
kA nirdeza kiyA hai  /  vistArabhaya se una sabhI viSayoM para hama jAnakara
nahIM likha rahe haiM  /  bArahavAM uddezaka bArahaveM udde zaka meM 44 sUtra
hai aura 3976-4225 gAthAoM meM bhASya likhakara una-una sUtroM para vistAra se
vivecana kiyA gayA hai| pahale sUtra meM karuNA se utprerita hokara zramaNa na
trasa jIvoM ko rassI se bAMdhe aura na bandhanamukta kre| yaha sahaja jijJAsA
utpanna ho sakatI hai ki anukampA, karuNA yaha samyaktva kA lakSaNa hai phira
isakA niSedha kyoM ? usakA mUla kAraNa hai ki use nispRhabhAva se saMyamasAdhanA
karanI hai| yadi vaha saMyama sAdhanA 1. 2. 3. 4. AcArAMga 2, 111 AcArAMga 2 / 1
/ 9 sUtrakRtAMga 1 / 1016-17 jaina AcAra siddhAnta svarUpa aura vizleSaNa, pR.
866 ( 51 )

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He who forgets and does such activities will face obstacles in his practice.
Here, there is no atonement for compassion or mercy, but atonement for serving
householders and for activities against restraint. A Shraman who repeatedly
breaks the vow of non-acceptance and approves of those who do so, incurs the
minor Chaturmasik atonement. The commentary states that breaking the vow of non-
acceptance leads to many faults. It is forbidden to wear skin with hair. It is
forbidden to sit on a straw mat covered with a householder's cloth. It is
forbidden to have a Sadhvi's cloth sewn by a non-Jain or a householder. It is
forbidden to even slightly harm the beings of the five stationary categories,
such as earth-bodied beings. It is forbidden to climb a tree with awareness. It
is forbidden to eat from a householder's vessel. It is forbidden to wear a
householder's clothes and sleep on his bed. It is forbidden to observe the
beauty of a well, a pond, a reservoir, a lotus pond, etc. It is forbidden to
desire to see a beautiful village, town, or city. It is forbidden to participate
in horse fights, elephant fights, etc. It is forbidden to watch carpentry,
painting, plastering, dentistry, etc. It is forbidden to use food and water
taken in the first watch in the fourth watch. It is forbidden to carry food and
water beyond two kos. It is forbidden to apply cow dung or other smearing
substances at night or to keep them at night and apply them during the day. It
is forbidden to cross the large rivers Ganga, Yamuna, Sarayu, Airavati, and Mahi
more than two or three times a month. The minor Chaturmasik atonement is
mentioned for performing these forbidden activities. The prohibitions mentioned
in this Uddeshak are found in the Agamas such as Dasha-Shruta-Skandha,
Acharanga, Brihatkalpa, Dasha-Vaikalika, Sutra-Kritanga, etc. A Sadhak should
not engage in such activities that would tarnish his practice. Thirteenth
Uddeshak The thirteenth Uddeshak has 78 Sutras. There is an extensive commentary
on them, consisting of 4226-4472 Gathas. It is forbidden to sleep, sit, or study
on the earth with awareness, with oil, or with moisture, to sit on a threshold,
a bathing platform, a wall, a stone, etc., to teach crafts to a non-Jain or a
householder, etc., to use tricks, material things, questions, questions like
questions, causes, signs, etc., to guide a householder who has gone astray, to
reveal metal science or treasure, to look at one's face in a vessel filled with
water, a mirror, a gem, oil, honey, ghee, etc., to take medicine for vomiting,
purging, strength, etc., and for intelligence, to bow to those who are weak in
conduct, such as those with a side ailment, and to eat food after consuming the
faults of production, etc. A Sadhak who engages in such activities incurs the
minor Chaturmasik atonement. Some of the prohibitions discussed in the
thirteenth Uddeshak are also prohibited in the Acharanga, Sutra-Kritanga, Dasha-
Vaikalika, Uttaradhyayayana, etc. There is an extensive discussion on the faults
of production, etc., in Pindan-Niyukti. In short, a Sadhak should be aware every
moment. He should not engage in any faulty activity. Fourteenth Uddeshak The
fourteenth Uddeshak has 41 Sutras. Some copies also have 45 Sutras. There is an
extensive commentary on them, consisting of 4473-4689 Gathas. Here, it is
forbidden to buy a vessel, to borrow, to change a vessel, to take a vessel by
force, to take a vessel without the permission of the shareholder of the vessel,
to take a vessel that has been brought forward, to take a vessel without the
permission of the Acharya. (52)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ko vismRta kara isa prakAra kI pravRttiyAM karegA to usakI sAdhanA meM vighna
aayeNge| yahAM para karuNAbhAva yA anukampAbhAva kA prAyazcitta nahIM hai apitu
gRhasthoM kI sevA aura saMyama viruddha pravRtti kA prAyazcitta hai| jo zramaNa
punaH punaH pratyAkhyAna bhaMga karatA hai aura karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai use laghu cAturmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai| bhASya meM pratyAkhyAna bhaMga
karane se aneka doSa paidA hote haiN| loma yukta carma rakhane kA niSedha hai|
gahastha ke vastrAcchAdita tRNapITha Adi para baiThane kA niSedha hai| sAdhvI kI
cAdara anyatIthika yA kisI gRhastha se silavAne kA niSedha hai  /  pRthvIkAya
Adi pAMcoM sthAvaroM ke jIvoM kI kiJcit bhI virAdhanA karane kA niSedha hai|
sacitta vRkSa para car3hane kA niSedha hai| gRhastha ke pAtra meM bhojana karane
kA niSedha hai  /  gRhastha kA vastra pahananA aura usakI zaiyyA para sone kA
niSedha hai| vApI, sara, nirbhara, pUSkariNI Adi kA saundaryasthala nirIkSaNa
karane kA niSedha hai| sundara grAma, nagara, paTTana Adi ko dekhane kI abhilASA
rakhane kA niSedha hai  /  azvayuddha, hastiyuddha Adi meM sammilita hone kA
niSedha hai| kASThakarma, citrakarma, lepakarma, dantakarma Adi dekhane kA
niSedha hai| prathama prahara meM grahaNa kiyA huA AhAra-pAnI kA upayoga
caturtha prahara meM karane kA niSedha hai| do kosa ke Age AhAra-pAnI le jAne kA
niSedha hai| gobara yA anya lepya padArtha rAtri meM lagAnA yA rAtri meM
rakhakara dina meM lagAne kA niSedha hai| gaMgA, yamunA, sarayU, airAvatI aura
mahI nAma kI bar3I nadiyoM ko mahIne meM do yA tIna bAra pAra karane kA niSedha
hai  /  ina niSedha pravRttiyoM ko karane para laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta kA
ullekha hai| prastuta uddezaka meM jina bAtoM kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai unakA
niSedha dazAzrutaskandha AcArAMga bRhatkalpa dazavaikAlikA sUtrakRtAMga prabhati
AgamoM meM milatA hai| sAdhaka ko isa prakAra kI pravRttiyA~ nahIM karanI cAhie
jo usakI sAdhanA ko dhUmila karane vAlI hoN| terahavAM uddezaka terahaveM
uddezaka meM 78 sUtra haiN| jina para 4226-4472 gAthAoM kA vistRta bhASya hai  /
sacitta, sasnigdha, sarajaska Adi pRthvI para sone, baiThane va svAdhyAya karane
kA, dehalI, snAnapITha, bhitti, zilA Adi para baiThane kA, anyatIthika yA
gRhastha Adi ko zilpa Adi sikhAne kA, kautukakarma, bhUtikarma, prazna, praznAdi
prazna, nimitta, lakSaNa Adi ke prayoga karane kA, gRhastha ko mArgabhraSTa hone
para rAstA batAne kA, dhAtuvidyA yA nidhi batAne kA, pAnI se bhare hue pAtra,
darpaNa, maNi, tela, madhu, ghRta Adi meM muMha dekhane kA, vamana, virecana
tathA bala Adi ke lie va buddhi ke lie auSadha Adi sevana kA, pArzvastha Adi
zithilAcAriyoM ko vandana karane kA tathA utpAdana ke doSoM kA sevana kara AhAra
grahaNa karane kA niSedha hai, ityAdi pravRttiyA~ karane vAle sAdhaka ko
laghacaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| terahaveM uddezaka meM jina-jina niSedhoM kI
carcA kI hai unameM se kucha bAtoM para AcArAMga sUtrakRtAMga dazavakAlika
uttarAdhyayana Adi meM bhI niSedha hai| piNDaniyukti meM utpAdana doSa Adi para
vistAra se vivecana hai| sArAMza yahI hai ki sAdhaka' pratipala pratikSaNa
jAgarUka rahe  /  doSayukta koI bhI pravRtti na kre| caudahavAM uddezaka
caudahaveM uddezaka meM 41 sUtra haiN| kinhIM-kinhIM pratiyoM meM 45 sUtra bhI
milate haiM  /  jina para 4473-4689 gAthAoM kA vistRta bhASya hai| yahA~ para
pAtra ko kharIdane, udhAra lene, pAtra parivartana karane, chIna karake pAtra
lenaa| pAtra ke hissedAra kI AjJA liye binA pAtra lenaa| sAmane lAyA haA pAtra
lenaa| AcArya kI AjJA liye binA ( 52 )

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Giving extra utensils to someone else. Giving extra utensils to the disabled or
the able. Not giving extra utensils to the disabled and the unable. Not keeping
the usable utensils and keeping the unusable utensils.  It is forbidden to make
a new fragrant or malodorous utensil particularly attractive, to take out the
living being, seed, root, flower, leaf, etc. from the utensil while taking the
utensil from the householder, to request the utensil after leaving the council,
and to stay for a month and four months for the utensil, etc. There is a
provision for a small Chimaasi atonement for doing such activities.  In the
present Uddeshak, the subject of utensils has been discussed in detail from
various perspectives. In the second Dhutaskandha of the Acharang Sutra, the
Shramans have been forbidden to take Krit, Pramritya, Acchheya, Anishta and
Abhihit utensils and it has also been indicated that the utensil which is to be
used should be taken for travel and the utensils should not be made colorful and
the utensils should not be dried in such a place where there is a possibility of
the utensils falling.  Fifteenth Uddeshak The fifteenth Uddeshak has 154 Sutras.
There is a detailed commentary on them from 4690-5094. The first four Sutras
describe the small Chaturmasik atonement for eating grass, and the remaining
Sutras describe the small Chaturmasik atonement for eating mangoes, mango seeds,
mango leaves, etc. with awareness. After that, it is forbidden to get work done
from the householder, to defecate and urinate in unimaginable places, and to
give and take food, clothes, etc. from the neighboring Shraddha, etc. It is
forbidden to take care of the body from the point of view of adornment, to
polish and wash clothes, etc. Doing these activities is said to be a small
Chaumasik atonement.  The things discussed in the present Uddeshak are also
discussed in the second Shrutaskandha of Acharang. There too, it is forbidden to
eat mangoes and other fruits with awareness. It is forbidden to get the body
taken care of by the householder and it is also forbidden to defecate and
urinate in unimaginable places. In Uttaradhyayayana and Dasavekalik, it is
forbidden to act from the point of view of adornment. Adornment is compared to
poison.  Sixteenth Uddeshak The sixteenth Uddeshak has 50 Sutras on which there
is a detailed commentary of 5095-5903 verses. It is forbidden for the monk to
enter the bed of the Sagarik, etc., to eat or suck sugarcane, Ganderi, etc. with
awareness, to take food and drink from those who live in the forest, go to the
forest, travel in the forest, to call the unchaste chaste and the chaste
unchaste, and to take food and drink from the Tirthikas who quarrel. The
commentator has described the seven Nivs. It is forbidden to wander in the
countries of the Dasya, Anarya, Mlechchha and the inhabitants of the extreme
countries who, in anger, bite others with their own teeth. These countries were
non-Aryan countries. Twenty-five countries like Magadh, Kosambi, Bhruuna Kunala,
etc. have been considered Aryan countries. It is forbidden to take food, drink,
clothes, blankets, etc. from the disgusting clans and to study there. It is
forbidden to eat with other Tirthikas or householders. If the feet touch the
seat of the Acharya, Upadhyaya, etc., it is forbidden to leave without bowing. (
53 )

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kisI anya ko atirikta pAtra denA  /  pravikalAMga yA samartha ko atirikta pAtra
denA  /  vikalAMga va asamartha ko atirikta pAtra na denA  /  upayoga meM Ane
yogya pAtra ko na rakhanA aura upayoga meM na Ane yogya pAtra ko rakhanA  /  ,
navIna surabhigandha yA durabhigandha yukta pAtra ko vizeSa cittAkarSaka banAne
kA, gRhastha se pAtra grahaNa karate samaya usa pAtra meM se usa jIva, bIja,
kandamUla, puppa patra Adi nikAlakara lene kA pariSad se nikalakara pAtra kI
yAcanA karane kA tathA pAtra ke lie mAsakalpa aura cAturmAsa rahane kA niSedha
hai, ityAdi pravRttiyA~ karane para laghucImAsI prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai|
prastuta udde zaka meM vistAra ke sAtha pAtra ke sambandha meM vividha dRSTiyoM
se cintana kiyA gayA hai| AcArAGgasUtra ke dvitIya dhutaskandha meM zramaNoM ko
krIta, prAmRtya, Accheya, aniSTa aura abhihRta pAtra lene kA niSedha kiyA gayA
hai aura yaha bhI sUcana kiyA gayA hai jo pAtra upayoga meM Ave use bhramaNa
grahaNa kare aura pAtroM ko raMga-viraMge nahIM banAve tathA aise sthAna para
bhI pAtroM ko nahIM sukhAnA cAhie jahA~ para pAtra girane kI sambhAvanA ho  /
pandrahavAM uddezaka pandrahaveM uddezaka meM 154 sUtra haiN| jina para
4690-5094 kA vistRta bhASya hai  /  prathama cAra sUtroM meM sAmAnya zramaNoM kI
ghAsAtanA karane kA aura pATha sUtroM meM sacitta Amra AmrapezI prAmracoka Adi
khAne kA laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta batAyA hai| usake pazcAt gRhastha se
parikarma karavAne kA akalpanIya sthAnoM meM mala-mUtra paraThane kA aura
pArzvastha zrAdi ko AhAra, vastra Adi dene aura unase lene kA niSedha kiyA gayA
hai  /  vibhUSA kI dRSTi se zarIra kA parikarma karanA vastra Adi kA parimArjana
prakSAlana karanA niSiddha hai| ye pravRttiyAM karane para laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta batalAyA gayA hai  /  " prastuta udde zaka meM jina-jina bAtoM kI
carcA hai usakI carcA AcArAGga dvitIya zrutaskandha meM bhI AI hai  /  vahA~
para bhI sacitta Ama Adi phaloM ko khAne kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| gRhastha se
zarIra parikarma karavAne kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai aura akalpanIya sthAnoM para
mala-mUtra visarjana kA bhI niSedha kiyA gayA hai| uttarAdhyayana va
dazavekAlika meM vibhUSA kI dRSTi se pravRtti karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai|
vibhUSAvRtti ko tAlapuTaviSa se upamita kiyA gayA hai| " solahavAM uddezaka
solahaveM uddeza meM 50 sUtra haiM jina para 5095-5903 gAthAoM kA vistRta bhASya
hai| bhikSu ko sAgArika Adi kI zaiyyA meM praveza karane kA, sacitta Ikha,
gaNDerI Adi khAnA yA cUsane kA, araNya meM rahane vAle, vana meM jAne vAle,
aTavI kI yAtrA karane vAloM kA prazana-pAna lene asaMyamI ko saMyamI, saMyamI ko
asaMyamI kahane kA tathA kalaha karane vAle tIrthikoM se azana-pAna Adi grahaNa
karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| bhASyakAra ne saptanivoM kA varNana kiyA hai|
krodha meM prAkara jo apane hI dAMtoM se dUsaroM ko kATa lete hoM aise dasyu,
anArya, mleccha aura pratyanta dezavAsiyoM ke janapadoM meM vihAra karane kA
niSedha kiyA hai| ye deza anAyeM deza the  /  magadha, kozAmbI, bhrUNA kuNAlA
Adi paccIsa dezoM ko Arya deza mAnA gayA hai| jugupsita kuloM se azana, pAna,
vastra, kambala Adi grahaNa karane kA aura vahA~ para svAdhyAya Adi karane kA
bhI niSedha hai  /  anyatIrthika yA gRhasthoM ke sAtha bhojana grahaNa karane kA
niSedha hai  /  AcArya, upAdhyAya Adi ke zrAsana para paira laga jAne para
vinaya kiye binA cale ( 53 )

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The translation preserving the Jain terms is as follows:  It is prohibited to
possess more than the prescribed Pramana and Agama-prescribed limits. Defecation
and urination on living soil and other prohibited places is prohibited.  The
matters discussed and the actions prohibited in the Sixteenth Uddesa are also
discussed in the Pachanga Dvitiya Srutaskandha, Brihatkalpika, and
Dasasrutaskandha. The Agama literature has cautioned the sadhaka at various
places not to indulge in such tendencies that corrupt the life of self-
restraint.   The Seventeenth Uddesa has 155 sutras. In some copies, there are
151 sutras. There is a commentary of 590,459,996 gatha verses on them. Out of
curiosity, binding and releasing trembling living beings with ropes, etc. is
prohibited. Out of curiosity, making and wearing various types of garlands,
ornaments, and jewelry is prohibited. Various types of clothing are also
mentioned here. A Sramana should have a serious nature devoid of curiosity.
Curiosity also leads to worldly defamation. The prohibition includes: getting
household work done by Sramanas and Sramanis, taking food by opening sealed
containers, taking food placed on living soil, taking freshly prepared cold
water, and claiming one's physical characteristics to be worthy of the Acharya
position.  Playing various musical instruments, laughing, dancing, making
animal-like sounds, craving to listen to various musical instruments, and
attachment to sound perception - for these, the present Uddesa mentions the
Laghuchamasi Prayaschitta.  The prohibition of such tendencies contrary to the
practice of self-restraint is mentioned in the Acharanga Dvitiya Srutaskandha.
In every chapter, emphasis is placed on the strict observance of rules and
regulations for the self-restrained sadhaka.  The Eighteenth Uddesa has 73
sutras. In some copies, there are 74 sutras. There is a commentary of 5997-6027
gatha verses on them. From the first to the thirty-second sutra, various aspects
of boat travel have been contemplated. Although the Sramana is a complete
renouncer of the violence against mobile beings, yet there is also a provision
for boat travel in the Acharangasutra, Brihatkalpika, and Dasasrutaskandha. But
it should be remembered that this boat is only for the prescribed water route.
He uses it only for the reasons mentioned in the Agamas or as specified in the
Agamas. The commentator has discussed this in detail in the present text. The
Acharanga Dvitiya Srutaskandha also has rules and prohibitions regarding boat
travel. Sutras 33 to 73 mention the consumption of defects related to clothing.
These tendencies are said to be Laghuchaumasi Prayaschitta. The present Uddesa
discusses the two aspects of boat and clothing.  The Nineteenth Uddesa has 35
sutras. In some copies, there are 40 sutras. There is a commentary of 6028-6271
gatha verses on them. Applying defects for medicine, bringing more than the
prescribed three doses of a specific medicine, keeping it with you during the
Vihara, consuming defects related to the preparation of medicine, before the
evening, after the evening, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 jaanaa| pramANa aura Agamokta parimANa se adhika upadhi rakhane kA niSedha kiyA
gayA hai  /  sacitta bhUmi para aura anya virAdhanA vAle sthAnoM para mala-mUtra
visarjana karane kA niSedha hai| solahaveM uddezaka meM jina-jina bAtoM kI carcA
kI gaI hai aura jina-jina kAryoM kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai, usakI carcA pAcArAMga
dvitIya zrutaskandha, bRhatkalpa aura dazAzrutaskandha meM bhI hai| Agama-
sAhitya meM yatra-tatra sAdhaka ko sAvadhAna kiyA gayA hai ki vaha isa prakAra
kI pravatti na kare jo saMyamI jIvana ko vikRta bnaaye| satrahavAM uddezaka
satrahaveM uddezaka meM 155 sUtra haiN| kinhIM-kinhIM pratiyoM meM 151 sUtra
milate haiN| jina para 59045996 gAthAoM kA bhASya hai| kutUhala se trasa
prANiyoM ko rassI Adi se bAMdhane aura kholane kA niSedha hai| kutUhala se aneka
prakAra kI mAlAe~, vividha prakAra kI mAlAeM, kar3e, AbhUSaNa banAne rakhane kA
niSedha hai| vividha prakAra ke vastroM kA bhI isameM ullekha humA hai| zramaNa
ko kutUhalavRtti se rahita gambhIra svabhAva vAlA honA caahie| kutUhalavRtti se
lokApavAda bhI hotA hai| zramaNa aura zramaNiyoM kA gRhasthoM ke dvArA parikarma
karavAne kA, banda vartana Adi khulavAkara AhAra lene kA, sacitta pRthvI para
rakhe hae AhAra ko lene kA, tatkAla bane hue pracitta zItala jala lene kA aura
AcArya pada yogya mere zArIrika lakSaNa haiM, isa prakAra kahane kA niSedha kiyA
gayA hai| vividha vAdya bajAnA, haMsanA, nRtya karanA, pazuoM kI taraha AvAja
nikAlanA, vividha prakAra ke vAdyoM ko sunane ke lie lalakanA, zabdazravaNa ke
prati Asakti rakhanA isake lie prastuta uddezaka meM laghucImAsI prAyazcitta kA
ullekha hai| AcArAMga ke dvitIya zrutaskandha meM isa prakAra kI saMyamasAdhanA-
viruddha pravRtti karane kA niSedha hai| pratyeka adhyAya meM isI bAta para bala
diyA gayA hai| sarvatra saMyamI sAdhaka ke lie bahuta hI niSThA ke sAtha
niyamopaniyama ke pAlana para bala diyA gayA hai| aThArahavAM uddezaka
aThArahaveM uddezakA meM 73 sUtra haiN| kinhIM-kinhIM prati meM 74 sUtra bhI
haiN| jina para 5997-6027 gAthAnoM kA bhASya hai| eka se lekara battIsa sUtra
taka naukA vihAra ke sambandha meM vividha dRSTiyoM se cintana kiyA gayA hai|
yoM to zramaNa apkAya ke jIvoM kI virAdhanA kA pUrNa rUpa se tyAgI hotA hai
phira vaha naukAvihAra kaise kara sakatA hai ? para AcArAMgasUtra, bRhatkalpa
aura dazAzrutaskandha meM apavAda rUpa se naukAvihAra karane kA bhI vidhAna hai|
para yaha smaraNa rakhanA hogA ki vaha naukA paramita jalamArga ke lie hI hai|
Agama meM batAye hue yA AgamoM meM nirdiSTa kAraNoM se hI vaha usakA upayoga
karatA hai| prastuta grantha ke vivecana meM vivecanakAra ne usa para vistAra se
carcA kI hai| AcArAMga dvitIya zrutaskandha meM bhI naukAvihAra ke vidhi-niSedha
haiN| sUtra 33 se 73 taka vastra sambandhI doSoM ke sevana kA ullekha hai|
ityAdi pravRttiyoM kA laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| naukA aura vastra
ina do ke sambandha meM ho prastuta uddezaka ke carcA hai| unnIsavAM uddezaka
unnIsaveM uddezaka meM 35 sUtra haiN| kinhIM-kinhIM pratiyoM meM 40 sUtra bhI
milate haiN| jina para 60286271 gAthAnoM kA bhASya hai| auSadha ke lie krIta Adi
doSa lagAnA, viziSTa auSadha kI tIna mAtrA se adhika lAnA, use vihAra meM sAtha
rakhanA, auSadha ke parikarma sambandhI doSoM kA sevana karanA, pUrva sandhyA,
pazcima sandhyA, ( 54 )

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is forbidden to study the scriptures during the time of midday, afternoon,
and midnight, as well as on the four great festivals and the four pratipada days
that follow them. The Kalikasutra describes the four praharas for studying the
scriptures. Studying the scriptures during the thirty-two types of asvadhyaya
times. Studying the scriptures during the time of physical asvadhyaya. Not
reciting the sutras in the order of pragmokt, starting the recitation of nishith
etc. chedasutras without completing the recitation of Acharang etc., giving
recitation to the ineligible and not giving recitation to the eligible, showing
partiality in giving recitation to equally worthy individuals, taking recitation
oneself without taking recitation from the acharya, upadhyaya, giving recitation
to other mithyatvis, other tethis, pavasthadi etc. is prohibited. The first
seven sutras of the present uddeśaka describe the relationship with medicine
etc. After that, from the eighth sutra to the thirty-fifth sutra, there is a
description of the relationship with the study and teaching of the scriptures.
The Stananga, Avashyakasutra, Vyavharasutra and Bahutkalpa also shed light on
these matters in various places. The given recitation is clearly prohibited in
this. Thus, there are only two topics discussed in the nineteenth uddeśaka.
Twentieth uddeśaka The twentieth uddeśaka has 51 sutras. There are 6272-6703
gathas in the commentary on them. There are provisions for various types of
atonement for deceitful and sincere criticism. The practitioner who criticizes
sincerely gets as much atonement as the practitioner who criticizes deceitfully
gets one month more atonement. In the reign of Bhagwan Mahavira, there is only a
provision for atonement for six months. These sutras are similar to the first
twenty sutras of the Vyavharasutra. It describes the atonement by telling
various bhangs. The criticism of the places of atonement, the giving of
atonement and the establishment of grace and disgrace during the time of its
carrying are clearly described. It should be remembered that according to the
nishith appointment and commentary, the sutra number of nishith is 2022. But in
the present edition, the total sutra number is 1401. The sutra number is not the
same in all the available copies of the nishith sutra. The difference in the
number of 621 sutras in the appointment and commentary is investigable for
researchers. Offense and Atonement Law - From a Buddhist Perspective There are
two streams of Shraman culture - one is Jain culture and the other is Buddhist
culture. We have already mentioned in the above lines that in the Jain method of
sadhana, if there are any lapses, there is a provision for atonement etc. in the
nishith etc. chedasutras to get rid of that lapse. First, a long list of
possible lapses is given and then atonement is provided for the purification of
those lapses. The place of nishith in the Jain tradition is the same as the
place of Vinayapitaka in the Buddhist tradition. The 'Vinayapitaka' gives the
constitution of the Buddhist Sangha. Conduct has a glorious place in the life of
a bhikkhu. The Tathagata Buddha preached the rules to be followed by the
bhikkhus and bhikkhunis from time to time. The present context also describes
offenses, faults and atonements. This book has its own importance in guiding
society and life. The Vinayapitaka is divided into three parts from the point of
view of Vinayavastu - (1) Suttabhanga, (2) Khandaka, (3) Parivara. ( 55 )

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aparAhna madhyAhna kA samaya aura ardharAtri ke samaya cAra mahAmahotsava aura
usake pazcAt cAra pratipadA ke dina svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha hai  /
kAlikasUtra kI cAra praharoM meM svAdhyAya karane kA varNana hai| battIsa
prakAra ke asvAdhyAya ke samaya svAdhyAya karanA  /  zArIrika asvAdhyAya ke
samaya svAdhyAya karanA  /  prAgamokta krama se sUtroM kI vAcanA na denA,
AcArAMga Adi kI vAcanA pUrNa kiye binA hI nizItha Adi chedasatroM kI vAcanA
prArambha karanA apAtra ko vAcanA denA pAtra ko vAcanA nahIM denA samAna yogya
vyaktiyoM ko vAcanA dene meM pakSapAta karanA prAcArya, upAdhyAya dvArA vAcanA
lie binA hI svayaM vAcanA grahaNa karanA anya mithyAtviyoM ko anyatIthiyoM ko
pAvasthAdi ko vAcanA dene Adi kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| prastuta uddezaka ke
prathama sAta sUtroM meM auSadha Adi ke sambandha meM batAyA hai| usake pazcAt
AThaveM sUtra se paitIsaveM sUtra taka svAdhyAya adhyayana aura adhyApana ke
sambandha meM varNana hai| sthAnAMga, AvazyakasUtra, vyavahArasUtra aura
bahatkalpa meM bhI ina bAtoM ke sambandha meM vividha sthAnoM para prakAza DAlA
gayA hai| pradatta vAcanA kA isameM spaSTa rUpa se niSedha kiyA gayA hai| isa
prakAra unnIsaveM uddezaka meM kevala do hI viSayoM kI carcA hai| bIsavAM
uddezaka bIsave uddezaka meM 51 sUtra haiN| jina para 6272-6703 gAthAoM meM
bhASya hai| kapaTayukta aura niSkapaTa AlocanA ke lie vividha prakAra ke
prAyazcittoM kA vidhAna hai| jo sAdhaka niSkapaTa AlocanA karatA hai usa sAdhaka
ko jitanA prAyazcitta AtA hai usase kapaTayukta AlocanA karane vAle ko eka mAsa
adhika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  bhagavAn mahAvIra ke zAsana meM utkRSTa chaha
mAsa ke prAyazcitta kA hI vidhAna hai| ina sUtroM meM prathama
bIsasUtravyavahArasUtra se milate-julate haiN| isameM vividha bhaMga batAkara
prAyazcitta kA nirUpaNa kiyA hai  /  prAyazcitta sthAnoM kI AlocanA prAyazcitta
dene para aura usake vahana kAla meM sAnugraha niranugraha sthApita aura
prasthApita kA spaSTa nirUpaNa kiyA gayA hai| yaha smaraNa rakhanA hogA ki
nizItha niyukti aura bhASya ke anusAra nizItha kI sUtra saMkhyA 2022 hai  /
para prastuta saMskaraNa meM sampUrNa sUtra saMkhyA 1401 hai| nizIthasUtra kI
jitanI bhI pratiyAM upalabdha hotI haiM unameM sUtra saMkhyA eka sadRza nahIM
hai  /  621 sUtroM kA niyukti aura bhASya kI prati meM jo antara hai, vaha
zodhArthiyoM ke lie anveSaNIya hai| aparAdha va prAyazcitta vidhAna-bauddhadRSTi
se zramaNasaMskRti kI do dhArAe~ haiM-eka jainasaMskRti aura dUsarI
bauddhasaMskRti  /  hama uparyukta paMktiyoM meM yaha batA cuke haiM ki jaina
sAdhanApaddhati meM skhalanAeM hone para usa skhalanA se mukta hone ke lie
nizItha Adi chedasUtroM meM prAyazcitta Adi kA nirUpaNa hai| sarvaprathama jina
skhalanAoM kI sambhAvanA hai unakI eka lambI sUcI dI gaI hai aura phira una
skhalanAyoM kI zuddhi hetu prAyazcitta kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| jaina paramparA
meM jo sthAna nizItha kA hai vaisA hI sthAna bauddhaparamparA meM vinayapiTaka
kA hai| vinayapiTaka' meM bauddha bhikSusaMgha kA saMvidhAna diyA gayA hai|
bhikSa jIvana meM AcAra kA gauravapUrNa sthAna hai| tathAgata buddha ne samaya-
samaya para bhikSu aura bhikSuNiyoM ke pAlana yogya niyamoM kA upadeza diyaa|
prastuta sandarbha meM aparAdhoM, doSoM aura prAyazcittoM kA bhI varNana hai|
samAja aura jIvana kA digdarzana karane hetu prastuta grantha kA apanA mahattva
hai| vinaya piTaka meM vinayavastu kI dRSTi se vaha tIna vibhAgoM meM vibhakta
hai-(1) suttavibhaMga, (2) khandhaka, (3) parivAra  /  ( 55 )

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Suttavibhanga describes the faults and violations of rules that monks were
expected to remember on the new and full moon days of each month. This is also
known as the Prati-moksha. From the perspective of monks and nuns, there are two
divisions of Prati-moksha, describing the violations of rules by monks and nuns.
When the recitation of Prati-moksha begins, the monks and nuns present in the
assembly stand up and confess to the offenses mentioned in the text. The purpose
of this confession is to prevent the repetition of such offenses in the future.
In the Majjhima Nikaya, the Tathagata Buddha clearly stated that Prati-moksha is
the beginning, the mouth, of virtuous deeds. Commenting on the word Prati-
moksha, an Acharya wrote that it protects those who uphold its rules, freeing
them from suffering, misery, and other evils.  The Khandhaka is also divided
into two parts: the Mahavagga and the Cullavagga. The Mahavagga describes the
nature of the monastic life of a monk and the rules he must follow. While the
Suttavibhanga primarily uses a negative style, the Mahavagga employs an
affirmative style. It elaborates on the procedures and rules for Upasampada,
Varshavas, Prati-moksha (Pati-mokkha), Pravarana, Chivarrangana, etc.  The
Cullavagga discusses daily conduct, what is appropriate and inappropriate, how
to walk, how to speak, etc. It also includes a collection of significant events
from Buddhist history.  The beginning of the Vinaya Pitaka provides an index of
the topics discussed.  The Tathagata Buddha instructed his chief disciple Ananda
to forgive minor mistakes. However, Ananda forgot to ask the Buddha what
constituted minor mistakes. After the Tathagata Buddha's Parinirvana, to prevent
the disintegration of the Sangha and preserve the sanctity of the Dharma Sangha,
strict rules were established during the First Buddhist Council. The primary
objective was to keep monks and nuns away from evil deeds. There were two types
of punishments in the Buddhist Sangha: severe and lenient. Severe punishments
included Parajika and other punishments like Sanghadisesa. These were known by
various names like Duththalapaatti, Garukapaatti, Adesanagamini Aapatti,
Thallavajja Aapatti, and Anavasesa Aapatti.  Lenient punishments were relatively
milder. They were known as Adullapaatti, Lahukapaatti, Athallavajja Aapatti,
Savasesa Aapatti, Desanagamini Aapatti, etc.  It is important to note that in
the Jain tradition, there are different forms of atonement for monks and nuns,
known as Niggantha or Nigganthini. Similarly, the Buddhist tradition also has
separate provisions for both. In the Buddhist Sangha, there are two divisions:
Bhikkhupati-mokkha and Bhikkhuni-pati-mokkha. The Bhikkhupati-mokkha has a
larger number of rules. Currently, due to the unavailability of texts related to
Bhikkhupati-mokkha, we are discussing this topic based on Bhikkhuni-pati-mokkha.
1. Pati-mokkhaṃ ti ādimetam mukhametaṃ pāmu khametaṃ kusalanāṃ dhammānaṃ tena
vuccati pati-mokkhaṃ ti. - Gopaka Moggallanasutta Majjhima Nikaya 3.118 (56)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 suttavibhaMga meM doSoM kA nirUpaNa hai| una niyamoM ke ullaMghana kA bhI
ullekha hai jinheM bhikSu pratyeka mahIne kI amAvasyA aura pUrNimA ke dina
smaraNa karatA thaa| ise dUsare zabda meM prAtimokSa bhI kahA jAtA hai| bhikSu
aura bhikSuNI kI dRSTi se prAtimokSa ke do vibhAga haiN| inameM bhikSu aura
bhikSuNI ke dvArA niyamollaMghana kA varNana hai| jaba prAtimokSa kA pATha
prArambha hotA hai taba unameM jina-jina aparAdhoM kA varNana AtA hai, una
aparAdhoM meM se sabhA meM upasthita bhikSu aura bhikSuNI ne jo-jo aparAdha kiye
haiM, ve bhikSu aura bhikSuNI apane sthAna se khar3e hokara una aparAdhoM ko
svIkAra karate haiN| aparAdha svIkAra karane ke pIche yahI uddezya rahA huA hai
ki bhaviSya meM vaha puna: isa prakAra ke aparAdha kI punarAvRtti nahIM kregaa|
majhimanikAya meM tathAgata buddha ne spaSTa zabdoM meM kahA ki prAtimokSa
kuzaladharmoM kA Adi hai arthAt mukha hai|' prAtimokSa zabda para TIkA karate
hue eka AcArya ne likhA hai ki jo usa prAtimokSa kI rakSA karatA hai, usake
niyamoM kA paripAlana karatA hai, vaha (prAtimokSa) use apAya asadgati Adi
duHkhoM se mukta karatA hai ata: vaha prAtimokSa hai| khandhaka bhI do bhAgoM
meM vibhakta hai ? eka mahAvagga aura dUsarA cullavagga  /  bhikSu kA saMghIya
jIvana kisa prakAra kA honA cAhie, use kina-kina niyamoM kA pAlana karanA cAhie,
yaha mahAvagga meM varNana hai| suttavibhaMga meM mukhya rUpa se niSedhAtmaka
zailI hai to mahAvagga meM vidheyAtmaka zailI hai  /  upasampadA, varSAvAsa,
prAtimokSa (pAtimokkhaM), pravAraNA, civararaMganA Adi vidhi krama aura niyamoM
kA vistAra se varNana hai| cullavagga meM daunandina arthAt pratidina kyA karane
yogya hai ? kyA karane yogya nahIM hai ? kisa prakAra calanA, kisa prakAra
bolanA Adi kA vivecana hai| isake atirikta bauddha itihAsa kI aneka
mahattvapUrNa ghaTanAoM kA bhI saMkalana hai| prArambha meM vinayapiTaka meM
varNita viSayoM kI anukramaNikA dI gaI hai| tathAgata buddha ne apane pradhAna
ziSya Ananda ko kahA thA ki choTI-choTI galatiyoM ko kSamA kara diyA jAya para
prAnanda buddha se yaha pUchanA bhUla gaye ki choTI-choTI galatiyAM kauna-sI
haiM ? tathAgata buddha ke nirvANa ke pazcAta saMgha vicchinna na ho jAya,
dharmasaMgha kI maryAdA ko akSuNNa rakhane kI dRSTi se prathama bauddhasaMgati
meM kaThora niyamoM kA gaThana kiyA gayA  /  isakA mUla uddezya bhikSu-bhikSuNI
bure kAryoM se dUra raheMge  /  bauddhasaMgha meM do prakAra ke daNDa thekaThora
daNDa aura narama daNDa  /  kaThora daNDa meM pArAjika evaM saMghAdi zeSa daNDa
Ate the| yaha duThThalApatti, garukApatti, adesanAgAminI Apatti, thallavajjA
Apatti, anavasesApatti vividha nAmoM se jAnA aura pahacAnA jAtA hai| narama
daNDa, isameM pUrvApekSayA narama daNDa diyA jAtA hai| ise adu?llApatti,
lahukApatti, athallavajjA Apatti, sAvasesApatti, desanAgAminI Apatti Adi nAmoM
se jAnate-pahacAnate haiM yahA~ yaha eka vizeSa rUpa se bAta smaraNa meM rakhanI
hogI ki jaina paramparA meM hara sthAna para bhikSu aura bhikSaNI niggantha yA
nigganthinI ke lie vibhinna prAyazcittoM kA vidhAna hai aura isI prakAra bauddha
paramparA meM bhI donoM ke lie alaga-alaga vidhAna hai  /  bauddha saMgha meM
bhikkhapAti mokkha aura bhikkhunIpAti mokkha ye do vibhAga haiN| bhikkhupAti
mokkha ke niyamoM kI saMkhyA adhika hai| vartamAna meM hamAre sAmane bhikkhapAti
mokkha ke sambandha meM grantha upalabdha na hone se bhikkhanIpAti mokkha ke
AdhAra se hI yahAM carcA kara rahe haiN| 1. pAtimokkhaM ti AdimetaM mukhametaM
pAmukhametaM kusalAnaM dhammAnaM tena vuccati pAtimokkhaM ti  /  -gopaka
moggalAnasUtta maJjhimanikAya 3 / 118 ( 56 )

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Bhikkhu and Bhikkhunis are punished for offenses known as Apatti. According to
the Bhikkhuni Patimokkha, there are five types of Apatti: (1) Parajika, (2)
Sanghadisesa, (3) Nissaggiya Pacittiya, (4) Pacittiya, and (5) Patidesaniya.
Additionally, there are three Apattis: (1) Thullaccaya, (2) Dukkata, and (3)
Dubbhasita.  Parajika is the most serious offense. The offender was expelled
from the Sangha, and was not allowed to re-enter. This offender was compared to
a leaf that has fallen off a tree, severing its connection. The Parajika
offender was considered to have fallen from the path of the true Dhamma. There
are eight types of Parajika offenses: (1) sexual intercourse, (2) theft, (3)
murder, searching for a weapon, or praising death, (4) claiming supernatural
powers without possessing them, (5) a Bhikkhuni touching the private parts of a
male with lustful intent, (6) knowing about a Parajika offender but not
restraining them or informing the Sangha, (7) following someone who has been
expelled by the Sangha, despite being warned three times, and (8) a Bhikkhuni
holding the hand of a male with lustful intent and going with him as per his
signals.  The most serious Parajika offense is sexual intercourse, as it cannot
occur without attachment. Therefore, the Sangha remained vigilant.  The
Sanghadisesa offense is similar to Parajika, primarily aimed at protecting
celibacy. It also includes not causing a schism in the Sangha, not speaking ill
words, not criticizing the Sangha, not mocking each other, and not revealing
each other's secret offenses. The offender of Sanghadisesa was given the Manatta
punishment. The offender had to promptly inform the Sangha, and if they did,
they received a six-night Manatta punishment. If they concealed the offense,
they were given the Parivasa (probation) punishment, for as many days as they
had concealed it. After Parivasa, they had to undergo a six-night Manatta
penance. Such offenders were required to remain outside the Sangha and were
deprived of certain privileges during the penance period.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhikSu bhikSuNiyoM ko jisa aparAdha ke kAraNa daNDa diyA jAtA hai vaha Apatti
ke nAma se vizruta hai| bhikSuNIpAtimokSa ke anusAra pA~ca prakAra kI ApattiyAM
haiM - ( 1 ) pArAjika, (2) saMghAdidesa, (3) nissaggiya pAvittiya (4) pAcittiya
(5) pATidesanIya inake atirikta tIna prApatiyoM kA varNana aura milatA hai| (1)
ghullaccaya, (2) dukkaTa, (3) dubbhAsita  /   /  3 pArAjika yaha sabase kaThora
aparAdha hai  /  prastuta aparAdha karane vAle ko saMgha se bahiSkRta kara diyA
jAtA thaa| saMgha meM praveza karane kA use punaH adhikAra nahIM thA jo
saddharma ke mArga se cyuta ho gayA hai usa aparAdhI kI | tulanA usa vRkSa ke
mujhavi huye patte se kI gaI hai jisakA sambandha vRkSa se kaTa gayA ho|
pArAjika kA aparAdhI dharma jJAna se yuta mAnA jAtA thaa| pArAjika ATha prakAra
ke haiM- (1) maithuna sevana karanA (2) corI karanA (3) mAnava kI hatyA karanA,
zastra kI anveSaNA karanA, mRtyu kI prazaMsA karanA (4) divya zakti prApta na
hone para bhI divya zakti mujhe prApta hai isa prakAra dAvA karanA (5) kAmAsakta
hokara bhikSuNI kA kAmuka puruSa ke jAnU bhAga ke Upara aura kaTibhAga se nicale
bhAga kA sparza karanA ( 6 ) pArAjika doSa vAle ko jAnate hue bhI na svayaM use
rokanA aura na gaNa ko sUcita karanA (7) jo samaya saMgha ke dvArA niSkAsita
dharma vinaya aura buddha ke upadeza para jo zraddhA rahita hai usakA anugamana
karanA, tIna bAra manA karane para bhI nahIM mAnanA (8) kAmAsakta hokara
bhikSuNI kA kAmuka puruSa kA hAtha pakar3anA aura usake saMketa ke anusAra
sthAna para jAnA  /  isI prakAra bhikSuNI yA mahilA kA hAtha pakar3anA aura
usake saMketAnusAra kArya karanA  /  ina pATha pArAjika meM gambhIratama
aparAdha maithuna kA hai| binA rAgabhAva ke maithuna nahIM ho sktaa| isa lie
satata saMgha sAvadhAna rahatA thA  /  pArAjika aparAdha ke sadRza saMdhAdidesa
aparAdha bhI hai| isameM bhI mukhya rUpa se brahmacarya kI surakSA ke lie hI
vizeSa sAvadhAnI hetu nirdeza diyA gayA hai| sAtha hI saMghabheda na karanA,
durvacana na bolanA, saMgha kI nindA na karanA, eka dUsare kA upahAsa nahIM
karanA, eka dUsare ke aparAdha ko jo gopanIya haiM unheM prakaTa na karanA  /
saMghAdidesa ke aparAdhI ko mAnata nAmaka daNDa diyA jAtA thA  /  saMghAdidesa
aparAdha karane para bhikSu ko zIghra hI saMgha ko sUcita karatA hotA thaa| jo
zIghra sUcita karatA thA use chaha rAta kA mAnata daNDa diyA jAtA thaa| aura jo
aparAdha ko chipAtA thA usake lie parivAsa kA daNDa arthAt niSkAsita kA vidhAna
thaa| jitane dina chipAtA utane dina use parivAsa kA daNDa diyA jAtA thaa|
parivAsa ke pazcAt use punaH chaha rAta kA mAnata prAyazcita karanA par3atA thA
/  isa prakAra ke aparAdhI bhikSu ko saMgha se bAhara rahane kA vidhAna thA aura
prAyazcitta kAla taka use anya adhikAroM se vaJcita kara diyA jAtA thA  /  jo
bhikSu parivAsa daNDa kA prAyazcitta kara rahA ho usake lie kucha vizeSa niyama
the  /  vaha upasampadA aura nissaya pradAna nahIM kara sakatA thA  /
bhikSuNiyoM ko upadeza bhI nahIM de sakatA thA  /  vaha bhikSuoM ke sAtha bhI 1.
2. 4. samantapAsAdikA bhAga tRtIya pR. 145 pAcittiya pAli pR. 287, 291
"pArAjiketi pAra nAmocyate dharmajJAnam  /  tatojInA ojInA saMjInA parihINA
tenAha pArAjiketi  /  " - bhikSuNI vinaya 123 cullavagga pATTi pR. 400 ( 57 )

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He could not stay. He could not stop the Uposatha and Pravarana, nor could he
blame anyone or punish anyone. There was no provision for the punishment of
Parivasa for the Bhikshuni. The inscriptions of Ashoka in the third century BC
describe both the Bhikshu and the Bhikshuni being sent to the Anavasasthan for
breaking the Sangha. According to Buddhaghosa, Chetiyagha (cremation ground),
Bodhidhara (Bodhigriha), Sammajjanivattak (bathing house), Daru-Prattak (wood
making place), Paniyamal (veranda), Vachhakutti (toilet) and Dvarakottak (door
chamber) were Anavasasthan. Dr. Arun Pratap Singh believes that there was a
provision for the punishment of Parivasa for the Bhikshunis in the Buddhist
Sangha. This is clear from the inscriptions of Emperor Ashoka. But later the
Sangha must have seen that staying in the Anavasasthan would create a problem in
protecting the Shila of the Bhikshunis. Therefore, the provision must have been
changed. The Theravadinikaya mentions 166 Pacittiya (penance) rules for the
Bhikshunis, while the Mahasanghikanikaya mentions 949 Pacittiya Dharma. There it
is called pure Pacittik Dharma. The Pacittiya rules are almost the same in both.
Some of these rules are related to misdeeds. Penance was given for having bad
feelings in the mind or for doing bad deeds. Some rules were for giving penance
for speaking harsh words to Buddhism and the Sangha or any other person. Some
rules were for giving penance for sexual offenses. Penance was given for
committing offenses related to handwork, applying oil, ghee etc. to the secret
organ and artificial intercourse. Some rules were for giving penance for
offenses related to violence. Some rules were related to killing, beating and
torturing, taunting, suicide and weapons etc. Some rules were for giving penance
for offenses related to theft. Some rules were for giving penance for offenses
related to the Sangha. To have relations with a person expelled from the Sangha.
Not following the Sangha's code of conduct. Many rules are related to offenses
related to food. Eating at night. Consumption of ghee, oil, honey, meat, fish,
butter, garlic by a healthy Bhikshuni. Roasting raw grains and eating them.
Feeding a householder or a wanderer with one's own hand. Eating at the wrong
time, wandering around the houses of householders for delicious food. Some rules
are related to clothes. Keeping clothes bigger or smaller than the measure.
Spinning yarn etc. is prohibited and some rules are related to self-study.
Learning mantras and other knowledge is prohibited. He has to accept the essence
of Dharma only, not other useless things. In short, whether it is the Jain
tradition, the Buddhist tradition or the Vedic tradition, all have considered
sexual intercourse, theft and violence as the most serious crimes. Both the Jain
and Buddhist traditions have given great importance to the Sangha. 1.
Chullavagga Patti p. 67-81 2. A Chun Kho Bhiku Wa Bhikhni Wa Sangha Bhakhti Se
Prodatani Dusani Sanan Dhapathiya Anavasasi Avasasiye. 3. Corpus Inscriptionum
Indicarum Vol. I. P. 161. 4. Samantapasadhika Part Third p. 1244 ( 58 )

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 nahIM raha sakatA thaa| uposatha aura pravAraNA ko roka nahIM sakatA thA aura
na vaha kisI para doSa lagA sakatA thA aura na kisI ko daNDa bhI de sakatA
thaa|' bhikSaNI ke lie parivAsa daNDa kA vidhAna nahIM thaa| IsA pUrva tRtIya
zatAbdI ke azoka ke abhilekhoM meM saMghabheda karane para bhikSu aura bhikSuNI
donoM ko AnAvAsasthAna meM preSita kara dene kA varNana hai| buddhaghoSa ke
mantavyAnusAra cetiyaghara (zmazAna-sthala), bodhidhara (bodhigRha),
sammajjanIaTTaka (snAnagRha). dArU-praTTaka (lakar3I banAne kA sthAna),
pAnIyamAla (chajjA), vacchakUTI (zaucAlaya) tathA dvArakoTTaka (dvArakoSThaka)
ye anAvAsasthAna thaa| DaoN. aruNapratApasiMha kI yaha kalpanA hai ki
bauddhasaMgha meM pahale bhikSuNiyoM ke lie bhI parivAsa daNDa kA vidhAna thA  /
yaha samrATa azoka ke abhilekhoM se spaSTa hotA hai| para bAda meM saMgha ne
dekhA hogA anAvAsa sthAna meM rahane se bhikSaNiyoM kI zIlarakSA kI samasyA
upasthita hogii| isalie usa vidhAna meM parivartana kiyA gayA ho|
theravAdInikAya meM bhikSuNiyoM ke lie 166 pAcittiya (prAyazcitta) niyama batAye
gaye haiM, to mahAsAMdhikanikAya meM pAcittiya dharma kI saMkhyA 949 hai  /
vahA~ para use zuddha pAcattika dharma kahA gayA hai| donoM meM hI pAcittaya
niyama prAyaH samAna haiN| ina niyamoM meM kucha niyama duSkRtya se sambandhita
haiM  /  antarmAnasa meM burI bhAvanA pAne para yA bure kArya karane para
prAyazcitta diyA jAtA thaa| kucha niyama buddha dharma aura saMgha yA anya kisI
bhI vyakti ko kaTuvacana kahane para prAyazcitta dene ke the  /  kucha niyama
maithuna sambandhI aparAdha ke lie prAyazcitta dene ke the  /  hastakarma
karanA, guptendriya ko tela ghRta Adi lagAkara saMcAlita karanA, kRtrima
maithuna Adi se sambandhita aparAdha karane para prAyazcitta diye jAte the|
kucha niyama hiMsA sambandhI aparAdhoM ke prAyazcitta dene ke the| kucha niyama
kisI ko mAranA, pITanA tathA tAr3anA, tarjanA, AtmaghAta karanA aura zastra Adi
se sambandhita the  /  kucha niyama corI sambandhI aparAdha ke liye prAyazcitta
dene ke the  /  kucha niyama saMgha saMbaMdhita aparAdhoM ke prAyazcitta dene ke
the  /  saMgha se niSkAsita vyakti ke sAtha sambandha karanA  /  saMghIya
AcArasaMhitA kA pAlana na karatA  /  kitane hI niyama AhAra sambandhI aparAdha
se sambandhita haiN| rAtribhojana karanA  /  svastha bhikSaNI kA ghata, tela,
madhu, mAMsa, machalI, makkhana lahasuna kA sevana karanA  /  kacce anAja ko
bhUnakara khAnA  /  gahastha yA parivrAjaka ko apane hAtha se khilaanaa| vikAla
meM bhojana karanA, svAdiSTa bhojana ke lie gRhasthoM ke yahA~ bhttknaa| kucha
niyama vastroM se sambandhita hai| vastroM ko nApa se adhika bar3A yA choTA
rkhnaa| sUta kAtanA Adi kA niSedha hai aura kucha niyama svAdhyAya se
sambandhita haiN| mantra Adi vidyAoM ko sIkhane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| use
dharma ke sAra ko hI grahaNa karanA hai anya nirarthaka bAteM nhiiN| sArAMza
yaha hai ki cAhe jaina paramparA rahI ho, cAhe bauddha paramparA rahI ho, cAhe
vaidika paramparA rahI ho, sabhI ne maithuna, corI aura hiMsA ko gambhIratama
aparAdha mAnA hai| jaina aura bauddha donoM paramparAmoM ne saMghako atyadhika
mahattva 1. cullavagga pATTi pR. 67-81 2. e cuM kho bhikhu vA bhikhani vA saMgha
bhAkhati se prodAtAni dusAni saMnaM dhApathiyA anAvAsasi aavaassiye| 3. Corpus
Inscriptionum Indicarum Vol. I. P. 161. 4. samantapAsAdikA bhAga tRtIya pR. 1244
( 58 )

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It is also a great offense to disregard the Sangha and the Sangha Nayak. One
Jainacharya has even written that when the Tirthankara is in Samavasarana, he
salutes the Sangha by saying "Namo Sanghass". Both Jain and Buddhist traditions
have been very careful that no ineligible person should be initiated, as entry
can lead to immorality. Jain and Buddhist monks and nuns are equal, and there
are many similarities in the system of severe penance. There are also many
similarities in the traditions. It is true that the Buddhist tradition has been
a middle path, so its code of conduct is also based on the middle path. The Jain
tradition has emphasized age and rigorous practice. Therefore, its code of
conduct is also strict.  A special feature is that in Jainism, penance is given
according to the offense, taking into account the circumstances. If a seeker
commits an offense willingly, repeatedly, does not admit the offense in front of
the gurus, or consumes intoxicants, then there was a provision for severe
punishment. And if the same offense has been committed unknowingly or due to
special circumstances, and if he admits the offense sincerely in front of the
gurus, then he is given less penance. But there was no such provision for
penance in Buddhism. Of the ten penances in Jainism, there are penances like
Pralaochana, Pratikramana, Kayotsarga, etc., which the seeker has to perform in
the morning and evening. He has to confess these sins before the guru. But in
Buddhism, there was no such mandatory rule to perform Pralaochana, Pratikramana
and Kayotsarga daily and to be free from penance. There, the vows of the
Patimokkha rules were recited on the fifteenth day during Uposatha. Therefore,
in the Buddhist Sangha, information about the offense was received after fifteen
days. During the annual Pavarana, the offense seen, heard and doubted was
investigated.  Thus, we see that it is human nature to commit offenses. Due to a
little carelessness, mistakes happen. But the system of penance in Jain and
Buddhist traditions for the purification of these mistakes is easy and simple.
But in the Vedic tradition's system of penance, the system of punishment has
also been included. As a result, there was also a provision for amputation, etc.
While there are no such provisions in Jain and Buddhist traditions. The offense
and penance system is from the Vedic point of view...  Indian culture has a
stream of Vedic tradition. On the same land, the Shraman culture and the Vedic
culture have flowed. The great sages of the Vedic culture have also made various
provisions for liberation from sin. The inner mind of the sages of the Rigveda
also has a strong desire to be free from sin. Thinking has been done from
various perspectives regarding the number of sins, their various types. The
Rigveda states that seven limits have been told for the wise or the Vishas. He
who transgresses even one of them is a sinner. In the Taittiriya Samhita,
Shatapatha Brahmana and other Brahmana texts, Brahmanahत्या has been considered
the greatest sin.  1. Rigveda 10/5/6 2. Taittiriya Samhita (2/5/9/2, 5/3/12/1-2)
3. Shatapatha Brahmana (13/3/1/1) 4. Kaṭhaka (13/7)  Because in the Sangha of
ineligible persons, there are many places in the code of conduct... the truths
of penance, which are both...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 diyaa| saMgha aura saMghanAyaka kI avahelanA karanA bhI mahAn aparAdha hai| eka
jainAcArya ne to yahA~ taka likhA hai ki jaba tIrthakara samavasaraNa meM
virAjate haiM taba 'namo saMghassa' kahakara saMgha kI abhivandanA karate haiM
/  jaina aura bauddha donoM hI parampa rAoM ne bahuta hI satarkatA rakhI hai ki
koI bhI ayogya pAtra dIkSA grahaNa na kare praveza ho jAne se durAcAra bar3ha
sakatA hai  /  jaina aura bauddha zramaNa aura zramaNiyoM kI para samAnatA hai
ghora prAyazcitta vyavasthA meM bhI aneka sthAnoM para samAnatA hai| paramparAoM
meM haiM usameM bhI kAphI samAnatA hai  /  yaha satya hai ki bauddha paramparA
madhyamamArgIya rahI isalie usakI AcArasaMhitA bhI madhyama mArga para hI
AdhArita hai| jaina paramparA umra aura kaThora sAdhanA para bala detI rahI hai|
isalie usakI AcArasaMhitA bhI kaThoratA ko liye hue hai| vizeSatA yaha hai ki
jainazAsana meM paristhiti ke anusAra aparAdha ko dekhakara prAyazcitta diyA
jAtA hai| yadi koI sAdhaka svecchA se aparAdha karatA hai, bAra-bAra aparAdha
karatA hai, aparAdha karake bhI gurujanoM ke samakSa usa aparAdha ko svIkAra
nahIM karatA yA mAyA kA sevana karatA hai to usake lie kaThora daNDa kI
vyavasthA thI aura vahI aparAdha anajAna meM yA paristhiti vizeSa ke kAraNa ho
gayA hai| gurujanoM ke samakSa niSkapaTa bhAva se yadi vaha AlocanA karatA hai
/  aparAdha ko svIkAra karatA hai to usako prAyazcitta kama diyA jAtA hai  /
para bauddhazAsana meM isa prakAra prAyazcitta kI vyavasthA nahIM thii|
jainazAsana meM jo dasa prAyazcitta haiM unameM se prAlocanA, pratikramaNa,
kAyotsarga Adi aise prAyazcitta haiM jo sAdhaka ko prAtaHkAla aura sandhyAkAla
karane hote haiN| guru ke samakSa una pApoM ko nivedana karane hote haiM para
boddhazAsana meM isa prakAra pratidina mAlocanA, pratikramaNa aura kAyotsarga
karane kA aura prAyazcitta se mukta hone kA Avazyaka niyama nahIM thA  /  vahA~
to pandrahaveM dina uposatha ke samaya pAtimokkha niyamoM kA vacana hotA thA
ataH bauddhasaMgha meM aparAdha kI sUcanA pandraha dina ke pazcAt milatI thI
ghora varSa meM eka bAra pravAraNA ke samaya dekhA huA, sunA huA aura zaMkA kiye
hue aparAdha kI anveSaNA hotI thI  /  isa prakAra hama dekhate haiM ki aparAdha
karanA mAnava kA svabhAva hai| jarA sI asAvadhAnI se skhalanAeM ho jAtI haiM
para una skhalanAoM kI vizuddhi hetu jaina aura bauddha paramparA meM jo
prAyazcittavidhAna hai unameM sahajatA hai, sugamatA hai para vaidika paramparA
ke prAyazcittavidhAnoM meM daNDavyavasthA bhI sammilita ho gii| jisake
phalasvarUpa aMgachedana Adi kA bhI vidhAna huaa| jabaki jaina aura bauddha
paramparA meM isa prakAra ke vidhAna nahIM haiM  /  aparAdha va prAyazcitta
vidhAna vaidika dRSTi se bhAratIya saMskRti kI eka dhArA vaidika paramparA hai|
eka hI dharatI para zramaNasaMskRti aura vaidikasaMskRti dhArAe~ pravAhita huI
haiN| vaidika saMskRti ke mahAmanISiyoM ne bhI pApapaMka se mukta hone ke lie
vividha vidhAna kiye haiN| Rgveda ke maharSiyoM ke antarmAnasa meM bhI
pAparahita hone kI prabala bhAvanA pAI jAtI hai| pApoM kI saMkhyA, unake vividha
prakAroM ke sambandha meM vibhinna dRSTiyoM se cintana kiyA gayA hai| Rgveda meM
kahA gayA ki buddhimAna yA vizoM ke lie sAta maryAdAe~ batAI gaI haiN| unameM se
kisI eka kA bhI jo pratikramaNa karatA hai vaha pApI hai| taitti rIyasaMhitA
zatapatha brAhmaNa aura anya brAhmaNa granthoM meM brAhmaNahatyA ko sabase bar3A
pApa mAnA hai  /  2 kAThaka Rgveda 10/5/6 taitirIyasaMhitA (2/5/9/2, 5/3/12/1-2
) zatapathabrAhmaNa (13/3/1/1) 1. 2. 3. 4. kAThaka (13/7) kyoMki ayogya pAtra ke
saMgha meM AcArasaMhitA meM aneka sthAnoM prAyazcitta kI jo saciyA~ donoM ( 59 )

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I consider abortion to be a greater sin than Brahmanicide. The Brihadaranyaka
Upanishad considers thieves and abortionists to be great sinners. The Vasishtha
Sutra divides sinners into three categories: 1. Ansavi, 2. Mahapataki, 3.
Upapataki. Ansavi refers to ordinary sinners. Specific atonement is prescribed
for them. According to Vasishtha, there are five Mahapatakas (1) Defiling the
bed of a Guru (2) Drinking liquor (3) Killing a fetus (4) Stealing the gold of a
Brahmin (5) Contact with an outcast. Upapataki is one who abandons Agnihotra. He
incurs the wrath of his Guru by his misdeeds. He earns his livelihood from
atheists. It is true that there have been different opinions regarding these
categories of sins. Due to the fear of expansion, we are not discussing all of
them and their opinions here. The descriptions of Brahmanicide, drinking liquor,
theft, sexual intercourse with the Guru's wife, etc. are found in detail in Agni
Purana, Prayaschittaviveka, Dharmasatra, Manusmriti, etc. Narada says that if a
person has sexual intercourse with his mother, maternal aunt, mother-in-law,
paternal aunt, sister-in-law, aunt, friend's wife, disciple's wife, sister,
sister's friend, wife's sister, teacher's wife, woman of the same gotra,
midwife, fasting woman and Brahmin woman, he becomes guilty of the sin of
Gurutalpa adultery. There is no punishment other than castration for such a
misdeed. After committing various sins, people started praising Aditi, Mitra,
Varuna, etc. to save themselves from those sins. Fearing the consequences of
their crimes, they also started performing various kinds of vows, etc. According
to the Rig Veda, the first ritual for atonement for sin was prayer for mercy,
praise to avoid sin, and sacrifice to get rid of the consequences of serious
sins. The Taittiriya Samhita Shatapatha Brahmana states that by performing
Ashvamedha, the gods freed the king from sin. Another means of getting rid of
sin was confession of sin. The Gautama Dharma Sutra, Vasishtha Smriti states
that Japa, Tapa, Homa, fasting and charity are the atonements for misdeeds.
Acharya Manu has written that by confessing the crime and repenting, performing
Tapa, chanting Gayatri mantras, the sinner is freed from the crime. If he cannot
do this, he is freed by charity. The same thing is mentioned in Parashara
Shatatapasmriti, Bhavishya Purana. The Shatapatha Brahmana clearly states that
whoever 1. Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 4/3/22 Narada Smriti Sloka 73-75 Rig Veda
7/86/4-5, 8/88/6-7, 7/89/1-4 Taittiriya Samhita 5/3/12/1-2 Shatapatha Brahmana
13/3/1/1 6. Gautama Dharma Sutra 19/11 7. Vasishtha Smriti 22/8 8. Manusmriti
3/227 Parashara Maghaviya 10/40 10. Shatatapasmriti 1/4 11. Bhavishya Purana
Prayah Vivek Page 31 12. Shatapatha Brahmana 2/5/2/20 ( 60 )

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 meM bhrUNahatyA ko brahmahatyA se bhI vizeSa pApa mAnA hai|
bRhadAraNyakopaniSad meM' cora aura bhrUNahatyAre ko mahApApI meM ginA hai|
vasiSThasUtra ne pApiyoM ko tIna koTi meM bAMTA hai-1. enasvI, 2. mahApAtakI, 3.
uppaatkii| enasvI sAdhAraNa pApI ko kahate haiN| usake lie viziSTa prAyazcitta
kI vyavasthA kI gaI hai| vasiSTha ke matAnusAra mahApAtaka pA~ca haiM (1) guru
kI zayyA ko apavitra karanA (2) surApAna (3) bhra Na kI hatyA (4) brAhmaNa ke
hiraNya kI corI (5) patita kA saMsarga  /  upapAtakI vaha hai jo agnihotra kA
tyAga kara detA hai| apane aparAdha se guru ko kupita karatA hai| nAstikoM ke
yahA~ jIvikA kA arjana karatA hai| yaha satya hai ina pApoM kI koTiyoM ke
sambandha meM bhI vibhinna mata rahe haiM, vistArabhaya se hama una sabakI carcA
aura matoM kA ullekha yahA~ nahIM kara rahe haiN| brahmahatyA, surApana, corI,
guru kI patnI ke sAtha sambhoga Adi ke varNana agnipurANa, prAyazcittaviveka,
dharmasatra, manasmati Adi meM vistAra se hai| 2 nArada kA kathana hai ki yadi
vyakti mAtA. mausI. sAsa. mAmI. phaphI, cAcI, mitrapatnI, ziSyapatnI, bahina,
bahina kI sakhI. patravadha, AcAryapatnI. sagotranArI. dAI, vratavatI nArI evaM
brAhmaNanArI ke sAtha sambhoga karatA hai vaha gurutalpa nAmaka vyabhicAra ke
pApa kA aparAdhI ho jAtA hai| aise duSkRtya ke lie zizna-kartana ke atirikta koI
aura daNDa nahIM hai| vibhinna prakAra ke pApa karane ke pazcAt usa pApa se
apane Apako bacAne ke lie aditi, mitra, varuNa Adi kI stutiyA~ karane kA krama
cAlU huaa| apane aparAdha ke pariNAmoM se bhayabhIta hokara unhoMne vividha
prakAra ke vrata prAdi bhI karane prArambha kiye| Rgveda ke anusAra
sarvaprathama pApa ke phala ko dUra karane hetu dayA ke lie prArthanA pApa se
bacane ke lie stutiyA~ tathA gambhIra pApoM ke phala se chuTakArA pAne hetu
yajJa kA vidhAna kiyaa| taittirIyasaMhitA zatapathabrAhmaNa' kA mantavya hai ki
azvamedha karane se devatAgaNa rAjA ko pApa mukta kara dete the| pApa se mukta
hone kA eka anya sAdhana thA pApa kI svIkArokti  /  gautama dharmasUtra,6
vasiSThasmRti kA kathana hai--japa-tapa-homa-upavAsa evaM dAna ye duSkRtya ke
prAyazcitta haiN| AcArya manu ne likhA hai ki aparAdha ko svIkAra kara
pazcAttApa tapa, gAyatrI mantroM ke jApa se pApI aparAdha se mukta ho jAtA hai|
yadi vaha yaha kArya na kara sake to dAna se mukta ho jAtA hai| yahI bAta
pArAzara zAtAtapasmRti'* bhaviSyapurANa'' meM batAI gaI hai| zatapathabrAhmaNa'
2 meM spaSTa rUpa se kahA gayA hai ki jo 1. bRhadAraNyakopaniSad 4/3/22
nAradasmRti zloka 73-75 Rgveda 7/86/4-5, 8/88/6-7, 7/89/1-4 taittirIyasaMhitA
5/3/12/1-2 zatapathabrAhmaNa 13/3/1/1 6. gautamadharmasUtra 19/11 7.
vasiSThasmRti 22/8 8. manusmRti 3/227 parAzara mAghavIya 10/40 10. zAtAtapasmRti
1/4 11. bhaviSyapurANa prAyaH viveka pR0 31 12. zatapathabrAhmaNa 2/5/2/20 ( 60
)

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A person's sin is reduced when they confess it. Confession of one's
transgression is the first step towards atonement. This is called *Aalocna* in
Jain tradition. The *Gautama Dharma Sutra* and *Manusmriti* state that a student
in the *Brahmacharya Ashram* who commits the sin of sexual intercourse should
declare their fault while begging for alms in seven houses.  It is not as bad to
commit a sin as it is to not recognize it as a sin. *Manusmriti*, *Vishnu
Dharmaottar*, and *Brahma Purana* clearly state that the more a person's mind
abhors their wrongdoing, the more their body is freed from sin. If a person does
not repent after committing a sin, they cannot be freed from it. They should
resolve in their mind that they will not repeat the act. The *Prayaschittaviveka
Grantha* provides a remedy by Angira: If a person is immersed in remorse after
committing sins and repents day and night, they become purified through
*Pranayama*. *Prayaschittaprakash* believes that repentance alone is not enough
to remove sins, but it makes the sinner eligible for atonement.  *Manusmriti*,
*Bodhayana Dharma Sutra*, *Vasishtha Smriti*, and *Abhisankha Smriti* state that
if a person performs sixteen *Pranayamas* with *Omkar* daily, they are freed
from the sin of abortion after a month. *Vishnu Dharma Sutra* also states that
the proper performance of three *Pranayamas* destroys all sins committed during
the day or night. The *Chandogya Upanishad* and *Mundaka Upanishad* consider
penance to be superior to sacrifice. Gautama has outlined the following
durations of penance according to the nature of the sin: one year, six months,
three months, two months, one month, twenty-four days, twelve days, six days,
three days, and one night. Acharya Manu has declared:  1.  2.  3.  4.  5.  6.
7.  8.  9.  10.  11.  12.  13.  14.   (61)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vyakti pApa ko svIkAra kara letA hai usakA pApa kama ho jAtA hai  /  pApamocana
ke lie zrAtmAparAdha ko svIkAra karanA sarvaprathama Avazyaka thA  /  ise hI
jainaparamparA meM AlocanA kahA hai  /  gautamadharmasUtra aura manusmRti meM
likhA hai ki brahmacaryAzrama meM vidyArthI ke dvArA sambhoga kA aparAdha hone
para sAta gharoM meM bhikSA mAMgate samaya apane doSa kI ghoSaNA karanI caahie|
pApa honA utanA burA nahIM jitanA pApa ko pApa na samajhanA  /  manusmRti'
viSNudharmottara' aura brahmapurANa [3 meM spaSTa rUpa se likhA hai ki vyakti kA
mana jitanA hI apane duSkarma ko ghRNita samajhatA hai utanA hI usakA zarIra
pApa se mukta ho jAtA hai  /  yadi vyakti pApakRtya karane ke pazcAt bhI
pazcAttApa nahIM karatA hai to pApa se mukta nahIM ho sakatA  /  use mana meM
yaha saMkalpa karanA cAhie ki maiM punaH yaha kArya nahIM karUMgA  /
prAyazcittaviveka grantha 4 meM aMgirA kI eka yukti dI hai - pApoM ko karane ke
uparAnta yadi vyakti anutApa meM DUbA huA ho aura rAtadina pazcAttApa kara rahA
ho to vaha prANAyAma se pavitra ho jAtA hai| prAyazcittaprakAza 5 kA mata hai
kevala pazcAttApa pApoM ko dUra karane ke lie paryApta nahIM, apitu usase pApI
prAyazcitta karane ke yogya ho jAtA hai| manusmRti bodhAyanadharmasUtra, 7
vasiSThasmRti, abhizaMkhasmRti Adi meM kahA hai yadi pratidina vyakti oMkAra ke
sAtha solaha prANAyAma kare to eka mAsa ke uparAnta bhrUNahatyA ke pApa se mukta
ho jAtA hai| viSNudharmasUtra 10 meM yaha bhI likhA hai ki tIna prANAyAmoM ke
samyak sampAdana se rAta yA dina meM kiye gaye sabhI pApa naSTa ho jAte haiM  /
chAndogyopaniSad 11, muNDakopaniSad 12 meM tapa ko yajJa se Upara mAnA hai  /
gautama ne pApa ke svarUpa ke anusAra tapa kI nimna avadhiyAM batAI haiM - eka
varSa, chaha mAsa tIna mAsa, do mAsa, eka mAsa, caubIsa dina, bAraha dina, chaha
dina tIna dina aura eka rAta | AcArya manu 14 ne ghoSaNA kI 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.
8. manusmRti 11 / 229-30 viSNudharmottara 2/ 73 / 231-33 brahmapurANa 218/5
prAyazcittaviveka grantha, pR0 30 prAyazcittaviveka, pR0 30 manusmRti 19 / 248
bodhAnadharmasUtra 4 / 1/31 vasiSThasmRti 26/4 smRti2 / 5, 12 / 18-19 9. 10.
viSNudharmasUtra 55/2 11. chAndogyopaniSad 5 / 10 / 1-2 12. muNDakopaniSad
10/154 / 2 13. gautamadharmasUtra 17 / 17 14. manusmRti 11 / 239-241 ( 61 )

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Those who are guilty of great sins and other misdeeds are freed from sin by
right austerities. In the Jain practice, various types of austerities are
mentioned for liberation from sin. The Vedic sages have described many ways to
be free from sin, such as homa, japa practice, charity, fasting, pilgrimage,
etc. In Vedic literature, the words *prāyaścitti* and *prāyaścitta* are used.
The word *prāyaścitti* is used many times in the Taittiriya Samhita. This word
is used there in the sense of atonement for sin. The word *prāyaścitta* is used
in the Atharva Veda, Vajasaneyi Samhita, 4 Aitireya Brahmana, Shatapatha
Brahmana, Kaushitaki Brahmana. Both the words *prāyaścitti* and *prāyaścitta*
are given in the Apastamba Srautasutra and Shankhayana Srautasutra. In the
*Prāyaścittaviveka* text, the etymology of *prāyaścitta* is *prāyaḥ-tapa* and
*citta-sankalpa*, meaning that *prāyaścitta* is related to the resolve of
austerity for the removal of sin. In the *Bāgbhaṭṭo Yājñavalkya Smṛti*, the
meaning of *prāyaḥ* is sin and the meaning of *citta* is purification. Hemadri
2, quoting the explanation of an unknown commentator, has written that the
meaning of *prāyaḥ* is destruction and the meaning of *cit* is reconciliation.
That is, the meaning of *prāyaścitta* is to make up for what has been lost.
Therefore, it is a necessary action for the destruction of sin. Brihaspati 3 and
other scholars have classified sin into two types. One is *kāmakṛta*, that is,
which is done intentionally. The other is *akāmakṛta*, which happens
unintentionally. *Akāmakṛta* sins can be destroyed by *prāyaścitta*. But can
*kāmakṛta* sin be destroyed by *prāyaścitta*? There has been a lot of
disagreement among scholars on this matter. In the Manusmriti 4 and the
Yājñavalkya Smṛti 5, it is clearly stated that *prāyaścitta* or the study of the
Vedas destroys sins committed unintentionally. The Yājñavalkya Smṛti 16 states
that knowingly

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ki jo mahApAtakoM evaM anya duSkarmoM ke aparAdhI hote haiM ve samyak tapa se
pApamukta ho jAte hai| jaina sAdhanA' padvati meM bhI pApa se mukta hone ke lie
vividha prakAra ke tapoM kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai| vaidika RSiyoM ne pApa se
mukta hone ke lie homa, japa kI sAdhanA, dAna, upavAsa, tIrthayAtrA Adi aneka
prakAra batAye haiN| vaidika sAhitya meM prAyazcitti aura prAyazcitta ye do
zabda vyavahRta hae haiN| taittirIyasaMhitA meM prAyazcitti zabda kA prayoga
aneka bAra hA hai| yaha zabda vahAM para pApa ke prAyazcitta ke artha meM hI
prayukta huA hai  /  atharvaveda vAjasaneyIsaMhitA,4 aittirIyabrAhmaNa,
zatapathabrAhmaNa kauSItakibrAhmaNa meM prAyazcitta zabda kA prayoga huA hai|
prApastaMbazrautasUtra zAMkhAyanazrautasUtra meM prAyazcitti aura prAyazcitta ye
donoM zabda diye haiM  /  prAyazcittaviveka. grantha meM prAyazcitta kI
vyutpatti prAyaH-tapa aura citta-saMkalpa arthAt prAyazcitta kA sambandha
pApamocana hetu tapa kA saMkalpa karanA  /  bAgbhaTTo yAjJavalkyasmRti" meM
prAyaH kA artha pApa aura citta kA artha zuddhikaraNa hai| hemAdri2 ne eka
ajJAta bhASyakAra kI vyAkhyA ko uddhRta kara likhA hai prAyaH kA artha vinAza
hai aura cita kA artha saMdhAna hai| arthAta prAyazcitta kA artha haA jo naSTa
ho gayA hai usakI pUrti karanA  /  ataH pApakSaya ke lie naimittika kArya hai|
bRhaspati 3 Adi vijJoM ne pApa ke do prakAra kiye haiN| eka kAmakRta hai arthAt
jo jAna-bUjhakara kiyA jAtA hai| dUsarA akAmakRta hai jo binA jAne-bUjhe ho
jaay| akAmakRta pApoM prAyazcitta ke dvArA naSTa kiyA jA sakatA hai| para
kAmakRta pApa ko prAyazcitta ke dvArA naSTa kiyA jA sakatA hai yA nahIM? isa
sambandha meM vijJoM meM atyadhika matabheda rahA hai  /  manusmRti'4 meM aura
yAjJavalkyasmRti'5 meM spaSTa rUpa se kahA gayA hai ki prAyazcitta yA
vidyAdhyayana se anajAna meM kiye gaye pApoM kA vinAza hotA hai|
yAjJavalkyasmRti16 meM likhA hai ki jAna rix; uttarAdhyayana 37/27
taittirIyasaMhitA 2/1/2/4, 2/1/2/4, 3/1/3/2-3, 5/1/9/3, evaM 5/3/12/1 3.
atharvaveda 14/1/30 vAjasaneyIsaMhitA 39/12 aittirIyabrAhmaNa5/27
zatapathabrAhmaNa 4/5/7/1, 7/1/4/9, 9/5/3/8 evaM 12/5/1/6 kauSItakibrAhmaNa
5/9/6/12 ApastaMbazrautasUtra 3/10/38 zAMkhAyanazrautasUtra 3/19/1 10.
prAyazcittaviveka pR0 2 11. yAjJavalkyasmRti 3/206 12. hemAdri prAyazcittaviveka
10 999 13. dharmazAstra kA itihAsa bhAga 3 pR0 1045 14. manusmRti 11/45 15.
yAjJavalkyasmRti 3/226 16. yAjJavalkyasmRti 3/226 ( 62 )

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
4.  Penance does not destroy sins committed knowingly, but if the sinner
performs penance, he becomes worthy of coming into contact with other people.
Manu has also written - He should not come into contact with the wise until he
has performed penance. The Smritis have provided for penance for the atonement
of sins here and there. In the Gautama Dharma Sutra, Vasishtha Smriti, 3
Manusmriti, Yajnavalkya Smriti, those great sages have prescribed that one who
has committed adultery with his mother, sister, daughter-in-law, etc., should
have his testicles and penis cut off and should walk in the south or south-west
direction until his body falls on the ground. Acharya Manu has written that a
thief should go to the king with a pestle or mace or a sharp weapon, which was a
kind of spear, or an iron rod, and declare his crime. If he dies or survives
half-dead after being beaten once by the king, he is freed from the crime of
theft. In the Vedic tradition, the literature on penance has been very vast. The
reason for this was that penance was of great importance to the common people in
ancient times. See, out of 28 chapters of Gautama Dharma Sutra, 10 chapters
describe penance. Out of 30 chapters printed in Vasishtha Dharma Sutra, 9
chapters are full of description of penance. There are a total of 222 verses in
Manusmriti related to penance. Yajnavalkya Smriti chapter 3 has 1009 verses. Out
of these, 122 verses are based on penance. Shatatap Smriti has only 274 verses
describing penance. The same is mentioned in the Puranas as well. For example,
Agni Purana (chapters 168-174), Garuda Purana 52, Kurma Purana (latter half
30-34), Varaha Purana (131-136), Brahmanda Purana (Upasangarapada chapter 9),
Vishnu Dharmaottaramrita (2, 73, 3/234-237) describe penance. Mitakshara, Aparak
Parasharamaadhaviya etc. commentaries have also discussed penance in detail. In
addition to these, there are detailed descriptions of penance in
Prayaschittaprakaran, Prayaschittaviveka, Prayaschittatattva, Smritimuktaphal
(Prayaschitta related chapter), Prayaschittasar, Prayaschittamayukha,
Prayaschittaprakash, Prayaschittendusekhar. It should also be remembered that
penance was not the same for all people. Even for the same crime, there was a
difference in giving penance. The severity and duration of penance depended on
whether the person was committing the crime for the first time or for many
times. There was a council that provided penance. They would decide the penance
according to the gravity and nature of the crime of the offender. There were
four main levels of penance. (1) Going to the council or (2) Proper penance
proclamation by the council, (3) Performance of penance, (4) Publication of the
sinner's atonement. 1. 2. 3. Vasishtha Smriti 20/13 4. Musmriti 11/47 Gautama
Dharma Sutra 23/10-11 5. 6. Manusmriti 91/104 Yajnavalkya Smriti 3/259
Manusmriti 8/314-315  (63)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 4 bUjhakara kiye gaye pApoM ko prAyazcitta naSTa nahIM karatA apitu pApI
prAyazcitta kara letA hai to anya vyaktiyoM ke samparka meM A jAne ke yogya ho
jAtA hai  /  manu' ne bhI likhA hai - jaba taka prAyazcitta nahIM kara letA taba
taka use vijJajanoM ke samparka meM nahIM AnA cAhie  /  smRtiyoM meM yatra-tatra
pApamocana ke lie prAyazcittoM kI vyavasthA dI hai  /  gautamadharmasUtra,
vasiSThasmRti, 3 manusmRti, yAjJavalkyasmRti meM una mahAmanISiyoM ne mAtA,
bahina, putravadhU Adi ke sAtha vyabhicAra sevana karane vAle ko aNDakoSa evaM
liMga kATa diye jAne para dakSiNa dizA meM yA dakSiNa-pazcima dizA meM taba taka
calate rahanA hai jaba taka usakA zarIra bhUmi para lur3haka na pdd'e| AcArya
manu ne likhA hai ki cora ko koI mUsala yA gadA yA dudhArI-zakti jo eka prakAra
kI barachI hotI thI athavA lohadaNDa lekara rAjA ke pAsa jAnA cAhie aura apane
aparAdha kI ghoSaNA kare  /  rAjA ke eka bAra mArane se vaha mRta ho jAya yA
ardhamRta hokara jIvita rahe to vaha corI ke aparAdha se mukta ho jAtA hai  /
vaidika paramparA meM prAyazcitta sambandhI sAhitya atyadhika vizAla rahA hai|
isakA kAraNa yaha thA ki prAcIna yuga meM prAyazcittoM kA jana-sAdhAraNa meM
bar3A mahattva thaa| dekhie, gautamadharmasUtra ke 28 adhyAyoM meM se 10 adhyAya
meM prAyazcitta kA varNana hai  /  vasiSThadharmasUtra meM jo 30 adhyAya mudrita
hue haiM, unameM se 9 adhyAya prAyazcitta sambandhI varNana se bhare par3e haiM
/  manusmRti meM kula 222 zloka prAyazcitta ke sambandha meM haiM  /
yAjJavalkyasmRti adhyAya 3 meM 1009 zloka haiM  /  usameM 122 zloka prAyazcitta
para AdhArita haiN| zAtAtapasmRti ke 274 zlokoM meM kevala prAyazcitta kA hI
varNana hai| utane hI purANoM meM bhI prAyazcita kA ullekha huA hai  /  jaise-
agnipurANa (adhyAya 168-174) garur3apurANa 52, kUrmapurANa (uttarArdha 30-34),
varAhapurANa (131-136), brahmANDapurANa (upasaMhArapAda adhyAya 9),
viSNudhamottarAmRta (2, 73, 3/234-237) meM prAyazcittoM kA varNana hai  /
mitAkSara, aparAkaM pArAzaramAdhavIya prabhRti TIkAoM meM bhI vistAra se
prAyazcitta ke Upara cintana kiyA gayA hai  /  inake atirikta
prAyazcittaprakaraNa, prAyazcittaviveka, prAyazcittatattva, smRtimuktAphala (
prAyazcitta vAlA prakaraNa ), prAyazcittasAra, prAyazcittamayUkha,
prAyazcittaprakAza, prAyazcittenduzekhara meM prAyazcitta ke sambandha meM
vistAra se varNana hai  /  yaha bhI smaraNa rakhanA hogA ki sabhI vyaktiyoM ke
lie eka samAna prAyazcitta nahIM thA  /  samAna aparAdha hone para bhI
prAyazcitta dene meM antara thA  /  prAyazcittoM kI kaThoratA aura avadhi vyakti
ke dvArA prathama bAra aparAdha karane para yA aneka bAra aparAdha karane para
prAyazcitta pradAna karane vAlI eka pariSad hotI thii| jo aparAdhI ke aparAdha
kI gurutA evaM svabhAva ko dekhakara usake anusAra prAyazcitta kI vyavasthA
karate  /  prAyazcitta ke mukhya cAra stara the  /  (1) pariSad ke pAsa jAnA yA
( 2 ) pariSad dvArA ucita prAyazcitta udghoSa, (3) prAyazcitta kA sampAdana, (4)
pApI ke pApa kI mukti kA prakAzana  /  1. 2. 3. vasiSThasmRti 20/13 4. musmRti
11 / 47 gautamadharmasUtra 23 / 10-11 5. 6. manusmRti 91/104 yAjJavalkyasmRti 3
/ 259 manusmRti 8 / 314- 315 ( 63 )

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Vedic texts mention various types of penances and their methods. We are
highlighting some of them. This penance involves standing in water and reciting
the Aghmarsha mantras three times a day. This penance is mentioned in the Rig
Veda, Bodhayana Dharma Sutra, Vasishtha Smriti, Manusmriti, Yajnavalkya Smriti,
Vishnu Purana, Shankha Smriti, etc.  The second is the Atikachch penance.
According to Acharya Manu, it involves eating only one mouthful of food in the
morning and one mouthful in the evening for three days, then eating one mouthful
of food without asking for three more days, and finally fasting for three days.
The Atisantapan penance lasts for eighteen days. It involves eating cow's urine
and five other substances for six days.  The Ardhakruchch penance lasts for six
days. It involves eating only once a day, then eating only in the evening, then
eating without asking for two days, and finally fasting completely.  In the
Gomutra Kruchch penance, a cow is fed barley and wheat, and then the number of
grains that come out of the cow's dung is used to make a porridge and dumplings
in cow's urine.  The Chandrayan penance involves eating according to the waxing
and waning of the moon. The Bodhayana Dharma Sutra mentions two types of
Chandrayan penance: Yavamdhya, which is thick in the middle and thin at both
ends like barley, and Pipilikamdhya, which is thin in the middle and thick at
both ends like an ant. Manusmriti, Yajnavalkya Smriti, and Vasishtha Smriti
define Chandrayan Yavamdhya as follows: one mouthful on the first day of the
bright fortnight,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vaidika granthoM meM aneka prakAra ke prAyazcittoM ke nAma bhI Aye haiM aura
una granthoM meM prAyazcittoM kI vidhi bhI batAI gaI hai  /  hama unameM se
kucha prAyazcitoM kA saMketa kara rahe haiM  /  yaha prAyazcitta jala meM khar3e
rahakara dina meM tIna bAra aghamarSaNa mantroM kA pATha kiyA jAtA hai  /  isa
prAyazcitta kA ullekha Rgveda,' bodhAyakadharmasUtra,2 vasiSThasmRti, manusmRti,
yAjJavalkyasmRti,' viSNupurANa, zaMkhAsmRti" Adi meM huA hai| dUsarA atikaccha
prAyazcitta kA ullekha hai| AcArya manu ke abhimatAnusAra tIna dina taka kevala
prAta:kAla eka kaura bhojana aura sandhyAkAla bhI eka kaura bhojana aura binA
mAMge punaH tIna dina taka eka kaura bhojana aura anta meM tIna dina taka
upavAsa karane kA ullekha hai| atisAntapana' isa prAyazcitta kI avadhi aThAraha
dinoM kI hai| isameM chaha dinoM taka gomUtra aura anya pAMca vastuoM kA bhojana
karate haiM  /  . ardhakRccha' yaha chaha dinoM kA prAyazcitta hai| jisameM eka
dina meM kevala eka bAra bhojana, eka dina sandhyAkAla aura do dina taka binA
mAMge bhojana aura phira pUrNa upavAsa  /  gomUtrakRccha11 eka gAya ko jau aura
gehUM khilAyA jAtA hai, phira gAya ke gobara meM se jitane dAne nikaleM,
gaumatra meM usake ATe kI lApasI aura mADeM banAkara pInA caahie| cAndrAyaNa'2
candra ke bar3hane aura ghaTane ke anurUpa jisameM bhojana kiyA jAya use
cAndrAyaNa-vrata kahate haiN| cAndrAyaNa-vrata ke yavamadhya jau ke samAna bIca
meM moTA aura donoM choroM se patalA, pIpilikAmadhya cIMTI ke sadRza bIca meM
patalA aura donoM chora meM moTA ye do prakAra bodhAyanadharmasUtra meM die
haiN| manusmRti, yAjJavalkyasmRti aura vasiSThasmRti meM cAndrAyaNa yavamadhya
kI paribhASA isa prakAra kI hai-zukla pakSa ke prathama dina eka grAsa, 1.
Rgveda 10/190/1-3 2. bodhAyanadharmasUtra 4/2/19/20 3. vasiSThasmRti 26/8
manusmRti 11/259-260 yAjJavalkyasmRtti 3/301 6. viSNupurANa 55/7 7. zaMkhasmRti
18/1-2 8. manusmRti 11/213 9. viSNupurANa 46/21 10. ApastaMbasmRti 9/43-44 11.
prAyazcittasAra pR. 187 12. (ka) mitAccharA yAjJavalkyasmRti TIkA 3/323 (kha)
bodhAyanadharmasUtra 3/8/33. (ga) vasiSThasmRti 27/1 (gha) manusmRti 11/27 ( 64
)

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
On the second day, two, in this way, on the full moon, fifteen *grasa* of food
are taken. In the same way, in the dark fortnight, on the first day, fourteen
*grasa*, reducing one *grasa* each day, on the fourteenth day, one *grasa* is
eaten, and on the new moon, a fast is observed. If someone starts the fast from
the first day of the dark fortnight, then on the first day, he eats fourteen
*grasa* and gradually reduces the *grasa*. On the fourteenth day, he eats one
*grasa* and on the new moon, he does not eat even one *grasa*, then on the first
day of the bright fortnight, he takes one *grasa* and increases it, eating
fifteen *grasa* on the full moon. In this situation, the month is *purnamantha*.
In this sequence, there is not even one *grasa* in the middle of the fast. The
number of *grasa* is more at the beginning and end. This atonement is called
*pipilikamdhya chandrayan*. There are various types mentioned in relation to the
*chandrayan* fast.  In this way, various types of austerities are mentioned in
the scriptures for removing various atonements. We are not mentioning all of
them here, but we are suggesting that you read the history of Dharma Shastra,
Part 3, written by Dr. Pandurang Vaman Kane. There is a detailed discussion and
debate on this.  ## Commentary Literature *Nishithanuyukti*  *Nishitha* has a
very glorious place in the *Chhedasutras*. To express the secrets contained in
it, commentary literature has been created on it from time to time. First, a
commentary in Prakrit language was written in verse form. That commentary is
famous as *Nishithanuyukti*. In it, the main focus is on the explanation of
technical terms, not on the explanation of each verse of the original text. This
style of commentary is based on the *nikshepa* method. In the *nikshepa* method,
after giving many possible meanings of a single word, the non-presented meanings
are negated and the presented meaning is accepted. This method has been very
popular in jurisprudence. *Bhadrabahuswami* considered this method suitable for
*sikti*. He has written in *Aavashyakaniyukti* that a word has many meanings,
but which meaning is appropriate for which context. Which meaning was associated
with which word at the time of the teachings of *Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira*,
etc., keeping all these things in mind, it is necessary to decide the meaning
correctly. And the purpose of *niyukti* is to establish the relationship of that
meaning with the words of the original text. In other words, *niyukti* is a
commentary that explains the definite relationship between the text and the
meaning. Or, *niyukti* is a method that explains the meaning with certainty. The
famous German scholar *Sarpeentier*, while defining *niyukti*, has written that
"niyuktis only work as an index of their main part. They briefly mention all the
detailed events."  In *Nishithanuyukti* also, the words of the text have been
explained using the *nikshepa* method. The verses of the present *niyukti* are:
1. *Lama* 2. *Aavashyakaniyukti*, verse 88 3. *Sutrarthayo: parasparam niyojan
sambandhan niyukti:*     - *Aavashyakaniyukti*, verse 83 4. *Nischyena
arthapratipadikayukti: niyukti:*     - *Acharangani*, 1/2/1 5. Introduction of
*Uttaraadhyayana*, page 50-51 6. (65)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsare dina do, isa prakAra kramazaH pUrNimA ko pandraha grAsa kA bhojana liyA
jAtA hai| isI prakAra kRSNapakSa meM prathama dina caudaha grAsa, eka-eka grAsa
kama karate hue caturdazI ko eka grAsa khAyA jAtA hai aura amAvasyA ko upavAsa
kiyA jAtA hai| yadi koI kRSNapakSa kI prathama tithi se vrata prArambha karatA
hai to prathama dina caudaha grAsa khAtA hai aura kramaza: grAsoM ko kama karatA
jAtA hai  /  caturdazI ko eka grAsa khAtA hai aura amAvasyA ko eka grAsa bhI
nahIM khAtA, phira zuklapakSa ke prathama dina eka grAsa letA hai aura bar3hatA-
bar3hatA pUrNamAsI ko pandraha grAsa khAtA hai  /  isa sthiti meM mAsa
pUrNimAnta hotA hai  /  isa krama meM vrata ke madhya meM eka bhI grAsa nahIM
hotA  /  adhika grAsoM kI saMkhyA prArambha aura anta meM hotI hai| isase yaha
prAyazcitta pIpilikAmadhya candrAyana kahA jAtA hai  /  candrAyana-vrata ke
sambandha meM vividha prakAroM kA ullekha hai| isa prakAra vividha prAyazcitta
utArane hetu vividha prakAra ke tapoM kA ullekha granthoM meM pratipAdita hai|
hama una sabakA yahA~ ullekha na kara DaoN. pANDuraMga vAmana kANe ke dvArA
likhita dharmazAstra kA itihAsa bhAga 3 ko par3hane kA kaSTa kareM, yaha saMketa
kara rahe haiN| jahAM isa para vistAra se vivecana aura carcA hai| vyAkhyA
sAhitya nizIthaniyukti chedasUtroM meM nizItha kA bahuta hI gauravapUrNa sthAna
rahA hai  /  usameM rahe hue rahasyoM ko vyakta karane hetu samaya-samaya para
isa para vyAkhyA sAhitya kA nirmANa hayA hai| sarvaprathama isa para prAkRta
bhASA meM padyabaddha TIkA likhI gaI  /  vaha TIkA nizItha niyukti ke nAma se
vizruta hai| isameM mUla grantha ke pratyeka pada para vyAkhyA na kara mukhya
rUpa se pAribhASika zabdoM kI vyAkhyA kI gaI hai| yaha vyAkhyAzailI
nikSepapaddhatiparaka hai| nikSepapaddhati meM kisI eka pada ke sambhAvita aneka
artha karane ke pazcAta unameM se aprastuta arthoM kA niSedha kara prastuta
artha ko grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai| nyAyazAstra meM yaha paddhati atyanta priya rahI
hai| bhadrabAhasvAmI ne sikti ke lie yaha paddhati upayukta mAnI hai| unhoMne
Avazyaka niyukti meM likhA hai ki eka zabda ke aneka artha hote haiM para
kaunasA artha kisa prasaMga ke lie upayukta hai| zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ke
upadeza ke samaya kaunasA artha kisa zabda se sambaddha rahA hai prabhati sabhI
bAtoM ko dhyAna meM rakhate hue sahI dRSTi se artha nirNaya krnaa| aura usa
artha kA mUla sUtra ke zabdoM ke sAtha sambandha sthApita karanA niyukti kA
prayojana hai|' apara zabdoM meM kahA jAya to sUtra aura artha kA nizcita
sambandha batAne vAlI vyAkhyA niyukti hai| ayavA nizcaya se artha kA pratipAdana
karane vAlI yukti niyukti hai| suprasiddha jarmana vidvAn sArapeNTiyara ne
niyukti kI paribhASA karate hue likhA hai ki 'niyuktiyA~ apane pradhAna bhAga ke
kevala iMDeksa kA kAma karatI haiN| ve sabhI vistArayukta ghaTanAvaliyoM kA
saMkSepa se ullekha karatI haiN| nizIthaniyukti meM bhI sUtragata zabdoM kI
vyAkhyA nikSepapaddhati se kI gaI hai| prastuta niyukti kI gAthAe~ 1. lAmA ain
Avazyakaniyukti, gA. 88 2. sUtrArthayoH parasparaM niyojana sambandhana niyuktiH
/  -Avazyakaniyukti gA. 83 3. nizcayena arthapratipAdikayuktiH niyuktiH  /
AcArAMgani. 1/2/1 4. uttarAdhyayana kI bhUmikA, pR. 50-51 ( 65 )

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The commentary (bhāṣya) has been found. Where the commentator (charṇikāra)
points this out, it is revealed that this is the story of the appointment
(niyukti) and this is the story of the commentary. In this appointment, the
conduct of the ascetics (śramaṇācāra) has been depicted. - Niśīthabhāṣya  The
style of explanation of the appointments was extremely profound and concise. Its
main goal was to explain technical terms. To reveal the deep secrets of the
appointments, a poetic explanation in the Prakrit language, similar to the
appointments, was written, which is known as the commentary. The commentators
are the first to be credited with expressing the abundance of meaning hidden in
the words of the appointments. The author of the commentary on Niśītha, Śrī
Saṅghdāsaga, has many verses of the commentary in the Bṛhatkalpa and Vyavahāra
Bhāṣya. There are also many interesting and witty stories. The conduct of the
ascetics has been depicted from various perspectives. For example, the Pūlindas,
etc., who were non-Aryan, killed the ascetics, mistaking them for Aryans, while
they were going into the forest. The merchants went to distant countries for
trade. In that era, many types of coins were in circulation. The commentary
mentions the names of Bṛhatkalpa, Nandī Sūtra, Siddhasena, and Govinda-vācaka,
etc. - Niśīthachūṇi  After the commentary, the Jain ācāryas decided to write
prose commentary literature. They composed commentaries in pure Prakrit and in
Prakrit mixed with Sanskrit. The commentary which is famous by the name of
charṇi. Two commentaries were created on Niśītha, but only one is available
today. The author of the Niśīthachūṇi is Jinadāsagaṇi Mahātara. This commentary
is called the special commentary. This commentary discusses the original sūtra,
the appointment, and the commentary verses. The language of this commentary is
Prakrit mixed with Sanskrit.  We have presented a brief summary of the twenty
purposes of Niśītha in the previous lines. That summary is given according to
the original Niśītha āgama. In the Niśīthachūṇi, the commentator has given some
new facts from his own side to clarify the original meaning of Niśītha.
Therefore, we are giving here the essence of what is found in the Niśīthachūṇi,
so this is not repetition. The reader will experience for themselves how the
commentator has clarified the subject.  The commentator has first saluted the
Arhant, Siddha, and Sadhus, and also saluted the meaning-giver, Pradyumna
Mahāśramaṇa. The ācārya, agra, prakalpa, calikā, and Niśītha have all been
contemplated by the method of deposition (nikṣepa paddhati). The meaning of
Niśītha is aprakāśa + andhakāra. The Niśīthasūtra is for the correct judgment of
unilluminated words. In common parlance, Niśītha is used for the darkness of
night. Other meanings of Niśītha have also been given. Niśītha is that which
destroys all types of karma-dust.  The description of the first person servant
(pratisevaka) is given. After that, the nature of service (pratisevana) and the
one to be served (pratisevitavya) is explained, and then the topics of non-
negligence service (apramāda-pratisevana), simultaneous cognition
(sahasātkarana), negligent service (pramāda-pratisevana), anger, etc., passions
(kaṣāya), the contradiction of knowledge, vision, and conduct (jñāna-darśana-
cāritra), false speech (vikathā), senses (indriya), sleep (nidrā), etc., are
discussed. The more one indulges in laziness, sexual intercourse, sleep, hunger,
and anger, the more they increase like the cloth of Draupadi.  Sthāna-nidrā is
that in which the intense obscuring karma of vision (darśanāvaraṇa karma)
arises. The sleep in which the mind becomes stiff or fixed is sthāna-nidrā. To
clarify its nature, the commentator has given the examples of a particle
(pudgala), a sweetmeat (modaka), a potter (kumbhakāra), and an elephant's tusk
(hastidanta).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhASya se mila gaI haiN| jahA~ para carNikAra yaha saMketa karate haiM vahIM
para yaha patA calatA hai ki yaha niyukti kI gAthA hai aura yaha bhASya kI gAthA
hai| isa niyukti meM zramaNAcAra kA hI nirUpaNa huA hai  /  nizIthabhASya
niryaktiyoM kI vyAkhyAzailI atyanta gUr3ha aura saMkSipta thii| usakA mukhya
lakSya pAribhASika zabdoM kI vyAkhyA karanA thaa| niyuktiyoM ke gambhIra
rahasyoM ko prakaTa karane hetu niyuktiyoM kI taraha hI prAkRta bhASA meM
padyAtmaka vyAkhyA likhI gaI jo bhASya ke nAma se prasiddha hai| niyuktiyoM ke
zabdoM meM chipe hue arthabAhulya ko abhivyakta karane kA sarvaprathama zreya
bhASyakAroM ko hai| nizItha ke bhASya-racayitA zrI saMghadAsaga bhASya kI aneka
gAthAe~ bRhatkalpa aura vyavahArabhASya meM haiN| aneka rasaprada sarasa kathAe~
bhI haiN| vividha dRSTiyoM se zramaNAcAra kA nirUpaNa haA hai| jaise pUliMda Adi
anArya araNya meM jAte hae zramaNoM ko Arya samajha kara mAra dete the|
sArthavAha vyApArArtha dUra-dUra dezoM meM jAte the| usa yuga meM aneka prakAra
ke sikke pracalita the  /  bhASya meM bRhatkalpa, nandIsUtra, siddhasena aura
govinda-vAcaka Adi ke nAmoM kA ullekha hamA hai| nizIthacUNi bhASya ke pazcAt
jainAcAryoM ne gadyAtmaka vyAkhyA sAhitya likhane kA nizcaya kiyaa| unhoMne
zuddha prAkRta meM aura saMskRta mizrita prAkRta meM vyAkhyAnoM kI racanA kii|
jo vyAkhyA caNi ke nAma se vizruta hai| nizItha para do-do cUNiyAM nirmita huI,
kintu vartamAna meM usa para eka hI cUNi upalabdha hai  /  nizIthacUNi ke
racayitA jinadAsagaNi mahattara haiM  /  isa cUNi ko vizeSa cUNi kahate haiM  /
isa cUNi meM mUla sUtra, niyukti va bhASya gAthAoM kA vivecana hai  /  isa caNi
kI bhASA saMskRta mizrita prAkRta hai  /  hamane pUrva paMktiyoM meM nizItha ke
bIsa uddezakoM kA saMkSipta sAra prastuta kiyA hai| vaha sAra nizItha mUla Agama
ke anusAra diyA gayA hai| nizIthacaNi meM nizItha ke mUla bhAvoM ko spaSTa
karane ke lie kucha naye tathya caNikAra ne apanI ora se diye haiN| ataH hama
prabuddha pAThakoM ko nizIthacaNi meM jo varNana pAyA hai usakA sAra yahA~ de
rahe haiM, isalie yaha punarAvRtti nahIM hai  /  pAThaka svayaM anubhava kareMge
ki cUrNikAra ne kisa prakAra viSaya ko spaSTa kiyA hai| carNikAra ne
sarvaprathama arihanta, siddha aura sAdhuoM ko namaskAra kiyA hai aura
arthapradAtA pradyumna mahAzramaNa ko bhI namaskAra kiyA hai| prAcArya, agra,
prakalpa, calikA aura nizItha ina sabakA nikSepapaddhati se cintana kiyA gayA
hai| nizItha kA artha hai aprakAza+andhakAra  /  aprakAzita vacanoM ke sahI
nirNaya hetu nizIthasUtra hai| lokavyavahAra meM nizItha kA prayoga rAtri ke
andhakAra ke liye hotA hai| nizItha ke anya artha bhI diye gaye haiN| jisase
pATha prakAra ke karmapaMka naSTa kiye jAyeM vaha nizItha hai| prathama puruSa
pratisevaka kA varNana hai  /  usake pazcAt pratisevanA aura pratisevitavya kA
svarUpa batAte hue apramAda-pratisevanA, sahasAtkaraNa, pramAdapratisevanA,
krodha Adi kaSAya, jJAna-darzana-cAritra kI virAdhanA, vikathA, indriya, nidrA
Adi aneka mahattvapUrNa viSayoM kA vivecana kiyA gayA hai  /  Alasya, maithuna,
nidrA, kSudhA aura Akroza ina pAMcoM kA jitanA sevana kiyA jAya, utanA hI ve
draupadI ke dukUla kI taraha bar3hate rahate haiM  /  styAnaddhinidrA vaha hai
jisameM tIvra darzanAvaraNakarma kA udaya hotA hai, jisa nidrA meM citta styAna
kaThina yA jama jAya vaha styAnaddhi hai  /  usake svarUpa ko spaSTa karane ke
lie carNikAra ne pudgala, modaka, kumbhakAra aura hastIdanta ke udAharaNa diye
haiN|

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The treatise on the six types of livelihood, the faults associated with them,
exceptions, and atonement has been discussed in the preface. Considerations have
been given to questions, food, clothing, shelter, movement, sleep, travel,
speech, departure, arrival, etc.  While discussing the violence against living
beings, false speech has been divided into two parts: worldly and
transcendental. The worldly false speech includes the narratives of four cunning
individuals: Shashka, Elaashaadh, Mooldev, and Khindpaana. The basis of this
narrative of cunning is the ancient story of Dhurtākhyāna by Acharya Haribhadra.
Following this, there is a description of transcendental false speech, accepting
gifts without giving, sexual intercourse, possession, and nighttime meals, which
are divided into two parts: Dapiika and Kalpika. Dapiika describes the faults
associated with these subjects and prohibits their consumption. Kalpika
describes their exceptions. After the description of the primary virtues, there
is a description of the secondary virtues. It includes the description of
purification of the body, etc. The conclusion of the preface highlights that the
essence of the Nisheetha Pithika should only be given to the learned, not to the
unworthy.  The first section elaborates on the fourth great vow. It sheds light
on accepting five types of Chilmilka, their evidence, and usage. It also
discusses the stick and its utility. The rules and regulations for tearing
clothes, sewing, etc., have also been mentioned.  The second section prohibits
the acceptance of foot-washing water, the use of fragrant substances, harsh
language, and bathing, etc. It also prohibits praising the giver before and
after giving. There are 64 types of material substances. These include 24 types
of grains like barley, wheat, rice, etc.; 24 types of gems like gold, copper,
silver, iron, lead, gold, stone, berry, gem, pearl, coral, conch, tin, agarwood,
sandalwood, silk cloth, wood, teeth, leather, hair, fragrance, medicinal
substances, etc.; three types of immovable objects like land, house, tree; two
types of bipeds like carts, etc., and humans; ten types of quadrupeds like cow,
camel, buffalo, goat, sheep, horse, mare, stallion, donkey, elephant; and the
64th is a cooking utensil.  The body of a person who has died in bed is not
acceptable. Accepting it results in the atonement of a small fast. The treatise
discusses the following: (1) Who is a Saagarika? (2) When does he become a
Shayyatar? (3) Types of his body, (4) When does he become a non-Shayyatar? (5)
How can a Saagarika be avoided by a restrained person? (6) Faults associated
with accepting the body of a Saagarika, (7) Under what circumstances can the
body of a Saagarika be accepted? (8) Accepting it with care, (9) Accepting it
from one or many Saagarikas, etc. There are five types of Saagarikas: Saagarika,
Shayyatar, giver, house, and body. While explaining the difference between a bed
and a mattress, it is stated that the bed is equal to the entire body, and the
mattress is two and a half hands long. It also elaborates on its various types.
While discussing the topic of Upadhi, it mentions two types: Avadhiyukt and
Upgrihit. For Jinakalpikas, there are twelve types of Upadhi Avadhiyukt, for
Sthavirakalpika, there are fourteen types, and for Sadhvis, there are twenty-
five types. Jinakalpika are of two types: Paanipatra Bhoji and Pratigrahadhari.
There are eight categories of the period of Jinakalpika. They have two, three,
four, five, nine, ten, eleven, and twelve types. The naked Paanipatra is the
most inferior...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaTjIvanikAya kI yatanA, usameM lagane vAle doSa, apavAda aura prAyazcitta kA
pIThikA meM vivecana kiyA gayA hai| prazana, pAna, vasana, vasati, halana-
calana-zayana, bhramaNa, bhASaNa, gamana, Agamana Adi para vicAra kiyaa| gayA
hai| prANAtipAta kA vivecana karate hue mRSAvAda ko laukika aura lokottara ina
do bhAgoM meM vibhakta kiyA gayA hai  /  laukika mRSAvAda meM zazaka, elASAr3ha
mUladeva, khiNDapANA ina cAra dhUrtoM ke AkhyAna haiM  /  isa dhUrtAkhyAna kA
mUla AdhAra AcArya haribhadrakRta dhurtAkhyAna kI prAcIna kathA hai  /  isake
bAda lokottara mRSAvAda, adattAdAna, maithuna, parigraha aura rAtribhojana kA
varNana hai, jo dapikA sambandhI aura kalpikA sambandhI do bhAgoM meM vibhakta
hai| dapikA meM una viSayoM meM lagane vAle doSoM kA varNana hai aura una doSoM
ke sevana kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai  /  kalpikA meM unake apavAdoM kA varNana
hai| mUlaguNapratisevanA ke pazcAt uttaraguNapratisevanA kA varNana hai| usameM
piNDavizuddhi Adi kA varNana hai  /  pIThikA ke upasaMhAra meM isa bAta para
prakAza DAlA hai ki nizIthapIThikA kA sUtrArtha bahuzruta ko hI denA cAhie,
ayogya puruSa ko nahIM  /  prathama uddezaka meM caturtha mahAvata para vistAra
se vizleSaNa hai| isameM pAMca prakAra kI cilimilikAoM ko grahaNa karanA, usakA
pramANa aura upayoga para prakAza DAlA hai| lAThI aura usakI upayogitA para bhI
vicAra kiyA gayA hai  /  vastra phAr3ane, sIne Adi ke niyamopaniyama bhI batAye
haiN| dvitIya uddezaka meM pAdapoMchana ke grahaNa, sugandhita padArthoM ke
saMghane, kaThora bhASA kA upayoga karane tathA snAna Adi karane kA niSedha hai
aura dAtA kI pUrva va pazcAt stuti kA bhI niSedha kiyA gayA hai| dravyasaMstava
64 prakAra kA hai| usameM java, godhUma, zAli Adi 24 prakAra ke dhAnya ;
suvarNa, taMba, rajata, loha, zIzaka, hiraNya, pASANa, bera, maNi, mauktika,
pravAla, zaMkha, tiniza, agaru, candana, abhilAta vastra, kASTha, danta, carma,
bAla, gandha, dravya auSadha ye 24 prakAra ke ratna; bhUmi, ghara, taru ye tIna
prakAra ke sthAvara; zakaTa Adi aura manuSya ye do prakAra ke dvipada; gau,
uSTrI, mahiSI, aja, meSa, azva, azvatara, ghoTaka, gardabha, hastI ye dasa
prakAra ke catuSpada aura 64vAM kupya upakaraNa hai| zayyAtara kA piNDa agrAhya
hai| use grahaNa karane para mAsalaghu kA prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /  (1) sAgArikA
kauna hotA hai, (2) vaha zayyAtara kaba banatA hai, (3) usake piNDa ke prakAra,
(4) azayyAtara kaba banatA hai, sAgArika kisa saMyata dvArA parihartavya hai.
(6) sAgArika-piNDa ke grahaNa se doSa, (7) kisa paristhiti meM sAgArikApiNDa
grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai, (8) yatanA se grahaNa karanA, (9) eka yA aneka
sAgArikoM se grahaNa karanA Adi viSayoM para cintana kiyA gayA hai| sAgArika ke
sAgArika, zayyAtara, dAtA, ghara tara ye pAMca prakAra haiM  /  zayyA aura
saMstAraka kA antara batAte hue kahA hai ki zayyA pUre zarIra ke barAbara hotI
hai aura saMstAraka DhAI hAtha lambA hotA hai  /  usake bhI bheda-prabheda kA
vistAra se varNana hai  /  upadhi kA vivecana karate hue usake avadhiyukta aura
upagRhIta ye do prakAra batAye haiN| jinakalpikoM ke lie bAraha prakAra kI,
sthavirakalpikoM ke lie caudaha prakAra kI aura sAdhviyoM ke lie paccIsa prakAra
kI upadhi avadhiyukta hai| jinakalpika pANipAtra bhojI aura pratigrahadhArI ye
do prakAra ke hote haiN| jinakalpika kI avadhi kI ATha koTiyAM haiN| unake do,
tIna, cAra, pAMca, nau, dasa, gyAraha, bAraha ye bheda haiN| nirvastra pANipAtra
kI jaghanya

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
There are two types of Upadhi Rajoharan and Mukhavastrika. If the Panipatras are
fully clothed and accept a cloth, then there are three types of them. The third
Uddeshak discusses the faults that occur during Bhikshagrahan and the atonement
for their purification. It also contemplates other faults. The fourth Uddeshak
describes favorable and unfavorable upsargas, various types of Kayotsarga,
Samachari, the entry of a Shraman in place of a Nirgranthi, the characteristics
of a king, minister, merchant, priest, caravan leader, village headman, national
headman, and Ganadhar, the service of a sick Shramani, the difference between
Sanrambh, Samarabh, and Prarabh, humor and its various causes. The fifth
Uddeshak describes the different types of Prabhutik beds, coverings, etc., and
the Saparikarma bed and its fourteen types. The interaction between Jain
Shramans regarding food, etc., is called Sambhog in Jain technical terms, and
the relationship is called Sambhogik Sambandh. The Churnikar has given some
historical anecdotes to explain the Sambhogik Sambandh, such as: Bhagwan
Mahavira, his disciple Sudharma, his Jambu, his Prabhav, his Shayambhav, his
Yashobhdra, his Sambhut, his Sthulbhadra, Sthulbhadra's Arya Mahagir, and Prarya
Suhasti, these two were the main disciples of the era. Chandragupta's son
Bindusara, his son Ashoka, and his son Kunal. The sixth Uddeshak describes Guru
Chaturmasik. Its main subject is the faults related to sexual intercourse and
atonement. The seventh Uddeshak describes the nature of Vikrit Ahar, Kundal,
Gun, Mani Tudiy, Tisiriy, Valambha, Palambahar, Ardhahar, Ekavali, Muktavali,
Kanakavali, Ratnavali, Patt, Mukut, etc., and prohibits their wearing. It also
prohibits embracing, etc. The eighth Uddeshak explains the meaning of Udyan,
Udyangrih, Udyanshala, Niryan, Niryanagrih, Niryanashala, Att, Attalak, Charika,
Prakar, Dwar, Gopur, Dak, Dakmarg, Dakpatha, Daktir, Dakasthan, Shunyagrih,
Shunyashala, Bhinnigrih, Bhinnashala, Kutagar, Kosthagar, Trinagrih, Trinashala,
Tushgrih, Tushashala, etc., and informs the Shraman that he should not wander
alone with a woman in all these places. He should not stay with family members,
etc., at night, and there is a provision for atonement if he does. There is also
a provision for atonement for searching for and consuming food, etc., at night.
The ninth Uddeshak states that the one who is Murdhaabhishikt, i.e., who has
been consecrated, who enjoys the kingdom along with the commander-in-chief,
minister, priest, merchant, and caravan leader, his Pind is forbidden for the
Shraman. This rule does not apply to those who are not Murdhaabhishikt. Ashan,
Pan, Khady and Swady, Vastra, Patra, Kambal and Padprachhan, these eight items
come under Rajpind. The Shraman should not go to Jirnantaspur, Navantaspur, and
Kanyakantaspur. The nature of Kosthagar, Bhandagar, Panagar, Kshiragrih,
Ganjashala, Mahanasashala, etc., has also been described. (68)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 upadhi rajoharaNa aura mukhavastrikA ye do hotI | yadi pANipAtra - savastra hai
aura eka kapar3A grahaNa karatA hai to usake tIna prakAra haiM  /  tRtIya udde
zaka meM bhikSAgrahaNa meM lagane vAle doSoM aura unakI zuddhi ke lie
prAyazcitta kA vidhAna 1 anya doSoM ke sambandha meM bhI cintana kiyA hai  /
caturtha udde zaka meM anukUla aura pratikUla upasarga, kAyotsarga ke vividha
prakAra, samAcArI, nirgranthI ke sthAna para zramaNa kA praveza, rAjA, amAtya,
zreSThi, purohita, sArthavAha, grAmamahattara, rASTramahattara, gaNadhara ke
lakSaNa, glAna zramaNI kI sevA, saMraMbha, samAraMbha aura prArambha ke bheda-
prabheda, hAsya aura usake utpanna hone ke vividha kAraNoM kA varNana hai  /
paMcama udde zaka meM prAbhRtika zayyA, chAdana Adi bheda, saparikarmazayyA,
usake caudaha prakAroM kA varNana hai  /  jaina zramaNoM meM paraspara AhAra Adi
kA jo vyavahAra hotA hai vaha jaina pAribhASika zabda meM saMbhoga kahalAtA hai
aura usa sambandha ko sAMbhogika sambandha kahate haiM  /  cUrNikAra ne
sAMbhogika sambandha ko samajhAne ke lie kucha aitihAsika prAkhyAna diye haiM,
yathA- bhagavAna mahAvIra, unake ziSya sudharmA, unake jambU, unake prabhava,
unake zayyaMbhava, unake yazobhadra, unake saMbhUta, unake sthUlabhadra,
sthUlabhadra ke Arya mahAgiri aura prArya suhastI ye do yugapradhAna ziSya hue
/  candragupta kA putra bindusAra, usakA azoka aura usakA putra kuNAla huA  /
chaThe uddezaka meM gurucAturmAsika kA varNana hai  /  isakA mukhya pratipAdya
viSaya maithuna sambandhI doSa aura prAyazcitta hai  /  saptama uddezaka vikRta
AhAra, kuNDala, guNa, maNi tuDiya, tisariya, vAlaMbhA, palaMbAhAra, ardhahAra,
ekAvalI, muktAvalI, kanakAvalI, ratnAvalI, paTTa, mukuTa Adi prAbhUSaNa kA
svarUpa batAkara unako dhAraNa karane kA niSedha hai va AliGganAdi kA niSedha
kiyA gayA hai  /  aSTama udde zaka meM udyAna, udyAnagRha, udyAnazAlA, niryANa,
niryANagRha, niryANazAlA, aTTa, aTTAlaka, carikA, prAkAra, dvAra, gopura, daka,
dakamArga, dakapathA, dakatIra, dakasthAna, zUnyagRha, zUnyazAlA, bhinnagRha,
bhinnazAlA, kUTAgAra, koSThAgAra, tRNagRha, tRNazAlA, tuSagRha, tuSazAlA Adi kA
artha spaSTa kara zramaNa ko sUcita kiyA hai ki ina sabhI sthAnoM meM akelI
mahilA ke sAtha vicaraNa na kare  /  nizA meM svajana - parijana Adi ke sAtha
bhI na rahe aura rahane para prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai| sAtha hI rAtri meM
bhojana Adi kI anveSaNA karanA, grahaNa karanA Adi ke lie bhI prAyazcitta kA
vidhAna kiyA gayA hai  /  nauveM udde zaka meM batAyA hai ki jo mUrdhAbhiSikta
hai arthAt abhiSeka ho cukA hai, jo senApati, amAtya, purohita, zreSThI aura
sArthavAha sahita rAjya kA upabhoga karatA hai, usakA piNDa zramaNa ke lie
varjya hai  /  jo mUrdhAbhiSikta nahIM hai usake lie yaha niyama nahIM hai|
azana, pAna, khAdya aura svAdya, vastra, pAtra, kambala aura pAdapracchana ye
prATha vastue~ rAjapiNDa meM AtI haiM  /  zramaNa ko jIrNAntaHpura, navAntaHpura
aura kanyakAntaHpura meM nahIM jAnA cAhie  /  koSThAgAra, bhANDAgAra, pAnAgAra,
kSIragRha, gaMjazAlA, mahAnasazAlA Adi kA bhI svarUpa batAyA gayA hai  /  ( 68 )

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The tenth Uddeshak discusses the excessiveness, harshness, etc., of language and
describes its atonement. It also details the faults and atonement of religious
food, the fickleness of the sick, their suffering, and the atonement for
neglecting them. The synonyms for Varshavas and Paryushana are given. The story
of Saraswati, the sister of Aryakalaka, who was extremely beautiful, being
abducted by King Gardhabhilla of Ujjayini, is narrated.  The eleventh Uddeshak
discusses the acceptance of vessels. It categorizes fear into four types: (1)
fear arising from Pisachas, etc., (2) fear arising from humans, etc., (3) fear
arising from plants, and (4) fear arising suddenly. It then describes seven
fears related to this world, the next world, etc.  It prohibits ineligible
initiation, stating that eighteen types of men, twenty types of women, and ten
types of eunuchs are ineligible. It categorizes child initiation into three
types: (1) a child of seven or eight years is an excellent child, (2) a child of
five or six years is a medium child, and (3) a child of four years or less is an
inferior child. All these are ineligible for initiation. A child older than
eight years is considered eligible for initiation. It also describes the various
types of ineligible individuals for initiation, such as the elderly, the sick,
the insane, and the foolish. Sixteen types of diseases and eight types of
ailments are described as per the context. The difference between an ailment and
a disease is that an ailment is cured quickly, while a disease takes a long time
to cure. Child death and the death of a learned person are also analyzed in
detail.  The twelfth Uddeshak describes the bondage and liberation, rejection,
breaking, etc., related to the Trisaprani.  The thirteenth Uddeshak discusses
Kayotsarga on smooth earth, stone, etc., harsh words to a householder, mantras,
benefits and losses, the location of the dhatu, performing Vaman Virechan
Pratikarmas, praising and honoring the neighbor, consuming Dhatripinda,
Dootipinda, Nimittapinda, Chikitsapinda, and Krodhadipinda, all of which are
eligible for Chaturlaghu atonement.  The fourteenth Uddeshak describes the
faults related to vessels and prescribes atonement for liberation from them.
The fifteenth Uddeshak prohibits Shramanas and Shramanis from eating with a
conscious mind. It describes four types of raw mangoes: Ussetim, Sansetim,
Uvakkhad, and Paliy, and four types of ripe mangoes. It also sheds light on the
method of accepting Talapralamb from the perspective of Shramanas and Shramanis.
The sixteenth Uddeshak prohibits Shramanas from wearing body ornaments and
excessively bright robes. Shramanas and Shramanis should reside in places where
their celibacy is not violated.  Food should not be accepted from a despised or
disgusting family. There are two types of despised families: Itvarik and
Yavatkathik. Families with Sutak, etc., are despised for a certain period.
Blacksmiths, distillers, and leatherworkers are Yavatkathik-despised families.
The Aryadesh extends from Magadha in the east to Sthuna in the west, and from
Kaushambi in the south to Kunala in the north, where Shramanas should wander.
This is also the belief of the commentator.  The seventeenth Uddeshak describes
the nature of songs, humor, music, dance, and acting, and considers their
practice unsuitable for Shramanas, prescribing atonement for it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dasaveM uddezaka meM bhASA kI agAr3hatA, paruSatA prAdi kA vivecana kara usake
prAyazcitta kA varNana kiyA hai| AdhArmika AhAra ke doSa va prAyazcitta, rugNa
kI vaiyAvRtya, usakI yatanA, upekSA karane para prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai|
varSAvAsa paryuSaNA ke ekArthaka zabda diye gaye haiM  /  Arya kAlaka kI bhaginI
sarasvatI jo atyanta rUpavatI thI-ujjayinI ke rAjA gardabhilla dvArA usake
apaharaNa Adi kI kathA dI gaI hai| gyArahaveM uddezaka meM pAtra-grahaNa kI
carcA hai| bhaya ke pahale cAra bheda kiye haiM-(1) pizAca prAdi se utpanna
bhaya, (2) manuSyAdi se utpanna bhaya, (3) vanaspati se utpanna bhaya aura (4)
akasmAt utpanna hone vAlA bhaya  /  phira ihaloka, paraloka Adi sAta bhaya
batAye haiN| ayogyadIkSA kA niSedha karate hue kahA hai ki aThAraha prakAra ke
puruSa, bIsa prakAra kI striyAM aura dasa prakAra ke napuMsaka ye ayogya haiN|
bAladIkSA ke tIna bheda kiye haiM-(1) sAta-ATha varSa kA bAlaka utkRSTa bAla
hai, (2) pA~ca-chaha varSa kI Ayu vAlA madhyama bAla hai aura (3) cAra varSa
taka kI Ayu vAlA jaghanya bAla hai| ye sabhI dIkSA ke ayogya haiN| ATha varSa se
adhika Ayu vAlA bAlaka hI dIkSA ke yogya mAnA gayA hai  /  vRddha, rogI,
unmatta, mUr3ha Adi jo dIkSA ke ayogya haiM, unakA bhI vividha bhedoM se varNana
kiyA hai| prasaMgAnusAra solaha prakAra ke roga, ATha prakAra kI vyAdhiyoM kA
bhI nirUpaNa hai| vyAdhi aura roga meM yahI antara hai ki vyAdhi kA nAza zIghra
hotA hai, kintu roga kA nAza lambe samaya meM hotA hai| bAlamaraNa aura
paNDitamaraNa para bhI vistAra se vizleSaNa kiyA gayA hai| bArahaveM uddezaka
meM trasaprANI sambandhI bandhana va mukti, pratyAkhyAna, bhaMga Adi kA varNana
huA hai  /  terahaveM uddezaka meM snigdha pRthvI, zilA Adi para kAyotsarga,
gRhastha ko kaTuka vacana, mantra, lAbha va hAni, dhAtu kA sthAna Adi batAnA,
vamana virecana pratikarma karanA, pArzvastha kuzIla kI prazaMsA va vandana,
dhAtrIpiNDa, dUtIpiNDa, nimittapiNDa, cikitsApiNDa, krodhAdipiNDa kA bhoga
karanA ye sabhI caturlaghu prAyazcitta ke yogya haiM  /  caudahaveM uddezaka meM
pAtra sambandhI doSoM kA nirUpaNa kara usase mukta hone ke lie prAyazcitta kA
vidhAna hai| pandrahaveM uddezaka meM zramaNa-zramaNiyoM ko sacitta bAma khAne
kA niSedha kiyA hai| dravya Ama ke ussetima, saMsetima, uvakkhaDa aura pAliya ye
cAra bheda haiM aura palita prAma ke cAra prakAra batAye haiN| zramaNa-
zramaNiyoM kI dRSTi se tAlapralamba ke grahaNa kI vidhi para bhI prakAza DAlA
hai| solahaveM uddezaka meM zramaNa ko dehavibhUSA aura atiujjvala upadhi
dhAraNa kA niSedha kiyA hai| zramaNazramaNiyoM ko aise sthAna para rahanA cAhie
jahAM para rahane se unake brahmacarya kI virAdhanA na ho| jugupsita yAni
ghRNita kula meM prAhAra grahaNa nahIM karanA caahie| jUgupsita itvarika aura
yAvatkathika rUpa meM do prakAra haiN| sUtaka Adi vAle ghara kucha samaya ke lie
jugupsita hote haiN| luhAra, kalAla, carmakAra, ye yAvatkathika-jugupsita kula
haiN| pUrva meM magadha se lekara pazcima meM sthUNA paryanta aura dakSiNa meM
kauzAmbI se lekara uttara meM kuNAlA paryanta Aryadeza hai, jahA~ para zramaNa
ko vicaranA caahie| bhASyakAra kI bhI yahI mAnyatA rahI hai| satrahaveM uddezaka
meM gIta, hAsya, vAdya, nRtya, abhinaya Adi kA svarUpa batAkara zramaNa ke lie
unakA AcaraNa karanA yogya nahIM mAnA gayA hai aura prAyazcitta kA vidhAna kiyA
gayA hai|

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The eighteenth Uddeshak has discussed the faults related to boats. It describes
the atonement for boarding a boat, buying a boat, taking a boat from water to
land and land to water, filling or emptying water in a boat, rowing a boat,
tying a rope to a boat, etc. The nineteenth Uddeshak has discussed about
Swadhyay (self-study) and Adhyapan (teaching). It highlights the time, non-time,
subject of Swadhyay, faults incurred by doing Swadhyay during non-time, faults
incurred by teaching an ineligible person, a person with side-effects and a
greedy person, and faults incurred by not teaching an eligible person. The
twentieth Uddeshak has discussed about monthly and other observances, counter-
consumption, criticism, atonement, etc. In the conclusion of the Churni, the
author has mentioned his name as Jinadasgani Mahttar and the name of the Churni
as Visheshchurni. This Churni holds a special place in Churnisahitya. It
contains a detailed explanation of the rules and opinions of conduct. It is a
unique collection of ancient cultural, social, and philosophical material of
India. It is a beautiful collection of many historical and mythological stories.
The stories of Dhurtakhyan, Tarangavati, Malayavati, Magadhasen, Aryakalak, etc.
are inspiring. Nishithchurnidurgapadavyakhya There were two Acharyas named Shri
Chandrasuri in the Jain tradition. One was a disciple of Maldhari
Hemchandrasuri, while the other was a disciple of the Guru couple Shri
Sheelbhadrasuri and Dhaneshwarasuri. His other name was Parsvadevgan. He wrote a
commentary called Nishith Churnidurgapadavyakhya on the twentieth Uddeshak of
Nishoshan. It was written to make the difficult parts of the Churni simple and
easy, as the commentator himself has admitted. But this commentary has become
monotonous due to its discussion on the types of months, days, etc. Along with
this, the second Nishith, named 'Ek Adhyayan', was written by Pandit Dalsukh
Bhai Malvaniya from the Shuvingsutra Lai. The edition of Nishiyasutra Bhashya,
Churni, and Parishista in four parts edited by Lalji M. 'Kamal' was also
published from Agra. A detailed preface was also written on it, which is an
introduction to his serious study. It was published in 1918 by the Jain Sahitya
Sanshodhak Samiti, Pune. The first Hindi translation of Nishithsutra along with
the original text was done by Acharya Amolka Rishiji M., which was published by
Sukhdev Sahay Jwalaprasad Johari, Hyderabad, Veer Samvat 2446. Acharya Pravar
Shri Ghasilalji M. has written a commentary on Nishith in Sanskrit language,
which was published by Jain Shastroddhar Samiti, Rajkot. Dharmopadeishta
Phulchandji M. 'Pupphabhikkhu' published the original text of thirty-two Agamas
in two parts of Suttagame. The original text of Nishiy was published in it. In
the book called Navsutani, the original text of Nishihbhanyan was also published
in the edition done by Yuvacharya Mahaprajnajji under the leadership of Acharya
Shri Tulsiji. It also contains variations in the text. Thus, Nishith has been
published from various places till today. But no edition containing a discussion
on Nishith has come out, which can reveal the secrets hidden in Nishith. The
main reason for this is confidentiality. ( 70 )

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aThArahaveM udde zaka meM naukA sambandhI doSoM para cintana kiyA gayA hai|
naukA para dhArUr3ha honA, naukA kharIdanA, naukA ko jala se sthala aura sthala
se jala meM lenA, naukA meM pAnI bharanA yA khAlI karanA, naukA ko khenA, nAva
se rassI bAMdhanA Adi ke prAyazcitta kA varNana hai  /  unnIsaveM udde zaka meM
svAdhyAya aura adhyApana ke sambandha meM cintana kiyA hai| svAdhyAya kA kAla,
akAla, viSaya, asvAdhyAyakAla meM svAdhyAya karane se lagane vAle doSa, ayogya
vyakti ko, pArzvastha va kuzIla ko adhyayana karAne se lagane vAle doSa aura
yogya vyakti ko na par3hAne se lagane vAle doSoM para prakAza DAlA hai| bIsaveM
udde zaka meM mAsika Adi parihArasthAna, pratisevana, Alocana, prAyazcitta Adi
para cintana kiyA gayA hai  /  cUrNi ke upasaMhAra meM lekhaka ne apanA nAma
jinadAsagaNi mahattara batAyA hai aura cUrNi kA nAma vizeSacUrNi likhA hai|
prastuta cUrNi kA cUrNisAhitya meM eka viziSTa sthAna hai| isameM AcAra ke
niyamopaniyama ko savistRta vyAkhyA hai| bhArata kI sAMskRtika, sAmAjika,
dArzanika prAcIna sAmagrI kA isameM anUThA saMgraha hai| aneka aitihAsika aura
paurANika kathAoM kA sundara saMkalana hai  /  dhUrtAkhyAna, taraMgavatI,
malayavatI, magadhasena, AryakAlaka Adi kI kathAe~ preraNAtmaka haiN|
nizIthacUNidurgapadavyAkhyA jaina paramparA meM zrI candrasUri nAma ke do AcArya
the| eka maladhArI hemacandrasUri ke ziSya the to dUsare candrakulI zrI
zIlabhadrasUri aura dhanezvarasUri guru yugala ke ziSya the| jinakA dUsarA nAma
pArzvadevagaNa bhI thA  /  unhoMne nizoSaNa ke bIsaveM uddezaka para nizItha
cUrNidurgapadavyAkhyA nAmaka TIkA likhI hai| cUrNi ke kaThina sthaloM ko sarala
va sugama banAne ke lie isakI racanA kI gaI hai, jaisA ki vyAkhyAkAra ne svayaM
svIkAra kiyA hai| para yaha vRtti mahinoM ke prakAra dina Adi ke sambandha meM
vivecana karane se nIrasa ho gaI hai| sAtha upAdhyAya zrI amara munijI ma. aura
paNDita muni zrI kanhaiyAprakAzana sanmati jJAnapITha AgarA se huA hai  /  usakA
dvitIya nizItha eka adhyayana nAma se paNDita dalasukhabhAI mAlavaNiyA ne
DabalyU zUviMga mUlasUtra lAi nizIyasUtra bhASya, cUrNi aura pariziSTa ke lAlajI
ma. 'kamala' dvArA sampAdita cAra bhAgoM kA saMskaraNa bhI punaH AgarA se hI
prakAzita huA hai| usa para savistRta prastAvanA bhI likhI, jo unake gambhIra
adhyayana kI paricAyikA hai siga 1918 jaina sAhitya saMzodhaka samiti pUnA se
prakAzita huaa| nizIthasUtra kA sarvaprathama mUlapATha ke sAtha hindI anuvAda
prAcArya amolaka RSijI ma. ne kiyA, jisakA prakAzana sukhadevasahAya
jvAlAprasAda jauharI haidarAbAda vIra saM. 2446 meM huA  /  zrAcAryapravara zrI
ghAsIlAlajI ma. ne nizItha para saMskRta bhASA meM TIkA likhI hai aura vaha
jaina zAstroddhAra samiti rAjakoTa se prakAzita huA  /  suttAgame ke do bhAga
meM dharmopadeSTA phUlacandajI ma. 'pupphabhikkhU' ne battIsa AgamoM ke
mUlapATha prakAzita kiye| usameM nizIya kA mUla pATha prakAzita huA hai|
navasutAni nAmaka grantha meM prAcArya zrI tulasIjI ke netRtva meM yuvAcArya
mahAprajJajI ne jo sampAdana kiyA, usameM mUlapATha ke rUpa meM nisIhajbhayaNaM
bhI prakAzita hai  /  isameM pAThAntara bhI diye gaye haiM  /  isa prakAra
nizItha para Aja dina taka vibhinna sthAnoM se prakAzana hue haiN| para nizItha
para vivecana yukta koI bhI saMskaraNa nahIM nikalA, jo nizItha meM rahe hue
rahasyoM ko udghATita kara ske| isakA mUla kAraNa gopanIyatA hI hai| ( 70 )

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Present Edition  There has long been a need for a Hindi translation and
commentary on the Nishīth Sūtra. The late Yuvacharya Mahāmānīchi Shri Madhukar
Muni ji, in the prime of his life, presented the Āgama Publication Scheme. Due
to the cooperation of many learned and generous individuals, this scheme quickly
took shape. During his lifetime, many Prāgamas were published in a short period
of time. Yuvacharya Madhukar Muni ji, in the beginning of the scheme, casually
told his close friend, the expert in Āgama literature, the proponent of
Dhanuyoga, the learned Pandit Shri Kanhaiyalal ji M. 'Kamal', that you should
write the editing and commentary of the Muni Pravara Chhedasūtras. How could
Kanhaiyalal ji M. refuse the request of the affectionate Madhukar Muni ji? He
agreed, but who knew that the Yuvacharya Shri would suddenly pass away. His
passing did cause some disruption, but the editorial board and publication
committee were determined to complete this task. As a result, thirty-two Āgamas
have been published.  Muni Shri Kanhaiyalal ji M. 'Kamal' has been dedicated to
the service of the Shruta since his youth. He has published the voluminous works
of Ganitānuyoga, Dharmakatānuyoga, and Charanakaranānuyoga in several volumes,
after hard work. The publication of Dravyānuyoga is also going to be in several
volumes. He has also done a brilliant editing of every Āgama. It was due to his
hard work that the Nishīth Bhāshya and Vishēshachūrni were published from Agra.
The translation and commentary of Nishīth has been written by a learned scholar,
an expert in Āgama literature. The commentary reveals the author's excellent
talent effortlessly. He has written a concise and comprehensive commentary in
the light of ancient texts. It is his nature to reach the bottom of the subject
and present it in beautiful and elegant language.  The original text of the
Nishīth Sūtra is pure. The translation is so beautiful that the reader easily
understands the subject while reading. The biggest feature of the translation is
that it is fluent. Writing a commentary on an Āgama like Nishīth, which is full
of profound secrets, is not a joke. His natural erudition is evident in them.
Pandit Shri Tilak Muni ji's affectionate cooperation has also been received in
the work of this present translation and commentary. Under the leadership of
Kanhaiyalal ji M. 'Kamal', he dedicated himself to this editing work due to his
ill health. The excellent talent of Kanhaiyalal ji M. 'Kamal' and the hard work
of Tilak Muni ji, thus, through this combination of gem and gold, the editing of
the book has been beautiful and quick.  Jain Sthānak, Pali (Raj.) Holi Festival,
Date: 28-2-91  (71)  -Upācharya Devendra Muni

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastuta saMskaraNa cirakAla se nizIyasUtra para hindI anuvAda aura vivecana kI
apekSA thii| svargIya yuvAcArya mahAmanIcI zrI madhukara munijI ne jIvana kI
sAnvavelA meM Agama prakAzana yojanA prastuta kii| aneka manIdhIpravaroM ke
sahayoga ke kAraNa isa yojanA ne zIghra hI mUrtarUpa grahaNa kiyaa| unake jIvana
kAla meM dhaura svalpa samaya meM aneka prAgama prakAzita ho gye| yuvAcArya
madhukara munijI ke ananya mitra bhAgamasAhitya ke marmajJa santarasna dhanuyoga
pravartaka paNDitapravara zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. 'kamala' se unhoMne yojanA ke
prArambha meM hI sahaja rUpa se kahA ki munipravara chedasUtroM kA sampAdana
aura vivecana Apako likhanA hai snehamUrti madhukara munijI kI bAta ko
kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. kaise TAla sakate the| unhoMne svIkRti pradAna kI para kise
patA thA ki yuvAcAryazrI kA Akasmika svargavAsa ho jaaegaa| unake svargavAsa se
kucha vyavadhAna avazya AyA para sampAdaka maNDala aura prakAzana samiti ne yaha
dRr3ha saMkalpa kiyA ki yaha kArya avazya hI sampanna kareMge  /
pariNAmasvarUpa battIsa AgamoM kA prakAzana ho sakA hai  /  muni zrI
kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. 'kamala' jIvana ke UpAkAla se hI zrutasevA meM samarpita rahe
haiN| unhoMne kaThina zrama kara gaNitAnuyoga, dharmakathAnuyoga, aura
caraNakaraNAnuyoga ke virATukAya grantha kaI jildoM meM prakAzita kara diye haiM
/  dravyAnuyoga kA prakAzana bhI kaI jildoM meM hone jA rahA hai| unhoMne hara
eka AgamoM kA zAnadAra [sampAdana bhI kiyA hai| unhIM ke kaThina zrama ke
phalasvarUpa hI nizISa bhASya va vizeSacUrNi sahita AgarA se prakAzita huA thA
/  AgamasAhitya ke marmajJa manISI ke dvArA nizItha kA anuvAda aura vivecana
likhA gayA hai| vivecana meM lekhaka kI prakRSTa pratibhA sahajarUpa se prakaTa
huI hai  /  prAcIna granthoM ke prAloka meM unhoMne bahuta hI saMkSipta meM
sArapUrNa vivecana likhA hai  /  viSaya ke talachaTa taka pahuMcakara viSaya ko
bahuta hI sundara sarasa zabdAvalI meM prastuta karanA unakA svabhAva hai  /
nizIthasUtra kA mUlapATha zuddha hai| anuvAda itanA adhika sundara huA hai ki
pAThaka par3hate-par3hate viSaya ko sahaja hI hRdayaMgama kara letA hai  /
anuvAda kI sabase bar3I vizeSatA hai ki vaha pravAhapUrNa hai  /  nizItha jaise
gurugambhIra rahasya bhare Agama para vivecana likhanA haMsI-majAka kA khela
nahIM hai| unameM unakI sahaja bahuzrutatA ke darzana hote haiM  /  prastuta
anuvAda aura vivecana Adi ke kArya meM paNDitapravara zrI tilokamunijI kA
snehapUrNa sahakAra bhI milA hai| kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. 'kamala' ke netRtva meM
rahakara unake svAsthya kI pratikUlatA hone se unhoMne samarpita hokara isa
sampAdana kArya ke lie sahayoga pradAna kiyaa| kanhaiyAlAlajI ma. 'kamala' kI
prakRSTa pratibhA prora tilokamunijI kA kaThina zrama, isa prakAra maNi-kAJcana
saMyoga se grantha kA sampAdana sundara aura zIghra ho sakA hai| jaina sthAnaka,
pAlI (rAja0 ) holI parva, di. 28-2-91 ( 71 ) -upAcArya devendramuni hai

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Table of Contents  **Serial Number** | **Topic** | **Page Number** ------- |
-------- | -------- 1 | **Penance Table** 1. From Dependence, 2. From Eagerness,
Equivalent Tapas Options for Fasting. 3. From Attachment. | -9 1 | **Objective**
1. Vedamohaday-Penance | 8-12 | Mangalacharan, Inquiry, Script Salutation,
Inquiry into the Originality of Uththānikas, Bhikshu Word also includes
Bhikshunī, Two Karana to Three Karana, Act of Approval. Penance for Angavān
Operation etc. | | Seven Examples, Angadān Explanation, Analysis of Words like
Abhyangan etc., Brief Text Information, Education | | Vachan, Relevant Meaning
of "Achett Shrot". | | Penance for Cleaning Ten Flowers etc. Conscious Objects |
11-14 | Penance for Building Footpath etc. by Householder | 15-18 | Analysis of
Footpath, Transition Path, Support, Dagvīnikā, Sneeze and Chilimilika. | |
Penance for Repairing and Improving Needle etc. | 14-17 | Meaning of
Uttarakaran, Two Types of Tools, Keeping Metal Tools, Form of Parigraha, Other |
| Distinction and Order of Thik Gahesth, Information about Relevant Meaning. | |
Penance for Making Needle etc. Useless | 23-26 | Penance for Taking Needle etc.
Illegally | 27-30 | Penance for Doing Undesignated Work with Needle etc. | 31-34
| Penance for Giving Needle etc. to Others | 35-38 | Penance for Returning
Needle etc. Illegally | | Penance for Repairing the Vessel | (72)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSaya-sUcI sUtrAMka viSaya pRSThAMka prAyazcitta tAlikA 1. parAdhInatA se 2.
AturatA se upavAsa ke samakakSa tapa vikalpa  /  3. Asakti se  /  -9 uddezaka 1
1. vedamohadaya-prAyazcitta maMgalAcaraNa vicAraNA, lipi namaskAra, utthAnikAnoM
ke maulikatA kI vicAraNA, bhikSu zabda se bhikSuNI bhI, do karaNa se tIna
karaNa, anumodana kI kriyA  /  aMgAvAna saMcAlana Adi kA prAyazcitta 8-12 sAta
dRSTAMta, aMgAdAna vyAkhyA, abhyaMgana Adi zabdoM kA vizleSaNa, saMkSipta pATha
sUcana, zikSA vacana, "acitta zrota" kA prAsaMgika artha  /  10 phUla Adi
sacitta padArtha sUdhane kA prAyazcitta 11-14 gRhastha dvArA padamArga Adi
banavAne kA prAyazcitta padamArga, saMkramaNamArga, avalaMbana, dagavINikA,
chIMkA evaM cilimilikA kA vizleSaNa  /  15-18 sUI Adi ke sudhAra-saMskAra karAne
kA prAyazcitta 14-17 uttarakaraNa kA artha, do prakAra ke upakaraNa, sadhAtuka
upakaraNa rakhanA, parigraha svarUpa, anyatI thika gahastha ke bheda-prabheda
evaM krama, prAsaMgika artha kI sUcanA  /  19-22 saI Adi ke niSprayojana lAne kA
prAyazcitta 23-26 sUI Adi avidhi se lene kA prAyazcitta 27-30 sUI Adi se
anirdiSTa kArya karane kA prAyazcitta 31-34 sUI Adi anya ko dene kA prAyazcitta
35-38 sUI Adi avidhi se lauTane kA prAyazcitta pAtra sudharavAne kA prAyazcitta
( 72 )

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Subject ## Penance for Correcting Damages etc. ## 41-46 Penance for Sewing
Together Cloth ## Index ## 40 ## 47-56 Penance for Sewing Gold to Cloth ## 57 ##
58 ## I T ## 9-5 ## One or Three Stitches, Explanation of Proper and Improper
Methods, Number of Bonds, Nature, Circumstances of More Than Three Bonds ##
Necessity of Stitches, Improper Sewing, When and How to Tie Knots, Necessity of
Sewing, Penance for Improper Methods, Excessive Stitching, Summary ## 19 ##
Penance for Removing Smoke from a Householder ## Method of Removing Smoke,
Medicinal Use of Smoke ## Penance for the Fault of Putikarma ## Three Types of
Putikarma, Concluding Sentence, Meaning of Pariharatthanam ## Summary with Index
Number of the Uddeshaka ## Which Sutras are the Subject of Other Agamas or Not
## Uddeshaka 2 ## Penance Related to Padapronchana with Punishment ## Meaning of
Padana, Its Various Uses in Agamas, Confusion Regarding Padana, Its Friendship
with Agamas, Proof, Time Limit, Auxiliary Equipment ## Penance for Smelling
Perfume etc. ## 10-13 Penance for Making One's Own Path etc. ## 14-17 Penance
for Repairing One's Own Needle etc. ## 18 ## Penance for Speaking Harsh Language
in the Least ## Making a Mosquito Net is a Penance, Keeping it is Not ## Penance
for Telling the Least Lie ## Examples of Small Lies ## Nature of the Least Harsh
Language, Five Examples of Harsh Language, Exception and Alternative to Harsh
Language ## When is Kandadanda, Rajoharana and Kandadanda-युक्त Padana ## (73)
## Page Number ## 21 ## 22-24 ## 24-27 ## 27 ## 28 ## 29-30 30 ## 31-34 ## 35 ##
35 ## 36 ## 36 ## 37

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSaya daMDa Adi sudharavAne kA prAyazcitta 41-46 pAtra sIne jor3ane kA
prAyazcitta sUtrAMka 40 47-56 vastra sone joDane kA prAyazcitta 57 58 I T 9-5
eka yA tIna galI, vidhi avidhi kI vyAkhyA, baMdhana saMkhyA svarUpa, tIna se
adhika baMdhana kI paristhiti galI kI AvazyakatA, avidhi sIvana, gAMTha kaba
aura kaisI lagAnA, sIne kI AvazyakatA, avidhi ke prAyazcitta, adhika jor3a,
sArAMza 19 gRhastha se dhUMA utaravAne kA prAyazcitta dhuMA utArane kI vidhi,
dhuMe kA auSadha rUpa upayoga pUtikarma doSa kA prAyazcitta tIna prakAra ke
pUtikarma, upasaMhAra vAkya parihAraTThANaM kA artha | uddezaka kA sUtra
kramAMka yukta sArAMza kina-kina sUtroM kA viSaya anya AgamoM meM hai athavA
nahIM hai uddeza 2 , daMDayukta pAdaproMchana sambandhI prAyazcitta pAdana kA
artha AgamoM meM isake vibhinna upayoga pAdana sambandhI bhrama AgamoM se inakI
mitratA siddhi kAla maryAdA, aupagrahika upakaraNa  /  itrAdi sUMghane kA
prAyazcitta 10- 13 padamArga Adi svayaM banAne kA prAyazcitta 14- 17 sUI Adi ko
svayaM sudhArane kA prAyazcitta 18 alpatama kaThora bhASA bolane kA prAyazcitta
maccharadAnI banAnA prAyazcitta kArya hai, rakhanA prAyazcita kArya nahIM  /
alpatama jhUTha bolane kA prAyazcitta alpa jhUTha ke udAharaNa  /  , alpatama
kaThora bhASA kA svarUpa, kaThora bhASA ke pAMca udAharaNa, kaThora bhASA kA
apavAda evaM vikalpa | kANDadaMDa kaba, rajoharaNa evaM kANDadaMDayukta pAdana
kI ( 73 ) pRSThAMka 21 22-24 24-27 27 28 29-30 30 31-34 35 35 36 36 37

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Number | Topic ------- | -------- 1 | **Prāyaścitta** for accepting
less than the prescribed amount (20 Alpa Adatta) * Āgama sources for the
prohibition of Adatta. * **Prāyaścitta** for washing the body and clothes. *
**Prāyaścitta** for keeping unbroken leather. * Four types of leather equipment
from the word "Kasiṇa". * **Prāyaścitta** for keeping valuable clothes. *
Alternatives and **Prāyaścitta** for Kritsna, Alpa-Mūlya, Bahu-Mūlya. *
**Prāyaścitta** for keeping 24 inseparable clothes. * Faults of keeping
inseparable clothes. 2 | **Prāyaścitta** for self-repairing vessels, staffs,
etc. (25-26) * **Prāyaścitta** for accepting vessels for investigation from
others (27-31) * **Prāyaścitta** for accepting invited Pind (32) * Transformed
words of Niyagapind, special meaning, two to four days continuous Gochari Kalpa.
3 | **Prāyaścitta** for accepting Dana Pind (33-36) * Word meaning, types of
Dana Kula, faults in going there, confusion about the investigation fault of
'Nitya Pind', proof from Āgama sources. * **Prāyaścitta** for Nitya Nivaasa. *
Time-lapsed action, present action, faults from Nitya Nivaasa, exception of
staying after Kalpa. * **Prāyaścitta** for praising the donor. * Explanation of
Purva-Sansthava, Paschat-Sansthava, reasons for praising, wisdom of praising the
donation. * **Prāyaścitta** for going back to the same Kula for begging. *
Faults and reasons for going back. 4 | **Prāyaścitta** for traveling with other
Bhikshucharas (40-42) * Word meaning, who to travel with, possible faults in
traveling with the mentioned individuals. * **Prāyaścitta** for drinking
pleasant water and eating unpleasant food. * Method of investigating unpleasant
water, tasting to test suitable and unsuitable water, wisdom of taking and
keeping water of different tastes, exceptions in eating. 5 | **Prāyaścitta** for
eating pleasant food and eating unpleasant food (44) * Meaning and synonyms of
main words, exceptions in eating food. 6 |  (74)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka viSaya 1 43-45 20 alpa adatta lene kA prAyazcitta adattaniSedha ke
Agamasthala  /  aMgopAMga prakSAlana kA prAyazcitta akhaNDa carma rakhane kA
prAyazcitta "kasiNa" zabda se cAra prakAra ke carma upakaraNa  /  bahamUlya
vastra rakhane kA prAyazcitta kRtsna ke vikalpa evaM prAyazcitta, alpamUlya-
bahumUlya  /  24 abhinna vastra rakhane kA prAyazcitta abhinna vastra rakhane ke
doSa  /  25-26 pAtra, daNDa Adi ke sudhAra kArya svayaM karane kA prAyazcitta
27-31 anya ko gaveSaNA ke pAtra lene kA prAyazcitta 32 nimantrita piMDa grahaNa
karane kA prAyazcitta niyAgapiMDa ke rUpAntarita zabda, vizeSArtha, do-cAra dina
lagAtAra gocarI kA kalpa  /  33-36 dAnapiMDa grahaNa karane kA prAyazcitta
zabdArtha, dAna kuloM ke prakAra, vahAM jAne meM doSa, 'nityapiDa' ke gaveSaNA
doSa hone kA bhrama, Agama pramANoM se siddhi  /  nitya nivAsa kA prAyazcitta
kAlAtikrAMta kriyA, upasthAnakriyA, nitya nivAsa se doSa, kalpa uparAMta
Thaharane kA apavAda  /  dAtA kI prazaMsA karane kA prAyazcitta  /
pUrvasaMstava, pazcAtsaMstava kI vyAkhyA, prazaMsA karane ke hetu, dAna kI
prazaMsA kA viveka  /  anurAgI kuloM meM dubArA bhikSArtha jAne kA prAyazcitta
dubArA jAne ke doSa evaM hetu  /  40-42 anya bhikSAcaroM ke sAtha gamanAgamana
kA prAyazcitta zabdArtha, kisake sAtha jAnA, sUtrokta vyaktiyoM ke sAtha jAne
meM saMbhAvita doSa  /  manojJa jala pIne aura amanojJa paraThane kA prAyazcitta
acitta jala kI gaveSaNA vidhi, yogyAyogya jala kI parIkSA ke lie cakhanA,
vibhinna rasa ke pAnI aura unake lene rakhane ke vivekA, paraThane meM apavAda
/  44 manojJa bhojana khAne, amanojJa paraThane kA prAyazcitta mukhya zabdoM ke
artha evaM paryAyavAcI zabda, AhAra paraThane meM apavAda  /  37 46-47 43 ( 74 )

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Index  **Topic** | **Page Number** ------- | -------- 45.  Prāyaścitta
for taking food from other Śramaṇas without asking | 45 51.  Word meanings,
skill of bringing Gocharī, sequential method before Pariṣṭhāpana | 46-47 51.
Prāyaścitta related to Śayyātar Piṇḍa | 46-47 52-53.  Specific faults, synonyms,
who is Śayyātar? Śayyātar Piṇḍa objects, objects not included in Śayyātar Piṇḍa,
alternative for taking Śayyātar Piṇḍa objects, when does Śayyātar begin, when
does Śayyātar end, mutual Śayyātar of many Sadhus, faults arising from taking
Śayyātar Piṇḍa, situational exceptions | 48 53-54.  Word meanings, method of
knowing a person. Prāyaścitta for taking food through active brokerage of Śayyā
| 50-51 53-54.  Nature of brokerage, consideration of Śayyātar Sutra number |
50-51 55-56.  Prāyaścitta for transgression of the time of request by Śayyātar
Sanstāraka | 52-53 55-56.  Forgivable transgression time, remaining time and
taking Ghās Pāt in Cāturmās, necessary reasons and utility. Prāyaścitta for not
removing Pāt etc. soaked by rain, reason for Sutra utterance, figurative
meaning, comparison of faults of removing and not removing | 54-55 54-55.
Prāyaścitta for taking Śayyā-Sanstāraka belonging to the owner elsewhere without
permission, meaning of the Sutra, method of taking elsewhere, faults of taking
without permission, consideration of Sutra number | 54-55 54-55.  Prāyaścitta
for not returning Śayyā-Sanstāraka properly | 54-55 57.  Prāyaścitta for not
searching for lost Śayyā-Sanstāraka | 57 59-60.  Prāyaścitta for not making a
transcript | 59-60 59-60.  Transcript of all equipment twice a day,
consideration of time of transcript, determination of time for two-time Pātra-
transcript | 59-60 60-61.  Summary of Uddesaka with Sutra number | 60-61 60-61.
Which Sutras are or are not the subject of other Āgāmas | 60-61 63-66.
Prāyaścitta for requesting food unlawfully, Uddesaka 31-12 | 63-66 63-66.  Dīn
Vṛtti and Adīn Vṛtti, essence of twelve Sutras | 63-66 (75)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka viSaya pRSThAMka 45 adhika AhAra anya zramaNoM ko binA pUche paraThane
kA prAyazcitta 51 zabdArtha, gocarI lAne vAle kI kuzalatA, pariSThApana ke pUrva
kI kramika vidhi  /  46-47 zayyAtara piMDa sambandhI prAyazcitta 52-53 viziSTa
doSa, paryAya zabda, zayyAtara kauna hotA hai ? zayyAtara piMDa vastue~,
zayyAtara piMDa meM nahIM Ane vAlI vastue~, zayyAtara piMDa kI vastueM lene kA
vikalpa, zayyAtara kaba se, zayyAtara kaba taka, aneka sAdhuoM kA pArasparika
zayyAtara, zayyAtara piMDa grahaNa se hone vAle doSa, paristhitika apavAda  /
48 zayyAtara kA ghara jAne binA gocarI jAne kA prAyazcitta 53-54 zabdArtha,
vyakti ko jAnane kA tarIkA  /  zayyA kI sakriya dalAlI se AhAra lene kA
prAyazcitta dalAlI kA svarUpa, zayyAtara sUtra saMkhyA vicAraNA  /  50-51
zayyAtara saMstAraka ke yAcanA kAla ke atikramaNa kA prAyazcitta 55-56 kSamya
atikramaNa kAla, zeSa kAla evaM cAturmAsa meM ghAsa pATa grahaNa karanA,
aAvazyaka kAraNa evaM upyogitaa| varSA se bhIgate pATa Adi ko na haTAne kA
prAyazcitta sUtroccAraNa kA hetu, lAkSaNika artha, haTAne evaM nahIM haTAne ke
doSoM kI tulanA  /  zayyA-saMstAraka mAlika kI binA AjJA anyatra le jAne kA
prAyazcitta sUtra kA Azaya, anyatra le jAne kI vidhi, binA AjJA se le jAne ke
doSa, sutra saMkhyA vicaarnnaa| 54-55 zayyA-saMstAraka vidhivata na lauTAne kA
prAyazcitta khoye gaye zayyA-saMstAraka kI khoja nahIM karane para prAyazcitta
57 pratilekhana nahIM karane kA prAyazcitta 59-60 sabhI upakaraNoM kA do vakta
pratilekhana, pratilekhana ke samaya kI vicAraNA, do bAra pAtra-pratilekhana ke
samaya kA nirdhAraNa  /  uddezaka kA sUtra kramAMka yukta sArAMza 60-61 kina-
kina sUtroM kA viSaya anya AgAmoM meM hai athavA nahIM hai uddezaka 3 1-12
avidhi ke AhAra kI yAcanA karane kA prAyazcita 63-66 dIna vRtti evaM adIna
vRtti, bAraha sUtroM kA sAra  /  ( 75 )

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutras  **13**  Penance for going to someone's house after being forbidden
**14**  Penance for a householder going to a place of begging during a major
fast **15**  Penance for consuming food with the Abhihada defect **16-21**
Penance for actions related to vessels **40**  How to take food brought from a
distance, the meaning of "three" in the sutra, and the entrance area in a
householder's house **41**  Penance for actions related to the body (Sutras
22-27), word meanings, defects arising from actions, analysis of the term
"Kumejj Egz" **28-33**  Penance for wound treatment **34-39**  Penance for
surgical treatment of boils, etc., explanation of words, the order of the six
sutras, the nature of treatment with and without cause, exceptions to treatment
for a monk with a stable mind, the nature of the Utsarga exception, when the
Utsarga exception applies, the exception of the path-seeking practitioners,
falling from the path due to exceptions, the amount of exceptions as understood
from the example of a sage, who is eligible for the Utsarga exception? **42-47**
Penance for cutting hair from the beard, armpits, etc. **48-50**  Penance for
brushing teeth, etc., **"**  Penance for removing worms from the anus, the
nature and cause of worms, **"**  Penance for cutting nails, analysis of the
one-sided and many-sided principles of nail cutting, collection of references
from various Agamas, knowledge of the situation with and without cause, **"**
Agamic rules, tooth decay, precautions for keeping teeth healthy, the connection
of tooth brushing with sense restraint, restraint, and meditation, the illness
of teeth and the fact that brushing teeth occasionally is not a transgression,
knowledge of discernment. **51-56**  Penance for actions related to the lips
**57-62**  Penance for actions related to the eyes **64-66**  Penance for
cutting hair from the head, etc., **"**  The number and order of the relevant 51
sutras, the meaning of the 13 terms and 26 sutras mentioned in the Churni, and
their table.  **(76)**  **Page Number** **66** **67** **"** **68-69** **70**
**70** **70-75** **75-76** **76** **77** **77-79** **79** **79** **80-81**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka 13 14 15 viSaya ke manA karane ke bAda bhI unake ghara gocarI jAne kA
prAyazcitta gRhastha bar3e jImanavAra meM mikSArtha jAne kA prAyazcitta abhihaDa
doSa sevana kA prAyazcitta 16- 21 pAtra parikarma kA prAyazcitta 40 gRhastha '
ke ghara meM pravezabhUmi, kitane dUra se lAyA gayA AhAra kaise lenA, sUtra meM
"tIna" zabda kyoM ? 41 22-27 zarIra parikarma kA prAyazcita zabdArtha, parikarma
pravRtti se doSa, "kUmejja egja" pada kI vicAraNA  /  28-33 vraNa cikitsA kA
prAyazcita 34-39 ghUmar3e Adi kI zalya cikitsA kA prAyazcitta zabdoM kI vyAkhyA,
chahoM sUtroM kA sambandha krama, sakAraNa akAraNa cikitsA svarUpa,
sthavirakalpI bhikSu ko cikitsA kA apavAda, utsarga apavAda kA svarUpa utsarga
apavAda kaba dhaura kaba taka, pathaSTa sAdhakoM kA kalaMkita apavAda, apavAda
se patana bhI, eka RSi ke dRSTAMta se apavAda kI mAtrA kA viveka jJAna, utsarga
apavAda kA adhikArI kauna ? 42-47 bAr3hI mUMcha evaM kAMkha Adi ke roma kATane
kA prAyazcitta 48-50 daMtamaMjana Adi karane kA prAyazcitta " apAnadvAra se
kRmiyAM nikAlane kA prAyazcitta kRmiyoM kA svarUpa evaM utpati kA kAraNa  /
nakha kATane kA prAyazcitta nakha kATane kA ekAMta anekAMta siddhAMta vicAraNA,
vibhinna Agama sthaloM kA saMketa saMkalana, akAraNa sakAraNa sthiti kA jJAna  /
Agamika vidhAna, daMtakSaya roga, dAMta svastha rakhane hetu sAvadhAniyAM,
adaMtadhAvana kA indriyanigraha aura saMyama samAdhi se sambandha, dAMtoM kI
rugNatA evaM kabhI daMtamaMjana karanA bhI anAcAra nahIM, viveka jJAna  /  51-56
oSTha parikarma kA prAyazcita 57-62 cakSu parikarma kA prAyazcitta 64-66 mastaka
Adi ke keza kATane kA prAyazcitta prAsaMgika 51 sUtroM kI saMkhyA evaM krama kA
nirNaya cUrNi meM sUcita 13 pada aura 26 sUtroM kA Azaya evaM unakI tAlikA  /  (
76 ) pRSThAMka 66 67 " 68-69 70 70 70-75 75-76 76 77 77-79 79 79 80-81

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Subject: Penance for Removing Sweat and Dirt from the Body  **Word
Explanation, Understanding of Capable and Incapable Devotees**  **Penance for
Removing Dirt from Eyes, Ears, Nose, and Nails:** Understanding of Cause and
Effect, Knowledge of Dirt Removal Exceptions. Penance for Covering the Head and
Going Anywhere.  **Gender Inversion, Exceptions, Prevailing Tradition:** Table
of 54 Sutras on Body Functions, 54 Sutras in Nine Other Purposes, Penance
Options for Cause and Effect, Analysis from Agamic Evidence Regarding Body
Instruments, Qualifications of the Authority to Decide Cause and His Independent
Movement.  **Penance for Subjugation**  **Penance for Defecating in 71-79
Unthinkable Places**  **Sutra Number**  **67** **68** **69** **70** **80**
**11** **1-5** **6-10**  **Sutra's Main Subject:** Meaning of Words, Specifics
of "Golehania", Examination of the Original Text, Origin of Guilt from
Understanding of Defecation, Knowledge of Understanding.  **Penance for
Defecating in a Place Where Sunlight Does Not Reach**  **Correct Meaning of the
Word "Anuggae Suriye", Knowledge of Understanding Defecation in a Shelter or
Open Ground, Understanding of Worms.**  **31**  **Summary of the Sutra Number
with the Purpose**  **Which Sutras are the Subject of Other Agamas or Not**
**Purpose 4**  **Penance for Subjugating Kings, etc.**  **Proper and Improper
Efforts, Loss and Gain, Provisions of the Sutra-Kritanga Sutra on this Subject**
**Penance for Praising Kings, etc.**  **11-15** **Penance for Attracting Kings,
etc.**  **Relationship with Previous Sutras and a Way to Subjugate Someone.**
**"Atthikare" in Many Texts, Relevant Meaning, Other Meanings.**  **16-30**
**Penance for Subjugating Village Guards, etc.**  **Meaning of Words,
Consideration of Sutra Number and Sequence.**  **Penance for Eating Grain or
Seeds with Mind**  **Explanation of the Word "Kasina", Agamic Evidence for
Eating Unconscious Unbroken Grain.**  **(77)**  **Page Number**  **82**
**82-83** **63-66** **86-87** **87-90** **91** **92-93** **93-94** **95-96**
**96** **97-98** **98-100** **100-101**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSaya zarIra se pasInA-maila haTAne kA prAyazcitta zabda vyAkhyA, samartha
asamartha sAdhaka kI apekSA viveka  /  AMkha, kAna, nAka aura nakha kA mela
nikAlane kA prAyazcita kAraNa- akAraNa kA viveka jJAna, maila nikAlane ke
apavAda | mastaka DhAMka kara kahIM bhI jAne kA prAyazcitta liMga viparItatA,
apavAda varNana, pracalita paramparA zarIra parikarma ke kula 54 sUtroM kI
tAlikA, anya uddezakoM meM nava bAra 54 sUtra, sakAraNa akAraNa meM prAyazcitta
vikalpa, zarIra upakaraNa sambandhI Agama pramANoM se vizleSaNa sakAraNa ke
nirNaya ke adhikArI kI yogyatA evaM usakA svatantra vicaraNa  /  vazIkaraNa
karane kA prAyazcitta 71-79 akalpanIya sthAnoM meM mala-mUtra paraThane kA
prAyazcitta sUtrAMka 67 68 69 70 80 1 1 1-5 6-10 , sUtra kA mukhya viSaya zabdoM
ke artha "golehaNiyA" kA viziSTAyeM, mUla pATha kI vicAraNA, paraThane ke
paviveka se doSotpatti, viveka jJAna dhUpa na Ane vAle sthAna meM mala visarjana
karane kA prAyazcitta "aNuggae sUrie" zabda kA sahI Azaya, upAzraya meM yA
sthaMDilabhUmi meM mala tyAga kA vivekajJAna, kRmiviveka  /  31 * uddezaka kA
sUtra kramAMka yukta sArAMza kina-kina sUtroM kA viSaya anya AgamoM meM hai
athavA nahIM hai uddezaka4 rAjA Adi ko vaza meM karane kA prAyazcitta prazasta
aprazasta prayatna, hAni aura lAbha isa viSaya meM sUtrakRtAMgasUtra kA vidhAna
rAjA Adi kI prazaMsA karane kA prAyazcitta 11-15 rAjA Adi ko AkarSita karane kA
prAyazcitta pUrva sUtroM se sambandha evaM kisI ko vaza meM karane kA eka tarIkA
/  'atthIkarei' aneka grathoM meM, prAsaMgika artha, anya zabdArtha | 16-30
grAma rakSaka Adi ko vaza meM karane Adi kA prAyazcitta zabdArtha sUtra saMkhyA
evaM krama kI vicAraNA  /  " sacitta dhAnya yA bIja Adi khAne kA prAyazcitta
"kasiNa" zabda kI vyAkhyA, acitta akhaNDa dhAnya khAne ke Agama pramANa  /  ( 77
) pRSThAMka 82 82-83 63-66 86-87 87-90 91 92-93 93-94 95-96 96 97-98 98-100
100-101

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Index  **Topic** | **Page Number** ------- | -------- 101-103 |
Penance for eating without the permission of the Guru and others, understanding
the wisdom of seeking permission, introduction to Vigaya and Mahavigaya,
collection of Agam texts prohibiting Vigaya. A projected Sutra hint. 103-104 |
Penance for going to Gochari without knowing the families established by 33
Sthaviras. Different meanings of the established family and relevant meanings,
clear meaning of other words and mutual differences, what is the fault of going
to these families? Penance for going to a Sadhvi's shelter illegally. 104 |
Knowledge of legal and illegal, Agam intention. Penance for placing equipment in
the path of a Sadhvi's arrival. 104-105 | Penance for creating new strife due to
lack of understanding, curiosity or impure thoughts. 105 | Penance for stirring
up a settled strife. 105 | Main reasons for strife and understanding. Penance
for laughing with an open mouth or making a sound. 106 | Quotations from other
Sutras, the fault that arises, clarification of the topic through an example.
Penance for giving or taking from Parsvastha etc. (39-48). 106-112 | Relevant
meaning of "Sanghatak", the faults that arise, knowledge of understanding.
Detailed form of the five Parsvastha etc. with quotations from Chuni, mistake of
Sutra sequence, exception to the tendencies mentioned in the nature of
Parsvastha etc., understanding of the consumption of exceptions and its
purification, who and where can Parsvastha etc. be? Knowledge and understanding.
112-116 | Violation of Prithvikaaya, violation of Apkaaya, violation of
Vanaspati and subsequent karma dosha, first Pindeshana, explanation of words,
consideration of Sutra number, special feature of the word "Pitra", related
delusion and its correction through logic and evidence, comparison and
coordination with the words of Dasha Vaikalik, consideration of the word
"Ukkatath", projected text of saying twenty-one and five additional words and
their unnecessary nature. 117-118 | Overstatement of 54 Sutras, meaning of
saying 41 in Chuni, table of 54 Sutras. (78)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka viSaya pRSThAMka 101-103 guru Adi kI AjJA binA vigaya khAne kA
prAyazcitta AjJA lene kA viveka jJAna, vigaya mahAvigaya kA paricaya,
vigayaniSedha ke Agama pAThoM kA saMkalana  /  eka prakSipta sUtra saMketa  /
33 sthaviroM dvArA sthApita kuloM ko jAne binA gocarI jAne kA prAyazcitta
103-104 sthApanAkula ke vibhinna artha evaM prAsaMgika artha, anya zabdoM kA
spaSTArtha evaM pArasparika aMtara, ina kuloM meM jAne se kyA doSa ? sAdhvI ke
upAzraya meM avidhi se jAne kA prAyazcitta 104 vidhi-avidhi kA jJAna, Agama
prAzaya  /  sAdhvI ke Ane ke mArga meM upakaraNa rakhane kA prAyazcitta 104-105
aviveka, kutUhala yA malina vicAra nayA kalaha karane kA prAyazcitta 105
upazAMta kalaha ko ubhArane kA prAyazcitta 105 kalahautpatti ke mukhya kAraNa
aura viveka  /  muha phAr3a kara yA AvAja karate hue haMsane kA prAyazcitta 106
anya sUtroM ke uddharaNa, utpanna doSa, eka dRSTAMta dvArA viSaya kA
spaSTIkaraNa  /  39-48 pArzvastha Adi ko sAdhu dene yA unase lene kA prAyazcitta
106-112 "saMghATaka" kA prAsaMgika artha, utpanna hone vAle doSa, vivekajJAna  /
pArzvastha Adi pAMcoM kA bhASya cUNi ke uddharaNa yukta vistRta svarUpa,
sUtrakrama vyatyaya kI bhUla, pArzvastha Adi ke svarUpa meM batAI gaI
pravattiyoM kA apavAda sevana evaM usakI zuddhi kA viveka jJAna, pAzvastha Adi
kauna aura kahAM ho sakate ? jJAnaviveka  /  49-62,63 sacita padArthoM se lipta
(kharaDe) hAthAdi se AhAra lene kA evaM binA kharaDe hAtha Adi se AhAra lene kA
prAyazcitta 112-116 pRthvIkAya kI virAdhanA, apakAya kI virAdhanA, vanaspati kI
virAdhanA evaM pazcAt karma doSa, prathama piMDeSaNA, zabdoM kI vyAkhyA,
sUtrasaMkhyA kI vicAraNA, "piTra" zabda kI vizeSatA, tatsaMbaMdhI bhrAnti aura
usakA tarka evaM pramANoM dvArA saMzodhana, dazavaikAlika ke zabdoM se tulanA
evaM samanvaya, "ukkaTaTha" zabda kI vicAraNA, ikkIsa kahane kA prakSipta pATha
evaM pAMca atirikta zabda aura unakI anAvazyakatA  /  64-117 sAdhuoM dvArA
paraspara zarIraparikarma karane kA prAyazcitta 117-118 54 sUtroM kA atideza,
cUNi meM 41 saMkhyA kahane kA tAtparya, 54 sUtroM kI tAlikA  /  ( 78 )

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Index  **Topic** | **Page Number** ------- | -------- **118-127** |
**Penance for violating the rules regarding excretion** **118-121** | **Brief
meaning of the ten sutras, their relation to excretion, no need for elaboration,
explanation and discussion of the main words of the sutras.** **128** |
**Penance for going for alms with someone who is performing penance**
**121-124** | **Difference in meaning of the words "Pariharic" and "Apariharik"
in Sutra 40 of Uddeshak 2 and the present sutra, introduction of Pariharic Sadhu
and Q&A for various information related to it. Summary of Uddeshak with Sutra
number.** **124-125** | **Which sutras are the subject of other Agamas or not**
**126-127** | **Penance for sitting near Vaksaskandha, etc. in Uddeshak 5 1-11**
**128-129** | **Explanation of words, Uddeshak, alternative meanings of
Samuddeshak. Penance for getting a sheet stitched from a householder** **129** |
**Eight types of householders, reasons for stitching and step-by-step method.
Penance for tying long strings to a chavar** **129-130** | **Who should tie how
many strings and when? How long should the strings be? Defects of long strings.
Penance for eating leaves after washing them** **130** | **Research, discretion,
defects of washing, meaning of "Padol"** **130-132** | **Penance related to
returnable foot-cloths 15-18** **131-132** | **Penance is not for the foot-cloth
but for the discretion of language. Penance related to returnable sticks, etc.
19-22** **132** | **Penance related to returnable bedding 23** **132-133** |
**Explanation of words, leaving bedding brought from outside in the shelter,
taking permission again, finally reaching the place. Penance for spinning yarn
24** **133-134** | **Means of spinning, origin of defects. Penance for making a
stick with a picture, colored or attractive 25-30** **133-134** | **Reasons for
making a stick, points to keep in mind while making it, explanation of words,
consideration of Sutra number.** **131** | **(79)**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka viSaya pRSThAMka 118-127 mala-visarjana sambandhI vidhi bhaMga karane
ke prAyazcitta 118-121 dasa sUtroM kA saMkSipta Azaya, inakA sambandha mala-
tyAga se hai, laghunIta kI apekSA nahIM hai, sUtroM ke mukhya zabdoM kI vyAkhyA
evaM vicAraNA  /  128 prAyazcitta vahana karane vAle ke sAtha bhikSArtha jAne kA
prAyazcitta 121-124 uddezaka 2 sUtra 40 aura prastuta sUtra meM parihArika
aparihArika zabda ke artha karane kI bhinnatA, pArihArika sAdhu kA paricaya evaM
tatsambandhI vibhinna jAnakArI ke liye praznottara  /  uddezaka kA sUtra
kramAMka yukta sArAMza 124-125 kina-kina sUtroM kA viSaya anya AgamoM meM hai
athavA nahIM hai 126-127 uddezaka 5 1-11 vakSaskaMdha ke nikaTa baiThane Adi kA
prAyazcitta 128-129 zabdoM kI vyAkhyA, uddezaka, samudde za ke vaikalpika artha
/  gRhastha se caddara silavAne kA prAyazcitta 129 gRhastha ke ATha prakAra,
silAI karane ke kAraNa evaM kramika vidhi  /  cAvara ke lambI DoriyAM bAMdhane
kA prAyazcitta 129-130 kisake kaba aura kitanI DoriyAM bAMdhanA? DoriyoM kI
kitanI lambAI ? laMbI DoriyoM ke doSa  /  patta dhokara khAne kA prAyazcitta 130
gaveSaNA viveka, dhone ke doSa, "paDola'' kI artha vicAraNA  /  15-18 lauTAne
yogya pAdapoMchana sambandhI prAyazcitta prAyazcitta pAdapoMchana kA nahIM kintu
bhASA ke praviveka kA hai| 19-22 lauTAne yogya daMDa Adi sambandhI prAyazcitta
131-132 23 lauTAne yogya zayyA-saMstAraka sambandhI prAyazcitta 132 zabda
vyAkhyA, bAhara se lAye zayyA-saMstAraka upAzraya meM chor3anA, punaH AjJA lenA,
anta meM yathA-sthAna phuNcaanaa| 24 sUta kAtane kA prAyazcitta 132-133 kAtane
ke sAdhana, doSotpatti  /  25-30 sacitta, raMgIna yA AkarSaka daMDa banAne kA
prAyazcitta 133-134 daMDa banAne meM kAraNa, banAne meM dhyAna rakhane yogya
mudde, zabdoM kI vyAkhyA, sUtrasaMkhyA vicaarnnaa| 131 ( 79 )

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Table of Contents  **Sutra Number** | **Topic** | **Page Number** ------- |
-------- | -------- 135-136 | Atonement for entering a newly built village,
suburb, etc. | Explanation of the words "gramadi", number and order of words,
determined order, meaning of "newly built" and its faults. Atonement for
entering a newly built mine. 137 | Meaning of the sutra, faults, refutation and
reasoning. Atonement for making and playing a veena. 137-138 | Form of the
veena, reason for playing it, refutation, decision on the sutra number. 138-144
| General introduction to the words "ush", "pahad" and "parikarma", specific
explanation based on the commentary, brief summary, teaching on the
investigation of the faults and merits of beds available today in three
sections, teaching on the investigation of "pat" in three sections. Knowledge of
the "agama" subject related to the investigation of "pat", its hypothetical
nature over time, investigation-knowledge in relation to the current Jain sects.
144 | Atonement for not accepting the "sanbhog-pratyayik-kriya". 144-146 |
Meaning of "al", "thir", "dhun", "dharanijj", difference between "padaphochhan"
and "rajoharan", knowledge of reasoning related to "parthan", sutra-
investigation, kriya-investigation. 146-149 | Form of "rajoharan", its quantity,
subtle points, explanation of major words like "kandusag bandhan", clear meaning
of the ten sutras, confusion in the eleventh sutra. - Summary of the "uddeshak"
with sutra number. 150 | Conclusion. 150-151 | "Uddeshak" 61-78 Atonement for
actions performed with the intention of "abrahm". 152-157 | Meaning of
"mauggam", form of "vinnavana", description of the difficulty of the
"brahmacharyavrat" in the "agama", description of the "agama" to encourage the
"vrat", education, meaning of the sutra, confidentiality and the current era,
reasoning, proof of the writing method from the "agama". Summary of the
"uddeshak" with sutra number. 157 | (80)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka viSaya pRSThAMka navanirmita grAma, upanagara Adi meM praveza karane
kA prAyazcitta 135-136 grAmAdi zabdoM kI vyAkhyA, zabdoM kI saMkhyA evaM krama
kI vicAraNA, nirNIta krama, navanirmita kA Azaya evaM doSa  /  /  navanimita
khAna meM praveza karane kA prAyazcitta 137 sUtra kA Azaya, doSa virAdhanA evaM
viveka  /  33-35 vINA banAne evaM bajAne kA prAyazcitta 137-138 vINA svarUpa,
bajAne kA hetu, virAdhanA, sUtra saMkhyA nirNayaH  /  36-38 doSa vAlI zayyA meM
praveza karane kA prAyazcita 138-144 uza, pAhaDa aura parikarma zabda kA sAmAnya
paricaya, bhASya ke AdhAra se vizeSa vyAkhyA, saMkSipta sArAMza, vartamAna meM
upalabdha zayyAoM ke sadoSa nirdoSa kI gaveSaNA kA zikSaNa tIna vibhAgoM se,
pATa kI gaveSaNA kA zikSaNa tIna vibhAgoM dvaaraa| pATa kI gaveSaNA ke sambandha
meM upalabdha Agama viSaya usakI kAlAMtara se kalpanIyatA, vartamAna jaina
phirakoM kI apekSA se gaveSaNA-jJAna  /  'saMbhoga-pratyayika-kriyA nahIM mAnane
kA prAyazcitta 144 isa kriyA kA svarUpa aura karmabaMdha evaM viveka jJAna  /
40-42 upadhi paraThane ke aviveka kA prAyazcitta 144-146 alaM, thiraM, dhuvaM,
dhAraNijjaM kA vyAkhyArtha, pAdapoMchana evaM rajoharaNa kI bhinnatA, paraThane
sambandhI viveka jJAna, sUtra-vicAraNA, kriyaa-vicaarnnaa| 43-52 rajoharaNa
sambandhI vidhi-vidhAna bhaMga karane ke prAyazcitta 146-149 rajoharaNa svarUpa,
parimANa kaisA, sUkSma zIrSa, kaMDUsaga baMdhana Adi pramukha zabdoM kI vyAkhyA,
dasoM sUtroM ke spaSTArtha, gyArahaveM sUtra kA bhrama  /  - uddezaka kA sUtra
kramAMka yukta sArAMza 150 upasaMhAra 150-151 uddezaka 6 1-78 abrahma ke
saMkalpa se kie jAne vAle kRtyoM ke prAyazcitta 152-157 "mAuggAma" kA artha,
"viNNavaNa' svarUpa, brahmacaryavrata kI duSkaratA ke Agama varNana, vrata meM
utsAhita karane ke Agama varNana, zikSA, sUtrAzaya, gopanIyatA aura vartamAna
yuga, viveka, lekhana paddhati kI Agama se siddhi  /  uddezaka kA sUtra kramAMka
yukta sArAMza 157 ( 80 )

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Index  **Topic** | **Page Number** ------- | -------- **Uddeshak-7** |
* **Penance for making and wearing a garland due to sexual desire** | 158-159 *
**Purpose of making a garland, examination of the words of the Sutra, meaning of
the actions.** | 159-160 * **Penance for making and wearing a "kada"** | 160-161
* **The true meaning of making a "kada", the faults arising from it, the
scriptural error in the actions of "Pinaddhei" and "Paribhanjai".** | 162-163 *
**Penance for making ornaments** | 163-163 * **Examination of the Sutra text.**
| 163-165 * **Penance for making and using various types of clothes (10-12)** |
165 * **Penance for the movement of the 13 limbs (13)** |  * **54 penances for
bodily actions (14-67)** |  * **Penance for sitting or making someone sit on the
earth, etc. with awareness (68-75)** |  * **Meaning of the words of the Sutra.**
| 76-77 * **Penance for sitting on the lap, etc. (78-79)** |  * **Penance for
sitting in a Dharmasala, etc. (80)** |  * **Penance for medical treatment
(81-82)** |  * **Penance for mental and physical projection, etc. (83-85)** |  *
**Penance for the movement of limbs of animals and birds, etc. (86-89)** |  *
**Penance for taking and giving food and water (90-91)** |  * **Penance for
taking and giving speech (92)** |  * **Penance for creating a form that
increases suffering** |  * **Summary of the Uddeshak with Sutra number** |  *
**Conclusion** |   **Uddeshak-8** |  * **Penance for contact with a single woman
(1-9)** | 165-166 * **Prohibition of contact with women and its analogy,
explanation of difficult words, conclusion.** | 166-166 * **Penance for
unlimited storytelling in the company of women at night** | 166-167 * **Meaning
of the Sutra and the opposing viewpoint, clarification of the concept of
"unlimited".** | 167-168 * **Penance for touching a woman's body** | 168 *
**Penance for touching a woman's clothes** | 169 * **Penance for touching a
woman's hair** | 169-170 * **Penance for touching a woman's ornaments** |
171-174 * **Penance for touching a woman's shadow** | 174-175  **(81)**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka viSaya pRSThAMka uddezaka-7 158-159 159-160 160-161 162-163 163 163
163-165 165 maithunasaMkalpa se mAlA banAne pahanane kA prAyazcitta mAlA banAne
kA hetu, sUtra ke zabdoM kI vicAraNA, kriyAoM kA artha  /  "kaDA" banAne
pahanane kA prAyazcitta kaDA banAne kA sahI artha, usase hone vAle doSa,
'piNaddheI' aura 'paribhaMjaI' kriyA kA lipi doss| AbhUSaNa banAne kA
prAyazcitta sUtrapATha kI vicaarnnaa| 10-12 vividha vastra nirmANa evaM upayoga
kA prAyazcitta 13 aMgoM ke saMcAlana kA prAyazcitta 14-67 zarIra parikarma ke 54
prAyazcitta 68-75 sacitta pRthvI Adi para baiThane baiThAne kA prAyazcitta sUtra
ke zabdoM kA Azaya  /  76-77 goda meM baiThAne Adi kA prAyazcitta 78-79
dharmazAlA Adi sthAnoM meM baiThane Adi kA prAyazcitta 80 cikitsA karane kA
prAyazcitta 81-82 manoja pudgala prakSepaNa Adi kA prAyazcitta 83-85 pazu-
pakSiyoM ke aMgasaMcAlanAdi kA prAyazcitta 86-89 AhAra-pAnI lene dene kA
prAyazcitta 90-91 vAcanA lene dene kA prAyazcitta 92 vikAravardhaka AkAra banAne
kA prAyazcitta - uddezaka kA sUtra kramAMka yukta sArAMza upasaMhAra uddezaka-8
1-9 akelI strI ke sAtha saMparka karane kA prAyazcitta strIsaMsarga niSedha evaM
upamA, kaThina zabdoM kI vyAkhyA, niSkarSa  /  rAtri meM strI pariSada meM
aparimita kathA karane kA prAyazcitta sUtra kA Azaya evaM pratipakSa tAtparya,
aparimANa kA spaSTIkaraNa  /  165-166 166 166-167 167-168 168 169 169 169-170
171-174 174-175 ( 81 )

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Index 11 12 13 1-2 3-5 14 18  **Prāyaścitta Sutra Introduction** for
taking food from the places of festivals etc. of kings anointed with the head,
meaning of the three special qualities of the king, explanation of difficult
words.  **Summary of the Uddesaka with Sutra Number** **Conclusion** - Is the
subject of the Uddesaka in other Agamas?  **Uddesaka** - 9 6 8-9 10 11
**Subject** Prāyaścitta for excessive contact with a Nimbi How much contact with
a Nirgranthi, duties of discharge and exception. Prāyaścitta for staying in a
woman's dwelling at night in an Upāśraya Context of the Sutra, meaning of
midnight, special meaning of the action "sanvasavei", additional Sutra
consideration. Prāyaścitta for going to and fro with a woman at night,
circumstances and reasons for going together. Prāyaścitta for taking Rajapiṇḍa
Eight substances of Rajapiṇḍa, consideration in relation to the reign of
Tirthankaras. 1 Prāyaścitta regarding entering the inner quarters of a king and
accepting alms Three types of inner quarters, alternative meanings of the word
"antaḥpuriya", description of the faults of having something brought out from
the gatekeeper. Prāyaścitta for accepting a gift from a king Prāyaścitta for
going to a Gocharī without going to the king's granary etc. Explanation of
words, faults of going there. Prāyaścitta for going to see the king or queen
Prāyaścitta for taking food from a king who has gone for hunting, Prāyaścitta
for going to a Gocharī where the king is a guest Difficult word explanation,
meaning of the Sutra. Prāyaścitta for staying near the king's residence,
prohibition of contact with kings in the Sutra Kṛtāṅgasūtra. 13-18 Prāyaścitta
for taking food from a king who has gone on a journey, Prāyaścitta for going to
and fro during the coronation. 19 20 Prāyaścitta for going repeatedly to any
capital, doubts and other faults from going repeatedly.  ( 82 )  **Page Number**
175-176 176 177 177-180 180 180-181 182 182-183 183-184 184 185 185-166 186
186-187 187-186 188-189 189 189-190

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka 11 12 13 1-2 3-5 14 18 mUrddhAbhiSikta rAjAoM ke mahotsava Adi sthaloM
se AhAra lene kA prAyazcita sUtra paricaya, rAjA ke tIna vizeSaNa kA tAtparya,
kaThina zabdoM kI vyAkhyA  /  uddezaka kA sUtrakramAMka yukta sArAMza
upasaMhAra- uddezaka kA viSaya anya AgamoM meM hai yA nahIM ? uddezaka - 9 6 8-9
10 11 viSaya nimbI se atisaMparka kA prAyazcitta nirgranthI se kitanA samparka,
utsarga aura apavAda ke kartavya  /  12 upAzraya meM rAtri ke samaya strInivAsa
kA prAyazcitta sUtra kA prasaMga, arddharAtri kA tAtparya "saMvasAvei" kriyA kA
vizeSArtha, atirikta sUtra vicAraNA  /  strI ke sAtha rAtri meM gamanAgamana kA
prAyazcitta sAtha jAne kI paristhiti evaM kAraNa  /  rAjapiMDa grahaNa karane kA
prAyazcitta rAjapiMDa ke ATha padArtha tIrthaMkaroM ke zAsana kI apekSA vicAraNA
/  1 rAjA ke aMtaHpura meM praveza evaM bhikSAgrahaNa sambandhI prAyazcita tIna
prakAra ke aMtaHpura, "aMtaHpuriyA" zabda ke arthavikalpa dvArapAla se bAhAra
maMgavAkara lene ke doSoM kA varNana  /  rAjA kA dAnapi grahaNa karane kA
prAyazcitta rAjA ke koThAra Adi ko jAne binA gocarI jAne kA prAyazcita zabdoM kI
vyAkhyA, vahAM jAne ke doSa  /  rAjA yA rAnI ko dekhane ke lie jAne kA
prAyazcitta zikAra ke lie gaye rAjA se AhAra lene kA prAyazcitta rAjA jahA~
mehamAna ho vahAM gocarI jAne kA prAyazcitta alpAhAra yA bhojana meM rAjA
nimaMtrita kaThina zabdavyAkhyA sUtrAzaya  /  rAjA ke upanivAsasthAna ke nikaTa
meM Thaharane kA prAyazcitta rAjAoM kA saMsarga niSedha sUtrakRtAMgasUtra meM  /
13- 18 yAtrA meM gaye rAjA kA AhAra lene kA prAyazcitta rAjyAbhiSeka ke samaya
gamanAgamana kA prAyazcitta 19 20 kisI bhI rAjadhAnI meM bAraMbAra jAne kA
prAyazcitta bAraMbAra jAne se zaMkA Adi doSa | ( 82 ) pRSThAMka 175-176 176 177
177-180 180 180-181 182 182-183 183-184 184 185 185-166 186 186-187 187-186
188-189 189 189-190

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Index  **Topic** | **Page Number** ------- | -------- 21-27.
**Prāyaścitta for consuming food prepared for a government official** | 190-194
* Potential faults, when is it inconceivable, explanation of difficult words,
essence of the sutra, consideration of the inferiority of words, inferiority of
the sutra. **Summary with Sutra Number** | 194 * Conclusion - Other Āgamas,
topics mentioned and not mentioned **Uddesaka - 10** | 195 1-4. **Prāyaścitta
for disrespecting Ācārya, Guru, etc.** | 196-197 * Types of harsh speech to
Ācārya, explanation of words, exceptions in Āśātanā. **Prāyaścitta for consuming
food together with Anantakaaya** | 198-199 * Characteristics of Anantakaaya,
summary. **Prāyaścitta for consuming food prepared by a Prādhākarmī** | 199-200
* Alternative explanations of the word Prādhākarmī, three types of Prādhākarmī,
two divisions of Prādhākarmī. 7-8. **Prāyaścitta for informing a householder
about a cause** | 200-202 * Types of causes, reasons for informing, methods of
informing, how to inform about a present cause? Prohibition of informing about a
cause in Āgamas, faults from informing about a cause, truthfulness of the cause.
**Prāyaścitta for kidnapping a Dīkṣita disciple** | 202 * Two types of
disciples, method of kidnapping and Vipariṇaman, and the difference between the
two. 9-10. **Prāyaścitta for kidnapping a Dīkṣārthī** | 203 * Explanation of the
word "Disam" and its correct meaning. 11-12. **Prāyaścitta for keeping an
unknown visiting monk without knowing the reason** | 203-204 * Explanation of
words, essence of the sutra, decision on the sutra number. 13. **Prāyaścitta for
having food and sexual intercourse with a monk who came after quarreling** | 204
14-18. **Prāyaścitta for saying and giving the wrong Prāyaścitta** | 204-205
19-24. **Prāyaścitta for having food with a monk who is eligible for
Prāyaścitta** | 205-206 25-28. **Prāyaścitta related to the fault of eating at
night** | 206-208 * Explanation of key words and essence of the sutra, Vivek-
jñāna. **Prāyaścitta for swallowing the regurgitation of food and water at
night** | 209 * Vivek-jñāna, the example of a pan and a closed water container.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka viSaya pRSThAMka 190-194 21-27 rAjakarmacArI ke nimitta banA AhAra
lene kA prAyazcittaM doSoM kI saMbhAvanA, kaba taka akalpanIya, kaThina zabdoM
kI vyAkhyA, sUtrAzaya, zabdoM kI hInAdhikatA kI vicAraNA, sUtra kI hInAdhikatA
/  194 uddezaka kA sUtrakramAMka yukta sArAMza upasaMhAra-anya AgAmoM meM ukta-
anukta viSaya 195 uddezaka-10 1-4 196-197 198-199 AcArya guru Adi ko avinaya
AzAtanA kA prAyazcitta AcArya ko kaThora bolane ke prakAra, zabdoM kI vyAkhyA,
AzAtanA meM apavAda  /  anaMtakAya saMyukta AhAra karane kA prAyazcitta
anantakAya ke lakSaNa, sArAMza  /  AdhAkarmI voSa ke sevana kA prAyazcitta
prAdhAkarma zabda kI vaikalpika vyAkhyAeM, AdhAkarma ke tIna prakAra, AdhAkarma
ke do vibhAga  /  199-200 7-8 200-202 gRhastha ko nimitta batAne kA prAyazcitta
nimitta ke prakAra, batAne ke hetu, batAne ke tarIke, vartamAna kA nimitta
batAnA kaise ? nimittakathana kA niSedha AgamoM meM, nimittakathana se doSa,
nimitta kI satyAsatyatA  /  dIkSita ziSya ke apaharaNa kA prAyazcitta ziSya ke
do prakAra, apaharaNa evaM vipariNamana kA tarIkA aura donoM meM antara  /  9-10
202 203 11-12 dIkSArthI ke apaharaNa karane kA prAyazcitta "disaM" zabda kI
vyAkhyA evaM sahI artha  /  13 ajJAta AgaMtuka bhikSu ko kAraNa jAne binA
rakhane kA prAyazcitta 14 kalaha karake Aye bhikSu ke sAtha AhAra-saMbhoga
rakhane kA prAyazcitta15-18 viparIta prAyazcitta kahane evaM dene kA prAyazcitta
19-24 prAyazcittayogya bhikSu ke sAtha AhAra karane kA prAyazcitta zabdoM kI
vyAkhyA, sUtrAzaya, sUtrasaMkhyA nirNaya  /  203-204 204 204-205 205-206 206-208
25-28 rAtribhojana doSa sambandhI prAyazcitta pramukha zabdoM kI vyAkhyA evaM
sUtrAzaya, vivekajJAna  /  rAtri meM AhAra-pAnI ke udgAla ko nigalane kA
prAyazcitta vivekajJAna, tave aura pAnI kI baMda kA dRSTAMta  /  209 ( 83 )

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Index  **Topic** | **Page Number** ------- | -------- 30-33.  Penance
for negligence in serving the sick | 209-110 * Meaning of the sutras, importance
of service, and understanding the purity of emotions. Service as a duty in the
Agamas. 34-35. Penance for wandering during Chaturmas | 210-212 * Kalpakalpa
related to wandering, the four months of Chaturmas in Pracharanga, the division
of twelve months in the Agamas, and the establishment of the four months of
Varshavas. The actions and practices in the Agamas for staying during Chaturmas,
and the practice of Paryushana. The two divisions of Chaturmas and the words
used for them, seasons and months. The meaning of the word "Duijjai" and its
explanation. Calculation of the time period for the extra month and the division
of seasons. 36-37. Penance for not observing Paryushana on the designated day |
212-214 * Establishment of the designated day, the designated date being
Bhadrava Sudi Panchami. Making an exception a transgression, the meaning of the
sutra, suggestions for unity, acceptance of the worldly Panchang and Rishi
Panchami. The Paksha of Purnima and Amavasya, two verses about the decisions of
the Acharyas and their meaning. 38-39. Penance for keeping hair and eating on
Paryushana days | 214-215 * Compilation of the duties of a monk related to
Paryushana, one day or eight days of Paryushana. 40. Penance for not reciting
the Paryushana Kalpa to householders | 215-216 * Recitation of the eighth study
of Dasha Shruta Skandha, the extinction of tradition, its historical corrupting
cause, corrupt tradition, and the interruption of study. Penance for taking
clothes during Chaturmas | 216 * The meaning of Samvasarana, the relevant
meaning of the word "Pattah", clearing confusion, indication of all instruments
in the explanation and their knowledge. Summary of the Sutra numbers in the
Uddeshak, which topics are in other Agamas or not. Uddeshak-11 | 216-217 |
217-218 | 1-4 | 219-222 Penance for taking and keeping prohibited vessels |
219-222 * The place of the prohibited vessel in the Agamas, description of the
vessels of the Parivrajakas, plastic vessels, the inadequacy and decision of the
words in the sutra text, the explanation with evidence of "Harpud",
consideration and decision of the sutra number, the meaning of making and
binding the vessel, consideration and decision of the text "Annay Rani Va
Thappagarani". Detailed information about the faults from the commentary. (84)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka viSaya pRSThAMka 209-110 30-33 glAna kI sevA meM pramAda karane kA
prAyazcitta sUtroM kA prAzaya, sevA kA mahattva evaM bhAvoM kI zuddhi kA viveka,
Agama meM sevAdharma  /  210-212 34-35 cAturmAsa meM vihAra karane kA
prAyazcitta vihAra sambandhI kalpAkalpa, caturmAsa ke cAra mahine prAcArAMga
meM, bAraha mahinoM ke vibhAgapUrvaka Agama vidhAna aura unase cAra mahinoM ke
varSAvAsa kI siddhi, caturmAsa rahane ke lie Agama meM kriyAprayoga evaM
paryuSaNa karane kI kriyA kA prayoga, caumAse ke do vibhAga aura unake lie
prayukta zabda, Rtu aura mahine, 'duijjaI' kriyA kA bhASya-artha, adhika mAsa
aura Rtu vibhAgoM kI kAlagaNanA  /  212-214 36-37 pardUSaNa nizcitta dina na
karane kA prAyazcitta dina kI nizcitatA siddhi, tithi kI nizcitatA bhAdavA sudI
paMcamI, apavAda ko utsarga banAnA aparAdha, sUtrAzaya, ekatA ke lie sujhAva-
laukika paMcAMga evaM RSipaMcamI svIkRti, pUnama amAvasa kI pakkhI, gItArtha
AcAryoM ke nirNaya kI do gAthA evaM usakA prAzaya  /  214-215 38-39 paryuSaNa ke
dina bAla rakhane aura AhAra karane kA prAyazcitta paYSaNa sambandhI bhikSu ke
kartavyoM kA saMkalana, paryuSaNa kA eka dina yA ATha din| 40 pa'SaNA-kalpa
gRhastha ko sunAne kA prAyazcitta dazAzrutaskandha ke AThaveM adhyayana kA
uccAraNa, paramparAvilupti, usakA aitihAsika dUSita kAraNa, dUSita paramparA,
adhyayanaviccheda  /  215-216 caumAse meM vastra lene kA prAyazcitta 216
samavasaraNa kA artha, "pattAha" zabda kA prAsaMgika artha, bhramaviccheda,
vyAkhyA meM sabhI upakaraNoM kA sUcana evaM unakA vivekajJAna  /  uddezaka kA
sUtrakramAMka yukta sArAMza kina-kina sUtroM kA viSaya anya AgamoM meM hai yA
nahIM uddezaka-11 216-217 217-218 1-4 219-222 niSiddha pAtra lene rakhane kA
prAyazcitta niSiddha pAtra ke Agama sthala, parivrAjakoM kA pAtra varNana,
plAsTika pAtra, sUtra pATha ke zabdoM kI hInAdhikatA evaM nirNaya, "hArapuDa" kI
sapramANa vyAkhyA, sUtrasaMkhyA vicAraNA evaM nirNaya, pAtra karane aura
baMdhana karane kA Azaya, aNNaya rANi vA tahappagArANi pATha kI vicAraNA evaM
nirNaya  /  doSoM kI vistRta jAnakArI bhASya se  /  ( 84 )

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Index  **Subject**  **Page 222**  Penance for transgression of
boundaries for a person, connection with the texts of Acharanga, clarification
of the situation from "Sapacchavayansi". Penance for denigration of religion,
many examples of denigration of Shrauta-Dharma and Charitra-Dharma, consequences
of denigration and penance.  **Page 223**  Penance for praising unrighteousness.
**Pages 223-224**  Nature, consequences and wisdom of praising unrighteousness.
Penance for serving the body of a householder (9-62).  **Page 224**  Extolling
the 54 Sutras and their discussions. Penance for frightening (63-64).  **Pages
224-225**  Intention of frightening, alternatives in penance, duties suitable
and unsuitable for a monk, faults of frightening, indication of wisdom. Penance
for astonishing (65-66).  **Pages 225-226**  Clear meaning of astonishing,
penance, curiosity, losses and wisdom. Penance for saying or showing something
contrary to one's true state (67-68).  **Page 226**  Penance for praising
excessively.  **Pages 226-227**  Praising the religion or personality of someone
present, the reason for penance is flattery. Penance for repeatedly going to
opposing kingdoms in a state of opposition.  **Pages 227-228**  Sutra meaning,
alternatives and wisdom in opposition.  **Pages 228-229**  **Pages 229-231**
Penance for denigrating daytime meals and praising nighttime meals (71-72).
Clarification from the texts of Dashakalika, the fault of approval, examples of
denigration and praise.  **Page 231**  Form of speech. Penance for eating at
night with fourfold aspects (73-76).  Sutra meaning, faults in vows from eating
at night, collection of Agamasthala, statement of Yogashastra.  **Pages
231-233**  Penance for keeping food at night and eating stale food (77-78).
Clarification of Sutra meaning, exceptional reasons mentioned in the commentary,
collection of prohibitive Agamasthala from Sangrahavatti.  **Pages 233-234**
Penance for staying elsewhere at night for specific food, alternative
interpretations of words, reasons and faults of changing residence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka viSaya pRSThAMka 222 pAtra ke lie kSetra sImA ullaMghana kA
prAyazcitta AcArAMga ke pAThoM se sambandha, "sapaccavAyaMsi' se paristhiti kA
spaSTIkaraNa  /  dharma kI nindA karane kA prAyazcitta zrata-dharma aura
cAritra-dharma kI nindA karane ke aneka udAharaNa, nindA kA pariNAma evaM
prAyazcitta  /  223 adharma kI prazaMsA karane kA prAyazcitta 223-224
adharmaprazaMsA kA svarUpa, pariNAma aura vivekajJAna  /  9-62 gRhastha ke
zarIra sambandhI sevA zuzrUSA karane kA prAyazcitta 224 54 sUtra aura unake
vivecana kI bhalAvaNa  /  63-64 bhayabhIta karane kA prAyazcitta 224-225
bhayabhIta karane kA Azaya, prAyazcitta meM vikalpa, bhikSu ke yogya aura ayogya
kartavya, bhayabhIta karane ke doSa, vivekasUcana  /  65-66 vismita karane kA
prAyazcitta 225-226 vismita karane kA spaSTa artha, prAyazcitta, kutUhalavRtti,
hAniyAM aura viveka  /  67-68 apanI sahI avasthA se viparIta kahane, dikhAne kA
prAyazcitta 226 atizayoktiyukta prazaMsA karane kA prAyazcitta 226-221 jo sAmane
ho usake dharma kI prazaMsA yA vyaktitva kI prazaMsA, prAyazcitta kA hetu
khuzAmadIpanA  /  viruddha rAjyoM kI virodhAvasthA meM bAraMbAra jAne kA
prAyazcitta 227-228 sUtrAzaya, virodhoM ke vikalpa evaM viveka  /  228-229
229-231 71-72 divasabhojana kI nindA evaM rAtribhojana kI prazaMsA karane kA
prAyazcitta dazavakAlika ke pAThoM se spaSTIkaraNa, anumodanadoSa, nindA evaM
prazaMsA ke udAharaNa  /  rUpa vAkya  /  73-76 rAtribhojana karane kA
caubhaMgIyukta prAyazcitta sUtrAzaya, rAtribhojana se vratoM meM doSa,
AgamasthaloM kA saMkalana, yogAzAstra kA kathana  /  77-78 rAtri meM AhAra
rakhane evaM vAsI khAne kA prAyazcitta sUtrAzaya kA spaSTIkaraNa, bhASyokta
apavAdika kAraNa, saMgrahavatti ke niSedhaka AgamasthaloM kA saMkalana  /
viziSTa AhArArtha anyatra rAtri meM rahane kA prAyazcitta zabdoM kI vaikalpika
vyAkhyAeM, gRhaparivartana ke hetu evaM doSa  /  231-233 233-234

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Index  **Topic** | **Page Number** ------- | -------- Penance for
eating *naivedya* | 234-235 (Two types: *nishraakrut* and *anishraakrut*. This
penance is for *nishraakrut*. Penance for *anishraakrut* is discussed
elsewhere.) Penance for praising a *yathachand* (self-restrained ascetic) | 235
(Description of *utsutr* and *praroopak* is discussed elsewhere.) Penance for
giving initiation or higher initiation to an ineligible person | 236-239
(Explanation of the sutra's meaning, 20 ineligible for initiation, 3 ineligible
for higher initiation, exceptions to the rule of ineligible initiation, *viveka
jnana* (wisdom), 15 qualities of a person eligible for initiation, qualities of
the initiating guru, duties of the initiating guru towards the aspirant, duties
towards the newly initiated, method of testing.) Penance for making an incapable
person serve | 239-240 (Signs of incapability and *viveka jnana*. Other sources
on this topic, meaning of the sutra, *thananga* exceptions and *viveka*,
coordination of *utsarga*, exceptions, and penance.) Penance for eating stale
*sanjoya* food at night | 240-241 (Meaning of the sutra, explanation of words,
two types of *achitt* salt, food and drink suitable for consumption, prohibition
of eating *anahaar* at night.) Penance for praising *balamaran* (suicide) |
242-244 (Twenty types of *balamaran*, 12 types based on comparison, *thananga*
also has a rule for two types of death, explanation of words, harm caused by
praise, encouragement of *panditamaran*, *vahayasamaran* in *achaarang* for the
protection of conduct. Summary of the *uddeshak* with sutra order.) Summary of
*uddeshak* | 244-245 (Which sutras are discussed in other scriptures and which
are not.) Penance for the bondage and liberation of 12 types of living beings |
245-246 ( *uddeshak* - 12) Penance for lack of compassion towards *shayyatar*
and animals | 247-248 (Compassionate conduct of a *shraman*, harms caused by the
above conduct, difference between penance for *moh* and *anukampa*, methods of
restraint, answer of *Namirajarshi*, *viveka* of situation and penance, penance
for mere criticism, opening, binding, etc.) 1-2 (Page numbers)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka viSaya pRSThAMka naivedyapiMDa khAne kA prAyazcitta 234-235 nizrAkRta-
anizrAkRta do bheda, prastuta prAyazcitta nizrAkRta kA, anizrAkRta kA
prAyazcitta dUsare uddezaka' meM, prAcIna dAna paddhatiyAM  /  81-82 yathAchaMda
(svachaMda sAdhu) kI vaMdanA prazaMsA karane kA prAyazcitta 235 utsUtra
prarUpaka pAsatyAdi kA varNana anyatra  /  83-84 ayogya ko dIkSA yA bar3I dIkSA
dene kA prAyazcitta 236-239 sUtrAzaya kA spaSTIkaraNa, dIkSA ke ayogya 20, dIkSA
ke ayogya tIna, ayogya ko dIkSA dene kI ApavAdika chUTa aura vivekajJAna, dIkSA
ke yogya vyakti ke guNa 15, dIkSAdAtA guru ke guNa, dIkSArthI (vairAgI) ke prati
dIkSAdAtA ke kartavya, navadIkSita ke prati kartavya, priikssnnvidhi| 239-240
asamartha se sevA karAne kA prAyazcitta ayogyatA ke lakSaNa evaM vivekajJAna  /
86-89 sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke eka sthAna para Thaharane kA prAyazcitta isa viSayaka
anya Agamasthala, sUtra-Azaya, ThANAMga kA ApavAdika vidhAna evaM viveka,
utsarga-apavAda evaM prAyazcitta kA samanvaya  /  240-241 rAtri meM bAsI rakhe
saMyojya padArtha khAne kA prAyazcitta 241-242 prastuta sUtra kA Azaya, zabdoM
kI vyAkhyA, do acitta namaka kI vicAraNA, AhAra-praNAhAra yogya padArtha,
aNAhAra bhI rAtri meM khAne kA niSedha  /   /  bAlamaraNa (AtmaghAta) kI
prazaMsA karane kA prAyazcitta 242-244 bAlamaraNa ke bIsa prakAra, apekSA se 12
prakAra, do maraNa kA ThANAMga meM vidhAna bhI hai, zabdoM kI vyAkhyA, prazaMsA
se hAni, paMDitamaraNa kI preraNA, zIlarakSA hetu vaihAyasamaraNa AcArAMga meN|
uddezaka kA sUtrakrama yukta sArAMza 244-245 kina-kina sUtroM kA viSaya anya
AgamoM meM hai yA nahIM hai 245-246 uddezaka-12 prasa prANiyoM ke bandhana
vimocana kA prAyazcitta 247-248 zayyAtara ke prati karuNAbhAva, pazu ke prati
karuNAbhAva, zramaNa samAcArI, ukta pravRtti se hAniyAM, moha aura anukaMpA ke
prAyazcitta meM antara, saMyama kI vidhieM, namirAjarSi kA uttara, paristhiti
evaM prAyazcitta viveka, kevala AlocanA prAyazcitta, kholanA, bAMdhanA Adi 1-2

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Index **3** **6** **9**  ## Subject Penance for transgressions, example
of Bhagwan Mahavir Swami's compassionate nature, essence of the sutra presented
in Bhagavati Sutra Shatak 15.  ## Penance for breaking a vow Possible faults
from breaking a vow, the meaning of the sutra, following the instructions of the
Gita, wisdom, inspiration from the elders.  ## Penance for eating food mixed
with salt, water, etc. Examples of mixed food, the meaning of the sutra and
wisdom, customs of householders, wisdom of penance.  ## Penance for using
leather with hair Explanation of the meaning of the sutra, faults of using
leather with hair, environmental regulations, reason for prohibition, wisdom of
penance, the concept of hairless leather, other books related to non-acceptance,
grass, etc., faults of keeping books, four examples of the faults of the five
types of grass, acceptance of these tools in exceptional circumstances and
penance, the meaning derived from the Agamas, wisdom of using and keeping books.
## Penance for sitting on a covered seat The broad meaning of the action
"Ahittehi", the concept of seats, the meaning of the sutra and faults.  ##
Penance for getting a bedsheet stitched for a sick person Types of bedsheets,
gradual wisdom and penance, possibility of faults, the context of stitching.  ##
Penance for harming the five stationary beings - The location of existence and
non-harming in the Agamas, introduction to the conscious and unconscious nature
of the earth element and the location of harming in the path and in the field.
Introduction to the body element and the location of harming in the path and in
the field, harming the fire element in the field or in the shelter, harming the
air element in the act of blowing or working with a fan, subtle harming with the
ten-fold time and the meaning of the Ayatana, harming the plant element in the
path, in the field, in the establishment, different penances for these. Harming
the water element in the path, in the field, in the bed, in the shelter, the
need for skill in examining substances along with research, wisdom and
establishment, wisdom of examining a lifeless house, the two-fold recording of
the shelter and applying incense, etc., penance.  ## Penance for climbing a tree
Three types of trees and penance, circumstances, the penance mentioned in the
sutra for a specific reason, faults of climbing a tree, support from an infinite
tree.  **(87)**  ## Page Number **249-250** **250** **251-255** **255**
**255-256** **256-261** **261-262**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka 3 6 9 viSaya pravRtiyoM se tapa prAyazcitta, bhagavAna mahAvIra svAmI
kI manukampA pravRtti kA udAharaNa, bhagavatIsUtra zataka 15 se prastuta sUtra
kA sAra  /  pratyAkhyAnabhaMga karane kA prAyazcitta zabaladoSa, uttaraguNa ke
paccakkhaNa, pratyAkhyAna bhaMga karane se saMbhAvita doSa, sUtrAzaya, gItArtha
kI AjJA se dhAgArasevana, vivekajJAna, caDhatA kI preraNA  /  sacitta namaka
pAnI Adi se saMyukta AhAra khAne kA prAyazcita mizrita AhAra ke udAharaNa,
sUtrAzaya evaM vivekajJAna, gRhasthoM ke rivAja, prAyazcittaviveka  /
saromacarma ke upayoga karane kA prAyazcitta sUtrAzaya kA spaSTIkaraNa,
saromacarma upayoga karane ke doSa, paristhitika vidhAna, niSedha kA kAraNa,
prAyazcittaviveka, romarahita carma kA kalpa, apratilekhyatA se sambandhita anya
pustaka, tRNa Adi, pustaka rakhane ke doSa, cAra STAnta tRNa paMcaka ke doSa,
apavAdika sthiti meM ye upakaraNa grahaNa evaM prAyazcitta, Agama varNanoM se
phalita prAzaya, pustaka upayoga karane rakhane kA viveka  /  vastrAcchAdita
pIDe para baiThane kA prAyazcitta 'ahiTThei" kriyA kA vizAla artha, pIDhoM kI
kalpyA kalpyatA, sUtrAzaya evaM doSa  /  niyaMgya kI caddara silavAne kA
prAyazcitta caddara ke prakAra, kramika viveka evaM prAyazcitta, doSoM kI
saMbhAvanA, silAI karane kA prasaMga | pAMca sthAvarakAya kI virAdhanA kA
prAyazcita - astitva evaM virAdhanA na karane ke Agamasthala, pRthvIkAra ke
sacitta acitta kA paricaya evaM virAdhanAsthala gocarI meM, mArga meM  /  kAya
kA paricaya aura virAdhanA sthala gocarI aura mArga, agni kI virAdhanA gocarI yA
upAzraya meM vAyu kI virAdhanA, havA karane yA avanA se kArya karane meM sUkSma
dRSTi se virAdhanA dazakAlika kA vidhAna aura ayatanA kA artha, vanaspati kI
virAdhanA mArga meM gocarI meM, pariSThApana meM inake alaga-alaga prAyazcitta
/  sa kI virAdhanA mArga meM gocarI meM zayyA meM upadhi meM gaveSaNA ke sAtha
padArthoM ke parIkSaNa meM bhI kuzalatA honA, viveka aura pariSThApana,
jIvarahita makAna gaveSaNA kA vivekajJAna, upadhi kA ubhayakAla pratilekhana
evaM dhUpa lagAnA Adi prAyazcitta  /  vRkSa para car3hane kA prAyazcitta vRkSoM
ke tIna prakAra evaM prAyazcitta, paristhitiyAM, sakAraNa kA sUtrokta
prAyazcitta vRkSa para car3hane ke doSa, anantakAdhika vRkSa kA sahArA  /  ( 87
) pRSThAMka 249-250 250 251-255 255 255-256 256-261 261-262

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Index  **Topic** | **Page Number** ------- | -------- 10 | 262-263   *
Prāyaścitta (atonement) for eating from a householder's utensils. * Muni
(ascetic) life, Ghṛvācāra (conduct of a householder), Daśavakālika (ten-day
period) A. 6, Dosha (faults), Anācāra (improper conduct), Sūyagadaṅga (a Jain
text), Niṣedha (prohibition), Bhāṣyōkta (explained in commentary), Dosha
(faults), Vivekajñāna (knowledge of discernment), Vastraprakshalana (washing of
clothes), Pātra (utensil) usage, absence of Sutra-mentioned faults. 13 | 263   *
Prāyaścitta for using a householder's clothes. * Sūtrāśaya (meaning of the
Sutra), Doshakathan (statement of faults), Muni Ācāra (conduct of an ascetic). *
Prāyaścitta for using a householder's bed or seat. 264   * Daśavakālika (ten-day
period) based Sūtrāśaya (meaning of the Sutra), Pariṣṭhitikavidhāna (rules for
specific situations), Viveka (discernment), Supratilekhya (properly received),
Duṣpratilekhya (improperly received), Apratilekhya (not received), Niṣedha
(prohibition). * Prāyaścitta for treating a householder. 264-265   * Sādhu (holy
person) Ācāra (conduct), Prāgamasthala (collection of texts), Cikitsā
(treatment), Dosha (faults), Pariṣṭhiti (situation), Prāyaścitta (atonement). *
Prāyaścitta for taking food contaminated by previous karma. 265-266   * Dosha
(fault) Swarūpa (nature), Gocharī (perception), Vicakṣaṇatā (discernment),
Dāyaka (giver), Ācārāṅga (a Jain text), Daśavakālika (ten-day period),
Vivekajñāna (knowledge of discernment), Prāyaścitta (atonement) Vicāraṇā
(consideration), Prāyaścitta for taking other substances from a person with
previous karma-contaminated food. 266-267   * ... 267-276   * ... 15 | 267-276
* Prāyaścitta for eating from a suitable utensil or hand, etc., in water with
consciousness. * Sūtrāśaya (meaning of the Sutra), Virādhaṇā (contradiction)
Dosha (fault), Paścāt Karma (later karma), Comparison with the fourth Uddesaka
(chapter), "Sīodaga Paribhōgena" (eating from a householder's utensil)
explanation. 16-31 | 276-277   * Prāyaścitta for seeing different places due to
attachment to form. * Explanation of words, Hīnādhikatā (lesser and greater),
Nirṇaya (decision), Vividha Vyākhyā (various explanations), Sūtrakrama (order of
Sutras), Ācārāṅga (a Jain text) comparison and Utkrama (reversal), Prāsakti
(attachment) Niṣedha (prohibition) Āgama (scriptural) Sthala (places)
collection, seeing places, consequences and faults, Vivekajñāna (knowledge of
discernment). 32 | 278   * Prāyaścitta for violating the limit of food in the
first Prahara (watch). * Third Prahara Gocharī (perception), any one-third part
Gocharī (perception), Bṛhatkalpasūtra (a Jain text) Vidhāna (rules), Niṣkarṣa
(conclusion), Viveka (discernment), Sangraha (collection) Rakṣaṇa (keeping)
Dosha (faults), Vivekajñāna (knowledge of discernment), Prāyaścitta (atonement)
Vikalpa (alternatives), Porisī (measure) Māpa (knowledge). * Prāyaścitta for
carrying food beyond two Kosas (miles). * Sūtrāśaya (meaning of the Sutra),
carrying forward Dosha (faults), Ardha Yojana (half a Yojana), Mūla Sthāna
(original place), Upāśraya (shelter), Kṣetrasīmā (boundary) Māpana (measurement)
Pramāṇa (proof). 276-277   * ... 278   * ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka viSaya pRSThAMka 10 262-263 gRhastha ke bartanoM meM AhAra karane kA
prAyazcitta muni jIvana kA ghra vAcAra, dazavakAlika a. 6 meM batAye doSa,
anAcAra, sUyagaDAMga meM varNita niSedha, bhASyokta doSa evaM vivekajJAna,
vastraprakSAlana sambandhI pAtra upayoga meM sUtrokta doSa kA abhaav| 13
gahastha ke vastra upayoga meM lene kA prAyazcitta 263 sUtrAzaya, doSakathana,
muni AcAra  /  gahastha ke zayyA Asana ko upayoga meM lene kA prAyazcitta 264
dazavakAlika ke AdhAra se sUtrAzaya, paristhitika vidhAna evaM viveka,
supratilekhya grahaNa, duSpratilekhya apratilekhya kA niSedha  /  gahastha kI
cikitsA karane kA prAyazcitta 264-265 sAdhu kA AcAra evaM prAgama sthala
saMkalana, cikitsA karane ke doSa, paristhiti evaM prAyazcitta  /  pUrvakarma
doSayukta AhAra lene kA prAyazcitta 265-266 doSa kA svarUpa, gocarI meM
vicakSaNatA, dAyaka doSa, AcArAMga evaM dazavakAlika meM varNana, vivekajJAna
evaM prAyazcitta vicAraNA, pUrvakarma doSa vAle ke atirikta vyakti se anya
padArtha lenA klpniiy| 266-267 267-276 15 sacitta jala meM upayukta bartana yA
hAtha Adi se AhAra lene kA prAyazcitta sUtrAzaya, virAdhanA doSa, pazcAt karma,
cauthe uddezaka se tulanA, "sIodaga paribhogeNa" kI vyaakhyaa| 16-31 rUpa kI
Asakti se vibhinna sthala dekhane jAne kA prAyazcitta zabdoM kI vyAkhyA,
hInAdhikatA evaM nirNaya, vividha vyAkhyAeM, sUtrakrama, AcArAMga se tulanA evaM
utkrama, prAsakti niSedha ke Agama sthaloM kI saMkalana, dekhane jAne kA
pratiphala evaM doSa, vivekajJAna  /  32 prathama prahara ke AhAra kI maryAdA
ullaMghana kA prAyazcitta tIsare prahara kI gocarI, kisI bhI eka tIsare bhAga kI
gocarI, bRhatkalpasUtra ke vidhAna, niSkarSa aura vivekA, saMgraha rakhane ke
doSa, vivekajJAna evaM prAyazcitta vikalpa, porisI mApa kA jJAna  /  do kosa se
Age AhAra le jAne kA prAyazcitta sUtrAzaya, Age le jAne ke doSa, arddha yojana
kA svarUpa, mUla sthAna rUpa upAzraya se kSetrasImA mApane kA pramANa  /
276-277 278

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Index  **Topic** | **Page Number** ------- | -------- 34-41.
**Prāyaścitta for applying unguents at night** | 279-281 * Sutraśaya and
comparison, knowledge and wisdom regarding cow dung. Other substances for
unguents, Sutra-prescribed Prāyaścitta for night use in necessary circumstances,
four types of unguent substances. 42-43. **Prāyaścitta for accepting an
honorific title from a householder** | 281 * Knowledge of the method and
technique of restraint, losses and defects in tradition, defects in giving food,
concern about fees, wisdom and Prāyaścitta. **Prāyaścitta for crossing a great
river** | 282-283 * Clarity of Sutraśaya from the description of other Sutras,
why the two words "dukkhuttho tikkhuttho"? Explanation of "uttaranaṃ
santaraṇaṃ", acceptance of others from the statement of five great rivers, even
a little water in the Eravati river, wisdom regarding discharge and exception.
**Summary of the Uddesaka with Sutra numbers** | 283-284 * Which Sutras are the
subject of other Agamas or not. **Uddesaka 13** | 284-285 1-8. **Prāyaścitta for
standing on a painted earth etc.** | 286-287 9-11. **Prāyaścitta for standing on
uncovered high places etc.** | 287-288 * Word meanings, consideration of place,
bed, and sitting, reason for prohibition, explanation of the provisions and
contradictions in Ācārāṅga, misunderstanding and correct meaning of
"antarikṣajāta". **Prāyaścitta for teaching a householder the arts etc.** | 289
* Explanation of words, 72 arts from the characteristic, defects in restraint.
13-16. **Prāyaścitta for making a householder feel ashamed by harsh words etc.**
| 291-293 * Language wisdom of a monk, conflict and karma bondage due to lack of
wisdom, language wisdom knowledge in other Sutras. 17-27. **Prāyaścitta for
curious acts etc.** | 293 * Explanation of words with appropriate meaning,
praise of the tenth Uddesaka for special information. 28. **Prāyaścitta for
showing the way etc.** | 294 * Word meanings, circumstances of the defect,
provisions of Ācārāṅga, meaning of the Sutra, wisdom in circumstances, complete
language and acceptance of Prāyaścitta. 29-30. **Prāyaścitta for revealing metal
and wealth** | 294 * Three types of metal, defect and Prāyaścitta for revealing,
many defects in extracting treasure. **Uddesaka 12** | 283-284

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka viSaya pRSThAMka 279-281 34-41 rAtri meM vilepana karane kA
prAyazcitta sUtrAzaya aura tulanA, gobara sambandhI jJAna aura viveka  /  anya
vilepana ke padArtha, Avazyaka paristhiti meM rAtri upayoga kA sUtrokta
prAyazcitta, vilepya padArthoM ke cAra prakAra  /  42-43 gRhastha se upadhi
vahana karAne kA prAyazcitta saMyama vidhi aura pravidhi kA jJAna, hAniyAM evaM
doSa paramparA, AhAra dene ke doSa, zulkacintA, vivekajJAna evaM prAyazcitta  /
281 282-283 mahAnadI pAra karane kA prAyazcitta anya sUtroM ke varNana se
sUtrAzaya kI spaSTatA, dukkhutto tikkhutto do zabda kyoM ? "uttaraNaM
saMtaraNaM" kI vyAkhyA, pAMca mahAnadiyoM ke kathana se anya kA grahaNa, erAvatI
nadI meM kahIM alpa pAnI bhI, utsarga-apavAda kA vivekajJAna  /  uddezaka kA
sUtrakramAMkayukta sArAMza kina-kina sUtroM kA viSaya anya AgamoM meM hai athavA
nahIM hai 283-284 284-285 uddezaka 13 12 1-8 sacita pRthvI Adi para khar3e
rahane Adi kA prAyazcitta 286-287 9-11 anAvRta UMce sthAnoM para khar3e rahane
Adi kA prAyazcitta 287-288 zabdArtha, sthAna-zayyA-niSadyA kI vicAraNA, niSedha
kA kAraNa, AcArAMga meM vidhAna evaM virAdhanAoM kA spaSTIkaraNa,
'antarikSajAta' kA arthabhrama evaM sahI artha  /  gahastha ko zilpakalA Adi
sikhAne kA prAyazcitta 289 zabdoM kI vyAkhyA, upalakSaNa se 72 kalA, saMyama meM
doSa  /  13-16 gRhastha kI kaThora zabda Adi se AzAtanA karane kA prAyazcita
bhikSu kA bhASAviveka, aviveka se kalaha evaM karmabaMdha, anya sUtroM meM
bhASAvivekajJAna  /  17-27 kautukakarma Adi ke prAyazcitta 291-293 zabdoM kI
vyAkhyA yukta spaSTArtha, vizeSa jAnakArI hetu dasaveM uddezaka kI bhalAvaNa  /
28 mArgAdi batAne kA prAyazcitta zabdArtha, doSa kI paristhitiyAM, AcArAMga kA
vidhAna, sUtra kA tAtparya, paristhiti meM viveka pUrNa bhASA evaM prAyazcitta
grahaNa  /  29-30 dhAtu evaM dhana batAne kA prAyazcitta 294 dhAtu ke tIna
prakAra, batAne para doSa evaM prAyazcitta, nidhi nikAlane meM bhI aneka doSa  /
293 ( 89 )

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Page Numbers 294-296 296-297  ## Sutra Numbers and Topics 31-41:
**Prāyaścitta** (atonement) for seeing reflections in vessels, etc. 42-45:
**Prāyaścitta** for using medicines like emetics, etc. 46-63: **Prāyaścitta**
for praising or bowing to **Pārśva** (a Tirthankara) and others.  ## Content
Summary * **Sutra** topics, **anācāra** (unrighteous conduct), potential
**doṣa** (faults), **viveka-jñāna** (discriminative knowledge). *
**Prāyaścitta** for using medicines without illness, **apvāda** (exceptions)
related to consumption, **viveka-jñāna**. * **Sutra** sequence analysis, who is
**avandanīya** (not to be bowed to), reasons for exceptional bowing, faults of
not bowing, **utsarga** (abandonment) and its relation to **vandanīya** and
**avandanīya**, **sūtra** meaning of not praising, **bhālāvaṇa** (praise) of the
fourth **uddeśaka** (speaker), analysis of **kāthika**, **prekṣaṇika**,
**māmaka**, **sāṁprasārika** from the **bhāṣya** (commentary), three categories
of **pāśvatthadi** (ten types of vessels) and comparative introduction,
importance of general **doṣa** through analogy, real definitions of **śuddha-
ācārī** (pure conduct) and **śithila-ācārī** (lax conduct), list of new rules
from prevalent **samācārī** (followers of tradition), it is not appropriate to
use these rules to judge **śuddha-ācārī** and **śithila-ācārī**.  ## Page
Numbers 297-305 305-307 307-308 308-309  ## Sutra Numbers and Topics 64-78:
**Prāyaścitta** for faults in **utpādana** (production). * Nature of **utpādana-
doṣa**, explanations, possibility of **udgama-doṣa** (originating fault) due to
**dīna-vṛtti** (poverty), **bhikṣu**'s (monk's) **viveka**, **prāyaścitta** for
faults. * Summary of **uddeśaka** with **sūtra** numbers. * Which **sūtra**
topics are found in other **āgama** (scripture) or not.  ## Page Numbers 310-313
313-314 314-316  ## Sutra Numbers and Topics 1-4: **Prāyaścitta** for taking
vessels with six **udgama-doṣa** (originating faults) like **kṛta** (made), etc.
* Meaning of **kṛta**, etc., **prāgama-sthala** (previous location) regarding
buying and selling, three types of **anumodana** (approval), **kṛta-pātra**
(vessel made) is conceivable after use by a householder, but not food. * Analogy
of **sarva-bhakṣī** (omnivorous) fire, discussion of all **doṣa** like
**prāṁṛtya**, etc., **anācāra**, **sabala-doṣa**, **viveka**, and
**prāyaścitta**. * **Prāyaścitta** for taking extra vessels without permission
from **guru** (teacher), etc. * Scarcity of vessels, bringing them from far
away, **gīta-artha** (meaning of the song), **viveka** of obtaining permission,
**vyavahāra-sūtra** (practical rules). * **Prāyaścitta** for giving or not
giving extra vessels, explanation of words, two meanings of **sūtra**, reason
for giving extra vessels to the disabled, this **prāyaścitta** is for the
**gaṇa-pramukha** (head of the community).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pRSThAMka 294-296 296-297 sUtrAMka viSaya 31-41 pAtra Adi meM pratibimba
dekhane kA prAyazcitta sUtrokta viSayoM kI saMgati, anAcAra, doSoM kI
saMbhAvanAeM, vivekajJAna  /  42-45 vamana Adi auSadha prayoga karane ke
prAyazcitta cAroM sUtroM kA prAzaya, binA roga ke auSadha prayoga se nukasAna,
apavAda sevana sambandhI vivekajJAna  /  46-63 pArzvastha Adi kI vaMdanA
prazaMsA karane kA prAyazcitta sUtrakrama vicAraNA, avaMdanIya kauna, apavAdika
vaMdana ke kAraNa, na karane para doSa, utsarga se vaMdanIya-avaMdanIya,
prazaMsA nahIM karane kA sUtrAzaya, cauthe uddezaka kI bhalAvaNa, kAthika,
prekSaNika, mAmaka, sAMprasArikA kA vizleSaNa bhASyadhAra se, pAsatthAdi kula 10
kI tIna zreNI evaM tulanAtmaka paricaya, sAmAnya doSa kA bhI mahattva upamA
dvArA, zuddhAcArI aura zithilAcArI kI vAstavika paribhASA, pracalita samAcAriyoM
ke Agama se atirikta naye niyamoM kI sUcI, inase zuddhAcArI zithilAcArI kI
kasauTI karanA ucita nhiiN| 297-305 64-78 utpAdanA ke doSoM kA prAyazcitta
305-307 utpAdanAdoSa kA svarUpa, vyAkhyAeM, udgamadoSa kI sambhAvanA dInavRtti,
bhikSu kA viveka, doSoM ke prAyazcitta  /  uddezaka kA sUtrakramAMkayukta
sArAMza 307-308 kina-kina sUtroM kA viSaya anya AgamoM meM hai yA nahIM hai
308-309 uddezaka 14 1-4 310-313 krIta Adi chaha udgamadoSayukta pAtra lene kA
prAyazcitta kRta Adi ke artha, kraya-vikraya vRtti ke viSaya meM prAgamasthala,
anumodana ke tIna prakAra, gRhastha ke upayoga meM Ane ke bAda krItapAtra
kalpanIya, kintu AhAra nhiiN| sarvabhakSI agni kI upamA, prAmRtya Adi sabhI
doSoM kA vivecana, anAcAra, sabaladoSa, viveka aura prAyazcitta  /  atirikta
pAtra guru Adi kI AjJA binA dene lene kA prAyazcitta pAtroM kI durlabhatA, dUra
se lAnA, gItArtha ko adhikAra, AjJAprApti kA viveka, vyavahArasUtra kA vidhAna
/  atirikta pAtra dene, na dene kA prAyazcitta zabdoM kI vyAkhyA, sUtrArtha do
prakAra se, vikalAMga ko atirikta pAtra dene kA kAraNa, yaha prAyazcitta
gaNapramukha ke lie  /  313.314 6-7 314-316

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Index  **Topic** | **Page Number** ------- | -------- 8-9.  Penance for
keeping an unsuitable vessel and for keeping a suitable vessel | 316-317 10-11.
Penance for making a vessel beautiful or ugly | 317-319 12-19. Penance for
performing vessel-related actions | 319-321 20-30. Penance for drying vessels in
inappropriate places | 321-323 31-36. Penance for taking a vessel after removing
animals, cobwebs, etc. | 323-325 37. Penance for drawing a picture (korani) on a
vessel | 325 Penance for requesting a vessel on the road, etc. | 325 Penance for
requesting a vessel from the assembly | 325 Penance for dwelling in a vessel |
325-326 40-41. Penance for desiring the belongings of a common monk | 326-327
5-12. Penance for eating or sucking a mango with awareness | 327-329 13-66.
Penance for getting a householder to perform bodily actions | 329  **Uddeshak
15**  **Summary with Sutra Numbers:**  This section discusses the penance for
various actions related to vessels, including:  * Keeping unsuitable vessels *
Making vessels beautiful or ugly * Performing vessel-related actions * Drying
vessels in inappropriate places * Taking vessels after removing animals,
cobwebs, etc. * Drawing pictures on vessels * Requesting vessels on the road,
etc. * Requesting vessels from the assembly * Dwelling in vessels * Desiring the
belongings of a common monk * Eating or sucking a mango with awareness * Getting
a householder to perform bodily actions  The text also clarifies the meaning of
certain terms, such as "bahudeesik" and "bahudevasik," and provides guidance on
how to determine the appropriate penance based on the specific circumstances.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka viSaya pRSThAMka 8-9 ayogya pAtra rakhane kA evaM yogya pAtra
paraThane kA prAyazcitta . sUtrAzaya, paraThane rakhane meM hetu, prAyazcitta
vidhAna  /  10-11 pAtra ko sundara yA kharAba karane kA prAyazcitta 316-317
upayoga meM Ane yogya pAtra honA cAhie, sundara kharAba kA lakSya nahIM honaa|
12-19 pAtraparikarma karane kA prAyazcitta 317-319 upayoga meM Ane yogya ho to
parikarma nahIM karanA, bahudesika aura bahudevasika' zabda kA spaSTArtha,
paristhitika chUTa, kAraNa akAraNa, sUtra saMkhyA vicAraNA evaM nirNaya  /
20-30 akalpanIya sthAnoM meM pAtra sukhAne kA prAyazcitta 319-321 niSedha kA
kAraNa-jIva virAdhanA aura girane phUTane kA bhaya  /  31-36 saprANI, jAle Adi
nikAla kara pAtra lene kA prAyazcitta 321-323 pAtra kI gaveSaNA meM dhyAna
rakhane yogya sUtrAzaya kI sUcI, sUtra saMkhyA va krama meM bhinnatA, agnikAya
pAtra meM kaise ? doSa aura viveka  /  37 pAtra meM koraNI (citra) karane kA
prAyazcitta 323 vibhUSAvRti, jhUSiradoSa, pramAdavRddhi  /  mArga Adi meM pAtra
kI yAcanA karane kA prAyazcitta 323 sUtrAzaya, yAcanA karane meM vivekaH,
aviveka karane meM hone vAle doSa  /  pariSad meM se uThAkara pAtra kI yAcanA
karane kA prAyazcitta 324 pAtra ke lie nivAsa karane kA prAyazcitta 324-325
gRhastha ko saMkalpabaddha karanA, doSotpatti, vivekajJAna  /  uddezaka kA
sUtrakramAMkayukta sArAMza - kina-kina sUtroM ke viSaya kA varNana AgamoM meM
hai yA nahIM hai 3 . 40-41 325 326 uddezaka 15 . sAmAnya sAdhu kI AzAtanA karane
kA prAyazcitta 327 svagaccha yA anyagaccha ke sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke sAtha
sadvyavahAra, anya upadezakoM se tulanA  /  5-12 sacitta Amra khAne-cUsane
sambandhI prAyazcitta 327-329 eka phala se aneka phaloM kA kathana, zabdoM kI
tulanA AcArAMga se, vyAkhyA meM bhI tulanA, punaH prayukta "aMba" ke aneka
artha, prAcArAMga kA pATha zuddha evaM vistRta  /  13-66 gahastha se
zarIraparikarma karAne kA prAyazcitta ( 91 )

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Index  **Topic** | **Page Number** ------- | -------- Prāyaścitta for
eating in unfathomable places (67-75) | 330-332 Prāyaścitta for eating with a
person who has eaten with a parśvastha (77-86) | 332-333 Prāyaścitta for giving
food and water to a person who has eaten with a sāmbhōgika (87) | 333-334
Prāyaścitta for giving clothes to a householder (88-97) | 333-334 Prāyaścitta
for taking clothes without investigation (98) | 335-336 Prāyaścitta for
performing bodily functions for adornment (99-152) | 337-338 Prāyaścitta for
keeping and washing equipment for adornment (153-154) | 338 Prāyaścitta for
staying in a prohibited bed (161-3) | 341 Prāyaścitta for eating and sucking
sugarcane (4-11) | 342-344  **Explanation:**  * **330-332:** This section
discusses the prāyaścitta (penance) for eating in unfathomable places. It
explains the concept of such places, the potential for them to be fathomable,
and the similarity to the third uddeśaka. The sutras are interpreted as
referring to the act of excreting waste. It also discusses the requirements for
a sādhū's dwelling, the meaning of the terms "jugg-jaṇ," and the types of
dwellings for a parivrājaka. * **332-333:** This section discusses the
prāyaścitta for eating with a person who has eaten with a parśvastha (someone
who has eaten with a person who has eaten with a sāmbhōgika). * **333-334:**
This section discusses the prāyaścitta for giving food and water to a person who
has eaten with a sāmbhōgika (someone who has engaged in sexual intercourse). It
also discusses the prāyaścitta for giving clothes to a householder. *
**335-336:** This section discusses the prāyaścitta for taking clothes without
investigation. * **337-338:** This section explains the meaning of the words
used in the sutras and the intention behind them. It also discusses the method
of investigation. * **338-340:** This section discusses the prāyaścitta for
performing bodily functions for adornment. It explains the purpose of the
sutras, the meaning of the sutras, and the potential for washing without
adornment. It also lists the places in other āgamas that prohibit adornment. *
**340-341:** This section discusses which sutras are mentioned in other āgamas.
* **341:** This section discusses the prāyaścitta for staying in a prohibited
bed. * **342-344:** This section discusses the meaning of a prohibited bed, the
types of prohibited beds, and the prāyaścitta for staying in such a bed. It also
discusses the types of beds that are considered prohibited in modern times. *
**344-345:** This section discusses the prāyaścitta for eating and sucking
sugarcane. It explains that this is a separate category from fruit, and that
there are both prohibitions and regulations regarding sugarcane in the
Prācārāṅga. It also discusses the difference between eating and sucking
sugarcane, and the meaning of the words used in the sutras.  **Note:** This
translation preserves the Jain terms as requested. However, it is important to
note that some of these terms may have different meanings in different contexts.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka viSaya pRSThAMka 330-332 67-75 akalpanIya sthAnoM meM paraThane kA
prAyazcitta zabda saMkhyA, sUtra saMkhyA evaM sthAnoM kA paricaya, doSopatti,
apekSA se ina sthAnoM meM paraThanA kalpanIya bhI, tIsare uddezaka se samAnatA,
sUtroM kA Azaya mala-tyAga se hai  /  sAdhu kA Thaharane kA makAna
pariSThApanabhUmi se yukta honA, "jugga-jANa" zabda kI vicAraNA, parivrAjaka ke
Azrama, zAlA, gRha kI vicaarnnaa| gRhastha ko AhAra dene kA prAyazcitta sAdhu kA
AcAra, tIsarA mahAvrata dUSita evaM anya doSa, AcArAMga meM paristhiti se puna:
dene kA vidhAna  /  332-333 77-86 pArzvastha Adi ke sAtha AhAra lena-dena kA
prAyazcitta 333-334 AhAra-pAnI sAMbhogika ke sAtha hii| 87 gRhastha ko vastrAdi
dene kA prAyazcitta 88-97 pArzvastha Adi se vastrAdi ke lena-dena karane kA
prAyazcitta 335-336 98 gaveSaNA kie binA vastra-grahaNa karane kA prAyazcitta
337-338 sUtrokta zabdoM kA spaSTArtha evaM sUtrAzaya, gaveSaNA vidhi  /  99-152
vibhUSA ke lie zarIraparikarma karane kA prAyazcitta 338 153-154 vibhUSA ke lie
upakaraNa rakhane evaM dhone kA prAyazcitta 338-340 upadhi rakhane kA sUtrokta
prayojana, donoM sUtroM kA tAtparya, binA vibhUSAvRtti se dhonA kalpanIya,
viziSTa sAdhana meM dhonA prakalpanIya, anya AgamoM ke vibhUSAniSedha sUcaka
sthaloM kI sUcI, sUtra kA sArAMza  /  uddezaka kA sUtrakramAMkayukta sArAMza
340-341 kina-kina sUtroM ke viSaya kA kathana anya AgamoM meM hai yA nahIM 341
uddezaka 16 1-3 niSiddha zayyA meM Thaharane kA prAyazcitta 342-344 sasAgArika
zayyA kA vistRta artha evaM doSa, viveka evaM prAyazcitta, jalayukta zayyA kI
vicAraNA, agniyukta zayyA kI vicAraNA, virAdhanA Adi doSa, vartamAna meM
upalabdha vidyuta, gItArtha-agItArtha, mena svIca evaM kvATja kI ghdd'iyaaN|
4-11 ikSu khAne cUsane sambandhI prAyazcitta 344-345 yaha phala se bhinna
vibhAga hai, prAcArAMga meM niSedha evaM vidhAna bhI, khAne evaM paraThane kA
viveka, zabdoM kI hInAdhikatA evaM nirNaya  /  ( 92 )

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Page 345 ## Sutra Number and Topic 12. Penance for taking food by forest
dwellers and those traveling in the forest Meaning of words and essence of the
sutra. || 13-14. Penance for false statements by pure-conduct and lax-conduct
individuals Explanation of words, true knowledge, faults of false statements,
discernment of speech. 346-347 347-348 15. Penance for transitioning from the
pure-conduct group to the lax-conduct group Group transition, reasons, method,
main intention of group transition, essence of the sutra, need for complete
consideration of the future in group transition, penance for sin, strong faults.
16-24. Penance for dealing with a Kadaagrahi Explanation and essence of "Vaggha
Vakkantaana", potential faults, not engaging in rude and uncultured behavior,
authority and penance in the context of the sutra, inferiority of the sutras.
348-350 25-26. Penance for traveling in non-Aryan territories and long distances
350-351. Upcoming difficulties and faults, concessions in the context, essence
and discernment. 27-32. Penance related to despised clans 351-352. Forbidden and
permissible clans, essence of the sutra, generosity, similarity of thoughts,
social norms. 33-35. Penance related to the place of taking food 353-354.
Reasons for not taking food on earth, sneezing, etc., concessions in the
context, knowledge of discernment. 36-37. Penance for taking food while sitting
in front of a householder 354-355. Explanation of the essence of the sutra,
arising faults, pre-meditation in penance, knowledge of discernment. 38. Penance
for not properly honoring the Acharya and Upadhyaya 355. Disobedience and
knowledge of discernment, penance and potential faults, why should the seat be
honored? Penance for having more equipment than the prescribed limit 356-368.
Description of equipment in the Agamas and their slight limits, sheet and its
measurement, measurement and number of Cholapattaka, knowledge of Mukhavastrika,
discernment of blanket, seat, clothes for the vessel, footwear, Nisiithiya,
special clothes and equipment for Sadhvi, examination of the caste and number of
vessels from the Agamas and current traditions, for the purpose of removing
dust, table of complete equipment knowledge, propagandistic equipment in the
pre-Agama and in the explanation, additional equipment prevalent in practice,
equipment is also a possession, discernment of penance. (93)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pRSThAMka 345 sUtrAMka viSaya 12 jaMgalavAsI evaM jaMgala meM bhramaNazIla
vyaktiyoM kA AhAra lene kA prAyazcitta zabdoM ke artha evaM sUtrAzaya  /  /
13-14 zuddhAcArI aura zithilAcArI ke ayathArtha kathana kA prAyazcitta sAdhaka
kI bhinna-bhinna avasthA, zabdoM kI vyAkhyA, yathArtha jAnakArI, ayathArtha
kathana ke doSa, vcnvivek| 346-347 347-348 15 zaddhAcArI gaNa se zithilAcArI
gaNa meM jAne kA prAyazcitta gaNaparivartana, kAraNa, vidhi, gaNaparivartana kA
pramukha Azaya, sUtrAzaya, gaNa-saMkramaNa meM bhaviSya kA pUrNa vicAra karanA
Avazyaka, pApazramaNa, sabala doSa  /  16-24 kadAgrahI ke sAtha lena-dena karane
kA prAyazcitta "vaggaha vakkaMtANaM" kI vyAkhyA aura sUtrAzaya, doSoM kI
saMbhAvanAeM, aziSTa evaM asabhya vyavahAra bhI nahIM karanA, paristhiti meM
gItArtha ko adhikAra evaM prAyazcitta, sUtroM kI hiinaadhiktaa| 348-350 25-26
anAryakSetra evaM lambe mArgoM meM vihAra karane kA prAyazcitta 350-351 Ane vAlI
ApattiyAM evaM doSa, paristhiti meM chUTa, sAra evaM vivekaH  /  27-32 jugupsita
kuloM se sambandhita prAyazcitta 351-352 varjanIya avarjanIya kula, sUtra kA
Azaya, udAratA, vicAroM kI sAmyatA, sAmAjika mryaadaa| 33-35 AhAra rakhane ke
sthAna sambandhI prAyazcitta 353-354 pRthvI, chIMkA Adi para AhAra nahIM rakhane
ke kAraNa, paristhiti se chUTa, vivekajJAna  /  36-37 gRhastha ke sAmane
baiThakara AhAra karane kA prAyazcitta 354-355 sUtrAzaya kA spaSTIkaraNa,
utpanna hone vAle doSa, tapa meM prAgAra, vivekajJAna  /  38 AcArya upAdhyAya ko
samyak ArAdhanA na karane kA prAyazcitta 355 avinaya evaM vivekajJAna,
prAyazcitta aura saMbhavita doSa, Asana ko vaMdana kyoM ? maryAdA se adhika
upakaraNa rakhane kA prAyazcitta 356-368 AgamoM meM upakaraNa varNana evaM unakI
kiMcit maryAdA, cAdara evaM usake mApa, colapaTTaka mApa evaM saMkhyA,
mukhavastrikA kA jJAna-vijJAna, kaMbalaviveka vicAraNA, Asana, pAtra ke vastra,
pAdaprauMchana, nizIthiyA, sAdhvI ke vizeSa vastropakaraNa, pAtra kI jAti
saMkhyA kI AgamoM se vicAraNA evaM vartamAna paramparAeM, rajoharaNasvarUpa,
saMpUrNa upakaraNajJAna kI tAlikA, propagrahika upakaraNa prAgama meM aura
vyAkhyA meM, pravatti meM pracalita atirikta upakaraNa, upakaraNa bhI parigraha,
prAyazcittaviveka  /  ( 93 )

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Table of Contents  **Chapter Number** | **Topic** | **Page Number** -------
| -------- | -------- 40-50 | Summary of atonement for consuming food
contaminated with excrement in places with 40-50 *viraadhana* | 368-369 1-14 |
Atonement for various tendencies of curiosity | 369 15-122 | Atonement for a
*shraman* or *shramani* having a householder perform bodily functions for them |
369-370 123-124 | Atonement for not giving a place to a similar *niyandh*
*nigranthi* | 372-375 125-127 | Atonement for *malopharit* and *mattiopalipta*
faults | 375-376 | **Uddeshak 17** | 376 | *Malopharit* - its true meaning and
fault, *mattiopalipta* - its detailed meaning | 376-378 126-131 | Atonement for
consuming food from earth, water, etc. with awareness, atonement for consuming
food due to *vayukaya* *viraadhana* | 378-380 132 | Atonement for immediately
taking a *dhovan* | 380-381 133 | Atonement for taking a *dhovan* after washing
| 381-386 134 | Description of *dhovan* in various *agamas*, for example, the
list of *dhovan* types in the *kasthya prakalpya* *agama*, warm water, tasting
the *dhovan*, *sovir* and *amlak* considerations, the confused meaning of pure
water and its solution, the *sadhu* taking water themselves, when does unmindful
water become mindful - the time for *dhovan* and warm water to remain unmindful
and its ancient evidence, the provision of *dhovan* water in penance, summary |
386-387 135 | Atonement for proclaiming oneself to be endowed with the
characteristics of an *acharya*, description of physical characteristics, harm
from pride, *vivekajnaan* | 387-388 136-155 | Atonement for hearing, going to,
and attachment to various words | 388-390 | **Uddeshak 18** | 390 | The meaning
of *tat*, *vitat*, etc., *vivekajnaan*, the benefit of the 12th *uddeshak*,
summary of the *uddeshak* with its *sutrakramanka* | 390-391 | Which topics of
which *sutras* are found in other *agamas* or not | 392-399 1-32 | Atonement
related to boat travel | 399 | The reasons for boat travel, the meaning of
"joyan mera", the 32 *sutras* individually | 399

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka viSaya 40-50 virAdhanA vAle sthAnoM meM mala-mUtra paraThane kA
prAyazcitta uddezaka kA sUtrakramAMkayukta sArAMza 1-14 kutUhala kI aneka
pravRttiyoM kA prAyazcita 15 - 122 zramaNa zramaNI kA paraspara gRhastha dvArA
zarIraparikarma karavAne kA prAyazcitta 123 - 124 sadRza niyaMndha nigraMthI ko
sthAna na dene kA prAyazcitta 125-127 mAlopahRta aura maTTiopalipta doSa kA
prAyazcitta kina-kina sUtroM ke viSaya kA varNana anya AgamoM meM hai yA nahIM
hai uddezaka 17 mAlopahRta kA sahI artha evaM doSa, maTTiopalipta kA
arthavistAra  /  126 131 sacitta pRthvI, pAnI Adi para se AhAra lene kA
prAyazcitta vAyukAya kI virAdhanA se AhAra lene kA prAyazcita tatkAla dhoye
dhovaNa lene kA prAyazcitta 132 133 134 " dhoSaNa aneka prakAra ke vibhinna
AgamoM meM ghoSaNa varNana, udAharaNa rUpa meM sUcita Agama ke kasthya prakalpya
dhovaNa kI nAmAvali, garma jala, dhovaNa ko cakha kara lenA, sovIra aura
Amlakaijika vicAraNA, zuddhodaka kA bhramita artha evaM samAdhAna, sAdhu kA
svayaM hI pAnI lenA, acitta pAnI punaH sacitta kaba arthAt dhovaNa aura garma
pAnI kA acitta rahane kA kAla aura usake prAcIna pramANa tapasyA meM bhI dhoraNa
pAnI kA vidhAna, sArAMza  /  , svayaM ko AcArya lakSaNoM se yukta hone kA
pracAra karane kA prAyazcitta zArIrika lakSaNa kathana, abhimAna se hAni,
vivekajJAna  /  gAyana Adi karane kA prAyazcitta 135 136 - 155 vibhinna zabda
zravaNArtha gamana evaM Asakti kA prAyazcitta tata, vitata Adi kA artha,
vivekajJAna, 12veM uddezaka kI bhalAvaNa  /  uddezaka kA sUtrakramAMkayukta
sArA~za kina-kina sUtroM kA viSaya anya AgamoM meM hai yA nahIM hai uddezaka 18
1-32 naukAvihAra sambandhI prAyazcita naukAvihAra ke kAraNa prakAraNa, "joyaNa
merA" kA artha, battIsa sUtroM kA alaga-alaga ( 94 ) pRSThAMka 368-369 369
369-370 372-375 375-376 376 376-378 378-380 380-201 381-386 386-387 387-366
366-390 390 390-391 392-399

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Table of Contents  **Page Number** | **Topic** | **Verse Number** ------- |
-------- | -------- 399-400 |  Prashya, Nauka Vihar's Vivekgyan, Pravachan-
Prabhavana and Nauka Vihar, Utsarg-Apavad, Vivek, Comparison of other vehicles
and Nauka Prayog, Geetarth's Adhikar, Prayashchitt. 33-73 Vastra Sambandhi
Different Prayashchitt | 1-7 400 | 14th Uddeshak's Bhalavan and Sutra Sankhya
Vicharana. Uddeshak's Sutra Kramank Yukt Saransh, Which Sutras' Subject is in
other Agams or not |  400-401 | Uddeshak 19 |  402-405 | Aushadh Sambandhi
Kretaadi Dosho ka Prayashchitt, In Agams "Viyad" word's use in different
meanings, Prasangik Arth-Nishkarsh, Sutras' Aashya, "Viyad" ka "Madya" parak
Arth Agam Sammat nahi, Aushadh Sevan-Asevan ka Kramik Vivek, Aushadh ki Matra ka
Vivek, Vihar mein Aushadh Kutna Pisna aadi Kriyaen |  405-407 | Four Sandhyakal
mein Swadhyay karne ka Prayashchitt, Four Sandhya ka Parichay, Aswadhyay ke
Karan, Sandhyaon ka Samay Nirnay, Prayashchitt |  407-409 | Utkal mein Kalik
Shrut ke Uccaran ka Prayashchitt, Sutraashya ka Spashtikaran, Kalik Utkalik ke
Swaroop ki Vicharana and Soochi, Kul Agamon ki Sankhya Vicharana, Agam ki
Paribhasha, Nandi Sutra mein Many Agam, Uske Rachanakaron ki Vicharana, Agam
Manne ka Sahi Nishkarsh, Sutraukt Prayashchitt ka Tatparya |  410-412 | Maha-
Mahothsavom mein Swadhyay karne ka Prayashchitt, Eight Din and their Vicharana,
Devon se Sambandh, Swadhyay Nishedh ka Karan, "Aashadi Pratipada" aadi Shabdon
ka Sahi Arth and Amand Manyata ki Agam se Vicharana, 10 Din Manne ki Parampara
Bhram se, Strok Prayashchitt |  412-414 | Swadhyaykal mein Swadhyay nahi karne
ka Prayashchitt, Sutraashya, Swadhyay nahi karne se Hani, Swadhyay karne ke
Labh, Swadhyay ke liye Prerak Agam Vakya Sangrah, Swadhyay Sambandhi Dincharaya,
Sutra Kanthast karna and Yaad rakhna Aavashyak, Bhikshu ka Vivekgyan |  414-418
| Aswadhyay ke Samay Swadhyay karne ka Prayashchitt, Aswadhyay Sambandhi Agam
Sthal, Kul 32 Aswadhyay, 20 Aswadhyay Sthan ki Vyakhya and unka Kalman Bhashya
ke Aadhar se, In Praswadhyayom Sambandhi Vibhinn Dosha, Aswa |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka viSaya pRSThAMka 399-400 prAzaya, naukA vihAra kA vivekajJAna,
pravacana-prabhAvanA va naukAvihAra, utsarga-apavAda viveka, anya vAhana aura
naukAprayoga kI tulanA, gItArtha kA adhikAra, prAyazcitta  /  33-73 vastra
sambandhI vibhinna prAyazcitta 14veM uddezaka kI bhalAvaNa evaM sUtrasaMkhyA
vicAraNA  /  uddezaka kA sUtrakramAMkayukta sArAMza kina-kina sUtroM kA viSaya
anya AgamoM meM hai yA nahIM hai uddezaka 19 400 400-401 1-7 402-405 auSadha
sambandhI krItAdi doSoM kA prAyazcitta AgamoM meM "viyaDa" zabda kA prayoga
vibhinna arthoM meM, prAsaMgika artha-niSkarSa, sUtroM ke Azaya, "viyaDa" kA
"madya" paraka artha Agamasammata nahIM, auSadha sevana-asevana kA kramika
viveka, auSadha kI mAtrA kA viveka, vihAra meM auSadha kUTanA pIsanA Adi
kriyaaeN| 405-407 cAra saMdhyAkAla meM svAdhyAya karane kA prAyazcitta cAra
saMdhyA kA paricaya, asvAdhyAya ke kAraNa, saMdhyAoM kA samaya nirdhAraNa,
prAyazcitta  /  407-409 utkAla meM kAlikazruta ke uccAraNa kA prAyazcitta
sUtrAzaya kA spaSTIkaraNa, kAlika utkAlika ke svarUpa kI vicAraNA evaM sUcI,
kula AgAmoM kI saMkhyA vicAraNA, Agama kI paribhASA, nandIsUtra meM mAnya Agama,
usake racanAkAroM kI vicAraNA, Agama mAnane kA sahI niSkarSa, sUtrokta
prAyazcitta kA tAtparya  /  410-412 . 11-12 mahA-mahotsavoM meM svAdhyAya karane
kA prAyazcitta ATha dina aura unakI vicAraNA, devoM se sambandha, svAdhyAya
niSedha kA kAraNa, "ASADhI pratipadA" Adi zabdoM kA sahI artha evaM amAMta
mAnyatA kI Agama se vicAraNA, 10 dina mAnane kI paramparA bhrama se, strokta
prAyazcitta  /  13 412-414 svAdhyAyakAla meM svAdhyAya nahIM karane kA
prAyazcitta sUtrAzaya, svAdhyAya na karane se hAni, svAdhyAya karane ke lAbha,
svAdhyAya ke lie preraka AgamavAkyasaMgraha, svAdhyAya sambandhI dinacaryA,
sUtra kaMThastha karanA aura yAda rakhanA Avazyaka, bhikSu kA vivekajJAna  /
asvAdhyAya ke samaya svAdhyAya karane kA prAyazcitta 414-418 asvAdhyAya
sambandhI Agamasthala, kUla 32 asvAdhyAya, 20 asvAdhyAya sthAna kI vyAkhyA aura
unakA kAlamAna bhASya ke AdhAra se, ina prasvAdhyAyoM sambandhI vibhinna doSa,
asvA ( 95 )

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Index  **15.  Penance for Self-Study in the Absence of Proper Study**
**Subject:** The main reason for study, the method of self-study, necessary
sutras and their recitation, the mantra of salutation, the method of
transcribing improper and proper study, and the conclusion.  **16-17. Penance
for Reciting Agamas in Reverse Order**  **22.**  **23.** Two types of self-study
and their analysis, menstruation, divine speech, the tendency towards restraint,
remembrance, praise, etc., consideration of the counter-example, knowledge of
discrimination.  **18-21. Penance for Reciting to the Unworthy and Not Reciting
to the Worthy**  **1-14.** **1.** Explanation of words, clarification of the
meaning of the sutras, the meaning of "Nav Vambacheer" as per the practical
sutras, the meaning of "Uttamasurya", the discharge and exception from the
relationship of both sutras, the faults of reverse recitation, the list of
sutras for the order of recitation in essence. **7.** Characteristics of the
worthy and unworthy, the method of recitation, the unworthy as per the
commentaries, loss and gain. Definition of a person, the example of an unbaked
pot, consideration of the increase in the number of sutras, the related meaning
of six sutras, penance. Penance for showing partiality in reciting.
Clarification of the meaning of the sutras, feelings of attachment and aversion,
loss and penance.  **Penance for Accepting Unrecited Recitation**  **Penance for
Reciting to the Unworthy**  **Reasons for Reciting, Serious Analysis of
Circumstances, Meaning of "Giran", Why the Words "Acharya" and "Upadhyaya"? The
Situation of Gachchha and Acharya Upadhyayas in the Present Time, The Duty of
the Disciple with Discrimination.**  **24-25. Penance for Exchanging Recitation
with a Householder** A householder with a false nature, faults as per the
commentaries, the householder who is a follower of the Shramanas, the attainment
of scriptural recitation from the Agamas, the exception of the meaning of the
song from the expectation of benefit, practice.  **26-35. Penance for Exchanging
Recitation with a Neighbor, etc.** Justification and exceptions to the previous
objectives.  **Summary with Sutra Numbers**  **Conclusion - Characteristics of
the Objective**  **Which Sutras are the Subject of Other Agamas or Not**
**Objective 20**  **Penance for a Deceitful and Honest Critic** Meaning of the
sutras, the qualification of the listener, faults in criticism in the sutras,
the order of criticism,  **Page Numbers** 418-419 419-422 422-425 425 425-426
426-427 427-428 429 429-430 431-439

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka 15 svazarIra sambandhI asvAdhyAya meM svAdhyAya karane kA prAyazcitta
viSaya dhyAya kA pramukha kAraNa aura svAdhyAya paddhati, Avazyaka sUtra evaM
usake pATha namaskAra mantra Adi, asvAdhyAya svAdhyAya kI pratilekhana vidhi
evaM upasaMhAra  /  16-17 viparIta krama se AgamoM ko vAcanA dene kA prAyazvitta
22 23 svakIya asvAdhyAya ke do prakAra aura unakA viveka, mAsikadharma, deva
vANI, saMvara-pravRtti, smaraNa stuti Adi kI vicAraNA, prati prarUpaNa doSa,
vivekajJAna  /  18- 21 ayogya ko vAcanA dene aura yogya ko vAcanA na dene kA
prAyazcita 1-14 1 zabdoM kI vyAkhyA sUtrAzaya kA spaSTIkaraNa vyavahArasUtrokta
krama "nava vaMbhacera" kA tAtparya, "uttamasurya" kA tAtparya, donoM sUtroM ke
sambandha se utsarga-apavAda, vyutkrama vAcanA ke doSa, sAra rUpa vAcanAkrama kI
sUtra sUcI  /  7 yogya ayogya ke lakSaNa, vAcanAvidhi, bhASyokta ayogya, hAni-
lAbha  /  vyakta kI paribhASA, kacce ghar3e kA dRSTAMta, sUtra saMkhyA vRddhi
vicAraNA, chaha sUtroM kA sambandhita artha, prAyazcita  /  vAcanA dene meM
pakSapAta karane kA prAyazcitta sUtrAzaya kA spaSTIkaraNa, rAga-dveSa ke bhAva,
hAni evaM prAyazcitta  /  adatta vAcanA grahaNa karane kA prAyazcitta pradatta
vAMcana ke kAraNa, paristhitika gambhIra viveka, "giraM" kA artha, prAcArya
upAdhyAya do zabda kyoM ? vartamAna meM gaccha evaM AcArya upAdhyAyoM kI sthiti,
ziSya kA vivekayukta kartavya  /  24-25 gRhasya ke sAtha vAcanA ke AdAna-pradAna
karane kA prAyazcitta mithyAtvabhAvita gRhastha, bhASyokta doSa, zramaNopAsaka
gRhastha ko zAstravAcanA siddhi AgAmoM se, lAbha kI apekSA se gItArtha kA
apavAda zrAcaraNa  /  26-35 pArzvastha Adi ke sAtha vAcanA ke AdAna-pradAna kA
prAyazcitta pUrva ke uddezoM kI bhalAvaNa evaM ApavAdika chUTa  /  uddezaka kA
sUtrakramAMkayukta sArAMza upasaMhAra -- uddezaka kI vizeSatA kina-kina sUtroM
kA viSaya anya AgamoM meM hai yA nahIM hai uddezaka 20 sakapaTa niSkapaTa
Alocaka ke prAyazcitta sUtrAzaya, AlocanA sunane vAle kI yogyatA sUtroM meM
AlocanA ke doSa, AlocanAkrama, , ( 96 ) pRSThAMka 418-419 419-422 422-425 425
425-426 426-427 427-428 429 429-430 431-439

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra Index  **Subject**  Ignorance of not criticizing, importance of
illusory criticism, 10 reasons for atonement, analysis of ten types of
atonement, analysis of transgression etc. four, meaning of "Teṇ Paraṁ",
atonement for penance or transgression not beyond 6 months, knowledge of giving
excellent atonement.  **15-16** Re-imposition of atonement in the establishment
of atonement Sutra meaning, consideration of the severance of the method of
penance. **19-24** Established imposition of two months atonement Graceful-
ungraceful atonement, meaning of two months twenty days, calculation of removing
days of grace, five types of difficult imposition of Thananga and its context
here.  **25-29** Established, imposition and gradual increase of two months
atonement Sutra meaning, graceful atonement even many times, meaning of "Teṇ
Paraṁ". **30-35** Established imposition of one month atonement **36-44**
Established, imposition and gradual increase of one month atonement **45-51**
Established, imposition and gradual increase of monthly and two-monthly
atonement, summary of the objective sutra with sutra number Conclusion  **(97)**
## Page Index  **440-445** Understanding the many alternatives of pure penance
from the meaning of the song and studying the commentary etc. for detailed
atonement experience from the given table, considering the complete sutra number
of Nishivasutra and conclusion, presenting the sutra number table in order of
twenty objectives, comparative table of the sutra number indicated by the
commentary.  **445-447**  **448-449**  **449-451**  **451-453**  **453-455**
**455-456**  **456-458**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtrAMka viSaya AlocanA nahIM karane kI ajJAnadazA, mAyAvI ghAlocanA kA
mahatva, pratisevanA ke 10 kAraNa, dasa prakAra ke prAyazcitta kA vizleSaNa
atikrama Adi cAra kA vizleSaNa, "teNa paraM" kA zrAzaya, tapa yA cheda kA
prAyazcitta 6 mAsa ke Age nahIM, utkRSTa prAyazcitta dene kA vivekajJAna | ,
15-16 prAyazcitta kI prasthApanA meM punaH pratisevanA ke AropaNa sUtrAzaya,
tapavahana vidhi ke viccheda kI vicAraNA  /  19-24 do mAsa ke prAyazcitta kI
sthApita AropaNA sAnugraha - niranugraha prAyazcitta, do mAsa bIsa dina kA
tAtparya, sAnugraha ke dina nikAlane kI gaNita, ThANAMga kathina pAMca prakAra
kI AropaNA evaM usakA yahAM prasaMga | 25-29 do mAsa prAyazcitta kI prasthApitA,
AropaNA evaM kramikavRddhi sUtrAzaya, sAnugraha prAyazcitta aneka bAra bhI,
"teNa paraM" kI arthavicAraNA  /  30-35 eka mAsa prAyazcitta kI sthApita AropaNA
36-44 eka mAsa prAyazcitta kI prasthApitA, AropaNA evaM kramikavRddhi 45-51
mAsika aura do mAsika prAyazcita kI prasthApitA, AropaNA evaM kramikavRddhi
uddezaka kA sUtra kramAMkayukta sArAMza upasaMhAra ( 97 ) pRSThAMka 440-445
zuddha tapa ke aneka vikalpa gItArtha se samajhanA evaM dI gaI tAlikA se vistRta
prAyazcitta anubhava ke lie bhASya Adi kA adhyayana, nizIvasUtra kI sampUrNa
sUtra saMkhyA vicAraNA evaM niSkarSa, bIsa uddezaka kI krama se
sUtrasaMkhyAtAlikA prastuta saMpAdana evaM bhASyasUcita sUtrasaMkhyA kI
tulanAtmaka taalikaa| 445-447 448-449 449-451 451-453 453-455 455-456 456-458

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Nisiha Sutta  Nisiha Sutra

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 NisIhasuttaM nizIthasUtra

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Primary ## Table of Penance Forms ## Penance for transgressions committed in
dependence or carelessness **Order** | **Penance Name** | **Lesser Penance** |
**Moderate Penance** | **Excellent Penance** ------- | -------- | -------- |
-------- | -------- 1. **Lahu-mas** | Four Ayambil | Fifteen Ayambil | Twenty-
seven Ayambil | Four Upavas 2. **Guru-mas** | Four Nirvikruti | Fifteen
Nirvikruti | Thirty Nirvikruti | Fifteen Upavas or Four Months Diksha 3. **Lahu-
chaumas** | Four Ekashana | Fifteen Ekashana | Twenty-seven Ekashana | Sixty
Nirvikruti or Four Chatth (Bela) 4. **Guru-chaumas** | Four Nirvikruti | Fifteen
Nirvikruti | Thirty Nirvikruti | One Hundred and Eight Upavas or One Hundred and
Twenty Upavas or Four Months Chhed  ## Penance for transgressions committed with
eagerness **Order** | **Penance Name** | **Lesser Penance** | **Moderate
Penance** | **Excellent Penance** ------- | -------- | -------- | -------- |
-------- 1. **Lahu-mas** | Four Ayambil | Fifteen Ayambil | Twenty-seven Ayambil
| Four Upavas 2. **Guru-mas** | Four Ayambil and renunciation of Dhar Vigaya in
Parana | Fifteen Ayambil and renunciation of Dhar Vigaya in Parana | Thirty
Ayambil and renunciation of Dhar Vigaya in Parana | Four Chatth (Bela) or Four
Attham or Six Days Chhed 3. **Lahu-chaumas** | Four Chhed or Four Days Chhed |
Four Chhed or Four Days Chhed | One Hundred Path Upavas | One Hundred and Twenty
Upavas or Four Months Chhed 4. **Guru-chaumas** | Four Chhed or Four Days Chhed
| Four Chhed or Four Days Chhed | One Hundred Path Upavas | One Hundred and
Twenty Upavas or Four Months Chhed

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prAthamika prAyazcitta svarUpa tAlikA parAdhInatA meM yA asAvadhAnI meM
honevAle aticArAdi kA prAyazcitta krama prAyazcittanAma jaghanya tapa madhyama
tapa utkRSTa tapa 1. laghumAsa 2. gurumAsa 3. laghu caumAsI 4. guru caumAsI cAra
ekAzanA cAra nirvikRtika cAra AyaMbila pandraha ekAzanA pandraha nirvikRtika
sATha nirvikRtika cAra chaTTa (belA) sattAvIsa ekAzanA tIsa nirvikRtika eka sau
ATha upavAsa eka sau bIsa upavAsa yA cAra mAsa dIkSA paryAya cheda cAra upavAsa
AturatA se laganevAle aticArAdi kA prAyazcittakrama prAyazcittanAma jaghanya
tapa . madhyama tapa utkRSTa tapa 1. laghumAsa 2. gurumAsa cAra AyaMbila cAra
AyaMbila evaM | pAraNe meM dhAra vigaya kA tyAga cAra upavAsa sattAvIsa AyaMbila
tIsa AyaMbila, pAraNe meM dhAra vigaya kA tyAga pandraha AyaMbila pandraha
AyaMbila evaM pAraNe meM dhAra vigaya kA tyAga cAra cha? (bele) cAra aTThama yA
chaha dina kA cheda 3. laghu caumAsI 4. guru caumAsI cAra cha yA cAra dina kA
cheda eka sau pATha upavAsa eka sau bIsa upavAsa yA cAra mAsa kA cheda

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Penance for Excesses Arising from Attachment to the World (Nishiy Sutra)
**Penance Categories**  * **Minor Penance** * **Medium Penance** * **Excellent
Penance**  **1. Short Period (Lahu Maas)** * **Four Fasts** * **Fifteen Fasts**
* **Twenty-Seven Fasts**  **2. Long Period (Guru Maas)** * **Four Fasts,
Renunciation of Four Viharas** * **Fifteen Fasts, Renunciation of Four Viharas**
* **Thirty Fasts, Renunciation of Four Viharas**  **3. Short Four Months (Lahu
Chaumasi)** * **Four Bele (Oil-based food)**, **Four Tele (Oil-based food) for
Parana (breaking the fast)** * **One Hundred and Eight Fasts, Ayambil (fasting
with water only) for Parana** * **Ayambil for Parana**  **4. Long Four Months
(Guru Chaumasi)** * **Four Tele, Fifteen Tele for Parana** * **One Hundred and
Twenty Fasts, Ayambil for Parana** * **Ayambil for forty days, Ayambil for sixty
days, Ayambil for Parana, Diksha Chhed (breaking of vows)** * **Diksha Chhed,
Re-initiation (for 120 days)**  **General Interpretation:**  Both minor and
excellent penances encompass all types of penances.  **Specific
Interpretation:** The commentator has described three types of penances: 1.
Minor, 2. Medium, 3. Excellent.  **Guidance:**  Based on the age, tolerance, and
circumstances of the practitioner, the Gītārttha Muni can prescribe penances,
including higher levels of penance, renunciation, and breaking of vows, as per
the table.  **Equivalence of Penance to One Fast:**  1. Forty-eight Navkarsi 2.
Twenty-four Porsi 3. Sixteen and a half Porsi 4. Eight Purimarth (two Porsi) 5.
Four Ekasana 6. Three Nivi 7. Two Ayambil 8. Recitation of two thousand Gathas
(2000)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [nizIyasUtra tIvra mohodaya se (prAsakti se) lagane vAle aticArAdi ke
prAyazcitta krama prAyazcittanAma jaghanya tapa madhyama tapa utkRSTa tapa 1.
laghumAsa cAra upavAsa pandraha upavAsa sattAvIsa upavAsa 2. gurumAsa cAra
upavAsa, pandraha upavAsa, tIsa upavAsa, cauvihAra tyAga cauvihAra tyAga
cauvihAra tyAga 3. laghu caumAsI cAra bele, pAraNe meM cAra tele, pAraNe meM eka
sau ATha upavAsa, AyaMbila prAyaMbila pAraNe meM AyaMbila 4. guru caumAsI cAra
tele, pAraNe meM pandraha tele, pAraNe meM eka sau bIsa upavAsa, AyaMbila yA 40
dina AyaMbila yA 60 dina pAraNe meM AyaMbila yA kA dIkSAcheda kA dIkSAcheda
punaH dIkSA yA 120 dina kA dIkSAcheda  /  sAmAnya vivakSA se jaghanya aura
utkRSTa do prakAra ke prAyazcittoM meM bhI sabhI prakAra ke prAyazcitta
samAviSTa ho jAte haiN| bhASyakAra ne vizeSa vivakSA se tIna prakAra ke
prAyazcitta kahe haiM-1. jaghanya, 2. madhyama, 3. utkRSTa  /  pratisevI kI
vaya, sahiSNutA aura deza-kAla ke anusAra gItArtha muni tAlikA meM kahe
prAyazcitta se hInAdhika tapa-cheda Adi de sakate haiN| eka upavAsa ke samakakSa
tapa1. aDatAlIsa navakArasI eka upavAsa 2. cauvIsa porasI 3. solaha Der3ha
porasI 4. ATha purimArdha (do porasI) 5. cAra ekAzana 6. nivI tIna 7. do
AyaMbila [2] 8. do hajAra gAthAoM kA svAdhyAya [2000] HM Kga

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Prāśama Uddesaka** **The Atonement of the Veda-Mohoday**  1. **The monk
who engages in manual labor or approves of those who do (incurs the Guru-Māsika
atonement).**  **Discussion:**  Upon reading this sūtra, a curious student of
the scriptures will naturally wonder why this sūtra appears at the very
beginning of this Āgama. Shouldn't there be a mangalācaraṇa (auspicious
invocation) or an utthānikā (introduction) at the start? This sūtra could have
been placed elsewhere.  The answer lies in the compilation style of the Āgamas.
They are structured to contain the desired topics from "ath" (beginning) to
"iti" (end). For example, consider the Ācārāṅga, Sūtrakṛtāṅga,  Sthānāṅga,
Samvāyāṅga, and the Br̥hatkalpa, Vyavahāra, etc. sūtras. These do not have
mangalācaraṇa sūtras or utthānikās. This is because the Śruta Dharma (scriptural
teachings) and Cāritra Dharma (ethical conduct) expounded in the Āgamas are
themselves auspicious. Therefore, the Āgamas and each of their sūtras are
auspicious in nature. Why then is there a need for an additional mangalācaraṇa?
Alternatively, atonement is a form of tapas (austerity). According to the
Daśavaikālika sūtra, tapas is auspicious. Therefore, the Pūrṇa Niśītha sūtra,
which outlines atonement, is itself auspicious. Hence, an additional
mangalācaraṇa is unnecessary.  In this regard, thoughtful students of the Āgamas
believe that the mangalācaraṇa sūtras or utthānikās found at the beginning or
end of some Āgamas were added later by a devout follower of the Āgamas during
the period of scriptural transcription or some other unknown time.  As evidence,
consider the "Namo Bamṁbīe Livīe" invocation found at the beginning of the
Bhagavati sūtra. This mangalācaraṇa in the form of a salutation originated
during the period of scriptural transcription. Why would there be a need to
salute the script as long as the scriptures were memorized and passed down
orally?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prazama uddezaka veda-mohodaya kA prAyazcitta 1. je bhikkhU hatthakammaM karei,
kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  1. jo bhikSu hastakarma karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai (use gurumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana isa sUtra ko
par3hate hI jijJAsu svAdhyAyI ke hRdaya meM sahasA eka jijJAsA jAgRta hotI hai
ki isa Agama ke prArambha meM hI yaha sUtra kaisA hai ? prArambha meM to
maMgalAcaraNa yA utthAnikA hI honI caahie| yaha sUtra to anyatra bhI kahIM liyA
jA sakatA thaa| isakA samAdhAna yaha hai ki AgamoM kI saMkalanazailI hI aisI hai
ki unameM 'atha se iti' taka abhISTa viSayoM kA saMkalana kiyA gayA hai|
udAharaNa ke lie AcArAMga, sUtrakRtAMga, sthAnAMga, samavAyAMga tathA
bRhatkalpa, vyavahAra Adi sUtra dekheN| inameM na maMgalAcaraNa sUtra hai aura
na utthAnikA hai| kyoMki AgamoM meM pratipAdita zrutadharma aura cAritradharma
svayaM maMgala hai, ataeva Agama aura unake pratyeka sUtra maMgala rUpa haiM,
phira atirikta maMgalAcaraNa kI AvazyakatA hI kyA hai ? athavA-prAyazcitta tapa
hai, dazavaikAlika sUtra ke anusAra tapa maMgala hai, ataeva
prAyazcittaprarUpaka pUrNa nizIthasUtra maMgala rUpa hI hai-isalie atirikta
maMgalAcaraNa anAvazyaka hai  /  isa sambandha ke cintanazIla Agama svAdhyAyiyoM
kA abhimata yaha hai ki jina AgamoM ke prArambha meM yA anta meM jo
maMgalAcaraNa sUtra haiM yA utthAnikAyeM haiM, ve saba lipikakAla meM yA anya
kisI ajJAta kAla meM kisI bhAvuka AgamAnurAgI ne bhaktivaza bAda meM jor3a die
haiM  /  pramANarUpa meM prastuta hailipi-namaskAra bhagavatIsUtra ke prArambha
meM "namo baMbhIe livIe" jo namaskAra rUpa maMgalAcaraNa hai vaha . lipikakAla
se pracalita huA hai, kyoMki jaba taka zrutaparamparA kaMThastha rahI taba taka
lipi ko namaskAra karane kI upAdeyatA hI kyA thI?

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nishiy Sutra Shrutadevata Namaskara In the same way, at the end of Bhagavati
Sutra, the final auspiciousness in the form of salutations to Shrutadevata and
other numerous gods and goddesses has been added in some era. The commentator
Shri Abhaydevsuri has also not explained them as "Mangal" of the scribe. It is
not appropriate for a Vrati Shraman to salute an Avrati Shrutadevata Yaksha,
some Agamjna Shrutadevata consider only Ganadhar, but Ganadhar are the creators
of Sutragama themselves, therefore it does not seem logical for them to salute
themselves. When the scribes started copying the Agamas, one of the scribes must
have written "Namo Bamhiye Liviye" at the beginning of Bhagavati, making it a
Mangalacharan in the form of salutation, so that the copy of Bhagavati could be
completed without any obstacles. Because Bhagavati has always been the greatest
Agama. As many copies of that copy were made, this script of salutation
Mangalacharan Sutra became permanent in them. Although the scribes did not write
in Brahmi script, they still had the belief that the original script was "Brahmi
script", and saluting it would give us prosperity in the profession of writing.
The Uththani Kayas used in the beginning The recitation of the available Agamas
is considered to be the recitation of Sudharmaswami, the introduction of them
and the description of their conduct in their recitation, as described in these
Uththani Kayas, can be understood by a common reader that these Uththani Kayas
are the work of someone else. The writing style of the Uththani Karas itself
makes it clear, for example, here is a part of the Uththani Ka: "Teṇam kāleṇam
teṇam samaeṇam samaṇassa bhagavao mahāvīrassā antevāsī ajjasuhhamme ṇāma there
jāisampanne jāv gāmaṇugāmaṁ dūijjमाणe suhaṁ suheṇam viharaमाणe jeṇev campaṇayaro
jeṇev puṇṇabhadde ceie teṇāmev uvāgaccahi." - Jnatadharmakatha A. 1, S. 1. At
that time, at that time, the Shraman Bhagwan Mahavira's Antavasin Arya Sudharma,
a Thera of noble lineage, was wandering from village to village, dwelling
happily and happily, where Champanagari was, where the Punnabhadra Chaitya was,
he came there. After reading this part of the Uththani Ka, a knowledgeable
reader should decide for himself whether these Uththani Kayas are compiled by
Sudharmaswami himself? If not, then it is certain that they were added later.
Therefore, the Mangalacharan Sutra and Uththani Kayas in the Sutras are not
original creations. Therefore, in this Nishith Sutra, without mentioning the
Mangalacharan Sutra and Uththani Ka Sutra, it has been called the Sutra of
atonement for the rise of Vedamohaniya. In the worship of the Anugar Dharma, the
worship of the Brahmacharya Mahavrat is very difficult. By fully observing this
one, it is possible to fully observe all the Mahavratas, and by breaking this
one, it is certain that all the Mahavratas will be broken.  ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [nizIyasUtra zrutadevatA namaskAra isI prakAra bhagavatIsUtra ke anta meM
zrutadevatA Adi aneka deva-deviyoM ko namaskAra rUpa antima maMgala bhI kisI
yuga meM jur3A hai| TIkAkAra zrI abhayadevasUri ne bhI inheM lipikartA ke
"maMgala' kahakara vyAkhyA nahIM kI hai| vratI zramaNa avratI zrutadevatA yakSa
ko namaskAra kareM yaha saMgata nahIM hotA, kucha AgamajJa zrutadevatA gaNadhara
ko hI mAnate haiM kintu gaNadhara to sUtrAgama ke svayaM sraSTA haiM, ata: ve
apane Apako namaskAra kareM yaha bhI yuktisaMgata pratIta nahIM hotA hai| jaba
lipika AgamoM kI pratilipiyA~ karane lage to unameM se kisI eka lipika ne
bhagavatI ke prArambha meM "namo baMbhIe livIe" likhakara namaskAra rUpa
maMgalAcaraNa kiyA hogA, jisase bhagavatI kI pratilipi nirvighna pUrNa ho  /
kyoMki bhagavatI hI sabase bar3A Agama sadA rahA hai  /  usa prati kI jitanI
pratilipiyA~ huIM, unameM yaha lipi namaskAra kA maMgalAcaraNa sUtra sthAyI ho
gyaa| yadyapi lipika brAhmI lipi meM nahIM likhate the phira bhI unakI yaha
zraddhA thI ki Adi lipi "brAhmI lipi" hai, use namaskAra karane para lipi kA
vyavasAya hameM samRddhi degaa| prArambha meM prayukta utthAnikAyeM upalabdha
AgamoM kI vAcanA sudharmAsvAmI kI vAcanA mAnI jAtI hai, unakI hI vAcanA meM
unakA paricaya aura unake vihAra kA varNana jisa prakAra ina utthAnikAnoM meM
varNita hai use dekhate hue sAmAnya pAThaka bhI yaha samajha sakatA hai ki ye
utthAnikAyeM kisI anya kI hI kRti haiN| utthAnikAroM kI racanAzailI se hI yaha
spaSTa jJAta ho jAtA haiudAharaNa ke lie prastuta hai-utthAnikA kA eka aMza
"teNaM kAleNaM teNaM samaeNaM samaNassa bhagavao mahAvIrassa aMtevAsI
ajjasuhamme NAma there jAisaMpanne jAva gAmANugAmaM dUijjamANe suhaM suheNaM
viharamANe jeNeva caMpANayaro jeNeva puNNabhadde ceie teNAmeva uvAgacchai."
-jJAtAdharmakathA a. 1, sU. 1. usa kAla usa samaya meM zramaNa bhagavAna
mahAvIra ke antevAsI Arya sudharmA nAma ke sthavira jAtisampanna 'yAvat' eka
grAma se dUsare grAma vicarate hue sukhe sukhe vihAra karate hue jahA~
campAnagarI thI, jahA~ pUrNabhadra caitya thA vahA~ Ae  /  utthAnikA ke isa aMza
ko par3hakara sujJa pAThaka svayaM nirNaya kareM ki kyA.ye utthAnikAeM svayaM
sudharmAsvAmI dvArA saMkalita haiM ? yadi nahIM to yaha nizcita hai ki bAda meM
ye joDI gaI haiM  /  isalie sUtroM meM maMgalAcaraNa sUtra aura utthAnikAeM
maulika racanA nahIM haiN| isIlie isa nizIthasUtra meM maMgalAcaraNa sUtra aura
utthAnikA sUtra kahe binA hI vedamohanIya ke udaya kA prAyazcitta sUtra kahA
gayA hai| anagAra dharma kI ArAdhanA meM brahmacarya mahAvrata kI ArAdhanA ati
kaThina hai| isa eka ke pUrNa pAlana se sabhI mahAvratoM kA pUrNa pAlana
sambhava hai aura isa eka ke bhaMga hone para sabhI mahAvratoM kA bhaMga honA
sunizcita hai  /

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Uddeshak  [7]  The importance of this Mahavrat is such that even Gods,
Demons, Humans, etc. all bow down before its complete observer.  _ The
scriptures contain a detailed description of its greatness and the factors that
facilitate and hinder its practice.  This first atonement sutra has been
presented in this scripture with the intention that the Sadhus and Sadhvis who
observe this Mahavrat remain constantly vigilant against the actions of
transgression, etc., which may arise due to the sudden and powerful emergence of
Vedamoha.  Some sutras in the Brihatkalpa Sutra Uddeshak 3-4-5 use only the
male-centric term "Bhikshu or Shraman Nirgrath". However, these regulations are
applicable to both Bhikshus and Bhikshuni. The Acharang Sutra uses both the
terms Bhikshu, Bhikshuni and the Brihatkalpa Sutra uses both Nigranth and
Nirgranthi. There can be many types of writing styles, but wherever the meaning
is relevant, it is understood.  Except for some sutras in the seventeenth
Uddeshak of the Nishisth Sutra, the atonement statements are generally made
using only the term "Bhikshu". However, one should understand the appropriate
atonement regulations for Sadhvis by implication.  Due to the distorted thoughts
arising from the Vibhavadasha born from Hattakkam-Ved-Mohodaya, the intention of
manual labor is carried out.  To understand the detailed description of its
negative consequences and the ways to get rid of it, one should study the
commentary and the Churni with discernment.  In the Karei, Karentam va Saizzai-
Sutra, the action of getting something done is not mentioned. "Getting something
done" is also a type of approval, because approval is certain in getting
something done, which also includes the action of getting something done. The
Churnikar has also explained it as "Saizjana duviha-karavane, anumoadane". And
from the statement of the beginning and the end, the middle can also be
understood. Therefore, wherever the text "Karei, Karentam va Saizzai" is
present, one should understand it as "does or gets it done or approves of the
one who does it".  However, where the text "Karei Karentam va Saizzai" is
present, one should understand the meaning as "gets it done by someone else or
approves of the one who gets it done".  In the currently available copies of the
Nishisth Sutra, there is no atonement-indicating text with each sutra, but in
ancient times, there would have been an atonement text with each sutra. The
Churnikar often mentions atonement in the meaning and discussion of many sutras.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama uddezaka] [7 isa mahAvrata kA mahattva itanA hai ki isake pUrNa pAlaka
ke sAmane deva, dAnava, mAnava Adi sabhI natamastaka rahate haiM  /  _ isake
mAhAtmya kA aura isakI sAdhanA ke sAdhaka bAdhaka kAraNoM kA AgamoM meM vistRta
varNana hai| isake pAlaka sAdhu-sAdhviyAM vedamohanIya ke Akasmika prabala udaya
se hone vAle atikramAdi ke AcaraNoM se satata sajaga rahakara isa mahAvrata kI
surakSA karate raheM, isI bhAvanA se isa Agama meM yaha prathama prAyazcitta
sUtra prastuta kiyA gayA hai| je bhikkhU-bRhatkalpa sUtra uddezaka 3-4-5 ke
kisI-kisI sUtra meM kevala "bhikSu yA zramaNa nirgratha" isa taraha puruSa
pradhAna zabda kA prayoga huA hai  /  tathApi ye vidhAna bhikSu, bhikSuNI donoM
ke liye upayukta haiM  /  AcArAMgasUtra meM bhikSu, bhikSuNI tathA
bRhatkalpasUtra meM nigraMtha, nirgranthI donoM padoM kA prayoga hai,
racanApaddhati ke aneka prakAra ho sakate haiM, phira bhI jahA~ jo artha saMgata
hotA hai, vaha samajhA jAtA hai| nizIthasUtra meM satrahaveM uddezaka ke kucha
sUtroM ko chor3akara prAyaH sarvatra "bhikSu" zabda ke prayoga se hI prAyazcitta
kathana huA hai, phira bhI upalakSaNa se sAdhvI ke lie yathAyogya prAyazcitta-
vidhAna samajha lene caahie| hatthakamma-veda-mohodaya se prAdurbhUta
vibhAvadazAjanya vikRta vicAroM se hastakarma kA saMkalpa kriyAnvita hotA hai  /
isake duSpariNAmoM kA vistRta varNana evaM isase mukti pAne ke upAyoM ko jAnane
ke liye bhASya evaM cUNi kA vivekapUrvaka svAdhyAya karanA cAhiye  /  karei,
kareMtaM vA sAijjai-sUtra meM karAne kI kriyA nahIM dI gaI hai| "karAnA" bhI eka
prakAra kA anumodana hI hai, kyoMki karAne meM anumodana nizcita hai jisase
karAne kI kriyA kA bhI grahaNa ho jAtA hai  /  cUrNikAra ne bhI "sAijjaNA
duvihA-kArAvaNe, anumodane" isa prakAra vyAkhyA kI hai tathA Adi aura aMta ke
kathana se madhya kA grahaNa bhI ho sakatA hai| ataH jahA~ para bhI "karei,
kareMtaM vA sAijjai pATha hai, vahA~ yaha artha samajha lenA cAhiye ki "karatA
hai yA karavAtA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|" kintu jahA~ para
"kArei kAreMtaM vA sAijjaI" pATha ho vahA~ "anya se karavAtA hai yA karavAne
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai," isa prakAra artha samajhanA caahiye| vartamAna
meM upalabdha nizIthasUtra kI pratiyoM meM pratyeka sUtra ke sAtha prAyazcitta
sUcaka pATha nahIM hai, kintu prAcIna kAla meM pratyeka sUtra ke sAtha
prAyazcitta pATha rahA hogaa| cUrNikAra prAyaH aneka sUtroM ke zabdArtha aura
vivecana meM prAyazcitta kA kathana karate haiN|

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīthসূত্র  **Example:** See the commentary of the second sūtra of the
first uddeśaka, the first sūtra of the second uddeśaka, and the first sūtra of
the third uddeśaka. In these sūtras, the explanation is given as "tass
māsagurupacchittaṁ, tass māsalahupacchittaṁ", "tass māsalahuṁ", etc. However,
the explanation of the available prāyaścitta text attached to the last sūtra of
the uddeśaka is rarely given. The action-explanation of the prāyaścitta-
indicating sentences like "tass māsalahu" etc. in the explanation of other
sūtras is mostly the same in the last sūtras.  Therefore, the last sentence of
each sūtra should be "karentaṁ vā sāijjai āvajjai se māsiyam parihāraṭṭhāṇaṁ
aṇugghāiyaṁ". (He who approves of the one who does it, receives the guru-māsika
prāyaścitta. This should be the case.)  Sometimes, when the original text was
summarized, instead of writing the prāyaścitta text along with all the sūtras,
the text "taṁ sevāmaṇe" was written more extensively to connect the relationship
with the last sūtra of the uddeśaka. This is known from the word meaning and
explanation given by the chūrṇikāra.  **Sāijjai:** To have an interest in the
occurrence of any prohibited act is "sāijjaṇā". It is of two types:  1.
**Getting someone else to do the prohibited act.** 2. **Approving of the one who
does the prohibited act.**  Getting someone else to do it is also of two types:
1. **Getting it done by someone who desires to do the prohibited act.** 2.
**Getting it done by someone who does not desire to do the prohibited act, by
force.**  Approval is also of two types:  1. **Praising the one who does the
prohibited act.** 2. **Not dissuading the one who does the wrong act by the head
of the assembly.**  **Example:** Which has a greater fault, getting someone else
to do a prohibited act or approving of the prohibited act? **Answer:** Approving
has a lesser fault, and getting someone else to do it has a greater fault.  **-
Ni. Chū. Bhā. 2, page 25, Gāthā 588, Prāyaścitta of the conduct of Angadāna**
2. **Je bhikku angadānaṁ kaṭheṇa vā, kiliceṇa vā, anguliyāe vā, salāgāe vā
sancālei, sancālantaṁ vā sāijjai.** (If a monk moves the Angadāna with a stick,
a sword, a finger, or a firebrand, or approves of the one who moves it.)  3.
**Je bhikku angadānaṁ sambāhejj vā, palimaddej vā, sambāhantaṁ vā, palimaiantaṁ
vā sāijjai.** (If a monk touches the Angadāna with his hand, or embraces it, or
approves of the one who touches it, or embraces it.)  4. **Je bhikku angadānaṁ
telleṇa vā, ghaeṇa vā, vasāe vā, ṇavaṇīeṇa vā, abbhangejj vā, makkhejj vā,
anbhangeṁtaṁ vā makkheṁtaṁ vā sāijjai.** (If a monk anoints the Angadāna with
oil, ghee, fat, or butter, or approves of the one who anoints it.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [nizIthasUtra udAharaNa ke rUpa meM prathama uddezaka ke dvitIya sUtra kI,
dvitIya uddezaka ke prathama sUtra kI, tRtIya uddezaka ke prathama sUtra kI
cUrNi dekheM, ina sUtroM meM-"tassa mAsagurupacchittaM, tassa mAsalahupacchittaM
"tassa mAsalahuM" ityAdi prakAra se vyAkhyA kI gaI hai| kintu uddezaka ke aMtima
sUtra ke sAtha saMlagna upalabdha prAyazcitta pATha kI vyAkhyA prAyaH nahIM kI
gaI hai  /  anya sUtroM kI vyAkhyA meM "tassa mAsalahu" Adi prAyazcitta sUcaka
vAkyoM kI kriyA-vyAkhyA jisa prakAra hai, aMtima sUtroM meM bhI prAyaH usI
prakAra hai| ataH pratyeka sUtra kA aMtima vAkya "kareMtaM vA sAijjai Avajjai se
mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM annugghaaiyN"| (karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai use
gurumAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai| aisA honA caahiye| kabhI mUla pATha kA
saMkSiptIkaraNa kiyA gayA, usa samaya saba sUtroM ke sAtha prAyazcitta pATha na
likhakara uddezaka ke aMtima sUtra ke sAtha "taM sevamANe" itanA pATha saMbaMdha
jor3ane ke liye adhika lagA kara likha diyA gayA ho  /  aisA cUrNikArakRta
zabdArtha aura vyAkhyA se jJAta ho jAtA hai  /  sAijjai-kisI bhI niSiddha kArya
ke hone meM abhiruci rakhanA "sAijjaNA" hai| vaha do prakAra kI hai 1. niSiddha
kRtya dUsare se karavAnA  /  2. niSiddha kRtya karate huye kA anumodana karanA
/  dUsare se karavAnA bhI do prakAra kA hai1. jisakI icchA niSiddha kArya karane
kI hai, usase karavAnA  /  2. jisakI icchA niSiddha kArya karane kI nahIM hai,
usase balapUrvaka krvaanaa| anumodana bhI do prakAra kA hai1. niSiddha kArya kI
va karane vAle kI sarAhanA krnaa| 2. akRtya karane vAle ko gaNapramukha dvArA
manA na krnaa| pra.-gurutara doSa kisameM hai, kisI anya se niSiddha kRtya
karavAne meM yA niSiddha kRtya kA anumodana karane meM ? u.-anumodana meM
laghutara doSa hai aura karavAne meM gurutara doSa hai  /  -ni. cU. bhA. 2
pRSTha-25, gAthA 588 aMgAdAna ke saMcAlanAdi kA prAyazcitta 2. je bhikkhU
aMgAdANaM kaTheNa vA, kiliceNa vA, aMguliyAe vA, salAgAe vA saMcAlei, saMcAlataM
vA saaijji| 3. je bhikkhU aMgAdANaM saMbAhejja vA, palimaddejja vA, saMbAhaMtaM
vA, palimaiMtaM vA sAijjai  /  4. je bhikkhU aMgAdANaM telleNa vA, ghaeNa vA,
vasAe vA, NavaNIeNa vA, abbhaMgejja vA, makkhejja vA, anbhaMgeMtaM vA makkheMtaM
vA sAijjai  /

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[First Objective] 5. A monk who applies or approves of the application of a
paste made from various substances, lodhra (a fragrant substance), padma-churna
(powder of lotus), ṇhāṇa (a type of lentil) and other powders, siṇāṇa (a
fragrant powder), chandana (sandalwood) powder, vardhamāna-churna (a type of
powder) or other powders to the "angadāna" (the body). 6. A monk who washes or
approves of the washing of the "angadāna" with cold water or hot water, once or
repeatedly. 7. A monk who lifts or approves of the lifting of the skin on the
front part of the "angadāna". 8. A monk who smells or approves of the smelling
of the "angadāna". [He incurs the monthly penance for a guru.] 2. A monk who
manipulates or approves of the manipulation of the "angadāna" with wood, bamboo,
a finger, or a rod made of cane. 3. A monk who massages or approves of the
repeated massage of the "angadāna". 4. A monk who anoints or approves of the
repeated anointing of the "angadāna" with oil, ghee, fat, or butter. 5. A monk
who applies or approves of the application of a paste made from various
substances, lodhra (a fragrant substance), padma-churna (powder of lotus), ṇhāṇa
(a type of lentil) and other powders, siṇāṇa (a fragrant powder), chandana
(sandalwood) powder, vardhamāna-churna (a type of powder) or other powders to
the "angadāna" (the body). 6. A monk who washes or approves of the washing of
the "angadāna" with cold water or hot water, once or repeatedly. 7. A monk who
lifts or approves of the lifting of the skin on the front part of the
"angadāna". 8. A monk who smells or approves of the smelling of the "angadāna".
[He incurs the monthly penance for a guru.] Discussion-Sutras 2 to 8 each have
seven illustrations given by the commentator for clarification, they are as
follows: 1. Illustration of the manipulation sutra - Just as a lion, when
awakened from sleep, destroys the life of the one who awakened him, so too, the
one who manipulates the quieted "angadāna" destroys his celibacy. 2.
Illustration of the massage sutra - Just as a quiet snake, when any part of it
is pressed by someone's foot, bites him, so too, the massage of the quieted
"angadāna" destroys celibacy.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama uddezaka] 5. je bhikkhU aMgAdANaM kakkeNa vA, loddheNa vA paumacuNNeNa
vA, hANeNa vA, siNANeNa vA, cuNehi vA, vahiM vA, uvvadRjja vA, parivaTTajja vA
uvvadRtaM vA parivadRtaM vA sAijjai  /  6. je bhikkhU aMgAdANaM soodagaviyaDeNa
vA, usiNodagaviyaDeNa vA uccholejja vA padhovejja vA, uccholeMtaM vA padhoveMtaM
vA saaijji| 7. je bhikkhU aMgAdANaM Nicchalei, NicchaletaM vA saaijji| 8. je
bhikkhU aMgAdANaM jiMghai, jighaMtaM vA saaijji| 2. jo bhikSu "aMgAdAna" ko
kASTha se, bAMsa Adi kI khapaccI se, aMgulI se yA beMta Adi kI zalAkA se
saMcAlana karatA hai yA saMcAlana karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 3. jo
bhikSu "aMgAdAna" kA mardana karatA hai yA bAra-bAra mardana karatA hai yA aisA
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 4. jo bhikSu "aMgAdAna" kA tela, ghI, vasA
yA makkhana se mAliza karatA hai yA bAra-bAra mAliza karatA hai yA aisA karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 5. jo bhikSu "aMgAdAna' kA kalka-aneka dravyoM ke
saMyoga se nirmita lepya padArtha se, lodhrasugaMdhita dravya se, padmacUrNa se,
NhANa-ur3ada Adi ke cUrNa se, siNANa-sugandhita cUrNa Adi se, caMdanAdi ke cUrNa
se, vardhamAna cUrNa se ubaTana-lepa yA pIThI eka bAra yA bAra-bAra karatA hai
yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  /  6. jo bhikSu "aMgAdAna" kA
prAsuka zItala jala se yA uSNa jala se prakSAlana [dhonA] eka bAra yA bAra-bAra
karatA hai yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 7. jo bhikSu "aMgAdAna'
ke agrabhAga kI tvacA ko Upara kI ora karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 8. jo bhikSu "aMgAdAna' ko sUghatA hai yA sUghane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  [use guru mAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  ] vivecana-sUtra saMkhyA
2 se 8 taka ke pratyeka viSaya ke spaSTIkaraNa ke lie bhASyakAra ne sAta
dRSTAMta diye haiM, ve isa prakAra haiMdRSTAMta saptaka 1. saMcAlana sUtra kA
dRSTAMta-jisa prakAra soe huye siMha ko jagAne para vaha siMha jagAne vAle ke
jIvana kA nAza kara detA hai usI prakAra jo upazAMta "aMgAdAna" kA saMcAlana
karatA hai usakA brahmacarya khaMDita ho jAtA hai| 2. saMbAdhana sUtra kA
dRSTAMta-jisa prakAra zAMta sarpa kA koI aMga kisI ke paira Adi se daba jAne
para vaha use Dasa letA hai usI prakAra upazAMta aMgAdAna kA mardana karane se
brahmacarya khaMDita ho jAtA hai|

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **[10]**  **[Nishith Sutra 3. Abhyangan Sutra's
Illustration:** Just as fire becomes intensely blazing when it is sprinkled with
ghee, similarly, the Kamagni (desire fire) becomes intensely ignited when the
Angadan (genitals) are massaged with oil etc.  **4. Ubtan Sutra's
Illustration:** Just as a spear becomes extremely deadly when its edge is
sharpened, similarly, the Ubtan (scrub) of the Angadan is extremely deadly for
Brahmacharya (celibacy).  **5. Utkshalan Sutra's Illustration:** Just as a lion,
when suffering from pain in its eyes, is cleansed by a physician's application
of medicine, and then eats the physician himself, similarly, the one who
performs "Prakshalan" (cleansing) of the Angadan, his Brahmacharya is broken.
**6. Nishchalan Sutra's Illustration:** Just as anyone who opens the mouth of a
sleeping python is eaten by it, similarly, the one who lifts the skin-covering
of the Angadan, his Brahmacharya is disturbed.  **7. Jighran Sutra's
Illustration:** A king, despite the physician's advice, kept smelling mangoes,
and as a result, he died of Ambashti disease. Similarly, the one who "massages
the Angadan and smells his hand," his Brahmacharya is destroyed by the Veda-
Mohodey (the power of the Vedas).  **"Angadan"** is a word that indicates the
genitals. In such contexts, the Agamkar (scriptural author) also uses obscure
synonyms, some of which have fixed meanings. Commentators refer to them as
"Saamyayiki Sanjna or Saiddhantic Prayog Vishesh" (contextual designation or
specific theoretical usage). Nevertheless, these words also convey the relevant
meaning. Some words are based on compound derivation, and they clearly refer to
the same meaning.  The explanation of this word states that this bodily part is
the cause of the production of other body parts. Therefore, it is called Angadan
because it is the cause of its origin. The names of Ang (limb), Upang
(appendage), and Angopang (sub-appendage) are as follows:  **1. Ang:** Head,
Heart, Abdomen, Back, Two Arms, Two Urus (thighs).  **2. Upang:** Ears, Nose,
Eyes, Jangh (lower leg), Hands, Feet etc.  **3. Angopang:** Nails, Hair,
Moustache, Beard, Fingers, Hastatal (palm), Hastupatal (raised part of the
palm).  **Abhangejj, Makkhejj, Nishith Sutra:** These three words are used in
the sense of massage with oil etc. - "Abhangejj, Makkhejj, Bhilingejj", all
three mean massage.  In a Sutra, where two of these three words are used, the
first word indicates "once" and the second word indicates "many times".  The
word "Makkhejj" when used with "Abhangejj" indicates "many times", and the same
"Makkhejj" when used with "Bhilingejj" indicates "once".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 10] [nizIthasUtra 3. abhyaMgana sUtra kA dRSTAMta-jisa prakAra agni ko "ghI" se
siMcane para vaha atyadhika prajjvalita hotI hai usI taraha aMgAdAna kA tailAdi
se mAliza karane para kAmAgni atyadhika pradIpta hotI hai| 4. ubaTana sUtra kA
dRSTAMta-jisa prakAra bhAle kI dhAra ko tIkSaNa karane para vaha atyadhika
ghAtaka hotI hai usI taraha aMgAdAna kA ubaTana brahmacarya kA atyadhika ghAtaka
hotA hai| 5. utkSAlana sUtra kA dRSTAMta-jisa prakAra siMha kI AMkhoM meM pIr3A
hone para kisI vaidya ke dvArA auSadha prayoga se zuddhi kara dene para vaha
bhUkhA siMha use hI khA jAtA hai  /  usI prakAra jo aMgAdAna kA "prakSAlana"
karatA hai usakA brahmacarya khaMDita ho jAtA hai| 6. nizchalana sUtra kA
dRSTAMta-jisa prakAra soye huye ajagara kA koI mukha kholatA hai to vaha use khA
jAtA hai usI taraha jo aMgAdAna ke tvacA-yAvaraNa ko Upara karatA hai usakA
brahmacarya vicalita ho jAtA hai| 7. jighraNa sUtra kA dRSTAMta-eka rAjA vaidya
ke manA karane para Amra sUghatA rahA, usakA pariNAma yaha huA ki vaha ambaSThI
vyAdhi se mara gayA  /  usI taraha jo "aMgAdAna kA mardana karake hAtha ko
sUghatA hai| usakA brahmacarya veda-mohodeya se vinAza ko prApta hotA hai  /
"aMgAdAna"yaha zabda jananendriya kA sUcaka hai  /  aise prasaMgoM meM AgamakAra
aprasiddha paryAyavAcI zabdoM kA prayoga bhI karate haiN| jinameM kucha zabda
rUr3ha arthavAle bhI hote haiM  /  vyAkhyAkAra unheM "sAmayikI saMjJA yA
saiddhAntika prayoga vizeSa" se sUcita karate haiN| phira bhI una zabdoM se
prAsaMgika artha bhI dhvanita ho jAtA hai  /  kucha zabda yaugika
vyutpattiparaka hote haiM, ve spaSTa rUpa se usI artha ko kahate haiM  /  isa
zabda kI vyAkhyA meM kahA gayA hai ki yaha zarIrAvayava aMgoM ke utpAdana meM
hetubhUta hai| ataH usakI utpatti kA kAraNa hone se yaha aMgAdAna kahA jAtA hai
/  aMga, upAMga Adi ke nAma isa prakAra haiM 1. aMga-pATha haiM-mastaka, hRdaya,
udara, pITha, do bhujA, do uru [ghuTanoM ke Upara kA bhAga]  /  2. upAMga-kAna,
nAka, aAMkha, jaMghA [ghuTane ke nIce kA bhAga]. hAtha, pAMva Adi  /  3.
aMgopAMga-nakha, keza, mUcha, dAr3hI, aMguliyAM, hastatala, hastaupatala
[hathelI kA ubharA huA bhAga  /  /  _abbhaMgejja-makkhejja-nizIthasUtra meM tIna
zabdoM kA prayoga taila Adi se mAliza karane ke artha meM huA hai-"abbhaMgejja,
makkhejja, bhiliMgejja", ina tInoM kA artha mAliza karanA hai| eka sUtra meM ina
tIna zabdoM meM se jahAM do zabdoM kA prayoga hai vahA~ unameM se prathama zabda
"eka bAra" aura dUsarA zabda "aneka bAra" artha kA dyotaka hai  /  "makkhejja"
zabda jaba "abbhaMgejja" ke sAtha prayukta hotA hai to vaha aneka bAra ke artha
kA vAcaka hotA hai, vahI makkhejja jaba "bhiliMgejja" ke sAtha prayukta hotA hai
taba vaha eka bAra ke artha ko prakaTa karatA hai|

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective] [11 _ 'Uvv?jj परिवट्टज्ज'-kalk etc. substances are used in
the sense of applying [applying, sticking, coating, grinding etc.] an ubtan.
There are three words used for this - "Ullolaj, Uvvjj, परिव?ज्ज", their meaning
is also similar to Abhangajj-Makkhaj. Difference between massage and ubtan: The
substances suitable for massage are oily. Special strength and effort is used in
massaging with them. This kind of massage is beneficial from the skin to the
bones. Ubtan substances are rough and soft. They do not require special strength
and effort to apply. Ubtan substances are generally beneficial for the skin.
Kakken: - Due to the difference in the field and time, there is a change in the
use of substances. The words Kalk etc. are also similar. Their meaning is based
on the powder: 1. Kakken, 2. Lodhen, 3. Paumchunnen, 4. Nhanen, 5. Sinanen, 6.
Chunnehim, 7. Vanehim. These seven words have been used in many places in the
context of body rituals. The scribes have abbreviated the text by putting a dot
in the context of such similar texts. Due to the lack of a uniform method of
abbreviation, two, three, or four words have been left in some places. In the
explanation of the further objectives, the Churnikar does not explain again by
referring to the first objective. Therefore, the Agama-Swadhyayi should make a
wise decision in such places. 9. Je Bhikkhu Angadaanam Anyaranshi Achittansi
Soyansi Anuppavesetta Sukkapoggale Nigyaaei, Nigyaaetam Va Saizjji. 9. A monk
who inserts "Angadaan" into any un-conscious hole and removes the Shukra-
Pudgalas or approves of the one who removes them (receives Guru-Masik
Pratikraman). Discussion: Failure to follow even one of the 9 Vads of
Brahmacharya and the intense rise of Vedamohaniya leads to such a state.
Uttaraadhyayana A. 16 mentions ten places for the Samadhi of Brahmacharya Vrat.
Utt. A. 32 and Dasha Vaikalik A. 8 also have teachings on this subject. Some
places are quoted here: 1. Vibhusa Itthisansaggo, Paniyam Pan-Bhoyanam.
Narasattgavesissa, Visan Talaud Jamha. - Dasha. A. 8, Ga. 56 2. Chitta Bhitti Na
Nijjhae, Nari Va Sualankiyam. Bhakharan Pi Va Dalun, Ditti Padisamahare. -
Dasha. A. 8, Ga. 54 3. Vivitt-Sejjasanjanatiyanam Omasananam Damindriyanam. _ Na
Raga Sattū Dharisei Chittan, Paraiao Vahir Ivo Sahehim. - Utt. A. 32, Ga. 12

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama uddezaka] [11 _ 'uvva?jja parivaTTajja'-kalka Adi padArthoM se ubaTana
[lagAnA, cupar3anA, lepa karanA, pIThI karanA Adi] karane ke artha meM bhI tIna
zabdoM kA prayoga hotA hai-"ullolejja, uvvajja, pariva?jja", unakA bhI artha
abbhaMgejja-makkhejja ke samAna hai| mAliza aura ubaTana meM antaraH-mAliza ke
yogya padArtha snigdha hote haiN| unase mAliza karane meM vizeSa zakti va zrama
kA upayoga hotA hai  /  isa taraha kI gaI mAliza tvacA se lekara asthi taka
lAbhaprada hotI hai| ubaTana kI vastueM rUkSa aura komala hotI haiN| unake
lagAne meM vizeSa zakti va zrama kI apekSA nahIM hotI hai  /  ubaTana ke
padArtha prAyaH tvacA ke liye lAbhaprada hote haiM  /  kakkeNa:-kSetra kAla ke
aMtara se padArthoM ke prayoga meM parivartana ho jAtA hai  /  kalkAdi zabda bhI
prAyaH aise hI haiM  /  cUrNi ke AdhAra se inakA artha kiyA hai 1. kakkeNa, 2.
loddheNa, 3. paumacuNNeNa, 4. NhANeNa, 5. siNANeNa, 6. cuNNehiM, 7. vaNehiM  /
ina sAta zabdoM kA prayoga zarIra parikarma ke prasaMga meM aneka sthaloM para
huA hai  /  lipikAroM ne aise samAna pAThoM ke prasaMga meM biMdI lagAkara pATha
saMkSipta kiye haiN| saMkSiptIkaraNa meM samAna paddhati nahIM rakhane se kahIM
do, kahIM tIna, kahIM cAra zabda raha gaye haiN| Age ke uddezoM kI vyAkhyA meM
cUrNikAra prathama uddezaka kA nirdeza kara punaH vyAkhyA nahIM karate haiN|
ataH Agama-svAdhyAyI ko aise sthaloM meM vivekapUrvaka nirNaya karanA caahiye|
9. je bhikkhU aMgAdANaM aNNayaraMsi acittaMsi soyaMsi aNuppavesettA sukkapoggale
NigyAei, NigyAeMtaM vA saaijji| 9. jo bhikSu "aMgAdAna' ko kisI acita chidra meM
praviSTa karake zukra-pudgaloM ko nikAlatA hai yA nikAlane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai (use gurumAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai  / ) vivecana-brahmacarya kI 9
vADa meM se eka kA bhI pAlana nahIM karane se tathA vedamohanIya ke tIvra udaya
hone para aisI avasthA prApta hotI hai| uttarAdhyayana a0 16 meM
brahmacaryavrata kI samAdhi ke lie dasa sthAna batAe haiN| utta0 a0 32 meM aura
dazavaikAlika a0 8 meM bhI isa viSaya ke zikSAvacana kahe gae haiN| katipaya
sthala yahAM uddhRta kiye jAte haiM1. vibhUsA itthisaMsaggo, paNIyaM pANa-
bhoyaNaM  /  narassattagavesissa, visaM tAlauDaM jahA ||-dsh. a. 8, gA. 56 2.
cittabhitti Na NijjhAe, NAri vA sualaMkiyaM  /  bhakkharaM pi va daLUNa, diTTi
paDisamAhare ||-dsh. a. 8, gA. 54 3. vivitta-sejjAsaNajaMtiyANaM omAsaNANaM
damiindiyANaM  /  _Na rAgasattU dharisei cittaM, parAio vAhirivosahehiM ||-utt.
a. 32, gA. 12

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 12] [Nishīthasūtra 4. When the Dvaggī garment is worn, the Samaaru is not to
be uttered. Even the Dvaggī, who is a Pagaambhoīna, does not become a
Brahmayāri.  - Utt. A. 32, Ga. 11 5. Rasa Pagaama should not be served, for Rasa
is a Dittīkara for humans. Dittī and Kāma are like the fruit of a tree for
birds. - Uttara. A. 32, Ga. 10 Saṃkṣipta Sāra-Vibhūṣā, the sexual intercourse
and the prepared Rasa food should be considered as poison for Brahmacharya. If
the eyes fall on the picture of a woman or women, they should be removed
immediately. The place of stay should be free from women etc., the bed and
bedding should be minimal, and the monk should always eat a light meal, not a
Kāma-bhojī. One should act without attachment and aversion to the objects of the
senses, etc. By taking such precautions, the Vedamoha remains subdued like a
disease that has been subdued by medicine, there is Samadhi in Brahmacharya, and
the soul remains away from the places of atonement mentioned in the Sūtra.  The
discussion of the nine Vaḍos and the ten Samadhi-sthānas should be known from
other Āgamas. The word 'Śrota' in 'Aciṭṭamsi Soyamsi' is used in the sense of
'Chidra'. However, it is also used in the sense of path, place, etc. in Pāgama.
Here, the meaning 'Sthāna' is more appropriate than the meaning 'Chidra'. There
are two Sūtras on this subject in Vyavahārasūtra Uddesa 6, both of which use the
word 'Aciṭṭamsi Soyamsi'. The only difference is that the Guru Chaumāsī
atonement comes when there is a tendency towards sexual intercourse, and the
Guru Māsika atonement comes when there is a tendency towards manual stimulation.
The reason for this difference is that the tendency in Aciṭṭa Sthāna is manual
stimulation, and the tendency in Aciṭṭa Chidra is sexual intercourse. Therefore,
'Aciṭṭamsi Soyamsi' should be understood as 'Aciṭṭa Sthāna' here.  Atonement for
smelling a Saciṭṭa substance 10. Je Bhikkhu Saciṭṭa Paiṭṭiyaṃ Gandhaṃ Jighāi
Jighantaṃ vā Sāijjai. 10. A monk who smells a fragrant Saciṭṭa substance or
approves of someone who smells it (incurs Guru Māsika atonement).  Discussion -
This Sūtra states the atonement for smelling fragrant Saciṭṭa flowers, etc.,
with desire. Prācā. Śr. 2, A. 15, in the contemplation of the fifth Mahāvrat,
inspires to be free from attachment and aversion to the natural fragrance that
comes. Ācā. Śru. 2. A. 1, U. 8, says that when a natural fragrance comes, one
should think, "Aho! What a good fragrance is coming, do not become attached to
smelling that fragrance."  When the practitioner is told to remain indifferent
even to the naturally occurring fragrance, then smelling it intentionally is
clearly a transgression, and its atonement is mentioned here.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 12] [nizIthasUtra 4. jahA davaggI paridhaNe vaNe, samAruo novasamaM uvei|
evidiyaggI vi pagAmabhoiNo, na baMbhayArissa hiyAya kassai  //  -utta. a. 32,
gA. 11 5. rasA pagAmaM na niseviyavvA, pAyaM rasA dittikarA nraannN| dittaM ca
kAmA samabhiddavaMti, dumaM jahA sAhuphalaM va pakkhI  //  -uttarA. a. 32, gA.
10 saMkSipta sAra-vibhUSA, strIsaMsarga va praNIta rasa bhojana ko brahmacarya
ke lie tAlapuTa viSa ke samAna samajhanA cAhiye  /  strI evaM striyoM ke citra
para yadi dRSTi pahuMce to zIghra haTA lenI cAhiye  /  Thaharane kA sthAna strI
Adi se rahita honA, zayana-pAsana alpa honA, prakAmabhojI na hokara bhikSu ko
sadA UnodarI yukta hI AhAra karanA cAhiye  /  indriyoM ke viSayoM meM rAga dveSa
na rakhate hue pravRtti karanA cAhiye, ityAdi sAvadhAniyAM rakhane para auSadha
se upazAMta bane hue roga ke samAna vedamoha bhI upazAMta rahatA hai,
brahmacarya meM samAdhi rahatI hai, jisase sUtrokta prAyazcitta sthAnoM se AtmA
dUra rahatI hai| nava vADoM evaM daza samAdhisthAnoM kA vivecana anya AgamoM se
jAna lenA cAhie  /  'acittaMsi soyaMsi'-'zrota' zabda 'chidra' artha meM
prayukta hotA hai  /  tathApi mArga, sthAna Adi artha meM bhI isakA prayoga
pAgama meM hujA hai  /  yahAM prAsaMgika artha 'chidra' kI apekSA 'sthAna'
vizeSa saMgata hai| vyavahArasUtra uddeza 6 meM isa viSaya ke do sUtra haiM,
donoM meM 'acittaMsi soyaMsi' zabda kA prayoga hai  /  antara itanA hI hai ki
maithuna ke bhAva yukta pravRtti hone para guru caumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai aura
hastakarma ke bhAva yukta pravRtti hone para guru mAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|
isa bhinnatA kA kAraNa yaha hai ki acitta sthAna meM kI gaI pravRtti hastakarma
hai aura acitta chidra meM kI gaI pravRtti maithuna hai| ataH yahAM para
'acittaMsi soyaMsi' se 'acitta sthAna' samajhanA caahie| sacitta padArtha
sUghane kA prAyazcitta 10. je bhikkhU sacitta paiTTiyaM gaMdhaM jighai jighaMtaM
vA sAijjai  /  10. jo bhikSu sacitta padArtha meM sthita sugaMdha ko sUghatA hai
yA sUghane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai (use guru mAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|)
vivecana--isa sUtra meM icchApUrvaka sugaMdhita sacitta phUla Adi sUghane kA
prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| prAcA. zra. 2, a. 15 meM pAMcaveM mahAvrata kI
bhAvanA meM svAbhAvika Ane vAlI gaMdha meM rAga-dveSa kI pariNati se mukta
rahane kI preraNA kI gaI hai| AcA. zru. 2. a. 1, u. 8 meM kahA hai ki svAbhAvika
sugaMdha Ane para 'aho gaMdho-aho gaMdhoM, ti no gaMdhamAdhAijjA' arthAt aho !
kyA baDhiyA sugaMdha A rahI hai, aisA soca kara usa sugaMdha ko sUghane meM
Asakta na ho| jaba svAbhAvika rUpa se AI huI gaMdha se bhI sAdhaka ko udAsIna
rahane ko kahA gayA hai to icchApUrvaka sUghanA to spaSTa anAcAra hai aura usakA
hI yahAM prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai|

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective] [It should be understood that all sentient beings, such as
green or dry plants, fruits, flowers, seeds, etc., are consumed from the
thirteen sentient substances. The atonement for smelling all non-sentient
substances, such as perfumes, etc., is mentioned in the second objective. The
atonement for the construction of a path, etc., by a householder is as follows:
11. A monk who causes or approves of the construction of a path, a crossing, a
support, or a vehicle by a non-Jain or a householder. 12. A monk who causes or
approves of the construction of a drain by a non-Jain or a householder. 13. A
monk who causes or approves of the construction of a sieve or its lid by a non-
Jain or a householder. 14. A monk who causes or approves of the construction of
a curtain, rope, or mosquito net by a non-Jain or a householder. (He incurs the
Guru-Masik atonement.) Discussion-1. Due to rain, etc., the path becomes
difficult to walk on due to water or mud, and there is harm to living beings
while walking. Therefore, for convenience, the path that is made by placing
bricks, stones, etc., in the shelter or near it is called a path. 2. Crossing
path- The path that is made like a bridge, slightly above the ground by placing
stones, etc., is called a crossing path. In this way, water flows below and
there is convenience for walking above. 3. Support- If there is a need for
support on both sides of a bridge, etc., or if there is a need for support while
climbing or descending somewhere, then the means of making a rope, pillar, etc.,
for this is called "support".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama uddezaka] [13 sacitta padArtha se harI yA sUkhI vanaspatiyAM, phala,
phUla, bIja Adi sabhI sacitta padArthoM kA grahaNa ho jAtA hai aisA samajhanA
cAhie tathA itrAdi samasta acitta padArtha sUghane kA prAyazcitta dUsare
uddezaka meM kahA gayA hai  /  gRhastha dvArA padamArgAdi nirmANakaraNa
prAyazcitta 11. je bhikkhU padamaggaM vA, saMkamaM vA, avalaMbaNaM vA,
aNNautthieNa vA gArathieNa vA kArei kAreMtaM vA saaijji| 12. je bhikkhU
dagavINiyaM aNNautthieNa vA gArathieNa vA kArei kAreMtaM vA sAijjai  /  13. je
bhikkhU sikkagaM vA, sikkagaNaMtagaM vA aNNautthieNa vA gArathieNa vA kArei
kAreMtaM vA saaijji| 14. je bhikkhU sottiyaM vA rajjuyaM vA cilamili
aNNautthieNa vA gArathieNa vA kArei kAreMtaM vA saaijji| 11. jo bhikSu padamArga
= calane kA rAstA, saMkramaNa mArga = jala kIcar3a Adi ko ullaMghana karane kA
pASANAdimaya mArga, avalaMbana = caDhane, utarane, calane meM sahArA lene kA
sAdhana, anyatIthika yA gRhastha ke dvArA nirmANa karavAtA hai yA karavAne vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| 12. jo bhikSu pAnI ke nikalane kI nAlI anyatIthika se
yA gRhastha se banavAtA hai yA banavAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 13. jo
bhikSu chIMkA yA usakA Dhakkana anyatIthika se yA gRhastha se banavAtA hai yA
banavAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  14. jo bhikSu sUta kI yA DoriyoM kI
cilimilikA (pardA-yavanikA-maccharadAnI) anyatIrthika yA gRhastha se banavAtA
hai yA banavAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use gurumAsika prAyazcitta AtA
hai|) vivecana-1. padamArgavarSA Adi ke kAraNa se mArga meM jala yA kIcar3a ho
jAne para usa mArga se jAnA-pAnA kaThina ho jAtA hai aura jAne-Ane meM jIvoM kI
virAdhanA hotI hai  /  ataH suvidhA ke liye upAzraya meM yA usake pAsa calane kA
jo mArga IMTa, patthara Adi rakhakara banAyA jAtA hai use padamArga kahate haiN|
2. saMkramaNamArga-patthara Adi rakhakara bhUmi se kucha Upara pula ke samAna jo
mArga banAyA jAtA hai use saMkramaNamArga kahate haiN| isa prakAra jala nIce
bahatA rahatA hai aura Upara se jAne-mAne kI suvidhA ho jAtI hai| 3. avalambana
pula Adi para donoM ora koI sahAre kI AvazyakatA ho yA kahIM car3haneutarane meM
sahAre kI AvazyakatA ho to usake lie rassI, thaMbhA Adi kA jo sAdhana banAyA
jAtA hai vaha "avalaMbana" kahA jAtA hai  /

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  **14]** **[Nishith Sutra]** **4. Dagvinika:**  A
passage constructed to drain water accumulated in various places due to rain or
other causes is called "Dagvinika". **5. Sikkag:**  To protect food from
creatures like rats, mice, dogs, etc., it is sometimes necessary to use a lid or
cover. This is called "Sikkag". **6. Chilimilika:**  When a safe place for
observing vows is not available, or when a safe place for eating is not
available, or when there are too many creatures like flies, mosquitoes, etc., a
curtain, a screen, or a mosquito net is made in one or up to five directions for
protection. This is called "Chilimilika".  These four activities should not be
performed by a Sadhu from a householder. If it is necessary to have them done by
a householder in a special circumstance, then it is subject to atonement.
**Atonement for getting these activities done:**  **15.** A monk who gets the
"Sui" (needle) sharpened by a non-Jain or a householder, or approves of such an
act, incurs atonement. **16.** A monk who gets the "Pippalagassa" (scissors)
sharpened by a non-Jain or a householder, or approves of such an act, incurs
atonement. **17.** A monk who gets the "Haccheyanagassa" (nail cutter) sharpened
by a non-Jain or a householder, or approves of such an act, incurs atonement.
**18.** A monk who gets the "Kannasohanagassa" (ear cleaner) sharpened by a non-
Jain or a householder, or approves of such an act, incurs atonement.
**Explanation:** **1. "Uttarakaranam"**:  The meaning of "Uttarakaranam" is to
refine, to make suitable for use as needed, to improve. **1.** To repair the
point and hole of a needle. **2.** To sharpen the edge of scissors.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14] [ nizIthasUtra 4. dagavINikA kaI sthAnoM para varSA Adi se pAnI ikaTThA ho
jAtA hai, use nikAlane kA jo mArga banAyA jAtA hai, use "dagavINika" kahate haiM
/  5. sikkaga-kIr3I, cUhA, kutte Adi jIvoM se khAdya sAmagrI kI surakSA ke lie
chIMkA aura chIMke kA Dhakkana rakhanA bhI kabhI Avazyaka ho jAtA hai use,
"sikkaga" kahA jAtA hai  /  6. cilimilikA - zIla rakSA ke yogya surakSita sthAna
na milane para, AhAra karane yogya surakSita sthAna na milane para makkhI,
macchara Adi saMpAtima jIvoM ke adhika ho jAne para, unakI rakSA ke liye eka
dizA meM yAvat pAMca dizAoM meM jo pardA, yavanikA yA maccharadAnI Adi banAye
jAte haiM, use "cilimilikA" kahA jAtA hai  /  ina cAroM sUtroM meM kahe gaye
kArya sAdhu ko gRhasthI se nahIM karAnA caahie| yadi kisI vizeSa paristhiti meM
gRhastha se karAnA par3e to vaha prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai  /  uttarakaraNa
karAne ke prAyazcitta 15. je bhikkhU " sUIe" uttarakaraNaM aNNautthieNa vA
gAratthieNa vA kArei kAreMtaM vA sAijjai  /  16. je bhikkhU "pippalagassa"
uttarakaraNaM aNNautthieNa vA gAratthieNa vA kArei kAreMtaM vA sAijjai  /  17.
je bhikkhU "haccheyaNagassa" uttarakaraNaM aNNautthieNa vA gAratthieNa vA kArei
kAreMtaM vA sAijjai  /  18. je bhikkhU "kaNNasohaNagassa" uttarakaraNaM
aNNautthieNa vA gAratthieNa vA kArei kAreMtaM vA sAijjai  /  15. jo bhikSu sUI
kA uttarakaraNa anyatIrthika yA gRhastha se karavAtA hai yA karavAne vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  16. jo bhikSu kataraNI kA uttarakaraNa anyatIrthika yA
gRhastha se karavAtA hai yA karavAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  17. jo
bhikSu nakhachedanaka kA uttarakaraNa anyatIrthika yA gRhastha se karavAtA hai
yA karavAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  18. jo bhikSu karNazodhanaka kA
uttarakaraNa anyatIrthika yA gRhastha se karavAtA hai yA karavAne vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai, ( use gurumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai | ) vivecana- 1. "
uttarakaraNaM " - uttarakaraNa kA artha hai - pariSkAra karanA arthAt
AvazyakatAnusAra upayAgI banAnA, sudhAranA  /  1. sUI kI aNI va chidra ko
sudhAranA  /  2. kataraNI kI dhAra teja karanA  /

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective] 3. To make the nail cutter suitable for cutting nails. 4. To
make the ear cleaner soft to touch. In this way, the four instruments are
reciprocated. 2. The four instruments - The sadhu can keep with him the
instruments useful for the body and restraint. The instruments that are always
necessary for all sadhus are called "Shraudh instruments". It is mandatory to
keep all such instruments with you at all times. For example - clothes,
utensils, dustpan, face cloth etc. Clothes and utensils are useful for the body
and face cloth and dustpan are useful for restraint. Some instruments are kept
due to special circumstances, they are called "Satellite instruments". They are
also of two types 1. Always used, 2. Sometimes used. [15 1. Glasses, sticks etc.
are often used always. Therefore, they can be kept with you at all times. 2. The
statement of the above four instruments used occasionally is in the above
sutras, the statement of other instruments (umbrella, leather etc.) is also in
the Agamas according to the context. Among them, easily available instruments
are brought in a returnable form, which are returned on the same day or after a
few days after the work is done. Although the sadhu is ordained to have very few
possessions, yet according to the area and time or according to the changing
physical conditions, when, where, what instruments are needed and at that time
perhaps those instruments are not available there; with this intention,
instruments for removing thorns or tooth cleaners etc. other instruments are
also kept with them at present. Similarly, the needle, scissors etc. mentioned
in the sutras can also be kept due to the circumstances of time etc., it appears
from these reciprocation sutras. Nishithbhashya Ga. 1413-1416 and
Brihatkalpbhashya Ga. 4096-4099 have mentioned many satellite instruments kept
in exceptional circumstances, see those verses with meaning in Udde. 16 Su. 39.
Those instruments include needle, scissors etc., leather - umbrella stick and
also books etc. are mentioned. These sutras of reciprocation are also related to
the satellite instruments like needle etc. kept with you due to circumstances.
Because a returnable instrument for one day is brought only after seeing and
being useful. If there is a mistake, it can be returned and another one can be
brought. But it is unimaginable for any monk to imagine sharpening the tip or
edge of a returnable needle, scissors etc. from a householder and becoming a
recipient of the Guru-monthly atonement.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama uddezaka ] 3. nakhachedanaka ko nakha kATane ke yogya banAnA  /  4.
karNazodhanaka ko mRdusparzI banAnA  /  isa prakAra cAroM upakaraNoM kA
uttarakaraNa hotA hai  /  2. upakaraNacatuSTaya - zarIra va saMyama ke upayogI
upakaraNoM ko sAdhu apane pAsa rakha sakatA hai  /  jo upakaraNa sabhI sAdhuyoM
ke lie sadA Avazyaka hote haiM ve " zraudhika upakaraNa" kahe jAte haiM  /  aise
sabhI upakaraNoM ko sadA sAtha meM rakhane kI AjJA hai  /  yathA - vastra,
pAtra, rajoharaNa, mukhavastrikA Adi  /  vastra, pAtra zarIra ke lie upayogI
haiM aura mukhavastrikA, rajoharaNa saMyama ke upayogI haiM  /  kucha upakaraNa
vizeSa paristhiti ke kAraNa rakhe jAte haiM, ve "aupagrahika upakaraNa" kahe
jAte haiM  /  ve bhI do taraha ke hote haiM 1. sadA kAma meM Ane vAle, 2. kabhI-
kabhI kAma Ane vAle  /  [15 1. cazmA lAThI Adi prAyaH sadA kAma prAte haiM  /
ataH ye sadA sAtha meM rakhe jA sakate haiM  /  2. kabhI-kabhI kAma meM Ane vAle
ukta cAroM upakaraNoM kA to uparokta sUtroM meM kathana hai hI, anya upakaraNoM
(chatra, carma Adi) kA kathana bhI AgamoM meM prasaMgAnusAra huA hai  /  unameM
se sarvatra sulabha upakaraNa pratyarpaNIya rUpa meM lAye jAte haiM, jo kArya ho
jAne para usI dina yA kucha dinoM se lauTA diye jAte haiM  /  yadyapi sAdhu ke
lie atyalpa upadhi rakhane kA vidhAna hai, phira bhI kSetra kAla ke anusAra yA
parivartita zArIrika sthitiyoM ke anusAra kaba, kahA~, kina upakaraNoM kI
AvazyakatA ho jAe aura usa samaya kadAcit vahA~ ve upakaraNa na mileM; isa Azaya
se kAMTA nikAlane ke upakaraNa yA daMtazodhaka Adi anya upakaraNa vartamAna meM
bhI sAtha meM rakhe jAte haiM  /  isI prakAra sUtrokta sUI, kataraNI Adi
upakaraNa bhI kAla Adi kI paristhiti se rakhe jA sakate haiM, aisA ina
uttarakaraNa sUtroM se pratIta hotA hai  /  nizIthabhASya gA0 1413-1416 tathA
bRhatkalpabhASya gA0 4096-4099 taka ApavAdika paristhiti meM rakhe jAne vAle
aneka aupagrahika upakaraNa sUcita kiye haiM, ve gAthAeM artha sahita udde0 16
sU0 39 ke vivecana meM dekheM  /  una upakaraNoM meM sUI, kataraNI Adi bhI haiM,
carma - chatra daMDa bhI haiM evaM pustakeM Adi bhI kahI gaI hai  /  ye
uttarakaraNa ke sUtra bhI paristhiti se sAtha meM rakhe hue zrapagrahika
upakaraNa rUpa sUI Adi sehI saMbaMdhita haiN| kyoMki eka dina ke liye
pratyarpaNIya upakaraNa to dekhakara aura upayogI hone para hI lAyA jAtA hai  /
kadAcit bhUla ho bhI jAya to use lauTAkara anya lAyA jA sakatA hai  /  kintu
pratyarpaNIya sUI, kaiMcI Adi kI noka yA dhAra gRhastha se karavAnA aura
gurumAsika prAyazcitta kA pAtra bananA, aisI pravRtti kisI bhI bhikSu ke dvArA
karane kI kalpanA hI nahIM kI jA sakatI  /

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīthসূত্র 16:  **The tools that are always kept close at hand, when they
become damaged with use, it becomes necessary to refine or repair them oneself
or sometimes have them repaired by others. It is only at that time that there is
a possibility of having a householder do it.**  Therefore, the area, time, etc.,
specified in the sūtra should be understood in relation to the needle, thread
cutter, nail cutter, and ear cleaner that are kept close at hand.  In the
present day, it is not customary to keep needles, thread cutters, and nail
cutters. Because they are made of metal, it is considered inconceivable to keep
them.  The needle, thread cutter, and nail cutter mentioned in these sūtras, and
the skin-cutting tools mentioned in the Ācārāṅga Sūtra and Vyavahāra Sūtra, are
all made of metal and are available everywhere. And in the Āgamas, there is no
text that states that metal tools are inconceivable except for vessels.  The
root of attachment is possessiveness. Possessiveness is usually greater for
valuable things. Therefore, the restrained ones (śramaṇa) should not keep money
(current coins), gold, silver, and things made from them. Such prohibitions are
found in many places in the Āgamas. See Daśavaikalika Śra. 10, Gā. 6, "Grahaṇe
ṇijjārūvarya" and Uttarādhyayana 35, Gā. 13, "Hiraṇṇaṁ jāyarūvaṁ ca maṇasā vi na
patthae," etc. However, there is no prohibition whatsoever in any Āgama against
keeping iron needles, scissors, nail cutters, ear cleaners, and skin-cutting
tools, etc. Therefore, it does not seem appropriate to completely prohibit them.
In the Āgamas, only in the context of vessels, there is a prohibition against
accepting vessels of many kinds other than the three types. In that, there is no
mention of a prohibition only of metal, but there is a prohibition of many
kinds, such as stone, glass, teeth, horn, leather, cloth, conch, etc., which is
only appropriate to understand in relation to vessels. That rule cannot be
applied to all tools. Otherwise, there would be a prohibition against many tools
made of glass, teeth, etc., that are kept in the present day.  Therefore,
sometimes, materials that are helpful in the pursuit of knowledge or in the
pursuit of the title of śramaṇik (a Jain monk) can also be kept, even if they
are made of metal (iron, etc.). This is clear from a consideration of these
उत्तरकरण sūtras and other Āgama passages.  ## अण्णउत्थिय गारत्थिय:  **A monk can
do his own work or have it done by another disciple, etc. And if, for some
reason, he is unable to do it in the absence of a male monk, he can also have it
done by a nun. By doing so, he does not become liable for atonement. But if he
has it done by a householder, he incurs atonement.**  In the present sūtra, the
term "अण्णउत्थिय - गारत्थिय" is used for the householder. In the commentary,
eight types of householders are mentioned. Here is an explanation of the order
in which work should be done by those householders:  "Si gihatthāṇa kārāvaṇe imo
kamo -  Pacchākaḍ, sābhiggha, nirābhiggha bhaddae vā asannī. Gihi aṇṇatittihie
vā gihi puvvaṁ etere pacchā."  - Bhā. Gā. 629 and 1929.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ nizIthasUtra jitane upakaraNa sadA pAsa meM rahate haiM ve kAma lete-lete
jaba kharAba ho jAte haiM taba unakA pariSkAra yA sudhAra svayaM karanA athavA
kabhI anya se karavAnA Avazyaka ho jAtA hai, usa samaya hI gRhastha se
uttarakaraNa karavAne kI sambhAvanA hotI hai  /  16] ataH sUtranirdiSTa
uttarakaraNa kSetra kAla Adi kI apekSA se pAsa meM rakhe gaye - sUI, karaNI,
nakhachedaka va karNazodhanaka sambandhI hI samajhane cAhie  /  vartamAna meM
sUI, kataraNI va nakhachedanaka rakhane kI paripATI nahIM hai  /  kyoMki ye
dhAtu-nirmita hone ke kAraNa rakhanA akalpanIya mAnA jAtA hai  /  prastuta
sUtroM meM varNita sUI, kataraNI, nakhachedanaka tathA AcArAMgasUtra aura
vyavahArasUtra meM varNita - carmachedana Adi upakaraNa dhAtunirmita hI sarvatra
upalabdha hote haiM tathA AgamoM meM pAtra ke sivAya dhAtu yukta upakaraNa kI
akalpanIyatA kA koI pATha nahIM milatA hai  /  parigraha kA mUla mamatva hai -
bahumUlya vastuoM para hI prAyaH mamatva adhika hotA hai - zrataeva saMyamI -
zramaNa dhana ( pracalita sikke), svarNa, rajata (cA~dI ) tathA unase nirmita
vastue~ na rakhe, aise niSedha AgamoM meM aneka jagaha milate haiM, dekhie
dazavaikAlika zra0 10 gA0 6 meM "grahaNe NijjAyarUvarayae" tathA uttarAdhyayana
0 35 gA0 13 meM "hiraNNaM jAyarUvaM ca maNasA vi na patthae" ityAdi; kintu lohe
kI sUI, kaiMcI, nakhachedanaka, karNazodhanaka aura carmachedanaka Adi rakhane
kA sarvathA niSedha kisI zrAgama meM upalabdha nahIM hai  /  ataH inakA ekAnta
niSedha karanA ucita pratIta nahIM hotA hai  /  AgamoM meM kevala pAtra ke
prasaMga meM tIna jAti ke sivAya anya aneka jAti ke pAtra grahaNa karane kA
niSedha hai  /  usameM kevala dhAtu ke hI niSedha kA varNana nahIM hai kintu
patthara, kA~ca, dA~ta, sIMga, carma, vastra, saMkha Adi aneka jAti kA niSedha
hai, jo kevala pAtra ke lie samajhanA hI upayukta hai  /  sabhI upakaraNoM ke
lie vaha vidhAna upayukta nahIM ho sakatA  /  anyathA vartamAna meM rakhe jAne
vAle kA~ca, dA~ta, Adi ke aneka upakaraNoM kA niSedha ho jAegA  /  ataH kabhI
zrapagrahika upadhi yA adhyayana meM sahAyaka sAmagrI dhAtu (lohe Adi ) kI bhI
rakhI jA sakatI hai  /  yaha ina uttarakaraNa sUtroM aura anya Agama sthaloM kI
vicAraNA se spaSTa hotA hai  /  3. aNNautthiya gAratthiya bhikSu apanA kArya
svayaM kara sakatA hai yA anya ziSya Adi se karA sakatA hai tathA sAdhu ke
abhAva meM kisI kAraNa se vaha na kara sake to sAdhvI se bhI karavA sakatA hai,
aisA karane se vaha prAyazcitta kA bhAgI nahIM hotA hai kintu gRhastha se karAne
para prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  prastuta sUtra meM gRhastha ke lie " aNNautthiya -
gAratthiya" zabda kA prayoga huA hai  /  jisake lie bhASya meM ATha prakAra ke
gRhastha kahe gaye haiM  /  una gRhasthoM se bhI kisa krama se kArya karAnA
cAhie, isakA spaSTIkaraNa isa prakAra hai "si gihatthANa kArAvaNe imo kamo-
pacchAkaDa, sAbhiggaha, nirabhiggaha bhaddae vA asaNNI  /  gihi aNNatitthie vA
gihi puvvaM etare pacchA  //  - bhA. gAH 629 tathA 1929  /  /

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective ] [17 **Churni** - "Pachchakaḍo = Old, read from him. In his
absence, Saabhigraho = Anuvvayasampanno, Saavao. Then Nirabhiggho Dassanasaavao.
Then Bhaddao = Asanni. These four are the divisions of Grihastha. In the same
way, these four divisions are also for Annautthiye, starting with Pachchakaḍo.
Each one has its own Asooya, Sooya, Bheya, and Kayavva. Earlier, Grihastha was
in Asooya, then in Sooyavadi, then in Annatitthiye. If you have to do your work
through a Grihastha, then this is the order: 1. Do it through a Shraman Vesh
Tyagi or an old experienced person, 2. If he is not available, then do it
through an Anuvratdhari Shravak, 3. If he is not available, then do it through a
Shraddhavan Shravak, 4. If he is not available, then do it through a Bhadra
Parinami. These four are the Grihasthas of one's own sect. In the same way, you
should understand the four divisions and order for the Grihasthas of other sects
(Annatitthik). That is, in the absence of the above four types of Grihasthas: 5.
Do it through a Sannyasatyagi or an old experienced person, 6. If he is not
available, then do it through someone who follows the vows of another sect, 7.
If he is not available, then do it through a devotee of another sect, 8. If he
is not available, then do it through someone with a simple nature. Here,
"Annautthiye" refers to the Grihasthas of other sects, and "Garatthiye" refers
to the Grihasthas of one's own sect. This same method should be understood in
all the subsequent objectives. However, in Objective 2 and 19, the use of these
two words refers to different types of Bhikshachari and Mithyamata Bhavit
Grihasthas respectively, not other Grihasthas. You should understand this
explanation from there itself. **Penance for asking without purpose** 19. The
Bhikshu who asks for a needle without purpose, or approves of someone asking for
it. 20. The Bhikshu who asks for a razor without purpose, or approves of someone
asking for it. 21. The Bhikshu who asks for a nail cutter without purpose, or
approves of someone asking for it. 22. The Bhikshu who asks for a dye without
purpose, or approves of someone asking for it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama uddezaka ] [17 cUrNi - "pacchAkaDo = purANo, paDhama tA teNa
karAvijjati  /  tassa abhAve sAbhigraho = aNuvvayasaMpanno, sAvao  /  tato
nirabhiggaho daMsaNasAvao  /  tato bhaddao = asaNNI  /  ete cauro gihibhedA |
aNNautthie vi ete cauro bhedA pacchAkaDAdi  /  ekkeke asoya soya bheyA kAyavvA
/  puvvaM gihi asoesu pacchA soyavAdIsu, pacchA aNNatitthie  /  paristhitivaza
apanA kArya gRhastha se karAnA ho to yaha krama hai 1. zramaNa veza tyAgI athavA
vRddha anubhavI se kArya karAve, 2. vaha na mile to aNuvratadhArI zrAvaka se, 3.
vaha na mile to zraddhAvAn zrAvaka se, 4. vaha na mile to bhadra pariNAmI se  /
ye cAra svamata ke gRhastha haiM  /  anyatIrthika = = paramata ke gRhastha ke
bhI isI taraha cAra bheda va krama samajhanA cAhie  /  arthAt uparyukta cAra
prakAra ke gRhastha ke abhAva meM-- 5. saMnyAsatyAgI athavA vRddha anubhavI se
kArya karavAve, 6. vaha na mile to anyamata ke vratoM kA pAlana karane vAle se,
7. vaha na mile to anyamata ke zraddhAlu se, 8. vaha na mile to sarala svabhAva
vAle se isa prakAra yahA~ " aNNautthiya" se anyamata ke gRhastha tathA
"gAratthiya" se svamata ke gRhastha kA kathana kiyA gayA hai  /  yahI paddhati
Age ke sabhI uddezoM meM bhI samajhanI cAhiye  /  kintu uddezaka do meM tathA 19
meM ina donoM zabdoM ke prayoga se kramazaH aneka prakAra ke bhikSAcaroM kA evaM
mithyAmatabhAvita gRhasthoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai, anya gRhasthoM kA nahIM,
isakA spaSTIkaraNa vahIM se jAna lenA cAhie  /  niSprayojana yAcanA kA
prAyazcitta 19. je bhikkhU aNaTThAe sUiM jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  20. je
bhikkhU aNaTTAe pippalagaM jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  21. je bhikkhU aTThAe
NahaccheyaNagaM jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  22. je bhikkhU aNaTThAe
vaNNasohaNagaM jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  19. jo bhikSu binA prayojana sUI
kI yAcanA karatA hai yA yAcanA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  20. jo
bhikSu binA prayojana kataraNI kI yAcanA karatA hai yA yAcanA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 21. jo bhikSu binA prayojana nakhachedanaka kI yAcanA
karatA hai yA yAcanA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[18] [Nishosuthra 22. A monk who asks for or approves of the asking for a Karna
Shodhanak without a purpose. (He incurs Guru-masik Prayashchitta.) Discussion:
One should ask for a Sai etc. only after consulting with elders, if it is
necessary for oneself or if someone else has asked for it. _ Because there is a
possibility of them being lost, broken, pricked, stuck, or forgotten to be
returned, therefore they should not be taken without a purpose.  Pravidhi
Yachana Prayashchitta 23. A monk who asks for or approves of the asking for a
Sui without a purpose. 24. A monk who asks for or approves of the asking for a
Pippalag without a purpose. 25. A monk who asks for or approves of the asking
for a Nakkhedanak without a purpose. 26. A monk who asks for or approves of the
asking for a Karna Shodhanak without a purpose. (He incurs Guru-masik
Prayashchitta.) Discussion: Every action of a Sadhu should be done with
discretion and in accordance with the rules. Sui, Pippalag etc. are sharp,
therefore discretion is necessary in taking them so that there is no bodily
harm. Seeing them being taken without discretion, the householder may have
doubts about the safety of his tools. This may reduce the desire to give. Some
specific types of Avidhis are mentioned in the following sutras. Anidishta
Upayokaran Prayashchitta 27. A monk who, having received a Sui, sews a cloth
with it, or approves of the sewing. 28. A monk who, having received a Pippalag,
cuts a cloth with it, or approves of the cutting.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 18] [nizothasUtra 22. jo bhikSu binA prayojana karNazodhanaka kI yAcanA karatA
hai yA yAcanA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurumAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana svayaM ke lie Avazyaka hone para yA anya ke
maMgavAne para bhI baDoM kI prAjJA lekara ke hI saI Adi kI yAcanA karanI
caahiye| _ kyoMki inake kho jAne, TUTa jAne, cubha jAne, laga jAne kI yA vApisa
denA bhUla jAne kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai, ataH inheM binA prayojana grahaNa
nahIM karanA caahiye| pravidhi yAcanA prAyazcitta 23. je bhikkhU avihIe sUI
jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  24. je bhikkhU avihIe pippalagaM jAyai, jAyaMtaM
vA sAijjai  /  25. je bhikkhU avihIe NahaccheyaNagaM jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA sAijjai
/  26. je bhikkhU avihIe kaNNasohaNagaM jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  23. jo
bhikSu avidhi se sUI kI yAcanA karatA hai yA yAcanA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 24. jo bhikSu pravidhi se kataraNI kI yAcanA karatA hai yA yAcanA
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 25. jo bhikSu avidhi se nakhachedanaka kI
yAcanA karatA hai yA yAcanA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 26. jo bhikSu
avidhi se karNazodhanaka kI yAcanA karatA hai yA yAcanA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  (use gurumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-sAdhu kA pratyeka
kArya vivekapUrvaka va vidhiyukta honA cAhiye  /  sUI, kataraNI Adi tIkSNa hote
haiM, unake grahaNa karane meM viveka Avazyaka hai jisase zArIrika kSati na ho
/  avivekapUrvaka grahaNa karate dekhakara gRhastha ko apane upakaraNa kI
surakSA meM zaMkA ho sakatI hai| jisase dene kI bhAvanA meM kamI A sakatI hai|
kucha vizeSa prakAra kI avidhiyoM kA kathana Age ke sUtroM meM hai| anidiSTa
upayogakaraNa prAyazcitta 27. je bhikkhU pADihAriyaM sUI jAittA vatthaM
sivvissAmi tti pAyaM sivvai sivvaMtaM vA saaijji| 28. je bhikkhU pADihAriyaM
pippalagaM jAittA vatthaM chidissAmi tti pAyaM chidai chidaMtaM vA saaijj|

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective  **27.** A monk who asks for a needle suitable for returning,
saying "I will sew clothes," and then sews a robe with it or approves of someone
else sewing a robe with it. **28.** A monk who asks for a cutter suitable for
returning, saying "I will cut clothes," and then cuts a robe with it or approves
of someone else cutting a robe with it. **29.** A monk who asks for a nail
cutter suitable for returning, saying "I will cut nails," and then uses it to
cut nails or approves of someone else using it to cut nails. **30.** A monk who
asks for an ear cleaner suitable for returning, saying "I will clean my ears,"
and then uses it to clean teeth or nails or approves of someone else using it to
clean teeth or nails. (He incurs the monthly penance for a guru.)
**Discussion:** The term "Padihariya" is used in the scriptures for an object
suitable for returning. When receiving a needle, etc., suitable for returning,
one should not specify a particular task.  If a needle, etc., is received with a
specific task in mind, it should not be used for any other purpose. Using it for
another purpose would violate the second and third great vows. If this is known,
the householder will lose faith in the monk or the monastic community, will
criticize them, and there is a possibility of not receiving necessary tools in
the future.  **Mutual Giving Penance**  **31.** A monk who asks for a needle for
his own use and then gives it to another monk or approves of someone else giving
it to another monk. **32.** A monk who asks for a toothpick for his own use and
then gives it to another monk or approves of someone else giving it to another
monk. **33.** A monk who asks for a nail cutter for his own use and then gives
it to another monk or approves of someone else giving it to another monk.
**34.** A monk who asks for an ear cleaner for his own use and then gives it to
another monk or approves of someone else giving it to another monk.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama uddezaka] [19 29. je bhikkhU pADihAriyaM nahaccheyaNagaM jAittA nahaM
chidissAmi tti salluddharaNaM karei, kareMtaM vA saaijji| 30. je bhikkhU
pADihAriyaM "kaNNasohaNagaM jAittA" kaNNamalaM NIharissAmi ti daMta-malaM vA,
Naha-malaM vA NIharai, NIharaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  27. jo bhikSu lauTAne yogya suI
ko yAcanA karake "vastra sIUMgA" aisA kaha kara usase pAtra sItA hai yA sone
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 28. jo bhikSu lauTAne yogya kataraNI kI yAcanA
karake "vastra kATUgA" aisA kahakara usase pAtra kATatA hai yA kATane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 29. jo bhikSu lauTAne yogya nakhachenadaka kI yAcanA
karake "nakha kATUgA" aisA kaha kara usase kAMTA nikAlatA hai yA nikAlane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| 30. jo bhikSa lauTAne yogya karNazodhanaka kI yAcanA
karake "kAna kA maila nikAlagA" aisA kahakara usase dAMta yA nakha kA maila
nikAlatA hai yA nikAlane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use guru mAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-lauTAne yogya vastu ke liye Agama meM
"pADihAriya" zabda kA prayoga hotA hai| lauTAne yogya sUI Adi grahaNa karane ke
samaya kisI eka kArya kA nirdeza nahIM karanA cAhie  /  yadi kisI eka kArya ko
karane kA spaSTa nirdeza karake sUI Adi grahaNa kiye gaye hoM to unheM anya kAma
meM nahIM lenA caahiye| anya kAma karane para dUsarA aura tIsarA mahAvrata
dUSita hotA hai  /  jJAta hone para gRhastha usa sAdhu para yA sAdhusamAja para
avizvAsa karatA hai, unakI niMdA karatA hai tathA bhaviSya meM Avazyaka
upakaraNoM ke alAbha Adi hone kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai| anyonya pradAna
prAyazcitta 31. je bhikkhu appaNo ekkassa aTThAe sUI jAittA aNNamaNNassa
aNuppadei, aNuppadetaM vA saaijji| - 32. je bhikkhU appaNo ekkassa aTThAe
pippalagaM jAittA aNNamaNNassa aNuppadei, aNuppadetaM vA saaijji| 33. je bhikkhU
appaNo ekkassa aTThAe NahaccheyaNagaM jAittA aNNamaNNassa aNuppadei,
aNuppadaMtaM vA saaijji| 34. je bhikkhU appaNo ekkassa aTThAe kaNNasohaNagaM
jAittA aNNamaNNassa aNuppadei, aNuppadaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  31. jo bhikSu kevala
apane liye sUI kI yAcanA karake lAtA hai aura bAda meM anya kisI sAdhu ko detA
hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  **20]**  **[Nishīth Sūtra 32. A monk who requests a
*katarṇī* for himself and later gives it to another monk or approves of the
giving.**  **33. A monk who requests a *nakhacchedaṇaka* for himself and later
gives it to another monk or approves of the giving.**  **34. A monk who requests
a *karṇaśodhana* for himself and later gives it to another monk or approves of
the giving.** (He incurs the *gurumāsika* penance.)  **Discussion:** In the
community of monks, different monks have different essential tasks. Therefore,
when accepting needles, etc., one should be mindful of the language used. That
is, one should not give instructions for a task or a person. If instructions are
given, then one should behave accordingly. This should be understood in the same
way as the discussion of the previous sūtras 26 to 30.  **Penance for the Return
of Tools**  **35. A monk who returns a needle improperly or approves of its
improper return.**  **36. A monk who returns a *katarṇī* improperly or approves
of its improper return.**  **37. A monk who returns a *nakhacchedaṇaka*
improperly or approves of its improper return.**  **38. A monk who returns a
*karṇaśodhana* improperly or approves of its improper return.** (He incurs the
*gurumāsika* penance.)  **Discussion:** The needle, etc., that has been
requested for return should be given with discretion so that there is no damage
to the tool or to one's own body or the body of another. That is, it should be
returned by placing it on the ground, etc.  **Penance for Having a Vessel
Cleaned**  **39. A monk who has a *tumba* vessel, a wooden vessel, or an earthen
vessel made by a non-Jain or a householder, or has its mouth repaired, or has
its unevenness smoothed, or instructs another monk to do so, knowing that he is
capable of doing it himself, or approves of it being done.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 20] [nizIthasUtra 32. jo bhikSu kevala apane liye kataraNI kI yAcanA karake
lAtA hai aura bAda meM anya kisI sAdhu ko detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 33. jo bhikSu kevala apane liye nakhachedanaka kI yAcanA karake lAtA
hai aura bAda meM anya kisI sAdhu ko detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 34. jo bhikSu kevala apane liye karNazodhanaka kI yAcanA karake lAtA hai
aura bAda meM anya kisI sAdhu ko detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai
/  (use gurumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-sAdhu samudAya meM bhinna-
bhinna sAdhuoM ke bhinna-bhinna Avazyaka kArya hote haiM, ataH sUI Adi grahaNa
karate samaya bhASA kA viveka rakhanA cAhiye  /  arthAt kisI kArya yA vyakti kA
nirdeza nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  nirdeza kare to usI ke anusAra vyavahAra karanA
cAhiye, zeSa sUtra 26 se 30 taka ke vivecana ke samAna samajhanA caahiye|
pravidhi pratyarpaNa kA prAyazcitta 35. je bhikkhU sUI avihIe paccappiNei,
paccappiNetaM vA sAijjai  /  36. je bhikkhU pippalagaM avihIe paccappiNei,
paccappiNetaM vA sAijjai  /  37. je bhikkhU NahaccheyaNagaM avihIe paccappiNei,
paccapiNetaM vA sAijjai  /  38. je bhikkhU kaNNasohaNagaM avihIe paccappiNei,
paccappiNetaM vA sAijjai  /  35. jo bhikSu avidhi se sUI lauTAtA hai yA lauTAne
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  36. jo bhikSu avidhi se kataraNI lauTatA hai yA
lauTAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  37. jo bhikSu avidhi se nakhachedanaka
lauTAtA hai yA lauTAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  38. jo bhikSu pravidhi
se karNazodhanaka lauTAtA hai yA lauTAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use
gurumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecanalauTAne kA kahakara lAI huI sUI Adi
vivekapUrvaka hI denI cAhiye jisase upakaraNa kI aura sva-para ke zarIra kI
kSati na ho  /  arthAt bhUmi Adi para rakhakara lauTAnA caahiye| pAtra-pariSkAra
karAne kA prAyazcitta 39. je bhikkhU lAuyapAyaM vA, dArupAyaM vA, maTTiyApAyaM
vA aNNautthieNa vA gArathieNa vA parighaTTAvei vA, saMThAvei vA, jamAvei vA,
"alamappaNo karaNayAe suhamavi no kappaI", jANamANe saramANe aNNamaNNassa
viyarai, viyaraMtaM vA sAijjai  /  . 39. "pAtra pariSkAra kA kArya svayaM karane
meM samartha hote hue gRhastha se kiMcit pariSkAra karAnA bhI nahIM kalpatA hai"
yaha jAnate hue, smRti meM hote hue yA karane meM samartha hote hue bhI jo
bhikSu tumbe kA pAtra, lakar3I kA pAtra va miTTI kA pAtra anyatIrthika yA
gRhastha se banavAtA hai, usakA mukha ThIka karavAtA hai, viSama ko sama
karavAtA hai yA anya sAdhu ko karAne kI AjJA detA hai athavA isa

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Precept  **[21. Approving the one who causes or orders the polishing of
the utensils (He incurs Guru-masik Prāyaścitta).]**  **Discussion:** A monk who
knows how to polish utensils should do it himself, and if necessary, should also
do the work of another monk. But he should not have it done by a householder,
nor should he give permission to any monk to have it done by a householder.
**Explanation of terms:** "Parighattaveï, Nimmavaṇam, Santhavaṇam, Muhaadiṇam,
Jamavaṇam, Visamaṇam, Samaikaraṇam"  1. **Parighattaveï-Nirmaṇam:** To make it
fit for use. 2. **Santhaveï:** To fix the mouth, to make it suitable and strong.
3. **Jamaveï:** To make the uneven even.  **Example:**  Binding ropes etc. on
the mouth of a wooden utensil is "Santhavaṇam". Applying oil, varnish,
whitewash, etc. is "Parighattaṇam". Filling a hole, smoothing a rough surface is
"Jamavaṇam". Similarly, the care of earthenware and bamboo utensils should also
be understood.  **Significance:** The mention of three types of utensils in this
sutra, instead of just the word "utensil", clearly indicates that it is
permissible for a monk to possess three types of utensils. The same statement is
found in the Ācārāṅga Sūtra, the Bṛhatkalpa Sūtra, and the Ṭhāṇāṅga Sūtra.
**Further details:** The description of the fruits of auspicious and
inauspicious utensils, etc., should be seen in the commentary.
**Recommendation:** A monk should seek out utensils that do not require any kind
of polishing.  **Prāyaścitta for polishing Danda, etc.**  **40. A monk who
causes or orders the polishing, fixing, or smoothing of a Danda, a stick, an
Avlehaṇikā, a bamboo needle, or any other object made of wood or metal, by a
non-Jain or a householder, even if he is capable of doing it himself, knowing,
remembering, or being able to do it himself, or approves of the one who causes
or orders it (He incurs Guru-masik Prāyaścitta).**  **Discussion:**  The
discussion of this sutra is similar to that of Sutra 39, but utensils are
"auḍhika upadhi" for a monk, which all monks keep with them permanently.
**Explanation:** The tools mentioned in this sutra are "praupagrahika upadhi",
meaning that a monk can keep them for as long as he needs them, with the
permission of his Guru. These tools are not kept without a specific reason.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama uddezaka] [21 taraha karAne vAle kA yA AjJA dene vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| (use gurumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana--jo bhikSu pAtra-
pariSkAra kA kArya jAnatA ho to use svayaM hI kara lenA cAhie tathA Avazyaka ho
to anya bhikSu kA kArya bhI kara denA caahie| kintu gRhastha se nahIM karAnA
cAhie tathA kisI sAdhu ko gRhastha se karAne kI prAjJA bhI nahIM denI caahie|
parighaTTAvei Adi-"parighaTTaNaM-nimmAvaNaM, saMThavaNaM-muhAdINaM, jamAvaNaM-
visamANaM samIkaraNaM," 1. parighaTTAvei-nirmANa karAnA arthAt kAma pAne lAyaka
banavAnA  /  2. saMThAvei-mukha ThIka karAnA-yogya va majabUta karAnA  /  3.
jamAvei-viSama ko sama kraanaa| kASTha pAtra ke mukha para Dore Adi bAMdhanA
'saMThavaNa' hai, tela, rogana, saphedA, Adi lagAnA "parighaTTaNa' hai| kahIM
khaDDA ho use bharanA, khuradarApana ho use ghisanA "jamAvaNa' hai| isI prakAra
miTTI ke pAtra kA tathA tube ke pAtra kA parikarma bhI samajha lenA caahie|
prastuta sUtra meM kevala "pAtra" zabda kA kathana na karake tIna prakAra ke
pAtroM kA nirdeza hone se yaha spaSTa hotA hai ki sAdhu ko tIna prakAra ke hI
pAtra rakhanA kalpatA hai| aisA hI kathana AcArAMga sUtra, bRhatkalpasUtra evaM
ThANAMgasUtra meM bhI hai| zubhAzubha pAtroM ke phaloM kA vidhAna Adi varNana
bhASya meM dekhanA cAhie  /  bhikSu ko aise pAtra kI hI gaveSaNA karanI cAhiye
ki jisameM kisI bhI prakAra kA parikarma na karanA pdd'e| daMDAdi ke pariSkAra
karAne kA prAyazcitta 40. je bhikkhU daMDayaM vA, laThThiyaM vA, avalehaNiyaM
vA, veNusUiyaM vA, aNNautthieNaM vA gAratthieNa vA, parighaTTAvei vA, saMThAvei
vA, jamAvei vA, alamappaNo karaNayAe suhumavi no kappai, jANamANe, saramANe,
aNNamaNNassa viyarai viyaraMtaM vA sAijjai  /  40. svayaM karane meM samartha ho
to kiMcit bhI gRhastha se karAnA nahIM kalpatA hai, yaha jAnate hue, smRti meM
hote hue yA karane meM samartha hote hue bhI jo bhikSu daNDa, lAThI, avalehanikA
aura bAMsa kI sUI kA parighaTTaNa, saMThavaNa aura jamAvaNa anyatIrthika yA
gRhastha se karavAtA hai yA anya sAdhu ko karavAne kI AjJA detA hai athavA
gRhastha se karavAne vAle kA yA AjJA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use
gurumAsika prAyazcitta prAtA hai  / ) vivecana-sUtra 39 ke vivecana ke anusAra
isa sUtra kA vivecana bhI jAnanA kiMtu pAtra sAdhu kI "aughika upadhi" hai,
unako sabhI sAdhu hamezA ke liye apane pAsa rakhate haiN| isa sUtra meM kathita
upakaraNa "praupagrahika upadhi" haiM arthAt inheM jisa sAdhu ko jitane samaya
ke liye Avazyaka ho utane samaya ke liye guru kI AjJA lekara rakha sakatA hai  /
binA vizeSa paristhiti ke ye aupagrahika upakaraNa nahIM rakhe jAte haiN| :

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 22] [Nishith Sutra Dand, Lathi - are kept for physical and regional
circumstances. Avalehanika - is kept for cleaning mud etc. stuck to the feet. A
bamboo needle is used to insert a string into the Rajoharan or Pujani pods, it
can also be used for sewing clothes, vessels etc. occasionally. Parighattan of
Dand etc. - cleaning from above. Santhavan - cleaning knots etc. Jamavan -
straightening the curved part. Detailed information about the type, quantity,
measurement etc. of these tools is given in the commentary. Patrasandhan Bandhan
Prayashchitta 41. The monk who gives or approves the giving of one Thegli to the
vessel. 42. The monk who gives or approves the giving of more than three Thegli
to the vessel. 43. The monk who binds or approves the binding of the vessel with
the proper method. 44. The monk who binds or approves the binding of the vessel
with one bandhan. 45. The monk who binds or approves the binding of the vessel
with more than three bandhan. 46. The monk who keeps the vessel with more than
three bandhan for more than a month and a half, or approves of it. (He gets
Guru-masik Prayashchitta). Discussion - Thegli - is used to fix the broken part
or to close the hole. 41-42 Sutras together mean that the Sadhu should not use
even one Thegli. If absolutely necessary, one, two or three Thegli can be used
for one vessel. Using more than three Thegli is completely prohibited.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 22] [nizIthasUtra daMDa, lAThI-zArIrika paristhiti va kSetrIya paristhiti se
rakhI jAtI hai| avalehanikA-pairoM meM lage kIcar3a Adi ko sApha karane ke liye
rakhI jAtI hai| rajoharaNa yA pUjaNI kI phaliyoM meM DorI DAlane ke lie bAMsa kI
sUI upayoga meM AtI hai, yadA kadA vastra pAtrAdi ke silAI ke kAma meM bhI A
sakatI hai| daMDa Adi kA parighaTTaNa-Upara se saphAI karanA  /  saMThavaNa-
gAMThoM Adi kI saphAI krnaa| jamAvaNa-vakra bhAga ko sIdhA karanA  /  ina
upakaraNoM ke prakAra, parimANa, mApa Adi kI vizeSa jAnakArI bhASya meM dI gaI
hai| pAtrasaMdhAna baMdhana prAyazcitta 41. je bhikkhU pAyassa ekkaM tuDiyaM
taDDei, taDDeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  42. je bhikkhU pAyassa paraM tiNhaM tuDiyANaM
taDDei, taDDeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  43. je bhikkhU pAyaM avihIe baMdhai, baMdhataM
vA saaijjaai| 44. je bhikkhU pAyaM egeNa baMdheNa baMdhai baMdhataM vA sAijjai
/  45. je bhikkhU pAyaM paraM tiNhaM baMdhANaM baMdhaI, baMdhataM vA sAijjai  /
46. je bhikkhU airega baMdhaNaM pAyaM, divaDDAo mAsAo pareNa dharei, dharataM vA
saaijji| 41. jo bhikSu pAtra ke eka thegalI detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  42. jo bhikSu pAtra ke tIna thegalI se adhika detA hai yA dene
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 43. jo bhikSu pAtra ko pravidhi se bAMdhatA hai yA
bAMdhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  44. jo bhikSu pAtra ko eka baMdhana se
bAMdhatA hai yA bAMdhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 45. jo bhikSu pAtra ko
tIna baMdhana se adhika bAMdhatA hai yA bAMdhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
46. jo bhikSu tIna se adhika baMdhana kA pAtra DeDha mAsa se adhika rakhatA hai
yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai
/ ) vivecana-thegalI-TUTe bhAga ko ThIka karane ke lie yA chidra ko baMda karane
ke lie lagAI jAtI hai| 41-42 sUtroM kA saMyukta bhAva yaha hai ki sAdhu eka bhI
thegalI na lagAve  /  atyanta Avazyaka ho to eka pAtra ke eka, do yA tIna
thegalI taka lagAI jA sakatI hai  /  tIna se adhika thegalI lagAnA sarvathA
niSiddha hai|

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective  [23 Thegali are of two types - 1. Homogeneous, 2.
Heterogeneous. Applying Thegali of the same type as the vessel is "Homogeneous",
applying Thegali of a different type is "Heterogeneous". If it is necessary to
apply Thegali to the vessel, then only Homogeneous Thegali should be applied,
not Heterogeneous. This rule should be understood in relation to wood, gourd,
clay, etc. But the cloth or thread used along with it is not called Homogeneous
or Heterogeneous. And applying Thegali to connect with the solution is not
called Thegali.  Avidhi-sutra 44-45 states the binding of the vessel, therefore
the statement of Avidhi related to the vessel should have been after these
sutras, but here in the 43rd sutra, this Vidhanasutra of Avidhi is related to
these four sutras 41-42 and 44-45.  Its implication is that Thegali should not
be applied by Pravidhi and binding should not be tied by Pravidhi.  Explanation
of Vidhi and Avidhi  1. After binding and Thegali and after stitching etc., that
place should become eligible for transcription. 2. Where binding, Thegali etc.
have been applied, the portion of food etc. should be easily cleaned from there.
3. The work of applying binding etc. should be done in the least amount of time.
These should be understood as Vidhi or Vivek and the opposite should be
understood as Pravidhi. Binding  The goal of the Sadhu should be to request only
such a vessel which does not need to be repaired or bound etc. The meaning of
these two sutras 41-42 and 44-45 is that "Whatever vessel is found should be
such that it can be used directly without any rituals. If not, then according to
the need, one inferior and three superior bindings can be applied."  _ Binding
means - strengthening the roundness of the vessel by tying it with thread etc.
so that it can remain safe for a longer time.  Applying binding at one place is
called one binding and tying at three places is called three bindings.  If the
clay vessel can work without binding, then there is no need to bind even at one
place.  A very small wooden vessel does not need even one binding.  A large
wooden vessel requires one binding. 1. In some copies, the following sutra is
found more, which is not in Bhashyachurni    "Je Bhikkhu Payan Avihie Taddei
Taddentan Wa Saijjae." ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama uddezaka] [23 thegalI do prakAra kI hotI hai-1. sajAtIya, 2. vijAtIya
/  jisa jAti kA pAtra ho usI jAti kI thegalI lagAnA "sajAtIya" hai, anya jAti kI
thegalI lagAnA "vijAtIya" hai  /  pAtra ke thegalI lagAnA Avazyaka ho to
sajAtIya thegalI hI lagAI jAe, vijAtIya nhiiN| yaha niyama lakar3I, tumbA, miTTI
Adi kI apekSA se samajhanA caahie| kintu sAtha meM kapar3e kA yA dhAge kA jo
upayoga kiyA jAtA hai vaha sajAtIya yA vijAtIya nahIM kahA jAtA hai  /  tathA
selyUzana se jor3ane ko thegalI lagAnA nahIM kahA jaataa| avidhi-sUtra 44-45 meM
pAtra ke baMdhana kA kathana hai ataH pAtra viSayaka avidhi kA kathana ina
sUtroM ke bAda meM honA cAhie thA kintu yahA~ 43veM sUtra meM avidhi kA yaha
vidhAnasUtra 41-42 aura 44-45 ina cAroM sUtra se sambandhita hai  /  isakA
phalitArtha yaha hai ki thegalI bhI pravidhi se nahIM lagAnI cAhie aura baMdhana
bhI pravidhi se nahIM bA~dhanA caahie| vidhi aura avidhi kI vyAkhyA 1. baMdhana
aura thegalI ke bAda tathA silAI Adi ke bAda vaha sthAna pratilekhana karane
yogya ho jAnA caahie| 2. jahA~ baMdhana, thegalI Adi lagAye gae hoM, vahA~ se
AhAra Adi kA aMza saralatA se sApha ho jAe aisA ho jAnA caahie| 3. baMdhana Adi
lagAne kA kArya kama se kama samaya meM ho jaae| ye hI vidhi yA viveka samajhane
cAhie aura isake viparIta pravidhi samajhanA caahie| baMdhana sAdhu kA lakSya to
yaha rahe ki jisa pAtra kA sudhAra yA usake baMdhana Adi kArya na karanA par3e,
aise pAtra kI hI yAcanA kre| 41-42 va 44-45 ina do-do sUtroM kA bhAva yahI hai
ki "jo bhI pAtra mile vaha aisA ho ki kucha bhI saMskAra kie binA sIdhA upayoga
meM Ave  /  yadi aisA na ho to AvazyakatAnusAra jaghanya eka aura utkRSTa tIna
baMdhana lagAye jA sakate haiN|" _ baMdhana kA artha hai--pAtra kI golAI ko
dhAge Adi se bAMdhakara majabUta karanA jisase adhika samaya surakSita raha ske|
eka sthAna para baMdhana lagAnA eka baMdhana kahalAtA hai aura tIna sthAnoM para
bAMdhanA tIna baMdhana kahalAtA hai| miTTI ke pAtra meM binA baMdhana ke kAma
cala sakatA ho to eka bhI jagaha bAMdhane kI AvazyakatA nahIM hotI hai| lakar3I
ke atyanta choTe pAtra meM eka bhI baMdhana kI AvazyakatA nahIM hotI hai|
lakar3I ke bar3e pAtra meM eka baMdhana Avazyaka hotA hai| 1. kucha pratiyoM meM
nimna sUtra adhika milatA hai, jo bhASyacUrNi meM nahIM hai "je bhikkhU pAyaM
avihIe taDDei taDDeMtaM vA saaijjii|"

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[24] The *Nishith Sutra* *tumbi* vessel, depending on need, can be secured with
two or three ties. The main goal of a *sadhu* should always be to avoid
excessive carelessness and to increase *svadhyaya*. The carelessness of a
*sadhu* is to perform actions related to the body and *upadhi*, he is a
renunciant of the *savadyayoga* form of carelessness. *Aireg* binding -
permission is given to bind when necessary, permission is also given to bind
with three excellent bindings. A vessel with three bindings can be kept as long
as it is in use. Generally, the need or utility of more than three bindings is
less likely in any type of vessel. This is clear from *sutras* 44-45, however,
*sutra* 46 gives limited permission in the sense of the possibility of a
difficult situation. That is, if in a particular area or time, a wooden or
*tuba* vessel, which already has one or three bindings, breaks, then until
another vessel is found, it should be used with 4-5 bindings, but as soon as
possible, a request should be made for an earthen vessel, etc., and the vessel
with more bindings should be discarded. Keeping it after one and a half months
incurs *prāyaścitta* from this (46th) *sutra*. *Vastra-sandhan-bandhan*
*prāyaścitta* 47. The *bhikkhu* who gives or receives a single *padiya* garment,
or who makes it, incurs *prāyaścitta*. 48. The *bhikkhu* who gives or receives
more than three *padiya* garments, or who makes them, incurs *prāyaścitta*. 49.
The *bhikkhu* who sews a garment without a needle, or who sews it, incurs
*prāyaścitta*. The *bhikkhu* who makes a single *faliy-gathi* on a garment, or
who makes it, incurs *prāyaścitta*. The *bhikkhu* who makes more than three
*faliy-gathi* on a garment, or who makes them, incurs *prāyaścitta*. 52. The
*bhikkhu* who ties a single *faliy* knot on a garment, or who ties it, incurs
*prāyaścitta*. 53. The *bhikkhu* who ties more than three *faliy* knots on a
garment, or who ties them, incurs *prāyaścitta*. 54. The *bhikkhu* who ties a
garment without a needle, or who ties it, incurs *prāyaścitta*. 55. The
*bhikkhu* who takes a garment with an unpermitted hand, or who takes it, incurs
*prāyaścitta*. 56. The *bhikkhu* who holds a garment with an *aireg-gahiy* for
more than a day or a month, or who holds it, incurs *prāyaścitta*. 1. The
*churnikara* has not given any meaning to *sutras* 52-53-54, but the
*bhashyakara* has given a verse that touches upon their subject. *Tiṇhuvari
faliyāṇam vattham, jo faliyampi sansivvē.* *Pañcaṇham egtarē so pāvati
prāṇamādīṇi* ||787|| Based on this verse, the text and meaning of the *sutras*
have been interpreted.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 24] [nizIthasUtra tumbe kA pAtra AvazyakatAnusAra do yA tIna jagaha baMdhana
lagAne se surakSita rahatA hai| sAdhu kA mukhya lakSya sadA yaha rahe ki adhika
pramAda na ho aura svAdhyAya bddh'e| sAdhu kA pramAda zarIra aura upadhi
saMbaMdhI kArya karanA hotA hai, sAvadya yogarUpa pramAda kA to vaha tyAgI hI
hotA hai| airega baMdhaNa-Avazyaka hone para baMdhana lagAne kI anujJA hai,
utkRSTa tIna baMdhana lagAne kI bhI anujJA hai| tIna baMdhana vAlA pAtra jaba
taka upayoga meM Ave taba taka rakhA jA sakatA hai| sAmAnyataH tIna se jyAdA
baMdhana kI AvazyakatA yA upayogitA kisI bhI prakAra ke pAtra meM kama saMbhava
hai| yaha sUtra 44-45 se spaSTa hotA hai, tathApi sUtra 46 meM vikaTa paristhiti
kI saMbhAvanA ke Azaya se usakI bhI sImita anujJA dI gaI hai| arthAt-kisI kSetra
yA kAla kI paristhiti meM lakar3I yA tubA kA pAtra jisameM ki pahale se eka yA
tIna baMdha lage haiM aura TUTa phUTa jAya to jaba taka anya pAtra na mile taba
taka 4-5 baMdhana lagAkara ke bhI calAnA par3e to yathAsaMbhava zIghrAtizIghra
miTTI Adi ke pAtra kI yAcanA kara lenA cAhie aura adhika baMdhana vAle pAtra ko
paraTha denA caahiye| use Der3ha mahIne ke bAda rakhane para isa (46veM) sUtra
se prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  vastra-saMdhAna-baMdhana prAyazcitta 47. je bhikkhU
vatthassa egaM paDiyANiyaM dei deMtaM vA sAijjai  /  48. je bhikkhU vatthassa
paraM tiNhaM paDiyANiyANaM dei deMtaM vA sAijjai  /  49. je bhikkhU vatthaM
avihIe sivvai, sivvaMtaM vA saaijji| je bhikkhU vatthassa egaM phAliya-gaThiyaM
karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  je bhikkhU vatthassa paraM tiNhaM phAliya-
gaMThiyANaM karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  52. je bhikkhU vatthassa egaM
phAliyaM gaNThei, gaMThetaM vA sAijjai  /  53. je bhikkhU vatthassa paraM tiNhaM
phAliyANaM gaMThei, gaMThetaM vA sAijjai  /  54. je bhikkhU vatthaM avihIe
gaMThei, gaMThetaM vA sAijjai  /  55. je bhikkhU vatthaM atajjAeNa gahei,
gaheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  56. je bhikkhU airega-gahiyaM-vatthaM paraM divaDDAo
mAsAo dharei dharetaM vA sAijjai  /  1. 52-53-54 tIna sUtroM kA cUrNikAra ne koI
artha nahIM kiyA hai, kintu bhASyakAra ne inake viSaya ko sparza karane vAlI
gAthA dI hai tiNhuvari phAliyANaM vatthaM, jo phAliyaMpi saMsivve  /  paMcaNhaM
egatare so pAvati prANamAdINi ||787 /  /  isa gAthA ke AdhAra se sUtroM kA pATha
va artha kiyA gayA hai|

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## [25 **First Objective** ] 47. A monk who attaches a patch to his robe or
approves of someone who does so. 48. A monk who attaches more than three patches
to his robe or approves of someone who does so. 49. A monk who sews his robe
improperly or approves of someone who does so. 50. A monk who ties a knot in a
torn robe or approves of someone who does so. 51. A monk who ties more than
three knots in a torn robe or approves of someone who does so. 52. A monk who
joins a torn robe with one stitch or approves of someone who does so. 53. A monk
who joins torn robes with more than three stitches or approves of someone who
does so. 54. A monk who joins a robe improperly or approves of someone who does
so. 55. A monk who joins a cloth of one kind to a cloth of another kind or
approves of someone who does so. 56. A monk who keeps a robe with extra joins,
etc., for more than a month and a half or approves of someone who does so. (He
incurs the Guru-masik penance.)  **Discussion:** **Patch:** When a robe is
damaged by a hole made by a rat, dog, etc., or by sparks of fire, and the
remaining part is usable, it is necessary to attach a patch to the robe. Other
such reasons should also be understood. The discussion regarding one patch and
three patches should be understood as before.  **Improper Sewing:** It is
necessary to sew when attaching a patch to a robe, but it should be done in a
way that takes the least amount of time and is well-stitched. Many types of
sewing are mentioned in the commentaries and Churnis, the meaning of which
should be understood from the Guru.  **Tying a Knot:** If a robe is not worn out
and has torn due to entanglement or pressure, then, in the absence of a needle,
etc., to sew it, both edges of the robe are held and a knot is tied. Such knot
tying is considered minor in one place and major in three places. If even after
tying knots in three places, the robe is not usable, then a needle, etc., should
be obtained and it should be sewn. But more than three knots should not be tied.
The word "improper" should be understood here as well from the above sutra 50,
meaning that in tying a knot also, there should be no improper method, but
rather a proper method should be followed. This also clarifies...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [25 prathama uddezaka ] 47. jo bhikSu vastra meM eka thegalI lagAtA hai yA
lagAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  48. jo bhikSu vastra ke tIna se adhika
thegalI lagAtA hai yA lagAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  49. jo bhikSu
vastra ko pravidhi se sItA hai yA sIne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  50. jo
bhikSu phaTe vastra ke eka gAMTha lagAtA hai yA lagAne vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  51. jo bhikSu phaTe vastra ke tIna se adhika gAMTha lagAtA hai yA lagAne
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  52. jo bhikSu phaTe vastra ko eka silAI se
jor3atA hai yA jor3ane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  53. jo bhikSu phaTe
vastroM ko tIna sIvaNa se adhika jor3atA yA jor3ane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai
/  54. jo bhikSu vastra ko pravidhi se jor3atA hai yA jor3ane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  55. jo bhikSu eka jAti ke kapar3e ko dUsarI jAti ke kapar3e se
jor3atA hai yA jor3ane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  56. jo bhikSu pratirikta
jor3a Adi ke vastra ko Der3ha mAsa se adhika kAla taka rakhatA hai yA rakhane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use gurumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  / )
vivecana- galI - cUhe, kutte Adi ke dvArA cheda kara diye jAne para yA agni kI
cinagAriyoM se kSata-vikSata ho jAne para yadi usakA zeSa bhAga upayoga meM Ane
yogya ho to vastra meM thegalI dene kI AvazyakatA hotI hai tathA anya bhI aise
kAraNa samajha lenA cAhiye  /  eka thegalI va tIna thegalI saMbaMdhI vivecana
pUrvavat samajha lenA cAhiye  /  avidhi sIvana - vastra ke thegalI lagAne meM
silAI karanA Avazyaka hai kintu silAI meM kama se kama samaya lage aura acchI
taraha pratilekhana ho sake yaha dhyAna rakhanA cAhiye  /  sIne ke aneka prakAra
bhASya, cUrNi meM batAye haiM, jinakA artha gurugama se samajha lenA cAhiye  /
gAMTha lagAnA- jo vastra jIrNa nahIM ho aura kahIM ulajhakara yA dabakara phaTa
gayA ho to aise vastra kI silAI ke lie sUI Adi tatkAla upalabdha na hone para
usa vastra ke donoM kinAroM ko pakar3akara gAMTha lagA dI jAtI hai, aise gAMTha
lagAnA jaghanya eka sthAna para tathA utkRSTa tIna sthAnoM para kiyA jA sakatA
hai | yadi tIna sthAnoM meM gAMTha dene para bhI kAma grAne lAyaka na ho sake to
sUI Adi upalabdha kara usakI silAI kara lenA cAhiye  /  kintu tIna se adhika
gAMTha nahIM lagAnA cAhiye  /  Upara ke sUtra 50 se 'avidhi' zabda ko yahAM bhI
grahaNa karake usakA artha samajha lenA cAhiye ki gAMTha dene meM bhI dikhane kI
apekSA yA pratilekhana kI apekSA pravidhi na ho| isase yaha bhI spaSTa

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [26]  **The Nishith Sutra states that it is not necessary to reopen any knot
that has been tied according to the rules for the purpose of transcription, as
it is well-written. Repeatedly opening and tying the knot is unnecessary
carelessness.**  **Two sutras have been given for joining cloth pieces - Thegli
and knot. These two (52-53) sutras are related to joining similar clothes.
Therefore, here also the context of one stitch and three stitches arises.**
**Faliyan - Torn. It can have two meanings: 1. When accepting new, 2. When torn
after taking.**  **When accepting new clothes, if they are less in width or
small pieces of less length, then they have to be joined to make them suitable
for a sheet etc., which has been instructed in Acharang Sutra Shru. 2 A. 5, U.
1.**  **One should try to take clothes that do not require any joining. Even if
necessary, no more than three joins should be made, as many joins can sustain
both the Sadhu and Sadhvi.**  **If a Sadhvi needs a sheet of four hands' width
and gets a cloth of one hand's width, it can be completed with three joins. Even
if pieces of less length than required are available, both the Sadhu and Sadhvi
can be sustained with three joins.**  **The word 'Ganthiyan Karei' is used in
the previous sutras 50, 51. It contains the atonement related to joining torn
clothes by tying a knot.**  **The verb 'Ganthe' is used in sutras 52-53-54. It
contains the atonement for joining different cloth pieces of the same kind by
stitching.**  **The verb "Gahe" is used in Sutra 55. It contains the atonement
for joining heterogeneous cloth pieces.**  **Thus, these sutras contain
atonements for joining torn clothes or cloth pieces.**  **There is no atonement
for joining similar cloth pieces and there is no atonement for stitching with
thread like cloth, because it is the method.**  **There is atonement for joining
dissimilar cloth pieces and atonement for stitching with a thread different from
cloth, because it is not the method.**  **The atonement for joining by non-
method and stitching by method is the same as Sutra 49.**  **Joining
heterogeneous clothes - The word 'jati' used in this sutra can be taken as many
kinds of clothes. For example - woolen, cotton, sanni, silk etc.**  **There are
many kinds of woolen and cotton clothes. Woolen clothes - blankets etc. made
from wool of sheep, goat, camel etc. Cotton clothes - muslin, lattha, reja etc.
various types of clothes.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 26] [nizIthasUtra hotA hai ki vidhipUrvaka lagAI huI kisI bhI gAMTha ko
pratilekhana ke liye punaH kholanA Avazyaka nahIM hotA hai kyoMki vaha
supratilekhya hotI hai  /  bAra bAra gAMTha kholanA evaM denA anAvazyaka pramAda
hai  /  vastra khaMDa jor3anA-thegalI va gAMTha ke do do sUtra die gae haiM,
unake samAna vastroM ko jor3ane saMbaMdhI ye do (52-53) sUtra haiM  /  ataH
yahAM para bhI eka sIvaNa aura tIna sIvaNa kA prasaMga ghaTita hotA hai|
phAliyaM-phaTe hue  /  isakA do prakAra se artha ho sakatA hai1. nayA grahaNa
karate samaya, 2. lene ke bAda kabhI phaTa jAne pr| nayA vastra grahaNa karate
samaya yadi vaha caur3AI meM kama ho yA kama lambAI ke choTe choTe Tukar3e hoM
to caddara Adi ke yogya banAne ke liye jor3anA par3atA hai, jisakA nirdeza
AcArAMgasUtra zru. 2 a. 5, u. 1 meM huA hai| yathAsaMbhava eka bhI jagaha jor3a
lagAnA na par3e aisA hI vastra lenA cAhiye  /  Avazyaka hone para bhI tIna se
adhika jor3a nahIM lagAnA cAhie, itane jor3a se sAdhu-sAdhvI donoM kA nirvAha ho
sakatA hai| sAdhvI ko cAra hAtha vistAra kI caddara kI jarUrata ho aura eka
hAtha ke vistAra kA kapar3A mile to tIna jor3a se pUrI ho sakatI hai  /  kabhI
AvazyakatA se kama lambe Tukar3e mileM to bhI tIna jor3a se sAdhu va sAdhvI
donoM kA nirvAha ho sakatA hai| pUrvokta sUtra 50, 51 meM 'gaMThiyaM karei' kA
prayoga hai| isameM phaTe hue vastra ko gAMTha dekara jor3ane saMbaMdhI
prAyazcitta hai| sUtra 52-53-54 meM 'gaMThei' kriyA kA prayoga hai| isameM eka
sarIkhe bhinna-bhinna vastrakhaNDoM ko silAI karake jor3ane kA prAyazcitta hai|
sUtra 55 meM "gahei" kriyA kA prayoga hai| isameM vijAtIya vastrakhaNDoM ko
jor3ane kA prAyazcitta hai| isa prakAra ina sUtroM meM phaTe vastroM ko yA
vastrakhaNDoM ko jor3ane ke prAyazcitta haiM  /  eka sarIkhe vastrakhaNDoM ko
jor3ane kA prAyazcitta nahIM hai aura vastra jaise dhAge se silAI karane kA bhI
prAyazcitta nahIM hai, kyoMki yaha vidhi hai  /  asamAna vastrakhaNDoM ko
jor3ane kA prAyazcitta hai aura vastra se bhinna prakAra ke dhAge se silAI
karane kA prAyazcitta hai, kyoMki yaha avidhi hai  /  avidhi se jor3ane kA aura
pravidhi se silAI karane kA prAyazcitta vivecana sUtra 49 ke samAna hai|
vijAtIya vastra jor3anA-isa sUtra meM prayukta jAti zabda se vastroM kI aneka
jAtiyAM grahaNa kI jA sakatI haiM  /  yathA-UnI, sUtI, saNI, rezamI Adi  /  UnI
aura sUtI vastroM kI anekAneka jAtiyAM haiM  /  UnI vastra-bher3a, bakarI, U~Ta
Adi kI Una se bane hue kambala Adi vastra  /  sUtI vastra-malamala, laTThA, rejA
Adi vividha prakAra ke vastra  /

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Objective] [25  There are many types of clothes and threads, even due
to color differences. Therefore, when a monk joins or sews pieces of cloth, he
should be mindful that the joined pieces of cloth and the stitching thread do
not appear different.  Regarding the excessive joining of clothes, the
commentator Charnikar has connected "Aireg Gahiyan" to the "Gahei" (knotting)
topic in the 52nd, 53rd, 54th, and 55th Sutras above, and also connected it to
Sutras 50 and 51. He has stated that if monks and nuns keep clothes with
excessive joining and knots for more than a month and a half, they are liable
for atonement. Just as the atonement Sutras discuss the matter of keeping a
vessel with excessive binding for more than a month and a half, the same meaning
should be understood here.  If even one joining is done after the limit, after
performing Sutraporisi and Arthaporisi, the other cloth should be examined. If
two or three joinings are done, only Sutraporisi should be performed and the
cloth examined. If more than three joinings are done, neither Sutra nor
Arthaporisi should be performed, and the cloth should be examined first. The
meaning of Sutra-Arthaporisi is 'porisi of self-study and meditation'.  Summary
- The essence of the aforementioned 6 Sutras related to vessels and 10 Sutras
related to clothes is that monks and nuns should avoid, as much as possible,
activities like attaching a thegli (patch) to clothes, knotting, joining pieces
of cloth, and attaching a tikdi (patch) or binding to vessels.  If it is
necessary to perform the aforementioned activities related to clothes and
vessels, they should not be performed more than three times.  If a situation
arises where these activities are performed more than three times, instead of
performing Sutraporusi and Arthaporusi, one should request a new cloth during
that time. This should not violate the limit of one and a half months.  Home
Smoke - Excursion - Atonement 57. Je Bhikkhu Gihadhum Annautthiyen Va Garathien
Va Parisadavei, Parisadavetam Va Saizjzai. 57. A monk who removes home smoke
from another non-Jain or a householder, or approves of the one who removes it,
(receives Guru-masik atonement).  Discussion - This Sutra lays down the
atonement for removing home smoke. The accumulated smoke from the stove on the
wall of the kitchen or under the roof is called 'home smoke'.  If a monk, after
obtaining permission from the owner of the kitchen to enter the kitchen, takes a
tool that can reach the height of the roof and removes the smoke, he does not
incur any atonement.  If a monk cannot remove the home smoke himself due to not
getting permission to enter the kitchen or due to physical inability, and gets
it removed by someone else, he incurs Guru-masik atonement.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama uddezaka] [25 raMgabheda se bhI vastroM ke aura dhAgoM ke aneka
prakAra haiN| ataH bhikSu vastrakhaNDoM ko jor3ate yA jur3avAte samaya aisA
viveka rakhe ki jur3e hue vastrakhaNDa aura silAI ke dhAge bhinna bhinna na
dikheM  /  vastra ke adhika jor3a-bhASya carNikAra ne "airega gahiyaM' kA
saMbaMdha Upara ke 52-53-5455veM sUtroM ke "gahei' (gaMThei) viSaya se jor3A hai
tathA sUtra 50-51 se bhI jor3A hai aura kahA hai ki sAdhu sAdhviyAM yadi adhika
jor3a kA, adhika gAMTha kA vastra Der3ha mAsa se adhika rakheM to ve prAyazcitta
ke pAtra hote haiM  /  jaisA pAtra ke sUtroM meM adhika baMdhana ke pAtra ko
Der3ha mahIne se adhika rakhane saMbaMdhI vivecana kiyA gayA hai usI prAzaya kA
vivecana yahAM bhI samajhanA caahiye| maryAdA uparAMta eka bhI jor3a kiyA ho to
sUtraporisI aura arthaporisI karane ke bAda anya vastra ko gaveSaNA kara lenA
cAhiye  /  do tIna jor3a kiye hoM to kevala sUtraporisI karake vastra kI
gaveSaNA karanA aura tIna se jyAdA jor3a kiye hoM to sUtra va artha donoM porisI
na kare, pahale vastra kI gaveSaNA kare  /  sUtra-artha porisI kA Azaya
hai-'svAdhyAya va dhyAna karane kI porisii|' sArAMza-pUrvokta pAtra viSayaka 6
sUtroM kA aura vastra viSayaka 10 sUtroM kA sAra yaha hai ki vastra ke thegalI
lagAnA, gAMTha denA, vastrakhaNDa jor3anA tathA pAtra ke Tikar3I lagAnA,
bandhana lagAnA Adi kArya sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko yathAsaMbhava nahIM karane cAhiye
/  vastra pAtra viSayaka ukta kArya karane yadi Avazyaka hoM to unheM tIna se
adhika nahIM karane cAhiye  /  ukta kArya tIna se adhika karane jaisI sthiti
yadi ho gaI ho to sUtrapauruSI, arthapauruSI na karake bhI usa kAla meM naye
vastra kI yAcanA kara lenI caahie| isameM Der3ha mAsa kI maryAdA kA ullaMghana
nahIM honA caahiye| gRhadhUma-parisATana. prAyazcitta 57. je bhikkhU gihadhUmaM
aNNautthieNa vA gArathieNa vA parisADAvei, parisADAvetaM vA saaijji| 57. jo
bhikSu gRhadhUma anyatIthika yA gRhastha se utarAtA hai yA utarAne vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai, (use gurumAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai| ) vivecana-isa sUtra
meM gRhadhUma utaravAne kA prAyazcitta vidhAna hai, rasoI ghara kI divAla para
yA chata ke nIce cUlhe kA jamA dhuAM 'gRhadhUma' kahA jAtA hai| rasoIghara ke
svAmI se rasoIghara meM praveza kI AjJA prApta karake chata kI UMcAI taka hAtha
pahuMca sake aisA sAdhana lekara sAdhu yadi dhuprAM utAra le to use kisI prakAra
kA prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai| rasoIghara meM praveza kI AjJA na milane se athavA
zArIrika asAmarthya se sAdhu svayaM gRhadhuma na utAra sake to anya se gRhadhUma
utaravAne para use gurumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [28] [Nishith Sutra]  **Solution by Churnikar regarding the removal of house
dust by a Sadhu:**  If a Sadhu develops skin diseases like eczema or itching, he
should treat it with house dust. However, Churnikar has not specified the method
of using "house dust". Therefore, one should learn the method of using house
dust from a skilled physician or a skin specialist.  **Putikarma - Prāyaścitta**
**58. A monk who consumes or approves of food, clothing, or dwelling
contaminated with Putikarma (impurity) incurs Guru-māsika Prāyaścitta
(penance).**  **Explanation:**  The commentator has described three types of
Putikarma: 1. Āhāra-Putikarma (food impurity), 2. Upadhi-Putikarma (clothing
impurity), and 3. Śayyā-Putikarma (bed impurity).  **1. Āhāra-Putikarma:**
There are two types of food impurity:  * Food contaminated with impure
substances. * Food prepared using contaminated utensils.  Food prepared with
pure ingredients but mixed with impure substances like hing (asafoetida), salt,
etc., contaminated with Pradhākarmadi (impurities) becomes Putikarma-
contaminated.  Pure food served with a spoon contaminated with Pradhākarmadi
becomes Putikarma-contaminated.  **2. Upadhi-Putikarma:**  If a householder sews
or attaches a thread contaminated with Pradhākarmadi to a pure garment, it
becomes Putikarma-contaminated.  If a householder uses a contaminated stick or
tie to attach a pure vessel, it becomes Putikarma-contaminated.  **3. Śayyā-
Putikarma:**  If any part of a pure bed is made using bamboo or wood
contaminated with Pradhākarmadi, the bed becomes Putikarma-contaminated.  Even
if Putikarma-contaminated food is mixed with pure food, it becomes Putikarma-
contaminated.  **Whoever consumes or approves of any of the Prāyaścitta-sthāna
(penance places) mentioned in these 58 Sutras incurs Guru-māsika Prāyaścitta.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 28 ] [ nizIthasUtra sAdhu kisa kArya ke lie svayaM gRhadhUma utAre yA anya se
utaravAye, isakA samAdhAna cUrNikAra ne isa prakAra kiyA hai sAdhu ke dAda
khujalI Adi kisI prakAra kA carmaroga ho jAe to vaha gRhadhUma se usakI cikitsA
svayaM kare, kintu cUrNikAra ne yaha nahIM batAyA ki 'gRhadhUma' kA prayoga kisa
prakAra kiyA jAya  /  ataH kisI kuzala vaidya se yA carmaroga vizeSajJa se
gRhadhUma ke prayoga kI vidhi jAna lenI cAhie | pUtikarma- prAyazcitta 58. je
bhikkhU pUikammaM bhujai bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  58. jo bhikSu pUtikarma doSa
se yukta AhAra, upadhi va vasati kA upayoga karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai, ( use gurumAsika prAyazcittaM prAtA hai | ) - vivecana -
bhASyakAra ne pUtikarma doSa tIna prakAra kA kahA hai1. zrAhArapUtikarma, 2.
upadhipUtikarma, 3. zayyApUtikarma  /  AhAra - pUtikarma do prakAra kA hai 1.
dUSita padArthoM se saMskRta AhAra 2. dUSita upakaraNa prayukta prahAra |
pradhAkarmAdi doSayukta hIMga, namaka Adi se mizrita nirdoSa AhAra bhI
pUtikarma-doSayukta ho jAtA hai  /  AdhAkarmAdi doSayukta AhAra se lipta cammaca
Adi se diyA jAne vAlA nirdoSa AhAra bhI pUtikarma doSayukta ho jAtA hai  /  2.
upadhi - pUtikarma gRhastha dvArA pradhAkarmAdi doSayukta dhAge se nirdoSa
vastra kI silAI karane para athavA thegalI lagAne para vaha pUtikarma doSayukta
ho jAtA hai  /  gRhastha dvArA AdhAkarmAdi doSayukta Tikar3I lagAne se athavA
bandhana lagAne se nirdoSa pAtra bhI pUtikarma - doSayukta ho jAtA hai  /  3.
zayyA - pUtikarma nirdoSa zayyA ke kisI bhI vibhAga meM pradhAkarmAdi doSayukta
bAMsa aura kASTha Adi kA upayoga huA ho to vaha zayyA bhI pUtikarma - doSayukta
ho jAtI hai  /  pUtikarma doSa vAlA AhAra bhI zuddha AhAra meM mila jAye to bhI
pUrtikarma doSayukta ho jAtA hai  /  taM sevamANe Avajjai mAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM aNugdhAiyaM  /  ina uparyukta 58 sUtroM meM kahe gaye kisI bhI
prAyazcittasthAna ke sevana karane vAle ko gurumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Uddeshak  **Discussion:** The explanation of this sutra is rarely found
with the final sutra or at the end.  In the original text, this text is placed
with the final sutra in almost all copies. For detailed information on this
topic, see the discussion of the first sutra.  The word 'Pariharadaan' in the
sutra is used only in the general sense of atonement. Similarly, in other
Uddeshaks, the words 'Maasik' and 'Chaturmasik' should be understood in the same
sense. However, special types of Pariharatapas should not be understood in the
sense of atonement.  **Summary of the First Uddeshak:**  * Sutra 1: Performing
Hastakarma. * Sutra 2-8: Performing the 1. Sanchalana, 2. Sambadhana, 3.
Abhyangan, 4. Ubtan, 5. Prakshalana, 6. Twacha Apvartana, and 7. Jighrana
actions of Angadaan. * Sutra 9: Removing Shukra Pudgala. * Sutra 10: Smelling
Satchitta substances. * Sutra 11: Building a path, a bridge, and a support. *
Sutra 12: Building a drain for water. * Sutra 13: Building a sneeze and its
cover. * Sutra 14: Building a thread or rope for a lamp. * Sutra 15-18:
Repairing a needle, scissors, nail cutter, and ear cleaner. * Sutra 19-22:
Asking for a needle, etc., without purpose. * Sutra 23-26: Asking for a needle,
etc., without proper procedure. * Sutra 27-30: Using a needle, etc., for a
different purpose than what it was asked for. * Sutra 31-34: Asking for a
needle, etc., for one's own work and then giving it to another for their work. *
Sutra 35-38: Returning a needle, etc., without proper procedure. * Sutra 39:
Performing the Parikarma of a vessel. * Sutra 40: Performing the Parikarma of a
stick, staff, writing instrument, and bamboo needle. * Sutra 41: Applying one
Thegali to a vessel without reason. * Sutra 42: Applying more than three
Thegalis to a vessel with reason. * Sutra 43: Tying a band to a vessel according
to the procedure. * Sutra 44: Applying one band to a vessel. * Sutra 45:
Applying more than three bands to a vessel. * Sutra 46: Keeping a vessel with
more than three bands for more than a month and a half. * Sutra 47: Applying one
Thegali to a torn cloth. * Sutra 48: Applying more than three Thegalis to a torn
cloth. * Sutra 49: Sewing a cloth according to the procedure. * Sutra 50: Giving
one knot to a torn cloth. * Sutra 51: Giving more than three knots to a torn
cloth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathama uddezaka vivecana-aMtima sUtra ke sAtha yA aMta meM isa sUtra kI
vyAkhyA prAyaH nahIM milatI hai| mUlapATha meM prAyaH sabhI pratiyoM meM aMtima
sUtra ke sAtha isa pATha ko rakhA gayA hai| isa viSaya kI vizeSa jAnakArI ke
liye prathama sUtra kA vivecana dekheN| sUtra meM 'parihAradANaM' zabda kevala
sAmAnya prAyazcitta artha meM prayukta hai| isI prakAra anya uddezakoM meM bhI
'mAsika' aura cAturmAsika zabda ke sAtha isI artha meM samajha lenA cAhiye  /
kintu vizeSa prakAra ke parihAratapa rUpa prAyazcitta ke artha meM nahIM
samajhanA cAhiye  /  prathama uddezaka kA sArAMzasUtra 1 hastakarma karanA  /
sUtra 2-8 aMgAdAna kA 1 saMcAlana 2 saMbAdhana 3 abhyaMgana 4 ubaTana 5
prakSAlana 6 tvacA apa vartana aura 7 jighraNa kriyAeM karanA  /  sUtra 9 zukra
pudgala nikaalnaa| sUtra 10 sacitta padArtha suughnaa| sUtra 11 padamArga
banavAnA, saMkramaNa (pula) mArga banavAnA, avalambana kA sAdhana bnvaanaa|
sUtra 12 pAnI nikalane kI nAlI bnvaanaa| sUtra 13 chIMkA aura usakA Dhakkana
banavAnA  /  sUtra 14 sUta kI yA rajju kI cilamilI banavAnA  /  sUtra 15-18 sUI,
kaiMcI, nakhachedanaka aura karNazodhanaka sudharavAnA  /  sUtra 19-22 sUI Adi
kI binA prayojana yAcanA krnaa| sUtra 23-26 sUI Adi kI avidhi se yAcanA krnaa|
sUtra 27-30 jisa kArya ke lie sUI Adi kI yAcanA kI hai, usase bhinna kArya
krnaa| sUtra 31-34 apane kArya ke lie sUI Adi kI yAcanA karake anya ko usake
kArya ke lie de denaa| sUtra 35-38 sUI Adi avidhi se lauTAnA  /  sUtra 39 pAtra
kA parikarma krvaanaa| sUtra 40 daNDa, lAThI, avalekhanikA aura bAMsa kI sUI kA
parikarma krvaanaa| sUtra 41 akAraNa pAtra ke eka thegalI lagAnA  /  sUtra 42
sakAraNa pAtra ke tIna se adhika thegaliyAM lagAnA  /  sUtra 43 pAtra ke
pravidhi se baMdhana baaNdhnaa| sUtra 44 pAtra ke eka baMdhana lgaanaa| sUtra 45
pAtra ke tIna se adhika baMdhana lgaanaa| sUtra 46 tIna se adhika bandhana vAlA
pAtra DeDha mAsa se adhika rkhnaa| sUtra 47 phaTe hue vastra ke eka thegalI
lagAnA  /  sUtra 48 phaTe hue vastra ke tIna se adhika thegalI lagAnA  /  sUtra
49 pravidhi se vastra siinaa| sUtra 50 phaTe hue vastra ke eka gAMTha denaa|
sUtra 51 phaTe hue vastra ke tIna se adhika gAMTha denaa|

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [30] [Nishīthasūtra Sūtra 52 Joining a piece of cloth with a torn cloth.
Sūtra 53 Joining more than three pieces of cloth with a torn cloth. Sūtra 54
Joining pieces of cloth by technique. Sūtra 55 Joining different types of pieces
of cloth. Sūtra 56 Keeping a cloth with more than three pieces joined for more
than a fortnight. Sūtra 57 Getting household smoke from a householder. Sūtra 58
Using food, utensils, and bedding contaminated with pūtikarma dosha. The guru
receives monthly atonement for such activities. The subject matter of these 20
sūtras is mentioned in the following Āgamas, such as Sūtra 1-9 Performing manual
labor is called a strong dosha. Daśā. Da. 21 Sūtra 10 Prohibition of being
attached to fragrance. Ā. Śru. 2 A. 1 U. 8, Ā. Śru. 2 A. 15. Sūtra 14 Keeping
and using a chel-chilimilika. Bṛha. U. 1. Sūtra 31-38 Prohibition of giving away
needles and other things received as a gift for one's work, and the method of
returning them. Ā. Śru. 2 A. 7 U. 1. Sūtra 58 Description of pūtikarma dosha.
Sūtrakr. Śru. 1 A. 1 U. 3. The subject matter of these 38 sūtras is not
mentioned in other Āgamas, such as Sūtra 11-13 Getting the path made by another
(householder). Sūtra 15-30 Getting needles etc. repaired. Taking needles etc.
without purpose. Taking needles etc. unlawfully. Sūtra 39-40 Getting utensils
and sticks etc. made and repaired. Sūtra 41-46 Putting a handle on a utensil.
Putting a band on a utensil. Sūtra 47-56 Putting a handle on a cloth. Tying a
knot in a cloth. Joining pieces of cloth. Sūtra 57 Getting household smoke from
a householder for medicine. || First Uddeshaka ends || 00 |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 30] [nizIthasUtra sUtra 52 phaTe hue vastra ke sAtha eka vastrakhaNDa jodd'naa|
sUtra 53 phaTe hue vastra ke sAtha tIna se adhika vastrakhaNDa jor3anA  /  sUtra
54 pravidhi se vastrakhaNDa jor3anA  /  sUtra 55 vibhinna prakAra ke
vastrakhaNDa jodd'naa| sUtra 56 tIna se adhika vastrakhaNDa jur3e hue vastra ko
DeDha mAsa se adhika rkhnaa| sUtra 57 gRhastha se gRhadhUma utrvaanaa| sUtra 58
pUtikarma doSa yukta AhAra upadhi tathA zayyA kA upayoga karanA  /  ityAdi
pravRttiyoM kA guru mAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai| isa uddezaka ke 20 sUtroM ke
viSaya kA kathana nimna AgamoM meM hai, yathAsUtra 1-9 hastakarma karanA sabala
doSa kahA hai  /  dazA. da. 21 sUtra 10 sugaMdha meM Asakta hone kA niSedha  /
A. zru. 2 a. 1 u. 8, A. zru. 2 a. 15. sUtra 14 cela-cilimilikA rakhanA evaM
usake upayoga kA vidhAna  /  bRha. u. 1. sUtra 31-38 apane kArya ke lie
prAtihArika grahaNa kI gaI sUI Adi anya ko dene kA niSedha tathA unake lauTAne
kI vidhi  /  A. zru. 2 a. 7 u. 1. sUtra 58 pUtikarmadoSa kA varNana  /  sUtrakR.
zru. 1 a. 1 u. 3. isa uddezaka ke 38 sUtroM ke viSaya kA kathana anya AgamoM meM
nahIM hai, yathAsUtra 11-13 padamArga kA anya (gRhastha) ke dvArA nirmANa
krvaanaa| sUtra 15-30 sUI Adi sudharavAnA  /  sUI Adi binA prayojana grahaNa
karanA  /  sUI Adi avidhi se grahaNa karanA  /  sUtra 39-40 pAtra tathA daNDa
Adi kA nirmANa karavAnA tathA sudharavAnA, sUtra 41-46 pAtra ke thegalI lagAnA
/  pAtra ke baMdhana lagAnA  /  sUtra 47-56 vastra ke thegalI lagAnA, vastra ke
gAMTha lagAnA, vastra khaNDa jodd'naa| sUtra 57 auSadhi ke lie gRhastha se
gRhadhUma utaravAnA  /  ||prthm uddezaka samApta  //  00 |

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective ##  Penance for Accepting "Padpronchan" with a Wooden Stick
1. A monk who makes or approves the making of a "Padpronchan" with a wooden
stick. 2. A monk who accepts or approves the acceptance of a "Padpronchan" with
a wooden stick. 3. A monk who wears or approves the wearing of a "Padpronchan"
with a wooden stick. 4. A monk who gives or approves the giving of a
"Padpronchan" with a wooden stick. 5. A monk who distributes or approves the
distribution of a "Padpronchan" with a wooden stick. 6. A monk who uses or
approves the use of a "Padpronchan" with a wooden stick. 7. A monk who keeps or
approves the keeping of a "Padpronchan" with a wooden stick for more than a
month and a half. 8. A monk who separates or approves the separation of a
"Padpronchan" with a wooden stick. (He incurs a minor monthly penance.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka daMDayukta pAdaproMchana graharaNa karane zrAdi kA prAyazcitta
1. je bhikkhU dArudaMDayaM pAyapu chaNaM karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  2. je
bhikkhU dArudaMDayaM pAyapu chaNaM geNhai, geNhataM vA sAijjai  /  3. je bhikkhU
dArudaMDayaM pAyapu chaNaM dharei, dharetaM vA sAijjai  /  4. je bhikkhU
dArudaMDayaM pAyapu chaNaM viyarai, viyataM vA sAijjai  /  5. je bhikkhU
dArudaMDayaM pAyapuM chaNaM paribhAei, paribhAeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  6. je bhikkhU
dArudaMDayaM pAyapu chaNaM paribhujai, paribhu jaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  7. je
bhikkhU dArudaMDayaM pAyapuM chaNaM paraM divaDDhAo mAsAo dharei, dhareMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  8. je bhikkhU dArudaMDayaM pAyapu chaNaM visuyAvei visuyAveMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  1. jo bhikSu kASThadaMDayukta "pAdaproMchana" banAtA hai yA banAne
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  2. jo bhikSu kASThadaMDayukta "pAdaproMchana"
grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  3. jo
bhikSu kASThadaMDayukta "pAdaproMchana" dhAraNa karatA hai yA dhAraNa karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai | 4. jo bhikSu kASThadaMDayukta "pAdaproMchana"
grahaNa karane kI AjJA detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  5. jo
bhikSu kASThadaMDayukta "pAdaproMchana" vitaraNa karatA hai yA vitaraNa karane
vAle kA zranumodana karatA hai  /  6. jo bhikSu kASThadaMDayukta "pAdaproMchana"
kA upayoga karatA hai yA upayoga karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  7. jo
bhikSu kASThadaMDayukta "pAdaproMchana" ko DeDha mAsa se adhika rakhatA hai yA
rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  8. jo bhikSu kASThadaMDayukta
"pAdaproMchana" ko pRthak karatA hai yA pRthak karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  ( use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  )

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [32] [Nishīthasūtra Vivēcana]  The first sūtra describes the creation of a
foot-cloth with a wooden stick, the second sūtra describes its acceptance, the
third sūtra describes its placement, the fourth sūtra describes the giving of
permission to accept it, the fifth sūtra describes its distribution, the sixth
sūtra describes its use, the seventh sūtra describes the keeping of a foot-cloth
with a wooden stick for more than a month and a half if there is a special
reason, and the eighth sūtra describes the atonement for removing the wooden
stick and separating it from the foot-cloth.  In the commentary and chūṇī of the
first sūtra, the word "rajoharan" is mentioned, which indicates the usefulness
of the foot-cloth with a wooden stick. This creates confusion, as "rajoharan" is
a medicinal term, which all ordained monks carry with them throughout their
lives. Therefore, what kind of "foot-cloth with a wooden stick (rajoharan)" is
there and what is its use? The solution to these questions is as follows:  1. A
foot-cloth is a piece of old or torn cloth, one hand long and wide. In Bṛha.
Udde. 1, sūtra 40, the names of these four implements are mentioned: cloth,
vessel, blanket, and foot-cloth. Similarly, these four names are found together
in many other Āgamas. This shows that the foot-cloth is as essential and useful
an implement as cloth, vessel, and blanket.  Even though it is an auxiliary
implement, the use of the foot-cloth was more prevalent in ancient times. In
Utt. A. 17, gāthā 7, it is mentioned that a Śramaṇa can sit on a foot-cloth
after worshipping it with rajoharan. Here, it is called "pāyakambla," and the
commentator has interpreted "pāyakambla" as "foot-cloth."  If a Śramaṇa
experiences a strong urge for a long bowel movement at night or in the evening,
and it is not possible for the sound of the recitation to reach the ground, then
he should use a foot-cloth when defecating in a secluded part of the shelter. If
he does not have his own foot-cloth at that time, he should take a foot-cloth
from his fellow Śramaṇa and use it. This is the rule in Ācha. Śru. 2, A. 10.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 32] [nizIthasUtra vivecana prathama sUtra meMkASThadaNDayukta pAdaproJchana
banAne kA, dvitIya sUtra meMuse grahaNa karane kA, tRtIya sUtra meM usake
rakhane kA, caturtha sUtra meM usake grahaNa karane kI AjJA dene kA, paMcama
sUtra meM usake vitaraNa karane kA, chaThe sUtra meM usake upayoga karane kA,
saptama sUtra meM kisI kAraNa vizeSa se kASTha daNDayukta pAdaproJchana rakhanA
par3e to Der3ha mAsa se adhika rakhane kA, aura - aSTama sUtra meM kASThadaNDa
ko kholakara pAdaproJchana se alaga karane kA prAyazcitta vidhAna hai| isa
sUtrASTaka meM se prathama sUtra ke bhASya evaM cUNi meM kASThadaNDayukta
pAdaproJchana kI upayogitA kA sUcaka "rajoharaNa" zabda aMkita hai  /  isase
bhrAnti utpanna hotI hai ki rajoharaNa "to audhika upadhi hai-jise sabhI
pravrajita bhikSu yAvajjIvana sAtha rakhate haiM, ataH "kASThadaNDayukta
pAdaproJchana (rajoharaNa)" kisa prakAra kA hotA hai aura usakA upayoga kyA hai
? ityAdi jijJAsAoM kA samAdhAna isa prakAra hai1. pAdaproMchana jIrNa yA phaTe
hue kambala kA eka hAtha lambA-caur3A khaNDa "pAdaproJchana" kahA jAtA hai  /
bRha0 udde0 1, sUtra 40 meM vastra, pAtra, kambala aura pAdaproJchana, ina cAra
upakaraNoM ke nAma haiN| isI prakAra anya AgamoM meM bhI aneka jagaha ye cAroM
nAma eka sAtha milate haiN| isase yaha jJAta hotA hai ki yaha pAdaproJchana bhI
vastra, pAtra aura kambala jitanA hI Avazyaka evaM upayogI upakaraNa hai|
aupagrahika upadhi hote hue bhI pAdapoMchana kA upayoga prAcIna kAla meM adhika
pracalita thaa| zramaNa rajoharaNa se pAdapoMchana ko pUjakara usapara baiTha
sakate haiM, aisA ullekha utta0 a0 17, gAthA 7 meM hai, yahA~ use "pAyakaMbala"
kahA gayA hai, TIkAkAra ne pAyakaMbala kA artha 'pAdapoMchana' kiyA hai| rAtri
meM yA vikAla meM zramaNa ko dIrgha zaMkA kA vega yadi prabala ho aura
pratilekhita uccAraprazravaNa bhUmi taka pahuMcanA zakya na ho to upAzraya ke
kisI ekAnta vibhAga meM mala visarjana karane ke samaya bhI pAdapoMchana kA
upayoga kare  /  yadi usa samaya apanA pAdapoMchana na ho to apane sAthI zramaNa
se pAdaproJchana lekara bhI usa kA upayoga kare, aisA AcA0 zru0 2, a0 10 meM
vidhAna hai|

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective] [33. Thus, wiping off the unrighteous dust from the feet
with a *padaponchhan*, cleaning the *padaponchhan* with a *rajoharan* and
sitting on it, and using the *padaponchhan* during defecation, etc., are all
prescribed in the scriptures. Therefore, *rajoharan* and *padaponchhan* are
different tools because *rajoharan* is used for cleaning, while *padaponchhan*
is used for wiping the feet, etc. Thus, both have different meanings and uses.
2. *Padaponchhan* with a wooden stick If it is not possible to clean a place in
the shelter with a *rajoharan*, and it is necessary to clean that place for some
special reason, then a wooden stick is tied in the middle of the *padaponchhan*
and used. This is clear from the *Brihatkalpa* U. 5. From the observation of the
commentary texts, it appears that the commentators have sometimes considered
*rajoharan* and *padaponchhan* to be the same tool, but the five types of
*rajoharan* mentioned in *Brihatkalpa* U. 2, Su. 30 and *Sthananga* A. 5, U. 3,
show that *padaponchhan* and *padaponchhan* with a wooden stick are different
tools. Difference between *rajoharan* and *padaponchhan* *Rajoharan* is not
considered *pratiharic*, but the *Nishith Uddeshak* 5, Su. 15-18, prescribes
penance for not returning the *pratiharic padaponchhan* at the appointed time,
which proves that it is *pratiharic*. A cloth is wrapped around the wooden stick
of the *rajoharan*, but a cloth is not wrapped around the wooden stick of the
*padaponchhan*. *Padaponchhan* is used not only for wiping the feet but also
during defecation, and sometimes one can even sit on it, but both these actions
are not possible with *rajoharan*. On the other hand, sitting on *rajoharan*,
sleeping on it, keeping it at the head, etc., are considered penance in *Nishith
Uddeshak* 5. *Nishith Uddeshak* 4, Sutra 30, prescribes penance for keeping
*rajoharan*, etc., on the path of the *nigranthi*’s arrival, but there is no
mention of *padaponchhan* there. *Nigranthi* can keep *padaponchhan* with a
wooden stick for a month and a half in case of unavoidable sinful situation, but
a *nigranthi* cannot keep *padaponchhan* with a wooden stick even in unavoidable
sinful situation according to her special *samachari*, but both have to keep
*rajoharan* with a wooden stick. Thus, the difference between *padaponchhan*,
*padaponchhan* with a wooden stick, and *rajoharan* is clear. In *Dasha* A. 4
and *Prashna* Shru. 2, A. 5, the tools of the *shramanas* are mentioned, and
they have separate names for *rajoharan* and *padaponchhan*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka] [33. isa prakAra pAdapoMchana se pairoM para lagI huI acitta
raja poMchanA, rajoharaNa se pAdapoMchana kA pramArjana kara usa para baiThanA-
tathA malavisarjana ke samaya pAdaproJchana kA upayoga karanA ityAdi kArya
AgamoM meM vihita haiM, ataH rajoharaNa aura pAdapoMchana bhinna-bhinna
upakaraNa haiM kyoMki rajoharaNa se to pramArjana hotA hai aura pAdapoMchana se
paira Adi poMche jAte haiM  /  isa prakAra donoM ke artha aura upayoga bhinna-
bhinna haiN| 2. kASThadaNDayukta pAdapoMchana rajoharaNa se upAzraya ke jisa
sthala kA pramArjana karanA zakya na ho aura usa sthala kA pramArjana karanA
kisI vizeSa kAraNa se anivArya ho to pAdapoMchana ke madhya meM kASTha daNDa
bAMdhakara usakA upayoga kiyA jAtA hai aisA bRhatkalpa u. 5 se spaSTa hotA hai||
vyAkhyA graMthoM ke avalokana se pratIta hotA hai ki vyAkhyAkAroM ne kahIM kahIM
rajoharaNa aura pAdapoMchana ko eka hI upakaraNa mAna liyA hai kintu bahatkalpa
u0 2, su0 30 tathA sthAnAMga a0 5, u03 meM kahe gae pAMca prakAra ke rajoharaNoM
se pAdapoMchana aura kASThadaNDayukta pAdapoMchana bhinna upakaraNa haiN|
rajoharaNa se prAdaproMchana kI bhinnatA rajoharaNa prAtihArika nahIM liyA jAtA
kintu nizItha udde0 5, sU0 15-18 meM prAtihArika pAdapoMchana nizcita samaya
para na lauTAne kA prAyazcitta vidhAna hone se usakA prAtihArika lenA siddha
hai| rajoharaNa ke kASThadaNDa para vastra lapeTA huaA rahatA hai aura
pAdapoMchana yukta kASThadaNDa para vastra lapeTA huA nahIM rahatA hai  /  /
pAdapoMchana kA upayoga paira poMchane ke atirikta malavisarjana ke samaya bhI
kiyA jAtA hai aura yadA kadA usa para baiTha bhI sakate haiM kintu ukta donoM
kArya rajoharaNa se honA sambhava nahIM haiM apitu rajoharaNa para baiThanA,
sonA, sirahAne rakhanA Adi kAryoM kA nizItha u0 5 meM prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai|
nizItha uddezaka 4 sUtra 30 meM nirgranthiyoM ke Agamana patha para rajoharaNa
Adi rakhane para prAyazcitta vidhAna hai kintu vahA~ pAdapoMchana kA kathana
nahIM hai| nigraMtha kASThadaNDayukta pAdapoMchana anivArya-pApavAdika sthiti
meM DeDha mAsa rakha sakatA hai aura nigraMthI apanI vizeSa samAcArI ke anusAra
anivArya ApavAdika sthiti meM bhI kASThadaMDayukta pAdapoMchana nahIM rakha
sakatI hai kintu kASThadaMDayukta rajoharaNa to donoM ko rakhanA anivArya hotA
hai| _ isa prakAra pAdapoMchana, kASThadaNDayukta pAdapoMchana aura rajoharaNa,
ina tonoM kA antara spaSTa hai| daza0 a0 4 meM tathA prazna0 zru0 2, a0 5 meM
zramaNoM ke upakaraNa kahe haiM, unameM rajoharaNa aura pAdapoMchana ke alaga
alaga nAma haiM  /

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[34] [Nishīthasūtra] The commentator of the Praśravya-karaṇa has stated in his
commentary on the above text that the number of instruments of the Śramaṇas,
which is said to be fourteen, is only possible if Rajo-haraṇa and Pāda-pochan
are considered as distinct. In Ācārya Śruti 2, Adhyāya 10, it is stated that if
a strong urge to defecate arises and one does not have their own Pāda-pochan,
they should request it from a fellow Śramaṇa. However, there is no such option
for Rajo-haraṇa, as even an Acela Jinakalpī Bhikṣu is required to have a Rajo-
haraṇa. These Āgama-pramaṇas prove that Rajo-haraṇa and Pāda-pochan are distinct
instruments, therefore, they should not be considered as one. Rajo-haraṇa is a
medicinal instrument made from a group of pods. Pāda-pochan is a piece of cloth
and is an auxiliary instrument. Pāda-pochan with a wooden stick is a piece of
cloth tied to a stick. In the seventh sūtra, the atonement for keeping a Pāda-
pochan with a wooden stick for more than a month and a half is mentioned. The
commentator, while explaining this topic, has stated that a new Pāda-pochan can
be kept for a month, an old Pāda-pochan can be kept for two months, and a worn-
out Pāda-pochan can be kept for a month and a half. After that, if necessary,
one should request another Pāda-pochan or make a new one. The reason for this is
that: 1. Pāda-pochan with a wooden stick can be used for 2-4 days in some places
or for a month and a half in an excellent area due to the nature of time. Later,
in many parts of the house, the propagation of small creatures like spiders does
not remain. Or 2. The cloth of the Pāda-pochan attached to the wooden stick
becomes very dirty after a month and a half due to moisture, etc., and the birth
of living beings takes place in it, or if the cloth is worn out, it becomes
unpleasant to look at, therefore, it can be removed and another cloth can be
attached. Therefore, the atonement for violating the limit of a month and a half
is mentioned in the sūtra. Before a month and a half, it can be removed and
changed whenever necessary. However, removing it without reason or removing it
daily leads to an increase in negligence. Therefore, in the eighth sūtra, the
atonement for removing and separating the cloth from the stick without reason is
mentioned. Pāda-pochan with a wooden stick should be tied in such a way that it
can be easily cleaned. Just as a cloth becomes easy to clean by sewing it
properly and tying it properly, similarly, Pāda-pochan tied properly with a
wooden stick is also easy to clean. There is no need to remove it without
reason. In Bhāṣya Gā. 1413, Pāda-pochan is called an auxiliary instrument,
therefore, it is appropriate to keep it and use it for as long as necessary in
the area and time. When it is no longer needed, it should be discarded or given
away. In summary, a Bhikṣu can keep a well-cleaned Pāda-pochan with a wooden
stick for a maximum of a month and a half if necessary. Even after that, if it
becomes necessary to keep it, it should be removed and changed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34] [nizIthasUtra prazravyAkaraNa ke TIkAkAra ne ukta pATha kI TIkA meM
zramaNoM ke upakaraNoM kI saMkhyA jo caudaha kahI hai vaha bhI rajoharaNa aura
pAdapoMchana ko bhinna-bhinna mAnane para hI hotI hai| AcA0 zru0 2, a0 10 meM
kahA hai mala kA prabala vega Ane para kisI ke pAsa svayaM kA pAdapoMchana na ho
to sAthI zramaNa se pAdapoMchana kI yAcanA kare  /  kintu rajoharaNa to svayaM
kA nahIM ho aisA vikalpa hI nahIM hotA hai, kyoMki acela jinakalpI bhikSu ko bhI
rajoharaNa rakhanA Avazyaka hai| ina AgamapramANoM se rajoharaNa aura
pAdapoMchana bhinna-bhinna upakaraNa siddha hote haiM, ataH donoM ko eka nahIM
mAnanA caahie| rajoharaNa phaliyoM ke samUha se banA huA audhika upakaraNa hai|
pAdapoMchana vastrakhaMDa hotA hai aura vaha aupagrahika upakaraNa hai|
kASThadaNDayukta pAdapoMchana DaMDe se bAMdhA huA vastrakhaMDa hai| jo sAtaveM
sUtra meM kASThadaNDa, yukta pAdapoMchana DeDha mAsa se adhika rakhane kA
prAyazcitta kahA hai, bhASyakAra ne isa viSaya ko spaSTa karate hae kahA hai ki
jo pAdapoMchana aparikarma vAlA ho arthAta nayA ho use : sakate haiM, jo
pAdapoMchana alpa parikarma vAlA (purAnA) ho use do mAsa taka rakhA jA sakatA
hai aura jo pAdapoMchana saparikarma (jIrNa) hai vaha DeDha mAsa taka rakhA jA
sakatA hai  /  usake bAda Avazyaka ho to anya pAdapoMchana kI yAcanA kara lenI
cAhie yA nayA banA lenA cAhie  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki-1. kASThadaNDayukta
pAdapoMchana kI kisI sthAna meM 2-4 dina yA utkRSTa kisI kSetra meM kAla-
svabhAva ke kAraNa DeDha mAsa taka upayogitA rahatI hai  /  bAda meM makAna ke
kaI bhAgoM meM makar3I Adi choTe-moTe jIvoM kA pracAra-prasAra nahIM rahatA hai
/  athavA 2. kASThadaNDa ke sAtha lagA huA pAdapoMchana kA vastra DeDha mAsa ke
bAda ati malina evaM namI Adi ke kAraNa usameM jIvotpati ho jAtI hai yA jIrNa
vastra ho to vaha duSpratilekhya ho jAtA hai, ataH use kholakara anya vastra
lagAyA jA sakatA hai  /  isIlie DeDha mAsa kI maryAdA kA ullaMghana karane kA
sUtra meM prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  DeDha mAsa ke pUrva kabhI bhI Avazyaka ho to
kholakara parivartana kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  kintu akAraNa kholane para yA
pratidina kholane para pramAdavRddhi hotI hai  /  isa kAraNa AThaveM sUtra meM
akAraNa daNDa se vastra ko kholane evaM alaga karane kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA
hai| kASThadaNDa ke pAdapoMchana ko aisI vidhi se bAMdhanA cAhie ki jisase usakI
pratilekhanA suvidhApUrvaka ho ske| jisa prakAra vastra ko vidhi-yukta sIne evaM
vidhiyukta gAMTha dene se vaha supratilekhya hotA hai usI prakAra kASThadaNDa ke
sAtha vidhi yukta bAMdhA gayA pAdapoMchana bhI supratilekhya hotA hai| use
akAraNa kholane kI AvazyakatA nahIM hotI hai| bhASya gA. 1413 meM pAdapoMchana
ko aupagrahika upakaraNa kahA hai ataH jisa kSetra meM aura jisa kAla meM jitane
samaya Avazyaka ho utane samaya taka rakhanA evaM upayoga meM lenA kalpatA hai
/  jaba AvazyakatA na rahe taba use chor3a denA yA paraTha denA cAhie  /
sArAMza yaha hai ki bhikSu Avazyaka hone para supratilekhya kASThadaNDayukta
pAdaproMchana utkRSTa Der3ha mAsa taka rakha sakatA hai| usake bAda bhI kabhI
rakhanA Avazyaka ho jAya to kholakara parivartana kara lenA caahiye|

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective: Penance for Smelling Perfumes etc.  9. A monk who smells a
fragrance that is not meant for him, or approves of someone who smells it,
(incurs a minor monthly penance).  ## Penance for Making Footpaths etc.  10. A
monk who makes a footpath, a crossing, or a support himself, or approves of
someone who does so. 11. A monk who makes a drain himself, or approves of
someone who does so. 12. A monk who makes a sprinkler or a sprinkler cover
himself, or approves of someone who does so. 13. A monk who makes a thread or
rope swing himself, or approves of someone who does so, (incurs a minor monthly
penance).  ## Discussion:  Although the actions mentioned in these sutras are
not suitable for a monk to perform, if they become necessary due to
circumstances, it is better to have a householder do them. This incurs a greater
penance than doing it oneself, because a monk can act more thoughtfully than a
householder. Therefore, the penance for minor violation of non-violence is also
considered minor. Having a householder do any work is considered misconduct for
a monk, as per the tenth chapter of the Acharanga Sutra. This is why it incurs a
greater penance.  The text mentions only two types of materials for making
swings, but the commentator mentions five types. For further details, refer to
the commentary.  It is clear from the Brihatkalpa Uddesaka 1, Sutra 18, and this
Sutra from the Nisitha, that it is permissible for monks and nuns to keep or use
swings when needed. However, if a pre-made swing is not available, making one
oneself from thread or rope is a minor monthly penance, and having a householder
make it is a major monthly penance. For further discussion, refer to the first
objective, Sutras 11-14.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka] itrAdi sUghane kA prAyazcitta 9. je bhikkhU acittapaiTTiyaM
gaMdha, jiMghA jighaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  9. jo bhikSu acitta padArtha (caMdana-
itrAdi) meM rahI huI sugaMdha ko sUghatA hai yA sUghane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai, (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) padamArga prAdi banAne kA
prAyazcitta 10. je bhikkhU padamaggaM vA, saMkamaM vA, avalaMbaNaM vA sayameva
karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  11. je bhikkhU dagavINiyaM sayameva karei,
kareMtaM vA saaijji|| 12. je bhikkhU sikkagaM vA, sikkagaNaMtagaM vA sayameva
karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  13. je bhikkhU sottiyaM vA, rajjuyaM vA cilimili
sayameva karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  10. jo bhikSu padamArga, saMkramaNamArga
yA avalaMbana kA sAdhana svayaM karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 11. jo bhikSu pAnI nikalane kI nAlI svayaM karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA 12. jo bhikSu chIMkA yA chIMke kA Dhakkana svayaM karatA hai yA
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 13. jo bhikSu sUta kI yA rassI kI cilamilI
kA nirmANa svayaM karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai, (use
laghumAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai ) _vivecana-ina sUtroM meM kahe gae kArya
yadyapi sAdhu ke karane yogya nahIM haiM phira bhI paristhitivaza ye kArya
karane Avazyaka hoM to gRhastha se karavAne para adhika prAyazcitta aura svayaM
karane para alpa prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai, kyoMki gRhastha kI apekSA svayaM
vivekapUrvaka kara sakatA hai  /  ataH alpa jIvavirAdhanA kA prAyazcitta bhI
alpa hI kahA gayA hai tathA gRhastha se koI bhI kArya karavAnA bhikSu ke liye
dazavai. a. 3 meM anAcAra kahA gayA hai| isa kAraNa se bhI yaha adhika
prAyazcitta yogya hai| sUtra pATha meM cilamilikA nirmANa yogya sAmagrI kevala
do prakAra kI kahI gaI hai kintu bhASyakAra ne pAMca prakAra kI sAmagrI se
nirmita cilamilikAeM kahI haiM  /  vizeSa jijJAsA vAle bhASya dekheN| bRhatkalpa
udde. 1 sU. 18 se tathA nizItha ke isa sUtra se yaha spaSTa jJAta hotA hai ki
sAdhusAdhviyoM ko jaba kabhI cilimilI kI AvazyakatA anubhava ho to unheM rakhanA
yA upayoga meM lenA kalpatA hai  /  kintu pUrvanirmita na milane para sUta se yA
DoriyoM se cilamilI kA svayaM nirmANa karanA laghumAsika prAyazcitta yogya kArya
hai aura gRhastha se nirmANa karavAnA gurumAsika prAyazcitta yogya kArya hai  /
inakA vivecana prathama uddezaka sUtra 11-14 meM dekheM  /

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīthসূত্র ### Penance for Performing Uttarakaraṇa  14. A monk who performs
the Uttarakaraṇa of a needle himself or approves of someone doing it. 15. A monk
who performs the Uttarakaraṇa of a razor himself or approves of someone doing
it. 16. A monk who performs the Uttarakaraṇa of nail clippers himself or
approves of someone doing it. 17. A monk who performs the Uttarakaraṇa of ear
cleaning himself or approves of someone doing it.  **Note:** The discussion of
the above sūtras can be found in the sūtras 15-18 of the first Uddesaka.  ###
Penance for the Excess of the First Mahāvat  18. A monk who speaks harsh words
or approves of someone speaking them.  **Discussion:** Harsh language uses harsh
words. Monks and nuns who follow the language code should not use such harsh
language because it is harmful.  If, due to circumstances, one becomes agitated,
one should try to remain silent while following the code of speech.  Words of
reproach, orders, instruction, and inspiration that are devoid of affection are
all considered "mild harsh words" according to the Chūrṇikāra. This penance is
for such harsh words.  **Example:**  1. A monk could not find his tool where he
had left it. He asked the monk sitting there, "I left my tool here, where did it
go?" The monk replied, "I don't know."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [nizIthasUtra uttarakaraNa karane kA prAyazcitta 14. je bhikkhU sUIe
uttarakaraNaM sayameva karei, kareMtaM vA saaijji| 15. je bhikkhU pippalagassa
uttarakaraNaM sayameva karei, kareMtaM vA saaijji| 16. je bhikkhU
NahaccheyaNagassa uttarakaraNaM sayameva karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  17. je
bhikkhU kaNNasohaNagassa uttarakaraNaM sayameva karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /
14. jo bhikSu sUI kA uttarakaraNa-sudhAra pariSkAra svayaM karatA hai yA karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 15. jo bhikSu kataraNI kA uttarakaraNa-sudhAra
pariSkAra svayaM karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodata karatA hai| 16. jo
bhikSu nakhachedanaka kA uttarakaraNa-sudhAra pariSkAra svayaM karatA hai yA
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 17. jo bhikSu karNazodhanaka kA
uttarakaraNa-sudhAra pariSkAra svayaM karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai, (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) . noTa-uparokta sUtroM kA
vivecana prathama uddezaka ke sUtra 15-18 meM dekheN| prathama mahAvata ke
aticAra kA prAyazcitta 18. je bhikkhU lahusagaM pharusaM vayai, vayaMta vA
sAijjai  /  18. jo bhikSu alpa kaThora vacana kahatA hai yA kahane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai, (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-paruSa
bhASA meM karkaza zabdoM kA prayoga hotA hai, bhASAsamiti kA pAlana karane vAle
sAdhu-sAdhvI aisI paruSa bhASA kA prayoga na kare kyoMki yaha bhASA sAvadha hotI
hai| paristhitivaza yadi Aveza A jAye to vacanagupti kA pAlana karate hue mauna
rakhane kA prayatna karanA caahie| sneha rahita zabda yukta upAlambha, Adeza,
zikSA tathA preraNA dene ke vacana, ye saba cUrNikAra ke anusAra 'alpa paruSa
vacana' haiM  /  yahA~ yaha prAyazcitta vidhAna aise hI paruSa vacanoM kA hai|
udAharaNa 1. eka sAdhu apanA upakaraNa jahA~ para rakhakara gayA thA use vaha
vahA~ nahIM milA, ataH usane vahA~ baiThe sAdhu se pUchA "yahA~ maiM apanA
upakaraNa rakha kara gayA thA, vaha kahA~ gayA?" vaha bolA "mujhe mAlUma nahIM
hai|"

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective  [37. The Sadhu said, "Hey, careless one! What are you doing
sleeping here? Tell the truth, who woke you up and where did they put you?" 2.
Seeing another Sadhu sitting on his seat, a Sadhu said, "Hey! Who is sitting
here? Get up from here, do you think this is your own seat?" 3. A sleeping Sadhu
was woken up by another Sadhu for some reason, and he said, "Who is this wicked
one who has disturbed my rest?" 4. A sick Sadhu said to another Sadhu, "How many
times have I told you - you are not bringing me medicine." He said to the sick
Sadhu, "Why are you crying out? Can't you be patient?" 5. A Ganapramukh asked
some Sadhus to bring a rare object, many searched but their search was
unsuccessful, only one's search was successful. One of the unsuccessful
searchers asked, "Who got the rare object?" The one who got it said, "I got it.
What did you get, your destiny is to wander, so keep wandering."  Using such
language causes pain to others, therefore harsh speech is subtle violence. It
leads to transgression in the first great vow. Even though it is harsh, it is
not harsh. Keshi Kumar Shraman had said some harsh words to King Pradesh, and
Rajimati had said some harsh words to Rahnemi, but those harsh words were not
harsh. Because the harsh language they spoke was spoken for the benefit of those
souls, therefore, in that situation, the harsh words spoken without any
attachment are not worthy of atonement.  Similarly, the harsh words spoken by
the Guru to teach the disciple are also not worthy of atonement.  The atonement
for harsh words spoken out of anger, pride, jealousy or hatred is mentioned in
the Sutra.  There is no atonement for harsh words spoken with affection and a
pure heart. Atonement for transgression of the second great vow  19. Je Bhikkhu
Lahusagan Musan Vayai, Vayantan Wa Saijjai. 19. A Bhikkhu who speaks a little
falsehood or approves of the one who speaks it (incurs a minor monthly
atonement).  Discussion - Words spoken without consideration or out of fear are
considered to be words of minor falsehood.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka] [37 sAdhu ne kahA-"are pramAdI ! tU yahA~ baiThA-baiThA kyA
nIMda le rahA hai ? saca batA kisane uThAyA aura kahA~ rkhaa|" 2. apane Asana
para kisI anya sAdhu ko baiThA dekhakara eka sAdhu ne kahA-"are ! yaha kauna
baiThA hai ? uTha yahA~ se, kyA ise apanA pAsana samajha rakhA hai|" 3. nIMda le
rahe kisI sAdhu ko kisI anya sAdhu ne kisI kAraNa se jagAyA to vaha bolA- _
"kauna hai yaha duSTa jisane mere ArAma meM bAdhA DAlI hai|" 4. kisI rugNa sAdhu
ne kisI anya sAdhu se kahA"maiM kitanI bAra kaha cukA hU~-tuma mere lie davAI
nahIM lA rahe ho|" usane rugNa sAdhu se kahA-"kyoM hAya hAya kara rahe ho !
thor3A dhairya nahIM rakha sakate ?" 5. kisI gaNapramukha ne kucha sAdhuoM se
eka durlabha vastu lAne ke lie kahA, kaIyoM ne gaveSaNA kI kintu unakI gaveSaNA
niSphala gaI, kevala eka kI gaveSaNA saphala rhii| niSphala gaveSakoM meM se
kisI eka ne pUchA-"kisa ko milI vaha durlabha vastu" ? jisako milI thI usane
kahA "mujhe milI hai| tumheM kyA mile, tumhAre bhAgya meM to bhaTakanA likhA hai
so bhaTakate phiro|" isa prakAra kI bhASA kA prayoga karane se dUsaroM ko duHkha
hotA hai, isaliye paruSa bhASaNa sUkSmahiMsA hai  /  jisase prathama mahAvrata
meM aticAra lagatA hai| parusa hote hue bhI paruSa nahIM kezIkumAra zramaNa ne
rAjA pradezI ko tathA rAjImati ne rahanemi ko jo kucha paruSa vAkya kahe the ve
paruSa (kaThora) hote hae bhI paruSa nahIM the| kyoMki unhoMne jo paruSa bhASA
kahI thI vaha una AtmAoM ke hita ke lie kahI thI ataH usa paristhiti meM kahe
gae kaSAyabhAva-rahita paruSa vacana prAyazcitta yogya nahIM hote haiN| isI
prakAra ziSya ko hitazikSA hetu kahe gae guru ke kaThora vacana bhI prAyazcitta
yogya nahIM hote haiN| krodha, mAna, IrSA yA dveSavaza kahe gae paruSa vacanoM
kA prAyazcitta sUtra meM kahA hai  /  AtmIyatA evaM pavitra hRdaya se kahe gaye
paruSa vacanoM kA prAyazcitta nahIM hai| dvitIya mahAvrata ke aticAra kA
prAyazcitta 19. je bhikkhU lahusagaM musaM vayai, vayaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  19. jo
bhikSu alpa mRSAvAda bolatA hai yA bolane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai (use
laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-binA vicAre yA bhaya se kahe gae
vacana alpa mRSAvAda ke vacana mAne gae haiM  /

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [38] [Nishīth Sūtra] 1. When asked about an action that has been done, to
say in fear, "I did not do it." When asked about an action that has not been
done, to say without thinking, "I did it." 2. When asked while sleeping, to say,
"I am not sleeping." 3. To claim another's property as one's own in the dark.
The prāyaścitta vidhāna for such mṛṣāvāda is in this sūtra. False words spoken
out of deceit or to harm someone are not to be understood here.   **Prāyaścitta
for the transgression of the third Mahāvrat** 20. The bhikṣu who accepts a small
amount of something not given, or approves of the one who accepts it, (receives
a laghumāsika prāyaścitta). **Discussion:** The bhikṣu should accept every
object only after requesting it. In Daśa. A. 6, it is said that "Even a blade of
grass (tṛṇa) for cleaning teeth should not be taken without permission." In
Vyav. U. 7, it is said that "Even to sit on the path, permission should be
taken." In Āchā. Śru. 2, A. 15, it is said that "The bhikṣu should always be
inclined to seek permission, otherwise, it is possible to accept something not
given." In Bhag. Ś. 16, U. 2, it is described that knowing the types of
avagraha, Śakrendra gives permission to all the bhikṣutrās of the Tīrthankara's
reign to wander in the Bharatakṣetra and to use ownerless objects and places.
Therefore, there is a news-based method of seeking permission for such objects
and places. For which, "Śakrendra's permission" or "Aṇujāṇaha Jassuggaho" is
uttered. In Āchā. Śru. 2, Pr. 7, it is said that "Even the equipment of one's
sambhogi sādhus should be accepted only after obtaining permission." In Sūy. Śru
1, A. 3, Praśna. Śru. 2, A. 3, Utt. A. 19 and A. 25, and many other Āgama texts,
there is a prohibition against accepting something not given.  **Prāyaścitta for
the transgression of the fourth Mahāvrat** 21. The bhikṣu who, with a small
amount of cold water or hot water, washes his hands, feet, ears, eyes, teeth,
head, face, or who encourages or allows someone to do so, or approves of the one
who encourages or allows it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 38] [nizIthasUtra 1. jo kArya kiyA hai usake sambandha meM pUchane para
bhayabhIta hokara kaha de-maiMne nahIM kiyaa| jo kArya nahIM kiyA hai usake
sambandha meM pUchane para binA vicAre kaha de-maiMne kiyA hai| 2. UMghate hue
ko pUchane para kaha de-maiM nahIM UMgha rahA huuN| 3. aMdhere meM kisI anya kI
vastu ko apanI vastu khnaa| isa prakAra ke mRSAvAda ke prAyazcittavidhAna isa
sUtra meM haiN| vaMcakavRtti se yA kisI kA ahita karane ke lie kahe gae asatya
vacanoM ko yahA~ nahIM samajhanA cAhiye  /  tRtIya mahAvrata ke aticAra kA
prAyazcitta 20. je bhikkhU lahusagaM adattaM Aiyai, AiyaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  20.
jo bhikSu alpa adatta-grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai, (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-bhikSu ko pratyeka
vastu yAcanA karake hI grahaNa karanI caahie| daza. a. 6 meM kahA hai ki "dA~ta
zodhana karane ke lie tinakA (tRNa) bhI AjJA lie binA .. nahIM lenA caahie|"
vyava. u. 7 meM kahA hai ki "mArga meM baiThanA ho to vahA~ bhI AjJA grahaNa
karanI caahie|" AcA. zru. 2, a. 15, meM kahA hai ki "bhikSu bAraMbAra (sadA)
AjJA lene kI vRtti vAlA honA cAhie anyathA kabhI adatta bhI grahaNa kiyA jAnA
saMbhava hai|" bhaga. za. 16, u. 2 meM varNana hai ki avagraha grahaNa ke
prakAroM ko jAnakara tIrthaMkara ke zAsana ke sampUrNa bhikSutroM ko
bharatakSetra meM vicarane kI aura svAmI rahita padArthoM va sthAnoM ke upayoga
meM lene kI zakrendra AjJA detA hai| isIlie aise padArthoM va sthaloM kI AjJA
grahaNa karane kI samAcArika vidhi hai  /  jisake lie "zakendra kI AjJA" athavA
"aNujANaha jassuggaho" aisA uccAraNa kiyA jAtA hai  /  AcA. zru. 2, pra. 7 meM
kahA hai-apane saMbhogI sAdhu ke upakaraNa bhI AjJA prApta kara ke hI grahaNa
karanA caahie| sUya. zru 1, a. 3, prazna. zru. 2, a. 3, utta. a. 19 tathA a. 25
Adi aneka Agama pAThoM meM adatta grahaNa karane kA niSedha hai  /  /  caturtha
mahAvrata ke atikramaNa kA prAyazcitta 21. je bhikkhU lahusaeNa sIodagaviyaDeNa
vA, usiNodagaviyaDeNa vA hatthANi vA, pAyANi vA, kaNNANi vA, acchINi vA, daMtANi
vA, NahANi vA, muhaM vA, uccholejja vA, padhovejja vA, uccholeMtaM vA
padhoveMtaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective] 21. A monk who washes his hands, feet, ears, eyes, teeth,
nails, or mouth with cold or hot water, or approves of someone who washes or is
being washed, (receives a minor monthly atonement.) Discussion- In Sutras
18-19-20, the atonement for the faults related to the first, second, and third
great vows are mentioned respectively. Further, in Sutras 22-23-24, the
atonement for the faults related to the fifth great vow is mentioned. Therefore,
in this Sutra, one should understand the atonement for the fault related to the
fourth great vow, because bathing is called 'Kamaanga' and a defilement of
celibacy, therefore, here the atonement for the tendency of bathing in the form
of 'Des-Snan' is mentioned. Washing hands up to the wrist after eating is not
considered worthy of atonement here, and cleaning feet, etc., that are covered
with dirt, feces, etc., is also considered permissible. These are general
reasons. Apart from this, tendencies of washing without a reason should be
considered prohibited. Those tendencies are called 'Bakushi' tendencies, and
their atonement should be understood from this Sutra. Atonement for wearing
whole leather 22. A monk who wears whole leather or approves of someone who
wears it, (receives a minor monthly atonement.) Discussion- The commentator has
mentioned four types of 'Kasina'. They are not considered permissible for a
monk. In the present Sutra, the atonement for 'Sakal-Kasina' is mentioned, which
means whole, complete leather. The remaining three types are: 1. 'Pramaan
Kasina'- shoes, etc. 2. 'Varna Kasina'- bright (beautiful colored) one of the
five colors. 3. 'Bandhan Kasina'- leather equipment for tying or protecting half
the foot, the whole foot, the shin, the knee, the fingers, etc. The atonement
for these three types of 'Kasina' leather is not the subject of this Sutra,
i.e., their atonement is major monthly, etc. The present objective is of minor
monthly atonement. Nevertheless, the commentator has described the types of
atonement for all the options in detail. Its complete scrutiny is very useful
for those who give atonement. One should also learn from the commentary about
which leather equipment can be used as auxiliary equipment in which exceptional
circumstances. Curious readers can understand more from the commentary. Here,
only the useful part of the subject mentioned in the Sutra is mentioned for
general curious readers.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka] 21. jo bhikSu alpa acitta zIta yA uSNa jala se hAtha, paira,
kAna, A~kha, dA~ta, nakha yA muha Adi ko prakSAlita karatA hai, dhotA hai yA
prakSAlana karane vAle kA yA dhone vAle kA anumodana karatA hai, (use
laghumAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-sUtra 18-19-20 meM kramazaH
prathama, dvitIya va tRtIya mahAvrata sambandhI doSoM kA prAyazcitta kahA hai|
Age ke sUtra 22-23-24 meM pA~caveM mahAvrata sambandhI doSoM kA prAyazcitta kahA
hai  /  ataH isa sUtra meM cauthe mahAvrata sambandhI doSa kA prAyazcitta
samajhanA cAhie kyoMki snAna ko 'kAmAMga' aura brahmacarya kA dUSaNa kahA gayA
hai ataH yahA~ deza-snAna rUpa pravRtti kA prAyazcitta hai  /  bhojana karane ke
bAda maNibandha paryaMta lipta hAthoM ko dhonA yahA~ prAyazcitta yogya nahIM hai
tathA mala-mUtrAdi ke lepa yukta pAMva Adi ko dhokara sApha karanA bhI kalpya
hai| ye sAmAnya kAraNa haiM  /  isake sivAya niSkAraNa prakSAlana kI pravRttiyA~
niSiddha samajhanI cAhie  /  ve pravRttiyA~ bAkuzI pravRttiyA~ kahI jAtI haiM,
unhIM kA isa sUtra se prAyazcitta samajhanA caahie| kRtsna carma dhAraNa kA
prAyazcitta 22. je bhikkhU kasiNAI cammAiM dharei, dharataM vA sAijjai  /  22.
jo bhikSu akhaNDa carma dhAraNa karatA hai yA dhAraNa karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai, (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana-bhASyakAra ne
"kasiNa ke cAra prakAra batAye haiN| ve sAdhu ko nahIM kalpate haiM, prastuta
sUtra meM" sakala-kasiNa kA prAyazcittavidhAna hai, jisakA artha akhaNDa pUrNa
carma hotA hai| zeSa tIna prakAra 1. pramANa "kasiNa"-jUtA Adi  /  2. varNa
"kasiNa"-ujjvala (sundara varNa vAlA) pA~coM varNa meM se kisI eka varNa yukta
/  3. baMdhaNa "kasiNa"-AdhA pA~va, pUrA pA~va, jaMghA, ghuTane, aMguliyA~ Adi
ko bA~dhane yA surakSA karane kA carmamaya upakaraNa  /  ina tIna prakAra ke
'kasiNa carmoM' kA prAyazcitta vidhAna karanA isa sUtra kA viSaya nahIM hai
arthAt inakA prAyazcitta gurumAsika Adi hai  /  prastuta uddezaka laghu mAsika
prAyazcitta kA hai| phira bhI bhASyakAra ne sabhI vikalpa kaha kara unake
prAyazcitta ke prakAroM kA bhI vistRta varNana kiyA hai| usakA pUrNa parizIlana
karanA prAyazcittadAtA gItArthoM ke lie bahuta upayogI hai| kisa ApavAdika
paristhiti meM aupagrahika upakaraNa rUpa meM kina-kina carma-upakaraNoM kA
upayoga kiyA jA sakatA hai, isakI jAnakArI bhI bhASya se karanI caahie| jijJAsu
pAThaka bhASya cUNi se adhika samajha sakate haiN| yahA~ sAmAnya jijJAsuoM ke
lie sUtrokta viSaya kA upayogI aMza hI aMkita kiyA hai|

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 4] **Penance for Wearing a *Krit-sna* Garment**  23. A monk who wears a
*Krit-sna* garment or approves of someone wearing it (incurs a minor monthly
penance).  **Discussion:**  The commentary on this sutra explains the meaning of
the term "Krit-sna" in detail and describes various types of penance. It states:
"There are four types of *Krit-sna* garments: 1. *Dravya-Krit-sna*, 2. *Kshetra-
Krit-sna*, 3. *Kala-Krit-sna*, 4. *Bhaava-Krit-sna*.  *Dravya-Krit-sna* - A
garment made from the finest, softest threads. *Kshetra-Krit-sna* - A garment
that is rare and valuable in a particular region. *Kala-Krit-sna* - A garment
that is rare and valuable in a particular time period. *Bhaava-Krit-sna* - A
garment that is beautiful in color or very valuable.  Each of these has three
sub-categories: inferior, medium, and superior. Thus, there are twelve types of
garments.  The penance for an inferior *Bhaava-Krit-sna* and an inferior, medium
*Dravya-Kshetra-Kala-Krit-sna* is as described in the sutras. The penance for a
superior *Dravya-Kshetra-Kala-Bhaava-Krit-sna* is a minor four-month penance.  A
garment worth less than eighteen rupees is considered an inferior *Bhaava-Krit-
sna*. Therefore, it is permissible for monks and nuns to accept garments worth
less than eighteen rupees.  [Nishita Sutra]  Garments worth between eighteen
rupees and one lakh rupees are considered valuable. A valuable garment is one
that is extremely beautiful in color and soft to the touch.  The commentary
describes the faults incurred by accepting the four types of *Krit-sna* garments
as follows:  "If these faults arise from the four types of *Krit-sna* garments,
then the acceptance of non-*Krit-sna* garments is considered better.  A garment
that is different, has a count, is made from a different material, is from a
different region, is from a different time period, is coarse, is of a dull
color, or is inferior in quality is considered non-*Krit-sna*."  Monks and nuns
should only accept *Krit-sna* garments. A *Dravya-Krit-sna* garment is one that
is free from flaws.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 4] kRtsna vastra dhAraNa kA prAyazcitta 23. je bhikkhU kasiNAraM vatthAiM
dharei, dhareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  23. jo bhikSu 'kRtsna' vastra dhAraNa karatA
hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai, ( use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA
hai | ) vivecana - isa sUtra ke bhASya meM 'kRtsna' zabda kA vistRta artha evaM
vividha prakAra ke prAyazcitta vidhAnoM kA kathana karake yaha kahA hai ki
suttanivAto kasiNe, cauvvidhe majjhiyammi vatthammI  /  jahaNe ya mollakasiNe,
taM sevaMtammi ANAdI  //  969  //  cAra prakAra ke kRtsna vastra 1.
dravyakRtsna, 2. kSetrakRtsna, 3. kAlakRtsna, 4. bhAvakRtsna  /  dravyakRtsna -
- zreSTha sukomala sUtroM se banA vastra, kSetrakRtsna - jisa kSetra meM jo
vastra bahumUlya hone se durlabha ho, kAlakRtsna - jisa kAla meM jo bahumUlya
vastra durlabha ho, bhAvakRtsna-varNa se sundara varNa vAlA athavA bahumUlya
vastra  /  pratyeka ke tIna-tIna prakAra haiM-jaghanya, madhyama, utkRSTa, yoM
bAraha prakAra ke vastra hote haiMjaghanya bhAvakRtsna kA tathA jaghanya,
madhyama dravya kSetra - kAla kRtsna kA sUtrokta prAyazcitta hai  /  utkRSTa
dravya-kSetra-kAla- bhAvakRtsna kA laghu caumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /
aThAraha rupaye se kama mUlya kA vastra jaghanya bhAvakRtsna hai, ataH aThAraha
rupaye se kama mUlya kA vastra sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko lenA kalpatA hai  /  [ nizItha
sUtra aThAraha rupaye se lekara eka lAkha rupaye taka ke mUlya ke sabhI vastra
bahumUlya mAne gae haiM  /  jo bahumUlya hotA hai vahI varNa se atyanta sundara
aura mRdu sparza vAlA hotA hai  /  cAroM prakAra ke kRtsna vastra grahaNa karane
para jo doSa lagate haiM, ve bhASyakAra ne isa prakAra kahe haiM-- kasiNe
cavvihammi jai dosA evamAiNo hoMti  /  uppajjate tamhA, akasiNagahaNaM tato
bhaNitaM  //  972  //  bhiNNaM, gaNaNAjuttaM ca davvato khetta kAlato u cittaM
/  mollalahu vaNNahINaM ca bhAvato taM aNuNNAtaM  //  973  //  cAra prakAra ke
akRtsna vastra sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko prakRtsna-vastra hI grahaNa karanA cAhie  /
dravya se kRtsna - phaliyA~ rahita vastra,

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective  **From the perspective of the field:**  clothes that are
readily available everywhere. **From the perspective of time:** clothes that are
suitable for everyone to wear. **From the perspective of feeling:** clothes that
are inexpensive and without attractive colors.  **Penance for wearing the same
clothes** 24. A monk who wears the same clothes or approves of someone wearing
the same clothes (incurs a minor monthly penance). [41]  **Discussion:** The
previous sutra spoke about the penance for taking and keeping whole clothes.
This sutra speaks about the penance for taking and keeping the same clothes.
Here, the meaning of "abhinna" is "unbroken". Taking and keeping unbroken
clothes leads to the following faults: 1. Not properly copying the clothes
according to the rules. 2. The clothes being too heavy. 3. The clothes being
stolen, etc. Therefore, monks and nuns should take the necessary clothes
according to the previously mentioned evidence.  **Penance for making utensils**
25. A monk who makes a clay pot, a wooden pot, or a metal pot himself or
approves of someone making them (incurs a minor monthly penance).
**Discussion:** See the first objective sutra 30 for the meaning of the words.
Monks and nuns should be engaged in their self-study, meditation, and all kinds
of worship at the appropriate time. They should not engage in any kind of
utensil making without a compelling reason, because making utensils is also a
kind of negligence. They should make utensils with discretion if absolutely
necessary. If they make them without discretion, they will incur the penance
mentioned in the sutra.  **Penance for making things like sticks, etc.** 26. A
monk who makes a stick, a club, a scraper, or a bamboo needle himself or
approves of someone making them (incurs a minor monthly penance).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddadezaka ] kSetra se prakRtsna - sarvatra sulabha vastra, kAla se
kRtsna - sarvajanabhogya vastra, bhAva se prakRtsna - alpamUlya vAlA aura
prAkarSaka varNa rahita vastra  /  abhinna vastra dhAraNa kA prAyazcitta 24. je
bhikkhU abhiNNAiM vatthAiM dharedda, dhareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  24. jo bhikSu
prabhinna vastra dhAraNa karatA hai yA dhAraNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai, ( use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai | ) [41] vivecana - pUrva sUtra meM "
kRtsna vastra lene kA tathA rakhane kA prAyazcitta kahA hai, isa sUtra meM
abhinna" vastra lene va rakhane kA prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  yahAM abhinna kA
artha 'akhaNDa' hai  /  prakhaNDa vastra lene se tathA rakhane se nimna doSa
hote haiM1. vidhipUrvaka vastra kI pratilekhanA na honA  /  2. adhika bhAra vAlA
vastra honA  /  3. vastra kA curAyA jAnA Adi  /  isalie sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko
prAgamokta pramANAnusAra Avazyaka vastra lene cAhiye  /  pAtra parikarma-
prAyazcitta 25. je bhikkhU lAuyapAyaM vA, dArupAyaM vA, maTTiyApAyaM vA,
sayameva parighaTTe i vA, saMThavei vA jamAvei vA parighaTTataM vA saMThavetaM
vA jamAveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  25. jo bhikSu tu bapAtra, kASThapAtra, mRttikApAtra
kA parighaTTana, saMThavaNa aura "jamAvaNa" svayaM karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai, ( use laghumAsika prAyazcitta prAtA hai | ) vivecana -
zabdArtha prAdi prathama uddezaka sUtra 30 meM dekheM  /  sAdhu-sAdhviyoM kA
svAdhyAya dhyAnAdi sabhI prakAra kI prArAdhanAeM yathAsamaya karane meM saMlagna
rahanA cAhie, anivArya paristhiti ke binA sabhI prakAra ke pAtraparikarma nahIM
karane cAhie, kyoMki parikarma karanA bhI eka prakAra kA pramAda hI hai  /
atyAvazyaka parikarma viveka pUrvaka karanA cAhie, aviveka se parikarma karane
para sUtrokta prAyazcitta prAtA hai | daNDa Adi ke parikarma karane kA
prAyazcitta 26. je bhikkhU daMDayaM vA, laTThiyaM vA, avalehaNiyaM vA,
veNusUiyaM vA, sayameva parighaTTa ei vA, saMThave vA, jamAve vA, parighaTTataM
vA, saMThaveMtaM vA jamAveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  26. jo bhikSu daNDa, lAThI,
avalehanikA aura vAMsa kI sUI kA "parighaTTaNa" "saMThavaNa" "jamAvaNa" svayaM
karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai, ( use laghumAsika prAyazcitta
AtA hai  / )

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [42] **Discussion:**  See the discussion of **Parighattan** etc. in **Uddeśa
1, Sūtra 40**.  **Other:**  **Gaveshita** - **Prāyaścitta** for accepting a
vessel obtained through another.  27. A monk who accepts a vessel obtained
through a **niyaga** (family member) or approves of one who accepts it. 28. A
monk who accepts a vessel obtained through a **para** (another Śrāvaka etc.) or
approves of one who accepts it. 29. A monk who accepts a vessel obtained through
a **vara** (chief person - head of a village, city, etc., a famous person, or a
Sarpanch with a title) or approves of one who accepts it. 30. A monk who accepts
a vessel obtained through a **balavan** (powerful person - strong in body or
authority) or approves of one who accepts it. 31. A monk who accepts a vessel
obtained through a **lava** (obtained by stating the benefits of the donation)
or approves of one who accepts it.  **Discussion:** 1. **Niyaga:**  By family
members. 2. **Para:**  By other Śrāvakas etc. 3. **Vara:**  By a chief person -
head of a village, city, etc., a famous person, or a Sarpanch with a title. 4.
**Balavan:**  By someone powerful in body or authority. 5. **Lava:**  Obtained
by stating the benefits of the donation.  **Sadhus and Sadhvis** should obtain
vessels etc. by their own **gaveshana** (investigation).  There is a possibility
of many faults arising from obtaining them through another's investigation.
Therefore, understand the donor's intention and investigate the vessel yourself
with a **pradīnavṛtti** (attitude of humility).  Accepting a vessel obtained
through another's investigation incurs the **prāyaścitta** mentioned in the
sūtra.  For detailed information on faults and **prāyaścitta**, see
**Niśīthacūrṇi**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 42 ] vivecana - parighaTTaNa Adi kA vivecana udde0 1 su0 40 meM dekheM  /  anya
- gaveSita - pAtra grahaNa kA prAyazcitta 27. je bhikkhU niyagagavesiyaM
paDiggahaM dharei, dhareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  28. je bhikkhU paragavesiyaM
paDiggahaM dharei, dhareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  29. je bhikkhU varagavesiyaM
paDiggahaM dharei, dhareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  30. je bhikkhU balagavesiyaM
paDiggahaM dharei, dhareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  31. je bhikkhU lavagavesiyaM
paDiggahaM dharei, dhareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  27. jo bhikSu svajana gaveSita pAtra
ko dhAraNa karatA hai yA dhAraNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  28. jo
bhikSu asvajana gaveSita pAtra ko dhAraNa karatA hai yA dhAraNa karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  29. jo bhikSu pradhAna puruSa dvArA gaveSita pAtra ko
dhAraNa karatA hai yA dhAraNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  jo bhikSu
balavAn gaveSita pAtra ko dhAraNa karatA hai yA dhAraNa karane vAle kA anumodana
30. karatA hai  /  [ nizIthasUtra 31. bhikSu lava gaveSita pAtra ko dhAraNa
karatA hai yA dhAraNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use laghumAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana- 1. niyaga - pArivArika sadasyoM ke dvArA  /
2. para - anya zrAvaka Adi ke dvArA  /  3. vara - pradhAna vyakti -grAma, nagara
Adi ke pramukha vyakti, prasiddha vyakti yA padavIprAptasarapaMca Adi ke dvArA
/  4. balavAn - zarIra se yA prabhutva se zaktisampanna ke dvArA  /  5. lava -
dAna kA phala Adi batAkara prApta kiyA gayA  /  sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko pAtra Adi
svayaM gaveSaNA karake prApta karanA cAhie, anya se gaveSaNA karavAkara ke
prApta karane meM aneka doSa lagane kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai  /  ataH dAtA kI
bhAvanA ko samajhakara pradInavRtti se svayaM vidhipUrvaka gaveSaNa kare  /
anya kI gaveSaNA kA pAtra grahaNa karane para sUtrokta prAyazcitta AtA hai  /
doSoM kI aura prAyazcittoM kI vistRta jAnakArI ke lie nizIthacUrNi dekheM  /

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[43 Second Uddeshak] Agrapinda Grahan Prayaschitta 32. The monk who regularly
consumes the Agrapinda or approves of its consumption. (He incurs a Laghu-masik
Prayaschitta.) Discussion - In the Dashavaikalik A. 3, the misconduct called
'Niyagpinda' has been mentioned. The Prayaschitta for the same has been
mentioned in this Sutra. The synonyms of Niyagpinda are: 1. Nitiya Aggrapinda,
2. Niya Aggrapinda, 3. Niyagg Pinda, 4. Niyaggpinda, 5. Niyagpinda. According to
the explanation, Niyagpinda is synonymous with 1. Nimantrapinda, 2.
Nikayanapinda, 3. Nityagra pinda, 4. Nitya Aggrapinda. All these mean - 'Food
given regularly with an invitation'. "You should regularly come to my house
every day to take alms." The householder who invites the monks in this way,
incurs a Laghu-masik Prayaschitta if he takes food from his house. Even if the
food is made for his personal use. This is the opinion of the Bhashya and the
Churnikar. The householder who regularly donates the best and delicious food
every day, whether he invites or not, incurs the Laghu-masik Prayaschitta
mentioned in the Sutra if he takes food from his house. The Churnikar also
interprets Agrapinda as Nitya Nimantrita pinda and explains its many
alternatives and the faults arising from it, saying, "Therefore, the pinda
should be avoided due to the invitation, etc. because of the fault of Nikayana
pinda." The monks who are in the state of Gottya Panag, avoid taking food for a
month, they take Niyaggpinda. The commentator has also clarified that it is not
a fault to take food from one house for two or four consecutive days in the
absence of invitation and regularity, by avoiding all the faults of research.
That is, it is not a misconduct called Niyagpinda. Danapinda Prayaschitta 33.
The monk who regularly consumes the pinda or approves of its consumption. 34.
The monk who regularly consumes the Avaddhabhag or approves of its consumption.
35. The monk who regularly consumes the Bhag or approves of its consumption. 36.
The monk who regularly consumes the Uvaddhabhag or approves of its consumption.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [43 dUsarA uddezaka] agrapiMDa grahaNa prAyazcitta 32. je bhikkhU nitiyaM
aggapiDaM bhujai bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  _32. jo bhikSu nitya-agra-piMDa-
pradhAnapiMDa arthAt nimantraNa dekara nitya diyA jAne vAlA AhAra bhogatA hai yA
bhogane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|)
vivecana-dazavaikAlika a. 3 meM 'niyAgapiMDa' nAmaka jo anAcAra kahA gayA hai
usI kA prAyazcitta isa sUtra meM kahA hai| niyAgapiMDa ke paryAyavAcI zabda 1.
nitiya aggapiMDa 2. niiya aggapiMDa, 3. niiyagga piMDa, 4. niyAggapiMDa, 5.
niyaagpiNdd| niyAgapiMDa ko vyAkhyA ke anusAra 1. nimantraNapiMDa, 2.
nikAyaNApiMDa 3. nityAgrapiMDa, 4. nitya agrapiMDa, ye saba niyAgapiMDa ke
samAnArthaka haiM  /  ina sabakA artha hai-'nitya niyamita nimantraNa pUrvaka
diyA jAne vAlA AhAra  / ' "Apa pratidina mere ghara para bhikSA lene ke lie
niyamita pdhaareN|" jo gRhastha sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko isa prakAra nimaMtraNa detA
hai usake yahA~ se AhAra lene para unheM laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai| bhale
hI vaha AhAra usake nijI upayoga ke lie hI banA ho  /  yaha bhASya aura
cUrNikAra kA abhipraay,hai| jisa gRhastha ke yahA~ pratidina niyamita rUpa se
zreSTha sarasa AhAra kA dAna diyA jAtA hai vaha gRhastha nimantraNa de yA na de
usake yahA~ se AhAra lene para bhI sUtrokta laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|
agrapiNDa kA bhI cUrNikAra nitya nimantritapiNDa artha karate haiM tathA usake
aneka vikalpa evaM usase hone vAle doSoM ko samajhAkara kahate haiM ki
"tasmAnimaMtraNAdi piMDo vartyaH kAraNe puNa nikAyaNA piDaM geNhejja"  /
gotatyo paNaga parihANie jAhe mAsalahuM patte tAhe NIyaggapiMDaM geNhaMti  //
_vyAkhyAkAra ne yaha bhI spaSTa kara diyA hai ki gaveSaNA ke sabhI doSa TAlakara
nimaMtraNa va niyamitatA ke abhAva meM do cAra dina lagAtAra bhI eka ghara se
AhAra lenA doSa nahIM hai  /  arthAt vaha niyAgapiMDa nAma kA anAcAra nahIM hai|
dAnapiMDa prAyazcitta 33. je bhikkhU nitiyaM piMDaM bhujai bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai
/  34. je bhikkhU nitiyaM-avaDDhabhAgaM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  35. je
bhikkhU nitiyaM bhAgaM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  36. je bhikkhU nitiyaM
uvaDDhabhAgaM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA saaijji|

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [44] [Nishith Sutra] 33. A monk who consumes or approves of the consumption
of food prepared in Jain households where the entire meal is donated daily,
incurs a minor monthly penance. 34. A monk who consumes or approves of the
consumption of food prepared in Jain households where half of the meal is
donated daily, incurs a minor monthly penance. 35. A monk who consumes or
approves of the consumption of food prepared in Jain households where one-third
of the meal is donated daily, incurs a minor monthly penance. 36. A monk who
consumes or approves of the consumption of food prepared in Jain households
where one-sixth of the meal is donated daily, incurs a minor monthly penance.
(He incurs a minor monthly penance.)  **Discussion:** The meaning of these
sutras is indicated by the commentary verse: "The entire meal, half of the meal,
one-third, and so on, the portion that is donated, that is the portion that is
considered excessive." [1009] Based on this verse, the meaning of the original
text is given here.  If a monk or nun accepts a special meal that is offered
daily with an invitation to specific individuals like priests, etc., they incur
a minor monthly penance. This rule is stated in the 32nd sutra, and these four
sutras mention accepting donations from households that donate daily.  If a monk
or nun accepts a regular meal that is offered to ordinary people, they incur a
minor monthly penance.  The Acharanga Sutra (Shru. 2, A. 1, U. 1) completely
prohibits monks and nuns from going to households where a portion of the food is
donated daily. These four penance sutras are related to that prohibition. The
text of the Acharanga Sutra is as follows:  "Do not go to those households where
they donate daily, where they donate the first portion daily, where they donate
a portion daily, where they donate an excessive portion daily, or to those
households that are constantly donating daily. Do not enter or exit those
households for food or for any other reason."  Going to such households creates
an obstacle to donations and incurs the fault of post-karma, because when the
food is prepared again, there is initial violence.  The food donated daily from
households that donate the entire meal is called "nitya-pinda." Monks and nuns
who accept such nitya-pinda incur the minor monthly penance mentioned in the
sutras.  The "nitya-pinda" mentioned in the Acharanga Sutra is different from
the "niyaga-pinda anachaar" mentioned in the Dashavaikalika Sutra. The Acharanga
Sutra and the Nishith Sutra refer to niyaga-pinda anachaar as "nitya agra-
pinda." Commentators have explained that niyaga-pinda and nitya agra-pinda have
the same meaning. In the current system, nitya-pinda is different from the fault
of daily donation and niyaga-pinda anachaar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 44] [nizIthasUtra 33. jina kuloM meM taiyAra kiyA gayA sampUrNa AhAra pratidina
dAna meM diyA jAtA hai, usa AhAra ko lAkara jo bhikSu bhogatA hai yA bhogane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  34. jina kuloM meM taiyAra kiye gaye prAhAra kA
AdhA bhAga pratidina dAna meM diyA jAtA hai, usa AhAra ko lAkara jo bhikSu
bhogatA hai yA bhogane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  35. jina kuloM meM
taiyAra kiye gaye AhAra kA tIsarA bhAga pratidina dAna meM diyA jAtA hai, usa
AhAra ko lAkara jo bhikSu bhogatA hai yA bhogane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
36. jina kuloM meM taiyAra kiye gaye AhAra kA chaThA bhAga pratidina dAna meM
diyA jAtA hai, usa AhAra ko lAkara jo bhikSu bhogatA hai yA bhogane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-ina sUtroM
ke zabdArtha kI sUcaka bhASya gAthApiMDo khalu bhattaTTho avaDDha piMDo tassa
jaM addhaM  /  bhAgo tibhAgamAdi, tassaddhamuvaDDhabhAgo ya  //  1009  //  isa
gAthA ke AdhAra se hI yahAM mUla pATha kA artha diyA gayA hai| purohitAdi
viziSTa vyaktiyoM ke lie nitya nimantraNapUrvaka diyA jAne vAlA viziSTa AhAra
yadi sAdhu-sAdhvI leM to unheM laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  yaha vidhAna
32 veM sUtra meM kiyA gayA hai aura ina cAroM sUtroM meM nitya dAna dene vAle
kuloM se dAna kA AhAra lene kA kathana hai| sAdhAraNa vyaktiyoM ke lie diyA jAne
vAlA sAdhAraNa AhAra yadi sAdhu-sAdhvI leM to unheM laghumAsika prAyazcitta pAtA
hai  /  AcArAMgasUtra zru. 2 a. 1 u. 1 meM pratidina bhojana kA kucha bhAga dAna
die jAne vAle kaloM meM sAdha-sAdhviyoM ko AhAra ke lie jAne kA sarvathA niSedha
hai aura yahA~ usI ke ye cAra prAyazcitta sUtra haiM  /  AcArAMga kA pATha isa
prakAra hai 'se jAiM puNa kulAiM jANejjA, imesu khalu kulesu nitie piMDe dijjai,
nitie aggapiMDe dijjai, nitie bhAe dijjai, nitie avaDDhabhAe dijjai,
tahappagArAI kulAI nitiyAiM nitiyovamANAI, No bhattAe vA pANAe vA, pavisejja vA
nikkhamejja vA'  /  aise kuloM meM AhAra ke lie jAne se dAna meM antarAya AtI
hai tathA pazcAtkarma doSa lagatA hai kyoMki dUsarI bAra AhAra banAyA jAne para
prArambhajA hiMsA hotI hai| pratidina pUrNa bhojana kA dAna karane vAle kuloM kA
AhAra 'nityapiMDa' kahA jAtA hai  /  isa prakAra kA nityapiNDa lene vAle sAdhu-
sAdhviyoM ko sUtrokta laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  isa prAcArAMgasUtra
vaNita "nitya-piMDa" se dazavaikAlikasUtra vaNita 'niyAgapiMDa anAcAra' bhinna
hai| niyAgapiMDa anAcAra ko AcArAMgasUtra tathA nizIthasUtra meM 'nitya
agrapiMDa' kahA gayA hai| vyAkhyAkAroM ne niyAgapiMDa aura nitya agrapiMDa ko
ekArthaka batAyA hai  /  , vartamAna praNAlI meM nityadAna piMDa doSa se tathA
niyAgapiMDa anAcAra se bhinna 'nityapiMDa

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective] [45 Anācāra' is considered. Its meaning is also
differentiated from the meaning of both, which has no ancient basis. Regarding
the interpretation of Niyagpiṇḍa, the commentators of Ācārāṅga, Daśavaikālika
and Niśīthasūtra are of one opinion. Yathāniyaga-pratinīyatam jan
nibandhakaraṇam, ṇ tu jan ahāsamavattīe diṇediṇe bhikṣāgahaṇam. - Daś. A. 3
Cūrṇi [Agastyasiṃhasūri] "Niyagam" nityāmantṛitasya piṇḍasya grahaṇam na tu
nityam anāmantṛitasya." - Daś. A. 3 Ṭīkā-Haribhadrīya "Āmantṛitasya piṇḍasya
grahaṇam." - Ācā. Śru. 2, A. 1 U. 1 Dīpikā The prevalent belief about Nitya-
piṇḍa is that "the Sadhu or Sadhvī who take food and water from a house today
should not take food and water from that house the next day, nor should their
Sambhogika Sadhu-Sadhvī." But the interpretation of the current Nitya-piṇḍa does
not seem to be consistent with the descriptions of 'Samūha-vihāra' and the
separate gocharī of each Saṅghāḍe mentioned in the Āgamas. In ancient times,
there used to be a group-vihāra of Śramaṇas with five hundred or a thousand
Sadhus. As mentioned in Rāyapasenī, the vihāra of Keśīkumāra Śramaṇa was
"Pañcahi aṇagārasaēhi saddi samparivude" with five hundred aṇagāras. In
Jñātādharmkathā A. 5, the vihāra of Thāvacchāputra aṇagāra was "Sahassēṇam
aṇagārēṇam saddi puvvāṇupudi caraamāṇe" with one thousand aṇagāras. If there are
even one hundred Saṅghāḍes with two Sadhus each who are taking food and water,
it is not possible for everyone to remember from which householder's house which
aṇagāra took food and water on which day. It is possible for another Saṅghāḍe to
take food and water from the same house the next day as the one from which a
Saṅghāḍe took food and water on a particular day. In fact, it is even possible
to take it on the same day, as mentioned in Antagaḍasūtra about Anīkasena etc.
In such a situation, according to the interpretation of the Ṭīkā of Daś. A. 3,
Gāthā. 2, regarding Niyagpiṇḍa, and the Cūrṇi and Bhāṣya of Niśītha Udd. 2,
regarding Nitya-agrapiṇḍa, "If a Sadhu takes food and water from the same house
every day after receiving an invitation with respect, then it is Niyagpiṇḍa. And
if they take food and water from the same house for several days without an
invitation, then it is not Niyagpiṇḍa." This interpretation is appropriate and
also consistent with the ancient group-vihāra, the separate gocharī of each
Saṅghāḍe, and the practice of inviting others to take food.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka] [45 anAcAra' mAnA jAtA hai| usakA artha bhI donoM ke artha se
bhinna kiyA jAtA hai, jisakA ki koI prAcIna AdhAra nahIM hai| niyAgapiMDa kI
vyAkhyA ke viSaya meM AcArAMga, dazavaikAlika tathA nizIthasUtra ke vyAkhyAkAra
eka mata haiM  /  yathAniyAga-pratiniyataM jaM nibaMdhakaraNaM, Na tu jaM
ahAsamAvattIe diNediNe bhikkhAgahaNaM  /  - daza. a. 3 cUrNi [agastyasiMhasUri]
"niyAgaM" nityAmaMtritasya piMDasya grahaNaM na tu nityaM anAmaMtritasya  / "  /
-daza. a. 3 TIkA-haribhadrIya "AmaMtritasya piMDasya grahaNam  / " -AcA. zru. 2,
a. 1 u. 1 dIpikA nityapiNDa kI pracalita mAnyatA yaha hai ki "aAja jisa ghara se
sAdhu yA sAdhviyA~ AhArapAnI leM usa ghara se dUsare dina ve aura unake
sAmbhogika sAdhu-sAdhvI AhAra pAnI na leM" kintu AgamoM ke varNakoM meM varNita
'samUha vihAra' tathA pratyeka saMghADe kI vibhakta gocarI ke varNanoM se bhI
vartamAna meM pracalita nityapiNDa kI vyAkhyA saMgata siddha nahIM hotii|
prAcIna kAla meM pAMca sau yA hajAra sAdhuoM ke sAtha zramaNoM kA samUha-vihAra
hotA thaa| yathA-rAyapaseNI meM varNita-kezIkumAra zramaNa kA vihAra "paMcahi
aNagArasaehi saddhi saMparivuDe" pAMca sau aNagAroM ke sAtha hotA thaa|
jJAtAdharmakathA a. 5 meM varNita thAvaccAputra aNagAra kA vihAra "sahasseNaM
aNagAreNaM saddhi puvvANupudi caramANe" eka hajAra aNagAroM ke sAtha hotA thaa|
unameM se do-do sAdhu ke sau saMghADe bhI yadi AhAra-pAnI karane vAle hoM to
kisa gRhastha ke ghara se kisa aNagAra ne kisa dina AhAra-pAnI liyA hai, yaha
sabakI smRti meM rahanA sambhava nahIM lgtaa| jisa dina jisa saMghADe ne jisa
ghara se prAhAra-pAnI liyA hai dUsare dina usI ghara se anya saMghADe dvArA
AhAra-pAnI lenA prAyaH sambhava hai balki aMtagaDasUtra vaNita anIkasena Adi ke
samAna usI dina bhI lenA sambhava rahatA hai  /  aisI sthiti meM daza. a. 3,
gAthA. 2 kI TIkA meM ukta niyAgapiNDa kI tathA nizItha udde. 2 meM ukta
nityaagrapiNDa kI cUNi evaM bhASya kI vyAkhyA ke anusAra-"aAdara pUrvaka
nimaMtraNa pAkara sAdhu yadi pratidina eka hI ghara se AhAra-pAnI le to
niyAgapiNDa hai aura nimaMtraNa binA kaI dina lagAtAra eka ghara se zaTa
gaveSaNA parvaka AhAra-pAnI le to niyAgapiNDa nahIM hai" yaha vyAkhyA hI
upayukta hai aura prAcIna kAla ke samUha vihAra tathA pratyeka saMghADe kI
vibhakta gocarI aura grahIta AhAra anya ko nimaMtraNa karane kI paddhati se bhI
ucita evaM saMgata hotI hai  /

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 46] [Nishith Sutra Nitya Niwas Prayashchitta 37. A monk who resides or
approves of the residence of another monk in a place for a period of one month
or four months, violating the prescribed limits, incurs a minor monthly penance.
Discussion - According to Praachana Shruti 2, Chapter 2, Verse 2, two actions
are considered as faults in relation to the prescribed limits: 1. Kalaatikrant
Kriya 2. Upasthana Kriya. Kalaatikrant Kriya If a monk does not move from a
place after staying there for one month (29 days) or does not move from a place
after staying there for four months (from Ashadh Purnima to Kartik Purnima),
then he incurs a fault called 'Kalaatikrant Kriya'. Upasthana Kriya If a monk
stays in a place for one month and then returns to the same place without
spending two months elsewhere, or if he stays in a place for four months and
then returns to the same place without spending eight months elsewhere, then he
incurs a fault called 'Upasthana Kriya'. The practice of both these actions is
considered as 'Nitya Vas', and the minor monthly penance mentioned in the sutras
is for this Nitya Vas. The fundamental reason for prohibiting Nitya Vas and
prescribing penance for it is that constant residence in one place without any
reason leads to excessive familiarity, which can lead to either contempt or
attachment, and the increase of attachment inevitably leads to a decline in
character. Therefore, it is essential to spend twice the time elsewhere after
one month or four months. According to the Dashavaikalik Dvitiya Chulika Gatha
11, the calculation of the period for not returning to a place where one has
stayed for four months is as follows: After the four months of the four-month
period, when eight months (twice the period) have passed, the four-month period
comes again, making it a total of three times the period. It is essential to
follow this prescribed limit. The Agamas do not provide any exceptions for
staying in a place after the prescribed period. However, the commentary verses
1021-1024 mention that Nitya Vas is considered faultless in situations like
illness, etc., and for the growth of knowledge and other virtues, and such a
monk is considered to be abiding by the teachings of the Jina and in restraint.
For a detailed explanation of Nitya Vas, refer to the commentary. Pre-Post
Sanstav Prayashchitta 38. A monk who praises the donor before or after receiving
alms, or approves of someone who does so, incurs a minor monthly penance. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46] [nizIthasUtra nitya nivAsa prAyazcitta 37. je bhikkhU "nitiyaM vAsaM" vasai
vasaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  37. jo bhikSu mAsakalpa va cAturmAsakalpa kI maryAdA ko
bhaMga karake nitya eka sthAna para rahatA hai yA rahane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  ( use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-kalpa-maryAdA ke
sambandha meM prAcA. zru. 2, a. 2, u. 2 ke anusAra do kriyAyeM doSarUpa kahI gaI
haiM-1. kAlAtikrAnta kriyA 2. upasthAna kriyaa| kAlAtikrAnta kriyA eka kSetra
meM eka mAsakalpa (29 dina) rahane ke bAda bhI vahAM se vihAra na kare tathA eka
kSetra meM cAturmAsakalpa (ASADha pUrNimA se kArtika pUrNimA taka) rahane ke
bAda bhI vahAM se vihAra na kare to 'kAlAtikrAnta kriyA' nAmaka doSa lagatA hai|
upasthAna kriyA eka kSetra meM eka mAsakalpa rahane ke bAda do mAsa anyatra
bitAye binA vahIM Akara rahe to tathA eka kSetra meM cAturmAsakalpa rahane ke
bAda ATha mAsa anyatra bitAye binA vahIM Akara rahe to 'upasthAna kriyA' nAmaka
doSa lagatA hai| ina donoM kriyAoM kA sevana karanA hI 'nityavAsa' mAnA gayA
hai, isI nityavAsa kA sUtrokta laghumAsa prAyazcitta hai| nityavAsa-niSedha evaM
usake prAyazcitta-vidhAna kA mUla hetu yaha hai ki akAraNa nirantara nityanivAsa
se atiparicaya hotA hai, usase avajJA yA anurAga donoM ho sakate haiM aura
rAgavRddhi se cAritra kI skhalanA honA anivArya hai| isalie mAsakalpa yA
cAturmAsakalpa se dugunA kAla anyatra vicaranA atyAvazyaka hai| dazavaikAlika
dvitIya cUlikA gAthA. 11 ke anusAra cAturmAsakalpa vAle kSetra meM eka varSa
paryanta punaH na jAne kI kAlagaNanA isa prakAra hai cAturmAsakalpa ke cAra
mAsa, usase dugunA ATha mAsa bItane para punaH cAturmAsakalpa A jAne se tigunA
kAla ho jAtA hai  /  isa kalpamaryAdA kA pAlana Avazyaka hai| AgamoM meM kalpa
uparAMta rahane kA kahIM bhI ApavAdika vidhAna upalabdha nahIM hai, kintu yahAM
bhASya gAthA 1021-1024 taka glAna avasthA Adi paristhitiyoM meM tathA jJAnAdi
guNoM kI vRddhi hetu nityavAsa ko doSa rahita kahA hai tathA usa bhikSu ko
jinAjJA evaM saMyama meM sthita mAnA hai| nityanivAsa kI vistRta vyAkhyA jAnane
ke lie bhASya dekheN| pUrva-pazcAt saMstava-prAyazcitta 38. je bhikkhU
puresaMthavaM vA, pacchAsaMthavaM vA karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  jo bhikSu
bhikSA lene ke pahale yA pIche dAtA kI prazaMsA karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai, (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|)

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective  [47. _ Pre-and Post-Praise Fault, is among the sixteen
faults of production. The monks and nuns who commit this fault have to perform a
minor penance.  Pre-Praise is the fault of praising the donor before accepting
alms. The intention behind this is that the monk thinks, "By praising him, he
will give better and more delicious food." Many monks and nuns, instead of
praising the donor, praise themselves. They impress the donor by telling them
about the miraculous glory of their caste, family, knowledge, meditation, or
austerity, so that they continue to receive respectful and sufficient food and
maintain a relationship. Post-Praise Praising the donor after accepting alms is
the fault of "Post-Praise." The intention behind this is that the monk thinks,
"When I come for alms again, I will receive food with devotion." Thus, praising
the donor for the sake of obtaining food is to corrupt the monk's selfless
attitude, therefore, do not praise the donor in this way. Explaining the nature,
method, and fruits of a worthy donation for the growth of religious rituals,
increasing religious awareness, and fostering devotion is not a fault but a
virtue. It leads to the propagation and spread of religion.  Pre-Alms Time
Family-Home Entry Penance 39. _ "A monk who is residing permanently, or who is
staying for a month, or who is traveling from village to village, or who has
arrived in a city, or who has met his former acquaintances, or who has met his
later acquaintances, enters the families before the alms time, or approves of
those who enter, (he incurs a minor monthly penance)." Explanation - If a
permanent resident monk, a month-long resident monk, or a monk traveling from
village to village has relatives or family members on his father's or mother's
side, or on his father-in-law's side, in a particular area, then he should not
go there for alms before the alms time. If he goes, he incurs a minor monthly
penance. Going there before the alms time and then again during the alms time
increases the possibility of incurring faults like "intentional," "bought," etc.
Similarly, if there are householders in that area who are attached to the monks
and nuns, then going there before the alms time and then again during the alms
time increases the possibility of incurring the aforementioned faults. If a monk
goes to the aforementioned families before the alms time, he has the intention
that "By going first, these people will prepare something special for me, and I
will go again during the alms time..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka] [47 _ vivecana-pUrva-pazcAtsaMstava doSa, utpAdana ke solaha
doSoM meM hai| isa doSa ko sevana karane vAle sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko laghumAsa kA
prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  pUrvasaMstavabhikSA grahaNa karane se pUrva bhikSAdAtA
kI prazaMsA karanA 'pUrvasaMstava' doSa hai  /  isake pIche sAdhu kA saMkalpa
yaha hotA hai ki 'prazaMsA karane se vaha zreSTha sarasa AhAra degA'  /  kaI
sAdhu-sAdhviyAM dAtA kI prazaMsA na karake apanI hI prazaMsA karate haiM  /  ve
apane jAti-kula kI, jJAna, dhyAna kI yA tapa Adi kI camatkAra bharI garimA
batAkara dAtA ko prabhAvita karate haiM jisase unheM sadA sammAnapUrvaka
yatheSTa AhAra milatA rahe aura paricaya banA rahe  /  pazcAtsaMstava bhikSA
grahaNa karane ke bAda dAtA kI prazaMsA karanA 'pazcAtsaMstava' doSa hai| aisA
karane meM sAdhu kA tAtparya yaha hotA hai ki 'bAda meM jaba kabhI bhikSA ke lie
AveM taba bhaktibhAva pUrvaka AhAra milatA rhe| isa prakAra AhAraprApti ke lie
dAtA kI prazaMsA karanA sAdhu kI nispRhavRtti ko dUSita karanA hai isalie dAtA
kI aisI prazaMsA na kreN| dhArmika saMskAra vRddhi hetu supAtra dAna kA svarUpa,
vidhi tathA usakA phala batAnA, dharmajAgRti bar3hAnA jisase bhaktibhAva bar3he
to vaha doSa rUpa nahIM hokara guNa rUpa hI hotA hai, usase to dharmaprabhAvanA
tathA nirjarA hotI hai  /  bhikSAkAlapUrva svajana-gRhapraveza prAyazcitta 39.
je bhikkhU samANe vA vasamANe vA gAmANugAmaM vA dUijjamANe pure saMthuyANi vA,
pacchA saMthayANi vA kulAI puvvAmeva bhikkhAyariyAe aNuppavisai aNupavisaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  39. jo bhikSu sthiravAsa rahA huA ho, mAsakalpa Adi rahA huA ho yA
grAmAnugrAma vihAra karate hue kahIM pahu~cA ho, vahAM para apane pUrva paricita
yA pazcAt paricita kuloM meM bhikSA kAla ke pUrva hI praveza karatA hai yA
praveza karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA
hai|) vivecana-jisa kSetra meM kisI sthiravAsI sthavira bhikSu ke, kisI
mAsakalpavAsI bhikSu ke yA kisI grAmAnugrAmavihArI bhikSu ke pitR-mAtR pakSa ke
athavA zvasura pakSa ke svajana parijana rahate hoM to use vahAM bhikSAkAla ke
pUrva bhikSA ke lie nahIM jAnA caahie| yadi jAve to laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA
hai| bhikSAkAla ke pUrva jAkara punaH bhikSAkAla meM jAne se auddezika, krIta
Adi doSoM ke lagane kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai| isI prakAra vahAM kahIM sAdhu-
sAdhviyoM ke rAgAnubandha vAle gRhastha rahate hoM to vahAM bhI bhikSAkAla ke
pUrva jAkara punaH bhikSAkAla meM jAne se pUrvokta doSa lagane kI sambhAvanA
rahatI hai| bhikSa bhikSAkAla ke pUrva ukta kuloM meM jAtA hai to usake mana meM
yaha saMkalpa rahatA hai ki "pahale jAne se ye loga mere lie kucha vizeSa
sAmagrI banAeMge aura maiM punaH bhikSAkAla meM jAkara

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[48] The injunction of the prescribed atonement is based on the fact that "I
will take sufficient food, etc., as per the Nishītha Sutra." This matter is
prohibited in Prācā. Śru. 2, A. 1, U. 9.  The atonement for going on alms-round,
etc., with other-than-Jain, etc., is as follows: 40. A monk who goes out or
enters a village or town for obtaining alms with an other-than-Jain or a
householder, or with a Parihārika or an Aparihārika, or who approves of such
going out or entering, incurs a minor monthly atonement. 41. A monk who goes out
or enters a vihāra-bhūmi or a viyāra-bhūmi with an other-than-Jain or a
householder, or with a Parihārika or an Aparihārika, or who approves of such
going out or entering, incurs a minor monthly atonement. 42. A monk who goes
from village to village with an other-than-Jain or a householder, or with a
Parihārika or an Aparihārika, or who approves of such going, incurs a minor
monthly atonement. Explanation: 1. Other-than-Jain - Ājīvika, Charaka,
Parivrājaka, Śākya, etc. 2. Householder - A householder who earns his livelihood
by begging, i.e., one who begs on certain days like Saturday, etc. 3. Parihārika
- One who is fully aware of the faults of investigation and does not commit
them. 4. Aparihārika - One who is aware of the faults of investigation but
commits them due to negligence. It is proper for a monk to be accompanied by
another monk who is fully aware of all the faults of investigation during the
alms-round. It is completely improper to be accompanied by any other person.
Keeping this in mind, a minor monthly atonement has been prescribed for going
with an other-than-Jain, a householder who earns his livelihood by begging, and
an Aparihārika of the same gender. Going with an other-than-Jain, etc., also
creates many doubts in the mind of the alms-giver. He thinks - Should I give
alms to the Śramaṇa Nirgrantha first or to those who have come with him? What
kind of food should I give to the Śramaṇa Nirgrantha and what kind of food
should I give to them? Why has the Śramaṇa Nirgrantha come with an other-than-
Jain, etc.? The Śramaṇa Nirgrantha is great himself. If he had come alone, would
I not have given him alms? Etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 48] [nizIthasUtra yatheSTa AhArAdi le AUMgA", isa tathya ko lakSya meM
rakhakara hI sUtrokta prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai tathA isa viSaya kA niSedha
prAcA. zru. 2, a. 1, u. 9 meM kiyA gayA hai  /  anyatIthika Adi ke sAtha
bhikSAcaryAdi-gamana-prAyazcitta 40. je bhikkhU aNNautthieNa vA gArathieNa vA
parihArio vA aparihArieNa saddhigAhAvaikulaM piMDavAyapaDiyAe aNupavisai,
aNupavisaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  41. je bhikkhU aNNautthieNa vA gAratthieNa vA
parihArio vA aparihArieNa saddhi bahiyA vihArabhUmi vA viyArabhUmi vA nikkhamai
vA pavisai vA NikkhamaMtaM vA pavisaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  42. je bhikkhU
aNNautthieNa vA gArathieNa vA parihArio vA aparihArieNa saddhi gAmANugAmaM
dUijjai, dUijjataM vA sAijjai  /  40. jo bhikSu anyatIthika yA gRhastha ke sAtha
tathA pArihArika sAdhu apArihArika sAdhu ke sAtha gAthApati kula meM AhAraprApti
ke liye niSkramaNa-praveza karatA hai yA niSkramaNa-praveza karane kA anumodana
karatA hai| 41. jo bhikSu anyatIthika yA gRhastha ke sAtha tathA pArihArika
sAdhu apArihArika sAdhu ke sAtha vihArabhUmi yA vicArabhUmi meM niSkramaNa-
praveza karatA hai yA niSkramaNa-praveza karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
42. jo bhikSu anyatIthika yA gRhastha ke sAtha tathA pArihArika sAdhu
apArihArika sAdhu ke sAtha grAmAnugrAma vihAra karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-1.
anyatIthika-AjIvaka, caraka parivrAjaka zAkya Adi  /  2. gRhastha-bhikSAjIvI
gRhastha arthAt zanivAra Adi nizcita dina bhikSA karane vaalaa| 3. pArihArika-
gaveSaNA-doSoM kA pUrNa jJAtA aura gaveSaNA ke doSa na lagAne vaalaa| 4.
apArihArika-gaveSaNA-doSoM kA jJAtA hote hue bhI pramAdavaza doSa lagAne vaalaa|
bhikSAkAla meM bhikSu ke sAtha usI bhikSu kA jAnA :ucita hai jo gaveSaNA ke
sabhI doSoM kA pUrNa jJAtA ho, anya vyaktiyoM kA sAtha meM jAnA sarvathA anucita
hai  /  isI prAzaya ko lakSya meM rakhakara yahA~ anyatIrthika ke sAtha,
bhikSAjIvI gRhastha ke sAtha tathA svaliMgI apArihArika ke sAtha jAne para
laghumAsika prAyazcitta vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| anyatIthika Adi ke sAtha jAne se
bhikSAdAtA ke mana meM bhI aneka vikalpa utpanna hote haiN| vaha socatA hai-
pahale zramaNa nirgrantha ko bhikSA dUM yA jinake sAtha ye Ae haiM inheM pahale
dUM? zramaNa nirgrantha ko kaisA AhAra dUM aura inheM kaisA pAhAra hU~?
anyatIthika Adi ke sAtha zramaNa nirgrantha kyoM Aye ? zramaNa nimrantha to
svayaM mahAn haiN| ye svayaM Ate to kyA maiM inheM bhikSA nahIM detA ? ityaadi|

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[49 Second Objective] The meaning of these three sutras mentioned above is that
a Shraman should not associate with an Anyatitthika, a householder, or an
Apariharaka with the aim of social interaction or public opinion. Being seen
with them everywhere creates many doubts in the minds of observers. Some people
think - "The conduct of Nirgranth Shramans is different from the conduct of
Anyatitthikas, etc., then why do they associate with them?" Some people think -
"These Shramans and these Anyatitthikas only appear different in their attire,
their inner nature seems to be the same, therefore they always stay together."
Apariharakas are often prone to faults, therefore their Shraman conduct is not
commendable in the general public, therefore associating with them also
tarnishes the reputation of the Pariharaka Shraman. For these reasons,
associating with Anyatitthikas, etc. is considered worthy of a Laghu-Masik
Pratikraman. The Pratikraman for drinking pleasant water and spitting out
unpleasant water 43. Je Bhikkhu Annayaran Panagajayam Padigahitta Puff Puff
Aiyai Kasayam Kasayam Parituvei, Pariventam Va Saizjai. 43. A monk who, having
taken various types of prasooka water, drinks the good and spits out the bad, or
approves of the one who spits it out. (He incurs Laghu-Masik Pratikraman.)
Discussion - Sadhus and Sadhvis use only the pure water obtained by avoiding all
the faults of Eshana. Such water is called Achitt Eshaniya or Prasooka in the
Agamas. In common language, it is also called Ghovan water, hot water, or
Prasooka water. Many types of such water are mentioned in Acharang, etc. When
taking water in the homes of householders, the takers should obtain complete
information about water with discretion. Such as "Has this water been Achitt so
far? That is, how long ago was it made? How is this water made? That is, with
the use of what substances is it made Achitt? Who made this water for what
purpose? Is it drinkable? Will drinking it quench my thirst? Is this water
suitable for my physical condition or not?" Such information is necessary with
discretion. Das. A5. U. 1, Ga. 81 states that if the water appears unfavorable
upon seeing it, then take a little water in your cupped hands to test it and put
it in your mouth and taste it. If it seems drinkable, then take more. If it is
not drinkable, then do not take it. If such water is accidentally consumed, then
it should be spit out.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [49 dUsarA uddezaka] Upara kahe gae ina tInoM sUtroM kA bhAva yaha hai ki
lokavyavahAra yA lokApavAda ko lakSya meM rakhakara zramaNa ko anyatIthika,
gRhastha yA apArihArika ke sAtha nahIM AnA-jAnA caahie| hara jagaha inake sAtha
jAne-mAne se dekhane vAloM ke mana meM kaI vikalpa utpanna hote haiM  /  kucha
loga socate haiM- "nirgrantha zramaNoM kI caryA aura anyatIthikAdi kI caryA
bhinna-bhinna hai phira bhI inake sAtha kyoM Ate-jAte haiM ?" kucha loga socate
haiM- "ye zramaNa aura ye anyatIrthI kevala veSa se bhinna-bhinna dikhAI dene
haiM, antaraMga to inakA samAna pratIta hotA hai ataeva ye sadA sAtha rahate
haiN|" apArihArika prAyaH doSasevI hotA hai isalie jana sAdhAraNa meM isakI
zramaNacaryA prasaMzanIya nahIM hotI ataH usake sAtha Ane jAne se pArihArika
zramaNa kI pratiSThA bhI dhUmila ho jAtI hai  /  ina kAraNoM se hI anyatIthikAdi
ke sAtha zramaNa kA AnA-jAnA ladhumAsika prAyazcitta yogya kahA hai  /  manojJa
jala pIne aura amanojJa jala paraThane kA prAyazcitta 43. je bhikkhU aNNayaraM
pANagajAyaM paDigAhittA puppha puppha Aiyai kasAyaM kasAyaM pariTuvei,
pariveMtaM vA saaijji| 43. jo bhikSu aneka prakAra ke prAsuka pAnI ko grahaNa
karake acchA-acchA pItA hai aura kharAba-kharAba paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-
sAdhu sAdhviyA~ eSaNA ke sabhI doSa TAlakara prApta kiye gae nirdoSa pAnI kA hI
upayoga karate haiM  /  AgamoM meM aise pAnI ko acitta eSaNIya yA prAsuka kahA
gayA hai| sAdhAraNa bhASA meM ghovana pAnI, garama pAnI, yA prAsuka pAnI bhI
kahate haiN|| AcArAMga Adi meM aise pAnI aneka prakAra ke kahe gae haiN|
gRhasthoM ke gharoM meM pAnI lete samaya lene vAloM ko viveka pUrvaka pAnI
sambandhI pUrI jAnakArI prApta karanI caahie| yathA"yaha pAnI aba taka acitta
huA yA nahIM ? arthAt kitane dera pahale kA banA huA hai ? yaha pAnI kisa
prakAra banA hai ? arthAt kina padArthoM ke prayoga se acitta banA hai ? yaha
pAnI kisane kisa kArya ke lie banAyA hai ? yaha pIne yogya hai ? isake pIne se
pyAsa zAnta hogI? yaha pAnI merI zArIrika sthiti ke anukUla hai yA nahIM ?"
ityAdi vivekapUrvaka jAnakArI Avazyaka hai| daza. a5. u. 1, gA. 81 meM batAyA
hai ki pAnI dekhane para kucha pratikUla lage to parakhane ke lie aMjali meM
thor3A sA pAnI le aura use muMha meM lekara cakhe, yadi pIne yogya pratIta ho to
aura leM le  /  pIne yogya na ho to na le  /  aisA pAnI bhUla se grahaNa ho jAya
to paraTha denA cAhie  /

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **[50]**  This Sutra contains these special words:  1.
**Puppham**, 2. **Kasayam**.  Water whose color, smell, taste, and touch are
pleasant is called **Puppham** here. Water whose color, smell, taste, and touch
are unpleasant is called **Kasayam** here. Water that is **Puppham** - sweet -
should be taken in a separate vessel, and water that is **Kasayam** should be
taken in a separate vessel.  Different types of water should be brought in
separate vessels and filtered.  First, the **Kasayam** water should be drunk,
and then the good water.  If one drinks **Manojnya** water due to attachment to
taste and rejects **Amanojnya** water, then **Laghumasik** atonement arises.
**[Nishith Sutra]**  Water that is produced from things like **Ker**,
**Karela**, **Methi**, **Besan**, etc., is **Kasayam**.  Milk, etc., and sweet
and fragrant substances, their water is **Manojnya**, and pure water and hot
water are also **Manojnya**.  A healthy Sadhu should have no aversion to
drinking various types of water. If one cannot drink **Kasayam** water, then
there is no atonement for rejecting it.  **Atonement for eating **Manojnya**
food and rejecting **Amanojnya** food**  **44. Je Bhikkhu Annyaram Bhoyanjayam
Padigahitta Subimb Subhi Bhujai, Dubbhi Dubbhi Paritthavei, Paritthavetam Va
Saizjai.**  **44. A monk who, having taken various types of food, eats the
pleasant and rejects the unpleasant, or approves of the rejection, (incurs
Laghumasik atonement).**  **Discussion:**  According to the previous Sutra, in
this Sutra also, the word 'Subbhi Dubbhi' is used in the Pragamik style.  In the
Churni, 'Subbhi' means 'Subham' and 'Dubbhi' means 'Abham'. In the Bhashya
Gatha:  **Vanean Ya Gandhen Ya, Rasena Phasena Jam Tu Uvvetan.** **Tam Bhoyanam
Tu Subbhi, Tavivirayam Bhave Dubbhi.** || 1112 ||  Food that is pleasant in
color, smell, taste, and touch should be understood as 'Subbhi', and food that
is opposite in color, smell, taste, and touch should be understood as 'Dubbhi'.
1. **Puppham** - Good color, smell, taste - Pleasant - Subimb - Shubham -
Bhaddagam - Manushnam. 2. **Kasayam** - Impure - Touch is opposite - Unpleasant
- Strong - Dubimb - Bad smell - Ashubham - Description.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 50 ] prastuta sUtra meM yo vizeSa zabda haiM 1. pupphaM, 2. kasAyaM  /  jisa
pAnI kA varNa, gaMdha, rasa aura sparza prazasta ho usakI yahA~ "puSpa" saMjJA
hai  /  jisa pAnI kA varNa, gaMdha, rasa aura sparza aprazasta ho usakI yahA~ "
kaSAya " saMjJA hai  /  jo pAnI puSpa - madhura hai use alaga pAtra meM lenA
cAhie aura jo kasailA ho use alaga lenA cAhie  /  aise vibhinna prakAra ke pAnI
alaga-alaga pAtroM meM lAnA aura chAnanA cAhie  /  pahale kasaile pAnI ko pInA
cAhie bAda meM acche pAnI ko  /  rasAsakti se manojJa pAnI pI lene para aura
amanojJa ko paraTha dene para laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  [ nizIthasUtra
jo pAnI kera, karelA, maithI, besana Adi se niSpanna ho vaha kasailA hotA hai  /
dUdha Adi susvAdu tathA sugandhI padArthoM kA pAnI manojJa hotA hai tathA
zuddhodaka evaM uSNodaka bhI manojJa hotA hai  /  svastha sAdhu ko aneka prakAra
ke prAsuka jala pIne meM aglAna bhAva rakhanA cAhie  /  prati kasailA pAnI na
piyA jA sake to use paraThane kA prAyazcitta nahIM hai manojJa bhojana khAne
aura amanojJa paraThane kA prAyazcitta 44. je bhikkhU aNNayaraM bhoyaNajAyaM
paDigAhittA subiMbha subhi bhujai, dubbhi dubbhi pariTThavei, pariTThavetaM vA
sAijjai  /  44 jo bhikSu vividha prakAra kA AhAra grahaNa karake sarasa- sarasa
khAtA hai aura nIrasa - nIrasa paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  ( use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  ) vivecana - pUrva
sUtra ke anusAra isa sUtra meM bhI prAgamika zailI se 'subbhi dubbhi' zabda kA
prayoga hai  /  cUrNi meM - subhi - subhaM, dubbhi - abhaM artha kiyA hai  /
bhASya gAthA meM - vaNeNa ya gaMdheNa ya, raseNa phAseNa jaM tu uvavetaM  /  taM
bhoyaNaM tu subbhi, tavvivarIyaM bhave dubbhi  /  /  1112  /  /  varNa, gaMdha,
rasa aura sparza se yukta prahAra ko 'subbhi' samajhanA aura isase viparIta
varNa, gaMdha, rasa, sparza se hIna AhAra ko 'dubbhi' samajhanA cAhie  /  1.
pupphaM- acchaM vaNNagaMdha rasopapetaM - pahANaM- subiMbha-zubhaM-- bhaddagaM -
maNuSNaM  /  2. kasAyaM-- kaluSaM -- sparzapratilomaM- appahANaM- bahalaM
--dubiMbha dugaMdha- prazubhaM - vivaraNa |

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective ] [ 51 This is how the use of synonyms should be understood.
The rest of the discussion is similar to Sutra 43. There is a possibility of
many faults related to eating due to attachment to food. There is no atonement
for eating food that is mixed with poison, enchanted, or contaminated. The
commentary explains the meaning of both [43-44] Sutras with examples. Remaining
eating - invitation atonement 45. If a monk takes delicious food, and it is
known that there is too much, and it cannot be eaten, but it will have to be
discarded, in such a situation, if there are any other fellow monks, companions,
like-minded, or those who have not been expelled from the community, nearby,
then he discards it without asking them or inviting them, or he approves of the
discarding. (He incurs a minor monthly atonement.) Discussion- 1. Delicious -
Here delicious means sweet and palatable food. 2. Food - All kinds of food. 3.
Leftover - Food left over after eating. 4. Nearby - In a nearby monastery or in
a monastery in the suburbs. 5. Fellow monks - Those who have the same knowledge
and conduct, or - those who have the same non-attachment, the same gender, and
the same appearance. 6. Companions - Those who exchange food and water with each
other. 7. Like-minded - Those who have the same conduct and have mutual
affection and goodwill, or those who have pure conduct - monks who have been
expelled from the community. 8. Those who have not been expelled from the
community - Those who have not received atonement. A monk who is skilled in
begging, who is knowledgeable about time, and who knows the amount of food for
himself and his fellow monks, is allowed to go begging. Even if the food is
delicious, sufficient, and given by a donor, he still eats according to the
needs of himself and his fellow monks, and in accordance with a restrained life,
he does not eat food, etc., out of greed, attachment, or lack of discernment,
even then, if some food is left over after eating, the method of using that food
is mentioned in this Sutra. He should take the leftover food to a nearby
monastery where there are fellow monks, companions, or like-minded monks, and
tell them that this is our leftover food, please use it. If they do not take it,
he should take it to a secluded place and discard it on the ground suitable for
discarding.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka ] [ 51 isa prakAra se paryAyavAcI zabdoM ke prayoga samajhanA
cAhiye  /  zeSa vivecana sUtra 43 ke samAna hai  /  AhAra kI prAsakti se prahAra
saMbaMdhI aneka doSa lagane kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai  /  viSamizrita,
abhimaMtrita aura doSayukta AhAra kA jJAna hone para paraThane kA prAyazcitta
nahIM hai| bhASya meM donoM [43-44 ] sUtroM kI vyAkhyA meM dRSTAMta dekara
sUtrokta bhAva samajhAye gaye haiM  /  avaziSTa prahAra - nimaMtraNa prAyazcitta
45. je bhikkhU maNuNNaM bhoyaNajAyaM paDigAhettA bahupariyAvaNNaM siyA, adUre
tattha sAhammiyA, saMbhoiyA, samaNuNNA, aparihAriyA saMtA parivasaMti, te
aNApucchiya aNAmaMtiya pariTThavei, pariTThavetaM vA sAijjai  /  45. manojJa
zrAhAra- grahaNa kara lene ke bAda jJAta ho jAe ki adhika hai, itanA nahIM khAyA
jA sakatA kintu paraThanA par3egA, aisI sthiti meM yadi anyatra samIpa meM hI
koI sAdharmika, saMbhogI, samanojJa yA parihArika sAdhu hoM to unako pUche binA
aura nimaMtrita kiye binA paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  ( use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana- 1. manojJa - yahAM
manojJa kA Azaya hai madhura tathA rucikara AhAra  /  2. bhoyaNajAyaM - sabhI
prakAra ke bhojya padArtha  /  3. bahupariyAvaNaM - prahAra karane ke bAda bacA
huA AhAra | 4. adUre - samIpa ke upAzraya meM athavA upanagara ke upAzraya meM
/  5. sAhammiyA - samAna zruta evaM cAritra dharma vAle athavA - samAna anagAra
dharma vAlesamAna liMga evaM samAna prarUpaNA vAle  /  6. saMbhoiyA - paraspara
AhAra- pAnI kA AdAna-pradAna karane vAle  /  7. samaNuNNA - samAna samAcArI vAle
evaM paraspara sneha sadbhAva vAle yA zuddha vyavahAra vAle- samAja se vahiSkRta
bhikSu  /  parihAriyA - jo prAyazcittaprApta na ho  /  8. jo bhikSu bhikSAcaryA
meM gaveSaNA - kuzala hotA hai, samayajJa hotA hai, svayaM tathA sAthI muni kI
AhAra kI mAtrA jAnane vAlA hotA hai-use hI gocarI jAne kI AjJA dI jAtI hai  /
manojJa prahAra ho, paryApta ho, dAtA ho, phira bhI vaha apanI aura sAthI
sAdhutroM kI AvazyakatA ke anusAra tathA saMyamI jIvana ke anukUla AhAra grahaNa
karatA hai, lobha, Asakti yA viveka se zrAhArAdi grahaNa nahIM karatA hai, to
bhI AhAra kara lene ke bAda kabhI kucha AhAra baca e to usa hAra kA upayoga
karane kI vidhi isa sUtra meM kahI gaI hai  /  samIpa ke kisI upAzraya meM jahAM
sAdharmika sAMbhogika yA samanojJa sAdhu hoM vahAM vaha bacA AhAra lekara jAveM
aura unheM kahe ki hamAre yaha bacA huA AhAra hai, Apa isakA upayoga kareM  /
yadi ve na leM to use ekAnta meM le jAkara prAsuka bhUmi para paraTha de  /

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishītha Sutra [52] If someone gives a gift without showing the remaining
offering to the monks present in the nearby monastery and without telling them
about its use, then they incur a minor monthly atonement.  The Sutra uses three
adjectives: sāmbhogika, etc., but sāmbhogika is the most prominent. Therefore,
if there is a prasāmbhogika monk nearby, then giving food, etc., as a gift
without inviting them does not incur the atonement mentioned in the Sutra.  ##
Shayyaatar Pind Atonement [46-47] A monk who accepts a Shayyaatar Pind or
approves of someone who accepts it, or a monk who consumes a Shayyaatar Pind or
approves of someone who consumes it, incurs a minor monthly atonement.
**Discussion:** The Āgamas and the commentary texts emphasize the prohibition of
Shayyaatar Pind due to the possibility of many faults. Here, to highlight this,
atonement is prescribed in these two Sutras, and its form is described in a
total of four Sutras (46-49). It is also mentioned in the fifth section of the
Thānāṅgasūtra, in the collected sayings of the Guru Atonement section.  There
are five synonyms for Shayyaadāta, due to differences in meaning or usage: 1.
Sāgārik, 2. Shayyaakar, 3. Shayyaadāta, 4. Shayyaadhar, 5. Shayyaatar.  The word
"Sāgārik" is used in the present Sutra. Other Āgamas also use the words
Shayyaatar and Sāgārik.  The commentary elaborates on this topic by dividing it
into nine doors, a brief introduction of which is as follows:  1. **Who is a
Shayyaatar?** "The Lord and those associated with the Lord are Shayyaatar." This
is also stated in the Ācārāṅgasūtra: "Je tattha īsare je tattha samahiṭṭhāe" -
one should stay with the permission of the owner of the house or the one who has
authority over the house, i.e., the administrator.  The Bṛhatkalpasūtra, verse
2, states that there can be many owners and many administrators. One should
consider the one who gives permission as Shayyaatar and not accept their
belongings as Shayyaatar Pind. Offerings, etc., can be taken from other
administrators or owners.  2. **Shayyaatar Pind is of 12 types:** 1. Asan
(food), 2. Pān (betel leaf), 3. Khādy (edible), 4. Svādy (tasty), 5. Vastr
(clothes), 6. Pātr (vessel), 7. Kamba (blanket), 8. Rajoharan (dustpan), 9. Sūī
(needle), 10. Kataraṇī (scissors), 11. Nakhaccheda (nail cutter), 12.
Karṇaśodhan (ear cleaner). Here, medicine and remedies are not considered
separately.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ nizItha sUtra samIpa ke upAzraya meM vidyamAna sAdhutroM ko bacA huA prahAra
dikhAye binA tathA upayoga meM ne kA kahe binA yadi koI paraTha de to use
laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  52 ] sUtra meM sAMbhogika Adi tIna vizeSaNa
prayukta haiM tathApi yahA~ sAMbhogika kI pramukhatA hai  /  ataH yadi nikaTa
meM prasAMbhogika sAdhu ho to unheM nimaMtraNa kiye binA azanAdi ke paraTha dene
para sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai  /  zayyAtara piMDa prAyazcitta 46. je
bhikkhU sAgAriryApiDaM giNhai, givhaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  47. je bhikkhU
sAgAriryApiDaM bhujai bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  46. jo bhikSu zayyAtara piMDa
grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  47. jo
bhikSu zayyAtarapiMDa bhogatA hai yA bhogane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (
use laghumAsika prAyazcitta prAtA hai | ) vivecana-AgamoM meM tathA
vyAkhyAgranthoM meM aneka doSoM kI sambhAvanA se zayyAtarapiMDa ke niSedha para
vizeSa bala diyA hai| yahAM bhI vizeSatA vyakta karane ke liye ina donoM sUtroM
meM prAyazcittavidhAna kiyA gayA hai aura kula 4 sUtroM (46-49) meM isake
prAyazcitta kA prarUpaNa kiyA gayA hai tathA ThANAMgasUtra ke pAMcaveM sthAna
meM guru prAyazcitta sthAna ke saMgrahIta boloM meM bhI isakA kathana hai  /
arthabheda yA prayogabheda se zayyAdAtA ke 5 paryAyavAcI zabda haiM, yathA - 1.
sAgArika, 2. zayyAkara, 3. zayyAdAtA, 4. zayyAdhara, 5. zayyAtara  /  prastuta
sUtra meM " sAgArika" zabda kA prayoga huA hai  /  anya AgamoM meM zayyAtara va
sAgArika zabda kA prayoga bhI huA hai  /  bhASya meM isa viSaya kA vibhAjana
nava dvAroM meM karake vistArapUrvaka kahA gayA hai, jinakA saMkSipta paricaya
isa prakAra hai 1. zayyAtara kauna hotA hai ? 'prabhu aura prabhusaMdiSTa,
zayyAtara hotA hai  /  isI Azaya kA kathana AcArAMgasUtra meM bhI hai yathA- 'je
tattha Isare je tattha samahiTThAe' jo makAna kA mAlika hai yA jisa ke adhikAra
meM makAna hai arthAt jo adhiSThAtA hai  /  usakI AjJA lekara ThaharanA cAhie  /
bRhatkalpasUtra u. 2 meM batAyA hai ki mAlika bhI aneka ho sakate haiM aura
adhiSThAtA bhI aneka ho sakate haiM  /  unameM se kisI eka kI AjJA lekara use
zayyAtara mAnanA aura usakI vastu ko zayyAtarapiMDa samajha kara grahaNa nahIM
karanA  /  anya adhiSThAtAoM yA mAlikoM ke yahAM se prahArAdi liye jA sakate
haiM  /  2. zayyAtarapiMDa 12 prakAra kA hotA hai 1. azana, 2. pAna, 3. khAdya,
4. svAdya, 5. vastra, 6. pAtra, 7. kaMbala, 8. rajoharaNa, 9. sUI, 10. kataraNI,
11. nakhachedanaka, 12. karNazodhanaka  /  yahAM auSadha bheSaja kI alaga
vivakSA nahIM kI

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective ] [ 53 It has gone. Therefore, by adding two more, there are
14 distinctions. In brief, these distinctions have two categories - 1. Food, 2.
Upadhi. By dividing food into 6 categories and Upadhi into eight categories,
there are a total of fourteen distinctions, and from one perspective, there are
12 types. Then, medicine, ointment, bed, and other things are not considered as
Shayatarapinda. 3. Grass, gravel, ash, Mallag (dried clay), bed, bedding,
pillow, and vessel coating, etc. are not called Shayatarapinda. From the
description, other equipment should also be considered as Shayatarapinda, such
as - glasses, pencils, pencil sharpeners, pens, etc., and books or furniture
used for reading should not be considered as Shayatarapinda. 4. If a member of
Shayatar comes to take the necessary Upadhi and food for taking initiation, then
that disciple, even though being a member of the Shayatar family, can be
accepted. When is Shayatar? - After taking initiation, when food and equipment
are kept in the shelter, it is called Shayatar, meaning that after that, its use
cannot be taken. After leaving the Shayatar's house, when should it be
considered Shayatar? 1. If one does not stay even for one night, but only for
some time during the day, then after leaving the house, it is not considered
Shayatar. 2. If one leaves the house after staying for one or many nights, then
until the end of the day, one should not take food, etc. from there, considering
it as Shayatar. 3. If the monks who eat together in one circle stay in many
houses, then all their owners should be considered Shayatar. If any monk brings
his own food, then they should consider their own Shayatar and the Acharya's
Shayatar as their own Shayatar. 4. Taking Shayatarapinda leads to the sin of
disobeying the command of Tirthankara Bhagwan. In worldly practice, it is
customary that guests who stay at someone's house eat there. If the Sadhu does
the same, then the possibility of Udgam, etc. sins becomes strong. The
Shayatar's spirit of giving may decrease. Because getting a bed is rare, doing
so can make the rarity of the bed even greater. 5. In exceptional circumstances,
it is necessary to observe the commentary to know the order of taking
Shayatarapinda, etc. Penance for not knowing the Shayatar's house 48. The monk
who does not know the Sagar family, does not ask, does not inquire, and goes to
the house of the Pindavaya-Padiya in the morning, and eats or does not eat, is
considered to have committed a sin.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka ] [ 53 gaI hai  /  ata: do aura jor3ane se 14 bheda hote haiM
/  ina bhedoM ke saMkSepa meM do bheda hote haiM - 1. AhAra, 2. upadhi  /  AhAra
ke 6 bheda aura upadhi ke ATha bheda karane se kula caudaha bheda hote haiM aura
eka apekSA se 12 prakAra hote haiM taba prauSadha bheSaja zayyAtarapiMDa nahIM
hote haiM  /  3. tRNa, Dagala, rAkha, mallaga (miTTI kA sikorA ), zayyA,
saMstAraka, pIDhA aura pAtralepAdi vastu zayyAtarapiMDa nahIM kahalAtI haiM  /
upalakSaNa se anya upakaraNoM ko bhI zayyAtarapiMDa samajha lenA cAhie, yathA -
cazmA, peMsila, peMsila chIlane kA sAdhana, pena Adi tathA par3hane ke liye
pustaka yA pharnIcara kI sAmagrI Adi ko zayyAtarapiMDa nahIM samajhanA cAhiye  /
4. zayyAtara kA koI sadasya dIkSA grahaNa karane ke liye Avazyaka upadhi evaM
AhAra lekara Ave to vaha ziSya zayyAtara ke parivAra kA hote hue bhI grahaNa
kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  zayyAtara kaba hotA hai- -prajJA grahaNa karane ke bAda
upAzraya meM AhAra, upakaraNa rakhane para zayyAtara kahalAtA hai arthAt usake
bAda usakA prahArAdi grahaNa nahIM kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  zayyAtara kA makAna
chor3ane ke bAda kaba taka zayyAtara samajhanA ? 1. yadi eka rAtri bhI nahIM
rahe kevala dina meM hI kucha samaya rahanA huA to makAna chor3ane ke bAda
zayyAtara nahIM rahatA  /  2. yadi eka yA aneka rAtri rahane ke bAda makAna
chor3A ho to grATha prahara taka use zayyAtara samajhakara usake yahAM se
AhArAdi nahIM lenA cAhiye  /  3. eka maMDala meM baiThakara AhAra karanevAle
zramaNa yadi aneka makAnoM meM Thahare hoM to unake sabhI mAlika zayyAtara
samajhane cAhie  /  yadi koI zramaNa svayaM kA lAyA huA prahAra karanevAle hoM
to ve apane zayyAtara ko aura AcArya ke zayyAtara ko apanA zayyAtara samajheM  /
4. zayyAtarapiMDa grahaNa karane se tIrthaMkara bhagavAn kI AjJAbhaMga kA doSa
lagatA hai, laukika vyavahAra meM yaha rUDha hai ki jisake ghara para atithi
Thaharate haiM ve usI ke yahAM kA bhojana karate haiM  /  sAdhu bhI yadi aisA
kare to udgama Adi doSoM kI saMbhAvanA dRDha ho jAtI hai  /  zayyAtara kI dAna
bhAvanA meM kamI A sakatI hai  /  kyoMki zayyA milanA vaise hI durlabha hotA hai
taba aisA karane se zayyA kI durlabhatA aura bhI bar3ha sakatI hai  /  5.
ApavAdika paristhiti meM kisa krama se zayyAtarapiMDa grahaNa karanA Adi zeSa
vivecana jAnane ke lie bhASya kA avalokana karanA Avazyaka hai  /  zayyAtara ke
ghara kI jAnakArI nahIM karane kA prAyazcitta 48. je bhikkhU sAgAriyakulaM
ajANiya apucchiya agavesiya puvvAmeva piMDavAya-paDiyAe aNupavisa aNupavitaM vA
sAijjai  /

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 54] [Nishith Sutra 48. A monk who enters a house for gochari without knowing
the house of the Shayatar, without asking or investigating, or approves of
someone entering (incurs a minor monthly penance). Discussion-1. Sagariyakulan-
Shayatar's house. 2. Ajanai-General information, i.e., without knowing the name
of the Shayatar and where his house is. 3. Apushchi-To inquire about specific
information, i.e., to inquire about the Shayatar's glory, to know whether there
is only one or many with the Shayatar's name, and to know the address of his
house. Without such inquiry. 4. Agveshi-Without seeing the house directly,
without seeing the Shayatar directly, without identifying him by age, caste,
marks, etc. In a familiar area, information about the name, lineage, and house
can be obtained simply by asking, but in an unfamiliar area, it is necessary to
see the person directly, observe his age, caste, appearance, and the surrounding
area of the house, and keep it in memory. Only then can a monk go to take
gochari. Word meanings-Gahavaai-House owner, Gahavaai-Kulan-House of a
householder with wife, children, etc., Pind-Food, etc., Pindvayapdiae-The wisdom
of receiving the food given by the householder in the vessel. The penance for
receiving food from the Shayatar. A monk who, with the help of the Shayatar,
asks for or begs for food, drink, edibles, or delicacies, or approves of someone
asking for them (incurs a minor monthly penance). Discussion-This section
describes the penance for obtaining food with the help of the Shayatar. That is,
taking the Shayatar along to show the house for gochari. In houses, saying "This
cloth is cheap, this item is cheap," giving it yourself, or inspiring someone to
give it at the request of a monk, etc., this is the penance for obtaining food
through the brokerage of the Shayatar. Sutras No. 45-46-47-48 are all related to
the Shayatar. The commentary and commentary mention only three sutras. It seems
that one sutra of "Ginhhai" has come into the original text due to a clerical
error. It does not seem to be particularly necessary according to the subject
matter. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 54] [nizIthasUtra 48. jo bhikSu zayyAtara kA ghara jAne binA; pUche binA yA
gaveSaNA kiye binA hI gocarI ke lie gharoM meM praveza karatA hai yA praveza
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|)
vivecana-1. sAgAriyakulaM-zayyAtara kA ghara  /  2. ajANiya-sAdhAraNa jAnakArI
arthAt zayyAtara kA nAma kyA hai tathA usakA ghara kidhara hai aisA jAne binaa|
3. apucchiya-vizeSa jAnakArI karanA arthAt zayyAtara ke gaurava kI jAnakArI
karanA, zayyAtara ke nAma vAlA eka hI hai yA aneka hai, yaha jAnanA aura usake
ghara kA patA jAnanA pRcchanA hai| aisI pUchatAcha kiye binaa| 4. agavesiya-
ghara ko pratyakSa dekhe binA, zayyAtara ko bhI pratyakSa dekhe binA use vaya,
varNa, cihna Adi se pahicAne binaa| paricita kSetra meM nAma gotra va ghara kI
jAnakArI kevala pUchane se ho jAtI hai kintu aparicita kSetra meM vyakti ko
pratyakSa dekhakara usake vaya, varNa, AkRti ko tathA makAna ke AsapAsa kA
sthala dekhakara use smRti meM rakhanA Avazyaka hotA hai, usake bAda hI koI bhI
bhikSu gocarI lene jA sakatA hai| zabdArtha-gAhAvaI-gRhasvAmI, gAhAvai-kulaM-
patnI putra Adi se yukta gRhastha kA ghara, piMDa-azanAdi, piMDavAyapaDiyAe--
gRhiNA dIyamANasya piMDasya pAtre pAtaH anayA 'prajJayA' arthAt gRhastha ke
dvArA diye jAne vAle AhAra ko pAtra meM grahaNa karane kI buddhi se| zayyAtara
ko nezrAya se pAhAragrahaNa kA prAyazcitta je bhikkhU sAgAriyaNIsAe asaNaM vA
pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA obhAsiya-obhAsiya jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA saaijji| 49.
jo bhikSu zayyAtara kI nezrAya se azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya mAMga-mAMga kara
yAcanA karatA hai yA yAcanA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use
laghumAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-isa satra meM zayyAtara ke sahayoga
se grAhAra prApta karane kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  arthAta zayyAtara ko
gocarI meM ghara batAne ke lie sAtha le jAnA. gharoM meM 'yaha vasta baharAyo,
yaha vastu baharAgo' isa taraha bolanA, khuda ke hAtha se baharAnA yA sAdhu ke
mAMgane para preraNA karake dilavAnA ityAdi zayyAtara kI dalAlI se AhAra prApta
karane kA yaha prAyazcittavidhAna hai| sUtra naM. 45-46-47-48 ye cAra sUtra
zayyAtara sambandhI haiN| cUNi tathA bhASya meM tIna sUtroM kA hI kathana hai  /
saMbhavataH "giNhai" kA eka sUtra lipi pramAda se mUla pATha meM A gayA lagatA
hai  /  viSayAnusAra isakI vizeSa AvazyakatA bhI pratIta nahIM hotI hai  /

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective] [55 The meaning of all three sutras is that one should not
go to a place where a bed-maker resides without first obtaining permission from
the owner of the place, nor should one accept food from the bed-maker or take
food from his hand, nor should one offer food to the bed-maker. If the fourth
sutra is accepted, then even acceptance becomes subject to atonement. Atonement
for the lapse of time of the bed-maker 50. If a monk keeps a bed-maker who has
been accepted for the remaining time, i.e., for the month, after Paryushana
(Samvatsari), or approves of the one who keeps him. 51. If a monk keeps a bed-
maker who has been accepted for the rainy season (Chaturmas) for more than ten
days after the rainy season, or approves of the one who keeps him. (He incurs a
minor monthly atonement.) Discussion- If a monk has accepted a house or a mat,
etc., in a particular area for a few days in the month of Ashadha, and due to
some reason, he has to stay in the same area for the rainy season, then he
should obtain permission again or return it to the owner. If he does not obtain
permission again or return it even by Samvatsari, then he incurs a minor monthly
atonement. Similarly, if a bed-maker has been accepted for the rainy season, and
due to some physical reason, he cannot leave the place after the rainy season,
then he should obtain permission again or return the bed-maker within ten days.
In many places in different Agamas, the instruction of "minor upadhi" is found.
Therefore, as far as possible, one should not accept mats, grass, etc., without
extreme necessity related to the body or restraint, because bringing, giving,
copying, cleaning, etc., lead to the loss of self-study. If necessary, mats,
grass, etc., can be accepted at any time during the remaining time or during the
rainy season. There is no atonement for it, but the period for which they are
accepted should not be violated, and permission should be obtained again before
the time specified in the sutra. In the Bhashya Churni, the necessary reasons
for accepting mats, grass, etc., have been stated. Their summary is as follows.
The ground of the house is wet or damp, which may cause the upadhi to
deteriorate and the body to become unhealthy. There is a conflict with ants,
termites, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka] [55 tInoM sUtroM kA bhAvArtha yaha ki zayyAtara ko tathA usake
ghara ko jAne binA khuda kI mukhyatA se gocarI nahIM jAnA, zayyAtara kI dalAlI
se AhAra prApta nahIM karanA athavA usake hAtha se AhArAdi nahIM lenA tathA
zayyAtara piMDa nahIM bhognaa| cauthA sUtra mAnane para grahaNa bhI prAyazcitta
yogya hotA hai| zayyA-saMstAraka ke kAlAtikramaNa kA prAyazcitta 50. je bhikkhU
uubaddhiyaM sejjAsaMthArayaM paraM pajjosavaNAo uvAiNAvei, uvAiNAveMtaM vA
saaijj| 51. je bhikkhU vAsAvAsiyaM sejjAsaMthArayaM paraM dasa rAyakappAo
uvAiNAvei, uvAiNAvetaM vA saaijji| 50. jo bhikSu zeSa kAla arthAt mAsakalpa ke
liye grahaNa kiye hue zayyA-saMstAraka ko paryuSaNa (saMvatsarI) ke bAda rakhatA
hai yA rakhanevAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 51. jo bhikSu varSAvAsa caumAse ke
liye grahaNa kiye huye zayyA-saMstAraka ko caumAse ke bAda dasa dina se adhika
rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-ASADha mahIne meM kucha dina rahane ke liye jisa
kSetra meM sAdhu ne makAna yA pATa Adi grahaNa kiye hoM aura kAraNavaza use usI
kSetra meM cAtarmAsa ke nimitta rahanA paDe taM liye unakI punaH AjJA prApta
karanI cAhiye yA mAlika ko lauTA dene cAhiye  /  yadi saMvatsarI taka bhI punaH
unakI AjJA prApta na kare aura na lauTAve to use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA
hai| isI taraha cAturmAsa ke liye zayyA-saMstAraka grahaNa kiye hoM aura
cAturmAsa ke bAda kisI zArIrika kAraNa se vihAra na ho sake to dasa dina ke
andara una zayyA-saMstArakoM kI puna: prAjJA prApta kara lenI cAhiye yA lauTA
denA cAhiye  /  vibhinna AgamoM ke aneka sthaloM meM "alpa upadhi' kA nirdeza
milatA hai| ataH yathAzakya zarIra yA saMyama sambandhI atyanta AvazyakatA ke
binA pATa-ghAsa Adi grahaNa nahIM karane cAhiye, kyoMki lAnA, denA, pratilekhana
karanA, pramArjana karanA Adi kAryoM se svAdhyAya kI hAni hotI hai  /
AvazyakatA hone para zeSa kAla meM yA cAturmAsa meM kabhI bhI pATa, ghAsa Adi
upakaraNa grahaNa kiye jA sakate haiM  /  usakA koI prAyazcitta nahIM hai kintu
jitanI avadhi ke liye grahaNa hoM usa avadhi kA ullaMghana nahIM honA cAhiye
tathA sUtranirdiSTa samaya ke pUrva punaH prAjJA prApta kara lenI cAhiye  /
bhASya cUrNi meM pATa, ghAsa Adi grahaNa karane ke Avazyaka kAraNa kahe haiM  /
unakA sArAMza isa prakAra hai| makAna kI bhUmi gIlI yA namI yukta ho, jisase ki
upadhi ke bigar3ane kI aura zarIra ke asvastha hone kI saMbhAvanA ho  /
cITiyAM, kuthuve Adi jIvoM kI virAdhanA hotI ho|

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīth Sūtra  If there is an abundance of Kanakhjūra (a type of insect),
rats, scorpions, snakes, etc., one should definitely take Pāt-ghās (a type of
grass) and other such things. Otherwise, there may be Jīva-virādhanā (killing of
living beings), Samyama-virādhanā (violation of vows), and Ātma-virādhanā
(violation of the self).  During Chaturmas, sleeping on wet or damp ground will
make the Upadhi (body) more polluted. This will lead to Apkāya-virādhanā
(violation of the body) when it rains during Gocharī (a period of travel) and
other such occasions. Otherwise, if the Upadhi becomes too polluted, it will
lead to the birth of living beings. Due to the pollution, the Upadhi will become
cold and infested with lice, causing sleeplessness. Sleeplessness will lead to
indigestion, and indigestion will lead to diseases. Therefore, one should
definitely take Pāt, Ghās, etc., when the ground is wet or damp.  Here, the
generation of lice is mentioned. The Āgamas state that a Sadhu (Jain monk)
should endure "Jall Pariṣah" (wetness) and not bathe. The Pratikramāṇa (a daily
ritual of repentance) also mentions "Chhappāi-saṅghaṭṭanāe" (a type of fault) in
the section on sleeplessness. However, the above discussion suggests that during
Chaturmas, there is a high possibility of lice generation due to rain and the
lack of sunlight on clothes. Therefore, it is appropriate to keep the Upadhi
clean and ensure that it does not become polluted. Hence, one should take the
necessary bedding and other materials.  **Penance for not removing bedding that
has become wet due to rain:**  52. **Je Bhikkhu Uubaddhiyam vā Vāsāvāsiyam vā
Sejjasanthārayam Uvari Sijjāmāṇam Pehāe Na Osārei, Na Osāretāṁ vā Sāijjai.**
52. A Bhikkhu (Jain monk) who sees his bedding, which he has taken for the
remaining period or for the rainy season, becoming wet due to rain, and does not
remove it, or who approves of someone who does not remove it, (incurs a minor
monthly penance).  **Discussion:** "Uvari Sijjāmāṇam" - becoming wet due to
rain.  The meaning of this Sūtra is that if any Upadhi, which is returnable,
such as bedding, etc., is becoming wet due to rain, etc., it is proper to remove
it and keep it in a safe place. Not removing it is a cause for penance.
Although no one wants their own Upadhi to become wet, there is a greater
possibility of negligence in removing returnable bedding, etc., when it is seen
becoming wet. Therefore, it is mentioned in the Sūtra. However, one should
understand from the implication that it applies to all types of Upadhi.
Although going out in the rain is a cause for violation, the penance for
neglecting to remove wet bedding is mentioned because it can lead to many other
faults.  Becoming wet can make the Upadhi unusable for some time, unfit for
writing, swollen, and can lead to the generation of insects like Kuṭhuve, etc.
It can also lead to Apkāya-virādhanā (violation of the body). If the owner of
the item finds out, they may become angry and criticize. Such negligence can
also make it difficult to obtain bedding, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [nizIthasUtra kAnakhajUrA, cUhe, bicchU, sarpa Adi kI adhika utpatti ho to
pATa-ghAsa Adi avazya grahaNa karane cAhiye  /  anyathA jIvavirAdhanA,
saMyamavirAdhanA va AtmavirAdhanA ho sakatI hai| cAturmAsa meM gIlI yA namI vAlI
jamIna para sone se upadhi adhika malIna hogii| jisase gocarI Adi prasaMgoM meM
varSA A jAne para apkAya kI virAdhanA hogI, anyathA upadhi ke adhika malIna hone
para jIvoM kI utpatti hogii| malinatA ke kAraNa upadhi ke zItala aura jUoM se
yukta hone se nidrA nahIM aaegii| anidrA se ajIrNa hogA aura ajIrNa hone para
roga utpanna hoMge  /  ataH gIlI yA namI yukta bhUmi hone para pATa, ghAsa Adi
avazya grahaNa karane caahiye| yahAM vivecana meM juoM kI utpatti kA nirdeza
kiyA gayA hai| AgamoM meM sAdhu ko 'jalla pariSaha' sahana karane kA tathA snAna
na karane kA kathana hai| pratikramaNa meM nidrA-doSazuddhi ke pATha meM
"chappaisaMghaTTaNAe" kA nirdeza bhI hai  /  phira bhI uparokta vivecana se
samajhanA yaha hai ki cAturmAsa meM varSA hone ke prasaMga ke kAraNa va vastroM
ko dhUpa na lagane se jUoM kI utpatti kI vizeSa saMbhAvanA rahatI hai, isaliye
aise samaya meM upadhi ko malina na rakhanA aura malina na ho isakA bhI dhyAna
rakhanA ucita hai  /  ataH Avazyaka zayyA-saMstAraka grahaNa kara lene caahiye|
varSA se bhIgate hue zayyA-saMstAraka ke na haTAne kA prAyazcitta 52. je bhikkhU
uubaddhiyaM vA vAsAvAsiyaM vA sejjAsaMthArayaM uvari sijjamANaM pehAe na osArei,
na osAretaM vA sAijjai  /  52. jo bhikSu zeSakAla yA varSAvAsa ke liye grahaNa
kiye hue zayyA-saMstAraka ko varSA se bhIgatA huA dekhakara bhI nahIM haTAtA hai
yA nahIM haTAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta
AtA hai  / ) vivecana"uvari sijjamANaM"-varSA se bhIgate huoM ko| isa sUtra kA
Azaya yaha hai ki zayyA-saMthArA Adi pratyarpaNIya koI bhI upadhi varSA Adi se
bhIga rahI hai, aisI jAnakArI hote hI use haTAkara surakSita sthAna meM rakhanA
kalpatA hai aura nahIM haTAnA yaha prAyazcitta kA kAraNa hai| _ svayaM kI upadhi
ko to koI bhI bhIgane denA nahIM cAhatA kintu punaH lauTAne yogya
zayyAsaMstAraka Adi ko bhIgate hue dekhakara bhI haTAne meM upekSA hone kI jyAdA
saMbhAvanA hone se usakA nirdeza sUtra meM kiyA gayA hai| phira bhI upalakSaNa
se sabhI prakAra kI upadhi ke viSaya meM samajha lenA caahiye| yadyapi varSA meM
jAnA virAdhanA kA kAraNa hai, kintu nahIM haTAne meM aneka anya doSoM kI
saMbhAvanA hone se usakI upekSA karane kA prAyazcitta batAyA hai| bhIga jAne se
upadhi kA kucha samaya anupayukta ho jAnA, pratilekhana ke ayogya ho jAnA,
phUlana ho jAnA, kuthuve Adi jIvoM kI utpatti ho jAnA, apkAya kI virAdhanA bhI
honA, jisakI vastu hai use mAlUma par3ane para usakA nArAja honA, niMdA karanA
Adi doSa saMbhava haiM tathA isa prakAra upekSA karane se zayyA-saMstAraka
milanA bhI durlabha ho jAtA hai|

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## [57 Second Uddeshak]  Penance for taking a bed-spread without permission
elsewhere  53. A monk who takes a bed-spread, which is either *padihariyam*
[brought from elsewhere] or *sagariyasantiyam* [taken from the place of
residence], without permission, or approves of its being taken, incurs a minor
monthly penance.  **Explanation:** The term "sagariyasantiyam" is used for the
bed-spread that is in the place of residence of the monk, and the term
"padihariyam" is used for the bed-spread that is brought from elsewhere. Both of
these are returnable.  If the bed-spread, which has been taken from the house
where the monk is staying, needs to be taken to another house for some reason,
it is necessary to obtain permission from the owner again. The owner of the bed-
spread brought from elsewhere also often gives it with the place of residence of
the monk in mind, and the owner of the bed-spread also gives it with the
expectation of using it in their own house. Therefore, it becomes necessary to
obtain permission again.  Taking it elsewhere without permission incurs the
fault of *adatta* [non-giving], and there is also the possibility of the owner
being angry, criticizing, and the bed-spread being rare, etc. Therefore, it is
said to be a minor monthly penance.  In the available original text, there are
three sutras in place of this sutra, of which this is the third sutra. It
appears that this was a single sutra during the time of the *Bhashya* and
*Churnika*. It is as follows:  "No kappi nigganthaan va nigganthiin va
padihariyam va sagariyasantiyam va sejjasantharam doccham pi oggaham
ananunnavetaa bahiya-niharittae."  Even from this text, it seems appropriate to
have only one sutra. Therefore, only one sutra is given in the original. The
remaining two sutras are:  Je bhikku padihariyam sejjasantharam ananuvetaa bahim
niinei, nonettam va saijjai. 53 ||  Je bhikku sagariyasantiyam sejjasantharam
ananunnavetaa bahim niinei, nonettam va saijjai. 54 ||  If there are three
sutras, the meaning is as follows: 1. The bed-spread is brought from elsewhere.
2. The bed-spread is taken from the same place. 3. The bed-spread is brought
from elsewhere. If these are taken to another house without permission, then a
minor monthly penance is incurred.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [57 dUsarA uddezaka] zayyA-saMstAraka binA prAjJA anyatra le jAne kA
prAyazcitta 53. je bhikkhU pADihAriyaM vA sAgAriyasaMtiyaM vA sejjA-saMthArayaM
doccaMpi aNaNaNNavettA bAhi NoNei, NoNetaM vA sAijjai  /  53. jo bhikSu
pratyarpaNIya [anya kisI se lAye gaye] yA zayyAtara se grahaNa kiye gaye
zayyAsaMstAraka ko punaH AjJA liye binA kahIM anyatra le jAtA hai yA le jAne
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  / )
vivecana-sAdhu ke Thaharane ke sthAna meM jo zayyA-saMstAraka ho, usake lie
"sAgAriyasaMtiyaM" zabda kA prayoga huA hai aura anyatra se lAye jAne vAle
zayyA-saMstAraka ke liye "pADihAriyaM" zabda kA prayoga huA hai| ye donoM hI
pratyarpaNIya haiN| jo zayyA-saMstAraka jisa makAna meM rahane kI apekSA grahaNa
kiyA hai, use kisI kAraNa se anya makAna meM le jAnA ho to usake mAlika kI AjJA
punaH lenA Avazyaka hai| anyatra se lAye gaye zayyA-saMstAraka kA mAlika bhI
prAyaH sAdhu ke Thaharane ke sthAna ko dhyAna meM rakha kara hI detA hai tathA
zayyAtara bhI apane makAna meM upayoga lene kI apekSA se hI detA hai  /  isaliye
punaH prAjJA prApta karanA Avazyaka ho jAtA hai| binA AjJA liye anyatra le jAne
meM adatta doSa lagatA hai tathA usake mAlika kA nArAja honA, niMdA karanA,
zayyA-saMstAraka kA durlabha honA Adi doSoM kI saMbhAvanA bhI rahatI hai| isalie
isakA laghumAsika prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| upalabdha mUla pATha meM isa sUtra
ke sthAna para tIna sUtra milate haiM, jinameM yaha tIsarA sUtra hai  /  bhASya
cUrNikAra ke samaya yaha eka sUtra hI thA aisA pratIta hotA hai  /  vaha isa
prakAra hai "no kappai NiggaMthANa vA NiggaMthINa vA paDihAriyaM vA
sAgAriyasaMtiyaM vA sejjAsaMthArayaM doccaM pi oggahaM aNaNuNNavettA bhiyaa-
niihritte|" isa pATha se bhI eka sUtra kA honA hI ucita pratIta hotA hai| isa
kAraNa mUla meM eka hI sUtra diyA hai  /  zeSa do sUtra ye haiM- je bhikkhU
pADihAriyaM sejjA-saMthArayaM aNaNuvettA bAhiM NINei, NoNetaM vA sAijjai  /  53
//  je bhikkhU sAgAriyasaMtiyaM sejjA-saMthArayaM aNaNuNNavettA bAhiM NINei,
NoNetaM vA sAijjai  /  54  //  tIna sUtra hone para artha isa prakAra hotA hai-
1. azayyAtara kA zayyA-saMstAraka anyatra se lAyA ho| 2. zayyAtara kA zayyA-
saMstAraka usI sthAna se liyA ho| 3. zayyAtara kA zayyA-saMstAraka anyatra se
lAyA ho| inako punaH AjJA liye binA anya makAna meM le jAe to laghumAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai|

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [58] [Nishīthasūtra Penance for not returning bedding properly 54. A monk
who takes bedding that is to be returned, and uses it without returning it, or
approves of someone who does so. 55. A monk who takes bedding from a
householder's house, and uses it without returning it in the same condition, or
approves of someone who does so. 54. A monk who takes bedding that is to be
returned [brought from someone else], and uses it without returning it, or
approves of someone who does so. 55. A monk who takes bedding from a
householder's house, and uses it without returning it in the same condition and
without taking care of it, or approves of someone who does so. (He incurs a
minor monthly penance.) Discussion - It is the duty of a monk to return bedding
[or any other item] that is to be returned to its owner before using it. The
bedding taken from a householder's house remains there. But if the monk,
according to his need, separates the bamboo slats, etc., that are tied together,
it is called 'vikaraṇa' (alteration), and not separating them is called
'avikaraṇa' (non-alteration). Therefore, one should use it only after returning
it in the same condition and taking care of it. Otherwise, there is a
possibility of many faults. This should be understood from the previous sutras
[52-53]. Penance for not searching for lost bedding 56. A monk who does not
search for lost bedding that is to be returned, or bedding from a householder's
house, or approves of someone who does not search. 56. A monk who does not
search for lost bedding that is to be returned, or bedding from a householder's
house, or approves of someone who does not search. (He incurs a minor monthly
penance.) Discussion - If a monk knowingly or unknowingly takes either of these
types of bedding, he should not neglect to inquire about them, search for them,
and inform the owner. Neglecting to do so can lead to many faults, which should
be understood from the previous sutras. The rules regarding penance, as
mentioned in these three sutras [54-55-56], are also mentioned in three sutras
of the Brihatkalpasutra, Uddesaka 3. These are also explained separately in the
Bhashya and Churni. The Bhashya provides a detailed description of the types of
bedding, the types of faults, the types of penance, and the methods of
searching. Those who are curious can obtain detailed information from there. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 58] [nizIthasUtra zayyA-saMstAraka vidhivata na lauTAne kA prAyazcitta 54. je
bhikkhU pADihAriyaM sejjA-saMthArayaM AyAe apaDihaTu saMpavvayai saMpavvayaMtaM
vA saaijji| 55. je bhikkhU sAgAriyasaMtiyaM sejjA-saMthArayaM avigaraNaM kaTu
aNappiNittA saMpavvayai, saMpavvayaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  54. jo bhikSu
pratyarpaNIya [ anya kisI se lAyA ] zayyA-saMstAraka grahaNa karake use lauTAye
binA hI vihAra karatA hai yA vihAra karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 55. jo
bhikSu zayyAtara ke zayyA-saMstAraka ko grahaNa kara lauTAte samaya pUrvavat
rakhe binA tathA saMbhalAe binA vihAra karatA hai yA vihAra karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-sAdhu
kA kartavya hai ki pratyarpaNIya zayyA-saMstAraka [ yA anya vastu ] vihAra
karane ke pUrva usake svAmI ko lauTA de  /  zayyAtara ke makAna meM se jo zayyA-
saMstAraka liyA hai, vaha to vahIM rahatA hai| kintu apanI AvazyakatAnusAra
usake jo bA~sa kaMbiyAM Adi bAMdhe hoM, unheM bikhera kara alaga kara denA
"vikaraNa' kahalAtA hai aura na bikheranA "avikaraNa" kahalAtA hai| ataH
pUrvavat karake tathA mAlika ko sambhalAkara ke hI vihAra karanA cAhiye  /
anyathA aneka doSoM kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai  /  jo pUrva sUtra [52-53] ke
vivecana se samajha lenA cAhiye  /  khoye gaye zayyA-saMstAraka kI gaveSaNA
nahIM karane kA prAyazcitta 56. je bhikkhU pADihAriyaM vA, sAgAriyasaMtiyaM vA
sejjAsaMthArayaM vippaNaTheM Na gavesai, Na gavasaMtaM vA saaijji| 56. jo bhikSu
khoe gae pratyarpaNIya zayyA-saMstAraka kI yA zayyAtara ke zayyA-saMstAraka kI
khoja nahIM karatA hai yA khoja nahIM karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use
laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-ye sUtrokta donoM prakAra ke zayyA-
saMstAraka koI jAnakara ke yA bhrAMtivaza uThAkara le jAye to sAdhu ko unakI
pUchatAcha karanA, khoja karanA evaM mAlika ko sUcanA dene meM upekSA nahIM
karanI cAhiye, upekSA karane se aneka doSoM kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai, unheM
pUrva sUtra se samajha lenA caahiye| ina [ 54-55-56 ] tInoM sUtroM meM kahe gaye
prAyazcitta viSayaka vidhi-niSedha kA kathana bRhatkalpasUtra, uddezaka tIna ke
tIna sUtroM meM hai| bhASya cUNi meM bhI inakI vyAkhyA alaga-alaga kI gaI hai|
bhASya meM saMstAraka ke prakAra, doSoM ke prakAra, prAyazcitta ke prakAra evaM
khojane ke tarIkoM kA vistRta varNana hai  /  jijJAsu vahIM se vistRta jAnakArI
prApta kara sakate haiM  /

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Second Objective] [59 57. The monk who does not perform the *pratilekhana* of
even a small *upadhi*, or approves of one who does not, receives the *laghu-
masik* penance. 57. The monk who does not perform the *pratilekhana* of even a
small *upadhi*, or approves of one who does not, receives the *laghu-masik*
penance. (He receives the *laghu-masik* penance.) Discussion- It is necessary
for the *sadhu* to perform the *pratilekhana* of all his instruments at both
times. If he neglects the *pratilekhana* of even a small instrument, he receives
the *laghu-masik* penance. The *chunikar* has said that there are many faults in
not performing the *pratilekhana*, such as harming living beings and self-harm
from scorpions, etc. From these faults, one should avoid all of them. According
to the *bhashya* (verse 1436), the monk should perform the *pratilekhana* of all
instruments at both times. The *bhashyakar* has said that the time for
*pratilekhana* for the *jinkalpi* is after sunrise, but the *sthavirakalpi* can
perform the *pratilekhana* some time before sunrise. In *gatha* 1425, it is said
that the following ten types of *upadhis* can be performed before sunrise:
*Muhpotti*, *rajoharana*, three *chaddar*, two *nisadya*, *cholpatta*,
*santhara*, and *uttarpatta*. When the *pratilekhana* of these ten is done, the
sun rises. In the *chuni*, it is said, "Others say" that the eleventh is
'danda'. It is possible that this *gatha* was taken from a text like the
*Dharmaprajnapti*, which was composed after the thirteenth century. Because in
the *Uttaradhyayanasutra* (study 26, verses 8 and 21), there is a clear
provision for performing the *pratilekhana* at sunrise, and before the above
*gatha* 1425, the *bhashyakar* himself has said in two *gatha*s that the
*pratilekhana* cannot be done at night. Those *gatha*s are: *Pratilekhana*,
*papphodana*, and *pamajjan* are done during the day. *Papphodana* and
*pamajjan* are done at night, but *pratilekhana* is not done. (1422)
*Pratilekhana*, *pamajjan*, and *payadiya* are done during the day. *Pamajjan*
is done at night, but *pratilekhana* is not done. (1423) *Rao*, *papphodana*,
and *pamajjan* are possible at night, but *pratilekhana* is not possible because
it is not visible.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka] [59 57. je bhikkhU ittariyaM pi uhi Na paDilehei, Na
paDileheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  57. jo bhikSu svalpa upadhi kI bhI pratilekhanA
nahIM karatA hai yA nahIM karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use
laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-sAdhu ko apane sabhI upakaraNoM kI
ubhayakAla pratilekhanA karanA Avazyaka hai| choTe se upakaraNa kI bhI
pratilekhanA meM upekSA kare to use laghumAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /
cUNikAra ne pratilekhana nahIM karane se jIvoM kI virAdhanA evaM bicchU Adi se
prAtmavirAdhanA Adi aneka doSa kahe haiM  /  jamhA ete dosA tamhA savvovahi
dusaMjhaM pddilehiyvvo| ni. bhASya gA. 1436 ke anusAra bhikSu ko sabhI
upakaraNoM kI donoM samaya pratilekhanA karanI caahiye| bhASyakAra ne
pratilekhana kA samaya jinakalpI ke lie sUryodaya ke bAda kA hI kahA hai kintu
sthavirakalpI sUryodaya ke kucha samaya pUrva bhI pratilekhanA kara sakate haiM,
aisA kahA hai  /  _gAthA 1425 meM kahA gayA hai ki sUryodaya se pUrva nimnokta
dasa prakAra kI upadhiyoM kA pratilekhana kiyA jA sakatA hai muhapottiya-
rayaharaNe kappatiga Nisejja colapaTTe ya  /  saMthAruttarapaTTa ya, pekkhite
jahuggame sUre  //  muhapatti, rajoharaNa, tIna caddara, do niSadyA, colapaTTa,
saMthArA va uttarapaTTa, ina dasa kI pratilekhanA hone para sUryodaya ho| cUNi
meM "aNNe bhaNaMti" aisA kahakara gyArahavAM 'daMDa' bhI kahA gayA hai| sambhava
hai ki yaha gAthA terahavIM zatAbdI ke bAda race gaye dharmaprajJapti prAdi kisI
graMtha se yahA~ lI gaI ho| kyoMki uttarAdhyayanasUtra adhyayana 26 gA. 8 va 21
meM sUryodaya hone para pratilekhana karane kA spaSTa vidhAna hai tathA uparokta
gAthA 1425 ke pUrva svayaM bhASyakAra ne do gAthAoM meM kahA hai ki rAtri meM
pratilekhanA nahIM ho sakatI hai  /  ve gAthAeM ye haiM paDilehaNa papphoDaNa
pamajjaNA ceva divasao hoti  /  papphoDaNA pamajjaNa ratti paDilehaNA Natthi  //
1422  //  paDilehaNA pamajjaNa pAyAdIyANa divasao hoi| tti pamajjaNA puNa,
bhaNiyA paDilehaNA patthi  //  1423  //  rAo ya papphoDaNa pamajjaNA ya do
saMbhavaMti, paDilehaNA na sambhavati ackkhuvisyaao|

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[60] The Nishīyasūtra clearly states that transcription occurs only during the
day, not at night. Therefore, the above commentary on verse 1425, which
instructs on the transcription of 10 types of titles before sunrise, is
questionable. The Uttarādhyayana Sūtra, in its study 26, verse 23, explicitly
instructs on the transcription of the Gochchaga after the transcription of the
Muhpatti, while this 10 titles does not mention the Gochchaga, but places it
with the transcription of the Patra after half a Paurashī. In this way, verse
1425 does not align with the original text of the Uttarādhyayana Sūtra. The
Uttarādhyayana, chapter 26 and commentary verse 1426, states that the
transcription of the Patra should be done when the fourth part of the first
Paurashī of the day remains, and the Patra should be transcribed and tied up at
the beginning of the last Paurashī. After that, the transcription of the
remaining instruments should be done and self-study should be done. _ "Sā
padhama-charmapouraśīsu kālo, tanvivariyo akālo paḍilehaṇāe." _ In this way, the
first fourth Paurashī of the day is the time for transcription, and the
remaining 6 Paurashīs [4 of the night and 2 of the day] are not the time. This
explanation also proves that the time of the last Paurashī of the night before
sunrise is not the time for transcription. The Uttarādhyayana Sūtra, in its
study 26, analyzes the faults and methods of transcription, and the commentary
also mentions the separate atonement for each method. Interested readers should
refer to the commentary. _ "Tan sevamanāe āvajjai māsiyam parihāraththāṇam
ugdhaiyam." _ Anyone who practices any of the atonement places mentioned in the
above 57 sūtras will incur a minor monthly atonement. This should be understood
in the same way as the first Uddesaka. The summary sūtra 1 of the second
Uddesaka is to make a foot-wiper with a wooden stick. Sūtra 2-8 is to receive,
keep, give permission to receive, distribute, use, keep for more than a month
and a half, and separate the foot-wiper from the wooden stick. Sūtra 9 is to
inform about inappropriate substances. Sūtra 10 is to make a path, etc.,
oneself. Sūtra 11-13 is to make a drain for water, a sneeze and a sneeze cover,
and a flicker oneself. Sūtra 13-17 is to repair a needle, etc., oneself. Sūtra
18 is to speak harsh language. Sūtra 19 is to speak a little falsehood. Sūtra 20
is to take a little without giving. Sūtra 21 is to wash hands, feet, ears, eyes,
teeth, nails, and mouth with inappropriate cold or hot water.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 60] [nizIyasUtra yahA~ atyadhika spaSTa kiyA gayA hai ki pratilekhanA dina meM
hI hotI hai, rAtri meM nahIM  /  ataH sUryodaya pUrva 10 prakAra kI upadhi kI
pratilekhanA kA uparokta bhASya gA. 1425 kA nirdeza saMdehAspada hai|
uttarAdhyayanasUtra adhyayana 26 gA. 23 meM muhapatti-pratilekhanA ke bAda
gocchaga kI pratilekhanA karane kA spaSTa nirdeza hai, jaba ki isa 10 upadhi meM
gocchaga kA kathana nahIM kiyA gayA hai kiMtu use pauna pauruSI bAda pAtra ke
pratilekhana ke sAtha rakhA hai| isa taraha uttarAdhyayanasUtra ke mUla pATha se
gAthA 1425 kI saMgati nahIM hotI hai| uttarAdhyayana a. 26 va bhASya gAthA 1426
meM batAyA hai ki pAtra-pratilekhanA dina kI prathama pauruSI ke caturtha bhAga
ke avazeSa rahane para karanA cAhiye aura carama pauruSI ke prArambha meM hI
pAtra pratilekhana karake bAMdha kara rakha denA cAhie usake bAda zeSa
upakaraNoM kI pratilekhanA karake svAdhyAya karanA caahiye| esa paDhama-
caramaporisIsu kAlo, tanvivarIo akAlo paDilehaNAe  /  _ isa taraha dina kI
prathama caturtha pauruSI pratilekhana kA kAla hai aura zeSa 6 pauruSI [ 4 rAtri
kI va do dina kI ] akAla hai  /  isa vyAkhyA se bhI sUryodaya ke pUrva rAtri kI
aMtima pauruSI kA samaya pratilekhana kA akAla siddha hotA hai|
uttarAdhyayanasUtra adhyayana 26 meM Aye pratilekhanA ke doSoM kA va vidhi kA
vizleSaNa bhASya meM kiyA gayA hai tathA pravidhi kA alaga-alaga prAyazcitta bhI
kahA hai  /  jijJAsu pAThaka bhASya dekheN| taM sevamANe Avajjai mAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM ugdhAiyaM  /  ina uparokta 57 sUtroM meM kahe gaye kisI bhI
prAyazcittasthAna ke sevana karane vAle ko laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /
isakA vivecana prathama uddezaka ke samAna samajhanA cAhiye  /  dvitIya uddezaka
kA sArAMzasUtra 1 kASThadaNDayukta pAdapoMchana bnaanaa| sUtra 2-8
kASThadaNDayukta pAdapoMchana grahaNa karanA, rakhanA, grahaNa karane kI AjJA
denA, vitaraNa karanA, upayoga karanA, Der3ha mAsa se adhika rakhanA evaM
kASThadaNDa se pAdaproMchana ko khola kara alaga karanA  /  sUtra 9 acitta
padArtha sUcanA  /  sUtra 10 padamArga Adi svayaM banAnA  /  sUtra 11-13 pAnI
nikalane kI nAlI, chIMkA aura chIMke kA Dhakkana, cilamilI svayaM banAnA  /
sUtra 13-17 sUI Adi ko svayaM sudhAranA  /  sUtra 18 kaThora bhASA bolanA  /
sUtra 19 alpa mRSA-asatya bolnaa| sUtra 20 alpa adatta lenaa| sUtra 21 acitta
zIta yA uSNa jala se hAtha, paira, kAna, AMkha, dAMta, nakha aura muMha dhonA  /

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Uddeshak  [61]  **Sutra 40**  **Sutra 22** Wearing a complete leather
garment. **Sutra 23** Wearing a complete cloth garment. **Sutra 24** Wearing an
undivided garment. **Sutra 25** Self-maintenance of a vessel made of a gourd,
wood, or clay. **Sutra 26** Self-repair of a staff, etc. **Sutra 27** Accepting
a vessel sought by one's own family. **Sutra 28** Accepting a vessel sought by
another's family. **Sutra 29** Accepting a vessel sought by a leader. **Sutra
30** Accepting a vessel sought by a strong person. **Sutra 31** Accepting a
vessel sought by a lover. **Sutra 32** Taking the daily offering of food.
**Sutra 33-36** Taking the offering of food as a gift. **Sutra 37** Wearing the
daily clothes. **Sutra 38** Praising the giver before or after receiving alms.
**Sutra 39** Entering houses for food before the time of alms. Entering for alms
with another non-Jain, with a householder, with a non-parivrajaka with a
parivrajaka. **Sutra 41** Entering the study ground outside the shelter or the
ground of chanting and recitation with these three. **Sutra 42** Traveling from
village to village with these three. **Sutra 43** Drinking palatable water,
chewing unpalatable water. **Sutra 44** Eating palatable food, chewing
unpalatable food. **Sutra 45** Chewing leftover food after eating without asking
the Saambhogika Sadhus. **Sutra 46** Accepting the offering of food from a
Sagarika. **Sutra 47** Eating the offering of food from a Sagarika. **Sutra 48**
Going for alms without going to the house, etc., of a Sagarika. **Sutra 49**
Receiving food from the care of a Sagarika or taking it from their hand. **Sutra
50** Violating the duration of the bed-spread during the remaining time. **Sutra
51** Violating the duration of the bed-spread during the Chaturmas period.
**Sutra 52** Not keeping the bed-spread in the shade while getting wet from the
rain. **Sutra 53** Taking the bed-spread elsewhere without permission a second
time. **Sutra 54** Traveling without returning the bed-spread to the
Praatiharika. **Sutra 55** Traveling without putting the bed-spread back in its
original position after using the bed. **Sutra 56** Not searching for the bed-
spread when it is lost. **Sutra 57** Not even copying a small inscription, etc.,
receives a minor monthly atonement.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka] [61 sUtra 40 sUtra 22 kRtsna carma dhAraNa karanA  /  sUtra 23
kRtsna vastra dhAraNa krnaa| sUtra 24 abhinna vastra dhAraNa karanA  /  sUtra 25
tumbe ke pAtra kA, kASTha ke pAtra kA aura miTTI ke pAtra kA svayaM parikarma
karanA  /  sUtra 26 daNDa Adi ko svayaM sudhAranA  /  sUtra 27 svajana-gaveSita
pAtra grahaNa krnaa| sUtra 28 parajana-gaveSita pAtra grahaNa krnaa| sUtra 29
pramukha-gaveSita pAtra grahaNa karanA  /  sUtra 30 balavAna-gaveSita pAtra
grahaNa krnaa| sUtra 31 lava-gaveSita pAtra grahaNa krnaa| sUtra 32 nitya
agrapiNDa lenaa| sUtra 33-36 dAnapiMDa lenaa| sUtra 37 nityavAsa vsnaa| sUtra 38
bhikSA ke pUrva yA pazcAt dAtA kI prazaMsA krnaa| sUtra 39 bhikSAkAla ke pahale
AhAra ke lie gharoM meM praveza krnaa| anyatIthika ke sAtha, gRhastha ke sAtha,
pArihArika kA apArihArika ke sAtha bhikSA ke lie praveza krnaa| sUtra 41 ina
tInoM ke sAtha upAzraya se bAhara kI svAdhyAyabhUmi meM yA uccAra-
prasravaNabhUmi meM praveza krnaa| ina tInoM ke sAtha grAmAnugrAma vihAra karanA
/  sUtra 43 manojJa pAnI pInA, kaSailA pAnI paraThanA  /  sUtra 44 manojJa AhAra
khAnA, amanojJa AhAra paraThanA  /  sUtra 45 khAne ke bAda bacA huA AhAra
sAMbhogika sAdhuoM ko pUche binA paraThanA  /  sUtra 46 sAgArika piNDa grahaNa
krnaa| sUtra 47 sAgArika piNDa khaanaa| sUtra 48 sAgArika kA ghara Adi jAne binA
bhikSA ke lie jaanaa| sAgArika kI nizrA se AhAra prApta karanA yA usake hAtha se
lenaa| sUtra 50 zeSa kAla ke zayyA-saMstAraka kI avadhi kA ullaMghana karanA  /
sUtra 51 cAturmAsa kAla ke zayyA-saMstAraka kI avadhi kA ullaMghana karanA  /
sUtra 52 varSA se bhIjate hue zayyA-saMstAraka ko chAyA meM na rkhnaa| sUtra 53
zayyA-saMstAraka ko dUsarI bAra AjJA lie binA anyatra le jaanaa| sUtra 54
prAtihArika zayyA-saMstAraka lauTAye binA vihAra karanA  /  sUtra 55 zayyAtara
kA zayyA-saMstArakapUrva sthiti meM kiye binA vihAra karanA  /  sUtra 56 zayyA-
saMstAraka khoye jAne para na DhU~DhanA  /  sUtra 57 alpa upadhi kI bhI
pratilekhanA na karanA, ityAdi pravRttiyoM kA laghumAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai|
sUtra 42 sUtra 49 .

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sutra 39 **62]**  [The subject matter of the 38 Sutras of this Uddesaka is
mentioned in the following Agamas: Sutra 1-7, the method and prohibition of
keeping a foot-cloth with a wooden stick - Brihatkalpa Uddesaka 5. Sutra 9, the
prohibition of smelling fragrance - Pravachana Shruta 2, Adhyayana 1, Uddesaka 8
and Acharanga Shruta 2, Adhyayana 15. Sutra 13, the form of Chilmili -
Brihatkalpa Uddesaka 5. Sutra 18-20, the description of the three Mahavratas -
Dasha Shruta 4 and Pravachana Shruta 2, Adhyayana 15. Sutra 21, the prohibition
of bathing and washing - Dasha Shruta 4, Gatha 26 and Adhyayana 6, Gatha 62.
Sutra 22-24, the prohibition of complete leather, complete cloth and inseparable
cloth - Brihatkalpa Uddesaka 3. Sutra 32-36, the prohibition of going for alms
in the families who give daily alms - Pravachana Shruta 2, Adhyayana 1, Uddesaka
1. Sutra 37, the prohibition of Nitya Vasa - Pravachana Shruta 2, Adhyayana 2,
Uddesaka 2. Sutra 38, the prohibition of praising the giver or oneself -
Pidanayukti. The prohibition of going for alms before the alms-time - Pravachana
Shruta 2, Adhyayana 1, Uddesaka 9. Sutra 40-42, the prohibition of going for
alms with the alms-takers - Pravachana Shruta 2, Adhyayana 1, Uddesaka 1. Sutra
43-45, eating and drinking palatable food and water, and not eating unpalatable
food - Pravachana Shruta 2, Adhyayana 1, Uddesaka 10. Sutra 46-48, the
prohibition of taking Pindas from the bed - Dasha Shruta 3 and Graha Shruta 2,
Adhyayana 2, Uddesaka 3. Sutra 53, taking permission from the master again to
take the bed-spread elsewhere - Vyavahara Uddesaka 8. Sutra 54-56, the method of
taking care of the bed-spread and going for Vihar - Brihatkalpa Uddesaka 3.
Sutra 57, the writing of the Upadhi - Uttaradhyayanasutra 26 and Pravachana
Shruta 4. The subject matter of the following 19 Sutras of this Uddesaka is not
mentioned in other Agamas, such as Sutra 8, opening the foot-cloth with a wooden
stick. Sutra 10-12, making the path etc. oneself. Sutra 14-17, repairing the
needle etc. oneself. Sutra 25-26, repairing the bowl, stick etc. oneself. Sutra
27-31, accepting the bowl etc. searched by relatives etc. Sutra 49, taking food
received from the inspiration of the bed. Sutra 50-51, keeping the bed-spread
after the stipulated time without taking permission again. Sutra 52, not keeping
the bed-spread in the shade while it is getting wet from the rain.  **|| Second
Uddesaka ends ||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sUtra 39 62] [nizIthasUtra isa uddezaka ke 38 sUtroM ke viSaya kA kathana nimna
AgamoM meM hai, yathAsUtra 1-7 kASThadaNDayukta pAdapoMchana rakhane ke vidhi-
niSedha -bRhatkalpa udde0 5 /  sUtra 9 sugaMdha sUghane kA niSedha prA0 zru 2,
a0 1, u0 8 tathA AcA0 zru0 2 a0 15  /  sutra 13 cilamilI prarUpaNa -bahatkalpa0
udde0 5 /  sUtra 18-20 tIna mahAvrata varNana -daza0 a0 4 tathA prA0 zru0 2 a0
15  /  sUtra 21 snAnaniSedha, prakSAlananiSedha-daza0 a0 4, gA0 26 tathA a06,'
26 tathA a0 6, gA0 62  /  sUtra 22-24 kRtsna carma niSedha, kRtsna vastra tathA
abhinna vastra niSedha - bRha0 udde0 3 /  /  sUtra 32-36 nityadAna diye jAne
vAle kuloM meM bhikSArtha jAne kA niSedha -prA0 zru0 2 a0 1, u0 1  /  sUtra 37
nityavAsa niSedha prA0 zru 2, a0 2, u0 2  /  sUtra 38 dAtA kI yA apanI prazaMsA
kA niSedha -piddniyukti| bhikSAkAla ke pahale bhikSArtha jAne kA niSedha-pA0
zru0 2, a0 1, udde0 9 /  sUtra 40-42 bhikSAcaroM ke sAtha bhikSA Adi jAne kA
niSedha - prA0 zru 2, a0 1, udde0 1  /  sUtra 43-45 manojJa AhAra pAnI khAnA,
pInA, amanojJa paraThanA -pA0 zru0 2, a0 1, u0 10  /  sUtra 46-48 zayyAtara
piNDa lene kA niSedha-daza0 a0 3 tathA grA0 zru 2 a0 2 udde0 3  /  sUtra 53
zayyA-saMstAraka anyatra le jAne ke lie dUsarI bAra svAmI se AjJA lenA-vyava0
udde0 8 /  sUtra 54-56 zayyA-saMstAraka svAmI ko saMbhalAkara vihAra karane kA
vidhAna -bRhatkalpa udde 0 3  /  sUtra 57 upadhi-pratilekhana -utta0 a026 tathA
prAva0 a04  /  isa uddezaka ke nimna 19 sUtroM ke viSaya kA kathana anya AgamoM
meM nahIM hai, yathAsUtra 8 kASThadaNDayukta pAdapoMchana ko kholanA  /  sUtra
10-12 padamArga Adi svayaM bnaanaa| sUtra 14-17 sUI Adi svayaM sudhaarnaa| sUtra
25-26 pAtra, daNDa Adi svayaM sudhaarnaa| sUtra 27-31 svajanAdi gaveSita pAtra
grahaNa karanA  /  sUtra 49 zayyAtara kI preraNA se prApta AhAra lenaa| sUtra
50-51 nirdhArita avadhi ke bAda bhI punaH prAjJA lie binA zayyA-saMstAraka
rkhnaa| sUtra 52 varSA se bhIMgate hue zayyA-saMstAraka ko chAyA meM na rkhnaa|
//  dUsarA uddezaka samApta  //

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Uddeshak ## Technology-Seeking Prāyaścitta  1. If a monk, while in an
āgantāra, āramāgāra, gāhāvaikula, or paryāvasa, sees or hears an "aṇṇauṭṭhiya or
gāratthiya" food, animal, khaima, or saima, or sees it being born or being born
and growing, 2. If a monk, while in an āgantāra, āramāgāra, gāhāvaikula, or
paryāvasa, sees or hears an "aṇṇauṭṭhiya or gāratthiya" food, animal, khaima, or
saima, or sees it being born or being born and growing, 3. If a monk, while in
an āgantāra, āramāgāra, gāhāvaikula, or paryāvasa, sees or hears an "aṇṇauṭṭhiṇī
or gāratthiṇī" food, animal, khaima, or saima, or sees it being born or being
born and growing, 4. If a monk, while in an āgantāra, āramāgāra, gāhāvaikula, or
paryāvasa, sees or hears an "aṇṇauṭṭhiṇīo or gāratthiṇīo" food, animal, khaima,
or saima, or sees it being born or being born and growing, 5. If a monk, while
in an āgantāra, āramāgāra, gāhāvaikula, or paryāvasa, sees or hears an
"aṇṇauṭṭhiya or gāratthiya" food, animal, khaima, or saima, or sees it being
born or being born and growing, while being in the state of having abandoned the
kouhala-vaḍiyā, 6. If a monk, while in an āgantāra, āramāgāra, gāhāvaikula, or
paryāvasa, sees or hears an "aṇṇauṭṭhiya or gāratthiya" food, animal, khaima, or
saima, or sees it being born or being born and growing, while being in the state
of having abandoned the kouhala-vaḍiyā, 7. If a monk, while in an āgantāra,
āramāgāra, gāhāvaikula, or paryāvasa, sees or hears an "aṇṇauṭṭhiṇī or
gāratthiṇī" food, animal, khaima, or saima, or sees it being born or being born
and growing, while being in the state of having abandoned the kouhala-vaḍiyā, 8.
If a monk, while in an āgantāra, āramāgāra, gāhāvaikula, or paryāvasa, sees or
hears an "aṇṇauṭṭhiṇīo or gāratthiṇīo" food, animal, khaima, or saima, or sees
it being born or being born and growing, while being in the state of having
abandoned the kouhala-vaḍiyā, 9. If a monk, while in an āgantāra, āramāgāra,
gāhāvaikula, or paryāvasa, sees or hears an "aṇṇauṭṭhieṇa or gārathieṇa" food,
animal, khaima, or saima, or sees it being born or being born and growing, while
being in the state of having abandoned the kouhala-vaḍiyā, and he accepts it,
then it will continue to grow, envelop, surround, and shine.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIya uddezaka pravidhi-yAcanA prAyazcitta 1. je bhikkhU AgaMtAresu vA,
ArAmAgAresu vA, gAhAvaikulesu vA, pariyAvasahesu vA, 'aNNautthiyaM vA
gAratthiyaM vA' asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA obhAsiya-obhAsiya jAyai,
jAyaMtaM vA saaijji| 2. je bhikkhU AgaMtAresu vA, ArAmAgAresu vA, gAhAvaikulesu
vA, pariyAvasahesu vA, 'aNNautthiyA vA gAratthiyA vA' asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM
vA sAimaM vA obhAsiya-obhAsiya jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA saaijji| 3. je bhikkhU
AgaMtAresu vA, ArAmAgAresu vA, gAhAvaikulesu vA, pariyAvasahesu vA, 'aNNautthiNI
vA gAratthiNI vA' asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA obhAsiya-obhAsiya
jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA saaijji| 4. je bhikkhU AgaMtAresu vA, ArAmAgAresu vA,
gAhAvaikulesu vA pariyAvasahesu vA, 'aNNautthiNIo vA gArasthiNIo vA' asaNaM vA
pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA obhAsiya-obhAsiya jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA sAijjai  /
5. je bhikkhU AgaMtAresu vA, ArAmAgAresu vA, gAhAvaikulesu vA pariyAvasahesu vA
kouhalavaDiyAe paDiyAgayaM samANaM 'aNNautthiyaM vA, gAratthiyaM vA' asaNaM vA
pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA obhAsiya-obhAsiya jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA sAijjai  /
6. je bhikkhU AgaMtAresu vA, ArAmAgAresu vA, gAhAvaikulesu vA, pariyAvasahesu vA
kouhalavaDiyAe paDiyAgayaM samANaM 'aNNautthiyA vA gArAtthiyA vA' asaNaM vA
pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA obhAsiya-obhAsiya jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA sAijjai  /
7. je bhikkhU AgaMtAresu vA, ArAmAgAresu vA, gAhAvaikulesu vA, pariyAvasahesu
vA, kouhalavaDiyAe paDiyAgayaM samANaM, 'aNNauiiNa vA gArathiNi vA' asaNaM vA
pANaM vA khAima vA sAimaM vA obhAsiya-obhAsiya jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA saaijji| 8. je
bhikkhU AgaMtAresu vA, ArAmAgAresu vA, gAhAvaikulesu vA, pariyAvasahesu vA
kouhalavaDiyAe paDiyAgayaM samANaM 'aNNautthiNIo vA gAratthiNIo vA' asaNaM vA
pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA obhAsiya-obhAsiya jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA saaijji| 9.
je bhikkhU AgaMtAresu vA, ArAmAgAresu vA, gAhAvaikulesu vA, pariyAvasahesu vA
'aNNautthieNa vA gArathieNa' vA asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA
abhihaDaM Aha? dejjamANaM paDisehettA, tameva aNuvattiya-aNuvattiya,
pariveDhiya-pariveDhiya, parijaviya-parijaviya, obhAsiya-obhAsiya jAyai,
jAyaMtaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīthasūtra 10-12:  **10.**  A monk who, in a lodging house, a pleasure
garden, a householder's home, or a hermitage, approves of another monk or a
householder who is begging for food, drink, edibles, or delicacies by repeatedly
asking for them, will be born as an **Anuvattīya Anuvattīya**, a **Parivedhīya
Parivedhīya**, a **Parījavīya Parījavīya**, or an **Obhāsīya Obhāsīya**, or will
be reborn as such.  **11.** A monk who, in a lodging house, a pleasure garden, a
householder's home, or a hermitage, approves of another monk or a householder
who is begging for food, drink, edibles, or delicacies by repeatedly asking for
them, will be born as an **Anuvattīya Anuvattīya**, a **Parivedhīya
Parivedhīya**, a **Parījavīya Parījavīya**, or an **Obhāsīya Obhāsīya**, or will
be reborn as such.  **12.** A monk who, in a lodging house, a pleasure garden, a
householder's home, or a hermitage, approves of another monk or a householder
who is begging for food, drink, edibles, or delicacies by repeatedly asking for
them, will be born as an **Anuvattīya Anuvattīya**, a **Parivedhīya
Parivedhīya**, a **Parījavīya Parījavīya**, or an **Obhāsīya Obhāsīya**, or will
be reborn as such.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ nizIthasUtra 10. je bhikkhU AgaMtAre vA, ArAmAgAresu vA, gAhAvaikulesu vA
pariyAvasahesu vA 'aNNautthi ehi vA gAratthi ehi vA' asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM
vA sAimaM vA abhihaDaM AhaTTu dejjamANaM paDisehettA, tameva aNuvattiya
aNuvattiya, parivediya pariveDhiya, parijaviya - parijaviya, obhAsiya- obhAsiya
jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  64] 11. je bhikkhU AgaMtAresu vA, ArAmAgAresu vA
gAhAvaikulesu vA pariyAvasahesu vA 'aNNautthiNIe vA gAratthiNIe vA' asaNaM vA
pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA abhihaDaM AhaTTa dejjamANaM paDisehettA, tameva
aNuvattiya aNuvattiya, pariveDhiya pariveDhiya, parijaviya - parijaviya,
obhAsiya- obhAsiya jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  12. je bhikkhU AgaMtAresu vA,
ArAmAgAresu vA gAhAvaikulesu vA pariyAvasahesu vA, 'aNNautthiNIhi vA
gAratthiNIhi vA' asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA abhihaDaM AhaTTa
dejjamANaM paDisehettA tameva aNuvattiya aNuvattiya, pariveDhiya pariveDhiya,
parijaviya - parijaviya, obhAsiya- obhAsiya jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  1. jo
bhikSu dharmazAlAoM meM, udyAnagRhoM meM tIrthika se yA gRhastha se prazana,
pAna, khAdya yA svAdya kara yAcanA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
gRhasthoM ke gharoM meM athavA zrAzramoM meM anyamAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA karatA
hai yA mAMga-mAMga 2. jo bhikSu dharmazAlAoM meM, udyAnagRhoM meM, gRhasthoM ke
gharoM meM athavA AzramoM meM anyatIrthoM se yA gRhasthoM se azana, pAna, khAdya
yA svAdya mAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA karatA hai yA mAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 3. jo bhikSu dharmazAlAoM meM, udyAnagRhoM meM,
gRhasthoM ke gharoM meM athavA AzramoM meM anyatIrthika yA gRhastha strI se
prazana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya mAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA karatA hai yA mAMga-
mAMga kara yAcanA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  4. jo bhikSu
dharmazAlAoM meM, udyAnagRhAM meM, gRhasthoM ke gharoM meM athavA prAzramoM meM
anyatIrthika yA gRhastha striyoM se azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya mAMga-mAMga
kara yAcanA karatA hai yA mAMgamAMga kara yAcanA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  5. jo bhikSu dharmazAlAoM meM, udyAnagRhoM meM gRhasthoM ke gharoM meM
yA AzramoM meM kautUhalavaza anyatIrthika se yA gRhastha se prazana, pAna,
khAdya yA svAdya mAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA karatA hai yA mAMgamAMga kara yAcanA
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  6. jo bhikSu dharmazAlAoM meM,
udyAnagRhoM meM, gRhasthoM ke gharoM meM yA grAzramoM meM kautUhalavaza
anyatIrthikoM se yA gRhasthoM se prazana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya mAMga-mAMga
kara yAcanA karatA hai yA mAMgamAMga kara yAcanA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  7. jo bhikSu dharmazAlAoM meM, udyAnagRhoM meM gRhasthoM ke gharoM meM
yA zrAzramoM meM kautUhalavaza anyatIrthika yA gRhastha strI se prazana, pAna,
khAdya yA svAdya mAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA karatA hai yA mAMgamAMga kara yAcanA
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Uddeshak [65]  8. A monk who, in Dharmasalas, gardens, houses of
householders, or Ashrams, out of curiosity, begs for food, drink, edibles, or
delicacies from non-Jain or householder women, or approves of someone who begs
in this manner. 9. A monk who, in Dharmasalas, gardens, houses of householders,
or Ashrams, when offered food, drink, edibles, or delicacies by non-Jain or
householders, refuses, but then follows them, stays around them, and begs by
speaking sweet words, or approves of someone who begs in this manner. 10. A monk
who, in Dharmasalas, gardens, houses of householders, or Ashrams, when offered
food, drink, edibles, or delicacies by non-Jain or householders, refuses, but
then follows them, stays around them, and begs by speaking sweet words, or
approves of someone who begs in this manner. 11. A monk who, in Dharmasalas,
gardens, houses of householders, or Ashrams, when offered food, drink, edibles,
or delicacies by non-Jain or householder women, refuses, but then follows them,
stays around them, and begs by speaking sweet words, or approves of someone who
begs in this manner. 12. A monk who, in Dharmasalas, gardens, houses of
householders, or Ashrams, when offered food, drink, edibles, or delicacies by
non-Jain or householder women, refuses, but then follows them, stays around
them, and begs by speaking sweet words, or approves of someone who begs in this
manner. (He incurs Laghu-Masik Prayashchitta).  **Discussion:** These twelve
sutras encompass all places where Bhiksha (alms) can be received, as indicated
by the mention of Dharmasalas and other places. Two types of Bhiksha-givers are
mentioned: 'Anyatheethik' - householders of other faiths, and 'Grihasth' -
householders of the same faith. The first four sutras describe the Prayashchitta
for begging by specifically naming the food items.  The text on Bhiksha-dosha-
nivritti (removal of faults in Bhiksha) also calls "begging repeatedly" as an
excess. People think, "Why do they beg like beggars?"  Accepting the necessary
and prescribed food items from what a householder willingly offers is "Adin
Vritti" (humble conduct), while begging repeatedly is "Din Vritti" (beggarly
conduct). Accepting Bhiksha through Din Vritti is a fault, hence the
Prayashchitta mentioned in these sutras.  A Gीतार्थ साधु (a monk who has
attained the stage of Gीतार्थ) can beg for food items by specifically naming
them, with discretion, for a special reason. Here, the Prayashchitta is for
begging without a reason.  This set of four sutras refers to both a single man
or multiple men, and a single woman or multiple women. The second set of four
sutras describes the Prayashchitta for begging out of curiosity.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka] [65 8. jo bhikSu dharmazAlAoM meM, udyAnagRhoM meM, gRhasthoM
ke gharoM meM yA AzramoM meM kautUhalavaza anyatIrthika yA gRhastha striyoM se
azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya mAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA karatA hai yA mAMgamAMga
kara yAcanA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 9. jo bhikSu dharmazAlAoM meM,
udyAnagRhoM meM, gRhasthoM ke gharoM meM athavA AzramoM meM anyatIthika yA
gRhastha dvArA azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya sAmane lAkara diye jAne para
niSedha karake phira usake pIche-pIche jAkara, usake AsapAsa va sAmane Akara
tathA miSTa vacana bolakara mAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA karatA hai yA yAcanA karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  10. jo bhikSu dharmazAlAoM meM, udyAnagRhoM
meM, gRhasthoM ke gharoM meM athavA AzramoM meM anyatIthikoM yA gRhasthoM dvArA
azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya sAmane lAkara diye jAne para niSedha karake phira
usake pIche-pIche jAkara, usake AsapAsa va sAmane Akara tathA miSTa vacana
bolakara mAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA karatA hai yA yAcanA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 11. jo bhikSa dharmazAlAoM meM, udyAnagRhoM meM, gRhasthoM ke gharoM
meM athavA AzramoM meM anyatIthika yA gRhastha strI dvArA azana, pAna, khAdya yA
svAdya sAmane lAkara diye jAne para niSedha karake phira usake pIche-pIche
jAkara, usake AsapAsa va sAmane Akara tathA miSTa vacana bolakara mAMga-mAMga
kara yAcanA karatA hai yA yAcanA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 12. jo
bhikSu dharmazAlAoM meM, udyAnagRhoM meM, gRhasthoM ke gharoM meM athavA AzramoM
meM anyatIthika yA gahastha striyoM dvArA azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya sAmane
lAkara diye jAne para niSedha karake phira usake pIche-pIche jAkara, usake
AsapAsa va sAmane Akara tathA miSTa vacana bolakara mAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA
karatA hai yA yAcanA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use laghumAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-ina bAraha sUtroM meM dharmazAlA Adi sthAnoM ke
kathana se bhikSA grahaNa ke sabhI sthAnoM kA grahaNa kiyA gayA hai tathA do
prakAra ke bhikSAdAtA kahe gaye haiN| 'anyatIthika' arthAt anya mata ke gRhastha
aura 'gRhastha'- arthAt svamata ke gRhastha  /  prathama sUtracatuSka meM khAdya
padArtha kA nAma le-lekara yAcanA karane kA prAyazcitta kahA hai| Avazyaka sUtra
ke bhikSAdoSanivRtti pATha meM bhI 'mAMga-mAMga kara lenA" aticAra kahA hai|
aisA karane para loga socate haiM ki ye bhikhArI kI taraha kyoM mAMgate haiM
ityAdi  /  sahaja bhAva se gRhastha jo azanAdi denA cAhe usameM se Avazyaka
kalpya padArtha grahaNa karanA "adIna vRtti" hai aura mAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA
karanA "dIna vRtti" hai  /  dIna vRtti se bhikSA grahaNa karanA doSa hai ataH
ina sUtroM meM usakA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| gItArtha sAdhu vizeSa kAraNa se
azanAdi kA nAma nirdeza karake vivekapUrvaka yAcanA kara sakatA hai  /  yahAM
akAraNa mAMga kara yAcanA karane kA prAyazcitta vidhAna hai| isa sUtracatuSka
meM eka puruSa yA aneka puruSa, tathA eka strI yA aneka striyoM kI vivakSA hai|
dvitIya sUtracatuSka meM "kautuka vaza" mAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA karane kA
prAyazcitta kahA hai|

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Nishith Sutra "Kautuk"** should be understood to encompass emotions like
humor, curiosity, inquisitiveness, or the intention to test, etc. For example,
"Let's see if this giver will give or not."  Seeking something with such a
curious mind, even with a name-directed request, is considered unlawful in the
practice of begging. Therefore, one should understand its atonement from this
set of four sutras.  The **Dasha Vaikalik Sutra, Study 10, Verse 13** states:
"**Aniyane Akouhale Je Bhikkhu**" - A monk who is devoid of motivation-intention
and curiosity is a true monk.  The essence of the aforementioned four sutras is
that a virtuous person should beg with humility. The essence of these sutras is
that one should beg without curiosity.  The **third set of four sutras** points
to the fickleness and flattery of the mind along with the previously mentioned
humility and curiosity. This can also be called an excess of curiosity.  In the
places mentioned in the sutras, a monk entering a householder's home for alms
refuses to accept something brought from another room in the house, or from an
unseen place, or from a very distant place, saying, "I don't want it." This
causes the giver to leave, but upon changing his mind, the monk again tells him,
"Take it, so that your feelings and efforts are not wasted," etc. These
sentiments are included in these four sutras.  Such unlawful begging also
corrupts the language of the community. Thus, these 12 sutras speak of the
atonement for: 1. Begging by asking, 2. Begging out of curiosity, and 3. Begging
with excessive curiosity.  **Atonement for Forbidden Entry into a House**  **13.
Je Bhikkhu Gahavaikulan Pindavaay-Padiyaaye Pavidhe Padiyaikkhaaye Samaane
Dochchampi Tamev Kulan Anuppavisai, Anuppavisantan Va Saizjzai.**  A monk who,
upon entering a householder's home for alms, enters the same house again after
being refused by the householder, or approves of someone entering, (receives a
minor monthly atonement).  **Discussion:** The previous sutra spoke of the
atonement for begging for forbidden food again through a method. This sutra
states that even if the householder says, "Go, go elsewhere, there is nothing
here," etc., and the monk goes back to the same house after some time, or if the
householder says, "Never come to our house," and the monk still goes there, this
is the monk's lack of wisdom. This lack of wisdom is the atonement mentioned in
this sutra. This lack of wisdom can lead to the giver becoming angry,
suspicious, and behaving inappropriately.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [nizIthasUtra "kautuka" meM-hAsya, kautUhala, jijJAsA yA parIkSA karane ke
saMkalpa Adi bhAvoM kA samAveza samajha lenA cAhiye  /  yathA. _"dekheMyaha dAtA
detA hai yA nahIM"  /  isa prakAra kI kautUhala buddhi se bhI nAma nirdeza
pUrvaka vastu kA mAMganA bhikSAvRtti meM avidhi hai| ataH usakA isa sUtracatuSka
se prAyazcitta samajhanA caahiye| dazavaikAlika sUtra adhyayana 10 gAthA. 13 meM
kahA hai "aniyANe akouhale je sa bhikkhU"-jo nidAna-saMkalpa rahita evaM
kautUhala vRtti rahita hotA hai vaha bhikSu hai| sAdhu adIna vRtti se bhikSAcarI
kareM, yaha pUrvokta cAra sUtroM kA sAra hai aura akautUhala vRtti se bhikSAcarI
kareM yaha ina sUtroM kA sAra hai| tRtIya sUtracatuSka meM pUrva nirdiSTa dIna
vRtti va kautUhala vRtti ke sAtha citta kI caMcalatA va khuzAmadI vRtti kA
nirdeza kiyA gayA hai  /  ise kautUhala vRtti kI atyadhikatA bhI kaha sakate
haiN| sUtrokta sthAnoM meM bhikSA hetu praviSTa bhikSu gRhastha ko ghara ke kisI
anya kakSa se yA adRSTa sthAna se yA ati dUra sthAna se prazanAdi lAkara dene
para niSedha kara detA hai ki mujhe nahIM kalpatA hai, jisase dAtA lauTa jAtA
hai kintu vicAra badala jAne para bhikSu punaH use kahe ki- "lAmo tumhArI
bhAvanA va zrama niSphala na ho isaliye le letA hU~" ityAdi bhAva ina cAra
sUtroM meM samAviSTa haiN| aisI avidhi se kI gaI yAcanA meM bhASA samiti bhI
dUSita hotI hai  /  isa prakAra ina 12 sUtroM meM 1. mAMgakara yAcanA karane kA,
2. kautUhala se mAMga kara yAcanA karane kA aura 3. atyadhika kautuhala vRtti se
yAcanA karane kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| niSiddha gRhapraveza-prAyazcitta 13.
je bhikkhU gAhAvaikulaM piMDavAya-paDiyAe paviDhe paDiyAikkhae samANe doccaMpi
tameva kulaM aNuppavisai, aNuppavisaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  jo bhikSa gAthApati kula
meM AhAra ke liye praveza karane para gRhastha ke manA karane ke bAda bhI punaH
usI ghara meM praveza karatA hai yA praveza karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai
/  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) _ vivecana-pUrva sUtra meM svayaM
bhikSa ke dvArA niSiddha AhAra kA pUnaH pravidhi se yAcanA karane kA prAyazcitta
kahA gayA hai  /  isa sUtra meM gRhastha niSedha kara de ki-'jAo, anyatra jAno,
yahAM kucha nahIM hai' "ityAdi kahane para bhI punaH usI ghara meM kucha samaya
bAda jAe  /  athavA jo gRhastha yaha kaha de ki" "hamAre ghara kabhI nahIM AnA"
phira bhI usake ghara jAe to yaha bhikSu kA aviveka hai  /  isI aviveka kA isa
sUtra meM prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| isa aviveka se dAtA kA ruSTa honA, zaMkita
honA va anucita vyavahAra karanA Adi doSoM kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai|

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective] [67 Short-lived Penance] 14. A monk who, seeing food
prepared for a large gathering, accepts food, drink, edibles, or delicacies, or
approves of someone who accepts them, incurs a minor monthly penance.
**Explanation:** "Sankaḍi-paloyana-" refers to seeing rice and other items
prepared in a kitchen and saying, "Give me this or that." This is called
"paloyana" with a Sankaḍi-view. A monk who accepts food, etc., in this manner
incurs a minor monthly penance. (Churni, page 206) "Sankaḍi-Jīmanavār" refers to
a large gathering where food is prepared for hundreds of people from the very
beginning. The Brihatkalpa Sutra, Uddesaka 1, and the Acharanga Sutra, 2.1.2-3,
prohibit going to or in the direction of such a Jīmanavār for alms. The original
text also mentions the disadvantages of doing so. Therefore, a penance is
prescribed here. The term "Sankaḍi-paloyana" is used in this sutra to explain
the act of seeing various types of food prepared at a Jīmanavār and taking the
desired items. Therefore, it should be understood that this sutra prescribes a
penance for going to a Sankaḍi for alms and accepting food from there. **Penance
for Accepting Offered Food** 15. A monk who, entering a householder's family for
alms, accepts food, drink, edibles, or delicacies offered from a distance of
more than three rooms, or approves of someone who accepts them, incurs a minor
monthly penance. **Explanation:** Food, etc., should be accepted only in the
room where it is offered or while standing outside it. However, the
Dasavaikalika Sutra, Adhyayana 5, Uddesaka 1, states, "Knowing the extent of the
family's land, one should stay within that limit." This means that a monk should
only go as far as the permitted area in the family's compound. If, for some
reason, it is not possible to go that far, and the householder brings the food
from a distance of three rooms, then it can be accepted without incurring the
faults of "eshana." It should also be noted that while accepting food brought
from a distance of three rooms is permitted, accepting food brought from a
distance without seeing it ("adiṭṭha-haḍāe") is not permitted.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka] [67 saMkhaDI gamanaprAyazcitta 14. je bhikkhU
saMkhaDipaloyaNAe asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA paDigAhei paDigAheMtaM
vA saaijji| jo bhikSu jImanavAra ke liye banI khAdya sAmagrI ko dekhate huye
azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| (use laghamAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana"saMkhaDi-
paloyaNA-" saMkhaDisAmiNA aNaNNAto tammi rasavaIe aNuppavisittA odaNAdi paloiuM
bhaNati-'ito ya ito payacchAhi "tti esa paloyaNA" jo evaM asaNAdi giNhati tassa
mAsa lahuM  /  cUNi pRSTha-206  //  rasoI ghara meM pahu~ca kara cAMvala Adi
vastuoM ko dekhakara "yaha do yA isameM se do" isa prakAra kahanA
saMkhaDipralokana pUrvaka AhAra grahaNa karanA kahA gayA hai| 'saMkhaDi-
jImanavAra-jahAM para atyadhika prAraMbha se saikaDoM vyaktiyoM ke liye AhAra
banA ho aise jImanavAra meM bhikSA ke liye jAne kA yA usa dizA meM jAne kA
bRhatkalpa sUtra uddezA 1 tathA AcA. zru. 2 a. 1 u. 2-3 meM niSedha kiyA hai va
usase hone vAle aniSToM kA kathana bhI mUla pATha meM hai  /  ataH yahA~
prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| . jImaNavAra meM aneka prakAra kI khAdya sAmagrI
banatI dekhanA va icchita vastu lenA, isa viSaya kA spaSTIkaraNa karane ke liye
isa sUtra meM "saMkhaDI-paloyaNAe" zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai  /  ataH
saMkhaDI meM bhikSA ke liye jAne kA aura vahAM se AhAra grahaNa karane kA isa
sUtra meM prAyazcitta hai, aisA samajhanA cAhiye  /  /  abhihata AhAra grahaNa
prAyazcitta 15. je bhikkhU gAhAvaikulaM piMDavAyapaDiyAeaNapaviThe samANe paraM
ti-gharaMtarAo asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA abhihaDaM AhaTu
dijjamANaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  jo bhikSa gAthApati kUla meM
AhAra ke liye praveza karake tIna ghara arthAt tIna kamare se adhika dUra se
sAmane lAkara dete hue azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya ko grahaNa karatA hai yA
grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA
hai  /  ) vivecana- jisa kamare se AhArAdi grahaNa karanA ho, usI meM yA usake
bAhara khar3A raha kara hI AhArAdi grahaNa karanA caahiye| kintu dazavaikAlika
sUtra adhyayana 5 uddezaka 1 meM kahA hai ki "kulassa bhUmiM jANittA, miyaM
bhUmi parakkame" arthAt jina kuloM meM sAdhu ko jitanI sImA taka praveza
anujJAta ho usa maryAdita sthAna taka hI jAnA cAhiye  /  isa kAraNa se tathA
anya kisI vizeSa kAraNa se usa sthAna taka jAnA na ho sake to tIna kamare jitanI
dUrI se gRhastha lAkara de to eSaNA doSoM ko TAlakara grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA
hai| tIna ghara [kamare] jitane dUra sthala se lAye gaye AhAra grahaNa kI anujJA
ke sAtha "adiTThahaDAe" doSa yukta grahaNa kI anujJA nahIM hai, yaha bhI dhyAna
meM rakhanA caahiye|

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 6] [Nishīthasūtra A minor monthly atonement arises from accepting prasnadi
(questions) brought from a place more than three houses (rooms) away. The word
"three" is used in many places in common parlance and in the Agamas. It is used
to define the limit of a subject or to determine it. Here, the limit has been
defined by the word "three". There is a possibility of fault in bringing an
object from a distance beyond this limit. Foot-related atonement 16. The monk
who performs 'āmarjana' of his own feet once or repeatedly, or approves of the
one who does so. 17. The monk who performs 'sanvāhana' - massage of his own
feet, once or repeatedly, or approves of the one who does so. 18. The monk who
massages his own feet with oil or ghee, once or repeatedly, or approves of the
one who does so. 19. The monk who applies a paste or colors to his own feet,
once or repeatedly, or approves of the one who does so. 20. The monk who washes
his own feet with cold water or hot water, once or repeatedly, or approves of
the one who does so. 21. The monk who colors his own feet (with lac, henna,
etc.) or polishes that color (with oil, etc.), or approves of the one who does
so. (He incurs a minor monthly atonement.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 6] [nizIthasUtra tIna ghara (kamare) se adhika dUrI ke sthAna se lAkara diye
jAne vAle prazanAdi grahaNa karane para laghu mAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|
saMkhyAvAcI "tIna' zabda kA prayoga lokavyavahAra meM tathA Agama meM aneka
sthaloM para hotA hai  /  kisI viSaya kI sImA karane meM yA use nizcita karane
meM isakA prayoga hotA hai  /  yahAM tIna zabda se sImA kI gaI hai| isase jyAdA
dUra kI vastu sAmane lAkara dene meM doSa lagane kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai| pAMva
parikarma prAyazcitta 16. je bhikkhU appaNo "pAe" Amajjejja vA pamajjejja vA,
AmajjaMtaM vA pamajjaMtaM vA saaijji| 17. je bhikkhU appaNo "pAe" saMbAhejja vA
palimadejja vA, saMbAheMtaM vA palimaheMtaM vA saaijji| 18. je bhikkhU appaNo
"pAe" telleNa vA jAva NavaNIeNa vA anbhaMgejja vA makkhejja vA, abbhaMgeMtaM vA
makkheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  19. je bhikkhU appaNo "pAe" kakkeNa vA jAva vaNNehiM
vA ullolejja vA uvvade'jja vA, ulloleMtaM vA uvvaTeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  20. je
bhikkhU appaNo 'pAe' sIodagaviyaDega vA, usiNodaga-viyaDeNa vA uccholejja vA
padhovejja vA, uccholeMtaM vA padhoveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  21. je bhikkhU appaNo
'pAe' phummejja vA, raejja vA, phurmataM vA raeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  16. jo bhikSu
apane pairoM kA eka bAra yA bAra-bAra 'aAmarjana' karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 17. jo bhikSu apane pairoM kA 'saMvAhana'-mardana, eka
bAra yA bAra-bAra karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  18. jo
bhikSu apane pairoM kI tela yAvat makkhana se eka bAra yA bAra-bAra mAliza
karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 19. jo bhikSu apane pairoM kA
kalka yAvat varNoM se eka bAra yA bAra-bAra ubaTana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 20. jo bhikSu apane pairoM ko acitta zItala jala se yA
acitta uSNa jala se eka bAra yA bAra-bAra dhotA hai yA dhone vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 21. jo bhikSu apane pairoM ko (lAkSArasa, mehaMdI Adi se) raMgatA
hai athavA (tela Adi se) usa raMga ko camakAtA hai yA aisA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|)

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective  **Discussion:** In these sutras, two words are given for
the same action. Their meaning is interpreted as doing it once and doing it
repeatedly. In the Churni and Bhashya, the meaning is given in a different way.
For example:  1. **Thovena Abhanganam, Bahuna Makkhanam.** - Churni p. 27, Sutra
4. 2. **Abhangam Thovena, Bahuna Makkhanam.** - Churni p. 212, line 2. 3.
**Etesi Padham Pada Sai Tu, Bitiya Tu Bahuso Bahuna Va.** - Ga. 1496.
**Aamjjan:** Rubbing hands on feet or rubbing with chariots. **Sanbahan:**
Massaging - pressing the feet with hands.  This atonement should be understood
as performing Aamjjan and Sanbahan without fatigue or diseases like Vata. In
special circumstances or lack of tolerance, the sthavirakalpi should be allowed
to perform bodily functions and take medicine.  **Note:** Bhashya Ga. 1491-1492.
**Vyav. U. 5, Ni. U. 13:** While explaining the possibility of faults in the
practice of bodily functions, the Bhashyakar says:  **Sanghattana Tu Vate,
Suhame Ya'nne Viradhae Paane.** **Baus Dos Vibhusa, Tamha Na Pamajjae Paae.** ||
1493 ||  Gaatha 1498 also describes the faults. The combined meaning of both
Gaathas is:  * Violation of Vayu Kay, * Violation of small and large Sanpatim
Jivas like mosquitoes and insects, * Vakushta, * Non-observance of Brahmacharya,
* Loss of Sutra-Artha (Swadhyay), * Lokapavad (public criticism), etc.
Therefore, these practices should not be performed without a special reason.
**Fumejj Va Raejj Va:** The act of applying oil, etc. (to make the color
brighter) with a cotton swab after applying henna, etc. is called "Fumejj" here,
as in:  **Fumante Laggate Rago - Alattagarango Fumijjato Laggati.** - 1496.
**Meaning:** The color is applied by fumiting - the color of Alaktak is applied
only by fumiting.  In the Sutra, the word "Fumejj" is given first, which is
possible due to reasons like Vyatyaya, etc. Or, sometimes oil is applied and
then colored substances are also applied, this statement can also be made in
this expectation.  **Kay-Parikarma-Prayashchitta:** 22-27 **Je Bhikkhu Appano
Kayam Aamjjejj Va Pamajjejj Va Aamjjantam Va Pamajjantam Va Saijjai Evam
Paygamena Neyavvam Javam Je Bhikkhu Appano Kayam Fumejj Va Raejj Va Fumantan Va
Rayantam Va Saijjai.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka] vivecana-ina sUtroM meM eka hI kriyA ke liye do do pada diye
gaye haiN| unakA artha eka bAra karanA aura bAra bAra karanA isa taraha kiyA
gayA hai| cUrNI va bhASya meM dUsarI taraha se bhI artha diyA gayA hai  /  yathA
1. thoveNa abbhaMgaNaM, bahuNA makkhaNaM |-cuurnnii pR. 27, sUtra 4  /  /  2.
abbhaMgo thoveNa, bahuNA makkhaNaM  /  cUrNI pR. 212, paMkti 2  //  3. etesi
paDhama padA saI tu, bitiyA tu bahuso bahuNA vA  //  gA. 1496  /  /  AmajjaNa-
pAMvoM para hAtha pheranA yA rAthoM se gharSaNa karanA  /  saMbAhaNa-mardana
karanA-hAtha se pAMva ko dabAnA  /  thakAna yA vAta Adi roga ke binA, Amarjana
saMvAhana karane para yaha prAyazcitta samajhanA cAhie  /  vizeSa kAraNa meM
athavA sahanazIlatA ke abhAva meM sthavirakalpI ko zarIra kA parikarma karane kI
aura auSadha ke sevana kI anujJA samajhanI ni. bhASya gA. 1491-1492 _ vyava. u.
5, ni. u. 13 parikarma kI pravRtti meM doSoM kI saMbhAvanA batAte huye
bhASyakAra kahate haiM - saMghaTTaNA tu vAte, suhame ya'NNe virAdhae pANe  /
bAusa dosa vibhUsA, tamhA Na pamajjae pAe  //  1493  //  gAthA 1498 meM bhI
doSoM kA varNana kiyA hai  /  donoM gAthAnoM kA sayukta bhAvArtha yaha
haivAyukAya kI virAdhanA, macchara pataMgA Adi choTe bar3e saMpAtima jIvoM kI
virAdhanA, vakuzatA, brahmacarya kI agupti, sUtra-artha (svAdhyAya) kI parihAni
tathA lokApavAda Adi doSa. hote haiM  /  ataH vizeSa kAraNa ke binA ye
pravRttiyAM nahIM karanI caahiye| phumejja vA raejja vA-mehaMdI Adi lagAne ke
bAda rUI ke phohe se (raMga ko camakIlA banAne ke liye) tela Adi lagAne kI kriyA
ko yahAM "phumejja" kahA gayA hai, yathA phumaMte laggate rAgo-alattagaraMgo
phumijjato laggati  /  -1496 artha-phUmita karane para raMga lagatA hai-alaktaka
kA raMga phUmita karane se hI lagatA hai  /  sUtra meM "phumejja" pada pahale
diyA gayA hai, jo pada vyatyaya Adi kAraNa se bhI honA saMbhava hai athavA
kvacit tela lagAkara phira raMga ke padArtha bhI lagAye jAte hoM, isa apekSA se
bhI yaha kathana ho sakatA hai| kAya-parikarma-prAyazcitta 22-27 je bhikkhU
appaNo kAyaM Amajjejja vA pamajjejja vA AmajjaMtaM vA pamajjaMtaM vA sAijjai
evaM pAyagameNa NeyavvaM jAva je bhikkhU appaNo kAyaM phumejja vA raejja vA
phumaMtaM vA rayaMtaM vA saaijji|

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīthসূত্র  **[Nishīthসূত্র]**  **[Verse 1]**  A monk who immerses his body
once or repeatedly, or approves of someone doing so, is to be known as a
transgressor, just like a transgressor of the rules regarding the feet.
Similarly, a monk who colors his body or makes that color bright, or approves of
someone doing so, (incurs a minor monthly penance).  **[Explanation]**  The
independent statements of the transgressors of the six rules related to various
limbs are mentioned here. Therefore, here, the statement about the body should
be understood to include the remaining limbs - hands, stomach, back, etc., as
six rules. The entire explanation should be understood here in accordance with
the subject matter, just like the explanation of the rules regarding the feet.
**[Verse 2]**  A monk who immerses a wound on his body once or repeatedly, or
approves of someone doing so, is to be known as a transgressor, just like a
transgressor of the rules regarding the feet. Similarly, a monk who colors a
wound on his body or makes it bright, or approves of someone doing so, (incurs a
minor monthly penance).  **[Explanation]**  **Wound:** This is of two types:  1.
**Naturally occurring on the body:**  Ringworm, itching, leprosy, etc. 2.
**Caused by external actions:** Wounds caused by weapons, thorns, nails, etc.,
bites from snakes, dogs, etc., stumbling, or falling.  If a monk has the
capacity to endure, then for the sake of karma-nirjara, he should bear the
suffering arising in these situations with equanimity, but should not engage in
any external actions.  Penance is prescribed for these external actions because
there is a possibility of increasing negligence, increasing disease, etc., in
many ways. This minor monthly penance is prescribed to remind the monk of the
goal of "not engaging in external actions without an unbearable situation."
**[Verse 3 & 4]**  A monk who cuts or severs a boil, pimple, ulcer, abscess, or
fistula on his body with a sharp surgical instrument, or approves of someone
doing so, (incurs a minor monthly penance).  A monk who cuts or severs a boil,
pimple, ulcer, abscess, or fistula on his body with a sharp surgical instrument,
and then applies ointment or honey to it, or dries it, or approves of someone
doing so, (incurs a minor monthly penance).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [nizIthasUtra jo bhikSu apane zarIra kA eka bAra yA bAra bAra Amarjana karatA
hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai, isa prakAra paira ke AlApaka ke
samAna jAnanA yAvat jo bhikSu apane zarIra ko raMgatA hai yA usa raMga ko
camakIlA banAtA hai, athavA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai (use
laghumAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai|)  /  vivecana-aneka aMgoM saMbaMdhI 6 sUtroM
ke AlApakoM kA svataMtra kathana hai  /  ataH yahAM zarIra ke kathana se avazeSa
aMga-hAtha, peTa, pITha Adi ke lie 6 sUtra samajha lene cAhie, tathA saMpUrNa
vivecana paira ke sUtroM ke vivecana ke samAna yahAM bhI viSayAnusAra samajha
lenA cAhiye  /  varaNa-cikitsA-prAyazcitta 28-33 je bhikkha appaNo kAyaMsi vaNaM
Amajjejja vA pamajjejja vA AmajjaMtaM vA pamajjaMtaM vA sAijjai evaM pAyagameNa
yavvaM jAva je bhikkhU appaNo kAryasi vaNaM phumejja vA raejja vA phumaMtaM vA
rayaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  jo bhikSa apane zarIra meM hue ghAva kA eka bAra yA
aneka bAra Amarjana karatA hai yA Amarjana karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai,
isa prakAra paira ke AlApaka ke samAna jAnanA yAvat jo bhikSu apane zarIra para
hue ghAva ko raMgatA hai yA camakIlA banAtA hai yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-vraNa-ghAva  /
yaha do prakAra kA hotA hai 1. zarIra para svataH utpanna-dAda khujalI, koDha
Adi  /  2. bAhya upakrama se utpanna-zastra, kAMTA, kIla Adi ke lagane se,
sAMpa, kuttA Adi ke kATane se, Thokara lagane se yA girane-par3ane se utpanna
ghAva  /  bhikSu ko yadi sahana karane kI kSamatA ho to karma-nirjarArtha ina
paristhitiyoM meM bhI samabhAva se utpanna duHkha ko sahana karanA cAhiye kintu
parikarma nahIM karanA caahiye| aneka prakAra se pramAdavRddhi, rogavRddhi Adi
kI saMbhAvanA hone ke kAraNa inake parikarma kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /
'asahya sthiti ke binA parikarma nahIM karanA' isa lakSya kI smRti banI rahe
isaliye inakA laghumAsika prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  gaMDAdi-zalya-cikitsA-
prAyazcitta 34. je bhikkhU appaNo kAyaMsi gaMDaM vA, pilagaM vA, araiyaM vA,
aMsiyaM vA, bhagaMdalaM vA aNNayareNaM tikkheNaM satthajAeNaM Acchidejja vA
vicchidejja vA, AcchidaMtaM vA vicchidaMtaM vA saaijji| 35. je bhikkhU appaNo
kAyaMsi gaMDaM vA, pilagaM vA, araiyaM vA, aMsiyaM vA, bhagaMdalaM vA,
aNNayareNaM tikkhaNaM satthajAeNaM AcchidittA vicchidittA pUrva vA soNiyaM vA
NIharejja vA visohejja vA, NoharataM vA visoheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  .

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Second Objective] [71.36. A monk who cuts or repeatedly cuts a boil, a tumor, a
boil, a boil, a fistula, or any other similar thing on his body with a sharp
surgical instrument, or who removes pus or blood from it, or who washes it with
cold or hot water, or who approves of someone who does so, is guilty of a minor
offense. 37. A monk who cuts or repeatedly cuts a boil, a tumor, a boil, a boil,
a fistula, or any other similar thing on his body with a sharp surgical
instrument, or who removes pus or blood from it, or who washes it with cold or
hot water, or who approves of someone who does so, is guilty of a minor offense.
38. A monk who cuts or repeatedly cuts a boil, a tumor, a boil, a boil, a
fistula, or any other similar thing on his body with a sharp surgical
instrument, or who removes pus or blood from it, or who washes it with cold or
hot water, or who approves of someone who does so, is guilty of a minor offense.
39. A monk who cuts or repeatedly cuts a boil, a tumor, a boil, a boil, a
fistula, or any other similar thing on his body with a sharp surgical
instrument, or who removes pus or blood from it, or who washes it with cold or
hot water, or who approves of someone who does so, is guilty of a minor offense.
34. A monk who cuts or repeatedly cuts a boil, a tumor, a boil, a boil, a
fistula, or any other similar thing on his body with a sharp surgical
instrument, or who removes pus or blood from it, or who washes it with cold or
hot water, or who approves of someone who does so, is guilty of a minor offense.
35. A monk who cuts or repeatedly cuts a boil, a tumor, a boil, a boil, a
fistula, or any other similar thing on his body with a sharp surgical
instrument, or who removes pus or blood from it, or who washes it with cold or
hot water, or who approves of someone who does so, is guilty of a minor offense.
36. A monk who cuts or repeatedly cuts a boil, a tumor, a boil, a boil, a
fistula, or any other similar thing on his body with a sharp surgical
instrument, or who removes pus or blood from it, or who washes it with cold or
hot water, or who approves of someone who does so, is guilty of a minor offense.
37. A monk who cuts or repeatedly cuts a boil, a tumor, a boil, a boil, a
fistula, or any other similar thing on his body with a sharp surgical
instrument, or who removes pus or blood from it, or who washes it with cold or
hot water, or who approves of someone who does so, is guilty of a minor offense.
38. A monk who cuts or repeatedly cuts a boil, a tumor, a boil, a boil, a
fistula, or any other similar thing on his body with a sharp surgical
instrument, or who removes pus or blood from it, or who washes it with cold or
hot water, or who approves of someone who does so, is guilty of a minor offense.
]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka] [71 36. je bhikkhU appaNo kAryasi gaMDaM vA, pilagaM vA
araiyaM vA aMsiyaM vA, bhagaMdalaM vA, aNNayareNaM tikkheNaM satthajAeNaM,
AcchidittA vicchidittA pUrva vA soNiyaM vA NIharittA visohittA, sIodagaviyaDeNa
vA usiNodagaviyaDeNa vA uccholejja vA padhovejja vA, uccholeMtaM vA padhoveMtaM
vA saaijji| 37. je bhikkhU appaNo kAyaMsi gaMDaM vA, pilagaM vA, araiyaM vA,
aMsiyaM vA, bhagaMdalaM vA, aNNayareNaM tikkheNaM satthajAeNaM AcchidittA
vicchidittA pUrva vA soNiyaM vA NIharittA visohittA, sIodagaviyaDeNa vA
usiNodagaviyaDeNa vA uccholittA padhovittA aNNayareNaM AlevaNa-jAeNaM Alipejja
vA vilipejja vA AlipaMtaM vA vilipaMtaM vA saaijji| 38. je bhikkhU appaNo
kAryasi gaMDaM vA, pilagaM vA, araiyaM vA, aMsiyaM vA, bhagaMdalaM vA,
aNNayareNaM tikkheNaM satthajAeNaM AcchidittA vicchidittA pUrva vA soNiyaM vA
NIharittA visohittA, sIodagaviyaDeNa vA usiNodagaviyaDeNa vA uccholittA
padhovittA, aNNayareNaM AlevaNajAeNaM AlipittA-vilipittA telleNa vA jAva
NavaNIeNa vA anbhaMgejja vA makkhejja vA, abbhaMgeMtaM vA makkheMtaM vA sAijjai
/  39. je bhikkhU appaNo kAyaMsi gaMDaM vA, pilagaM vA, araiyaM vA aMsiyaM vA,
bhagaMdalaM vA aNNayareNaM tikkhaNaM sattha-jAeNaM, AcchidittA vicchidittA,
pUyaM vA soNiyaM vA NIharittA-visohittA, sIodagaviyaDeNa vA usiNodagaviyaDeNa vA
uccholittA padhovittA, aNNayareNaM AlevaNa-jAeNaM AlipittA-vilipittA telleNa vA
jAva NavaNIeNa vA anbhaMgettA makkhettA, aNNayareNaM dhUvajAeNaM dhUvejja vA
padhUvejja vA dhUvetaM vA padhUtaM vA saaijji| 34. jo bhikSu apane zarIra para
hue gaMDamAla, pairoM Adi para hue gumar3e, choTI-choTI phusiyA (alAiyA~) masA
tathA bhagaMdara Adi ko kisI tIkSNa zastra se eka bAra kATatA hai yA bAra-bAra
kATatA hai yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  35. jo bhikSu apane
zarIra ke gaMDamAla, gUmar3e, phusiyoM mase yA bhagaMdara ko kisI tIkSNa zastra
se kATakara pIpa yA rakta nikAlatA hai yA zodhana karatA hai, yA aisA karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 36. jo bhikSu apane zarIra ke gaMDamAla, gUmar3e,
phusiyoM, mase yA bhagaMdara ko kisI tIkSNa zastra se kATakara, pIpa, khUna
nikAlakara, zItala yA uSNa acitta jala se eka bAra yA bAra-bAra dhotA hai yA
dhone vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  37. jo bhikSu apane zarIra ke gaMDamAla,
gUmar3e, phusiyoM, mase yA bhagaMdara ko kisI tIkSNa zastra se kATakara, pIpa,
khUna nikAlakara, zItala yA uSNa acitta jala se dhokara kisI bhI prakAra kA
lepa-malahama lagAtA hai yA bAra-bAra lagAtA yA lagAne vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 38. jo bhikSa apane zarIra ke gaMDamAla, gUmar3e, phusiyoM, mase yA
bhagaMdara ko kisI tIkSNa zastra se kATakara, pIpa, khUna nikAlakara, zItala yA
uSNa acitta jala se dhokara kisI bhI prakAra kA

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[72] A monk who applies a *nishith sutra* ointment, massages with oil or ghee
once or repeatedly, or approves of someone doing so. 39. A monk who cuts his
body's *gandmala*, *pilga*, *phusi*, *masi*, or *bhagandir* with a sharp
instrument, removes pus and blood, washes with cold or hot water, applies any
kind of ointment, massages with oil or ghee, and perfumes with a fragrant
substance once or repeatedly, or approves of someone doing so, (incurs a *laghu
masik* penance). Discussion-1. *Gachchatiti gandam, tam cha gandmala*. || Ni.
Chu. || "From the upper region to the lower region it goes" that *gandmala* is
known as "throat swelling" in the world. Ni. Gha. || - A specific disease
related to the area below the ear, throat, and neck. 2. *Pilgam tu padagatam
gandam*. || Ni. Chu. || Here, understand the *pilga* that occurs throughout the
body from the *pilga* of the foot, because the word "pilga" is used in the
sutra. 3. *"Araiyan va"* *aratito jan na pacchati*. || Ni. Chu. || A small
wound-like form that arises due to blood disorder. In which, at that time, it
feels like comfort, but later there is an increase in pain, it is known as
"phusi" in the world. || Ni. Gha. || A group of ordinary heat-related *phusi* or
specific (smallpox-measles-chickenpox etc.) *phusi* by which the body becomes
unpleasant. 4. *Asiyam-ahittane nasaye vrane su va bhavati*. || Ni. Chu. ||
*Arshi* or, a disease in the anus, is known as "piles" in the world. || Ni. Gha.
|| 5. *Bhagandir*- a specific disease in the genital area. *Ekka si ishad va
aachhidanam, bahuvaram suthth va chhidanam vicchhidanam*. || Ni. Chu. || In the
*churni* of each sutra of this *shastak*, it is said that after saying the
complete *palap* of the previous sutra, one should say the specific *alavaga*
later. "The complete text of the previous sutra should be recited, and then
these *alavaga* should be recited." Therefore, the complete text of the previous
sutra is accepted here, and the meaning is summarized. Here, the use of the word
*annayaran* or *jatam* along with the *shashtra* *palevan* and *dhuv* is used.
The meaning of this is that these are of many types, and any one type is
intended here. In many previous *palap*s, the *abhyangan* sutra came first, and
then the *ubatan* sutra. But here, the *alapan* sutra comes first, and then the
*abhyangan* sutra. From this, it should be understood that these six sutra-
related actions in these *gand* etc. happen in this order. These sutras should
be understood as sequential and related sutras. But the actions described in the
previous *alavaga*s are non-sequential and independent, and the *alapan* and
*ubatan* are different actions in both *palavaga*s, it should be understood.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 72] [nizIthasUtra malahama lagAkara, tela yAvat makkhana se eka bAra yA bAra-
bAra mAliza karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 39. jo bhikSu
apane zarIra ke gaMDamAla, gUmar3e, phusiyoM, mase yA bhagaMdara ko kisI tIkSNa
zastra se kATakara, pIpa, khuna nikAlakara, zItala yA uSNa jala se dhokara kisI
bhI prakAra kA mala lagAkara, tela yAvat makkhana se mAliza karake kisI
sugaMdhita padArtha se eka bAra yA bAra-bAra suvAsita karatA hai yA karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  / )
vivecana-1. gacchatIti gaMDaM, taM ca gaMDamAlA  /  /  ni. cU.  /  /
"uccapradezAt nIcapradezaM gacchati" saH gaMDamAlA "kaMThamAlA" iti lokprsiddhH|
ni. ghaa.|| -kAna ke nIce va kaMTha aura gardana se sambandhita vyAdhivizeSa  /
2. pilagaM tu pAdagataM gNddN|  //  ni. cU.  /  /  yahA~ pA~va ke gUmaDe se pUre
zarIra meM hone vAle gUmar3e samajha leM kyoMki sUtra meM "pilagaM" zabda hI
hai| 3. "araiyaM vA" aratito jaM na paccati  //  ni.cuu.|| raktavikAreNa
jAyamAne laghu vraNa jarUpe  /  yasyAM kharjane tatsamaye sukhamiva jAyate
pazcAtduHkhAdhikyam "phunsIti" lokaprasiddham  //  ni. ghaa.|| jinake dvArA
zarIra aratikara ho jAtA hai, aisI sAdhAraNa garmI kI phusiyA yA viziSTa
(cecaka-aorI-acapaDA Adi) phusI samUha  /  4. asiyaM-ahiTThANe NAsAe vraNesu vA
bhavati  / " || ni. cU.  /  /  arzI vA, gudAgato rogaH "bavAsIra" iti
lokprsiddhH|"  //  ni. ghA.  //  5. bhagaMdara-guhya sthAna gata roga vizeSa  /
ekkasi ISad vA AcchidaNaM, bahuvAraM suThTha vA chidaNaM vicchidaNaM  /   //
ni. cuu.|| isa sUtra SaSTaka ke pratyeka sUtra kI cUrNI meM batAyA hai ki
pUrvokta sUtra kA pUrA pAlApaka kaha karake bAda meM vizeSa AlApaka kahanA
caahie| "puvvasuttaM savvaM uccAreUNa ime airittA aalaavgaa|" ataH yahA~ pUrva
sUtra kA pUrA pATha svIkAra kiyA gayA hai aura artha saMkSipta kiyA hai| yahA~
zastra ke pAlevaNa ke aura dhUva ke sAtha aNNayaraM yA jAtaM zabda kA prayoga
huA hai| isakA Azaya yaha hai ki ye aneka prakAra ke hote haiM unameM se kisI
bhI eka prakAra kA yahA~ vivakSita hai| pUrva ke aneka pAlApakoM meM pahale
abhyaMgana satra AyA hai, bAda meM ubaTana sUtra  /  kintu yahA~ para pahale
Alepana sUtra hai phira abhyaMgana sUtra hai| isase yaha samajhanA cAhie ki ina
gaMDa Adi meM ye 6 sUtragata kriyAe~ isa krama se hotI haiM,  /  ina sUtroM ko
kramika va sambandhita sUtra samajhanA caahie| kintu pUrva ke AlApakoM meM
varNita kriyAe~ akramika va svataMtra haiM tathA donoM pAlApakoM meM Alepana
aura ubaTana ye bhinna-bhinna kriyAe~ haiM aisA samajhanA caahie|

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective  **Actions of the previous healers:** 1. **Āmarjana** -
rubbing with hands, 2. **Mardana** - pressing with hands, 3. **Mālisha** - with
oil etc., 4. **Ubtana** - with lodha etc., 5. **Prakṣālana** - with purified
water, 6. **Raṅgana** - with henna etc.  **Actions of the healers of wounds
etc.:** 1. Cutting with a weapon and after cutting, 2. Draining pus and blood
and after draining, 3. Washing with purified water and after washing, 4.
Applying ointment and after applying, 5. Massaging with oil etc. and after
massaging, 6. Perfuming with fragrant substances.  From Sutra number 16 to 69,
there are a total of 54 Sutras on the atonement for bodily actions. The
commentator has explained the meaning of these Sutras as follows: "One should
understand that there is permission to perform these actions due to a cause, and
atonement for performing them without a cause." However, there are 6 Sutras for
wounds and 6 Sutras for wounds etc. Why is atonement mentioned in these 12
Sutras even though the cause is clear?  In response to this question, the
commentator says: "Knowing that the disease is caused by the unbearable, one
should remain happy with a compassionate heart and endure it with equanimity,
but one should not engage in contemplation or meditative state. The Jina-kalpi
Grama-rananta remain in this state. However, when the pain becomes unbearable
for the sthavira-kalpi, they perform these actions for the following reasons: 1.
To avoid the severance of the meaning of the Sutra, 2. For the sake of a
disciplined life, 3. To attain death with a meditative state, and 4. To increase
knowledge, vision, character, and penance. This is called "performing with a
cause."  1. Performing these actions without considering endurance etc., 2.
Without aiming to increase capacity, 3. Performing these actions out of mere
habit due to ordinary reasons is called "performing without a cause." This is
the expectation behind this atonement rule.  Three verses indicating this
meaning are as follows:  **Nikkāraṇe ṇ kappati, gaṇḍādīesu chēa-dhūvaṇādī |
Āsajja kāraṇaṁ puṇa, so chēva gamo havayi tattha || 1507**  **Cupatitaṁ dukkhaṁ,
abhibhūto veyaṇāe tivvāe | Addīṇo avvahiyo, taṁ dukkhaṁ ahiyaasae sammāṁ || 1508
||**  **[73**  **Avvochchittiṇimittaṁ, jīvaṭṭhie samāhiheḍaṁ vā | Pamajjaṇādi tu
pade, jayanaae samāyare bhikkhū || 1509 || Ni. Chū.**  In the Nisītha Sutra,
objective 13 states that if one performs medical treatment without a disease
[before or after a disease], then atonement is required. From its implications,
it also emerges that the sthavira-kalpi, considering their meditative state, can
perform actions of treatment and bodily actions, if necessary, with gradual
discernment, based on the meaning of the Gīta and the meaning of the Gīta. The
decision regarding exceptional circumstances is made in accordance with the
principles of the Gīta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka ] pUrva AlApakoM kI kriyAe~ 1. Amarjana - hAtha se gharSaNa, 2.
mardana hAtha se dabAnA, 3. mAliza telAdi se, 4. ubaTana --- lodhAdi se, 5.
prakSAlana- pracitta jala se, 6. raMganA - mehaMdI Adi se, gaMDAdi AlAyaka kI
kriyAe~1. zastra se kATanA va kATakara, 2. pIpa khUna nikAlanA va nikAlakara, 3.
pracitta jala se dhonA aura dhokara, 4. malahama lagAnA va lagAkara, 5. telAdi
se mAliza karanA, karake, 6. sugaMdhita dravya se suvAsita karanA  /  sUtra
saMkhyA 16 se 69 taka zarIraparikarma prAyazcitta ke kula 54 sUtra haiM  /
vyAkhyAkAra ne ina sUtroM kA bhAva yaha batAyA hai ki- 'kAraNa se karane meM
anujJA va akAraNa se karane para prAyazcitta hai' aisA samajhanA cAhiye  /
kintu vraNa ke 6 sUtra aura gaMDAdi ke 6 sUtra haiM  /  ina 12 sUtroM meM to
kAraNa spaSTa hai phira bhI prAyazcitta kyoM kahA gayA hai ? isa prazna ke
uttara meM vyAkhyAkAra kahate haiM ki- 'roga ko asAtAvedanIya se utpanna huA
jAnakara pradIna bhAva se prasannacitta rahakara nirjarArtha samabhAva se sahana
karanA cAhiye, kintu prartadhyAna yA samAdhi bhAva nahIM karanA cAhiye  /
jinakalpI grAmaraNAMta isI avasthA se rahate haiM  /  kintu sthavira - kalpI
dvArA vedanA asahya hone para 1. sUtra artha ke viccheda na hone ke liye 2.
saMyamI jIvana ke liye, 3. samAdhibhAva pUrvaka maraNa kI prApti ke liye tathA
4. jJAna-darzana- cAritra tapa kI vRddhi karane ke liye, ina kriyAoM ko karanA
vaha "sakAraNa karanA" kahalAtA hai  /  1. sahanazIlanA Adi kA vicAra kiye binA,
2. kSamatA bar3hAne kA lakSya rakhe binA, 3. sAdhAraNa kAraNa se hI zIghra
upacAra karane kI Adata mAtra se ye pravRttiyAM karanA "akAraNa karanA" kahalAtA
hai, isa apekSA se yaha prAyazcittavidhAna hai  /  isa bhAvArtha kI sUcaka tIna
gAthAyeM isa prakAra haiMNikkAraNe Na kappati, gaMDAdIesu chea-dhuvaNAdI  /
Asajja kAraNaM puNa, so ceva gamo havai tattha  /  /  1507 cupatitaM dukkhaM,
abhibhUto veyaNAe tivvAe  /  addINo avvahio, taM dukkhaM ahiyAsae sammaM  /  /
1508  //  [73 avvocchittiNimittaM, jIvaTThie samAhiheDaM vA  /  pamajjaNAdi tu
pade, jayaNAe samAyare bhikkhU  /  /  1509  //  ni. cU. nizItha sUtra uddezaka
13 meM binA roga ke [ roga ke pUrva yA pazcAt ] cikitsA kare to prAyazcitta kahA
gayA hai  /  usake phalitArtha se bhI yaha bhAva nikalatA hai ki sthavirakalpI
apane samAdhi bhAva kA vicAra karake Avazyaka ho to gItArtha va gItArtha kI
nizrA se kramika vivekapUrvaka upacAra tathA zarIraparikarma kI kriyAeM kara
sakatA hai  /  apavAda prasaMga kA nirNaya gItArtha ke tattvAvadhAna meM hotA
hai  /

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[74] It would be relevant here to quote some essential parts from the
introduction of Nishīthachūrṇī Part-3 to understand the decision of Utsarga and
Apavāda in Nishīthasūtra. Utsarga and Apavāda The goal of both Utsarga and
Apavāda is the purification of life, spiritual development, protection of
restraint, and the growth of virtues like knowledge, etc. Just as a traveler
walking on a royal path, when faced with a particular obstacle, abandons the
highway and takes a nearby path, and after going some distance, if no obstacle
is seen, returns to the highway. This is what should be understood in relation
to going from Utsarga to Apavāda and from Apavāda to Utsarga. The goal of both
is progress. Therefore, both are paths, not wrong paths or wrong paths. The
harmony of both makes the sadhaka's sadhana successful and prosperous. When and
for how long Utsarga and Apavāda? The question is actually important. Utsarga is
the general method of sadhana. Therefore, the sadhaka has to walk on it
continuously. Utsarga can be abandoned but not without reason. Utsarga is
abandoned and Apavāda is adopted only in special circumstances, but not forever.
_ A sadhaka who abandons the path of Utsarga without reason or leaves it when a
common reason arises is not a true sadhaka, he is not a worshiper of Jinājnā but
a destroyer. A person who takes medicine without reason or pretends to be sick
even when he is not sick is a cheat, he is duty-bound. Such people themselves go
astray and taint society. This is the condition of those sadhakas who abandon
the path of Utsarga for ordinary reasons or who constantly use Apavāda without
reason, who after using Apavāda once due to reason, continue to use Apavāda even
after the reason is over. Such sadhakas themselves go astray and also present an
inappropriate example in society. Such sadhakas have no principles and no limits
to their Utsarga Apavāda. They defame the prescribed path of Apavāda to fulfill
their desires or to hide their weakness. The path of Apavāda is also a special
path. It also leads the sadhaka towards liberation, not towards the world. Just
as Utsarga is the path of restraint, so is Apavāda. But it should be truly
Apavāda. The sadhaka needs to be constantly vigilant, aware and alert to ensure
that the desire for enjoyment (and the kṣaya vrutti) does not deceive him in the
guise of Apavāda. If the sadhaka is faced with a truly difficult situation, no
other easy path is found, and as a result, Apavāda has become unavoidable, then
using Apavāda is Dharma. And as soon as the stormy atmosphere that has come is
cleared, the situation is no longer difficult, then one should get on the path
of Utsarga. In such a situation, even a moment's delay (restraint) can be fatal.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 74] [nizIthasUtra utsarga va apavAda ke nirNaya ko samajhane ke lie
nizIthacUrNI bhAga-3 kI prastAvanA se kucha Avazyaka aMza uddhata karanA yahAM
prAsaMgika hogaa| utsarga aura apavAda utsarga aura apavAda donoM kA lakSya hai-
jIvana kI zuddhi, AdhyAtmika vikAsa, saMyama kI surakSA, jJAnAdi sadguNoM kI
vRddhi  /  jaise rAjapatha para calane vAlA pathika yadA kadA vizeSa bAdhA
upasthita hone para rAjamArga kA parityAga kara pAsa kI pagaDaMDI pakar3a letA
hai aura kucha dUra jAne ke bAda kisI prakAra kI bAdhA dikhAI na de to punaH
rAjamArga para lauTa AtA hai| yahI bAta utsarga se apavAda meM jAne aura apavAda
se utsarga meM Ane ke saMbaMdha meM samajha lenI caahie| donoM kA lakSya pragati
hai  /  ata: donoM hI mArga haiM, amArga yA unmArga nahIM haiM  /  donoM ke
samanvaya se sAdhaka kI sAdhanA siddha evaM samRddha hotI hai  /  utsarga aura
apavAda kaba aura kaba taka ? prazna vastutaH mahatva kA hai| utsarga sAdhanA kI
sAmAnya vidhi hai  /  ataH usa para sAdhaka ko satata calanA hotA hai| utsarga
chor3A jA sakatA hai kintu akAraNa nahIM  /  kisI vizeSa paristhitivaza hI
utsarga kA parityAga kara apavAda apanAyA jAtA hai, para sadA ke lie nhiiN| _ jo
sAdhaka akAraNa utsarga mArga kA parityAga kara detA hai athavA sAmAnya kAraNa
upasthita hone para use chor3a detA hai, vaha sAdhaka saccA sAdhaka nahIM hai,
vaha jinAjJA kA ArAdhaka nahIM apitu virAdhaka hai| jo vyakti akAraNa auSadha
sevana karatA hai athavA roga na hone para bhI rogI hone kA abhinaya karatA hai
vaha dhUrta hai, kartavyavimukha hai| aise vyakti svayaM pathabhraSTa hokara
samAja ko kalaMkita karate haiM  /  yahI dazA una sAdhakoM kI hai jo sAdhAraNa
kAraNa se utsarga mArga kA parityAga kara dete haiM yA akAraNa hI apavAda kA
sevana karate rahate haiM, kAraNavaza eka bAra apavAda sevana ke bAda, kAraNa
samApta hone para bhI apavAda kA satata sevana karate rahate haiN| aise sAdhaka
svayaM pathabhraSTa hokara samAja meM bhI eka anucita udAharaNa upasthita karate
haiN| aise sAdhakoM kA koI siddhAnta nahIM hotA hai aura na unake utsarga
apavAda kI sImA hotI hai  /  ve apanI vAsanApUrti ke lie yA durbalatA chipAne ke
lie vihita apavAda mArga ko badanAma karate haiN| apavAda mArga bhI eka vizeSa
mArga hai| vaha bhI sAdhaka ko mokSa kI ora hI le jAtA hai, saMsAra kI ora nahIM
/  jisa prakAra utsarga saMyama mArga hai usI prakAra apavAda bhI saMyama mArga
hai  /  kintu vaha apavAda vastutaH apavAda honA cAhiye  /  apavAda ke pavitra
veSa meM kahIM bhogAkAMkSA (va kaSAya vRtti) cakamA na de jAya, isake liye
sAdhaka ko satata, sajaga, jAgarUka evaM saceSTa rahane kI AvazyakatA hai|
sAdhaka ke sanmukha vastutaH koI vikaTa paristhiti ho, dUsarA koI sarala mArga
sUjha hI na par3atA ho, phalataH apavAda aparihArya sthiti meM upasthita ho gayA
ho tabhI apavAda kA sevana dharma hotA hai aura jyoM hI samAgata tUphAnI
vAtAvaraNa sApha ho jAya, sthiti kI vikaTatA na rahe, tyoM hI utsarga mArga para
ArUr3ha ho jAnA caahiye| aisI sthiti meM kSaNa bhara kA vilaMba bhI (saMyama)
ghAtaka ho sakatA hai|

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Second Objective  [75]  Another point is that one should consume
exceptions only as much as necessary. It should not be that once one has done
it, one thinks, "What's the harm in doing this too?"  Continuously rolling
through life from one exception to another with a lax attitude is not an
exception. For those who lack awareness of their limits, who do not know the
quantity and boundaries of exceptions, exceptions do not lead to upliftment but
to a hundredfold downfall. There is a very beautiful mythological illustration.
From it, one can easily understand what the limits of renunciation and
exceptions are and how one should analyze them with utmost honesty.  "A learned
sage was passing by. He was extremely distressed by hunger and thirst. There was
a terrible famine for twelve years. Some wrestlers of the king were sitting
together eating. The sage asked for food. The reply was, "The food is leftover."
The sage said, "So what if it's leftover, after all, I need to fill my stomach."
"In times of crisis, there are no limits." He took the food, ate it, and started
to walk. Then he asked for water. The sage replied, "The water is leftover, I
cannot drink it." The people said, "It seems that as soon as the food went into
your stomach, your intelligence returned." The sage calmly said, "Brothers! Your
thinking is right, but I have a limit. Food was not available elsewhere, and I
was so distressed by hunger that my life was coming to an end, and I had no more
capacity to endure. Therefore, I accepted leftover food in the situation of an
exception. Now, water can be found pure elsewhere according to my limits.
Therefore, why should I drink leftover water in vain?"  In short, the essence is
that one should walk on the path of renunciation as long as one can. When it
becomes completely impossible to walk, and there is no other way to escape, then
one should resort to the path of exceptions. And as soon as the situation
improves, one should immediately return to the path of renunciation.  The path
of renunciation is the normal path. There is no room for the question of who
walks on it and who does not. As long as there is strength, enthusiasm, no sense
of dejection even in times of adversity, no harm to the Dharma or the Sangha, or
no particular occasion for the loss of knowledge, vision, or character, one
should walk on the path of renunciation, not on the path of exceptions.  One
walks on the path of exceptions only occasionally. Not every seeker can walk on
it at all times. The seeker who has fully studied the Acharanga Sutra and other
codes of conduct, who understands the subtle essence of the Gītārttha, the
Nīśītha Sutra, and other Chheda Sutras, who not only studies but also has a
clear experience of the terms renunciation and exceptions, is the one who can
make the right decision regarding the acceptance or rejection of exceptions.
Therefore, in performing the practices mentioned in all the sutras dealing with
exceptional rules, one should keep in mind the description of the nature of
renunciation and exceptions.  **Worm-killing Penance**  40. The monk who, with
his own hand, kills a worm, whether it is a small worm or a large worm, or who
causes it to be killed, or who approves of its killing.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka] [75 aura eka bAta yaha bhI hai ki jitanA Avazyaka ho utanA hI
apavAda kA sevana karanA cAhiye  /  aisA na ho ki jaba yaha kara liyA to aba
isameM kyA hai ? yaha bhI kara leM  /  jIvana ko nirantara eka apavAda se dUsare
apavAda para zithila bhAva se luDhakAte jAnA, apavAda nahIM hai| jina logoM kI
maryAdA kA bhAna nahIM haiM, apavAda kI mAtrA evaM sImA kA parijJAna nahIM hai,
unakA apavAda ke dvArA utthAna nahIM hai apitu zatamukha patana hotA hai| eka
bahuta sundara paurANika dRSTAMta hai  /  usa para se sahaja samajhA jA sakatA
hai ki utsarga aura apavAda kI apanI kyA sImAeM hotI haiM aura usakA sUkSma
vizleSaNa kisa ImAnadArI se karanA cAhiye  /  "eka vidvAn RSi kahIM se gujara
rahe the  /  bhUkha aura pyAsa se atyanta vyAkula the| dvAdazavarSI bhayaMkara
durbhikSa thaa| rAjA ke kucha hastIpaka (pIlavAna) eka jagaha sAtha meM
baiThakara bhojana kara rahe the  /  RSi ne bhojana maaNgaa| uttara
milA-'bhojana to jUThA hai'  /  RSi bole-"jUThA hai to kyA, Akhira peTa to
bharanA hai" "ApatkAle maryAdA nAsti' bhojana liyA, khAyA aura calane lage to
jala lene ko kahA, taba RSi ne uttara diyA-'jala jUThA hai, maiM nahIM pI
sktaa'| logoM ne kahA ki mAlUma hotA hai ki-'anna peTa meM jAte hI buddhi lauTa
AI hai| RSi ne zAMta bhAva se kahA baMdhupro ! tamharA socanA ThIka hai kintu
merI eka maryAdA hai| anna anyatra mila nahIM rahA thA aura maiM bhUkha se itanA
Akula-vyAkula thA ki prANa kaMTha meM A rahe the aura adhika sahane kI kSamatA
samApta ho cukI thii| ataH maiMne jUThA anna bhI apavAda kI sthiti meM svIkAra
kara liyaa| aba jala to merI maryAdA ke anusAra anyatra zuddha mila sakatA hai|
ataH maiM vyartha hI jUThA jala kyoM pIU~  / " saMkSepa meM sAra yaha hai ki
jaba taka calA jA sakatA hai utsarga mArga para hI calanA cAhiye, jaba calanA
sarvathA dastara ho jAya, dUsarA koI idhara-udhara bacAva kA mArga na rahe taba
apavAda mArga kA sevana karanA cAhiye aura jyoM hI sthiti sudhara jAya punaH
tatkSaNa utsarga mArga para lauTa AnA cAhiye  /  utsarga mArga sAmAnya mArga
hai| yahAM kauna cale kauna nahIM cale, isa prazna ke liye kucha bhI sthAna
nahIM hai| jaba taka zakti rahe. utsAha rahe. aApatti kAla meM bhI kisI prakAra
kA glAnibhAva na Ave, dharma evaM saMgha para kisI prakAra kA upadrava na ho
athavA jJAna darzana cAritra kI kSati kA koI vizeSa prasaMga upasthita na ho,
taba taka utsarga mArga para hI calanA hai, apavAda mArga para nahIM  /  apavAda
mArga para kabhI kadAcitt hI calA jAtA hai  /  isa para hara koI sAdhaka hara
kisI samaya nahIM cala sakatA hai| jo sAdhaka aAcArAMgasUtra Adi AcArasaMhitA kA
pUrNa adhyayana kara cukA hai, gItArtha hai, nizItha sUtra Adi cheda sUtroM ke
sUkSmatama marma kA bhI jJAtA hai, utsarga-apavAda padoM kA adhyayana hI nahIM
apitu spaSTa anubhava rakhatA hai, vahI apavAda ke svIkAra yA parihAra ke
saMbaMdha meM ThIka ThIka nirNaya de sakatA hai| ataH sabhI ApavAdika vidhAna.
karane vAle sutroM meM kahI gaI pravRttiyoM ke karane meM isa utsarga-apavAda ke
svarUpa saMbaMdhI varNana ko dhyAna meM rakhanA caahiye| kRmi-nIharaNa
prAyazcitta 40. je bhikkhU appaNo pAlu-kimiyaM vA, kucchikimiyaM vA, aMgulIe
Nivesiya-Nivesiya NIharai, NIharaMtaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 76] [Nishīthasūtra A monk who removes the worms from his apānadvāra or kukshi
with his finger, or approves of someone who does so, incurs a minor monthly
atonement. Discussion - Worms are generated in the stomach due to digestive
disorders and often come out with impurities from the apānadvāra (anus). These
worms sometimes stop at the mouth of the apānadvāra or sometimes inside. It is
possible to cause harm by removing them with a finger, hence the atonement.
Kukshi - The inner part of the apānadvāra up to 3-4 inches. Pālu - The outer
opening of the apānadvāra. Kimiyam - Worms are of many types, small and large.
They live for a short time after coming out. They can be like fine threads or
like small snake babies. Nakh-parikarma atonement 41. A monk who cuts or trims
the tips of his overgrown nails, or approves of someone who does so, incurs a
minor monthly atonement. Discussion - In the Āgamas, "doharomanhansiṇo" - long
hair and nails - Das. A. 6 Ga. 64 and "dhuttakesamansuromanhe" - one who does
not perform the rites of hair, mustache, hair and nails - Praśna. Śru. 2, A. 1,
Sū. 4, etc., even though there are such texts, one should not understand that
cutting nails is absolutely prohibited because in Āchā. Śru. 2, A. 7, U. 1,
there is a statement about not giving the nail cutter taken for oneself to
another monk and the method of returning it to oneself. In Nishīth U. 1, Sūtra
32, there is an atonement for using the nail cutter taken for cutting nails for
other purposes. And in Sūtras 17, 21, 25, 29, 37, there are atonement provisions
for taking it improperly, returning it properly, taking it without purpose, etc.
From these Āchārāṅga and Nishīthasūtra texts, it is self-evident that a monk can
take a nail cutter properly if necessary, cut his nails and return it properly.
But in the present sūtra, there is a statement of atonement for cutting nails,
which makes it clear that there is a prohibition and atonement for cutting nails
without reason, and there is no atonement for cutting nails with reason. If
overgrown nails are an obstacle in performing service tasks, then cutting nails
is "with reason". Cutting nails with the intention of cutting them on a fixed
day is "without reason".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 76] [nizIcasUtra jo bhikSu apane apAnadvAra kI kRmiyoM ko aura kukSi kI kRmiyoM
ko aMgulI DAla-DAlakara nikAlatA hai yA nikAlane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai
(use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-pAcana kI vikRti se peTa meM
kRmiyoM kI utpatti hotI hai jo prAyaH apAnadvAra gudA bhAga se azuci ke sAtha
bAhara nikalatI haiM  /  ye kRmiyAM kabhI apAnadvAra ke mukha para yA kabhI
kucha andara bhAga meM ruka jAtI haiN| unheM aMgulI ke dvArA nikAlane meM
virAdhanA saMbhava hotI hai ataH prAyazcitta kahA hai| kukSi-apAna dvAra kA 3-4
aMgula taka kA bhItarI bhAga  /  pAlu-apAna dvAra kA bAhya mukhasthAna  /
kimiyaM-kRmi choTI bar3I aneka prakAra kI hotI haiM  /  jo bAhara nikalane ke
vAda alpa samaya taka hI jIvita rahatI haiM  /  ve bArIka laTa jaisI yAvat sarpa
ke choTe bacce jaisI bhI ho sakatI hai  /  nakha-parikarma prAyazcitta 41. je
bhikkhU appaNo dohAo NahasIhAo' kappejja vA, saMThavejja vA, kaptaM vA
saMThaveMtaM vA saaijji| 41. jo bhikSu apane bar3he huye nakhoM ke agrabhAgoM ko
kATatA hai yA sudhAratA hai yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use
laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-aAgAmoM meM
"doharomanahaMsiNo"-dIrgha roma nakhoM vAlA-daza. a. 6 gA. 64 tathA
"dhuttakesamaMsuromaNahe" -keza, mUcha, roma aura nakhoM ke saMskAra nahIM
karane vAlA, -prazna. zru. 2, a. 1, sU, 4 ityAdi pAThoM ke hote hue bhI nakha
kATane kA ekAMta niSedha nahIM samajhanA cAhiye kyoMki AcA. zru. 2, a. 7, u. 1,
meM svayaM ke liye grahaNa kiye nakhachedanaka ko anya bhikSu ko nahIM dene kA
tathA svayaM ke lauTAne kI vidhi kA kathana hai  /  nizItha u. 1, sUtra 32 meM
nakha kATane ke lie grahaNa kiye nakhachedanaka se anya kArya karane kA
prAyazcitta hai  /  tathA sUtra 17, 21, 25, 29, 37 meM avidhi se grahaNa karane,
pravidhi se lauTAne, binA prayojana grahaNa karane Adi ke prAyazcitta vidhAna
haiM  /  ina AcArAMga tathA nizIthasUtra ke pAThoM se svataH siddha hai ki sAdhu
nakhachedanaka Avazyaka hone para vidhi se grahaNa kara sakatA hai, nakha kATa
sakatA hai aura vidhi se lauTA sakatA hai  /  kintu prastuta sUtra meM nakha
kATane kA prAyazcitta kathana hai, isase yaha spaSTa hotA hai ki akAraNa nakha
kATane kA niSedha aura prAyazcitta hai evaM sakAraNa nakha kATane para
prAyazcitta nahIM hai  /  sevAkAryoM ke karane meM bar3he hue nakha yadi bAdhA
rUpa hoM to nakha kATanA "sakAraNa" hai  /  niyata dina se nakha kATane kA
saMkalpa rakha kara nakha kATanA "akAraNa" hai  /

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective:  **Hair Removal Penance**  42. A monk who cuts or trims the
hair on his thighs, or approves of someone doing so. 43. A monk who cuts or
trims the hair on his genitals, or approves of someone doing so. 44. A monk who
cuts or trims the hair on his stomach, chest, or back, or approves of someone
doing so. 45. A monk who cuts or trims the hair on his eyebrows, or approves of
someone doing so. 46. A monk who cuts or trims his beard, or approves of someone
doing so. 47. A monk who cuts or trims his mustache, or approves of someone
doing so. (He incurs a minor monthly penance.)  **Teeth Care Penance**  48. A
monk who files or polishes his teeth, or approves of someone doing so. 49. A
monk who cleans his teeth with cold or hot water, or polishes them, or approves
of someone doing so.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka ] roma- parikarma prAyazcitta 42. je bhikkhU appaNo dIhAI
jaMgha - romAI kappejja vA saMThavejja vA, kappetaM vA saMThaveMtaM vA sAijjai
/  43. je bhikkhU appaNo dIhAiM vatthi-romAiM kappejja vA saMThavejja vA,
kappetaM vA saMThaveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  [ 77 44. je bhikkhU appaNo dohAI
"romarAI" kappejja vA saMThavejja vA, kappetaM vA saMThaveMtaM vA sAijjai  /
45. je bhikkhU appaNo dIhAI kakkha-romAI kappejja vA saMThavejja vA kappetaM vA
saMThavetaM vA sAijjai 46. je bhikkhU appaNo dohAI "uttaroTTha-romAI" kappejja
vA saMThavejja vA, kappetaM vA saMThaveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  47. je bhikkhU appaNo
dIhAI "maMsuromAI" kappejja vA saMThavejja vA, kappetaM vA saMThaveMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  42. jo bhikSu apane bar3he hue "jaMghA " ke romoM ko kATatA hai yA
sudhAratA hai ( saMvAratA hai) yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
43. jo bhikSu bar3he hue guhya deza ke romoM ko kATatA hai, sudhAratA hai, yA
aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  44. jo bhikSu apane bar3he hue
peTa, chAtI va pITha bhAga ke romoM ko kATatA hai yA sudhAratA haisaMvAratA hai
yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  45. jo bhikSu apane car3he hue
AMkha ke romoM ko kATatA hai yA sudhAratA hai-saMvAratA hai yA aisA karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  46. jo bhikSu apanI bar3hI huI "dAr3hI" ko kATatA
hai yA sudhAratA-saMvAratA hai yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA haiM  /
47. jo bhikSu apanI bar3hI huI " mU~choM" ko kATatA hai yA sudhAratA -saMvAratA
hai yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use laghumAsika
prAyazcitta prAtA hai | ) daMta - parikarma- prAyazcitta 48. je bhikkhU appaNo
"daMte" AghaMsejja vA paghaMsejja vA, AghaMsaMtaM vA paghaMsaMtaM vA sAijjai  /
49. je bhikkhU appaNo "daMte" sIodagaviyaDeNa vA, usiNodaga - viyaDeNa vA,
uccholejja vA padhovejja vA, uccholeMtaM vA padhoveMtaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[78] [Nishīthasūtra 50. A monk who polishes or rubs his teeth, or approves of
someone who polishes or rubs their teeth, incurs a minor monthly atonement. 48.
A monk who washes his teeth with cold or hot water, once or repeatedly, or
approves of someone who washes their teeth, incurs a minor monthly atonement.
49. A monk who colors his teeth with missi or other substances, or makes them
shiny by applying oil or other substances, or approves of someone who does so,
incurs a minor monthly atonement. Discussion - In Dashavaikalika A. 3, Ga. 3,
tooth brushing is called an act of misconduct. In Uvvai and other Agamas,
"adanta-dhavan" (not brushing teeth) is mentioned as a practice in the life of a
Shraman. In the present age, due to the difference in the food and water
consumed by monks and nuns compared to ancient times, there is a possibility of
tooth decay or "pyorrhea" if they do not brush their teeth. Therefore, those
monks and nuns who wish to follow this Jina-injunction should take the following
precautions: 1. Do not consume nutritious foods, and if they do, they should
observe fasts or other austerities. 2. Always practice the Unodari tapa
(austerity of eating only once a day). 3. Do not consume extremely hot or
extremely cold substances. 4. After eating or drinking something, one should
drink some water while cleaning their teeth. Similarly, when abandoning the four
viharas in the evening, one should drink water while thoroughly cleaning their
teeth. 5. Do not eat chocolates, pills, etc. By taking these precautions, even
while following the "adanta-dhavan" rule, teeth can remain healthy, and there
can be a state of samadhi (concentration) in sensory restraint, celibacy, etc.
The Agamic injunctions regarding adanta-dhavan, bathing, celibacy, Unodari tapa,
and other external and internal austerities, and all other rules are
interconnected. Therefore, only by fully following all the Agamic rules can
health and the samadhi of restraint be maintained. The implication is that
success in sensory restraint can be achieved only with the observance of the
adanta-dhavan rule and with discretion in eating and drinking. Success in
sensory restraint is the success of restraint worship. For these reasons, the
Agamas give so much importance to adanta-dhavan. Generally, using toothpaste and
performing tooth-brushing related activities are all unsuitable practices for a
life of restraint. However, if teeth become diseased due to carelessness or any
other reason, using toothpaste and performing tooth-brushing related activities
for medical treatment is not an act of misconduct. And it does not incur
atonement from the present sutra. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 78] [nizIthasUtra 50. je bhikkhU appaNo "daMte" phumejja vA raejja vA, phutaM
vA raeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  _ artha48. jo bhikSu dA~ta (maMjana Adi se) ghisatA
hai yA bAra-bAra ghisatA hai yA ghisane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 49. jo
bhikSu apane dA~ta zItala yA uSNa acitta jala se eka bAra yA bAra-bAra dhotA hai
yA dhone vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 50. jo bhikSu apane dA~ta missI Adi se
raMgatA hai yA tela Adi padArtha lagAkara camakIle banAtA hai yA aisA karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana-
dazavaikAlika a. 3, gA. 3, meM daMtaprakSAlana ko anAcAra kahA hai tathA uvavAI
Adi anya AgamoM meM aneka sthAnoM para zramaNa-caryA meM "adaMta-dhAvaNa' bhI
eka caryA kahI gaI hai| vartamAna yuga meM sAdhu-sAdhviyoM kI AhAra pAnI kI
sAmagrI prAcIna kAla jaisI na rahane ke kAraNa daMtaprakSAlana Adi na karane
para dA~toM meM dantakSaya yA "pAyariyA" Adi roga hone kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai
/  ataH jina sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko ukta jinAjJA kA pAlana karanA ho to unheM nIce
likhI sAvadhAniyA~ rakhanI cAhie- 1. pauSTika padArthoM kA sevana nahIM karanA,
yadi sevana kiyA jAe to upavAsa Adi tapa avazya karanA, 2. sadA UnodarI tapa
karanA, 3. atyanta garma yA atyanta ThaNDe padArthoM kA sevana nahIM karanA, 4.
bhojana karane ke bAda yA kucha khAne-pIne ke bAda dA~toM ko sApha karate hue
kucha pAnI pI lenA cAhie  /  zAma ko cauvihAra kA tyAga karate samaya bhI isI
prakAra dA~toM ko acchI taraha sApha karate hue pAnI pI lenA caahie| 5. cAkeleTa
goliyA~ Adi nahIM khAnA caahie| ukta sAvadhAniyA~ rakhane para "adaMtadhAvaNa"
niyama kA pAlana karate hue bhI dA~ta svastha raha sakate haiM evaM indriya-
nigraha, brahmacarya-pAlana Adi meM bhI samAdhi bhAva raha sakatA hai| Agamokta
adaMtadhAvana, asnAna, brahmacarya, UnodarI tapa tathA anya bAhya Abhyantara
tapa evaM anya sabhI niyama paraspara sambandhita haiM, ata: Agamokta sabhI
niyamoM kA pUrNa pAlana karane para hI svAsthya evaM saMyama kI samAdhi kAyama
raha sakatI hai| tAtparya yaha hai ki adaMtadhAvana niyama ke pAlana ke sAtha
khAna-pAna ke viveka se hI indriyanigraha meM saphalatA prApta ho sakatI hai|
indriyanigraha kI saphalatA meM hI saMyamArAdhana kI saphalatA rahI huI hai|
inhIM kAraNoM se AgamoM meM adaMtadhAvana ko itanA mahattva diyA gayA hai|
sAmAnyataH maMjana karanA aura daMtadhAvana sambandhI kriyAe~ karanA, ye saba
saMyama jIvana ke ayogya pravRttiyA~ haiN| kintu asAvadhAnI se yA anya kisI
kAraNa se dA~toM ke rugNa ho jAne para cikitsA ke lie maMjana karanA evaM
daMtaprakSAlana sambandhI kriyAe~ karanA anAcAra nahIM hai  /  evaM usakA
prastuta sUtra se prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai  /  .

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective] [79 After knowing the disease of teeth, one should be free
from tooth brushing which is done for the purpose of treatment by taking
appropriate precautions, i.e. one should accept the practice of *adantdhavan* by
being mindful of food and not accepting tooth brushing forever. It should be
understood that the present sutras speak of the atonement for brushing without
reason, or for brushing, or for applying any other substance. The atonement of
*laghu chaumasi* for brushing etc. with the intention of adornment is mentioned
in the fifteenth objective. *Prostha-parikarma-prayaschitta* 51-56. The monk who
performs *pamarjan* of his lips once or repeatedly, or approves of the one who
does so, should know that it is like the *payagame* (foot-washer), just as the
monk who applies color to his lips or makes them shiny, or approves of the one
who does so. (He incurs *laghu-masik* atonement.) Discussion-Like the sutras of
the feet, here also one should know the discussion according to the subject
matter. *Chakshu-parikarma-prayaschitta* 57. The monk who cuts or trims his
*akshipatra* (eyelashes) or approves of the one who does so. 58-63. The monk who
performs *amarjan* of his eyes once or repeatedly, or approves of the one who
does so, should know that it is like the *payagame*, just as the monk who colors
his eyes or makes them shiny, or approves of the one who does so (he incurs
*laghu-masik* atonement.) Discussion-Like the 6 sutras of the feet, one should
understand the discussion of the 6 sutras of the eyes according to the subject
matter. That is, there are actions of rubbing, cleaning, and massaging etc. in
the case of the feet, and these actions related to the eyes and lips.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka] [79 dA~toM kI rugNatA jJAta hone ke bAda bhI upayukta
sAvadhAniyA~ rakha kara zIghra hI cikitsA ke nimitta kiye jAne vAle
daMtaprakSAlana se mukta ho jAnA cAhie, arthAt sadA ke lie daMtaprakSAlana
svIkAra na karake khAna-pAna kA viveka karake adaMtadhAvana caryA ko svIkAra
kara lenA caahie| prastuta sUtroM meM akAraNa maMjana karane kA evaM prakSAlana
karane kA yA anya koI padArtha lagAne kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai aisA
samajhanA cAhie  /  vibhUSA ke saMkalpa se maMjana Adi karane kA laghu caumAsI
prAyazcitta Age pandrahaveM uddezaka meM kahA gayA hai| proSTha-parikarma-
prAyazcitta 51-56 je bhikkhU appaNo u8 Amajjejja vA pamajjejja vA AmajjaMtaM vA
pamajjaMtaM vA sAijjai, evaM pAyagameNa yanvaM jAva je bhikkhU appaNo u8 phujja
vA raejja vA phumaMtaM vA rayaMtaM vA saaijji| 51-56-jo bhikSu apane hoThoM kA
eka bAra yA bAra-bAra pAmarjana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai, isa prakAra paira ke AlApaka ke samAna jAnanA yAvat jo bhikSu apane hoThoM
para raMga lagAtA hai yA use camakolA banAtA hai yA aisA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-paira
ke sUtroM ke samAna yahAM bhI viSayAnusAra vivecana jAna lenA cAhiye  /
cakSuHparikarma-prAyazcitta 57. je bhikkhU appaNo dohAI "acchipattAI" kappejja
vA saMThavejja vA kaptaM vA saMThaveMtaM vA saaijji| 58-63. je bhikkhU appaNo
acchoNi Amajjejja vA pamajjejja vA AmajjaMtaM vA pamajjaMtaM vA sAijjai evaM
pAyagameNaM NeyavvaM jAva je bhikkhU appaNo acchoNi phumejja vA raejja vA
phumaMtaM vA rayaMtaM vA saaijji| 57. jo bhikSu apane akSipatra-cakSu romoM ko
kATatA hai yA sudhAratA-saMvAratA hai yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 58-63. jo bhikSu apanI AMkhoM kA eka bAra yA bAra-bAra Amarjana karatA hai
yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai, isa prakAra paira ke samAna jAnanA yAvat
jo bhikSu apanI AMkhoM ko raMgatA hai yA use camakIlA banAtA hai yA aisA karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-
pairoM ke 6 sUtroM ke samAna aAMkha ke 6 sUtroM kA vivecana viSayAnusAra samajha
lenA cAhie  /  arthAt vahA~ gharSaNa-malanA va mardanAdi kriyAe~ karane meM aura
aAMkha aoSTha saMbaMdhI ye kriyAeM |

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 8.]  One should understand the nuances in performing the Nishīthasūtra, and
in the context of 'Phumejj Raezz', the difference between applying henna and
applying collyrium, etc.  **Rom-Keśa-Parikarmaprayaschitta**  64. The monk who
cuts or trims the hairs of his nose, or approves of someone who does so. 65. The
monk who cuts or trims the hairs of his overgrown eyebrows, or approves of
someone who does so. 66. The monk who cuts or trims the hairs of his overgrown
head, or approves of someone who does so. (He receives a minor monthly
atonement.)  **Discussion:**  The sequence of 25 sūtras from 16 to 40, along
with the original text, commentary, and Chūrṇī, is clear. 6+6+6+6+1 = 25 sūtras.
The Chūrṇikāra has also indicated the number of 26 sūtras from 41 to 66, and the
subject matter of the first and last sūtras. He has instructed to combine the
meaning of the remaining 24 sūtras. In doing so, the original text of these 26
sūtras has not been preserved. This is evident because due to the poetic
composition in the Niyuktigāthā, the words and order of all the sūtras could not
be retained. The Chūrṇikāra himself calls the sūtra related to the hairs of the
head the last one, and he also explains it in the Niyuktigāthā by placing it in
the middle.  In total, including the Chūrṇī and Niyuktigāthā, there is only an
explanation of 18 sūtras instead of 26. There is no clear indication of one
sūtra related to the armpit, six sūtras related to the lips, and one sūtra
related to the eyelid in that explanation. The available texts of the 18 sūtras
that have been explained are also different. For example, a sūtra related to
"Pās" is found instead of "Nāsā". It is neither necessary nor explained. The
explanation of Romrāji is given, but there is no sūtra for it. Instead, the
statement about the hairs of the eye has been repeated from the "Akṣipatra"
sūtra.  The situations have been carefully observed. Based on the instruction of
26 sūtras and 13 verses in Chī. Gā. 1518, and matching the order from the bottom
to the top of the body (as in Āchā. Śru. 1, A. 1, U. 2), the sūtras have been
arranged in their order and meaning, taking into account the Chūrṇī-
Niyuktigāthā, the original text, the initial and final sūtras, and the number 26
and 13.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 8.] [nizIthasUtra karane meM nyUnAdhikatA samajha lenA cAhiye, tathA 'phumejja
raejja' ke prasaMga meM meMhadI Adi ke sthAna para aMjana Adi ke lagAne kI
bhinnatA samajha lenI cAhiye  /  roma-keza-parikarmaprAyazcitta 64. je bhikkhU
appaNo--"nAsA-romAI" kappejja vA saMThavejja vA, kaptaM vA saMThaveMtaM vA
saaijji| 65. je bhikkhU appaNo dohAI "bhamuga-romAI" kappejja vA saMThavejja vA,
kaptaM vA saMThaveMtaM vA saaijji| 66. je bhikkhU appaNo "dohAI-kesAI" kappejja
vA saMThavejja vA, kaptaM vA saMThaveMtaM vA saaijji| 64. jo bhikSu apanI nAsikA
ke romoM ko kATatA hai yA sudhAratA-saMvAratA hai yA aisA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 65. jo bhikSu apane bar3he hue bhauMhoM ke kezoM ko kATatA
hai yA sudhAratA-saMvAratA hai yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 66.
jo bhikSu apane bar3he hue mastaka ke kezoM ko kATatA hai yA sudhAratA-saMvAratA
hai yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta
pAtA hai|) vivecana-sUtra 16 se 40 taka 25 sUtroM kA krama tathA mUla pATha
bhASya cUrNI se spaSTa ho jAtA hai  /  6+6+6+6+1=25 sUtra  /  prastuta 41 se 66
taka ke 26 sUtroM kI saMkhyA kA nirdeza evaM prathama va aMtima sUtra kA
viSayanirdeza bhI cUNikAra ne kiyA hai aura zeSa 24 sUtroM kA artha niyukti
saMyukta karane kA nirdeza kiyA hai  /  aisA karane meM ina 26 sUtroM ke mUla
pATha surakSita nahIM rhe| kyoMki niyuktigAthA meM padyaracanA ke kAraNa sabhI
sUtroM ke zabdoM kA nirdeza va krama nahIM raha sakA yaha spaSTa hai  /  mastaka
ke vAloM saMbaMdhI sUtra ko cUrNikAra svayaM aMtima kahate haiM aura ve hI use
niyuktigAthA meM bIca meM dikhA kara vahAM bhI usakI cUrNI karate haiN| cUrNI
aura niyukti meM saba milAkara bhI 26 sUtroM kI jagaha 18 sUtroM kI hI vyAkhyA
hai  /  eka kAMkha kA sUtra, aoSTha ke 6 sUtra, eka akSipatra kA sUtra ina ATha
sUtroM kA usa vyAkhyA meM koI spaSTa nirdeza nahIM huA hai| jina 18 sUtroM kI
vyAkhyA kI hai unake upalabdha pATha bhI vibhinna haiN| yathA "nAsA" kI jagaha
"pAsa" saMbaMdhI sUtra milatA hai  /  vaha na Avazyaka hai aura na usakI vyAkhyA
huI hai| romarAji kI vyAkhyA kI hai to usakA sUtra hI nahIM hai usakI jagaha
"akSipatra'' sUtra se AMkha ke roma kA kathana dubArA ho gayA hai| sthitiyoM kA
vivecana meM dhyAnapUrvaka anuprekSaNa kiyA gayA hai  /  tathA 26 sUtroM aura 13
padoM kA jo nirdeza cI kI gA. 1518 meM hayA hai, usake aAdhAra se va zarIra ke
nIce se Upara ke krama kA milAna karate hue (jaisA ki AcA. zru. 1, a. 1, u. 2,
meM hai ) cUrNi-niyukti mUla pATha evaM Adi aMta ke sUtroM kI tathA 26 va 13 kI
saMkhyA kI saMgati milAte hue sUtroM ko unake krama ko evaM artha ko isa taraha
vyavasthita kiyA hai

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[81 Second Objective] Sutra-sequence 41 Word-count 44 Sutra-topic Sutra-number
Nail Sutra (First Sutra) Shin-hair Sutra Belly-hair Sutra Hair-king Sutra
Armpit-hair Sutra Beard Sutra Moustache Sutra Tooth Sutra Lip Sutra Eye Sutra
Nose-hair Sutra Eyebrow-hair Sutra Head-hair Sutra (Last Sutra) oron arrror orm
ur 9 48-50 51-56 57-63 Their or or w 26 No desired sequence of 13 words or 26
Sutras is formed by adding or subtracting any other Sutra or by disrupting the
sequence, while the above sequence is unopposed. Hair-king-Tirthankara, Yugalik
etc. are described in the body description after the Guhya Pradesh. Here also,
there is an explanation of Hair-king in the Bhashya Churni and the text "Romaim"
is also available in other copies. Therefore, the Sutra with the word "Romaraim"
has been kept, but keeping the Sutra of "Chakshurrom" creates opposition in the
number 13 and 26, as well as in the explanation and meaning. There is also
repetition, so that Sutra has not been kept. Nose-hair-near-Hair-king includes
the hair of the stomach and back, so the Sutra related to "near-hair" is
unnecessary. In fact, "near-hair" does not have a separate existence in the
body. And by doing "near", the "nose"-related Sutra is reduced. In the original
text of the published Churni, there is no 'nose', while the Churni of this "nose
hair" exists and the nose hair has a separate existence in the body and also has
a tendency to cut. The original text of the eight Sutras related to the lip,
armpit and eyelid is generally available in all copies, and since it is
consistent with the 13 words-26 Sutras specified by the Churni, and since the
sequence is according to the structure of the body, it is necessary to accept
these eight Sutras in the original text without explaining them, so they have
been placed in the sequence-obtained place. The description of "cause-non-cause"
and the expectation of doing the tendencies mentioned in these Sutras without
cause is itself a statement of atonement, etc., should be understood from the
discussion of Sutra 34 of this objective.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [81 dUsarA uddezaka] sUtra-krama 41 pada-saMkhyA 44 sUtra-viSaya sUtra-saMkhyA
nakha kA sUtra (Adi sUtra) jaMghA-roma sUtra vatthi-roma sUtra romarAji sUtra
kakkha-roma sUtra dADhI kA sUtra mUcha kA roma sUtra dAMta ke sUtra hoMTha ke
sUtra AMkha ke sUtra nAsA-roma kA sUtra bhamuga-roma kA sUtra mastaka ke bAla kA
sUtra (aMtima sUtra) oron arrror orm ur 9 48-50 51-56 57-63 n khy or or w 26
anya kisI sUtra ko bar3hAne-ghaTAne meM yA kramabhaMga karane meM
caNikAranidiSTa 13 padoM kA yA 26 sUtroM kA vivakSita krama nahIM banatA hai,
jaba ki uparyukta krama nirvirodha hai  /  romarAji-tIrthakara, yugalika Adi ke
zarIravarNana meM guhya pradeza ke bAda romarAji kA varNana AtA hai  /  yahAM
bhI bhASya cUrNI meM romarAji kI vyAkhyA hai tathA "romAiM" aisA pATha anya
pratiyoM meM upalabdha bhI hotA hai  /  ataH "romArAiM" zabdayukta sUtra rakhA
gayA hai kintu "cakSuroma" kA sUtra rakhane se 13 va 26 kI saMkhyA meM tathA
vyAkhyA evaM arthasaMgati meM virodha prAtA hai  /  punarukti bhI hotI hai ataH
usa sUtra ko nahIM rakhA hai| nAsA-pAsa-romarAji se peTa aura pITha ke romoM kA
grahaNa ho jAtA hai isalie "pAsaroma" saMbaMdhI sUtra anAvazyaka hai  /  vAstava
meM "pAsaroma" kA zarIra meM alaga astitva bhI nahIM hai  /  tathA "pAsa" karane
se "nAsA'-saMbaMdhI sUtra ghaTa jAtA hai| prakAzita cUrNI ke mUla pATha meM bhI
'nAsA' nahIM hai jaba ki isa "nAsA roma" kI cUrNI vidyamAna hai aura zarIra meM
nAka ke bAloM kA alaga astitva bhI hai tathA usake kATane kI pravRtti bhI hotI
hai| oSTha kAMkha aura akSipatrasaMbaMdhI ATha sUtroM kA mUla pATha prAyaH sabhI
pratiyoM meM samAna upalabdha hone se tathA cUrNI nirdiSTa 13 pada-26 sUtra
saMkhyA meM saMgata hone se aura zarIra kI racanA ke anusAra krama ho jAne se
ina ATha sUtroM kI vyAkhyA nahIM hote hue inakA mUla pATha meM svIkAra karanA
Avazyaka hone se kramaprApta sthAna para inako rakhA gayA hai| "kAraNa-akAraNa"
kA varNana tathA binA kAraNa ina sUtroM meM kahI gaI pravRttiyAM karane kI
apekSA hI ye prAyazcitta-kathana hai, ityAdi vivecana isI uddezaka ke sUtra 34
ke vivecana se samajha lenA caahiye|

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 82] **Sweat Removal - Penance**  57. A monk who removes or purifies the
sweat, accumulated dirt, wet dirt, or dust from his body, or approves of someone
doing so, incurs a minor monthly penance.  **Explanation**  * **Seyam wa:**
"Seyo - Prasveda:" -  Slight dry dirt. * **Jallum wa:** "Thingalam jallo
bhanati." -  Accumulated dirt - a lot of dirt. * **Pankam wa:** "Es ev prasveda
ullito panko bhanati." - This (above mentioned) dry dirt, when wet by sweat,
etc., is called "pank." * **Or:** "Anno wa jo kaddemo laggo." - Or, any other
mud, etc., that sticks to it, is also called "pank." Here, the first meaning is
relevant. * **Malum wa:** "Malo pun uttarmano achcho, renu wa." -  That which
naturally falls off due to touch, etc., and falls off and stays with it. Or,
dust, etc., that sticks to it.  (See Churni, page 221) * **Niharan:** Removing,
taking away, or eliminating something small or large. * **Vishudhan:** "Ase
savishudhanam." - To make it completely pure.  This sutra's penance provision
indicates that a healthy or capable practitioner should patiently and carefully
endure the dirt of the body with a detached attitude.  A practitioner with
limited capacity should also have the intention to endure the dirt according to
their ability and should not engage in unnecessary actions. The penance
mentioned in the sutra is incurred only when such actions are performed without
reason. The determination of "unnecessary" or "necessary" depends on the
individual's tolerance level. Or, it depends on their state of meditation or
meditative state.  **Eye, Ear, Tooth, and Nail Removal - Penance**  68. A monk
who removes or purifies the dirt from his eyes, ears, teeth, or nails, or
approves of someone doing so, incurs a minor monthly penance.  **Explanation**
The meaning of the words is clear. The rest of the explanation should be
understood in the same way as sutra 67. This penance is incurred when these
actions are performed without reason.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 82] prasvedanivAraNa - prAyazcitta 57. je bhikkhU appaNo kAyAo seyaM vA jallaM
vA paMkaM vA malaM vA nIharejja vA visohejja vA, NIharaMtaM vA visohaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  67. jo bhikSu apane zarIra kA pasInA, jamA huA maila, gIlA maila
aura Upara se lagI huI raja Adi ko nivAraNa karatA hai yA vizodhana karatA hai
yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta
prAtA hai  / ) vivecana [ nizIthasUtra seyaM vA - 'seyo - prasveda : ' - svalpa
malaH thor3A sUkhA maila  /  jallaM vA - 'thiMgalaM jallo bhaNati'  /  - maila
kA thegalA - jyAdA maila  /  paMkaM vA 'esa eva prasveda ullito paMko bhaNNati'
- yahI ( Upara kathita) sUkhA maila pasIne Adi se gIlA ho jAne para "paMka"
kahalAtA hai  /  athavA - 'aNNo vA jo kaddamo laggo' - prathavA anya koI kIcaDa
Adi laga jAya use bhI "paMka" kahate haiM  /  yahA~ pahalA artha hI
prasaMgasaMgata hai  /  malaM vA - 'malo puNa uttaramANo accho, reNU vA' - jo
svataH sparzAdi se utarane jaisA ho aura utara kara sAtha ho jAya  /  athavA
Upara se lagI huI dhUla Adi  /  ni. cUrNI. pRSTha 221 NIharaNa - alpa yA adhika
nikAlanA, dUra karanA haTAnA  /  vizodhana - ' ase savisohaNaM' - pUrNa vizuddha
kara denA  /  isa sUtra ke prAyazcitta-vidhAna meM yaha sUcita kiyA gayA hai ki
svastha yA samartha sAdhaka jalla pariSaha ko aglAna bhAva se satata sAvadhAnI
pUrvaka sahana kare  /  alpa sAmarthya vAlA sAdhaka bhI sAmarthyAnusAra parISaha
sahana karane kI bhAvanA rakhe tathA akAraNa parikarma karane kI pravRtti na
kare  /  akAraNa pravRtti karane para hI sUtrokta prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /
pratyeka vyakti kI sahanazakti ke anusAra hI 'akAraNa sakAraNa' kA nirNaya hotA
hai  /  athavA usake samAdhi yA samAdhi bhAva para nirbhara karatA hai  /  cakSu
karNa - daMsa-nahamalanIharaNa- prAyazcitta 68. je bhikkhU appaNo acchimalaM vA,
kaNNamalaM vA, daMtamalaM vA NahamalaM vA, NIharejja vA, visohejja vA,
gIharaMtaM vA, visohaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  - artha- jo bhikSu apane A~kha kA
maila, kAna kA maila, dA~ta kA maila yA nakha kA maila nikAlatA hai yA unheM
vizuddha karatA hai yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use
laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana zabdoM kA artha spaSTa hai  /
zeSa vivecana sUtra 67 ke samAna samajha lenA caahie| ye kArya akAraNa karane
para sUtrokta prAyazcitta AtA hai  /

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective  [83] Removing eye dirt due to minor eye disease is
considered 'sakaran' and is not subject to atonement. Removing food particles
and dirt from teeth due to minor dental issues should also be considered
'sakaran'. Removing impurities and food particles from nails is not subject to
atonement. However, removing nail dirt for purposes related to the needs of the
elderly, the sick, or for collective service is considered 'sakaran'. _ Those
who are 'atmalabdhi' (self-realized) in their diet, or who follow a solitary
diet, or who are 'gachchvasi' (members of a monastic order) with a strong
inclination towards Dharma, like the 'anagar' or 'arjunamali' sadhakas, or who
are 'gachchnirgat' (have left the monastic order), or who are 'gachchgat' (still
within the monastic order) but have completely withdrawn from service-related
activities, or who are similar in their inclinations and are supportive
sadhakas, do not need to remove nail dirt except for removing impurities and
food particles._ _ The tendency to scratch and itch can be reduced by leading a
self-reliant and service-oriented life, which also reduces the likelihood of
dirt accumulating under the nails._ _ Sutra 67 and 68 emphasize conquering the
'jall parisah' (minor transgressions). Even if a monk is unable to conquer the
'jall parisah' due to his capabilities, the circumstances, or the time, he
should not act contrary to the principles of these 'parisahjay' (conquering
transgressions)._  ## Atonement for Covering the Head in the Monastery  69. If a
monk covers his head while traveling from village to village, or approves of
someone doing so, (he incurs a minor monthly atonement).  Discussion: "Sissass
Avaranam Sissduvaram" - Covering the head in the monastery, while going out for
alms, or while going elsewhere for other reasons, is considered 'ling-viparayas'
(gender inversion) because covering the head while going out is a woman's
attire. Therefore, a sadhu who covers his head while going out or coming in, or
while traveling in the monastery, without any reason or in ordinary
circumstances, incurs atonement. Covering the head due to old age, illness, or
unbearable heat or cold is considered 'sakaran'. For a sadhvi, not covering the
head due to 'ling-viparayas' should be considered atonement. Covering the head
while sitting in the 'upashray' (monastery) should not be considered atonement.
There is a tradition of covering the head while going out to relieve oneself at
night, so this should not be considered atonement either. However, there is no
clear provision for this tradition in the scriptures.  From Sutra 16 to 69, 54
Sutras discuss the atonement for performing bodily functions 'on one's own'. The
meaning is that performing these functions without any reason [simply out of
inclination] incurs a minor monthly atonement.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka] [83 alpAdhika cakSu roga ho jAne ke kAraNa aA~kha kA maila
nikAlanA 'sakAraNa' hai aura vaha prAyazcitta yogya nahIM hai| dA~toM meM se
anna Adi kA kaNa nikAlanA tathA alpAdhika daMta-roga ho jAne para dA~toM kA
maila nikAlanA bhI 'sakAraNa' samajhanA caahie| nakhoM meM praviSTa azucimaya
padArthoM kA nikAlanA tathA praviSTa annakaNoM ko nikAlanA prAyazcitta yogya
nahIM hai, tathA bAla glAna vRddha Adi kI vaiyAvRtya sambandhI kAryoM ke lie
athavA sAmUhika sevA kAryoM ke lie nakhoM kA maila nikAlanA 'sakAraNa' hai  /  _
jo Atmalabdhika AhAra karane vAle yA ekAkI AhAra karane vAle gacchavAsI
dharmaruci anagAra yA arjunamAlI ke samAna sAdhaka ho tathA gacchanirgata
sAdhaka ho yA gacchagata hote hue bhI sevA sambandhI kAryoM se pUrNa nivRtta
sAdhaka ho yA samAna ruci vAle sahayogI sAdhaka hoM to unheM azuci va AhAra
kaNoM ke nikAlane ke sivAya nakha kA maila nikAlane kI AvazyakatA nahIM rahatI
hai| _ khAja khujalAne Adi kI pravRtti kama karane se yA svAvalaMbI va
sevAniSTha jIvana hone se nakhoM meM maila ke rahane kI saMbhAvanA bhI kama
rahatI hai  /  _ sUtra 67 aura 68 ke isa prAyazcittavidhAna meM jalla parISaha
ko jItane ke lie bala diyA gayA hai  /  jo bhikSu sAmarthya yA kSetra kAla kI
dRSTi se jalla parISaha jItane meM saphala na ho sake to bhI use ina
parISahajaya ke vidhAnoM se viparIta prarUpaNA to nahIM karanI caahie| vihAra
meM mastaka DhAMkane kA prAyazcitta 69. je bhikkhU gAmANugAmaM dUijjamANe appaNo
sIsa-duvAriyaM karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  69. jo bhikSu grAmAnugrAma vihAra
karate hue apanA mastaka DhaMkatA hai yA DhaMkane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai
/  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-"sIsassa AvaraNaM
sIsaduvAraM"-vihAra meM tathA gocarI jAte samaya yA anya kAryavaza anyatra jAnA
ho to mastaka para vastrAdi aor3ha kara jAnA 'liMga-viparyAsa' hai kyoMki
mastaka DhaMka kara anyatra jAnA strI kI vezabhUSA hai  /  ataH jo sAdhu akAraNa
yA sAdhAraNa sthiti meM mastaka DhaMka kara anyatra jAve-Ave yA vihAra kare to
prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  vRddha yA rugNa hone para athavA asahya garmI sardI meM
mastaka DhaMka kara jAnA sakAraNa hai  /  liMga viparyAsa ke kAraNa sAdhvI ke
liye mastaka nahIM DhaMkanA prAyazcitta samajha lenA cAhiye  /  upAzraya meM
mastaka DhaMkakara baiThane Adi kA prAyazcitta nahIM samajhanA caahiye| rAtri
meM mala-mUtra parityAga ke liye mastaka DhaMka kara bAhara jAne kI paraMparA
hai ataH usakA bhI prAyazcitta nahIM samajhanA cAhiye  /  kintu isa paraMparA ke
liye Agama meM koI spaSTa vidhAna nahIM milatA hai| sUtra naM. 16 se 69 taka 54
sUtroM meM "svayaM' zarIra ke parikarma karane kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai,
unakA bhAvArtha yaha hai ki inheM akAraNa [pravRtti mAtra se] karane para
laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 84] [Nihianga] The six sutras of "Vana" and the six sutras of "Gandamala"
etc., totaling twelve sutras, have a different nature in terms of their
causality and non-causality compared to the other 42 sutras. This difference has
been explained in its respective place. The essence of this difference is:  1.
In the 42 sutras, performing an action without a cause is considered worthy of
atonement. 2. In the 12 sutras, the goal is not to endure as much as possible,
but to seek immediate treatment, which is considered worthy of atonement.  This
group of 54 sutras is a single Alapaka or Gamaka, whose purpose is also
mentioned in the other Uddesakas 4, 6, 7, 11, 15, and 17. The original text and
the interpretation of the meaning of this Uddesaka are mentioned everywhere.
Therefore, it should be understood again from this concise table.  16-21: Sutras
for Foot Care 22-27: Sutras for Body Care 28-33: Sutras for Wound Treatment
34-39: Sutras for Surgical Treatment of Gandamala etc. 40: Sutra for Worm
Removal 42-47: Sutras for Nail Care 48-50: Sutras for Hair Care (Janga, Vatthi,
Romarai, Kakkha, Uttarottha, and Mansu) 51-56: Sutras for Teeth Care 57-63:
Sutras for Lip Care 64-69: Sutras for Eye Care 70-75: Sutras for Hair Care
(Nasa, Bhamug, Kesain) 76: Sutra for Preventing Perspiration 77-82: Sutras for
Eye, Ear, Teeth, Nail, and Feces Removal 83: Sutra for Covering the Head  This
third Uddesaka explains the atonement for performing an action without a cause
oneself. The fourth Uddesaka explains the atonement for performing an action
without a cause between a Sadhu and another Sadhu.  The sixth and seventh
Uddesakas explain the atonement for performing an action without a cause due to
sexual desire, both by oneself and between a Sadhu and another Sadhu.  The
eleventh Uddesaka explains the atonement for a Sadhu performing these actions
for a householder.  The fifteenth Uddesaka explains the atonement for a
householder performing these actions, and for performing them oneself with the
intention of adornment, as explained by two Alapakas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 84] [nihiiangg chaH sUtra "vaNa" ke va chaH sUtra 'gaMDamAla' Adi ke yoM 12
sUtroM kI sakAraNatA akAraNatA meM, anya 42 sUtroM se kucha bhinnatA hai; jisakA
spaSTIkaraNa yathAsthAna kara diyA gayA hai  /  usakA sArAMza yaha haiM ki 1. 42
sUtroM meM-akAraNa karanA prAyazcitta yogya hai| 2. 12 sUtroM meM yathAzakti
sahana karane kA lakSya na rakha kara zIghra upacAra karanA prAyazcitta yogya
hai| yaha 54 sUtroM kA samUha rUpa eka AlApaka yA gamaka hai jisakA anyAnya
apekSA se uddezaka 4-6-7-11-15-17 meM bhI kathana hai  /  sarvatra isI uddezaka
ke mUla pATha va artha-vivecana kI sUcanA kI gaI hai  /  ataH inako saMkSipta
tAlikA se punaH samajha lenA cAhiye  /  16-21 paira parikarma ke sUtra 22-27
kAya parikarma ke sUtra 28-33 vraNa cikitsA ke sUtra 34-39 gaMDAdi kI zalya
cikitsA ke sUtra kRminIharaNa kA sUtra nakha parikarma kA sUtra 42-47 roma
parikarma ke sUtra (jaMgha, vatthi, romarAi, kakkha, uttaroTTha aura maMsu)
48-50 daMta parikarma ke sUtra 51-56 proSTha parikarma ke sUtra 57-63 cakSu
parikarma ke sUtra roma keza parikarma ke sUtra (nAsA, bhamuga, kesAiM) 3
prasveda nivAraNa kA sUtra cakSu, karNa, daMta nakha, mala nIharaNa sUtra
mastaka DhaMkane kA sUtra ur or ur ur rarror morym or or isa tIsare uddezaka meM
akAraNa svayaM karane kA prAyazcitta batAyA hai| cauthe uddezaka meM akAraNa
sAdhu-sAdhu paraspara meM karane kA prAyazcitta batAyA hai| chaThe sAtaveM
uddezaka meM maithuna bhAva se kramazaH svayaM karane va sAdhu-sAdhu paraspara
karane kA prAyazcitta hai| gyArahaveM uddezaka meM sAdhu ke dvArA gRhastha ke ye
kArya karane kA prAyazcitta hai  /  _ paMdrahaveM uddezaka meM gRhastha se ye
kArya karAne kA va svayaM vibhUSA vRtti se karane kA do pAlApakoM dvArA
prAyazcitta kahA hai|

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective  [In the 85th objective of the 17th objective, the atonement
for a Sadhu performing a ritual for a Grihastha and a Sadhvi performing a ritual
for a Sadhu has been stated. In this way, these 54 sutras have been repeated a
total of nine times in the Nishita Sutra, apart from other expectations. Just as
in this objective, the atonement for these 54 sutras is for performing these
actions without a reason, similarly in other objectives, wherever there are
other general sutras related to the actions of the body and instruments (without
instructions for adornment, sexual intercourse, household service, etc.),
atonement should be understood as being for performing them without a reason. In
this regard, there are also the following Agam proofs in addition to the Churni
Bhashya: **Regarding Upadhi:** 1. If one discards their Upadhi even though it is
fit for use, then atonement - Ni. U. 5. 2. If one gives an Upadhi to a
Grihastha, then also atonement - Ni. U. 15. 3. In the sutras regarding atonement
for carrying, stitching, binding, sewing, etc. of clothes and vessels, atonement
for doing more than three times the number of the least severe action - Ni. U.
1. 4. Atonement for sewing, etc. work done improperly - Ni. U. 1. If the
intention of the Agam was to perform these actions with or without a reason,
then instead of the above, there would be statements like - "Atonement for
sewing, binding, carrying, stitching, etc. of clothes, whether done properly or
improperly." But instead, atonement has been stated in the above-mentioned
sutras. Therefore, it is clear that there is no atonement in the case of a
reason. **Regarding the Body:** 1. Atonement for removing earwax, atonement for
cutting nails - Ni. U. 3. 2. Atonement for using a needle, scissors, nail
cleaner, ear cleaner for a purpose different from the one for which it was
taken, i.e., atonement for using it for the intended purpose - Ni. U. 1. 3.
Prohibition of using stale oil, etc. or pastes, ointments, etc. - Brihatkalpa U.
5. 4. Two Chaubhangis of atonement for using pastes and cow dung applied during
the day at night - Ni. U. 12. 5. Atonement for performing bodily rituals or
taking medication even when healthy - Ni. U. 13. If the intention of the Agam
was to prohibit or state atonement for all bodily rituals without distinction
between with or without a reason, then there would be a clear statement about
atonement for simply taking a nail cleaner, etc.  ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA uddezaka [85 satrahaveM uddezaka meM sAdhu gRhastha ke dvArA sAdhvI ke
karAne kA tathA sAdhvI gRhastha ke dvArA sAdhu ke karAne kA prAyazcitta kathana
huA hai| isa prakAra ina 54 sUtroM kA nizItha sUtra meM kula nava bAra
punarAvartana anyAnya apekSAoM se huA hai| jisa prakAra isa uddezaka meM ina 54
sUtroM kA prAyazcittavidhAna akAraNa se ye pravRttiyAM karane kA hai usI prakAra
anya uddezoM meM bhI jahAM kahIM zarIra aura upakaraNa ke parikarma saMbaMdhI
anya sAmAnya (vibhUSA, maithuna, gRhasthasevA Adi ke nirdeza binA) sUtra haiM
vahAM bhI akAraNa karane kA ho prAyazcitta samajhanA cAhiye  /  isa sambandha
meM cUrNI bhASya ke atirikta nimna Agama pramANa bhI haiM upadhiviSayaka- 1.
apanI upadhi upayoga meM Ane yogya hote huye bhI yadi use paraTha de to
prAyazcitta-ni. u. 5  /  2. gRhastha ko upadhi deve to bhI prAyazcitta-ni. u. 15
/  3. vastra pAtra ke thegalI, saMdhAna, baMdhana, sIvaNa Adi kArya ke
prAyazcitta-sUtroM meM jaghanya eka kA utkRSTa tIna-tIna saMkhyA se jyAdA karane
kA prAyazcitta-ni. u. 1  /  4. avidhi se sIvaNa Adi kArya karane kA prAyazcitta-
ni. u. 1  /  sakAraNa yA akAraNa kisI bhI rUpa se ye kArya karane kA Agama kA
Azaya hotA to uparokta ke sthAna para aise kathana hote ki-"vastrAdi ke sIne ke
kArya, bAMdhane ke kArya, thegalI lagAne kA kArya, sAMdhane kA kArya, vidhi se
yA pravidhi se kisI bhI taraha kare to bhI prAyazcitta  / " kintu aisA na hokara
Upara nirdiSTa sUtroM se prAyazcitta-kathana huA hai| ataH sakAraNa avasthA meM
ye prAyazcitta nahIM hai yaha spaSTa hotA hai| zarIraviSayaka 1. kAna kA maila
nikAle to prAyazcitta, nakha kATe to prAyazcitta  /  ni. u. 3  /  2. sUI,
kataranI, nakhazodhanaka, karNazodhanaka grahaNa karate samaya jisa kArya ke lie
lene kA kahA usase bhinna kArya kare to prAyazcitta arthAt vahI kArya kare to
prAyazcitta nahIM  /  ni. u. 1  /  3. parivAsita (bAsI) tela Adi yA kalka loghra
Adi lepya padArthoM ko upayoga meM lene kA niSedha  /  bRhatkalpa u. 5  /  4.
dina meM grahaNa kiye lepya padArtha va gobara ko rAtri meM upayoga lene ke
prAyazcitta kI do caubhNgii| ni. u. 12  /  5. svastha hote hue bhI zarIra kA
parikarma yA auSadha-upacAra kare to prAyazcitta  /  ni. u. 13  /  yadi zarIra
ke samasta parikarmoM kA sakAraNa akAraNa kI vivakSA ke binA niSedha yA
prAyazcitta kahane kA AgamakAra kA prAzaya hotA to nakhazodhanaka Adi grahaNa
karane mAtra kA spaSTa |

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[86] [Nishītha Sūtra It is said that the prāyaścitta for merely consuming a
leppable substance is a prāyaścitta, and the prāyaścitta for merely consuming
medicine is a prāyaścitta. There are no other alternative sūtras of this type. _
The meaning of these sūtras is that they are prāyaścitta sūtras for the uncaused
karma of the body and instruments. The decision of uncaused and caused can only
be made by a gītartha. It is not proper for anyone to wander without a gītartha
or without the guidance of a gītartha. Brihatkalpa Bhāṣya Gā. 688 || The words
gītartha and bahuśruta are both indicative of the same meaning. In the āgamas,
the word bahuśruta is often used, and in the commentary texts, the word
"gītartha" is used. The explanation of gītartha is in Brihatkalpa Bhāṣya Pothikā
Gā. 693. The explanation of bahuśruta is in Nishītha Bhāṣya Pīthikā Gā. 495.
There is uniformity in both explanations. That explanation is as follows: "One
who has memorized the Jghana Ācārāṅga Sūtra and the Nishītha Sūtra along with
their meaning, along with the practice of many āgamas and adherence to the
prācāra." 'One who is a holder of the excellent 14 pūrvas.' And in the middle,
one who has memorized at least the Pācārāṅga, Nishītha, Sūyagaḍāṅga, Daśaśruta
Skandha, Brihatkalpa and Vyavahāra Sūtra. This is the explanation for bahuśruta
and this is the explanation for gītartha. The meaning of 'holding' in the āgama
is to memorize the original and the meaning. Because there is also a prāyaścitta
statement for forgetting these āgamas, and there is no prāyaścitta for a
sthavira forgetting. This is described in Vyav. U. 5. _ Therefore, it is proper
to wander only with the guidance of a gītartha (or bahuśruta) of this
qualification, and to decide on exceptions with their guidance. The prohibition
of the unqualified becoming prominent and wandering is in Vyav. U. 3 Sūtra 1.
Vasīkaraṇa Sūtra - Karana Prāyaścitta 70. Je bhikku saṇ-kappāsao vā, uṇṇa-
kappāsao vā, poṇḍ-kappāsao vā, amila-kappāsao vā vasīkaraṇasuttāi karei,
karentaṁ vā sāijjai. A bhikku who makes a vasīkaraṇa sūtra (thread) from cotton
from saṇ, wool, poṇḍ or amila, or approves of one who makes it. (He incurs a
laghumāsika prāyaścitta.) Discussion 1. Saṇ - a well-known plant. 2. Uṇṇa -
sheep's wool.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 86] [nizIthasUtra prAyazcitta kahA jAtA, lepya padArtha grahaNa karane mAtra kA
prAyazcitta hotA va auSadhasevana mAtra kA prAyazcittakathana hotA anya vikalpoM
se yukta uparyukta prakAra ke sUtra nahIM hote|| _ isa prakAra ke ina sUtroM kA
Azaya yaha hai ki ye prAyazcittasUtra zarIra aura upakaraNoM ke akAraNa
parikarma ke haiN| akAraNa sakAraNa kA nirNaya gItArtha hI kara sakate haiM  /
gItArtha hue binA yA gItArtha kI nizrA ke binA kisI ko bhI vicaraNa karanA nahIM
kalpatA hai  /  bRhatkalpa bhASya gA. 688  //  gItArtha aura bahuzruta ye donoM
zabda eka hI bhAva ke sUcaka haiM  /  AgamoM meM prAyaH bahuzruta zabda kA
prayoga hai aura vyAkhyA graMthoM meM "gItArtha" zabda kA prayoga hai  /
gItArtha kI vyAkhyA bRhatkalpa bhASya poThikA gA. 693 meM hai| bahuzruta kI
vyAkhyA nizItha bhASya pIThikA gA. 495 meM hai  /  donoM vyAkhyAnoM meM
ekarUpatA hai  /  vaha vyAkhyA isa prakAra hai prAcAraniSTha va aneka AgamoM ke
abhyAsa ke sAtha "jaghanya AcArAMga sUtra aura nizItha sUtra ko artha sahita
kaMThastha dhAraNa karane vAlA ho|" 'utkRSTa 14 pUrva kA dhArI ho|' aura
madhyama meM kama se kama pAcArAMga, nizItha, sUyagaDAMga, dazAzrutaskaMdha,
bRhatkalpa va vyavahAra sUtra kA dhAraNa karane vAlA ho| yahI vyAkhyA bahuzruta
ke liye aura yahI vyAkhyA gItArtha ke liye kI gaI hai| prAgama meM Aye 'dhAraNa
karane' kA Azaya yaha hai ki mUla aura artha kaNThastha dhAraNa karanA  /
kyoMki ina aAgamoM ke bhUla jAne kA bhI prAyazcitta kathana hai, tathA sthavira
ko bhUlane para koI prAyazcitta nahIM hai  /  aisA varNana vyava. u. 5 meM hai
/  _ataH isa yogyatA vAle gItArtha (yA bahuzruta) kI nezrAya se hI vicaranA aura
unakI nezrAya se apavAdoM kA nirNaya karanA yogya hotA hai  /  ayogya ko
pramukha banakara vicaraNa karane kA niSedha vyava. u. 3 sUtra 1 meM hai|
vazIkaraNasUtra-karaNa prAyazcitta 70. je bhikkhU saNa-kappAsao vA, uNNa-
kappAsao vA, poMDa-kappAsao vA, amilakappAsao vA vasIkaraNasuttAI karei,
kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  jo bhikSu sana ke kapAsa se, Una ke kapAsa se, poMDa ke
kapAsa se athavA amila ke kapAsa se vazIkaraNa sUtra (DorA) banAtA hai yA banAne
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana
1. saNa-prasiddha vanaspati  /  2. Una-bher3a ke roma  /

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Objective] 3. **Ponda** - Cotton. **Ponda** is the plant, its fruit,
its fibers are used for spinning. 4. **Amil** - Its explanation is rarely found.
Sometimes, meanings like **praak** (a type of grain) or wool are found. [87 5.
**Kappas** - Here, **Kappas** refers to wool, cotton, etc., which are in a state
suitable for spinning. 6. **Vasikaran** - "**Avsa vase kiranti jenam tam
vasikaran- suttam**" - Making a thread from cotton or twisting threads together
and infusing it with a mantra, which can be used to subdue someone. ##  Various
places like houses, etc., where **mal-mutra** (excreta) **parishthapan**
(purification) is done. 71. The monk who performs **uchchar-pasavan** (chanting)
in a house, at the entrance of a house, at the main door of a house, at the
secondary door of a house, in a courtyard, in a garden, or in a house-like
place, or who performs **paritthava** (purification) there, is **saizzai**
(guilty). 72. The monk who performs **uchchar-pasavan** in a **madga-gihansi**
(a place where **madga** (a type of grass) grows), in a **madga-chhariyansi** (a
place where **madga** is cut), in a **madga-thubhiyansi** (a place where
**madga** is piled), in a **madga-asayansi** (a place where **madga** is
stored), in a **madga-lenansi** (a place where **madga** is kept), in a **madga-
thandillansi** (a place where **madga** is dried), or in a **madga-vacchansi**
(a place where **madga** is used), or who performs **paritthava** there, is
**saizzai**. 73. The monk who performs **uchchar-pasavan** in a **ingal-
dahansi** (a place where **ingal** (a type of grass) is burnt), in a **khar-
dahansi** (a place where **khar** (a type of grass) is burnt), in a
**gayadahansi** (a place where cow dung is burnt), in a **tusadahansi** (a place
where **tus** (husk) is burnt), or in a **bhusadahansi** (a place where **bhus**
(chaff) is burnt), or who performs **paritthava** there, is **saizzai**. 74. The
monk who performs **uchchar-pasavan** in a **abhinaviyasu** (a new place), in a
**golehaniyasu** (a place where **golehan** (a type of grass) grows), in a
**abhinaviyasu** (a new place), in a **mattiyakhanisu** (a place where clay is
dug), in a **aparibhujjamaniyasu** (a place where food is not eaten), or in a
**aparibhujjamaniyasu** (a place where food is not eaten), or who performs
**paritthava** there, is **saizzai**. 75. The monk who performs **uchchar-
pasavan** in a **seyayayansi** (a place where **seyaya** (a type of grass)
grows), in a **panansi** (a place where mud is found), or in a **panagansi** (a
place where **panag** (a type of grass) grows), or who performs **paritthava**
there, is **saizzai**. 76. The monk who performs **uchchar-pasavan** in a
**umbaravacchansi** (a place where **umbar** (a type of tree) grows), in a
**naggoohavacchansi** (a place where naked people live), in a
**asotyavacchansi** (a place where **asoty** (a type of tree) grows), or in a
**pilkkhuvacchansi** (a place where **pilkkhu** (a type of tree) grows), or who
performs **paritthava** there, is **saizzai**. 77. The monk who performs
**uchchar-pasavan** in a **dagavacchansi** (a place where **dag** (a type of
tree) grows), in a **sagavacchansi** (a place where **sag** (a type of tree)
grows), in a **mulgavacchansi** (a place where **mulga** (a type of tree)
grows), in a **kotyum barivacchansi** (a place where **kotyum** (a type of tree)
grows), in a **kharavacchansi** (a place where **khar** (a type of grass)
grows), in a **jirayavacchansi** (a place where **jiraya** (a type of tree)
grows), in a **damanagavacchansi** (a place where **damanaga** (a type of tree)
grows), or in a **marugavacchansi** (a place where **maruga** (a type of tree)
grows), or who performs **paritthava** there, is **saizzai**. 78. The monk who
performs **uchchar-pasavan** in a **ikkuvansi** (a place where **ikku**
(sugarcane) grows), in a **salivanansi** (a place where **sali** (rice) grows),
in a **kusanbhavanansi** (a place where **kusan** (a type of grass) grows), or
in a **kappas-varnasi** (a place where cotton grows), or who performs
**paritthava** there, is **saizzai**. 79. The monk who performs **uchchar-
pasavan** in a **asogavansi** (a place where **asog** (a type of tree) grows),
in a **sattivannanavansi** (a place where **sattivana** (a type of tree) grows),
in a **champagavansi** (a place where **champga** (a type of tree) grows), in a
**chuy-varnasi** (a place where **chuy** (a type of tree) grows), or in a
**are** (a place where **are** (a type of tree) grows), in a **tapagare** (a
place where fire is used), in a **pattovavesu** (a place where leaves are
found), in a **pushpovavesu** (a place where flowers are found), in a
**phalovavesu** (a place where fruits are found), or in a **biovavesu** (a place
where seeds are found), or who performs **paritthava** there, is **saizzai**.
71. The monk who performs **uchchar-pasavan** in a house, at the "mouth" of a
house, at the main door of a house, at the secondary door of a house, in a
courtyard, in a garden, or in a house-like place, or who performs **paritthava**
there, is **saizzai**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 " dUsarA uddezaka ] 3. poMDa - sUtI kapAsa  /  poMDA vamaNI, tassa phalaM,
tassa pamhA rese kaccaNijjA" 4. amila - isakI vyAkhyA prAyaH nahIM milatI hai  /
prAka (grAkaDA) yA Una vizeSa aise artha kvacit milate haiM  /  [87 5. kappAsa
kAtane ke yogya sthiti meM jo Una, rUI Adi hoM unako yahA~ 'kappAsa' kahA hai  /
6. vasIkaraNa - ' avasA vase kIraMti jeNaM taM vasIkaraNa- suttayaM' - kapAsa se
DorA banAkara yA DoroM ko baTakara maMtra se bhAvita karanA, jisake prayoga se
kisI ko bazIbhUta kiyA jA sake  /  gRhAdi vibhinna sthaloM meM mala-mUtra
pariSThApana prAyazcitta 71. je bhikkhU gihaMsi vA, gihamuhaMsi vA, giha-
duvAriyaMsi vA, gihapaDiduvAriyaMsi vA, giluyaMsi vA, hiMgaNaMsi vA,
gihavaccaMsi vA uccAra- pAsavaNaM pariTThavei pariTThaveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  72.
je bhikkhU maDaga-gihaMsi vA, maDaga-chAriyaMsi vA, maDaga - thUbhiyaMsi vA,
maDaga AsayaMsi vA, maDaga- leNaMsi vA, maDaga - thaMDilaMsi vA, maDaga vaccaMsi
vA uccAra- pAsavaNaM paridvavei, pariTThataM vA sAijjai  /  73. je bhikkhU
iMgAla- dAhaMsi vA, khAra- dAhaMsi vA, gAyadAhaMsi vA, tusadAhaMsi vA,
bhusadAhaMsi vA uccAra pAsavaNaM pariTThavei, paridvaveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  74.
je bhikkhU abhiNaviyAsu vA, golehaNiyAsu, abhiNaviyAsu vA maTTiyAkhANisu,
aparibhujjamANiyAsu vA aparibhujjamANiyAsu vA uccArapAsavaNaM pariTThavei,
pariTThavetaM vA sAijjai  /  75. je bhikkhU seyAyayaNaMsi vA, paMkaMsi vA,
paNagaMsi vA, uccArapAsavaNaM paridvaveda, paridvavetaM vA sAijjai  /  76. je
bhikkhU uMbaravaccaMsi vA NaggohavaccaMsi vA, AsotyavaccaMsi vA,
pilakkhuvaccaMsi vA uccAra pAsavaNaM paridvavei, paridvaveMtaM vA sAijjai  /
77. je bhikkhU DAgavaccaMsi vA, sAgavaccaMsi vA, mUlagavaccaMsi vA, kotyuM
barivaccaMsi vA, khAravaccaMsi vA, jIrayavaccaMsi vA, damaNagavaccaMsi vA,
marugavaccaMsi vA, uccArapAsavaNaM, pariTuvei pariTThataM vA sAijjai  /  78. je
bhikkhU ikkhuvaNasi vA, sAlivaNaMsi vA, kusaMbhavaNaMsi vA kappAsa-varNasi vA
uccArapAsavaNaM pari vei, pariTThavetaM vA sAijjai  /  79. je bhikkhU
asogavaNaMsi vA, sattivaNNavaNaMsi vA, caMpagavaNaMsi vA, cUya- varNasi vA, are
vA tapagAresu, pattovaveesu, puSphovaveesu, phalovaveesu, bIovaveesu uccAra-
pAsavaNaM parive, paritaM vA sAijjai  /  71. jo bhikSu ghara meM, ghara ke
"mukha" sthAna meM, ghara ke pramukha dvArA sthAna meM, ghara ke upadvAra

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 88] [Nishīthasūtra]  **72.** A monk who utters or approves of the utterance
of *Uccāra-prasravaṇa* in a place where a dead body is kept, in a place where
the ashes of the dead are kept, on the *stūpa* of the dead, in the place where
the dead person resided, in the place where the dead person was cremated, in the
place where the dead person was buried, or in the place surrounding the
cremation ground, incurs *laghu māsika prāyaścitta*.  **73.** A monk who utters
or approves of the utterance of *Uccāra-prasravaṇa* in a place where charcoal is
made, in a place where *sajjīkhār* etc. are made, in a place where animal dung
is collected, in a place where *tus* is burnt, or in a place where straw is
burnt, incurs *laghu māsika prāyaścitta*.  **74.** A monk who utters or approves
of the utterance of *Uccāra-prasravaṇa* in newly ploughed land, in a newly dug
clay pit, in a place where people defecate or urinate, or in a place where
people do not defecate or urinate, incurs *laghu māsika prāyaścitta*.  **75.** A
monk who utters or approves of the utterance of *Uccāra-prasravaṇa* in a place
with a lot of mud and little water, in a place with mud, or in a place with
flowers, incurs *laghu māsika prāyaścitta*.  **76.** A monk who utters or
approves of the utterance of *Uccāra-prasravaṇa* in a place where *gūlar*,
*baḍ*, *pīpal*, and *pīpalī* fruits are collected, incurs *laghu māsika
prāyaścitta*.  **77.** A monk who utters or approves of the utterance of
*Uccāra-prasravaṇa* in a place where leafy vegetables, other vegetables, roots,
*kostubha*, plants, *dhanā*, *jīrā*, *damanaka*, and *maruka* plants are
collected or grown, incurs *laghu māsika prāyaścitta*.  **78.** A monk who
utters or approves of the utterance of *Uccāra-prasravaṇa* in a field of
sugarcane, rice, other grains, *kusambha*, or cotton, incurs *laghu māsika
prāyaścitta*.  **79.** A monk who utters or approves of the utterance of
*Uccāra-prasravaṇa* in a forest of *aśoka* trees, a forest of *śaktipārṇa*
(seven-leaved) trees, a forest of *champaka* trees, a mango grove, or any other
forest that has leaves, flowers, fruits, and seeds, incurs *laghu māsika
prāyaścitta*.  **Discussion:**  * *Uccāra* is a synonym for *baḍī nīta*, *mala*,
*aśuci*, *saṇṇā*, *vacca*, *pāsavana*, *laghu nīta*, *mūtra*, *kāyikī*, *mutta*,
etc. * Here, the emphasis is on *baḍī nīta*, and *laghu nīta* is almost always
present with *baḍī nīta*. Therefore, the term "Uccāra-pāsavana" is used
together. * The commentator has also explained this with emphasis on *baḍī
nīta*. * **House:** The term "house" refers to the entire house, including all
its parts and the open ground. * The text specifically mentions six possible
places, so the remaining rooms, kitchen, etc. are considered to be included in
the "house" as a whole.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 88] [nizIthasUtra sthAna meM, dvAra ke madhya ke sthAna meM, ghara ke AMgana
meM, ghara kI parizeSa bhUmi arthAt AsapAsa kI khulI bhUmi meM uccAra prasravaNa
paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  72. jo bhikSu
mRtakagRha meM, mRtaka kI rAkha vAle sthAna meM, mRtaka ke stUpa para, mRtaka ke
Azraya-sthAna para, mRtaka ke layana meM, mRtaka kI sthala-bhUmi athavA zmasAna
kI cautarapha sImA ke sthAna meM uccAra-prasravaNa paraThatA hai yA paraThane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  73. jo bhikSu koyale banAne ke sthAna meM,
sajjIkhAra aAdi banAne ke sthAna meM, pazutroM ke DAma dene ke sthAna meM, tusa
jalAne ke sthAna meM, bhUsA jalAne ke sthAna meM uccAra-prasravaNa paraThatA hai
yA paraThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 74. jo bhikSu navIna hala calAI huI
bhUmi meM yA navIna miTTI kI khAna meM, jahA~ loga malamUtrAdi tyAgate hoM yA
nahIM tyAgate hoM, vahA~ uccAra-prasravaNa paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 75. jo bhikSu kardamabahula alpa pAnI ke sthAna meM,
kIcar3a ke sthAna meM yA phUlana yukta sthAna meM uccAra-prazravaNa paraThatA
hai yA paraThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 76. jo bhikSu gUlara, bar3a,
pIpala va pIpalI ke phala saMgraha karane ke sthAna para ucca-prasravaNa
paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 77. jo bhikSu patte
vAlI bhAjI, anya sabjiyAM, mUlaga, kostubha, vanaspati, dhanA, jIrA, damanaka va
maruka vanaspati vizeSa ke saMgraha sthAna yA utpanna hone kI vADiyoM meM
uccAra-prasravaNa paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 78.
jo bhikSu ikSu, cAvala, (Adi dhAnya) kusaMbha va kapAsa ke kheta meM uccAra-
prasravaNa paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 79. jo
bhikSu azoka vRkSoM ke vana, zaktiparNa (saptavarga) vRkSa ke vana, caMpaka
vRkSoM ke vana aura Amravana yA anya bhI aise vana, jo patra, puSpa, phala, bIja
Adi se yukta hoM, vahA~ uccAra prasravaNa paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-uccAra-
bar3I nIta, mala, azuci, saNNA, vacca, pAsavaNa-laghunIta, mUtra, kAyikI, mutta,
Adi ina paryAyavAcI zabdoM kA prayoga kiyA jAtA hai| yahA~ para bar3I nIta kI
mukhyatA kA prasaMga hai aura bar3I nIta ke sAtha laghunIta kA AnA prAyaH
nizcitta hai ataH "uccAra-pAsavaNa" ubhaya zabda kA eka sAtha prayoga huA hai  /
vyAkhyAkAra ne bhI bar3InIta kI mukhyatA se vyAkhya kI hai| 1. ghara--samuccaya
rUpa se sabhI vibhAga va khulI jamIna yukta ghara  /  vizeSa saMbhavita 6
sthAnoM kA to alaga nirdeza kiyA hI hai ataH parizeSa kamare, rasoI ghara Adi
"samuccaya ghara" meM samAviSTa samajhanA  /

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [89 Second Objective] **Gṛha-mukha** - The platform (chowki) or enclosed
area in front of the house. The main entrance of the house - a large pole, with
an area as wide as the pole and slightly longer. The secondary entrance of the
house - a small door inside after entering through the main entrance pole.
**Gṛha-eluka** - The raised "sal" on both sides of the door, i.e., the area
built on both sides after entering through the main entrance. **Gṛha-āṅgan** -
The courtyard inside the house, between the rooms. **Gṛha-vaccha** - The open
land behind and around the house, or the land used by the household for
excreting waste. **2. Mṛtaka-gṛha** - The place where the deceased is kept
before cremation in the cremation ground. The place where the ashes remain after
the deceased's cremation with alkali. In other words, the cremation site.
**Mṛtaka-stūpa** - A platform, etc., built for remembrance. **Mṛtaka-pāśraya** -
The place where the deceased is sheltered, i.e., kept for a short time, before
entering the cremation ground. **Mṛtaka-lyan** - A chaitya or platform built for
remembrance at the cremation site. **Mṛtaka-sthaṇḍila** - The place where the
burnt bones, etc., of the deceased are disposed of. **Mṛtaka-vaccha** - Other
open land in the cremation ground that may be used for cremation or burial. **3.
Gāyadāhansi** - A designated place where animals are treated by applying a
poultice for their ailments. **- Tusadāhansi - Bhusadāhansi** - Tus - The husk
of grain or grain containing husk. Bhus - The entire waste of grain stalks.
There can be two types of places for burning these: 1. A place near the field
for burning unusable tus-bhus. 2. A place where potters, etc., burn tus-bhus as
fuel. The **Niśītha Bhāṣya** and the **Prācārāṅga Sūtra. Śru. 2, A. 10**
commentary do not explain these two words. It explains the three words
"**Ingāladāhansi, Khāradāhansi, and Gātadāhansi**". These two words are not
found in the **Ācārāṅga Sūtra**. In **Niśītha**, the variant reading of these
two words is "**Tustāṇansi vā Bhusthāṇansi vā**". This means the place where
these are collected or kept near the field - "**Khalīhāna**". Thus, even when
these five places mentioned in the sūtra are empty, one should not excrete waste
there.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [89 dUsarA uddezaka] gRhamukha-ghara ke Age cabUtare (caukI) yA ghirA huA
sthala  /  ghara kA pramukha dvAra-bar3I pola, isameM pola jitanI caur3I va
kucha laMbI jagaha hotI hai| ghara kA upadvAra-mukhya dvAra-pola se praveza kara
aMdara calane para choTA daravAjA hotA hai  /  gRha-elukA-daravAje meM donoM
tarapha U~cI banI huI "sAla" arthAt pramukha dvAra se praveza karane para donoM
ora banA huaA sthala  /  gRha-AMgana-ghara ke aMdara, kamaroM ke bIca kA cauka
/  gRha-vacca-makAna ke pIche va Asa pAsa kI khulI bhUmi yA ghara vAloM ke
malamUtra tyAgane kI bhUmi  /  2. mRtaka-gRha- zmasAna meM jalAne ke pUrva
mRtaka ko rakhe jAne kA sthAna  /  mRtaka kSAradAhakriyA ke bAda jahA~ rAkha
par3I rahe vaha sthAna  /  arthAt dAhakriyAsthala  /  mRtaka-stUpa-smRti ke liye
banA cabUtarA Adi  /  mRtaka-pAzraya-zmazAna kSetra meM praveza karane se pUrva
mRtaka ko prAzraya dene kA arthAt thor3I dera ThaharAne kA sthAna  /
mRtakalayana-dAhakriyA sthala para smRti ke liye banA huA caityAlaya yA cabUtarA
/  mRtakasthaMDila-mRtaka kI jalI huI haDDiyAM Adi DAlane kA sthAna  /
mRtakavacca-zmazAna kI anya khulI bhUmi jo kabhI kisI ko jalAne yA gAr3ane ke
upayoga meM A sakatI hai| 3. gAyadAhaMsI-pazuoM ke rogopazama ke liye jahA~
DAMma dekara upacAra kiyA jAtA hai, aisA niyata sthala  /  - tusadAhaMsi-
bhusadAhaMsi-tusa-dhAnya ke Upara kA chilkA yA tusa yukta dhAnya  /  bhusa-
dhAnya ke pUloM kA saMpUrNa kacarA  /  inako ko jalAne ke sthAna do prakAra ke
ho sakate haiM1. kheta ke pAsa hI anupayogI tusa-bhusa ko jalAne kA sthAna  /
2. kuMbhakAra Adi kA tusa-bhusa ko iMdhana rUpa meM jalAne kA sthAna  /  nizItha
bhASya meM tathA prAcArAMga sUtra. zru. 2, a. 10 kI cUrNI meM ina donoM zabdoM
kI vyAkhyA nahIM hai "iMgAladAhasi, khAradAhaMsi tathA gAtadAhasi" ina tIna
zabdoM kI vyAkhyA hai| ye donoM zabda AcArAMga sUtra meM nahIM haiN| nizItha meM
ina donoM zabdoM ke pAThAMtara rUpa meM "tusaThANaMsi vA bhusaThANaMsi vA" aisA
pATha bhI milatA hai  /  inakA artha yaha hai ki kheta ke pAsa inake saMgraha
karane yA rakhane ke sthAna-"khalihAna"  /  isa prakAra sUtrokta pAMcoM sthAna
jaba rikta hoM to bhI vahAM mala-mUtra kA tyAga nahIM karanA caahiye|

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 90 [Nishīthasūtra 4. In the context of the violation of the earth, in the
10th chapter, verse 4, the text "na ālihijjā na vilihijjā" appears. Its meaning
is to draw lines on the earth with a weapon or something similar. Here, the word
"liha" with the word "go" is used, which means "land plowed by a bull or other
animal with a plow." That land is new and immediate, meaning it is 1-2 days old,
so it is sentient. Therefore, it is essential to avoid it. If a householder is
using that new, freshly dug land, it is still inconceivable due to its
sentience, and even if they are not using it, it is still inconceivable. Some
time before the rains, farmers plow the land and leave it. Whether people go
there for defecation or not, as long as it is new, there is a possibility of
sentience or mixture, so a monk should not go there. When it becomes non-
sentient, it is no longer called new. Interpreting it this way, the subject of
both "maṭṭiyā khāṇī" and "golehaṇiyā" becomes the same, making the adjectives
"abhiṇaviyāsu" and "paribhujjamāṇa aparibhujjamāṇa" meaningful and consistent.
5. "Kaddamabahulaṁ pāṇīyaṁ - seobhaṇṇati, tassa āyataṇaṁ - seyāyayanaṁ." A place
where there is more mud and less water is called "seyāyayanaṁ." After the rains,
this kind of mud forms, and there are also flowers (some) there. Therefore, due
to the violation, there is atonement for stepping on it. 6. The sūtra mentions
the collection places of some fruits like banyan, peepal, etc. Similarly, other
fruit collection places should be understood. 7. The Chūrṇīkāra has not
explained sūtras 77-78-79. He has only said that "these are words known to the
people." The commentator has explained that in the places mentioned in sūtras 71
to 79, if one defecates, there is a fault because the owner of the house, etc.,
may be angry and, in contempt, push the impure person down or throw the impure
thing on the monk. In cremation grounds, etc., there is a possibility of the
Vyantara devata being angry. In places like sentient earth, etc., there is
violation of life. Except for the violation of life, in non-sentient places
where other people generally defecate or where the owner allows it, there is no
atonement for stepping on it. In sūtra 74, there is violation of the earth body,
in sūtra 75, there is violation of the non-earth body, in sūtra 72, there is
deception of the gods, and in the remaining sūtras (71, 73, 76, 77, 78, 79),
there is a possibility of being scorned and criticized by the owner. Avidhi-
pariṣṭhāpana atonement 80. If a monk, while walking, takes a step on a piece of
cloth or a piece of wood that is being thrown away, or if he goes on a different
path, he should turn the cloth or wood around and follow the sun. He should do
this or he should be silent. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 90 [nizIthasUtra 4. abhiNaviyAsu golehaNiyAsu-pRthvI kI virAdhanA ke prasaMga
meM dazavai a. 4, meM "na AlihijjA na vilihijjA" pATha AtA hai  /  usakA artha
pRthvI meM khIlA zastra Adi se lakIra karanA hotA hai  /  yahA~ 'go' zabda yukta
liha zabda kA prayoga huA hai jisakA artha hotA hai ki-'baila Adi ke dvArA hala
se jotI huI bhUmi  / ' vaha bhUmi nUtana tatkAla kI ho arthAt 1-2 dina kI ho to
sacitta hotI hai  /  ata: usakA varjana Avazyaka hai  /  usa tatkAla kI nUtana
khudI bhUmi kA gRhastha upayoga le rahe hoM to bhI sacitta hone se akalpanIya
hai aura usakA upayoga nahIM le rahe hoM to bhI akalpanIya hai  /  varSA hone ke
kucha samaya pUrva kisAna bhUmi para hala calAkara chor3a dete haiM  /  vahA~
loga zauca ke liye jAte hoM yA nahIM bhI jAte hoM kintu jaba taka vaha navIna
hai sacitattA yA mizratA kI saMbhAvanA hai to vahA~ sAdhu ko nahIM jAnA cAhiye
/  jaba acitta ho jAye taba vaha navIna nahIM kahalAtI hai  /  isa taraha artha
karane para maTTiyA khANI aura golehaNiyA' donoM padoM kA viSaya samAna ho jAtA
hai jisase "abhiNaviyAsu" va "paribhujjamANa aparibhujjamANa" ye vizeSaNa
sArthaka evaM saMgata ho jAte haiN| 5. kaddamabahulaM pANIyaM-seobhaNNati, tassa
AyataNaM-seyAyayaNaM  /  kIcar3a adhika ho pAnI kama ho aisA sthAna
"seyAyayaNaM' kahalAtA hai  /  varSA ho jAne para isa prakAra kA kIcaDa ho jAtA
hai, tathA vahA~ phUlaNa (koI) bhI A jAtI hai  /  ataH virAdhanA ke kAraNa vahA~
para paraThane se prAyazcitta AtA hai| 6. bar3a, pIpala Adi kucha phaloM ke
saMgrahasthAnoM kA kathana sUtra meM hai isI prakAra anya bhI phalasaMgraha ke
sthAna samajha lenA cAhiye  /  7. sUtra 77-78-79 kI vyAkhyA cUrNIkAra ne nahIM
kI hai  /  mAtra yaha kaha diyA hai ki'ye janapada prasiddha zabda haiN| sUtra
71 se 79 taka kathita sthAnoM meM mala-mUtra paraThane para doSa batAte hue
bhASyakAra ne batAyA hai ki gRha Adi ke mAlika ruSTa hokara tiraskAra karate hue
azuci para hI dhakkA dekara girA sakate haiM yA sAdhu para azuci pheMka sakate
haiN| zmasAna Adi meM vyaMtara devatA ke kupila hone kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai  /
sacitta pRthvIkAya Adi ke sthAnoM meM jIva virAdhanA hotI hai  /  jIva virAdhanA
ke sivAya acitta sthAnoM meM jahA~ anya loga sAdhAraNatayA zaucanivRtti karate
hoM yA jahA~ mAlika kI AjJA ho vahA~ paraThane para prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai|
sUtra 74 meM pRthvIkAya kI virAdhanA, sUtra 75 meM apakAya kI virAdhanA,
sUtra-72 meM devachalanA aura zeSa sUtroM meM (71, 73, 76, 77, 78, 79) meM usake
svAmI se tiraskAra va apavAda hone kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai  /  avidhi-
pariSThApana prAyazcitta 80. je bhikkhU diyA vA rAo vA viyAle vA uccAra-
pAsavaNeNaM ubbAhijjamANe sapAyaM gahAya, parapAyaM vA jAittA, uccAra-pAsavaNaM
parivettA aNuggae sUrie eDei, eDataM vA sAijjai  /

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[91 Second Objective] Serving this, the minor monthly atonement arises from the
transgression of the prohibition of defecation. One who, being afflicted by the
urge of excretion in the day, night, or twilight, takes his own vessel or
requests the vessel of another monk, discards the excretion therein, and
defecates in a place where the sun's light (heat) does not reach, or approves of
one who does so. The consumption of these 80 Sutra-based transgressions leads to
the minor monthly atonement. Discussion - "Aṇuggaē sūriē" is directly
interpreted as "not defecating before sunrise," but this meaning is not in
accordance with the Agamas and is therefore inappropriate. The reasons for this
are: 1. The word "diā vā" used in the Sutra becomes meaningless. Because, in
comparison to one who has defecated during the day, the sentence "Aṇuggaē sūriē"
does not make sense. 2. Leaving excrement overnight causes harm to the
microscopic beings and also leads to the inability to study due to impurity. 3.
Defecation at night is completely prohibited. 4. The transcription of the
excretion-land in the fourth watch of the night also becomes meaningless. 5.
This meaning also contradicts many instructions from the Ācāra Sūtra. Therefore,
it is reasonable to understand this atonement Sutra as meaning defecation in a
shady place where the sun's light (heat) never reaches, either during the day or
night. The method of discarding excretion into a vessel and then defecating is
instructed in Ācārāṅga Śruti 2, A. 10, and in this Sutra. However, the combined
meaning of other Agama texts and this ordinance is that if a suitable obstacle,
suitable time, and suitable defecation ground are available, one should go to
the defecation ground and defecate. But if there is a strong urge to defecate or
if there is no suitable time to go some distance, such as during twilight or
night, midday in the summer, or if there is no faultless defecation ground
nearby, etc., one can go to a secluded place in the shelter and defecate in a
vessel, and then defecate in a suitable place. Sutras 71 to 79 describe the
atonement for defecating in an unsuitable place, which includes harming the
earth, water, and gods, deceiving, and the possibility of incurring the wrath of
the master, public censure, etc. In accordance with this Sutra 80, one should
avoid the aforementioned unsuitable places, and also pay attention to whether
the sun's rays reach the defecation place or not. If the sun's rays do not
reach, it will not dry quickly, leading to the generation of microscopic beings
and prolonged harm. For this reason, the Sutra states the atonement for improper
defecation. If there are worms in someone's impurity, one should sit in the
shade or defecate after a while (10-20 minutes).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [91 dUsarA uddezaka] taM sevamANe Avajjai mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM ugghAiyaM  /
jo bhikSa dina meM, rAtri meM, yA vikAla meM uccAra-prasravaNa ke vega se
bAdhita hone para apanA pAtra grahaNa kara yA anya bhikSu kA pAtra yAcakara
usameM uccAra-prasravaNa kA tyAga karake jahAM sUrya kA prakAza (tApa) nahIM
pahu~catA hai aise sthAna meM paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| ina 80 sUtragata doSasthAnoM kA sevana karane para laghumAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai| vivecana-"aNuggae sUrie" isakA sIdhA artha "sUryodaya ke
pUrva nahIM paraThanA" aisA bhI kiyA jAtA hai kintu yaha artha prAgamasammata
nahIM hone se asaMgata hai  /  usake kAraNa isa prakAra haiM sUtra meM prayukta
'diyA vA' zabda nirarthaka ho jAtA hai  /  kyoMki 1. dina meM jisane mala tyAga
kiyA hai usakI apekSA se "aNaggae sarie" isa vAkya kI saMgati nahIM ho sakatI
hai| 2. rAta meM mala-mUtra par3A rakhane se sammUcchima jIvoM kI virAdhanA hotI
hai aura azuci ke kAraNa asvAdhyAya bhI rahatA hai| 3. rAtri meM paraThane kA
sarvathA niSedha ho jAtA hai| 4. uccAra-prazravaNa bhUmi kA cauthe prahara meM
kiyA gayA pratilekhana bhI nirarthaka ho jAtA hai| 5. aneka AcAra sUtra gata
nirdezoM se bhI yaha artha viparIta ho jAtA hai  /  ataH "jahAM para sUrya nahIM
ugatA" arthAt jahAM para dina yA rAta meM kabhI bhI sUrya kA prakAza (tApa)
nahIM pahu~catA hai aise chAyA ke sthAna meM paraThane kA yaha prAyazcitta sUtra
hai, aisA samajhanA yuktisaMgata hai| uccAra-prasravaNa ko pAtra meM tyAgakara
paraThane kI vidhi kA nirdeza AcArAMga zru. 2, a. 10 meM tathA isa sUtra meM
hai| phira bhI anya prAgama sthaloM kA tathA isa vidhAna kA saMyukta tAtparya
yaha hai ki-yogya bAdhA, yogya samaya va yogya sthaMDila bhUmi sulabha ho to
sthaMDila bhUmi meM jAkara hI malamUtra tyAganA cAhiye  /  kintu doghazaMkA kA
tIvra vega ho yA kucha dUrI para jAne mAne yogya samaya na ho, yathA-saMdhyA
kAla yA rAtri ho, grISma Rtu kA madhyAhna ho yA mala mUtra tyAgane yogya nirdoSa
bhUmi samIpa meM na ho, ityAdi kAraNoM se upAzraya meM hI jo ekAnta sthAna ho
vahAM jAkara pAtra meM mala tyAga karake yogya sthAna meM paraThA jA sakatA hai
/  sUtra 71 se 79 taka ayogya sthAna meM paraThane kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai
jisameM pRthvI, pAnI kI virAdhanA va deva chalanA, svAmI ke prakopa loka-apavAda
hone kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai  /  isa sUtra 80 ke anusa parokta ayogya sthAnoM
kA varjana karane ke sAtha yaha bhI dhyAna rakhanA cAhie ki paraThane ke sthAna
para sUrya kI dhUpa AtI hai yA nahIM, dhUpa na pAtI ho to jaldI nahIM sUkhane se
sammUcchima manuSyoM kI utpatti hokara jyAdA samaya taka virAdhanA hotI rahatI
hai  /  isa hetu se avidhi pariSThApana kA sUtra meM prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai|
yadi kisI ke azuci meM kRmiyA~ AtI hoM to chAyA meM baiThanA cAhiye yA kucha
dera (10-20 minaTa) bAda pariSThApana karanA cAhiye  /

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [92] [Nishīthasūtra Sūtra 15 Sūtra 16 Summary Sūtra 1 of the Third
Uddeshaka: Begging by going from one person to another in a Dharmasala or other
such place. Sūtra 2: Begging by going from one person to another in a Dharmasala
or other such place. Sūtra 3: Begging by going from one woman to another in a
Dharmasala or other such place. Sūtra 4: Begging by going from one woman to
another in a Dharmasala or other such place. Sūtra 5-8: Begging out of curiosity
in a Dharmasala or other such place. Sūtra 9-12: After being refused once, going
back to the place where food was brought from an unseen location and begging
again. Sūtra 13: Going back to the house of the householder even after being
refused to take food. Sūtra 14: Going to a place where there is a communal meal
(big Jīmanvār). Taking food brought from a distance of more than three houses
(rooms). Washing the feet. Sūtra 17: Massaging the feet. Sūtra 18: Applying oil
to the feet. Sūtra 19: Applying ubtan to the feet. Sūtra 20: Washing the feet.
Sūtra 21: Coloring the feet. Sūtra 22-27: Washing the body, etc. Sūtra 28-33:
Washing the wound, etc. Sūtra 34: Cutting the goiter, etc. Sūtra 35: Drawing out
pus and blood from the goiter, etc. Sūtra 36: Washing the goiter, etc. Sūtra 37:
Applying a paste to the goiter, etc. Sūtra 38: Rubbing oil, etc. on the goiter,
etc. Sūtra 39: Applying fragrant substances to the goiter, etc. Sūtra 40:
Removing worms from the external or internal part of the anus. Sūtra 41: Cutting
the nails. Sūtra 42: Cutting the hair on the thighs. Sūtra 43: Cutting the hair
on the private parts. Sūtra 44: Cutting the hair of the Romarājī. Sūtra 45:
Cutting the hair of the armpits. Sūtra 46: Cutting the beard hair. Sūtra 47:
Cutting the mustache hair. Sūtra 48-50: Grinding, washing, and coloring the
teeth. Sūtra 51-56: Washing the lips, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 92] [nizIthasUtra sUtra 15 sUtra 16 tRtIya uddezaka kA sArAMzasUtra 1
dharmazAlA Adi sthAnoM meM eka puruSa se mAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA krnaa| satra 2
dharmazAlA Adi sthAnoM meM aneka paruSoM se mAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA krnaa| sUtra
3 dharmazAlA Adi sthAnoM meM eka strI se mAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA karanA  /
sUtra 4 dharmazAlA Adi sthAnoM meM aneka striyoM se mAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA
krnaa| sUtra 5.8 dharmazAlA Adi sthAnoM meM kautukavaza mAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA
krnaa| sUtra 9-12 dharmazAlA Adi sthAnoM meM adRSTa sthAna se AhAra lAkara dene
para eka bAra niSedha karake punaH usake pIche-pIche jAkara yAcanA krnaa| sUtra
13 gRhasvAmI ke manA karane para bhI punaH usake ghara AhAra Adi lene ke liye
jAnA  /  sUtra 14 sAmUhika bhoja (bar3e jImanavAra) ke sthAna para AhAra ke liye
jaanaa| tIna gRha (kamare) ke antara se adhika dUra kA lAyA huA AhAra lenaa|
pairoM kA pramArjana krnaa| sUtra 17 pairoM kA mardana karanA  /  sUtra 18
pairoM kA abhyaMgana karanA  /  sUtra 19 pairoM kA ubaTana krnaa| sUtra 20
pairoM kA prakSAlana krnaa| sUtra 21 pairoM ko raMganA  /  sUtra 22-27 kAyA kA
pramArjana Adi karanA  /  sUtra 28-33 vraNa kA pramArjana Adi krnaa| sUtra 34
gaMDamAlA Adi kA chedana krnaa| sUtra 35 gaMDamAlA Adi kA pIva va rakta
nikaalnaa| sUtra 36 gaMDamAlA Adi kA prakSAlana karanA  /  sUtra 37 gaMDamAlA
Adi para vilepana krnaa| sUtra 38 gaMDamAlA Adi para tailAdi kA malanA  /  sUtra
39 gaMDamAlA Adi para sugaMdhita padArtha lagAnA  /  sUtra 40 gudA ke bAhya
bhAga yA bhItarI bhAga ke kRmi nikAlanA  /  sUtra 41 nakha kaattnaa| sUtra 42
jaMghA ke bAla kATanA  /  sUtra 43 guhya sthAna ke bAla kATanA  /  sUtra 44
romarAji ke bAla kaattnaa| sUtra 45 bagala-kA~kha ke bAla kATanA  /  sUtra 46
dADhI ke bAla kATanA sUtra 47 mUcha ke bAla kATanA  /  sUtra 48-50 dAMtoM ko
ghisanA, dhonA, raMganA  /  sUtra 51-56 hoThoM kA pramArjana Adi krnaa|

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Uddeshak  **Sutras 57 to 80**  **Sutras 57 to 63** **Sutras 64 to 79**
* Cutting eyelashes. Cleaning eyes, etc. * Cutting nose hair. * Cutting eyebrow
hair. * Cutting hair on the head. * Removing dirt accumulated on the body.
Cleaning eyes, ears, teeth, and nails. Covering the head while traveling from
village to village. Making a Vashikaran Sutra. * Excreting in the divisions of
the house. Excreting in the divisions of the cremation ground. Excreting in new
clay mines, etc. Excreting in places where coal is made, etc. Excreting in
places with mud, etc. Excreting in places where fruits are collected. Excreting
in places where vegetables are grown. Excreting in forests of sugarcane, rice,
etc. Excreting in forests of Ashoka trees, etc. Excreting in places where
sunlight does not reach.  These activities have a minor monthly atonement.
**Sutra 80**  **The subject matter of the 65 Sutras of this Uddeshak is
mentioned in the following Agamas:**  * **Sutras 1-4:** Prohibition of begging,
prohibition of traveling in a narrow path. - Aav. Pra. 4 * **Sutra 14:**
Prohibition of taking food brought in front of you. - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3, 5, 9,
6, 14, 15 * **Sutra 15:** Prohibition of bodily activities. - Das. Pra. 6, Ga.
65 * **Sutras 16-39:** Prohibition of long nails and hair for monks. - Das. Pra.
3, Ga. 3 * **Sutras 41-47:** Prohibition of activities related to teeth, etc. -
Prashna. Shru. 2, A. 1, U. 2, 3 * **Sutras 48-63:** Prohibition of activities
related to hair and body hair. - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3 * **Sutra 64-66:**
Prohibition of activities related to hair and body hair. - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3 *
**Sutra 67:** Prohibition of preventing sweat in the description of Jalla
Parishha. - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3 * **Sutras 72-79:** Prohibition of excreting in
cremation grounds, etc. - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3  **It is an offense to take the
following from the above Agamas:**  * Aacha. Shru. 2, A. 1, U. 2, 3 * Das. Pra.
3, Ga. 3 * Prashna. Shru. 2, A. 1, Su. 4 * Das. A. 6, Ga. 65 * Utt. 2, Ga. 37 *
Aacha. Shru. 2, Pra. 10  **The subject matter of the following 15 Sutras of this
Uddeshak is not mentioned in other Agamas:**  * **Sutras 5-8:** Begging out of
curiosity. * **Sutras 9-12:** Prohibition of taking food brought from an unseen
place and then taking it again, going to that house after being forbidden. *
**Sutra 13:** - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3 * **Sutra 14:** - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3 *
**Sutra 15:** - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3 * **Sutra 16:** - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3 *
**Sutra 17:** - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3 * **Sutra 18:** - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3 *
**Sutra 19:** - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3 * **Sutra 20:** - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3 *
**Sutra 21:** - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3 * **Sutra 22:** - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3 *
**Sutra 23:** - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3 * **Sutra 24:** - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3 *
**Sutra 25:** - Das. Pra. 3, Ga. 3  **[93]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dUsarA udde zaka ] sUtra 57 sUtra 58 63 sUtra 64 sUtra 65 sUtra 66 sUtra 67
sUtra 68 sUtra 69 sUtra 70 sUtra 71 sUtra 72 sUtra 73 sUtra 74 sUtra 75 sUtra 76
sUtra 77 sUtra 78 sUtra 79 sUtra 80 AMkhoM ke bAla kATanA  /  prAMkhoM kA
pramArjana Adi karanA  /  nAka ke bAla kATanA  /  bhauhoM ke bAla kATanA |
mastaka ke bAla kATanA  /  zarIra para jamA huA maila haTAnA  /  prAMkha-kAna-
dAMta aura nakhoM kA maila nikAlanA  /  grAmAnugrAma vihAra karate hue mastaka
Dha~kanA  /  vazIkaraNa sUtra banAnA  /  ghara ke vibhAgoM meM mala-mUtra
tyAganA  /  zmazAna ke vibhAgoM meM mala-mUtra tyAganA  /  navIna miTTI kI khAna
Adi meM mala-mUtra tyAganA  /  koyale banAne Adi sthAnoM meM mala-mUtra tyAganA
/  kIcaDa Adi ke sthAnoM meM mala-mUtra tyAganA  /  phala saMgraha karane ke
sthAnoM meM mala-mUtra tyAganA  /  vanaspati [ sabjI ] ke sthAnoM meM mala-mUtra
tyAganA  /  ikSu, zAli Adi ke vana meM mala-mUtra tyAganA  /  azoka vRkSa Adi ke
vana meM mala-mUtra tyAganA  /  dhUpa na Ane ke sthAna meM mala-mUtra tyAganA  /
ityAdi pravRttiyoM kA laghumAsika prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  isa uddezaka ke 65
sUtroM ke viSaya kA kathana nimna AgamoM meM hai yathA sUtra 1-4 mAMga-mAMga
kara lene kA niSedha saMkhaDI gamana niSedha - Ava. pra. 4 sUtra 14 sUtra 15
sAmane lAyA huA AhAra sUtra 16-39 zarIra parikarma niSedha sUtra 41-47 bhikSu
lambe nakha aura keza sUtra 48-63 dantAdi parikarma niSedha sUtra 64-66 roma -
keza parikarma niSedha sUtra 67 jalla parISaha varNana meM pasInA nivAraNa
niSedha sUtra 72-79 zmazAna Adi meM mala mUtra tyAgane kA niSedha AcA. zru. 2,
a. 1, u. 2, 3 Adi grahaNa karanA anAcAra hai  /  daza. pra. 3, gA. 3, 5, 9, 6,
14, 15 vAlA hotA hai  /  - daza. pra. 6, gA. 65 3 tathA 9 1 -daza. pra. 3, gA. -
prazna. zru. 2, a. isa uddezaka ke nimna 15 sUtroM ke viSaya kA kathana anya
AgamoM meM nahIM hai, yathA- sUtra 5-8 kautUhala se yAcanA, sUtra 9-12 adRSTa
sthAna se lAye hue AhAra kA niSedha karake punaH lenA, manA kiye jAne para usa
ghara meM gocarI jAnA  /  sUtra 13 - daza. pra. 3, gA. 3 1, su. 4 daza. a. 6,
gA. 65 utta. 2, gA. 37 AcA. zruta. 2, pra. 10 [ 93

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nishīthasūtra Sūtra 40 Worm Removal, Sūtra 68 Removing Impurities from Eyes,
Ears, Teeth, and Nails. Sūtra 69 Covering the Head, Sūtra 70 Creating a
Vashikaran Sūtra. || Sūtra 71 Excreting Waste in the House and its Divisions.
Sūtra 80 Excreting Waste in a Place Where the Sun's Heat Does Not Reach. ||
Third Uddeshaka Ends || 00

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [nizIthasUtra sUtra 40 kRmi nikAlanA, sUtra 68 aA~kha, kAna, dA~ta aura nakhoM
meM se maila nikaalnaa| sUtra 69 mastaka DhaMkanA, sUtra 70 vazIkaraNa sUtra
banAnA  /  /  sUtra 71 ghara meM aura ghara ke vibhAgoM meM malamUtrAdi
paraThanA  /  sUtra 80 jahA~ sUrya kA tApa na ho aise sthAna meM mala-mUtra
paraThanA  /   //  tRtIya uddezaka samApta  //  00

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Fourfold  Determinants  **Penance for Subduing Kings and Others**  1. A monk
who subdues a king or approves of one who subdues a king. 2. A monk who subdues
a king's bodyguard or approves of one who subdues a king's bodyguard. 3. A monk
who subdues a city guard or approves of one who subdues a city guard. 4. A monk
who subdues a guild guard or approves of one who subdues a guild guard. 5. A
monk who subdues a universal protector or approves of one who subdues a
universal protector. - (He incurs the minor monthly penance.)  **Explanation:**
* **Atikareï:** To make favorable or to subdue.  There are proper and improper
reasons and methods for subduing. Here, the minor monthly penance is mentioned
for subduing with a proper reason and through proper effort. The rest of the
explanation can be found in the commentary.  The commentary states that subduing
kings and their relatives can hinder restraint and practice, and if they are
unfavorable, they can also cause obstacles.  If it is necessary to make kings
and others favorable for the benefit of the Sangha in times of special crisis,
this is a proper reason. Subduing them through the merit gained from one's own
restraint and tapas is a proper effort.  Subduing them through deceitful and
sinful practices is an improper effort.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturza uddezaka rAjA Adi ko apane vaza meM karane kA prAyazcitta 1. je bhikkhU
"rAyaM" atIkarei, attIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  2. je bhikkhU "rAyArakkhiyaM"
attIkarei, attIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  3. je bhikkhU "nagarArakkhiyaM"
attIkarei, attIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  4. je bhikkhU "nigamArakkhiyaM"
attIkarei, attIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  5. je bhikkhU "savvArakkhiyaM" attIkarei,
attIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  1. jo bhikSu rAjA ko vaza meM karatA hai yA karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 2. jo bhikSu rAjA ke aMgarakSaka ko vaza meM
karatA hai yA vaza meM karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 3. jo bhikSu
nagararakSaka ko vaza meM karatA hai yA vaza meM karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 4. jo bhikSu nigamarakSaka ko vaza meM karatA hai yA vaza meM karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| 5. jo bhikSu sarvarakSaka ko vaza meM karatA hai yA
vaza meM karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| - (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA
hai|) vivecana-attIkarei-apane anukUla banAnA yA vaza meM karanA  /  vaza meM
karane ke prazasta aura aprazasta kAraNa tathA upAya hote haiM, yahA~ prazasta
kAraNa se aura prazasta prayatna se vaza meM karane para laghumAsika prAyazcitta
kahA gayA hai| zeSa vivecana bhASya se jAneM  /  rAjA Adi ke vaza meM karane se
hone vAlI hAniyA~ batAte hue bhASya meM kahA gayA hai ki rAjA tathA usake
svajana anukUla hone para saMyama-sAdhanA meM bAdhaka bana sakate haiM aura
pratikUla hone para upasarga bhI kara sakate haiN| vizeSa saMkaTa Ane para
saMgha hita ke lie rAjA Adi ko yadi anukUla karanA Avazyaka ho to yaha prazasta
kAraNa hai tathA apane saMyama evaM tapobala se prApta labdhi dvArA inheM vaza
meM karanA prazasta prayatna hai| jhUTha kapaTa Adi pApa yukta pravRttiyoM se
inheM vaza meM karanA aprazasta prayatna hai  /

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīthসূত্র  To enhance someone's reputation, to harm someone, or to subdue
someone for selfish reasons are all improper motives. The atonement for this is
severe.  The Sūyagḍāṅg Sūtra, Chapter 1, Section 2, Verse 2, Line 18 also
states: "Saṁsaggi asāhu rāihiṁ, asamahi u tahagayassa vi."  "For a practitioner
engaged in the practice of self-restraint, association with kings and their
company is not appropriate, as such association can lead to distraction from
self-restraint." Therefore, practitioners should avoid personal contact with
such individuals.  If kings, etc., come to them for Dharmaśravaṇa, etc., there
is no fault in trying to make them Dharma-loving. The atonement for praising
kings, etc., is:  6. The monk who praises the king, or approves of those who
praise him. 7. The monk who praises the king's bodyguard, or approves of those
who praise him. 8. The monk who praises the city guard, or approves of those who
praise him. 9. The monk who praises the guild guard, or approves of those who
praise him. 10. The monk who praises the universal protector, or approves of
those who praise him. (He incurs the atonement of a small monthly penance.)
**Discussion:**  "Acchīkarei" refers to praising someone's virtues, such as
bravery, in their presence or absence. These sūtras are related to the
"Attikarei" sūtras, which describe a method of subduing someone. In essence, the
easiest way to win someone over is to praise them in their presence or absence.
Therefore, these "Acchīkarei atonement sūtras" should be understood as
complementary to the "Attikarei" sūtras.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [nizIthasUtra kisI kI pratiSThA bar3hAne ke lie yA kisI kA ahita karane ke lie
yA svArtha se vaza meM karanA aprazasta kAraNa hai  /  isakA prAyazcitta adhika
hai| sUyagaDA~ga sUtra zru0 1, a0 2, u0 2, gA0 18 meM bhI yaha batAyA hai
ki"saMsaggi asAhu rAihiM, asamAhI u tahAgayassa vi  / " 'saMyama sAdhanA meM
lage hue sAdhaka ke lie rAjAoM kA paricaya tathA unakI saMgati ThIka nahIM hai
kyoMki inakA paricaya yA saMgati saMyama meM asamAdhi paidA karane kA kAraNa
hai|' ataH sAdhaka ko ina viziSTa vyaktiyoM ke sAtha vyaktigata samparka nahIM
karanA caahie| dharmazravaNa Adi ke lie rAjA Adi svataH pAveM to unheM
dharmAnurAgI banAne meM koI doSa nahIM hai| rAjA Adi ko prazaMsA karane kA
prAyazcitta 6. je bhikkhU "rAyaM" "accIkarei" accIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  7. je
bhikkhU "rAyArakkhiyaM" accIkarei, accIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  8. je bhikkhU
"nagarArakkhiyaM" accIkarei, accIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  9. je bhikkhU
"nigamArakkhiyaM" accIkarei, accIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  10. je bhikkhU
"savvArakkhiyaM" accIkarei, accokareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  6. jo bhikSu rAjA kI
prazaMsA-guNa-kIrtana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  7.
jo bhikSu rAjA ke aMgarakSaka kI prazaMsA-guNakIrtana karatA hai yA karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| 8. jo bhikSu nagararakSaka kI prazaMsA-guNakIrtana
karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 9. jo bhikSu nigamarakSaka kI
prazaMsA-guNakIrtana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  10.
jo bhikSu sarvarakSaka kI prazaMsA-guNakIrtana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-
accIkarei-rAjA ke sAmane yA pIche usake vIratA Adi guNoM kI prazaMsA karanA  /
ye sUtra attIkarei sUtroM se sambandhita haiN| arthAt vaza meM karane ke eka
tarIke kA kathana isa sUtra meM huaA hai  /  vastutaH kisI bhI vyakti ko apanA
banAne kA sabase sarala tarIkA yaha hai ki usake sAmane yA pIche usakI prazaMsA
kI jAya  /  ataH ye "accIkarei ke prAyazcitta sUtra bhI" attIkarei sUtra ke
pUraka haiM, aisA samajhanA cAhie  /

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Uddeshaka:  **Penance for Attracting the King and Others**  11. A monk
who makes the king his *arthi* (object of attraction) or approves of someone who
does so. 12. A monk who makes the king's protector his *arthi* or approves of
someone who does so. 13. A monk who makes the city protector his *arthi* or
approves of someone who does so. 14. A monk who makes the guild protector his
*arthi* or approves of someone who does so. 15. A monk who makes the universal
protector his *arthi* or approves of someone who does so. (He incurs the
*laghumasik* penance.)  **Discussion:**  There are three meanings of
*prathikarei*:  1. The monk prays to the king. 2. The monk performs actions that
cause the king to pray to him. 3. The monk fulfills a task for the king.  These
are the types of *arthi* (attraction). Alternatively, the monk may tell the
king, "I possess such and such knowledge, *nimittagyan* (knowledge of causes),
or knowledge of specific periods, etc." These are all means of attracting the
king.  *Arthi* is also a type of *prati* (acceptance). Therefore, the *arthi*
sutras should be understood as complementary to the *prati* sutras.  Of the
three meanings of *arthi*, the latter two seem more relevant than the first. The
first meaning, praying to the king, is already included in the *acchikarei*
sutras. The meaning of attracting the king through the power of one's
austerities is more relevant to the context. Therefore, the meaning of
*prathikarei* is to attract them to oneself.  In summary, these 15 sutras state
that one should not have any inclination to make the king or others their own.
The etymology of the remaining words is as follows...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha uddezaka ] rAjA zrAdi ko AkarSita karane kA prAyazcitta 11. je bhikkhU
"rAyaM" atthIkarei, atthIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  12. je bhikkhU " rAyArakkhiyaM"
atthIkarei, atthIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  13. je bhikkhU " nagarArakkhiyaM"
atthIkarei, atthIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  14. je bhikkhU "nigamAra kkhiyaM"
atthIkarei, atthIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  15. je bhikkhU " savvArakkhiyaM"
atthIkarei, atthIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  11. jo bhikSu rAjA ko apanA arthI
banAtA hai yA banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  12. jo bhikSu rAjA ke
aMgarakSaka ko apanA arthI banAtA hai yA banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
13. jo bhikSu nagararakSaka ko apanA arthI banAtA hai yA banAne vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  [ 97 14. jo bhikSu nigamarakSaka ko apanA arthI banAtA
hai yA banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  15. jo bhikSu sarvarakSaka ko
apanA arthI banAtA hai yA banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use
laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana - pratthIkarei ke tIna artha kiye
gaye haiM 1. sAdhu rAjA kI prArthanA kare, 2. sAdhu aise kArya kare jisase rAjA
sAdhu kI prArthanA kare, 3. rAjA kA koI kArya siddha kara de  /  ye arthIkaraNa
ke prakAra haiM  /  athavA rAjA ko kahe ki " mere pAsa aisI vidyAeM haiM,
nimittajJAna hai yA viziSTa avadhi Adi jJAna haiM  /  ye saba rAjA ko arthI
(AkarSita karane ke upAya haiM  /  rthIkaraNa bhI pratIkaraNa kA hI eka prakAra
hai  /  ataH accIkaraNa ke sUtroM ke samAna arthIkaraNa ke sUtra bhI
prattIkaraNa ke hI pUraka haiM, aisA samajhanA cAhie  /  arthIkaraNa ke tIna
arthoM meM se prathama artha kI apekSA pIche ke donoM artha vizeSa saMgata
pratIta hote haiM  /  pahalA artha hai rAjA kI prArthanA karanA, usakA bhAvArtha
to "accIkarei" ke sUtroM meM samAviSTa haiM tathA apane tapobala se prApta
labdhi dvArA rAjA ko vaza meM karanA arthAt apanI tarapha prAkRSTa karanA yaha
artha prasaMga saMgata hotA hai  /  ataH "pratthIkarei" kA artha huA ki inako
apanI ora AkRSTa karanA  /  isa prakAra ina sabhI (15) sUtroM kA saMkSipta sAra
yaha hai ki rAjA Adi ko apanA banAne kI koI pravRtti nahIM karanA cAhie  /  zeSa
zabdoM kI vyutpatti isa prakAra hai

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīthasūtra  **1. Rāyarakkhiyam:** One who protects the king is a
Rāyarakkhiyo - Siroraksah - King's bodyguard. **2. Nagararakkhiyam:** One who
protects the city is a Nagararakkhiyo - Kottāpāl - Kotwal. **3.
Nigmarakkhiyam:** One who protects all the people is a Nigmarakkhiyo - Seththi -
Nagaraseth. **4. Savvarakkhiyam:** One who protects all these is a Savvarakkhiyo
- He is the one who should be consulted in all matters and is the one with great
power - Advisor in all matters.  **Penance for controlling the Gram-Rakshak
etc.** **16.** A monk who controls the Gram-Rakshak or approves of the one who
controls him, will be punished. **17.** A monk who controls the Desaraksak or
approves of the one who controls him, will be punished. **18.** A monk who
controls the Simaraksak or approves of the one who controls him, will be
punished. **19.** A monk who controls the Ranṇaraksak or approves of the one who
controls him, will be punished. **20.** A monk who controls the Savvaraksak or
approves of the one who controls him, will be punished. (He will be given a
Laghumāsik penance).  **Penance for praising the Gram-Rakshak etc.** **21.** A
monk who praises the Gram-Rakshak or approves of the one who praises him, will
be punished. **22.** A monk who praises the Desaraksak or approves of the one
who praises him, will be punished. **23.** A monk who praises the Simaraksak or
approves of the one who praises him, will be punished. **24.** A monk who
praises the Ranṇaraksak or approves of the one who praises him, will be
punished. **25.** A monk who praises the Savvaraksak or approves of the one who
praises him, will be punished.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [nizIthasUtra 1. rAyArakkhiyaM-rAyANaM jo rakkhati so rAyarakkhiyo-sirorakSaH-
rAjA kA aMgarakSaka  /  2. nagarArakkhiyaM-nagaraM rakkhati jo so nagararakkhio
-koTTapAla:-kotavAla  /  3. nigamArakkhiyaM-savvapagaio jo rakkhai so
nigamarakkhio -seTThI-nagaraseTha  /  4. savvArakkhiyaM--etANi savvANi jo
rakkhai so savvArakkhiyo-eteSu sarvakAryeSu prApRcchanIyaH sa ca mahAbalAdhikaH
ityarthaH-sabhI kAryoM meM salAhakAra  /  grAma-rakSaka Adi ko apane vaza meM
karane kA prAyazcitta 16. je bhikkhU "gAmArakkhiyaM" attIkarei, attokareMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  17. je bhikkhU "desArakkhiya" attIkarei, attIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /
18. je bhikkhU "sImArakkhiyaM" attIkarei, attIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  19. je
bhikkhU "raNNArakkhiyaM" attIkarei attIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  20. je bhikkhU
"savvArakkhiyaM" attIkarei, attIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  16. jo bhikSu
grAmarakSaka ko apane vaza meM karatA hai yA vaza meM karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 17. jo bhikSu dezarakSaka ko apane vaza meM karatA hai yA vaza meM
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 18. jo bhikSu sImArakSaka ko apane vaza meM
karatA hai yA vaza meM karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 19. jo bhikSu
rAjarakSaka ko apane vaza meM karatA hai yA vaza meM karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 20. jo bhikSu sarvarakSaka ko apane vaza meM karatA hai yA vaza meM
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta aAtA hai  /
)  /  grAmarakSaka Adi kI prazaMsA karane kA prAyazcitta 21. je bhikkhU
"gAmArakkhiyaM" accIkarei accIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  22. je bhikkhU
"desArakkhiyaM" accIkarei accIkareMtaM vA saaijji| 23. je bhikkhU
"sImArakkhiyaM" accIkarei accIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  24. je bhikkhU
"raNNArakkhiyaM" accIkarei accIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  , 25. je bhikkhU
"savvArakkhiyaM" accIkarei accIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Uddesaka  **21.** A monk who praises or approves of the praise of a
**Gramaraakshaka** (protector of the village). **22.** A monk who praises or
approves of the praise of a **Desharaakshaka** (protector of the country).
**23.** A monk who praises or approves of the praise of a **Seemaraakshaka**
(protector of the boundaries). **24.** A monk who praises or approves of the
praise of a **Raajaraakshaka** (protector of the king). **25.** A monk who
praises or approves of the praise of a **Sarvaraakshaka** (protector of all).
(He incurs **Laghumaasik Praayaaschitta** (minor monthly atonement)). This
atonement applies to attracting **Gramaraakshaka** etc.  **26.** A monk who
attracts a **Gramaraakshaka** or approves of someone who attracts a
**Gramaraakshaka**. **27.** A monk who attracts a **Desharaakshaka** or approves
of someone who attracts a **Desharaakshaka**. **28.** A monk who attracts a
**Seemaraakshaka** or approves of someone who attracts a **Seemaraakshaka**.
**29.** A monk who attracts a **Raajaraakshaka** or approves of someone who
attracts a **Raajaraakshaka**. **30.** A monk who attracts a **Sarvaraakshaka**
or approves of someone who attracts a **Sarvaraakshaka**. (He incurs
**Laghumaasik Praayaaschitta** (minor monthly atonement)).  **Discussion:** The
commentary in the **Churni** only hints at the subject of these sutras, stating:
"And this **Pannaras** sutra is to be recited." The meaning is the same as
before. The commentary verse states: "In attracting etc., the meaning of the
king etc. has been stated."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha uddezaka] 21. jo bhikSu grAmarakSaka kI prazaMsAguNakIrtana karatA hai
yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 22. jo bhikSu dezarakSaka kI prazaMsA-
guNakIrtana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 23. jo bhikSu
sImArakSaka kI prazaMsA-guNakIrtana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 24. jo bhikSu rAjarakSaka kI prazaMsA-guNakIrtana karatA hai yA
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 25. jo bhikSu sarvarakSaka kI prazaMsA-
guNakIrtana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use
laghumAsika prAyazcitta aAtA hai  /  ) grAmarakSaka Adi ko AkarSita karane kA
prAyazcitta 26. je bhikkhU "gAmArakkhiyaM" atthokarei, atthIkareMtaM vA sAijjai
/  27. je bhikkhU "desArakkhiyaM" atthIkarei, atthIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  28.
je bhikkhU "sImArakkhiyaM" atyIkarei, atthIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  29. je
bhikkhU "raNNArakkhiyaM" atthIkarei, atthIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  30. je bhikkhU
"savvArakkhiyaM" atthIkarei, atthIkareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  26. jo bhikSu
grAmarakSaka ko apanI tarapha AkRSTa karatA hai yA AkRSTa karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 27. jo bhikSu dezarakSaka ko apanI tarapha AkRSTa karatA
hai yA AkRSTa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 28. jo bhikSu sImArakSaka ko
apanI tarapha AkRSTa karatA hai yA AkRSTa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
29. jo bhikSu rAjarakSaka ko apanI tarapha AkRSTa karatA hai yA AkRSTa karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| _30. jo bhikSu sarvarakSaka ko apanI tarapha
AkRSTa karatA hai yA AkRSTa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use
laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  ) vivecana-ina sUtroM ke viSaya kA bhASya
cUrNI meM saMketa mAtra hai, yathAcUrNI-evaM paNNarassa suttA uccAreyavvA  /
arthaH pUrvavat  /  bhASyagAthA-attIkaraNAdIsu, rAyAdINaM tu jo gamo bhaNiyo  /

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 100] [Nishith Sutra 100 and Nirvaseso, Gamadarakkhimadi in 1854. || 1.
Gramarakshaka - Village protectors - Sarpanch etc. 2. Desharakshaka - Protectors
of specific divisions like districts etc. - District Magistrate etc. or those
who protect the country from thieves etc. 3. Simarakshaka - Protectors of the
border areas of the state. 4. Ranarakshaka - Protectors of the state - Governor
etc. 5. Savvarakshaka - In all these areas, they are the chief advisors. The
first 15 Sutras are related to the king and the capital, and these 15 Sutras are
related to the entire state. This is the reason for dividing these 15-15 Sutras
into two separate divisions. "Sarvarakshaka" is mentioned in both divisions. 1 -
In all the tasks of the first division, they are to be consulted. 2 - In all the
tasks of the second division, they are to be given permission. Understanding
this meaning clarifies the difference between the two. There are variations in
the number and order of these Sutras in many copies. The number is 24, 27, 30,
40 etc. The order is sometimes 40 together, sometimes 24 together, sometimes
some Sutras are in the Uddeshaka and some are in between the Uddeshaka.
Sometimes there are 5 or 6 Attikarei Sutras, while sometimes only three Sutras
related to the king are given, followed by three Sutras related to the king's
protector. There are many such orders. These variations are due to the mistakes
of the scribes. Since there is no impropriety of any kind, the text with 30
Sutras has been taken here, and the order and number have been given according
to the Churni and Bhashya. The "Nisihjhayanam" published by the Terapanthi
Mahasabha has divided the 15-15 Sutras into two divisions and has given a note
for the second division: _"Etani sutrani uddeshakadisutrebyah kimartham
prithakkrutani iti na charcitamasti bhashyachadao" - Page 28. || Prāyaschitta
for eating whole grain 31. Je bhikkhu "kasinao" osahio ahareï, aharatam vā
saijjai. The monk who eats "whole" medicines (whole grain etc.) or approves of
the one who does so. (He incurs a minor monthly prāyaschitta.) Discussion -
"Kasina" - There are four parts of these two types: dravyakrtsna and
bhavakrtsna. Dravyakrtsna means whole and bhavakrtsna means with consciousness.
Here, the subject of prāyaschitta is involved, so the meaning of "bhavakrtsna"
(with consciousness) should be taken. "Osahïro" - It should be understood as
grains and other seeds containing every living being by implication. Therefore,
the meaning of the Sutra is that eating whole grain and seeds with consciousness
incurs a minor monthly prāyaschitta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 100] [nizIthasUtra sau ceva niravaseso, gAmAdArakkhimAdIsu 1854  /  /  1.
grAmarakSaka-gAMva kI dekha-rekha karane vAle-sarapaMca Adi  /  2. dezarakSaka-
vibhAga vizeSa yathA-jilA Adi ke rakSaka-jilAdhIza Adi athavA cora Adi se deza
kI rakSA karane vAle  /  3. sImArakSaka-rAjya kI sImA-kinAre ke vibhAgoM kI
rakSA - dekha-rekha karane vAle  /  4. raNArakSaka-rAjya kI rakSA karane vAle
rAjyapAla Adi  /  5. savvArakSaka-ina sabhI kSetroM meM ApRcchanIya-pradhAnavat
/  pUrva ke 15 sUtra rAjA aura rAjadhAnI saMbaMdhI haiM aura ye 15 sUtra
saMpUrNa rAjya kI apekSA vAle haiN| ina 15-15 sUtroM ke alaga-alaga do vibhAga
karane kA yahI karaNa hai  /  "sarvarakSaka" donoM vibhAgoM meM kahA gayA hai  /
1-prathama vibhAga ke sabhI kAryoM meM salAha lene yogya 2-dvitIya vibhAga ke
sabhI kAryoM meM anumati lene yogya, aisA artha samajha lene se donoM kI
bhinnatA samajha meM A jAtI hai| ina sUtroM kI saMkhyA meM va krama meM aneka
pratiyoM meM bhinnatA hai, vaha saMkhyA 24, 27, 30, 40 Adi haiM  /  krama kahIM
eka sAtha 40, kahIM eka sAtha 24, kahIM uddezaka kI Adi meM kucha sUtra haiM va
kucha uddezaka ke bIca meM Aye haiN| kahIM 5 yA 6 attIkarei ke sUtra haiM to
kahIM kevala rAjA saMbaMdhI tIna sUtra dekara usake bAda rAjArakSaka ke tIna
sUtra die haiN| isa taraha aneka krama haiN| ye vibhinnatAeM lipikoM ke pramAda
se huI haiM, kisI prakAra kA anaucitya na hone se eka sAtha 30 sUtra vAlA pATha
yahA~ liyA gayA hai aura krama evaM saMkhyA cUrNI aura bhASya ke anusAra dI gaI
hai| terApaMthI mahAsabhA se prakAzita "nisIhajjhayaNaM' meM 15-15 sUtroM ke do
vibhAga kiye haiM aura dvitIya vibhAga ke lie TippaNa diyA hai _"etAni sUtrANi
uddezakAdisUtrebhyaH kimarthaM pRthakkRtAni iti na carcitamasti
bhASyacAdau"-pRSTha 28  /  /  kRtsna dhAnya khAne kA prAyazcitta 31. je bhikkhU
"kasiNAo" osahio AhArei, AhArataM vA sAijjai  /  jo bhikSu "kRtsna" auSadhiyoM
(sacitta dhAnya Adi) kA AhAra karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai
/  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-"kasiNa"-dravyakRtsna aura
bhAvakRtsna ina do bhedoM ke cAra bhAga hote haiN| dravyakRtsna kA artha hai
akhaMDa aura bhAvakRtsna kA artha hai sacitta  /  yahA~ prAyazcitta kA viSaya
hai isalie "bhAvakRtsna" (sacitta) artha hI grahaNa karanA caahiye|
"aosahiro'-dhAnya aura upalakSaNa se anya pratyeka jIva vAle bIjoM ko grahaNa
karanA caahiye| ata: sUtra kA artha yaha hai ki sacitta dhAnya evaM bIja kA
AhAra karane se laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Uddeshak  [101] The first and second two bhangas in the fourfold
classification of dravya and bhava are related to the soul, and their
pratyachitt is as described. There is no pratyachitt mentioned in the sutras for
the two bhangas related to the non-soul.  The commentator has mentioned
pratyachitt for "achitt akhand" as well, but this cannot be the intention of the
sutrakar. The following passages should be considered:  1. "Adu javaitth
luhenam, ayanam manthukummassenam." Pra. Su. 1, A. 9, U. 4, Ga. 4 2. "Avi suiyam
va sukkam va, sipidam puranakummasan." Adu bukkasan va pulagam va, laddhe pinde
aladdhe davie. Pra. Su. 1, A. 9, U. 4, Ga. 13 3. "Ayamgam cheva javodanam cha,
siyam sovir-javodagam cha." Utt. A. 15, Ga. 13 4. "Patani cheva sevejja, siyar
yapadam puranakummasan. Adu bukkasan pulagam va, javanatthae nisevae manthu."
Utt. A. 8, Ga. 12 5. "Dasavai. A. 5. U. 1, Ga. 98" mentions
"manthukummāsabhoyānam."  It is clear from the above passages that Bhagwan
Mahavir Swami consumed food like rice, urad dal, etc., which are achitt akhand.
The Uttaradhyayanasutra mentions the consumption of "jav" (barley) porridge and
urad dal sprouts. Even today, porridge made from rice, bajra, barley, etc., and
dishes made from whole moong dal, chana dal, etc., are common.  Therefore, it is
not appropriate to consider the consumption of achitt akhand grains like rice,
etc., as requiring pratyachitt. Instead, it should be understood as pratyachitt
for the consumption of sachit grains and seeds.  The pratyachitt for knowingly
consuming sachit grains and unknowingly consuming them is different. This should
be understood from the pratyachitt table given at the beginning of the first
uddeshak.  ## Pratyachitt for consuming vigaya without permission  32. "Je
bhikkhu ayariy-uvjjaaehi avidinnam annayaran vigai ahare, aharetam va saijjai."
A monk who consumes any vigaya without the specific permission of the acharya or
upadhyaya, or who approves of someone else doing so, incurs laghumasik
pratyachitt.  ## Explanation  1. If the acharya or upadhyaya is present, then
their permission should be sought. Otherwise, the permission of the upadhyaya
should be sought, or, by implication, the permission of the senior monk or
sthavir under whose guidance or in whose company the monk is living.  2. A sadhu
always seeks permission before consuming food. However, this permission only
allows for the consumption of food without vigaya. If it is necessary to consume
vigaya like ghee or milk, then specific permission should be sought.  According
to general practice, a sadhu can only consume food without vigaya. If it is
necessary to consume food with vigaya due to special circumstances, then the
sadhu cannot consume vigaya without the permission of the acharya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha uddezaka] [101 dravya aura bhAva kI caubhaMgI meM sacitta saMbaMdhI
prathama aura dvitIya do bhaMga haiM unakA hI yaha prAyazcitta hai, acitta
saMbaMdhI do bhaMgoM meM sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM hai| _ vyAkhyAkAra ne
"acitta akhaMDa" meM bhI prAyazcitta kahA hai kintu sUtrakAra kA prAzaya yaha
nahIM ho sakatA  /  isake lie nimna sthala dekhane cAhiye- 1. adu jAvaittha
lUheNaM, AyaNaM maMthukummAseNaM  /  prA. su. 1, a. 9, u. 4, gA. 4 2. avi sUiyaM
va sukkaM vA, sIpiDaM purANakummAsaM  /  /  adu bukkasaM va pulAgaM vA, laddhe
piMDe aladdhe davie  //  prA. su. 1, a. 9, u. 4, gA. 13 3. AyAmagaM ceva
javodaNaM ca, sIyaM sovIra-javodagaM c| utta. a. 15, gA. 13 4. patANi ceva
sevejjA, sIyaryApaDaM purANakummAsaM  /  adu bukkasaM pulAgaM vA, javaNaTThAe
Nisevae mNthu|| utta. a. 8, gA. 12 5. dazavai. a. 5. u. 1, gA. 98 meM
'mNthukummaasbhoynnN'| uparokta sthaloM se spaSTa siddha hai ki bhagavAn
mahAvIra svAmI ne acitta akhaMDa dhAnya cAvala, ur3ada Adi kA AhAra kiyA thA
tathA uttarAdhyayana sUtra meM "java" ke prodana kA va ur3ada ke bAkale Adi ke
sevana kA kathana hai  /  vartamAna meM bhI cAvala, bAjarA, jau Adi kA prodana
va akhaMDa mUga, caNA Adi kA vyaMjana hotA hai| ataH acitta akhaMDa dhAnyAdi
khAne kA prAyazcitta na samajha kara sacitta dhAnya bIja ke AhAra kA prAyazcita
hai yaha samajhanA hI Agamasammata hai  /  sacita dhAnya jAnakara khAne kA
prAyazcitta aura anajAne meM khAne kA prAyazcitta bhinna-bhinna hotA hai  /  use
prathama uddezaka ke prAraMbha meM dI gaI prAyazcitta-tAlikA se samajha lenA
cAhiye  /  prAjJA lie binA vimaya khAne kA prAyazcitta 32. je bhikkhU Ayariya-
uvajjhAehi avidiNNaM aNNayaraM vigaI AhArei, AhAreMtaM vA saaijji| jo bhikSu
prAcArya yA upAdhyAya kI vizeSa prAjJA ke binA kisI bhI vigaya kA AhAra karatA
hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA
hai|) vivecana-1. Ayariya-uvajjhAya-prAcArya vidyamAna hoM to unakI anyathA
upAdhyAya kI aura upalakSaNa se jisa pramukha yA sthavira kI adhInatA meM yA
sAnnidhya meM rahakara vicaraNa kara ra usI kI AjJA lenI cAhiye  /  2. avidiNNa-
sAdhu gocarI ke liye to AjJA lekara jAtA hI hai  /  kintu usa aAjJA se to vigaya
rahita AhAra hI grahaNa kara sakatA hai  /  yadi vigaya-ghI, dUdha lenA Avazyaka
ho to vizeSa spaSTa kahakara AjJA lenI cAhiye  /  sAmAnya vidhAna ke anusAra
sAdhu vigayarahita AhAra hI le sakatA hai| vizeSa kAraNa se vigayayukta AhAra
lenA Avazyaka ho to prAcArya kI AjJA prApta kiye binA vigaya nahIM le sakatA

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 102]  [This is the Nishītha Sutra. They also give permission to consume
*vigaya* after understanding the necessity and deciding the quantity. In the
absence of the *prācārya*, permission can also be taken from the *upādhyāya*.
Because both these degree holders are *gītartha* only. In the absence of both of
them, permission can also be taken from the one who is the main *gītartha*. It
is not permissible for any monk to wander without the subordination or proximity
of the *gītartha*.  3. *Aṇṇayarṁ vigaiṁ* - any *vigaya* from the five *vigayas*.
The five *vigayas* are: 1. Milk, 2. Curd, 3. Ghee, 4. Oil, and 5. Jaggery-Sugar.
In the ninth *ṭhāṇa* of the *Ṭhāṇāṅga Sutra*, nine *vigayas* are mentioned, and
out of them, four *vigayas* are called *mahāvigaya* in the fourth *ṭhāṇa*.
Therefore, by implication, the remaining five are called *vigayas*. The four
*mahāvigayas* are: 1. Butter, 2. Honey, 3. Alcohol, 4. Meat. Out of these, two,
alcohol and meat, are *aprashasta mahāvigaya*, and are completely forbidden for
the seeker, because the consumption of alcohol and meat is said to be the cause
of hell in the fourth *ṭhāṇa* of the *Ṭhāṇāṅga Sutra*.  In *Daśavai. Cha. 2, Gā.
7*, the monk is called "**amjjamansāsi**". That is, the monk does not consume
alcohol or meat.  Generally, the consumption of the five *vigayas* is forbidden,
so the question of consuming *mahāvigaya* does not arise. However, honey and
butter *mahāvigaya* are not completely unacceptable.  The consumption of all
five *vigayas* can be done only after taking permission in case of unavoidable
necessity, and the consumption of the two *prashasta mahāvigayas* cannot be done
without fear of disease, etc. The following verses are from the *āgamas*
regarding the prohibition of *vigaya*:  1. *Lahvitti susantuṭhe.*    - *Daśavai.
A. 8, Gā. 25* 2. *Paṇīyarasabhoyanaṁ visan tālauḍaṁ jahā.*    - *Daśavai. A. 8,
Gā. 57* 3. *Paṇṭāṇi ceva sevejjā, sīyapīṇḍapurāṇakummāsaṁ.  _ Adu bukkasaṁ
pulāgaṁ vā, javaṇṭṭāe nisevae mathu.*    - *Uttara. A. 1, Gāthā 12* 4. *ṇo hīlae
piḍaṁ nīrasaṁ tu, paṇṭakulāiṁ parivvaē sa bhikku.*    - *Uttara. A. 15, Gā. 13*
5. *Paṇīyaṁ bhattapāṇaṁ tu, khippaṁ mayavivaddanaṁ.  Bambačeraraō bhikku,
niccaso parivajjāe.*    - *Uttara. A. 16, Gā. 7* 6. *Duddha dahi vigaiō, āhārei
abhikkhaṇaṁ.  _ Arae ya tavokamme, pāvasamaṇe tti vucchai.*    - *Uttara. A. 17,
Gā. 15* 7. *Abhikkhaṇaṁ nivigaiṁ gaya ya.*    - *Daś. Chū. 2. Gā. 7* 8. *Rasā
pagāmaṁ na niseviyavvā, pāyaṁ rasā dittikarā garāṇaṁ.*    - *Uttara. A. 32, Gā.
10* 9. *Vigaiṁ nijjahaṇaṁ kare.*    - *Uttara. A. 36, Gā. 255* 10. *Tao no
kappati vāittae-avīṇīe, vigaipaḍibaddhe, avioṣaviā pāhuḍe.*    - *Bṛhat. U. 4* ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 102] [nizIthasUtra hai  /  ve bhI AvazyakatA kA aucitya samajhakara aura
parimANa kA nirNaya karake vigaya sevana kI AjJA dete haiN| prAcArya kI
anupasthiti meM upAdhyAya kI bhI AjJA le sakate haiN| kyoMki ye donoM
padavIdhara gItArtha hI hote haiM  /  ina donoM kI anupasthiti meM jo pramukha
gItArtha ho usakI bhI AjJA le sakate haiN| gItArtha kI adhInatA yA sAnnidhya ke
binA kisI bhI sAdhu ko vicaraNa karanA bhI nahIM kalpatA hai| 3. aNNayaraM
vigaiM-pAMca vigaya meM se koI bhI vigaya  /  pAMca vigaya nimna haiM-1. dUdha,
2. dahI, 3. ghRta, 4. taila aura 5. gur3a-zakkara  /  ThANAMga sUtra ke navameM
ThANe meM 9 vigaya kahe haiM aura unameM se cAra vigayoM ko cauthe ThANe meM
mahAvigaya kahA hai  /  ataH arthApatti se zeSa 5 hI vigaya kahI jAtI hai  /
cAra mahAvigaya haiM 1. makkhana, 2. madhu, 3. madya, 4. mAMsa  /  inameM se do
madya-mAMsa aprazasta mahAvigaya to sAdhaka ke lie sarvathA vayaM haiM, kyoMki
madya-mAMsa ke AhAra ko ThANAMga sUtra ke cauthe ThANe meM naraka gati kA kAraNa
kahA gayA hai| dazavai. ca. 2, gA. 7 meM sAdhu ko "amajjamaMsAsi" kahA hai|
arthAt sAdhu madya mAMsa kA AhAra nahIM karane vAlA hotA hai| sAdhAraNatayA
pAMca vigayoM kA sevana vayaM hai to mahAvigaya ke sevana kA to prazna hI nahIM
rahatA  /  phira bhI madhu, makkhana mahAvigaya sarvathA agrAhya nahIM hai  /
anivArya AvazyakatA hone para hI aAjJA lekara pAMcoM vigayoM kA sevana kiyA jA
sakatA hai aura do prazasta mahAvigayoM kA sevana rogAtaMka Adi ke binA nahIM
kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  AgamoM meM vigayaniSedha ke nimna pATha haiM1. lahavittI
susNtutthe| -~-dazavai. a. 8, gA. 25 2. paNIyarasabhoyaNaM visaM tAlauDaM jahA
/  dazavai. a. 8, gA. 57 3. paMtANi ceva sevejjA, sIyapiMDapurANakummAsaM  /  _
adu bukkasaM pulAgaM vA, javaNaTTAe nisevae mthu| -uttarA. a. 1, gAthA 12 4. No
hIlae piDaM nIrasaM tu, paMtakulAiM parivvae sa bhikkhU  /  uttarA. a. 15, gA.
13 5. paNIyaM bhattapANaM tu, khippaM mayavivaDDaNaM  /  /  baMbhacerarao
bhikkhU , niccaso privjje| uttarA. a. 16, gA. 7 6. duddha dahI vigaio, AhArei
abhikkhaNaM  /  _arae ya tavokamme, pAvasamaNe tti vuccai  /  uttarA. a. 17, gA.
15. 7. abhikkhaNaM NivigaiM gayA ya  /  daza. cU. 2. gA. 7 8. rasA pagAmaM na
niseviyavvA, pAyaM rasA dittikarA graannN| uttarA. a. 32, gA. 10. 9. vigaI
NijjahaNaM kre| -uttarA. a. 36, gA. 255 10. tao no kappati vAittae-aviNIe,
vigaipaDibaddhe, aviosavia pAhuDe  /  -bRhat. u. 4

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Uddeshak  [103 11. The five types of food that are always to be
avoided by the Samanas, the Nigganthas, the Bhagavaya Mahavorena, are: 1.
Arasahare, 2. Virasahare, 3. Antahaare, 4. Pantahaare, 5. Luhahaare. -Thanam. A.
5 This Sutra is a Sutra of atonement for taking food that was given in many
previous copies of this Sutra, which has come to be after the commentary and
Churnivyakhya due to a scribal error or some other reason. This Sutra is not
included in the "Nisihajzhayana" published by the Terapanth Mahasabha. 33. The
monk who enters the house of a householder for food without knowing the
"Thavanakulai", without asking, without investigating, or who approves of the
one who enters, (he receives a minor monthly atonement). Discussion -
"Thavanakulai" is a family that is not suitable for begging. There are many
types of such families: 1. Extremely hateful families are to be completely
avoided. 2. Extremely affectionate families, 3. Families living near the
shelter, 4. Families with valuable goods or special medicines are considered to
be for ordinary monks. For children, the sick, the elderly, the teacher, the
guest, etc., only experienced and knowledgeable monks can go to these houses for
begging if necessary. This statement is made in relation to the expectation of
those who bring separate Gochari for the monks who are wandering with a large
group of monks or who are staying in the old age home. Ajanij, Apuchchij,
Agavesij - Without asking, one gets "information" from someone else's telling or
from direct or indirect knowledge. If you don't have information, you should ask
for it. Asking about name, lineage, caste, etc. is called "Pricha".
Understanding the location of the house from signs or signals is called
"Gaveshana". Or, for a former acquaintance, it is "Pricha", and for an
unfamiliar person, it is "Pricha-युक्त Gaveshana". Going for Gochari without
knowing can lead to going to Thavanakulai, which can lead to disorder and the
fault of not giving, and it can be difficult to obtain special items when
needed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha uddezaka] [103 11. paMca ThANAiM samaNeNaM bhagavayA mahAvoreNaM
samaNANaM NiggaMthANaM NiccaM vaNiyAI, NiccaM kittiyAI, NiccaM buiyAI, NiccaM
pasatthAI, NiccaM abbhaNuNNAyAI bhavaMti  /  taM jahA-1. arasAhAre, 2.
virasAhAre, 3. aMtAhAre, 4. paMtAhAre, 5. lUhAhAre  /  -ThANaM. a. 5 isa sUtra
ke pUrva kaI pratiyoM meM pradatta AhAra lene ke prAyazcitta kA eka sUtra hai jo
bhASya aura cUrNivyAkhyA ke bAda lipidoSa yA anya kisI prakAra se A gayA hai  /
terApaMtha mahAsabhA se prakAzita "nisIhajjhayaNaM" meM bhI yaha sUtra nahIM
liyA gayA hai  /  /  sthApanAkula kI jAnakArI kiye binA bhikSArtha praveza
karane para prAyazcitta 33. je bhikkhU 'ThavaNAkulAI' ajANiya, apucchiya,
agavesiya, puvAmeva gAhAvai kulaM piMDavAya paDiyAe aNuppavisai, aNuppavisaMtaM
vA sAijjai  /  jo bhikSu "sthApanAkuloM" kI jAnakArI kiye binA, pUche binA yA
gaveSaNA kiye binA hI AhAra ke liye gRhastha ke gharoM meM praveza karatA hai yA
praveza karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta
pAtA hai|) vivecana-"sthApanAkula''bhikSA ke liye nahIM jAne yogya kula  /  ve
kula kaI prakAra ke hote haiM 1. atyanta dveSI kula sarvathA tyAjya hote haiM  /
2. atyanta anurAga vAle kula, 3. upAzraya ke nikaTa rahane vAle kula, 4.
bahumUlya padArtha yA viziSTa auSadhiyoM kI upalabdhi vAle kula sAdhAraNa
sAdhuoM ke liye varNya hote haiM  /  bAla, glAna, vRddha, prAcArya, atithi Adi
ke liye Avazyaka hone para viziSTa anubhavI gItArtha sAdhu hI ina gharoM meM
bhikSA ke liye jA sakate haiM  /  vizAla sAdhusamUha ke sAtha-sAtha vicaraNa
karate samaya yA vRddhAvAsa meM rahe hue sAdhuoM meM se pRthak-pRthak gocarI
lAne vAloM kI apekSA se yaha kathana hai  /  ajANiya apucchiya agavesiya-binA
pUche svataH hI kisI ke kaha dene se yA pratyakSa va parokSa jJAna se "jAnakArI"
hotI hai| jAnakArI na ho to pUchakara jAnakArI karanA cAhiye  /  nAma gotra jAti
Adi pUchanA "pRcchA" kahI jAtI hai| cihnoM se yA saMketoM se ghara kA ThikAnA
samajhanA"gaveSaNA" kahI jAtI hai| athavA pUrva paricita ke liye "pRcchA" hotI
hai aura aparicita kI apekSA "pRcchA yukta gaveSaNA' hotI hai| jAnakArI kiye
binA gocarI ke liye jAne para sthApanAkuloM meM jAne kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai,
jisase avyavasthA aura adatta doSa ke sAtha AvazyakatA ke samaya viziSTa
padArtha kI prApti durlabha ho sakatI hai|

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Nishīthasūtra Commentary  The commentary on the Nishīthasūtra mentions both
worldly prohibited families and families that are prohibited due to sleeping
together, but their atonement is mentioned elsewhere.  Therefore, in this
context, the families established by the elders for going on alms-round during
times of essential need should be understood as the established families.
**Atonement for entering a nunnery improperly**  34. A monk who enters a nunnery
improperly or approves of someone entering improperly (incurs a minor monthly
atonement).  **Discussion:** The commentator has described the reasons why a
monk may enter a nunnery, and has mentioned the many potential faults of
entering improperly.  "Improperly" refers to entering without giving prior
notice, i.e., entering silently.  "Properly" refers to staying outside the
nunnery, i.e., outside the main entrance, and informing them of one's arrival
with words of address. After some time has passed for the nuns to be informed,
one may enter. Alternatively, after giving notice, one may enter when a nun
signals with a word like "Come in."  There is also an explanation that one
should pronounce the word "Nisihi" when entering, but this explanation does not
seem appropriate. This is because every nun has a specific way of pronouncing
this word when entering the nunnery. Therefore, the appropriate signal for a
monk's entry should be a different word, or one should enter after being
informed by a lay person.  The point is that the nuns should be aware of the
monk's entry. Entering without the reasons mentioned in the scriptures is also
improper entry. For more information, one should study the commentary.
**Atonement for placing objects in the path of a nun's arrival**  35. A monk who
places a staff, stick, broom, face-cloth, or any other object in the path of a
nun's arrival, or approves of someone doing so (incurs a minor monthly
atonement).  **Discussion:** When it is time for the nuns to arrive at the
monastery, no objects should be placed in their path. Besides the path, until
reaching the Acharya or others,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ nizIthasUtra vyAkhyA meM laukika varjya kula aura zayyAtara kula kA bhI
varNana hai kintu unakA prAyazcitta anyatra kahA gayA hai  /  104] ataH yahAM
anivArya AvazyakatA ke samaya meM bhikSArtha jAne ke liye sthaviroM ke dvArA
sthApita kuloM ko hI sthApanAkula samajhanA cAhiye  /  sAdhvI ke upAzraya meM
pravidhi se praveza karane para prAyazcitta 34. je bhikkhU NiggaMthINaM
uvastayaMsi avihIe aNuppavisai, aNuppavisaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  34. jo bhikSu
nirgranthiyoM ke upAzraya meM avidhi se praveza karatA hai yA avidhi se praveza
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use laghumAsika prAyazcitta prAtA hai
| ) vivecana - sAdhvI ke upAzraya meM sAdhu kina-kina kAraNoM se jA sakatA hai,
bhASyakAra ne isakA varNana kiyA hai tathA pravidhi se praveza karane para aneka
doSoM kI saMbhAvanAeM kahI haiM  /  "pravidhi" - - praveza karane se pUrva
sUcanA diye binA praveza karanA arthAt mauna rahakara praveza karanA pravidhi
praveza kahalAtA hai  /  sAdhvI ke upAzraya ke bAhara grarthAt mukhya
pravezadvAra ke bAhara Thahara kara saMbodhana ke zabdoM se apane Ane kI sUcanA
denA aura sAdhviyoM ko jAnakArI ho jAne ke kucha samaya bAda praveza karanA
athavA sUcanA dene ke bAda sAdhviyoM ke sAvadhAna ho jAne para kisI sAdhvI ke
dvArA " padhAro" isa taraha saMketa rUpa zabda ke kahane para praveza karanA
"vidhi praveza" kahalAtA hai  /  praveza karate samaya "NisIhi" zabdocAraNa
karane kI vyAkhyA bhI milatI hai kintu yaha vyAkhyA upayukta nahIM lagatI,
kyoMki upAzraya meM praveza karate samaya pratyeka sAdhvI ke isa zabda kA
uccAraNa karane kI vidhi hotI hai ataH sAdhu ke praveza karane kA yogya bhinna
zabda saMketa rUpa honA cAhiye athavA zrAvaka yA zrAvikA ke dvArA sUcanA karavA
dene ke bAda praveza karanA cAhiye  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki sAdhu ke praveza kI
jAnakArI sAdhvI ko ho jAnI cAhie | Agamokta kAraNa binA praveza karanA bhI
pravidhi praveza hI hai  /  vizeSa jAnakArI ke lie bhASya kA adhyayana karanA
cAhie | sAdhvI ke Agamana patha meM upakaraNa rakhane kA prAyazcitta 35. je
bhikkhU NiggaMthINaM AgamaNapahaMsi, daMDagaM vA, laTThiyaM vA, rayaharaNaM vA,
muhapottiyaM vA aNayaraM vA uvagaraNajAyaM Thavei, ThaveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  35.
jo bhikSu sAdhvI ke Ane ke mArga meM daMDa, lAThI, rajoharaNa yA mukhavastrikA
Adi koI bhI upakaraNa rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (
use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana - jaba sAdhutroM ke upAzraya
meM sAdhviyoM ke Ane kA samaya ho usa samaya unake Ane ke mArga meM koI
upakaraNa nahIM rakhanA cAhie  /  rAste ke sivAya AcArya Adi ke pAsa pahu~cane
taka kA

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Uddeshak [105]  **The place should also be understood as the path
here.** This atonement arises when an instrument is placed on the path due to
lack of discretion or curiosity.  Placing an instrument on the path carelessly
while sitting in front of the Acharya, etc., while showing food or doing other
work, is called placing it with discretion.  If it is placed due to other
worldly thoughts, the atonement of Guru Chaumasi arises.  **Atonement for
creating new strife**  36. **The monk who creates new strife or approves of the
one who creates it.** (He incurs the atonement of Laghu-Masik.)  **Discussion:**
Strife arises from natural argumentativeness or pointless speech. Strife can
also arise from humor or curiosity. Therefore, the monk should be discreet.  In
the Suyagadaang Sutra 02, 02, Ga. 19, while teaching, it is said:  "**Ahigaran
kadasa bhikkhuno, vayamanassa pasajja darunam. Parihai bahu, ahigaranam na
karejja pandie.**"  **Causing strife leads to great loss of restraint, while
speaking harsh words increases harmony and peace among people. Therefore, the
monk should always stay away from strife and the causes of its origin.**
**Atonement for stirring up settled strife**  37. **The monk who rekindles old
strife that has been settled through apology or approves of the one who does
so.** (He incurs the atonement of Laghu-Masik.)  **Discussion:**  1. **Khamiy:**
"Khamiy - Vayae" - Apologizing with proper words. 2. **Viosmiy:** "Manasa
Viosmiyavyutrushtam" - Churni. To remove strife from the mind, to abandon it, to
settle it.  **One should be fully discreet towards the person or the occasion
that caused or could cause strife. One should try to keep one's nature calm as
much as possible. Otherwise, one should stay away from those topics or
occasions. Even with discretion, if there is a possibility of strife, one should
stay away from that person's contact. One should understand the effect of one's
karma-udaya and the nature or the arising of the particular person, and act with
discretion accordingly.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha uddezaka ] [105 sthAna bhI yahA~ mArga hI samajha lenA cAhie  /
aviveka yA kutUhala se mArga meM upakaraNa rakhane para yaha prAyazcitta AtA hai
/  AcAryAdi ke sanmukha baiThate samaya prAhAra dikhAte samaya yA anya kArya
karate samaya asAvadhAnI se mArga meM upakaraNa rakhanA praviveka se rakhanA
kahA jAtA hai  /  anya mIlina vicAroM se rakhane para guru caumAsI prAyazcitta
AtA hai  /  nayA kalaha karane kA prAyazcitta 36. je bhikkhU NavAiM aNuppaNNAI
ahigaraNAI uppAei, uppAeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  36. jo bhikSu naye-naye jhagar3e
utpanna karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana - una prakRti se prativAcAlatA se yA
nirarthaka bhASaNa se kalaha hote haiM  /  hAsya yA kutUhala se bhI kalaha ho
sakatA hai  /  ataH sAdhu ko viveka rakhanA cAhie  /  sUyagaDAMga sUtra 02, 02,
gA0 19 meM zikSA dete hue kahA gayA hai ki "ahigaraNakaDassa bhikkhuNo,
vayamANassa pasajjha dAruNaM  /  parihAI bahu, ahigaraNaM na karejja paMDie  / "
kleza karane se saMyama kI atyadhika hAni hotI hai, kaTuka vacana kahane se
Apasa meM samAdhi va zAMti kI vRddhi ho jAtI hai  /  ataH sAdhu adhikaraNa se va
adhikaraNa kI utpatti ke kAraNoM se sadA dUra rahe | upazAMta kalaha ko ubhArane
kA prAyazcitta - 37. je bhikkhU porANAI ahigaraNAI khAmiya viosamiyAI puNo
udIrei udIreMtaM vA sAijjai  /  37. jo bhikSu kSamAyAcanA se upazAMta purAne
jhagar3oM ko punaH utpanna karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
( use laghumAsika prAyazcitta prAtA hai  / ) vivecana- 1. khAmiya - " khAmiya -
vAyAe" - vidhipUrvaka vacana se kSamAyAcanA karanA  /  2. viosamiya- " maNasA
viosamiyaM vyutsRSTaM " - cUrNI  /  mana se kalaha haTA denA, tyAga denA,
upazAMta kara denA  /  jisa vyakti se yA jisa prasaMga ke nimitta se kleza
utpanna huA ho yA ho sakatA ho usake lie pUrNa viveka rakhanA cAhie  /
yathAsaMbhava apanI prakRti ko zAMta rakhanA cAhie, anyathA una viSayoM se yA
una prasaMgoM se alaga rahanA cAhie  /  viveka rakhate hue bhI kleza hone kI
saMbhAvanA rahe to usa vyakti ke samparka se hI alaga rahanA caahie| apane
karmodaya ke prabhAva ko evaM vyaktivizeSa' kI prakRti ko yA udayabhAva ko
samajha kara yathAvasara viveka karanA cAhie  /

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Nishīth Sūtra, Prāyaścitta of Hāraya]  **38. A monk who laughs with his
mouth wide open or encourages others to laugh.** (He incurs a minor monthly
penance.)  **Discussion:** This refers to the penance for laughing excessively
or in an inappropriate manner. The Daśavaikalika Sūtra states that monks should
always be engaged in self-study, knowledge, and meditation, rather than wasting
time in idle chatter and laughter. As it says:  "Do not indulge in much sleep,
avoid excessive laughter. Do not delight in worldly pleasures, but remain
absorbed in contemplation." - Daśavaikalika Sūtra, Chapter 8, Verse 42  The
Ācārāṅga Sūtra states that a monk who abandons laughter is a true Niggantha,
therefore a monk should not laugh. As it says:  "A Niggantha recognizes
laughter, he does not laugh." - Ācārāṅga Sūtra, Chapter 2, Section 16  A monk
should be free from curiosity and have a serious nature, and should not
associate with those who are curious.  This kind of laughter is a cause of
attachment or it encourages others to laugh. It also leads to public censure. It
also violates the air element and the life of sentient beings. It can also lead
to the humiliation, anger, or hatred of others.  The commentator gives an
example:  "A king and queen were sitting together in a window. Looking towards
the royal path, the queen said, "A dead man is laughing." When the king asked,
the queen pointed towards a monk and explained that by renouncing all worldly
pleasures, he is like a dead man, yet he is still laughing."  Therefore, a monk
should not laugh loudly, but only smile moderately.  **39. A monk who gives a
"Pārsvastha" (side-by-side) offering.** (He incurs a minor monthly penance.)
**40. A monk who accepts a "Pārsvastha" offering.** (He incurs a minor monthly
penance.)  **41. A monk who gives an "Osanna" (offering to the sick) offering.**
(He incurs a minor monthly penance.)  **42. A monk who accepts an "Osanna"
offering.** (He incurs a minor monthly penance.)  **43. A monk who gives a
"Kusīla" (offering to the virtuous) offering.** (He incurs a minor monthly
penance.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 106] [nizIthasUtra hAraya-prAyazcitta 38. je bhikkhU muhaM vipphAliya-
vipphAliya hasai, hasaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  38. jo bhikSu muha, phAr3a-phAr3a kara
ha~satA hai yA ha~sane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana-mUha ko adhika khola kara yA vikRta kara
amaryAdita ha~sane kA yahA~ prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  dazavaikAlika sUtra
meM kahA gayA hai ki Apasa meM bAteM karane va ha~sI ThaTThA karane meM samaya
kharca na karate hue sAdhu ko sadA svAdhyAya jJAna dhyAna meM lIna rahanA
caahie| yathA "NidaM ca Na bahu majjA , sappahAsaM vivjje| miho kahAhiM na rame,
sajjhAyammi rao syaa||" -dazavai0 a0 8, gA0 42 AcArAMga sUtra meM kahA hai ki
"hAsya kA tyAga karane vAlA bhikSu hai, ataH sAdhu ko hAsya karane vAlA nahIM
honA caahie|" yathA"hAsaM parijANai se NiggaMthe, No hAsaNae siyA  /  -prAcA0
zru0 2, a0 16 sAdhu ko kutUhala vRtti rahita evaM gambhIra svabhAva vAlA honA
cAhie aura kutUhalavRtti vAle kI saMgati bhI nahIM karanI caahie| isa taraha kA
ha~sanA moha kA kAraNa hotA hai athavA dUsaroM ko ha~sI utpanna karAne vAlA hotA
hai  /  lokaniMdA bhI hotI hai  /  vAyukAya kI tathA saMpAtima jIvoM kI
virAdhanA bhI hotI hai  /  dUsare ke apamAna, roSa yA vaira kA utpAdaka bhI ho
sakatA hai| bhASyakAra ne yahA~ eka dRSTAMta diyA hai "eka rAjA rAnI ne sAtha
jharokhe meM baiThA thaa| use rAjapatha kI ora dekhate hue rAnI ne kahA -"mRta
manuSya haMsa rahA hai  / " rAjA ke pUchane para rAnI ne sAdhu kI tarapha izArA
kiyA aura spaSTIkaraNa kiyA ki ihalaukika saMpUrNa sukhoM kA tyAga kara dene se
yaha mRtaka ke samAna hai, phira bhI haMsa rahA hai  / " ataH sAdhu ko maryAdita
muskarAne ke atirikta hA-hA karate hue nahIM haMsanA cAhiye  /  pArzvastha Adi
ko saMghATaka ke AdAna-pradAna kA prAyazcitta 39. je bhikkhU 'pAsatthassa'
saMghADayaM dei, deMtaM vA sAijjai  /  40. je bhikkhU 'pAsatthassa' saMghADayaM
paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  41. je bhikkhU 'osaNNassa' saMghADayaM
dei, deMtaM vA sAijjai  /  42. je bhikkhU 'osaNNassa' saMghADayaM paDicchai,
paDicchataM vA sAijjai  /  43. je bhikkhU 'kusIlassa' saMghADayaM dei, detaM vA
sAijjai  /

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Objective] [107 44. A monk who gives a *sanghāḍa* to a *kuśīlas* or
approves of the giver. 45. A monk who gives a *sanghāḍa* to a *samsattas* or
approves of the giver. 46. A monk who receives a *sanghāḍa* from a *samsattas*
or approves of the receiver. 47. A monk who gives a *sanghāḍa* to a *nityas* or
approves of the giver. 48. A monk who receives a *sanghāḍa* from a *nityas* or
approves of the receiver. 39. A monk who gives a *sanghāḍa* to a *pārśvastha* or
approves of the giver. 40. A monk who receives a *sanghāḍa* from a *pārśvastha*
or approves of the receiver. 41. A monk who gives a *sanghāḍa* to an *avasanna*
or approves of the giver. 42. A monk who receives a *sanghāḍa* from an
*avasanna* or approves of the receiver. 43. A monk who gives a *sanghāḍa* to a
*kuśīla* or approves of the giver. 44. A monk who receives a *sanghāḍa* from a
*kuśīla* or approves of the receiver. 45. A monk who gives a *sanghāḍa* to a
*samsakta* or approves of the giver. 46. A monk who receives a *sanghāḍa* from a
*samsakta* or approves of the receiver. 47. A monk who gives a *sanghāḍa* to a
*nityaka* or approves of the giver. 48. A monk who receives a *sanghāḍa* from a
*nityaka* or approves of the receiver. (He incurs the *laghumāsika* penance.)
Discussion - 'Sanghāḍa' - A group of two or more monks is called a *sanghāṭaka*
(*sanghāḍa*) and a group of many *sanghāṭakas* is called a *gaṇa* or *gaccha*.
In the *āgama*, the word *gaṇa* is sometimes used for *sanghāṭaka* as well.
Giving a monk to someone to live as a *sanghāṭaka* is also called giving a
*sanghāḍa*. These sutras state the penance for giving a *sanghāḍa*, i.e., giving
one's own monk to live with *pāsattā* etc. Living with *pāsattā* etc. and going
together on *gocari* can lead to conflict due to differences in conduct or
investigation, or it can lead to disrespect for the Jain teachings in various
ways, and it can also lead to  |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha uddezka] [107 44. je bhikkhU 'kusIlassa' saMghADayaM paDicchai,
paDicchaMtaM vA saaijji| 45. je bhikkhU 'saMsattassa' saMghADayaM dei, deMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  46. je bhikkhU 'saMsattassa' saMghADayaM paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA
saaijji| 47. je bhikkhU nitiyassa' saMghADayaM dei, deMtaM vA saaijji| 48. je
bhikkhU 'nitiyassa' saMghADayaM paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  39. jo
bhikSu 'pArzvastha' ko saMghADA detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
40. jo bhikSu 'pArzvastha' se saMghADA grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| 41. jo bhikSu 'avasanna' ko saMghADA detA hai yA dene
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  42. jo bhikSu 'avasanna' se saMghADA grahaNa
karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 43. jo bhikSu
'kuzIla' ko saMghADA detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  44. jo
bhikSu 'kuzIla' se saMghADA grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 45. jo bhikSu 'saMsakta' ko saMghADA detA hai yA dene vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| 46. jo bhikSu 'saMsakta' se saMghADA grahaNa karatA hai
yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 47. jo bhikSu 'nityaka' ko
saMghADA detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  48. jo bhikSu
'nityaka' se saMghADA grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-'saMghADayaM'-do yA
do se adhika sAdhuoM kA samUha 'saMghATaka' (saMghADA) kahalAtA hai tathA aneka
saMghATakoM ke samUha ko gaNa yA gaccha kahA jAtA hai  /  Agama meM kahIM kahIM
saMghATaka ke liye bhI gaNa zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai  /  saMghATaka rUpa
meM vicarane ke liye kisI ko eka sAdhu denA bhI saMghADA denA kahalAtA hai| ina
sUtroM meM pAsatthA Adi ko vicarane ke liye apanA sAdhu dene kA arthAt saMghADA
dene kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| pAsatthA Adi ke sAtha meM rahane se tathA
gocarI jAne ke samaya sAtha-sAtha jAne se prAcArabheda athavA gaveSaNAbheda ke
kAraNa kleza paidA hone kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai athavA dharma meM bhinnatA
dikhane se jinazAsana kI aneka prakAra se avahelanA bhI ho sakatI hai tathA usa
pAsatthA Adi kI |

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[108] The investigation and acceptance of the impure Nishītha Sūtra, as well as
the karma-bandha caused by it, is not considered appropriate. Therefore, it is
not permissible to give or receive it from a sadhu, whether one or many. The
implication is that in external behavior, only those who share similar conduct
and thoughts should be associated with, as this allows for the peaceful
completion of the practice of restraint and ensures that behavior remains pure.
The nature of Pāsaththa, etc. 1. Pāsaththa-Pāvastha: - Every substance has two
sides - one right, the other wrong. The diligent conduct of a restrained life is
the right side, and the relaxed conduct of an unrestrained life is the wrong
side of a restrained life. "In Darshan, Jnana, Charitra, Tapa, and Pravachana,
those who have established their soul, the Pārsva-vihārī, i.e., those who do not
follow their conduct, should be considered Pārsvastha." (434) "Pāsa and Bandhana
are both synonymous. All the causes of Bandhana are Pāsa. Those who are in them
are Pārsvastha, this is another synonym (one meaning) of Pārsvastha." (4343)
"There are two types of Pārsvastha: 1. Desha-Pārsvastha, 2. Sarva-Pārsvastha."
"Desha-Pārsvastha desires in Shayya-tara Kuladi. There are three options for
Sarva-Pārsvastha." "In the practice of Darshan, Jnana, and Charitra, those who
are lazy, i.e., do not exert themselves in their practice and indulge in their
excesses and misconduct, are Sarva-Pārsvastha." (4342) "That Sarva-Pārsvastha
does not engage in Sūtra-Paurushi, Artha-Paurushi, and continues to indulge in
excesses and doubts of Samyak-Darshan, desires, etc. He does not prevent the
excesses of Samyak-Charitra. Therefore, he is Sarva-Pārsvastha."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 108] [nizIthasUtra azuddha gaveSaNA va AcAra kA anumodana tathA tannimittaka
karmabaMdha kA kAraNa bhI hotA hai| ataH inako saMghADA arthAt eka sAdhu yA
aneka sAdhu denA yA unase sAdhu lenA nahIM kalpatA hai  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki
bAhya vyavahAra meM jo samAna AcAra vicAra vAle haiM, unake hI sAtha rahane se
saMyamasAdhanA zAMtipUrvaka sampanna ho sakatI hai aura vyavahAra bhI zuddha
rahatA hai  /  pAsatthA Adi kA svarUpa1. pAsattho-pAvastha:- - pratyeka padArtha
ke do pArzva bhAga hote haiM--eka sulTA, dUsarA ulTA  /  udyata vihAra saMyamI
jIvana kA sulTA pArzvabhAga hai aura zithilAcAra rUpa asaMyamI jIvana saMyamI
jIvana kA ulTA pArzvabhAga hai| dasaNa-NANacaritte, tave ya attAhito pavayaNe ya
/  tesiM pAsavihArI, pAsatthaM taM viyANAhi  /  /  434  /  /  darzana, jJAna,
cAritra, tapa aura pravacana meM jinhoMne apanI AtmA ko sthApita kiyA hai aise
udyata vihAriyoM kA jo pArzvavihArI hai arthAt unake samAna AcAra pAlana nahIM
karatA hai use pArzvastha jAnanA caahiye| pAsotti baMdhaNaM tiya, egaLaM
baMdhahetavo paasaa| pAsatthiya pAsatthA, eso aNNovi pajjApro  /  /  4343  /  /
pAza aura baMdhana ye donoM ekArthaka haiM  /  baMdhana ke jitane hetu haiM ve
saba pAza haiM  /  unameM jo sthita haiM ve pArzvastha haiM, yaha bhI pArzvastha
kA anya paryAya (eka artha) hai| duvidho khalu pAsattho, dese savve ya hoi
naayvvo| savve tiNNi vigappA dese sejjAtarakulAdI  /  /  4340  /  /  pArzvastha
do prakAra ke jAnane cAhie1. dezapArzvastha, 2. sarvapArzvastha, dezapArzvastha
zayyAtara kulAdi meM eSaNA karatA hai  /  sarvapArzvastha ke tIna vikalpa haiN|
sarvapArzvastha daMsaNa-NANa-caritte, sattho acchati tahiM Na ujjamati  /  /
eteNa u pAsattho, eso aNNovi pajjApro  /  /  4342  /  /  1. darzana, 2. jJAna,
3. cAritra kI ArAdhanA meM jo Alaso hotA hai arthAt unakI ArAdhanA meM udyama
nahIM karatA hai tathA unake aticAra anAcAroM kA sevana karatA hai vaha
sarvapArzvastha hai| vaha sarvapArzvastha sUtrapauruSI, arthaporuSI nahIM karatA
hai, samyagdarzana ke aticAra zaMkA, kAMkSA Adi karatA rahatA hai| samyakcAritra
ke aticAroM kA nivAraNa nahIM karatA hai| isalie vaha sarvapArzvastha hai|

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Uddeshaka  [109 Desha-Parsvastha] 1. Sejjaayara Kula, 2. Nissita, 3.
Thavanakula, 4. Paloyana, 5. Abhihadeya. 6. Putiv Paccha Santhuta, 7.
Nitiyaggapindabhoti Passatho. || 4344 || 1. One who takes alms from the house of
a bed-giver. 2. One who sustains life with the help of devout householders. 3.
One who unnecessarily seeks food in established communities. 4. One who seeks
food in a large communal feast or looks at his reflection in a mirror. 5. One
who takes food that is brought before him. 6. One who praises himself or the
giver before or after taking alms. 7. One who accepts invitations and takes food
and other things from the house of the inviter every day. One who practices
these faults is Desha-Parsvastha. 2. Osanno-Avasanna This is a Deshya adjective,
it has three synonyms: 1. Avasanna, 2. Prosanna, 3. Ussanna. All three have the
same meaning: 1. Avasanna - lazy, 2. Prosanna - one with broken conduct, 3.
Ussanna - devoid of restraint. Chuni-Posanno Doso - one with many faults,
Prosanno Bahutargunavarahi - one who corrupts many virtues, Uyo (Gato-Chupuro)
Va Sanjamo Tammi Sunno Ussanno - one who is devoid of restraint, fallen from
restraint, is Avasanna. Samayaari Vitahan Osanno Pavati Tattha. -
Gathapuravardha || 4349 || One who acts contrary to the conduct of restraint is
called 'Avasanna'. Gatha - Avasaga-Sajjaaye, Pidalehajjaana Bhikkha Bhattathe.
Kaussagga-Padikkamane, Kitikamme Neva Padileha. || 4346 || Avasagam Aniyatam
Kareti, Heenatiritta Vivariyam. Guruvayana-Nioga-Valayamanne, Inamo U Osane. ||
4347 || 1. Avasaga - ten types of conduct like Pravassahhi. 2. Sajjaaye - doing
self-study, Sutra, Purushi, Artha Purushi. 3. Padileha - copying clothes,
utensils, etc. twice a day.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha uddezaka] [109 deza-pArzvastha 1. sejjAyara kula, 2. nissita, 3.
ThavaNakula, 4. paloyaNA, 5. abhihaDeya  /  6. puTiva pacchA saMthuta, 7.
NitiyaggapiMDabhoti pAsattho  /  /  4344  /  /  1. jo zayyAdAtA ke ghara se
bhikSA letA hai  /  2. jo zraddhAlu gRhasthoM ke sahayoga se jIvananirvAha
karatA hai| 3. jo sthApanAkuloM meM akAraNa eSaNA karatA hai| 4. bar3e sAmUhika
bhoja meM AhAra kI eSaNA karatA hai yA kAca meM apanA pratibiMba dekhatA hai| 5.
jo sammukha lAyA huaA aAhAra letA hai| 6. jo bhikSA lene ke pahale yA pIche
apanI bar3AI yA dAtA kI prazaMsA karatA hai| 7. jo nimaMtraNa svIkAra karake
pratidina nimaMtraka ke ghara se AhArAdi grahaNa karatA rahatA hai| isa prakAra
ke doSoM kA AcaraNa karatA hai vaha deza-pArzvastha hai| 2. osaNNo-avasanna yaha
dezya vizeSaNa hai, isa ke tIna samAnArthaka paryAya haiM1. avasaNNa, 2.
prosaNNa, 3. ussaNNa  /  tInoM ke tIna artha1. avasaNNa-AlasI 2. prosaNNa-
khaNDitacAritra 3. ussaNNa-saMyama se zUnya cUNi-posaNNo doso-adhikatara doSoM
vAlA, prosaNNo bahutaraguNAvarAhI-aneka guNoM ko dUSita karane vAlA, uyo (gato-
cupro) vA saMjamo tammi suNNo ussaNNo -saMyama se cyuta-saMyama zUnya avasanna
hotA hai| samAyAri vitahaM osaNNo pAvatI ttth| -gAthApUrvArdha  //  4349  //
saMyama samAcArI se viparIta AcaraNa karane vAlA 'avasanna' kahA jAtA hai  /
gAthA-AvAsaga-sajjhAe, piDalehajjhANa bhikkha bhtttthe| kAussagga-paDikkamaNe,
kitikamma Neva paDilehA  //  4346  //  AvAsagaM aNiyataM kareti, hINAtiritta
vivarIyaM  /  guruvayaNa-Nioga-valayamANe, iNamo u osaNe  //  4347  //  1.
AvAsaga-prAvassahI Adi dasa prakAra kI smaacaarii| 2. sajjhAe-svAdhyAya-sUtra
pauruSI, artha pauruSI krnaa| 3. paDileha-donoM samaya vastra pAtrAdi kA
pratilekhana karanA  /

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 110] [Nishīthasūtra 4. Jhāṇaṁ-Dhyāna-pūrva rātri yā pichalī rātri meṁ dhyāna
karnā. 5. Bhikkhaṁ-doṣa rahit gaveṣaṇā karnā. 6. Bhatṭhe āgamokta vidhi se pāhār
karnā. 7. Kausagg-gamanaāgamana, gocharī, pratilēkhana ādi ke bād kāyoatsarga
karnā. 8. Paḍikkamanē-pratikramṇa karnā. 9. Kitikamm-kr̥tikarm-vandana karnā.
10. Paḍilēhā-pratilēkhana-baiṭhnā ādi pratyēka kārya dēkhkar karnā tatha
pratyēka vastu dēkhkar yā pramārjana kar upayog meṁ lēnā. Jo prosann-avasann
hotā hai vah prāvassahī ādi das prakar kī samāchāriyōṁ ko kabhī kartā hai, kabhī
nahīṁ kartā hai, kabhī vipartīta kartā hai. Is prakar svādhyāya ādi bhī nahīṁ
kartā hai yā dūṣita āchāraṇ kartā hai tatha śuddha pālana ke lie gurujanoṁ dvārā
prēraṇā kiye jāne par unake vachanoṁ kī upekshā yā avhēlanā kartā hai. Vah
"avasann" kahā jātā hai. 3. Kusīl-kusīl jo nindanīya kāryoṁ meṁ arthāt sanayama-
jīvana meṁ nahīṁ karnē yogya kāryoṁ meṁ lagā rahta hai vah "kusīl" kahā jātā
hai. Kouy bhūtikamme, paśināpaśiṇaṁ nimittamājīvī. Kakka-kurūy-sumina-lakkaṇa-
mūla manta-vijjōvajīvī kusīlō u || 4345 || 1. Jo kautukakarm kartā hai. 2.
Bhūtikarm kartā hai. 3. Anguṣṭhapraśna yā bāhupraśna kā phal kahta hai athavā
āṅkhoṁ meṁ anjana karke praśnōttara kartā hai. 4. Atīta kī, vartmana kī aur
bhaviṣya kī bāteṁ batākar ājīvikā kartā hai. 5. Jāti, kula, gaṇa, karma aur
śilpa se ājīvikā kartā hai. 6. Lodhra, kalka grādadi se apanī jangha ādi par
ubaṭana kartā hai. 7. Śarīra kī śuśruṣā kartā hai arthāt bakuś bhāva kā sevna
kartā hai. 8. Śubhāśubha svapnoṁ kā phal kahta hai. 9. Striyoṁ ke yā puruṣoṁ ke
masa-tila ādi lakṣaṇoṁ kā śubhāśubha phal kahta hai. 10. Anek rogoṁ ke upasamana
hētu kandamūla kā upacār batātā hai athavā garbha girānē kā mahāpāpa mūlakarm
doṣa kartā hai. 11. Mantra yā vidyā se ājīvikā kartā hai. Vah "kusīl" kahā jātā
hai. 4–Sansatta-sankehvo imo-jo jāriseṣu milati so tāriso cev bhavati eriso
sansatto nāyavvo-cūrṇi || . Jo jaise sādhūoṁ ke sāth rahta hai vah vaisā hī ho
jātā hai. Ataḥ vah sansakta kahā jātā hai.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 110] [nizIthasUtra 4. jhANaM-dhyAna-pUrva rAtri yA pichalI rAtri meM dhyAna
karanA  /  5. bhikkhaM-doSa rahita gaveSaNA karanA  /  6. bhattaThe Agamokta
vidhi se pAhAra karanA  /  7. kAusagga-gamanAgamana, gocarI, pratilekhana Adi ke
bAda kAyotsarga krnaa| 8. paDikkamaNe-pratikramaNa krnaa| 9. kitikamma-
kRtikarma-vandana krnaa| 10. paDilehA-pratilekhana-baiThanA Adi pratyeka kArya
dekhakara karanA tathA pratyeka vastu dekha kara yA pramArjana kara upayoga meM
lenaa| jo prosaNNa-avasanna hotA hai vaha prAvassahI Adi dasa prakAra kI
samAcAriyoM ko kabhI karatA hai, kabhI nahIM karatA hai, kabhI viparIta karatA
hai  /  isa prakAra svAdhyAya Adi bhI nahIM karatA hai yA dUSita AcaraNa karatA
hai tathA zuddha pAlana ke liye gurujanoM dvArA preraNA kiye jAne para unake
vacanoM kI upekSA yA avahelanA karatA hai  /  vaha "avasanna" kahA jAtA hai| 3.
kusIla-kuzIla jo nindanIya kAryoM meM arthAt saMyama-jIvana meM nahIM karane
yogya kAryoM meM lagA rahatA hai vaha "kuzIla' kahA jAtA hai| kouya bhUtikamme,
pasiNApasiNaM NimittamAjIvI  /  kakka-kurUya-sumiNa-lakkhaNa-mUla maMta-
vijjovajIvI kusIlo u  //  4345  /  /  1. jo kautukakarma karatA hai| 2.
bhUtikarma karatA hai| 3. aMguSThaprazna yA bAhuprazna kA phala kahatA hai
athavA aAMkhoM meM aMjana karake praznottara karatA hai| 4. atIta kI, vartamAna
kI aura bhaviSya kI bAteM batAkara AjIvikA karatA hai  /  5. jAti, kula, gaNa,
karma aura zilpa se AjIvikA karatA hai  /  6. lodhra, kalka grAdi se apanI
jaMghA Adi para ubaTana karatA hai| 7. zarIra kI zuzruSA karatA hai arthAt
bakuza bhAva kA sevana karatA hai| 8. zubhAzubha svapnoM kA phala kahatA hai| 9.
striyoM ke yA puruSoM ke masa-tila Adi lakSaNoM kA zubhAzubha phala kahatA hai|
10. aneka rogoM ke upazamana hetu kaMdamUla kA upacAra batAtA hai athavA garbha
girAne kA mahApApa mUlakarma doSa karatA hai| 11. maMtra yA vidyA se AjIvikA
karatA hai| vaha 'kuzIla" kahA jAtA hai| 4-saMsatta-saMkhevo imo-jo jArisesu
milati so tAriso ceva bhavati eriso saMsatto NAyavvo-cUrNi  //  . jo jaise
sAdhuoM ke sAtha rahatA hai vaha vaisA hI ho jAtA hai| ataH vaha saMsakta kahA
jAtA hai|

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Uddeshak  [111 Gatha - Pasattha Ahachanda, Kusil Osannameva Sansatte.
Piyadhammo Piyadhammasuk Cheva Inamo Tu Sansatto || 4350 || One who becomes like
Pasattha, Ahachanda, Kusil and Osanna, and becomes a Piyadharmi while staying
with a Piyadharmi, such a person is called "Sansakt".  Gatha -
Panchasavapavatto, Jo Khalu Tihim Garavehi Padibbadho. Itthi-Gihi Sankiliṭṭho,
Sansatto So Ya Nayavvo || 4351 || One who is involved in the five Asravas like
violence, etc. is bound to the three Gaus - Riddhi, Rasa, and Sata. He is
attached to women, meaning he is their servant. He is attached to householders,
meaning he is involved in the happiness and sorrow related to the family,
animals, etc. of the householder, either directly or indirectly. Such a person
who becomes whatever he wants is called "Sansakt".  Chani - "Ahva - Sansatto
Anegaruvi Natavat Elakavat. Jaha Nado Pattvassa Anegani Ruvani Kareti, Uranago
Va Jaha Halidaraagena Ratto, Dhovium Puno Guligagerugadiraagena Rajjate Evam
Puno Vi Dhovium Annonnan Rajjati Evam Elagadivat Bahuruvi. Bhavartha - One who
can take on many forms like an actor and many colors like a sheep, and can also
leave them, such a person with a chameleon-like nature is called "Sansakt".  5.
Nitiya - One who stays in the same area continuously, violating the limits of
Masakalp and Chaturmasik Kalp, is called "Kalatikrant-Nityak". And one who
completes Masakalp and Chaturmasik Kalp and then returns to the same area after
spending double the time elsewhere is called "Upasthananityak". One who
practices the Upasthan Kriya and Kalatikrant Kriya mentioned in Pracha. Shru. 2
A. 2, U. 2 is called "Nityak" or "Nitiya". Or one who stays in one place without
any reason and does not travel is called Nityak. For a detailed explanation, the
commentator has referred to the "Nitiyavas" sutra of the second Uddeshak.  The
order of these 10 sutras is different in different manuscripts. But after
observing the Bhashya Churni, the above order seems to be correct. For example,
the Gatha "Pasatthosannanam, Kusil Sansatt Nitiyavasiinam. Je Bhikkhu Sanghadam,
Dijja Ahva Padicchhejjja ||" 1828 || This is the first Bhashya Gatha of these
ten sutras. In this and the previous Sutrasparshi Chani, both have the same
order of sutras, and the same order is also in Bhashya Gatha 1830.  In the
original text with Churni and in "Nisihajzhayana" edited by the Terapanthi
Mahasabha, the sutras of "Sansattassa" are placed after "Nitiyassa". The reasons
for this are not explained there.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha uddezaka] [111 gAthA-pAsattha ahAchaMde, kusIla osaNNameva sNstte|
piyadhammo piyadhammasu ceva iNAmo tu saMsatto  //  4350  /  /  jo pAsattha,
ahAchaMda, kuzIla aura prosaNNa ke sAtha milakara vaisA hI bana jAtA hai tathA
priyadharmI ke sAtha meM rahatA huA priyadharmI bana jAtA hai isa taraha kI
pravRtti karane vAlA "saMsakta" kahalAtA hai| gAthA-paMcAsavapavatto, jo khalu
tihiM gAravehi pddibddho|| itthi-gihi saMkiliTTho, saMsatto so ya NAyavvo  //
4351  /  /  jo hiMsA Adi pAMca AzravoM meM pravRttaM hotA hai  /  Rddhi, rasa,
sAtA ina tIna gauM meM pratibaddha arthAt bhAva pratibaddha hotA hai| striyoM ke
sAtha saMzliSTa arthAt pratisevI hotA hai  /  gRhasthoM se saMzliSTa hotA hai
arthAt pratyakSa rUpa se yA parokSa rUpa se gRhastha ke parivAra, pazu Adi ke
sukha-duHkha saMbaMdhI kArya karane meM pratibaddha ho jAtA hai, isa prakAra
jaisA cAhe vaisA bana jAtA hai vaha 'saMsakta' hai  /  caNi-''ahavA-saMsatto
aNegarUvI naTavat elakavat  /  jahA NaDo paTTavasA aNegANi rUvANi kareti,
UraNago vA jahA hAlidarAgeNa ratto, dhoviuM puNo guligagerugAdirAgeNa rajjate
evaM puNo vi dhoviuM aNNoNNaNa rajjati evaM elagAdivat bahurUvI  /  bhAvArtha
-jo naTa ke samAna aneka rUpa aura bher3a ke samAna aneka raMgoM ko dhAraNa kara
sakatA hai evaM chor3a sakatA hai, aisA bahurupiyA svabhAva vAlA "saMsakta" kahA
jAtA hai  /  5. nitiya-jo mAsakalpa va cAturmAsikakalpa kI maryAdA kA ullaMghana
karake niraMtara eka hI kSetra meM rahatA hai, vaha "kAlAtikrAMta-nityaka"
kahalAtA hai, tathA mAsakalpa aura cAturmAsika kalpa pUrA karake anyatra duguNA
samaya bitAye binA usI kSetra meM punaH Akara nivAsa karatA hai vaha
"upasthAnanityaka" kahalAtA hai| prAcA. zru. 2 a. 2, u. 2 meM kahI gaI upasthAna
kriyA kA tathA kAlAtikrAMta kriyA kA sevana karane vAlA "nityaka"-"nitiya"
kahalAtA hai  /  athavA jo akAraNa sadA eka sthAna para hI sthira rahatA hai,
vihAra nahIM karatA hai vaha nityaka kahA jAtA hai  /  vizeSa varNana ke liye
bhASyakAra ne dUsare uddezaka ke "nitiyAvAsa" sUtra kA nirdeza kara diyA hai|
ina 10 sUtroM kA krama bhinna-bhinna pratiyoM meM bhinna-bhinna hai  /  kintu
bhASya cUrNi ke avalokana se uparokta krama hI ucita pratIta huaA hai  /  yathA
gAthA"pAsatthosaNNANaM, kusIla saMsatta nitiyavAsINaM  /  je bhikkhU saMghADaM,
dijjA ahavA paDicchejjA  // " 1828  //  ina dasa sUtroM kI yaha prathama bhASya
gAthA hai  /  isameM tathA isake pUrva sUtrasparzI caNi hai, donoM meM
sUtrakrama samAna hai tathA bhASya gAthA 1830 meM bhI yahI krama hai  /  cUNi ke
sAtha ke mUla pATha meM tathA terApaMthI mahAsabhA dvArA saMpAdita
"NisIhajjhayaNaM" meM Nitiyassa ke bAda "saMsattassa" ke sUtroM ko rakhA hai|
isake kAraNoM kA spaSTIkaraNa vahAM nahIM kiyA |

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 112]  The Nishītha Sūtra has been lost. However, the commentary and
explanation of these Sūtras accept the above order. Still, in all publications
of Nishītha, the Sūtras of "Sansattass" are after "Nitiyass". This is considered
a mistake that has been passed down through tradition, and the order as per the
commentary has been accepted.  While explaining Pasatthā etc., the mention of
all the tendencies contrary to restraint, if consumed as an exception due to
special circumstances, or for the sake of a song, or in accordance with the
Shraddha Prarūpaṇā Āgama, and if they are free from that exceptional situation,
and if there is a desire to reach pure restraint by performing atonement, then
they are not called Pasatthā etc. But they are called Pratisevī Nigrantha.
Those who engage in all these corrupt tendencies are called 'Pasatthā' etc. due
to the lack of pure conduct, not being vigilant towards restraint, consuming
faults without reason, having a free-flowing mind, not being faithful to the
conduct mentioned in the Āgama, continuing prohibited tendencies, and not having
the goal of improving tendencies and accepting atonement.  These Pasatthā etc.
can have their own independent Gachchha, or they can be alone. Even while
staying in the Udyata Viharī Gachchha, some monks or a monk can become Pasatthā
etc. due to individual faults, and even in the Gachchha of Pasatthā etc., some
can be pure-conduct. The true judgment can only be made by one's own soul or by
the omniscient and all-seeing.  Knowing these characteristics of Pasatthā etc.,
those who practice restraint should be careful of corrupt tendencies.  ##
Atonement for receiving food with a hand that is stained with something:  49.
The monk who receives food with a hand that is stained with "Udaullena" (mud),
or with a hand that is stained with "Matta" (intoxication), or with a hand that
is stained with "Daviya" (oil), or with a hand that is stained with "Bhayan"
(fear), or with a hand that is stained with "Asana" (food), or with a hand that
is stained with "Paana" (drink), or with a hand that is stained with "Khaima"
(meat), or with a hand that is stained with "Saima" (poison), or who intends to
receive food with such a hand, is stained.  50. The monk who receives food with
a hand that is stained with "Mattiya-Sansatte" (earth), or who intends to
receive food with such a hand, is stained.  51. The monk who receives food with
a hand that is stained with "Uus-Sansatte" (grass), or who intends to receive
food with such a hand, is stained.  52. The monk who receives food with a hand
that is stained with "Hariyal-Sansatte" (green), or who intends to receive food
with such a hand, is stained.  53. The monk who receives food with a hand that
is stained with "Hingul-Sansatte" (red), or who intends to receive food with
such a hand, is stained.  54. The monk who receives food with a hand that is
stained with "Manosil-Sansatte" (mind), or who intends to receive food with such
a hand, is stained.  55. The monk who receives food with a hand that is stained
with "Anjan-Sansatte" (collyrium), or who intends to receive food with such a
hand, is stained.  56. The monk who receives food with a hand that is stained
with "Lon-Sansatte" (salt), or who intends to receive food with such a hand, is
stained.  57. The monk who receives food with a hand that is stained with
"Geruy-Sansatte" (red ochre), or who intends to receive food with such a hand,
is stained.  58. The monk who receives food with a hand that is stained with
"Vanniya-Sansatte" (color), or who intends to receive food with such a hand, is
stained.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 112] [nizIthasUtra gayA hai| kintu ina sUtroM kI cUNi va bhASya meM to
uparyukta krama ko hI svIkAra kiyA gayA hai  /  phira bhI nizItha ke sabhI
prakAzanoM meM "nitiyassa" ke bAda "saMsattassa" ke sUtra haiM  /  jo paramparA
se calI AI bhUla mAtra hai, aisA samajhakara bhASyasammata krama svIkAra kiyA
hai| pAsatthA Adi kI vyAkhyA karate hue saMyamaviparIta jitanI pravRttiyoM kA
yahAM kathana kiyA gayA hai, unakA vizeSa paristhitivaza apavAda rUpa meM
gItArtha yA gItArtha kI nezrAya se sevana kiyA jAne para tathA unakI zraddhA
prarUpaNA Agama ke anusAra rahane para evaM usa apavAda sthiti se mukta hote hI
prAyazcitta lekara zuddha saMyama aArAdhanA meM pahu~cane kI lagana (hArdika
abhilASA) rahane para vaha pAsatthA Adi nahIM kahA jAtA hai  /  kintu pratisevI
nigraMtha kahA jAtA hai  /  zuddha saMskAroM ke abhAva meM, saMyama ke prati
sajaga na rahane se, akAraNa doSa sevana se, svacchaMda manovRtti se, Agamokta
AcAra ke prati niSThA na hone se, niSiddha pravRttiyA~ cAlU rakhane se tathA
pravRtti sudhArane va prAyazcitta grahaNa kA lakSya na hone se, una sabhI dUSita
pravRttiyoM ko karane vAle 'pAsatthA' Adi kahe jAte haiM  /  ina pAsatthA Adi kA
svataMtra gaccha bhI ho sakatA hai, kahIM ve akele-akele bhI ho sakate haiN|
udyata vihArI gaccha meM rahate hue bhI kucha bhikSu yA koI bhikSu vyaktigata
doSoM se pAsatthA prAdi ho sakate haiM tathA pAsatthA Adi ke gaccha meM bhI koI
koI zuddhAcArI ho sakatA hai| yathArtha nirNaya to svayaM kI AtmA yA sarvajJa
sarvadarzI hI kara sakate haiM  /  pAsatthA Adi ke ina lakSaNoM ke jJAtA hokara
saMyamasAdhanA ke sAdhakoM ko dUSita pravRttiyoM se sAvadhAna rahanA caahiye|
sacitta-lipta hastAdi se pAhAra grahaNa karane kA prAyazcitta 49. je bhikkhU
"udaulleNa" hattheNa vA matteNa vA, davIe vA, bhAyaNeNa vA, asaNaM vA, pANaM vA,
khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 50. je bhikkhU
"maTTiyA-saMsaTTeNa" hattheNa vA "jAva" paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /
51. je bhikkhU "Usa-saMsaTTeNa" hattheNa vA "jAva" paDiggAhei paDiggAheMtaM vA
saaijji| 52. je bhikkhU "hariyAla-saMsaTTeNa" hattheNa vA "jAva" paDiggAhei,
paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 53. je bhikkhU "hiMgula-saMsaTTeNa" hattheNa vA "jAva"
paDiggAhei, paDiggAhetaM vA saaijji| 54. je bhikkhU "maNosila-saMsaTTeNa"
hatyeNa vA "jAva" paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 55. je bhikkhU "aMjaNa-
saMsaTTeNa" hattheNa vA "jAva" paDiggAhei paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 56. je
bhikkhU "loNa-saMsaTTeNa" hattheNa vA "jAva" paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA
saaijji| 57. je bhikkhU "geruya-saMsaTTeNa" hattheNa vA "jAva" paDiggAhei,
paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  58. je bhikkhU "vaNNiya-saMsaTTeNa" hattheNa vA
"jAva" paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Uddesaka  [113] 59. A monk who accepts or approves of the acceptance
of food, drink, edibles, or delicacies offered by a hand that has touched a
"seḍhiya-samsatṭhaṇa" (a vessel made of clay, such as a cup or a bowl), a "jav"
(a ladle), or a "paḍiggaha" (a spoon). 60. A monk who accepts or approves of the
acceptance of food, drink, edibles, or delicacies offered by a hand that has
touched a "soratṭhiya-piṭṭha-samsatṭa" (a vessel made of clay, such as a cup or
a bowl), a "jav" (a ladle), or a "paḍiggaha" (a spoon). 61. A monk who accepts
or approves of the acceptance of food, drink, edibles, or delicacies offered by
a hand that has touched a "kukkus-samsatṭa" (a vessel made of clay, such as a
cup or a bowl), a "jav" (a ladle), or a "paḍiggaha" (a spoon). 62. A monk who
accepts or approves of the acceptance of food, drink, edibles, or delicacies
offered by a hand that has touched a "ukkuṭṭha-samsatṭa" (a vessel made of clay,
such as a cup or a bowl), a "jav" (a ladle), or a "paḍiggaha" (a spoon). 63. A
monk who accepts or approves of the acceptance of food, drink, edibles, or
delicacies offered by a hand that has touched an "asamsatṭa" (a vessel made of
clay, such as a cup or a bowl), a "jav" (a ladle), or a "paḍiggaha" (a spoon).
49. A monk who accepts or approves of the acceptance of food, drink, edibles, or
delicacies offered by a hand that has touched water, a clay vessel (such as a
cup or a bowl), a ladle, or a metal vessel. 50. A monk who accepts or approves
of the acceptance of food, drink, edibles, or delicacies offered by a hand that
has touched wet clay. 51. A monk who accepts or approves of the acceptance of
food, drink, edibles, or delicacies offered by a hand that has touched earth-
alkali. 52. A monk who accepts or approves of the acceptance of food, drink,
edibles, or delicacies offered by a hand that has touched strike-powder. 53. A
monk who accepts or approves of the acceptance of food, drink, edibles, or
delicacies offered by a hand that has touched hingul-powder. 54. A monk who
accepts or approves of the acceptance of food, drink, edibles, or delicacies
offered by a hand that has touched manśil-powder. 55. A monk who accepts or
approves of the acceptance of food, drink, edibles, or delicacies offered by a
hand that has touched anjan-surma (collyrium). 56. A monk who accepts or
approves of the acceptance of food, drink, edibles, or delicacies offered by a
hand that has touched salt-powder. 57. A monk who accepts or approves of the
acceptance of food, drink, edibles, or delicacies offered by a hand that has
touched geru-gairika-powder (red ochre). 58. A monk who accepts or approves of
the acceptance of food, drink, edibles, or delicacies offered by a hand that has
touched vernic-yellow-earth powder. 59. A monk who accepts or approves of the
acceptance of food, drink, edibles, or delicacies offered by a hand that has
touched khaḍiya (khaḍḍī) powder (a type of clay).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha uddezaka] [113 59. je bhikkhU "seDhiya saMsaTThaNa" hattheNa vA "jAva"
paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  60. je bhikkhU
"soraThThiyapiTThasaMsaTTeNa" hatyeNa vA "jAva" paDiggAhei paDiggAheMtaM vA
saaijji| 61. je bhikkhU "kukkusa-saMsaTTeNa" hattheNa vA "jAva" paDiggAhei
paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 62. je bhikkhU "ukkuTTha-saMsaTTeNa" hattheNa vA
"jAva" paDiggAhei paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  63. je bhikkhU "asaMsaTTeNa"
hattheNa vA "jAva" paDiggAhei paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  49. jo bhikSu pAnI se
gIle hAtha se miTTI ke bartana (sarAvalA pyAlA Adi) se, kur3achI se yA kisI
dhAtu ke bartana se diyA jAne vAlA azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karatA
hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 50. jo bhikSu sacitta miTTI
se lipta, hAtha se yAvat grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 51. jo bhikSu usa-pRthvI-khAra se lipta hAtha se yAvat grahaNa
karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 52. jo bhikSu
har3atAla-cUrNa se lipta hAtha se yAvat grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 53. jo bhikSu hiMgula-cUrNa se lipta hAtha se
yAvat grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 54. jo
bhikSu mainazila-cUrNa se lipta hAtha se yAvat grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 55. jo bhikSu aMjana-suramA se lipta hAtha
se yAvat grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 56.
jo bhikSu namaka-cUrNa se lipta hAtha se yAvat grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 57. jo bhikSu.geru-gairikA-cUrNa se lipta
hAtha se yAvat grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 58. jo bhikSu varNika-pIlI-miTTI ke cUrNa se lipta hAtha se yAvat grahaNa
karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 59. jo bhikSu khaDiyA
(khaDDI)cUrNa se lipta hAtha se yAvat grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai|

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [114] [Nishīthasūtra] 60. A monk who accepts food with a hand smeared with
alum powder, or approves of someone who does so. 61. A monk who accepts food
with a hand smeared with the peel of a green plant, straw, etc., or approves of
someone who does so. 62. A monk who accepts food with a hand smeared with the
powder of a green plant, or approves of someone who does so. 63. A monk who
accepts food with an unsoiled, rough hand, or approves of someone who does so.
(He receives a minor monthly atonement.)  **Discussion:** These atonements are
mentioned in relation to the violation of the Apkāya in Sūtra 49, the violation
of the Pṛthvīkāya in Sūtras 50-60, and the violation of the Vanaspatikāya in
Sūtras 61-62. Therefore, all these substances are considered to be sentient in
this context. If, due to any particular use, these substances become non-
sentient by becoming weapons, and the hands become soiled by them, then there is
no atonement for accepting food with those hands. For example, hands can become
wet from hot water ("udaullang"). Salt can sometimes become non-sentient, etc.
This should be understood in the same way everywhere.  The atonement mentioned
in Sūtra 63 is in relation to the Pāścātkarma. If the food is such that there is
no Pāścātkarma defect, or if the giver is discerning and does not cause a
Pāścātkarma defect, then there is no atonement for accepting alms with unsoiled
hands, etc. In Daśavai-a. 5 u. 1 gā. 35, it is said: "Pachchākammṁ jahi bhave" -
meaning that a monk should not accept food that is given with a Pāścātkarma
defect.  In Prācā. śr. 2 a. 1 u. 11, the first Piṇḍaiṣaṇā, Abhigṛha, is
mentioned. A monk who observes this Abhigṛha accepts alms only with unsoiled
hands, etc., not with soiled hands, etc. A monk who observes this vow can accept
both smeared and un-smeared food, because the fourth Piṇḍaiṣaṇā (vow), called
"Alepā," is mentioned as accepting only un-smeared (rough) food. Therefore, it
is understood that this atonement for unsoiled hands is in relation to the
appropriate context, as per the Āgama.  **Word meanings:** 1. "Maṭṭiyā" -
ordinary soil - smooth soil, black soil, red soil, etc., which is used for
building raw houses, cleaning utensils, making pots, etc. 2. "Ūs" - on ordinary
land, i.e., barren land, salt accumulates, which is called salt or "pāṁśu khār".
"Ūṣaḥ-pāṁśu kṣāraḥ". Daśavai. Cūṇi and Ṭīkā. 3. "Maṇosil" - Maenaśil - a type of
hard yellow soil. 4. "Geruy" - hard red soil. 5. "Vaṇiy" - yellow soil - "Jeṇa
suvaṇṇṁ vaṇijjati". 6. "Seḍiy" - white soil - khadīyā soil.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 114] [nizIthasUtra 60. jo bhikSu phiTakarI ke cUrNa se lipta hAtha se yAvat
grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 61. jo bhikSu
harI-vanaspati ke chilake, bhUse Adi se lipta hAtha se yAvat grahaNa karatA hai
yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  62. jo bhikSu harI-vanaspati
ke cUrNa se lipta hAtha se yAvat grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 63. jo bhikSu aliptabinA kharaDe-hAtha se yAvat grahaNa
karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika
prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-sUtra 49 meM apkAya kI virAdhanA, sUtra 50 se 60
taka pRthvIkAya kI virAdhanA aura sUtra 61-62 meM vanaspatikAya kI virAdhanA kI
apekSA se ye prAyazcitta kahe gaye haiM  /  ataH yahAM ye saba padArtha sacitta
ko apekSA se gRhIta haiN| yadi kisI bhI prayogavizeSa se ye vastueM zastra-
pariNata hokara acitta ho gaI hoM aura unase hAtha Adi lipta hoM to una hAthoM
se AhAra grahaNa karane kA koI prAyazcitta nahIM samajhanA cAhiye  /
yathA-"udaullaM" garma pAnI se bhI gIle hAtha ho sakate haiM  /  namaka kabhI
acitta bhI ho sakatA hai ityAdi  /  isI prakAra sarvatra samajha lenA cAhiye  /
sUtra 63 meM pazcAtakarma kI apekSA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| yadi pazcAtakarma
doSa na ho aisA khAdya padArtha ho athavA dAtA viveka vAlA ho jo pazcAtkarma
doSa na lagAve to asaMsRSTa hAtha Adi se bhikSA lene kA prAyazcitta nahIM hai  /
dazavai-a. 5 u. 1 gA. 35 meM kahA hai-pacchAkammaM jahi bhave' arthAt jahAM
pazcAtkarma ho aisA diyA jAtA huaA AhAra bhikSu grahaNa na kre| prAcA. zra. 2 a.
1 u. 11 meM sAta piMDaiSaNA meM prathama piMDaiSaNA abhigraha kA kathana hai|
usa abhigraha ko dhAraNa karane vAlA bhikSu asaMsRSTa (alipta) hAtha Adi se hI
bhikSA grahaNa karatA hai, saMsRSTa hAtha Adi se nahIM  /  isa pratijJA vAlA
bhikSu lepya alepya donoM prakAra ke khAdya padArtha grahaNa kara sakatA hai
kyoMki kevala alepya (rUkSa) padArtha grahaNa karane kI 'alepA' nAmaka cauthI
piMDaiSaNA (pratijJA) kahI hai  /  ataH yaha asaMsRSTa kA prAyazcitta upayukta
apekSA se hai, aisA samajhanA Agama sammata hai| zabdArtha-1.
"maTTiyA"-sAdhAraNa miTTI-cikanI miTTI, kAlI miTTI lAla miTTI Adi jo kacce
makAna banAne, bartana mAMjane-sApha karane, ghar3e Adi bartana banAne ke kAma
meM AtI hai| 2. "Usa" sAdhAraNa bhUmi para arthAt USara bhUmi para khAra jamatA
hai, use khAra yA 'pAMzu khAra' kahate haiM  /  "USaH-pAMzukSAraH"  /  dazavai.
cUNi va ttiikaa| 3. "maNosila"-mainazila-eka prakAra kI pIlI kaThora mittttii|
4. "geruya"-kaThora lAla mittttii| 5. "vaNiya"pIlI miTTI-'jeNa suvaNNaM
vaNijjati'  /  6. "seDiya"-sapheda miTTI-khaDiyA miTTI  /

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Uddeshaka  [115 7. "Soratthiya" - Alum - "Soratthiya Tuvaria Jie
Suvannakara Uppam Karenti Suvannas Piḍam". 8. Ukkuṭṭha - "Sachitta Vanassa
Icuṇṇo-Prokkuṭṭho Bhaṇṇati" In Prakrit language, there are many alternatives,
therefore - 'Ukkaṭṭha, Ukkiṭṭha-Ukkuṭṭha' all three are pure and 'Seḍhiya
Seḍiya' both are pure. Both are found in the Churni.  These 15 sutras contain
the rules of atonement, which are mentioned in Pracharang Shru. 2, A 1, U. 6 and
Dashakaliak A. 5, U. 1. There are two verses on this topic in the Dashakaliak
Sutra, which mention 16 types of hands or other things being contaminated. The
word "Piṭṭha" which comes after "Soratthiya" is merely an adjective for all the
hard earths mentioned before "Soratthiya". Because the hands can only be
contaminated by the powder of those hard earths. Therefore, this word is used in
the verse after the words related to earth are finished, but it is interpreted
as 17 types of contaminated hands etc. by considering it as an independent word.
That logic is not sound, but only a misconception.  _"Agastya Churni and
Jinadasagani's Churni interpret the word "Piṭṭha" as independent, which leads to
the following interpretation: "Uncooked dough (flour) cooked on a low flame
becomes unmindful (achitta) in one prahar, and cooked on a high flame becomes
quickly unmindful.  Here, the dough (flour of grains) is considered mindful
before and after being placed on fire, which is not appropriate. Rice is
considered unmindful, and other grains are one-bodied, they remain mindful for
hours even after being ground into flour, this explanation is also given because
of considering the word "Piṭṭha" separately.  During the time of Gochari, hands
filled with flour at home can be of two types: 1. While sifting the flour or
taking it from the container to the plate, 2. While grinding the grains. Taking
Gochari from the one who grinds the grains is prohibited, and considering it
mindful until the time of sifting is not appropriate. Therefore, by considering
the word "Piṭṭha" as an adjective for the earth-bodied words mentioned in the
sutras, and interpreting it as hands etc. contaminated by their powder, both the
original text and meaning are consistent.  There are 16 words on this topic in
the Dashakaliak Sutra. Here, their atonement is mentioned in 14 sutras. The
atonement of "Sasiniḍḍha" is included in "Udaulla" and the atonement of
"Sasarakkha" is included in "Maṭṭiyasansatṭa". Therefore, there are only 14
sutras, and one sutra "Asansatṭha" makes a total of 15 sutras. The order of
these sutras is clear from the commentary verse.  The Churnikar has only
interpreted the meaning of some words. Commentary verse - "Udaulla, Maṭṭiya Va,
Usagate Cheva Hoti Bodhavve. Haritale Hingulae, Maṇosila Anjane Lone || 1848 ||"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha uddezaka] [115 7. "soraTThiya"--phiTakarI-"soraThThiyA tUvariyA jIe
suvaNNakArA uppaM kareMti suvvaNNassa piddN"| 8. ukkuTTha-"sacitta vaNassa
icuNNo-prokkuTTho bhaNNati" prAkRta bhASA meM aneka vikalpa hote haiM, isaliye-
'ukkaTTha, ukkiTTha-ukkuTTa' tInoM hI zuddha haiM tathA seDhiya seDiya' donoM
zuddha haiM  /  donoM cUNi meM milate haiN| ina 15 sUtroM meM jo
prAyazcittavidhAna hai inakA nirdeza prAcArAMga zru. 2, a 1, u. 6 va dazakAlika
a. 5. u. 1 meM hayA hai| dazavakAlika satra meM isa viSaya kI do gAthAe~ haiM.
jinameM 16 prakAra se hAtha yAdi lipta kahe haiM  /  vahAM "soraThThiya' ke bAda
jo "piTTha" zabda hai vaha "soraThThiya" paryaMta kahI gaI sabhI kaThora
pRthviyoM kA vizeSaNa mAtra hai  /  kyoMki una kaThora pRthviyoM ke cUrNa se hI
hAtha lipta ho sakatA hai  /  ataH pRthvI saMbaMdhI zabdoM ke samApta hone para
isa zabda kA prayoga gAthA meM huA hai kintu use bhI svataMtra zabda mAna kara
17 prakAra se lipta hAtha Adi haiM aisA artha kiyA jAtA hai  /  vaha
tarkasaMgata nahIM hai apitu kevala bhrAnti hai  /  _"agastya cUNi meM va
jinadAsagaNI kI cUNi meM "piTTha" zabda ko svataMtra mAna kara jo arthasaMgati
kI gaI hai vaha isa prakAra hai "agni kI maMda AMca se pakAyA jAne vAlA apakva
piSTa (ATA) eka prahara se zastrapariNata (acitta) hotA hai aura teja prAMca se
pakAyA jAne vAlA zIghra zastrapariNata hotA hai  /  yahAM piSTa (dhAnya ke ATe)
ko agni para rakhane ke pahale aura bAda meM sacitta batAyA hai vaha ucita nahIM
hai| dhAnya meM cAvala to acitta mAne gaye haiM aura zeSa dhAnya ekajIvI hote
haiM, ve dhAnya pisa kara grATA bana jAne ke bAda bhI ghaMToM taka pATA sacitta
rahe yaha vyAkhyA bhI "piTTha" zabda ko alaga mAnane ke kAraNa hI kI gaI hai|
gocarI ke samaya ghara meM ATe se bhare hAtha do prakAra ke ho sakate haiM1.
pATA chAnate samaya yA bartana se parAta meM lete samaya, 2. dhAnya pIsate
samaya  /  dhAnya pIsane vAle se to gocarI lenA niSiddha hai hI aura chAnate
samaya taka sacitta mAnanA saMgata nahIM hai  /  ataH "piSTa" zabda ko sUtrokta
pRthvIkAya ke zabdoM kA vizeSaNa mAnakara unake cUrNa se lipta hAtha Adi aisA
artha karane se mUla pATha evaM artha donoM kI saMgati ho jAtI hai| dazavakAlika
sUtra meM isa viSaya ke 16 zabda haiM  /  yahAM unakA 14 sUtroM meM prAyazcitta
kahA hai| "udaulla" meM "sasiNiddha" kA prAyazcitta samAviSTa kara diyA gayA hai
aura 'sasarakkha' kA prAyazcitta maTTiyAsaMsaTTa' meM samAviSTa kara diyA gayA
hai  /  ataH 14 sUtra hI hote haiM aura eka sUtra "asaMsaTTha" kA hone se kula
15 sUtra hote haiM  /  bhASya gAthA se inakA krama spaSTa jJAta ho jAtA hai|
cUrNikAra ne kucha zabdoM ke hI artha kiye haiM  /  bhASya gAthA-"udaulla,
maTTiyA vA, Usagate ceva hoti bodhavve  /  haritAle hiMgulae, maNosilA aMjaNe
loNe  //  1848  //

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [116] [Nishith Sutra] Geruy vanniya sediya, soratthiya pitth kukkusakaye ya.
Ukkatthamasansthe, yave anupuve. || 1849 || Here, Nishith Churnikar has also
interpreted the word "pitth" as independent, explaining it as "tandulapidhen
pram asatthovahatam". This is the same meaning that is used in the available
translations. If "tandula" is interpreted as dry rice, then it is inanimate. And
if it is interpreted as green rice, then there is a separate sutra for it,
"ukkutth", which Churnikar himself explains as "sachittavansasai chunno okuttho
bhannati". This includes all chopped green plants, chutneys, etc. There are some
differences between the original text of Nishith, the commentary, the Churni,
and the Dashavaikalik. In many copies, the word "soratthiya" is not present, but
other words like "kantav, lodh, kandamul, singaver, pupfhag" have been added.
Also, phrases like "evam ekkaavinsam hattha bhaniyaavva", "egavisaabheena
hatthena", etc. have been added, and in some copies, the number 23 has also been
added. Here, two words are used in relation to plants: 1. Crushed, ground,
powdered, and chutney of plants. 2. Peels, husks, etc. of plants. These can come
into contact with hands, etc., and they include all types of plants. Therefore,
there is no need for separate sutras for lodhra, kand, mul, singaver, and
pupfhag. These words are not authenticated by the commentary, Churni, or
Dashavaikalik. The word "kantav" is unknown. Therefore, these five words and the
21 hattha, etc. phrases were added much later, as there is no ancient basis for
them. ##  Penance for performing acts on another's body 64. Je bhikkhu
annamannas pae amajjejj va pamajjejj va, amajjantm va pamajjantm va saijjai.
Evam taiyauddesagamenam neyaavvam jaav je bhikkhu gaamanugaman duijjamanne
annamannas sisaduvvariyam karei, karentm va saijjai. 64. A monk who performs
"amarjan" on another's feet once or many times, or approves of someone doing it,
or who covers another's head while traveling from village to village, or
approves of someone doing it, incurs a minor monthly penance. ##  Discussion
These are a total of 54 sutras. Penance is incurred according to these sutras
when performing acts on another's body without a necessary reason, only out of
devotion or curiosity. In the third uddeśaka, penance is mentioned for
performing these acts oneself, and here, penance is mentioned for monks
performing these acts on each other. With this distinction, we should understand
that there are 54 sutras here as well, and their meaning and discussion should
be understood in the same way.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 116] [nizIthasUtra geruya vaNNiya seDiya, soraThThiya piTTha kukkusakae ya  /
ukkaTThamasaMsaThe, yave ANupuvIe  //  1849  //  yahAM para nizItha cUrNikAra ne
bhI "piTTha' zabda ko svataMtra mAnakara "taMdulapiDheM prAma asatthovahataM"
vyAkhyA kI hai  /  yahI artha upabdha anuvAdoM meM kiyA jAtA hai  /  "taMdula"
se sUkhe cAvala artha kiyA jAe to ve acitta hI hote haiM aura hare cAvala artha
kiyA jAya to usake liye "ukkuTTha' zabda kA pAge svataMtra sUtra hai jisakA
artha cUrNikAra svayaM sacittavaNassaIcuNNo okuTTho bhaNNati aisA karate haiN|
jisameM sabhI harI vanaspatiyoM ke kaTe va caTanI Adi kA samAveza ho sakatA hai|
bhASya, cUNi evaM dazavaikAlika kI apekSA nizItha ke mUla pATha meM kucha
bhinnatA hai  /  kaI pratiyoM meM to 'soraTTiya' zabda nahIM hai kintu anya
'kaMtava, loddha, kaMdamUla, siMgavera, pupphaga' ye zabda bar3ha gaye haiM
tathA 'evaM ekkavIsaM hatthA bhANiyavvA', 'egavIsabheeNa hattheNa' Adi pATha
bar3ha gaye haiM to kisI prati meM 23 saMkhyA bhI ho gaI hai| vanaspati se
saMsaTTha kI apekSA yahAM do zabda prayukta haiM 1. vanaspati kA kUTA pIsA cUrNa
caTanI, 2. vanaspati ke chilake bhUsA Adi  /  ina se hAtha Adi saMsRSTa ho
sakate haiM aura inameM sabhI prakAra kI vanaspati kA samAveza bhI ho jAtA hai
/  ataH lodhra, kaMda, mUla, siMgabera, pupphaga ke sUtroM kI alaga koI
AvazyakatA nahIM rahatI hai  /  bhASya, cUNi tathA dazavaikAlika Adi se bhI ye
zabda prAmANita nahIM haiM  /  'kaMtava' zabda to aprasiddha hI hai  /  ataH ye
pAMca zabda aura 21 hatthA Adi pATha bahuta bAda meM jor3A gayA hai| kyoMki
usake liye koI prAcIna AdhAra dekhane meM nahIM AtA hai| anyonya zarIra kA
parikarma karane kA prAyazcitta 64. je bhikkhU aNNamaNNassa pAe Amajjeja vA
pamajjejja vA, AmajjaMtaM vA pamajjaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  evaM taiyauddesagameNaM
NeyavvaM jAva je bhikkhU gAmANugAmaM dUijjamANe aNNamaNNassa sIsaduvAriyaM
karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  64. jo bhikSu Apasa meM eka dUsare ke pAvoM kA
eka bAra yA aneka bAra 'aAmarjana' karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  isa prakAra tIsare uddezaka ke (sUtra 16 se 69 taka ke) samAna pUrA
pAlApaka jAna lenA cAhiye yAvat jo bhikSu Apasa meM eka dUsare kA grAmAnugrAma
vihAra karate samaya mastaka DhAMkatA hai yA DhAMkane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-ye kula 54 sUtra haiM  /
Avazyaka kAraNa ke binA, kevala bhakti yA kutUhalavaza Apasa meM zarIra kA
parikarma karane para ina sUtroM ke anusAra prAyazcitta AtA hai| tIsare uddezaka
meM ye kArya svayaM karane kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai aura yahAM sAdhu-sAdhu
Apasa meM parikarma kareM to prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  itanI vizeSatA ke
sAtha yahAM bhI 54 hI sUtra samajha lenA cAhie aura unakA artha evaM vivecana
bhI prAyaH vaisA hI samajha lenA caahie|

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Uddesaka  [117 The Churnikara has indicated here the number 41 sutras,
which is as follows... "Ityadi ekkatali-sam suttam uccareyavva jav annam-annass
sisad-uvariyam karei ity-adi arthah purvavat. Gatha-pad-adi tu pammajjan, sisad-
uvar-adi jo gamo tat-ie. Annon-nass tu karane so cev gamo chaut-thammi || 1855
|| This is explained by the third Uddesaka. Churni. Even though there is no
instruction to reduce any sutra in this commentary, the reason for mentioning
the number 41 sutras in the Churni is that in the third Uddesaka, for 26 sutras,
the number 26 has been mentioned, but the number of padas is 13. It is likely
that the same number of padas has been counted here as the number of sutras. As
a result, 13 is subtracted from 54, resulting in 41 sutras. Therefore, even
though the original text of the above 54 sutras is in this Uddesaka, there is no
contradiction in the number 41 mentioned by the Churnikara. It is only a
difference in interpretation. Sutras 64 to 117, which deal with the mutual body-
actions, are similar to the third Uddesaka. Their table is as follows: Number
Foot-actions Body-actions Wound-treatment Gandamala etc. surgical treatment Worm
removal Nail cutting 90 to 95 Hair-actions 96 to 98 Tooth-actions 99 to 104 Lip-
actions 105 to 111 Eye-actions 112 to 114 Hair-actions 115 Sweat prevention
Removing dirt from eyes etc. Covering the head while walking 00i WOOK our our
woo.urm or 9 m or orr |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha uddezaka] [117 cUrNikAra ne yahAM 41 sUtra-saMkhyA kA nirdeza kiyA hai
vaha isa prakAra hai.. "ityAdi ekkatAlIsaM suttA uccAreyavvA jAva aNNamaNNassa
sIsaduvAriyaM karei ityAdi arthaH pUrvavat  /  gAthA-pAdAdi tu pamajjaNa,
sIsaduvArAdi jo gamo ttie| aNNoNNassa tu karaNe so ceva gamo cautthammi  //
1855  //  tRtIya uddezagamena neyaM  /  cUNi  /  isa vyAkhyA meM kisI bhI sUtra
ko kama karane kA nirdeza nahIM hote hue bhI cUNi meM sUtra saMkhyA 41 kahane kA
kAraNa yaha hai ki tIsare uddezaka meM 26 sUtroM ke liye sUtrasaMkhyA 26 kaha
kara bhI pada saMkhyA 13 kahI hai  /  usI pada saMkhyA ko saMbhavataH yahAM
sUtrasaMkhyA gina lI gaI hai| jisase 54 meM se 13 kI saMkhyA kama hone para 41
sUtrasaMkhyA kahI gaI hai  /  ataH uparyukta 54 sUtroM kA mUla pATha isa
uddezaka meM hone para bhI cUrNikArakathita 41 kI saMkhyA meM koI virodha nahIM
hotA hai| kevala vivakSA bheda hI hai| sUtra 64 se 117 taka anyonya zarIra-
parikarma sUtra tIsare uddezaka ke samAna hai  /  inakI tAlikA isa prakAra hai
saMkhyA paira-parikarma kAyA-parikarma vraNa-cikitsA gaMDamAla Adi kI zalya-
cikitsA kRmi nikAlanA nakha kATanA 90 se 95 roma-parikarma 96 se 98 daMta-
parikarma 99 se 104 hoTha-parikarma 105 se 111 cakSa-parikarma 112 se 114 roma-
keza parikarma 115 prasveda nivAraNa cakSu Adi kA maila nikAlanA mastaka DhAMka
kara vihAra karanA 00i WOOK our our woo.urm or 9 m or orr |

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
118. The monk who does not transcribe the fourth portion of the fourth *porisi*
of the *uccara-prasravan* or approves of the one who does not do so. 119. The
monk who does not transcribe the three *uccara-prasravan* lands or approves of
the one who does not do so. 120. The monk who transcribes the *uccara-prasravan*
in a space smaller than one hand or approves of the one who does so. 121. The
monk who transcribes the *uccara-prasravan* unlawfully or approves of the one
who does so. 122. The monk who transcribes the *uccara-prasravan* but does not
wipe the anus or approves of the one who does not do so. 123. The monk who
transcribes the *uccara-prasravan* and wipes the anus with wood, bamboo, finger,
or a stick of cane, etc., or approves of the one who does so. 124. The monk who
transcribes the *uccara-prasravan* but does not perform *acaman* or approves of
the one who does not do so. 125. The monk who transcribes the *uccara-prasravan*
and performs *acaman* on the same spot or approves of the one who does so.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 118] [nizIthasUtra pariSThApanA samiti ke doSoM kA prAyazcitta 118. je bhikkhU
sANuppae uccAra-pAsavaNabhUmi Na paDilehei, Na paDilehaMtaM vA saaijji| 119. je
bhikkhU tao uccAra-pAsavaNabhUmio na paDilehei, na paDilehaMtaM vA saaijji| 120.
je bhikkhU khuDDAgaMsi thaMDilaMsi uccAra-pAsavaNaM pariTThavei, pariveMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  121. je bhikkhU uccAra-pAsavaNaM avihIe pariTThavei, pariTThaveMtaM
vA sAijjai  /  122. je bhikkhU uccAra-pAsavaNaM parivettA Na puchai, Na puchataM
vA sAijjai  /  123. je bhikkhU uccAra-pAsavaNaM pariTThavettA kaTTeNa vA,
kiliMceNa vA, aMguliyAe vA, salAgAe vA puchai, puchataM vA sAijjai  /  124. je
bhikkhU uccAra-pAsavaNaM pariTThavettA NAyamai, NAyamaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  125.
je bhikkhU uccAra-pAsavaNaM pariTThavettA tattheva Ayamai, AyamaMtaM vA sAijjai
/  126. je bhikkhU uccAra-pAsavaNaM pariTThavettA aidUre Ayamai AyamaMtaM vA
saaijji| 127. je bhikkhU uccAra-pAsavaNaM pariTThavettA paraM tiNhaM NAvApUrANaM
Ayamai, AyamaMtaM vA saaijji| 118. jo bhikSu cauthI porisI ke cauthe bhAga meM
uccAra-prasravaNa kI bhUmi kA pratilekhana nahIM karatA hai yA nahIM karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  119. jo bhikSu tIna uccAra-prasravaNa bhUmi kI
pratilekhanA nahIM karatA hai yA nahIM karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
120. jo bhikSu eka hAtha se bhI kama laMbI-caur3I jagaha meM uccAra-prasravaNa
paraThatA hai yA * paraThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  121. jo bhikSu
uccAra-prasravaNa ko avidhi se paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 122. jo bhikSu uccAra-prasravaNa ko paraTha kara maladvAra ko nahIM
poMchatA hai yA nahIM poMchane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 123. jo bhikSu
uccAra-prasravaNa ko paraTha kara maladvAra ko kASTha se, bAMsa kI khapaccI se,
aMgulI se yA beMta Adi kI zalAkA se poMchatA hai yA poMchane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 124. jo bhikSu uccAra-prasravaNa ko paraTha kara Acamana nahIM
karatA hai yA nahIM karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 125. jo bhikSu uccAra-
prasravaNa ko paraTha kara vahIM usake Upara hI Acamana karatA hai yA Acamana
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Uddeshak  [119-126. A monk who, after defecating, goes too far to
perform ablution or approves of someone who does so. 127. A monk who, after
defecating, performs ablution more than three times or approves of someone who
does so. (He incurs a minor monthly penance.)]  **Discussion:** The essence of
these ten sutras is that one should mark out three places for defecation during
the evening. The ground for sitting should be at least one handspan long and
wide. One should follow the procedure of looking around, etc. After defecation,
one should clean the anus with a piece of cloth. Then, one should move a little
distance away and purify oneself with water.  The mention of wiping and
ablution, etc., is related to great ethics. Sometimes there is a great obstacle
of doubt. Therefore, marking out three places is also suitable for that.  After
urinating, it is not necessary to wipe or perform ablution, and often one has to
urinate more than three times. Therefore, it is appropriate to understand the
meaning of these ten sutras primarily in relation to defecation.  1. "Khuddaga"
- "Whatever is less than a handspan in length and width is called khuddaga." In
the detailed explanation of the gatha, whatever is less than a handspan in
length and width is called "khuddaga." A place that is four angulas deep and
less than a handspan in length and width is called "jaghannya vistirna."  2.
"Sanuppae" - "Sanuppae is the name of the fourth part of the fourth part of the
human body." After finishing one's studies, one should mark out the sleeping
place and the place for defecation and urination during the evening time of non-
study.  _One can only know about the burrows of animals, insects, etc., pits,
uneven ground, etc., by marking out the place. By marking out the place, one can
avoid many faults. But if one does not mark out the place, then if one suddenly
has to defecate, it is possible to get sick or even die.  3. "Tao" - The reason
for marking out three places is that if one looks at only one place, and someone
else defecates there or an animal sits there, then there is a possibility of
many faults. Therefore, one should mark out three places.  4. "Avihie" - The
procedure is to mark out or clean the place where one will sit before
defecating, to look around to see if anyone is nearby, to defecate thoughtfully
in a place that dries quickly, and not to defecate in the sun if there are worms
in the feces. Doing the opposite of this is called "pravidhi."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha uddezaka] [119 126. jo bhikSu uccAra-prasravaNa ko paraThakara ati
dUra jAkara Acamana karatA hai yA pAcamana karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
127. jo bhikSu uccAra-prasravaNa ko paraThakara tIna se adhika pasalI se Acamana
karatA hai yA Acamana karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai| ) vivecana-ina dasa sUtroM kA saMkSipta bhAva yaha hai ki
saMdhyA samaya meM tIna uccAra-prasravaNa paraThane kI bhUmiyoM kA pratilekhana
karanA cAhiye  /  baiThane ke liye jIvarahita bhUmi kama se kama eka hAtha laMbI
caur3I honI hI cAhiye  /  dizAvalokana Adi vidhi kA pAlana karanA cAhiye  /
mala-nivRtti ke bAda vastrakhaMDa se maladvAra ko poMcha kara sApha karanA
cAhiye  /  phira kucha dUra haTa kara maryAdita jala se zuddhi kara lenI
caahiye| poMchanA aura pAcamana Adi kA kathana bar3I nIta se hI saMbaMdhita hai|
bar3I zaMkA kI bAdhA kabhI kabhI hotI hai  /  ataH tIna bhUmiyoM kA pratilekhana
bhI usake liye upayukta hai| laghuzaMkA se nivRtta hone ke bAda poMchanA yA
pAcamana karanA Avazyaka nahIM hai tathA prAyaH tIna se adhika bAra bhI
laghuzaMkA ke liye jAnA hotA hai  /  isalie ina dasa sUtroM kA artha mala-tyAga
kI mukhyatA se samajhanA ucita hai| 1. khuDDAgaMsi"-rayaNipamANAto jaM Arato taM
khuddddN|" gAthA-vitthArAyAmeNaM, thaMDillaM jaM bhave rayaNimittaM  /
cauraMgulovagADhaM, jahaNNayaM taM tu visthiNNaM  /  /  1864  //  laMbAI-cauDAI
meM eka hAtha se kama vistAra vAlI bhUmi "khuDDaga' kahI jAtI hai aura eka hAtha
vistAra vAlI 'jaghanya vistIrNa' bhUmi kahI jAtI hai  /  2. "sANuppae""sANuppao
NAma caubhAgAvasesa carimAe" cauthI pauruSI ke cauthe bhAga meM arthAt svAdhyAya
se nivRtta hone ke bAda saMdhyA samaya ke asvAdhyAya kAla meM zayyAbhUmi va
uccAraprasravaNa bhUmi kI pratilekhanA karanI caahiye| _ harI vanaspati, kIDiyoM
Adi ke bila, khaDDe, viSama bhUmi Adi kI jAnakArI pratilekhana karane se hI hotI
hai  /  pratilekhana karane para aneka doSoM se bacA jA sakatA hai  /  kintu
pratilekhana na karane para acAnaka hue dIrca zaMkA ke vega ko rokane para roga
yA mRtyu bhI honA saMbhava hai| 3. 'tao'-tIna jagaha pratilekhana karane kA
kAraNa yaha hai ki eka hI jagaha dekhane para vahAM yadi anya koI mala tyAga
kara de yA pazu Akara baiTha jAya to aneka doSoM kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai  /
ataH tIna bhUmiyoM kA pratilekhana karanA caahiye| 4. "avihIe-mala tyAga ke
pUrva baiThane kI bhUmi kA pratilekhana yA pramArjana karanA, 'koI AsapAsa meM
hai yA nahIM' yaha jAnane ke lie dizAvalokana karanA, jaldI sUkha jAya aise
sthAna para vivekapUrvaka paraThanA, mala meM kRmi Ate hoM to dhUpa meM
malatyAga nahIM karanA ityAdi samAcArI kA pAlana karanA vidhi kahalAtA hai  /
usase viparIta karanA pravidhi hai|

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[120] The commentary on the Nishīth Sūtra states that after saying "Aṇujāṇaha
Jassuggahoṁ," one should perform a parathnā (prayer) to avoid the disturbance of
gods and demons. During the day, one should face north, and at night, one should
face south. One should also avoid turning one's back towards the wind, a
settlement, or the sun.  5. "Puṁchaī" - After wiping the anus with a cloth, one
can achieve purity by performing āchaman (ritual rinsing) with a little water. A
worn-out cloth is often found with a sādhū (holy person). The reason for
prohibiting wiping with wood, etc., is to avoid any kind of injury to the
delicate area. Wiping with a finger or hand does not ensure cleanliness and
leaves a lingering odor, hence the prescribed atonement for using them. 6.
'Āchaman' - The sūtra states that "Ucchare Vosīrijjāmāne Avassan Pāsaṇam
Bhavatī" (Urine is always present during excretion). Therefore, the sūtra
mentions urine along with feces. However, after excreting feces, one should
perform āchaman (washing) of the anus, not the urinary organ. Wiping the anus
with a piece of cloth does not ensure complete purity and leaves a lingering
impurity. Therefore, āchaman is also necessary. Failure to perform āchaman
results in the prescribed atonement mentioned in the sūtra. Performing āchaman
directly over the excreted matter increases wetness, which takes longer to dry,
increasing the possibility of contamination. Therefore, it is appropriate to
perform āchaman at a distance. Performing āchaman in the same place increases
the risk of feces getting on the hands. Performing purification too far away can
lead to people believing that āchaman is not being performed. Nāvāpūraṇam -
"Nāva" refers to a hand-sized cup of water, which should be used for
purification. The verse states, "Gāthā-Uccārāmāyarittā, Pareṇ Tiṇhaṁ Tu
Nāvāpūraṇam." Those who perform āchaman with three nāvāpūraṇam (handfuls of
water) receive the benefits of āṇamā (spiritual merit) and other benefits.
[1880] Using more than three nāvāpūraṇam (handfuls of water) leads to the
following disadvantages: Uccholaṇā (excessive washing) leads to a difficult path
to liberation, and other disadvantages arise from it. It causes harm to insects
and other creatures, and small creatures, leaves, flowers, and fruits fall into
the water. [1881] The commentary on the tenth chapter of the fourth section
states that a monk who performs excessive washing and cleansing has a difficult
path to liberation. Excessive washing leads to many other disadvantages. The
excessive flow of water causes pain to insects and other creatures. When water
fills a pit, it traps small creatures, and leaves, flowers, and fruits fall into
it. Excessive washing leads to the defilement of restraint. Nāvāpūraka - A hand-
sized cup of water, similar in size to a nāva (boat), is called a nāvāpūraka.
After excreting feces and urine, one should purify the anus with three
nāvāpūraka.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 120] [nizIthasUtra bhASyakAra ne vidhi ke varNana meM kahA hai ki "aNujANaha
jassuggahoM" aisA bolakara phira paraThanA cAhiye jisase deva dAnava kA upadrava
na ho tathA dina meM uttara dizA kI ora tathA rAtri meM dakSiNa dizA kI ora
mukha karanA cAhiye  /  havA, bastI va sUrya kI tarapha bhI pITha nahIM karanA
Adi varNana kiyA hai| 5. "puMchaI"-maladvAra ko kapar3e se poMcha lene ke bAda
thor3e pAnI se Acamana karane para bhI zuddhi ho sakatI hai  /  jIrNa kapar3A
bhI sAdhu ke pAsa prAyaH mila jAtA hai  /  kASTha Adi se poMchane kA niSedha
karane kA kAraNa yaha hai ki komala aMga meM kisI prakAra kA AghAta na lage  /
aMgulI yA hAtha se pauMchane para svacchatA nahIM rahatI tathA bahuta samaya
taka hAtha meM gaMdha AtI rahatI hai ataH inase poMchane kA prAyazcitta kahA
hai| 6. 'Acamana'-uccAre vosirijjamANe avassaM pAsavaNaM bhavati tti teNa
gahitaM  /  pAsavaNaM puNa kAuM sAgArie (aMgAdANaM NAyamai jahA uccAre'-mala
tyAgane ke samaya mUtra avazya AtA hai isaliye hI sUtra meM mala ke sAtha mUtra
kA kathana hai| kintu mala tyAgane ke bAda maladvAra kA Acamana (prakSAlana)
kiyA jAtA hai, vaise mUtraMdriya kA Acamana karanA nahIM samajhanA cAhiye  /
maladvAra ko vastrakhaMDa se poMcha lene para bhI pUrNa zuddhi nahIM hotI hai
tathA usakI asvAdhyAya rahatI hai| ataH Acamana karanA bhI Avazyaka hotA hai,
Acamana nahIM karane para sUtrokta prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /  mala tyAgane ke bAda
usake Upara hI Acamana karane se gIlApana adhika bar3hatA hai jisase sUkhane meM
adhika samaya lagane se virAdhanA kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai  /  ataH kucha dUrI
para Acamana karanA ucita hai  /  vahIM para Acamana karane se hAtha ke mala
lagane kI bhI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai| adhika dUra jAkara zuci karane se logoM meM
Acamana na karane kI bhrAMti bhI ho sakatI hai| NAvApUrANaM-"NAva" tti pasato,
tAhiM AyamiyavvaM  /  gAthA-uccAramAyarittA, pareNa tiNhaM tu nnaavpuurennN| je
bhikkhU Ayamati, so pAvati-ANamAdINi  //  1880  //  tIna pasalI se jyAdA pAnI kA
upayoga karane para nimna doSoM kI prApti hotI hai uccholaNA padhoiyassa,
dullabhA soggatI tArisagassa uccholaNA dosA bhavaMti, pipIliyAdINaM vA pANANaM
uppilAvaNA bhavai, khillaraMdhe tasA paDaMti, tarugaNapattANi vA, pupphANi vA,
phalANi vA paDaMti kurUkayakaraNe bAussattaM bhavati  /  bhASya gAthA  //  1881
//  daza. a. 4 meM kahA hai-jo bAra-bAra prakSAlana karatA hai, dhotA hai aise
bhikSu kI sugati durlabha hai, prakSAlana se anya aneka doSa lagate haiM  /
adhika pAnI ke rele se kIDI Adi aneka prANiyoM ko pIDA hotI hai  /  kisI khaDDe
meM pAnI bharane para usameM trasa jIva par3ate haiM tathA vRkSa ke patte,
puSpa, phala Adi par3ate haiN| adhika prakSAlana karane se saMyama malIna hotA
hai  /  nAvApUraka-nAva jaisI prAkRti vAlI pAnI bharI eka hAtha kI aMjalI
(pasalI) ko nAvApUraka kahA gayA hai, mala-mUtra tyAgane ke bAda aise tIna
nAvApUrakoM se maladvAra kI zuddhi karanI cAhie  /

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Uddeshak  [121] A monk who performs purification by more than three
name-givers after discarding excrement is liable to the offenses of violating
the commands of the Vitaraga, etc. At the end of the third Uddeshak, there is a
statement about the lands suitable and unsuitable for discarding excrement and
urine. In the absence of a suitable place, the method of discarding excrement in
one's own vessel at one's own place during the day and night has been
instructed. In these last 10 sutras of this fourth Uddeshak, the subject of
utterance, excretion, and cleansing has been discussed. However, here, while
giving information about the method of discarding excrement only by going to a
suitable place, penance has been mentioned.  Penance for going with a Pariharic
for begging 128. If a monk who is not a Pariharic says to a Pariharic, "O Arya!
Come, you and I will go together and take prasna, drink, food, or something
tasty, and after that, we will eat and drink separately," whoever says this or
approves of the one who says it, upon consuming the places of offense mentioned
in the above 128 sutras, incurs a minor monthly penance.  Discussion - The words
Pariharic and Apariharic are used in Uddeshak 2, Sutra 40. There, their meaning
is respectively, one who does not incur offense and one who incurs offense. But
here, their meaning is respectively, a monk who observes penance, whose food is
separate, and a pure monk who is free from penance.  Churni - "The one who
performs penance is Apariharic, the one who does not perform penance is
Pariharic, from one month to six months."  The monk who performs penance is
called "Pariharic," he is avoided by all the monks of the Gachchha except the
Acharya, only the Acharya interacts with him, other monks of the Gachchha cannot
interact with him in any way, thus he is to be avoided by the Gachchha, hence he
is called Pariharic.  Question - Who can perform this penance? Answer - 1. One
who is strong and well-built, 2. One who is patient, 3. One who is knowledgeable
about the scriptures, 4. One who is capable. Even if the first three qualities
are present, if one is a child, old, or sick, then he is considered incapable.
Therefore, only a young and healthy person should be considered capable.
Question - What kind of penance does he perform? Answer - He performs a penance
of one month to six months.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha uddezaka ] [121 jo bhikSu mala tyAga karake tIna se adhika nAvApUrakoM
dvArA yadi zuddhi karatA hai to vaha vItarAga kI AjJAbhaMga Adi doSoM kA pAtra
hotA hai  /  tIsare uddezaka ke aMta meM mala-mUtra tyAgane yogya aura ayogya
bhUmiyoM kA kathana hai  /  yogya sthaMDila ke abhAva meM dina va rAtri meM
apane sthAna para apane hI bhAjana meM mala tyAga kI vidhi kA nirdeza kiyA gayA
hai  /  isa caturtha uddezaka ke bhI ina aMtima 10 sUtroM meM uccAra- prasravaNa
- pariSThApana ke viSaya meM kahA hai  /  kintu yahA~ yogya sthaMDilabhUmi meM
hI jAkara malatyAga kI vidhi saMbaMdhI sUcanA dete hue prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai
/  pArihArika saha bhikSArtha gamana prAyazcitta 128. je bhikkhU aparihArie NaM
"parihAriyaM" vaejjA - ehi ajjo ! tumaM ca ahaM ca. emao asaNaM vA pANaM vA
khAimaM vA sAimaM vA paDiggAhettA tao pacchA patteyaM patteyaM bhokkhAmo vA
pAhAmo vA, jo taM evaM vayai, vayaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  taM sevamANe Avajjai
mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM ugghAiyaM  /  128. jo bhikSu apArihArika hai, vaha
pArihArika se yaha kahe ki he Arya ! Ao tuma aura maiM eka sAtha jAkara prazana,
pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karake usake bAda donoM alaga-alaga khAyeMge
pIyeMge, isa prakAra jo pArihArika se kahatA hai yA kahane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  uparyukta 128 sUtroM meM kahe gaye doSasthAnoM kA sevana karane
para laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  vivecana - uddezaka 2 sUtra 40 meM
pArihArika aura apArihArika zabda kA prayoga huA hai  /  vahAM inakA artha
kramazaH doSa na lagAne vAlA aura doSa lagAne vAlA hai  /  kintu yahAM kramazaH
jisakA AhAra alaga hai, aisA prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA sAdhu aura
prAyazcitta rahita zuddha sAdhu, ye artha hai cUrNi - " pAyacchittaM aNAvaNNo
aparihArio, AvaNNo mAsiyaM jAva chammAsiyaM so parihArio  / " prAyazcitta ke
nimitta tapazcaryA karane vAlA sAdhu " pArihArika" kahA jAtA hai, prAcArya ke
atirikta gaccha ke sabhI sAdhutroM dvArA vaha parihArya hotA hai, usake sAtha
kevala prAcArya hI vArtAlApa Adi vyavahAra karate haiM, gaccha ke anya sAdhu
usake sAtha kisI prakAra kA vyavahAra nahIM kara sakate, isa prakAra vaha gaccha
ke liye pariharaNIya hai, ataH vaha pArihArika kahA jAtA hai  /  prazna - yaha
prAyazcitta vahana kauna kara sakatA hai ? uttara- 1. sudRDha saMhanana vAlA ho,
2. dhairyavAn ho, 3. gItArtha ho, 4. samartha ho - pUrva ke tIna guNa hote hue
bhI bAla vRddha yA rogI ho to vaha asamartha kahalAtA hai  /  ataH jo taruNa
evaM svastha ho use hI samartha samajhanA cAhiye  /  prazna - vaha kauna-sA
prAyazcitta vahana karatA hai ? uttara - ekamAsika yAvat chaH mAsika prAyazcitta
vahana karatA hai  /

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[122] Question - What austerity does he perform? Answer - He performs at least
an ekantar fast and eats ayambil on the day of parana. Question - In this sutra,
it is said that there is a penance for going on a pilgrimage with him, and there
are also penances for other types of behavior with him? [Nishīthasūtra Answer -
There is a laghumasik penance for performing eight actions with him, the eighth
being going on a pilgrimage with him. Therefore, it should be understood that
the previous seven actions are also included with him. In addition to these,
there are two more actions for which there is a guru-masik penance. Question -
What are those ten actions? Answer - 1. Talking to each other. 2. Asking about
the meaning of the sutras. 4. Getting up, sitting down, etc. together. 3.
Listening to and reciting memorized knowledge such as swadhyay. 5. Vandan-
behavior. 7. Doing work such as copying. 9. Giving and taking food. Question -
If he wants to say something, ask something, or criticize something, to whom
should he (the pariharik) sadhu go? 6. Giving and taking utensils, etc. 8.
Making a sanghada for both and going on a pilgrimage, etc. 10. Sitting in one
mandala and performing prahar, i.e., eating together. Answer - If he has to do
anything, he should do it with the permission of the acharya, criticize him, ask
him questions, and tell him about his food. If he is in distress or has a
disease, etc., he should also tell the acharya. Another sadhu cannot go to him,
speak to him, or ask him questions, etc. Question - If someone sees him in a
sick state, who should he inform? Answer - If he is in unbearable pain at any
time in the upashraya, he should tell the acharya himself. If he is unable to
tell the acharya due to unbearable pain, another sadhu should go and inform the
acharya about his pain. Later, the acharya should appoint someone to serve him.
Question - If the bhikshu who has gone on a pilgrimage, etc., falls somewhere on
the way, is it necessary to take the acharya's permission to serve him? Answer -
No, in such a situation, any sadhu can serve him. After bringing him to the
place, the acharya is informed and other actions such as criticism are
performed, and he is also served until he is healthy. He should do as much work
as he can do himself. And the work that he cannot do, another sadhu should do
according to the acharya's instructions. Question - Why is he treated in this
way? If someone serves him always, is there any fault?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 122] prazna - vaha kyA tapasyA karatA hai ? uttara- kama se kama ekAMtara
upavAsa karatA hai aura pAraNe ke dina AyaMbila karatA hai  /  prazna- isa sUtra
meM to gocarI sAtha jAne kA prAyazcitta kahA hai tathA aura bhI usake sAtha anya
aneka prakAra ke vyavahAra karane para prAyazcitta AtA hai ? [ nizIthasUtra
uttara - usake sAtha ATha kArya karane para laghumAsika prAyazcitta prAtA hai,
jisameM AThavAM sAtha gorI jAne kA hai  /  ataH pUrva ke sAta kArya bhI usake
sAtha aMtarbhAvita haiM, aisA samajha lenA cAhiye  /  inake atirikta do kArya
aura haiM jinake karane para gurumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  prazna - ve dasa
kArya kauna se haiM ? uttara - 1. Apasa meM vArtAlApa karanA  /  2. sUtrArtha
pUchanA | 4. sAtha meM uThanA baiThanA Adi  /  3. svAdhyAya Adi kaMThastha jJAna
sunanA aura sunAnA  /  5. vaMdana- vyavahAra  /  7. pratilekhana Adi kArya
karanA  /  9. AhAra denA lenA  /  prazna --- kucha bhI kahanA ho, pUchanA ho,
AlocanA karanA ho to vaha ( pArihArika ) sAdhu kisake pAsa kare ? 6. pAtra Adi
upakaraNa denA lenA  /  8. donoM kA saMghADA banA kara gocarI Adi jAnA  /  10.
eka maNDalI meM baiThakara prahAra karanA arthAt sAtha meM khAnA  /  uttara -
use kucha bhI kAma karanA ho to AcArya kI AjJA lekara kare, unake pAsa AlocanA
kare, unase hI prazna pUche aura unheM hI AhAra batAve, kaSTa Ane para yA roga
Adi hone para bhI AcArya se hI khe| dUsare sAdhu kA usake pAsa jAnA, kahanA yA
pUchanA Adi nahIM ho sakatA  /  prazna- yadi koI use rugNa avasthA meM dekhe to
kise sUcanA de ? uttara - upAzraya meM kisI samaya use asahya takalIpha ho to
vaha svayaM AcArya se kahe  /  yadi vaha asahya vedanA ke kAraNa AcArya ko na
kaha sake to anya sAdhu jAkara usakI vedanA ke saMbaMdha meM AcArya ko jAnakArI
de, bAda meM usakI sevA ke liye prAcArya jise niyukta kareM vaha usakI sevA kare
/  prazna- gocarI Adi ke liye gayA huA vaha bhikSu mArga meM kahIM gira jAye to
usakI sevA ke lie AcArya kI prAjJA lenA Avazyaka hai ? uttara - nahIM, aisI
paristhiti meM koI bhI sAdhu usakI sevA kara sakatA hai  /  sthAna para le Ane
ke bAda AcArya ko jAnakArI denA aura AlocanA karanA Adi kArya kiye jAte haiM
aura svastha na ho taba taka usakI sevA bhI kI jAtI hai  /  jitanA kArya vaha
svayaM kara sakatA ho utanA vaha svayaM kare  /  aura jo kArya vaha na kara sake
vaha anya sAdhu AcArya kI AjJAnusAra kare  /  prazna - usake sAtha aisA
vyavahAra kyoM kiyA jAtA hai, yadi koI usakI sevA sadA kare to kyA doSa hai ?

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fourth Uddeshak] [123 Answer- This solution is explained by an example. Just as
an animal is taken out of the village to graze when it is able to graze on its
own. If it is weak, the shepherd brings grass etc. to it at home. Similarly, one
should understand in relation to the service of the Pariharic. Question- Why is
such severe penance and harsh treatment done to him? Answer- The one who commits
a sin is given the same penance. Parihar penance is given for the purification
of the fault and the purification of the self, which is accepted voluntarily.
This will also remind or frighten other monks that such a penance is done for
such a fault. In addition, doing this penance also leads to the destruction of
karma. Question- The penance of criticism is done in solitude, so how can there
be clear information. So that other monks become afraid and beware of such
faults? Answer- Before establishing this penance bearing form, the Shraman
community is informed collectively and complete information about the sin is
given, after giving full explanation, he is withdrawn for self-purification by
stopping dealing with him. He is counted under the Acharya's subordination and
obedience. One day before the penance bearing, the Acharya himself goes with him
and gives him (Manojnya-Vigaya-Yukt) food. In this way, this penance is given by
informing the fourfold community with respect and this penance is started for
the sake of this penance. The Shraman community is given complete information
about the penance of that Pariharic, what kind of behavior can be done in what
circumstances and when. _ Question- If the enthusiasm for doing penance
decreases due to not taking Vigaya even in Parana, then is it necessary to do
that penance even without desire? Answer- The Acharya can do as appropriate
after knowing the whole situation. It is the responsibility of the Acharya to
encourage him to do penance, to do his Sarana, Varana or to do penance. If they
deem it necessary, they can also give permission for Vigaya and they also go
with him to give food for special satisfaction. Question- Is such penance done
for all small and big faults? Answer- No, in the penance of faults related to
Uttar Guna and in the penance of heinous, medium penance related to Mula Guna,
only penance penance is given. In the penance of the consumption of excellent
faults related to Mula Guna, monthly or up to six months "Parihar penance" is
given. It is also given to the worthy. If he is not worthy, ordinary penance is
given, and ordinary penance is given to the Sadhvos. Parihar penance is not
given. is given. Question- Is this penance greater than the penance of the hole?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha uddezaka] [123 uttara-isakA samAdhAna dRSTAMta dvArA samajhAyA jAtA
hai| jisa prakAra pazu svayaM carane jAne ke liye samartha hotA hai taba taka
use jAne ke liye gAMva ke bAhara nikAla diyA jAtA hai  /  yadi vaha azakta hotA
hai to gopAlaka use ghara para hI ghAsa Adi lAkara detA hai  /  isI prakAra
pArihArika kI sevA ke saMbaMdha meM samajhanA caahiye| prazna-isa prakAra kA
kaThora tapa aura kaThora vyavahAra usake sAtha kyoM kiyA jAtA hai ? uttara-jo
jaisA doSa sevana karatA hai use vaisA hI prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai| doSazuddhi
evaM Atmazuddhi ke liye svecchA se svIkAra karane para parihAra tapa diyA jAtA
hai  /  isase anya sAdhuoM ko bhI yaha dhyAna rahe yA bhaya rahe ki isa taraha
ke doSa kA aisA prAyazcitta hotA hai| isake atirikta isa tapa ke karane para
karmoM kI nirjarA bhI hotI hai| prazna-AlocanA prAyazcitta to ekAMta meM kiyA
jAtA hai ataH spaSTa jAnakArI kaise ho sakatI hai  /  jisase dUsare sAdhu
bhayabhIta bana kara vaise doSoM se sAvadhAna raheM ? uttara-isa prAyazcitta
vahana rUpa sthApanA meM sthApita karane ke pUrva sAmUhika rUpa se zramaNa
samudAya ko sUcanA dI jAtI hai aura doSasevana kI pUrI jAnakArI dI jAtI hai,
pUrNa spaSTIkaraNa karane ke bAda usake sAtha vyavahAra baMda karake use
Atmazuddhi ke liye nivRtta kiyA jAtA hai  /  vaha AcArya adhInatA meM va AjJA
meM ginA jAtA hai| tapa vahana ke eka dina pUrva svayaM prAcArya usake sAtha
jAkara use (manojJa-vigaya yukta) AhAra dilavAte haiN| isa prakAra Adara pUrvaka
caturvidha saMgha ko jAnakArI dekara yaha prAyazcitta dekara isa prAyazcitta ke
nimitta tapa prArambha kiyA jAtA hai  /  usa pArihArika ke prAcAra kI tapa kI
tathA kaba kisa paristhiti meM kyA kyA vyavahAra kiyA jA sakatA hai, ityAdi kI
pUrI jAnakArI zramaNasamudAya ko dI jAtI hai  /  _ prazna-pAraNe meM bhI vigaya
na lene se tapa karane kA utsAha maMda ho jAe to binA icchA ke bhI vaha tapa
karanA jarUrI hotA hai ? uttara-AcArya sArI sthiti kI jAnakArI karake yathAyogya
kara sakate haiN| usakI sAraNA, vAraNA karanA yA prAyazcitta karane ke lie
utsAha bar3hAnA Adi sArA uttaradAyitva prAcArya kA hotA hai  /  Avazyaka samajhe
to ve vigaya kI chUTa bhI de sakate haiM aura vizeSa saMtuSTi ke lie sAtha meM
jAkara AhAra bhI dilAte haiN| prazna-choTe-moTe sabhI doSoM kA aisA hI
prAyazcitta hotA hai ? uttara-nahIM, uttaraguNa sambandhI doSoM ke prAyazcitta
meM tathA mUlaguNa sambandhI jaghanya, madhyama prAyazcitta meM kevala tapa
prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai| mUlaguNa sambandhI utkRSTa doSa sevana ke prAyazcitta
meM mAsika yAvat chaHmAsI "parihAra tapa" kA prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai| vaha bhI
yogya ko diyA jAtA hai| yogya na hone para sAdhAraNa tapa diyA jAtA hai, tathA
sAdhvo ko sAdhAraNa tapa kA hI prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai| parihAra tapa kA
prAyazcitta nahIM  /  diyA jAtA hai| prazna-kyA cheda prAyazcitta se bhI yaha
prAyazcitta bar3A hai ?

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[124] [Nishīth Sūtra] Answer- No, Chhed Prāyaśchitta is given when someone
repeatedly commits an immoral act, when they remain in the sin for a long time,
when they are criticized by the public, or when they lack the strength to
perform penance. This is a type of Prāyaśchitta different from Tapa. Chhed
Prāyaśchitta can be given for a minimum of one day and a maximum of six months.
If more Prāyaśchitta is required, then the fifth "Mūla" (new initiation)
Prāyaśchitta is given. However, there is no provision for giving more than six
months of Prāyaśchitta for Tapa, Parihāra Tapa, or Dīkshāchhed. Question- Is
anyone currently given Prāyaśchitta by this method? Answer- Due to the lack of
specific Sanhanan etc., currently, Prāyaśchitta of ordinary Tapa is given, and
further Chhed and Mūla (new initiation) Prāyaśchitta is also given, but the said
Parihāra Tapa Prāyaśchitta is not given. For hundreds of years after Vīra
Nirvāṇa, Parihāra Tapa Prāyaśchitta was given. In the original text of Chhed
Sūtras, there are many provisions related to Parihārik Sadhus in many places,
and detailed descriptions are also found in the Bhāṣya texts. If there is a
possibility of Parihārik and Aparihārik appearing together, then one should stop
and the other should be separated. The Sūtra states that Prāyaśchitta is for
Aparihārik. If Parihārik also does this, then he also receives Prāyaśchitta,
this should also be understood. Summary of the Fourth Uddeshak To subdue the
king. Sūtra 2 To subdue the king's protector. Sūtra 3 To subdue the city
protector. Sūtra 4 To subdue the guild protector. Sūtra 5 To subdue the all-
protector. Sūtra 6-10 To praise the king etc. Sūtra 11-15 To attract the king
etc. to your side. Sūtra 16 To attract the village protector. Sūtra 17 To
attract the country protector. Sūtra 18 To attract the border protector. Sūtra
19 To attract the state protector. Sūtra 20 To attract the all-protector. Sūtra
21-25 To praise the village protector etc. Sūtra 26-30 To attract the village
protector etc. to your side. Sūtra 31 To eat food with awareness. Sūtra 1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 124] [nizIthasUtra uttara-nahIM, kisI anAcAra kA aneka bAra sevana karane para,
jyAdA lambe samaya taka doSa sevana karane para, lokApavAda hone para athavA
tapasyA karane kI zakti na hone para cheda prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai  /  yaha
parihAra tapa se bhinna prakAra kA prAyazcitta hai  /  cheda prAyazcitta
jaghanya eka dina kA, utkRSTa chaha mAsa kA diyA jA sakatA hai| isase jyAdA
prAyazcitta Avazyaka hone para pAThavA~ "mUla" (naI dIkSA kA) prAyazcitta diyA
jAtA hai| kintu kevala tapa, parihAra tapa yA dIkSAcheda kA prAyazcitta chaha
mAsa se adhika dene kA vidhAna nahIM hai  /  prazna-kyA vartamAna meM kisI ko
isa vidhi se prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai ? uttara-viziSTa saMhanana Adi ke abhAva
ke kAraNa vartamAna meM sAdhAraNa tapa kA prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai aura usake
Age cheda aura mUla (naI dIkSA) prAyazcitta bhI diyA jAtA hai kintu ukta
parihAra tapa kA prAyazcitta nahIM diyA jAtA hai| vIra nirvANa ke bAda saikar3oM
varSoM taka parihAra tapa prAyazcitta diyA jAtA rahA  /  cheda sUtroM ke mUla
pATha meM aneka jagaha pArihArika sAdhu sambandhI aneka vidhAna haiM tathA
bhASya granthoM meM bhI vistRta varNana milatA hai| pArihArika va apArihArika kA
kadAcit eka sAtha gocarI nikalane kA yoga bana jAya to eka ko ruka kara dUsare
ko alaga ho jAnA cAhie  /  sUtra meM apArihArika ke lie prAyazcitta kahA gayA
hai| pArihArika bhI yadi aisA kare to use bhI prAyazcitta pAtA hai, yaha bhI
samajha lenA cAhie  /  caturtha uddezaka kA sArAMza rAjA ko vaza meM karanA  /
sUtra 2 rAjA ke rakSaka ko vaza meM krnaa| sUtra 3 nagararakSaka ko vaza meM
krnaa| sUtra 4 nigamarakSaka ko vaza meM karanA  /  sUtra 5 sarvarakSaka ko vaza
meM krnaa| sUtra 6-10 rAjA Adi ke gUNagrAma krnaa| sUtra 11-15 rAjA Adi ko apanI
ora AkarSita karanA  /  sUtra 16 grAmarakSaka ko AkarSita karanA  /  sUtra 17
dezarakSaka ko AkarSita karanA  /  sUtra 18 sImArakSaka ko AkarSita karanA  /
sUtra 19 rAjyarakSaka ko AkarSita krnaa| sUtra 20 sarvarakSaka ko AkarSita
karanA  /  sUtra 21-25 grAmarakSaka Adi ke guNagrAma karanA  /  sUtra 26-30
grAmarakSaka Adi ko apanI ora AkarSita karanA  /  sUtra 31 sacitta dhAnya kA
AhAra karanA  /  sUtra 1

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Uddeshaka  **[125 Sutras]**  **32.** Taking milk and other substances
without the permission of the Acharya or other authorized person. **33.** Going
out for begging without informing the established community. **34.** Entering
the abode of Nirgranthis without proper procedure. **35.** Placing punishments
or obstacles in the path of Nirgranthis. **36.** Creating new conflicts. **37.**
Rekindling extinguished conflicts. **38.** Laughing with a wide open mouth.
**39-48.** Giving or taking the Sanghāḍa (robe) from or to the following five:
* Pārśvastha (those who are near death)     * Avasanna (those who are depressed)
* Kuśīla (those who are of bad character)     * Samsakta (those who are attached
to worldly things)     * Nitya (those who are always engaged in worldly
activities) **49-63.** Taking food or other things with hands that are
contaminated with sentient substances like water, earth, plants, etc.
**64-117.** Performing bodily functions on each other by Sadhus. **118-119.**
Not recording the three Uccāra-Prasravaṇa-Bhūmi (places for excretion) at dusk.
**120.** Excreting in a place that is too small or too large. **121.** Excreting
without proper procedure. **122.** Not wiping the anus after excreting. **123.**
Wiping the anus with wood or other materials. **124.** Not purifying the anus.
**125.** Purifying oneself on the excrement itself. **126.** Purifying oneself
at a distance that is too far. **127.** Purifying oneself with more than three
breaths of water. **128.** Going out for begging with someone who is performing
Prāyaścitta (atonement).  **Etc.** These activities lead to Laghu Māsika
Prāyaścitta (minor monthly atonement).  **The topics of these 55 Sutras are
mentioned in the following Āgamas:**  * **Sutra 31:** Eating sentient seeds,
etc. is an act of misconduct. - Daśa. A. 3, Ga. 7 * **Sutra 32:** Taking
substances for Nirgranthis is inconceivable. - Daśa. D. 8, Su. 62 * **Sutra
36-37:** Creating new conflicts or rekindling extinguished conflicts is
considered an Asamādhi (unmindful) state. - Daśa. D. 1 * **Sutra 49-63:**
Prohibition of taking food from those whose hands are contaminated with sentient
water, earth, plants, etc.     * (a) Daśa. A. 5, U. 1, Ga. 33-34     * (b) Āca.
Śru. 2, A. 1, U. 6, Sutras 64 to 87, 89 to 95, 112 to 116 * **Sutra 64-117:**
Prohibition of performing bodily functions on each other by Sadhus. - Āca. Śru.
2, A. 14 * **Sutra 118:** Recording the Uccāra-Prasravaṇa-Bhūmi. - Utt. A. 26,
Ga. 39 * **Sutra 120:** Excreting in a large Uccāra-Prasravaṇa-Bhūmi. - Utt. A.
24, Ga. 18

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha uddezaka] [125 sUtra 32 prAcAryAdi kI AjJA ke binA dugdhAdi vikRtiyA~
lenaa| sUtra 33 sthApanAkuloM ko jAne binA bhikSAcaryA ke lie jAnA  /  sUtra 34
nirgranthiyoM ke upAzraya meM avidhi se praveza karanA  /  sUtra 35
nirgranthiyoM ke prAgamanapatha meM daNDAdi rakha denaa| sUtra 36 naye kalaha
utpanna karanA  /  sUtra 37 upazAnta kalaha ko punaH utpanna karanA  /  sUtra 38
muha phAr3a-phAr3akara ha~sanA  /  /  sUtra 39-48 pArzvastha, avasanna, kuzIla,
saMsakta, nityaka ina pA~ca ko apanA saMghADA denA yA unakA saMghADA lenaa|
sUtra 49-63 apkAya, pRthvIkAya aura vanaspatikAya Adi sacitta padArthoM se lipta
hAthoM dvArA AhArAdi lenaa| sUtra 64-117 sAdhu-sAdhu kA paraspara
zarIraparikarma karanA  /  sUtra 118-119 saMdhyA samaya tIna uccAra-
prasravaNabhUmi kA pratilekhana na krnaa| sUtra 120 kama lambI-caur3I bhUmi meM
mala-mUtra tyAganA  /  sUtra 121 pravidhi se mala-mUtra tyAganA  /  sUtra 122
mala-mUtra tyAga kara maladvAra na pauMchanA  /  sUtra 123 maladvAra ko kASThAdi
se pauMchanA  /  sUtra 124 maladvAra kI zuddhi nahIM karanA  /  sUtra 125 mala
para hI zuddhi krnaa| sUtra 126 adhika dUrI para zuddhi karanA  /  sUtra 127
tIna pasalI se adhika pAnI se zuddhi karanA  /  sUtra 128 prAyazcitta vahana
karane vAle ke sAtha bhikSAcaryA jAnA  /  ityAdi pravRttiyoM kA laghumAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai| isa uddezaka ke 55 sUtroM ke viSayoM kA kathana nimna
AgamoM meM hai, yathAsUtra 31 sacitta bIja Adi kA AhAra karanA anAcAra hai  /
-dazA0 a0 3, gA0 7 sUtra 32 nirgrantha-nirgranthiyoM ke lie vikRtiyA~ lenA
akalpanIya hai| -dazA0 da0 8, su0 62 sUtra 36-37 nayA kalaha utpanna karanA yA
upazAnta kalaha ko punaH uttejanA denA asamAdhi sthAna kahA hai| -dazA0 da01
sUtra 49-63 sacitta pAnI, miTTI, vanaspati Adi se lipta hAtha vAloM se AhAra
lene kA niSedha --(ka) daza. a. 5, u. 1, gA. 33-34 - (kha) AcA. zru. 2, a. 1, u.
6, sUtra 64 se 87, 89 se 95, 112 se 116 sAdhu-sAdhu ke paraspara zarIra-
parikarma kA niSedha  /  -AcA. zru 2, a. 14 sUtra 118 uccAra-prasravaNabhUmi kA
pratilekhana karanA  /  -utta. a. 26, gA. 39 sUtra 120 vistIrNa uccAra-
prasravaNabhUmi meM mala-mUtra tyAganA  /  -utta. a. 24, gA. 18

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishoth Sutra 126  **Fourth Uddeshak Ends**  The topics of the following 37
Sutras of this Uddeshak are not mentioned in other Agamas, such as:  * Sutra
1-30: Subduing kings, etc. * Sutra 33: Going for begging without knowing the
established families. * Sutra 34: Entering the shelter of Nirgranthis
unlawfully. * Sutra 35: Placing punishment, etc., in the path of Nirgranthis. *
Sutra 38: Laughing with a wide open mouth. * Sutra 39-48: Giving one's own
Sanghāḍa to Passathādis or taking their Sanghāḍa. * Sutra 88: Removing worms
from the anus. * Sutra 89: Cutting each other's nails without reason. * Sutra
96-98: Performing rituals for teeth. * Sutra 99-105: Performing rituals for
lips. * Sutra 105-111: Performing rituals for eyes. * Sutra 117: Covering each
other's heads while traveling from village to village. * Sutra 119: Not
transcribing the three Uccāra-Prasravaṇa-Bhūmis. * Sutra 121: Discarding excreta
and urine through a proper method. * Sutra 122: Not wiping the anus after
discarding excreta and urine. * Sutra 123: Wiping the anus with wood, etc. *
Sutra 124: Not purifying the anus. * Sutra 125: Purifying oneself with excreta
and urine. * Sutra 126: Purifying oneself by going further away from the place
of discarding excreta and urine. * Sutra 127: Purifying oneself with more than
three ribs of water after discarding excreta and urine. * Sutra 128: Going to
Gocharī with a Parihārik.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [nizothasUtra 126] isa uddezaka ke nimna 37 sUtroM ke viSayoM kA kathana anya
AgamoM meM nahIM hai, yathAsUtra 1-30 rAjA Adi ko vaza meM krnaa| sUtra 33
sthApanAkuloM ko jAne binA bhikSAcaryA ke lie jaanaa| sUtra 34 nirgranthiyoM ke
upAzraya meM avidhi se praveza karanA  /  sUtra 35 nirgranthiyoM ke Agamanapatha
meM daNDAdi rakha denaa| sUtra 38 . muMha phAr3a-phAr3akara ha~sanA  /  sUtra
39-48 pAsatthAdi ko apanA saMghADA denA yA unakA saMghADA lenaa| sUtra 88
maladvAra se kRmi nikAlanA  /  sUtra 89 paraspara eka dUsare ke akAraNa nakha
kATanA  /  sUtra 96-98 dAMtoM kA parikarma karanA  /  sUtra 99-105 hoThoM kA
parikarma krnaa| sUtra 105-111 cakSu kA parikarma krnaa| sUtra 117 grAmAnugrAma
vihAra karate samaya paraspara eka dUsare kA mastaka DhaMkanA  /  sUtra 119 tIna
uccAra-prasravaNabhUmiyoM kA pratilekhana na krnaa| sUtra 121 mala-mUtra
pravidhi se tyAganA  /  sUtra 122 mala-mUtra tyAga kara mala dvAra na pauMchanA
/  sUtra 123 maladvAra ko kASTha Adi se pauNchnaa| sUtra 124 maladvAra kI zuddhi
na krnaa| sUtra 125 mala-mUtra para hI zuddhi karanA  /  sUtra 126 mala-mUtra
tyAgane ke sthAna se adhika dUra jAkara zuddhi krnaa| sUtra 127 mala-mUtra
tyAgakara tIna pasalI se adhika pAnI lekara zuddhi karanA  /  sUtra 128
pArihArika ke sAtha gocarI jaanaa| ||cauthaa uddezaka samApta  //

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Uddesaka: Penance for Staying Near the Root of a Tree  1. A monk who,
with awareness, stands or sits near the root of a tree, and looks around, or
approves of someone looking around. 2. A monk who, with awareness, stands or
sits near the root of a tree, and performs Kayotsarga, sleeps, or sits, or
approves of someone doing so. 3. A monk who, with awareness, stands or sits near
the root of a tree, and eats, drinks, or consumes food or delicacies, or
approves of someone doing so. 4. A monk who, with awareness, stands or sits near
the root of a tree, and recites or listens to a discourse, or approves of
someone doing so. 5. A monk who, with awareness, stands or sits near the root of
a tree, and performs a Samaya, or approves of someone doing so. 6. A monk who,
with awareness, stands or sits near the root of a tree, and sees a Samaya, or
approves of someone seeing it. 7. A monk who, with awareness, stands or sits
near the root of a tree, and hears a Samaya, or approves of someone hearing it.
8. A monk who, with awareness, stands or sits near the root of a tree, and
approves of a Samaya, or approves of someone approving it. 9. A monk who, with
awareness, stands or sits near the root of a tree, and speaks about a Samaya, or
approves of someone speaking about it. 10. A monk who, with awareness, stands or
sits near the root of a tree, and accepts a Samaya, or approves of someone
accepting it. 11. A monk who, with awareness, stands or sits near the root of a
tree, and observes a Samaya, or approves of someone observing it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAMcavAM uddezaka vRkSaskandha ke nikaTa Thaharane Adi kA prAyazcitta 1. je
bhikkhU sacitta-rukkhamUlaMsi ThiccA Aloejja vA, paloejja vA, AloeMtaM vA
paloeMtaM sAijjai  /  2. je bhikkhU sacitta-rukkhamUlaMsi ThiccA ThANaM vA, seja
vA, NisIhiyaM vA ceei, ceetaM vA saaijji| 3. je bhikkhU sacitta-
rukkhamUlaMsiThiccA asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA AhArei, AhArataM
vA sAijjai  /  4. je bhikkhU sacitta-rukkhamUlaMsi ThiccA uccAraM vA, pAsavaNaM
vA pariTuvei, pariveMtaM vA saaijji| 5. je bhikkhU sacitta-rukkhamUlaMsi ThiccA
sajjhAyaM karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  6. je bhikkhU sacitta-rukkhamUlaMsi
ThiccA sajjhAyaM udisai, udisaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  7. je bhikkhU sacitta-
rukkhamUlaMsi ThiccA sajjhAyaM samuddisai, samudisaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  8. je
bhikkhU sacita-rukhamUlaMsi ThiccA sajjhAyaM aNujANai, aNujANaMtaM vA sAijjai  /
9. je bhikkhU sacitta-rukkhamUlaMsi ThiccA sajjhAyaM vAei vAyaMtaM vA sAijjai  /
10. je bhikkhU sacitta-rukkhamUlaMsi ThiccA sajjhAyaM paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  11. je bhikkhU sacitta-rukkhamUlaMsi ThiccA sajjhAyaM pariyaTTei,
pariyataM vA saaijji| 1. jo bhikSu sacitta vRkSa ke mUla meM (vRkSaskaMdha ke
pAsa kI sacitta pRthvI para) khar3A rahakara yA baiThakara eka bAra yA aneka
bAra (idhara udhara) dekhatA hai yA dekhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 2. jo
bhikSu sacitta vRkSa ke mUla meM Thaharakara kAyotsarga, zayana karatA hai yA
baiThatA hai yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 3. jo bhikSu sacitta
vRkSa ke mUla meM Thaharakara azana pAna khAdya yA svAdya kA AhAra karatA hai yA
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 4. jo bhikSu sacitta vRkSa ke mUla meM
Thaharakara uccAra-prasravaNa paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai|

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[128] 5. A monk who, with mindfulness, dwells at the root of a tree and engages
in self-study, or approves of one who does so. 6. A monk who, with mindfulness,
dwells at the root of a tree and intends to engage in self-study, or approves of
one who does so. 7. A monk who, with mindfulness, dwells at the root of a tree
and sets out to engage in self-study, or approves of one who does so. 8. A monk
who, with mindfulness, dwells at the root of a tree and instructs in self-study,
or approves of one who does so. 9. A monk who, with mindfulness, dwells at the
root of a tree and recites the meaning of the sutras, or approves of one who
does so. 10. A monk who, with mindfulness, dwells at the root of a tree and
listens to the meaning of the sutras, or approves of one who does so. 11. A monk
who, with mindfulness, dwells at the root of a tree and repeats self-study, or
approves of one who does so. (He incurs the minor monthly atonement.) Discussion
'Saccitta rukkhamuulensi' - "Jassa saccitta rukkassa hatthi-pay-pamanno pehulleṇ
khando tassa savvato jaav rayanippamaṇā tāv saccittabhūmi." - Churni If the
trunk of a tree is as thick as an elephant's foot, then the ground around it for
a distance of one hand is considered saccitta. If the trunk is thicker, then the
ground near it is considered saccitta in proportion to its thickness. Therefore,
standing, sitting, or lying down in such a place would violate the earth-body,
and touching the trunk of the tree carelessly would violate the plant-body.
'Thaṇam-sejj-ṇisihiyam' "Thaṇam-kaussaggo, vasahi nimittan sejjā, visam-thaṇ
nimittanṇisihiyā." - Churni "Saccitta-rukkhamūle, thaṇam-ṇisiyaṇ-tuyatṭaṇam
vāvi" ||1909|| Standing near the trunk of a tree is called thaṇam, lying down is
called sejjā, and sitting is called ṇisihiyā. "Sajjhayan" "Aṇuppēhā, dhammakahā,
pucchamō sajjhāyakaraṇam." - Churni The word "sajjhayan" includes contemplation,
discourse on the Dharma, and asking questions. "Uddeśa" - "Uddeśo abhinava
adhitass" - reciting a new text. "Samuddeśa" - "Athirassa samuddeśo" -
clarifying and purifying what has been memorized.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 128] [nizIthasUtra 5. jo bhikSu sacitta vRkSa ke mUla meM Thaharakara svAdhyAya
karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 6. jo bhikSu sacitta vRkSa ke
mUla meM Thaharakara svAdhyAya kA uddeza karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 7. jo bhikSu sacitta vRkSa ke mUla meM Thaharakara svAdhyAya kA
samuddeza karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 8. jo bhikSu
sacitta vRkSa ke mUla meM Thaharakara svAdhyAya kI AjJA detA hai yA dene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| _ 9. jo bhikSu sacitta vRkSa ke mUla meM Thaharakara
sUtrArtha kI vAcanA detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  10. jo
bhikSu sacitta vRkSa ke mUla meM Thaharakara sUtrArtha kI vAcanA grahaNa karatA
hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 11. jo bhikSu sacitta vRkSa
ke mUla meM Thaharakara svAdhyAya kA punarAvartana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta aAtA hai|) vivecana
'sacitta rukkhamUlaMsi'-"jassa sacitta rukkhassa hatthi-paya-pamANo pehulleNa
khaMdho tassa savvato jAva rayaNippamANA tAva sacittabhUmi  / " cUNi jisa vRkSa
ke skaMdha kI moTAI hAthI ke paira jitanI ho to usake cAroM ora eka hAtha
pramANa bhUmi sacitta hotI hai  /  isase adhika moTAI hone para usI anupAta se
skaMdha ke pAsa kI bhUmi sacitta hotI hai  /  ataH utane sthAna para khar3A
rahane se, baiThane se yA zayanAdi karane se pRthvIkAya kI virAdhanA hotI hai
tathA asAvadhAnI se vRkSaskaMdha kA sparza hone para vanaspatikAya kI virAdhanA
hotI hai  /  'ThANaM-sejja-NisIhiyaM'"ThANaM-kAussaggo, vasahi NimittaM sejjA,
visama-ThANa nnimittNnnisiihiyaa|"-cuunni "sacitta-rukkhamUle, ThANa-NisIyaNa-
tuyaTTaNaM vAvi"  // 1909 //  vRkSaskaMdha ke samIpa bhUmi para khar3e hone ko
sthAna, sone ko zayyA aura baiThane ko niSadyA karanA kahA gayA hai|
"sajjhAyaM""aNuppehA, dhammakahA, pucchAmo sajjhAyakaraNaM |"-cuurnni "sajjhAya"
zabda se anuprekSA, dharmakathA aura prazra pUchanA, inakA grahaNa huA hai|
"uddesa"-"uddeso abhinava adhItassa"-naye mUlapATha kI vAcanA denaa| "samuddesa"
- "athirassa samuddeso"-kaNThastha kiye hue ko pakkA va zuddha karAnA  /

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 63 **Fifth Uddeshak**  [129 "Anunna"-"Thiribhuyas Anunna"- After firmly and
purely memorizing, giving permission to teach others. —Ni. Chuni. The other
meanings of Uddeshak, Samuddeshak and Anunna are also given in the Haribhadraiya
Tika of the Anuyoagdwar Sutra, as follows: 1. Uddeshak- Giving permission to
read the Sutra. 2. Samuddeshak- Giving permission to stabilize. 3. Anunna-
Giving permission to teach others. "Vayana" giving the reading of the Sutra
meaning. "Padichhana" accepting the reading of the Sutra meaning. Here, the
prohibition and atonement for staying near the tree-trunk automatically proves
the prohibition and atonement for all other actions. Still, the prohibition and
atonement for doing many actions and doing Swadhyaya etc. is said through eleven
Sutras, expecting a detailed style. The atonement for getting a sheet stitched
from a householder 12. Je Bhikkhu Appano Sanghadi Annautthiyenam Va, Garathien
Va Sivvavei, Sivvavetam Va Saizzaj. 12. The monk who gets his sheet stitched by
a non-Jain or a householder, or approves of the one who gets it stitched.
_Vivechan- Jai Nikkarane Appana Sivveti, Karane Va Annautthiya-Garathiyehi
Sivvavei Tassa Masalhum.'  1921 Chuni. According to the discussion of the first
Uddeshak Sutra eleven, one should understand here that there are eight types of
householders, four being Swatithik and four being Paratithik. If a long and wide
cloth is not available as per need, or if it is torn due to some reason before
becoming 'Analam, Athiram Adharaniy', then it is necessary to stitch it. In that
case, one should stitch it themselves or get it stitched by another monk. If
there is no monk who can stitch, then one can get it stitched by a nun. There is
no atonement for this, but if it is stitched by a householder, then there is a
Laghumasik atonement. The atonement for making long strings of the sheet 13. Je
Bhikkhu Appano Sanghadiye Doh-Suttain Karei, Karentam Va Saizzaj. 13. The monk
who ties long strings to his sheet or approves of the one who ties them. (He
gets Laghumasik atonement.) Vivechan- If the sheet or Gati is short in length
and it is necessary to tie strings, then strings can be tied at four or,
preferably, six places, which makes one, two or, preferably, three knots.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 63 pAMcavAM uddezaka] [129 "aNuNNA"-"thirIbhUyassa aNuNNA"- sthira evaM zuddha
kaNThastha ho jAne para dUsare ko sikhAne kI AjJA denA  /  --ni. cuunni| uddeza,
samuddeza aura aNuNNA kA anya artha bhI anuyogadvAra sUtra kI haribhadrIya TIkA
meM kiyA hai, yathA 1. uddeza-sUtra par3hane ke liye AjJA denA  /  2. samuddeza-
sthira karane ke lie AjJA denA  /  3. aNuNNA-anya ko par3hAne kI AjJA denaa|
"vAyaNA"sUtrArtha kI vAcanA denA  /  "paDicchaNA" sUtrArtha kI vAcanA grahaNa
karanA  /  yahA~ vRkSa-skaMdha ke pAsa Thaharane ke niSedha aura prAyazcitta ke
vidhAna se anya sabhI kAryoM kA niSedha aura prAyazcitta svataH siddha ho jAtA
hai  /  phira bhI gyAraha sUtroM dvArA aneka kAryoM kA tathA svAdhyAyAdi karane
kA niSedha aura prAyazcitta vidhAna vistRta zailI kI apekSA se kahA gayA hai  /
gRhastha se caddara silavAne kA prAyazcitta 12. je bhikkhU appaNo saMghADi
aNNautthieNaM vA, gArathieNa vA sivvAvei, sivvAvetaM vA saaijji| 12. jo bhikSu
apanI cAdara ko anyatIthika se yA gRhastha se silavAtA hai yA silavAne vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| _ vivecana-jai NikkAraNe appaNA sivveti, kAraNe vA
aNNautthiya-gArathiehi sivvAveti tassa mAsalahuM  / ' 1921 cUNi  /  svatIthika
aura paratIthika cAra-cAra prakAra ke gRhastha hone se kula ATha prakAra ke
gRhastha prathama Daddezaka sUtra gyAraha ke vivecana ke anusAra yahA~ samajha
lenA cAhie  /  AvayakatAnusAra lambA caur3A kapar3A na milane para yA 'aNalaM,
athiraM adhAraNIya' hone ke pUrva kisI kAraNa se phaTa jAne para sInA Avazyaka
ho to svayaM sIve yA anya sAdhu se silAve aura koI bhI sAdhu sIne vAlA na ho to
sAdhvI se silA lene para prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai, kintu gRhastha se silAne
para laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  cAdara ke dIrghasUtra karane kA
prAyazcitta 13. je bhikkhU appaNo saMghADIe doha-suttAiM karei, kareMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  13. jo bhikSu apanI cAdara ke lambI DoriyA~ bA~dhatA hai yA bA~dhane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|)
vivecana-cAdara yA gAtI lambAI meM choTI ho aura bA~dhanA Avazyaka ho to cAra yA
utkRSTa chaH sthAnoM para DoriyA~ bA~dhI jA sakatI haiM, jisase eka, do yA
utkRSTa tIna ba~dhana ho jAte haiM  /

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [130] [Nishith Sutra] "Je te sanghaadibandhan suttha te dihaa na kaayavvaa"
- The binding thread should be no longer than four angulas (finger widths) after
tying the knots.  This is because a longer thread is difficult to handle,
leading to discomfort, and incurs the faults of "sammadda" and
"anegaruavadhrnaa" in the scriptural record. It also becomes a source of
ridicule for those with limited intelligence or curious minds.  Alternatively,
if the threads become tangled, it takes time to untangle them, leading to a loss
of the sutra's meaning. Therefore, if necessary, "chaurangulppamaanam, tamhaa
sanghaadi-suttagam kujjaa" - a binding thread of four angulas should be made.
Making it larger incurs penance.   ## Penance for Eating Leaves [14] Je bhikku
piumand-palasayam vaa, padol-palasayam vaa, billpalasayam vaa, meodag-viyaden
vaa usinodag-viyaden vaa sanphaaniy-sanphaaniy ahareï, aharantan vaa saïjjaï.
[14] A monk who eats neem leaves, padol-parval leaves, bilva leaves, or leaves
that have been repeatedly dipped in cold or hot water, or approves of such
eating, incurs a minor monthly penance.  ## Explanation If these dry leaves, as
mentioned in the sutra, are needed for medicinal purposes, then one should
search for them at a householder's home, where they are dried and cleaned for
personal use. If a monk washes these leaves himself and throws away the water,
it is considered a violation of life and an increase in carelessness, leading to
penance. It should be understood that this also includes washing other medicinal
leaves, flowers, etc. Here, the meaning of "padol" is not explained in the
Churni or Bhashya. In other sources like Kosha, it is interpreted as a specific
type of creeper and "parval leaves".  ## Penance for Using a Cloth to Wipe Feet
[15] Je bhikku paadihaariyam paayapuchhanam jaïtta "tamev rani
paccappini'ssamitti" sue paccappini'ï paccappini'ntam vaa saïjjaï. [16] Je
bhikku paadihaariyam paayapuchhanam jaïtta "sue paccappini'ssami" tti tamev
rayani paccappini'ï, paccappini'ntam vaa saïjjaï. [17] Je bhikku saagariy-
santiyam paayapuchhanam jaïtta "tamev rani paccappini'ssami" tti sue
paccappini'ï, paccappini'ntam vaa saïjjaï.  [15] A monk who uses a cloth to wipe
his feet and says, "I will use this cloth to wipe my feet," or approves of such
use, incurs a minor monthly penance. [16] A monk who uses a cloth to wipe his
feet and says, "I will use this cloth to wipe my feet," or approves of such use,
incurs a minor monthly penance. [17] A monk who uses a cloth to wipe his feet
and says, "I will use this cloth to wipe my feet," or approves of such use,
incurs a minor monthly penance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 130] [nizIthasUtra "je te saMghADibaMdhaNasuttA te dIhA Na kAyavvA" ye DoriyA~
bA~dha lene ke bAda cAra aMgula se jyAdA na bace, itanI hI lambI karanI caahie|
kyoMki adhika lambI hone se uThAne-rakhane meM ayatanA hotI hai, 'saMmaddA va
"aNegarUvadhraNA" nAmaka pratilekhanA doSa lagatA hai, alpabuddhi yA kutUhala
vRtti vAle ke upahAsa kA nimitta ho jAtA hai| athavA DoriyoM ke ulajha jAne para
sulajhAne meM samaya lagane ke kAraNa sUtrArtha kI hAni hotI hai| ataH Avazyaka
ho to "cauraMgulappamANaM, tamhA saMghADi-suttagaM kujjA" cAra aMgula lambe
baMdhana sUtra banAne cAhie, jyAdA bar3e banAne para prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /
patte khAne kA prAyazcitta 14. je bhikkhU piumaMda-palAsayaM vA, paDola-
palAsayaM vA, billapalAsayaM vA, mIodaga-viyaDeNa vA usiNodaga-viyaDeNa vA
saMphANiya-saMphANiya AhArei, AhAraMtaM vA sAijjai  /  14. jo bhikSu nIma ke
patte, paDola-paravala ke patte, bilva ke patte, acitta zItala yA uSNa jala meM
DubA-DubA kara-dho-dho kara khAtA hai yA khAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
(use laghumAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai  / ) vivecana-ye sUtra-nirdiSTa sUkhe
patte auSadha rUpa meM lenA Avazyaka ho to gRhastha ke yahA~ svayaM ke lie
sukAkara svaccha kiye hue mila jAe~ aisI gaveSaNA karanI caahie| unheM bhikSu
svayaM dhove aura dhoyA huA pAnI pheMke to jIva-virAdhanA va pramAda-vRddhi hone
se prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| anya bhI auSadha-yogya acitta patra-puSpa Adi kA
dhonA bhI isameM samAviSTa hai, aisA samajha lenA caahie| yahA~ "paDola' kA
artha cUNi evaM bhASya meM nahIM kiyA hai  /  anyatra koSa Adi meM 'velI vizeSa'
tathA "paravala ke patte'' artha kiyA gayA hai  /  pratyarpaNIya pAdapoMchana
sambandhI prAyazcitta 15. je bhikkhU pADihAriyaM pAyapuchaNaM jAittA "tameva
raNi paccappiNissAmitti" sue paccappiNai paccappiNaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  16. je
bhikkhU pADihAriyaM pAyapuchaNaM jAittA "sue paccappiNissAmi" tti tameva rayaNi
paccappiNai, paccappiNaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  17. je bhikkhU sAgAriya-saMtiyaM
pAyapuchaNaM jAittA "tameva raNi paccappiNissAmi" tti sue paccappiNai,
paccappiNaMtaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Uddeshak  **[131 18. A monk who, having requested a householder's
*Saagariy-Santiy* (foot-cloth), says "I will return it today," but returns it
the next day, or approves of the return being made the next day, incurs a *Rani*
(minor) *PaccAppini* (penance).**  **15. A monk who, having requested a
householder's foot-cloth, says "I will return it tomorrow," but returns it the
same day, or approves of the return being made the same day, incurs a *Rani*
(minor) *PaccAppini* (penance).**  **16. A monk who, having requested a
*Shayatar's* (layman's) foot-cloth, says "I will return it today," but returns
it tomorrow, or approves of the return being made tomorrow, incurs a *Rani*
(minor) *PaccAppini* (penance).**  **17. A monk who, having requested a
*Shayatar's* (layman's) foot-cloth, says "I will return it tomorrow," but
returns it the same day, or approves of the return being made the same day,
incurs a *Rani* (minor) *PaccAppini* (penance).**  **(He incurs a *Laghumaasik*
(monthly) *Praayashchitt* (penance).)**  **Discussion:** The second *Uddeshak*
mentions the *Praayashchitt* (penance) for keeping a foot-cloth with a wooden
stick. Here, the *Praayashchitt* (penance) is mentioned for returning a
householder's or a *Shayatar's* foot-cloth, which was taken for one or two days,
before or after the promised time.  In a specific situation related to the place
and time, a foot-cloth for wiping feet can be taken from a householder or a
*Shayatar* as a *Praatihaarik* (temporary possession). Here, the *Praayashchitt*
(penance) is not mentioned for taking a *Praatihaarik* foot-cloth, but for the
lack of discretion in language.  A monk keeps a piece of cloth as a 'foot-
cloth', perhaps also keeps a foot-cloth with a wooden stick when necessary, and
sometimes, in special circumstances, takes a householder's or a *Shayatar's*
foot-cloth for one or two days. This seems to be indicated by these sutras.
**Penance for returnable 'stick' etc.**  **19. A monk who, having requested a
*Padihaariy* (returnable) stick, a *Latthi* (staff), an *Avlehaniy* (writing
implement), or a *VeNuSuI* (bamboo needle), says "I will return it today," but
returns it tomorrow, or approves of the return being made tomorrow, incurs a
*Rani* (minor) *PaccAppini* (penance).**  **20. A monk who, having requested a
*Padihaariy* (returnable) stick, a *Latthi* (staff), an *Avlehaniy* (writing
implement), or a *VeNuSuI* (bamboo needle), says "I will return it today," but
returns it the same day, or approves of the return being made the same day,
incurs a *Rani* (minor) *PaccAppini* (penance).**  **21. A monk who, having
requested a *Saagariy-Santiy* (foot-cloth), a stick, a *Latthi* (staff), an
*Avlehaniy* (writing implement), or a *VeNuSuI* (bamboo needle), says "I will
return it today," but returns it tomorrow, or approves of the return being made
tomorrow, incurs a *Rani* (minor) *PaccAppini* (penance).**  **22. A monk who,
having requested a *Saagariy-Santiy* (foot-cloth), a stick, a *Latthi* (staff),
an *Avlehaniy* (writing implement), or a *VeNuSuI* (bamboo needle), says "I will
return it today," but returns it the same day, or approves of the return being
made the same day, incurs a *Rani* (minor) *PaccAppini* (penance).**  **19. A
monk who, having requested a stick, a staff, a writing implement, or a bamboo
needle from a householder, says "I will return it today," but returns it
tomorrow, or approves of the return being made tomorrow, incurs a *Rani* (minor)
*PaccAppini* (penance).**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAMcavAM uddezaka [131 18. je bhikkhU sAgAriya-saMtiyaM pAyapuchaNaM jAittA
"sue paccappiNissAmi tti" tameva raNi paccappiNai, paccappiNaMtaM vA sAijjai  /
15. jo bhikSu gRhastha ke pAdapoMchana ko yAcanA karake "aAja hI lauTA dUgA"
aisA kahakara dUsare dina lauTAtA hai yA lauTAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
16. jo bhikSu gRhastha ke pAdapoMchana kI yAcanA karake kala lauTA dene kA
kahakara usI dina lauTA detA hai yA lauTA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
17. jo bhikSu zayyAtara se pAdapoMchana kI yAcanA karake "aAja hI lauTA dUMgA"
aisA kahakara kala lauTAtA hai yA lauTAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  18.
jo bhikSu zayyAtara ke pAdapoMchana kI yAcanA karake "kala lauTA dUgA" aisA
kahakara usI dina lauTA detA hai yA lauTA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
(use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana- dUsare uddezaka meM
kASThadaMDayukta pAdapoMchana ke rakhane kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai aura yahA~
eka yA do dina ke lie gRhastha kA yA zayyAtara kA pAdapoMchana prAtihArika
grahaNa kara lauTAne kA jo samaya kahA ho usase pahale-pIche lauTAne kA
prAyazcitta kahA hai| kSetra kAla sambandhI kisI vizeSa paristhiti meM gRhastha
se yA zayyAtara se paira poMchane kA upakaraNa prAtihArika liyA jA sakatA hai  /
yahA~ prAtihArika pAdapoMchana ke grahaNa karane kA prAyazcitta nahIM kahA gayA
hai kintu bhASA ke aviveka kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| sAdhu ke pAsa
vastrakhaMDa kA 'pAdapoMchana' rahatA hai, kadAcit Avazyaka hone para
dArudaMDayukta pAdapoMchana bhI rakhatA hai aura kabhI vizeSa paristhiti meM
gRhastha kA yA zayyAtara kA pAdapoMchana eka-do dina ke liye grahaNa karatA hai
/  aisA ina sUtroM se pratIta hotA hai| pratyarpaNIya 'daMDa' Adi kA prAyazcitta
19. je bhikkhU pADihAriyaM daMDayaM vA, laTTiyaM vA, avalehaNiyaM vA, veNusUI vA
jAittA "tameva rayaNi paccappiNissAmi tti" sue paccappiNai, paccappiNaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  20. je bhikkhU pADihAriyaM daMDayaM vA, laTThiyaM vA, avalehaNiyaM
vA, veNusUI vA jAittA sue paccappiNissAmi tti tameva raNi paccappiNai,
paccappiNaMtaM vA saaijji| 21. je bhikkhU "sAgAriyasaMtiyaM" daMDayaM vA,
laTThiyaM vA, avalehaNiyaM vA, veNusUI vA jAittA "tameva raNi paccappiNissAmi
tti" sue paccappiNai, paccappiNaMtaM vA saaijji| 22. je bhikkhU "sAgAriya-
saMtiyaM" daMDayaM vA, laThThiyaM vA, avalehaNiyaM vA, veNusUI vA jAittA "sue
paccappiNissAmi tti" tameva raNi paccappiNai, paccappiNaMtaM vA saaijji| 19. jo
bhikSu gRhastha se daMDa, lAThI, avalekhanikA yA bAMsa kI sUI kI yAcanA karake
use 'Aja hI lauTA dUMgA' aisA kahakara kala lauTAtA hai yA lauTAne vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai|

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Nishith Sutra]  **132]**  **20.** A monk who requests a staff, stick,
writing implement, or bamboo needle from a householder, saying "I will return it
tomorrow," and returns it today or approves of the return,  **21.** A monk who
requests a staff, stick, writing implement, or bamboo needle from a householder,
saying "I will return it today," and returns it tomorrow or approves of the
return,  **22.** A monk who requests a staff, stick, writing implement, or
bamboo needle from a householder, saying "I will return it tomorrow," and
returns it today or approves of the return, (incurs a minor monthly atonement).
**Discussion:** A staff, stick, etc. are also objects that can be accepted as a
gift. These can also be accepted from a householder or another person with the
promise of returning them. They can be accepted for a day or two, or for a
longer period. Here, the atonement is for the lack of discernment in language.
**Atonement related to returning bedding materials:**  **23.** A monk who,
having returned the bedding materials of another householder or a householder,
uses them again without asking permission, or approves of their use, (incurs a
minor monthly atonement).  **Discussion:** The term "Padihariyam" is used for
bedding materials brought from elsewhere, and the term "Sagariy-Santiyam" is
used for bedding materials, etc., that are kept at the place of stay.  If a monk
does not need the bedding materials, he should hand them over to the householder
at the shelter. Later, if he needs them again, he must ask the householder's
permission. If he takes them without asking permission again, he incurs
atonement according to this sutra.  The bedding materials of a householder can
be left in his house, but bedding materials brought from another householder's
house can also be left in the shelter for a short time. This is implied by this
atonement sutra and the Vyavahar Sutra Uddeshak 8. However, before going on a
journey, they must be returned to their rightful place and handed over. This is
stated in the Bahutkalp Uddeshak 3, and if they are not returned, atonement is
incurred according to the Nishith Uddeshak 2.  **Atonement for spinning
cotton:**  **24.** A monk who spins cotton from flax, wool, pond cotton, or amil
cotton, or approves of it,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 132] [ nizItha sUtra 20. jo bhikSu gRhastha se daMDa, lAThI, avalekhanikA yA
bAMsa kI sUI kI yAcanA karake "kala lauTA dUMgA" aisA kahakara grAja hI lauTA
detA hai yA lauTA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  21. jo bhikSu zayyAtara
se daMDa, lAThI, avalekhanikA yA bAMsa kI sUI kI yAcanA karake 'Aja hI lauTA
dUMgA' aisA kahakara kala lauTAtA hai yA lauTAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
22. jo bhikSu zayyAtara se daMDa, lAThI, avalekhanikA yA bAMsa kI sUI kI yAcanA
karake "kala lauTA dUMgA' aisA kahakara prAja hI lauTA detA hai yA lauTA dene
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai | )
vivecana daMDa, lAThI Adi bhI zrapagrahika upadhi hai  /  ye bhI zayyAtara kI yA
anya kI vApisa lauTAne kA kahakara grahaNa kI jA sakatI hai  /  eka do dina ke
liye yA jyAdA samaya ke liye bhI grahaNa kI jA sakatI hai  /  yahA~ bhASA ke
aviveka kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  pratyarpita zayyAsaMstAraka saMbaMdhI
prAyazcitta 23. je bhikkhU pADihAriyaM vA sAgAriya-saMtiyaM vA sejjAsaMthArayaM
paccappiNittA doccaM pi ohaM aNaguNaviya ahiTThei, ahiTThetaM vA sAijjai  /  23.
jo bhikSu anya gRhastha kA yA zayyAtara kA zayyAsaMstAraka lauTA karake ( punaH
Avazyaka hone para) dUsarI bAra prAjJA liye vinA hI upayoga meM letA hai yA lene
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  / )
vivecana - anyatra se lAye gaye zayyA saMstAraka ke liye "pADihAriyaM" zabda kA
prayoga kiyA gayA hai aura Thaharane ke sthAna para rahe hue zayyA - saMstAraka
Adi ke lie "sAgAriya- saMtiyaM" zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai  /  yadi bhikSu
ko zayyA saMstAraka kI AvazyakatA na rahe to vaha unheM upAzraya meM hI gRhastha
ko saMbhalA deve, bAda meM jaba kabhI AvazyakatA ho to punaH unakI gRhastha AjJA
lenA Avazyaka hotA hai  /  yadi punaH prAjJA liye vinA grahaNa kare to isa sUtra
ke anusAra prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  zayyAtara ke zayyA - saMstAraka to usake
makAna meM chor3e jA sakate haiM kintu anya gRhastha ke ghara se lAye gaye zayyA
- saMstAraka bhI alpa samaya ke liye upAzraya meM chor3e jA sakate haiN| aisA
isa prAyazcitta sUtra se aura vyavahArasUtra uddezaka 8 se phalita hotA hai  /
kintu vihAra karane ke pUrva unheM yathAsthAna pahu~cA kara sambhalAnA Avazyaka
hotA hai, aisA bahatkalpa uddezaka 3 meM vidhAna hai aura na lauTAne para nizI.
uddezaka 2 ke anusAra prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  kapAsa [ rUI ] kAtane kA
prAyazcitta 24. je bhikkhU saNakappAsao vA, uNNakappAsao vA, poMDakappAsao vA,
amila kappAsao vA, dohasuttAI karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  bhikSu sana ke pAsa
se, Una ke kapAsa se, poMDa ke kapAsa se yA amila ke kapAsa se #

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Uddesaka  [133, The Katakar makes or approves the making of the Dirgha
Sutra. (He incurs the Laghumasik Pratikramana.)]  **Discussion:** "Doha suttam
nama katta ti" - The meaning of Dirgha Sutra is Katana, i.e., spinning cotton
with a "takli, charkha" etc.  **Bhaṣya Gāthā:** Sutatte palimanthō, uddāho
jhusir doso sammho. Hatthō vāghay sanchay, pasang āḍāṇ gamanam cha. || 1966 ||
This Gāthā contains a collection of the faults of spinning. Spinning is the work
of a householder, doing it causes a monk to lose his holiness. It causes harm to
mosquitoes and other living beings, excessive spinning causes fatigue in the
hands and other parts of the body. Spinning can also lead to the tendency to
weave.  There is also the possibility of collecting and other faults. Thus, this
Gāthā describes self-harm and restraint-harm.  Therefore, a monk should not
engage in spinning or other such activities. If he engages in such activities or
approves of them, he incurs Pratikramana from this Sutra. The Pratikramana for
making a colorful, attractive, and decorated staff is:  25. The monk who makes
or approves the making of a staff made of wood, bamboo, or cane, which is
decorated. 26. The monk who carries or approves the carrying of a staff made of
wood, bamboo, or cane, which is decorated. 27. The monk who makes or approves
the making of a staff made of wood, bamboo, or cane, which is colored. 28. The
monk who carries or approves the carrying of a staff made of wood, bamboo, or
cane, which is colored. 29. The monk who makes or approves the making of a staff
made of wood, bamboo, or cane, which is variegated. 30. The monk who carries or
approves the carrying of a staff made of wood, bamboo, or cane, which is
variegated.  25. The monk who makes or approves the making of a staff made of
wood, bamboo, or cane, which is decorated. 26. The monk who carries or approves
the carrying of a staff made of wood, bamboo, or cane, which is decorated.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAMcavAM uddezaka] [133, kAtakara dIrgha sUtra banAtA hai yA banAne vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  / )
vivecana-"dohasuttaM nAma kattati" dIrgha sUtra kA artha hai kAtanA arthAt
kapAsa ko "takalI, carkhA" aAdi se kAtanA  /  bhASya gAthA sutatthe palimaMtho,
uDDAho jhusira dosa smmho| hatthovAghaya saMcaya, pasaMga AdANa gamaNaM ca  //
1966  //  isa gAthA meM kAtane ke doSoM kA saMgraha kiyA gayA hai  /  kAtanA
gRhastha kA kArya hai, ise karane se sAdhu kI holanA hotI hai  /  macchara Adi
jIvoM kI virAdhanA hotI hai, adhika kAtane para hAtha Adi zarIra ke avayavoM meM
thakAna A jAtI hai  /  kAtane se bunane kI pravRtti bhI pracalita ho sakatI hai|
saMgraha Adi doSoM kI bhI sambhAvanA rahatI hai  /  isa prakAra isa gAthA meM
AtmavirAdhanA aura saMyamavirAdhanA batAI hai| ataH bhikSu ko carkhA kAtanA Adi
pravRtti nahIM karanI cAhiye  /  aisI pravRtti karane para yA usakA anumodana
karane para bhI isa sUtra se prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /  sacitta, raMgIna aura
AkarSaka daMDa banAne kA prAyazcitta 25. je bhikkhU "sacittAI" dArudaMDANi vA,
veNudaMDANi vA vetta-daMDANi vA karei, kareMtaM vA saaijji| 26. je bhikkhU
"sacittAI" dArudaMDANi vA, veNudaMDANi vA, vettadaMDANi vA dharei, dharataM vA
saaijji| 27. je bhikkhU "cittAI" dArudaMDANi vA, veNudaMDANi vA, vetta daMDANi
vA karei, kareMtaM vA saaijji| 28. je bhikkhU "cittAI" dArudaMDANi vA,
veNudaMDANi vA vetta daMDANi vA dharei, dharetaM vA saaijji| 29. je bhikkhU
"vicittAI" dArudaMDANi vA, veNudaMDANi vA, vetta daMDANi vA karei, kareMtaM vA
saaijji| _30. je bhikkhU "vicittAI" dArudaMDANi vA, veNudaMDANi vA, vetta
daMDANi vA dharei, dharataM vA saaijji| 25. jo bhikSu sacitta kASTha, bAMsa yA
veMta ke daMDa banAtA hai yA banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 26. jo bhikSu
sacitta kASTha, bAMsa yA veMta ke daMDa dhAraNa karatA hai yA dhAraNa karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [134]  **27.** A monk who makes or approves of the making of a colored staff
made of wood, bamboo, or cane. **28.** A monk who carries or approves of the
carrying of a colored staff made of wood, bamboo, or cane. **29.** A monk who
makes or approves of the making of a multi-colored staff made of wood, bamboo,
or cane. **30.** A monk who carries or approves of the carrying of a multi-
colored staff made of wood, bamboo, or cane. (He incurs the minor monthly
atonement.)  **Discussion:** "Staff" is an auxiliary accessory. This means that
it can only be used by someone with a specific physical weakness, etc., but it
is not generally considered appropriate for all monks.  Therefore, if a ready-
made staff is available, it can be used. If not, the monk can make one himself
from suitable wood, etc.  The following points must be kept in mind when making
and carrying a staff:  1. The wood should not contain any living creatures,
i.e., the wood, etc., should be completely devoid of life. 2. The wood, etc.,
should not be dyed any color other than its natural color. 3. It should not be
made unusual with multiple attractive colors, craftsmanship, or paintings.
**Technical Terms:**  "Saccitta" - containing living beings. "Citrakah" - one
color. "Vicitra" - multiple colors.  It is not forbidden to apply a coating to
protect the staff. However, it is not appropriate to make or carry a staff with
one or multiple colors for decoration or with craftsmanship.  Making or carrying
a staff made of living wood is a clear violation of non-violence. All three
types of staffs incur the minor monthly atonement.  **Note:** The commentary
does not explain the three sutras containing the verb "paribhajayi" and there is
no instruction regarding them. This is because auxiliary accessories are only
used when necessary. Therefore, these three sutras are also not necessary. These
sutras were not present in the original text of the copies from the time of the
commentary and the commentary writer, and were added later. Therefore, these
three sutras are not included in the original text here, and only six sutras are
accepted and explained.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 134] [nizIthasUtra 27 jo bhikSu kASTha, bAMrA yA ta ke raMgIna daMDa banAtA hai
yA banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 28. jo bhikSu kASTha, bAMsa yA veMta ke
raMgIna daMDa dhAraNa karatA hai yA dhAraNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
29. jo bhikSu kASTha, bAMsa yA veMta ke aneka raMga vAle daMDa banAtA hai yA
banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 30. jo bhikSu kASTha, bAMsa yA veMta ke
aneka raMga vAle daMDa dhAraNa karatA hai yA dhAraNa karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta aAtA hai|) vivecana-"daMDa"
aupagrahika upadhi hai  /  arthAt vizeSa zArIrika durbalatA Adi kAraNoM se hI
koI rakha sakatA hai kintu sabhI sAdhuoM ko sAdhAraNatayA rakhanA nahIM kalpatA
hai| ataH Avazyaka hone para banA banAyA daMDa mile to dhAraNa kiyA jA sakatA
hai  /  na mile to bhikSu acitta kASTha Adi se svayaM banA sakatA hai  /  daMDa
banAne meM va dhAraNa karane meM nimna bAtoM kA dhyAna rakhanA Avazyaka hai 1-
jIva-jantu yukta lakar3I nahIM honI cAhiye arthAt kASTha aAdi sarvathA
jIvarahita honA caahiye| 2- lakar3I Adi ke svAbhAvika raMga ke sivAya anya koI
raMga nahIM honA cAhie  /  3- anya aneka aAkarSaka raMga, kArIgarI yA citra Adi
se vicitra nahIM honA cAhie  /  pAribhASika zabda "sacittA-jIvasahitA" "citrakaH
-eka varNaH, vicitrA- nAnA varNA":  /  cUNi daMDa kI surakSA ke lie kisI prakAra
kA lepa lagAnA nipiddha nahIM hai  /  vibhUSA ke lie eka yA aneka varNa kA
banAnA athavA kArIgIrI yukta banAnA aura dhAraNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai  /
sacitta lakar3I kA daMDa banAne yA rakhane meM jIva-virAdhanA spaSTa hai| ye
tInoM prakAra ke daMDa karane kA dhAraNa karane kA laghumAsika prAyazcitta aAtA
hai  /  _ "paribhajaI' kriyA yukta tIna sUtroM kI vyAkhyA nahIM milatI hai aura
na unakA nirdeza hI hai| kyoMki praupagrahika upadhi AvazyakatA par3ane para hI
dhAraNa kI jAtI hai  /  ata: ina tIna sUtroM kI AvazyakatA bhI nahIM hai  /
bhASya va cUrNikAra ke samaya kI pratiyoM ke mUla pATha meM ye sUtra nahIM the,
bAda meM bar3hAye gaye haiM  /  ataH una tIna sUtroM ko yahAM mUla pATha meM na
lekara kevala 6 sUtroM ko svIkAra karake unakI vyAkhyA kI gaI hai  /

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Uddeshak [135] ## Penitence for Entering Newly Established Villages,
etc. 31. A monk who enters a newly established 1. village, 2. city, 3. Kheda, 4.
Karbat, 5. Madamb, 6. Dronamukha, 7. Pattana, 8. Ashram, 9. Sannivesha, 10.
Nigama, 11. Sambah, or 12. capital city, and partakes of food, drink, edibles,
or savories, or approves of one who partakes of them, incurs a minor monthly
penance.  **Explanation of the places mentioned in the Sutra:**  1. **Gama:** "A
place where eighteen types of artisans reside" or "where there are no qualities
like wisdom, etc." 2. **Nagaram:** "Where there is not even a single artisan."
3. **Khedam:** "A place surrounded by a wall of dust." 4. **Kabbadam:** "A small
city, Karbart." 5. **Madambam:** "A place where there is no village, etc.,
within a radius of one and a half gavyutis in all directions." 6. **Pattanam:**
"Pattana is of two types: Jalapattana and Sthalapattana." A place where goods
are brought by water or land routes. 7. **Dronamukham:** A place where goods are
received from both water and land routes. 8. **Nigama:** "Where merchants
reside." A group of traders living together. 9. **Asamam:** A place where the
residence of ascetics, etc., is prominent. A place where the first ascetics
built their ashrams, and then other people came and settled. 10. **Sannivesam:**
The meaning of the word "Sannivesha" is explained in Acharanga Sutra 1, Adhyaya
8, Uddeshak 6, Nisitha Uddeshak 12, and Rajendra Kosh. The explanation is based
on the word "Nivesha" in Nisitha Uddeshak 5 and Brihatkalpa Bhashya. Since the
explanation is the same everywhere, the word "Sannivesha" has been retained in
the original text. 11. **Rayahani:** "Where the king resides." 12. **Sambah:** A
place near a mountain where grains, etc., are collected and stored. 13.
**Ghosa:** A settlement of cowherds. 14. **Ansiyam:** The third or fourth part
of a village, etc., where one has gone to stay. 15. **Pudabheyana:** A
settlement near a market place where goods are sold from various directions. 16.
**Agara:** A place near where stones, metals, etc., are produced and extracted.
Brihat Bhashya, Bha. 2, p. 342.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAMcavAM uddezaka [135 navanirmita grAmAdi meM praveza karane kA prAyazcitta
31. je bhikkhU "Navaga-NivesaMsi" gAmaMsi vA, nagaraMsi vA, kheDaMsi vA
kabbaDasi vA, maDaMbasi vA, doNamuhaMsi vA, paTTaNaMsi vA, AsamaMsi vA,
saNNivesaMsi vA, nigamaMsi vA, saMbAhaMsi vA, rAyahANisi vA aNuppavisittA asaNaM
vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 31. jo
bhikSu naye base hue 1. grAma, 2. nagara, 3. kheDa, 4. karbaTa, 5. maDaMba, 6.
droNamukha, 7. paTTaNa, 8. Azrama, 9. sanniveza, 10. nigama, 11. saMbAha yA 12.
rAjadhAnI meM praveza karake azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karatA hai yA
grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA
hai) vivecana-sUtra meM Ae sthAnoM kI vyAkhyA isa prakAra hai1.
'gAma'-"karANAmaSTAdazAnAm gamanIyaM" 'asate vA buddhayAdIn guNAn" 2.
'nagaraM'"na vidyate eko'pi krH|" 3. 'kheDaM-.-."dhUliprAkAraparikSiptam" 4.
'kabbaDaM'.-"kunagaraM karbarTa  / "  /  5. 'maDambaM'"sarvAsu dikSu
ardhatRtIyagavyUtamaryAdAyAmavidyamAna graamaadikN"| 6. 'paTTaNaM'-'pattanaM
dvidhA jalapattanaM ca sthalapattanaM caM', jalamArga yA sthala-mArga se jahAM
sAmAna-mAla AtA ho| 7. 'doNamuhaM'-jahAM jalamArga aura sthalamArga dono se mAla
pAtA ho  /  8. 'nigama-vaNik vasati  /  vyApArIvarga kA samUha jahAM rahatA ho
/  9. 'AsamaM'-tApasa Adi ke Azrama kI pramukhatA vAlI vasati  /  arthAt jahAM
prathama tApasoM ke Azrama bane, phira anya loga Akara base aisA sthAna  /  10.
'saNNivesaM'AcArAMga zru. 1, a.8, u. 6 meM va nizItha uddezaka 12 meM tathA
rAjendrakoSa meM "sanniveSa' zabda kA artha kiyA hai| nizItha u. 5. va
bRhatkalpabhASya meM "niveza" zabda ke nirdeza se vyAkhyA kI gaI hai| vyAkhyA
sarvatra samAna hone se "sannivesa" zabda hI mUla pATha meM rakhA gayA hai| 11.
'rAyahANI''jahAM rAjA kA nivAsa ho| 12. 'saMbAha-parvata ke nikaTa dhAnyAdi
saMgraha karane evaM rahane kA sthAna  /  13. 'ghosaM'-gopAlakoM kI bstii| 14.
'aMsiyaM'-grAmAdi kA tRtIya caturtha aMza jahAM jAkara rahA ho  /  15.
'puDabheyaNaM'-aneka dizAnoM se sAmAna pAkara jahAM bikatA ho, aise maMDI sthala
ke pAsa basI huI bstii| 16. 'AgaraM'patthara tathA dhAtu Adi jahAM utpanna hoM
va nikAle jAeM, usake pAsa kI vasati  /  bRha. bhASya. bhA. 2, pR. 342

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[136] This Sutra mentions 12 out of the 16 places like villages, etc. The place
"Pragar" is mentioned in the next Sutra. Thus, a total of 13 places are
mentioned here. The remaining 13th, 14th, and 15th places are mentioned in the
Brihatkalpa Sutra Uddeshak? Sutra 6. The Nishith Bhashya does not explicitly
mention or explain these words. The Churnikar has explained them. The verses of
the Brihatkalpa Bhashya explain these words. There are 16 words explained there,
and the original text also has 16 words. The explanation (in the Bhashya)
mentions one name more than the other. The name "Sankaro" is a little bit of a
village, a hunting ground, and an ashram. The original texts of different Sutras
have different orders of these words. There are 16 names in many places and 12
names in many places. Of these, the numbers 13-14-15 are definitely less, and
one of the three, Agar, Nigam, and Ashram, is less. The reason for this is
unknown. In the Bhashya and commentary of Brihatkalpa Uddeshak? Sutra 6, the
order of "Rajdhani" is tenth, and the total number of names is 16. In the
subsequent Sutras 7-8-9, the text "Gamansin va jav Rayhanisin va" is found to be
the same in all copies. If we want to have the same text everywhere, then
considering the antiquity of the Brihatkalpa Bhashya and according to its text,
and keeping the word "Rajdhani" at the end, if we accept 16 words, then there is
no possibility of any contradiction. The order of these 16 should be as follows:
1. Gram 2. Nagar 3. Khed 4. Karbat 5. Madamb 6. Pattana 7. Agar 8. Dronamukha 9.
Nigam 10. Ashram 11. Sannivesh 12. Sambadh 13. Ghosh 14. Anshika 15. Putbhadan
16. Rajdhani. In the present Sutra, only 15 names are appropriate except "Agar",
because there are many types of "Pagar" mentioned in the Sutra ahead. There
should be 16 words in the Vyavaharsutra, Brihatkalpa Sutra, Nishith Sutra, and
Acharang, and the short text should have "Gamansin va jav Rayhanisin va"
everywhere. In some places, the short text "Gamansin va jav Sannivesansin va" is
also found. There should be uniformity in such short texts. The students of Agam
should pay attention to this. This will eliminate the alternatives of different
numbers. "Navag-Nivesansin" - Sadhus and Sadhvis should not enter newly settled
villages, etc., for some days. Because both auspicious and inauspicious omens
are obstacles in the practice of Sadhus. In case of inauspicious omens, it can
be a cause of hindrance for other Sadhus. Therefore, one should not go to stay
in such places and should not even go for Gochari, etc. The atonement for
entering a newly built mine 32. If a monk enters "Navag-Nivesansin", Ayagarsin
va, Tambagarsin va, Tauyagarsin va, Sisagarsin va, Hirannagarsin va,
Suvannagarsin va, Vairagarsin va, and eats food, drink, or takes something, he
is guilty.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 136] [nizIthasUtra _ grAmAdi 16 sthAnoM meM se isa sUtra meM 12 sthAnoM kA
nirdeza hai aura "prAgara" kA agale sUtra meM varNana hai, isa prakAra kula 13
sthAnoM kA yahAM para kathana hai| zeSa 13 veM, 14 veM, 15 veM sthAnoM kA
kathana vRhatkalpasUtra uddezaka ? sUtra 6 meM huA hai| nizItha-bhASya meM ina
zabdoM kA spaSTa nirdeza va vyAkhyA nahIM hai  /  cUrNikAra ne vyAkhyA kI hai|
bRhatkalpabhASya kI gAthAoM meM ina zabdoM kI vyAkhyA kI gaI hai  /  vahAM 16
zabdoM kI vyAkhyA hai aura mUlapATha meM bhI 16 zabda haiM  /  vyAkhyA meM
(bhASya meM) eka nAma matAMtara se adhika kahA hai  /  "saMkaro" nAma kiMcit
grAmo'pi, kheTamapi Azramopi  /  . vibhinna sUtroM ke mUla pAThoM meM ina zabdoM
ke vibhinna krama haiM  /  kaI sthaloM para 16 nAma aura kaI sthaloM para 12
nAma haiM  /  jisameM naM. 13-14-15 tIna to nizcitta kama hote haiM aura Agara,
nigama, Azrama ina tIna meM se koI bhI eka kama hotA hai  /  isakA kAraNa ajJAta
hai| bRhatkalpa uddezaka ? sUtra 6 ke bhASya evaM TIkA meM "rAjadhAnI' kA krama
dasavAM hai va kula nAma 16 haiM  /  usake bAda ke sUtra 7-8-9 meM "gAmaMsi vA
jAva rAyahANisi vA" pATha sabhI pratiyoM meM samAna milatA hai| sarvatra eka
samAna pATha karanA ho to bRhatkalpabhASya kI prAcInatA ko lakSya meM rakhakara
va usake pATha ke anusAra tathA "rAjadhAnI" zabda ko aMta meM rakhate hae 16
zabda svIkAra kiye jAeM to koI viro varodha hone kI saMbhAvanA nahIM rahatI hai|
ina 16 kA krama isa prakAra honA caahiye| 1. grAma 2. nagara 3. kheDa 4. karbaTa
5. maDamba 6. paTTaNa 7. Agara 8. droNamukha 9. nigama 10. Azrama 11. sanniveza
12. saMbAdha 13. ghoSa 14. aMzikA 15. puTabhedana 16. rAjadhAnI  /  prastuta
sUtra meM "aAgara" ke sivAya 15 nAma hI ucita haiM, kyoMki Age meM sUtra ke
aneka prakAra ke "pAgara" kA kathana hai  /  vyavahArasUtra, bRhatkalpasUtra,
nizIthasUtra aura AcArAMga meM 16 zabda hI hone cAhiye tathA saMkSipta pATha meM
sarvatra "gAmaMsi vA jAva rAyahANisi vA" honA cAhiye  /  kahIM-kahIM para
"gAmaMsi vA jAva saNNivesaMsi vA" aisA saMkSipta pATha bhI milatA hai, aise
saMkSipta pAThoM meM ekarUpatA honA Avazyaka hai, Agama svAdhyAyiyoM ko isa ora
dhyAna denA caahiye| jisase vibhinna saMkhyAoM ke vikalpa samApta ho sakate
haiN| "Navaga-NivesaMsi"-naye base hue grAmAdi meM kucha dinoM taka sAdhu,
sAdhviyoM ko praveza nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  kyoMki zakuna aura apazakUna donoM
hI sAdhuoM kI sAdhanA meM bAdhaka haiN| apazakuna . hone se anya sAdhuoM ke liye
aMtarAya hone kA kAraNa ho sakatA hai  /  ataH aise sthAnoM para Thaharane ke
lie nahIM jAnA cAhiye tathA gocarI Adi ke lie bhI nahIM jAnA caahie| navanirmita
khAna meM praveza karane kA prAyazcitta 32. je bhikkhU "Navaga-NivesaMsi"
ayAgaraMsi vA, taMbAgaraMsi vA, tauyAgaraMsi vA, sIsAgaraMsi vA, hiraNNAgaraMsi
vA, suvaNNAgaraMsi vA, vairAgaraMsi vA, aNuppavisittA asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM
vA sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji|

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Uddeshak  [137. A monk who, near a mine of 1. iron, 2. copper, 3. taru
(iron ore), 4. lead, 5. silver, 6. gold, or 7. vajraratna (diamond), goes to a
newly settled habitation and consumes food, drink, edibles, or savories, or
approves of someone who does so, incurs a laghumasik pratyakshita (minor monthly
penance).]  **Explanation:** Mines of iron, gold, etc., are of many types.
People who work in those mines reside near them. One should not go to such newly
settled habitations for gochari (walking for alms).  In the previous sutra, the
penance for going to a newly settled village, etc., for gochari was mentioned.
Because there, some people believe in omens and portents, and in mines, apart
from omens and portents, some people may have doubts about profit and loss
regarding the materials extracted from there, therefore, this sutra about
penance is mentioned separately. Also, being near a mine, it is possible for
earth-bodied beings to be harmed. Sometimes, an accusation of theft may also be
made against the monk. Therefore, one should not go to these places for gochari,
etc.  In many copies, the word "rayanagranshi" is found in excess. This has come
due to a scribal error. Here, the mention of vajraratna includes all gems.
**Penance for making and playing a Veena**  33. A monk who makes or approves of
someone who makes a veena from 1. mouth, 2. teeth, 3. proshtha (lip), 4. nose,
5. armpit, 6. hand, 7. nails, 8. leaves, 9. flowers, 10. fruits, 11. seeds, or
12. green grass, incurs a laghumasik pratyakshita.  34. A monk who plays a veena
from the mouth to green grass, or approves of someone who does so, incurs a
laghumasik pratyakshita.  35. A monk who produces or approves of someone who
produces other similar unproduced sounds, incurs a laghumasik pratyakshita.
**Explanation:** Out of the above 12 types of veenas, 7 are related to the body,
and the remaining 5 are related to plants. These veenas can be played naturally
or by combining them with other materials. Curiosity, fickleness, or mental
awareness are prominent in making and playing them, which is inappropriate for a
monk. Making them requires distorting the body parts and cutting plants.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAMcavAM uddezaka] [137 arya-jo bhikSu 1. lohA, 2. tAMbA, 3. taruyA (rAMgA), 4.
zIzA, 5. cAMdI, 6. sonA yA 7. vajraratna ko khAna ke samIpa basI huI navIna
vasati meM jAkara azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|)
vivecana-khAne lohe, sone Adi aneka prakAra kI hotI haiM  /  una khAnoM ke
samIpa unameM kArya karane vAle loga nivAsa karate haiM  /  aisI naI basI huI
bastiyoM meM gocarI Adi ke liye nahIM jAnA caahiye| pUrva sUtra meM naye base
hue grAmAdi meM gocarI jAne kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| kyoMki vahA~ kucha
loga zakuna-apazakuna ko mAnyatA vAle hote haiM tathA khAnoM meM zakuna-
apazakuna ke sivAya vahAM se nikAle jAne vAle padArthoM ke sambandha meM kucha
logoM ke mana meM lAbha-alAbha kI AzaMkA bhI utpanna ho sakatI hai, ataH
prAyazcitta kA yaha sUtra alaga kahA gayA hai tathA khAna ke nikaTa hone se
pRthvIkAyika jIvoM kI virAdhanA honA bhI saMbhava hai  /  kabhI corI kA AkSepa
bhI sAdhu para A sakatA hai  /  isalie ina sthAnoM para gocarI Adi ke liye nahIM
jAnA caahie| kaI pratiyoM meM 'rayaNAgaraMsi' zabda adhika hai| jo lipi doSa se
A gayA hai  /  yahAM vajraratna ke kathana se sabhI ratnoM kA grahaNa ho jAtA
hai| vINA banAne va bajAne kA prAyazcitta 33. je bhikkhU muMha-vINiyaM vA,
daMta-vINiyaM vA, oTu-vINiyaM vA, NAsA-vINiyaM vA, kakkha-vINiyaM vA, hattha-
vINiyaM vA, Naha-vINiyaM vA, patta-vINiyaM vA, phala-vINiyaM vA, bIya-vINiyaM
vA, hariya-vINiyaM vA karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  34. je bhikkhU muMha-
vINiyaM vA jAva hariya-vINiyaM vA vAei, vAeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  _ 35. je bhikkhU
aNNayarANi vA tahappagArANi aNuddiNNAI saddAI udIrei, udIrataM vA saaijj| 33. jo
bhikSu, 1. muha, 2. dAMta, 3. proSTha, 4. nAka, 5. kA~kha, 6. hAtha, 7. nakha,
8. patra, 9. puSpa, 10. phala, 11. bIja yA 12. harI ghAsa ko vINA jaisI dhvani
nikAlane yogya banAtA hai yA banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  34. jo
bhikSu mukha se yAvat harI ghAsa se vINA bajAtA hai yA bajAne vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 35. jo bhikSu anya bhI isI prakAra ke anutpanna zabdoM ko utpanna
karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-uparyukta 12 prakAra kI vINAoM meM 7 zarIra se
sambandhita haiM zeSa 5 vanaspati se sambandhita haiN| ye vINAeM prAkRti se yA
anya kisI padArtha ke saMyoga se bajAI jA sakatI haiN| inake banAne va bajAne
meM kutUhala vRtti yA caMcala vRtti athavA mAnasaMjJA pramukha hotI hai, jo
sAdhu ke lie anucita hai  /  inake banAne meM zarIra ke avayavoM ko vikRta
karanA par3atA hai aura vanaspati kA chedana

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[138] The Nishīthasūtra is a musical instrument that causes harm to the self and
to plants, and when played, it harms plants, air bodies, or both. It generates
various distorted thoughts in the minds of those who hear and see it. This
practice also tends to bewilder the self and others.  These actions are not
suitable for a renunciant. Therefore, they are considered to require atonement.
Although it is a minor monthly atonement, various types of atonement, such as
minor, medium, and major, can be given according to the severity of the offense.
"Muhvīṇiyaṁ" should be understood as a vīṇā played with the throat.  The
atonement for making different sounds with stones, glass, or any other object,
or for playing musical instruments, should be understood from the above sūtra
35.  After the time of the commentary (vyākhyā), it has been observed in many
copies that these three sūtras have sometimes become 25 or 24 sūtras in the
original text. However, there is no such instruction in the commentary, chani,
etc., therefore, it seems appropriate to keep three sūtras here instead of
accepting 25 sūtras.  Atonement for entering a purposeful bed: 36. The monk who
enters a purposeful (uddiṣṭa) bed, or approves of the one who enters. 37. The
monk who enters a bed with a "pāhuḍiya" defect, or approves of the one who
enters. 38. The monk who enters a bed with a "parikarma" defect, or approves of
the one who enters. (He incurs a minor monthly atonement.)  Discussion: 1. The
house built for a renunciant is called a "purposeful defect" bed. 2. The sixth
defect in the sixteen defects of "pāhuḍiya" is called "pāhuḍiya". This same
defect should be understood here for the bed. The construction of a house should
be for the householder, but if the construction time is delayed or expedited,
that same bed is called a "pāhuḍiya defect bed". 3. "Parikarman" - Cleaning,
causing to be cleaned, covering, causing to be covered, making it airy, or
closing it off for a renunciant in a house built for a householder. Making the
door smaller or larger,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 138] [nizIthasUtra hotA hai jisase AtmavirAdhanA aura vanaspati kI virAdhanA
hotI hai aura bajAne meM vanaspati kI yA vAyukAya kI athavA donoM ko eka sAtha
virAdhanA hotI hai| sunane va dekhane vAle ke mana meM aneka prakAra ke vikRta
vicAra utpanna hote haiM  /  yaha pravRtti sva-para ko vyAmohita karane vAlI bhI
hotI hai  /  ye kArya saMyamI ke karane yogya nahIM haiM  /  ataH inakA
prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| laghumAsika kA kathana hote hue bhI doSa-sthiti ke
anusAra jaghanya, madhyama aura utkRSTa aneka prakAra ke prAyazcitta diye jA
sakate haiN| 'muhavINiyaM' se kaMTha dvArA bajAI jAne vAlI vINA samajha lenI
cAhiye  /  patthara, kAMca yA kisI bhI vastu se bhinna-bhinna prakAra kI dhvani
karane kA yA vAditra Adi bajAne kA prAyazcitta uparokta sUtra 35 se samajha lenA
cAhiye  /  cUNi (vyAkhyA) kAla ke bAda kabhI ina tIna sUtroM se 25 yA 24 sUtra
mUla pATha meM bana gaye haiM, aisA aneka pratiyoM meM dekhA gayA hai kintu
bhASya, caNi Adi meM aisA koI nirdeza nahIM hai, ataH yahAM 25 sUtra grahaNa na
karake tIna sUtra rakhanA hI ucita pratIta huaA hai  /  prauddezika zayyA meM
praveza karane kA prAyazcitta 36. je bhikkhU "uddesiyaM-sejja" aNuppavisai,
aNuppavisaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  37. je bhikkhU "sapAhuDiyaM sejja" aNuppavisai,
aNuppavisaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  38. je bhikkhU "saparikammaM sejja" aNuppavisai,
aNuppavisaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  36. jo bhikSu prauddazika doSa yukta (uddiSTa)
zayyA meM praveza karatA hai yA praveza karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
_37. jo bhikSa saprAbhRtika zayyA meM praveza karatA hai yA praveza karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| 38. jo bhikSu saparikarma zayyA meM praveza karatA hai
yA praveza karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta
AtA hai  / ) vivecana 1. sAdhu ke liye jisa makAna kA nirmANa kiyA jAtA hai vaha
"zrauddezika doSa" yukta zayyA kahI jAtI hai| 2. sapAhuDiyaM-udgama ke 16 doSoM
meM chaTThA "pAhuDiyA" nAmaka doSa hai| vahI doSa yahAM zayyA ke liye samajhanA
cAhiye  /  makAna kA nirmANa gRhastha ke liye hI karanA ho kintu nirmANa ke
samaya ko Age pIche karane para yA zIghratA se karane para vahI zayyA "pAhuDiya
doSa-yukta zayyA" kahalAtI hai| 3. saparikamma-gRhastha ke liye bane hue makAna
meM sAdhu ke liye saphAI karanA, karAnA, chAdana-lepana karanA, karAnA, havA
vAlA karanA yA havA baMda karanA  /  daravAjA choTA-bar3A karanA,

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Uddeshak  [139] A bed is considered to have "parikarma dosha" if it is
located where actions like leveling the ground, moving heavy objects, or
transporting goods have been performed. The Acharangasutra (Shru. 2, A. 2, U. 1)
states that it is not appropriate for a monk to stay in a bed with the
aforementioned parikarma dosha. However, if a householder has taken possession
of the place after these parikarma actions have been performed by a sadhu, then
it is appropriate for the sadhu to stay there. Therefore, entering a bed with
parikarma dosha before it is taken into use by a householder incurs the
praayaschitta mentioned in the sutra. 1. "Uddeshik"  Javatayam uddeso,
pasandanan bhawe samuddeso. Samanaan tu aadeso, nigganthan samaadeso. || 2020 ||
1. For all types of travelers, 2. For all types of pasandi (heretics), meaning
those who have renounced the world from all sects, 3. For the five types of
Shramanas like Shakyas, 4. For Jain sadhus, entering a bed built for any of
these four types incurs a laghumaasik praayaschitta.  Acharangasutra (Shru. 2,
A. 2, U. 1) states "Bahwe saman-mahan-atihi-kiwan-vanimae paganij paganij." 1.
This is the sutra. The meaning of this sutra should be understood in the first
and second alternatives as explained by the commentator. The third alternative
should be understood in the "savadh kriya" mentioned in the Acharangasutra, and
the fourth alternative should be understood in the "mahasavady" kriya.  2.
"Pahud" - Apart from changing the time of building a house, doing other things
before or after also leads to pahud dosha. This is explained in the commentary.
Viddhansan chavan levane ya, bhumikamme paducc pahudiya. Osakkan ahisakkan, dese
savve ya nayavva. || 2026 || Sammajjan varisiyan, uvalevan pupph dive cheva.
Osakkan ussakkan, dese savve ya nayavva. || 2031 || In these two gathas, the
term "prosakkan-ussakkan" is used after mentioning actions like badar and subtle
parikarma. The explanation of this term is as follows: "Ete puvvam appano
kajjamane cheva navaran sahavo paducc osakkan ussakkan va." Meaning, doing
something for oneself that was already being done, but doing it before or after
for the sake of a sadhu.  The detailed description of subtle badar parikarma
actions and their "prosakkan ussakkan" should be understood from the commentary.
3. "Parikaram" - In the pahud dosha, some parikarma actions are mentioned in the
context of doing things before or after. However, this sutra collects parikarma
actions with the intention of differentiating between their "mulguna" (original
quality) and "uttaraguna" (subsequent quality). This is as follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAMcavAM uddezaka] [139 bhUmi ko sama-viSama karanA, sacina-vastuoM ko tathA
acitta bhArI sAmAna ko sthAnAMtarita karanA Adi kArya jahAM kiye gaye hoM vaha
"parikarma doSa" yukta zayyA kahI jAtI hai| AcArAMgasUtra zru. 2, a. 2. u. 1 meM
kahA gayA hai ki uparyukta parikarma yukta zayyA meM rahanA bhikSu ko nahIM
kalpatA hai  /  kintu ye parikarma kArya sAdhu ke liye karane ke bAda yadi
gRhastha ne usa sthAna ko apane upayoga meM le liyA ho to usake bAda sAdhu ko
vahAM rahanA kalpatA hai  /  ataH gRhastha ke upayoga meM lene se pUrva hI
parikarma doSayukta zayyA meM praveza karane se sUtrokta prAyazcitta AtA hai| 1.
"uddezika" jAvatiyaM uddeso, pAsaMDANaM bhave samuddeso  /  /  samaNANaM tu
Adeso, NiggaMthANaM samAdeso  //  2020  //  1. sabhI prakAra ke yAtriyoM ke
liye, 2. sabhI prakAra ke pASaMDI arthAt sabhI matoM ke gRhatyAgiyoM ke liye, 3.
zAkyAdi pAMca prakAra ke zramaNoM ke liye, 4. jaina sAdhuoM ke lie nirmita
makAna, ina cAroM prakAra kI zayyA meM praveza karane se laghumAsika prAyazcitta
pAtA hai|| AcArAMga zru. 2, a. 2, u. 1, meM 'bahave samaNa-mAhaNa-atihi-kivaNa-
vaNImae pagaNiya pagaNiya .' 1. yaha sUtra hai  /  isa sUtra ke artha kI apekSA
ko-bhASyakRta prathama dvitIya vikalpa meM samajha lenA caahiye| tIsare vikalpa
ko prAcArAMga kathita 'sAvadha kriyA' meM va cauthe vikalpa ko 'mahAsAvadya'
kriyA meM samajha lenA caahiye| 2. 'pAhuDa'-makAna banAne ke samaya kA
parivartana karane ke sivAya anya kArya bhI Age pIche karane se pAhuDa doSa hotA
hai| aisA bhASya meM batAyA gayA hai  /  viddhaMsaNa chAvaNa levaNe ya,
bhUmikamme paDucca paahuddiyaa| osakkaNa ahisakkaNa, dese savve ya NAyavva  //
2026  //  sammajjaNa varisIyaNa, uvalevaNa puppha dIvae ceva  /  osakkaNa
ussakkaNa, dese savve ya NAyavvA  // 2031  //  ina donoM gAthAoM meM kramazaH
bAdara va sUkSma parikarma Adi kAryoM kA kathana karake "prosakkaNa-ussakkaNa'
pada diyA gayA hai, jisakI cUNi isa prakAra hai "ete puvvaM appaNo kajjamANe
ceva navaraM sAhavo paDucca osakkaNaM ussakkaNaM vaa"| arthAt apane lie pahale
se kiye jA rahe kArya ko sAdhu ke nimitta se pahale-pIcheka ranA  /  sUkSma
bAdara parikarma kAryoM kA aura unake "prosakkaNa ussakkaNa" kA vistRta varNana
bhASya se jAnanA caahiye| 3. 'parikarma'-pAhuDa doSa meM bhI Age-pIche karane ke
prasaMga se kucha parikarma kAryoM kA kathana huA hai  /  tathApi isa sUtra meM
parikarma kAryoM kA mUlaguNa va uttaraguNa ke bheda kI vivakSA se saMgraha kiyA
gayA hai  /  vaha isa prakAra hai

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[140] The two types of *patti-vansa* are *dharana* and *chattari mula veliyo*.
*Mulaguna* with *saparikamma* is the *sejjau nayavva*. || 2046 || *Vansaga*,
*kadana*, *ukampana*, *chavana*, *levana*, *duvara*, *bhumhi* are the *y*.
*Saparikamma* *sejjau* is the *muluttara-gunesu*. || 2047 || *Dumiya*, *dhumia*,
*vasia*, *ujjovia*, *balikada*, *avatta* are the *y*. *Sitta*, *sammattha*, *vi*
are the *y*. *Visohi*, *kodi*, *kaya*, *vasahi* are the *y*. || 2048 || Other
types of faults are mentioned in verses 2052-53-54, such as: *padamarg*,
*sankramanamarg*, *dagavinka*, making a hole in the wall for air in the summer,
closing such places in winter and rainy season, repairing old walls, repairing
holes and pits, fixing leaks in the house, repairing joints in walls, etc.
[Nishitasutra Performing the above *parikarma* work with the intention of a
*sadhu* makes the bed a "parikarma dosha" one. According to the *heenaadhik*
*savady* tendency, there is *heenaadhikta* in the *prayaschitta-sthan* and
*tap*. The commentator has explained that the bed with the fault of *uttaraguna*
and *alp-prarambha* has a *laghu-masik* *prayaschitta*. According to the
*Acharang Sutra*, a bed with many *parikarma* becomes eligible for a *sadhu*
over time when it is used naturally by a householder. In such a situation, there
is no *prayaschitta* for entering and staying in that house. Brief Meaning 1. A
*dharmasala* etc. built for the purpose of only a Jain *sadhu* or for the
purpose of many *sadhus* or travelers is called "uddeshik-shayya". 2. If the
time of the *parikarma* work of a house built for a householder is shifted
forward or backward for the sake of a *sadhu* or if it is done quickly, i.e., if
a 5-day work is done in one day, then that householder's personal house also
becomes "sapahuḍ shayya". 3. The house is built for the householder. If
*parikarma* work is done in it for a *sadhu* before it is used by the
householder, then for some time that house is "saparikarma shayya". It is said
that there is a *laghu-masik* *prayaschitta* for entering and staying in these
three types of faulty beds.  It should be noted that the construction of the
second and third faulty beds is for the householder's own purpose, while the
first faulty bed is not built for the purpose of the builders, but only for the
purpose of others. The eligibility of the available *upaashraya* in the present
time The place where *sadhu*-*sadhvi* stay is called 'shayya, vasati and
upaashraya' in the *agama* and 'upaashraya or sthanak' in the common language.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 140] paTTIvaMso do dhAraNA, cattAri mUla velIo | mUlaguNa- saparikammA, esA
sejjAu NAyavvA  /  /  2046  /  /  vaMsaga, kaDaNa - ukaMpaNa, chAvaNa levaNa
duvAra bhUmi ya  /  saparikammA sejjA, esA mUluttaraguNesu  /  /  2047  /  /
dumiya dhumiya vAsiya, ujjoviya balikaDA avattA ya  /  sittA sammaTThA vi ya,
visohI koDI kayA vasahI  //  /  2048  //  anya prakAra se aura bhI doSoM kA
kathata gAthA 2052-53-54 meM huA hai yathA- padamArga, saMkramaNamArga,
dagavINikA, grISmaRtu meM dIvAla meM khaDDA kara havA kA rAstA banAnA, sardI,
varSA meM aise sthAnoM ko banda karanA, jIrNa dIvAla Adi ko ThIka karanA, bila,
gaDDhe Adi ko ThIka karanA, makAna se pAnI cUtA ho to ThIka karanA, dIvAla Adi
kI saMdhiyoM ko ThIka karanA ityAdi  /  [ nizIthasUtra uparyukta parikarma ke
kArya sAdhu ke uddezya se karane para vaha zayyA " parikarma doSa" vAlI hotI hai
/  hInAdhika sAvadya pravRtti ke anusAra prAyazcittasthAna va tapa meM
hInAdhikatA hotI hai  /  bhASyakAra ne batAyA hai ki uttaraguNa ke va
alpaprArambha ke doSa vAlI zayyA kA laghumAsika prAyazcitta hai  /
AcArAMgasUtra ke anusAra aneka parikarma yukta zayyA gRhastha ke svAbhAvika
upayoga meM A jAne para kAlAntara se sAdhu ke liye kalpanIya ho jAtI hai  /
aisI avasthA meM usa makAna meM praveza karane va rahane se koI prAyazcitta
nahIM AtA hai  /  saMkSipta bhAvArtha 1. kevala jaina sAdhu ke uddezya se athavA
jaina sAdhu yukta aneka prakAra ke sAdhuoM yA pathikoM 'uddezya se banAyI gayI
dharmazAlA Adi " uddezika- zayyA" hai  /  2. gRhastha ke apane liye banAye jAne
vAle makAna kA yA parikarma kArya kA samaya sAdhu nimitta Age-pIche karane para
yA zIghratA se karane para arthAt 5 dina kA kArya eka dina meM karane para vaha
gRhastha kA vyaktigata makAna bhI "sapAhuDa zayyA" ho jAtI hai  /  3. makAna
gRhastha ke liye banA huA hai  /  usameM sAdhu ke liye parikarma kArya karane
para gRhastha ke upayoga meM Ane ke pUrva kucha kAla taka vaha makAna "
saparikarma zayyA " hai  /  ina tIna prakAra ke doSayukta zayyA meM praveza
karane kA prarthAt rahane kA laghumAsika prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  dUsare va
tIsare doSa vAlI zayyA kA nirmANa gRhastha ke svaprayojana se hotA hai aura
prathama doSa vAlI zayyA meM banAne vAloM kA svaprayojana nahIM hokara kevala
paraprayojana se usakA nirmANa kiyA jAtA hai, yaha antara dhyAna meM rakhanA
cAhiye  /  vartamAna meM upalabdha upAzrayoM kI kalpya kalpyatA sAdhu-sAdhvI ke
Thaharane ke sthAna ko Agama meM 'zayyA, vasati evaM upAzraya' kahA jAtA hai
aura lokabhASA meM 'upAzraya yA sthAnaka' kahA jAtA hai  /

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Objective  In villages, towns, and cities, there are three types of
places:  1. **Kalpya:**  Free from defects, completely pure, suitable for the
stay of Sadhus and Sadhvis. 2. **Akalpya:**  Defective, unsuitable for the stay
of Sadhus and Sadhvis. 3. **Kalpya-Kalpya:**  Defective, but suitable for stay
after a period of time or due to changes made by individuals.  **Kalpya
Upashraya:**  1. An individual constructs a new house for personal use, social
purposes, or for collective worship of religious activities. 2. A generous
householder or a sister dedicates their extra house to the Sangha for religious
worship or for the stay of Sadhus and Sadhvis. 3. In large areas, when there are
differences of opinion within the community or Sangha, different groups
construct separate houses. 4. Even if an Upashraya exists, the need for a new
house arises for independent Poshad, Pratikraman, etc., by brothers and sisters
during Chaturmas and other periods. 5. A house built by someone is purchased for
the purpose of religious worship.  These houses are completely free from defects
as they are not built for the purpose of Sadhus and Sadhvis.  **Akalpya
Upashraya:**  1. In many villages, there are only one or two Jain householders,
or none at all. In such places, a new house is constructed for the stay of
Sadhus and Sadhvis by one individual or a group of people. 2. When it is felt
that the places of stay for Saints and Sadhvis should be separate, a new house
is constructed. 3. In newly established villages or suburbs, or in old villages
where religious sentiment or inclination increases, houses are constructed for
the religious worship of householders and for the stay of Sadhus and Sadhvis. 4.
New houses are constructed for the stay of Sadhvis and for the religious worship
of sisters.  These houses are completely Akalpya due to the presence of
provincial and mixed-caste defects, as the primary purpose of their construction
is for Sadhus and Sadhvis.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAMcavAM uddezaka ] grAma nagarAdi meM ye sthAna tIna prakAra ke milate haiM 1.
kalpya - doSa rahita = pUrNa zuddha, sAdhu-sAdhvI ke Thaharane yogya  /  2.
akalpya - doSa yukta - sAdhu-sAdhvI ke Thaharane ke ayogya  /  3. kalpya kalpya
- doSa yukta hote hue bhI kAlAntara se yA puruSAntarakRta hone para Thaharane
yogya  /  [ 141 kalpya upAzraya - 1. koI eka vyakti kevala apane liye yA
sAmAjika upayoga ke liye athavA dhArmika kriyAoM kI sAmUhika ArAdhanA ke liye
naye makAna kA nirmANa karavAtA hai  /  2. kisI udAramanA gRhastha yA kisI
bahina dvArA apanA atirikta makAna dhArmika ArAdhanA ke liye athavA sAdhu-
sAdhviyoM ke Thaharane ke liye saMgha ko samarpita kara diyA jAtA hai  /  3.
bar3e-bar3e kSetroM ke samAja yA saMgha meM matabheda hone para vibhinna pakSoM
ke dvArA bhinna-bhinna makAnoM kA nirmANa karavAyA jAtA hai  /  4. eka upAzraya
hote hue bhI cAturmAsa Adi meM bhAI evaM bahinoM ke svatantra poSadha,
pratikramaNa Adi karane ke liye dUsare upAzraya kI AvazyakatA pratIta hone para
naye makAna kA nirmANa karavAyA jAtA hai  /  5. dhArmika kriyAoM kI ArAdhanA ke
liye kisI kA banA huA makAna kharIda liyA jAtA hai  /  ina makAnoM meM sAdhu-
sAdhviyoM ke nimitta nirmANa kArya Adi na hone se ye pUrNa nirdoSa hote haiM  /
akalpya upAzraya - 1. kaI aise gAMva hote haiM jinameM jaina gRhasthoM ke kevala
eka-do ghara hote haiM yA eka bhI ghara nahIM hotA hai, vahAM sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke
Thaharane ke liye naye makAna kA nirmANa kisI eka vyakti dvArA yA kucha
sammilita vyaktiyoM dvArA karavAyA jAtA hai  /  2. santa satiyoM ke Thaharane ke
sthAna alaga-alaga hone cAhiye, aisA anubhava hone para dUsare makAna kA nirmANa
karavAyA jAtA hai  /  3. naye base hue gAMva yA upanagara meM athavA purAne
gAMva meM dharma bhAvanA yA pravRtti bar3hane para gRhasthoM kI dhArmika
ArAdhanAoM ke liye aura sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke Thaharane ke liye makAna kA nirmANa
karavAyA jAtA hai  /  4. satiyoM ke Thaharane ke liye aura bahinoM kI dhArmika
prArAdhanAoM ke liye bhI naye makAna kA nirmANa karavAyA jAtA hai  /  ina
makAnoM ke banavAne meM pramukha uddezya sAdhu-sAdhviyoM kA hone se pradezika
evaM mizrajAta doSa ke kAraNa ye pUrNataH akalpanIya hote haiM  /

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 142] **Kalpyakalpya Upashraya**  1. In large assemblies, when constructing a
new building, the needs of the saints and holy women are also considered, along
with the intended purpose of the building. 2. A house is purchased for the
saints and holy women. 3. Sometimes, a house is purchased for the joint use of
householders and saints and holy women. 4. Even in a faultless house, various
improvements or changes and additions are made for the purpose of the saints and
holy women. 5. On the occasion of Chaturmas, some improvements are made for the
convenience of the listeners, for the splendor of the assembly, or for the
necessary uses of the saints. 6. For the purpose of the saints and holy women,
sentient substances or heavy, non-sentient equipment are moved, or the house is
cleaned.  These houses, due to subtle intentions, minor beginnings, or actions,
become *kalpyaniya* after being used by householders or over time.
**Reference:** In *Shraacha. Shru. 2 A. 5 & 6*, the clothes and utensils
purchased for the saint are said to be *kalpyaniya* after being used by the
householder. In *Pra. 2 U. 1*, houses with various beginnings and actions done
for the saint are also said to be *kalpyaniya* after being used by the
householder. Based on these and other scriptural evidence, these houses are said
to become *kalpyaniya* over time.  **Summary:**  1. Houses whose construction
and actions do not involve the saints and holy women in any way are completely
*kalpyaniya*. 2. Houses whose main purpose is for the saints and holy women are
completely *akalpyaniya*. 3. Houses whose construction does not have the saints
and holy women as the main goal, but considers their needs, or where general or
specific actions (improvements) are done for them, are *akalpyaniya* but become
*kalpyaniya* over time or after being used by householders. - *Shraacha. Shru.
2. 2 U. 1*.  **Paat**  Along with knowing the options for *sadosha* and
*nirdosha* *upashraya*, it is also necessary to know the options regarding
*paat*. Because many *upashraya* have *paat* for sleeping and sitting, there are
three options regarding these *paat*:  1. *Nirdosha* 2. *Sadosha* 3.
*Avyaktadoosha*  *Nirdosha* *paat* are made as needed in the homes of
householders, in buildings for social work, in schools, and in libraries, etc.,
according to the prevailing practice in many provinces. They are sometimes
offered to the *upashraya*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 142] kalpyAkalpya upAzraya 1. bar3e - bar3e saMghoM meM apane prayojanoM ko
lekara banAye jAne vAle makAna meM santa satiyoM kI anukUlatAoM ko bhI lakSya
meM rakhakara naye makAna kA nirmANa karavAyA jAtA hai  /  [ nizIthasUtra 2.
sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke liye makAna kharIda liyA jAtA hai  /  3. gRhasthoM evaM
sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke saMyukta upayoga ke liye bhI kahIM-kahIM makAna kharIda liyA
jAtA hai  /  4. nirdoSa makAna meM bhI sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke uddezya se kaI prakAra
ke sudhAra karavAye jAte haiM yA parivartana parivardhana karavAye jAte haiM  /
5. cAturmAsa ke avasara para zrotAoM kI suvidhA ke liye, saMgha kI zobhA ke liye
athavA sAdhutroM ke prAvazyaka upayogoM ke nimitta kucha sudhAra karavAye jAte
haiM  /  6. sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke uddezya se sacitta padArtha yA adhika vajana vAle
acitta upakaraNa sthAnAntarita kiye jAte haiM athavA makAna kI saphAI kara dI
jAtI hai  /  ina makAnoM meM sUkSma uddezya yA alpa Arambha athavA parikarma
kArya hone se ye gRhasthoM ke upayoga meM Ane ke bAda yA kAlAntara se kalpanIya
ho jAte haiM  /  zrAcA. zru. 2 a. 5 evaM 6 meM sAdhu ke liye kharIde gaye vastra
- pAtra ko gRhastha ke upayoga meM Ane ke bAda kalpanIya kahA gayA hai| pra. 2
u. 1 meM sAdhu ke liye kiye gaye aneka prakAra ke prArambha evaM parikarma yukta
makAna bhI gRhastha ke upayoga meM Ane ke bAda kalpanIya kahe haiM, ityAdi Agama
pramANoM ke AdhAra se hI yahAM ukta makAnoM ko kAlAntara se kalpanIya honA
batAyA gayA hai  /  sArAMza yaha hai - 1. jina makAnoM ke nirmANa evaM parikarma
meM sAdhu-sAdhvI kA kiMcit bhI nimitta nahIM hai, ve pUrNa kalpanIya hote haiM
/  2. jina makAnoM ke nirmANa meM mukhya uddezya sAdhusAdhvI kA hotA hai, ve
pUrNa akalpanIya hote haiM  /  3. jina makAnoM ke nirmANa meM sAdhu-sAdhviyoM kA
mukhya lakSya na hokara unakI anukUlatAoM kA lakSya rakhA gayA ho yA unake
nimitta sAmAnya yA vizeSa parikarma [ sudhAra ] Adi kiye gaye hoM to ve makAna
akalpanIya hote hue bhI kAlAntara se yA gRhastha ke upayoga A jAne se kalpanIya
ho jAte haiM  /  - zrAcA. zru. 2 . 2 u. 1  /  pATa sadoSa - nirdoSa upAzraya ke
vikalpoM kI jAnakArI hone ke sAtha pATa sambandhI vikalpoM kI jAnakArI honA bhI
Avazyaka hai  /  kyoMki kaI upAzrayoM meM sone baiThane ke liye pATa bhI rahate
haiM, una pAToM ke sambandha meM bhI tIna vikalpa hote haiM 1. nirdoSa, 2.
sadoSa, 3. avyaktadoSa  /  nirdoSa pATa kaI prAntoM meM pracalita paripATI ke
anusAra gRhasthoM ke gharoM meM, sAmAjika kAryoM ke makAnoM meM, pAThazAlAoM meM
tathA pustakAlayoM Adi meM zrAvazyakatAnusAra pATa banAye jAte haiN| ve kabhI
upAzraya meM bheMTa de diye jAte haiM  /

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Uddeshak  [1.43 2. In many villages, mats are made for use by Shravaks
and Shravikas during Samayik, Poshadh, Pratikraman, etc., due to the nuisance of
creatures like scorpions and centipedes. These texts are completely pure.
**Defective Mats:** 1. Mats are made for the purpose of sitting or sleeping by
saints, or for sitting while reading lectures. 2. In many places, mats are made
for use by both Sadhus and householders. 3. Mats made for the purpose of Sadhus
and Sadhvis are purchased and offered to the Upashray. These are mats purchased
or made for the purpose of Sadhus.  **Mats with Latent Defects:** 1. Mats are
made and offered on special occasions like weddings, without considering whether
they are necessary for the Upashray. 2. Mats are offered to the Upashray with
the thought that "It is best to give a mat so that my name remains in the
Upashray." These are mats made with no purpose or with a latent purpose.  There
are no Agam texts that mention the serious defects of purpose, etc., in relation
to mats and other such items. There are also no texts available that clearly
state which defective mat remains conceivable for how long and when it becomes
conceivable.  In Pracha. Shra. 2.2 U. 3, the text related to mats states that if
Sadhus and Sadhvis wish to accept a mat, they must keep in mind: 1. Whether
there are any living beings in it. 2. Whether the householder will accept it
back. 3. Whether it is too heavy. 4. Whether it is worn out or unusable, etc.
If the mat is free of living beings, acceptable, light, and stable (strong),
then it should be accepted, otherwise it should not be taken.  Apart from this,
there is no mention of defects related to mats in the Agams. In the construction
of mats, etc., only Paricarma actions are performed, which are very minor
compared to the conceivable defects of a house that has undergone Purushantar.
That is, there is no complete violation of fire, earth, etc., in their making.
The wood is also dry, so there is no violation of vegetation. There is also
rarely any violation of Apkay. Therefore, there is no possibility of
Pradhakarma, etc., defects in them. Therefore, the only defects in their making
are Paricarma defects or Krit defects.  Just as a house with Krit or Paricarma
defects is considered conceivable over time, so too should all these defective
mats be considered conceivable over time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAMcavAM uddezaka ] [ 1.43 2. kaI gAMvoM meM makor3e, bicchU Adi jIvoM ke
upadrava ke kAraNa zrAvaka-zrAvikAoM ke sAmAyika, poSadha, pratikramaNa Adi
karate samaya upayoga meM lene ke liye kaI pATa banavAye jAte haiM  /  ye ukta
donoM prakAra ke pATha pUrNa zuddha haiM  /  sadoSa pATa - 1. santa-satiyoM ke
baiThane yA zayana karane ke liye athavA vyAkhyAna vAMcate samaya baiThane ke
liye choTe-bar3e pATa banavAye jAte haiM  /  2. kaI jagaha sAdhu aura gRhastha
donoM ke upayoga meM lene ke liye pATa banavAye jAte haiM  /  3. bane hue pATa
sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke uddezya se kharIdakara upAzraya meM bheMTa kiye jAte haiM  /
ye 'sAdhu ke uddezya se kharIde yA banAye gaye pATa haiM  /  avyakta doSa vAle
pATa - 1. vivAha Adi ke vizeSa avasaroM para pATa banavAkara bheMTa diye jAte
haiM, usa samaya upAzraya meM Avazyaka hai yA nahIM isakA koI vicAra nahIM kiyA
jAtA hai  /  2. merA nAma upAzraya meM rahe isake liye pATa hI denA vizeSa
upayukta hai, aise vicAra se bhI upAzrayoM meM pATa bheMTa kiye jAte haiM  /  ye
niruddezya yA avyakta uddezya se banAye gaye pATa haiM  /  pATa Adi saMstArakoM
ke sambandha meM auddezikAdi gurutara doSoM kA kathana karane vAle zrAgamapATha
nahIM milate haiM tathA kisa doSa vAlA pATa kaba taka prakalpya rahatA hai aura
kaba kalpya ho jAtA hai, isa prakAra kA spaSTa kathana karane vAle pATha bhI
upalabdha nahIM hote haiM  /  prAcA. zra. 2 . 2 u. 3 meM pATa se sambandhita jo
pATha hai  /  usakA sAra yaha hai ki sAdhusAdhvI pATa grahaNa karanA cAheM to
unheM yaha dhyAna rakhanA Avazyaka hai 1. usameM kahIM jIva jantu to nahIM hai
/  2. gRhastha use punaH svIkAra kara legA yA nahIM  /  3. adhika bhArI to nahIM
hai  /  4. jIrNa yA anupayogI to nahIM hai, ityAdi  /  yadi vaha pATa
jIvarahita, prAtihArika, halkA evaM sthira ( majabUta ) hai to grahaNa karanA
cAhiye anyathA nahIM lenA cAhiye  /  isake atirikta pATha se sambandhita doSoM
kA kathana AgamoM meM upalabdha nahIM hai  /  pATa Adi ke nirmANa meM kevala
parikarma kArya hI kiye jAte haiM jo makAna ke puruSAntarakRta kalpanIya doSoM
se atyalpa hote haiM  /  arthAt inake banane meM agni, pRthvI Adi kI virAdhanA
to sarvathA nahIM hotI hai  /  lakar3I bhI sUkhI hotI hai ataH vanaspati kI bhI
virAdhanA nahIM hotI hai  /  apkAya kI virAdhanA bhI prAyaH nahIM hotI hai  /
ataH pradhAkarmAdi doSoM kI isameM sambhAvanA nahIM hai  /  ataH inake banAne
meM kevala parikarma doSa yA krItadoSa hI hotA hai  /  kIta makAna yA parikarma
doSa yukta makAna ke kalpanIya hone ke samAna hI ina ukta sabhI doSoM vAle pAToM
ko bhI kAlAntara se kalpanIya samajha lenA cAhiye  /

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  [144] The food or dwelling made for the monks of one sect is
not considered to be inherently faulty for the monks of another sect. This topic
is not mentioned in the original scriptures but is found in ancient
commentaries. The meaning is that those who have similar principles and attire
are called "sarmik" (similar) in terms of preaching and gender. Food, dwelling,
etc., made for such a "sarmik" monk is not considered suitable for other
"sarmik" monks.  The attire and principles of the four Jain sects have diverged,
and each sect has established a completely distinct and independent existence.
Therefore, the dwelling, etc., made for one Jain sect is not considered suitable
for those of another sect.  In a small area with a small community of lay
followers, the dwelling, etc., made for all Jain sects with a mixed feeling
should be considered inherently faulty for the monks of all sects.  **Penance
for the act of "Samyoga-Pratyayik" (sexual association)**  39. A monk who says,
"There is no 'Samyoga-Pratyayik' action," or approves of someone who says so,
incurs a minor monthly penance.  **Explanation:** "Eating together is 'Samyoga',
and the action-karma-bond associated with it is 'Pratyayik'. If someone says
there is no such thing, they incur a minor monthly penance. This is the meaning
of the sutra."  "A 'Samyogik' monk who is purified by the elimination of the
eight 'Uggamdosha' (root faults) through the practice of 'Samyoga' with another
'Samyogik' monk, becomes pure. If he becomes impure due to 'Uggamdosha', then
the karma-bond associated with the act of 'Samyoga' and the penance for it are
incurred." - Ni. Churni.  Therefore, one should not have wrong beliefs and
interpretations regarding "Samyoga-Pratyayik" action. For detailed information
on "Samyoga" and "Visamyoga", it is necessary to study the commentary. For
general information, refer to the commentary of Brihatkalpa, Chapter 4, Sutra
23.  **Penance for abandoning a worthy "Upadhi" (object of attachment)**  40. A
monk who abandons a "Lauya-pay" (cloth made from bark), "Darupaya" (cloth made
from wood), "Mattiya-pay" (cloth made from clay), or any other object that is
durable and worthy of being worn, incurs a minor monthly penance.  41. A monk
who abandons a "Vath" (cloth), "Kambal" (blanket), "Pay-punchhan" (towel), or
any other object that is durable and worthy of being worn, incurs a minor
monthly penance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 144] [nizIthasUtra jaina sAdhuoM ke digabamra, zvetAmbara, mandiramArgI,
sthAnakavAsI, terahapaMthI Adi rUpa jo bheda haiM, unameM se eka saMgha ke
sAdhuoM ke uddezya se banA huA AhAra yA makAna dUsare saMgha ke sAdhuoM ke liye
prauddezika doSayukta nahIM hai  /  isa viSaya kA kathana mUla prAgamoM meM
nahIM hai kintu prAcIna vyAkhyA granthoM meM hai  /  usakA Azaya yaha hai ki
jinake siddhAnta aura veza samAna hoM ve pravacana evaM liMga (ubhaya) se
sArmika kahe jAte haiM  /  isa prakAra ke sArmika sAdhu ke liye banA AhAra
makAna Adi dUsare sArmikoM ke liye bhI kalpanIya nahIM hotA hai| uparyukta cAroM
jaina vibhAgoM ke veza aura siddhAntoM meM bheda par3a gaye haiM aura pratyeka
saMgha ne eka dUsare se sarvathA bhinna va svatantra astitva dhAraNa kara liyA
hai  /  ata. eka jaina saMgha kA prauddezika makAna Adi dUsase saMgha vAloM ke
liye prauddezika nahIM hai| choTe kSetra ke choTe zrAvakasamAja meM sabhI jaina
saMghoM ke mizrita bhAva se nirmita auddezika zayyA Adi sabhI saMghoM ke sAdhuoM
ke liye auddezikadoSayukta hI samajhanA caahiye| saMbhoga-pratyayika
kriyAniSedha kA prAyazcitta 39. je bhikkhU "Nasthi saMbhoga-vattiyA kiriyatti"
vayai, vayaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  39. jo bhikSu "saMbhoga pratyayika kriyA nahIM
lagatI hai', isa prakAra kahatA hai yA kahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
(use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-"ekatra bhojanaM saMbhogaH,
tatpratyayA kriyA-karmabaMdhaH, nAstIti, jo evaM bhASate, tassa mAsa lahuM  /
esa suttttho|" "saMbhoio saMbhoieNa samaM urvahiM solasehiM AhAkammAdiehi
uggamadosehiM suddhaM uppAeti to suddho, aha asuddhaM uppAei, jeNa uggamadoseNa
asuddhaM gehati, tattha jAvatio kammabaMdho jaM ca pAyacchittaM taM Avajjati
|"-ni. cuurnni| jisake sAtha meM AhAra Adi kA saMbhoga hotA hai aisA koI bhI
sAMbhogika sAdhu AhArAdi kI gaveSaNA meM koI doSa lagAtA hai to usa vastu kA
upayoga karane vAloM ko bhI gaveSaNA doSa saMbaMdhI kriyA arthAt karmabaMdha va
prAyazcitta AtA hai| ataH saMbhogapratyayika kriyA ke saMbaMdha meM galata
dhAraNA tathA prarUpaNA nahIM karanI caahiye| saMbhoga-visaMbhoga saMbaMdhI
vistRta jAnakArI ke liye bhASya kA adhyayana karanA Avazyaka hai  /  sAmAnya
jAnakArI ke liye bRhatkalpa u. 4 sUtra 23 kA vivecana dekheN| dhAraNa karane
yogya upadhi ke parityAga kA prAyazcitta 40. je bhikkhU lAuya-pAyaM vA,
dArupAyaM vA, maTTiyApAyaM vA, alaM thiraM dhuvaM dhAraNijjaM paribhidiya-
paribhadiya parivei, pariveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  41. je bhikkhU vatthaM vA,
kaMbalaM vA, pAyapuMchaNaM vA, alaM thiraM dhuvaM dhAraNijjaM
palichidiyapalichidiya pariTuvei, pariveMtaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Uddeshak] [145 42. A monk who breaks or causes to be broken a staff, a
stick, a writing implement, or a bamboo needle, incurs a minor monthly penance.
40. A monk who breaks or approves of the breaking of a bowl, a wooden bowl, or
an earthen bowl that is complete, sturdy, durable, and appropriate, incurs a
minor monthly penance. 41. A monk who breaks or approves of the breaking of a
robe, a blanket, or a foot-cloth that is complete, sturdy, durable, and
appropriate, incurs a minor monthly penance. 42. A monk who breaks or approves
of the breaking of a staff, a stick, a writing implement, or a bamboo needle,
incurs a minor monthly penance. Discussion: 1. That which is sufficient -
complete, of the required length and breadth - is called "alan". 2. That which
is sturdy - strong, fit for use - is called "thiran". 3. That which is non-
returnable - not to be given back to a householder, a monk, or a preceptor,
etc., i.e., for which permission to keep has been obtained - is called "dhuran".
4. That which is approved by the scriptures, has the right characteristics, or
is free from defects such as origin, etc., i.e., pure and beautiful, is called
"dharaniy". Any tool, even if complete, may become unfit for use due to wear and
tear. Even if complete and fit for use, it may be forbidden to keep it
permanently. Even if complete, fit for use, and non-returnable, it may be
defective or flawed. Therefore, the four adjectives "alan", "thiran", "dhuran",
and "dharaniy" have been mentioned. A bowl possessing all four qualities is fit
to be kept. Breaking such a bowl incurs penance. - In the scriptures, three
types of bowls are mentioned as being "jatayu-kt", meaning that a monk can only
keep three types of bowls. "Vath-kambla-pay-puchan" - this second sutra mentions
three types of garments. Here, the commentary and the commentator refer to "pay-
puchan" as a garment, but do not interpret it as meaning "cleaning". This second
sutra and the third sutra regarding the staff, etc., have the following
commentary verse: "Payammi u jo gamo, niyama vath-ammi hoti so cheva. Dand-
gamadisu taha, pugve avarammi y padammi." [2164] This verse, related to the
second sutra, also refers to a garment, not to cleaning. The ten sutras related
to cleaning are after the staff sutra. They cover all aspects of cleaning.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAMcavAM uddezaka] [145 42. je bhikkhU daMDagaM vA, laTThiyaM vA, avalehaNiyaM
vA, veNusUI vA palibhaMjiya-palibhaMjiya parihavei, pariveMtaM vA, sAijjai  /
40. jo bhikSu tubapAtra, kASTha pAtra yA miTTI ke pAtra ko jo paripUrNa
(pramANayukta) haiM, dRr3ha (kArya ke yogya) haiM, rakhane yogya haiM aura
kalpanIya haiM, unheM Tukar3e kara karake paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 41. jo bhikSu paripUrNa, dRr3ha, rakhane yogya va
kalpanIya vastra, kaMbala yA pAdapoMchana ko khaMDakhaMDa karake paraThatA hai
yA paraThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  42. jo bhikSu daMDa, lAThI,
avalekhanikA yA bAMsa kI sUI ko tor3a-tor3a kara paraThatA hai |y paraThane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  use laghumAsika prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  vivecana-
jaM pajjattaM taM alaM, daDhaM thiraM, apaDihAriyaM dhuvaM tu| lakkhaNa juttaM
pAyaM, taM hoMti dhAraNijjaM tu  // 2159 //  1. jo paryApta hai--paripUrNa hai,
jitanA laMbA-caur3A parimANa cAhiye utanA hai, vaha "alaM" kahalAtA hai| 2. jo
dRDha hai-majabUta hai-kAma Ane yogya hai, vaha "thiraM" kahalAtA hai| 3. jo
apaDihArI hai-apratyarpaNIya hai, gRhastha yA sAdhu athavA prAcArya Adi kisI ko
punaH dene yogya nahIM hai arthAt jisake liye rakhane ko prAjJA prApta hai, vaha
"dhuvaM" kahalAtA hai| 4. jo Agamokta hai, lakSaNa yukta hai athavA udgama Adi
doSoM se rahita hai arthAt zuddha evaM suzobhita hone se kalpanIya hai, vaha
"dhAraNIya" kahalAtA hai| koI bhI upakaraNa pramANa yukta hote hue bhI jIrNa
hone se kArya ke ayogya ho sakatA hai, pramANayukta aura kArya yogya hote hue
bhI usako sadA rakhane kI anAjJA ho sakatI hai, pramANa yukta, kArya yogya aura
apaDihArI hote hue bhI lakSaNahIna yA doSayukta ho sakatA hai| ataH alaM,
thiraM, dhuvaM, dhAriNijja ye cAra vizeSaNa kahe gaye haiN| cAroM vizeSaNoM se
yukta pAtra dhAraNa karane yogya hotA hai  /  aise pAtra ko Tukar3e-Tukar3e
karake paraThane para prAyazcitta AtA hai| - AgamoM meM aneka jagaha tIna
prakAra ke pAtroM ko jAtiyukta kathana kiyA gayA hai, usakA Azaya yaha hai ki
sAdhu tIna prakAra ke pAtra hI dhAraNa kara sakatA hai| vatthaM-kaMbalaM-
pAyapuchaNaM-isa dUsare sUtra meM tIna prakAra ke vastroM kA kathana huA hai  /
yahA~ niyukti evaM bhASyakAra 'pAyapuchaNaM' se vastra kA hI nirdeza karate haiM
kintu pAyapuchaNa se rajoharaNa kA artha nahIM karate  /  isa dUsare sUtra ke
tathA tIsare daMDAdi sUtra ke saMbaMdha meM bhASyagAthA isa prakAra hai pAyammi
u jo gamo, NiyamA vatthammi hoti so ceva  /  daMDagamAdisu tahA, pugve avarammi
ya padammi  // 2164 //  dvitIya sUtra se saMbaMdhita isa gAthA meM bhI vastra kA
hI nirdeza hai, rajoharaNa kA saMketa nahIM hai| rajoharaNa saMbaMdhI dasa sUtra
daMDasUtra ke bAda meM haiM hii| unameM rajoharaNa saMbaMdhI sabhI viSayoM kA
kae

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīth Sūtra and the Concept of Paypuchaṇ  The Nishīth Sūtra mentions the
concept of paypuchaṇ along with the statement of prāyaścitta. Therefore, the
statement of paypuchaṇ in relation to clothes is merely a tool for clothes and
is different from rajoharaṇ. If the word paypuchaṇ was used in place of
rajoharaṇ in the following 10 sūtras, it would be appropriate to understand
paypuchaṇ as rajoharaṇ, but this is not the case. ... In other words, in the
Āgamas, wherever there is a statement about topics related to rajoharaṇ, the
word rajoharaṇ is used. Where the word paypuchaṇ is used, it is not appropriate
to interpret it as rajoharaṇ.  Therefore, the meaning of this second sūtra is
that "alṁ thiraṁ dhāraṇijja" - one should not tear up clothes. If they are worn
out and no longer suitable for any purpose, they can be discarded. If one uses
clothes that are fit for discarding without discarding them, they still incur
prāyaścitta.  **Danda etc.** - In this sūtra, "al-thiraṁ" etc. are not
adjectives. The reason for this is that whether danda etc. are fit to be worn or
not, when they become unusable, they should be discarded in the state they are
in. These four are auxiliary tools, therefore, when the cause ceases, they can
be discarded even if they are still usable, and if they are unusable, they
should be discarded in the same state in the sthāṇḍila. There is a possibility
of getting hurt by their pieces. Therefore, one should understand that tearing
them up is prohibited and incurs prāyaścitta.  If all three types of clothes are
worn out, there is no prāyaścitta in tearing them up and discarding them. If
earthen and bamboo vessels are worn out or unusable, there is no prāyaścitta in
tearing them up and discarding them. If a wooden vessel is worn out or unusable,
there is still a possibility of getting hurt by its pieces, therefore, one
should understand that it should not be torn up like danda etc.  The purpose of
having a separate sūtra for danda etc. is clear - they are auxiliary tools and
can be taken back even after being given away.  The purpose of having two
separate sūtras for clothes and vessels is also this - there is some difference
in their discarding and non-returnable nature, i.e., clothes are not taken and
returned, while vessels are sometimes taken and returned for various reasons
like applying paste etc. Due to this difference, separate sūtras have been
stated for them.  **Paribhidai** - Three different actions are used in the three
sūtras. Therefore, paribhidai means to break. Palichhidai means to tear.
Palibhanjai means to break. One should understand the characteristics of these
three words in this way.  **Prāyaścitta for Opposite Practices Related to
Rajoharaṇ**  43. If a monk performs rajoharaṇ without the proper measurement, or
if he intends to do so, he incurs prāyaścitta.  44. If a monk performs rajoharaṇ
with excessive fineness, or if he intends to do so, he incurs prāyaścitta.  45.
If a monk binds rajoharaṇ with a kandausaga, or if he intends to do so, he
incurs prāyaścitta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [nizIthasUtra sAtha prAyazcitta kathana kiyA gayA hai  /  ataH vastroM ke sAtha
jo pAyapuchaNa kA kathana hai, vaha vastra kA hI eka upakaraNa hai aura vaha
rajoharaNa se bhinna hai| yadi Age kahe gaye una 10 sUtroM meM rajoharaNa ke
sthAna para pAyapuchaNa zabda kA prayoga hotA to pAyapuchaNa se rajoharaNa artha
mAnanA ucita hotA, kintu aisA nahIM hai  / .... arthAt AgamoM meM jahA~-jahA~
rajoharaNa se saMbaMdhita viSayoM kA kathana hai vahA~ rajoharaNa zabda kA hI
prayoga huA hai  /  pAyapuchaNa zabda kA jahA~ prayoga hai vahAM rajoharaNa
artha karanA ucita nahIM hai| ataH isa dUsare sUtra kA bhAvArtha hai ki "alaM
thiraM dhAraNijja' vastra ko Tukar3e karake nahIM paraThanA caahiye| jIrNa hone
para kisI kArya ke yogya nahIM rahe to paraThA jA sakatA hai  /  paraThane yogya
vastrAdi ko na paraTha kara upayoga meM le to bhI prAyazcitta pAtA hai| daMDa
Adi -isa sUtra meM 'ala-thiraM" Adi vizeSaNa nahIM haiN| isakA kAraNa yaha ki
daMDa Adi dhAraNa karane yogya hoM athavA na hoM, anupayogI hone para unako jisa
avasthA meM hoM usI avasthA meM paraTha denA yA chor3a denA cAhiye  /  ye cAroM
aupagrahika upakaraNa haiM, ataH kAraNa ke samApta hote hI upayoga ke yogya hone
para bhI ye chor3e jA sakate haiM aura ayogya hone para sthaMDila meM paraThanA
ho to usI avasthA meM paraTha denA caahiye| inake Tukar3e karane se hAtha Adi
meM lagane kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai  /  ataH inake liye Tukar3e karane kA
niSedha aura prAyazcitta samajhanA caahiye| tInoM prakAra ke vastra yadi jIrNa
hoM to Tukar3e karake paraThane meM koI prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai| pAtroM meM se
miTTI aura tube ke jIrNa yA ayogya hone para Tukar3e karake paraThane para
prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai| kASTha kA pAtra yadi jIrNa yA ayogya ho to bhI usake
Tukar3e karane meM hAthoM meM lagane kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai, ata: usake liye
bhI daMDa Adi ke samAna Tukar3e nahIM karane kA samajha lenA cAhiye  /  daMDa
Adi kA alaga sUtra karane kA Azaya spaSTa hai ki ye praupagrahika upakaraNa haiM
aura lauTAne kA kahakara bhI liye jA sakate haiN| vastra, pAtra ke do alaga
sUtra kahane kA Azaya bhI yaha hai ki donoM ke paraThane meM tathA
apratihArikatA meM kucha aMtara hotA hai arthAt vastra ke lene aura lauTAne kA
vyavahAra nahIM hai aura pAtra to lepa lagAne Adi kaI kAraNoM se kabhI lekara
lauTAye bhI jAte haiM  /  isI aMtara ke kAraNa inake bhinnabhinna sUtra kahe
hai| paribhidai-tIna sUtroM meM bhinna-bhinna tIna kriyAoM kA prayoga huA hai|
ata: paribhidai phor3anA  /  palichidai-phAr3anA  /  palibhaMjai -tor3anA  /
isa prakAra tInoM zabdoM kI vizeSatA samajhanI caahiye| rajoharaNa sambandhI
viparIta anuSThAna-prAyazcitta 43. je bhikkhU airegapamANaM rayaharaNaM dharei,
dharetaM vA saaijji| 44. je bhikkhU suhumAiM rayaharaNa-sIsAiM karei, kareMtaM
vA sAijjai  /  45. je bhikkhU rayaharaNaM kaMDUsaga-baMdheNaM, baMdhai baMdhataM
vA sAijjai  /

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Uddesaka  [147] 46. A monk who binds the *rajoharan* in an improper
way, or approves of one who does so. 47. A monk who gives one *bandhan* to the
*rajoharan*, or approves of one who does so. 48. A monk who gives more than
three *bandhan* to the *rajoharan*, or approves of one who does so. 49. A monk
who holds the *rajoharan* in an *anisitundhara* way, or approves of one who does
so. 50. A monk who holds the *rajoharan* in a *vosatundhara* way, or approves of
one who does so. 51. A monk who sits on the *rajoharan*, or approves of one who
does so. 52. A monk who places the *rajoharan* under his head while sleeping, or
approves of one who does so. (He incurs the *laghumasik* penance.)
**Discussion:** The term "rajoharan" is primarily used in reference to the group
of *phalikas*, as the actions of having excessive size, fine *phalikas*, sitting
on it, and placing it under the head are only relevant to them.  1. The
circumference of the group of *phalikas* should be of proper size. The
*rajoharan* should be large enough that one can fit their foot within the area
covered by it after sweeping.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAMcavAM uddezaka] [147 46. je bhikkhU rayaharaNaM avihIe baMdhai, baMdhataM vA
sAijjai  /  47. je bhikkhU rayaharaNassa ekkaM baMdhaM dei, detaM vA sAijjai  /
48. je bhikkhU rayaharaNassa paraM tiNhaM baMdhANaM dei, detaM vA sAijjai  /
49. je bhikkhU rayaharaNaM aNisiTuMdharei, dharataM vA saaijji| 50. je bhikkhU
rayaharaNaM vosaTuMdharei, dharataM vA saaijji| 51. je bhikkhU rayaharaNaM
ahiTThai, ahi...taM vA sAijjai  /  52. je bhikkhU rayaharaNaM ussIsa-mUle
Thavei, ThaveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  43. jo bhikSu pramANa se bar3A rajoharaNa
rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  44. jo bhikSu rajoharaNa
kI phaliyA~ sUkSma bArIka banAtA hai yA banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 45.
jo bhikSu rajoharaNa ko "kaMDUsaga baMdhana" se bA~dhatA hai yA bA~dhane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 46. jo bhikSu rajoharaNa ko pravidhi se bAMdhatA hai yA
bAdhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  47. jo bhikSu rajoharaNa ke eka
baMdhana detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  48. jo bhikSu
rajoharaNa ke tIna se adhika baMdhana detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 49. jo bhikSu akalpanIya rajoharaNa dhAraNa karatA hai yA dhAraNa karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 50. jo bhikSu rajoharaNa ko zarIra-pramANa kSetra
se dUra rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 51. jo bhikSa
rajoharaNa para adhiSThita hotA hai yA adhiSThita hone vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 52. jo bhikSu sote samaya rajoharaNa ko zira ke nIce-sirahAne rakhatA hai
yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai
/ ) vivecana-"rajoharaNa' zabda kA prayoga mukhya rUpa se phaliyoM ke samUha
bhAga kI apekSA se kahA gayA hai| kyoMki adhika pramANa, sUkSma phaliyA~,
adhiSThita honA, sirahAne rakhanA Adi kAryoM kA sambandha unake lie hI saMgata
hotA hai  /  1. airegapamANaMphaliyoM ke samUha kA gherA pramANopeta honA cAhie
/  rajoharaNa ke dvArA eka bAra meM pUjI huI bhUmi meM apanA pA~va A sake, itanA
pramANa phaliyoM ke samUha kA honA caahie|

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[148] [Nishi Sutra] In the commentaries, a measurement of 32 angulas is
mentioned, which is considered appropriate for the circumference of the fruit. A
group of fruits with a circumference of 32 angulas requires a minimum of 16
angulas wide land for sweeping. The length of a foot is usually between 12 and
15 angulas. This allows for the proper performance of the act of sweeping.
Therefore, the measurement of the broom should be understood in relation to its
circumference. The measurement of 32 angulas should not be understood in
relation to the length of the broom stick. A 9-year-old monk may have a height
of 2.5 feet, and a 20-year-old monk may have a height of 6 feet. The rule of 32
angulas for the length of the stick is not suitable for everyone. The
circumference of 32 angulas should not be considered absolute, but rather as an
upper limit. From the sutra text, it is sufficient to understand that the broom
should have a circumference or length that allows for the proper performance of
the act of sweeping, according to the length of the body and the foot. Any
circumference or length beyond that is unnecessary and is considered excessive
broom. It should be understood that using a broom smaller than the prescribed
measurement is also a fault and requires atonement. 2. After mentioning the
measurement of the broom in terms of the circumference of all the fruits, this
section discusses the quantity of those fruits. The top of the broom, i.e., the
top of the fruits that are strung together, will be very thin if the fruits are
thin. This will result in a larger number of fruits, and the thin top fruits
will not be very durable. Therefore, each fruit and its top should not be too
thin, but should be of medium size. 3. 'Kandu sag bandhan' - Kandu sag
bandhanam, tajjaitarena jo urayaharanam. Kanduso pun patta u anadino dosha.
Bandhan 2175. Meaning - Binding the fruits together with a string of the same
type (wool, etc.) or of a different type is called "Kandu sag bandhan", and
binding them with a cloth strip is called "Kandu sag patta". These are forms of
faults, and therefore require atonement. The commentary states that if the
fruits of the broom become worn out and break apart, binding them together will
prevent them from scattering and will also facilitate transcription. For
example, "Etehi karahi tamev thiggal-karenam sambaddham kareti, jena
egpadilehana bhavati." 2177. This explanation also suggests that binding the
fruits together is the meaning of "Kandu sag bandhan". 4. Avihie - Binding the
broom with a cloth strip or binding the entire broom in a cloth or bag, and
making it difficult to transcribe (for transcription) and difficult to sweep
(for sweeping), is called "Pravidhi bandhan". 5. Paran tihan - To keep the broom
properly bound with a wooden stick, three bindings can be applied. It is not
necessary to apply more than three bindings to the broom. Applying more bindings
than necessary or applying even one binding without purpose requires atonement.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 148] [nizI sUtra vyAkhyAtroM meM 32 aMgula kA nirdeza milatA hai, use phaliyoM
ke gherAva ke lie samajhanA susaMgata hai  /  32 aMgula ke gherAva kI phaliyoM
kA samUha kama se kama 16 aMgula caur3I bhUmi kA pramArjana karatA hai  /  pA~va
kI lambAI 12 se 15 aMgula taka kI prAyaH hotI hai  /  jisase pUMjakara calane kA
kArya samyak prakAra se sampanna ho sakatA hai  /  ataH rajoharaNa kA pramANa
usake gherAva kI apekSA se samajhanA cAhie  /  32 aMgula kA pramANa rajoharaNa
kI DaMDI ke viSaya meM nahIM samajhanA cAhie  /  9 varSa kA sAdhu aDhAI phuTa kI
avagAhanA vAlA ho sakatA hai aura 20 varSa kA sAdhu 6 phuTa kA bhI ho sakatA hai
/  saba ke lie DaMDI kI lambAI 32 aMgula kA niyama upayukta nahIM hai  /  32
aMgula kA gherAva bhI ekAMtika na samajhakara utkRSTa sImA kA samajha sakate
haiM  /  sUtrapATha se to itanA hI bhAva samajhanA paryApta hai ki zarIra tathA
pA~va kI lambAI ke anusAra pUjane kA kArya samyak prakAra se sampanna ho sake,
utanA gherAva yA lambAI kA rajoharaNa honA cAhie  /  usase adhika gherAva athavA
lambAI anAvazyaka hone se vaha pramANAtirikta rajoharaNa kahalAtA hai  /
upalakSaNa se pramANa se kama karanA bhI doSa va prAyazcitta yogya samajha lenA
cAhie  /  2. sumAI rayaharaNasIsAi sampUrNa phaliyoM ke gherAva rUpa rajoharaNa
ke pramANa ke viSaya ko kahane ke bAda una phaliyoM ke parimANa kA kathana isa
pada se huA hai  /  rajoharaNazIrSa arthAt phaliyoM kA zIrSasthAna jo ki Dore
meM piroyA jAtA hai, vaha jyAdA sUkSma-patalA hogA to phalI bhI sUkSma hogI  /
jisase kula phaliyoM kI saMkhyA jyAdA hogI tathA sUkSma zIrSa phaliyA~ jyAdA
TikAU bhI nahIM hotI haiM, ataH pratyeka phalI va usakA zIrSa sthAna bhI sUkSma
nahIM honA cAhie kintu ve madhyama pramANa vAle hone cAhie  /  3. 'kaMDUsaga
baMdhana' - kaMDUsagabaMdheNaM, tajjaitareNa jo urayaharaNaM  /  kaMDUso puNa
paTTa u ANAdiNo dosA  /  /  baMdha 2175  /  /  bhAvArtha - jisa jAti (Una zrAdi)
kA rajoharaNa ho usa jAti ke yA anya jAti ke Dore se phaliyoM ko Apasa meM
bA~dhanA "kaMDUsaga baMdhana" hai aura kapar3e kI paTTI se bA~dhanA "kaMDUsaga
paTTa" hai  /  ye doSa rUpa haiM, ataH inakA prAyazcitta hai  /  bhASya meM kahA
hai ki rajoharaNa kI phaliyoM ke jIrNa hone para yadi ve TUTa kara bikharatI hoM
to unako sambaddha kara dene se bikhareM bhI nahIM tathA pratilekhana bhI
suvidhA se ho sake, yathA-' - " etehi kArahi tameva thiggala -kAreNaM sambaddhaM
kareti, jeNa egapaDilehaNA bhavati  /  /  2177  /  /  isa vyAkhyA se bhI
phaliyoM ko eka dUsarI se sambaddha karanA yahI "kaMDUsaga baMdhana" kA artha
hai  /  4. avihIe - rajoharaNa ko kapar3e kI paTTI se bA~dhanA yA pUrNa
rajoharaNa ko eka vastra yA thailI meM bA~dhanA tathA duSpratilekhya (
pratilekhana ke prayogya) va duSpramArNya (pramArjana ke prayogya) ho, isa
prakAra rajoharaNa bA~dhanA 'pravidhi baMdhana' hai  /  5. paraM tihaM--
kASThadaMDa se rajoharaNa vyavasthita rUpa meM baMdhA rahe, isake lie tIna
sthAnoM para baMdhana lagAye jA sakate haiN| tIna se adhika sthAnapara baMdhana
lagAnA rajoharaNa meM prAvazyaka nahIM hai  /  viveka se jyAdA baMdhana lagAve
yA binA prayojana eka bhI baMdhana lagAve to prAyazcitta AtA hai  /

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [149 Fifth Uddeshak ] 6. Anissiddha - - "Anissittha naam titthakarehiṁ
adiṇṇa" ahva bitio aaso - jaṁ guru jaṇṁ aṇanuṇṇāyaṁ taṁ anissittha. " Gatha
Pancatirıktaṁ davve u, acittaṁ dullbhaṁ ca dosam tu. Bhavammi vannamollā,
aṇanuṇṇāyaṁ va jaṁ gurunā. || 2182 || The five types of rajoharan that are
prescribed by the Tirthankara Bhagwan are: wool, camel hair, flax, vacchakadhas,
and munja. Brih. U. 2, and Thananga A. 5. Any rajoharan other than these five
types is called "Anissiddha". The commentary also states that, based on the
distinction of dravya-kshetra-kala-bhava, any rajoharan that is different from
the five types, or is rare and valuable, or is accepted without the knowledge of
the guru, is "Anissittha". 7. 'Vosattha' - Auggha khettao, pareṇ jaṁ taṁ tu hoti
vos areṇṁ avosattha, vosatthe . Dharent aṇadi || 2185 || 7. The rajoharan kept
away from the atma-praman, i.e., the body-praman, is called 'Vosattha', and if
it is within the atma-praman avgraha, it is called 'Avosattha'. Keeping
'Vosattha' violates the injunction and incurs prāyaścitta. The meaning is that
the rajoharan should always be kept with you and near you. If it is kept at a
distance of one dhanush (bow), there is no prāyaścitta. If it is kept further
than that, there is a laghumasik prāyaścitta. In the prevalent practice, some
observe a limit of 5 hands. Some also say that the entire house is the limit.
But it is more appropriate to say atma-praman, as it can be easily and quickly
used when needed. 'Muhpottiy nisejjāe eseva gamo vosatṭā vosatu puvvavarapadesu.
|| 2188 || Thus, the commentator has indicated that the mukhavastrika and
nisadya (seat) should also be kept in mind for 'Avos' and 'Vos' by way of
upalakshana. 8. Adhiṣṭhita - Standing, sitting, and sleeping on it can be
included in being adhiṣṭhita. Since there is a separate sutra for 'Ussiśa-mūle'
(placing under the head), it should be understood that all other possible
actions are included in being adhiṣṭhita. The rajoharan is used for cleaning the
feet or the body, but it should not be used as a seat or bed. Placing it under
the head is called placing a pillow, and sleeping, sitting, etc., on the rest of
the body is called being adhiṣṭhita. That is, it is not permissible to press the
rajoharan under any part of the body.  9. Ussiśamūle - After the churni of this
sutra, the original text of the Uddeshak ends. Therefore, the eleventh sutra
"Tuyatteï" that is available seems to have been added later. The commentator has
also

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ 149 pA~cavAM uddezaka ] 6. aNisiddha - - " aNisiTTha nAma titthakarehiM
adiNNa" ahavA bitio Aeso - jaM guru jaNaM aNaNuNNAyaM taM aNisiTTha  / " gAthA
paMcAtiriktaM davve u, acittaM dullabhaM ca dosaM tu  /  bhAvammi vannamollA,
aNaNuNNAyaM va jaM guruNA  /  /  2182  //  Una kA, U~Ta ke kezoM kA, sana kA,
vaccakadhAsa kA aura mUMja kA ye pAMca prakAra kA joharaNa rakhane kI
tIrthaMkara bhagavAn kI AjJA hai  /  bRha. u. 2, tathA ThANAMga a. 5  /  inase
bhinna prakAra kA rajoharaNa rakhanA "aNisiddha" kahA gayA hai  /  bhASya meM
bhI dravya-kSetra - kAla-bhAva ke bheda se yaha kahA gayA hai ki pA~ca prakAra
ke rajoharaNa se bhinna prakAra kA athavA durlabha aura bahumUlya tathA guru kI
prajJA ke binA grahaNa kiyA gayA rajoharaNa " aNisiTTha" hotA hai  /  7. 'voTa'
- Auggaha khettAo, pareNa jaM taM tu hoti vosa AreNaM avosaTTa, vosaTThe  /
dhareMta ANAdI || 2185  /  /  7. zrAtmapramANa arthAt zarIrapramANa kSetra se
dUra rakhA gayA rajoharaNa 'vosaTTha' kahA jAtA hai aura AtmapramANa avagraha ke
andara ho to 'avosaTTha' kahA jAtA hai  /  'vosaTTha' rakhane para AjJA kA
ullaMghana hotA hai tathA prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  bhAvArtha yaha hai ki
rajoharaNa ko sadA apane sAtha va pAsa meM hI rakhanA cAhie  /  zarIra pramANa -
eka dhanuSa jitanA dUra rahane para prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai  /  usase jyAdA
dUra hone para laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai | pracalita pravRtti meM koI 5
hAtha kI maryAdA karate haiM  /  koI pUre makAna kI maryAdA bhI kahate haiM  /
kintu AtmapramANa kahanA adhika ucita hai, AvazyakatA hone para saralatA se
usakA zIghra upayoga ho sakatA hai  /  'muhapottiya NisejjAe eseva gamo vosaTTA
vosaTu su puvvAvarapadesu  /  /  2188  //  isa prakAra bhASyakAra ne
mukhavastrikA aura niSadyA ( prAsana) ke lie bhI upalakSaNa se 'avosa' 'vosa' kA
viveka rakhanA sUcita kiyA hai  /  8. ahigs - adhiSThita hone meM khar3A honA,
baiThanA tathA usa para sonA Adi kA samAveza ho sakatA hai  /  'ussIsa- mUle'
zira ke nIce dene kA alaga sUtra hone se usake sivAya sabhI sambhAvita kriyAoM
kA gradhiSThita hone meM samAveza samajha lenA cAhie  /  pAMvoM kA yA zarIra kA
pramArjana karane meM to rajoharaNa kA upayoga kiyA jAtA hai kintu Asana yA
zayyA ke rUpa meM usakA upayoga nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  zira ke nIce denA
sirahAnA karanA kahalAtA hai aura zeSa aMga se sonA, baiThanA Adi adhiSThita
honA kahalAtA hai  /  arthAt zarIra ke kisI bhI avayava ke nIce rajoharaNa ko
dabAnA nahIM kalpata hai| 9. ussIsamUle- isa sUtra kI cUrNi ke bAda uddezaka kA
mUla pATha samApta ho jAtA hai  /  ataH upalabdha gyArahavAM "tuyaTTei" kA sUtra
bAda meM bar3hAyA gayA pratIta hotA hai  /  bhASyakAra ne bhI

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [150] [Nishīthasūtra]  The term "tuyattēnte" has been used for the analysis
of "ussīsamūle" and its explanation has been completed in the discussion of the
sūtra "ussīsamūle ṭhavai". No independent sūtra with the verb "tuyattēi" has
been shown. It is clear that this sūtra was not available to the Chūrṇikāra and
the Bhāṣyakāra. Therefore, only 10 sūtras of rajoharan seem to be relevant here.
Bhāṣya Gāthā - "Je bhikṣū tuyattēnte, rajaharaṇam sīsage ṭhavejjahi" || 2192 ||
This Bhāṣya Gāthā is the explanation of "ussīsamūle ṭhavai". It is possible that
someone wrote a new sūtra after seeing "tuyattēnte" in it. But the clear meaning
of the prose is that 'a monk who keeps rajoharan at his head while sleeping is
liable to atonement'. Therefore, it is not appropriate to imagine two separate
sūtras from this prose.  **Summary of the Fifth Uddeshaka**  1-11. Standing,
sitting, sleeping, eating, excreting, studying, etc. on the sentient earth
around the trunk of a tree. 12. Getting one's sheet (etc.) sewn by a
householder. 13. Making the strings for tying small sheets (etc.) long. 14.
Eating un-sentient leaves of neem (etc.) after washing them with water. 15-22.
Not turning over the foot-cloth and staff (etc.) of the bed-maker or others at
the specified time. 23. Using the bed-spread after returning it without asking
for permission again. 24. Spinning wool, thread (etc.). 25-30. Making or keeping
a staff that is sentient, colored, and attractive with many colors. 31-32. Going
to graze in a newly settled village (etc.) or in new mines. 33-35. Making or
playing a vīṇā from the mouth (etc.) and playing other instruments (etc.).
36-38. Entering or staying in a bed that is intentional, with a visible form,
and with an action. 39. Prohibiting the action of sexual desire. 40-41. Breaking
a usable vessel or tearing pieces of cloth, blanket, foot-cloth and throwing
them away. 42. Breaking pieces of a staff and throwing them away. 43-52. Making
it bigger than the rajoharan-measure, making the beans subtle, connecting the
beans together, tying them together in an improper way, making even one
unnecessary tie, making more than three ties even if necessary. 43-52. Making a
rajoharan of another kind except the five types, keeping it away, pressing it
under the feet (etc.), keeping it under the head (etc.).  The above activities
lead to a small monthly atonement.  **Conclusion**  In the first four
Uddeshakas, all the sūtras have been collected in two divisions, but...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 150] [nizIthasUtra "tuyaTeMte" zabda kA prayoga "ussIsamUle" ke vizleSaNa ke
liye kiyA hai aura "ussIsamUle Thavei" sUtra ke vivecana meM hI vyAkhyA pUrNa
kara dI hai  /  "tuyaTTei" kriyA vAlA svatantra sUtra nahIM dikhAyA hai| vaha
sUtra cUrNikAra va bhASyakAra ke sAmane nahIM thA, aisA spaSTa jJAta hotA hai  /
ataH yahAM rajoharaNa ke kula 10 sUtra hI saMgata pratIta hote haiN| bhASya
gAthA-"je bhikkhU tuyaTeMte, rayaharaNaM sIsage ThavejjAhi"  //  2192  //
"ussIsamUle Thavei" kI vyAkhyA rUpa yaha bhASya gAthA hai  /  isameM "tuyaTeMte"
kA prayoga dekha kara kisI ne nayA sUtra likha diyA ho, aisA bhI sambhava ho
sakatA hai  /  kintu gadyAMza kA yaha spaSTArtha hai ki 'jo bhikSu sote samaya
rajoharaNa ko sirahAne rakhatA hai, vaha prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai|' ataH
isa gadyAMza se bhI alaga-alaga do sUtra kI kalpanA karanA ucita nahIM hotA hai|
pAMcaveM uddezaka kA sArAMza 1-11. vRkSa skandha ke Asa-pAsa kI sacitta pRthvI
para khar3e rahanA, baiThanA, sonA, AhAra karanA, mala tyAga karanA, svAdhyAyAdi
krnaa| 12. apanI cAdara (Adi) gahastha ke dvArA silvaanaa| choTI cAdara Adi ko
bAMdhane kI DoriyAM lambI krnaa| 14. nIma Adi ke acitta pattoM ko pAnI se
dhokara khAnA  /  15-22. zayyAtara ke yA anya ke pAdapoMchana va daNDa Adi
nirdiSTa samaya para nahIM loTAnA  /  23. zayyA-saMstAraka lauTAne ke bAda punaH
AjJA liye binA upayoga meM lenA  /  24. Una, sUta Adi kaatnaa| 25-30. sacitta,
raMgIna tathA aneka raMgoM se AkarSaka daNDa banAnA yA rkhnaa| 31-32. naye base
hue grAmAdi meM yA naI khAnoM meM gocarI ke liye jAnA  /  33-35. mukha Adi se
vINA banAnA yA bajAnA tathA anya vAdya Adi bjaanaa| 36-38. prauddezika,
saprAbhUta, saparikarma zayyA meM praveza karanA yA rhnaa| 39.
saMbhogapratyayika kriyA lagane kA niSedha karanA  /  40-41. upayoga meM Ane
yogya pAtra ko phor3akara yA vastra, kambala, pAdapoMchana ke Tukar3e karake
prtthnaa| 42. daNDa lAThI ke Tukar3e karake paraThanA  /  43-52. rajoharaNa-
pramANa se bar3A banAnA, phaliyAM sUkSma banAnA, phaliyoM ko Apasa meM saMbaddha
karanA, avidhi se bAMdhakara rakhanA, anAvazyaka eka bhI bandhana karanA,
Avazyaka bhI tIna se adhika bandhana karanA  /  pAMca prakAra ke sivAya anya
jAti kA rajoharaNa banAnA, dUra rakhanA, pAMva Adi ke nIce dabAnA, sira ke nIce
rkhnaa| ityAdi pravRttiyoM kA laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  upasaMhAra-
prArambha ke cAra uddezakoM meM saMpUrNa sUtroM ko do vibhAgoM meM saMgraha kiyA
hai kintu

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Fifth Uddeshak] [151 It is sufficient to give only a brief instruction
regarding the 52 sutras of this Uddeshak without collecting them into two
divisions. The subject matter of Sutra No. 23 is dealt with in the eighth
Uddeshak of the Kavya Vyavahar Sutra, and the subject matter of Sutras 36 and 38
is dealt with in Pracharang Shru. 2 A. 2 U. 1. The remaining subjects of this
Uddeshak are not found in any other Agam, but they are those which, while giving
clear information about the rules and prohibitions, lay down the rules of
atonement. This is the special feature of this Uddeshak compared to the previous
Uddeshaks. 1. The subject matter of 3 sutras of this Uddeshak is mentioned in
other Agams, such as sutras 23, 36, 38. 2. The subject matter of the remaining
49 sutras of this Uddeshak is not mentioned in any other Agam. || Fifth Uddeshak
ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pAMcavAM uddezaka] [151 isa uddezaka ke 52 sUtroM kA do vibhAgoM meM saMgraha
na karake mAtra saMkSipta nirdeza hI kara denA paryApta hai| sUtra naM. 23 ke
viSaya kAvyavahAra sUtra ke AThaveM uddezaka meM tathA sUtra 36 va 38 ke viSayoM
kA prAcArAMga zru0 2 a0 2 u0 1 meM vidhAna huA hai, isa uddezaka ke zeSa sabhI
viSaya anya Agama meM nahIM Aye haiM, kintu vidhi-niSedha kI spaSTa sUcanA
karate hue prAyazcitta kA vidhAna karane vAle haiN| yaha isa uddezaka kI pUrva
ke uddezakoM se vizeSatA hai| 1. isa uddezaka ke 3 sUtroM ke viSaya kA kathana
anya AgamoM meM hai yathAsUtra-23, 36, 38  /  2. isa uddezaka ke zeSa 49 sUtroM
ke viSaya kA kathana anya AgamoM meM nahIM hai|  //  pAMcavAM uddezaka samApta
//

Page #252 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Uddesa  Expiation for acts committed with the intention of non-brahmacarya
(celibacy)  1. If a monk discloses or causes to disclose the sexual act of a
woman, he incurs the offense.  2-10. If a monk engages in or causes to engage in
manual acts related to the sexual act of a woman, it should be understood in the
same way as the first uddesa.  11. If a monk himself commits or speaks about the
sexual act of a woman, he incurs the offense.  12. If a monk creates or speaks
about a quarrel related to the sexual act of a woman, or goes out of the
quarrel, he incurs the offense.  13. If a monk writes or causes to write a
letter related to the sexual act of a woman, or goes out of the letter, he
incurs the offense.  14. If a monk prepares or causes to prepare a seat or bed
for the sexual act of a woman, he incurs the offense.  15. If a monk, while a
woman is sitting or lying down, prepares a seat or bed for her with the
intention of the sexual act, and if he sprinkles cold water or hot water on her,
or causes her to be sprinkled, he incurs the offense.  16. If a monk, while a
woman is sitting or lying down, prepares a seat or bed for her with the
intention of the sexual act, and if he, after sprinkling cold water or hot water
on her and wiping her, anoints or causes to anoint her with any ointment, he
incurs the offense.  17. If a monk, while a woman is sitting or lying down,
prepares a seat or bed for her with the intention of the sexual act, and if he,
after sprinkling cold water or hot water on her and wiping her, anoints or
causes to anoint her with oil or ghee, he incurs the offense.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chaThA uddezaka abrahma ke saMkalpa se kiye jAne vAle kRtyoM ke prAyazcitta 1.
je bhikkhU mAuggAssa mehuNaM vaDiyAe viNNavei, viNNavetaM vA sAijjai  /  _2-10.
je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe hatthakammaM karei, kareMtaM vA saaijji|
evaM paDhamuddezagameNa NeyavvaM jAva je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe
aMgAdANaM aNNayaraMsi acittaMsi soyaMsi aNuppavesittA sukkapoggale NigghAyai,
NigghAyaMtaM vA saaijji| 11. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe avADi sayaM
kujjA, sayaM bUyA, kareMtaM vA, bUeMtaM vA saaijji| 12. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa
mehuNavaDiyAe kalahaM kujjA, kalahaM bUyA, kalahavaDiyAe bAhi gacchai,
gacchaMtaM vA saaijji| 13. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe lehaM lihai,
lehaM lihAvei, lehavar3iyAe bAhiM gacchai, gacchaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  14. je
bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe posataM vA piTThataM vA bhallAyaNa uppAei,
uppAeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  15. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe posaMtaM vA
piDheMtaM vA bhallAyaeNa uppaaetaa| sIodaga-viyaDeNa vA usiNodaga-viyaDeNa vA,
uccholejja vA, padhovejja vA, uccholeMtaM vA, padhoveMtaM vA saaijji| 16. je
bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe posaMtaM vA, piTThataM vA, bhallAyaeNa uppAetA
sIsodaga-viyaDeNa vA, usiNodaga-viyaDeNa vA, uccholittA, padhovittA, aNNayareNaM
AlevaNajAeNaM Alipejja vA, vilipejja vA AlipaMtaM vA, vilipaMtaM vA saaijji| 17.
je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe posaMtaM vA piDheMtaM vA, bhallAyaeNa
uppAettA, sIodaga-viyaDeNa vA, usiNodaga-viyaDeNa vA, uccholettA padhovittA,
aNNayareNaMAlevaNa-jAeNaM AlipittA vilipittA, telleNa vA jAva NavaNIeNa vA
anbhegejja vA, makkhejja vA, abhaMgeMtaM vA makkheMttaM vA saaijji|

Page #253 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
18. A monk who bathes or washes the female pudendum of a woman engaged in sexual
intercourse, or who sprinkles or pours cold or hot water on it, or who anoints,
smears, or massages it with any kind of ointment, oil, or ghee, or who fumigates
or perfumes it with any kind of incense, is guilty.  19. A monk who wears
"kasināī" garments belonging to a woman engaged in sexual intercourse, or wears
them while they are being worn, is guilty.  20. A monk who wears "ahayāī"
garments belonging to a woman engaged in sexual intercourse, or wears them while
they are being worn, is guilty.  21. A monk who wears "dhoyarattāī" garments
belonging to a woman engaged in sexual intercourse, or wears them while they are
being worn, is guilty.  22. A monk who wears "cittāī" garments belonging to a
woman engaged in sexual intercourse, or wears them while they are being worn, is
guilty.  23. A monk who wears "vicittāī" garments belonging to a woman engaged
in sexual intercourse, or wears them while they are being worn, is guilty.
24-77. A monk who massages or caresses the body of a woman engaged in sexual
intercourse, or is massaged or caressed by her, is guilty.  In this way, the
entire section from the third uddesa should be understood up to a monk who, in
the context of a woman engaged in sexual intercourse, goes out to have his head
covered, or has it covered.  78. A monk who consumes milk, curd, ghee, oil,
molasses, sugar, or any other sweet drink belonging to a woman engaged in sexual
intercourse, or consumes them while they are being consumed, is guilty. By
consuming these, he incurs the four-month penance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chaThA uddezaka] [153 18. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe posaMtaM vA
piTThataM vA, bhallAyaeNa uppAettA sIodagaviyaDeNa vA, usiNodagaviyaDeNa vA
uccholettA padhovittA, aNNayareNaM AlevaNajAeNaM AlipittA vilipittA telleNa vA
jAva NavaNIeNa vA abhaMgettA makkhettA, aNNayareNa dhUvajAeNa dhUvejja vA
padhUvejja vA dhUtaM vA parvataM vA saaijji| 19. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa
mehuNavaDiyAe "kasiNAI" vatthAI dharei, dharataM vA sAijjai  /  20. je bhikkhU
mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe "ahayAI" vatthAI dharei, dharataM vA saaijji| 21. je
bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe "dhoyarattAI" vatthAI dharei, dharetaM vA
sAijjai  /  22. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe "cittAI" vatthAiM dharei,
dharataM vA sAijjai  /  23. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe "vicittAI"
vatthAiM dharei, dharataM vA sAijjai  /  24-77. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa
mehuNavaDiyAe appaNo pAe Amajjejja vA pamajjejja vA, AmajjaMtaM vA pamajjaMtaM
vA saaijji| evaM taiyauddesagagameNa NeyavvaM jAva je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa
mehuNavaDiyAe gAmANugAmaM duijjamANe appaNo sIsaduvAriyaM karei, kareMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  78. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe khIraM vA, dahiM vA,
NavaNIyaM vA, sappiM vA, gulaM vA, khaMDaM vA, sakkaraM vA, macchaMDiyaM vA,
aNNayaraM paNIyaM AhAraM AhArei, AhArataM vA saaijji|| taM sevamANe Avajjai
cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM aNugdhAiyaM  /  1. jo bhikSu strI ko maithuna sevana
ke liye kahatA yA kahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 2-10. jo bhikSu strI ke
sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se hastakarma karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  isa taraha prathama uddezaka ke sUtra 1 se 9 taka ke
samAna pUrA AlApaka yahAM jAna lenA cAhiye yAvat jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha
maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se aMgAdAna ko kisI pracita srota-chidra meM
praviSTa karake zukra pudgala nikAlatA hai yA nikAlane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  11. jo bhikSu maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se strI ko svayaM vastrarahita
karatA hai yA vastrarahita hone ke lie kahatA hai yA aisA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 12. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se
kalaha karatA hai yA kalaha utpAdaka vacana kahatA hai yA kalaha karane ke lie
bAhara jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 13. jo bhikSu strI ke
sAtha maithana sevana ke saMkalpa se patra likhatA hai, likhavAtA hai yA patra
likhane ke liye bAhara jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| |

Page #254 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nishītha Sūtra]  154. A monk who, with the intention of sexual intercourse with
a woman, causes inflammation or pain to the vagina or anus of a woman by using
'bhilāvā' and other medicines, or approves of such an act.  155. A monk who,
with the intention of sexual intercourse with a woman, causes the vagina or anus
of a woman to become diseased by using 'bhilāvā' and other medicines, and then
washes it with cold or hot water once or multiple times, or approves of such an
act.  156. A monk who, with the intention of sexual intercourse with a woman,
causes the vagina or anus of a woman to become diseased by using 'bhilāvā' and
other medicines, washes it with cold or hot water, and then applies some kind of
ointment once or multiple times, or approves of such an act.  157. A monk who,
with the intention of sexual intercourse with a woman, causes the vagina or anus
of a woman to become diseased by using 'bhilāvā' and other medicines, washes it
with cold or hot water, applies some kind of ointment, and then massages it with
oil or ghee once or multiple times, or approves of such an act.  158. A monk
who, with the intention of sexual intercourse with a woman, causes the vagina or
anus of a woman to become diseased by using 'bhilāvā' and other medicines,
washes it with cold or hot water, applies some kind of ointment, massages it
with oil or ghee, and then perfumes it with fragrant substances once or multiple
times, or approves of such an act.  159. A monk who, with the intention of
sexual intercourse with a woman, keeps or approves of keeping 'precious
garments'.  160. A monk who, with the intention of sexual intercourse with a
woman, keeps or approves of keeping 'unbroken garments (bolts of cloth)'.  161.
A monk who, with the intention of sexual intercourse with a woman, keeps or
approves of keeping 'garments dyed with colors (such as indigo)'.  162. A monk
who, with the intention of sexual intercourse with a woman, keeps or approves of
keeping 'colored garments'.  163. A monk who, with the intention of sexual
intercourse with a woman, keeps or approves of keeping 'multi-colored or printed
(embroidered) garments'.  164-217. A monk who, with the intention of sexual
intercourse with a woman, rubs his feet once or multiple times, or approves of
such rubbing, should be understood in the same way as the explanatory sūtras 16
to 69 of the third section, up to a monk who, with the intention of sexual
intercourse with a woman, covers his head while wandering from village to
village, or approves of such an act.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 154] [nizIyasUtra 14. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se
strI kI yoni yA apAnadvAra ke agra bhAga ko "bhilAvA" Adi auSadhi ke dvArA zotha
yukta arthAt pIDAyukta karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 15. jo
bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se strI kI yoni yA apAnadvAra
ke agra bhAga ko bhilAvA Adi auSadhi ke dvArA rogagrasta karake use acitta
zItala jala yA uSNa jala se . eka bAra yA aneka bAra dhotA hai yA dhone vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 16. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se
strI kI yoni yA apAnadvAra ke agra bhAga ko bhilAvA Adi auSadhi ke dvArA roga
grasta karake acitta zItala yA uSNa jala se dhokara kisI prakAra kA lepa eka
bAra yA aneka bAra lagAtA hai yA lagAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 17. jo
bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana se saMkalpa ke strI kI yoni yA apAnadvAra
ke agra bhAga ko bhilAvA Adi auSadhi ke dvArA rogagrasta karake acitta zItala
jala yA uSNa jala se dhokara kisI prakAra kA lepa lagAkara tela yAvat makkhana
se eka bAra yA aneka bAra mAliza karatA hai yA mAliza karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 18. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se strI kI
yoni yA apAnadvAra ke agrabhAga ko bhilAvA Adi auSadhi ke dvArA rogagrasta
karake acitta zItala yA uSNa jala se dhokara, koI eka prakAra kA lepa lagAkara,
tela yAvat makkhana se mAliza karake kisI sugaMdhita padArtha se eka bAra yA
aneka bAra suvAsita karatA hai yA suvAsita karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
19. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se 'bahumUlya vastra'
rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 20. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha
maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se 'akhaNDa vastra (thAna)' rakhatA hai yA rakhane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 21. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke
saMkalpa se 'dhokara raMga (nIla Adi) lagAe hue vastra' rakhatA hai yA rakhane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 22. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke
saMkalpa se 'raMgIna vastra' rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 23. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se 'aneka raMga ke
yA citrita (chapAI yukta) vastra' rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 24-77. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se apane
pairoM kA eka bAra yA aneka bAra gharSaNa karatA hai yA gharSaNa karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai, isa prakAra tIsare uddezaka ke sUtra 16 se 69 taka ke
AlApaka ke samAna yahAM jAna lenA cAhie yAvat jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna
sevana ke saMkalpa se grAmAnugrAma vihAra karate hue apanA mastaka DhaMkatA hai
yA DhaMkane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|

Page #255 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[The Sixth Instruction] [155 Sections, 78. A monk who consumes nutritious foods
such as milk, curd, butter, ghee, jaggery, sugar or candy etc. with the
intention of sexual intercourse with a woman, or approves of one who does so.
The one who indulges in the defects mentioned in the above 78 sutras incurs the
Gurucaramasi Prayaścitta (major penance).  Explanation - 'Mātugāma' means 'one
whose body parts are like a mother, i.e., a woman'. In the Maharashtrian dialect
too, a woman is called 'Mātugāma'. Therefore, these two terms should be
understood as synonymous.  Viṣṇave - 'Viṣṇavaṇa' means 'prayer' - here, a
request is accepted.  When the rise of the Mohanīya (deluding) karmas is
intense, if a monk does not make the preliminary statements ineffective through
contemplation and requests (i.e., asks) a woman for sexual intercourse, then due
to the breach of celibacy in spirit or the breach of the fourth vow by engaging
in sexual intercourse, he incurs the Gurucaramasi Prayaścitta.  The Ācāryas
describe the difficulty of the vow of celibacy as follows: "To abstain from
sensual pleasures for one who has tasted the flavors of sensual enjoyments, and
to uphold the severe and dreadful vow of celibacy is extremely difficult."
(Uttarādhyayana 19, Gāthā 28) "For one whose self is not great but small, to
uphold the dreadful and difficult vow of celibacy is extremely painful."
(Uttarādhyayana 19, Gāthā 33)  The Ācāryas, while encouraging the vow of
celibacy, say: "This (sexual intercourse) is the root of the self and the
accumulation of great faults. Therefore, the Nirgranthas (Jain ascetics) avoid
sexual contact." (Daśavaikālika 6, Gāthā 17)  The Ācāryas, in various sutras,
caution about the vow of celibacy (Brahmacārya Mahāvrata), as it is opposed to
the liberation from the cycle of rebirth and is the mine of endless sensual
pleasures. (Uttarādhyayana 14, Gāthā 53-60; Daśavaikālika 2, Gāthā 2-9;
Uttarādhyayana 9, Gāthā 53; Uttarādhyayana 8, Gāthā 4-6, 18-19)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chaThA uddezaka ] [ 155 khAMDa, 78. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke
saMkalpa se dUdha, dahI, makkhana, ghI, gur3a, zakkara yA mizrI Adi pauSTika
AhAra karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  uparyukta 78 sUtroM
meM kathita doSa-sthAnoM kA sevana karane vAle ko gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA
hai  /  vivecana - mAuggAmaM 'mAtisamANo gAmo mAtugAmo, marahaTThavisayabhAsAe'
vA 'itthI' mAuggAmo bhaNNati" mAtA ke samAna hai zarIrAvayava jisake use arthAt
strI ko mAtRgrAma kahate haiN| tathA mahArASTra deza kI bhASA meM bhI strI ko
"mAuggAma" kahA jAtA hai  /  ataH ye donoM paryAyavAcI zabda samajhanA cAhiye  /
viSNaves - 'viSNavaNa vijJApanA- iha tu prArthanA parigRhyate  / ' mohanIya
karma kA prabala udaya hone para jo bhikSu prAgamavAkyoM ke ciMtana se use
niSphala nahIM karatA hai aura strI se prArthanA karatA hai arthAt maithuna
sevana ke lie kahatA hai to bhAva se brahmacarya bhaMga hone ke kAraNa athavA
maithuna sevana karane para caturtha vrata ke bhaMga hone se use gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  grAgamakAra brahmacaryavrata kI duSkaratA kA varNana isa
prakAra karate haiM viraI ababhacerassa, kAmabhoga rasaNNuNA  /  uggaM
mahavvayaM baMbhaM, dhAreyavvaM sudukkaraM  //  dukkhaM baMbhavayaM ghoraM,
dhAreuM amahappaNo  /  - utta. pra. 19, gA. 28 - utta. pra. 19. gA. 33
kAmabhogoM ke rasa ke anubhavI ke lie abrahmacarya se virata honA aura ugra evaM
ghora brahmacarya mahAvrata ko dhAraNa - pAlana karanA atyanta kaThina hai  /
jo AtmA mahAn nahIM hai kintu kSudra hai, usake lie ghora duSkara brahmacarya
mahAvrata ko dhAraNa karanA atIva kaSTakara hai  /  AgamakAra brahmacarya vrata
ke liye utsAhita karate hue kahate haiM mUlameyaM ahammassa, mahAdosasamussayaM
/  tamhA mehuNa saMsagaM, NiggaMthA vajjayaMti NaM  //  - dasavai a, 6, gA, 17
methuna dharma kA mUla hai aura mahAn doSoM kA samUha hai ataH nigraMtha
maithuna saMsarga kA varjana karate haiM  /  'saMsAra - mokkhassa vipakkhabhUyA,
khANI aNatyANa kAmabhoga mokSa ke virodhI haiM arthAt saMsAra bar3hAne AgamakAra
aneka sUtroM meM yathAprasaMga brahmacaryaM mahAvrata 1. dazavai. pra. 8, gA.
53-60 3. dazavai. a. 2, gA. 2-9 kAmabhogA  /  vAle haiM prataeva ye kI surakSA
ke liye sAvadhAna karate haiM - uttarA 14 gA, pranarthoM kI khAna haiM  /  2. 4.
utta. pra. 9, gA. 53 utta. a. 8, gA. 4-6, 18-19

Page #256 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Nishith Sutra]  **156]**  * **5.** Utt. A. 13, Ga. 16-17 * **6.** Utt. A.
19, Ga. 17 * **7.** Utt. A. 25, Ga. 27, 41-43 * **8.** Utt. A. 32, Ga. 9-20 *
**9.** Utt. A. 2, Ga. 16-17 * **10.** Utt. A. 1, Ga. 26 * **11.** Suyagadaang
Shru. 1, A. 4, is related to Brahmacharya. * **12.** In Acharang Sutra A. 5, U.
4, the Sutrakar mentions Santhara as the final resort for protecting
Brahmacharya, among other measures. * **13.** In Pracharang Sutra A. 8, U. 4,
the Sutrakar suggests death by hanging as a means to protect Brahmacharya and
considers such death as auspicious. * **14.** Both 'Nav Vaad' and 'Das
Brahmacharya Samadhi Sthan' discuss similar topics. Following them completely is
essential for complete protection of Brahmacharya. * **15.** Not following 'Nav
Vaad' can lead to the occasional rise of Mohkarma, which can result in all the
actions described in this section. Engaging in transgressions or immoral acts
prevents the seeker from remaining stable in self-control. The Agamas consider
Mohandha (delusion) to be a deeper blindness than other blindnesses. Therefore,
the seeker should live according to the Agamas with constant vigilance. All the
sutras in this section mention the atonement for polluting the Brahmacharya
Mahavrata. They also mention various tendencies that pollute the Brahmacharya
Vrata, and all the sutras include the phrase 'Mauggamass Mehunavadiae'. This is
because the fundamental intention in each tendency is 'to engage in sexual
intercourse with a woman'. * **16.** The Nishith Sutra is considered
confidential due to the detailed description of atonement for Brahmacharya
violation in the sixth and seventh sections. Here, confidentiality means that
the student of this Sutra should be highly qualified and that the study should
not lead their soul towards any kind of subject-passion. * **17.** In this age
of publication, it is impossible to prevent the publication of any famous Agama
or text due to the continuous development of printing presses. However, the
student of this Sutra should be determined to calm their distorted tendencies.
Only then can the study of this Sutra lead them to Samadhi. * **18.** Sutra No.
13 provides information about letter writing. According to this Sutra, it seems
that the practice of writing and keeping writing materials was prevalent in the
Sadhu community during the Agama period. This section mentions atonement for
writing a letter with the intention of sexual intercourse. Atonement for the
tendency to write, apart from the intention of sexual intercourse, is not
mentioned in any other section. While the systematic compilation of Agamas might
have happened during the time of Devadhiggani, it does not seem that the Sadhu
community completely prohibited writing and keeping writing materials before
that time. This Sutra makes it clear.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 156] [nizIthasUtra 5. utta. a.13, gA.16-17 6. utta. a. 19, gA. 17 7. utta. a.
25, gA. 27,41-43 8. utta. a. 32, gA. 9-20 9. utta. a. 2, gA. 16-17 10. utta a.
1, gA. 26 11. sUyagaDAMga zru. 1, a. 4, brahmacarya viSayaka hai  /  12.
AcArAMgasUtra a. 5, u. 4 meM sUtrakAra brahmacarya kI surakSA ke lie aneka
upAyoM kA kathana karate hue antima upAya saMthArA karane kA sUcita karate haiN|
13. prAcArAMgasUtra a. 8, u. 4 meM sUtrakAra ne brahmacarya ko surakSA hetu
phA~sI lagAkara mara jAne ke lie bhI sUcita kiyA hai aura aise maraNa ko
kalyANakArI kahA hai| 14. 'nava vADa' aura 'dasa brahmacaryasamAdhisthAna' ina
donoM meM prAyaH samAna viSayoM kA pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai  /  brahmacarya kI
pUrNa surakSA ke lie inakA pUrNa rUpa se pAlana anivArya hai| 'nava vADa' kA
pAlana na karane para yadA-kadA mohakarma kA prabala udaya ho jAtA hai jisase
isa pUre uddezka meM varNita sabhI kriyAyeM ho sakatI haiN| aticAroM kA yA
anAcAroM kA AcaraNa karane para sAdhaka apane ko saMyama meM sthira nahIM rakha
sakatA hai| AgamoM meM anya andhoM kI apekSA mohAMdha ko pragADha andha kahA
hai| ataH sAdhaka ko satata sAvadhAna rahakara AgamAnusAra jIvanayApana karanA
caahie| . isa uddezaka ke sabhI sUtroM meM brahmacarya mahAvrata ko dUSita
karane kA prAyazcitta kahA hai| sAtha hI brahmacarya vrata ko dUSita karane vAlo
aneka prakAra kI pravRttiyA~ kahI gaI haiM aura sabhI sUtroM meM 'mAuggAmassa
mehuNavaDiyAe' ye pada lagAye gaye haiM  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki pratyeka
pravRtti meM mUla saMkalpa 'strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana karane kA hai|' cha8
aura sAtaveM uddezaka meM brahmacarya bhaMga ke vistRta prAyazcita kA varNana
hone ke kAraNa bhI nizIthasUtra ko gopanIya mAnA gayA hai| yahA~ gopanIyatA kA
tAtparya yaha hai ki isa sUtra kA svAdhyAyI atyadhika yogya ho aura isake
adhyayana se usakI AtmA kisI prakAra ke viSaya-kaSAya meM pravRtta na ho|
prakAzana ke isa yuga meM mudraNa-yantroM ke uttarottara vikAsa kAla meM kisI
prasiddha Agama yA grantha kA prakAzana na ho yaha asaMbhava hai| phira bhI isa
satra ke svAdhyAyI ko cAhie ki vaha apanI vikRta pravRttiyoM ko zAMta rakhane kA
dRr3ha nizcaya kara le, tabhI isa sUtra kA adhyayana usake lie samAdhi kA kAraNa
ho sakatA hai| sUtra naM. 13 se patralekhana kI jAnakArI milatI hai| isa sUtra
ke anusAra Agama kAla meM sAdhu samudAya meM lekhana kI pravRtti aura lekhana
sAmagrI rakhane kI paramparA bhI pracalita thI, aisA jJAta hotA hai| maithuna ke
saMkalpa se patra likhane kA prAyazcitta isa uddezaka meM kahA hai  /  maithuna
saMkalpa ke atirikta likhane kI pravRtti kA prAyazcitta anya uddezakoM meM kahIM
nahIM kahA gayA hai| AgamoM kA vyavasthita khanakArya devaddhigaNI ke samaya
hayA hogA, to bhI usake pahale sAdha samudAya meM lekhanapravatti kA va
lekhanasAmagrI ke rakhane kA sarvathA niSedha rahA ho aisA pratIta nahIM hotA  /
isa sUtra se yaha spaSTa hai|

Page #257 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Sixth Uddesa  [157] Posa-mrigipada, meaning the end of the vagina. Its end is
called posaṃtāṇi. The end of the vulva is called pidruṭa, meaning the anus. He
makes it mature with intensity - uppāeṭi, and says to the woman, "This is cooked
for me," with the intention of having sex.  When the woman has some kind of pain
in her anus or vagina, she will tell me, show me, or ask for medicine, etc. With
the intention of fulfilling the desire for sexual intercourse, one should give
"bhilāvā" and other medicines for any kind of treatment.  Or, with the intention
that the husband may abandon her, if the woman asks or due to one's own impure
thoughts, one should give such medicine or ointment, making that place diseased.
The discussion of this is in Bhāṣya Gāthās 2269 to 2272. If one does this
deceitfully, then the woman may complain to the husband, and there is a
possibility of such faults. Therefore, the actions taken to cure her, which are
mentioned in the following sūtras, are when it is done with the woman's consent.
Summary of the Sixth Uddesa: 1-10. Requesting the woman for impure conduct,
performing manual acts, managing organ donation, etc. up to ejaculation. 11-13.
Disrobing the woman due to sensual desire, asking her to be disrobed,
quarreling, writing letters. 14-18. Anointing, washing, etc. the woman's vagina
or anus with the intention of sexual intercourse. 19-23. Keeping valuable,
unbroken, washed, colored, and multicolored clothes. 24-77. Grooming the body.
78. Consuming nourishing foods like milk, curd, etc. with the intention of
sexual intercourse, results in the Guru-caumāsī penance.  Many instructions
regarding the Fourth Great Vow and its protection are given in the Āgamas.
Still, in these 78 sūtras of this Uddesa, the description of what kind of
activities can happen with the intention of sexual intercourse is different from
the description in other sūtras. This is the specialty of this Uddesa.  || End
of the Sixth Uddesa ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 chaThA uddezaka [157 poSaH-mRgIpadamityarthaH tasya aMtAni poSaMtAni  /
piTThIe aMtaM pidrutaM-apAnadvAramityarthaH  /  ut prAbalyena pAkayati-uppAeti,
saNe-koueNa'uppakkaM mameyaM sei' tti kAuM  /  strI ke apAnadvAra yA yonidvAra
meM kisI prakAra kI pIr3A hone para vaha mujha se kahegI yA dikhAyegI yA
aauSadha pUchegI ityAdi saMkalpa se 'bhilAvA Adi auSadha' kisI bhI upacAra ke
nimitta se denA, jisase maithuna ke saMkalpa ko saphala karane kA avasara
milegaa| athavA pati usakA parityAga kara de, isa saMkalpa se strI ke pUchane
para yA apane malina vicAroM se aisI auSadha yA lepa dekara usa sthAna ko
rogagrasta krnaa| isakA vivecana bhASya gAthA 2269 se 2272 taka hai| dhokhe se
aisA karane para to vaha pati se zikAyata kare ityAdi doSoM kI sambhAvanA rahatI
hai  /  ataH strI kI icchA se karane para hI phira use ThIka karane kI jo
kriyAe~ kI jAtI haiM, unakA kathana Age ke sUtroM meM hai| chaThe uddezaka kA
sArAMza 1-10 kuzIla-sevana ke lie strI ko nivedana karanA, hasta karma karanA,
aMgAdAna kA saMcAlana Adi pravRtti karanA yAvat zukrapAta krnaa| 11-13
viSayecchA se strI ko vastrarahita karanA, vastrarahita hone ke liye kahanA,
kalaha karanA, patra likhnaa| 14-18 maithuna-sevana ke saMkalpa se strI kI yoni
yA apAnadvAra kA lepa, prakSAlana Adi kArya krnaa| 19-23 bahumUlya, akhaMDa,
dhule, raMgIna aura raMgabiraMge vastra rkhnaa| 24-77 zarIra kA parikarma karanA
/  78. dUdha, dahI Adi pauSTika AhAra karanA ityAdi pravRttiyAM maithuna ke
saMkalpa se karane para gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| caturtha mahAvrata
tathA usakI surakSA ke sambandha meM aneka sUcanAe~ AgamoM meM dI gaI haiN|
phira bhI isa uddezaka ke 78 sUtroM meM maithuna ke saMkalpa se kaisI-kaisI
pravRttiyAM ho sakatI haiM, unakA kathana hai jo anya sUtroM ke varNana se
bhinna prakAra kI haiM  /  yaha isa uddezaka kI vizeSatA hai|  //  chaThA
uddezaka samApta  /

Page #258 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Uddeshaka Prayashchittas (Expiations) for the Making of Malas (Rosaries)
1. A monk who makes or approves of a mala made of: 1. Grass, 2. Munja grass, 3.
Venta grass, 4. Wood, 5. Wax, 6. Bhid (a type of grass), 7. Peacock feather, 8.
Bone, 9. Tooth, 10. Conch shell, 11. Horn, 12. Leaves, 13. Flowers, 14. Fruits,
15. Seeds, or 16. Green plants, for the purpose of indulging in sexual
misconduct.  2. A monk who wears or approves of wearing a mala made of grass up
to the one made of green plants, for the purpose of indulging in sexual
misconduct.  3. A monk who puts on or approves of putting on a mala made of
grass up to the one made of green plants, for the purpose of indulging in sexual
misconduct (incurs the Guruchaumasi prayashchitta).  Explanation: The malas
mentioned in the sutra are considered as ornaments. Sometimes, wearing them
becomes necessary to fulfill the resolve for sexual misconduct.  The commentator
has mentioned cowrie shell malas instead of conch shell malas. Possibly, the
reading 'conch' was replaced by 'cowrie' in the text available to the
commentator.  The two malas related to seeds and green plants were possibly not
present in the text available to the commentator. The explanation is provided up
to the 'fruit mala'.  There are differences in the main text of this sutra, as
well as in the order and number of words. The order has been corrected according
to the commentary. A total of 16 words have been kept, while the commentary
explains only 13 words. The explanations for conch shell, fruit, and seed malas
are missing.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM uddezaka mAlA nirmANAdi ke prAyazcitta 1. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa
mehuNavaDiyAe 1. taNamAliyaM vA, 2. mujamAliyaM vA, 3, veMtamAliyaM vA, 4.
kaTTamAliyaM vA 5, mayaNamAliyaM vA, 6. bhiDamAliyaM vA, 7. picchamAliyaM vA 8.
haDDamAliyaM vA 9. daMtamAliyaM vA, 10. saMkhamAliyaM vA, 11. siMgamAliyaM vA,
12. pattamAliyaM vA, 13. puSpamAliyaM vA, 14. phalamAliyaM vA, 15, bomAliyaM vA,
16. hariyamAliyaM vA karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  2. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa
mehuNavaDiyAe taNamAliyaM vA 'jAva' hariyamAliyaM vA dharei, dharataM vA sAijjai
/  3. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe taNamAliyaM vA 'jAva' hariyamAliyaM
vA piNaddhei, piNaddhetaM vA sAijjai  /  1. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna
sevana ke saMkalpa se 1. tRNa kI mAlA, 2. mUMja kI mAlA, 3. veMta kI mAlA, 4.
kASTha kI mAlA, 5. meNa ( moma ) kI mAlA 6. bhIMDa kI mAlA 7. morapicchI kI
mAlA, 8. haDDI kI mAlA, 9. dAMta kI mAlA, 10. saMkha kI mAlA, 11. sIMga kI mAlA,
12. patroM kI mAlA, 13. puSpoM kI mAlA, 14. phaloM kI mAlA, 15. bIjoM kI mAlA yA
16. harita (vanaspati) kI mAlA banAtA hai yA banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai
/  2. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se tRNa kI mAlA yAvat
harita kI mAlA dhAraNa karatA hai yA dhAraNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai
/  3. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se tRNa kI mAlA yAvat
harita kI mAlA pahanatA hai yA pahanane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai | ) vivecana-sUtrokta mAlAeM vibhUSA kA eka
aMga haiM  /  maithuna kA saMkalpa siddha karane ke liye kabhI-kabhI vibhUSita
honA bhI prAvazyaka hotA hai  /  kI mAlA ke sthAna para cUrNikAra ne kauDI kI
mAlA kA ullekha kiyA hai  /  sambhavata: unake sAmane 'zaMkha' ke sthAna para
'kauDI' kA pATha rahA hogA  /  vIja va harita sambandhI do mAlAoM kA pATha
cUrNikAra ke sAmane nahIM rahA hogA  /  'phalamAlA' taka zabdoM kI vyAkhyA kI
gaI hai  /  isa sUtra ke mUla pATha meM tathA zabdoM ke krama va saMkhyA meM
bhinnatA milatI hai  /  cUrNi ke anusAra krama ko sudhArA gayA hai  /  kula
zabda 16 rakhe haiM, cUrNi meM 13 zabdoM kI hI vyAkhyA hai  /  zaMkha, phala,

Page #259 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[159th Uddeshaka]  The explanation of the term 'bija' (seed) and 'harita-mala'
(green garland) is not given, and the explanation of the term 'varatika'
(cowrie) is more. This term is not available in any text.  In these three
sutras, three actions are mentioned: In the first sutra, the verb 'kareti' (to
make) is stated. In the second sutra, the verb 'dhareti' (to hold) is stated. In
the third sutra, the verb 'pindadheti' (to wear) is stated.  Here, 'kareti'
means to make, i.e., to create. 'Dhareti' means to hold, i.e., to keep with
oneself. 'Pindadheti' means to wear, i.e., to wear it oneself. Thus, the three
verbs have different meanings.  Similarly, in the subsequent sutras, the use of
these three verbs is found, and the same meanings apply everywhere.  Expiation
for the formation of the root, etc.  4. A bhikkhu who, with the intention of
sexual intercourse with a woman, makes -  1. an iron ornament, 2. a copper
ornament, 3. a tin ornament, 4. a glass ornament, 5. a silver ornament, 6. a
gold ornament, or approves of the one who makes it.  5. A bhikkhu who, with the
intention of sexual intercourse with a woman, holds -  an iron ornament up to a
gold ornament, or approves of the one who holds it.  6. A bhikkhu who, with the
intention of sexual intercourse with a woman, wears -  an iron ornament up to a
gold ornament, or approves of the one who wears it.  (He incurs the Guru-
chaumasi prayashchitta.)  Explanation - The restraint of the one who is burning
with passion is the abandonment of the six-fold activity. There, the faults of
bondage, etc. arise. "Therefore, he does not make, nor hold, nor wear [them]."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [159 sAtavA~ uddezaka ] bIja, harita mAlA kI vyAkhyA nahIM hai tathA varATikA (
kauDI) zabda kI vyAkhyA adhika hai  /  vaha zabda kisI bhI prati meM upalabdha
nahIM hai  /  ina tIna sUtroM meM tIna kriyAyeM kahI gaI haiMprathama sUtra meM
'karei' kriyA kA kathana hai  /  dvitIya sUtra meM 'dharei' kriyA kA kathana hai
/  tRtIya sUtra meM 'piNa' kriyA kA kathana hai  /  yahA~ karei kA artha karanA
hai arthAt banAnA hai, dharei kA artha dhAraNa karanA hai arthAt apane pAsa
rakhanA hai  /  piNai kA artha pahananA hai arthAt svayaM pahanatA hai ityAdi  /
isa prakAra tInoM kriyAoM ke bhinna-bhinna artha haiM  /  isI prakAra Age ke
sUtroM meM ina tIna kriyAtroM kA prayoga hai, unameM bhI sarvatra ukta prartha
hI....... hotA hai  /  dhAtu ke nirmANa prAdi kA prAyazcitta 4. je bhikkhU
mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe 1. ayalohANi vA, 2. taMbalohANi vA, 3. tauyalohANi vA,
4. sIsalohANi vA, 5. ruppa - lohANi vA, 6. suvaNalohANi vA karei, kareMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  5. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe ayalohANi vA jAva
suvaNNalohANi vA dharei, dharetaM vA sAijjai  /  6. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa
mehuNavaDiyAe ayalohANi vA jAva suvaNNalohANi vA piNaddhei, piNaddhetaM vA
sAijjai  /  4. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se-- 1. lohe
kA kar3A, 2. tAMbe kA kar3A, 6 . trapuSa kA kar3A, 4. zIze kA kar3A, 5. cAMdI kA
kar3A, 6, sone kA kar3A banAtA hai yA banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  5.
jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se lohe kA kar3A yAvat sone
kA kar3A dhAraNa karatA hai yA dhAraNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
6. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se lohe kA kar3A yAvat
sone kA kar3A pahanatA hai yA pahanane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai  / ) vivecana-dhamaMta phumaMtassa saMjama -
chakkAyavirAhaNA  /  rAule mUijjai tattha baMdhaNAdiyA ya dosA | "jamhA ete dosA
tamhA No kareti No dhareti, No piNaddheti  //  cUrNa  //

Page #260 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
160] [In the Nishitha Sutra, lighting a fire by means of the dharma to heat iron
and other materials, stimulating the air, and harming the six types of living
beings constitute restraint. 'Raul' is a type of instrument in which thick wires
are inserted into the holes and then pulled to make thin wires. The act of
inserting the wires, tightening them, and pulling them, etc. are flawed actions.
Therefore, a monk does not make, keep, or wear hard or wire ornaments. Sutras 1,
2, and 3 mention the making, keeping, and wearing of garlands. Sutras 7, 8, and
9 mention the making, keeping, and wearing of ornaments. Therefore, it seems
appropriate to interpret Sutras 4, 5, and 6 as referring to the wearing of iron
ornaments. Ornaments can be worn on the hands or feet according to one's
preference. In Sutra 6, the reading 'pariṇaddhe i' is available instead of the
verb 'piṇaddhe'. The commentator has accepted the verb 'piṇaddhe' and also
referred to it in the seventeenth topic. Therefore, the verb 'piṇaddhe' is
retained in the original text. Atonement for making ornaments, etc. 7. A monk
who, with the intention of sexual intercourse, makes 1. garlands, 2. half-
garlands, 3. single-stranded garlands, 4. pearl garlands, 5. gold garlands, 6.
gem garlands, 7. waist-bands, 8. bracelets, 9. armlets, 10. earrings, 11.
sashes, 12. crowns, 13. pendant-threads, or 14. gold threads, or approves of
someone making them, incurs the offense. 8. A monk who, with the intention of
sexual intercourse, wears garlands 'up to' gold threads, or approves of someone
wearing them, incurs the offense. 9. A monk who, with the intention of sexual
intercourse, puts on garlands 'up to' gold threads, or approves of someone
putting them on, incurs the offense of Guru-Chaumasi penance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 160] [nizIthasUtra lohe Adi ko garma karane ke liye dhamaNa ke dvArA agni
jalAne meM, vAyu ko prerita karane meM saMyama kI evaM chaH kAya jIvoM kI
virAdhanA hotI hai| 'rAula'-eka prakAra kA yantra hai jisameM bane hue chidroM
meM moTe tAra DAlakara tathA unheM khIMca kara patale tAra banAkara taiyAra kiye
jAte haiM usameM tAroM kA DAlanA, unheM kasanA evaM khIMcanA Adi kriyAjanya doSa
hote haiM ityAdi doSa haiM, ataH bhikSu kaDe yA unake tAra nahIM banAtA hai,
nahIM rakhatA hai evaM nahIM pahanatA hai  /  sUtra naM. 1, 2, 3 meM mAlAoM ke
banAne, rakhane aura pahanane kA kahA hai| sUtra naM. 7, 8, 9 meM AbhUSaNa
banAne, rakhane aura pahanane kA kahA hai| ataH sUtra 4, 5, 6, se lohe ke kaDe
pahananA-yaha artha karanA upayukta lagatA hai| kaDe hAthoM meM yA pA~voM meM
apanI ruci anusAra pahane jA sakate haiM  /  sUtra naM 6 meM 'piNaddhe i' kriyA
ke sthAna para 'paribhujaI' kriyA kA pATha upalabdha hotA hai| cUrNikAra ne
'piNaddhei' kriyA ko svIkAra karake hI vyAkhyA kI hai tathA satrahaveM uddezaka
meM 'piNaddhei' kriyA kA saMketa kiyA hai  /  ataH yahA~ mUla pATha meM
'piNaddhei' kriyA hI rakhI gaI hai| AbhUSaNa-nirmANa Adi ke prAyazcitta 7. je
bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe 1. hArANi vA, 2. addhahArANi vA, 3. egAvalI
vA, 4. muttAvalI vA, 5. kaNagAvalI vA, 6. rayaNAvalI vA, 7. kaDagANi vA, 8.
tuDiyANi vA, 9. keUrANi vA, 10. kuMDalANi vA, 11. paTTANi vA, 12. mauDANi vA,
13. palaMbasuttANi vA, 14. suvaNNasuttANi vA karei, kareMtaM vA saaijji| 8. je
bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe hArANi vA 'jAva' suvaNNasuttANi vA dharei,
dharataM vA saaijji| 9. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe hArANi vA 'jAva'
suvaNNasuttANi vA piNaddhei, piNaddhetaM vA saaijji| 7. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha
maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se 1 hAra, 2. arddhahAra, 3. ekAvalI, 4. muktAvalI,
5. kanakAvalI, 6. ratnAvalI, 7. kaTisUtra, 8. bhujabaMdha, 9. keyUra-kaMThA, 10.
kuDala, 11. paTTa, 12. mukuTa, 13. pralaMbasUtra yA 14. suvarNasUtra banAtA hai
yA banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  8. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna
sevana ke saMkalpa se hAra 'yAvat' suvarNasUtra dhAraNa karatA hai yA dhAraNa
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  9. jo bhikSa strI ke sAtha maithana
sevana ke saMkalpa se hAra 'yAvat' suvarNasUtra pahanatA hai yA pahanane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta aAtA hai  / )

Page #261 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  [The Seventh Uddeshaka] [161]
Explication - The original text that was likely before the commentator
(Churnikara) differs in some words and their order from the versions presented
here.  The commentator (Churnikara) first explains the term 'kundala' and the
Bhashyakara states it as 'kadagai shrabharana'. In Acarangasutra Shu. 2.13 and
Shr. 2, Adh. 15, the word 'hara' comes first, and in Acarangasutra Shr. 2, Pra.
2, Ud. 1, the word 'kudala' comes first. It appears that the text before the
commentator (Churnikara) was likely similar to Acarangasutra Shr. 2, Adh. 2, Ud.
1. The explanation seems to be in the same sequential order as those words.
Since both types of evidence are found, this should be understood as just a
difference in usage.  Expiation for Manufacture of Garments, etc. 10. A monk
who, due to the resolve of engaging in sexual intercourse with a woman, 1. makes
or wears garments made from the skin of mice, etc., 2. makes or wears fine
garments, 3. makes or wears fine and beautiful garments, 4. makes or wears
garments made from the fine hair of animals, 5. makes or wears garments made
from indigo-colored cotton, 6. makes or wears ordinary cotton garments, 7. makes
or wears special cotton garments from the Dugubala tree of the Gauda region, 8.
makes or wears garments made from the parts of the Tirodapatta tree, ... 33.
makes or wears ornamental garments, 34. makes or wears elaborately ornamented
garments.  11. A monk who, due to the resolve of engaging in sexual intercourse
with a woman, 'up to' makes or wears elaborately ornamented garments.  12. A
monk who, due to the resolve of engaging in sexual intercourse with a woman, 'up
to' binds or ties elaborately ornamented garments.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM uddezaka ] [161 vivecana - cUrNikAra ke sAmane jo prati rahI hogI usake
mUla pATha meM aura zabdoM ke krama meM prastuta pratiyoM se bhinnatA rahI hai
/  cUrNikAra 'ku MDala' zabda kI sarvaprathama vyAkhyA karate haiM aura
bhASyakAra 'kaDagAI zrAbharaNA' isa prakAra kA kathana karate haiM  /
AcArAMgasUtra zu. 2 . 13, meM tathA zru. 2, a. 15 meM 'hAra' zabda prArambha meM
hai tathA AcArAMgasUtra zru. 2, pra. 2, u. 1 meM 'kuDala' zabda prArambha meM
hai  /  cUrNikAra ke sAmane saMbhavataH AcArAMga zru. 2, a 2, u. 1 ke samAna
pATha thA, aisA spaSTa pratIta hotA hai  /  prAyaH una zabdoM kI hI kramapUrvaka
vyAkhyA kI gaI hai  /  donoM taraha ke pramANa milane ke kAraNa ise kevala
vivakSAbheda samajhanA cAhiye  /  vastra-nirmAraNa Adi ke prAyazcitta 10. je
bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe 1. AiNANi vA, 2. sahiNANi vA, 3.
sahiNakallANANi vA, 4. AyANi vA, 5. kAyANi vA, 6. khomiyANi vA, 7. dugullANi vA,
8. tiroDapaTTANi vA 9. malayANi vA, 10. pattuNNANi 11. suyANivA, 12. ciNaMsuyANi
vA, 13. desarAgANi vA, 14. amilANi vA, 15. gajjalANi vA, 16. phAlihANi vA, 17.
koyavANi vA, 18. kaMbalANi vA, 19. pAvarANi vA, 20. uddANi vA, 21. pesANi vA,
22. pesalesANi vA, 23. kiNhamigAINagANi vA, 24. nIlamigAINagANi vA, 25.
goramigAINagANi vA, 26. kaNagANi vA, 27. kaNagaMtANi vA, 28. kaNagapaTTANi vA,
29. kaNagakhaciyANi vA, 30. kaNagaphusiyANi vA, 31. vagghANi vA, 32. vivagdhANi
vA, 33. AbharaNa-cittANi vA, 34. AbharaNa-vicittANi vA karei, kareMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  11. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe AiNANi vA, 'jAva' AbharaNa
- vicittANi vA dharei, dhareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  12. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa
mehuNavaDiyAe AiNANi vA 'jAva' AbharaNa-vicittANi vA piNaddhei, piNaddhetaM vA
sAijjai  /  10. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se 1. mUSaka
Adi ke carma se niSpanna vastra, 2. sUkSma vastra, 3. sUkSma va suzobhita
vastra, 4. prajA ke sUkSma roma se niSpanna vastra, 5. indranIlavarNI kapAsa se
niSpanna vastra, 6. sAmAnya kapAsa se niSpanna sUtI vastra, 7. gauDa deza meM
prasiddha yA dugubala vRkSa se niSpanna viziSTa kapAsa kA vastra, 8. tiroDa
vRkSAvayava se niSpanna vastra,

Page #262 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nishitha Sutra] 9. Cloth made from the leaves of the Malaya mountain sandalwood
tree, 10. Cloth made from fine hair-like fibers, 11. Cloth made from the inner
parts of the Dugula tree, 12. Extremely fine cloth produced in the China region,
13. Dyed cloth of a particular region, 14. Cloth made in the land of Rome, 15.
Cloth that makes noise when walked upon, 16. Cloth as clear as crystal, 17. A
special type of cloth called 'Kotavo-Varako', 18. Blanket, 19. Special type of
blanket called 'Kharadaga Parigadi, Pavarage', 20. Cloth made from the skin of a
fish from the Sindhu region, 21. Cloth made from the fine skin of an animal from
the Sindhu region, 22. Cloth made from the fine wool of the same animal, 23.
Black deer skin, 24. Blue deer skin, 25. Light-colored deer skin, 26. Cloth that
appears to be made of pure gold due to being coated with gold essence, 27. Cloth
with borders dyed with gold essence, 28. Cloth with strips of gold essence, 29.
Cloth with gold threads woven into it, 30. Cloth with gold tassels or flowers
attached, 31. Tiger skin, 32. Leopard skin, 33. Cloth decorated with various
ornaments, 34. Cloth decorated with multiple types of ornaments, or one who
approves of such cloth.  11. A monk who wears cloth made from the skin of mice,
etc. up to cloth decorated with various ornaments, with the intention of
engaging in sexual intercourse with a woman.  12. A monk who wears cloth made
from the skin of mice, etc. up to cloth decorated with various ornaments, or
approves of someone wearing such cloth. (He incurs the Guruchaushashi
Prayashchitta).  The sutras describe various types of cloths, including those
made from leather. The Pracharanga Sutra states that these are precious and made
of leather, and completely prohibits their acquisition.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 162] [nizIthasUtra 9. malayAgiricandana ke patroM se niSpanna vastra, 10.
bArIka bAloM-taMtuoM se niSpanna vastra, 11. dugula vRkSa ke abhyaMtarAvayava se
niSpanna vastra, 12. cIna deza meM niSpanna atyanta sUkSma vastra, 13. deza
vizeSa ke raMge vastra, 14. roma deza meM bane vastra, 15. calane para AvAja
karane vAle vastra, 16. sphaTika ke samAna svaccha vastra, 17. vastra vizeSa
'kotavo-varako' 18. kaMbala 19. kaMbala vizeSa--'kharaDaga pArigAdi, pAvAragA'
/  20. siMdhu deza ke maccha ke carma se niSpanna vastra  /  21. sindhu deza ke
sUkSma carma vAle pazu se niSpanna vastra, 22. usI pazu kI sUkSma pazmI se
niSpanna, 23. kRSNa mRga cameM, 24. nIla mRga carma, 25. gaura mRga carma, 26.
svarNa-rasa se lipta sAkSAt svarNamaya dikhe aisA vastra, 27. jisake kinAre
svarNa-rasaraMjita kiye hoM aisA vastra, 28. svarNa-rasamaya paTTiyoM se yukta
vastra, 29. sone ke tAra jar3e hue vastra, 30. sone ke stabaka yA phUla jar3e
huye vastra, 31. vyAghra carma, 32. cIte kA carma, 33. eka prakAra ke
prAbharaNoM se yukta vastra, 34. aneka prakAra ke AbharaNoM se yukta vastra,
banAtA hai yA banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 11. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha
maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se mUSaka Adi ke carma se niSpanna vastra yAvat
aneka prakAra ke prAbharaNoM se yukta vastra dhAraNa karatA hai yA dhAraNa
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 12. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana
ke saMkalpa se mUSaka Adi ke carma se niSpanna vastra yAvat aneka prakAra ke
AbharaNoM se yukta vastra pahanatA hai yA pahanane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
(use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai ) vivecana-aneka prakAra ke vastroM kA va
carmanirmita vastroM kA ina sUtroM meM varNana kiyA gayA hai| _ prAcArAMga sUtra
meM ye vastra bahumUlya tathA carmamaya kahe gaye haiN| tathA inake grahaNa
karane kA sarvathA niSedha kiyA gayA hai|

Page #263 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Seventh Uddeshaka] [163] According to the words used in Acarangasutra Sru. 2,
Ch. 5, Uddeshaka 1, the commentator has given the explanation. The text before
them was similar to the Acarangasutra. The available original text of
Nishithasutra is not found in any other sutra. And it was also not before the
commentator, as is clear from his explanation. Therefore, here the text of
Acarangasutra and the commentary-approved text is given.  In these 12 sutras,
the meaning of "dharei" is to keep, and "pinddhei" is to wear and use. In some
copies, the verb "paribhujjai" is found instead of 'pinddhei', which is likely a
scribal error after the commentator.  Expiation for body movement: 13. A monk
who, with the intention of sexual intercourse with a woman, grasps or moves her
eye, thigh, abdomen or breast, or approves of one who does so, (he obtains the
Guruciaumasi expiation).  Explanation - "Akkha nama sankhaniya-padesa" - the
genital region. "Ahava annataraṃ indriya-jataṃ akkhaṃ bhannati" - or any sense
organ is called 'akkha'. "Akkha-cakṣuḥ" - Rajendra Kosh Bha. ? The word
'akkhapaya'. Here, the meaning of the genital form is relevant. Expiation for
bodily activities, etc.  14-67. A monk who, with the intention of sexual
intercourse with a woman, rubs or massages each other's feet, or approves of one
who rubs or massages, should be understood in the same way as the 54 sutras of
the Third Uddeshaka (Sutras 16 to 69). Up to a monk who, with the intention of
sexual intercourse with a woman, covers or approves of one who covers each
other's heads while wandering from village to village. (He obtains the
Guruciaumasi expiation).  Explanation - The word 'annamannassa' here indicates
that these expiation sutras are said when two monks engage in the activities
mentioned in the sutras. The commentator has said that the meaning should be
understood to include activities with a woman or a eunuch as well.  Expiation
for sitting on conscious earth, etc.: 68. A monk who, with the intention of
sexual intercourse with a woman, makes another sit or stand on the 'anantara-
hiya' (uninterrupted) earth, or approves of one who does so.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavA~ uddezaka] [163 prAcArAMga sUtra zru. 2, a. 5, u. 1 meM Aye zabdoM ke
anusAra ho cUrNikAra ne vyAkhyA kI hai| unake sAmane prAcArAMga sUtra ke sadRza
hI pATha thaa| nizIthasUtra kA upalabdha mUla pATha anya kisI sUtra meM
upalabdha nahIM hai  /  tathA carNikAra ke sAmane bhI nahIM thA aisA unakI
vyAkhyA se spaSTa jJAta hotA hai| ataH yahAM AcArAMga sUtra tathA cUNi sammata
pATha hI rakhA hai| ina 12 sUtroM meM "dharei" se rakhanA va "piNaddheI" se
pahananA evaM upayoga meM lenA aisA artha samajhanA cAhiye  /  kaI pratiyoM meM
'piNaddhei, ke sthAna para 'paribhujai, kriyA kisI sUtra meM upalabdha hotI hai
jo cUNikAra ke bAda huA lipidoSa hI saMbhava hai| aMga saMcAlana kA prAyazcitta
13. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe akkhaMsi vA, Uru si vA, uyaraMsi vA,
thaNaMsi vA gahAya saMcAlei, saMcAlataM vA sAijjai  /  13. jo bhikSu strI ke
sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se strI ke akSa, urU udara yA stana ko grahaNa
kara saMcAlita karatA hai yA saMcAlita karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /  ) vivecana-cUNi-"akkhA NAma
saMkhANiyapaesA"-yonisthAna "ahavA aNNayaraM iMdiyajAyaM akkhaM bhaNNati" athavA
koI bhI indriya akSa kahalAtI hai| "akkhaM-cakSuH"-rAjendra koza bhA. ?
"akkhapAya" zabda  /  yahAM yoni rUpa artha hI prAsaMgika hai  /
zarIraparikarma Adi ke prAyazcitta 14-67 je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe
aNNamaNNassa pAe Amajjejja vA pamajjejja vA, AmajjaMtaM vA pamajjaMtaM vA
sAijjai evaM taiyauddesagagameNa NeyavvaM jAva je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa
mehuNavaDiyAe gAmANugAmaM dUijjamANe aNNamaNNassa sosaduvAriyaM karei, kareMtaM
vA sAijjai  /  jo bhikSa strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se Apasa meM
eka dUsare ke pA~va kA eka bAra yA aneka bAra gharSaNa karatA hai yA gharSaNa
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| isa prakAra tIsare uddezaka ke (sUtra 16 se
69) 54 sUtroM ke AlApaka ke samAna jAna lenA cAhie yAvat jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha
maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se grAmAnugrAma vihAra karate hue Apasa meM eka
dUsare ke mastaka ko DhAMkatA hai yA DhAMkane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-yahA~ 'aNNamaNNassa' zabda se do
sAdhu Apasa meM sUtrokta pravRttiyA~ kareM isa apekSA ye prAyazcittasUtra kahe
haiM  /  vyAkhyAkAra ne kahA hai ki artha vistAra kI apekSA strI ke sAtha yA
napuMsaka ke sAtha bhI ina 54 sUtroM meM kahe kArya karane para prAyazcitta AtA
hai-aisA samajha lenA caahie| sacitta pRthvI Adi para niSadyAdi karane kA
prAyazcitta 68. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNa-vaDivAe 'aNaMtarahiyAe' puDhavIe'
NisIyAvejja vA tuyaTTAvejja vA, NisIyAvetaM vA tuyaTTAvetaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #264 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
68. A bhikkhu who makes a woman sit or lie down on the earth near the Maulgama's
sexual intercourse, or approves of the one who makes her sit or lie down, is
guilty.  69. A bhikkhu who makes a woman sit or lie down on the earth moistened
by water near the Maulgama's sexual intercourse, or approves of the one who
makes her sit or lie down, is guilty.  70. A bhikkhu who makes a woman sit or
lie down on the earth mixed with gravel near the Maulgama's sexual intercourse,
or approves of the one who makes her sit or lie down, is guilty.  71. A bhikkhu
who makes a woman sit or lie down on the earth mixed with clay near the
Maulgama's sexual intercourse, or approves of the one who makes her sit or lie
down, is guilty.  72. A bhikkhu who makes a woman sit or lie down on the earth
near the Maulgama's sexual intercourse, or approves of the one who makes her sit
or lie down, is guilty.  73. A bhikkhu who makes a woman sit or lie down on the
stone near the Maulgama's sexual intercourse, or approves of the one who makes
her sit or lie down, is guilty.  74. A bhikkhu who makes a woman sit or lie down
on the clod of earth or stone near the Maulgama's sexual intercourse, or
approves of the one who makes her sit or lie down, is guilty.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 164] [nizIthasUtra 69. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe 'sasiNiddhAe
puDhavoe' NisIyAvejja vA, tuyaTTAvejja vA, NisIyAvetaM vA, tuyaTTAvetaM vA
sAijjai  /  70. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe 'sasarakkhAe puDhavIe'
NisIvAvejja vA, tuyaTTAvejja vA, NisIyAvetaM vA, tuyaTTAvetaM vA sAijjai  /  .
71. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe 'maTTiyAkaDAe puDhavIe' NisIyAvejja vA,
tuyaTTAvejja vA, NisIyAvetaM vA, tuyaTTAveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  72. je bhikkhU
mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDivAe 'cittamaMtAe puDhavIe' NisIyAvejja vA tuyaTTAvejja vA,
NisIyAvetaM vA, tuyaTTAveMtaM vA saaijji| 73. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa
mehuNavaDiyAe 'cittamaMtAe silAe' NisIyAvejja vA tuyaTTAvejja vA, NisIyAtaM vA,
tuyaTTAveMtaM vA saaijji| _74. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe 'cittamaMtAe
lelue' NisIyAvejja vA tuyaTTAvejja vA, NisIyAvetaM vA tuyaTTAveMtaM vA sAijjai
/  75. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe kolAvAsaMsi vA dArue jIvapaiTThIe;
saaMDe, sapANe, sabIe, saharie, saose, saudae, sauttigapaNaga-daga-maTTiya-
makkaDAsaMtANae NisIyAvejja vA tuyaTTAvejja vA NisIyAvetaM vA tuyaTTAvetaM vA
sAijjai  /  68. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se sacitta
pRthvI ke nikaTa kI bhUmi para strI ko biThAtA hai yA sulAtA hai athavA biThAne
vAle kA yA sulAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 69. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha
maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se sacitta jala se snigdha bhUmi para strI ko
biThAtA hai yA sulAtA hai athavA biThAne vAle kA yA sulAne vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 70. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se sacitta
rajayukta bhUmi para strI ko biThAtA hai yA sulAtA hai athavA biThAne vAle kA yA
sulAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  71. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna
sevana ke saMkalpa se sacitta miTTIyukta bhUmi para strI ko biThAtA hai yA
sulAtA hai athavA biThAne vAle kA yA sulAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 72. jo
bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se sacitta pRthvI para strI ko
biThAtA hai yA sulAtA hai athavA biThAne vAle kA yA sulAne vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  73. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se
sacitta zilA para strI ko biThAtA hai yA sulAtA hai athavA biThAne vAle kA yA
sulAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  74. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna
sevana ke saMkalpa se sacitta miTTI ke Dhele para yA patthara para strI ko
biThAtA hai yA sulAtA hai athavA biThAne vAle kA yA sulAne vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai|

Page #265 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[The Seventh Topic] [165] 75. If a monk sits or lies down with a woman with the
intention of sexual intercourse, on a place infested with wood-worms or
termites, or where there are eggs, mobile beings, seeds, green grass, chaff,
water, ant-hills, etc., he incurs the Guru-Caumasi Prayaschitta (major
expiation).  Explanation - In the first four sutras, the ground is described as
insentient, but in the first sutra, it is said to be near the sentient earth. In
the second sutra, the ground is described as moist due to water, etc. In the
third sutra, the ground is described as dusty. In the fourth sutra, the ground
is described as scattered with soil. In the fifth, sixth, and seventh sutras,
the ground, rock, and pebbles are themselves described as sentient.  The
beginning of the eighth sutra mentions wood infested with life. After that,
various places infested with different types of life forms are described.  The
term 'sa-ande' here should be understood to mean a place with the eggs of lower
organisms. The words 'osa' and 'udaka' indicate the presence of water-bodied
organisms. The term 'dagamatti' indicates a mixture of earth-bodied and water-
bodied organisms. This can include the soil on the banks of ponds, etc., as well
as the moist soil prepared by potters.  The expiation for sitting or lying down
(on such places).  76. If a monk sits or lies down with a woman with the
intention of sexual intercourse, he incurs the (Guru-Caumasi) Prayaschitta.  77.
If a monk, with the intention of sexual intercourse with a woman, makes her sit
on his lap or in a chair, or feeds or gives her food or drink, he incurs the
(Guru-Caumasi) Prayaschitta.  78. If a monk sits or lies down with a woman with
the intention of sexual intercourse in a guest house, monastery, householder's
home, or resting place, he incurs the (Guru-Caumasi) Prayaschitta.  79. If a
monk, with the intention of sexual intercourse with a woman, makes her sit on
his lap or in a chair in a guest house, monastery, householder's home, or
resting place, he incurs the (Guru-Caumasi) Prayaschitta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM uddezaka] [165 75. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa
se ghuna yA dImaka laga jAne se jo kASTha jIva yukta ho usa para tathA jisa
sthAna meM aMDe, trasa jIva, bIja, harIghAsa, prosa, pAnI, kIDI Adi ke bila,
lIlana-phalana, gIlI miTI yA makaDI ke jAle hoM. vahAM para strI ko biThAtA hai
yA sulAtA hai athavA biThAne vAle kA yA sulAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai (use
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-prArambha ke cAra sUtroM meM mUla
bhUmi to acitta hI kahI gaI hai kintu prathama sUtra meM sacitta pRthvI ke
nikaTa kI acitta bhUmi kahI gaI hai, dUsare sUtra meM varSA Adi ke jala se
snigdhatA yukta bhUmi kahI gaI hai, tIsare sUtra meM sacitta rajayukta bhUmi
kahI gaI hai aura cauthe sUtra meM sacitta miTTI bikharI huI bhUmi kahI gaI hai|
pAMcaveM, chaThe va sAta sUtra meM bhUmi, zilA va DhelA-patthara svayaM sacitta
kahe gae haiN| AThaveM sUtra ke prAraMbha meM jIvayukta kASTha kA kathana hai|
usake pazcAt samuccaya rUpa se aneka prakAra ke jIvoM se yukta sthAnoM kA
nirdeza kiyA gayA hai| 'saaMDe' zabda se yahA~ vikaleMdriyoM ke aMDoM se yukta
sthAna samajhanA caahiye| aosa ora udaka ina do zabdoM se apkAya kA sUcana kiyA
hai, ataH Age Aye "dagamaTTi" se pRthvIkAya aura apkAya ke mizraNa kA sUcana
kiyA hai  /  isameM tAlAba Adi ke kinAre kI miTTI tathA kubhAra dvArA gIlI banAI
gaI miTTI bhI ho sakatI hai, vaha sacitta yA mizra hotI hai| aMka meM palyaMka-
niSadyAdi karane kA prAyazcitta 76. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe aMkasi
vA, paliyaMkasi vA NisIyAvejja vA, tuyaTTAvejja vA, NisIyAvetaM vA tuyaTTAvetaM
vA saaijji| 77. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe aMkasi vA, paliyaMkasi vA
NisIyAvettA vA, tuyaTTAvettA vA, asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA
aNugghAsejja vA aNuppAejja vA, aNugghAsaMtaM vA aNuppAeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  76.
jo bhikSa strI ke sAtha maithana sevana ke saMkalpa se strI ko ardhapalyaMka
pAsana meM yA pUrNa palyaMkAsana meM-goda meM biThAtA hai yA sulAtA hai athavA
biThAne vAle kA yA sulAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 77. jo bhikSu strI ke
sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se strI ko eka jaMghA para yA paryaMkAsana meM
biThAkara yA sulAkara azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya khilAtA yA pilAtA hai athavA
khilAne-pilAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta
pAtA hai  / ) dharmazAlA Adi meM niSadyAdikaraNa-prAyazcitta 78. je bhikkhU
mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe AgaMtAresu vA, ArAmAgAresu vA, gAhAvaikulesu vA,
pariyAvasahesu, vA, NisIyAvejja vA, tuyaTTAvejja vA, NisIyAvetaM vA,
tuyaTTAvetaM vA sAijjai  /  79. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe AgaMtAresu
vA, ArAmAgAresu vA gAhAvaikulesu

Page #266 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nishītha Sūtra]  166. If a monk sits or lies down with a woman, or approves of
one who does so, or eats or drinks or consumes food or drink with her, or
approves of one who does so, he becomes guilty.  78. If a monk, with the
intention of sexual intercourse, makes a woman sit or lie down in a temple,
garden, householder's home, or ascetic's place, or approves of one who does so.
79. If a monk, with the intention of sexual intercourse, makes a woman sit or
lie down in a temple, garden, householder's home, or ascetic's place, and feeds
or gives her food or drink, or approves of one who does so, he incurs the Guru-
caturmāsya penance.  Explanation: 'Anugghasejja' means 'afterwards'. He first
eats himself and then gives the morsel to her, i.e., puts it in her mouth.
Similarly, he first drinks from the bowl, etc., and then gives it to her to
drink. This is the medical-penance.  80. If a monk, with the intention of sexual
intercourse, treats or approves of one who treats a woman medically, he incurs
the Guru-caturmāsya penance.  Explanation: Medical treatment can be of four
types - 1. Vāta, 2. Pitta, 3. Kapha, and 4. Sannipātika diseases. If he himself
or approves of one who treats the woman for any of these, he incurs the Guru-
caturmāsya penance. The emphasis here is on the treatment of the woman.  81. If
a monk, with the intention of sexual intercourse, removes or approves of one who
removes inauspicious substances.  82. If a monk, with the intention of sexual
intercourse, applies or approves of one who applies auspicious substances. (He
incurs the Guru-caturmāsya penance.)  Explanation: Removing inauspicious
substances means cleaning the body and utensils or the house. Applying
auspicious substances means applying cosmetics, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 166] [nizIthasUtra vA, pariyAvasahesu vA, NisIyAvettA vA, tuyaTTAvettA vA,
asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA aNugghAsejja vA, aNupAejja vA,
aNugghAsaMtaM vA, aNupAeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  78. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna
sevana ke saMkalpa se strI ko dharmazAlA meM, bagIce meM, gRhastha ke ghara meM
yA parivrAjaka ke sthAna meM biThAtA hai yA sulAtA hai athavA biThAne yA sulAne
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 79. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke
saMkalpa se strI ko dharmazAlA meM, bagIce meM, gRhastha ke ghara meM yA
parivrAjaka ke sthAna meM biThAkara yA sulAkara azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya
khilAtA hai,yA pilAtA hai athavA khilAne-pilAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
(use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta aAtA hai|) vivecana-'aNugghAsejja' anu-pazcAdbhAve
/  appaNA grasitu pacchA toe grAsaM deti, evaM karoDagAdisu appaNA pAuM pacchA
taM pAeti  /  -cUNi  /  pahale khuda khAtA hai aura phira strI ko khilAtA hai
arthAt grAsa usake muMha meM detA hai  /  kaTorI Adi se svayaM peya pIkara phira
use pilAtA hai| cikitsAkaraNa-prAyazcitta 80. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa
mehuNavaDiyAe aNNayaraM teicchaM AuTTai, AuTaitaM vA sAijjai  /  80. jo bhikSu
strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se kisI prakAra kI cikitsA karatA hai
yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA
hai|) vivecana-cikitsA 4 prakAra kI hotI hai-1. vAta, 2. pitta, 3. kapha evaM 4.
sAnnipAtika rogoM kii| inameM se kisI prakAra kI cikitsA maithuna sevana ke
saMkalpa se svayaM kI karatA hai athavA strI kI karatA hai to use gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta aAtA hai| yahA~ strI kI cikitsA kI pradhAnatA samajhanI caahie|
pudgalaprakSepaNAdi ke prAyazcitta 81. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe
amaNunAI poggalAI nIharai, nIharaMtaM vA saaijji| _82. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa
mehuNavaDiyAe maNuNNAI poggalAI uvakirai, uvakirataM vA saaijjii| 81. jo bhikSu
strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se amanojJa pudgaloM ko nikAlatA hai
(dUra karatA hai) yA nikAlane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 82. jo bhikSu strI
ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se manojJa pudgaloM kA prakSepa karatA hai
yA prakSepa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta
AtA hai  / ) /  vivecana-amanojJa pudgala ko dUra karane kA tAtparya hai zarIra
evaM upakaraNoM kI yA makAnoM

Page #267 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[The Seventh Topic] [167] The purpose is to remove the impurity and to project
the pleasant material (pudgala). This means to adorn the body, possessions or
the dwelling. In the last sutra of the sixth topic, there is an expiation for
consuming nourishing food to strengthen the body. Therefore, this statement
should be understood in relation to the external skin etc. of the body. The
statement regarding medical treatment is made in sutra 80. Immediately after
that, in these two sutras, the expiation for external purity or adornment is
stated. The commentator has also related it to possessions and dwelling, in
addition to the body. This is only related to purity and beauty.  83. A monk
who, with the intention of sexual intercourse, moves or approves the movement of
any part such as the foot, side (wing), tail or head of an animal or a bird.
84. A monk who, with the intention of sexual intercourse, inserts a piece of
wood, cloth, finger or a stick into the orifice (ear or genital) of an animal or
a bird, or approves such an act.  85. A monk who, with the intention of sexual
intercourse, embraces, caresses, kisses, pierces or cuts an animal or a bird,
thinking "this is a woman", or approves such an act. (He incurs the grave
penance of Gurucarmasī).  Explanation - The acts of embracing etc. arise from
the rise of deluding karmas. A similar text is also found in the Ācārāṅgasūtra,
Śrutaskandha 2, Adhyayana 9, where the prohibition of such acts by the monks who
have gone to a secluded place for self-study is mentioned. In many copies, the
word "vicchindeḍḍa" is not present, which may be due to a scribal error or
confusion. However, this word must have been present before the commentator, and
it is indeed present in the Ācārāṅgasūtra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM uddezaka] . [167 kI azuddhi ko dUra karanA tathA manojJa pudgala ke
prakSepa karane kA tAtparya hai zarIra, upadhi yA makAna ko susajjita krnaa|
zarIra ko puSTa karane ke liye cha? uddezaka ke aMtima sUtra meM pauSTika AhAra
sevana karane kA prAyazcitta kathana huA hai  /  ataH yaha kathana zarIra kI
bAhya tvacA Adi kI apekSA se samajhanA caahiye| cikitsA saMbaMdhI kathana sUtra
80 meM kiyA gayA hai| usake anaMtara hI ina do sUtroM meM bAhya zuddhi athavA
susajjita karane kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| vyAkhyAkAra ne isakA saMbaMdha
zarIra ke atirikta upadhi aura makAna ke sAtha bhI kiyA hai  /  jo zuddhi aura
zobhA se hI saMbaMdhita hotA hai| pazu-pakSiyoM ke aMgasaMcAlana Adi kA
prAyazcitta 83. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe annayaraM pasujAyaM vA,
pakkhijAyaM vA, pAyaMsi vA, pakkhaMsi vA, pucchaMsi vA, sIsaMsi vA gahAya
saMcAlei saMcAlataM vA saaijji| 84. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe
aNNayaraM pasujAyaM vA, pakkhijAyaM vA, soyaMsi kaTTha vA, kilicaM vA aMguliyaM
vA, salAgaM vA aNuppavesittA saMcAlei, saMcAlataM vA sAijjai  /  85. je bhikkhU
mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe aNNayaraM pasujAyaM vA, pakkhijAyaM vA ayamitthitti
kaTu AliMgejja vA, parissaejja vA, paricumbejja vA chidejja vA, vicchiMdejja vA,
AliMgaMtaM vA, parissayaMtaM vA, paricubaMtaM vA, chidaMtaM vA, vicchiMdeMtaM vA
saaijji| 83. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se kisI bhI
jAti ke pazu yA pakSI ke 1. pAMva ko, 2. pArzvabhAga ko, (paMkha ko) 3. pUcha ko
yA 4. mastaka ko pakar3a kara saMcAlita karatA hai yA saMcAlita karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 84. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se
kisI bhI jAti ke pazu yA pakSI ke zrota arthAt apAnadvAra yA yonidvAra meM
kASTha, khapaccI, aMgulI yA beMta Adi kI zalAkA praviSTa karake saMcAlita karatA
hai yA saMcAlita karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 85. jo bhikSu strI ke
sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se kisI bhI jAti ke pazu yA pakSI ko "yaha
strI hai" aisA jAnakara usakA AliMgana (zarIra ke eka deza kA sparza) karatA
hai, pariSvajana (pUre zarIra kA sparza) karatA hai, mukha kA cubana karatA hai
yA nakha Adi se eka bAra yA aneka bAra chedana karatA hai yA AliMgana Adi karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  )
vivecana-AliMgana Adi pravRttiyAM mohakarma ke udaya se hotI haiN|
prAcArAMgasUtra zru. 2, a. 9 meM bhI isa prakAra kA pATha hai  /  vahAM ekAMta
meM svAdhyAyasthala para gaye sAdhuoM dvArA paraspara aisI pravRttiyAM karane kA
niSedha kiyA hai| aneka pratiyoM meM "vichidejja" zabda nahIM hai, jo lipi doSa
se yA bhrama se nahIM likhA gayA hai| kintu carNikAra ke sAmane yaha zabda rahA
hogA tathA AcArAMgasUtra meM to yaha zabda hai hI, yathA

Page #268 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nishitha Sutra] "One should not embrace, caress, or kiss another's body, nor
should one tear or cut with one's teeth or nails." Here, all the words are
preserved in the original text. Embracing, etc. are done out of delusion, while
tearing or cutting with nails, etc. is done out of delusion and passions.
Offering-accepting, giving-receiving, and atonement. 86. A monk who gives food,
drink, edible or non-edible to a woman with the intention of sexual intercourse,
or approves of the one who gives. 87. A monk who accepts food, drink, edible or
non-edible from a woman with the intention of sexual intercourse, or approves of
the one who accepts. 88. A monk who gives clothes, bowl, blanket or foot-cloth
to a woman with the intention of sexual intercourse, or approves of the one who
gives. 89. A monk who accepts clothes, bowl, blanket or foot-cloth from a woman
with the intention of sexual intercourse, or approves of the one who accepts.
(He incurs the Guru-Chaumasi penance.) Atonement for giving and receiving. 90. A
monk who recites scriptures for a woman with the intention of sexual
intercourse, or approves of the one who recites. 91. A monk who listens to the
recitation of scriptures from a woman with the intention of sexual intercourse,
or approves of the one who listens. (He incurs the Guru-Chaumasi penance.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 168] [nizIthasUtra "no aNNamaNNassa kAyaM Aligejja vA viliMgeja vA, cubejja vA,
daMtehiM vA, pahehi vA Achidejja vA vicchidejja vaa|" ataH yahAM para sabhI
zabda mUla pATha meM rakhe haiM  /  AliMgana Adi kriyAeM kevala moha vaza kI
jAtI haiM, jaba ki nakha Adi se chedana kriyA moha evaM kaSAya vaza bhI kI jAtI
hai| bhakta-pAna AdAna-pradAna-prAyazcitta 86. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa
mehuNavaDiyAe asaNaM vA, pANaM bA, khAimaM vA sAimaM vA dei, detaM vA saaijji|
87. je bhikkhU nAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM
vA paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA saaijji| 88. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe
vatthaM vA paDiggahaM vA kaMbalaM vA pAyapuchaNaM vA dei, deMtaM vA saaijji| 89.
je khikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe vatthaM vA, paDiggahaM vA, kaMbalaM vA,
pAyachaNaM vA paDiggAhei, paDiggahAveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  86. jo bhikSu strI ke
sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se use azana pAna khAdya yA svAdya detA hai yA
dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 87. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana
ke saMkalpa se usase prazana pAna khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  88. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna
sevana ke saMkalpa se use vastra, pAtra, kaMbala yA pAdapoMchana detA hai yA
dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 89. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana
ke saMkalpa se usase vastra pAtra kaMbala yA pAdapoMchana grahaNa karatA hai yA
grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA
hai|) vAcanA dene-lene kA prAyazcitta 90. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe
sajjhAyaM vAei, vAeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  91. je bhikkhU mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe
sajjhAyaM paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  90. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha
maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se sUtrArtha kI vAcanA detA hai yA vAcanA dene vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  91. jo bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke
saMkalpa se sUtrArtha kI vAcanA letA hai yA vAcanA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|) |

Page #269 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Uddeshaka] Penance for Increasing Defilements 92. If a bhikkhu makes or
approves of the form of any sense organ, such as the eye, ear, etc., with the
intention of sexual intercourse with a woman. By indulging in this, he incurs
the Caturmasya Parihara-sthana (four-monthly penance).  Summary of the Seventh
Uddeshaka: 1-12 Making, keeping or wearing various kinds of garlands, ornaments,
jewelry and different types of leather and cloth with the intention of sexual
intercourse. 13 Manipulating the limbs of a woman with the intention of sexual
intercourse. 14-67 Performing 54 bodily acts with the intention of sexual
intercourse. 68-79 Seating or lying down a woman on the places of violation of
earth-body, water-body, plant-body and mobile-body, holding her in lap or in a
religious hall, etc. and eating food. 80-82 Performing medical treatment,
cleansing the body, etc. with the intention of sexual intercourse. 83-85
Manipulating the limbs of animals and birds, inserting objects in their
orifices, and embracing their female counterparts. 86-91 Giving or taking food,
clothes, etc. from a woman and discussing spiritual matters with her or
receiving spiritual discourses from her. 92 Performing any sensual act with
one's own body part.  The Gurucaramasi penance is incurred for all these
activities.  Conclusion: Though the scriptures have many provisions for the
protection of the fourth great vow, the clear prohibitions mentioned in these 92
sutras of this Uddeshaka are not found elsewhere in the scriptures. This is the
specialty of this Uddeshaka.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAtavAM uddezaka ] vikAravardhaka zrAkAra banAne kA prAyazcitta 92. je bhikkhU
mAuggAmassa mehuNavaDiyAe aNNayareNaM iMdieNaM AkAraM karei kareMtaM vA sAijjai
/  taM sevamANe Avajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM aNugghAiyaM  /  92. jo
bhikSu strI ke sAtha maithuna sevana ke saMkalpa se kisI bhI indriya se arthAt
prAMkha, hAtha Adi kisI bhI aMgopAMga se kisI bhI prakAra ke AkAra ko banAtA hai
yA banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ina 92 sUtroM meM kahe gaye
doSasthAnoM kA sevana karane ko gurucImAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  vivecana -
AkAroM kA varNana bhASya meM isa prakAra hai- A~kha se izArA karanA, romAMcita
honA, zarIra ko kaMpita karanA, pasInA AnA, dRSTi yA mukha ( ceharA ) rAgayukta
karanA, nizvAsa chor3ate hue bolanA, bAra-bAra bAteM karanA, bAra-bAra ubAsI
lenA ityAdi  /  sAtaveM uddezaka kA sArAMza [ 169 1-12 maithunasevana ke
saMkalpa se aneka prakAra kI mAlAe~, aneka prakAra ke kar3e, aneka prakAra ke
AbhUSaNa va aneka jAti ke carma va vastra banAnA, rakhanA yA pahananA  /  13
maithunasevana ke saMkalpa se strI ke aMgopAMga kA saMcAlana karanA  /  14-67
maithuna ke saMkalpa se zarIraparikarma ke 54 bola paraspara karanA  /  68-79
strI ko pRthvIkAya, apkAya, vanaspatikAya va trasakAya kI virAdhanA ke sthAnoM
para biThAnA yA sulAnA, goda meM yA dharmazAlA Adi sthAnoM meM biThAnA, sulAnA
yA AhAra karanA  /  80-82 maithunasevana ke saMkalpa se cikitsA karanA, zarIra
Adi kI zuddhi karanA, zarIra Adi ko sajAnA  /  83-85 pazu-pakSI ke aMgopAMga kA
saMcAlana karanA, unake srotasthAnoM meM kASThAdi praviSTa karanA tathA unakA
saMcAlana karanA, unakI strI jAti kA AliMgana karanA  /  86-91 strI ko AhAra va
vastrAdi denA - lenA tathA unase sUtrArtha lenA yA unako sUtrArtha denA  /  92
apane zarIra ke kisI avayava se kAmaceSTA karanA  /  ityAdi pravRttiyoM kA
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  upasaMhAra caturtha mahAvrata va usakI
surakSA ke lie AgamoM meM aneka vidhAna haiM, phira bhI isa uddezaka ke 92
sUtroM meM jo prAyazcitta kahe gaye haiM, aise spaSTa niSedha granya AgamoM meM
nahIM haiM  /  yaha isa uddezaka kI vizeSatA hai  /

Page #270 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nishitha Sutra]  In the sixth and seventh uddesas, only the penances for the
activities performed with the intention of sexual intercourse have been
mentioned. Therefore, special discretion should be exercised in the study and
teaching of these.  In this uddesa, the penances for sitting on the ground with
life (on it) with the intention of sexual intercourse have been mentioned.
However, even without the intention of sexual intercourse, these activities are
unimaginable in a life of restraint. Their penances have been mentioned in the
eleventh uddesa. In this way, one should understand many other subjects related
to the sixth and seventh uddesas.  || The seventh uddesa is complete ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 170] [nizIyasUtra ina chaThe va sAtaveM uddezakoM meM kevala maithunasevana ke
saMkalpa se kiye gaye kAryoM ke hI prAyazcitta kahe gae haiM, ataH inake
adhyayana-adhyApana meM vizeSa viveka rakhanA caahie| isa uddezaka meM maithuna
ke saMkalpa se sacitta bhUmi para baiThane Adi pravRttiyoM ke prAyazcitta kahe
haiM  /  kintu maithuna kA saMkalpa na hote hue bhI ve pravRttiyA~ saMyamajIvana
meM akalpanIya haiM  /  unake prAyazcitta gyArahaveM uddezaka meM kahe gae haiN|
isa prakAra chaThe-sAtaveM uddezaka ke anya aneka viSayoM ke sambandha meM bhI
samajha lenA cAhie  /   //  sAtavAM uddezaka samApta  //

Page #271 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Uddeshak: Penitence for Contact with a Single Woman  1. A monk who
engages in conversation, companionship, eating, drinking, sharing food, or
touching with a single woman in a secluded place, a resting place, a gathering
place, or a dwelling place, and who claims or believes that he is not committing
an Asamanpaugga, is committing a sin. 2. A monk who engages in conversation,
companionship, eating, drinking, sharing food, or touching with a single woman
in a deserted place, a deserted house, a deserted hall, a secluded place, a
secluded house, or a secluded hall, and who claims or believes that he is not
committing an Asamanpaugga, is committing a sin. 3. A monk who engages in
conversation, companionship, eating, drinking, sharing food, or touching with a
single woman in a stable, a stable yard, a courtyard, a gate, a door, or a
tower, and who claims or believes that he is not committing an Asamanpaugga, is
committing a sin. 4. A monk who engages in conversation, companionship, eating,
drinking, sharing food, or touching with a single woman on a path, a road, a
bridge, or a place of rest, and who claims or believes that he is not committing
an Asamanpaugga, is committing a sin. 5. A monk who engages in conversation,
companionship, eating, drinking, sharing food, or touching with a single woman
in an empty house, an empty hall, a different house, a different hall, a
storehouse, or a granary, and who claims or believes that he is not committing
an Asamanpaugga, is committing a sin. 6. A monk who engages in conversation,
companionship, eating, drinking, sharing food, or touching with a single woman
in a grass house, a grass hall, a bamboo house, a bamboo hall, a straw house, or
a straw hall, and who claims or believes that he is not committing an
Asamanpaugga, is committing a sin. 7. A monk who engages in conversation,
companionship, eating, drinking, sharing food, or touching with a single woman
in a carriage hall, a carriage house, a vehicle house, or a vehicle hall, and
who claims or believes that he is not committing an Asamanpaugga, is committing
a sin. 8. A monk who engages in conversation, companionship, eating, drinking,
sharing food, or touching with a single woman in a merchant's house, a
merchant's hall, a bad man's house, or a bad man's hall, and who claims or
believes that he is not committing an Asamanpaugga, is committing a sin. 9. A
monk who engages in conversation, companionship, eating, drinking, sharing food,
or touching with a single woman in a cattle hall, a cattle house, a large
family, or a large house, and who claims or believes that he is not committing
an Asamanpaugga, is committing a sin.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AThavAM uddezaka akelI strI ke sAtha saMparka karane ke prAyazcitta 1. je
bhikkhU AgaMtAraMsi vA, ArAmAgAraMsi vA, gAhAvaikulaMsi vA, pariyAvasahaMsi vA,
ego egithie saddhi vihAraM vA karei, sajjhAyaM vA karei, asaNaM vA, pANaM vA,
khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA, AhArei, uccAraM vA, pAsavaNaM vA parivei, aNNayaraM vA
aNAriyaM NiThTharaM asamaNapAuggaM kahaM kahei, kaheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  2. je
bhikkhU ujjANaMsi vA, ujjANagihaMsi vA, ujjANasAlaMsi vA, NijjANaMsi vA,
NijjANagihaMsi vA, NijjANasAlaMsi vA ego egitthie saddhi vihAraM vA karei jAva
asamaNapAuggaM kahaM kahei, kaheMtaM vA saaijji| . 3. je bhikkhU aTasi vA,
aTTAlayaMsi vA, cariyaMsi vA, pAgAraMsi vA, dAraMsi vA gopuraMsi vA ego egitthIe
saddhi vihAraM vA karei jAva asamaNapAuggaM kahaM kahei, kaheMtaM vA sAijjai  /
4. je bhikkhU daga-maggaMsi vA, daga- pahaMsi vA, daga-toraMsi vA, daga-ThANaMsi
vA ego egithie saddhi vihAraM vA karei, jAva asamaNapAuggaM kahaM kahei,
kaheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  5. je bhikkhU suNNagihaMsi vA, suNNasAlaMsi vA,
bhiNNagihaMsi vA, bhiNNasAlaMsi vA, kuDAgAraMsi vA, koTThAgAraMsi vA ego
egitthIe saddhi vihAraM vA karei jAva asamaNapAuggaM kahaM kahei, kaheMtaM vA
saaijji| 6. je bhikkhU taNagihaMsi vA, taNasAlaMsi vA, tusagihaMsi vA,
tusasAlaMsi vA, bhusagirhasi vA, bhusasAlaMsi vA ego egitthIe saddhi vihAraM vA
karei jAva asamaNapAuggaM kahaM kahei, kaheMtaM vA saaijji| 7. je bhikkhU
jANasAlaMsi vA, jANagihaMsi vA, vAhaNagihaMsi vA, vAhaNasAlaMsi vA ego egitthIe
saddhi vihAraM vA karei, jAva asamaNapAuggaM kahaM kahei, kaheMta vA sAijjai  /
8. je bhikkhU paNiyagihaMsi vA, paNiyasAlaMsi vA, kuviyagihaMsi vA,
kuviyasAlaMsi vA, ego egitthoe saddhi vihAraM vA karei jAva asamaNapAuggaM kahaM
kahei, kaheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  9. je bhikkhU goNasAlaMsi vA, goNagihaMsi vA,
mahAkulaMsi vA, mahAgihaMsi vA ego egitthIe saddhi vihAraM vA karei jAva
asamaNapAuggaM kahaM kahei, kaheMtaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #272 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Nishīth Sūtra 172:  **1.** A monk who stays alone with a woman in:  1. a
Dharmaśālā (rest house),  2. an Udyānagṛha (garden house),  3. a householder's
house, or  4. a Parivrājaka's (wandering ascetic) āśrama (hermitage),  and
engages in svādhyāya (self-study), praśna (questioning), pān (drinking), khādya
(food), or svādya (tasty food), or utchār-prasravaṇa (uttering and listening),
or tells or approves of any story unfit for a sādhū (holy person), incurs Guru-
Chaumāsi prāyaśchitta (penance).  **2.** A monk who stays alone with a woman in:
1. a place of stay near a city,  2. a house near a city,  3. a śālā (hall) near
a city,  4. a place of stay near a city during the exit of a king or other
dignitaries,  5. a house, or  6. a śālā,  and tells or approves of any story
unfit for a sādhū, incurs Guru-Chaumāsi prāyaśchitta.  **3.** A monk who stays
alone with a woman in:  1. a house on top of a rampart,  2. a window of a
rampart,  3. a path between the rampart and the city,  4. a rampart,  5. a city
gate, or  6. a place between two gates,  and tells or approves of any story
unfit for a sādhū, incurs Guru-Chaumāsi prāyaśchitta.  **4.** A monk who stays
alone with a woman in:  1. a path to get water from a reservoir,  2. a path to
carry water from a reservoir,  3. on the bank of a reservoir, or  4. in a
reservoir,  and tells or approves of any story unfit for a sādhū, incurs Guru-
Chaumāsi prāyaśchitta.  **5.** A monk who stays alone with a woman in:  1. a
śūnyagṛha (empty house),  2. a śūnyaśālā (empty hall),  3. a khaṇḍharagṛha
(ruined house),  4. a khaṇḍharśālā (ruined hall),  5. a jhopaḍī (hut), or  6. a
koṭhār (storehouse) for grains,  and tells or approves of any story unfit for a
sādhū, incurs Guru-Chaumāsi prāyaśchitta.  **6.** A monk who stays alone with a
woman in:  1. a tṛṇagṛha (grass house),  2. a tṛṇaśālā (grass hall),  3. a
tuṣagṛha (husk house) for śāli (rice) etc.,  4. a tuṣaśālā (husk hall),  5. a
bhusagṛha (husk house) for mūga (green gram), uḍad (black gram) etc., or  6. a
bhusasālā (husk hall),  and tells or approves of any story unfit for a sādhū,
incurs Guru-Chaumāsi prāyaśchitta.  **7.** A monk who stays alone with a woman
in:  1. a yānagṛha (vehicle house),  2. a yānaśālā (vehicle hall),  3. a
vāhanagṛha (vehicle house), or  4. a vāhanaśālā (vehicle hall),  and tells or
approves of any story unfit for a sādhū, incurs Guru-Chaumāsi prāyaśchitta.
**8.** A monk who stays alone with a woman in:  1. a vikrayśālā (shop),  2. a
vikrayagṛha (market),  3. a śālā for making chana (chickpeas) etc., or  4. a
house for making chūna (lime),  and tells or approves of any story unfit for a
sādhū, incurs Guru-Chaumāsi prāyaśchitta.  **9.** A monk who stays alone with a
woman in:  1. a gauśālā (cow shed),  2. a gaugṛha (cow house),  3. a mahāśālā
(big hall), or  4. a mahāgṛha (big house),  and tells or approves of any story
unfit for a sādhū, incurs Guru-Chaumāsi prāyaśchitta.  **Discussion:** In all
these places mentioned in the sūtra, and in any other place, a sādhū should not
stay alone with a woman...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 172] [nizIthasUtra 1. jo bhikSu 1. dharmazAlA meM, 2. udyAnagRha meM, 3.
gRhastha ke ghara meM yA 4. parivrAjaka ke Azrama meM akelA, akelI strI ke sAtha
rahatA hai, svAdhyAya karatA hai, prazana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya kA AhAra
karatA hai, uccAra-prasravaNa paraThatA hai yA koI sAdhu ke na kahane yogya
kAmakathA kahatA hai yA kahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  2. jo bhikSu 1.
nagara ke samIpa Thaharane ke sthAna meM, 2. nagara ke samIpa Thaharane ke gRha
meM, 3. nagara ke samIpa Thaharane kI zAlA meM, 4. rAjA Adi ke nagara, nirgamana
ke samaya meM Thaharane ke sthAna meM, 5. ghara meM, 6. zAlA meM akelA, akelI
strI ke sAtha rahatA hai yAvat sAdhu ke na kahane yogya kAmakathA kahatA hai yA
kahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  3. jo bhikSu 1. prAkAra ke Upara ke gRha
meM, 2. prAkAra ke jharokhe meM, 3. prAkAra va nagara ke bIca ke mArga meM, 4.
prAkAra meM, 5. nagaradvAra meM yA 6. do dvAroM ke bIca ke sthAna meM akelA,
akelI sAtha rahatA hai yAvata sAdhU ke na kahane yogya kAmakathA kahatA hai yA
kahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 4. jo bhikSu 1. jalAzaya meM pAnI pAne ke
mArga meM, 2. jalAzaya se pAnI le jAne ke mArga meM, 3. jalAzaya ke taTa para,
4. jalAzaya meM akelA, akelI strI ke sAtha rahatA hai yAvat sAdhu ke na kahane
yogya kAmakathA kahatA hai yA kahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  5. jo
bhikSu 1. zUnyagRha meM, 2. zUnyazAlA meM, 3. khaNDaharagRha meM, 4.
khaNDaharazAlA meM, 5. jhoMpar3I meM, 6. dhAnyAdi ke koThAra meM akelA, akelI
strI ke sAtha rahatA hai yAvat sAdhu ke ayogya kAmakathA kahatA hai yA kahane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  6. jo bhikSu 1. tRNagRha meM, 2. tRNazAlA meM,
3. zAli Adi ke tuSagRha meM, 4. tuSazAlA meM, 5. mUga ur3ada Adi ke bhusagRha
meM, 6. bhusazAlA meM akelA, akelI strI ke sAtha rahatA hai yAvat sAdhu ke
ayogya kAmakathA kahatA hai yA kahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 7. jo bhikSu
1. yAnagRha meM, 2. yAnazAlA meM, 3. vAhanagRha meM yA 4. vAhanazAlA meM akelA,
akelI strI ke sAtha rahatA hai yAvat sAdhu ke ayogya kAmakathA kahatA hai yA
kahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 8. jo bhikSu 1. vikrayazAlA (dUkAna) meM,
2. vikrayagRha (hATa) meM, 3. cane Adi banAne ko zAlA meM yA 4. cUnA banAne ke
gRha meM akelA, akelI strI ke sAtha rahatA hai yAvat sAdhu ke ayogya kAmakathA
kahatA hai yA kahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  9. jo bhikSu 1. gauzAlA
meM, 2. gaugRha meM, 3. mahAzAlA meM yA 4. mahAgRha meM akelA, akelI strI ke
sAtha rahatA hai yAvat sAdhu ke ayogya kAmakathA kahatA hai yA kahane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana- ina
sabhI sUtrokta sthAnoM meM tathA anya kisI bhI sthAna meM sAdhu ko akelI strI

Page #273 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Precept  [173]  One should not engage in conversation, standing, etc.
with women. In the Dashakalika Sutra, sexual intercourse is compared to the
poison of a snake, and even intercourse with a woman who is a hundred years old
is prohibited. The commentary states:  "Even if it is with an old mother or
sister, etc., who is alone, even a discussion of Dharma is not appropriate. What
then to say of other conversations with young women, etc." [2344]  Commentary:
"Even if it is with an old mother or sister, etc., who is alone, even a
discussion of Dharma is not appropriate. What then to say of other conversations
with young women, etc."  Meaning: If even a discussion of Dharma is not
appropriate with an old mother or sister, etc., who is alone, then it is self-
evident that other conversations with young women, etc. are prohibited.
Explanation of specific terms:  1. **Viharam karei:** Here, the meaning of
"vihar" is to stay together. Therefore, one should not understand the meaning
here as "traveling from village to village." 2. **Uccaram va pasavanam va
parituvei:** "Goes to the land of the dead." 3. **Anariyam adi:** "Anariyam
kamakaha, nirantaram va apriyam kaham kaheti-kamaniṭṭharakahao, eta cev
asamanpao gga." 4. **Ujjānam:** "Where people gather, or the elevated place of a
city, that is ujjānam." "Near the city, there are places for vehicles, games,
etc." - Rayappaseneya Sutra Commentary. 5. **Nijjānāṁ rāyādiāṁ niggamaṇṭhāṇāṁ
nijjānīyā, nagaraniggame jaṁ ṭhiyam taṁ nijjānāṁ. Etesu tev giha kaya-ujjāṇa-
nijjāna-giha.** "The place of exit from the city, etc., is nijjānīyā, the place
where one stands at the exit of the city, that is nijjānāṁ. These are the houses
in the ujjāṇa, nijjānā, and giha." 6. **Aṭasi:** "On top of a palace, in a house
on top of a wall, or in a house for soldiers on top of a wall." 7.
**Aṭṭālayansi:** "A special place of shelter on top of a wall." "A temple on top
of a wall of a fort." "In the city, there are houses, and in the same place,
there are aṭṭālagos." "Battle towers." 8. **Cariyansi:** "A path eight cubits
wide between the city walls." "The path eight cubits wide around the house is
cariyā." 9. **Gopura:** "A gate with a tower." "A strong gate, two strong gates
attached to the house, the space between them is the gopura." 10. **Taṇa-Tusa-
Bhusā:** "A place for grass, etc., a place for grass, a place for rice, etc., a
place for husks, etc."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AThavAM uddezaka] [173 ke sAtha bAtacIta karanA, khar3e rahanA Adi nahIM karanA
cAhiye  /  strIsaMsarga ko dazavakAlika sUtra meM tAlapuTa viSa kI upamA dI gaI
hai aura zatAyu strI ke sAtha bhI saMsarga karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai|
bhASya meM kahA hai avi mAyaraM pi saddhi, kahA tu egAgiyassa pddisiddhaa|
kiMpuNa aNAriyAdi, taruNitthIhiM sahagayassa  // 2344 //  cUNi-"mAibhagiNimAdIhi
agamamitthIhi saddhi egANigassa dhammakahA vi kAuM NaM vaTTati  /  ki puNa
aNNAhi taruNitthohiM saddhi  / " bhAvArtha-vRddha mAtA yA bahina aAdi yadi akelI
ho to usake sAtha dharmakathA bhI karanA nahIM kalpatA hai to taruNa va anya
strI ke sAtha anya kathA karane kA niSedha to svataH hI siddha hai  /  viziSTa
zabdoM kI vyAkhyA isa prakAra hai 1. vihAraM karei-yahAM vihAra kA artha sAtha
meM rahanA hai  /  ataH grAmAnugrAma vihAra karanA artha yahAM nahIM samajhanA
cAhiye  /  2. uccAraM vA pAsavaNaM vA pariTuvei-'viyArabhUmi gacchati  / ' 3.
aNAriyaM Adi-'aNAriyAkAmakahA, niraMtaraM vA apriyaM kahaM kaheti-
kAmaNiThTharakahAo, etA ceva asmnnpaaoggaa|' 4. ujjANaM-'jattha logA ujjANiyAe
vaccati, jaM vA Isi nagarassa ukkaMThaM ThiyaM taM ujjANaM  /  'nagarAt
pratyAsannavatiyAnavAhanakrIDAgRhAdi  / ' -rAyappaseNiya sUtra TIkA  //  5.
NijjANaM rAyAdiyANa niggamaNaThANaM NijjANiyA, Nagaraniggame jaM ThiyaM taM
NijjANaM  /  etesu teva gihA kyaa-ujjaann-nnijjaann-gihaa|' 6. aTasi-
prAsAdasyoparigRhe, prAkAroparisthasainyagRhe ca  /  7. attttaalyNsi-
praakaaroprivti-aashryvishessH| 'praakaarkossttkoprivtimNdirH|' nagare pAgAro,
tasseva dese attttaalgo| 'yuddha karane ke burja' 8.
cariyaMsi-'nagaraprAkArayoraMtare asstthstprmaannmaargH|' pAgArassa aho
aTTahattho rahamaggo-cariyA  /  9. gopur-prtolikaadvaarH| utarA. a. 9  //
'balANagaM dAraM do balANagA pAgArapaDibaddhA, tANa aMtaraM gopuraM  / ' 10.
taNa-tusa-bhusa-'dabbhAdi taNaThANaM adhopagAsaM taNasAlA, sAlimAditusaTTANaM
tusasAlA muggamAdiyANaM bhusaa|

Page #274 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **[174]** **[Nishīth Sūtra]**  **11. Jāṇa-Jugga-** "Jugādi
jāṇāṇam akuḍḍā sāla sakudḍam giham. Assādiyāṇ vāhaṇā tāṇam sāla giham vā." **12.
Pariyāga-** "Pāsandinō pariyāga tesi āvasaho sāla giham." Bhāṣya Gāthā 2426 and
2428, as well as the Chūrṇi, explain this term. While the first sūtra mentions
"pariyāvasahesu," there is no need for further explanation. **13. Kuviyam-** The
Bhāṣyakāra does not explain this term. The Chūrṇikāra explains "kammiyam sāla"
in place of this word. Elsewhere, the word "kuviyam" means a workshop for making
iron tools, etc. The Chūrṇi explains it as "Chuhādi jaththa kammivijjati sā
kammantashālā giham vā." **14. Mahāgiham-** Mahantā giham mahāgiham = a large
house or the main house. **15. Mahākulan-** "Inbhakulaadi" "bahujanaaiṇṇam."  In
addition to these places, one should understand by implication that the places
like Upāśraya, etc., are also included.  **Uttara. A. 1 Gā. 26** also prohibits
a monk from standing alone with a woman and talking to her in many places.
Therefore, a monk can only talk to a woman if another woman or man is present.
One should not understand this as a prohibition against accepting alms from a
woman alone or listening to her auspicious teachings when she comes to the
Upāśraya.  **Prohibition against telling religious stories in a gathering of
women at night**  **10. Je bhikku rāo vā, viyāle vā, itthimajjhagaē,
itthisansatte itthi-parivude aparimājāē kaham kaheī, kaheṇtam vā sāijjai.**
**Meaning:** A monk who tells an unlimited story in the night or evening, 1. in
a gathering of women, 2. in a gathering with women, 3. surrounded by women, or
who approves of someone telling such a story, (will incur the Guruchaumāsi
penance).  **Discussion:** While the Āgamas prohibit sexual contact with women,
they do not completely prohibit telling religious stories to women. The
prohibition against telling religious stories, etc., to a woman alone or to a
monk alone is found in other sūtras and in the above sūtras. There is no
prohibition if there are many women or many monks. In other words, if there are
many women or women with men, religious stories can be told during the day.
However, it is essential to exercise discretion regarding age, suitability, and
the Guru's instructions.  The present sūtra prohibits telling religious stories
at night. Therefore, even if there is only a gathering of women or a gathering
of women with men at night, one should not tell religious stories.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 174] [nizIthasUtra 11. jANa-jugga-.'jugAdi jANANaM akuDDA sAlA sakuDDaM gihaM
/  assAdiyANa vAhaNA tANaM sAlA gihaM vaa|' 12. pariyAgA-'pAsaMDiNo pariyAgA
tesi Avasaho sAlA giha  / ' bhASya gAthA 2426 va 2428 meM tathA cUrNi meM bhI
isa zabda kI vyAkhyA kI hai  /  jaba ki prathama sUtra meM 'pariyAvasahesu" pAyA
hai ataH punaH kathana kI AvazyakatA nahIM lagatI hai| 13. kuviyaM-bhASyakAra ne
isakI vyAkhyA nahIM kI hai| cUrNikAra ne isa zabda kI jagaha 'kammiya sAlA" kI
vyAkhyA kI hai  /  anyatra "kuviya" zabda kA artha lohe Adi ke upakaraNa banAne
kI zAlA hotA hai  /  cUNi meM--'chuhAdi jattha kammavijjati sA kammaMtazAlA
gihaM vA' isa prakAra vyAkhyA kI gaI hai| 14. mahAgiha-mahaMtaM gihaM mahAgiha =
bar3A ghara yA pradhAna ghara  /  15. mahAkulaM-'inbhakulAdi' 'bahujaNAiNNaM'  /
ina sthAnoM ke atirikta sthAnoM kA arthAt upAzraya prAdi kA grahaNa bhI
upalakSaNa se samajha lenA caahiye| uttarA. a. 1 gA. 26 meM bhI aneka sthAnoM
meM akelI strI ke sAtha akele bhikSu ko khar3e rahane kA evaM vArtAlApa karane
kA niSedha kiyA hai  /  ataH anya strI yA puruSa pAsa meM ho to hI bhikSu strI
se vArtAlApa kara sakatA hai  /  akelI strI se bhikSA lene kA evaM darzana
karane upAzraya meM A jAya to use maMgala pATha sunAne kA niSedha nahIM
samajhanA cAhiye  /  strIpariSada meM rAtri-kathA karane kA prAyazcitta 10. je
bhikkhU rAo vA, viyAle vA, itthimajjhagae, itthisaMsatte itthi-parivuDe
aparimAjAe kahaM kahei, kaheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  _ artha-jo bhikSa rAtri meM yA
saMdhyAkAla meM 1. strI pariSad meM, 2. strIyukta pariSad meM, 3. striyoM se
ghirA huA aparimita kathA kahatA hai yA kahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
(use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta aAtA hai|) vivecana AgamoM meM strI-saMsarga kA
niSedha hote hue bhI striyoM ko dharmakathA kahane kA sarvathA niSedha nahIM
kiyA hai  /  akelA sAdhu aura akelI strI ho to dharmakathA Adi kA niSedha anya
sUtroM meM tathA uparyukta sUtroM meM huaA hai| aneka striyAM yA aneka sAdhu hoM
to usakA niSedha nahIM hai| arthAt aneka striyAM ho yA puruSa yukta striyAM hoM
to dina meM dharmakathA kahI jA sakatI hai| phira bhI vaya, yogyatA va guru kI
AjJA lene kA viveka rakhanA Avazyaka hai| prastuta sUtra meM gatri meM
dharmakathA kahane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai  /  ataH rAtri meM kevala strI
pariSad ho yA puruSa yukta strIpariSad ho to bhI dharmakathA nahIM kahanI cAhiye
/

Page #275 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Uddeshak  [175 Aparamanaae] A monk who has gone out for alms cannot
preach Dharma in the house of a householder. However, he can answer a very
important question briefly - Brihatkalpa Uddeshak 3. The word 'Aparamanaae' is
used in the sutra with the same meaning. The same meaning is stated in Bhashya
Churni etc. Bhashya Gatha 'Itthina Majjhammi, Itthisansatte Parivude Tahi. Chavu
Panch U Parimanam, Ten Paran Kahant Anaadi ||2430||' 'Parimanam Jav Tinni Chauro
Panch Va Vagaranani, Parato Chatthaadi Aparamanam.' Here, three, four or five
questions or verses are called limited. Six questions or more are called
unlimited. Staying in the house of a householder after taking alms is prohibited
in Brihatkalpa, but according to the Brihatkalpa sutra, there is also a
provision for giving a brief answer in exceptional circumstances. Therefore, the
word 'Aparamanaae' in this sutra should be understood as an exceptional
statement. For a monk, any other story or false story is completely prohibited,
therefore, here, preaching Dharma etc. is expected from the story. If it seems
appropriate, he can tell a brief Dharma story or answer a question in the said
assembly at night. Only if the limit is exceeded, does the monk receive
Guruchaumasi penance.  ## Penance for Contact with a Nigranthi  11. Je Bhikkhu
Sagnicchiaae Va, Paraganicchiaae Va, Nigganthiee Saddi Gamaanugaman Duijjamanee
Puroo Gachchhmane, Pittto Riyamanee, Ohayamanasankappe Chita-Soyasagar
Sampavithe, Karayalpalhatthamuhe, Attajjhanoovagae, Viharam Va Karei Jav
Asamanpaauggan Kahm Kahei, Kahentam Va Saizjji. Meaning - A monk who travels
from village to village with a Sadhvi of his own or another group, while
thinking and contemplating, is anxious, immersed in the ocean of sorrow, keeps
his face on his palm, meditates in sorrow, or tells a love story that is not
appropriate for a monk, or approves of the one who tells it. (He receives
Guruchaumasi penance.)  ## Discussion  Just as contact or acquaintance with a
woman is prohibited except for Dharma story or Gochari, similarly, a monk should
consider contact with a Sadhvi to be prohibited except for self-study, reading
of sutra meanings. Generally, it is prohibited for a monk and a Sadhvi to sit or
stand in each other's place (Upashraya) - Brihatkalpa Uddeshak 3, Sutra 1-2.
This sutra mentions penance for a monk's travel and excessive contact with a
Sadhvi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AThavAM uddezaka] [175 aparimANAe bhikSAcarI Adi ke liye gayA huA sAdhu
gahastha ke ghara meM dharma kathA nahIM kaha sakatA hai  /  kintu atyAvazyaka
prazna kA uttara saMkSipta meM de sakatA hai-bRhatkalpa uddezaka 3  /  isI
prAzaya se yahAM bhI 'aparimANAe' zabda kA prayoga sUtra meM kiyA gayA hai  /
bhASyacUNi Adi meM bhI isI prAzaya kA kathana hai| bhASyagAthA'itthINaM
majjhammi, itthIsaMsatte parivuDe tAhi  /  cau paMca u parimANaM, teNa paraM
kahaMta ANAdI  // 2430 //  'parimANaM jAva tiNNi cauro paMca vA vAgaraNAni,
parato chaTThAdi aparimANaM  / ' yahAM tIna, cAra yA pA~ca pRcchA yA gAthA kA
kathana parimita kahA gayA hai  /  cha pRcchA Adi ko aparimANa kahA hai| bhikSA
le lene ke bAda gRhastha ke ghara meM khar3e rahane kA niSedha bRhatkalpa meM
kiyA gayA hai, kintu ApavAdika sthiti meM bRhatkalpa sUtra ke anusAra saMkSipta
uttara dene kA vidhAna bhI hai  /  ataH isa sUtra meM 'aparimANAe' zabda se
ApavAdika kathana hI samajhanA caahiye| sAdhu ke liye anya kathA yA vikathA to
sarvathA niSiddha hai hI ataH yahAM kathA se dharmopadeza Adi karanA hI apekSita
hai  /  yadi ucita pratIta ho to rAtri meM ukta pariSada meM saMkSipta
dharmakathA yA prazna kA uttara kaha sakatA hai, parimANa ullaMghana hone para
hI gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /  nigraMthI se saMparka karane kA
prAyazcitta 11. je bhikkhU sagaNicciyAe vA, paragaNicciyAe vA, NiggaMthIe saddhi
gAmANugAmaM dUijjamANe purao gacchamANe, piTTao rIyamANe, ohayamaNasaMkappe
citA-soyasAgarasaMpaviThe, karayalapalhatthamuhe, aTTajjhANovagae, vihAraM vA
karei jAva asamaNapAuggaM kahaM kahei, kaheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  artha-jo bhikSu
svagaNa kI yA anya gaNa kI sAdhvI ke sAtha Age yA pIche grAmAnugrAma vihAra
karate hue saMkalpa-vikalpa karatA hai , citAtura rahatA hai, zoka-sAgara meM
DUbA huA rahatA hai, hathelI para muha rakhakara prArtadhyAna karatA rahatA hai
yAvat sAdhu ke na kahane yogya kAmakathA kahatA hai yA kahane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana-dharmakathA yA
gocarI ke sivAya jisa taraha strI ke sAtha saMparka yA paricaya niSiddha hai usI
taraha sAdhvI ke sAtha bhI sAdhu ko svAdhyAya, sUtrArtha vAcana ke sivAya
samparka karanA bhI niSiddha samajhanA caahiye| sAdhAraNatayA sAdhu sAdhvI ko
eka dUsare ke sthAna (upAzraya) meM baiThanA yA khar3e rahanA Adi bhI niSiddha
hai-bRhatkalpa uddezA 3, sU. 1-2  /  prastuta sUtra meM sAdhu sAdhvI ke sAtha
vihAra kA aura atisamparka kA nirdeza karake prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai|

Page #276 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 176] [Nishīthasūtra In exceptional circumstances, monks and nuns can serve
each other in many ways and can also criticize and do penance for each other.
But they cannot serve or criticize each other in a dedicated manner - Vyavahāra
Sūtra Uddesa-5. Therefore, monks and nuns should keep their mutual service,
etc., only in exceptional circumstances and exchange necessary readings, etc.
Apart from this, they should not increase mutual contact. This is the Jinājñā.
Night residence penance in the Upāśraya 12. If a monk keeps a woman, whether she
is a relative or a stranger, a devotee or another, inside the Upāśraya for half
a night or a full night, or approves of someone keeping her, (he incurs
Guruchaumāsi penance). Meaning - A monk who keeps a woman, whether she is a
relative or a stranger, a devotee or another, inside the Upāśraya for half a
night or a full night, or approves of someone keeping her, (he incurs
Guruchaumāsi penance). Discussion - The sūtra does not explicitly mention
"woman" or "man", but in context, it should be understood as penance for keeping
a woman. The Bhāṣyaṇi also says that "This sūtra is about a woman." Gāthā -
Itthi paḍucch suttam, sahiraṇṇa sabhoyane ya āvāse. Jai nissangaya je vā mehuṇa
nisibhoyanaṃ kujjā ||2469|| Adham vā rāi'addham rāi'e do jāma, 'vā' vikappeṇa
egaṃ jāma. Chauro jāma kasiṇā rāi 'vā' vikappeṇa tiṇṇī jāma. The word "addham"
can mean not only half a night but also an incomplete night. In Uttarādhyayana
Sūtra A. 34, the word "muhuttaddham" is used. Its meaning is not only half a
muhūrta but also less than a muhūrta. Accordingly, here too, in addition to the
whole night, less or more than a night can also be included. Therefore, the
meaning of this sūtra is that if a woman is kept in the Upāśraya for a short or
long time at night, then penance is incurred. Samvasāve'i - "Keeping" can happen
in two ways: 1. Asking her to stay 2. Not stopping her from staying. Therefore,
one should not ask a woman to stay inside the Upāśraya at night, and if she
wants to stay without being asked, one should stop her. "Not stopping her" also
means letting her stay. Therefore, if one asks her to stay or does not stop her,
then penance is incurred according to the statement "samvasāve'i". Due to the
above explanation, many manuscripts also have a separate sūtra about not
stopping her. But its syntax seems incorrect. Therefore, that sūtra seems to be
an interpolation. Because the subject matter is fulfilled by this accepted
sūtra. That sūtra is not present in the original text of the published Chūrṇi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 176] [nizIthasUtra ApavAdika sthiti meM sAdhu-sAdhvI eka dUsare kI aneka
prakAra se sevA kara sakate haiM aura paraspara AlocanA prAyazcitta bhI kara
sakate haiN| kintu utsarga rUpa se ve paraspara sevA evaM AlocanAdi bhI nahIM
kara sakate-vyavahAra sUtra uddezA-5  /  /  ataH sAdhu-sAdhvI paraspara sevA Adi
kA samparka prApavAdika sthiti meM hI rakheM tathA Avazyaka vAcanA Adi kA AdAna-
pradAna kreN| isake atirikta paraspara samparka-vRddhi nahIM kareM  /  yahI
jinAjJA hai| upAzraya meM rAtri strInivAsa prAyazcitta 12. je bhikkhU NAyagaM
vA, aNAyagaM vA, uvAsagaM vA, aNuvAsagaM vA aMto uvassayassa addhaM vA rAI,
kasiNaM vA rAiM saMvasAvei, saMvasAveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  artha- jo bhikSu
svajana yA parajana kI, upAsaka yA anya kI strI ko upAzraya ke andara arddha
rAtri yA pUrNa rAtri taka rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
(use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-sUtra meM "strI" yA "puruSa" kA
spaSTa kathana nahIM hai, prasaMgavaza strI ke rakhane kA hI prAyazcitta
samajhanA cAhiye  /  bhASyaNi meM bhI kahA hai ki "imaM puNa suttaM itthi
paDucca" yaha sUtra strI kI apekSA se hai| gAthA-itthi paDucca suttaM, sahiraNNa
sabhoyaNe ya AvAse  /  jai nissaMgaya je vA mehuNa nisibhoyaNaM kujjA  // 2469
//  addhaM vA rAiMaddhaM rAIe do jAmA, 'vA' vikappeNa egaM jAma  /  cauro jAmA
kasiNA rAI 'vA' vikappeNa tiNNI jAmA  /  addhaM zabda kA artha AdhI rAta na
karake apUrNa rAtri bhI kiyA jA sakatA hai| uttarAdhyayana sUtra a. 34 meM
"muhuttaddhaM" zabda hai  /  usakA artha kevala AdhA muhUrta hI nahIM hai apitu
muhUrta se kama bhI ho sakatA hai  /  tadanusAra yahAM bhI saMpUrNa rAtri ke
atirikta kama jyAdA rAtri kA bhI grahaNa ho sakatA hai  /  ataH isa sUtra kA
bhAvArtha yaha hai ki rAtri meM alpa yA adhika samaya strI ko upAzraya meM rakhe
to prAyazcitta pAtA hai| saMvasAvei-"rakhanA" do taraha se ho sakatA hai 1.
rahane ke lie kahanA 2. rahate hue ko manA nahIM karanA  /  ataH rAtri meM
upAzraya ke andara strI ko rahane ke liye kahanA nahIM aura binA kahe prA jAve
aura rahanA cAhe to use manA kara denA cAhiye  /  'manA nahIM karanA' bhI rahane
denA hI hotA hai  /  ataH rahane kA kahe yA manA nahIM kare to bhI "saMvasAvei"
kathana se prAyazcitta AtA hai| ukta vyAkhyA ke kAraNa kaI pratiyoM meM manA
nahIM karane kA svatantra sUtra bhI alaga milatA hai| kintu usakI vAkyaracanA
azuddha pratIta hotI hai| ataH vaha sUtra prakSipta hI pratIta hotA hai| kyoMki
isa svIkRta sUtra se hI viSaya kI pUrti ho jAtI hai  /  prakAzita cUrNi ke mUla
pATha meM vaha sUtra nahIM hai  /

Page #277 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Uddeshak  [177]  **Penance for going out with a woman at night**  13.
A monk who keeps a woman, whether she be a relative or a non-relative, an
upasika or a non-upasika, within his shelter for half a night or a full night,
or who goes out or enters for her sake, or who approves of someone going out or
entering for her sake, incurs the Guruchaumasi penance.  **Explanation:** The
previous sutra spoke of the penance for keeping a woman. The meaning of this
sutra, which follows, is that a monk should not keep a woman, and even if a
woman remains there due to circumstances, he should not go out with her at night
due to physical constraints.  There could be two reasons for going out with her:
1. The woman is afraid, 2. Or the monk is afraid.  There is a possibility of
many kinds of faults and apprehensions in going out with them at night.
**Penance for taking food from the festival of an anointed king**  14. A monk
who takes food, drink, edibles, or sweets from the following places of an
anointed king's festival: 1. Samvaasesu, 2. Pindaniyare, 3. Indamahe, 4.
Khandamahe, 5. Ruddamahe, 6. Mugudamahe, 7. Bhuyamahe, 8. Jakkhamahe, 9.
Nagamahe, 10. Thubhamahe, 11. Cheiyamhe, 12. Rukkhamahe, 13. Giriamahe, 14.
Darimahe, 15. Agadmahe, 16. Tadagamahe, 17. Dahaamahe, 18. Gaiamahe, 19.
Saramahe, 20. Sagaramahe, 21. Aagamahe, or any other such places, or from the
great festivals in the open, incurs the Guruchaumasi penance.  15. A monk who
takes food, drink, edibles, or sweets from the Uttarasaalans or Uttargihans of
an anointed king's festival, incurs the Guruchaumasi penance.  16. A monk who
takes food, drink, edibles, or sweets from the following places of an anointed
king's festival: 1. Hayasala-gaya, 2. Gayasala-gaya, 3. Mantasala-gaya, 4.
Gujjhasala-gaya, 5. Rahassala-gaya, 6. Mehunasaala-gaya, incurs the Guruchaumasi
penance.  17. A monk who takes milk, etc., from the collected offerings of an
anointed king's festival, incurs the Guruchaumasi penance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AThavAM uddezaka] [177 strI ke sAtha rAtri meM gamanAgamana karane kA
prAyazcitta 13. je bhikkhU NAyagaM vA, aNAyagaM vA, uvAsagaMvA, aNuvAsagaM vA,
aMto uvassayassa addhaM vA rAI, kasiNaM vA rAI saMvasAvei, taM paDucca Nikkhamai
vA, pavisai vA, NikkhamaMtaM vA, pavisaMtaM vA saaijji| 13. jo bhikSu svajana yA
parajana (anya), upAsaka yA anya kisI bhI strI ko arddharAtri yA pUrNarAtri
upAzraya ke andara rakhatA hai yA usake nimitta gamanAgamana karatA hai yA
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| . (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /
) vivecana-pUrva sUtra meM strI ke rakhane kA prAyazcitta kahA hai| tadanantara
kahe gae isa sUtra kA bhAva yaha hai ki sAdhu strI ko na rakhe aura manA karane
para bhI yadi koI strI vahAM paristhitivaza raha jAye to rAtri meM zArIrika
bAdhA se vaha bAhara jAve to usake nimitta usake sAtha jAnA-mAnA nahIM karanA
caahie| sAtha jAne-mAne meM do kAraNa ho sakate haiM-1. strI ko bhaya lagatA ho,
2. athavA sAdhu ko bhaya lagatA ho| rAtri meM unake sAtha bAhara jAne-Ane meM
aneka prakAra ke doSoM kI evaM AzaMkAoM kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai|
mUrddhAbhiSikta rAjA ke mahotsavAdi sthaloM se AhAra grahaNa karane kA
prAyazcitta 14. je bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM, 1.
samavAesu vA, 2. piMDaniyaresu vA, 3. iMdamahesu vA, 4. khaMdamahesu vA, 5.
ruddamahesu vA, 6. mugudamahesu vA, 7. bhUyamahesu vA, 8. jakkhamahesu vA, 9.
NAgamahesu vA, 10. thUbhamahesu vA, 11. ceiyamahesu vA, 12. rukkhamahesu vA, 13.
girimahesu vA, 14. darimahesu vA, 15. agaDamahesu vA, 16. taDAgamahesu vA, 17.
dahamahesu vA, 18. gaimahesu vA, 19. saramahesu vA, 20. sAgaramahesu vA, 21.
AgAramahesu vA, aNNayaresu vA, tahappagAresu virUvarUvesu mahAmahesu asaNaM vA,
pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  15. je
bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM uttarasAlaMsi vA,
uttaragihaMsi vA, rIyamANANaM asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA
paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  16. je bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM
mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM 1. hayasAlA-gayANa vA, 2. gayasAlAgayANa vA, 3.
maMtasAlAgayANa vA, 4. gujjhasAlAgayANa vA, 5. rahassasAlAgayANa vA, 6.
mehuNasAlAgayANa vA asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei,
paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 17. je bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM
muddhAbhisittANaM saNNihisaNNicayAo khIraM vA,

Page #278 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 178] If a monk accepts or approves of the acceptance of *nishithasutr*,
*vahin*, *gavaniyam*, *sappi*, *gul*, *khand*, *sakkar*, *machchandiy*, or any
other food item, he incurs a *guruchaumasiya* penance.  ## 18] If a monk accepts
or approves of the acceptance of *ranno khattiyanam mudiyanam muddhabisittanam*
(a king of pure lineage, crowned and anointed) *ussatth-pid*, *sansatth-pid*,
*anaah-pid*, or *vanimaga-pid*, he incurs a *guruchaumasiya* penance.  ## 14] If
a monk accepts or approves of the acceptance of food, drink, or delicacies
offered to a king of pure lineage, crowned and anointed, at any of the following
festivals: 1. *mele*, 2. *pitrubhoj*, 3. *indra*, 4. *kartikeya*, 5. *ishwar*,
6. *baldev*, 7. *bhoot*, 8. *yaksh*, 9. *naagkumar*, 10. *stoop*, 11. *chait*,
12. *vrksh*, 13. *parvat*, 14. *gufa*, 15. *kutra*, 16. *talab*, 17. *hrad*, 18.
*nadi*, 19. *sarovar*, 20. *samudra*, 21. *khan*, or any other similar festival,
he incurs a *guruchaumasiya* penance.  ## 15] If a monk accepts or approves of
the acceptance of food, drink, or delicacies offered to a king of pure lineage,
crowned and anointed, while he is residing in the *uttarashala* or *uttaragruh*
(a pavilion), he incurs a *guruchaumasiya* penance.  ## 16] If a monk accepts or
approves of the acceptance of food, drink, or delicacies offered to a king of
pure lineage, crowned and anointed, while he is in the 1. *ashwashala*, 2.
*hastishala*, 3. *mantranashala*, 4. *guptshala*, 5. *guptvicharanashala*, or 6.
*maithunashala*, he incurs a *guruchaumasiya* penance.  ## 17] If a monk accepts
or approves of the acceptance of *doodh*, *dahi*, *makhan*, *ghrit*, *gud*,
*khand*, *sakkar*, or *misri*, or any other food item, from the storehouse of a
king of pure lineage, crowned and anointed, where perishable or imperishable
goods are kept, he incurs a *guruchaumasiya* penance.  ## 18] If a monk accepts
or approves of the acceptance of 1. *ussatth-pid*, 2. *bhuktvishesh-pid*, 3.
*anaath-pid*, or 4. *vanip-pid* (beggar's alms) offered by a king of pure
lineage, crowned and anointed, he incurs a *guruchaumasiya* penance.
**Explanation:**  From the sixth *uddeshak* to the thirteenth *sutr* of this
*uddeshak*, the text discusses penances related to women. These penances require
a *guruchaumasiya* penance. From *sutr* 14 to the end of the eighth *uddeshak*
and throughout the ninth *uddeshak*, the text discusses penances related to
various types of *rajapind* (royal alms) and other situations involving kings.
The text uses three specific adjectives to describe the king, which collectively
mean "a very great king." The meaning of each word is as follows:  1. *mudiyan*
- of pure lineage,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 178] [nizIthasUtra vahiM vA, gavaNIyaM vA, sappi vA, gulaM vA, khaMDaM vA,
sakkaraM vA, macchaMDiyaM vA, aNNayaraM bhoyaNajAyaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM
vA saaijji| 18. je bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM
ussaTTha-piDaM vA, saMsaTTha-piDaM vA, aNAha-piDaM vA, vaNImaga-piMDaM vA
paDiggAhei paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  taM sevamANe Avajjai cAummAsiyaM
parihAraThANaM aNugdhAiyaM  /  14. jo bhikSu mUrddhAbhiSikta zuddhavaMzIya
kSatriya rAjA ke-1. mele Adi meM, 2. pitRbhoja meM, 3. indra, 4. kArtikeya, 5.
Izvara, 6. baladeva, 7. bhUta, 8. yakSa, 9. nAgakumAra, 10. stUpa, 11. caitya,
12. vRkSa, 13. parvata, 14. guphA, 15. kutrA, 16. tAlAba, 17. hrada, 18. nadI,
19. sarovara, 20. samudra, 21. khAna ityAdi kisI prakAra ke mahotsava meM tathA
anya bhI isI prakAra ke aneka mahotsavoM meM unake nimitta se banA azana, pAna,
khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 15. jo bhikSu zreSTha kulotpanna mUrddhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjA jaba
uttarazAlA yA uttaragRha (maMDapa) meM rahatA ho taba usakA azana, pAna, khAdya
yA svAdya grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 16.
jo bhikSu 1. azvazAlA, 2. hastizAlA, 3. maMtraNAzAlA, 4. guptazAlA, 5.
guptavicAraNAzAlA yA 6. maithunazAlA meM gaye hue zreSTha kulotpanna
mUrddhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjA ke prazana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya ko grahaNa
karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 17. jo bhikSu zreSTha
kulotpanna mUrddhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjA ke vinAzI dravyoM yA avinAzI dravyoM ke
saMgrahasthAna se dUdha, dahI, makkhana, ghRta, guDa, khAMDa, zakkara yA misrI
tathA anya bhI koI khAdya padArtha grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 18. jo bhikSu zreSTha kulotpanna mUrdhAbhiSikta kSatriya
rAjA ke 1. utsRSTapiDa, 2. bhuktavizeSapiMDa, 3. anAthapiMDa yA 4. vanIpapiMDa,
(bhikhArIpiMDa) ko grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| uparyukta 14 se 18 sUtroM meM kahe gaye doSasthAna ko sevana karane para
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai| vivecana-chaThe uddezaka se lekara isa
uddezaka ke 13veM sUtra taka strI sambandhI prAyazcittoM kA kathana nirantara
huA hai| unakA gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| sUtra 14 se AThaveM uddezaka ke
pUrNa hone taka aura saMpUrNa navameM uddezaka meM aneka prakAra ke rAjapiMDa
tathA rAjA se saMbaMdhita aneka prasaMgoM ke prAyazcitta kahe gaye haiN| yahAM
rAjA ke lie tIna vizeSaNoM kA prayoga hai, jisakA saMkSipta artha hai-'bahuta
bar3e rAjA" pratyeka zabda kA artha isa prakAra hai , 1. mudiya-zuddhavaMzIya,

Page #279 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Objective  [179] 2. **Murdhabhishikt** - Anointed by many kings,
meaning anointed by many kings or by parents. 3. **Rano Khattiyanam** - A
Kshatriya king. A pure-blooded Kshatriya king anointed by many kings or by
parents. These three epithets are merely descriptive of the nature and
importance. Therefore, it should be understood that these words are used in
relation to a very great king. The implication is that it is not permissible for
monks and nuns to accept food, etc., from a **Murdhabhishikt** great king during
the reign of the 24th Tirthankara. Therefore, it should not be understood as a
prohibition on landlords, chieftains, etc.  1. **Samavaasu** - **Samavayo** is
the gathering of assemblies, the association of merchants, etc. - Rajendra Kosh.
**Samavayo** is the gathering - Sankhchhed Shreniyadeh. - Pracha. Shru. 2, A. 1,
U. 2. **Samavayo** is the group of food. - Churni. 2. **Pindaniyare** -
**Pitripindam** means the offering to the deceased. - Aacha. 1 **Pindanigaro**
is the offering of food, **Pitripindapadanam** (offering of **Pitripinda**) or
**Pindanigaro**. - Churni. 3. **Rudra** - **Bhaginayo** is **Rudra**. **Rudra**
is **Shiva**. In Acharanga, its meaning is God. In Rajendra Kosh, it is
described as "**Mahadev-Maheshwar**" with a detailed narrative of its origin. 4.
**Mukunda** - **Mukudo** is **Baldev**. - Churni. **Vasudeva Mahotsav**. - Bhag
Sh. 9, U. 33 5. **Cheiy** - **Cheiyam** - Temple. 6. **Sar** - A naturally
formed water body - pond, without excavation. 7. **Tadag** - A pond prepared by
excavation.  Many types of festivals are started at different times for various
reasons and continue for a long time on that fixed date. If a monk accepts food
prepared for these festivals by the king, he incurs **Guruchaumasi** atonement.
Going to such places has the possibility of many faults, and both the king's
happiness or anger can lead to many faults. Therefore, one should not go to such
places for alms.  Sutras 15-16. refer to the various places of a king who has
gone elsewhere due to work. The atonement for accepting the food prepared for
the king at those places is mentioned. The commentator has said that these are
examples, and it should be understood in relation to other such places. 1.
**Uttarshala** - 'Where the king goes first, that is the **Uttarshala** house to
be considered.' '**Aththanigaadimandavo Uttarshala, Mulagiham Asambaddham
Uttargiham**. Sutra 18 mentions the food to be given as charity.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AThavAM uddezaka] [179 2. muddhAbhisittaaneka rAjAroM ke mastaka jise jhukate
haiM arthAt aneka rAjAoM dvArA abhiSikta athavA mAtA-pitA ke dvArA abhiSikta  /
3. raNo khattiyANaM-aisA kSatriya rAjA  /  aneka rAjAoM dvArA yA mAtA-pitA Adi
ke dvArA abhiSikta zuddhavaMzIya kSatriya rAjA  /  ye tInoM vizeSaNa kevala
svarUpadarzaka va mahattva batAne ke liye kahe gaye haiM  /  ataH bahuta bar3e
rAjA kI apekSA ho ina zabdoM kA prayoga hai, aisA samajhanA cAhiye  /  tAtparya
yaha hai ki mUrddhAbhiSikta bar3e rAjA kA AhAra Adi 24veM tIrthaMkara ke zAsana
meM sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ko grahaNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai  /  ataH isase
jAgIradAra, ThAkura Adi kA niSedha nahIM samajhanA caahiye| 1. samavAesu-
samavAyogoSThInAM melApakaH, vaNijAdinAM saMghAtaH  /  rAjendra koza  /
samavAyo melakaH-saMkhaccheda zreNyAdeH  /  -prAcA. zru. 2, a. 1, u. 2  /
samavAyo goTThI bhattaM  /  cuurnni| 2. piMDaniyaresu-pitRpiMDaM
mRtakabhaktamityarthaH  /  AcA. 1 piMDanigaro dAibhattaM,
pitipiMDapadANaM-(pitRpiMDapradAna) vA piMDanigaro  /  cUNi  /  3. rudra-
bhAgiNeyo rudraH  /  rudraH zivaH  /  AcArAMga meM isakA artha Izvara kiyA hai|
rAjendra koza meM "mahAdeva-mahezvara" kahakara usakI utpatti kA vistRta
kathAnaka kiyA hai| 4. mukuMda-mukudo baladevaH  /  -cUNi  /  vAsudeva
mahotsavaH |-bhg za. 9, u. 33 5. ceiya-ceiyaM-devakulaM  /  6. sara-khudAI kiye
binA svataH niSpanna jalAzaya-tAlAba  /  7. taDAga-khudAI karake taiyAra kiyA
gayA tAlAba  /  aneka prakAra ke mahotsava aneka nimittoM se bhinna-bhinna kAla
meM prArambha kara diye jAte haiM tathA lambe kAla taka usa nizcita tithi meM
calate rahate haiN| rAjA kI tarapha se ina mahotsavoM meM banAyA gayA AhAra
grahaNa karane para bhikSu ko gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /  aise sthaloM
meM jAne para aneka doSoM kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai tathA rAjA kA prasanna honA
yA nArAja honA donoM hI sthitiyAM aneka doSoM kA nimitta ho sakatI haiN| ataH
aise sthaloM meM bhikSA ke liye nahIM jAnA cAhiye  /  sUtra 15-16. meM kAryavaza
kahIM anyatra gaye hue rAjA ke vibhinna sthAnoM kA nirdeza kiyA gayA hai| una
sthAnoM para rAjA ke liye jo AhAra banatA hai, usake grahaNa karane kA
prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  vyAkhyAkAra ne kahA hai ki ye udAharaNa rUpa meM
kahe gaye haiM, anya bhI isa taraha ke sthAnoM ke sambandha meM samajha lenA
caahiye| 1. uttarazAlA-'jattha ya koDApuvvaM gacchati, tattha NaM vasati te
uttarazAlA gihA vattavvA' 'atthAnigAdimaMDavo uttarasAlA, mUlagihaM asaMbaddhaM
uttaragihaM  / ' sUtra 18 meM dAna diye jAne vAle AhAra kA kathana hai|

Page #280 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nishītha Sūtra]  'Ussaṭṭha'-kākādibhyaḥ-prakṣepanāya sthāpitaṃ piṇḍaṃ. Ussaṭṭhe
-ujjhiyadhammiē. Upalabdha aneka pratiyo̱ṃ me̱ṃ "kiviṇapiṇḍa" pāṭha adhika hai.
Bhāṣya, cūrṇi me̱ṃ isaki vyākhyā nahī̱ṃ kī gaī hai tathā is śabda kī yahā̱ṃ
āvaśyakatā bhī pratīta nahī̱ṃ hotī hai. Uska āśaya dānapiṇḍa eva̱ṃ vanīpakapiṇḍa
me̱ṃ garbhita ho jātā hai. Āṭhave̱ṃ uddēśaka kā sārā̱ṃśa Chaṭhe, sātave̱ṃ
uddēśaka me̱ṃ maithuna ke saṃkalpa se kī gaī pravṛttiyoṃ ke prāyaścitta kahe
hai̱ṃ. Āṭhave̱ṃ uddēśaka me̱ṃ maithunasēvana ke saṃkalpa kī nimittarūpa strī
saṃbandhi prāyaścitta kā kathana hai, bāda me̱ṃ rājapiṇḍa se saṃbanddhita
prāyaścitta kahe gaye hai̱ṃ. Sūtra 1 se 9 tak-dharmashālā ādi 4 me̱ṃ, udyānādi 4
me̱ṃ, aṭṭālikā ādi 6 me̱ṃ, dagamārga ādi 4 me̱ṃ, śūnyagṛha ādi 6 me̱ṃ, tṛṇagṛha
ādi 6 me̱ṃ, yānashālā ādi 4 me̱ṃ, dukāna ādi 4 me̱ṃ, gōshālā ādi 4 me̱ṃ akēlā
sādhū akēlī strī ke sātha rahe, āhārādi karē, svādhyāya karē, sthaṇḍilabhūmi
jāye yā vikārotpādaka vārttālāpa ādi karē. 10. Rātri ke samaya strīpariṣad me̱ṃ
yā strī yukta puruṣapariṣad me̱ṃ aparimita kathā karē. 11. Sādhvī ke sātha
vihāra ādi karē yā ati saṃparka rakhē. 12-13. Upāśraya me̱ṃ strī ko rātri me̱ṃ
rahane dēve, manā nahī̱ṃ karē tathā usake sātha bāhara ānā jānā karē. 14.
Mūrdhābhiṣikta rājā ke aneka prakāra ke mahotsavōṃ me̱ṃ āhāra grahaṇa karē.
15-16. Uttaraśālā athavā uttaragṛha me̱ṃ tathā aśvaśālā prādi me̱ṃ āhāra grahaṇa
karē. 17. Rājā ke dūdha-dahī ādi ke saṃgrahasthānōṃ se āhāra grahaṇa karē. 18.
Rājā ke utsṛṣṭapiṇḍa ādi-dāna nimittasthāpita āhāra ko grahaṇa karē. Ityādi
pravṛttiyōṃ kā gurucaumāsī prāyaścitta ātā hai. Upasaṃhāra Is uddēśaka ke 14
sūtrōṃ ke viṣaya kā kathana nīmna āgamōṃ me̱ṃ hai, yathā Strīsaṃsarga kā niṣēdha
daśavai. a. 8, gā. 52-58, uttarā. a. 1, gā. 26, a. 33, gā. 13-16 ādi aneka
pāgama sthalo̱ṃ me̱ṃ hai. Usī kā kuchha spashṭīkaraṇa va sthalanirdēśa yukta
varṇana sūtra 1 se 9 me̱ṃ hai. 1. Daśavaikālika a. 3 v ācārāṃgasūtra śru. 2, a.
1, u. 3 me̱ṃ rājapiṇḍa, 2. Daśave. a. 5, gā. 47 se 52 me̱ṃ dānapiṇḍa, 3.
Ācārāṃgasūtra śru. 2, a. 1, u. 2 me̱ṃ saṃkhaḍī me̱ṃ bane bhojana kā grahaṇa
karṇā niṣiddha hai. Inakā yahā̱ṃ sūtra 14-18 tak vistāra pūrvaka prāyaścitta
kathana hai. Is prakāra 1 se 9 v 14 se 18 kul 14 sūtrōṃ me̱ṃ anya prāgama
nirdishṭa viṣayōṃ kā prāyaścitta kathana hai.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 180] [nizIthasUtra * 'ussaTTha'-kAkAdibhyaH-prakSepaNAya sthApitaM piMDaM  /
ussaTTe -ujjhiyadhammie  /  upalabdha aneka pratiyoM meM "kiviNapiMDa' pATha
adhika hai  /  bhASya, cUNi meM isakI vyAkhyA nahIM kI gaI hai tathA isa zabda
kI yahAM AvazyakatA bhI pratIta nahIM hotI hai  /  usakA Azaya dAnapiMDa evaM
vanIpakapiNDa meM garbhita ho jAtA hai| AThaveM uddezaka kA sArAMza chaThe,
sAtaveM uddezaka meM maithuna ke saMkalpa se kI gaI pravRttiyoM ke prAyazcitta
kahe haiN| AThaveM uddezaka meM maithunasevana ke saMkalpa kI nimitta rUpa strI
saMbaMdhI prAyazcitta kA kathana hai, bAda meM rAjapiMDa se saMbaMdhita
prAyazcitta kahe gaye haiN| sUtra 1 se 9 taka-dharmazAlA Adi 4 meM, udyAnAdi 4
meM, aTTAlikA Adi 6 meM, dagamArga Adi 4 meM, zUnyagRha Adi 6 meM, tRNagRha Adi
6 meM, yAnazAlA Adi 4 meM, dukAna Adi 4 meM, gozAlA Adi 4 meM akelA sAdhu akelI
strI ke sAtha rahe, AhArAdi kare, svAdhyAya kare, sthaMDilabhUmi jAye yA
vikArotpAdaka vArtAlApa Adi kare  /  10. rAtri ke samaya strIpariSad meM yA strI
yukta puruSapariSad meM aparimita kathA kare  /  11. sAdhvI ke sAtha vihAra Adi
kare yA ati saMparka rkhe| 12-13. upAzraya meM strI ko rAtri meM rahane deve,
manA nahIM kare tathA usake sAtha bAhara AnA jAnA kre| 14. mUrddhAbhiSikta rAjA
ke aneka prakAra ke mahotsavoM meM AhAra grahaNa kare  /  15-16. uttarazAlA
athavA uttaragRha meM tathA azvazAlA prAdi meM AhAra grahaNa kare  /  17. rAjA
ke dUdha-dahI Adi ke saMgrahasthAnoM se AhAra grahaNa kre| 18. rAjA ke
utsRSTapiMDa Adi-dAna nimitta sthApita AhAra ko grahaNa kre| ityAdi pravRttiyoM
kA gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| upasaMhAra isa uddezaka ke 14 sUtroM ke
viSaya kA kathana nimna AgamoM meM hai, yathA strIsaMsarga kA niSedha dazavai.
a. 8, gA. 52-58, uttarA. a. 1, gA. 26, a. 33, gA. 13-16 Adi aneka pAgama sthaloM
meM hai  /  usI kA kucha spaSTIkaraNa va sthalanirdeza yukta varNana sUtra 1 se
9 meM hai| 1. dazavaikAlika a. 3 va AcArAMgasUtra zru. 2, a. 1, u. 3 meM
rAjapiMDa, 2. dazave. a. 5, gA. 47 se 52 meM dAnapiNDa, 3. AcArAMgasUtra zru. 2,
a. 1, u. 2 meM saMkhaDI meM bane bhojana kA grahaNa karanA niSiddha hai| inakA
yahAM sUtra 14-18 taka vistAra pUrvaka prAyazcitta kathana hai  /  isa taraha 1
se 9 va 14 se 18 kula 14 sUtroM meM anya prAgama nirdiSTa viSayoM kA prAyazcitta
kathana hai|

Page #281 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[181 Eighth Uddeshak] The subject matter of the 4 sutras of this Uddeshak is not
found in other Agamas, such as  The subject matter of the remaining four sutras
could also fall under the category of contact with women, but due to some
specific statements, their discussion has been separated. 10. One should not
tell Dharmakatha etc. to women at night, and to men in the company of women, and
if one does, one incurs Prāyaścitta, and some exceptions [exemptions] have also
been mentioned. 11. The prohibition of doing many things in the Upāśraya of
Sadhvis is in the Brihatkalpa Uddeshak 3, but the prohibition of traveling from
village to village and other activities, and the statement of Prāyaścitta, is
here. 12-13 The statement that one should not stay in a place where there are
women is found elsewhere, but these two sutras contain the instruction on how to
behave if a woman wants to stay in the place of a Sadhu or stays there, and the
statement of Prāyaścitta. _ Some statements in this Uddeshak are special. In
addition to these, some original topics are also discussed in other Agamas. ||
Eighth Uddeshak ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [181 AThavAM uddezaka] isa uddezaka ke 4 sUtroM ke viSaya kA kathana anya
AgamoM meM nahIM hai, yathA zeSa cAra sUtroM kA viSaya bhI strIsamparka ke
antargata A sakatA hai kintu kucha vizeSa kathana hone se unakA kathana alaga
kiyA gayA hai  /  10. rAtri meM striyoM ko tathA striyoM sahita puruSoM ko
dharmakathA Adi nahIM kahanA cAhiye aura kahe to prAyazcitta pAtA hai tathA
kucha apavAdoM [chUTa] kA nirdeza bhI huA hai| 11. sAdhviyoM ke upAzraya meM
aneka kAryoM ke karane kA niSedha bRhatkalpa uddezaka 3 meM hai kintu
grAmAnugrAma vihAra kA tathA anya aneka pravattiyoM kA niSedha aura prAyazcitta
kA kathana to yahIM para hai| 12-13strIyukta sthAna meM nahIM ThaharanA aisA
varNana anyatra AtA hai kintu strI sAdhu ke sthAna para rahanA cAhe yA raha jAye
to kaisA vyavahAra karanA, isakA sUcana tathA prAyazcitta kA kathana ina do
sUtroM meM hI hai| _ isa uddezaka meM kucha kathana vizeSatA yukta haiM  /  ina
ke atirikta kucha maulika viSayoM kA kathana to anya AgamoM meM bhI vaNita hai|
//  AThavAM uddezaka samApta  //

Page #282 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Natama Uddesaka** **Rajapinda-Grahana-Prayaschitta**  1. **Je Bhikkhu
Rayapidam Ginhai, Ginhantam Va Saizzai.** 2. **Je Bhikkhu Rayapidam Bhujai,
Bhujantam Va Saizzai.**  1. **A monk who accepts or approves of the acceptance
of Rajapinda.** 2. **A monk who enjoys or approves of the enjoyment of
Rajapinda.** (He receives Guruchomaasi Prayaschitta.)  **Vivechana:** Rajapinda
is of eight types: 1. Asana, 2. Pana, 3. Khadyam, 4. Swadyam, 5. Vastram, 6.
Patram, 7. Kambalam, 8. Padaponchana. (Bhashya Gatha 2500)  Rajapinda is
prohibited during the reign of the first and last Tirthankaras. It is not
prohibited during the reign of the middle Tirthankaras and in the Mahavideha
region.  **Antahpura-Pravesha Va Bhiksagrahana Prayaschitta**  3. **Je Bhikkhu
Rayantepuram Pavisai, Pavisantam Va Saizzai.** 4. **Je Bhikkhu Rayantepuriyam
Vadejja "Auso Rayantepuriye! No Khalu Amham Kappai Rayantepuram Nikkhamittae Va,
Pavisittae Va, Iman Nam Tumham Padiggaham Ghaya Rayantepurao Asanam Va, Panam
Va, Khaimam Va, Saim Va Abhihadam Ahatu Dalayahi", Jo Tam Evam Vayai Vayantan Va
Saizzai.** 5. **Je Bhikkhu No Vayajja Rayantepuriya Vayajja "Ausanto Samana! No
Khalu Tujham Kappai Rayantepuram Nikkhamittae Va Pavisittae Va, Ahareyan
Padiggaham Anto Aham Rayantepurao Asanam Va, Panam Va, Khaimam Va, Saim Va
Abhihadam Ahatu Dalayami", Jo Tam Evam Vayanti PadisuNai, PadisuNantan Va
Saizzai.**  3. **A monk who enters the king's inner palace or approves of the
entry.** 4. **A monk who says to the king's wife, "O Ayushmati Rayantepurike! It
is not proper for us to enter or leave the king's inner palace. Therefore, you
should take this bowl and bring us food, drink, edibles, or delicacies from the
king's inner palace." A monk who says this or approves of someone saying this.**
5. **If the monk does not say this, but the king's wife says, "O Ayushman
Shraman! It is not proper for you to enter or leave the king's inner palace. I
will bring you food, drink, edibles, or delicacies from the king's inner
palace." A monk who hears this or approves of someone hearing this.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 natama uddezaka rAjapiMDa-grahaNa-prAyazcitta 1. je bhikkhU rAyapiDaM giNhai,
giNhataM vA sAijjai  /  2. je bhikkhU rAyapiDaM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /
1. jo bhikSu rAjapiMDa grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 2. jo bhikSu rAjapiMDa bhogatA hai yA bhogane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| (use gurucomAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-rApiMDa ATha prakAra
kA hotA hai1. azana, 2. pAna, 3. khAdya, 4. svAdya, 5. vastra, 6. pAtra, 7.
kaMbala, 8. pAdapoMchana  /  bhASya gAthA 2500  /  prathama va aMtima
tIrthaMkara ke zAsana meM rAjapiMDa niSiddha hai| madhyakAlIna tIrthaMkaroM ke
zAsana meM aura mahAvideha kSetra meM niSiddha nahIM hai| aMtaHpura-praveza va
bhikSAgrahaNa prAyazcitta 3. je bhikkhU rAyaMtepuraM pavisai, pavisaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  4. je bhikkhU rAyaMtepuriyaM vadejjA "Auso rAyaMtepurie ! No khalu
amhaM kappai rAyaMtepuraM Nikkhamittae vA, pavisittae vA, imaM NaM tumaM
paDiggahaM gahAya rAyaMtepurAo asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA
abhihaDaM AhaTu dalayAhi", jo taM evaM vayai vayaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  5. je
bhikkhU no vaejjA rAyaMtepuriyA vaejjA "AusaMto samaNA ! No khalu tujhaM kappai
rAyaMtepuraM Nikkhamittae vA pavisittae vA, AhareyaM paDiggahaM aMto ahaM
rAyaMtepurAo asaNaM vA, pANaM 'vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA abhihaDaM AhaTu
dalAyAmi", jo taM evaM vayaMti paDisuNai, paDisuNaMtaM vA saaijji| 3. jo bhikSu
rAjA ke aMtaHpura meM praveza karatA hai yA praveza karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 4. jo bhikSu rAjA kI aMta:purikA se kahe ki "he AyuSmatI
rAyaMtepurike ! hameM rAjA ke aMtaHpura meM praveza karanA yA nikalanA nahIM
kalpatA hai, isalie tuma yaha pAtra lekara rAjA ke aMtaHpura meM se azana, pAna,
khAdya yA svAdya yahAM lAkara de do", jo usako isa prakAra kahatA hai yA kahane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  , 5. yadi bhikSu na kahe kintu aMtaHpurikA kahe
ki "he AyuSman zramaNa ! tumheM rAjA ke aMta:

Page #283 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Uddeshak] [183 Entering or leaving the inner palace is not virtuous,
therefore this is suitable for me. I will bring food, drink, edibles and
delicacies from the inner palace here," if he accepts this statement or approves
of the one who accepts it. (He incurs Guruchaumasi Prāyaścitta.) Discussion- The
king's inner palace is of three types: 1. Juṇṇatepuraṁ-Apari-bhogyā-Vṛddhā
Rānīyoṁ kā antaḥpura. 2. Navantepuraṁ Pari-bhogyā Yuva Rānīyoṁ kā antaḥpura. 3.
Kaṇṇatepuraṁ-A-prāpta Yauvanā-Kanyā Rājakumārīyoṁ kā antaḥpura. Rāyantepuriyā-
Cūrṇikāra has interpreted this as "the king's queen". This meaning is not
relevant, therefore it is not taken here. The second meaning is-'Daasī' The
third meaning is-The protector of the inner palace, who usually stands near the
door. This meaning is relevant. Therefore, 'Antepuriyā' means one who resides in
the inner palace or one who protects the inner palace. Due to this difference in
meaning, some alternatives have arisen in the text of Sutra No. 5, their true
decision has not been possible. Where the female doorkeeper resides, there the
feminine "Jo taṁ evaṁ vadantī paḍisuṇeī" where the male doorkeeper is, there the
masculine "Jo taṁ evaṁ vadantaṁ paḍisuṇeī" in this way both readings can be
correct. By getting it from the doorkeeper, one may consume food that is
contaminated with poison, contaminated with poison, enchanted, or excessive
food. There is also a possibility of many other faults. The king's Dānapiṇḍa-
grahaṇa Prāyaścitta 6. Je bhikkhū raṇṇo khattiyāṇam mudiyāṇam muddhābhisittāṇam,
1. Duvāriya-bhattaṁ vā, 2. Pasu-bhattaṁ vā, 3. Bhayyaga-bhattaṁ vā, 4. Bala-
bhattaṁ vā, 5. Kayaga-bhattaṁ vā, 6. Haya-bhattaṁ vā, 7. Gāya-bhattaṁ vā, 8.
Kantāra-bhattaṁ vā, 9. Dubhikkha-bhattaṁ vā, 10. Dukāla-bhattaṁ vā, 11. Damaga-
bhattaṁ vā, 12. Gilāna-bhattaṁ vā, 13. Baddaliyā-bhattaṁ vā, 14. Pāhuṇa-bhattaṁ
vā paḍiggahēī, paḍiggahēntaṁ vā sāijjai. 6. If a monk accepts food prepared for
1. doorkeepers, 2. animals, 3. servants, 4. soldiers, 5. slaves or employees, 6.
horses, 7. elephants,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navama uddezaka] [183 pura meM praveza karanA yA nikalanA nahIM kalpatA hai,
ataH yaha pAtra mujhe do| maiM aMta:pura se azana, pAna, khAdya vA svAdya yahAM
lAkara dU," jo usake isa prakAra kahane para use svIkAra karatA hai yA svIkAra
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|)
vivecana-rAjA kA aMtaHpura tIna prakAra kA hotA hai1. juNNatepuraM-aparibhogyA-
vRddhA rAniyoM kA antaHpura  /  2. navaMtepuraMparibhogyA yuvA rAniyoM kA
antaHpura  /  3. kaNNatepuraM-aprApta yauvanA-kanyA rAjakumAriyoM kA antaHpura
/  rAyaMtepuriyA-cUrNikAra ne isakA artha "rAjA kI rAnI" kiyA hai| yaha artha
prasaMgasaMgata nahIM hai, isalie yahAM nahIM liyA hai| dUsarA artha hai-'dAsI'
tIsarA artha hai-aMtaHpura kA rakSaka, jo prAyaH dvAra ke pAsa khar3A rahatA
hai| yaha artha prasaMga saMgata hai| ataH 'aMtepuriyA' kA artha hai aMtaHpura
meM rahane vAlA yA aMtaHpura kI rakSA karane vaalaa| isa arthabheda ke kAraNa
sUtra naM. 5 ke pATha meM bhI kucha vikalpa utpanna hue haiM, unakA yathArtha
nirNaya nahIM ho pAyA hai| jahAM strI dvArapAlikA rahatI hai vahAM strIliMgavAcI
"jo taM evaM vadaMtI paDisuNeI" jahAM puruSa dvArapAla ho vahAM puliMgavAcI "jo
taM evaM vadaMtaM paDisuNei" isa prakAra donoM pATha zuddha ho sakate haiM  /
dvArapAla se maMgavAkara rAjapiMDa grahaNa karane meM eSaNAdoSayukta, viSayukta,
abhimaMtrita AhAra yA adhika AhAra grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  anya bhI aneka
doSoM ke lagane kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai  /  rAjA kA dAnapiMDa-grahaNa
prAyazcitta 6. je bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM, 1.
duvAriya-bhattaM vA, 2. pasu-bhattaM vA, 3. bhayaga-bhattaM vA, 4. bala-bhattaM
vA, 5. kayaga-bhattaM vA, 6. haya-bhattaM vA, 7. gaya-bhattaM vA, 8.
kaMtArabhattaM vA, 9. dubhikkha-bhattaM vA, 10. dukAla-bhattaM vA, 11. damaga-
bhattaM vA, 12. gilANa-bhattaM vA, 13. baddaliyA-bhattaM vA, 14. pAhuNa-bhattaM
vA paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  6. jo bhikSu zuddhavaMzaja
mUrddhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjA ke1. dvArapAloM ke nimitta banA bhojana, 2. pazuoM
ke nimitta banA bhojana, 3. naukaroM ke nimitta banA bhojana, 4. sainikoM ke
nimitta banA bhojana, 5. dAsoM ke nimitta yA karmacAriyoM ke nimitta banA
bhojana, 6. ghoDoM ke nimitta banA bhojana, 7. hAthI ke nimitta banA bhojana,

Page #284 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [184] [Nishith Sutra 8. Food prepared for travelers in the forest, 9. Food
given to famine-stricken people, 10. Food given to drought-stricken people, 11.
Food prepared for the poor, 12. Food prepared for the sick, 13. Food prepared
for people affected by rain,  14. Food prepared for visitors, or one who
approves of such food being taken. (He incurs Guruchaumasi Pratikraman.)]
**Discussion:** In many royal families or wealthy families, there is a custom of
offering such food daily. If a monk accepts any such food, it causes obstruction
to those for whom the food was prepared, or it initiates the process of
preparing food again, and also incurs the fault related to accepting royal food.
**Explanation of Specific Words:** 1. Duvariya-Bhattan - Dovaria - Darapala -
Gatekeeper of the city. 2. Balan - Chaunvihan - Paikkbalan, Asabalan,
Hatthibalan, Rahbalan. 3. Kantar - Adaviniggyaan - Bhookhttaanam. 4. Dubhikkha -
Jam Dubhikkhe Raaya Deti Tam Dubhikkhabhatta. 5. Damag - Damaga - Ranka, Teshi
Bhattan - Damagbhattan.  6. Baddelia - Sattah (seven days) Baddele Padte Bhattan
Karei Raaya Ativrishti Se Piditon Ka Bhoojan.  Churnikar has explained some
words, in the original text, sometimes 11, 13 and 14 words are also found. As
sufficient basis for decision is available, 14 words have been taken in the
original.  **Pratikraman for going to the king's storehouse etc. without
begging:** 7. The monk who, without knowing, asking or investigating, enters or
exits the four to five day residence of the pure lineage, crowned Kshatriya
king, in these six places of fault, 1. Kodagar-Salani, 2. Bhandagar-Salani, 3.
Paan-Salani, 4. Kheer-Salani, 5. Ganj-Salani, 6. Mahanas-Salani. 7. The monk
who, without knowing, asking or investigating, enters or exits the four to five
day residence of the pure lineage, crowned Kshatriya king, in these six places
of fault, enters or exits the residence of the Gaathapati families for food.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 184] [nizIthasUtra 8. aTavI ke yAtriyoM ke nimitta banA bhojana, 9. dubhikSa-
pIr3itoM ke lie diyA jAne vAlA bhojana, 10. duSkAla-pIr3itoM ke lie diyA jAne
vAlA bhojana, 11. dIna janoM ke nimitta banA bhojana, 12. rogiyoM ke nimitta
banA bhojana, 13. varSA se pIr3ita janoM ke nimitta banA bhojana, 14. AgaMtukoM
ke nimitta banA bhojana grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai  / ) vivecana-aneka
rAjakuloM meM yA aneka zrImanta kuloM meM pratidina ukta prakAra kA bhojana dene
kI eka prakAra kI maryAdA hotI hai| unameM se kisI prakAra kA bhojana sAdhu
grahaNa kare to jinake nimitta bhojana banAyA hai, unake aMtarAya lagatI hai
athavA dUsarI bAra bhojana banAne kI prArambhajA kriyA lagatI hai tathA
rAjapiMDa grahaNa saMbaMdhI doSa bhI lagatA hai| vizeSa zabdoM kI vyAkhyA1.
duvAriya-bhattaM-dovAriyA-dArapAlA-nagara ke dvArapAla  /  2. balaM-caunvihaM-
pAikkabalaM, AsabalaM, hatthibalaM, rahabalaM  /  3. kaMtAra-aDaviniggayANa-
bhukhattANaM  /  4. dubbhikkha-jaM dubhikkhe rAyA deti taM dubhikkhbhttaa| 5.
damaga-damagA-raMkA, tesi bhattaM-damagabhattaM  /  6. baddaliyA-sattAha (sAta
dina) baddale paDate bhattaM karei rAyAativRSTi se pIr3itoM kA bhojana  /
cUrNikAra ne kucha zabdoM kI vyAkhyA kI hai, mUla pATha meM kahIM 11, 13 va 14,
zabda bhI milate haiM  /  nirNaya karane kA paryApta prAdhAra upalabdha ma hone
se mUla meM 14 zabda hI liye gaye rAjA ke koThAra prAdi sthAnoM ko jAne binA
bhikSAgamana kA prAyazcitta 7. je bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM
muddhAbhisittANaM imAiM chaddosAyayaNAiM ajANiyaapucchiya-agavesiya paraM
caurAya-paMcarAyAo gAhAvaikulaM piMDavAyapaDiyAe Nikkhamai vA pavisai vA
NikkhamaMtaM vA pavisaMtaM vA sAijjaDa, taM jahA1. koDAgAra-sAlANi vA, 2.
bhaMDAgAra-sAlANi vA, 3. pANa-sAlANi vA, 4. khIra-sAlANi vA, 5. gaMja-sAlANi vA,
6. mahANasa-sAlANi vaa| 7. jo bhikSu zuddhavaMzaja mUrddhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjA
ke ina chaha doSasthAnoM kI 4-5 dina ke bhItara jAnakArI kie binA, pUchatAcha
kie binA va gaveSaNA kie binA gAthApati kuloM meM AhAra

Page #285 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Uddeshak [185]  A monk who goes out or enters, or approves of someone
going out or entering (such a place), incurs the Guru-Chaumasi Pratikraman.
There are six Dosha-Sthanas:  1. Kotthagarasala (Granary) 2. Bhandagarasala
(Treasury) 3. Panasala (Liquor Shop) 4. Ksheerasala (Dairy) 5. Ganjasala
(Market) 6. Mahanasasala (Kitchen)  **Explanation:**  After entering a capital
city or similar place, a monk going out for alms should first inquire about
these six places of the king. Because these are the six places of Dosha
(faults). If he does not inquire about these six places within 4-5 days and goes
out for alms, he incurs the Guru-Chaumasi Pratikraman.  **Explanation of Special
Words:**  1. **Kotthagara:** A storehouse for grains, nuts, etc. 2.
**Bhandagara:** A treasury for gold, silver, jewels, etc. 3. **Pana:** "Sura-
Madhu-Sidhu-Khandag-Macchandiy-Muddiya Pabhiin Panagani." Places of liquor, etc.
4. **Ksheera:** "Kheerghar, Jath Kheeram Dadi-Navaniyam-Takkaadi Acchanti." A
place for milk, curd, ghee, etc. 5. **Ganj:** "Jath Dhannam Dabhijjati Sa
Ganjasala. Jath Sanasattarasani Dhanani Kottijanti." A place where seventeen
types of grains are stored. 6. **Mahanasa:** Uvakkhadanasala - Kitchen.  If a
monk does not know about these places and goes there for alms, he may encounter
the guards of those places. If the guards are benevolent, he may incur the fault
of accepting Rajapinda (royal offering). If they are hostile, they may consider
him a thief and cause him harm or even arrest him.  "Je Rakkhaga Te Bhadd Panta,
Bhaddesu Rayapadadosa, Pantesu Genhanadayo Dosha" (Churni). Therefore, it is
essential to know about these places.  **Pratikraman for Trying to See the King,
etc.:**  8. A monk who sees or tries to see the king, a Kshatriya, a wealthy
person, or a person who has been honored with a crown, either coming or going,
incurs the Pratikraman.  9. A monk who sees or tries to see the king, a
Kshatriya, a wealthy person, or a woman adorned with all ornaments, either
coming or going, incurs the Pratikraman.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navama uddezaka ] [185 ke liye nikalatA hai yA praveza karatA yA nikalane vAle
kA yA praveza karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) chaH doSasthAna ye haiM 1. koSThAgArazAlA, 3. pAnazAlA,
5. gaMjazAlA, 2. bhANDAgArazAlA, 4. kSIrazAlA, 6. mahAnasazAlA  /  vivecana -
rAjadhAnI Adi meM praveza karane ke bAda bhikSA ke liye jAne vAle sAdhu ko
zayyAtara evaM sthApya kula ke samAna sarvaprathama rAjA ke ina 6 sthAnoM kI
jAnakArI kara lenI cAhiye  /  kyoMki ye chahoM doSoM ke sthAna haiM  /  4-5 dina
meM ukta chaha sthAnoM kI jAnakArI na kare aura bhikSArtha calA jAe to use
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  vizeSa zabdoM kI vyAkhyA 1. koTThAgAra -
dhAnya, mevA Adi kA koThAra  /  2. bhaMDAgAra - sonA, cAMdI, ratna Adi dhana kA
bhaMDAra  /  3. pANa- - "surA - madhu-sIdhu - khaMDaga-macchaMDiya - muddiyA
pabhiINa pANagANi  / " madyasthAna Adi  /  4. 'khIra' - khIragharaM, jattha
khIraM dadhi-NavaNIyaM- takkAdi acchaMti - dUdha, dahI, ghI Adi kA sthAna  /  5.
'gaMja' - " jattha dhaNNaM dabhijjati sA gaMjasAlA  /  jattha saNasattarasANi
dhaNNANi koTTijjaMti" - jahAM satraha prakAra ke dhAnya kUTe jAte haiM, vaha
sthAna  /  6. 'mahANasa' uvakkhaDaNasAlA - rasoIghara  /  - ina sthAnoM kI
jAnakArI na hone para vahAM bhikSu bhikSArtha pahuMca sakatA hai  /  una sthAnoM
ke rakSaka puruSa yadi bhadra hoM to rAjapiMDa grahaNa karane kA doSa lagatA hai
aura pratikUla hoM to cora Adi samajha kara ve kaSTa bhI de sakate haiN|
giraphtAra kara sakate haiM 'je rakkhagA te bhadda paMtA, bhaddesu rAyapaDadosA,
paMtesu geNhaNAdayo dosA' cUrNi  /  ataH ina sthAnoM kI jAnakArI karanA Avazyaka
hai  /  rAjA zrAdi ko dekhane ke lie prayatna karane kA prAyazcitta- 8. je
bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM AgacchamANANaM vA
NiggacchamANANaM vA payamavi cakkhudaMsaNa - vaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei,
abhisaMdhAreMtaM vA sAijjai  /  9. je bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM
muddhAbhisittANaM itthIo savvAlaMkAra - vibhUsiyAo pavi cakkhudaMsaNa- vaDiyAe
abhisaMdhArei, abhisaMdhAreMtaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #286 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  **186]**  **8.** A monk who walks even a single step
with the intention of seeing a pure lineage, crowned Kshatriya king, or approves
of someone who does so, incurs Guru-Chaumasika penance.  **9.** A monk who walks
even a single step with the intention of seeing the queens of a pure lineage,
crowned Kshatriya king, adorned with all ornaments, or approves of someone who
does so, incurs Guru-Chaumasika penance.  **Discussion:**  The Acharanga Sutra
prohibits seeing many objects and places, and the 12th Uddesaka of the Nishita
Sutra states that they incur Laghu-Chaumasika penance. Seeing a king or queen is
considered particularly objectionable, hence Guru-Chaumasika penance is
mentioned for it in these two Sutras. The commentator explains the order of
penance as follows:  "If one thinks of seeing, it is Maas Guru, if one rises to
see, it is Chatur-Laghu, and if one walks, it is Chatur-Guru." "Even if one
walks a single step, it is Chatur-Guru, what to speak of seeing? This leads to
the transgression of the injunction, and if the king is favorable or
unfavorable, many other faults may also arise."  **Penance for consuming food
offered to a king who has gone out for hunting etc.**  **10.** A monk who
accepts or approves of the acceptance of food, drink, edibles, or delicacies of
a pure lineage, crowned Kshatriya king who has gone out to hunt for meat, fish,
or game, incurs Guru-Chaumasika penance.  **Discussion:**  "They mention food,
drink, edibles, and delicacies for the king who has gone out to hunt, and they
also mention food for those who are engaged in the practice of penance." This
means that even if the king has food at the place where he has gone out to hunt
for meat, fish, etc., it is not permissible to accept such food.  **Penance for
consuming food from the place where the king has eaten.**  **11.** A monk who
accepts or approves of the acceptance of food, drink, edibles, or delicacies
from the place where a pure lineage, crowned Kshatriya king has eaten, incurs
Guru-Chaumasika penance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 186] [nizIthasUtra 8. jo bhikSu zuddha vaMzaja mUrddhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjA ke
Ane-jAne ke samaya unheM dekhane ke saMkalpa se eka kadama bhI calatA hai yA
calane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 9. jo bhikSu zuddha vaMzaja mUrddhAbhiSikta
kSatriya rAjA kI sarva alaMkAroM se vibhUSita rAniyoM ko dekhane ke saMkalpa se
eka kadama bhI calatA hai yA calane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana AcArAMgasUtra meM aneka darzanIya
padArthoM va sthaloM ko dekhane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai tathA nizIthasUtra ke
12veM uddezaka meM unakA laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  rAjA yA rAnI
ko dekhane kI pravRtti vizeSa Apattijanaka hone se usakA gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta
ina do sUtroM meM kahA hai  /  vyAkhyAkAra ne isakA prAyazcittakrama isa prakAra
bhI batAyA hai _ 'maNasA citeti mAsa guru, udvite caulahuM, padabhede cauguru'
'egapadabhede vi caugurugA kimaMga puNa diThe ! ANAdivirAhaNA bhaddapaMtA dosA
ya  / ' arthAt dekhane kA vicAra kare to mAsa guru, dekhane ke liye uThe to
caturlaghu aura cale to caturguru prAyazcitta AtA hai aura jaba eka kadama
calane para bhI caturguru prAyazcitta AtA hai to dekhane kI to bAta hI kyA?
isase AjJAbhaMga doSa hotA hai tathA rAjA anukUla yA pratikUla ho to anya aneka
doSa bhI laga sakate haiN| zikArAdi ke nimitta nikale rAjA kA AhAra grahaNa
karane para prAyazcitta 10. je bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM
muddhAbhisittANaM maMsakhAyANa vA, macchakhAyANa vA, chavikhAyANa vA bahiyA
jiggayANaM asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM
vA saaijji| 10. jo bhikSu mAMsa, machalI va chavi Adi khAne ke liye bAhara gaye
hue, zuddha vaMzaja mUrddhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjA ke azana, pAna, khAdya yA
svAdya ko grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
(use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-rAINaM NiyaggayANaM tattheva
asaNaM-pANaM-khAima-sAimaM ukkareMti taDiyakappaDiyANaM vA tattheva bhattaM
krejj|" arthAt mAMsa, maccha Adi khAne ke liye vana meM yA nadI, draha-samudra
Adi sthaloM para gaye hue rAjA ke vahAM para azanAdi bhojana bhI ho sakatA hai,
aisA AhAra bhI grahaNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai| rAjA ne jahAM bhojana kiyA ho,
vahAM se AhAra grahaNa karane kA prAyazcitta 11. je bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM
mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM aNNayaraM uvavUhaNIyaM samIhiyaM pehAe tIse parisAe
aNuTThiyAe, abhiNNAe avocchiNNAe jo tamaNNaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA
saaijji|

Page #287 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Uddeshak  **11.** A monk who partakes of food or approves of someone
partaking of food in a house where a pure-lineage, crowned Kshatriya king is
being served food, before the royal council rises, before they leave, and before
everyone has left, incurs the Guru-Chaumasī Prāyaścitta.  **Explanation:** If a
person has arranged a light meal or a full meal and has invited the king to it,
then a monk should not go there to beg for food as long as the king and his
companions are eating. It is not forbidden to partake of food after they have
left. Partaking of food before that and going there is objectionable. Therefore,
if it is seen or known that the king has been invited there, i.e., he is eating
there, then going to that house or partaking of food there incurs the Guru-
Chaumasī Prāyaścitta.  "Aṇṇataraghaṇena bhedadarśanaṁ, śarīraṁ upavrihayanīti
upavrihaṇīyā" "Sā ya cauṇviha āsaṇādi." "Jementass raṇṇo uvavūhaṇīyā āṇiyā,
'piṭṭhao' tti vuttaṁ bhavati. Taṁ jo tāe parisāe aṇuṭṭhitāe gehati tass ṅkā
(cauguru). Rāyapindo ceva so. Āsaṇāṇi mottu udghaṭṭiyāe accchanti, tato kei
niggatā bhiṇṇā, aseśesu niggatēsu vocchiṇṇā, erise ṇ rāyapindo." - Chūṇi p.
459-60.  The meaning of this sūtra is that it is not proper for a monk to go to
a house where the king is eating. According to this sūtra, there is no
Prāyaścitta for going there after the king has eaten and left.  **12.** If it is
known that the king is staying in this place, then a monk who stays in that
house, in any part of that house, or in any place near that house, studies,
performs Japa, partakes of food, drink, edibles, or delicacies, or excretes or
approves of someone doing so, incurs the Guru-Chaumasī Prāyaścitta.
**Explanation:** The previous sūtra spoke of the Prāyaścitta for going to the
house where the king had come to eat, and this sūtra speaks of the Prāyaścitta
for staying in the house where the king has stayed for a day or two.  The
meaning of these sūtras is that a monk should stay away from the places where
the king eats, stays, or makes a short stay. It is not objectionable for the
king to come to the monk's place, but the monk should not go to any place where
the king is staying or even near it.  Sūtrakṛtāṅgasūtra A. 2, U. 2, Gā. 18 also
says that...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navama uddezaka]] [187 11. jo bhikSu zuddhavaMzaja mUrddhAbhiSikta kSatriya
rAjA ko kahIM para bhojana diyA jA rahA ho, use dekhakara usa rAja-pariSad ke
uThane ke pUrva, jAne ke pUrva tathA sabake cale jAne ke pUrva vahA~ se AhAra
grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai|) vivecana-kisI vyakti ne alpAhAra yA
pUrNAhAra kA Ayojana kiyA ho aura usameM rAjA ko bhI nimaMtrita kiyA ho, vahAM
jaba taka rAjA va usake sAtha vAle bhojana karate hoM taba taka bhikSArtha nahIM
jAnA cAhie  /  unake cale jAne ke bAda vaha AhAra grahaNa karanA niSiddha nahIM
hai| usake pUrva grahaNa karanA aura vahAM jAnA Apattijanaka hai| ataH dekhane
meM yA jAnane meM A jAe ki yahAM rAjA nimaMtrita kiye gaye haiM arthAt vahAM
bhojana kara rahe haiM to usa samaya ghara meM jAye yA AhAra grahaNa kare to
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| 'aNNataragahaNena bhedadarzanaM, zarIraM
upavRhayaMtIti upavRhaNIyA' 'sA ya caunvihA asaNAdi  / ' 'jemaMtassa raNNo
uvavUhaNIyA ANiyA, 'piTThao' tti vuttaM bhavati  /  taM jo tAe parisAe
aNuTThitAe gehati tassa GkA (cauguru)  /  rAyapiMDo ceva so  /  AsaNANi mottu
udghaTTiyAe acchaMti, tato kei NiggatA bhiNNA, asesesuNiggatesu vocchiNNA, erise
Na raaypiNddo|' - cUNi pR. 459-60  //  isa sUtra kA bhAvArtha yaha hai ki rAjA
jahA~ bhojana kara rahA ho usa samaya usa ghara meM bhikSArtha jAnA nahIM
kalpatA hai| unake bhojana karake cale jAne ke bAda jAne para isa sUtra ke
anusAra prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai| rAjA ke upanivAsasthAna ke samIpa Thaharane
Adi kA prAyazcitta 12. aha puNa evaM jANejjA 'ihajja rAyakhattie parivusie' je
bhikkhU tAhe gihAe tAe paemAe tAe uvAsaMtarAe vihAraM vA karei, sajjhAyaM vA
karei, asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA AhArei, uccAraM vA pAsavaNaM
vA pariTTavei, pariveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  . . 12. jaba yaha jJAta ho jAe ki Aja
isa sthAna meM rAjA Thahare haiM taba jo bhikSu usa gRha meM, usa gaha ke kisI
vibhAga meM yA usa gaha ke nikaTa kisI sthAna meM ThaharatA hai. svAdhyAya
karatA hai. prazana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya kA AhAra karatA hai yA mala-mUtra
tyAgatA hai yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecanapUrva sUtra meM rAjA jisa ghara meM bhojana karane
AyA ho vahAM gocarI jAne kA prAyazcitta kahA hai aura isa sUtra meM jisa ghara
meM rAjA ne eka do dina ke liye nivAsa kiyA ho, vahAM Thaharane kA prAyazcitta
kahA hai| - ina sUtroM kA tAtparya yaha hai ki rAjA ke bhojana, nivAsa,
alpakAlIna prAvAsa Adi ke sthAnoM se sAdhu ko dUra rahanA caahiye| rAjA sAdhu ke
sthAna para Aye yaha koI Apattijanaka nahIM hai kintu sAdhu rAjA ke kisI prAvAsa
meM yA usake nikaTa bhI na jAye  /  sUtrakRtAMgasUtra a. 2, u. 2, gA. 18 meM bhI
kahA hai ki

Page #288 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 188] [Nishith Sutra 'Usinodag tattabhoino, dhammaṭhiassa muniassa hīmaō.
Sansaggi asāhu rāihiṁ, asamāhi u tahāgayassa vi॥'  Many guards and royal
officials reside outside and around the king's residence, and there is a
possibility of various kinds of doubts. Therefore, after knowing such places,
the Sadhu should not go there.  Penance for a king's consumption of food while
on a journey. 13.  A Bhikkhu who accepts food, drink, edibles, or delicacies
from a pure-lineage, crowned Kshatriya king who is going on a journey for war or
other purposes, or approves of such acceptance, incurs a penance. 14. A Bhikkhu
who accepts food, drink, edibles, or delicacies from a pure-lineage, crowned
Kshatriya king who is returning from a journey for war or other purposes, or
approves of such acceptance, incurs a penance. 15. A Bhikkhu who accepts food,
drink, edibles, or delicacies from a pure-lineage, crowned Kshatriya king who is
going on a journey across a river, or approves of such acceptance, incurs a
penance. 16. A Bhikkhu who accepts food, drink, edibles, or delicacies from a
pure-lineage, crowned Kshatriya king who is returning from a journey across a
river, or approves of such acceptance, incurs a penance. 17. A Bhikkhu who
accepts food, drink, edibles, or delicacies from a pure-lineage, crowned
Kshatriya king who is going on a journey across a mountain, or approves of such
acceptance, incurs a penance. 18. A Bhikkhu who accepts food, drink, edibles, or
delicacies from a pure-lineage, crowned Kshatriya king who is returning from a
journey across a mountain, or approves of such acceptance, incurs a penance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 188] [nizIthasUtra 'usiNodaga tattabhoiNo, dhammaThiyassa muNissa hiimo|
saMsaggi asAhu rAIhiM, asamAhi u tahAgayassa vi||' rAjA ke nivAsasthAna ke
bAhara va Asa-pAsa kaI rakSaka rAjapuruSa rahate haiM, kaI prakAra kI zaMkAoM kI
saMbhAvanA rahatI hai| ataH aise sthAnoM ko jAna lene ke bAda sAdhu ko usa ora
nahIM jAnA caahiye| yAtrA meM gaye hue rAjA kA AhAra-grahaNa karane para
prAyazcitta 13. je bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM bahiyA
jattAsaMpaTThiyANaM asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei,
paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  14. je bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM
muddhAbhisittANaM bahiyA jattApaDiNiyattANaM asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA,
sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 15. je bhikkhU khattiyANaM
mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM Nai-jattAsaMpaTTiyANaM asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM
vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 16. je bhikkhU raNNo
khattiyANaM mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM gai-jattApaDiNiyattANaM asaNaM vA,
'pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  17. je
bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mubiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM giri-jattAsaMpaTTiyANaM
asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai
/  18. je bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM giri-
jattApaDiNiyattANaM asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei,
paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  13. jo bhikSu yuddha Adi kI yAtrA ke liye jAte hue
zuddhavaMzaja mUrdhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjA kA azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya
grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 14. jo bhikSu
yuddha Adi kI yAtrA se punaH lauTate hue zuddhavaMzaja mUrddhAbhiSikta kSatriya
rAjA kA azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| 15. jo bhikSu nadI kI yAtrA ke liye jAte hue
zuddhavaMzaja mUrddhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjA kA azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya
grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| . 16. jo
bhikSa nadI kI yAtrA se punaH lauTate hae zuddhavaMzaja mUrddhAbhiSikta kSatriya
rAjA kA azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| 17. jo bhikSu parvata kI yAtrA ke liye jAte hue
zuddhavaMzIya mUrddhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjA kA azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya
grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 18. jo bhikSu
parvata kI yAtrA se punaH lauTate hue zuddhavaMzIya mUrddhAbhiSikta kSatriya
rAjA kA azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  -

Page #289 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Uddeshak  **(He incurs Guruchaumasi Pratikraman)**  **Discussion:**
When traveling to these places and returning, food is prepared at the stopover
points. The Pratikraman for consuming this food is mentioned here. Because there
is a possibility of many faults like auspiciousness, inauspiciousness, and
doubt, etc., in consuming food prepared for such journeys.  **Pratikraman for
travel during the coronation:**  **19.** A monk who leaves or enters a city
where a pure-lineage, crowned Kshatriya king is being coronated, or approves of
someone doing so, incurs Guruchaumasi Pratikraman.  **Discussion:** When a
coronation is taking place, there is constant coming and going of royal
officials and people in the city for various tasks. During such times, a monk
should stay in his place and should not go anywhere. Or, he should not go to or
from that direction. There is a possibility of auspiciousness, inauspiciousness,
and many faults due to the crowded nature of the place while traveling.
**Pratikraman for frequent entry into the capital:**  **20.** A monk who leaves
or enters, or approves of someone leaving or entering, any of the ten cities
declared as capitals, where pure-lineage, crowned Kshatriya kings have been
coronated, twice or thrice in a month, incurs Guruchaumasi Pratikraman. These
cities are well-known by their names: 1. Champa, 2. Mathura, 3. Varanasi, 4.
Sravasti, 5. Saketapur, 6. Kampilya, 7. Kaushambi, 8. Mithila, 9. Hastinapur,
10. Rajagriha.  **Discussion:** Twelve Chakravartis have been in these ten
capitals. Shantinath, Kunthunath, and Aranath, these three Chakravartis were in
the same Hastinapur city. It is forbidden to go to or from these capitals more
than once a month. Pratikraman may not be incurred for going a second time due
to a specific reason, but it is definitely incurred for going a third time.
There is a possibility of many faults like suspicion of being a spy by royal
officials, etc., when going to or from these large capitals more than once a
month. In previous scriptures, the king...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navama uddezaka ] ( use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai | ) vivecana - ina
yAtrAoM ke liye jAte samaya aura punaH lauTate samaya mArga meM jahAM par3Ava
kiyA jAtA hai vahAM AhAra banAyA jAtA hai  /  use grahaNa karane kA yahAM
prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  kyoMki aisI yAtrAoM ke nimitta banAe gae AhAra ke
lene meM maMgala amaMgala tathA zaMkA Adi aneka doSoM kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai
/  [ 189 rAjyAbhiSeka ke samaya gamanAgamana kA prAyazcitta- 19. je bhikkhU
raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM mahAbhiseyaMsi vaTTamANaMsi
Nivakhamai vA pavisai vA, NikkhamaMtaM vA, pavisaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  19. jo
bhikSu zuddhavaMzIya mUrddhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjA ke mahAn rAjyAbhiSeka hone ke
samaya nikalatA hai yA praveza karatA hai yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  ( use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai 1 ) vivecana - jisa samaya
rAjyAbhiSeka ho rahA ho usa samaya usa nagarI meM aneka kAryoM ke liye
rAjapuruSoM kA va logoM kA AnA-jAnA Adi banA rahatA hai  /  aise samaya sAdhu ko
apane sthAna meM hI rahanA cAhiye, kahIM para jAnA mAnA nahIM karanA cAhiye  /
athavA usa dizA meM jAnA-AnA nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  jAne-Ane meM maMgala
amaMgala kI bhAvanA va janAkIrNatAjanya aneka doSoM kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai|
rAjadhAnI meM bAraMbAra praveza kA prAyazcitta 20. je bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM
mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM imAo dasa abhiseyAo rAyahAo uddiTThAo gaNiyAo
vaMjiyAo aMto mAsassa dukkhutto vA, tikkhutto vA Nikkhamai vA pavisaha vA,
NikkhamaMtaM vA pavisaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  taM jahA - 1. campA, 2. mahurA, 3.
vANArasI, 4. sAvatthI, 5. kaMpillaM, 6. kosaMbI, 7. sAkeyaM, 8. mihilA, 9.
hatthiNAuraM, 10. rAyagihaM  /  20. zuddhavaMzIya mUrddhAbhiSikta kSatriya
rAjAoM ke rAjyAbhiSeka kI nagariyAM, jo rAjadhAnI ke rUpa meM ghoSita haiM,
unakI saMkhyA dasa hai  /  ve saba apane nAmoM se prakhyAta haiM, ina
rAjadhAniyoM meM jo bhikSa eka mahIne meM do bAra yA tIna bAra jAnA-AnA karatA
hai yA jAne-mAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta
prAtA hai) una nagariyoM ke nAma isa prakAra haiM- 1. caMpA, 2. mathurA, 3.
vArANasI, 4. zrAvastI, 5. sAketapura, 6 . kAMpilya nagara 7. kauzAMbI 8. mithilA
9. hastinApura 10. rAjagRhI  /  vivecana- ina dasa rAjadhAniyoM meM bAraha
cakravartI huye haiN| zAMtinAtha, kuMthunAtha aura aranAtha ye tIna cakravartI
eka hI hastinApura nagarI meM huye haiM  /  ina rAjadhAniyoM meM eka mahIne meM
eka bAra se adhika jAne-Ane kA niSedha hai  /  prAyazcitta to kisI vizeSa kAraNa
se dUsarI bAra jAne para nahIM bhI AtA hai, kintu tIsarI bAra jAne para to
prAyazcitta AtA hI hai  /  ina bar3I rAjadhAniyoM meM eka mahIne meM eka bAra se
jyAdA jAne-mAne para rAjapuruSoM ko guptacara hone kI zaMkA honA Adi aneka doSoM
kI sambhAvanAeM rahatI haiM  /  pUrva sUtroM meM rAjA ke

Page #290 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Nishosha Sutra]  This Sutra advises on the importance of discretion in
matters like food, residence, coronation, etc. It prohibits frequent visits to
the capital cities of great kings and outlines the atonement for such actions.
The commentary mentions the possibility of various other transgressions related
to restraint. These capital cities are often filled with festivities for the
king and the citizens. There is an atmosphere conducive to sensual desires, with
dances, songs, musical instruments, and alluring appearances of men and women.
Witnessing this can lead to a loss of restraint and mindfulness, either through
memories of past indulgences or curiosity for the uninitiated. The noise and
commotion of the people can also hinder self-study and meditation. The abundance
of vehicles and crowded streets can lead to collisions and other inconveniences
during begging rounds. Due to these drawbacks, frequent visits to large capital
cities and other major towns are not beneficial for the restrained.  **Atonement
for accepting food offered by the king's officials and staff:**  **21.** A monk
who accepts food, drink, a meal, or a snack offered by a king, a nobleman, a
minister, a royal descendant, or a royal servant, or who intends to accept such
offerings, commits a transgression.  **Examples:**  1. A nobleman 2. A king 3. A
minister 4. A royal descendant 5. A royal servant  **22.** A monk who accepts
food, drink, a meal, or a snack offered by a king, a nobleman, a minister, a
royal descendant, or a royal servant, or who intends to accept such offerings,
commits a transgression.  **Examples:**  1. A guard 2. A gatekeeper 3. A
treasurer 4. A soldier 5. A wrestler 6. A boxer 7. A wrestler 8. A player 9. A
singer 10. A dancer 11. A musician  **23.** A monk who accepts food, drink, a
meal, or a snack offered by a king, a nobleman, a minister, a royal descendant,
or a royal servant, or who intends to accept such offerings, commits a
transgression.  **Examples:**  1. An elephant keeper 2. A horse keeper 3. A
buffalo keeper 4. A camel keeper 5. A lion keeper 6. A tiger keeper 7. A donkey
keeper 8. A sheep keeper 9. A deer keeper 10. A dog keeper 11. A pig keeper 12.
A goat keeper 13. A chicken keeper 14. A peacock keeper 15. A partridge keeper
16. A parrot keeper 17. A dove keeper 18. A sparrow keeper 19. A goose keeper
20. A peacock keeper 21. A swan keeper  **24.** A monk who accepts food, drink,
a meal, or a snack offered by a king, a nobleman, a minister, a royal
descendant, or a royal servant, or who intends to accept such offerings, commits
a transgression.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 190] [nizoSasUtra bhojana, nivAsasthAna, rAjyAbhiSeka grAdi prasaMgoM ke
saMbaMdha meM viveka rakhane kA sUcana kiyA gayA hai to isa sUtra meM una bar3e
rAjAoM kI rAjadhAnI meM bArambAra praveza kA niSedha aura prAyazcitta sUcita
kiyA hai| bhASya meM anya aneka saMyama sambandhI doSoM kI sambhAvanAeM bhI kahI
haiN| ina rAjadhAniyoM meM aneka mahotsava rAjA ke tathA nagaravAsiyoM ke hote
rahate haiM  /  nRtya, gIta, vAditra vAdana, strI puruSoM ke aneka mohaka rUpa
Adi viSayavAsanAvardhaka vAtAvaraNa rahatA hai| yaha dekhakara bhuktabhogI ko
pUrvakAlika smRti, abhukta ko kutUhala Adi se saMyama-arati evaM asamAdhi
utpanna ho sakatI hai tathA janatA ke kolAhala Adi se svAdhyAya, dhyAna kI bhI
hAni hotI hai  /  vAhanoM ko pracuratA se aura janAkorNa mArga rahane se
bhikSAgamana Adi meM saMghaTTana parighaTTana Adi hote haiM, ityAdi doSoM ke
kAraNa ina dama bar3I rAjadhAniyoM meM tathA aisI anya bar3I nagariyoM meM bhI
bArambAra jAnA-pAnA saMyamI ke lie hitakara nahIM hai| rAjA ke adhikArI va
karmacArI varga ke nimitta banA hA AhAra grahaNa karane kA prAyazcitta :- 21. je
bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM asaNaM vA, pANaM vA,
khAimaM vA sAimaM vA parassa nohaDaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji|
taMjahA-1. khattiyANa vA, 2. rAINa vA, 3. kurAINa vA, 4. rAyavaMsiyANa vA, 5.
rAyapesiyANa vaa| 22. je bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM
asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA, parassa NIhaDaM paDiggAhei,
paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  _ taMjahA-1. NaDANa vA, 2. gaTTANa vA, 3. kacchyANa
vA, 4. jallANa vA, 5. mallANa vA, 6. muTTiyANa vA, 7. velaMbagANa vA, 8.
khelayANa vA, 9. kahagANa vA, 10 pavagANa vA, 11. lAsagANa vaa| 23.. je bhikkhU
raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA,
sAimaM vA, parassa. NIhaDaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| . taMjahA-1.
Asa-posayANa vA, 2. hatthi-posayANa vA, 3. mahisa-posayANa vA, 4. vasahaposayANa
vA, 5. sIha-posayANa vA, 6. vaggha-posayANa vA, 7. aya-posayANa vA, 8. poya-
posayANa vA, 9. miga-posayANa vA, 10. suNaya-posayANa vA, 11. sUyara-posayANa
vA, 12. meMDha-posayANa vA, 13. kukkuDa-posayANa vA, 14. makkaDa-posayANa vA,
15. tittira-posayANa vA, 16. vaTTaya-posayANa vA, 17. lAvaya-posayANa vA, 18.
cIralla-posayANa vA, 19. haMsa-posayANa vA, 20. mayUra-posayANa vA, 21. suya-
posayANa vaa| 24. je bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM
asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA, parassa NIhaDaM paDiggAhei,
paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  |

Page #291 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Uddeshak  **[191]**  **1.  **As-damgaṇ vā, 2. Hatthi-damgaṇ vā, 3. As-
pariyatṭaṇ vā, 4. Hatthi-pariyaṇ vā, 5. As-miṭhaṇ vā, 6. Hasthi-miṭhaṇ vā, 7.
Asarohaṇ vā, 8. Hatthirōhaṇ vā.  **25.**  Je bhikku raṇṇo khattiyaṇam mudiyaṇam
muddhābhisittāṇam asanaṃ vā, pāṇaṃ vā, khaimaṃ vā, saimaṃ vā parassa ṇīhaḍaṃ
paḍiggahēi, paḍiggahēntaṃ vā saijjai.  **1.  **Satyavāhaṇ vā, 2. Sambāhayāṇ vā,
3. Ambhaṅgayāṇ vā, 4. Uvvaṭṭayāṇ vā, 5. Majjavayāṇ vā, 6. Maṇḍāvayāṇ vā, 7.
Chhattagghaṇ vā, 8. Cāmaraggahaṇ vā, 9. Haḍappggahaṇ vā, 10. Pariyaṭṭaggahaṇ vā,
11. Dīviyaggahaṇ vā, 12. Asīggahaṇ vā, 13. Dhanuggahaṇ vā, 14. Sattiggahaṇ vā,
15. Kontagghahaṇ vā.  **26.**  Je bhikku raṇo khattiyaṇam mudiyaṇam
muddhābhisittāṇam asanaṃ vā, pāṇaṃ vā, khaimaṃ vā, saimaṃ vā, parassa ṇīhaḍaṃ
paḍiggahēi paḍiggahēntaṃ vā saijjai.  **1.  **Varisadharāṇ vā, 2. Kancuijjāṇ vā,
3. Duvāriyaṇ vā, 4. Daṇḍārakkhiyāṇ vā.  **27.**  Je bhikku raṇṇo khattiyaṇam
mudiyaṇam muddhābhisittāṇam asanaṃ vā, pāṇaṃ vā, khaimaṃ vā, saimaṃ vā parassa
ṇīhaḍaṃ paḍiggahēi, paḍiggahēntaṃ vā, saijjai.  **1.  **Khujjāṇ vā, 2. Cilāiyāṇ
vā, 3. Vāmaṇīṇ vā, 4. Vaḍabhīṇ vā, 5. Bavvarīṇ vā, 6. Bausiṇ vā, 7. Joṇiyāṇ vā,
8. Palhavīyāṇ vā, 9. Isīṇīyāṇ vā, 10. Dhorūgīṇīṇ vā, 11. Lāsīyāṇ vā, 12.
Lausiyāṇ vā, 13. Siṅhalīṇ vā, 14. Damilīṇ vā, 15. Ārbīṇ vā, 16. Pulidoṇ vā, 17.
Pakkaṇīṇ vā, 18. Bahalīṇ vā, 19. Muranḍīṇ vā, 20. Sabarīṇ vā, 21. Pārsiṇ vā.
**Tāṃ sevāmaṇe āvajjai cāummaāsiyam parihāraṭṭhāṇaṃ aṇugghāiyaṃ.**  **21.**  Jo
bhikṣu śuddhavamsīya rājya mudrādhārak mūrdhābhisikta kṣatriya rājā ke- 1.
Angarakṣaka, 2. Ādhīna rājā, 3. Jāgīrdār, 4. Rājā ke āśrita rahanē vāle vaṃśaja,
5. Aur in cāroṃ ke sevakoṃ ke liye nikālā huā asana, pāna, khādya yā svādya
grahaṇ kartā hai yā grahaṇ karne vāle kā anumodan kartā hai.  **22.**  Jo bhikṣu
śuddhavamsīya rājya mudrādhārak mūrdhābhisikta kṣatriya rājā ke- 1. Nāṭak karne
vāle, 2. Nṛtya karne vāle, 3. Ḍorī par nṛtya karne vāle, 4. Stuti pāṭh karne
vāle, 5. Mall yuddha karne vāle, 6. Muṣṭiyuddha karne vāle, 7. Uchal-kūda karne
vāle, 8. Anek prakār ke khel karne vāle, 9. Kathā karne vāle, 10. Nadī ādi meṃ
tairaṇe vāle, 11. Jay-jay dhvani karne vāle, inke liye nikālā huā asana-pāna-
khādya yā svādya āhār grahaṇ kartā hai yā grahaṇ karne vāle kā anumodan kartā
hai.  **23.**  Jo bhikṣu śuddhavamsīya rājya mudrādhārak mūrdhābhisikta kṣatriya
rājā ke- 1. Aśva, 2. Hasti, 3. Mahiṣ, 4. Vṛṣabha, 5. Siṃha, 6. Vyāghra, 7. Ajā,
8. Kabūtar, 9. Mṛga, 10. Śvāna, 11. Śūkara, 12. Meṇḍhā, 13. Kukkūṭ, 14. Baṇdar,
15. Tītar, 16. Batakh, 17. Lāvak,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navama uddezaka] [191 taMjahA-1. Asa-damagANa vA, 2. hatthi-damagANa vA, Asa-
pariyaTTANa vA, 4. hatthi-pariyANa vA, 5. Asa-miThANa vA, 6. hasthi-miThANa vA,
7. AsarohANa vA, 8. hatthirohANa vaa| 25. je bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM
muddhAbhisittANaM asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA parassa NIhaDaM
paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  taMjahA-1. satyavAhANa vA, 2.
saMbAhayANa vA, 3. ambhaMgayANa vA, 4. uvvaTTayANa vA, 5. majjAvayANa vA, 6.
maMDAvayANa vA, 7. chattaggahANa vA, 8. cAmaraggahANa vA, 9. haDappaggahANa vA,
90. pariyaTTaggahANa vA, 11. dIviyaggahANa vA, 12. asiggahANa vA, 13.
dhaNuggahANa vA, 14. sattiggahANa vA, 15. koMtaggahANa vaa| 26. je bhikkhU raNo
khattiyANaM mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM
vA, parassa NIhaDaM paDiggAhei paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| taMjahA-1.
varisadharANa vA, 2. kaMcuijjANa vA, 3. duvAriyANa vA, 4. daMDArakkhiyANa vaa|
27. je bhikkhU raNNo khattiyANaM mudiyANaM muddhAbhisittANaM asaNaM vA, pANaM
vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA parassa nIhaDaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA, sAijjai
/  taMjahA-1. khujjANa vA, 2. cilAiyANa vA, 3. vAmaNINa vA, 4. vaDabhINa vA, 5.
bavvarINa vA, 6. bausINa vA, 7. joNiyANa vA, 8. palhaviyANa vA, 9. isINIyANa vA,
10. dhorUgININa vA, 11. lAsiyANa vA, 12. lausIyANa vA, 13. siMhalINa vA, 14.
damilINa vA, 15. ArabINa vA, 16. pulidoNa vA, 17. pakkaNINa vA, 18. bahalINa vA,
19. muraMDINa vA, 20. sabarINa vA, 21. pArasINa vaa| taM sevamANe Avajjai
cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM aNugghAiyaM  /  21. jo bhikSu zuddhavaMzIya
rAjyamudrAdhAraka mUrdhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjA ke-1. aMgarakSaka, 2. AdhIna
rAjA, 3. jAgIradAra, 4. rAjA ke Azrita rahane vAle vaMzaja, 5. aura ina cAroM ke
sevakoM ke liye nikAlA huaA azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karatA hai yA
grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 22. jo bhikSu zuddhavaMzIya rAjya
mudrAdhAraka mUrdhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjA ke- 1. nATaka karane vAle, 2. nRtya
karane vAle, 3. DorI para nRtya karane vAle, 4. stutipATha karane vAle, 5.
mallayuddha karane vAle, 6. muSTiyuddha karane vAle, 7. uchala-kUda karane vAle,
8. aneka prakAra ke khela karane vAle, 9. kathA karane vAle, 10. nadI Adi meM
tairane vAle, 11. jaya-jaya dhvani karane vAle, inake liye nikAlA huA azana-
pAna-khAdya yA svAdya AhAra grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 23. jo bhikSu zuddhavaMzIya rAjyamudrAdhAraka
mUrdhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjA ke- 1. azva, 2. hastI, 3. mahiSa, 4. vRSabha, 5.
siMha, 6. vyAghra, 7. ajA, 8. kabUtara, 9. mRga, 10. zvAna, 11. zUkara, 12.
meMDhA, 13. kukkuTa, 14. baMdara, 15. tItara, 16. batakha, 17. lAvaka,

Page #292 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Nishiy Sutra 192]  **18.** A monk who consumes or approves of the
consumption of food, drink, or delicacies prepared for the following animals: 1.
Chiralla, 2. Hansa (swan), 3. Mayura (peacock), 4. Tota (parrot), commits a sin.
**24.** A monk who consumes or approves of the consumption of food, drink, or
delicacies prepared for the following people who serve pure-lineage, royal-seal-
bearing, crowned Kshatriya kings: 1-2. Those who train horses and elephants,
3-4. Those who ride horses and elephants, 5-6. Those who adorn horses and
elephants with ornaments, clothes, etc., 7-8. Those who ride horses and
elephants in battle or other activities, commits a sin.  **25.** A monk who
consumes or approves of the consumption of food, drink, or delicacies prepared
for the following people who serve pure-lineage, royal-seal-bearing, crowned
Kshatriya kings: 1. Messengers, 2. Massagers, 3. Massagers, 4. Those who apply
ubtan (a paste used for cleansing), 5. Those who bathe the king, 6. Those who
adorn the king with crowns and other ornaments, 7. Those who hold the royal
umbrella, 8. Those who hold the royal fly whisk, 9. Those who carry the box of
ornaments, 10. Those who carry the king's change of clothes, 11. Those who hold
the lamp, 12. Those who carry the sword, 13. Those who carry the trident, 14.
Those who carry the spear, commits a sin.  **26.** A monk who consumes or
approves of the consumption of food, drink, or delicacies prepared for the
following people who serve pure-lineage, royal-seal-bearing, crowned Kshatriya
kings: 1. Eunuchs who guard the inner palace, 2.  Janmanapumsakas (those born as
eunuchs) who live in the inner palace, 3. Gatekeepers of the inner palace, 4.
Dandarakshakas (guards who carry a staff) of the inner palace, commits a sin.
**27.** A monk who consumes or approves of the consumption of food, drink, or
delicacies prepared for the following women who serve a pure-lineage, royal-
seal-bearing, crowned Kshatriya king: 1. Kubja (hunchbacked) maidservant, 2.
Kirata (from the Kirata country) maidservant, 3. Vaman (short) maidservant, 4.
Vaka (bent) maidservant, 5. Barber (from the Barber country) maidservant, 6.
Bakush (from the Bakush country) maidservant, 7. Yavan (from the Yavan country)
maidservant, 8. Palhava (from the Palhava country) maidservant, 9. Isinika (from
the Isinika country) maidservant, 10. Dhoruk (from the Dhoruk country)
maidservant, 11. Lat (from the Lat country) maidservant, 12. Lakush (from the
Lakush country) maidservant, 13. Sinhala (from the Sinhala country) maidservant,
14. Dravid (from the Dravid country) maidservant, 15. Arab (from the Arab
country) maidservant, 16. Pulind (from the Pulind country) maidservant, 17.
Pakkan (from the Pakkan country) maidservant, 18. Bahal (from the Bahal country)
maidservant, 19. Murand (from the Murand country) maidservant, 20. Shabar (from
the Shabar country) maidservant, 21. Pars (from the Pars country) maidservant,
commits a sin.  The above mentioned sutras describe the sins committed by
consuming food prepared for the mentioned individuals. The penalty for such an
act is Guruchaumasi Pratikramana (a form of atonement).   **Discussion
[21-27]:** These seven sutras describe the sins related to consuming food
prepared for the mentioned individuals. These sins include Rajapinda dosa (sin
related to the king), other related sins, Antaray dosa (sin related to
obstacles), and Punah Prarabdha (sin related to rebirth).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 192] [nizIyasUtra 18. ciralla, 19. haMsa, 20. mayUra, 21. totA, ina pazu-
pakSiyoM ke poSaNa karane vAle arthAt inako pAlane vAloM yA rakSaNa karane vAloM
ke liye nikAlA huA azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  24. jo bhikSu zuddhavaMzaja,
rAjyamudrAdhAraka mUrdhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjAoM ke (1-2) azva aura hastI ko
vinIta arthAt zikSita karane vAle ke lie (3-4) azva aura hastI ko phirAne vAloM
ke lie (5-6) azva aura hastI ko AbhUSaNa, vastra Adi se susajjita karane vAloM
ke lie tathA (7-8) azva aura hastI para yuddha Adi meM prArUDha hone vAloM ke
lie arthAt savArI karane vAloM ke lie nikAlA huA azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya
grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 25. jo bhikSu
zuddhavaMzaja rAjyamudrAdhAraka mUrdhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjAoM ke- 1. saMdeza
dene vAle, 2. mardana karane vAle, 3. mAliza karane vAle, 4. ubaTana karane
vAle, 5. snAna karAne vAle, 6. mukuTa Adi AbhUSaNa pahinAne vAle, 7. chatra
dhAraNa karAne vAle, 8. cAmara dhAraNa karAne vAle, 9. prAbhUSaNoM kI peTI
rakhane vAle, 10. badalane ke vastra rakhane vAle, 11. dIpaka rakhane vAle, 12.
talavAra dhAraNa karane vAle, 13. trizUla dhAraNa karane vAle, 14. bhAlA dhAraNa
karane vAle, inake liye nikAlA huaA azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya AhAra grahaNa
karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 26. jo bhikSu
zuddhavaMzaja rAjyamudrAdhAraka mUrdhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjAoM ke- 1. aMtaHpura
rakSaka-kRtrimanapuMsaka, 2. aMtaHpura meM rahane vAle janmanapuMsaka, 3.
aMtaHpura ke dvArapAla, 4. daMDarakSaka =aMtaHpura ke daMDadhArI-praharI, inake
liye nikAlA huaA azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  27. jo bhikSu zuddhavaMzIya
rAjyamudrAdhAraka mUrdhAbhiSikta kSatriya rAjA kI- 1. kubjA dAsI (kubar3e zarIra
vAlI), 2. kirAta dezotpanna dAsI, 3. vAmana (choTe kada vAlI) dAsI, 4. vakra
zarIravAlI dAsI, 5. barbara dezotpanna dAsI, 6. bakuza dezotpanna dAsI, 7.
yavana dezotpanna dAsI, 8. palhava dezotpanna dAsI, 9. isInikA dezotpanna dAsI,
10. dhorUka dezotpanna dAsI, 11. lATa dezotpanna dAsI, 12. lakuza dezotpanna
dAsI. 13. siMhala dezotpanna dAsI, 14. dravir3a dezotpanna dAsI, 15. araba
dezotpanna dAsI, 16. puliMda dezotpanna dAsI 17. pakkaNa dezotpanna dAsI, 18.
bahala dezotpanna dAsI, 19. muraMDa dezotpanna dAsI, 20. zabara dezotpanna dAsI,
21. pArasa dezotpanna dAsI, inake lie nikAlA huaA azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya
grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| uparyukta
sUtra kathita doSa-sthAnoM kA sevana karane vAle ko gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA
hai| ..vivecana-[ 21-27 ] ina sAta sUtroM meM varNita vyaktiyoM ke liye nikAlA
gayA AhAra grahaNa karane meM rAjapiMDa doSa aura usase sambandhita anya aneka
doSa, aMtarAya doSa yA punaH prArambha

Page #293 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Uddeshak [193]  There is a possibility of faults such as the fault of
doing, etc. If these individuals, after being given by the king and accepting
them, are of an undesirable and harmful lineage, then there is no atonement in
accepting food from them with the consent of the Eshana committee.  It is
inconceivable that it would be prepared for them at the king's place or kept
separate for them. The atonement for accepting the same food has been mentioned
in the above sutras.  **Sutra 21** - "Khattiyanam adi" - Kshatraat Trayate iti
Kshatriya Aaraksaka iti arthaha. Adhivoraya. Kutsito Raya Kuraaya Ahva
Pacchantanivo Kuraaya. "Rajavamshe Sthitaha Rajno Matul-Bhagineadayah
Rayavansatthiya." Je Eteshi Cheva Preshya-Presita Dandapasikaprabhrityah. - Ni.
Churni Va Aacha. Shru. 2, A. 1, U. 3  **Sutra 22** - In this sutra,
"Velambagaan" could mean those who play jumping and leaping games, etc. However,
due to a script error, the true meaning is not clear, and since it is found in
many copies, "Khelayaan Va" = "those who play various types of games" is a
separate reading and its meaning.  _In this sutra, the word "Chhattanuyaan Va"
is also found more often, which seems to be due to a script error. It seems that
this reading was not before the Churnikar, and it is mentioned separately in
Sutra 25. Therefore, it has not been included here as it is not necessary._
**Sutra 23** - "Poshak" - those who take care of food, medicine, water, those
who provide physical service, bath, massage, etc., those who take care of the
cleanliness of the dwelling place, i.e., those who provide complete protection,
are called "Poshak". In many copies, "Makkadposayaan" is not there. But in
Aacharaanga Shru. 2, A. 10, the word "Makkad" is present in some copies between
the words "Kukkud" and "Titar", therefore, the word "Makkad" has been included
in the sutra here.  "Brihattara Rakta Padaa Vattha, Alpatara Lavaga" - those
with small red feet are "Lavak". Those with large red feet are called "Battak".
**Sutra 24** - In place of this sutra, three or four sutras are also found in
many copies. "Ni and Bhashya in" Iman Suttavakkhanam" Asaan Ya Hatthina Ya,
Damaga Je Padhamtaae Viniyanti. Pariyatt-Menth Paccha, Aroha Juddhakalaammi
||2601||"  "Je Padham Vinyam Gahethi Te Damaga, Je Jana Jogasaneehi Vaavaram Va
Vahethi Te Mentha, Juddhakale Je Aruhamti Te Aroha ||2601||"  The previous sutra
mentions those who nurture 21 animals and birds, including horses and elephants.
This sutra mentions those who train horses and elephants, those who ride them,
those who adorn them with saddles, clothes, and ornaments, and those who ride
them in battle, as known from the gatha. The word "Pariyatt" is not explained in
Churni. For this reason, making separate sutras, three...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navama uddezaka] [193 karane kA doSa ityAdi doSoM kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai|
rAjA kI tarapha se ina vyaktiyoM ko diye jAne ke bAda aura unake svIkAra kara
lene para ve vyakti yadi ajugupsita-ahita kula ke hoM to eSaNA samiti pUrvaka
unase pAhAra grahaNa karane meM koI prAyazcitta nahIM pAtA hai| rAjA ke yahAM
inake liye banAyA gayA ho yA inake liye vibhakta karake rakhA gayA ho taba taka
akalpanIya hotA hai  /  usI prAhAra ko grahaNa karane kA uparyukta sUtroM meM
prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  sUtra 21 - "khattiyANaM Adi"-kSatAt trAyate iti
kSatriyA ArakSakA ityarthaH  /  adhivoraayaa| kutsito rAyA kurAyA ahavA
paccaMtanivo kuraayaa| "rAjavaMze sthitAH rAjJo mAtula-bhAgineyAdayaH
raayvNstttthiyaa|" je etesi ceva preSyA-presitA daMDapAsikaprabhRtayaH  /  -ni.
cUrNi va AcA. zru. 2, a. 1, u. 3 sUtra 22-isa sUtra meM "velaMbagANa" se uchala-
kUda khela Adi karane vAle aisA artha ho sakatA hai tathApi lipidoSa ke kAraNa
yathArtha nirNaya na hone se aura aneka pratiyoM meM milane se 'khelayANa vA" =
aneka prakAra ke khela karane vAle" aisA alaga pATha va usakA artha rakhA hai| _
isa sUtra meM "chattANuyANa vA" zabda bhI jyAdA milatA hai jo lipi-pramAda se
AyA huA pratIta hotA hai  /  cUrNikAra ke sAmane bhI yaha pATha nahIM rahA hogA,
aisA lagatA hai tathA sUtra 25 meM isakA alaga kathana hai  /  ataH yahA~
Avazyaka na hone se nahIM rakhA gayA hai| sUtra 23"poSaka"-AhAra, auSadha, pAnI
saMbaMdhI dhyAna rakhane vAle, zArIrika sevA, snAna, mardana Adi karane vAle,
nivAsasthAna kI zuddhi kA dhyAna rakhane vAle arthAt pUrNa saMrakSaNa karane
vAle 'poSaka' kahalAte haiN| aneka pratiyoM meM 'makkaDaposayANa' nahIM hai|
kintu AcArAM prAcArAMga zra.2, a.10 meM kukkuDa va tItara zabda ke bIca meM
makkaDa zabda kucha pratiyoM meM hai ataH yahA~ bhI sUtra meM "makkaDa" zabda
rakhA hai| "bRhattarA raktapAdA vaTTA, alpatarA lAvagA" alpa lAla pAMva vAle
"lAvaka" hote haiN| adhika lAla pAMva vAle "battaka' kahalAte haiM  /  sUtra
24-isa sUtra ke sthAna para kaI pratiyoM meM tIna aura kahIM cAra sUtra bhI
milate haiM  /  "Ni aura bhASya meM" imaM suttavakkhANaM"AsANa ya hatthINa ya,
damagA je paDhamatAe viNiyaMti  /  pariyaTTa-meMTha pacchA, ArohA juddhakAlammi
// 2601 // " "je paDhamaM viNayaM gAheti te damagA, je jaNA jogAsaNehi vAvaraM
vA vaheMti te meMThA, juddha kAle je AruhaMti te ArohA  // 2601 // " pUrva sUtra
meM azva va hastI Adi 21 pazu-pakSiyoM ke poSaNa karane vAloM kA kathana hai|
isa sUtra meM azva va hastI ina do ko zikSita karane vAle, ghumAne-phirAne vAle,
Asana vastra prAbhUSaNa se susajjita karane vAle tathA yuddha meM inakI savArI
karane vAloM kA kathana hai, aisA gAthA se jJAta hotA hai  /  cUrNi meM
"pariyaTTa" zabda kI vyAkhyA nahIM hai| isI kAraNa se pRthak-pRthaka sUtra
karane para tIna

Page #294 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  **[194]**  The *Nishith Sutra* has become one Sutra,
not four. The commentary mentions the phrase "Imām Suttavakkānaṃ" which
indicates that there was only one Sutra during the time of the commentary. Based
on this analysis, only one Sutra is included here.  **Sutra 25:** "The
*Sathvaha* (merchants) say, 'The *Rāyasatthama* (merchants) bring and announce
the *Rāyasattha* (merchandise).'" They bring and invite the *Rāyasattha*
(merchandise) or announce the king's message.  The original words for the
remaining terms are: 1. *Sanvāhaka* (carrier), 2. *Abhyangaka* (anointer), 3.
*Udvarttaka* (lifter), 4. *Majjāpaka* (massager), 5. *Mandāpaka* (decorator).
Therefore, the original text is: 1. *Sanbāhayāṇaṃ*, 2. *Abhangayāṇaṃ*, 3.
*Uvvattṭayāṇaṃ*, 4. *Majjāvayāṇaṃ*, 5. *Mandāvayāṇaṃ*.  The first three terms
refer to those who "massage, etc.", while the last two refer to those who
"bathe, adorn, etc." Therefore, the original words have been corrected for
scribal errors. The subsequent terms like "Chhattaggahāṇaṃ" are found to be
correct.  **Sutra 26:** This Sutra describes four individuals who work in the
inner palace: 1. *Krit-napusaka* (eunuch) - a guard who resides within the inner
palace. 2. *Daṇḍarakṣaka* (guard) - a guard who protects the palace from
outside, armed with a staff. 3. *Dvārāpāla* (gatekeeper) - one who stands at the
gate. 4. *Kanchuki* (eunuch) - a eunuch who performs internal and external tasks
for the queens and resides within the inner palace.  **Sutra 27:** This Sutra
mentions two names of female slaves, indicated by the word "Jāv" in many
manuscripts. Some manuscripts also mention the numbers 17, 18, and 21. The
reading with 21 is appropriate because "18 female slaves of the country" is a
well-known phrase in the Sutras, and three body types are mentioned: 1. *Kubja*
(hunchback), 2. *Vakra* (bent), 3. *Vāmana* (dwarf).  The summary of the ninth
*Uddesaka* is as follows: 1-5. Accept the *Rājapinda* (royal offering), eat it.
Enter the inner palace, order food from within the inner palace. 6. The
*Dvārāpāla* (gatekeeper) accepts the *Rājapinda* (royal offering) for animals,
etc. 7. If one goes out for alms and does not receive information about the
king's six locations even after 4-5 days, 8-9. If one takes even a single step
with the intention of seeing the king or queen, 10. If one eats the king's food
while he is away for hunting, etc., 11. If one goes for alms to the place where
the king is eating, 12. If one stays where the king is staying, 13-18. If one
eats the king's food while he is going or coming for war, travel, or a journey
to the mountains or rivers, 19. If one goes to and fro during the commotion of
the king's coronation, 20. If one goes to the ten major capitals more than once
a month.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 194] [nizIthasUtra sUtra bana gaye, cAra nahIM bane  /  cUNi meM "imaM
suttavakkhANaM" pada se gAthA dI gaI hai| ataH cUNi kAla taka eka sUtra rahA
hogA  /  ityAdi vicAraNA se yahA~ eka hI sUtra rakhA gayA hai| sUtra
25"rAIsatthamAdiyANi rAyasatthANi AhayaMti kathayaMti te" satthavAhA, "rAjJA
sArthAni sacivAdirUpANi (tAn) AhayaMti AmaMtrayaMti rAjasaMdezaM vA kathayaMti
ye te tyaa|" zeSa zabdoM ke mUla zabda isa prakAra haiM1. saMvAhaka, 2.
abhyaMgaka, 3. udvartaka, 4. majjApaka, 5. maMDApaka  /  isaliye inakA mUla
pATha isa prakAra se hai1. saMbAhayANaM, 2. abhaMgayANaM, 3. uvvaTTayANaM, 4.
majjAvayANaM, 5. maMDAvayANaM  /  prathama tIna padoM meM 'mardana Adi karane
vAle aisA artha hotA hai, aMtima do padoM meM snAna karAne vAle, AbhUSaNa Adi
pahanAne vAle' aisA artha hotA hai  /  ataH mUla zabdoM kI racanA ke lipidoSoM
kA saMzodhana kiyA hai  /  'chattaggahANa' Adi Age ke zabda to zuddha hI milate
haiM  /  sUtra 26-isa sUtra meM aMtaHpura meM kAma karane vAle cAra vyaktiyoM kA
kathana hai1. kRta-napusaka = aMtaHpura ke aMdara rahane vAle rakSaka  /  2.
daMDarakSaka = praharI, bAhara cautarapha se rakSA karane vAlA daMDadhArI puruSa
/  3. dvArapAla = dvAra ke Upara khar3A rahane vaalaa| 4. kaMcukI = janma,
napuMsaka, rAniyoM ke AbhyaMtara, bAhya kArya karate hue aMtaHpura meM hI rahane
vaale| sUtra 27-isa sUtra meM dAsiyoM ke nAma ke pATha ko kaI pratiyoM meM
'jAva' zabda se sUcita karake do nAma hI diye haiM tathA kaI pratiyoM meM
saMkhyA 17, 18 va 21 hai  /  21 kI saMkhyA vAlA pATha upayukta hai, kyoMki '18
deza kI dAsiyAM' sUtroM meM prasiddha haiM aura tIna zarIra kI AkRti se-1.
kubja, 2. vakra (jhukI huI), 3. vAmana dAsiyAM kahI haiM  /  navama uddezaka kA
sArAMza 1-5-rAjapiMDa grahaNa kare, khAve  /  aMta:pura meM praveza kare,
aMtaHpura meM se AhAra mNgvaave| 6-dvArapAla-pazu Adi ke nimitta kA rAjapiMDa
grahaNa kare  /  7-bhikSArtha jAte 4-5 dina ho jAe~ phira bhI rAjA ke 6 sthAnoM
kI jAnakArI na kre| 8-9-rAjA yA rAnI ko dekhane ke saMkalpa se eka kadama bhI
cale  /  10-zikAra Adi ke liye gaye rAjA kA AhAra grahaNa kare  /  11-rAjA
bhojana karane gaye hoM, usa sthala meM usa samaya bhikSArtha jaave| 12-rAjA
jahAM kahIM Thahare hoM, vahA~ Thahare  /  13-18-yuddha, yAtrA yA parvata, nadI
kI yAtrArtha jAte-Ate rAjA kA AhAra grahaNa kare  /  19-rAjyAbhiSeka kI halacala
ke samaya udhara jAve-Ave  /  - 20dasa bar3I rAjadhAniyoM meM eka mahIne meM eka
bAra se adhika bAra jAve  /

Page #295 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Navama Uddesaka [195 21-25 - To consume food offered for the sake of the king's
officials and employees, etc. Such activities lead to Guruchaumasi Prāyaścitta.
Conclusion - This Navama Uddesaka describes the Prāyaścitta for various
incidents related to the Rajapinda and the king. Dasava. A. 3 states that
consuming Rajapinda is an Anācāra, and the fifth Thāna of Thānaṅga mentions five
exceptions for entering the king's inner chambers. Thus, the subject matter of
the first three sūtras of this Uddesaka is found in other Āgamas. The remaining
sūtras, from 4 to 27, discuss topics not mentioned in other Āgamas and their
Prāyaścitta. Therefore, this Uddesaka primarily deals with topics not mentioned
in other Āgamas (24 sūtras), and the subject matter is related to a king. This
is the unique characteristic of this Uddesaka. || Navama Uddesaka Samāpta ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navama uddezaka [195 21-25-rAjA ke adhikArI va karmacArI Adi ke nimitta nikAlA
AhAra grahaNa kare  /  ityAdi pravRttiyAM karane para gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta
AtA hai| upasaMhAra-isa navama uddezaka meM rAjapiMDa va rAjA se sambandhita
aneka prasaMgoM kA hI prAyazcitta kathana hai| dazavai. a. 3 meM rAjapiMDa
grahaNa ko anAcAra kahA gayA hai tathA ThANAMga ke pAcaveM ThANe meM 5 kAraNa se
rAjA ke aMtaHpura meM praveza karane kA prApavAdika kathana hai  /  isa taraha
isa uddezaka ke prathama tIna sUtroM kA viSaya anya AgamoM meM AyA huA hai  /
zeSa sUtra 4 se 27 taka ke sUtroM meM anya AgamoM meM anirdiSTa viSaya kA
kathana tathA prAyazcitta hai| isa prakAra isa uddezaka meM anya AgamoM meM
anukta viSaya hI adhika (24 sUtroM meM) haiM aura viSaya bhI eka rAjA sambandhI
hai| yahI isa uddezaka kI vizeSatA hai  /   //  navama uddezaka samApta  //

Page #296 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tenth Uddeshak: Prāyaścitta for Disrespecting Ācārya etc.  1. A monk who
speaks harshly to the Ācārya etc. or approves of someone who does so. 2. A monk
who speaks to the Ācārya etc. in a way devoid of affection, or approves of
someone who does so. 3. A monk who speaks harshly and without affection to the
Ācārya etc. or approves of someone who does so. 4. A monk who commits any of the
thirty-three pāśātanās of the Ācārya etc. or approves of someone who does so.
(Such a monk receives the Guru-Chaumāsi Prāyaścitta.)  **Discussion:**  The
Ācārya etc. can be spoken to harshly or without affection regarding the
following seventeen topics:  1. Jāti (caste) 2. Kula (family) 3. Rūpa (form) 4.
Bhāṣā (language) 5. Dhana (wealth) 6. Bala (strength) 7. Pariyāya
(circumstances) 8. Jasa (fame) 9. Tave (skill) 10. Lābha (profit) 11. Sat
(truth) 12. Vaya (age) 13. Buddhi (intelligence) 14. Dhāraṇa (holding) 15. Uggha
(excellence) 16. Sīla (conduct) 17. Samāyāri (agreement)  For example, to say
explicitly to the Ācārya etc., "You are of a low caste," or to say
sarcastically, "You are of a very high caste, I am of a low caste."  Similarly,
one should understand this in relation to Kula, Rūpa etc.  **Āgādha:** A word
that causes the inner kṣaya to manifest.  **Farusa:** A word devoid of affection
and unpleasant, i.e., even if not spoken in anger, it is unpleasant to hear and
stings the heart.  **Āgādha-Farusa:** Both harsh and unpleasant, a combination
of both.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dasavAM uddezaka . prAcAryAdi ke avinaya karane kA prAyazcitta 1. je bhikkhU
bhadaMtaM AgADhaM vayai, vayaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  2. je bhikkhU bhadaMtaM
pharusaM vayai, vayaMtaM vA saaijji| 3. je bhikkhU bhadaMtaM AgADhaM pharusaM
vayai, vayaMta vA sAijjai  /  4. je bhikkhU bhadaMtaM aNNayarIe accAsAyaNAe
accasAei, accAsAeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  1. jo bhikSu prAcArya Adi ko roSayukta
vacana bolatA hai yA bolane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 2. jo bhikSu prAcArya
prAdi ko sneharahita rUkSa vacana bolatA hai yA bolane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 3. jo bhikSu prAcArya Adi ko roSayukta rUkSa vacana bolatA hai yA bolane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 4. jo bhikSu AcArya Adi kI tetIsa pAzAtanAoM meM
se kisI bhI prakAra kI pAzAtanA karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-jAti Adi nimna sattaraha
viSayoM ko lekara AcArya Adi ko AgADha aura pharusa vacana kahe jA sakate haiM,
yathA 1 jAti 2 kula 3 rUva 4 bhAsA 5 dhaNa 6 bala 7 pariyAya 8 jasa 9 tave 10
laabhe| 11 satta 12 vaya 13 buddhi 14 dhAraNa, 15 uggaha 16 sIle 17 samAyArI  //
2609 //  prAcArya Adi ko aisA spaSTa kahanA ki "tuma to hIna jAti ke ho" athavA
vyaMgyayukta vAkya se kahanA ki "Apa bar3e hI jAtisampanna haiM, maiM to hIna
jAti vAlA huuN|" isI taraha kula, rUpa Adi se bhI samajha lenA caahiye| AgADhaM-
zarIrasya uSmA yena uktena jAyate tamAgADhaM-jisa vacana ke bolane se bhItara kA
kaSAya prakaTa hotA hai| pharusa-NeharahiyaM NippivAsaM pharusa bhaNNati-
sneharahita apriya vacana, arthAt roSayukta na hote hue bhI jo vacana sunane
vAle ko apriya lagate haiM, hRdaya meM cubhane vAle hote haiM  /  AgADhapharusa-
gADhapharusaM ubhayaM, tatiyasutte saMjogo doNha vi-jo vacana roSayukta bhI ho
tathA apriya bhI ho|

Page #297 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tenth Uddeshak  [195] In these three sutras, the word "Bhadant" is used
instead of "Pāyiriya". This encompasses all those who hold the titles of
Acharya, Upadhyaya, etc., as well as gurus and Ratnadhikas. If this atonement
was only for the Acharya, then the word "Pāyiriya" would have been used.  In the
Asāyanā-Bhāṣya, the Dashaśruta-Skandha-Vaṇita describes 33 Asātanās and
elaborates on them by dividing them into four categories: Dravya, Kshetra, Kāla,
and Bhāva. There, many exceptions to Asātanās are also mentioned, such as:  1.
If a guru is ill, one should not show them food that is not suitable for them,
but should eat it themselves or give it to someone else without asking. 2. To
walk ahead to remove thorns or other obstacles from the path. 3. To walk very
close for support in a difficult place or when ill. 4. To sit close and touch
for physical care. 5. To sit close during the recitation of the Chhedasutra so
that an uninitiated Sadhu can hear. 6. If a householder's house is nearby, not
to speak even when the guru calls out, or not to speak even if there is a
possibility of conflict. 7. If the path is blocked by Sadhus, to answer from the
same place. 8. If one is ill oneself or is engaged in the service of another who
is ill, not to speak even when called. 9. Not to speak while excreting. 10. If
one accidentally utters a Utsutrā-Prarūpaṇā to the guru, to say it discreetly or
in private. 11. To use harsh language to stabilize the guru, etc., if their
restraint is slackening.  Even if one engages in the above-mentioned Asātanās,
the atonement mentioned in the sutras does not apply. This is because these
actions are not motivated by Asātanā, but by proper discernment.  The atonement
for eating food mixed with Anantakaaya is:  5. **Je Bhikkhu Anantakaaya-
Sanjuttaṁ Āhāraṁ Āhārei, Āhāratṁ vā Sāijjai.** 5. **A monk who eats food mixed
with Anantakaaya, or approves of someone who does so.**  (He receives the Guru-
Chaumāsi atonement.)  The Vivechana Sutra mentions the atonement for eating food
mixed with Anantakaaya, not pure Anantakaaya. This is because a monk does not
knowingly eat Anantakaaya with intention. However, if pieces of edible roots
mixed with Anantakaaya are present in the food and the monk is unaware of them,
then eating such food is considered Anantakaaya-Sanjutta Āhāra. Alternatively,
if the monk is unaware of the presence of Anantakaaya in an edible substance
while picking it up, consuming it, and even while eating it, then this can also
be considered Anantakaaya-Sanjutta Āhāra.  **End of Section**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dasavAM uddezaka] [195 bhadaMtaina tIna sUtroM meM "pAyariya' zabda kA prayoga
na karake "bhadaMta' zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai| usase prAcArya, upAdhyAya
Adi padavIdhara tathA guru yA ratnAdhika sabakA grahaNa kiyA gayA hai| yadi
yahA~ prAcArya ke lie hI yaha prAyazcitta-vidhAna hotA to "prAyariya" kA hI
prayoga kiyA jaataa| AsAyaNA-bhASya meM dazAzrutaskandhavaNita 33 AzAtanAoM kA
nirdeza kiyA gayA hai aura dravya, kSetra, kAla va bhAva ye cAra bheda karake
AzAtanAoM kA vistRta vivecana kiyA hai  /  vahA~ AzAtanA ke aneka apavAdoM kA
bhI ullekha kiyA hai, yathA 1. guru bImAra ho to unake lie jo apathya AhAra ho
vaha unheM na dikhAnA kintu svayaM _khA lenA yA binA pUche anya ko de denA  /  /
2. mArga meM kAMTe Adi haTAne ke lie Age calanA  /  3. viSama sthAna meM yA
rugNa avasthA meM sahAre ke liye atyanta nikaTa calanA  /  4. zArIrika paricaryA
karane ke lie nikaTa baiThanA evaM sparza karanA  /  5. apariNata sAdhu na suna
sake, isake liye chedasUtra kI vAcanA ke samaya nikaTa baiThanA  /  6. gRhastha
kA ghara nikaTa ho to guru ke AvAja dene para bhI na bolanA athavA saMgharSa kI
sambhAvanA ho to bhI na bolnaa| 7. sAdhunoM se mArga avaruddha ho to sthAna para
se hI uttara de denaa| 8. svayaM bImAra ho yA anya bImAra kI sevA meM saMlagna
ho to bulAne para bhI na bolnaa| 9. malavisarjana karate hue na bolanA  /  10.
guru se kabhI utsUtra prarUpaNA ho jAye to vivekapUrvaka yA ekAnta meM kaha
denaa| 11. guru Adi ke saMyama meM zithila ho jAne para unheM saMyama meM sthira
karane ke liye karkaza bhASA kA prayoga krnaa| ukta aAzAtanA kI pravRtti karane
para bhI sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai  /  kyoMki inameM AzAtanA ke bhAva
na hokara ucita vivekadRSTi hotI hai| anantakAyasaMyukta AhAra karane kA
prAyazcitta 5. je bhikkhU aNaMtakAya-saMjuttaM AhAraM AhArei, AhArataM vA
saaijji| 5. jo bhikSu anaMtakAyasaMyukta (mizrita) AhAra karatA hai yA karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai|)
vivecanasUtra meM anaMtakAya se mizrita pAhAra kA prAyazcitta kahA hai, zuddha
anantakAya kA  /  nhiiN| kyoMki bhikSa jAna-bajhakara sacitta anantakAya to
nahIM khAtA hai kinta kisI khA sacitta kandamUla ke Tukar3e mizrita hoM aura
unakI jAnakArI na ho, aisI sthiti meM yadi khAne meM A jAe to vaha
anantakAyasaMyukta AhAra kahA jAtA hai  /  athavA kisI acitta khAdya padArtha
meM lIlana aura grahaNa karate samaya va khAte samaya taka bhI usakI jAnakArI na
ho pAe. taba bhI anantakAyasaMyukta AhAra karane kA prasaMga bana sakatA hai|
phalana STAY kADa

Page #298 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[198] [Nishīthasūtra Anantakaaya - A plant that contains infinite living beings
is called an Anantakaayika plant. Roots and flowers are forms of Anantakaaya,
but the Paṇṇavaṇā and other Āgamas mention many other types of Anantakaaya. From
the stem of a plant to its seed, there are eight divisions, and if they possess
the characteristics of Anantakaaya, they can be considered Anantakaaya. The
Āgamas mention some characteristics of Anantakaaya as follows: "Jass mūlassa
bhagga'ssa, samo bhangō padīsai. Aṇantajīve u se mūle, je yāvaṇṇe tahāviha. || 9
|| Jass mūlassa kaṭṭhāmō challi bahalayarī bhave. Aṇantajīvā u sā challi je
yāvaṇṇe tahāviha. || 30 || Chakkāgaṁ bhajjamāṇassa, gaṇṭhī cuṇṇam ghaṇō bhave.
Puḍhavī sarisabheēṇaṁ, aṇantajīvaṁ viyāṇāhi || 38 || Gūḍhachirāgaṁ pattaṁ,
sachīraṁ jaṁ cha nicchīraṁ. Jaṁ piya paṇṭṭha-sandhi, aṇantajīvaṁ viyāṇāhi. || 39
|| Je kei ṇāliyābaddhā pupphā, saṁkhijja jīviyā bhaṇiyā. Nihuyā aṇantajīvā, je
yāvaṇṇe tahāviha. || 4 || Sabbōvi kisalayo khalu, uggamāṇō aṇantano bhaṇiyō. Sō
cheva vivadḍhaṁtō, hoi paritto aṇantō vā || 52 || -Paṇṇavaṇāsūtra, pada 1
sāraṁśa - 1. A plant from whose broken piece milk comes out. 2. A plant that has
two flat divisions when broken by hand. 3. A plant whose division, when cut in a
circular shape, shows particles like earth in the cut part. 4. A plant whose
root, tuber, stem, and branch have thick bark. 5. A leaf that does not have
veins (fibers) or joints. 6. A fruit that is not ṇālabaddha. 7. A sprout that is
growing. In this way, vegetables, leaves, etc. can also be Anantakaaya, and
Paṇaga, Sewāl, Pāl, Lahsun, Kāndā, Gājar, Mūlā, Adarak, Haldi, Ratālu,
Shakarakand, Arabi, and many aquatic plants are Anantakaaya. If their sentient
parts or portions are present in an insentient diet, then it is fit for
consumption. The atonement for consuming Prādhākarma food, etc. 6. Je bhikkhū
āhākammāṁ bhujai, bhujantaṁ vā sāijjai. 6. A monk who consumes Prādhākarma food,
clothing, and bedding, or approves of those who do so, (receives the
Guruchaumāsi atonement).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 198] [nizIthasUtra anantakAya-jisa vanaspati meM ananta jIva hoM vaha
anantakAyika vanaspati kahalAtI hai| kandamUla aura phUlana to anantakAya ke
rUpa haiM hI kintu pannavaNA Adi AgamoM meM isake atirikta bhI aneka prakAra ke
anantakAya kahe haiM  /  vanaspati ke skandha se lekara bIja taka ke ATha
vibhAga haiM, ve bhI anantakAya ke lakSaNoM se yukta hoM to anantakAya samajhe
jA sakate haiM  /  AgamoM meM anantakAya ke kucha lakSaNa isa prakAra kahe gaye
haiM "jassa mUlassa bhaggassa, samo bhaMgo padIsai  /  aNaMtajIve u se mUle, je
yAvaNNe tahAvihA  /  /  9 /  /  jassa mUlassa kaTThAmo challI bahalayarI bhave
/  aNaMtajIvA u sA challI je yAvaNNe tahAvihA  /  / 30 /  /  cakkAgaM
bhajjamANassa, gaMThI cuNNaM ghaNo bhave  /  puDhavI sarisabheeNaM, aNaMtajIvaM
viyANAhi  // 38 /  /  gUDhachirAgaM pattaM, sachIraM jaM ca nicchIraM  /  jaM
piya paNaTTha-saMdhi, aNaMtajIvaM viyANAhi  /  / 39 /  /  je kei NAliyAbaddhA
pupphA, saMkhijjajIviyA bhaNiyA  /  NihuyA aNaMtajIvA, je yAvaNNe tahAvihA  /  /
4 /  /  sabbovi kisalayo khalu, uggamamANo aNaMtano bhaNiyo  /  so ceva
vivaDDhaMto, hoi paritto aNaMto vA  // 52 //  -paNNavaNAsUtra, pada 1 sArAMza-1.
jisa vanaspati ke Tukar3e meM se dUdha nikle|| 2. hAtha se Tukar3e karane para
jisa vanaspati ke do samatala vibhAga hoM  /  3. jisa vanaspati ke vibhAga ko
cakrAkAra kATane para kaTe hue bhAga meM pRthvIraja ke samAna kaNa-kaNa dikhAI
de|| 4. jisa vanaspati ke mUla, kaMda, khaMdha aura zAkhA kI chAla adhika moTI
ho  /  5. jisa patte meM zirAeM (reze) na dikheM  /  saMdhiyAM na dikheM  /  6.
jo phala NAlabaddha na ho| 7. ugate hue aMkura hoN| isa prakAra zAka, patte Adi
vanaspatiyAM bhI anaMtakAya ho sakatI haiM tathA paNaga, sevAla, pAla, lahasuna,
kAMdA, gAjara, mUlA, adaraka, haldI, ratAlu, zakarakaMda, arabI tathA aneka
jalaja vanaspatiyAM to anantakAya hI haiM  /  acitta AhAra meM inake sacitta
khaMDa yA aMza hoM to vaha paraThane yogya hotA hai  /  prAdhAkarma AhArAdi ke
upayoga meM lene kA prAyazcitta 6. je bhikkhU AhAkammaM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  6. jo bhikSu prAdhAkarmI aAhAra, upadhi va zayyA kA upabhoga karatA
hai yA karane vAle kA granumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta
pAtA hai|)

Page #299 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tenth Uddeshak  [199 Discussion - "Ahakamma is the taking of food, and from
this, karma is attached to the soul, or the soul is attached to karma." (This is
Ahakamma) 2. "From the taking of Ahakamma, because a person who is in a pure
state of restraint falls into impure states of restraint, again and again, this
is called Bhava-Ahakamma." 3. "Bhava-Ahakamma is destroyed by the knowledge,
vision, and conduct of the soul." 4. "Ahakamma, when it matures, becomes
Parakamma, and the soul makes it its own, this is called Attakamma."  The
commentator has explained the four meanings of Pradhaakarma:  1. Pradhaakarma is
the taking of food, etc., which causes the soul to be covered by karma. Or, the
soul is covered by karma. 2. Pradhaakarma is the taking of food, etc., which
causes the soul to fall from pure states of restraint into impure states of
restraint. Or, the soul repeatedly falls down. 3. Pradhaakarma is the taking of
food, etc., which destroys the soul's qualities of Bhava, knowledge, vision, and
conduct. 4. Pradhaakarma is the taking of food, etc., which results in the soul
binding karma through the actions of a householder.  Types of Ahakamma:
"Ahakamma is of three types: Aahara, Uvadhi, and Vasheemaadi. Aahara-Ahakamma is
of four types: Asana, Paana, Khaadya, and Swaadya. ||2663|| Uvadhi-Ahakamma is
of two types: Vastra and Paatra. Vastra is of five types, and Paatra is of three
types. ||2664|| Vashee-Ahakamma is of seven types each for the Moola-guna and
Uttara-guna. ||2665||  1. Aahara-Pradhaakarma - There are four types: 1. Asana
(food), 2. Paana (drink), 3. Khaadya (edible), 4. Swaadya (tasty). 2. Uvadhi-
Pradhaakarma - There are two types: Vastra (clothing) and Paatra (utensils).
Vastra is of five types, and Paatra is of three types. Other medicinal and
auxiliary Uvadhi should be understood by implication. 3. Vashee-Pradhaakarma -
There are seven types each for the Moola-guna (primary qualities) and Uttara-
guna (secondary qualities) of the bed.  **Kalpya-Kalpyata of Ahakamma:**
Ahakamma-Aahara, created for the purpose of one or many Sadhus during the reign
of the first and last Tirthankaras, is not Kalpya (permissible) for any Sadhu or
Sadhvi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dasavAM uddezaka] [199 vivecana-"AhAkammaM grahaNAdAtmani karma AhitaM, AtmA vA
karmaNi aahitH|" (iti AhAkamma) 2. "AhAkammaggahaNAto jamhA
visuddhasaMjamaThANehito appANaM avisuddhaThANesu aho aho kareti tamhA bhAva
AhokammaM  / " 3. "bhAva-Ate NANa-daMsaNa-caraNA taM haNaMto bhAvAtAhammaM  / "
4. "AhAkammapariNato parakammaM attakammIkareti tti attakammaM  / " vyAkhyAkAra
ne prAdhAkarma ke cAra paryAya karake artha kiye haiM 1. prAdhAkarma AhAra Adi
grahaNa karane se AtmA para karmoM kA AvaraNa AtA hai  /  athavA AtmA karmoM se
AvRta hotI hai  /  2. AdhAkarma AhArAdi grahaNa karane se AtmA vizuddha
saMyamasthAnoM se girakara avizuddha saMyamasthAnoM meM A jAtI hai  /  athavA
AtmA kA punaH punaH adhaHpatana hotA rahatA hai| 3. prAdhAkarma AhArAdi grahaNa
karane se AtmA ke bhAva-guNa, jJAna, darzana, cAritra kA hanana hotA hai| 4.
prAdhAkarma aAhArAdi grahaNa karane ke pariNAmoM se prAtmA gRhastha ke kAryoM se
apane karmoM kA baMdha karatI hai| AdhAkarma ke prakAra "AhAkamme tivihe, AhAre
uvadhi vasahimAdIsu  /  AhArAhAkamma, caunvidhaM hoi asaNAdI  // 2663 /  /
uvahi-AhAkammaM, vatthe pAe ya hoi NAyavvaM  /  vatthe paMcavidhaM puNaM,
tivihaM puNa hoi pAyammi  // 2664 //  vasahI-AhAkamma, mUlaguNe ceva uttaraguNe
ya  /  ekkekkaM sattavihaM, gAyavvaM ANupuvvIe  // 2665 //  1. AhAra-
prAdhAkarma-cAra prakAra kA hai-1. azana, 2. pAna, 3. khAdya, 4. svAdya  /  2.
upadhi-prAdhAkarma-do prakAra kA hai-vastra aura pAtra  /  vastra pA~ca prakAra
ke haiM aura pAtra tIna prakAra ke haiN| upalakSaNa se anya bhI audhika aura
aupagrahika upadhi samajha lenI caahiye| _ 3. vasati-prAdhAkarma-zayyA ke mUla
vibhAga va uttara vibhAga kI apekSA sAta-sAta prakAra hote haiN| AdhAkarma kI
kalpyAkalpyatA prathama va antima tIrthaMkara ke zAsana meM eka yA aneka sAdhu
ke uddezya se banA huA prAdhAkarma AhAra kisI bhI sAdhu yA sAdhvI ko nahIM
kalpatA hai| .

Page #300 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[200] In the reign of the middle Tirthankaras, it is considered appropriate to
accept food, etc., from a sadhu or sadhvi who does not have an objective. It is
not considered appropriate to accept food, etc., from a sadhu or a sangha who
has an objective. There are two divisions of adhakarma: 1. Adhakarma is that
food, etc., which has an objective for one or more sadhus. 2. Prauddeshik is
that food, etc., which does not have an objective. In the reign of the middle
Tirthankaras, "adhakarma" is not acceptable. In the reign of the first and last
Tirthankaras, both "adhakarma and prauddeshik" are not acceptable. To explain
the reason for this difference, the commentator has said that the reason is
simplicity and complexity, and he has illustrated them with examples for both
householders and sadhus. Nimittakathan-Prayaschitta 7. A bhikkhu who speaks of a
present nimitta or approves of the one who speaks of it. 8. A bhikkhu who speaks
of a future nimitta or approves of the one who speaks of it. (He is given the
Guruchaumasi prayaschitta.) Vivechan-Labh, Alabh, Sukh, Duhkha and Maran are the
six types of nimitta. These six have three divisions each: past, present and
future. There are many reasons for telling nimitta, such as: 1. For the
attainment of food, etc., 2. For fame, reputation or prestige, 3. For someone's
sake, 4. For someone's benefit or out of compassion, etc. There are many ways to
tell nimitta, such as: 1. From the lines of the hand, from the lines of the
feet, from the lines of the forehead, 2. From other signs of the body, 3. From
the date, day or zodiac sign, 4. From the date of birth or birth chart, 5. From
asking questions, etc. Examples of present nimitta: 1. I have sent a certain
person to a certain place, has he received a sum of money there or not? Is he
coming or not? 2. Someone has gone abroad, is he alive or dead there?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 200] [nizIthasUtra madhyavartI tIrthaMkaroM ke zAsana meM-AdhAkarma meM jina
sAdhu yA sAdhvI kA uddezya nahIM hai, unheM grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai  /  jisa
eka sAdhu kA yA saMgha kA uddezya ho to usa sAdhu ko yA saMgha ko grahaNa karanA
nahIM kalpatA hai  /  AdhAkarma aura auddezika-prAdhAkarma ke do vibhAga haiM 1.
jisa prAdhAkarma AhArAdi meM eka yA aneka sAdhuoM kA uddezya hai, unake liye
vaha AhArAdi prAdhAkarma hai| 2. jinakA uddezya nahIM hai, unake liye vahI
AhArAdi prauddezika haiM  /  madhyama tIrthaMkaroM ke zAsana meM "prAdhAkarma"
agrAhya hotA hai| prathama va antima tIrthaMkara ke zAsana meM "prAdhAkarma aura
prauddezika" donoM agrAhya hote haiM  /  , isa antara ke kAraNa ko samajhAne ke
liye vyAkhyAkAra ne saralatA aura vakratA kA kAraNa kahA hai aura unheM gRhastha
aura sAdhu donoM para udAharaNa sahita ghaTita kiyA hai  /  nimittakathana-
prAyazcitta 7. je bhikkhU paDuppaNNaM nimittaM vAgarei, vAgareMtaM vA sAijjai  /
8. je bhikkhU aNAgayaM nimittaM vAgarei, vAgareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  7. jo bhikSu
vartamAna saMbaMdhI nimitta kA kathana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| _8. jo bhikSu bhaviSya sambandhI nimitta kA kathana karatA hai yA
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta aAtA hai  / )
vivecana-lAbha, alAbha, sukha, duHkha aura maraNa ye nimitta ke chaha prakAra
haiM  /  ina chaha ke bhUta bhaviSya aura vartamAna ye tIna-tIna bheda haiN|
nimitta batAne ke aneka hetu haiM, yathA 1. AhArAdi kI upalabdhi ke liye, 2.
yazaHkIrti yA pratiSThA ke liye, 3. kisI ke lihAja se, 4. kisI ke hita ke lie yA
anukampA ke liye ityAdi  /  nimitta batAne ke aneka tarIke haiM, yathA-. 1.
hastarekhA se, pAdarekhA se, mastakarekhA se, 2. zarIra ke anya lakSaNoM se, 3.
tithi, vAra yA rAzi se, 4. janmatithi yA janmakuNDalI se, 5. prazna karane se
ityAdi  /  vartamAna nimitta ke udAharaNa 1. maiMne amuka vyakti ko amuka ke
pAsa bhejA hai, vahA~ use dhana kI rAzi mila gaI yA nahIM ? vaha A rahA hai yA
nahIM ? , 2. koI videza gayA hai, vaha vahA~ jIvita hai yA mara gayA ?

Page #301 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [The Twenty-First Objective]  [2013. Answering questions like "Am I happy or
sad now?" with reference to the present moment is called a *nimitta* statement.
Similarly, one should understand questions and answers related to future loss,
gain, happiness, sorrow, birth, and death, all based on *nimitta*.  This section
discusses the *guruchaumaasi* atonement for *nimitta* statements in the present
and future. The *laghuchaumaasi* atonement for *nimitta* statements in the past
is discussed in the thirteenth objective.  The prohibition of *nimitta*
statements is mentioned in different ways in the *Praagamas*. Here are some
examples:  1. "Those who practice *lakshana*, *suvijna*, and *angavidya* are not
truly called *shramanas*, as the Tirthankaras have said." - *Uttara*. A. 8, G.
32 2. "Those who practice *lakshana* and *suvijna*, who are deeply involved in
*nimitta* and *kautukakarya*, who earn a living through *prasrava*-filled
knowledge that creates false wonder, cannot find refuge at the time of death." -
*Uttara*. A. 20, G. 45 3. "One who leaves their own home and works in the homes
of others, using *nimitta* to predict good and bad fortune and earn a living, is
called a *papasramana*." - *Uttara*. A. 17, G. 18 4. "A monk who does not earn a
living through *chhinna*, *sara*, *bhoom*, *antariksha*, *suvijna*, *lakshana*,
*danda*, *vastuvidya*, *angviyar*, and *sarasvijaya* is a true monk." -
*Uttara*. A. 15, G. 7 5. "Stars, dreams, *yoga*, *nimitta*, mantras, and
medicines are not to be considered by householders, as they lead to worldly
attachments." - *Dashava*. A. 8, G. 50  1. Those who practice *lakshana*
(physiognomy), *suvijna* (dream interpretation), and *angavidya* (body science)
are not truly called *shramanas* (ascetics), as the Tirthankaras have said. 2.
Those who practice *lakshana* and *suvijna*, who are deeply involved in
*nimitta* (omens) and *kautukakarya* (curiosity-driven activities), who earn a
living through *prasrava*-filled knowledge that creates false wonder, cannot
find refuge at the time of death. 3. One who leaves their own home and works in
the homes of others, using *nimitta* to predict good and bad fortune and earn a
living, is called a *papasramana* (sinful ascetic). 4. A monk who does not earn
a living through *chhinna* (cutting), *sara* (voice), *bhoom* (earth),
*antariksha* (space), *suvijna* (dream interpretation), *lakshana*
(physiognomy), *danda* (punishment), *vastuvidya* (architecture), *angviyar*
(body tremors), and *sarasvijaya* (victory over the senses) is a true monk. 5.
Stars, dreams, *yoga*, *nimitta*, mantras, and medicines are not to be
considered by householders, as they lead to worldly attachments.  ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 basavAM uddezaka] [201 3. koI parIkSA karane kI dRSTi se pUche ki "maiM abhI
sukhI hU~ yA duHkhI ?" ityAdi praznoM kA uttara denA vartamAna nimitta kathana
hai  /  isI prakAra bhaviSyakAla ke hAni, lAbha, sukha, duHkha, janma, maraNa
sambandhI nimitta ke prazna va unake uttara bhI samajha lene caahiye| prastuta
prakaraNa meM vartamAna aura bhaviSya ke nimitta-kathana kA gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  bhUtakAla ke nimittakathana kA laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta terahaveM uddezaka meM hai| nimittakathana kA niSedha prAgamoM meM
bhinna-bhinna prakAra se huA hai| kucha uddharaNa isa prakAra haiM 1. "je
lakkhaNaM ca suviNaM ca, aMgavijjaM ca je pauMjaMti  /  Na hu te samaNA
vuccaMti, evaM Ariehi akkhAyaM  //  -uttarA. a. 8, gA. 3 2. je lakkhaNaM suviNaM
pauMjamANe, Nimitta kouhala saMpagADhe  /  kuheDa vijjAsavadArajIvI, na gacchai
saraNaM .tammi kAle  //  -uttarA. a. 20, gA. 45 3. sayaM gehaM pariccajja,
paragehaMsi vAvare  /  nimitteNa ya vavaharai, pAvasamaNe tti vucci| -uttarA. a.
17, gA. 18 4. chinnaM saraM bhomamantalikkhaM, suviNaM lakkhaNa-daNDa-vattha-
vijjaM  /  aMga-viyAraM sarassa vijayaM, je vijjAhiM na jIvaI sa bhikkhU  //
-uttarA. a. 15, gA. 7 5. nakkhattaM sumiNaM jogaM, nimittaM mNt-bhesjN| gihiNo
taM na Aikkhe, bhUyAhigaraNaM payaM  //  -dazavai. a. 8, gA. 50 1. jo sAdhaka
lakSaNazAstra, svapnazAstra evaM aMgavidyA kA prayoga karate haiM unheM sacce
arthoM meM zramaNa nahIM kahA jAtA, aisA tIrthaMkaroM ne kahA hai| 2. jo
lakSaNazAstra aura svapnazAstra kA prayoga karatA hai, jo nimittazAstra aura
kautukakArya meM lagA rahatA hai, mithyA Azcarya utpanna karane vAlI
prAsravayukta vidyAoM se AjIvikA karatA hai, vaha maraNa ke samaya kisI kI
zaraNa nahIM pA sktaa| 3. jo apanA ghara chor3akara dUsaroM ke ghara meM jAkara
unakA kArya karatA hai aura nimittazAstra se zubhAzubha batAkara jIvana-
vyavahAra calAtA hai, vaha pApazramaNa kahalAtA hai| 4. jo chedana, svara
(uccAraNa), bhauma, aMtarikSa, svapna, lakSaNa, daMDa, vAstuvidyA, aMgasphuraNa
aura svaravijJAna Adi vidyAoM ke dvArA AjIvikA nahIM karatA hai, vaha bhikSu
hai|

Page #302 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīthসূত্র 5  **Nishīthসূত্র 5** 5. Stars, dreams, methods of controlling
others, omens, mantras, and medicines - these are all places where beings are
harmed, therefore a Muni should not tell householders about their results.
Telling about omens violates the Jina's teachings. A seeker becomes agitated by
the practice of restraint. He becomes the cause of blameworthy actions. Telling
about omens has the potential to cause many evils. [202]  **Sūtrakṛtāṅgasūtra A.
12, G. 10** states that "many omens are true at times, and false at other
times." This causes the reputation of the Sadhu and the second great vow to be
tarnished.  **Penance for Stealing a Disciple** 9. A monk who steals another's
disciple, or approves of the stealing. 10. A monk who changes the feelings of
another's disciple, or approves of the changing. (He is given the Guru-Chaumasi
penance.)  **Discussion:** There are two types of disciples: 1. Dīkṣita (Sadhu)
and 2. Dīkṣārthī (Vairaagi). The following sutras refer to Dīkṣārthī, therefore
here we should understand Dīkṣita Sadhu.  **Stealing:** To make another's
disciple favorable, i.e., to attract him, to give him food, to teach him, and to
take him away, send him away, or hide him.  **Changing Feelings:** To criticize
the disciple or the Guru by pointing out their faults, and to praise oneself by
highlighting one's own virtues. To point out the disadvantages of staying with
another, and to point out the benefits of staying with oneself, thereby changing
the disciple's feelings.  **Difference between Changing Feelings and Stealing:**
1. **Stealing:** To take away by attracting. 2. **Changing Feelings:** To create
faith in oneself and change the disciple's thoughts, so that he leaves his own
Guru.  The commentator has elaborated on changing feelings through thirteen
doors, and has described in detail how, with the body, speech, and mind, one can
criticize and condemn, both when asked and without being asked.  **Penance for
Stealing a Direction** 11. A monk who steals a direction, or approves of the
stealing. 12. A monk who changes a direction, or approves of the changing.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [nizIthasUtra 5. nakSatra, svapna, vazIkaraNa yoga, nimitta, mantra aura
bheSaja- ye jIvoM kI hiMsA ke sthAna haiM, isalie muni gRhasthoM ko inake
phalAphala na batAe  /  nimittakathana se jinAjJA kA ullaMghana hotA hai  /
sAdhaka saMyamasAdhanA se calita ho jAtA hai  /  sAvadya pravRttiyoM kA nimitta
banatA hai  /  fafe kathana se hI aneka anartha hone kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai  /
202] sUtrakRtAMgasUtra a. 12, gA. 10 meM batAyA hai ki "kaI nimitta kaI bAra
satya hote haiM to kaI bAra asatya bhI ho jAte haiM  / " jisase sAdhu kA yaza
aura dvitIya mahAvrata kalaMkita hotA hai  /  ziSya apaharaNa kA prAyazcitta 9.
je bhikkhU sehaM avaharai, avaharaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  10. je bhikkhU sehaM
vippariNAmei, vippariNAmetaM vA sAijjai  /  9. jo bhikSu ( anya ke ) ziSya kA
apaharaNa karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  10. jo bhikSu (
anya ke ) ziSya ke bhAvoM ko parivartita karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai | ) vivecana - ziSya do
prakAra ke hote haiM - 1. dIkSita (sAdhu) aura 2. dIkSArthI ( vairAgI )  /  Age
ke sUtroM meM dIkSArthI sambandhI kathana hai ataH yahA~ dIkSita sAdhu hI
samajhanA cAhiye  /  apaharaNa - anya ke ziSya ko anukUla banAne ke lie arthAt
AkarSita karane ke liye AhAra Adi denA, zikSA yA jJAna denA aura use lekara
anyatra cale jAnA, bheja denA yA chipA denA  /  vippariNamana - ziSya ke yA guru
ke avaguNa batAkara nindA karanA va khuda ke guNa batAkara prazaMsA karanA  /
anya ke pAsa rahane kI hAniyA~ batAkara apane pAsa rahane ke lAbha batAkara
usake bhAvoM kA parivartana kara denA  /  vipariNamana aura apaharaNa meM aMtara
- 1. apaharaNa - AkarSita karake le jAnA  /  2. vipariNamana - guru ke prati
zraddhA paidA karake vicAroM meM parivartana kara denA, jisase vaha svayaM guru
ko chor3a de  /  bhASyakAra ne teraha dvAroM se vipariNamana kA vistAra kiyA hai
tathA ziSya ke pUchane para yA binA pUche kAyA se, vacana se aura mana se jisa-
jisa taraha nindA garhA kI jAtI hai, usakA vistRta varNana kiyA hai  /  dizA
apaharaNa kA prAyazcitta 11. je bhikkhU disaM avaharai, avaharaMtaM vA sAijjai
/  12. je bhikkhU disaM viSpariNAmei, vippariNAmetaM vA sAijjai  /  2

Page #303 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 10: The Tenth Uddeshak  **11. A monk who abducts the direction of a
newly initiated disciple or approves of such an act.**  **12. A monk who alters
the direction of a newly initiated disciple or approves of such an act. (He
incurs Guruchaumasi Prāyaścitta.)**  **Explanation:** "Direction" refers to the
Acharya or Upadhyaya designated by the Acharya or Upadhyaya during the time of
initiation or the time of the larger initiation.  Abducting the direction means
abandoning that Acharya or Upadhyaya and accepting another Acharya or Upadhyaya.
(This applies to a Sadhvi and her Pravartini.)  - Churni  **Meaning:** During
the time of initiation or the larger initiation, the newly initiated disciple is
given the guidance of a specific Acharya or Upadhyaya. This is called their
"direction."  To remove the disciple from the guidance of that Acharya or
Upadhyaya and place them under the guidance of another Acharya or Upadhyaya is
called abducting their direction.  Similarly, for a Sadhvi, to direct her to a
different Pravartini than the one she was originally assigned is called
abducting her direction.  Abduction involves directly placing the disciple under
the guidance of another Acharya or Upadhyaya, while alteration involves changing
the disciple's thoughts and beliefs.  Sutras 9-10 deal with the Prāyaścitta for
abducting or altering the direction of a previously initiated disciple, while
Sutras 11-12 deal with the Prāyaścitta for abducting or altering the direction
of a newly initiated disciple.  Abduction and alteration are two distinct
actions that relate to the individual. Therefore, "Seh" refers to the initiated
disciple, and "Dis" refers to the direction, which is the one who is directed,
meaning the newly initiated disciple. Therefore, "Dis" should be understood as
the abduction and alteration of the newly initiated disciple.  **Prāyaścitta for
Sheltering an Unknown Monk**  **13. A monk who shelters a monk from another
Gachchha who has arrived alone without inquiring about him for more than three
days, or approves of such an act.** (He incurs Guruchaumasi Prāyaścitta.)
**Explanation:** If the arriving monk is known, then one should inquire about
the reason for his arrival. If he is unknown, then one should inquire about
where he came from, where he wants to go, etc., and obtain complete information
before acting accordingly. Because an unknown person could be a thief, a cheat,
a hater, a criminal of the king, a fornicator, a seeker of loopholes, a
murderer, or a provocateur.  Even with a known person, it is necessary to
inquire as a matter of courtesy. As far as possible, one should obtain
information on the same day. Due to illness or other reasons, this may not be
possible...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [203 dasavAM uddezaka 11. jo bhikSu navadIkSita kI dizA kA apahAra karatA hai
yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 12. jo bhikSu navadIkSita kI dizA ko
vipariNAmita karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-"dizA-iti vyapadezaH, pravrajanakAle
upasthApanakAle vA, yAM AcArya upAdhyAyo vA vyapadizyate sA tasya dizA ityrthH|
tasyApahArI-taM parityajya anyaM AcArya-upAdhyAyaM vA pratipadyate ityarthaH  /
saMjatIe pvttinnii|" cUrNi bhAvArtha-pravrajyA yA upasthApanA (bar3I dIkSA) ke
samaya navadIkSita ko jisa AcArya, upAdhyAya ke netRtva kA nirdeza kiyA jAtA hai
vaha usakI "dizA" kahalAtI hai| una prAcArya, upAdhyAya ke nirdeza ko chur3Akara
anya prAcArya, upAdhyAya kA kathana karavAnA yaha usa ziSya kI dizA kA apaharaNa
karanA kahalAtA hai| isI prakAra sAdhvI ke liye bhI jisa pravartinI kA nirdeza
karanA ho, use dUsarI pravatinI kA nirdeza kara denA usakI dizA kA apaharaNa
karanA kahalAtA hai| apaharaNa meM svayaM anya AcArya, upAdhyAya kA nirdeza kara
diyA jAtA hai aura vipariNamana meM navadIkSita ke vicAroM meM parivartana
karAyA jAtA hai  /  sUtra 9-10 meM pUrvadIkSita ziSya ke apaharaNa yA
bhAvaparivartana kA prAyazcitta hai aura sUtra 11-12 meM dIkSArthI ke apaharaNa
yA bhAvaparivartana kA prAyazcitta hai| apaharaNa aura vipariNamana ye donoM
bhinna-bhinna kriyAyeM haiM, jo vyakti se saMbaMdha rakhatI haiN| ataH "seha" kA
artha "dIkSita ziSya" samajhA jAtA hai, vaise hI "disa" dizA jisakI ho vaha
dizAvAn arthAt dIkSArthI  /  ataH "disa" se dIkSArthI kA apaharaNa aura
vipariNamana samajha lenA cAhiye  /  ajJAta bhikSu ko Azraya dene kA prAyazcitta
13. je bhikkhU bahiyAvAsiyaM AesaM paraM ti-rAyAo aviphAlettA saMvasAvei,
saMvasAvetaM vA saaijji| 13. jo bhikSu anya gaccha ke Aye hue (ekAkI) sAdhu ko
pUchatAcha kiye binA tIna dina se adhika sAtha meM rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-
yadi Ane vAlA sAdhu paricita hai to Ane kA kAraNa pUchanA cAhie  /  yadi
aparicita hai to vaha kahAM se AyA hai ? kahAM jAnA cAhatA hai ? ityAdi prazna
pUchakara pUrI jAnakArI karake yathAyogya karanA cAhiye  /  kyoMki aparicita
vyakti cora, Thaga, dveSI, rAjA kA aparAdhI, maithunasevI, chidrAnveSo, hatyArA
yA utsUtraprarUpaka Adi bhI ho sakatA hai| paricita vyakti se bhI pUchatAcha
karanA vyavahAra ko apekSA se Avazyaka hai| jahA~ taka sambhava ho usI dina
jAnakArI kara lenI cAhie  /  bImArI Adi kAraNoM se aisA

Page #304 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  204]  If it is not possible to perform the Nisith Sutra, then one should not
violate the third day, otherwise they become liable for atonement.  It is the
duty of the Gachchhanayak or the leading monk there, and they are the ones who
are liable for atonement.  The incoming monk may come for criticism
(purification), for gaining knowledge, for the work of the Sangha, or for
ordination.  Failure to inquire may lead to a change in their faith, disgrace,
etc. Therefore, the leading monk should diligently perform this duty.
**Atonement for eating with a monk who has been punished by conflict**  14. A
monk who has not calmed down, has not performed atonement, who eats with him
without inquiry or even after inquiry, or approves of those who eat with him, is
liable for Guruchaumasi atonement.  **Discussion:**  The Brihatkalpa Sutra
Uddeshak 4 states that if a monk has a conflict with another monk, they should
not go out for any work, including Gochari, without calming down or performing
atonement for criticism.   This atonement sutra implies that if a monk who has
been punished by conflict does not calm down or accept atonement even after
inquiry, then one cannot have any dealings with them, including eating, after
three days.   Those who exchange food with them after three days are liable for
atonement.   Here, the commentator has mentioned many reasons for the origin of
conflict and also many ways to calm down the monk who has not calmed down.  The
many harms that result from neglecting these methods are explained with an
interesting example.   **Atonement for saying and giving the opposite
atonement**  15. A monk who gives a higher atonement for a lower atonement, or
approves of those who do so.  16. A monk who gives a lower atonement for a
higher atonement, or approves of those who do so.  17. A monk who gives a higher
atonement for a lower atonement, or approves of those who do so.  18. A monk who
gives a lower atonement for a higher atonement, or approves of those who do so.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 204] [nizIthasUtra karanA sambhava na ho to bhI tIsare dina kA ullaMghana to
nahIM karanA cAhiye, anyathA prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| gacchanAyaka kA yA
vahAM jo pramukha sAdhu ho usI kA yaha karttavya hai aura vahI prAyazcitta kA
pAtra hai| Ane vAlA sAdhu khyAti sunakara AlocanA-(zuddhi) ke liye, jJAnaprApti
ke liye, saMgha ke kArya ke lie yA upasampadA ke liye bhI pA sakatA hai|
pUchatAcha na karane se usakI zraddhA meM parivartana honA, apayaza honA Adi
sambhava hotA hai  /  ataH pramukha sAdhu ko isa kartavya kA vivekapUrvaka
pAlana karanA caahiye| kalaha karake prAye hue bhikSu ke sAtha AhAra karane kA
prAyazcitta 14. je bhikkhU sAhigaraNaM, aviosaviya-pAhuDaM, akaDa-pAyacchittaM,
paraM tirAyAo vipphAliya avipphAliya saMbhujai, saMbhujaMtaM vA saaijji| 14.
jisane kleza karake use upazAnta nahIM kiyA hai, usakA prAyazcitta nahIM kiyA
hai, usase pUchatAcha kiye binA yA pUchatAcha karake bhI jo bhikSu usake sAtha
tIna dina se adhika AhAra-sambhoga rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai|) vivecana-bRhatkalpasUtra
uddezaka 4 meM batAyA gayA hai ki kisI sAdhu kA kisI sAdhu ke sAtha kleza ho
gayA ho to use upazAnta kiye binA yA AlocanA prAyazcitta kiye binA gocarI Adi
kisI bhI kArya ke liye bAhara jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai  /  isa prAyazcittasUtra se
yaha phalita hotA hai ki klezayukta bhikSu yadi pUchatAcha Adi kara lene ke bAda
bhI upazAnta nahIM hotA hai, prAyazcitta grahaNa nahIM karatA hai to tIna dina
ke bAda usake sAtha AhAra Adi karane kA vyavahAra nahIM rakhA jA sakatA  /  tIna
dina ke bAda jo usake sAtha AhAra kA AdAna-pradAna karate haiM ve prAyazcitta ke
pAtra hote haiN| yahA~ vyAkhyAkAra ne kleza utpatti ke aneka kAraNa kahe haiM
aura anupazAnta bhikSu ko upazAMta karane ke aneka upAya bhI kahe haiM  /  ina
upAyoM ko na karake unakI upekSA karane se hone vAlI aneka hAniyoM ko eka rocaka
dRSTAnta se samajhAyA gayA hai| viparIta prAyazcitta kahane evaM dene kA
prAyazcitta 15. je bhikkhU ugghAiyaM aNugghAiyaM vayai, vayaMtaM vA sAijjai  /
16. je bhikkhU aNugghAiyaM ugghAiyaM vayai, vayaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  17. je
bhikkhU ugghAiyaM aNugdhAiyaM dei, deMtaM vA sAijjai  /  18. je bhikkhU
aNugghAiyaM ugghAiyaM dei, deMtaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #305 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Vasa Vandeshak] [205 15. A monk who calls the minor penance a major penance or
approves of someone who does so. 16. A monk who calls the major penance a minor
penance or approves of someone who does so. 17. A monk who gives the major
penance for a minor penance or approves of someone who does so. 18. A monk who
gives the minor penance for a major penance or approves of someone who does so.
(He incurs the Guru Chaumasik penance.) Discussion - The penance is mentioned
for doing the opposite in two sutras and the penance is mentioned for giving
less or more penance due to attachment-aversion or ignorance. Giving more
penance causes pain to the sadhu, he is compassionate and the critic does not
criticize again due to fear. Giving less penance does not lead to complete
purification and there is a possibility of repeating the fault. Therefore, the
authority giving penance should be careful not to give the opposite penance.
Penance for eating with a monk who is eligible for penance 19. A monk who,
having heard or known that a monk is undergoing a minor penance, eats with him
or approves of someone who does so. 20. A monk who, having heard or known the
reason for a minor penance, eats with him or approves of someone who does so.
21. A monk who, having heard or known the resolve of a minor penance, eats with
him or approves of someone who does so. 22. A monk who, having heard or known
that a monk is undergoing a major penance, eats with him or approves of someone
who does so. 23. A monk who, having heard or known the reason for a major
penance, eats with him or approves of someone who does so. 24. A monk who,
having heard or known the resolve of a major penance, eats with him or approves
of someone who does so. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vasavAM uddezaka] [205 15. jo bhikSu laghuprAyazcittasthAna ko guru
prAyazcittasthAna kahatA hai yA kahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 16. jo
bhikSu guruprAyazcittasthAna ko laghu prAyazcittasthAna kahatA hai yA kahane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 17. jo bhikSu laghuprAyazcittasthAna kA
guruprAyazcitta detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 18. jo bhikSu
guruprAyazcittasthAna kA laghu prAyazcitta detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta aAtA hai|) vivecana-do sUtroM meM
viparIta prarUpaNA karane kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai aura do sUtroM meM rAga-
dveSa se yA ajJAna se kama yA adhika prAyazcitta dene kA prAyazcitta kathana
hai| adhika prAyazcitta dene se sAdhu ko pIr3A hotI hai, usakI ananukampA hotI
hai tathA Alocaka bhaya ke kAraNa phira kabhI AlocanA nahIM karatA hai| _ kama
prAyazcitta dene se pUrNa zuddhi nahIM hotI hai aura punaH doSa sevana kI
sambhAvanA rahatI hai  /  ataH prAyazcitta dene vAle adhikArI ko viparIta
prAyazcitta na dene kA dhyAna rakanA cAhie  /  prAyazcitta yogya bhikSu ke sAtha
pAhAra karane kA prAyazcitta 19. je bhikkhU ugghAiya soccA gaccA saMbhaMjai,
saMbhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  20. je bhikkhU ugghAiya-heuM soccA NaccA saMbhaMjai,
saMbhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  21. je bhikkhU ugdhAiya-saMkappaM soccA NaccA
saMbhujai, saMbhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  22. je bhikkhU aNugdhAiya soccA NaccA
saMbhujai saMbhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  23. je bhikkhU aNugghAiya-heuM soccA gaccA
saMbhujai, saMbhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  24. je bhikkhU aNugghAiya-saMkappaM soccA
NaccA saMbhujai saMbhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  19. jo bhikSu laghu
prAyazcittasthAna ke sevana karane kA sunakara yA jAnakara usa sAdhu ke sAtha
AhArAdi kA vyavahAra rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  20.
jo bhikSu laghuprAyazcitta ke hetu ko sunakara yA jAnakara usa sAdhu ke sAtha
AhArAdi kA vyavahAra rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 21. jo
bhikSu laghuprAyazcitta ke saMkalpa ko sunakara yA jAnakara usa sAdhu ke sAtha
AhArAdi kA vyavahAra rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 22. jo
bhikSu guruprAyazcittasthAna ke sevana karane kA sunakara yA jAnakara usa sAdhu
ke sAtha AhArAdi kA vyavahAra rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai|

Page #306 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [206] [Nishīthasūtra 23. A monk who, upon hearing or knowing the reason for
the Guru Prāyaścitta, maintains a relationship with that sadhu, including
sharing food, or approves of those who do so. 24. A monk who, upon hearing or
knowing the intention of the Guru Prāyaścitta, maintains a relationship with
that sadhu, including sharing food, or approves of those who do so. (He is
subject to the Guru Chaumāsi Prāyaścitta.) Discussion - 1. Ugghaīyaṁ ti
pāyaścittaṁ vahatassa, 2. pāyaścittamāpaṇṇassa jāva aṇāloiyaṁ tāva "he"
bhaṇṇati, 3. āloiye amugadinē tujjheyam pacchittaṁ dijihiti tti "sankappaiṁ"
bhaṇṇati. - ṇi. 1. Ugghaīyaṁ - while performing the Prāyaścitta, 2. heuṁ - after
that, until the criticism, 3. sankappaṁ - until the day on which the Prāyaścitta
is established. From the time of performing the Prāyaścitta until the completion
of the penance performed for the purpose of the Prāyaścitta, it is forbidden to
exchange food with that sadhu. The specific method of penance to be performed
for the Prāyaścitta eliminates all normal interactions with the one performing
the Prāyaścitta. However, here, the prohibition of food exchange in the previous
stage is stated in three parts, and is called Prāyaścitta. Three sūtras mention
the Prāyaścitta related to Udghatika, and three sūtras mention the Prāyaścitta
related to Anudghātika. The Chūrṇikāra, at the beginning of the explanation of
these sūtras, has said, "ete chaḥ sutā." After that, the meaning of the words
Udghatika, etc., has been explained. Nevertheless, these six sūtras have
sometimes become twelve sūtras, which are found in all available copies. It is
possible that the basis for the increase may be the bhang mentioned in the Chani
of Bhāṣya Gāthā 2887. There, it is clarified that there are only 6 sūtras. The
Saṁyogasūtra should be made from these 6, whose number is 55. Prāyaścitta for
Sunrise-Sunset Violation 25. A monk who, while performing the Uggaya-Vitti, with
an unrighteous intention, in a state of confusion, with the intention of
violating the Samavāṇa, takes food, drink, or something to eat or drink for
himself, should know this: "As the sun rises or sets," whatever is in the mouth,
in the hand, or in the possession, should be discarded, for whoever eats it or
feeds the eater, will not be free from sin. 26. A monk who, while performing the
Uggaya-Vitti, with an unrighteous intention, in a state of confusion, with the
intention of violating the Samavāṇa, takes food, drink, or something to eat or
drink for himself, should know this: "As the sun rises or sets," whatever is in
the mouth, in the hand, or in the possession, should be discarded, for whoever
eats it or feeds the eater, will not be free from sin.  ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 206] [nizIthasUtra 23. jo bhikSu guruprAyazcitta ke hetu ko sunakara yA
jAnakara usa sAdhu ke sAtha AhArAdi kA vyavahAra rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 24. jo bhikSu guruprAyazcitta ke saMkalpa ko sunakara yA
jAnakara usa sAdhu ke sAtha AhArAdi kA vyavahAra rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai  / ) vivecana-
1. ugghAiyaM ti pAyacchittaM vahatassa, 2. pAyacchittamApaNNasya jAva aNAloiyaM
tAva "he" bhaNNati, 3. Aloie amugadiNe tujjheyaM pacchittaM dijihiti tti
"saMkappiyaM" bhaNNati |-nni| 1. ugghAiyaM--prAyazcittasthAna sevana karate
samaya, 2. heuM-usake bAda AlocanA kare taba taka, 3. saMkappaMprAyazcitta meM
sthApita karane kA jo dina nizcita kiyA ho usa dina taka  /  prAyazcitta sthAna
sevana karane ke samaya se lekara prAyazcitta ke nimitta kRta tapa ke pUrNa hone
taka usa sAdhu ke sAtha AhAra kA AdAna-pradAna karane kA niSedha hai|
prAyazcitta ke nimitta kiye jAne vAle tapa kI jo viziSTa vidhi hotI hai, usameM
to prAyazcitta karane vAle ke sAtha sabhI sAmAnya vyavahAra samApta kara diye
jAte haiM  /  kintu yahA~ usake pUrva kI avasthA meM AhAra kA vyavahAra baMda
karane kA tIna vibhAgoM dvArA kathana kara prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  tIna
sUtroM meM udghAtika se sambandhita prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai aura tIna sUtroM
meM anudghAtika se sambandhita prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  cUrNikAra ne ina
sUtroM kI vyAkhyA ke prArambha meM hI kahA hai ki "ete chaH suttaa|" isake bAda
udghAtika Adi zabdoM kA artha kiyA hai| phira bhI ina chaH sUtroM ke kabhI
bAraha sUtra bana gaye haiM jo upalabdha sabhI pratiyoM meM milate haiM  /
sambhava hai bar3hane kA AdhAra bhASya gAthA 2887 kI caNi meM kahe gae bhaMga ho
sakate haiN| vahA~ yaha spaSTa kiyA gayA hai ki sUtra to 6 hI haiN| saMyogasUtra
ina 6 se banA lenA cAhie, jinakI saMkhyA 55 hai  /  sUryodaya-vRttilaMghana kA
prAyazcitta 25. je bhikkhU uggaya-vittIe aNathamiya-saMkappe saMthaDie
nivitigicchA-samAvaNNeNaM appANeNaM asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA
paDiggAhettA AhAraM AhAremANe, aha puNa evaM jANejjA-"aNuggae sUrie, atthamie
vA" se jaM ca muhe, jaM ca pANisi, jaM ca paDiggahe, taM vigicemANe visohemANe
nAikkamai jo taM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA saaijji|| 26. je bhikkhU uggayavittIe
aNathamiya-saMkappe saMthaDie vitigicchA-samAvaNNeNaM appANeNaM asaNaM vA pANaM
vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA paDiggAhettA AhAraM AhAremANe, aha puNa evaM
jANejjA"aNuggae sUrie, atthamie vA" se jaM ca muhe, jaM ca pANisi, jaM ca
paDiggahe, taM vigicemANe visohemANe nAikkamai, jo taM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /

Page #307 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tenth Uddeshak  [207 27. A monk who, with a firm resolve and without any
doubt, takes food, drink, edibles, or savories, knowing that the sunrise has not
occurred or the sunset has already happened, and while eating, finds that the
food is in his mouth, hand, or vessel, should discard it, cleanse his mouth,
hands, and vessel, and should not be considered to have violated the Jain code.
However, one who consumes the remaining food or approves of the consumption of
the remaining food, is considered to have violated the Jain code. 28. A monk
who, with a firm resolve and without any doubt, takes food, drink, edibles, or
savories, knowing that the sunrise has not occurred or the sunset has already
happened, and while eating, finds that the food is in his mouth, hand, or
vessel, should discard it, cleanse his mouth, hands, and vessel, and should not
be considered to have violated the Jain code. However, one who consumes the
remaining food or approves of the consumption of the remaining food, is
considered to have violated the Jain code. 25. A monk resolves to take food only
after sunrise and before sunset. If a capable monk, without any doubt, takes
food, drink, edibles, or savories, and while eating, finds that the sunrise has
not occurred or the sunset has already happened, and the food is in his mouth,
hand, or vessel, he should discard it, cleanse his mouth, hands, and vessel, and
should not be considered to have violated the Jain code. However, one who
consumes the remaining food or approves of the consumption of the remaining
food, is considered to have violated the Jain code. 26. A monk resolves to take
food only after sunrise and before sunset. If a capable monk, with doubt, takes
food, drink, edibles, or savories, and while eating, finds that the sunrise has
not occurred or the sunset has already happened, and the food is in his mouth,
hand, or vessel, he should discard it, cleanse his mouth, hands, and vessel, and
should not be considered to have violated the Jain code. However, one who
consumes the remaining food or approves of the consumption of the remaining
food, is considered to have violated the Jain code. 27. A monk resolves to take
food only after sunrise and before sunset. If an incapable monk, without any
doubt, takes food, drink, edibles, or savories, and while eating, finds that the
sunrise has not occurred or the sunset has already happened, and the food is in
his mouth, hand, or vessel, he should discard it, cleanse his mouth, hands, and
vessel, and should not be considered to have violated the Jain code. However,
one who consumes the remaining food or approves of the consumption of the
remaining food, is considered to have violated the Jain code. 28. A monk
resolves to take food only after sunrise and before sunset. If an incapable
monk, with doubt, takes food, drink, edibles, or savories, and while eating,
finds that the sunrise has not occurred or the sunset has already happened, and
the food is in his mouth, hand, or vessel, he should discard it, cleanse his
mouth, hands, and vessel, and should not be considered to have violated the Jain
code. However, one who consumes the remaining food or approves of the
consumption of the remaining food, is considered to have violated the Jain code.
(He receives the Guruchaumasi atonement). Discussion - These four sutras discuss
the four aspects of capable-incapable, doubt-free-doubtful. A capable monk takes
food without any doubt. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dasavAM uddezaka] [207 27. je bhikkhU uggaya-vittIe aNathamiya-saMkappe
asaMthaDie nivitigicchAsamAvaNNeNaM appANeNaM asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA
sAimaM vA paDiggAhettA AhAramAhAremANe, aha puNa evaM jANejjA"aNuggae sUrie,
atyamie vA," se jaM ca muhe, jaM ca pANisi. jaM ca paDiggahe, taM vigicemANe
visohemANe nAikkamai, jo taM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA saaijji| 28. je bhikkhU
uggaya-vittIe aNathamiya-saMkappe asaMthaDie vitigicchAsamAvaNNeNaM appANeNaM
asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA paDiggAhettA AhAramAhAremANe, aha puNa
evaM jANejjA -"aNuggae, sUrie, athamie vA" se jaM ca muhe, jaM ca pANisi, jaM ca
paDiggahe, taM vigicemANe visohemANe nAikkamai, jo taM bhujai, bhujaMtaM sAijjai
/  25. bhikSu kA sUryodaya ke bAda aura sUryAsta ke pUrva AhAra lAne kA evaM
khAne kA saMkalpa hotA hai  /  jo samartha bhikSu saMdeha rahita AtmapariNAmoM
se azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAda grahaNa karake khAtA huaA yaha jAne ki
"sUryodaya nahIM huA hai yA sUryAsta ho gayA hai| usa samaya jo AhAra muMha meM
yA hAtha meM liyA huA ho aura jo pAtra meM rakhA huA ho use nikAlakara paraThatA
huA tathA mukha, hAtha va pAtra ko pUrNa vizuddha karatA huA vaha jinAjJA kA
ullaMghana nahIM karatA hai  /  kintu jo usa zeSa AhAra ko khAtA hai yA khAne
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 26. bhikSu kA sUryodaya ke bAda aura sUryAsta ke
pUrva AhAra lAne va khAne kA saMkalpa hotA hai| jo samartha bhikSu saMdehayukta
prAtmapariNAmoM se azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa kara khAtA huA yaha
jAne ki "sUryodaya nahIM huA hai yA sUryAsta ho gayA hai" usa samaya jo AhAra
mukha meM yA hAtha meM liyA huA ho aura pAtra meM rakhA huA ho, use nikAlakara
paraThatA huA tathA mukha, hAtha va pAtra ko pUrNa vizuddha karatA huA jinAjJA
kA ullaMghana nahIM karatA hai| kintu jo usa zeSa AhAra ko khAtA hai yA khAne
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  27. bhikSu kA sUryodaya ke bAda aura sUryAsta
ke pUrva AhAra lAne va khAne kA saMkalpa hotA hai  /  jo asamartha bhikSu
saMdeharahita AtmapariNAmoM se azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karake
khAtA huA yaha jAne ki "sUryodaya nahIM huA hai yA sUryAsta ho gayA hai" usa
samaya jo AhAra muMha meM yA hAtha meM liyA huA ho aura jo pAtra meM rakhA ho
use nikAlakara paraThatA huA tathA mukha, hAtha va pAtra ko pUrNa bizuddha
karatA hA vaha jinAjJA kA ullaMghana nahIM karatA hai| kintu jo usa zeSa AhAra
ko khAtA hai yA khAne vAle kA anamodana karatA hai| 28. bhikSu kA sUryodaya ke
bAda aura sUryAsta ke pUrva AhAra lAne va khAne kA saMkalpa hotA hai  /  jo
asamartha bhikSu saMdehayukta AtmapariNAmoM se azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya
grahaNa kara khAtA huA yaha jAne ki "sUryodaya nahIM huA hai yA sUryAsta ho gayA
hai" usa samaya jo AhAra muMha meM yA hAtha meM liyA hayA ho aura jo pAtra meM
rakhA huA ho, use nikAlakara paraThatA huA tathA mukha, hAtha va pAtra ko pUrNa
vizuddha karatA huA vaha jinAjJA kA ullaMghana nahIM karatA hai| kintu jousa
AhAra ko khAtA hai yA khAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta pAtA  / ) vivecana-ina cAroM sUtroM meM samartha-asamartha,
saMdeharahita-saMdehayukta' kI caubhaMgI kI gaI hai1. samartha sAdhu
saMdeharahita hokara AhAra grahaNa karatA hai  /

Page #308 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 208] [Nishith Sutra 2. A Samarth Sadhu takes food with doubt. 3. An Asamarth
Sadhu takes food without doubt. 4. An Asamarth Sadhu takes food with doubt.
Charinkara says: 1. Santhadio naam hatth-samatyoo, 2. Vitigiccha-vimarsha-
mativipluta sandeh ityartha, sa niggata vitigiccha jassa so nivitigiccho
bhavati. 3. Abbadihehi karanehi anidhe aicche sanka bhavati-kim udito anudito
ti. Athamanakale vi kim suro dharati na va ti sanka bhavati. (So vitigicchaao).
4. Chh ththamadina tavena kilanto asanthado, gelanneena va dubbalasariro
asanthado, dohadhdhaaneena va pajjattan alabhanto asanthado. 1. Sansthrita
arthat swasth ya samarth. 2. Nivichikitsa arthat sandeharahit. 3. Badal adi
karanon se surya ke nahin dikhne par shanka hoti hai ki suryoday hua ya nahin
athava suryaast ke samay surya hai ya ast ho gaya, aisi shanka hoti hai. 4.
Bele, tele adi tap se ashakta bana hua, rugnata se durbal sharir wala ya lambe
vihar mein aahar ke alabh se kshudhatur bhikshu asansthrita kahalata hai. While
travelling, if there is no possibility of getting food ahead and the village
where the night rest was taken, almost all the people are going to the fields
etc. in the morning, then even a Samarth (healthy) Sadhu can go to take food.
Similarly, if there is no possibility of getting food etc. the next day, then
the occasion of bringing alms in the evening may arise. For an Asamarth (weak),
such occasions are easily possible. Sometimes, due to clouds or mountains etc.,
there may be an impression that the sunrise has happened or the sunset has not
happened. Then, after a while, the correct situation comes to the fore. _ If, in
a doubtful or non-doubtful situation, after taking food, it is decided that the
sunrise has not happened or the sunset has happened, or if the sunrise has
happened after taking food, then that food is not considered fit for the Sadhu
to eat. If eaten, the fault of night food is incurred and he has to perform the
atonement of Guruchaumasi. Therefore, whether the food is in the food vessel or
in the hand or in the mouth, it should be discarded and the hands etc. should be
washed with water. Atonement for swallowing the vomit 29. If a Bhikshu vomits up
the food he has eaten, whether in the day or at night, and swallows it again, or
swallows it again, he incurs a sin.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 208] [nizIthasUtra 2. samartha sAdhu saMdehayukta hokara AhAra grahaNa karatA
hai| 3. asamartha sAdhu saMdeharahita hokara AhAra grahaNa karatA hai| 4.
asamartha sAdhu saMdehayukta hokara AhAra grahaNa karatA hai| cariNakAra kA
kathana hai 1. saMthaDio nAma haTTha-samatyo, 2. vitigicchA-vimarSaH-mativiplutA
saMdeha ityarthaH, sA NiggatA vitigicchA jassa so nivitigiccho bhavati  /  3.
abbhAdiehi kAraNehiM adiThe Aicce saMkA bhavati-kiM udito aNudito ti|
atthamaNakAle vi kiM sUro dharati na vA ti saMkA bhavati  /  (so vitigicchaao)|
4. cha ThThamAdiNA taveNa kilaMto asaMthaDo, gelaNNeNa vA dubbalasarIro
asaMthaDo, dohaddhANeNa vA pajjattaM alabhaMto asNthddo| 1. saMstRta arthAt
svastha yA samartha  /  2. nivicikitsA arthAt saMdeharahita  /  3. bAdala Adi
kAraNoM se sUrya ke nahIM dikhane para zaMkA hotI hai ki sUryodaya huA yA nahIM
athavA sUryAsta ke samaya sUrya hai yA asta ho gayA, aisI zaMkA hotI hai| 4.
bele, tele Adi tapa se azakta banA huA, rugNatA se durbala zarIra vAlA yA lambe
vihAra meM AhAra ke alAbha se kSudhAtura bhikSu asaMstRta kahalAtA hai| vihAra
karate samaya Age AhAra milane kI sambhAvanA na ho aura rAtri vizrAma jahA~ kiyA
ho usa grAma ke prAyaH sabhI loga prAtaHkAla hI kheta Adi ke liye jA rahe hoM,
aise samaya meM samartha (svastha) sAdhu bhI grahaNa karane jA sakatA hai  /
isI taraha dUsare dina AhArAdi milane kI sambhAvanA na ho, aise samaya meM zAma
ko bhikSA lAne kA prasaMga upasthita ho sakatA hai| asamartha (glAna) ke liye to
aise avasara sahaja sambhava haiN| bAdala yA pahAr3a Adi se kabhI-kabhI
sUryodaya hone yA sUryAsta na hone kA AbhAsa ho sakatA hai  /  phira thor3I dera
bAda sahI sthiti sAmane A jAtI hai  /  _ saMdigdha yA asaMdigdha avasthA meM
AhAra grahaNa karane ke bAda yadi nirNaya ho jAe ki sUryodaya nahIM huA yA
sUryAsta ho gayA hai, yA grAhAra grahaNa karane ke bAda sUryodaya huA hai to
vaha AhAra sAdhu ko khAnA nahIM kalpatA hai  /  khAye jAne para rAtribhojana kA
doSa lagatA hai tathA usakA gurucaumAsI prAyazcita pAtA hai  /  ata: vaha pAhAra
pAtra meM ho yA hAtha meM ho yA mukha meM ho, paraTha denA cAhiye aura hAtha Adi
ko pAnI se dho lenA caahiye| udgAla gilane kA prAyazcitta 29. je bhikkhU rAo vA
viyAle vA sapANaM sabhoyaNaM uggAlaM uggilittA paccogilai, paccogilaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /

Page #309 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [The 209th Objective]  [A monk who, after food or water has come up to his
mouth during the night or the twilight, swallows it again or approves of the one
who swallows it. (He incurs the Guruchaumasi Pratikraman.)]  **Discussion:**
One may experience Udgal (regurgitation) during the day, night, or twilight due
to overeating. If the Udgal comes up to the throat and returns, there is no
Pratikraman. However, if it comes to the mouth and is swallowed, the monk incurs
Pratikraman, but not if it is swallowed during the day.  The commentator
(Bhashya, Churnikar) has explained this with the example of a drop of water on a
hot 'tava' (griddle), that the monk should eat such a limited amount of food
that it is completely digested by the digestive fire, and no digestive disorder
occurs.  This sutra encourages the observance of subtle rules related to
nighttime meals.  The Agamkaras have considered swallowing Udgal as nighttime
food. Therefore, it is called Guruchaumasi Pratikraman.  **Pratikraman for
negligence in the service of the sick**  30. A monk who, having heard or known
about a sick monk, does not find out his whereabouts or approves of the one who
does not find out.  31. A monk who, having heard or known about a sick monk,
leaves the path leading to the sick monk and goes by another path or by the same
path (the one he came from) or approves of the one who does so.  32. A monk who,
being present in the service of the sick, does not express regret to the sick
monk when his own benefit does not allow him to serve the sick, or approves of
the one who does not do so.  33. A monk who, being present in the service of the
sick, does not tell the sick monk when he does not get the appropriate medicine,
diet, etc., or approves of the one who does not do so. (He incurs the
Guruchaumasi Pratikraman.)  **Discussion:** 1. If one receives information about
a sick person who needs service, one should obtain complete information and go
to serve him.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 basavAM uddezaka] [209 jo bhikSu rAtri meM yA vikAla meM prAhAra yA pAnI sahita
udgAla ke muha meM Ane ke bAda punaH use nigala jAtA hai yA nigalane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai|) vivecana-
maryAdA se adhika khA lene para dina meM, rAtri meM yA vikAla (saMdhikAla) meM
udgAla pA sakatA hai  /  udgAla yadi gale taka Akara punaH lauTa jAye to
prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai kintu muha meM A jAya aura use nigala jAe to bhikSu ko
prAyazcitta AtA hai, kintu dina meM nigalane para prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai| _
isa sUtra meM vyAkhyAkAra (bhASya, cUrNikAra) ne garma 'tave' para pAnI kI bUda
kA dRSTAnta dekara samajhAyA hai ki sAdhu ko itanA maryAdita AhAra karanA cAhiye
ki jisakA jaTharAgni dvArA pUrNa pAcana ho jAe, apAcana sambandhI koI vikAra na
hone paae| yaha sUtra rAtribhojana se sambandhita sUkSma maryAdA ke pAlana kA
preraka hai  /  AgamakAra ne udgAla nigalane ko bhI rAtribhojana hI mAnA hai  /
ataH isakA gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA hai| glAna kI sevA meM pramAda karane kA
prAyazcitta 30. je bhikkhU gilANaM soccA NaccA Na gavesai, Na gavasaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  31. je bhikkhU gilANaM soccA NaccA ummaggaM vA paDipahaM vA gacchai,
gacchaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  32. je bhikkhU gilANa-veyAvacce abbhuTThie saeNa
lAbheNa asaMtharamANe jo tassa Na paDitappai, ma paDitappaMtaM vA sAijjai  /
33. je bhikkhU gilANa-veyAvacce abbhuTTie gilANa-pAugge davvajAe alabbhamANe, jo
taM Na paDiyAikkhaha, Na paDiyAikkhaMtaM vA sAijjaha  /  30. jo bhikSu glAna
sAdhu kA samAcAra sunakara yA jAnakara usakA patA nahIM lagatA hai yA patA nahIM
lagAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 31. jo bhikSu glAna sAdhu kA samAcAra
sunakara yA jAnakara glAna bhikSu kI ora jAne vAle mArga ko chor3akara dUsare
mArga se yA pratipatha se (jidhara se AyA udhara hI) calA jAtA hai yA jAne vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| 32. jo bhikSu glAna kI sevA meM upasthita hokara apane
lAbha se glAna kA nirvAha na hone para usake samIpa kheda prakaTa nahIM karatA
hai yA nahIM karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  33. jo bhikSu glAna kI sevA
meM upasthita hokara usake yogya auSadha, pathya Adi nahIM milane para usako
Akara nahIM kahatA hai yA nahIM kahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecanaH-1. kisI glAna ke sambandha meM
sUcanA mile ki sevA karane vAle kI use AvazyakatA hai to pUrI jAnakArI prApta
karake usakI sevA meM jAnA caahiye| .

Page #310 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[210] [Nishīthasūtra 2. But if the sick monk knows the village or place, he
should not go elsewhere out of a feeling of not serving, and should not return
by the same route by which he came. 3. If the necessary materials for the sick
are not available or not available in full quantity, then one should express
regret by taking the blame for not getting it on oneself for his satisfaction.
4. Even if medicine or diet is not found on investigation, one should not engage
in other work or sit anywhere, but first inform the sick that "even after so
much investigation, the necessary item has not been found or is likely to be
found after some time." In the Āgama, Vaiyāvṛtya is called Prābhāntara Tapa.
Therefore, the Sadhu should consider it as his work of self-purification and
should think that this sick person is doing a favor to me, giving me the
opportunity of easy Prābhāntara Tapa. By serving in this way, considering it as
a favor, there is great Nirjarā. In Uttarādhyayana Sūtra A. 29, it is said that
the best benefit of the Tīrthankara position is obtained from service. In
Sūtrakṛtāṅga Sūtra Śru. 1 A. 3 Udd. 3 and 4, instructions have been given to
serve the sick monk without any feeling of being sick. Penance for wandering
during the rainy season 34. Je Bhikku Paḍhama-Pāuṣammi Gāmaṇugāmaṁ Dūijjai,
Dūijjantaṁ vā Saijjai. 35. Je Bhikku Vāsāvāsaṁ Pajjosaviyansi Gāmaṇugāmaṁ
Dūijjai, Dūijjantaṁ vā Saijjai. 34. The monk who wanders from village to village
in the first rainy season or approves of the one who wanders. 35. The monk who
wanders from village to village after performing Paryuṣaṇa during the rainy
season or approves of the one who wanders. (He gets Gurucaumāsi penance.)
Discussion: The monk should wander in the eight months of Hemant and Grīṣma and
should not wander in the four months of the rainy season. As No Kappi Nigganthāṇ
vā Nigganthīṇ vā Vāsāvāṣāsu Cārae. Kappi Nigganthāṇ vā Nigganthīṇ vā
Hemantgimmāsu Cārae. -Bṛhatkalpa 0 U. 1, Sū. 36-37 These two sūtras describe
twelve months, in which the time of Vārṣāvāsa-Cāturmās is counted as four
months. The statement of the months of the birth etc. of Tīrthankara Bhagavān
Mahāvīra is as follows Gimmāṇam Cauṭthe Māse Aṭṭhame Pakkhe Āsāḍhasuddhe
Vāsāvāṣāṇam Tacce Māse Pancame Pakkhe Āsoyabahule Hemantāṇam Paḍhame Māse
Paḍhame Pakkhe Migasarabahule. -Ācā 0 Śru. 2, A. 15 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 210] [nizIthasUtra 2. kintu glAna bhikSu ke grAma kI yA sthAna kI jAnakArI hone
para sevA na karane kI bhAvanA se unmArga se anyatra na jAve tathA jisa mArga se
A rahA ho usI mArga se vApisa na lauTe  /  3. glAna ke lie Avazyaka padArtha na
mile yA pUrNa mAtrA meM na mile to usakI saMtuSTi ke liye nahIM milane kA doSa
apane Upara lekara kheda prakaTa karanA caahie| 4. auSadha yA pathya gaveSaNA
karane para bhI na mile to na anya kAma meM lage aura na kahIM baiThe kintu
pahale glAna ko yaha jAnakArI de ki "itanI gaveSaNA karane para bhI Avazyaka
vastu nahIM milI hai yA kucha dera bAda milane kI sambhAvanA hai|" Agama meM
vaiyAvRtya ko prAbhyantara tapa kahA hai  /  ataH sAdhu ko ise apanI Atmazuddhi
kA kArya samajhakara karanA cAhiye tathA yaha socanA cAhiye ki yaha glAna mujha
para upakAra kara rahA hai, mujhe sahaja pAbhyantara tapa kA avasara de rahA hai
/  isa taraha upakAra mAnakara sevA karane se atyadhika nirjarA hotI hai  /
uttarAdhyayana sUtra a. 29 meM sevA se tIrthaMkara pada kA sarvottama lAbha honA
kahA hai  /  sUtrakRtAMga sUtra zru. 1 a. 3 udde. 3 tathA 4 meM glAna bhikSu kI
aglAna bhAva se sevA karane kA nirdeza kiyA gayA hai| varSAkAla meM vihAra
karane para prAyazcitta 34. je bhikkhU paDhama-pAusammi gAmANugAmaM dUijjai,
duijjaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  35. je bhikkhU vAsAvAsaM pajjosaviyaMsi gAmANugAmaM
dUijjai, duijjaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  34. jo bhikSu prathama prAvRT Rtu meM
grAmAnugrAma vihAra karatA hai yA vihAra karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
35. jo bhikSu varSAvAsa meM paryuSaNa karane ke bAda grAmanugrAma vihAra karatA
hai yA vihAra karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecanaH-bhikSu hemanta aura grISma ke ATha mahInoM
meM vicaraNa kare aura varSAkAla ke cAra mAsa meM vicaraNa nahIM kare  /  yathA
no kappai NiggaMthANa vA NiggaMthINa vA vAsAvAsAsu caare| kappai NiggaMthANa vA
NiggaMthINa vA hemaMtagimhAsu cArae  /  -bRhatkalpa0 u0 1, sU0 36-37 ina do
sUtroM meM bAraha mahInoM kA varNana kiyA gayA hai, jisameM varSAvAsa-cAturmAsa
kA kAla cAra mAsa kA ginA gayA hai| tIrthaMkara bhagavAn mahAvIra ke janma Adi
ke mahInoM kA kathana isa prakAra hai gimhANaM cautthe mAse aTThame pakkhe
AsADhasuddhe vAsAvAsANaM tacce mAse paMcame pakkhe Asoyabahule hemaMtANaM
paDhame mAse paDhame pakkhe migsrbhule| -AcA0 zru0 2, a0 15

Page #311 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tenth Objective ] [211 It is clear from these texts that the rainy season,
winter, and summer are each four months long. The division of twelve months is
also done in this way in the sutras related to the method, prohibitions, and
atonement related to the acceptance of clothes. No Kappi Nigganthaan wa
Nigganthiin wa Padham-Samosaranuddesapattaai chelai Padiggahetttae. Kappi
Nigganthaan wa Nigganthiin wa Dochchsamosaranuddesapattaai chelai
Padiggahetttae. - Brihatkalp 0 Uo 3, Suo 16-17 Je Bhikkhu Padhamsamosaranuddes
se Pattaai Chivrai Padiggahei, Padiggaarhatam wa Saizzjai. - Nishit 0 Uo 10, Suo
47 Vitiyam Samosaranam Udubaddham, Tam Paduchch Vasavaasoggaho Padhamsamosaranam
Bhannati.   Nishit Chuni Uo 10, Pri 158 In these sutras, the four-month rainy
season is called the first samvasaran, and the eight-month seasonal period is
called the second samvasaran. Thus, the twelve months are divided into two
samvasarans. Ah Pun Evam Janijja - Chattari Maasa Vaasaavaasaanam Viikkant.
Pracha 0 Shro 2, 03, Uo 1 This text also mentions only four months for the
Chaturmas. Therefore, the rainy season (Chaturmas) is four months long, and this
clear decision is made from the above sutra texts. The verb used for "staying
for Chaturmas" is as follows: Sevam Gachcha No Gaamanugaman Duijjezza Tao
Sanjayamev Vaasaavaasan Uvalliezza. Tahappgaaram Gaamam wa Jav Raayhaani wa No
Vaasaavaasan Uvalliezza. Tahappgaaram Gaamam wa Jav Raayhaani wa Tao Sanjayamev
Vaasaavaasan Uvalliezza. - Acha 0 Shro 2, A 3, Uo 1 In these sutras, the verb
'Uvalliezza' is used for staying for four months. The use of the verbs
Pajjosavana and Pajjosave is Je Bhikkhu Apajjosavanaae Pajjosavei, Pajjosaventam
wa Saizzjai. Je Bhikkhu Pajjosavanaae Na Pajjosavei Na Pajjosaventam wa
Saizzjai. Je Bhikkhu Pajjosavanaae Ittariyampi Aharam Aaharei, Aharatam wa
Saizzjai. In these sutras, the verb 'Pajjosavei' is used for the Samvatsari and
for doing the Samvatsari.  - Nishit Uo 10, Suo 36-38

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dasavAM uddadezaka ] [211 ina pAThoM se yaha spaSTa hai ki varSAvAsa, hemaMta
aura grISmakAla cAra-cAra mAsa ke hote haiM  /  vastragrahaNa sambandhI vidhi -
niSedha va prAyazcitta saMbaMdhI sUtroM meM bhI bAraha mahInoM kA vibhAga isa
prakAra kiyA hai no kappai NiggaMthANa vA NiggaMthINa vA paDhama-
samosaraNuddesapattAiM celAI paDiggAhettAe  /  kappai NiggaMthANa vA NiggaMthINa
vA doccasamosaraNuddesapattAI celAI paDiggAhettae  /  - bRhatkalpa 0 u0 3, sU0
16-17 je bhikkhU paDhamasamosaraNudde se pattAI cIvarAI paDigAhei, paDiggArhataM
vA sAijjai  /  - nizItha0 u0 10, su0 47 vitiyaM samosaraNaM uDubaddhaM, taM
paDucca vAsAvAsoggaho paDhamasamosaraNaM bhaNNati  /  nizItha cUNi u0 10, pR0
158 ina sUtroM meM bhI 4 mahInoM ke varSAvAsa ko prathama samavasaraNa kahA hai
aura ATha mahInoM ke Rtubaddha kAla ko dUsarA samavasaraNa kahA hai| isa prakAra
bAraha mahInoM ko do samavasaraNoM meM vibhakta kiyA hai  /  aha puNa evaM
jANijjA - cattAri mAsA vAsAvAsANaM vIikkaMtA | prAcA0 zra0 2, 03, u0 1 isa pATha
meM bhI cAturmAsa ke cAra mahIne hI kahe haiM  /  ataH varSAvAsa (cAturmAsa )
cAra mAsa kA hotA hai, uparyukta sUtra pAThoM se yaha spaSTa nirNaya ho jAtA hai
/  " cAturmAsa rahane" ke liye kriyA prayoga isa prakAra hai sevaM gaccA No
gAmANugAmaM duijjejjA tao saMjayAmeva vAsAvAsaM uvalliejjA  /  tahappagAraM
gAmaM vA jAva rAyahANi vA No vAsAvAsaM uvalliejjA  /  tahappagAraM gAmaM vA jAva
rAyahANi vA tao saMjayAmeva vAsAvAsaM uvalliejjA  /  - AcA0 zru0 2, a0 3, u0 1
ina sUtroM meM cAra mAsa taka rahane ke lie 'uvalliejjA' kriyA kA prayoga kiyA
gayA hai  /  pajjosavaNA aura pajjosaveda kriyA kA prayoga je bhikkhu
apajjosavaNAe pajjosavei, pajjosaveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  je bhikkhU pajjosavaNAe
Na pajjosavei Na pajjosaveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  je bhikkhU pajjosavaNAe
ittariyaMpi AhAraM AhArei, AhArataM vA sAijjai  /  ina sUtroM meM saMvatsarI ke
lie pajjosavaNA aura saMvatsarI karane ke lie 'pajjosavei' kriyA kA prayoga huA
hai  /  - nizItha u0 10, su0 36-38

Page #312 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[212] The Nishītha Sūtra and the Ṭhānāṅga Sūtra (A. 5 U. 2 Su. 2) both mention
the reasons for observing the Cāturmās in two divisions. The first division is
called 'Paḍhama Pauṣammi' and the second division is called 'Vāsavāsaṁ
Pajjoṣaviyansi'.  Both divisions mention five different reasons for observing
the Cāturmās. These two divisions are specific to the Cāturmās, as observing the
Cāturmās is considered to be a possibility in the remaining eight months.
Exceptions are only possible in the impossible.  Similar to these Sūtras in the
Ṭhānāṅga Sūtra, Sūtras 34-35 also mention the two divisions of the Cāturmās and
state that they are for atonement.  The use of the verb 'Pajjoṣavei' has been
explained above for performing the Samvatsarī. Therefore, it is appropriate to
understand these two divisions as follows: the first division is before the
Samvatsarī and the second division is after the Samvatsarī (Paryuṣaṇa).  The
statement about observing the Cāturmās for atonement and the reasons for
observing it are more appropriate for the four months of the Cāturmās
(Varṣavās). The words 'Paḍhama Pauṣammi' and 'Vāsavāsaṁ Pajjoṣaviyansi' in
Sūtras 34-35 and the Ṭhānāṅga Sūtra, therefore, should be understood as 'in the
first division of the Pauṣa (rainy season)' and 'after performing the Paryuṣaṇa
(Samvatsarī) during the Varṣavās'.  This interpretation is also appropriate from
the perspective of tradition. The Bhagavati Sūtra mentions that Lord Mahāvīra
observed the Cāturmās and performed the four-month fast. Since then, for the
past 2500 years, people have generally observed the four-month Varṣavās.
Therefore, the verb 'Pajjoṣaviyansi' that comes with 'Vāsavās' in the Nishītha
and Ṭhānāṅga Sūtra refers to the Paryuṣaṇa. Only by accepting this
interpretation is there consistency in the meaning.  The commentator and the
Chūrṇikāra have stated that the first season is the Prāvṛṭ season. There is a
provision for atonement for observing the Cāturmās in this season. They have
also stated that the meaning of 'Dūijjai' is that the monk travels in two
seasons (winter and summer), hence the verb 'Dūijjai'.  The three divisions of
the Samvatsar are Hemant, Grīṣma, and Varṣakāla, and the six divisions are
Prāvṛṭ, etc. Even if there is a change in the natural cycle or a month is added
or removed, there is no change in the months mentioned in the calculation of
these divisions.  Atonement for not observing the Paryuṣaṇa during the Paryuṣaṇa
period 36. Je Bhikku Pajjoṣavaṇāe ṇ Pajjoṣavei ṇ Pajjoṣarvatam vā Saijjai. 37.
Je Bhikku Apajjoṣavaṇāe Pajjoṣavei Pajjoṣarvatam vā Saijjai.  36. A monk who
does not observe the Paryuṣaṇa (Samvatsarī) on the day of the Paryuṣaṇa or
approves of someone who does not observe it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 212] [nizIghasUtra ThANAMgasUtra a. 5 u. 2 su. 2 meM cAturmAsa meM vihAra
karane ke kAraNoM kA kathana do vibhAga karake kahA gayA hai-prathama vibhAga ko
'paDhama pAusammi' kahA hai aura dvitIya vibhAga ko 'vAsAvAsaM pajjosaviyaMsi'
kahA hai| donoM vibhAgoM meM vihAra karane ke bhinna-bhinna 5-5 kAraNa kahe haiM
/  ye donoM vibhAga cAturmAsa ke hI haiM  /  kyoMki zeSa ATha mahInoM meM vihAra
karane ko kalpanIya kahA gayA hai| apavAda to akalpanIya meM hotA hai|
ThANAMgasUtra ke ina sUtroM ke samAna prastuta sUtra 34-35 meM bhI cAturmAsa ke
do vibhAgoM kA kathana karate hue prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| 'pajjosavei' kriyA
kA prayoga saMvatsarI karane ke lie Upara batAyA hai, ataH ye do vibhAga
cAturmAsa ke isa prakAra samajhanA Agamasammata hai  /  prathama vibhAga
saMvatsarI ke pUrva aura dUsarA vibhAga saMvatsarI (paryuSaNA) ke bAda  /
vihAra karane kA prAyazcitta-vidhAna aura kAraNoM se vihAra karane kA kathana
cAturmAsa (varSAvAsa) ke cAra mahInoM kI apekSA sahI hai| jisake lie prastuta
donoM sUtra 34-35 meM tathA ThANAMgasUtra meM 'paDhamapAusammi' tathA 'vAsavAsaM
pajjosaviyaMsi' zabda haiM, jinakA 'pAusa-varSAkAla ke prathama vibhAga meM'
aura 'varSAvAsa meM paryuSaNA (saMvatsarI) karane ke bAda meM', aisA artha
karanA hI prasaMga-saMgata hai| pravRtti kI apekSA se bhI yahI artha ucita hotA
hai| bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ke cAturmAsa rahane kA aura cAra mAsakhamaNa kA
pAraNA hone kA varNana bhI bhagavatIsUtra meM hai| usake bAda ke Aja taka ke
2500 varSoM ke itihAsa meM bhI prAyaH cAra mAsa kA varSAvAsa hI karate Ae haiN|
ataH 'vAsAvAsa' ke sAtha Ane vAlI pajjosaviyaMsi kriyA nizItha va ThANAMga meM
paryuSaNa kA hI kathana karane vAlI hai, aisA mAnane para hI artha kI pUrvApara
saMgati hotI hai| bhASyakAra aura cUrNikAra ne chaH Rtu meM pahalI prAvaTa Rtu
kahI hai| isameM vihAra karane ke prAyazcitta kA vidhAna hai tathA 'dUijjai' kA
artha karate hue kahA hai ki do (zIta aura grISma) kAla meM bhikSu calatA hai,
isalie dUijjai kriyA hai  /  _ saMvatsara ke hemanta, grISma aura varSAkAla rUpa
tIna vibhAga aura prAvRTRtu Adi chaha vibhAga nizcita haiN| prAkRtika
parivartana hone para yA eka mAsa kI vRddhi-hAni ho jAne para bhI ina vibhAgoM
kI kAlagaNanA meM jo mahIne kahe gaye haiM, unameM koI parivartana nahIM hotA
hai  /  /  paryuSaNakAla meM paryuSaNa na karane kA prAyazcitta 36. je bhikkhU
pajjosavaNAe Na pajjosavei Na pajjosarvataM vA saaijji| 37. je bhikkhU
apajjosavaNAe pajjosavei pajjosarvataM vA sAijjai  /  36. jo bhikSu paryuSaNa
(saMvatsarI) ke dina paryuSaNa nahIM karatA hai yA nahIM karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai|

Page #313 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Tenth Uddeshak ] [213 37. A monk who observes Paryushana on a day other than
the designated day or encourages others to do so, (incurs Guruchaumasi
Pratikraman). Discussion – Chaturmas Varshavas is a four-month period, as
explained earlier. These two sutras mention Paryushana. This Paryushana is for
one day, which is also certain. Therefore, these two sutras mention the
pratikraman for not observing Paryushana on that day and observing it on another
day. There is no clear statement in the Agamas regarding this day, yet the
pratikraman vidhan in these two sutras indicates the definite day of Sanvatsari.
While explaining these sutras, the Churni of Gatha 3146 and Gatha 3153 mentions
Bhadva Sudi Panchami, and the explanation of Gatha 3152-53 also mentions 1 month
20 days. The same statement is also found in the 70th Samavay. Therefore, the
implication is that the pratikraman mentioned in the sutras is incurred for
observing Paryushana on any day other than this day, and the date of Bhadva Sudi
Panchami is fixed for that day. It is said that Kalkaacharya observed the
Sanvatsari on the fourth day at the request of the Shaatvahan king, and since
then, the Sanvatsari is observed on the fourth day. 1 Any Geetarth or Agamvihary
Muni can decide to take the path of exception due to circumstances. Upon the end
of the Pravaadic situation, they perform the appropriate pratikraman and accept
the conduct mentioned in the sutras again. No Geetarth or Agamvihary has the
right to establish a tradition contrary to the sutras for the exception taken
due to circumstances. Therefore, it is possible that the former Kalkaacharya may
have observed the Sanvatsari on the fourth day at the request of a king of a
country, but it is not appropriate for them to establish or allow a tradition.
Because making an exceptional conduct into a regular conduct is a crime.
Therefore, according to the above statement, changing the time of Sanvatsari
cannot be considered appropriate. 1 The day mentioned in the Gam is definitely
Bhadva Sudi Panchami, and it remains so. Observing Paryushana on any day other
than that incurs pratikraman, this is the meaning of these two sutras. Even
today, Rishi Panchami is written on this day in the Panchangs. This can be
determined by looking at the Panchangs of the last 10-20 years. If the entire
Jain Sangha accepts the decision to observe Paryushana (Sanvatsari) on the day
of Rishi Panchami written in the Panchangs, abandoning their own prejudices,
then both the Agama tradition and uniformity can be maintained. The name "Rishi
Panchami" also indicates this meaning, the festival day of the Rishis-Munis.
This word "Rishi" includes all Sadhus, Jain and non-Jain. The Jain Agamas also
use the word "Rishi" for Sadhu. Hundreds (1200-1300) years ago, the Geetarth
Acharyas decided to celebrate all festival days according to the worldly
Panchang, such as -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dasavAM uddezaka ] [213 37. jo bhikSu paryuSaNa ke dina se anya dina meM
paryuSaNa karatA hai yA karane vAle kA numodana karatA hai  /  ( use gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta prAtA hai )  /  vivecana - cAturmAsa varSAvAsa cAra mahIne kA hotA
hai, yaha pUrva meM spaSTa kiyA gayA hai  /  ina do sUtroM meM paryuSaNa
sambandhI kathana hai  /  yaha paryuSaNa eka dina kA hotA hai, vaha bhI nizcita
hai  /  isa liye ina do sUtroM meM usa dina paryuSaNa na karane kA tathA anya
dina karane kA prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  AgamoM meM isa dina ke sambandha meM
spaSTa kathana nahIM hai, phira bhI ina do sUtroM meM prAyazcittavidhAna karane
se saMvatsarI ke dina kA nizcita nirdeza kiyA gayA hai  /  ina sUtroM kI vyAkhyA
karate hue gAthA 3146 va gAthA 3153 kI cUrNi meM bhAdavA sudI paMcamI kA kathana
kiyA gayA hai tathA gAthA 3152-53 kI vyAkhyA meM 1 mAsa 20 dina kA kathana bhI
kiyA hai| aisA hI kathana 70 veM samavAya meM bhI hai  /  ataH tAtparya yaha hai
ki isa dina ko chor3akara anya dina paryuSaNa karane para sUtrokta prAyazcitta
prAtA hai aura usa dina ke lie bhAdavA sudI paMcamI tithi nizcitta hai  /  isa
viSaya meM kahA jAtA hai ki zAtavAhana rAjA ke Agraha se kAlakAcArya ne cautha
kI saMvatsarI kI, taba se cautha kI saMvatsarI kI jAtI hai  /  1 koI bhI
gItArtha yA AgamavihArI muni paristhitivaza apavAdamArga ke sevana kA nirNaya le
sakate haiM  /  prAvAdika sthiti ke samApta hone para usakA yathocita
prAyazcitta kara punaH sUtrokta AcaraNa svIkAra kara lete haiM  /
paristhitivaza sevana kiye gae apavAda ke lie sUtraviparIta paramparA calAne kA
adhikAra kisI bhI gItArtha yA grAgamavihArI ko nahIM hai  /  ataH pUrvadhara
kAlakAcArya ke dvArA kisI deza ke rAjA ke Agraha se cautha kI saMvatsarI karanA
kadAcit sambhava ho sakatA hai, kintu unake dvArA paramparA calAnA yA calane
denA ucita nahIM hai  /  kyoMki apavAda AcaraNa ko utsarga AcaraNa banAnA
aparAdha hai  /  ataH uparyukta kathana ke anusAra saMvatsarI ke kAla kA
parivartana ucita nahIM kahA jA sakatA  /   /  1 gamokta nizcita divasa to
bhAdavA sudI paMcamI kA hI thA aura hai  /  usase bhinna kisI bhI dina paryuSaNa
karane para prAyazcitta prAtA hai, yahI ina do sUtroM kA Azaya samajhanA cAhie
/  Aja bhI paMcAMgoM meM RSipaMcamI, isI dina likhI jAtI hai  /  10-20 varSoM ke
pacAGga dekhakara nirNaya kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  apane-apane matAgrahoM ko tyAga
kara paMcAGgoM meM likhI RSipaMcamI ke dina paryuSaNa ( saMvatsarI) karane kA
nirNaya sampUrNa jaina saMgha svIkAra kara le to Agama paramparA aura ekarUpatA
donoM kA nirvAha sambhava hai  /  " RSipaMcamI" nAma bhI isa artha kA sUcaka hai
ki RSi-muniyoM kA parvadivasa  /  isa " RSi " zabda meM jaina-jainetara sabhI
sAdhunoM kA samAveza ho jAtA hai  /  jainAgamoM meM bhI sAdhu ke lie "RSi" zabda
kA prayoga huA hai  /  Aja se saikar3oM (1200 -1300) varSoM pUrva gItArtha
zrAcAryoM ne laukika paMcAMga se hI sabhI parvadivasa manAne kA nirNaya liyA
thA, yathA-

Page #314 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[214] [Nishith Sutra] Due to the irregularity of time, the knowledge of the
movements of the planets, days of the week, constellations, and the correct
determination of festivals and tithis has been lost. Therefore, in determining
festivals and tithis, there is a contradiction. Knowing this, all the Gītartha
Ācāryas have accepted that the "worldly calendar is also according to the Āgama"
and have accepted the determination of festivals and tithis from it. Therefore,
the entire Jain community should accept the decision to celebrate the last day
of the Paksha and Chaturmas, i.e., Amavasya, Purnima as Pakkhi, Chaumasi
festival, and Rishi Panchami as the Samvatsari Mahotsav as per the worldly
calendar. Doing so will not incur the prāyaścitta mentioned in the sūtras and
will also follow the correct decision of many Gītartha Pūrva Ācāryas. The
prāyaścitta for keeping hair and eating on the day of Paryushana is as follows:
38. The monk who keeps hair as fine as cow hair on the day of Paryushana
(Samvatsari) or approves of it. 39. The monk who eats even a little food on the
day of Paryushana (Samvatsari) or approves of it. (He incurs the Guru Chaumasi
prāyaścitta.) Discussion - The duties of a monk regarding Paryushana: 1. If a
suitable place for Varshavas is not found and Chaturmas is not established, then
Chaturmas should be established on this day. 2. If the request to keep the bed
and bedding taken for the seasonal period until the end of Chaturmas has not
been made, then it should be done on this day. 3. Even if there are hairs as
fine as cow hair on the head or beard, they should be removed. Because hairs as
fine as cow hair can be grasped and removed. 4. On the day of Samvatsari, one
should completely abstain from all four types of food, i.e., observe a
Chavivihar fast. If these duties are not performed, the monk is liable for
prāyaścitta. Performing these duties is called purifying Paryushana. In
addition, one should contemplate the restraint and transgression of the whole
year, observe the loss and gain, criticize, perform pratikramna and ask for
forgiveness, and thus make the soul peaceful and healthy.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 214] [nizIthasUtra visame samayavisese, karaNaggaha-cAra-vAra-rikkhANaM  /
pavatihINa ya sammaM, pasAhagaM vigaliyaM suttaM  // 1 //  to pavvAivirohaM
gAuM, savvehi giiysuuriihiN|| AgamamUlamiNaMpi a, to loiya TippaNayaM pagayaM
// 2 //  arthasamaya kI viSamatA ke karaNa, grahoM kI gati, vAra, nakSatra aura
parva tithiyoM kI samyak siddhi karane vAlA zruta naSTa ho cukA hai, ataH parva-
tithi Adi ke nirNaya me |vrodh AtA jAnakara sabhI gItArtha prAcAryoM ne yaha
"laukika paMcAMga bhI AgamAnusAra hI hai" aisA mAnakara isI se parva-tithi Adi
karanA svIkAra kiyA hai| ataH sampUrNa jaina samAja ko laukika paMcAMga-nirdiSTa
pakSa evaM cAturmAsa ke antima dina arthAt amAvasa, pUnama ko pakkhI, caumAsI
parva tathA RSipaMcamI ko saMvatsarI mahAparva manAne kA nirNaya svIkAra karanA
cAhiye  /  aisA karane meM sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai tathA aneka
gItArtha pUrvAcAryoM ke samyak nirNaya kA pAlana bhI hotA hai| payuSaNa ke dina
bAla rahane dene kA aura pAhAra karane kA prAyazcitta38. je bhikkhU pajjosavaNAe
golomAI pi bAlAI uvAiNAvei, uvAiNAvetaM vA sAijjai  /  39. je bhikkhU
pajjosavaNAe ittariyaM pi AhAraM AhArei AhArataM vA saaijji| 38. jo bhikSu
paryuSaNa (saMvatsarI) ke dina gAya ke roma jitane bAloM ko rakhatA hai yA
rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 39. jo bhikSu paryuSaNa (saMvatsarI) ke
dina thor3A bhI pAhAra karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
(use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-paryuSaNa sambandhI bhikSu ke
kartavya - 1. varSAvAsa yogya kSetra na milane para yadi cAturmAsa kI sthApanA
na ko ho to isa dina cAturmAsa nizcita kara denA cAhiye  /  2. Rtubaddha kAla ke
lie grahaNa kiye gae zayyA, saMstAraka kI cAturmAsa-samApti taka rakhane kI
punaH yAcanA na kI ho to isa dina avazya kara lenI cAhiye  /  .. 3. zira yA
dADhI-mUcha ke go-roma jitane bAla bhI ho gae hoM to unakA loca avazya kara lenA
cAhiye  /  kyoMki go-roma jitane bAloM ko pakar3akara loca kiyA jA sakatA hai| 4
saMvatsarI ke dina cAroM AhAroM kA pUrNa tyAga karanA cAhiye arthAt cauvihAra
upavAsa karanA caahiye|  /  ina kartavyoM kA pAlana na karane para bhikSu
prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| inakA pAlana karanA ho paryuSaNa ko paryuSita
karanA kahA jAtA hai  /  isake atirikta varSa bhara kI saMyama pArAdhanA-
virAdhanA kA cintana kara hAni-lAbha kA avalokana karanA, AlocanA, pratikramaNa
va kSamApanA Adi kara AtmA ko zAnta va svastha karake

Page #315 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [215 Tenth Uddeshak] This is the day of Paryushana for the purpose of
awakening specific Dharma, such as maintaining the results of Vardhamana. The
importance of this day for the soul lies in the observance of these duties. The
word "Paryushana" is used in the Agam for this day. In the Shwetambar tradition,
the eighth day, which includes seven days of prior sadhana, is called
Paryushana, and this day is called "Samvatsari." But in reality, the day of
Samvatsari is the Paryushana day as mentioned in the Agam. The remaining days
are like a prelude to Paryushana. In the Digambar tradition, there is a practice
of performing Dharma-aradhana for ten days after the day of Paryushana. Over
time, the Samvatsari festival has come to be celebrated on the tenth day (Anant
Chaturdashi). ##  Penance for reciting Paryushana Kalp to householders 40.  Je
Bhikkhu Annautthiyan va Garathiyan va Pajjosavei, Pajjosaventam va Saijzai. 40.
A monk who recites Paryushana Kalp (sadhu-samachari) to a non-Jain or a
householder, or approves of someone who does so. (He incurs Guruchaumasi
penance.) ##  Discussion "Non-Jain and householder" should be understood as
eight types of householders, which have been explained in Sutra 15 of the first
Uddeshak. The name of the sixth study of Dasha Shruta Skandha is "Pajjosavana
Kapp." It contains the statement of the sadhu-samachari during the rainy season.
On the day of Paryushana, all sadhus should perform the evening Pratikraman and
collectively recite or listen to the "Pajjosavana Kapp" study, and follow the
sadhu-samachari mentioned therein during the rainy season and other times.
Churna says - 'Pajjosavana Kapp Kahane Ima Samayari' - 'Appano Uvassaaye
Paadosaye Avasaye Kaye Kalam Ghetttu (record the time) Kale Suddhe Patthaveta
Kahijjati..... . Savve Sahuu Sampayaniyam Kaussaggham Karenti.... '' The method
of recording the time of self-study, listening to this study, and then
performing the Kayotsarga at the end, etc., is described in Churni. The present
Sutra states that reciting the "Paryushana Kalp - study" to householders or in a
sadhu-parishad with householders is a penance. Therefore, the practice is to
recite and listen to it only in the sadhu-parishad at night. This tradition of
the "Pajjosavana Kapp" study has been discontinued since an unknown time. At the
time of the composition of the Dasha Shruta Skandha, its appointment, etc.,
explanations, this study was complete in its place. After that, it is possible
that in the 13th-14th century, it was abridged and added to the present well-
known Kalpasutra. And some copyist has written the entire Kalpasutra in place of
this study. This has resulted in the loss of the true form of this study. Many
texts have been interpolated in the description of Tirthankaras, the list of
elders, and the original samachari, which can be clearly understood by studying
the appointment and its Churni.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ 215 dasavAM uddezaka ] vardhamAna pariNAma rakhanA ityAdi viziSTa dharma-
jAgaraNA karane ke liye yaha paryuSaNa kA dina hai  /  ina kartavyoM kA pAlana
karane para hI AtmA ke liye isI dina kA mahattva hai  /  AAgama meM isI dina ke
liye "paryuSaNa" zabda prayoga kiyA gayA hai  /  zvetAmbara paramparA ke pUrva
sAdhanA ke sAta dina yukta AThaveM dina ko paryuSaNa kahA jAtA hai aura isa dina
ko "saMvatsarI" kahA jAtA hai  /  kintu vAstava meM saMvatsarI kA dina hI
grAgamokta paryuSaNa dina hai  /  zeSa dina paryuSaNa kI bhUmikA rUpa haiM  /
digambara paramparA meM paryuSaNa ke dina se bAda meM 10 dina taka dharma-
ArAdhanA karane kI paripATI hai  /  kAlAntara se dasaveM dina (ananta caturdazI
ko ) saMvatsarI parva kA ArAdhana kiyA jAne lagA hai  /  paryuSaNAkalpa gRhastha
ko sunAne kA prAyazcitta 40. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyaM vA gAratthiyaM vA
pajjosavei, pajjosaveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  40. jo bhikSu anyatIrthika yA gRhastha
ko paryuSaNAkalpa ( sAdhu-samAcArI) sunAtA hai yA sunAne vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  ( use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  ) vivecana
"anyatIrthika aura gRhastha" se ATha prakAra ke gRhastha samajhanA cAhiye jinakA
spaSTIkaraNa pahale uddezaka ke sUtra 15 meM kara diyA gayA hai  /
dazAzrutaskandha ke grAThaveM adhyayana kA nAma " pajjosavaNAkappa" hai  /
usameM varSAvAsa kI sAdhu-samAcArI kA kathana hai  /  paryuSaNa ke dina
sAyaMkAlIna pratikramaNa karake sabhI sAdhu " pajjosavaNAkappa' adhyayana kA
sAmUhika uccAraNa kareM yA zravaNa kareM tathA usameM varNita sAdhu-samAcArI kA
varSAmAsa meM va anya kAla meM pAlana kare  /  cUrNa meM kahA hai-
'pajjosavaNAkappakahaNe imA sAmAyArI' - ' appaNo uvassae pAdosie Avassae kae
kAlaM ghettu (kAla pratilekhana kara ) kAle suddhe paTThavettA kahijjati  /
.....  /  savve sAhU samappAyaNiyaM kAussaggaM kareMti.... '' svAdhyAya- kAla kA
pratilekhana kara isa adhyayana kA zravaNa kara phira samApti kA kAyotsarga
karanA ityAdi vidhi cUrNi meM batAI gaI hai  /  prastuta sUtra meM
"paryuSaNAkalpa - adhyayana" gRhasthoM ko sunAne kA yA gRhastha-yukta sAdhu-
pariSad meM sunAne kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  ataH rAtri ke samaya sAdhu-
pariSad meM hI kahane aura sunane kA vidhAna hai | "pajjosavaNAkappa" adhyayana
kI yaha paramparA ajJAta kAla se vicchinna ho gaI hai  /  dazAzrutaskandha kI
niyukti Adi vyAkhyAnoM kI racanA ke samaya taka yaha adhyayana apane sthAna para
hI pUrNa rUpa se thA  /  usake bAda sambhava hai terahavIM - caudahavIM zatAbdI
meM ise saMkSipta karake vartamAna prakhyAta kalpasUtra se jor3A gayA hai tathA
kisI prati ke lekhaka ne isa adhyayana ke sthAna para pUre kalpasUtra ko hI
likha diyA hai  /  isase isa adhyayana kA sahI svarUpa hI nahIM rahA  /
tIrthaMkaroM ke varNana va sthavirAvalI ke sAtha - sAtha maulika samAcArI meM
bhI aneka pATha prakSipta kiye gaye haiM, jo niyukti va usakI cUrNi ke adhyayana
se spaSTa jAne jA sakate haiM  /

Page #316 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[216] The 'Pajjosavaṇakappa' section of the Nishīthasūtra Kālika Daśāśruta
Skandha Sūtra is forbidden to be recited to householders. Yet, it has been
combined with the Uttkālika (Chulla) Kalpasūtra, etc., and a new Kalpasūtra
compilation has been made and recited in the afternoon (Uttkāla) in front of
householders. This study is currently in a distorted state. Its originality, as
well as the pure tradition associated with it, has been severed. As a result,
the meaning and penance tradition of this Prāyaścitta Sūtra 40 has also been
almost severed. Penance for accepting clothes during the rainy season 41. If a
monk accepts clothes after the beginning of the Chaturmas period, or approves of
someone who does so, he incurs the Guru Chaturmas penance. The use of these 41
Sūtra-stated places incurs the Guru Chaturmas penance. Discussion - The terms
'Prathama Samavasarana' and 'Dvitiya Samavasarana' are used in the Āgama for the
Chaturmas period and the seasonal period, respectively. The arrival of a monk in
a village, etc., is called Samavasarita. That arrival is of two types - arrival
for the seasonal period and arrival for the Chaturmas period. This period of
arrival is called 'Samavasarana'. It has two divisions, hence the terms Prathama
and Dvitiya Samavasarana are etymologically correct. In the Brihatkalpasutra
Uddesaka 3, Sūtra 16, there is a prohibition against accepting clothes during
Chaturmas, and this Sūtra states the penance for it. The word 'Pattai' is in the
Sūtra. Both commentators have interpreted it as 'Prāptāni' and created 'Patt'
'Apatt' areas and time violations. The word 'Pattai' also has the meaning of
'vessel', but according to the structure of the Sūtra, the meaning 'Prāptāni' is
appropriate. Because if there are two things to be stated, the Āgamakar uses the
word 'vā', for example - 'Vatttham vā Padiggham vā'. Therefore, this Sūtra only
mentions clothes, yet the commentators have prohibited the acceptance of all
equipment during Chaturmas, and have also clarified which and how many
additional and necessary items should be accepted before Chaturmas. Summary
Sūtra 1-4 of the Uddesaka - Speak harsh, rough, or both words to the Acharya or
Ratnaadhika Shraman, and make any kind of request.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 216] [nizIthasUtra kAlika dazAzrutaskandhasUtra kA 'pajjosavaNAkappa' adhyayana
gRhasthoM ko sunAne kA niSedha hai, phira bhI use utkAlika (culla) kalpasUtra
Adi kisI se jor3A gayA hai aura nayA kalpasUtra saMkalana kara dopahara (utkAla)
meM tathA gRhasthoM ke sAmane vAMcana kiyA jAne lagA hai| yaha adhyayana
vartamAna meM vikRta avasthA meM hai| isakI maulikatA ke sAtha hI isase
sambandhita zuddha paramparA bhI vyavacchinna ho gaI  /  jisase isa
prAyazcittasUtra 40 kI arthaparamparA va prAyazcittaparamparA bhI
vicchinnaprAyaH ho cukI hai| varSAkAla meM vastra grahaNa karane kA prAyazcitta
41. je bhikkhU paDhamasamosaraNuddese-pattAI cIvarAI paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM
vA sAijjai  /  taM sevamANe Avajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAra-ThANaM aNugdhAiyaM  /
41. jo bhikSu cAturmAsakAla prArambha ho jAne para bhI vastra grahaNa karatA hai
yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| ina 41 sUtrokta sthAnoM kA sevana karane
para gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| vivecana-'prathama samavasaraNa' va
'dvitIya samavasaraNa' ye zabda kramazaH cAturmAsa kAla tathA Rtubaddha kAla ke
lie Agama meM prayukta hue haiM  /  sAdhu ke grAmAdi meM Agamana ko samavasRta
honA kahA jAtA hai  /  vaha Agamana do prakAra kA hai-RtubaddhakAla ke lie
Agamana aura cAturmAsakAla ke lie Agamana  /  isa prAgamana kAla ko hI
'samavasaraNa' kahA jAtA hai| usake do vibhAga haiM ataH prathama va dvitIya
samavasaraNa kahA jAnA vyutpattiyukta hai| bRhatkalpasUtra uddezaka 3, sUtra 16
meM cAturmAsa meM vastragrahaNa karane kA niSedha hai aura isa sUtra meM usakA
prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| sUtra meM 'pattAi' zabda hai usakI vyAkhyA me donoM
vyAkhyAkAroM ne 'prAptAni' chAyA karake 'patta' 'apatta' kSetra evaM kAla ke
bhaMga banAye haiN| 'pattAi' zabda kA pAtra' artha bhI hotA hai kintu
sUtraracanA ke anusAra 'prAptAni' artha saMgata hotA hai| kyoMki do kA kathana
karanA ho to AgamakAra 'vA' kA prayoga karate haiM, yathA-'vatthaM vA paDiggahaM
vA'  /  ataH isa sUtra meM kevala vastra kA hI kathana hai, phira bhI
vyAkhyAkAra ne sabhI upakaraNoM kA cAturmAsa meM grahaNa karane kA niSedha kiyA
hai aura cAturmAsa se pUrva Avazyaka aura atirikta kauna-kauna sI upadhi va
kitanI saMkhyA meM grahaNa karanI cAhie, yaha bhI spaSTa kiyA hai| uddezaka kA
sArAMzasUtra-1-4 AcArya yA ratnAdhika zramaNa ko kaThora, rUkSa yA ubhaya vacana
kahe tathA kisI bhI prakAra kI AzAtanA kre|

Page #317 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighth Uddeshak  **Sutras**  **Sutras 5-6** * To partake in food that has
been touched by an infinite number of bodies. * To consume food that has been
contaminated by the Pradhakarma dosha.  **Sutras 7-8** * To partake in food that
has been touched by an infinite number of bodies.  **Sutras 9-10** * To abduct a
disciple, etc.  **Sutras 11-12** * To abduct a candidate for initiation, etc.
**Sutras 13-14** * To make a statement about the present or future that is not
based on a valid reason.  **Sutras 15-16** * To partake in food that has been
touched by an infinite number of bodies.  **Sutras 19-24** * To partake in food
that has been touched by an infinite number of bodies.  **Sutras 25-28** * To
partake in food that has been touched by an infinite number of bodies.  **Sutra
29** * To partake in food that has been touched by an infinite number of bodies.
**Sutras 30-33** * To partake in food that has been touched by an infinite
number of bodies.  **Sutras 34-35** * To partake in food that has been touched
by an infinite number of bodies.  **Sutras 36-36** * To perform Paryushana
(Samvatsari) on a day that is not designated for it and to perform it on other
days.  **Sutra 37** * To provide shelter to a Sadhu without knowing the reason
for their arrival.  **Sutra 38** * To partake in food with someone who has not
pacified their conflict or has not performed their atonement.  **Sutra 39** * To
misrepresent the form of atonement or to give a wrong atonement.  **Sutra 40** *
To partake in food with a monk, even after hearing or knowing about their
atonement, its purpose, and their intention.  **Sutra 41** * To partake in food
when there is doubt about the sunrise or sunset.  **Sutra 42** * To swallow the
saliva in the mouth at night.  **Sutra 43** * To not serve the sick or to not
serve them properly.  **Sutra 44** * To travel during Chaturmas.  **Sutra 45** *
To not perform Lochan during Paryushana.  **Sutra 46** * To not observe the
four-fold fast during Paryushana.  **Sutra 47** * To recite the Paryushana Kalpa
to householders.  **Sutra 48** * To accept clothes during Chaturmas.  **The
Guruchaumasi atonement is prescribed for such activities.**  **The subject
matter of the 16 Sutras of this Uddeshak is mentioned in the following Agamas:**
**Sutras 1-4** * The mention of the Avinaya Ashatanās is found in Dasha Shruta
Skandha Dasha 1 & 3, Uttaradhyayanasutra Pra. 1 & A. 17, Dasha Vaikalika Pra. 9,
and other Agamas.  **Sutra 5** * The mention of Pariṣṭhāpana is found in Aacha.
Shru. 2, A. 1, U. 1.  **Sutra 6** * The prohibition of consuming food that has
been touched by an infinite number of bodies is found in Praacha. Shru. 2, A. 1,
U. 9, and Suy. Shru. 1, A. 10, Ga. 8 & 11, and in many other places. The mention
of Nimitta is found in Uttaradhyayanasutra Pra. 8, A. 17, and Pra. 20.  **Sutras
7-8 & 25-29** * The four types of night food prohibition and the swallowing of
saliva are mentioned in Brihatkalpa U. 5.  **Sutras 34-35** * The prohibition of
traveling during Chaturmas is mentioned in Brihatkalpa Uddeshak 1, Sutra 36.
**Sutra 41** * The prohibition of accepting clothes during Chaturmas is
mentioned in Brihatkalpa Uddeshak 3, Su. 16.  **The subject matter of the 25
Sutras of this Uddeshak is not mentioned in other Agamas.**  **Sutras 9-12** *
The clear mention of the disciple and the candidate for initiation, as well as
their atonement, can be included in the third Mahavrata.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 basavAM uddezaka ] sUtra sUtra 5 anantakAya saMyukta prahAra kare  /  6
pradhAkarma doSa kA sevana kare  /  sUtra 7-8 sUtra 9-10 ziSya kA apaharaNa Adi
kare  /  sUtra 11-12 dIkSArthI kA apaharaNa Adi kare  /  sUtra sUtra sUtra 15-16
sUtra 19 - 24 sUtra 13 14 sUtra vartamAna yA bhaviSya sambandhI nimitta kahe  /
sUtra 25 - 28 sUtra 29 sUtra 30 - 33 sUtra 34-35 sUtra 36-36 paryuSaNa
(saMvatsarI) nizcita dina na kare aura anya dina kare  /  sUtra sUtra sUtra
sUtra Ane vAle sAdhu ke Ane kA kAraNa jAne binA Azraya de  /  kalaha upazAnta na
karane vAle ke yA prAyazcitta na karane vAle ke sAtha AhAra kare  /  prAyazcitta
kA viparIta prarUpaNa kare yA viparIta prAyazcitta de  /  prAyazcitta sevana,
usake hetu aura saMkalpa ko sunakara yA jAnakara bhI usa bhikSu ke sAtha AhAra
kare  /  sUryodaya yA sUryAsta ke saMdigdha hone para bhI AhAra kare  /  rAtri
ke samaya mukha meM prAye udgAla ko nigala jAve  /  glAna kI sevA na kare athavA
vidhipUrvaka sevA na kare  /  cAturmAsa meM vihAra kare  /  38 paryuSaNa ke dina
taka loca na kare  /  39 paryuSaNa ke dina cauvihAra upavAsa na kare  /  40
paryuSaNAkalpa gRhasthoM ko sunA  /  41 cAturmAsa meM vastra grahaNa kare  /
aisI pravRttiyAM kA gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta zrAtA hai  /  isa uddezaka ke 16
sUtroM ke viSaya kA kathana nimna AgamoM meM hai, yathA sUtra 1- 4 avinaya
AzAtanAoM kA kathana dazAzrutaskandha dazA 1 va 3 meM, uttarAdhyayana pra. 1 va
a. 17 meM, dazavaikAlika pra. 9 meM tathA anya AgamoM meM bhI huA hai  /
pariSThApana karane kA kathana AcA. zru.2, 5 anantakAyayukta AhAra A jAne para
usake a. 1, u. 1 meM hai  /  [217 6 pradhAkarma doSayukta grahAra grahaNa karane
kA niSedha prAcA. zru. 2, a. 1, u. 9 tathA sUya. zru. 1, a. 10, gA. 8 va 11 meM
tathA anya aneka sthaloM meM hai  /  nimitta kathana kA varNana uttarA. pra. 8 a
17 tathA pra. 20 meM hai  /  sUtra 7-8 sUtra 25 - 29 rAtri bhojana niSedha ke
cAra bhA~ge aura udgAla nigalane kA sUtra bRhatkalpa u. 5 meM hai  /  sUtra
34-35 cAturmAsa meM vihAra karane kA niSedha bRhatkalpa uddeza. 1, sUtra 36 meM
hai  /  sUtra 41 cAturmAsa meM vastra grahaNa karane kA niSedha bRhatkalpa
uddeza. 3, sU. 16 meM hai  /  isa uddezaka ke 25 sUtroM ke viSaya kA kathana
anya AgamoM meM nahIM hai, yathAsUtra 9-12 ziSya va dIkSArthI sambandhI isa
taraha kA spaSTa kathana va prAyazcitta inakA samAveza tIsare mahAvrata meM ho
sakatA hai  /

Page #318 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[218] [Nishīthasūtra Sūtra 13: Prāyaścitta for sheltering a visiting sādhū.
Sūtra 14: Prāyaścitta for taking food with an unrepentant person. Sūtra 15-24:
Prāyaścitta for the opposite manifestation of prāyaścitta, etc. Sūtra 30-33:
Instructions for serving the glāna are also found in Sūyagadaṅga A. 3 and other
Āgamas, but here they are called special prāyaścitta with clear instructions.
Sūtra 36-40: Special regulations and prāyaścitta for Paryushana. || Tenth
Uddeshaka ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 218] [nizIthasUtra sUtra 13 Agantuka sAdhu ko Azraya dene kA prAyazcitta  /
sUtra 14 anupazAnta ke sAtha AhAra karane kA prAyazcitta  /  sUtra 15-24
prAyazcittoM kI viparIta prarUpaNA Adi kA prAyazcitta  /  sUtra 30-33 glAna kI
sevA kA nirdeza sUyagaDAMga a. 3 tathA anya AgamoM meM bhI hai, kintu yahA~
spaSTa sUcanAyukta vizeSa prAyazcitta kahe haiM  /  sUtra 36-40 paryuSaNA ke
vizeSa vidhAna aura prAyazcitta  /   //  dasavAM uddezaka samApta  //

Page #319 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Forbidden Vessel Acceptance - Holding - Atonement  **1.** A monk who makes,
approves of the making of, or uses:  1. Iron vessels,  2. Copper vessels,  3.
Tin vessels,  4. Glass vessels,  5. Silver vessels,  6. Gold vessels,  7. Brass
vessels,  8. Vessels adorned with pearls and other gems set in iron,  9.
Gemstone vessels,  10. Glass vessels,  11. Bronze vessels,  12. Conch vessels,
13. Horn vessels,  14. Ivory vessels,  15. Cloth vessels,  16. Stone vessels,
17. Leather vessels.  **2.** A monk who keeps, approves of the keeping of, or
uses:  1. Iron vessels,  2. Copper vessels,  3. Tin vessels,  4. Glass vessels,
5. Silver vessels,  6. Gold vessels,  7. Brass vessels,  8. Vessels adorned with
pearls and other gems set in iron,  9. Gemstone vessels,  10. Glass vessels,
11. Bronze vessels,  12. Conch vessels,  13. Horn vessels,  14. Ivory vessels,
15. Cloth vessels,  16. Stone vessels,  17. Leather vessels.  **3.** A monk who
makes, approves of the making of, or uses:  1. Iron bands on vessels,  2. Copper
bands on vessels,  3. Tin bands on vessels,  4. Glass bands on vessels,  5.
Silver bands on vessels,  6. Gold bands on vessels,  7. Brass bands on vessels,
8. Vessels adorned with pearls and other gems set in iron bands,  9. Gemstone
bands on vessels,  10. Glass bands on vessels,  11. Bronze bands on vessels,
12. Conch bands on vessels,  13. Horn bands on vessels,  14. Ivory bands on
vessels,  15. Cloth bands on vessels,  16. Stone bands on vessels,  17. Leather
bands on vessels.  **4.** A monk who keeps, approves of the keeping of, or uses:
1. Iron banded vessels,  2. Copper banded vessels,  3. Tin banded vessels,  4.
Glass banded vessels,  5. Silver banded vessels,  6. Gold banded vessels,  7.
Brass banded vessels,  8. Vessels adorned with pearls and other gems set in iron
bands,  9. Gemstone banded vessels,  10. Glass banded vessels,  11. Bronze
banded vessels,  12. Conch banded vessels,  13. Horn banded vessels,  14. Ivory
banded vessels,  15. Cloth banded vessels,  16. Stone banded vessels,  17.
Leather banded vessels.  **(Such a monk is subject to the Guruchaumasi
atonement.)**  **Discussion:**  The Praachana Shruta 2, Pra. 6, U. 1 and the
Thaananga Sutra Pra. 3 prescribe three types of vessels for acceptance and use
by monks and nuns:  1. Copper vessels,  2. Wooden vessels,  3. Clay vessels.
Many other Agamas also describe these three types of vessels. The Praachana A.
2, A. 6, U. 1 mentions the acceptance of vessels made of iron and other
materials, as well as vessels with bands made of iron and other materials.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 niSiddha pAtragrahaNa - dhAraNa- prAyazcitta 1. je bhikkhU 1. aya-pAyANi vA, 2.
taMba - pAyANi vA, 3. tajaya-pAyANi vA, 4. sIsagapAyANi vA, 5. hiraNNa-pAyANi
vA, 6. suvaNNa-pAyANi vA, 7. roriya-pAyANi vA 8. hArapuDapAyANi vA 9. maNi-
pAyANi vA, 10. kAya pAyANi vA, 11. kaMsa- pAyANi vA, 12. saMkha - pAyANi vA, 13.
siMga - pAyANi vA, 14. daMta-pAyANi vA, 15. cela-pAyANi vA, 16. sela-pAyANi vA,
17. camma- pAyANi vA karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  gyArahavA~ uddezaka 2. je
bhikkhU aya-pAyANi vA jAva camma-pAyANi vA dharei, dhareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  je
bhikkhU aya-baMdhaNANi vA jAva camma baMdhaNANi vA ( pAyANi) karei, kareMtaM vA
3. sAijjai  /  4. je bhikkhU aya-baMdhaNANi vA jAva camma- baMdhaNANi vA (
pAyANi) dharei, dhareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  1. jo bhikSu 1. lohe ke pAtra, 2. tAMbe
ke pAtra, 3. rAMge ke pAtra, 4. zIze ke pAtra, 5. cAMdI ke pAtra, 6. sone ke
pAtra, 7. pItala ke pAtra, 8. muktA Adi ratna jar3ita lohe Adi ke pAtra, 9. maNi
ke pAtra, 10. kAMca ke pAtra, 11. kAMse ke pAtra, 12. saMkha ke pAtra, 13. sIMga
ke pAtra, 14. dAMta ke pAtra, 15. vastra ke pAtra, 16. patthara ke pAtra, 17.
carma ke pAtra banAtA hai yA banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  2. jo
bhikSu lohe ke pAtra yAvat carma ke pAtra rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  3. jo bhikSu pAtra para lohe ke baMdhana lagAtA hai yA
lagAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  4. jo bhikSu lohe ke baMdhana yAvat
carma ke baMdhana vAle pAtra rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai
/  ( use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai  / ) vivecana - prAcA. zru. 2, pra.
6. u. 1 meM tathA ThANAMgasUtra pra. 3 meM sAdhu-sAdhvI ke liye tIna prakAra ke
pAtra grahaNa karane evaM dhAraNa karane kA vidhAna hai, yathA-1 tumbe ke pAtra,
2. lakar3I ke pAtra, 3. miTTI ke pAtra  /  anya aneka AgamoM meM bhI inhIM tIna
prakAra ke pAtroM kA nirdezapUrvaka varNana kiyA gayA hai  /  grAcA. a. 2, a. 6,
u. 1 meM lohe Adi ke pAtra tathA lohe Adi ke baMdhana yukta pAtra grahaNa

Page #320 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 220] [Nishith Sutra] The use of iron and other similar vessels is prohibited.
The four sutras presented here describe the atonement for accepting such
vessels.  The Acharangasutra prohibits the acceptance of vessels made of iron,
leather, and other similar materials, and describes them as being valuable.
Wooden, earthen, and gourd vessels are indicative of the humility of a monk. The
Bhagavati Sutra, Chapter 3, Verse 1, describes the acceptance of wooden vessels
by Talitas. The Uvvaiyasutra, in its description of ascetics and wanderers,
mentions that they should only have three types of vessels: wooden, earthen, and
gourd, and prohibits the use of many types of vessels.  Wooden, earthen, and
gourd vessels are inexpensive and common, so there is no fear of them being
stolen. Wooden and gourd vessels are also lightweight.  Iron and other similar
vessels are heavy and valuable, hence their prohibition and atonement.  In the
present day, monks and nuns also use plastic vessels. Plastic is considered to
be made from a combination of wood and resin. Plastic vessels are lighter and
cheaper than wooden vessels. They do not have the same disadvantages as iron
vessels. However, they are not suitable for holding and consuming all types of
food. Therefore, they are not as useful as the wooden, earthen, and gourd
vessels prescribed by the scriptures.  Therefore,  The Acharangasutra mentions
17 types of prohibited vessels, which are generally the same in all manuscripts.
However, the list mentioned in the present atonement sutra varies in different
manuscripts, i.e., there are some differences in the order and names.  In many
manuscripts of the Nishith Sutra, a total of 22 names are mentioned, of which 12
names are common in all manuscripts and 10 names are present in some manuscripts
but not in others.  The twelve names are as follows:  1. Shray-payani, 2. Tamb-
payani, 3. Tauy-payani, 4. Suvanna-payani, 5. Kans-payani, 6. Mani-payani, 7.
Dant-payani, 8. Sing-payani, 9. Sankh-payani, 10. Chamm-payani, 11. Chel-payani,
12. Vahir-payani.  The ten names are as follows:  1. Sisag-payani, 2. Rupp-
payani, 3. Jayaruv-payani, 4. Kanag-payani, 5. Hiranna-payani, 6. Ririy-payani,
7. Harpud-payani, 8. Kay-payani, 9. Sel-payani, 10. Ank-payani.  The Nishith
Churni mentions four to five names and explains one or two words. The
Acharangasutra commentary only explains one word and mentions its name.
Therefore, there is no definitive solution to these textual variations.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 220] [ nizItha sUtra karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai  /  prastuta cAra sUtroM
meM unhIM lohe yAdi ke pAtroM ko grahaNa karane kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /
AcArAMgasUtra meM lohe se carma paryanta kathana karane ke sAtha anya bhI isa
prakAra ke pAtra grahaNa karane kA niSedha kiyA hai tathA inheM bahumUlya
vizeSaNa se sUcita kiyA hai  /  meM lakar3I, tumvA va miTTI ke pAtra bhikSu kI
laghutA ke sUcaka haiM  /  bhagavatIsUtra za. 3, u. 1 tAlitAsa ke kASTha - pAtra
grahaNa karane kA varNana hai  /  uvavAIsUtra meM tApasa-parivrAjaka Adi ke
varNana meM unake lie kASTha Adi tIna prakAra ke hI pAtra rakhane kA varNana hai
evaM aneka prakAra ke pAtra rakhane kA niSedha hai  /  kASThAdi tInoM prakAra ke
pAtra alpamUlya evaM sAmAnya jAtIya hone se unakI corI hone kA bhaya nahIM
rahatA hai  /  kASTha va tumbe ke pAtra meM vajana bhI kama hotA hai  /  lohe
Adi ke pAtra bhArI tathA bahumUlya hote haiM, ataH inakA niSedha va prAyazcitta
kahA gayA hai| vartamAna meM plAsTika ke pAtra bhI sAdhu-sAdhvI upayoga meM lete
haiM  /  plAsTika ko kASTha rasa saMyoga se nirmita mAnA jAtA hai  /  plAsTika
ke pAtra kA vajana va mUlya kASThapAtra se bhI kama hotA hai  /  lohe Adi ke
pAtra meM hone vAle doSoM kI isameM sambhAvanA nahIM hai  /  kintu ye pAtra
sabhI prakAra ke khAdya padArtha grahaNa karane va rakhane ke yogya nahIM hote
haiM  /  ataH zrAgama nirdiSTa kASThAdi pAtra ke samAna ye pUrNa rUpa se upayogI
nahIM haiM  /  ataH AcArAMgasUtra meM niSiddha pAtroM ke varNana meM 17 jAti kA
nAmollekha hai  /  jo prAyaH sabhI pratiyoM meM eka samAna hai  /  kintu
prastuta prAyazcittasUtra meM jo ullekha hai, vaha vibhinna pratiyoM meM
vibhinna rUpa se upalabdha hai arthAt krama aura nAmoM meM bhI kucha-kucha
bhinnatA hai  /  nizIthasUtra kI aneka pratiyoM meM kula milAkara (22) bAvIsa
nAma Ate haiM, jinameM ( 12 ) bAraha nAma sabhI pratiyoM meM samAna haiM aura
(10) dasa nAma kisI meM haiM, kisI meM nahIM haiM  /  ve bAraha nAma isa prakAra
haiM 1. zraya - pAyANi, 2. taMba - pAyANi, 3. tauya pAyANi, 4. suvaNNa-pAyANi,
5. kaMsa pAyANi, 6. maNi-pAyANi, 7. daMta - pAyANi, siMga pAyANi, 9. saMkha -
pAyANi, 10. camma pAyANi, 11. celapAyANi, 12. vaira - pAyANi  /  8. dasa nAma
isa prakAra haiM 1. sIsaga - pAyANi, 2. ruppa - pAyANi, 3. jAyarUva-pAyANi, 4.
kaNaga-pAyANi, 5. hiraNNapAyANi, 6. rIriya- pAyANi, 7. hArapuDa pAyANi, 8. kAya
pAyANi 9 sela-pAyANi, 10. aMkapAyANi  /  nizIthacUrNi meM cAra-pAMca nAma
nirdiSTa haiM aura eka do zabdoM kI vyAkhyA hai  /  AcArAMgaTIkA meM kevala eka
zabda kI vyAkhyA va nAmanirdeza hai  /  isaliye ina pAThAntaroM kA koI prAmANika
samAdhAna sambhava nahIM hai  /

Page #321 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  [221 rai Uddeshak]  Understanding the impurities that have
entered the text over time, seventeen names have been accepted in the original
text according to the uniform text of the Acharanga Sutra (17), which are also
available in one copy of the Nisitha Sutra and also 17 names are found in the
Prashnavyakaran Sutra. Five names have been omitted, which are as follows: 1.
Rupp-Payani, 2. Jayaruva-Payani, 3. Kanag-Payani, 4. Ank-Payani, 5. Vaier-
Payani.  There are three reasons for omitting these:  1. These five are not in
the Acharanga Sutra. 2. These five are also not found in any copy of the
Prashnavyakaran Sutra. 3. "Rupp" is included in "Hirann", "Jayaruva and Kanag"
in "Suvann" and "Ank and Vaier" in "Harpud". The meaning of Harpud is as
follows:  "Harpudam naam ayam adyaah patravisheshah
mauktikalataabhirrupshobhithah." - Ni. Chu. U. 11, Su. 1  Meaning: Special
vessels made of iron etc. (gold-silver etc.), which are adorned with pearls
etc., i.e., vessels made of iron, gold, silver etc. studded with pearls-gems
etc. should be understood as Harpud vessels. Ank and Vajra are also a type of
special gems. Therefore, they should be understood under the Harpud vessel.
Many available copies have six sutras of vessel atonement. But the Churnikar has
explained four sutras by indicating the number as follows:  "Prathamasutre
swayameva karanam kajjai. Dvitiyasutre anyakrutasyadharanam. Tritiyasutre ayam
adibhih swayameva bandham karoti. Chaturthasutre anyena ayam adibhirbandham
dharayati."  The Churnikar has not mentioned the third and sixth sutras, but has
indicated four sutras. Therefore, only four sutras have been accepted in the
original text.  The intention of making vessels of iron etc. oneself should be
understood as making them fit for one's own use. But originally, it is not
possible for a Sadhu to make them. - Ni. Churni. It is clear that  "Binding iron
etc. wires on wooden etc. vessels or making the edges of glass etc. by attaching
it to the edges of the vessel all around", should be understood as binding them.
Keeping and using such vessels or vessels with these bindings is called wearing
them.  In one copy of the Nisitha Sutra, similar to the Acharanga Sutra, the
text "Pranayarani va thappagarani payaim karei, karentam va saijjai" is found,
but it is not found in the Churni commentary or in many copies. Therefore, that
word has not been kept. Nevertheless, since it is prohibited in the Acharanga,
this atonement should be understood for making and keeping other such vessels as
well.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [221 rai uddezaka ] lipi - kAla meM praviSTa azuddhiyAM samajhakara ekarUpatA
se upalabdha AcArAMga ke pATha ke anusAra ( 17 ) sataraha nAma mUla pATha meM
svIkAra kiye haiM jo nizItha kI bhI eka prati meM upalabdha haiM tathA
praznavyAkaraNasUtra meM bhI 17 hI nAma milate haiN| pAMca nAma chor3a diye
haiM, jo isa prakAra haiM1. rUppa - pAyANi, 2. jAyarUva-pAyANi, 3. kaNaga-
pAyANi, 4 aMka-pAyANi, 5. vaira - pAyANi  /  inheM chor3ane ke tIna kAraNa haiM
1. ye pAMcoM prAcArAMgasUtra meM nahIM haiM  /  2. ye pAMcoM
praznavyAkaraNasUtra meM bhI kisI prati meM nahIM haiM  /  3. "ruppa " kA "
hiraNNa" meM, "jAyarUva evaM kaNaga" kA " suvaNNa" meM tathA "aMka evaM vaira"
kA "hArapuDa" meM samAveza ho jAtA hai  /  hArapuDa kA artha isa prakAra hai
"hArapuDaM nAma ayamAdyAH pAtravizeSAH mauktikalatAbhirUpazobhitAH  /  " - ni.
cU. u. 11, sU. 1 artha lohe Adi ( sonA-cAMdI Adi) ke pAtravizeSa, jo ki muktA
Adi se zobhita haiM arthAt muktA - ratna Adi se jar3ita lohe, sone, cA~dI Adi ke
pAtra ko hArapuDa pAtra samajhanA cAhie | aMka aura vajra bhI eka prakAra ke
ratnavizeSa haiM  /  ataH hArapur3a pAtra ke antargata inheM samajha lenA cAhie
/  aneka upalabdha pratiyoM meM pAtra prAyazcitta ke 6 sUtra milate haiM  /
kintu cUrNikAra ne saMkhyAnirdeza karake cAra sUtroM kI vyAkhyA isa prakAra kI
hai "prathamasUtre svayameva karaNaM kajjai  /  dvitIyasUtre anyakRtasya
dharaNaM  /  tRtIyasUtre ayamAdibhiH svayameva baMdhaM karoti  /  caturthasUtre
anyena ayamAdibhirbaddhaM dhArayati  / " cUrNikAra ne tIsare chaTThe sUtra kA
ullekha nahIM kiyA hai kintu cAra sUtra nirdeza kiyA hai  /  ataH mUla pATha meM
cAra sUtra hI svIkAra kiye haiM  /  lohe Adi ke pAtra svayaM karane kA Azaya
yaha samajhanA cAhiye ki apane upayoga meM Ane ke yogya banAnA  /  kintu mUlataH
banAnA sAdhu ke liye sambhava nahIM ho sakatA  /  - ni. cUrNi  /  hI hone kA
spaSTa "kASTha Adi ke pAtra para lohe Adi ke tAra se baMdhana karanA yA kAMca
Adi ko pAtra ke kinAre cautarapha lagAkara usakI kinAra banAnA", inakA baMdhana
karanA samajhanA cAhiye  /  isa prakAra ke pAtra yA ina baMdhanoM vAle pAtra
rakhanA va upayoga meM lenA hI dhAraNa karanA hai  /  AcArAMgasUtra ke samAna
nizIthasUtra kI eka prati meM " praNayarANi vA tahappagArANi pAyAiM karei,
kareMtaM vA sAijjai" isa prakAra pATha milatA hai, kintu cUrNi vyAkhyA meM va
aneka pratiyoM meM nahIM milatA hai | ataH vaha zabda nahIM rakhA hai  /  phira
bhI AcArAMga meM niSedha hone se isa prakAra ke anya bhI pAtroM ke karane evaM
rakhane kA yahI prAyazcitta samajha lenA cAhiye  /

Page #322 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Nishith Sutra  **[222]**  The third and sixth sutras, which were not
accepted in the original, are as follows:  **3.**  A monk who consumes food or
drinks offered in a vessel made of iron or leather, or approves of such
consumption, incurs a sin.  **6.** A monk who consumes food or drinks offered in
a vessel made of iron or leather, or approves of such consumption, incurs a sin.
For information on the atonement for accepting vessels made of iron, etc., as
mentioned in the sutra, and the potential faults associated with it, please
refer to the commentary.  **Atonement for Violating the Half-Yojana Limit for
Vessels**  **5.** A monk who goes beyond half a yojana to obtain a vessel, or
approves of such a journey, incurs a sin.  **6.** A monk who accepts a vessel
brought from beyond the half-yojana limit due to an obstacle in the path, or
approves of such acceptance, incurs a sin. (This incurs the Guruchaumasi
atonement.)  **Discussion:**  The Acharanga Sutra (Shru. 2, A. 6, U. 1)
prohibits going beyond half a yojana to obtain a vessel. This is the territorial
limit for exploration from one's place of residence, allowing travel up to two
kos. Going beyond this distance and returning involves excessive time and
potential for faults like instability. Therefore, the fifth sutra mentions the
atonement for this.  The Acharanga Sutra (Shru. 2, A. 6, U. 1) prohibits
accepting a vessel brought from afar, and the atonement for this is mentioned in
the Nishith Sutra Uddeśaka 14. The sixth sutra here mentions the atonement for a
specific situation.  If the path to the vessel is blocked by a lion, snake, or a
mad elephant, or by water, and there is an urgent need for the vessel, and it is
being brought from within the half-yojana (two kos) area, then accepting it does
not incur the Guruchaumasi atonement according to this sutra. However, accepting
a vessel brought from beyond the half-yojana limit does incur this atonement.
The sutra uses the word "sapacchavayansi," which means "a situation with some
kind of obstacle." Therefore, a vessel brought from afar due to illness or other
reasons can be accepted, but violating the half-yojana limit incurs the
atonement mentioned in the sutra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 222] nizIthasUtra mUla meM svIkAra nahIM kiyA gayA tIsarA va chaTThA sUtra isa
prakAra haije bhikkhU aya-pAyANi vA jAva camma-pAyANi vA paribhujai,
paribhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  // 3 //  je bhikkhU aya-baMdhaNANi vA jAva camma-
baMdhaNANi vA paribhujai, paribhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  // 6 //  sUtrakathita lohe
Adi ke pAtra kisa-kisa kImata ke grahaNa karane se kitanA-kitanA prAyazcitta
prAtA hai tathA kina-kina doSoM kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai ityAdi jAnakArI ke liye
bhASya dekheN| . pAtra hetu ardhayojana kI maryAdA bhaMga karane kA prAyazcitta
5. je bhikkhU paraM addhaMjoyaNamerAo pAyavaDiyAe gacchai, gacchaMtaM vA sAijjai
/  6. je bhikkhU paraM addhajoyaNamerAo sapaccavAyaMsi pAyaM abhihaDaM AhaTu
dejjamANaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 5. jo bhikSu Adhe yojana se Age
pAtra ke liye jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 6. jo bhikSa bAdhA
vAle mArga ke kAraNa Adhe yojana kI maryAdA ke bAhara se sAmane lAkara diyA jAne
vAlA pAtra grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
(use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-AcArAMgasUtra zru. 2, a. 6, u. 1
meM Adhe yojana se Age pAtra ke liye jAne kA niSedha hai  /  apane Thaharane ke
sthAna se gaveSaNA ke liye jAne kI yaha kSetra-maryAdA hai ki do kosa taka jA
sakatA hai| usase adhika dUra jAne meM evaM punaH Ane meM samaya kI adhikatA
tathA anavasthA Adi doSoM ko sambhAvanA rahatI hai  /  ata: pAMcaveM sUtra meM
isakA prAyazcitta kahA hai| AcArAMgasUtra zru. 2, a. 6, u. 1 meM sAmane lAyA huA
pAtra grahaNa karane kA niSedha hai, jisakA prAyazcitta kathana nizIthasUtra
uddezaka 14 meM hai  /  yahA~ chaThe sUtra meM vizeSa sthiti kA prAyazcitta hai|
jisa dizA meM pAtra upalabdha ho vahA~ jAne kA mArga siMha, sarpa yA unmatta
hAthI Adi se avaruddha ho gayA ho yA jala se avaruddha ho gayA ho aura pAtra kI
yadi atyanta AvazyakatA ho aura prAdhA yojana (do kosa) kSetra meM se sAmane
lAkara diyA jA rahA ho to grahaNa karane para isa sUtra ke anusAra gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai, kintu prAdhA yojana ke Age se sAmane lAyA gayA pAtra
grahaNa karane para yaha prAyazcitta AtA hai| sUtra meM "sapaccavAyaMsi" zabda
hai| jisakA "kisI prakAra kI bAdhAjanaka sthiti' aisA artha hotA hai  /  ataH
bImArI Adi kAraNoM se bhI sAmane lAyA gayA pAtra grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai
kintu arddha yojana kI maryAdA bhaMga karane para sUtrokta prAyazcitta pAtA hai|

Page #323 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## [223 Eleventh Uddeshak]  Penance for Criticizing Dharma  7. A monk who
criticizes Dharma or approves of those who do so (incurs Guruchaumasi penance).
**Explanation:** Dharma is of two types: 1. Shruta Dharma, 2. Charitra Dharma.
1. **Shruta Dharma:** Criticizing or calling "inappropriate" the eleven Angas,
Purvajnaana and Aavashyak Sutra, and their meanings, as well as the five types
of Swadhyaya, is considered Avrnavaad of Shruta Dharma. For example:  (1) It is
inappropriate to repeatedly mention the six Kayas, the Mahavratas, the
principles of conduct, and the concepts of Pramada and Apramada in various
places.  (2) What is the purpose of astrological descriptions, "Joonipahuud,"
and descriptions of auspicious times for monks who have renounced worldly life?
Therefore, why is there a need for their inclusion in the scriptures?  (3) All
the Agamas are in one language, Ardhamagadhi. This is not right. They should be
in different languages.  Making Shruta easy in this way is a criticism of Shruta
Dharma.  2. **Charitra Dharma:** Criticizing the fundamental principles or
secondary principles of the rules of conduct for Shravakas or Sadhus, and
calling them "inappropriate," is considered Avrnavaad of Charitra Dharma. For
example:  (1) It is pointless to transcribe scriptures in a place devoid of
life.  (2) The entire world is filled with living beings. How can one maintain a
pure character while performing actions like walking and moving around?  (3) It
is inappropriate to impose severe punishment for minor offenses, such as giving
a small monthly penance for the accidental contact of a single sense organ with
another body.  (4) The mention of Mokshamachan (urination) as an exception is
also inappropriate.  (5) If a householder has prepared food that is contaminated
with Pradhaakarma dosha, what fault does a Sadhu have in consuming it?  This is
a criticism of Charitra Dharma.  Criticizing Shruta Dharma or Charitra Dharma
can cause slow-witted practitioners to deviate from their practice upon hearing
it. The one who criticizes binds themselves with Karma like Jnaanavarna,
becoming difficult to enlighten.  For detailed information on the penance for
criticizing fundamental principles or secondary principles, Desh Dharma or Sarva
Dharma, and Grihastha Dharma or Sanayama Dharma, refer to the Bhashya.
**Penance for Praising Adharma:**  8. A monk who praises Adharma or approves of
those who do so (incurs Guruchaumasi penance).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [223 gyArahavAM uddezaka] dharma kI niMdA karane kA prAyazcitta 7. je bhikkhU
dhammassa avaNNaM vayai, vayaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  7. jo bhikSu dharma kI niMdA
karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta
pAtA hai|) vivecana-dharma do prakAra kA hai 1. zrutadharma, 2. cAritradharma  /
1. zrutadharma-gyAraha aMga, pUrvajJAna aura aAvazyakasUtra evaM inake artha
tathA pAMca prakAra ke svAdhyAya kI niMdA karanA athavA use "ayukta" kahanA
"zrutadharma" kA avarNavAda hai  /  yathA (1) chaha kAyA Adi jIvoM kA, mahAvrata
Adi prAcAra kA tathA pramAda-apramAda kA aneka sthaloM meM bAra-bAra kathana
kiyA gayA hai, vaha ayukta hai  /  (2) vairAgya se pravajita hone vAle
bhikSatroM ko jyotiSa varNana, 'joNipAhuDa' va nimittavarNana se kyA prayojana
hai ? ataH inake varNana kI pAgama meM bhI kyA AvazyakatA hai ? (3) sabhI Agama
eka ardhamAgadhI bhASA meM hI haiM, yaha ThIka nahIM hai| alaga-alaga bhASA meM
hone caahiye| ityAdi prakAra se zruta kI AsAnatA karanA zrutadharma kI nidA hai|
2. cAritradharma-zrAvaka-dharma athavA sAdhu-dharma ke prAcAra-niyamoM ke
mUlaguNoM yA uttaraguNoM ke viSaya meM niMdA karanA, unheM "ayukta" kahanA
cAritradharma kA avarNavAda hai  /  yathA (1) jIvarahita sthAna ho to
pratilekhana karanA nirarthaka hai| (2) sampUrNa loka jIvoM se vyApta hai to
gamanAgamana Adi kriyA karate hue nirdoSa cAritra kaise raha sakatA hai ? (3)
pratyekakAya-ekendriya ke saMghaTTana mAtra kA laghumAsika prAyazcitta denA
ityAdi alpa aparAdha meM ugra daMDa denA ayukta hai  /  (4) apavAda meM
mokAcamana (mUtraprayoga) kA kathana bhI ayukta hai| (5) prAdhAkarma doSa yukta
AhAra gRhastha ne banA hI diyA to phira lene meM sAdhu ko kyA doSa hai, ityAdi
/  yaha cAritradharma kI niMdA hai  /  zrutadharma yA cAritradharma kI niMdA
karane se use sunakara maMdabuddhi sAdhaka sAdhanA se cyuta ho sakate haiM  /
niMdA karane vAlA jJAnAvaraNIya prAdi karmoM kA baMdha karake durlabhabodhi hotA
hai  /  mUlaguNa yA uttaraguNa kI niMdA, dezadharma yA sarvadharma kI niMdA evaM
gRhasthadharma yA saMyamadharma kI niMdA ke vikalpoM se yukta prAyazcitta kI
vizeSa jAnakArI ke liye bhASya dekheN| adharma-prazaMsA-karaNa-prAyazcitta 8. je
bhikkhU ahammassa vaNNaM vayai, vayaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #324 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 224] [Nishosth Sutra 8. A monk who praises or approves of an act of adharma
(unrighteousness). (He incurs Guruchaumasi Pratikraman.)] **Discussion:**
Praising acts of violence, falsehood, or the supporters of sin, such as the
Charak-Parivrajaka and others, or praising the five fires penance, the remnants
of vows, or the eighteen sins, is considered adharma-prashansa (praising
unrighteousness). Praising adharma inspires people to commit those sinful acts.
It nourishes the belief in the false nature of beings. Ordinary people are
attracted to falsehood. Therefore, when faced with the occasion to praise sin or
adharma, a monk should remain silent, maintain an attitude of indifference, and
seize the opportunity to present the true Dharma. **Householder's Body-Action-
Speech Pratikraman** 9 to 62. A monk who performs or approves of the "ammarjan"
(washing) of the feet of an Anyatithika (non-Jain) or a householder, once or
many times. Similarly, according to the third Uddeshak (Sutras 16 to 69), one
should know that a monk who, while traveling from village to village, covers the
head of an Anyatithika or a householder, or approves of such an act. (He incurs
Guruchaumasi Pratikraman.) **Discussion:** There are 54 Sutras related to the
householder's body-action-speech Pratikraman. A monk incurs Guruchaumasi
Pratikraman for serving a householder. These Sutras are discussed in the third
Uddeshak, from Sutras 16 to 69. Therefore, refer to them. For the clear meaning
of Anyatithika and householder, refer to the discussion in Sutra 15, Uddeshak 1.
**Fear-Inducing Pratikraman** 63. A monk who frightens himself or approves of
someone who frightens him. 64. A monk who frightens another or approves of
someone who frightens another. (He incurs Guruchaumasi Pratikraman.)
**Discussion:** It is not appropriate for a monk to make himself fearful of
ghosts, spirits, demons, snakes, lions, thieves, etc., or to use fear-inducing
words to frighten others. The commentator has stated that if these fear-inducing
entities exist, then frightening someone incurs Laghuchaumasi Pratikraman, and
if they do not exist, then frightening someone incurs Guruchaumasi Pratikraman.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 224] [nizothasUtra 8. jo bhikSu adharma kI prazaMsA karatA hai yA karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta aAtA hai|) vivecana-
hiMsA, asatya ke samarthaka pApazrutoM kI, caraka-parivrAjaka Adi ke paMcAgni
tapa vratAvazeSA kA tathA hisA Adi aThAraha pApoM kI prazaMsA karanA
adharmaprazaMsA hai| adharma kI prazaMsA karane se una pApakAryoM ko karane kI
preraNA milatI hai| jIvoM ke mithyAtva kA poSaNa hotA hai  /  sAmAnya vyakti
mithyAtva kI tarapha AkarSita hote haiN| ataH pApa yA adharma kI prazaMsA karane
kA prasaMga upasthita hone para bhikSu mauna rahe evaM upekSA bhAva rakhe tathA
avasara dekhakara zuddha dharma kA prarUpaNa kare  /  gRhastha kA zarIra-
parikarma-karaNa prAyazcitta 9 se 62. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyassa vA gAratthiyassa
vA pAe Amajjejja vA pamajjejja vA, AmajjaMtaM vA pamajjaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  evaM
taiyauddesagameNa yavvaM jAva je bhikkhU gAmANugAmaM dUijjamANe aNNautthiyassa
vA gAratthiyassa vA sosavAriyaM karei, kareMtaM vA saaijji| 9 se 62. jo bhikSu
anyatIthika yA gRhastha ke pairoM kA eka bAra yA aneka bAra "aAmarjana" karatA
hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  isa prakAra tIsare uddezaka ke
(sUtra 16 se 69) ke samAna AlApaka jAna lene cAhie yAvat jo bhikSu grAmAnugrAma
vihAra karate samaya anyatIthika yA gRhastha kA mastaka DhAMkatA hai yA DhAMkane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-
gRhastha-parikarma prAyazcitta ke 54 sUtra haiN| sAdhu ke dvArA gRhastha kI sevA
karane para ina sUtroM se gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai| inakA vivecana
uddezaka 3 sUtra 16 se 69 taka meM kiyA gayA hai  /  ataH vahAM dekheN|
anyatIrthika tathA gRhastha kA spaSTArtha u. 1, sUtra 15 ke vivecana meM dekheN|
bhayabhItakaraNa-prAyazcitta 63. je bhikkhU appANaM bIbhAvei, bIbhAveMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  64. je bhikkhU paraM bIbhAvei, bIbhAvataM vA sAijjai  /  63. jo
bhikSu svayaM ko DarAtA hai yA DarAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 64. jo
bhikSu dUsare ko DarAtA hai yA DarAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana-bhikSu ko bhUta, pizAca, rAkSasa,
sarpa, siMha, cora Adi se svayaM ko bhayagrasta banAnA yA anya ko bhayabhIta
karane ke liye bhayajanaka vacana kahanA yogya nahIM hai| bhASyakAra ne batAyA
hai ki ina bhaya-nimittoM kA astitva ho to bhayabhIta karane para laghucaumAsI
prAyazcita AtA hai aura vinA astitva ke hI bhayabhIta karane para gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta prAtA hai|

Page #325 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Uddeshak  **[225]** A monk should naturally be serious and fearless.
Even when fearful circumstances arise, he should remain cautious and discerning.
If he needs to inform other saints, he should do so with serious and comforting
words, not in a way that causes fear.  Fearful circumstances not arising, yet
causing fear in others or oneself, is due to excessive fearfulness or curiosity,
which is inappropriate for a monk.  The consequences of causing fear are:  1.
Neglect of one's own or others' happiness. 2. Becoming proud due to the pleasure
of others being afraid. 3. Becoming agitated or experiencing fear of disease. 4.
If a 'ghost' or similar entity enters due to fear or causing fear, it leads to
many negative consequences. 5. Useless actions caused by fear can lead to the
suffering of the six categories of beings.  Therefore, one should not be afraid
oneself, nor should one cause fear in others.  **Vismitikaran Prāyaścitta**
**65.** A monk who makes himself amazed or approves of being amazed. **66.** A
monk who makes others amazed or approves of being amazed. (He incurs Guru-
Chaumasi Prāyaścitta.)  **Discussion:**  It is not appropriate for a monk to
amaze himself or others through knowledge, mantras, achievements through
penance, magic, statements about past, present, and future, disappearance,
walking on water, and yoga (combination of substances).  The present sutras
state that Guru-Chaumasi Prāyaścitta is incurred for making oneself or others
amazed through the imagination of such supernatural practices that one has not
personally experienced or witnessed being performed by others. The commentary
states that making oneself or others amazed through actual supernatural
practices incurs Laghu-Chaumasi Prāyaścitta.  One should understand from this
sutra that there are also other forms of Prāyaścitta for causing amazement
through various forms of curiosity.  **Consequences of Supernatural Practices**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gyArahavAM uddezaka [225 bhikSu ko svabhAva se hI gambhIra aura nirbhIka rahanA
cAhiye  /  bhayakArI nimittoM ke utpanna hone para bhI sAvadhAna aura
vivekapUrvaka rahanA cAhiye tathA anya santoM ko sUcita karanA ho to
bhayotpAdaka tarIke se kathana na karate hue sAvadhAna karane yogya gambhIra
evaM sAMtvanApUrNa zabdoM meM kahanA caahie| bhayakArI nimittoM ke na hone para
anya ko bhayabhIta karanA yA svayaM bhayabhIta honA ati bhayabhIrutA yA kutUhala
vRtti se hotA hai, jo bhikSu ke liye ayogya hai  /  bhayabhIta karane se hone
vAle doSa1. apane yA anya ke sukha kI upekSA hotI hai| 2. dUsaroM ke bhayabhIta
hone kI prasannatA se dRptacitta ho jAtA hai  /  3. bhayabhIta hone para koI
kSiptacitta ho jAtA hai yA use rogAtaMka ho jAtA hai  /  4. bhayabhIta hone para
yA anya ko bhayabhIta karane para kabhI 'bhUta' Adi kA praveza ho jAe to usase
aneka doSotpatti hotI hai| _5. bhaya ke kAraNa honevAlI upayogarahita
pravRttiyoM se chaHkAya ke jIvoM kI virAdhanA ho sakatI hai| ataH svayaM bhI
bhayabhIta nahIM honA cAhie aura anya ko bhayabhIta nahIM karanA caahiye|
vismitakaraNa prAyazcitta 65-je bhikkhU appANaM vimhAvei, vimhAvetaM vA saaijji|
66-je bhikkhU paraM vimhAvei, vimhAveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  65jo bhikSu svayaM ko
vismita karatA hai yA vismita karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  66-jo
bhikSu dUsare ko vismita karatA hai yA vismita karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-vidyA, maMtra, tapolabdhi,
indrajAla, bhUta-bhaviSya-vartamAna sambandhI nimitta vacana, aMtardhAna,
pAdalepa aura yoga (padArthoM ke sammizraNa) Adi se svayaM vismita honA yA anya
ko vismita karanA bhikSu ke liye yogya nahIM hai  /  jo svayaM ne prayoga nahIM
kiye hoM aura dUsaroM ke dvArA kiye jAte huye ko dekhA-sunA bhI na ho aise
asadbhUta prayogoM kI kalpanA dvArA kathana se svayaM ko yA anya ko vismita
karane kA prastuta sUtroM meM gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  bhASya
meM vAstavika vismayakAraka prayogoM se svayaM ko yA anya ko vismita karane kA
laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta batAyA hai| anya bhI aneka kutUhalavRttiyoM se
AzcaryAnvita (cakita) karane kA prAyazcitta bhI isI sUtra se samajha lenA cAhiye
/  vismayakAraka prayogoM se hone vAlI hAniyAM

Page #326 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **226]** [Nishīthasūtra 1. 'I have done such a wondrous feat',
he may become intoxicated with this joy. 2. By astonishing others, he may become
distracted. 3. He may request that knowledge, etc. Giving it leads to a cautious
tendency, and not giving it makes him an enemy. 4. Engaging in the use of
knowledge, etc., leads to the loss of austerity and restraint. 5. Astonishing
others with unreal feats involves the use of illusion and falsehood. Therefore,
both real and unreal wondrous tendencies incur atonement.  **Viparīyasakaraṇa-
Prāyaścitta** 67-The monk who makes himself opposite, or approves of the one who
makes him opposite. 68-The monk who makes another opposite, or approves of the
one who makes another opposite. (He incurs Guru-Caturmāsī Prāyaścitta.)
**Discussion:** Whatever state one is in, such as female, male, child, old,
young, diseased, healthy, beautiful, ugly, etc., to act opposite to that state
is self-viparīyasakaraṇa. Similarly, to make another act opposite to their state
is para-viparīyasakaraṇa. Doing so incurs Guru-Caturmāsī Prāyaścitta.  From
sūtra 63 to 68, these six sūtras describe atonement due to the faults of
curiosity and illusionary conduct. In sūtras 67-68, the commentator has
discussed the statement of viparīyasakaraṇa more than the act of
viparīyasakaraṇa.  **Anyamatapraśaṃsākaraṇa-Prāyaścitta** 69-The monk who
praises another religion, or approves of the one who praises it. (He incurs
Guru-Caturmāsī Prāyaścitta.)  **Discussion:** To praise the religion, etc., of
someone who is devoted to another religion is mukhavarṇa. These are the places
of such praise, such as: 1. The Ganga, etc., holy rivers.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 226] [nizIthasUtra 1. 'maiMne aisA vismayakAraka prayoga kiyA', isa harSa se
unmatta ho sakatA hai| 2. anya ko vismita karane se vaha vikSiptacitta ho sakatA
hai| 3. usa vidyA Adi kI koI yAcanA kara sakatA hai  /  use dene para sAvadya
pravRtti hotI hai aura nahIM dene para vaha virodhI banatA hai  /  4. vidyA Adi
ke prayoga meM pravRtta hone se tapa-saMyama kI hAni hotI hai  /  5. asadbhUta
prayogoM se vismita karane meM mAyA-mRSAvAda kA sevana hotA hai  /  ataH
sadbhUta yA asadbhUta donoM prakAra kI vismayakAraka pravRttiyA~ karane para
prAyazcitta AtA hai| viparyAsakaraNa-prAyazcitta 67-je bhikkhU appANaM
vippariyAsei, vippariyAsaMtaM vA saaijji| 68-je bhikkhU paraM vippariyAsei,
vippariyAsaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  67jo bhikSu svayaM ko viparIta banAtA hai yA
banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  68-jo bhikSu dUsare ko viparIta banAtA
hai yA viparIta banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-svayaM kI jo bhI avasthA hai, yathA-strI, puruSa,
bAla, vRddha, javAna, saroga, nIroga, surUpa, kurUpa Adi, unase viparIta avasthA
karanA-yaha svaviparyAsakaraNa hai| isI taraha anya kI bhI jo avasthA ho usase
viparIta banAnA yaha paraviparyAsakaraNa hai| aisA karane se gurucAturmAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai| sUtra 63 se 68 taka ina chahoM sUtroM meM kutUhalavRtti
aura mAyAcaraNa doSa ke kAraNa prAyazcitta kA kathana hai| sUtra 67-68 meM
bhASyakAra ne viparyAsa karane kI jagaha viparyAsa kathana kA adhika vivecana
kiyA hai| anyamataprazaMsAkaraNa-prAyazcitta 69-je bhikkhU muhavaNNaM karei,
kareMta vA saaijji| jo bhikSu anya dharma kI prazaMsA karatA hai yA karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana-
jo jisa dharma kA bhakta ho usake sAmane usake dharma Adi kI prazaMsA karanA
mukhavarNa hai  /  ve prazaMsA ke sthAna ye haiM, yathA- 1. gaMgA Adi kutIrthoM
kii|

Page #327 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Uddeshak  2. Praise of the Shakyamat (Buddhist) doctrine and other
false doctrines. 3. Praise of the Mallagandha dharma (Jain heterodoxy) and other
false dharmas. 4. Praise of the Go-vrat (killing of animals) and other false
vrats. 5. Praise of the Bhoomidan (land donation) and other false dans. 6.
Praise of the 363 forms of Pakhand (heresy) and other wrong paths.  Praising
these leads to the strengthening of Mithyatva (false belief) and Mithya-
pravritti (false conduct). It diminishes the impact of the Jina's teachings. It
also leads to the degradation of the sadhu (monk) as people will perceive him as
a flatterer who praises everyone's beliefs.  Therefore, if a monk praises the
beliefs of a Kutirthika (non-Jain) in front of them, or praises the main tenets
or the main propagator of another religion, he incurs the Guru-chaumasi
pratyachit (penance).  The word "Mukhavarna" in the sutra means "to praise what
is in front of you". Praising someone in their presence is considered flattery
and also attracts the sin of Maya (illusion) and Asatyavachan (false speech) due
to the utterance of false qualities. This leads to the Guru-chaumasi pratyachit.
Previous sutras have mentioned the pratyachit for Asat-bhayabhitakaran (falsely
frightening), Vismitakaran (falsely astonishing), and Viparyasakaran (falsely
confusing). Therefore, it is more appropriate to understand that this sutra
refers to the pratyachit for excessively praising someone in their presence
(false praise).  The Bhashya (commentary) discusses the praise of other
religions and their main tenets in the presence of their followers, rather than
the praise of "Bhavamukha" (the one who is present). The essence of this
discussion is given above.  ## Pratichit for travelling to a hostile kingdom
70. A monk who travels to, comes from, or travels to and from a hostile kingdom,
or approves of someone doing so, incurs the Guru-chaumasi pratyachit.
**Explanation:**  Travelling from one hostile kingdom to another is "Gaman".
Returning from there is "Aagaman". Travelling to and from repeatedly is
"Gamanagaman". Alternatively, "Gaman" can be understood as travelling in
relation to the Prajnapak (the one who gives instructions), and "Aagaman" as
travelling in relation to another place.  If there is hostility between two
kings and there is a restriction on entering the territory of one kingdom from
the other, then a monk should not go there. If it is absolutely necessary to go
there, then going or coming once does not incur the pratyachit mentioned in the
sutra. However, repeated travelling to and fro has the potential for many
faults, hence the pratyachit is prescribed for it.  The Brihatkalpasutra
Uddeshak 1 prohibits this and states that such a person violates both the
commands of the Bhagavan (the Jina) and the king.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gyArahavAM uddezaka ] 2. zAkya mata prAdi kusiddhAMtoM kI  /  3.
mallagaNadharma prAdi kudharmoM kI  /  4. govrata Adi kuvratoM kI  /  5.
bhUmidAna Adi kudAnoM kI  /  6. 363 pAkhaMDa rUpa unmArgoM kI  /  inakI prazaMsA
karane se mithyAtva va mithyA pravRtti kI puSTi hotI hai  /  jinapravacana kI
prabhAvanA meM kamI hotI hai  /  sAdhu kI apakIti hotI hai ki ye khuzAmadI haiM,
isIliye hara kisI ke samakSa usake mata kI prazaMsA karate haiM  /  [227 ataH
kutIrthikoM ke sAmane unake mata kI prazaMsA kare, anya dharma ke mukhya tatvoM
kI yA mukhya pravartaka kI prazaMsA kare to usa bhikSu ko gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  sUtra meM ' mukhavarNa' zabda hai, jisakA artha hai - jo
sAmane ho usakI prazaMsA karanA  /  jisa kisI ke sAmane usakI prazaMsA karanA
khuzAmada karanA kahA jAtA hai aura asat guNakathana se mAyA va asatya vacana kA
doSa bhI lagatA hai  /  jisase gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta kA kAraNa banatA hai  /
isake pUrva ke sUtroM meM bhI asat bhayabhItakaraNa, vismitakaraNa aura
viparyAsakaraNa ke prAyazcitta kA kathana hai  /  ataH prastuta sUtra meM bhI
koI vyakti sAmane hai, usakI atizayoktiyukta prasat prazaMsA ( jhUThI prazaMsA )
karane kA yaha prAyazcitta hai, aisA samajhanA adhika saMgata pratIta hotA hai
/  bhASya meM "bhAvamukha" kI apekSA anya dharma evaM unake mukhya tattvoM kI
prazaMsA usI dharma ke anuyAyI ke sAmane karane kI apekSA se vivecana kiyA gayA
hai, jisakA sArAMza Upara diyA gayA hai  /  viruddha rAjya gamanAgamana-
prAyazcitta 70. je bhikkhU verajja - viruddha rajjaMsi sajjaM gamaNaM, sajjaM
AgamaNaM, sajjaM gamanAgamaNaM karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  70. do rAjAoM kA
paraspara virodha ho aura paraspara rAjyoM meM gamanAgamana niSiddha ho, vahA~
jo bhikSu bAraMbAra gamana, zrAgamana yA gamanAgamana karatA hai yA karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai  / )
vivecana - eka virodhI rAjya se dUsare virodhI rAjya meM jAnA "gamana"  /
jAkara punaH lauTanA " Agamana" hai tathA bAra-bAra jAnA-AnA " gamanAgamana" hai
/  athavA - prajJApaka kI apekSA " gamana", anya sthAna kI apekSA "Agamana" hai
/  do rAjAoM meM paraspara virodha cala rahA ho, eka rAjya se dUsare rAjya kI
sImA meM jAne para pratibaMdha ho to vahAM bhikSu ko nahIM jAnA caahiye| vahAM
jAnA Avazyaka hI ho to eka bAra jAnA yA zrAnA kare to sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM
AtA hai  /  kintu bAraMbAra jAne yA Ane meM aneka doSoM kI saMbhAvanA hone se
usakA prAyazcittavidhAna hai  /  bRhatkalpasUtra uddezaka eka meM isa sambandha
meM niSedha kiyA gayA hai tathA aisA karane vAlA bhagavadAjJA tathA rAjAjJA
donoM kA ullaMghana karane vAlA hotA hai, aisA kahA gayA hai  /

Page #328 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[228] [Nishīthasūtra] This implies that if it is absolutely necessary for a monk
to go to or come from an enemy kingdom, then it does not violate the king's
order or the order of the Bhagavan. There can be many types of opposition.
Therefore, in those enemy territories where travel is completely prohibited, one
should not go there even once. But where there is some allowance for travel for
"merchants" etc., or where there is allowance to go and come from other places
besides the enemy kingdom, then one can go there if necessary. If it is not
necessary, then one should not travel to such enemy territories. **Penance for
criticizing day-time meals and praising night-time meals** 71. The monk who
criticizes the eating of food during the day or approves of the one who does so.
72. The monk who praises the eating of food at night or approves of the one who
does so. (He incurs the Guru-Chaumasi penance). **Discussion** - In the
Dashavaikalika Sutra, Chapter 4, it is stated that the monk renounces night-time
meals for life through three karana and three yoga. Therefore, praising it
breaks the renunciation of approval. This fault was spoken by the Jñātaputra.
The Nirgranthas do not eat any food at night, knowing it to be faulty. -
Dashavaikalika Sutra, Chapter 6, Verse 25. Meaning - Knowing night-time meals to
be faulty, the Jñātaputra, the Shraman Bhagavan Mahavira, said that the
Nirgranthas do not eat any kind of food at night. The implication is that night-
time meals are faulty and completely to be abandoned by the monk. By criticizing
day-time meals and praising night-time meals, the monk becomes an instigator of
night-time meals, which corrupts the vow of renunciation of night-time meals
made through three karana and three yoga, and also incurs the fault of
presenting a contrary form to the Jina-vani. Therefore, the penance for these is
mentioned in the present two sutras. **Types of criticism of day-time meals** 1.
The essence of food is absorbed by the sun, wind, etc. Therefore, the food is
not strengthening. 2. The essence of food is taken away by others seeing it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 228] [nizIthasUtra isase yaha phalita hotA hai ki aise viruddha rAjya meM
bhikSu ko eka bAra jAnA yA AnA atyAvazyaka ho to rAjAjJA yA bhagavadAjJA kA
ullaMghana nahIM hotA hai| virodha ke bhI aneka prakAra ho sakate haiM  /  ataH
jina virodhI kSetroM meM jisa samaya sarvathA gamanAgamana niSedha ho usa samaya
vahA~ eka bAra bhI nahIM jAnA cAhiye  /  kintu jahA~ "vyApArI" Adi ke liye
gamanAgamana kI kucha chUTa ho yA virodhI rAjya ke sivAya anyatra jAne Ane kI
chUTa ho to vahA~ Avazyaka hone para jAyA jA sakatA hai  /  yadi Avazyaka na ho
to aise virodhI kSetroM meM gamanAgamana nahIM karanA cAhiye  /
divasabhojananidA tathA rAtribhojanaprazaMsA karane kA prAyazcitta 71. je
bhikkhU diyAbhoyaNassa avaNNaM vayai, vayaMtaM vA saaijji| 72. je bhikkhU
rAibhoyaNassa vaNNaM vayai, vayaMtaM vA saaijji| 71. jo bhikSu dina meM bhojana
karane kI nindA karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 72. jo bhikSu
rAtribhojana karane kI prazaMsA karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| vivecana-dazavaikAlika sUtra a. 4
meM kathana hai ki-bhikSu rAtri bhojana kA tIna karaNa tIna yoga se jIvana
paryaMta ke liye pratyAkhyAna karatA hai  /  ataH prazaMsA karane se anumodana
ke tyAga kA bhaMga hotA hai| eyaM ca dosaM vaThThaNa NAyaputteNa bhAsiyaM  /
savvAhAraM na bhujaMti NiggaMthA rAibhoyaNaM  /  -dazavai. a. 6. gA. 25 artha-
rAtribhojana ko doSayukta jAnakara jJAtaputra zramaNa bhagavAn mahAvIra ne kahA
hai ki nirgrantha kisI prakAra kA AhAra rAtri meM nahIM karate  /  tAtparya yaha
hai ki rAtribhojana doSayukta hai aura bhikSu ke liye sarvathA tyAjya hai| .
divasa-bhojana kI nindA evaM rAtribhojana kI prazaMsA karane se bhikSu
rAtribhojana kA preraka hotA hai, jisase tIna karaNa tIna yoga se kiyA gayA
rAtribhojanapratyAkhyAna vrata dUSita ho jAtA hai aura jinavANI se viparIta
prarUpaNA karane kA doSa bhI lagatA hai  /  ataH prastuta sUtradvaya meM inakA
prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| divasa-bhojana ko nindA ke prakAra 1. vAyu prAtapa
Adi se AhAra kA satva zoSita ho jAtA hai| ataH AhAra balavardhaka nahIM rahatA
hai| 2. dUsaroM ke dekhane se AhAra kA sattva apahRta ho jAtA hai  /  .

Page #329 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Uddeshak  [229 3. One may be affected by the evil eye. 4. Flies and
other creatures may fall into food. 5. Bird droppings and other such things may
fall from the sky. 6. After eating during the day, one may engage in various
types of strenuous activities, leading to excessive sweating and water
consumption, which weakens the food's nourishing power.  **Praises of Nighttime
Meals:** 1. It increases lifespan. 2. Resting after eating strengthens the
senses. 3. The abundance of auspicious karmas leads to a slower aging process.
**Penance for Nighttime Meals:**  A monk who receives food, drink, edibles, or
delicacies during the day and eats them during the day or approves of someone
else eating them, incurs the Guruchaumasi penance.  73. A monk who receives
food, drink, edibles, or delicacies during the day and eats them at night or
approves of someone else eating them, incurs the Guruchaumasi penance.  74. A
monk who receives food, drink, edibles, or delicacies at night and eats them
during the day or approves of someone else eating them, incurs the Guruchaumasi
penance.  75. A monk who receives food, drink, edibles, or delicacies at night
and eats them at night or approves of someone else eating them, incurs the
Guruchaumasi penance.  **Discussion:**  These sutras describe the Guruchaumasi
penance for nighttime meals, specifying the time of receiving the food and the
time of eating it. This establishes the penance for eating at night, eating at
night after receiving it during the day, and eating during the day after
receiving it at night.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gyArahavAM uddezaka] [229 3. kisI kI dUSita dRSTi se najara laga jAtI hai  /
4. makkhiyA~ Adi jantu AhAra meM gira jAte haiN| 5. AkAza meM ur3ane vAle
cir3iyA-vagguli Adi kI vITa Adi gira jAtI hai  /  6. dina meM AhAra karane ke
bAda aneka prakAra kA parizrama kiyA jAtA hai, jisase pasInA adhika hotA hai
aura pAnI kA adhika sevana kiyA jAtA hai, phalata: AhAra zaktivardhaka nahIM
rahatA hai  /  rAtribhojana kI prazaMsA ke prakAra1. Ayubala kI vRddhi hotI hai|
2. AhAra ke bAda vizrAma kara lene se indriyA~ puSTa hotI haiN| 3. zubha
pudgaloM kA adhika upacaya hone se zarIra zIghra jIrNa nahIM hotA hai, ityAdi  /
isa prakAra kA kathana karane se bhikSu ko gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|
rAtribhojana karane kA prAyazcitta 73. je bhikkhU diyA asaNaM pANaM khAimaM
sAimaM paDiggAhettA diyA bhuMjai, bhujaMtaM vA saaijji| 74. je bhikkhU diyA
asaNaM pANaM khAimaM sAimaM paDiggAhettA ratti bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA saaijji| 75.
je bhikkhU ratti asaNaM pANaM khAimaM sAimaM paDiggAhettA diyA bhujai, bhujaMtaM
vA saaijji| _76. je bhikkhU ratti asaNaM pANaM khAimaM sAimaM paDiggAhettA ratti
bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA saaijji| 73 jo bhikSu dina meM azana, pAna, khAdya yA
svAdya grahaNa karake (rAtri meM rakhakara dUsare dina) dina meM khAtA hai yA
khAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 74. jo bhikSu dina meM azana, pAna, khAdya
yA svAdya grahaNa kara rAtri meM khAtA hai yA khAne vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 75. jo bhikSu rAtri meM azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karake dina
meM khAtA hai yA khAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 76. jo bhikSu rAtri meM
prazana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karake rAtri meM khAtA hai yA khAne vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecanaina
sUtroM meM caubhaMgI dvArA rAtribhojana kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai aura inameM
grahaNa karane ke samaya kA tathA khAne ke samaya kA kathana bhI kiyA hai  /
jisase rAtri meM AhAra grahaNa karane kA, rAtri meM khAne kA tathA rAtri meM
rakhakara dina meM khAne kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai|

Page #330 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 230]  [The Nishīth Sutra states that consuming food at night violates the
fundamental principles like non-violence (ahimsa) and the other five vows. The
sixth vow, abstaining from food at night, is also a fundamental principle, and
its violation is a transgression. It is impossible to purify minute living
beings like insects and the seeds of fruits. Searching for food at night also
violates the principle of non-attachment (aeshana samiti).  Churnikaar has said,
"Even those who have direct knowledge and see the purity of food and drink, do
not eat at night because it violates the fundamental principles."  The
Tirthankaras, Ganadharas, and Acharyas have also refrained from eating at night
because it violates the sixth fundamental principle. Therefore, one should not
eat at night.  **Meaning:** Those who have direct knowledge, even though they
know the purity of food and drink, do not eat at night because it violates the
fundamental principles. The Tirthankaras, Ganadharas, and Acharyas have not
consumed food at night, which violates the sixth fundamental principle.
Therefore, one should not eat at night.  **The following passages from the
scriptures prohibit eating at night:**  1. The Dashavakalik Sutra, Chapter 3,
states that eating at night is considered unrighteous for a Nigrantha. 2. The
Dashavakalik Sutra, Chapter 6, states that eating at night leads to corruption
of the Nigrantha state and lists its consequences. 3. The Dashavakalik Sutra,
Chapter 4, mentions abstaining from food at night as the sixth vow along with
the five great vows. 4. The Dashavakalik Sutra, Chapter 8, prohibits even
mentally desiring food from sunset to sunrise. 5. The Uttaradhyayanasutra,
Chapter 19, Verse 31, describes the difficulty of self-control and mentions that
abstaining from all four types of food at night is very difficult. 6. The
Brihatkalpa, Chapter 1, prohibits consuming all four types of food at night or
during twilight (sandhya). 7. The Brihatkalpa, Chapter 5, states that if one
realizes that sunrise has not occurred or sunset has already happened while
eating, one should spit out the food in the mouth and perform atonement. It also
mentions atonement for swallowing food or water at night and prescribes spitting
it out. 8. The Dasha-Dasha, Chapter 2, and the Samavayanga Sutra, Chapter 21,
call eating at night a "shabal dosha" (a fault). 9. The Brihatkalpa, Chapter 4,
mentions the atonement for eating at night as "anudghatik" (severe). 10. The
Thananga Sutra, Chapter 3 and Chapter 5, mention the atonement for eating at
night as "anudghatik." 11. The Suyagadaanga Sutra, Chapter 1, Chapter 2, and
Chapter 3, mention the five great vows, including abstaining from food at night,
as the supreme jewels that a sadhu should possess. This highlights the
importance of abstaining from food at night, equating it to the great vows.
**Other scriptures also mention the following regarding eating at night:**  ...
]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 230] [nizIthasUtra rAtribhojana se prANAtipAta Adi mUlaguNoM kI virAdhanA hotI
hai tathA chaThA rAtribhojanaviramaNa vrata bhI mUlaguNa hai, usakA bhaMga hotA
hai  /  kuthue Adi sUkSma prANI tathA phalaNa Adi kA zodhana honA azakya hotA
hai| rAtri meM AhAra kI gaveSaNA karane meM eSaNAsamiti kA pAlana bhI nahIM hotA
hai  /  cUrNikAra ne kahA hai ki ca ye'pi pratyakSajJAnino te vizuddhaM
bhaktAnapAnaM pazyaMti tathApi rAtrau na bhujate, mUlaguNabhaMgatvAt  / "
tIrthaMkaragaNadharAcAryaiH anAcIrNatvAt, jamhA chaTTho mUlaguNo virAhijjati
tamhA Na rAto bhottavvaM  /  artha-jo pratyakSa jJAnI hote haiM ve AhArAdi ko
vizuddha jAnate hue bhI rAtri meM nahIM khAte, kyoMki mUlaguNa kA bhaMga hotA
hai  /  tIrthaMkara, gaNadhara aura prAcAryoM se anAsevita hai, isase chaThe
mUlaguNa kI virAdhanA hotI hai, ataH rAtribhojana nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  /
prAgamoM meM rAtribhojana niSedha-sUcaka sthala isa prakAra haiM1. dazavakAlika
sUtra a. 3 meM rAtribhojana nigraMtha ke liye anAcAra kahA gayA hai  /  2.
dazavakAlika a. 6 meM rAtribhojana karane se nigraMtha avasthA se bhraSTa honA
kahA hai tathA doSoM kA kathana bhI kiyA hai| 3. dazavai. a. 4 meM pA~ca
mahAvrata ke sAtha rAtribhojanaviramaNa ko chaTThA vrata kahA hai| 4. dazavai.
a. 8 meM sUryAsta se sUryodaya taka AhAra kI mana se bhI cAhanA karane kA
niSedha hai| 5. uttarA. a. 19 gA. 31 meM saMyama kI duSkaratA ke varNana meM
cAroM prakAra ke AhAra kA rAtri meM varjana karanA bhI suduSkara kahA hai  /  6.
bRhatkalpa u. 1 meM rAtri yA vikAla (saMdhyA) ke samaya cAroM prakAra ke prAhAra
grahaNa karane kA niSedha hai| 7. bRhatkalpa u. 5 meM AhAra karate samaya jJAta
ho jAye kisUryodaya nahIM huA hai yA sUryAsta ho gayA hai to muMha meM rakhA
huaA aAhAra bhI nikAlakara paraThane kA vidhAna kiyA hai aura khAne kA
prAyazcitta kahA hai tathA rAtri meM prAhAra-pAnI yukta 'udgAla' yA jAe to use
nigalane kA bhI prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai aura use bhI paraThane kA vidhAna hai|
8. dazA. da. 2 tathA samavAyAMga sa. 21 meM rAtribhojana karanA 'zabala doSa'
kahA hai| 9. bRhatkalpa u. 4 meM rAtribhojana kA anudghAtika (guru) prAyazcitta
kahA hai| 10. ThANAMga a. 3 tathA a. 5 meM rAtribhojana kA anudghAtika
prAyazcitta kahA hai| 11. sUyagaDAMgasUtra zru. 1, a. 2, u. 3 meM rAtribhojana
tyAga sahita pAMca mahAvrata parama ratna kahe gaye haiM, jinheM sAdhu dhAraNa
karate haiM  /  isa prakAra mahAvrata ke tulya rAtribhojanaviramaNa kA mahattva
kahA gayA hai| anyatra bhI rAtribhojana ke liye nimnAMkita kathana hai

Page #331 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Uddeshak  [231]  1. Owls, crows, cats, vultures, jackals, and pigs,
as well as snakes, scorpions, and lizards, are born from eating at night. [1] 2.
One who eats only once a day, receives the fruit of Agnihotra. One who does not
eat at night, receives the fruit of a pilgrimage. [2] 3. There is no offering,
no bath, no Shraddha, no worship of deities, no charity prescribed at night,
especially not food. [3] 4. It is extremely condemned, for the sake of Dharma
and Artha, to eat at night, as it is harmful to insects, worms, frogs, and other
living beings. [4]  - Yogashastra A.3: The atonement for keeping and eating food
at night.  77. A monk who keeps food, drink, edibles, or delicacies at night, or
approves of someone who does so, in a non-critical situation. 78. A monk who
consumes even a pinch, a speck, or a drop of food, drink, edibles, or delicacies
kept at night in a non-critical situation, or approves of someone who does so.
(He incurs the Guruchaumasī atonement.)  77. A monk who keeps food, drink,
edibles, or delicacies at night, or approves of someone who does so, in a non-
critical situation. 78. A monk who consumes even a pinch, a speck, or a drop of
food, drink, edibles, or delicacies kept at night in a non-critical situation,
or approves of someone who does so. (He incurs the Guruchaumasī atonement.)
**Discussion:** A monk who keeps even one, two, three, or four types of food at
night in a non-critical situation incurs the Guruchaumasī atonement.  There are
many places in the Agamas where the collection of food, etc., i.e., keeping food
at night, is prohibited. The present two sutras do not mention the atonement for
keeping food in a critical situation, but they do mention the atonement for
keeping food at night in a non-critical situation. They also state that eating
even a small amount of food kept at night in a non-critical situation incurs the
Guruchaumasī atonement.  The atonement for eating even a small amount of food
kept at night in a critical situation has also been mentioned. Therefore, the
meaning of a critical situation should be understood as follows: There is no
atonement for keeping food at night if there is no other option, but there is an
atonement for eating it. Such a critical situation is possible, for example:  1.
After bringing the evening gochari, heavy rain with strong winds (storm,
hurricane) may come, and due to darkness, one may not be able to eat. Then the
sun sets and the rain does not stop. Due to this, one may have to keep food at
night.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gyArahavAM uddezaka]] [231 1. uluuk-kaak-maarjaar-gRddh-sNbr-shuukraaH| _ ahi-
vRzcika-godhAzca, jAyaMte rAtribhojanAt  // 1 //  2. ekabhaktAzanAnnityaM,
agnihotraphalaM labhet  /  anastabhojano nityaM, tIrthayAtrAphalaM labhet  // 2
//  3. naivAhutirna ca snAnaM, na zrAddhaM devatArcanam  /  dAnaM na vihitaM
rAtrau, bhojanaM tu vizeSataH  // 3 //  4. pataMga-kITa-maMDUka-
satvasaMghAtaghAtakam  /  ato'tininditaM tAvat dharmArtha nizibhojanam  // 4 //
-yogazAstra a.3 rAtri meM prAhAra rakhane va khAne kA prAyazcitta 77-je bhikkhU
asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA aNAgADhe parivAsei, parivAtaM vA
saaijji| 78-je bhikkhU parivAsiyassa asaNassa vA pANassa vA khAimassa vA
sAimassa vA tayappamANaM vA bhUippamANaM vA biMduppamANaM vA AhAraM AhArei,
AhArataM vA saaijji| 77. jo bhikSu AgADha paristhiti ke atirikta azana, pAna,
khAdya yA svAdya rAtri meM rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
jo bhikSa anAgADha paristhiti se rAtri meM rakhe hue prazana, pAna, khAdya yA
svAdya kA tvakpramANa (cuTakI), bhUti pramANa athavA bindupramANa bhI AhAra
karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-bhikSu azanAdi cAra, tIna, do yA eka bhI prakAra
kA AhAra rAtri meM anAgADha sthiti meM rakhe to use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA
hai| AgamoM ke aneka sthaloM meM prazanAdi saMgraha arthAt rAtri meM AhAra
rakhane kA niSedha hai  /  prastuta sUtradvaya meM prAgADha paristhiti meM
rakhane kA prAyazcitta na kahate hue anAgADha sthiti meM rAtri ke samaya AhAra
rakhane kA prAyazcitta kathana hai aura anAgADha paristhiti meM rakhe gaye AhAra
meM se kucha bhI khAne yA pIne kA gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA hai| AgADha
paristhiti meM rakhe gaye azanAdi ke bhI kicit mAtra khAne para prAyazcitta kahA
gayA hai isaliye AgADha paristhiti kA yaha artha samajhanA cAhiye ki anya koI
upAya na ho sakane se rAtri meM azanAdi rakhane kA prAyazcitta nahIM hai kintu
use khAne kA prAyazcitta hai  /  vaha AgADha paristhiti isa prakAra sambhava
hai, yathA 1. sAyaMkAlIna gocarI lAne ke bAda mahAvAta (aAMdhI, tUphAna) yukta
varSA A jAya aura aMdherA ho jAne se AhAra nahIM kara sake, phira sUryAsta ho
jAe aura varSA na ruke  /  isa kAraNa se AhAra rAtri meM rakhanA pdd'e|

Page #332 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[232] [Nishīthasūtra 2. If food has been taken in excess, and it is necessary to
fast, and at that time heavy rain begins suddenly, which continues from sunset
to night, and it is necessary to keep the food, then this is a difficult
situation. It is not proper to eat even a little of the food kept in this way.
Eating it will lead to atonement according to the second (78th) sūtra. The
commentator has included illness and other causes in the difficult situation,
and has also mentioned the keeping of rare substances etc. as a difficult cause.
But it is clear from the Āgama-descriptions that a mendicant should never
collect food etc. at night, because in Daśa. A. 6 it is said that 'the mendicant
who is even desirous of collecting food is a 'householder', not a mendicant'.
Some pre-texts indicating the prohibition of sanniidhi (collection) are as
follows: 1. In Daśavai. A. 3 Ga. 3, 'sannihi' is called anācāra. 2.
Bidmunbheimam loṇam, tillan sappiṁ ca phaṇiyaṁ. || ṇa te sannihimicchanti,
nāyaputtavaora ya || -Daśa. A. 6 Ga. 18 3. Je siyā sannihiikāme, gihi, pavvaiye-
na se. -Daśa. A. 6 Ga. 19 4. Saṇihiṁ ca na kuvvejjā, aṇumāyaṁ pi saṁjaye.
Muhājīvī asambaddha havejjā jaganiṣṣie || -Daśa. A. 8 Ga. 24 5. Taheva asanaṁ
pāṇagaṁ vā, vivihaṁ khāimaṁ sāimaṁ labhitta.  _ hohi aṭṭho sue pare vā, taṁ na
nihe na nihāvaē, je sa bhikku || -Daśa. A. 10 Ga. 8 6. Kaya-vikkaya-saṇihiyo
viraē, savvasangāvagae ya je sa bhikku || -Daśa. A. 10 Ga. 16 7. Cauṁvihe vi
āhāre, rāibhoyaṇavajjaṇā.  _saṇnihi saṁcaō ceva, vajje yavvo sudukkaraṁ. ||
-Uttarā. A. 19 Ga. 30 8. Saṇihiṁ ca ṇa kuvvejjā, levamāyāe saṁjaye. Pakkhīpattaṁ
samādāya, hiravekkho parivvaē || -Uttarā. A. 6, Ga. 15 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 232] [nizIthasUtra 2. AhAra adhika mAtrA meM A gayA ho, paraThanA Avazyaka ho
usa samaya acAnaka mUsaladhAra varSA prArambha ho jAya jo ki sUryAsta ke bAda
rAtri taka cAlU rahe aura AhAra rakhanA par3e to yaha AgADha paristhiti hai| isa
prakAra rakhe hue AhAra ko kiMcinmAtra bhI khAnA nahIM kalpatA hai| khAne para
dvitIya (78 veM) sUtra ke anusAra prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  vyAkhyAkAra ne AgADha
paristhiti se rogAdi kAraNoM ko grahaNa kiyA hai tathA durlabha dravya prAdi
rakhane ko bhI AgADha kAraNa meM batAyA hai| kinta Agama-varNanoM se yahI spaSTa
hotA hai ki bhikSa rAtri meM khAdya padArtha Adi kA saMgraha kadApi na kare
kyoMki daza. a. 6 meM kahA hai ki 'jo bhikSu khAdya padArthoM ke saMgraha kA
icchuka bhI hotA hai vaha 'gRhastha' hai, sAdhu nahIM hai|' sannidhi (saMgraha)
niSedhasUcaka kucha prAgamasthala isa prakAra haiM 1. dazavai0 a0 3 gA. 3 meM
'saNNihI' anAcAra kahA hai| 2. biDamunbheimaM loNaM, tillaM sappiM ca phANiyaM
/  /  Na te saNNihimicchaMti, NAyaputtavaorayA  //  -daza0 a0 6 gA0 18 3. je
siyA saNNihIkAme, gihI, pavvaie-na se| -daza0 a06 gA0 19 4. saNihiM ca na
kuvvejjA, aNumAyaM pi sNje| muhAjIvI asaMbaddha havejja jagaNissie  //  -daza0
a08 gA024 5. taheva asaNaM pANagaM vA, vivihaM khAimaM sAimaM lbhittaa| _ hohI
aTTho sue pare vA, taM na nihe na nihAvae, je sa bhikkhU  //  -daza0 a0 10 gA08
6. kaya-vikkaya-saNihio virae, savvasaMgAvagae ya je sa bhikkhU  //  -daza0 a0
10 gA0 16 7. caumvihe vi AhAre, rAibhoyaNavajjaNA  /  _saNNihI saMcao ceva,
vajjeyavvo sudukkaraM  /  /  -uttarA0 a0 19 gA0 30 8. saNihiM ca Na kuvvejjA,
levamAyAe sNje| pakkhIpattaM samAdAya, hiravekkho privve|| -uttarA0 a0 6, gA0 15

Page #333 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Uddeshak  [233]  9.  Do not eat food that is offered in a place of
impurity. -Suy. Shru. 1, A. 6, Ga. 25  10.  Even if it is offered as a gift,
such as:  Odan, Kummas, Ganj, Tappan, Madhu, Bhujjiya, Palal, Soup, Sakkuli,
Vedhim, Varasarakachunna, Kosag, Pind, Siharini, Vatt, Moyag, Kheer, Dahi,
Sappi, Navaniy, Tell, Gul, Khand, Macchhandiy, Khajjakavanjan, Vihima, etc., it
is not permissible to eat it at night, even if it is offered by a friend or a
relative.  Question: Shru. 2, A. 5, Su. 4  11.  Even if a monk is offered food,
and he is suffering from a disease, such as:  vata, pitta, etc., which affects
the whole body, it is not permissible to eat it, even if it is his own medicine
or the medicine of another.  Question: Shru. 2, A. 5, Su. 7  This passage
clearly states that it is forbidden for a monk to keep any food or medicine
overnight. The commentary explains that if a monk keeps food overnight in an
exceptional situation, he incurs the prescribed atonement mentioned in the
sutra.  A monk who has conquered the disease of greed and the thirst for food
and drink will never take advantage of this exception, but will instead follow
the path of pure restraint and the commands of the Lord.  For the sake of food,
he will not stay overnight elsewhere and incur the atonement for doing so.  79.
If a monk sees another monk taking food from a rich man's house, a woman's
house, a house where food is prepared in memory of a deceased person, a cattle
shed, or any other such place, and he desires that food or is thirsty for it,
and he goes to another place (another upashraya) to spend the night because of
that desire, or he approves of someone else doing so, he incurs the atonement of
Guruchaumasi.  Meaning:  If a monk sees another monk taking food from a rich
man's house, a woman's house, a house where food is prepared in memory of a
deceased person, a cattle shed, or any other such place, and he desires that
food or is thirsty for it, and he goes to another place (another upashraya) to
spend the night because of that desire, or he approves of someone else doing so,
he incurs the atonement of Guruchaumasi.  Explanation:  The words "Ahenam" etc.
are explained in Acharanga Sutra Shru. 2, A. 1, U. 4.  According to that, the
meaning is as given here.  In addition, "Hingolan" there also means food taken
on a journey to a Yaksha, etc., and "Sammelan" means food prepared in honor of
relatives, etc.  The commentary on this sutra gives alternative explanations for
these words, which are as follows:  "Ahenam" - 1. Food, etc., that comes as a
gift from another's house. 2. Food, etc., that is taken from the woman's house
to the man's house as a gift. 3. Food, etc., that is sent back and forth between
the man's house and the woman's house.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gyArahavAM uddezaka] [233 9. Na saNihi kuvvai AsupaNNe  /  -sUya0 zru0 1, a0 6,
gA0 25 10. jaMpi ya odaNa-kummAsa-gaMja-tappaNa-mathu-bhujjiya-palala-
sUpasakkuli-veDhimavarasarakacuNNa-kosagapiMDasihariNivaTTamoyaga-khIra-dahi-
sappi-NavaNIya-tella-gula-khaMDa-macchaMDiya-khajjakavaMjaNavihimAdiyaM paNIyaM;
uvassae, paradhare va raNNe na kappai taM pi saNihi kAuM suvihiyANaM  //
prazna. zru 2, a. 5, sU. 4 11. jaMpi ya samaNassa suvihiyassa u rogAyaMke
bahuppagArammi samuppanne-vAtAhiga pitta jAva jIviyaMtakare,
savvasarIraparitAvaNakare, na kappai tArise vi appaNo taha parassa vA osaha-
bhesajja, bhattapANaM ca taM pi saNNihIkayaM  //  prazna zru. 2, a. 5. sU. 7 isa
pAgama sthaloM se yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki AhAra evaM auSadhi ke kisI bhI
padArtha kA rAtri meM rakhanA bhikSu ke lie sarvathA niSiddha hai  /  bhASya
nirdiSTa apavAda paristhiti meM azanAdi rakhane para sUtrokta prAyazcitta pAtA
hai| rogaparISaha evaM kSudhA-pipAsAparISaha vijetA bhikSu isa apavAda kA kadApi
sevana nahIM kare kintu niraticAra zuddha saMyama kA evaM bhagavadAjJA kA
pArAdhana kre| AhArArtha anyatra rAtrinivAsa-prAyazcitta 79. je bhikkhU AheNaM
vA, paheNaM vA, hiMgolaM vA, saMmelaM vA aNNayaraM vA tahappagAraM virUvarUvaM
hIramANaM pehAe tAe Asa ra tAe AsAe, tAe pivAsAe taM raNi aNNattha uvAiNAvei,
uvAiNAvataM vA saaijji| artha-jo bhikSu vara ke ghara ke bhojana, vadhu ke ghara
ke bhojana, mRta vyakti kI smRti meM banAye gaye bhojana, goTha Adi meM banAye
gaye bhojana athavA anya bhI aise vividha prakAra ke bhojana ko le jAte hue
dekhakara usa AhAra kI AzA se, usakI pipAsA (lAlasA) se anyatra jAkara (anya.
upAzraya meM) rAtri vyatIta karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
(use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana-"AheNaM" Adi zabdoM kI
vyAkhyA AcArAMgasUtra zru. 2, a. 1, u. 4 meM kI gaI hai| tadanusAra yahA~ artha
kiyA gayA hai  /  isake atirikta vahA~ "hiMgolaM" kA artha yakSAdi kI yAtrA kA
bhojana bhI kiyA hai tathA "saMmelaM' se parijana Adi ke sammAnArtha banAyA gayA
bhojana artha kiyA gayA hai| prastuta sUtra kI cUNi meM ina zabdoM kI vaikalpika
vyAkhyAe~ dI haiM, jo isa prakAra haiM "AheNaM"-1. anya ke ghara se upahAra rUpa
meM Ane vAlA khAdya padArtha Adi  /  2. bahU ke ghara se vara ke ghara upahAra
rUpa meM le jAyA jAne vAlA khAdya padArtha Adi  /  3. vara yA vadhU ke ghara
paraspara bhejA jAne vAlA khAdya padArtha Adi  /

Page #334 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [234] **[Nishiya Sutra]**  **"Paheṇam"** - 1. Food, etc., sent as a gift to
another's house. 2. Food, etc., sent as a gift from the groom's house to the
bride's house. 3. Food, etc., sent as a gift by someone other than the groom and
bride.  **"Hingolan"** - Funeral feast, Shraddha bhojan, etc.  **"Sammelan"** -
1. Food related to a wedding. 2. Goṣṭhībhojan - Food of a group. 3. Food offered
at the beginning of any work.  If a monk sees food being carried around during
these occasions and knows that a particular householder is hosting a special
meal, and due to the desire to partake in that food, leaves the householder's
house and goes to stay at someone else's house for the night (on the day before
the meal), with the thought that he cannot partake in the householder's food
while staying in that house, then he incurs the atonement mentioned in the
sutra.  The householder may also insist on the monk staying due to devotion, or
the monk may decide to do so on his own. In both situations, if he leaves with
the intention of partaking in that food, the atonement mentioned in the sutra
applies.  Such actions may lead to attachment to food, public criticism, or
other faults related to the body.  The commentator has explained that even if
the food is at the house of someone other than the householder, the atonement
for changing houses applies according to this sutra. For example, if a devout
person is hosting a meal and the location is far away, one can stay overnight
closer to that location. In this way, the atonement for changing location should
be understood as a Guruchaumasi, in comparison to the householder's food or
other food.  **Atonement for partaking in Naivedya food**  **80-J** A monk who
partakes in Naivedya pinda, or approves of someone who partakes in it, incurs
the atonement of Guruchaumasi.  **Discussion:**  The pinda offered to the
Arihantpakshika Devatas like Purnabhadra Mani Bhadra, etc., is called "Naivedya
pinda". There are two types of Naivedya pinda:  1. **Nishrakrit:** 1. Offered
with the intention of giving it to the monk. This means the Naivedya pinda is
made without any mixed-caste impurities. 2. Offered before or after the
designated day with the intention of giving it to the monk. 3. The Naivedya
pinda is prepared and kept aside for the monk. All these are Nishrakrit Naivedya
pinda.  2. **Anishrakrit:** This is not offered with the intention of giving it
to the monk.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 234] [nizIya sUtra 'paheNaM"-anya ke ghara upahAra rUpa meM bhejA jAne vAlA
khAdya padArtha Adi  /  2. vara ke ghara se bahU ke ghara upahAra rUpa meM bhejA
jAne vAlA khAdya padArtha Adi  /  3. vara-vadhU ke sivAya anya ke dvArA kahIM
upahAra rUpa meM bhejA jAne vAlA AhArAdi  /  "hiMgolaM".mRtakabhoja-
zrAddhabhojana Adi  /  "saMmelaM"-1. vivAha sambandhI bhojana  /  2.
goSThIbhoja-goTha kA bhojana  /  3. kisI bhI kArya ke prArambha meM kiyA jAne
vAlA bhojana  /  bhikSu ina prasaMgoM se AhAra ko idhara-udhara le jAte dekhe
aura jAne ki zayyAdAtA ke ghara vizeSa bhojana kA Ayojana hai| usa AhAra ko
grahaNa karane kI AkAMkSA utpanna hone se usa zayyAdAtA kA makAna chor3akara
anya kisI ke makAna meM (usa bhojana ke pahale dina kI) rAtri meM rahane ke liye
jAtA hai, isa vicAra se ki isa makAna meM rahate hue zayyAtara kA AhAra grahaNa
nahIM kiyA jA sktaa| gRhaparivartana karane meM gRhasvAmI zayyAdAtA kA bhI
bhaktivaza Agraha ho sakatA hai athavA bhikSu kA svataH bhI saMkalpa ho sakatA
hai| ina donoM sthitiyoM meM usa bhojana ko grahaNa karane ke saMkalpa se jAne
para sUtrokta prAyazcitta AtA hai| _aisA karane meM AhAra kI Asakti, lokanindA
yA anya saMkhaDI sambandhI doSoM kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai| vyAkhyAkAra ne
zayyAdAtA ke alAvA anya vyakti ke ghara kA bhojana ho to bhI gRhaparivartana
karane kA prAyazcitta isI sUtra se batAyA hai| yathA-jisa kisI bhaktimAn vyakti
ke ghara meM bhojana hai aura vaha sthAna dUra hai to usake nikaTa meM jAkara
rAtri-nivAsa kiyA jA sakatA hai| isa prakAra zayyAtara va anya bhojana kI apekSA
sthAnaparivartana kA prAyazcitta gurucaumAsI samajhanA caahiye| naivedya kA
AhAra karane para prAyazcitta 80-je bhikkhU NiveyaNapiDaM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  80. jo bhikSu naivedya piMDa khAtA hai yA khAne vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-pUrNabhadra
mANibhadra Adi jo arihaMtapAkSika devatA haiM, unake lie arpita piMDa
"naivedyapiMDa' kahalAtA hai  /  vaha naivedya piMDa do prakAra kA hotA hai,
yathA 1. bhikSu kI nizrAkRta 2. bhikSu ko anizrAkRta  /  1. nizrAkRta-1. jo
bhikSu ko dene kI bhAvanA se yukta hai  /  arthAt mizrajAta doSa yukta naivedya
piMDa banA hai| 2. jo sAdhu ko dene kI bhAvanA se niyata dina ke pahale yA pIche
kiyA gayA hai| 3. naivedyapiMDa taiyAra hone ke bAda sAdhu ke lie sthApita
karake rakha diyA hai  /  ye sabhI nizrAkRta naivedya piMDa haiN|

Page #335 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Uddeshak  [235 2. Whether or not the *Anishrakrut* Sadhu is in the
village, if a *Naivedya Pind* is naturally prepared for a specific day and the
Sadhu unexpectedly arrives, then it is an *Anishrakrut Naivedya Pind*.  The
meaning is that for the Sadhu, the *Pahudia Dosha*, *Mishrajat Dosha*, and
*Thavanadosha*, etc., are the *Udgam Dosha* (originating faults) in the
*Naivedya Pind*. In comparison to this, this is called the *Guruchaumasik*
atonement, and that *Pind* is called the *Nishrakrut Naivedya Pind*.  The
*Anishrakrut* natural *Naivedya Pind*, i.e., the one kept for donation after
being offered to the deity, is an *Anishrakrut Naivedya Pind*, i.e., a
*Danapind*. Therefore, it is included in the atonement sutras of the *Danapind*
mentioned in the second *Uddeshak* of the *Nishisutra*. There, it is called the
*Laghumasik* atonement.  This shows that during the *Agamkal*, a large amount of
food was offered to the deities, which was distributed as charity after the
worship ceremony.  Similarly, a devotee would also have a tendency to donate to
the *Bhikshu* for some reason. Therefore, in this sutra, the atonement for the
*Nishrakrut Naivedya Pind* is mentioned in the same context.  The atonement for
praising and honoring the *Yathachhand* is:  81. The *Bhikshu* who praises the
*Yathachhand* or approves of the one who praises him. 82. The *Bhikshu* who
honors the *Yathachhand* or approves of the one who honors him. (He incurs the
*Guruchaumasik* atonement).  **Discussion:** The one who creates a form that is
contrary to the *Pragam* and is imagined by the *Stramati* is called
'Yathachhand'.  By praising and honoring such a *Yathachhand* *Bhikshu*, he is
encouraged, and there is a possibility of the origin of many other faults.
Therefore, in this sutra, the *Guruchaaturmasik* atonement is mentioned. By
implication, the same atonement should be understood for the exchange of
disciples or food, etc.  For honoring and praising the *Pasattha* and other nine
types of Sadhus, one incurs the *Laghuchaumasik* atonement. - *Ni. U. 13*.  The
mention of other contacts with them, like *Laghuchaumasik* or *Laghumasik*
atonement, is in other *Uddeshak*. However, since the *Yathachhand* is the
originator of the *Utsutra* form, the contact with him is mentioned here as the
*Guru Chaaturmasik* atonement.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gyArahavAM uddezaka] [235 2. anizrAkRta-sAdhu gA~va meM ho athavA na ho,
svAbhAvika rUpa se hI nizcita dina naivedya piMDa banAyA ho aura acAnaka sAdhu
vahA~ pahu~ca gayA ho to vaha anizrAkRta naivedyapiMDa hai  /  tAtparya yaha hai
ki sAdhu ke lie pAhuDiyA doSa, mizrajAta doSa aura ThavaNAdoSa Adi udgama ke
doSa jisa naivedya piMDa meM hoM usakI apekSA yaha gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA
gayA hai aura usa piMDa ko nizrAkRta naivedyapiMDa kahA jAtA haiN| jo anizrAkRta
svAbhAvika naivedyapiMDa hai arthAt devatA ko arpita karane ke bAda dAna ke lie
rakhA huA hai vaha anizrAkRta naivedyapiMDa arthAt dAnapiMDa hone se
nizIthasUtra ke dUsare uddezaka meM Aye dAnapiMDa ke prAyazcitta sUtroM meM
isakA samAveza hotA hai  /  vahA~ isako laghumAsika prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai|
isase jJAta hotA hai ki AgamakAla meM devatAoM ko adhika mAtrA meM khAdya
padArtha arpita kiyA jAtA thA jo pUjA-vidhi karake dAna rUpa meM vitarita kara
diyA jAtA thaa| kisI zraddhAzIla ke dvArA bhikSu ko kisI nimitta se dAna dene ke
liye bhI aisI pravRtti kI jAtI thI  /  ataH usI apekSA se isa sUtra meM
nizrAkRta naivedyapiMDa kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  yathAchaMda ko vaMdana
karane tathA usakI prazaMsA karane kA prAyazcitta 81. je bhikkhU ahAchaMdaM
pasaMsai, pasaMsaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  82. je bhikkhU ahAchaMdaM vaMdai, vaMdaMtaM
vA sAijjai  /  81. jo bhikSu svacchaMdAcArI kI prazaMsA karatA hai yA karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  82. jo bhikSu svacchaMdAcArI ko vaMdana karatA
hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA
hai| vivecana-jo prAgamaviparIta evaM stramatikalpita prarUpaNA karatA hai, vaha
'yathAchaMda' kahA jAtA aise svacchaMdAcArI bhikSu kI prazaMsA evaM vaMdanA
karane se use protsAhana milatA hai tathA anya bhI aneka doSoM kI utpatti kI
saMbhAvanA hone se prastuta sUtra meM isakA gurucAturmAsika prAyazcitta kahA
gayA hai tathA upalakSaNa se ziSya yA AhArAdi kA AdAna-pradAna karane para bhI
yahI prAyazcitta samajha lenA caahiye| pAsatthA Adi 9 prakAra ke sAdhuoM ko
vaMdanA evaM unakI prazaMsA karane para laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /
-ni0 u0 13. unake sAtha anya samparka rakhane kA bhI laghucaumAsI yA laghumAsika
prAyazcitta kA kathana anya uddezakoM meM hai  /  kintu yathAchaMda utsUtra
prarUpaka hone se isake sAtha samparka kA yahA~ guru cAturmAsika prAyazcitta
kahA gayA hai|

Page #336 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 236] [Nishīthasūtra Prāyaścitta for ordaining an ineligible person 83. A monk
who ordains an ineligible person, whether a layman or a non-layman, an upāsaka
or an anupāsaka, or approves of such ordination, incurs prāyaścitta. 84. A monk
who installs an ineligible person, whether a layman or a non-layman, an upāsaka
or an anupāsaka, or approves of such installation, incurs prāyaścitta. 53. A
monk who ordains an ineligible person, whether a layman or a non-layman, an
upāsaka or an anupāsaka, or approves of such ordination. 84. A monk who installs
an ineligible person, whether a layman or a non-layman, an upāsaka or an
anupāsaka, or approves of such installation. (He incurs the prāyaścitta of Guru-
Chaumāsi.) Discussion- The first sūtra states the prāyaścitta for ordaining an
ineligible person. If, after ordaining someone, it becomes known that the person
was ineligible for ordination, then according to the second sūtra, prāyaścitta
is incurred for installing them. The first sūtra states the prāyaścitta for
knowingly ordaining an ineligible person. The second sūtra states the
prāyaścitta for ordaining someone unknowingly and then, upon knowing their
ineligibility, continuing to install them. This implies that after ordination,
if ineligibility becomes known, one should not install the person. There can be
two reasons for not knowing about the ineligibility. These are: 1. The candidate
concealing their ineligibility. 2. The ordainer not thoroughly investigating and
obtaining complete information. In the second case, the ordainer is at fault,
and therefore incurs the prāyaścitta mentioned in the sūtra. Whether to leave
the person installed or not after installation depends on the decision of the
Gītartha. The following are ineligible for pravrajyā: 1. Child- Under eight
years of age. 2. Elderly- Over seventy (70) years of age. 3. Eunuch- Born
eunuch, made eunuch, female eunuch, and male eunuch, etc. 4. Inert- Physically
weak, mentally deficient, and mute. 5. Klib- Unable to overcome the attachment
arising from the words, form, and invitation of a woman. 6. Sick- Suffering from
any of the sixteen types of diseases and eight types of ailments. The rapidly
fatal ailments are called śīghraghāti, and the chronic diseases are called
ciraghāti. -Bhāṣya Gā. 3647. 7. Thief- One who enters another's house at night
to steal, a pickpocket, etc. There are many types of thieves, robbers, and
plunderers. 8. State criminal- One who has been declared a criminal for
committing any act against the state. 9. Madman- Possessed by a yakṣa or insane.
10. Blind- Born blind or one who has lost the sight of one or both eyes later.
11. Slave

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 236] [nizIthasUtra ayogya ko pravajita karane kA prAyazcitta 83. je bhikkhU
NAyagaM vA aNAyagaM vA uvAsaga vA aNuvAsagaM vA aNalaM pavAvei, pavAvetaM vA
saaijji| 84. je bhikkhU NAyagaM vA aNAyagaM vA uvAsagaM vA aNuvAsagaM vA aNalaM
uvaTThAvei, uvaTThAveMtaM vA saaijji| 53. jo bhikSu ayogya svajana yA parajana,
upAsaka yA anupAsaka ko pravajita karatA hai yA pravrajita karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 84. jo bhikSu ayogya svajana yA parajana, upAsaka yA
anupAsaka ko upasthApita karatA hai yA upasthApita karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-prathama sUtra
meM ayogya ko dIkSA dene kA prAyazcitta kathana hai| yadi kisI ko dIkSA dene ke
bAda jAnakArI ho ki yaha dIkSA ke ayogya hai to jAnakArI hone ke bAda use
upasthApita karane para dvitIya sUtra ke anusAra prAyazcitta AtA hai| prathama
sUtra meM jAnakara ayogya ko dIkSA dene kA prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  dvitIya
sUtra meM anajAna meM dIkSA diye bAda ayogya jAnakara ke bhI bar3I dIkSA dene kA
prAyazcitta kahA hai| isase yaha dhvanita hotA hai ki dIkSA dene ke bAda
ayogyatA kI jAnakArI hone para bar3I dIkSA nahIM denI caahie| ayogyatA kI
jAnakArI na hone ke do kAraNa ho sakate haiM  /  yathA 1. dIkSArthI dvArA apanI
ayogyatA ko chipA lenaa| 2. dIkSAdAtA ke dvArA chAnabIna karake pUrNa jAnakArI
na karanA  /  dUsare kAraNa meM dIkSAdAtA kA pramAda hai, ataH vaha sUtrokta
prAyazcitta ko prApta karatA hai  /  upasthApita karane ke bAda use chor3anA yA
na chor3anA yaha gItArtha ke nirNaya para nirbhara hai| pravrajyA ke ayogya
vyakti nimnalikhita haiM 1. bAla-ATha varSa se kama umra vaalaa| 2. vRddha-
sattara (70) varSa se adhika umra vaalaa| 3. napuMsaka-janma-napuMsaka,
kRtanapuMsaka, strInapusaka tathA puruSa napuMsaka aadi| 4. jar3a-zarIra se
azakta, buddhihIna va mUka  /  5. klIba-strI ke zabda, rUpa, nimantraNa Adi ke
nimitta se udita moha-veda ko niSphala karane meM asamartha 6. rogI-16 prakAra
ke roga aura ATha prakAra kI vyAdhi meM se kisI bhI roga yA vyAdhi se yukta  /
zIghraghAtI vyAdhi kahalAtI hai aura ciraghAtI roga kahalAte haiM  /  -bhASya
gA0 3647  /  7. cora-rAtri meM para-ghara praveza kara corI karane vAlA, jeba
kATane vAlA ityAdi aneka prakAra ke cora DAkU luttere| 8. rAjya kA aparAdhIkisI
prakAra kA rAjyaviruddha kArya karane para aparAdhI ghoSita kiyA huA  /  9.
unmatta-yakSAviSTa yA pAgala  /  10. cakSuhInajanmAMdha ho yA bAda meM kisI eka
yA donoM A~khoM kI jyoti calI gaI ho  /  11. dAsa

Page #337 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [237 Eleventh Uddeshak]  1. **Das** - One who has become a slave due to
purchase or other reasons. 2. **Dusht** -  **Kshaya Dusht** (prone to anger),
**Vishaya Dusht** (attached to worldly pleasures). 3. **Mookh** -  Foolish,
confused in mind, including **Dravya Mookh** (attached to material possessions)
and others. 4. **Karj-dar** -  One who borrows another's wealth and does not
repay. 5. **Jugit (Heen)** -  Low in caste, karma, skill, or body (having lost
limbs like nose, ears, hands, feet, etc.). 6. **Baddh** -  Bound by a vow to
someone for learning or teaching karma, skill, knowledge, mantras, etc. 7.
**Bhrutk** -  One who receives daily wages or travel allowance. 8. **Apahrut** -
A child brought without the knowledge of parents or guardians. 9.
**Garbhavathi** -  A pregnant woman. 10. **Balavatsa** -  A woman with a
breastfeeding child.  The commentary elaborates on various sub-categories of
these individuals and discusses the faults and atonement for initiating them.
These 20 types of individuals eligible for initiation are described in the
Nisheeth Bhashya and other commentaries. The Agam mentions this topic in the
Brihatkalpa Sutra, Uddeshak 4. There, it states that initiating three types is
considered Akalpany (inappropriate), namely:  1. **Pandak** 2. **Kleb** 3.
**Vatik**  The Brihatkalpa Bhashya explains "Vatik" from the reading "Vaiye".
However, the Nisheeth Bhashya uses the word "Vahiye" in the description of
ineligible individuals, implying a meaning of "afflicted by disease", and uses
"Vatik" in the description of types of eunuchs.  **Vatik** - One who suffers
from a disorder caused by a wind-related ailment and is only relieved by
indulging in immoral acts.  **Kleb** - One who experiences involuntary
ejaculation due to sight, sound, touch (embracing), or invitation.  The
Brihatkalpa Sutra's original text separates these two from "Pandak" (eunuch)
because they are considered men in terms of gender and Vedic qualifications, but
they become eunuchs over time. Therefore, despite being men, they are prohibited
from initiation.  **Aagamvihari Prati-shayajnani** (one who is well-versed in
the Agam and has attained knowledge) can initiate all these individuals as
appropriate.  The **Thanang Sutra, Chapter 5, Sutra 108** implies that one can
initiate a "Balavaya" (child) with a **Geetarth Diksha** (initiation with a
focus on devotional songs) due to certain reasons.  Commentary verse 3738 states
that some of these 20 types of eligible individuals can be initiated as
appropriate, but the authority to grant Geetarth Diksha to a "Balavaya" rests
with the advice of other Geetarth practitioners. Otherwise, the initiator also
incurs atonement.  **Individuals eligible for initiation:**  1. **Aryakshetra-
utpann** - Born in a noble land. 2. **Jatikul-sampann** -  Born into a noble
family. 3. **Lghukarmi** -  One with minimal karma. 4. **Nirmal-buddhi** -  One
with a pure mind. 5. **One who understands:**     * The rarity of human birth in
the ocean of existence.     * The suffering of birth and death.     * The fickle
nature of wealth.     * The pain of worldly pleasures.     * The separation from
loved ones.     * The fleeting nature of life.     * The terrible consequences
of actions in the afterlife.     * The futility of worldly existence. 6.
**Virakt** -  Detached from the world. 7. **Alpkashayi** -  One with minimal
passions. 8. **Alphasyādi** -  Free from curiosity and frivolous pursuits.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [237 gyArahavAM uddezaka ] kisI kA kharIdA huA yA anya kisI kAraNa se dAsatva
ko prApta  /  12. duSTa - kaSAya duSTa ( prati krodhI), viSayaduSTa (viSayAsakta
) | 13. mUrkha - - dravyamUDha Adi aneka prakAra ke mUrkha - bhramita buddhi
vAle  /  14. karjadAra - anya kI sampatti udhAra lekara na dene vAlA  /  15.
jugita ( hIna ) - jAti se, karma se, zilpa se hIna aura zarIra se hInAMga (
jisake nAka, kAna, paira, hAtha prAdi kaTe hue hoM)  /  16. baddha - karma,
zilpa, vidyA, maMtra Adi sIkhane yA sikhAne ke nimitta kisI ke sAtha
pratijJAbaddha ho  /  17. bhRtaka - divasabhRtaka yAtrAbhRtaka Adi  /  18.
apahRta - mAtA-pitA Adi kI prAjJA binA pradatta lAyA huA bAlaka Adi  /  19.
garbhavatI - strI  /  20. bAlavatsA - dudhamu~ hai bacce vAlI strI  /  bhASya
meM inake aneka bheda prabheda kie haiM tathA inheM dIkSA dene se hone vAle
doSoM aura unake prAyazcittoM ke aneka vikalpa kahe haiM  /  dIkSA ke prayogya
ina 20 prakAra ke vyaktiyoM kA varNana nizIthabhASya tathA anya vyAkhyAgraMthoM
meM milatA hai  /  zrAgama meM isa viSayaka kathana bRhatkalpasUtra uddezaka
cAra meM hai  /  vahA~ tIna ko dIkSA denA Adi akalpanIya kahA hai, yathA - 1.
paMDaka, 2. klIba 3. vAtika  /  bRhatkalpabhASya meM "vAie" pATha se "vAtika" kI
vyAkhyA kI gaI hai  /  kintu nizIthabhASya meM ayogyoM ke varNana meM " vAhie"
zabda kaha kara vyAdhigrasta artha kiyA hai tathA napuMsaka ke prabhedoM meM
"vAtika" kahA hai| vAtika - vAyujanya doSa se jo vikAra ko prApta hotA hai evaM
anAcAra - sevana karane para hI upazAMta hotA hai  /  klaba - dRSTi, zabda,
sparza (grAliMgana) yA nimantraNa se vikAra ko prApta hokara jisake svataH vIrya
nikala jAtA hai  /  bRhatkalpasUtra ke mUla pATha meM "paMDaka" (napuMsaka) se
ina donoM ko alaga kahane kA kAraNa hai ki ye liMga va veda kI apekSA se puruSa
haiM kintu kAlAntara se napuMsaka bhAva ko prApta ho jAte haiM  /  ataH puruSa
hote hue bhI inheM dIkSA dene kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai  /  yaha AgamavihArI
pratizayajJAnI ina bhASyavarNita sabhI ko yathAvasara dIkSA de sakate haiM  /
"bAlavaya" vAle ko kAraNavaza gItArtha dIkSA de sakate haiM, aisA ThANAMga sUtra
a0 5, sUtra 108 se phalita hotA hai  /  bhASya-gAthA 3738 meM bIsa prakAra ke
prayogyoM meM se kucha ko yathAvasara dIkSA dI bhI jA sakatI hai, aisA batAyA
hai kintu gItArtha ko yaha adhikAra anya gItArtha kI salAha se hI hotA hai  /
zranyathA use bhI prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  dIkSA ke yogya vyakti 1.
zrAryakSetrotpanna 2. jAtikulasampanna 3. laghukarmI 4. nirmalabuddhi 5.
saMsAra-samudra meM manuSya bhava kI durlabhatA, janma-maraNa ke duHkha, lakSmI
kI caMcalatA, viSayoM ke duHkha, iSTa saMyogoM kA viyoga, Ayu kI
kSaNabhaMguratA, maraNa pazcAt parabhava kA prati raudra vipAka aura saMsAra kI
asAratA Adi bhAvoM ko jAnane vAlA 6. saMsAra se virakta 7. alpakaSAyI 8.
alpahAsyAdi ( kutahalavRtti se rahita )

Page #338 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 238 [Nishīthasūtra 9. Sukṛtagnya 10. Vinayavān 11. Rājya-aparādha rahit 12.
Suḍaul sharīra 13. Shraddhāvān 14. Sthira chitta vāla 15. Samyag upasampanna.
One possessing these qualities should be given initiation, or even if one or two
of these qualities are lacking, one possessing many qualities can be given
initiation. -Abhi. Rajendra Koṣa “Pavajjā" p. 736 Characteristics of the
Initiator The above fifteen qualities are possessed, and 16. initiated according
to the prescribed procedure, 17. served the Guru's household in the correct
manner, 18. possessed unbroken conduct since the time of accepting the
pravrajyā, 19. free from harming others, 20. possessed the sūtra received
according to the prescribed procedure, 21. knowledgeable about the connections
between the sūtras, studies, etc., 22. knowledgeable about the truth, 23. calm,
24. possessing affection for preaching, 25. devoted to the welfare of beings,
26. possessing the right words, 27. nurturing disciples according to their
nature, 28. serious (generous), 29. not showing humility when faced with a
Pariṣaha, etc., 30. possessing the ability to calm (skilled in calming),
possessing the ability to obtain equipment, possessing the ability to obtain a
steady hand, 31. speaker of the meaning of the sūtra, 32. possessing the
position of a Guru as authorized by one's own Guru. • Such a qualified
practitioner should be made a Guru. -Abhi. Rajendra Koṣa “Pavajjā" p. 734 Duties
of the Initiator towards the Initiate 1. One should ask the initiate: "Who are
you? Why do you seek initiation? How did you develop dispassion?" If, upon
asking, they appear suitable and are not found to be unsuitable in any other
way, then it is appropriate to initiate them. 2. Knowing them to be worthy of
initiation, one should tell them these good conduct rules: 1. Going for alms
every day, 2. Taking only uncontaminated food in alms, 3. Taking it purely, free
from faults like greed, etc., 4. After bringing it, giving it to children, the
elderly, etc., and eating it with equal distribution, 5. Always being absorbed
in self-study, 6. Not bathing for life, 7. Sleeping on the ground or on a mat,
8. Possessing eighteen thousand (or thousands) of virtues, 9. Enduring many
hardships like hunger, etc. If they accept all this willingly, then they should
be initiated. -Ni. Cūṇi p. 278 Duties of the Initiator towards the Newly
Initiated Monk 1. To teach them the study of "Śastraparijñā" or to teach them
the study of "Chhajīvanikā". 2. To explain to them the ultimate meaning, that
these earth, etc., are living beings, sunlight, shade, dust particles, etc., are
non-living, and the nine substances of merit-demerit, inflow-outflow, decay,
bondage, liberation, the causes of karmic bondage and their divisions, results,
etc. 3. To repeatedly explain these truths to them, to make them possess them,
to make them have faith. 4. After that, to teach them the discrimination of the
suffering of those living beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 238 [nizIthasUtra 9. sukRtajJa 10. vinayavAn 11. rAjya-aparAdha rahita 12.
suDaula zarIra 13. zraddhAvAn 14. sthira citta vAlA 15. samyag upasampanna  /
ina guNoM se sampanna ko dIkSA denI cAhiye, athavA inameM se eka-do guNa kama
bhI hoM to bahuguNasampanna ko dIkSA dI jA sakatI hai| -abhi. rAjendra koSa
"pavajjA" pR. 736 dIkSAdAtA ke lakSaNa uparyukta pandraha guNa sampanna tathA
16. vidhipUrvaka pravajita, 17. samyak prakAra se gurukulavAsasevI, 18.
pravrajyA-grahaNa kAla se satata akhaMDa zIlavAlA, 19. paradroha rahita, 20.
yathokta vidhi se grahIta sUtra vAlA, 21. sUtroM, adhyayanoM Adi ke pUrvApara
sambandhoM meM niSNAta 22. tatvajJa, 23. upazAMta, 24. pravacanavAtsalyayukta,
25. prANiyoM ke hita meM rata, 26. prAdeya vacana vAlA, 27. bhAvoM kI anukUlatA
se ziSyoM kI paripAlanA karane vAlA, 28. gambhIra (udAramanA) 29. parISaha Adi
Ane para dInatA na dikhAne vAlA, 30. upazamalabdhi sampanna (upazAMta karane meM
catura) upakaraNalabdhisampanna, sthirahastalabdhisampanna, 31. sUtrArtha-vaktA,
32. svaguruanujJAta guru pada vaalaa| * aise guNa sampanna viziSTa sAdhaka ko
guru banAnA caahie| -abhi. rAjendra koSa "pavajjA" pR. 734 dIkSArthI ke prati
dIkSAdAtA ke kartavya 1. dIkSArthI se pUchanA cAhiye ki- "tuma kauna ho ? kyoM
dIkSA lete ho? tumheM vairAgya utpanna kaise huA ?" isa prakAra pUchane para
yogya pratIta ho tathA anya kisI prakAra se ayogya jJAta na ho to use dIkSA denA
kalpatA hai  /  2. dIkSA ke yogya jAnakara use yaha sAdhvAcAra kahanA cAhie
yathA-1. pratidina bhikSA ke liye jAnA, 2. bhikSA meM acitta padArtha lenA, 3.
vaha bhI eSaNA Adi doSoM me rahita zuddha grahaNa karanA, 4. lAne ke bAda bAla-
vRddha Adi ko dekara samavibhAga se khAnA, 5. svAdhyAya meM sadA lIna rahanA, 6.
AjIvana snAna na karanA, 7. bhUmi para yA pATa para zayana karanA, 8. aTThAraha
hajAra (yA hajAroM) guNoM ko dhAraNa karanA, 9. loca Adi ke aneka kaSToM ko
sahana karanA Adi  /  yadi vaha yaha saba saharSa svIkAra kara le to use dIkSA
denI cAhiye  /  -ni. cUNi pR. 278 navadIkSita bhikSu ke prati dIkSAdAtA ke
kartavya 1. "zastraparijJA" kA adhyayana karAnA athavA "chajjIvanikA" kA
adhyayana kraanaa| . 2. usakA arthaparamArtha samajhAnA ki ye pRthvI Adi jIva
haiM, dhUpa chAyA pudgala Adi ajIva haiM tathA puNya-pApa, Asrava-saMvara,
nirjarA, baMdha, mokSa nava padArtha, karmabaMdha ke hetu va unake bheda,
pariNAma ityAdi kA parijJAna kraanaa| 3. inhIM tattvoM ko punaH punaH
samajhAkara use dhAraNa karAnA, zraddhA karAnA  /  , 4. tatpazcAt una jIvoM kI
yatanA kA viveka sikhAnA  /

Page #339 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Uddeshak  [239 5. Testing Shraddha and Vivek after teaching, such
as: Telling a person to stand, sit, sleep or lie down on a specific spot, and
observing if they are concerned about the spot or not. Similarly, testing by
asking them to walk on wet ground like a pond, move a lamp, fan themselves in
the heat, and walk on a path with plants and insects. Testing by asking them to
accept alms with the fault of Eshana. _ One should only establish those who are
qualified in study, knowledge of meaning, Shraddha, Vivek, and testing. If one
establishes someone who is not qualified by the above methods, then one incurs
Prāyaścitta. - Nishīth Chūṇī p. 280 Prāyaścitta for causing a person to
associate with an unqualified person. 85. A monk who causes or approves of a
monk to associate with an unqualified person, whether a relative or a stranger,
an Upāsaka or an Anupāsaka, incurs Guruchaumāsi Prāyaścitta. Discussion: Service
can be of many types. However, the commentator has described the unqualified
person in terms of service only in relation to Bhikṣācari. They can be of four
types: 1. One who has not studied Pidaiṣaṇā, 2. One who does not have Shraddha
and interest in service, 3. One who does not know the meaning and ultimate
purpose of service, 4. One who cannot avoid faults. One incurs Prāyaścitta for
causing association with such an unqualified person. This is also appropriate
for many other services. One should only ask for service from a monk who is
physically capable and also qualified in terms of Kṣayopaśama. Asking for
service from someone who is not capable or qualified can lead to many faults and
one incurs the Prāyaścitta mentioned in the sutra. Prāyaścitta for staying in
the same place as monks and nuns: 86. A monk who stays in the same place as a
monk or nun who is qualified incurs Prāyaścitta. 87. A monk who stays in the
same place as a monk or nun who is not qualified incurs Prāyaścitta. 58. A monk
who stays in the same place as a monk or nun who is qualified incurs
Prāyaścitta. 89. A monk who stays in the same place as a monk or nun who is not
qualified incurs Prāyaścitta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gyArahavAM uddezaka] [239 5. sikhAne ke bAda zraddhA evaM viveka kI parIkSA
karanA, yathA khar3e rahane, baiThane, sone yA paraThane ke liye sacitta bhUmi
batAkara kahanA ki "yahA~ khar3e raho, paraTho ityAdi  /  sacitta sthala
dekhakara vaha ciMtita hotA hai yA nahIM, isakI parIkSA karanA  /  isI taraha
tAlAba Adi kI gIlI bhUmi meM calane, dIpaka sarakAne, garmI meM havA karane
tathA vanaspati va trasa jIva yukta mArga meM calane kA kahakara parIkSA karanA
/  eSaNA doSa yukta bhikSA grahaNa karane ko kaha kara parIkSA karanA  /  _ isa
prakAra adhyayana, arthajJAna, zraddhAna, viveka tathA parIkSA meM yogya ho use
upasthAna karanA caahiye| ullikhita vidhi se jo yogya na banA ho use upasthApita
karane para prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  -nizItha cUNi pR. 280 ayogya se vaiyAvRtya
karAne kA prAyazcitta 85. je bhikkhU nAyageNa vA anAyageNa vA uvAsaeNa vA
aNuvAsaeNa vA aNaleNa veyAvaccaM kAravei, kAraveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  jo bhikSu
ayogya svajana yA parajana, upAsaka yA anupAsaka dIkSita bhikSu se sevA karavAtA
hai yA karavAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA
hai|) vivecana-sevAkArya aneka prakAra ke ho sakate haiN| kintu bhASyakAra ne
kevala bhikSAcarI kI apekSA se sevAkArya meM ayogya kA varNana kiyA hai  /  ve
cAra prakAra ke ho sakate haiM, yathA 1. jisane piDaiSaNA kA adhyayana na kiyA
ho, 2. jisakI sevAkArya meM zraddhA-ruci na ho, 3. jisane usakA artha-paramArtha
na jAnA ho, 4. jo doSoM kA parihAra na kara sakatA ho| isa prakAra ke ayogya se
vaiyAvRtya karAne para prAyazcitta AtA hai| anya aneka sevAkAryoM ke liye bhI
yahI ucita hai ki jo zArIrika zakti se sakSama ho aura kSayopazama kI apekSA bhI
yogya ho, usI sAdhu se sevAkArya karavAnA cAhiye  /  zakti aura yogyatA se
adhika sevAkArya karAne para aneka doSoM kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai evaM sUtrokta
prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /  sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke eka sthAna meM Thaharane kA
prAyazcitta 86. je bhikkhU sacele sacelANaM majjhe saMvasai, saMvasaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  87. je bhikkhU sacele acelANaM majjhe saMvasai, saMvasaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  58. je bhikkhU acele sacelANaM majjhe saMvasai, saMvasaMtaM vA
saaijji| 89. je bhikkhU acele acelANaM majjhe saMvasai, saMvasaMtaM vA sAijjai
/

Page #340 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[240] [Nishosha Sutra 86. A Sachhel monk who lives with or approves of Sachhel
nuns 87. A Sachhel monk who lives with or approves of Achel nuns 88. An Achel
monk who lives with or approves of Sachhel nuns 89. An Achel monk who lives with
or approves of Achel nuns. (He receives the Guruchaumasi penance.) Discussion-1.
The Brihatkalpa Sutra states that women should not stay in a place where men are
present and nuns should not stay in a place where men are present. 2. The
Uttaradhyayanasutra, Chapter 16 and Chapter 32, also prescribe separate beds. 3.
The Dashavaikalika Sutra, Chapter 8, Verse 54, states that a monk should always
be afraid of women. 4. The Uttaradhyayanasutra 32, Verse 16, states that even if
a monk is not tempted by adorned celestial nymphs, it is still better for him to
stay in a place without women, knowing that solitude is beneficial. Although
both monks and nuns are keepers of restraint, they should not live in the same
place. Even if a Sachhel monk lives with a Sachhel nun, there is a possibility
of many faults, so living with an Achel nun is clearly harmful. The Nishisha
Uddeshak 9 states that living together with a monk and a nun is a Guruchaumasi
penance, and here it states that living together with a monk and a nun in the
fourfold combination of Sachhel and Achel is a Guruchaumasi penance. The
Thananga Sutra, Chapter 5, Sutra 417, states that if a monk and a nun live
together in exceptional circumstances, it is not a violation of the Lord's
command. The Thananga Sutra, Chapter 5, Sutra 418, states that if an Achel
nirgranthi lives with a Sachhel nirgranthi, it is not a violation of the Lord's
command. In such a situation, due to circumstances, it is done with discretion
under the leadership of the Geetaarth. Due to the ten reasons mentioned in the
above Thananga, the penance does not apply to monks and nuns living together as
per the present Sutra. The Brihatkalpa, Chapter 3, Sutra 1-2, prohibits monks
and nuns from standing, sitting, sleeping, etc. in each other's presence.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 240] [nizoSasUtra 86. jo sacela bhikSu sacela sAdhviyoM ke sAtha rahatA hai yA
rahane vAle kA anumodana karatA ra 87. jo sacela bhikSu acela sAdhviyoM ke sAtha
rahatA hai yA rahane vAle kA anumodana karatA 88. jo acela bhikSu sacela
sAdhviyoM ke sAtha rahatA hai yA rahane vAle kA anumodana karatA 89. jo acela
bhikSu acela sAdhviyoM ke sAtha rahatA hai yA rahane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-1. bRhatkalpasUtra
uddezaka meM strI-yukta sthAna meM va sAdhvI ko puruSa-yukta sthAna meM
Thaharane kA niSedha hai  /  2. uttarAdhyayanasUtra a0 16 tathA a0 32 meM bhI
vivikta zayyA meM rahane kA vidhAna hai| 3. dazavaikAlikasUtra a. 8, gA. 54 meM
kahA hai sAdhu ko strI se sadA bhaya banA rahatA hai| 4. uttarAdhyayana 32, gA0
16 meM kahA hai ki yadi bhikSu ko vibhUSita devAMganAeM bhI saMyama se vicalita
na kara sakatI hoM to bhI use ekAnta hitakArI jAnakara strIrahita sthAna meM hI
rahanA zreyaskara hai| yadyapi sAdhu-sAdhvI donoM hI saMyama ke pAlaka haiM
phira bhI unheM eka sthAna meM nivAsa nahIM karanA caahiye| sacela sAdhu sacela
sAdhvI ke sAtha rahe to bhI aneka doSoM kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai to acela kA
sAtha rahanA to spaSTa hI ahitakara hai  /  nizItha uddezaka 9 meM sAdhu-sAdhvI
ke saha-vihAra kA gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai aura yahA~ sacela acela
kI caubhaMgI ke sAtha sAdhu-sAdhvI ke sahanivAsa kA gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA
hai| ThANAMga sUtra a. 5, sU. 417 meM kahA hai ki ApavAdika paristhiti meM
sAdhu-sAdhvI eka sAtha rahe to bhagavad-AjJA kA ullaMghana nahIM hotA hai|
ThANAMga sUtra a. 5, sU. 418 meM kahA hai ki acela nirgrantha sacela nirgranthI
ke sAtha rahe to bhagavad-AjJA kA ullaMghana nahIM hotA hai| paristhiti ke
kAraNa aisA prasaMga Ane para gItArtha ke netRtva meM vivekapUrvaka rahA jAtA
hai| ukta sthAnAMga-kathita dasa kAraNoM se sAdhu sAdhviyoM ke eka sAtha rahane
kA prastuta sUtra se prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai  /  bRhatkalpa u. 3, sU. 1-2 meM
sAdhu-sAdhvI ko eka dUsare ke upAzraya meM khar3e rahanA, baiThanA, sonA Adi
sabhI kAryoM kA niSedha hai  /

Page #341 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Uddeshak] [241 Thus, the statement of the Brihatkalpa and other
Sutras is the method of Utsarga, the statement of the Thananga Sutra is the
method of Apavada, and the present Sutra should be understood as being about co-
residence without the stated Prāyaścitta situation. Prāyaścitta for eating salt,
etc., at night 90. If a monk eats or approves of the eating of preserved pepper
or pepper powder, chili or chili powder, ginger or ginger powder, rock salt or
refined salt at night, (he incurs Guruchaumasi Prāyaścitta.) Discussion-The
prohibition of collecting salt, etc., is in Dasavai. A. 6, Ga. 18-19, and the
prohibition of keeping food, etc., nearby is in many other Agamas. For this, see
the discussion of Sutra 77 of this Uddeshak. Eating at night or eating food kept
at night during the day also breaks the Ratribhojanaviraman Vrata in its
original form. - Sutra 73 to 76 have stated the Prāyaścitta for all these types
of night meals through Chaubhangi. The present Sutra again states the
Prāyaścitta related to night meals, the reason for this is that food, drink,
etc., are meant to quench hunger and thirst, but salt, etc., do not have this
property. Due to this difference, their Prāyaścitta has been stated separately.
Explanation of words Pippal-A specific medicine-pepper. -Prakrit Hindi Kos p. 58
Miriyam-Chili. It comes in many varieties-red chili, black pepper, white pepper.
In many copies, the words 'Miriyam wa Miri-chunnam wa' are not found, but it
seems that these words were in the original text in front of Churnikar,
therefore these words have been kept in the original text. Pepper and chili are
both Saccitta substances, but they are also found as Sastraparinat in many
places. Singaberam-Ginger. When dried, it is called Sonth, which is Achitta. The
Achitta powder of these three can also be naturally available in many places.
Bilan wa Lonam-Cooked salt. Ubiyam wa Lonam-Other Sastraparinat salt. Both these
types of salt are Achitta. In the Agama, the names of these two types of salt do
not appear with Saccitta salt. Dasavai. A. 3, Ga. 8 states that taking and
eating 6 types of Saccitta salt is Anachar, such as

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gyArahavAM uddezaka] [241 isa prakAra bRhatkalpa Adi sUtroM kA kathana utsarga
vidhi hai, ThANAMgasUtra kA kathana apavAda vidhi hai evaM prastuta sUtra
kathita prAyazcitta paristhiti ke binA saha nivAsa karane kA hai, aisA samajhanA
caahie| rAta meM lavaNAdi khAne kA prAyazcitta 90. je bhikkhU pariyAsiyaM
pippala vA, pippali-cuNNaM vA, mirIyaM vA, mirIya-cuNNaM vA, siMgaberaM vA,
siMgabera-cuNNaM vA, bilaM vA loNaM, ubhiyaM vA loNaM AhArei, AhAretaM vA
sAijjai  /  90 jo bhikSu rAtri meM rakhe hue pIpara yA pIpara kA cUrNa, mirca yA
mirca kA cUrNa, soMTha yA soMTha kA cUrNa, bir3alavaNa yA udbhinnalavaNa ko
khAtA hai yA khAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai, (use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta
AtA hai|) vivecana-lavaNa Adi ke saMgraha kA niSedha dazavai. a. 6, gA. 18-19
meM hai aura AhArAdi pAsa meM rakhane kA niSedha anya aneka AgamoM meM hai|
jisake lie isI uddezaka ke sUtra 77 kA vivecana dekheM  /  rAtri meM khAne se yA
rAtri meM rakhe hue padArtha dina meM khAne se bhI mUlaguNa rUpa
rAtribhojanaviramaNa vrata kA bhaMga hotA hai  /  - ina sabhI prakAra ke
rAtribhojana kA sUtra 73 se 76 taka caubhaMgI ke dvArA prAyazcitta kahA hai  /
prastuta sUtra meM punaH rAtribhojana sambandhI prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai, isakA
kAraNa yaha hai ki azana, pAna Adi padArtha bhUkha-pyAsa ko zAMta karane vAle
hote haiM kintu lavaNAdi padArthoM meM yaha guNa nahIM hotA hai  /  isa bhinnatA
ke kAraNa inakA prAyazcitta pRthak kahA gayA hai  /  zabdoM kI vyAkhyA pippala-
auSaSi vishess-piipr| -prAkRta hindI koSa pR. 58 mirIyaM-mirca  /  yaha aneka
prakAra kI hotI hai-lAla mirca, kAlI mirca, sapheda mirca  /  aneka pratiyoM meM
'mirIyaM vA mirIya-cuNNaM vA' ye zabda nahIM milate haiM kintu cUrNikAra ke
sAmane ye zabda mUla pATha meM the, aisA pratIta hotA hai, ataH ina zabdoM ko
mUla pATha meM rakhA gayA hai  /  pIpara aura mirca ye donoM sacitta padArtha
haiM, kintu aneka jagaha ye zastrapariNata bhI milate haiN| siMgaberaM-adarakha
/  sUkhane para ise soMTha kahA jAtA hai, jo acitta hotI hai| ina tInoM kA
acitta cUrNa bhI aneka jagaha svAbhAvika rUpa se upalabdha ho sakatA hai  /
bilaM vA loNaM-pakAyA huA nmk| ubhiyaM vA loNaM-anya zastrapariNata nmk| ye
donoM prakAra ke namaka acitta haiM  /  Agama meM sacitta namaka ke sAtha ina do
prakAra ke namaka kA nAma nahIM AtA hai  /  dazavai. a. 3, gA. 8 meM 6 prakAra
ke sacitta namaka grahaNa karane va khAne ko anAcAra kahA hai, yathA

Page #342 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[242] [Nishīth Sūtra "Sovacchale Sindhave Loṇam, Romāloṇe Ya Āmae. Samudde Pansu
Khāre Ya, Kāla Loṇe Ya Āmae ||" Āchā. Śru. 2, A. 1, U. 10 mentions the
prescription for eating these two types of salt. _ Daśavai A. 6, Gā. 18
prohibits the collection of these two, and the present sūtra prescribes
atonement for eating salt kept overnight. From the description of these places,
it is clear that out of the above six types of conscious salt, if any salt is
cooked in fire, it is called 'Bidala-vaṇa' and if it is transformed by other
weapons, it is called 'Udbhinna-namak'. The commentator here describes the food
and non-food items, stating that these sūtra-mentioned items, although not
quenching hunger and thirst, are added to food and refine food, hence they are
also beneficial to food, so they are food. Medicines are said to be of two
types, food and non-food: 1. Those that taste good when eaten are food-like. 2.
Those that are undesirable and unpalatable to eat are non-food, such as Triphala
etc. medicines, urine, Nimba etc. bark, Nimboli and many other leaves, flowers,
fruits, seeds etc. should be understood. Or whatever can be eaten in hunger is
food. This explanation should be understood only from a particular perspective.
Because according to Vyav. U. 9, drinking one's own urine at night is also
prohibited, which is called non-food in the commentary. Therefore, these
Triphala etc. substances should not be considered as non-food according to the
scriptures, even if they are kept overnight, eaten or eaten during fasting etc.
At the end of the discussion, the commentator has also prohibited keeping and
eating food and non-food items generally at night. Atonement for keeping food is
Guru-chaumāsi and for keeping non-food is Laghu-chaumāsi. Bālamaraṇa-praśaṁsā-
prāyaśchitta 91-He who praises the following types of child deaths, or praises
those who praise them, is punished with a four-month atonement: 1. Giri-
padaṇāṇi, 2. Maru-padaṇāṇi, 3. Bhigupadaṇāṇi, 4. Taru-padaṇāṇi, 5. Giri-
pakkhandanāṇi, 6. Maru-pakkhandanāṇi, 7. Bhigup-pakkhandanāṇi, 8. Taru-
pakkhandanāṇi, 9. Jal-pavesāṇi, 10. Jalaṇa-pavesāṇi, 11. Jal-pakkhandanāṇi, 12.
Jalaṇa-pakkhandanāṇi, 13. Visabhakkhanāṇi, 14. Satthopāḍanāṇi, 15. Valaya-
maraṇāṇi, 16. Vasatṭa-maraṇāṇi, 17. Tabbhava-maraṇāṇi, 18. Antosalla-maraṇāṇi,
19. Vehāna-samaraṇāṇi, 20. Giddhapuṭa-maraṇāṇi, or any other such types of child
deaths.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 242] [nizIthasUtra "sovaccale siMdhave loNaM, romAloNe ya aame| sAmudde
paMsukhAre ya, kAlA loNe ya Amae  // " AcA. zru. 2, a. 1, u. 10 meM ina do
prakAra ke namaka ko khAne kA vidhAna hai| _ dazavai a. 6, gA. 18 meM ina do ke
saMgraha kA niSedha hai aura prastuta sUtra meM rAtri meM rakhe hue ko khAne kA
prAyazcitta hai  /  ina sthaloM ke varNana se yahI spaSTa hotA hai ki uparokta
chaH prakAra ke sacitta namaka meM se koI namaka agni-pakva ho to use
'biDalavaNa' kahate haiM aura anya zastrapariNata ho to use 'udbhinna namaka'
kahate haiM  /  bhASyakAra yahA~ AhAra evaM anAhAra yogya padArthoM kA varNana
karate hue batAte haiM ki ye sUtrokta padArtha bhUkha-pyAsa ko zAMta karane vAle
na hote hue bhI AhAra meM milAye jAte haiM aura AhAra ko saMskArita karate haiM,
ataH ye bhI AhAra ke upakAraka hone se AhAra hI haiM  /  auSadhiyA~ AhAra va
anAhAra meM do prakAra kI kahI haiM1. jinheM khAne para kucha bhI anukUla svAda
Ae ve AhAra rUpa haiM  /  2. jo khAne meM anicchanIya evaM arucikara hoM ve
anAhAra haiM, yathA-triphalA Adi auSadhiyAM, mUtra, nimbAdi kI chAla, nimbolI
tathA aura bhI aise aneka patra, puSpa, phala, bIja Adi samajha lene cAhie  /
athavA bhUkha meM jo kucha bhI khAyA jA sakatA hai vaha saba AhAra hai  /  yaha
vyAkhyA eka vizeSa apekSA se hI samajhanI cAhie  /  kyoMki vyava. u. 9 ke
anusAra rAtri meM svamUtra pInA bhI niSiddha hai, jise bhASya meM anAhAra kahA
gayA hai| ataH ina triphalA Adi padArthoM ko bhI rAtri meM rakhanA, khAnA yA
upavAsa Adi meM anAhAra samajhakara khAnA Agama sammata nahIM samajhanA caahie|
vivecana ke anta meM bhASyakAra ne bhI AhAra va anAhAra rUpa padArthoM ko
sAmAnyatayA rAtri meM rakhane aura khAne kA niSedha kiyA hai  /  AhAra ke
rakhane para gurucaumAsI aura anAhAra ke rakhane para laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta
kahA hai| bAlamaraNaprazaMsA-prAyazcitta 91-je bhikkhU 1. giripaDaNANi vA, 2.
maru-paDaNANi vA, 3. bhigupaDaNANi vA, 4. tarupaDaNANi vA, 5. giripakkhaMdaNANi
vA, 6. marupakkhaMdaNANi vA, 7. bhigupakkhaMdaNANi vA, 8. tarupakkhaMdaNANi vA,
9. jalapavesANi vA, 10. jalaNapavesANi vA, 11. jalapakkhaMdaNANi vA, 12. jalaNa-
pakkhaMdaNANi vA, 13. visabhakkhaNANi vA, 14. satthopADaNANi vA, 15.
valayamaraNANi vA, 16. vasaTTa-maraNANi vA, 17. tabbhava-maraNANi vA, 18.
aMtosalla-maraNANi vA, 19. vehANasamaraNANi vA, 20. giddhapuTa-maraNANi vA
aNNayarANi vA tahappagArANi bAlamaraNANi pasaMsai, pasaMsaMtaM vA sAijjai  /
taM sevamANe Avajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM aNugdhAiyaM  /  |

Page #343 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Uddeshak ] [ 243 91 - A monk who praises or approves of those who
praise any of the following types of self-inflicted premature death, or any
other such death, incurs a Guruchaumasi penance:  1. Falling from a mountain to
a visible place and dying,  2. Falling from a mountain to an invisible place and
dying,  3. Falling into a ditch, well, etc. and dying,  4. Falling from a tree
and dying,  5. Jumping from a mountain to a visible place and dying,  6. Jumping
from a mountain to an invisible place and dying,  7. Jumping into a ditch, well,
etc. and dying,  8. Jumping from a tree and dying,  9. Entering water and dying,
10. Entering fire and dying,  11. Jumping into water and dying,  12. Jumping
into fire and dying,  13. Dying by consuming poison,  14. Dying by being cut by
a sword or other weapon,  15. Dying by being strangled,  16. Dying due to the
pain of separation,  17. Dying to regain the present existence,  18. Dying by
being pierced by an arrow, spear, etc.,  19. Dying by hanging oneself,  20.
Dying by being eaten by a vulture.   **Discussion:**  In Bhagavati Sutra,
Chapter 13, Uddeshak 7, Sutra 81, and in Thananga Sutra, Anga 2, Uddeshak 4,
Sutra 113, these 20 types of death are included in 12 types of death.  Nishith
Churni also states that praising any of these twelve types of premature death
incurs a Guruchaumasi penance.  The first four deaths - "falling and dying" -
are similar, hence they constitute one type of death. The next four deaths -
"jumping and falling" - are also similar, hence they constitute another type of
death. Similarly, the ninth and tenth deaths constitute one type, and the
eleventh and twelfth deaths constitute another type. Thus, instead of twelve
deaths, there are four types of death. Adding the remaining eight types of
death, such as poison consumption, etc., we get a total of twelve types.
However, looking at the original texts, it is clear that jumping and falling are
considered the same, and "Maru" and "Bhigu" are not considered separately but
are included in "Giri". Thus, the eight types mentioned in the sutras are
included in two types - "Giri-Padan, Taru-Padan", and the four types related to
water and fire are included in two types. This makes a total of twelve types.
Therefore, both twelve and twenty types are valid, one should understand this.
The last two deaths are considered permissible due to specific reasons in
Thananga, Anga 2, Sutra 113: 1. Vaihanasamaran, 2. Giddhasprushtamaran. Also, in
Acharanga Sutra, Anga 1, Uddeshak 4, there is a provision for accepting
Vaihanasamaran for the protection of celibacy.   These twelve or twenty types of
premature death are different ways of committing suicide. They are called
premature death because they are accepted by knowledgeable people due to their
passions. However, if the body is abandoned for the sake of restraint or for the
protection of virtue, such as in Vaihanasamaran, or in any other way, it is not
considered premature death.   **Explanation of some words:**  Giri - Mah -
"Giri" refers to a place where, when someone is standing on a mountain, the
place below is visible. "Maru" refers to a place where it is not visible.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gyArahavAM uddezaka ] [ 243 91 - jo bhikSu 1. parvata se dRzya sthAna para gira
kara maranA, 2 . parvata se adRzya sthAna para gira kara maranA, 3 . khAI - kue
Adi meM girakara maranA, 4 . vRkSa se girakara maranA, 5 . parvata se dRzya
sthAna para kUda kara maranA, 6. parvata se adRzya sthAna para kUdakara maranA,
7. khaDDhe kue Adi meM kUda kara maranA, 8. vRkSa se kUdakara maranA, 9. jala
meM praveza karake maranA, 10. agni meM praveza karake maranA, 11. jala meM
kUdakara maranA, 12. agni meM kUdakara maranA, 13. viSabhakSaNa karake maranA,
14. talavAra Adi zastra se kaTakara maranA, 15. galA dabAkara maranA, 16.
virahavyathA se pIr3ita hokara maranA, 17. vartamAna bhava ko punaH prApta
karane ke 18. tIra bhAlA prAdi se viMdha kara maranA, 19. phAMsI lagAkara
maranA, 20. gRddha kA bhakSaNa karavAkara maranA, ina AtmaghAta rUpa bAla-
maraNoM kI athavA anya bhI isa maraNoM kI prazaMsA karatA hai yA prazaMsA karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai, prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  saMkalpa se maranA, Adi se
zarIra prakAra ke bAlause gurucaumAsI vivecana - bhagavatIsUtra za. 13, u. 7,
sU. 81 meM tathA ThANAMgasUtra a. 2, u. 4, sU. 113 meM ina 20 prakAra ke maraNoM
ko 12 prakAra ke maraNa meM samAviSTa kiyA hai  /  nizIthacUrNi meM bhI kahA
gayA hai - ina bAraha prakAra ke bAlamaraNoM meM se kisI bhI bAlamaraNa kI
prazaMsA karane para gurucImAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  prArambha ke cAra
maraNoM meM- "girakara marane" kI samAnatA hone se eka maraNabheda hotA hai, Age
ke cAra maraNoM meM - " kUdakara girane" kI samAnatA hone se unakA bhI eka bheda
hotA hai  /  isI taraha navameM aura dasaveM maraNa kA eka tathA gyArahaveM
tathA bArahaveM maraNa kA eka bheda hotA hai  /  isa prakAra bAraha maraNoM ke
badale 4 maraNa bheda ho jAte haiM aura zeSa viSabhakSaNAdi ATha maraNa ke ATha
bheda ginane se kula 12 bhedoM kA samanvaya ho jAtA hai  /  kintu mUla pAThoM ko
dekhane se yaha jJAta hotA hai ki kUdakara girane aura sAmAnya girane ko eka hI
mAnA gayA hai tathA "maru" aura "bhigu" ina donoM ko bhI alaga vivakSita na
karake "giri" meM hI samAviSTa kiyA hai  /  isa prakAra sUtrokta ATha bhedoM ko
do bheda - 'giri-paDaNa, taru- paDaNa meM samAviSTa kiyA hai tathA jala aura
agni sambandhI cAra bhedoM ko do bhedoM meM samAviSTa kiyA hai  /  jisase kula
12 bheda kiye gaye haiM  /  ataH 12 va 20 donoM bheda nirvirodha haiM, aisA
samajhanA cAhiye  /  antima do maraNoM ko ThANAMga. a. 2, sU. 113 meM viziSTa
kAraNa se anujJAta kahA hai1. vaihAnasamaraNa, 2. gRddhaspRSTamaraNa tathA AcA.
zru. 1, a. 8, u. 4 meM bhI brahmacarya rakSA ke liye vaihAnasamaraNa svIkAra
karane kA vidhAna hai  /  ye 12 athavA 20 prakAra ke bAlamaraNa AtmaghAta karane
ke vibhinna tarIke haiM  /  ye prajJAniyoM dvArA kaSAyavaza svIkAra kiye jAne se
bAlamaraNa kahe gaye haiM  /  kintu saMyama yA zIlarakSArtha vaihAnasamaraNa se
yA anya kisI tarIke se zarIra kA tyAga karane para ye bAlamaraNa nahIM kahe jAte
haiM  /  katipaya zabdoM kI vyAkhyA - girI -maha- jattha pavvae ArUDhehiM aho
pavAyaTThANaM dIsai so "girI" bhaNNai, adissamANe "maru"  /

Page #344 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 244] [Nishith Sutra, Bhiggu Nadi Tardi.  Adi Saddato Vijjukkhaayam, Agado Va
Bhannai. Padan-Pakkhandan-Thiy-Nissann-Nivannasss Anuppitta Pavadamanass
"Pavadan". Uppaitta Jo Padai "Pakkhandan".  Rukkhaao Ya Samapadathtass Anuppitta
Pavadamanass Pavadan.  Rukkhanttiyasss Jan Uppaitta Padan Tan "Pakkhandan".
Valayamaran-Galm Va Appano Valei. Tabbhavamaran-Jammi Bhave Vattai Tass Bhavasss
Heusu Vattamane.  Aauyam Bandhitta Puno Tatth Uvajjuiukaamass Jan Maran Tan
Tabbhavamaran. Vasattmaran-Indiyavisaessu Ragadosavasatto Maranto "Vasattmaran"
Marai. Aatmaghāt Rūp Bālamaraṇo Kā Kathana Hone Se Vaśārtmaraṇ Kā Prāśaya Is
Prakār Jānana Upayukta Hai Ki Viraha Ya Viyoga Se Duḥkhī Hokar Chāti Ya Mastak
Me Āghāt Lagākar Marnā. Athavā Kisī Iccha-Sankalpa Ke Pūrṇa Na Hone Par Uske
Nimitta Se Duḥkhī Hokar Taḍap-Taḍap Kar Marnā. Giddhapuḍhamaraṇam-Giddhehiṁ
Puḍheṁ-Giddhapuḍheṁ, Gṛddhaikṣitavyamityarthaḥ.  Tan Gomāikalevare Attāṇam
Pakkhivitta Giddhehi Appāṇam Bhakkhāvei. ...  Ahavā Piṭṭha-Udara-Ādisu
Alattapuḍage Dāuṁ Appāṇam Giddhehi Bhakkhāvei. In Bālamaraṇo Ki Praśansā Karne
Par Sunne Vālā Koi Soce Ki "Aho Ye Ātmārthī" Sādhu In Maraṇo Ki Praśansā Karte
Hai To Ye Vastav Me Karaṇīya Hai, Inmeṁ Koi Doṣa Nahīṁ Hai.  Sanyam Se Khinn Koi
Sādhu Is Prakār Sunakar Bālamaraṇ Svīkār Kar Sakta Hai.  Itādi Doṣotpatti Ke
Kāran Hone Se Bhikkhu Ko In Maraṇo Ki Praśansā Nahīṁ Karnī Cāhiye. Jab In Maraṇo
Ko Praśansā Karnā Hī Akalpany Hai To In Maraṇo Kā Sankalpa Ya Inmeṁ Pravṛtti
Karne Kā Niṣedha To Svataḥ Siddha Ho Jātā Hai.  Ataḥ Mumukṣu Sādhak In Maraṇo Ki
Kadāpi Cāhnā Na Kare Apitu Kāran Upasthit Hone Par Samabhāv, Śānti Ki Vṛddhi
Hētu Sādhanā Kare Evam Sanlekhanā Svīkār Kar Bhaktpratyākhyān, Ingīṇīmaraṇ Ya
Pādapōpagamanmaraṇ Rūp Paṇḍitamaraṇ Ko Svīkār Kare.  Aisā Karne Se Sanyam Ki
Śuddha Ārādhanā Ho Sakti Hai.  Kintu Duḥkhoṁ Se Ghabaraakar Ya Tīvra Kaṣāya Se
Prerit Hokar Bālamaraṇ Svīkār Karne Se Punaḥ Punaḥ Duḥkhaparampārā Ki Hī Vṛddhi
Hotī Hai. Śīlarakṣā Hētu Kabhī Phāṁsī Lagākar Maraṇ Karnā Paḍe To Vah Prātmā Ke
Liye Ahitakar Na Hokar Kalyāṇ Kā Evam Sukha Kā Hētu Hotā Hai, Aisā-Yācā. Śru. 1,
A. 8, U. 4 Meṁ Kahā Gayā Hai.  Gyārahvaṁ Uddeshak Kā Sārāṁś Sūtra 1-2 Lohe Ādi
Ke Pātra Banānā V Rakhnā Sūtra 3-4 Lohe Ādi Ke Bandhanayukta Pātra Karnā V
Rakhnā Sūtra 5 Pātra Ke Liye Arddhayōjan Se Āge Jānā Sūtra 6 Kāranavash Bhī
Arddhayōjan Ke Āge Se Sāmnē Lākar Diye Jāne Vālā Pātra Lenā.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 244] [nizIthasUtra bhiguNadItaDI  /  Adi saddAto vijjukkhAyaM, agaDo vA
bhnnnni| paDaNa-pakkhaMdaNa-Thiya-Nisanna-NivaNNassa aNuppaittA pavaDamANassa
"pvddnnN"| uppaittA jo paDai "pakkhaMdaNaM"  /  rukkhAo yA samapAdaThitassa
aNuppaittA pavaDamANassa pavaDaNaM  /  rukkhaMTTiyassa jaM uppaittA paDaNaM taM
"pkkhNdnnN"| valayamaraNa-galaM vA appaNo valei  /  tabbhavamaraNa-jammi bhave
vaTTai tassa bhavassa heusu vaTTamANe  /  AuyaM baMdhittA puNo tattha
uvajjiukAmassa jaM maraNaM taM tabbhavamaraNaM  /  vasaTTamaraNa-iMdiyavisaesu
rAgadosavasaTTo maraMto "vasaTTamaraNaM" marai  /  AtmaghAta rUpa bAlamaraNoM kA
kathana hone se vazArtamaraNa kA prAzaya isa prakAra jAnanA upayukta hai ki
viraha yA viyoga se duHkhI hokara chAtI yA mastaka meM AghAta lagAkara mrnaa|
athavA kisI icchA-saMkalpa ke pUrNa na hone para usake nimitta se duHkhI hokara
tar3apha-tar3apha kara maranA  /  giddhapuDhamaraNaM-giddhehiM puDheM-
giddhapuDheM, gRddhaikSitavyamityarthaH  /  taM gomAikalevare attANaM
pakkhivittA giddhehi appANaM bhakkhAvei  /  ... ahavA piTTha-udara-Adisu
alattapuDage dAuM appANaM giddhehi bhakkhAvei  /  ina bAlamaraNoM kI prazaMsA
karane para sunane vAlA koI soce ki "aho ye AtmArthI" sAdhu ina maraNoM kI
prazaMsA karate haiM to ye vAstava meM karaNIya haiM, inameM koI doSa nahIM hai|
saMyama se khinna koI sAdhu isa prakAra sunakara bAlamaraNa svIkAra kara sakatA
hai| ityAdi doSotpatti ke kAraNa hone se bhikSu ko ina maraNoM kI prazaMsA nahIM
karanI caahiye| jaba ina maraNoM ko prazaMsA karanA hI akalpanIya hai to ina
maraNoM kA saMkalpa yA inameM pravRtti karane kA niSedha to svataH siddha ho
jAtA hai| ataH mumukSu sAdhaka ina maraNoM kI kadApi cAhanA na kare apitu kAraNa
upasthita hone para samabhAva, zAnti kI vRddhi hetu sAdhanA kare evaM saMlekhanA
svIkAra kara bhaktapratyAkhyAna, iMgiNImaraNa yA pAdapopagamanamaraNa rUpa
paMDitamaraNa ko svIkAra kre| aisA karane se saMyama kI zuddha ArAdhanA ho
sakatI hai| kintu duHkhoM se ghabarAkara yA tIvra kaSAya se prerita hokara
bAlamaraNa svIkAra karane se punaH punaH duHkhaparamparA kI hI vRddhi hotI hai
/  zIlarakSA hetu kabhI phAMsI lagAkara maraNa karanA par3e to vaha prAtmA ke
lie ahitakara na hokara kalyANa kA evaM sukha kA hetu hotA hai, aisA-yAcA. zru.
1, a. 8, u. 4 meM kahA gayA hai| gyArahaveM uddezaka kA sArAMza sUtra 1-2 lohe
Adi ke pAtra banAnA va rakhanA sUtra 3-4 lohe Adi ke baMdhanayukta pAtra karanA
va rakhanA sUtra 5 pAtra ke liye arddhayojana se Age jAnA sUtra 6 kAraNavaza bhI
arddhayojana ke Age se sAmane lAkara diye jAne vAlA pAtra lenaa|

Page #345 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Uddeshak  [245]  **Sutra 72** Sutra 7: Slandering Dharma Sutra 8:
Praising Adharma Sutra 9-62: Performing bodily actions of a householder Sutra
63-64: Frightening oneself or others Sutra 65-66: Astonishing oneself or others
Sutra 67-68: Showing or speaking in a contradictory manner to oneself or others
Sutra 69: Praising the Dharma leader, principles, or conduct of someone who is
present, or falsely praising that person Sutra 70: Traveling back and forth
between two opposing kingdoms Sutra 71: Slandering daytime meals, praising
nighttime meals Sutra 73: Eating food brought in the day on the next day Sutra
74: Eating food brought in the day at night Sutra 75: Eating food brought in at
night during the day Sutra 76: Eating food brought in at night at night Sutra
77: Keeping food, etc., at night without a compelling reason Sutra 78: Eating
food kept due to a compelling reason Sutra 79: Staying overnight elsewhere with
the desire to consume food from a particular place Sutra 80: Eating food offered
as Naivedya Sutra 81-82: Praising a free-willed person, bowing to them Giving
initiation or higher initiation to an ineligible person Making an ineligible
person perform service Sutra 86-89: A male ascetic with a bag staying with
female ascetics with or without a bag Sutra 90: Eating stale (overnight) powder,
salt, etc. Sutra 91: Praising those who commit suicide  **Etc.**  The
consumption of these doshasthana leads to Guruchaumasi pratyakshita. The subject
matter of the 20 sutras of this Uddeshak is mentioned in the following Agamas:
Sutra 1-4: Prohibition of keeping and binding vessels made of iron, etc. -
Aacha. Shru. 2, A. 6, U. 1 Sutra 5: Prohibition of going beyond half a yojana
for a vessel. - Aacha. Shru. 2, A. 6, U. 1 Sutra 7: One who speaks ill of the
Tirthankaras and their Dharma binds the Mahamohaniya karma. - Dasha. D. 9, Ga.
23-24 Sutra 8: 'Parapasandaprasaansa' is an excess of Samyaktva. - Upa. A. 1
Sutra 83-84 Sutra 85

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 gyArahavAM uddezaka] [245 sUtra 72 sUtra 7 dharma kI nindA karanA sutra 8
adharma kI prazaMsA karanA sUtra 9-62 gRhastha ke zarIra kA parikarma karanA
sUtra 63-64 svayaM ko yA anya ko DarAnA sUtra 65-66 svayaM ko yA anya ko vismita
karanA sUtra 67-68 svayaM ko yA anya ko viparIta rUpa meM dikhAnA yA kahanA
sUtra 69 jo sAmane ho usake dharmapramukha kI, siddhAntoM kI yA prAcAra kI
prazaMsA karanA athavA usa vyakti kI jhUThI prazaMsA karanA sUtra 70 do virodhI
rAjyoM ke bIca punaH punaH gamanAgamana karanA sUtra 71 divasabhojana kI nindA
karanA rAtribhojana kI prazaMzA karanA sUtra 73 dina meM lAyA AhAra dUsare dina
khAnA sUtra 74 dina meM lAyA AhAra rAtri meM khAnA sUtra 75 rAtri meM lAyA AhAra
dina meM khAnA sUtra 76 rAtri meM lAyA AhAra rAtri meM khAnA sUtra 77 AgADha
paristhiti ke binA rAtri meM azanAdi rakhanA sUtra 78 AgADha paristhiti se rakhe
AhAra ko khAnA sUtra 79 saMkhaDI ke AhAra ko grahaNa karane kI abhilASA se
anyatra rAtrinivAsa karanA sUtra 80 naivedya-piMDa grahaNa karake khAnA sUtra
81-82 svacchaMdAcArI kI prazaMsA karanA, use vandana karanA ayogya ko dIkSA denA
yA bar3I dIkSA denA ayogya se sevAkArya karAnA sUtra 86-89 acela yA sacela sAdhu
kA sacela yA acela sAdhviyoM ke sAtha rhnaa| sUtra 90 paryuSita (rAta rakhe)
cUrNa, namaka Adi khAnA sUtra 91 aAtmaghAta karane vAloM kI prazaMsA karanA
ityAdi doSasthAnoM kA sevana karane para gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| isa
uddezaka ke 20 sUtroM ke viSaya kA kathana nimna AgamoM meM hai, yathA sUtra 1-4
lohe Adi ke pAtra rakhane evaM unake baMdhana karane kA niSedha  /  -AcA. zru.
2, a. 6, u. 1 sUtra 5 arddhayojana ke Age pAtra ke liye jAne kA niSedha  /  /
-AcA. zru. 2, a. 6, u. 1 sUtra 7 tIrthakara va unake dharma kA avarNavAda karane
vAlA mahAmohanIya karma kA baMdha karatA hai| -dazA. da. 9, gA. 23-24 sUtra 8
'parapAsaMDapasaMsA' yaha samyaktva kA aticAra hai| upA. a.1 sUtra 83-84 sUtra
85

Page #346 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **[246]** **Sutra 70** **Sutra 83-84 Sutra = 6-89** **Sutra
73, 76, 78**  Eating at night is prohibited in many Sutras. **Sutra 6** **Sutra
6-62 Sutra 63-68** **Sutra 69** **Sutra 71-72 Sutra 77** **Sutra 79** **Sutra
80** **Sutra 81-82** **Sutra 85** **Sutra 91**  - **Brihatkalpa U. 1, Su. 39**
[Nishyasutra Statement of the qualifications for initiation or great initiation.
Prohibition of a Sadhu staying in the place of a Sadhvi. - See discussion for
the place. **Brihatkalpa Sutra U. 4** **Sutra 90** Prohibition of collecting
salt, etc. The subject matter of these 71 Sutras of this Uddeshak is not found
in other Agamas, such as taking a vessel brought from beyond half a yojana in a
difficult situation. Performing bodily functions of a householder. Frightening
oneself or others, astonishing, doing in a contrary state  **Brihatkalpa Sutra
U. 3 - Dasha. Pra. 6, Ga. 18-19** Or saying. Praising the religious principles
of someone who belongs to a particular religion in front of them, or falsely
praising them. Criticizing day-time meals and praising night-time meals. Keeping
food, etc. at night in a difficult situation. Changing the shelter for the sake
of a conch shell. Eating offerings. Praising and worshipping a free-willed
person. Making an unsuitable person do service. Praising suicide (child deaths).
|| Eleventh Uddeshak ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 246 ] sUtra 70 sUtra 83-84 sUtra =6-89 sUtra 73,76,78 rAtri meM zrAhAra rakhanA
yA khAnA aneka sUtroM meM niSiddha hai  /  virodhI rAjyoM ke bIca bAraMbAra
gamanAgamana karanA  /  sUtra 6 sUtra 6-62 sUtra 63-68 sUtra 69 sUtra 71-72
sUtra 77 sUtra 79 sUtra 80 sUtra 81-82 sUtra 85 satra 91 - bRhatkalpa u. 1, sU.
39 [nizayasUtra dIkSA yA bar3I dIkSA Adi ke prayogya kA kathana  /  sAdhvI ke
sthAna para sAdhu ko rahane Adi kA niSedha | -sthala ke liye vivecana dekheM  /
bRhatkalpasUtra u. 4 sUtra 90 namaka Adi ke saMgraha kA niSedha | isa uddezaka
ke 71 sUtroM ke viSaya kA kathana anya AgamoM meM nahIM hai, yathAvikaTa sthiti
meM arddhayojana ke Age se lAyA pAtra lenA  /  gRhastha kA zArIrika parikarma
karanA  /  sva-para ko bhayabhIta karanA, vismita karanA, viparIta avasthA meM
karanA bRhatkalpasUtra u. 3 - daza. pra. 6, gA. 18-19 yA kahanA  /  jo jisa
dharmavAlA ho usake sAmane usake dharma tattvoM kI prazaMsA karanA athavA usakI
jhUThI prazaMsA karanA  /  divasabhojana kI nindA va rAtribhojana kI prazaMsA
karanA  /  nAgADha paristhiti meM rAtri meM prazanAdi rakhanA  /  saMkhaDI ke
prahArArtha upAzraya kA parivartana karanA  /  naivedyapiMDa khAnA  /
svacchaMdAcArI kI prazaMsA, vaMdanA karanA  /  ayogya se sevAkArya karAnA  /
AtmaghAta (bAlamaraNoM) kI prazaMsA karanA  /   //  gyArahavAM uddezaka samApta
//

Page #347 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak: Atonement for Binding and Releasing Sentient Beings  **1.**
A monk who binds or approves of binding another sentient being with a **tarn-
paas** (grass rope), **muj-paas** (hair rope), **katt-paas** (wood rope),
**chamm-paas** (leather rope), **bett-paas** (cane rope), **rajju-paas** (hemp
rope), or **sutt-paas** (thread rope) incurs a minor atonement.  **2.** A monk
who releases or approves of releasing another sentient being bound with a
**tarn-paas** (grass rope) to a **sutt-paas** (thread rope) incurs a minor
atonement.  **Explanation:**  The word **kolun** signifies compassion or
empathy. Compassion is of two types:  1. Compassion towards a **shayyatar**
(householder) or similar individuals. 2. Compassion towards a sentient being.
1. If a monk is staying near a stable or enclosure and the householder leaves
for some work, and an animal tries to escape, then binding it or following the
householder's instructions to bind or release animals at specific times is
considered compassion towards the **shayyatar**.  2. If a bound animal is
struggling to break free, releasing it or binding it for its safety in a
designated place is considered compassion towards the animal.  A monk is a
**mudhajiv** (one who lives by begging) and practices **nihspprih** (non-
attachment) through **samyam** (self-control). Therefore, performing personal
tasks for a householder out of compassion goes against his **shraman
samaachari** (conduct of a monk).  Binding an animal can cause it suffering and
distress, leading to the **tajjan** (intentional) **himsa** (violence) offense.
Releasing an animal can also lead to harm if it gets injured, lost, or preyed
upon by other animals in the wild.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM uddezaka prasa prANiyoM ke baMdhana-vimocana kA prAyazcitta 1-je
bhikkhU koluNa-vaDiyAe aNNayaraM tasapANajAyaM, 1. taNa-pAsaeNa bA, 2. muja-
pAsaeNa vA, 3. kaTTa-pAsaeNa vA, 4. camma-pAsaeNa vA, 5. betta-pAsaeNa vA, 6.
rajjU-pAsaeNa vA, 7. sutta-pAsaeNa vA baMdhai, baMdhataM vA saaijji|| 2-je
bhikkhU koluNa-vaDiyAe aNNayaraM tasapANajAyaM taNa-pAsaeNa vA jAva sutta-
pAsaeNa vA baddhelayaM mucai mucataM vA saaijji| 1-jo bhikSu karuNA bhAva se
kisI trasa prANI ko 1. tRNa ke pAza se, 2. muja ke pAza se, 3. kASTha ke pAza
se, 4. carma ke pAza se, 5. vetra ke pAza se, 6. rajjU ke pAza se, 7. sUtra ke
pAza se bAMdhatA hai yA bAMdhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 2-jo bhikSu
karuNA bhAva se kisI trasa prANI ko tRNa-pAza se yAvat sUtra-pAza se baMdhe hue
ko kholatA hai yA kholane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| [use laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta AtA hai|] vivecana-koluNaM kAruNyaM, annukmpaa| -cUrNi cUrNikAra ne
koluNa zabda kA artha karuNA yA anukampA kiyA hai| karuNA do prakAra ko hotI
hai, yathA 1. zayyAtara Adi [ gRhasvAmI ] ke prati karuNA bhAva  /  2. kisI
trasa prANI ke prati karuNA bhAva  /  1. bhikSu yadi pazu Adi ke bAr3e ke nikaTa
hI ThaharA ho aura gRhasvAmI kisI kArya ke liye kahIM calA jAye, usa samaya koI
pazu bAr3e meM se nikalakara bAhara jA rahA ho to use bAMdhanA .athavA gRhasvAmo
bAhara jAte samaya yaha kahe ki "amuka samaya para ina pazuoM ko khola denA yA
bAhara se amuka samaya pazu AyeMge taba unheM bAMdha denA" to una pazuoM ko
bAMdhanA yA kholanA, yaha zayyAtara para kiyA gayA karuNA bhAva hai| 2. baMdhA
huA pazu baMdhana se mukta hone ke liye chaTapaTA rahA ho, use baMdhana se mukta
kara denA athavA surakSA ke liye khule pazu ko niyata sthAna para bAMdha denA
yaha pazu ke prati karuNA bhAva hai|| bhikSu mudhAjIvI hotA hai tathA niHspRha
bhAva se saMyama pAlana karatA hai ataH karuNA bhAva se gRhasvAmI kA nijI kArya
karanA, yaha usakI zramaNa samAcArI se viparIta hai| pazu ko bAMdhane para vaha
baMdhana se pIr3ita ho yA Akula-vyAkula ho to tajjanya hiMsA doSa lagatA hai  /
kholane para kucha hAni kara de, nikalakara kahIM guma jAye yA jaMgala meM calA
jAye aura vahAM koI dUsarA pazu use khA jAye yA mAra DAle to bhI doSa lagatA
hai|

Page #348 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[248] A monk should not stay in a place that breaks his samadhi. If he has to
stay there due to some reason, he should remain detached. In the eleventh
Uddeshak, performing household duties with a sense of service or attachment is
called Guru Chaturmasik Pratikraman. Opening and closing of animals etc. are
also household duties. However, if a monk performs any household duty out of
compassion in a special situation, then he incurs Laghu Chaturmasik Pratikraman
according to this sutra. And if he performs any worldly act like tying, opening
etc. out of attachment or affection for the householder, then he incurs Guru
Chaturmasik Pratikraman. - Although the acts of opening and closing of animals
etc. are not prescribed for the one who practices restraint, here, performing it
out of compassion is called Laghu Chaturmasik Pratikraman instead of Guru
Chaturmasik Pratikraman. Having compassion is the main characteristic of
Samyaktva, yet there are many restrictions on the restrained life of a monk so
that he does not get entangled in many household activities. If a monk has more
food or water than necessary, even if he is in a position to eat, he is not
allowed to give it to a hungry or thirsty person, either on request or without
request. Because this type of giving tendency or performing the tendency
mentioned in this sutra can gradually lead the monk to get entangled in many
activities and deviate from the main goal of restrained practice. In Uttara. A.
9 Ga. 40, Namiraj Rishi says to Shakrendra in response to the inspiration of
charity: "Tassavi Sanjamo Seo, Aditass Vi Kinchanam." Meaning - Restraint is
superior even to the great charity of a householder, even without giving
anything. There is a difference in the Pratikraman for the general situation of
compassion and the Pratikraman for the special situation, which depends on the
decision of the Pratikraman giver according to the meaning of the song. If an
animal or human being is in danger of death and there is no one to save them, if
a monk saves them in such a situation, he does not incur Chhed or Tap
Pratikraman. He only needs to be criticized by the Guru. _ If there is any act
of breaking the rules like tying, opening etc. household work, giving food and
water etc. or any act of violence against living beings in that tendency of
compassion, then Laghu Chaturmasik Pratikraman is incurred. _ Tirthankara
Bhagwan Mahavir Swami saved Goshalak, who was about to be burnt to ashes by Tejo
Leshya during the time of restrained practice, with his Shital Leshya and said
after attaining Kevalgyan: "I gave up Shital Leshya for the sake of compassion
for Goshalak, due to which the Tejo Leshya of the Vesh Yayana Bal Tapasvi was
obstructed." - Bhag. Sh. 15 Therefore, in this sutra, it should be understood
that there is no Pratikraman for compassion or compassion, but for the household
tendency or the tendency to break the rules of restraint that is done along with
it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 248] [nizIthasUtra bhikSu ko aise samAdhi bhaMga karane vAle sthAna para
ThaharanA hI nahIM cAhiye  /  kAraNavaza ThaharanA par3e to nispRha bhAva se
rahe  /  gyArahaveM uddezaka meM sevA bhAvanA se yA moha bhAva se gRhastha ke
kArya karane kA gurucAturmAsika prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| pazu Adi ko kholanA-
bAMdhanA bhI gahastha ke hI kArya haiM  /  phira bhI kisI vizeSa paristhiti meM
bhikSa karuNAbhAva se koI gahastha ke kArya kara le to use prastuta sUtra se
laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai aura gRhastha ke prati anurAga yA moha se
bAMdhanA-kholanA Adi koI bhI sAMsArika kRtya kare to use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta
AtA hai| - yadyapi pazu Adi ke kholane-bAMdhane Adi ke kArya saMyama samAcArI se
vihita nahIM haiM tathApi yahAM karuNA bhAva se kholane para gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta na kaha kara laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta kahA hai| anukampA bhAva
rakhanA yaha samyaktva kA mukhya lakSaNa hai, phira bhI bhikSu aise aneka
gRhastha, jIvana ke kAryoM meM na ulajha jAye isaliye usake saMyama jIvana kI
aneka maryAdAeM haiN| bhikSu ke pAsa AhAra yA pAnI AvazyakatA se adhika ho to
use paraThane kI sthiti hone para bhI kisI bhUkhe yA pyAse vyakti ko mAMgane
para yA binA mAMge denA nahIM kalpatA hai  /  kyoMki isa prakAra dene kI
pravRtti se yA prastuta sUtra kathita pravRtti karane se kramazaH bhikSu aneka
kRtyoM meM ulajha kara saMyama sAdhanA ke mukhya lakSya se dUra ho sakatA hai  /
uttarA. a. 9 gA. 40 meM namirAjarSi zakrendra ko dAna kI preraNA ke uttara meM
kahate haiM "tassAvi saMjamo seo, aditassa vi kiMcaNaM  // " arthAt-kucha bhI
dAna na karate hue gRhastha ke mahAn dAna se bhI saMyama zreSTha hai  /
anukampA bhAva kI sAmAnya paristhiti ke prAyazcitta meM evaM vizeSa paristhiti
ke prAyazcitta meM bhI antara hotA hai jo prAyazcittadAtA gItArtha ke nirNaya
para hI nirbhara rahatA hai| yadi koI pazu yA manuSya mRtyu saMkaTa meM par3e
hoM aura unheM koI bacAne vAlA na ho, aisI sthiti meM yadi koI bhikSu unheM bacA
le to use cheda yA tapa prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai| kevala guru ke pAsa use
AlocanA karanA Avazyaka hotA hai| _ yadi usa anukampA kI pravRtti meM bAMdhanA,
kholanA Adi gRhakArya, AhAra-pAnI denA Adi maryAdAbhaMga ke kArya yA
jIvavirAdhanA kA koI kArya ho jAye to laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai| _
tIrthakara bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI ne saMyamasAdhanA kAla meM tejolezyA se
bhasmabhUta hone vAle gozAlaka ko apanI zItalezyA se bacAyA aura kevalajJAna ke
bAda isa prakAra kahA ki "maiMne gozAlaka kI anukampA ke liye zItalezyA chor3I,
jisase vezyAyana bAlatapasvI kI tejolezyA pratihata ho gii| -bhaga. za. 15 ataH
prastuta sUtra meM karuNA bhAva yA anukampA bhAva kA prAyazcitta nahIM hai kintu
usake sAtha kI gaI gRhastha kI pravRtti yA saMyamamaryAdA bhaMga kI pravRtti kA
prAyazcitta hai, aisA samajhanA caahiye|

Page #349 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak] [249 Penance for Breaking Pratyakhyana 3-J Bhikkhu
AbhikKhanam-AbhikKhanam Pacchakkhanam Bhanjai Bhanjantam Va Saizjai. 3-A monk
who repeatedly breaks Pratyakhyana or approves of the one who breaks it. [He
receives the Laghu Chaturmasik penance.] Discussion-Repeatedly breaking
Pratyakhyana is called a strong fault in Dasha. D. 2. Repeatedly means many
times, here the commentator has said that this Sutra-mentioned penance comes
after breaking Pratyakhyana for the third time. Here, Pratyakhyana should be
understood as the right to Pratyakhyana like "Namukkar Sahiyam" etc. in the form
of Uttar Guna. That is, this penance comes after breaking "Namukkar Sahiyam"
etc. intentionally for the third time. Faults arising from breaking Pratyakhyana
"Apacchao Ya Avanno, Pasang Dosho Ya Adadhruta Dhamme. Maya Ya Musavaao, Hoi
Painnai Lovo Ya || Nishi. Bhashya, Ga. 3988 1. "Whoever repeatedly breaks Uttar
Guna Pratyakhyana, he will also break the Mula Guna Pratyakhyanas", thus he
becomes a subject of disbelief = distrust. 2. There is Avarnavada of himself or
the Sangha. 3. Breaking one Pratyakhyana leads to the possibility of breaking
other Mula Guna Pratyakhyanas and the tradition of many faults increases. 4.
There is no firmness in other Pratyakhyanas and in following the Shraman Dharma.
5. He does one thing in Pratyakhyana and another in conduct, which leads to the
use of Maya. For example, he takes Ekashana after rejecting Ayambil. 6. He says
one thing and does another, hence the fault of Mrishavaad is attached. For
example, he says "I am having Ekashana today" and eats twice. 7. He may speak
falsely with Maya to hide his own fault. 8. Breaking Pratyakhyana is a violation
of restraint. 9. Repeatedly breaking Pratyakhyana may cause a deity to become
angry and make him agitated. This is the penance for neglecting Pratyakhyana and
intentionally breaking it many times. But if the Aagaras mentioned in the
Pratyakhyana Sutra are used, then Pratyakhyana is not broken, but its criticism
should definitely be done with the Geetarth Bhikkhu.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM uddezaka] [249 pratyAkhyAna-bhaMga karane kA prAyazcitta 3-je bhikkhU
abhikkhaNaM-abhikkhaNaM paccakkhANaM bhaMjai bhaMjaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  3-jo
bhikSu bAraMbAra pratyAkhyAna bhaMga karatA hai yA bhaMga karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| [ use laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai| ] vivecana-
bAraMbAra pratyAkhyAna ke bhaMga karane ko dazA. da. 2 meM zabaladoSa kahA gayA
hai  /  bArambAra arthAt aneka bAra, yahAM bhASyakAra ne kahA hai ki tIsarI bAra
pratyAkhyAna bhaMga karane para yaha sUtrakathita prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  yahAM
pratyAkhyAna se uttaraguNa rUpa "namukkAra sahiyaM" Adi pratyAkhyAna kA adhikAra
samajhanA cAhiye  /  arthAt 'namukkAra sahiyaM" Adi kA saMkalpa pUrvaka tIsarI
bAra bhaMga karane para yaha prAyazcitta AtA hai| pratyAkhyAna-bhaMga karane se
hone vAle doSa "apaccao ya avaNNo, pasaMga doso ya adaddhRtA dhamme  /  mAyA ya
musAvAo, hoi paiNNAi lovo ya  //  nizI. bhASya, gA. 3988 1. "jo uttaraguNa-
pratyAkhyAna kA bArambAra bhaMga karatA hai, vaha mUlaguNa-pratyAkhyAnoM kA bhI
bhaMga karatA hogA", isa prakAra kI apratIti = avizvAsa kA pAtra hotA hai  /  2.
svayaM usakA yA saMgha kA avarNavAda hotA hai| 3. eka pratyAkhyAna ke bhaMga
karane se anya mUlaguNa-pratyAkhyAnoM ke bhaMga hone kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai
tathA aneka doSoM kI paramparA bar3hatI hai| 4. anya pratyAkhyAnoM meM tathA
zramaNadharma ke pAlana meM bhI dRDhatA nahIM rahatI hai| 5. pratyAkhyAna kucha
karatA hai aura AcaraNa kucha karatA hai, jisase mAyA kA sevana hotA hai  /
yathA-AyaMbila kA pratyAkhyAna karake ekAzanA kara le  /  6. kahatA kucha anya
hai aura karatA kucha anya hai, ataH mRSAvAda doSa lagatA hai  /  yathA'mere Aja
ekAzana hai, aisA kaha kara do bAra khA letA hai| 7. apane usa avaguNa ko
chipAne ke liye kabhI mAyA pUrvaka mRSA bhASaNa kara sakatA hai| 8. pratyAkhyAna
kA bhaMga hone para saMyama kI virAdhanA hotI hai| 9. bArambAra pratyAkhyAna
bhaMga karane se kadAcit koI deva ruSTa ho jAe to vikSiptacitta kara sakatA hai|
pratyAkhyAna ke prati upekSA bhAva se evaM saMkalpa pUrvaka aneka bAra
pratyAkhyAna bhaMga karane kA yaha prAyazcitta hai  /  kintu kadAcit
pratyAkhyAnasUtra meM kathita AgAroM kA sevana kiyA jAye to pratyAkhyAna bhaMga
nahIM hotA hai kintu usakI AlocanA gItArtha bhikSu ke pAsa avazya kara lenI

Page #350 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [250] **The Nishītha Sūtra is required. It is also necessary to seek the
guidance of the Gītartha before consuming any specific food. A Gītartha who is
not [Abahuśruta] or is not a Pariṇāmī or Atipariṇāmī monk is unfit to decide on
the consumption of food or exceptions to the rules.**  **It is also essential to
be mindful of the location, time, and person when deciding to consume food or
make exceptions. In difficult situations, one should firmly adhere to the
guidance of the Gītartha and refrain from consuming food. This not only brings
great benefit to oneself but also contributes to the influence of the
Jinaśāsana.**  **Therefore, a monk should firmly adhere to the principle of non-
violation of the vow of non-consumption, even once.**  **Prāyaścitta for
consuming food mixed with all bodies (Pratyekakāya-saṃyukta āhārakaraṇa-
prāyaścitta)**  **4. A monk who consumes food mixed with all bodies or approves
of such consumption.** [This incurs a Laghu-Cāumāsī Prāyaścitta.]
**Discussion:** The fourth Uddesaka mentions the Laghu-Māsīka Prāyaścitta for
consuming grains and seeds with awareness. The tenth Uddesaka mentions the Guru-
Cāumāsī Prāyaścitta for consuming food mixed with countless bodies, such as
fermented food. This Sūtra mentions the Laghu-Cāumāsī Prāyaścitta for consuming
food mixed with all bodies.  **The discussion of the aforementioned Sūtras is
found in their respective Uddesakas. Food mixed with all bodies includes:**  1.
**Food containing salt with awareness, where the salt has not been purified by
fire.** 2. **Buttermilk or juice of fruits, etc., containing water with
awareness, as long as they have not been purified by fire.** 3. **Dishes that
have coriander leaves, etc., added after being removed from the fire.**  **Here,
the mention is of substances containing countless living beings, as the mention
of substances containing all bodies in the form of grains and seeds has already
been made in the fourth Uddesaka. Therefore, food containing salt, water, and
certain plants with awareness, and where the substance or time for purification
by fire has not passed, is called food mixed with all bodies. If one becomes
aware of this after consuming such food, one should not consume it. If one
becomes aware after consuming some of it, one should spit out the remaining food
and perform the Prāyaścitta.**  **Cārṇikāra has mentioned the existence of food,
such as grains, containing various types of leaves, flowers, fruits, etc., with
awareness. He has also mentioned the custom of householders adding salt
immediately to food. If a monk consumes such food, it violates the principle of
non-violence towards living beings, thus polluting the first Mahāvrat.**  **The
Prāyaścitta for knowingly consuming such food, unknowingly consuming it, or
consuming it due to a compelling reason, differs. The decision rests with the
Gītartha. A table of Prāyaścitta is given at the beginning of the first
Uddesaka.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 250] [nizIthasUtra cAhiye  /  kabhI viziSTa prAgAra sevana ke pUrva bhI
gItArtha kI AjJA lenA Avazyaka hotA hai| agItArtha [abahuzruta] aura apariNAmI
yA atipariNAmI bhikSu AgAra-sevana aura apavAda-sevana ke nirNaya karane meM
ayogya hote haiN| AgAra-sevana yA apavAda-sevana meM kSetra, kAla yA vyakti kA
dhyAna rakha kara vivekapUrvaka pravRtti karanA bhI Avazyaka hotA hai| vikaTa
paristhiti meM bhI gItArtha ke netRtva meM dRr3hatA pUrvaka pratyAkhyAna kA
pAlana kiyA jAya evaM AgAroM kA sevana na kiyA jAya to vaha svayaM ke liye to
mahAn lAbha kA kAraNa hotA hI hai, sAtha hI usase jinazAsana kI bhI prabhAvanA
hotI hai| ataH bhikSu ko eka bAra bhI pratyAkhyAna bhaMga na karate hue dRr3hatA
pUrvaka usakA pAlana karanA caahiye| pratyekakAya-saMyukta AhArakaraNa-
prAyazcitta 4-je bhikkhU parittakAya-saMjuttaM AhAraM AhArei, AhAreMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  4- jo bhikSu pratyekakAya se mizrita AhAra khAtA hai yA khAne vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| [ use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|] vivecana-
caturtha uddezaka meM sacitta dhAnya aura bIja khAne kA laghumAsika prAyazcitta
kahA hai  /  dazaveM uddezaka meM phUlaNa Adi anaMtakAya se mizrita AhAra karane
kA gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA hai aura prastuta sUtra meM pratyekakAya-
saMyukta AhAra khAne kA laghu-caumAsI prAyazcitta kahA hai| pUrvokta sUtroM kA
vivecana una-una uddezakoM meM kiyA gayA hai, pratyekakAya-mizrita AhAra ye
haiM1. sacitta namaka se yukta AhAra, jisameM namaka zastrapariNata na huA ho|
2. sacitta pAnI yukta chAcha yA grAma kA rasa Adi, ye jaba taka zastrapariNata
nahIM hue hoN| 3. agni para se utAra lene ke bAda vyaMjana meM dhaniyA pattI Adi
DAle gaye hoN| yahA~ asaMkhya jIva yukta padArthoM kA kathana hai, kyoMki dhAnya
va bIja rUpa pratyekakAya ke padArthoM kA kathana cauthe uddezaka meM ho cukA
hai| ataH sacitta namaka, pAnI aura kucha vanaspatiyoM se yukta khAdya padArtha
hoM aura una sacitta padArthoM ke zastrapariNata hone yogya vaha dravya na ho yA
samaya na bItA ho to aise khAdya padArtha ko pratyekakAya-saMyukta AhAra kahA
gayA hai| grahaNa karane ke bAda jJAta hone para aisA AhAra nahIM khAnA cAhiye
aura khAne ke bAda yA kucha khAne ke bAda jJAta ho jAye to zeSa AhAra ko paraTha
kara usakA prAyazcitta le lenA caahiye| carNikAra ne aneka prakAra ke sacitta
patra, puSpa, phala Adi se bhI yukta azanAdi kA honA batAyA hai tathA kaI cIjoM
meM tatkAla namaka DAla kara gRhasthoM ke khAne ke rivAja kA kathana kiyA hai|
vaise padArtha sAdhu ke dvArA khAne para jIvavirAdhanA hone se prathama
mahAvrata dUSita hotA hai  /  jAnakara khAne para yA binA jAne khAne para athavA
prabala kAraNa se khAne para prAyazcitta bhinna-bhinna pAte haiM, inakA nirNaya
gItArtha para nirbhara hotA hai, unakI eka prAyazcitta-tAlikA prathama uddezaka
ke prArambha meM dI gaI hai|

Page #351 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak  [251 Sarom-Charma-Paribhog-Prayaschitta]  5- The monk who
uses or approves of the use of skin with hair. [He incurs a Laghu-Chaumasik
Prayaschitta.]  **Discussion:**  Generally, it is not appropriate for a monk to
keep skin [in the Utsargamarga]. It is permissible to keep and use it only when
necessary due to some reason. In old age, when the marrow of the body becomes
weak, the skin rubs against the bones of the waist and other parts, or if there
are diseases like leprosy, piles, etc., then skin can be used.  Skin is not a
medicinal accessory for a monk, therefore, all the sutras related to this topic
mentioned in the Brihatkalpasutra, Uddeshak 3, should be understood from the
perspective of exceptional situations.  The meaning of those sutras is that in
special circumstances, a monk or nun can take and keep a piece of skin without
hair, which is suitable for use. In a special situation, a monk can use skin
with hair according to the method mentioned in the sutras, but he cannot keep it
for a long time. For a nun, skin with hair is completely prohibited.  There are
the following disadvantages of using skin with hair:  1. Many microscopic
creatures are born in the hair. 2. Transcription cannot be done properly. 3. It
becomes moldy or gets infested with insects in the rain. 4. Keeping it in the
sun causes harm to those creatures.  If it is necessary to bring skin with hair
in any situation, then it should be brought from a blacksmith, goldsmith, etc.,
who use it for sitting all day and it is unnecessary for them at night. It
should be kept overnight and returned, because blacksmiths, goldsmiths, etc.,
work near fire all day, so the possibility of life arising in it is not possible
for one night. Therefore, keeping it for more than one night is prohibited.
Churnikar has said that this Prayaschitta mentioned in the sutras should be
understood for a monk, but if a nun uses skin with hair, then Guru-Chaumasik
Prayaschitta arises.  Explaining the reason for the complete prohibition for a
nun, the commentator says that skin with hair gives the feeling of touch like a
man, therefore, it is completely forbidden for a nun.  However, skin without
hair can be taken by a monk or nun in special circumstances and kept for a fixed
time. There is no mention of Prayaschitta in the sutras for keeping it.  The
commentator has said in the discussion of this sutra that if a monk keeps skin
without hair, he incurs Guru-Chaumasik Prayaschitta, and if a nun keeps it, she
incurs Laghu-Chaumasik Prayaschitta. This has been said from the perspective of
keeping it without any reason. Because keeping any accessory without any reason
is worthy of Prayaschitta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM uddezaka [251 saroma-carma-paribhoga-prAyazcitta 5-je bhikkhU
salomAiM cammAiM ahiTThai, ahidvaita vA sAijjai  /  5-jo bhikSu roma [keza]
yukta carma kA upayoga karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  [
use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai| ] vivecana-sAmAnyatayA [ utsargamArga meM
] sAdhu ko carma rakhanA nahIM kalpatA hai, kisI kAraNa se AvazyakatA paryanta
rakhA jAnA evaM upayoga meM lenA vihita hai| vRddhAvasthA meM zarIra kI majjA
kSINa hone para kamara Adi avayavoM kI asthiyoM se tvacA kA gharSaNa hotA hai
athavA kuSTha, arza Adi roga ho jAye to carma kA upayoga kiyA jA sakatA hai|
carma sAdhu kI audhika upadhi nahIM hai, ataH bRhatkalpasUtra, uddezaka 3 meM
kahe gaye isa viSaya ke sabhI sUtra apavAdika sthiti kI apekSA se hI kahe gaye
haiM, aisA samajhanA cAhiye  /  una sUtroM kA abhiprAya yaha hai ki vizeSa
paristhiti meM upayoga meM Ane yogya kaTA humA romarahita carmakhaNDa sAdhu-
sAdhvI le sakate haiM aura AvazyakatA ke anusAra rakha sakate haiN| kisI vizeSa
paristhiti meM sAdhu saromacarma bhI sUtrokta vidhi ke anusAra upayoga meM le
sakatA hai, kintu adhika samaya taka nahIM rakha sakatA hai  /  sAdhvI ke liye
saromacarma sarvathA niSiddha hai  /  saromacarma-prayoga karane meM nimna doSa
haiM, yathA1. romoM meM aneka sUkSma prANI utpanna ho jAte haiM  /  2.
pratilekhanA acchI taraha nahIM ho pAtI hai| 3. varSA meM kuthue yA phUlana ho
jAtI hai  /  4. dhUpa meM rakhane se una jIvoM kI virAdhanA hotI hai  /  kisI
paristhiti meM saroma-carma lAnA par3e to jo kubhakAra, lohAra Adi ke dina bhara
baiThane ke kAma A rahA ho aura rAtri meM unake yahA~ anAvazyaka ho to vaha lAnA
cAhie aura rAtri meM rakha kara vApisa de denA cAhie, kyoMki kubhakAra, luhAra
Adi ke dina bhara agni ke pAsa kAma karane ke kAraNa usameM eka rAtri taka
jIvotpati saMbhava nahIM rhtii| ataH eka rAtri se adhika rakhane kA niSedha kiyA
hai| cUrNikAra ne batAyA hai ki sAdhu ke lie yaha sUtrokta prAyazcitta samajhanA
cAhie, kintu sAdhvI saroma carma kA upayoga kare to gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA
hai| sAdhvI ke liye pUrNa niSedha kA kAraNa batAte hue vyAkhyAkAra kahate haiM
ki saroma carma meM puruSa jaise sparza kA anubhava hotA hai, ataH sAdhvI ke
liye vaha sarvathA varNya hai  /  kintu roma rahita carma vizeSa kAraNa hone
para sAdhu-sAdhvI le sakate haiM aura niyata samaya taka rakha sakate haiM  /
usake rakhane kA sUtra meM prAyazcitta nahIM kahA gayA hai| bhASyakAra ne isa
sUtra ke vivecana meM roma rahita carma rakhane para sAdhu ko gurucaumAsI aura
sAdhvI ko laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta Ane kA kahA hai, vaha akAraNa rakhane kI
apekSA se kahA gayA hai  /  kyoMki koI bhI aupagrahika upadhi akAraNa rakhanA
prAyazcitta yogya hai|

Page #352 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 252  The commentator has described in detail here other books, grass, etc.,
which are also prone to dust mites, due to the presence of dust mites in the
Nishith Sutra wrapped in leather. The summary is as follows:  1. **Book
Quintet:**     1. **Gandi Book:** A book that is square and long, with equal
width and thickness.     2. **Kachchhpi Book:** A book that is wider in the
middle and narrower at the edges, with less thickness.     3. **Musti Book:** A
book that is round, with a diameter of four fingers, or square with four fingers
in length and width.     4. **Samputa-Phalaka Book:** A book made from the
planks of trees, etc.     5. **Chhedapati Book:** A book made from the leaves of
palm trees, etc., with less width and more length and thickness, and with one,
two, or three holes in the middle.  All these books are prone to dust mites and
therefore difficult to read, hence they are considered unsuitable.  2. **Grass
Quintet:**     1. **Shali**, 2. **Vrihi**, 3. **Kodrava**, 4. **Ralak (Kangu)**
- these four are types of straw-like grass, and 5. **Praranyaka** - wild grass
like Shyamaka, etc.  These are also prone to dust mites. The description of
these grasses is found in the Uttaradhyayanasutra, Adhyaya 23, Gatha 17:
"Palalam phasuyam tattha, panchamam kusa tanani ya. Go yamas sa nisijjaae,
khippam sampaname."  **Toka:** This Gatha states that there are four types of
straw, seedless and suitable for bedding, and five types of Kusa grass. The
"chakara" indicates that other suitable grasses are also included.  The
commentator has called these five grasses unsuitable for reading due to the
presence of dust mites, and has also prescribed a short-term atonement for them.
The presence of dust mites in these straws is evident, yet they are called
"prasauk" in the above Gatha. The reason for this is that they become "prasauk"
when used by householders.  In the Agam era, both Sadhus and Shravaks used
straw, Darbha, etc. This is described in many Agams. Their use has become very
limited in the present time.  3. **Unsuitable Cloth Quintet:**     1.
**Koyavirui:** Cloth with Koyavirui attached.     2. **Pravaraka:** Large
blankets from Nepal, etc., with wool attached.     3. **Dadhigalli:** Cloth with
ten, i.e., pods attached.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 252 [nizIthasUtra saroma carma ke andara pola hone se bhASyakAra ne yahA~ anya
bhI pola yukta pustaka, tRNa Adi kA vistRta varNana kiyA hai  /  jisakA sArAMza
isa prakAra hai 1. pustakapaMcaka, 2. tRNapaMcaka, 3. duSpratilekhya
vastrapaMcaka, 4. apratilekhya vastrapaMcaka, 5. carmapaMcaka  /  1.
pustakapaMcaka 1. gaMDI pustaka-caur3AI, moTAI meM samAna arthAt caurasa laMbI
pustaka  /  2. kacchapI pustaka-bIca meM caur3I, kinAre kama caur3I, alpa moTAI
vaalii| 3. muSTi pustaka-cAra aMgula vistAra meM vRttAkAra gola athavA cAra
aMgula laMbI-caur3I samacaurasa  /  4. saMpuTa-phalaka pustaka-vRkSa Adi ke
phalaka se nirmita pustaka  /  5. chedapATI pustaka-tAr3a Adi ke pattoM se banI
pustaka, kama caur3I tathA lambAI va moTAI meM adhika evaM bIca meM eka, do yA
tIna chidra vaalii|| ye sabhI pustakeM jhuSira [polAra] yukta hone se
duSpratilekhya haiM, ataH akalpanIya haiM  /  2. tRNapaMcaka 1. zAli, 2. vrIhi,
3. kodrava, 4. rAlaka [ kaMgu ] ye cAra parAla rUpa tRNa aura 5. prAraNyaka-
jaMgalI zyAmAkAdi tRNa  /  ye bhI pola yukta hote haiN| ina tRNoM kA varNana
uttarAdhyayanasUtra a. 23, gA. 17 meM isa prakAra hai "palAlaM phAsuyaM tattha,
paMcamaM kusa taNANi ya  /  goyamassa nisijjAe, khippaM saMpaNAmae  // " TokA-
goyamasya upavezanArthaM prAsukaMnirbIjaM caturvidhaM palAlaM, paMcamAni
kuzatRNAni, cakArAt anyAnyapi sAdhuyogyAni tRNAni samarpayati  /  isa gAthA meM
inheM prAsuka kahA hai  /  inhIM pAMca ko bhASyakAra ne pola yukta hone se
duSpratilekhya kahA hai aura usakA laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta bhI kahA hai  /  ina
parAloM kA pola yukta honA pratyakSasiddha hai, phira bhI ukta gAthA meM inheM
prAsuka kahA hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki gRhastha ke upayoga meM A jAne se ve
prAsuka ho jAte haiN| Agama yuga meM parAla, darbha Adi kA upayoga sAdhu va
zrAvaka donoM hI karate the, aisA varNana aneka AgamoM meM upalabdha hai|
vartamAna meM inakA upayoga bahuta kama ho gayA hai  /  3. duSpratilekhya
vastrapaMcaka 1. koyavirUI lage hue vastra  /  2. prAvAraka-Una lage hue nepAla
Adi ke bar3e kambala  /  3. dADhigAli-daziyoM arthAt phaliyoM yukta vastra  /

Page #353 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak  **4. Purit-sthal San-Sutram-may Vastragalicha Adi.** **5.
Viralika-Dwisara Sutram-may Vastra.**  **4. Apratilekhya Vastra-Panchak** 1.
Upadhan-Hansa Rom Adi Se Bhara Sirhana, Takia. 2. Tooli-Sanskarit Kapas, Arkatul
Adi Se Bhara Sirhana. 3. Aalinganika-Purush Praman Lambha Va Gol Gadda Jis Par
Karvat Se Sote Samay Panv Hath Ghutne Kuhni Adi Rakhe Ja Sakenge. 4.
Gandopadhan-Galmasurika-Jo Karvat Se Sote Samay Muh Ke Niche Rakha Jay. 5.
Masurak-Masur Ki Dal Jaise Aakar Ke Gol Va Chhote Gadde Jo Kursi, Mudde Adi Par
Rakhe Jate Hain, Jin Par Ek Vyakti Baith Sakta Hai.  _These five mattresses or
pillows [Prosike] etc. are Apratilekhya Vastras, because they are filled with
cotton etc. and stitched._  **5. Chram-Panchak** 1. Go-Chram, 2. Mahish-Chram,
3. Aja [Bakri]-Chram, 4. Edak-[Bhed Ka] Chram, 5, Aranyak = Anya Mrig Adi
Vanyapashuchram.  _These five types of hairy skins are Agrahya. The atonement
for their acceptance and consumption is mentioned in the present Sutra. The
atonement for the acceptance of the remaining book-panchak etc. is mentioned in
the Bhashya, Churni, Laghchaumasi etc._  _The Bhashyakar has mentioned the
following defects of keeping book-panchak etc._  **1. Pustak-Panchak** 1. Bihar
mein Bhar Adhik Hota Hai. 2. Kandhon Par Ghav Ho Sakte Hain. 3. Pol Rahne Se
Pratilekhan Achchi Tarah Nahin Hota Hai. 4. Kuthuve, Phulan [Panak] Ki Utpatti
Ho Sakti Hai. 5. Dhan Ki Prasha Se Chor Chura Sakte Hain. 6. Tirthankar Bhagwan
Ne Inke Upayog Karne Ki Agyan Nahin Di Hai Arthat Prashnavyakaran Adi Agamon
Mein Kahe Gaye Bhikshu Ke Upakaranon Mein Inka Naam Nahin Hai. 7. Sthanantarit
Karne Mein Parimanth Hota Hai. 8. Sutra Likha Hua Hai Hi, Aisa Soch Kar Sadhu
Sadhvi Pramadavash Punaravritti Ya Kanthasthan Nahin Kare To Usse Shrut-Arth
Vinash Hota Hai. 9. Pustak Sambandhi Parikaram Mein Sutrarth Ke Swadhyay Ki Hani
Hoti Hai. 10. Akshar Likhne Mein Kuthuve Adi Pranion Ka Vadh Ho Sakta Hai.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM uddezaka] 4. pUrita-sthala sana-sUtramaya vastra-galIcA aadi| 5.
viralikA-dvisarA sUtramaya vstr| 4. apratilekhya vastra-paMcaka 1. upadhAna-
haMsa roma Adi se bharA sirahAnA, tkiyaa| 2. tUlI-saMskArita kapAsa, arkatUla
Adi se bharA sirahAnA  /  3. AliMganikA-puruSa pramANa lambA va gola gaddA jisa
para karavaTa se sote samaya pAMva hAtha ghuTane kuhanI Adi rakhe jA skeN| 4.
gaMDopadhAna-galamasUrikA-jo karavaTa se sote samaya muha ke nIce rakhA jAya  /
5. masUraka-masUra kI dAla jaise AkAra ke gola va choTe gadde jo kursI, muDDhe
Adi para rakhe jAte haiM, jina para eka vyakti baiTha sakatA hai| _ ye pAMcoM
gadde yA takiye [prosIke] Adi apratilekhya vastra haiM, kyoMki ye rUI Adi bhara
kara sile hue hote haiN| 5. carma-paMcaka 1. go-carma, 2. mahiSa-carma, 3. ajA
[bakarI]-carma, 4. eDaka-[bheDa kA] carma, 5, AraNyaka = anya mRga Adi
vanyapazucarma  /  ye pAMcoM prakAra ke roma yukta carma agrAhya haiM  /  inake
grahaNa evaM upabhoga kA prAyazcitta prastuta sUtra meM kahA gayA hai  /  zeSa
pustaka-paMcaka Adi ke grahaNa kA prAyazcitta bhASya, cUrNi meM laghacaumAsI Adi
batAyA hai| bhASyakAra ne pustaka-paMcaka Adi rakhane ke nimna doSa batAye haiM-
1. pustaka-paMcaka 1. bihAra meM bhAra adhika hotA hai  /  2. kaMdhoM para ghAva
ho sakate haiN| 3. pola rahane se pratilekhana acchI taraha nahIM hotA hai  /
4. kuthuve, phUlana [panaka] kI utpatti ho sakatI hai| 5. dhana kI prAzA se cora
curA sakate haiM  /  6. tIrthaMkara bhagavAn ne inake upayoga karane kI AjJA
nahIM dI hai arthAt praznavyAkaraNa Adi AgamoM meM kahe gaye bhikSu ke
upakaraNoM meM inakA nAma nahIM hai| 7. sthAnAMtarita karane meM parimaMtha hotA
hai| 8. sUtra likhA huA hai hI, aisA soca kara sAdhu sAdhvI pramAdavaza
punarAvRtti yA kaMThastha nahIM kareM to usase zruta-artha vinaSTa hotA hai  /
9. pustaka sambandhI parikarma meM sUtrArtha ke svAdhyAya kI hAni hotI hai  /
10. akSara likhane meM kuthuve Adi prANiyoM kA vadha ho sakatA hai  /

Page #354 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[254] [Nishith Sutra] 11. The bodies of many Sanghātim beings stick to the
letters or their blood gets on the letters. Four examples of killing living
beings - 1. Deer from the midst of the four-armed army, Sanpātim beings, 3.
Sesame seeds or Trasa beings from the oil mill etc. and many beings like fish
etc. may possibly escape, may also be saved, but the person who goes cannot be
saved. Therefore, it is said in the commentary 2. Tṛṇa-Pañcaka Jattiya mettā
vārā, muñcati, bandhati ya jattiyā vārā. Jatti akkharāṇi lihati va, tatti lahuga
ca āvajje. As many times as these books are opened, closed or as many letters
are written, so many times there is a small Chaturmasik atonement and the
atonement for the creature that dies also comes separately. 2. From ghee, milk
etc. 4. Caught in a net in the middle of the book Bha. Ga. 4008 1. There is
killing of small beings like Kuṭhue etc. 2. There is self-killing from poisonous
creatures. 3. Therefore, as many times as one turns over or contracts and
expands, so many small Chaturmasik atonements come. In the remaining three
Pañcakas, due to the transcription not being pure or due to the killing of
living beings, there is a violation of restraint. Therefore, due to the Bhūṣira
fault, these instruments are not fit to be taken. But in a situation of
exception, if these instruments are taken, then atonement should be taken for
them and they should be considered as inconceivable instruments or cursed
instruments. Brihatkalpasutra Uddesaka - 3 has a provision of limited use of
wool and leather for the Sadhu and there is also a description of taking Tṛṇa-
Pañcaka in Uttaradhyayanasutra Pra. 23 etc. many Agamas. From these
descriptions, it is concluded that sometimes, due to circumstances, these
Bhūṣira instruments can also be kept in a way that does not kill living beings,
according to that method and limit. But when the killing of living beings is
possible or not necessary, then they should be abandoned.  Due to physical
circumstances, if necessary, the Charma Pañcaka and Tṛṇa-Pañcaka or Vastra-
Pañcaka can be taken and used, in the same way, due to reasons like forgetting
the scriptures etc., books etc. means can also be kept with the said discretion,
as they are helpful in studies. It is the necessary conduct of a Bhikshu to
transcribe and clean both times the technical and cursed titles kept with him.
Accordingly, if books are to be kept as his title, then they should also be
transcribed and cleaned both times as per the rules. By doing so, there is no
possibility of the faults mentioned in the commentary and there is also
convenience in the worship of knowledge.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 254] [ nizIthasUtra 11. kaI saMghAtima jIvoM ke kalevara akSaroM para cipaka
jAte haiM athavA unakA khUna akSaroM para laga jAtA hai  /  jIvavadha ke cAra
dRSTAnta - 1. caturaMgiNI senA ke bIca se hiraNa, saMpAtima jIva, 3. tela kI
ghANI Adi meM se tila yA trasa jIva tathA matsya ityAdi aneka jIva kadAcit chUTa
bhI sakate haiM, baca bhI sakate haiM, kintu jAne vAlA prANI nahIM baca sakatA
/  isaliye bhASya meM kahA hai 2. tRNa-paMcaka jattiya mettA vArA, muMcati,
baMdhati ya jattiyA vArA  /  jatti akkharANi lihati va, tatti lahugA ca Avajje
//  ina pustakoM ko jitanI bAra khole, baMda kare yA jitane akSara likhe utanI
bAra laghucAturmAsika prAyazcittAtA hai aura jo prANI mara jAya usakA
prAyazcitta bhI alaga AtA hai  /  2. ghI-dUdha Adi meM se 4. jAla meM phaMsA huA
pustaka ke bIca meM zrA bhA. gA. 4008 1. kuthue Adi choTe jIvoM kI virAdhanA
hotI hai  /  2. jaharIle jIva-jantu se AtmavirAdhanA hotI hai  /  3. ataH jitanI
bAra karavaTa badale athavA AkuMcana-prasAraNa kare, utane laghucAturmAsika
prAyazcitta Ate haiM  /  zeSa tInoM paMcaka meM pratilekhana zuddha na hone se
yA jIvavirAdhanA hone se saMyama virAdhanA hotI hai  /  grataH bhuSira doSa ke
kAraNa ye upakaraNa grahaNa karane yogya nahIM haiM  /  kintu zrApavAdika sthiti
meM yadi ye upakaraNa grahaNa kiye jAeM to usakA prAyazcitta lenA cAhiye aura
inheM akalpanIya upakaraNa yA zrapagrahika upakaraNa samajhanA cAhiye  /
bRhatkalpasUtra uddezaka - 3 meM sAdhu ke liye saroma carma kA maryAdA yukta
vidhAna hai tathA tRNapaMcaka bhI grahaNa karane kA uttarAdhyayana pra. 23 Adi
aneka zrAgamoM meM varNana hai  /  ina varNanoM se yaha phalita hotA hai ki
kabhI paristhitivaza ye bhuSira upakaraNa bhI jIvavirAdhanA na ho, usa vidhi se
evaM maryAdA se rakhe jA sakate haiM  /  kintu jaba jIvoM kI virAdhanA sambhava
ho yA AvazyakatA na rahe taba unheM chor3a denA cAhiye  /  zArIrika paristhiti
se grAvazyaka hone para carma paMcaka aura tRNa-paMcaka yA vastra - paMcaka
grahaNa karake upayoga meM liye jA sakate haiM, usI prakAra zrutavismRti Adi
kAraNoM se, adhyayana meM sahayogI hone se pustaka Adi sAdhana bhI ukta viveka
ke sAtha rakhe jA sakate haiM  /  apane pAsa rakhI jAne vAlI praudhika aura
propagrahika upadhi kA ubhaya kAla pratilekhana, pramArjana karanA bhikSu kA
prAvazyaka grAcAra hai| tadanusAra yadi pustakoM ko apanI upadhi rUpa meM
rakhanA ho to unakA bhI ubhaya kAla yathAvidhi pratilekhana, pramArjana karanA
caahiye| aisA karane para bhASyokta doSoM kI sambhAvanA bhI nahIM rahatI hai
aura jJAna - prArAdhanA meM bhI suvidhA rahatI hai  /

Page #355 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak  [255 Compared to the books of the past, the books of the
present age have very little Jhushira. Therefore, the possibility of defects in
them is also less. Many types of living beings are born in uncopied books kept
in knowledge repositories without proper discernment. There is a high
possibility of killing living beings while using such books, therefore, proper
discernment should be exercised. Penance for sitting on a covered platform 6-J
If a monk sits or approves of sitting on 1. a grass platform [stool etc.], 2. a
straw platform, 3. a dung platform, 4. a cane platform, 5. a wooden platform
covered with a householder's cloth, he incurs [a minor four-month penance].
Discussion: The word "ahi-chhe" refers to all actions like sitting, sleeping,
standing etc. The platforms mentioned in the sutra [bajot etc.] are generally
used for sitting. The sutra mentions platforms made of grass etc. These
platforms can be used by the monk. But if they are covered with a householder's
cloth, then sitting on them incurs a minor four-month penance. If they are
defective due to Jhushira, then they are not acceptable and the defects
mentioned in the fifth sutra should be understood. If there is no defect related
to Jhushira, then other auxiliary equipment made of grass, cane etc. can also be
acceptable. It is permissible for a monk to accept a platform, stool, bed, and
bedding, but it is not permissible for a monk to use a householder's cloth.
Therefore, a platform etc. covered with cloth is not permissible. Because a
platform covered with cloth has defects due to uncopying or improper copying,
and killing living beings is also possible. Therefore, the penance for using a
platform covered with cloth is mentioned in the present sutra. Penance for
getting a Nigranthi's shawl stitched 7-J If a monk gets a Nigranthi's [shawl]
stitched by a non-Jain or a householder, or approves of getting it stitched, he
incurs [a minor four-month penance]. Discussion: "Sanghāḍīo cauro, ti-pamanā tā
puṇo bhave duviha. Egamanegakkhanḍī, ahigaro anegakkhanḍīe ||4026||" ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM uddezaka] [255 bhASyakAla kI pustakoM kI apekSA vartamAna yuga kI
pustakoM meM jhuSira avasthA bhI atyalpa hotI hai  /  isa kAraNa se bhI inameM
doSa kI sambhAvanA alpa hai| jJAnabhaMDAroM meM ucita viveka kie binA rakhI jAne
vAlI apratilekhita pustakoM meM aneka prakAra ke jIva utpanna ho jAte haiM, una
pustakoM kA upayoga karane meM jIvavirAdhanA kI atyadhika sambhAvanA rahatI hai,
ataH usakA yathocita viveka rakhanA caahiye| vastrAcchAdita pIDhe para baiThane
kA prAyazcitta 6-je bhikkhU 1. taNapIDhagaM vA, 2. palAlapIDhagaM vA, 3.
chagaNapIDhagaM vA, 4. vettapIDhagaM vA, 5. kaTThapIDhagaM vA
paravattheNocchaNNaM ahichei, ahidrutaM vA saaijji| 6-jo bhikSu gRhastha ke
vastra se DhaMke hue, 1. ghAsa ke pIr3he [caukI Adi] para, 2. parAla ke pIr3he
para, 3. gobara ke pIr3he para, 4. beMta ke pIr3he para, 5. kASTha ke pIr3he
para baiThatA hai yA baiThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| [use laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta AtA hai|] vivecn"ahiche|" kriyA pada se baiThanA, sonA, khar3e
rahanA Adi sabhI kriyAeM samajha lenI cAhiye sUtrokta por3he [bAjoTa Adi] prAyaH
baiThane ke upayoga meM Ate haiM  /  sUtra meM tRNa Adi se nirmita pIDhoM kA
kathana hai| ye pIr3he bhikSu grahaNa karake upayoga meM le sakatA hai| kintu
ina para gRhastha ke vastra bichAye hue hoM to baiThane para laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta prAtA hai| yadi jhuSira doSa yukta hoM to ye agrAhya hote haiM aura
inake grahaNa karane para pAMcaveM sUtra meM kahe doSa samajha lene caahie|
jhuSira saMbaMdhI doSa na ho to tRNa, beMta aAdi se nirmita anya aupagrahika
upakaraNa bhI grAhya ho sakate haiN| bhikSu ko pIDha-phalaga-zayyA-saMstAraka
grahaNa karanA to kalpatA hai kintu gRhastha kA vastra sAdhu ko upayoga meM lenA
nahIM kalpatA hai  /  ataH vastra yukta pIDhAdi akalpanIya haiN| kyoMki vastra
yukta pIDhe meM apratilekhanA yA duSpratilekhanAjanya doSa hote haiM tathA
jIvavirAdhanA bhI saMbhava rahatI hai| ataH vastra yukta pIDhe ke upayoga karane
kA prastuta sUtra meM prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| nigraMthI kI zATikA silavAne kA
prAyazcitta 7-je bhikkhU NiggaMthIe saMghADi aNNautthieNa vA gArathieNa vA
sivAvei khivAvetaM vA saaijji| 7-jo bhikSu sAdhvI kI saMghATikA [cAdara] ko
anyatIthika yA gRhastha se silavAtA hai yA silavAne vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| [ use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai| ] vivecana-"saMghADIo cauro, ti-
pamANA tA puNo bhave duvihA  /  egamaNegakkhaMDI, ahigAro aNegakhaMDIe  // 4026
//

Page #356 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīthসূত্র  **For a sādhvī, it is prescribed to have four sheets.** This is
based on the number of sheets. **In terms of measurement, it is prescribed to
have sheets of three measurements:** [4 cubits, 3 cubits, 2 cubits].  **These
sheets can be made of one piece or multiple pieces.** A sheet made of one piece
does not require stitching, but a sheet made of multiple pieces requires
stitching or getting it stitched. Therefore, the present sūtra refers to the
right of a sheet made by joining multiple pieces of cloth.  **A bhikṣu or
bhikṣuṇī can do the necessary stitching themselves.** If there is no one to do
it, then they can get it done from each other with the knowledge of the
gītartha, due to circumstances.  **If at any time, no bhikṣu or bhikṣuṇī nearby
can do the stitching, then if they get it stitched from a householder, then
according to Uddesaka 5 sū. 12, they incur a laghumāsika prāyaścitta.** However,
if a sādhvī gets her sheet stitched by a householder, then according to the
present sūtra, they incur a laghucoumāsika prāyaścitta.  **Getting clothes
stitched from a householder is not within the bounds of a sādhvī's conduct.**
However, there is a possibility of other faults in getting a sādhvī's sheet
stitched. For example, the householder who stitches it may ask whose sheet it
is. If the correct answer is given, then they may use it for vashikaran
(hypnotic control), or they may spread false rumors about the sādhvī's
brahmacharya (celibacy). Therefore, it is best not to do this.  **If it is
necessary to get it stitched from a householder, then it should be done with
discretion in the following order:**  **Bhāṣya Gāthā:** "Pachchakaḍ, sābhiggah,
ṇirabhiggah, bhaddae ya asannī. Gihi aṇṇatitthiēṇ vā, gihi puvvaṁ ētare
pachcha."  **The meaning of this gāthā has been explained in the discussion of
Uddesaka 1 sūtra 15.**  **Thānāṅg Pra. 4 sū. 59 and Prāchā. Śru. 2. 5 u. 1 state
that a sādhvī should have 4 sheets and their measurements.** Āchārāṅgasūtra also
states that if cloth of the prescribed measurement is not available, then pieces
of cloth of lesser measurement should be joined together to make a sheet of the
prescribed measurement. Therefore, in such a situation, it becomes necessary to
stitch or get it stitched. In such a case, if one acts with awareness of the
sūtra's instructions, then there is no prāyaścitta.  **Sthāvara Kāya - Himsā
Prāyaścitta**  **2. Āukāyass vā,**  **8. Je bhikṣu 1. Puḍhavikāsa vā, 3.
Agaṇikāyass vā 4. Vāukāyass vā, 5. Vaṇassai kāyass vā, kalmāyam avi samāraṃbhaī,
samāraṃbhatam vā sāijjai.** 8. Any bhikṣu who commits violence, even in a small
amount, against 1. Earth, 2. Water, 3. Fire, 4. Air, or 5. Plants, or approves
of such violence, incurs a laghucoumāsika prāyaścitta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ nizIthasUtra sAdhvI ko saMkhyA kI apekSA se cAra cAdara rakhanA kalpatA hai
/  pramANa arthAt nApa kI apekSA se tIna pramANa vAlI [ 4 hAtha, 3 hAtha, 2
hAtha ] cAdara rakhanA kalpatA hai  /  256] ye cAdareM eka khaMDa vAlI yA aneka
khaMDa vAlI bhI ho sakatI haiM  /  eka khaMDa vAlI meM silAI karane kI
AvazyakatA nahIM hotI hai, kintu aneka khaMDa vAlI meM silAI karane kI yA silAI
karavAne SataratA hotI hai  /  ataH prastuta sUtra meM aneka vastrakhaMDa jor3a
kara banAI jAne vAlI cAdara kAhI adhikAra hai  /  bhikSu yA bhikSuNI silAI kA
Avazyaka kArya svataH hI kara sakate haiM  /  koI karane vAlA na ho to
paristhitivaza gItArtha kI prAjJA se ve paraspara karavA sakate haiM  /  kisI
samaya samIpastha bhikSu yA bhikSuNI koI bhI silAI kA kArya na kara sake taba ve
svayaM gRhastha se silavAyeM to uddezaka 5 sU. 12 ke anusAra laghumAsika
prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  kintu sAdhvI kI cAdara sAdhu gRhastha ke dvArA
silavAve to prastuta sUtra ke anusAra laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  /
gRhastha se vastra silavAnA bhI sAdhu kI maryAdA meM nahIM hai tathApi sAdhvI kI
cAdara silavAne meM aura bhI anya doSoM kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai  /  yathA ne
vAlA gRhastha pUcha bhI sakatA hai ki kisakI cAdara hai ? sahI uttara dene se
jAnakArI hone para vazIkaraNa prayoga kara sakatA hai, sAdhu ke brahmacarya meM
zaMkita hokara galata pracAra kara sakatA hai  /  ataH aisA nahIM karanA hI
uttama hai  /  gRhastha se silavAnA Avazyaka hone para nIce likhe krama se
vivekapUrvaka karavAnA cAhiye bhASya gAthA "pacchAkaDa, sAbhiggaha,
Nirabhiggaha, bhaddae ya asaNNI  /  gihi aNNatitthieNa vA, gihi puvvaM etare
pacchA  //  isa gAthA ke artha kA spaSTIkaraNa uddezaka 1 sUtra 15 ke vivecana
meM kiyA gayA hai ThANAMga pra. 4 sU. 59 evaM prAcA. zru. 2 . 5 u. 1 meM sAdhvI
ko 4 cAdara rakhane kA tathA usake pramANa kA kathana hai  /  AcArAMgasUtra meM
yaha bhI kahA gayA hai ki ukta pramANa kA vastra na mile to kama pramANa vAle
vastra khaMDoM ko paraspara jor3akara ukta pramANa vAlI cAdara banA lenI cAhiye
/  ataH aisI sthiti meM silAI karanA yA karavAnA Avazyaka ho jAtA hai, taba
sUtrAjJA kA dhyAna rakhakara pravRtti karane para prAyazcitta nahIM prAtA hai  /
sthAvara kAya - hiMsA prAyazcitta 2. AukAyassa vA, 8-je bhikkha 1. puDhavikAsa
vA, 3. agaNikAyassa vA 4. vAukAyassa vA, 5. vaNassaikAyassa vA, kalamAyamavi
samAraMbhai, samAraMbhataM vA sAijjai  /  8 - jo bhikSu 1. pRthvI kAya, 2.
apkAya, 3. agnikAya, 4. vAyukAya yA 5. vanaspatikAya kI alpa mAtrA meM bhI hiMsA
karatA hai yA hiMsA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  [ use laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta trAtA hai  /  ]

Page #357 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak  **Discussion**  The number of beings in the earth element
is very small.  **Explanation**  The five single-sense beings, starting with the
earth element, are described in Acharanga Sutra, Chapter 1, Section 1. Their
existence, the types of their violence, and the causes of their violence are
described there.  The vow of not harming them is mentioned in Dashavaikalika
Sutra, Chapter 4. The nature of the Muni's vow in this regard is also mentioned
in Dashavaikalika Sutra, Chapter 6.  The Bhagavati Sutra, Pannavanasutra,
Uttaradhyayanasutra, and other Agamas describe the various types of beings in
the earth element.  **[257]**  The Nisitha Bhashya Pithika Gatha 145 to 257
discusses in detail how a monk can commit violence against the five stationary
beings, starting with the earth element, and the various options for their
atonement. Therefore, one should study the above-mentioned texts for detailed
information.  Here are some places where violence can occur:  **Places where
violence against the earth element can occur:**  1. **In the vicinity of a
dwelling:**  If one receives alms with a hand or a utensil that is smeared with
the powder of any of the following eleven substances, it constitutes violence
against the earth element: 1. Black soil, 2. Red soil, 3. Alkali, 4. Orpiment,
5. Realgar, 6. Manjistha, 7. Collyrium, 8. Salt, 9. Ochre, 10. Yellow soil
(Met), 11. Alum.  Or, if the giver gives alms while grinding or mixing these
substances, it constitutes violence against them.  2. **On the path:** If the
path is made of or contains any of the following, walking on it constitutes
violence against the earth element: 1. Black, red, or yellow soil with life, 2.
Mud, 3. Sand, 4. Gravel, 5. Pieces of stone, 6. Salt, 7. Alkali, 8. Coal.  Land
that has been recently plowed, the ground beneath fruit-bearing trees, and land
that has become wet due to rain and is not used for walking are also considered
mixed. The soil that forms a crust on the banks of rivers, ponds, or ditches
when the water dries up becomes inhabited. Walking or sitting on these places
constitutes violence against the earth element.  Generally, the top four fingers
of soil become lifeless due to walking, cold, heat, etc., and the soil below
that is either mixed or inhabited.  On a path where the earth is inhabited or
mixed, it becomes lifeless within one to three praharas due to the movement of
humans and other beings.  Soft earth becomes completely lifeless after being
thoroughly ground, while hard earth becomes lifeless only on the surface after a
change in color. This is because the hardness prevents the inner beings from
being harmed by the touch of feet, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavA~ uddezaka ] vivecana kalamAyaMti stoka pramANaM  /  cUrNi  /  pRthvIkA
Adi ye pAMcoM ekendriya jIva haiM  /  inake astitva kA inakI virAdhanA ke
prakAroM kA aura virAdhanA ke kAraNoM kA varNana AcA. zru. 1, pra. 1 meM kiyA
gayA hai  /  dazavai. pra. 4 meM inakI virAdhanA na karane kI pratijJA karane kA
kathana hai  /  dazave. a. 6 meM bhI isa viSaya meM muni kI pratijJA kA svarUpa
kahA gayA hai  /  bhagavatIsUtra, pannavaNAsUtra, uttarAdhyayanasUtra ityAdi
zrAgamoM meM pRthvIkAya Adi ke bhedaprabheda batAye gaye haiM  /  [257 nizItha
bhASya pIThikA gAthA. 145 se 257 taka pRthvIkAya prAdi pA~ca sthAvaroM kI
virAdhanA bhikSu dvArA kitane prakAra se ho sakatI hai aura unake prAyazcitta ke
kitane vikalpa hote haiM ityAdi viSayoM kA vistRta vivecana kiyA gayA hai  /
ataH vistRta jAnakArI ke liye uparyukta sthaloM kA adhyayana karanA cAhiye  /
kucha virAdhanAsthala isa prakAra haiM pRthvIkAya kI virAdhanA ke sthAna 1.
gocarI meM - sacittaraja-yukta hAtha Adi tathA 1. kAlI - lAla miTTI, 2. USa -
khAra, 3. haratAla, 4. hiMgulaka, 5. mensila, 6. aMjana, 7. namaka, 8. gerU, 9.
pIlI miTTI ( meTa), 10. khaDDI [ khaDiyA ], 11. phiTakarI, ina gyAraha ke cUrNo
[piSToM ] se lipta hAtha, kur3achI yA bartana se bhikSA grahaNa karane para
pRthvIkAya kI virAdhanA ho jAtI hai  /  athavA inakA saMghaTTana Adi karate hue
dAtA bhikSA debe to inakI virAdhanA ho jAtI hai  /  2. mArga meM - 1. kAlI,
lAla, pIlI sacitta miTTI, murar3a, reta, bajarI [dANA ], 2. pattharoM ye Tukar3e
[ giTTI Adi ], 3. namaka, 4 USa - khAra, 5. patthara ke koyale Adi yukta mArga
ho yA padArtha mArga meM bikhare hue hoM to ina para calane se pRthvIkAya kI
virAdhanA ho jAtI hai  /  tatkAla hala calAI huI bhUmi, madhura phala vAle
vRkSoM ke nIce kI vistRta bhUmi aura varSA se gIlI banI gamanAgamana rahita
sthAna kI bhUmi bhI mizra hotI hai  /  nadI, tAlAba Adi ke kinAre yA khaDDoM meM
pAnI ke sUkhane para jo miTTI papar3I bana jAtI hai, vaha sacitta ho jAtI hai  /
ina para calane baiThane Adi se pRthvIkAya kI virAdhanA ho jAtI hai  /
sAmAnyatayA Upara kI cAra aMgula bhUmi gamanAgamana, sardI, garmI Adi se acitta
ho jAtI hai aura usake nIce kramaza: kahIM mizra yA kahIM sacitta hotI hai  /
mArga meM jahA~ sacitta yA mizra pRthvI ho vahA~ manuSya Adi ke gamanAgamana se
eka yA do - tIna prahara meM pracitta ho jAtI hai  /  komala pRthvI acchI taraha
pisa jAne ke bAda pUrNa pracitta ho jAtI hai aura kaThora pRthvI varNa
parivartana ho jAne para kevala Upara se pracitta ho jAtI hai, kyoMki usameM
kaThoratA ke kAraNa andara ke jIvoM kI pAMva ke sparza Adi se virAdhanA nahIM
hotI hai  /

Page #358 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [258] [Nishīthasūtra] **Places of Violation of Apkāya**  **1. In Gocharī:**
* 1. Accepting alms from a giver who touches water with his hands, etc. * 2.
Accepting alms from a giver who touches water with oily hands, etc. * 3.
Accepting alms from a giver who has committed a Pūrvakarmadoṣa. * 4. Accepting
alms from a giver who has committed a Paścātkarmadoṣa. * 5. Accepting alms from
a giver who touches water, etc.  **2. On the Path:** * 1. Walking in the water
of a river, stream, pond, etc. * 2. Walking on the ground where there is dew,
dust, or rainwater. * 3. Walking on water that has fallen on the path, or
touching water placed or thrown by someone else.  **In Vihar:** * Crossing water
that reaches the thighs or waist can also lead to the violation of Apkāya.
**Note:** * As long as the subtle particles of water exist in the above-
mentioned places, they remain sentient. * When the moisture of water that has
fallen on the path disappears, i.e., when the water is completely absorbed into
the earth, it becomes insentient. * When the water of a river, pond, etc., dries
up completely, there are no Apkāya beings in it, but the sentience of Pṛthvīkāya
remains there for some time.  **Places of Violation of Agnīkāya**  **1. In
Gocharī:** * Taking an object that has been in contact with fire, or taking an
object placed on fire, or starting a fire in any way by the giver for the
purpose of giving alms.  **2. In Upāśraya:** * It is not appropriate for a monk
to stay in a place with fire or a lamp. However, it is permissible to stay there
for one or two days if no other place is available.  **Note:** * If a monk
happens to stay in such a place, he may inadvertently violate Agnīkāya while
performing actions like copying, cleaning, walking, etc.  **Places of Violation
of Vāyukāya**  **1. Fanning any hot substance to cool it down.**  **2. Fanning
oneself with any means due to heat.**  **Note:** * The commentator has also
stated that sitting in a wind-driven breeze for a householder, or going to an
open place and making a resolution like "Let the wind come," is also a type of
violation of Vāyukāya.  **3. While performing the necessary activities of
copying, etc., while performing various (parikarma) actions of the body and
equipment, while walking, standing, sitting, sleeping, speaking, or eating, and
while placing, lifting, or rubbing any object, if these actions are performed
with the stirring of air, it leads to the violation of Vāyukāya.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 258] [nizIthasUtra apakAya kI virAdhanA ke sthAna 1. gocarI meM-1. udakA hAtha
Adi se, 2. sasnigdha hAtha Adi se, 3. pUrvakarmadoSa se, 4. pazcAtkarmadoSa se
aura 5. jala kA sparza Adi karane vAle dAtA se bhikSA grahaNa karane para apkAya
kI virAdhanA hotI hai| 2. mArga meM-1. nadI, nAlA, tAlAba Adi ke pAnI meM, 2.
bhUmi para prosa, dhUara aura varSA ke par3e hue pAnI meM, 3. mArga meM gire hue
pAnI para calane se yA kisI anya ke rakhe hue yA pheMke jAte hue pAnI kA sparza
Adi hone se apkAya kI virAdhanA ho jAtI hai| vihAra meM kabhI jaMghAsaMtArima yA
nAvAsaMtArima pAnI ko pAra karake jAne meM bhI apkAya kI virAdhanA ho AtI hai| _
uparyukta sthAnoM meM pAnI ke sUkSma aMza kA astitva rahe taba taka vaha sacitta
rahatA hai| mArga meM gire hue pAnI kI snigdhatA samApta ho jAne para arthAt
pRthvI meM pAnI ke pUrNatayA vilIna ho jAne para vaha acitta ho jAtA hai| nadI,
tAlAba Adi kA pAnI pUrNatayA sUkha jAne para usameM apkAya ke jIva to nahIM
rahate haiM kintu vahA~ kucha samaya taka pRthvIkAya kI sacittatA rahatI hai|
agnikAya kI virAdhanA ke sthAna 1. gocarI meM agni ke anaMtara yA parampara
sparza karatI huI vastu lene se yA agni para rakhI huI vastu lene se athavA
bhikSA dene ke nimitta dAtA dvArA kisI prakAra se agni kA prAraMbha karane para
agnikAya kI virAdhanA ho jAtI hai  /  2. upAzraya meM-agni yA dIpaka yukta
sthAna meM ThaharanA bhikSu kI nahIM kalpatA hai  /  kintu anya sthAna ke na
milane para eka yA do dina vahAM ThaharanA kalpatA hai  /  _-bRhatkalpa u. 2
bhikSu kabhI paristhitivaza aise sthAna meM ThaharA ho to vahA~ usake
pratilekhana, pramArjana, gamanAgamana aAdi kriyAe~ karate hue asAvadhAnI se
agnikAya kI virAdhanA ho jAtI hai  /  vAyukAya kI virAdhanA ke sthAna 1. kisI
bhI uSNa padArtha ko zItala karane ke lie havA karane se vAyukAya kI virAdhanA
ho jAtI hai| 2. garmI ke kAraNa zarIra para kisI bhI sAdhana se havA karane para
vAyukAya kI virAdhanA ho jAtI hai| bhASyakAra ne yaha bhI batAyA hai ki gRhastha
ke liye saMcAlita havA meM baiThanA athavA khule sthAna meM jAkara "havA Ave"
isa prakAra kA saMkalpa karanA bhI vAyukAya kI virAdhanA kA prakAra hai| 3.
pratilekhana Adi saMyama kI Avazyaka pravRtti karane meM, zarIra aura upakaraNa
ke aneka (parikarma) kArya karane meM, calanA, khar3e honA, baiThanA, sonA,
bolanA yA khAnA tathA koI bhI vastu rakhane, uThAne yA paraThane meM havA kI
udIraNA karate hue ayatanA se ye kArya karane para vAyukAya kI virAdhanA hotI
hai|

Page #359 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak  [259] From a subtle perspective, every movement of the body
involves the violation of the Vayu-kaya. This violation continues until the time
of Yoga-nirodha at the end of the thirteenth Gunasthan. It has no relation to
the rules of restraint or this atonement chapter.  It is not permissible for a
monk to fan himself to cool down a substance or to calm down bodily heat.
Performing essential activities with 'effort' leads to the binding of sinful
karma, i.e., it is considered a Savadya activity.  - Dasha. Pra. 4  The meaning
of 'effort' - In performing any action, moving the hands, feet, body, or tools
with rapid speed, throwing something upwards when placing it down, and not using
the hands, etc., in essential bodily processes like sneezing, coughing, etc.,
should be understood as 'effort'.  **Places of violation of Vanaspati-kaya:**
1. **On the Path:** While walking on the path, in villages or outside villages,
walking on green grass, new sprouts, flowers, leaves, seeds, etc., or on land
covered with moss, or touching them, violates the Vanaspati-kaya.  Sitting in
the shade of a tree, if one carelessly touches its branches, etc., or touches
flowers, leaves, seeds, etc., lying there, it violates the Vanaspati-kaya.  2.
**In Gochari:** After consuming green vegetables, fruits, flowers, seeds, moss,
etc., or touching them, consuming food, fire, etc., consuming unripe mixed or
conscious green vegetables, etc., half-ripe sattu, hole, etc., or touching these
plants by the giver for the purpose of giving alms, violates the Vanaspati-kaya.
1. Seeds, grains, 2. Green plants, and 3. Food containing moss, if consumed,
violates the Vanaspati-kaya. The atonement for which is mentioned in the fourth,
twelfth, and tenth Uddeshak respectively.  If any substance, such as pieces of
plants, peels, leaves, and freshly ground chutney, etc., is attached to the
giver's hand or a shovel, etc., then receiving a blow from them violates the
Vanaspati-kaya.  3. **In Parishthapan:** Excreting feces, urine, phlegm, mucus,
food, water, and other bodily waste on green grass, on land covered with sprouts
and moss, and on seeds, flowers, and leaves, violates the Vanaspati-kaya. At
dusk, one should carefully examine the land for the night's rest and choose a
place free of plants, etc., for Parishthapan. Failure to do so violates the
Vanaspati-kaya.  **Atonement:** If a householder violates the Prithvi-kaya, Ap-
kaya, Agni-kaya, Vayu-kaya, and every Vanaspati-kaya in Gochari, then the
atonement is Laghu-masik. If one violates the Ananta-kaya, then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM uddezaka ] [259 sUkSma dRSTi se to kAyA ke pratyeka halana calana
mAtra meM vAyukAya kI virAdhanA hotI hai  /  yaha virAdhanA terahaveM guNasthAna
ke antima samaya meM yoganirodha hone ke pUrva taka hotI rahatI hai  /  saMyama
maryAdA meM va isa prAyazcitta prakaraNa meM usakA koI saMbaMdha nahIM hai  /
kisI padArtha ko ThaMDA karane ke lie yA zArIrika garmI ko zAMta karane ke lie
havA karanAkarAnA bhikSu ko nahIM kalpatA hai aura Avazyaka pravRttiyAM
'prayatanA se' karane para pApakarma kA baMdha hotA hai arthAt vaha sAvadya
pravRtti kahI jAtI hai  /  - daza. pra. 4 atanA kA artha - kisI bhI kArya ke
karane meM hAtha, pA~va, zarIra yA upakaraNa Adi ko zIghra gati se calAnA, kisI
padArtha ko nIce rakhane paraThane meM Upara se pheMkanA tathA chIMka khAMsI Adi
Avazyaka zArIrika prakriyAoM meM hAtha Adi kA upayoga na karanA ityAdi ko
prayatanA samajhanA cAhie  /  vanaspatikAya kI virAdhanA ke sthAna - 1. mArga
meM - vihAra meM, grAmAdi meM yA grAmAdi ke bAhara kAryavaza jAne Ane meM harI
ghAsa, naye aMkura, phUla, patte, bIja Adi para tathA phUlana (kAI) yukta bhUmi
para calane se yA inakA sparza ho jAne para vanaspatikAya kI virAdhanA ho jAtI
hai  /  kahIM vRkSa kI chAyA meM baiThane para asAvadhAnI se usake skaMdha Adi
kA sparza ho jAya, vahA~ para par3e hue phUla, patte, bIja Adi kA sparza ho jAya
to vanaspatikAya kI virAdhanA ho jAtI hai  /  1 2. gocarI meM --harI
tarakAriyAM, phala, phUla, bIja, phUlana Adi ke anaMtara yA paraMpara sparza
karate hue khAdya padArtha, agni Adi se aparipakva mizra yA sacitta harI
tarakAriyAM Adi zrarddhapakva saTTe, hole Adi grahaNa karane se athavA bhikSA
dene ke nimitta dAtA dvArA ina vanaspatiyoM kA sparza karane se vanaspatikAya kI
virAdhanA hotI hai  /  1. bIja dhAnya, 2. harI vanaspatiyAM aura 3. phUlana
yukta zrAhAra pranAbhoga se khAne meM A jAya to vanaspatikAya kI virAdhanA hotI
hai  /  jisakA prAyazcitta kathana kramazaH uddezaka cauthe, bArahaveM tathA
dasaveM meM kiyA gayA hai  /  vanaspati ke Tukar3e, chilake, patte tathA tatkAla
kI pIsI huI caTanI Adi koI bhI padArtha yadi dAtA ke hAtha yA kuDachI Adi ke
lage hue hoM to unase prahAra grahaNa karane para vanaspatikAya kI virAdhanA
hotI hai  /  3. pariSThApana meM - mala-mUtra, kapha, zleSma, AhAra- pAnI,
upadhi Adi ko harI ghAsa para aMkura evaM phUlana yukta bhUmi para tathA bIja
phUla patte Adi para paraThane se vanaspatikAya kI virAdhanA hotI hai  /  rAtri
meM paraThane ke liye usa bhUmi kI saMdhyA ke samaya dhyAna pUrvaka pratilekhanA
karake vanaspati Adi se rahita bhUmi meM pariSThApana karanA caahie| aisA na
karane para vanaspatikAya kI virAdhanA hotI hai  /  prAyazcitta -- gocarI meM
gRhastha dvArA pRthvIkAya, apkAya, agnikAya, vAyukAya tathA pratyeka
vanaspatikAya kI virAdhanA ho jAya to laghumAsika prAyazcitta, anaMtakAya kI
virAdhanA ho jAya to

Page #360 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [260]  This Sutra describes the **Lahu-Chaumasi** atonement for the
violation of the five stationary beings (earth, water, fire, air, and space) by
a Sadhu. If a Sadhu violates an **Anant-Kay** (ordinary plant body), the
atonement is **Guru-Chaumasi**, as described in the commentary (Gatha 117). For
further details on atonement options, refer to the commentary (Gatha 117) and
the Churni from Gatha 145 to 257.  The commentary (Gatha 258 to 289) similarly
discusses the violation of **Tras-Kay** (minute living beings). While this Sutra
focuses on the atonement for violating the five stationary beings, the
discussion on Tras-Kay is included here for its relevance.  **Violation of Tras-
Kay can occur in various situations:**  1. **On the Path:** Red and black
insects, worms, termites, snails, shells, mussels, leeches, mosquitoes, small
frogs, and other creatures may be found on paths, in villages, or other areas. A
monk, due to carelessness, may inadvertently violate these creatures while
walking. To avoid this, the monk should carefully observe the path or cleanse it
before walking, especially if there is no alternative route.  2. **During Alms-
Seeking:**      * **Food:**  Butter, curd, ghee, and other products made from
sugarcane may contain minute living beings. Similarly, cold water may also
harbor Tras-Kay. Consuming these without careful observation can lead to their
violation.     * **Food:** Insects may be present in various food items, and
their violation can occur if not noticed.     * **Food:** Insects may be present
at the place where alms are received, leading to their violation by the giver.
* **Food and Water:**  "Rasaj" (minute living beings) may develop in food and
water due to fermentation, altering their taste and smell. These creatures are
visible as saliva-like substances when such food is divided or when water is
touched by hand.  Violation occurs if these Rasaj are not noticed.  Therefore, a
monk must be skilled in examining food and water, in addition to being
proficient in the methods of seeking alms.  If food or water containing Tras-Kay
is accidentally received, it should be purified if possible. If purification is
not possible, it should be discarded. The methods for purification are described
in the previous sections.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 260] [nizIthasUtra gurumAsika prAyazcitta tathA sAdhu ke dvArA kahIM bhI pRthvI
Adi kI virAdhanA ho jAya to prastuta sUtra se ladhucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai
/  sAdhu ke dvArA anaMtakAya arthAt sAdhAraNa vanaspatikAya kI virAdhanA ho jAya
to usakA bhASya gA. 117 meM gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA hai| prAyazcitta ke
anya bhI aneka vikalpa jAnane ke liye bhASya gA. 117 tathA gAthA. 145 se 257
taka kI cUNi kA adhyayana karanA caahiye| bhASya. gA. 258 se 289 taka trasakAya
ke saMbaMdha meM bhI isI prakAra se varNana kiyA hai| prastuta sUtra meM to
pAMca sthAvara kI virAdhanA kA hI prAyazcitta kahA hai, tathApi yahAM upayukta
hone se trasakAya saMbaMdhI varNana bhI diyA jAtA hai| trasakAya kI virAdhanA ke
sthAna 1. mArga meM mArga meM yA grAmAdi meM lAla kIr3iyAM, kAlI kIr3iyAM,
makor3e, dImaka tathA varSA hone se utpanna hue aneka prakAra ke sIpa zaMkha
gijAiyAM alasiyA evaM jalokA macchara Adi tathA atyanta choTe meMDhaka Adi jIva
bhramaNa karate haiM  /  bhikSu ke dvArA gamanAgamana meM asAvadhAnI hone para
ina jIvoM kI virAdhanA ho sakatI hai| anya mArga ke na hone para aise jIvayukta
mArga se jAte samaya sAvadhAnI pUrvaka dekhakara yA pramArjana karake calane se
bhikSu jIvavirAdhanA se baca sakatA hai  /  grAmAdi ke aMdara yA bAhara jahAM
manuSya ke mala-mUtra Adi azuci padArtha hoM, vahAM asAvadhAnI se calane yA
khar3e rahane se saMmUrchima manuSyAdi kI virAdhanA ho sakatI hai| 2. bhikSAcarI
meM-1. chAcha, dahI, makkhana, ikSa nirmita kAkaba aura ghata Adi ke vikata ho
jAne para unameM laTeM Adi jIva utpanna ho jAte haiN| kahIM acitta zItala jala
meM bhI trasa jIva ho sakate haiM  /  asAvadhAnI se kabhI bhikSAcarI meM inake
grahaNa kara liye jAne para una jIvoM kI virAdhanA hotI hai| 2. aneka khAdya
padArthoM meM kIr3iyAM Adi A jAtI haiM aura viveka na rakhane para una jIvoM kI
virAdhanA ho sakatI hai| 3. bhikSA lene ke sthAna para kIDiyAM Adi hoM to dAtA
ke dvArA unakI virAdhanA ho sakatI hai| 4. AhAra-pAnI ke calitarasa ho jAne para
usameM "rasaja" jIva utpanna ho jAte haiM, jisase una padArthoM kA svAda aura
gaMdha badalakara kharAba ho jAtA hai  /  aise calitarasa khAdya-padArthoM ko
vibhAjita karane para aura peya padArthoM ko hAtha se sparza karake dekhane para
lAra jaise jaMtu dikhAI dete haiM  /  viveka na rahane para una rasaja jIvoM kI
virAdhanA hotI hai  /  ataH bhikSu ko gaveSaNAvidhi meM kuzala hone ke sAtha-
sAtha padArthoM ke parIkSaNa karane meM bhI kuzala honA caahie| _ asAvadhAnI se
uparyukta jIvayukta padArtha bhikSA meM A jAve to zodhana karane yogya kA
zodhana kiyA jAtA hai aura paraThane yogya kA pariSThApana kara diyA jAtA hai|
isakI vidhi Upara

Page #361 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak  [261]  The specified gathas and the "Parishthapanika
Niyukti" are mentioned in the necessary sutra, section 4. Nishita Churnikar has
also directed the same place.  3. In the bed - insects, moths, termites, various
types of ants, spiders, etc. can be in the shelter. Therefore, by looking at
each movement or by cleaning, there is no violation of these beings.  In the
place of the house which is not cleaned, in such a high place or on the edge of
the place, and under the cupboards etc. or in the grass, spiders and creatures
like Kuthuva of the same color as that place are born. If grains etc. are kept
near the shelter, then creatures like caterpillars and Dhaneria also move
around. Due to carelessness, these beings can be violated.  If there are flies,
mosquitoes, etc. in the house, then while scratching or turning over, if there
is no awareness of worship, and if there is no care in keeping or eating liquid
substances, then these beings are also violated.  4. In the clothes, there may
be lice, etc., in the bed, there may be termites, bedbugs, etc., in books and
cupboards, etc., there may be moths, etc., and in grass, etc., there may be
various types of parasitic beings. By writing or cleaning without awareness, or
by using them, these beings can be violated.  If the monk does not take a house,
bed, etc. containing living beings, and if he follows the Shramana Dharma of
writing them both times with proper method, then there is no possibility of the
birth of many types of beings. Due to which there is no violation of those
beings.  If care is taken to expose the clothes to the sun at the right time,
then there is no possibility of the birth of beings in them either.  On the
roads and other places, there is a possibility of the above-mentioned Tristhavar
beings, but if care is taken to see the beings in every movement or to clean
them, then they are not violated.  There are many alternatives to atonement for
many alternatives of violation, information about them can be obtained from the
commentary. Briefly, the atonement for the violation of stationary beings is
mentioned above. - The general atonement for the violation of Tris beings is as
follows:  Violation of two-sense beings - Laghu Chaumasi, violation of three-
sense beings - Guru Chaumasi, violation of four-sense beings - Laghu Chahmasi,
violation of five-sense beings - Guru Chahmasi.  Atonement for climbing a tree
with consciousness -  9. Je Bhikkhu Sachitt-Rukkha Duruhhai, Duruhantm Wa
Saizjai.  9. The monk who climbs a tree with consciousness or approves of the
one who climbs it. (He gets Laghu Chaumasi atonement.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM uddezaka ] [261 nirdiSTa gAthAoM meM tathA " pariSThApanikA niyukti"
Avazyaka sUtra pra. 4 meM batAI gaI hai  /  nizItha cUrNikAra ne bhI usI sthala
kA nirdeza kiyA hai  /  3. zayyA meM - kIDiyAM, makor3e, dImaka, aneka prakAra
kI kaMsAriyAM, makar3iyAM Adi jIva upAzraya meM ho sakate haiM  /  ataH pratyeka
pravRtti dekhakara yA pramArjana karake karane se ina jIvoM kI virAdhanA nahIM
hotI hai  /  makAna ke jisa sthala kA pramArjana na hotA ho, aise U~ce sthAna yA
kinAre ke sthAna meM tathA alamAriyoM Adi ke nIce yA grAsa-pAsa meM makaDiyAM
aura usa sthAna ke anurUpa varNa vAle kuthuve Adi jIva utpanna ho jAte haiM  /
upAzraya ke nikaTa meM dhAnyAdi rakhe hoM to illI dhaneriyA Adi jIva bhI
gamanAgamana karate haiM  /  asAvadhAnI se ina jIvoM kI virAdhanA ho sakatI hai
/  makAna meM makkhiyAM macchara prAdi hoM to khujalAne meM yA karavaTa palaTane
meM pUjane kA viveka na rahane para tathA drava padArthoM ko rakhane yA khAne
meM sAvadhAnI na rakhane para bhI ina jIvoM kI virAdhanA hotI hai  /   /  4.
upadhi meM vastra meM jU lIkha Adi, pATa meM dImaka khaTamala Adi, pustakoM evaM
alamArI Adi meM leve Adi tathA tRNa darbha Adi meM aneka prakAra ke prAgaMtuka
jIva ho sakate haiM  /  zraviveka pUrvaka pratilekhana pramArjana karane se yA
unheM upayoga meM lene se una jIvoM kI virAdhanA ho sakatI hai  /  bhikSu yadi
jIvayukta makAna pATa Adi grahaNa nahIM karane ke tathA unakA ubhayakAla
vidhisahita pratilekhana karane ke zrAgama vidhAna kA barAbara pAlana kare to
aneka prakAra jIvoM kI utpatti kI saMbhAvanA nahIM rahatI hai  /  jisase una
jIvoM kI virAdhanA bhI nahIM hotI hai  /  vastroM ko yathAsamaya dhUpa meM
pratApita karane kA dhyAna rakhe to unameM bhI jIvotpatti kI saMbhAvanA nahIM
rahatI hai  /  mArga Adi sthaloM meM uparokta trasa sthAvara jIvoM kI saMbhAvanA
to ho pratyeka pravRtti meM jIvoM ko dekhane kA yA pramArjana karane kA dhyAna
rakhane para unakI virAdhanA nahIM hotI hai  /  virAdhanA ke aneka vikalpoM se
prAyazcitta ke bhI aneka vikalpa hote haiM, unakI jAnakArI bhASya se kI jA
sakatI hai  /  saMkSipta meM sthAvara jIvoM kI virAdhanA ke prAyazcitta Upara
batAye gaye haiM  /  - trasa jIvoM kI virAdhanA kA sAmAnya prAyazcitta isa
prakAra hai dvandriya kI virAdhanA kA laghucaumAsI trIndriya kI virAdhanA kA
gurucaumAsI, caturindriya kI virAdhanA kA laghuchaH mAsI, paMcendriya kI
virAdhanA kA guruchaH mAsI  /  sacitta vRkSArohaNa - prAyazcitta 9. je bhikkhU
sacitta-rukkhaM durUhai, duruhaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  9. jo bhikSu sacitta vRkSa
para car3hatA hai yA car3hane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use
laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  / )

Page #362 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [262]  **Discussion**  There are three types of sentient trees:  1. **Trees
with a countable number of living beings**, such as the palm tree. 2. **Trees
with an uncountable number of living beings**, such as the mango tree. 3.
**Trees with infinite living beings**, such as the **Thura** tree.  Climbing a
tree with a countable or uncountable number of living beings incurs a **Lahu-
Chaumasi** penance, while climbing a tree with infinite living beings incurs a
**Guru-Chaumasi** penance.  The fifth **Uddeshak** also mentions penance for
standing near a sentient tree.  If one has to climb a tree due to a flood, a
wild animal, or a thief, then the penance mentioned in the **Sutras** is
incurred. If the situation demands, the penance can be increased.
**Consequences of Climbing a Tree:**  1. **Violation of the plant body.** 2.
**Scratches on hands, feet, etc., while climbing.** 3. **Violation of other
living beings if one falls.** 4. **Self-violation due to injuries on hands,
feet, etc.**  **[Nishita Sutra]**  5. **Seeing a monk climbing a tree can raise
many doubts in someone's mind.** 6. **It can also lead to disregard for
Dharma.**  **Penance for Eating from a Householder's Vessel:**  It is not
possible to climb trees like **Thura** and **Graak** which have infinite living
beings, so one should understand the penance for taking support from them.  10.
**A monk who eats from a householder's vessel or approves of someone doing so,
incurs a Lahu-Chaumasi penance.**  **Discussion:**  A monk can accept food from
a householder and eat it, but they cannot eat from the householder's plate,
bowl, etc., and they cannot drink water from their glass, jug, etc. This is the
practice of a monk's life.  The tenth **Prashna**, **Gatha 51-52-53**, prohibits
this, stating: "A monk who takes food or drink from a householder's vessel made
of bronze, clay, or any other material, becomes corrupt in their practice."  The
householder's vessels are violated when the monk eats or drinks from them, and
when the water is thrown away, many living beings are also violated.
**Jineshwara Deva** has called this **Asanyam** (uncontrolled behavior).
**Washing the vessels leads to violence against the body, therefore...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 262] vivecana sacitta vRkSa tIna prakAra ke hote haiM 1 1. saMkhyAta jIva vAle
tAr3a vRkSAdi, 2. asaMkhyAta jIva vAle AmravRkSAdi 3. anaMta jIva vAle thUrAdi
/  saMkhyAta jIva vAle yA prasaMkhyAta jIva vAle vRkSa para car3hane kA
laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai aura anaMta jIva vAle vRkSa para car3hane kA
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  pAMcaveM uddezaka meM sacitta vRkSa ke
nikaTa khar3e rahane kA bhI prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  ativRSTi se bAr3ha Ane
para, zvApada yA cora ke ko vRkSa para car3hanA par3e to sUtrokta prAyazcitta
zrAtA hai, prasaMga Ae to prAyazcitta kI vRddhi hotI hai  /  vRkSa para car3hane
se hone vAle doSa 1. vanaspatikAya kI virAdhanA hotI hai  /  2. car3hate samaya
hAtha-pA~va Adi meM kharoMca A jAtI hai  /  3. gira par3ane se anya jIvoM kI
virAdhanA hotI hai  /  4. hAtha-pA~va prAdi meM coTa Ane se AtmavirAdhanA hotI
hai  /  [ nizIthasUtra bhaya yA anya kisI paristhiti se bhikSu kintu akAraNa
car3he yA bArambAra car3hane kA 5. vRkSa para car3hate hue dekhakara kisI ke
mana meM aneka AzaMkAyeM utpanna ho sakatI haiM  /  6. dharma kI avahelanA honA
bhI saMbhava hai  /  gRhastha ke pAtra meM prahAra karane kA prAyazcitta-
anaMtakAyika thUhara grAka Adi vRkSoM para car3hanA saMbhava nahIM hotA hai,
ataH unakA sahArA lenA Adi kA prAyazcitta samajha lenA cAhie  /  10. je bhikkhU
gihi-matte bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  10. jo bhikSu gRhastha ke pAtra meM
AhAra karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana - bhikSu gRhastha ke dvArA apane pAtra meM
zrAhArAdi grahaNa kara use khA sakatA hai kintu gRhastha ke thAlI - kaTorI Adi
meM nahIM khA sakatA hai tathA unake gilAsa loTe prAdi se pAnI nahIM pI sakatA
hai  /  yaha munijIvana kA pracAra hai  /  dazavai. pra. 6 gA. 51-52-53 meM
isakA niSedha kiyA gayA hai, vaha varNana isa prakAra hai"kAMsya miTTI Adi kisI
bhI prakAra ke gRhastha ke bartana meM prazana-pAna Adi prahAra karatA bhikSu
apane pracAra se bhraSTa ho jAtA hai  /  bhikSu ke khAne yA pIne ke bAda
gRhastha ke dvArA una bartanoM ko virAdhanA hotI hai aura usa pAnI ke pheMkane
para aneka trasa prANiyoM kI bhI jinezvara deva ne asaMyama kahA hai  /  dhoye
jAne para prakAya kI hiMsA hotI hai, ataH isameM

Page #363 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak  **[263]**  Because of the attachment of **pūrvakarma**,
**paścātkarma**, and other faults, it is not appropriate for a monk to eat or
drink from the utensils of a householder. For the same reasons, **nirgrantha**
monks do not consume food or drink from the utensils of householders.
**Daśavai. A. 3 Ga. 3** refers to the tendency to eat from a householder's
utensils as **anācāra** (unrighteous conduct).  **Sūy. Śru. 1 A. 2 U. 2 Ga. 20**
states that a monk who does not eat from the utensils of a householder is
considered **samāyik** (observant of the vows) and **cāritravān** (virtuous).
**Sūy. Śru. 1 A. 9 Ga. 20** states that a monk should never consume food or
water from the utensils of a householder. The faults that arise from eating from
a householder's utensils are:  1. Eating in the householder's home. 2. Eating
food brought by the householder. 3. Having the utensils washed by the
householder, either before or after use. 4. Purchasing new utensils. 5. Having
separate arrangements for food and water.  And so on, leading to a multitude of
faults.  Therefore, according to the **āgama**, a monk should consume food only
from utensils made of wood, clay, or **tumba** (a type of gourd) that have been
received. They should not use plates, bowls, glasses, or pitchers belonging to a
householder.  The above **āgama** texts prohibit the use of a householder's
utensils for food and water. The commentaries on these texts also discuss the
faults associated with food and water. Therefore, if a householder's utensil is
used as an auxiliary tool for washing clothes, the **sūtra**-prescribed
**prāyaścitta** (atonement) does not apply. This is because using them does not
incur **paścātkarma** or other faults.  **[11]** **Je bhikku gihivattham
parihei, parihentan vā sāijjai.**  **[11]** A monk who wears the clothes of a
householder or approves of someone wearing them (incurs a **laghucoumasi**
atonement).  **Discussion:** When a monk needs clothes, they should request them
from a householder. However, it is not appropriate for a **paḍihārī**
(attendant) to accept clothes from a householder and use them before returning
them. This is what the present **sūtra** refers to as atonement.  Furthermore,
only clothes that are meant to be returned are considered the clothes of a
householder. Using them incurs **pūrvakarma**, **paścātkarma**, and other
numerous faults. These should be understood as similar to the faults mentioned
in the discussion of householder utensils.  **Sūy. Śru. 1 A. 9 Ga. 20**
prohibits the use of clothes belonging to a householder.  Therefore, a monk
should only use clothes that have been given to them completely by a
householder, in accordance with **muni** (sage) tradition. However, they should
not use clothes that are meant to be returned.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM uddezaka [263 pUrvakarma-pazcAtkarma Adi doSa lagate haiM ataH bhikSu
ko gRhastha ke bartanoM meM khAnA-pInA nahIM kalpatA hai  /  inhIM kAraNoM se
nirgrantha muni gRhastha ke bartana meM AhArAdi nahIM karate  /  dazavai. a. 3
gA. 3 meM gRhastha ke bartana meM khAne kI pravRtti ko anAcAra kahA hai  /
sUya. zru. 1 a. 2. u. 2 gA. 20 meM gRhastha ke bartanoM meM nahIM khAne vAle
bhikSu ko sAmAyika cAritravAn kahA hai| sUya. zru. 1 a. 9 gA. 20 meM kahA gayA
hai ki-bhikSu gRhastha ke bartanoM meM AhAra-pAnI kadApi nahIM kre| gRhastha ke
pAtra meM khAne se hone vAle doSa 1. gRhastha ke ghara meM khAnA, 2. gRhastha ke
dvArA sthAna para lAyA huA khAnA, 3. gRhastha dvArA bartanoM ko pahale yA pIche
dhonA, 4. nayA bartana kharIdanA, 5. AhAra-pAnI kI alaga-alaga vyavasthA krnaa||
ityAdi aneka doSoM kI paramparA bar3hatI hai| ataH bhikSu ko AgamAnusAra gRhIta
lakar3I, miTTI yA tumbe ke pAtra meM hI AhAra karanA cAhie  /  gRhastha ke
thAlI, kaTorI, gilAsa, loTe Adi kA upayoga nahIM karanA caahie| uparyukta Agama
pAThoM meM gRhastha ke pAtra meM AhAra-pAnI ke upayoga karane kA niSedha hai
aura una sUtroM kI vyAkhyAoM meM prAhAra-pAnI sambandhI doSoM kA hI kathana hai
/  ataH vastraprakSAlana ke lie aupagrahika upakaraNa ke rUpa meM gRhastha ke
pAtra kA yadi upayoga kiyA jAe to sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai  /  kyoMki
unakA upayoga karane para pazcAtkarmAdi doSa nahIM lagate haiN| gRhastha ke
vastra kA upayoga karane para prAyazcitta 11. je bhikkhU gihivatthaM parihei,
pariheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  11. jo bhikSu gRhastha ke vastra ko pahanatA hai yA
pahanane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /
) vivecanabhikSu vastra kI AvazyakatA hone para gRhastha se vastra kI yAcanA
karake hI upayoga meM letA hai  /  kintu paDihArI vastra grahaNa karake use
upayoga meM lekara gRhastha ko lauTAnA nahIM kalpatA hai  /  isI kA prastuta
sUtra meM prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| puna: lauTAne yogya vastra hI gRhastha kA
vastra kahA jAtA hai| usakA upayoga karane para pUrvakarma, pazcAtkarma Adi
aneka doSa lagate haiN| unheM gRhastha-pAtra ke vivecana meM kahe gaye doSoM ke
samAna samajha lenA caahie| sUya. zru. 1 a. 9 gA. 20 meM gRhastha ke vastra ko
upayoga meM lene kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| ata: bhikSu ko muni-prAcAra ke
anusAra gRhastha dvArA pUrNa rUpa se diyA gayA vastra hI upayoga meM lenA
caahie| kintu lauTAne yogya vastra lekara upayoga meM nahIM lenA caahie|

Page #364 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 264] [Nishith Sutra: Penance for using a householder's seat] 12. A monk who
sits on a householder's seat or approves of someone sitting on it. (He incurs a
Laghu-Chaumasika penance.) **Discussion:** There are many types of seats, such
as beds and couches, that are not permissible or difficult to justify for a
householder. A monk who goes to a householder's house for alms or other purposes
is prohibited from sitting there and sleeping on a couch, etc., as stated in
Dasavai. A. 6. This is also considered misconduct in Dasavai. A. 3. Dasavai. A.
6 also mentions the faults of sitting in a householder's house, and it is
considered permissible for the elderly, the sick, and the ascetic to sit there.
However, sitting on a bed or couch is prohibited for everyone. This is the
penance mentioned in the present Sutra. Sutra 6 describes various types of
backrests and cushions. If a householder's cloth is not on them, then according
to that Sutra, there is no penance for sitting on them. Thus, if a householder's
seat, couch, etc., is made of wood, etc., and is easily justifiable, then a monk
can accept it as "Padihari" and use it. If the chair, etc., is a seat with a
support, then a monk can accept and use it. However, the Brihatkalpa U. 5
prohibits a nun from accepting a supported bed or seat. Uttara. A. 17 Ga. 19
calls someone who sits on a householder's seat a "Papi Shraman" (sinful monk).
Suy. Su. 1 A. 9 Ga. 21 prohibits sitting on a stool, couch, etc. Therefore, a
monk should not sit on these seats of a householder. **Penance for treating a
householder** 13. A monk who treats a householder or approves of someone
treating a householder. (He incurs a Laghu-Chaumasika penance.) **Discussion:**
It is not permissible for a monk to prescribe medicine or other treatments for a
householder's illness, or to perform any kind of surgery. Uttara. A. 15 Ga. 8
prohibits various types of medical treatment. Dasavai. Chulikā 2 states that "a
monk should not treat a householder." Dasavai. A. 8 Ga. 51 prohibits prescribing
medicine to a householder. Dasavai. A. 3 Ga. 6 calls treating a householder
(medical practice) misconduct. Dasavai. A. 3 Ga. 4 calls treating a householder
(medical practice) misconduct.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 264] [nizIthasUtra gRhastha kI niSadyA ke upayoga karane kA prAyazcitta 12. je
bhikkhU gihi-NisejjaM vAhei, vAheMtaM vA saaijji| 12. jo bhikSu gRhastha ke
paryakAdi para baiThatA hai yA baiThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use
laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) .. vivecana-gRhastha ke khATa-palaMga Adi
aneka prakAra ke apratilekhya yA duSpratilekhya Asana hote haiM  /  gRhastha ke
ghara gocarI Adi ke lie gaye hue bhikSu ko vahA~ baiThane kA tathA palyaMka Adi
para zayana karane kA dazavai. a. 6 meM niSedha kiyA gayA hai tathA unheM hI
dazavai. a. 3 meM anAcAra kahA hai  /  dazavai. a. 6 meM gRhastha ke ghara meM
baiThane se hone vAle doSoM kA bhI kathana hai aura vRddha, vyAdhigrasta tathA
tapasvI ko vahA~ baiThanA kalpanIya kahA hai| kintu khATa-palaMga Adi para
baiThane kA sabhI ke lie niSedha kiyA hai  /  isakA hI prastuta sUtra meM
prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  sUtra 6 meM aneka prakAra ke pITha-bAjoTa Adi kA
varNana hai, una para gRhastha kA vastra na ho to baiThane para usa sUtra ke
anusAra prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai  /  isa prakAra gRhastha ke Asana palyaMka Adi
kASTha Adi ke hoM aura ve supratilekhya hoM to sAdhu unheM "paDihArI" grahaNa
kara sakatA hai aura upayoga meM le sakatA hai  /  yadi kursI Adi AlaMbanayukta
Asana hoM to sAdhu grahaNa karake upayoga meM le sakatA hai kintu sAdhvI ko
AlaMbanayukta zayyA prAsana grahaNa karane kA bRhatkalpa u. 5 meM niSedha kiyA
hai| . uttarA. a. 17 gA. 19 meM gRhi-niSadyA para baiThane vAle ko 'pApa
zramaNa' kahA gayA hai  /  sUya. su. 1 a. 9 gA. 21 meM AsaMdI, palyaMka Adi para
baiThane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai| ataH bhikSu ko gRhastha ke ina AsanoM para
nahIM baiThanA caahie| gRhastha kI cikitsA karane kA prAyazcitta 13. je bhikkhU
gihi-teicchaM karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  13. jo bhikSu gRhastha kI cikitsA
karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta
pAtA hai|) vivecana-gRhastha ko roga upazAMti ke lie auSadha-bheSaja batAnA yA
anya bhI kisI prakAra kI zalyacikitsA Adi karanA sAdhu ko nahIM kalpatA hai  /
, uttarA. a. 15 gA. 8 meM aneka prakAra kI cikitsA karane kA niSedha kiyA gayA
hai| dazavai. cUlikA 2 meM kahA hai ki-'bhikSu gRhastha kI vaiyAvRtya nahIM
kre|' dazavai. a. 8 gA. 51 meM gRhastha ko auSadha-bheSaja batAne kA niSedha
kiyA hai  /  dazavai. a. 3 gA. 6 meM gRhastha kI vaiyAvRtya karanA anAcAra kahA
hai| dazavai. a. 3 gA. 4 meM gRhastha kI cikitsA (vaidyavRtti) karanA anAcAra
kahA hai  /

Page #365 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak:  **Faults in Medical Practice**  1. Many medical practices
involve harmful tendencies. 2. The use of harmful substances is encouraged. 3.
Even if a disease is cured by restrictive medical practices, it can lead to an
increase in the movement of many people. 4. If a medical practice worsens
someone's disease, it brings disrepute. Due to these faults, the Sutra
prescribes atonement for a monk engaging in household medical practice.
**Acharanga Sutra 1.2.5** states that medical practice involves many harmful
tendencies like killing, etc. Therefore, a monk should not engage in the
practice of treating diseases.  Knowing these scriptural injunctions, a monk
should not engage in household medical practice. If, due to circumstances,
medical practice is used, the atonement prescribed in the Sutra should be
undertaken.  **Atonement for Taking Food Prepared with Previous Actions**  14. A
monk who takes food, drink, edibles, or delicacies with a hand, earthen pot,
ladle, or metal vessel that has been touched by previous actions, or approves of
someone who takes such things, incurs a minor four-month atonement.
**Explanation:** If a householder washes their hands or a ladle, bowl, etc.,
before offering food to a monk, then those hands or utensils are considered to
be touched by previous actions. It is not proper to accept alms from them. This
is because washing them involves violating the principles of non-violence and
non-harming.  In many families, it is customary to touch food items after
washing hands. Some people want to offer alms with a washed vessel out of a
sense of purity, or they want to wash the food that has touched their hands or
vessels before offering it. Therefore, a discerning monk who is aware of the
situation should prohibit the donor from washing their hands, etc., beforehand.
Even if the donor washes their hands, etc., before or after the prohibition, the
monk should not accept the offering.  **Acharanga Sutra 2.1.6** provides a
detailed explanation of this topic.  This fault is included in the "giving"
faults of the category of "desire."  **Dashavaikalika Sutra 5.1.32** also
prohibits accepting alms from hands, etc., that have been touched by previous
actions.  If the donor washes their hands, ladle, etc., with water that has been
purified by chanting, then the fault of previous actions does not apply.
However, if they wash with water that has not been purified by chanting, or if
they wash without discernment, then the fault of previous actions applies.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM uddezaka ] cikitsA karane ke doSa 1. aneka cikitsAoM meM sAvadya
pravRtti kI jAtI hai, 2. sAvadya sevana kI preraNA dI jAtI hai, 3. nirbaMdha
cikitsA se bhI kisI kA roga dUra ho jAya to aneka logoM kA AvAgamana bar3ha
sakatA hai, [265 4. cikitsA se kabhI kisI ke roga kI vRddhi ho jAya to apayaza
hotA hai, ityAdi doSoM ke kAraNa bhikSu ko gRhIcikitsA karane kA prastuta sUtra
meM prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  AcA. zru. 1 a. 2 u. 5 meM kahA hai ki cikitsA
- vaidyavRtti karane meM hanana Adi aneka pravRttiyA~ bhI kI jAtI haiM, ataH
bhikSu vyAdhi-cikitsA kA pratipAdana na kare  /  ina sUtrokta vidhAnoM ko
jAnakara bhikSu ko gRhI - cikitsA meM pravRtta nahIM honA cAhiye  /
paristhitivaza kabhI cikitsA prayoga kiyA jAya to sUtrokta prAyazcita grahaNa
kara lenA cAhiye  /  pUrva karma - kRta AhAra grahaNa prAyazcitta 14. je bhikkhU
purekammakaDeNa hattheNa vA matteNa vA, davieNa vA, bhAyaNeNa vA asaNaM vA pANaM
vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, paDiggArhataM vA sAijjai  /  14. jo bhikSu
pUrva karmadoSa se yukta hAtha se, miTTI ke bartana se, kuDachI se, dhAtu ke
bartana se azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  / )
vivecana - bhikSu ko grAhAra dene ke pUrva gRhastha hAtha dhoe yA kuDachI,
kaTorI Adi dhoe to vaha hAtha yA kuchI Adi pUrvakarmadoSayukta kahe jAte haiN|
unase bhikSA lenA nahIM kalpatA hai  /  kyoMki unake dhone meM akAya va
trasakAya Adi kI virAdhanA hotI hai  /  kaI kuloM meM aisI paripATI hotI hai ki
ve hAtha dhokara bhojana sAmagrI kA sparza karate haiM, kaI zuddhi ke saMkalpa
se bartana ko dhokara usase bhikSA denA cAhate haiM athavA hAtha yA bartana ke
lage huye padArtha ko dhokara bhikSA denA cAhate haiM  /  ataH gocarI karane
vAlA vicakSaNa bhikSu dAtA ke aise bhAvoM ko anubhava se jAnakara pahale se hI
hAtha Adi dhone kA niSedha kara de  /  niSedha karane ke pahale yA pIche bhI
hAtha Adi dhokara de to prazanAdi grahaNa nahIM karanA cAhiye  /  AcA. zru. 2 a.
1 u. 6 meM isa viSaya kA vistRta varNana hai  /  yaha doSa eSaNA ke 'dAyaka'
doSoM meM samAviSTa hotA hai  /  dazavai. a. 5 u. 1 gA. 32 meM bhI
pUrvakarmakRta hAtha Adi se bhikSA lene kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai  /  yadi dAtA
kisI bartana meM rakhe pracitta pAnI se hAtha kur3achI prAdi ko dhoe to
pUrvakarmadoSa nahIM lagatA hai kintu sacitta jala se dhoe yA pracitta jala se
bhI binA viveka ke dhoe to pUrba karmadoSa lagatA hai  /  +

Page #366 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [266] [Nishipa Sutra]  If a monk does not accept food even after the donor
is accused in this way, he does not incur the atonement mentioned in the sutra.
If he accepts food with washed hands, etc., he incurs the Laghu-Chaumasik
atonement.  In the Bhadrabahu-krit Niyukti Gatha 4066, it is said that if
another man gives another food or the same food, it can be accepted. But
according to the commentary in Gatha 4072, it is not permissible to accept food
from a person whose hands have been involved in previous karma, even after his
hands have dried.  The Bhikṣācārī-Aticāra-Pratikramāṇa text in Āva. A. 4 also
mentions the fault of previous karma.  **Atonement for accepting food from a
water vessel**  15. If a monk accepts food, drink, edibles, or delicacies from a
householder or another non-Jain, with wet hands, a clay pot, a ladle, or a metal
vessel, or approves of someone who does so, (he incurs the Laghu-Chaumasik
atonement).  **Discussion:**  The previous sutra states that if a donor washes
his hands, vessels, etc., before giving alms, then accepting food from him does
not incur atonement. This sutra states that if a householder is performing any
action with conscious water, which makes his hands wet with conscious water, or
if a vessel is being used to fill or carry conscious water, then accepting alms
from such hands or vessels constitutes a violation of the living beings in the
water. Furthermore, if that hand or vessel is then placed in other conscious
water, it also violates the Apkāyik beings.  Thus, this sutra states the
atonement for the violation of the water remaining in the hands, etc., and the
subsequent violation that occurs later.  The commentary explains that when
accepting alms from a vessel used to carry or drink water, a portion of the food
remains in the vessel, which, when placed in water, violates the Apkāyik beings.
Therefore, one should not accept food from vessels that have been used for
conscious water.  If one accepts un-conscious hot or cold water from such hands,
vessels, etc., it violates the water present in the hands, vessels, etc., and
the remaining un-conscious water in the vessels violates other conscious water.
The fourth Uddesaka states the Laghu-Māsik atonement for accepting food from wet
or oily hands, vessels, etc., with conscious water. Here, the Laghu-Chaumasik
atonement is stated in relation to the fault of subsequent karma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 266] [nizIpasUtra dAtA ke isa prakAra doSa lagAne para bhI bhikSu yadi AhAra
grahaNa na kare to use sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai  /  dhoye hue hAtha
Adi se AhAra grahaNa karane para laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|
bhadrabAhukRta niyukti gAthA 4066 meM kahA hai ki yadi anya puruSa anya AhAra yA
usI AhAra ko de to grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai| kintu pUrvakarma hAtha vAle
vyakti se hAtha sUkha jAne para bhI grahaNa karanA nahIM kalpatA hai, aisA
bhASya gAthA 4072 meM kahA gayA hai  /  Ava. a. 4 meM bhikSAcArI-aticAra-
pratikramaNa pATha meM bhI pUrvakarmadoSa kA kathana hai  /  udaka-bhAjana se
AhAragraharaNa-prAyazcitta 15. je bhikkhU gihatthANa vA aNNautthiyANa vA sIodaga
paribhogeNa hatyeNa vA, matteNa vA, davieNa vA, bhAyaNeNa vA asaNaM vA, pANaM
vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 15. jo bhikSu
gRhastha yA anyatIthika ke sacitta jala se gIle hAtha, miTTI ke bartana,
kur3achI yA dhAtu ke bartana se azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karatA hai
yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta
AtA hai|) vivecana-pUrva sUtra meM dAtA bhikSA dene ke pUrva hAtha, bartana Adi
dhokara deve to usase AhAra grahaNa karane kA prAyazcitta kahA hai aura isa
sUtra meM yaha kahA gayA hai ki gRhastha sacitta pAnI se koI bhI kArya kara rahA
ho, jisase usake hAtha sacitta jala se bhare hue hoM athavA koI bartana sacitta
pAnI bharane yA lene ke kAma A rahA ho to aise hAthoM yA bartanoM se bhikSA lene
se una para lage pAnI ke jIvoM kI virAdhanA hotI hai tathA punaH usa hAtha yA
bartanoM ko anya sacitta jala meM DAlane para bhI apkAya ke jIvoM kI virAdhanA
hotI hai| isa taraha isa sUtra meM hAtha Adi meM rahe jala kI virAdhanA aura
bAda meM hone vAlI virAdhanA rUpa pazcAtkarmadoSa kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai
/  vyAkhyA meM batAyA gayA hai ki pAnI lene yA pIne ke bartana se bhikSA lene
para usa khAdya padArtha kA aMza bartana meM rahatA hai jo punaH pAnI meM DAlane
para apkAyika jIvoM kI virAdhanA karatA hai| ataH sacitta jala ke kAma Ane vAle
bartanoM se AhAra grahaNa nahIM karanA caahiye| aise hAtha, bartana Adi se
acitta uSNa yA zItala jala grahaNa karane para hAtha bartana Adi meM vidyamAna
jala kI virAdhanA hotI hai tathA bartanoM meM zeSa rahe hue acitta jala se anya
sacitta pAnI kI virAdhanA hotI hai| caturtha uddezaka meM sacitta pAnI se gIle
yA snigdha hAtha, bartana Adi se AhAra grahaNa karane kA laghumAsika prAyazcitta
kahA gayA hai aura yahA~ pazcAtkarmadoSa kI apekSA se laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta
kahA hai|

Page #367 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak  [267 The fourth Uddeshak mentions general utensils and
other things, but here it mentions the hand used while working with conscious
water and the utensil used to take and drink conscious water. This is the
difference in the subject matter of the sutras in these two Uddeshak. The word
'Seoudag Paribhogena' used in the present sutra is explained as follows - "Jena
Mattena Sachittodagam Paribhujjati, Tena Bhikkhaggahanam Padisiddham" - This
means that it is forbidden to accept alms from utensils used for conscious water
or from utensils used to take, give, or remove conscious water.  **Penance for
attachment to form** 16. A monk who contemplates, or contemplates with
attachment, the following for the sake of visual enjoyment: 1. Fields, 2. Fruit
trees, 3. Granaries, 4. Toranas (gateways), 5. Fire altars, 6. Fire altar
enclosures, 7. Forts, 8. Passes, 9. Storehouses, 10. Houses with a roof, 11.
Houses with trees, 12. Houses on hills, 13. A tree or a piece of wood, 14. A
mound of earth or a piece of wood, 15. Seats, 16. Platforms, 17. Temples, 18.
Roads, 19. Paths, 20. Merchant houses, 21. Merchant halls, 22. Learned houses,
23. Learned halls, 24. Beautiful objects, 25. Proud objects, 26. Strong objects,
27. Crooked objects, 28. Colored objects, 29. Iron objects, 30. Wooden objects,
31. Cemetery objects, 32. Peaceful objects, 33. Mountain objects, 34. Cave
objects, 35. Rock objects, 36. Residential houses. 17. A monk who contemplates,
or contemplates with attachment, the following for the sake of visual enjoyment:
1. Wells, 2. Rivers, 3. Ponds, 4. Rings, 5. Caves, 6. Cave entrances, 7.
Forests, 8. Forest entrances, 9. Mountains, 10. Mountain entrances, 11. Fields,
12. Tanks, 13. Wells, 14. Creeks, 15. Wells, 16. Ponds, 17. Streams, 18. Canals,
19. Lakes, 20. Lake banks, 21. Lake and river banks. 18. A monk who
contemplates, or contemplates with attachment, villages to royal palaces for the
sake of visual enjoyment. 19. A monk who contemplates, or contemplates with
attachment, large villages to large royal palaces for the sake of visual
enjoyment. 20. A monk who contemplates, or contemplates with attachment, village
roads to royal palace roads for the sake of visual enjoyment. 21. A monk who
contemplates, or contemplates with attachment, village boundaries to royal
palace boundaries for the sake of visual enjoyment. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM uddezaka] [267 cauthe uddezaka meM sAmAnya hAtha bartana Adi kA
kathana hai kintu yahA~ sacitta jala se kArya karate hue hAtha kA tathA sacitta
jala lene-pIne ke bartana kA kathana hai| yaha ina donoM uddezaka meM sUtroM ke
viSayoM meM antara hai| prastuta sUtra meM prayukta 'sIaodaga paribhogeNa' zabda
kI vyAkhyA isa prakAra hai- jeNa mattaeNa sacittodagaM paribhujjati, teNa
bhikkhaggahaNaM paDisiddhaM ||-nni isakA bhAvArtha yaha hai ki sacitta jala ke
kArya meM upayukta hAtha bartana Adi athavA sa zitta jala lene-dene-nikAlane ke
bartana Adi se bhikSA grahaNa karanA niSiddha hai| rUpa-prAsakti ke prAyazcitta
16. je bhikkhU-1. vappANi vA, 2. phalihANi vA, 3. pAgArANi vA, 4. toraNANi vA,
5. aggalANi vA, 6. aggala-pAsagANi vA, 7. gaDDAo vA, 8. darIo vA, 9. kUDAgArANi
vA, 10. NUma-gihANi vA, 11. rukkha-gihANi vA, 12. pavvaya-gihANi vA, 13. rukkhaM
vA ceiya vA kaDaM, 14. thUbhaM vA ceiyaM kaDaM, 15. AesaNANi vA, 16. AyataNANi
vA, 17. devakulANi vA, 18. sahAo vA, 19. pavAo vA, 20. paNiya-gihANi vA, 21.
paNiya-sAlAo vA, 22. jANa-gihANi vA, 23. jANa-sAlAo vA, 24. suhA-kammaMtANi vA,
25. dambha-kammaMtANi vA, 26. vaddha-kammaMtANi vA, 27. vakka-kammaMtANi vA, 28.
vaNa-kammaMtANi vA, 29. iMgAla-kammaMtANi vA 30. kaTTha-kammaMtANi vA, 31.
susANa-kammaMtANi vA, 32. saMti-kammaMtANi vA, 33. giri-kammaMtANi vA, 34.
kaMdarakammaMtANi vA, 35. selovaTThANa-kammaMtANi vA, 36. bhavaNagihANi vA
cakkhudaMsaNavaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei, abhisaMdhAretaM vA sAijjai  /  17. je
bhikkhU-1. kacchANi vA, 2. daviyANi vA, 3. NUmANi vA, 4. valayANi vA, 5.
gahaNANi vA, 6. gahaNa-viduggANi vA, 7. vaNANi vA, 8. vaNa-viduggANi vA, 9.
pavvayANi vA, 10. pavvaya-viduggANi vA, 11. agaDANi vA, 12. taDAgANi vA, 13.
dahANi vA, 14. gaIo vA, 15. vAvIo vA, 16. pukkharaNIo vA, 17. dIhiyAo vA, 18.
gujAliyAo vA, 19. sarANi vA, 20. sara-paMtiyANi vA, 21. sara-sarapaMtiyANi vA
cakkhudaMsaNavaDiyAe abhisaMdhAreI, abhisaMdhAreMtaM vA saaijji| 18. je bhikkhU
gAmANi vA jAva rAyahANINi vA cakkhudaMsaNavaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei,
abhisaMdhAreMtaM vA saaijji| 19. je bhikkhU gAma-mahANi vA jAva rAyahANi-mahANi
vA cakkhudaMsaNavaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei, abhisaMdhAretaM vA saaijji| 20. je
bhikkhU gAma-vahANi vA jAva rAyahANI-vahANi vA cakkhudaMsaNavaDiyAe
abhisaMdhArei, abhisaMdhAretaM vA saaijji| 21. je bhikkhU gAma-pahANi vA jAva
rAyahANI-pahANi vA cakkhudaMsaNavaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei, abhisaMdhAretaM vA
saaijji|

Page #368 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Nishīth Sūtra]  **22.**  A monk who contemplates, or is attached to, the
following, is committing an offense against the eye-gate:  1.  *Āsa-karaṇāṇi*
(things related to desire),  2.  *Hasthi-karaṇāṇi* (things related to
elephants),  3.  *Mahis-karaṇāṇi* (things related to buffaloes),  4.  *Vasaha-
karaṇāṇi* (things related to horses),  5.  *Kukkud-karaṇāṇi* (things related to
roosters),  6.  *Makkad-karaṇāṇi* (things related to peacocks),  7.  *Lāvay-
karaṇāṇi* (things related to parrots),  8.  *Vattay-karaṇāṇi* (things related to
monkeys),  9.  *Tittir-karaṇāṇi* (things related to partridges),  10. *Kavoay-
karaṇāṇi* (things related to crows),  11. *Kavija-karaṇāṇi* (things related to
pigeons).  **23.** A monk who contemplates, or is attached to, the following, is
committing an offense against the eye-gate:  1.  *Hay-juddhāṇi* (horse fights),
2.  *Gay-juddhāṇi* (ox fights),  3.  *Uṭṭ-juddhāṇi* (camel fights),  4.  *Goṇa-
juddhāṇi* (bull fights),  5.  *Mahis-juddhāṇi* (buffalo fights),  6.  *Meṇḍ-
juddhāṇi* (goat fights),  7.  *Kukkud-juddhāṇi* (rooster fights),  8.  *Makkad-
jukhāṇi* (peacock fights),  9.  *Lāvay-juddhāṇi* (parrot fights),  10. *Vattay-
juddhāṇi* (monkey fights),  11. *Tittir-juddhāṇi* (partridge fights),  12.
*Kavoay-juddhāṇi* (crow fights),  13. *Kavija-jukhāṇi* (pigeon fights),  14.
*Ahi-juddhāṇi* (snake fights),  15. *Sūkar-juddhāṇi* (pig fights).  **24.** A
monk who contemplates, or is attached to, the following, is committing an
offense against the eye-gate:  1.  *Jūhiy-ṭhāṇāṇi* (gambling places),  2.  *Hay-
jūhiy-ṭhāṇāṇi* (horse racing places),  3.  *May-jūhiy-ṭhāṇāṇi* (ox racing
places),  4.  *Gay-jūhiy-ṭhāṇāṇi* (ox racing places),  5.  *Aṇiyāṇi* (hunting),
6.  *Vajan* (weight) *ṇoṇijj-māṇam* (being weighed) *pehāe* (for the sake of).
**25.** A monk who contemplates, or is attached to, the following, is committing
an offense against the eye-gate:  1.  *Āghāiy-ṭhāṇāṇi* (places of violence),  2.
*Māṇu-māṇiy-ṭhāṇāṇi* (places of human entertainment),  3.  *Mahāyā-hay-naṭṭ-gīy-
vāiy-tantī-tāl-tuḍiy-ghaṇa-muing-paḍupp-vāiy-ṭhāṇāṇi* (places of music, dance,
singing, string instruments, drums, cymbals, bells, and other musical
instruments).  **26.** A monk who contemplates, or is attached to, the
following, is committing an offense against the eye-gate:  1.  *Kalahaṇi*
(quarrels),  2.  *Dimbāṇi* (drums),  3.  *Damarāṇi* (tambourines),  4.  *Mahā-
juddhāṇi* (great battles),  5.  *Mahā-sangāmāṇi* (great assemblies),  6.
*Jūyāṇi* (gambling),  7.  *Sabhāṇi* (assemblies).  **27.** A monk who
contemplates, or is attached to, the following, is committing an offense against
the eye-gate:  1.  *Kaṭṭha-kammāṇi* (woodworking),  2.  *Poṭṭha-kammāṇi*
(bookmaking),  3.  *Citta-kammāṇi* (painting),  4.  *Maṇi-kammāṇi* (jewelry
making),  5.  *Vanṭ-kammāṇi* (weaving),  6.  *Gaṇṭhimāṇi* (knot tying),  7.
*Veḍhimāṇi* (piercing),  8.  *Pūrimāṇi* (filling),  9.  *Saṇghāimāṇi*
(assembling),  10. *Vivihaṇi-kammāṇi* (various crafts).  **28.** A monk who
contemplates, or is attached to, the following, is committing an offense against
the eye-gate:  *Virūva-rūvesu* (in various forms) *mahus-savesu* (in great
festivals) *itthīṇi* (women) *vā* (or) *purisāṇi* (men) *vā* (or) *therāṇi*
(elders) *vā* (or) *majjhimāṇi* (middle-aged) *vā* (or) *ḍaharāṇi* (youths) *vā*
(or) *aṇalankiāṇi* (unadorned) *vā* (or) *su-alankiāṇi* (well-adorned) *vā* (or)
*gāyam-tāṇi* (singing) *vā* (or) *vāyam-tāṇi* (playing music) *vā* (or) *naccam-
tāṇi* (dancing) *vā* (or) *hasam-tāṇi* (laughing) *vā* (or) *ram-tāṇi*
(enjoying) *vā* (or) *moham-tāṇi* (being infatuated) *vā* (or) *viulam*
(abundant) *asaṇam* (food) *vā* (or) *pāṇam* (drink) *vā* (or) *khāim-am* (food)
*vā* (or) *saim-am* (drink) *vā* (or) *paribhāyam-tāṇi* (serving) *vā* (or)
*paribhujam-tāṇi* (eating) *vā*.  **29.** A monk who contemplates, or is
attached to, the following, is committing an offense against the eye-gate:
*Samvāyesu* (in assemblies) *vā* (or) *piṇḍaṇiy-reṣu* (in gatherings) *vā* (or)
*indam-heṣu* (in Indra's heaven) *vā* (or) *jāva* (until) *āgaram-heṣu* (in the
heaven of the Āgaras) *vā* (or) *annay-reṣu* (in other heavens) *vā* (or)
*virūva-rūvesu* (in various forms) *mahā-maheṣu* (in great heavens).  **30.** A
monk who contemplates, or is attached to, the following, is committing an
offense against the eye-gate:  *Bahus-gaḍāṇi* (many forts) *vā* (or) *bahu-
rahāṇi* (many chariots) *vā* (or) *bahu-mil-akkhūṇi* (many beautiful women) *vā*
(or) *bahu-paccam-tāṇi* (many beautiful things) *vā* (or) *annay-rāṇi* (other
things) *virūva-rūvāṇi* (in various forms) *mahā-savāṇi* (in great festivals).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 268] [nizIthasUtra 22. je bhikkhU-1. Asa-karaNANi vA, 2. hasthi-karaNANi vA, 3.
mahisa-karaNANi vA, 4. vasahakaraNANi vA, 5. kukkuDa-karaNANi vA, 6. makkaDa-
karaNANi vA, 7. lAvaya-karaNANi vA, 8. vaTTayakaraNANi vA, 9. tittira-karaNANi
vA, 10. kavoya-karaNANi vA, 11. kavijala-karaNANi vA cakkhudaMsaNavaDiyAe
abhisaMdhArei, abhisaMdhAreMtaM vA sAijjai  /  23. je bhikkhU-1. haya-juddhANi
vA, 2. gaya-juddhANi vA, 3. uTTa-juddhANi vA, 4. goNajuddhANi vA, 5. mahisa-
juddhANi vA, 6. meMDha-juddhANi vA, 7. kukkuDa-juddhANi vA, 8. makkaDa-jukhANi
vA, 9. lAvaya-juddhANi vA, 10. vaTTaya-juddhANi vA, 11. tittira-juddhANi vA, 12.
kavoya-juddhANi vA, 13. kavijala-jukhANi vA, 14. ahi-juddhANi vA, 15. sUkara-
juddhANi vA cakkhudaMsaNa-vaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei, abhisaMdhAreMtaM vA saaijji|
24. je bhikkhU-1. jUhiya-ThANANi vA, 2. haya-jUhiya-ThANANi vA, 3. maya-jUhiya-
ThANANi vA, 4. gaya-jUhiya-ThANANi vA, 5. aNiyANi vA, 6. vajhaM vA NoNijjamANaM
pehAe cakkhudaMsaNavaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei, abhisaMdhAretaM vA saaijji|| 25. je
bhikkhU-1. AghAiya ThANANi vA, 2. mANummANiya ThANANi vA, 3. mahayA-hayanaTTa-
gIya-vAiya-taMtI-tAla-tuDiya-ghaNa-muiMga-paDuppavAiya ThANANi vA
cakkhudaMsaNavaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei, abhisaMdhAretaM vA saaijji| 26. je
bhikkhU-1. kalahANi vA, 2. DimbANi vA, 3. DamarANi vA, 4. mahAjuddhANi vA, 5.
mahA-saMgAmANi vA, 6. jUyANi vA, 7. sabhANi vA cakkhudaMsaNavaDiyAe
abhisaMdhArei, abhisaMdhAretaM vA saaijji| 27. je bhikkhU-1. kaTTha-kammANi vA,
2. pottha-kammANi vA, 3. citta-kammANi vA, 4. maNi-kammANi vA, 5. vaMta-kammANi
vA, 6. gaMthimANi vA, 7. veDhimANi vA, 8. pUrimANi vA, 9. saMghAimANi vA, 10.
vivihANi-kammANi cakkhudaMsaNavaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei, abhisaMdhAretaM vA saaijji|
28. je bhikkhU virUvarUvesu mahussavesu itthINi vA, purisANi vA, therANi vA,
majjhimANi vA, DaharANi vA, aNalaMkiyANi vA, sualaMkiyANi vA, gAyaMtANi vA,
vAyaMtANi vA, naccaMtANi vA, hasaMtANi vA, ramaMtANi vA, mohaMtANi vA, viulaM
asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paribhAyaMtANi vA, paribhujaMtANi vA
cakkhudaMsaNavaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei, abhisaMdhAretaM vA saaijji| 29. je bhikkhU
samavAyesu vA, piMDaNiyaresu vA, iMdamahesu vA jAva Agaramahesu vA annayaresu vA
virUvarUvesu mahAmahesu cakkhudaMsaNavaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei, abhisaMdhAretaM vA
saaijji| 30. je bhikkhU bahusagaDANi vA, bahurahANi vA, bahumilakkhUNi vA,
bahupaccaMtANi vA, annayarANi vA virUvarUvANi mahAsavANi cakkhudaMsaNavaDiyAe
abhisaMdhArei, abhisaMdhAretaM vA saaijji|

Page #369 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak  [269 31. A monk who is attached to, delighted in, or
interested in, or who approves of someone who is attached to, delighted in, or
interested in, the following:  1. **Ihaloiesu** (worldly) realms, 2. **Ruvesu**
(forms), 3. **Paraloiesu** (otherworldly) realms, 4. **Dithesu** (visible)
realms, 5. **Adithhesu** (invisible) realms, 6. **Suesu** (pleasant) realms, 7.
**Asuesu** (unpleasant) realms, 8. **Vinnaesu** (known) realms, 9. **Avinnaesu**
(unknown) realms.  16. A monk who is attached to, delighted in, or interested
in, or who approves of someone who is attached to, delighted in, or interested
in, the following:  1. **Khet** (field), 2. **Khai** (ditch), 3. **Kot** (fort),
4. **Toran** (gateway), 5. **Argala** (door bolt), 6. **Argalapaas** (doorway),
7. **Gaddha** (pit), 8. **Gufa** (cave), 9. **Kuta** (palace-like structure),
10. **Guptgriha** (underground chamber), 11. **Vriksha-griha** (tree-house), 12.
**Parvat-gah** (mountain cave), 13. **Vaks** (chest) **Chaityalaya** (shrine),
14. **Stupa** (monument) **Chaityalaya** (shrine), 15. **Luharashala**
(blacksmith's workshop), 16. **Dharmasala** (rest house), 17. **Devalaya**
(temple), 18. **Sabhasthal** (assembly hall), 19. **Pyaau** (water well), 20.
**Dukanen** (shops), 21. **Godam** (warehouse), 22. **Yaan-griha** (vehicle
house), 23. **Yaan-shala** (vehicle shed), 24. **Chune ke karkhane** (lime
factory), 25. **Darbh-karm ke sthan** (grass-working place), 26. **Charm-karm ke
sthan** (leather-working place), 27. **Valkaj-karm ke sthan** (bark-working
place), 28. **Van-karm-vanaspati ke karkhane** (forest-product factory), 29.
**Koyle ke karkhane** (coal factory), 30. **Lakdi ke karkhane** (wood factory),
31. **Shmashan** (crematorium), 32. **Shantikarm karne ke sthan** (place for
performing peace rituals), 33. **Parvat** (mountain), 34. **Gufa mein bane
griha** (house built in a cave), 35. **Pashan-karm ke sthan** (stone-working
place), 36. **Bhavanon aur grihon ko dekhne ke liye jata hai ya jaane wale ka
anumodan karta hai** (goes to see buildings and houses or approves of someone
who does).  17. A monk who is attached to, delighted in, or interested in, or
who approves of someone who is attached to, delighted in, or interested in, the
following:  1. **Ikshu** (sugarcane) **vaigerah ki vatka** (garden) (or
vegetable garden), 2. **Ghaas ka jangal** (grassland), 3. **Prachchhan sthan**
(hidden place), 4. **Ndi ke jal se gire hue sthal** (place surrounded by river
water), 5. **Sghan jangal** (dense forest), 6. **Sudirgh atvi** (long forest),
7. **Ek jatiya vrikshon ka van** (grove of one type of tree), 8. **Anek jatiya
vrikshon ka sghan van** (dense forest of many types of trees), 9. **Parvat**
(mountain), 10. **Anek parvaton ka samuh** (group of many mountains), 11.
**Kuan** (well), 12. **Talab** (pond), 13. **Drah** (swamp), 14. **Nadiyan**
(rivers), 15. **Bavdiyan** (stepwells), 16. **Pushkarniyan** (sacred ponds), 17.
**Deepika-lambhi bavdiyan adi** (long stepwells etc.), 18. **Paraspar kapat se
sanjukt anek bavdiyan** (many stepwells connected by doors), 19. **Sarovar**
(lake), 20. **Sarovar-pancti** (row of lakes), 21. **Anyonyasambaddh-sarovar ko
dekhne ke liye jata hai ya jaane wale ka anumodan karta hai** (goes to see
interconnected lakes or approves of someone who does).  18. A monk who is
attached to, delighted in, or interested in, or who approves of someone who is
attached to, delighted in, or interested in, seeing a village or a capital city.
19. A monk who is attached to, delighted in, or interested in, or who approves
of someone who is attached to, delighted in, or interested in, seeing a village
festival or a capital city festival.  20. A monk who is attached to, delighted
in, or interested in, or who approves of someone who is attached to, delighted
in, or interested in, seeing a village massacre or a capital city massacre.  21.
A monk who is attached to, delighted in, or interested in, or who approves of
someone who is attached to, delighted in, or interested in, seeing the roads of
a village or the roads of a capital city.  22. A monk who is attached to,
delighted in, or interested in, or who approves of someone who is attached to,
delighted in, or interested in, seeing the following:  1. **Ashva** (horse), 2.
**Hasti** (elephant), 3. **Mahish** (buffalo), 4. **Vrishabh** (bull), 5.
**Kukkut** (chicken), 6. **Markar** (monkey), 7. **Lavak pakshi** (bird of
prey), 8. **Battakh** (duck), 9. **Tittir** (partridge), 10. **Kabutar**
(pigeon), 11. **Kuraj ya chatak** (bird) etc.  23. A monk who is attached to,
delighted in, or interested in, or who approves of someone who is attached to,
delighted in, or interested in, seeing the following:  1. **Ashvayuddha** (horse
fight), 2. **Gajayuddha** (elephant fight), 3. **Unton ka yuddha** (camel
fight), 4. **Sandon** (bulls) **ka yuddha** (bull fight),

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM uddezaka] [269 31. je bhikkhU ihaloiesu vA rUvesu, paraloiesu vA
rUvesu, diThesu vA rUvesu, adiThesu vA rUvesu, suesu vA rUvesu, asuesu vA
rUvesu, vinnAesu vA rUvesu, avinnAesu vA rUvesu sajjai, rajjai, gijjhai,
ajjhovavajjai, sajjaMtaM vA, rajjaMtaM vA, gijjhaMtaM vA, ajjhovavajjaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  16. jo bhikSu-1. kheta, 2. khAI, 3. koTa, 4. toraNa, 5. argalA, 6.
argalApAsa, 7. gaDDhA, 8. guphA, 9. kUTa ke sadRza mahala, 10. guptagRha
(talaghara), 11. vRkSa-gRha (vRkSa para yA vRkSa ke Azraya se vanA ghara), 12.
parvata-gaha, 13. vakSa kA caityAlaya, 14. stUpa kA caityAlaya, 15 luhArazAlA,
16. dharmazAlA, 17. devAlaya, 18. sabhAsthala, 19. pyAU, 20 dukAneM, 21. godAma,
22. yAna-gRha, 23. yAna-zAlA, 24. cUne ke kArakhAne, 25. darbha-karma ke sthAna,
26. carma-karma ke sthAna, 27. valkajakarma ke sthAna, 28. vana-karma-vanaspati
ke kArakhAne, 29. koyale ke kArakhAne, 30. lakar3I ke kArakhAne, 31. zmazAna,
32. zAntikarma karane ke sthAna, 33. parvata, 34. guphA meM bane gRha, 35.
pASANakarma ke sthAna, 36. bhavanoM aura gRhoM ko dekhane ke liye jAtA hai yA
jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA 17. jo bhikSu-1. ikSu vagairaha kI vATikA (athavA
sabjI kI vATikA), 2. ghAsa kA jaMgala, 3. pracchanna sthAna, 4. nadI ke jala se
ghire hue sthala, 5. saghana jaMgala(aTavI), 6.sudIrgha aTavI, 7. eka jAtIya
vRkSoM kA vana (upavana), 8. aneka jAtIya vRkSoM kA saghana vana, 9. parvata,
10. aneka parvatoM kA samUha, 11. kueM, 12. tAlAba, 13. draha, 14. nadiyAM, 15.
bAvar3iyAM, 16. puSkaraNiyAM, 17. dIpikA-lambI vAvar3iyA Adi, 18. paraspara
kapATa se saMyukta aneka vAvar3iyA, 19. sarovara, 20. sarovarapaMkti, 21.
anyonyasaMbaddha-sarovara ko dekhane ke liye jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA anamodana
karatA hai| 18. jo bhikSu grAma yAvat rAjadhAnI ko dekhane ke liye jAtA hai yA
jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 19. jo bhikSu grAma-mahotsava (yAtrAdi) yAvat
rAjadhAnI meM hone vAle mahotsava ko dekhane ke liye jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  20. jo bhikSu grAmaghAta yAvat rAjadhAnIghAta ko
dekhane ke liye jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 21. jo bhikSu
grAma ke mArgoM ko yAvat rAjadhAnI ke mArgoM ko dekhane ke liye jAtA hai yA jAne
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  22. jo bhikSu-1. azva, 2. hastI, 3. mahiSa, 4.
vRSabha, 5. kukkuTa, 6. markaTa (bandara), 7. lAvaka pakSI, 8. battakha, 9.
tittira, 10. kabUtara, 11. kuraja yA cAtaka (pakSI) Adi ko zikSita karane kA
sthAna dekhane ke liye jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  23. jo
bhikSu-1. azvayuddha, 2. gajayuddha, 3. U~ToM kA yuddha, 4. sAMDoM (bailoM) kA
yuddha,

Page #370 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 270] [Nishīthসূত্র 5. A monk who goes to see or approves of someone going to
see a battle of buffaloes, 6. a battle of goats, 7. a battle of roosters, 8. a
battle of monkeys, 9. a battle of jackals, 10. a battle of ducks, 11. a battle
of partridges, 12. a battle of pigeons, 13. a battle of chataks, 14. a battle of
snakes (mongoose), 15. a battle of pigs, or any other type of battle. 24. A monk
who goes to see or approves of someone going to see a thief being taken to 1. a
wedding pavilion, 2. a place where a group of horses is gathered, 3. a place
where a group of elephants is gathered, 4. a place where an army is gathered, or
5. a place of execution. 25. A monk who goes to see or approves of someone going
to see 1. a place of assembly (for speeches), 2. a place where grains are
measured and weighed, 3. a place where musical instruments are played, such as
drums, cymbals, stringed instruments, and other instruments that make a loud
sound, or 4. a place where dancing, singing, and playing music is happening. 26.
A monk who goes to see or approves of someone going to see 1. a quarrel among
ordinary people, 2. a quarrel in the house of a king, prince, or other royal, 3.
the harassment of a king by an enemy, 4. a great battle (a battle with weapons),
5. a great war with a four-armed army, 6. a place where gambling is happening,
or 7. a place where a large crowd of people is gathered. 27. A monk who goes to
see or approves of someone going to see 1. wood carving, 2. book making, 3.
painting, 4. gem setting, 5. ivory carving, 6. a place where garlands are made
by weaving flowers, 7. a place where garlands are made by weaving fruits, 8. a
place where flowers are used to fill empty spaces, 9. a place where flowers are
collected to make bouquets, 10. or any other place where various types of
weaving work is being done. 28. A monk who goes to see or approves of someone
going to see various types of festivals where many old people, young people,
children, men, or women are gathered, either in their usual attire or adorned
with ornaments, singing, playing music, dancing, laughing, playing games,
charming others, eating a lot of food, drinking, eating, or distributing
delicious food. 29. A monk who goes to see or approves of someone going to see
fairs, places where ancestral offerings are made, Indra festivals, Agar
festivals, or any other such festivals. 30. A monk who goes to see or approves
of someone going to see places where there are many oxcarts, chariots,
Mlechchhas (foreigners), or robbers, or places where there is a lot of evil. 31.
A monk who is attached to seeing, whether seen or unseen, heard or unheard,
known or unknown, or who approves of someone who is attached, attracted, greedy,
or infatuated with seeing. (He incurs the minor Caturmāsika atonement)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 270] [nizIthasUtra 5. mahiSa (bhaisoM) kA yuddha, 6. meMDhoM kA yuddha, 7.
kukkuTayuddha, 8. markaTayuddha, 9. lAvakayuddha, 10. battakhayuddha, 11.
tittirayuddha, 12. kapotayuddha, 13. cAtakayuddha, 14. sarpa-(nevale) kA yuddha,
15. zUkarayuddha Adi kisI bhI prakAra ke yuddha ko dekhane ke liye jAtA hai yA
jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 24. jo bhikSu-1. vivAha-maMDapa, 2. azva-
yUtha (samUha) kA sthala, 3. gaja-yUtha-sthala, 4. senA samudAya athavA 5.
vadhasthAna para le jAte hue corAdi ko dekhane liye jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 25. jo bhikSu-1. sabhAsthala (bhASaNa ke sthAna), 2.
dhAnyAdi ke mApa-taula Adi kA sthala, 3. mahAn zabda karate hue bajAye jAte
vAdya-nRtya-gIta-taMtrI-tala-tAla-truTita-ghaNa-mRdaMga Adi bajAne ke sthaloM ko
dekhane ke liye jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 26. jo bhikSu-1.
sAmAnyajana-kalaha, 2. rAjA, yuvarAja Adi kA gRhakalaha, 3. parazatru rAjA kA
upadrava, 4. mahAyuddha (zastrayuddha), 5. caturaMgiNI senA yukta mahAsaMgrAma,
6. juA khelane ke sthala, 7. jana-samUha ke sthala ko dekhane ke liye jAtA hai
yA jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA haiM  /  27. jo bhikSu-1. kASTha-karma, 2.
pustaka-karma, 3. citra-karma, 4. maNi-karma, 5. daMta-karma, 6. phUloM ko
gUthakara mAlAdi banAne kA sthala, 7. phaloM ko veSTita karake mAlA Adi banAne
kA sthala, 8. rikta jagaha ko phUloM Adi se pUrita karane kA sthala, 9. phUloM
ko saMgraha karake gucchA Adi banAne kA sthala, 10. anya bhI vividha veSTa
karmoM ke sthaloM ko dekhane ke liye jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 28. jo bhikSu aneka prakAra ke mahotsavoM meM jahAM para ki aneka vRddha,
yuvaka, bAlaka, puruSa yA striyAM sAmAnya veSa meM yA vastrAbhUSaNoM se
susajjita hokara gAte, bajAte, nAcate, haMsate, krIr3A karate, mohita karate,
vipula azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya AhAra khAte yA bAMTate hoM to unheM dekhane
ke liye jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 29. jo bhikSu meloM,
pitRbhojasthaloM, iMdramahotsava yAvat AgaramahotsavoM yA anya bhI aise
mahotsavoM ko dekhane ke liye jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 30.
jo bhikSu aneka bailagAr3iyoM, rathoM, mleccha yA luTere Adi ke mahAprAzrava
vAle (pApa) sthAnoM ko dekhane ke liye jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  31. jo bhikSu ihalaukika yA pAralaukika, dekhe yA binA dekhe, sune yA
binA sune, jAne yA anajAne rUpoM ko dekhane meM Asakta hotA hai, anurakta hotA
hai, gRddha hotA hai, mUcchita hotA hai yA Asakta, anurakta, gRddha aura
mUcchita hone vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA

Page #371 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak  [271]  **Explanation of Some Words**  1. **Vappa-Kedaro-
Kheta** or **Kyarियां** (fields or beds). **Torana-Ranno-Duvaradis-Raja**'s
fort's gate, adorned with **Korani** (a type of decorative element) and
**Mandap** (a pavilion-like structure) made of stone, etc. **Aggal-Pasaga-
Argala** (a type of enclosure) where things are trapped, **Argalaghar** (a room
with an enclosure) or the side of a wall. **Nam-Gihan-Bhumigaran-Bhoyara**
(basement), **Talghar** (underground chamber), etc. **Rukkh-Giha-Rukkh-Occiya
Gihagaro** (a house built on a tree), **Rukkh-Wa Gihan Kadan** (a tree-shaped
house or a house built under the shelter of a tree). **Rukkh-Wa Cheiya Kadan**
(a place under a tree, a tree inhabited by a deity). **Thubhan-Wa Cheiya Kadan**
(a place under a **Stupa** (a dome-shaped Buddhist monument), a **Stupa**
inhabited by a deity). **Aaveshan-Loha-Kutti-Loha-Shala** (a blacksmith's
workshop). **Ayatan-Log-Samavay-Thanam-Chaupal** (a public meeting place).
**Paniy-Giha-Sala-Jath-Bhand-Achchati-Tan-Paniy-Gihan** (a shop where goods are
stored). **Jath-Vikkai-Sa-Sala-Ahva-Sakudd-Giha, Akudda-Sala** (a shop where
goods are sold, a house with walls, a shop without walls). **Thambhon-Par-Tiki-
Hui-Chhat-Wali-Sala** (a shop with a roof supported by pillars). **Giri-Guha-
Kandara-Gufa** (a cave). **Bhavan-Giha-Van-Raiya-Mandiyan-Bhavan, Van-
Vivajjiyan-Giha** (a building with a forest, a house without a forest).  The
words **"Uppalani, Pallalani, Ujjharani, Nijjarani"** appear frequently in Sutra
16, but there is no indication of their meaning in the **Acharaang Tika,
Pracharangani, or Nisihchuni**. These four names are not appropriate in the
context where they appear.  These four words appear after **"Vappani Wa
Falhihani Wa"**. However, in the **Acharaang Sutra**, the phrase **"Pagarani
Wa"** appears after **"Vappani, Falhihani"** in many places. The **Nisihchuni**
also explains **"Pagarani"** after **"Vappani, Falhihani"** in its commentary on
this Sutra.  Here, the original text has been retained according to **Acharaang
Shru. 2 A. 3 U. 3 and A. 4 U. 2** and **Nisihchuni**. It is clear that the text
of this sixteenth Sutra and the following seventeenth Sutra in the
**Nisihchuni** has become corrupted due to a scribal error after the commentary
(explanation).  2. **Kachcha-Nadya-Sann-Nimna-Pradesha, Mula-Kawa-Lukadi-
Waatika** (a low-lying area near a river, a garden of roots, vegetables, etc.).
**Ikkhu-Madi-Kachcha** (a low-lying area near a river, a field of sugarcane,
etc.). **Daviyani-Ghas-Ka-Jungle, Van-Me-Ghas-Ke-Liye-Avarudd-Bhum** (a grassy
jungle, land blocked for grass in the forest). **Gahanani-Kananani, Nirjal-
Pradesho-Aranya-Kshetram** (forests, waterless wilderness). **Samavrutta-Vapi,
Chaursa-Pukkhrani, Eta-Pro-Chev-Dihiyar-Dihiya, Mandali-Santhiya-Yo-Anno-Unna-
Kawa-D-Sanjutta-No-Gujaliya-Bhannati** (a circular well, a square pond, a long
and narrow pond, a pond with a circular shape and a gate for entering and
exiting).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM uddezaka] [271 vivecana-katipaya zabdoM kI vyAkhyA1. vappo-kedAro-
kheta yA kyAriyAM  /  toraNA-raNNoduvArAdisu-rAjA ke kile ke dvAra para lage hue
koraNI yukta maMDapAkAra patthara aadi| aggala-pAsagA-argalA jisameM phaMsAI
jAtI hai, vaha argalAghara arthAt bhitti kA pArzvabhAga  /  Nama-gihaM-
bhUmigharaM-bhoyarA, talaghara Adi  /  rukkhagiha-rukkhocciya gihAgAro, rukkhe
vA gihaM kaDaM-vRkSAkAra gRha yA vRkSa ke Azraya se banA huA ghara  /  rukkhaM
vA ceiya kaDaM-vRkSasya adho vyaMtarAdi sthalakaM devAdhiSThita vRkSa  /
thUbhaM vA ceiya kaDaM-vyantarAdi-kRtaM-devAdhiSThita stUpa  /  aavesnn-
lohaarkuttttii-lohaarshaalaa| AyataNaM-logasamavAyaThANaM-caupAla  /  paNiya-
giha-sAlA-jattha bhaNDaM acchati taM paNiyagihaM-dukAna  /  jattha vikkAi sA
sAlA-ahavA sakuDDa giha, akuDDA sAlA-jahAM mAla becA jAya vaha zAlA athavA
dIvAla sahita ho vaha ghara aura binA dIvAla kI ho vaha shaalaa| thambhoM para
TikI huI chata vAlI shaalaa| giriguhaa-kNdraa-guphaa| bhavaNa-giha-vaNarAiya
maMDiyaMbhavaNaM, vaNa-vivajjiyaM giha-jo vana-rAji se yukta ho vaha bhavana, jo
vana rahita ho vaha gRha  /  sUtra 16 ke pATha meM 'uppalANi, palalANi,
ujjharANi, NijjarANi' zabda adhika milate haiM, jinakA AcArAMga TIkA,
prAcArAMgaNi va nizIthacUNi meM koI saMketa bhI nahIM milatA hai tathA jisa
krama ke bIca meM ye cAra nAma haiM, vahAM ye upayukta bhI nahIM haiN| ye cAroM
zabda 'vappANi vA phalihANi vA' ke bAda meM haiN| jaba ki AcArAMgasUtra meM
aneka jagaha vappANi, phalihANi ke bAda 'pAgArANi vA' pATha milatA hai tathA
nizIthacUrNikAra ne bhI isa sUtra kI vyAkhyA meM vappANi, phalihANi ke bAda
pAgArANi kI hI vyAkhyA kI hai| yahAM AcArAMga zru. 2 a. 3 u. 3 evaM a. 4 u. 2
tathA nizIthacUNi ke anusAra mUla pATha rakhA gayA hai  /  nizIthasUtra meM
upalabdha isa solahaveM sUtra kA va isake Age ke 17veM sUtra kA pATha cUNi
(vyAkhyA) ke bAda lipidoSa se azuddha ho gayA hai, aisA spaSTa jJAta hotA hai|
2. kacchA-nadyAsanna nimnapradezA, mUlakavAlukAdi vATikA  /  ikkhumAdi kacchA-
nadI ke nikaTa kA nIcA bhUbhAga, mUlA, baiMgana Adi kI vADI, Ikha Adi kA kheta
/  daviyANi-ghAsa kA jaMgala, vana meM ghAsa ke liye avaruddha bhUmi  /
gahaNANi-kAnanAni, nirjala pradezo araNyakSetram-jalahIna vanyapradeza  /
samavRttA vApI, cAurasA-pukkharaNI, etApro ceva dIhiyAro dIhiyA,
maMDalisaMThiyAyo annonna kavADasaMjuttAno gujAliyA bhaNNati  /

Page #372 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[272] [Nishith Sutra: A well that is perfectly round is called a Vapi, a square
one is called a Pushkarini, a long one is called a Dirghika, and other circular
ones with lids are called Gujalia. These are all types of Bawdis. There are four
Sutras for Grama, etc., the meanings of all these words have been given in the
fifth Uddeshak. The reader should understand the original text and its meaning
from there. Pras-Sikkhavana-Pasakaran, and the rest like Ashva, etc., are places
for teaching. In the Sutra related to war, the words "Midh (frog)" and "Ahi
(snake)" are more frequent. Understand the rest of the words as similar to the
Sutra for teaching. Kavinjal-Kapirv Javate Ishat Pingalo Va. Kamaniya Shabdam
Pinjayati - Chatak Pakshi. 6. Juhiy - Here the Churnikar has given three
meanings with three words: 1. Ujjuhiy, 2. Nijjuhiy, 3. Mihujjuhiy. Here the
third meaning seems relevant - Vadhu-Var-Pariyanam, Vadhu-Varadhik Tat-Sthanam,
Vedikadi. Evam Hay-Gay-Yuthadi Sthanani Vivahamandap Adi. Explanation in another
way Gosankhadi Ujjuhiga Bhannati, Gavinan Nivedhana Pariyanad Nijihuhiga
(Bhannati) Gavio Ujjuhitao Adavihuuttiyo Ujjuhijjanti. The learned reader should
try to understand this himself. The Churnikar has collected four types of army
communities from the army and has also given instructions for thieves, etc.,
while taking them for execution in the explanation. Such a text is also
available in the Acharang Sutra, but that sentence is not found in the original
text of the Nishith Sutra. Akhanag Adi Aghyayam, Akhyayika Sthanani - Kathanak
Sthanani - Places for stories. Kalha, Dib, Damar are all types of troubles.
"Mahayuddha" and "Mahasangram" are types of battles. In the discussion of this
Sutra in Acharang and Nishith, only the word "Kalha" is mentioned. But different
texts are found in the manuscripts. Other words available in Nishith Sutra and
Acharang Sutra are: 1. Kharani Va, 2. Verani Va, 3. Bolani Va, 4. Do Rajjani Va,
5. Vairrajani Va, 6. Viruddha-Rajjani Va. The first three words are found more
in Nishith and the last three words are found more in Acharang. Out of these,
Bolani is included in Kalhani. The remaining five are emotional. Since they do
not match the subject matter of the Sutra related to the place and are not found
in the Bhashya, Chuni, these words have not been included in the original.
Chitta Kammani - Chittagan Leparamadi - Aacha., Chitta Lepa Pasidha - Nishith.
In many manuscripts, the word "Chitra Karma" is found and in many manuscripts,
"Chitra Karma", "Lepya Karma" ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 272] [nizIthasUtra arthAt jo samagolAkAra ho vaha vApI, jo caukora ho vaha
puSkariNI, jo lambI ho vaha dIrghikA kahalAtI hai aura maMDalAkAra sthita
anyAnya kapATasaMyukta gujAliyA kahalAtI hai| ye bAvaDiyoM ke hI prakAra haiN|
grAmAdi ke cAra sUtra haiM, una sabhI zabdoM ke artha pAMcaveM uddezaka meM kara
diye gaye haiM  /  pAThaka vahA~ se mUla pATha va artha samajha leN| prAsa-
sikkhAvaNaM-pAsakaraNaM, evaM sesANi vi-azva Adi ko zikSA dene kA sthAna  /
yuddhasaMbaMdhI sUtra meM "miDha (meMDhA) zabda aura ahi (sarpa) zabda adhika
haiN| zeSa zabda zikSita karane ke sUtra ke samAna samajhanA  /  kaviMjala-
kapiriva javate ISat piMgalo vA  /  kamanIyaM zabdaM piMjayati-cAtaka pkssii| 6.
jUhiya-yahAM cUrNikAra ne tIna zabda karake artha kiye haiM1. ujjUhiya, 2.
nijjUhiya, 3. mihujjUhiya  /  yahA~ tIsarA artha prAsaMgika lagatA hai - vadhU-
vara-pariANaM, vadhu-varAdikaM tatsthAnaM, vedikAdi  /  evaM haya-gaya-yUthAdi
sthAnAnivivAhamaMDapa aadi| anya prakAra se vyAkhyA gosaMkhaDI ujjUhigA
bhannati, gAvINaM NiveDhaNA pariyANAdi NijjUhigA (bhannati) gAvIo ujjUhitAo
aDavihuttio ujjuhijjaMti  /  isakA artha vidvAn pAThaka svayaM samajhane kA
prayatna kreN| senA se cUrNikAra ne cAra prakAra ke senA-samudAya kA saMgraha
kiyA hai tathA vadha ke lie le jAte hue cora Adi kA nirdeza bhI vyAkhyA meM kiyA
hai  /  AcArAMgasUtra meM vaisA pATha bhI upalabdha hai kintu nizIthasUtra ke
mUla pATha meM vaha vAkya nahIM milatA hai| akkhANagAdi AghAiyaM,
AkhyAyikAsthAnAni-kathAnakasthAnAni - kathA ke sthAna  /  kalaha, Diba, Damara
ye sabhI kleza ke prakAra haiM  /  'mahAyuddha' tathA 'mahAsaMgrAma' ye lar3AI
ke prakAra haiM  /  AcArAMga va nizItha meM isa sUtra ke vivecana meM kevala eka
"kalaha" zabda kA hI nirdeza hai| kintu pratiyoM meM bhinna-bhinna pATha milate
haiN| nizIthasUtra va AcArAMgasUtra meM upalabdha anya zabda ye haiM 1. khArANi
vA, 2. verANi vA, 3. bolANi vA, 4. do rajjANi vA, 5. vairajjANi vA, 6. viruddha-
rajjANi vaa| prArambha ke tIna zabda nizItha meM aura aMtima tIna zabda AcArAMga
meM adhika milate haiM, inameM se bolANi kA samAveza kalahANi meM ho jAtA hai|
zeSa pAMca bhAvAtmaka haiM  /  sthala viSayaka sUtrokta viSaya meM inakI saMgati
na hone se tathA bhASya, cUNi meM bhI na hone se ina zabdoM ko mUla meM nahIM
rakhA hai| cittakammANi-cittAgaM lepAramAdI |-aacaa., cittalepA pasiddhA-
nizItha.  /  kaI pratiyoM meM 'citrakarma' eka zabda milatA hai aura kaI
pratiyoM meM 'citrakarma', 'lepyakarma'

Page #373 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak  [273]  These two words are similar. The Churnikar of
Acharanga has explained only one word, and the Nishita Churni indicates that
there are two words. Both citations are given above.  In Nishita, the meaning of
Thim, Vedhi, etc. is related to flowers, while in Acharanga, it means to wrap
with cloth, etc.  The word "Pattachhejjakamanni" is found more often in many
manuscripts, but it is not present in the Churnis of both Sutras. This word is
present in the Acharanga Tika. The word "Vihimani" is also present at the end of
this Sutra in the manuscripts, but it is not mentioned in the Churni or Tika.
In the Acharanga Tika, the four words Ganthimadi are first, and the words
Katthakamanni, etc. are later. But both Churnikars have first explained
Katthakamanni, etc. and then explained Ganthimadi, etc.  This Sutra is found in
many manuscripts at the beginning of these Sutras or at different places, but
the Nishita Churnikar has placed this Sutra where he has explained it.  In the
Acharanga Sutra, the explanation of this Sutra is in the Tika of the 12th
Adhyayan, and the explanation of all the remaining Sutras is in the 11th
Adhyayan. But in the Pracharanga Churni and Nishita Churni, there is complete
similarity in the Sutra location and word location. In both Churnis, the mention
of Mahamahotsavas is done after this.  The explanation of the three Sutras of
Mahotsava, Mahamahotsava, and Mahashravasthanas is available in the Bhashya
Gathas. But in the manuscripts of Nishita, only the original text of one Sutra
is found. The Churni indicates the existence of all three Sutras.  In Acharanga,
the original text and Tika of two Sutras are available, and in the Acharanga
Churni, like the Nishita Churni, there is an indication of the existence of all
three Sutras. Therefore, two Sutras are placed according to Acharanga, and one
Mahamahotsava Sutra is placed according to Nishita Uddeshak 8. For clarity of
the meanings of these three Sutras, see the eighth Uddeshak.  The Bhashyakar has
used the words "Itthimadi Thana" for festivals, "Samavayadi Thana" for
Mahamahotsavas, and "Viruvaruvadi Thana" for Mahashravasthanas in Gathas 4137,
4138, and 4139 respectively.  The last Sutra mentions the atonement for the
attachment of all known, unknown, seen, and unseen forms. This Sutra uses four
words for attachment, while in Acharanga, five words are also found. There, the
word "No Mujhbhejjja" is more, which means not to faint, and after that, "No
Prajjhovavjejjja", which means not to faint excessively.  In the Acharanga
Sutra, the description of the attachment of form is in the 12th Adhyayan in the
second Shruta Skandha, and before that, the description of the attachment of
words is in the 11th Adhyayan. But in the Nishita Sutra, the atonement for the
attachment of form is mentioned first in the 12th Uddeshak, and then the
atonement for the attachment of words is mentioned in the 17th Uddeshak. This is
an inversion in the description of both Sutras.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM uddezaka ] [273 ye do zabda milate haiM  /  AcArAMga ke cUrNikAra ne
eka zabda kI vyAkhyA kI hI hai aura nizIthacUrNi meM do zabda hone kA nirdeza
hai  /  donoM uddharaNa Upara diye gaye haiM  /  thima, veDhi prAdi kA nizItha
meM puSpasambandhI artha kiyA hai aura AcArAMga meM vastrAdi se veSTana karanA
Adi artha kiyA hai  /  kaI pratiyoM meM "pattacchejjakammANi" zabda adhika
milatA hai kintu donoM sUtroM kI cUrNiyoM meM yaha zabda nahIM hai  /  AcArAMga
TIkA meM yaha zabda hai  /  pratiyoM meM isa sUtra ke anta meM "vihimANi" zabda
bhI hai, parantu usakA nirdeza cUrNi yA TIkA meM nahIM hai  /  AcArAMga TIkA meM
gaMthimAdi cAra zabda pahale haiM aura kaTThakammANi Adi zabda bAda meM haiM  /
kintu donoM cUrNikAroM ne pahale kaTThakammANi Adi kI vyAkhyA karake usake bAda
gaMthima Adi kI vyAkhyA kI hai  /  yaha sUtra kaI pratiyoM meM ina sUtroM ke
prAraMbha meM yA bhinna-bhinna sthaloM meM milatA hai kintu nizItha cUrNikAra ne
jahAM isakI vyAkhyA kI hai vahIM isa sUtra ko rakhA hai  /  AcArAMga sUtra meM
isa sUtra kI vyAkhyA 12veM adhyayana kI TIkA meM hai aura zeSa sabhI sUtroM kI
vyAkhyA gyArahaveM adhyayana meM hai  /  kintu prAcArAMgacUrNi meM aura
nizothacUrNi meM sUtrasthala evaM zabdasthala meM pUrNataH samAnatA hai  /
donoM cUrNiyoM meM isake bAda mahAmahotsavoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai  /
mahotsava, mahAmahotsava aura mahAzravasthAnoM ke tIna sUtroM kI vyAkhyA bhASya
gAthAoM meM upalabdha hai  /  kintu nizItha kI pratiyoM meM eka sUtra kA mUla
pATha hI milatA hai  /  cUrNi meM tInoM sUtroM ke astitva kA saMketa milatA hai
/  AcArAMga meM do sUtroM kA mUla pATha va TIkA upalabdha hai tathA
AcArAMgacUrNi meM nizIthacUrNi ke samAna tInoM sUtroM ke astitva kA saMketa
milatA hai  /  ataH do sUtra AcArAMga ke anusAra aura eka mahAmahotsava kA sUtra
nizItha uddezaka ATha ke anusAra rakhA hai  /  ina tInoM sUtroM ke zabdArtha
spaSTatA ke lie AThavAM uddezaka dekheM  /  bhASyakAra ne gAthA. 4137, 4138 evaM
4139 meM kramazaH utsavoM ke lie - ' itthimAdi ThANA', mahAmahotsavoM ke lie - "
samavAyAdi ThANA " aura mahAzravasthAnoM ke liye - "virUvarUvAdi ThANA" zabda kA
prayoga kiyA hai  /  aMtima sUtra meM sabhI jJAta ajJAta aura dRSTa pradRSTa
rUpoM kI prAsakti kA prAyazcitta kahA hai| isa sUtra meM prAsakti ke lie cAra
zabdoM kA prayoga hai, jabaki AcArAMga meM pAMca zabda bhI milate haiM  /  vahA~
"no mujbhejjA" zabda adhika hai, jisakA artha hai mUcchita na ho aura usake bAda
"no prajjhovavajjejjA" arthAt atyaMta mUcchita na ho  /  AcArAMgasUtra dvitIya
zrutaskaMdha meM rUpa kI prAsakti kA varNana bArahaveM adhyayana meM hai aura
usake pahale gyArahaveM adhyayana meM zabda kI Asakti kA varNana hai  /  kintu
nizIthasUtra meM pahale rUpa kI Asakti kA bArahaveM uddezaka meM prAyazcitta
kathana karake bAda meM satarahaveM uddezaka meM zabda kI Asakti kA prAyazcitta
kathana kiyA hai  /  yaha donoM sUtroM ke varNana meM utkrama hai  /

Page #374 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīthasūtra (Chapter 274)  **Verses on the prohibition of attachment to
sense objects like sound, form, etc., and various Prāgama sayings on remaining
indifferent to them:**  1. One who is *prāmāda* (desiring sense objects) is said
to be the doer of his own soul. - Prācā. Śru. 1, Adhyāya 1, Uddesa 4  2. The
objects of the senses are the root cause of the world. The objects of the senses
are the root cause of the world. One who desires these objects of the senses
becomes overwhelmed by great suffering, falls under their control, and engages
in *prāmāda* conduct. - Prācā. Śru. 1, Adhyāya 2, Uddesa 1  3. Sound, etc., are
the cycles of the world. Sound, etc., are the cause of the cycles of the world.
People in the world, seeing living beings in various directions, up, down,
sideways, and east, etc., and hearing sounds, become unconscious. This is said
to be the cause of the world. One who is not free from these objects is outside
the command of the Lord and again consumes sound, etc. - Ācā. Śru. 1, Adhyāya 1,
Uddesa 5  4. It is extremely difficult to conquer these sense objects... Those
beings who desire these sense objects grieve, become cruel, shed tears, suffer,
and become greatly distressed when they do not obtain them or when they are
lost. - Prācā. Śru. 1, Adhyāya 2, Uddesa 5  5. One who has truly understood the
consequences of attachment to sound, form, smell, taste, and touch and has
renounced them is a seeker, a soul-aspirant, a knower, a scholar of scriptures,
righteous, and self-controlled. - Ācā. Śru. 1, Adhyāya 2, Uddesa 1  6. The muni,
remaining indifferent to sounds and forms, renounces birth and death and,
through self-control, becomes free from birth and death. - Prā. Śru. 1,
Prakaraṇa 3, Uddesa 1 - Ācā. Śru. 1, Prakaraṇa 3, Uddesa 2  7. Living beings,
becoming attached to sense objects, accumulate karma.  8. Some munis, who
restrain their senses like eyes, etc., again become attached to these sense
objects, which are the cause of karma bondage, due to the arising of delusion.
Those young beings are not free from karma bondage, cannot violate the *saṃyoga*
(connections), remain in the darkness of delusion, do not understand the path of
liberation, and cannot obtain the benefit of worshipping the Lord's command. -
Ācā. Śru. 1, Adhyāya 4, Uddesa 4  9. For one of little strength, it is extremely
difficult to renounce sense objects. - Prācā. Śru. 1, Adhyāya 5, Uddesa 1  10.
Many worldly beings, attached to form, etc., are wandering in many births. Those
beings experience many sufferings there. - Prācā. Śru. 1, Adhyāya 5, Uddesa 1
11. Young beings, attached to form, etc., or attached to violence, etc., fall
away from dharma and wander in the world. - Prācā. Śru. 1, Prakaraṇa 5, Uddesa 3
Beings attached to form, etc., suffer and lament pitifully. Yet, they cannot be
freed from the fruits of those karmas. - Ācā. Śru. 1, Adhyāya 6, Uddesa 1  12.
...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ nizIthasUtra zabda, rUpa Adi indriyaviSayoM kI Asakti kA niSedha evaM unase
udAsIna rahane ke vibhinna prAgama vAkya isa prakAra haiM- 274 ] 1. jo pramAda
guNArthI (indriyaviSayoM kA icchuka ) hotA hai, vahI apanI AtmA ko karane vAlA
kahA jAtA hai  /  - prAcA. zru. 1 a. 1 u. 4 2. jo indriyoM ke viSaya haiM ve hI
saMsAra ke mUla kAraNa haiM  /  jo saMsAra ke mUla kAraNa haiN| indriyoM ke
viSaya hI haiM  /  ina indriyoM ke viSayoM kA icchuka mahAn duHkhAbhibhUta
hokara unake vazIbhUta hotA hai aura pramAdAcaraNa karatA hai  /  - prAcA. zru.
1 a. 2 u. 1. 3. jo zabdAdi viSaya haiM ve saMsAra Avarta haiM, jo saMsAra -
Avarta ke kAraNa haiM ve zabdAdi viSaya hI haiM  /  loka meM Upara, nIce,
tirache evaM pUrva Adi dizAoMoM meM jIva rUpoM ko dekhakara aura zabdoM ko
sunakara unameM mUcchita hote haiM, yahI saMsAra kA kAraNa kahA gayA hai  /  jo
ina viSayoM se agupta hai, vaha bhagavadAjJA se bAhara hai aura punaH zabdAdi
viSayoM kA sevana karatA hai  /  AcA. zru 1. a. 1 u. 5 4. ina indriyaviSayoM
para vijaya prApta karanA ati kaThina hai.... jo ye indriyaviSayoM ke icchuka
prANI haiM, ve unake prApta na hone para yA naSTa ho jAne para zoka karate haiM,
krUrate haiM, mAMsU bahAte haiM, pIr3ita hote haiM aura mahA duHkhI ho jAte haiM
/  - prAcA. 1 a. 2 u. 5. 5. jisane zabda, rUpa, gaMdha, rasa, sparzo kI prAsakti
ke pariNAmoM ko samyak prakAra se jAnakara unakA tyAga kara diyA hai vaha
sAdhaka zrAtmArthI hai, jJAnI hai, zAstrajJa hai, dharmI hai aura saMyamavAn hai
/  -- AcA. zru. 1 a. 2 u. 1 6. zabdoM aura rUpoM ke prati upekSAbhAva rakhatA
huA muni janma-maraNa se vimukha rahakara saMyamAcaraNa dvArA janma maraNa se
chUTa jAtA hai  /  - prA. zru. 1, pra. 3, u. 1 AcA. zru. 1 pra. 3 u. 2 7. jIva
indriyaviSayoM meM gRddha hokara karmoM kA saMcaya karate haiM  /  8. cakSu Adi
indriyoM kA nirodha karane vAle koI muni punaH mohodaya se karmabaMdha ke
kAraNabhUta ina indriyaviSayoM meM gRddha ho jAte haiM  /  ve bAla jIva
karmabaMdhana se mukta nahIM hote, saMyogoM kA ullaMghana nahIM kara pAte, moha
rUpI aMdhakAra meM rahakara mokSa mArga ko nahIM samajha pAte, ve bhagavadAjJA
kI ArAdhanA ke lAbha ko bhI prApta nahIM kara sakate  /  - AcA. zra. 1 a. 4. u.
4 9. alpa sAmarthya vAle ke lie indriyaviSayoM kA tyAga karanA atyanta kaThina
hai  /  - prAcA. zru. 1 a. 5. u. 1 10. aneka saMsArI prANI rUpa Adi meM gRddha
hokara aneka yoniyoM meM paribhramaNa kara rahe haiM  /  ve prANI vahAM aneka
kaSToM ko prApta hote haiM  /  - prAcA. zru. 1. a. 5 u. 1 11. bAla jIva rUpAdi
meM prAsakta hokara yA hiMsAdi meM Asakta hokara dharma se cyuta ho jAte haiM
aura saMsAra meM bhramaNa karate haiM  /  - prAcA. zru. 1 pra. 5. u. 3 rUpAdi
meM prAsakta jIva duHkhI hokara karuNa vilApa karate haiM  /  phira bhI una
karmoM ke phala se ve mukta nahIM ho sakate  /  - AcA. zra. 1 a. 6 u. 1. 12.

Page #375 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak  [275 13. Pracha. Shru. 2 A. 15 mentions the five feelings
of the five great vows, the renunciation of objects like words, and the absence
of attachment and aversion towards them. The fifth Samvara-dwar of the
Prashnavyakaran Sutra also elaborates on the renunciation of attachment to
objects. 14. The Jnata Sutra A. 4 mentions the control of senses through the
example of a tortoise, and in A. 17, through the example of a "horse," it
explains the negative consequences of being attached to sensory objects and the
positive consequences of remaining unattached. 15. Uttara. A. 29 mentions the
benefits of controlling the five senses. 16. Uttara. A. 32, in 65 verses,
describes the nature of objects like words, attachment to them, the resulting
tendencies of beings, their consequences, and the benefits of detachment from
them. Examples of beings dying due to attachment to each sensory object are also
given. 17. Uttara. A. 16, in the tenth Samadhi of Brahmacharya, advises the
renunciation of all five sensory objects, and in the fourth and fifth Samadhis,
the renunciation of form and sound. Other Samadhis also mention the renunciation
of sensory objects. 18. Bhagavati Sutra Sh. 12, U. 2 states that by being under
the control of each sense, a being increases the nature, state, taste, and
regions of karma, repeatedly binds itself to the unbearable, and wanders in the
four states of existence. 19. Even those who have faith in Dharma cannot follow
restraint while being intoxicated by sensory objects. - Uttara. A. 10. Ga. 20.
20. Those who do not control themselves and are greedy for sensory objects like
taste, cannot sever the root of karmic bonds. - Uttara. A. 20 Ga. 39 21. Uttara.
A. 23 Ga. 38 considers uncontrolled senses as enemies of the soul. 22. A Muni
walking on the path should progress while renouncing sensory objects. - -
Uttara. A. 24 Ga. 8 23. One who exerts effort (discernment) in sensory objects
does not wander in the world. - Uttara. A. 31 Ga. 7 24. Uncontrolled senses are
a sign of Krishna-leshya, and controlled senses are a sign of Padma-leshya.
Uttara. A. 34 Ga. 22 25. A wise Muni, knowing the bitter consequences of sensual
desires, does not accept pleasing objects like words. 26. The Jnata Sutra Adhy.
2 elaborates on the practice of taking food with detachment from the body, and
Adhy. 18 elaborates on the practice of maintaining detachment from food items
through individual examples.]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM uddezaka] [275 13. prAcA. zru. 2 a. 15 meM pA~caveM mahAvrata kI
pA~ca bhAvanAtroM meM zabdAdi viSayoM ke tyAga kA tathA una para rAga-dveSa na
karane kA kathana hai tathA praznavyAkaraNasUtra ke pAMcaveM saMvaradvAra meM
bhI viSayoM ko Asakti ke tyAga kA vistRta kathana hai  /  14. jJAtAsUtra a. 4
meM kachue ke dRSTAMta se indriyanigraha karane kA kathana hai aura a.
satrahaveM meM ''azva" ke dRSTAMta dvArA indriya-viSayoM meM prAsakta hone kA
duSpariNAma aura pAnAsakta rahane kA supariNAma kahA hai| 15. uttarA. a. 29 meM
pA~coM indriyoM ke nigraha karane ke phala kA kathana hai  /  16. uttarA. a. 32
kI 65 gAthAoM meM zabdAdi viSayoM kA svarUpa, Asakti, usase hone vAlI jIvoM kI
pravRttiyA~ aura unakA pariNAma batAkara usase virakta hone kA pariNAma bhI kahA
gayA hai| eka-eka indriyaviSaya kI Asakti se marane vAle prANiyoM ke dRSTAMta
bhI diye gaye haiN| 17. uttarA. a. 16 meM brahmacarya kI dasavIM samAdhi meM
pAMcoM indriyaviSayoM kA aura cauthI pAMcavIM samAdhi meM rUpa va zabda kA
varjana karane kA upadeza hai tathA anya samAdhiyoM meM bhI indriyaviSaya ke
tyAga kA kathana hai| 18. bhagavatIsUtra za. 12, u. 2 meM kahA hai ki eka-eka
indriya ke vaza meM hokara jIva karmoM kI prakRti, sthiti, rasa evaM pradezoM kI
vRddhi karatA hai, asAtAvedanIya kA bArambAra baMdha karatA hai aura cAra gati
rUpa saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karatA hai| 19. dharma para zraddhA karane vAle
prANI bhI indriyoM ke viSayoM meM mUcchita ho kara saMyama kA pAlana nahIM kara
sakate haiN| -uttarA. a. 10. gA. 20. _20. aAtmanigraha na karane vAle aura rasa
Adi indriyaviSayoM meM gRddha muni karmabandhanoM kA mUla se chedana nahIM kara
sakate  /  -uttarA. a. 20 gA. 39 21. uttarA. a. 23 gA. 38 meM vaza meM nahIM kI
gaI indriyoM ko AtmAzatruoM meM ginA gayA hai| 22. mArga meM calatA huA muni
indriyaviSayoM kA parityAga karatA huA gamana kre| - -uttarA. a. 24 gA.8 23.
indriyoM ke viSayoM meM yatanA (viveka) karane vAlA saMsAra meM bhramaNa nahIM
karatA hai| -uttarA. a. 31 gA. 7 24. ajitendriya honA kRSNalezyA kA lakSaNa hai
tathA jitendriya honA padmalezyA kA lakSaNa uttarA. a. 34 gA. 22 25. kAmaguNoM
ke kaTu vipAka ko jAnane vAlA paNDita muni manojJa zabdAdi viSayoM ko svIkAra
nahIM karatA hai| 26. jJAtAsUtra adhya. 2 meM zarIra ke prati anAsaktabhAva se
prAhAra karane kA evaM adhya. 18 meM khAdya padArthoM ke prati anAsaktabhAva
rakhane kA eka-eka dRSTAnta dvArA vistRta kathana kiyA gayA hai|

Page #376 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **276]**  A monk who goes to see many places, develops
attachment and aversion towards them, binds karma, praises the initial work with
words, and approves of the careful actions thinking that it is good. Or
sometimes he may criticize or praise the creator.  While staying at the places
mentioned in the sutras, aquatic, terrestrial, aerial, etc. beings may be
distressed upon seeing the monk, run here and there, eat and drink, etc. Due to
such reasons, there is a lack of restraint and karma binding. Therefore, the
monk should renounce desire for objects and practice pure restraint.  In the
ninth Uddesaka, it is said that even going one step to see the king or queen is
a Guru-Chaumasika atonement. And in this twelfth Uddesaka, it is said that going
to see various places is a Laghu-Chaumasika atonement. The monk should not even
think of going to see these places. If by chance he does think of it, he should
restrain himself and immerse himself in self-study, meditation, and restraint.
**Atonement for violating the time limit for food:**  **32.** A monk who takes
food, drink, edibles, or delicacies in the first watch and keeps them until the
last fourth watch, or approves of the one who keeps them, (incurs Laghu-
Chaumasika atonement).  **Discussion:**  In the twenty-sixth study of the
Uttaradhyayanasutra, while describing the daily routine of a monk, verses 12 and
32 prescribe going for Gochari in the third watch.  * The Bhagavati Sutra,
Antakrid Dasha Sutra, Upasaka Dasha Sutra, etc. mention going for Gochari in the
third watch in many places. * In the Dasha Shruta Skandha, Dasha. 7, it is
prescribed that a monk who carries an image can go for Gochari in any one of the
three divisions of the day. There is no prescription or prohibition of the
first, second, third, or fourth watch. * The Brihatkalpa Sutra, Uddesaka 5,
states that if a monk, while eating near sunset or sunrise, realizes that the
sun has not risen or has not set or has set, and if he spits out the food from
his mouth, hand, or vessel, he does not violate the command of the Bhagavan. But
if he eats after knowing, he incurs atonement. * The Brihatkalpa, Uddesaka 4,
states that it is not appropriate for a monk or nun to keep food and water taken
in the first watch until the fourth watch. If it is forgotten by mistake, it
should be spit out.  **Conclusion:**  Monks and nuns should generally go for
Gochari in the third watch. In special circumstances, they can go for Gochari at
any time of the day, depending on the suitability of the area. But it is not
appropriate to keep the food taken for more than three watches. If it is
forgotten by mistake, it should not be eaten. It is said in the Chuni...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 276] [nizIthasUtra aneka sthaloM ko dekhane ke lie jAne vAlA muni unake prati
rAga-dveSa karake karmabandha karatA hai, Arambhajanya kArya kI vacana se
prazaMsA karatA hai aura yaha acchA banAyA, aisA socakara sAvadha karmoM kA
anumodana bhI karatA hai  /  athavA kabhI banAne vAle ko nindA yA prazaMsA bhI
karatA hai| sUtrokta sthAnoM para rahe hue jalacara, sthalacara, khecara Adi
prANI bhikSu ko dekhakara trAsa ko prApta hoveM, idhara-udhara daur3eM, khAte-
pIte hoM to aMtarAya doSa lage ityAdi kAraNa se bhI asaMyama aura karmabandha
hotA hai  /  ata: bhikSu viSayecchA se nivRtta hokara zuddha saMyama kI ArAdhanA
kare  /  uddezaka 9 meM rAjA yA rAnI ko dekhane ke lie eka kadama bhI jAne kA
gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA hai aura isa bArahaveM uddezaka meM vibhinna
sthaloM ko dekhane ke lie jAne kA laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  bhikSu
ko ina sthaloM ke dekhane kA saMkalpa bhI nahIM karanA caahie| yadi kadAcit
saMkalpa ho bhI jAya to usakA nirodha karake svAdhyAya dhyAna saMyamayoga meM
lIna ho jAnA caahie| AhAra ko kAlamaryAdA ke ullaMghana kA prAyazcitta 32. je
bhikkhU paDhamAe porisIe asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhettA
pacchimaM porisiM uvAiNAvei uvAiNAvetaM vA sAijjai  /  32. jo bhikSu prathama
prahara meM prazana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya grahaNa karake use aMtima cauthI
prahara meM rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use
laghucaumAsI prAyazcita AtA hai  / ) vivecana-uttarAdhyayanasUtra ke chabbIsaveM
adhyayana meM bhikSu kI dinacaryA kA varNana karate hue gAthA 12 aura 32 meM
tIsare prahara meM gocarI jAne kA vidhAna hai| _ bhagavatIsUtra,
aMtakRddazAsUtra, upAsakadazAsUtra Adi meM aneka sthaloM para tIsare prahara meM
gocarI jAne vAloM kA varNana hai  /  dazAzrutaskaMdha dazA. 7 meM pratimAdhArI
bhikSu ke lie dina ke tIna vibhAgoM meM se kisI bhI eka vibhAga meM gocarI
karane kA vidhAna hai| vahAM prathama, dvitIya, tRtIya yA caturtha kisI bhI
prahara kA vidhAna yA niSedha nahIM hai| bRhatkalpasUtra uddezaka 5 meM kahA hai
ki sUryAsta yA sUryodaya ke nikaTa samaya meM AhAra karate hue bhikSu ko yaha
jJAta ho jAya ki sUryodaya nahIM huA hai yA sUryAsta nahIM huA hai yA sUryAsta
ho gayA hai, usa samaya yadi bhikSu mukha meM se, hAtha meM se va pAtra meM se
AhAra ko paraTha detA hai to bhagavadAjJA kA ullaMghana nahIM karatA hai, kintu
jAnakArI hone ke bAda aAhAra karatA hai to use prAyazcitta pAtA hai| bRhatkalpa
uddezaka 4 meM kahA hai ki prathama prahara meM grahaNa kiyA AhAra-pAnI caturtha
prahara meM rakhanA sAdhu, sAdhvI ko nahIM kalpatA hai  /  yadi bhUla se raha
gayA ho to paraTha denA cAhiye  /  niSkarSa yaha hai ki sAdhu, sAdhvI
sAdhAraNatayA tIsare prahara meM gocarI ke lie jaae| vizeSa Avazyaka sthiti meM
ve dina meM kisI bhI samaya kSetra kI anukUlatAnusAra gocarI hetu jA sakate haiM
/  kintu grahaNa kiye AhAra ko tIna prahara se jyAdA rakhanA nahIM kalpatA hai|
yadi bhUla se raha jAya to khAnA nahIM kalpatA hai  /  cUNi meM kahA hai

Page #377 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak  [277 "To take food in the first porisi of the day, and to
finish it in the fourth porisi, that is the rule." "There are three paharas
before noon, and three paharas after noon. If one is tempted by vices during
those paharas, it is called apachchitti. After noon, even with vices, it is
called sapchchitti."  The Bhashya and Churni state that collecting food leads to
many vices: 1. If ants, etc., enter the food, it is difficult to remove them,
and it is a violation. 2. One has to be careful of dogs, etc., and many other
activities have to be performed. And there is also the possibility of many other
vices. Therefore, the monk should eat the food in the same pahara in which it is
received. It should not be kept for the next pahara. Because keeping it leads to
the possibility of the above-mentioned vices.  The Bhashya-kar has also said
that if a Jinakalpika monk keeps the food for the next pahara, he incurs a
prayaschitta. But a sthavirakalpika monk is allowed to keep it for three
paharas. Even if ants enter the food despite careful efforts, there is no
prayaschitta. But if it is kept for the fourth pahara, even if the above-
mentioned vices do not occur, prayaschitta is prescribed. If there are vices
while keeping the food for Jayana, it is still acceptable, according to the
authority of the Agam. - Bha. Ga. 4148 Churni. This sutra states that keeping
food received in the first pahara for the fourth pahara is a laghuchoumasi
prayaschitta. The fourth Uddeshak of the Brihatkalpasutra also states that
eating it is a laghuchoumasi prayaschitta.  According to the Churni, this sutra
should be similar to the sutra in Brihatkalp U. 4, because while explaining the
phrase "Ahachch Uvainaavie Sia", the Churnikar has stated that eating it is also
a laghuchoumasi prayaschitta. But if a Jinakalpika keeps or eats the food in the
fourth pahara, he incurs a guruchoumasi prayaschitta.  _ When the day is divided
into hours and minutes, dividing it by 4, the number of hours and minutes
obtained is added to the time of sunrise to get the time of the first porisi,
and subtracting it from the time of sunset gives the time of the fourth porisi.
## Prayaschitta for violating the territorial limits of food 33. If a monk
receives food, drink, or anything to be eaten or drunk, beyond half a yojana, he
incurs a prayaschitta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM uddezaka] [277 "divasassa paDhama porisIe bhattapANaM ghettu,
carimaMti-cauttha porisI, taM jo saMpAveti, tassa culhu|" "kAlo aNuNNAto AdillA
tiNNi paharA, bIyAI vA tiNNi paharA  /  tammi aNuNNAe kAle jaivi dosehi
phusijjati tahAvi apcchittii| aNuNNAta kAlAto pareNa atikAmeto asaMtehiM vi
dosehiM sapacchittI bhavati  / " bhASya tathA cUNi meM kahA gayA hai ki saMgraha
karane se aneka doSa utpanna hote haiM 1. cITiyAM Adi AhAra meM A jAve to unheM
nikAlanA kaThina hotA hai tathA unakI virAdhanA hotI hai| 2. kutte Adi se
sAvadhAnI rakhane ke liye aneka pravRttiyAM karanI par3atI haiM  /  tathA anya
aneka doSoM kI saMbhAvanA bhI rahatI hai| ata: bhikSu jisa prahara meM AhAra
lAve usI prahara meM khAkara samApta kara de| dasare prahara meM bhI nahIM rkhe|
kyoMki rakhane para upayUkta doSoM kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai| bhASyakAra ne yaha
bhI kahA hai ki jinakalpI bhikSu yadi dUsare prahara meM rakhe to use
prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  kintu sthavirakalpI bhikSu ko tIna prahara taka rakhanA
anujJAta hai| kAraNavaza yatanApUrvaka rakhane para bhI yadi cITiyAM A jAeM to
bhI unheM prAyazcitta nahIM hai aura cauthe prahara meM rakhane para ukta doSa
na hone para bhI prAyazcitta kahA haijayaNAe dhareMtassa jadi dosA bhavaMti
tahAvi sujjhati, Agama prAmANyAt  /  -bhA. gA. 4148 cUNi. isa sUtra meM prathama
prahara ke grahaNa kiye hue AhAra ko caturtha prahara meM rakhane kA
laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  bRhatkalpasUtra ke cauthe uddezaka
meM use khAne kA bhI laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA hai| cUNi ke anusAra yaha
sUtra bhI bRhatkalpa u. 4 ke sUtra ke samAna hI honA cAhie, kyoMki "Ahacca
uvAiNAvie siyA" isa vAkya kI vyAkhyA karate hue cUrNikAra ne khAne kA bhI
laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  kintu jinakalpI yadi cauthe prahara meM
rakhe yA khAye to use gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai| _ jaba jitane ghaNTe
minaTa kA dina hotA hai usameM 4 kA bhAga dene para jitane ghaMTe minaTa pAe~
unheM sUryodaya ke samaya meM jor3ane para eka porisI kA kAlamAna hotA hai aura
sUryAsta ke samaya meM ghaTAne se cauthI porisI kA kAlamAna prApta hotA hai  /
/  AhAra kI kSetramaryAdA ke ullaMghana kA prAyazcitta 33. je bhikkhU paraM
addhajoyaNamerAo asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA uvAiNAvei
uvAiNAvetaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #378 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīthasūtra 33:  **33. A monk who takes or approves of taking alms, food,
or drink beyond the limit of two kosas, incurs the minor four-month penance.**
**[278]**  **Discussion:**  The regulation of the excellent area limit for
taking or bringing food is stated in Uttarādhāyaṇa Praśna 26, and in the
Brihatkalpa Uddesaka 4, it is forbidden to take food beyond half a yojana. If
one goes beyond this limit by mistake, it is forbidden to eat that food, and
penance is also prescribed for eating it. The present sūtra only prescribes
penance for taking food beyond the limit.  **Consequences of taking food beyond
two kosas:**  1. More water will be taken. 2. More weight will lead to more
labor. 3. The absence of a limit will increase the collection of wealth. 4.
Attachment to food will increase. 5. A tradition of many other faults will grow.
The area limit of half a yojana is stated in the Āgamas. This limit is mentioned
to avoid the collection of wealth. This limit is from the place of residence in
all four directions, meaning that a monk can go for alms up to half a yojana in
all four directions from his residence, and while traveling, he can take food
and water with him up to half a yojana from his residence.  This area limit is
based on the human body, which is measured in angulas.  **4 kosas** **2 kosas**
**1 yojana** **1/2 yojana** **1 kosa** **2 kosas** **2000 dhanush** **43 miles =
7 kilometers**  In Brihatkalpa Uddesaka 3, half a kosa is mentioned as an
additional limit in each direction. This is mentioned in relation to going to a
place called Sthandila.  Two and a half kosas in one direction and including two
directions is called an avagraha of five kosas. Therefore, the main center of
the area limit is considered to be the monk's place of residence - the upāśraya.
"Sese sakosa mandala, mula nibandha anumuyantaṇam." - Bri. Bha. Ga. 4845
**Meaning:** If there is no obstacle in any direction, such as a mountain,
river, or sea, then one should understand the avagraha as a mandala shape with a
length of one kosa and one yojana, without leaving one's original place. That
is, the diameter (length) of the circular area formed in all four directions
should be one kosa and one yojana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ nizIthasUtra 33. jo bhikSu do koza kI maryAdA se Age prazana, pAna, khAdya yA
svAdya le jAtA hai yA le jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use
laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai | ) 278 ] vivecana- -AhAra le jAne yA lAne kI
utkRSTa kSetramaryAdA kA vidhAna utta. pra. 26 meM kiyA gayA hai tathA
bRhatkalpa uddezaka 4 meM arddha yojana se Age AhAra le jAne kA niSedha kiyA
gayA hai  /  yadi bhUla se calA jAye to usa AhAra ko khAne kA niSedha kiyA hai
aura khAne para prAyazcitta bhI kahA hai  /  prastuta sUtra meM kevala maryAdA
se Age le jAne kA hI prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  do koza se Age le jAne se hone
vAle doSa - 1. pAnI kI mAtrA adhika lI jAyegI  /  2. vajana adhika ho jAne se
zrama adhika hogA  /  3. sImA na rahane se saMgrahavRtti bar3hegI  /  4. khAdya
padArthoM kI prAsakti kI vRddhi hogI  /  5. anya aneka doSoM kI paramparA
bar3hegI  /  arddhayojana kI kSetramaryAdA Agamokta hai, saMgrahavRtti se bacane
ke liye yaha maryAdA kahI gaI hai  /  yaha sImA upAzrayasthala se cautaraphI kI
hai arthAt bhikSu apane upAzraya se cAroM dizA meM arddha yojana taka bhikSA ke
liye jA sakatA hai aura vihAra karane para apane upAzraya se AhAra- pAnI arddha
yojana taka sAtha meM le jA sakatA hai  /  yaha kSetra maryAdA AtmAMgula arthAt
pramANopeta manuSya kI apekSA se hai 4 kosa 2 kosa eka yojana arddha yojana eka
kosa do kosa 2000 dhanuSa 43 mAila = 7 kilomITara bRhatkalpa u. 3 meM AdhA kosa
eka-eka dizA meM adhika kahA gayA hai  /  vaha sthaMDila ke liye jAne kI apekSA
se kahA gayA hai  /  eka dizA meM ar3hAI kosa aura do dizAoM ko zAmila karane se
pAMca kosa kA avagraha kahA gayA hai  /  isalie kSetrasImA parimANa kA mukhya
kendra bhikSu kA nivAsasthala - upAzraya mAnA gayA hai "sese sakosa maMDala,
mUla nibaMdha aNumuyaMtANaM  / " - bR. bhA. gA. 4845 artha-kisI dizA meM
parvata, nadI yA samudra Adi kI bAdhA na ho to apane mUlasthAna ko na chor3ate
hue eka koza aura eka yojana kI lambAI kA maMDala rUpa avagraha samajhanA cAhie
/  arthAt cAroM dizAoM meM jo maMDalAkAra kSetra banatA hai usakA vyAsa ( laMbAI
) eka koza aura eka yojana kA honA cAhie  /  .

Page #379 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak  [259] Thus, the essence of the sutra of the Brihatkalpa
Uddeshak 3 and 4 is that it is permissible to take or bring food from one's
residence in all directions up to two kos, and if it is necessary to go beyond
that for the purpose of excreting, it is permissible to go up to half a kos
further.  ## Night-time Application Prāyaścitta  34. A monk who takes cow dung
during the day and applies it to a wound on his body the next day, or approves
of someone doing so, incurs a prāyaścitta. 35. A monk who takes cow dung during
the day and applies it to a wound on his body at night, or approves of someone
doing so, incurs a prāyaścitta. 36. A monk who takes cow dung at night and
applies it to a wound on his body during the day, or approves of someone doing
so, incurs a prāyaścitta. 37. A monk who takes cow dung at night and applies it
to a wound on his body at night, or approves of someone doing so, incurs a
prāyaścitta. 38. A monk who takes cow dung during the day and applies it to a
wound on his body during the day, or approves of someone doing so, incurs a
prāyaścitta. 39. A monk who takes cow dung during the day and applies it to a
wound on his body at night, or approves of someone doing so, incurs a
prāyaścitta. 40. A monk who takes cow dung at night and applies it to a wound on
his body during the day, or approves of someone doing so, incurs a prāyaścitta.
41. A monk who takes cow dung at night and applies it to a wound on his body at
night, or approves of someone doing so, incurs a prāyaścitta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM uddezaka] [259 isa prakAra bRhatkalpa uddezaka 3 tathA 4 ke sUtra kA
sAra yaha hai ki apane upAzraya se sabhI dizAoM meM AhAra le jAnA yA lAnA do-do
kosa taka kalpatA hai aura vahAM se mala-visarjana ke liye jAnA Avazyaka ho to
AdhA kosa taka aura Age jAnA kalpatA hai| rAtrivilepana prAyazcitta 34. je
bhikkhU diyA gomayaM paDiggAhettA diyA kAyaMsi vaNaM Alipejja vA vilipejja vA
AlipaMtaM vA vilipaMtaM vA saaijji| 35. je bhikkhU diyA gomayaM paDiggAhettA
ratti kAyaMsi vaNaM Alipejja vA vilipejja vA AlipaMtaM vA vilipaMtaM vA sAijjai
/  36. je bhikkhU ratti gomayaM paDiggAhettA diyA kAyaMsi vaNaM Alipejja vA
vilipejja vA AlipaMtaM vA vilipaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  37. je bhikkhU ratti gomayaM
paDiggAhettA ratti kAyaMsi vaNaM AliMpejja vA vilipejja vA AlipaMtaM vA
vilipaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  38. je bhikkhU diyA AlevaNajAyaM paDiggAhettA diyA
kAyaMsi vaNaM Alipejja vA vilipejja vA AlipaMtaM vA vilipaMtaM vA sAijjai  /
39. je bhikkhU diyA AlevaNajAyaM paDiggAhettA ratti kAryasi vaNaM Alipejja vA
vilipejja vA AlipaMtaM vA vilipaMtaM vA saaijji| 40. je bhikkhU ratti
AlevaNajAyaM paDiggAhettA diyA kAyaMsi vaNaM Alipejja vA vilipejja vA AlipaMtaM
vA vilipaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  41. je bhikkhU ratti AlevaNajAyaM paDiggAhettA
ratti kAyaMsi vaNaM Alipejja vA vilipejja vA AlipaMtaM vA vilipaMtaM vA sAijjai
/  34. jo bhikSu dina meM gobara grahaNa kara dUsare dina zarIra ke vraNa para
Alepana yA vilepana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  35. jo
bhikSu dina meM gobara grahaNa kara rAtri meM zarIra ke vraNa para Alepana yA
vilepana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 36. jo bhikSu rAtri
meM gobara grahaNa kara dina meM zarIra ke vraNa para Alepana yA vilepana karatA
hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /

Page #380 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [280] [Nishīthasūtra 37. A monk who takes cow dung at night and applies it
to a wound on his body at night, or approves of someone doing so. 38. A monk who
takes a substance for application during the day and applies it to a wound on
his body the next day, or approves of someone doing so. 39. A monk who takes a
substance for application during the day and applies it to a wound on his body
at night, or approves of someone doing so. 40. A monk who takes a substance for
application at night and applies it to a wound on his body during the day, or
approves of someone doing so. 41. A monk who takes a substance for application
at night and applies it to a wound on his body at night, or approves of someone
doing so. (He incurs the Laghu-Chaumāsi Prāyaścitta.)  **Discussion:** If it is
necessary to apply cow dung or other substances suitable for application as
medicine to a wound, etc., a monk who is a Sthavirakalpi can take it during the
day and use it during the day. As stated in the two four-fold statements of the
sūtra, if it is used at night or the next day, the Laghu-Chaumāsi Prāyaścitta is
incurred for keeping it overnight and using it.  In the eleventh Uddesaka, a
Guru-Chaumāsi Prāyaścitta is mentioned for similar four-fold statements
regarding the consumption of food. Since the fault of application is less than
that of consuming food at night, the Laghu-Chaumāsi Prāyaścitta is mentioned
here.  The discussion regarding the four-fold statements and the relationship
between Sanniidhi and Sangraha should be understood according to the eleventh
Uddesaka.  The Bhāṣya states that fresh buffalo dung is excellent for
detoxification, and if it is not available, cow dung is also beneficial. Dung
that has been exposed to sunlight, is old, or is partially dry is not as
beneficial.  Therefore, if it is necessary to use it at night, the Laghu-
Chaumāsi Prāyaścitta mentioned in the sūtra is incurred.  Other substances for
application are prepared for specific uses. These can be used for a long time.
However, due to intense pain, the Laghu-Chaumāsi Prāyaścitta is incurred if they
are used within the time mentioned in the present sūtras.  These substances for
application can remain on the body at night after being applied during the day.
This does not incur any Prāyaścitta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 280] [nizIthasUtra 37. jo bhikSu rAtri meM gobara grahaNa kara rAtri meM zarIra
ke vraNa para aAlepana yA vilepana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  38. jo bhikSu dina meM vilepana ke padArtha grahaNa kara dUsare dina
zarIra ke vraNa para aAlepana yA vilepana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 39. jo bhikSu dina meM vilepana ke padArtha grahaNa kara rAtri meM
zarIra ke vraNa para aAlepana yA vilepana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 40. jo bhikSu rAtri meM vilepana ke padArtha grahaNa kara dina meM
zarIra ke vraNa para aAlepana yA vilepana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  41. jo bhikSu rAtri meM vilepana ke padArtha grahaNa kara rAtri
meM zarIra ke vraNa para Alepana yA vilepana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana--
gobara athavA vilepanayogya anya padArtha auSadha rUpa meM vraNa Adi para
vilepana karanA Avazyaka ho to sthavirakalpI bhikSu inheM dina meM grahaNa
karake usI dina, dina meM upayoga meM le sakatA hai| sUtrokta caubhaMgIdvaya meM
kahe anusAra rAtri meM yA dUsare dina upayoga meM lene para, rAtri meM rakhane
kA aura upayoga meM lene kA laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| gyArahaveM
uddezaka meM AhAra karane kI apekSA se aisI hI caubhaMgI ke dvArA gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta kahA hai, rAtri meM prakSepAhAra kI apekSA vilepana kA doSa alpa
hone se isakA yahA~ laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| caubhaMgI aura
sannidhi-saMgraha saMbaMdhI vivecana gyArahaveM uddezaka ke anusAra jAna lenA
cAhiye  /  bhASya meM kahA gayA hai ki tatkAla kA (tAjA) bhaiMsa kA gobara
viSaharaNa ke liye ati uttama hotA hai, usake na milane para gAya kA gobara bhI
upayoga meM lenA lAbhadAyaka hai| dhUpa lagA huA yA jyAdA samaya kA yA kucha-
kucha sUkhA gobara adhika lAbhaprada nahIM hotA hai| ataH Avazyaka paristhiti
meM rAtri meM bhI upayoga karanA par3a jAya to sUtrokta laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta
pAtA hai| vilepana ke anya padArtha prayoga vizeSa se taiyAra kiye jAte haiN| ye
lambe samaya taka bhI upayoga . meM lene yogya hote haiN| phira bhI tIvra vedanA
ke kAraNa prastuta sUtroM meM kahe gaye samaya meM upayoga . karane para
laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /  ye vilepana ke padArtha dina meM lagA dene
ke bAda rAtri meM bhI zarIra para lage raha sakate haiN| isase koI prAyazcitta
nahIM AtA hai|

Page #381 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak] [281 There are four types of substances in terms of their
properties: 1. Those that soothe pain, 2. Those that ripen boils, etc., 3. Those
that draw out pus and blood, 4. Those that heal wounds. The atonement for
causing a householder to carry one's belongings 42. If a monk causes a
householder or another non-Jain to carry his belongings or approves of it, he
incurs a minor atonement. 43. If a monk gives food, drink, edibles, or
delicacies to a householder for the purpose of carrying his belongings or
approves of it, he incurs a minor atonement. 42. If a monk causes a householder
or another non-Jain to carry his belongings or approves of it, he incurs a minor
atonement. 43. If a monk gives food, drink, edibles, or delicacies to a
householder for the purpose of carrying his belongings or approves of it, he
incurs a minor atonement. (He incurs a minor atonement for four months.)
Discussion-The scriptures prescribe that a monk should carry only a very small
amount of belongings, which he can easily carry himself. For a detailed
discussion on belongings, see Sutra 39 in the sixteenth Uddeshak. If a monk has
to carry more belongings due to physical illness or the weight of scriptures,
etc., he incurs the atonement mentioned in the sutra. According to the
scriptures, a healthy monk can carry the belongings of a sick monk. It is not in
accordance with the principles of restraint to have a householder accompany you
and carry your belongings. Any sinful act that occurs during the householder's
walking, etc., is also considered to be approved of by the monk in the form of
approval. If the householder drops the belongings, breaks them, places them in
an inappropriate place, or runs away with them, it leads to a loss of
mindfulness. The householder may experience discomfort due to the weight of the
belongings or the journey. If he becomes ill due to the exertion, there is a
possibility of a chain of faults arising, such as the need for medication,
treatment, etc. If the householder does not find food on the way, the monk's
resolve may be strengthened, or if he gives the householder food from his own
collection, he incurs atonement according to the other sutra. If the householder
demands wages for carrying the belongings, it leads to a fault in relation to
the great vow of non-possession. If the householder is given food, it may become
known to other donors, which could lead to a decrease in their affection for the
monk and their desire to donate. Therefore, a monk should carry only as many
belongings as he can carry himself. If, due to circumstances, he has to carry
more belongings and have a householder carry them, he should take other
necessary precautions and also accept the atonement mentioned in the sutra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavA~ uddezaka] [281 vilepana ke padArtha guNa kI apekSA cAra prakAra ke
hote haiM1. vedanA ko upazAMta karane vAle, 2. phor3e Adi ko pakAne vAle, 3.
pIva va khUna bAhara nikAla dene vAle, 4. ghAva bhara dene vAle  /  gRhastha se
upadhi vahana karAne kA prAyazcitta 42. je bhikkhU aNNutthieNa vA gArathieNa vA
uhi vahAvei, vahAveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  43. je bhikkhU tannIsae asaNaM vA pANaM
vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA dei, detaM vA sAijjai  /  42. jI bhikSu anyatIrthika yA
gRhastha se apanI upadhi (sAmAna) vahana karAtA hai yA vahana karAne vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  43. jo bhikSu bhAra vahana karAne ke nimitta se use
azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
(use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana-bhikSu ko atyanta alpa
upadhi rakhane kA Agama meM vidhAna hai  /  jinako bhikSu svayaM sahaja hI
uThAkara vihAra kara sakatA hai| upadhi sambandhI vistRta vivecana solahaveM
uddezaka ke sUtra 39 meM dekheN| zArIrika asvasthatA ke kAraNa rakhe gaye
upakaraNa adhika ho jAne se athavA zAstra Adi kA vajana adhika ho jAne se
gRhastha se vahana karAne para sUtrokta prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  vidhi ke
anusAra rugNa sAdhu kI upadhi anya svastha sAdhu uThA sakatA hai  /  gRhastha ko
sAtha rakhanA va sAmAna uThavAnA saMyama kI vidhi nahIM hai  /  gRhastha ke
calane Adi pravRttiyoM meM jo bhI sAvadya kArya hotA hai usakA pApabaMdha
anumodana rUpa meM sAdhu ko bhI hotA hai| kadAcit vaha upadhi girA de,
tor3a-phor3a de, ayogya sthAna meM rakha de yA lekara bhAga jAya to asamAdhi
utpanna hotI hai| bhAra adhika hone se athavA calane se usa gRhastha ko paritApa
utpanna hotA hai  /  zrama ke kAraNa yadi vaha rugNa ho jAe to auSadha upacAra
karanA karAnA Adi aneka doSoM kI paramparA kA honA saMbhava rahatA hai| gRhastha
ko mArga meM AhAra kA saMyoga na milane para bhikSu ke saMkalpoM kI vRddhi hotI
hai athavA vaha apane gaveSaNA karake lAye AhAra meM se use detA hai to dUsare
sUtra ke anusAra vaha prAyazcitta kA pAtra hotA hai| bhAravAhaka majadUrI lenA
cAhe to usa nimitta se aparigraha mahAvrata ke sambandha meM doSotpatti hotI
hai| use AhAra dene para dAnadAtAoM ko jJAta ho jAne para sAdhu ke prati aprIti
va dAna kI bhAvanA meM kamI A sakatI hai| ataH bhikSu ko itanI hI upadhi rakhanI
cAhiye jise vaha svayaM uThA ske| paristhitivaza bhI kabhI adhika upadhi rakhanA
va gRhastha se uThavAnA par3e to anya Avazyaka sAvadhAniyAM rakhe aura sUtrokta
prAyazcitta bhI svIkAra kare  /

Page #382 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English Translation (preserving Jain terms):  282 ] Prayashchitta (Atonement)
for Crossing Major Rivers  44. If a bhikkhu crosses, traverses, or ferries
across these five great rivers - Ganga, Yamuna, Sarayu, Iravati, and Mahi - once
or twice or thrice within a month, either by walking or by boat, or approves of
someone else doing so, then he incurs the Laghuchatumasika Prayashchitta (minor
four-monthly penance).  Explanation - According to the Maasakalpa Vihara
(monthly conduct), crossing a river once in a month is permissible, but crossing
it two or three times in the same month is not allowed. There is no
prayashchitta (atonement) required for crossing the rivers a total of nine times
in eight months, where the first month can have two crossings and the remaining
seven months can have one crossing each.  However, the Dashashrutaskandha Dasha
2 states that crossing these major rivers three times in a month and ten times
in a year is considered a grave offense.  The Brihatkalpasuttra Uddeshaka 4
prohibits crossing these major rivers more than two or three times in a month,
but allows crossing smaller rivers with water up to the knee.  The terms
'dukkhuto' and 'tikkhuto' indicate that the prayashchitta is incurred if the
bhikkhu crosses the major rivers three times in the first month and two times
each in the remaining months.  Uttaranam (crossing by limbs) and Santaranam
(crossing by boat) - Crossing by arms or legs is called Uttaranam, while
crossing by kumbha (earthen pot), diwadi (small boat), udupaiehim (small boats)
etc. is called Santaranam.  These Five (rivers) are mentioned collectively, the
rest are also great, deep rivers. There, the copper (vessel) does not dry up
even before (the crossing is completed).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 282 ] mahAnadI pAra karane kA prAyazcitta 44. je bhikkhU imAo paMca mahaNNavAo
mahANaIo uddiTThAo, gaNiyAo vaMjiyAo, aMtomAsassa dukkhuto vA tikkhuto vA
uttarai vA, saMtarai vA, uttaraMtaM vA saMtaraMtaM vA sAijjai  /  taM jahA 1.
gaMgA, 2. jauNA, 3. sarayU 4. erAvaI, 5. mahI  /  taM sevamANe Avajjai
cAummAsiyaM parihAradvANaM ugdhAiyaM  /  44. gaMgA, yamunA, sarayU, airAvatI
aura mAhI ye pAMca mahAnadiyAM kahI gaI haiM, ginAI gaI haiM, prasiddha haiM,
inako jo bhikSu eka mAsa meM do bAra yA tIna bAra paidala pAra karatA hai athavA
nAva Adi se pAra karatA hai yA pAra karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ina
44 sUtrokta sthAnoM kA sevana karane vAle ko laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai
/  vivecana - mAsakalpa vihAreNa sakRt kalpate eva uttaritu  /  tasminneva mAse
dvi-tRtIya vArA pratiSedhaH  /  - cUrNi  /  [ nizIthasUtra mAsakalpa vihAra kI
apekSA eka mahIne meM eka bAra eka nadI utaranA kalpatA hai kintu usI mahIne meM
do-tIna bAra utaranA nahIM kalpatA hai  /  ATha mahInoM meM kula nau bAra
utarane para prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai  /  jisameM prathama mahIne meM do bAra
aura zeSa sAta mahInoM meM sAta bAra nadI pAra kI jA sakatI hai  /
dazAzrutaskaMdha dazA 2 meM eka mAsa meM tIna bAra aura eka varSa meM 10 vAra
uparyukta ye bar3I nadiyAM pAra karane kA sabala doSa kahA hai  /
bRhatkalpasUtra uddezaka 4 meM ina bar3I nadiyoM meM eka mAsa meM do yA tIna
bAra utarane kA niSedha hai  /  sAtha hI arddha jaMghA pramANa jala vAlI choTI
nadiyoM ko pAra karanA kalpanIya kahA hai  /  dukkhutto tikkhutto-do zabda
kahane kA Azaya yaha hai ki prathama mAsa meM tIna bAra aura zeSa mAsoM meM do-
do bAra mahA nadI meM utarane yA pAra karane para prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  pahale
mahIne meM do bAra aura zeSa mahInoM meM eka-eka bAra utarane para zabala doSa
nahIM hone kA tathA prAyazcitta nahIM Ane kA kAraNa cUrNikAra ne mAsakalpa
vihAra batAyA hai  /  vizeSa spaSTIkaraNa ke lie dazA. da. 2 kA vivecana dekheM
| uttaraNaM saMtaraNaM - bAhAhiM va pAehiM va uttaraNaM, saMtaraM tu saMtaraNaM
/  taM puNa kubhe daie, nAvA uDupAiehiM vA  /  /  4209  /  /  bhujAoM se yA
pairoM se pAra karanA 'uttaraNa' kahalAtA hai  /  kuMbha, dIvar3I nAvA, choTI
nAvA, tumbA Adi ke dvArA pAra karanA 'saMtaraNa' kahalAtA hai  /  imA paMca-
paMcahaM gahaNeNaM, sesAto sUtitA mahAsalilA  /  tattha purA vihari Na ya tAmro
kayAi sukkhati  /  /  4211  /  /

Page #383 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twelfth Uddeshak  [283 Meaning - The remaining large rivers are also
indicated by the statement of the five rivers. These five major rivers never
dried up and were famous in the ancient wandering area. Therefore, the Sutra
refers to their name and number. One should understand the other large rivers of
that time by their characteristics. Mahannv-Mahaslila 'Bahudako' - having
abundant water. Mahanaipro - main rivers. The Brihatkalpasutra Uddeshak 4 and
Pracha. Shru. 2 A. 3 U. 2 describe the method of crossing a river on foot, and
Aacha. Shru. 2 A. 3 U. 1 & 2 describe the method of crossing a river by boat and
the method to be followed in case of an attack. The five rivers mentioned in
this Sutra may also have less water at times. The Brihatkalpasutra Uddeshak 4
mentions that the Airavati river near Kunala city had less water. According to
the Utsarga Vidhan, a monk is not even allowed to touch water. But this is an
exception if he has to cross a river while traveling. The Bahutkalpashabhya and
Nishithabhashya discuss this exception and its reasoning in detail. There are
many options for how much to travel by land and how much by water, based on the
earth, green grass, flowers, etc. There are also many options in the
Prāyaścitta. The method of swimming using a boat, a raft, etc. is also
described. For this, one should study the Bhashya. The summary of the twelfth
Uddeshak is: 1-2 Binding or releasing sentient beings. Repeatedly breaking the
vow of non-acceptance. 4 Consuming mixed food of each body. Using wool and
leather. Sitting on a straw mat covered with clothes belonging to a householder.
Getting a householder to sew a Sadhvi's sheet. Even slightly harming the five
stationary beings like earth, etc. Climbing a tree with awareness. 10-13 Eating
from a householder's utensils, wearing a householder's clothes, sitting on a
householder's bed, treating a householder. 14 Consuming food with previous karma
defects. 15 Consuming food from a water vessel (a householder's vessel for
taking and removing raw water). 16-30 Visiting places of interest. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavAM uddezaka] [283 artha-pAMca nadiyoM ke kathana se zeSa bar3I nadiyA~
bhI sUcita kI gaI haiN| prAcIna kAla ke vicaraNa kSetra meM ye pAMca pramukha
nadiyAM kabhI nahIM sUkhatI thIM aura prasiddha thiiN| ataH sUtra meM inakA nAma
aura saMkhyA kA nirdeza hai| upalakSaNa se jisa samaya jo bar3I nadiyAM hoM,
unheM bhI samajha lenA caahie| mahaNNava-mahAsalilA 'bahu udako'-adhika jala
vaalii| mahANaIpro-pradhAna nadiyAM  /  bRhatkalpasUtra uddezaka 4 meM tathA
prAcA. zru. 2 a. 3 u. 2 meM pairoM se cala kara nadI pAra karane kI vidhi batAI
gaI hai tathA AcA. zru. 2 a. 3 u. 1 va 2 meM nAvA se nadI pAra karane kI vidhi
aura upasarga Ane para kI jAne vAlI vidhi kA vistRta varNana hai  /  prastuta
sUtra meM nirdiSTa pAMca nadiyAM bhI kabhI kahIM alpa udaka vAlI ho sakatI haiM
/  bRhatkalpasUtra uddezaka 4 meM kuNAlA nagarI ke samIpa airAvatI nadI meM alpa
pAnI honA batAyA hai| bhikSu ko utsarga vidhAna ke anusAra jala kA sparza karanA
bhI nahIM kalpatA hai| kintu vihAra meM nadI pAra karanA par3e to yaha ApavAdika
vidhAna hai| bahatkalpabhASya meM tathA nizIthabhASya meM isa viSaya ke apavAda
aura viveka kA vistata vivecana kiyA gayA hai| sthalamArga meM kitanA cakkara ho
to kitane jala mArga se jAnA, usameM bhI pRthvIkAya, harI-ghAsa, phUlana Adi ke
AdhAra para aneka vikalpa kiye haiN| prAyazcitta meM bhI aneka vikalpa diye haiM
/  nAvA kubhAdi se tairane kI vidhi bhI batAI gaI hai| isake liye bhASya kA
adhyayana karanA cAhiye  /  bArahaveM uddezaka kA sArAMza 1-2 trasa prANiyoM ko
bAMdhanA yA kholnaa| bAra-bAra pratyAkhyAna bhaMga krnaa| 4 pratyekakAya mizrita
AhAra karanA  /  saroma carma kA upayoga karanA  /  gRhastha ke vastrAcchAdita
tRNapIDha Adi para baitthnaa| sAdhvI kI cAdara gRhastha se silvaanaa| pRthvI Adi
pA~ca sthAvarakAyika jIvoM kI kiMcit bhI virAdhanA karanA  /  sacitta vRkSa para
cddh'naa| 10-13 gRhastha ke bartanoM meM khAnA, gRhastha ke vastra pahananA,
gRhastha kI zayyA Adi para baiThanA, gRhastha kI cikitsA krnaa| 14
pUrvakarmadoSa yukta AhAra grahaNa krnaa| 15 udakabhAjana (gRhastha ke kacce
pAnI lene-nikAlane ke bartana) se AhAra grahaNa krnaa| 16-30 darzanIya sthaloM
ko dekhane jaanaa|

Page #384 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 284] [Nishīthasūtra m Www mm mm x < u n  Being attached to beautiful forms.
Eating food taken in the first prahara in the fourth prahara. Using food and
water beyond two kosas. 34-41 Applying cow dung or lepya substances at night or
keeping them overnight and applying them during the day. 42-43 Accepting an
honorific title from a householder and accepting food from them. 44 Crossing
large rivers more than once a month by wading or swimming.  Performing such
activities results in the laghuchoumasi prāyaścitta. The topics of the 29 sūtras
of this uddeśaka are mentioned in the following āgamas, such as:  Repeatedly
breaking pratyākhyāna is a śabaladoṣa. - Daśa. Da. 2 Eating food mixed with
sentient substances is prohibited. - Prāca. Śru. 2 A. 1 U. 1 Taking saroma
leather is prohibited. - Bṛhatkalpa U. 3 Prohibition of violating the five
sthāvara kāyas. - Daśavai. A. 4 and A. 6 - Āca. Śru. 1 A. 1 U. 2-7 Prohibition
of climbing trees. - Āca. Śru. 2 A. 3 U. 3 Prohibition of eating from a
householder's utensils. – Daśavai. A. 3 and A. 6 - Sūy. Śru. 1. A. 2 U. 2 Ga. 20
Prohibition of using a householder's clothes. - Sūy. Śru. 1 A. 9 Ga. 20
Prohibition of sitting on a householder's cot, bed, etc. - Daśavai. A. 3 and A.
6 - Sūy. Śru. 1 A. 9 Ga. 21 Prohibition of treating a householder. - Daśavai. A.
3 and A. 8 Ga. 50 - Uttara. A. 15 Ga. 8 Prohibition of consuming food with
pūrvakarmadoṣa. - Prāca. Śru. 2 A. 1 U. 6 16-31 Prohibition of visiting scenic
places and being attached to beautiful forms. Prāca. Śru. 2 A. 12 32-33
Prohibition of eating food taken in the first prahara in the fourth prahara and
prohibition of carrying food beyond two kosas. - Bṛhatkalpa U. 4 44 Prohibition
of crossing large rivers. - Daśa. Da. 2, Bṛhatkalpa U. 4 The topics of the 15
sūtras of this uddeśaka are not mentioned in other āgamas, such as: 1-2 Not
tying or untying animals with ropes, etc. Not sitting on a platform covered with
a householder's cloth. 14

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 284] [nizIthasUtra m Www mm mm x < u n manohara rUpoM meM Asakta honA  /
prathama prahara meM grahaNa kiyA huaA aAhAra caturtha prahara meM khAnA  /  do
koza se Age le jAkara AhAra-pAnI kA upayoga karanA  /  34-41 gobara yA lepya
padArtha rAtri meM lagAnA yA rAta se rakhakara dina meM lagAnA  /  42-43
gRhastha se upadhi vahana karAnA tathA use AhAra denaa| 44 bar3I nadiyoM ko
mahineM meM eka bAra se adhika utara kara yA taira kara pAra krnaa| ityAdi
pravRttiyA~ karane para laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /  isa uddezaka ke 29
sUtroM ke viSayoM kA kathana nimna AgamoM meM hai, yathA bAraMbAra pratyAkhyAna
bhaMga karanA zabaladoSa hai| -dazA. da. 2 sacitta padArtha mizrita AhAra khAne
kA niSedha  /  -prAcA. zru. 2 a. 1 u. 1 saroma carma ke lene kA niSedha  /
-bRhatkalpa u. 3 pAMca sthAvara kAyoM kI virAdhanA karane kA niSedha  /
-dazavai. a. 4 tathA a. 6 -AcA. zru. 1 a. 1 u. 2-7 vRkSa para caDhane kA niSedha
/  -AcA. zru. 2 a. 3 u. 3 gRhastha ke bartana meM khAne kA niSedha  /  -dazavai.
a. 3 tathA a. 6 -sUya. zru. 1. a. 2 u. 2 gA. 20 gRhastha kA vastra upayoga meM
lene kA niSedha  /  -sUya. zru. 1 a. 9 gA. 20 gRhastha ke khATa palaMga Adi para
baiThane kA nissedh| -dazavai. a. 3 tathA a. 6 -sUya. zru.1 a. 9 gA.21 gahastha
kI cikitsA karane kA niSedha  /  -dazavai. a. 3 tathA a. 8 gA. 50 -uttarA. a. 15
gA. 8 pUrvakarmadoSa yukta AhAra grahaNa karane kA nissedh| -prAcA. zru. 2 a. 1
u. 6 16-31 darzanIya sthaloM meM jAne kA tathA manohara rUpoM meM Asakti karane
kA niSedha  /  prAcA. zru. 2 a. 12 32-33 prathama prahara meM grahaNa kiye hue
AhAra ko cauthe prahara meM khAne kA niSedha tathA do koza uparAMta AhAra le
jAne kA niSedha  /  -bRhatkalpa u. 4 44 bar3I nadiyoM ko pAra karane kA niSedha
/  -dazA. da. 2, bRhatkalpa u. 4 isa uddezaka ke 15 sUtroM ke viSayoM kA kathana
anya AgamoM meM nahIM hai, yathA1-2 rassI Adi se pazuoM ko bAMdhanA kholanA
nahIM  /  gRhastha ke vastra se acchAdita pIDha Adi para baiThanA nahIM  /  14

Page #385 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Twelfth Uddeshak] [285] It is not permissible for a householder to sew a
Sadhvi's cloth. [286] It is forbidden to take food from a water vessel. [34-41]
The Agamas do not prohibit the consumption of dung and other substances used for
smearing at night, but they do prohibit the collection of medicines and
remedies. - Question. Shru. 2 A. 5 Su. 7. [42-43] It is forbidden to have a
householder carry a load during travel and to give him food. || Twelfth Uddeshak
ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bArahavA~ uddezaka] [285 gRhastha se sAdhvI kI caddara silAnA nahIM  /
udakabhAjana se AhAra lene kA niSedha  /  34-41 gobara tathA vilepana padArtha
ko rAtri meM grahaNa karane Adi kA niSedha AgamoM meM nahIM hai kintu auSadha-
bheSaja ke saMgraha kA niSedha |-prshn. zru. 2 a. 5 sU. 7 meM hai| 42-43 vihAra
meM gRhastha se bhAravahana karAne kA tathA use AhAra dene kA niSedha  /   /
bArahavAM uddezaka samApta  /  /

Page #386 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thirteenth Uddeshak: ### Penitence for Standing, Lying Down, or Sitting on
Earth with Awareness  1. **A monk who stands, lies down, or sits on earth with
awareness, or approves of someone who does so, commits an Anantariya.** 2. **A
monk who stands, lies down, or sits on earth moistened with water with
awareness, or approves of someone who does so, commits an Anantariya.** 3. **A
monk who stands, lies down, or sits on earth mixed with dust with awareness, or
approves of someone who does so, commits an Anantariya.** 4. **A monk who
stands, lies down, or sits on earth mixed with clay with awareness, or approves
of someone who does so, commits an Anantariya.** 5. **A monk who stands, lies
down, or sits on earth with awareness, or approves of someone who does so,
commits an Anantariya.** 6. **A monk who stands, lies down, or sits on a stone
with awareness, or approves of someone who does so, commits an Anantariya.** 7.
**A monk who stands, lies down, or sits on sand with awareness, or approves of
someone who does so, commits an Anantariya.** 8. **A monk who stands, lies down,
or sits on a place where living beings like ants, worms, or insects reside, or
approves of someone who does so, commits an Anantariya.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 terahavA~ uddezaka sacitta pRthvI Adi para khar3e rahane Adi kA prAyazcitta 1.
je bhikkhU aNaMtarahiyAe puDhavIe ThANaM vA, sejjaM vA, nisIhiyaM vA ceei,
ceetaM vA saaijji| 2. je bhikkhU sasiNiddhAe puDhavIe ThANaM vA, sejjaM vA,
nisIhiyaM vA ceei, ceeMtaM vA saaijji| 3. je bhikkhU sasarakkhAe puDhavIe ThANaM
vA, sejjaM vA nisIhiyaM vA ceei, ceetaM vA saaijji| 4. je bhikkhU maTTiyAkaDAe
puDhavIe ThANaM vA, sejjaM vA, nisIhiyaM vA ceei, ceeMtaM vA saaijji| 5. je
bhikkhU cittamaMtAe puDhavIe ThANaM vA, sejjaM vA, nisIhiyaM vA ceei, ceeMtaM vA
saaijji| 6. je bhikkhU cittamaMtAe silAe ThANaM vA, sejjaM vA, nisIhiyaM vA
ceei, ceeMtaM vA saaijji| 7. je bhikkhU cittamaMtAe lelUe ThANaM vA, sejjaM vA,
nisIhiyaM vA ceei, ceetaM vA saaijj| 8. je bhikkhU kolAvAMsasi vA dArue
jIvapaidie, saaMDe jAva makaDAsaMtANae ThANaM vA, sejja vA, nisIhiyaM vA ceei,
ceeMtaM vA saaijji| 1. jo bhikSu sacitta pRthvI ke nikaTa kI bhUmi para khar3e
rahanA, sonA yA baiThanA Adi karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai
/  2. jo bhikSu sacitta jala se snigdha bhUmi para khar3e rahanA, sonA yA
baiThanA Adi karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  _3. jo bhikSu
sacitta rajayukta bhUmi para khar3e rahanA, sonA yA baiThanA prAdi karatA hai yA
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  4. jo bhikSu sacitta miTTIyukta bhUmi
para khar3e rahanA, sonA yA baiThanA karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai|

Page #387 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thirteenth Uddeshak  [387]  5. A monk who stands, sleeps, or sits on the
earth with awareness, or approves of someone doing so. 6. A monk who stands,
sleeps, or sits on a rock with awareness, or approves of someone doing so. 7. A
monk who stands, sleeps, or sits on a rock fragment or stone with awareness, or
approves of someone doing so. 8. A monk who stands, sleeps, or sits on wood
infested with worms or termites, or in a place with eggs or spider webs, or
approves of someone doing so. (He incurs the minor four-month penance.)
**Discussion:** The discussion and explanation of these sutras has already been
done in the eight sutras from 68 to 75 of the seventh Uddeshak.  **Penance for
standing, etc., on uncovered high places**  9. A monk who stands, sleeps, or
sits on a pillar, threshold, mortar, or bathing platform, which is not stable,
not well-maintained, not firm, but movable, or approves of someone doing so. 10.
A monk who stands, sleeps, or sits on steps, a wall, a rock, or a rock fragment,
a celestial (uncovered high) place, which is not stable, not well-maintained,
not firm, but movable, or approves of someone doing so. 11. A monk who stands,
sleeps, or sits on a shoulder, a plank, a platform, a pavilion, a mound, a
palace, a mansion's peak, etc., which is a celestial (uncovered high) place, not
stable, not well-built, not firm, but movable, or approves of someone doing so.
(He incurs the minor four-month penance.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 terahavA~ uddezaka ] [ 387 5. jo bhikSu sacita pRthvI para khar3e rahanA, sonA
yA baiThanA Adi karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  6. jo
bhikSu sacitta zilA para khar3e rahanA, sonA yA baiThanA Adi karatA hai yA
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  7. jo bhikSu sacitta zilAkhaMDa yA
patthara Adi para khar3e rahanA, sonA yA baiThanA zrAdi karatA hai yA karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  8. jo bhikSu ghuna yA dImaka lage hue jIvayukta
kASTha para tathA aNDoM se yAvat makaDI ke jAloM se yukta sthAna para khar3e
rahanA, sonA yA baiThanA Adi karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai
/  ( use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai | ) vivecana - ina sUtroM kA vivecana
aura zabdoM kI vyAkhyA uddezaka 7, sUtra 68 se 75 taka ke ATha sUtroM meM kI jA
cukI hai  /  anAvRta U~ce sthAnoM para khar3e rahane Adi kA prAyazcitta 9. je
bhikkhU thUNaMsi vA, giheluyaMsi vA, usuyAlaMsi vA, kAmajalaMsi vA, dubbaddhe
duNNikhitte, anikaMpe calAcale ThANaM vA, sejjaM vA nisIhiyaM vA ceei, ceetaM vA
sAijjai  /  10. je bhikkhU kuliyaMsi vA, bhittisi vA, silaMsi vA leluMsi vA,
aMtarikkhajAyaMsi, dubbaddhe, duNNikhitte, anikaMpe, calAcale ThANaM vA, sejjaM
vA, nisIhiyaM vA ceei, ceetaM vA sAijjai  /  11. je bhikkhU khaMdhasi vA,
phalihaMsi vA, maMcaMsi vA, maMDavaMsi vA, mAlaMsi vA, pAsAyaMsi vA, hammatasi
vA, aMtarikkhajAyaMsi dubbaddhe duNNikhitte, anikaMpe, calAcele ThANaM vA,
sejjaM vA, nisIhiyaM vA ceei, cetaM vA sAijjai  /  9. jo bhikSu stambha, dehalI,
Ukhala athavA snAna karane kI caukI Adi jo ki sthira na hoM, acchI taraha rakhe
hue na hoM, niSkampa na hoM kintu calAyamAna hoM una para khar3e rahanA, sonA yA
baiThanA Adi karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  10. jo bhikSu
sopAna, bhIMta, zilA yA zilAkhaNDa - pattharAdi AkAzIya (anAvRta UMce) sthAna,
jo ki sthira na hoM, acchI taraha rakhe hue na ho, niSkampa na hoM kintu
calAyamAna hoM una para khar3e rahanA, sonA yA baiThanA Adi karatA hai yA karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  11. jo bhikSu skandha para, phalaka para, maMca
para, maNDapa para, mAla para, prAsAda para, havelI ke zikhara para ityAdi jo
AkAzIya (anAvRta UMce) sthala jo ki asthira hoM, acchI taraha bane hue na hoM,
niSkampa na hoM kintu calAyamAna hoM vahA~ para khar3e rahanA, sonA yA baiThanA
Adi karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta prAtA hai | )

Page #388 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [288] [Nishith Sutra]  **Explanation of words:**  * **Thuna-Veli-Chhota
Thamba:**  Small pillar. * **Giheluko-Umbaro-Dehli:**  Doorway. * **Asukalam-
Ukkhalam-Ukhala:**  Mortar. * **Kamajalan-Hanapidham-Snan ki Chauki:**  Bath
platform.  **Silansi-Lelusi:** These words appear twice in these sutras. First,
they are used in a conscious way and later in a celestial way.  * **Kuliyansi:**
Mud wall or thin wall. * **Bhittisi:**  Brick, stone, etc. wall or river bank. *
**Khandhansi:**  "Khandam Pagaro Pedham Wa" - Fort, platform or pillar house. *
**Falihansi:**  Wooden plank, platform or place built over a ditch or ditch. *
**Manchansi:**  Platform, place higher than the ground. * **Malanshi:**
"Gihovari Malo" - Second floor, etc. * **Pasayansi:**  "Nijjuha-
Gavakkhovasobhito Pasado" - Decorated palace. * **Hammatalansi:**  "Savvovari
Talam" - Peak place or roof. * **Dubbadh:**  Not properly tied with bamboo or
rope. * **Dunikkhitte:**  Not properly established. * **Anikampe:**  Unstable -
"Anishprakampitvadav Chalachal Chalachalanasvabham"  **Than-Sej-Nisihiyam:**
Charnikar has explained these three words at the beginning and later also
explained four words. There, the third word "Nisejj" is said more. But in the
Acharanga Sutra and Nishith Uddeshak five, there are only three words.
Therefore, here also three words are kept in the original, which includes all
the activities to be done in those places - 1. Standing with Kayotsarga or
standing without Kayotsarga. 2. Sleeping on any bed. 3. Sitting for study or
eating.  The prohibition of doing these activities in the eight places mentioned
in the previous sutras is due to the violation of the earth, etc. and in these
three sutras, the prohibition is due to the possibility of the monk falling.
Because these places are high and uncovered, i.e. open to the sky in all
directions. Since these are places without support, there is a possibility of
the monk falling or the equipment falling, which can lead to self-violation,
destruction of equipment and violation of life. Therefore, one should not stand,
sleep, sit, etc. in such places.  Acharanga Shru. 2, A. 2, U. 1 prohibits the
monk from staying in such places. If it is necessary to stay in such places, it
is instructed to be very careful and also explains the various types of
violations that can occur due to carelessness.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 288] [nizIthasUtra vivecana-zabdoM kI vyAkhyAthUNA-velI-choTA thambA  /
giheluko- umbro-dehlii| asukAlaM-ukkhalaM-Ukhala  /  kAmajalaM-hANapIDhaM-snAna
kI caukii| silaMsi-lelusi-ye zabda ina sUtroM meM do bAra Aye haiN| pahale
sacitta rUpa se aura bAda meM AkAzIya rUpa se prayukta hue haiN| kuliyaMsi-miTTo
kI dIvAra yA patalI dIvAra  /  bhittisi-IMTa, patthara Adi kI dIvAra athavA nadI
kA taTa  /  khaMdhaMsi-"khaMdhaM pAgAro peDhaM vA"-koTa, pIThikA yA stambhagRha
/  phalihaMsi-lakar3I kA takhata, pATiyA athavA khAI ke Upara banA sthala yA
arglaa| maMcaMsi-maMca, samabhUmi se UMcA sthAna  /  /  mAlaMsi"gihovari mAlo"
dUsarA maMjila Adi  /  pAsAyaMsi-"NijjUha-gavakkhovasobhito pAsAdo" suzobhita
mahala  /  hammatalaMsi-"savvovari talaM'-zikhara sthAna athavA chata  /
dubbaddha-bAMsa Adi rassI se ThIka baMdhe na hoN| duNikkhitte-ThIka se sthApita
na hoN| aNikaMpe-calAcale-"aniSprakaMpitvAdeva calAcalaM calAcalanasvabhAvaM"
ThANa-seja-nisIhiyaM-carNikAra ne ina tIna zabdoM kI vyAkhyA prArambha meM kI
hai aura bAda meM cAra zabdoM kI vyAkhyA bhI kI hai| vahA~ tIsarA zabda
"Nisejja" adhika kahA hai| kintu prAcArAMgasUtra meM tathA nizItha uddezaka
pA~ca meM tIna zabda hI haiN| ataH yahA~ bhI mUla meM tIna zabda hI rakhe haiM,
jisameM una sthAnoM para kI jAne vAlI sabhI pravRttiyoM kA samAveza ho jAtA
hai-1. kAyotsarga karake khar3e rahanA yA binA kAyotsarga kie khar3e rhnaa| 2.
kisI bhI prAsana se zayana krnaa| 3. svAdhyAya karane ke lie yA AhAra karane ke
lie baiThanA  /  pUrva sUtrokta ATha sthAnoM meM ye kArya karane kA niSedha
pRthvI Adi kI virAdhanA ke kAraNa kiyA hai aura ina tIna sUtroM meM bhikSu ke
girane kI sambhAvanA ke kAraNa niSedha hai| kyoMki ye sthAna U~ce aura anAvRta
arthAt sabhI dizAoM meM khule AkAza vAle haiM  /  ye binA sahArA ke sthAna hone
se sAdhu ke gira par3ane kI yA upakaraNa Adi ke girane kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai,
jisase AtmavirAdhanA, upakaraNoM kA vinAza aura jIvavirAdhanA ho sakatI hai|
ataH aise sthAnoM meM khar3e rahanA, sonA, baiThanA Adi kArya nahIM karanA
caahie| AcArAMga zru. 2, a. 2, u. 1 meM aise sthAnoM meM bhikSu ke Thaharane kA
niSedha kiyA gayA hai| kadAcit aise sthAnoM meM ThaharanA par3e to atyanta
sAvadhAnI rakhane kA nirdeza kiyA hai tathA asAvadhAnI se hone vAlI aneka
prakAra kI virAdhanAoM kA spaSTIkaraNa bhI kiyA hai  /

Page #389 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thirteenth Uddeshak  [289]  The height of places like space-born platforms,
malls, houses, and roofs is clear from their names. Therefore, the term "space-
born" should not be interpreted as "high place," but rather as "open sky." This
means that if the surrounding area of the high places mentioned in the sutra is
not enclosed by walls, but open sky, then they are called "space-born." This
meaning is clear from the detailed text on this subject in Praachan Shru. 2, A.
2, U. 1. Because if the high places mentioned in the sutra are enclosed on all
sides by walls, then the possibility of falling, etc., mentioned in the sutra
would not be logical.  ## The Penance for Teaching Skills, etc.  12. A monk who
teaches or approves of someone teaching another ascetic or householder: 1.
Skills, 2. Praise, 3. Gambling, 4. Dice games, 5. Warfare, 6. Poetry
composition, (incurs a minor Chaturmasik penance).  **Explanation:**  *
**Sippam:** "Tunnagaadi" = Skills like sewing, etc. * **Silogam:** "Vannana" =
Praise, extolling virtues. * **Atthavayam:** Gambling with dice, etc. *
**Kakkadayam:** "Kakkadagam-heuu" = A type of game played with dice. *
**Vuggah:** "Vuggaho-kalho" = Fighting, martial arts. * **Salaha:** "Salaha-
kavvakaranappoga" = Poetry composition.  The Churnikaar has also explained
"Atthavayam" and "Kakkadayam" in another way, as follows:  * "Imam Attapaadam -
Puchchito apuchchito va bhanati - Amhe nimittam na suttha jaanamo. Ettiyam pun
jaanamo - Param pabhayakale dadhikuram sunga vi khaatium aichchhihinti, arth
padein gyayate subhikkham." = To tell the reason. * "Kakkadagam-heuu - Jaththa
bhanite ubhayha vi dosho bhavati jaha - Jeevass nitchatt pariggrahe naragadi
bhavo na bhavati. Anichche va bhanite vinaasi ghatavat kritavipranasadayasch
dosha bhavati. Athava karkaat hetu sarvabhaavaikya pratipatti." = To state
definitively the various religions that exist in objects.  It should be
understood that teaching the activities mentioned in the sutra to a householder
is not the conduct of a virtuous person. By implication, the same penance is
incurred for teaching the 72 arts, etc. Teaching these things encourages the
householder's activities or encourages and approves of worldly activities. It
also leads to the loss of the restraints of self-study, meditation, etc.  ## The
Penance for Speaking Harsh Words to a Householder  13. A monk who speaks harshly
to another ascetic or householder, or approves of such speech, (incurs a minor
Chaturmasik penance).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 terahavAM uddezaka] [289 aMtarikSajAta-maMca, mAla, makAna kI chata Adi sthaloM
kI UMcAI to unake nAma se hI spaSTa ho jAtI hai, ata: aMtarikSajAta kA "UMce
sthAna" aisA artha nahIM karanA cAhiye, kintu "AkAzIyaanAvRtasthala" aisA artha
karanA cAhiye arthAt sUtra kathita U~ce sthaloM ke cautarapha bhitti Adi na
hokara khulA AkAza ho to ve UMce sthala aMtarikSajAta vizeSaNa vAle kahe jAte
haiN| yahI artha prAcA. zru. 2, a. 2, u. 1 ke isa viSayaka vistRta pATha se
spaSTa hotA hai  /  kyoMki sUtragata UMce sthala yadi bhitti Adi se cautarapha
AvRta hoM to girane Adi kI kahI gaI sambhAvanA saMgata nahIM ho sakatI hai|
zilpakalAdi sikhAne kA prAyazcitta 12. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyaM vA gAratthiyaM
vA1. sippaM vA, 2. silogaM vA, 3. aTThAvayaM vA, 4. kakkaDagaM vA, 5. vuggahaM
vA, 6. salAhaM vA sikkhAvei, sikkhAtaM vA saaijji| 12. jo bhikSu anyatIthika yA
gRhastha ko-1. zilpa, 2. guNakIrtana, 3. juA khelanA, 4. kAMkarI khelanA, 5.
yuddha karanA, 6. padya racanA karanA sikhAtA hai yA sikhAne vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  (use laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-
sippaM-"tuNNAgAdi" = silAI Adi zilpa  /  silogaM--"vaNNaNA"-prazaMsA, guNagrAma
krnaa| aTThAvayaM-caupar3a pAsAdi se juA khelanA  /  kakkaDayaM-"kakkaDagaM-heU
= kAMkarI kauDiyoM se khelane kA eka prakAra  /  vuggaha-"vuggaho-kalaho" =
jhagar3anA, yuddha klaa| salAha- "salAhA-kavvakaraNappogA" = kAvya-racanA karanA
/  cUrNikAra ne "aTThAvayaM" "kakkaDayaM" kI vyAkhyA anya prakAra se bhI kI hai,
yathA "imaM aTTApadaM-pucchito apucchito vA bhaNati-amhe NimittaM na suThTha
jANAmo  /  ettiyaM puNa jANAmo-paraM pabhAyakAle dadhikUraM suNagA vi khAtiuM
aicchihiMti, artha padena jJAyate subhikkhaM  / " = nimitta batAnA  /
"kakkaDagaM-heU-jattha bhaNite ubhayahA vi doSo bhavati jahA-jIvassa Niccatta
pariggahe NAragAdi bhAvo Na bhavati  /  aNicce vA bhaNite viNAsI ghaTavat
kRtavipraNAsAdayazca doSA bhavaMti  /  athavA karkaTa hetu sarvabhAvaikya
pratipattiH" = padArthoM meM rahe vividha dharmoM kA ekAMtika kathana krnaa|
sUtrokta kArya gRhastha ko sikhAnA sAdhu kA AcAra nahIM hai tathA upalakSaNa se
72 kalA Adi sikhAne para bhI yahI prAyazcitta pAtA hai, aisA samajha lenA cAhiye
/  inake sikhAne para gRhastha ke kAryoM kI yA sAvadha kAryoM ko preraNA evaM
anumodanA hotI hai  /  svAdhyAya dhyAnAdi saMyama yogoM kI hAni bhI hotI hai|
gRhastha ko pharuSa vacana Adi kahane ke prAyazcitta 13. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyaM
vA gAratthiyaM vA AgADhaM vayai, vayaMtaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #390 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nishith Sutra] 13. A monk who speaks harsh words to a non-Jain or a
householder, or approves of such speech. 14. A monk who speaks harsh words to a
non-Jain or a householder, or approves of such speech. 15. A monk who speaks
harsh words with anger to a non-Jain or a householder, or approves of such
speech. 16. A monk who insults a non-Jain or a householder in any way, or
approves of such insult. (He incurs the minor four-month penance.)  Discussion:
A monk is not allowed to speak harsh language at all. For speaking even slightly
harsh words, the minor four-month penance is incurred according to Nishith
Uddeshak 2 Sutra 19. And for speaking harsh words to a teacher or a
Ratnaadhikar, the major four-month penance is mentioned in Uddeshak 10. These
present sutras mention the minor four-month penance for speaking harsh words to
any householder or for insulting them in any other way. The explanation of the
words "Aagaadh" etc. is found in the tenth Uddeshak.  A monk should always speak
words that are beneficial to all, limited, and sweet. Whether it is a small monk
or a big monk, a small or big householder, or even children, it is not
appropriate to speak harsh words to anyone, to scorn them, or to insult them in
any way. Doing so corrupts restraint, insulting others is the cause of the
arising of passions. Therefore, he is liable to penance according to these
sutras.  Speaking harsh language leads to defilement, which binds karma and also
becomes the cause of conflict.  The statement about the wisdom regarding
language is found in the Dasavaikalik Sutra, chapters 4-6-7-8-10, in Aacha.
Shru. 2, chapter 4, and in the Prashnavyakaran Shru. 2, chapter 2, and also in
many places in the Uttaradhyayanasutra etc. The observance of the language
committee in the five committees is said to be very difficult. Therefore, a monk
should always be very careful about his language.  Penance for Curiosity-related
Actions 17. A monk who performs a curiosity-related action, or approves of such
action.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 290] [nizIthasUtra 14. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyaM vA gAratthiyaM vA pharusaM
vayai, vayaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  15. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyaM vA gAratthiyaM vA
AgADhaM-pharusaM vayai, vayaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  16. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyaM vA
gAratthiyaM vA aNNayarIe accAsAyaNAe accAsAei, accAsAeMtaM vA saaijji| 13. jo
bhikSu anyatIthika yA gRhastha ko Avezayukta vacana kahatA hai yA kahane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 14. jo bhikSu anyatIthika yA gRhastha ko kaThora vacana
kahatA hai yA kahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 15. jo bhikSu anyatIthika yA
gRhastha ko Avezayukta kaThora zabda kahatA hai yA kahane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 16. jo bhikSu anyatIthika yA gRhastha kI kisI bhI prakAra kI
prAzAtanA karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use
laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana-bhikSu ko kiMcit bhI kaThora
bhASA bolanA nahIM kalpatA hai  /  atyalpa pharuSa vacana bolane para nizItha
uddezaka 2 sUtra 19 se laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai tathA uddezaka 10 meM
prAcArya yA ratnAdhika ko kaThora vacana bolane Adi kA gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta
kahA hai  /  ina prastuta sUtroM meM kisI bhI gRhastha ko kaThora zabda kahane
yA anya kisI prakAra se unakI AzAtanA-avahelanA karane kA laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  AgAr3ha Adi zabdoM kI vyAkhyA dasaveM uddezaka meM
dekheN| bhikSu ko sadA sabake liye hitakArI, parimita aura madhura zabda hI
kahane caahie| cAhe vaha choTA sAdhu ho yA bar3A sAdhu ho, koI choTA bar3A
gRhastha ho athavA bacce Adi bhI kyoM na hoM, kisI ko kaThora zabda kahanA,
tiraskAra karanA yA anya kisI taraha se unakI avahelanA karanA ucita nahIM hai
/  aisA karane para saMyama dUSita hotA hai, anya kA apamAna karanA kaSAya
utpatti kA kAraNa hotA hai  /  ataeva vaha ina sUtroM se prAyazcitta kA pAtra
hotA hai  /  kaThora bhASA bolane meM malinabhAva hone se karma baMdha hotA hai
tathA kalaha utpati kA nimitta bhI ho jAtA hai| bhASA sambandhI viveka kA
kathana dazavaikAlika sUtra a. 4-6-7-8-10 meM, AcA. zru. 2, a. 4 meM tathA
praznavyAkaraNa zru. 2, a. 2 meM hai tathA uttarAdhyayana Adi sUtroM meM bhI
aneka jagaha hai  /  pAMca samiti meM bhASAsamiti kA pAlana atyanta kaThina kahA
gayA hai| ataH bhikSu ko sadA bhASA kA atyanta viveka rakhanA caahiye|
kautukakarma prAdi ke prAyazcitta 17. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyANa vA gAratthiyANa
vA kougakammaM karei, kareMtaM vA saaijji|

Page #391 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thirteenth Uddesaka  **18. A monk who performs or approves of the performance
of ** *kauthukakarma* **by non-Jain or householders.**  **19. A monk who
performs or approves of the performance of ** *bhutikarma* **by non-Jain or
householders.**  **20. A monk who asks or approves of the asking of **
*kauthukaprashna* **from non-Jain or householders.**  **21. A monk who answers
or approves of the answering of ** *kauthukaprashna* **from non-Jain or
householders.**  **22. A monk who speaks or approves of the speaking of **
*nimitta* **related to the past by non-Jain or householders.**  **23. A monk who
speaks or approves of the speaking of the results of ** *lakshana* **(marks on
the body) by non-Jain or householders.**  **24. A monk who speaks or approves of
the speaking of the results of ** *banjana* **(birthmarks, moles, etc.) by non-
Jain or householders.**  **25. A monk who speaks or approves of the speaking of
the results of ** *svapna* **(dreams) by non-Jain or householders.**  **26. A
monk who performs or approves of the performance of ** *vijan* **(divination) by
non-Jain or householders.**  **27. A monk who performs or approves of the
performance of ** *manta* **(incantations) by non-Jain or householders.**  **28.
A monk who performs or approves of the performance of ** *yoga* **by non-Jain or
householders.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 terahavAM uddezaka [291 18. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyANa vA gAratthiyANa vA
bhUikammaM karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  19. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyANa vA
gAratthiyANa vA pasiNaM karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  20. je bhikkhU
aNNautthiyANa vA gAratthiyANa vA pasiNApasiNaM karei, kareMtaM vA saaijji| 21.
je bhikkhU aNNautthiyANa vA gAratthiyANa vA tIyaM nimittaM kahei, kaheMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  22. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyANa vA gAratthiyANa vA lakkhaNaM kahei,
kaheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  23. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyANa vA gAratthiyANa vA baMjaNaM
kahei, kaheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  24. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyANa vA gAratthiyANa vA
sumiNaM kahei, kaheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  25. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyANa vA
gAratthiyANa vA vijaM pauMjai, pauMjaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  26. je bhikkhU
aNNautthiyANa vA gAratthiyANa vA maMtaM pauMjai, pajaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  27. je
bhikkhU aNNautthiyANa vA gAratthiyANa vA jogaM pauMjai, pauMjaMtaM vA sAijjai  /
17. jo bhikSu anyatIthikoM yA gRhasthoM kA kautukakarma karatA hai yA karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 18. jo bhikSu anyatIthikoM yA gRhasthoM kA
bhUtikarma karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 19. jo bhikSu
anyatIthikoM yA gRhasthoM se kautuka-prazna karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| - 20. jo bhikSu anyatIthikoM yA gRhasthoM ke kautuka
praznoM ke uttara detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 21. jo bhikSu
anyatIthikoM yA gRhasthoM ke bhUtakAla sambandhI nimitta kA kathana karatA hai
yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  22. jo bhikSu anyatIthikoM yA
gRhasthoM ko unake (zarIra ke rekhA Adi) lakSaNoM kA phala kahatA hai yA kahane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 23. jo bhikSu anyatIthikoM yA gRhasthoM ko (unake)
tila-masA Adi vyaMjanoM kA phala kahatA hai yA kahane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 24. jo bhikSu anyatIthikoM yA gRhasthoM ko svapna kA phala kahatA hai yA
kahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|

Page #392 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[292] [Nisiyasutra 25. A monk who uses "vidya" for non-Jains or householders or
approves of its use. 26. A monk who uses "mantra" for non-Jains or householders
or approves of its use. 27. A monk who uses "yoga" (tantra) for non-Jains or
householders or approves of its use. (He receives a laghu-chaturmasik
pratyachit.) Discussion - "Kouy-bhutiin ya karanam. Pasinass, pasinapasinas,
nimittass, lakkhan-banjan suminaan ya vagaranam. Sesanan vijjadadian
paunganata." Kautukakarma - Bathing the dead calf, etc., in the cremation ground
or in the thief's place, etc. Burning incense, offering oblations, etc., for
good fortune, etc. Applying kajal tilak for protection from eye defects. _
Bhutikarma - Making a protective pouch with ashes imbued with vidya for the
protection of the body, etc., or applying ashes to the body. Thirdly, the cause
- There is less possibility of faults in the statement of the cause in the past
tense than in the present and future tenses, therefore, in the tenth uddeśaka,
the statement of the cause in the present and future tenses is called guru-
chaumasi pratyachit and here the statement of the cause in the past tense is
called laghu-chaumasi pratyachit. Pasin - Invoking a deity in a mirror, etc., by
the power of mantra or vidya and asking questions. Pasinapasina - Saying the
auspicious and inauspicious results known by invoking a deity in a dream by the
power of mantra or vidya. Lakshan - The external marks of a human being are 32,
of Baldev Vasudev are 108, and of a Chakravarti or Tirthankara are 1008, due to
the rise of auspicious karma acquired in the previous birth, in the body, hands,
feet, etc. There may also be many other internal marks. These marks are in the
form of lines or in the form of the shape of the limbs. These marks are also in
the form of sounds and colors. The height, weight, and measurement of the body
are also forms of auspicious marks. If the volume of the body is equal to one
drona of water, then that man is called "manayukta". If the weight of the body
is half the weight, then that man is called "unmanayukta". If the measurement of
the body is 108 angulas, then that man is called "pramanayukta". Vyanjan - The
appropriate marks are born with the body and those that are born later are
called "vyanjan". For example, moles, freckles, other marks, etc. Vidya-mantra -
The mantra whose presiding deity is a goddess is called "vidya" and the mantra
whose presiding deity is a god is called "mantra". Or, that which is obtained by
special practice is called "vidya" and that which is perfected by mere chanting
is called "mantra".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 292] [nizIyasUtra 25. jo bhikSu anyatIthikoM yA gRhasthoM ke lie "vidyA" kA
prayoga karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 26. jo bhikSu
anyatIthikoM yA gRhasthoM ke lie "mantra" kA prayoga karatA hai yA karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| 27. jo bhikSu anyatIthikoM yA gRhasthoM ke lie "yoga"
(tantra) kA prayoga karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use
laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-"kouya-bhUtINa ya karaNaM  /
pasiNassa, pasiNApasiNassa, Nimittassa, lakkhaNa-baMjaNa sumiNANa ya vAgaraNaM
/  sesANaM vijjAdiyANa pauMjaNatA  / " kautukakarma-mRtavatsA Adi ko zmazAna yA
corAhe Adi meM snAna kraanaa| saubhAgya Adi ke liye dhUpa, homa Adi karanA  /
dRSTi doSa se rakSA ke liye kAjala kA tilaka karanA  /  _ bhUtikarma-zarIra Adi
kI rakSA ke liye vidyA se abhimaMtrita rAkha se rakSA poTalI banAnA yA
bhasmalepana krnaa| tIyaM nimittaM-vartamAna kAla aura bhaviSya kAla kI apekSA
bhUtakAla ke nimitta kathana meM doSoM kI sambhAvanA kama rahatI hai, ataH
dasaveM uddezaka meM vartamAna aura bhaviSya ke nimitta-kathana kA gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta kahA hai aura yahA~ atIta ke nimitta-kathana kA laghacaumAsI
prAyazcitta kahA hai| pasiNaM-mantra yA vidyA bala se darpaNa Adi meM devatA kA
AhvAna karanA va prazna pUchanA  /  pasiNApasiNa-mantra yA vidyA bala se svapna
meM devatA ke AhvAna dvArA jAnA huA zubhAzubha phala kA kathana karanA  /
lakSaNa-pUrva bhava meM upAjita aMgopAMga Adi zubha nAmakarma ke udaya se
zarIra, hAtha-pAMva Adi meM sAmAnya manuSya ke 32, baladeva vAsudeva ke 108
tathA cakravartI yA tIrthakara ke 1008 bAhya lakSaNa hote haiM, anya aneka
prAMtarika lakSaNa bhI ho sakate haiM  /  ye lakSaNa rekhA rUpa meM yA aMgopAMga
kI AkRti rUpa hote haiM tathA ye lakSaNa svara evaM varNa rUpa meM bhI hote
haiN| zarIra kA mAna, unmAna aura pramANa ye bhI zubha lakSaNa rUpa hote haiM  /
zarIra kA Ayatana eka droNa pAnI ke barAbara ho to vaha puruSa "mAnayukta" kahA
jAtA hai  /  zarIra kA vajana arddhabhAra ho to vaha puruSa 'unmAnayukta' kahA
jAtA hai  /  zarIra kI avagAhanA 108 aMgula ho to vaha puruSa 'pramANayukta'
kahA jAtA hai| vyaMjana-upayukta lakSaNa to zarIra ke sAtha utpanna hote haiM
aura bAda meM utpanna hone vAle 'vyaMjana' kahe jAte haiM  /  yathA-tila, masa,
anya cihna Adi  /  vidyAmantra-jisa mantra kI adhiSThAyikA devI ho vaha 'vidyA'
kahalAtI hai aura jisa mantra kA adhiSThAyaka deva ho vaha 'mantra' kahalAtA
hai| athavA viziSTa sAdhanA se prApta ho vaha "vidyA' aura kevala jApa karane se
jo siddha ho vaha 'mantra' kahA gayA hai|

Page #393 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [293 Thirteenth Uddeshak] _ Yoga-vashikaran, padalepa, antardhan hona adi
'yoga' kahe jate hain. Ye yoga vidyayukt bhi hote hain aur vidya ke bina bhi
hote hain. For further information, refer to the seventh sutra of the tenth
Uddeshak.  ##  Praayashchitt for guiding the path 28. Je bhikkhu annautthiyaan
wa garatthiyaan wa natthaan, moodhaan, vippariyasiyaan maggam wa paveei, sandhi
wa paveei, maggaao wa sandhi paveei, sandhiyo wa maggam paveei, paveent wa
saijjai. 28. A bhikkhu who guides the path of other-worldly beings or
householders who are lost, confused or have gone in the wrong direction, or who
guides the junction of the path, or who guides the junction from the path, or
who guides the path from the junction, or who approves of the one who guides,
(incurs a laghu-chaturmasik praayashchitt). ##  Vivechan Shandhi - The place
where multiple paths meet or the origin of multiple paths. Maggaao wa sandhi -
To tell how far the junction is from the path and where it is. Sandhiyo wa magg
- To tell the path to be taken from the junction, to tell its direction. After
guiding the path, the person may go elsewhere due to their own mistake, may be
confused in understanding, or the path may seem long, difficult, robbers may
come, lions may come, etc. Due to such reasons, various kinds of impure thoughts
or wrong perceptions may arise towards the bhikkhu. If there is water,
vegetation, or harmful creatures on the path, there may also be opposition to
them. ##  Praacha. Shru. 2, A. 3, U. 3 It is stated that if a householder asks a
bhikkhu walking in the vihar, "How far is such and such village from here, or
how far is the path to such and such village?", then the bhikkhu should not
answer, but remain silent or ignore it and move on. Even if he knows, he should
not say "I don't know" or "I know but I won't tell", he should simply remain
silent with indifference. The meaning of this rule in the Acharang Sutra is that
if the bhikkhu makes a mistake in telling, or if the listener does not
understand properly and gets confused, or if the householder gets lost on the
path or takes longer on the path, or if it becomes midday or night, or if he
becomes distressed due to hunger or thirst, etc., there is a possibility of many
faults. Therefore, the bhikkhu should walk with discretion and indifference in
such situations. If, due to circumstances or any other reason, he has to guide
the path out of concern for the welfare of others, he should guide the path in a
discreet language and accept the praayashchitt as prescribed in the sutras. ##
Praayashchitt for telling about dhatu and nidhi 29. Je bhikkhu annautthiyaan wa
garatthiyaan wa dhaun pavedei, pavetam wa saijjai. 30. Je bhikkhu annautthiyaan
wa garatthiyaan wa nihim pavedei, pavedem wa saijjai.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [293 terahavAM uddezaka] _ yoga-vazIkaraNa, pAdalepa, aMtardhAna honA Adi
'yoga' kahe jAte haiN| ye yoga vidyAyukta bhI hote haiM aura vidyA ke binA bhI
hote haiM  /  anya vizeSa jAnakArI ke liye dasaveM uddezaka ke sAtaveM sUtra kA
vivecana dekheN| mArgAdi batAne kA prAyazcitta 28. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyANa vA
gAratthiyANa vA naTThANaM, mUDhANaM, vippariyAsiyANaM maggaM vA paveei, saMdhi
vA paveei, maggAo vA saMdhi paveei, saMdhIo vA maggaM paveei, paveeMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  28. jo bhikSu mArga bhUle hue, dizAmUDha hue yA viparIta dizA meM
gae hue anyatIthikoM yA gRhasthoM ko mArga batAtA hai yA mArga kI saMdhi batAtA
hai athavA mArga se saMdhi batAtA hai yA saMdhi se mArga batAtA hai yA batAne
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|)
vivecana-saMdhi-aneka mArgoM ke milane kA sthAna yA aneka mArgoM kA udgama
sthAna  /  maggAo vA saMdhi-mArga se saMdhisthAna kitanA dUra hai, kahAM hai
yaha batAnA  /  saMdhio vA magga-saMdhisthAna se gantavya mArga batAnA, usakI
dizA batAnA  /  mArga batAne ke bAda vyakti svayaM kI galatI se anyatra calA
jAya, samajhane meM bhUla ho jAya yA mArga lambA lage, vikaTa lage, cora luTere
A jAyeM, zera Adi A jAya ityAdi kAraNoM se bhikSu ke prati aneka prakAra ke
malina vicAra yA galata dhAraNA ho sakatI hai| mArga meM pAnI, vanaspati, trasa
jIva Adi hoM to unakI virAdhanA bhI ho sakatI hai| prAcA. zru. 2, a. 3, u. 3 meM
batAyA gayA hai ki vihAra meM calate hue bhikSu se koI gRhastha pUcha le ki
'yahAM se amuka gAMva kitanA dUra hai yA amuka gAMva kA mArga kitanI dUrI para
hai ?' to bhikSu usakA uttara na de kintu mauna rahe yA sunA anasunA karake Age
gamana kare tathA jAnate hue bhI maiM nahIM jAnatA hUM athavA maiM jAnatA hUM
para kahUMgA nahIM, aisA na kahe kevala upekSAbhAva rakhakara mauna rahe  /
AcArAMgasUtra ke isa vidhAna kA tAtparya bhI yahI hai ki bhikSu ke kahane meM
bhUla ho jAya yA sunane vAle ke barAvara samajha meM na Ane se bhrama ho jAya,
kabhI gRhastha mArga bhUla jAe yA mArga meM use adhika samaya laga jAya, garmI
kA samaya (madhyAhna) ho jAya yA rAtri ho jAya, bhUkha pyAsa se vyAkula ho jAya
ityAdi aneka doSoM kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai  /  ataH bhikSu aise prasaMgoM meM
vivekapUrvaka upekSA bhAva rakhatA huA gamana kre| kabhI paristhitivaza yA anya
kisI kAraNa se hitAhita kA vicAra karake mArga batAnA par3e to vivekapUrNa bhASA
meM mArga batAve tathA yathAyogya sUtrokta prAyazcitta svIkAra kara le| dhAtu
aura nidhi batAne kA prAyazcitta 29. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyANa vA gAratthiyANa vA
dhAuM pavedei, pavetaM vA saaijji| 30. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyANa vA gAratthiyANa
vA nihiM pavedei, pavedeMtaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #394 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Nishīth Sūtra 294]  **29.** A monk who reveals the location of a *dhātu*
(metal) to non-monks or householders, or approves of someone else doing so.
**30.** A monk who reveals the location of a *nidhi* (treasure) to non-monks or
householders, or approves of someone else doing so. (He incurs the *laghu-
chaturmāsīka* penance.)  **Discussion:** There are three types of *dhātu*: 1.
*Pāṣāṇa-dhātu*, 2. *Rasa-dhātu*, 3. *Miṭṭī-dhātu*.  1. *Pāṣāṇa-dhātu* is
obtained by rubbing iron or other metals against a specific stone, resulting in
gold or other precious metals.  2. *Rasa-dhātu* is obtained by pouring water
containing a specific metal onto copper or other metals, resulting in gold or
other precious metals.  3. *Miṭṭī-dhātu* is obtained by mixing a specific type
of soil with other substances or rubbing it against iron or other metals,
resulting in gold or other precious metals.  A monk should not reveal the
location of a *dhātu* or *nidhi* to householders, whether he has learned it from
someone else or discovered it himself. Doing so incurs the penance mentioned in
the sūtra.  Revealing the location of a *dhātu* or *nidhi* to householders can
lead them to engage in various harmful activities, including other sins. Sharing
this information with one person can lead to its spread among many, creating a
harmful tradition. Keeping this information from some while sharing it with
others can lead to attachment and aversion. If someone fails to find the *dhātu*
or *nidhi* due to obstacles, it can lead to disbelief. Therefore, monks should
avoid these harmful consequences.  Extracting a *nidhi* can lead to harm to
living beings, such as earthworms and ants. If the *nidhi* belongs to someone
else, it can lead to conflict or punishment.  **Penance for looking at one's
reflection in a vessel:**  **31.** A monk who looks at his reflection in a
*matta* (vessel made of clay).  **32.** A monk who looks at his reflection in a
*adā* (vessel made of wood).  **33.** A monk who looks at his reflection in a
*asī* (vessel made of iron).  **34.** A monk who looks at his reflection in a
*maṇi* (gemstone).  **35.** A monk who looks at his reflection in a *kuḍ-pāṇa*
(vessel made of leather).  **36.** A monk who looks at his reflection in a
*telle* (vessel made of oil).  **37.** A monk who looks at his reflection in a
*mahu* (vessel made of honey).  **38.** A monk who looks at his reflection in a
*sappi* (vessel made of ghee).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 294] [nizIthasUtra 29. jo bhikSu anyatIthikoM yA gRhasthoM ko dhAtu batAtA hai
yA batAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 30. jo bhikSu anyatIthikoM yA gRhasthoM
ko nidhi (khajAnA) batAyA hai yA batAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use
laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai  / ) vivecana-dhAtu tIna prakAra ke hote
haiM-1. pASANadhAtu, 2. rasadhAtu, 3. miTTIdhAtu  /  1. kisI pASANa (patthara)
vizeSa ke sAtha lohA Adi kA yukti pUrvaka gharSaNa karane se suvarNa Adi banatA
hai, vaha 'pASANadhAtu' kahA jAtA hai  /  2. jisa dhAtu kA pAnI tAmra Adi dhAtu
para siMcana karane para suvarNa Adi banatA hai, vaha 'rasa dhAtu kahA jAtA hai|
3. jisa miTTI ko kisI anya padArthoM ke saMyoga se yA lohe Adi para gharSaNa
karane se suvarNa Adi banatA hai vaha 'miTTI dhAtu' kahA jAtA hai  /  bhikSu ko
kisI ke dvArA yA svataH kisI dhAtu kI yA nidhi kI jAnakArI ho jAya to gRhastha
ko batAnA nahIM kalpatA hai  /  batAne para sUtrokta prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  .
gRhastha ko dhAtu, nidhi batAne para vaha aneka prArambhamaya pravRttiyoM meM
athavA anya pApa kAryoM meM vRddhi kara sakatA hai  /  eka ko batAne para anekoM
ko mAlUma par3ane para paramparA bar3hatI hai  /  kisI ko batAye, kisI ko nahIM
batAye to rAga-dveSa kI vRddhi hotI hai| aMtarAya ke udaya se kisI ko saphalatA
na mile to avizvAsa hotA hai  /  ata: bhikSu ko ina doSasthAnoM se dUra hI
rahanA cAhie  /  nidhi ke nikAlane meM pRthvIkAya, trasakAya Adi ke virAdhanA kI
sambhAvanA rahatI hai  /  yadi kisI nidhi kA koI svAmI ho to usase kalaha hone
kI yA daNDita hone kI sambhAvanA bhI rahatI hai  /  pAtra prAdi meM apanA
pratibimba dekhane kA prAyazcitta 31. je bhikkhU mattae appANaM dehai, dehataM
vA sAijjai  /  32. je bhikkhU adAe appANaM dehai, dehaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  33. je
bhikkhU asIe appANaM dehai, dehataM vA sAijjai  /  34. je bhikkhU maNie appANaM
dehai, dehaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  35. je bhikkhU kuDa-pANae appANaM dehai, dehataM
vA sAijjai  /  36. je bhikkhU telle appANaM dehai, dehataM vA sAijjai  /  37. je
bhikkhU mahue appANaM dehai, dehaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  38. je bhikkhU sappie
appANaM dehai, dehataM vA sAijjai  /

Page #395 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thirteenth Uddeshak  **39.** A monk who sees his reflection in **faṇi** (a
type of water) or approves of the one who sees it, incurs **dehant** (minor
transgression). **40.** A monk who sees his reflection in **majjā** (marrow) or
approves of the one who sees it, incurs **dehant**. **41.** A monk who sees his
reflection in **basā** (a type of water) or approves of the one who sees it,
incurs **dehant**. **31.** A monk who sees his reflection in a **pātra** (bowl)
or approves of the one who sees it, incurs **dehant**. **32.** A monk who sees
his reflection in a **arīsa** (mirror) or approves of the one who sees it,
incurs **dehant**. **33.** A monk who sees his reflection in a **tala-vār**
(sword) or approves of the one who sees it, incurs **dehant**. **34.** A monk
who sees his reflection in a **maṇi** (jewel) or approves of the one who sees
it, incurs **dehant**. **35.** A monk who sees his reflection in water
containing **kuḍe** (dirt) or approves of the one who sees it, incurs
**dehant**. **36.** A monk who sees his reflection in **tel** (oil) or approves
of the one who sees it, incurs **dehant**. **37.** A monk who sees his
reflection in **madhu** (honey) or approves of the one who sees it, incurs
**dehant**. **38.** A monk who sees his reflection in **ghī** (clarified butter)
or approves of the one who sees it, incurs **dehant**. **39.** A monk who sees
his reflection in **gīle guḍ** (wet jaggery) or approves of the one who sees it,
incurs **dehant**. **40.** A monk who sees his reflection in **madya** (alcohol)
or approves of the one who sees it, incurs **dehant**. **41.** A monk who sees
his reflection in **vasā** (fat) or approves of the one who sees it, incurs
**laghu-cāturmāsīka prāyaścitta** (minor four-month penance).  **Discussion:**
Here, twelve substances are mentioned from twelve sutras, and seeing one's
reflection in them incurs penance. The word **pātra** refers to the bowls of
monks and the utensils of householders. The **tel**, **ghī**, and **guḍ**
mentioned in the sutras could have been consumed as alms. **Madhu** and **vasā**
could have been consumed for medicinal purposes. A monk does not consume **tala-
vār**, **arīsa**, **madya**, etc., but it is possible to see one's reflection in
them when entering the house of a householder for alms. The commentary collects
the words from the sutras as follows:  "**Dappana maṇi ābharaṇe, sattha daē
bhāyan'antarē ya. Tell - mahu - sappi faṇit, majj - vasā - suttamādīsu.**"
(4318)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 terahavA~ uddezaka ] 39. je bhikkhU phANie appANaM dehai, dehaMtaM vA sAijjai
/  40. je bhikkhU majjae appANaM dehai, dehaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  4. je bhikkhU
basAe appAnaM dehai, dehaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  31. jo bhikSu pAtra meM apanA
pratibimba dekhatA hai yA dekhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  32. jo bhikSu
arIsA meM apanA pratibimba dekhatA hai yA dekhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai
/  33. jo bhikSu talavAra meM apanA pratibimba dekhatA hai yA dekhane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  34. jo bhikSu maNi meM apanA pratibimva dekhatA hai yA
dekhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  35. jo bhikSu kuDe Adi ke pAnI meM
apanA pratibimba dekhatA hai yA dekhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  36. jo
bhikSu tela meM apanA pratibimba dekhatA hai yA dekhane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  37. jo bhikSu madhu (zahada) meM apanA pratibimba dekhatA hai yA dekhane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  [295 38. jo bhikSu ghI meM apanA pratibimba
dekhatA hai yA dekhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  39. jo bhikSu gIle gur3a
meM apanA pratibimba dekhatA hai yA dekhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  40.
jo bhikSu madya meM apanA pratibimba dekhatA hai yA dekhane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  41 jo bhikSu carabI meM apanA pratibimba dekhatA hai yA dekhane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  / )
vivecana - yahA~ bAraha sUtroM se bAraha padArthoM meM apanA pratibimba dekhane
kA prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  pAtra zabda se sAdhu ke pAtroM kA evaM gRhastha ke
bartanoM kA kathana hai  /  sUtra meM kahe gaye tela, ghI, gur3a bhikSA meM
grahaNa kiye hue ho sakate haiM  /  madhu, vazA kabhI zroSadha nimitta se
grahaNa kiye hue ho sakate haiM  /  anya talavAra, arIsA, madya Adi sAdhu
grahaNa nahIM karatA hai kintu bhikSA ke lie gRhastha ke ghara meM praveza
karane para vahA~ unameM mukha dekhanA sambhava ho sakatA hai  /  bhASya meM
sUtragata zabdoM kA saMgraha isa prakAra kiyA hai "dappaNa maNi AbharaNe, sattha
dae bhAyaNa'nnatarae ya  /  tella - mahu - sappi phANita, majja - vasA -
suttamAdIsu  //  4318  //

Page #396 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[296] [This gatha from the Nishīthasūtra collects all the terms except the
character, and also mentions that 'maṇi' is an ornament along with 'ābhūṣaṇa'
and that 'sutta' refers to sugarcane juice. The Daśavakālika Sūtra, chapter 3,
states that it is improper for a sādhū to look at their reflection in a mirror,
etc. The commentator has pointed out many potential faults in looking at one's
face in a mirror, etc. For example, one may become proud of their appearance,
develop a desire for objects upon seeing their beauty, become despondent upon
seeing their ugliness, learn about hypnotism, etc., or become obsessed with
their body, experience joy and sorrow. If a householder, etc., sees a sādhū
while they are looking in a mirror, it may lead to the sādhū or the saṅgha being
defamed. Therefore, a bhikṣu should not even think about looking at their face
in the things mentioned in the sūtra or in other such places. Instead, they
should remain absorbed in the self, practice restraint, and follow the jina's
instructions. Penance for using emetics, etc. 42. A bhikṣu who vomits or
approves of someone who vomits. 43. A bhikṣu who uses a purgative or approves of
someone who uses a purgative. 44. A bhikṣu who vomits and uses a purgative or
approves of someone who does so. 45. A bhikṣu who uses medication even when they
are not sick or approves of someone who does so. (They receive the penance of a
short cāturmāsīka.) Discussion: The fourth sūtra mentions the penance for using
medication without being sick. The three sūtras about vomiting and using
purgatives should be understood in the same way. That is, one should not use any
medication without a reason or without being sick. This is the essence of these
four sūtras. Vomiting and using purgatives can be done in the same way as taking
medication when there is a reason. This is also a type of treatment. Using
medication without being sick increases the feeling of bodily attachment and
decreases the feeling of restraint. Using medication without being sick can also
sometimes cause a new illness. Excessive vomiting or using purgatives can even
lead to death. If there is no place to perform the ritual of parīṣṭhāpana or if
it is too far away, or if there is an obstacle due to a householder being
present, there is also a possibility of other illnesses, etc. Obstacle]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 296] [nizIthasUtra isa gAthA meM pAtra ke atirikta sabhI padoM kA saMgraha kiyA
gayA hai tathA maNi ke sAtha AbhUSaNa kA evaM 'sutta' zabda se ikSurasa kA bhI
kathana kiyA gayA hai| dazavakAlika sUtra a. 3 meM darpaNa Adi meM apane
pratibimba ko dekhanA sAdhu ke lie anAcaraNIya kahA hai  /  _ vyAkhyAkAra ne
darpaNa Adi meM apanA mukha (ceharA) dekhane meM aneka doSoM kI sambhAvanA batAI
hai  /  yathA-apane rUpa kA abhimAna karegA, apane ko rUpavAn dekhakara
viSayecchA hogii| virUpa dekhakara nidAna karegA, vazIkaraNAdi sIkhegA yA
zarIrabakuza banegA, harSa-viSAda kregaa| darpaNa dekhate samaya koI gRhastha
Adi kI dRSTi par3a jAya to sAdhu kI yA saMgha kI holanA hogii| ataH bhikSu
sUtrokta padArthoM meM yA aise anya sthaloM meM apanA mukha dekhane kA saMkalpa
bhI na kre| kintu AtmabhAva meM lIna rahakara saMyama kA aura jinAjJA kA pAlana
kareM  /  vamana Adi auSadhaprayoga karane kA prAyazcitta 42. je bhikkhU vamaNaM
karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  43. je bhikkhU vireyaNaM karei, kareMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  44. je bhikkhU vamaNa-vireyaNaM karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  45.
je bhikkhU ArogiyapaDikammaM karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  42. jo bhikSu vamana
karatA hai yA vamana karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 43. jo bhikSu virecana
karatA hai yA virecana karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 44. jo bhikSu vamana
aura virecana karatA hai yA karane kA anumodana karatA hai| 45. jo bhikSu roga
na hone para bhI upacAra karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
(use laghu cAturmAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana yahA~ cauthe sUtra meM
binA roga ke auSadha-upacAra karane kA prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  isI prAzaya se
vamana, virecana ke tIna sUtra bhI samajhane cAhie  /  arthAt kisI kAraNa ke
binA yA roga ke binA koI bhI auSadhaprayoga nahIM karanA cAhie, yahI ina cAroM
sUtroM kA sAra hai| kAraNa hone para auSadha lene ke samAna vamana-virecana bhI
kiyA jA sakatA hai| yaha bhI upacAra kA hI eka prakAra hai  /  binA roga ke
upacAra karane se zarIra-saMskAra kI bhAvanA bar3hatI hai aura saMyama kI
bhAvanA ghaTatI hai  /  binA roga ke auSadha karane se kabhI nayA roga bhI
utpanna ho sakatA hai  /  adhika vamana yA virecana hone para mRtyu bhI ho
sakatI hai| pariSThApanabhUmi ke na hone se yA adhika dUra hone se athavA
gRhastha ke baiThe rahane ke kAraNa bAdhA rokane para anya rogAdi hone kI bhI
sambhAvanA rahatI hai| bAdhA

Page #397 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thirteenth Uddeshak] [297 If one cannot hold it, then excreting where one is
sitting can damage clothes and other things. A householder, upon knowing this,
may also show contempt. The commentator has said in verse 4337 that if someone
knows that they will get a certain disease at a certain time and that it cannot
be cured by taking a certain medicine, then it is beneficial and appropriate to
use the medicine before the disease occurs to avoid great harm or faults.
Although the Uttaradhyayanasutra prohibits the use of medicine, if a weak
practitioner takes medicine after getting sick, then there is no atonement for
it here. Atonement for bowing down to and praising the Parshva, etc. 46. The
monk who bows down to the Parshva, or who bows down to the one who bows down.
47. The monk who praises the Parshva, or who praises the one who praises. 48.
The monk who bows down to the Kusola, or who bows down to the one who bows down.
49. The monk who praises the Kusola, or who praises the one who praises. 50. The
monk who bows down to the Osanna, or who bows down to the one who bows down. 51.
The monk who praises the Osanna, or who praises the one who praises. 52. The
monk who bows down to the Sansatta, or who bows down to the one who bows down.
53. The monk who praises the Sansatta, or who praises the one who praises. 54.
The monk who bows down to the Nitiya, or who bows down to the one who bows down.
55. The monk who praises the Nitiya, or who praises the one who praises. 56. The
monk who bows down to the Kahiya, or who bows down to the one who bows down. 57.
The monk who praises the Kahiya, or who praises the one who praises. 58. The
monk who bows down to the Pasaniya, or who bows down to the one who bows down.
59. The monk who praises the Pasaniya, or who praises the one who praises. 60.
The monk who bows down to the Mamga, or who bows down to the one who bows down.
61. The monk who praises the Mamga, or who praises the one who praises. 62. The
monk who bows down to the Sampsariya, or who bows down to the one who bows down.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 terahavAM uddezaka] [297 ruka na sake to jahA~ baiThA ho vahI malotsarga ho
jAne se vastra Adi kharAba ho sakate haiN| kisI gRhastha ko jJAta hone para
avahelanA bhI kara sakatA hai| bhASyakAra ne gA. 4337 meM kahA hai ki yadi kisI
ko yaha jJAta ho jAya ki mujhe amuka kAla meM amuka roga ho hI jAtA hai aura
amuka auSadha lene se nahIM hotA hai to bahuta hAni yA doSoM se bacane ke lie
roga ke pUrva auSadha prayoga karanA yaha roga zAnti ke lie hone se saprayojana
hai tathA lAbhadAyaka hai  /  yadyapi uttarAdhyayanasUtra meM auSadha sevana kA
niSedha hai phira bhI alpa zaktivAlA sAdhaka roga pAne para nirvadya cikitsA
kare to usakA yahA~ prAyazcitta nahIM hai  /  pArzvasthAdi-vaMdana-prazaMsana
prAyazcitta 46. je bhikkhU pAsatthaM vaMdai, vaMdaMtaM vA saaijji| 47. je
bhikkhU pAsatyaM pasaMsai, pAsaMsaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  48. je bhikkhU kusolaM
vaMdai, vaMdaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  49. je bhikkhU kusIlaM pasaMsai, pasaMsaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  50. je bhikkhU osaNNaM vaMdai, vaMdaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  51. je
bhikkhU osaNNaM pasaMsai, pasaMsaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  52. je bhikkhU saMsattaM
vaMdai, vaMdaMtaM vA saaijji| 53. je bhikkhU saMsattaM pasaMsai, pasaMsaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  54. je bhikkhU NitiyaM vaMdai, vaMdaMtaM vA saaijji| 55. je bhikkhU
NitiyaM pasaMsai, pasaMsaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  56. je bhikkhU kAhiyaM vaMdai,
vaMdaMtaM vA saaijji| 57. je bhikkhU kAhiyaM pasaMsai, pasaMsaMtaM vA sAijjai  /
58. je bhikkhU pAsaNiyaM vaMdai, vaMdataM vA sAijjai  /  59. je bhikkhU
pAsaNiyaM pasaMsai, pasaMsaMtaM vA saaijji| 60. je bhikkhU mAmagaM vaMdai,
vaMdaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  61. je bhikkhU mAmagaM pasaMsai, pasaMsaMtaM vA sAijjai
/  62. je bhikkhU saMpasAriyaM vaMdai, vaMdaMtaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #398 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nishīthasūtra 63. The monk who approves of the *sampasāriya* or approves of the
one who approves of it. 46. The monk who salutes the *pārśvastha* or approves of
the one who salutes him. 47. The monk who praises the *pārśvastha* or approves
of the one who praises him. 48. The monk who salutes the *kuśīla* or approves of
the one who salutes him. 49. The monk who praises the *kuśīla* or approves of
the one who praises him. 50. The monk who salutes the *avasanna* or approves of
the one who salutes him. 51. The monk who praises the *avasanna* or approves of
the one who praises him. 52. The monk who salutes the *sanskta* or approves of
the one who salutes him. 53. The monk who praises the *sanskta* or approves of
the one who praises him. 54. The monk who salutes the *nityaka* or approves of
the one who salutes him. 55. The monk who praises the *nityaka* or approves of
the one who praises him. 56. The monk who salutes the one who engages in
*vikathā* or approves of the one who salutes him. 57. The monk who praises the
one who engages in *vikathā* or approves of the one who praises him. 58. The
monk who salutes the one who watches dances, etc., or approves of the one who
salutes him. 59. The monk who praises the one who watches dances, etc., or
approves of the one who praises him. 60. The monk who salutes the one who has
excessive attachment to equipment, etc., or approves of the one who salutes him.
61. The monk who praises the one who has excessive attachment to equipment,
etc., or approves of the one who praises him. 62. The monk who salutes the one
who instructs the *asanyata* in their initial actions or approves of the one who
salutes him. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 298] [nizIthasUtra 63. je bhikkhU saMpasAriyaM pasaMsai, pasaMsaMtaM vA sAijjai
/  46. jo bhikSu pArzvastha ko vandana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  47. jo bhikSu pArzvastha kI prazaMsA karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 48. jo bhikSu kuzIla ko vandana karatA hai yA karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| 49. jo bhikSu kuzIla kI prazaMsA karatA hai yA karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  50. jo bhikSu avasanna ko vandana karatA hai yA
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 51. jo bhikSu avasanna kI prazaMsA karatA
hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  52. jo bhikSu saMsakta ko vandana
karatA hai yA karane vAlA kA anumodana karatA hai  /  53. jo bhikSu saMsakta kI
prazaMsA karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  54. jo bhikSu
nityaka ko vandana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  55. jo
bhikSu nityaka kI prazaMsA karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
56. jo bhikSu vikathA karane vAle ko vandana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 57. jo bhikSu vikathA karane vAle kI prazaMsA karatA hai
yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 58. jo bhikSu nRtyAdi dekhane vAle ko
vandana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 59. jo bhikSu nRtyAdi
dekhane vAle kI prazaMsA karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 60.
jo bhikSu upakaraNa Adi para atyadhika mamatva rakhane vAle ko vadanna karatA
hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 61. jo bhikSu upakaraNa Adi para
atyadhika mamatva rakhane vAle kI prazaMsA karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  62. jo bhikSu asaMyatoM ke prArambha-kAryoM kA
nirdezana karane vAle ko vandana karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /

Page #399 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Thirteenth Uddeshak] [299 63. A monk who praises or approves of someone who
instructs in the initial actions of the unchaste (incurs a minor four-month
penance). Discussion - In the fourth Uddeshak, sutras 39 to 48 describe the
penance for a monk who gives or takes his own sadhu to a parshvastha, depressed,
kusheel, attached, and constant monk. There, in the commentary verses 1828 and
1832, the order 'parshvastha, depressed, kusheel' is accepted. The same order is
also in the commentary of those sutras. But in the commentary and commentary of
this Uddeshak, the order 'parshvastha, kusheel, depressed' has been accepted and
discussed in detail. There is no discussion about why the order is different
from the fourth Uddeshak. Therefore, the order of the sutras has been kept
according to the commentary of this Uddeshak. In the present case, there are
eighteen sutras of the nine from parshvastha etc. In each of these, penance is
said for bowing or praising him. 'Who is not to be bowed to?' This is explained
in the commentary verse 4367 "Mūlaguṇa uttaraguṇe, santharāmāṇa vi je pamāenti.
Te hota'vandanijjā, taṭṭhāṇārōvaṇā cauro ||" Meaning - Those who, being strong
or healthy, carelessly neglect the basic qualities or the advanced qualities,
that is, find fault with restraint, use the places of parshvastha etc., are not
to be bowed to. Bowing to them incurs a minor four-month penance. That is, those
who, due to circumstances, find fault with the basic qualities or the advanced
qualities, are not to be bowed to. For detailed information including the
discharge, exceptions of bowing or not bowing, one should study the necessary
appointment verses 1105 to 1200. The commentary of the present sutra also
describes the subject of exceptions as follows: "Vandan vises karanā ime
Pariyāya paris purisam, khett kālam ca āgamaṁ gāuṁ. Karan jāte jāte, jahārihaṁ
jassa jaṁ joggaṁ. Vayāe-ṇamokkāro, hatthusseho ya sīsanamaṇam ca. Sampucchhaṇaṁ,
acchhaṇaṁ, chhob vandaṇaṁ, vandaṇaṁ vā || Eyāiṁ akuvvanto, jahārihaṁ ariha desie
magge. Na bhava'i pavayaṇa bhakti, abhattimaṁtādiyā dosā || Ga. 4372-74 Meaning
- Knowing any reason like initiation, assembly, person, field, time, knowledge
of scriptures etc., one should also properly say 'mattha'eṇa vandāmi', join
hands, bow one's head, ask politely etc. to those who are devoid of the
qualities of conduct. Because, in the reign of Arihant Bhagwan, a monk who does
not behave properly even with treatment does not have devotion to the sermon,
but only lack of devotion and many other faults.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 terahavAM uddezaka] [299 63. jo bhikSu asaMyatoM ke prArambha-kAryoM kA
nirdezana karane vAle kI prazaMsA karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-cauthe uddezaka meM
sUtra 39 se 48 taka pArzvastha, avasanna, kuzIla, saMsakta aura nityaka bhikSu
ko apanA sAdhu dene tathA lene ke vyavahAra kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /
vahAM para bhASya gAthA 1828 tathA 1832 meM 'pArzvastha, avasanna, kuzIla' yaha
krama svIkAra kiyA gayA hai  /  una sUtroM kI cUNi meM bhI yahI krama hai| kintu
isa uddezaka ke bhASya aura cUrNi meM 'pArzvastha, kuzIla, avasanna' yaha krama
svIkAra karake vistRta vivecana kiyA hai| cauthe uddezaka se isameM krama bheda
kyoM hai isa viSaya kI koI bhI carcA nahIM kI gaI hai  /  ataH isa uddezaka ke
bhASyAnusAra hI sUtroM kA krama rakhA hai| prastuta prakaraNa meM pArzvastha Adi
nava ke aThAraha sUtra haiN| inameM pratyeka ko vandana karane kA yA usakI
prazaMsA karane kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| 'avandanIya kauna hotA hai ?'
isakA bhASya gAthA 4367 meM spaSTIkaraNa kiyA gayA hai "mUlaguNa uttaraguNe,
saMtharamANA vi je pamAeMti  /  te hota'vaMdaNijjA, taTThANArovaNA curo||"
artha-jo sazakta yA svastha hote hue bhI akAraNa mUlaguNa yA uttaraguNa meM
pramAda karate haiM arthAt saMyama meM doSa lagAte haiM, pArzvastha Adi sthAnoM
kA sevana karate haiM ve avandanIya hote haiN| unheM vandana karane para
laghacaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai| arthAta jo paristhitivaza malagaNa yA
uttaraguNa meM doSa lagAte haiM ve avandanIya nahIM hote haiN| vandana karane yA
nahIM karane ke utsarga, apavAda kI carcA sahita vistRta jAnakArI ke liye
Avazyakaniyukti gA. 1105 se 1200 taka kA adhyayana karanA caahiye| prastuta
sUtra kI cUNi meM bhI apavAda viSayaka varNana isa prakAra hai"vaMdaNa visesa
kAraNA ime pariyAya parisa purisaM, khetta kAlaM ca AgamaM gAuM  /  kAraNa jAte
jAte, jahArihaM jassa jaM joggaM  /  vAyAe-NamokkAro, hatthusseho ya sIsanamaNaM
ca  /  saMpucchaNaM, acchaNaM, chobha vaMdaNaM, vaMdaNaM vA  //  eyAiM
akuvvaMto, jahArihaM ariha desie mgge| na bhavai pavayaNa bhatti,
abhattimaMtAdiyA dosA  //  gA. 4372-74 bhAvArtha-dIkSA paryAya, pariSad, puruSa,
kSetra, kAla, Agama jJAna Adi koI bhI kAraNa ko jAnakara cAritra guNa se rahita
ko bhI yathAyogya 'matthaeNa vaMdAmi' bolanA, hAtha jor3anA, mastaka jhukAnA
sukhasAtA pUchanA Adi vinayavyavahAra karanA caahiye| kyoMki arihaMta bhagavAn
ke zAsana meM rahe hue bhikSu ko upacAra se bhI yathAyogya vyavahAra na karane
para pravacana kI bhakti nahIM hotI hai, kintu abhakti hI hotI hai tathA anya
bhI aneka doSa hote haiN|

Page #400 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[300] One should not bow down to those who are not worthy of being bowed down
to, even if they are mother, father, guru, king, or anyone else. A wise muni,
who is well-established in meditation, restrained, endowed with the five samitis
and three guptis, and who is far from non-restraint, should be bowed down to.
[Nishīthasūtra Darshan, knowledge, conduct, austerity, and humility are always
present in you. Those who are harmful to the Jain religion are not worthy of
being bowed down to. [1191] Meaning: Those who are always in the state of
parśvastha, etc., and who are harmful to the Jain religion, are not worthy of
being bowed down to. Bowing down to them or praising them strengthens their
state of negligence, and for this reason, atonement is mentioned in these
sutras. Even though they are not worthy of being bowed down to, they may have
some praiseworthy qualities, such as intelligence, humility, generosity,
devotion, social skills, pleasant speech, eloquence, and pleasantness. However,
even if they have these qualities, one should not praise them if they are not
striving for restraint, but should remain neutral. If one praises them, the
atonement mentioned in the sutras will be incurred. - Ni. Bha. Ga. 4363-64 1.
Kāhiya - (Kāthika) - The nature of parśvastha, avasanna, kuśīla, samsakta, and
nityaka has been discussed in the fourth uddeśaka, and one should learn about it
from there. The nature of kāthika, prekṣaṇīka, māmaka, and samprasārika is as
follows: "Sāj઼jhāyādi karaṇijje jōge mōttu jō desakahāadi kahāto kaheti sō
"kāhiō" ।" One who keeps telling stories like desakathā, etc., while neglecting
necessary duties like svādhyāya, etc., is called a 'kāthika'. - Cūrṇi Bha. 3, p.
398 One who tells religious stories for the sake of food, clothing, utensils,
fame, or worship, or one who always keeps telling religious stories, is also
called a 'kāthika'. - Bha. Ga. 4353 If one keeps telling religious stories
without paying attention to time, then one cannot perform pratilekhan,
pratikramṇa, svādhyāya, dhyāna, etc., at the appropriate time, which leads to
the restrained life being polluted by many faults.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 300] utsarga se vandanIya avandanIya asaMjayaM na vaMdijjA, mAyaraM piyaraM
guruM  /  seNAvai pasatthAraM, rAyANaM devayANi ya  //  samaNaM vaMdijja mehAvI
saMjayaM susamAhiyaM  /  paMcasamiya tiguttaM, assaMjama dugucchagaM  /  /
1105-6  /  /  Ava. ni. bhAvArtha - prasaMyati ko vandana nahIM karanA cAhiye,
vaha cAhe mAtA, pitA, guru, rAjA, Adi koI bhI ho  /  devatA buddhimAn muni
susamAdhivaMta, saMyata, pAMca samiti tIna gupti se yukta tathA saMyama se dUra
rahane vAle zramaNa ko vandanA kare  /  [ nizIthasUtra daMsaNa NANa carita tava
viNae nicca kAla pAsatthA  /  ee avaMdaNijjA je jasaghAI pavayaNassa  /  /  1191
/  /  Ava. ni. bhAvArtha - jo jJAna, darzana, cAritra, tapa aura vinaya kI
apekSA sadaiva pArzvastha Adi bhAva meM hI rahate haiM aura jinazAsana kA
apayaza karane vAle haiM, ve bhikSu avandanIya haiM  /  inheM vandana karane se
yA inakI prazaMsA karane se unake pramAdasthAnoM kI puSTi hotI hai, isa apekSA
se ina sUtroM meM prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  avandanIya hote hue bhI
prazaMsAyogya guNa nimna ho sakate haiMbuddhi, namratA, dAnaruci, pratibhakti,
lokavyavahArazIla, sundarabhASI, vaktA, priyabhASI Adi  /  kintu saMyama meM
udyama na karane vAle kI ina guNoM ke hote hue bhI prazaMsA nahIM karanA kintu
taTastha bhAva rakhanA cAhiye  /  prazaMsA karane para sUtrokta prAyazcitta
prAtA hai  /  - ni. bhA. gA. 4363-64 1. kAhiya - - (kAthika ) - pArzvastha,
avasanna, kuzIla, saMsakta aura nityaka ke svarUpa kA vivecana caturtha uddezaka
meM kiyA gayA hai, vahAM se jAna lenA cAhiye  /  kAfthaka, prekSaNIka, mAmaka
aura samprasArika kA svarUpa isa prakAra hai "sajjhAyAdi karaNijje joge mottu jo
desakahAdi kahAto kaheti so "kAhio"  / " svAdhyAya Adi Avazyaka kRtyoM ko chor3a
karake jo dezakathA Adi kathAeM karatA rahatA hai, vaha 'kAthika' kahA jAtA hai
/  - cUrNi bhA. 3, pR. 398 AhAra, vastra, pAtra, yaza yA pUjA-pratiSThA prApti
ke liye jo dharmakathA kahatA hai athavA jo sadA dharmakathA karatA hI rahatA
hai, vaha bhI 'kAthika' kahA jAtA hai  /  - bhA. gA. 4353 samaya kA dhyAna na
rahate hue dharmakathA karate rahane se pratilekhana, pratikramaNa, svAdhyAya,
dhyAna Adi kArya yathAsamaya nahIM kiye jA sakate, jisase saMyamI jIvana aneka
doSoM se dUSita ho jAtA hai  /

Page #401 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thirteenth Uddeshak  [301]  1. **Kaathik:** One who spends time in idle talk,
narrates religious stories for the sake of praise, and constantly engages in
religious storytelling is called a 'Kaathik'.  2. **Paasaniy (Prekshanik):** One
who observes worldly affairs, like watching plays, dances, etc., is called a
'Paasaniy' (observer). This is because such observation leads to the neglect of
self-restraint, the goal of liberation, and the teachings of the Jinas. (Churni)
Alternatively, one who answers or teaches about worldly matters, engages in
curiosity by explaining complex riddles and stories, is also called a
'Paasaniy'. (Churni) The second definition implies 'Kushila', therefore the
first definition is more relevant here.  3. **Mamak:** "One who acts with 'Mami'
(mine-ness) is a 'Mamak'."  **Gatha:** "He consumes food, enjoys pleasures, and
resides in his family and village. He is attached to his possessions and
considers them his own. He is a 'Mamak'." (4359)  **Meaning:** One who is
attached to food, does not share, does not invite others, is possessive of his
belongings, does not allow others to touch his title, is attached to his body,
seeks only comfort and does not endure any hardship. He claims ownership over
his study and meditation spaces, prohibiting others from sitting there. He
claims ownership over his house, sleeping place, sitting place, and other
belongings, not allowing others to use them. He considers his house, village,
etc., as his own, believing that no one else can enter them. Such a person, with
the thought of "My village, my house, my belongings", is called a 'Mamak'.
Because attachment is forbidden for a Sadhu.  **Verses against attachment:**  1.
"Even in one's own body, one should not think 'mine'." (Dasha. Pra. 6, Ga. 22)
2. "The monk, who has conquered his senses, is like a tamed elephant. No one can
harm him. There is no death for the liberated soul. Therefore, follow the path
of self-control." (Aacha. Shru 1, Pra. 2, U. 6) 3. "One who abandons attachment,
truly conquers attachment. The liberated soul, who has no attachment, is like a
mountain." (Uttara Pra 2, Ga. 27)  A Muni, who is free from attachment to any
object, village, house, body, title, etc., is truly the one who understands and
knows the path of liberation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 terahavAM uddezaka ] [ 301 ata: vikathAoM meM samaya bitAne vAlA, prahArAdi ke
liye dharmakathA karane vAlA aura sadA dharmakathA hI karate rahane vAlA
'kAthika' kahA gayA hai  /  2. pAsaNiya ( prekSaNika) jaNavayavavahAre,
DaNaTTAdisu vA jo pekkhaNaM kareti so pAsaNio  /  janapada Adi meM aneka
darzanIya sthaloM kA yA nATaka nRtya Adi kA jo prekSaNa karatA hai vaha saMyama
lakSya tathA jinAjJA kI upekSA karane se 'pAsaNiya' prekSaNika kahA jAtA hai  /
cUrNi  /  athavA jo aneka laukika (sAMsArika) praznoM ke uttara detA hai yA
sikhAtA hai; ulajhI gutthiyAM, pralikAeM batAne rUpa kutUhala - vRtti karatA
hai, vaha bhI 'pAsaNiya' kahA jAtA hai  /  cUrNi  /  dUsarI vaikalpika paribhASA
kA artha to 'kuzIla' kA dyotaka hai, ataH yahAM prathama paribhASA hI prAsaMgita
hai  /  3. mAmaka - "mamIkAra kareMto mAmao" gAthA - AhAra uvahi dehe, vIyAra
vihAra vasahi kula gAme  /  paDisehaM ca mamattaM, jo kuNati mAmao so u  /  /
4359  /  /  bhAvArtha - jo AhAra meM Asakti rakhatA hai, saMvibhAga nahIM karatA
hai, nimantraNa nahIM detA hai, upakaraNoM meM adhika mamatva rakhatA hai, kisI
ko apanI upadhi ke hAtha nahIM lagAne detA hai, zarIra meM mamatva rakhatA hai,
kucha bhI kaSTa parISaha sahane kI bhAvanA na rakhate hue sukhaiSI rahatA hai  /
svAdhyAyasthala va pariSThApanabhUmi meM bhI apanA alaga svAmitva rakhate hue
dUsaroM ko vahAM baiThane kA niSedha karatA hai| makAna meM, sone, baiThane yA
upayoga meM lene ke sthAnoM meM apanA svAmitva rakhatA hai, dUsaroM ko upayoga
meM nahIM lene detA hai  /  zrAvakoM ke ye ghara yA gAMva Adi merI samyaktva meM
haiM  /  inameM koI vicara nahIM sakatA ityAdi saMkalpoM se gAMvoM yA gharoM ko
mere kSetra, zrAvaka aisI cittavRtti rakhatA huA mamatva karatA hai, vaha
'mAmaka' kahalAtA hai  /  kyoMki mamatva karanA sAdhu ke liye niSiddha hai  /
mamatva nahIM karane ke prAgamavAkya 1. avi appaNo vi dehammi nAyaraMti mamAiyaM
/  2. samaNaM saMjayaM daMtaM, haNijjA koI katthai  /  Natthi jIvassa NAsutti,
evaM pehejja saMjae | 3. je mamAiyamaI jahAi, se cayai mamAiyaM, hudipa muNI,
jassa Natthi mamAiyaM  /  - daza. pra. 6, gA. 22 - AcA. zru 1, pra. 2, u. 6 kisI
bhI padArtha gAMva, ghara, zarIra, upadhi Adi meM jisakA mamatva arthAt
prAsaktibhAva nahIM hai, vAstava meM vahI vItarAgamArga ko jAnane samajhane vAlA
muni hai  /  - uttarA pra 2, gA. 27

Page #402 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīthসূত্র  **[Nishīthসূত্র]**  A Muni who, disregarding these many
pronouncements of the Āgamas, and with diminished restraint or dispassion,
develops attachment to the aforementioned substances, quarrels because of them,
or becomes pacified, is called a **Māmaka**. [4. "**Samprāsārika**" 302]
**Meaning:** A householder is called a **Samprāsārika**.  **Ajāṇa Bhikkhu, Kajje
Asanjamdhyavatteṣu. Jo Deti Samattham, Sampāsārō U Nāyavvō.**  One who, being
involved in worldly affairs, advises householders, either when asked or without
being asked, saying, "Do this," "Don't do that," "Doing this will cause great
harm," "Do as I say," is called a **Samprāsārika**. - Bhā. Gā. 4361  **-Bhāṣya
Gā. 4361**  One who participates in or contributes to worldly affairs, either to
a small or large extent.  **Examples:**  1. Giving an auspicious time for a
foreign journey. 2. Giving an auspicious time for returning from a foreign
journey. 3. Giving an auspicious time for starting a business or taking up a
job. 4. Advising someone to lend money at interest or not. 5. Giving auspicious
times for worldly events like marriage. 6. Predicting the future of a business
by giving auspicious signs from the scriptures, indicating a bull or bear
market, and saying, "Buy this," "Sell that," etc.  Such a person is also called
a **Samprāsārika**.  One who participates in worldly affairs of householders to
a lesser or greater extent - Chūrṇi Bhāg 3, Gā. 4362  **Pārśvasthādi Nau** and
the tenth **Uddeshaka**, as described in the **Yathāchanda**, are collectively
called the ten **Dūṣita Prachāra** (corrupt propagators). According to the
**Gama**, they are also classified into three categories: 1. **Utkṛṣṭa Dūṣita
Chāritra** (highly corrupt character), 2. **Madhyama Dūṣita Chāritra**
(moderately corrupt character), 3. **Jighanya Dūṣita Chāritra** (extremely
corrupt character).  1. The first category includes **Yathāchanda**. Along with
it, **Vandanavyavahāra** (exchange of greetings), **Āhāra** (food), **Vastra**
(clothing), **Shiṣya** (disciple), etc., the exchange of **Guṇagrāma** (virtuous
qualities), giving and receiving **Vāchanā** (scriptural teachings), and the
**Guruchaumāsī Prāyaśchitta** (penance) are included. 2. The second category
includes **Pārśvastha**, **Avasanna**, **Kuśīla**, **Sansakta**, and
**Nityaka**. Along with them, **Vandanavyavahāra**, **Āhāra**, **Vastra**, etc.,
the exchange of **Guṇagrāma**, giving and receiving **Vāchanā**, and the
**Laghuchaumāsī Prāyaśchitta** (minor penance) are included. The **Laghumāsīka
Prāyaśchitta** (minor monthly penance) is included for taking and giving
disciples. 3. The third category includes **Kāthika**, **Prekṣaṇīka**,
**Māmaka**, and **Samprāsārika**. Along with them, **Vandanavyavahāra**,
**Āhāra-Vastra**, etc., the exchange of **Guṇagrāma** and the **Laghu...**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ nizIthasUtra ina aneka Agamokta vidhAnoM kI upekSA karake tathA saMyama yA
vairAgya bhAva kama karake jo muni uparyukta padArthoM meM mamatva - prAsakti
karatA hai, unake nimitta se kalaha karatA hai yA prazAnta ho jAtA hai, vaha
'mAmaka' kahA jAtA hai  /  4. " saMprasArika " 302] bhAvArtha gRhastha ke
'saMprasArika' kahA jAtA hai  /  ajANa bhikkhu, kajje asaMjamadhyavattesu  /  jo
deti sAmatthaM, saMpasArao u nAyavvo  //  jo sAdhu sAMsArika kAryoM meM pravRtta
hokara gRhasthoM ke pUchane para yA binA pUche hI apanI salAha deve ki 'aisA
karo' 'aisA mata karo' 'aisA karane se bahuta nukasAna hogA' 'maiM kahUM vaisA
hI karo' isa prakAra kathana karane vAlA 'saMprasArika' kahA jAtA hai  /  - bhA.
gA. 4361 -bhASya gA. 4361 kAryoM meM alpa yA adhika bhAga lene vAlA yA sahayoga
dene vAlA udAharaNArtha kucha kAryoM kI sUcI 1. videzayAtrArtha jAne ke samaya
kA muhUrta denA  /  2. videzayAtrA karake vApisa Ane para praveza samaya kA
muhUrta denA  /  3. vyApAra prArambha karane kA aura naukarI para jAne kA
muhUrta batAnA  /  4. kisI ko dhana byAja se do yA na do, aisA kahanA | 5.
vivAha Adi sAMsArika kAryoM ke muhUrta batAnA  /  6. tejI maMdI sUcaka nimitta
zAstrokta lakSaNa dekara vyApArika bhaviSya batAnA arthAt yaha cIja kharIda lo,
yaha beca do ityAdi kahanA  /  isa prakAra ke aura 'saMprasArika' kahalAtA hai
/  bhI gRhasthoM ke sAMsArika kAryoM meM kama jyAdA bhAga lene vAlA - cUrNi
bhAga 3, gA. 4362 pArzvasthAdi nau tathA dasaveM uddezaka meM varNita
yathAchaMda, ye kula dasa dUSita pracAra vAle kahe gaye haiM  /  gama ke anusAra
inakI bhI tIna zreNiyA~ banatI haiM - 1. utkRSTa dUSitacAritra, 2. madhyama
dUSitacAritra, 3 jaghanya dUSitacAritra | 1. prathama zreNI meM 'yathAchaMda' kA
grahaNa hotA hai  /  isake sAtha vandanavyavahAra, AhAra, vastra, ziSya Adi kA
AdAna-pradAna va guNagrAma karane kA, vAcanA dene - lene kA gurucaumAsI
prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  2. dUsarI zreNI meM - 'pArzvastha', 'avasanna',
'kuzIla', 'saMsakta' aura 'nityaka' ina pAMca kA grahaNa hotA hai  /  inake
sAtha vandanavyavahAra, AhAra, vastrAdi kA prAdAna-pradAna va guNagrAma karane
kA, vA~caNI lene-dene kA laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai va ziSya lene-dene kA
laghumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  3. tRtIya zreNI meM - 'kAthika' 'prekSaNIka'
'mAmaka' aura 'saMprasArika' ina cAra kA grahaNa hotA hai  /  inake sAtha
vandanavyavahAra, AhAra-vastra Adi kA AdAna-pradAna va guNagrAma karane kA laghu

Page #403 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [303 Thirteenth Uddeshak] The four-month penance has arrived. No penance has
been mentioned for the disciple's transactions, nor for the Vaanchni
transactions. The first category is impure in its very form. Therefore, being of
a form contrary to the Agamas, it is a highly guilty one. The second category -
they commit faults in the observance of Mahavrat, Samiti, and Guptis, and they
engage in many subtle and gross corrupt tendencies related to conduct, therefore
they are moderately guilty. The third category - they are those who commit
faults in a limited and general conduct and thoughts, therefore they are the
least guilty. That is, someone only tells the auspicious time, someone only has
attachment, someone only spends time in idle talk, someone keeps looking at
scenic places. These four are not major faults, but general faults. 1 The head
and eyes are the highest limbs. Feet, fingers, nails, are the lowest limbs. Just
as the body's peace or samadhi is disturbed when the lowest limbs are injured,
or even when a nail gets stuck in the foot, similarly, even general faults
corrupt the restraint and samadhi. Thus, those of all three categories are
called शीतलविहारी (Shithilachari) due to their corrupt conduct, but those who
stay away from these states and observe the pure restraint are called
उद्यतविहारी (Udyatvihari) विहारी (Shuddhachari). Shuddhachari - one who fully
observes all the conduct mentioned in the Agamas. If, for some reason, they
consume a fault as an exception, they accept its penance. When the reason is
over, they abandon that tendency and adopt the pure form of the conduct
mentioned in the Agamas, they are called 'Shuddhachari'. Shithilachari - one who
always conducts themselves contrary to the conduct mentioned in the Agamas, does
not have the discernment of the state of Utsarga and exception, does not take
penance for the contrary conduct, or adopts a form contrary to the conduct
mentioned in the Agamas, they are called 'Shithilachari'. Apart from the rules
and prohibitions mentioned in the Agamas, it is not appropriate to consider
someone as Shuddhachari or Shithilachari based on the observance or non-
observance of any community's Samachari, which is formed from the perspective of
area, time, etc. But those who live in a community must follow those rules
according to the orders of that Sangha. If they do not follow them, they are
eligible for penance. Some rules of the prevalent Samachari, in addition to the
Agamic rules: Food. 1. Do not take processed roots and tubers, butter, food made
the previous day, and biscuits, etc. 2. Do not combine raw yogurt and legumes,
and do not eat such food   1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ 303 terahavAM uddezaka ] caumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  ziSya lena-dena kA
koI prAyazcitta nahIM batAyA gayA hai tathA vAMcaNI lena-dena kA bhI prAyazcitta
nahIM hai  /  prathama zreNI vAle kI prarUpaNA hI azuddha hai  /  ataH
prAgamaviparIta prarUpaNA vAlA hone se vaha utkRSTa doSI hai  /  dvitIya zreNI
vAle - mahAvrata, samiti, guptiyoM ke pAlana meM doSa lagAte haiM aura aneka
grAcAra sambandhI sUkSma sthUla dUSita pravRttiyAM karate haiM, ataH ye madhyama
doSI haiM  /  tIsarI zreNI vAle eka sImita tathA sAmAnya AcAra-vicAra meM doSa
lagAne vAle haiM ataH ye jaghanya doSI haiM  /  arthAt koI kevala muhUrta batAtA
hai, koI kevala mamatva karatA hai, koI kevala vikathAoM meM samaya bitAtA hai,
koI darzanIya sthala dekhatA rahatA hai| ye cAroM mukhya doSa nahIM haiM pitu
sAmAnya doSa 1 mastaka va A~kha uttamAMga haiM  /  pA~va, aMguliyA~, nakha,
adhamAMga haiM  /  adhamAMga meM coTa Ane para yA pA~va meM kevala kIlA gar3a
jAne para bhI jisa prakAra zarIra kI zAMti yA samAdhi bhaMga ho jAtI hai  /  isI
prakAra sAmAnya doSa se bhI saMyama-samAdhi to dUSita hotI hI hai  /  isa
prakAra tInoM zreNiyoM vAle dUSita pracAra ke kAraNa zItalavihArI (zithilAcArI)
kahe haiM kintu jo ina avasthAoM se dUra rahakara niraticAra saMyama kA pAlana
karate haiM ve udyatavihArI vihArI (zuddhAcArI ) kahalAte haiM  /  zuddhAcArI -
jo grAgamokta sabhI prAcAroM kA pUrNa rUpa se pAlana karatA hai  /  kisI
kAraNavaza apavAda rUpa doSa ke sevana kiye jAne para usakA prAyazcitta svIkAra
karatA hai  /  kAraNa samApta hone para usa pravRtti ko chor3a detA hai aura
Agamokta zrAcAroM kI zuddha prarUpaNA karatA hai, use 'zuddhAcArI' kahA jAtA hai
/  zithilAcArI - jo Agamokta AcAroM se sadA viparIta AcaraNa karatA hai, utsarga
apavAda kI sthiti kA viveka nahIM rakhatA hai, viparIta AcaraNa kA prAyazcitta
bhI nahIM letA hai athavA Agamokta AcAroM se viparIta prarUpaNA karatA hai, use
'zithilAcArI' kahA jAtA hai  /  Agamokta vidhiniSedhoM ke atirikta kSetra kAla
Adi kisI bhI dRSTikoNa se jo kisI samudAya kI samAcArI kA gaThana kiyA jAtA hai
usake pAlana se yA na pAlane se kisI ko zuddhAcArI yA zithilAcArI samajhanA
ucita nahIM hai  /  kintu jisa samudAya meM jo rahate haiM, unheM usa saMgha kI
AjJA se una niyamoM kA pAlana karanA Avazyaka hotA hai  /  pAlana na karane para
ve prAyazcitta ke pAtra hote haiM  /  Agama vidhAnoM ke atirikta pracalita
samAcAriyoM ke kucha niyama khAnA  /  1. pracitta kaMda-mUla makkhana, kala kA
banA bhojana evaM biskuTa Adi nahIM lenA  /  2. kaccA dahI aura dvidala ke
padArthoM kA saMyoga nahIM karanA aura aise khAdya padArtha nahIM 1

Page #404 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  **304]** [Nishīthasūtra]  3. Covering the head after
sunset or going outside wearing a blanket even during the day. 4. Not using a
fountain pen, pencil for writing or a mat, rug, etc. for sitting. 5. Not using
cotton, thread, bandages, etc. during Chaturmas. 6. Not consuming food or water
before Navakārsi (48 minutes after sunrise). 7. Not having iron or other metals
in prosthetic devices or not keeping metallic prosthetic devices. 8. Not taking
food or water from the house where it was consumed the previous day. Or, not
going to the house where one went for Gocharī in the morning, in the afternoon
or evening. 9. Considering the traditional conflict (parampra sanghatta) of
sentient and insentient objects kept on a fixed cupboard, table, etc., even if
there is no Viradhana. 10. Not going to the same house or to any other person
for Gocharī if there is a Viradhana with one person. 11. A Sadhu or Sadhvī
should not possess more than four vessels and 72 or 96 hand-spans of cloth. 12.
Performing two Pratikramans or five Pratikramans during the Chaumāsi Samvatsarī,
or performing Kayotsarga for 20 or 40 people. 13. Not tying the Muhpatti with a
string or keeping it tied for 24 hours. 14. Not writing letters oneself, taking
Prāyaśchitta even if written by a householder, or not keeping postcards, etc.
15. A Sadhu should not sit without the presence of a man, even if there are many
Sadhvīs or women. The same applies to a Sadhvī. 16. Copying the entire Rajoharan
or Pramārjanikā, etc., with it fully open. 17. Not going for Gocharī if there is
a woman alone in the house. 18. Not accepting food if a householder offers it
after opening the lock or the door of the kitchen. 19. Not accepting food, etc.,
from Śrāvakas who have come from outside the village for darshan. 20. Not drying
clothes on a rope. 21. A Sadhvī should not sit on the platform in front of a
Sadhu during a Pravachansabhā. 22. Calling the house 'Asūjhata' if any object
falls from above the knee by the donor, or calling any house 'Asūjhata' due to
any other Viradhana. 23. Not going outside the Upāśraya without a blanket or not
tying the blanket, Cholapatta, etc., with a knot.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 304] [nizIthasUtra 3. sUryAsta ke bAda mastaka DhakanA athavA dina meM bhI
kambala or3hakara bAhara jaanaa| 4. likhane ke lie phAunTana pena, pensila aura
bichAne ke lie caTAI, puDhe Adi nahIM lenaa| 5. cAturmAsa meM rUI, dhAgA,
beMDeja paTTI Adi nahIM lenaa| 6. navakArasI (sUryodaya bAda 48 minaTa) ke
pahale AhAra-pAnI nahIM lenA yA nahIM khAnA  /  7. praupagrahika prApavAdika
upakaraNa meM bhI lohA Adi dhAtu nahIM honA yA dhAtu ke aupagrahika upakaraNa
nahIM rkhnaa| 8. Aja AhAra-pAnI grahaNa kiye gaye ghara se kala AhAra yA pAnI
nahIM lenA  /  athavA subaha gocarI kiye gaye ghara se dopahara ko yA zAma ko
gocarI nahIM karanA  /  9. virAdhanA na ho to bhI sthira alamArI, Tebala Adi
para rakhe gaye sacitta acitta padArthoM kA paramparA saMghaTTA maannaa| 10. eka
vyakti se eka bAra koI virAdhanA ho jAya to anya vyakti se yA pUre dina usa
ghara meM gocarI nahIM lenA  /  11. eka sAdhu-sAdhvI ko cAra pAtra aura 72 yA 96
hAtha vastra se adhika nahIM rakhanA  /  12. caumAsI saMvatsarI ko do
pratikramaNa karanA yA paMca pratikramaNa karanA, 20 yA 40 logassa kA kAyotsarga
karanA  /  13. muhapatti Dore se nahIM bA~dhanA yA 24 hI ghanTe muhapatti
bA~dhakara rkhnaa| 14. svayaM patra nahIM likhanA, gRhastha se likhavAne para
bhI prAyazcitta lenA athavA posTakArDa Adi nahIM rkhnaa| 15. aneka sAdhviyAM yA
aneka striyA~ hoM to bhI puruSa kI upasthiti binA sAdhu ko nahIM baiThanA  /
aise hI sAdhvI ke lie samajha lenaa| 16. rajoharaNa yA pramArjanikA Adi ko
sampUrNa kholakara hI pratilekhana krnaa| 17. ghara meM akelI strI ho to gocarI
nahIM lenaa| 18. gRhastha tAlA kholakara yA cUliyA vAle daravAje kholakara AhAra
de to nahIM lenaa| 19. grAmAntara se darzanArtha Aye zrAvakoM se AhArAdi nahIM
lenA  /  20. DorI para kapar3e nahIM sukhAnA  /  21. pravacanasabhA meM sAdhu ke
samakSa sAdhvI kA pATa para nahIM baiThanA  /  22. dAtA ke dvArA ghuTane ke
Upara se koI padArtha gira jAe to usa ghara ko 'asUjhatA' kahanA yA anya kisI
bhI virAdhanA se kisI ke ghara ko 'asUjhatA' karanA  /  23. caddara bA~dhe binA
upAzraya se bAhara nahIM jAnA athavA caddara colapaTTA gA~Tha dekara nahIM
baaNdhnaa|

Page #405 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thirteenth Uddeshak  [305 etc. In different Gachch communities, many rules
have been made which are in addition to the Paagam Vidhanas and have been made
from time to time according to their own expectations. It is not appropriate to
relate them to the definition of Shithilachar or Shuddhachar. Because these are
only traditions, not Paagamokta rules.   **Penance for consuming food with the
defects of Dhatrupinda etc.**  64. The monk who consumes Dhatrupinda or approves
of the one who consumes it.  65. The monk who consumes Dutpinda or approves of
the one who consumes it. 66. The monk who consumes food by saying it is
Trikaalik Nimitta or approves of the one who consumes it. 67. The monk who
consumes Aajeeviypinda or approves of the one who consumes it. 68. The monk who
consumes Vanipinda or approves of the one who consumes it. 69. The monk who
consumes Tigicchaapinda or approves of the one who consumes it. 70. The monk who
consumes Kopinda or approves of the one who consumes it. 71. The monk who
consumes Manpinda or approves of the one who consumes it. 72. The monk who
consumes Mayapinda or approves of the one who consumes it. 73. The monk who
consumes Lopinda or approves of the one who consumes it. 74. The monk who
consumes Vijjapinda or approves of the one who consumes it. 75. The monk who
consumes Mampinda or approves of the one who consumes it. 76. The monk who
consumes Churnaapada or approves of the one who consumes it. 77. The monk who
consumes Jogpinda or approves of the one who consumes it. 78. The monk who
consumes Antaddhanaapinda or approves of the one who consumes it.   Such a monk
should be given a four-month period of Ugdhaaya Pariharatthana (penance).  64.
The monk who consumes Dhatrupinda or approves of the one who consumes it. 65.
The monk who consumes Dutpinda or approves of the one who consumes it. 66. The
monk who consumes food by saying it is Trikaalik Nimitta or approves of the one
who consumes it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 terahavAM uddezaka [305 ityAdi bhinna-bhinna gaccha samudAyoM meM aise aneka
niyama banAye gaye haiM jo pAgama vidhAnoM ke atirikta haiM aura samaya-samaya
para apanI-apanI apekSAoM se banAye gaye haiN| inheM zithilAcAra yA zuddhAcAra
kI paribhASA se sambandhita karanA ucita nahIM hai| kyoMki ye kevala paramparAe~
haiM, pAgamokta niyama nahIM haiN| dhAtRpiMDAdi doSayukta AhAra karane ke
prAyazcitta 64. je bhikkhU dhAIpiMDaM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  65. je
bhikkhU dUipiDaM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA saaijji| 66. je bhikkhU NimittapiDaM
bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  67. je bhikkhU AjIviyapiDaM bhujai, bhujaMtaM
vA sAijjai  /  68. je bhikkhU vaNImapiMDaM bhujai, bhujataM vA saaijji| 69. je
bhikkhU tigicchApiDaM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  70. je bhikkhU kopiDaM
bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA saaijji| 71. je bhikkhU mANapiDaM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  72. je bhikkhU mAyApiDaM bhujai, bhujataM vA sAijjai  /  73. je
bhikkhU lopiDaM bhuMjai, bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  74. je bhikkhU vijjApiDaM
bhujai, bhujataM vA sAijjai  /  75. je bhikkhU maMpiDaM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  76. je bhikkhU curNApaDaM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  77. je
bhikkhU jogapiMDaM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  78. je bhikkhU
aMtaddhANapiMDaM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  taM sevamANe Avajjai
cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM ugdhAiyaM  /  64. jo bhikSu dhAtRpiMDa bhogatA hai
yA bhogane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 65. jo bhikSu dUtapiMDa bhogatA hai yA
bhogane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  66. jo bhikSu traikAlika nimitta
kahakara AhAra bhogatA hai yA bhogane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|

Page #406 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nishīthসূত্র 67. A monk who enjoys or approves of the enjoyment of Ājīvika-
piṇḍa. 68. A monk who enjoys or approves of the enjoyment of Vanīpa-piṇḍa. 69. A
monk who enjoys or approves of the enjoyment of Cikitsā-piṇḍa. 70. A monk who
enjoys or approves of the enjoyment of Kopa-piṇḍa. 71. A monk who enjoys or
approves of the enjoyment of Māna-piṇḍa. 72. A monk who enjoys or approves of
the enjoyment of Māyā-piṇḍa. 73. A monk who enjoys or approves of the enjoyment
of Lobha-piṇḍa. 74. A monk who enjoys or approves of the enjoyment of Vidya-
piṇḍa. 75. A monk who enjoys or approves of the enjoyment of Mantra-piṇḍa. 76. A
monk who enjoys or approves of the enjoyment of Cūrṇa-piṇḍa. 77. A monk who
enjoys or approves of the enjoyment of Yoga-piṇḍa. 78. A monk who enjoys or
approves of the enjoyment of AntarDhāna-piṇḍa (food taken without being seen).
Those who consume these 78 places mentioned in the sūtra incur the Laghu-
Caturmāsī prāyaścitta. Discussion- Obtaining food by a monk through many corrupt
practices is called production defect. The number of these defects in Piṇḍa-
niyukti is said to be sixteen. Here, the prāyaścitta of fourteen of these
defects has been mentioned, and the prāyaścitta of 'AntarDhāna-piṇḍa' has been
mentioned separately. This can be included in Yoga-piṇḍa. Dhātṛ-piṇḍa- The
duties of a Dhātṛ are of five types: 1. Feeding the child milk, 2. Bathing the
child, 3. Dressing the child in clothes and ornaments, 4. Feeding the child, 5.
Holding the child in the lap or armpit. Obtaining food from a householder by
performing these duties is called 'Dhātṛ-piṇḍa' defect. Dūtī-piṇḍa- Obtaining
food, etc., by talking about things here and there to each other or by
exchanging news of relatives. Ājīvika-piṇḍa- Obtaining food by introducing
oneself by caste, family, etc., or by telling one's own qualities. Vanīpa-piṇḍa-
Obtaining alms like a beggar by stating the fruit of charity or by giving many
blessings to the donor.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [nizIthasUtra 67. jo bhikSu AjIvikapiDa bhogatA hai yA bhogane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  68. jo bhikSu vanIpapiMDa bhogatA hai yA bhogane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  69. jo bhikSu cikitsApiMDa bhogatA hai yA bhogane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 70. jo bhikSu kopapiMDa bhogatA hai yA bhogane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  71. jo bhikSu mAnapiMDa bhogatA hai yo bhogane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 72. jo bhikSu mAyApiMDa bhogatA yA bhogane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  73. jo bhikSu lobhapiMDa bhogatA hai yA bhogane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  74. jo bhikSu vidyApiMDa bhogatA hai yo bhogane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  75. jo bhikSu maMtrapiMDa bhogatA hai yA bhogane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  76. jo bhikSu cUrNapiMDa bhogatA hai yA bhogane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| 77. jo bhikSu yogapiMDa bhogatA hai yA bhogane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 78. jo bhikSu aMtardhAnapiMDa (adRSTa rahakara grahaNa kie
huye AhAra ko) bhogatA hai yA bhogane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ina 78
sUtrokta sthAnoM ke sevana karane vAle ko laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|
vivecana-aneka dUSita pravRttiyoM ko karake bhikSu kA AhAra prApta karanA,
utpAdana doSa kahA jAtA hai  /  piMDaniyukti meM ina doSoM kI saMkhyA solaha
kahI hai| yahAM unameM se 14 doSoM kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai tathA
'aMtardhAnapiMDa' kA prAyazcitta adhika kahA gayA hai| jisakA samAveza jogapiMDa
meM ho sakatA hai| dhAtRpiMDa-dhAya ke kArya pAMca prakAra ke hote haiM1. bAlaka
ko dUdha pilAnA, 2. snAna karAnA, 3. vastrAbhUSaNa pahinAnA, 4. bhojana karAnA,
5. goda meM yA kAkha meM rakhanA  /  ye kArya karake gRhastha se AhAra prApta
karanA 'dhAtRpiMDa' doSa kahA jAtA hai  /  dUtIpiMDa-dUtI ke samAna idhara-
udhara kI bAteM eka dUsare ko kahakara athavA svajana sambandhiyoM ke samAcAroM
kA AdAna-pradAna karake AhArAdi lenA  /  _AjIvikapiMDa-jAti-kula Adi kA paricaya
batAkara yA apane guNa kahakara AhAra prApta krnaa| - vanIpapiMDa-dAna ke phala
kA kathana karate hue yA dAtA ko aneka AzIrvacana kahate hue bhikhArI kI taraha
dInatApUrvaka bhikSA prApta karanA  /

Page #407 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Thirteenth Uddeshak  [307] Taking food, etc., by being angry with the
householder or by threatening to curse them if they don't give food, etc. Taking
alms by saying, "I will take alms," when the householder refuses to give alms,
and then using cleverness to obtain alms from another member of the household.
Obtaining alms by deceitfully changing one's form (Maya-pinda). Taking more than
what is needed when the desired item is available, or wandering around until the
desired item is found, and not accepting any other imaginable item (Lopi-pinda).
Obtaining alms by suggesting the use of medicine, etc., for a disease, either
when asked by the householder or without being asked, or by saying, "My such and
such disease was cured by such and such medicine or physician," is called
Chikitsa-pinda. Obtaining food through the use of knowledge, mantras, powders,
or yoga, obtaining food while remaining invisible, and obtaining food by giving
a reason, are also faults of "Utpādana" and result in a Laghu-Chaumasi
Prāyaścitta. The explanation of the terms "Vidya" etc. is given in this
Uddeshak, one should understand it from there. If the giver becomes favorable to
these faults, he may accuse the monk of "Udgaman" fault, and if he becomes
unfavorable, he may neglect or criticize the monk, which will bring disrepute to
Dharma and the Jain teachings. These fifteen faults mentioned in these fifteen
sutras involve "Dina-vṛtti" (dependence on others). While a monk is said to
always follow "A-dina-vṛtti" (independence) and "Eṣaṇa-samiti" (balance in
needs), therefore, he should not even think of obtaining food through these
tendencies. The author of the Niyukti-kāra has stated the "Mūla-karma" fault of
"Utpādana" as resulting in a Guru-Chaumasi Prāyaścitta, and the "Pūrva-paścāt-
sanstava-doṣa" as resulting in a Laghu-Māsika Prāyaścitta in the second
Uddeshak. The remaining faults of "Utpādana" are stated in these sutras as
resulting in a Laghu-Chaumasi Prāyaścitta. Summary of the Thirteenth Uddeshak:
18. Standing, sitting, or sleeping on the earth near the surface, on smooth,
moist, earth mixed with dust, on earth mixed with mud, on earth, on stone or
rock, and on wood or earth containing living beings. 9-11. Standing, sitting, or
sleeping on high places without being covered by a wall, etc. 13-16. Teaching a
householder a craft, etc., speaking harshly or rudely to a householder, or
causing him anxiety in any other way. 17-18. Engaging in a householder's
entertainment or worldly activities. 12.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 terahavAM uddezaka] [307 kropiMDa-kupita hokara AhArAdi lenA yA AhArAdi na dene
para zrApa dene kA bhaya dikhAkara AhArAdi lenaa| mAnapiMDa-bhikSA na dene para
kahanA ki 'maiM bhikSA lekara rhuuNgaa|' tadanantara buddhi prayoga karake ghara
ke anya sadasya se bhikSA prApta krnaa| mAyApiMDa-rUpa parivartana karake
chalapUrvaka bhikSA prApta karanA  /  lopiMDa-icchita vastu milane para viveka
na rakhate hue ati mAtrA meM lenA yA icchita vastu na mile vahA~ taka ghUmate
rahanA, anya kalpanIya vastu bhI nahIM lenA  /  cikitsApiMDa-gRhastha ke pUchane
para yA binA pUche hI kisI roga ke viSaya meM auSadha Adi ke prayoga batAkara
bhikSA prApta karanA athavA merA amuka roga amuka davA yA vaidya se ThIka huA
thA aisA kahakara bhikSA prApta karanA cikitsApiMDa hai| vidyA, maMtra, cUrNa,
yoga ke prayoga se AhAra prApta karanA, adRzya rahakara AhAra prApta karanA
tathA nimitta batAkara AhAra prApta karanA bhI 'utpAdanA' doSa hai aura inake
sevana se laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /  'vidyA' Adi padoM kI vyAkhyA isI
uddezaka meM kI gaI hai, vahA~ se samajha lenA caahiye| ina doSoM ke sevana meM
dAtA ke anukUla ho jAne para vaha udgama doSa lagA sakatA hai aura pratikUla ho
jAne para sAdhu kI avahelanA yA nindA kara sakatA hai, jisase dharma kI tathA
jinazAsana kI apakIrti hotI hai| _ ina pandraha sUtroM meM kahe gaye pandraha
doSasthAnoM ke sevana meM dInavRtti kA sevana hotA hai  /  jabaki bhikSu sadA
adInavRtti se eSaNAsamiti kA pAlana karane vAlA kahA gayA hai, ata: use ina
pravRttiyoM dvArA AhAra prApti kA saMkalpa bhI nahIM karanA caahiye| niyuktikAra
ne utpAdanA ke 'mUlakarma' doSa kA gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA hai, aura
pUrvapazcAt saMstavadoSa kA dUsare uddezaka meM laghumAsika prAyazcitta kahA
gayA hai  /  utpAdanA ke zeSa doSoM kA laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta ina sUtroM meM
kahA hai| terahaveM uddezaka kA sArAMza18. sacitta pRthvI ke nikaTa kI bhUmi
para, snigdha, sacitta rajayukta pRthvI para, sacitta miTTIyukta-pRthvI para,
sacitta pRthvI para, zilA yA patthara para tathA jIvayukta kASTha yA bhUmi para
khar3A rahanA, baiThanA yA sonaa| 9-11 bhitti Adi se anAvRtta U~ce sthAnoM para
khar3e rahanA, baiThanA yA sonA  /  gRhastha ko zilpa Adi sikhaanaa| 13-16
gRhastha ko saroSa, rUkSa vacana kahanA yA anya kisI prakAra se usako AzAtanA
krnaa| 17-18 gRhastha ke kautukakarma yA bhUtikarma karanA  /  12

Page #408 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[308] [Nishīthasūtra 19-20 Asking curious questions from householders or
answering them. 21 Telling about the past causes. 22-24 Telling the results of
omens, signs, or dreams. 25-27 Using knowledge, mantras, or yoga for
householders. 28 Showing the way to householders. 29-30 Telling householders
about metals or treasures. 31-41 Seeing one's reflection in objects like
vessels, mirrors, swords, etc. mentioned in the sūtras. 42-45 Inducing vomiting
or purging or taking medicine while healthy. 46-63 Saluting or praising the
nine: Pārśvastha, Kuśīla, Avasanna, Samsakta, Nityaka, Kāthika, Paśyanīka
(Prekṣaṇika), Māmaka, Sāmprasārika. 64-78 Eating and consuming food with defects
in production. Etc. Performing these activities leads to the Laghuchauṁsī
prāyaścitta. The subject matter of the 41 sūtras of this uddeśaka is mentioned
in the following āgamas, as follows: 1-11 Prohibition of staying in places where
living beings are harmed and in high places without walls. -Āchā. Śru. 2, A. 7,
U. 1 And -Prāchā. Śru. 2, A. 2, U. 1 12 Prohibition of teaching householders
about aṣṭāpada, jutrā, etc. —Sūy. Śru. 1, A. 9, Gā. 17 13-16 Prohibition of
causing harm to householders. -Daśa. A. 9, U. 3, Gā. 12 17-27 Prohibition of
telling about causes. -Uttarā. A. 8, A. 15, A. 17, A. 20 Daśa. A. 8, Gā. 50
31-41 Seeing one's reflection is considered anāchāra. -Daśa. A. 3, Gā. 3 42-44
Inducing vomiting or purging while healthy is considered anāchāra. -Daśa. A. 3,
Gā. 9 -Sūy. Śru. 1, A. 9, Gā. 12 The subject matter of the 27 sūtras of this
uddeśaka is not mentioned in other āgamas, as follows: 28 Prāyaścitta for
showing the way to someone who is lost, confused, or going in the wrong
direction. 29-30 Prāyaścitta for telling householders about metals or treasures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 308] [nizIthasUtra 19-20 gRhastha se kautuka prazna karanA yA unakA uttara
denaa| 21 bhUtakAla sambandhI nimitta batAnA  /  22-24 lakSaNa, vyaMjana yA
svapna kA phala batAnA  /  25-27 gRhastha ke liye vidyA, mantra yA yoga kA
prayoga krnaa| 28 gRhastha ko mArgAdi batAnA  /  29-30 gRhastha ko dhAtu yA
nidhi batAnA  /  31-41 pAtra, darpaNa, talavAra Adi sUtrokta padArthoM meM apanA
pratibimba dekhnaa| 42-45 svastha hote hue bhI vamana-virecana karanA yA auSadha
sevana karanA  /  46-63 pArzvastha, kuzIla, avasanna, saMsakta, nityaka,
kAthika, pazyanIka (prekSaNika), mAmaka, sAMprasArika ina nau ko vandana karanA
yA inakI prazaMsA krnaa| 64-78 utpAdana ke doSoM kA sevana kara AhAra grahaNa
karanA evaM khAnA  /  ityAdi pravRttiyA~ karane para laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta
AtA hai| isa uddezaka ke 41 sUtroM ke viSaya kA kathana nimna AgamoM meM hai,
yathA1-11 jIva virAdhanA vAle sthAnoM meM tathA binA divAla vAle U~ce sthAnoM
para Thaharane kA niSedha  /  -AcA. zru. 2, a. 7, u. 1 tathA-prAcA. zru. 2, a.
2, u. 1 12 gRhastha ko aSTApada, jutrA Adi sikhAne kA niSedha  /  --sUya. zru.
1, a. 9, gA. 17 13-16 gRhastha kI pAzAtanA karane kA niSedha  /  -daza. a. 9, u.
3, gA. 12 17-27 nimitta kathana kA niSedha  /  -uttarA. a. 8, a. 15, a. 17, a.
20 daza.a.8, gA.50 31-41 apanA pratibimba dekhanA anAcAra kahA gayA hai| -daza.
a. 3, gA. 3 42-44 svastha hote hue bhI vamana-virecana karanA anAcAra kahA hai|
-daza.a. 3, gA. 9 -sUya. zru. 1, a. 9, gA. 12 isa uddezaka ke 27 sUtroM ke
viSaya kA kathana anya AgamoM meM nahIM hai, yathA28 mArga bhUle hue ko,
digmUr3ha ko aura viparIta mArga se jAne vAle ko mArga batAne kA prAyazcitta  /
29-30 gRhastha ko dhAtu yA nidhi batAne kA prAyazcitta  /

Page #409 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Thirteenth Uddeshak] 45. Prāyaścitta for treating a disease that does not
exist. 46-63. Prāyaścitta for bowing down to and praising Pārśva, etc. 64-78.
Prāyaścitta for consuming Dhātr̥-piṇḍa, etc. In brief, the statement about
consuming food without production defects is found in Prāva. A. 4 and Praśna.
Śru. 2, A. 1. However, the names and numbers are not mentioned there separately.
In Piṇḍaniyukti, their names and detailed discussions with illustrations are
given. Similarly, the prohibition of acquaintance with Pārśva, etc. is found in
Sūy. Śru. 1. A. 9 and A. 10, but there is no clear prohibition of bowing down
and praising. || Thirteenth Uddeshak ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 terahavAM uddezaka] 45 binA roga ke cikitsA karane kA prAyazcitta  /  46-63
pArzvastha Adi ko vandanA karane kA tathA unakI prazaMsA karane kA prAyazcitta
/  64-78 dhAtR-piMDa Adi bhogane kA prAyazcitta  /  saMkSipta meM utpAdana doSa
rahita AhAra grahaNa karane kA kathana prAva. a. 4 tathA prazna. zru. 2, a. 1
meM hai| kintu vahAM alaga-alaga nAma evaM saMkhyA nahIM kahI gaI hai  /
piMDaniyukti meM inakA nAma evaM dRSTAntayukta vistRta vivecana hai  /  isI
taraha pArzvastha Adi ke sAtha paricaya karane kA niSedha sUya. zru. 1. a. 9
tathA a. 10 meM hai kintu vandana evaM prazaMsA kA spaSTa niSedha nahIM hai  /
//  terahavAM uddezaka samApta  //

Page #410 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourteenth Uddesaka  ## The Prāyaścitta for Buying, Receiving, etc., a Pātra
1. A monk who buys a pātra, causes it to be bought, accepts a pātra that is
being given as bought, or approves of the acceptance of such a pātra, incurs a
minor prāyaścitta. 2. A monk who borrows a pātra, causes it to be borrowed,
accepts a pātra that is being given as borrowed, or approves of the acceptance
of such a pātra, incurs a minor prāyaścitta. 3. A monk who exchanges a pātra for
another pātra belonging to a householder, causes it to be exchanged, accepts a
pātra that is being given as exchanged, or approves of the acceptance of such a
pātra, incurs a minor prāyaścitta. 4. A monk who accepts a pātra that is given
by force, given without the consent of one of the two owners, or given in front
of him, or approves of the acceptance of such a pātra, incurs a minor
prāyaścitta.  **Discussion:** These four sūtras describe the prāyaścitta for six
types of pātra-related offenses. The six offenses are:  1. **Krita:** A pātra
that is bought. 2. **Prāmritya:** A pātra that is borrowed. 3. **Parivartita:**
A pātra that is exchanged. 4. **Ācchinnha:** A pātra that is taken by force. 5.
**Anisṛṣṭa:** A pātra that is given without the consent of the co-owner. 6.
**Abhihata:** A pātra that is brought from home and given to the āśrama.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caudahavAM uddezaka pAtra kharIdane prAdi kA tathA unheM grahaNa karane kA
prAyazcitta 1. je bhikkhU paDiggahaM kiNei, kiNAvei, koyamAhaTTa dejjamANaM
paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 2. je bhikkhU paDiggahaM pAmiccei,
pAmiccAvei, pAmiccamAhaTu dejjamANaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  3.
je bhikkhU paDiggahaM pariyaTTei, pariyaTTAvei, pariyaTTiyamAhaTu vejjamANaM
paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 4. je bhikkhU paDiggahaM acchejja,
aNisiThTha, abhihaDamAhaTu dejjamANaM :paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /
1. jo bhikSu pAtra kharIdatA hai, kharIdavAtA hai, kharIdA huA lAkara dete hue
se letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  2. jo bhikSu pAtra udhAra
letA hai, udhAra livAtA hai, udhAra lAkara dete hue se letA hai yA lene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 3. jo bhikSu pAtra ko gRhastha ke anya pAtra se badalatA
hai, badalavAtA hai, badalA huA lAkara dene vAle se letA hai yA lene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  4. jo bhikSu chInakara diyA jAtA huA, do svAmiyoM meM
se eka kI icchA binA diyA huA aura sAmane lAkara diyA huA pAtra letA hai yA lene
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| [use laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ]
vivecana-ina cAra sUtroM meM pAtra sambandhI chaha udgama doSoM ke prAyazcittoM
kA kathana hai  /  chaha udgama doSa1. krIta-kharIdA huA pAtra 2. prAmRtya-
udhAra liyA huA pAtra 3. parivartita-badalA huaA pAtra 4. Acchinna-chInakara
lAyA huA pAtra 5. anisRSTa-bhAgIdAra kI AjJA lie binA lAyA huA pAtra 6.
abhihata-ghara se lAkara upAzraya meM diyA jAne vAlA pAtra  /  lh sh >> -

Page #411 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourteenth Uddeshak  [311] The first, second, and third sutras describe the
atonement for the three origin-defects of *krita*, *adi*, and *tritya*,
respectively. The fourth sutra describes the atonement for the remaining three
origin-defects together.  A sadhu buying a vessel from a vessel-seller and
paying the price to the vessel-seller from a devotee householder, this is
considered the sadhu buying the vessel.  A sadhu asking a devotee householder to
buy a vessel and bring it to him, this is considered the sadhu having the vessel
bought.  Similarly, borrowing, lending, and exchanging, and having these done,
should also be understood in the same way.  These three defects are forms of
transgression of the *parigraha* mahavrata.  The atonement for the remaining
three defects is said to be done by the householder, because it is not possible
for a sadhu to commit these defects.  Or, if someone perhaps commits such an
unbridled act, then the *laghu-chaumasi* atonement mentioned in the present
sutra does not apply to him, but the *guru-chaumasi* atonement applies.  The
consumption of the *achchhinna* defect is a form of transgression of the first
and third mahavrata. The consumption of the *anisrusht* defect is a form of
transgression of the third mahavrata. The consumption of the *abhihad* defect is
a form of transgression of the first mahavrata. These six defects are called the
origin-defects of *eshana-samiti*.  1. A *krita-bhikshu* is a complete
renunciant of *parigraha*, therefore buying and selling is not his conduct. He
obtains necessary requisites and food only through *bhiksha*. Uttara. A. 35, Ga.
13-15 states that:  A bhikshu should not even desire gold and silver in his
mind, he should see stone and gold with equal vision, and refrain from the
tendency to buy and sell.  The buyer is the customer (buyer) and the seller is
the merchant. Even if a bhikshu engages in buying and selling, he is not a
transgressor of *jina-agna*.  Therefore, a bhikshu who lives by *bhiksha* should
obtain every object only through *bhiksha*, but should not buy. Because buying
and selling is a great sin for a bhikshu, and *bhiksha* is a great source of
happiness. - Uttara. A. 35 Ga. 13-15.  Dasavai. A. 3, Ga. 3 states that it is
considered misconduct for a bhikshu to accept an object bought by a householder
with the intention of giving it to a sadhu, i.e., an object tainted with the
*krita* defect.  Dasavai. A. 6, Ga. 48 states that "A bhikshu who consumes food
etc. tainted with the *krita* etc. defects is an approver of the sin that occurs
in the making of that substance." This is the third type of approval. There are
three types of approval...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caudahavAM uddezaka] [311 pahale, dUsare aura tIsare sUtra meM krItAdi tIna
udgama doSoM kA kramazaH prAyazcitta kathana hai| cauthe sUtra meM zeSa tIna
udgama doSoM kA eka sAtha prAyazcitta kathana hai|| sAdhu svayaM pAtravikretA se
pAtra kharIde aura pAtra kA mUlya kisI anurAgI gRhastha se pAtravikretA ko
dilAve, yaha sAdhu kA pAtra kharIdanA hai| kisI anurAgI gRhastha ko pAtra
kharIdakara lAne ke lie sAdhu dvArA kahanA, yaha sAdhu kA pAtra kharIdavAnA hai|
isI prakAra sAdhu dvArA udhAra lenA, livAnA aura parivartana karanA, karavAnA
bhI samajha lenA caahie| ye tInoM doSa parigraha mahAvrata ke aticAra rUpa haiM
/  zeSa tIna doSa gRhastha dvArA lagAe jAne kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| kyoMki
ve doSa sAdhu dvArA lagAe jAnA sambhava nahIM hai| athavA kadAcit koI aisI
amaryAdita pravRtti kara le to use prastuta sUtrokta laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta
nahIM AtA hai kintu gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| Acchinna doSa kA sevana
prathama evaM tRtIya mahAvrata ke aticAra rUpa hai| anisRSTa doSa kA sevana
tIsare mahAvrata kA aticAra rUpa hai| abhihaDa doSa kA sevana prathama mahAvrata
kA aticAra rUpa hai  /  ye chahoM doSa eSaNAsamiti ke udgama doSa kahe gaye
haiN| 1. krIta-bhikSu parigraha kA pUrNa tyAgI hotA hai ataH kraya-vikraya
karanA usakA AcAra nahIM hai  /  Avazyaka upadhi aura bhojana vaha bhikSAvRtti
se hI prApta karatA hai| uttarA a. 35, gA. 13-15 meM kahA hai ki bhikSu sone-
cAMdI kI mana se bhI kAmanA na kare, patthara aura sone ko samAna dRSTi se dekhe
aura kraya-vikraya kI pravRtti se virata rhe| kharIdane vAlA kretA (grAhaka)
hotA hai aura becane vAlA vyApArI hotA hai  /  bhikSu bhI yadi kraya-vikraya ke
kArya kare to vaha jinAjJA kA pArAdhaka nahIM hotA hai| ataH bhikSAjIvI bhikSu
ko bhikSA se hI pratyeka vastu prApta karanA cAhiye, kintu kharIdanA nahIM
cAhiye  /  kyoMki kraya-vikraya karanA bhikSu ke liye mahAdoSa hai aura
bhikSAvRtti mahAn sukhakara hai| -uttarA. a. 35 gA. 13-15. dazavai. a. 3, gA. 3
meM krItadoSa yukta arthAt sAdhu ke bhAva se gRhastha dvArA kharIdI huI vastu
grahaNa karanA bhikSu ke liye anAcAra kahA gayA hai  /  dazavai. a. 6, gA. 48
meM kahA hai ki "krIta Adi doSa yukta AhArAdi grahaNa karane vAlA bhikSu usa
padArtha ke banane meM hone vAle pApa kA anumodanakartA hotA hai|" yaha
anumodana kA tIsarA prakAra hai  /  anumodana ke tIna prakAra

Page #412 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **[312]**  1. To understand well with the mind. 2. To speak
well with words. 3. To accept it with the body, meaning to use it.  Therefore,
if a monk does not take the items made or bought for him, he is not considered
to have any fault. If he takes it and uses it, then the fault of bodily
acceptance arises.  [Nishīthasūtra, Āchā. Śru. 2, A. 6 states that if a
householder takes for his own use the vessel bought for a monk, who did not take
it, then later on, the same monk can take that vessel. Because that vessel has
become "puruṣāntarakṛta".]  [Āchā. Śru. 2, A. 1, U. 1 states that a vessel made
"puruṣāntarakṛta" in this way cannot be used to take water.]  [Uttara. A. 20,
Gā. 47 calls a monk who consumes things with the faults of prauddeśika, krīta,
etc., as sarvabhakshi (omnivorous).]  Therefore, a monk should not have the
tendency to buy things, and he should not accept items bought for him.
**Prāmritya** - If a monk borrows a vessel from someone and later the
householder pays for it, then this kind of tendency should also not be adopted
by the monk. Doing so leads to a chain of many faults and can even lead to
disrespect for Dharma.  If a householder brings a vessel, etc., for a monk on
loan, then it is not considered appropriate to accept it. This is also a fault
of eṣaṇā. If the householder who brought it on loan is unable to pay for it due
to circumstances, then he may become a great debtor. Therefore, such a faulty
vessel is unacceptable for a monk.  **Parivartita** - Giving one's own vessel
and taking another vessel in exchange from a householder is called "parivartan"
(exchange). It is not considered appropriate for a monk to do this himself or to
have it done. And if a householder gives a vessel to a monk after exchanging it
with another householder, then accepting such a vessel is also faulty. Doing so
may anger the family members and relatives of that family. If the vessel given
by the monk to the householder breaks when taken home, then the householder may
suspect that "he must have given me a broken vessel." If someone becomes ill or
dies after consuming food, etc., in that vessel, then due to delusion, there may
be hatred towards the monk, which can lead to many other misfortunes. Therefore,
a monk should not exchange vessels with a householder himself, and even if a
devout householder gives a vessel after exchanging it, the monk should not
accept it.  [Āchā. Śru. 2, A. 5 and 6, U. 2 states that "a monk should not
exchange vessels, etc., with another monk either."]  **Āchhin** - If a powerful
person uses the influence of his power to pressure a weak person and takes a
vessel from him by force, and gives that vessel to a monk or has it given to
him, then that...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 312] 1. mana se acchA samajhanA 2. vacana se acchA kahanA 3. kAyA se use
svIkAra karanA arthAt upayoga meM lenA  /  ataH bhikSu ke liye banAye gaye yA
kharIde gaye padArtha yadi vaha nahIM le to use kisI prakAra kA doSa nahIM
lagatA hai  /  yadi vaha grahaNa karake usakA upayoga kare to kAyika anumodana
kA doSa lagatA hai  /  [ nizIthasUtra AcA. zru. 2, a. 6 meM sAdhu ke liye
kharIde gaye pAtra ko sAdhu ke na lene para yadi gRhastha apane upayoga meM le
letA hai to kAlAntara meM phira kabhI vahI bhikSu usa pAtra ko grahaNa kara
sakatA hai  /  kyoMki vaha pAtra "puruSAntarakRta" ho gayA hai  /  AcA. zru. 2,
a. 1, u. 1 ke anusAra isa taraha puruSAntarakRta banA huA prahAra- pAnI grahaNa
nahIM kiyA jA sakatA  /  uttarA. a. 20, gA. 47 meM prauddezika, krIta Adi doSoM
kA sevana karane vAle bhikSu ko na kI upamA dete hue sarvabhakSI kahA hai  /
ataH sAdhu ko kharIdane kI pravRtti nahIM karanI cAhiye tathA sAdhu ke nimitta
kharIde gaye padArtha bhI use grahaNa nahIM karane cAhiye  /  prAmRtya - sAdhu
kisI se pAtra udhAra lAe, bAda meM usakA mUlya gRhastha de to isa prakAra kI
pravRtti bhI bhikSu ko nahIM karanI caahiye| aisA karane se aneka doSoM kI
paramparA bar3hatI hai tathA kabhI dharma kI avahelanA bhI ho sakatI hai  /
yadi koI gRhastha bhikSu ke liye pAtra Adi udhAra lAkara de to bhI grahaNa
karanA nahIM kalpatA hai  /  yaha bhI eSaNA kA doSa hai  /  yadi udhAra lAne
vAlA gRhastha paristhitivaza mUlya nahIM cukA sakegA to vaha mahARNI bhI bana
sakatA hai, ataH aisA doSayukta pAtra bhikSu ke liye agrAhya hai  /  parivartita
- apanA pAtra dekara badale meM dUsarA pAtra gRhastha se lenA yaha parivartana
karanA kahalAtA hai  /  aisA svayaM karanA tathA karAnA sAdhu ko nahIM kalpatA
hai tathA gRhastha bhI anya gRhastha se isa prakAra pAtra parivartana karake
sAdhu ko de to aisA pAtra lenA bhI doSayukta hai  /  aisA karane para usa
parivAra ke svajana - parijana nArAja ho sakate haiM  /  sAdhu dvArA gRhastha ko
diyA gayA pAtra yadi ghara le jAne para phUTa jAe to use AzaMkA ho sakatI hai ki
'mujhe phUTA pAtra de diyA hogA  / ' usa pAtra meM AhArAdi kA sevana karane se
yadi koI bImAra ho jAe yA mara jAe to bhrAnti se sAdhu ke prati dveSa bhAva ho
sakatA hai, jisase anya aneka anarthoM ke hone kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai  /  ataH
bhikSu svayaM gRhastha se pAtra kA parivartana na kare tathA koI zraddhAlu
gRhastha isa prakAra pAtra parivartana karake de to bhI sAdhu grahaNa na kare  /
AcA. zru. 2, a. 5 tathA 6, u. 2 meM kahA gayA hai ki 'bhikSu anya bhikSu ke
sAtha bhI isa prakAra pAtrAdi kA parivartana na kare  / ' Achina - yadi koI
balavAn vyakti sattA ke prabhAva se kisI nirbala vyakti para dabAva DAlakara
usase pAtra ko chInakara le aura vaha pAtra sAdhu ko de athavA usase hI dilavAve
to vaha

Page #413 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourteenth Uddeshak  **[313 "Prachhinna" is faulty.** Because taking it
causes suffering to the weak person, he may sometimes, out of hatred, snatch,
break, or otherwise harm the sadhu's vessel.  **Anisrishta -** If there are many
partners who own a vessel, and one partner wants to give it, but the other
partners do not want to give it, and the sadhu is given the vessel without their
permission, then that vessel is considered to have the Anisrishta fault.  **Or**
if a servant gives it without the master's consent, or a member of the household
gives it without the head of the household's consent, then that vessel is also
considered to have the Anisrishta fault.  Taking such a vessel can lead to
increased suffering later, and someone may come to demand the vessel back from
the sadhu, or may cause other harm. Obtaining such vessels in the future may
become difficult.  **Abhihit -** If a householder brings a vessel from his home
and gives it to the upashraya, or brings a vessel for the sadhu from another
place or village and keeps it at home, then that vessel is considered to have
the "Abhihit" fault. Taking such a vessel implies approval of the harm caused to
living beings on the way. In Dashava. A. 3, this is called anachaar. A person
walking or traveling by vehicle harms both moving and stationary beings, and
rain or a river may also come on the way. The person who brings it...  ...may
also bring a vessel with other faults. Therefore, one should not take a vessel
brought from the front.  Of these six faults, two are called anachaar in
Dashava. A. 3. Except for the "Parivartita" fault, the remaining five are also
called "Sabaldosha" in Dashava. D. 2. In Praacha. Shru. 2, A. 1-2-5-6, etc., it
is forbidden to take food, clothing, or vessels with these five faults.
Therefore, knowing these six as faults of origin, one should abandon them. If
one has to take a vessel with these faults in a particular situation, then one
incurs the Laghuchaumasik pratyashchit.  **Pratyashchit for giving an extra
vessel without the permission of the Garani**  **5. Je bhikkhu
airegapadiddiggham gani uddisiya, gani samuddisiya, tam gani anapucchiya
anamantiya annamannassa viyarai, viyarantan va saijjai.**  **5. A bhikkhu who
takes an extra vessel for the Gani, and gives it to someone else without asking
the Gani or inviting him, or approves of the giver.** [He incurs the
Laghuchaaturmasik pratyashchit.]  **Discussion -** Bhikkhus do not find all the
desirable and suitable wooden vessels everywhere. Vessels made of Tumbe are not
readily available everywhere, and earthen vessels are readily available
everywhere, but they are not convenient. They are sometimes used in special
circumstances.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caudahavAM uddezaka] [313 "prAchinna" doSayukta hotA hai| kyoMki use lene se
nirbala vyakti ko duHkha hotA hai, vaha kabhI dveSa meM Akara kisI samaya sAdhu
se pAtra chIna sakatA hai, phor3a sakatA hai yA anya kisI prakAra se kaSTa de
sakatA hai| anisRSTa-yadi kahIM kucha pAtra aneka bhAgIdAroM ke svAmitva vAle
hoM to unameM se koI eka bhAgIdAra ke dene kI icchA ho, anya bhAgIdAroM ke dene
kI icchA na ho aura unakI anumati liye binA hI koI sAdhu ko pAtra de to vaha
anisRSTa doSa vAlA pAtra hotA hai| athavA koI naukara seTha kI icchA binA yA
ghara kA koI sadasya ghara ke mukhiyA kI icchA binA de to bhI vaha pAtra
anisRSTa doSayukta hotA hai  /  aise pAtra lene para bAda meM kleza ko vRddhi ho
sakatI hai aura koI sAdhu se pAtra Adi punaH mAMgane ke liye bhI A sakatA hai yA
anya upasarga bhI kara sakatA hai| bhaviSya meM pAtrAdi kI prApti durlabha ho
sakatI hai| abhihata-yadi koI gRhastha apane ghara se pAtra lAkara upAzraya meM
deve athavA anya kisI sthAna se yA kisI grAma se sAdhu ke liye pAtra lAkara
ghara meM rakhe to vaha pAtra "abhihRta" doSayukta hotA hai  /  aisA pAtra lene
para mArga meM hone vAlI jIvoM kI virAdhanA kA anumodana hotA hai| dazavai. a. 3
meM ise anAcAra kahA gayA hai| paidala cala kara Ane vAlA yA vAhana se Ane vAlA
trasa aura sthAvara jIvoM kI hiMsA karatA hai, mArga meM varSA yA nadI bhI A
sakatI hai| lAne vAlA vyakti  /  ta Adi doSayakta pAtra bhI lA sakatA hai| ataH
sAmane lAyA gayA pAtra nahIM lenA caahiye| ina chaha doSoM meM se do doSoM ko
daza. a. 3 meM anAcAra kahA gayA hai  /  "parivartita" doSa ko chor3akara zeSa 5
ko dazA. da. 2 meM sabaladoSa bhI kahA gayA hai  /  prAcA. zru. 2, a. 1-2-5-6
Adi meM ina 5 doSoM se yukta AhAra, vastra, pAtra ko lene kA niSedha hai| ataH
ina chahoM ko udgama ke doSa jAnakara inakA tyAga karanA caahiye| kisI
paristhiti vizeSa meM ina doSoM se yukta pAtra lenA par3e to laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta pAtA hai| atirikta pAtra garaNI kI AjJA lie binA dene kA prAyazcitta
5. je bhikkhU airegapaDiggahaM gaNi uddisiya, gaNi samuddisiya, taM gaNi
aNApucchiya aNAmaMtiya aNNamaNNassa viyarai, viyaraMtaM vA sAijjai  /  5. jo
bhikSu gaNI ke nimitta adhika pAtra grahaNa karake gaNI ko pUche binA yA
nimantraNa kiye binA anya kisI ko detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
[use laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai|] vivecana-bhikSu ko kalpanIya aura
yogya lakar3I ke pAtra sarvatra nirdoSa nahIM milate haiN| tumbe ke pAtra
sarvatra sulabha nahIM hote haiM aura miTTI ke pAtra sarvatra sulabha hote haiM,
kintu ve suvidhA vAle nahIM hote haiN| ve vizeSa paristhiti meM kabhI-kabhI kAma
meM Ate haiN|

Page #414 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[314] [Nishith Sutra] While wandering where wooden vessels are readily
available, if a monk is staying with the Acharya or is going to wander there,
some extra vessels are requested for the needs of the Gachchha. Sometimes, monks
can be sent to bring vessels only if it is absolutely necessary. If more vessels
are found than the number requested and it is deemed appropriate, he can bring
them, but it is not permissible to give them to anyone without the Acharya's
permission. If another monk is encountered on the way while going, and he says
that if more are available, then bring some vessels for me too. At that time, if
the Acharya is nearby, then one should bring them only after taking his
permission. If the Acharya is far away, then one can bring them without
permission, but after bringing them, one should give them to the one who
requested them only after taking the Acharya's permission. Giving them to anyone
without informing them and without asking them incurs the pratyashchittam
mentioned in the sutras. The commentator has also explained that if it is
considered necessary to give vessels to a sadhu due to his special circumstances
on the way, then the Gītartha sadhu can also decide and give the vessels himself
and later inform the Acharya about giving the vessels. If there are many
Acharyas, many Vachanacharyas, Pravrajanaacharyas, etc. in a Gachchha, then
generally bringing vessels by instructing the Acharya is 'Uddesha' and bringing
vessels by instructing a particular Acharya is 'Samuddesha'. Giving the extra
vessels brought to the Acharya is 'Samarpit karna-dena' and inviting him is
'Nimantaran'. If it is to be given to someone else, then obtaining permission
for it is 'Pricchana'. Vyavahar Sutra Uddesa 8 describes the practice of
bringing such extra vessels from a distant area. There is a general practice of
bringing vessels for each other, and it is also forbidden to give vessels to
anyone without asking the Gani or without inviting them. It is prescribed to ask
them, invite them, and then give them to others. The present sutra mentions the
pratyashchittam for bringing and giving vessels without the Gani's permission.
Pratyashchittam for giving or not giving extra vessels 6. The monk who gives or
approves of giving extra vessels to a young sadhu-sadhvi, or to an old sadhu-
sadhvi, whose hands, feet, ears, nose, lips are not cut off, who is strong. 7.
The monk who does not give or approve of giving extra vessels to a young sadhu-
sadhvi, or to an old sadhu-sadhvi, whose hands, feet, ears, nose, lips are not
cut off, who is strong.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 314] [nizIthasUtra lakar3I ke pAtra jahAM sulabha hoM udhara se vicaraNa karate
hue koI bhikSu AcArya ke pAsa prA rahe hoM yA udhara vicaraNa karane jA rahe
hoM, unake sAtha gaccha kI AvazyakatA ke liye kucha atirikta pAtra maMgA liye
jAte haiN| kabhI atyanta Avazyaka ho jAne para pAtra lAne ke liye hI bhikSuoM ko
bhejA jA sakatA hai| jitane pAtra maMgAye gaye hoM usase adhika bhI mila jAeM
aura ucita samajhe to vaha lA sakatA hai kintu prAcArya kI AjJA binA kisI ko
denA nahIM kalpatA hai  /  jAte samaya hI mArga meM koI anya bhikSu mila jAya
aura vaha kahe ki aura adhika milate hoM to mere liye bhI kucha pAtra lAnA  /
usa samaya yadi prAcArya nikaTa hoM to unakI AjJA lekara ke hI lAnA cAhie  /
yadi prAcArya dUra hoM to binA aAjJA bhI lA sakatA hai kintu lAne ke bAda unakI
AjJA lekara ke hI maMgAne vAle ko de sakatA hai  /  unheM batAye binA aura unase
pUche binA kisI ko dene para sUtrokta prAyazcitta pAtA hai| bhASyakAra ne yaha
bhI spaSTIkaraNa kiyA hai ki mArga meM kisI sAdhu kI vizeSa paristhiti dekhakara
pAtra denA Avazyaka samajhe to gItArtha sAdhu svayaM bhI nirNaya karake pAtra de
sakatA hai aura bAda meM AcArya ko pAtra dene kI jAnakArI de sakatA hai| eka
gaccha meM aneka prAcArya, aneka vAcanAcArya, pravrAjanAcArya prAdi hoM to
sAmAnya rUpa se prAcArya kA nirdeza karake pAtra lAnA 'uddeza' hai tathA kisI
prAcArya kA nAma nirdeza karake pAtra lAnA 'samuddeza' hai| atirikta lAye gaye
pAtra prAcArya kI sevA meM samarpita karanA-denA' hai aura nimantraNa karanA
'nimantraNa' hai  /  anya kisI ko denA ho to usake lie AjJA prApta karanA
'pRcchanA' hai| vyavahAra sUtra udde. 8 meM aise atirikta pAtra dUra kSetra se
lAne kA kalpa batAyA hai  /  vahA~ eka dUsare ke lie pAtra lAne kA sAmAnya
vidhAna hai sAtha hI gaNI ko pUche binA yA nimantraNa diye binA kisI ko pAtra
dene kA niSedha bhI kiyA hai  /  unheM pUchakara nimantraNa karake bAda meM anya
ko dene kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| prastuta sUtra meM gaNI kI AjJA ke binA pAtra
lAne evaM dene kA prAyazcitta kahA hai| atirikta pAtra dene na dene kA
prAyazcitta 6. je bhikkhU airegaM paDiggahaM khuDDagassa vA, khuDDiyAe vA,
theragassa vA, theriyAe vA, ahatthacchiNNassa, apAyacchiNNassa,
akaNNacchiNNassa, aNAsacchiNNassa, aNo?cchiNNassa, sakkassa dei, deMtaM vA
saaijji| . 7. je bhikkhU airegaM paDiggaha, khuDDagassa vA, khuDDiyAe vA,
theragassa vA, theriyAe vA, hatthacchiNNassa, pAyacchiNNassa, kaNNacchiNNassa,
NAsacchiNNassa, oTThacchiNNassa, asakkassa na dei, na deMtaM vA saaijji| 6. jo
bhikSu bAla sAdhu-sAdhvI ke lie, athavA vRddha sAdhu-sAdhvI ke lie jinake ki
hAtha, paira, kAna, nAka, hoMTha kaTe hue nahIM haiM, sazakta hai, use atirikta-
pAtra rakhane kI anujJA detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|

Page #415 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourteenth Uddeshak] [315 7. A monk who does not allow or approves of not
allowing an extra vessel for a young sadhu-sadhvi or an old sadhu-sadhvi whose
hands, feet, ears, nose, lips are cut off or who is disabled (he incurs a small
Chaturmasik pratyachit). Discussion- The previous sutra describes the general
vessels brought in excess of need. These sutras describe giving more vessels
than the Kalpmaryada. Bhashya gatha 4524 and its Chuni state that two types of
vessels are allowed by the Tirthankaras, namely- 1. Vessel, 2. Matrak. Apart
from this, taking a third vessel is 'extra vessel'. See the discussion on the
number of vessels and matraks in the sixteenth Uddeshak. Khadak-Khuddika- Sadhus
or Sadhvis from the age of nine to sixteen years are called children. They are
called 'Khuddhag' or 'Dahar' in the Pagam. Ther-Sthavir- Sthavir are said to be
of three types- 1. By age, 2. By knowledge, 3. By restraint paryay. Here, only
the Sthavir of 60 years of age should be understood. Hatyachchhinna etc.- The
sutra states that the hands, feet, lips, nose and ears are cut off. This means
that they are disabled in any way, such as blind, deaf, lame, etc. Although such
disabled people are not given initiation, but even after taking restraint,
someone may become disabled due to some reason, this statement should be
understood in this context. Asak-Ashakta- A monk who is not disabled but is
weak, i.e. tired from continuous travel, surrounded by illness or frightened by
some other ordeal, is called weak here. The meaning of this sutra can be
interpreted in two ways: 1. A young or old sadhu-sadhvi who is disabled or weak
can be given an extra vessel, but a young sadhu-sadhvi and an able-bodied, non-
disabled child-old person cannot be given an extra vessel. 2. From the statement
of the beginning and the end, the middle is accepted, according to this logic,
any sadhu-sadhvi, young or old, who is disabled or weak can be given an extra
vessel, but not a strong and non-disabled one. Because disabled or diseased,
young sadhu-sadhvis are also worthy of compassion like children and old people.
Even a young person becomes weak due to illness, etc. The reason for giving an
extra vessel to the disabled and the weak is that it is necessary for their
medication, diet, etc. Separate vessels are needed for defecation, urination or
phlegm, etc., or due to disability or weakness, the vessel is more likely to
break and he cannot bring it himself, then he can do his work with the extra
vessel.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caudahavAM uddezaka] [315 7. jo bhikSu bAla sAdhu-sAdhvI ke lie athavA vRddha
sAdhu-sAdhvI ke lie jinake ki hAtha, paira, kAna: nAka, hoMTha kaTe hue haiM
athavA jo azakta hai, use atirikta pAtra rakhane kI anujJA nahIM detA hai yA
nahIM dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta
AtA hai  / ) vivecana-pUrva sUtra meM AvazyakatA se adhika lAye gaye sAmAnya
pAtra sambandhI varNana hai  /  ina sUtroM meM kalpamaryAdA se adhika pAtra
rakhane ke lie dene kA varNana hai  /  bhASya gAthA 4524 tathA usakI cUNi meM
kahA gayA hai ki do prakAra ke pAtra tIrthaMkaroM ke dvArA anujJAta haiM,
yathA-1. pAtra, 2. mAtraka  /  isa ke sivAya tIsarA pAtra grahaNa karanA
'atirikta pAtra' hai  /  pAtra evaM mAtraka kI saMkhyA viSayaka vivecana
solahaveM uddezaka meM dekheM  /  khar3aka-khuDikA-nau varSa kI umra se lekara
16 varSa kI umra taka ke sAdhu yA sAdhvI bAlaka vaya vAle kahe jAte haiM  /
inako pAgama meM 'khuDDaga' yA 'Dahara' kahA gayA hai  /  thera-sthavira
sthavira tIna prakAra ke kahe gaye haiM-1. umra se, 2. jJAna se, 3. saMyama
paryAya se  /  yahA~ para kevala 60 varSa kI umra vAle sthavira kA hI kathana
samajhanA caahie| hatyachinna Adi-sUtra meM hAtha, pA~va, aoSTha, nAka aura kAna
kaTe hue kA kathana hai  /  inakA tAtparya yaha ki kisI bhI prakAra se vikalAMga
ho, yathA-andhA, baharA, laMgar3A Adi  /  yadyapi aise vikalAMgoM ko dIkSA nahIM
dI jAtI hai tathApi saMyama lene ke bAda bhI kisI kAraNa se koI vikalAMga ho
sakatA hai, yahA~ isI apekSA se yaha kathana samajhanA caahie| asakka-azakta-jo
bhikSu vikalAMga to nahIM hai kintu azakta hai arthAt nirantara vihAra se thake
hue, roga se ghire hue yA anya kisI parISaha se ghabarAye hue sAdhu yA sAdhvI ko
yahA~ azakta kahA gayA hai  /  isa sUtra kA bhAvArtha do prakAra se kiyA jA
sakatA hai 1. bAlaka yA vRddha sAdhu-sAdhvI jo azakta ho yA vikalAMga ho use
atirikta pAtra diyA jA sakatA hai kintu taruNa sAdhu-sAdhvI ko aura avikalAMga
sazakta bAla-vRddha ko atirikta pAtra nahIM diyA jA sktaa| 2. Adi evaM anta ke
kathana se madhya kA grahaNa ho jAtA hai, isa nyAya se AbAla-vRddha koI bhI
sAdhu-sAdhvI vikalAMga yA azakta ho to use atirikta pAtra diyA jA sakatA hai
kintu sazakta aura avikalAMga ko nahIM diyA jA sktaa| kyoMki vikalAMga yA
rogagrasta, taruNa sAdhu-sAdhvI bhI bAla evaM vRddha ke samAna hI anukampA ke
yogya hote haiM  /  roga Adi se taruNa bhI azakta ho jAtA hai| vikalAMga va
azakta ko atirikta pAtra dene kA kAraNa yaha hai ki usake auSadhopacAra,
pathyaparaheja Adi ke lie atirikta pAtra Avazyaka hotA hai  /  mala, mUtra yA
kapha Adi paraThane ke lie alaga-alaga pAtra Avazyaka hote haiM, athavA
vikalAMga hone ke kAraNa yA azakti ke kAraNa pAtra phUTa jAne kI sambhAvanA
adhika rahatI hai aura vaha svayaM gaveSaNa karake nahIM lA sakatA hai, taba
vaha atirikta pAtra se apanA kArya kara sakatA hai  /

Page #416 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [316] The rules for atonement in both these sutras are for the head of the
gana. They are the ones who must decide which sadhu or sadhvi is worthy of
receiving additional possessions and which are not. The atonement for keeping an
unworthy possession and rejecting a worthy one is:  8. The bhikkhu who keeps or
approves of keeping a possession that is unsuitable for use, unstable, not
durable, and not fit to be kept. 9. The bhikkhu who does not keep or approves of
not keeping a possession that is suitable for use, stable, durable, and fit to
be kept.  (He incurs the atonement of a short chaturmas.)  **Discussion:** All
types of equipment, including possessions, should be used as long as they are
usable. It is not appropriate to discard them or leave them with a householder.
Even if a possession becomes damaged or breaks while in use, it should not be
discarded or left behind as long as it remains usable.  If a possession is no
longer usable, if transcription or livelihood cannot be fully carried out, or if
there are more than three straps or bindings, then it is not appropriate to keep
that possession.  Keeping a possession that is no longer usable can lead to
attachment to it, such as thinking, "This is my initiation possession." However,
a bhikkhu should renounce such attachment and discard it.  These two sutras
state that the atonement for discarding a usable possession and keeping an
unusable one is a short chaturmas. The atonement for adding and keeping more
straps or bindings is mentioned in the first uddeśaka.  See the fifth uddeśaka
for a discussion of the words "aṇalaṁ" etc. used in the sutra. The atonement for
changing the color of a possession is:  10. The bhikkhu who makes a possession
of good color discolored or approves of doing so. 11. The bhikkhu who makes a
discolored possession of good color or approves of doing so. (He incurs the
atonement of a short chaturmas.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 316] [nizIthasUtra donoM sUtroM meM jo prAyazcitta vidhAna hai vaha gaNa-
pramukha ke lie hai  /  unheM hI yaha nirNaya karanA hotA hai ki kaunase sAdhu
yA sAdhvI atirikta pAtra dene ke yogya haiM aura kauna ayogya haiN| ayogya pAtra
rakhane kA tathA yogya pAtra paraThane kA prAyazcitta 8. je bhikkhU paDiggahaM
aNalaM, athiraM, adhuvaM, adhAraNijja dharei, dharataM vA sAijjai  /  9. je
bhikkhU paDiggahaM alaM, thiraM, dhuvaM, dhAraNijjaM na dharei, na dharetaM vA
sAijjai  /  8. jo bhikSu kAma ke ayogya, asthira, adhra va aura dhAraNa karane
ke ayogya pAtra ko dhAraNa karatA hai yA dhAraNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 9. jo bhikSu kAma ke yogya, sthira, dhra va aura dhAraNa karane yogya pAtra
ko dhAraNa nahIM karatA hai yA dhAraNa nahIM karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| (use laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta prAtA hai|) vivecana-pAtra Adi sabhI
prakAra ke upakaraNa jaba taka upayoga meM Ane yogya raheM taba taka upayoga meM
lene caahie| unheM paraTha denA yA gRhastha ke pAsa chor3a denA ucita nahIM hai
/  pAtra upayoga meM lete-lete kharAba bhI ho sakatA hai, kabhI phUTa bhI sakatA
hai to bhI upayoga meM Ane yogya rahe taba taka use paraThanA yA chor3anA nahIM
caahie| yadi pAtra upayoga meM Ane yogya nahIM ho, pratilekhana yA jIvarakSA
pUrNatayA nahIM ho sakatI ho athavA thegalI yA bandhana, tIna se adhika ho gaye
hoM to usa pAtra ko rakhanA nahIM kalpatA hai  /  upayoga meM na Ane yogya pAtra
ko rakhane meM usa pAtra ke prati mamatvabhAva ho sakatA hai, yathA'yaha merI
dIkSA kA pAtra hai' ityAdi  /  kintu bhikSu ko mamatva na karake use tyAga denA
cAhie  /  ina do sUtroM meM upayoga meM Ane yogya pAtra ko tyAga dene kA tathA
anupayogI pAtra ko rakhane kA laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA hai| bandhana yA
thegaliyA~ adhika lagAne evaM rakhane kA prAyazcitta prathama uddezaka meM kahA
gayA hai| sUtra meM prayukta 'aNalaM' Adi zabdoM kA vivecana pA~caveM uddezaka
meM dekheN| pAtra kA varNa parivartana karane kA prAyazcitta 10. je bhikkhU
vaNNamaMtaM paDiggahaM vivaNNaM karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  11. je bhikkhU
vivaNNaM paDiggahaM vaNNamaMtaM karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  10. jo bhikSu
acche varNa vAle pAtra ko vivarNa karatA hai yA vivarNa karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 11. jo bhikSu vivarNa pAtra ko acche varNa vAlA karatA hai yA karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|)

Page #417 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourteenth Uddeshak  [317 Discussion-worthy] If a bowl is ugly in appearance
but usable, one should not make any effort to make it beautiful. If a bowl is
found to be very beautiful, one should not try to make it ugly out of the
feeling that someone else might ask for it or the Acharya might take it for
himself or someone might steal it. Both types of resolutions and efforts are
unnecessary in the practice of restraint. Therefore, a monk should not engage in
such tendencies.  **Penance for bowl-related actions**  12. A monk who, thinking
"I have not received a new bowl," washes the bowl with cold water that is not
pleasant or with hot water that is not pleasant, once or repeatedly, or approves
of the washing. 13. A monk who, thinking "I have not received a new bowl,"
washes the bowl with cold water that is not pleasant or with hot water that is
not pleasant, once or repeatedly, or approves of the washing. 14. A monk who,
thinking "I have not received a new bowl," washes the bowl with water that is
not pleasant or with water that is not pleasant in color, once or repeatedly, or
approves of the washing. 15. A monk who, thinking "I have not received a new
bowl," washes the bowl with water that is not pleasant or with water that is not
pleasant in color, once or repeatedly, or approves of the washing. 16. A monk
who, thinking "I have received a bowl with a bad smell," washes the bowl with
cold water that is not pleasant or with hot water that is not pleasant, once or
repeatedly, or approves of the washing. 17. A monk who, thinking "I have
received a bowl with a bad smell," washes the bowl with cold water that is not
pleasant or with hot water that is not pleasant, once or repeatedly, or approves
of the washing. 18. A monk who, thinking "I have received a bowl with a bad
smell," washes the bowl with water that is not pleasant or with water that is
not pleasant in color, once or repeatedly, or approves of the washing. 19. A
monk who, thinking "I have received a bowl with a bad smell," washes the bowl
with water that is not pleasant or with water that is not pleasant in color,
once or repeatedly, or approves of the washing.  12. A monk who, thinking "I
have not received a new bowl," washes the bowl with cold water that is not
pleasant or with hot water that is not pleasant, once or repeatedly, or approves
of the washing. 13. A monk who, thinking "I have not received a new bowl,"
washes the bowl with cold water that is not pleasant or with hot water that is
not pleasant, once or repeatedly, or approves of the washing.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caudahavAM uddezaka] [317 vivecana-pAtra yadi dikhane meM vidrUpa ho kintu
upayoga meM Ane yogya ho to use sundara banAne ke lie kisI prakAra kA prayatna
nahIM karanA caahie| pAtra yadi atyanta sundara milA ho to use dUsarA koI mA~ga
na le yA prAcAryAdi svayaM na le le athavA koI curA na le jAe, aisI bhAvanA se
pAtra ko vidrUpa karane kA prayatna bhI nahIM karanA caahie| saMyama-ArAdhanA
meM ukta donoM prakAra ke saMkalpa evaM prayatna anAvazyaka haiM  /  ataH bhikSu
ko isa prakAra kI pravRtti nahIM karanI caahie| pAtra parikarma karane ke
prAyazcitta 12. je bhikkhU "no navae me paDiggahe laddhe" ti kaTu bahudesieNa
sIodagaviyaDeNa vA usiNodagaviyaDeNa vA uccholejja vA padhoejja vA uccholeMtaM
vA padhoeMta vA sAijjai  /  13. je bhikkhU "no navae me paDiggahe laddhe" tti
kaTu bahudevasieNa sIodagaviyaDeNa vA usiNodagaviyaDeNa vA uccholejja vA
padhoejja vA uccholeMtaM vA padhoeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  14. je bhikkhU "no navae
me paDiggahe laddhe" tti kaTu bahudesieNa loddheNa vA jAva vaNNeNa vA ullolejja
vA uvvallejja vA ulloleMtaM vA uvvaletaM vA saaijji| 15. je bhikkhU "no navae me
paDiggahe laddhe" ti kaTTa bahudevasieNa loddheNa vA jAva vaNNeNa vA ullolejja
vA uvvalejja vA ulloleMtaM vA uvvaletaM vA sAijjai  /  16. je bhikkhU
"dubbhigaMdhe me paDiggahe laddhe" ti kaTu bahudesieNa sIodagaviyaDeNa vA
usiNodagaviyaDeNa vA uccholejja vA padhoejja vA uccholeMtaM vA padhoeMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  17. je bhikkhU "dubhigaMdhe me paDiggahe laddhe" ti kaTu
bahudevasieNa sIodagaviyaDeNa vA usiNodagaviyaDeNa vA uccholejja vA padhoejja vA
uccholeMtaM vA padhoeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  18. je bhikkhU "dunbhigaMdhe me
paDiggahe laddhe" tti kaTu bahudesieNa loddheNa vA jAva vaNNeNa vA ullolejja vA
unvalejja vA ulloleMtaM vA uvvaletaM vA sAijjai  /  19. je bhikkhU "dubhigaMdhe
me paDiggahe laddhe" ti kaTu bahudevasieNa loddheNa vA jAva vaNeNa vA ullolejja
vA uvvalejja vA ulloleMtaM vA uvvaletaM vA sAijjai  /  12. jo bhikSu "mujhe nayA
pAtra nahIM milA hai" aisA socakara pAtra ko alpa yA bahuta acitta zIta jala se
yA acitta uSNa jala se eka bAra yA bAra-bAra dhotA hai yA dhone vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 13. jo bhikSu "mujhe nayA pAtra nahIM milA hai aisA
socakara pAtra ko rAta rakhe hue acitta zIta jala se yA acitta uSNa jala se eka
bAra yA bAra-bAra dhotA hai yA dhone vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|

Page #418 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[318] [Nishīthasūtra 14. A monk who, thinking, "I have not received a new
vessel," applies a coating of lodhra, either little or much, or of any color, to
the vessel once or repeatedly, or approves of the one who applies the coating.
15. A monk who, thinking, "I have not received a new vessel," applies a coating
of lodhra, of any color, that has been kept overnight, to the vessel once or
repeatedly, or approves of the one who applies the coating. 16. A monk who,
thinking, "I have received a vessel that has a foul odor," washes the vessel
once or repeatedly with a little or much cold water that is not fit for
drinking, or with hot water that is not fit for drinking, or approves of the one
who washes it. 17. A monk who, thinking, "I have received a vessel that has a
foul odor," washes the vessel once or repeatedly with cold water that is not fit
for drinking, or with hot water that is not fit for drinking, that has been kept
overnight, or approves of the one who washes it. 18. A monk who, thinking, "I
have received a vessel that has a foul odor," applies a coating of lodhra,
either little or much, or of any color, to the vessel once or repeatedly, or
approves of the one who applies the coating. 19. A monk who, thinking, "I have
received a vessel that has a foul odor," applies a coating of lodhra, of any
color, that has been kept overnight, to the vessel once or repeatedly, or
approves of the one who applies the coating. (He incurs the minor Chaturmasika
prāyaścitta.) Discussion-When a monk is searching for a vessel, he should take
one that does not require any kind of processing. Even if, while searching, he
finds a very old vessel or a vessel with an unpleasant odor, he should not be
inclined to wash it or make it fragrant. Here, in the first and third sūtras,
the prāyaścitta is stated for washing with a little or much water, or for making
fragrant with a paste, etc. After that, in the second and fourth sūtras, the
prāyaścitta is stated for washing with water that has been kept for many days,
or for making fragrant with a paste, etc. The meaning is that if it is not at
all unfavorable for restraint or health, then one should not wash or make
fragrant with a little or much water, or with a paste, etc. But if it is
necessary to wash, then one should not wash for many days, and one should not
keep the substances used for washing and making fragrant in the vessel
overnight. The commentator has said that if the vessel is affected by a
poisonous substance or a mantra, or if it has the smell of alcohol, etc., then,
as an exception, it can be purified by keeping a paste, etc., or water in it for
many days. Or sometimes it can be purified with alkaline substances. These
sūtras state the prāyaścitta for washing, etc., without reason, and for washing,
etc., with stale substances kept overnight when there is a reason. There are a
total of eight sūtras here - four for old vessels and four for vessels with a
foul odor.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 318] [nizIthasUtra 14. jo bhikSu "mujhe nayA pAtra nahIM milA hai" aisA
socakara pAtra ko alpa yA bahuta lodhra se yAvat varNa se eka bAra yA bAra-bAra
lepa karatA hai yA lepa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 15. jo bhikSu
"mujhe nayA pAtra nahIM milA hai" aisA socakara pAtra ke rAta rakhe hue lodhra
yAvat varNa se eka bAra yA bAra-bAra lepa karatA hai yA lepa karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 16. jo bhikSu "mujhe durgaMdha vAlA pAtra milA hai" aisA
socakara pAtra ko alpa yA bahuta acitta zIta jala se yA acitta uSNa jala se eka
bAra yA bAra-bAra dhotA hai yA dhone vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 17. jo bhikSu
"mujhe durgandha vAlA pAtra milA hai" aisA socakara pAtra ko rAta rakhe hue
acitta zIta jala se yA acitta uSNa jala se eka bAra yA bAra-bAra dhotA hai yA
dhone vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 18. jo bhikSu "mujhe durgandha vAlA pAtra
milA hai" aisA socakara pAtra ko alpAM yA bahuta lodhra se yAvat varNa se eka
bAra yA bAra-bAra lepa karatA hai yA lepa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
19. jo bhikSu "mujhe durgandha vAlA pAtra milA hai" aisA socakara pAtra ko rAta
rakhe hue lodhra yAvat varNa se eka bAra yA bAra-bAra lepa karatA hai yA lepa
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghucAturmAsika prAyazcita AtA
hai|) vivecana-bhikSu pAtra kI gaveSaNA karate samaya aisA hI pAtra le ki usameM
kisI prakAra kA parikarma na karanA pdd'e| yadi gaveSaNA karate hue bhI bahuta
purAnA pAtra mile yA koI amanojJa gaMdha vAlA pAtra mile to use dhone yA
sugandhita karane kI pravRtti na kare  /  yahA~ pahale aura tIsare sUtra meM
alpa yA adhika jala se dhone kA yA kalkAdi se sugaMdhita karane kA prAyazcitta
kahA hai| usake bAda dUsare aura cauthe sUtra meM bahudaivasika jala se dhone kA
yA kalkAdi se sugaMdhita karane kA prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki
yadi saMyama yA svAsthya ke liye kiMcit bhI pratikUla na ho to alpa yA adhika
jala se yA kalkAdi se na dhoe, na sugaMdhita kare  /  kintu Avazyaka hone para
dhonA par3e to aneka dinoM taka na dhoe tathA rAtri meM una dhone aura
sugaMdhita karane ke padArthoM ko pAtra meM na rakhe  /  bhASyakAra ne kahA hai
ki yadi vaha pAtra viSaile padArtha yA maMtra se prabhAvita ho athavA madya Adi
kI gandha yukta ho to apavAda rUpa meM aneka dinoM taka kalkAdi yA jala
rakhakara use zuddha kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  athavA kabhI kSAra dravyoM se bhI
zuddha kiyA jA sakatA hai| ina sUtroM meM akAraNa dhone Adi kA tathA kAraNa hone
para rAta meM bAsI rakhakara dhone Adi kA prAyazcitta kahA hai| . yahA~ kula
ATha sUtra haiM-cAra purAne pAtroM ke aura cAra durgandha yukta pAtroM ke  /

Page #419 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourteenth Uddeshak  [319 The Bhāṣya Cūrṇikār has explained only these
sūtras. It does not seem possible to have more sūtras. In the available
manuscripts, four more sūtras are found after Teladi, making a total of 12
sūtras. Some manuscripts also include sūtras for fragrant and new vessels. Thus,
these sūtras are found in many different ways and in different numbers. The
lowest number is 8 and the highest number is 26. These seem to have been added
later after the Bhāṣya Cūrṇikār, and the reason for this is also unknown. In the
sūtra text, "Bahudesieṇ" and "Bahudevasieṇ" are similar words, so it seems that
there may have been a scribal error here. The following Bhāṣya-Cūrṇi passages
are useful in deciding the sūtra text: Dag kakkādi aṇave, tehi bahudesitehi je
pādam. Emev ya duggandha, dhuvaṇ-uvaṭeṇt āṇādi ||4642|| . Sutțe bahudeseṇ vā
pādo, bahudevasiteṇ vā. Ekkā pasali do vā tiṇṇi vā pasaliyo deso bhaṇṇati,
tiṇhaṁ pareṇ bahudeso bhaṇṇati. Aṇāhārādi kakkeṇ vā saṁvāsiteṇ, ettha ega rāti
saṁvāsitam taṁ pi bahudevasiyam bhavati. Bitiya sutțe esevaṭṭho gavaraṁ-
bahudevasitehiṁ sīoda-usiṇodehi vatavvaṁ. Tatiya sutțe kakko, cauṭṭha sutțe
kakkādiehi cev bahudevasiehiṁ. Jahā aṇavapāde cauro sutṭā bhaṇitā tahā duggandhe
vi cauro sutṭā bhaṇiyavvā. From these explanations, it becomes clear that the
first four sūtras are in relation to an old vessel. Of these, the first two
sūtras are about washing with water, and the last two are about applying paste,
etc. Similarly, the next four sūtras are in relation to a foul-smelling vessel.
There are a total of eight sūtras. In the first sūtra, the word "Bahudesieṇ" is
used, and in the second sūtra, the word "Bahudevasieṇ" is used. This is also
clear from the Cūrṇi. Therefore, these eight sūtras have been placed in the
original text in this order. Penance for drying a vessel in an inappropriate
place 20. Je bhikkhu aṇantarahīyāe puḍhavīe paḍiggahaṁ āyāvejjā vā payāvejjā vā,
āyātam vā payāvetam vā sāijjai. 21. Je bhikkhu sasiniḍḍhāe puḍhavīe paḍiggahaṁ
āyāvejjā vā payāvejjā vā, āyātam vā payāvetam vā sāijjai. 22. Je bhikkhu
sasarakkhāe puḍhavīe paḍiggahaṁ āyāvejjā vā payāvejjā vā, āyātam vā payāvetam vā
sāijjai. 23. Je bhikkhu maṭṭiyākaḍāe puḍhavīe paḍiggahaṁ āyāvejjā vā payāvejjā
vā, āyāvetam vā payāvetam vā sāijjai. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caudahavA~ uddezaka] [319 bhASya cUrNikAra ne itane hI sUtroM kA kathana karate
hue vyAkhyA kI hai| isase adhika sUtroM kA honA sambhava nahIM lagatA hai|
upalabdha pratiyoM meM telAdi ke 4 sUtra adhika milane se 12 sUtra hote haiN|
kucha pratiyoM meM sugandhita aura nae pAtra ke bhI sUtrAlApaka diye haiM  /
yoM aneka prakAra se aura bhinna-bhinna saMkhyA meM ye sUtra milate haiN| jinakI
jaghanya saMkhyA 8 hai aura utkRSTa saMkhyA 26 hai  /  jo bhASya cUrNikAra ke
bAda kabhI jor3a diye gaye pratIta hote haiM tathA isakA kAraNa bhI ajJAta hai
/  sUtrapATha :meM "bahudesieNa" aura "bahudevasieNa" eka sarIkhe zabda hone se
aisA pratIta hotA hai ki isameM bhI kabhI lipi doSa humA ho  /  sUtra pATha ke
nirNaya meM nimna bhASya-cUNi ke sthala upayogI haiM daga kakkAdi aNave, tehi
bahudesitehi je pAdaM  /  emeva ya duggaMdha, dhuvaNa-uvaTeMta ANAdI  // 4642 //
. sutte bahudeseNa vA pAdo, bahudevasiteNa vA  /  ekkA pasalI do vA tiNNi vA
pasalIo deso bhaNNati, tiNhaM pareNa bahudeso bhaNNati  /  aNAhArAdi kakkeNa vA
saMvAsiteNa, ettha ega rAti saMvAsitaM taM pi bahudevasiyaM bhavati  /  bitiya
sutte esevattho gavaraM-bahudevasitehiM sIoda-usiNodehi vattavvaM  /  tatiya
sutte kakko, cauttha sutte kakkAdiehi ceva bahudevasiehiM  /  jahA aNavapAde
cauro suttA bhaNitA tahA duggaMdhe vi cauro suttA bhANiyavvA  /  ina vyAkhyAyoM
se yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki pahale cAra sUtra purAne pAtra kI apekSA se haiM
/  inameM bhI pahale do sUtra jala se dhone ke haiM aura bAda ke do sUtra
kalkAdi lagAne ke haiM  /  isI taraha cAra sUtra bAda meM durgandha yukta pAtra
kI apekSA se haiM  /  kula ATha sUtra haiM  /  isameM prathama sUtra meM
"bahudesieNa" pada hai aura dUsare sUtra meM "bahudevasieNa" pada hai, yaha bhI
cUNi se spaSTa ho jAtA hai| ataH isI krama se ATha sUtra mUla pATha meM rakhe
gaye haiN| akalpanIya sthAnoM meM pAtra sukhAne ke prAyazcitta 20. je bhikkhU
aNaMtarahiyAe puDhavIe paDiggahaM AyAvejja vA payAvejja vA, AyAtaM vA payAvetaM
vA saaijji| 21. je bhikkhU sasiNiddhAe puDhavIe paDiggahaM AyAvejja vA payAvejja
vA, AyAtaM vA payAvetaM vA saaijji| 22. je bhikkhU sasarakkhAe puDhavIe
paDiggahaM AyAvejja vA payAvejja vA, AyAtaM vA payAvetaM vA saaijji| 23. je
bhikkhU maTTiyAkaDAe puDhavIe paDiggahaM AyAvejja vA payAvejja vA, AyAvetaM vA
payAvetaM vA saaijji|

Page #420 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
20. A bhikkhu who dries or approves of drying a vessel on the inanimate earth
near the animate earth. 21. A bhikkhu who dries or approves of drying a vessel
on the earth moistened with water. 22. A bhikkhu who dries or approves of drying
a vessel on the earth mixed with dust. 23. A bhikkhu who dries or approves of
drying a vessel on the earth scattered with clods. 24. A bhikkhu who dries or
approves of drying a vessel on the earth. 25. A bhikkhu who dries or approves of
drying a vessel on the stone. 26. A bhikkhu who dries or approves of drying a
vessel on the pebbles and the like.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 320] [nizIthasUtra 24. je bhikkhU cittamaMtAe puDhavIe paDiggahaM AyAvejja vA
payAvejja vA, AyAtaM vA payAvetaM vA saaijji| 25. je bhikkhU cittamaMtAe silAe
paDiggahaM AyAvejja vA payAvejja vA, AyAta vA payAvetaM vA saaijji| 26. je
bhikkhU cittamaMtAe lelUe paDiggahaM AyAvejja vA payAvejja vA, AyAtaM vA payAtaM
vA saaijji| 27. je bhikkhU kolAvAsaMsi vA dArue jIvapaidie saaMDe jAva
makkaDAsaMtANae paDiggahaM AyAvejja vA payAvejja vA, AyAtaM vA payAvetaM vA
saaijji| 28. je bhikkha thaNaMsi vA, gihelayaMsi vA. usayAlaMsi vA, kAmajalaMsi
vA, aNNayaraMsi vA tahappagAraMsi aMtalikkhajAyaMsi dubbaddhe jAva calAcale
paDiggahaM AyAvejja vA payAvejja vA AyAtaM vA payAvetaM vA saaijji| 29. je
bhikkhU kuliyaMsi vA, bhittisi vA, silaMsi vA, lelusi vA aNNayaraMsi vA
tahappagAraMsi aMtalikkhajAyaMsi dubbaddhe jAva calAcale paDiggahaM AyAvejja vA
payAvejja vA AyAtaM vA payAvetaM vA saaijji| 30. je bhikkhU khaMdhaMsi vA jAva
hammatalaMsi vA aNNayaraMsi vA tahappagAraMsi aMtalikkhajAyaMsi " dubvaddhe jAva
calAcale paDiggahaM AyAvejja vA payAvejja vA, AyAtaM vA payAvetaM vA sAijjai  /
20. jo bhikSu sacitta pRthvI ke nikaTa kI acitta pRthvI para pAtra ko sukhAtA
hai yA sukhAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 21. jo bhikSu sacitta jala se
snigdha pRthvI para pAtra ko sukhAtA hai yA sukhAne vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 22. jo bhikSu sacitta |rj se yukta pRthvI para pAtra ko sukhAtA hai yA
sukhAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 23. jo bhikSu sacitta miTTI bikharI huI
pRthvI para pAtra ko sukhAtA hai yA sukhAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 24. jo
bhikSu sacitta pRthvI para pAtra ko sukhAtA hai yA sukhAne vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 25. jo bhikSu sacitta zilA para pAtra ko sukhAtA hai yA sukhAne vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| 26. jo bhikSu sacitta zilAkhaNDa Adi para pAtra ko
sukhAtA hai yA sukhAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|

Page #421 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourteenth Uddesaka  **[321 27. A monk who dries his bowl on wood containing
termites and other living beings, or on a place containing eggs, or on a place
containing a spider web, or who approves of someone doing so.**  **28. A monk
who dries his bowl on a pillar, a threshold, a mortar, or a bathing platform, or
on any other such aerial place that is not properly secured or is movable, or
who approves of someone doing so.**  **29. A monk who dries his bowl on a mud
wall, a brick wall, a stone, or a stone slab, or on any other such aerial place
that is not properly secured or is movable, or who approves of someone doing
so.**  **30. A monk who dries his bowl on a shoulder, or on the roof of a
palace, or on any other such aerial place that is not properly secured or is
movable, or who approves of someone doing so. [He incurs the minor Chaturmasika
Pratikramana].**  **Discussion:** In the Pancha. Shru. 2, A. 6, U. 1, it is
stated that drying the bowl in eleven places is prohibited. Of these, eight
places are prohibited only due to the killing of living beings, and the
remaining three places, in addition to the killing of living beings, also have
the possibility of the bowl breaking if it falls, and the monk falling.
Therefore, the bowl can be dried in a safe place where it will not fall from
above.  In the previous Sutra, the Pratikramana for washing the bowl is
mentioned. If there is a need to dry it in the sun after washing due to some
special reason, then the Pratikramana for drying it in unsuitable places is
mentioned here.  The special meanings and discussions of the words used in these
eleven Sutras have been given in the eleven Sutras at the beginning of the
thirteenth Uddesaka. There, the Pratikramana for standing or staying in those
places is mentioned. Here, the Pratikramana for drying the bowl in those same
places is mentioned. Similarly, the Pratikramana for excreting and drying
clothes in these eleven places is mentioned in the sixteenth and eighteenth
Uddesakas. The eleven Sutras are the same everywhere.  **Pratikramana for taking
the bowl after removing the living beings, etc.**  **31. A monk who takes the
bowl after removing the living beings, or who causes them to be removed, or who
takes the bowl while they are being removed, or who approves of someone doing
so.**  **32. A monk who takes the bowl after removing the seeds, or who causes
them to be removed, or who takes the bowl while they are being removed, or who
approves of someone doing so.**  **33. A monk who takes the bowl after removing
the roots, leaves, flowers, or fruits, or who causes them to be removed, or who
takes the bowl while they are being removed, or who approves of someone doing
so.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caudahavAM uddezaka] [321 27. jo bhikSu dImaka Adi jIva-yukta kASTha para tathA
aMDe yukta sthAna para yAvat makar3I ke jAle se yukta sthAna para pAtra ko
sukhAtA hai yA sukhAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 28. jo bhikSu stambha,
dehalI, Ukhala yA snAna karane kI caukI para athavA anya bhI aise aMtarikSajAta
(AkAzIya) sthAna para, jo ki bhalIbhAMti baMdhA huA nahIM hai yAvat calAcala
hai, vahA~ pAtra ko sukhAtA hai yA sukhAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 29. jo
bhikSu miTTI kI dIvAra para, IMTa kI dIvAra para, zilA para yA zilAkhaNDa Adi
para athavA anya bhI aise aMtarikSajAta [AkAzIya] sthAna para, jo ki bhalIbhAMti
baMdhA huA nahIM haiM yAvat calAcala hai, vahAM pAtra ko sukhAtA hai yA sukhAne
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  . 30. jo bhikSu skandha para yAvat mahala kI
chata para athavA anya bhI aise aMtarikSajAta [AkAzIya] sthAna para, jo ki
bhalIbhAMti baMdhA huA nahIM hai yAvat calAcala hai, vahAM pAtra ko sukhAtA hai
yA sukhAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| [use laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta pAtA
hai|] vivecana-pAcA. zru. 2, a. 6, u. 1 meM ukta gyAraha sthAnoM meM pAtra ko
sukhAne kA niSedha hai| inameM se ATha sthAnoM kA niSedha kevala jIva-virAdhanA
ke kAraNa hai aura zeSa tIna sthAnoM meM jIva-virAdhanA ke sAtha-sAtha pAtra ke
gira jAne para usake phUTa jAne kI tathA sAdhu ke gira jAne kI bhI sambhAvanA
rahatI hai| ataH Upara se pAtra na gire aise surakSita sthAna meM pAtra sukhAe
jA sakate haiN| pUrva sUtra meM pAtra dhone kA prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  kisI
vizeSa kAraNa se dhone ke bAda dhUpa meM sukhAne kI AvazyakatA ho to ayogya
sthAnoM meM sukhAne kA yahAM prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| ina gyAraha sUtroM meM
Aye hue zabdoM ke vizeSArtha aura vivecana terahaveM uddezaka ke prArambha ke
gyAraha sUtroM meM de die haiM  /  vahAM ukta sthAnoM meM khar3e rahane yA
Thaharane Adi ke prAyazcitta kahe haiN| yahAM unhIM sthAnoM meM pAtra sukhAne kA
prAyazcitta kahA hai| isI prakAra ina gyAraha sthAnoM meM mala-mUtra tyAgane kA
tathA vastra sukhAne kA prAyazcitta solahaveM aura aThArahaveM uddezaka meM hai|
sarvatra gyAraha sUtra samAna haiN| trasa prANI prAdi nikAlakara pAtra grahaNa
karane ke prAyazcitta 31. je bhikkhU paDiggahAo tasapANajAiM nIharai, noharAvei,
nohariyaM AhaTTa dejjamANaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  32. je
bhikkhU paDiggahAo osahi-bIyAI noharai, noharAvei, nIhariyaM AhaTu dejjamANaM
paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  33. je bhikkhU paDiggahAo kaMdANi vA,
mUlANi vA, pattANi vA, pupphANi vA, phalANi vA nIharai, nIharAvei, nohariyaM
Ahaai, dejjamANaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji|

Page #422 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīthasūtra  **34.** A monk who takes, causes to be taken, accepts, or
approves of the taking of a *paḍiggaha* containing a *pṛthvīkāya* with life in
it. **35.** A monk who takes, causes to be taken, accepts, or approves of the
taking of a *paḍiggaha* containing an *apkāya* with life in it. **36.** A monk
who takes, causes to be taken, accepts, or approves of the taking of a
*paḍiggaha* containing an *agnikāya* with life in it. **31.** A monk who takes,
causes to be taken, accepts, or approves of the taking of a *paḍiggaha*
containing *trasa* beings. **32.** A monk who takes, causes to be taken,
accepts, or approves of the taking of a *paḍiggaha* containing grains like
wheat, or seeds like cumin. **33.** A monk who takes, causes to be taken,
accepts, or approves of the taking of a *paḍiggaha* containing roots, stems,
leaves, flowers, or fruits with life in them. **34.** A monk who takes, causes
to be taken, accepts, or approves of the taking of a *paḍiggaha* containing a
*pṛthvīkāya* with life in it. **35.** A monk who takes, causes to be taken,
accepts, or approves of the taking of a *paḍiggaha* containing an *apkāya* with
life in it. **36.** A monk who takes, causes to be taken, accepts, or approves
of the taking of a *paḍiggaha* containing an *agnikāya* with life in it. [He
incurs the *laghucāturmāsīka* atonement.]  **Discussion:** When examining a
*paḍiggaha*, the following points must be considered: 1. If there are *trasa*
beings like spiders, do not take it. 2. If it contains grains or seeds, do not
take it. 3. If it contains roots, stems, etc., do not take it. 4. If it contains
salt or other *pṛthvīkāya* with life in it, do not take it. 5. If it contains
water with life in it, do not take it. 6. If it is an earthen *paḍiggaha*
containing fire [like a cucumber, etc.], do not take it. 7. Do not take a
*paḍiggaha* by yourself removing these beings or substances. 8. Even if a
householder removes them and gives it to you, do not take it.  If one takes a
*paḍiggaha* that is not permissible, one incurs the atonement mentioned in these
sūtras.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ nizIthasUtra 34. je bhikkhU paDiggahAo puDhavikAyaM noharai, noharAvei,
nIhariyaM AhaTTu bejjamANaM DiggAi, paDiggA vA sAijjai  /  322] 35. je bhikkhU
paDiggahAo AukkAyaM nIharai, nIharAvei, nohariyaM AhaTTu dejjamANaM DiggAes,
paDiggAtaM vA sAijjai  /  36. je bhikkhU paDiggahAo teukkAyaM nIharai,
noharAvei, nIhariyaM AhaTTu vejjamANaM DiggAes, paDiggArhataM vA sAijjai  /  31.
jo bhikSu pAtra se trasa prANiyoM ko nikAlatA hai, nikalavAtA hai athavA nikAla
kara ko letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  dete hu 32. jo bhikSu
pAtra se gehUM Adi dhAnya ko aura jIrA Adi bIja ko nikAlatA hai, nikalavAtA hai
athavA nikAlakara dete hue ko letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
33. jo bhikSu pAtra se sacitta kanda, mUla, patra, puSpa, phala nikAlatA hai,
nikalavAtA hai athavA nikAla kara dete hue ko letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  34. jo bhikSu pAtra se sacitta pRthvIkAya ko nikAlatA hai,
nikalavAtA hai athavA nikAla hue ko letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  kara dete 35. jo bhikSu pAtra se sacitta apkAya ko nikAlatA hai,
nikalavAtA hai athavA nikAla kara dete hue ko letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  36. jo bhikSu pAtra se sacitta agnikAya ko nikAlatA hai,
nikalavAtA hai athavA nikAla ko letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
[ use laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta kara dete hue prAtA hai  / ] vivecana - pAtra
kI gaveSaNA karate samaya nimnAMkita bAtoM kA dhyAna rakhanA Avazyaka hai 1.
pAtra meM yadi makar3I Adi trasa jIva hoM to nahIM lenA  /  2. usameM dhAnya yA
bIja rakhe hue hoM to nahIM lenA  /  3. usameM kaMda-mUla Adi vanaspati hoM to
nahIM lenA  /  4. usameM namaka Adi sacitta pRthvIkAya ho to nahIM lenA  /  5.
usameM sacitta jala ho to nahIM lenA  /  6. miTTI ke pAtra meM agni [ khIrA Adi
] ho to nahIM lenA  /  7. ina jIvoM yA padArthoM ko svayaM nikAla karake pAtra
nahIM lenA  /  8. gRhastha inheM nikAla kara deve to bhI nahIM lenA  /  aisA
akalpanIya pAtra grahaNa karane para ina sUtroM se prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /

Page #423 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourteenth Uddeshak] [323 The order of these 6 sutras is available in
different ways and there is also variation in the number of sutras. Here the
order is kept according to the commentary. It is not possible to keep fire in a
wooden or earthen vessel. Therefore, this statement of atonement for fire should
be understood only in relation to an earthen vessel. In taking such vessels,
those beings are transferred and their composition and compression also takes
place. Therefore, atonement has been stated for taking such vessels. Atonement
for polishing the vessel 37. Je bhikkhu padiggaham korei, koravei, koriyam
ahattta dejjamaanam padiggahaei, padiggahaentam va saijjai. _37. A monk who
polishes a vessel, causes it to be polished, or takes a polished vessel while it
is being given, or approves of the one who takes it. [He incurs a minor
Chaturmasik atonement.] Discussion - In the first Uddeshak, there is a statement
of atonement for correcting the mouth of the vessel and for making the uneven
one even. Atonement has been stated for other actions in this Uddeshak and here
in this 37th sutra, atonement has been stated for polishing the vessel.
Polishing the vessel is done by digging. The main purpose of doing this is
decoration and decoration is prohibited for monks in the Dasha Vaikalik etc.
sutras. The commentator has called it "Jhushira dosha" because in the place dug
for polishing, the living beings or the food paste cannot be properly cleaned.
Therefore, atonement has been stated for doing this. Atonement for begging for a
vessel on the path 38. Je bhikkhu nayagam va, anayagam va, uvasagam va,
anuvaasagam va gamantaransin va, gaampahaantaransin va padiggaham obhaasiya-
obhaasiya jayai, jayanta va saijjai. 38. A monk who begs for a vessel from his
relatives or from others, from an Upasaka or from an Anupasaka, in the village
or on the village path, or approves of the one who begs. [He incurs a minor
Chaturmasik atonement.] Discussion - A vessel can also be begged from
householders who are related or unrelated. Such householders can be Upasakas or
Anupasakas. Therefore, to make it clear, this sutra mentions four types of
people, including relatives. If you want to beg for a vessel from any
householder, you should first see if he is in his house or in any other place of
his own, then you should beg for the vessel from him at that time. But if he is
out of the village or in another village, then you should not beg from him and
in the village

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caudahavA~ uddezaka] [323 ina 6 sUtroM kA krama bhinna-bhinna taraha se
upalabdha hotA hai tathA sUtra-saMkhyA meM bhI bhinnatI milatI hai  /  yahAM
bhASya-cUNi ke anusAra krama rakhA gayA hai| lakar3I aura tumbe ke pAtra meM
agnikAya kA rakhA jAnA sambhava nahIM hai| ataH yaha agnikAya kA prAyazcitta
kathana kevala miTTI ke pAtra kI apekSA se samajhanA cAhiye  /  isa prakAra ke
pAtra lene meM una jIvoM ko sthAnAntarita kiyA jAtA hai tathA unakA saMghaTana,
sammardana bhI hotA hai| isaliye aise pAtra lene kA prAyazcitta kahA hai  /
pAtra korane kA prAyazcitta 37. je bhikkhU paDiggahaM korei, korAvei, koriyaM
AhaTTa dejjamANaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| _37. jo bhikSu pAtra ko
koratA hai, koravAtA hai athavA korakara dete hue ko letA hai yA lene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| [use laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai|] vivecana
-prathama uddezaka meM pAtra kA mukha ThIka karane kA tathA viSama ko sama
banAne rUpa parikarma kA prAyazcitta kathana hai| anya parikarmoM kA isa
uddezaka meM prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai aura yahAM isa 37veM sUtra meM pAtra para
koranI karane kA prAyazcitta kahA hai| pAtra meM koranI, khudAI karane se hotI
hai  /  aisA karane meM mukhya uddezya vibhUSA kA rahatA hai aura vibhUSAvRtti
bhikSu ke liye dazavaikAlika Adi sUtroM meM niSiddha hai  /  bhASyakAra ne
isameM "jhuSira doSa" kahA hai, kyoMki koraNI ke liye khudAI kiye sthAna meM
jIva yA AhAra ke lepa kA bhalIbhAMti zodhana nahIM ho sakatA hai  /  ataH aisA
karane kA yahAM prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| mArga prAdi meM pAtra kI yAcanA
karane kA prAyazcitta 38. je bhikkhU NAyagaM vA, aNAyagaM vA, uvAsagaM vA,
aNuvAsagaM vA gAmaMtaraMsi vA, gAmapahaMtaraMsi vA paDiggahaM obhAsiya-obhAsiya
jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA saaijji| 38. jo bhikSu svajana se yA anya se, upAsaka se yA
anupAsaka se grAma meM yA grAmapatha meM pAtra mAMga-mAMga kara yAcanA karatA
hai yA yAcanA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| [use laghucAturmAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  vivecana-pAtra kI yAcanA pArivArika yA apArivArika
gRhasthoM se bhI kI jA sakatI hai| aise gRhastha upAsaka bhI ho sakate haiM aura
anupAsaka bhI ho sakate haiN| ataH vizeSa spaSTa karane ke liye isa sUtra meM
jJAtijana Adi cAra prakAra ke vyaktiyoM kA kathana hai| kisI bhI gRhastha se
pAtra kI yAcanA karanI ho to pahale yaha dekhanA cAhie ki vaha apane ghara meM
yA apane hI kisI anya sthAna meM hai, to usI samaya usase pAtra kI yAcanA karanI
cAhie  /  kintu vaha grAma se bAhara ho yA anya grAma meM ho to usase yAcanA
nahIM karanI cAhie tathA grAma meM

Page #424 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[324] One should not request a bowl from a householder in a place other than
their home, even if they encounter them on the road. If they are a devotee,
there is a possibility of incurring the fault of importunity. If they are not a
devotee, they may become angry and disrespect the monk or refuse to give the
bowl even if they have one. Therefore, one should not request a bowl from anyone
in a place other than their home or on the road.  It is said: The penance for
requesting a bowl from a householder, etc., while they are sitting in a council.
39. The monk who, while they are sitting in a council, takes a householder, non-
householder, upasaka, or anupasaka aside and repeatedly requests a bowl from
them, or approves of the one who is requesting, [incurs the penance of a short
chaturmasika].  Discussion: The previous sutra states the penance for requesting
a bowl from a householder in a place other than their home. This sutra states
the penance for requesting a bowl from a householder who is in their own home,
but is engaged in conversation with one or more people, or is sitting in a
council.  Doing so would interrupt their necessary conversation, and the giver
or other people may become angry. It may lead to a lack of faith in the monk or
in the Dharma. The giver is busy in conversation, so they may refuse to give the
bowl even if they have one. In such a situation, the monk should request the
bowl with discretion. If the monk needs the bowl urgently, they should stand in
solitude for a while and wait for a suitable opportunity, or request it at
another time.  If the householder themselves leaves the conversation and comes
to the monk upon hearing of their arrival, then there is no penance as stated in
the sutra for requesting a bowl from them with discretion.  The penance for a
monk residing for a bowl. 40. The monk who resides for a bowl during the fixed
season [winter or summer], or approves of the one who resides, [incurs the
penance of a short chaturmasika]. 41. The monk who resides for a bowl during the
rainy season, or approves of the one who resides, [incurs the penance of a short
chaturmasika].  _ The one who serves them incurs the penance of a chaturmasika
with the exclusion of the four months.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 324] [nizIthasUtra bhI kahIM mArga meM mila jAe to vahAM bhI usase pAtra kI
yAcanA nahIM karanI caahie| kyoMki vaha yadi anurAgI hai to aisA karane meM
eSaNA ke doSa lagane kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai aura yadi vaha anurAgI nahIM hai
to anya sthAna meM mAMgane se ruSTa hokara vaha anAdara kara sakatA hai athavA
pAtra hote hue bhI manA kara sakatA hai| ataH kisI se bhI ghara ke atirikta anya
kisI sthAna meM yA mArga meM pAtra kI yAcanA nahIM karanI caahie| kahA hai
pariSad meM baiThe hue svajana Adi se pAtra kI yAcanA karane kA prAyazcitta 39.
je bhikkhU NAyagaM vA, aNAyagaM vA, uvAsagaM vA, aNuvAsagaM vA parisAmajhAo
ulavettA paDiggahaM obhAsiya-obhAsiya jAyai, jAyaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  39. jo
bhikSu svajana ko yA anya ko, upAsaka ko yA anupAsaka ko pariSad meM se uThAkara
usase mAMga-mAMga kara pAtra kI yAcanA karatA hai yA yAcanA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| [use laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ] vivecana-
pUrva sUtra meM kisI bhI gRhastha se anya sthAna meM pAtra yAcanA karane kA
prAyazcitta ra isa sUtra meM pAtradAtA ke svagaha meM hote hae bhI yadi vaha
kisI eka vyakti se yA aneka vyaktiyoM se bAtacIta kara rahA ho yA kisI pariSada
meM baiThA ho to vahAM se use uThAkara pAtra kI yAcanA karane kA prAyazcitta
kahA hai| aisA karane para unake Avazyaka vArtAlApa meM rukAvaTa ho jAtI hai,
dAtA yA anya vyakti ruSTa ho sakate haiM  /  sAdhu ke prati yA dharma ke prati
azraddhA ho sakatI hai| dAtA vArtAlApa meM vyasta hotA hai, ataH vaha pAtra hote
hue bhI dene ke liye manA kara sakatA hai| aise samaya meM bhikSu ko viveka se
yAcanA karanI caahiye| bhikSa ko yadi pAtra kI zIghra AvazyakatA ho to vaha
kucha samaya taka ekAnta meM khar3A raha kara anukala avasara kI pratIkSA kare
yA anya kisI samaya meM yAcanA ke lie A jaae| yadi sAdhu ke Ane kI jAnakArI hote
hI gRhastha svayaM bAtacIta chor3akara A jAe to viveka rakhate hue usase pAtra
kI yAcanA karane para sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai| pAtra ke liye bhikSu
ko nivAsa karane kA prAyazcitta 40. je bhikkhU paDiggaha-nIsAe uDubaddhaM vasai,
vasaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  41. je bhikkhU paDiggaha-nIsAe vAsAvAsaM vasai, vasaMtaM
vA sAijjai  /  _ taM sevamANe Avajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM ugghAiyaM  /
40. jo bhikSu pAtra ke lie Rtubaddha kAla [sardI yA garmI] meM rahatA hai yA
rahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 41. jo bhikSu pAtra ke lie varSAvAsa meM
rahatA hai yA rahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|

Page #425 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourteenth Uddeshak] [325 _ One who consumes the things mentioned in these 41
sutras incurs the minor Chaturmasik pratyakshya. Discussion- If a monk tells a
householder, "We are staying here for the sake of a vessel, or we are observing
Chaturmas, therefore, you should give us a good vessel or arrange for one," to
make such a determination is to reside for the sake of a vessel, and this is
what is called pratyakshya in both sutras. Perhaps if a monk stays somewhere for
a few days due to an extreme need for a vessel and does not engage in
appropriate conversation with the householder regarding the vessel, then he does
not incur the pratyakshya mentioned in the sutras. If a monk resolves to stay
for the sake of a vessel and engages in appropriate conversation with the
householder, but due to fate, a vessel is not found there, then various types of
resolutions and alternatives may arise for the monk or the householder. If the
householder is attached, he will give or arrange for a vessel even by accusing
the monk of various faults, which will violate restraint. Therefore, a monk
should not reside in any area with such a resolution. Summary Sutra of the
Fourteenth Uddeshak 1 Buying a vessel or taking a vessel that has been bought,
Borrowing a vessel or taking a borrowed vessel, changing a vessel or taking a
changed vessel, a touched vessel, a vessel brought without the knowledge of the
partner or a vessel brought in front of them, giving an extra vessel to someone
without the permission of the Acharya, giving an extra vessel to the disabled or
the able, Not giving an extra vessel to the disabled or the unable, 8-9 Keeping
a vessel that is not fit for use, abandoning a vessel that is fit for use, 10-11
Making a beautiful vessel ugly or making an ugly vessel beautiful, 12-19
Repeatedly washing or applying paste etc. to an old vessel or a foul-smelling
vessel or keeping it filled with water etc. overnight for many days and fixing
it, 20-30 Drying a vessel in a place with a picture, a place with a trembling
creature, or a place without a wall, 31-36 A trembling creature, grain seeds,
tubers etc., earth, water or fire being in the vessel, taking the vessel after
removing it, Scratching a vessel or taking a scratched vessel, 38-39 Requesting
a vessel from a householder residing in another place or from a householder who
is discussing with someone,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caudahavA~ uddezaka] [325 _ ina 41 sUtroM meM kahe gaye sthAnoM kA sevana
karane vAle ko laghucAturmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai| vivecana-bhikSu yadi
gRhastha ko yaha kahe ki 'hama pAtra ke liye hI mAsakalpa Thahare haiM yA
caumAsA karate haiM, ataH hameM acche pAtra denA yA dilAnA' aisA nizcaya karanA,
yaha pAtra ke liye nivAsa karanA hai aura isakA hI donoM sUtroM meM prAyazcitta
kahA gayA hai| kadAcit bhikSu yadi pAtra kI atyanta AvazyakatA hone ke kAraNa
kahIM kucha dina Thahara bhI jAe aura gRhastha se pAtra ke nimitta upayukta
vArtA nahIM kare to use sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai| pAtra ke nimitta
Thaharane kA saMkalpa evaM gRhastha se upayukta vArtA karake Thaharane para
kabhI daivayoga se vahAM pAtra na mile to sAdhu ko yA gRhastha ko aneka prakAra
ke saMkalpa-vikalpa utpanna ho sakate haiM  /  vaha gRhastha yadi anurAgI hogA
to aneka prakAra ke doSa lagAkara bhI pAtra degA yA dilavAyegA, isase saMyama kI
virAdhanA hogii| ataH aise saMkalpa se bhikSu ko kisI kSetra meM nivAsa nahIM
karanA caahie| caudahaveM uddezaka kA sArAMzasUtra 1 pAtra kharIdanA yA kharIda
kara lAyA huA pAtra lenA, pAtra udhAra lenA yA udhAra lAyA huA pAtra lenA, pAtra
kA parivartana karanA yA parivartana kara lAyA huA pAtra lenA, chonA huA pAtra,
bhAgIdAra kI binA prAjJA lAyA huA pAtra yA sAmane lAyA huA pAtra lenA, prAcArya
kI AjJA ke binA kisI ko atirikta pAtra denA, avikalAMga ko yA samartha ko
atirikta pAtra denA, vikalAMga yA asamartha ko atirikta pAtra na denA, 8-9
upayoga meM na Ane yogya pAtra ko rakhanA, upayoga meM Ane yogya pAtra ko chor3a
denA, 10-11 sundara pAtra ko vidrUpa karanA yA vidrUpa pAtra ko sundara karanA,
12-19 purAne pAtra ko yA durgandha yukta pAtra ko bAraMbAra dhonA yA kalkAdi
lagAnA athavA aneka dinoM taka pAnI Adi bharakara rAta meM rakhanA evaM use
ThIka karanA, 20-30 sacitta sthAna, trasa jIva yukta sthAna athavA binA divAla
vAle sthAna para pAtra sukhAnA, 31-36 pAtra meM trasa jIva, dhAnya bIja,
kaMdAdi, pRthvI, pAnI yA agni ho, use nikAlakara pAtra lenA, pAtra para koraNI
karanA yA koraNI vAlA pAtra lenA, 38-39 anya sthAna meM sthita gRhastha se yA
kisI ke sAtha vicAra-carcA karane vAle gRhastha se pAtra kI yAcanA karanA,

Page #426 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[326] 40-41 The topics of the 27 sutras of this Uddeshak are mentioned in the
Acharanga Sutra. 1-4 8-30 For a Patra, the minor atonement of Laghu Chaumasika
comes for practices such as staying for a month or for the four months (Masakalp
or Chaturmas). 31-36 37 The topic of the 14 sutras of this Uddeshak is not
mentioned in other Agamas, such as 5-7  - Pracha. Shru. 2, A. 6, U. 1-2 A
Bhikshu should not take a Krit, Pramritya, Prachhedya, Anisrusht, or Abhihrut
Patra, and should not change the Patra. Only a usable Patra should be taken, not
an unusable one. The color should not be changed, the Patra should not be used
for other purposes, and the Patra should not be dried in a place containing
sentient beings or in the sky.   Pracha. Shru. 2, A. 6, U. 1-2 [ Nishisutra An
extra Patra should not be given to anyone without the knowledge of the Acharya.
It should be given to the weak and not to the strong. But in Byav. U. 8, there
is a provision for bringing an extra Patra from a distant land. A Patra
containing stationary living beings should not be taken. The Patra should not be
scratched on the top or inside, and a scratched Patra should not be taken. 38-39
40-41 All the sutras of this Uddeshak mention only the atonement related to
Patra, and not any other type of atonement. This is the special feature of this
Uddeshak. || Fourteenth Uddeshak ends || A householder should not be taken from
another place or from the assembly to request a Patra. He should not stay for a
month or for the four months (Masakalp or Chaturmasakalp) for a Patra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 326] 40-41 isa uddezaka ke 27 sUtroM ke viSayoM kA kathana AcArAMga sUtra meM
hai 1-4 8-30 pAtra ke liye hI mAsakalpa yA cAturmAsa rahanA, ityAdi pravRtiyoM
kA laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  31-36 37 isa uddezaka ke 14 sUtroM ke
viSaya kA kathana anya AgamoM meM nahIM hai, yathA 5-7 - zracA. zru. 2, a. 6, u.
1-2 bhikSu ko krIta, prAmRtya, pracchedya, anisRSTa tathA abhihRta pAtra nahIM
lenA evaM pAtra kA parivartana nahIM karanA cAhie  /  upayoga meM Ane yogya
pAtra hI lenA, anupayogI nahIM lenA  /  varNa parivartana nahIM karanA, pAtra -
parikarma nahIM karanA, sacita jIva yukta tathA AkAzIya sthAna para pAtra nahIM
sukhAnA | prAcA. zru. 2, a. 6, u. 1-2 [ nizIthasUtra atirikta pAtra prAcArya kI
prAjJA binA kisI ko nahIM denA  /  azakta ko denA aura sazakta ko nahIM denA  /
kintu byava. u. 8 meM atirikta pAtra dUra deza se lAne kA vidhAna hai | trasa
sthAvara jIvoM se yukta pAtra na lenA  /  pAtra meM Upara yA andara koraNI nahIM
karanA tathA koraNI kiyA huA pAtra nahIM lenA  /  38-39 40-41 isa uddezaka ke
sabhI sUtroM meM pAtra sambandhI prAyazcitta kA hI kathana hai, anya kisI
prakAra ke prAyazcittoM kA kathana nahIM hai  /  yaha isa uddezaka kI vizeSatA
hai  /   //  caudahavAM uddezaka samApta  //  anya sthAna meM yA sabhA meM se
gRhastha ko uThAkara pAtra kI yAcanA na karanA  /  pAtra ke liye mAsakalpa yA
cAturmAsakalpa nahIM rahanA  /

Page #427 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifteenth Uddesaka: Penance for Insulting a Bhikkhu  1. A bhikkhu who speaks
harshly to a bhikkhu, or approves of such speech. 2. A bhikkhu who speaks rudely
to a bhikkhu, or approves of such speech. 3. A bhikkhu who speaks both harshly
and rudely to a bhikkhu, or approves of such speech. 4. A bhikkhu who insults a
bhikkhu in any way, or approves of such insult. (He incurs the penance of Laghu-
Chaumasika.)  **Discussion:** The first four sutras of the tenth Uddesaka
describe the penance for insulting revered gurus, elders, and Ratnaadhikas. It
is the duty of every bhikkhu to respect these individuals. However, a bhikkhu
should also refrain from speaking disrespectfully or insulting ordinary saints,
virtuous women, or sadhus and sadhvis from other gachchas. If a bhikkhu, lacking
control over his speech or behavior, engages in such conduct, he deviates from
the path of self-discipline and becomes liable for the penance mentioned in the
sutras.  The thirteenth Uddesaka similarly describes four sutras outlining the
penance for insulting a householder. The first three sutras address the penance
for verbal insults, while the fourth sutra encompasses all other forms of
insult.  **Penance for Consuming Food with Awareness**  5. A bhikkhu who
consumes food with awareness, or approves of such consumption. 6. A bhikkhu who
rejects food with awareness, or approves of such rejection. 7. A bhikkhu who
consumes food offered by a person with awareness, or approves of such
consumption.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pandrahavA~ uddezaka bhikSa kI prAsAtanA karane kA prAyazcitta 1. je bhikkhU
bhikkhu AgADhaM vayai, vayaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  2. je bhikkhU bhikkhu pharUsaM
vayai, vayaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  3. je bhikkhU bhikkhu AgADha-pharUsaM vayai,
vayaMta vA saaijji| 4. je bhikkhU bhikkhu aNNayarIe AsAyaNAe AsAei, AsAeMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  1. jo bhikSu bhikSu ko roSa yukta vacana bolatA hai yA bolane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  2. jo bhikSu bhikSu ko kaThora vacana bolatA hai yA
bolane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  3. jo bhikSu bhikSu ko roSa yukta vacana
ke sAtha-sAtha kaThora vacana bhI bolatA hai yA bolane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 4. jo bhikSu bhikSu kI kisI prakAra kI prAsAtanA karatA hai yA karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-
dasaveM uddezaka ke prathama cAra sUtroM meM pUjya gurujanoM evaM. sthaviroM kI
aura pUjya ratnAdhikoM kI prAsAtanA karane kA prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  pUjanIyoM
kA vinaya karanA to pratyeka bhikSu kA kartavya hotA hI hai, kintu sAmAnya
santoM, satiyoM yA anya gaccha ke sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke prati bhI bhikSu ko
avinaya-pAsAtanA yukta vacana-vyavahAra aura aisI hI anya tiraskAradyotaka
pravRttiyA~ nahIM karanA caahie| yadi koI bhikSu apane vacana yA vyavahAra para
niyaMtraNa na rakha kara aisI pravRtti karatA hai to vaha saMyamasAdhanA se
cyuta ho jAtA hai aura sUtrokta prAyazcitta kA pAtra banatA hai| terahaveM
uddezaka meM aise hI cAra sUtroM se gRhastha kI AsAtanA karane ke prAyazcitta
kahe gae haiM  /  inameM prathama tIna sUtroM meM vacana sambandhI prAsAtanAoM
ke prAyazcittoM kA kathana karake cauthe sUtra meM anya sabhI prakAra kI
prAsAtanAoM kA prAyazcittoM kA kathana kiyA gayA hai| sacitta aMba-upabhoga
sambandhI prAyazcitta 5. je bhikkhU sacittaM aMbaM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai
/  6. je bhikkhU sacittaM aMbaM viDaMsai, viDaMsaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  7. je
bhikkhU sacitta-paiTThiyaM aMbaM bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #428 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nishītha Sūtra 8. A monk who eats a fruit with life or approves of one who is
eating it. 9. A monk who eats 1. a fruit, 2. a piece of a fruit, 3. the pulp of
a fruit, 4. the skin of a fruit, 5. the round pieces of a fruit, 6. the fibers
of a fruit, or approves of one who is eating it. 10. A monk who eats a fruit
with life or approves of one who is eating it. 11. A monk who eats a fruit with
life or approves of one who is eating it. 12. A monk who eats a fruit with life
or approves of one who is eating it. (He incurs the Laghu-Chaumāsī Prāyaścitta.)
Explanation - In these sūtras, the prāyaścitta (expiation) for eating a fruit
with life is mentioned. The commentator has indicated that the prāyaścitta for
eating any kind of fruit with life should be understood from these sūtras. The
first set of four sūtras mention the prāyaścitta for eating or sucking an entire
fruit, and the second set of four sūtras mention the prāyaścitta for eating or
sucking the parts of a fruit. In this second set of sūtras, the term 'amba'
(mango) appears again, which was also present before the commentator, but it is
not used again in Ācārāṅga Sūtra 2, Chapter 6, Lesson 2. There are also
differences in the order of the other terms between the two scriptures.]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 328] [nizIthasUtra 8. je bhikkhU sacitta-paiTThiyaM aMbaM viDaMsai, viDaMsaMtaM
vA sAijjai  /  9. je bhikkhU sacittaM-1. aMbaM vA, 2. aMba-pesi vA, 3. aMba-
bhittaM vA, 4. aMba-sAlagaM vA, 5. aMbaDagalaM vA, 6. aMbacoyagaM vA bhujai,
bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  10. je bhikkhU sacittaM aMbaM vA jAva aMbacoyagaM vA
viDaMsai viDaMsaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  11. je bhikkhU sacitta-paiTThiyaM aMbaM vA
jAva aMbacoyagaM vA bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  12. je bhikkhU sacitta-
paiTThiyaM aMbaM vA jAva aMbacoyagaM vA viDaMsai, viDaMsaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  5.
jo bhikSu sacitta Ama khAtA hai yA khAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 6. jo
bhikSu sacitta prAma cUsatA hai yA cUsane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  7. jo
bhikSu sacitta-pratiSThita Ama khAtA hai yA khAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai
/  8. jo bhikSu sacitta-pratiSThita prAma cUsatA hai yA cUsane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  9. jo bhikSu sacitta 1. prAma ko, 2. Ama kI phAMka ko 3. prAma ke
arddhabhAga ko, 4. grAma ke chilake ko (athavA Ama ke rasa ko), 5. Ama ke gola
Tukar3oM ko, 6. Ama kI kesarAoM ko (athavA Ama ke chilake ko) khAtA hai yA khAne
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 10. jo bhikSu sacitta bAma ko yAvat grAma kI
kesarAoM ko cUsatA hai yA cUsane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 11. jo bhikSu
sacitta-pratiSThita grAma kI yAvat prAma kI kesarAtroM ko khAtA hai yA khAne
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 12. jo bhikSu sacitta-pratiSThita Ama ko yAvat Ama
kI kesarAoM ko cUsatA hai yA cUsane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| [use
laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /  vivecana-ina sUtroM meM sacitta Amra phala
khAne kA prAyazcitta kahA hai| yahAM bhASyakAra ne upalakSaNa se anya sabhI
prakAra ke sacitta phaloM ke khAne kA prAyazcitta bhI ina sUtroM se samajha lene
kA sUcita kiyA hai| prathama sUtracatuSTaya meM akhaNDa Ama ke khAne yA cUsane
kA prAyazcitta kahA hai tathA dvitIya sUtracatuSTaya meM usake vibhAgoM [khaMDoM
ko khAne yA cUsane kA prAyazcitta kahA hai| isa sUtracatuSTaya meM puna: 'aMbaM
vA' pATha AyA hai jo cUrNikAra ke sAmane bhI thA kintu AcA. zru. 2 a. 6 u. 2 meM
punaH aMbaM zabda kA prayoga nahIM hai  /  anya zabdoM ke krama meM bhI donoM
AgamoM meM antara hai|

Page #429 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifteenth Uddesaka  [329 Nishīthasūtra]  In Ācārāṅgasūtra: 1. Ambaṁ 1. Ambaṁ
bhittaṁ 2. Ambaṁ pesi 2. Ambaṁ pesi 3. Ambaṁ bhittaṁ 3. Ambaṁ coyyagaṁ 4. Ambaṁ
sālagaṁ 4. Ambaṁ sālagaṁ 5. Ambaṁ dagalaṁ 5. Ambaṁ dagalaṁ 6. Ambaṁ coyyagaṁ
There are also differences in the interpretation of some words in both the
Āgams. In Ācārāṅga: Nishīth: Ambaṁ sālagaṁ = Mango juice Mango peel Ambaṁ
coyyagaṁ = Mango peel Mango kesara  Again, the word 'Ambaṁ' has many meanings,
which the Chūrṇikār has explained as follows: 1. Whole mango, not even slightly
broken. 2. In the first set of four sūtras, it is a mango with a bound seed, in
the second set of four sūtras, it is a mango with an unbound seed. 3. In the
first set of four sūtras, it is an unbroken mango, in the second set of four
sūtras, it is a broken mango. 4. In the first set of four sūtras, it is a
general statement, in the second set of four sūtras, it is a specific statement.
Looking at these alternatives, it seems that the text of Ācārāṅga is correct and
their meanings also seem consistent. In Nishīth, it is possible that the word
"Ambaṁ" has been repeated due to a scribal error.  These sūtras state the
atonement for eating or sucking a mango with a seed, or for eating a mango with
a seed that is bound. Therefore, if the mango is seedless and the seed has been
removed, there is no atonement for eating or sucking such a mango.  _Eating
means chewing with teeth and sucking means drawing juice into the mouth without
chewing with teeth._  See Ācārāṅga Śruta 2, Adhyāya 7, Uddesaka 2 for a detailed
description of staying in a mango grove and eating mangoes.  Atonement for
getting the body cleaned by a householder 13 to 66. If a monk gets his feet
washed or massaged by someone other than a monk or a householder, or approves of
someone getting their feet washed or massaged, he should be punished according
to the third Uddesaka, just as if a monk gets his head cleaned by someone other
than a monk or a householder, or approves of someone getting their head cleaned.
13 to 16. If a monk gets his feet washed or massaged by someone other than a
monk or a householder, once or many times, or approves of someone getting their
feet washed or massaged, he should be punished according to the third Uddesaka,
just as if a monk gets his head cleaned by someone other than a monk or a
householder, or approves of someone getting their head cleaned.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pandrahavAM uddezaka [329 nizIthasUtra meM AcArAMgasUtra meM 1. aMbaM 1. aMba
bhittaM 2. aMbaM pesi 2. aMbaM pesi 3. aMbabhittaM 3. aMbacoyagaM 4. aMbasAlagaM
4. aMbasAlagaM 5. aMbaDagalaM 5. aMbaDagalaM 6. aMbacoyagaM donoM prAgamoM meM
kucha zabdoM kI vyAkhyA bhI bhinna-bhinna haiAcArAMga meM nizItha meM aMbasAlaga
= aAmra kA rasa Amra kI chAla aMbacoyaga = aAmra kI chAla Amra kI kesarA pUnaH
Aye 'aMbaM' zabda ke aneka arthoM kI cUrNikAra ne isa prakAra kalpanA kI hai1.
akhaMDa Amra, kiMcit bhI khaMDita nhiiN| 2. prathama sUtracatuSka meM
baddhasthika Amra hai, dvitIyasUtra catuSka meM abaddhasthika Amra hai  /  3.
prathama catuSka meM akhaMDita pAmra hai, dvitIya catuSka meM khaMDita Amra hai|
4. prathama catuSka meM aviziSTa [sAmAnya] kathana hai, dvitIya catuSka meM
viziSTa kathana hai  /  ityAdi vikalpoM ko dekhane se yahI lagatA hai ki
prAcArAMga kA pATha zuddha hai aura unake artha bhI saMgata pratIta hote haiN|
nizItha meM saMbhava hai ki lipi-pramAda se "aMbaM" zabda dUsarI bAra pA gayA
hai| ina sUtroM meM sacitta Amra va Amra-vibhAgoM ke khAne kA athavA cUsane kA
tathA sacitta pratibaddha [guThalI yukta] ko khAne kA prAyazcitta kahA hai  /
ataH pAmra acitta ho aura guThalI nikAla do gaI ho to vaise Amra khAne yA cUsane
kA prAyazcitta nahIM hai| _ khAne kA tAtparya hai dAMtoM se cabAnA tathA cUsane
kA artha hai dAMtoM se binA cabAye mukha meM rasa khIMca kara niglnaa| Amravana
meM Thaharane kA va Amra khAne Adi kA vizeSa varNana AcA. zru. 2 a. 7 u. 2 meM
dekheN| gRhastha se zarIra kA parikarma karAne kA prAyazcitta 13 se 66. je
bhikkhU aNNautthieNa vA gArathieNa vA appaNo pAe AmajjAvejja vA pamajjAvejja vA,
AmajjAvaMtaM vA pamajjAvaMtaM vA sAijjai evaM taiya uddesaga gameNaM NeyavvaM
jAva je bhikkhU gAmANugAmaM duijjamANe aNNautthieNa vA gArathieNa vA appaNo
sIsavAriyaM kArei kAreMtaM vA saaijji| 13 se 16. jo bhikSu anyatorthika yA
gRhastha se apane pAMvoM kA eka bAra yA aneka bAra "Amarjana" karavAtA hai yA
karavAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| isa prakAra tIsare uddezaka ke

Page #430 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[330] A monk who knows the entire Palapaca, similar to the Nisitha Sutra [Sutras
16 to 69], who covers his head or approves of someone covering their head while
traveling from village to village with a non-Jain or householder, [receives the
Laghu Chaumasi Pratikramana]. Discussion - If a monk has a householder perform
bodily care for him, he receives the Pratikramana as stated in the Sutra. Here,
the discussion of 54 Sutras should be understood as similar to the third
Uddeśaka. Pratikramana for excreting in unallowable places 67. A monk who
excretes or approves of someone excreting in a Dharmasala, a garden, a house of
a story teller, or a hermitage. 68. A monk who excretes or approves of someone
excreting in a garden, a garden house, a garden hall, a place outside the city,
a house outside the city, or a hall outside the city. 69. A monk who excretes or
approves of someone excreting in a stable, a stable house, a charioteer's house,
a gate, a door, or a tower. 70. A monk who excretes or approves of someone
excreting on a road, a path, a river bank, or a place of worship. 71. A monk who
excretes or approves of someone excreting in a deserted house, a deserted hall,
a broken house, a broken hall, a storehouse, or a granary. 72. A monk who
excretes or approves of someone excreting in a grass house, a grass hall, a
straw house, a straw hall, a chaff house, or a chaff hall. 73. A monk who
excretes or approves of someone excreting in a workshop, a workshop house, a
vehicle house, or a vehicle hall. 74. A monk who excretes or approves of someone
excreting in a shop, a shop house, a market, a market house, a store, or a store
house. 75. A monk who excretes or approves of someone excreting in a cattle
shed, a cattle shed house, a large house, or a large house. 67. A monk who
excretes or approves of someone excreting in a Dharmasala, a garden, a house of
a story teller, or a hermitage. 68. A monk who excretes or approves of someone
excreting in a garden, a garden house, a garden hall, a place outside the city,
a house outside the city, or a hall outside the city.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 330] [nizIthasUtra [sUtra 16 se 69] ke samAna pUrA pAlApaka jAnanA yAvat jo
bhikSu anyatIthika yA gRhastha se grAmAnugrAma vihAra karate hue apanA mastaka
DhaMkavAtA hai yA DhaMkavAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  [use laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta pAtA hai  / ] vivecana-bhikSu yadi gRhastha se zArIrika paricaryA
karAve to use sUtrokta prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  yahAM 54 sUtroM kA vivecana
tIsare uddezaka ke samAna samajhe  /  akalpanIya sthAnoM para mala-mUtra-
pariSThApana kA prAyazcitta 67. je bhikkhU AgaMtAgAraMsi vA, ArAmAgAraMsi vA,
gAhAvaikulaMsi vA, pariyAvasahaMsi vA uccAra-pAsavaNaM pariTThavei
pariTThaveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  68. je bhikkhU ujjANaMsi vA, ujjANagihaMsi vA,
ujjANasAlaMsi vA, nijjANaMsi vA, nijjANagihaMsi vA, nijjANasAlaMsi vA uccAra-
pAsavaNaM pariTThavei, pariveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  69. je bhikkhU aTTasi vA,
aTTAlayaMsi vA, cariyaMsi vA, pAgAraMsi vA, dAraMsi vA, gopuraMsi vA uccAra-
pAsavaNaM pariDhuvei, pariveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  70. je bhikkhU dagamaggaMsi vA,
dagapahaMsi vA, dagatIraMsi vA dagaTThANaMsi vA uccAra-pAsavaNaM pariTThavei,
parivetaM vA saaijji| 71. je bhikkhU sunnagihaMsi vA, sunnasAlaMsi vA,
bhinnagihaMsi vA, bhinnasAlaMsi vA, kUDAgAraMsi vA, koTThAgAraMsi vA uccAra-
pAsavaNaM parivei, pariveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  72. je bhikkhU taNagihaMsi vA,
taNasAlaMsi vA, tusagihaMsi vA, tusasAlaMsi vA, bhusagirhasi vA, bhusasAlaMsi vA
uccAra-pAsavaNaM pariTThavei, pariveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  73. je bhikkhU
jANasAlaMsi vA, jANagihaMsi vA, vAhaNagihaMsi vA, vAhaNasAlaMsi vA uccAra-
pAsavaNaM paridRvei, pariveMtaM vA saaijji| 74. je bhikkhU paNiyasAlaMsi vA,
paNiyagihaMsi vA, pariyAsAlaMsi vA, pariyAgihaMsi vA, kuviyasAlaMsi vA, kuviya
gihaMsi vA uccAra-pAsavaNaM pariTavei paridvavetaM vA sAijjai  /  75. je bhikkhU
goNasAlaMsi vA, goNagihaMsi vA, mahAkulaMsi vA, mahAgihaMsi vA uccArapAsavaNaM
pariTavei, pariveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  67. jo bhikSu dharmazAlA meM, udyAna meM,
gAthApatikula meM yA parivrAjaka ke Azrama meM mala-mUtra kA parityAga karatA
hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 68. jo bhikSu udyAna meM, udyAnagRha
meM, udyAnazAlA meM, nagara ke bAhara bane hue sthAna meM, nagara ke bAhara bane
hue ghara meM, nagara ke bAhara banI huI zAlA meM mala-mUtra kA parityAga karatA
hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /

Page #431 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifteenth Uddeshak  [331]  69. A monk who abandons excrement or approves of
someone doing so on a platform, an attic, a charika, a rampart, a doorway, or a
gopura. 70. A monk who abandons excrement or approves of someone doing so in a
water passage, a water path, on the bank of a reservoir, or in a water place.
71. A monk who abandons excrement or approves of someone doing so in an empty
house, an empty hall, a broken house, a broken hall, a granary, or a storehouse.
72. A monk who abandons excrement or approves of someone doing so in a grass
house, a grass hall, a tus house, a tus hall, a husk house, or a husk hall. 73.
A monk who abandons excrement or approves of someone doing so in a vehicle hall,
a vehicle house, a vehicle hall, or a vehicle house. 74. A monk who abandons
excrement or approves of someone doing so in a sales hall, a sales house, a
wandering monk hall, a wandering monk house, a lime making hall, or a lime
making house. 75. A monk who abandons excrement or approves of someone doing so
in a bull hall, a bull house, a mahakula, or a mahagriha. [He incurs the
laghuchoumasi pratyachitta.]  **Discussion:** - These nine sutras mention 46
places. Some of these places are individual and some are public. These places
also have owners or protectors. It is completely forbidden to abandon excrement
in such places. Therefore, abandoning excrement in such places causes a fault in
the third mahavrata of the monk, and if the monk is aware of it, it also leads
to the condemnation of all monks and the sangha. There can also be many types of
rude behavior.  **Civility and foolishness are revealed when someone is angered,
along with the behavior of the monk.**  Therefore, a monk should not abandon
excrement in the places mentioned in the sutras.  If any of these public places
have become places for people to abandon excrement, then there is no
pratyachitta for a monk to abandon excrement in that place in a proper manner.
If the owner of any individual place has given permission to the monks to
abandon excrement in it, then the monk can abandon excrement in a suitable place
devoid of living beings, with discretion. There is no pratyachitta mentioned in
the sutras for abandoning excrement in that place, which has been granted
permission.  In the third uddeshak, there is also mention of pratyachitta
related to abandoning excrement in many places. The pratyachitta mentioned there
is also in the same spirit.  In such places, although the words "uccar" and
"prasravan" are used to indicate excrement,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pandrahavAM uddezaka [ 331 69. jo bhikSu cabUtare para, aTTAlikA meM, carikA
meM, prAkAra para, dvAra meM, gopura meM mala-mUtra kA parityAga karatA hai yA
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  70. jo bhikSu jala mArga meM, jalapatha
meM, jalAzaya ke tIra para, jalasthAna para mala-mUtra kA parityAga karatA hai
yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  71. jo bhikSu zUnya gRha meM, zUnya
zAlA meM, TUTe ghara meM TUTI zAlA meM, kUTAgAra meM, koSThAgAra meM mala-mUtra
kA parityAga karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  72. jo bhikSu
tRNa - gRha meM, tRNazAlA meM, tusa - gRha meM, tusazAlA meM, bhusa -gRha meM
bhusazAlA meM mala-mUtra kA parityAga karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  } 73. jo bhikSu yAnazAlA meM, yAnagRha meM, vAhana - zAlA meM
vAhana gRha meM mala-mUtra kA parityAga karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  74. jo bhikSu vikrayazAlA meM yA vikrayagRha meM parivrAjakazAlA
meM yA parivrAjaka - gRha meM, cUnA prAdi banAne kI zAlA meM yA gRha meM mala-
mUtra kA parityAga karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  75. jo
bhikSu baila-zAlA meM yA baila-gRha meM, mahAkula meM yA mahAgRha meM mala-mUtra
kA parityAga karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  [ use
laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  ] vivecana- -ina nau sUtroM meM 46
sthAnoM kA kathana hai  /  ina sthAnoM meM kucha sthAna vyaktigata haiM aura
kucha sArvajanika sthAna haiN| ina sthAnoM ke svAmI yA rakSaka bhI hote haiM  /
aise sthAnoM meM malamUtra tyAgane kA sarvathA niSedha hotA hai  /  isalie aise
sthAnoM meM mala-mUtra tyAgane se bhikSu ke tIsare mahAvrata meM doSa lagatA hai
aura jAnakArI hone para usa sAdhu kI hai, sAtha hI samasta sAdhutroM evaM saMgha
kI niMdA hotI hai  /  kisI ke aneka prakAra ke aziSTa vyavahAra bhI ho sakate
haiM  /  sabhyatA evaM mUrkhatA pragaTa hotI kupita hone para usa sAdhu ke sAtha
ataH bhikSu ko sUtrokta sthAnoM para mala-mUtra kA tyAga nahIM karanA cAhie  /
inameM se yadi koI sArvajanika sthAna janatA ke mala-mUtra tyAgane kA bana cukA
hai to usa sthAna para bhikSu ko vidhipUrvaka mala-mUtra tyAga karane para koI
prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai  /  inameM se yadi kisI vyaktigata sthAna ke svAmI ne
bhikSutroM ko usameM mala-mUtra tyAgane kI AjJA de dI ho to jIva Adi se rahita
yogya bhUmi meM bhikSu viveka pUrvaka mala-mUtra paraTha sakatA hai  /  usa
prAjJAprApta sthAna meM mala-mUtra paraThane para sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM AtA
hai  /  tIsare uddezka meM bhI kaI sthaloM para mala-mUtra paraThane sambandhI
prAyazcitta kA kathana hai| vahAM bhI isI Azaya se prAyazcitta kahe gae haiM  /
aise sthaloM meM yadyapi mala-mUtrasUcaka "uccAra- prasravaNa " ina donoM zabdoM
kA prayoga hai

Page #432 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Nishiy Sutra 332]  Although, primarily, one should understand the [mal] of
speech. This topic is explained in the 3rd and 4th Uddeshak.  For the purpose of
[mal] disposal, generally, the monk is ordained to go to a secluded place
outside the village, etc., where there is no coming and going. However, there is
no ordinance anywhere for monks to go outside the village, etc., during the day
or night for the purpose of excretion. Where they stay, there is a blameless
[paristhapan] ground, they can dispose of urine, etc., in that very place.  If
there is no [paristhapan] ground attached to the place where the monk stays,
then according to the 10th A. 8 and Shraacha. Shru. 2 A. 2, that place is not
fit for the monk to stay.  Even a common householder, if he has to stay
somewhere for a few days, also wants to stay where there is a place to dispose
of [mal] and urine nearby.  The monk, engaged in the practice of restraint, has
the fifth [paristhapanika] samiti, therefore, he should definitely see a
[paristhapan] worthy ground before staying.  In some copies of Nishith, the text
"Juggsalans" is found after "Jaanagihans", but from the study of Churn, it is
known that "Jugg" is a type of "Jaan" and after that, the word "Vahan" means a
stable and house for horses, etc.  As - Juggadi Jaanaana Akudda Sala, Sakuddum
Giham. Assadia Vahana, Taana Sala Giham Wa. - Churn ||  A place without walls
for vehicles, etc., is called "Sala" and a place with walls is called "Griha".
Horses, etc., are called vehicles, their "Sala" and "Griha" are called
"Vahansala" and "Vahangriha". According to this explanation, the original text
is accepted here.  In Sutra 67, the Ashram of the Parivrajaks is mentioned and
in Sutra 74, the Parivrajaksala and Parivrajagrih are mentioned. The place where
the Parivrajaks reside permanently is called Ashram. And the place built for
resting on the way is called Sala or Griha, one should understand this. Perhaps,
due to a scribal error, "Pariya" has become "Paniy" and the text has become
longer, this topic is explained in the eighth Uddeshak.  ##  Penance for giving
food to a householder  76. Je Bhikkhu Annautthiyaassa Wa, Garathiyassa Wa Asanan
Wa Paanan Wa Khaiman Wa Saiman Wa Dei, Detan Wa Saizjai.  76. The monk who gives
food, drink, edible or palatable to another Tirthika or a householder, or
approves of the giver, [he is given the Laghu Chaumasi penance].  Explanation -
It is not permissible for a monk to give food to any householder or to a Samayik
vow-taker Shravak sitting in the Upashraya, because his Savadya Yoga is not
completely abandoned.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ nizIyasUtra 332] tathApi mukhyatA uccAra [ mala] kI hI samajhanI cAhiye  /
isa viSaya kA spaSTIkaraNa uddezaka 3-4 meM kiyA gayA hai  /  malaparityAga ke
liye sAmAnya rUpa se bhikSu ko grAmAdi ke bAhara AvAgamana rahita dRSTa sthAna
meM jAne kA vidhAna hai  /  kintu prasravaNa ke liye dina meM yA rAtri meM
bhikSutroM ko grAmAdi ke bAhara jAne kA kahIM vidhAna nahIM hai  /  ve jahAM
Thaharate haiM vahIM nirdoSa pariSThApana bhUmi rahatI hai, usI meM mUtrAdi kA
parityAga kara sakate haiM  /  yadi bhikSu ke Thaharane ke sthAna se saMlagna
pariSThApanabhUmi nahIM hai to dazaveM. a. 8 tathA zrAcA. zru. 2 a. 2 ke anusAra
vaha sthAna bhikSu ke Thaharane yogya nahIM hai  /  sAmAnya sadgRhastha ko bhI
yadi kahIM kucha dina ke liye ThaharanA par3atA hai to vaha bhI mala-mUtra se
nivRtta hone kA sthAna Asa-pAsa meM kahIM ho, vahAM ThaharanA cAhatA hai  /
saMyama sAdhanA-rata bhikSu ke to pAMcavI pariSThApanikAsamiti hai, ataH use
Thaharane ke pahale hI pariSThApana yogya bhUmi ko avazya dekhanA cAhie  /
nizItha kI kucha pratiyoM meM " jANagihaMsi" ke bAda "juggasAlaMsi" pATha milatA
hai kintu cUrNa ke adhyayana se yaha jJAta hotA hai ki "jugga" to 'jANa' kA hI
eka prakAra hai aura usake bAda " vAhaNa" zabda se ghor3e Adi kI zAlA aura gRha
aisA artha kiyA gayA hai| yathA - jugAdi jANANa akuDDA sAlA, sakuDDaM gihaM  /
assAdiyA vAhaNA, tANaM sAlA gihaM vA  /  - cUrNa || yugya Adi yAnoM ke bhitti
rahita sthAna ko 'zAlA' kahate haiM aura bhitti sahita sthAna ko 'gRha' kahate
haiM  /  azva Adi ko vAhana kahate haiM, unake rahane ke 'zAlA' aura 'gRha' ko
'vAhanazAlA' aura 'vAhanagRha' kahate haiM  /  isa vyAkhyA ke anusAra hI yahAM
mUla pATha svIkAra kiyA gayA hai  /  sUtra 67 meM parivrAjakoM ke zrAzrama kA
kathana hai aura sUtra 74 meM parivrAjakazAlA aura parivrAjakagRha kA kathana
hai  /  parivrAjakoM ke sthAyI nivAsa karane kA sthAna prAzrama kahA jAtA hai|
aura mArga meM vizrAnti hetu Thaharane ke lie banA huA sthAna zAlA yA gRha kahA
jAtA hai, aisA samajhanA cAhie  /  kadAcit sambhava hai lipidoSa se "paNiya" se
pariyA hokara adhika pATha ho gayA hai, isa viSaya kA AThaveM uddezaka meM
spaSTIkaraNa kiyA gayA hai  /  gRhastha ko AhAra dene kA prAyazcitta 76. je
bhikkhU aNNautthiyassa vA, gAratthiyassa vA asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM
vA dei, detaM vA sAijjai  /  76. jo bhikSu anyatIrthika yA gRhastha ko azana,
pAna, khAdima yA svAdima detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  [ use
laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai  / ] vivecana - kisI bhI gRhastha ko yA
upAzraya meM baiThe hue sAmAyika vratadhArI zrAvaka ko AhAra denA bhikSu ko
nahIM kalpatA hai, kyoMki usake sAvadya yoga kA sampUrNa tyAga nahIM hotA hai  /

Page #433 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifteenth Uddeshak  [333] Even during Samayik, all necessary activities like
business and farming remain under the ownership of the householder. Therefore,
giving food to anyone other than the intended recipient incurs the prescribed
atonement according to the Sutras.  The householder who gives food does so with
devotion to support the monk's practice of restraint. Therefore, giving that
food to someone else without the knowledge of the Jina and the householder's
permission, violates the third Mahavrata.  If the householder who gave the food
learns that the monk gave it to someone else, it leads to disrespect for the
monks and diminishes the spirit of giving.  If, due to carelessness on the part
of the giver or the monk, food, water, or any other unsuitable food is consumed
knowingly, it should be returned to the same householder immediately. This is
the rule mentioned in Praachan Shruti 2, Adhyaya 1, Uddehak 10 and Adhyaya 6,
Uddehak 2.  **Atonement for giving and receiving food with a Parshvastha, etc.**
77. A monk who gives food, drink, edible things, or drinkable things to a
Parshvastha, is guilty of a sin. 78. A monk who receives food, drink, edible
things, or drinkable things from a Parshvastha, is guilty of a sin. 79. A monk
who gives food, drink, edible things, or drinkable things to an Osanna, is
guilty of a sin. 80. A monk who receives food, drink, edible things, or
drinkable things from an Osanna, is guilty of a sin. 81. A monk who gives food,
drink, edible things, or drinkable things to a Kusila, is guilty of a sin. 82. A
monk who receives food, drink, edible things, or drinkable things from a Kusila,
is guilty of a sin. 83. A monk who gives food, drink, edible things, or
drinkable things to a Sansatta, is guilty of a sin. 84. A monk who receives
food, drink, edible things, or drinkable things from a Sansatta, is guilty of a
sin. 85. A monk who gives food, drink, edible things, or drinkable things to a
Nitiya, is guilty of a sin.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pandrahavAM uddezaka] [333 sAmAyika ke samaya bhI vANijya evaM khetI Adi ke
sabhI sAvadha kArya usake svAmitva meM hI hote rahate haiM  /  ataH kisI bhI
gRhastha ko azanAdi dene para sUtrokta prAyazcitta prAtA hai| AhAra dene vAlA
gRhastha -saMyamasAdhanA meM sahayoga karane ke liye hI bhikSu ko bhAvapUrvaka
AhAra detA hai  /  isalie vaha AhAra anya kisI ko dene para jinAjJA evaM
gRhastha kI AjJA na hone se tIsarA mahAvrata dUSita hotA hai| AhAra dAtA
gRhastha ko yaha jJAta ho jAe ki 'merA diyA huA AhAra sAdhu ne amuka ko diyA hai
to usakI sAdhuoM ke prati azraddhA hotI hai aura dAna bhAvanA meM bhI kamI A
jAtI hai  /  kabhI dAtA kI yA bhikSu kI asAvadhAnI se sacitta AhAra-pAnI yA
akalpanIya AhArAdi padArtha grahaNa kara liyA gayA ho to zIghra hI usI gRhastha
ko punaH de denA caahie| aisA vidhAna prAcA. zru. 2 a. 1 u. 10 tathA a. 6 u. 2
meM hai| pArzvastha prAdi ke sAtha AhAra kA dena-lena karane kA prAyazcitta 77.
je bhikkhU pAsatthassa asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA dei, detaM vA
saaijj| 78. je bhikkhU pAsasthassa asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA
paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA saaijji| 79. je bhikkhU osaNNassa asaNaM vA, pANaM
vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA dei, deMtaM vA saaijji| 80. je bhikkhU osaNNassa
asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDicchai paDicchaMtaM vA saaijj| 81.
je bhikkhU kusIlassa asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA dei, deMta vA
saaijji| 82. je bhikkhU kusIlassa asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA
paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA saaijji| 83. je bhikkhU saMsattassa asaNaM vA, pANaM
vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA dei, dataM vA saaijji| 84. je bhikkhU saMsattassa
asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA saaijji|
85. je bhikkhU Nitiyassa asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA dei, detaM
vA saaijji|

Page #434 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīthasūtra 86  **86. A monk who accepts, gives, or approves of the
acceptance or giving of food, drink, or delicacies to a person who is not a
monk.**  **77. A monk who accepts, gives, or approves of the acceptance or
giving of food, drink, or delicacies to a person who is a *pārśvastha*.**  **78.
A monk who accepts, gives, or approves of the acceptance or giving of food,
drink, or delicacies to a person who is a *pārśvastha*.**  **79. A monk who
accepts, gives, or approves of the acceptance or giving of food, drink, or
delicacies to a person who is *avasanna*.**  **80. A monk who accepts, gives, or
approves of the acceptance or giving of food, drink, or delicacies to a person
who is *prasanna*.**  **81. A monk who accepts, gives, or approves of the
acceptance or giving of food, drink, or delicacies to a person who is
*kuśīla*.**  **82. A monk who accepts, gives, or approves of the acceptance or
giving of food, drink, or delicacies to a person who is *kuśīla*.**  **83. A
monk who accepts, gives, or approves of the acceptance or giving of food, drink,
or delicacies to a person who is *sanskta*.**  **84. A monk who accepts, gives,
or approves of the acceptance or giving of food, drink, or delicacies to a
person who is *sanskta*.**  **85. A monk who accepts, gives, or approves of the
acceptance or giving of food, drink, or delicacies to a person who is
*nityaka*.**  **86. A monk who accepts, gives, or approves of the acceptance or
giving of food, drink, or delicacies to a person who is *nityaka*. (He incurs
the *laghucoumasi* penance.)**  **Discussion:**  Giving food to a householder
implies approval of their worldly life. This is considered a transgression, as
stated in the previous sūtra (76). Giving food to *pārśvastha* and other monks
implies approval of their *eṣaṇā* (desire) tainted tendencies. Accepting food
from *pārśvastha* and others involves consuming food tainted with *udgama*
(origin) and other faults. Therefore, the penance for accepting or giving food
to these individuals is described in these 10 sūtras.  The nature of
*pārśvastha* and others has been explained in the discussion of the fourth
*uddeśaka*.  The order of the five sūtras concerning *pārśvastha* and others is
the same as in the fourth *uddeśaka*, but there is some inversion in the 13th
*uddeśaka*, which may be due to a scribal error.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ nizIthasUtra 86. je bhikkhU Nitiyassa asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM
vA paricchadda, paDicchataM vA sAijjai  /  334] 77. jo bhikSu pArzvastha ko
prazana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima prahAra detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  78. jo bhikSu pArzvastha se prazana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima
AhAra letA yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  79. jo bhikSu avasanna ko
azana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima AhAra detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  80. jo bhikSu prasanna se prazana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima prahAra letA
hai yA lene vAle kA nodana karatA hai  /  81. jo bhikSu kuzIla ko azana, pAna,
khAdima yA svAdima AhAra detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  82.
jo bhikSu kuzIla se prazana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima AhAra letA hai yA lene
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  83. jo bhikSu saMsakta ko prazana, pAna,
khAdima yA svAdima AhAra detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  84.
jo bhikSu saMsakta se azana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima AhAra letA hai yA lene
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  85. jo bhikSu nityaka ko prazana, pAna, khAdima
yA svAdima prahAra detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  86. jo
bhikSu nityaka se prazana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima zrAhAra letA hai yA lene
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  / )
vivecana- gRhastha ko AhAra dene para usake sAvadya jIvana kA anumodana hotA hai
/  usI kA pUrva sUtra 76 meM prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| pArzvastha Adi bhikSuoM
ko AhAra dene para unake eSaNA dUSita pravRttiyoM kA anumodana hotA hai tathA
pArzvastha Adi se AhAra lene meM udgama Adi doSa yukta AhAra kA sevana hotA hai
/  ataH inase AhAra lene-dene kA prAyazcitta ina 10 sUtroM meM kahA gayA hai  /
pArzvastha Adi kA svarUpa cauthe uddezaka ke vivecana meM kahA jA cukA hai  /
pArzvastha zrAdi pAMcoM sUtroM kA krama yahAM cauthe uddezaka ke samAna hai,
kintu 13veM uddezaka meM kucha vyutkrama huA hai, jo lipidoSa se honA saMbhava
hai  /

Page #435 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [335 Fifteenth Uddeshak] The restraint of a monk is gradually corrupted when
he gives or receives food from Parshvastha and others, as it increases contact.
Therefore, a monk should exchange food only with pure, restrained, and virtuous
monks, not with others. Penance for giving clothes, etc., to a householder 87.
If a monk gives or approves of giving clothes, a bowl, a blanket, or a foot-
cloth to a non-Jain or a householder, (he incurs a minor Caturmasika penance).
Discussion-Sutra 76 should be consulted for the discussion of this. The only
difference is that there is a mention of food, while here there is a mention of
clothes, etc. A monk can receive food, clothes, etc., from a householder, but he
is not allowed to give the accepted clothes, etc., to any householder. Penance
for exchanging clothes, etc., with Parshvastha and others 88. If a monk gives or
approves of giving clothes, a bowl, a blanket, or a foot-cloth to a Parshvastha,
(he incurs a minor Caturmasika penance). 89. If a monk receives or approves of
receiving clothes, a bowl, a blanket, or a foot-cloth from a Parshvastha, (he
incurs a minor Caturmasika penance). 90. If a monk gives or approves of giving
clothes, a bowl, a blanket, or a foot-cloth to an Osanna, (he incurs a minor
Caturmasika penance). 91. If a monk receives or approves of receiving clothes, a
bowl, a blanket, or a foot-cloth from an Osanna, (he incurs a minor Caturmasika
penance). 92. If a monk gives or approves of giving clothes, a bowl, a blanket,
or a foot-cloth to a Kusil, (he incurs a minor Caturmasika penance). 93. If a
monk receives or approves of receiving clothes, a bowl, a blanket, or a foot-
cloth from a Kusil, (he incurs a minor Caturmasika penance). 94. If a monk gives
or approves of giving clothes, a bowl, a blanket, or a foot-cloth to a Sansatta,
(he incurs a minor Caturmasika penance). 95. If a monk receives or approves of
receiving clothes, a bowl, a blanket, or a foot-cloth from a Sansatta, (he
incurs a minor Caturmasika penance).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [335 pandrahavAM uddezaka] pArzvasthAdi ko AhAra dene-lene se saMsarga-vRddhi
hone para kramazaH saMyama dUSita hotA rahatA hai| ataH bhikSu ko zuddha saMyamI
sAMbhogika sAdhunoM ke sAtha hI AhAra kA AdAna-pradAna karanA cAhiye, anya ke
sAtha nhiiN| gRhastha ko vastrAdi dene kA prAyazcitta 87. je bhikkhU
aNNautthiyassa vA gAratthiyassa vA vatthaM vA, paDiggahaM vA, kaMbalaM vA,
pAyapuchaNaM vA dei, detaM vA sAijjai  /  87. jo bhikSu anyatIthika ko yA
gRhastha ko vastra, pAtra, kambala yA pAdapoMchana detA hai yA dene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA  / ) vivecana-sUtra
76 ke samAna isakA bhI vivecana jAnanA cAhie  /  aMtara itanA hI hai ki vahA~
AhAra kA kathana hai, yahA~ vastrAdi kA kathana hai  /  bhikSu gRhastha se
AhAra, vastra Adi grahaNa kara sakatA hai, kintu svIkAra kiye gaye vastra Adi ko
use kisI bhI gRhastha ko denA nahIM kalpatA hai| pArzvastha Adi ke sAtha
vastrAdi ke AdAna-pradAna karane kA prAyazcitta 88. je bhikkhU pAsatthassa
vatthaM vA, paDiggahaM vA, kaMbalaM vA, pAyapuchaNaM vA dei, deMtaM vA saaijji|
89. je bhikkhU pAsatthassa vatthaM vA, paDiggahaM vA, kaMbalaM vA, pAyapuMchaNaM
vA paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA saaijji| 90. je bhikkhU osaNNassa vatthaM vA,
paDiggahaM vA, kaMbalaM vA, pAyapuchaNaM vA dei, deMtaM vA saaijj| . 91. je
bhikkhU osaNNassa vatthaM vA, paDiggahaM vA, kaMbalaM vA, pAyachaNaM vA
paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA saaijji| * 92. je bhikkhU kusIlassa vatthaM vA,
paDiggahaM vA, kaMbalaM vA, pAyapuchaNaM vA dei deMtaM vA saaijji| 93. je
bhikkhU kusIlassa vatthaM vA, paDiggahaM vA, kaMbalaM vA, pAyapuchaNaM vA
paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA saaijji| _94. je bhikkhU saMsattassa vatthaM vA,
paDiggahaM vA, kaMbalaM vA, pAyapuchaNaM vA dei, deMtaM vA saaijjii| 95. je
bhikkhU saMsattassa vatthaM vA, paDiggahaM vA, kaMbalaM vA, pAyapuchaNaM vA
paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA saaijji|

Page #436 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[336] [Nishīthasūtra . 96.  A monk who gives a garment, a bowl, a blanket, or a
foot-cloth to a *Nitya* or approves of the giving, 97. A monk who takes a
garment, a bowl, a blanket, or a foot-cloth from a *Nitya* or approves of the
taking, 88. A monk who gives a garment, a bowl, a blanket, or a foot-cloth to a
*Pārśvastha* or approves of the giving, 89. A monk who takes a garment, a bowl,
a blanket, or a foot-cloth from a *Pārśvastha* or approves of the taking, 90. A
monk who gives a garment, a bowl, a blanket, or a foot-cloth to a *Avasanna* or
approves of the giving, 91. A monk who takes a garment, a bowl, a blanket, or a
foot-cloth from a *Avasanna* or approves of the taking, 92. A monk who gives a
garment, a bowl, a blanket, or a foot-cloth to a *Kuśīla* or approves of the
giving, 93. A monk who takes a garment, a bowl, a blanket, or a foot-cloth from
a *Kuśīla* or approves of the taking, 94. A monk who gives a garment, a bowl, a
blanket, or a foot-cloth to a *Sanskta* or approves of the giving, 95. A monk
who takes a garment, a bowl, a blanket, or a foot-cloth from a *Sanskta* or
approves of the taking, 96. A monk who gives a garment, a bowl, a blanket, or a
foot-cloth to a *Nitya* or approves of the giving, 97. A monk who takes a
garment, a bowl, a blanket, or a foot-cloth from a *Nitya* or approves of the
taking (incurs the *Laghu-Caturmāsī* penance). Discussion- It is not appropriate
for a monk who is seeking liberation to exchange garments, bowls, and other
equipment with *Pārśvastha* and others, just as it is not appropriate to
exchange food. The rest of the discussion should be understood as before.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 336] [nizIthasUtra . 96. je bhikkhU Nitiyassa vatthaM vA, paDiggahaM vA,
kaMbalaM vA pAyapuchaNaM vA dei, deMtaM vA saaijji| 97. je bhikkhU Nitiyassa
vatthaM vA, paDiggahaM vA, kaMbalaM vA, pAyapuchaNaM vA paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM
vA saaijji| 88. jo bhikSu pArzvastha ko vastra, pAtra, kaMbala yA pAdapoMchana
detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| _89. jo bhikSu pArzvastha kA
vastra, pAtra, kaMbala yA pAdapoMchana letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 90. jo bhikSu avasanna ko vastra, pAtra, kambala yA pAdanoMchana detA hai
yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 91. jo bhikSu avasanna kA vastra, pAtra,
kambala yA pAdapoMchana letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 92. jo
bhikSu kuzIla ko vastra, pAtra, kambala yA pAdapoMchana detA hai yA dene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 93. jo bhikSu kuzIla kA vastra, pAtra, kambala yA
pAdapoMchana letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 94. jo bhikSu
saMsakta ko vastra, pAtra, kambala yA pAdapoMchana detA hai yA dene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 95. jo bhikSu saMsakta kA vastra, pAtra, kambala yA
pAdapoMchana letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 96. jo bhikSu
nityaka ko vastra, pAtra, kambala yA pAdapoMchana detA hai yA dene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 97. jo bhikSu nityaka kA vastra, pAtra, kambala yA
pAdapoMchana letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai (use laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-pArzvastha Adi ke sAtha AhAra ke samAna vastra,
pAtra Adi upakaraNoM kA lena-dena bhI suvihita sAdhu ko nahIM kalpatA hai| zeSa
vivecana pUrvavat jAnanA cAhiye  /

Page #437 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifteenth Uddeshak:  **Penance for Accepting Clothes Without Investigation**
98. A monk who accepts or approves of accepting a requested or invited garment
without knowing, asking, or investigating, is liable to penance.  This garment
can be any of the four types:  1. **Nitya Niyamsajjie:** A garment used daily.
2. **Majjanie:** A garment worn for bathing. 3. **Chhannoosavie:** A garment
worn for festivals. 4. **Rayaduvarie:** A garment worn for attending the royal
court.  **(He is liable to the Laghu Chaumasik penance.)**  **Explanation:**
The sutra mentions two ways of obtaining garments:  1. **Yachana-Vastra:** A
garment obtained by the monk requesting, "O householder, do you have any
suitable garment for us?" 2. **Nimantana-Vastra:** A garment obtained when the
householder, without being asked, invites the monk, "O Muni, if you need any
garment, I have this one, please take it."  The sutra categorizes the garments
based on their use by the householder. These four categories encompass all the
householder's garments.  1. **Nitya:** This includes garments used daily for
various purposes like lying down, wearing, or covering. The monk can accept
those that are suitable and useful for him.  2. **Majjanie:** This can be
included in the first category, as these garments are used for a short time and
not worn all day. Alternatively, bathing is not a daily activity, so these
garments are mentioned separately. The Churnikar has also included garments worn
for visiting the temple in this category. These are also worn for a short time.
Therefore, this category should be understood to include other garments used for
a short duration.  3. **Mahothsav:** This category includes garments used for
special occasions like festivals, celebrations, fairs, weddings, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pandrahavAM uddezaka ] gaveSaNA kiye binA vastra grahaNa karane kA prAyazcitta
98. je bhikkhU jAyaNA vatthaM vA, NimaMtaNA-vatthaM vA ajANiya, apucchiya,
agavesiya paDiggAhei, paDiggArhataM vA sAijjai  /  se ya vatthe cauNhaM,
aNNayare siyA, taMjahA 1. Nicca niyaMsajie, 2. majjaNie, 3. chaNNUsavie, 4.
rAyaduvArie  /  98. jo bhikSu yAcita-vastra tathA nimaMtrita - vastra ko jAne
binA pUche binA, gaveSaNA kie binA letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai
/  vaha vastra cAra prakAra ke vastroM meM se kisI bhI prakAra kA ho sakatA hai,
yathA 1. nitya kAma meM Ane vAlA vastra, 2. snAna ke samaya pahanA jAne vAlA
vastra, 3. utsava meM jAne ke samaya pahanane yogya vastra, 4. rAjasabhA meM
jAte samaya pahanane yogya vastra  /  ( use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai
/ ) [ 337 ? vivecana - - sUtra meM vastra kI prApti do prakAra se kahI gaI hai
1. bhikSu ke dvArA yAcanA kiye jAne para ki " he gRhapati ! Apake pAsa hamAre
lie kalpanIya koI vastra hai ?" 2. bhikSu ke pUche binA hI gRhastha svataH
nimaMtraNa kare ki "he muni ! Apako koI vastra kI AvazyakatA ho to mere pAsa
amuka vastra hai, kRpayA lIjie  / " isa prakAra ke 'yAcanA - vastra = yAcanA se
prApta' aura "nimaMtraNa vastra nimaMtraNa pUrvaka prApta" vastra kahe gaye haiM
/  = vastra gRhastha ke kina-kina upayoga meM Ane vAle hote haiM, isakA isa
sUtra meM cAra prakAroM meM kathana kiyA gayA hai  /  ina cAra prakAroM meM
gRhastha ke sabhI vastroM kA samAveza ho jAtA hai  /  1. nitya upayoga meM Ane
vAle - bichAne, pahanane, proDhane Adi kisI bhI kAma meM Ane vAle vastroM kA
isameM samAveza kiyA gayA hai  /  usameM se jo bhikSu ke lie kalpanIya aura
upayogI hoM unheM vaha grahaNa kara sakatA hai  /  2. snAna ke samaya -- isakA
samAveza prathama prakAra meM ho sakatA hai, phira bhI kucha samaya ke liye hI
ve vastra kAma meM lekara rakha diye jAte haiM, dina bhara nahIM pahane jAte  /
athavA snAna bhI koI sadA na karake kabhI-kabhI kara sakatA hai, ata: inheM
alaga sUcita kiyA hai| isake sAtha cUrNikAra ne maMdira jAte samaya pahane jAne
vAle vastra bhI grahaNa kiye haiM  /  ve bhI alpa samaya pahana kara rakha diye
jAte haiM  /  ataH isa vikalpa meM anya bhI alpa samaya meM upayoga meM Ane vAle
vastroM ko samajha lenA cAhiye  /  3. mahotsava - tyauhAra, utsava, mele, vivAha
Adi vizeSa prasaMgoM para upayoga meM liye jAne vAle vastroM ko tIsare bheda meM
kahA hai,

Page #438 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 338] [Nishiy Sutra] 4. Rajasabha - The fourth category of clothes refers to
those worn when going to the king's court or to the king's presence.  If a monk
wishes to accept any type of garment, he should inquire about the garment and
ascertain that it is free from any origin-related defects, completely pure. Only
after such inquiry should he accept it. Accepting it without inquiry can lead to
various defects like establishment, acceptance, purchase, non-creation, etc. It
can also lead to intentional or subsequent karma defects. Therefore, this Sutra
states that if these four types of garments are obtained through begging or
invitation, it is a sin not to inquire and investigate them. Therefore, the monk
should carefully investigate the garment. The statement about the garment should
be understood to include the need for investigation and atonement regarding
other utensils, etc.  **Atonement for bodily care for adornment:** 99-152. A
monk who, for the sake of adornment, washes his feet once or repeatedly, or
approves of someone doing so, is subject to the atonement of the third Uddesaka
(knowing the entire Alapaka from Sutra 16 to 69, or a monk who, while traveling
from village to village for adornment, covers his head or approves of someone
doing so, is subject to the atonement of the small Chaumasika).  **Discussion:**
The discussion of these 54 Sutras should be understood to be similar to the
third Uddesaka. The only difference is that here, performing these actions with
the intention of adornment is considered a sin of the small Chaumasika.
**Atonement for wearing and washing utensils for adornment:** 153. A monk who,
with the intention of adornment, holds a garment, a bowl, a blanket, a foot-
cloth, or any other utensil, or approves of someone doing so, is subject to the
atonement of the small Chaumasika. 154. A monk who, with the intention of
adornment, washes a garment, a bowl, a blanket, a foot-cloth, or any other
utensil, or approves of someone doing so, is subject to the atonement of the
small Chaumasika.  If he serves such a person, he is subject to the atonement of
the small Chaumasika, which includes the abandonment of the four-month retreat.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 338 ] [ nizIyasUtra 4. rAjasabhA - rAjA kI sabhA meM yA kahIM bhI rAjA ke pAsa
jAne ke samaya pahane jAne vAle vastroM ko cauthe bheda meM kahA gayA hai  /
inameM se kisI prakAra ke vastra ko grahaNa karanA ho to bhikSu usa vastra ke
viSaya meM pUchatAcha karake yaha jAnakArI kara le ki yaha vastra kisI bhI
udgama Adi doSa se yukta to nahIM hai, pUrNa rUpa se nirdoSa hai ? aisI jAnakArI
karake hI use grahaNa kare  /  binA jAnakArI kiye lene para sthApanA, abhihRta,
krIta, anisRSTa Adi aneka doSoM ke lagane kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai| prauddezika
yA pazcAt - karma doSa bhI laga sakatA hai  /  ataH ye cAroM prakAra ke vastra
yAcanA prApta hoM yA nimaMtraNA se prApta hoM to inake saMbaMdha meM Avazyaka
pUchatAcha - gaveSaNA na karane kA isa sUtra prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /
isalie bhikSu ko vastra ke saMbaMdha meM sAvadhAnI pUrvaka gaveSaNA karanI cAhie
/  vastra ke kathana se anya bhI pAtra Adi upakaraNoM ke saMbaMdha meM gaveSaNA
karane kI AvazyakatA aura prAyazcitta samajha lenA cAhie  /  vibhUSArtha zarIra
ke parikarma karane kA prAyazcitta - 99-152. je bhikkhU vibhUsAvaDiyAe appaNopAe
Amajjejja vA, pamajjejja vA, AmajjaMtaM vA pamajjaMtaM vA sAijjai evaM taiya
uddesaga gameNa NeyavvaM jAva je bhikkhU vibhUsAvaDiyAe gAmANugAmaM ijjamANe
appaNI sIsavAriyaM karei kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  99-152. jo bhikSu vibhUSA ke
liye apane pAMvoM kA eka bAra yA bAra- bAra " grAmarjana " karatA hai yA karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai, isa prakAra tIsare uddezaka ke (sUtra 16 se 69
taka ke samAna pUrA AlApaka jAnanA yAvat jo bhikSu vibhUSA ke liye grAmAnugrAma
vihAra karate samaya apane mastaka ko DhaMkatA hai yA DhaMkane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  ( use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana - uddezaka
tIna ke samAna ina 54 sUtroM kA vivecana samajha lenA cAhie  /  yahA~ vibhUSA ke
vicAroM se ye kArya karane para laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai, itanA hI
aMtara hai  /  vibhUSA hetu upakaraNa dhAraNa evaM prakSAlana kA prAyazcitta
153. je bhikkhU vibhUsAvaDiyAe vatthaM vA, paDiggahaM vA, kaMbalaM vA,
pAyapuchaNaM vA aNNayaraM vA vagaraNajAyaM dharei, dhareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  154.
je bhikkhU vibhUsAvaDiyAe vatthaM vA, paDiggahaM vA, kaMbalaM vA, pAyapu chaNaM
vA aNNayaraM vA uvagaraNajAyaM dhovei, dhovaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  taM sevamANe
Avajjai cAummasiyaM parihAraTThANaM ugghAithaM  /  153. jo bhikSu vibhUSA ke
saMkalpa se vastra, pAtra, kaMbala, pAdaproMchana yA anya koI bhI upakaraNa
rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  154. jo bhikSu vibhUSA
ke saMkalpa se vastra, pAtra, kaMbala, pAdaproMchana yA anya koI bhI upakaraNa
dhotA hai yA dhone vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /

Page #439 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifteenth Uddeshak ] [ 339 One who consumes the places mentioned in these 154
sutras incurs the minor Chau-masi pratyachitt. Discussion - The monk keeps and
uses the equipment like robes, bowls, etc. for the sake of observing restraint.
In Dasavekalik Sutra, Pra. 6 Ga. 20, it is said: "Jampi vattham va payam va,
kambalam payapunchhanam. Tampi sanjam lajjatta, dharanti parihara ti ya." In
Prashnavyakaran Sutra, Shru. 2 Pra. 1 and 5, it is said: "Eyam pi sanjamassa
uvabuhhanattayae vayaatavadansamasaga siya parirakkhanattayae uvgaranam
ragosarahiyam parihariyavam sanjaenam." Meaning - The monk wears or uses robes,
etc. for the sake of observing restraint, to avoid shame, to protect the body
from heat, cold, wind, dust, mosquitoes, etc. The purpose of keeping these
equipment is clear in the Agamas. But if the monk wears any equipment for the
sake of adornment, for the beauty of the body, etc., i.e., to make himself look
beautiful, or for no purpose, then according to the 153rd Sutra, he incurs
pratyachitt. The 154th Sutra states the pratyachitt for washing or decorating
robes, etc. for the sake of adornment. From these two sutras, it is also clear
that if the monk keeps or washes robes, etc. for any purpose other than
adornment, then the pratyachitt mentioned in the sutras does not apply. That is,
the monk can keep the necessary equipment for restraint and wash them as needed,
but there should be no intention of adornment in washing. If it were completely
unthinkable for the monk to wash robes, etc., then the pratyachitt for it would
have been stated differently. But the sutra mentions the pratyachitt only for
washing for the sake of adornment. The 54 sutras related to bodily activities
are often found in many Uddeshak, but here, in the chapter on adornment, 56
sutras are mentioned. Therefore, this sutra prescribes the washing of robes by
the monk. In Gracha. Shru. 1.8 U. 4-5-6, there is a prohibition on washing robes
for those who wear specific Abhigraha images. This is also clear from the
description there. This Uddeshak mentions the pratyachitt for bodily activities,
keeping and washing equipment, with the intention of adornment. In other Agamas,
adornment is prohibited for the monk in various ways: 1. In Dasha. Pra. 3 Ga. 9,
adornment is called an unrighteous act. 2. In Dasha. A. 6 Ga. 65 to 67, it is
said: "What is the purpose of adornment for a monk who accepts nakedness and
shaved head, who does not perform the rituals of hair and nails, and who is
abstaining from sexual intercourse? That is, there is no purpose for such a monk
to adorn himself. Yet, if a monk adorns himself,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pandrahavAM uddezaka ] [ 339 ina 154 sUtroM meM kahe gaye sthAnoM ko sevana
karane vAle ko laghucaumAsI prAyazcittaM AtA hai  /  vivecana - bhikSu vastra,
pAtra Adi upakaraNa saMyama nirvAha ke liye rakhatA hai aura upayoga meM letA
hai  /  dazavekAlikasUtra pra. 6 gA. 20 meM ' kahA hai jaMpi vatthaM va pAyaM
vA, kaMbalaM pAyapuMchaNaM  /  taMpi saMjama lajjaTThA, dhAraMti pariharati ya
//  praznavyAkaraNasUtra zru. 2 pra. 1 tathA 5 meM kahA hai eyaM pi saMjamassa
uvabUhaNaTTayAe vAyAtavadaMsamasaga sIya parirakkhaNaTTayAe uvagaraNaM
rAgosarahiyaM parihariyavvaM saMjaeNaM  /  bhAvArtha- saMyama nirvAha ke lie,
lajjA nivAraNa ke liye, garmI, sardI, havA, DAMsa, macchara zrAdi se zarIra ke
saMrakSaNa ke lie bhikSu vastrAdi dhAraNa kare yA upayoga meM le  /  isa prakAra
upakaraNoM ko rakhane kA prayojana AgamoM meM spaSTa hai  /  kintu bhikSu yadi
vibhUSA ke liye, zarIra Adi kI zobhA ke liye arthAt apane ko sundara dikhAne ke
liye athavA niSprayojana kisI upakaraNa ko dhAraNa karatA hai to use 153 veM
sUtra ke anusAra prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  154veM sUtra meM vibhUSAvRtti se arthAt
sundara dikhane ke liye yadi bhikSu vastrAdi upakaraNoM ko dhove yA susajjita
kare to usakA prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  ina donoM sUtroM se yaha bhI spaSTa hai
ki bhikSu binA vibhUSA vRtti ke kisI prayojana se vastrAdi upakaraNa rakhe yA
unheM dhove to sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai arthAt bhikSu saMyama ke
Avazyaka upakaraNa rakha sakatA hai aura unheM AvazyakatAnusAra dho bhI sakatA
hai, kintu dhone meM vibhUSA ke bhAva nahIM hone cAhiye  /  yadi pUrNa rUpa se
bhikSu ko vastra Adi dhonA akalpanIya hI hotA to usakA prAyazcitta kathana alaga
prakAra se hotA kintu sUtra meM vibhUSAvRtti se hI dhone kA hI prAyazcitta kahA
hai  /  zarIra parikarma saMbaMdhI 54 sUtra aneka uddezyakoM meM prAye haiM
kintu yahA~ vibhUSAvRtti ke prakaraNa meM 56 sUtra kahe gaye haiM  /  ataH isI
sUtra se bhikSu kA vastraprakSAlana vihita hai  /  viziSTa abhigraha pratimA
dhAraNa karane vAloM kI apekSA grAcA. zru. 1.8 u. 4-5-6 meM vastraprakSAlana kA
niSedha hai  /  aisA vahAM ke varNana se bhI spaSTa ho jAtA hai  /  isa uddezaka
meM vibhUSA ke saMkalpa se zarIra - parikarmoM kA aura upakaraNa rakhane tathA
dhone kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  anya AgamoM meM bhI bhikSu ke lie
vibhUSAvRtti kA vibhinna prakAra se niSedha kiyA gayA hai-- 1. daza. pra. 3gA. 9
meM vibhUSA karane ko anAcAra kahA hai  /  2. daza. a. 6 gA. 65 se 67 taka meM
kahA hai ki - "nagnabhAva evaM muDabhAva svIkAra karane vAle, bAla evaM nakha kA
saMskAra na karane vAle tathA maithuna se virata bhikSu ko vibhUSA se prayojana
hI kyA hai ? arthAt aise bhikSu ko vibhUSA karane kA koI prayojana hI nahIM hai
/  phira bhI jo bhikSu vibhUSA

Page #440 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[340] [Nishīthasūtra] "He who engages in the activity of beautification binds
himself with smooth karmas, causing him to fall into the deep and difficult
ocean of the world." "Knowledgeable ones consider even thoughts of
beautification, like tendencies, to be the cause of karma-binding and the world.
From this attitude of beautification, many wrong tendencies arise. This is not
worthy of the conduct of a muni who protects the six bodies." 3. In Daśa. A. 8
Ga. 57, the attitude of beautification is compared to the poison of a snake. 4.
In Uttarā. A. 16, it is said: "A monk who engages in beautification should not
do so. A monk should abandon beautification and body-care, and a celibate monk
should not wear clothes or other adornments for the sake of beauty." From these
Āgama passages, it becomes clear that the attitude of beautification is
completely harmful for celibacy, is a cause of karma-binding, and is worthy of
atonement. Therefore, monks should abandon the thoughts of beautification, that
is, they should not try to beautify their bodies or make their utensils look
beautiful. They should wear utensils only for the sake of restraint and the
protection of the body, and they should wash them only when necessary. Summary
of the Fifteenth Uddeshaka 1-4 5-12 13-66 67-75 76-97 98 He who engages in the
activity of beautification is not free from karmas, therefore a monk should not
engage in beautification. 5-12 13-66 To cause discomfort to another monk through
harsh words, etc., to eat raw mangoes or their pieces with awareness, 99 - 152
To perform the 54 acts mentioned in the sūtras related to body-care with the
thought of beautification, to keep clothes and other utensils with the thought
of beautification, to wash clothes and other utensils with the thought of
beautification, 153 154 etc., these activities incur the minor four-month
atonement.  To have a householder perform one's bodily functions, To defecate
and urinate in inappropriate places, To give food, clothes, etc., to a
householder, to exchange blows, clothes, etc., with a companion, etc. To not
fully investigate the avoidance of faults like origin, etc., in accepting
clothes, The topics of the 127 sūtras of this Uddeshaka are mentioned in the
following Āgamas: the prohibition of eating raw mangoes, etc., with awareness,
the prohibition of having a householder perform one's bodily functions,  - Prā.
Śru. 2 Pr. 7 U. 2 - Prā. Śru. 2 A. 13

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 340] [ nizIthasUtra vRtti karatA hai vaha cikane karmoM kA baMdha karatA hai,
jisase vaha ghora evaM dustara saMsAra-sAgara meM giratA hai  / " "kevala
vibhUSA ke vicAroM ko bhI jJAnI, pravRtti ke samAna hI karmabandha evaM saMsAra
kA kAraNa mAnate haiM  /  isa vibhUSAvRtti se aneka sAvadya pravRttiyA~ hotI
haiM  /  yaha SaTkAya-rakSaka muni ke prAcaraNa yogya nahIM hai  / " 3. daza. a.
8 gA. 57 meM saMyama ke lie vibhUSAvRtti ko tAlapuTa viSa kI upamA dI gaI hai  /
4. uttarA. a. 16 meM kahA hai ki- 'jo bhikSu vibhUSA ke karanI cAhie  /  bhikSu
vibhUSA aura zarIra - parimaMDana kA tyAga kare tathA brahmacaryarata bhikSu
zrRMgAra ke lie vastrAdi ko bhI dhAraNa na kare  / ' ina Agama sthaloM se yaha
spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki brahmacarya ke liye vibhUSAvRtti sarvathA ahitakara hai,
karmabaMdha kA kAraNa hai tathA prAyazcitta ke yogya hai  /  ataH bhikSu vibhUSA
ke saMkalpoM kA tyAga kareM arthAt zArIrika zRMgAra karane kA evaM upakaraNoM ko
sundara dikhAne kA prayatna na kare  /  upakaraNoM ko saMyama kI aura zarIra kI
surakSA ke lie hI dhAraNa kare evaM Avazyaka hone para hI unakA prakSAlana kare
/  pandrahaveM uddezaka kA sArAMza 1-4 5-12 13-66 67-75 76-97 98 lie pravRtti
karatA hai vaha nirgrantha nahIM hai, ataH bhikSu ko vibhUSA nahIM 5-12 13-66
paruSa vacana Adi se anya bhikSu kI AsAtanA karanA, sacitta zrAmra yA unake
khaMDa prAdi khAnA, 99 - 152 vibhUSA ke saMkalpa se zarIra parikarma ke 54
sUtrokta kArya karanA, vibhUSA ke saMkalpa se vastrAdi upakaraNa rakhanA,
vibhUSA ke saMkalpa se vastrAdi upakaraNoM ko dhonA, 153 154 ityAdi pravRttiyoM
kA laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  gRhastha se apanA kAya - parikarma
karavAnA, akalpanIya sthAnoM meM mala-mUtra paraThanA, gRhastha ko AhAra
vastrAdi denA, pArzvasthAdi se prahAra - vastrAdi kA lena-dena karanA  /  vastra
grahaNa karane meM udgama Adi doSoM ke parihAra ke yogya pUrNa gaveSaNA na
karanA, isa uddezaka ke 127 sUtroM ke viSayoM kA kathana nimna AgamoM meM hai,
yathAsacitta Amra Adi khAne kA niSedha, gRhastha se zarIra - parikarma karavAne
kA niSedha, - prA. zru. 2 pra. 7 u. 2 - prA. zra. 2 a. 13

Page #441 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifteenth Uddeshak 67-75 99 - 154 1-4 76-97  **Prohibition of defecation and
urination in inconceivable places, prohibition of vows and tendencies related to
adornment,**  The topics of the 27 sutras of this Uddeshak are not found in
other Agamas, such as:  * Not having expectations from ordinary Sadhus and
Sadhvis. * Not giving food, clothes, etc. to householders and not exchanging
food and clothes with Parsva, etc. * Not investigating the origin and defects of
begging clothes or invitation clothes.  [341 - Pracha. Shru. 2 A. 10 — Uttara.
A. 16 and - Dashava. A. 3 A. 6.8 98  Some hints of these topics are found in the
following Agamas, such as:  * Prohibition of contact with Kushila - Suy. Shru. 1
Pra. 9 Ga. 28. * Prohibition of speaking pleasant words to other monks -
Dashava. A. 10 Ga. 18. * The rule of investigating the origin and defects in
general - Uttara. Pra. 24 and Dashava. A. 5.  || Fifteenth Uddeshak ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pandrahavAM uddezaka 67-75 99 - 154 1-4 76-97 akalpanIya sthAnoM meM mala-mUtra
paraThane kA niSedha, vibhUSA ke saMkalpoM kA tathA pravRttiyoM kA niSedha, isa
uddezaka ke 27 sUtroM ke viSayoM kA kathana anya AgamoM meM nahIM hai, yathA-
sAmAnya sAdhu sAdhviyoM kI bhI AzAtanA nahIM karanA  /  gRhastha ko AhAra-
vastrAdi na denA tathA AhAra evaM vastrAdi kA lena-dena pArzvasthAdi se nahIM
karanA  /  yAcanA - vastra yA nimaMtraNa vastra ke udgamAdi doSoM kI gaveSaNA na
karanA  /  [ 341 - prAcA. zru. 2 a. 10 -- uttarA. a. 16 tathA - dazavai. a. 3 a.
6.8 98 ina viSayoM ke kucha saMketa nimnAMkita AgamoM meM milate haiM, yathA
-kuzIla ke sAtha saMsarga karane kA niSedha - sUya. zru. 1 pra. 9gA. 28 meM hai
/  dUsare bhikSuoM ko priyavacana kahane kA niSedha - dazavai. a. 10 gA. 18 meM
hai  /  sAmAnya rUpa se udgama prAdi doSoM kI gaveSaNA kA vidhAna uttarA. pra.
24 tathA dazave. a. 5 meM hai  /   //  pandrahavAM uddezaka samApta  //

Page #442 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixteenth Uddeshak: Penance for Staying in a Forbidden Bed  1. A monk who
stays in a Sagarik bed, or approves of one who stays in such a bed, incurs a
penance. 2. A monk who stays in a Saudaga bed, or approves of one who stays in
such a bed, incurs a penance. 3. A monk who stays in a Saganij bed, or approves
of one who stays in such a bed, incurs a penance. [He incurs the penance of
Laghu-Chaumasik.]  **Explanation:**  "Sasagarik Sejjan = Jath Ithi Purisa
Vasanti Sa Sagarika, Ithisagari Guruga Suttanivato." - Churni.  A place where a
man and a woman reside, or where a single woman resides, or where only women
reside, is called a "Sagarik bed". This Sutra states the penance for monks
staying in such a bed.  The commentator has called a place adorned with
ornaments, clothes, food, fragrant substances, musical instruments, dance,
drama, songs, and sleep, seating, etc., as "Dravya-Sagarik bed", and a place
with women as "Bhav-Sagarik bed".  Alternatively, a bed that evokes the
possibility of sexual thoughts is called a "Sagarik bed".  Staying in a Dravya
or Bhav Sagarik bed leads to spending time in contemplation or observation of
those objects and their discussions, which hinders the observance of self-study,
transcription, and Pratikraman, etc., of the restrained practitioner. It also
leads to the remembrance of worldly tendencies, laxity in restraint, bondage of
Mohkarma, and violation of restraint.  A disguised seeker may be tempted to
indulge in Mohkarma at any time, leading to deviation from restraint or
celibacy.  Acha. Shru. 2, A. 2 prohibits staying in a bed with women, children,
animals, and food, etc., and also mentions the many faults of staying in such a
Sagarik bed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 solahavAM uddezaka niSiddha zayyA meM Thaharane kA prAyazcitta 1. je bhikkhU
sAgAriyaM sejjaM uvAgacchadda, uvAgacchaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  2. je bhikkhU
saudagaM sejjaM uvAgacchai, uvAgacchaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  3. je bhikkhU sAgaNiyaM
sejjaM uvAgacchai, uvAgacchaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  1. jo bhikSu gRhastha yukta
zayyA meM rahatA hai yA rahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  2. bhikSu pAnI
yukta zayyA meM rahatA hai yA rahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  3. jo
bhikSu agni yukta zayyA meM rahatA hai yA rahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| [
use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai  / ] vivecana - "sasAgArika sejjaM =
jattha itthi purisA vasaMti sA sAgArikA, itthisAgAri gurugA suttaNivAto  / " -
cUrNi  /  /  strI-puruSa jahAM rahate hoM athavA jahAM akelI strI rahatI ho yA
kevala striyAM hI rahatI hoM, vaha sthAna " sAgArika zayyA" hai  /  aisI zayyA
meM bhikSutroM ke rahane kA isa sUtra meM prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  vyAkhyAkAra
ne AbhUSaNa, vastra, AhAra, sugandhita padArtha, vAdya, nRtya, nATaka, gIta
tathA zayana, Asana Adi se yukta sthAna ko " dravya - sAgArika zayyA" kahA hai
aura strIyukta sthAna ko "bhAva - sAgArika zayyA" kahA hai| athavA jisa zayyA
meM rahane se sambhoga ke saMkalpa utpanna hone kI sambhAvanA ho, vaha "sAgArika
zayyA" kahI jAtI hai  /  dravya yA bhAva sAgArika zayyA meM rahane se una
padArthoM ke cintana yA prekSaNa meM tathA unakI vArtA meM samaya laga jAtA hai,
jisase svAdhyAya, pratilekhana, pratikramaNa Adi saMyama samAcArI kA paripAlana
nahIM ho pAtA tathA sAMsArika pravRttiyoM kA smaraNa tathA saMyama bhAva meM
zaithilya A jAne mohakarma kA bandha evaM saMyamavirAdhanA hotI hai  /
chadmastha sAdhaka ke anukUla nimitta milane para kabhI bhI mohakarma kA udaya
ho sakatA hai  /  jisase vaha saMyama yA brahmacarya se vicalita ho sakatA hai
/  AcA. zru. 2, a. 2 meM strI, bacce, pazu tathA zrAhArAdi se yukta zayyA meM
Thaharane kA niSedha kiyA hai aura aisI sAgArika zayyA meM Thaharane se hone
vAle aneka doSoM kA bhI kathana kiyA hai  /

Page #443 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixteenth Uddeshak ] [ 343 Therefore, the monk should abandon the bed of the
ocean of matter and emotion and seek a pure bed. If even after searching, a
faultless bed is not found, then he should remain in the refuge of the Gītartha
and take the atonement mentioned in the sūtras. Saudagam Sejjam   Where there is
water in an open vessel or a pot, etc., the monk's actions of coming and going,
etc., may cause harm to the microscopic beings. From the arising of an
intention, a monk may also have the intention to drink that water, or other
people may have the fear that the monk will drink the water. In the
Brihatkalpasutra U 2, it is forbidden to stay where there are pots full of water
throughout the day and night, and here, atonement is mentioned for staying in a
place where water is generally present. Sāgaṇiya Sejjam   In the
Brihatkalpasutra, two options are mentioned for staying on a bed with fire: 1.
Fire burning in a stove, furnace, etc., 2. The fire of a lit lamp. The monk
should not stay in a house or a room of a house where there is fire burning or a
lamp lit, because if he moves around there or performs the actions of bowing,
writing, cleaning, etc., which are part of the conduct of a monk, there is a
possibility of harming the fire element. Using fire for warmth will incur the
guilt of approving violence. The commentaries have imagined many faults, which
are mostly related to open fire or open lamps. In the present day, the electric
lamps, etc., that are available do not have those faults, but the faults related
to the use of light are still possible. In the Brihatkalpasutra, it is forbidden
to stay in a place where fire or lamps are burning day and night, but here,
atonement is mentioned for staying on a bed with a generally lit fire. In the
Āchārya Śruti 2, Pra. 2, U. 3, there is a prohibition on staying in a sāmaric
bed, a bed with fire, and a bed with water, all at the same time. In the
Brihatkalpasutra Uddeshak 2, there is an exceptional provision for the monk to
stay in a place with water or fire for one or two nights if no other place is
available. In the Niśīthabhāṣya Cūrṇa, it is also said that even if a Gītartha
monk stays in such a place for one or two nights, he incurs atonement, but a
Gītartha monk does not incur atonement. Because he can make a true decision
about the exceptional situation. In reality, to practice the Gītartha and to
practice in the refuge of the Gītartha is the only conceivable practice. The
wandering of one or many Gītarthas and the prohibition of all actions like
begging, etc., is the same. Therefore, if other houses are not available, the
monk can stay in the aforementioned beds for one or two nights, and if he stays
longer, he should understand the atonement mentioned in the sūtras. Many
managers of monasteries install electrical fittings for convenience. They use
and allow the use of lights when necessary. Saints also stay in the same
monastery. There...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 solahavAM uddezaka ] [ 343 ataH bhikSu dravya evaM bhAva sAgArika zayyA kA
parityAga karake zuddha zayyA kI gaveSaNA kare  /  yadi gaveSaNA karane para bhI
nirdoSa zayyA na mile to gItArtha kI nizrA meM vivekapUrvaka rahe aura sUtrokta
prAyazcitta grahaNa kare  /  saudagaM sejjaM jahAM para khule hoja meM yA ghar3e
Adi meM pAnI rahatA ho vahAM Thaharane para bhikSu ke gamanAgamana Adi kriyAoM
se prakAyika jIvoM kI virAdhanA ho sakatI hai  /  udaya bhAva se kisI bhikSu ko
usa jala ke pIne kA saMkalpa bhI ho sakatA hai athavA anya logoM ko sAdhu ke
jala pIne kI AzaMkA ho sakatI hai  /  bRhatkalpasUtra u 2 meM jahAM sampUrNa
dina-rAta pracitta jala ke ghar3e bhare rahate hoM vahAM Thaharane kA niSedha
hai aura yahAM sAmAnya rUpa se jala par3A rahane vAle sthAna meM Thaharane kA
prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  sAgaNiya sejjaM bRhatkalpa sUtra meM agni vAlI zayyA
meM Thaharane ke do vikalpa kahe gae haiM1. cUlhe bhaTTI Adi meM jalane vAlI
agni, 2 . prajvalita dIpaka kI agni  /  jisa ghara meM yA ghara ke eka kakSa meM
agni jala rahI ho yA dIpaka jalatA ho to vahAM bhikSu na Thahare kyoMki vaha
vahAM gamanAgamana karegA yA vandana, pratilekhana, pramArjana Adi saMyama
samAcArI ke kArya karegA to agnikAya kI virAdhanA hone kI sambhAvanA rahegI  /
zIta nivAraNa ke liye agni kA upayoga karane para hiMsA ke anumodana kA doSa
lagegA  /  vyAkhyAgranthoM meM jitane doSoM kI kalpanA kI gaI hai, ve prAyaH
khulI agni yA khule dIpaka se hI sambandhita haiM  /  vartamAna meM upalabdha
vidyut saMcAlita dIpaka Adi meM una doSoM kI sambhAvanA nahIM hai, phira bhI
prakAza ke upayoga se sambandhita doSa sambhavita hai hI  /  jahAM agni yA
dIpaka dina-rAta jalate hoM aise sthAna meM Thaharane kA bRhatkalpa sUtra meM
niSedha hai kintu yahA~ sAmAnyarUpa se prajvalita agni vAlI zayyA meM Thaharane
kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  AcA. zru.2, pra. 2, u. 3 ke hI sUtra meM eka
sAtha sAmArika zayyA, agni vAlI zayyA aura jala vAlI zayyA meM Thaharane kA
niSedha hai  /  vRhatkalpa sUtra uddezaka 2 meM anya sthAna na milane para
bhikSu ko jala yA agni yukta sthAna meM eka-do rAta Thaharane kA apavAdika
vidhAna hai  /  nizIthabhASyacUrNa meM yaha bhI kahA gayA hai ki pragItArtha
sAdhu ko aise sthAna meM 1-2 rAtri Thaharane para bhI prAyazcitta AtA hai,
gItArtha sAdhu ko prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai  /  kyoMki vaha prApavAdika sthiti
ke viveka kA yathArtha nirNaya le sakatA hai  /  vAstava meM gItArtha kA vihAra
karanA aura gItArtha kI nizrA meM vihAra karanA hI kalpanIya vihAra hai  /  eka
yA aneka gItArthoM ke vicaraNa kA tathA bhikSAcarI Adi sabhI kAryoM kA niSedha
hI hai | ataH anya makAna ke sulabha na hone para pUrvokta zayyAoM meM bhikSu
1-2 rAtri Thahara sakatA hai, adhika Thahane para sUtrokta prAyazcitta samajhanA
cAhie  /  aneka upAzrayoM ke vyavasthApaka suvidhA ke lie bijalI kI phiTiMga
karavAte haiM  /  zrAvazyaka kArya hone para lAiTa kA upayoga karate karavAte
haiM  /  usI upAzraya meM santa satiyAM bhI Thaharate haiM  /  vahAM

Page #444 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[344] The main switch of the electricity in the Nishīth sūtra remains lit for 24
hours, but its light cannot be used for necessary tasks. Nowadays, cell-powered
clocks are installed in those shelters for time information. There is no
objection to the main switch and quartz clocks, therefore, no atonement arises
from staying in such shelters. Atonement for consuming sugarcane with awareness
4. The monk who consumes sugarcane with awareness, or approves of the one who
consumes it. 5. The monk who sucks sugarcane with awareness, or approves of the
one who sucks it. 6. The monk who consumes established sugarcane with awareness,
or approves of the one who consumes it. 7. The monk who sucks established
sugarcane with awareness, or approves of the one who sucks it. 8. The monk who
consumes with awareness 1. the middle part of the sugarcane joint, 2. the
section of the sugarcane with the peel (ganderi), 3. the peel of the sugarcane,
4. the section of the sugarcane without the peel, 5. the juice of the sugarcane,
6. the small pieces of the sugarcane, or approves of the one who consumes it. 9.
The monk who sucks with awareness the middle part of the sugarcane joint up to
the small pieces of the sugarcane, or approves of the one who sucks it. 10. The
monk who consumes with awareness the middle part of the sugarcane joint up to
the small pieces of the sugarcane, or approves of the one who consumes it. 11.
The monk who sucks with awareness the middle part of the sugarcane joint up to
the small pieces of the sugarcane, or approves of the one who sucks it. 4. The
monk who consumes sugarcane with awareness, or approves of the one who consumes
it. 5. The monk who sucks sugarcane with awareness, or approves of the one who
sucks it. 6. The monk who consumes established sugarcane with awareness, or
approves of the one who consumes it. 7. The monk who sucks established sugarcane
with awareness, or approves of the one who sucks it. 8. The monk who consumes
with awareness 1. the middle part of the sugarcane joint, 2. the section of the
sugarcane with the peel (ganderi), 3. the peel of the sugarcane, 4. the section
of the sugarcane without the peel, 5. the juice of the sugarcane, 6. the small
pieces of the sugarcane, or approves of the one who consumes it. 9. The monk who
sucks with awareness the middle part of the sugarcane joint up to the small
pieces of the sugarcane, or approves of the one who sucks it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 344] [nizIthasUtra bijalI kA maina svIca caubIsa ghaMTe hI jalatA rahatA hai
kintu usake prakAza kA upayoga Avazyaka kAryoM ke lie nahIM kiyA jA sakatA hai|
samaya kI jAnakArI ke lie aAjakala saila se calane vAlI ghar3iyAM una upAzrayoM
meM lagI rahatI haiN| maina svIca aura kvATja ghar3iyoM se uparokta virAdhanA
nahIM hotI hai, ataH aise upAzrayoM meM Thaharane para sUtrokta prAyazcitta
nahIM AtA hai| sacitta ikSu kA sevana kA prAyazcitta 4. je bhikkhU sacittaM
ucchu bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  5. je bhikkhU sacittaM ucchu viDaMsai,
viDaMsaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  6. je bhikkhU sacitta-paiTThiyaM ucchu bhujai,
bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  7. je bhikkhU sacitta-paiTThiyaM ucchu viDasai,
viDaMsaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  8. je bhikkhU sacittaM 1. aMtarUcchyaM vA, 2.
acchukhaMDiyaM vA, 3. ucchucoyagaM vA, 4. ucchumeragaM vA, 5. ucchusAlagaM vA,
6. ucchuDagalaM vA bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  9. je bhikkhU sacittaM
aMtarUcchuyaM vA jAva ucchuDagalaM vA viDaMsai viDaMsaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  10. je
bhikkhU sacitta-paiTThiyaM aMtarUcchuyaM vA jAva ucchuDagalaM vA bhujai,
bhujaMtaM vA saaijji| 11. je bhikkhU sacitta-paiTThiyaM aMtarUcchuyaM vA jAva
ucchuDagalaM vA viDaMsaMi viDaMsaMtaM vA saaijji| 4. jo bhikSu sacitta Ikha
[gannA] khAtA hai yA khAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  5. jo bhikSu sacitta
Ikha ko cUsatA hai yA cUsane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 6. jo bhikSu sacitta
pratiSThita Ikha ko khAtA hai yA khAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  7. jo
bhikSu sacitta pratiSThita Ikha ko cUsatA hai yA cUsane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  8. jo bhikSu sacitta 1. Ikha ke parva kA madhya bhAga, 2. Ikha ke
chilake sahita khaNDa (gaMDerI), 3. Ikha ke chilake, 4. Ikha ke chilake rahita
khaNDa, 5. Ikha kA rasa, 6. Ikha ke choTe-choTe Tukar3e khAtA hai yA khAne vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  9. jo bhikSu sacitta Ikha ke parva kA madhya bhAga
yAvat Ikha ke choTe-choTe Tukar3e cUsatA hai yA cUsane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /

Page #445 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixteenth Uddeshak  **[345 10. A monk who eats or approves of the eating of
the middle part of a sugarcane stalk, or of small pieces of sugarcane, with
conscious awareness.**  **11. A monk who sucks or approves of the sucking of the
middle part of a sugarcane stalk, or of pieces of sugarcane, with conscious
awareness. (He incurs a Laghu-Chaumasi Pratikraman.)**  **Discussion:** In the
previous Uddeshak, the statement about "village fruits" refers to the
Pratikraman for eating all fruits with conscious awareness or with conscious
awareness and attachment. However, "ikshu" (sugarcane) is not included in those
fruits, because it is not a fruit but a "skandha" (stalk). Therefore, its
Pratikraman is mentioned here in eight sutras.  The first four sutras deal with
general sugarcane, and the second four sutras deal with its parts.  In Acharanga
Sutra 2, Adhyaya 1, Uddeshak 10, sugarcane is described as having many abandoned
dharmas, and its consumption is prohibited. In Praacharan Sutra 2, Adhyaya 7,
Uddeshak 2, it is stated that if the sugarcane is without conscious awareness,
then its consumption is permissible. Here, the Pratikraman for consuming
sugarcane with conscious awareness is mentioned. Therefore, even if it is
without conscious awareness, it is acceptable for a specific reason, otherwise,
due to having many abandoned dharmas, it is unacceptable. If it is consumed for
any reason, one should be mindful of discarding the inedible parts in a secluded
place.  In the Bhashya-Churni, the word "Uchchume-rangam" is explained as
"Uchchumo-yam," which is a synonym. There are also explanations for other words
like "Kaaniyam, Angariyam, Vigadumiyam," etc. These words are found in
Praacharan Sutra 2, Adhyaya 1, Uddeshak 8. These words are not found in the
present sutras. Refer to Acharanga for the explanation of these words. There,
they are also described as "Sachitt" (with conscious awareness) and "Ashastra-
parinat" (transformed without weapons).  **Pratikraman for consuming food, etc.,
by those living in forests, etc.**  **12. A monk who takes food, drink, edibles,
or delicacies from those living in the forest, those who have gone into the
forest, those who are going on a journey through the forest, or those who are
returning from a journey through the forest, or approves of those who take them.
(He incurs a Laghu-Chaumasi Pratikraman.)**  **Discussion:** The sutra mentions
the Pratikraman for consuming food, etc., in the forest, jungle, and wilderness.
There, one may encounter four types of people:  1. **Aranyavaasi:** Those who
live in the forest, eating roots, tubers, etc. 2. **Those who have gone into the
forest:** To collect wood, fruits, etc. 3. **A group of people going on a long
journey through the forest.** 4. **A group of people returning from a journey
through the forest.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 solahavA~ uddezaka [345 10. jo bhikSu sacitta pratiSThita Ikha ke parva kA
madhya bhAga yAvat Ikha ke choTe-choTe Tukar3e khAtA hai yA khAne vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 11. jo bhikSu sacitta pratiSThata Ikha ke parva kA madhya
bhAga yAvat Ikha ke Tukar3e cUsatA hai yA cUsane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
(use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-pUrva uddezaka meM grAma-phala
ke kathana se sabhI sacitta yA sacitta pratiSThita phaloM ke khAne kA
prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| kintu una phaloM meM 'ikSu' kA grahaNa nahIM hotA
hai, kyoMki yaha phala nahIM hai apitu 'skandha' hai  /  ataH isakA yahA~ ATha
sUtroM meM prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| prathama sUtracatuSka meM sAmAnya ikSu kA
aura dvitIya sUtracatuSka meM usake vibhAgoM kA kathana hai| AcA. zru. 2 a. 1 u.
10 meM ikSu ko bahu ujjhita dharma vAlA batAkara grahaNa karane kA niSedha kiyA
gayA hai  /  prAcA. zru 2 a. 7 u. 2 meM acitta ikSu ho to usake grahaNa karane
kA vidhAna hai tathA yahA~ sacitta ikSu ke grahaNa karane kA prAyazcitta kahA
gayA hai| ataH acitta hone para bhI kisI vizeSa kAraNa se yaha grAhya hai
anyathA bahu ujjhita dharma vAlA hone se agrAhya hI hai  /  kabhI kisI kAraNa se
grahaNa kiyA jAe to akhAdya aMza ko vivekapUrvaka ekAnta sthAna meM paraThane kA
dhyAna rakhanA caahie| bhASyacaNi meM 'ucchameragaM' ke sthAna para 'ucchumoyaM'
zabda kI vyAkhyA kI gaI hai, jo samAnArthaka hai tathA vahA~ anya bhI 'kANiyaM,
aMgAriyaM, vigadUmiyaM' Adi zabdoM kI vyAkhyA hai  /  ye zabda prAcA. zru. 2 a.
1 u. 8 meM upalabdha haiM  /  prastuta sUtracatuSka meM ye zabda upalabdha nahIM
haiN| ina zabdoM kI vyAkhyA AcArAMga meM dekheM  /  vahA~ inheM sacitta evaM
azastrapariNata bhI kahA hai  /  AraNyakAdikoM kA AhArAdi grahaNa karane kA
prAyazcitta 12. je bhikkhU AraNagANaM vagaMdhANaM, aDavi-jattA-saMpaTTiyANaM,
aDavijattApaDiNiyattANaM asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei,
paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji.| 12. jo bhikSu araNya meM rahane vAloM kA, vana meM
gae huoM kA, aTavI kI yAtrA ke lie jAne vAloM kA yA aTavI kI yAtrA se lauTane
vAloM kA azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai  / ) vivecana-sUtra meM vana,
jaMgala tathA aTavI meM azanAdi grahaNa karane kA prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  vahA~
cAra prakAra ke logoM kA saMyoga mila sakatA hai 1. araNyavAsI-kaMda, mUla Adi
khAkara vana meM hI rahane vaale| . 2. kASTha, phala Adi padArthoM ko lene ke
lie gae hae  /  3. kisI lambI aTavI ko pAra karane ke lie jA rahA janasamUha  /
4. aTavI se lauTatA huaA janasamUha  /  .

Page #446 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[346] [Nishīthasūtra] If one were to take food from these people, there is a
possibility of them committing violence against plants or animals, or suffering
from hunger, etc., due to the lack of other means in the forest. Therefore, one
should not take food from them. The sūtra uses three similar words, but their
meanings are slightly different. A forest that is very far from settlements like
villages, towns, etc. is called "aranya". "Vana" refers to a forest that is near
villages, towns, etc. "Aṭavī" is a long forest that is full of dangers like
thieves, etc., and takes many days to cross, with no settlements in between.
Even if one were to take food from people returning from "aṭavī", if there is a
possibility of crossing the "aṭavī" in 1-2 days, they may still take longer due
to thieves, etc., or getting lost. Therefore, one should completely avoid taking
food from those who have traveled through "aṭavī". The sūtra uses two words in
relation to "aṭavī", both of which refer to a person who is staying in "aṭavī".
However, if someone is preparing to go to "aṭavī" or has crossed "aṭavī" and
reached a village, etc., then one should not consider taking food from them as a
transgression. In some copies, two sūtras are found in place of this one sūtra.
The main reason for this is a scribal error. ## The Prāyaścitta for Saying
"Vasurātnīka" and "Avasurātnīka" 13. A monk who calls a person with excellent
character qualities as having poor character qualities, or approves of someone
who says so. 14. A monk who calls a person with poor character qualities as
having excellent character qualities, or approves of someone who says so. (He
incurs the prāyaścitta of Laghu-Cāumāsī.) ## Discussion After taking saṃyama,
many practitioners remain engaged in pure worship for their entire lives. Many
practitioners become less dedicated to saṃyama due to their declining physical
abilities or changes in their ideology. Some even start to transgress the limits
of saṃyama and do not purify themselves. Thus, there are different stages of
practitioners. Monks who practice saṃyama with pure worship are wealthy with the
treasure of saṃyama. Therefore, they are referred to as "Vasurātnīka" in this
sūtra. Those who transgress the limits of saṃyama and do not purify themselves
are not wealthy with the treasure of saṃyama. Therefore, they are referred to as
"Avasurātnīka" in the sūtra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 346] [nizIthasUtra inase AhAra lene para jaMgala meM anya koI sAdhana na hone
ke kAraNa ve vanaspati kI virAdhanA kareMge yA pazu pakSI kI hiMsA kareMge
athavA kSudhA se pIr3ita hoMge ityAdi doSoM kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai  /  ata:
inase AhAra grahaNa nahIM karanA caahie| sUtra meM tIna samAna zabdoM kA prayoga
hai, kintu unake artha meM kucha-kucha bhinnatA hai araNya-nagara grAma Adi
bastI se atyanta dUra ke jaMgala  /  vana-grAma nagara Adi ke samIpa ke vana  /
aTavI-cora Adi ke bhaya se yukta lambA jaMgala, jise pAra karane meM aneka dina
lageM evaM bIca meM koI bastI na ho| aTavI se lauTa rahe vyaktiyoM se bhI AhAra
grahaNa karane para yadi 1-2 dina se aTavI pAra hone kI sambhAvanA ho to bhI
cora Adi ke kAraNa se athavA mArga bhUla jAne se kabhI adhika samaya bhI laga
sakatA hai  /  ataH aTavI-yAtrA karane vAloM kA AhAra sarvathA agrAhya samajhanA
caahie| sUtra meM aTavI ke sambandha meM do zabda haiM, una donoM se aTavI meM
rahe hue vyakti hI samajhanA cAhie, kintu aTavI meM jAne kI taiyArI meM hoM yA
aTavI pAra kara grAmAdi meM pahu~ca gae hoM to unakA AhAra grahaNa karane kA
prAyazcitta nahIM samajhanA caahie| kucha pratiyoM meM isa eka sUtra ke sthAna
para do sUtra milate haiN| isameM lipi-pramAda hI pramukha kAraNa hai|
vasurAtnika avasurAtnika kathana kA prAyazcitta 13. je bhikkhU vasurAiyaM
avasurAiyaM vayai vayaM vA sAijjai  /  14. je bhikkhU avasurAiyaM vasurAiyaM
vayai vayaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  13. jo bhikSu vizeSa cAritra guNa sampanna ko alpa
cAritra guNa vAlA kahatA hai yA kahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  14. jo
bhikSu alpa cAritra guNa vAle ko vizeSa cAritra guNa sampanna kahatA hai yA
kahane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|)
vivecana-saMyama dhAraNa karane ke bAda kaI sAdhaka jIvanaparyanta zuddha
ArAdhanA meM hI lage rahate haiM tathA aneka sAdhaka zArIrika kSamatA kama ho
jAne se yA vicAradhArA ke parivartana se saMyama meM alpa puruSArthI ho jAte
haiM to kaI saMyama-maryAdA kA atikramaNa hI karane laga jAte haiM aura unakI
zuddhi bhI nahIM karate haiM  /  isa prakAra sAdhakoM kI bhinna-bhinna avasthAe~
hotI haiN| _ saMyama kI zuddha ArAdhanA karane vAle bhikSu saMyama rUpI ratna ke
dhana se dhanavAna hote haiM  /  ataH unako isa sUtra meM "vasurAtnika" zabda se
sUcita kiyA gayA hai| jo saMyamamaryAdA kA atikrama karake usakI zuddhi nahIM
karate haiM, ve saMyama rUpa ratnI ke dhana se dhanavAn nahIM rahate haiM  /
ataH sUtra meM unako "avasurAtnika" zabda se sUcita kiyA gayA hai|

Page #447 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sixteenth Uddeshak  [347] A monk should not make false statements about
these practitioners who engage in various types of practices, based solely on
attachment, aversion, or ignorance, without having accurate knowledge. That is,
a monk of pure conduct should not be called a monk of lax conduct, and a monk of
lax conduct should not be called a monk of pure conduct.  Contradictory
statements are made only out of attachment, aversion, or ignorance. Such actions
are not appropriate for a monk. For this reason, atonement is mentioned in these
sutras.  Not only should one not make false statements, but even truthful words
that are unpleasant or harmful should not be spoken by a monk.  _The implication
is that calling a pure-conduct practitioner a lax-conduct practitioner, and a
lax-conduct practitioner a pure-conduct practitioner, is a contradictory
statement, and therefore atonement is mentioned for it in these two sutras.
Calling a lax-conduct practitioner a lax-conduct practitioner is a harsh
statement, and therefore atonement arises according to the second sutra of the
fifteenth Uddeshak.  Therefore, a monk should not make false statements, and
even if a truthful statement is unpleasant or harmful to someone, it should not
be made.  This statement is made with respect to the qualities of restraint, and
atonement for false statements regarding all other qualities, such as knowledge,
should be understood from these sutras.  ## Atonement for Gan-Samkramana
(Transition of Group) for Saambhogik (Worldly) Conduct  15. The monk who
transitions from a group of virtuous practitioners to a group of less virtuous
practitioners, or approves of such a transition, (incurs a minor four-month
atonement).  **Explanation:** A Gan-Nayak (leader of a group) is usually endowed
with virtuous qualities, and the monks and nuns of that group are also generally
endowed with similar virtuous qualities. Therefore, a group is also called pure-
conduct or lax-conduct according to the Gan-Nayak.  If a monk does not find
peace or satisfaction in his own group for some reason, and wishes to change
groups, he may do so.  The Thananga Sutra mentions five reasons for changing
groups in its fifth section.  The Brihatkalpa Sutra, chapter 4, lays down the
procedure for joining another group: If a practitioner holding the rank of
Acharya (teacher) or higher wishes to join another group, he should appoint
another monk qualified for the position of Acharya in his place, with the
consent of the group, and then leave with the permission of the group.
_Ordinary monks should also leave only with the permission of the Acharya or
higher. No one can join another group without permission.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 solahavAM uddezaka] [347 vibhinna prakAra kI sAdhanA karane vAle ina sAdhakoM
ke viSaya meM bhikSu ko yathArtha jAnakArI prApta kie binA kevala rAga-dveSavaza
yA ajJAnavaza ayathArtha kathana nahIM karanA caahie| arthAt zuddha AcaraNa vAle
bhikSu ko zithila AcaraNa vAlA aura zithila AcaraNa vAle bhikSu ko zuddha
AcaraNa vAlA nahIM kahanA caahie| viparIta kathana rAga, dveSa se yA ajJAna se
hI kiyA jAtA hai| aisA karanA bhikSu ke liye ucita nahIM hai  /  isI kAraNa ina
sUtroM meM prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  asatya kathana nahIM karanA, itanA hI
nahIM, satya vacana bhI apriya yA ahitakara ho to bhikSu ko bolanA ucita nahIM
hai| _ tAtparya yaha hai ki zuddhAcArI ko zithilAcArI aura zithilAcArI ko
zuddhAcArI kahanA, viparIta kathana hone se prastuta sUtradvaya meM isakA
prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| zithilAcArI ko zithilAcArI kahanA paruSa vacana hone
se 15veM uddezaka ke dUsare sUtra ke anusAra prAyazcitta AtA hai| ataH bhikSu ko
ayathArtha kathana bhI nahIM karanA aura yathArtha kathana bhI kisI ko apriya
evaM ahitakara ho to nahIM karanA caahie| sUtra meM saMyama guNoM kI apekSA se
yaha kathana hai, anya jJAnAdi sabhI guNoM ke viSayoM meM ayathArtha kathana kA
prAyazcitta ina sUtroM se hI samajha lenA caahie| sAMbhogika vyavahAra ke liye
gaNasaMkramaNa kA prAyazcitta 15. je bhikkhU vusirAiyagaNAo avusirAiyagaNaM
saMkamai, saMkamaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  15. jo bhikSu vizeSa cAritra guNa sampanna
gaNa se alpa cAritra guNa vAle gaNa meM saMkramaNa karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana-
gaNanAyaka jaise cAritraguNa se sampanna hotA hai, usa gaNa ke sAdhu-sAdhvI bhI
prAyaH vaise hI cAritraguNa se sampanna hote haiN| ataH gaNanAyaka ke anusAra
gaNa bhI zuddhAcAra vAlA yA zithilAcAra vAlA kahA jAtA hai| kisI bhikSu ko
svagaccha meM kisI vizeSa kAraNa se prAtmazAnti yA santuSTi na ho aura vaha
gaNaparivartana karanA cAhe to kara sakatA hai  /  ThANAMga sUtra ke pAMcaveM
sthAna meM gaNaparivartana ke pAMca kAraNa batAye haiN| bRhatkalpa sUtra u. 4
meM anya gaNa meM jAne kI prakriyA kA vidhAna isa prakAra kiyA haiprAcAryAdi
padavIdhara yadi anya gaNa meM jAnA cAheM to apane pada para gaNa kI sammati se
prAcArya padayogya kisI anya bhikSu ko prasthApita karake aura gaNa kI AjJA
lekara ke jaaeN| _ sAmAnya sAdhu bhI prAcAryAdi kI prAjJA lekara hI jaae| binA
AjJA liye koI bhI anya gaNa meM nahIM jA sakatA hai  /

Page #448 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[348] [Nishīthasūtra] The Āgama states that the primary reason for a change of
gana is to achieve inner peace and growth of spiritual qualities. If a change of
gana leads to inner unrest or a decline in spiritual qualities, then even with
the permission of the guru, it is not considered right according to the Jain
scriptures. This is the understanding from these sūtras. The meaning is that if
someone wants to move from their current gana to a gana with less strict rules,
then according to the sūtras, it is not considered right. However, if a monk,
due to lack of patience or inability to maintain physical and mental composure,
joins such a gana, then according to this sūtra, they incur the prāyaścitta of a
small Caturmāsī. In the 5th ṭhāna of the Ṭhānāṅga Sūtra, the reasons for
changing ganas are mentioned. If a monk changes ganas for any of these reasons
with the permission of the ācārya or other authorities, then they do not incur
the prāyaścitta mentioned in the sūtras. It is essential to carefully consider
the future benefits and drawbacks before changing ganas, as someone who
frequently changes ganas is called a pāpaśramaṇa in Uttarādhyayana 17. If they
change ganas again within six months, then they are called a sabaladoṣa in
Daśavaikālika 2. Therefore, one should not change ganas impulsively without
careful consideration. Prāyaścitta for dealing with a kadāgrahī 16. A monk who
gives food, drink, medicine, or money to a kadāgrahī incurs prāyaścitta. 17. A
monk who accepts food, drink, medicine, or money from a kadāgrahī incurs
prāyaścitta. 18. A monk who gives clothes, a blanket, or a towel to a kadāgrahī
incurs prāyaścitta. 19. A monk who accepts clothes, a blanket, or a towel from a
kadāgrahī incurs prāyaścitta. 20. A monk who gives a dwelling to a kadāgrahī
incurs prāyaścitta. 21. A monk who accepts a dwelling from a kadāgrahī incurs
prāyaścitta. 22. A monk who enters the dwelling of a kadāgrahī incurs
prāyaścitta. 23. A monk who gives a gift to a kadāgrahī incurs prāyaścitta. 24.
A monk who accepts a gift from a kadāgrahī incurs prāyaścitta.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 348] [nizIthasUtra aAgama meM gaNaparivartana kA pramukha kAraNa yaha kahA hai
ki gaNaparivartana se vAstava meM prAtmazAnti hotI ho aura AtmaguNoM kI vRddhi
hotI ho to jAnA kalpatA hai kintu gaNaparivartana karake bhI AtmA meM azAnti yA
AtmaguNoM kI hAni hotI ho to guru kI AjJA milane para bhI gaNaparivartana karane
meM jinAjJA nahIM hai, aisA ina sUtroM se samajhanA cAhiye  /  _ bhAvArtha yaha
hai ki yadi koI apane gaNa ke prAcAra se apekSAkRta kama prAcAra vAle gaNa meM
jAnA cAhe to use sUtrAnusAra jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai| phira bhI koI bhikSu
sahanazIlatA kI kamI se yA zArIrika-mAnasika samAdhi na rahane se aise gaNa meM
jAve to prastuta sUtra ke anusAra use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| ThANAMga
sUtra ke 5veM ThANe meM jo gaNa-saMkramaNa ke kAraNa kahe haiM, unameM se kisI
bhI kAraNa se yadi koI bhikSu AcAryAdi kI AjJA lekara gaNa-saMkramaNa kare to
sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM pAtA hai| gaNasaMkramaNa ke pUrva bhaviSya ke
hitAhita kA pUrNa vicAra karanA atyAvazyaka hai, kyoMki bAraMbAra gaNasaMkramaNa
karane vAle ko uttarA a. 17 meM pApazramaNa kahA gayA hai tathA chaH mAsa ke
andara hI phira anya gaNa meM saMkramaNa kare to use dazA. da. 2 meM sabaladoSa
kahA hai| ataH Aveza meM Akara binA vicAra kie gaNasaMkramaNa nahIM karanA
caahiye| kadAgrahI ke sAtha lena-dena karane kA prAyazcitta 16. je bhikkhU
buggahavaktANaM asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA dei, dataM vA
saaijji| 17. je bhikkhU buggahavakkaMtANaM asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA,
sAimaM vA paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA saaijji| 18. je bhikkhU buggahavakkaMtANaM
vatthaM vA, paDiggahaM vA, kaMbalaM vA, pAyapuchaNaM vA dei, detaM vA saaijji|
19. je bhikkhU buggahavaktANaM vatthaM vA, paDiggahaM vA, kaMbalaM vA,
pAyapuchaNaM vA paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA saaijji| 20. je bhikkhU
buggahavakkaMtANaM vasahiM dei, deMtaM vA saaijji| 21. je bhikkhU
buggahavakkaMtANaM vasahi paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  22. je bhikkhU
vuggahavakkaMtANaM vasahi aNupavisai, aNupavisaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  23. je
bhikkhU buggahavakkaMtANaM sajjhAyaM dei, detaM vA saaijji| 24. je bhikkhU
buggahavakkaMtANaM sajjhAyaM paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #449 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sixteenth Uddeshak  [349]  16. A monk who gives or approves of giving
alms, food, drink, or delicacies to monks who are *kadagrahi* (those who have
abandoned the path of right conduct) 17. A monk who takes or approves of taking
alms, food, drink, or delicacies from monks who are *kadagrahi* 18. A monk who
gives or approves of giving clothes, bowls, blankets, or foot-cloths to monks
who are *kadagrahi* 19. A monk who takes or approves of taking clothes, bowls,
blankets, or foot-cloths from monks who are *kadagrahi* 20. A monk who gives or
approves of giving shelter to monks who are *kadagrahi* 21. A monk who takes or
approves of taking shelter from monks who are *kadagrahi* 22. A monk who enters
the shelter of monks who are *kadagrahi* or approves of such entry. 23. A monk
who gives or approves of giving scriptures to monks who are *kadagrahi* 24. A
monk who takes or approves of taking scriptures from monks who are *kadagrahi*
(He incurs the *laghu-chaumasi* penance).  **Explanation:**  "**Buggaho kala ho,
tam kaun avakkamati.**" "**Ariho ti kalaho tti, bhandanam ti, vido tti egatt**"
- Churni  The sutra uses the term "**Buggahavakkantam**" for monks who are
*duragrahi* (those who hold onto wrong views) and who engage in conflict by
speaking or acting contrary to the scriptures, or who abandon the *gachchha*
(community) and wander freely. This section discusses the penance for
associating with such monks, having contact with them, or engaging in any kind
of exchange with them.  This is because, due to their oppositional nature, there
is a possibility of using coercion or poison when giving or receiving food,
water, clothes, etc. Perhaps, according to the "**kakatalia nyaya**" (the
principle of coincidence), some incident might occur, leading to suspicion or
accusations against each other.  Staying with a *kadagrahi* can lead to
unnecessary disputes or an increase in *kashya* (negative emotions). Monks who
are less knowledgeable or mature might be misled and abandon their *gana*
(group) or their *samyama* (self-control). Alternatively, they might choose to
stay with the *kadagrahi*.  Giving or receiving scriptures can also lead to the
development or increase of various *samsargja dosha* (faults arising from
contact). Therefore, one should avoid any contact with *kadagrahi* monks who are
*utsutr pra-rupka* (those who are openly rebellious).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 solahavA~ uddezaka ] [ 349 16. jo bhikSu kadAgrahI bhAva se alaga vicarane vAle
[kadAgrahI ] bhikSutroM ko prazana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya detA hai yA dene vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  17. jo bhikSu kadAgrahI bhikSutroM se prazana, pAna,
khAdya yA svAdya letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  18. jo bhikSu
kadAgrahI bhikSutroM ko vastra, pAtra, kambala yA pAdaproMchana detA hai yA dene
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  19. jo bhikSu kadAgrahI bhikSutroM se vastra,
pAtra, kambala yA pAdaproMchana letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
21. 20. jo bhikSu kadAgrahI bhikSutroM ko upAzraya detA hai yA dene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  jo bhikSu kadAgrahI bhikSutroM se upAzraya letA hai yA
lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  bhikSu kadAhI bhikSutroM ke upAzraya meM
praveza karatA hai yA praveza karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  22. 23. jo
bhikSu kadAgrahI bhikSutroM ko vAcanA detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  24. jo bhikSu kadAgrahI bhikSutroM se vAcanA letA hai yA lene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai  / ) vivecana
- "buggaho kala ho, taM kAuM avakkamati  / " ariho ti kalaho tti, bhaMDaNaM ti,
vivAdo tti egaTTha  //  - cUrNi  //  jo durAgrahI bhikSu sUtra se viparIta
kathana yA viparIta AcaraNa karake kalaha karate haiM yA gaccha kA parityAga
kara svacchanda vicarate haiM, unake liye sUtra meM "buggahavakkaMtANaM" zabda
kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai  /  yahA~ aise sAdhuyoM kI saMgati karane kA, unase
samparka karane kA yA unake sAtha prAdAnapradAna Adi vyavahAra karane kA
prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  kyoMki virodhabhAva rahane se AhAra, pAnI,
vastrAdi ke dene lene meM vazIkaraNa kA prayoga yA viSa kA prayoga kiyA jA
sakatA hai  /  kadAcit 'kAkatAlIya nyAya' ke anusAra koI ghaTanA ghaTa jAe to
eka dUsare para AzaMkA yA Aropa lagAne kA prasaMga utpanna ho jAtA hai  /
kadAgrahI ke sAtha Thaharane se anAvazyaka vivAda yA kaSAyavRddhi ho sakatI hai
/  alpajJa yA paripakva sAdhu bhramita hokara gaNa yA saMyama kA bhI tyAga kara
sakate haiM  /  athavA kadAgrahI ke sAtha hI raha sakate haiM  /  vAcanA dene-
lene meM bhI saMsargaja doSa Adi aneka doSoM kI utpatti yA vRddhi hone kI
sambhAvanA rahatI hai  /  ataH utsUtra prarUpaka kadAgrahI sAdhutroM se kisI
prakAra kA samparka nahIM rakhanA cAhie  /

Page #450 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[350] [Nishīthasūtra] Here, the atonement for bowing to or praising those who
have taken the vow of begging for food is not mentioned, but it should be
understood. Although atonement is mentioned for various types of contact with
those who have taken the vow of begging for food, or those who are close to
them, it is never appropriate for a monk to behave rudely or impolitely towards
them. Doing so is also a cause for atonement. A monk who knows the cause of a
particular type of benefit, or in exceptional circumstances, may give them food,
etc. Then, by accepting the appropriate atonement for that act, he can also
become pure. There is no instruction in the commentary of the twenty-second
atonement sūtra in the Upāśraya. Therefore, it appears that this sūtra has been
added to the original text for some reason. Before that sūtra, there are two
atonement sūtras about transactions in the Upāśraya. Having three sūtras means
that one should not stay in an Upāśraya with them, nor should one go to their
Upāśraya. Atonement for traveling in forbidden areas 25. A monk who, even though
he is in a region where food and other amenities are readily available, resolves
to travel a long route that takes many days, or approves of someone who does so.
26. A monk who, even though he is in a region where food and other amenities are
readily available, travels towards a region where non-Aryan, Mleccha, and
border-dwelling thieves and robbers live, or approves of someone who does so.
(He is subject to the atonement of Laghu-Chaumāsi). Discussion - Āchā. Śru, 2 a.
3 u. 1 prohibits traveling in non-Aryan regions and on routes that take many
days to traverse, and also explains the difficulties that arise from doing so.
It also indicates that one should not travel towards such regions when there are
regions suitable for practicing restraint. Traveling in non-Aryan regions can
lead to cruel harassment by the ignorant inhabitants, causing the monk to be
unable to remain steadfast in his body and the meditation of restraint. In the
event of a fatal harassment, there would also be self-destruction and
destruction of restraint. Therefore, monks are not permitted to travel to such
regions. Even to travel to an Aryan region, if there is a long forest on a route
that takes many days to cross, and there is no food, water, or housing along the
way, then one should not travel in that direction.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 350] [nizIthasUtra yahA~ una kadAgrahI bhikSuoM ko vandana karane kA yA unakI
prazaMsA karane kA prAyazcitta nahIM kahA hai, tathApi usakA prAyazcitta samajha
lenA caahie| kadAgrahI yA pArzvastha Adi ke sAtha aneka prakAra ke samparkoM kA
yadyapi prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai tathApi unake sAtha aziSTa yA asabhya
vyavahAra karanA sAdhu ke lie kadApi ucita nahIM hai| aisA karanA bhI
prAyazcitta kA kAraNa hai| gItArtha bhikSu kisI vizeSa prakAra ke lAbha kA
kAraNa jAnakara yA ApavAdika paristhiti meM unheM AhAra denA Adi vyavahAra kara
sakatA hai  /  phira usa kRtya kA yathocita prAyazcitta grahaNa kara zuddha bhI
ho sakatA hai| upAzraya meM praveza karane ke bAvIsaveM prAyazcitta sUtra kA
bhASya caNi meM koI nirdeza nahIM hai| ataH mUla pATha meM kisI kAraNa se yaha
sUtra bar3hA huA pratIta hotA hai| usa sUtra ke pUrva upAzraya ke lena-dena ke
do prAyazcitta sUtra haiM  /  tIna sUtra hone se yaha artha hogA ki unake sAtha
eka upAzraya meM nahIM ThaharanA cAhie tathA unake upAzraya meM jAnA bhI nahIM
caahie| niSiddha kSetroM meM vihAra karane kA prAyazcitta 25. je bhikkhU vihaM
aNegAha-gamaNijja sailADhe vihArAe saMtharamANesu jaNavaesu vihAravaDiyAe
abhisaMdhArei, abhisaMdhAretaM vA sAijjai  /  26. je bhikkhU virUva-rUvAI
dasuyAyataNAI aNAriyAI milakkhUI paccaMtiyAI sailADhe vihArAe saMtharamANesu
jaNavaesu vihAra-vaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei abhisaMdhAretaM vA saaijji|| 25. jo
bhikSu AhAra Adi suvidhA se prApta hone vAle janapadoM [kSetroM] ke hote hue bhI
bahuta dina lageM aise lambe mArga se jAne kA saMkalpa karatA hai yA karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| 26. jo bhikSu AhArAdi suvidhA se prApta hone vAle
janapadoM [kSetroM] ke hote hue bhI anArya, mleccha evaM sImA para rahane vAle
cora-luTere Adi jahA~ rahate hoM, usa tarapha vihAra karatA hai yA vihAra karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai|)
vivecana-AcA. zru, 2 a. 3 u. 1 meM anArya kSetroM meM tathA aneka dinoM meM pAra
hone yogya mArga meM jAne kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai tathA jAne para Ane vAlI
ApattiyoM kA bhI spaSTIkaraNa kiyA hai aura yaha bhI sUcita kiyA hai ki
saMyamasAdhanA ke yogya kSetra hote hue aise kSetroM kI ora vihAra nahIM karanA
caahie| anArya kSetroM meM vihAra karane se vahA~ ke ajJa nivAsI manuSya krUratA
se upasarga kareM to bhikSu apane zarIra aura saMyama kI samAdhi meM sthira
nahIM raha sakegA aura mAraNAMtika upasarga hone para AtmavirAdhanA evaM
saMyamavirAdhanA bhI hogI ataH bhikSu ko aise kSetroM meM jAne kI jinAjJA nahIM
hai| _AryakSetra meM jAne ke liye bhI kisI mArga meM aisI lambI aTavI ho ki jise
pAra karane meM aneka dina lageM aura mArga meM AhAra-pAnI yA makAna bhI na mile
to usa dizA meM vihAra nahIM karanA

Page #451 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixteenth Uddeshak  [351] This is necessary because if there is sudden
rainfall on the way, water fills up everywhere, there is vegetation or mud,
etc., then due to the lack of food and other necessities, a critical situation
arises for the restraint and life of the monk. If there is a lot of water in the
rivers, it is also not possible to find a boat, etc. The Acharanga Sutra
prohibits such travel by stating these faults. The same is mentioned here in
these two sutras as a penance.  If one has to cross a difficult forest path to
reach an Aryan area due to famine or the hateful behavior of a king or others,
and there is no other suitable area for maintaining restraint, then the penance
mentioned in the sutras does not apply. Both the Acharanga and Nishita Sutras
allow for this exception, and the Acharanga Sutra also explains what discretion
should be exercised in such a situation.  In addition, it is also prohibited to
travel in the direction where there is an army camp or where there is conflict
between two kings. Therefore, a monk should not travel as far as possible on
paths or in areas that cause distraction to the body and restraint.  The penance
for begging, etc., in despicable families:  27. The monk who accepts food,
drink, edibles, or delicacies from despicable families, or approves of those who
accept them. 28. The monk who accepts clothes, bowls, blankets, or foot-cloths
from despicable families, or approves of those who accept them. 29. The monk who
accepts a bed from despicable families, or approves of those who accept them.
30. The monk who performs self-study (reciting the original text) in despicable
families, or approves of those who do so. 31. The monk who recites the
scriptures in despicable families, or approves of those who do so. 32. The monk
who accepts offerings in despicable families, or approves of those who do so.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 solahavAM uddezaka] [351 cAhie, kyoMki mArga meM acAnaka varSA A jAe, jagaha-
jagaha pAnI bhara jAe, vanaspati yA kIcar3a Adi ho jAe to vahA~ AhAra Adi ke
abhAva meM saMyama aura prANoM ke lie saMkaTapUrNa sthiti utpanna ho jAtI hai  /
yadi kahIM nadiyoM meM pAnI adhika A jAe to vahA~ naukA milanA bhI sambhava
nahIM hai, ityAdi doSoM kA kathana karake AcArAMgasUtra meM aise vihAra kA
niSedha kiyA hai| usI kA yahA~ ina do sUtroM meM prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai|
duSkAla ke kAraNa yA rAjA Adi ke dveSapUrNa vyavahAra se saMyama-nirvAha ke
yogya anya kSetra ke abhAva meM vikaTa aTavI kA mArga pAra karake AryakSetra meM
jAnA par3e to sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai  /  AcArAMga aura nizItha donoM
hI sUtroM meM isakI chUTa dI gaI hai tathA vaisI paristhiti meM kyA viveka
karanA cAhie yaha bhI AcArAMgasUtra meM batAyA gayA hai  /  isake atirikta mArga
meM jahA~ senA kA par3Ava ho, do rAjAnoM kA virodha cala rahA ho, usa dizA meM
jAne kA bhI vahA~ niSedha kiyA gayA hai  /  ataH bhikSu jahA~ taka sambhava ho
zarIra aura saMyama meM asamAdhi utpanna karane vAle mArga yA kSetroM meM vihAra
nahIM kare  /  ghRNita kuloM meM bhikSAgamanAdi kA prAyazcitta 27. je bhikkhU
duguchiyakulesu asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei,
paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 28. je bhikkhU dugu chiyakulesu vatthaM vA, paDiggahaM
vA, kaMbalaM vA, pAyapuchaNaM vA paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 29. je
bhikkhU dugu chiyakulesu vasahiM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  30. je
bhikkhU duguchiyakulesu sajjhAyaM uddisai, uddisaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  31. je
bhikkhU duguchiyakulesu sajjhAyaM vAei, vAeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  32. je bhikkhU
dugu chiyakulesu sajjhAyaM paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  27. jo bhikSu
ghRNita kuloM se azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya letA hai yA lene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 28. jo bhikSu ghRNita kuloM se vastra, pAtra, kambala yA
pAdapoMchana letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| _ 29. jo bhikSu
ghRNita kuloM kI zayyA grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 30. jo bhikSu ghRNita kuloM meM svAdhyAya kA uddeza (mUla pATha kI
vAcanA denA) karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|

Page #452 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[352] [Nishīthasūtra 31. A monk who gives or approves of giving the recitation
(sūtrārtha) of svādhyāya in despicable families. 32. A monk who takes or
approves of taking the recitation of svādhyāya in despicable families. (He
incurs the prāyaścitta of laghu-cāumāsī.) Discussion-Pāca. Śru. 2 a. 1 u. 2
states that it is permissible to go for alms in the 12 families that are not to
be despised and not to be avoided, and in other similar families. These sūtras
only mention the prāyaścitta for taking alms from despicable families. Brāhmaṇa,
Kṣatriya, and Vaiśya are the three families that are not to be despised, and
Śūdra is a despicable family. Mlecchas and other non-Aryan families are also
considered to be forbidden for alms, etc. Pāca. Śru. 2 a. 1 u. 2 states that it
is permissible to go to the villages of cowherds, farmers, carpenters, weavers,
artisans, barbers, and other such families. Uttara. a. 12 and 13 mention that
people from the 'Harijan' family take saṃyama and go to mokṣa by performing
pūjā. Therefore, one should not understand that people from despicable families
are forbidden from performing dharma-pūjā. If a monk happens to touch a Harijan,
he does not incur any prāyaścitta. However, since the families from which monks
take alms are mostly those who perform śauca-karma, he should not go to
despicable families for alms, because he has to enter the houses of those who
perform śauca-karma to avoid the faults of eṣaṇā. Monks who enter despicable
families for alms may be refused entry into the houses of other śauca-karma-
performing (those who perform śauca-karma as their main dharma) people.
Therefore, one should understand that this prohibition and prāyaścitta mentioned
in the sūtras is only due to social behavior. Uttara. a. 25 states that
Kṣatriya, Vaiśya, and Brāhmaṇa are born from karma, and Śūdra is also born from
karma. Āca. Śru. 1 a. 2 u. 3 states that this being is born sometimes in a high
family and sometimes in a low family, therefore, there is no one who is low and
no one who is high. A monk always behaves with equality towards everyone, yet it
is also necessary to follow the rules mentioned in the sūtras, such as not
entering these families due to social norms. In the Bhāṣya Cūrṇi, families who
perform sūtaka and the rituals of the deceased are also considered to be
despicable families for a short period of time. Although there is only
prāyaścitta for merely staying in a despicable family, if one has to stay there
for some reason, one should not perform svādhyāya or recite it there.
Prāyaścitta for placing a foot on the earth, a bed, and a sneeze 33. A monk who
throws or approves of throwing food, drink, or a morsel on the earth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 352] [nizIthasUtra 31. jo bhikSu ghRNita kuloM meM svAdhyAya kI vAcanA
(sUtrArtha) detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 32. jo bhikSu ghRNita
kuloM meM svAdhyAya ko vAcanA letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
(use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta aAtA hai  / ) vivecana-pAcA. zru. 2 a. 1 u. 2 meM
ajugupsita aura agahita 12 kuloM meM tathA anya aise hI kuloM meM bhikSA ke lie
jAne kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| ina sUtroM meM kevala jugupsita kuloM se bhikSA
lene kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  brAhmaNa, kSatriya aura vaizya ye tIna
ajugupsita kula haiM aura zUdra jugupsita kula hai  /  mleccha Adi anArya kula
bhI bhikSA Adi ke lie varjanIya kula mAne gae haiN| gopAlaka, kRSaka, bar3haI,
julAhe, zilpI, nAI tathA anya bhI aise kuloM meM gocarI jAne kA prAcA. zru. 2 a.
1 u. 2 meM vidhAna hai| uttarA. a. 12 tathA 13 meM 'harijana' kula vAloM ke
dvArA saMyama grahaNa karanA evaM pArAdhanA kara mokSa jAne kA varNana milatA
hai  /  ataH jugupsita kula vAloM ko dharma-pArAdhanA karane kA niSedha nahIM
samajhanA cAhie  /  kabhI kisI harijana se bhikSu kA yadi sparza ho jAe to use
kisI prakAra kA prAyazcitta nahIM pAtA hai  /  tathApi bhikSu jina kuloM se
bhikSA letA hai, unameM zaucakarmavAdI adhika hote haiM, ataH use jugupsita
kuloM meM bhikSA ke lie nahIM jAnA cAhie, kyoMki use eSaNA doSoM ko TAlane ke
lie zaucakamiyoM ke gharoM meM praveza karanA par3atA hai  /  bhikSA ke lie
jugupsita kuloM meM praveza karane vAle bhikSu ko anya zaucakarmI (zauca
pradhAna dharma vAle) loga apane gharoM meM praveza karane ke lie manA kara
sakate haiM  /  ataH kevala sAmAjika vyavahAra ke kAraNa yaha sUtrokta niSedha
evaM prAyazcitta vidhAna hai, aisA samajhanA cAhie  /  uttarA. a. 25 meM kahA
hai ki karma se kSatriya, vaizya aura brAhmaNa hote haiM aura karma se hI zUdra
hote haiN| AcA. zru. 1 a. 2 u. 3 meM kahA hai ki yaha jIva kabhI uccagotra meM
aura kabhI nIcagotra meM janma letA hai, ataH na koI nIca hai aura na koI ucca
hai| bhikSu sabhI ke sAtha sadA samabhAva se vyavahAra karatA hai, phira bhI
sAmAjika maryAdA se ina kUloM meM praveza nahIM karanA Adi sUtrokta vidhAnoM kA
pAlana kiyA jAnA bhI Avazyaka hai| bhASya cUrNi meM sUtaka aura mRtaka ke
kriyAkarma karane vAle kuloM ko bhI alpakAlIna jugupsita kula meM ginAyA gayA
hai| yadyapi jugupsita kula meM Thaharane mAtra kA hI prAyazcitta hai, tathApi
kabhI kAraNavaza ThaharanA par3a jAya to vahA~ para svAdhyAya kA uddeza yA
vAcanA Adi nahIM karanA caahie| pRthvI, zayyA tathA chIMke para pAhAra rakhane
kA prAyazcitta 33. je bhikkhU asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA
puDhavIe Nikkhivai, NikkhivaMtaM vA saaijji|

Page #453 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sixteenth Uddeshak  [353]  34. A monk who places food, drink, or edibles
on the ground, or approves of someone doing so, incurs a minor atonement.  35. A
monk who places food, drink, or edibles on a seat, or approves of someone doing
so, incurs a minor atonement.  36. A monk who places food, drink, or edibles on
a peg, a hook, or a similar object, or approves of someone doing so, incurs a
minor atonement.  **Explanation:**  Monks are the holders of the begging bowl.
Therefore, it is permissible to place food, drink, or edibles in their hands, in
their bowls, or on the cloth used to hold the bowl. However, it is not
permissible to place food, drink, or edibles on the ground or on a seat while
they are being held in the hand or the bowl.  There are many types of humans and
other living beings, such as ants, who roam the earth. They often discard impure
substances, and the ground is covered with various types of impure particles,
dust, and other impurities. There are also many types of insects that roam the
earth. Placing food on the ground is also considered inappropriate in social
conduct. Therefore, the sutra states that this act incurs an atonement.  A seat
or a mat made of grass is used for many days. If food is placed on it, the food
particles may stick to it, attracting insects. The seat may also be soiled with
dirt, sweat, etc. Therefore, placing food on a seat, and for the same reasons,
on clothing, or on objects used for cleaning, should also be considered
prohibited.  Placing food on a peg, a hook, etc., may lead to the bowl breaking
if it falls. Rats and other animals may also reach there and bite or drop the
food.  For these reasons, it is prohibited to place food on the ground, on a
seat, or on a peg, etc. Doing so incurs a minor atonement.  According to the
second Uddeshak of Nishītha, it is permissible to tie food in a cloth and hang
it on a peg, etc., if it is necessary due to local circumstances.  Many food
items are dry and free from impurities. Placing them on the ground, etc., may
not cause the above-mentioned problems. However, due to carelessness, the
tradition of committing this offense may increase. Therefore, the sutra states
the atonement for placing all types of food, drink, etc., on the ground, etc.,
in general.  If, by mistake, some food falls on the ground and becomes impure
due to dust, etc., then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 solahavAM uddezaka ] [ 353 34. je bhikkhU asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA,
sAimaM vA saMthArae Nikkhivai, NikkhivaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  35. je bhikkhU asaNaM
vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA vehAse Nikkhivai, NikkhivaMtaM vA sAijjai  /
33. jo bhikSu prazana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya bhUmi para rakhatA hai yA rakhane
vAle kA anumodana " karatA hai  /  34. jo bhikSu prazana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya
saMstAraka para rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 35. jo
bhikSu azana, pAna, khAdya yA svAdya chIMke khUMTI Adi para rakhatA hai yA
rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA
hai  / ) vivecana- bhikSu karapAtrI yA pAtradhArI hote haiM  /  ataH hAtha meM,
pAtra meM yA pAtra rakhane ke vastra para to azanAdi rakhA jA sakatA hai| kintu
hAtha meM yA pAtra meM grahaNa kie hue AhAra ko bhUmi para yA Asana para rakhanA
nahIM kalpatA hai  /  pRthvI para aneka prakAra ke manuSya tiyaMcAdi jIva
phirate rahate haiM aura ve prazucimaya padArthoM kA jahA~ tahA~ parityAga
karate rahate haiM, bhUmi para aneka prakAra ke apavitra pudgala par3e rahate
haiM, raja Adi bhI rahatI hai, kIr3o Adi aneka prakAra ke prANI bhI paribhramaNa
karate rahate haiM tathA bhUmi para khAdya padArtha rakhanA lokavyavahAra se bhI
anucita hai, ataH sUtra meM isakA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  vastra kA Asana
yA ghAsa kA saMstAraka aneka dinoM taka upayoga meM AtA rahatA hai  /  usa para
AhAra rakhane se AhAra kA aMza lepa laga jAne para kIr3iyoM ke Ane kI sambhAvanA
rahatI hai  /  Asana meM maila pasInA Adi bhI lage rahate haiM  /  ataH Asana
para aura inhIM kAraNoM se pahanane ke vastra, rajoharaNAdi para AhAra rakhanA
bhI niSiddha samajha lenA cAhie  /  khUMTI, chIMke Adi para rakhane se kabhI
girane para pAtroM ke phUTane kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai  /  cUhe Adi bhI vahAM
pahu~ca kara kATa sakate haiM, girA sakate haiM  /  ityAdi kAraNoM se pRthvI
para Asana para tathA choMkA Adi para azanAdi rakhanA niSiddha hai| aura rakhane
para laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  prAdezika paristhiti ke kAraNa choMkA
Adi meM AhAra ko bA~dhakara rakhanA Avazyaka ho to chIMkA va usakA Dhakkana
rakhA jA sakatA hai, aisA nizItha ke dUsare uddezaka se spaSTa hotA hai  /  .
khAdya padArthoM meM kaI leparahita zuSka padArtha bhI hote haiM  /  unheM
pRthvI Adi para rakhane se uparyukta doSa sambhava nahIM haiM, phira bhI
pramAdarUpa pravRtti ho jAne se doSa paramparA bar3hatI hai  /  ataH sUtra meM
sAmAnyarUpa se sabhI prakAra ke prazana Adi ko rakhane kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA
hai  /  yadi asAvadhAnI se koI khAdya padArtha bhUmi para gira jAe aura usa para
raja Adi apavitra

Page #454 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[354] [Nishīthasūtra] If there are no material objects, then the monk can use
them after carefully examining them. There is no prāyaścitta (atonement)
mentioned in the sūtra for doing so. It is an inappropriate tendency to place
food on the ground voluntarily. The sūtra mentions the prāyaścitta for such a
tendency. The prāyaścitta for eating in front of householders is as follows: 36.
The monk who eats with other non-Jain ascetics or householders, or approves of
those who eat. 37. The monk who eats surrounded by other non-Jain ascetics or
householders, or approves of those who eat. (He receives the laghu-cāumāsī
prāyaścitta.) 36. The monk who eats with other non-Jain ascetics or householders
[sitting nearby], or approves of those who eat. 37. The monk who eats surrounded
by other non-Jain ascetics or householders [sitting or standing some distance
away], or approves of those who eat. (He receives the laghu-cāumāsī
prāyaścitta.) Discussion: In the fifteenth uddeśaka, the prāyaścitta for giving
food etc. to a householder is mentioned. Now, here, it is appropriate to
understand the meaning of the word "saddi" as eating while sitting nearby.
Because, if they eat together, i.e., from the same vessel, then there is a
possibility of many faults. If the food is brought by the householder, then it
may be contaminated with prādhākarma etc. faults. If the food is brought by the
monk, then the fault of adatta (not giving) is incurred, and these faults are
worthy of the guru-cāumāsī prāyaścitta, whereas the present sūtra mentions the
laghu-cāumāsī prāyaścitta. Therefore, from the first sūtra, one should
understand the prāyaścitta for eating together with a householder and a monk
sitting nearby. If the householder is not eating, but is standing or sitting in
a distant direction or all around, then if the monk eats in front of them, then
the prāyaścitta for that is mentioned in the second sūtra. When eating near a
householder, there is a possibility of the householder inviting, giving, etc.,
and those who see may have doubts. Sometimes, a householder may forcibly put
food into the vessel or snatch it away. Among the householders who are sitting
or standing in front, there may be some who are curious or hateful. They may
insult the food or the monk eating in many ways. The method of eating for a monk
is also different from that of a householder. For example, eating after wiping
and cleaning the vessel, or drinking after washing it, etc. Therefore, one
should eat in a secluded place with walls and a roof on all sides. Even while
eating, if a householder happens to come there and sit down, then the monk
should also go elsewhere in the "ekāsana" tapa.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 354] [nizIthasUtra padArtha na lage hoM to acchI taraha dekhakara usakA upayoga
bhikSu kara sakate haiN| aisA karane para sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai  /
svecchA se khAdya padArtha pRthvI para rakhanA anucita pravRtti hai| sUtra meM
aisI pravRtti kA hI prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| gRhasthoM ke sAmane AhAra karane
kA prAyazcitta 36. je bhikkhU aNNautthiehi vA gArathiehi vA saddhi bhujai,
bhujaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  37. je bhikkhU aNNautthiehi vA gArathiehi vA saddhi
AveDhiya-pariveDhiya bhujai, bhujaMtaM vA saaijji| 36. jo bhikSu anyatIrthikoM
yA gRhasthoM ke sAtha [samIpa baiThakara] pAhAra karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 37. jo bhikSu anyatIthikoM yA gRhasthoM se ghirakara
[kucha dUra baiThe yA khar3e hoM, vahA~] AhAra karatA hai yA AhAra karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai  / )
vivecana-pandrahaveM uddezaka meM gRhastha ko AhArAdi dene kA prAyazcitta kahA
gayA hai| aba yahA~ "saddhi" pada se samIpa meM baiThakara khAnA yaha artha
karanA prasaMgasaMgata hai| kyoMki sAtha meM arthAt eka pAtra meM khAne para to
aneka doSoM kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai  /  yadi gRhastha kA lAyA huA AhAra hai to
prAdhAkarma Adi doSayukta ho sakatA hai| yadi sAdhu kA lAyA huaA AhAra hai to
dene meM adattadoSa lagatA hai aura ye doSa to gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta ke yogya
haiM, jabaki prastuta sUtra meM laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta kA kathana hai  /  ataH
prathama sUtra se gRhastha aura bhikSu kA samIpa meM baiThakara AhAra karane kA
prAyazcitta samajhanA caahie| gRhastha bhojana nahIM kara rahe hoM, kintu dUra
eka dizA meM yA cAroM tarapha khar3e yA baiThe hoM taba bhikSu unake sAmane
pAhAra kare to usakA dUsare sUtra meM prAyazcitta kahA hai| gRhastha ke nikaTa
baiThakara khAne meM gRhastha ke dvArA nimantraNa karanA, denA Adi pravRtti hone
kI sambhAvanA rahatI hai, dekhane vAloM ko zaMkA ho sakatI hai| kabhI koI
gRhastha jabardastI bhI pAtra meM AhAra DAla sakatA hai yA chIna sakatA hai|
sAmane jo gRhastha baiThe yA khar3e hoM, unameM koI kutUhalavRtti vAle yA dveSI
bhI ho sakate haiM  /  ve AhAra ko yA AhAra karate hue bhikSu ko dekhakara aneka
prakAra se avahelanA Adi kara sakate haiN| bhikSu ke AhAra karane kI vidhi bhI
gRhastha se bhinna hotI hai| yathA-pAtra poMchakara sAphakara ke khAnA yA
dhokara pInA Adi  /  ataH cAroM ora kI dIvAroM vAle evaM chata vAle ekAnta
sthAna meM AhAra karanA caahie| AhAra karate samaya bhI kadAcit koI gRhastha
vahA~ A jAye aura baiTha jAe to bhikSu ko ,"ekAsana" tapa meM bhI anyatra jAnA
kalpatA hai  /

Page #455 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixteenth Uddeshak  [355] If a monk does not find a place to eat away from a
householder, he can eat by putting up a curtain of cloth on one side or all
sides. If the monk is eating alone, he can eat with his back towards the
householder, being mindful. The meaning is that the monk should eat in such a
place where the householder cannot see him. Monks should use food and other
things only in such places.  **Penance for disrespecting the Acharya and
Upadhyaya**  38. If a monk, while walking, touches the bedding of the Acharya or
Upadhyaya with his foot, and does not apologize with his hand, nor confesses his
mistake, or approves of someone else doing so, he incurs a minor four-month
penance.  **Explanation:**  It is unwise to touch anything with one's foot. The
Acharya and Upadhyaya are the most respected in the entire Gachchha. Therefore,
every monk should show them respect and honor. Touching their bedding with the
foot is also a sign of disrespect and unwise behavior. Touching their body,
food, clothes, etc., with the foot is also disrespectful. Therefore, a monk
should be very mindful while walking near the Acharya, Upadhyaya, or their
belongings.  The Churni says:  "If one does not apologize with his hand after
touching with his foot, and does not confess his mistake, he incurs a minor
four-month penance."  If a monk's foot touches the bedding of the Acharya or
Upadhyaya, he should apologize to them respectfully. If they are not present, he
should touch the bedding with his hand to make amends for the disrespect shown
by his foot, and say "Micchami Dukkadam" to acknowledge his mistake. If any dust
or dirt has been transferred from the foot, he should clean it.  If a monk's
foot touches the belongings or body of another monk, he should show the same
mindfulness.  If a monk, in such situations, does not show any respect or
mindfulness and continues walking as if nothing happened, he incurs the penance
mentioned in the sutra.  This is because such behavior shows disrespect towards
the Acharya and Upadhyaya, perpetuates unwise behavior, makes others feel
disrespected, disrespects the Gachchha, and encourages other monks to follow
suit, leading to an increase in disrespect within the Gachchha.  Although food
and other things are not worthy of worship, touching them with the foot is
disrespectful. Therefore, the sutra emphasizes that one should show respect by
touching the bedding with the hand to make amends for the disrespect shown by
the foot.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 solahavAM uddezaka] [355 kadAcit gRhastha rahita sthAna AhAra karane ke lie na
mile to bhikSu eka ora yA cAroM ora vastra kA pardA lagAkara bhI AhAra kara
sakatA hai  /  yadi bhikSu akelA hI AhAra karane vAlA ho to gRhastha kI tarapha
pITha karake vivekapUrvaka AhAra kara sakatA hai  /  tAtparya yaha hai ki
gRhastha na dekhe, aise sthAnoM meM baiThakara hI bhikSutroM ko AhArAdi kA
upayoga karanA caahie| prAcArya upAdhyAya kI ArAdhanA kA prAyazcitta 38. je
bhikkhU Ayariya-uvajhAyANaM sejjA-saMthArayaM pAeNaM saMghaddettA hattheNaM
aNaNuNNavettA dhArayamANe gacchai, gacchaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  38. jo bhikSu
AcArya-upAdhyAya ke zayyA-saMstAraka ko paira se sparza ho jAne para hAtha se
vinaya kie binA mithyA duSkRta die binA calA jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-kisI kI koI bhI
vastu ke pAMva lagAnA avivekapUrNa AcaraNa hai| prAcArya aura upAdhyAya to
sampUrNa gaccha meM sabase adhika sammAnanIya hote haiN| ataH pratyeka sAdhu ko
unakA vinayabahumAna karanA hI caahie| unake zayyA-saMstAraka-bichaune ke pAMva
laga jAnA bhI avinaya evaM aviveka kA dyotaka hai aura unake zarIra, AhAra,
vastrAdi ke pAMva laganA bhI avinaya hai  /  ataH ' bhikSu ko prAcAryAdi ke yA
unakI upadhi evaM pAhArAdi ke nikaTa se atyanta vivekapUrvaka gamanAgamana
karanA caahie| cUNi meM kahA hai _ hatyeNa aNaNuNNavettA-hastena spRSTvA na
namaskArayati, mithyAduSkRtaM ca na bhASate, tassa culhuN| kadAcit AcAryAdi ke
saMstAraka para bhikSu kA pAMva laga jAe to usa bhikSu ko vahAM vidyamAna
AcAryAdi se vinayapUrvaka kSamAyAcanA karanI caahie| yadi ve anyatra hoM to
pAMva se avinaya hone kI pratipUrti meM hAtha se sparza kara vinaya karanA aura
"micchAmi dukkaDaM" kaha kara bhUla svIkAra karanA cAhie  /  yadi pAMva se koI
raja Adi laga jAe to use sApha karanA cAhie  /  anya sAdhu kI koI upadhi yA
zarIra Adi ke pAMva laga jAe to bhI isI prakAra kA viveka pradarzita karanA
caahie| _ jo bhikSu aise prasaMgoM meM kucha bhI vinaya-viveka kie binA jaise
cala rahA hai vaise hI sIdhA calA jAe to use sUtrokta prAyazcitta AtA hai|
kyoMki aisA karane se prAcAryAdi ke prati sammAna nahIM rahatA hai, aviveka kI
paramparA pracalita hotI hai, dekhane vAloM ko avinaya kA anubhava hotA hai,
gaccha kI avahelanA hotI hai, anya sAdhu bhI usI kA anusaraNa kareM to gaccha
meM avinaya kI vRddhi hotI hai| yadyapi prAsana Adi padArtha vaMdanIya nahIM
haiM, tathApi paira ke sparza se hue avinaya kI nivRtti ke lie kevala hAtha se
sparza kara vinayabhAva prakaTa karanA cAhie, yaha sUtra kA prAzaya hai  /

Page #456 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 356] [Penance for possessing more than the prescribed number or measure of
possessions] 39. A monk who possesses or approves of possessing more than the
prescribed number or measure of possessions. 36. A monk who possesses or
approves of possessing more than the prescribed number or measure of
possessions. (He incurs the penance of Laghu-Chaumasika.)  **Discussion:** The
complete list of possessions for a monk is found in the Brihatkalpasutra, U. 3,
and the Prashnavyakaranasutra, Shru. 2, A. 5.  According to the
Brihatkalpasutra, a monk should be ordained after receiving Rajoharan, Gochchag,
Patra, and three Akhand Vastra.  Here, the number of Rajoharan, Gochchag
[Poojani], and Patra is not mentioned. The remaining equipment includes a sheet,
Cholapattka, Mukhavastrika, Asana, Jholi, Patra's cloth, Rajoharan's cloth, for
which a total of three Akhand Vastra are mentioned, but their individual number
or size is not mentioned.  The Brihatkalpasutra prohibits possessing more than
three Akhand Vastra (complete cloth). Therefore, the three Thans mentioned here
should be understood as indicators of the measure of the complete possessions.
Traditionally, this measure is considered to be 72 hands of cloth. However, this
measure is not explicitly mentioned in the original Agamas or commentaries.  The
Prashnavyakaranasutra states, "These are the possessions of a well-established
Shraman who holds a Patra: Patra, Patrabandhan, Patrakesarika, cloth for holding
Patra (three Patals), Rajastraan, Gochchag, three sheets, Rajoharan,
Cholapattka, Mukhavastrika, etc. He also wears these for restraint and physical
protection."  Here, while mentioning Rajoharan and Gochchag, it mentions six
equipment related to Patra instead of Patra, and instead of three Akhand Vastra,
it mentions sheets, Cholapattka, Mukhavastrika, etc. It mentions three each for
Patals and sheets, but does not specify the number of Patra, Cholapattka,
Mukhavastrika, and all the equipment. The word "etc." is used at the end of the
text, which suggests that other possessions can also be accepted, such as
Prasana, etc.  Apart from these two sources, the Acharangasutra also has an
independent study on cloth and Patra, and the Chhedasutras also describe the
rules and prohibitions regarding cloth, Patra, Rajoharan, etc. in many sutras.
The present Prashchittasutra mentions penance for possessing more than the
prescribed number and measure of possessions, but the above-mentioned Agamas do
not explicitly mention the measure and number of possessions. Only the number of
sheets, Patra's Patals, and Akhand Vastra is mentioned. Even though the
commentary provides a detailed description of possessions, it does not mention
the measure and number of many essential equipment, and many mentions are
unclear, such as keeping one Patra or keeping a Cholapattka of two hands for a
young Sadhu. Keeping one unit but not using it, etc. Due to these reasons, the
traditions regarding the quantity and measure of possessions have become
different.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 356] [nizIyasUtra maryAdA se adhika upadhi rakhane kA prAyazcitta 39. je
bhikkhU gaNaNAirittaM vA, pamANAirittaM vA uhi dharei, dharataM vA sAijjai  /
36. jo bhikSu gaNanA se yA pramANa se adhika upadhi rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-
bhikSu ke sampUrNa upadhi sUcaka sUtra bRhatkalpasUtra u. 3 meM tathA
praznavyAkaraNasUtra zru. 2, a. 5 meM hai| bhikSu ko dIkSita hote samaya
rajoharaNa, gocchaga, pAtra aura tIna akhaNDa vastra grahaNa karake pravajita
honA kalpatA hai| aisA bRhatkalpasUtra meM kahA hai  /  yahA~ rajoharaNa,
gocchaga [pUjaNI] aura pAtra kI saMkhyA kA kathana nahIM kiyA gayA hai  /  zeSa
upakaraNa caddara, colapaTTaka, mukhavastrikA, Asana, jholI, pAtra ke vastra,
rajoharaNa kA vastra inake lie kula tIna akhaNDa vastra lene kA kathana hai,
kintu inakI alaga-alaga saMkhyA yA mApa nahIM batAyA gayA hai| bRhatkalpasUtra
ke uddezaka tIna meM hI akhaNDa vastra (pUrNa thAna) rakhane kA niSedha kiyA
gayA hai| ataH yahA~ para kahe gae tIna thAna kevala sampUrNa upadhi ke mApa ke
sUcaka haiM, aisA samajhanA caahie| jisakA paramparA se 72 hAtha pramANa vastra
kA mApa mAnA gayA hai| kintu mUla AgamoM meM evaM bhASyAdi meM isa mApa kA
spaSTa ullekha nahIM hai  /  praznavyAkaraNasUtra meM kahA hai "pAtradhArI
suvihita zramaNa ke ye upakaraNa hote haiM-pAtra, pAtrabandhana, pAtrakesarikA,
pAtra rakhane kA vastra tIna paTala, rajastrANa, gocchaga, tIna caddara,
rajoharaNa, colapaTTaka, mukhavastrikA Adi inako bhI vaha saMyama aura zArIrika
surakSA ke lie dhAraNa karatA hai|" yahA~ rajoharaNa aura gocchaga kA kathana
karane ke sAtha pAtra ke sthAna para pAtra sambandhI 6 upakaraNa evaM tIna
akhaNDa vastra kI jagaha caddara, colapaTTaka, mukhavastrikA Adi kahe haiM,
inameM paTala evaM cAdara kI saMkhyA tIna-tIna kahI hai, kintu pAtra,
colapaTTaka, mukhavastrikA tathA sampUrNa upakaraNoM kI saMkhyA kA nirdeza nahIM
hai tathA pATha ke anta meM "Adi" zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai, jisase anya
upadhi kA bhI grahaNa ho sakatA hai, yathA-prAsana Adi  /  ina do sthaloM ke
atirikta AcArAMgasUtra meM vastra-pAtra sambandhI svatantra adhyayana bhI hai
tathA chedasUtroM meM bhI vastra pAtra rajoharaNa Adi ke vidhi-niSedha kA aneka
sUtroM meM varNana hai| prastuta prAyazcittasUtra meM ginatI se aura pramANa
[mApa] se adhika upadhi rakhane kA prAyazcitta kahA hai kintu uparyukta prAgamoM
meM upadhi ke mApa tathA saMkhyA kA spaSTa ullekha kahIM nahIM milatA hai|
kevala caddara aura pAtra ke paTala evaM akhaNDa vastra kI saMkhyA kA ullekha
hai  /  bhASya niyukti meM upadhi kA vistRta varNana hote hue bhI aneka Avazyaka
upakaraNoM ke mApa evaM saMkhyA kA ullekha nahIM hai tathA kaI ullekha aspaSTa
haiM, yathA-eka pAtra rakhanA yA taruNa sAdhu ko do hAtha kA colapaTTaka rakhanA
/  eka mAtraka rakhanA kintu usako upayoga meM nahIM lenA, ityaadi| inhIM
kAraNoM se upadhi  /  parimANa kI paramparAe~ bhinna-bhinna ho gaI haiN|

Page #457 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixteenth Discourse  [357] The mention of keeping three sheets is clear in
the Agamas, and in the commentary of this sutra, it is stated that a Jain monk
who has a begging bowl or is a holder of a bowl should keep one, two, or three
sheets.  In Acharanga Sutra 1, Chapter 8, Verses 4-5-6, there is a description
of a monk who is a holder of possessions regarding clothing. There too, there is
a description of a monk who wears three garments [sheets], two garments, one
garment, and a monk who wears only a loincloth and a shawl.  In the description
of the "Uṇodari" (wearing a single garment) of clothing, it is stated in the
original text to keep one garment [sheet]. In the commentary, it is also said
that keeping two sheets is also considered "Uṇodari" of clothing. Therefore, the
number of sheets is clear in the Agamas and their commentaries.  In Acharanga
Sutra 2, Chapter 5, Verse 1, after mentioning six types of garments, it is
stated that "A monk who is young and healthy should wear one garment, i.e., only
one type of garment, not another." It is not appropriate to interpret this
statement as referring to the number of sheets, because here only the type of
garment is prescribed, and in the previous Agamas, there is a clear mention of
keeping three sheets for both Jain monks and those who hold possessions. The
description of "Uṇodari" of clothing also proves that keeping multiple sheets is
permissible. Therefore, it is in accordance with the Agamas to interpret the
text of Acharanga Sutra as meaning that a capable monk should wear only one type
of garment, and it should be understood that performing "Uṇodari" tapasya by
keeping less than three sheets, i.e., two or one sheet, is optional.  In the
commentary verse 5807, it is stated that Jain monks, those who hold possessions,
etc., can keep three, two, or one sheet, but a "Sthavirakalpi" (senior monk)
should keep three sheets as a rule.  In the commentary verse 5794, the medium
size of a sheet is stated as 33423 hands, and the excellent size as 4423 hands.
This means that a young monk should keep a sheet that is three and a half hands
long, and an elderly monk should keep a sheet that is four hands long.  In the
study of "Vastraishana" (clothing) in Acharanga Sutra, the width of a nun's
sheets is stated as four hands, three hands, and two hands. There is no mention
of the length. However, the length is always greater than the width, so the
tradition of keeping a sheet that is five hands long is appropriate.  In Uttara
Adhyayana 26, in the section on "Pratilekhana" (copying), the statement "Chha
Purima Nav Khodha" also suggests that the excellent length of a sheet should be
five hands.  The three sizes of four sheets mentioned for nuns are not all of
the same length and width. Similarly, the three sheets of a monk are not all the
same. Since the Agamas do not mention their measurements, they can be made
smaller or larger according to their usefulness and need.  The commentary
mentions only one type of width for a sheet, i.e., two and a half hands. It is
not appropriate to consider this as applicable to all three sheets according to
the Agamas. Therefore, the length and width of all three sheets of a monk can
vary. Currently, a sheet that is five hands long and three hands wide is
commonly used.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 solahavAM uddezaka] [357 cAdara-tIna caddara rakhane kA ullekha AgamoM meM
spaSTa hai tathA isa sUtra kI cUNi meM karapAtra vAle yA pAtradhArI jinakalpI
bhikSu ko eka, do yA tIna caddara rakhanA batAyA hai  /  AcArAMga zru. 1, a.8,
u. 4-5-6 meM vastra sambandhI abhigrahadhArI bhikSu kA varNana hai  /  vahA~ bhI
tIna vastra [caddara] dhArI, do vastradhArI, eka vastradhArI aura acelaka
colapaTTakadhArI bhikSu kA varNana hai| vastra kI UNodarI ke varNana meM eka
vastra [caddara] rakhanA mUla pATha meM kahA hai  /  vyAkhyA meM do caddara
rakhanA bhI vastra kI uNodarI honA kahA hai  /  ata: caddara kI saMkhyA AgamoM
meM tathA unakI vyAkhyAnoM meM spaSTa hai| AcA. zru. 2, a. 5, u. 1 meM kisa-kisa
jAti ke vastra grahaNa karanA, isa varNana meM 6 jAti kA ullekha karane ke
pazcAt kahA gayA hai ki-"jo bhikSu taruNa evaM svastha ho, vaha eka vastra
arthAt eka hI jAti kA vastra dhAraNa kare dUsarA nhiiN|" isa kathana ko caddara
kI saMkhyA ke lie mAnakara artha karanA ucita nahIM hai, kyoMki yahA~ vastra kI
jAti kA hI vidhAna kiyA gayA hai tathA prAgamoM meM jinakalpI va abhigrahadhArI
bhikSu ke lie bhI tIna caddara rakhane kA spaSTa ullekha hai| vastra kI UNodarI
karane ke varNana se bhI aneka caddara rakhanA siddha hai  /  ataH samartha
sAdhu ko eka jAti ke vastra hI dhAraNa karanA aisA artha AcArAMgasatra ke pATha
kA karanA hI Agamasammata hai tathA tIna cahara se kama arthAt do yA eka caddara
rakhakara UNodarI tapa karanA aicchika samajhanA caahie| bhASya gAthA 5807 meM
kahA hai ki jinakalpI abhigrahadhArI Adi bhikSu tIna, do yA eka caddara rakha
sakate haiM kintu sthavirakalpI ko tIna caddara niyamataH rakhanI caahie| bhASya
gAthA 5794 meM caddara kA madhyama mApa 334 23 hAtha tathA utkRSTa 4423 hAtha .
kahA hai  /  arthAt taruNa santa ke lie sADhe tIna hAtha aura vRddha santa ke
lie cAra hAtha lambI caddara rakhanA kahA hai| AcArAMgasUtra ke vastraiSaNA
adhyayana meM sAdhvI ke caddaroM kI caur3AI cAra hAtha, tIna hAtha tathA do
hAtha kI kahI hai, vahA~ lambAI kA kathana nahIM hai  /  phira bhI caur3AI se
lambAI to adhika hI hotI hai, isalie pAMca hAtha kI lambI caddara karane kI
paramparA upayukta hI hai| uttarA. a. 26 meM pratilekhanA prakaraNa meM jo "cha
purimA nava khoDA" kA kathana hai, usase bhI caddara kI utkRSTa lambAI pAMca
hAtha kI honA upayukta hai  /  sAdhvI ke lie jo tIna mApa kI cAra caddaroM kA
kathana hai ve caddareM samAna lambI-caur3I nahIM hotI haiM, vaise hI bhikSu ke
tInoM caddareM samAna nahIM hotI haiM  /  AgamoM meM inake mApa kA ullekha na
milane se upayogitA aura AvazyakatAnusAra choTI-bar3I banAI jA sakatI haiN|
caddara kI caur3AI kA kathana vyAkhyA meM eka hI prakAra kA arthAt DhAI hAtha kA
batAyA hai  /  use Agama varNana ke anusAra tInoM hI caddaroM ke lie samajha
lenA ucita nahIM hai  /  ataH bhikSu ke tInoM caddaroM kI lambAI-caur3AI
hInAdhika hotI hai| vartamAna meM prAyaH pAMca hAtha lambI aura tIna hAtha
caur3I caddara kA upayoga kiyA jAtA hai|

Page #458 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  [358] The *Cholpattak* is only mentioned by name in the
*Nishith Sutra* and the *Cholpattak-Prashnavyakaran Sutra* in the context of a
monk's attire. There is no further description of it in other Agamas.  The
*Nishith Bhashya* (verse 5804) mentions a *Cholpattak* measurement of two hands
long and one hand wide for a young monk. This is not sufficient to cover the
body in a way that would be considered modest in worldly terms. Therefore, its
purpose is not clear.  This verse does not mention the number of *Cholpattak*s.
For an older monk, the same verse mentions a *Cholpattak* measurement of four
hands long and one hand wide. This may not be sufficient to cover the body in a
way that would be considered modest for them either.  Due to the lack of a
clear, ancient, and pure tradition, there are many different sizes of
*Cholpattak*s in use today, with varying lengths and widths. These variations
contradict the evidence provided by the *Bhashya*.  The *Brihatkalpa Sutra*
states that a monk should receive three whole pieces of cloth (*than*) at the
time of initiation, which are sufficient for all the necessary equipment. If the
*Cholpattak* and other garments are made according to the measurements mentioned
in the *Bhashya*, then there would be no need for the three *than* of cloth
mentioned in the *Brihatkalpa Sutra*. Therefore, the true size of the
*Cholpattak* is that it should be large enough to provide modesty, protect from
the cold, and fit the body in terms of length and width.  Although the Agamas
and *Bhashya* do not mention the number of *Cholpattak*s, it is appropriate for
a *sthavirakalpi* to have two *Cholpattak*s, considering the need for copying
scriptures and other activities.  *Mukhavastrika* - " *Mukhapotika* - *mukham
pidhanaya*, *potam* - *vastran mukham potam*, *tadeva hrasvam
chaturangulaadhikavitastimaatra pramanatvat mukhapotika*. *Mukhavastrikaayam*."
- *Pindaniyukti*.  Meaning: *Mukhavastrika* is the cloth used to cover the face.
It is one *bent* and four *angula* (16 *angula*) long.  The *Nishith Bhashya*
and *Brihatkalpa Bhashya* mention this measurement, but they do not specify the
length and width. Other Agamas and commentaries also do not mention the length
and width separately. Therefore, it is clear that the *mukhavastrika* should be
16 *angula* square.  In the *murtipujak* community, it is common to use a square
*muhpatti*. In the *Sthanakvasi* community, it is common to use a
*mukhavastrika* that is 21 *angula* long and 16 *angula* wide. This measurement
is not found in any Agama or commentary, but it is more suitable for covering
the face.  The *Odhaniyukti* mentions the *mukhavastrika* as follows:  "
*Chatvaryangulaani vitastishcheti, etacchaturastra mukhanantakasya pramanam,
athava idam dvitiya pramanam - yadut mukhapramnam karttavya muhanantam;
etaduktan bhavathi vasatipramarjanadou yatha mukham pacchaadyate tryanan
konadvaaye grihitva krikaatika prishthatasch yatha granthitum shakyate tatha
karttavya etaddvitiyam pramanam, ganana pramanena punastadekakameva
mukhanantakam bhavathi iti*. - *Odhaniyukti* verse 711 commentary.  Meaning: The
*mukhavastrika* is 16 *angula* long and wide, making it square. There is another
type of *mukhavastrika* that is triangular and used to cover the face and nose
when cleaning the house. It is tied at the back of the head in such a way that
it can be tied securely. This is the second measurement. However, according to
the calculation, there is only one type of *mukhanantak* (face covering).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 358] [nizIthasUtra colapaTTaka-praznavyAkaraNasUtra meM bhikSu kI upadhi meM
colapaTTaka kA kevala nAmollekha hai  /  isake atirikta anya varNana AgamoM meM
nahIM hai  /  nizIthabhASya gAthA 5804 meM taruNa bhikSu ke lie kevala do hAtha
lambA, eka hAtha caur3A colapaTTaka kA mApa kahA hai  /  jo laukika vyavahAra
meM lajjA rakhane ke lie paryApta nahIM hai| isalie isakA aucitya samajha meM
nahIM aataa| isa gAthA meM colapaTTaka kI saMkhyA bhI nahIM kahI hai| vRddha
bhikSu ke lie isI gAthA meM cAra hAtha lambA aura eka hAtha caur3A colapaTTaka
kA mApa batAyA hai| jo unake lie bhI pUrNa lajjA rakhane ke lie paryApta nahIM
ho sakatA hai  /  prAcIna zuddha paramparA ke abhAva meM vartamAna sAdhu samAja
meM aneka prakAra ke lambAI evaM caur3AI ke mApa vAle colapaTTaka pracalita haiM
/  jo bhASya kathita pramANa meM bhinna haiN| bRhatkalpasUtra ke tIsare uddezaka
meM bhikSu ke Avazyaka sabhI upakaraNoM hetu tIna akhaNDa vastra [thAna] grahaNa
karake dIkSA lene kA vidhAna hai  /  yadi bhASya kathita parimANa ke caddara-
colapaTTaka Adi banAe jAyeM to ukta vidhAna ke tIna thAna jitane vastroM ko
grahaNa karane kI AvazyakatA nahIM rahatI hai| isalie caddara, colapaTTaka kA
pUrNa parimANa yahI hai ki vaha lajjA rakhane yogya, zIta nivAraNa yogya aura
apane zarIra ko lambAI-caur3AI ke anusAra ho| colapaTTaka kI saMkhyA ke
sambandha meM Agama tathA bhASya meM yadyapi ullekha nahIM hai| phira bhI
pratilekhana Adi kI apekSA se jaghanya do colapaTTaka rakhanA sthavirakalpI ke
lie ucita hI hai  /  mukhavastrikA-"mukhapotikA-mukhaM pidhAnAya, potaM-vastraM
mukhaMpotaM, tadeva hrasvaM caturaMgulAdhikavitastimAtrapramANatvAt mukhapotikA
/  mukhavastrikAyAm  / " -piMDaniyukti  /  bhAvArthamukhavastrikA arthAt mukha
ko prAvRtta karane kA vastra  /  eka beMta aura cAra aMgula arthAt solaha aMgula
kI mukhavastrikA  /  nizIthabhASya evaM bRhatkalpabhASya meM yahI eka mApa kahA
gayA hai, kintu lambAI-caur3AI kA ullekha nahIM kiyA hai| anya AgamoM kI
vyAkhyAoM meM bhI lambAI-caur3AI kA alaga-alaga ullekha nahIM milatA hai| ataH
mukhavastrikA kA pramANa solaha aMgula samacaurasa honA spaSTa hai  /
mUrtipUjaka samAja meM prAyaH samacaurasa muhapatti rakhane kI paramparA
pracalita hai| sthAnakavAsI samAja meM 21 aMgula lambI aura solaha aMgula caur3I
mukhavastrikA rakhane kI paramparA hai  /  mukhavastrikA kA yaha mApa kisI Agama
meM yA vyAkhyA grantha meM nahIM hai, kintu yaha mApa mukha para bAMdhane meM
adhika upayukta hai| aodhaniyukti meM mukhavastrikA ke sambandha meM isa prakAra
kahA hai, yathA catvAryaGa gulAni vitastizceti, etaccaturastra mukhAnantakasya
pramANam, athavA idaM dvitIya pramANaM-yaduta mukhapramANaM karttavyaM
muhaNaMtayaM; etaduktaM bhavati vasatipramArjanAdau yathA mukhaM pacchAdyate
tryanaM koNadvaye gRhItvA kRkATikA pRSTatazca yathA graMthituM zakyate tathA
kartavyaM etadvitIyaM pramANaM, gaNanA pramANena punastadekakameva mukhAnaMtakaM
bhvtiiti| -odhaniyukti gAthA-711 kI TIkA  /  bhAvArtha-mukhavastrikA solaha
aMgula kI lambI aura caur3I samacaurasa hotI hai| dUsare prakAra kI
mukhavastrikA bhI hotI hai jo makAna kA pramArjana karane ke samaya trikoNa
karake mukha evaM nAka ko

Page #459 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixteenth Uddeshak  [359]  It is tied by giving a knot behind the neck after
covering it, and it is also square. Its proof is as much as one should
understand from the aforementioned method. It is necessary to keep one each of
both types of mukhavastrikas for every Shraman and Shramani.  The commentary on
the 694th gatha of the Aodhaniyukti also mentions that the mukhavastrikas are
square and sixteen angulas in size. For this reason, the commentary texts of the
Chhedasutras do not mention the length and width of the mukhavastrikas
separately, but only the measurement of sixteen angulas. Due to lack of
knowledge of this statement of Aodhaniyukti, or not considering it as suitable
evidence, modern Acharyas have imagined a length of twenty-one angulas and a
width of sixteen angulas. But the original evidence is only of a square
mukhavastrikas of sixteen angulas.  The purpose of both types of mukhavastrikas
is explained in gatha 712. Its commentary is as follows:  "Sampatim
satvarakshanarth jalpadbhimukhe diyate," "Tatha nasikamukham badhnati taya
mukhavastrikaya vasati pramardayan, yena na mukhadau raja pravishati iti."  The
mukhavastrikas are kept on the mouth while speaking to protect the Sampatim
beings, and while cleaning the upashraya, the mukhavastrikas are tied to prevent
fine dust from entering the mouth and nose. In the commentary of Uttara. A. 3,
the reason for keeping the mukhavastrikas is explained as follows:  Santi
sampatimaḥ satvāḥ, sūkshmaśca vyāpino 'pare. Teṣām rakṣānimittaṁ ca, vijñeyā
mukhavastrikāḥ.  -Abhi. Rajendra Kosh Bha. 6, page 333 Meaning - It should be
understood that the 'mukhavastrikas' are kept for the protection of Sampatim
beings and other subtle beings that spread everywhere.  In Bhagavati Sutra Sh.
16, U. 2, the language spoken with an open mouth is called Savad. A Muni is a
renunciant of Savad language.  Even the Jinkalpi, etc., who are mendicants
without clothes and without power, are required to keep mukhavastrikas. Because
mukhavastrikas and rajoharan are essential tools of the Muni symbol.  For proof,
see: 1. Brihatkalp U. 3, commentary on gatha 3963 2. Nishita U. 2, commentary on
gatha 1391 3. Abhidhan Rajendra Kosh Part 4 'Jinkapp' page 1489,  -Pracha. Shru.
1 A. 2 commentary 4. Abhidhan Rajendra Kosh Part 6 'Lingkapp' page 656.
-Panchakalp: Bhashya and Churni, Kalp 2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 solahavAM uddezaka] [359 Dhakakara gardana ke pIche gAMTha dekara bAMdhI jAtI
hai, yaha bhI samacaurasa hotI hai  /  isakA pramANa ukta vidhi se bAMdhI jA
sake jitanA samajhanA cAhiye  /  gaNanA kI apekSA donoM prakAra kI
mukhavastrikAe~ pratyeka zramaNa-zramaNI kI eka-eka-rakhanA caahie| _odhaniyukti
gAthA 694 kI TIkA meM bhI mukhavastrikA ke samacaurasa solaha aMgula kI hone kA
ullekha hai| isI kAraNa se chedasUtroM ke vyAkhyA granthoM meM mukhavastrikA kI
lambAI-caur3AI alagaalaga na kahakara kevala solaha aMgula kA mApa hI kahA gayA
hai| aodhaniyukti ke isa kathana kI jAnakArI na hone ke kAraNa athavA ise
upayukta pramANa na mAnakara arvAcIna prAcAryoM ne ikkIsa aMgula kI lambAI aura
16 aMgula kI caur3AI kI kalpanA kI hai| kintu maulika pramANa to solaha aMgula
kI samacaurasa mukhavastrikA hone kA hI milatA hai  /  gAthA 712 meM donoM
prakAra kI mukhavastrikA kA prayojana batAyA hai  /  usakI TIkA isa prakAra hai
"saMpAtimasatvarakSaNArtha jalpadabhimukhe dIyate," "tathA nAsikAmukhaM badhnAti
tayA mukhavastrikayA vasati pramArjayan, yena na mukhAdau rajaH pravizatIti  / "
saMpAtima jIvoM kI rakSA ke lie bolate samaya mukhavastrikA mukha para rakhI
jAtI hai tathA upAzraya kA pramArjana karate samaya sUkSma raja mukha aura nAka
meM praveza na kare, isake lie mukhavastrikA bAMdhI jAtI hai| uttarA. a. 3 kI
vyAkhyA meM mukhavastrikA rakhane kA kAraNa spaSTa karate hue kahA hai ki saMti
saMpAtimAH satvAH, sUkSmAzca vyApino'pare  /  teSAM rakSAnimittaM ca, vijJeyA
mukhavastrikAH  /  /  -abhi. rAjendra koSa bhA. 6, pRSTha 333 artha-saMpAtima
prANiyoM tathA anya idhara-udhara phaile hue sUkSma jIvoM kI rakSA ke lie
'mukhavastrikA' rakhI jAtI hai, aisA samajhanA cAhie  /  bhagavatIsUtra za. 16,
u. 2 meM khule muMha se bolI jAne vAlI bhASA ko sAvadha kahA hai  /  muni
sAvadha bhASA kA tyAgI hotA hai| jinakalpI Adi vastrarahita evaM pAvarahita
rahane vAle bhikSutroM ko bhI mukhavastrikA rakhanA Avazyaka hai  /  kyoMki
mukhavastrikA tathA rajoharaNa muni cihna ke Avazyaka upakaraNa haiM  /  pramANa
ke lie dekheM1. bRhatkalpa u. 3, bhASya gA. 3963 kI TIkA 2. nizItha u. 2, bhASya
gA.1391 3. abhidhAna rAjendra koSa bhAga 4 'jiNakappa' pR. 1489, -prAcA.zru. 1
a. 2 TIkA 4. abhidhAna rAjendra koSa bhAga 6 'liMgakappa' pR. 656  /  /
-paMcakalpa:bhASya evaM cUrNi, kalpa 2

Page #460 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīthসূত্র  Based on these proofs, it is clear that tying the mukhapatti on
the mouth is suitable for the muni-chinha and for the protection of life.
Otherwise, it is certain that almost all sadhus and sadhvis will speak with
their mouths open, and if it is left aside, the muni-chinha will also not
remain. While walking in villages and so on, or in viharas and so on, if the
mukhastrika is not on the mouth, then it becomes meaningless to call it an
essential tool in the bhaṣyādi for the sake of the jinkalpi, etc., in comparison
to the muni-chinha. [360]  In Bhagavati Sutra, Chapter 9, Verse 32, there is
mention of the mukhapatti with eight folds. In the Samutthāna Sutra, there is
also mention of eight folds.  In the Śvetāmbara Murtipujaka community, a
mukhapatti with four folds is kept, but a prāṭha pat is also made on one side.
It is always kept in the hand. During viharas and so on, it is also hung in the
cholapattka. Śvetāmbara Sthānakavāsī munis completely tie the mukhavastrikā on
their face with eight folds. In the Śivapurāṇa, Chapter 21, while introducing
the Jain sadhu, it is said that they wear a mukhavastrikā on their face. As
follows:  > With a vessel in hand, and holding a cloth in their turban, they
wear dirty clothes and speak little.  In the Nishīthabhāṣya and Piṇḍaniyukti, it
is said:  > The second thing to be observed is the mukhapatti. [5805]  -
Rājendra Koṣa, Vol. 6, p. 333. This statement about making the mouth a prāmāṇa
by tying the mukhavastrikā on the face can only be meaningful. The number of
mukhavastrikās is not mentioned in the Āgama. Therefore, two or more can be kept
as needed. In the vyākhyā granthas, it is said to keep one mukhavastrikā each.
## Kambaḷ  The name kambaḷ appears in many places in the Āgamas. It is kept for
the protection of the body from cold.  In the Praśnavyākaraṇasūtra, where there
is mention of three chadḍars, the name kambaḷ is not mentioned in the other
upadhi, therefore it is included in the three chadḍars. A bhikṣu who can
tolerate cold can manage with one cotton chadḍar and can also remain without an
achela, while performing the Ūṇodari tapa of clothing.  Or, a bhikṣu performing
the Ūṇodari tapa, depending on the type of cloth, can give up the kambaḷ by
keeping only cotton cloth.  The kambaḷ has come to be considered a means of
protecting life, which is merely a tradition, but not Āgama-sanmata. In Daśa
Daśa, Chapter 7, there is a description of the padimadhārī bhikṣu going on vihar
from sunrise to sunset. It is said that wherever the sunset occurs, they should
spend the night there without negligence.  In the Bṛhatkalpa, Chapter 2, it is
said that it is desirable for a sadhu to stay in a place with an open sky, and
it is desirable for a sādhvī to stay there. But it is not said there that there
should be a violation of the apkāya or that they should stay wearing a kambaḷ.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ nizIthasUtra ina pramANoM ke AdhAra se yaha spaSTa hotA hai ki mu~hapatti
mukha para bAMdhanA hI muni-cihna evaM jIvarakSA ke lie upayukta hai  /  anyathA
prAyaH sabhI sAdhu-sAdhviyoM kA khule mu~ha bolanA nizcita hai tathA idhara-
udhara rakha dene se muni-cihna bhI nahIM rahatA hai  /  grAmAdi meM calate
samaya yA vihAra Adi meM mukhastrikA mukha para na rahe to jinakalpI Adi ke lie
bhASyAdi meM ise muni cihna kI apekSA Avazyaka upakaraNa kahanA nirarthaka ho
jAtA hai  /  360] bhagavatI sUtra za. 9, u. 32 meM ATha paTa kI mu~hapatti kA
ullekha hai  /  samutthAna sUtra meM bhI ATha paTa hone kA ullekha hai  /  zve.
mUrtipUjaka samAja meM cAra paTa kI mu~hapatti rakhI jAtI hai kintu eka kinAre
prATha paTa bhI kara die jAte haiM  /  use sadA hAtha meM rakhate haiM  /
vihAra Adi ke samaya colapaTTaka meM bhI laTakA dete haiM  /  zve. sthAnaka vAsI
muni pUrNa rUpa se ATha paTa karake mukhavastrikA mukha para bA~dha kara rakhate
haiM  /  zivapurANa adhyAya 21 meM jaina sAdhu kA paricaya dete hue mukha para
mukhavastrikA dhAraNa karane kA kahA hai  /  yathA - haste pAtraM dadhAnAzca,
turaMDe vastrasya dhArakAH  /  malinAnyeva vAsAMsi dhArayaMtyalpa bhASiNaH  //
nizIthabhASya tathA piMDaniyukti meM kahA haibitiyaM piyappamANaM, muhappamANeNa
kAyavvaM  /  / 5805  /  /  - rAjendra koSa bhA. 6, pR. 333 mukhavastrikA mukha
para bA~dhane se hI mukha pramANa banAne kA yaha kathana sArthaka ho sakatA hai
/  mukhavastrikA kI saMkhyA bhI zrAgama meM nahIM kahI gaI hai  /  ataH do yA
adhika AvazyakatAnusAra rakhI jA sakatI hai  /  vyAkhyA granthoM meM eka-eka
mukhavastrikA rakhanA kahA hai  /  kambala - prAgamoM meM aneka jagaha kambala
kA nAma AtA hai  /  yaha zIta se zarIra kI rakSA ke lie rakhA jAtA hai  /
praznavyAkaraNasUtra meM jahA~ tIna caddara kA kathana hai, vahA~ anya upadhi
meM kambala kA nAma nahIM hai, isalie isakA samAveza tIna caddaroM meM kiyA jAtA
hai  /  jo bhikSu zIta parISad sahana kara sakatA hai vaha vastra kA UNodarI
tapa karatA huA eka sUtI caddara se bhI nirvAha kara sakatA hai tathA acela bhI
raha sakatA hai  /  athavA vastra kI jAti kI apekSA UNodarI tapa karatA huA
bhikSu kevala sUtI vastra rakhane para kambala kA tyAga kara sakatA hai  /
kambala ko jIvarakSA kA sAdhana bhI mAnA jAne lagA hai jo paramparA mAtra hai,
kintu Agamasammata nahIM hai  /  dazA da. 7 meM paDimAdhArI bhikSu kA sUryodaya
se sUryAsta taka vihAra karane kA varNana hai  /  jahA~ sUryAsta ho jAe vahIM
rAtri bhara apramatta bhAva se vyatIta karane kA kathana hai  /  bRhatkalpa u. 2
meM sAdhu ko khule AkAza vAle sthAna meM rahanA kalpanIya kahA hai, sAdhvI ko
kalpanIya kahA hai  /  kintu vahA~ apkAya kI virAdhanA honA yA kambala or3hakara
rahanA nahIM kahA hai  /

Page #461 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixteenth Uddeshak  [361] Therefore, considering a blanket as an essential
tool for life protection, similar to a face cloth or a dust remover, is not in
accordance with the Agamas.  A monk who sits on an _asana_ can keep a cotton or
woolen _asana_ in addition to a _chaddar_, _cholpattak_, and _kambla_, as per
his need and desire. A monk who practices _unodari_ tapasya (austerity) can
discard woolen clothes and keep a cotton _asana_. A monk who practices further
austerity can even discard the _asana_. He can use the same cloth he wears for
sleeping and sitting. A monk who becomes an _achel_ (one who wears only a
loincloth) can manage with only a _shayya-sanstark_ (bedding) without an
_asana_.  Commentary texts mention two _asanas_: one cotton and one woolen. They
call the cotton one _uttar-patta_ and the woolen one _sanstark-patta_.
**Clothes related to _patra_ (bowl):**  1. _Jholi_ (bag) for bringing alms 2.
Cloth for keeping bowls containing food 3. Cloth to be placed between empty
bowls when tied together 4. Cloth for filtering or covering water 5. Soft cloth
for cleaning bowls  These are called, respectively, 1. _patrabandhan_, 2. _patra
sthapanak_, 3. _patla_, 4. _rajastraan_, 5. _patrakesarika_ in _Prashna Shruti_
2, _Adhyaya_ 5. These clothes can be kept long or wide as per need, as the
Agamas do not mention any specific measurements.  **_Padapronchhan_ (foot-
cloth):**  This is also a cloth-based tool. It is mentioned in many places in
the Agamas, including the _Nishith Sutra_. Its main use is to wipe feet.  The
_Acharaanga Sutra_ mentions its use during defecation. According to
_Brihatkalpa_ 5 and _Nishith_ 2, it is sometimes used to clean the bed by tying
it to a wooden stick. According to _Nishith_ 5, a householder's _padapronchhan_
can be brought for a day or two if needed. Thus, the Agamas describe various
types and uses of _padapronchhan_. Due to these diverse uses or other
perspectives, commentary texts consider it synonymous with _rajohan_ (dust
remover). Sometimes, it is divided into two parts: 'patra' and 'pronchhan' (dust
remover). This misunderstanding might have led to the use of 'padapronchhan' in
place of 'rajohan' in the original text.  The _Prashna Vyakaran Sutra_ clarifies
that _padapronchhan_ is a different tool from _rajohan_. It mentions both tools
separately, and the commentator also counts them separately, making the total
number of tools 12.  _Dasha_ 4 also mentions both tools together.  It is made
from old or used cloth pieces, which can be cotton or woolen. There is no
specific measurement for it. Commentary texts describe it as a square woolen
cloth piece of one hand span. However, those who practice _unodari_ use only
cotton cloth for all purposes, discarding woolen clothes. Therefore, it cannot
be insisted that any tool must be woolen. For further information on
_padapronchhan_, refer to _Uddeshak_ 2, _Sutra_ 1-8.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 solahavAM uddezaka] [361 ataH kambala ko mukhavastrikA yA rajoharaNa ke samAna
jIvarakSA kA Avazyaka upakaraNa mAnanA Agamasammata nahIM hai| _ Asana-bhikSu
caddara, colapaTTaka, kambala ke sivAya sUtI yA UnI Asana bhI AvazyakatA evaM
icchAnusAra rakha sakatA hai  /  vastra UNodarI tapa karane vAlA bhikSu UnI
vastra kA tyAga karake sUtI Asana rakha sakatA hai tathA vastra kA adhika tyAga
karane vAlA bhikSu Asana rakhane kA bhI tyAga kara sakatA hai  /  vaha jo bhI
vastra rakhatA hai, usI ko zayyA Asana ke upayoga meM le letA hai  /  jo acela
bana jAtA hai vaha binA Asana ke kevala zayyA-saMstAraka se hI nirvAha karatA
hai  /  vyAkhyA granthoM meM do Asana rakhane kA vidhAna bhI hai-eka sUtI,
dUsarA uunii| vahA~ sUtI ko uttara-paTTa aura UnI ko saMstAraka-paTTa kahA hai|
pAtra sambandhI vastra-1. bhikSA lAne ke lie jholI, 2. AhAra yukta pAtroM ko
rakhane kA vastra, 3. khAlI pAtroM ko bA~dhane ke samaya unake bIca meM die jAne
vAle vastra, 4. pAnI chAnane yA use DhaMkane kA vastra, 5. pAtra-pramArjana
karane kA komala vastra  /  inheM prazna. zru. 2, a. 5 meM kramazaH 1.
pAtrabandhana, 2. pAtrasthApanaka, 3. paTala, 4. rajastrANa, 5. pAtrakesarikA
kahA hai| ye vastra AvazyakatAnusAra lambe-caur3e rakhe jA sakate haiM  /
kyoMki AgamoM meM inake mApa kA koI ullekha nahIM hai  /  pAdaproMcchana-yaha
bhI eka vastramaya upakaraNa hai| isakA kathana AgamoM meM aneka sthaloM para
hai  /  nizIthasUtra meM bhI aneka jagaha isakA kathana hai  /  isakA mukhya
upayoga pA~va poMchanA hai  /  AcArAMgasUtra meM malatyAga ke samaya bhI isakA
upayoga karane kA kahA hai  /  bRhatkalpa u. 5 tathA nizItha u. 2 ke anusAra
kabhI-kabhI kASThadaNDa se bA~dhakara zayyA ke pramArjana meM bhI isakA upayoga
kiyA jAtA hai| nizItha u. 5 ke anusAra yadi kabhI Avazyaka ho to gRhastha kA
pAdapoMcchana eka do dina ke lie lAyA jA sakatA hai| isa taraha AgamoM meM
pAdaproMcchana ke aneka prakAra evaM aneka upayoga batAe haiN| ina bhinna-bhinna
prayogoM ke kAraNa yA anya kisI daSTikoNa se vyAkhyAgranthoM meM ise rajohaNa kA
paryAyavAcI bhI mAna liyA gayA hai| kahIM isako do padoM meM vibhAjita karake
'pAtra' tathA 'proMcchana' (rajoharaNa) aisA artha bhI kiyA gayA hai| isa
arthabhrama ke kAraNa mUla pATha meM bhI aneka jagaha rajoharaNa ke sthAna para
pAdaproMcchana likhA gayA ho, aisA pratIta hotA hai  /  yaha pAdaproMcchana
rajoharaNa se bhinna upakaraNa hai, aisA praznavyAkaraNasUtra se spaSTa hai|
kyoMki vahA~ donoM upakaraNa alaga-alaga kahe haiM aura TIkAkAra ne bhI alaga-
alaga ginakara upakaraNoM kI saMkhyA 12 kahI hai| daza. a. 4 meM bhI eka sAtha
donoM upakaraNoM ke nAma ginAe haiN| yaha jIrNa yA upayoga meM Ae hue
vastrakhaNDa kA banAyA jAtA hai, jo sUtI yA UnI kisI bhI prakAra kA ho sakatA
hai  /  isakA bhI koI mApa nirdiSTa nahIM hai  /  vyAkhyAgranthoM meM yaha eka
hAtha kA samacaurasa UnI vastra khaNDa kahA gayA hai| kintu UnI vastra kA tyAga
kara UNodarI karane vAle sabhI kAmoM meM sUtI vastra kA hI upayoga karate haiN|
ataH koI bhI upakaraNa UnI hI ho, aisA Agraha nahIM kiyA jA sakatA hai  /
pAdaproMcchana viSayaka anya jAnakArI ke lie u. 2 sUtra 1-8 kA vivecana dekheN|

Page #462 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [362] [Nishith Sutra]  Nishithya - This is a cloth used to wrap around the
stick used for menstruation. There is no mention of it in the Agamas. Therefore,
it is used traditionally to wrap around the stick used for menstruation. This
helps keep the menstruation cloth tied securely and prevents animals from being
scared by the wooden stick with the cloth. There is also a tendency to keep
Nishithya with embroidery and colors, and to wrap two or three Nishithya
together, which is purely a tradition. This has no significance in terms of
restraint and such colorful, embroidered tools are unimaginable for a Sadhu.
All these are considered clothing related tools. The Agamas do not clearly
describe the measurements of all these. Therefore, a monk can keep useful
clothes according to his needs and the Gan Samachari, without attachment.
However, if the total measurement of all these clothes exceeds three unbroken
cloths (than-taka), they will incur the prescribed atonement. According to
Nishi. U. 18, there is no atonement for keeping extra clothes beyond the limit
with permission due to inability (ashakti praadi).  For Sadhvi - The Pagams
mention 4 chadars and their width. 'Uggahanantk' and 'Ugghapattak' are two
special tools mentioned. The Agamas do not have a clear separate measurement for
the tools of Sadhvi. Therefore, Sadhvis can also keep tools according to their
needs and Samachari, but they should understand that keeping more than four
unbroken cloths without reason and permission will also incur the prescribed
atonement.  Due to the protection of virtue and the structure of the body, some
tools may have a higher number and measurement, for which one unbroken cloth is
mentioned in the Brihatkalpasutra.  Uggahanantk - Ugghapattak - The long (like a
loincloth) cloth used to cover the genitals is called 'Ugghapattak'. The
underwear-like tool can be called Uggahanantk.  Brihatkalpa Sutra U. 3 prohibits
these two tools for Sadhus and prescribes them for Sadhvis. These two tools are
kept for the protection of virtue and are worn as needed. The commentators have
described six tools in place of these two tools and have mentioned a total of 25
tools for Sadhvi and 14 tools for Sadhu. There is no such instruction in the
Agamas. Different tools are mentioned in different places. The Prashnavyakaran
Sutra mentions the tools together, but there is no mention of the number, nor
does that statement determine the number mentioned in the commentaries.  Patra -
Wooden, Tumba, Earthen, any of these three types of Patras can be kept, this is
clearly mentioned in many Agamas, but the number of Patras is not determined by
any Agama text.  1. Aacha. Shru. 1, A. 8, U. 4 mentions many Patras for a
specific vow-taker, capable monk: 'Je Bhikkhu Tihi Vatthehi Parivasie, Pay
Chautthehi.'

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 362] [nizIthasUtra nizIthiyA-yaha rajoharaNa kI DaMDI ke Upara lapeTane kA
vastra hotA hai| isakA Agama meM kahIM bhI nirdeza nahIM hai  /  ataH yaha
paramparA se rajoharaNa kI DaMDI para lapeTane ke lie hai| isase rajoharaNa
vyavasthita baMdhA rahatA hai aura vastra yukta kASTha daMDa se pazu Adi koI
bhayabhIta bhI nahIM hote haiM  /  kasIdA evaM raMgoM se yukta nizIthiyA rakhane
kI aura do-tIna nizIthiye lapeTakara rakhane kI pravati bhI hai, jo kevala
paramparAmAtra hai  /  jisakA saMyama kI apekSA se koI mahattva nahIM hai aura
aise citravicitra raMga-biraMge kasIde vAle upakaraNa sAdhu ke lie akalpanIya
bhI haiN| ye saba vastra sambandhI upakaraNa kahe gaye haiN| AgamoM meM ina
sabhI ke mApa kA spaSTa varNana nahIM hai  /  ataH bhikSu mamatva bhAva na
karate hue upayogI vastra AvazyakatA evaM gaNa samAcArI ke anusAra rakha sakatA
hai| kintu una sabhI vastroM kA kula mApa tIna akhaNDa vastra (thAna-tAkA) se
adhika hone para unheM sUtrokta prAyazcitta AtA hai aura nizI. u. 18 ke anusAra
sakAraNa (azakti prAdi se) AjJA pUrvaka maryAdA se atirikta vastra rakhe jAne
para prAyazcitta nahIM pAtA hai| sAdhvI ke lie-pAgamoM meM 4 caddaroM kA aura
unakI caur3AI kA kathana hai  /  'uggahaNaMtaka' aura 'uggahapaTTaka' ye do
upakaraNa vizeSa kahe gae haiN| AgamoM meM sAdhvI ke upakaraNoM kA bhI
alagaalaga spaSTa mApa nahIM hai  /  ataH sAdhviyAM bhI AvazyakatA aura samAcArI
ke anusAra upakaraNa rakha sakatI haiM kintu akAraNa evaM AjJA binA cAra akhaMDa
vastra ke mApa se adhika vastra rakhane para unheM bhI sUtrokta prAyazcitta
samajhanA cAhie  /  zIlarakSA ke lie aura zarIra-saMracanA ke kAraNa kucha
upakaraNa saMkhyA va mApa meM adhika hone se inake lie bRhatkalpasUtra meM eka
akhaNDa vastra adhika kahA gayA hai| uggahaNaMtaka-uggahapaTTaka-guptAMga ko
DhaMkane kA lambA (laMgoTa jaisA) kapar3A 'uggahapaTTaka' kahA gayA hai  /
jAMghiyA jaise upakaraNa ko uggahaNaMtaka kaha sakate haiM  /  bRhatkalpa sUtra
u. 3 meM ye donoM upakaraNa sAdhu ko rakhane kA niSedha hai aura sAdhvI ko
rakhane kA vidhAna hai  /  ye donoM upakaraNa zIlarakSA ke lie rakhe jAte haiM
aura yathAsamaya pahane jAte haiN| vyAkhyAkAroM ne ina do upakaraNoM ke sthAna
para chaha upakaraNoM kA varNana kiyA hai tathA sAdhvI ke lie kula 25 upakaraNoM
kI saMkhyA batAI hai aura sAdhu ke lie 14 upakaraNa kahe haiM  /  AgamoM meM
saMkhyA kA aisA koI nirdeza nahIM hai  /  bhinna-bhinna sthaloM para bhinna-
bhinna upakaraNoM kA kathana hai  /  praznavyAkaraNasUtra meM eka sAtha
upakaraNoM kA kathana hai parantu vahA~ saMkhyA kA nirdeza nahIM hai, na hI usa
kathana se bhASyokta saMkhyA kA nirNaya hotA hai| pAtra-lakar3I, tumbA, miTTI,
ina tIna jAti ke pAtroM meM se kisI bhI jAti ke pAtra rakhe jA sakate haiM, aisA
varNana aneka AgamoM meM spaSTa milatA hai kintu pAtra kI saMkhyA kA nirNaya
kisI bhI AgamapATha se nahIM hotA hai| 1. AcA. zru. 1, a. 8, u. 4 meM viziSTa
pratijJAdhArI samartha bhikSu ke lie aneka pAtroM kA varNana hai 'je bhikkhU
tihiM vatthehiM parivasie, pAya cautthehi  / '

Page #463 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixteenth Discourse] [363 Here, instead of using the singular form, the
plural word 'pay chautthehin' has been used. 2. In Vyav. Up. 2, while laying
down the rules for a monk who is performing Pariharatapaschitta, five words have
been used in relation to the vessel: 'Sayansi wa Padiggahanssi, Sayansi wa
Palasaganssi, Sayansi wa Kamandalanssi, Sayansi wa Khubbaganssi, Sayansi wa
Panissi.' Here, the word 'Padiggahanssi' is for the vessel of food. The word
'Palasaganssi' is for the measure, and the word 'Kamandalanssi' is for the water
vessel. This text also clearly states that there are many types of vessels. _3.
In Bhagavati Sutra Sh. 2, Up. 5, there is a description of Gautam Swami's many
vessels while going on a pilgrimage: Tae nan se Bhagavan Goyame
Chatthakkhamanparanganssi Jav Bhayanai Vatthai Padilhehi Bhayanai Vatthai
Padilhehita Bhayanai Pamjjahi, Bhayanai Pamjjitta Bhayanai Uggahehi, Bhayanai
Uggahettta Jenev Samane Bhagavan Mahavire Jav Bhikkhayeriyan Adahi Jav Esanan
Anesanan Aloaehi Aloaetta Bhattapanam Padidamsehi. This description states that
Gautam Swami transcribed and cleaned many vessels and showed both the food and
water brought on the pilgrimage to the Lord. Here, there is a clear description
of Gautam Swami having many vessels. 4. In Bhagavati Sutra Sh. 25, Up. 7, the
description of Uparana-Unodari is as follows: 'Se ki tan Uvagaranomoyariya?
Uvagaranomoyariya Ege Vatthe, Ege Pae, Chiyattovagaran Saizjanaya.' Here, it is
stated that having one cloth (sheet) and one vessel constitutes Unodari tapas.
This clearly proves that having many clothes and many vessels is possible,
because only if there are many clothes and vessels to choose from can having one
cloth or vessel constitute Unodari tapas. 5. In Prashnavyakaran Sutra Shru. 2,
A. 5, the number of 'Patals' in the equipment of the vessel is said to be three.
The Patals are used to tie the vessels together. Due to being placed in the
middle of the vessels, they are called 'Patals' (Astan). Their number is said to
be three, therefore, it is self-evident that there are more than three vessels.
Three Patals are not needed for one or two vessels. The commentators have
explained that the Patals are used to cover the food vessels while traveling on
a pilgrimage, and they have also said that five to seven Patals should be kept.
But in the Agam, separate equipment like Jholi and Rajastran are mentioned for
covering the food vessels, therefore, the above-mentioned use of Patals is
appropriate. 6. In Pracha. Shru. 2, A. 6, the text related to the vessel is as
follows:

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 solahavAM uddezaka] [363 yahA~ para ekavacana kA prayoga na karake 'pAya
cautthehiM' aisA bahuvacanAMta zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai  /  2. vyava. u. 2
meM parihAratapa prAyazcitta vahana karane vAle bhikSu ke lie AhAra karane kA
vidhAna karate hue pAtra kI apekSA se pA~ca zabdoM kA prayoga kiyA hai 'sayaMsi
vA paDiggahaMsi, sayaMsi vA palAsagaMsi, sayaMsi vA kamaMDalaMsi, sayaMsi vA
khubbagaMsi, sayaMsi vA pANisi  / ' yahA~ AhAra ke pAtra ke lie 'paDiggahaMsi'
zabda hai  /  mAtraka ke lie 'palAsagaMsi' zabda hai aura pAnI ke pAtra ke lie
'kamaMDalaMsi' zabda hai  /  isa pATha meM bhI aneka prakAra ke pAtra hone kA
kathana spaSTa hai| _3. bhagavatIsUtra za. 2, u. 5 meM gautamasvAmI ke gocarI
jAne ke varNana meM unake aneka pAtroM kA varNana hai tae NaM se bhagavaM goyame
chaTThakkhamaNapAraNagaMsi jAva bhAyaNAI vatthAI paDilehei bhAyaNAI vatthAI
paDilehitA bhAyaNAI pamajjai, bhAyaNAI pamajjittA bhAyaNAI uggAhei, bhAyaNAI
uggAhettA jeNeva samaNe bhagavaM mahAvIre jAva bhikkhAyariyaM aDai jAva esaNaM
aNesaNaM Aloei AloettA bhattapANaM paDidaMsei  /  isa varNana meM batAyA gayA
hai ki gautamasvAmI ne bahuta se pAtroM kA pratilekhana, pramArjana kiyA tathA
gocarI meM lAe hue AhAra tathA pAnI donoM bhagavAn ko dikhAe  /  yahA~ para
gautamasvAmI ke aneka pAtra hone kA spaSTa varNana hai| 4. bhagavatIsUtra za.
25, u. 7 meM upakaraNa-UNodarI kA varNana isa prakAra hai'se ki taM
uvagaraNomoyariyA ? uvagaraNomoyariyA ege vatthe, ege pAe,
ciyttovgrnnsaaijjnnyaa|' yahA~ eka vastra (caddara) evaM eka pAtra rakhane se
UNodarI tapa hone kA kathana hai  /  isase aneka vastra evaM aneka pAtra rakhanA
spaSTa siddha hotA hai, kyoMki aneka vastra-pAtra kalpanIya hoM taba hI eka
vastra yA pAtra rakhane se UNodarI tapa ho sakatA hai  /  5.
praznavyAkaraNasUtra zru. 2, a. 5 meM pAtra ke upakaraNoM meM 'paTala' kI
saMkhyA tIna kahI gaI hai| paTala kA upayoga pAtroM ko bAMdhakara rakhate samaya
kiyA jAtA hai| pAtra ke bIca meM rakhe jAne ke kAraNa ina ko 'paTala' (astAna)
kahA gayA hai| inakI saMkhyA tIna kahI gaI hai ataH pAtra to tIna se jyAdA honA
svataH siddha ho jAtA hai  /  eka yA do pAtra ke lie tIna paTala kI AvazyakatA
nahIM hotI hai  /  vyAkhyAkAroM ne paTala kA upayoga gocarI meM bhramaNa karate
samaya AhAra ke pAtroM ko DhaMkane kA batAyA hai, pA~ca sAta paTala rakhanA bhI
kaha diyA hai| kintu Agama meM prAhAra ke pAtroM ko DhAMkane ke lie jholI evaM
rajastrANa upakaraNa alaga kahe gaye haiM, ataH paTala kA uparyukta upayoga hI
ucita hai| 6. prAcA. zru. 2, a. 6 meM pAtra sambandhI pATha isa prakAra hai

Page #464 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[364] "If a monk or a nun wishes to investigate a vessel, they should know that
it is a vessel made of gourd, wood, or clay. Of these, the vessel that is sturdy
and well-made, suitable for a young Nigrantha, should be taken, not another."
The meaning is that this rule regarding the acceptance of one type of vessel out
of three is in relation to the type of vessel, not the number. If it is
understood without considering the context that only one vessel is permissible
for a monk, not many, then this meaning contradicts many other scriptures.
Because it is clear from the scriptures mentioned above that a Ganadhara, a monk
who practices Pariharic tapas, and a monk who has taken a specific vow, can have
multiple vessels.  If only one vessel is permissible for a young, healthy monk,
then having multiple vessels would be considered a weakness and a deviation from
the path. In such a situation, there would be no purpose in practicing Uṇodari
tapas. However, the scriptures like Bhagavati Sutra clearly mention and explain
the practice of Uṇodari tapas.  Therefore, the only interpretation that is free
from contradictions is that this passage from Acharanga Sutra refers to the type
of vessel that is permissible for a young monk, not the number.  This clarifies
that a monk can have multiple vessels, but it does not specify how many.  The
passage about the three layers clearly states that a minimum of four vessels is
permissible. In addition, three types of containers are mentioned: 1.
Uccaramaatraka, 2. Prasravaṇamaatraka, 3. Khelaamaatraka.  While
Prasravaṇamaatraka is necessary for everyone, Khelaamaatraka and Uccaramaatraka
are necessary for some due to specific reasons.  Based on this passage from
Acharanga Sutra or other reasons, the commentators have argued that having one
vessel and one container is permissible. They attribute the rule regarding the
container to Aryarakshit. This topic has been discussed extensively elsewhere.
However, this argument holds no significance in the face of the scriptures
mentioned above, and there is no tradition of having only one or two vessels.
In the description of the vows taken during the acceptance of Gochchaga-samyama,
the term "Gochchaga" is mentioned separately from the vessel.  In
Uttaradhyayanasutra 26, after the mention of the inscription of the
Mukhavastrika at sunrise, the inscription of the "Gochchaga" is mentioned. This
is followed by the mention of the inscription of the garment. Then, after the
measurement of one and a half porisi, the inscription of the vessel is
mentioned.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 364] [nizISasUtra "bhikkhU vA bhikkhUNI vA abhikaMkhejjA pAyaM esittae, se jaM
puNa pAyaM jANejjA, taM jahAalAupAyaM vA dArupAyaM vA maTTiyApAyaM vA,
tahappagAraM pAyaM je niggaMthe taruNe jAva thirasaMghayaNe, se egaM pAyaM
dhArejjA No bIyaM  / ' artha-bhikSu yA bhikSuNI pAtra kI gaveSaNA karanA cAhe,
taba vaha aisA jAne ki yaha tumbe kA pAtra, lakar3I kA pAtra yA miTTI kA pAtra
hai| inameM se jo nirgrantha taruNa yAvat sthira saMhanana vAlA hai vaha eka hI
prakAra kA pAtra grahaNa kare dUsare prakAra kA nahIM  /  yahA~ tIna jAti ke
pAtroM kA kathana karake eka ko grahaNa karane kA jo vidhAna kiyA hai vaha eka
jAti kI apekSA se hai, aisA artha hI AgamasaMgata hai  /  yadi sambandha milAe
binA hI aisA samajha liyA jAe ki saMkhyA meM eka hI pAtra bhikSu ko kalpatA hai
aneka nahIM, to yaha artha uparyukta aneka AgamapAThoM se viruddha hai  /
kyoMki gaNadhara gautamasvAmI ke evaM pArihArika tapa karane vAle bhikSu ke
tathA viziSTa pratijJAdhArI bhikSuoM ke bhI aneka pAtra honA Upara batAe gae
AgamapramANoM se spaSTa hai| yadi taruNa svastha sAdhu ko eka hI pAtra kalpatA
ho to aneka pAtra rakhanA kamajorI aura apavAdamArga siddha hotA hai  /  aisI
sthiti meM pAtra kI UNodarI karane kA koI prayojana hI nahIM rahatA  /  jabaki
bhagavatI Adi sUtroM meM UNodarItapa kA pATha spaSTa milatA hai tathA usakI
vyAkhyA bhI milatI hai| ataH AcArAMga ke isa pATha meM eka jAti ke pAtra hI
taruNa sAdhu ko kalpate haiM, yahI artha karanA nirAbAdha hai| isa prakAra se
bhikSu ke aneka pAtra rakhane kA nirNaya to ho jAtA hai, kintu kitane pAtra
rakhanA yaha nirNaya nahIM ho pAtA hai  /  tIna paTala ke pATha se jaghanya 4
pAtra rakhanA to spaSTa hai, isake atirikta mAtraka tIna prakAra ke kahe gae
haiM-1. uccAramAtraka, 2. prasravaNamAtraka, 3. khelamAtraka  /  inameM
prasravaNamAtraka to sabhI ko Avazyaka hotA hai, kintu khelamAtraka aura uccAra
mAtraka vizeSa kAraNa se kisI-kisI ko Avazyaka hotA hai| AcArAMga ke isa pATha
se yA anya kisI kAraNa se bhASya-TIkAkAroM ne pAtra saMkhyA kI carcA karate hue
eka pAtra va eka mAtraka rakhane ko kalpanIya siddha kiyA hai  /  jisameM
mAtraka kA vidhAna AryarakSita ke dvArA kiyA gayA batAyA hai  /  anyatra bhI isa
viSayaka vistRta carcA kI gaI hai  /  jisakA uparyukta Agama pramANoM ke sAmane
kucha bhI mahattva nahIM rahatA hai tathA eka yA do pAtra rakhane kI koI
paramparA bhI pracalita nahIM hai  /  gocchaga-saMyama lete samaya grahaNa kI
jAne vAlI upadhi ke varNana meM pAtra se bhinna "gocchaga" kA kathana hai|
uttarA. a. 26 meM sUryodaya hone para mukhavastrikA kI pratilekhanA ke bAda
"gocchaga" ke pratilekhana karane kA vidhAna hai| usake bAda vastra-pratilekhana
kA kathana hai| tadanantara pauna porisI mAne para pAtrapratilekhana kA vidhAna
hai|

Page #465 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixteenth Uddeshak  [365 In these sutras, it is clearly established that
"Gochchhag" is not a utensil related to a vessel, but a tool for cleaning in the
transcription of clothes, which is called Pramanika (Poojani). In the
Prashnavyakaranasutra Shru. 2, A. 5, there are names of many tools and the word
"Adi" is also used there, from which tools like Padappochan, Matrak, Asan etc.
are included. In that text also, "Gochchhag" tool is said to be independent. In
Dashava. A. 4, along with the instructions of many tools, "Gochchhag" is also
instructed separately from the vessel. Commentators have considered and
explained "Gochchhag" as a tool of the vessel itself and described it as a
woolen cloth piece. But from the above explanation, it is appropriate to
understand Gochchhag as Poojani. In Brihatkalpa Sutra U. 5 and Prashna. Shru. 2,
A. 5, there is a description of the "Paykesariya" tool. Which is a soft cloth-
like tool for cleaning the vessel. To clean the vessel of Tumbe, the monk can
also tie it with a small wooden stick, but the Brihatkalpasutra prohibits the
Sadhvi from keeping it with a wooden stick. Sometimes it is also considered as
"Gochchhag". But in the Prashnavyakaranasutra, the third tool is called
"Paykesarika" among the tools of the vessel and Gochchhag is said to be
separate, therefore both the tools are different. Gochchhag is used for cleaning
clothes, body or other Upadhi and Paykesarika is used for cleaning the vessel.
For cleaning. Thus, both have different functions. Rajoharan - This is an
essential tool of the monk. It is necessary for all Sadhus, both Jinakalp and
Sthavirakalp. It is so long that the ground can be cleaned while standing and it
has such a circumference that the foot can be placed evenly on the cleaned
ground. An excellent circumference can also be understood as 32 angulas. Special
description should be known from the last sutras of Uddeshak five. It is used
for cleaning while walking and for cleaning Asan, Shayya and house. It is also
called 'Rishi-Dhwaj'. In the Agamas, the monk is also called 'Achel' and
'Apaatra' (Karpatri). In the Bhashya etc., it is said to abandon all the tools
except Muhpatti and Rajoharan, because these two are the main means of restraint
and protection of life and the remaining tools are kept for the protection of
the body and the importance of shame. Jinakalp etc. monks who have few Upadhis
can also do the work of Gochchhag from Rajoharan. Table of all the tools of the
Sadhu Vastramaap Tool Description 1 Hand Muhpatti Two (at least) length 21
angulas, width 16 angulas or 16 angulas square. One (suitable for cleaning body,
tools and clothes) Gochchhag ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 solahavAM uddezaka] [365 ina sUtroM se yaha spaSTa siddha hotA hai ki
"gocchaga" pAtra sambandhI upakaraNa nahIM hai kintu vastroM ke pratilekhana meM
pramArjana karane kA upakaraNa hai, jise pramAnikA (pUjaNI) kahA jAtA hai|
praznavyAkaraNasUtra zru. 2, a. 5 meM aneka upakaraNoM ke nAma nirdeza haiM
tathA vahA~ "Adi" zabda kA bhI prayoga kiyA gayA hai, jisase pAdapoMchana,
mAtraka, Asana Adi anirdiSTa upakaraNoM ko grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai  /  usa pATha
meM bhI "gocchaga' upakaraNa svatantra kahA gayA hai| dazavai. a. 4 meM aneka
upakaraNoM ke nirdeza ke sAtha "gocchaga" kA bhI nirdeza pAtra se alaga kiyA
hai| vyAkhyAkAroM ne "gocchaga" ko pAtra kA hI upakaraNa ginAyA evaM samajhAyA
hai aura use UnI vastrakhaNDa batAyA hai| kintu uparyukta spaSTIkaraNa se
gocchaga ko pUjaNI hI samajhanA ucita hai| bRhatkalpa sUtra u. 5 meM tathA
prazna. zru. 2, a. 5 meM "pAyakesariyA" upakaraNa kA varNana hai  /  jo
pAtrapramArjana kA komala vastra rUpa upakaraNa hai  /  tumbe ke pAtra kA
pramArjana karane ke lie ise bhikSu choTe kASThadaMDa se bAMdhakara bhI rakha
sakatA hai, kintu sAdhvI ko kASThadaMDa yukta rakhane kA bRhatkalpasUtra meM
niSedha hai| kahIM-kahIM ise bhI "gocchaga" hI mAna liyA jAtA hai| kintu
praznavyAkaraNasUtra meM pAtra ke upakaraNoM ke bIca tIsarA upakaraNa
"pAyakesarikA" kahA hai aura gocchaga alaga kahA hai, ataH donoM upakaraNa
bhinna-bhinna haiM  /  gocchaga kA upayoga vastra, zarIra yA anya upadhi ke
pramArjana ke lie hotA hai evaM pAtrakesarikA kA upayoga pAtrapramArjana ke lie
hai pramArjana ke lie hotA hai  /  isa prakAra donoM kA kArya bhI bhinna-bhinna
hai| rajoharaNa-yaha bhikSu kA Avazyaka upakaraNa hai| jinakalpI evaM
sthavirakalpI sabhI sAdhunoM ko rakhanA Avazyaka hotA hai  /  khar3e-khar3e
bhUmi kA pramArjana kiyA jA sake, itanA lambA hotA hai tathA eka bAra meM
pramArjana kI huI bhUmi meM barAbara paira rakhA jA sake itanA gherAva hotA hai
/  utkRSTa gherAva 32 aMgula bhI samajhA jA sakatA hai| vizeSa varNana uddezaka
pAMca ke antima sUtroM se jAnanA cAhie  /  calate samaya pramArjana karane meM
tathA Asana, zayyA va makAna kA pramArjana karane meM isakA upayoga kiyA jAtA
hai| ise 'RSi-dhvaja' bhI kahA gayA hai| AgamoM meM bhikSu ko 'acela' aura
'apAtra' (karapAtrI) bhI kahA hai| bhASyAdi meM muhapattI evaM rajoharaNa ke
sivAya sabhI upakaraNoM kA tyAga karanA batAyA hai, kyoMki ye donoM saMyama evaM
jIva rakSA ke pramukha sAdhana haiM aura zeSa upakaraNa zarIra kI rakSA evaM
lajjA kI pramukhatA se rakhe jAte haiN| alpa upAdhi rakhane vAle jinakalpI Adi
bhikSu rajoharaNa se gocchaga kA kArya bhI kara sakate haiN| sAdhu ke sabhI
upakaraNoM kI tAlikA vastramApa upakaraNa vivaraNa 1 hAtha muhapattI do (kama se
kama) lambAI 21 aMgula, caur3AI 16 aMgula athavA 16 aMgula samacaurasa  /  eka
(zarIra, upakaraNa aura vastra ke pramArjana yogya) gocchaga

Page #466 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
35 cubits 15 cubits 7 cubits Sheet Cholapatta [Nishīthasūtra Rajoharana One
(suitable for cleaning the ground while standing or walking) Three (woollen
blanket or cotton sheet) Two (length 5 cubits and width 16 cubits) Prasana One
(3342) Patra Four (at least), units separate. Patra's clothes seven
Padpraunchana One Nishīthīya one, for attaching to the wooden rod of Rajoharana.
Three Akhanda Vastra is 72 cubits. 10 cubits 1 cubit 1 cubit 70 cubits
approximately Table of all the equipment of the Sadhvi 1. Sheet 4 45 cubits 2.
Saatika (Sari) 2 20 cubits 3. Uggahanantaka, Ugghapattaka, Kanchuki 10 cubits 4.
Remaining Muhpatti etc. aforementioned 20 cubits 4 Akhanda Vastra - 96 cubits 95
cubits approximately Keeping the above mentioned title is the Utsarga Vidhi of
the Bhikshu. Except for the other titles, they can be kept for a short time as
per the order of the Geetaarth Bhikshu as per the need. But it is not
appropriate to keep it forever and for all the Sadhus. Therefore, no title can
be kept without any reason. Propaganda title is as follows 1. Dand 2. Lathi 3.
Bamboo Khapachchi 4. Bamboo Needle 5. Charma 6. Charmakosh 7. Charmachhedanak 8.
Chatra. 9 Bhrishika 10. Nalika 11. Chilamili 12. Suyi 13. Kacchi 14.
Nakchhedanak 15. Karnashodhanak 16. Means of removing thorns etc. The mention of
propaganda equipment is in the Agamas. The commentary has mentioned the
exceptional propaganda equipment as follows Peethga' Nisajja' Dandga' Pamjanni
Ghattae Daglamaadi. Pippala' Suyi-Nahaharani', Sodhanagaduga. 6 Jahanno U
||1413|| Vasattane Panaga 10, Chilamili'' Panaga Duganch 12 Santhare. Dandaadi'
3 Panaga Pun, Mataga' 4 Tiga Padalehaniya ||1414|| Chammatiga 16 Pattadduga 17
Nayavo...............................||1415||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 35 hAtha 15 hAtha 7 hAtha caddara colapaTTa [nizIthasUtra rajoharaNa eka
(khar3e-khar3e yA calate samaya bhUmipramArjana yogya) tIna (UnI kambala yA sUtI
caddara) do (lambAI 5 hAtha aura caur3AI 16 hAtha) prAsana eka (3342) pAtra cAra
(kama se kama), mAtraka alg| pAtra ke vastra sAta pAdaprauMchana eka nizIthiyA
eka, rajoharaNa ke kASThadaNDa para lagAne ke lie| tIna akhaNDa vastra 72 hAtha
hotA hai| 10 hAtha 1 hAtha 1 hAtha 70 hAtha lagabhaga sAdhvI ke sabhI upakaraNoM
kI tAlikA 1. caddara 4 45 hAtha 2. sATikA (sAr3I)2 20 hAtha 3. uggahaNaMtaka,
uggahapaTTaka, kaMcukI 10 hAtha 4. zeSa muhapattI Adi pUrvokta 20 hAtha 4
akhaNDa vastra-96 hAtha 95 hAtha lagabhaga uparyukta upadhi rakhanA bhikSu kI
utsarga vidhi hai  /  apavAda se anya upadhi AvazyakatAnusAra alpa samaya ke lie
gItArtha bhikSu kI AjJA se rakhI jA sakatI hai| kintu sadA ke lie aura sabhI
sAdhuoM ke lie rakhanA upayukta nahIM hai| ataH akAraNa koI upadhi nahIM rakhI
jA sakatI hai  /  propagrahika upadhi isa prakAra hai 1. daNDa 2. lAThI 3. bAMsa
kI khapaccI 4. bAMsa kI suI 5. carma 6. carmakoza 7. carmachedanaka 8. chatra. 9
bhRzikA 10. nAlikA 11. cilamilI 12. sUI 13. kaiMcI 14. nakhacchedanaka 15.
karNazodhanaka 16. kAMTA nikAlane kA sAdhana ityAdi aupagrahika upakaraNoM kA
ullekha AgamoM meM hai  /  bhASya meM ApavAdika praupagrahika upakaraNa isa
prakAra kahe haiM pIThaga' Nisajja' daMDaga' pamajjaNI ghaTTae DagalamAdI  /
pippala' sUyi-NahaharaNi', sodhaNagadugaM. 6 jahaNNo u  // 1413 //  vAsattANe
paNagaM10, cilamili'' paNagaM dugaMca12 saMthAre  /  daMDAdi'3 paNagaM puNa,
mattaga'4 tigaM pAdalehaNiyA  // 1414 //  cammatigaM16 paTTadugaM17
nnaayvo...............................||1415||

Page #467 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixteenth Uddeshak  **Akhya**  Santharo 10, Egamanenegangio y Ukkosso.
Potthapanagan 20 Falagan 21 Bitiyapade Hoi Ukkosso. ||1416|| - Ni. Bhashya Bha.
2 Page 192-93 - Brihatkalpa Bhashya Ga. 4096 to 4099  **Meaning:**  1. Various
types of beds,  2. Nishadya (a type of seat),  3. Dandapramārjanikā (a stick for
cleaning),  4. Dāndiyā (a type of stick used for sitting),  5. Dagal (stones
etc.),  6. Scissors (Katerni),  7. Needle,  8. Nakhachedanak (nail cutter),  9.
Karna-shodhanak (ear cleaner),  10. Danta-shodhanak (tooth cleaner),  11. Chatra
Panchak (five types of umbrellas),  12. Chilamilika Panchak (five types of
lamps),  13. Sanstarak (various types of grass),  14. Five types of sticks,  15.
Avale khanika (bamboo stick),  16. Charmatrik (gold, sitting and wearing),  17.
Sanstarak Pat and Uttarapatta (woollen and cotton bedsheets),  18. Praks-
Samavasaran (installation Acharya),  19. Mat etc.,  20. Pustak Panchak (five
types of books),  21. Falagan (wooden planks etc.).  **Explanation:**  A monk
cannot keep these instruments through the Utsargavidhi (ceremony of
renunciation). In exceptional circumstances, these worldly instruments can be
kept.  According to the book, other instruments for writing and studying, as
well as spectacles, can be kept as needed, depending on the time and place.  It
is noteworthy that these instruments include metal instruments like needles,
scissors, and umbrellas.  Books, measures, Sanstarak, planks, and bedsheets are
also considered exceptional instruments. Many other common instruments and
materials are not mentioned here.  Apart from the Agamas and their commentaries,
some instruments prevalent in different communities are:  1. Naand, Tagdi,
Supari, Chuli, Murti etc. 2. Photos of Gurus etc. 3. Clock for time information.
4. Thamani for the installation Acharya. 5. Saapda, Saapdi for keeping books. 6.
Yoga Patli, Dandi, Dandasan. 7. Box or wallet for Vasakshep (essentials). 8.
Plastic utensils like tumblers, glasses, lids etc. 9. Lime box for putting in
water at night. 10. Soap, soda, surf etc. for cleaning clothes, utensils etc.
11. Ropes for drying clothes and for Chilamili etc.  The rules for keeping these
instruments are not mentioned in the Agamas or commentaries. However, these
worldly instruments can be kept only when absolutely necessary for restraint and
the protection of the body etc.  Apart from this, all instruments kept only due
to inclination or tradition are considered Parigraha (worldly possessions).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 solahavAM uddezaka ] akkhA saMthAro 10 ya, egamaNegaMgio ya ukkoso  /
potthapaNagaM 20 phalagaM 21 bitiya pade hoi ukkoso  // 1416 //  - ni. bhASya
bhA. 2 pRSTha 192-93 - bRhatkalpa bhASya gA. 4096 se 4099 artha - 1. aneka
prakAra ke pIDhe, 2. niSadyA, 3. daMDapramArjanikA, DAMDiyA yA DaMDAsana, 4.
Dagala - pattharAdi, 5. kaiMcI ( kataranI), 6. sUI, 7. nakhachedanaka, 8. karNa-
zodhanaka, 9. danta-zodhanaka, 10. chatra paMcaka, 11. cilamilikA paMcaka, 12.
saMstAraka ( aneka prakAra ke tRNa), 13. pAMca prakAra ke daMDa lAThI Adi, 14.
tIna mAtraka (uccAra, prasravaNa, khela mAtraka ), 15. avalekhanikA (bAMsa kI
khapaccI), 16. carmatrika (sone, baiThane evaM proDhane kA ), 17. saMstAraka
paTa aura uttarapaTTa ( UnI evaM sUtI zayanavastra), 18. prakSa-samavasaraNa
(sthApanAcArya), 19. caTAI Adi, 20 pustaka paMcaka, 21. phalaga- lakar3I ke pATa
Adi  /  [ 367 bhikSu ina upakaraNoM ko utsargavidhi se nahIM rakha sakatA hai,
ApavAdika sthiti meM ye grahika upakaraNa rakhe jA sakate haiM  /  pustaka ke
kathana se adhyayana kI lekhana sAmagrI ke anya upakaraNa evaM cazme Adi bhI
kSetrakAla anusAra Avazyaka hone para rakhe jA sakate haiM  /  yahAM yaha
ullekhanIya hai ki ina upakaraNoM meM sUI, kaiMcI, chatra Adi dhAtu vAle
upakaraNa bhI kahe haiM  /  pustaka, mAtraka, saMstAraka, pATa tathA
zayanavastra ko bhI ApavAdika upakaraNa kahA hai tathA aneka pracalita
upakaraNoM evaM padArthoM kA yahAM koI ullekha nahIM hai  /  zrAgama tathA unake
bhASya TIkA ke atirikta bhinna-bhinna samudAyoM meM pracalita kucha upakaraNa
isa prakAra haiM 1. nAMda, tagar3I, sUpar3I, cUlI, mUrti Adi  /  2. gurujanoM ke
phoTU Adi  /  3. samaya kI jAnakArI ke lie ghar3I  /  4. sthApanAcArya ke lie
ThamaNI  /  5. pustaka rakhane ke sApar3A, sApar3I | 6. yoga kI pATalI, dAMDI,
daMDAsana  /  7. vAsakSepa kA DibbA yA baTuA  /  8. plAsTika ke loTA gilAsa
Dhakkana Adi upakaraNa  /  9. rAtri meM rakhane ke pAnI meM DAlane ke cUne kA
DibbA  /  10. vastra, pAtra Adi ko svaccha karane ke lie sAbuna soDA sarpha
prAdi  /  11. vastrAdi sukhAne ke lie tathA cilamilI Adi ke lie DoriyAM  /  ina
upakaraNoM ke rakhane kA vidhAna AgamoM meM yA bhASya Adi vyAkhyA granthoM meM
nahIM hai  /  phira bhI atyAvazyaka hone para hI saMyama evaM zarIra Adi kI
surakSA ke hetu ye propagrahika upakaraNa rakhe jA sakate haiM  /  isake
atirikta kevala pravRtti yA paramparA se rakhe jAne vAle sabhI upakaraNa
parigraha rUpa hote haiM  /

Page #468 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[368] This [Nishīth sūtra] is related to the prāyaścitta sūtra presented in the
utsargika upādhi. In it, the prāyaścitta for the violation of that which is
available in the āgama by calculation or proof (measurement) should be
understood from this. The remaining prāyaścitta should be understood according
to the traditional samāchārī in the absence of proof. In the present discussion,
an attempt has been made to clarify the measurement of some instruments by
inference, as their measurement is not available in the āgama. The āgama states
the guruchaumāsik prāyaścitta for keeping an additional upādhi without any
reason or even after the reason has ceased. One who keeps the auxiliary
instruments incurs guruchaatu māsik prāyaścitta. One who establishes a tradition
of keeping the auxiliary instruments permanently incurs the prāyaścitta of
utsūtraprūpaṇā, and those who keep them incur guruchaumāsik prāyaścitta.
Therefore, the forceful establishment of any instrument like a stick, blanket,
sthāpanāchārya, etc., should be understood as mithyāpravartan. The prāyaścitta
for walking on places where there is a contradiction. 40. The monk who walks or
stands on the infinite earth. 41. The monk who walks or stands on the purified
earth. 42. The monk who walks or stands on the protected earth. 43. The monk who
walks or stands on the earth made of clay. 44. The monk who walks or stands on
the earth made of stone. 45. The monk who walks or stands on the stone made of
stone. 46. The monk who walks or stands on the stone made of iron. 47. The monk
who walks or stands on the kolavāsa, wood, or living beings, from the egg to the
maggot stage. 48. The monk who walks or stands on the pillars, houses, walls,
beds, or other places where there are inscriptions, which are not properly tied,
not properly written, not compassionate, or unstable. 49. The monk who walks or
stands on the walls, houses, stones, iron, or other places where there are
inscriptions, which are not properly tied, not properly written, not
compassionate, or unstable. 50. The monk who walks or stands on the shoulders,
arms, platforms, canopies, garlands, seats, or other places where there are
inscriptions, which are not properly tied, not properly written, not
compassionate, or unstable.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 368] [nizIthasUtra prastuta prAyazcittasUtra protsargika upadhi se sambandhita
hai| usameM bhI jisakI gaNanA yA pramANa (mApa) Agama meM upalabdha hai usI ke
ullaMghana kA prAyazcitta isase samajhanA cAhie  /  zeSa prAyazcitta
pramANAbhAva meM paramparAgata samAcArI ke anusAra samajhanA caahie| prastuta
vivecana meM katipaya upakaraNoM kA mApa Agama meM na hone ke kAraNa anumAna se
spaSTa karane kA prayatna kiyA gayA hai| Agama nirapekSa atirikta upadhi rakhane
kA gurucaumAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  kAraNa binA yA kAraNa ke samApta ho
jAne para bhI aupagrahika upakaraNoM ko rakhane para gurucAtu mAsika prAyazcitta
pAtA hai  /  aupagrahika upakaraNoM ko sadA ke lie Avazyaka rUpa se rakhane kI
paramparA calAne para utsUtraprarUpaNA kA prAyazcitta pAtA hai aura rakhane
vAloM ko gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  ataH DaMDA, kaMbala,
sthApanAcArya prAdi kisI bhI upakaraNa kA Agrahayukta prarUpaNa karanA
mithyApravartana samajhanA caahie| virAdhanA vAle sthAnoM para paraThane kA
prAyazcitta  /  40. je bhikkhU aNaMtarahiyAe puDhavIe uccAra-pAsavaNaM parivei,
parivetaM vA sAijjai  /  41. je bhikkhU sasiNiddhAe puDhavIe uccAra-pAsavaNaM
pariTavei, pariveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  42. je bhikkhU samarakkhAe puDhavIe uccAra-
pAsavaNaM pariTTavei, pariveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  43. je bhikkhU maTTiyAkaDAe
puDhavIe uccAra-pAsavaNaM pariTavei, parivetaM vA sAijjai  /  44. je bhikkhU
cittamaMtAe puDhavIe uccAra-pAsavaNaM pariTavei, pariveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  45.
je bhikkhU cittamaMtAe silAe uccAra-pAsavaNaM parivei, pariDhataM vA sAijjai  /
46. je bhikkhU cittamaMtAe lelae uccAra-pAsavaNaM pariTuvei, pariDhuveMtaM vA
saaijji| 47. je bhikkhU kolAvAsaMsi vA dArUe jIvapaiTThie, saaMDe jAva makkaDA-
saMtANae uccArapAsavaNaM pariDhuvei, pariveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  48. je bhikkhU
thUNaMsi vA, giheluyaMsi vA, usuyAlaMsi vA, kAmajalaMsi vA, aNNayaraMsi vA
tahappagAraMsi aMtalikkhajAyaMsi dubbaddhe, dunikhitte, anikaMpe, calAcale
uccAra-pAsavaNaM pariTuvei, parivetaM vA saaijji| 49. je bhikkhU kuliyaMsi vA,
bhittisi vA, silaMsi vA, lelusi vA aNNayaraMsi vA tahappagAraMsi
aMtalikkhajAyaMsi dubbaddha, dunnikhitte, anikaMpe, calAcale uccAra-pAsavaNaM
pariDhuvei, pariTurvetaM vA saaijji| 50. je bhikkhU khaMdhaMsi vA, phalihaMsi
vA, maMcaMsi vA, maMDavaMsi vA, mAlaMsi vA, pAsAyaMsi vA, hammiyatalaMsi vA
aNNayaraMsi vA tahappagAraMsi aMtalikkhajAyaMsi, dubbaddhe, dunnikhitte,
anikape, calAcale uccAra-pAsavaNa pariTuvei, paridvavetaM vA sAijjai  /

Page #469 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixteenth Study] [369. While observing the four-month restraint, the
following places are to be avoided.  40. The monk who, with awareness, relieves
himself on the ground near the earth, or approves of someone doing so. 41. The
monk who, with awareness, relieves himself on the earth moistened by water, or
approves of someone doing so. 42. The monk who, with awareness, relieves himself
on the earth mixed with dust, or approves of someone doing so. 43. The monk who,
with awareness, relieves himself on the earth where soil is scattered, or
approves of someone doing so. 44. The monk who, with awareness, relieves himself
on the earth, or approves of someone doing so. 45. The monk who, with awareness,
relieves himself on a stone, or approves of someone doing so. 46. The monk who,
with awareness, relieves himself on a stone slab, etc., or approves of someone
doing so. 47. The monk who, with awareness, relieves himself on wood infested
with termites and living beings, or on a place containing eggs or spider webs,
or approves of someone doing so. 48. The monk who, with awareness, relieves
himself on a fixed, unstable, immovable or movable pillar, threshold, mortar,
bathing platform, or other such celestial places, or approves of someone doing
so. 49. The monk who, with awareness, relieves himself on a fixed, unstable,
immovable or movable mud wall, brick wall, stone, stone slab, or other such
celestial places, or approves of someone doing so. 50. The monk who, with
awareness, relieves himself on a fixed, unstable, immovable or movable shoulder
(beam), fruit, platform, pavilion, garland, palace or mansion roof, or other
such celestial places, or approves of someone doing so.  By using the places
mentioned in these 50 sutras, one incurs the minor four-month penance.
Discussion - Where there is self-contradiction and restraint-contradiction,
relieving oneself in such places...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 solahavA~ adhyayana] [369 taM sevamANe Avajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM
ugdhAiyaM  //  40. jo bhikSu sacitta pRthvI ke nikaTa kI bhUmi para mala-mUtra
kA parityAga karatA hai yA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 41. jo bhikSu
jala se snigdha pRthvI para uccAra-prasravaNa paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 42. jo bhikSu sacitta rajayukta pRthvI para uccAra-
prasravaNa paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 43. jo
bhikSu sacitta miTTI bikharI huI pRthvI para uccAra-prasravaNa paraThatA hai yA
paraThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  44. jo bhikSu sacitta pRthvI para
uccAra-prasravaNa paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 45.
jo bhikSu sacitta zilA para uccAra-prasravaNa paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 46. jo bhikSu sacitta zilAkhaNDa Adi para uccAra-
prasravaNa paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 47. jo
bhikSu dImaka lage hue jIvayukta kASTha para tathA aNDe yAvat makar3I ke jAloM
se yukta sthAna para uccAra-prasravaNa paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  48. jo bhikSu durbaddha, dunikSipta, aniSkampa yA
calAcala thaMbhe para, dehalI para, aokhalI para, snAnapITha para yA anya bhI
aise AkAzIya sthAnoM para uccAra-prasravaNa paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 49. jo bhikSu durbaddha, dunikSipta, aniSkampa yA calAcala
miTTI kI dIvAra para, IMTa Adi kI bhitti para, zilA para, zilAkhaNDa-patthara
para yA anya bhI aise antarikSajAta sthAnoM para uccAraprasravaNa paraThatA hai
yA paraThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 50. jo bhikSu durbaddha, dunikSipta,
aniSkampa yA calAcala skandha (TAMDa), phalaha, maMca, maMDapa, mAlA, mahala yA
havelI kI chata para yA anya bhI aise antarikSajAta sthAna para uccAra-
prasravaNa paraThatA hai yA paraThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ina 50
sUtroM meM kahe gae sthAnoM kA sevana karane para laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA
hai  /  vivecana-jahA~ Atma-virAdhanA tathA saMyama-virAdhanA hotI ho aise
sthAnoM para paraThane kA

Page #470 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[370] _ [This is stated in the Nishisutra Prāyaścitta. The discussion regarding
the prohibition of defecation in forbidden places is found in U. 3 and U. 15.
See other discussions related to the sutras in U. 13. The summary of the
sixteenth Uddesaka is as follows: Sutras 1-3: Staying in a bed that is
associated with a householder, water, or fire. 4-11: Eating or sucking on
sugarcane or a piece of sugarcane with awareness. 12: Accepting food from those
who live in the forest, go to the forest, or travel in the forest. 13-14:
Calling someone with few good qualities as having many good qualities, and
calling someone with many good qualities as having few good qualities. Going
from a sect with many good qualities to a sect with few good qualities. 16-24:
Engaging in the exchange of food, clothing, housing, and study with monks who
have taken possessions. 25-26: Traveling in inhospitable areas or on difficult
paths when there are areas suitable for comfortable travel. 27-32: Accepting
food, clothing, or bedding from those of a despised lineage, and engaging in the
reading and recitation of scriptures in their presence. 33-35: Placing food on
the ground, on a bed, or on a peg or a hook. 36-37: Eating with householders or
eating in the presence of householders. Leaving the seat of the Acharya or
others without bowing and placing one's feet on it. Having more possessions than
the number or measure (quantity) stated in the sutras. 40-50: Defecating in
places where it is prohibited. Those who consume the things of these prohibited
places receive the Prāyaścitta of Laghu-Chaumāsi. The subject matter of the 32
sutras of this Uddesaka is found in the following Agamas: Sutras 1-3:
Prohibition of staying in a house associated with a woman, fire, or water. Acha.
Shru. 2, A. 2, U. 3 and Brih. Udd. 2 4-11: Prohibition of consuming sugarcane or
a piece of sugarcane with awareness. -Acha. Shru. 2, A. 7, U. 2 Prohibition of
going to a sect where the qualities of conduct do not increase. -Brih. U. 4
25-26: Prohibition of traveling in inhospitable areas when there are suitable
areas. -Pracha. Shru. 2, A. 3, U. 1 27-32: The rule of going to beg for alms in
despised and harmful lineages. -Pracha. Shru. 2, A. 1, U. 2 38: Leaving the seat
of the Acharya or others without bowing and placing one's feet on it is
considered disrespectful. -Dasha. D. 3 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 370] _ [nizIyasUtra prAyazcitta ina sUtroM meM kahA gayA hai| niSiddha sthAnoM
meM paraThane sambandhI vivecana u. 3 tathA u. 15 meM dekheM evaM sUtra
sambandhI anya vivecana u. 13 meM dekheN| solahaveM uddezaka kA sArAMza sUtra
1-3 gRhasthayukta, jalayukta aura agniyukta zayyA meM tthhrnaa| 4-11 sacitta
ikSu yA ikSukhaNDa khAnA yA cuusnaa| 12 araNya meM rahane vAle, vana (jaMgala)
meM jAne vAle, aTavI kI yAtrA karane vAloM se AhAra lenaa| 13-14 alpacAritraguNa
vAle ko vizeSacAritraguNa sampanna kahanA aura vizeSacAritraguNa sampanna ko
alpa cAritraguNa vAlA kahanA  /  vizeSacAritraguNa vAle gaccha se
alpacAritraguNa vAle gaccha meM jaanaa| 16-24 kadAgraha yukta bhikSutroM ke
sAtha AhAra, vastra, makAna, svAdhyAya kA lena-dena krnaa| 25-26 sukhapUrvaka
vicarane yogya kSetra hote hue bhI anArya kSetroM meM yA vikaTa mArgoM meM
vihAra karanA  /  27-32 jugupsita kula vAloM se AhAra vastra zayyA grahaNa
karanA tathA unake vahA~ svAdhyAya kI vAcanA lenaa-denaa| 33-35 bhUmi para yA
saMstAraka (bichaune) para AhAra rakhanA yA khUTI chIMkA Adi para AhAra rkhnaa|
36-37 gRhasthoM ke sAtha baiThakara AhAra karanA yA gRhastha dekheM vahA~ AhAra
krnaa| prAcArya Adi ke Asana para pA~va lagAkara vinaya kiye binA cale jaanaa|
sUtrokta saMkhyA yA mApa (parimANa) se adhika upadhi rakhanA  /  40-50 virAdhanA
vAle sthAnoM para mala-mUtra prtthnaa| ityAdi doSa sthAnoM kA sevana karane vAle
ko laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /  isa uddezaka ke 32 sUtroM ke viSaya kA
kathana nimna AgamoM meM hai, yathAsUtra 1-3 strI, agni, pAnIyukta makAna meM
Thaharane kA niSedha  /  . AcA. zru. 2, a. 2, u. 3 tathA bRha. udde. 2 4-11
sacitta ikSu va ikSukhaNDa grahaNa kA nissedh| -AcA. zru. 2, a. 7, u. 2 cAritra
kI vRddhi na ho aise gaccha meM jAne kA niSedha  /  -bRha. u.4 25-26 yogya
kSetra ke hote hue vikaTa kSetra meM vihAra karane kA niSedha  /  /  -prAcA.
zru. 2, a. 3, u. 1 27-32 ajugupsita ahita kuloM meM bhikSArtha jAne kA vidhAna
/  -prAcA. zru. 2, a. 1, u. 2 38 AcAryAdi ke Asana ko pAMva lagAkara vinaya kie
binA cale jAnA AzAtanA hai| -dazA.da.3

Page #471 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Sixteenth Study] [371 40-50 Prohibition of defecation on Earth, etc., and in
places of extraterrestrial origin. -Pracha. Shru. 2, A. 10 The topics of the 18
sutras of this Uddeshak are not mentioned in other Agamas, such as Sutra 12 Not
taking food from those who live in or travel to forests, jungles, etc. 13-14 Not
speaking negatively about those who are of little or special character. 16-24
Not dealing with or contacting a Kadagrahi. 33-35 Not keeping food on the
ground, a seat, or a peg, etc. 36-37 Not eating while sitting with or in front
of a householder. Not keeping a title that is more than the count or quantity.
|| Sixteenth Uddeshak ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 solahavAM adhyayana] [371 40-50 pRthvI Adi kI virAdhanA vAle tathA
antarikSajAta sthAnoM para mala-mUtra paraThane kA nissedh| -prAcA. zru. 2, a.
10 isa uddezaka ke 18 sUtroM ke viSayoM kA kathana anya AgamoM meM nahIM hai,
yathAsUtra 12 araNya vana aTavI Adi meM rahane tathA jAne-Ane vAloM se AhAra
nahIM lenaa| 13-14 alpa yA vizeSa cAritravAn ke sambandha meM viparIta kathana
nahIM krnaa| 16-24 kadAgrahI se lena-dena samparka nahIM karanA  /  33-35 bhUmi,
Asana para yA khUTI Adi para AhAra nahIM rkhnaa| 36-37 gRhastha ke sAtha
baiThakara yA usake sAmane baiThakara AhAra nahIM karanA  /  gaNanA yA parimANa
se adhika upadhi nahIM rkhnaa|  //  solahavA~ uddezaka samApta  //

Page #472 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Penance for Curiosity-Driven Actions  **Chapter on Penance**  **Penance for
Curiosity-Driven Actions**  1. A monk who binds or causes to be bound another
living being out of curiosity with:      1. Grass,      2. Soft grass,      3. A
piece of wood,      4. A piece of leather,      5. A piece of cloth,      6. A
rope,      7. A thread,      commits a sin.  2. A monk who releases or causes to
be released another living being bound with grass or thread, commits a sin.  3.
A monk who makes or causes to be made out of curiosity:     1. A garland of
grass,      2. A garland of soft grass,      3. A garland of cloth,      4. A
garland of wood,      5. A garland of flowers,      6. A garland of leaves,
7. A garland of feathers,      8. A garland of bones,      9. A garland of
teeth,      10. A garland of conch shells,      11. A garland of horns,      12.
A garland of leaves,      13. A garland of flowers,      14. A garland of
fruits,      15. A garland of seeds,      16. A garland of gems,      commits a
sin.  4. A monk who wears or causes to be worn a garland of grass or gems,
commits a sin.  5. A monk who ties or causes to be tied a garland of grass or
gems, commits a sin.  6. A monk who makes or causes to be made out of curiosity:
1. An iron ornament,      2. A copper ornament,      3. A tin ornament,      4.
A lead ornament,      5. A silver ornament,      6. A gold ornament,
commits a sin.  7. A monk who wears or causes to be worn an iron ornament or a
gold ornament, commits a sin.  8. A monk who ties or causes to be tied an iron
ornament or a gold ornament, commits a sin.  9. A monk who makes or causes to be
made out of curiosity:     1. A necklace,      2. A half-necklace,      3. A
string of pearls,      4. A string of pearls,      5. A string of gems,      6.
A string of gems,      7. A bracelet,      8. An earring,      9. ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sAhatAM udadezaka kautuhalajanita pravRttiyoM kA prAyazcitta 1. je bhikkhU
kouhalla-vaDiyAe aNNayaraM tasapANajAyaM 1. taNa-pAsaeNa vA, 2. maMju-pAsaeNa
vA, 3. kaTTa-pAsaeNa vA, 4. camma-pAsaeNa vA, 5. vettapAsaeNa vA, 6. rajju-
pAsaeNa vA, 7. sutta-pAsaeNa vA baMdhai, baMdhataM vA sAijjai  /  2. je bhikkha
kouhalla-vaDiyAe aNNayaraM tasapANajAyaM taNa-pAsaeNa vA jAva sutta-pAsaeNa vA
baddhelayaM mucai, muMcataM vA sAijjai  /  3. je bhikkhU kouhalla vaDiyAe 1.
taNamAliyaM vA, 2. mujamAliyaM vA, 3. vettamAliyaM vA, 4. kaTumAliyaM vA, 5.
mayaNamAliyaM vA, 6. bhiDamAliyaM vA, 7. picchamAliyaM vA, 8. haDamAliyaM vA, 9.
daMtamAliyaM vA, 10. saMkhamAliyaM vA, 11. siMgamAliyaM vA, 12. pattamAliyaM vA,
13. pupphamAliyaM vA, 14. phalamAliyaM vA, 15. bIyamAliyaM vA, 16. hariyamAliyaM
vA karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  4. je bhikkhU kouhalla-vaDiyAe taNamAliyaM vA
jAva hariyamAliyaM vA dharei, dharataM vA saaijji| 5. je bhikkhU kouhalla-
vaDiyAe taNa-mAliyaM vA jAva hariyamAliyaM vA piNaddhei, piNaddhetaM vA saaijji|
6. je bhikkhU kouhalla-vaDiyAe- ' 1. ayalohANi vA, 2. taMbalohANi vA, 3.
tauyalohANi vA, 4. sIsalohANi vA, 5. rUppalohANi vA, 6. suvaNNalohANi vA karei,
kareMtaM vA saaijji| 7. je bhikkhU kouhalla-vaDiyAe aya-lohANi vA jAva
suvaNNalohANi vA dharei, dharataM vA saaijji| 8. je bhikkhU kouhalla-vaDiyAe
aya-lohANi vA jAva suvaNNalohANi vA piNaddhei, piNaddhetaM vA sAijjai  /  9. je
bhikkhU kouhalla-vaDiyAe-1. hArANi vA, 2. addhahArANi vA, 3. egAvali vA, 4.
muttAli vA, 5. kaNagAvali vA, 6. rayaNAvali vA, 7. kaDagANi vA, 8. tuDiyANi vA,
9.

Page #473 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Seventeenth Study] [373. If a monk makes or approves of the making of: 1.
Keuraani, 2. Kundalaani, 3. Pattaani, 4. Maudaani, 5. Palambasuttaani, 6.
Suvannasuttaani. 10. If a monk wears or approves of the wearing of: 1. Koouhall-
vadiyaae Haaraani, 2. Suvannasuttaani. 11. If a monk ties or approves of the
tying of: 1. Koouhall-vadiyaae Haaraani, 2. Suvannasuttaani. 12. If a monk makes
or approves of the making of: 1. Iinaani, 2. Sahinaani, 3. Sahin-kallaanaani, 4.
Aayaani, 5. Kaayaani, 6. Khomiaani, 7. Dugulaani, 8. Tirodapattaani, 9.
Malayaani, 10. Patushnaani, 11. Ansuyaani, 12. Chinansuyaani, 13. Desaraagaani,
14. Abhilaani, 15. Gajjalaani, 16. Falihaani, 17. Koyavaani, 18. Kambalaani, 19.
Paavaaraani, 20. Uddaani, 21. Pesani, 22. Pesalesaani, 23. Kinhamigaai-nagaani,
24. Neelamigaai-nagaani, 25. Goramigaai-nagaani, 26. Kanagaani, 27.
Kanagakantani, 28. Kanagapattaani, 29. Kanag-khachiani, 30. Kanagphusyani, 31.
Vagdhaani, 32. Vivagghanaani, 33. Aabharanachittani, 34. Aabharan-vichittani.
13. If a monk wears or approves of the wearing of: 1. Iinaani, 2. Aabharan-
vichittani. 14. If a monk ties or approves of the tying of: 1. Iinaani, 2.
Aabharan-vichittani. 1. If a monk, out of curiosity, ties or approves of the
tying of a terrified creature with: 1. Trna-paash, 2. Muj-paash, 3. Kaasth-
paash, 4. Charma-paash, 5. Bent-paash, 6. Rajju-paash, 7. Sutr (thread) paash.
2. If a monk, out of curiosity, unties or approves of the untying of a terrified
creature tied with: 1. Trna-paash, 2. Sutr-paash. 3. If a monk, out of
curiosity, makes or approves of the making of: 1. Trna mala, 2. Muj mala, 3.
Bent mala, 4. Kaasth mala, 5. Mom mala, 6. Bhind mala, 7. Pichchi mala, 8. Haddi
mala, 9. Dant mala, 10. Shankh mala, 11. Sing mala, 12. Patra mala, 13. Pushp
mala, 14. Phal mala, 15. Beej mala, 16. Harit (vegetation) mala. 4. If a monk,
out of curiosity, keeps or approves of the keeping of: 1. Trna mala, 2. Harit
mala.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 satrahavAM adhyayana] [373 keurANi vA, 10. kuNDalANi vA, 11. paTTANi vA, 12.
mauDANi vA, 13. palaMbasuttANi vA, 14. suvaNNasuttANi vA karei, kareMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  10. je bhikkhU kouhalla-vaDiyAe hArANi vA jAva suvaNNasuttANi vA
dharei, dharataM vA saaijji| 11. je bhikkhU kouhalla-vaDiyAe hArANi vA jAva
suvaNNasuttANi vA piNaddhei piNaddhetaM vA saaijji| 12. je bhikkhU kouhalla-
vaDiyAe-1. AINANi vA, 2. sahiNANi vA, 3. sahiNakallANANi vA, 4. AyANi vA, 5.
kAyANi vA, 6. khomiyANi vA, 7. dugulANi vA, 8. tiroDapaTTANi vA, 9. malayANi vA,
10. patuSNANi vA, 11. aMsuyANi vA, 12. ciNaMsuyANi vA, 13. desarAgANi vA, 14.
abhilANi vA, 15. gajjalANi vA, 16. phalihANi vA, 17. koyavANi vA, 18. kaMbalANi
vA, 19. pAvArANi vA, 20. uddANi vA, 21. pesANi vA, 22. pesalesANi vA, 23.
kiNhamigAINagANi vA, 24. nIlamigAINagANi vA, 25. goramigAINagANi vA, 26.
kaNagANi vA, 27. kaNagakaMtANi vA, 28. kaNagapaTTANi vA, 29. kaNaga-khaciyANi
vA, 30. kaNagaphusiyANi vA, 31. vagdhANi vA, 32. vivagghANi vA, 33.
AbharaNacittANi vA, 34. AbharaNa-vicittANi vA karei, kareMtaM vA saaijji| 13. je
bhikkhU kouhalla-vaDiyAe AINANi vA jAva AbharaNa-vicittANi vA dhareI, dharetaM
vA saaijji| _14. je bhikkhU kouhalla-vaDiyAe AINANi vA jAva AbharaNa-vicittANi
vA piNaddhei, piNaddhetaM vA saaijji| 1. jo bhikSu kautUhala ke saMkalpa se kisI
trasaprANI ko 1. tRNa-pAza se, 2. muja-pAza se, 3. kASTha-pAza se, 4, carma-pAza
se, 5. beMta-pAza se, 6. rajju-pAza se, 7. sUtra (Dore) ke pAza se bAMdhatA hai
yA bAMdhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 2. jo bhikSu kautUhala ke saMkalpa se
kisI trasaprANI ko tRNa-pAza se yAvat sUtra-pAza se baMdhe hue ko kholatA hai yA
kholane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  3. jo bhikSu kautUhala ke saMkalpa se 1
tRNa kI mAlA, 2. muja kI mAlA, 3. beMta kI mAlA, 4. kASTha kI mAlA, 5. moma kI
mAlA, 6. bhIMDa kI mAlA, 7. picchI kI mAlA, 8. haDDI kI mAlA, 9. daMta kI mAlA,
10. zaMkha kI mAlA, 11. sIMga kI mAlA, 12. patra kI mAlA, 13. puSpa kI mAlA, 14.
phala kI mAlA, 15. bIja kI mAlA, 16. harita (vanaspati) kI mAlA banAtA hai yA
banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  4. jo bhikSu kautUhala ke saMkalpa se
tRNa kI mAlA yAvat harita kI mAlA rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /

Page #474 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nishīth Sūtra 374] 5. The monk who, out of curiosity, wears a garland of grass
or a garland of green leaves, or approves of one who wears such a garland. 6.
The monk who, out of curiosity, makes or approves of one who makes: 1. an iron
bangle, 2. a copper bangle, 3. a bangle of wood, 4. a glass bangle, 5. a silver
bangle, 6. a gold bangle. 7. The monk who, out of curiosity, keeps an iron
bangle or a gold bangle, or approves of one who keeps such a bangle. 8. The monk
who, out of curiosity, wears an iron bangle or a gold bangle, or approves of one
who wears such a bangle. 9. The monk who, out of curiosity, makes or approves of
one who makes: 1. a necklace, 2. a half-necklace, 3. a single-string necklace,
4. a pearl necklace, 5. a gold necklace, 6. a gem necklace, 7. a waist-cord, 8.
an armlet, 9. a neck-cord, 10. a head-band, 11. a belt, 12. a crown, 13. a long
pendant, 14. a gold thread. 10. The monk who, out of curiosity, keeps a necklace
or a gold thread, or approves of one who keeps such an item. 11. The monk who,
out of curiosity, wears a necklace or a gold thread, or approves of one who
wears such an item. 12. The monk who, out of curiosity, makes or approves of one
who makes: 1. a garment made from the skin of a mouse or other animal, 2. a fine
garment, 3. a fine and beautiful garment, 4. a garment made from the fine wool
of a goat, 5. a garment made from indigo-colored cotton, 6. a cotton garment
made from ordinary cotton, 7. a garment made from the special cotton of the
Dugula tree, famous in the Gauḍa country, 8. a garment made from the fibers of
the Tīroḍa tree, 9. a garment made from the leaves of the fragrant sandalwood,
10. a garment made from fine hair-fibers, 11. a garment made from the inner part
of the Dugula tree, 12. a very fine garment made in the country of China, 13. a
garment dyed in a particular country, 14. a garment made in the country of Rome,
15. a garment that makes a sound when walked in, 16. a garment as clear as
crystal, 17. a special type of garment called Koṭavo-Varko, 18. a blanket, 19. a
special type of blanket called Kharḍaga Pārigāda Pāvāraga, 20. a garment made
from the skin of a fish from the Sindhu country, 21. a garment made from the
fine-skinned animal of the Sindhu country, 22. a garment made from the fine wool
of the same animal, 23. a black antelope skin, 24. a blue antelope skin, 25. a
white antelope skin, 26. a garment that appears to be made of gold, coated with
gold juice, 27. a garment whose edges are gilded with gold juice, 28. a garment
with gold-juice strips, 29. a garment with gold threads woven into it, 30. a
garment with gold studs or fruits embedded in it, 31. a tiger skin, 32. a
cheetah skin, 33. a garment with a special type of ornament, 34. a garment with
many types of ornaments.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 374] [nizIthasUtra 5. jo bhikSu kautUhala ke saMkalpa se tRNa kI mAlA yAvat
harita kI mAlA pahanatA hai yA pahanane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  6. jo
bhikSu kautUhala ke saMkalpa se- 1. lohe kA kar3A, 2. tAMbe kA kar3A, 3. vapuSa
kA kar3A, 4. zIze kA kar3A, 5. cAMdI kA kar3A, 6. suvarNa kA kar3A, banAtA hai
yA banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 7. jo bhikSu kautUhala ke saMkalpa se
lohe kA kar3A yAvat suvarNa kA kar3A rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  8. jo bhikSu kautUhala ke saMkalpa se lohe kA kar3A yAvat suvarNa
kA kar3A pahanatA hai yA pahanane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 9. jo bhikSu
kautUhala ke saMkalpa se-1. hAra, 2. ardhahAra, 3. ekAvalI, 4. muktAvalI, 5.
kanakAvalI, 6. ratnAvalI, 7. kaTisUtra, 8. bhujabandha, 9. keyara (kaMThA), 10.
kuDala, 11. paTTa, 12. mukuTa, 13. pralambasUtra, 14. suvarNasUtra banAtA hai yA
banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 10. jo bhikSu kautUhala ke saMkalpa se hAra
yAvat suvarNasUtra rakhatA hai yA rakhane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 11. jo
bhikSu kautUhala ke saMkalpa se hAra yAvat suvarNasUtra pahanatA hai yA pahanane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 12. jo bhikSu kautUhala ke saMkalpa se-1. mUSaka
Adi ke carma se niSpanna vastra, 2. sUkSma vastra. 3. sUkSma va suzobhita
vastra, 4. ajA ke sUkSmaroma se niSpanna vastra, 5. indranIlavarNI kapAsa se
niSpanna vastra, 6. sAmAnya kapAsa se niSpanna sUtI vastra, 7. gauDa deza meM
prasiddha yA dugula vRkSa se niSpanna viziSTa kapAsa kA vastra, 8. tiroDa
vakSAvayava se niSpanna vastra, 9. malAgAra candana ke patroM se niSpanna
vastra. 10. bArIka bAloM-taMtuoM se niSpanna vastra, 11. dugula vRkSa ke
AbhyaMtarAvayava se niSpanna vastra, 12. cIna deza meM niSpanna atyanta sUkSma
vastra, 13. deza vizeSa ke raMge vastra, 14. roma deza meM bane vastra, 15.
calane para AvAja karane vAle vastra, 16. sphaTika ke samAna svaccha vastra, 17.
vastravizeSa kotavo-varako, 18. kaMbala, 19. kaMbalavizeSa-kharaDaga pArigAdi
pAvAragA, 20. siMdhu deza ke maccha ke carma se niSpanna vastra, 21. sindhu deza
ke sUkSma carma vAle pazu se niSpanna vastra, 22. usI pazu kI sUkSma pazamI se
niSpanna vastra, 23. kRSNamRga-carma, 24. nIlamRga-carma, 25. gauramRga-carma,
26. svarNarasa se lipta sAkSAt svarNamaya dikhe aisA vastra, 27. jisake kinAre
svarNarasaraMjita kiye ho aisA vastra, 28. svarNarasamaya paTTiyoM se yukta
vastra, 29. sone ke tAra jar3e hae vastra, 30. sone ke stabaka yA phala jaDe
haye vastra. 31. vyAghracarma. 32. cIte kA carma. 33. eka viziSTa prakAra ke
prAbharaNa yukta vastra, 34. aneka prakAra ke AbharaNa yukta vastra banAtA hai
yA banAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|

Page #475 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Seventeenth Study] [375 13. A monk who, out of curiosity, wears clothes
made from the skin of mice, etc., or adorned with various ornaments, or approves
of someone who does so. 14. A monk who, out of curiosity, wears clothes made
from the skin of mice, etc., or adorned with various ornaments, or approves of
someone who does so. (He incurs the minor four-month penance.) Discussion - A
monk should be free from curiosity and have a serious nature. He should not
associate with those who are curious. He should always be engaged in restraint,
austerity, self-study, meditation, etc. The discussion of Sutras 1 and 2 is in
Uddeshak 12, and the discussion of Sutras 3 to 14 is in Uddeshak 7. Wearing
garlands, ornaments, etc., leads to a distortion of appearance. It also invites
public censure. There is also the possibility of faults in obtaining and keeping
these things. Therefore, these tendencies are inappropriate for a monk. The
penance for a Shraman or Shramani having their body cared for by another Shraman
or Shramani, or by a householder, is 15-68. If a Niggranthi has their feet
massaged by another Niggranthi, or by a householder, once or repeatedly, or
approves of someone who does so, they incur the penance. Similarly, according to
the third Uddeshak, it should be known that if a Niggranthi, while traveling
from village to village, has their head covered by another Niggranthi, or by a
householder, or approves of someone who does so, they incur the penance. 69-122.
If a Niggranthi has their feet massaged by another Niggranthi, or by a
householder, once or repeatedly, or approves of someone who does so, they incur
the penance. Similarly, according to the third Uddeshak, it should be known that
if a Niggranthi, while traveling from village to village, has their head covered
by another Niggranthi, or by a householder, or approves of someone who does so,
they incur the penance. 15-68. If a Nirgranthi has their feet massaged by
another Nirgranthi, or by a householder, once or repeatedly, or approves of
someone who does so, they incur the penance. Similarly, according to the third
Uddeshak, it should be known that if a Nirgranthi, while traveling from village
to village, has their head covered by another Nirgranthi, or by a householder,
or approves of someone who does so, they incur the penance. 69-122. If a
Nirgranthi has their feet massaged by another Nirgranthi, or by a householder,
once or repeatedly, or approves of someone who does so, they incur the penance.
Similarly, according to the third Uddeshak, it should be known that if a
Nirgranthi, while traveling from village to village, has their head covered by
another Nirgranthi, or by a householder, or approves of someone who does so,
they incur the penance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 satrahavA~ adhyayana] [ 375 13. jo bhikSu kautUhala ke saMkalpa se mUSaka zrAdi
ke carma se niSpanna vastra yAvat aneka prakAra ke AbharaNayukta vastra dhAraNa
karatA hai yA dhAraNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  14. jo bhikSu
kautUhala ke saMkalpa se mUSaka Adi ke carma se niSpanna vastra yAvat aneka
prakAra ke AbharaNayukta vastra pahanatA hai yA pahanane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  ( use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai 1 ) vivecana - bhikSu ko
kutuhalavRtti se rahita evaM gaMbhIra svabhAva vAlA honA cAhiye  /  use kutUhala
vRtti vAloM kI saMgati bhI nahIM karanA caahie| saMyama, tapa, svAdhyAya, dhyAna
Adi meM hI sadA pravRtta rahanA cAhiye  /  sUtra 1 ra 2 kA vivecana uddezaka 12
meM tathA 3 se 14 taka kA vivecana uddezaka 7 kiyA jA cukA hai  /  mAlA,
AbhUSaNa Adi pahanane se veSaviparyAsa hotA hai  /  lokaniMdA bhI hotI hai  /
ina padArthoM kI prApti meM tathA rakhane meM bhI doSoM kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai
/  ataH ye pravRttiyAM bhikSu ke liye anAvaraNIya haiM  /  zramaNa yA zramaNI
dvArA eka dUsare kA zarIra - parikarma gRhastha se karavAne kA prAyazcitta 15-
68. jA NiggaMthI NiggaMthassa pAe aNNautthieNa vA gAratthieNa vA AmajjAvejja vA
majjAvejja vA, AmajjAvataM vA pamajjAveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  evaM taiya
uddesagagameNa NeyavvaM jAva jA NiggaMthI NiggaMthassa gAmANugAmaM duijjamANassa
aNNautthiena vA gAratthieNa vA sIsavAriyaM kArAvei, kArAveMtaM vA sAijjai  /
69-122. je NiggaMthe NiggaMthIe pAe aNNautthieNa vA gAratthieNa vA AmajjAvejja
vA pamajjA vejja vA, AmajjAveMtaM vA pamajjAveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  evaM taya
uddegagameNa NeyavvaM jAva je NiggaMthe NiggaMthIe gAmANugAmaM duijjamANIe
aNNautthieNa vA gAratthieNa vA sosaduvAriyaM kArAvei, kArAveMtaM vA sAijjai  /
15- 68. jo nirgranthI nirgrantha ke pairoM kA anyatIrthika yA gRhastha se eka
bAra yA bAra-bAra Amajana karavAtI hai yA karavAne vAlI kA anumodana karatI hai
/  isa prakAra tIsare uddezaka ke ( sUtra 16 se 69 ) ke samAna pUrA zrAlApaka
jAnanA cAhie yAvat jo nirgranthI grAmAnugrAma jAte hue nirgrantha ke mastaka ko
anyatIrthika yA gRhastha se DhakavAtI hai| yA DhakavAne vAlI kA anumodana karatI
hai  /  69-122. jo nirgrantha nirgranthI ke pairoM kA anyatIrthika yA gRhastha
se eka bAra yA bArabAra grAmarjana karavAtA hai yA karavAne vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  isa prakAra tIsare uddezaka ke samAna pUrA zrAlApaka jAnanA cAhie
yAvat jo nirgrantha

Page #476 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  376] [Nishith Sutra] A Nirgranthi covers the head of another Nirgranthi with
a non-Jain or householder, or approves of someone doing so. (This incurs a
Laghu-Chaumasik Pratikraman.)  **Discussion:** The Pratikraman for a Sadhu
having a householder perform their bodily duties, etc., is mentioned in the 15th
Uddeshak. Here, two speakers discuss the Pratikraman for a Nirgranthi having a
householder perform bodily duties for another Nirgranthi, or for a Nirgranthi
having a householder perform bodily duties for another Nirgranthi. Such behavior
can lead to doubt about the Sadhu-Sadhvi's restraint, etc. These faults should
be understood as similar to those mentioned in the Sutra about having a
householder sew a Sanghati in the 5th Uddeshak. The discussion of all other
Sutras should be understood as similar to the 3rd Uddeshak.  ## Similar
Pratikraman for not giving space to Nirgranthis 123. A Nirgranthi who, having
space in their dwelling, does not give space to a Nirgranthi of similar conduct,
or approves of not giving space. 124. A Nirgranthi who, having space in their
dwelling, does not give space to a Nirgranthi of similar conduct, or approves of
not giving space. (This incurs a Laghu-Chaumasik Pratikraman.)  **Discussion:**
Those who have similar conduct, are similar in the 10 Kalpas of Achelky, etc.,
and do not accept food, clothing, bedding, or disciples that are tainted, are
called "Sadhu of similar conduct." It is necessary to give space to such Sadhus
in one's dwelling if there is space.  Even if a Sadhu comes due to some
difficulty and is not of similar conduct, they should still be given space. Not
giving space when there is space is a violation of Dharma-Shastra and leads to a
loss of restraint, an increase in attachment and aversion. Therefore, a Sadhu or
Sadhvi incurs Pratikraman according to these Sutras for such behavior.  ##
Pratikraman for accepting stolen food 125. A Bhikshu who accepts stolen food,
drink, edible items, or delicacies that are being offered, or approves of
someone doing so. (This incurs a Laghu-Chaumasik Pratikraman.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 376 ] [ nizIthasUtra grAmAnugrAma jAtI huI nirgranthI ke mastaka ko
anyatIrthika yA gRhastha se DhakavAtA hai yA DhakavAne vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  ( use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai  / ) vivecana - sAdhu ko svayaM
kA kAya- parikarma Adi gRhastha se karavAne kA prAyazcitta pandrahaveM uddezaka
meM kahA gayA hai  /  yahAM nirgrantha ke dvArA nirgranthI kA yA nirgranthI ke
dvArA nirgrantha kA gRhastha se kAyaparikarma karavAne kA prAyazcitta do
AlApakoM dvArA kahA gayA hai| aisI pravRtti karane meM gRhastha sAdhu-sAdhvI ke
saMyama meM saMdeha ho sakatA hai ityAdi doSa pAMcaveM uddezaka ke saMghATI
silavAne ke sUtra meM kahe gaye doSoM ke samAna samajha lenA cAhie  /  anya
saMpUrNa sUtroM kA vivecana tIsare uddezaka ke samAna samajhanA cAhie  /  sadRza
nirgrantha nirgranthiyoM ko sthAna na dene kA prAyazcitta 123. je NiggaMthe
NiggaMthassa sarisagassa aMte ovAse saMte, ovAsaM na dei, na detaM vA sAijjai  /
124. jA NiggaMthI NiggaMthIe sarisiyAe aMte ovAse saMte, ovAsaM na dei, na detaM
vA sAijjai  /  123. jo nirgrantha sadRza zrAcAra vAle nirgrantha ko apane
upAzraya meM avakAza (sthAna) hote hue bhI Thaharane ke liye sthAna nahIM detA
hai yA nahIM dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  124. jo nirgranthI sadRza
zrAcAra vAlI nirgranthI ko apane upAzraya meM avakAza hote hue bhI Thaharane ke
liye sthAna nahIM detI hai yA nahIM dene vAlI kA anumodana karatI hai  /  ( use
laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai 1 ) vivecana - jo samAna samAcArI vAle hoM,
acelakya Adi 10 kalpoM meM jo samAna hoM aura sadoSa AhAra, upadhi, zayyA aura
ziSyAdi ko grahaNa nahIM karate hoM ve saba 'sadRza sAdhu' kahe jAte haiM  /
apane upAzraya meM jagaha hote hue una sadRza sAdhunoM ko avazya sthAna denA
cAhiye  /  kisI Apatti ke kAraNa Ane vAle sAdhu yadi asadRza hoM to unheM bhI
avazya sthAna denA cAhiye  /  sthAna hote hue bhI sthAna nahIM dene para
dharmazAsana kI avahelanA hotI hai aura saMyamabhAvoM kI hAni hotI hai, rAga-
dveSa kI vRddhi hotI hai  /  ataH aisA karane para sAdhu yA sAdhvI ko ina sUtroM
ke anusAra prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  mAlopahRta zrAhAra grahaNa karane kA
prAyazcitta 125. je bhikkhU mAlohaDaM asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA
dejjamANaM paDiggA hei, DiggArhataM vA sAijjai  /  125. jo bhikSu diye jAte hue
mAlApahRta prazana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima ko letA hai yA lene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta zrAtA hai | )

Page #477 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Seventeen: The Seventeenth Uddesaka  [377]  **Discussion:** If food,
etc., cannot be easily taken while standing on the ground, then taking it from a
high place is considered a Malaprahita fault. In the Churni, this is explained
with the distinctions of inferior, medium, and superior. It should be understood
that this atonement applies to the superior Malaprahita. For example:
"Suttanipaato ukko sayammi, tam khandhamadisu havejja" - Commentary, verse 5952.
This means that food from high places like those where things are obtained using
a ladder, etc., and similarly from low places like cellars, etc., should be
considered Malaprahita.  There is a possibility of many faults arising from the
ladder slipping or from the carelessness of the person climbing up or down. The
ladder might fall, their hands or feet might break, or there might be slander
like "It fell while climbing up or down to give it to the Sadhu, or the Sadhu
made it fall."  The prohibition of Malaprahita food is clearly stated in Dasha.
A. 5, U. 1, and in Aacha. Shru. 2, Pra. 1, U. 7. It is also stated as a cause of
Karma-bandha, saying that it is against the principles of Pran, Bhut, Jiva, and
Satva. In Pindaniyukti, it is mentioned as one of the Udgama faults.  Food given
from a normal height, or from a means that does not fall, or from a permanent
means of climbing up and down, is not considered to have the Malaprahita fault.
Aacha. Shru. 2, A. 1, U. 7 also discusses this in detail.  **Atonement for
taking food kept in a loft:**  126. If a monk takes food, drink, edible, or
palatable items kept in a loft, by lifting them up or bending down, or approves
of someone taking them in this way, (he incurs the atonement of Laghu-
Chaumasika).  **Discussion:** Lofts are made of mud, dung, stone, or metal, etc.
If the loft is excessively high or low, or very large, and if it does not
require a ladder, etc., to take things out, but it is difficult to take things
out, i.e., it requires painful actions like lifting up or bending down, then
taking food, etc., from such a loft is prohibited in Aacha. Shru. 2, A. 1, U. 7,
and its atonement is mentioned here.  This topic is mentioned in the Aacharaanga
after the description of Malaprahita, making it a type of Malaprahita fault. In
the atonement mentioned here, it is also mentioned after Malaprahita. In the
commentary, it is also called "Tiryak Malaprahita." Refer to the Aacharaanga
Sutra for further discussion.  **Statement:**  **Atonement for taking food from
a different place:**  127. If a monk takes food, drink, edible, or palatable
items that have been moved from their original place, by lifting them up or
bending down, or approves of someone taking them in this way, (he incurs the
atonement of Laghu-Chaumasika).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 satrahavAM uddezaka ] [ 377 vivecana - bhUmi para khar3e-khar3e saralatA se
nahIM liye jA sakate hoM to aise U~ce sthAna para rakhe hue AhAra Adi lenA
mAlApahRta doSa hai  /  cUrNi meM isake jaghanya, madhyama, utkRSTa bheda karake
yaha batAyA hai ki utkRSTa mAlApahRta kI apekSA yaha prAyazcitta kathana
samajhanA cAhiye  /  yathA suttanipAto ukkosayammi, taM khaMdhamAdisu havejjA -
- bhASya gA. 5952 arthAt niHsaraNI Adi lagAkara jahA~ se vastu prApta kI jAtI
hai aise U~ce sthAnoM kA tathA vaise hI nIce talaghara Adi sthAnoM kA AhAra bhI
mAlApahRta samajhanA cAhiye  /  niHsaraNI ke khisakane se athavA car3hane-
utarane vAle kI svayaM kI asAvadhAnI se vaha gira sakatA hai, usake hAtha pAMva
Adi TUTa sakate haiM, 'sAdhu ko dene ke liye car3hate-utarate yaha gira gayA yA
sAdhu ne girA diyA' aisI apakIrti ho sakatI hai ityAdi aneka doSoM kI saMbhAvanA
rahatI hai  /  mAlApahRta AhAra kA daza. a. 5 u. 1 meM tathA zrAcA. zru. 2, pra.
1, u. 7 meM spaSTa niSedha kiyA gayA hai tathA prANa, bhUta, jIva aura satva kI
virAdhanA hone kI saMbhAvanA kahakara karmabaMdha SIT kAraNa bhI kahA hai  /
piMDaniyukti meM ise udgama doSoM meM batAyA gayA hai  /  sAmAnya U~ce sthAna se
yA nahIM girane vAle sAdhana se athavA sthAyI car3hane-utarane ke sAdhana se
prA-jAkara diyA jAne vAlA AhAra mAlApahRta doSa vAlA nahIM hotA hai  /  AcA.
zru. 2., a. 1, u. 7 meM bhI isa saMbaMdha meM vistRta vivecana kiyA gayA hai  /
koThe meM rakhA huA prahAra lene kA prAyazcitta 126. je bhikkhU koTTiyAutaM
asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA ukkujjiya nikkujjiya ohariya
dejjamANaM paDiggAhei, paDiggArhataM vA sAijjai  /  126. jo bhikSu koThe meM
rakhe hue prazana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima ko U~cA hokara yA nIcejhukakara
nikAlakara dete hue se letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use
laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta zrAtA hai | ) vivecana - miTTI, gobara, patthara yA
dhAtu zrAdi ke koThe hote haiM  /  jo koThe atyadhika U~ce yA nIce hoM athavA
bahuta bar3e hoM, jinameM se vastu nikAlane meM niHsaraNI Adi kI AvazyakatA to
nahIM par3atI hai kintu kaThinAI se vastu nikAlI jAtI hai, arthAt U~ce honA,
nIce jhukanA Adi kaSTaprada kriyA karanI par3atI hai to aise koThe Adi se
AhArAdi lene kA niSedha prAcA. zru. 2 a. 1 u. 7 meM kiyA gayA hai aura yahA~
isakA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  AcArAMga meM mAlApahRta varNana ke anaMtara
sUtra se hI isa viSaya kA kathana karake ise eka prakAra kA mAlApahRta doSa mAnA
hai aura yahA~ prAyazcitta kathana meM bhI mAlApahRta ke anaMtara hI isakA |
TIkA meM ise tiryak mAlApahata bhI kahA gayA hai  /  anya vivecana
prAcArAMgasUtra meM dekheM  /  kathana udbhinna prahAra grahaNa karane kA
prAyazcitta 127. je bhikkhU maTTiolittaM asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM
vA ubhidiya nibhidiya vejjamANaM paDiggAhei, paDiggArhataM vA sAijjai  /

Page #478 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[378] [Nishīthasūtra 127. A monk who takes food, drink, food, or taste that is
covered with a vessel smeared with mud, or approves of the one who takes it, (he
incurs the minor Chauṃāsī prāyaścitta.) Discussion-Here, the "ubbhinn" defect of
origin has been taken from "maṭṭiolittan". Its prohibition is also in Ācā. Śru.
2, A. 1. U. 7 and Daśava. A. 5, U. 1. From the description in both those places,
food that is opened from a vessel closed by all kinds of lids is inconceivable
for a monk. This includes heavy substances or vessels and lids made of mud and
plant leaves, etc., and lids packed with iron, etc. The reason for the statement
that the killing of living beings is caused by opening them is that all types of
lids are included. Only in the case of mud-coated, it is not possible to kill
all the living beings like fire, etc. Therefore, even though the word
"maṭṭiolittan" is there, one should understand the prohibition and prāyaścitta
of food closed by various types of lids or coatings, etc., by implication. After
giving it to the monk, there is also a beginning in putting on many lids again,
which causes the paścātkarma defect. Therefore, such food, etc., should not be
taken. Food covered with heavy substances should be understood as a heavy
covering, as the giver may experience difficulty in lifting and keeping it, and
the killing of living beings may be possible in keeping it, etc. If there is no
killing in opening and closing ordinary lids, and they can be easily opened or
closed, there is no prāyaścitta in taking food that is given after opening them.
Prāyaścitta for taking food with defects 128. A monk who takes food, drink,
food, or taste that is situated on the earth, or approves of the one who takes
it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 378] [nizIthasUtra 127. jo bhikSu miTTI se upalipta bartana meM rahe azana,
pAna, khAdima yA svAdima ko lepa tor3a kara diye jAne para grahaNa karatA hai yA
grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA
hai|) vivecana-maTTiolittaM se yahA~ udgama kA "ubbhinna" doSa grahaNa kiyA gayA
hai| isakA niSedha AcA. zru. 2, a. 1. u. 7 tathA dazava. a. 5, u. 1 meM bhI hai
/  una donoM sthaloM ke varNana se sabhI prakAra ke Dhakkana dvArA baMda kiye
hue bartanoM meM se Dhakkana khola kara diyA jAne vAlA AhAra sAdhu ke liye
akalpanIya hotA hai| isameM bhArI padArtha yA bartana tathA miTTI evaM vanaspati
patra Adi se banAyA huaA Dhakkana (chAMdA) evaM lohe Adi se paika kie hue
DhakkanoM kA bhI samAveza ho jAtA hai| sabhI prakAra ke DhakkanoM ke samAviSTa
hone ke kAraNa hI unake kholane para trasa-sthAvara jIvoM kI virAdhanA hone kA
kathana hai| kevala miTTI se lipta meM agni Adi sabhI trasa-sthAvara jIvoM kI
virAdhanA sambhava nahIM hai| ataH "maTTiolittaM' zabda hote hue bhI upalakSaNa
se aneka prakAra ke Dhakkana yA lepa Adi se banda kie AhAra kA niSedha aura
prAyazcitta samajha lenA caahie| sAdhu ko dene ke bAda kaI DhakkanoM ko punaH
lagAne meM bhI prArambha hotA hai, jisase pazcAtkarma doSa lagatA hai  /  ataH
aisA AhAra Adi grahaNa nahIM karanA cAhie  /  bhArI padArtha se Dhake AhAra ko
dene meM dAtA ko vajana uThAne-rakhane meM kaSTa kA anubhava ho tathA jise
rakhane Adi meM jIva-virAdhanA sambhava ho, aisA bhArI AvaraNa samajhanA cAhie
/  yadi sAmAnya DhakkanoM ko kholane, banda karane meM koI virAdhanA na ho tathA
jo sahaja hI khole yA banda kie jA sakate hoM, unako kholakara diyA jAne vAlA
AhAra grahaNa karane para prAyazcitta nahIM prAtA hai| nikSipta-doSayukta AhAra
grahaNa karane kA prAyazcitta 128. je bhikkhU asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA,
sAimaM vA puDhavi-paiTThiyaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  129. je
bhikkhU asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA Au-paiTThiyaM paDiggAhei,
paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  130. je bhikkhU asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA,
sAimaM vA teu-paiTTiyaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 131. je bhikkhU
asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA vaNapphai-paiTTiyaM paDiggAhei
paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 128. jo bhikSu sacitta pRthvI para sthita azana, pAna,
khAdima yA svAdima AhAra ko letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /

Page #479 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Seventeenth Uddeshak  [379 129. A monk who, with awareness, takes or
approves of the taking of food, drink, or palatable food that is situated on
water. 130. A monk who, with awareness, takes or approves of the taking of food,
drink, or palatable food that is situated on fire. 131. A monk who, with
awareness, takes or approves of the taking of food, drink, or palatable food
that is situated on vegetation. (He incurs the minor four-month penance.)]
**Discussion:** A monk should not take food or a vessel containing food that is
situated on salt, earth, etc., or on water with awareness, or on a water vessel,
or on embers or a stove, or on grass, vegetables, etc. with awareness.
**Explanation:** In Praachara Shruti 2, Chapter 1, Uddeshak 7, there is a
prohibition against taking food placed on earth, etc. Here, the penance for that
is laid down. By taking such food that is contaminated with the fault of being
placed on something, there is violence to the one-sensed beings. This is the
penance for the fault of being placed on something that is mentioned in this
Uddeshak. In the commentary, it is said that the penance for the fault of being
placed on something by another is a monthly penance, and if the food is placed
on an infinite-bodied being, then the penance for taking it is the major four-
month penance.  **Question:** When food is lifted from earth, etc. with
awareness, the burden is removed from those beings and they get peace. So why is
it prohibited to take such food?  **Solution:** One-sensed beings experience
great pain from mere touch. When a monk lifts food or a vessel from something,
some beings are crushed. This causes them great pain due to the monk. Because of
this violence, it is prohibited to take such food and a penance is prescribed.
(Churni)  Here, the penance for the fault of being placed on something is laid
down. However, the penance for the fault of being "hidden" in food should also
be understood from this Sutra, i.e., if food is taken after removing something
placed on it with awareness, then the minor four-month penance is incurred.
Here, the penance is prescribed because of the violence to earth, etc. The fault
of being touched is not mentioned in this Sutra or in the faults of food, but
because of the violence to earth-bodied beings, etc., the penance for taking
food that is touched with awareness should also be understood from this Sutra,
similar to the fault of being hidden.  **Explanation:** In direct touch,
violence is obvious. But in indirect touch, sometimes there is violence and
sometimes there is not. Therefore, if violence is not possible, then there is no
penance for taking food that has been indirectly touched. The same understanding
of the Sutra and the penance should be applied to taking clothes and other
equipment, as it is for food.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 satrahavAM uddezaka] [379 129. jo bhikSu sacitta jala para sthita azana, pAna,
khAdima yA svAdima AhAra ko letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /
130. jo bhikSu sacitta agni para sthita azana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima AhAra ko
letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 131. jo bhikSu sacitta vanaspati
para sthita azana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima AhAra ko letA hai yA lene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana-bhikSu
ko sacitta namaka, miTTI Adi para, sacitta pAnI para yA pAnI ke bartana para,
aMgAroM para yA cUlhe para tathA sacitta ghAsa sabjI Adi para koI khAdya
padArtha yA khAdya padArtha yukta bartana par3A ho to usameM se lenA nahIM
kalpatA hai  /  prAcA. zru. 2, a. 1, u. 7 meM pRthvI Adi para rakhA AhAra lene
kA niSedha hai, yahA~ usI kA prAyazcitta vidhAna hai| aisA nikSipta-doSayukta
AhAra lene para una ekendriya jIvoM kI virAdhanA hotI hai tI hai| anantara-
nikSipta kA yaha satrokta prAyazcitta hai| bhASya meM paraspara-nikSipta kA
mAsika prAyazcitta kahA hai aura yadi anaMtakAya para nikSipta AhAra ho to use
grahaNa karane para gurucaumAsI prAyazcitta kahA hai  /  prazna-sacitta pRthvI
Adi para se khAdya padArtha uThAne para to una jIvoM para se bhAra haTatA hai
aura unheM zAMti milatI hai  /  ataH usa AhAra ko grahaNa karane kA niSedha kyoM
kiyA gayA hai ? samAdhAna-ekendriya jIvoM ko sparza mAtra se mahAna vedanA hotI
hai| usa para se khAdya padArtha yA bartana sAdhu ke liye uThAne se kucha jIvoM
kA saMghaTTana hotA hai| jisase unako sAdhu ke nimitta se mahatI vedanA hotI hai
/  isa virAdhanA ke kAraNa aisA AhAra lene kA niSedha va prAyazcitta kahA gayA
hai| -(cUrNi) yahA~ para nikSiptadoSa kA prAyazcitta vidhAna hai, phira bhI
eSaNA ke "pihita" doSa kA prAyazcitta bhI isI sUtra se samajha lenA cAhiye,
arthAt khAdya padArtha para rakhe sacitta padArtha ko haTAkara diyA jAne vAlA
AhAra grahaNa karane para laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| . yahA~ pRthvI Adi
kI virAdhanA hone ke kAraNa prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| saMspRSTadoSa kA kathana
isa sUtra meM yA eSaNA doSoM meM bhI kahIM nahIM hai, tathApi usameM pRthvIkAya
Adi kI virAdhanA hone ke kAraNa pihitadoSa ke samAna sacitta se saMspRSTa AhAra
lene kA prAyazcitta bhI isI sUtra se samajha lenA caahiye| anaMtara-saMsparza
meM to virAdhanA honA spaSTa hI hai  /  kintu paraMpara-sparza meM kabhI
virAdhanA ho sakatI hai aura kabhI nahIM  /  ataH virAdhanA saMbhava na ho to
paraMpara-sparza vAle khAdya padArtha grahaNa karane meM prAyazcitta nahIM AtA
hai  /  khAdya padArtha ke samAna hI vastra Adi sabhI upakaraNoM ke grahaNa
karane meM bhI sUtrokta viveka va prAyazcitta samajha lenA caahie|

Page #480 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  [380] The *Nishīthasūtra Ācārāṅga Ṭīkā* states that the
prohibition of the *nikshiptadoṣa* implies the prohibition of all ten *eṣaṇā*
faults. Since all these faults are related to the violation of earth, etc.,
while consuming food, their atonement can also be understood from this sūtra.
The atonement for consuming food that has been cooled down is as follows:  132.
A monk who consumes extremely hot food, drink, *khādim* or *svādim* substances,
which have been cooled down by: 1. a soup ladle, 2. a fan, 3. a *tāḍapatra*, 4.
a leaf, 5. a piece of leaf, 6. a branch, 7. a piece of branch, 8. a peacock
feather, 9. a peacock tail feather, 10. a cloth, 11. the edge of a cloth, 12. a
hand, or 13. by blowing with the mouth or by fanning with a fan, etc., or who
approves of someone who consumes such food, incurs the *laghu-cāumāsī*
atonement.  **Explanation:**  Fanning with a fan, etc., inevitably leads to the
violation of *vāyu-kāya* beings, and it is also possible to violate small flying
creatures. Therefore, it is not appropriate for a monk to consume food that has
been cooled down by such means (violating *vāyu-kāya* beings). This is
prohibited in *Prācā. Śru.* 2, *a.* 1, *u.* 7, and the present sūtra states its
atonement.  If hot food, etc., is placed in a wide vessel for some time to cool
down, it can be consumed under certain circumstances, but it is essential to be
mindful that no *sampātim* beings fall into it.  *Daśavai.* *a.* 4 states that a
monk should completely renounce blowing with the mouth, fanning with a fan,
etc., and approving of such actions.  The atonement for consuming hot food and
water is mentioned here because it violates *vāyu-kāya* beings. The
*Ācārāṅgasūtra* prescribes the consumption of hot food, etc., without violating
*vāyu-kāya* beings, but one should not consume extremely hot food, etc.,
because:  * It is possible that the giver or the monk's hand, etc., may get
burned by the splashes or steam while giving it. * The giver may not be able to
tolerate the heat and may drop the vessel, etc., from their hand. * The monk's
bowl may get damaged (due to disease, etc.) or may crack.  Therefore, a monk
should not consume extremely hot food and water. They can be consumed only after
the heat has subsided.  If the giver or the monk gets severely burned by hot
water, it is a violation of Dharma. If the bowl breaks, it takes time to perform
the necessary rituals or to find another bowl, which delays *svādhyāya*, etc.,
and hinders *samyama*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 380] [nizIthasUtra AcArAMga TIkA meM nikSiptadoSa ke niSedha se eSaNA ke dasa
hI doSoM kA niSedha samajha lene kA kathana kiyA hai| kyoMki ve sabhI doSa AhAra
grahaNa karate samaya pRthvI Adi kI virAdhanA se saMbaMdhita haiM, isalie una
dasoM doSoM kA prAyazcitta bhI isI sUtra se samajhA jA sakatA hai  /  zItala
karake diyA jAne vAlA AhAra grahaNa karane kA prAyazcitta 132. je bhikkhU
accusiNaM asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA 1. suppeNa vA, 2. vihuNeNa
vA, 3. tAliyaMTeNa vA, 4. patteNa vA, 5. pattabhaMgeNa vA, 6. sAhAe vA, 7.
sAhAbhaMgeNa vA, 8. pihuNeNa vA, 9. pihuNahatyeNa vA, 10. celeNa vA, 11.
celakaNNeNa vA, 12. hattheNa vA, 13. muheNa vA phumittA vIittA AhaTu dejjamANaM
paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  132. jo bhikSu atyanta uSNa azana,
pAna, khAdima yA svAdima padArtha ko 1. sUpa se, 2. paMkhe se, 3. tADapatra se,
4. patte se, 5. patrakhaMDa se, 6. zAkhA se, 7. zAkhAkhaMDa se, 8. morapaMkha
se, 9. morapIchI se, 10. vastra se, 11. vastra ke kinAre se, 12. hAtha se yA 13.
muha se phUka dekara yA paMkhe Adi se havA karake lAkara dene vAle se grahaNa
karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|| (use laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-paMkhe Adi se havA karane para vAyukAya ke jIvoM
kI virAdhanA honA nizcitta hai tathA ur3ane vAle choTe prANiyoM ko bhI virAdhanA
honA sambhava hai| ataH isa prakAra (vAyukAya kI) virAdhanA karake zItala kiyA
gayA AhAra lenA bhikSu ko nahIM kalpatA hai  /  prAcA. zru. 2, a. 1, u. 7 meM
isakA niSedha kiyA gayA hai aura prastuta sUtra meM isakA prAyazcitta kahA gayA
hai| caur3e bartana meM uSNa AhArAdi DAlakara kucha dera rakha kara ThaNDA
karake de to paristhitivaza vaha AhArAdi liyA jA sakatA hai, kintu usameM bhI
saMpAtima jIva na gire aisA viveka rakhanA Avazyaka hai| - dazavai. a. 4 meM
bhikSu ko muha se phUka dene kA aura paMkhe Adi se havA karane karavAne evaM
anumodana karane kA pUrNa tyAgI kahA gayA hai| vAyukAya kI virAdhanA hone ke
kAraNa uSNa AhAra pAnI ke lene kA yahA~ prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai, AcArAMgasUtra
meM vAyukAya kI virAdhanA kiye binA uSNa AhArAdi grahaNa karane kA vidhAna kiyA
gayA hai, tathApi atyanta uSNa AhArAdi grahaNa nahIM karanA cAhiye, kyoMki use
dene meM usake chIMTe se yA bhApa se dAtA yA sAdhu kA hAtha Adi jala jAya yA
uSNatA sahana na ho sakane se hAtha meM se bartana grAdi chaTa kara gira jAya yA
sAdhu ke pAtra kA lepa (rogAnAdi) kharAba ho jAya athavA pAtra phaTa jAya,
ityAdi doSa sambhava haiM  /  ataH vaise atyanta garma AhAra-pAnI sAdhu ko nahIM
lene cAhie  /  kucha samaya bAda uSNatA kama hone para hI ve grAhya ho sakate
haiN| garmAgarma pAnI se dAtA yA bhikSu ke adhika jala jAne para dharma kI
avahelanA hotI hai  /  pAtra phUTa jAne para parikarma karane se yA anya pAtra
kI gaveSaNA karane meM samaya lagane se svAdhyAyAdi saMyama

Page #481 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Seventeen:  **It should be understood that prohibition arises from
obstacles in the course of actions or from other such causes, and that general
warm water, etc., can be consumed.**  **[381]**  **Here, in many texts, two
sutras are found regarding the atonement for consuming warm food and water, but
in the commentary and the churni, the subject is completed by explaining only
one sutra, and there is also only one sutra in the Acharanga Sutra. Therefore,
only one sutra has been retained in the original text here.**  **Atonement for
consuming water that has been washed immediately**  **133. A monk who consumes -
1. Utsvedim, 2. Sansvedim, 3. Chavalodak, 4. Varodak, 5. Tilodak, 6. Tushodak,
7. Yavodak, 8. Prosaman, 9. Kanji, 10. Gramlakandjik, 11. Shuddha Prasauk Jal
-**  **1. Which has been washed immediately, 2. Whose taste has not changed, 3.
Which has not been contaminated by living beings, 4. Which has not been
transformed by weapons, 5. Which has not been fully purified -**  **Consumes
such water or approves of the one who consumes it (he incurs the Laghu Chaumasi
atonement).**  **Discussion:**  **In the Agamas, there are many mentions of the
names of unpurified cool water, i.e., washing water. Among them, only eleven are
considered acceptable, as mentioned in this sutra. Any other names that are
available are all considered acceptable.**  **After becoming acceptable washing
water, it does not become immediately consumable. It becomes consumable after
about half an hour or a muhurta. The Churnikar, without specifying the time, has
said to determine the time by intelligence. If taken immediately, then according
to the present sutra, atonement is incurred.**  **In the Agamas, there are
provisions for consuming various types of unpurified and non-purifiable water,
and there is a prohibition against consuming purified and non-purifiable
water.**  **1. There are 10 names of water that can be consumed - see A.S. 2, A.
1, U. 7, S. 369-370 - Dasha Pra. 5, U. 1, Ga. 106 (75)**  **2. There are 12
names of water that cannot be consumed - see A.S. 2, A. 1, U. 8, S. 373.**
**The Agama texts do not specify a definite number for the water that can be
consumed and the water that cannot be consumed, but in the Agama texts for the
water that can be consumed, there is also a provision for consuming other such
water that can be consumed.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 satrahavAM uddezaka ] pravRtiyoM meM bAdhA Ane se athavA anya bhI aise kAraNoM
se niSedha samajhanA cAhiye tathA sAmAnya garma prazanAdi ko grahaNa kiyA jA
sakatA hai, aisA samajhanA cAhiye  /  [ 381 garmAgarma AhAra pAnI ko grahaNa
karane kA vAyukAya Adi kI virAdhanA kiye binA yahAM aneka pratiyoM meM garma
AhAra -pAnI sambandhI prAyazcitta ke do sUtra milate haiM, kintu bhASya evaM
cUrNi meM eka hI sUtra kI vyAkhyA karake viSaya pUrNa kiyA gayA hai evaM
AcArAMgasUtra meM bhI eka hI sUtra hai  /  ataH yahA~ bhI mUlapATha meM eka
sUtra hI rakhA gayA hai  /  tatkAla dhoye pAnI ko graharaNa karane kA
prAyazcitta 133. je bhikkhU - 1. usseimaM vA, 2. saMseimaM vA, 3. cAulodagaM vA,
4. vArodagaM vA, 5. tilodagaM vA, 6. tusodagaM vA, 7. javodagaM vA, 8. AyAmaM
vA, 9. sovIraM vA, 10. aMbakajiyaM vA, 11. suddhaviyaDaM vA  /  1. ahuNAdhoyaM,
2. aNaMbilaM, 3. avukkataM, 4. apariNayaM 5. aviddhatthaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheM
taM vA sAijjai  /  133. jo bhikSu - 1. utsvedima, 2. saMsvedima, 3. cAvalodaka,
4. vArodaka, 5. tilodaka, 6. tuSodaka, 7. yavodaka, 8. prosAmaNa, 9 kAMjI, 10.
grAmlakAMjika, 11. zuddha prAsuka jala  /  1. jo ki tatkAla dhoyA huA ho, 2.
jisakA rasa badalA huA na ho, 3. jIvoM kA pratikramaNa na huA ho, 4.
zastrapariNata na huA ho, 5. pUrNa rUpa se pracitta na huA ho  /  aise jala ko
grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use
laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai 1 ) vivecana - AgamoM meM aneka jagaha acitta
zItala jala arthAt dhovaNa pAnI ke nAmoM kA kathana hai  /  unameM grAhya pAnI
gyAraha hI haiM, jo isa sUtra meM kahe gaye haiM  /  isase adhika nAma jo bhI
upalabdha haiM ve saba grAhya kahe gaye haiM  /  grAhya dhoraNa pAnI banane ke
bAda turanta grAhya nahIM hotA hai  /  karIba AdhA ghaNTA yA muhUrta ke bAda
grAhya hotA hai  /  cUrNikAra ne samaya-nirdhAraNa na karate hue buddhi se hI
samaya nirNaya karane ko kahA  /  tatkAla lene para to prastuta sUtrAnusAra
prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  AgamoM meM aneka prakAra ke acitta evaM eSaNIya pAnI
lene kA vidhAna hai aura sacitta evaM aneSaNIya pAnI lene kA niSedha hai  /  1.
lene yogya pAnI ke 10 nAma haiM- dekhie A0 sU0 2, a0 1, u07, sU0 369-370 - daza0
pra0 5, u0 1, gA0 106 (75) 2. na lene yogya pAnI ke 12 nAma haiM - dekhie - 0
sU0 2 0 1, u0 8, sU0 373  //  lene yogya pAnI ke AgamapATha meM aura na lene
yogya pAnI ke AgamapATha meM nizcita saMkhyA sUcita nahIM hai, kintu lene yogya
pAnI ke zrAgamapATha meM anya bhI aise lene yogya pAnI lene kA vidhAna

Page #482 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 382] [Nishith Sutra] There is a prohibition against taking other types of
non-acceptable water even in the section on the arrival of non-acceptable water.
Therefore, it is clear that there can be many other types of imaginable and
unimaginable water.   Water does not become immediately non-living even after
being used for weapons, therefore it is not acceptable. The same water becomes
acceptable after some time when it becomes non-living.   If there are seeds,
kernels, etc. in the non-living water used for washing fruits, etc., even if
such water is filtered and given, it is not acceptable.   The sources of the
Agamas that indicate washing water are as follows:  1. In Dasha Vaikalik,
Chapter 5, Verse 1, Verse 106 (75), three types of washing water are said to be
acceptable. Two types of washing water are mentioned according to Acharanga
Sutra, Chapter 2, Chapter 1, Verse 7, Sutra 369, and 'War-Dhoyanam' is
additional. 2. In Uttaradhyayanasutra, Chapter 15, Verse 13, three types of
washing are mentioned. The mention of all three is in Pravachana Sutra, Chapter
2, Chapter 1, Verse 7, Sutra 369-370. 3. In Acharanga Sutra, Chapter 2, Chapter
1, Verse 7, Sutra 369-370, there is a prohibition against taking washing water
of short duration, there is a provision for taking washing water of long
duration, and there is also a provision for taking it automatically at the
behest of the householder. 4. In Pravachana Sutra, Chapter 2, Chapter 1, Verse
8, Sutra 373, there is a mention of many types of washing water. If there are
seeds, kernels, etc. in such water, even if it is filtered and given, it is not
acceptable. 5. In Thaananga, Chapter 3, Verse 3, Sutra 188, there is a provision
for 3-3 types of acceptable water in the fourth, sixth, and eighth tapas. 6. In
Dasha Vaikalik, Chapter 8, Verse 6, there is a provision for taking hot water.
The 'Suddh Viyad' mentioned in Acharanga and Nishith is different from hot
water, because there it is said that taking the freshly prepared Suddh Viyad is
prohibited and there is a penance for it. Therefore, it should be understood as
pure, cold water that is non-living.  The brief meanings of the acceptable and
unacceptable washing water mentioned in the Agamas are as follows:  Eleven types
of acceptable washing water:  1. Utsvedim - Washing of hands or utensils smeared
with dough,  2. Sansvedim - Water used for washing boiled sesame seeds, leaves,
vegetables, etc.,  3. Tandalodak - Washing of rice,  4. Tilodak - Washing of
sesame seeds,  5. Tushodak - Washing of husk or water made from husking grains
containing husk,  6. Javodak - Washing of barley,  7. Payam - Avshravan - Water
from boiled substances,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 382] [nizIthasUtra hai tathA na lene yogya pAnI ke AgamapATha meM bhI anya aise
na lene yogya pAnI lene kA niSedha hai  /  ataH kalpanIya akalpanIya pAnI anya
aneka ho sakate haiM, yaha spaSTa hai|| pAnI zastra-pariNamana hone para bhI
tatkAla acitta nahIM hotA hai, ataH vaha lene yogya nahIM hotA hai  /  vahI pAnI
kucha samaya bAda acitta hone para lene yogya ho jAtA hai| . phala Adi dhoe hue
acitta pAnI meM yadi bIja, guThalI Adi ho to aisA pAnI chAna karake de, to bhI
vaha lene yogya nahIM hai  /  dhovaNa-pAnI sUcaka Agamasthala isa prakAra haiM
1. dazavaikAlika a0 5, u0 1, gA0 106 (75) meM tIna prakAra ke dhovaNa-pAnI lene
yogya kahe haiM  /  inameM do prakAra ke dhovaNa-pAnI AcArAMga zru0 2, a0 1, u0
7, sU0 369 ke anusAra hI kahe gae haiM aura 'vAra-dhoyaNaM' adhika hai| 2.
uttarAdhyayana sUtra a0 15, gA0 13 meM tIna prakAra ke dhovaNa kahe gae haiM  /
ina tInoM kA kathana prA0 zru0 2, a0 1, u07, sU0 369-370 meM hai  /  3. AcArAMga
zru0 2, a0 1, u0 7, sU0 369-370 meM alpakAla kA dhovaNa lene kA niSedha hai,
adhika kAla kA banA hA dhovana lene kA vidhAna hai tathA gahastha ke kahane para
svataH lene kA bhI vidhAna hai| 4. prA0 zru0 2, a0 1, u08, sU0 373 meM aneka
prakAra ke dhovaNa-pAnI kA kathana hai| inameM bIja, guThalI Adi ho to aise pAnI
ko chAna karake dene para bhI lene kA niSedha hai| 5. ThANaM0 a0 3, u0 3, sU0
188 meM cauttha, chaTTha, aTThama tapa meM 3-3 prakAra ke grAhya pAnI kA vidhAna
hai| 6. dazavakAlika a0 8, gA0 6 meM uSNodaka grahaNa karane kA vidhAna hai|
AcArAMga va nizItha meM varNita 'suddha viyaDa' uSNodaka se bhinna hai, kyoMki
vahA~ tatkAla bane zuddha viyaDa grahaNa karane kA niSedha evaM prAyazcitta kahA
gayA hai  /  ataH use acitta zuddha zItala jala hI samajhanA caahiye| AgamoM meM
varNita grAhya agrAhya dhovaNa pAnI ke saMkSipta artha isa prakAra haiMgyAraha
prakAra ke grAhya dhovaNa-pAnI 1. utsvedima-ATe ke lipta hAtha yA bartana kA
dhovaNa, 2. saMsvedimaubAle hue tila, patra-zAka Adi kA dhoyA huA jala, 3.
tandulodaka-cAvaloM kA dhovaNa, 4. tilodaka-tiloM kA dhovaNa, 5. tuSodaka-bhUsI
kA dhovaNa yA tuSa yukta dhAnyoM ke tuSa nikAlane se banA dhovaNa, 6. javodaka-
jau kA dhovana, 7. pAyAma-avazrAvaNa-ubAle hue padArthoM kA pAnI,

Page #483 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Seventeenth Uddeshak  [383]  8. Sauvir-Kanji water, water in which hot
iron, wood, etc. has been dipped, 9. Water made into Prasook by pure Vikat
Harad, Baheda, ash, etc., 10. Varodak-water used to wash the vessels of food
items like jaggery, etc., 11. Amlakanjik-water used to wash sour substances or
the residue of buttermilk. These are twelve types of unacceptable washing water.
1. Pamrodak-water used to wash mangoes, 2. Ambadodak-water used to wash Amratak
(a specific fruit), 3. Kapitthodak-water used to wash Kath or Kavith, 4.
Beejpuroudak-water used to wash Bijore, 5. Drakshodak-water used to wash grapes,
6. Dadimoudak-water used to wash pomegranates, 7. Khajuroudak-water used to wash
dates, 8. Nalikeroadak-water used to wash coconuts, 9. Karirodak-water used to
wash Karis, 10. Badarodak-water used to wash berries, 11. Amlodak-water used to
wash Amla, 12. Chichoudak-water used to wash tamarind.  Apart from these, hot
water is also considered acceptable, which is of only one type. When water boils
completely on fire, it becomes Achitt. This means that the water should be so
hot that one cannot keep their hand in it. If it is less hot than this, it is
not completely Achitt and cannot be considered. In the Tika, etc., it is
mentioned that it becomes Achitt after three boils.  It is clear from the above
Agam Sthalas that washing water, i.e., Achitt cold water, can be of many types.
The names mentioned in the Agam are just examples. It is permissible for a monk
to take water used to wash flour, rice, or any other food item, or water used to
wash the vessels of food items, or water made completely Achitt by any other
type of substance.  According to Dashavkalik A. 5 U. 1 Ga. 76-81, while
accepting Achitt water, one should also have the discretion to consider whether
this water can be drunk? Will it quench thirst or not? To decide this, one can
even taste the water. If such water has been consumed, it should be considered
unusable and discarded in a secluded, lifeless place.  In this Sutra, both the
words 'Sauvir' and 'Amlakanjik' are used, while in other Praagams only the word
'Sauvir' is mentioned. Its meaning in the Tika, etc., is given as Kanji water,
Arnal water, etc. In the Hindi dictionary, while explaining Kanji water, it is
said to be a delicious and digestive sour water made from salt, cumin, etc. This
suggests that the word 'Amlakanjik' is a synonym of the word 'Sauvir', which is
sometimes added here as a synonym.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 satrahavAM uddezaka] [383 8. sauvIra-kAMjI kA jala, garma lohA, lakar3I Adi
DubAyA huA pAnI, 9. zuddhavikaTa harar3a baher3A rAkha Adi padArthoM se prAsuka
banAyA gayA jala, 10. vArodaka-gur3a Adi khAdya padArthoM ke ghaDe (bartana) kA
dhoyA jala, 11. AmlakAMjika-khaTTa padArthoM kA dhovaNa yA chAcha kI prAcha  /
bAraha prakAra ke agrAhya dhovaNa-pAnI 1. pAmrodaka-Amra kA dhoyA hayA pAnI, 2.
ambADodaka-aAmrAtaka (phala vizeSa) kA dhoyA huA pAnI, 3. kapitthodaka-kaitha yA
kavITha kA dhoyA humA pAnI, 4. bIjapUrodaka-bijore kA dhoyA huA pAnI, 5.
drAkSodaka-dAkha kA dhoyA huA paanii| 6. dADimodaka-anAra kA dhoyA huA pAnI, 7.
khajU rodaka-khajUra kA dhoyA huaA pAnI, 8. nAlikerodaka-nAriyala kA dhoyA huA
pAnI, 9. karIrodaka-kaira kA dhoyA hayA pAnI, 10. badirodaka-beroM kA dhoyA hayA
pAnI, 11. Amalodaka-prAMvaloM kA dhoyA huA pAnI, 12. cicodaka-imalI kA dhoyA huA
paanii| inake sivAya garma jala bhI grAhya kahA gayA hai, jo eka hI prakAra kA
hotA hai| pAnI ke agni para pUrNa ubala jAne para vaha acitta ho jAtA hai|
arthAt garma pAnI meM hAtha na rakhA jA sake, itanA garma ho jAnA cAhiye  /
isase kama garma hone para pUrNa acitta evaM kalpanIya nahIM hotA hai  /  TIkA
Adi meM tIna ukAle Ane para acitta hone kA ullekha milatA hai| ukta AgamasthaloM
se spaSTa hai ki dhovaNa-pAnI arthAt acitta zItala jala aneka prakAra kA ho
sakatA hai| Agamokta nAma to udAharaNa rUpa meM haiN| ATA, cAvala Adi kisI
khAdya padArtha ko dhoyA huA pAnI yA khAdya padArtha ke bartana ko dhoyA huA
pAnI athavA anya kisI prakAra ke padArthoM se pUrNa acitta banA huA pAnI bhikSu
ko lenA kalpatA hai| dazavakAlika a0 5 u0 1 gA0 76-81 ke kathanAnusAra acitta
pAnI ko grahaNa karane ke sAtha yaha viveka bhI avazya rakhanA cAhiye ki kyA
yaha pAnI piyA jA sakegA? isase pyAsa bujhegI yA nahIM ? isakA nirNaya karane ke
lie kabhI pAnI ko cakhA bhI jA sakatA hai| kadAcit aisA pAnI grahaNa kara liyA
gayA ho to use anupayogI jAnakara ekAnta nirjIva bhUmi meM paraTha denA caahie|
isa sUtra meM 'sovIra' aura AmlakAMjika donoM zabdoM kA prayoga hai jabaki anya
prAgamoM meM eka 'sauvIra' zabda hI kahA gayA hai| isakA artha TIkA Adi meM
kAMjI kA pAnI, AranAla kA pAnI Adi kiyA gayA hai| hindI zabdakoSa meM kAMjI ke
pAnI kA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue-namaka jIrA Adi padArthoM se banAyA gayA
svAdiSTa evaM pAcaka khaTTA pAnI kahA hai| isase yaha anumAna hotA hai ki
sauvIra zabda kA hI paryAyavAcI 'grAmlakAMjika' zabda hai, jo kabhI paryAyavAcI
rUpa meM yahA~ jor3A

Page #484 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[384] [Nishiy Sutra] It has gone. Because this word is not in other Agamas and
its explanation is not in the commentary of this Sutra. If the existence of both
words is accepted separately, then the meaning of Sauvira is considered to be
the water of Kanji and the meaning of Ambakanjiyam is considered to be the Aach
of buttermilk, etc. Considering the subjects of Agama-path, it becomes clear
that the meaning of 'Sauvira' given in the commentary and the treasury, etc. is
not relevant to the context. Because the water to quench the thirst of Achitt
mentioned in the Sutra is drinking water and it is prescribed to drink it in
tapasya up to Tela. Whereas the water of Kanji is a delicious prepared beverage
which is not even considered to be drunk in Prayambila. It would be completely
inappropriate to drink it in the tapasya of fasting, Bela and Tela. .. The
washing water of sour substances like Amla, Tamarind, etc. has also been
mentioned separately in Aacha. Shru. 2, A. 1, U. 8, therefore, it may be
relevant to the context to consider the word Sauvira as one and consider its
meaning as the Aach of buttermilk. Or by accepting both words, the word
'Sauvira' can be considered as the water in which iron, etc. hot substances are
dipped and cooled, and the word 'Amlakanjik' can be considered as the Aach that
has settled on top of the buttermilk, then the two words in the Sutra can also
be consistent. The water washed with fruits can also be Achitt, because the
juice of some fruits and the touch of other substances on them make the water
Achitt after staying in the water for some time or washing. But in Pracha. Shru.
2, A. 1, U. 8, such water is considered to be Akalpanya due to the presence of
the kernels, seeds or their beats in the water. Still, if Achitt water without
seeds, etc. is available, it can be taken. In the present Sutra, the word
'Shuddodak' is also mistakenly considered to mean hot water, but the word
Ushnodak is used in the Agamas for hot water. Here, the subject is of immediate
washing (Achitt water) and in Aacha. Shru. 2, A. 1, U. 7, Shuddodak (pure Achitt
water) is mentioned in the description of such washing water. Achitt water made
or made from the portion of food and having many unpleasant tastes should be
considered as Shuddodak. This includes water mixed with cloves, black pepper,
Triphala, ash, etc. But considering Shuddodak as hot water is inappropriate.
Because it has no relation to the atonement mentioned in the Sutra. In Aacha.
Shru. 2. A. 1, U. 7, it is also said that the monk should take Achitt water
himself. The reason for this is that it is difficult for a monk to get pure
Achitt water and it is also difficult to survive without water. Therefore, if
pure Achitt water is available, sometimes the person giving water may be unable
to lift the weight or the sister giving water may be pregnant or there may be
Satchitt substances on the way to get it or there may be a possibility of
killing living beings by their arrival, etc. reasons, the monk can take Achitt
water on the advice of the householder or by obtaining permission from him
himself. If the quantity of water is more, it cannot be lifted by carrying the
vessel, then the monk can take it from his own vessel or from the householder's

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 384] [nizIyasUtra gayA ho  /  kyoMki anya Agama meM yaha zabda nahIM hai evaM
isa sUtra kI cUNi meM bhI isakI vyAkhyA nahIM hai| donoM zabdoM kA pRthak
astitva svIkAra karane para sauvIra kA artha kAMjI kA pAnI aura ambakaMjiyaM kA
artha chAcha kA Acha Adi aisA kiyA jAtA hai  /  AgamapATha ke viSayoM kA vicAra
karane para yaha spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki 'sauvIra' kA TIkA evaM koSa Adi meM kiyA
gayA artha prasaMga saMgata nahIM hai| kyoMki sUtra meM kahe gae acitta jala
tRSA zAnta karane ke peya jala haiM aura inheM tele taka tapasyA meM pIne kA
vidhAna hai  /  jabaki kAMjI kA pAnI to svAdiSTa banAyA gayA peya padArtha hai
jo prAyambila meM bhI pInA nahIM kalpatA hai  /  use upavAsa, belA evaM telA kI
tapasyA meM pInA to sarvathA anucita hotA hai| .. AMvalA, imalI Adi khaTTe
padArthoM ke dhovaNa-pAnI kA bhI ullekha AcA. zru. 2, a. 1, u. 8 meM pRthak kiyA
gayA hai, ataH yahA~ eka sauvIra zabda mAnakara usakA chAcha kI Acha artha
mAnanA prasaMga saMgata ho sakatA hai| athavA donoM zabda svIkAra karake
'sauvIra' zabda lohe Adi garma padArthoM ko jisa pAnI meM DubA kara ThaNDA kiyA
gayA ho, vaha pAnI evaM 'amlakAMjika' zabda se chAcha ke Upara kA nitarA huA
Acha aisA artha karane para bhI sUtragata donoM zabdoM kI saMgati ho sakatI hai|
phaloM kA dhoyA huA pAnI bhI pracitta to ho sakatA hai, kyoMki pAnI meM kucha
dera rahane yA dhone para kucha phaloM kA rasa tathA una para lage anya
padArthoM kA sparza pAnI ko acitta kara detA hai  /  kintu phaloM kI guThaliyA~,
bIja yA unake bITake jala meM hone se prAcA0 zru0 2, a0 1, u08 meM aisA pAnI
akalpanIya kahA gayA hai| phira bhI kabhI bIja Adi se rahita acitta pAnI
upalabdha ho to grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai| prastuta sUtra meM 'zuddhodaka'
zabda kA bhrAMti se garma pAnI artha bhI kiyA jAtA hai, kintu garma pAnI ke liye
AgamoM meM uSNodaka zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai| yahA~ tatkAla ke dhovaNa
(acitta jala) kA viSaya hai tathA AcA0 zra0 2, a0 1, u07 meM bhI aise hI
dhovaNa-pAnI ke varNana meM zuddhodaka (zuddha pracitta jala) kA kathana hai  /
anna ke aMza se rahita tathA aneka amanojJa rasoM vAle dhovaNa-pAnI ke atirikta
acitta bane yA banAye gaye zItala jala ko zuddhodaka samajhanA caahie| isameM
lauMga, kAlI-mirca, triphalA, rAkha Adi milAye hue pAnI kA samAveza ho jAtA hai|
kintu zuddhodaka kA garma pAnI artha karanA anucita hI hai  /  kyoMki usakA
sUtrokta prAyazcitta se koI sambandha nahIM hai| AcA0 zru0 2. a0 1, u0 7 meM
acitta pAnI bhikSu ko svayaM grahaNa karane kA bhI kahA hai  /  isakA kAraNa
yaha hai ki bhikSu ke liye nirdoSa acitta pAnI milanA kucha kaThina hai tathA
pAnI ke binA nirvAha honA bhI kaThina hai| ataH acitta nirdoSa pAnI upalabdha ho
jAne para kabhI pAnI dene vAlA vajana uThAne meM asamartha ho yA pAnI dene vAlI
bahana garbhavatI ho athavA unake pAne ke mArga meM sacitta padArtha par3e hoM
yA unake Ane se jIva-virAdhanA hone kI sambhAvanA ho ityAdi kAraNoM se bhikSu
gRhastha ke prAjJA dene para yA svayaM usase AjJA prApta karake acitta jala
grahaNa kara sakatA hai| yadi pAnI kA , parimANa adhika ho, bartana uThAkara
nahIM liyA jA sakatA ho to bhikSu svayaM ke pAtra se yA gRhastha ke

Page #485 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Seventeenth Uddeshak  [385 It is possible to take water from a vessel, but
there is no such provision in the Pragama for taking water for drinking. Nor is
there a tradition of taking food in this way. Once water becomes a-chit, it can
become chit again over time. Because beings from the one-sense to the non-
conscious five-sense can be reborn in the same body of the same form. - Suy 0
Shru 2, A 3 In the fifth study of the Dasha Vaikalika Churni, it is said that in
summer, water heated for a day and night becomes chit in the afternoon, and in
winter and rainy season, water heated in the morning becomes chit in the
evening. As - Gimhe Aho Rattenam Sachitti Bhavathi, Hemant Vasasu Puvanhe Katam
Avaranhe Sachitti Bhavathi. - Dasha. Churni Page 61, 114 There has been a
misconception for some time about washing water, that its time of being a-chit
is not mentioned, or that life arises in it quickly, therefore it is
inconceivable for a Sadhu. Such a statement is not appropriate according to the
Agamas. Because the Agamas have provisions for taking many types of washing
water, as well as a prohibition against taking freshly prepared washing water
and a penance for taking it. Taking the same washing water after some time is
considered conceivable. Therefore, the acceptability of washing water is clear.
In the Kalpantar Vachya Tika of the Kalpasutra, many types of washing water are
discussed and it is considered conceivable for a Sadhu to take them even in the
penance of Teli. And those who prohibit it are called Dharma and Agama-
independent and not afraid of hell. As "Parakiyam Avasravanadipanamatinirasam
api yadashanaaharataaya varnanyanti kanjikam chaanantakaayam vadanti
tatteshamaevaaharalampattyam dharmagamanirapekshata durgaterebhirutata kevalam
vyanyakti." - Kalpa. Samarthana Page 50 It is noteworthy here that the author of
this explanation is a Tapgachch Acharya, who has said a lot targeting the
Kharataragachch and Anchalagachch who prohibit Avasravan etc. - Kalpa.
Samarthana Preface. _ In response to this, Kharataragachch Acharya
Jinaprabhasuri wrote a verse-based chapter called 'Tapotamtakuṭṭan', refuting
the taking of warm water by the Pradhakarmi and defending the taking of cold
water that is a-chit, and wrote a lot in a language of anger to the Tapgachch
Acharyas. See - Prabhandha Parijat Page 145-146 In the commentary of Acharang
Shru 1, A 1, U 3, there is a description of washing water being a-chit and being
conceivable for a Sadhu. There is also a description of many types of substances
that make water a-chit. In Pravachnasaroḍdhara Dvara 136, Gatha 881, it is
stated that a-chit cold water that is Prasauk is acceptable, and in Gatha 882,
the time for both hot water and Prasauk cold water to remain a-chit is also

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 satrahavA~ uddezaka] [385 loTe Adi se bhI pAnI le sakatA hai kintu pAhAra ke
liye isa prakAra kA koI vidhAna prAgama meM nahIM hai evaM na hI isa prakAra se
AhAra ke svayaM lene ko paramparA hai  /  eka bAra acitta banA huA pAnI punaH
kAlAntara se sacitta bhI ho sakatA hai| kyoMki ekendriya se lekara asaMjJI
paMcendriya taka ke jIva punaH usI kAya ke usI zarIra meM utpanna ho sakate haiM
/  --sUya 0 zru0 2, a0 3 dazavaikAlika ke pAMcaveM adhyayana kI cUrNi meM kahA
gayA hai ki garmI meM eka ahorAtra se evaM sardI aura varSAkAla meM pUrvAhna
(subaha) meM garma kiye jala ke aparAhna (sAyaMkAla) meM sacitta hone kI
sambhAvanA rahatI hai| yathA-gimhe ahoratteNaM saccittI bhavati, hemanta vAsAsu
puvaNhe kataM avaraNhe sacittI bhavati  /  -daza. cUNi pRSTha 61, 114 dhovaNa-
pAnI ke viSaya meM kucha samaya se aisI bhrAMta dhAraNA pracalita huI hai ki
isake acitta rahane kA kAla nahIM batAyA gayA hai athavA isameM zIghra
jIvotpatti ho jAtI hai, ataH vaha sAdhu ko akalpanIya hai| isa prakAra kA
kathana karanA Agama pramANoM se ucita nahIM hai  /  kyoMki AgamoM meM aneka
prakAra ke dhovaNa-pAnI lene kA vidhAna hai, sAtha hI tatkAla banA huA dhovaNa-
pAnI lene kA niSedha hai evaM usake lene kA prAyazcitta bhI kahA gayA hai| usI
dhovaNa-pAnI ko kucha dera ke bAda lenA kalpanIya kahA gayA hai  /  ataH
dhovaNa-pAnI kA grAhya honA spaSTa hai| kalpasUtra kI kalpAntara vAcya TIkA meM
aneka prakAra ke dhovaNa-pAnI kI carcA karake unheM sAdhu ke liye tele taka kI
tapasyA meM lenA kalpanIya kahA hai aura niSedha karane vAloM ko dharma evaM
Agama nirapekSa aura durgati se nahIM Darane vAlA kahA hai  /  yathA
"parakIyamavazrAvaNAdipAnamatinIrasamapi yadazanAhAratayA varNayaMti kAMjikaM
cAnaMtakAyaM vadaMti tatteSAmevAhAralAMpaTyaM dharmAgamanirapekSatA
durgaterabhIrUtA kevalaM vynkti|" -kalpa. samarthana pR. 50 yahA~ ullekhanIya
yaha hai ki isa vyAkhyA ke karane vAle tapagaccha ke prAcArya haiM, unhoMne
avasrAvaNa Adi kA niSedha karane vAle khataragaccha evaM aMcalagaccha vAloM ko
lakSya karake bahuta kucha kahA hai| -kalpa. samarthana prstaavnaa| _ isake
pratyuttara meM kharataragacchIya prAcArya jinaprabhasUri ne prAdhAkarmI garma
pAnI lene kA khaMDana evaM acitta zItala jala lene kA maNDana karane vAlA
'tapoTamatakuTTana' zlokabaddha prakaraNa likhakara tapagaccha ke prAcAryoM ko
Akroza kI bhASA meM bahuta likhA hai  /  dekheM-prabandha pArijAta pR0 145-146
AcArAMga zru0 1, a0 1, u0 3 kI TIkA meM dhovaNa-pAnI ke acitta hone kA evaM
sAdhu ke liye kalpanIya hone kA varNana hai  /  vahAM pAnI ko acitta karane vAle
aneka prakAra ke padArthoM kA varNana bhI hai| pravacanasAroddhAra dvAra 136
gAthA 881 meM prAsuka acitta zItala jala ke grAhya hone kA kathana hai tathA
gAthA 882 meM uSNa jala evaM prAsuka zItala jala donoM ke acitta rahane kA kAla
bhI

Page #486 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[386] [Nishīthasūtra] It has been said. In its commentary, it is clarified that
the time for the water used for washing rice, etc., to remain unmindful is the
same as that of hot water. Usiṇodagaṃ tidanḍukkāliyaṃ, phāsuyajalāti jai kappam.
Navari gilāṇāikae paharatigovarī vi dhariyavvaṃ ||51|| Tribhirdaṇḍe-
utkālairūtkālitam prāvṛtam yaduṣṇodakam  tathā yatprāsuk-svakāya parakāya
śastropahatatvena acittabhūtam jalaṃ tadeva yatīnām kalpyam, gṛhītumucitam.
Jāyai sacittayā se giṃhami paharapañcagasssuri. Caupaharovarī sisire vā sāsu
puṇo tipaharuvari || 882|| Tadūrdhvam api dhriyate tadā kṣāraḥ prakṣepaṇīyo,
yena bhūyaḥ sacittaṃ na bhavatīti. Laghu pravacana sāroddhāra kī mūlagāthā 85
meṃ bhī donoṃ prakār ke acitta pānī kā kāla samān kahā hai. Yathā Khāimi tale
vivaccāse, ti-cau-paṇ jāma usiṇanīrass. Vāsāisu tammāṇam, phāsuy-jalassāvi emev
||85|| Is prakār ṭīkā-granthōṃ meṃ donoṃ prakār ke jalōṃ ke prāsuk rahnē kā kāla
bhī miltā hai aur āgamōṃ meṃ to donoṃ prakār ke prāsuk jalōṃ ko grahaṇ karne kā
vidhān hai hī. Ataḥ pūrvōkt pracalit dhāraṇā bhṛānt hai aur vah pāgamasammat
nahīṃ hai. Sthānāṅgasūtra ke tīse sthān meṃ upavās ādi tapasya meṃ bhī dhōvaṇ-
pānī pīnē kā vidhān kiyā gayā hai tatha kalpasūtra ke samācārī prakaraṇ meṃ
cāturmās meṃ kiye jānē vāle upavās, belā, telā meṃ cāval, āṭe, til ādi ke
dhōvaṇ-pānī kā tatha ōsāmaṇ ya kānjī ādi kul 9 prakār ke pānī kā ullekh karke
samasat prakār ke acitta jalōṃ ko lenē kā vidhān kiyā gayā hai. Isse bhī spasṭ
ho jātā hai ki dhōvaṇ pānī ko akalpanyeya ya śankit mānna ya aisā pracār karana
ucit nahīṃ hai. Sārāṃś yah hai ki eṣaṇā doṣōṃ se rahit āgamasammat kisī bhī
acitta jal ko grāhya samajhna cāhie evam uskā niṣedh nahīṃ karana cāhie. Sāth hī
unheṃ grahaṇ karne meṃ vah pānī acitta huyā hai ya nahīṃ, isakī parīkṣā karne kā
tatha mausam ke anusār uske calitaraś hoṇe kā evam punaḥ sacitta hoṇe ke samay
kā vivek avśya rakhna cāhie. Apne āpko prācārya-lakṣaṇayukta kahne kā
prāyaścitta 134. Je bhikṣū appanō āyriyattāe lakṣaṇāī vāgarei, vāgarantaṃ vā
sāijjai.  _ 134. Jo bhikṣu svayam apne ko prācārya ke lakṣaṇōṃ se sampanna kahta
hai ya kahne vāle kā anumodan kartā hai. (Use laghucāumāsī prāyaścitta pātā
hai.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 386] [nizIthasUtra kahA hai  /  usakI TIkA meM spaSTa kiyA gayA hai ki uSNa
pAnI jitanA hI cAvala Adi ke dhovaNa kA bhI acitta rahane kA kAla hai|
usiNodagaM tidaMDukkAliyaM, phAsuyajalAti jai kappaM  /  navari gilANAikae
paharatigovari vi dhariyavvaM  // 51 //  tribhirdaNDe-utkAlairUtkAlitaM prAvRtaM
yaduSNodakaM tathA yatprAsuka-svakAya parakAya zastropahatatvena acittabhUtaM
jalaM tadeva yatInAm kalpyaM, gRhItumucitaM  /  jAyai sacittayA se gimhami
paharapaMcagassuri  /  caupaharovari sisire vAsAsu puNo tipaharUvari  //  882 //
tadUrdhvamapi dhriyate tadA kSAraH prakSepaNIyo, yena bhUyaH sacittaM na
bhavatIti  /  laghupravacana sAroddhAra kI mUlagAthA 85 meM bhI donoM prakAra ke
acitta pAnI kA kAla samAna kahA hai  /  yathA khAimi tale vivaccAse, ti-cau-paNa
jAma usinnniirss| vAsAisu tammANaM, phAsuya-jalassAvi emeva  // 85 //  isa
prakAra TIkA-granthoM meM donoM prakAra ke jaloM ke prAsuka rahane kA kAla bhI
milatA hai aura AgamoM meM to donoM prakAra ke prAsuka jaloM ko grahaNa karane
kA vidhAna hai hii| ataH pUrvokta pracalita dhAraNA bhrAMta hai aura vaha
pAgamasammata nahIM hai| sthAnAMgasUtra ke tIsare sthAna meM upavAsa Adi tapasyA
meM bhI dhovaNa-pAnI pIne kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai tathA kalpasUtra ke samAcArI
prakaraNa meM cAturmAsa meM kiye jAne vAle upavAsa, belA, telA meM cAvala, ATe,
tila Adi ke dhovaNa-pAnI kA tathA osAmaNa yA kAMjI Adi kula 9 prakAra ke pAnI kA
ullekha karake samasta prakAra ke acitta jaloM ko lene kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai|
isase bhI spaSTa ho jAtA hai ki dhovaNa pAnI ko akalpanIya yA zaMkita mAnanA yA
aisA pracAra karanA ucita nahIM hai| sArAMza yaha hai ki eSaNA doSoM se rahita
Agamasammata kisI bhI acitta jala ko grAhya samajhanA cAhie evaM usakA niSedha
nahIM karanA caahie| sAtha hI unheM grahaNa karane meM vaha pAnI acitta huyA hai
yA nahIM, isakI parIkSA karane kA tathA mausama ke anusAra usake calitarasa hone
kA evaM punaH sacitta hone ke samaya kA viveka avazya rakhanA caahie| apane
Apako prAcArya-lakSaNayukta kahane kA prAyazcitta 134. je bhikkhU appaNo
AyariyattAe lakkhaNAI vAgarei, vAgaraMtaM vA sAijjai  /  _ 134. jo bhikSu svayaM
apane ko prAcArya ke lakSaNoM se sampanna kahatA hai yA kahane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai|)

Page #487 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Seventeenth Uddeshak  [387]  **Discussion:** If a monk were to describe
the characteristics of his body in such a way as to say, "The lines on my hands
and feet, the marks of the moon, the wheel, the goad, etc., and my well-
proportioned and perfect body, these characteristics will surely make me an
Acharya," then he would incur the Praayaschitta mentioned in the Sutras.  It is
a fault to be proud of becoming an Acharya. Such pride may lead to someone
becoming agitated, the knowledge of auspicious signs may become false, someone
with animosity may try to kill him knowing that he will become an Acharya, etc.
Knowing the possibility of such faults and understanding the teachings of the
Bhagavan, a monk should not reveal such characteristics, but should remain
serious and humble, progressing in the virtues of restraint.  Pride and self-
praise lead to the loss of virtues and good deeds.  When establishing a new
Acharya, a Sthavir or Acharya, etc., may want to know about the characteristics,
or if an unsuitable person is being appointed to the position, then for the sake
of the Sangha's dignity, one can reveal their characteristics, either by
themselves or through others, but there should be no thought of pride, conflict,
or stubbornness.  **Praayaschitta for Singing, etc.**  135. A monk who 1. sings,
2. laughs, 3. plays a musical instrument, 4. dances, 5. acts, 6. imitates the
sound of a horse, 7. imitates the roar of an elephant, 8. imitates the roar of a
lion, or approves of those who do so, incurs a Laghu-Chaumasik Praayaschitta.
**Discussion:** All the above activities are indicative of a curious mind and
are born from the arising and stimulation of the karma of attachment. A monk
strives for victory over the senses and the pacification of attachment,
therefore these activities are unsuitable for him.  If singing is done for the
purpose of promoting Dharma in a Dharmakatha, then it cannot be considered a
subject of Praayaschitta. But if it is a song for entertainment, secular in
nature, and the goal is to showcase singing skills, then it is worthy of
Praayaschitta.  Laughing, playing musical instruments, dancing, acting,
imitating someone out of curiosity, and imitating the sounds of animals like
elephants, horses, monkeys, lions, etc., are all useless activities on the path
of restraint and should be abandoned. These activities can also lead to self-
restraint and harm to living beings. Those who do such things are called
"Kaandapika" in Uttaradhyayanasutra 35, who, being opposed to restraint, attain
a bad destiny. Therefore, the Sutras mention Praayaschitta for such activities.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 satrahavA~ uddezaka] [387 vivecana-koI bhikSu apane zarIra ke lakSaNoM kA isa
prakAra kathana kare ki 'mere hAtha-pAMva Adi meM jo rekhAeM haiM yA jo candra,
cakra, aMkuza Adi cihna haiM tathA merA zarIra suDaula evaM pramANopeta hai, ina
lakSaNoM se maiM avazya prAcArya banUgA,' isa prakAra kathana karane para use
sUtrokta prAyazcitta AtA hai| prAcArya hone kA abhimAna karanA hI doSa hai| isa
prakAra abhimAna karane se kadAcit koI kSiptacitta ho jAtA hai, nimitta lakSaNa
jJAna asatya bhI ho jAtA hai| koI vairabhAva rakhane vAlA usakA prAcArya honA
jAnakara use jIvanarahita karane kA prayAsa kara sakatA hai ityAdi doSoM kI
sambhAvanA jAnakara tathA bhagavadAjJA samajhakara bhikSu apane aise lakSaNoM ko
prakaTa na kare kintu gambhIra va nirabhimAna hokara saMyamaguNoM meM pragati
karatA rahe  /  ghamaMDa karane se tathA svayaM apanI prazaMsA karane se guNoM
ko tathA puNyAMzoM kI kSati hotI hai  /  navIna prAcArya sthApita karate samaya
sthavira yA prAcAryAdi jAnakArI karanA cAheM athavA kabhI ayogya ko pada para
sthApita kiyA jA rahA ho to saMgha kI zobhA ke liye svayaM yA anya ke dvArA
apane lakSaNoM kI jAnakArI dI jA sakatI hai, kintu usameM mAnakaSAya, kalaha yA
durAgraha ke vicAra nahIM hone caahiye| gAyana prAdi karane kA prAyazcitta 135.
je bhikkhU-1. gAejja vA, 2. hasejja vA, 3. vAejja vA, 4. Naccejja vA, 5.
abhiNaejja vA, 6. haya-hesiyaM vA, 7. hatthigulagulAiyaM vA, 8.
ukkiTThasohaNAyaM vA karei, kareMtaM vA saaijji| 135. jo bhikSu-1. gAye, 2.
ha~se, 3. vAdya bajAye, 4. nAce, 5. abhinaya kare, 6. ghor3e kI AvAja
(hinahinAhaTa), 7. hAthI kI garjanA (ciMghADa) aura 8. siMhanAda karatA hai yA
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  /
) vivecana-ukta sabhI pravRttiyAM kutUhalavRtti kI dyotaka haiM tathA mohakarma
ke udaya evaM udIraNA se janita haiM  /  bhikSu indriyavijaya evaM moha kI
upazAMti meM prayatnazIla hotA hai ataH usake liye ye ayogya pravRttiyA~ haiN|
dharmakathA meM yadi dharmaprabhAvanA ke liye kabhI gAyana kiyA jAya to use
prAyazcitta kA viSaya nahIM kahA jA sakatA hai  /  kintu janaraMjaka,
dharmanirapekSa gIta ho tathA gAyana kalA pradarzana kA lakSya ho to
prAyazcittayogya hotA hai| ha~sanA, vAdiMtra Adi bajAnA, nRtya karanA, nATaka
karanA, kutUhala se kisI kI nakala karanA tathA hAthI, ghor3e, baMdara, siMha
Adi pazuoM kI AvAja kI nakala karanA ityAdi saMyama-sAdhanAmArga meM nirarthaka
pravRttiyA~ hone se tyAjya haiM tathA ina pravRttiyoM meM Atma-saMyama evaM
jIvavirAdhanA bhI saMbhava hai| aisA karane vAle ko uttarA. a0 35 meM
kAMdapikabhAva karane vAlA kahA hai, jo saMyamavirAdhaka hokara durgati prApta
karatA hai  /  isalie sUtra meM aisI pravRttiyoM kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /

Page #488 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [Nishīth Sūtra]  **388.** However, if one has to make some kind of sound for
protection from danger, then one should not consider it to be a transgression.
**Penance for the Attachment to Sound**  **136.** A monk who goes to hear, or
approves of someone going to hear, the sounds of: 1. a *bherī*, 2. a *paṭaha*,
3. a *muraja*, 4. a *mṛdanga*, 5. a *nāndī*, 6. a *jhālara*, 7. a *vallarī*, 8.
a *ḍamaru*, 9. a *maḍuya*, 10. a *saduya*, 11. a *pradeśa*, 12. a *golukī*, or
other such *vitata* musical instruments.  **137.** A monk who goes to hear, or
approves of someone going to hear, the sounds of: 1. a *vīnā*, 2. a *vipancī*,
3. a *tūṇa*, 4. a *vavvīsaga*, 5. a *vīnādika*, 6. a *tumbavīnā*, 7. a
*jhoṭaka*, 8. a *ḍhaṅkuṇa*, or other such *tata* stringed instruments.  **138.**
A monk who goes to hear, or approves of someone going to hear, the sounds of: 1.
a *tāla*, 2. a *kaṁsatāla*, 3. a *lattika*, 4. a *gohika*, 5. a *makarya*, 6. a
*kacchabhi*, 7. a *mahatī*, 8. a *saṇālikā*, or other such *ghana* percussion
instruments.  **139.** A monk who goes to hear, or approves of someone going to
hear, the sounds of: 1. a *saṅkha*, 2. a *vaṁsa*, 3. a *veṇu*, 4. a *kharamuhi*,
5. a *pariliśa*, 6. a *vevā*, or other such *jhūsira* wind instruments.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 388] [nizIthasUtra kintu Apatti se rakSAhetu kisI prakAra kI AvAja karanI par3a
jAya to usakA prAyazcitta nahIM samajhanA caahie| zabdazravaNa-prAsakti kA
prAyazcitta 136. je bhikkhU 1. bheri-saddANi vA, 2. paDaha-saddANi vA, 3.
muraja-saddANi vA, 4. muiMgasaddANi vA, 5. gaMdi-sahANi vA, 6. jhallarI-saddANi
vA, 7. vallari-saddANi vA, 8. DamarUya-sadANi vA, 9. maDDaya-saddANi vA, 10.
saduya-saddANi vA, 11. paesa-saddANi vA, 12. goluki-sahANi vA annayarANi vA
tahappagArANi vitatANi saddANi kaNNasoya-vaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei abhisaMdhAretaM
vA saaijji| 137. je bhikkhU 1. vINA-saddANi vA, 2. vipaMci-sahANi vA, 3. tUNa-
sahANi vA, 4. vavvIsaga-saddANi vA, 5. vINAiya-sadANi vA, 6. tubavINA-sahANi vA,
7. jhoDaya-saddANi vA, 8. DhaMkuNa-sadANi vA aNNayarANi vA tahappagArANi tatANi
saddANi kaNNasoya-vaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei abhisaMdhAreMtaM vA saaijji| 138. je
bhikkhU 1. tAla-saddANi vA, 2. kaMsatAla-saddANi vA, 3. littiya-sahANi vA, 4.
gohiya-saddANi vA, 5. makariya-saddANi vA, 6. kacchabhi-sahANi vA, 7. mahati-
saddANi vA, 8. saNAliyA-saddANi vA, 9. valiyA-saddANi vA aNNayarANi vA
tahappagArANi ghaNANi saddANi kaNNasoya-vaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei, abhisaMdhAretaM
vA sAijjai  /  139. je bhikkhU-1. saMkha-sahANi vA, 2. vaMsa-saddANi vA, 3.
veNu-sahANi vA, 4. kharamuhI-sahANi vA, 5. parilisa-sahANi vA, 6. vevA-saddANi
vA aNNayarANi vA tahappagArANi jhusirANi sahANi kaNNasoya-vaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei,
abhisaMdhAretaM vA saaijji| 136. jo bhikSu-1. bherI ke zabda, 2. paTaha ke
zabda, 3. muraja ke zabda, 4. mRdaMga ke zabda, 5. nAndI ke zabda, 6. jhAlara ke
zabda, 7. vallarI ke zabda, 8. DamarU ke zabda, 9. maDuya ke zabda, 10. saduya
ke zabda, 11. pradeza ke zabda, 12. golukI ke zabda yA anya bhI aise vitata
vAdyoM ke zabda sunane ke saMkalpa se jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  137. jo bhikSu-1. vINA ke zabda, 2. vipaMcI ke zabda, 3. tUNa ke zabda,
4. vavvIsaga ke zabda, 5. vINAdika ke zabda, 6. tumbavINA ke zabda, 7. jhoTaka
ke zabda, 8. DhaMkuNa ke zabda yA anya bhI aise tAra vAle vAdyoM ke zabda sunane
ke saMkalpa se jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  138. jo
bhikSu-1. tAla ke zabda, 2. kaMsatAla ke zabda, 3. lattika ke zabda, 4. gohika
ke zabda. 5. makarya ke zabda, 6. kacchabhi ke zabda. 7. mahatI ke zabda.
8.sanAlikA ke zabda yA anya bhI aise ghanavAdyoM ke zabda sunane ke saMkalpa se
jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|

Page #489 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Seventeenth Uddesaka  [389-139. A monk who goes or approves of someone
going with the intention of hearing the sound of 1. a conch, 2. a bamboo
instrument, 3. a flute, 4. a kharmuhi, 5. a parilis, 6. a veva, or other such
*jhuser* musical instruments. (He incurs the *laghu* four-month penance.)
**Discussion:** The twelfth *uddesaka* discusses the penances for attachment to
forms, and here the penance for attachment to sounds is mentioned.  This set of
four sutras mentions four types of musical instruments. In the *Acharanga Sutra*
(2, 11), in the sutras prohibiting attachment to sounds, this set of four sutras
is also present, but there the names of the instruments are fewer, and here they
are more.  In the *Nishita Chani*, the explanation of very few sounds has been
given, the remaining sounds have been said to be "well-known". Their detailed
discussion should be seen in the discussion of the *Acharanga Sutra*. Briefly,
* *Vitata* - Instruments without strings or made of leather - tabla, dhol, etc.
* *Tata* - Instruments with strings - veena, etc. * *Ghan* - Instruments played
by striking them against each other - jalatarang, etc. * *Jhuser* - Instruments
with a hole in the middle - flute, etc.  "If the sound of these instruments
falls on the ears of a monk without his desire, he should not develop any
attachment to it." This is the first sentiment of the fifth great vow.
Therefore, going with the intention of hearing them is completely inconceivable.
A detailed description of this topic should be known from the discussion related
to the conquest of the senses in the twelfth *uddesaka*. There is no penance for
hearing the sound of instruments like *bhamha* (drum) for the purpose of
preventing disease. Similarly, other reasons should also be understood.
**Penance for hearing sounds and attachment in different places**  140-154. A
monk who goes to villages or houses with the intention of hearing sounds, or
approves of someone going with that intention. Similarly, all the sutras
mentioned in the twelfth *uddesaka* should be understood in relation to sounds.
A monk who goes to crowded places or other places with the intention of hearing
loud sounds, or approves of someone going with that intention.  155. A monk who
is attached to, enjoys, craves, or is absorbed in sounds, whether they are 1. in
this world, 2. in the other world, 3. loud, 4. soft, 5. pleasant, 6. unpleasant,
7. known, or 8. unknown, or is becoming attached, enjoying, craving, or absorbed
in them.  He incurs the four-month penance for violating the *parihara* rules.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 satrahavAM uddezaka] [389 139. jo bhikSu-1. zaMkha ke zabda, 2. bAMsa ke zabda,
3. veNu ke zabda, 4. kharamuhi ke zabda, 5. parilisa ke zabda, 6. vevA ke zabda
yA anya bhI aise jhusiravAdyoM ke zabda sunane ke saMkalpa se jAtA hai yA jAne
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use laghu caumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-
bArahaveM uddezaka meM rUpoM kI prAsakti ke prAyazcittoM kA kathana hai aura
yahA~ zabdoM kI Asakti kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| prastuta sUtracatuSka meM
cAra prakAra ke vAdyoM kA nAmollekha hai  /  AcA0 zru0 2, a0 11 meM zabdAsakti-
niSedha sUtroM meM bhI yaha sUtra-catuSka hai kintu vahA~ vAdyoM ke nAma kama
haiM aura yahA~ adhika haiN| nizIthacaNi meM bahuta kama zabdoM kI vyAkhyA kI
gaI hai, zeSa zabda 'lokaprasiddha haiM' aisA kaha diyA gayA hai  /  inakA
vistRta vivecana AcArAMgasUtra ke vivecana meM dekheN| saMkSepa meM vitata-binA
tAra vAle yA carmAvata vAdya-tabalA, Dholaka Adi  /  tata-tAra vAle vAdya-vINA
Adi  /  ghana-paraspara TakarA kara bajAye jAne vAle vAdya-jalataraMga prAdi  /
jhusira-madhya meM polara (chidra) vAle vAdya-bAMsurI Adi  /  'ina vAdyoM kI
AvAja yadi binA cAhe hI kAnoM meM par3a jAya to bhikSu ko usameM rAgabhAva nahIM
karanA cAhiye' yaha pAMcaveM mahAvrata kI prathama bhAvanA hai  /  ataH unheM
sunane ke saMkalpa se jAnA to sarvathA akalpanIya hI hai  /  isa viSaya kA
vistata varNana 1 varNana 12veM uddezaka ke indriyavijaya saMbaMdhI vivecana se
jAnanA caahie| roganivAraNArtha bhaMbhA (bherI) Adi vAdyoM kI AvAja sunane kA
prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai  /  aise hI anya kAraNa bhI samajha lene caahiye|
vibhinna sthAnoM ke zabda-zravaNa evaM prAsakti kA prAyazcitta 140-154. je
bhikkhU vappANi vA jAva bhavaNagihANi vA kaNNasoyavaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei
abhisaMdhAretaM vA sAijjai  /  evaM bArasamuddesaga gameNaM savve suttA
saddAlAvageNaM bhANiyavvA jAva je bhikkhU bahusagaDANi vA jAva aNNayarANi vA
virUvarUvANi mahAsavANi kaNNasoyavaDiyAe abhisaMdhArei, abhisaMdhAretaM vA
sAijjai  /  155. je bhikkhU 1. ihaloiesu vA saddesu, 2. paraloiesu vA saddesu,
3. diDhesu vA saddesu, 4. adiThesu vA saddesu, 5. suesu vA saddesu, 6. asuesu vA
saddesu. 7. viNNAesu vA saddesu, 8. aviNNAesu vA saddesu sajjai, rajjai,
gijjhai, ajjhovavajjai, sajjamANaM, rajjamANaM, gijjamANaM, ajjhovavajjhamANaM
saaijjji| taM sevamANe Avajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM ugghAiyaM  /

Page #490 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [390] [Nishīthasūtra 140-154. Just as in the 12th Uddeshaka, a monk who goes
to a field or a house with the intention of hearing sounds, or approves of
someone who does so, and so on, all the sūtras should be understood from the
'speaker of sound'. Similarly, a monk who goes to a place with many oxcarts or
other places with great noise, with the intention of hearing sounds, or approves
of someone who does so. 155. A monk who is attached, addicted, greedy, and
excessively greedy for: 1. worldly sounds, 2. otherworldly sounds, 3. visible
sounds, 4. invisible sounds, 5. previously heard sounds, 6. unheard sounds, 7.
known sounds, 8. unknown sounds, or approves of someone who is attached,
addicted, greedy, and excessively greedy for these.  For consuming the places
mentioned in these 155 sūtras, Laghu-Chaumāsi Prāyaśchitta arises. Discussion -
The entire discussion of these 16 sūtras should be understood according to the
12th Uddeshaka. The Chūrṇikāra has also indicated this.  Summary of the 17th
Uddeshaka Sūtra 1-2 Curiosity binds and releases a being. 3-14 Making, keeping,
and wearing garlands, beads, ornaments, and clothes out of curiosity. 15-68 A
householder performing bodily services for a sādhvī, sādhū. 69-122 A householder
performing bodily services for a sādhū, sādhvī. 123-124 Not giving a place to a
similar nirgrantha nirgranthī. 125-127 128-131 132 133 134 135 Taking food from
a place that is too high or too low, or from a large loft, or opening a sealed
vessel with a ladle, etc., and taking food. Taking food that is placed on the
earth, etc., with awareness. Taking food that is cooled by a fan, etc. Taking
cold water (for washing) that is made immediately and without awareness.
Speaking of one's own physical characteristics that are worthy of the Āchārya
position.  Singing, playing music, laughing, dancing, acting, making sounds like
elephants, horses, lions, etc. 136-139 Going to hear the sounds of vīta, tata,
wealth, and head instruments. 140-155 Going to hear the sounds of many other
places. Being attached to sounds, etc. These activities lead to Laghu-Chaumāsi
Prāyaśchitta.  The topics of the 29 sūtras of this Uddeshaka are mentioned in
the following Āgamas: 125-127 Prohibition of taking food that is stolen, kept in
a loft, and covered with a mat. - Āchā. Śru. 2, A. 1, U. 7 ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 390] [ nizIthasUtra 140-154. jo bhikSu kheta yAvat bhavanagRhoM ke zabda sunane
ke saMkalpa se jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai ityAdi 12veM
uddezaka ke samAna yahA~ bhI sabhI sUtra, 'zabdazravaNa ke AlApaka' se jAnanA
yAvat jo bhikSu aneka bailagAr3iyoM ke yAvat anya aneka prakAra ke mahAprAzrava
vAle sthAnoM meM zabda sunane ke saMkalpa se jAtA hai yA jAne vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  155. jo bhikSu - 1. ihalaukika zabdoM meM, 2. pAralaukika zabdoM
meM, 3. dRSTa zabdoM meM, 4. adRSTa zabdoM meM, 5. pUrva sune hue zabdoM meM, 6.
prazruta zabdoM meM, 7. jJAta zabdoM meM, 8. ajJAta zabdoM meM prAsakta,
anurakta, gRddha aura atyadhika gRddha hotA hai yA grAsakta, anurakta, gRddha
aura atyadhika gRddha hone vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ina 155 sUtroM meM
kahe gaye sthAnoM kA sevana karane para laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  /
vivecana - ina 16 sUtroM kA saMpUrNa vivecana 12veM uddezaka ke anusAra jAnanA
cAhie, cUrNikAra ne bhI yahI sUcana kiyA hai  /  satrahaveM uddezaka kA sArAMza
sUtra 1-2 kutUhala ' sa prANI ko bAMdhanA, kholanA  /  3-14 kutUhala se mAlAeM,
kar3e, AbhUSaNa aura vastrAdi banAnA, rakhanA aura pahananA  /  15-68 sAdhvI,
sAdhu kA zarIraparikarma gRhastha dvArA karavAve | 69-122 sAdhu, sAdhvI kA
zarIraparikarma gRhastha dvArA karavAve  /  123-124 sadRza nirgrantha nirgranthI
ko sthAna nahIM denA  /  125 - 127 128 - 131 132 133 134 135 adhika U~ce-nIce
sthAna meM se yA bar3e koThe meM se AhAra lenA athavA lepa Adi se baMda bartana
khulavAkara AhAra lenA  /  sacitta pRthvI Adi para rakhA huA AhAra lenA  /
paMkhe Adi se ThaMDA karake diyA gayA AhAra lenA  /  tatkAla banA huA acitta
zItala jala (dhovaNa ) lenA  /  apane AcAryapada yogya zArIrika lakSaNa kahanA
/  gAnA, bajAnA, ha~sanA, nRtya karanA nATaka karanA, hAthI, ghor3e, siMha Adi
jAnavaroM ke jaise AvAja karanA  /  136-139 vitata, tata, dhana aura sira vAdyoM
kI dhvani sunane jAnA  /  140-155 anya aneka sthaloM ke zabda sunane ke lie jAnA
/  zabdoM meM prAsakti rakhanA ityAdi pravRttiyAM karane para laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  isa uddezaka ke 29 sUtroM ke viSayoM kA kathana
nimnAMkita zrAgamoM meM hai, yathA125-127 mAlopahRta, koThe meM rakhA aura
maTTiyopalipta AhAra lene kA niSedha | - AcA. zru. 2, a. 1, u. 7

Page #491 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Seventeenth Uddesaka  [391 128-32 Prohibition of consuming food obtained
by harming the earth, etc. -Pracha. Shru. 2, A. 1, U. 7 134 Prohibition of
consuming immediately prepared, unchilled water and the rule for consuming
chilled water after some time. -Acha. Shru. 2, A. 1, U. 7 137-156 Prohibition of
going to hear scriptures. -Acha. Shru. 2, A. 11 The topics of the 126 sutras of
this Uddesaka are not mentioned in other Agamas. The topics of sutras 1 to 124
and sutras 135, 136 are not mentioned in other Agamas, but the general
prohibition of wearing garlands, ornaments, etc. is mentioned in Dasha. A. 3 and
other Sambhogik Sadhus come, giving them bedding, etc. is mentioned in Pracha.
Shru. 2, A. 7, U. 2, but here the statement of a similar Nigrantha is mentioned.
|| The Seventeenth Uddesaka ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 satrahavAM uddezaka] [391 128-32 pRthvI Adi kI virAdhanA karake diyA gayA AhAra
lene kA niSedha  /  -prAcA. zru.2, a.1, u. 7 134 tatkAla banAyA huA acitta
zItala jala lene kA niSedha aura cirakAla kA lene kA vidhaan| -AcA. zru. 2, a.
1, u.7 137-156 zabdazravaNa ke liye jAne kA niSedha  /  -AcA. zru. 2, a. 11 isa
uddezaka ke 126 sUtroM ke viSayoM kA kathana anya AgamoM meM nahIM hai sUtra 1
se 124 taka tathA sUtra 135, 136 ke viSayoM kA kathana anya AgamoM meM nahIM
hai, kintu mAlA, AbhUSaNa Adi pahanane kA daza. a. 3 meM sAmAnya niSedha hai
tathA anya sAMbhogika sAdhu A jAya, use zayyA-saMstAraka dene vA vidhAna-prAcA.
zru. 2, a.7, u. 2 meM hai, kintu yahA~ sadRza nigrantha kA kathana hai|  //
satrahavAM uddezaka samApta  //

Page #492 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighteenth Uddesaka: Penance for Boat Riding  1. The monk who rides a
boat that is difficult to navigate or is in a difficult situation. 2. The monk
who buys, sells, or gives a boat as a gift, and it is difficult to navigate or
is in a difficult situation. 3. The monk who receives, accepts, or is given a
boat as a gift, and it is difficult to navigate or is in a difficult situation.
4. The monk who uses, causes to be used, or is given a boat to use, and it is
difficult to navigate or is in a difficult situation. 5. The monk who rides a
boat that is broken, not strong, or is in a dangerous situation. 6. The monk who
causes a boat to be moved from land to water, or is involved in such an action.
7. The monk who causes a boat to be moved from water to land, or is involved in
such an action. 8. The monk who causes a full boat to be overloaded, or is
involved in such an action. 9. The monk who causes a boat to be sunk, or is
involved in such an action. 10. The monk who rides a boat that is difficult to
navigate due to its construction. 11. The monk who rides a boat that is going
upstream or downstream, or is involved in such an action. 12. The monk who rides
a boat that travels more than one yojana or more than half a yojana, or is
involved in such an action. 13. The monk who causes a boat to be lifted,
lowered, rowed, or pulled with a rope, or is involved in such an action. 14. The
monk who rides a boat that is being pulled by a rope, a pole, a bamboo, or a
stick, or is involved in such an action.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aThArahavAM uddezaka naukAvihAra karane kA prAyazcitta 1. je bhikkhU aNaTThAe
NAvaM duruiha duruhaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  2. je bhikkhU NAvaM kiNai, kiNAvei,
koyaM AhaTTa dejjamANaM duruiha, duruhaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  3. je bhikkhU NAvaM
pAmiccai, pAmiccAvei, pAmiccaM AhaTu dejjamANaM duruhai, duruhaMtaM vA saaijji|
4. je bhikkhU NAvaM pariyaTTei, pariyaTTAvei, pariyaTa AhaTTa dejjamANaM
duruhai, duruhaMtaM vA saaijji| 5. je bhikkhU NAvaM acchejja, aNisiLaM,
abhihaDaM AhaTu dejjamANaM duruhai, duruhaMta vA saaijji| 6. je bhikkhU thalAo
NAvaM jale okkasAvei, okkasAveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  7. je bhikkhU jalAo NAvaM
thale ukkasAvei, ukkasAvetaM vA sAijjai  /  8. je bhikkhU puNNaM NAvaM
ussicAvei, ussicAvetaM vA sAijjai  /  9. je bhikkhU saNNaM NAvaM uppilAvei,
uppilAvetaM vA sAijjai  /  10. je bhikkhU paDiNAviyaM kaTu NAvAi duruhai,
duruhaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  11. je bhikkhU uDDhagAmiNi vA NAvaM, ahogAmiNi vA
NAvaM duruhai, duruhaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  12. je bhikkhU paraM joyaNavelAgAiiNa
vA paraM addhajoyaNavelAgAmiNi vA NAvaM duruhai, duruhaMtaM vA saaijji| 13. je
bhikkhU NAvaM ukkasei vA, vokkasei vA, khevei vA, rajjue vA gahAya Akasei,
ukkasaMtaM vA, vokkasaMtaM vA khevaMtaM vA, rajjue vA gahAya AkasaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  14. je bhikkhU NAvaM alittaeNa vA, papphiDaeNa vA, vaMseNa vA,
valaeNa vA vAhei, vAheMtaM vA saaijji|

Page #493 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighteenth Uddesaka  **15.** Those monks who, by name, by grasping, by
pride, or by self-praise, become arrogant or cause arrogance, are condemned.
**16.** Those monks who, by name, by origin, by the power of their vows, by
their actions, by their hands, by their feet, by a stick, by a blade of grass,
by clay, or by a piece of cloth, touch or cause to be touched, are condemned.
**17.** Those monks who, by name, take food, drink, clothing, or shelter from a
person who is not a monk, are condemned.  **18.** Those monks who, by name, take
food, drink, clothing, or shelter from a person who is a monk, are not
condemned.  **19.** Those monks who, by name, take food, drink, clothing, or
shelter from a person who is a layman, are condemned.  **20.** Those monks who,
by name, take food, drink, clothing, or shelter from a person who is a laywoman,
are not condemned.  **21.** Those monks who, by water, take food, drink,
clothing, or shelter from a person who is not a monk, are not condemned.
**22.** Those monks who, by water, take food, drink, clothing, or shelter from a
person who is a monk, are not condemned.  **23.** Those monks who, by water,
take food, drink, clothing, or shelter from a person who is a layman, are not
condemned.  **24.** Those monks who, by water, take food, drink, clothing, or
shelter from a person who is a laywoman, are not condemned.  **25.** Those monks
who, by earth, take food, drink, clothing, or shelter from a person who is not a
monk, are condemned.  **26.** Those monks who, by earth, take food, drink,
clothing, or shelter from a person who is a monk, are not condemned.  **27.**
Those monks who, by earth, take food, drink, clothing, or shelter from a person
who is a layman, are not condemned.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aThArahavAM uddezaka ] 15. je bhikkhU NAvAo udagaM bhAyaNeNa vA, paDiggahaNeNa
vA, matteNa vA, nAvAussicaNeNa vA ussacas, ussitaM vA sAijjai  /  [ 393 f 16. je
bhikkhU NAvaM uttigeNa udagaM AsavarmANi uvaruvari vA kajjalamANi pehAe hattheNa
vA, pAeNa vA, AsatthapatteNa vA, kusapatteNa vA, maTTiyAe vA, celakaNNeNa vA
paDipii paDipitaM vA sAijjai  /  17. je bhikkhU NAvAgao NAvAgayassa asaNaM vA,
pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, DiggA vA sAijjai  /  18. je bhikkhU
NAvAgao jalagayassa asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei,
paDiggArhataM vA sAijjai  /  19. je bhikkhU NAvAgao paMkagayassa asaNaM vA,
pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, DiggA vA sAijjai  /  20. je bhikkhU
NAvAgao thalagayasta asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei,
DiggArhataM vA sAijjai  /  21. je bhikkhU jalagao NAvAgayassa asaNaM vA, pANaM
vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, paDiggArhataM vA sAijjai  /  22. je
bhikkhU jalagao jalagayassa asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggA
hei, DiggArhataM vA sAijjai  /  23. je bhikkhU jalagao paMkagayassa asaNaM vA,
pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, paDiggArhataM vA sAijjai  /  24. je
bhikkhU jalagao thalagayassa asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA
paDiggAhei, paDiggArhataM vA sAijjai  /  25. je bhikkhU paMkagao NAvAgayassa
asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, DiggAtaM vA sAijjai  /
26. je bhikkhU paMkagao jalagayassa vA asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM
vA paDiggAhei, DiggArhataM vA sAijjai  /  27. je bhikkhU paMkagao paMkagayassa
asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, DiggArhataM vA sAijjai  /

Page #494 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[394] [Nishīthasūtra 28. Any monk who accepts, approves of, or causes the
acceptance of food, water, a khaima, or a saima from a person who is standing on
a piece of land, is committing a transgression. 29. Any monk who accepts,
approves of, or causes the acceptance of food, water, a khaima, or a saima from
a person who is standing on a piece of land, is committing a transgression. 30.
Any monk who accepts, approves of, or causes the acceptance of food, water, a
khaima, or a saima from a person who is standing on a piece of land, is
committing a transgression. 31. Any monk who accepts, approves of, or causes the
acceptance of food, water, a khaima, or a saima from a person who is standing on
a piece of land, is committing a transgression. 32. Any monk who accepts,
approves of, or causes the acceptance of food, water, a khaima, or a saima from
a person who is standing on a piece of land, is committing a transgression. 1.
Any monk who sits on a nava that has been acquired without a proper purpose, or
approves of someone who does so, is committing a transgression. 2. Any monk who
buys, causes the purchase of, or accepts a nava that has been bought, and then
sits on it or approves of someone who does so, is committing a transgression. 3.
Any monk who borrows, causes the borrowing of, or accepts a nava that has been
borrowed, and then sits on it or approves of someone who does so, is committing
a transgression. 4. Any monk who exchanges, causes the exchange of, or accepts a
nava that has been exchanged, and then sits on it or approves of someone who
does so, is committing a transgression. 5. Any monk who sits on a nava that has
been taken by force, brought for a short time, or brought in front of them, or
approves of someone who does so, is committing a transgression. 6. Any monk who
causes a nava to be moved from land to water, or approves of someone who does
so, is committing a transgression. 7. Any monk who causes a nava to be moved
from water to land, or approves of someone who does so, is committing a
transgression. 8. Any monk who causes a nava that is full of water to be
emptied, or approves of someone who does so, is committing a transgression. 9.
Any monk who causes a nava that is stuck in mud to be removed, or approves of
someone who does so, is committing a transgression. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 394] [nizIthasUtra 28. je bhikkhU paMkagao thalagayassa asaNaM vA, pANaM vA,
khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 29. je bhikkhU
thalagao NAvAgayassa asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei,
paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 30. je bhikkhU thalagao jalagayassa asaNaM vA, pANaM
vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 31. je bhikkhU
thalagao paMkagayassa asaNaM vA, pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei,
paDiggAheMtaM vA sAijjai  /  32. je bhikkhU thalagao thalagayassa asaNaM vA,
pANaM vA, khAimaM vA, sAimaM vA paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 1. jo
bhikSu binA prayojana nAvA para baiThatA hai yA baiThane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  2. jo bhikSu nAvA kharIdatA hai, kharIdavAtA hai yA kharIdI huI
nAvA de to usa para baiThatA hai yA baiThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  3.
jo bhikSu nAvA udhAra letA hai, udhAra livAtA hai yA udhAra lI huI nAvA de to
usa para baiThatA hai yA baiThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  4. jo bhikSu
nAvA ko adala-badala karatA hai, karavAtA hai aura adala-badala kI huI nAvA de
to usa para baiThatA hai yA baiThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  5. jo
bhikSu chInakara lI huI, thor3e samaya ke lie lAkara dI huI aura sAmane lAI gaI
nAvA para baiThatA hai yA baiThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  6. jo bhikSu
sthala se nAvA ko jala meM utaravAtA hai yA utaravAne vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 7. jo bhikSu jala se nAvA ko sthala para rakhavAtA hai yA rakhavAne vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 8. jo bhikSu pAnI se pUrNa bharI nAvA ko khAlI karavAtA
hai yA khAlI karavAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 9. jo bhikSu kIcar3a meM
phaMsI nAvA ko nikalavAtA hai yA nikalavAne vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|

Page #495 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighteenth Uddeshaka [395]  10. A monk who sits on a boat called
*Prativaana* or approves of someone sitting on it. 11. A monk who sits on a boat
called *Urdhvagamini* or *Adhogamini* or approves of someone sitting on it. 12.
A monk who sits on a boat that travels more than one yojana or more than half a
yojana or approves of someone sitting on it. 13. A monk who pulls a boat towards
the shore, pulls it into the water, anchors it, ties it with a rope, or approves
of someone doing these actions. 14. A monk who steers a boat with a paddle, a
*naukapapphidaka* (a specific boat-steering tool), a bamboo stick, or a bat, or
approves of someone doing these actions. 15. A monk who removes water from a
boat using a vessel, a bowl, an earthen pot, or a *naava usinchana* (a specific
water-removing tool), or approves of someone doing these actions. 16. A monk
who, upon seeing water entering a hole in the boat or the boat sinking, plugs
the hole with his hand, foot, a group of peepal leaves, a group of kusha grass
leaves, mud, or a piece of cloth, or approves of someone doing these actions.
17. A monk who is in a boat and accepts food, drink, *khadim* (a type of food),
or *svadim* (a type of food) from a householder who is also in the boat, or
approves of someone doing these actions. 18. A monk who is in a boat and accepts
food, drink, *khadim*, or *svadim* from a householder who is in the water, or
approves of someone doing these actions. 19. A monk who is in a boat and accepts
food, drink, *khadim*, or *svadim* from a householder who is in the mud, or
approves of someone doing these actions. 20. A monk who is in a boat and accepts
food, drink, *khadim*, or *svadim* from a householder who is on land, or
approves of someone doing these actions. 21. A monk who is in the water and
accepts food, drink, *khadim*, or *svadim* from a householder who is in a boat,
or approves of someone doing these actions. 22. A monk who is in the water and
accepts food, drink, *khadim*, or *svadim* from a householder who is also in the
water, or approves of someone doing these actions. 23. A monk who is in the
water and accepts food, drink, *khadim*, or *svadim* from a householder who is
in the mud, or approves of someone doing these actions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aThArahavA~ uddezaka ] [ 395 10. jo bhikSu pratinAvA karake nAvA meM baiThatA
hai yA baiThane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  11. jo bhikSu Urdhvaga  /  minI
nAvA para yA adhogAminI nAvA para baiThatA hai yA baiThane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  12. jo bhikSu eka yojana se adhika pravAha meM jAne vAlI athavA
ardhayojana se adhika pravAha meM jAne vAlI nAvA para baiThatA hai yA baiThane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  13. jo bhikSu nAvA ko upara kI ora ( kinAre)
khIMcatA hai, nIce kI ora ( jala meM ) khIMcatA hai, laMgara DAla kara bAMdhatA
hai yA rassI se kasa kara bAMdhatA hai yA aisA karane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  14. jo bhikSu nAvA ko nau-daMDa ( cappU) se, naukA papphiDaka ( naukA
calAne ke upakaraNa - vizeSa ) se, bAMsa se yA balle se calAtA hai yA calAne
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  15. jo bhikSu nAva meM se bhAjana dvArA, pAtra
dvArA, miTTI ke bartana dvArA yA nAvA usiMcanaka dvArA pAnI nikAlatA hai yA
nikAlane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  16. jo bhikSu nAva ke chidra meM se
pAnI Ane para athavA nAva ko DubatI huI dekhakara hAtha se, paira se, pIpala ke
patte ( patra samUha ) se, kusa ke patte ( kusasamUha ) se, miTTI se yA
vastrakhaMDa se usake cheda ko banda karatA hai yA baMda karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  17. nAva meM rahA huA bhikSu nAva meM rahe hue gRhastha
se prazana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  18. nAva meM rahA huA bhikSu jala meM rahe hue
gRhastha se azana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  19. nAva meM rahA huA bhikSu kIcar3a meM rahe
hue gRhastha se prazana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  20. nAva meM rahA huA bhikSu bhUmi para
rahe hue gRhastha se prazana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima grahaNa karatA hai yA
grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  21. jala meM rahA huA bhikSu
nAva meM rahe hue gRhastha se prazana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima grahaNa karatA
hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  22. jala meM rahA huA
bhikSu jala meM rahe hue gRhastha se prazana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima grahaNa
karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  23. jala meM rahA
huA bhikSu kIcar3a meM rahe hue gRhastha se prazana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima
grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /

Page #496 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīth Sūtra  24. A monk residing in water accepts food, drink, *khādim* or
*svādim* from a householder residing on land, or approves of the one who accepts
it. 25. A monk residing in mud accepts food, drink, *khādim* or *svādim* from a
householder residing in a boat, or approves of the one who accepts it. 26. A
monk residing in mud accepts food, drink, *khādim* or *svādim* from a
householder residing in water, or approves of the one who accepts it. 27. A monk
residing in mud accepts food, drink, *khādim* or *svādim* from a householder
residing in mud, or approves of the one who accepts it. 28. A monk residing in
mud accepts food, drink, *khādim* or *svādim* from a householder residing on
land, or approves of the one who accepts it. 29. A monk residing on land accepts
food, drink, *khādim* or *svādim* from a householder residing in a boat, or
approves of the one who accepts it. 30. A monk residing on land accepts food,
drink, *khādim* or *svādim* from a householder residing in water, or approves of
the one who accepts it. 31. A monk residing on land accepts food, drink,
*khādim* or *svādim* from a householder residing in mud, or approves of the one
who accepts it. 32. A monk residing on land accepts food, drink, *khādim* or
*svādim* from a householder residing on land, or approves of the one who accepts
it. (He incurs the *laghu-chaumāsi* penance.)  **Discussion:** 1. A monk is
completely renounced, being averse to harming *ap-kāya* beings, therefore, it is
not appropriate for him to travel by boat.  *Āchārāṅga Sūtra*, *Bṛhatkalpa
Sūtra* and *Daśāśruta Skandha* prescribe the use of a boat for specific purposes
as an exception. This is explained in the 12th *uddeshaka*.  The main reason for
traveling by boat mentioned in these sūtras is to follow the *kalpa* rules.
Additionally, 1. going for service, 2. going to areas where food is easily
available when it is scarce, 3. when the land route is crowded with living
beings, 4. when the land route is excessively long (the proportion is to be
known from the commentary), 5. when there is fear of thieves, non-Aryan people
or violent animals on the land route, 6. when a king or someone else has
forbidden a certain area, then it is prescribed by the *āgama* to board a boat
to cross a river that can be crossed by boat, or it is considered to be with a
proper purpose. They do not incur penance from this sūtra, but the penance for
harming *ap-kāya* beings, etc., should be understood according to what is said
in the twelfth *uddeshaka*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [nizIthasUtra 24. jala meM rahA huA bhikSu bhUmi para rahe hue gRhastha se
azana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 25. kIcar3a meM rahA huA bhikSu nAva meM rahe hue gRhastha
se azana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  26. kIcar3a meM rahA huA bhikSu jala meM rahe hue
gRhastha se azana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 27. kIcar3a ke rahA huaA bhikSu kIcar3a meM rahe
hue gRhastha se azana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa
karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  28. kIcar3a meM rahA huA bhikSu bhUmi
para rahe hue gRhastha se azana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima grahaNa karatA hai yA
grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  29. sthala para rahA huA bhikSu
nAva meM rahe hue gRhastha se azana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima grahaNa karatA hai
yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 30. sthala para rahA huA bhikSu
jala meM rahe hue gRhastha se azana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima grahaNa karatA hai
yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  31. sthala para rahA huaA
bhikSu kIcar3a meM rahe hue gRhastha se azana, pAna, khAdima yA svAdima grahaNa
karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  32. sthala para
rahA huaA bhikSu sthala para rahe hue gRhastha se azana, pAna, khAdima yA
svAdima grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use
laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana-1. apkAya ke jIvoM kI virAdhanA
kA bhikSu pUrNataH tyAgI hotA hai, ataH use naukAvihAra karanA nahIM kalpatA hai
/  AcArAMgasUtra, bRhatkalpasUtra tathA dazAzrutaskaMdha meM apavAdarUpa vizeSa
prayojanoM se naukA dvArA jAne kA vidhAna hai, isakA spaSTIkaraNa 12veM uddezaka
meM kiyA gayA hai| ina sUtroM meM kahe gaye naukAvihAra karane kA pramukha
kAraNa to kalpamaryAdA pAlana karane kA hai, sAtha hI 1. sevA meM jAnA, 2.
bhikSA durlabha hone para sulabha bhikSA vAle kSetroM meM jAnA, 3. sthalamArga
jIvAkUla hone para, 4. sthalamArga atyadhika lambA hone para (isakA anupAta
bhASya se jAnanA), sthalamArga meM cora, anArya yA hiMsaka jantuoM kA bhaya ho,
6. rAjA Adi ke dvArA niSiddha kSetra ho to naukA dvArA pAra karane yogya nadI ko
pAra karane ke liye nAvA meM baiThanA Agamavihita hai athavA saprayojana mAnA
gayA hai, unakA isa sUtra se prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai kintu apkAya Adi kI hone
vAlI virAdhanA kA prAyazcitta bArahaveM uddezaka meM kahe anusAra samajha lenA
cAhie  /

Page #497 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighteenth Uddeshak  [397]  The Thaanag Sutra, A. 5, mentions some
reasons for traveling during the rainy season. If, due to these reasons, one has
to cross a river or other water body by boat, then it is considered a justified
boat journey and the prescribed atonement does not apply.  Sitting in a boat for
the purpose of seeing a boat, fulfilling the desire for a boat journey,
wandering from village to village, visiting pilgrimage sites, or for no reason
or a general reason is considered a pointless journey. The atonement for this is
mentioned in the first Sutra.  2-5. Even if one has to travel by boat due to a
compelling reason, it is not permissible to travel in a boat that is tainted
with the faults of being bought, etc., as mentioned in the Sutra. This means
that the boatman should take the traveler without any payment, and then the
atonement does not apply. If the boat is tainted with the faults of being
bought, etc., then the atonement mentioned in the Sutra applies.  6-9. For a
Sadhu, traveling in a boat that is being brought from the shore into the water,
or from the water to the land, or being pulled out of mud, or being cleaned by
removing water from it, the atonement mentioned in the Sutra applies. This means
that if all the preparations for other passengers are done beforehand, then the
atonement mentioned in the Sutra does not apply.  10. If the boat crossing the
river is large and is far from the shore, and one has to use another small boat
(Pratinaava) or other means to reach it, then the atonement applies. This means
that if the boat is near the shore and one can reach it on foot as mentioned in
the Praachaa Shru 2, A. 3, U. 1, then the atonement mentioned in the Sutra does
not apply.  11. It is not permissible to travel in a boat that is going with the
flow or against the flow of the river. However, it is permissible to travel in a
boat that cuts across the width of the river to reach the opposite bank. The
prohibition against traveling in such a boat is mentioned in Aachaa Shru 2, A.
3, U. 1, and here the atonement for it is mentioned.  12. Even if the width of
the river is small, if the speed of the water flow is fast and the boat has to
travel a long, diagonal path, causing the boat to travel more than half a yojana
or even a full yojana, then it is not permissible to travel in such a boat at
that time. The atonement mentioned in the Sutra applies. Therefore, if the boat
crosses the river in less than half a yojana, then the atonement mentioned in
the Sutra does not apply.  Here, the words "yojana" and "ardha-yojana" are used.
This means that generally, one should not travel in a boat that travels more
than half a yojana. However, if one is forced to travel due to a very difficult
situation, then a monk can travel in a boat that travels a full yojana. But he
should completely avoid traveling in a boat that travels more than a full
yojana.  13-14. The Aachaarang Sutra, in its description of boat travel, states
that if, after boarding the boat, the boatman asks for help in rowing the boat,
the monk should not agree but remain silent.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aThArahavA~ uddezaka] [397 ThANAgaM sUtra a. 5 meM varSAkAla meM vihAra karane
ke kucha kAraNa kahe haiM, una kAraNoM se vihAra karane para kabhI naukA dvArA
nadI Adi pAra karanA par3e to vaha bhI sakAraNa naukAvihAra hai, ataH usakA
sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai| nAvA dekhane ke liye yA naukAvihAra kI
icchApUrti ke liye, grAmAnugrAma vicaraNa karane ke lie yA tIrthasthAnoM meM
bhramaNa karane hetu athavA akAraNa yA sAmAnya kAraNa se nAvA meM baiThanA
niSprayojana baiThanA kahA jAtA hai, usI kA isa prathama sUtra meM prAyazcitta
kahA gayA hai| 2-5. AgADha (prabala) kAraNa se naukAvihAra karanA par3e to bhI
sUtrokta krItAdi doSa se yukta naukA meM jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai arthAt nAvika
apanI bhAvanA se le jAve, kirAyA nahIM leve to prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai  /
krItAdi doSa lagane para sUtrokta prAyazcitta AtA hai| 6-9. sAdhu ke liye naukA
ko kinAre se jala meM le jAve yA jala se sthala meM lAve, kIcar3a meM se nikAle,
nAvA meM se jala ko nikAlakara sApha kare, aisI nAvA meM jAne para sUtrokta
prAyazcitta prAtA hai arthAt anya yAtriyoM ke liye pUrva meM saba taiyArI ho
jAya, vaisI nAvA meM jAne para sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai| 10. yadi pAra
jAne vAlI naukA bar3I ho aura vaha kinAre se bahuta dUra ho to vahA~ taka
pahu~cane ke liye svayaM ke liye hI dUsarI choTI (pratinAvA) naukA Adi sAdhana
karake jAe to bhI prAyazcitta AtA hai, arthAt jo naukA kinAre ke nikaTa hai aura
prAcA0 zru 2, a0 3, u01 meM kahI vidhi se paidala calakara pahu~ca sakatA hai,
aisI nAvA meM jAne para sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM pAtA hai  /  11. jo naukA
pravAha meM yA pravAha ke sanmukha jAne vAlI ho usameM jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai,
kintu jo nadI ke vistAra ko kATakara sAmane tIra para jAne vAlI ho, usI naukA
meM jAnA kalpatA hai  /  AcA0 zru0 2, a0 3, u0 1 meM bhI ukta naukA meM jAne kA
niSedha hai aura yahA~ usI kA prAyazcitta kahA hai| 12. nadI kA vistAra kama
hote hae bhI pAnI ke pravAha kA vega tIvra hone se yadi naukA ko tirachA lambA
mArga taya karanA par3e, jisase naukA AdhA yojana se adhika yA eka yojana se bhI
adhika cale to vaisI nAvA meM aura vaise samaya meM jAnA nahIM kalpatA hai  /
jAne para sUtrokta prAyazcitta prAtA hai| ataH jaba jo nAvA prAdhA yojana se
kama cala kara nadI pAra kare taba usa nAvA meM jAne para sUtrokta prAyazcitta
nahIM AtA hai| _ yahA~ "joyaNa" evaM "addhajoyaNa" ye do zabda die gae haiM,
isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki sAmAnya rUpa se to ardha yojana se adhika calane vAlI
nAvA meM bhI nahIM jAnA cAhiye, kintu atyanta vikaTa sthiti meM kabhI anivArya
rUpa se jAne kA prasaMga pA jAe to bhikSu eka yojana calane vAlI nAvA meM katA
hai. kinta eka yojana se adhika jAne vAlI nAvA kA to use pUrNatayA varjana
karanA caahie| 13-14. AcArAMgasUtra meM naukAvihAra ke varNana meM kahA hai ki
yadi naukA meM baiThane ke bAda nAvika naukA calAne meM madada karane ke lie
kucha bhI kahe to bhikSu use svIkAra na kare kintu mauna

Page #498 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 398] [Nishith Sutra] The Sutra states the atonement for engaging in
activities related to pulling, pushing, and navigating a boat, which are
mentioned earlier. 15-16. If water fills a boat for any reason, it is not
permissible for a monk to remove it using a vessel or any other means, or to
close any hole from which water is entering, or to inform the boatman. The monk
should remain focused in meditation, maintaining peace of mind and patience. If
these boat-related activities are performed due to circumstances, the atonement
mentioned in the Sutra is applicable. 17-32. 1. On land by the river (in a place
with consciousness), 2. In mud, 3. In water, 4. In a boat - a monk residing in
these four places cannot accept food from a householder residing in these four
places. Acha. Shru. 2, A. 3, U. 1 states that when a monk reaches the riverbank
for a boat ride, he should abandon all four types of Prahar and perform Sagari
Santhara, along with keeping food and other necessities. In this case, there is
no option to accept new food. Because the monk is situated in a place where
there is a possibility of harming living beings, it is not appropriate for him
to perform Prahar. He should remain steadfast and abstain from yogic practices.
Generally, even if water droplets fall on the body due to rain or other reasons
while on a journey, food is not consumed until they dry. Due to the reasons
mentioned in the discussion of the first Sutra, if it is necessary to travel by
boat, and there is no other way to cross the water-filled path, the Sutra allows
for boat travel. If the water is knee-deep, the method of walking across is
mentioned in Pra. Shru. 2, 3, U. 2. If the body becomes weak or due to any other
physical reason, the monk can stay in one place. - Vyav. U. 8, Su. 4 The boat
travel mentioned in the Sutra is not for the purpose of traveling for preaching
and influencing others, because Nishith U. 12 and Dasha. D. 2 allow for this
only twice a month and nine times a year. This is only related to crossing the
river to follow the rules of the Kalpa. Apart from this, it is inappropriate for
a monk who walks on foot to take a vow to use vehicles for preaching and
influencing others in a life of restraint. According to the Utsarga rules,
walking is the most appropriate way for a monk who practices restraint, and
according to the exception rules, the Agama allows for crossing a limited water
path by boat. The use of other vehicles is prohibited in Prashna. Shru. 2, 5.
This includes elephants, horses, chariots, palanquins, and other vehicles. In
special circumstances, their exceptional use should be decided wisely based on
the Geetaarth's instructions. The reasons for using vehicles should be
understood in relation to the atonement for Ritas and other faults, according to
these boat Sutras.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 398 ] [ nizIthasUtra pUrvaka rahe  /  unhIM Age-pIche khIMcane Adi naukA calAne
sambandhI pravRttiyoM ke karane kA ina sUtroM meM prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /
15-16. naukA meM kisI kAraNa se pAnI bhara jAe to use pAtra Adi se nikAlanA
tathA kisI chidra Adi se pAnI AtA dIkhe to use kisI bhI sAdhana se banda karanA
yA nAvika ko sUcanA denA bhikSu ko nahIM kalpatA hai  /  bhikSu ko vahA~
ekAgratA pUrvaka dhyAna meM lIna rahakara zAntacitta se dhairya rakhate hue
samaya vyatIta karanA cAhie  /  paristhitivaza naukA sambandhI ye kArya karane
para sUtrokta prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  17-32. 1. nadI ke kinAre sthala meM
(sacitta bhUmi meM ), 2. kIcaDa meM, 3. jala meM, 4. nAvA meM, - ina cAra
sthAnoM meM rahA huA bhikSu ina cAra sthAnoM meM rahe hue gRhastha se AhAra
grahaNa nahIM kara sakatA hai  /  AcA0 zru0 2, a0 3, u01 meM vidhAna hai ki jaba
bhikSu nadI kinAre naukAvihAra ke lie pahu~ce taba cAroM prakAra ke prahAra kA
tyAga karake sAgArI saMthArA kara le evaM sAtha meM AhArAdina rakhe, kintu sabhI
vastra - pAtrAdi ko eka sAtha bAMdha le  /  taba phira nayA AhAra grahaNa karane
kA to vikalpa hI nahIM rahatA hai  /  kyoMki bhikSu prapkAya jIvoM kI virAdhanA
ke sthAna para sthita hai, usa samaya use prahAra karanA upayukta nahIM hai  /
sthirakAya hokara yoga-pravRtiyoM se nivRtta rahanA hotA hai  /  sAmAnyatayA bhI
yadi gocarI meM varSA Adi se jala kI bUMdeM zarIra para gira jAyeM to unake
sUkhane taka AhAra nahIM kiyA jAtA hai  /  prathama sUtra ke vivecana meM batAye
gaye kAraNoM se jAnA Avazyaka hone para naukA- saMtArima jalayukta mArga hone
para anya koI upAya na hone se naukAvihAra kA sUtra meM vidhAna hai  /  yadi
jaMghAsaMtArima jala ho to use pAra karane ke lie paidala jAne kI vidhi prA0
zru02, 03, u02 meM batAI gaI hai| ghAbala kSINa ho jAne para yA anya kisI
zArIrika kAraNa se vihAra na ho sake to bhikSu eka sthAna para sthiravAsa raha
sakatA hai  /  - vyava0 u08, su0 4 sUtrokta naukAvihAra kA vidhAna
pravacanaprabhAvanA ke lie bhramaNa karane hetu nahIM hai, kyoMki nizItha u0 12
meM tathA dazA0 da02 meM mahine meM do bAra aura varSa meM 9 nava bAra kI hI
chUTa hai  /  jisakA kevala kalpa maryAdA pAlana hetu nadI pAra karane se
sambandha hai  /  isake sivAya pravacanaprabhAvanA ke lie pAdavihArI bhikSu ko
vAhanoM ke prayoga kA saMkalpa karanA bhI saMyama jIvana meM anucita hai  /
utsarga vidhAnoM ke anusAra saMyamasAdhanA karane vAle bhikSu ko pAdavihAra hI
prazasta hai aura apavAda vidhAnoM ke anusAra parimita jala-mArga ko naukA dvArA
pAra karane kA Agama meM vidhAna hai  /  anya vAhanoM ke upayoga karane kA
niSedha prazna. zru0 2 0 5 meM hai  /  vahA~ hAthI ghor3e prAdi vAhana, ratha
prAdi yAna tathA DolI pAlakI Adi vAhana kA niSedha hai  /  vizeSa paristhiti meM
unake apavAdika upayoga kA nirNaya gItArtha kI nizrA se viveka pUrvaka karanA
caahie| yAna vAhana ke kAraNoM ko rItAdi doSa saMbaMdhI prAyazcittoM ko ina nAvA
sUtroM ke anusAra jAna lenA cAhie  /  I

Page #499 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighteenth Uddeshak] [399 In crossing a water-way by boat, the **apkayik**
beings have more **viraadhana** (violation) when there is a special reason, and
the **kayik** beings have less **viraadhana**. For other means of transport, the
**vayukayik** beings have more **viraadhana**, the **tejaskaayik** beings have
less **viraadhana**, and the remaining **kayik** beings have even less
**viraadhana**. According to Uddeshak 12, Sutra 8, one obtains **prāyaścitta**
(atonement) for these **jiva-viraadhana** (violations of living beings). The
**geetarth** (scriptural interpretation) determines the consumption of
exceptions, their limits, and the **prāyaścitta**. Using vehicles other than
those mentioned in the **āgama** (scripture) and **vyākhyā** (commentary) is
considered **akāraṇa** (without reason), therefore, the **prāyaścitta** for
their **akāraṇa** use should be understood according to the first Sutra, and
**prāyaścitta** is not obtained for **sākāraṇa** (with reason) vehicle use. This
is also clear from the first Sutra. However, the **prāyaścitta** for
**gaveṣaṇā** (investigation) etc. faults and **viraadhana** related faults
applies to both **sākāraṇa** and **akāraṇa** vehicle use. This is the meaning of
these Sutras. The detailed description of the rules and prohibitions related to
boat travel and the **upsargajanaya** (adverse) situation has been given by the
Sutrakar himself in **Prācā** (ancient) **śruti** (scripture) 2, **a** (chapter)
3, **u** (uddeshak) 1-2. Therefore, the meaning and word meanings should be
known from there. **Prāyaścitta** for faults related to clothing 33-73. If a
**bhikkhu** buys clothes, has them bought, accepts clothes brought for a
**sadhu**, or approves of the one who accepts them, etc., all the Sutras should
be said according to the fourteenth **uddeshak** with the **vatthābhilāva**
(desire for clothes), until the **bhikkhu** stays in **cāturmāsya** (four-month
retreat) for clothes or approves of the one who stays. The consumption of the
fault-places mentioned in these Sutras results in **laghu-cāturmāsya** (short
four-month retreat) **prāyaścitta**. **Vivecana** (explanation) - These 41
Sutras related to clothing should be understood with wisdom in the same way as
the 41 Sutras related to **pātra** (utensils) in the fourteenth **uddeshak**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aThArahavA~ uddezaka] [399 vizeSa kAraNa hone para naukA dvArA jala-mArga pAra
karane meM apkAyika jIvoM kI virAdhanA adhika hotI hai aura anya kAyika jIvoM kI
virAdhanA alpa hotI hai  /  sakAraNa anya yAnoM ke upayoga meM vAyukAyika jIvoM
kI virAdhanA adhika tathA tejaskAyika jIvoM kI virAdhanA alpa evaM zeSa kAyika
jIvoM kI virAdhanA aura bhI alpa hotI hai  /  uddezaka 12, sUtra 8 ke anusAra
ina jIva-virAdhanAoM kA prAyazcitta pAtA hai|| apavAdoM ke sevana kA, unake
sevana kI sImA kA aura prAyazcittoM kA nirdhAraNa to gItArtha hI karate haiN|
Agamokta evaM vyAkhyA meM kahe apavAdoM ke atirikta yAnoM kA upayoga karanA
akAraNa upayoga mAnA jAtA hai, ataH unake akAraNa upayoga kA prAyazcitta yahA~
prathama sUtra ke anusAra samajhanA cAhie evaM sakAraNa vAhana upayoga kA
prAyazcitta nahIM pAtA hai  /  yaha bhI isa prathama sUtra se spaSTa hotA hai  /
kintu gaveSaNA Adi doSoM kA evaM virAdhanA sambandhI doSoM kA prAyazcitta
sakAraNa yA akAraNa donoM prakAra ke vAhanaprayoga meM AtA hai, yaha ina sUtroM
kA tAtparya hai  /  naukAvihAra sambandhI vidhi-niSedha tathA upasargajanya
sthiti kA vistRta varNana prAcA0 zru0 2, a0 3, u0 1-2 meM svayaM sUtrakAra ne
kiyA hai| ataH tatsambandhI artha vivecana evaM zabdArtha vahIM se jAnanA
caahie| vastrasambandhI doSoM ke sevana kA prAyazcitta 33-73. je bhikkhU vatthaM
kiNai, kiNAvei, koyaM AhaTTa dejjamANaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji|
evaM cauddasamaM uddesagagameNaM savve suttA vatthAbhilAveNaM bhaNiyavvA jAva je
bhikkhU vatthaNIsAe vAsAvAsaM vasai, vasaMtaM vA saaijji| taM sevamANe Avajjai
cAummAsiyaM parihAraTTANaM ugghAiyaM  /  33-73. jo bhikSu vastra kharIdatA hai,
kharIdavAtA hai yA sAdhu ke lie kharIdakara lAyA huA grahaNa karatA hai athavA
grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai, ityAdi caudahaveM uddezaka ke
samAna sabhI sUtra vastrAlApaka se kahane cAhie yAvat jo bhikSu vastra ke lie
(pratibaddha hokara) cAturmAsa meM rahatA hai yA rahane vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai  /  ina sUtroM meM kahe doSasthAnoM kA sevana karane para laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta AtA hai| vivecana-vastrasambandhI ina 41 sUtroM kA vivecana 14veM
uddezaka ke pAtrasambandhI 41 sUtroM ke vivecana ke samAna hI vivekapUrvaka
samajha lenA caahie|

Page #500 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  [400] [Nishisha Sutra] The Chanikara has stated that there are
25 sutras instead of 41, and has also indicated that the meaning should be
understood as similar to the 14th Uddeshak. The Churnikara, in stating the
number of sutras as 25, has counted the number of sutras related to old and
foul-smelling clothes in two sutras, and has also counted the eleven sutras
related to drying the vessels as one sutra. This results in a reduction of 16
sutras, leaving only 25 instead of 41. Thus, there is only a difference in the
way the number of sutras is counted, but there should be no fundamental
difference in the number of sutras. The sutra related to performing Korani in a
vessel should be understood here as meaning embroidery in clothes, etc. 6-9
Summary of the Eighteenth Uddeshak Sailing in a boat or traveling in other
vehicles without a very important purpose. 2-5 Boarding a boat with defects like
cracks, etc. Getting the boat from water to land, from land to water, getting it
out of mud, or removing water from the boat for boarding. Using another boat,
etc., to reach the boat. Traveling in a boat going against the current or with
the current. Traveling in a boat that covers a distance of half a yojana or more
than one yojana. 13-14 Steering the boat or assisting in it. Removing water that
enters the boat. Closing a hole in the boat if it develops one. 17-32 Eating
food on land, water, mud, or in the boat during the course of sailing. 33-73
Using clothes with defects.  The minor four-month atonement applies to these
activities. The subject matter of the 42 sutras of this Uddeshak is mentioned in
the Acharanga Sutra. 2-16 The rules and prohibitions related to boats are
described in a systematic manner. -Pracha. Shru. 2, A. 3, U. 1-2 33-36 And the
subject matter of these 27 sutras should be understood as similar to sutras 1-4
and 8-30 of the fourteenth Uddeshak for clothes. 40-62 -Pracha. Shru. 2, A. 6,
U. 1-2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 400] [nizISasUtra 41 satroM ke sthAna para caNikAra ne 25 satroM kA uccAraNa
karane kA kahA hai tathA 14veM uddezaka ke samAna artha samajhane kI sUcanA bhI
kI hai  /  cUrNikAra ne sUtrasaMkhyA 25 kahane meM purAne evaM durgandhayukta
vastra ke pATha sUtroM kI saMkhyA ko do sUtroM meM ginA hai tathA pAtra sukhAne
ke gyAraha sUtroM ko bhI eka sUtra ginA hai, jisase 16 sUtra kama ho jAne se 41
ke sthAna para 25 hI zeSa rahate haiM  /  isa prakAra sUtrasaMkhyA ginane meM
kevala apekSAbheda hai, kintu sUtrasaMkhyA meM koI maulika antara nahIM
samajhanA caahie| pAtra meM jo koraNI karane kA sUtra hai, usase yahA~ vastra
meM kasIdA karanA Adi artha samajha lenA caahiye| 6-9 aThArahaveM uddezaka kA
sArAMza atyAvazyaka prayojana ke binA naukAvihAra karanA yA anya vAhana vihAra
karanA  /  2-5 krItAdi doSayukta naukA meM car3hanA  /  naukA meM car3hane ke
liye nAvA ko jala se sthala meM, sthala se jala meM maMgAnA, kIcar3a meM se
nikalavAnA yA nAvA meM bharA jala niklvaanaa| naukA taka jAne ke liye dUsarI
naukA Adi karanA  /  anusrota yA pratisrota meM jAne vAlI naukA meM jAnA  /
prAdhA yojana yA eka yojana se adhika lambA mArga taya karane vAlI naukA meM
jaanaa| 13-14 naukA calAnA yA usameM sahAyatA karanA  /  naukA meM Ane vAle jala
ko bAhara ulIcanA  /  naukA meM chidra ho jAne para use banda karanA  /  17-32
naukAvihAra ke prasaMga meM sthala, jala, kIcar3a yA nAvA meM AhAra grahaNa
krnaa| 33-73 vastrasambandhI doSoM kA sevana krnaa| ityAdi pravRttiyoM kA
laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| isa uddezaka ke 42 sUtroM ke viSaya kA kathana
AcArAMgasUtra meM hai2-16 naukAsambandhI vidhi niSedhoM kA kramabaddha varNana
hai| -prAcA. zru. 2, a. 3, u. 1-2 33-36 tathA ina 27 sUtroM ke viSaya caudahaveM
uddezaka ke sUtra 1-4 tathA 8-30 taka ke samAna 40-62 vastra ke liye smjhnaa|
-prAcA. zru. 2, a. 6, u. 1-2

Page #501 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Eighteenth Uddeshak] [401 The subject matter of the 31 sutras of this Uddeshak
is not found in other Agamas, such as the prohibition of boat travel without an
essential purpose. 17-32 Not to eat food in water, land, mud, or boat during
boat travel. 37-39. The subject matter of these fourteen sutras is to be
understood as similar to sutras 5-7 and 31 to 41 (63-73) of the fourteenth
Uddeshak for the same garment. This Uddeshak discusses the atonement for
garments and boats in 73 sutras, and no other subject matter is discussed. This
is the special feature of this Uddeshak. || Eighteenth Uddeshak ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aThArahavAM uddezaka] [401 isa uddezaka ke 31 sUtroM ke viSaya kA kathana anya
AgamoM meM nahIM hai, yathA atyAvazyaka prayojana ke binA naukA vihAra kA
niSedha  /  17-32 naukA vihAra ke samaya jala, sthala, kIcar3a evaM naukA meM
AhAra grahaNa nahIM krnaa| 37-39  /  ina caudaha sUtroM ke viSaya caudahaveM
uddezaka ke sUtra 5-7 tathA 31 se 41 taka ke 63-73 ) samAna vastra ke liye
samajhanA  /  isa uddezaka meM vastra evaM naukA ina do viSayoM kA prAyazcitta
73 sUtroM meM kahA gayA hai, anya koI viSaya nahIM hai yaha isa uddezaka kI
vizeSatA hai|  //  aThArahavA~ uddezaka samApta  //

Page #502 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nineteenth Uddesaka: ###  Penance for the Faults of Buying, etc., in Relation
to Medicine  1. The monk who buys medicine, causes it to be bought, or accepts
it from one who is giving it for the sake of a sadhu, or approves of the one who
accepts it. 2. The monk who borrows medicine, causes it to be borrowed, or
accepts it from one who is lending it, or approves of the one who accepts it. 3.
The monk who exchanges medicine, causes it to be exchanged, or accepts it from
one who is exchanging it, or approves of the one who accepts it. 4. The monk who
accepts medicine that has been stolen, taken without the owner's permission, or
brought before him, or approves of the one who accepts it. 5. The monk who
accepts more than three doses of medicine for a sick person, or approves of the
one who accepts it. 6. The monk who carries medicine from village to village, or
approves of the one who carries it. 7. The monk who sells medicine, causes it to
be sold, or accepts it from one who is selling it, or approves of the one who
accepts it.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavAM uddezaka auSadha sambandhI krotAdi doSoM ke prAyazcitta 1. je bhikkhU
viyaDaM kiNai, kiNAvei, koyaM AhaTTa dejjamANaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA
saaijji| 2. je bhikkhU viyarDa pAmiccai, pAmiccAvei, pAmiccaM AhaTTa dejjamANaM
paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 3. je bhikkhU viyarDa pariyaTTai,
pariyaTTAvei, pariyaTTiyaM AhaTu dejjamANaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA
saaijji| _4. je bhikkhU viyaDaM acchejja, aNisiTTha, abhihaDaM AhaTTa dejjamANaM
paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 5. je bhikkhU gilANassa aTThAe paraM tihaM
viyaDa datINaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMta vA saaijji| 6. je bhikkhU viyaDaM gahAya
gAmANugAma duijjai duijjataM vA saaijji| 7. je bhikkhU viyaDaM gAlei, gAlAvei,
gAliyaM AhaTTa dejjamANaM paDiggAhei, paDiggAheMtaM vA saaijji| 1. jo bhikSu
auSadha kharIdatA hai, kharIdavAtA hai yA sAdhu ke lie kharIda kara dene vAle se
grahaNa karatA hai athavA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  2. jo
bhikSu auSadha udhAra lAtA hai, udhAra livAtA hai yA udhAra lAne vAle se grahaNa
karatA hai athavA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  3. jo bhikSa
auSadha ko badalatA hai, badalavAtA hai yA badalavAkara lAne vAle se grahaNa
karatA hai athavA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  4. jo bhikSu
chInakara lAI huI, svAmI kI AjJA ke binA lAI huI athavA sAmane lAI huI auSadha
grahaNa karatA hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  5. jo
bhikSu glAna ke lie tIna mAtrA (tIna khurAka) se adhika auSadha grahaNa karatA
hai yA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|

Page #503 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Nineteenth Study] [403 6. A monk who carries medicine and travels from village
to village, or approves of one who does so. 7. A monk who takes medicine
himself, gives it to others, or accepts it from someone who gives it, or
approves of one who does so. (He incurs the minor four-month penance.)
Discussion - The word "viyad" used in the present sutras has been used in many
meanings in many Agamas. For example: 1. In the Brihatkalpa Sutra, Uddeshak 2,
Su. 4-7, it has been used as an adjective for cold water, hot water, sura and
sauvira, such as: 1. Ciodag viyad kumbe va, 2. Usinodag viyad kumbe va, 3. Sura
viyad kumbe va, 4. Sovira viyad kumbe va, etc. 2. In the Brihatkalpa Sutra,
Uddeshak 2, Su. 11-12, the word "viyad" has been used in the sense of an open
house. Nirgranthas are ordained to stay in such open houses, and Nirgranthis are
prohibited from staying there. 3. In the Dasha Shruta Skandha, Dasha 6, the word
"viyadbhoji" is used in the sense of day food for the Shravaka in the Chhatto
Pratima. 4. In the Prajnapanapada 9, the word "viyad" is used in the sense of a
type of "yoni" as the place of birth of beings, such as "viyada joni". 5. In the
Thananga Sutra, Pra. 3, the word "viyad" is used in the sense of a type of
medicine for a sick monk. There, it is ordained that three types of "viyad
datti" should be taken for the sick. 6. In the Dasha. Da. 8, there is a passage
"viyadgam bhocca pecca" in the ordinance that when a sadhu goes to Gochari and
it rains on the way, he should sit in a safe place and eat and drink water. 7.
In the Pracha. Shru. 1, Pra. 9, U. 1, Ga. 18, Bhagwan Mahavir Swami did not
commit any kind of sinful karma, did not consume the sin of pradha karma, and
"ate the food of the mind" in this sense, the word "viyad" is used, such as -
Tam akuvvam viyadam bhu njiththa. Here, the independent word "viyad" is
indicative of the strike. Thus, in the Agamas, where the word "viyad" is an
adjective for unmindful hot water, unmindful cold water, it is also an adjective
for "madya" such as sura - sauvira etc. It is also in the sense of medicine,
food-water, day food, and bed and yoni. The present case is about the penance
related to the ordinance mentioned in the Thananga Sutra. 3. In both places, the
acceptance of "viyad" is related to the sick, so here, many substances in the
form of medicine should be understood by the word "viyad".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavA~ adhyayana] [ 403 6. jo bhikSu auSadha sAtha meM lekara grAmAnugrAma
vihAra karatA hai yA vihAra karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  7. jo bhikSu
prauSadha ko svayaM galAtA hai, galavAtA hai yA galA kara dene vAle se grahaNa
karatA hai athavA grahaNa karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use
laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  / ) vivecana - prastuta sUtroM meM prayukta
"viyaDa " zabda kA prayoga aneka AgamoM meM aneka arthoM meM huA hai  /  yathA
1. bRhatkalpa sUtra uddezaka 2, su. 4-7 meM - zItala pAnI, garma pAnI, surA
zraura sauvIra ke vizeSaNa rUpa meM prayoga huA hai, yathA 1. sIodaga viyaDa
kuMbhe vA, 2. usiNodaga viyaDa kubhe vA, 3. surA vighaDa kubhe vA, 4. sovIra
viyaDa kuMbhe vA, ityAdi  /  2. bRhatkalpa sUtra uddezaka 2, su. 11-12 meM -
khule gRha ke artha meM "viyaDa " zabda kA prayoga huA hai  /  nirgrantha ko
aise khule gRha meM Thaharane kA vidhAna kiyA gayA hai aura nirgranthI ko vahA~
Thaharane kA niSedha kiyA gayA hai  /  3. dazAzruta skandha kI dazA 6 meM
zrAvaka ko chaTTo pratimA meM divasa bhojana ke artha meM "viyaDabhojI" zabda
prayukta hai  /  4. prajJApanA pada 9 meM - jIvoM ke utpanna hone ke sthAna rUpa
eka prakAra kI "yoni" ke artha meM "viDa" zabda prayukta hai, yathA- "viyaDA
joNI"  /  5. ThANAMga sUtra pra. 3 meM - glAna bhikSu ke lie kisI eka prakAra kI
proSadha ke artha meM "viyaDa" zabda kA prayoga hai  /  vahA~ glAna ke lie tIna
prakAra kI "viyaDadatti" grahaNa karane kA vidhAna hai  /  6. dazA. da. 8 meM -
gocarI gae sAdhu ke mArga meM kahIM varSA A jAne para vahIM surakSita sthAna meM
baiThakara zrAhAra- pAnI ke sevana kara lene ke vidhAna meM "viyaDagaM bhoccA
peccA" aisA pATha hai  /  7. prAcA. zru. 1, pra. 9, u. 1, gA. 18 meM bhagavAn
mahAvIra svAmI ne kisI bhI prakAra kA pApa karma na karate hue, pradhAkarma doSa
kA sevana na karate hue "citta bhojana kiyA thA" isa artha meM "viDa" zabda kA
prayoga hai yathA-taM akuvvaM viyaDaM bhu MjitthA  /  yahA~ svatantra " viyaDa"
zabda prahAra kA bodhaka hai  /  isa prakAra AgamoM meM jahA~ "viyaDa" zabda
acitta garma pAnI kA, acitta zItala pAnI kA vizeSaNa hai vahIM surA - sauvIra
Adi "madya" kA bhI vizeSaNa hai  /  proSadha, AhAra- pAnI, divasa bhojana tathA
zayyA evaM yoni artha meM bhI hai  /  prastuta prakaraNa meM ThANAMga sUtra . 3
meM kahe gae vidhAna se sambandhita prAyazcitta kA viSaya hai  /  donoM sthaloM
meM "viyaDa " grahaNa karane kA sambandha bImAra ke lie kiyA gayA hai ataH yahA~
prauSadha rUpa aneka padArthoM ko hI "viyaDa" zabda se samajhanA cAhie  /

Page #504 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[404] These Sutras mention Datti-Khurak (dosage), also state that it should not
be taken on a journey, and also mention melting it. Therefore, here, opium etc.
in the form of medicine can also be understood in the word "Viyad". Opium is
used to stop diarrhea or to induce sleep for the peace of the sick. It is
considered a successful medicine for these purposes. The dosage varies for each
person. Therefore, the statement of the Thanang Sutra regarding the heinous,
medium, and excellent dosage also becomes consistent. Many times people use
opium by dissolving it in water and grinding it in a mortar. This allows for the
use of a very small amount of opium. If necessary, it can also be easily taken
on a journey. Except for the melting process and the three dosage Sutras, the
remaining five Sutras can occur in many other medicines. Therefore, here,
instead of understanding "Viyad" as a specific substance, understanding it as
all types of medicines, both general and specific, makes the meaning of the
presented Sutras clear. The word "Viyad" has not been defined in the Channi
commentary, and the explanation has been given only with the meaning of "madya"
in mind. However, in the Brihatkalpa Sutra etc., the words "Majj", "Sura",
"Sauvir" have been used for "madya", and the word "Viyad" has been used as an
adjective with them. Which is also used as an adjective for water there.
Therefore, from the seven Agam proofs mentioned above, it is not possible to use
the word "Viyad" for "madya". In Dashakalik A. 5, U. 2, verse 36, there is also
the use of "Suran va Meragan vaavi, Annan va Majjagam Rasam", but there is no
use of the word "Viyad". In the Agamas, "madya-mansa" has been said to be
"abhakhya" and "varjaniya" for the virtuous. Their consumption has been
described as the cause of hell in the Thanang Sutra, and in the pre-Agam texts
related to "madya", the word "Viyad" alone has not been used in place of "madya"
anywhere. Therefore, it cannot be said that the meaning of "madya" for "Viyad"
is consistent with the Agamas. From the above-mentioned Agam references, it is
also clear that the word "Viyad" is mostly used as an adjective with another
word. The independent use of the word "Viyad" is only in Dasha. D. 8 in the
sense of food-water, and in the present case of Thanang and Nishita in the sense
of medicine, and in Acharang in the sense of harmless food. 1-4. These Sutras
state the atonement for the faults of "eshana". According to Uttara. A. 2, verse
33, a monk should not even desire medicine if he has the power of endurance, the
spirit of conquering disease, and enthusiasm. But if a monk has to take medicine
to maintain his samadhi, then he should search for pure, harmless medicine
without consuming the faults mentioned in these Sutras, such as "krit" etc. The
atonement mentioned in the Sutras comes from consuming medicine with the above-
mentioned faults. The same atonement should be understood for consuming "pathya
ahar" etc. with the above-mentioned faults. A detailed discussion of these
faults can be seen in the fourteenth Uddeshak.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 404] [nizotha sUtra ina sUtroM meM datti-khurAka kA bhI ullekha hai, vihAra meM
na le jAne kA bhI kathana hai tathA galAne kA bhI pratipAdana hai  /  ataH yahA~
auSadha rUpa meM aphIma Adi kA samAveza bhI "viyaDa" zabda meM samajhA jA sakatA
hai| aphIma kA prayoga dastoM ko banda karane ke lie yA bImAra ko zAnti hetu
nidrA ke lie kiyA jAtA hai  /  ina kAryoM ke lie yaha saphala auSadha mAnI jAtI
hai  /  pratyeka vyakti ke lie isakI khurAka bhinna-bhinna hotI hai| ataH
ThANAMga sUtra kathita jaghanya, madhyama, utkRSTa khurAka ke kathana kI saMgati
bhI ho jAtI hai| kaI bAra loga aphIma ko pAnI meM galAkara kharala meM ghoTakara
bhI upayoga karate haiN| jisase aphIma kA atyalpa mAtrA meM upayoga kiyA jA
sakatA hai  /  Avazyaka hone para ise vihAra meM bhI sahaja hI le jAyA jAnA
sambhava hai  /  galAne ke satra tathA tIna khurAka ke sUtra ke sivAya zeSa
pA~ca sUtra to anya aneka auSadhiyoM meM ghaTita ho sakate haiN| ataH yahA~
"viyaDa" zabda se koI eka padArtha vizeSa na samajhakara sAmAnya yA viziSTa
sabhI prakAra kI auSadhiyA~ samajha lene se prastuta sUtroM kA artha ghaTita ho
jAtA hai| "viyaDa" zabda kA bhASya caNi meM zabdArtha nahIM kiyA gayA hai aura
vyAkhyA madya artha ko lakSya rakhakara hI kI gaI hai kintu bRhatkalpa sUtra Adi
meM madya ke lie "majja", "surA", "sauvIra" zabdoM kA prayoga huA hai aura
"viyaDa" zabda unake sAtha vizeSaNa rUpa meM AyA hai  /  jo ki vahA~ pAnI ke
vizeSaNa rUpa meM bhI prayukta hai  /  ataH Upara kahe gae sAta Agama pramANoM
se viyaDa zabda kA madya ke lie prayoga kiyA jAnA sambhava nahIM hai  /
dazavakAlika a. 5, u. 2 gAthA 36 meM bhI madya ke lie 'suraM vA meragaM vAvi,
aNNaM vA majjagaM rasaM' aisA. prayoga hai kintu 'viyaDaM' aisA zabdaprayoga
nahIM hai| AgamoM meM madya-mAMsa sAdhu ke lie abhakSya evaM varjanIya kahe
haiN| inake sevana ko ThANAMga sUtra meM naraka gati kA kAraNa batAyA hai evaM
madya sambandhI prAgama pAThoM meM kahIM bhI madya ke sthAna meM kevala "viyaDa"
zabda kA prayoga nahIM kiyA gayA hai  /  ataH "viyaDa' kA madya artha karanA
Agama saMgata nahIM kahA jA sktaa| _ uparyukta Agama ullekhoM se yaha bhI spaSTa
hai ki "viyaDa' zabda adhikAMzataH kisI anya zabda ke sAtha vizeSaNa rUpa meM
prayukta huyA hai| svatantra "viyaDa" zabda kA prayoga kevala dazA. da. 8 meM
AhAra-pAnI ke artha meM tathA ThANAMga va nizItha ke prastuta prakaraNa meM
auSadha ke artha meM aura AcArAMga meM nirdoSa AhAra ke artha meM hai| 1-4. ina
sUtroM meM eSaNA ke doSoM kA prAyazcitta kathana hai| bhikSu ko sahana zakti,
roga parISaha jaya kI bhAvanA evaM utsAha hone para to uttarA. a. 2, gA. 33 ke
anusAra auSadha kI icchA bhI nahIM karanI caahie| kintu yadi kisI bhikSu ko
samAdhi banAe rakhane ke lie auSadha lenA ho to ina satroM meM kahe gae krIta
prAdi doSoM kA sevana na karate hue zaddha nirdoSa auSadha kI gaveSaNA karanI
caahie| ukta doSoM se yukta auSadhI grahaNa karane para sUtrokta prAyazcitta AtA
hai  /  pathya AhArAdi bhI ukta doSayukta grahaNa karane para yahI prAyazcitta
samajha lenA caahie| ina doSoM kA vizeSa vivecana caudahaveM uddezaka meM
dekheN|

Page #505 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nineteenth Uddeshak] [405 5. Each monk's minimum, medium, and maximum dosage
of specific medicines like opium, etc. (natural digestive capacity) varies,
therefore they should not consume more than that. Or they should not consume
more than three doses in a day. Because many medicines, when taken in excess,
cause intoxication or other harm. Therefore, this sutra advises caution
regarding the dosage of medicine. Elsewhere in the Agamas, the word "datti" is
used in the sense of "one unbroken stream." But here, in the context of
medicine, it is appropriate to use "dosage of medicine." Because the quantity of
medicine is measured in tola, masha, ratti, etc., but not in "one stream" or one
rib, etc. Even today, the quantity of specific medicine is mentioned in "grams"
or the quantity of liquid medicine is mentioned in terms of a lid or a drop.
Although it is necessary to pay attention to the quantity in every medicine, it
is more important to pay attention to the quantity in opium or other chemical
medicines. The atonement provision in this sutra for consuming more than three
doses should be understood in relation to opium, amber, etc., intoxicating
substances or gold bhasma, etc., chemicals. If consumed in excess, it may raise
doubts about the monk in the mind of the giver or other observers. Excessive
consumption can also lead to suicide by a monk, therefore such substances should
not be brought in excess. 6. The previous sutra mentions three doses, which can
be taken over three days, one dose each day. By then, the disease that has
arisen is usually calmed. Just as a monk in a vihara cannot carry food and water
after two kos, similarly, he cannot carry medicine from village to village. If
necessary, the monk can stop at a place and take medicine. Carrying medicine
along in the vihara leads to an increase in many faults, increases the tendency
to accumulate wealth, and there is also fear of the state or thieves. Due to
these reasons, the atonement for carrying medicine along in the vihara is
mentioned in this sutra. 7. Soaking any medicine in water, melting it, grinding
it in a mortar, and other crushing and grinding activities increase negligence,
cause harm to sanpatim, etc., living beings, and lead to various types of
suffering. Therefore, monks should not perform these actions. It is appropriate
to use medicine that is readily available. Performing other actions also leads
to a loss of time for study, etc. Even if a householder performs these
activities and gives medicine to a monk, these faults should be understood. For
these reasons, atonement is mentioned in this sutra. 8. The monk who wants to
perform the evening meditation, performs it or is performing it. That is - 1. In
the early evening, 2. In the late evening, 3. In the twilight, 4. In the night.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavAM uddezaka] [405 5. pratyeka bhikSa kI aphIma Adi viziSTa auSadhiyoM kI
jaghanya madhyama utkRSTa khurAka (sahaja pAcana kSamatA) bhinna-bhinna hotI hai
ataH unheM usase adhika grahaNa nahIM karanA cAhie  /  athavA tIna khurAka se
adhika eka dina meM grahaNa nahIM karanA caahie| kyoMki kaI auSadhI mAtrA se
adhika le lene para nazA yA anya hAni utpanna karatI haiN| ataH isa sUtra meM
auSadhI kI mAtrA ke viSaya meM sAvadhAna rahane kA sUcana kiyA gayA hai| anyatra
AgamoM meM "datti" zabda kA prayoga "eka akhaNDa dhAra" artha meM huA hai| kintu
yahAM auSadha prakaraNa meM "auSadhI kI khurAka" karanA hI prasaMga saMgata hai|
kyoMki auSadhI kI mAtrA tolA, mAzA, rattI Adi se kahI jAtI hai kintu "eka dhAra"
yA eka pasalI Adi se nahIM  /  vartamAna meM bhI viziSTa auSadhI kI mAtrA
"grAma" ke athavA peya auSadhI kI mAtrA Dhakkana yA bUnda ke rUpa meM kahI jAtI
hai| yadyapi pratyeka auSadhI meM mAtrA kA dhyAna rakhanA Avazyaka hotA hai
tathApi aphIma yA anya rAsAyanika auSadhoM meM mAtrA kA dhyAna rakhanA adhika
Avazyaka hotA hai  /  isa sUtra meM jo tIna khurAka se adhika grahaNa karane kA
prAyazcitta vidhAna hai vaha aphIma ambara Adi mAdaka padArthoM yA svarNa bhasma
Adi rasAyana kI apekSA se samajhanA cAhie  /  adhika grahaNa karane para dAtA ko
yA anya dekhane vAloM ko sAdhu ke viSaya meM zaMkA utpanna ho sakatI hai  /
adhika mAtrA se koI sAdhu AtmaghAta bhI kara sakatA hai, ataH aise padArtha
adhika mAtrA meM lAne hI nahIM caahie| 6. pUrva sUtra meM tIna kharAka kA
kathana hai jo eka-eka kharAka lene se tIna dina taka lI jA sakatI hai  /  taba
taka utpanna roga prAyaH zAnta ho jAtA hai  /  vihAra meM bhikSu jisa taraha
AhAra-pAnI do koza ke bAda nahIM le jA sakatA usI prakAra auSadha bhI
grAmAnugrAma nahIM le jA sakatA  /  Avazyaka hone para bhikSu eka sthAna para
rukakara auSadha le sakatA hai  /  vihAra meM auSadhI sAtha meM lene se aneka
doSa-paramparA kI vRddhi hotI hai, saMgrahavRtti bar3hatI hai, rAjya sambandhI
yA cora sambandhI bhaya bhI rahatA hai| ityAdi kAraNoM se prastuta sUtra meM
vihAra meM auSadha sAtha lene kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai  /  7. kisI bhI
auSadha ko pAnI meM bhijonA, galAnA, kharala meM ghoTanA tathA anya bhI
kUTanApIsanA Adi pravRtti karane para pramAda kI vaddhi hotI hai, saMpAtima Adi
jIvoM kI virAdhanA tathA aneka prakAra kI ayatanA hotI hai| ataH ye kriyAe~
bhikSu ko nahIM karanI caahie| sahaja rUpa meM milane vAlI auSadha kA prayoga
karanA hI upayukta hai  /  anya kriyAe~ karane meM svAdhyAya Adi ke samaya kI
bhI hAni hotI hai| yadi sAdhu ke lie gRhastha ye pravattiyAM karake auSadha deve
to bhI ye doSa samajha lene cAhie  /  inhIM kAraNoM se isa sUtra meM prAyazcitta
kahA gayA hai  /  saMdhyAkAla meM svAdhyAya karane kA prAyazcitta 8. je bhikkhU
cahi saMjhAhiM sajjhAyaM karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  taM jahA-1. puvvAe
saMjhAe, 2. pacchimAe saMjhAe, 3. avaraNhe, 4. aDDaratte  /

Page #506 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[406] A monk who studies the scriptures or approves of someone studying the
scriptures in the four sandhyas: morning sandhya, evening sandhya, midday, and
midnight, incurs the minor four-month penance.  **Explanation:**  The four
sandhyas are:  1. **East Sandhya:** The reddish hue in the eastern direction at
sunrise is called "East Sandhya." This is the junction of night and day. The
reddish hue persists for a longer time before sunrise and for a shorter time
after sunrise. This time is approximately one muhurta. 2. **West Sandhya:**
Similar to the East Sandhya, the West Sandhya should be understood as the time
of sunset. The reddish hue in the western direction persists for a shorter time
before sunset and for a longer time after sunset. This entire period of the
reddish hue is called "West Sandhya." 3. **Afternoon:** The middle of the day.
The middle muhurta of the day, based on the number of muhurtas in the day, is
called midday. In the sutra, it is called "Afternoon." This time usually falls
between 12 noon and 1 pm. Sometimes it may be slightly earlier or later. 4.
**Midnight:** The middle of the night is called "Midnight." It should be
understood similar to "Afternoon."  The middle of the day and night are
considered unsuitable times for reading secular scriptures. The other two
sandhyas are mentioned in the scriptures as the time for performing pratikramna
and writing down the shayya upadhi. Studying the scriptures during these times
would infringe upon the time for these essential activities.  These four times
are for the movement of the Vyantara Devas. Therefore, if there is any
negligence, it is possible for them to cause trouble. In the secular world,
morning and evening are considered times for worship and remembrance, and
midnight is considered the time for the movement of spirits.  By not studying
the scriptures during these four times, the monk gets some rest. The duration of
these four sandhyas is as follows:  1. **East Sandhya:** 24 minutes before
sunrise and 24 minutes after sunrise, or 36 minutes before sunrise and 12
minutes after sunrise. 2. **West Sandhya:** 24 minutes before sunset and 24
minutes after sunset, or 12 minutes before sunset and 36 minutes after sunset.
From a subtle perspective, the duration of these sandhyas is as long as the
reddish hue persists, which may be slightly shorter or longer than the above
durations.  3-4. **Midday and Midnight:** Traditionally, the time from 12 noon
to 1 pm is considered the midday and midnight. From a subtle perspective, it is
one muhurta in the middle of the day or night.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 406] [nizIyasUtra 8. jo bhikSu prAtaHkAla saMdhyA meM, sAyaMkAla saMdhyA meM,
madhyAhna meM aura ardharAtri meM ina cAra sandhyAoM meM svAdhyAya karatA hai yA
svAdhyAya karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghu caumAsI prAyazcitta
AtA hai|) vivecana-sandhyAe~ cAra kahI gaI haiM, yathA 1. pUrva sandhyA-
sUryodaya ke samaya jo pUrva dizA meM lAlimA rahatI hai use 'pUrva sandhyA' kahA
jAtA hai  /  yaha rAtri aura divasa kA saMdhikAla hai  /  isameM sUryodaya ke
pUrva adhika samaya lAlimA rahatI hai aura sUryodaya ke bAda alpa samaya rahatI
hai  /  yaha samaya lagabhaga eka muhUrta kA hotA hai  /  2. pazcima sandhyA-
pUrva sandhyA ke samAna hI pazcima sandhyA sUryAsta ke samaya samajhanI cAhie  /
isameM sUryAsta ke pUrva lAla dizA kama samaya rahatI hai aura sUryAsta ke bAda
lAla dizA adhika samaya taka rahatI hai  /  isa sampUrNa lAla dizA ke kAla ko
'pazcima sandhyA' kahA gayA hai  /  3. aparAhna-madhyAhna-divasa kA madhyakAla
/  jitane muhUrta kA dina ho usake bIca kA eka muhUrta samaya madhyAhna kahA
jAtA hai  /  use hI sUtra meM "aparAhna" kahA hai| yaha samaya prAyaH bAraha
baje se eka baje ke bIca meM AtA hai  /  kabhI-kabhI kucha pahale yA pIche bhI
ho jAtA hai| 4. aDDaratte-rAtri ke madhyakAla ko "arddha rAtri" kahA gayA hai  /
ise "aparAhna" ke samAna samajhanA caahie| divasa aura rAtri kA madhyakAla
laukika zAstra-vAcana ke lie bhI ayogya kAla mAnA jAtA hai  /  zeSa donoM
saMdhyAkAla ko Agama meM pratikramaNa aura zayyA upadhi ke pratilekhana karane
kA samaya kahA hai, isa samaya meM svAdhyAya karane para ina Avazyaka kriyAoM ke
samaya kA atikramaNa hotA hai  /  ye cAroM kAla vyantara devoM ke bhramaNa
karane ke haiN| ataH kisI prakAra kA pramAda hone para unake dvArA upadrava honA
sambhava rahatA hai| laukika meM bhI prAta:-sAyaM bhajana smaraNa  /  evaM
arddha rAtri pretAtmAoM ke bhramaNa ke mAne jAte haiM  /  ina cAra kAloM meM
bhikSu ko svAdhyAya na karane se kucha vizrAnti bhI mila jAtI hai| ina cAroM
sandhyAoM kA kAla sthUla rUpa meM isa prakAra hai 1. pUrva sandhyA-sUryodaya se
24 miniTa pahale aura 24 miniTa bAda athavA 36 miniTa pUrva aura 12 miniTa baad|
2. pazcAt sandhyA-sUryAsta se 24 miniTa pahale aura 24 miniTa bAda athavA 12
miniTa pUrva aura 36 miniTa bAda  /  /  sUkSma dRSTi se ina sandhyAoM kA kAla
lAla dizA rahe jaba taka hotA hai jo uparokta kAlAvadhi se hInAdhika bhI ho jAtA
hai| 3-4. madhyAhna evaM arddha rAtri-paramparA se sthUla rUpa meM dina aura
rAtri ke 12 baje se eka baje taka kA samaya mAnA jAtA hai| sUkSma dRSTi se dina
yA rAtri ke madhya bhAga kA eka muhUrta samaya hotA hai|

Page #507 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nineteenth Uddeshak ] [ 407 The recitation, reading, and study of the
original text of the Agamas should not be done during these four Sandhyas.
Because, according to the present Sutra, the performance of Swadhyay leads to
the consumption of knowledge (Akale ko Sajjhapro) and other defects, resulting
in the Laghu Chaumasi Pratikshepa.  ## Pratikshepa for violating the limits of
Kalikat in Utkal 9. The Bhikshu who asks more than three questions from the
Kalikashrut in Utkal, or approves of the one asking, (he should perform Laghu
Chaumasi Pratikshepa). 10. The Bhikshu who asks more than seven questions from
the Drishtivad in Utkal, or approves of the one asking, (he should perform Laghu
Chaumasi Pratikshepa).  ## Explanation For Kalikat, the first and last Prahar of
the day and night are the time for Swadhyay, and the second and third Prahar are
Utkal. Therefore, Swadhyay of Kalikashrut is not done during Utkal, but some
exceptions are mentioned here for the purpose of memorizing new studies, etc.,
in which seven questions are prescribed for Drishtivad and three questions for
other Kalikashrut, such as Acharang, etc.  "Hi Siloh Ega Puchcha, Tihi
Puchchahim Nav Siloga Bhavanti Evam Kaliyasuyass Egataran. Dittivaye Sattasu
Puchchasu Egaavinsan Siloga Bhavanti." - Churni Bha. Ga. 6061.  One question
consists of three Shlokas, and three questions make nine Shlokas. This is for
each Kalik Sutra. For Drishtivad, there are twenty-one Shlokas for seven
questions. That is, twenty-one Shlokas of Drishtivad and nine Shlokas of other
Kalikashrut can be recited, etc., during Utkal.  The word "Puchcha" generally
means to ask and answer. But for asking and answering, there is no question of
Swadhyay or the time of Swadhyay, so this meaning is not relevant here in this
context.  The word "Puchcha" has many other alternative meanings, which should
be known from the Bhashya.  The Vad Sutra has a detailed description of many
subtle and subtler topics, Bhang Bhed, etc., so its Puchcha is said to be more,
so that more of its text can be recited together.  There is no clear definition
available in the Agamas that distinguishes between Kalikat and Utkalikashrut.
But in the Nandi Sutra, a list of Kalik and Utkalik Sutras is available. From
this, it is clear which Agamas are Kalik and which are Utkalik. But the reason
why the Agamas are Utkalik or Kalik is not explained there.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavAM uddezaka ] [ 407 ina cAroM sandhyAtroM meM Agama ke mUla pATha kA
uccAraNa, vAcana evaM svAdhyAya nahIM karanA cAhie | kyoMki svAdhyAya karane
para jJAna ke praticAra (akAle ko sajjhApro) kA sevana hone se tathA anya doSoM
ke hone se prastuta sUtra ke anusAra laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /
utkAla meM kAlikata kI maryAdA ullaMghana kA prAyazcitta 9. je bhikkhU
kAliyasuyassa paraM tinhaM pucchANaM pucchai, pucchaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  10. je
bhikkhU diTThivAyassa paraM sattaNhaM pucchANaM pucchara, pucchaMtaM vA sAijjai
/  9. jo bhikSu kAlikazruta kI tIna pRcchAtroM se adhika pRcchAe~ akAla meM
pUchatA hai yA pUchane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  10. jo bhikSu dRSTivAda
kI sAta pRcchAoM se adhika pRcchAe~ akAla meM pUchatA hai yA pUchane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta prAtA hai | ) vivecana -
kAlikata ke lie divasa aura rAtri kA prathama aura antima prahara svAdhyAya kA
kAla hai aura dUsarA tIsarA prahara utkAla hai  /  ataH utkAla ke samaya
kAlikazruta kA svAdhyAya nahIM kiyA jAtA hai kintu nayA adhyayana kaMThastha
karane Adi kI apekSA se yahA~ kucha zrApavAdika maryAdA batalAI gaI hai, jisameM
dRSTivAda ke lie sAta pRcchAoM kA aura anya kAlikazruta AcArAMga Adi ke lie 3
pRcchAoM kA vidhAna kiyA hai  /  hi siloha egA pucchA, tihi pucchAhiM Nava
silogA bhavaMti evaM kAliyasuyassa egataraM  /  diTTivAe sattasu pucchAsu
egavIsaM silogA bhavaMti  //  - cUrNi bhA. gA. 6061. tIna zlokoM kI eka pRcchA
hotI hai, tIna pRcchA se 9 zloka hote haiM  /  ye pratyeka kAlika sUtra ke lie
hai  /  dRSTivAda ke lie sAta pRcchAoM ke 21 zloka hote haiM  /  arthAt
dRSTivAda ke 21 zloka pramANa aura anya kAlikazruta ke 9 zloka pramANa pATha kA
uccAraNa Adi utkAla meM kiyA jA sakatA hai  /  "pRcchA" zabda kA sAmAnya artha
praznottara karanA hotA hai  /  kintu praznottara ke lie svAdhyAya yA svAdhyAya
kAla kA koI prazna hI nahIM hotA hai ataH yahA~ isa prakaraNa meM yaha artha
prAsaMgika nahIM hai  /  "pRcchA" zabda ke anya aneka vaikalpika artha bhI hote
haiM, unheM bhASya se jAnanA cAhie  /  vAda sUtra meM aneka sUkSma sUkSmatara
viSaya, bhaMga bheda Adi ke vistRta varNana hone se usakI pRcchA adhika kahI gaI
hai jisase usake adhika pATha kA uccAraNa eka sAtha kiyA jA sake  /  kAlikata
aura utkAlikazruta kI bheda-rekhA karane vAlI koI spaSTa paribhASA AgamoM meM
upalabdha nahIM hai  /  kintu nandIsUtra meM kAlika aura utkAlika sUtroM kI sUcI
upalabdha hai  /  usase yaha to spaSTa jJAta ho jAtA hai ki kauna se Agama
kAlika haiM aura kaunase utkAlika haiM  /  kintu Agama utkAlika yA kAlika kyoM
haiM, isakA kAraNa vahA~ spaSTa nahIM kiyA gayA hai  /

Page #508 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[408] Of the 32 available Agamas, 9 Sutras are Utkalika, namely: 1. Uvvaisutr,
2. Rayapaseniyasutra, 3. Jivajivabhigamsutra, 4. Prajnapanasutra, 5.
Suryaprajnaptisutra, 6. Dasavaikalikasutra, 7. Nandisutra, 8. Anuyogadwarasutra,
9. Avasyakasutra. The remaining 23 Agamas, including the eleven Angas, are
Kalikasutra. The Nandisutra lists the names of 29 Utkalika Sutras and 42 Kalika
Sutras. Including the Avasyakasutra, the total number of Sutras is 72. The
Avasyakasutra is referred to as an Utkalika Sutra in the Anuyogadwarasutra. The
Nandisutra classifies 5 out of the 12 Upanga Sutras as Utkalika and seven as
Kalika. Similarly, it classifies one each as Kalika and Utkalika from the
Chandraprajnapti and Suryaprajnapti respectively. Therefore, a definitive
definition cannot be established from this. Agamas composed by Ganadharas are
considered Kalika. The Pragamas, which are quoted verbatim from the Angasutra
without any modification, are also considered Kalikasruta, as they represent the
original form of those Angasutras. However, Agamas composed by other Purvadharas
in their own style should be considered Utkalikasruta. This is because they may
retain the original meaning but not the original form of the Sutra. The
tradition of considering the number of Agamas to be 32 or 45 should be
understood as a mere assumption based on different perspectives and a specific
time and place. In reality, the list of 72 Sutras mentioned in the Nandisutra
represents the Agamas available at the time of its composition. It also includes
the Nandisutra itself, which was composed by a Purvadhara named Sri
Devarddhigani Kshama Shraman (Devavachaka). The list also includes the names of
numerous other Agamas composed by different Purvadharas. There is no authentic
historical record of the time of composition or the authors of many Agamas. The
fragmented sections of the Mahanishoth and other Sutras mentioned in the
Nandisutra have been completed with supplementary texts. The definition of
Agamas in the scriptures is as follows: Suttam Ganahar Raiyam, Taheva Pattey
Buddhar Raiyam Cha. Suy Kevalina Raiyam, Abhinna Das Pugvina Raiyam ||154|| -
According to this verse from the Brihatsangrahani, the compositions of every
Buddha, Ganadhara, 14 Purvas, and all ten Purvadharas can be called Sutras or
Agamas. According to the Nandisutra, the Shruta of different ten Purvadharas can
be both Samyag and Asamyag. However, the Shruta of those who have fully embraced
the ten Purvas (when applicable) is always Samyag. _ The authors of four
Chedasutras, Dasavaikalikasutra, and Prajnapanasutra are known and are
considered to be ten Purvas and fourteen Purvadharas. The Avasyakasutra and
eleven Angasutras are considered to be composed by Ganadharas. However, in the
Prashnavyakaranasutra, etc., the entire subject matter composed by Ganadharas
has been removed and replaced with other topics, which are not mentioned in the
Nandisutra. The authors of many other available Sutras are unknown.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 408] [nizIthasUtra upalabdha 32 AgamoM meM 9 sUtra utkAlika haiM yathA 1.
uvavAIsUtra, 2. rAyapaseNiyasUtra, 3. jIvAjIvAbhigamasUtra, 4. prajJApanAsUtra,
5. sUryaprajJaptisUtra, 6. dazavaikAlikasUtra, 7. nandIsUtra, 8.
anuyogadvArasUtra, 9. AvazyakasUtra  /  zeSa gyAraha aMga Adi 23 Agama
kAlikasUtra haiM  /  nandIsUtra meM 29 utkAlikasUtroM ke nAma haiM aura 42
kAlikasUtroM ke nAma haiM  /  Avazyaka sUtra milAne se kula 72 sUtra hote haiM
/  AvazyakasUtra ko anuyogadvArasUtra meM utkAlikasUtra kahA hai| nandIsUtra meM
12 upAMga sUtroM meM se 5 ko utkAlika aura sAta ko kAlika kahA hai tathA
candraprajJapti evaM sUryaprajJapti meM se bhI kramazaH eka ko kAlika aura eka
ko utkAlika kahA hai  /  ataH isase bhI koI paribhASA nizcita nahIM kI jA sakatI
hai| gaNadharoM dvArA racita Agama to kAlika hI hote haiM aura dRSTivAda Adi
aMgasUtroM meM se mA-parivartana ke binA jyoM kA tyoM uddhRta kiyA gayA prAgama
bhI kAlikazrata kahA jAtA hai, kyoMki vaha to una aMga sUtroM kA maulika rUpa hI
hotA hai| kintu anya pUrvadharoM ke dvArA apanI zailI meM racita Agama ko
utkAlikazruta samajhanA cAhie  /  kyoMki isameM artha kI maulikatA raha sakatI
hai kintu sUtra kI maulikatA nahIM rahatI hai| AgamoM kI 32 yA 45 saMkhyA mAnane
kI paramparA bhI alaga-alaga apekSA se tathA kisI kSetra-kAla meM kI gaI kalpanA
mAtra hI samajhanI caahie| vAstava meM nandIsUtra meM 72 sUtroM ke jo nAma haiM,
vaha nandIsUtra kI racanA ke samaya upalabdha AgamoM kI sUcI hai| usameM svayaM
nandIsUtra kA bhI nAma hai jo eka pUrvadhara zrI devarddhigaNI kSamA zramaNa
(deva vAcaka) dvArA racita hai| tathA anya bhI eka pUrvadhara dvArA racita aneka
AgamoM ke nAma vahA~ die gaye haiN| aneka AgamoM ke racanAkAla yA racanAkAra kA
koI prAmANika itihAsa bhI nahIM milatA hai  /  nandIsUtra meM kahe gae
mahAnizotha Adi sUtroM ke khaNDita ho jAne para unheM pUraka pAThoM se pUrA kiyA
gayA hai| granthoM meM AgamoM kI paribhASA isa prakAra kahI gaI hai suttaM
gaNahara raiyaM, taheva patteya buddha raiyaM ca  /  suya kevaliNA raiyaM,
abhinna dasa pugviNA raiyaM  // 154 //  -bRhatsaMgrahaNI isa gAthA ke anusAra
pratyeka buddha, gaNadhara, 14 pUrvI tathA sampUrNa dasa pUrvadharoM kI
racanAsaMkalanA ko sUtra yA Agama kahA jA sakatA hai  /  nandIsUtra ke anusAra
bhI bhinna dasa pUrvadharoM kA zruta, samyag bhI ho sakatA hai aura asamyag bhI
/  kintu 10 pUrva sampUrNa dhAraNa karane vAloM kA zruta (upayogayukta hone
para) samyag hI hotA hai| _ upalabdha aAgamoM meM cAra chedasUtra,
dazavaikAlikasUtra tathA prajJApanAsUtra ke racanAkAra jJAta haiM jo 10 pUrva
tathA 14 pUrvadhara mAne jAte haiM  /  aAvazyakasUtra evaM gyAraha aMgasUtra
gaNadhara racita mAne jAte haiM tathApi praznavyAkaraNasUtra Adi meM gaNadhara
racita sampUrNa viSaya haTAkara anya viSaya hI rakha die gae haiM, jinakA
nandIsUtra meM nirdeza bhI nahIM hai| anya aneka upalabdha sUtroM ke kartA
ajJAta haiM

Page #509 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nineteenth Uddeshak  [409]  The term "Shruta" as used in the definition of
"Agam" (sutra) is very limited. Currently, the tradition is to refer to 32
Shragam or 45 Agam, which includes many Agam in addition to the sutra as
defined, and some commentary texts are also counted as sutras, such as Shakti
etc.  Shruta composed by a Jnani from ten Purva to one Purva can also be
considered Samyak and can be called Agam. This is clear from the list of Utkalik
Shruta and Kalik Shruta in the Nandi Sutra. The author of the Nandi Sutra
accepted the 72 sutras available at the time of its composition as Shragam.
Among them are also Shruta composed or compiled by many one-Purva holders, who
were Bahushruta.  Therefore, it is only prejudice to not consider those 72
sutras, which are available and have not undergone any significant alteration or
damage, as Agam. This also clearly shows the disrespect towards the author of
the Nandi Sutra. It is also not appropriate to consider those 72 sutras as pure
Pragam, which have been interpolated with formulations contrary to the
fundamental principles of Ahimsa etc.  It is completely inappropriate to insist
on considering other sutras, texts, commentaries, bhashyas, niyukti, churni,
nibandhagranth or samaachari-granth etc. as Shragam or equivalent to Shragam,
apart from those 72 sutras.  It is certain that at the time of the composition
of the Nandi Sutra, no other sutras, texts or commentary texts composed by
previous holders were available. If some were available, they would have been
included in the Shruta list, as this list also includes Shruta composed by
unknown authors and many one-Purva holders. Therefore, there can be no reason to
not mention in any form the Shruta composed by many Purva holders or 14 Purva
holders, which were available. Therefore, it is clear that all other sutras,
commentaries, texts etc. were composed after the composition of the Nandi Sutra.
However, due to the corruption of historical accounts, there are prevalent
misconceptions that commentary texts were also composed by fourteen Purva
holders etc.  In the present Prayashchitta Sutra, one should understand the
evidence of three prishchas, i.e., 9 shlokas, regarding the study of the
available Kalik Sutras among the Agam mentioned in the Nandi Sutra.  The twelfth
Ang Sutra, called Drishtivad, is currently fragmented. Therefore, the evidence
of 7 prishchas, i.e., 21 shlokas, should not be understood for any currently
available sutra. Even for those sutras which are extracted (uddhrit sankalit)
from Drishtivad and are Kalik Sutras, one should understand the evidence of only
three prishchas [9 shlokas] due to their becoming independent laghusutras.  If
it is necessary to pronounce the original text of these sutras in Utkal, then
there is no Prayashchitta for pronouncing 9 shlokas together. Pronouncing more
than this amount of text will incur the Prayashchitta mentioned in the sutra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavAM uddezaka ] [ 409 isa prakAra Agama (sUtra) kI paribhASA meM Ane vAlA
zruta bahuta hI alpa hai  /  vartamAna meM 32 zrAgama athavA 45 Agama kahane ko
paramparA pracalita hai, jisameM sUtra ko paribhASA ke atirikta aneka Agama
sammilita kie jAte haiM aura inameM kisI-kisI vyAkhyA grantha ko bhI sUtra gina
liyA gayA hai yathA sakti Adi  /  dasa pUrva se kama yAvat eka pUrva taka ke
jJAnI dvArA racita zruta bhI samyag ho sakatA hai aura use Agama kahA jA sakatA
hai  /  yaha nandIsUtra ke utkAlikazruta evaM kAlikazruta kI sUcI se spaSTa hotA
hai  /  nandIsUtra kI racanA ke samaya upalabdha 72 sUtroM ko nandIsUtra ke
racanAkAra ne zrAgama rUpa meM svIkAra kiyA hai| unameM kaI eka pUrvadhArI
bahuzrutoM ke dvArA racita yA saMkalita zruta bhI haiM  /  ataH ina 72 sUtroM
meM se jitane sUtra upalabdha haiM aura jinameM koI atyadhika parivartana yA
kSati nahIM huI hai, unheM Agama na mAnanA kevala durAgraha hai, evaM usase
nandIsUtrakartA kI prAsAtanA bhI spaSTa hai  /  ina 72 sUtroM meM se upalabdha
jina sUtroM meM ahiMsAdi mUla siddhAntoM ke viparIta prarUpaNa prakSipta kara
diyA hai unheM zuddha prAgama mAnanA bhI ucita nahIM hai  /  ina 72 sUtroM ke
sivAya anya sUtra, grantha, TIkA, bhASya, niyukti, cUrNI, nibandhagrantha yA
sAmAcArI - grantha Adi ko zrAgama yA zrAgama tulya mAnane kA Agraha karanA to
sarvathA anucita hai  /  nandI sUtra kI racanA ke samaya 72 sUtroM ke atirikta
anya koI bhI pUrvadharoM dvArA racita sUtra, grantha yA vyAkhyA-grantha
upalabdha nahIM the yaha nizcita hai  /  yadi kucha upalabdha hote to unheM
zrutasUcI meM avazya samAviSTa kiyA jAtA, kyoMki isa sUcI meM ajJAta racanAkAroM
ke tathA eka pUrvadhArI bahutoM ke racita zruta ko bhI sthAna diyA gayA hai  /
to aneka pUrvadhArI yA 14 pUrvadhArI prAcAryoM dvArA racita aura upalabdha zruta
kA kisI bhI rUpa meM ullekha nahIM karane kA koI kAraNa hI nahIM ho sakatA  /
ataH zeSa sabhI sUtra, vyAkhyAeM, grantha Adi nandIsUtra kI racanA ke bAda meM
racita haiM yaha spaSTa hai  /  phira bhI itihAsa sambandhI varNanoM ke dUSita
ho jAne se vyAkhyA grantha bhI caudaha pUrvI Adi dvArA racita hone kI bhrAMta
dhAraNAeM pracalita haiM  /  prastuta prAyazcitta sUtra meM nandIsUtra meM
nirdiSTa AgamoM meM se upalabdha kAlikasUtroM ke svAdhyAya ke viSaya meM tIna
pRcchAoM arthAt 9 zloka kA pramANa samajhanA cAhie  /  dRSTivAda nAmaka
bArahaveM aMgasUtra kA abhI viccheda hai  /  ataH 7 pRcchA arthAt 21 zloka kA
pramANa vartamAna meM upalabdha kisI bhI sUtra ke liye nahIM samajhanA cAhie  /
jo sUtra dRSTivAda meM se niryUDha (uddhRta saMkalita) kiye gaye haiM aura ve
kAlikasUtra haiM to unake lie bhI svatantra laghusUtra bana jAne se tIna pRcchA
[9 zloka ] kA pramANa hI samajhanA cAhie  /  ina sUtroM ke mUlapATha kA utkAla
meM uccAraNa karanA Avazyaka ho to eka sAtha 9 zloka pramANa uccAraNa karane
para prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai| isase adhika pATha kA uccAraNa karane para
sUtrokta prAyazcitta AtA hai  /

Page #510 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [410] **Penance for Studying during Great Festivals**  11. A monk who
studies during the four great festivals, or approves of one who does so, is
subject to penance. These festivals are: 1. Indramahotsava, 2. Skandamahotsava,
3. Yakshamahotsava, 4. Bhutamahotsava.  12. A monk who studies during the four
great pratipadas, or approves of one who does so, is subject to penance. These
pratipadas are: 1. Ashoya-padivae, 2. Kattiy-padivae, 3. Sugimhag-padivae, 4.
Ashadhi-padivae.  **Explanation:**  These two sutras state that studying on the
days of the full moon and the following pratipada (first day) of the months of
Ashadha, Ashoj, Kartik, and Chaitra is subject to penance.  The Thananga Sutra
(4) prohibits studying on the four pratipadas. The order of these pratipadas in
the Thananga Sutra is: "Ashadha Padivae, Indamah Padivae, Kattiy Padivae,
Sugimhag Padivae." The same order is mentioned in the Nisithabhashya (verse
6065): "Ashadhi, Indamaho, Kattiy, Sugimhao ye boddhvvo. Ete maha maha khalu,
chev padava."  The order mentioned in the Thananga Sutra and the Nisithabhashya
is the same. In this order, Indramahotsava is in the second place, which clearly
indicates that it is the full moon and pratipada of Ashadha.  It seems
appropriate to understand the remaining three festivals mentioned in Sutra 11,
Skanda, Yaksha, and Bhuta, as the full moon and pratipada of Kartik, Chaitra,
and Ashadha respectively. However, this explanation is not provided in either
the Thananga Tika or the Nisithachurni.  The original text of these sutras, as
found in available manuscripts, places Indramahotsava first among the great
festivals and Ashoj full moon (Indramahotsava) and pratipada third among the
great pratipadas. However, the above-mentioned commentary and verse interpret
the text according to the Thananga Sutra. Therefore, the original text of the
Nisith Sutra must have also been in accordance with the Thananga Sutra.  Thus,
it is clear that Indramahotsava, the full moon of Ashoj, is in the first place
in the sutra. Skandamahotsava, the full moon of Kartik, can be considered to be
in the second place, as Skanda is also known as Kartikeya. The remaining
festivals, Yaksha and Bhuta, are...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 410] mahAmahotsavoM meM svAdhyAya karane kA prAyazcitta 11. je bhikkhU causu
mahAmahesu saJjJAyaM karei, kareMta vA sAijjai  /  taM jahA - 1. iMdama, 2.
khaMdamahe, 3. jakkhamahe, 4. bhUyamahe  /  [ nizIthasUtra 12. je bhikkhU causu
mahApADivaesu sajjhAyaM karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  taMjahA - 1. Asoya -
pADivae, 2. kattiya - pADivae, 3. sugimhaga- pADivae, 4. AsADhI - pADiva  /  11.
jo bhikSu indramahotsava, skandamahotsava, yakSamahotsava, bhUtamahotsava, ina
cAra mahotsavoM svAdhyAya karatA hai yA svAdhyAya karane vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  12. jo bhikSu prAzvina pratipadA, kArtika pratipadA, caitrI
pratipadA aura ASADhI pratipadA ina cAra mahApratipadAtroM meM svAdhyAya karatA
hai yA svAdhyAya karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  [ use laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  ] vivecana - prASADhI pUrNimA, AsojI pUrNimA, kArtikI
pUrNimA aura caitrI pUrNimA ke dina aura usake dUsare dina kI pratipadA [ ekama]
ina ATha dinoM meM svAdhyAya karane kA ina do sUtroM meM prAyazcitta kahA gayA
hai  /  ThANAMga a. 4 meM cAra pratipadA ko svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha kiyA
gayA hai  /  vahA~ unake nAma isa krama se kahe haiM "AsADha pADivae, iMdamaha
pADivae, kattiya pADivae, sugimhaga pADivae  / " nizIthabhASya kI gAthA 6065 meM
bhI aisA hI krama kahA gayA hai, yathA1 AsADhI, 2 iMdamaho, 3 kattiya, 4
sugimhao ya boddhavvo  /  ete mahA mahA khalu, ceva pADavA || ThANAMga sUtra
aura nizIthabhASya kI isa gAthA meM kahA gayA krama samAna hai  /  inameM indra
mahotsava kA dvitIya sthAna hai jo prASADha ke bAda krama se prApta prasauja kI
pUnama evaM ekama kA honA spaSTa hai  /  prastuta sUtra 11 meM kahe zeSa skanda,
yakSa aura bhUta tIna mahotsava kramaza: kArtika, caitra aura ASADha ina tIna
pUnama ekama ko samajha lenA ucita pratIta hotA hai  /  kintu isakA spaSTIkaraNa
ThANAMga TIkA evaM nizIthacUrNi donoM meM nahIM kiyA gayA hai  /  prastuta
sUtroM ke mUla pATha meM upalabdha pratiyoM meM mahAmahotsavoM meM indra
mahotsava kA krama pahalA kahA hai aura mahApratipadA meM AsojI pUnama ( indra
mahotsava ) aura ekama kA krama tIsarA kahA hai, jabaki uparyukta bhASya - gAthA
meM ThANAMga sUtra ke pATha ke anusAra vyAkhyA kI gaI hai  /  ataH nizItha sUtra
kA mUla pATha bhI ThANAMga ke anusAra hI rahA hogaa| isa prakAra sUtra meM indra
mahotsava - Asoja kI pUnama ke dina kA prathama sthAna hai yaha spaSTa hai aura
skandha mahotsava kArtika pUnama kA dvitIya sthAna mAnA jA sakatA hai kyoMki
skandha ko kArtikeya kahA jAtA hai  /  zeSa yakSa aura bhUta mahotsava I

Page #511 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nineteenth Uddeshak] [411 There is no basis to determine the exact day,
however, according to the order, the Yaksha Mahotsav can be considered to be on
the full moon day of Chaitra and the Bhoot Mahotsav on the full moon day of
Ashadha. In Aacha. Shru. 2, A. 1, U. 2, there is a mention of many festivals.
The names of the four festivals mentioned in the present eleventh sutra are also
there, but the order is different, as follows: 1. Inda Mahasu va, 2. Khand
Mahasu va, 3. Rudd Mahasu va, 4. Mugud Mahasu va, 5. Bhuya Mahasu va, 6. Jakkha
Mahasu va, 7. Nag Mahasu va. Here too, in the mention of festivals, Indra and
Skandha Mahotsav are mentioned in the first and second places. Therefore, the
conclusion is that according to the Indra, Skandha, Yaksha and Bhoot Mahotsav of
the eleventh sutra, the order of the words in the twelfth sutra should be as
follows: Ashoji Pratipada, Kartiki Pratipada, Chaitri Pratipada and Ashadhi
Pratipada. Therefore, this order has been accepted in the present sutra 12.
These four festivals are respectively related to Indra, Kartikeya Deva, Yaksha
and Bhoot Vyantar jati Devas, i.e., people worship and honor them to please
them, and they spend the whole day drinking, singing, dancing, roaming, drinking
alcohol, etc., enjoying themselves. These festivals are held on the full moon
day. The arrival of the Devas also continues during these days, and many people
also travel here and there. On the Pratipada day, some of the program of these
festivals remains, hence it is also called the Pratipada day of the
Mahamahotsav. The reason for the prohibition of Swadhyaya is that the Devas who
travel during those days are of many types, small and large, and they are also
of different temperaments and curious. These Devas can cause trouble if they
make a mistake in Swadhyaya. Even if there is no mistake, the more prosperous
Devas can cause trouble. On the days of enjoyment, entertainment, pleasure and
joy, the reading of scriptures is considered impractical in the world. People
also travel in various kinds of intoxication and can cause trouble out of
curiosity or hatred. Due to these reasons, there is no Agam permission to do
Swadhyaya in these eight days. From the instructions of these four festivals, in
the main days of other festivals mentioned in the Pracharang Sutra, which are
prevalent everywhere, Swadhyaya should not be done or should not be done in a
loud voice. The word 'Ashadhi Pratipada' etc. in sutra 12 should be understood
as the Pratipada coming after the Ashadhi Purnima, i.e., Shravan Vadi Ekam. But
it should not be understood as 'Ashadhi Purnima followed by Ashadha Vadi Ekam'.
Similarly, the remaining three Pratipada should also be considered as the
Pratipada coming after the Purnima of that festival. In many places in the
Agams, in the descriptions of Tirthankaras etc., the first Krishna Paksha and
the second Shukla Paksha are clearly mentioned in every month. For example, in
Pracharang Shru. 2, A. 15: "Gimhanam Padhame Mase Docche Pakkhe Chett Suddhe,
Tassanam Chett Suddhass Terasi Pakkhenam"...... .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavAM uddezaka] [411 kA dina nizcita karane kA koI AdhAra nahIM milatA hai
tathApi krama ke anusAra yakSa mahotsava caitra ko pUnama evaM bhUta mahotsava
ASADha kI pUnama kA mAnA jA sakatA hai  /  AcA. zru. 2, a. 1, u. 2 meM aneka
mahotsavoM kA kathana hai| prastuta gyArahaveM sUtra meM kahe gaye cAroM
mahotsavoM ke nAma bhI vahAM hai kintu krama bhinna hai, yathA 1. iMda mahesu
vA, 2. khaMda mahesu vA, 3. rUdda mahesu vA, 4. muguda mahesu vA, 5. bhUya
mahesu vA, 6. jakkha mahesu vA, 7. nAga mahesu vaa| yahA~ bhI mahotsava kathana
meM indra aura skandha mahotsava ko prathama evaM dvitIya sthAna meM kahA gayA
hai| ataH niSkarSa yaha hai ki gyArahaveM sUtra ke indra, skandha, yakSa aura
bhUta mahotsava ke anusAra bArahaveM sUtra ke zabdoM kA krama isa prakAra honA
caahie| AsojI pratipadA, kArtikI pratipadA, caitrI pratipadA aura ASADhI
pratipadA  /  isalie prastuta sUtra 12 meM yahI krama svIkAra kiyA hai| ye cAroM
mahotsava kramazaH indra se, kArtikeya deva se, yakSa evaM bhUta vyantara jAti
ke devoM se sambandhita haiM arthAta inheM prasanna rakhane ke lie loga inakI
pUjA-pratiSThA karate hae dina bhara pInA, gAnA-bajAnA, nAcanA-ghUmanA,
madyapAna karanA Adi mauja zauka karate hue pramoda pUrvaka rahate haiM  /  ye
mahotsava pUnama ke dina hote haiM  /  devoM kA AvAgamana bhI ina dinoM meM banA
rahatA hai tathA aneka logoM kA bhI idhara-udhara AvAgamana rahatA hai|
pratipadA ke dina bhI ina mahotsavoM kA kucha kAryakrama zeSa raha jAtA hai ata:
use bhI mahAmahotsava kI pratipadA kA dina kahA gayA hai| svAdhyAya-niSedha kA
kAraNa yaha hai ki una dinoM meM bhramaNa karane vAle deva choTe-bar3e aneka
prakAra ke hote haiM tathA bhinna-bhinna svabhAva vAle evaM kautUhalI bhI hote
haiN| ve deva svAdhyAya meM skhalanA ho jAne para upadrava kara sakate haiN|
skhalanA na hone para bhI adhika Rddhisampanna deva upadrava kara sakate haiN|
mauja-zauka manoraMjana prAnanda ke dina zAstravAcana loka meM avyAvahArika
samajhA jAtA hai  /  loga bhI aneka prakAra ke naze meM bhramaNa karate hue
kutUhala yA dveSavaza upadrava kara sakate haiM  /  ityAdi kAraNoM se ina ATha
dinoM meM svAdhyAya karane kI Agama aAjJA nahIM hai  /  ina cAra mahotsavoM ke
nirdeza se prAcArAMgasUtra kathita anya aneka mahotsava, jo sarvatra pracalita
hoM unake pramukha dinoM meM bhI svAdhyAya nahIM karanA cAhie yA uccasvara se
nahIM karanA caahie| sUtra 12 meM jo 'ASADhI pratipadA' Adi zabda hai unakA
artha ASADhI pUnama ke bAda Ane vAlI pratipadA arthAt zrAvaNa vadI ekama aisA
samajhanA hI upayukta hai| kintu 'prASADhI pUnama ke bAda punaH ASADha vadI
ekama ho' aisA nahIM samajhanA caahie| isI prakAra zeSa tInoM pratipadA bhI usa
mahotsava kI pUnama ke bAda Ane vAlI pratipadA ko hI mAnanA ucita hai| AgamoM
meM aneka sthaloM meM kathita tIrthaMkara Adi ke varNanoM meM spaSTa rUpa se
pratyeka mAsa meM prathama kRSNapakSa aura dvitIya zuklapakSa kahA jAtA hai  /
yathA-prAcArAMga zru. 2, a. 15 meM "gimhANaM paDhame mAse docce pakkhe cetta
suddhe, tassaNaM cetta suddhassa terasI pakkheNaM"......  /

Page #512 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[412] [Nishiy Sutra] Here, while describing the birth of Bhagwan Mahavira on the
thirteenth day of the bright fortnight of Chaitra, the second fortnight of the
first month of the summer season is called Chaitra Suddha (Sudi). Similarly,
there are descriptions elsewhere as well. Therefore, it is scripturally correct
to understand that the first day of the next month comes after the full moon. In
common practice, the number (30) thirty is written for the new moon and this is
considered the last day of the month. But this belief is not scripturally
correct. Many scholars consider this common belief to be based on the presented
Sutra (12), but understanding such meaning from this Sutra is misleading.
Because this meaning has not been given in the Thananga Tika or the Nishith
Churni, and also, deriving such meaning from the text of the mentioned Acharanga
A. 15 is against the scriptures. Therefore, the full moon of Ashadha, Asauj,
Kartik and Chaitra and the first day of Shravan, Kartik, Margashirsha and
Vaishakh, these eight days should be considered as Asvadhyaya. Although the full
moon of Asauj is mentioned in the Jain scriptures for Indra Mahotsav and also in
non-Jain scriptures, different traditions have become prevalent over time in
different regions. For example, the Churnikar has mentioned that Indra Mahotsav
takes place on the full moon of Shravan in the Lat country. Similarly, due to
some reason, the tradition of considering the full moon of Bhadava as a festival
day and considering it as Asvadhyaya is prevalent. Due to this, a total of 10
days are considered as Asvadhyaya related to the festival. But this should be
understood as only a tradition because there is no original evidence for it. In
the presented Sutra, eight days have been mentioned according to the above
description, and performing Swadhyay on them leads to the prescribed atonement
mentioned in the Sutra. Atonement for not performing Swadhyay during the
Swadhyay period 13. Je Bhikkhu Chaukalam Uvainavaei, Uvainaventam Va Saizjzai.
13. A monk who spends the four Swadhyay periods without performing Swadhyay or
approves of someone who does so. (He receives the Laghuchoumasi atonement.)
Discussion - The first and last Paurashis of the day and the first and last
Paurashis of the night, these four Paurashis are the Swadhyay periods according
to the Kalikashrat. Not performing Swadhyay in these four periods and spending
time in other Vikatha, Pramad etc. is an excess of knowledge, as - "Kale Na Kao
Sajjao, Sajjaae Na Sajjaaiyam". Prav. A. 4 Performing this excess leads to the
atonement mentioned in the Sutra. The implication is that a monk must perform
Swadhyay in all four Paurashis except for essential service work. Loss due to
not performing Swadhyay 1. Not performing Swadhyay causes the previously
acquired Shruti to be forgotten. 2. New Shruti is not received and its growth
does not occur.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 412] [nizIyasUtra yahA~ caitra sudI terasa ko bhagavAn mahAvIra kA janma batAte
hue grISma Rtu ke prathama mAsa kA dvitIya pakSa caitra suddha (sudi) kahA hai
/  isI taraha anyatra bhI varNana hai| ata: pUnama ke bAda agale mahIne kI ekama
samajhanA hI zAstrasammata hai  /  laukika pracalana meM amAvasyA ke lie (30)
tIsa kA aMka likhA jAtA hai aura ise hI mAsa kA antima dina mAnA jAtA hai| kintu
yaha mAnyatA zAstrasammata nahIM hai  /  kaI vidvAna prastuta sUtra (12) ke
AdhAra se bhI isa laukika mAnyatA kA nirdeza mAnate haiM kintu isa sUtra se aisA
artha samajhanA bhramapUrNa hai| kyoMki ThANAMga TIkA va nizItha cUrNI meM bhI
vaisA artha nahIM kiyA gayA hai, tathA ukta AcArAMga a. 15 ke pATha se bhI aisA
artha karanA Agama viruddha hai  /  ataH ASADha, Asauja, kArtika aura caitra kI
pUnama evaM zrAvaNa, kArtika, mArgazIrSa aura vaizAkha kI ekama ye ATha dina hI
asvAdhyAya ke samajhane cAhiye  /  yadyapi indra mahotsava ke liye Asoja ko
pUnama jainAgamoM kI vyAkhyAnoM meM tathA jainettara zAstroM meM bhI kahI gaI
hai tathApi bhinna-bhinna kSetroM meM kucha bhinna-bhinna paramparAeM bhI
kAlAntara se pracalita ho jAtI haiM  /  yathA-lATa deza meM zrAvaNa kI pUnama ko
indra mahotsava honA cUrNikAra ne batAyA hai  /  aise hI kisI kAraNa se bhAdavA
kI pUnama ko bhI mahotsava kA dina mAnakara asvAdhyAya mAnane kI paramparA
pracalita hai  /  jisase kula 10 dina mahotsava sambandhI asvAdhyAya ke mAne
jAte haiM  /  kintu ise kevala paramparA hI samajhanA cAhie kyoMki isake lie
maulika pramANa kucha bhI nahIM hai| prastuta sUtra meM uparyukta varNana ke
anusAra ATha dina hI kahe gaye haiM unameM svAdhyAya karane para sUtrokta
prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  svAdhyAyakAla meM svAdhyAya nahIM karane kA prAyazcitta
13. je bhikkhU cAukAlaM uvAiNAvei, uvAiNAveMtaM vA sAijjai  /  13. jo bhikSa
cAroM svAdhyAyakAla ko svAdhyAya kiye binA vyatIta karatA hai yA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| (use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai  / ) vivecana-dina
kI prathama va antima pauruSI aura rAtri kI prathama aura antima pauruSI, ye
cAra pauruSiyAM kAlikazrata kI apekSA se svAdhyAyakAla haiM  /  ina cAroM kAla
meM svAdhyAya nahIM karanA aura anya vikathA pramAda Adi meM samaya vyatIta kara
denA yaha jJAna kA aticAra hai, yathA-"kAle na kao sajjhAo, sajjhAe na
sajjhAiyaM"  /  prAva. a. 4 isa aticAra ke sevana karane para sUtrokta
prAyazcitta AtA hai| tAtparya yaha hai ki bhikSu ko Avazyaka sevAkArya ke sivAya
cAroM hI pauruSiyoM meM svAdhyAya karanA Avazyaka hotA hai  /  svAdhyAya na
karane se hone vAlI hAni 1. svAdhyAya nahIM karane se pUrvagrahIta zruta vismRta
ho jAtA hai| 2. nae zruta kA grahaNa evaM usakI vRddhi nahIM hotI hai  /

Page #513 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nineteenth Uddeshak  **3.** Precious time is wasted in idle talk and other
distractions. **4.** The qualities of restraint are destroyed. **5.** One is
deprived of the benefits of self-study, austerity, and purification. As a
result, the cycle of birth and death cannot be broken. Therefore, a monk should
consider self-study as his paramount duty.  **Benefits of Self-Study**  **1.**
Self-study leads to abundant purification. **2.** Scriptural knowledge becomes
stable and rich. **3.** Faith, detachment, restraint, and interest in austerity
increase. **4.** The qualities of the self are strengthened. **5.** Success is
achieved in controlling the mind and senses. **6.** Self-study is said to be the
foundation of Dharma meditation, and it leads to concentration of the mind.
Consequently, one attains Dharma meditation and pure meditation.
**Inspirational Agamic Sayings for Self-Study**  **1.** *Sajjhayammi Rao Saya* -
A monk should always be engaged in self-study. **2.** *Bhocca Sajjhayaraye Je Sa
Bhikkhu* - He is a monk who has attained faultless knowledge. **3.** *Sajjhaya -
Sajjhaanarayassa Taaino* - The karma of the six protectors of the body is
purified for those who are engaged in self-study and meditation. (Dasavai. Pra.
8, Ga. 62) **4.** *Naanam Eggachitto Ya Thio Ya Thavai Param. Suyani Ya Ahijitaa
Rao Suya Samahie* - Knowledge makes the mind one-pointed, the knower himself is
stable in Dharma, and he makes others stable. Therefore, one should study the
scriptures and remain in scriptural meditation. (Dasavai. Pra. 10, Ga. 15)
**5.** *Sutattham Cha Viyaanai Je Sa Bhikkhu* - He is a monk who has special
knowledge of the sutras and their meaning. (Dasavai. Pra. 10, Ga. 9) **6.**
*Uttaara. Pra. 29* mentions numerous benefits, including purification, resulting
from self-study and its five divisions, such as reading. **7.** *Uttaara. Pra.
26* describes the daily routine of a virtuous person, emphasizing the allocation
of significant time for self-study. This is analyzed in *Nishith Churni* as
follows:  "One should engage in the study of scriptures at the beginning and end
of the day, and also at the beginning and end of the night. In these four
periods, one should study and contemplate. In the remaining time, one should
engage in the study of scriptures during the second part of the day. One should
listen to the meaning of the scriptures, and this is also a form of meditation.
In the third part of the day, one should beg for alms. If one does not go out,
one should study the scriptures during that time. One should study what one has
learned previously..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavAM uddezaka ] 3. vikathAoM tathA anya pramAdoM meM saMyama kA amUlya
samaya vyatIta hotA hai  /  4. saMyama guNoM kA nAza hotA hai  /  5. svAdhyAya -
tapa aura nirjarA ke lAbha se vaMcita honA par3atA hai  /  pariNAmataH bhava -
paramparA naSTa nahIM ho sakatI hai  /  ataH svAdhyAya karanA bhikSu kA parama
kartavya samajhanA cAhie  /  svAdhyAya karane se hone vAle lAbha 1. svAdhyAya
karane se vipula nirjarA hotI hai  /  2. zrutajJAna sthira evaM samRddha hotA
hai  /  3. zraddhA, vairAgya, saMyama evaM tapa meM ruci bar3hatI hai  /  4.
Atma guNoM kI puSTi hotI hai  /  5. mana evaM indriya nigraha meM saphalatA
milatI hai  /  6. svAdhyAya dharma dhyAna kA Alambana kahA gayA hai evaM isase
citta kI ekAgratA siddha hotI hai  /  phalata: dharma dhyAna aura zukla dhyAna
kI prApti hotI hai  /  svAdhyAya ke lie preraka Agama vAkya 1. sajjhAyammi rao
sayA - bhikSu sadA svAdhyAya meM rata rahe  /  2. bhoccA sajjhAyarae je sa
bhikkhU - - prApta nirdoSa prahAra karake hai vaha bhikSu hai  /  3. sajjhAya -
sajjhANarayassa tAiNo-svAdhyAya aura saddhyAna meM rata rahane vAle chaH kAya
rakSaka kA karmamala zuddha ho jAtA hai  /  dazavai. pra. 8, gA. 62 [ 413 5.
NANaM egaggacitto ya Thio ya ThAvaI paraM  /  suyANi ya ahijjittA rao suya
samAhie  //  4. sutatthaM ca viyANai je sa bhikkhU - jo sUtra aura artha kA
vizeSa jJAna karatA hai vaha bhikSu - dazavai. pra. 10 gA. 15 hai  /  jJAna se
citta ekAgra hotA hai, jJAnI svayaM dharma meM sthira hotA sthira karatA hai
ataH zrutoM kA adhyayana karake zruta samAdhi meM - dazavai. a. 8, gA. 4 jo
svAdhyAya meM rata rahatA - dazavai. pra. 10, gA. 9 hai aura anya ko bhI dharma
meM lIna rahanA cAhie  /  - dazavaM. a. 9. u. 4, gA. 3 6. uttarA. a. 29 meM
svAdhyAya se tathA vAMcanA Adi pAMcoM bhedoM se hone vAle phala kI pRcchA ke
uttara meM nirjarA Adi aneka lAbha batAe haiM  /  7. uttarA. pra. 26 meM sAdhu
kI dinacaryA kA varNana karate hue atyadhika samaya svAdhyAya meM vyatIta karane
kA vidhAna hai| usI kA vizleSaNa nizItha cUrNi meM isa prakAra kiyA hai
"divasassa paDhama carimAsu, NisIe ya paDhamacarimAsu ya eyAsu causu vi
kAliyasuyassa gahaNaM guNaNaM ca karejja  /  sesAsu tti - divasassa bitIyAe
ukkAliyasuyassa gahaNaM kareti, atthaM vA suti, esA caiva bhayaNA  /  tatiyAe
bhikkhaM hiMss, aha Na hiMDai to ukkAliyaM paDhai, puvvagahiyaM

Page #514 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[414] The *Kalikashrut* is studied in all four *kalas*, while the
*Utkalikashrut* is studied or its meaning is grasped in the other *praharas*. In
the third *prahara* of the day, one should not engage in the study of the
*Utkalikashrut* or other activities. In the second *prahara* of the night, one
should either study the *Utkalikashrut* or sleep. In the third *prahara* of the
night, one should sleep and then wake up and engage in the study of the
*Utkalikashrut* if time permits. Then, in the fourth *prahara*, one should study
the *Kalikashrut*.  This is a description of the daily routine of a *sadhu*,
which is filled with study. In the *paurushi* of the *utkala*, one can engage in
the study of the *sutras*, the meaning of the *sutras*, food, sleep, and other
activities. However, in all four *kalas* and *paurushi*, only study is
performed. According to *Uttara. A. 26*, if a *guru* or someone else asks for
service during the time of study, one should perform it. If not, one should
remain absorbed in study.  This study is of the *Kalikashrut*. It includes
memorizing new material or repeating what has already been memorized. Once the
new material has been memorized, one only needs to repeat it.  *Vyav. U. 4*
states that it is essential for *sadhus* and *sadhvis* to retain the knowledge
they have learned. If they forget, they are subject to the most severe
*prayaschitta*. This means that if they forget due to negligence, they will not
be given any position for the rest of their lives. If they are already holding a
position, they will be removed from it. Only elderly *sthaviras* are exempt from
this *prayaschitta*.  Therefore, memorizing the *shrut* and keeping it stable
can only be achieved through continuous study.  *Uttara. A. 26* describes study
as the *uttaraguna* of *samyama*. It is said to liberate one from all suffering
and purify all *bhavas*.  By holding these teachings in their hearts, *bhikshus*
should always be engaged in study and avoid the *prayaschitta* mentioned in the
*sutras*. This means they should not waste time on idle talk, negligence, or
other activities besides study.  **Prayaschitta for Studying During the Time of
Non-Study**  14. A *bhikshu* who studies during the time of non-study or
approves of someone who does so, receives the *laghuchoumasi prayaschitta*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 414] [nizIthasUtra ukkAliyaM vA guNei, atthaM vA suNei  /  Nisissa bitiyAe esA
ceva bhayaNA, suvai vA  /  Nisissa tatiyAe NiddAvimokkhaM karei, ukkAliyaM
geNhai guNei vA, kAliyaM vA suttaM atthaM vA karei  /  bhAvArtha-cAroM kAla meM
kAlikazruta kA svAdhyAya karanA tathA anya praharoM meM utkAlikazruta kA
svAdhyAya karanA yA arthagrahaNa karanA arthAt vAMcaNI lenA  /  dina ke tIsare
prahara meM bhikSA na to utkAlikazruta ke svAdhyAya Adi meM lage rahanA  /
rAtri ke dUsare prahara meM bhI ukta svAdhyAya kare yA soye  /  rAtri ke tIsare
prahara meM nidrA lekara usase nivRtta ho jAe aura usa prahara kA samaya zeSa ho
to utkAlikazruta Adi kA svAdhyAya kre| phira cauthe prahara meM kAlikazruta kA
svAdhyAya kre| yaha sAdhu kI dinacaryA evaM rAtricaryA kA varNana svAdhyAya se
ho paripUrNa hai  /  utkAla kI paurUSI meM sUtroM kA svAdhyAya, sUtroM kA artha,
AhAra, nidrA Adi pravRtti kI jA sakatI hai| kintu cAroM kAla, paurUSI-meM kevala
svAdhyAya hI kiyA jAtA hai  /  uttarA. a. 26 ke anusAra usa svAdhyAya ke samaya
meM yadi guru Adi koI sevA kA kArya kaheM to karanA cAhie aura na kaheM to
svAdhyAya meM hI lIna rahanA caahie| yaha svAdhyAya kAlikazruta kA hai| isameM
nayA kaMThastha karanA yA usI kA punarAvartana karanA Adi samAviSTa hai  /  jaba
nayA kaMThastha karanA pUrNa ho jAya taba usakI kevala punarAvRtti karanA hI
hotA hai| vyava. u. 4 meM sAdhu-sAdhvI ko sIkhe hue jJAna ko kaMThastha rakhanA
Avazyaka batAyA hai aura bhUla jAne para kaThoratama prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai
arthAta pramAda se bhUla jAne para use jIvana bhara ke lie kisI bhI prakAra kI
padavI nahIM dI jAtI hai aura padavIdhara ho to use padavI se haTA diyA jAtA
hai| kevala vRddha sthaviroM ko yaha prAyazcita nahIM pAtA hai| ataH zruta
kaMThastha karanA aura use sthira rakhanA, nirantara svAdhyAya karate rahane se
hI ho sakatA hai| uttarA. a. 26 meM svAdhyAya ko saMyama kA uttaraguNa batAyA
hai  /  sarva duHkhoM se mukta karane vAlA tathA sarvabhAvoM kI zuddhi karane
vAlA kahA hai| ina saba pAgama varNanoM ko hRdaya meM dhAraNa karake bhikSu sadA
svAdhyAyazIla rahe aura sUtrokta prAyazcitta sthAna kA sevana na kare arthAt
svAdhyAya ke sivAya vikathA pramAda Adi meM samaya na bitaave| asvAdhyAya ke
samaya svAdhyAya karane kA prAyazcitta 14. je bhikkhU asajjhAie sajjhAyaM karei,
kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  14. jo bhikSu asvAdhyAya ke samaya svAdhyAya karatA hai
yA svAdhyAya karane vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  [use laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta pAtA hai  / ]

Page #515 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nineteenth Uddeshak  [415]  **Discussion:** While it is essential to engage
in *svādhyāya* (self-study) both during the day and night, one must always be
mindful of the times when *svādhyāya* is prohibited, as outlined in the *āgamas*
(scriptural texts).  The following *āgamas* describe the places where
*svādhyāya* is prohibited:  1. **Thaṇāṅga Sūtra, Chapter 4, Verse 4:** Prohibits
*svādhyāya* on the four *pratipadās* (first days of the lunar fortnight) and the
four *sandhyās* (twilight periods). 2. **Thaṇāṅga Sūtra, Chapter 10:** Mentions
ten *ākāśīya* (celestial) and ten *audārika* (worldly) *asvādhyāya* (prohibited
times for *svādhyāya*). 3. **This present Uddeshak:** Describes the
*prāyaścitta* (atonement) for performing *svādhyāya* during the four *mahā
mahotsavas* (great festivals), four *pratipadās*, and four *sandhyās*. 4.
**Vyavahāra Uddeshak, Chapter 7:** Prohibits *svādhyāya* related to one's own
body.  By compiling all these prohibited places, we arrive at a total of 32
*asvādhyāya* places. These include those related to the sky, the world,
festivals, the first days of the lunar fortnight, and twilight periods.  **Total
32:** Out of these, 12 *asvādhyāya* have been discussed in previous *sūtras*
(texts). The remaining 20 *asvādhyāya* are as follows:  1. **Ulkāpāt:** The
falling of a star, meaning its displacement. When a star-vehicle moves sideways
or a deity performs *vikūrvaṇā* (distortion), it appears as if a star is falling
in the sky. Sometimes it appears as a long line falling, sometimes as a luminous
object falling. Generally, the phenomenon of stars falling in the sky is a
continuous process, therefore, if it is accompanied by a specific light or a
line, it should be considered *asvādhyāya*. This lasts for one *prahara* (three
hours).  2. **Digdāh:** Due to the transformation of *pudgala* (matter), a
condition resembling a great city burning in one or more directions is visible.
This appears slightly above the ground. This lasts for one *prahara*.  3.
**Garjan:** The sound of thunder. This lasts for two *praharas*. However, it is
not considered *asvādhyāya* during the *varṣā-nakṣatras* (rain constellations)
from *Prāṇa-nakṣatra* to *Svāti-nakṣatra*.  4. **Vidyut:** The flashing of
lightning. This lasts for one *prahara*. However, it is not considered
*asvādhyāya* during the aforementioned rain constellations.  5. **Nirghāt:** The
flashing of lightning accompanied by a terrible [horrible] sound. This is also
called lightning striking or thunder. This lasts for eight *praharas*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavA~ uddezaka] [415 vivecana-dina meM tathA rAtri meM svAdhyAya karanA
Avazyaka hote hue bhI AgamoM meM jaba jahA~ svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha kiyA
gayA hai usa asvAdhyAyakAla kA sadA dhyAna rakhanA caahie| nimna AgamoM meM
asvAdhyAya sthAnoM kA varNana hai 1. ThANAMga sUtra a. 4 meM-4 pratipadAoM aura
4 saMdhyAoM meM svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha kiyA hai| 2. ThANAMga sUtra a. 10
meM-10 AkAzIya asvAdhyAya aura 10 audArika asvAdhyAya kahe haiN| 3. yahA~
prastuta uddezaka meM 4 mahA mahotsava 4 pratipadA aura 4 saMdhyA meM svAdhyAya
karane kA prAyazcitta kahA hai| 4. vyava. u. 7 meM svazarIra sambandhI
asvAdhyAya karane kA niSedha kiyA hai| ina sabhI niSedha sthAnoM kA saMgraha
karane se kula 32 asvAdhyAya sthAna hote haiM  /  yathAAkAza sambandhI audArika
sambandhI mahotsava evaM pratipadA sambandhI saMdhyAkAla sambandhI | Kja.. kula
32 inameM se 12 asvAdhyAyoM kA vivecana pUrva sUtroM meM kiyA jA cukA hai| zeSa
20 asvAdhyAya isa prakAra haiM 1. ulkApAta-tAre kA TUTanA arthAt sthAnAntarita
honA  /  tArA vimAna ke tiryak gamana karane para yA deva ke vikurvaNA Adi
karane para AkAza meM tArA TUTane jaisA dRzya hotA hai| yaha kabhI lambI
rekhAyukta girate hue dikhatA hai, kabhI prakAzayukta girate hue dikhatA hai|
sAmAnyataH AkAza meM tAre TUTane jaisA krama prAyaH sadA banA rahatA hai, ataH
viziSTa prakAza yA rekhAyukta ho to asvAdhyAya samajhanA cAhie  /  isakA eka
prahara taka asvAdhyAya hotA hai| 2. digdAha-pudgala pariNamana se eka yA aneka
dizAoM meM koI mahAnagara jalane jaisI avasthA dikhAI de use digdAha samajhanA
cAhie  /  yaha bhUmi se kucha Upara dikhAI detA hai  /  isakA eka prahara kA
asvAdhyAya hotA hai| 3. garjana-bAdaloM kI dhvani  /  isakA do prahara kA
asvAdhyAya hotA hai| kintu prAnakSatra se svAtinakSatra taka ke varSA-nakSatroM
meM asvAdhyAya nahIM ginA jaataa| 4. vidyut-bijalI kA camakanA  /  isakA eka
prahara kA asvAdhyAya hotA hai| kintu uparyukta varSA ke nakSatroM meM
asvAdhyAya nahIM hotA hai  /  5. nirghAta-dAruNa-[ghora] dhvani ke sAtha bijalI
kA cmknaa| ise bijalI kar3akanA yA bijalI giranA bhI kahA jAtA hai  /  isakA
ATha prahara kA asvAdhyAya hotA hai  /

Page #516 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīthসূত্র (Nishīth Sutra)  **6. Yūpaka:** The mixed state of time during
sunset and lunar eclipse on the first, second, and third days of the Shukla
Paksha (bright fortnight) is called Yūpaka. During the first prahar (watch) of
these days, there is asvādhȳāya (unfavorable time for study). This is also
called the asvādhȳāya of the बालचन्द्र (young moon).  **7. Yakṣadīpta:** The
sight of numerous forms of luminous pudgalas (particles) in the light. This has
an asvādhȳāya of one prahar.  **8. Dhūmikā:** The falling of dark smoke. As long
as it persists, there is asvādhȳāya.  **9. Mahikā:** The falling of ordinary
smoke without darkness. As long as it persists, there is also asvādhȳāya. During
both these asvādhȳāyas, to avoid violating the apkāya (body), bodily and verbal
activities like copying are also not performed. The time for these occurrences
is the months of Kārttika, Mārgaśīrṣa, Pauṣa, and Māgha. In other words, during
these months, sometimes, in some places, smoke or mahikā falls. In some years,
it may not fall in some areas.  A similar sight occurs in mountainous regions
when clouds move around. However, their nature is different from smoke, so there
is no asvādhȳāya for them.  **10. Raj Udghata:** The covering of light by dust
and the falling of dust. As long as it persists, there is asvādhȳāya. The Bhāṣya
(commentary) states that if dust falls for three days with awareness, then after
that, apart from study, copying, etc., should also not be done because dust
spreads everywhere with awareness. These are the ten asvādhȳāyas related to the
sky.  **11-12-13. Hadḍī-Māṃsa-Khūna-Tiyanc:** If bone or flesh is visible within
60 hastas (cubits) for animals and 100 hastas for humans, there is asvādhȳāya.
If the bones are burnt or washed, there is no asvādhȳāya. Otherwise, there is
asvādhȳāya for 12 years. The same should be understood for teeth.  If blood is
visible or its smell is present, there is asvādhȳāya. Otherwise, there is no
asvādhȳāya. In other words, the limit of 60 hastas or 100 hastas does not apply
to this. There is asvādhȳāya for three prahars for the blood of animals and for
a whole day and night for human blood.  If a girl is born in a house near the
upāśraya (Jain temple), there is asvādhȳāya for eight days, and if a boy is
born, there is asvādhȳāya for seven days. In this, the limit of seven houses
attached to the wall is considered. If a birth occurs for an animal, there is
asvādhȳāya for three prahars after the placenta falls.  **14. Aśuci:** As long
as human excrement is visible or its smell is present, there is asvādhȳāya. If
the smell of animal excrement is present, there is asvādhȳāya, otherwise not.
There is asvādhȳāya near a urinal, etc., where the smell of human urine is
present. There is also asvādhȳāya where the smell of city drains and sewers is
present. If any human smells the bodily pudgalas of an animal, there is also
asvādhȳāya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ nizIthasUtra 6. yUpaka - zukla pakSa kI ekama, bIja aura tIja ke dina
sUryAsta hone evaM candra grasta hone ke samaya kI mizra avasthA ko yUpaka kahA
jAtA hai| ina dinoM ke prathama prahara meM asvAdhyAya hotA hai  /  ise
bAlacandra kA asvAdhyAya bhI kahA jAtA hai  /  416] 7. yakSAdIpta - prakAza meM
prakAzamAna pudgaloM kI aneka AkRtiyoM kA dRSTigocara honA  /  isakA eka prahara
kA prasvAdhyAya hotA hai  /  8. dhUmikA - aMdhakArayukta dhuara kA giranA  /
yaha jaba taka rahe taba taka isakA asvAdhyAyakAla rahatA hai  /  9. mahikA -
aMdhakAra rahita sAmAnya dhuara kA giranA  /  yaha jaba taka rahe taba taka
isakA bhI svAdhyAya rahatA hai  /  ina donoM prasvAdhyAyoM ke samaya apkAya kI
virAdhanA se bacane ke lie pratilekhana Adi kAyika- vAcika kArya bhI nahIM kie
jaate| inake hone kA samaya kArtika, mArgazIrSa, pauSa aura mAgha mAsa hai  /
arthAt ina garbhamAsoM meM kabhI-kabhI, kahIM-kahIM ghura yA mahikA giratI hai
/  kisI varSa kisI kSetra meM nahIM bhI giratI hai  /  parvatIya kSetroM meM
bAdaloM ke gamanAgamana karate rahane ke samaya bhI aisA dRzya hotA hai  /
kintu unakA svabhAva ghuMara se bhinna hotA hai ataH unakA asvAdhyAya nahIM hotA
hai  /  10. raja udghAta - prakAza meM dhUla kA AcchAdita honA aura raja kA
giranA  /  yaha jaba taka rahe taba taka asvAdhyAya hotA hai  /  bhASya meM
batAyA hai ki tIna dina sacitta raja giratI rahe to usake bAda svAdhyAya ke
sivAya pratilekhana Adi bhI nahIM karanA cAhie kyoMki sarvatra sacitta raja
vyApta ho jAtI hai  /  ye dasa AkAza sambandhI asvAdhyAya hai  /  11.-12-13.
haDDI-mAMsa- khUna-tiyaMca kI haDDI yA mAMsa 60 hAtha aura manuSya kI 100 hAtha
ke bhItara dRSTigata ho to asvAdhyAya hotA hai  /  haDDiyAM jalI huI yA dhulI
huI ho to usakA asvAdhyAya nahIM hotA hai  /  anyathA usakA 12 varSa taka
prasvAdhyAya hotA hai  /  isI taraha dAMta ke lie bhI samajhanA cAhie  /  khUna
jahA~ dRSTigocara ho yA gaMdha Ave to usakA asvAdhyAya hotA hai anyathA
asvAdhyAya nahIM hotA hai  /  arthAt 60 hAtha yA 100 hAtha kI maryAdA isake lie
nahIM hai  /  tiyaMca paMcendriya ke khUna kA tIna prahara aura manuSya ke khUna
kA ahorAtra taka asvAdhyAya hotA hai  /  upAzraya ke nikaTa ke gRha meM lar3akI
utpanna ho to ATha dina aura lar3akA ho to 7 dina svAdhyAya rahatA hai  /
isameM dIvAla se saMlagna sAta ghara kI maryAdA mAnI jAtI hai  /  tiryaMca
sambandhI prasUti ho to jarA girane ke bAda tIna prahara taka asvAdhyAya
samajhanA cAhie  /  14. azuci - manuSya kA mala jaba taka sAmane dIkhatA ho yA
gaMdha AtI ho taba taka vahA~ prasvAdhyAya samajhanA cAhie  /  tiryaMca ke mala
kI durgaMdha AtI ho to asvAdhyAya hotA hai, anyathA nahIM  /  manuSya ke mUtra
kI jahA~ durgaMdha AtI ho aise mUtrAlaya Adi ke nikaTa asvAdhyAya hotA hai  /
jahA~ para nagara kI nAliyAM gaTara Adi kI durgaMdha AtI ho vahA~ bhI asvAdhyAya
hotA hai  /  anya koI bhI manuSya tiryaMca ke zArIrika pudgaloM kI durgaMdha
prAtI ho to usakA bhI prasvAdhyAya samajhanA cAhie  /

Page #517 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nineteenth Uddeshak  [417]  15. **Asvadhyaya** (prohibition of study) occurs
around a **shmashan** (cremation ground).  16. **Surya Grahan** (solar eclipse):
If it is **apurn** (partial), **asvadhyaya** lasts for 12 **prahar** (3 hours),
and if it is **पूर्ण** (full), it lasts for 16 **prahar**. **Asvadhyaya** should
be considered to begin from the start of the eclipse. Alternatively,
**asvadhyaya** lasts for the entire day and night of the eclipse, and not on the
following day.  17. **Chandra Grahan** (lunar eclipse): If it is **apurn**
(partial), **asvadhyaya** lasts for 8 **prahar**, and if it is **पूर्ण** (full),
it lasts for 12 **prahar**. This should be understood from the beginning of the
eclipse. Alternatively, **asvadhyaya** should be considered from the beginning
of the lunar eclipse that night until the next day's **chandrodya** (moonrise).
After that, **asvadhyaya** does not continue.  18. **Patan** (fall): When a
prominent person like a king or minister dies, **asvadhyaya** should be
considered in that city until the mourning period ends and a new king is
established. **Asvadhyaya** should also be considered for one **aho-ratra** (day
and night) in their kingdom.  19. **Raj-vyudgrah** (war): **Asvadhyaya** occurs
near the location of the war or in the capital city where the war is taking
place. After the war ends, **asvadhyaya** lasts for one **aho-ratra**.  20.
**Audarik Kalevar** (corpse): If a human corpse is lying in an **upaashray**
(temple), **asvadhyaya** occurs within 100 **haath** (cubits). If it is a
**tiryanch** (animal) corpse, **asvadhyaya** lasts for 60 **haath**. However,
according to tradition, **asvadhyaya** lasts within the boundaries of the
**upaashray** as long as the **audarik kalevar** remains. **Asvadhyaya** lasts
for 3 **prahar** for a dead or broken egg.  These are the ten **asvadhyaya**
related to **audarik** (corpse). The discussion of all these 20 **asvadhyaya**
is mainly based on the **bhashya** (commentary), so refer to **Nishith Bhashya**
verses 60786162; **Vyav. U. 7 Bhashya** verses 272-386; **Abhi. Ra. Kosh** part
1 page 827, the word "**asajjhaiy**".  If one studies during these 32 types of
**asvadhyaya**, it is a violation of **jina-gyan** (Jain knowledge) and may even
lead to **upadrav** (disturbance) by the **dev** (deities). It also does not
constitute pure **gyanachar** (practice of knowledge) but rather **atichaar**
(excess).  Studying **svadhyay** (self-study) in **dhumika** (introduction) and
**mahika** (main part) also contradicts **apkay** (non-violence).  Studying
**svadhyay** during the ten **asvadhyaya** related to **audarik** also goes
against **lok vyavahar** (social conduct) and does not respect the **sutra**
(scripture).  Studying **svadhyay** during war and the death of a king may cause
**apreeti** (displeasure) or **dvesh** (hatred) towards the **sadhu** (saint)
from the king or royal officials.  The main reason for prohibiting **svadhyay**
during **asvadhyaya** is that **Bhag. Sh. 5, U. 4** states that **dev**
(deities) speak in **ardhamagadi** language, which is also the language of the
**agams** (scripture). Therefore, there is a possibility of **upadrav**
(disturbance) by **mithyatvi** (false believers) and **kautuhali** (curious)
**dev**.  These locations of **asvadhyaya** also indicate that the practice of
**svadhyay** involves repeating the **pragama** (scripture) with clear
pronunciation. It is in this context that these **asvadhyaya** are mentioned.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavAM uddezaka] [417 15. zmazAna-zmazAna ke nikaTa cAroM tarapha asvAdhyAya
hotA hai  /  16. sUryagrahaNa-apUrNa ho to 12 prahara aura pUrNa ho to 16
prahara taka asvAdhyAya hotA hai, sUryagrahaNa ke prArambha se asvAdhyAya kA
prArambha samajhanA cAhie  /  athavA jisa dina ho usa pUre dina-rAta taka
asvAdhyAya hotA hai, dUsare dina asvAdhyAya nahIM rahatA hai  /  17.
candragrahaNa-apUrNa ho to ATha prahara aura pUrNa ho to 12 prahara taka
asvAdhyAya rahatA hai  /  yaha grahaNa ke prArambha kAla se samajhanA cAhie  /
athavA usa rAtri meM candragrahaNa ke prArambha se agale dina jaba taka
candrodaya na ho taba taka asvAdhyAya samajhanA cAhie  /  usake bAda asvAdhyAya
nahIM rahatA hai| 18. patana-rAjA mantrI Adi pramukha vyakti kI mRtyu hone para
usa nagarI meM jaba taka zoka rahe aura nayA rAjA sthApita na ho taba taka
asvAdhyAya samajhanA aura usake rAjya meM bhI eka ahorAtra kA asvAdhyAya
samajhanA caahie| 19. rAja-vyudgraha-jahA~ rAjAoM kA yuddha cala rahA ho usa
sthala ke nikaTa yA rAjadhAnI meM asvAdhyAya rahatA hai  /  yuddha ke samApta
hone ke bAda eka ahorAtra taka asvAdhyAya kAla rahatA hai| 20. audArika
kalevara-upAzraya meM mRta manuSya kA zarIra par3A ho to 100 hAtha ke bhItara
asvAdhyAya hotA hai| tiryaMca kA zarIra ho to 60 hAtha taka asvAdhyAya hotA hai
/  kintu paramparA se yaha mAnyatA hai ki audArika kalevara jaba taka rahe taba
taka usa upAzraya kI sImA meM asvAdhyAya rahatA hai  /  mRta yA bhagna aMDe kA
tIna prahara taka asvAdhyAya rahatA hai| ye dasa audArika sambandhI asvAdhyAya
haiN| ina sabhI (20 hI) asvAdhyAyoM kA vivecana prAyaH bhASya ke AdhAra se kiyA
gayA hai ataH pramANa ke lie dekheMnizItha bhASya gA. 60786162; vyava. u. 7
bhASya gA. 272-386; abhi. rA. koSa bhAga 1 pR. 827 'asajjhAiya' zabda  /  ina 32
prakAra ke asvAdhyAyoM meM svAdhyAya karane para jinAjJA kA ullaMghana hotA hai
aura kadAcita deva dvArA upadrava bhI ho sakatA hai| tathA jJAnAcAra kI zuddha
pArAdhanA nahIM hotI hai apitu aticAra kA sevana hotA hai| dhUmikA, mahikA meM
svAdhyAya Adi karane se apkAya kI virAdhanA bhI hotI hai  /  audArika sambandhI
dasa asvAdhyAya meM svAdhyAya karane para loka vyavahAra se viruddha AcaraNa bhI
hotA hai tathA sUtra kA sammAna bhI nahIM rahatA hai  /  yuddha samaya aura rAja
mRtya-samaya meM svAdhyAya karane para rAjA yA rAja karmacAriyoM ko sAdhu ke
prati aprIti yA dveSa utpanna ho sakatA hai  /  asvAdhyAya meM svAdhyAya ke
niSedha karane kA pramukha kAraNa yaha hai ki bhaga. za. 5, u. 4 meM devoM ko
ardhamAgadhI bhASA kahI hai aura yahI bhASA Agama kI bhI hai  /  ataH mithyAtvI
evaM kautuhalI devoM ke dvArA upadrava karane kI sambhAvanA banI rahatI hai|
asvAdhyAya ke ina sthAnoM se yaha bhI jJAta hotA hai ki spaSTa ghoSa ke sAtha
uccAraNa karate hue prAgamoM ko punarAvRtti rUpa svAdhyAya karane kI paddhati
hotI hai  /  isI apekSA se ye asvAdhyAya kahe

Page #518 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **418]**  [These are the Nishītha Sūtras. However,
there is no Asvadhyāya (unsuitable study) in studying the Āgama which is
translated in relation to these.   The specific rule regarding Asvadhyāya is
that there is no Asvadhyāya in the reading and recitation of the essential
Sūtras, because this is always to be done at the time of both Sandhyās
(twilight). Therefore, the recitation of the "Namaskāra Mantra", "Logass" etc.,
essential Sūtras can be read or spoken always and everywhere.  If one becomes
aware of any Asvadhyāya, then to complete the remaining study or objective,
there is a Prāyaścitta (atonement) for studying.  If one needs to purify the
blood etc. of a Tiryanch (non-human) Panchendriya (five-sensed being) or a human
being with water, then one should go 60 hands or 100 hands away from the study
place and do it. The blood or body of a Tri-indriya (three-sensed being) or
Chatur-indriya (four-sensed being) is not considered Asvadhyāya.  If there is a
highway in the midst of the Audārika (impure) substances, then there is no
Asvadhyāya. Even if there is any Audārika Asvadhyāya left after studying
properly in the Upāśraya (monastery) and outside up to 60 hands, then the
Prāyaścitta mentioned in the Sūtras does not apply.  Therefore, the Bhikshu
should study by transcribing and considering all types of Asvadhyāyas during the
day, and at night, he should transcribe the Kāla-pratilekhan (time-
transcription) in three places where all directions and the sky are clearly
visible when standing. Due to rain etc., Kāla-pratilekhan can also be done in a
house sometimes.  In a very large group of Śramaṇas, two Sadhus (monks) do Kāla-
pratilekhan after taking permission from the Āchārya (teacher), then all the
Sadhus study after being informed. If the cause of Asvadhyāya is known in
between, then the study is stopped after making a complete decision about it.
Even though Svādhyāya (study) is a means of inner penance and great Nirjarā
(purification), studying in Asvadhyāya violates Jināgnā (Jain teachings), leads
to Karma-bandha (bondage of karma) due to violation of rules, sometimes brings
disgrace, therefore, it leads to violation of restraint and Prāyaścitta. -
Nishītha Chūṇī presents this Sūtra.  Therefore, the Svādhyāya-priya Bhikshu
should always be careful about Asvadhyāyas.  **Prāyaścitta for studying in one's
own Asvadhyāya**  **15.** Je Bhikkhu appano asajjhaie sajjaayam karei, karentam
vā saijjai.  **15.** The Bhikshu who studies in his own physical Asvadhyāya or
approves of the one who studies (receives the Laghu-chaumāso Prāyaścitta).
**Discussion:** One's own Asvadhyāya is of two types: 1. Wound-related 2.
Menstrual-related. In this, the Bhikshu has one type of Asvadhyāya and the
Bhikshuni has both types.  When blood or pus comes out of boils, ulcers, warts
etc. in the body, then there is Asvadhyāya. After purifying it, one can study
outside 100 hands.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 418] [nizIthasUtra haiN| kintu inakI anuprekSA meM yA bhASAMtarita hue Agama kA
svAdhyAya karane meM asvAdhyAya nahIM hotA hai| asvAdhyAya ke sambandha meM
vizeSa vidhAna yaha hai ki Avazyaka sUtra ke paThana-pAThana meM asvAdhyAya
nahIM hotA hai kyoMki yaha sadA ubhayakAla saMdhyA samaya meM hI avazya karaNIya
hotA hai| ataH 'namaskAra mantra', "logassa'' Adi Avazyaka sUtra ke pATha bhI
sadA sarvatra par3he yA bole jA sakate haiM  /  kisI bhI asvAdhyAya kI jAnakArI
hone ke bAda zeSa rahe hue adhyayana yA uddezaka ko pUrNa karane ke lie
svAdhyAya karane para prAyazcitta AtA hai| tiryaMca paMceMdriya yA manuSya ke
rakta Adi kI jala se zuddhi karanA ho to svAdhyAya sthala se 60 hAtha yA 100
hAtha dUra jAkara karanI cAhie  /  trindriya caturiMdriya ke khUna yA kalevara
kA asvAdhyAya nahIM ginA jAtA hai| audArika sambandhI azuci padArthoM ke bIca
meM rAjamArga ho to asvAdhyAya nahIM hotA hai| upAzraya meM tathA bAhara 60
hAtha taka acchI taraha pratilekhana karake svAdhyAya karane para bhI koI
audArika asvAdhyAya raha jAya to sUtrokta prAyazcitta nahIM AtA hai| ataH bhikSu
dina meM sabhI prakAra ke asvAdhyAyoM kA pratilekhana evaM vicAra karake
svAdhyAya kare aura rAtri meM svAdhyAyakAla pratilekhana karane yogya arthAt
jahAM para khar3e hone para sabhI dizAeM evaM AkAza spaSTa dikheM aisI tIna
bhUmiyoM kA sUryAsta pUrva pratilekhana kare  /  varSA Adi ke kAraNa se kabhI
makAna meM rahakara bhI kAla pratilekhana kiyA jA sakatA hai| bahuta bar3e
zramaNa samUha meM do sAdhu AcArya kI AjJA lekara kAla pratilekhana karate haiM,
phira sUcanA dene para sabhI sAdhu svAdhyAya karate haiN| bIca meM asvAdhyAya kA
kAraNa jJAta ho jAne para usakA pUrNa nirNaya karake svAdhyAya banda kara diyA
jAtA hai| svAdhyAya Abhyantara tapa evaM mahAn nirjarA kA sAdhana hote hue bhI
asvAdhyAya meM svAdhyAya karane para jinAjJA kA ullaMghana hotA hai, maryAdA
bhaMga Adi se karmabandha hotA hai, kabhI apayaza bhI hotA hai isalie saMyama
virAdhanA kI evaM prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| -nizIthacUNi prastuta sUtra  /
ataH svAdhyAya-priya bhikSu ko asvAdhyAyoM ke sambandha meM bhI sadA sAvadhAnI
rakhanI caahie| svakIya asvAdhyAya meM svAdhyAya karane kA prAyazcitta 15. je
bhikkhU appaNo asajjhAie sajjhAyaM karei, kareMtaM vA sAijjai  /  15. jo bhikSu
apanI zArIrika asvAdhyAya meM svAdhyAya karatA hai yA svAdhyAya karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  (use laghucaumAso prAyazcitta pAtA hai  / ) vivecana-
svayaM kA asvAdhyAya do prakAra kA hotA hai-1. vraNa sambandhI 2. Rtudharma
sambandhI  /  isameM bhikSu ke eka prakAra kA evaM bhikSuNI ke donoM prakAra kA
asvAdhyAya hotA hai| zarIra meM phor3e-phunsI, bhagaMdara, masA Adi se jaba
rakta yA pIva bAhara AtA hai taba usakA asvAdhyAya hotA hai| usakI zuddhi karake
100 hAtha ke bAhara paraThakara svAdhyAya kiyA jA sakatA

Page #519 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nineteenth Uddeshak  [419. Even after purification, if blood etc. continues
to flow, then self-study cannot be done. But by tying one or two excellent
three-layered cloths, mutual recitation of Agamas can be done. If blood appears
again outside the three layers, then it is necessary to purify them again.  The
period of non-self-study during menstruation lasts for three days. But in
Uddeshak 7, Sutra 17 of Vyavahar Sutra, the provision of mutual recitation
during one's non-self-study period is mentioned. Its commentary explains the
procedure as follows: After purifying blood etc., by applying one or two or, if
necessary, seven excellent layered cloths, Sadhus and Sadhvis can mutually
recite Agamas. For proof, see Vyav. U. 7, Commentary Ga. 390-394 and
Nishithabhashya Ga. 6167-6170. And Abhi. Rajendra Kosh Part 1, Page 833 "Asaj
It should be understood that all the non-self-study Agamas mentioned in Sutras
14 and 15 are related to the recitation of their original text, as they are in
the language of the Gods.  Therefore, there is no prohibition on understanding
the meaning of Agamas, or on contemplation, questioning, listening to
explanations, etc. during menstruation, etc. Similarly, there is no prohibition
for householders to perform Samayik, etc., Sanvara practices, daily rituals, and
remembering the Lord, etc.  If the rules of Agama self-study are applied to
Dharma practices like Samayik, Pratikraman, etc., then it would be a violation
of the principle of differentiation and would hinder all Dharma activities. It
is an inappropriate attempt to apply the rules of one subject to another.  When
the Agama-maker himself prescribes the recitation of Agamas during one's own
non-self-study period due to menstruation, etc., in Vyav. Uddeshak 7, then it is
absolutely not appropriate for any Acharya to prohibit the recitation of
Samayik, Pratikraman, remembering the Lord, Namaskar Mantra, and Logassa, etc.
Because, if such an opposite view of the Agama is held, then even on the day of
the Sanvatsari Mahaparva, one would be deprived of all religious practices like
Pratikraman, listening to explanations, seeing the Muni, and reciting Namaskar
Mantras, etc. A householder deprived of all Dharma practices would be engaged in
careless conduct and negligence even on festival days, therefore, such
differentiation is completely inappropriate.  Therefore, during their own non-
self-study period, Shravaks and Shravikas should perform Samayik, Pratikraman,
etc., activities with discretion, and there should be no fault in this. And
during these three days of abstinence from household duties, they should spend
the maximum time in Sanvara, etc., Dharma activities. Sadhvis should also spend
their time in other studies, listening, service, penance, self-reflection,
meditation, etc.  Penance for reciting Agamas in the opposite order:  16. The
monk who recites the lower Samavasarana while being in the higher Samavasarana,
or vice versa, commits a sin.  17. The monk who recites the lower Brahmacharia
while being in the higher Brahmacharia, or vice versa, commits a sin.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavAM uddezaka] [419 hai| zuddhi karane ke bAda bhI rakta Adi nikalatA rahe
to svAdhyAya nahIM kiyA jA sktaa| kintu usake eka-do utkRSTa tIna paTa vastra ke
bAMdhakara paraspara Amaga kI vAMcanI lI-dI jA sakatI hai, tIna taTa ke bAhara
punaH khUna dIkhane laga jAe to phira unheM zuddha karanA Avazyaka hotA hai|
Rtudharma kA asvAdhyAya tIna dina taka rahatA hai| kintu vyavahAra sUtra ke
uddezaka 7, sUtra 17 meM apane asvAdhyAya meM paraspara vAMcaNI lene-dene kA
vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| usakI bhASya meM vidhi isa prakAra batAI hai ki-rakta Adi
kI zuddhi karake AvazyakatAnusAra eka-do athavA utkRSTa sAta vastra paTa
lagAkara sAdhu-sAdhvI paraspara AgamoM kI vAMcaNI de-le sakate haiN| pramANa ke
lie dekheMvyava. u. 7, bhASya gA. 390-394 tathA nizIthabhASya gA. 6167-6170.
tathA abhi. rAjendra koza bhAga 1 pR. 833 "asaja sUtra 14 aura 15 meM varNita
sabhI asvAdhyAya AgamoM ke deva vANI meM hone se usake mUlapATha ke uccAraNa se
hI sambandhita jAnane caahie| ataH mAsika dharma Adi avasthA meM AgamoM ke artha
vAMcanA yA anuprekSA, pRcchA, vyAkhyAna zravaNa Adi karane kA niSedha nahIM hai
tathA gRhastha ko sAmAyika Adi saMvara pravRtti evaM nitya niyama tathA prabha-
stuti-smaraNa karane kA niSedha bhI nahIM hai| . Agama svAdhyAya ke niyama yadi
sAmAyika pratikramaNa Adi dharma pravRttiyoM ke lie bhI lAgU kie jAveM to yaha
prarUpaNA kA atikramaNa hotA hai evaM samasta dharmakriyAoM meM aMtarAya hotA
hai| eka viSaya ke niyama ko anya viSaya meM jor3anA anucita prayatna hai  /
vyava. uddezaka 7 meM jaba svayaM AgamakAra mAsika dharma Adi ke apane
asvAdhyAya meM Agama kI vAMcaNI lene kA bhI vidhAna karate haiM to phira kisI
bhI prAcArya ke dvArA sAmAyika, pratikramaNa, prabhusmaraNa, namaskAra mantra
evaM logassa Adi ke uccAraNa kA niSedha kiyA jAnA kadApi ucita nahIM kahA jA
sakatA hai| kyoMki isa prakAra kI Agama viparIta mAnyatA rakhane para saMvatsarI
mahAparva ke dina bhI Sadha. pratikramaNa. vyAkhyAnazravaNa, mani darzana evaM
namaskAra mantroccAraNa Adi sabhI dhArmika pravRttiyoM se vaMcita rahanA par3atA
hai| sabhI prakAra kI dharma pravRttiyoM se vaMcita gRhastha parva dinoM meM bhI
sAvadha pravRtti evaM pramAda meM hI saMlagna hotA hai isalie aisI prarUpaNA
karanA sarvathA anucita hai| ataH svakIya asvAdhyAya meM zrAvaka zrAvikA
vivekapUrvaka sAmAyika pratikramaNa Adi kriyA kareM to isameM koI doSa nahIM
samajhanA cAhie aura gRha kAryoM se nivRtti ke ina tIna dinoM meM unako saMvara
Adi dharmakriyA meM hI adhikatama samaya vyatIta karanA cAhiye  /  sAdhviyoM ko
bhI anya adhyayana, zravaNa, sevA, tapa, Atmacintana, dhyAna Adi meM samaya
vyatIta karanA caahiye| viparIta krama se prAgamoM kI vAMcanA dene kA
prAyazcitta 16. je bhikkhU hechillAiM samosaraNAI avAettA uvarillAiM samosaraNAI
vAei vAyaMtaM vA saaijji| 17. je bhikkhU Nava baMbhacerAI avAettA uttama-suyaM
vAei vAeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  .

Page #520 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[420] [Nishīthasūtra 16. A monk who recites or approves the recitation of later
recitation-worthy sūtras without first reciting the earlier recitation-worthy
sūtras. 17. A monk who recites or approves the recitation of Uttamaśruta without
first reciting the first Śruta-skandha called Nava-brahmacarya-adhyayana. (He
incurs the Laghu-cāumāsī prāyaścitta.) Discussion - Just as a group of people
sitting together and listening to someone's discourse is called "samavasarana",
similarly, the Āgama which contains the collection of discussions of many
principles is also called "samavasarana". Just as the first (or lower) floor of
a house is called "heṭṭhill" (adhastana) and the second floor is called
"uvarill", similarly, here in the sūtra, the Āgama of the first recitation is
called "heṭṭhill" and the Āgama of the subsequent recitation is called
"uvarill". Therefore, the Āgama, Śruta-skandha, adhyayana, uddeśaka, etc., which
are to be recited first in sequence, are recited first, and those which are to
be recited later are recited later. For example: 1. The recitation of
Ācārāṅgasūtra is done first and the recitation of Sūyagaḍaṅgasūtra is done
later. 2. The recitation of the first Śruta-skandha is done first and the
recitation of the second Śruta-skandha is done later. 3. The recitation of the
first adhyayana and in it also the first uddeśaka is done first and the
recitation of the subsequent adhyayana uddeśakas is done later. The Cūrṇikāra
has stated here that the Āvaśyaka-sūtra is the first recitation-sūtra in
comparison to the Daśavaikalika. The Daśavaikalika-sūtra is the first
recitation-sūtra in comparison to the Uttarādhyayana-sūtra. Even in the
Āvaśyaka-sūtra, the Samāyika adhyayana is the first recitation-worthy, the
remaining adhyayana are recitation-worthy in sequence thereafter. Vyav. U. 10
gives the order of recitation of the Kālika sūtras and also explains the
relationship of the dīkṣā paryaya. In that order, the Utkalikaśruta and
Jñātādharmkathā etc. angas are not mentioned. Only the order of Ācāraśāstra and
Saṅgraha śāstras is given. Therefore, it should be understood that there is no
definite order of the Jñātādi Kālika-sūtra and Uvvai etc. Utkalika sūtras which
describe the story or the life of a tapasvi samyami. And many sūtras have been
composed and compiled after the composition of the Vyavahāra-sūtra. Therefore,
their study order is not there. Therefore, the Gītartha Muni can recite them
whenever he finds an opportunity. The prāyaścitta mentioned in the present sūtra
should be understood as an inversion of the order mentioned in the Vyavahāra-
sūtra. The above order of Āvaśyaka-sūtra and Uttarādhyayana-sūtra mentioned by
the Cūrṇikāra should be understood as the order before Ācārāṅga.  ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 420] [ nizIthasUtra 16. jo bhikSu pahale vAcanA dene yogya sUtroM kI vAcanA die
binA bAda meM vAcanA dene yogya sUtroM kI vAcanA detA hai yA dene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  17. jo bhikSu nava brahmacarya adhyayana nAmaka
prathama zrutaskandha kI vAcanA die binA uttamazruta kI vAcanA detA hai yA dene
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  ( use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai  / )
vivecana - jisa prakAra janasamUha kahIM para baiThakara kisI kA pravacana
sunatA hai usa sthAna ko " samavasaraNa" kahA jAtA hai vaise hI aneka tattvoM kI
carcAoM kA jisa zrAgama meM saMgraha ho usa Agama ko bhI " samavasaraNa " kahA
jAtA hai  /  jisa prakAra makAna kI prathama ( yA nIce kI ) maMjila ko heTThilla
( adhastana ) kahA jAtA hai aura dUsarI maMjila ko "uvarilla" kahA jAtA hai, usI
prakAra yahA~ sUtra meM prathama vAcanA ke Agama ko "heTThilla" aura usake bAda
kI vAcanA ke Agama ko " uvarilla" kahA gayA hai  /  ataH Agama, zrutaskandha,
adhyayana, uddezaka Adi jo anukrama se pahale vAcanA dene ke haiM unakI vAcanA
pahale dI jAtI hai aura jinakI vAcanA bAda meM dene kI hai unakI vAcanA bAda meM
dI jAtI hai  /  yathA 1. AcArAMgasUtra kI vAcanA pahale dI jAtI hai aura
sUyagaDAMgasUtra kI vAcanA bAda meM dI jAtI hai  /  2. prathama zrutaskandha kI
vAcanA pahale dI jAtI hai aura dvitIya zrutaskandha kI vAcanA bAda meM dI jAtI
hai  /  3. prathama adhyayana kI evaM usameM bhI prathama uddezaka kI vAcanA
pahale dI jAtI hai aura Age ke adhyayana uddezakoM kI vAcanA bAda meM dI jAtI
hai  /  cUrNikAra ne yahA~ batAyA hai ki dazavaikAlika kI apekSA AvazyakasUtra
prathama vAcanA- sUtra hai  /  uttarAdhyayanasUtra kI apekSA dazavaikAlikasUtra
prathama vAcanA -sUtra hai  /  Avazyaka sUtra meM bhI sAmAyika adhyayana
prathama vAcanA yogya hai, zeSa adhyayana krama se pazcAt vAcanA yogya hai  /
vyava. u. 10 meM kAlika sUtroM kI vAcanA kA krama diyA hai tathA sAtha hI dIkSA
paryAya kA sambandha bhI batAyA gayA hai  /  usa krama meM utkAlikazruta evaM
jJAtAdharmakathA Adi aMgoM kA ullekha nahIM hai  /  zrAcArazAstra evaM saMgraha
zAstroM kA hI krama diyA hai  /  ataH kathA yA tapomaya saMyamI jIvana ke
varNana vAle jJAtAdi kAlikasUtra evaM uvavAI Adi utkAlika sUtroM kA koI nizcita
krama nahIM hai, aisA samajhanA cAhie tathA kitane hI sUtroM kI racanA -
saMkalanA bhI vyavahArasUtra kI racanA ke bAda meM huI hai  /  jisase unakA
adhyayanakrama vahA~ nahIM hai  /  ataH gItArtha muni unakI vAcanA yogya avasara
dekhakara kabhI bhI de sakate haiM  /  prastuta sUtragata prAyazcitta,
vyavahArasUtra meM kahe gae anukrama kI apekSA utkrama karane para samajhanA
cAhie  /  Avazyaka sUtra evaM uttarAdhyayanasUtra kA uparyukta krama jo
cUrNikAra ne batAyA hai use AcArAMga ke pUrva kA krama hI samajhanA cAhie  /

Page #521 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nineteenth Uddeshak] [421 The first Shruta Skandha of the Acharyaanga Sutra
describes the teachings that encourage steadfastness in restraint, detachment
and faith, as well as the ideas of Parishhajay, etc. Brahmacharya is a synonym
for restraint or it is the main part of restraint. Therefore, the first Shruta
Skandha is known as "Nav Bhamcheer". One country takes the whole. Therefore,
Churnikar has said - "Nav Bhamcheer Gahnen Samvo Ayaroo Gahito Ahva Savvo
Charananuogo" i.e. from the statement of Nav-Brahmacharya, the entire
Acharyaanga Sutra or the entire Charananuyog (the science of conduct) should be
taken. The reference to the Chhedasutra and Drishtivad Sutra from "Uttamashrut"
is made in the Bhashya Ga. 6184. The Chhedasutras are called "Uttamashrut"
because they describe the Utsarga, Apavad Kalpas, as well as the Pratikshetra
and Sangha system. Drishtivad is also called Uttamashrut because it describes
the four Anuyogs and the subtle description of substances from Nay and Praman,
etc., and because it is very vast. The meaning of the 17th Sutra is that when a
monk with special qualifications becomes steadfast in the knowledge and practice
of the principles of restraint, he is given the reading of "Uttamashrut". Or, we
can also understand that the 17th Sutra is an exception to the 16th Sutra,
because in the 17th Sutra, the word "Uttmasuyam" is often found in all the
copies as "Uvarimsuyam". From this perspective, the combined meaning of both the
Sutras is that if any Sutra, etc., is read in reverse order, then Pratikshetra
arises, but if it is absolutely necessary to read the later Sutras due to
special reasons, then at least the first Shruta Skandha of the Acharyaanga Sutra
should be studied and Pratikshetra arises even if the later Sutras are read
without studying it. In this exceptional situation, there may be many reasons
like lack of time for the Sutra-arth-vicched or the reader, etc. But if any
order is violated without any exceptional circumstances, the reader incurs
Pratikshetra. The defects in reading in reverse order are: 1. Not understanding
the later subject without understanding the previous subject, 2. The opposite
result of Utsarga-Apavad, 3. Not studying the previous subject after studying
the later subject, 4. Being called Bahushrut, etc., without full qualification,
etc. Therefore, all the Sutras should be read in the order prescribed by the
Agamas. In these Sutras and in many other Sutras that will be found later,
Pratikshetra has been mentioned for the reader, but there is no provision for
Pratikshetra for the listener. The reason for this is that it is the
responsibility of the reader to decide who should be given what reading? The
word "vachana" has been used in the Sutras to refer to the study of the meaning,
and the words "uddesha, samuddesha" have been used to refer to the study of the
original Agama. But here

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavAM uddezaka] [421 prAcArAMga prathama zrutaskandha ke nava adhyayanoM
meM saMyama meM dRr3hatA, vairAgya evaM zraddhA, parISahajaya Adi ke vicAroM ko
protsAhana dene vAle upadeza kA varNana hai  /  brahmacarya saMyama kA hI eka
paryAyavAcI zabda hai athavA yaha saMyama kA mukhya aMga hai  /  isalie prathama
zrutaskandha kA "nava baMbhacera" nAma prasiddha hai| eka deza se sampUrNa kA
grahaNa ho jAtA hai  /  ataH cUrNikAra ne kahA hai-"nava baMbhacera gahaNeNa
samvo AyAro gahito ahavA savvo caraNANuogoM" arthAt nava-brahmacarya ke kathana
se sampUrNa AcArAMga sUtra athavA sampUrNa caraNAnuyoga (AcAra zAstra ko)
grahaNa kara lenA caahie| "uttamazruta" se chedasUtra tathA dRSTivAda sUtra kA
nirdeza bhASya gA. 6184 meM kiyA gayA hai| utsarga, apavAda kalpoM kA tathA
prAyazcitta evaM saMgha vyavasthA kA varNana hone se chedasUtroM ko
"uttamazruta" kI saMjJA dI gaI hai| cAroM anuyogoM kA tathA naya aura pramANa
Adi se dravyoM kA sUkSmatama varNana hone se tathA atyanta vizAla hone se
dRSTivAda ko bhI uttamazruta kahA jAtA hai| 17veM sUtra kA Azaya yaha hai ki
saMyama ke prAcAra kA jJAna evaM pAlana karane meM dRDhatA ho jAne para vizeSa
yogyatA vAle bhikSu ko "uttamazruta" kI vAcanA dI jAtI hai| athavA 16veM sUtra
meM yaha 17vAM apavAda sUtra hai aisA bhI samajha sakate haiM, kyoMki 17veM
sUtra meM "uttamasuyaM" ke sthAna para "uvarimasuyaM" pATha prAyaH sabhI
pratiyoM meM upalabdha hotA hai| isa apekSA se donoM sUtroM kA sammilita
bhAvArtha yaha hotA hai ki kisI bhI sUtra Adi ko vyutkrama se par3hAne para
prAyazcitta AtA hai, kintu vizeSa kAraNoM se Age ke sUtroM kI vAMcanA karanA
atyAvazyaka ho to kama se kama AcArAMgasUtra ke prathama zrutaskandha kA
adhyayana to avazya karA hI denA cAhie aura usakA adhyayana karAye binA apavAda
rUpa se bhI Age ke sUtra par3hAne para prAyazcitta prAtA hai| isa apavAda sthiti
meM sUtrArtha-viccheda yA vAcanAdAtA kA samayAbhAva Adi aneka kAraNa ho sakate
haiN| kintu binA kisI apavAdika paristhiti ke kisI bhI krama ko bhaMga karane
para vAcanAdAtA ko prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  vyutkrama se vAcanA dene meM hone
vAle doSa 1. pUrva ke viSaya ko samajhe binA Age kA viSaya samajha meM nahIM
AnA, 2. utsarga-apavAda kA viparIta pariNamana honA, 3. Age kA adhyayana karane
ke bAda pUrva kA adhyayana nahIM karanA. 4. pUrNa yogyatA binA bahuzruta Adi
kahalAnA, ityAdi  /  ataH Agamokta krama se hI sabhI sUtroM kI vAcanA denA
caahie| ina sUtroM meM tathA Age bhI pAne vAle aneka sUtroM meM, vAcanA dene
vAle ko prAyazcitta kahA hai, vAcanA grahaNa karane vAle ke prAyazcitta kA yahA~
vidhAna nahIM hai  /  isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki yaha vAcanA dene vAle kI
jimmedArI kA hI viSaya hai ki kise kyA vAcanA denA? sUtroM meM artha kA
adhyayana karAne ke lie "vAcanA" zabda kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai, aura mUla Agama
kA adhyayana karAne ke lie "uddeza, samuddeza" zabdoM kA prayoga kiyA gayA hai
/  kintu yahA~

Page #522 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[422] [Nishīthasūtra] It should be understood that this is a prāyaścitta
(atonement) concerning both the text and its meaning, in brief, from the
Vācanāsūtra, since there are no separate sūtras. From these two sūtras and their
discussions, the order of Vācanā can be understood as follows: 1. Āvashyaka
Sūtra 2. Daśavaikālika Sūtra 3. Uttarādhyayana Sūtra 4. Ācārāṅga Sūtra 5.
Nishīthasūtra 6. Sūyagaḍāṅga Sūtra 7. Three Chhedasūtras (Daśāśruta Skandha
Sūtra, Bṛhatkalpa Sūtra, Vyavahāra Sūtra) 8. Ṭhānāṅga Sūtra, Samavāyāṅga Sūtra
9. Bhagavati Sūtra The remaining Kālika or Utkalika Sūtras should be studied or
taught at any point in the middle or after this study order, as per the command
of Gītartha Muni. This order should be understood as the Āgama system for
memorizing the Āgama in its original and meaningful form. Prāyaścitta for giving
Vācanā to the ineligible and not giving it to the eligible 18. Je bhikṣū
appaṭṭaṁ vāeī, vāeṁtaṁ vā sāijjī. 19. Je bhikṣū paṭṭaṁ ṇa vāeī, ṇa vāeṁtaṁ vā
sāijjī. 20. Je bhikṣū avvaṭṭaṁ vāeī, vāeṁtaṁ vā sāijjī. 21. Je bhikṣū vaṭṭaṁ ṇa
vāeī, ṇa vāeṁtaṁ vā sāijjī. 18. The bhikṣu who gives Vācanā to the ineligible
(apaṭṭa) or approves of the one who gives it. 19. The bhikṣu who does not give
Vācanā to the eligible (paṭṭa) or approves of the one who does not give it. 20.
The bhikṣu who gives Vācanā to the unmanifested (avvaṭṭa) or approves of the one
who gives it. 21. The bhikṣu who does not give Vācanā to the manifested (vaṭṭa)
or approves of the one who does not give it. (He incurs the Laghuchauṁāsī
prāyaścitta.) Discussion - In the previous sūtras, the prāyaścitta for not
giving Vācanā in order, of the sūtras, and of the study, uddeśaka, etc., has
been stated. Because, by receiving the Vācanā of the Āgama-designated primary
sūtra, study, uddeśaka, etc., one becomes eligible for the Vācanā of the
subsequent sūtras, study, uddeśaka, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 422] [nizIthasUtra alaga-alaga sUtra na hone se saMkSepa meM vAcanAsUtra se
mUla evaM artha donoM hI prakAra kI vAcanA viSayaka yaha prAyazcitta hai aisA
samajha lenA caahie| ina donoM sUtroM se evaM unake vivecana se vAcanA kA krama
isa prakAra se samajhA jA sakatA hai1. Avazyaka sUtra 2. dazavaikAlika sUtra 3.
uttarAdhyayana sUtra 4. AcArAMgasUtra 5. nizIthasUtra 6. sUyagaDAMgasUtra 7.
tIna chedasUtra (dazAzrutaskandhasUtra, bRhatkalpasUtra, vyavahAra sUtra) 8.
ThANAMga sUtra, samavAyAMga sUtra 9. bhagavatI sUtra zeSa kAlika yA
utkAlikasUtra isa adhyayana krama ke madhya meM yA bAda meM kahIM bhI gItArtha
muni kI AjJA se adhyayana karanA yA karAnA cAhie  /  isa krama se hI mUla aura
artharUpa Agama ko kaMThastha karane kI Agama praNAlI samajhanI caahie| ayogya
ko vAcanA dene evaM yogya ko na dene kA prAyazcitta 18. je bhikkhU apattaM vAei,
vAeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  19. je bhikkhU pattaM Na vAei, Na vAeMtaM vA saaijji| 20.
je bhikkhU avvattaM vAei, vAeMtaM vA saaijji| 21. je bhikkhU vattaM Na vAei, Na
vAeMtaM vA sAijjai  /  18. jo bhikSu apAtra (ayogya) ko vAcanA detA hai yA dene
vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 19. jo bhikSu pAtra (yogya) ko vAcanA nahIM detA
hai yA nahIM dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 20. jo bhikSu avyakta ko vAcanA
detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| 21. jo bhikSu vyakta ko vAcanA
nahIM detA hai yA nahIM dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai| (use laghucaumAsI
prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-pUrva sUtroM meM, sUtroM kI tathA adhyayana,
uddezaka Adi ko kramapUrvaka vAcanA na dene kA prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai| kyoMki
Agama nirdiSTa prAthamika sUtra, adhyayana yA uddezaka Adi kI vAcanA le lene se
hI Age ke sUtra adhyayana yA uddezaka Adi ke vAcanA kI yogyatA prApta hotI hai
evaM  /

Page #523 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nineteenth Uddeshak ] [ 423 Gradually, the merit also increases. Therefore,
in those sutras, the subject of eligibility and ineligibility for recitation is
also expected. In the present four sutras, two types of eligibility are
indicated by the words "Patra" and "Vyakt". 1. Patra - One who has attained full
eligibility to receive the recitation of the Kalikasutras, i.e., one who
possesses the qualities necessary for recitation, is called "Patra", and one who
does not possess the qualities necessary for recitation is called "Apatra". In
the fourth Uddeshak of the Brihatkalpa Sutra, there is a provision for giving
recitation to one who possesses three qualities, and a prohibition against
giving recitation to one who possesses three demerits. Three qualities 1.
Vinita. 2. One who abandons the Vigaayas. 3. Three demerits 1. Avinita 2. One
who does not abandon Vigaayas. 3. One who does not pacify the Kashaya Klesha.
One who quickly pacifies the Kashaya Klesha. Of these three qualities, the
first, Vinaya, is very vast and is also called the root of Dharma. Nevertheless,
at the very least, there should be complete faith, devotion, and dedication
towards the reciter, there should be a respectful demeanor towards them, there
should be complete interest and joy in receiving the recitation from them, and
there should be the wisdom to study while holding their instructions as sacred.
Such a Vinaya disciple is eligible for recitation. Newly initiated disciples are
first taught by the Pravartaka Muniraj about all the practices related to
Samyama, respectful behavior, and general knowledge. The Stavira Munivers
stabilize them with the qualities of Samyama. After this initial education,
those who become eligible Patras, as described above, are appointed to study
under the leadership of the Upadhyaya. Those who do not attain eligibility
continue to increase their knowledge and meditation under the guidance of the
Pravartaka and Stavira. Under the Upadhyaya, the study of the original text is
completed with pure pronunciation and Ghoshashuddhi, and the Acharya gives them
the recitation of the Sutra-artha, which is full of meaning and ultimate
meaning, according to their eligibility. In the Vyavahar Bhashya Uddeshak 1, it
is stated that it is necessary for each Gachchha to have five Padavidharas, of
whom four are described above and the fifth is the Ganavachchedaka. These
Ganavachchedakas are those who arrange all kinds of services, etc., related to
the Gan, and are great assistants to the Acharya. With these five Padavidharas,
the Gachchhavasis Sadhus can have a proper arrangement for the worship of
knowledge, vision, character, etc. Therefore, the Bhashya encourages a Bhikshu
who desires Samyama and Samadhi to stay in such a Gachchha, explaining it in
detail with examples. The following is a collection of verses from the Bhashya
about the characteristics of an Apatra:  Titiṇie calacitte, gāṇangaṇie ya dubbal
carite. Āyiriya paribhāsi, vāmavattē ya pisuṇē ya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavA~ uddezaka ] [ 423 kramazaH yogyatA kI vRddhi bhI hotI hai  /  ataH una
sUtroM meM bhI apekSA se vAcanA ke yogyAyogya kA hI viSaya hai  /  prastuta cAra
sUtroM meM bhI "pAtra" aura "vyakta" zabda se do prakAra kI yogyatA sUcita kI
gaI hai| 1. pAtra - jisane kAlikasUtroM kI vAcanA grahaNa karane kI pUrNa
yogyatA prApta karalI hai arthAt jo vAcanA ke yogya guNoM se yukta hai use
"pAtra" kahA gayA hai aura jo vAcanA ke yogya guNoM se yukta nahIM hai use
"apAtra " kahA gayA hai  /  bRhatkalpa sUtra ke caturtha uddezaka meM tIna guNoM
se yukta ko vAcanA dene kA vidhAna hai aura tIna avaguNa vAle ko vAcanA dene kA
niSedha hai tIna guNa 1. vinIta  /  2. vigayoM kA tyAga karane vAlA  /  3. tIna
avaguNa 1. avinIta 2. vigaya tyAga nahIM karane vAlA  /  3. kaSAya kleza ko
upazAnta nahIM karane vAlA  /  kaSAya kleza ko zIghra upazAnta kara dene vAlA |
ina tIna guNoM meM prathama vinaya guNa atyanta vizAla hai evaM dharma kA mUla
bhI kahA gayA hai | phira bhI kama se kama vAcanAdAtA ke prati pUrNa zraddhA
bhakti niSThA ho, unake prati vinaya kA vyavahAra ho, unase vAcanA grahaNa
karane meM pUrNa ruci evaM prasannatA ho tathA unakI AjJA zirodhArya karate hue
adhyayana karane kA viveka ho, aisA vinayI ziSya vAcanA ke yogya hotA hai  /
navadIkSita ziSyoM ko sarvaprathama pravartaka munirAja saMyama sambandhI
samasta pravRttiyoM kA jJAna, vinaya vyavahAra evaM sAmAnya jJAna karAte haiM  /
sthavira munivara unheM saMyama guNoM se sthira karate haiM  /  isa prakAra
prArambhika zikSA ke bAda jo uparyukta yogyatAprApta pAtra hote haiM unheM
upAdhyAya ke netRtva meM adhyayana karane ke lie niyukta kiyA jAtA hai  /  jo
yogyatA prApta nahIM kara pAte haiM ve pravartaka evaM sthavira ke netRtva meM
kramazaH jJAna dhyAna kI vRddhi karate rahate haiM  /  upAdhyAya ke pAsa zuddha
uccAraNa evaM ghoSazuddhi ke sAtha mUla pATha kA adhyayana pUrNa kiyA jAtA hai,
sAtha hI zrAcArya unheM yogyatAnusAra artha - paramArthayukta sUtrArtha kI
vAcanA dete haiM  /  vyavahAra bhASya uddezaka 1 meM batAyA gayA hai ki pratyeka
gaccha meM pA~ca padavIdharoM kA honA Avazyaka hai, jinameM cAra uparivarNita
evaM pA~caveM gaNAvacchedaka hote haiM  /  ye gaNAvacchedaka gaNa sambandhI
sabhI prakAra kI sevA Adi kI vyavasthA karane vAle hote haiM tathA prAcArya ke
mahAn sahayogI hote haiM  /  ina pA~ca padavIdharoM se yukta gacchavAsI
sAdhutroM ke jJAna darzana cAritrAdi ke ArAdhana kI samucita vyavasthA ho sakatI
hai  /  ataH saMyama samAdhi ke icchuka bhikSu ko aisI vyavasthA se yukta gaccha
meM hI rahane kI preraNA karate hue vahA~ bhASya meM vistAra se udAharaNa sahita
samajhAyA gayA hai apAtra ke lakSaNoM kI saMgrAhaka bhASya - gAthA isa prakAra
hai titiNie calacitte, gANaMgaNie ya dubbala carite  /  Ayariya paribhAsI,
vAmAvaTTe ya pisuNe ya  /

Page #524 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Nishith Sutra 4.24  A monk who is attached to food, equipment, bed, and
place, and who is eager for favorable benefits and complains when they are not
received, who is fickle in his standing, sitting, speech, and thoughts, who
changes his conduct without the reasons stated in the scriptures, who is slow in
observing his vows, who speaks in front of teachers and those holding high
positions, or those who have many jewels, thus showing disrespect, who acts
contrary to their instructions and wishes, and who takes pleasure in slandering
and gossiping about others to defeat them, is ineligible for the recitation of
scriptures.  ##  Further Explanation  Those who are arrogant, use abusive
language, and are ungrateful are also considered ineligible.  The violation of
the rules and prohibitions mentioned in the Brihatkalpa Uddesa 4 leads to
atonement according to the first two sutras. This means that both the reciter
who does not give the recitation to the eligible person and the reciter who
gives the recitation to the ineligible person are subject to atonement.  Not
giving the recitation to the eligible person leads to the decline of the
scriptures, and giving the recitation to the ineligible person is a misuse of
the scriptures. Therefore, it is essential to exercise discretion in both cases.
##  Interpretation of "Patta" and "Vyakt"  The first two sutras describe the
"eligible" person in terms of their qualities, while the subsequent two sutras
describe the "eligible" person in terms of their physical form.  The commentary
explains that a monk is considered "vyakt" (eligible) when the hair on their
body, including eyebrows and mustache, has grown. Alternatively, a monk is
considered "vyakt" after the age of 16.  Such a "vyakt" monk is not given the
recitation of the Kalika scriptures (Angasutra and Chhedasutra). The commentary
explains that young monks lack the capacity to fully comprehend and retain the
scriptures. The commentator uses the analogy of an unbaked pot to illustrate
this point. Just as an unbaked pot is placed in fire to be hardened but not
filled with water, young monks are nurtured through education and study but are
not given the recitation of these scriptures until they are mature and eligible.
The word "patta" in these sutras has two meanings: "eligible" and "received."
Similarly, "vyakt" has two meanings: "age-eligible" and "eligible by virtue of
attaining the vows." A monk who is 16 years old is considered "age-eligible,"
while a monk who has received the vows for three years and is stable in his vows
is considered "eligible by virtue of attaining the vows."  These alternative
meanings are explained in the commentary. Due to these alternative meanings, or
perhaps due to other received traditions, the number of sutras in these four
sutras varies in different manuscripts. Some manuscripts have six sutras, while
others have eight. In these manuscripts, the sutras "pattam - prapattam" are
repeated twice or thrice, and the alternative meanings are linked to different
sutras.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ nizIthasUtra AhAra, upakaraNa, zayyA evaM sthAna Adi meM Asakti hone ke
kAraNa manonukUla lAbha na hone para usake lie lAlAyita rahane vAlA evaM na
milane para tinatinATa karane vAlA, khar3e rahane meM baiThane meM, bhASA aura
vicAra meM caMcala vRtti rakhane vAlA, Agamokta kAraNoM ke binA gaccha
parivartana karane vAlA, cAritra pAlana meM maMda utsAha vAlA, prAcArya Adi
padavIdharoM ke tathA ratnAdhika ke sAmane bolane vAlA arthAt unakA tiraskAra
karane vAlA, unakI zrAjJA evaM icchA ke viparIta AcaraNa karane vAlA tathA
dUsaroM kI nindA cugalI karake unakA parAbhava karane meM zrAnanda mAnane vAlA
ityAdi avaguNoM se yukta bhikSu vAcanA ke lie apAtra hotA hai  /  4.24]
ghamaNDI, apazabda bhASI tathA kRtaghna Adi bhI apAtra kahe gaye haiM  /
bRhatkalpa udde. 4 meM kahe gae vidhi-niSedha kA ullaMghana karane para prastuta
prathama sUtradvika se prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  arthAt pAtra ko vAcanA na dene
vAle aura apAtra ko vAcanA dene vAle donoM hI vAcanAdAtA prAyazcitta ke pAtra
hote haiM  /  pAtra ko vAcanA na dene para zruta kA hrAsa hotA hai aura apAtra
ko vAcanA dene kA zruta kA durupayoga hotA hai  /  ataH donoM prakAra kA viveka
rakhanA Avazyaka hai  /  2. vyakta - pUrva sUtradvika meM bhAva vyakta prarthAt
guNoM se vyakta kA varNana "pAtra" zabda se kiyA gayA hai aura bAda ke
sUtradvika meM dravya se vyakta arthAt zarIra se vyakta kA kathana kiyA gayA hai
/  "jAva kakkhAdisu romasaMbhavo na bhavati tAva avvatto, tassaMbhave vatto |
ahavA jAva solasaraso tAva avvatto, parato vatto  / " - cUrNi kAMkha, mU~cha Adi
ke bAloM kI utpatti hone para vyakta kahA jAtA hai aura usake pUrva avyakta kahA
jAtA hai  /  athavA 16 varSa kI umra taka avyakta kahA jAtA hai usake bAda
vyakta kahA jAtA hai  /  aise vyakta bhikSu ko kAlikazruta ( aMgasUtra tathA
chedasUtra ) kI vAcanA nahIM dI jAtI hai  /  isakA kAraNa spaSTa karate hue
bhASya meM batAyA hai ki alpa vaya meM pUrNa rUpa se zruta grahaNa karane kI
evaM dhAraNa karane kI zakti alpa hotI hai tathA bhASyakAra ne kacce ghar3e kA
dRSTAnta dekara bhI samajhAyA hai  /  jisa prakAra kacce ghar3e ko agni meM
rakhA jAtA hai aura pakAyA jAtA hai kintu usameM pAnI nahIM DAlA jAtA hai, usI
prakAra alpavaya vAle ziSya ko zikSA adhyayana Adi se paripakva banAyA jAtA hai
kintu ukta AgamoM kI vAcanA vyakta evaM pAtra hone para dI jAtI hai  /  isa
sUtra dvika meM zrAe "patta" zabda ke pAtra yA prApta aise do chAyArtha hote
haiM, tathA "vyakta" ke bhI "vaya prApta" eva " paryAya prApta" aise do artha
hote haiM, 16 varSa vAlA " vaya prApta vyakta" hotA hai aura tIna varSa kI dIkSA
paryAya athavA saMyama guNoM meM sthira bhikSu "paryAya vyakta" hotA hai  /  isa
prakAra se vaikalpika artha cUrNi meM kiye haiM  /  ina vaikalpika arthoM ke
kAraNa se athavA anya kisI prApta paramparA se ina cAra sUtroM ke sthAna para
kahIM chaH aura kahIM prATha sUtra pratiyoM meM milate haiM  /  vahA~ "pattaM -
prapattaM" ke sUtradvika kA dubArA yA tibArA uccAraNa kiyA gayA hai evaM
vaikalpika arthoM ko alaga-alaga sUtroM se sambandhita kiyA hai  /

Page #525 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nineteenth Udva Shak  [425] In reality, only four sutras are appropriate
because repeating the same sutras again and again in the same chapter is not
worthy of sutra composition.  From the perspective of meaning, the statement of
qualifications like Vinaya etc. is included in the first pair of sutras, and the
statement of qualifications like age etc. is included in the second pair of
sutras. The statement of other topics like Praadi, which are obtained through
the order of the sutras, has already been included in the previous sutras.
Therefore, the texts with options of six or eight sutras have not been accepted
here.  In this way, from sutra 16 to 21, three topics have been stated in pairs
of two sutras: 1. Giving recitation in the order of the sutras, 2. Giving it
only to those who are qualified by Vinaya, qualities etc., 3. Giving recitation
only to those who are qualified and have attained the required age.  Penance is
incurred for acting contrary to these regulations.  **Penance for showing
partiality in giving recitation**  22. **Je bhikku doṇhaṁ sarisgaṇāṁ ekkāṁ
sancikkhāveï, ekkāṁ na sancikkhāveï, ekkāṁ vāeï, ekkāṁ na vāeï, taṁ karantāṁ vā
sāïjjai.**  A monk who teaches one of two equally qualified disciples and not
the other, gives recitation to one and not the other, or approves of someone
doing so (incurs the penance of Laghuchomaaso).  **Discussion:**  Disciples who
possess the qualities of eligibility and individuality mentioned in the previous
sutras, and who have the auspicious signs of correctly understanding the sutra,
should be given recitation impartially and with equanimity.  In determining
eligibility or ineligibility, besides discernment, there should also be an equal
view of all disciples by the degree holders. If there is some prior or
subsequent relationship with someone, there may be partiality due to attachment,
or if there is an unpleasant relationship with someone, there may be aversion.
But a Bahushruta who has attained the degree and the responsibility of teaching
should not behave with such attachment or aversion. This is the meaning of this
sutra.  Doing so increases discord among the disciples and unrest and disorder
in the Gachchha. Therefore, the giver of recitation incurs the penance mentioned
in the sutra. The Acharya or Ganavachchedak arranges for the giving of such
penances.  **Penance for accepting recitation that has not been given**  23.
**Je bhikku āïri-uvajjhāehiṁ avidiṇṇaṁ giraṁ āïyaï, āïyantāṁ vā sāïjjai.**  A
monk who accepts recitation without it being given by the Acharya and Upadhyaya,
or approves of someone doing so (incurs the penance of Laghuchomaaso).
**Discussion:**  Due to the established order, not giving recitation of a sutra
etc., not giving recitation due to being ineligible to give it, not giving
recitation due to lack of the required age, or showing partiality...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavAM udva zaka] [425 vAstava meM cAra sUtra hI upayukta haiM kyoMki eka
samAna sUtroM kA eka hI prakaraNa meM eka sAtha punaH punaH uccAraNa kiyA jAnA
sUtra racanA ke yogya nahIM hotA hai  /  artha kI dRSTi se vinaya Adi yogyatA kA
kathana prathama sUtradvika meM evaM vaya Adi kI yogyatA kA kathana dvitIya
sUtradvika meM ho jAtA hai  /  anya sUtra-krama-prApta prAdi viSaya kA kathana
pUrva sUtroM meM ho gayA hai  /  ataH yahA~ chaH yA ATha sUtroM ke vikalpa vAle
pATha svIkAra nahIM kiye gae haiM  /  isa prakAra sUtra 16 se 21 taka do-do
sUtroM meM tIna viSaya krama se kahe gaye haiM-1. sUtra Adi kI krama se hI
vAcanA denA, 2. vaha bhI vinaya guNa Adi se yogya ko hI denA, 3. yogya meM bhI
vayaH prApta ko hI vAcanA denaa| ina vidhAnoM se viparIta AcaraNa karane para
prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  vAcanA dene se pakSapAta karane kA prAyazcitta 22. je
bhikkhU doNhaM sarisagANaM ekkaM saMcikkhAvei, ekkaM na saMcikkhAvei, ekkaM
vAei, ekkaM na vAei, taM karaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  jo bhikSa do samAna yogyatA
vAle ziSyoM meM se eka ko zikSita karatA hai aura eka ko nahIM karatA hai, eka
ko vAcanA detA hai aura eka ko nahIM detA hai athavA aisA karane vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai (use laghucomAso prAyazcitta pAtA hai|) vivecana-pUrva
sUtroM meM kahe gaye pAtratA ke evaM vyaktatA ke guNoM se yukta tathA sUtra kA
sahI pariNamana karane ke zubha lakSaNoM se yukta ziSyoM ko niSpakSa hokara
samabhAva se vAcanA denA caahie| yogyatA yA ayogyatA ke nirNaya meM viveka ke
atirikta padavIdharoM kI sabhI ziSyoM ke prati samAna dRSTi bhI honI cAhie  /
kisI ke sAtha pUrva yA pazcAt kA kucha sambandha ho to rAga-bhAva se pakSapAta
ho sakatA hai athavA kisI ke sAtha yA pazcAt kA apriya sambandha ho to dveSa-
bhAva bhI ho sakatA hai kintu pada prApta evaM adhyApana kA dAyitva prApta
bahuzruta aise rAgadveSa se yukta vyavahAra na kare, yaha isa sUtra kA tAtparya
hai| aisA karane meM ziSyoM meM vaimanasya evaM gaccha meM azAnti-avyavasthA kI
vRddhi hotI hai  /  ataH aisA karane para vAcanAdAtA ko sUtrokta prAyazcitta AtA
hai  /  aise prAyazcittoM ke dene kI vyavasthA prAcArya yA gaNAvacchedaka karate
adatta vAcanA grahaNa karane kA prAyazcitta 23. je bhikkhU Ayariya-uvajjhAehiM
avidiNNaM giraM Aiyai, AiyaMtaM vA saaijji| jo bhikSu AcArya aura upAdhyAya ke
die binA vAcanA letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai  /  (use
laghucaumAso prAyazcitta AtA hai|) vivecana-nirdhArita krama ke kAraNa kisI
sUtrAdi kI vAcanA na dene para, vAcanA dene ke ayogya hone se vAcanA na dene
para; vyakta vaya ke abhAva meM vAcanA na dene para athavA pakSapAta kI

Page #526 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  [426] It is not appropriate for a monk to study the meaning of
the sutras on their own if they have not received the recitation from a
Nishīthasūtra practitioner or if there is no one in their lineage who is
qualified to give the recitation. Similarly, it is not appropriate to accept the
recitation if the Acharya or Upadhyaya has forbidden it. If, for some specific
reason, the Acharya or Upadhyaya has forbidden the recitation of the original
text or its meaning, then the recitation of the Agamas should be taken only
after obtaining their permission. Until the permission of the Acharya or others
is received, one should increase their tapas and restraint to attain
qualification.  If the Acharya or others have forbidden it out of malice, then
one should try to appease them through Vinaya or request it from other
knowledgeable individuals in the lineage, such as the Gītartha Ganavacchedaka.
However, one should not accept the scriptures through the prescribed method
until permission is received. In both general and specific situations, accepting
the scriptures without permission incurs the prāyaścitta mentioned in the
sutras.  In the sutras, the word "gir" refers to the Jina's teachings, which are
considered the Agamas. The mention of both Acharya and Upadhyaya is because both
are involved in giving the recitation. The Upadhyaya gives the recitation of the
original sutras, while the Acharya gives the recitation of the meaning and
ultimate meaning of the sutras.  Currently, there are many lineages and many
sects where there are no Acharyas or Upadhyayas, and even among those who exist,
there are few who are knowledgeable in the scriptures and experts in the
exceptions. Even they, being busy with social responsibilities, are unable to
give regular recitations of the Agamas to qualified disciples. Therefore, it is
beneficial for qualified disciples to obtain permission from their Gurudev and
then recite, contemplate, and reflect on the Agamas. Because modern publications
of the Agamas contain word meanings, meanings, and detailed discussions,
studying those sutras on one's own can be particularly beneficial.  Therefore,
one should recite the sutras with discernment, following the order of study,
after obtaining permission from their Gurudev. Reciting on one's own after
obtaining permission from the Gurudev does not incur the prāyaścitta for
"unauthorised recitation" mentioned in the sutras, and one also benefits from
familiarity with the scriptures and self-study.  The prāyaścitta for exchanging
recitations with a householder is:  24. A monk who gives a recitation to another
ascetic or a householder, or approves of someone giving a recitation, incurs a
prāyaścitta. 25. A monk who accepts a recitation from another ascetic or a
householder, or approves of someone accepting a recitation, incurs a
prāyaścitta. [They receive the prāyaścitta of a small Caturmāsa.]  Discussion:
Just as in the second Uddesaka, the words "householder" and "another ascetic"
refer to "Bhiksācara householder" ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 426] [nizIthasUtra bhAvanA se vAcanA na dene para yA kabhI kisI gaccha meM
yogya vAcanA dene vAlA na hone para bhikSu ko svayaM sUtrArtha kA adhyayana
karanA nahIM kalpatA hai  /  athavA AcArya upAdhyAya ke niSedha kara dene para
canA grahaNa karanA bho nahIM kalpatA hai| yadi kisI vizeSa kAraNa se prAcArya
yA upAdhyAya ne mUla pATha yA artha kI vAcanA lene ke lie manA kiyA ho to unakI
AjJA prApta hone ke bAda hI Agama kI vAcanA lenI caahie| jaba taka AcAryAdi kI
AjJA na mile taba taka yogyatA kI prApti ke lie tapa saMyama meM vRddhi karanI
caahie| yadi prAcAryAdi ne dveSa bhAva se niSedha kiyA ho to unheM vinaya ke
dvArA prasanna karane kA prayatna karanA cAhie athavA gaccha ke anya gItArtha
gaNAvacchedaka Adi se nivedana karanA cAhie  /  kintu jaba taka AjJA na mile
taba taka pravidhi se zruta grahaNa nahIM karanA caahie| sAmAnya yA vizeSa
sthiti meM bhI adatta zruta grahaNa karane para sUtrokta prAyazcitta to AtA ho
hai  /  sUtra meM "gira" zabda se jinavANI ko hI Agama mAnA gayA hai, tathA
prAcArya-upAdhyAya donoM kA nirdeza isalie kiyA gayA hai ki donoM vAcanA dene
vAle hote haiN| upAdhyAya mUla sUtroM kI vAcanA dene vAle hote haiM evaM
prAcArya sUtrArtha-paramArtha kI vAcanA dene vAle hote haiN| vartamAna meM kaI
gaccha aura kaI sampradAya aise haiM jinameM koI prAcArya evaM upAdhyAya hI
nahIM haiM aura jo haiM unameM bahuzruta evaM utsagaM apavAdoM ke vizeSajJa alpa
haiN| ve bhI sAmAjika vyavasthAoM meM vyasta rahane se yogya ziSyoM ko AgamoM kI
niyamita vAcanA de nahIM pAte  /  isalie yogya ziSyoM ko gurudevoM se AjJA
prApta karake AgamoM kA vAcana-cintana-manana karanA zreyaskara hai  /  kyoMki
AgamoM ke Adhunika prakAzanoM meM zabdArtha, bhAvArtha evaM vistRta vivecana
hote haiM isalie una sUtroM kA svataH adhyayana karane se vizeSa lAbha hI
saMbhava hai| ataH gurudevoM se AjJA prApta karake adhyayana krama ke anusAra
sUtroM kA vAcana vivekapUrvaka karanA caahie| gurudevoM kI AjJA lene ke bAda
svataH vAMcana karane para sUtrokta "adatta vAcanA" kA prAyazcitta bhI nahIM AtA
hai evaM zruta paricaya tathA svAdhyAya kA lAbha bhI ho jAtA hai  /  gRhastha ke
sAtha vAcanA ke AdAna-pradAna kA prAyazcitta 24. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyaM vA
gAratthiyaM vA sajjhAyaM vAei, vAeMtaM vA saaijji| 25. je bhikkhU aNNautthiyassa
vA gAratthiyassa vA vAyaNaM paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA saaijji| 24. jo bhikSu
anyatIthika yA gRhastha ko vAcanA detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA hai|
25. jo bhikSu anyatothika se yA gRhastha se vAcanA letA hai yA lene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  [use laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta pAtA hai  / ] vivecana-
jisa prakAra dUsare uddezaka meM gRhastha evaM anyatothika zabda kA 'bhikSAcara
gRhastha

Page #527 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nineteenth Uddeshak] [427 The term "anyatothika" has been given a specific
meaning, i.e., it refers to the atonement for going and coming with them in
gochari etc. Similarly, in the present sutras, one should understand the
atonement for the exchange of teachings with a householder and anyatothika who
are imbued with mithyatva. The commentator has explained that receiving
teachings from them leads to condemnation in this way: "Their religion lacks
scriptural knowledge, which is why they go to others to acquire knowledge. And
giving them teachings can lead them to create disputes, make inappropriate
accusations, spread propaganda against the Jina dharma, distort many important
topics, or further strengthen their mithyatva, and by narrating the practice of
this exchange of teachings, they can make others mithyatvi. The reasons stated
in the commentary also make it clear that this prohibition is not for the
samyagdrsti or the sramana-upasaka, but for the mithyadrsti. The Nandisootra and
Samavayanga Sutra mention the study of scriptures by sramana-upasakas and the
practice of the upadhana [tapas] of the sutras, as follows: Uvasagadassu nam
uvasagaanam nagaraai jav posahovavvasa padivajjanayaao suy parighaha,
tavovahanaa, padimao............ -Sam. A similar passage is found in the
Nandisootra, and the Agamas also mention special qualities like bahushruta and
kovida in Jinamat for the sramana-upasaka. They are included in the four tirthas
and the four types of sramana sanghas, so this atonement should not be
understood as applicable to the sramana-upasaka. If a mithyadrsti is worthy of
being approached for dharma, there is no fault in explaining and teaching him
appropriate teachings or Agamic descriptions, but this task is suitable for a
geetarth and a discerning bhikshu, otherwise, even making contact for the sake
of acquaintance is considered an excess of samyaktva. In the sramana class, if
there is a lack of a teacher of teachings, or if it is necessary at times, it is
not atonement-worthy to receive teachings from a bahushruta sramana-upasaka,
because there is no reason for fault, and the Thananga Sutra states in the
passage "Chauvehe samanasanghe" that the sramana-upasaka holds a very honorable
position. Therefore, understanding the meaning according to the context, one
should understand here the atonement for the exchange of teachings with a
householder imbued with mithyatva, etc. Atonement for the exchange of teachings
with a parshvastha 26. Je bhikkhu passathassa vayanam dei, detan va saijjai. 27.
Je bhikkhu passathassa vayanam padicchai, padicchantan va saijjai. 28. Je
bhikkhu osannassa vayanam dei, ventan va saijjai.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 unnIsavAM uddezaka] [427 evaM bhikSAcara anyatothika' aisA viziSTa artha kiyA
gayA hai arthAt unake sAtha gocarI Adi meM gamanAgamana karane para prAyazcitta
kahA hai, usI prakAra prastuta sUtroM meM bhI mithyAtvabhAvita gRhastha evaM
anyatIthika liMgadhArI ke sAtha vAcanA ke AdAna-pradAna kA prAyazcitta samajhanA
cAhie  /  bhASyakAra ne batAyA hai ki unake pAsa se vAcanA grahaNa karane para
isa prakAra se nindA hotI hai ki-"inake dharma meM zAstra-jJAna nahIM hai isa
kAraNa se dUsaroM ke pAsa jJAna lene jAte haiM aura unheM vAcanA dene para ve
vivAda paidA kara sakate haiM, anucitta AkSepa karake jinadharma ke viruddha
pracAra kara sakate haiM, kaI pAgama viSayoM ko vikRta karake pracAra kara
sakate haiM athavA ve apane mithyAtva ko aura adhika puSTa kara sakate haiM
tathA usa vAcanA lena-dena ke vyavahAra kA kathana karake logoM ko mithyAtvI
banA sakate haiN| bhASya kathita ina kAraNoM se bhI yahI spaSTa hotA hai ki yaha
niSedha samyagdRSTi yA zramaNopAsaka ke lie nahIM hai kintu mithyAdRSTi ke lie
hai| nandosUtra evaM samavAyAMgasUtra meM zramaNopAsakoM ke zruta adhyayana
karane kA evaM sUtroM ke upadhAna [tapa] kA kathana hai yathA uvAsagadasAsu NaM
uvAsagANaM nagarAI jAva posahovavAsa paDivajjaNayAo suya parigahA, tavovahANA,
paDimAo............ -sama. isI prakAra kA pATha nandIsUtra meM bhI hai tathA
AgamoM meM zramaNopAsaka ke lie bahuzruta evaM jinamata meM kovida Adi vizeSaNa
bhI pAe haiM  /  cAra tIrtha meM aura cAra prakAra ke zramaNa saMgha meM unheM
samAviSTa kiyA gayA hai ataH yaha prAyazcitta zramaNopAsaka kI apekSA nahIM
samajhanA caahie| mithyAdRSTi yadi dharma ke sanmukha hone yogya ho to use yogya
upadeza athavA Agama varNana batAne evaM samajhAne meM bhI doSa nahIM samajhanA
cAhie kintu yaha kArya gItArtha evaM vicakSaNa bhikSu ke yogya hai, anyathA
paricaya samparka karanA bhI samyakatva kA aticAra kahA gayA hai| zramaNa varga
meM vAcanAdAtA ke abhAva meM athavA kabhI Avazyaka hone para bahuzruta
zramaNopAsaka se vAcanA grahaNa karanA bhI prAyazcitta yogya nahIM hai, kyoMki
isameM doSa kA koI kAraNa nahIM hai tathA ThANAMga sUtra ke "cauvihe
samaNasaMghe" isa pATha meM zramaNopAsaka kA bahuta sammAnanIya sthAna kahA gayA
hai| ataH prasaMgAnukUla artha karate hue yahA~ mithyAtva bhAvita gRhastha Adi
ke sAtha vAcanA ke AdAna-pradAna kA prAyazcitta samajhanA caahie| pArzvastha ke
sAtha vAcanA ke AdAna-pradAna kA prAyazcitta 26. je bhikkhU pAsatthassa vAyaNaM
dei, detaM vA sAijjai  /  27. je bhikkhU pAsatthassa vAyaNaM paDicchai,
paDicchaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  28. je bhikkhU osaNNassa vAyaNaM dei, veMtaM vA
sAijjai  /

Page #528 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[428] [Nishīthasūtra 29. A monk who gives a *vācana* to an *avasanna* or
approves of the giver. 30. A monk who gives a *vācana* to a *kusīla* or approves
of the giver. 31. A monk who receives a *vācana* from an *avasanna* or approves
of the receiver. 32. A monk who gives a *vācana* to a *sansaṭṭa* or approves of
the giver. 33. A monk who receives a *vācana* from a *sansaṭṭa* or approves of
the receiver. 34. A monk who gives a *vācana* to a *nityaka* or approves of the
giver. 35. A monk who receives a *vācana* from a *nityaka* or approves of the
receiver. By engaging in these 35 *sūtras*, one incurs the *laghu-cāumāsiya*
*parihāraṭṭhāna* *ugdhāya*. 26. A monk who gives a *vācana* to a *pārśvastha* or
approves of the giver. 27. A monk who receives a *vācana* from a *pārśvastha* or
approves of the receiver. 28. A monk who gives a *vācana* to an *avasanna* or
approves of the giver. 29. A monk who receives a *vācana* from an *avasanna* or
approves of the receiver. 30. A monk who gives a *vācana* to a *kusīla* or
approves of the giver. 31. A monk who receives a *vācana* from a *kusīla* or
approves of the receiver. 32. A monk who gives a *vācana* to a *sansaṭṭa* or
approves of the giver. 33. A monk who receives a *vācana* from a *sansaṭṭa* or
approves of the receiver. 34. A monk who gives a *vācana* to a *nityaka* or
approves of the giver. 35. A monk who receives a *vācana* from a *nityaka* or
approves of the receiver. Engaging in these 35 *sūtras* incurs the *laghu-
cāumāsiya* *prāyaścitta*. Discussion: Just as the previous *sūtra* mentioned the
possibility of faults in giving and receiving *vācana* from a *mithyātvī*
householder, so too should one understand it with regard to *pārśvastha* etc.
However, here, instead of *mithyātvā*, one should understand the fault of
nurturing and modeling lax conduct. In previous *uddeśas*, *prāyaścitta* has
been mentioned for contact with these individuals in terms of *vandana*,
*āhāra*, *śayyā*, etc. Therefore, one should understand the specific discussion
and faults from *uddeśaka* 4, 10, and 13. If a *gītartha* *muni* ever gives a
*vācana* to a *pārśvastha* etc. with the hope that they will improve in
*samyama*, then one should not consider it a *prāyaścitta*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 428] [nizIthasUtra 29. je bhikkhU osaNNassa vAyaNaM paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA
sAijjai  /  30. je bhikkhU kusIlassa vAyaNaM dei, deMtaM vA sAijjai  /  31. je
bhikkhU kusIlassa vAyaNaM paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA saaijji| 32. je bhikkhU
saMsattassa vAyaNaM dei, detaM vA sAijjai  /  33. je bhikkhU saMsattassa vAyaNaM
paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM vA sAijjai  /  34. je bhikkhU Nitiyassa vAyaNaM dei,
deMtaM vA sAijjai  /  35. je bhikkhU Nitiyassa vAyaNaM paDicchai, paDicchaMtaM
vA sAijjai  /  taM sevamANe Avajjai cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM ugdhAiyaM  /
26. jo bhikSu pArzvastha ko vAcanA detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana karatA
hai| 27. jo bhikSu pArzvastha se vAcanA letA hai yA lene vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai| 28. jo bhikSu avasanna ko vAcanA detA hai yA dene vAle kA anumodana
karatA hai  /  29. jo bhikSu avasanna se vAcanA letA hai yA lene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  30. jo bhikSu kuzIla ko vAcanA detA hai yA dene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  31. jo bhikSu kuzIla se vAcanA letA hai yA lene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai| 32. jo bhikSu saMsakta ko vAcanA detA hai yA dene vAle kA
anumodana karatA hai  /  33. jo bhikSu saMsakta se vAcanA letA hai yA lene vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| 34. jo bhikSu nityaka ko vAcanA detA hai yA dene vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai  /  35. jo bhikSu nityaka se vAcanA letA hai yA lene
vAle anumodana karatA hai  /  ina 35 sUtroM meM varNita doSa sthAnoM kA sevana
karane para laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA hai| vivecana-jisa prakAra mithyAtvI
gahastha se vAcanA lene-dene meM doSoM kI sambhAvanA pUrva sUtra meM kahI hai
usI prakAra pArzvastha Adi ke sAtha bhI samajhanA cAhie kintu yahAM mithyAtva ke
sthAna para zithilAcAra kA poSaNa evaM prarUpaNa karane sambandhI doSa samajhane
cAhie  /  pUrva uddezoM meM bhI inake sAtha vandana, AhAra, zayyA Adi ke
samparka karane sambandhI prAyazcitta kahe haiN| ataH vizeSa vivecana evaM doSoM
kA varNana uddezaka 4, 10 tathA 13 se jAna lenA cAhie  /  yadi kabhI koI
gItArtha muni pArzvastha Adi ko saMyama meM unnata hone kI sambhAvanA se vAcanA
de to prAyazcitta nahIM samajhanA caahie|

Page #529 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 9-10 Nineteenth Uddeshak] [Summary Sutra 1-7 of the 429th Uddeshak: Accusing
Krita etc. faults for medicine, taking more than three doses of specific
medicine, keeping medicine with you during Vihar, and consuming faults related
to the rituals of medicine, studying four Sandhyas, reciting more than 9 verses
of Kalik Sutra and 21 verses of Drishtivad during the time of Asvadhyaya (i.e.,
during Utkal), 11-12 studying on the four Mahamahotsav and the four Maha
Pratipada days after them,  spending four Praharas without studying Kalik Sutra,
studying during 32 types of Asvadhyaya, studying during one's own physical
Asvadhyaya,  not reciting the Sutras in the order prescribed by the Agamas,
reciting Cheda Sutra or Drishtivad without completing the recitation of 17
Acharang Sutra, 18-21 reciting to the ineligible and not reciting to the
eligible, reciting to the invisible and not reciting to the visible. 22 Showing
partiality in reciting to those of equal merit, 23 taking recitation without
being given by the Acharya Upadhyaya, 24-25 reciting to and taking recitation
from Mithyatva-minded householders and other non-monks, 26-35 reciting to and
taking recitation from Parsvastadi,  etc. leads to Laghu Chaumasi Pratikraman.
Conclusion- This Uddeshak begins with a statement about medicine. The rest of
the Sutras deal with the topics of Swadhyaya and study-teaching. The clear and
concise Pratikraman rules given here provide a sequential and clear instruction
on the complete methods of Shruta Swadhyaya and teaching. Thus, the Uddeshak is
complete in two topics. This Uddeshak contains a unique collection of material
mentioned or implied in other Pragama related to Swadhyaya, which is a special
feature of this Uddeshak. The topics of the 12 Sutras of this Uddeshak are
mentioned in the following Agamas: Sutra 6 - Prohibition of taking more than
three doses of medicine for Glana - Thanam A.3 Not studying four Sandhyas -
Thanam A.4 Not studying on four Pratipada, - Thanam. A.4

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 9-10 unnIsavA~ uddezaka] [429 unnIsaveM uddezaka kA sArAMzasUtra 1-7 auSadha ke
lie krIta Adi doSa lagAnA, viziSTa auSadha kI tIna mAtrA (khurAka) se adhika
lAnA, auSadha ko vihAra meM sAtha rakhanA tathA auSadha ke parikarma sambandhI
doSoM kA sevana karagA, cAra saMdhyA meM svAdhyAya karanA, kAlikasUtra kI 9
gAthA evaM dRSTivAda kI 21 gAthAoM se jyAdA pATha kA asvAdhyAya kAla meM (arthAt
utkAla meM) uccAraNa karanA, 11-12 cAra mahAmahotsava evaM unake bAda kI cAra
mahA pratipadA ke dina svAdhyAya karanA, kAlikasUtra kA svAdhyAya karane ke cAra
praharoM ko svAdhyAya kie binA hI vyatIta karanA, 32 prakAra ke asvAdhyAya ke
samaya svAdhyAya karanA, apane zArIrika asvAdhyAya ke samaya svAdhyAya karanA,
sUtroM kI vAcanA aAgamokta krama se na denA, 17 AcArAMga sUtra kI vAcanA pUrNa
kie binA chedasUtra yA dRSTivAda kI vAcanA denA, 18-21 apAtra ko vAcanA denA
aura pAtra ko na denA, avyakta ko vAcanA denA aura vyakta ko vAcanA na denaa| 22
samAna yogyatA vAloM ko vAcanA dene meM pakSapAta karanA, 23 prAcArya upAdhyAya
dvArA vAcanA die binA svayaM vAcanA grahaNa karanA, 24-25 mithyAtva bhAvita
gRhastha evaM anyatIthikoM ko vAcanA denA evaM unase lenA, 26-35 pArzvasthAdi ko
vAcanA denA evaM unase lenA, ityAdi pravRttiyoM kA laghucaumAsI prAyazcitta AtA
hai  /  upasaMhAra-isa uddezaka ke prArambha meM auSadha viSayaka kathana kiyA
gayA hai| zeSa sabhI sUtroM meM svAdhyAya evaM adhyayana-adhyApana sambandhI
viSayoM kA kathana hai| eka sAtha itanI spaSTatA ke sAtha kie gae prAyazcitta
vidhAna se yahAM para zruta svAdhyAya evaM adhyApana sambandhI pUrNa vidhiyoM kA
kramika evaM spaSTa nirdeza kiyA gayA hai  /  isa prakAra kula do viSayoM meM
uddezaka pUrNa ho jAtA hai  /  isameM svAdhyAya sambandhI anya prAgamoM meM ukta
yA anukta sAmagrI kA eka sAtha anupama saMgraha huA hai, yaha isa uddezaka kI
vizeSatA hai| isa uddezaka ke 12 sUtroM ke viSayoM kA kathana nimna AgamoM meM
hai, yathAsUtra 6 _ glAna ke lie auSadha kI tIna datti se adhika lene kA niSedha
-ThANaM a.3 cAra saMdhyA meM svAdhyAya nahIM karanA -ThANaM a. 4 cAra pratipadA
meM svAdhyAya nahIM karanA, -ThANaM. a.4

Page #530 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[430] [Nishīthasūtra 14 15 16-17 18-19 Not performing *svādhyāya* in all four
*kālas* is called *aticāra*. *Prāva. A. 4* Prohibition of *svādhyāya* in
*asvādhyāya*. -*Vyav. U. 7* Prohibition of *svādhyāya* in one's own physical
*asvādhyāya*. *Vyav. U. 7* The ordinance of the order of reading the *āgamas*.
-*Vyav. U. 10* Prohibition of giving *vācanā* to an ineligible person and the
ordinance of giving *vācanā* to an eligible person. -*Bṛhatkalpa U. 4*
Prohibition of giving *vācanā* to an *avyakt* and the ordinance of giving
*vācanā* to a *vyakt*. -*Vyav. U. 10* 20-21 The subject matter of these 23
*sūtras* is not mentioned in other *āgamas*, such as *sūtras* 1-5, 7. All the
descriptions related to *auṣadha* are not found elsewhere. 9-10 The ordinance of
reciting the 9 *gāthās* of *kālikashruta* and the 21 *gāthās* of *dṛṣṭivāda*.
The prohibition of performing *svādhyāya* in the four great festivals. Not being
partial in giving *vācanā*. Not accepting *vācanā* that has not been given.
24-35 Not giving *vācanā* to *mithyātva* -affected householders and
*pārśvasthādi* and not taking *vācanā* from them. || The nineteenth *uddeśaka*
is complete || 22 23

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 430] [nizIthasUtra 14 15 16-17 18-19 cAroM kAloM meM svAdhyAya nahIM karanA
aticAra kahA hai prAva. a. 4 asvAdhyAya meM svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha -vyava.
u.7 apanI zArIrika asvAdhyAya meM svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha vyava. u. 7 AgamoM
ke vAcanA-krama kA vidhAna -vyava. u. 10 apAtra ko vAcanA dene kA niSedha evaM
pAtra ko vAcanA dene kA vidhAna -bRhatkalpa u. 4 avyakta ko vAcanA dene kA
niSedha aura vyakta ko vAcanA dene kA vidhAna -vyava. u. 10 20-21 isa uddezaka
ke 23 sUtroM ke viSaya kA kathana anya AgamoM meM nahIM hai, yathAsUtra 1-5, 7
auSadha sambandhI ukta samasta varNana anyatra nahIM hai  /  9-10 kAlikazruta kI
9 gAthAoM evaM dRSTivAda kI 21 gAthAoM ko uccAraNa karane kA vidhAna cAra
mahAmahotsavoM meM svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha vAcanA dene meM pakSapAta nahIM
karanA adatta vAcanA grahaNa nahIM karanA 24-35 mithyAtva bhAvita gRhasthoM ko
evaM pArzvasthAdi ko vAcanA nahIM denA aura unase vAcanA nahIM lenaa|  //
unnIsavAM uddezaka samApta  //  22 23

Page #531 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twentieth Uddesaka  **Method of Penance for the Palochka with and without
Deception**  1. The Bhikkhu who has served the *Pariharatthana* for one month,
if he is found guilty, should be given one month of *Aloejja*, and if he is
found innocent, he should be given two months of *Aloejja*. 2. The Bhikkhu who
has served the *Pariharatthana* for two months, if he is found guilty, should be
given two months of *Aloejja*, and if he is found innocent, he should be given
three months of *Aloejja*. 3. The Bhikkhu who has served the *Pariharatthana*
for three months, if he is found guilty, should be given three months of
*Aloejja*, and if he is found innocent, he should be given four months of
*Aloejja*. 4. The Bhikkhu who has served the *Pariharatthana* for four months,
if he is found guilty, should be given four months of *Aloejja*, and if he is
found innocent, he should be given five months of *Aloejja*. 5. The Bhikkhu who
has served the *Pariharatthana* for five months, if he is found guilty, should
be given five months of *Aloejja*, and if he is found innocent, he should be
given six months of *Aloejja*. Therefore, whether he is found guilty or
innocent, he should be given six months. 6. The Bhikkhu who has served the
*Pariharatthana* for many months, if he is found guilty, should be given one
month of *Aloejja*, and if he is found innocent, he should be given two months
of *Aloejja*. 7. The Bhikkhu who has served the *Pariharatthana* for many
months, if he is found guilty, should be given two months of *Aloejja*, and if
he is found innocent, he should be given three months of *Aloejja*. 8. The
Bhikkhu who has served the *Pariharatthana* for many months, if he is found
guilty, should be given three months of *Aloejja*, and if he is found innocent,
he should be given four months of *Aloejja*. 9. The Bhikkhu who has served the
*Pariharatthana* for many months, if he is found guilty, should be given four
months of *Aloejja*, and if he is found innocent, he should be given five months
of *Aloejja*. 10. The Bhikkhu who has served the *Pariharatthana* for many
months, if he is found guilty, should be given five months of *Aloejja*, and if
he is found innocent, he should be given six months of *Aloejja*. Therefore,
whether he is found guilty or innocent, he should be given six months.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bIsavAM uddezaka kapaTa-sahita tathA kapaTa-rahita pAlocaka ko prAyazcitta dene
kI vidhi 1. je bhikkhU mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA, apaliuMciya
AloemANassa mAsiyaM, paliuMciya AloemANassa domAsiyaM  /  2. je bhikkhU do
mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA, apaliuMciya AloemANassa do mAsiyaM,
paliuMciya pAloemANassa temAsiyaM  /  _3. je bhikkhU temAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM
paDisevittA AloejjA, apaliuMciya AloemANassa temAsiyaM, paliuMciya AloemANassa
cAummAsiyaM  /  4. je bhikkhU cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA,
apaliuMciya AloemANassa cAummAsiyaM, paliuMciya AloemANassa paMcamAsiya  /  5.
je bhikkhU paMcamAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA apaliuMciya
AloemANassa paMcamAsiyaM paliuMciya AloemANassa chammAsiyaM  /  teNaM paraM
paliuMlie vA, apaliuMcie vA te ceva chammAsA  /  6. je bhikkhU bahuso vi mAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA-apaliuMciya AloemANassa mAsiyaM, paliuMciya
AloemANassa do mAsiyaM  /  7. je bhikkhU bahuso vi do mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM
paDisevittA AloejjA, apaliuMcie AloemANassa do mAsiyaM, paliuMciya AloemANassa
temAsiyaM  /  8. je bhikkhU bahuso vi temAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA
AloejjA, apaliuMciya AloemANassa temAsiyaM, paliuMciya AloemANassa cAummAsiyaM
/  9. je bhikkhU bahuso vi cAummAsiyaM parihAraDhANaM paDisevittA AloejjA,
apaliuMciya AloemANassa cAummAsiyaM, paliuMciya AloemANassa paMcamAsiyaM  /  10.
je bhikkhU bahuso vi paMcamAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA,
apaliuMciya AloemANassa paMcamAsiyaM, paliuMciya AloemANassa chammAsiyaM  /
teNa paraM paliuMcie vA apaliuMcie vA te ceva chammAsA  /

Page #532 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[432] 11. If a monk, having observed a monthly *parihara-sthana*, observes
another *parihara-sthana*, and criticizes, he incurs a one-month penance for
criticizing without *maya*, and a two-month penance for criticizing with *maya*.
If he criticizes with *maya*, he incurs a two-month penance, and if he
criticizes without *maya*, he incurs a six-month penance. 12. If a monk, having
observed a *parihara-sthana* for many months, observes another *parihara-
sthana*, and criticizes, he incurs a one-month penance for criticizing without
*maya*, and a two-month penance for criticizing with *maya*. If he criticizes
with *maya*, he incurs a two-month penance, and if he criticizes without *maya*,
he incurs a six-month penance. 13. If a monk, having observed a three-month
*parihara-sthana*, a *sairag-chaumasik* *parihara-sthana*, a five-month
*parihara-sthana*, or a *sairag-panchamasik* *parihara-sthana*, observes another
*parihara-sthana*, and criticizes, he incurs a three-month penance for
criticizing without *maya*, and a five-month penance for criticizing with
*maya*. If he criticizes with *maya*, he incurs a five-month penance, a *sairag-
panchamasik* penance, or a six-month penance, and if he criticizes without
*maya*, he incurs a six-month penance. 14. If a monk, having observed a three-
month *parihara-sthana*, a *sairag-chaumasik* *parihara-sthana*, a five-month
*parihara-sthana*, or a *sairag-panchamasik* *parihara-sthana* for many months,
observes another *parihara-sthana*, and criticizes, he incurs a three-month
penance for criticizing without *maya*, and a five-month penance for criticizing
with *maya*. If he criticizes with *maya*, he incurs a five-month penance, a
*sairag-panchamasik* penance, or a six-month penance, and if he criticizes
without *maya*, he incurs a six-month penance. 1. If a monk criticizes after
observing a monthly *parihara-sthana*, he incurs a one-month penance for
criticizing without *maya*, and a two-month penance for criticizing with *maya*.
2. If a monk criticizes after observing a bi-monthly *parihara-sthana*, he
incurs a bi-monthly penance for criticizing without *maya*, and a tri-monthly
penance for criticizing with *maya*. 3. If a monk criticizes after observing a
tri-monthly *parihara-sthana*, he incurs a ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 432] [nizIthasUtra 11. je bhikkhU mAsiyaM vA jAva paMcamAsiyaM vA eesi
parihAraTThANaM aNNayaraM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA apaliuMciya
AloemANassa mAsiyaM vA jAva paMcamAsiyaM vA  /  paliuMciya AloemANassa do
mAsiyaM vA jAva chammAsiyaM vA  /  teNa paraM paliuMcie vA apaliuMcie vA te ceva
chmmaasaa| 12. je bhikkhU bahuso vi mAsiyaM vA jAva bahuso vi paMcamAsiyaM vA
eesi parihAraTThANANaM paraM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA apaliuMciya
AloemANassa mAsiyaM vA jAva paMcamAsiyaM vA, paliuMciya AloemANassa do mAsiyaM
vA jAva chammAsiyaM vA  /  teNa paraM paliuMcie vA apaliuMcie vA te ceva
chmmaasaa| 13. je bhikkhU cAummAsiyaM vA, sAirega-cAummAsiyaM vA, paMcamAsiyaM
vA sAirega-paMcamAsiyaM vA, eesi parihAraTThANANaM aNNayaraM parihAraTThANaM
paDisevittA aaloejjaa| apaliuMciya AloemANassa cAummAsiyaM vA, sAirega-
cAummAsiyaM vA paMcamAsiyaM vA sAirega-paMcamAsiyaM vA, paliuMciya AloemANassa
paMcamAsiyaM vA, sAirega paMcamAsiyaM vA, chammAsiyaM vA, teNa paraM paliuMcie
vA apaliuMcie vA te ceva chammAsA  /  14. je bhikkhU bahuso vi cAummAsiyaM vA,
bahuso vi sAirega-cAummAsiyaM vA, bahuso vi paMcamAsiyaM vA, bahuso vi sAirega-
paMcamAsiyaM vA, eesi parihAraTThANANaM aNNayaraM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA
AloejjA apaliuMciya AloemANassa cAummAsiyaM vA, sAirega-cAummAsiyaM vA,
paMcamAsiyaM vA, sAirega-paMcamAsiyaM vA, paliuMciya AloemmANassa paMcamAsiyaM
vA, sAirega-paMcamAsiyaM vA chammAsiyaM vaa| teNa paraM paliuMcie vA, apaliuMcie
vA te ceva chmmaasaa| 1. eka bhikSu eka bAra mAsika-parihArasthAna kI
pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use mAyA-rahita AlocanA karane para eka mAsa
kA prAyazcitta AtA hai aura mAyA-rahita AlocanA karane para do mAsa kA
prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /  2. jo bhikSu eka bAra dvimAsika parihArasthAna kI
pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use mAyA-rahita AlocanA karane para
dvaimAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai aura mAyA-sahita AlocanA karane para traimAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  3. jo bhikSu eka traimAsika parihArasthAna kI
pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to mAyA

Page #533 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twentieth Uddeshak  [433] For criticizing without Maya, the penance is for
three months, and for criticizing with Maya, the penance is for four months.  4.
If a monk, after observing the four-month Pariharasthan once, criticizes, then
for criticizing without Maya, the penance is for four months, and for
criticizing with Maya, the penance is for five months.  5. If a monk, after
observing the five-month Pariharasthan once, criticizes, then for criticizing
without Maya, the penance is for five months, and for criticizing with Maya, the
penance is for six months.  _After this, for criticizing with or without Maya,
the same six-month penance applies._  6. If a monk, after observing the monthly
Pariharasthan many times, criticizes, then for criticizing without Maya, the
penance is for one month, and for criticizing with Maya, the penance is for two
months.  7. If a monk, after observing the two-month Pariharasthan many times,
criticizes, then for criticizing without Maya, the penance is for two months,
and for criticizing with Maya, the penance is for three months.  8. If a monk,
after observing the three-month Pariharasthan many times, criticizes, then for
criticizing without Maya, the penance is for three months, and for criticizing
with Maya, the penance is for four months.  9. If a monk, after observing the
four-month Pariharasthan many times, criticizes, then for criticizing without
Maya, the penance is for four months, and for criticizing with Maya, the penance
is for five months.  10. If a monk, after observing the five-month Pariharasthan
many times, criticizes, then for criticizing without Maya, the penance is for
five months, and for criticizing with Maya, the penance is for six months.
_After this, for criticizing with or without Maya, the same six-month penance
applies._  11. If a monk, after observing any Pariharasthan once, from monthly
to five-monthly, criticizes, then for criticizing without Maya, the penance is
monthly to five-monthly according to the observed Pariharasthan, and for
criticizing with Maya, the penance is two-monthly to six-monthly according to
the observed Pariharasthan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bIsavAM uddezaka] [433 rahita AlocanA karane para traimAsika prAyazcitta AtA
hai aura mAyA-sahita AlocanA karane para cAturmAsika prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /
4. jo bhikSa eka bAra cAturmAsika parihArasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA
kare to use mAyA-rahita AlocanA karane para cAturmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai aura
mAyA-rahita aAlocanA karane para paMcamAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /  5. jo
bhikSu eka bAra paMcamAsika parihArasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to
use mAyA-rahita AlocanA karane para paMcamAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai aura mAyA-
sahita AlocanA karane para SANmAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /  _ isake uparAnta
mAyAsahita yA mAyArahita AlocanA karane para bhI vahI pANmAsika prAyazcitta AtA
hai| 6. jo bhikSu aneka bAra mAsika parihArasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA
kare to use mAyArahita AlocanA karane para eka mAsa kA prAyazcitta AtA aura
mAyAsahita AlocanA karane para dvaimAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai| 7. jo bhikSu
aneka bAra dvaimAsika parihArasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use
mAyArahita AlocanA karane para dvaimAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai aura mAyAsahita
AlocanA karane para traimAsika prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  8. jo bhikSu aneka bAra
traimAsika parihArasthAna kI prativedanA karake AlocanA kare to use mAyArahita
AlocanA karane para traimAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai aura mAyAsahita AlocanA
karane para cAturmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  9. jo bhikSu aneka bAra
cAturmAsika parihArasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use mAyArahita
AlocanA karane para cAturmAsika prAyazcitta pAtA hai aura mAyAsahita AlocanA
karane para paMcamAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  10. jo bhikSu aneka bAra
paMcamAsika parihArasthAna ko pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use mAyArahita
AlocanA karane para paMcamAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai aura mAyAsahita AlocanA
karane para pANmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  isake uparAnta mAyAsahita yA
mAyArahita AlocanA karane para bhI vahI pANmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai| 11. jo
bhikSu mAsika yAvat paMcamAsika ina parihArasthAnoM meM se kisI parihArasthAna
kI eka bAra pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use mAyArahita AlocanA karane
para Asevita parihArasthAna ke anusAra mAsika yAvat paMcamAsika prAyazcitta AtA
hai aura mAyAsahita AlocanA karane para Asevita parihArasthAna ke anusAra
dvaimAsika yAvat SANmAsika prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /

Page #534 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[434] [Nishīthasūtra] 12. If a monk criticizes a *parihārasthāna* (period of
observance) after having observed it many times, whether it be a *māsika*
(monthly), *yāvat* (as long as), or *pañcamāsika* (five-monthly), then he incurs
a *māsika* to *pañcamāsika* *prāyaścitta* (penance) according to the
*parihārasthāna* observed, if the criticism is without *māyā* (deceit). If the
criticism is with *māyā*, then he incurs a *dvaimāsika* (two-monthly) to
*pañcamāsika* *prāyaścitta* according to the *parihārasthāna* observed. _
Thereafter, whether the criticism is with or without *māyā*, the same
*pañcamāsika* *prāyaścitta* is incurred._ 13. If a monk criticizes a
*parihārasthāna* after having observed it once, whether it be a *cāturmāsīka*
(four-monthly) or a *cāturmāsīka* with some extension, a *pañcamāsika* or a
*pañcamāsika* with some extension, then he incurs a *cāturmāsīka* or a
*cāturmāsīka* with some extension, a *pañcamāsika* or a *pañcamāsika* with some
extension *prāyaścitta* according to the *parihārasthāna* observed, if the
criticism is without *māyā*. If the criticism is with *māyā*, then he incurs a
*pañcamāsika* or a *pañcamāsika* with some extension, or a *pañcamāsika*
*prāyaścitta* according to the *parihārasthāna* observed. _ Thereafter, whether
the criticism is with or without *māyā*, the same *pañcamāsika* *prāyaścitta* is
incurred._ 14. If a monk criticizes a *parihārasthāna* after having observed it
many times, whether it be a *cāturmāsīka* or a *cāturmāsīka* with some
extension, a *pañcamāsika* or a *pañcamāsika* with some extension, then he
incurs a *cāturmāsīka* or a *cāturmāsīka* with some extension, a *pañcamāsika*
or a *pañcamāsika* with some extension *prāyaścitta* according to the
*parihārasthāna* observed, if the criticism is without *māyā*. If the criticism
is with *māyā*, then he incurs a *pañcamāsika* or a *pañcamāsika* with some
extension, or a *ṣaḍmāsīka* (six-monthly) *prāyaścitta*. _ Thereafter, whether
the criticism is with or without *māyā*, the same *ṣaḍmāsīka* *prāyaścitta* is
incurred._ Discussion: These fourteen sūtras describe the various options for
giving *prāyaścitta* to a critic, according to the criticism, after he has
observed the faults mentioned in the nineteen *uddeśakas* (topics). A critic may
criticize *prāyaścitta* places by observing them once or many times, and may
also criticize many *prāyaścitta* places once or many times, either together or
separately. Some critics are sincere and make truthful criticisms, while others
are deceitful. Therefore, the method of giving *prāyaścitta* to such critics is
described here.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 434] [nizIthasUtra isake uparAnta mAyAsahita yA mAyArahita AlocanA karane para
vahI pANmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai| 12. jo bhikSu mAsika yAvat paMcamAsika ina
parihArasthAnoM meM se kisI eka parihArasthAna kI aneka bAra pratisevanA karake
AlocanA kare to use mAyArahita AlocanA karane para Asevita parihArasthAna ke
anusAra mAsika yAvat paMcamAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai aura mAyAsahita AlocanA
karane para Asevita parihArasthAna ke anusAra dvaimAsika yAvat pANmAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai| _ isake uparAnta mAyAsahita yA mAyArahita AlocanA karane
para vahI pANmAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai| 13. jo bhikSu cAturmAsika yA kucha
adhika cAturmAsika, paMcamAsika yA kucha adhika paMcamAsika-ina parihArasthAnoM
meM se kisI eka parihArasthAna kI eka bAra pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to
use mAyArahita AlocanA karane para prAsevita parihArasthAna ke anusAra
cAturmAsika yA kucha adhika cAturmAsika, paMcamAsika yA kucha adhika paMcamAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai aura mAyAsahita AlocanA karane para Asevita parihArasthAna
ke anusAra paMcamAsika yA kucha adhika paMcamAsika yA pANmAsika prAyazcitta AtA
hai| isake uparAnta mAyAsahita yA mAyArahita AlocanA karane para vahI pANmAsika
prAyazcitta AtA hai| 14. jo bhikSu aneka bAra cAturmAsika yA aneka bAra kucha
adhika cAturmAsika, aneka bAra paMcamAsika yA aneka bAra kucha adhika
paMcamAsika parihArasthAna meM se kisI eka parihArasthAna kI pratisevanA karake
AlocanA kare to use mAyArahita AlocanA karane para prAsevita parihArasthAna ke
anusAra cAturmAsika yA kucha adhika cAturmAsika, paMcamAsika yA kucha adhika
paMcamAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai aura mAyAsahita AlocanA karane para paMcamAsika
yA kucha adhika paMcamAsika yA chamAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai| isake uparAMta
mAyAsahita yA mAyArahita AlocanA karane para vahI chamAsika prAyazcitta AtA hai|
vivecana-unnIsa uddezakoM meM kahe hue doSoM ke sevana karane ke bAda Alocaka ko
AlocanA ke anusAra prAyazcitta dene ke vibhinna vikalpoM kA varNana ina caudaha
sUtroM meM kiyA gayA hai  /  AlocanA karane vAlA eka prAyazcitta sthAnoM ko eka
bAra yA aneka bAra tathA aneka prAyazcitta sthAnoM ko eka bAra yA aneka bAra
sevana karake unakI eka sAtha bhI AlocanA kara sakatA hai aura kabhI alaga-alaga
bhii| koI pAlocaka niSkapaTa yathArtha AlocanA karanevAlA hotA hai aura koI
kapaTayukta AlocanA karane vAlA bhI hotA hai ata: aise AlocakoM ko die jAne vAle
prAyazcitta dene kI vidhi yahA~ kahI gaI hai|

Page #535 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twentieth Uddeshak  [435]  The nineteenth Uddeshak discusses four types
of Prāyaścitta: Māsika, Chaumāsi, and their Guru or Laghu. However, some
specific Doshas have Prāyaścitta with an increase of five days or ten days.
Therefore, in Sutra 13-14, there is a mention of four months or four months
plus, five months or five months plus. However, there is no independent
instruction in the Praagamas for Panchamaasi or Chhamaasi Prāyaścitta places,
similar to the Chaumāsi Prāyaścitta places. Only a hint of them is found in this
Uddeshak.  If one performs Prāyaścitta at any of these places once or multiple
times and then criticizes oneself, the Prāyaścitta place remains the same, but
the intensity of the penance decreases.  If there are multiple Prāyaścitta
places, then Prāyaścitta is obtained for all those places, and penance is
performed according to the intensity of each Prāyaścitta place.  If one
criticizes oneself with a simple mind, Prāyaścitta is obtained according to the
Prāyaścitta place. If one criticizes with deceit, then upon knowing the deceit,
one month more Prāyaścitta is added to that Prāyaścitta place, meaning a Guru
month of Prāyaścitta is added for the deceit.  From the ninth to the fourteenth
Purva, the Shrutagyani, Avadhigyani, Manahparyavagyani, and Kevalgyani, these
Aagamavihāri Bhikshus, know the deceit of the critic through their knowledge.
Therefore, one should criticize and perform Prāyaścitta only in their presence.
In their absence, a Shrutavyavahari Sadhu can understand the deceit through
language and expressions after listening to the criticism three times, as they
are also experienced in the meaning of the scriptures.  If the deceit of the one
who criticizes with deceit is not known, then their purification does not
happen. Therefore, the Aagamas mention the qualifications of the one who
criticizes and the one who listens, and there are other descriptions related to
criticism. For example:  1. In Thaanaang A. 10, it is said that the one who
criticizes must have ten qualities. These are:     1. Jaatisampanna (born into a
good family)     2. Kulasampanna (from a good lineage)     3. Vinayasampanna
(well-mannered)     4. Gyanasampanna (knowledgeable)     5. Darshanasampanna
(possessing right vision)     6. Charitrasampanna (of good character)     7.
Kshamavan (forgiving)     8. Damneendriya (having controlled senses)     9.
Amaayi (not deceitful)     10. Not regretting after criticizing.  2. In
Thaanaang A. 10, the ten qualities of the one who listens to the criticism are
mentioned as follows:     1. Praachaaravan (following the right conduct)     2.
Able to understand all faults     3. Knower of the order of the five Vyavaharas
4. Skilled in removing hesitation     5. Able to make someone criticize     6.
Not revealing the criticism to anyone     7. Giver of appropriate Prāyaścitta
8. Able to explain the negative consequences of not criticizing or criticizing
with deceit     9. Priyadharmmi (devoted to Dharma)     10. Dridhadharmmi (firm
in Dharma)  In Uttara A. 36 Ga. 262, three qualities of the one who listens to
the criticism are mentioned:     1. Expert in the Aagamas     2. Able to
generate Samadhi     3. Gunagrahi (one who accepts good qualities)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bIsavAM uddezaka] [435 unnIsa uddezakoM meM mAsika, caumAsI aura inake guru yA
laghu yoM cAra prakAra ke prAyazcitta kA kathana hai tathApi kucha vizeSa doSoM
ke prAyazcittoM meM pAMca dina, dasa dina kI vRddhi bhI hotI hai| isIlie sUtra
13-14 meM cAra mAsa yA cAra mAsa sAdhika, pAMca mAsa yA pAMca mAsa sAdhika aisA
kathana hai, kintu caumAsI prAyazcitta sthAnoM ke samAna paMcamAsI yA chamAsI
prAyazcitta sthAnoM kA svataMtra nirdeza prAgamoM meM nahIM hai  /  prastuta
uddezaka meM bhI unakA kevala saMketa milatA hai| ina prAyazcitta sthAnoM meM se
kisI eka prAyazcitta sthAna kA eka bAra yA aneka bAra sevana karake eka sAtha
AlocanA karane para prAyazcitta sthAna vahI rahatA hai kintu tapa kI hInAdhikatA
ho jAtI hai| yadi prAyazcitta sthAna aneka hoM to una sabhI sthAnoM ke
prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai aura una sabhI prAyazcitta sthAnoM ke anusAra
yathA yogya tapa prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai| sarala mana se AlocanA karane para
prAyazcitta sthAna ke anurUpa prAyazcitta AtA hai aura koI kapaTa yukta aAlocanA
kare to kapaTa kI jAnakArI ho jAne para usa prAyazcitta sthAna se eka mAsa
adhika prAyazcitta AtA hai arthAt kapaTa karane kA eka guru mAsa kA prAyazcitta
aura saMyukta kara diyA jAtA hai| 9 pUrvI se lekara 14 pUrva taka ke zrutajJAnI,
avadhijJAnI, manaHparyavajJAnI, kevalajJAnI ye AgamavihArI bhikSu Alocaka ke
kapaTa ko apane jJAna se jAna lete haiM ataH inake sanmukha hI AlocanA evaM
prAyazcitta karanA caahiye| inake abhAva meM zrutavyavahArI sAdhu tIna bAra
AlocanA sunakara bhASA tathA bhAvoM se kapaTa ko jAna sakate haiM kyoMki ve bhI
anubhavI gItArtha hote haiN| yadi kapaTayukta AlocanA karane vAle kA kapaTa
nahIM jAnA jA sake to usakI zuddhi nahIM hotI hai  /  isalie AgamoM meM AlocanA
karane vAle kI evaM sunane vAle kI yogyatA kahI gaI hai tathA AlocanA saMbaMdhI
anya varNana bhI hai  /  yathA 1. ThANAMga a. 10 meM AlocanA karane vAle ko 10
guNayukta honA anivArya kahA gayA hai  /  yathA 1. jAtisaMpanna, 2.
kulasaMpanna, 3. vinayasaMpanna, 4. jJAnasaMpanna, 5. darzanasaMpanna, 6.
cAritrasaMpanna, 7. kSamAvAn, 8. damanendriya, 9. amAyI, 10. AlocanA karake
pazcAtApa nahIM karane vaalaa| 2. ThANAMga a. 10 meM AlocanA sunane vAle ke 10
guNa isa prakAra kahe haiM yathA 1. prAcAravAn, 2. samasta doSoM ko samajha
sakane vAlA, 3. pAMca vyavahAroM ke krama kA jJAtA, 4. saMkoca-nivAraNa meM
kuzala, 5. AlocanA karAne meM samartha, 6. AlocanA ko kisI ke pAsa prakaTa na
karane vAlA, 7. yogya prAyazcitta dAtA, 8. AlocanA na karane ke yA kapaTapUrvaka
AlocanA karane ke aniSTa pariNAma batAne meM samartha  /  9. priyadharmI, 10.
dRddhdhrmii| uttarA. a. 36 gA. 262 meM AlocanA sunane vAle ke tIna guNa kahe
haiM1. AgamoM kA vizeSajJa, 2. samAdhi utpanna kara sakane vAlA, 3. guNagrAhI  /

Page #536 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  [436] [Nishīthasūtra 3. Ṭhāṇāṅga a. 10 mentions 10 faults in criticism as
follows: 1. Criticizing after pleasing someone with service etc. 2. Criticizing
by pleading for less penance etc. 3. Criticizing faults seen by others. 4.
Criticizing major faults. 5. Criticizing minor faults. 6. Speaking very
unclearly. 7. Speaking very loudly. 8. Criticizing the same fault to many
people. 9. Criticizing someone who is not receptive. 10. Criticizing someone who
indulges in the same faults. Criticism is pure only when the above points are
considered with proper discernment. If the listener is not worthy, then
criticism can be given to a member of the same <i>gaccha</i>, another
<i>gaccha</i>, or a <i>śrāvaka</i>, etc. in sequence. Finally, the provision for
criticizing with the witness of Arhats and Siddhas is also mentioned in
Vyavahāra U. 1. Ṭhāṇāṅga a. 3 states that criticism and penance are performed
for the pure worship of knowledge, vision, and conduct. One who does not
criticize and perform penance for their faults spoils both this world and the
next, becomes a hypocrite, and makes the soul a participant in lower realms.
Among the many reasons for not criticizing, the main reason is the fear of
humiliation and disgrace. But this is a state of ignorance. Because one who
becomes pure by criticizing attains complete samadhi in this life and the next,
while one who does not criticize becomes inwardly distressed in this life and
attains non-samadhi in both worlds. By not criticizing, one becomes a long-lived
being due to a painful death. If a monk hides faults committed once or many
times in the fundamental virtues or the secondary virtues, does not criticize
the committed faults, and does not perform penance, then the accountant should
question him about the committed faults. If he speaks falsely and claims to be
innocent, then someone should be appointed to observe him committing the fault
and, with proof, the fault should be proven in front of him and penance should
be given. There is no provision for penance for such a deceitful person in the
nineteen <i>uddeśakas</i>. These only contain provisions for penance for those
who criticize voluntarily. If the aforementioned deceitful monk does not readily
accept the committed faults, he should be expelled from the <i>gaccha</i>. If he
readily accepts the committed faults and the <i>gaccha</i> leader is convinced
of his sincerity, then he can be kept in the <i>gaccha</i> after giving him the
following penance: 1. If he has not committed the fault many times, and has not
spoken falsely many times, and has not...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 436] [nizIthasUtra 3. ThANAMgaM a. 10 meM AlocanA ke 10 doSa isa prakAra kahe
haiM1. sevA prAdi se prasanna karane ke bAda usake pAsa AlocanA krnaa| 2. mere
ko prAyazcitta kama denA ityAdi anunaya karake AlocanA krnaa| 3. dUsaroM ke
dvArA dekhe gaye doSoM kI AlocanA karanA, 4. bar3e-bar3e doSoM kI AlocanA
karanA, 5. choTe-choTe doSoM kI AlocanA karanA, atyaMta aspaSTa bolanA, 7.
atyanta jora se bolanA, 8. anekoM ke pAsa eka hI doSa kI AlocanA karanA  /  9.
agItArtha ke pAsa AlocanA karanA, 10. apane samAna doSoM kA sevana karane vAle
ke pAsa AlocanA krnaa| uparokta sthAnoM kA yogya viveka rakhane para hI AlocanA
zuddha hotI hai| yadi AlocanA sunane vAlA yogya na mile to anukrama se
svagaccha, anya gaccha yA zrAvaka Adi ke pAsa bhI AlocanA kI jA sakatI hai, aMta
meM arihaMta-siddhoM kI sAkSI se bhI AlocanA karane kA vidhAna vyava. u. 1 meM
kiyA gayA hai| ThANAMga a. 3 meM kahA hai ki jJAna-darzana-cAritra kI zuddha
ArAdhanA ke liye AlocanAprAyazcitta kiyA jAtA hai| doSoM kI AlocanA evaM
prAyazcitta nahIM karane vAlA ihaloka aura paraloka donoM hI bigAr3atA hai aura
vaha virAdhaka hokara AtmA ko adhogati kA bhAgI banAtA hai| AlocanA nahIM karane
ke aneka kAraNoM meM mukhya kAraNa apamAna evaM apayaza ke hone kA hotA hai
kintu yaha vicAroM kI ajJAnadazA hai  /  kyoMki AlocanA karake zuddha hone vAlA
isa bhava meM aura parabhava meM pUrNa samAdhi ko prApta karatA hai aura AlocanA
nahIM karane vAlA isa bhava meM aMdara hI aMdara khinna hotA hai evaM ubhayaloka
meM asamAdhi ko prApta karatA hai aura AlocanA na karake sazalya maraNa se
dIrghasaMsArI hotA hai| jo bhikSu mUlaguNoM meM athavA uttaraguNoM meM eka vAra
yA aneka vAra doSa lagAkara unheM chipAve, lage hue doSoM kI na AlocanA kare
aura na prAyazcitta le to gaNanAyaka use lage hue doSoM ke saMbaMdha meM puuche|
yadi vaha asatya bole, apane Apako nirdoSa siddha kare to doSa sevana karate hue
use dekhane ke lie kisI ko niyukta kare aura pramANapUrvaka usake doSa sevana kA
usI ke sAmane siddha karavAkara prAyazcitta deN| unnIsa uddezakoM meM aise
mAyAvI ko die jAne vAle prAyazcittoM kA vidhAna nahIM hai| inameM kevala svecchA
se AlocanA karane vAloM ko die jAne vAle prAyazcittoM kA vidhAna hai| ukta
mAyAvI bhikSu lage hue doSoM ko saralatA se svIkAra na kare to gaccha se nikAla
denA cAhie  /  yadi vaha lage hae doSoM ko saralatA se svIkAra kara le, gaccha
pramukha ko usakI saralatA para vizvAsa ho jAve to use nimna prAyazcitta dekara
gaccha meM rakhA jA sakatA hai| 1. yadi usane aneka bAra doSa sevana na kie hoM,
aneka bAra mRSA bhASaNa karake usane apane

Page #537 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twentieth Uddeshak  [437 If the fault is not concealed and the knowledge of
its transgression is not known to the public, then the penance of Chhed Diksha
should be given. 2. If he has repeatedly violated the great vows like
Brahmacharya, repeatedly spoken Maya-Msha speech, and the knowledge of his
repeated violation of Brahmacharya etc. has become known to the public, then he
should be given the penance of Mula, i.e., new Diksha. In Uttaradhyayanasutra,
Chapter 29, criticism, condemnation, and reproach are said to be extremely
auspicious and excellent fruits of faults. In Thananga, Chapter 10, Bhagavati
Sutra, Chapter 25, Uddeshak 7, Upadesha Sutra, Chapter 30, and
Uttaradhyayanasutra, Chapter 30, ten types of penances are mentioned, among
which criticism is said to be the first place of penance. Penance is performed
for the transgression of faults, either in the original qualities of Charitra or
in the subsequent qualities. In Nishisthasutra, four main divisions of penance
are mentioned, and in the commentary, while explaining it in detail, penance
from five days to six months, and Chhed Mula Ananvasthapya and Paranchik penance
are mentioned. According to the feelings of transgression, the penance for the
same fault-place is increased or decreased. In Bhagavati Sutra, Chapter 25,
Uddeshak 7, and Thananga, Chapter 10, ten types of transgression are mentioned.
They are: 1. Due to pride (power and audacity), 2. Due to laziness, 3. Due to
carelessness, 4. Due to eagerness for hunger, thirst, etc., 5. When there is a
crisis, 6. Due to narrowness of field, etc., 7. Due to mistake, 8. Due to fear,
9. Due to anger or hatred, 10. For the sake of testing the disciple, etc. Behind
every transgression, there is one or more of these reasons. Out of these
reasons, some faults can be purified only by criticism, some by criticism and
Pratikraman, and some by penance, Chhed, etc. After transgression, the seeker of
self-purification performs penance by criticism. Just as dirt on clothes is
purified by washing, similarly, the faults (in restraint, etc.) of the soul are
purified by penance. In Uttaradhyayanasutra, Chapter 29, it is said that by
performing penance, faults are purified, character becomes unblemished, and the
one who accepts the right penance becomes a devotee of the path of liberation
and conduct. Ten types of penance: 1. For those who are worthy of criticism -
only criticism is sufficient for purification of exceptional behavior, tendency,
etc., due to field, etc. 2. For those who are worthy of Pratikraman - only
Pratikraman (Micchami Dukkadam) is sufficient for purification of Ayatana due to
carelessness.  ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bIsavA~ uddezaka] [437 doSa na chipAye hoM aura usake doSa-sevana kI jAnakArI
janasAdhAraNa ko na huI to use dIkSA cheda kA prAyazcitta denA caahie| 2. yadi
usane bAra-bAra brahmacarya Adi mahAvrata bhaMga kiyA ho, bAra-bAra mAyA-maSA
bhASaNa kiyA ho, usake bAra-bAra brahmacarya Adi bhaMga kI jAnakArI
janasAdhAraNa ko ho gaI ho to use mUla arthAt naI dIkSA dene kA prAyazcitta denA
caahie| uttarAdhyayana sUtra a. 29 meM doSoM kI AlocanA niMdA evaM gardA kA
atyaMta zubha evaM zreSTha phala kahA hai| ThANaM0 a0 10, bhagavatI za0 25 u0 7,
uva0 sUtra0 30 aura uttarA0 a0 30 meM 10 prakAra ke prAyazcitta kahe haiM unameM
AlocanA karanA prathama prAyazcitta sthAna kahA gayA hai  /  prAyazcitta-cAritra
ke mUla guNoM meM yA uttara guNoM meM kI gaI pratisevanAoM arthAt doSa sevana kA
prAyazcitta kiyA jAtA hai| nizIthasUtra meM tapa-prAyazcitta ke cAra mukhya
vibhAga kaheM haiM aura bhASya meM usI kI vistAra se vyAkhyA karate hue pA~ca
dina ke tapa se lekara chaH mAsa taka tapa tathA cheda mUla anavasthApya evaM
pArAMcika prAyazcitta taka kA kathana kiyA hai  /  pratisevanA ke bhAvoM ke
anusAra eka hI doSa-sthAna ke prAyazcittoM kI vRddhi yA kamI kI jAtI hai|
bhagavatI za0 25 u0 7 evaM ThANAMga a0 10 meM pratisevanA dasa prakAra kI kahI
hai  /  yathA 1. darpa se (prAzakti evaM dhRSTatA se), 2. Alasya se, 3.
asAvadhAnI se, 4. bhUkha pyAsa Adi kI AturatA se, 5. saMkaTa Ane para 6. kSetra
Adi kI saMkIrNatA se, 7. bhUla se, 8. bhaya se, 9. roSa se yA dveSa se, 10.
ziSya Adi kI parIkSA ke lie| pratyeka doSa-sevana ke pIche inameM se koI bhI eka
yA aneka kAraNa hote haiN| ina kAraNoM meM se kisI kAraNa se lage doSa kI kevala
pAlocanA se hI zuddhi ho sakatI hai to kisI kI AlocanA aura pratikramaNa se
zuddhi hotI hai aura kisI kI tapa cheda Adi se zuddhi hotI hai| doSa-sevana ke
bAda prAtmazuddhi kA icchuka AlocanA kara prAyazcitta grahaNa karatA hai  /
jisa prakAra vastra meM lage maila kI zuddhi dhone se ho jAtI hai usI prakAra
AtmA ke (saMyamAdi meM) lage doSoM kI zuddhi prAyazcita se ho jAtI hai| _utarA0
a0 29 meM kahA hai ki prAyazcitta karane se doSoM kI vizuddhi ho jAtI hai,
caritra niraticAra ho jAtA hai, tathA samyag prAyazcitta svIkAra karane vAlA
mokSamArga evaM AcAra kA ArAdhaka hotA hai| dasa prakAra kA prAyazcitta 1.
AlocanA ke yogya-kSetrAdi ke kAraNa ApavAdika vyavahAra pravRtti prAdi kI kevala
AlocanA se zuddhi hotI hai  /  2. pratikramaNa ke yogya-asAvadhAnI se hone vAlI
ayatanA kI zuddhi kevala pratikramaNa se (micchAmi dukkar3a se) hotI hai  /

Page #538 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[438] 1. **Tadu-bhaya Yoga-Tap Praayaschitta** (Praayaschitta for both Yoga and
Tap): Very minor offenses, such as those related to the Samiti (assembly), are
purified through Alochana (reflection) and Pratikramana (confession). 2.
**Viveka Yoga-Tap Praayaschitta** (Praayaschitta for Viveka Yoga and Tap): When
a mistake is made in accepting food or drink that is either defective or
inappropriate, or when the rules regarding the time and place of eating are
violated, the appropriate Praayaschitta is to give up the food or drink. 3.
**Vyutsarga Yoga-Tap Praayaschitta** (Praayaschitta for Vyutsarga Yoga and Tap):
When a simple mistake is made, the Praayaschitta is to perform the prescribed
number of breaths of Kayotsarga (body purification). This is also the fifth
requirement in the Ubha-Kala Pratikramana. All five of these Praayaschittas are
free from Tap. 4. **Tap Yoga-Tap Praayaschitta** (Praayaschitta for Tap Yoga and
Tap): When a fault is committed in the Mula Guna (primary qualities) or Uttara
Guna (secondary qualities), the Praayaschitta ranges from Puri-madd (one-day
fast) to a six-month Tap. This is of two types:     a. **Shuddha Tap** (Pure
Tap)     b. **Parihar Tap** (Avoidance Tap) 5. **Chheda Yoga-Tap Praayaschitta**
(Praayaschitta for Chheda Yoga and Tap): When offenses are repeatedly committed,
when criticism is made without reason, or when there is excessive public
censure, the Praayaschitta is to undergo a Chheda (suspension) of the Diksha
(initiation) for a period ranging from one day to six months. 6. **Mula Yoga-Tap
Praayaschitta** (Praayaschitta for Mula Yoga and Tap): When offenses that are
eligible for Chheda are committed due to negligence or self-indulgence, the
Praayaschitta is to undergo a complete Chheda of the Diksha and receive a new
initiation. 7. **An-avasthapya Paranchika Praayaschitta** (Praayaschitta for An-
avasthapya Paranchika): These two Praayaschittas are considered to be distinct
in the present time. Before receiving a new initiation, the individual undergoes
rigorous Tap-filled practices, is kept separate from the group for a period of
time, and then is given a new initiation after being dressed as a householder.
There are differences in the specific Tap, its duration, and other aspects. For
further details, refer to Brihatkalpa Uddeshak 4 and Vyavahar Uddeshak 2.  These
sutras describe the Praayaschittas involving the Laghu-masik (short-term) and
other Taps. The Bhashya Gatha 6499 states that the Praayaschittas mentioned in
the 19 Uddeshakas are for violations of Jnana (knowledge), Darshan (vision), and
Charitra (conduct). These Praayaschittas are applicable to the Sthavirakalpi
(those who have attained the highest stage of spiritual development) only when
they commit an An-achar (major offense), while the Jinakalpi (those who are
still on the path of spiritual development) receive these Praayaschittas for all
four types of violations: Atikrama, Vyatikrama, Atichar, and An-achar.  1.
**Atikrama**: The intention to commit an offense. 2. **Vyatikrama**: The
beginning of preparation to commit an offense. 3. **Atichar**: The near
completion of the tendency to commit an offense. 4. **An-achar**: The actual
commission of the offense.  For example: 1. **Atikrama**: The intention to eat
food that is prohibited. 2. **Vyatikrama**: Going to obtain the prohibited food.
3. **Atichar**: Bringing the prohibited food and keeping it ready. 4. **An-
achar**: Eating the prohibited food.  The Sthavirakalpi receive the five
Praayaschittas from Atikrama to Vyutsarga, while the Jinakalpi receive one of
the five remaining Praayaschittas when they commit an An-achar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 438] [nizIthasUtra 3. tadubhaya yogya-tapa prAyazcitta ke ayogya samiti Adi ke
atyanta alpa doSa kI zuddhi AlocanA evaM pratikramaNa se ho jAtI hai| 4. viveka
yogya-bhUla se grahaNa kiye gae doSayukta yA akalpanIya AhArAdi ke grahaNa kiye
jAne para athavA kSetrakAla sambandhI prAhAra kI maryAdA kA ullaMghana hone para
use paraTha denA hI viveka prAyazcitta hai| 5. vyutsarga ke yogya -kisI
sAdhAraNa bhUla ke ho jAne para nirdhArita zvAsocchvAsa ke kAyotsarga kA
prAyazcitta diyA jAya yaha vyutsarga prAyazcitta hai| ubhaya kAla pratikramaNa
meM pAMcavA~ aAvazyaka bhI isI prAyazcitta rUpa hai  /  ye pAMcoM prAyazcitta
taparahita haiM  /  6. tapa ke yogya-mUla guNa yA uttara guNa meM doSa lagAne
para purimaDDa se lekara 6 mAsI tapa taka kA prAyazcitta hotA hai  /  yaha do
prakAra kA hai1. zuddha tapa, 2. parihAra tapa  /  7. cheda ke yogya-doSoM ke
bAra-bAra sevana se, akAraNa apavAda sevana se yA adhika loka niMdA hone para
AlocanA karane vAle kI eka dina se lekara chaH mAsa taka kI dIkSA-paryAya kA
chedana krnaa| 8. mUla ke yogya cheda ke yogya doSoM meM upekSA bhAva yA
svacchandatA hone para pUrNa dIkSA cheda karake naI dIkSA denaa| 9-10.
anavasthApya pArAMcika prAyazcitta-vartamAna meM ina do prAyazcittoM kA viccheda
honA mAnA jAtA hai| naI dIkSA dene ke pUrva kaThora tapamaya sAdhanA karavAI
jAtI hai, kucha samaya samUha se alaga rakhA jAtA hai phira eka bAra gRhastha kA
veSa pahanAkara punaH dIkSA dI jAtI hai ina donoM meM viziSTa tapa evaM usake
kAla Adi kA antara hai aura inakA anya vivecana bRhatkalpa uddezaka 4 meM tathA
vyava. u. 2 meM dekheM  /  ina sUtroM meM laghumAsika Adi tapa prAyazcittoM kA
kathana hai| bhASya gAthA 6499 meM kahA hai ki 19 uddezakoM meM kahe gaye
prAyazcitta jJAnadarzana cAritra ke atikrama vyatikrama aticAra evaM anAcAra ke
haiN| inameM se sthavirakalpI ko kisI anAcAra kA AcaraNa karane para hI ye
prAyazcitta Ate haiM aura jinakalpI ko atikrama Adi cAroM ke ye prAyazcitta pAte
haiM  /  1. atikrama-doSa sevana kA saMkalpa  /  2. vyatikrama-doSa sevana ke
pUrva kI taiyArI kA prArambha  /  3. aticAra-doSa sevana ke pUrva kI pravRtti kA
lagabhaga pUrNa ho jAnA  /  4. anAcAra-doSa kA sevana kara lenA  /  jaise ki-1.
prAdhAkarmI AhAra grahaNa karane kA saMkalpa, 2. usake liye jAnA, 3. lAkara
rakhanA, 4. khA lenaa| sthavirakalpI ko atikramAdi tIna se vyutsarga taka ke
pAMca prAyazcitta pAte haiM evaM anAcAra sevana karane para unheM Age ke pAMca
prAyazcittoM meM se koI eka prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /

Page #539 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twentieth Uddeshak  [439 The description of Parihar Tap and Shuddha Tap, who
they are given to, is in the Bhashya Gatha 6586 to 91. There it is also said
that Shuddha Tap Prāyaścitta is given only to Sadhvi and the Agiatartha, Durbal
and the Bhikshu who has completed three Santhyanas. To the one who has taken
Diksha for 20 years, to the one who is above 29 years of age, to the one who is
Utkrishta Gittarth, i.e., who has attained the knowledge of 9 Purvas, to the one
who has completed the first Santhan, and to the one who practices many Abhigha
Tap Sadhana, Parihar Tap is given. The complete method of giving Parihar Tap is
described in Bhashya Gatha 6592. From Sutra 1 to 5, the general Prāyaścitta is
said to be the consumption of one-month Prāyaścitta Sthana to five-month
Prāyaścitta Sthana once, and from Sutra 6 to 10, the consumption of many times.
Along with this, it is said to give a special Guru-mas Prāyaścitta for deceitful
criticism. From Sutra 11 to 14, information is given about many Sutras with
Dwisanayogi etc. Bhang, from the consumption of many of these Prāyaścitta
Sthana. In the Bhashya Chuni, the count of crores of Sutras is mentioned in
detail. In Sutras 5, 10 and 11 to 14, the phrase "Teṇ Param-Paliuñciya
Apaliuñciya Te Chev Chhammasa" is present. Its meaning should be understood as -
if someone is eligible for a 6-month or 7-month Prāyaścitta, or if they are
criticizing with or without deceit, then also this six-month Prāyaścitta is
applicable, not more than that. Subahuhi Vi Masehi, Chhanham Masana Param Na
Dayavvam || 6524 || Chuni - Tawarihehi Bahuhi Masehi Chhammasa Param Na Dijjai,
Savvassev Es Niyamo, Ettha Karanam Jamha Amham Vaddhamana Samino Evam Chev Param
Pamanam Thavitam. Meaning - In the reign of Vardhaman Mahavira Swami, only this
much Prāyaścitta is prescribed, and this rule is for all Sadhu-Sadhvi. _
Agiatartha, Atiparinama, Aparinama Sadhu-Sadhvi are given only 6 months of Tap,
not Chhed Prāyaścitta. But if they repeatedly commit the fault, or if they
commit violence against the five senses with Akutti Buddhi, i.e., with the
intention of killing, or if they consume Kushila with pride, then they can be
given Chhed Prāyaścitta. And those who are indifferent to Chhed are given "Mula
Prāyaścitta". If someone commits other small or big faults, they are not given
Chhed or Mula Prāyaścitta for the first time, but if they are warned once that
"O Arya! If you commit this fault repeatedly, then Chhed or Mula Prāyaścitta
will be given", then they can be given Chhed or Mula Prāyaścitta. The one who
has not been warned cannot be given Chhed or Mula Prāyaścitta. In the Bhashya,
the Sadhu who has been warned is called "Vikovit" and the Sadhu who has not been
warned is called "Avikovit". Vikovit is given Lagghu for the first time, Guru
for the second time and Chhed Prāyaścitta for the third time. ]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bIsavAM uddezaka] [439 parihAra tapa evaM zuddha tapa kina-kina ko diyA jAtA
hai yaha varNana bhASya gAthA-6586 se 91 taka meM hai  /  vahA~ para yaha bhI
kahA hai ki sAdhvI ko evaM agItArtha, durbala aura aMtima tIna saMdhayaNa vAle
bhikSu ko zuddha tapa prAyazcitta hI diyA jAtA hai| 20 varSa kI dIkSA
paryAyavAle ko, 29 varSa kI umra se adhika vaya vAle ko, utkRSTa gItArtha arthAt
9 pUrva ke jJAnI ko, prathama saMhanana vAle ko tathA aneka abhigraha tapa
sAdhanA ke abhyAsI ko parihAra tapa diyA jAtA hai  /  bhASya gAthA. 6592 meM
parihAra tapa dene kI pUrNa vidhi kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| sUtra 1 se 5 taka
eka mAsika prAyazcitta sthAna se lekara pAMca mAsika prAyazcitta sthAna ke eka
bAra sevana kA tathA sUtra 6 se 10 taka aneka bAra sevana kA sAmAnya prAyazcitta
kahA gayA hai sAtha hI kapaTayukta AlocanA kA eka gurumAsa prAyazcitta vizeSa
dene kA kahA gayA hai| sUtra 11 se 14 meM inhIM prAyazcitta sthAnoM meM se aneka
sthAnoM ke sevana se dvisaMyogI Adi bhaMgayukta aneka sUtroM kI sUcanA kI gaI
hai, bhASya cUNi meM bhaMga-vistAra se karor3oM sUtroM kI gaNanA batAI gaI hai|
sUtra 5, 10 tathA 11 se 14 taka ke sUtroM meM "teNa paraM-paliuMciya apaliuMciya
te ceva chammAsA" yaha vAkya hai  /  isakA Azaya yaha samajhanA cAhie ki-isake
Age koI 6 mAsa yA 7 mAsa ke yogya prAyazcitta kA pAtra ho-athavA kapaTasahita yA
kapaTarahita AlocanA karane vAlA ho to bhI yahI chaH mAsa kA prAyazcitta AtA
hai, isase adhika nahIM AtA hai| subahuhi vi mAsehi, chaNhaM mAsANa paraM Na
dAyavvaM  //  6524  //  cUNi-tavArihehi bahuhi mAsehi chammAsA paraM Na dijjai,
savvasseva esa Niyamo, ettha kAraNaM jamhA amhaM vaddhamANa sAmiNo evaM ceva
paraM pamANaM ThavitaM  /  bhAvArtha-varddhamAna mahAvIra svAmI ke zAsana meM
itane hI prAyazcitta kI maryAdA nirdhArita hai aura sabhI sAdhu-sAdhvI ke lie
yaha niyama hai  /  _ agItArtha, atipariNAmI, apariNAmI sAdhu-sAdhvI ko 6 mAsa
kA tapa hI diyA jAtA hai, cheda prAyazcitta nahIM diyA jAtA hai| kintu doSa ko
punaH punaH sevana karane para yA AkuTTI buddhi prarthAt mArane ke saMkalpa se
paMcendriya kI hiMsA karane para yA darpa se kuzIla ke sevana karane para inheM
cheda prAyazcitta diyA jA sakatA hai tathA cheda ke prati upekSAvRtti rakhane
vAloM ko "mUla prAyazcitta" diyA jAtA hai| anya aneka choTe bar3e doSoM ke
sevana karane para prathama bAra meM cheda yA mUla prAyazcitta nahIM diyA jAtA
hai, kintu jise eka bAra isa prakAra kI cetAvanI de dI gaI hai ki "he Arya !
yadi bAraMbAra yaha doSa sevana kiyA to cheda yA mUla prAyazcitta diyA
jaayegaa|" use hI cheda yA mUla prAyazcitta diyA jA sakatA hai| jise isa prakAra
kI cetAvanI nahIM dI gaI hai use cheda yA mUla prAyazcitta nahIM diyA jA sakatA
hai  /  bhASya meM cetAvanI diye gaye sAdhu ko 'vikovita' evaM cetAvanI nahIM
diye gaye sAdhu ko "avikovita" kahA gayA hai  /  vikovita ko bhI prathama bAra
laghu, dUsarI bAra guru evaM tIsarI bAra cheda prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai|

Page #540 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīthasūtra  **Chapter 440**  The **Chheda Prāyaścitta** is also excellent
for six months and can be given up to three times. After that, the **Mūla
Prāyaścitta** is given.  **As** if a **Puṇo** arises during the six months, then
the **Chheda** should be given for three times. This is an **Aviseṭṭa** or three
times **Challahu Chheda**.  **Or** - If the **Tava** is **Teya** then the
**Chheda** is given - within a month, within four months, within six months, and
from there, different months up to six months, in those **Chhinna** (broken)
**Chheda** **Teya** becomes **Atikka** (excessive). Then, if it arises again,
the **Mūla** is given for three times. - **Cūrṇi Bhā. 4 p. 351-52**  From this,
it is clear that during the reign of **Vardhamāna Mahāvīra Svāmī**, there is no
provision for giving **Tap** and **Chheda Prāyaścitta** for more than six
months. Therefore, no **Doṣa** should be given more than six months of **Tap**
or **Chheda**. Because giving more **Prāyaścitta** would be contrary to this
**Sūtrāṁśa** and the **Bhāṣyōkta Paramparā**. The **Mūla** (new **Dīkṣā**)
**Prāyaścitta** can also be given three times, and the six months of **Tap** and
six months of **Chheda** can also be given only three times. After that, further
**Prāyaścitta** is given. Finally, the person is expelled from the **Gaccha**.
**On ** **Pratisevna** **in ** **Prasthāpanā** **, **Āropaṇa**  **15.** If a
**Bhikṣu** performs **Cāumāsiya** or **Sāirega Cāumāsiya** or **Pañcamāsiya** or
**Sāirega Pañcamāsiya**, and performs another **Parihāratthāṇa** after
performing these **Parihāratthāṇa**, then he should be **Āloeya** (reprimanded).
**Apaliuñciya** (not reprimanded) **Āloeya** (reprimanded) **Thavaṇijja** (to be
made to stand) **Thavaitta** (made to stand) **Karaṇijja** (to be made to do)
**Veyāvaḍiya** (to be made to leave). Even if he performs **Paḍisevita**
(repetition), he should be **Āruheya** (made to climb) in the same **Kasiṇa**.
1. **Puvvim Paḍiseviya** (previous repetition) **Puvvim Āloiya** (previous
reprimand), 2. **Puvvim Paḍiseviya** (previous repetition) **Pacchā Āloiya**
(later reprimand), 3. **Pacchā Paḍiseviya** (later repetition) **Puvvim Āloiya**
(previous reprimand), 4. **Pacchā Paḍiseviya** (later repetition) **Pacchā
Āloiya** (later reprimand), 1. **Apaliuñciya** (not reprimanded) **Apaliuñciya**
(not reprimanded), 2. **Apaliuñciya** (not reprimanded) **Paliuñciya**
(reprimanded), 3. **Paliuñciya** (reprimanded) **Apaliuñciya** (not
reprimanded), 4. **Paliuñciya** (reprimanded) **Paliuñciya** (reprimanded),  ...
**Āloeya** (reprimanded) **Savvameya** (all) **Sakaya** (himself) **Sāhaṇiya**
(with the **Sāhaṇa**) **Āruheya** (to be made to climb),  If he performs
**Paḍiseva** (repetition) while **Nivvisamāṇa** (leaving) after being
**Paṭṭhava** (established) for this **Paṭṭaṇā** (establishment), he should be
**Āheya** (made to stay) in the same **Kasiṇa**.  **16.** If a **Bhikṣu**
performs **Cāumāsiya** or **Sāirega Cāumāsiya** or **Pañcamāsiya** or **Sāirega
Pañcamāsiya**, and performs another **Parihāratthāṇa** after performing these
**Parihāratthāṇa**, then he should be **Āloeya** (reprimanded).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ nizIthasUtra cheda prAyazcitta bhI utkRSTa chaH mAsa kA hotA hai tathA tIna
bAra taka diyA jA sakatA hai usake bAda mUla prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai  /  440]
yathA chammAsovari jai puNo Avajjai to tiSNi vArA lahu caiva chedo dAyavvo  /
esa avisiTTo vA tiSNi vArA challahu chedo  /  ahavA - jaM caiva tava tiyaM taM
chedatiya pi- mAsabbhaMtaraM caumAsabbhaMtaraM, chammAsabhaMtaraM ca, jamhA evaM
tamhA bhiNNamAsAdi jAva chammAsaM, tesu chiNNesu cheya tiyaM atikkataM bhavati
/  tato vi jati paraM Avajjati to tigNi vArA mUlaM dijjati  /  - cUrNi bhA. 4
pR. 351-52 isase yaha spaSTa hotA hai ki vardhamAna mahAvIra svAmI ke zAsana meM
tapa aura cheda prAyazcitta chaH mAsa se adhika dene kA vidhAna nahIM hai  /
ataH kiso bho doSa kA chaH mAsa tapa yA cheda se adhika prAyazcitta nahIM denA
cAhiye  /  kyoMki adhika prAyazcitta dene para 'teNa paraM isa sUtrAMza se evaM
bhASyokta paramparA se viparIta AcaraNa hotA hai  /  mUla (naI dikSA)
prAyazcitta bhI tIna bAra diyA jA sakatA hai aura chaH mAsa kA tapa aura chaH
mAsa kA cheda bhI tIna bAra hI diyA jA sakatA hai  /  usake bAda Age kA
prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai  /  anta meM gaccha se nikAla diyA jAtA hai  /
prasthApanA meM pratisevanA karane para zrAropaNa 15. je bhikkhU cAummAsiyaM vA,
sAirega cAummAsiyaM vA, paMcamAsiyaM vA sAirega- paMcamAsiyaM vA, eesa
parihAraTThANANaM aNNayaraM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA apaliuMciya
AloemANe ThavaNijjaM ThavaittA karaNijjaM veyAvaDiyaM  /  ofae vi paDisevittA,
se vi kasiNe tattheva ArUheyavve siyA  /  1. puvviM paDiseviyaM puvviM AloiyaM,
2. puvviM paDiseviyaM pacchA AloiyaM, 3. pacchA paDiseviyaM puvviM AloiyaM, 4.
pacchA paDiseviyaM pacchA AloiyaM, 1. apaliuMcie apaliuMciya, 2. apaliuMcie
paliuMciyaM, 3. paliuMcie apaliuMciyaM, 4. paliuMcie paliuMciyaM, ...
AloemANassa savvameyaM sakayaM sAhaNiya Aruheyavve siyA, je eyAe paTTaNAe
paTThavie nivvisamANe paDisevei, se vi kasiNe tattheva Aheyavve siyA  /  16. je
bhikkhU cAummAsiyaM vA, sAirega cAummAsiyaM vA, paMcamAsiyaM vA,
sAiregapaMcamAsayaM vA, eesa parihAraTThANANaM aNNayaraM parihAradvANaM
paDisevittA AloejjA,

Page #541 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twentieth Uddesaka  [441]  It is necessary to establish the **Palivunciya
Aloemaana** (period of observance) and to perform the **Thavanijja**
(observance) accordingly. If one observes it, one should ascend to the
**Vikasina** (heaven) right there.   1. If one observes it **before** the
**Aloemaana**, one should ascend to the **Vikasina** right there. 2. If one
observes it **after** the **Aloemaana**, one should ascend to the **Vikasina**
right there. 3. If one observes it **before** the **Aloemaana**, one should
ascend to the **Vikasina** right there. 4. If one observes it **after** the
**Aloemaana**, one should ascend to the **Vikasina** right there.  1. If one
observes it **without** the **Palivunciya**, one should ascend to the
**Vikasina** right there. 2. If one observes it **with** the **Palivunciya**,
one should ascend to the **Vikasina** right there. 3. If one observes it
**without** the **Palivunciya**, one should ascend to the **Vikasina** right
there. 4. If one observes it **with** the **Palivunciya**, one should ascend to
the **Vikasina** right there.  One should ascend to the **Vikasina** right
there, by oneself, by one's own effort, by one's own **Saahaniya** (merit). If
one observes it, being **Nivvisamaana** (free from attachment), with the
**Pattavana** (knowledge) of this, one should ascend to the **Vikasina** right
there.  17. If a **Bhikkhu** observes the **Pariharatthana** (observance) of
**Chaummaasiya** (four months), **Sairega-Chaummaasiya** (four months with
**Sairega**), **Panchamaasiya** (five months), or **Sairega-Panchamaasiya**
(five months with **Sairega**), and then observes the **Aloemaana**,  It is
necessary to establish the **Palivunciya Aloemaana** (period of observance) and
to perform the **Thavanijja** (observance) accordingly. If one observes it, one
should ascend to the **Vikasina** (heaven) right there.   1. If one observes it
**before** the **Aloemaana**, one should ascend to the **Vikasina** right there.
2. If one observes it **after** the **Aloemaana**, one should ascend to the
**Vikasina** right there. 3. If one observes it **before** the **Aloemaana**,
one should ascend to the **Vikasina** right there. 4. If one observes it
**after** the **Aloemaana**, one should ascend to the **Vikasina** right there.
1. If one observes it **without** the **Palivunciya**, one should ascend to the
**Vikasina** right there. 2. If one observes it **with** the **Palivunciya**,
one should ascend to the **Vikasina** right there. 3. If one observes it
**without** the **Palivunciya**, one should ascend to the **Vikasina** right
there. 4. If one observes it **with** the **Palivunciya**, one should ascend to
the **Vikasina** right there.  One should ascend to the **Vikasina** right
there, by oneself, by one's own effort, by one's own **Saahaniya** (merit). If
one observes it, being **Nivvisamaana** (free from attachment), with the
**Pattavana** (knowledge) of this, one should ascend to the **Vikasina** right
there.  18. If a **Bhikkhu** observes the **Pariharatthana** (observance) of
**Chaummaasiya** (four months), **Sairega-Chaummaasiya** (four months with
**Sairega**), **Panchamaasiya** (five months), or **Sairega-Panchamaasiya**
(five months with **Sairega**), and then observes the **Aloemaana**,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bIsavAM uddezaka] [441 paliuMciya AloemANe ThavaNijja ThavaittA karaNijjaM
veyAvaDiyaM  /  Thavie vi paDisevittA, se vi kasiNe tattheva ArUheyavve siyaa|
1. pubviM paDiseviyaM puvviM AloiyaM, 2. pugviM paDiseviyaM pacchA AloiyaM, 3.
pacchA paDiseviyaM puTviM AloiyaM, 4. pacchA paDiseviyaM pacchA AloiyaM  /  1.
apaliuMcie apaliuMciyaM, 2. apaliuMcie paliuMciyaM, 3. paliuMcie apaliuMciyaM,
4. paliuMcie paliuMciyaM  /  AloemANassa savvameyaM sakayaM sAhaNiya ArUheyanve
siyaa| je eyAe paTTavaNAe paTTavie nivisamANe paDisevei, se vikasiNe tattheva
ArUheyadhve siyaa| 17. je bhikkhU bahuso vi cAummAsiyaM vA, bahuso vi sAirega-
cAummAsiyaM vA, bahuso vi paMcamAsiyaM vA, bahuso vi sAirega-paMcamAsiyaM vA,
eesi parihAraTThANANaM annayaraM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA,
apaliuMciya AloemANe ThavaNijja ThavaittA karaNijja veyAvaDiyaM  /  Thavie vi
paDisevittA se vikasiNe tattheva Alheyavve siyaa| 1. puTviM paDiseviyaM puvviM
AloiyaM, 2. puvviM paDiseviyaM pacchA AloiyaM, 3. pacchA paDiseviyaM puvviM
AloiyaM, 4. pacchA paDiseviyaM pacchA AloiyaM  /  1. apaliuMcie apaliuMciyaM, 2.
apaliuMcie paliuMciyaM, 3. paliuMciya apaliuMciyaM, 4. paliuMciyae paliuMciyaM
/  AloemANassa savvameyaM sakayaM sAhaNiya ArUheyavve siyaa| je eyAe paDhavaNAe
paTTavie nivvisamANe paDisevei, se vikasiNe tattheva ArUheyamve siyaa| 18. je
bhikkhU bahuso vi cAummAsiyaM vA, bahuso vi sAirega-cAummAsiyaM vA, bahuso vi
paMcamAsiyaM vA, bahuso vi sAirega paMcamAsiyaM vA eesi parihAraTThANANaM
annayaraM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA,

Page #542 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[442] [Nishīthasūtra] If a monk, having performed a single *pratisevana* in any
of the *parihāra sthāna* such as *cāturmāsīka*, *kuchchha adhika cāturmāsīka*,
*pañcamāsīka*, *kuchchha adhika pañcamāsīka*, criticizes it, then he should be
established in the *prāyaścitta* form of *parihāra tapa* according to the
*pratisevana* performed, and his appropriate *vaiyāvṛtya* should be done without
any *māyā*.  If he performs any kind of *pratisevana* even after being
established in the *parihāra tapa*, then his entire *prāyaścitta* should be
included in the previously given *prāyaścitta*. 1. If the criticism is done
before the *ālocanā* of the previously performed *pratisevana*. 2. If the
criticism is done after the *ālocanā* of the previously performed *pratisevana*.
3. If the criticism is done before the *ālocanā* of the later performed
*pratisevana*. 4. If the criticism is done after the *ālocanā* of the later
performed *pratisevana*. 1. If the criticism is done without *māyā* with the
intention of doing it without *māyā*. 2. If the criticism is done with *māyā*
with the intention of doing it without *māyā*. 3. If the criticism is done
without *māyā* with the intention of doing it with *māyā*. 4. If the criticism
is done with *māyā* with the intention of doing it with *māyā*. In case of any
kind of violation in the *ālocanā*, the *prāyaścitta* of all his accepted
offenses should be combined and included in the previously given *prāyaścitta*.
If a monk, being established in this *prāyaścitta* form of *parihāra tapa* and
carrying it out, again performs any kind of *pratisevana*, then his entire
*prāyaścitta* should be imposed on the previously given *prāyaścitta*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 442] [nizIthasUtra paliuMciya AloemANe ThavaNijja ThavaittA karaNijjaM
veyAvaDiyaM  /  Thavie vi paDisevittA se vi kasiNe tattheva ArUheyavve siyaa| 1.
puvviM paDiseviyaM puTviM AloiyaM, 2. puTviM paDiseviyaM pacchA AloiyaM, 3.
pacchA paDiseviyaM puvviM AloiyaM, 4. pacchA paDiseviyaM pacchA AloiyaM  /  1.
apaliuMcie apaliuMciyaM, 2. apaliuMcie paliuMciyaM, 3. paliuMcie apaliuMciyaM,
4. paliuMcie paliuMciyaM  /  AloemANassa savvameyaM sakayaM sAhaNiya ArUheyavve
siyA  /  je eyAe paTThavaNAe paTTavie nivvisamANe paDisevei, se vi kasiNe
tattheva ArUheyanve siyaa| 15. jo bhikSu cAturmAsika yA kucha adhika
cAturmAsika, paMcamAsika yA kucha adhika paMcamAsika-ina parihArasthAnoM meM se
kisI eka parihArasthAna kI eka bAra pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use
mAyArahita AlocanA karane para Asevita pratisevanA ke anusAra prAyazcitta rUpa
parihAra tapa meM sthApita karake usakI yogya vaiyAvRtya karanI caahiye| yadi
vaha parihAra tapa meM sthApita hone para bhI kisI prakAra kI pratisevanA kare
to usakA sampUrNa prAyazcitta bhI pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM sammilita kara
denA cAhiye  /  1. pUrva meM pratisevita doSa kI pahale AlocanA kI ho, 2. pUrva
meM pratisevita doSa kI pIche pAlocanA kI ho, 3. pIche se pratisevita doSa kI
pahale AlocanA kI ho, 4. pIche se pratisevita doSa kI pIche se AlocanA kI ho  /
1. mAyArahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyArahita AlocanA kI ho  /  2.
mAyArahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyAsahita AlocanA kI ho| 3.
mAyAsahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyArahita AlocanA kI ho| 4.
mAyAsahita pAlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyAsahita AlocanA kI ho| inameM
se kisI prakAra ke bhaMga se AlocanA karane para usake sarva svakRta aparAdha ke
prAyazcitta ko saMyukta karake pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM sammilita kara denA
caahiye| jo isa prAyazcitta rUpa parihAra tapa meM sthApita hokara vahana karate
hue bhI punaH kisI prakAra kI pratisevanA kare to usakA sampUrNa prAyazcitta bhI
pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM Aropita kara denA caahie|

Page #543 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twentieth Uddeshak  [443  _ 16. If a monk, having performed **Chaturmasik**
or more than **Chaturmasik**, **Panchmasik** or more than **Panchmasik**,
criticizes any one of these **Pariharasthanas** after performing them, then he
should be established in **Prayaschitta** form **Parihar Tapa** according to the
performed **Pratiseshana**, and his appropriate **Vyayavritti** should be done.
_ If, even after being established in **Parihar Tapa**, he performs any kind of
**Pratiseshana**, then his entire **Prayaschitta** should also be included in
the previously given **Prayaschitta**. 1. If the criticism is done before the
**Pratiseshana** of the fault, 2. If the criticism is done after the
**Pratiseshana** of the fault, 3. If the criticism is done before the
**Pratiseshana** of the fault done later, 4. If the criticism is done after the
**Pratiseshana** of the fault done later. 1. If the criticism is done without
**Maya** with the intention of doing it without **Maya**, 2. If the criticism is
done with **Maya** with the intention of doing it without **Maya**, 3. If the
criticism is done without **Maya** with the intention of doing it with **Maya**,
4. If the criticism is done with **Maya** with the intention of doing it with
**Maya**. In case of any kind of violation from these, the **Prayaschitta** for
all the committed offenses should be combined and included in the previously
given **Prayaschitta**. If, after being established in this **Prayaschitta**
form **Parihar Tapa** and carrying it out, he again performs any kind of
**Pratiseshana**, then his entire **Prayaschitta** should also be included in
the previously given **Prayaschitta**. 17. If a monk performs **Chaturmasik** or
more than **Chaturmasik**, **Panchmasik** or more than **Panchmasik**, many
times and criticizes any one of these **Pariharasthanas** after performing them,
then he should be established in **Prayaschitta** form **Parihar Tapa**
according to the performed **Pratiseshana** without **Maya**, and his
appropriate **Vyayavritti** should be done. If, even after being established in
**Parihar Tapa**, he performs any kind of **Pratiseshana**, then his entire
**Prayaschitta** should also be included in the previously given
**Prayaschitta**. 1. If the criticism is done before the **Pratiseshana** of the
fault, 2. If the criticism is done after the **Pratiseshana** of the fault, 3.
If the criticism is done before the **Pratiseshana** of the fault done later, 4.
If the criticism is done after the **Pratiseshana** of the fault done later. 1.
If the criticism is done without **Maya** with the intention of doing it without
**Maya**, 2. If the criticism is done with **Maya** with the intention of doing
it without **Maya**, 3. If the criticism is done without **Maya** with the
intention of doing it with **Maya**, 4. If the criticism is done with **Maya**
with the intention of doing it with **Maya**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bIsavAM uddezaka] [443 _ 16. jo bhikSu cAturmAsika yA kucha adhika cAturmAsika,
paMcamAsika yA kucha adhika paMcamAsika ina parihArasthAnoM meM se kisI eka
parihArasthAna kI pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to use mAyAsahita AlocanA
karane para prAsevita pratisevanA ke anusAra prAyazcitta rUpa parihAra tapa meM
sthApita karake unakI yogya vaiyAvRtya karanI caahie| _ yadi vaha parihAra tapa
meM sthApita hone para bhI kisI prakAra kI pratisevanA kare to usakA sampUrNa
prAyazcitta bhI pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM sammilita kara denA cAhie  /  1.
pUrva meM pratisevita doSa kI pahale AlocanA kI ho, 2. parva meM pratisevita
doSa kI pIche aAlocanA ko ho, 3. pIche se pratisevita doSa kI pahale AlocanA kI
ho, 4. pIche se pratisevita doSa kI pIche AlocanA kI ho| 1. mAyArahita AlocanA
karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyArahita AlocanA kI ho, 2. mAyArahita AlocanA karane
kA saMkalpa karake mAyAsahita AlocanA kI ho, 3. mAyAsahita AlocanA karane kA
saMkalpa karake mAyArahita AlocanA ko ho, 4. mAyAsahita AlocanA karane kA
saMkalpa karake mAyAsahita AlocanA kI ho  /  inameM se kisI bhI prakAra ke
bhaMga se AlocanA karane para usake sarva svakRta aparAdha ke prAyazcitta ko
saMyukta karake pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM sammilita kara denA caahie| jo isa
prAyazcitta rUpa parihAra tapa meM sthApita hokara vahana karate hue bhI punaH
kisI prakAra kI pratisevanA kare to usakA sampUrNa prAyazcitta bhI pUrvapradatta
prAyazcitta meM prAropita kara denA caahie| 17. jo bhikSu cAturmAsika yA kucha
adhika cAturmAsika, paMcamAsika yA kucha adhika paMcamAsika ina parihArasthAnoM
meM se kisI eka parihArasthAna kI aneka bAra pratisevanA karake AlocanA kare to
use mAyArahita AlocanA karane para Asevita pratisevanA ke anusAra prAyazcitta
rUpa parihAra tapa meM sthApita karake usakI yogya vaiyAvRtya karanI cAhiye  /
yadi vaha parihAra tapa meM sthApita hone para bhI kisI prakAra kI pratisevanA
kare to usakA sampUrNa prAyazcitta bhI pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM sammilita
kara denA cAhiye  /  1. pUrva meM pratisevita doSa kI pahale AlocanA kI ho, 2.
pUrva meM pratisevita doSa kI pIche AlocanA kI ho, 3. pIche se pratisevita doSa
kI pahale AlocanA kI ho, 4. pIche se pratisevita doSa kI pIche AlocanA kI ho  /
1. mAyArahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyArahita AlocanA kI ho, 2.
mAyArahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyAsahita AlocanA kI ho, 3.
mAyAsahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyArahita AlocanA kI ho, 4.
mAyAsahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyAsahita AlocanA ko ho|

Page #544 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[444] [Nishīthasūtra] If a monk is criticized for any kind of transgression, the
prāyaścitta for all the offenses committed should be combined and included in
the previously given prāyaścitta. _ If, while established in this prāyaścitta-
form of pariharatapa, he again commits any kind of transgression, then his
entire prāyaścitta should also be imposed on the previously given prāyaścitta.
18. If a monk, by repeatedly committing transgression in any one of these
pariharasthānas - cāturmāsīka or slightly more than cāturmāsīka, pañcamāsīka or
slightly more than pañcamāsīka - does not do so, then he should be subjected to
a suitable vyāvartya, being established in the prāyaścitta-form of pariharatapa,
according to the number of transgressions committed, upon being criticized with
māyā. If, even after being established in the pariharatapa, he commits any kind
of transgression, then his entire prāyaścitta should also be included in the
previously given prāyaścitta. 1. If the previously committed transgression is
criticized first, 2. If the previously committed transgression is criticized
later, 3. If the later committed transgression is criticized first, 4. If the
later committed transgression is criticized later. 1. If he has committed
māyarahita ālocanā with the intention of committing māyarahita ālocanā, 2. If he
has committed māyasahita ālocanā with the intention of committing māyarahita
ālocanā, 3. If he has committed māyarahita ālocanā with the intention of
committing māyasahita ālocanā, 4. If he has committed māyasahita ālocanā with
the intention of committing māyasahita ālocanā. If a monk is criticized for any
kind of transgression, the prāyaścitta for all the offenses committed should be
combined and included in the previously given prāyaścitta. If, while established
in this prāyaścitta-form of pariharatapa, he again commits any kind of
transgression, then his entire prāyaścitta should also be imposed on the
previously given prāyaścitta. Discussion - The previous sūtras describe the
giving of prāyaścitta, and these subsequent sūtras describe the bearing of
prāyaścitta. Although cāturmāsīka prāyaścitta etc. are mentioned, the latter
statement should be understood to include the former, and the method of bearing
all prāyaścittas, including māsika etc., with all their asamyogi-samyogi
alternatives, should be understood in the same way. Here, the bearing of
prāyaścitta is first called 'sthāpana', and the prāyaścitta given during that
period of bearing is called 'prasthāpana'. It is said that the prāyaścitta for
the transgressions committed during the prasthāpana period should also be
combined with it. Thus, the combination of prāyaścitta is mentioned in these
sūtras. In the first sūtra, the establishment of prāyaścitta is for the
transgression committed once, without deception, and in the second sūtra, it is
for the transgression committed with deception. In the next two sūtras, the
establishment of prāyaścitta is for the transgression committed...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 444] [nizIthasUtra inameM se kisI bhI prakAra ke bhaMga se AlocanA karane para
usake sarva svakRta aparAdha ke prAyazcitta ko saMyukta karake pUrva pradatta
prAyazcitta meM sammilita kara denA caahie| _ jo isa prAyazcitta rUpa parihAra
tapa meM sthApita hokara vahana karate hue bhI punaH kisI prakAra kI pratisevanA
kare to usakA sampUrNa prAyazcitta bhI pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM Aropita
kara denA caahiye| 18. jo bhikSu cAturmAsika yA kucha adhika cAturmAsika,
paMcamAsika yA kucha adhika paMcamAsika-ina parihArasthAnoM meM se kisI eka
parihArasthAna kI aneka bAra pratisevanA karake nA kare to use mAyAsahita
AlocanA karane para Asevita pratisevanA ke anusAra prAyazcitta rUpa parihAra
tapa meM sthApita karake usakI yogya vaiyAvRtya karanI caahiye| yadi vaha
parihAra tapa meM sthApita hone para bhI kisI prakAra ko pratisevanA kare to
usakA sampUrNa prAyazcitta bhI pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM sammilita kara denA
caahiye| 1. pUrva meM pratisevita doSa kI pahale AlocanA kI ho, 2. pUrva meM
pratisevita doSa kI pIche AlocanA kI ho, 3. pIche se pratisevita doSa kI pahale
AlocanA kI ho, 4. pIche se pratisevita doSa kI pIche AlocanA kI ho| 1.
mAyArahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyArahita AlocanA kI ho, 2.
mAyArahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyAsahita pAlocanA kI ho, 3.
mAyAsahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyArahita mAlocanA kI ho, 4.
mAyAsahita AlocanA karane kA saMkalpa karake mAyAsahita AlocanA kI ho| inameM se
kisI bhI prakAra ke bhaMga se AlocanA karane para usake sarva svakRta aparAdha
ke prAyazcitta ko saMyukta karake pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM sammilita kara
denA caahie| jo isa prAyazcitta rUpa parihAra tapa meM sthApita hokara vahana
karate hue bhI punaH kisI prakAra kI pratisevanA kare to usakA sampUrNa
prAyazcitta bhI pUrvapradatta prAyazcitta meM Aropita kara denA caahie|
vivecana-pUrva sUtroM meM prAyazcitta dene saMbaMdhI varNana hai aura ina aAge
ke sUtroM meM prAyazcitta vahana karAne saMbaMdhI varNana hai  /  inameM
cAturmAsika prAyazcitta Adi kA kathana kiyA gayA hai phira bhI anta ke kathana
se Adi kA grahaNa kara lenA cAhie aura mAsika Adi sabhI asaMyogI-saMyogI
vikalpoM vAle prAyazcittoM ke vahana karane kI bhI vidhi isI prakAra samajha
lenI caahie| yahA~ sarvaprathama prAyazcitta vahana karane ko 'sthApana karanA'
kahA gayA hai aura usa vahanakAla meM die gaye prAyazcitta ko 'prasthApana
karanA' kahA gayA hai| prasthApanAkAla meM lagAye jAne vAle doSoM ke prAyazcitta
ko bhI usameM saMyukta karane ke lie kahA gayA hai| isa prakAra prAyazcitta
saMyukta karane kA kathana ina sUtroM meM hai| prathama sUtra meM prAyazcitta kI
sthApanA eka bAra lagAye gaye doSa ke kapaTarahita AlocanA kI hai aura dUsare
sUtra meM kapaTasahita AlocanA kI hai| Age ke do sUtroM meM prAyazcitta kI
sthApanA

Page #545 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twentieth Uddeshak  [445]  Criticism, both deceitful and non-deceitful, has
been discussed many times. Regarding the criticism of faults committed during
the performance of Prāyaścitta, four types of breaches have been mentioned.
Regardless of the type of criticism, the Prāyaścitta encompasses all of them.
These sutras also instruct on the possibility of the Prāyaścitta performer
becoming dependent during the Prāyaścitta period. This means that if service is
necessary during that period, it is performed. The Prāyaścitta performer does
not have service done for them until they are able to perform their own duties.
This method of performing Prāyaścitta is mentioned in relation to Parihāra Tapa.
For further details, refer to the fourth Uddeshak.  One who performs Prāyaścitta
in the form of pure Tapa can complete the fasts, etc., received during the
Prāyaścitta, at any time within the period specified by the Prāyaścitta giver.
They also complete the Prāyaścitta in the same way if they are criticized again
for the same faults.  The method of performing Prāyaścitta through pure Tapa in
the Prāyaścitta places of Laghu Māsik, Guru Māsik, Laghu Chaumāsi, Guru
Chaumāsi, Laghu Chha: Māsi, and Guru Chha: Māsi is given in the table before the
first Uddeshak. All divisions of Prāyaścitta should be understood according to
that.  It should be understood that the descriptions in these sutras of the
twentieth Uddeshak and all subsequent sutras pertain to Parihāra Tapa
Prāyaścitta. This description, or any other descriptions found in the
Chhedasutras, do not imply its discontinuation. However, commentators explain
this Parihāra Tapa Prāyaścitta as being for Āgamavihārīs, and thus, indicate its
discontinuation in the present time.  Therefore, this tradition of Prāyaścitta
is not current.  **Establishment of Two-Month Prāyaścitta**  19. If a six-month
Parihāra Daana is prescribed, and within that, a two-month Parihāra is
performed, then the criticism, the number of days, the twenty-day period of
Ārovaṇa, the beginning, middle, and end, all should be included, and the reason
should be stated. It is not diminished, and therefore, it becomes twenty-seven
days of two months.  20. If a five-month Parihāra is prescribed, and within
that, a two-month Parihāra is performed, then the criticism, the number of days,
the twenty-day period of Ārovaṇa, the beginning, middle, and end, all should be
included, and the reason should be stated. It is not diminished, and therefore,
it becomes twenty-seven days of two months.  21. If a four-month Parihāra is
prescribed, and within that, a two-month Parihāra is performed, then the
criticism, the number of days, the twenty-day period of Ārovaṇa, the beginning,
middle, and end, all should be included, and the reason should be stated. It is
not diminished, and therefore, it becomes twenty-seven days of two months.  22.
If a three-month Parihāra is prescribed, and within that, a two-month Parihāra
is performed, then...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bIsavAM uddezaka] [445 aneka bAra lagAye gaye kapaTarahita evaM kapaTasahita
AlocanA kI hai| prAyazcitta vahana ke bIca meM lagAye gae doSoM kI AlocanA ke
sambandha meM cAra-cAra bhaMga kahe gae haiM unameM se kisI bhI prakAra se
AlocanA kI gaI ho vaha saba prAyazcitta usameM aMtarnihita kara diyA jAtA hai|
prAyazcitta vahanakAla meM prAyazcitta tapa karane vAle kI vaiyAvatya karane kA
bhI ina sUtroM meM nirdeza kiyA gayA hai  /  isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki usa tapa
kAla meM sevA karanA yadi Avazyaka ho to sevA kI jAtI hai  /  prAyazcitta
vahanakartA svayaM apanA kArya kara sake taba taka sevA nahIM karavAtA hai  /
yaha prAyazcitta vahana vidhi parihAra tapa kI apekSA se kahI gaI hai| isase
saMbaMdhita vizeSa vivecana cauthe uddezaka se jAnanA caahie| zuddha tapa rUpa
prAyazcitta karane vAlA prAyazcitta meM prApta hue upavAsa Adi ko prAyazcitta
dAtA dvArA nirdiSTa avadhi meM kabhI bhI pUrNa kara sakatA hai  /  anya doSoM kI
punaH kabhI AlocanA karane para bhI usI prakAra prAyazcitta pUrNa karatA hai|
laghumAsika, gurumAsika, laghucaumAsI, gurucaumAsI, laghucha:mAsI aura guru
cha:mAsI prAyazcitta sthAnoM ke zuddha tapa se prAyazcitta dene kI vidhi
prathama uddezaka ke pUrva meM tAlikA dvArA dI gaI hai, usake anusAra sabhI
prAyazcitta vibhAga samajha lene caahie| _isa bIsaveM uddezaka ke ina sUtroM meM
tathA Age ke sabhI sUtroM meM jo varNana hai vaha parihAra tapa prAyazcitta
sambandhI hai aisA samajhanA caahiye| isa varNana se yA anya chedasUtroM meM Aye
varNanoM se isake viccheda hone kA phalitArtha nahIM nikalatA hai, tathApi
vyAkhyAkAra isa parihAra tapa prAyazcitta ko AgamavihArI ke lie kahakara
vartamAna meM isakA viccheda batAte haiM  /  ataH yaha prAyazcitta kI paramparA
vartamAna nahIM hai  /  do mAsa prAyazcitta kI sthApitA prAropaNA 19.
chammAsiyaM parihAradANaM paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA do mAsiyaM parihAraTTANaM
paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA vIsairAiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe saajhaiM saheUM
sakAraNaM ahINamairittaM teNaM paraM savIsairAiyA domaasaa| 20. paMcamAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA do mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA
AloejjA-ahAvarA vIsairAiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe saaLaM saheuM sakAraNaM
ahINamairittaM teNaM paraM savIsairAiyA do mAsA  /  21. cAummAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM paDhavie aNagAre aMtarA domAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA
AloejjA-ahAvarA vIsairAiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe saajhai saheuM sakAraNaM
ahINamairittaM teNaM paraM savIsairAiyA do mAsA  /  22. temAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA domAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA

Page #546 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[446] [Nishith Sutra] If an *anagāra* performing a six-month *prāyaścitta*
consumes a two-month *prāyaścitta*-worthy *doṣa* due to a purpose, reason, or
cause at the beginning, middle, or end of the *prāyaścitta* period, then he
incurs a *prāyaścitta* of neither less nor more than twenty nights of *āropaṇā*.
If he consumes the *doṣa* again, then he incurs a *prāyaścitta* of two months
and twenty nights. 20. If an *anagāra* performing a five-month *prāyaścitta*
consumes a two-month *prāyaścitta*-worthy *doṣa* due to a purpose, reason, or
cause at the beginning, middle, or end of the *prāyaścitta* period, then he
incurs a *prāyaścitta* of neither less nor more than twenty nights of *āropaṇā*.
If he consumes the *doṣa* again, then he incurs a *prāyaścitta* of two months
and twenty nights. 21. If an *anagāra* performing a four-month *prāyaścitta*
consumes a two-month *prāyaścitta*-worthy *doṣa* due to a purpose, reason, or
cause at the beginning, middle, or end of the *prāyaścitta* period, then he
incurs a *prāyaścitta* of neither less nor more than twenty nights of *āropaṇā*.
If he consumes the *doṣa* again, then he incurs a *prāyaścitta* of two months
and twenty nights. 22. If an *anagāra* performing a three-month *prāyaścitta*
consumes a two-month *prāyaścitta*-worthy *doṣa* due to a purpose, reason, or
cause at the beginning, middle, or end of the *prāyaścitta* period, then he
incurs a *prāyaścitta* of neither less nor more than twenty nights of *āropaṇā*.
If he consumes the *doṣa* again, then he incurs a *prāyaścitta* of two months
and twenty nights. 23. If an *anagāra* performing a two-month *prāyaścitta*
consumes a two-month *prāyaścitta*-worthy *doṣa* due to a purpose, reason, or
cause at the beginning, middle, or end of the *prāyaścitta* period, then he
incurs a *prāyaścitta* of neither less nor more than twenty nights of *āropaṇā*.
If he consumes the *doṣa* again, then he incurs a *prāyaścitta* of two months
and twenty nights. 24. If an *anagāra* performing a one-month *prāyaścitta*
consumes a two-month *prāyaścitta*-worthy *doṣa* due to a purpose, reason, or
cause at the beginning, middle, or end of the *prāyaścitta* period, then he
incurs a *prāyaścitta* of neither less nor more than twenty nights of *āropaṇā*.
If he consumes the *doṣa* again, then he incurs a *prāyaścitta* of two months
and twenty nights.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 446] [ nizIthasUtra AloejjA ahAvarA vIsairAiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANeM
saaThThe saheuM sakAraNaM ahINamairittaM teNa paraM savIsairAiyA do mAsA  /  23.
do mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA domAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM
paDisevittA AloejjA - ahAvarA vIsairAiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe saaTTha saheuM
sakAraNaM ahINamairittaM taNaM paraM savIsairAiyA do mAsA  /  24. mAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA domAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA
AloejjA - ahAvarA vIsairAiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe saaTTha saheuM sakAraNaM
ahINamairittaM te paraM savIsairAiyA do mAsA  /  19. chaH mAsika prAyazcitta
vahana karanevAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke prArambha meM madhya
meM yA anta meM prayojana hetu yA kAraNa se do mAsa prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA
sevana karake AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika bosa rAtri kI prAropaNA kA
prAyazcitta AtA hai, usake bAda punaH doSa sevana karale to do mAsa aura bIsa
rAtri kA prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  20. paMcamAsika prAyazcitta vahana karanevAlA
aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM
prayojana hetu yA kAraNa se do mAsa prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA sevana karake
AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika bIsa rAtri kI zrAropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA
hai, usake bAda punaH doSa sevana karale to use do mAsa aura bIsa rAtri kA
prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  21. cAturmAsika prAyazcitta vahana karanevAlA aNagAra
yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana
hetu yA kAraNa se do mAsa prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA sevana karake AlocanA kare
to use na kama na adhika bIsa rAtri kI AropaNA kA prAyazcitta prAtA hai, usake
bAda punaH doSa sevana karale to do mAsa aura bIsa rAtri kA prAyazcitta AtA hai
/  22. traimAsika prAyazcitta vahana karanevAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahana
kAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana hetu yA kAraNa se do
mAsa prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA sevana karake AlocanA kare to use na kama na
adhika bIsa rAtri kI prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta prAtA hai, usake bAda punaH doSa
sevana karale to do mAsa aura bIsa rAtri kA prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  23. do
mAsika prAyazcitta vahana karanevAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke
prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana, hetu yA kAraNa se do mAsa
prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA sevana karake AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika
bosa rAtri kI prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA hai, usake bAda punaH doSa sevana
kara le to do mAsa aura bIsa rAtri kA prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /  24. mAsika
prAyazcitta vahana karanevAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke prArambha
meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana hetu yA kAraNa se do mAsa prAyazcitta
yogya doSa kA sevana karake

Page #547 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[447 Twentieth Uddeshak] If one criticizes, then the atonement of twenty nights
is prescribed for him, neither less nor more. After that, if he commits the
fault again, then the atonement of two months and twenty nights is prescribed.
Again, Discussion - In these sutras, the method of giving the atonement of the
two months atonement place form fault, with grace and without grace, is stated
while bearing any atonement from one month to six months. If a fault is
committed for the first time during the period of bearing atonement, then it is
given with grace and a lesser atonement is given. That is called the gracious
atonement. Again, if the same fault is committed, then full atonement is given
without grace. That is called the ungracious atonement. The meaning of these
sutras is that if atonement is given again before the gracious atonement is
imposed during the period of bearing atonement, then it is ungracious. The
gracious twenty days and the ungracious two months atonement, before the
gracious atonement is combined with the atonement being borne, are combined and
stated in the sutra as two months and twenty days. Method of calculating the
number of days of gracious atonement By adding two to the number of months of
the atonement place and multiplying by five, the number of days of atonement is
obtained. For example, by adding two to two months, it becomes four, and
multiplying it by five, it becomes twenty. Thus, the gracious days for two
months are twenty. Alternatively, one should understand the gracious atonement
days as fifteen days for one month, twenty days for two months, twenty-five days
for three months, etc. In Thananga Sutra A. 5, five types of atonement are
stated: 1. Prasthapita - Atonement that is added to the days of other atonement
while bearing atonement. 2. Sthapita - Atonement that is kept separate from the
days of other atonement while being borne. 3. Kritsna - Ungracious atonement
that is given for the entire days of the atonement place of the fault committed
during the period of bearing. 4. Akritsna - Gracious atonement that is given by
reducing the days of the atonement place of the fault committed during the
period of bearing. 5. Hadhada - Atonement that is to be borne immediately. In
these sutras, the subject related to four types of atonement is stated together.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ 447 bIsavA~ uddezaka ] AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika bIsa rAtri kI
AropaNA kA prAyazcitta prAtA hai, usake bAda doSa sevana karale to do mAsa aura
bosa rAtri kA prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  punaH vivecana - ina sUtroM meM eka mAsa
se lekara chaH mAsa taka kisI bhI prAyazcitta ko vahana karate samaya lagAye
gaye do mAsa prAyazcitta sthAna rUpa doSa kI sAnugraha evaM niranugraha
prAropaNa prAyazcitta dene kI vidhi kahI gaI hai  /  prAyazcitta vahana kAla meM
kisI kAraNa se prathama bAra doSa lagAne para usa para anugraha karake alpa
prAyazcitta diyA jAtA hai  /  vaha sAnugraha AropaNA prAyazcitta kahA jAtA hai
/  punaH vahI doSa sevana karane para anugraha na karake pUrNa prAyazcitta diyA
jAtA hai vaha niranugraha prAropaNA prAyazcitta kahA jAtA hai  /  ina sUtroM kA
tAtparya yaha hai ki prAyazcitta vahana kAla meM diye gaye sAnugraha prAyazcitta
ko Aropita karane ke pUrva yadi phira prAyazcitta diyA jAe to vaha niranugraha
hotA hai  /  sAnugraha prAyazcitta kI AropaNA ko vahana kiye jAne vAle
prAyazcitta meM saMyukta na karane se pUrva kI sAnugraha bIsa dina aura bAda kI
niranugraha do mAsa AropaNA ko saMyukta karake do mAsa aura bIsa dina kI
prAropaNA sUtra meM kahI gaI hai  /  sAnugraha AropaNA prAyazcitta ke dinoM kI
saMkhyA nikAlane kI vidhi prAyazcitta sthAna ke mAsa saMkhyA meM do jor3akara
pAMca se guNA karane para jo saMkhyA Ave utane dina kA prAyazcitta hotA hai  /
yathA- do mAsa meM do jor3ane se cAra hue, use pAMca se guNA karane para bIsa
hue isa prakAra do mAsa ke sAnugraha dina 20 hote haiM  /  prathavA eka mAsa kA
15 dina, do mAsa kA 20 dina, tIna mAsa kA 25 dina, ityAdi sAnugraha prAyazcitta
ke dina samajhane cAhie  /  ThANAMga sUtra a. 5 meM prAropaNA prAyazcitta pAMca
prakAra ke kahe gaye haiM 1. prasthApitA - prAyazcitta vahana karate samaya anya
prAyazcitta ke dinoM ko jor3a die jAne vAlI AropaNA  /  2. sthApitA- vahana kiye
jAne vAle prAyazcitta se anya prAyazcitta ke dinoM ko alaga rakhI jAne vAlI
AropaNA  /  3. kRtsnA - vahana kAla meM lage doSa ke prAyazcitta sthAna ke
saMpUrNa dinoM kI dI jAne vAlI niranugraha AropaNA | 4. akRtsnA - vahana kAla
meM lage doSa ke prAyazcitta sthAna ke dinoM ko kama kara dI jAne vAlI sAnugraha
prAropaNA  /  5. hADahaDA - tatkAla hI vahana karAI jAne vAlI AropaNA  /  ina
sUtroM meM eka sAtha cAra prakAra kI AropaNA se saMbaMdhita viSaya kA kathana
kiyA gayA hai  /

Page #548 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[448] [Nishīth Sūtra Two Months Penance, Its Establishment, Imposition and
Increase 25. An ānāgāra who is performing a two-month penance, if he commits a
two-month penance-worthy offense during the beginning, middle, or end of the
penance, due to a purpose, reason, or cause, and is criticized for it, then he
should perform a twenty-night prāropaṇā penance, neither less nor more. When
combined, this results in a three-month and ten-night prastāpanā. 26. An ānāgāra
who is performing a three-month and ten-night penance, if he commits a two-month
penance-worthy offense during the beginning, middle, or end of the penance, due
to a purpose, reason, or cause, and is criticized for it, then he should perform
a twenty-night prāropaṇā penance, neither less nor more. When combined, this
results in a four-month prastāpanā. 27. An ānāgāra who is performing a four-
month penance, if he commits a two-month penance-worthy offense during the
beginning, middle, or end of the penance, due to a purpose, reason, or cause,
and is criticized for it, then he should perform a twenty-night prāropaṇā
penance, neither less nor more. When combined, this results in a four-month and
twenty-night prastāpanā. 28. An ānāgāra who is performing a four-month and
twenty-night penance, if he commits a two-month penance-worthy offense during
the beginning, middle, or end of the penance, due to a purpose, reason, or
cause, and is criticized for it, then he should perform a twenty-night prāropaṇā
penance, neither less nor more. When combined, this results in a five-month
prastāpanā. 29. An ānāgāra who is performing a five-month penance, if he commits
a two-month penance-worthy offense during the beginning, middle, or end of the
penance, due to a purpose, reason, or cause, and is criticized for it, then he
should perform a twenty-night prāropaṇā penance, neither less nor more. When
combined, this results in a six-month prastāpanā. 25. An ānāgāra who is
performing a two-month and twenty-night penance, if he commits a two-month
penance-worthy offense during the beginning, middle, or end of the penance, due
to a purpose, reason, or cause, and is criticized for it, then he should perform
a twenty-night prāropaṇā penance, neither less nor more. When combined, this
results in a three-month and ten-night prastāpanā. 26. An ānāgāra who is
performing a three-month and ten-night penance, if he commits a two-month
penance-worthy offense during the beginning, middle, or end of the penance, due
to a purpose, reason, or cause, and is criticized for it, then he should perform
a twenty-night prāropaṇā penance, neither less nor more. When combined, this
results in a four-month prastāpanā. 27. An ānāgāra who is performing a four-
month penance, if he commits a two-month penance-worthy offense during the
beginning, middle, or end of the penance, due to a purpose, reason, or cause,
and is criticized for it, then he should perform a twenty-night prāropaṇā
penance, neither less nor more. When combined, this results in a four-month and
twenty-night prastāpanā. 28. An ānāgāra who is performing a four-month and
twenty-night penance, if he commits a two-month penance-worthy offense during
the beginning, middle, or end of the penance, due to a purpose, reason, or
cause, and is criticized for it, then he should perform a twenty-night prāropaṇā
penance, neither less nor more. When combined, this results in a five-month
prastāpanā. 29. An ānāgāra who is performing a five-month penance, if he commits
a two-month penance-worthy offense during the beginning, middle, or end of the
penance, due to a purpose, reason, or cause, and is criticized for it, then he
should perform a twenty-night prāropaṇā penance, neither less nor more. When
combined, this results in a six-month prastāpanā.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 448] [nizIthasUtra do mAsa prAyazcitta ko prasthApitA prAropaNA evaM vRddhi 25.
savIsairAiyaM domAsiyaM parihAradvANaM paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA domAsiyaM
parihAradvANaM paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA vIsairAiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe
saaTuM saheuM sakAraNaM ahINamairittaM teNa paraM sadasarAyA tinnnnimaasaa| 26.
sadasarAiya-temAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA domAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA vIsairAiyA orovaNA, AdimajjhAvasANe
saaTeM saheuM sakAraNaM ahINamairitta teNa paraM cattAri mAsA  /  27.
cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTuvie aNagAre aMtarA domAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM
paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA vIsairAiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe saaLaM saheuM
sakAraNaM ahoNamairittaM teNa paraM savIsairAiyA cattAri maasaa| 28.
savIsairAiya-cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTTavIe aNagAre aMtarA domAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA- ahAvarA vIsairAiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe
saaTuM saheuM sakAraNaM ahoNamairittaM teNa paraM sadasarAyA pNcmaasaa| 29.
sadasarAiya-paMcamAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA domAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA vIsairAiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe
saaLaM saheuM sakAraNaM ahINamairittaM teNa paraM chmaasaa| 25. do mAsa aura
bIsa rAtri kA prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta la ke
prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana, hetu yA kAraNa se do mAsa
prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA sevana karake AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika
bIsa rAtri kI prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta prAtA hai| jise saMyukta karane para tIna
mAsa aura dasa rAtri kI prasthApanA hotI hai| 26. tIna mAsa aura dasa rAtri kA
prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke prArambha
meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana, hetu yA kAraNa se do mAsa prAyazcitta
yogya doSa kA sevana karake AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika bIsa rAtri kI
prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  jise saMyukta karane para cAra mAsa kI
prasthApanA hotI hai| 27. cAturmAsika prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra
yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana
hetu yA kAraNa se do mAsa prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA sevana karake AlocanA kare
to use na kama na adhika bIsa rAtri kI prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA hai| jise
saMyukta karane se cAra mAsa aura bIsa rAtri kI prasthApanA hotI hai| _28. cAra
mAsa aura bIsa rAtri kA prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta

Page #549 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twentieth Uddeshak  [449] If an Anugara, while undergoing a two-month
penance, commits a two-month penance-worthy offense due to purpose, motive, or
cause, at the beginning, middle, or end of the penance period, then he incurs a
penance of twenty nights of Aropaṇa, neither less nor more. Combining this with
the previous penance, it becomes a penance of five months and ten nights of
Prasthāpanā.  [29] If an Anugara, while undergoing a penance of five months and
ten nights, commits a two-month penance-worthy offense due to purpose, motive,
or cause, at the beginning, middle, or end of the penance period, then he incurs
a penance of twenty nights of Aropaṇa, neither less nor more. Combining this
with the previous penance, it becomes a penance of six months.  **Discussion:**
In the previous sutras, the establishment of a two-month penance place within
the penance period was called Aropaṇa. The same is mentioned in these sutras as
a separate method of carrying out the penance after it has been completed. The
method of increasing Prasthāpanā-Aropaṇa is explained in a sequential manner.
This describes the consumption of a two-month penance place again while carrying
out the previously obtained two-month penance, and its Anugraha Aropaṇa.  These
sutras state that Anugraha Aropaṇa can occur repeatedly in the penance given
sequentially through Prasthāpanā. However, it was stated in the previous six
sutras that Anugraha Aropaṇa occurs only once in the established Aropaṇa
penance.  The word "Teṇa Param" in the fifth, tenth, nineteenth, etc. sutras of
this Uddeshak naturally has a contextually relevant meaning. However, it is not
contextually relevant to interpret the word "Teṇa Param" directly in these
sutras because this is Prasthāpitā Aropaṇa, and the penance days are added
sequentially, totaling six months.  The Churnikara also explained the same,
stating that the penance before and after is added sequentially here. Therefore,
it is necessary to interpret the word "Teṇa Param" in these sutras as "combining
which".  Perhaps, due to a scribal error, the text in these sutras became
similar to the previous sutras, while its original form may have indicated the
meaning mentioned above. Because the Churnikara has also interpreted this
section in the same way.  **One-month penance and established Aropaṇa**  [30] If
an Anugara, while undergoing a six-month penance, consumes a one-month penance
place due to purpose, motive, or cause, at the beginning, middle, or end of the
penance period, then he incurs a penance of one month of Aropaṇa, neither less
nor more. Combining this with the previous penance, it becomes a penance of
seven months.  [31] If an Anugara, while undergoing a five-month penance,
consumes a one-month penance place due to purpose, motive, or cause, at the
beginning, middle, or end of the penance period, then he incurs a penance of one
month of Aropaṇa, neither less nor more. Combining this with the previous
penance, it becomes a penance of six months.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bIsavAM uddezaka] [449 vahana kAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM
prayojana, hetu yA kAraNa se do mAsa prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA sevana karake
AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika bIsa rAtri kI prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA
hai  /  jise saMyukta karane se pAMca mAsa aura dasa rAtri kI prasthApanA hotI
hai| 29. pAMca mAsa aura dasa rAtri kA prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra
yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana,
hetu yA kAraNa se do mAsa prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA sevana karake AlocanA kare
to use na kama na adhika bIsa rAtri kI prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  jise
saMyukta karane se chaH mAsa kI pra vivecana-pUrva ke sUtroM meM vahana kAla ke
bhItara lage do mAsa ke prAyazcitta sthAna kI sthApitA AropaNA kahI gaI hai usI
ko vahana kiye jAne vAle prAyazcitta ke pUrNa kara lene ke bAda meM alaga se
vahana karAne kI vidhi ina sUtroM meM kahI gaI hai aura kramazaH prasthApanA-
prAropaNA vRddhi kI vidhi batAI gaI hai| isameM pUrva prApta do mAsa ke
prAyazcitta ko vahana karAte hue puna: do mAsa ke prAyazcitta sthAna kA sevana
evaM usake sAnugraha aAropaNA kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| kramazaH prasthApita
karake diye gaye prAyazcitta meM punaH punaH sAnugraha aAropaNA ho sakatI hai
yaha ina sUtroM meM kahA gayA hai  /  kintu sthApitA AropaNA prAyazcitta meM eka
bAra hI sAnugraha AropaNA hotI hai yaha pUrva chaH sUtroM meM kahA gayA hai| .
isa uddezaka ke pAMcaveM, dasaveM, unnIsaveM Adi sUtroM meM "teNa paraM" zabda
kA svAbhAvika hI prasaMga saMgata artha ho jAtA hai, kintu ina sUtroM meM "teNa
paraM" zabda kA sIdhA artha karanA prasaMga-saMgata nahIM hotA hai kyoMki yaha
prasthApitA AropaNA hai aura isameM Age se Age prAyazcitta dina jor3akara kula
chaH mAsa taka kA yoga kiyA gayA hai  /  cUrNikAra ne bhI yahI batAyA hai ki
yahA~ kramazaH pUrva aura pazcAt ke prAyazcitta ko jor3A gayA hai ata: ina
sUtroM meM "teNa paraM" zabda se "jise saMyukta karane para" aisA artha karanA
Avazyaka ho jAtA hai| saMbhavataH ina sUtroM meM kabho lipi doSa se pUrva sUtroM
ke samAna pATha bana gayA hogA jisakA maulika rUpa kabhI uparokta kiye gaye
artha kA sUcaka hI rahA hogA  /  kyoMki isa sUtrAMza kA cUrNikAra ne bhI
uparokta artha hI kiyA hai| eka mAsa prAyazcitta ko sthApitA prAropaNA 30.
chammAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTuvie aNagAre aMtarA mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM
paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA pakkhiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe saaLaM saheuM
sakAraNaM ahINamairittaM teNa paraM divaDDo maaso| 31. paMca mAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM paDhavie aNagAre aMtarA mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA For
Private & Personal use only

Page #550 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[450] _32. If an _anagāra_ performing a four-month _parihāra_ commits a _māsika_
_parihāra_ worthy offense due to a purpose, reason, or cause at the beginning,
middle, or end of the _parihāra_ period, he incurs the _prāyaścitta_ of one
_pakṣa_ of _prāropaṇā_. If he commits the offense again, he incurs the
_prāyaścitta_ of one and a half months. _33. If an _anagāra_ performing a three-
month _parihāra_ commits a _māsika_ _parihāra_ worthy offense due to a purpose,
reason, or cause at the beginning, middle, or end of the _parihāra_ period, he
incurs the _prāyaścitta_ of one _pakṣa_ of _prāropaṇā_. If he commits the
offense again, he incurs the _prāyaścitta_ of one and a half months. 34. If an
_anagāra_ performing a two-month _parihāra_ commits a _māsika_ _parihāra_ worthy
offense due to a purpose, reason, or cause at the beginning, middle, or end of
the _parihāra_ period, he incurs the _prāyaścitta_ of one _pakṣa_ of
_prāropaṇā_. If he commits the offense again, he incurs the _prāyaścitta_ of one
and a half months. 35. If an _anagāra_ performing a one-month _parihāra_ commits
a _māsika_ _parihāra_ worthy offense due to a purpose, reason, or cause at the
beginning, middle, or end of the _parihāra_ period, he incurs the _prāyaścitta_
of one _pakṣa_ of _prāropaṇā_. If he commits the offense again, he incurs the
_prāyaścitta_ of one and a half months. 30. If an _anagāra_ performing a six-
month _prāyaścitta_ commits a _māsika_ _prāyaścitta_ worthy offense due to a
purpose, reason, or cause at the beginning, middle, or end of the _prāyaścitta_
period, he incurs the _prāyaścitta_ of one _pakṣa_ of _prāropaṇā_. If he commits
the offense again, he incurs the _prāyaścitta_ of one and a half months. 31. If
an _anagāra_ performing a five-month _prāyaścitta_ commits a _māsika_
_prāyaścitta_ worthy offense due to a purpose, reason, or cause at the
beginning, middle, or end of the _prāyaścitta_ period, he incurs the
_prāyaścitta_ of one _pakṣa_ of _prāropaṇā_. If he commits the offense again, he
incurs the _prāyaścitta_ of one and a half months. 32. If an _anagāra_
performing a four-month _prāyaścitta_ commits a _māsika_ _prāyaścitta_ worthy
offense due to a purpose, reason, or cause at the beginning, middle, or end of
the _prāyaścitta_ period, he incurs the _prāyaścitta_ of one _pakṣa_ of
_prāropaṇā_. If he commits the offense again, he incurs the _prāyaścitta_ of one
and a half months. 33. If an _anagāra_ performing a three-month _prāyaścitta_
commits a _māsika_ _prāyaścitta_ worthy offense due to a purpose, reason, or
cause at the beginning, middle, or end of the _prāyaścitta_ period, he incurs
the _prāyaścitta_ of one _pakṣa_ of _prāropaṇā_. If he commits the offense
again, he incurs the _prāyaścitta_ of one and a half months.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 450] [nizIthasUtra AloejjA-ahAvarA pakkhiyA ArovaNA AdimajhAvasANe saaTuM
saheuM sakAraNaM ahINamaharitaM teNa paraM divaDDo maaso| _32. cAummAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA
AloejjA-ahAvarA pakkhiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe saaTTha saheuM sakAraNaM
ahINamairittaM teNa paraM divaDDo maaso| _ 33. temAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTuvie
aNagAre aMtarA mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA pakkhiyA
ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe saaTuM saheuM sakAraNaM ahINamaharitaM teNa paraM
divaDDo maaso| 34. do mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA mAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA pakkhiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe
saaTTha saheuM sakAraNaM ahINamairittaM teNa paraM divaDDo maaso| 35. mAsiyaM
parihArahANaM paTavie aNagAre aMtarA mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA
AloejjA-ahAvarA pakkhiyA ArovaNA AdimajhAvasANe saaTuM saheuM sakAraNaM
ahINamairittaM teNa paraM divaDDo maaso| 30. chaH mAsika prAyazcitta vahana
karane vAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA
anta meM prayojana, hetu yA kAraNa se mAsika prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA sevana
karake AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika eka pakSa kI prAropaNA kA
prAyazcitta AtA hai usake bAda punaH doSa sevana kara le to DeDha mAsa kA
prAyazcitta pAtA hai| 31. paMca mAsika prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra
yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana,
hetu yA kAraNa se mAsika prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA sevana karake AlocanA kare to
use na kama na adhika eka pakSa kI prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  usake
bAda punaH doSa sevana kara le to DeDha mAsa kA prAyazcitta pAtA hai| 32.
cAturmAsika prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla
ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana, hetu yA kAraNa se mAsika
prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA sevana karake AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika
eka pakSa kI prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta pAtA hai| usake bAda punaH doSa sevana
kara le to DeDha mAsa kA prAyazcitta pAtA hai| 33. tIna mAsa prAyazcitta vahana
karane vAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA
anta meM prayojana, hetu yA kAraNa se mAsika prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA sevana
karake AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika eka pakSa kI prAropaNA kA
prAyazcitta pAtA hai| usake bAda pUnaH doSa sevana kara le to DeDha mAsa kA
prAyazcitta AtA hai|

Page #551 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twentieth Uddeshak  [451]  34. If an Anugara, undertaking a two-month
*prāyaścitta*, consumes a *māsika prāyaścitta* worthy offense due to purpose,
motive, or reason at the beginning, middle, or end of the *prāyaścitta* period,
he incurs a *prāyaścitta* of one *pakṣa* of *prāropaṇā*, neither less nor more.
If he consumes the offense again, he incurs a *prāyaścitta* of one and a half
months.  35. If an Anugara, undertaking a *māsika prāyaścitta*, consumes a one-
month *prāyaścitta* worthy offense due to purpose, motive, or reason at the
beginning, middle, or end of the *prāyaścitta* period, he incurs a *prāyaścitta*
of one *pakṣa* of *prāropaṇā*, neither less nor more. If he consumes the offense
again, he incurs a *prāyaścitta* of one and a half months.  **Discussion:** This
should be understood in the same way as Sutra 19-24. The difference is that
there, the statement is about the establishment of *prāropaṇā* for a
*prāyaścitta* of two months in the middle of the *prāyaścitta* period, while
here, the statement is about the establishment of *prāropaṇā* for a
*prāyaścitta* of one month in the middle of the *prāyaścitta* period.
**Establishment of *prāropaṇā* and Increase for a One-Month *Prāyaścitta***  36.
If an Anugara, undertaking a *prāyaścitta* of one *divada-māsa*, consumes a
*prāyaścitta* worthy offense due to purpose, motive, or reason at the beginning,
middle, or end of the *prāyaścitta* period, he incurs a *prāyaścitta* of two
months.  37. If an Anugara, undertaking a *prāyaścitta* of two months, consumes
a *prāyaścitta* worthy offense due to purpose, motive, or reason at the
beginning, middle, or end of the *prāyaścitta* period, he incurs a *prāyaścitta*
of one and a half months.  38. If an Anugara, undertaking a *prāyaścitta* of one
and a half months, consumes a *prāyaścitta* worthy offense due to purpose,
motive, or reason at the beginning, middle, or end of the *prāyaścitta* period,
he incurs a *prāyaścitta* of three months.  39. If an Anugara, undertaking a
*prāyaścitta* of three months, consumes a *prāyaścitta* worthy offense due to
purpose, motive, or reason at the beginning, middle, or end of the *prāyaścitta*
period, he incurs a *prāyaścitta* of four months.  40. If an Anugara,
undertaking a *prāyaścitta* of four months, consumes a *prāyaścitta* worthy
offense due to purpose, motive, or reason at the beginning, middle, or end of
the *prāyaścitta* period, he incurs a *prāyaścitta* of four and a half months.
41. If an Anugara, undertaking a *prāyaścitta* of four and a half months,
consumes a *prāyaścitta* worthy offense due to purpose, motive, or reason at the
beginning, middle, or end of the *prāyaścitta* period, he incurs a *prāyaścitta*
of five months.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bIsavAM uddezaka] [451 34. do mAsa prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra yadi
prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana, hetu
yA kAraNa se mAsika prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA sevana karake AlocanA kare to use
na kama na adhika eka pakSa kI prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA hai| usake bAda
punaH doSa sevana kara le to DeDha mAsa kA prAyazcitta AtA hai| 35. mAsika
prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke prArambha
meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana, hetu yA kAraNa se eka mAsa prAyazcitta
yogya doSa kA sevana karake AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika eka pakSa kI
prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA hai| usake bAda punaH doSa sevana kara le to DeDha
mAsa kA prAyazcitta pAtA hai| vivecana-isakA vivecana sUtra 19-24 ke samAna
samajhanA caahie| antara yaha hai ki vahA~ yazcitta vahana ke madhya meM 'do
mAsa' ke prAyazcitta kI sthApitA AropaNA kA kathana hai aura yahA~ prAyazcitta
vahana ke madhya meM eka mAsa ke prAyazcitta kI sthApitA-prAropaNA kA kathana
hai| eka mAsa prAyazcitta kI prasthApitA prAropaNA evaM vRddhi 36. divaDa-
mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTuvie aNagAre aMtarA mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM
paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA pakkhiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe saaTeM saheuM
sakAraNaM ahINamairittaM teNa paraM do maasaa| 37. do mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM
paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA
pakkhiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe saaLaM saheuM sakAraNaM ahINamairittaM teNa
paraM aDDAijjA maasaa| 38. aDDAijja-mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTTavie aNagAre
aMtarA mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA pakkhiyA ArovaNA
AdimajjhAvasANe saaTTha saheuM sakAraNaM ahINamairittaM teNa paraM tiNNimAsA  /
39. temAsiyaM parihAraTTANaM paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA mAsiyaM parihArahANaM
paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA pakkhiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe saaLaM saheuM
sakAraNaM ahINamairittaM teNa paraM adhuTThA maasaa| - 40. aduTThamAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM paTuvie aNagAre aMtarA mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA
AloejjA-ahAvarA pakkhiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe saaLaM saheuM sakAraNaM
ahINamairittaM teNa paraM cttaarimaasaa| 41. cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM
paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA

Page #552 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[452] [Nishith Sutra] If an Aṇagāra, while performing the Āloka-Ajja-Ahavāra
Pakkhiya Ārovana, commits a monthly penance-worthy offense due to a purpose,
reason, or cause at the beginning, middle, or end of the penance period, then he
shall perform the penance of one Pakkhiya Ārovana, neither less nor more. This,
when combined, results in a penance of two months. 42. If an Aṇagāra, while
performing the penance of two months, commits a monthly penance-worthy offense
due to a purpose, reason, or cause at the beginning, middle, or end of the
penance period, then he shall perform the penance of one Pakkhiya Ārovana,
neither less nor more. This, when combined, results in a penance of two and a
half months. 43. If an Aṇagāra, while performing the penance of two and a half
months, commits a monthly penance-worthy offense due to a purpose, reason, or
cause at the beginning, middle, or end of the penance period, then he shall
perform the penance of one Pakkhiya Ārovana, neither less nor more. This, when
combined, results in a penance of three months. 44. If an Aṇagāra, while
performing the penance of three months, commits a monthly penance-worthy offense
due to a purpose, reason, or cause at the beginning, middle, or end of the
penance period, then he shall perform the penance of one Pakkhiya Ārovana,
neither less nor more. This, when combined, results in a penance of three and a
half months. 36. If an Aṇagāra, while performing the penance of three and a half
months, commits a monthly penance-worthy offense due to a purpose, reason, or
cause at the beginning, middle, or end of the penance period, then he shall
perform the penance of one Pakkhiya Ārovana, neither less nor more. This, when
combined, results in a penance of four months.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 452] [ nizIthasUtra AloejjA- ahAvarA pakkhiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe saaTTha
saheDaM sakAraNaM ahINamairitaM teNa paraM aDDapaMcamAsA | 42. aDDa-
paMcamAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTThavie aNagAre aMtarA mAsiyaM parihAradvANaM
paDisevittA AloejjA- ahAvarA pakkhiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe saaTTha saheuM
sakAraNaM ahINamairitaM teNa paraM paMcamAsA | 43. paMca - mAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA
AloejjA - ahAvarA pakkhiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe saaTTha saheuM sakAraNaM
ahINamairittaM teNa paraM addhachaTTAmAsA  /  44. addhachaTTamAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA
AloejjA - ahAvarA pakkhiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe saaTTha saheDaM sakAraNaM
ahINamairittaM teNa paraM chammAsA  /  36. DeDha mAsa prAyazcitta vahana karane
vAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahanakAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta
meM prayojana, hetu yA kAraNa se mAsika prAyazcitta yogya doSa sevana karake
jhAlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika eka pakSa kI prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta
AtA hai  /  jise saMyukta karane se do mAsa kI prasthApanA hotI hai  /  37. do
mAsa prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahanakAla ke
prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana hetu yA kAraNa se mAsika
prAyazcitta yogya doSa sevana karake AAlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika eka
pakSa kI AropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  jise saMyukta karane seDhAI mAsa kI
prasthApanA hotI hai  /  38. DhAI mAsa prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra
yadi prAyazcitta vahanakAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana,
hetu yA kAraNa se mAsika prAyazcitta yogya doSa sevana karake AlocanA kare to
use na kama na adhika eka pakSa kI prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  jise
saMyukta karane se tIna mAsa kI prasthApanA hotI hai  /  39. tIna mAsa
prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahanakAla ke prArambha
meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana, hetu yA kAraNa se mAsika prAyazcitta
yogya doSa sevana karake AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika eka pakSa kI
prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  jise saMyukta karane se sADhe tIna mAsa
prasthApanA hotI hai  /  40. sADhe tIna mAsa prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA
aNagAra yadi prAyaztita vahanakAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM
prayojana, hetu yA kAraNa se mAsika prAyazcitta yogya doSa sevana karake AlocanA
kare to use na kama na adhika eka pakSa kI AropaNA kA prAyazcitta prAtA hai  /
jise saMyukta karane se cAra mAsa kI prasthApanA hotI hai  /

Page #553 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twentieth Uddeshak  [453]  41. An Anugara who is performing a four-month
penance, if he commits a monthly penance-worthy offense due to purpose, motive,
or reason at the beginning, middle, or end of the penance period, and is
criticized for it, then he incurs a penance of one paksha of Aroopana. Combining
this with the original penance, it becomes a penance of four and a half months.
42. An Anugara who is performing a four and a half month penance, if he commits
a monthly penance-worthy offense due to purpose, motive, or reason at the
beginning, middle, or end of the penance period, and is criticized for it, then
he incurs a penance of one paksha of Aroopana. Combining this with the original
penance, it becomes a penance of five months.  43. An Anugara who is performing
a five-month penance, if he commits a monthly penance-worthy offense due to
purpose, motive, or reason at the beginning, middle, or end of the penance
period, and is criticized for it, then he incurs a penance of one paksha of
Aroopana. Combining this with the original penance, it becomes a penance of five
and a half months.  44. An Anugara who is performing a five and a half month
penance, if he commits a monthly penance-worthy offense due to purpose, motive,
or reason at the beginning, middle, or end of the penance period, and is
criticized for it, then he incurs a penance of one paksha of Aroopana. Combining
this with the original penance, it becomes a penance of six months.
**Discussion:**  This should be understood in the same way as Sutras 25 to 29.
The only difference is that instead of the Aroopana being a replacement for the
two-month penance, here it should be understood as a replacement for the one-
month penance.  **Increase and Aroopana of Monthly and Two-Monthly Penances**
45. If an Anugara who is performing a two-month Pariharatthana commits a monthly
Pariharatthana offense due to purpose, motive, or reason at the beginning,
middle, or end of the penance period, and is criticized for it, then he incurs a
penance of one paksha of Aroopana. Combining this with the original penance, it
becomes a penance of two and a half months.  46. If an Anugara who is performing
a two and a half month Pariharatthana commits a two-month Pariharatthana offense
due to purpose, motive, or reason at the beginning, middle, or end of the
penance period, and is criticized for it, then he incurs a penance of twenty-one
days of Aroopana. Combining this with the original penance, it becomes a penance
of three months.  47. If an Anugara who is performing a three-month
Pariharatthana commits a monthly Pariharatthana offense due to purpose, motive,
or reason at the beginning, middle, or end of the penance period, and is
criticized for it, then he incurs a penance of one paksha of Aroopana. Combining
this with the original penance, it becomes a penance of three and a half months.
48. If an Anugara who is performing a three and a half month Pariharatthana
commits a two-month Pariharatthana offense due to purpose, motive, or reason at
the beginning, middle, or end of the penance period, and is criticized for it,
then he incurs a penance of twenty-one days of Aroopana. Combining this with the
original penance, it becomes a penance of four months.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bIsavAM uddezaka] [453 41. cAra mAsa prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra
yadi prAyazcitta-vahanakAla ke prArambha, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana, hetu
yA kAraNa se mAsika prAyazcitta yogya doSa sevana karake AlocanA kare to use na
kama na adhika eka pakSa kI prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  jise saMyukta
karane se sAr3he cAra mAsa kI prasthApanA hotI hai  /  42. sAr3he cAra mAsa
prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahanakAla ke prArambha
meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana, hetu yA kAraNa se mAsika prAyazcitta
yogya doSa sevana karake AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika eka pakSa kI
prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta pAtA hai| jise saMyukta karane se pAMca mAsa kI
prasthApanA hotI hai| 43. pAMca mAsa prAyazcita vahana karane vAlA aNagAra yadi
prAyazcitta vahanakAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana, hetu
yA kAraNa se mAsika prAyazcitta yogya doSa sevana karake AlocanA kare to use na
kama na adhika eka pakSa kI prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  jise saMyukta
karane se sAr3he pAMca mAsa kI prasthApanA hotI hai  /  44. sAr3he pAMca mAsa
prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahanakAla ke prArambha
meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana, hetu yA kAraNa se mAsika prAyazcitta
yogya doSa sevana karake AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika eka pakSa kI
prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta pAtA hai  /  jise saMyukta karane se chaH mAsa kI
prasthApanA hotI hai  /  vivecanainakA vivecana sUtra 25 se 29 ke samAna
samajhanA cAhie antara kevala yaha hai ki do mAsa ke prAyazcitta sthAna kI
prasthApitA AropaNA ke sthAna para yahA~ eka mAsa ke prAyazcita sthAna kI
prasthApita prAropaNA samajhanA cAhie  /  mAsika aura do mAsika prAyazcitta kI
prasthApitA pAropaNA evaM vRddhi 45. do mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTuvie aNagAre
aMtarA mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA pakkhiyA ArovaNA
AdimajjhAvasANe saaTuM saheuM sakAraNaM ahINamairittaM teNa paraM aDDAijjA mAsA
/  46. aDDAijja-mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA do mAsiyaM
parihAraDhANaM paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA vIsairAiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe
saaTTha saheuM sakAraNaM ahoNamairittaM, teNa paraM saMpacarAiyA tinnnnimaasaa|
47. saMpacarAiya-temAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA mAsiyaM
parihANaTANaM paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA pakkhiyA ArovaNA AdimajjhAvasANe
saaLaM saheuM sakAraNaM ahINamairitaM, teNa paraM savIsairAiyA tiNi mAsA  /  48.
savIsairAiya-temAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTTavie aNagAre aMtarA do mAsiyaM
parihAraTThANaM

Page #554 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[454] If an *Aṇagāra* who is performing *Niśītha Sūtra* *Parihāra* for 20 days,
commits a *Māsika* *Parihāra* worthy offense at the beginning, middle or end of
the *Parihāra* due to a purpose, reason or cause, then he shall perform
*Prāropaṇā* for one *Pakṣa* without any reduction or increase. This, when
combined, results in a *Prasthāpanā* of 2.5 months. [49] If an *Aṇagāra* who is
performing *Sad-Saraiya-Cāum-Māsiya* *Parihāra* for four months, commits a
*Māsika* *Parihāra* worthy offense at the beginning, middle or end of the
*Parihāra* due to a purpose, reason or cause, then he shall perform *Prāropaṇā*
for one *Pakṣa* without any reduction or increase. This, when combined, results
in a *Prasthāpanā* of five months and five nights. [50] If an *Aṇagāra* who is
performing *Pañcūṇa-Pañca-Māsiya* *Parihāra* for five months, commits a *Māsika*
*Parihāra* worthy offense at the beginning, middle or end of the *Parihāra* due
to a purpose, reason or cause, then he shall perform *Prāropaṇā* for twenty
nights without any reduction or increase. This, when combined, results in a
*Prasthāpanā* of six months and five nights. [51] If an *Aṇagāra* who is
performing *Addha-Chhaṭṭa-Māsiya* *Parihāra* for six months, commits a *Māsika*
*Parihāra* worthy offense at the beginning, middle or end of the *Parihāra* due
to a purpose, reason or cause, then he shall perform *Prāropaṇā* for one *Pakṣa*
without any reduction or increase. This, when combined, results in a
*Prasthāpanā* of six months and twenty nights. [45] If an *Aṇagāra* who is
performing *Prāyaścitta* for two months, commits a *Māsika* *Parihāra* worthy
offense at the beginning, middle or end of the *Parihāra* due to a purpose,
reason or cause, then he shall perform *Prāropaṇā* for one *Pakṣa* without any
reduction or increase. This, when combined, results in a *Prasthāpanā* of two
and a half months. [46] If an *Aṇagāra* who is performing *Prāyaścitta* for two
months, commits a *Māsika* *Parihāra* worthy offense at the beginning, middle or
end of the *Parihāra* due to a purpose, reason or cause, then he shall perform
*Prāropaṇā* for twenty nights without any reduction or increase. This, when
combined, results in a *Prasthāpanā* of three months and five nights. [47] If an
*Aṇagāra* who is performing *Prāyaścitta* for three months and five nights,
commits a *Māsika* *Parihāra* worthy offense at the beginning, middle or end of
the *Parihāra* due to a purpose, reason or cause, then he shall perform
*Prāropaṇā* for one *Pakṣa* without any reduction or increase. This, when
combined, results in a *Prasthāpanā* of three months and twenty nights. [48] If
an *Aṇagāra* who is performing *Prāyaścitta* for three months and twenty nights,
commits a *Māsika* *Parihāra* worthy offense at the beginning, middle or end of
the *Parihāra* due to a purpose, reason or cause, then he shall perform
*Prāropaṇā* for twenty nights without any reduction or increase. This, when
combined, results in a *Prasthāpanā* of four months and ten nights. [49] If an
*Aṇagāra* who is performing *Prāyaścitta* for four months and ten nights,
commits a *Māsika* *Parihāra* worthy offense at the beginning, middle or end of
the *Parihāra* due to a purpose, reason or cause, then he shall perform
*Prāropaṇā* for one *Pakṣa* without any reduction or increase. This, when
combined, results in a *Prasthāpanā* of five months and five nights.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 454] [nizIthasUtra paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA vIsairAiyA ArovaNA
AdimajjhAvasANe saaTTha saheuM sakAraNaM ahINamairittaM, teNa paraM sadasarAiyA
cattAri maasaa| _ 49. sadasarAiya-cAummAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTuvie aNagAre
aMtarA mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AsoejjA-ahAvarA pakkhiyA ArovaNA
AdimajjhAvasANe saaLaM saheuM sakAraNaM ahINamairittaM, teNa paraM paMcUNA
pNcmaasaa| 50. paMcUNa-paMca-mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTuvie aNagAre aMtarA do
mAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA vIsairAiyA ArovaNA
AdimajjhAvasANe saaLaM saheuM sakAraNaM ahINamairittaM, teNa paraM
addhachaTTamAsA  /  51. addhachaTTamAsiyaM parihAraTThANaM paTTavie aNagAre
aMtarA mAsiyaM parihAradvANaM paDisevittA AloejjA-ahAvarA pakkhiyA ArovaNA
AdimajjhAvasANe sagaLaM saheuM sakAraNaM ahINamaharitaM teNa paraM chmmaasaa|
45. do mAsa prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla
ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana, hetu yA kAraNa se mAsika
prAyazcitta yogya doSa sevana karake AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika eka
pakSa kI prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA hai| jise saMyukta karane se DhAI mAsa kI
prasthApanA hotI hai| . 46. DhAI mAsa prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra
yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana,
hetu yA kAraNa se do mAsika prAyazcitta yogya doSa sevana karake AlocanA kare to
use na kama na adhika bIsa rAtri kI prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta pAtA hai| jise
saMyukta karane se tIna mAsa aura pAMca rAtri kI prasthApanA hotI hai| 47. tIna
mAsa aura pAMca rAtri prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta
vahana kAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana, hetu yA kAraNa
se eka mAsa prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA sevana karake AlocanA kare to use na kama
na adhika eka pakSa kI prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  jise saMyukta karane
se tIna mAsa aura bIsa rAtri kI prasthApanA hotI hai  /  48. tIna mAsa aura bIsa
rAtri prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke
prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana kAraNa se do mAsa prAyazcitta
yogya doSa kA sevana karake AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika bIsa rAtri kI
prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  jise saMyukta karane se cAra mAsa aura dasa
rAtri kI prasthApanA hotI hai| 49. cAra mAsa aura dasa rAtri prAyazcitta vahana
karane vAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA
anta meM prayojana, hetu yA kAraNa se eka mAsa prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA sevana
karake AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika eka pakSa kI prAropaNA kA
prAyazcitta AtA hai| jise saMyukta karane se pAMca mAsa meM pAMca rAtri kama kI
prasthApanA hotI hai  /

Page #555 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[455 Twentieth Uddeshak] 50. An Anugara who is undergoing a five-night less
Prāyaścitta for five months, if he criticizes a two-month Prāyaścitta-worthy
fault due to purpose, motive or reason at the beginning, middle or end of the
Prāyaścitta period, then he incurs a Prāyaścitta of twenty nights, neither less
nor more. This, when combined, results in a five-and-a-half-month Pratiṣṭhāpana.
51. An Anugara who is undergoing a five-and-a-half-month Prāyaścitta, if he
criticizes a one-month Prāyaścitta-worthy fault due to purpose, motive or reason
at the beginning, middle or end of the Prāyaścitta period, then he incurs a
Prāyaścitta of one Pakṣa, neither less nor more. This, when combined, results in
a six-month Pratiṣṭhāpana. Discussion- In these sūtras, the combined
Pratiṣṭhāpana of monthly and two-monthly Prāyaścitta places is called Āropaṇa.
The rest of the discussion should be understood as in the previous sūtras.
Similar to one month and two months, other multiple-month related Pratiṣṭhāpana,
Āropaṇa, etc. alternatives should also be understood accordingly. The summary
sūtra 1-5 of the twentieth Uddeshak states that for a Prāyaścitta place from one
month to five months, the Prāyaścitta for criticizing it without deceit is the
same number of months. For criticizing with deceit, a Prāyaścitta of one Guru
month is incurred. For a Prāyaścitta place of six months or more, the
Prāyaścitta is only six months, whether criticized with or without deceit. There
is no further Prāyaścitta provision, just as there is no jail sentence of more
than 20 years in the state system. 6-10 The Prāyaścitta for criticizing a
Prāyaścitta place consumed multiple times should be understood as in the
previous sūtras. 11-12 The Prāyaścitta for criticizing monthly, etc. Prāyaścitta
places with dual-combination breaches should also be understood as in the
previous sūtras. 13-14 The Prāyaścitta for criticizing full-month or more-than-
full-month places, with or without deceit, etc. should be understood as in the
previous sūtra. When a fault place consumed once is criticized without deceit,
and the fault is applied again, then Āropaṇa of Prāyaścitta is done for any
breach of the two four-fold breaches. The Prāyaścitta for criticizing a place
consumed once with deceit, and the Āropaṇa in it, should be understood as in the
previous sūtras. 17-18 The entire description related to the place consumed
multiple times should be understood as in these two sūtras, similar to the
previous two sūtras.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [455 bIsavAM uddezaka] 50. pAMca mAsa meM pAMca rAtri kama prAyazcitta vahana
karane vAlA aNagAra yadi prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA
anta meM prayojana, hetu yA kAraNa se do mAsa prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA sevana
karake AlocanA kare to use na kama na adhika bIsa rAtri kI prAropaNA kA
prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  jise saMyukta karane se sAr3he pAMca mAsa kI prasthApanA
hotI hai| 51. sAr3he pAMca mAsa prAyazcitta vahana karane vAlA aNagAra yadi
prAyazcitta vahana kAla ke prArambha meM, madhya meM yA anta meM prayojana, hetu
yA kAraNa se eka mAsa prAyazcitta yogya doSa kA sevana karake AlocanA kare to
use na kama na adhika eka pakSa kI prAropaNA kA prAyazcitta AtA hai| jise
saMyukta karane se chaH mAsa kI prasthApanA hotI hai  /  vivecana-ina sUtroM meM
mAsika aura do mAsika prAyazcitta sthAnoM kI saMyukta prasthApitA AropaNA kahI
gaI hai  /  zeSa vivecana pUrva sUtroM ke samAna samajha lenA caahiye| eka mAsa
aura do mAsa ke samAna hI anya aneka mAsa sambandhI prasthApanA AropaNA Adi ke
vikalpa bhI yathA yogya samajha lene caahie| bIsaveM uddezaka kA sArAMzasUtra
1-5 eka mAsa prAyazcitta sthAna se lekara pAMca mAsa taka ke prAyazcitta sthAna
kI niSkapaTa AlocanA kA utane-utane mAsa kA prAyazcitta AtA hai| kapaTa yukta
AlocanA karane para eka guru mAsa kA prAyazcitta adhika prAtA hai  /  chaha mAsa
yA usase adhika prAyazcitta sthAna kI AlocanA sakapaTa yA niSkapaTa karane para
bhI kevala chaha mAsa hI prAyazcitta AtA hai| isake Age prAyazcitta vidhAna
nahIM hai, jisa prakAra rAjya-vyavasthA meM 20 varSa se adhika jela kI sajA
nahIM hai| 6-10 aneka bAra sevana kie gae prAyazcitta sthAna kI AlocanA ke
viSaya meM pUrva sUtravat prAyazcitta samajhanA cAhie  /  11-12 mAsika Adi
prAyazcitta sthAnoM kI dvika saMyogI bhaMgoM se yukta AlocanA ke prAyazcitta bhI
pUrva sUtravat samajhanA caahie| 13-14 pUre mAsa yA sAdhika mAsa sthAnoM kI
AlocanA kA prAyazcitta kapaTa sahita yA kapaTarahita Adi pUrva sUtra ke samAna
samajhanA cAhie  /  eka bAra sevita doSa sthAna kI kapaTa rahita AlocanA ke
prAyazcitta ko vahana karate hae pUnaH lagAye jAne vAle doSoM kI do caubhaMgI ke
kisI bhI bhaMga se pAlocanA karane para prAyazcitta kI prAropaNA kI jAtI hai  /
eka bAra sevita sthAna kI kapaTayukta AlocanA kA prAyazcitta vahana evaM usameM
prAropaNA, pUrva sUtroM ke samAna samajha lenA caahie| 17-18 aneka bAra sevita
sthAna sambandhI sampUrNa varNana ukta donoM sUtra ke samAna hI ina do sUtroM kA
samajha lenA caahie|

Page #556 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Nishīyasūtra 19-24  For a period of atonement lasting from one to six months,
for the first two months, the *sānugṛaha sthāpitā āropaṇā* is twenty days, and
then for the next two months, the *niranugraha sthāpitā āropaṇā* is two months,
and a total of two months and twenty days of *sthāpitā pāropaṇā* is given. 25-29
While undergoing the atonement of two months and twenty days of *sthāpitā
āropaṇā*, the *prasthāpitā āropaṇā* of twenty days for each two months of
atonement is increased, and this *āropaṇā* is done up to six months. 30-35  The
*sānugṛaha* and *niranugraha sthāpitā āropaṇā* are to be known as in sūtra
19-24, but instead of the two-month atonement period, one month and twenty days
should be understood, and instead of twenty days of *āropaṇā*, fifteen days
should be understood, and instead of two months and twenty days, one and a half
months should be understood. 36-44  The *prasthāpitā āropaṇā* is to be known as
in sūtra 25-29, but here, instead of two months and twenty days, there is a
*prasthāpana* of one and a half months, and instead of twenty days of *āropaṇā*,
there is an increase of fifteen days of *āropaṇā* for the one-month atonement
period, and this *āropaṇā* should be understood as extending up to six months.
45-51  When a fault is committed while undergoing the atonement of two months,
an increase of fifteen days of *āropaṇā* is given for the one-month period.
Subsequently, an increase of twenty days of *āropaṇā* is given for the two-month
period. In this way, the *prasthāpitā āropaṇā* should be understood as
increasing from both periods up to six months.  Thus, in this *uddeśaka*, the
giving of atonement for the criticism of atonement periods, and the *sānugṛaha*,
*niranugraha*, *sthāpitā*, and *prasthāpitā āropaṇā* during the period of
atonement are clearly stated.  **Conclusion:**  In the four divisions of
atonement periods, such as *laghumāsika*, etc., the faults that are mentioned
should be understood to be similar to other unmentioned faults. Due to factors
such as the nature of the fault, the ability of the one receiving atonement,
etc., there are many alternatives for the pure austerities, etc., that are given
in these periods, which should be understood from the guidance of the *gītartha
muni* or from tradition, and an attempt should also be made to understand them
from the atonement table given earlier in the first *uddeśaka*.  To understand
the atonement method with its detailed alternatives, one should study the
*niśītha pīṭhikā* and the commentary of the twentieth *uddeśaka*, or one should
study the *bṛhatkalpasūtra*, *vyavahārasūtra*, and *niśīthasūtra* completely,
including their *niyukti*, commentary, *cūrṇi*, and *ṭīkā*.  According to the
*niyukti* and commentary, the sūtra number of the *niśītha* is 2022 (two
thousand twenty-two). The present edition has 1401 sūtras. Although the sūtra
numbers may differ in the available manuscripts, the difference is not
significant. However, the difference between the sūtra number of the present
edition and the sūtra number mentioned in the *niyukti* and commentary is 621
sūtras. This significant difference in the original sūtras is worth considering.
The discussion of the sūtras in the present edition is mostly based on the
commentary and *cūrṇi*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [nizIyasUtra 19-24 eka mAsa se lekara chaha mAsa taka kisI bhI prAyazcitta ke
vahanakAla meM lage do mAsa sthAna kI sAnugraha sthApitA AropaNA bIsa dina ko
tathA punaH usa sthAna kI niranugraha sthApitA AropaNA do mAsa kI evaM kula do
mAsa aura bosa dina kI sthApitA pAropaNA dI jAtI hai| 25-29 sthApitA AropaNA ke
do mAsa aura bIsa dina ke prAyazcitta ko vahana karate hue punaH-punaH do mAsa
ke prAyazcitta kI bIsa-bIsa dina kI prasthApitA AropaNA bar3hAte hue chaha mAsa
taka kI prAropaNA kI jAtI hai  /  30-35 sUtra 19-24 ke samAna sAnugraha aura
niranugraha sthApitA AropaNA jAnanA kintu do mAsa prAyazcitta sthAna kI jagaha
eka mAsa evaM 20 dina kI prAropaNA kI jagaha 15 dina tathA do mAsa bIsa dina kI
jagaha Der3ha mAsa samajhanA caahie| 36-44 sUtra 25-29 taka ke samAna
prasthApitA prAropaNA jAnanA kintu yahA~ prArambha meM do mAsa bIsa dina kI
jagaha Der3ha mAsa kI prasthApanA hai aura 20 dina kI prAropaNA kI jagaha eka
mAsa prAyazcitta sthAna kI 15 dina kI prAropaNA vRddhi karate hue chaha mAsa
taka kI aAropaNA kA varNana samajhanA caahie| 45-51 do mAsa ke prAyazcitta ko
vahana karate hue doSa lagAne para eka mAsa sthAna ko 15 dina kI prAropaNA
vRddhi kI jAtI hai| tadanantara do mAsa sthAna kI 20 dina kI prAropaNA vRddhi ko
jAtI hai| isa taraha donoM sthAnoM se prAropaNA vRddhi karate hue chaha mAsa
taka ko prasthApitA AropaNA samajha lenI caahiye| isa prakAra isa uddezaka meM
prAyazcitta sthAnoM kI AlocanA para prAyazcitta dene kA evaM usake vahanakAla
meM sAnugraha, niranugraha, sthApitA evaM prasthApitA AropaNA kA spaSTa kathana
kiyA gayA hai| upasaMhAra-laghumAsika Adi prAyazcitta sthAnoM ke cAra vibhAgoM
meM jo-jo doSa sthAnoM kA varNana hai tadanusAra usake samAna anya bhI anukta
doSoM ko samajha lenA caahiye| doSa sevana ke bhAva evaM prAyazcitta grahaNa
karane vAle kI yogyatA prAdi kAraNoM se ina sthAnoM meM diye jAne vAle zUddha
tapa Adi ke anekoM vikalpa hote haiM jinheM gItArtha muni kI nizrA se yA
paramparA se samajhanA cAhiye tathA prathama uddezaka ke pUrva dI gaI
prAyazcitta-tAlikA se bhI samajhane kA prayatna karanA cAhiye  /  vistRta
vikalpoM yukta prAyazcitta vidhi ko samajhane ke liye nizItha pIThikA kA tathA
bIsaveM uddezaka ke bhASya caNi kA adhyayana karanA cAhiye athavA
bRhatkalpasUtra, vyavahArasUtra evaM nizIthasUtra kA niyukti, bhASya, cUrNi,
TIkA yukta pUrNa adhyayana karanA cAhiye  /  niyukti evaM bhASya ke anusAra
nizItha kI sUtra saMkhyA 2022 (do hajAra bAvIsa) hotI hai| prastuta saMskaraNa
meM 1401 sUtra haiN| yadyapi upalabdha pratiyoM meM sUtra saMkhyA bhinna-bhinna
avazya hai to bhI vaha antara adhika nahIM hai  /  kintu niyukti evaM bhASya meM
kahI gaI sUtra saMkhyA se prastuta saMskaraNa ko sUtra saMkhyA kA antara 621
sUtroM kA hai  /  mUla sUtroM meM itanA adhika antara vicAraNIya hai  /
prastuta saMskaraNa ke sUtroM kA vivecana prAyaH bhASya evaM caNi kA prAdhAra
lekara kiyA gayA

Page #557 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[457 Twentieth Uddeshak] It is said that the number of sutras in this Uddeshak
is different from the total number of sutras in the entire Nishītha, as
mentioned in the Bhāṣya Gāthā 6469 to 73, and the number of Laghu, Guru, Māsika,
Chaumāsika, and Prāropaṇa sutras. It is also impossible to reconcile this with
the available number of sutras. For example, In the first Uddeshak, the number
of sutras available is 58, and the Bhāṣya Chūrṇi also explains the same number
of sutras, yet this Uddeshak is said to have 252 sutras in the aforementioned
Gāthās. Therefore, the statement of 2022 sutras is very difficult to understand.
In the present time, those who love to study the scriptures will have to be
content with only 1401 sutras. Researchers, thoughtful Āgama lovers, and those
who have studied extensively can try to find a solution to this. Table of sutras
in the twenty Uddeshak Uddeshak 1  2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
20 Prāyaśchitta-sthāna Guru Māsika Laghu Māsika Ghūmā Laghu Māsika Laghu Māsika
Guru Chaumāsi Guru Chaumāsi Guru Chaumāsi Guru Chaumāsi Guru Chaumāsi Guru
Chaumāsi Laghu Chaumāsi Laghu Chaumāsi Laghu Chaumāsi Laghu Chaumāsi Laghu
Chaumāsi Laghu Chaumāsi Laghu Chaumāsi Laghu Chīmāmi Shrāropaṇa Yoga  Number of
Sutras 58 57 80 128 52 78 92 18 25 41 91 317 345 44 78 41 154 50 155 73 35 51
1401 (Fourteen hundred and one) 630

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [457 bIsavAM uddezaka ] hai, phira bhI isake sUtroM kI saMkhyA bhASyagAthA 6469
se 73 taka meM kahI gaI pUre nizItha ke sUtroM kI evaM laghu, guru, mAsika,
caumAsika evaM prAropaNA sUtroM kI saMkhyA se bhinna hai  /  upalabdha sUtra
saMkhyA se inakA samanvaya karanA bhI azakya hai  /  yathA prathama uddezaka meM
sUtra saMkhyA 58 upalabdha hai, bhASyacUrNi meM bhI itane hI sUtroM kI vyAkhyA
hai, phira bhI isa uddezaka ko sUtra saMkhyA ukta gAthAoM meM 252 kahI gaI hai
/  ataH 2022 sUtroM kA kathana bahuta gamya hai  /  vartamAna ke to
svAdhyAyapremiyoM ko 1401 sUtroM se hI santoSa karanA par3egA  /  anveSaka
cintanazIla AgamapremI bahuzruta isa viSaya meM prayatna karake samAdhAna
prakaTa kara sakate haiM  /  bIsa uddezakoM ke sUtroM kI tAlikA uddezaka 1 2 3 4
5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 prAyazcitta-sthAna gurumAsika
laghumAsika ghumA laghumAsika laghumAsika gurucaumAsI gurucaumAsI gurucaumAsI
gurucaumAsI gurucaumAsI gurucaumAsI laghucaumAsI laghucaumAsI laghucaumAsI
laghucaumAsI laghucaumAsI laghucaumAsI laghucaumAsI laghucImAmI zrAropaNA yoga
sUtra - saMkhyA 58 57 80 128 52 78 92 18 25 41 91 317 345 44 78 41 154 50 155 73
35 51 1401 ( caudaha sau eka) 630

Page #558 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[458] [Nishīthasūtra Table of sūtras in the present edition and sūtras specified
in the commentary Note-(The commentary does not give separate sūtra numbers for
each uddeśaka.) Uddeśaka Prāyaścitta sthāna Antara Sūtra number specified in the
commentary Sūtra number in the present edition 252 194 2-5 644 Gurumāsika
Laghumāsika Gurucaumāsī Laghucaumāsī Prāropaṇā Yoga 317 345 630 299 12-19 724 94
20 2022 1401 || Twentieth Uddeśaka ends || || Nishīthasūtra ends ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 458] [nizIthasUtra prastuta saMskaraNa ke sUtroM kI aura bhASya nirdiSTa sUtroM
kI tAlikA noTa-(bhASya meM pratyeka uddezaka kI alaga-alaga sUtra saMkhyA nahIM
dI gaI hai|) uddezaka prAyazcittasthAna antara bhASya nirdiSTa sUtra saMkhyA
prastuta saMskaraNa kI sUtra saMkhyA 252 194 2-5 644 gurumAsika laghumAsika
gurucaumAsI laghucaumAsI prAropaNA yoga 317 345 630 299 12-19 724 94 20 2022
1401  //  bIsavAM uddezaka samApta  //   //  nizIthasUtra samApta  //

Page #559 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Unfavorable Time for Study  [Quoted from the Nandi Sutra, edited by Acharya
Pravar Shri Pratmaramji Maharaj]  One should study scriptures only during the
time prescribed in the Pramanas for study. Studying during unfavorable times is
prohibited.  The Manusmriti and other Smritis also describe unfavorable times in
detail. Vedic people also mention unfavorable times for studying the Vedas.
Similarly, other ancient texts are also considered unfavorable for study. Since
the Jain Agamas are the words of the omniscient, are divinely inspired, and are
a form of self-knowledge, their unfavorable times are also mentioned in the
Agamas. For example:  **Ten unfavorable times related to the sky:**  1.
**Ukkavate (Meteor Shower):** If there is a large meteor shower, one should not
study for one prahar (3 hours). 2. **Disidaaghe (Red Sky):** One should not
study as long as the sky appears red, as if it is on fire.  **Ten unfavorable
times related to the body:**  1. **Atthi (Eating):** One should not study while
eating. 2. **Mansam (Meat):** One should not study while eating meat. 3.
**Sonitte (Blood):** One should not study while dealing with blood. 4.
**Asutisamante (Near a Dead Body):** One should not study near a dead body. 5.
**Susanasamante (Near a Cemetery):** One should not study near a cemetery. 6.
**Chandovarate (During the Moon's Eclipse):** One should not study during a
lunar eclipse. 7. **Surovvarate (During the Sun's Eclipse):** One should not
study during a solar eclipse. 8. **Padane (Falling):** One should not study
after falling. 9. **Rayavuggahe (Loss of Wealth):** One should not study after
losing wealth. 10. **Uvassayassa Anto Oralie Sarirage (During the Last Moments
of Life):** One should not study during the last moments of life.  **Four
Mahapadivaa (Major Days):**  * **Praashadpadivaa (Ashadha Purnima):** One should
not study on the full moon day of Ashadha. * **Indamahapadivaa (Indra
Purnima):** One should not study on the full moon day of Indra. *
**Kattiapadivaa (Kartika Purnima):** One should not study on the full moon day
of Kartika. * **Sugimhapadivaa (Shravana Purnima):** One should not study on the
full moon day of Shravana.  **Four Sanjha (Junctions):**  * **Padimate (Dawn):**
One should not study at dawn. * **Pachchimaate (Sunset):** One should not study
at sunset. * **Majjhanhe (Noon):** One should not study at noon. * **Addharatte
(Midnight):** One should not study at midnight.  **Four Chaukkal (Quarters):**
* **Puvanhe (Morning):** One should study in the morning. * **Avaranhe
(Afternoon):** One should study in the afternoon. * **Panose (Evening):** One
should study in the evening. * **Pacchuse (Night):** One should study at night.
According to the above sutra, there are 32 unfavorable times for study: ten
related to the sky, ten related to the body, four Mahapadivaa, four Mahapadivaa
full moons, and four Sanjha. These are summarized as follows:  **Ten unfavorable
times related to the sky:**  1. **Ukkavate (Meteor Shower):** One should not
study for one prahar (3 hours) after a large meteor shower. 2. **Disidaaghe (Red
Sky):** One should not study as long as the sky appears red, as if it is on
fire.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anadhyAyakAla [sva0 AcAryapravara zrI prAtmArAmajI ma0 dvArA sampAdita
nandIsUtra se uddhRta] svAdhyAya ke lie prAgamoM meM jo samaya batAyA gayA hai,
usI samaya zAstroM kA svAdhyAya karanA cAhie  /  anadhyAyakAla meM svAdhyAya
varjita hai  /  manusmRti Adi smRtiyoM meM bhI anadhyAyakAla kA vistArapUrvaka
varNana kiyA gayA hai| vaidika loga bhI veda ke anadhyAyoM kA ullekha karate
haiN| isI prakAra anya ArSa granthoM kA bhI anadhyAya mAnA jAtA hai| jainAgama
bhI sarvajJokta, devAdhiSThita tathA svaravidyA saMyukta hone ke kAraNa, inakA
bhI AgamoM meM anadhyAyakAla varNita kiyA gayA hai, jaise ki dasavidhe
aMtalikkhite asajjhAe paNNatte, taM jahA-ukkAvAte, disidAghe, gajjite, nigdhAte,
juvate, jakkhAlitte, dhUmitA, mahitA, rayaugghAte  /  dasavihe porAlite
asajjhAtite, taM jahA-aTThI, maMsaM, soNitte, asutisAmaMte, susANasAmaMte,
caMdovarAte, sUrovarAte, paDane, rAyavuggahe , uvassayassa aMto orAlie sriirge|
-sthAnAGgasUtra, sthAna 10 no kappati niggaMthANa vA, niggaMthINa vA cauhi
mahApADivaehiM sajjhAyaM karittae, taM jahAprAsADhapADivae, iMdamahApADivae,
kattiapADivae, sugimhapADivae  /  no kappai niggaMthANa vA niggaMthINa vA, cauhi
saMjhAhiM sajjhAyaM karettae, taM jahA-paDimAte, pacchimAte, majjhaNhe,
aDDharatte  /  kappai niggaMthANaM vA niggaMthINa vA, cAukkAlaM sajjhAyaM
karettae, taM jahA-puvaNhe, avaraNhe, panose, paccUse  /  -sthAnAGga sUtra,
sthAna 4, uddeza 2 uparokta sUtrapATha ke anusAra, dasa aAkAza se sambandhita,
dasa audArika zarIra se sambandhita, cAra mahApratipadA, cAra mahApratipadA kI
pUrNimA aura cAra sandhyA isa prakAra battIsa anadhyAya mAne gaye haiM  /
jinakA saMkSepa meM nimna prakAra se varNana hai, jaise AkAza sambandhI dasa
anadhyAya 1. ulkApAta-tArApatana-yadi mahat tArApatana huA hai to eka prahara
paryanta zAstrasvAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 2. digdAha-jaba taka dizA
raktavarNa kI ho arthAt aisA mAlUma par3e ki dizA meM Aga-sI lagI hai, taba bhI
svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie|

Page #560 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Unfavorable Times for Study (Anadhyaya)  **3-4. Thunder, Lightning, and
Rain:** Thunder, lightning, and rain are generally associated with the natural
course of the seasons. Therefore, the period from Ardra to Swati Nakshatra is
not considered unfavorable for study.  **5. Nirdhaat:** If there is a loud
thunderclap in a cloudless sky, or if there is thunder and lightning in a cloudy
sky, then there is an unfavorable period for study for two praharas
(approximately 3 hours).  **6. Yupaka:** In the Shukla Paksha (bright
fortnight), the first, second, and third days are called Yupaka. This is when
the light of the setting sun and the moon combine. During these days, one should
not study from the evening until night.  **7. Yakshadeepta:** If there is a
flash of light in any direction, like lightning, but it is intermittent and
appears at intervals, it is called Yakshadeepta. One should not study as long as
this light appears in the sky.  **8. Dhumika Krishna:** From Kartik to Magh
(October-February), the time is considered the gestation period for clouds.
During this time, a fine, smoky, watery mist falls, which is called Dhumika
Krishna. One should not study as long as this mist falls.  **9. Mihika Shweta:**
In winter, a fine, white, watery mist falls, which is called Mihika. One should
not study as long as this mist falls.  **10. Raj Udghat:** Due to wind, dust
spreads throughout the sky. One should not study as long as this dust remains.
These ten reasons are related to the sky and are unfavorable for study. The
following ten reasons are related to worldly matters.  **11-12-13. Bones, Flesh,
and Blood:** If one sees the bones, flesh, or blood of a five-sensed animal,
then one should not study until these things are removed from sight. Some
scholars consider it unfavorable for study within a radius of 60 hands
(approximately 90 feet) from these things.  Similarly, the bones, flesh, and
blood of a human being are also considered unfavorable for study. However, the
unfavorable period for these is considered to be within a radius of 100 hands
(approximately 150 feet) and lasts for one day and night. The unfavorable period
for a woman's menstrual cycle is three days. The unfavorable period for the
birth of a child is seven days for a boy and eight days for a girl.  **14.
Impurity:** One should not study as long as excrement or urine is visible.
**15. Cremation Ground:** The area within a radius of 100 hands (approximately
150 feet) around a cremation ground is considered unfavorable for study.  **16.
Lunar Eclipse:** During a lunar eclipse, one should not study for a minimum of
12 praharas (approximately 18 hours) for a low-level text, 12 praharas for a
medium-level text, and 16 praharas for a high-level text.  **17. Solar
Eclipse:** During a solar eclipse, one should not study for a minimum of 12
praharas (approximately 18 hours) for a low-level text, 12 praharas for a
medium-level text, and 16 praharas for a high-level text.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anadhyAyakAla] 3-4.-gajita-vidyut-garjana aura vidyuta prAyaH Rtu svabhAva se
hI hotA hai  /  ataH ArdrA se svAti nakSatra paryanta anadhyAya nahIM mAnA
jaataa| 5. nirdhAta-binA bAdala ke AkAza meM vyantarAdikRta ghora garjana hone
para yA bAdaloM sahita AkAza meM kar3akane para do prahara taka asvAdhyAyakAla
hai  /  6. yUpaka-zukla pakSa meM pratipadA, dvitIyA, tRtIyA ko sandhyA kI
prabhA aura candraprabhA ke milane ko yUpaka kahA jAtA hai  /  ina dinoM prahara
rAtri paryanta svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 7. yakSAdIpta-kabhI kisI dizA meM
bijalI camakane jaisA, thor3e thor3e samaya pIche jo prakAza hotA hai vaha
yakSAdIpta kahalAtA hai  /  ataH AkAza meM jaba taka yakSAkAra dIkhatA rahe taba
taka svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 8. dhUmikA kRSNa-kArtika se lekara mAgha
taka kA samaya meghoM kA garbhamAsa hotA hai  /  isameM dhUmra varNa kI sUkSma
jalarUpa dhudha par3atI hai  /  vaha dhUmikA-kRSNa kahalAtI hai| jaba taka yaha
dhudha par3atI rahe, taba taka svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| 9. mihikAzveta-
zItakAla meM zveta varNa kI sUkSma jalarUpa dhundha mihikA kahalAtI hai| jaba
taka yaha giratI rahe, taba taka asvAdhyAya kAla hai| 10. raja udghAta-vAyu ke
kAraNa AkAza meM cAroM ora dhUli chA jAtI hai| jaba taka yaha dhUli phailI
rahatI hai , svAdhyAya nahIM karanA caahie| uparokta dasa kAraNa AkAza sambandhI
asvAdhyAya ke haiN| audArika sambandhI dasa anadhyAya 11-12-13. haDDI mAMsa aura
rudhira-paMcedriya tiryaMca kI haDDI, mAMsa aura rudhira yadi sAmane dikhAI deM,
to jaba taka vahA~ se yaha vastueM uThAI na jAe~ jaba taka asvAdhyAya hai  /
vRttikAra Asa pAsa ke 60 hAtha taka ina vastuoM ke hone para asvAdhyAya mAnate
haiN| isI prakAra manuSya sambandhI asthi mAMsa aura rudhira kA bhI anadhyAya
mAnA jAtA hai  /  vizeSatA itanI hai ki inakA asvAdhyAya sau hAtha taka tathA
eka dina rAta kA hotA hai  /  strI ke mAsika dharma kA prasvAdhyAya tIna dina
taka  /  bAlaka evaM bAlikA ke janma kA asvAdhyAya kramazaH sAta evaM ATha dina
paryanta kA mAnA jAtA hai| 14. azuci-mala-mUtra sAmane dikhAI dene taka
asvAdhyAya hai| 15. zmazAna-zmazAnabhUmi ke cAroM ora sau-sau hAtha paryanta
asvAdhyAya mAnA jAtA hai| 16. candragrahaNa-candragrahaNa hone para jaghanya
pATha, madhyama bAraha aura utkRSTa solaha prahara paryanta svAdhyAya nahIM
karanA cAhie  /  17. sUryagrahaNa-sUryagrahaNa hone para bhI kramazaH pATha,
bAraha aura solaha prahara paryanta asvAdhyAyakAla mAnA gayA hai|

Page #561 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 18:  Anadhyayakala  **18. Patan:**  When a great king or a national
leader dies, one should not perform *svadhyaya* until their cremation is
completed. Alternatively, one should gradually resume *svadhyaya* only after a
new authority takes over.  **19. Rajavyudgraha:**  When neighboring kings are
engaged in war, one should not perform *svadhyaya* for one day and night, even
after peace is restored.  **20. Audarik Sharira:**  When a five-sense being dies
within the *upaashraya*, one should not perform *svadhyaya* as long as the body
remains there. If the lifeless body lies within a hundred *haath* (cubits),
*svadhyaya* should be avoided.  The above ten reasons for avoiding *svadhyaya*
are related to the *audarik sharira* (physical body).  **21-28. Four Mahotsav
and Four Mahapratipada:**  The four *mahotsav* (festivals) are: *Shraavana
Purnima*, *Ashwin Purnima*, *Kartik Purnima*, and *Chaitra Purnima*. The
*pratipada* (first day) following these *purnima* (full moon) days are called
*mahapratipada*. *Svadhyaya* is prohibited on these days.  **29-32. Pratah,
Sayam, Madhyahna, and Ardharatri:**  One should not perform *svadhyaya* one
*ghadi* (hour) before and after sunrise, one *ghadi* before and after sunset,
one *ghadi* before and after midday, and one *ghadi* before and after midnight.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [anadhyAyakAla 18. patana - kisI bar3e mAnya rAjA athavA rASTra puruSa kA
nidhana hone para jaba taka usakA dAhasaMskAra na ho taba taka svAdhyAya na
karanA caahie| athavA jaba taka dUsarA adhikArI sattArUDha na ho taba taka
zanaiH zanaiH svAdhyAya karanA cAhie  /  19. rAjavyudgraha - samIpastha rAjAoM
meM paraspara yuddha hone para jaba taka zAnti na ho jAe, taba taka usake pazcAt
bhI eka dina rAtri svAdhyAya nahIM kreN| 20. audArika zarIra - upAzraya ke
bhItara paMcendriya jIva kA vadha ho jAne para jaba taka kalevara par3A rahe,
taba taka tathA 100 hAtha taka yadi nirjIva kalevara par3A ho to svAdhyAya nahIM
karanA cAhie  /  asvAdhyAya ke uparokta 10 kAraNa praudArika zarIra sambandhI
kahe gaye haiM  /  21-28 cAra mahotsava aura cAra mahApratipadA -
zrASADhapUrNimA, Azvina pUrNimA, kArtikapUrNimA aura caitra pUrNimA ye cAra
mahotsava haiM  /  ina pUrNimAoM ke pazcAt Ane vAlI pratipadA ko mahApratipadA
kahate haiM  /  isameM svAdhyAya karane kA niSedha hai  /  29-32. prAtaH sAyaM
madhyAhna aura ardharAtritra - prAtaH sUrya ugane se eka ghar3I pahile tathA eka
ghar3I pIche  /  sUryAsta hone se eka ghar3I pahile tathA eka ghar3I pIche  /
madhyAhna arthAt dopahara meM eka ghar3I Age aura eka ghar3I pIche evaM
ardharAtri meM bhI eka ghar3I prAge tathA eka ghar3I pIche svAdhyAya nahIM
karanA cAhie  /  www.jainelibrary.ury

Page #562 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #563 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Shri Shraagam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar List of Benefactor Members Maha Stambh 1.
Shri Seth Mohanmalji Chordia, Madras 2. Shri Gulabchandji Mangilalji Surana,
Secunderabad  Patron 1. Shri Birdichaandji Prakashchandji Talesara, Pali 2. Shri
Gyanrajji Kevalchandji Mootha, Pali 3. Shri Premrajji Jatanrajji Mehta, Medta
City 4. Shri Sh. Jadawmalji Manakchandji Betala, Bagalkot 3. Shri Pukharajji
Shishodia, Byawar 4. Shri Sayarmalji Jethamalji Chordia, Bangalore 5. Shri
Premrajji Bhanwarlalji Shrisrimal, Durg 6. Shri S. Kishan Chandji Chordia,
Madras 7. Shri Kanwarlalji Betala, Guwahati 8. Shri Seth Khivrajji Chordia
Madras 9. Shri Gumanmalji Chordia, Madras 10. Shri S. Badalchandji Chordia,
Madras 11. Shri J. Doolichandji Chordia, Madras 12. Shri S. Ratanchandji
Chordia, Madras 13. Shri J. Annarajji Chordia, Madras 14. Shri S. Sayarchandji
Chordia, Madras 15. Shri R. Shanti Lalji Uttamchandji Chordia, Madras 16: Shri
Siremalji - Hirachandji Chordia, Madras 13. 17. Shri J. Hukmichandji Chordia,
Madras 14.  Stambh Member 1. Shri Agarchandji Fatechandji Parkh, Jodhpur 2. Shri
Jasrajji Ganeshmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur 3. Shri Tilakchandji, Sagarmalji
Sancheti, Madras, 4. Shri Poosalalji Kisturchandji Surana, Katangi 5. Shri R.
Prasannachandji Chordia, Madras 6. Shri Deepchandji, Chordia, Madras 7. Shri
Moolchandji Chordia, Katangi 8 Shri Vardhaman Industries, Kanpur 9. Shri
Mangilalji Mishrilalji Sancheti, Durg 5. Shri Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra,
Byawar 6. Shri Mohanlalji Nemichandji Lalwani, Changaitola 7. Shri Deepchandji
Chandanmalji Chordia, Madras 8. Shri Pannalalji Bhagchandji Bothra, Changa -
Tila 9. Shrimati Sikavar Bai Dharm Patni Sw. Shri Suganchandji Jhamar,
Madurantakam 10. Shri Bastimalji Mohanlalji Bohra ( K. G. F.) Jadan 11. Shri
Thanchandji Mehta, Jodhpur 12. Shri Bhairudanji Labhchandji Surana, Nagaur Shri
Khubchandji Gadiya, Byawar Shri Mishrilalji Dhanrajji Vinayakiya 15. 16 Byawar
Shri Indrachandji Baid, Rajnandgaon Shri Ravatmalji Bhikmachandji Pagaria,
Balaghat 17. Shri Ganeshmalji Dharmichaandji Kankaria, Tangla 18. Shri
Suganchandji Bokadria, Indore 19. Shri Harkachandji Sagarmalji Betala, Indore
20. Shri Raghunathmalji Likhmichandji Lodha, Changaitola 21. Shri Sidhkarannji
Shikharchandji Baid, Changaitola

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrI zrAgamaprakAzana samiti, byAvara arthasahayogI sadasyoM kI zubha nAmAvalI
mahAstambha 1. zrI seTha mohanamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 2. zrI gulAbacandajI
mAMgIlAlajI surANA, sikandarAbAda saMrakSaka 2. 1. zrI biradIcaMdajI
prakAzacaMdajI talesarA, pAlI zrI jJAnarAjajI kevalacandajI mUthA, pAlI 3. zrI
premarAjajI jatanarAjajI mehatA, mer3atA siTI 4. zrI za0 jar3AvamalajI
mANakacandajI betAlA, bAgalakoTa 3. zrI pukharAjajI zizodiyA, byAvara 4. zrI
sAyaramalajI jeThamalajI corar3iyA, baiMgalora 5. zrI premarAjajI bhaMvaralAlajI
zrIzrImAla, durga 6. zrI esa. kizana candajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 7. zrI
kaMvaralAlajI baitAlA, gohATI 8. zrI seTha khIMvarAjajI corar3iyA madrAsa 9. zrI
gumAnamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 10. zrI esa. bAdalacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa
11. zrI je. dulIcandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 12. zrI esa. ratanacandajI corar3iyA,
madrAsa 13. zrI je. annarAjajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 14. zrI esa. sAyaracandajI
corar3iyA, madrAsa 15. zrI Ara. zAntilAlajI uttamacandajI coraDiyA, madrAsa 16:
zrI siremalajI - hIrAcandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 13. 17. zrI je. hukmIcandajI
corar3iyA, madrAsa 14. stambha sadasya 1. zrI agaracandajI phatecandajI pArakha,
jodhapura 2. zrI jasarAjajI gaNezamalajI saMcetI, jodhapura 3. zrI
tilokacaMdajI, sAgaramalajI saMcetI, madrAsa, 4. zrI pUsAlAlajI kisturacaMdajI
surANA, kaTaMgI 5. zrI Ara. prasannacandajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 6. zrI
dIpacandajI, corar3iyA, madrAsa 7. zrI mUlacandajI corar3iyA, kaTaMgI 8 zrI
varddhamAna iNDasTrIja, kAnapura 9. zrI mAMgIlAlajI mizrIlAlajI saMcetI, durga
5. zrI hIrAlAlajI pannAlAlajI caupar3A, byAvara 6. zrI mohanalAlajI nemIcandajI
lalavANI, cAMgATolA 7. zrI dIpacaMdajI candanamalajI corar3iyA, madrAsa 8. zrI
pannAlAlajI bhAgacandajI botharA, cAMgA - TIlA 9. zrImatI sikuvara bAI
dharmapatnI sva. zrI suganacandajI jhAmar3a, madurAntakam 10. zrI bastImalajI
mohanalAlajI boharA ( K. G. F.) jAr3ana 11. zrI thAnacandajI mehatA, jodhapura
12. zrI bhairudAnajI lAbhacandajI surANA, nAgaura zrI khUbacandajI gAdiyA,
byAvara zrI mizrIlAlajI dhanarAjajI vinAyakiyA 15. 16 byAvara zrI indracandajI
baida, rAjanAMdagAMva zrI rAvatamalajI bhIkamacandajI pagAriyA, bAlAghATa 17.
zrI gaNezamalajI dharmIcandajI kAMkariyA, TaMgalA 18. zrI suganacandajI
bokar3iyA, indaura 19. zrI harakacandajI sAgaramalajI betAlA, indaura 20. zrI
raghunAthamalajI likhamIcandajI lor3hA, cAMgATolA 21. zrI siddhakaraNajI
zikharacandajI baida, cAMgATolA

Page #564 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Members List**  **22. Shri Sagarmalji Nortamlaji Pincha, Madras** **8. Shri
Phoolchandji Gautamchandji Kanted, Pali** **23. Shri Mohanrajji Mukanchandji
Baliya, Ahmedabad** **9. Shri K. Pukharajji Bafna, Madras** **10. Shri Rooprajji
Jodhrajji Mootha, Delhi** **24. Shri Keshrimalji Janvarilaji Telesara, Pali**
**11. Shri Mohanlalji Mangalchandji Pagaria, Raipur** **25. Shri Ratanchandji
Uttamchandji Modi, Beawar** **12. Shri Nathmalji Mohanlalji Luniya, Chandawal**
**26. Shri Dharmichadji Bhagchandji Bohra, Jhutha** **13. Shri Bhanvarlalji
Gautamchandji Pagaria, Dondi Lohara Kushalpura** **27. Shri Chhogmalji Hemrajji
Lodha, Bellary** **14. Shri Uttamchandji Mangilalji, Jodhpur** **28. Shri
Gunachandji Dalichandji Kataria, Bellary** **15. Shri Moolchandji Parkh,
Jodhpur** **29. Shri Moolchandji Sujanmalji Sancheti, Jodhpur** **16. Shri
Sumermalji Medtiya, Jodhpur** **30. Shri C. Amarchandji Bothra, Madras** **17.
Shri Ganeshmalji Nemichandji Tantia, Jodhpur** **31. Shri Bhanvarlalji
Moolchandji Surana, Madras** **18. Shri Udayrajji Pukharajji Sancheti, Jodhpur**
**32. Shri Badalchandji Jugrajji Mehta, Indore** **19. Shri Badarmalji
Pukharajji Bant, Kanpur** **33. Shri Lalchandji Mohanlalji Kothari, Gothan**
**20. Smt. Sundarbai Gothi w/o Shri Tarachandji Gothi, Jodhpur** **34. Shri
Hiralalji Pannalalji Chopra, Ajmer** **21. Shri Raychandji Mohanlalji, Jodhpur**
**35. Shri Mohanlalji Parsamalji Pagaria, Bangalore** **22. Shri Ghevarchandji
Rooprajji, Jodhpur** **36. Shri Bhanvarimalji Chordia, Madras** **23. Shri
Bhanvarlalji Manakchandji Surana, Madras** **37. Shri Bhanvarlalji Gotho,
Madras** **24. Shri Janvarilaji Amarchandji Kothari, Beawar** **38. Shri
Jalmachandji Rikhabchandji Bafna, Agra** **25. Shri Manakchandji Kishnalalji,
Medta City** **39. Shri Ghevarchandji Pukharajji Bhurt, Guwahati** **26. Shri
Mohanlalji Gulabchandji Chatar, Beawar** **40. Shri Jabarchandji Gelda, Madras**
**27. Shri Jasrajji Janvarilaji Dhariawal, Jodhpur** **41. Shri Jadavmalji
Suganchandji, Madras** **28. Shri Mohanlalji Champalalji Gothi, Jodhpur** **42.
Shri Pukharajji Vijayrajji, Madras** **29. Shri Nemichandji Dakalia Mehta,
Jodhpur** **43. Shri Chenmalji Surana Trust, Madras** **30. Shri Tarachandji
Kevalchandji Karnavat, Jodhpur** **44. Shri Loon Karanji Rikhabchandji Lodha,
Madras** **31. Shri Asumal & Co., Jodhpur** **45. Shri Surajmalji Sajjanrajji
Mehta, Koppal** **32. Shri Pukharajji Lodha, Jodhpur**  **Associate Members**
**1. Shri Devkaranji Shrichandji Dosa, Medta City** **2. Smt. Chagnibai
Vinaykia, Beawar** **3. Shri Poonamchandji Nahata, Jodhpur** **4. Shri
Bhanvarlalji Vijayrajji Kankaria, Villipuuram** **5. Shri Bhanvarlalji Chopra,
Beawar** **6. Shri Vijayrajji Ratnalalji Chatar, Beawar** **7. Shri B. Gajrajji
Bokdia, Salem** **33. Smt. Sugnibai W/o Shri Mishrilalji Sand, Jodhpur** **34.
Shri Bachharaji Surana, Jodhpur** **35. Shri Harkachandji Mehta, Jodhpur** **36.
Shri Devrajji Labhchandji Medtiya, Jodhpur** **37. Shri Kanakrajji Madanrajji
Golia, Jodhpur** **38. Shri Dhevarchandji Parsamalji Tantia, Jodhpur** **39.
Shri Mangilalji Chordia, Kuchera**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 l l s l llh sh [sadasya-nAmAvalI 22. zrI sAgaramalajI noratamalajI pIMcA,
madrAsa 8. zrI phUlacandajI gautamacandajI kAMTheDa, pAlI 23. zrI mohanarAjajI
mukanacandajI bAliyA, 9. zrI ke. pukharAjajI bAphaNA, madrAsa ahamadAbAda 10.
zrI rUparAjajI jodharAjajI mUthA, dillI 24. zrI kezarImalajI jaMvarIlAlajI
talesarA, pAlI 11. zrI mohanalAlajI maMgalacaMdajI pagAriyA, rAyapura 25. zrI
ratanacandajI uttamacandajI modI, byAvara 12. zrI nathamalajI mohanalAlajI
lUNiyA, caNDAvala 26. zrI dharmIcandajI bhAgacandajI boharA, jhUThA 13. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI gautamacandajI pagAriyA, 27. zrI chogamalajI hemarAjajI lor3hA
DoMDIlohArA kuzAlapurA 28. zrI guNacaMdajI dalIcaMdajI kaTAriyA, bellArI 14. zrI
uttamacaMdajI mAMgIlAlajI, jodhapura 29. zrI mUlacandajI sujAnamalajI saMcetI,
jodhapura 15. zrI mUlacandajI pArakha, jodhapura 30. zrI sI0 amaracandajI
botharA, madrAsa 16. zrI sumeramalajI mer3atiyA, jodhapura 31. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI mUlacaMdajI surANA, madrAsa 17. zrI gaNezamalajI nemIcandajI
TAMTiyA, jodhapura 32. zrI bAdalacaMdajI jugarAjajI mehatA, indaura 18. zrI
udayarAjajI pukharAjajI saMcetI, jodhapara 33. zrI lAlacaMdajI mohanalAlajI
koThArI, goThana 19. zrI bAdaramalajI pukharAjajI baMTa, kAnapura 34. zrI
hIrAlAlajI pannAlAlajI caupar3A, ajamera 20. zrImatI sundarabAI goThI w/o zrI
tArAcaMdajI 35. zrI mohanalAlajI pArasamalajI pagAriyA, goThI, jodhapura
baiMgalora 21. zrI rAyacandajI mohanalAlajI, jodhapura 36. zrI bhaMvarImalajI
coraDiyA, madrAsa 22. zrI ghevaracandajI rUparAjajI, jodhapura 37. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI goTho, madrAsa 23. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI mANakacaMdajI surANA,
madrAsa 38. zrI jAlamacaMdajI rikhabacaMdajI bAphanA, AgarA 24. zrI
jaMvarIlAlajI amaracandajI koThArI. byAvara 39. zrI ghevaracaMdajI pukharAjajI
bhuraTa, gohaattii| 25. zrI mANakacandajI kizanalAlajI, mer3atAsiTI 40. zrI
jabaracandajI gelar3A, madrAsa 26. zrI mohanalAlajI gulAbacandajI catara,
byAvara 41. zrI jar3AvamalajI suganacandajI, madrAsa 27. zrI jasarAjajI
jaMvarIlAlajI dhArIvAla, jodhapura 42. zrI pukharAjajI vijayarAjajI, madrAsa 28.
zrI mohanalAlajI campAlAlajI goThI, jodhapura 43. zrI cenamalajI surANA TrasTa,
madrAsa  /  29. zrI nemIcaMdajI DAkaliyA mehatA, jodhapura 44. zrI lUNakaraNajI
rikhabacaMdajI lor3hA, madrAsa 30. zrI tArAcaMdajI kevalacaMdajI karNAvaTa,
jodhapura 45. zrI sUrajamalajI sajjanarAjajI mahetA, koppala 31. zrI AsUmala
eNDa kaM0, jodhapura 32. zrI pukharAjajI loDhA, jodhapura sahayogI sadasya 33.
zrImatI suganIbAI W/o zrI mizrIlAlajI 1. zrI devakaraNajI zrIcandajI DosA,
mer3atAsiTI sAMDa, jodhapura 2. zrImatI chaganIbAI vinAyakiyA, byAvara 34. zrI
baccharAjI surANA, jodhapura 3. zrI pUnamacandajI nAhaTA, jodhapura 35. zrI
harakacandajI mehatA, jodhapura 4. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI vijayarAjajI kAMkariyA,
36. zrI devarAjajI lAbhacaMdajI mer3atiyA, jodhapura villIpuram 37. zrI
kanakarAjajI madanarAjajI goliyA, 5. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI caupar3A, byAvara
jodhapura 6. zrI vijayarAjajI ratanalAlajI catara, byAvara 38. zrI
dhevaracandajI pArasamalajI TAMTiyA, jodhapura 7. zrI bI. gajarAjajI bokaDiyA,
selama 39. zrI mAMgIlAlajI corar3iyA, kucerA WWW

Page #565 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[Member List] 40. Shri Sardarmalji Surana, Bhilai 41. Shri Shrokchandji Hemrajji
Soni, Durg 42. Shri Surajkaranji Surana, Madras 43. Shri Ghisulalji Lalchandji
Parkh, Durg 44. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, (Jain Transport Co.) Jodhpur 45. Shri
Champalalji Saklecha, Jalna 46. Shri Premrajji Mithalalji Kamdar, Bangalore 47.
Shri Bhanwarlalji Mutha & Sons, Jaipur 48. Shri Lalchandji Motilalji Gadiya,
Bangalore 49. Shri Bhanwarlalji Navratnamalji Sankhla, Mettupalayam 50. Shri
Pukharajji Chhallani, Karanguli 51. Shri Shraskaranji Jasrajji Parkh, Durg 52.
Shri Ganeshmalji Hemrajji Soni, Bhilai 53. Shri Amritrajji Jaswantrajji Mehta,
Medtacity 54. Shri Ghevarchandji Kishormalji Parkh, Jodhpur 55. Shri Mangilalji
Rekhchandji Parkh, Jodhpur 56. Shri Munnilalji Mulchandji Gulechha, Jodhpur 57.
Shri Ratnalalji Lakpatrajji, Jodhpur 58. Shri Jivrajji Parsamalji Kothari, Medta
City 59. Shri Bhanwarlalji Rikhabchandji Nahata, Nagaur 60. Shri Mangilalji
Prakashchandji Runwal, Mysore 61. Shri Pukharajji Bohra, Pipaliya Kalan 62. Shri
Harkachandji Jugrajji Bafna, Bangalore 63. Shri Chandanmalji Premchandji Modi,
Bhilai 64. Shri Bhinvrajji Baghmar, Kuchera 65. Shri Tilokchandji Premprakashji,
Ajmer 66. Shri Vijaylalji Premchandji Gulechha, Rajnandgaon 67. Shri Ravatmalji
Chajed, Bhilai 68. Shri Bhanwarlalji Dungarmalji Kankaria, Bhilai  69. Shri
Hiralalji Hastimalji Deshlhara, Bhilai 70. Shri Vardhaman Sthanakwasi Jain
Shravak Sangh, Dalli-Rajhara 71. Shri Champalalji Budhrajji Bafna, Byawar 72.
Shri Gangaramji Indrachandji Bohra, Kuchera 73. Shri Fatehrajji Nemichandji
Karnavat, Calcutta 74. Shri Balchandji Thanchandji Bharat, Calcutta 75. Shri
Sampatrajji Kataria, Jodhpur 76. Shri Janvarilalji Shanti Lalji Surana, Bolaram
77. Shri Kanmalji Kothari, Dadia 78. Shri Pannalalji Motilalji Surana, Pali 79.
Shri Manakchandji Ratnalalji Munot, Tangla 80. Shri Chimman Singhji Mohansinghji
Lodha, Byawar 81. Shri Riddhakaranji Ravatmalji Bhurt, Guwahati 82. Shri
Parsamalji Mahavirchandji Bafna, Goth 83. Shri Fakirchandji Kamalchandji
Shrisrimal, Kuchera 84. Shri Mangilalji Madanlalji Chordia, Bhairund 85. Shri
Sohनलालजी लूणकरणजी सुराणा, कुचेरा 86. Shri Ghisulalji, Parsamalji, Janvarilalji
Kothari, Gothan 87. Shri Sardarmalji & Company, Jodhpur 88. Shri Champalalji
Hiralalji Bagrecha, Jodhpur 86. Shri Dhukharajji Kataria, Jodhpur 90. Shri
Indrachandji Mukanchandji, Indore 91. Shri Bhanwarlalji Bafna, Indore 92. Shri
Jethmalji Modi, Indore 93. Shri Balchandji Amarchandji Modi, Byawar 94. Shri
Kundanmalji Parsamalji Bhanda, Ri Bangalore 65. Smt. Kamalakunwar Lalwani, wife
of Late Shri Parsamalji Lalwani, Gothan 96. Shri Shrakhechandji Lunakaranji
Bhandari, Calcutta 97. Shri Suganchandji Sancheti, Rajnandgaon

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sadasya- nAmAvalI ] 40. zrI saradAramalajI surANA, bhilAI 41. zrI zrokacaMdajI
hemarAjajI sonI, durgaM 42. zrI sUrajakaraNajI surANA, madrAsa 43. zrI
ghIsUlAlajI lAlacaMdajI pArakha, durga 44. zrI pukharAjajI boharA, (jaina
TrAnsaporTa kaM.) jodhapura 45. zrI campAlAlajI sakalecA, jAlanA 46. zrI
premarAjajI mIThAlAlajI kAmadAra, baiMgalora 47. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI muthA eNDa
sansa, jayapura 48. zrI lAlacaMdajI motIlAlajI gAdiyA, beMgalora 49. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI navaratnamalajI sAMkhalA, meTTUpAlayama 50. zrI pukharAjajI
challANI, karaNagullI 51. zrI zrAsakaraNajI jasarAjajI pArakha, durga 52. zrI
gaNezamalajI hemarAjajI sonI, bhilAI 53. zrI amRtarAjajI jasavantarAjajI mehatA,
mer3atAsiTI 54. zrI ghevaracaMdajI kizoramalajI pArakha, jodhapura 55. zrI
mAMgIlAlajI rekhacaMdajI pArakha, jodhapura 56. zrI munnIlAlajI mUlacaMdajI
gulecchA, jodhapura 57. zrI ratanalAlajI lakhapatarAjajI, jodhapura 58. zrI
jIvarAjajI pArasamalajI koThArI, mer3atA siTI 59. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI
rikhabacaMdajI nAhaTA, nAgaura 60. zrI mAMgIlAlajI prakAzacandajI rUNavAla,
maisUra 61. zrI pukharAjajI boharA, pIpaliyA kalAM 62. zrI harakacaMdajI
jugarAjajI bAphanA, beMgalora 63. zrI candanamalajI premacaMdajo modI, bhilAI
64. zrI bhIMvarAjajI bAghamAra, kucerA 65. zrI tilokacaMdajI premaprakAzajI,
ajamera 66. zrI vijayalAlajI premacaMdajI gulecchA, rAjanAMdagAMva 67. zrI
rAvatamalajI chAjer3a, bhilAI 68. zrI bhaMvaralAlajI DUMgaramalajI kAMkariyA,
bhilAI 69. zrI hIrAlAlajI hastImalajI dezalaharA, bhilAI 70. zrI varddhamAna
sthAnakavAsI jaina zrAvakasaMgha, dallI-rAjaharA 71. zrI campAlAlajI
buddharAjajI bAphaNA, byAvara 72. zrI gaMgArAmajI indracaMdajI boharA, kucerA
73. zrI phateharAjajI nemIcaMdajI karNAvaTa, kalakattA 74. zrI bAlacaMdajI
thAnacandajI bharaTa, kalakattA 75. zrI sampatarAjajI kaTAriyA, jodhapura 76.
zrI jaMvarIlAlajI zAMtilAlajI surANA, bolArama 77. zrI kAnamalajI koThArI,
dAdiyA 78. zrI pannAlAlajI motIlAlajI surANA, pAlI 79. zrI mANakacaMdajI
ratanalAlajI muNota, TaMgalA 80. zrI cimmanasiMhajI mohanasiMhajI loDhA, byAvara
81. zrI riddhakaraNajI rAvatamalajI bhuraTa, gauhATI 82. zrI pArasamalajI
mahAvIracaMdajI bAphanA, goTha 83. zrI phakIracaMdajI kamalacaMdajI zrIzrImAla,
kucerA 84. zrI mAMgIlAlajI madanalAlajI corar3iyA, bhairUMda 85. zrI
sohanalAlajI lUNakaraNajI surANA, kucerA 86. zrI ghIsUlAlajI, pArasamalajI,
jaMvarIlAlajI koThArI, goThana 87. zrI saradAramalajI eNDa kampanI, jodhapura
88. zrI campAlAlajI hIrAlAlajI bAgarecA, jodhapura 86. zrI dhukharAjajI
kaTAriyA, jodhapura 90. zrI indracandajI mukanacandajI, indaura 91. zrI
bhaMvaralAlajI bAphaNA, indaura 92. zrI jeThamalajI modI, indaura 93. zrI
bAlacandajI amaracandajI modI, byAvara 94. zrI kundanamalajI pArasamalajI
bhaMDA, rI beMgalora 65. zrImatI kamalAkaMvara lalavANI dharmapatnI zrI sva.
pArasamalajI lalavANI, goThana 96. zrI zrakhecaMdajI lUNakaraNajI bhaNDArI,
kalakattA 97. zrI suganacandajI saMcetI, rAjanAMdagA~va

Page #566 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Agam Prakashan Samiti, Byawar published Agam-Sutras) Agam-Sutras Translator-
Editor Acharaang Sutra [Two Parts] Shri Chand Surana 'Saras' Upasakadashaang
Sutra Dr. Chaganlal Shastri (M.A., Ph.D.) Jnatadharmakathaang Sutra Pt.
Shobhachand Bharill Antakriddashaang Sutra Sadhvi Divyaprabha (M.A., Ph.D.)
Anuttarovvaiya Sutra Sadhvi Muktiprabha (M.A., Ph.D.) Staanaang Sutra Pt.
Hiralal Shastri Samavaayaang Sutra Pt. Hiralal Shastri Sutrakrtaang Sutra Shri
Chand Surana 'Saras' Vipaak Sutra Pt. Roshanlal Shastri Pt. Shobhachand Bharill
Nandi Sutra Mahasati Umravkunwarji M. Sa. 'Archana' Kamala Jain 'Gigi' M.A.
Aupapattik Sutra Dr. Chaganlal Shastri Vyakhya Prajnapti Sutra [Four Parts] Shri
Amarmuni Rajprasniya Sutra Vaanibhushan Ratnamuni, Devkumar Jain Prajnapana
Sutra [Three Parts] Jainbhushan Gyanmuni Prashnavyakaran Sutra Muni Praveen
Rishi Pt. Shobhachand Bharill Uttaradhyayanasutra Shri Rajendramuni Shastri
Nirayavali Ka Sutra Shri Devkumar Jain Dashavaikalik Sutra Mahasati Pushpavati
Aavashyak Sutra Mahasati Suprabha Sudha' M.A., Ph.D. Jambudvipa Prajnapti Sutra
Dr. Chaganlal Shastri Anuyogdvaar Sutra Upadhyay Shri Kevalmuni, Ed. Devkumar
Jain Suryachandra Prajnapti Sutra Muni Shri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' Jivajivabhigam
Sutra [Two Parts] Shri Rajendramuni Nishita Sutra Munishri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal'
Triini Chhed Sutraani Munishri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' (Dasha Shruta Skandha,
Brihat Kalpa Sutra-Vyavahar Sutra) For special information, contact Shri Agam
Prakashan Samiti Shri Braj-Madhukar Smriti Bhavan, Pipaliya Bazaar,
Byawar-305601 Phone: 250087 *

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
Agama prakAzana samiti. byAvara dvArA prakAzita Agama-sUtra ) Agama-sUtra
anuvAdaka-sampAdaka AcArAMgasUtra [ do bhAga] zrIcanda surANA'sarasa'
upAsakadazAMgasUtra DaoN. chaganalAla zAstrI (ema.e., pI-eca. DI.)
jJAtAdharmakathAMgasUtra paM. zobhAcandra bhArilla antakRddazAMgasUtra sAdhvI
divyaprabhA (ema.e., pI-eca. DI.) anuttarovavAiyasUtra sAdhvI muktiprabhA
(ema.e., pI-eca. DI.) sthAnAMgasUtra paM. hIrAlAla zAstrI samavAyAMgasUtra paM.
hIrAlAla zAstrI sUtrakRtAMgasUtra zrIcanda surANA'sarasa' vipAkasUtra paM.
rozanalAla zAstrI paM.zobhAcandra bhArilla nandIsUtra mahAsatI umarAvakuMvarajI
ma. sA. 'arcanA' kamalA jaina 'jIjI' ema.e. aupapAtikasUtra DaoN.chaganalAla
zAstrI vyAkhyAprajJaptisUtra [cAra bhAga] zrI amaramuni rAjapraznIyasUtra
vANIbhUSaNa ratanamuni, devakumAra jaina prajJApanAsUtra [ tIna bhAga]
jainabhUSaNa jJAnamuni praznavyAkaraNasUtra muni pravINaRSi paM.zobhAcandra
bhArilla uttarAdhyayanasUtra zrI rAjendramuni zAstrI nirayAvalikAsUtra zrI
devakumAra jaina dazavaikAlikasUtra mahAsatI puSpavatI AvazyakasUtra mahAsatI
suprabhA sudhA' ema.e., pI-eca. DI. jambUdvIpaprajJaptisUtra DaoN. chaganalAla
zAstrI anuyogadvArasUtra upAdhyAya zrI kevalamuni, saM. devakumAra jaina
sUryacandraprajJaptisUtra muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI'kamala' jIvAjIvAbhigamasUtra [
do bhAga] zrI rAjendramuni nizIthasUtra munizrI kanhaiyAlAlajI'kamala'
trINichedasUtrANi munizrI kanhaiyAlAlajI 'kamala' (dazAzrutaskandha,
bRhatkalpasUtra-vyavahArasUtra) vizeSa jAnakArI ke liye samparkasUtra zrI Agama
prakAzana samiti zrI braja-madhukara smRti bhavana, pIpaliyA bAjAra,
byAvara-305601 phona : 250087 *

Page #567 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pragam Prakasana Samiti, Byawar, has published the following Agam-Sutras to
date:  **Translator-Editor**  * **Pracharang Sutra (Two Parts)** - Shri Chand
Surana 'Saras' * **Upasakadasang Sutra** - Dr. Chaganlal Shastri (M.A., Ph.D.) *
**Jnatadharmakathang Sutra** - Pt. Shobhachand Bharill * **Antakrid Dasang
Sutra** - Sadhvi Divyaprabha (M.A., Ph.D.) * **Anuttarovvaiya Sutra** - Sadhvi
Muktiprabha (M.A., Ph.D.) * **Sthanang Sutra** - Pt. Hiralal Shastri *
**Samavayang Sutra** - Pt. Hiralal Shastri * **Sutrakritang Sutra** - Shri Chand
Surana 'Saras' * **Vipak Sutra** - Translated by Pt. Roshanlal Shastri, Edited
by Pt. Shobhachand Bharill * **Nandi Sutra** - Translated by Sadhvi Umravkunwar
'Prachanna', Edited by Kamala Jain 'Gigi' M.A. * **Propapattik Sutra** - Dr.
Chaganlal Shastri * **Vyakhyaprajnapti Sutra (Four Parts)** - Shri Amarmuni *
**Rajprasniya Sutra** - Vani Bhushan Ratnamuni, Edited by Devkumar Jain *
**Prajnapan Sutra (Three Parts)** - Jain Bhushan Gyanmuni * **Prashnavyakaran
Sutra** - Translated by Muni Pravin Rishi, Edited by Pt. Shobhachand Bharill *
**Uttaradhyayanasutra** - Shri Rajendramuni Shastri * **Niryaavali Kasutra** -
Shri Devkumar Jain * **Dashakalik Sutra** - Mahasati Pushpavati * **Aavashyak
Sutra** - Mahasati Suprabha * **Jambudeep Prajnapti Sutra** - Dr. Chaganlal
Shastri * **Anuyogdvaar Sutra** - Upadhyay Shri Kevalmuni, Edited by Devkumar
Jain * **Surya Prajnapti, Chandra Prajnapti Sutra** - Edited by Muni Shri
Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' * **Jivajivaabhigam Sutra (First Part)** - Shri
Rajendramuni * **Nishita Sutra** - Munishri Kanhaiyalalji 'Kamal' * **Shighra
Prakasya** - Shri Tilakmuni * **Jivajivaabhigam Sutra (Second Part)** -   **For
more information on the Shri Niched Sutra, please contact:**  Shri Agam
Prakasana Samiti Shri Braj-Madhukar Smriti Bhavan, Peepaliya Bazaar,
Byawar-305901

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
prAgamaprakAzana samiti, byAvara dvArA adyAvadhi prakAzita Agama-sUtrA nAma
anuvAdaka-sampAdaka prAcArAMgasUtra [do bhAga] zrIcanda surAnA 'sarasa'
upAsakadazAMgasUtra DaoN. chaganalAla zAstrI (ema.e., pI-eca. DI.)
jJAtAdharmakathAMgasUtra paM. zobhAcandra bhArilla antakRddazAMgasUtra sAdhvI
divyaprabhA (ema.e., pI-eca.DI.) anuttarovavAiyasUtra sAdhvI muktiprabhA
(ema.e., pI-eca.DI.) sthAnAMgasUtra paM. hIrAlAla zAstrI samavAyAMgasUtra paM.
hIrAlAla zAstrI sUtrakRtAMgasUtra zrIcanda surAnA 'sarasa' vipAkasUtra anu. paM.
rozanalAla zAstrI sampA.paM. zobhAcandra bhArilla nandIsUtra anu. sAdhvI
umarAvakuMvara 'pracaMnA' sampA. kamalA jaina 'jIjI' ema. e. propapAtikasUtra
DaoN. chaganalAla zAstrI vyAkhyAprajJaptisUtra [cAra bhAga] zrI amaramuni
rAjapraznIyasUtra vANIbhUSaNa ratanamuni, saM. devakumAra jaina prajJApanAsUtra
[tIna bhAga] jainabhUSaNa jJAnamuni praznavyAkaraNasUtra anu. muni pravINaRSi
sampA. paM. zobhAcandra bhArilla uttarAdhyayanasUtra zrI rAjendramuni zAstrI
nirayAvalikAsUtra zrI devakumAra jaina dazavakAlikasUtra mahAsatI puSpavatI
AvazyakasUtra mahAsatI suprabhA jambUdvIpaprajJaptisUtra DaoN. chaganalAla
zAstrI anuyogadvArasUtra upAdhyAya zrI kevalamuni, saM. devakumAra jaina
sUryaprajJapti, candraprajJaptisUtra sampA. muni zrI kanhaiyAlAlajI 'kamala'
jIvAjIvAbhigamasUtra [pra. bhAga] zrI rAjendramuni nizIthasUtra munizrI
kanhaiyAlAlajI 'kamala' zIghra prakAzya zrI tilokamuni jIvAjIvAbhigamasUtra
[dvi. bhA.] zrINichedasUtrANi vizeSa jAnakArI ke liye samparkasUtra zrI Agama
prakAzana samiti zrI braja-madhukara smRti bhavana, pIpaliyA bAjAra,
byAvara-305901

