Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/001822/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Padmapurana Acharya Ravishena [First Part]  || The entire secret of the path of
knowledge and liberation is revealed. The divine Kanya (Goddess) Vasu, the
destroyer of the enemy, is worshipped. || 73 || Thus ends the twelve names of
the Acharya Vishnu. || 12 ||  Then, crossing over, the highly respected ones,
distressed by the sweet and bitter experiences, preceded by thousands of
followers, approached the abode of Prabhavana. They stayed there as per their
liking. || 2 ||  (There) the thousands of weeping ones, whose faces were not
anointed, showed their inability. But the mother (Goddess) did not accept it.
Quickly she became pleased. || 4 ||  On being told this by the mouths of the
Lokapalas (guardians of the world), they were amazed! The Lokapalas laughed
heartily and said, "We shall release you from this bondage. ||   For whom the
lord of the gods, the pure one, free from thorns, has come from the city of the
gods, how can this worldly lord obstruct him? Filled with reverence, they said,
"We shall release you from this, for there is no other way." || 11 ||  Seeing
this, the Lokpala did not do anything. || 12 ||  Then, being humble, he said to
the cycle of transmigration, "Here the imperishable, nectar-like letters are not
more than that. How can the violation of the command be?" || 14 ||  "If the
gurus are not in the ultimate truth, then the one who is worthy of worship gives
me a seat. The ninefold vows are not to be abandoned. || 16 ||  My mind is
distressed. Who is my fourth born now? The best among the brothers, the best
among the brothers, the best among the brothers." || 20 ||  The Lokapalas were
just as they were before. "Is there anything more than this in your
discernment?" || 21 ||  "Let this one be tired in Varanasi, where the land is
made sacred." Then the sweet words came out. "Certainly, the birth is new. The
best among the devotees, may your desire be fulfilled. Not at all, there is no
defect in you. Equal to the capable one. The one who creates fame, the two
faults, the two faults, what is your choice?" || 22 ||  But the birth on the
earth cannot be abandoned with pride. A

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANa AcArya raviSeNa [ prathama bhAga | ||jnyaanaavyaaj gatinikhila
marmajanitaM  /  visu kAnyA maM gAra virucakara yAta murutaM  // 73 //  ityAderi
viSaNAcArya nAma dvAdayaH  // 12 //  tataH trAkramya saMmatAH svAduiHkha
samAkulAH puraskRtisahakhAH prAbhArAvaNa me tAmyacaritAdatte  /  vAsaneSu yatheo
citN|| 2 //  thagauravanece sahazrArodanA) nanAMjita stAta yAtra mattaM sAmarthA
darzitaMtra yA  /  para bAbI va mA dahi  /  mamI raMtena shiighraaH||4|| ityukte
lokapAlAnAM vadanenyaH mamuLetaH! lokapAlAno vaa|| vihaspA hAsitAMtaka: mameyo
stivimuMcA mi|| yena nAthaM divoka saMta sahiHpurAtpAvakiH jUtivAparAga zuciyAmA
kaMTakavarjitA mI kimmaTmasya lokeza kI te madha manoharaiH  /  trItAH prakura
nAyu kroyaditi itimAdarAH  /  vimuMcAmitataH trA kutohi ktiranyathA  //  11 //
ityutkA vIkSamANe) so -tAyapAli nA kare ||12|| tato vinayanatraH sansAramavocata
nAhada yahA rilpAkSarantivajirAmRta namadhikaM vA tataH kurthI  /
kathamAjJAvilaMghanaM  //  14 //  guraraH paramArthena yadi nasyurbha vaahaaH||
pradhastate vAnasyatpUjyo dadAti mamatrAsanaM  //  navadvidhaniyogA nona
padeyuSya varjitA  //  16 //  tudghAra ciMta yate mama ca prayetrA ko mama jAtA
turIyaH sAMprate valIkarAma varIyaH saprita velI e 7) lokapAlAstathaivA spAta
rAjya yathA purA  //  tatodhikaM vA kAnu"vivekena ki mAvayoH  //  2 //  matAna :
zAhicA rakSAle kAra kAra  //  21  //  zrAmyatAmisvAnuM dAdatha vAraghanapure
yatratakAbhUmi mADIkRta maansH|| vacana mahArastato pimadhura vaca:23 nUnaM
smutpttiH|| maja nAnA navA prabhuprAnnompA binayo yaMta beottamaH kAmaste
vAdhyatAM gtH|| na bato yAyokAralIrutaiau  //  samAnatA samarthena  /  kuMda
nirmAta kIrtinA doSANAM se javAMkA yAya hAte vathika kuprakarikarAkarau kurutaH
kiMnate cunau||2|| kiMtu mAnena zakyA tyaktuM janma vasuMdharA sahida A na
sampAdana-anuvAda DaoN0 pannAlAla jaina sAhityAcArya

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Jain tradition, Maryadapurushotam Ram is considered one of the 63 Shalaka
Purushas. One of his names was also Padma. This name is more prevalent in Jain
Puranas and Charitakavyas. Jain poets have presented Ram's character in various
languages like Prakrit, Sanskrit, Apabhramsha, etc., under names like
Paumachariyam, Paumachariyu, Padma Purana, Padmacharit, etc. Acharya Ravishena's
(7th century) present work, Padma Purana, is considered one of the most
excellent character-based epics in Sanskrit. Even though it is a Purana, this
work is so extraordinary in terms of poetic art, psychoanalysis, character
portrayal, etc., that it cannot be compared to any other Purana Kavya. The
poetic beauty in it is so profound that this poetic stream, emanating from the
mental snow-capped mountains as the poet's inner voice, seems to be the
Mandakini itself. From the perspective of subject matter, the poet has depicted
the Vidhyadharaloka, Anjana-Pavananjay, Hanuman, Sukoshal, etc., along with the
main plot, which has increased the interest of the work so much that one does
not feel like stopping after starting to read it once. Edited by Purana-paragami
Dr. (Pan.) Pannalal Jain Sahityacharya with a preface, appendix, etc., and
translated into Hindi, this work has been published in three volumes by
Bharatiya Gyanpith. This is another new edition of the work, keeping in mind the
expectation and need of scholars, researchers, and self-study enthusiasts.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANa jaina paramparA meM maryAdApuruSottama rAma kI mAnyatA treSaTha
zalAkApuruSoM meM hai| unakA eka nAma padma bhI thaa| jaina-purANoM evaM
caritakAvyoM meM yahI nAma adhika pracalita rahA hai| jaina kAvyakAroM ne rAma
kA caritra paumacariyaM, paumacariu, padmapurANa, padmacarita Adi aneka nAmoM se
prAkRta, saMskRta, apabhraMza Adi bhASAoM meM prastuta kiyA hai| AcArya raviSeNa
(sAtavIM zatI) kA prastuta grantha padmapurANa saMskRta ke sarvotkRSTa
caritapradhAna mahAkAvyoM meM parigaNita hai| purANa hokara bhI kAvyakalA,
manovizleSaNa, caritracitraNa Adi meM yaha kAvya itanA adbhuta hai ki isakI
tulanA kisI anya purANakAvya se nahIM kI jA sakatI hai| kAvya-lAlitya isameM
itanA hai ki kavi kI antarvANI ke rUpa meM mAnasa-himakandarA se niHsRta yaha
kAvyadhArA mAno sAkSAt mandAkinI hI bana gayI hai| viSayavastu kI dRSTi se kavi
ne mukhya kathAnaka ke sAtha-sAtha prasaMgavaza vidyAdharaloka, aMjanA-
pavanaMjaya, hanumAna, sukozala Adi kA jo citraNa kiyA hai, usase grantha kI
rocakatA itanI bar3ha gayI ki ise eka bAra par3hanA Arambha kara bIca meM
chor3ane kI icchA hI nahIM hotii| purANapAragAmI DaoN. (paM.) pannAlAla jaina
sAhityAcArya dvArA prastAvanA, pariziSTa Adi ke sAtha sampAdita aura hindI meM
anUdita hokara yaha grantha bhAratIya jJAnapITha se tIna bhAgoM meM prakAzita
hai| vidvAnoM, zodhArthiyoM aura svAdhyAya-premiyoM kI apekSA aura AvazyakatA ko
dekhate hue prastuta hai grantha kA yaha eka aura nayA sNskrnn| Ja Fortivate are
sorel Use Only

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Murtidevi Jain Granyamala: Sanskrit Granyanka-1 - Srimad Ravishenaacharya
Pranitam Padma Puranam [Padmacharitam] Prathamo Bhaga Hindi Anuvaad, Prastavana
Tatha Shlokanukramanika Sahit Sampadan-Anuvaad Dr. Pannalal Jain, Sahityacharya
BLMERO STRILIATig THosie Bharatiya Gyanapith Aathvaan Sankaran: 2000  Muly: 180
Ru.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 mUrtidevI jaina granyamAlA : saMskRta granyAMka-1 - zrImadraviSeNAcAryapraNItam
padmapurANam [padmacaritam ] prathamo bhAgaH hindI anuvAda, prastAvanA tathA
zlokAnukramaNikA sahita sampAdana-anuvAda DaoN. pannAlAla jaina, sAhityAcArya
BLMERO STRILIATig THosie bhAratIya jJAnapITha AThavA~ saMskaraNa : 2000 0 mUlya
: 180 ru.

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
ISBN 81-263-0507-X (Set) 81-263-0508-8 Bharatiya Jnanpith (Established: Falgun
Krishna 9; Veer Ni. San. 2470; Vikram San. 2000; 18 February 1944) Established
in memory of Punyashloka Mata Murtidevi by Sahu Shantiprasad Jain and supported
by his wife Smt. Rama Jain Murtidevi Jain Granthamala This Granthamala publishes
research-based editions and translations of Jain literature in various subjects
like Agamic, philosophical, mythological, literary, historical, etc. available
in ancient languages like Prakrit, Sanskrit, Apabhramsha, Hindi, Kannada, Tamil,
etc. along with their original texts and translations wherever possible.
Bibliographies of Jain libraries, collections of inscriptions, studies on art
and architecture by eminent scholars and public-welfare Jain literature are also
being published in this Granthamala.  Granthamala Editor (First Edition) Dr.
Hiralal Jain and Dr. A. N. Upadhye Publisher Bharatiya Jnanpith 18,
Institutional Area, Lodi Road, New Delhi-110003 Printer: Nagari Printers, Naveen
Shahdara, Delhi-110 032 Â© All rights reserved by Bharatiya Jnanpith

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ISBN 81-263-0507-X (Set ) 81-263-0508-8 bhAratIya jJAnapITha ( sthApanA :
phAlguna kRSNa 9; vIra ni. saM. 2470; vikrama saM. 2000; 18 pharavarI 1944 )
puNyazlokA mAtA mUrtidevI kI smRti meM sAhU zAntiprasAda jaina dvArA saMsthApita
evaM unakI dharmapatnI zrImatI ramA jaina dvArA saMpoSita mUrtidevI jaina
granthamAlA isa granthamAlA ke antargata prAkRta, saMskRta, apabhraMza, hindI,
kannar3a, tamila Adi prAcIna bhASAoM meM upalabdha Agamika, dArzanika,
paurANika, sAhityika, aitihAsika Adi vividha-viSayaka jaina sAhitya kA
anusandhAnapUrNa sampAdana tathA unakA mUla aura yathAsambhava anuvAda Adi ke
sAtha prakAzana ho rahA hai| jaina-bhaNDAroM kI granthasUciyA~, zilAlekha
saMgraha, kalA evaM sthApatya para viziSTa vidvAnoM ke adhyayana - grantha aura
lokahitakArI jaina - sAhitya grantha bhI isa granthamAlA meM prakAzita ho rahe
haiN| granthamAlA sampAdaka (prathama saMskaraNa) DaoN. hIrAlAla jaina evaM
DaoN. e. ena. upAdhye prakAzaka bhAratIya jJAnapITha 18, iMsTITyUzanala eriyA,
lodI roDa, nayI dillI-110003 mudraka : nAgarI priNTarsa, navIna zahAdarA, dillI-
110 032 (c) bhAratIya jJAnapITha dvArA sarvAdhikAra surakSita

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Moortidevi Jain Granthamala: Sanskrit Series-21  RAVISENÄCÄRYA'S PADMA PURÄá¹A
[PADMACARITA ] Vol. I Edited and Translated by Dr. Pannalal Jain Sahityacharya
BHARATIYA JNANPITH Eighth Edition: 2000 Price: Rs. 180

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Moortidevi Jain Granthamala: Sanskrit Series-21 RAVISENACARYA'S PADMA PURANA
[PADMACARITA ] Vol. I Edited and Translated by Dr. Pannalal Jain Sahityacharya
BHARATIYA JNANPITH Eighth Edition: 2000 Price: Rs. 180

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
ISBN 81-263-0507-X (Set) 81-263-0508-8 BHARATIYA JNANPITH (Founded on Phalguna
Krishna 9; Vira N. Sam. 2470; Vikrama Sam. 2000; 18th Feb. 1944) MOORTIDEVI JAIN
GRANTHAMALA FOUNDED BY Sahu Shanti Prasad Jain In memory of his illustrious
mother Smt. Moortidevi and promoted by his benevolent wife Smt. Rama Jain In
this Granthamala critically edited Jain agamic, philosophical, puranic,
literary, historical and other original texts in Prakrit, Sanskrit, Apabhramsha,
Hindi, Kannada, Tamil etc. are being published in original form with their
translations in modern languages. Also being published are catalogues of Jain
bhandaras, inscriptions, studies on art and architecture by competent scholars
and also popular Jain literature. General Editors : (First edition) Dr. Hiralal
Jain & Dr. A.N. Upadhye Published by Bharatiya Jnanpith 18, Institutional Area,
Lodi Road, New Delhi-110 003 Printed at : Nagri Printers, Naveen Shahdara,
Delhi-110 032 Â© All Rights Reserved by Bharatiya Jnanpith

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ISBN 81-263-0507-X (Set) 81-263-0508-8 BHARATIYA JNANPITH (Founded on Phalguna
Krishna 9; Vira N. Sam. 2470; Vikrama Sam. 2000; 18th Feb. 1944) MOORTIDEVI JAIN
GRANTHAMALA FOUNDED BY Sahu Shanti Prasad Jain In memory of his illustrious
mother Smt. Moortidevi and promoted by his benevolent wife Smt. Rama Jain In
this Granthamala critically edited jain agamic, philosophical, puranic,
literary, historical and other original texts in Prakrit, Sanskrit, Apabhramsha,
Hindi, Kannada, Tamil etc. are being published in original form with their
translations in modern languages. Also being published are catalogues of Jain
bhandaras, inscriptions, studies on art and architecture by competent scholars
and also popular Jain literature. General Editors : (First edition) Dr. Hiralal
Jain & Dr. A.N. Upadhye Published by Bharatiya Jnanpith 18, Institutional Area,
Lodi Road, New Delhi-110 003 Printed at : Nagri Printers, Naveen Shahdara,
Delhi-110 032 (c) All Rights Reserved by Bharatiya Jnanpith

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Editorial [First Edition]  The Ramayana has been the most ancient, extensive,
revered, and interesting subject in Indian literature. If we measure ancient
Sanskrit and Prakrit literature from this perspective, then perhaps more than
half of it will be found to be connected, originated, or inspired by this story
in some form. In the Vedic tradition, the Valmiki Ramayana is considered the
oldest epic. The most excellent epic of that tradition is Kalidasa's
'Raghuvamsa', whose subject is the same Rama story. And the two excellent plays
of the great poet Bhavabhuti, 'Mahavira Charita' and 'Uttara-Ramacharita', are
also entirely based on the Ramayana. Although this story is not found to be as
extensive in the Buddhist tradition, it is narrated in the famous 'Jataka'
section of Pali literature, called 'Dasaratha Jataka'. And in it, Lord Buddha
himself is considered to be Rama Pandit in a previous birth. This story is
concise and unique in its own way in some aspects. Its greatest peculiarity is
considering both Rama and Sita as brother and sister, and their marriage after
returning from exile. In the Shakya dynasty, from which Lord Buddha was born,
there are mentions of the practice of brother-sister marriage. This story was
also very popular among the mixed Semitic races. According to Jain Puranas, the
marriage of brother and sister in the Bhoga-bhumis has been a stable system.  In
the Jain tradition, Rama is counted among the sixty-three Shalaka-purushas as
Vasudeva, and great Puranas have been written about his life story. Rama's name
was also Padma, and this name is more commonly used for him in Jain Puranas.
The oldest Jain Purana related to the Ramayana is the Padma Purana written in
Sanskrit by Ravishena, the Pauma-Chariya written in Prakrit by Vimalsuri, and
the 'Pauma-Chariu' written in Apabhramsha by Swayambhu. This character is also
found in the Sanskrit Mahapurana by Jinasena Gunabhadra, the Apabhramsha
Mahapurana by Pushpadanta, and the Sanskrit Trishatishataka Shalaka Purusha
Charita by Hemachandra. From the perspective of the similarity and dissimilarity
of the story, we can divide this literature into two categories. One category
includes the works of Vimalsuri, Ravishena, Swayambhu, and Hemachandra, and the
other category includes the works of Gunabhadra and Pushpadanta. The biggest
peculiarity of the works of this second category compared to the first is that
they consider Rama's father Dasharatha to be the king of Banaras and describe
Sita as born from the womb of Mandodari, the queen of Ravana. Why this
difference in belief arose is a subject of study.  Regarding the two oldest and
greatest works related to the Ramayana, the Padma Purana written in Sanskrit by
Ravishenacharya and the Paumachariyam written in Prakrit by Vimalsuri, many
thought-provoking points arise. The plot of both is entirely the same. Not only
this, but by looking at both together, there is no doubt that they are merely
linguistic adaptations of each other. Who translated whose work could be known
from their chronological order of composition. But a difficulty has arisen in
this matter. Ravishena completed his work in 733 CE. This is mentioned in the
text itself, and no one doubts it. But the date of completion of his work, 60
CE, mentioned by Vimalsuri, has been accepted by Dr. Winternitz, but many other
scholars are not willing to accept it. German scholar Dr. Hermann Jacobi, who
first edited this text, expressed his doubt that the form of Prakrit language
that appears in this text and the use of certain special words in it, suggests
that this work is not from the first century CE but from the third or fourth
century CE. According to Dr. Wulner, this text indicates the Apabhramsha period
due to its word formation. Pandit Keshalal Dhruva has studied the various meters
used in this text, which also supports Dr. Wulner's opinion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pradhAna sampAdakIya [prathama saMskaraNa] rAmakathA bhAratIya sAhityakA sabase
adhika prAcIna, vyApaka, AdaraNIya aura rocaka viSaya rahA hai| yadi hama
prAcIna saMskRta prAkRta sAhityako isa dRSTise mApeM to sambhavataH Adhese
adhika sAhitya kisI na kisI rUpameM isI kathAse sambaddha, udbhUta yA prerita
pAyA jaayegaa| vaidika paramparAmeM vAlmIkikRta rAmAyaNa prAcInatama kAvya mAnA
jAtA hai| usa paramparAkA utkRSTatama mahAkAvya kAlidAsakRta 'raghuvaMza' hai
jisakA viSaya vahI rAma-kathA hai| aura mahAkavi bhavabhUtike do utkRSTa nATaka
'mahAvIra carita' aura 'uttara-rAmacarita' bhI pUrNataH rAmakathA viSayaka hI
haiN| bauddha-paramparAmeM yadyapi isa kathAkA utanA vistAra huA nahIM pAyA
jAtA, tathApi pAlI-sAhityake suprasiddha 'jAtaka' nAmaka vibhAga ke 'dasaratha
jAtaka' meM yaha kathA vaNita hai| aura usameM bhagavAna buddha kA hI janmAntara
rAma paNDitake rUpameM mAnA gayA hai| yaha kathA saMkSipta hai aura hata
aMzoMmeM apane DhaMgakI vilakSaNa bhI hai| isakI sabase baDI vilakSaNatA hai
rAma aura sItA donoMko bhAIbahana mAnanA va donoMkA vanavAsase lauTane ke pazcAt
vivAha honA  /  jisa vaMzameM bhagavAn buddha utpanna hue the, usa zAkya-
vaMzameM bhAI-bahanake vivAha hone kI prathAke ullekha milate haiM  /  mizra Adi
semeTika jAtiyoM meM bhI isa kathAkA bahuta pracAra rahA hai| jaina purANoMke
anusAra bhogabhUmiyoMmeM sahodara bhAI-bahanake vivAhako sthira praNAlI rahI
hai| jaina paramparAmeM rAmako tresaTha zalAkApuruSoM meM vAsudeva ke rUpameM
ginA gayA hai aura unake jIvana caritra sambandhI bar3e-bar3e purANa bhI race
gaye haiN| rAmakA eka nAma padma bhI thA aura jaina purANoMmeM unakA yahI nAma
adhika grahaNa kiyA gayA hai| rAmakathA sambandhI sabase prAcIna jaina purANa
saMskRtameM raviSeNa kRta padmapurANa, prAkRtameM vimalasUri kRta pauma-cariya
aura apabhraMzameM svayambhUkRta 'pauma-cariu' hai| yaha caritra jinasena
guNabhadra kRta saMskRta mahApurANameM, puSpadanta kRta apabhraMza mahApurANameM
aura hemacandra kRta saMskRta triSaSTi zalAkA puruSa caritameM bhI pAyA jAtA
hai| kathA kI samatA-viSamatAkI dRSTise isa sAhityako hama do zreNiyoMmeM
vibhAjita kara sakate haiN| eka zreNI meM haiM vimalasUri, raviSeNa, svayambhU
aura hemacandrakI racanAe~ aura dUsarI zreNImeM guNabhadra aura puSpadantakI
rcnaaeN| isa dUsarI zreNIkI racanAoMkI prathamase sabase bar3I vilakSaNatA yaha
hai ki ve rAmake pitA dazarathako banArasake rAjA mAnakara calate haiM tathA
sItAko rAvaNakI rAnI mandodarIke garbhase utpanna batalAte haiM  /  yaha
mAnyatA-bheda kyoM utpanna huA yaha eka adhyayanakA viSaya hai| rAmakathA
viSayaka jo do sabase prAcIna aura mahAna racanAeM saMskRtameM raviSeNAcArya
kRta padmapurANa aura prAkRta meM vimalasUri kRta paumacariyaM-haiM, unake
viSayameM aneka cintanIya bAteM utpanna hotI haiN| donoMkA kathAnaka sarvathA
eka hI hai| yahI nahIM, donoMko paraspara milAkara dekhane se isameM kisIko koI
sandeha nahIM rahatA ki ve eka dUsareke bhASAtmaka rUpAntara mAtra haiN| kisane
kisakA anuvAda kiyA hai, yaha unake racanAkAla-kramase jAnA jA sakatA thaa|
kintu isa viSayameM eka kaThinAI uTha khar3I huI hai| raviSeNane apanI racanA
vi. saM. 733 meM samApta kI thii| isakA granthameM hI ullekha hai aura usapara
kisIko koI sandeha nahIM hai| kintu vimalasUrine apanI kRtikI samAptikA jo kAla-
vi. saM. 60 sUcita kiyA hai use DaoN. viNTarnIjane to svIkAra kiyA hai, kintu
anya bahuta-se vidvAn use mAnane ko taiyAra nahIM haiN| jarmana vidvAna DaoN.
harmana jaikovI, jinhoMne isa granthakA sarvaprathama sampAdana kiyA, ne apanA
yaha sandeha prakaTa kiyA ki isa granthameM prAkRta bhASAkA jo svarUpa prakaTa
huA hai aura usameM kahIM-kahIM jina vizeSa zabdoMkA prayoga kiyA gayA hai,
usase yaha racanA vikramakI prathama zatAbdIkI nahIM kintu usakI tIsarI-cauthI
zatAbdIkI pratIta hotI hai| DaoN. vulanarake matAnusAra to yaha grantha apanI
kucha zabdaracanAse apabhraMza kAlakA saMketa karatA hai  /  paM. kezavalAla
dhruvane isa granthameM prayukta vibhinna chandoMkA adhyayana kiyA hai jisase
unakA mata bhI DaoN. bulanarake

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  6 Padma Purana bows to the opinion. The implication is
that there is doubt and controversy regarding the time of composition of the
Prakrit Paumachari. It is only certain that Udyotan Suri, in his work called
Kuvalayamala, which he completed in Saka Samvat 700, Vikrama Samvat 835,
mentions both Ravishena's work and Paumachari. Therefore, it can be said with
certainty that Paumachari was composed before Vikrama Samvat 835.  This
chronological information leaves the precedence of the Padma Purana and
Paumachari undecided. Therefore, it cannot be said with certainty who translated
whose work. Pandit Nathuramji Premi had some thoughts on this in an article
titled "Padmacharit and Paumachari" published in 1942 in Anekant, year 5, Kiran
1-2, and later in his "Jain Literature and History" [First Edition 1942, Second
Edition 1956]. The editor of the present work has mentioned the important points
that Premiji has made on this subject in his introduction. But the important
discussion that Premiji has made in his article, which sheds some light on the
precedence of the two works, has been completely forgotten here. In short,
Premiji has pointed out three things. One is that there are many examples in
ancient Jain literature of translations from Prakrit to Sanskrit, but there are
no examples of translations from Sanskrit to Prakrit on such a large scale.
Secondly, the Paumachari is concise, while the Padma Purana is detailed. And
thirdly, the story of the origin of the 'Man' [Brahmin] found in Ravishena's
Padma Purana [4, 122] suggests its Prakrit source, because the word 'Mahan' is
Prakrit and its etymology can only be understood from the Prakrit expression
'Mahan' mat marose, as found in the Prakrit Paumachari. The word 'Mahan' is not
accepted in Sanskrit, nor is there any use of this word in the Ravishena sect or
tradition. On the contrary, this word is used extensively in Prakrit Jain Agam
texts. This leads us to believe that Ravishenacharya has retained it as it is in
Sanskrit based on the Paumachari. This subject is not to be overlooked, but
deserves special attention and further study.  1 One aspect of the comparative
study of the two works is that while Ravishena's work is entirely Digambara
tradition, what is the sectarian arrangement of Vimalsuri's Paumachari? Some
scholars have studied the Paumachari from this perspective. As a result, there
are some things in the text that are in line with the Digambara tradition, some
with the Svetambara tradition, and some that are contrary to both, possibly
pointing to a third tradition. These have been mentioned in the introduction.
In addition to these, the new points that have come to our attention are as
follows:  1. In Paumachari 2,22, Lord Mahavira is said to have come from the
womb of Trisaladevi. As follows:  Tassa ya bahugunakaliya bhajja tisallatti
ruva-sampanna. Tie gabbhammi jino ayaao charim-samayami. || 2,22  This is
completely in line with the Digambara tradition, but only partially agrees with
the Svetambara tradition, as there is also mention of the Lord coming from the
womb of Devananda.  2. In Paumachari 2,36-37, it is said that after Lord
Mahavira attained Kevalgyan, he preached and wandered to the Vipulachal
mountain. As follows:  Evam so muni-vasaho atta-maha-padihere parierio. Viharai
jinid bhanu bohinto bhavia-kamalai. || Aya-vihui sahio gana ganaharasyala-sangha
parierio. Viharanto cichay patto viul-giridam mahaviro. || 2,36-37

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 6 padmapurANa matako ora jhukatA hai  /  tAtparya yaha ki prAkRta paumacariyake
racanAkAlake sambandhameM sandeha aura vivAda hai  /  nizcita kevala itanA hI
hai ki udyotana sUrine apanI jisa kuvalayamAlA nAmaka kRtiko zaka saMvat 700 vi.
saM. 835 meM samApta kiyA thA, usameM raviSeNakI racanAkA bhI ullekha hai aura
paumacariyakA bhI  /  ataeva nizcita itanA ho kahA jA sakatA hai ki paumacariya
vi. saM. 835 se pUrva kI racanA hai  /  isa kAla sUcanAse padmapurANa aura
paumacariyakI racanAkA pUrvAparatva anirNIta raha jAtA hai  /  ataeva yaha
nizcayapUrvaka nahIM kahA jA sakatA ki kisane kisakA anuvAda kiyaa| isakA kucha
vicAra paM. nAthUrAmajI premIne apane eka lekhameM kiyA thA jo 'padmacarita aura
paumacariya' zIrSaka se san 1942 meM anekAnta, varSa 5, kiraNa 1-2 meM aura
tatpazcAt unake 'jaina sAhitya aura itihAsa' [ prathama saMskaraNa 1942, dvi.
saM. 1956 ] ke antargata prakAzita  /  premIjI ne ukta viSayaka jo aneka
mahattvapUrNa bAteM batalAyI haiM unakA ullekha prastuta grantha ke sampAdakane
apanI prastAvanA meM kiyA hai  /  kintu jo mahattvapUrNa carcA premIjIne apane
lekha meM ukta donoM granthoMke pUrvAparatvake sambandha meM kucha prakAza
DAlanevAlI kI hai, usako yahA~ sarvathA bhulA diyA gayA hai| saMkSepameM,
premIjIne tIna bAteM batalAyI haiM  /  eka to yaha ki prAkRta se saMskRta meM
anuvAdake to prAcIna jaina sAhitya meM bahuta udAharaNa milate haiM, kintu
saMskRtase itane bar3e paimAne para prAkRta meM anuvAdake koI udAharaNa nahIM
milte| dUsare varNana meM paumacariyameM saMkSetra aura padmapurANa meM vistAra
pAyA jAtA hai  /  aura tIsare 'mANa' [ brAhmaNa ] kI utpattike sambandhakI jo
kathA raviSeNake padmapurANa [ 4, 122 ] meM pAyI jAtI hai, usase usake prAkRta
srotakA hI anumAna hotA hai, kyoMki mAhaNa zabda prAkRtakA hai aura usIko eka
vyutpatti prAkRta ukti 'mAhaNa' mata mArose sArthaka baiTha sakatI hai jaisA ki
prAkRta paumacariya meM pAyA jAtA hai  /  saMskRta meM 'mAhaNa' zabdako kahIM
svIkAra nahIM kiyA gayA aura na raviSeNa sampradAya va paramparAmeM isa zabdakA
koI prayoga pAyA jAtA  /  isake viparIta prAkRta jaina Agama granthoM meM isa
zabdakA bahuta adhika prayoga pAyA jAtA hai| isase hameM yahI mAnanA par3atA hai
ki raviSeNAcAryane ise paumacariyake AdhArase jaisAkA taisA saMskRta meM rakha
diyA hai  /  yaha viSaya dRSTike ojhala karane yogya nahIM kintu vizeSa dhyAna
dekara aura adhika adhyayana karane yogya hai  /  1 donoM granthoMke paraspara
tulanAtmaka adhyayanakI eka dizA yaha bhI hai, ki jaba raviSeNakI kRti solaho
Ane digambara paramparAkI hai, taba vimalasUrike paumacariyako sAmpradAyika
vyavasthA kyA hai  /  kucha vidvAnoMne isa dRSTise paumacariyakA adhyayana kiyA
hai| pariNAmataH grantha meM kucha bAteM aisI haiM jo digambara paramparAke
anukUla haiM, kucha zvetAmbara paramparAke aura kucha aisI bAteM bhI haiM jo
donoMke pratikUla hokara sambhavataH kisI tIsarI hI paramparAkI ora saMketa
karatI haiM  /  inakA ullekha prastAvanA meM A gayA hai| unake atirikta jo nayI
bAteM hamArI dRSTimeM AyI haiM ve nimna prakAra haiM 1. pauma cariya 2,22 meM
bhagavAn mahAvIrako trizalAdevIkI kUMkhase Aye kahA gayA  /  yathA tassa ya
bahuguNakaliyA bhajjA tisallAtti rUva-saMpannA  /  tIe gabbhammi jiNo AyAo
carima-samayammi  //  2,22 yaha bAta digambara paramparA ke pUrNataH anukUla
hai, kintu zvetAmbara paramparAse AMzika rUpase hI milatI hai, kyoMki vahA~
bhagavAn ke devAnandAkI ku~khameM Ane kA bhI ullekha hai  /  * 2. pauma cariya
2,36-37 meM bhagavAn mahAvIrake kevalajJAna utpanna honeke pazcAt upadeza karate
hue vihArakara vipulAcala parvatapara Ane kI bAta kahI gayI hai  /  yathA evaM
so muNi-vasaho aTTa -mahA-pADihera pariyario  /  viharai jiNida bhANU bohinto
bhaviya-kamalAI  //  aya-vihUi sahio gaNa gaNaharasayala - saMgha pariyario  /
viharanto cicaya patto viula-giridaM mahAvIro  /  /  2,36-37

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Editorial  This point is in accordance with the Svetambara belief and against
the Digambara belief, because here it is believed that only after the knowledge
arose, the Lord came to Mount Vipulachal after staying silent for sixty-six days
and it was here that his first sermon took place.  In Paumachari 3,62, there is
a mention of the dreams of Rishabhdev's mother, Marudevi, before his birth.
Here, the number of dreams has been counted as fifteen by Premji and the editor
of the present book, which they have said is different from both the Svetambara
and Digambara beliefs. But in reality, this is not the case. The incident of the
dreams of the mother of Jin Bhagwan is mentioned in another place in the book
where the birth of Tirthankara Muni Suvrata Nath is described. Ram is considered
to have been in his Tirthankal. The mention of these dreams is as follows:
"Ahasa Suhan Patta Rayanie Pachchhimmammi Jamasmi. Pechchai Chaudas Sumine
Pasath-Jogen Kallani." (21, 12)  "Gay-Vasaha Siha - Abhisheya-Dam-Sasi Dinayaram
Jhayam Kumbham. Pauma-Sar-Sagar - Viman Bhavan Rayanuchchay- Simhin Cha." (21,
13)  Here, the author himself has said that the mother had fourteen dreams,
which he has also counted. If there is any difference between these and
Marudevi's dreams, it is only that what is called 'Abhisheka Dam' here is
mentioned as 'Varshiri-Dam' there. The aforementioned scholars have considered
this as two separate dreams, Lakshmi and a garland of flowers, and thus counted
the number of dreams as fifteen. But from the mention of the dreams at the time
of the birth of Muni Suvrata Nath, it becomes clear that 'Varshri-Dam' and
'Abhisheka-Dam' are both indicative of the same beautiful or auspicious garland,
thus proving the number of dreams to be fourteen. The verse in Paumachari 21,
13, which counts the dreams, is exactly the same as the one found in 'Chhathe
Shrutaang Naya-Dhammakhao' (1, 1). When we compare these dreams with the dreams
mentioned in the Padma Purana (3,124-139), the order of the dreams is exactly
the same, and the places where there is a difference in number and names are,
firstly, the one with 'Varshri-Dam', where Sri Lakshmi and garlands of flowers
are considered as two separate dreams. Secondly, where 'Jhayam' (flag) is
mentioned, 'Matsya' (fish) is found, which indicates a difference in reading or
error in 'Jhas' (fish) and 'Jhay' (flag). And 'Simhasan' (throne) has been added
between 'Sagar' (ocean) and 'Viman' (aircraft). It seems to us that the
difference in the names and number of dreams is similar to the difference in the
number of heavens, 12 and 16, which was once considered to be indicative of
sectarian differences, but now, since both are mentioned together in
Tiloayapanatti, it is not considered to be indicative of sectarian differences.
This matter needs to be considered.  Regarding the sect of the author of
Paumachari, Premji's point is also worth noting that an ancient commentator
called the Apabhramsha poet Svayambhu, who followed this story, as belonging to
the Yapuliya (Yapaniya) sect. It is not surprising that Vimalsuri belongs to the
same tradition. It should be kept in mind that the Yapaniya sect was almost
completely merged into the Digambara sect, and this is proven by inscriptions.
The effort made by Pandit Pannalalji Sahityacharya in preparing this edition of
the Padma Purana with translation is commendable. We especially congratulate the
President of Gyanpeeth, Smt. Rmaraniji, for the rapid pace at which this ancient
literature is being published in a beautiful manner by Gyanpeeth. We also thank
the Minister, Director, and other workers of Gyanpeeth from the bottom of our
hearts for their dedication.  Heeralal Jain A. Ne, Upadhye Granthamala Editor

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pradhAna sampAdakIya yaha bAta zvetAmbara mAnyatA ke anukUla par3atI hai aura
digambara mAnyatA ke pratikUla, kyoMki, yahA~ yaha mAnA gayA hai ki kevalajJAna
utpanna hone ke pazcAt bhagavAn chayAsaTha dina taka maunapUrvaka vihAra karate
hue hI vipulAcala parvata para Aye the aura yahIM unakA sarvaprathama upadeza
huA thA  /  pauma cari 3,62 meM RSabha bhagavAn ke janmase pUrva unakI mAtA
marudevI ke svapnoM kA ullekha hai  /  yahA~ svapnoM kI gaNanA premIjIne tathA
prastuta granyake sampAdakane pandraha lagAkara use zvetAmbara digambara donoM
mAnyatAoMse pRthaka kahA hai  /  kintu yathArthataH aisI bAta nahIM hai| jina
bhagavAnkI mAtA ke svapnoMkA prasaMga grantha meM eka sthAnapara aura AtA hai
jahA~ tIrthaMkara muni suvratanAthake janmakA varNana hai  /  rAma unhIM ke
tIrthaMkAla meM hue mAne gaye haiM  /  yaha svapnoM kA ullekha nimna prakAra hai
ahasA suhaM pattA rayaNIe pacchimammi jAmasmi  /  pecchai caudasa sumiNe
pasattha-jogeNa kallANI  /  /  21, 12 gaya-vasaha sIha - abhiseyadAma-sasi
diNayaraM jhayaM kuMbhaM  /  paumasara-sAgara - vimANa bhavaNa rayaNuccaya-
sihiM ca  /  /  21, 13 yahA~ granthakArane svayaM kaha diyA hai ki mAtAko
caudaha svapna hue the jo unhoMne ginA bhI diye haiM  /  inameM aura marudevI
svapnoMmeM yadi koI bheda hai to kevala itanA ho ki yahA~ jo abhiSeka dAma kahA
gayA hai| vahI vahA~ 'varasiri-dAma' rUpase ullikhita hai  /  ise pUrvokta
vidvAnoMne lakSmI aura puSpamAlA aisA pRthak do svapna mAnakara svapnoMkI
saMkhyA pandraha nikAlI hai  /  kintu munisuvratanAthake janma samayake svapnoM
ke ullekha se suspaSTa ho jAtA hai ki 'varazrIdAma' aura 'abhiSekadAma' eka hI
zobhAyukta yA abhiSeka yogya puSpamAlAkA vAcI hokara svapnoMkI saMkhyAko caudaha
hI siddha karatA hai  /  paumacariya 21, 13 meM svapnoMko ginAnevAlI gAthA ThIka
vahI hai jo 'chaThe zrutAMga NAyAdhammakahAo' ( 1, 1 ) meM bhI pAyI jAtI hai  /
ina svapnoMkA jaba hama padmapurANa (3,124 - 139 ) meM ullikhita svapnoMse
milAna karate haiM taba svapnoMkA krama ThIka vahI hote hue jo saMkhyA va
nAmoMmeM bheda utpanna karanevAle sthala haiM ve eka to vahI 'varazrIdAma' vAlA
jahA~ zrIlakSmI aura puSpamAlAe~ aise do svapna gaye haiM  /  dUsare jahA~
'jhayaM' dhvaja ) kA ullekha hai vahIM 'matsya' ( machalI ) kA pAyA jAnA jhaSa (
machalI ) aura jhaya dhvaja ke pAThabheda yA bhrAntiko sUcita karatA hai  /
evaM sAgara aura vimAna ke bIca 'siMhAsana' adhika AyA hai  /  hameM pratIta
hotA hai ki svapnoMke nAmoM aura saMkhyAkA bheda aisA hI to na ho jaisA svargoM
kI 12 aura 16 kI saMkhyAko kisI samaya sampradAya bheda sUcaka mAnA jAtA thA,
kintu tiloyapaNNatti meM donoM kA ullekha sAtha-sAtha mila jAnese aba vaha
sampradAya bhedakA sUcaka nahIM mAnA jAtA  /  isa viSayapara vicAra kiye jAnekI
AvazyakatA hai  /  paumacariyake kartA sampradAya ke sambandha meM premIjIkI
yaha bAta bhI dhyAna dene yogya hai ki isa kathA - nakakA anusaraNa karanevAle
apabhraMza kavi svayaMbhUko eka prAcIna TippaNakArane yApulIya ( yApanIya )
saMghakA kahA | Azcarya nahIM jo vimalasUri usI paramparA ke hoN| yaha bAta
dhyAna meM rakhanI cAhie ki yApanIya sampradAyakA prAyaH pUrNataH vilInIkaraNa
digambara sampradAyameM huA hai aura yaha bAta zilAlekhoMse pramANita haiM  /
padmapurANakA yaha saMskaraNa anuvAda sahita taiyAra karanemeM paM. pannAlAlajI
sAhityAcAryaMne jo parizrama kiyA hai vaha prazaMsanIya hai  /  idhara jisa
tIvra gati se yaha prAcIna sAhitya bar3e sundara DhaMgase jJAnapITha dvArA
prakAzita ho rahA hai, usake lie jJAnapIThakI adhyakSA zrImatI ramArAnIjIkA hama
vizeSa rUpase abhinandana karate haiM  /  jJAnapIThake mantrI va saMcAlaka Adi
kAryakartAoM ko bhI hama unakI tatparatA ke lie hRdaya se dhanyavAda dete haiM
/  hIrAlAla jaina A. ne, upAdhye granthamAlA sampAdaka

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Editorial [Second Edition]  The first part of the 'Padma Purana' was
published eighteen years ago in 1958. At that time, its editorial was written by
Dr. Hiralal Jain and Dr. A.N. Upadhye. Both of them have now passed away.
Therefore, I have had to bear their burden.  The thought-provoking points they
raised in their editorial regarding the Sanskrit 'Padma Purana' and the Prakrit
'Paumachariy' are still relevant today. At that time, we had aligned the first
two Parvas of the 'Padma Purana' with the Prakrit 'Paumachariy', marking the
verse numbers of the 'Paumachariy' in our copy of the 'Padma Purana'. That is
still before us. The verses from number 32 to 89 of the first Parva of the
'Paumachariy' are present in the first Parva of the 'Padma Purana' from verse
numbers 43 to 101. There is only a difference of two. The transformation of
verses 44 and 47 of the 'Padma Purana' is not present in the 'Paumachariy'. Such
uniformity cannot happen without following. Some minor changes are also seen. In
the 'Paumachariy', verse number 51 has the word 'Munivarena'. In the 'Padma
Purana', in its place, it is "Digambarena".  In the second Parva, during the
description of Lord Mahavira's birth ceremony, it is mentioned that at the time
of the ceremony on Mount Meru, the child shook Meru with his big toe. Such a
description is not found elsewhere in the Digambar tradition's literature. In
the Svetambar literature, twenty reasons for the bondage of the Tirthankara
nature are considered. Accordingly, twenty numbers are also specified in the
'Paumachariy', but in the 'Padma Purana', sixteen reasons are mentioned
according to the Digambar belief. A comparative study of both reveals other such
points that are thought-provoking.  The influence of Samantabhadra's works is
also sometimes visible. For example, when reading verse 92 in the 14th Parva,
the verse of Samantabhadra's 'Swayambhustotra', 'Doshaya Nallam Kanika Vishaya',
etc., comes to mind, and the 60th verse of this same Parva reminds one of
'Ratnakaranda Shravakachar's 'Kshitigatamiva Vatabijam'. In this fourteenth
Parva, the Muni Raj gives Dharma Upadesh to Ravana when he asks, and in it, so
much emphasis is given on the abandonment of alcohol, meat, honey, and night
meals that such emphasis is not seen elsewhere. Perhaps the reason for this is
that elsewhere, demons are called nocturnal. However,  The story of Rama is
found everywhere in an interesting form. The moral teachings that the
storyteller has given to the people in this interesting form are invaluable for
humanity.  Today, there is a discussion among scholars about whether the
Ramayana is a true event? And there are various speculations on this. Scholars
are entangled in discussions, but ordinary men and women, all inspired by the
pure life of Rama and Sita, make their lives meaningful. Rama, a son and husband
like him, and Sita, a devoted wife like her, are symbols of India's bright
ideals. As long as the spotless ideal of Rama and Sita lives in India, Ravanas,
the slayers of women, cannot be respected in this country.  The President of the
Bharatiya Gyanapith, Smt. Ramarani, was a daughter of that same Sati Sita - a
shining symbol of Indian womanhood. The effect of the cycle of time, that she
too, like Sita, became a resident of heaven and left her husband, Sah Shanti
Prasadji, like Rama, alone. We remember her with great respect. Her dedication
to the upliftment of Indian literature is unforgettable. Now, Sahuji has taken
on her burden, so there is hope and faith that the publication work of the
Mootidevi Granthamala will continue to flourish. The Minister of the Gyanapith,
Ba. Lakshmichandraji, is constantly striving for it as before.  - Kailashchandra
Shastri

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pradhAna sampAdakIya [dvitIya saMskaraNa ] 'padmapurANa' ke prathama bhAgakA
prakAzana aThAraha varSa pUrva san 1958 meM huA thaa| usa samaya usakA
sampAdakIya DaoN. hIrAlAla jaina aura DaoN. e. ena. upAdhyene likhA thA  /  Aja
donoM hI svargata ho cuke haiN| ataH mujhe unake bhArako sakheda vahana karanA
par3A hai| unhoMne apane pradhAna sampAdakIyameM saMskRta 'padmapurANa' aura
prAkRta 'paumacariya' ko lekara jo cintanIya bAteM upasthita kI thI, ve bAteM
Aja bhI cintanIya hI hai  /  hamane usI samaya prAkRta 'paumacariya' ke sAtha
padmaparANa' ke Adya do parvokA milAna karate hue 'padmaparANa' kI apanI
pratimeM 'paumacariya' kI gAthAoMkI kramasaMkhyA aMkita kI thii| vaha Aja bhI
hamAre sAmane hai| 'paumacariya' ke prathama parvakI padya saM. 32 se 89 taka
'padmapurANa' ke prathama parvameM zloka saMkhyAse 43 se 101 taka vartamAna hai|
kevala dokA antara hai| 'padmapurANa' ke zloka 44 aura 47 kA rUpAntara
'paumacariya' meM nahIM hai aisI ekarUpatA binA anusaraNa kiye nahIM ho sktii|
kahIM-kahIM yatkicit parivartana bhI dekhA jAtA hai  /  'paumacariya' meM padya
saMkhyA 51 meM 'muNivareNa' pada hai| 'padmapurANa' meM usake sthAnameM
"digambareNa' hai|| dUsare parvameM bhagavAn mahAvIrake janmAbhiSekake
varNanameM AtA hai ki meru parvatapara abhiSekake samaya bAlakane apane pairake
aMgaThese meruko kampita kiyaa| digambara paramparAke sAhitya meM anyatra aisA
varNana nahIM milatA  /  zvetAmbara sAhityameM tIrthaMkara prakRtike bandhake
bIsa kAraNa mAne gaye haiN| tadanusAra hI 'paumacariya' meM bhI bIsa saMkhyA
nirdiSTa hai kintu 'padmapurANa' meM digambara mAnyatAke anusAra solaha hI
kAraNa kahe haiN| donoMkA tulanAtmaka adhyayana karanese isa prakArako anya bhI
bAteM prakAzameM AtI haiM jo cintya haiN| samantabhadrakI kRtiyoMkA bhI prabhAva
kvacit parilakSita hotA hai| yathA 14veM parvameM zloka 92 ko par3hate hI
samantabhadrake 'svayaMbhUstotra' kA padya 'doSAya nAlaM kaNikA viSasya' Adi
smRti pathapara A jAtA hai aura isI parvakA 60vA zloka 'ratnakaraNDa
zrAvakAcAra' ke 'kSitigatamiva vaTabIjaM' kA smaraNa karAtA hai| isa caudahaveM
parvameM rAvaNake pUchanepara munirAja jo dharmopadeza dete haiM usameM madya,
mAMsa, madhuke sAtha rAtri bhojanake tyAgapara itanA adhika bala diyA gayA hai
ki itanA adhika bala anyatra dRSTigocara nahIM hotaa| zAyada isakA kAraNa yaha
ho ki anyatra rAkSasoMko nizAcara kahA hai  /  astu, rAmakI kathA sarvatra
rocaka rUpameM hI milatI hai| isa rocaka kathAke rUpameM kathAkAroMne janatAko
jo sadupadeza diyA hai vaha manuSyajAtike lie bahumalya hai| Aja vidvAnoM meM
yaha carcA calatI hai ki kyA rAmAyaNako ghaTanA satya hai? aura isapara vividha
UhApoha calate haiM  /  vidvAn to carcAoMmeM ulajhe rahate haiM kintu sAdhAraNa
jana strI aura puruSa sabhI rAma aura sItAke pavitra jIvanase anuprANita hokara
apane jIvanako sArthaka karate haiN| rAma-jaisA putra aura pati tathA sItA jaisI
pativratA nArI-ye bhAratake ujjvala Adarzake pratIka hai| jabataka bhAratameM
rAma aura sItAkA niSkalaMka Adarza jIvita hai, tabataka nArIke hartA rAvaNoMko
isa deza meM samAdara nahIM mila sktaa| bhAratIya jJAnapIThako adhyakSA zrImatI
ramArAnI usI satI sItAko eka santAna thI-bhAratIya nArIkA eka ujjvala pratIka  /
kAlacakrakA prabhAva, ki ve bhI sItAjI kI taraha svargavAsinI ho gayIM aura
apane pati sAha zAntiprasAdajIko rAmakI taraha ho ekAko chor3a gyiiN| hama bar3e
Adarake sAtha unakA smaraNa karate haiM  /  bhAratIya sAhityake uddhArake lie
unako laganazIlatA cirasmaraNIya hai| aba sAhUjIne unake bhArako vahana kiyA hai
ataH AzA aura vizvAsa hai ki mUtidevI granthamAlAkA prakAzana kArya uttarottara
samRddha hI hogA  /  jJAnapIThake mantrI bA. lakSmIcandrajI usake lie pUrvavat
satata yatnazIla haiM  /  -kailAzacandra zAstrI

Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Editorial (Second Edition)  Sri Ravishenacharya, by composing the Padma
Purana, has greatly benefited all beings. The eighth Balabhadra, Sri
Ramachandraji, was known as Padma. This text is known as Padmacharit or Padma
Purana after him. Ramachandraji's brother Lakshmana, the ruler of the three
divisions of Bharat Kshetra, was the eighth Narayana. The love between Narayana
and Balabhadra is world-renowned. These great souls, born in Ayodhya, adorned
the land of India in the Tirtha of Bhagwan Manisuvratnath. Even after a long
time, they are worthy of reverence for every Indian.  Ramachandraji's life is
filled with extraordinary events. He is worshipped as Maryadapurushotam. He was
completely obedient to his father, King Dasharatha. Upon receiving the order of
fourteen years of exile, he went to the forest without any protest. He
considered exile to be the best course of action, believing that Bharat's
kingdom would not prosper while he was alive. The devoted wife Sita and
Lakshmana, filled with brotherly love, were his companions in exile. The Padma
Purana clearly shows how many destitute kings he protected during his exile.
Lakshmana was the embodiment of brotherly love, while Sita was the epitome of
the natural adornment of the Indian woman, the virtue of Pativrata Dharma.
Ravana, the king of Lanka, abducted Sita from Dandaka Van. To retrieve her,
Ramachandraji waged a righteous war against Ravana. In this righteous war,
Ravana's younger brother Vibhishana, the prominent Sugriva of the Vanarvansha,
Hanuman, and the Vidhyadharas like Viradhit, all provided full support. The
victory achieved by Rama-Lakshmana, who were earthbound, over the celestial
Vidhyadharas, is a testament to their extraordinary inner strength.  After
Ravana's death, Ramachandraji treated his family with affection. He declared
that he had to fight Ravana only to oppose injustice. After the war ended, the
comfort he provided to Ravana's widowed queens and Vibhishana, who was
overwhelmed by the loss of his brother, reveals his noble nature.  He was a
staunch advocate of the happiness of the people and the protection of justice.
This is why, when some people presented the argument of Avarnavada, he had the
pregnant Sita abandoned in a terrifying forest. One should understand that
Sita's Panyoday means that even in that desolate forest, she was provided with
means of protection. He did not hesitate even for a moment to abandon the same
Sita for whom he had fought a terrible war against Ravana, driven by the
sentiment of the people's happiness.  Among the Purana texts, the Padma Purana,
composed by Ravishenacharya, holds a prominent place. It is read with great
devotion by people of all ages. The Hindu society also has a natural reverence
for the Ramakatha. There is hardly any temple where a copy of the Padma Purana
is not found.  The first edition of the Padma Purana, edited by me, was
published by the Bharatiya Gyanpeeth in 1958. [2]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 sampAdakIya ( dvitIya saMskaraNa ) padmapurANakI racanA kara zrI
raviSeNAcAryane jana-janakA bahuta kalyANa kiyA hai  /  aSTama balabhadra
zrIrAmacandrajI padma nAmase prasiddha the| unhIM ke nAmase isa granthakA
padmacarita yA padmapurANa nAma prasiddha huA hai| rAmacandra jIke bhAI lakSmaNa
tIna khaNDa bharatakSetrake adhipati aSTama nArAyaNa the  /  nArAyaNa aura
balabhadrakA sneha jagataprasiddha hai| bhagavAna manisuvratanAthake tIrthameM
ina mahAnubhAvoMne ayodhyAmeM janma lekara bhAratabhUmiko alaMkRta kiyA thA  /
sudIrghakAla vyatIta ho jAnepara bhI ye pratyeka bhAratIyako zraddhAke pAtra
haiM  /  rAmacandrajIkA jIvana alaukika ghaTanAoMse bharA huA hai| ve eka
maryAdApuruSottamake rUpa meM pUje jAte haiM  /  pitA-rAjA dazarathake ve parama
AjJAkArI the| unake dvArA 14 varSake vanavAsakI AjJA pAkara ve binA kisI
pratikriyAke vanako cala dete haiN| mere rahate hue bharatakA rAjya vRddhiMgata
nahIM ho sakegA isalie unhoMne vanavAsa karanA hI zreyaskara samajhA thaa|
patibhaktA sItA aura bhrAtRsnehase paripUrNa lakSmaNa, ye do hI unake vanavAsake
sAthI the| vanavAsake samaya unhoMne kitane dInahIna rAjAoMkA saMrakSaNa kiyA,
yaha padmapurANake svAdhyAyase spaSTa hotA hai| lakSmaNa bhrAtasnehakI mUrti the
to sItA bhAratIya nArIke sahaja alaMkArapAtivratya dharmako pratikRti thii|
laMkAdhipati rAvaNane daNDakavanase sItAkA apaharaNa kiyA thA use vApasa prApta
karane ke lie rAmacandrajIne rAvaNase dharmayuddha kiyA thaa| isa dharmayuddha
meM rAvaNake anuja vibhISaNa, vAnaravaMzake pramukha sugrIva tathA hanUmAn aura
virAdhita Adi vidyAdharoMne pUrNa sahayoga kiyA thaa| bhUmigocarI rAma-lakSmaNa
dvArA gaganagAmI vidyAdharoMke sAtha yuddha kara vijaya prApta karanA, yaha
unake alaukika AtmabalakA paricAyaka hai| rAvaNakA maraNa honepara rAmacandrajI
usake parivArase AtmIyavat vyavahAra karate haiM  /  unhoMne udghoSa kiyA thA ki
mujhe anyAyakA pratikAra karane ke lie hI rAvaNase yuddha karanA pdd'aa|
yuddhake samApta honepara unhoMne rAvaNakI vidhavA rAniyoM tathA bhrAtRviyogase
vihvala vibhISaNake lie jo sAntvanA dI thI vaha unakI udAtta bhAvanAko sUcita
karanevAlI hai| prajAkI prasannatA aura nyAyakI surakSAke ve pUrNa pakSapAtI
the, isIlie to unhoMne katipaya logoMke dvArA avarNavAda prastuta kiye jAnepara
garbhavatI sItAkA bhayAvaha aTavImeM parityAga karAyA thaa| sItAkA paNyodaya hI
samajhanA cAhie ki usa nirjana aTavI meM bhI unheM surakSAke sAdhana
samapalabdha he| jisa sItAkI prApti ke lie unhoMne rAvaNase bhayaMkara yuddha
kiyA thA, prajAkI prasannatAko bhAvanAse usI sItAkA parityAga karate hae unheM
raMcamAtra bho saMkoca nahIM haa| purANa granthoMmeM raviSeNAcArya viracita
padmapurANa apanA pramukha sthAna rakhatA hai| ise AbAla-vRddhasabhI loga bar3I
zraddhAse par3hate haiN| hindU samAjameM bhI rAmakathAke prati logoMkA sahaja
Adara hai| viralA hI aisA koI mandira hogA jahA~ padmapurANakI prati na ho| mere
dvArA sampAdita padmapurANakA prathama saMskaraNa bhAratIya jJAnapIThakI orase
san 1958 meM prakA [2]

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
10 Padma Purana It was cold. But now this second edition is being published
because the copies are unavailable. This should be understood as the religious
devotion or literary devotion of the founder of Jnanapith, Shri Shanti Prasadji
Sahu, and its director, Shri Lakshmichandraji Adika, that they are engaged in
the publication of Jinvani with great zeal and dedication. In a short time,
Jnanapith has published such a vast amount of literature while protecting the
standard of publication, which many other institutions together could not do.
The contribution of the late Shri Ramaji, the chairperson of Jnanapith, to this
publishing institution will be remembered forever. Not only did she contribute
to the publication of Jinvani, but she also spent thousands of rupees with
proper arrangements for the renovation of ancient pilgrimage sites like Papoura,
Ahar, etc. She had the capacity to build many more Jain temples, but instead of
building new ones, she considered it better to renovate the pre-existing
temples. I hope that this second edition will also end like the first edition,
increasing the faith of the people. I wished that this edition would also be
adorned with appendices like the second editions of Adipurana and Uttarapurana,
but due to the urgency of publication and my own busyness, I could not prepare
the appendices. I regret this. Varnibhavan, Sagar 1-8-1606   Vinit Pannalal
Sahityacharya

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 10 padmapurANe zita huA thaa| kintu aba pratiyA~ anupalabdha hone ke kAraNa
yaha dUsarA saMskaraNa prakAzita ho rahA hai| jJAnapITha ke saMsthApaka zrI
zAntiprasAdajI sAhu tathA usake saMcAlaka zrI lakSmIcandrajI AdikA yaha
dharmAnurAga yA sAhityAnurAga hI samajhanA cAhie ki ve bar3I tatparatA aura
niSThAke sAtha jinavANIke prakAzana meM saMlagna haiM  /  bhAratIya jJAnapIThane
alpa samaya meM prakAzana starakI rakSA karate hue jitanA vipula sAhitya
prakAzita kiyA hai utanA anya aneka saMsthAeM milakara bhI nahIM kara sakI haiM
/  jJAnapIThakI adhyakSA svargIya zrI ramAjI isa prakAzana saMsthAko jo pragati
pradAna kara gayIM vaha cirasmaraNIya rhegii| na kevala jinavANI ke prakAzana
meM unakA sahayoga rahA hai apitu papaurA, ahAra Adi prAcIna tIrthakSetroMke
jIrNoddhAra meM bhI unhoMne hajAroM rupaye samucita vyavasthA ke sAtha vyaya
kiye haiN| ve ekase eka bar3akara aneka jinamandiroMkA nirmANa karAnekI kSamatA
rakhatI thIM parantu nayA nirmANa na karAkara unhoMne pUrvanirmita mandiroM kA
jIrNodvAra karAnA ho uttama samajhA AzA karatA hU~ ki yaha dvitIya saMskaraNa
bhI logoMkI zraddhAko vRddhiMgata karatA huA prathama saMskaraNake samAna
samApta hogaa| merI icchA thI ki isa saMskaraNako bhI AdipurANa aura
uttarapurANake dvitIya saMskaraNoMke samAna pariziSToMse alaMkRta kiyA jAye
parantu prakAzana kI zIghratA aura apanI vyastatA ke kAraNa pariziSTa taiyAra
nahIM kara sakA isakA kheda hai  /  varNIbhavana, sAgara 1-8-1606 vinIta
pannAlAla sAhityAcArya

Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  The editing of the Padmacarita was done based on the following
manuscripts [1]  **Introduction of Manuscript 'K'**  This manuscript belongs to
the Digambar Jain Saraswati Bhandar, Dharmpura, Delhi. It was obtained through
the kind efforts of Shri Pandit Parmanandji Shastri. It contains 246 leaves of
1246 inches in size. Initially, there are 15-16 lines per leaf and 40 characters
per line, but later there are 24 lines per leaf and 57-58 characters per line.
The numbers of most of the verses are given in red ink, but only black ink is
used in the later part. This book was completed on the 7th Wednesday of
Paushvadi Samvat 1775 by Sukhananda, son of Man Singh, resident of Bhusawar. The
scribe of the book does not seem to be knowledgeable in Sanskrit language,
therefore many errors have occurred in the writing. The following inscription is
found at the end of this book:  _âThus, the Shri Padmapuran is complete. Written
by Sukhananda, son of Man Singh, resident of Suyan, Bhusawar, in the Motr Vainda
script, written on the 7th Wednesday of Paushvadi Samvat 1775. May it give
auspiciousness and prosperity. Whoever sees this book, I have written it.
Whether it is correct or incorrect, my fault is not to be given. [1] The
qualities of a gentleman are to be taken. [2] This is truly done by him, which
is a giver of liberation and happiness.â_  The code name of this manuscript is
'K'.  **Introduction of Manuscript 'Kh'**  This manuscript belongs to the Shri
Digambar Jain Saraswati Bhavan Panchayati Mandir Masjid Khajur, Delhi. It was
obtained through the courtesy of Shri Pandit Parmanandji Shastri. It contains
510 leaves of 1145 inches in size. There are 14 lines per leaf and 40-41
characters per line. There is no mention of the year of copying or the scribe at
the end of the book. In the middle of this manuscript, several leaves have
become worn out, due to which they have been re-written by another writer. The
ancient script is mostly correct, but the newly added leaves have more errors.
At the beginning of this manuscript, there is also a Sanskrit commentary on 1-2
verses. The code name of this manuscript is 'Kh'.  **Introduction of Manuscript
'J'**  This manuscript belongs to the Shri Atishaya Kshetra Mahaveerji. It was
obtained through the courtesy of Shri Pandit Chainsukhdasji. It contains 554
leaves of 1245 size. Looking at the paper of the manuscript, it is clear that
this manuscript is very...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA padmacaritakA sampAdana nimnAMkita pratiyoMke AdhArapara kiyA gayA
hai[1] 'ka' pratikA paricaya yaha prati digambara jaina sarasvatI bhaNDAra
dharmapurA, dehalIkI hai| zrI paM. paramAnandajI zAstrIke satprayatnase prApta
huI hai| isameM 1246 iMcakI sAIjake 246 patra hai| prArambhameM pratipatrameM
15-16 paMktiyA~ aura pratipaMkti meM 40 taka akSara hai para bAdameM
pratipatrameM 24 paMktiyAM aura pratipaMktimeM 57-58 taka akSara haiN| adhikAMza
zlokoMke aMka lAla syAhImeM diye gaye haiM para pIcheke hisse meM sirpha kAlI
syAho kA hI upayoga kiyA gayA hai| isa pustakakI lipi pauSavadI 7 budhavAra
saMvat 1775 ko bhusAvara nivAsI zrI mAnasiMhake putra sukhAnandane pUrNa kI hai|
pustakake lipikartA saMskRta bhASAke jJAtA nahIM jAna par3ate haiM isalie bahuta
kucha azuddhiyA~ lipi karanemeM huI haiM  /  isa pustakake antameM nimna lekha
pAyA jAtA hai _iti zrIpadmapurANasaMpUrNa bhavataH  /  likhyataM sukhAnanda
mAnasiMhasutaM vAsI suyAna bhusAvarake motra vainAr3A lipi likhI suMgrAne madhi
saMvat satraisai pacahattara miti pauSavadI saptamI budhavAra zubhaM kalyANaM
dadAtu  /  jAisI pustakaM dRSTA tAisI likhitaM myaa| jAdi zuddhamazuddha vA mama
doSo na dIyate  // 1 //  sajjanasya guNaM grAhyaM gaNArNavama  /  ayaM zaddhaM
kRtaM tasya mokSasaukhyapradAyakama  // 2 //  jo koI par3ha sUnai tyAhanai mhArI
zrI jinAya namaH  /  sajjana aihI bInatI sAdharmI soM pyAra  /  deva dharma guru
parakhakeM sevo mana vaca sAra  //  deva dharama guru jo lakheM te nara uttama
jAna  /  saradhA ruci paratIti sau so jiya samyak vAna  //  deva dharama sUM
parakhiye so hai samyakavAna  /  darzana guNa graha Adi hI jJAna aMga ruci mAna
/  /  cArita adhikArI kaho mokSa rUpa traya mAna  /  sajjana so sajjana kahai
ehU sAra tava jAna  /  nizcai aru vyavahAra naya ratnatraya mana khAna  /  appA
daMsana nAnamaya cAritaguna appAna  /  appA appA joiye jyoM pAvai niyani
zubhamastu  / ' isa pratikA sAMketika nAma [2] 'kha' pratikA paricaya yaha prati
zrI di. jaina sarasvatI bhavana paMcAyatI mandira masajida khajUra dehalI kI
hai| zrI paM. paramAnandajI zAstroke saujanyase prApta huI hai| isameM 1145
iMcakI sAIjake 510 patra haiN| pratipatrameM 14 paMktiyA~ aura pratipaMktimeM
40-41 taka akSara haiN| pustakake antameM pratilipi saMvat tathA lipikartAkA
kucha bhI ullekha nahIM hai| isa pratike bIca-bIca meM kitane hI patra jIrNa ho
jAne ke kAraNa anya lekhakake dvArA phirase likhAkara milAye gaye haiN| prAcIna
lipi prAyaH zuddha hai para jo navIna patra milAye gaye haiM unameM azuddhiyA~
adhika raha gayI haiN| isa pratike prArambhameM 1-2 zlokoMkI saMskRta TIkA bhI
dI gayI hai| isa pratikA sAMketika nAma 'kha' hai| [3] 'ja' pratikA paricaya _
yaha prati zrI atizaya kSetra mahAvIrajIkI hai| zrImAn paM. cainasukhadAsajIke
saujanyase prApta huI hai| isameM 1245 sAIjake 554 patra hai  /  pratike
kAgajako ora dRSTi denese patA calatA hai ki yaha prati bahuta

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  **12** **Padma Purana**  This manuscript is ancient,
but it does not contain any information about the scribe or the date of writing.
It seems that a page is missing from the end of this manuscript, otherwise, the
date and scribe's information would have been available. Due to the age of the
book, 44 new pages have been added at the beginning. These 44 pages have 13
lines per page and 40 to 45 characters per line. The original pages have 12
lines and 35 to 38 characters per line. Most of the script has been corrected.
This manuscript also contains a Sanskrit commentary on the first 1-2 verses,
similar to the 'Kha' manuscript. The code name of this manuscript is 'J'.  **[4]
Introduction to the 'B' Manuscript**  This book belongs to Pandit Dhannalal
Rishabhchandra Ramchandra of Bombay. This book has 265 pages, each measuring
13x6 inches. Each page has 19 lines and 55 to 60 characters per line. The date
of writing and the scribe's name are not available. However, it seems that the
scribe was knowledgeable in Sanskrit, as there are very few errors in the
script. Almost all the text has been written correctly. There are also
annotations on difficult passages in between. This manuscript has been of great
help in editing this edition. Its code name is 'B'.  **[5] Introduction to the
Commentary Manuscript**  This manuscript belongs to the Shri Di. Jain Saraswati
Bhandar, Dharmpura, Delhi. It was obtained through the courtesy of Shri Pandit
Parmanandji. This is a commentary manuscript. It has 58 pages, each measuring
10.5 inches. Very brief commentaries are given on the difficult passages of the
Padmacharit. The script of this book was completed on Sunday, the 5th of Paush,
Vikram Samvat 1894. It was written in Lashkar. The name of the scribe is not
mentioned. Regarding its creation, it is written at the end:  "Laat Wagad Shri
Pravachan Sen Panditan Padmacharitam Samakarnnya Balatkaragan Shreenandyaacharya
SatvashiShyena Shrichandramunin Shrimadvikramditya Samvatsare
Saptaashityadhikasahastra (Parimitam Shrimadharaayam Shrimato Rajye Bhojadevasya
Padmacharite)."  This means that this commentary was composed by Shri
Chandramuni, a disciple of Shri Nandi Acharya, in the year 1087 Vikram Samvat,
in Dharanagari, during the reign of King Bhoj. Due to the scribe's carelessness,
there are many errors in the script.  **[6] Introduction to the 'M' Manuscript**
This manuscript was published in three volumes in Vikram Samvat 1985 by Shri
Sahityaratna Pandit Darbarilalji Nyayatirith (Swami 'Satyabhakta' Vardha) from
the Shri Danveer Seth Manikchand Granthamala, Bombay. It is not known which
manuscripts were used by the said Panditji for editing this manuscript, but
there are many errors. Its code name is 'M'.  While taking and comparing the
readings of these manuscripts, wherever doubts remained, Pandit K. Bhujabali
Shastri had it compared with the palm leaf manuscript located in Moodbidri. In
this way, this edition has been edited by comparing it with many handwritten
manuscripts.  **Sanskrit Literature - Ocean**  Sanskrit literature is as vast as
an endless ocean. Just as there are many gems within the ocean, similarly, there
are Puranas, Kavya, Nyaya, Dharma, Vyakaran, Natak, etc. within the ocean of
Sanskrit literature.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 12 padmapurANe prAcIna hai parantu antameM lipikA saMvat aura lipikArakA koI
paricaya upalabdha nahIM hai  /  aisA jAna par3atA hai ki isa pratike antakA eka
patra guma ho gayA hai anyathA usameM lipi saMvat vagairahakA ullekha mila jAtA
/  pustakakI jIrNatA ke kAraNa prArambhameM 44 patra naye likhakara lagAye gaye
haiM  /  ina 44 patroMmeM pratipatrameM 13 paMkti aura pratipaMkti meM 40 se 45
taka akSara haiM  /  prAcIna patroMmeM 12 paMktiyA~ aura pratipaMkti meM 35 se
38 taka akSara haiM  /  adhikAMza lipi zuddha kI gayI hai  /  isa pratimeM bhI
'kha' pratike samAna prArambhake 1-2 zlokoMkI saMskRta TIkA dI gayI hai  /  isa
pratikA sAMketika nAma 'ja' hai  /  [4] 'ba' pratikA paricaya yaha pustaka paM.
dhannAlAla RSabhacandra rAmacandra bambaIkI hai  /  isa pustakameM 13x6 iMcakI
sAIja ke 265 patra haiM  /  pratipatra meM 19 paMktiyA~ aura pratipaMkti meM 55
se 60 taka akSara haiN| lipike saMvat aura lipikArakA ullekha aprApta | para
jAna par3atA hai ki lipikartA saMskRta bhASAkA jAnakAra thA isalie lipi
sambandhI azuddhiyA~ nahIM ke barAbara haiM  /  prAyaH saba pATha zuddha aMkita
kiye gaye haiM  /  bIca-bIca meM kaThina sthaloM para TippaNa bhI diye gaye haiM
/  isa saMskaraNake sampAdana meM isa pastaka se adhika sahAyatA prApta huI hai
/  isakA sAMketika nAma 'ba' hai  /  [5] TippaNa pratikA paricaya yaha prati zrI
di. jaina sarasvatI bhaNDAra dharmapurA dillIkI hai| zrI paM. paramAnandajI ke
saujanya se prApta huI hai  /  yaha TippaNakI prati hai  /  isameM 105 iMcakI
sAIjake 58 patra haiM  /  bahuta hI saMkSepa meM padmacarita kaThina sthaloMpara
TippaNa diye gaye haiM  /  isa pustakakI lipi pauSa vadI 5 ravivAra saMvat 1894
ko pUrNa huI hai  /  lazkara meM likhI gayI hai  /  kisane likhI ? isakA ullekha
nahIM hai  /  isakI racanA ke viSaya meM anta meM likhA hai 'lATa vAgar3a zrI
pravacana sena paNDitAn padmacaritaM samAkarNya balAtkAragaNa zrInandyAcArya
sattvaziSyeNa zrIcandramuninA zrImadvikramAditya saMvatsare
saptAzItyadhikasahasra ( parimitaM zrImaddhArAyAM zrImato rAjye bhojadevasya
padmacarite'  /  arthAt rAjA bhojake rAjyakAlameM saMvat 1087 meM dhArAnagarI
meM zrInandI AcAryake ziSya zrI candra munine isa TippaNakI racanA kI  /
lipikartAko asAvadhAnIse lipi sambandhI azuddhiyA~ bahuta haiM  /  [6] 'ma'
pratikA paricaya yaha prati zrI dAnavIra seTha mANikacandra granthamAlA bambaI
se zrI sAhityaratna paNDita darabArIlAlajI nyAyatIrtha ( svAmI 'satyabhakta'
varadhA) ke dvArA sampAdita hokara tIna bhAgoM meM vikrama saMvat 1985 meM
prakAzita huI hai  /  isakA sampAdana ukta paNDitajIne kina pratiyoMke
AdhArapara kiyA yaha patA nahIM calA para azuddhiyA~ adhika raha gayI haiM  /
isakA sAMketika nAma 'ma' hai  /  ina pratiyoM ke pAThabheda lene tathA milAna
karanepara bhI jahA~ kahIM sandeha dUra nahIM huA to mUDabidrI meM sthita
tAr3apatrIya pratise paM. ke. bhujabalI zAstrI dvArA usakA milAna karavAyA hai|
isa taraha yaha saMskaraNa aneka hastalikhita pratiyoMse milAna kara sampAdita
kiyA gayA hai  /  saMskRta sAhitya - sAgara saMskRta sAhitya agAdha sAgarake
samAna vizAla hai| jisa prakAra sAgara ke bhItara aneka ratna vidyamAna rahate
haiM usI prakAra saMskRta sAhitya - sAgara ke bhItara bhI purANa, kAvya, nyAya,
dharma, vyAkaraNa, nATaka,

Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  There are many gems like Ayurveda, Astrology, etc. in
existence. You will not find a subject in ancient Sanskrit on which someone has
not written. The Sanskrit literature is vast, but even though Jain Sanskrit
literature is comparatively small in quantity, it is of a high quality. The main
characteristic of Jain literature is that the description of the subject matter
is heart-touching, it presents the facts of the subject matter, and it is
beneficial to all living beings.  ## Ramayana Literature  Maryadapurushotam
Ramachandra has been such a popular figure that he has been described not only
in the literature of India but also outside India with respect. He is not only
mentioned in Jain literature but also in Vedic and Buddhist literature. High-
quality texts have been written on this subject in ancient languages like
Sanskrit, Prakrit, Apabhramsha, etc., and in various regional languages of
India. Not only Puranas but also Kavya, Mahakavya, Natak, Upanatak, etc., have
been written in good numbers on this subject. Any writer who has taken recourse
to the Ramayana has infused life into his dull words. The example of Bhatti
Kavya is present.  ## Different Streams of Ramayana  This story has been written
in its own way by the followers of Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism, and all
three religions consider Rama as their ideal, great man. The general opinion of
most scholars is that the first basis of the Ramayana is Valmiki Ramayana. After
that, this story has been briefly recorded in the Mahabharata, Brahma Purana,
Padma Purana, Agni Purana, Vayu Purana, and all other Puranas with some changes.
Apart from this, many Ramayana texts have been written under the names Adhyatma
Ramayana, Anand Ramayana, Adbhut Ramayana. Based on these, the Tibetan and
Khothani Ramayana, the oldest work of Hindesh 'Ramayana Kaka Vin', the modern
'Serat Ram' of Java, and the Ramayana stories of Indochina, Siam, Burma, and Sri
Lanka have also been written. The Ramayana story of Valmiki Ramayana is famous
everywhere. Therefore, it is inappropriate to mention it. Yes, the story of
Sita's birth written in Adbhut Ramayana is unique, so I am presenting it here.
It is written that there was a sage named Gritsamad in Dandakaranya. His wife
prayed to him that Lakshmi be born from our womb. Hearing the wife's prayer, the
sage started keeping milk in a pot every day. At that time, Ravana arrived there
one day. To conquer the sage, he pierced the sage's body with the tips of his
arrows, extracting drop by drop of blood from his body and filling it in the
same pot. Ravana took the pot with him and gave it to Mandodari, saying, "This
blood is more potent than poison." After some time, Mandodari felt that her
husband did not love her truly, so in despair of life, she drank that blood. But
due to its effect, she did not die but became pregnant. Mandodari was frightened
by the conception in the absence of her husband and tried to hide it. Finally,
one day she went to Kurukshetra by plane and buried that womb in the ground.
Later, while plowing, that womb-born girl was found by King Janak, and he raised
her. This is Sita. In fact, this story of Adbhut Ramayana is amazing. There are
many other stories about Sita's birth, which I will mention in a separate
chapter. Among the Buddhists, the Pali language 'Jataka Kathavanna' has a brief
account of the Ramayana in the Dasaratha Jataka -

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA 13 Ayurveda, jyotiSa Adi aneka ratna vidyamAna haiM  /  prAcIna
saMskRta meM aisA Apako viSaya nahIM milegA jisapara kisI ne kucha na likhA ho
/  arjana saMskRta sAhitya to vizAlatama hai hI parantu jaina saMskRta sAhitya
bhI usake anupAta meM alpaparimANa honepara bhI uccakoTikA hai| jaina sAhityakI
pramukha vizeSatA yaha hai ki usameM vastu strarUpakA jo varNana kiyA gayA hai
vaha hRdayasparzI hai, vastuke tathyAMzako pratipAdita karanevAlA hai aura
prANimAtrakA kalyANakAraka hai  /  rAmakathA sAhitya maryAdApuruSottama
rAmacandra itane adhika lokapriya puruSa hue haiM ki unakA varNana na kevala
bhAratavarSa ke sAhitya meM huA hai apitu bhAratavarSa ke bAhara bhI sammAna ke
sAtha unakA nirUpaNa huA hai aura na kevala jaina sAhitya meM hI unakA varNana
AtA hai kintu vaidika aura bauddha sAhitya meM bhI sAMgopAMga varNana AtA hai  /
saMskRtaprAkRta apabhraMza Adi prAcIna bhASAoM evaM bhArata kI prAntIya vibhinna
bhASAoMmeM isake Upara uccakoTike grantha likhe gaye haiM  /  na kevala purANa
apitu kAvya- mahAkAvya aura nATaka - upanATaka Adi bhI isake Upara acchI saMkhyA
meM likhe gaye haiM  /  jisa kisI lekhakane rAmakathAkA Azraya liyA hai usake
nIrasa vacanoM meM bhI rAmakathA jAna DAla dI hai  /  isakA udAharaNa bhaTTi
kAvya vidyamAna hai  /  rAmakathA kI vibhinna dhArAe~ hindU, bauddha aura jaina
-- ina tInoM hI dharmAvalambiyoM meM yaha kathA apane-apane DhaMga se likhI gayI
hai aura tInoM hI dharmAvalambI rAmako apanA Adarza - mahApuruSa mAnate haiM  /
abhI taka adhikAMza vidvAnoMkA mala yaha hai ki rAmakathAkA sarvaprathama AdhAra
vAlmIki rAmAyaNa hai  /  usake bAda yaha kathA mahAbhArata, brahmapurANa,
padmapurANa, agnipurANa, vAyupurANa Adi sabhI purANoMmeM thor3e bahuta hera-
phera ke sAtha saMkSepameM lipibaddha kI gayI hai  /  isake sivAya
adhyAtmarAmAyaNa, AnandarAmAyaNa, adbhutarAmAyaNa nAmase bhI kaI rAmAyaNa
grantha likhe gaye  /  inhoMke AdhArapara tibbatI tathA khotAnI rAmAyaNa,
hindeziyA kI prAcInatama racanA 'rAmAyaNa kAkA vina', jAvAkA Adhunika 'serata
rAma' tathA hindacIna, zyAma, brahmadeza evaM siMhala Adi dezoMkI rAmakathAe~
bhI likhI gayI haiM  /  vAlmIki rAmAyaNakI rAmakathA sarvatra prasiddha hai  /
isalie use aMkita karanA anupayukta hai| hA~, adbhuta rAmAyaNa meM sItAkI
utpattikI jo kathA likhI hai vaha nirAlI hai ataH use yahA~ de rahA hU~  /
usameM likhA hai ki daNDakAraNyameM gRtsamada nAmake eka RSi the  /  unakI
strIne unase prArthanA kI ki hamAre garbha se sAkSAt lakSmI utpanna ho  /
strIkI prArthanA sunakara RSi pratidina eka ghar3e meM dUdhako amantrita kara
rakhane lage  /  isI samaya vahA~ eka dina rAvaNa A pahu~cA, usane RSipara
vijaya prApta karane ke lie unake zarIrapara apane bANoMkI noMke cubhA-cubhAkara
zarIrakA bU~da-bU~da rakta nikAlA aura usI ghar3e meM bhara diyaa| rAvaNa usa
ghar3eko sAtha hI le gayA aura le jAkara usane mandodarIko yaha jatAkara de diyA
ki 'yaha rakta viSase bhI tIvra hai  / ' kucha samaya bAda mandodarIko yaha
anubhava huA ki hamArA pati mujhapara saccA prema nahIM karatA hai isalie
jIvanase nirAza ho usane vaha rakta pI liyA  /  parantu usake yogase vaha marI
to nahIM kintu garbhavatI ho gayI  /  patikI anupasthiti meM garbhadhAraNa ho
jAnese mandodarI bhayabhIta huI aura vaha use chipAne kA prayatna karane lgii|
nidAna, eka dina vaha vimAna dvArA kurukSetra jAkara usa garbhako jamInameM
gAr3a AyI  /  usake bAda hala jotate samaya vaha garbhajAta kanyA rAjA janakako
milI aura unhoMne usakA pAlana-poSaNa kiyA  /  yahI sItA hai| vastutaH adbhuta
rAmAyaNa kI yaha kathA adbhuta hI hai  /  sItAjanmake viSaya meM aura bhI
vibhinna prakArakI kathAe~ pracalita haiM unakA ullekha alaga prakaraNa meM
karU~gA  /  bauddhoM ke yahA~ pAlI bhASAmaya 'jAtakaTThavaNNanA' ke
dazarathajAtakameM rAmakathAkA saMkSepa isa prakAra hai-

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, King Dasharatha ruled righteously in Varanasi. His eldest
queen had three children: two sons [Rampandit and Lakshman] and a daughter [Sita
Devi]. After the queen's death, the king appointed another woman as his chief
queen. She gave birth to a son [Bharat Kumar]. On this occasion, the king
granted her a boon. When Bharat was seven years old, the queen requested the
kingdom for her son. The king flatly refused. But when the queen continued to
plead for it day after day, the king, fearing her schemes, called his two sons
and said, "Staying here might bring you harm, so go to another kingdom or forest
and live there. After my death, return and claim the kingdom." At that time, the
king summoned astrologers and asked them about his death. Upon receiving the
answer of twelve years, he said, "My sons, return after twelve years and claim
the throne." After paying their respects to their father, the two brothers were
about to leave when Sita Devi also bid farewell to her father and joined them.
Many others accompanied them. They returned and reached the Himalayas, where
they built an ashram and resided. After nine years, Dasharatha died due to grief
over his sons. The queen failed to make Bharat king as the ministers and Bharat
himself opposed it. Then, Bharat, with his four-armed army, went to the forest
to bring Ram. At that time, Ram was alone. Bharat told him the whole story of
his father's death and began to weep, but Rampandit neither grieved nor cried.
In the evening, Lakshman and Sita returned. Hearing of their father's death,
both were deeply saddened. To console them, Rampandit preached the Dharma of
impermanence. Hearing this, everyone was relieved of their sorrow. Later,
despite Bharat's repeated requests, Rampandit decided to stay in the forest,
saying, "My father ordered me to rule after twelve years, so I cannot return and
fulfill his command now. I will return after three years."  When Bharat also
refused to accept the throne, Rampandit gave him his Tridanda-Tridanda and said,
"These will rule until my return." Taking the Tridanda, Bharat returned to
Varanasi with Lakshman, Sita, and others. The ministers performed their duties
in the presence of these Tridanda. Whenever injustice occurred, the Tridanda
would strike each other, and when a just decision was made, they would become
silent.  After three years, Rampandit returned and married his sister Sita.
After ruling for sixteen thousand years, he ascended to heaven. At the end of
the Jataka, the Buddha explains the connection of the Jataka as follows: At that
time, King Shuddhodana was King Dasharatha. Mahamaya [Buddha's mother] was Ram's
mother, Yashodhara [Rahul's mother] was Sita, Anand was Bharat, and I was
Rampandit.  Similarly, in the "Anamakam Jataka," the story is told without
mentioning any specific character, but it is related to Ram's life. The special
feature of this Jataka is that Ram is not exiled by his father due to his
stepmother. He leaves the kingdom himself after hearing about his maternal
uncle's preparations for an attack.  Similarly, within the Chinese Tripitaka,
there is a collection of 121 Avadanas called "Tsa-Pau-Tsang-King." This
collection was translated into Chinese in 472 AD. It also contains a
"Dasharathakatha." It also mentions the Ramayana, with the special feature that
it does not mention Sita or any other princess.   Three... 1. In the third
century AD, "Anamakam Jataka" was translated into Chinese by Kang-Seng-Hui.
Although the original Indian text is unavailable, the Chinese translation is
preserved in the book "Lielu-Si King." [See the Taisho edition of the Chinese
Tripitaka No. 152]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe dazaratha mahArAja vArANasI meM dharmapUrvaka rAjya karate the|
inakI jyeSThA mahiSIke tIna santAna thI-do putra [ rAmapaNDita aura lakkhaNa ]
aura eka putrI [ sItA devI ] /  isa mahiSIke maraneke pazcAt rAjAne eka dUsarIko
jyeSThA mahiSIke padapara niyukta kiyaa| usake bhI eka putra [ bharata kumAra ]
utpanna huaa| rAjAne usI avasarapara usako eka vara diyaa| jaba bharatakI
avasthA sAta varSakI thI, taba rAnIne apane putrake lie rAjya maaNgaa| rAjAne
spaSTa inakAra kara diyaa| lekina jaba rAnI anya dinoMmeM bhI punaH-punaH isake
lie anurodha karane lagI taba rAjAne usake SaDyantroMke bhayase apane donoM
putroMko bulAkara kahA-'yahA~ rahanese tumhAre aniSTa honekI sambhAvanA hai
isalie kisI anya rAjya yA vanameM jAkara raho aura mere maraneke bAda lauTakara
rAjyapara adhikAra prApta kro|' usI samaya rAjAne jyotiSiryoko bulAkara unase
apanI mRtyukI avadhi puuchii| bAraha varSakA uttara pAkara unhoMne kahA-'he
putro ! bAraha varSake bAda Akara chatrako utthaanaa|' pitAkI vandanA kara donoM
bhAI calanevAle the ki sItA devI bhI pitAse vidA lekara unake sAtha ho lii|
tInoMke sAtha-sAtha bahuta-se anya loga bhI cala diye  /  unako lauTAkara tInoM
himAlaya pahu~ca gaye aura vahAM Azrama banAkara rahane lge| nau varSake bAda
dazaratha putrazokake kAraNa mara jAte haiN| rAnI bharatako rAjA banAne meM
asaphala hotI hai kyoMki amAtya aura bharata bhI isakA virodha karane lge| taba
bharata caturaMgiNI senA lekara rAmako le Aneke uddezyase vanako cale jAte haiN|
usa samaya rAma akele hI haiN| bharata unase pitAke dehAntakA sArA vRttAnta
kahakara rone lagate haiM parantu rAmapaNDita na to zoka karate haiM aura na
rote haiN| sandhyA samaya lakSaNa aura sItA lauTate haiN| pitAkA dehAnta
sunakara donoM atyanta zoka karate haiN| isapara rAmapaNDita unako dhairya dene
ke lie anityatAkA dharmopadeza sunAte haiN| use sunakara saba zokarahita ho jAte
haiM  /  bAdameM bharatake bahuta anurodha karanepara bhI rAmapaNDita yaha
kahakara vanameM rahanekA nizcaya prakaTa karate haiM-'mere pitAne majhe bAraha
varSako avadhike anta meM rAjya karane kA Adeza diyA hai ataH abhI lauTakara
maiM unakI AjJAkA pAlana na kara skuuNgaa| maiM tIna varSa bAda lauTa aauuNgaa|'
jaba bharata bhI zAsanAdhikAra asvIkAra karate haiM taba rAmapaNDita apanI
tiNNapAdukA-tRNapAdukA dekara kahate haiM 'mere Ane taka ye zAsana kreNgii|'
tRNapAdukAoMko lekara bharata lakSmaNa, sItA tathA anya logoMke sAtha vArANasI
lauTate haiN| amAtya ina pAdukAoMke sAmane rAjakArya karate haiN| anyAya hote hI
ve pAdukAe~ eka dUsarepara AghAta karatI thIM aura Thoka nirNaya honepara zAnta
hotI thiiN| tIna varSa vyatIta honepara rAmapaNDita lauTakara apanI bahana
sItAse vivAha karate haiN| solaha sahasra varSa taka rAjya karaneke bAda ve
svarga cale jAte haiN| jAtakake antameM mahAtmA buddha jAtakakA sAmaMjasya isa
prakAra baiThAte haiM-usa samaya mahArAja zuddhodana mahArAja dazaratha the|
mahAmAyA [ buddhakI mAtA ] rAmakI mAtA, yazodharA [ rAhulakI mAtA ] sItA, Ananda
bharata the aura maiM rAmapaNDita thaa| isI prakAra 'anAmakaM jAtakam' meM bhI
kisI pAtrakA ullekha na kara sirpha rAmake jIvanavRttase sambandha rakhanevAlI
kathA kahI gayI hai| isa jAtakameM vizeSatA yaha hai ki rAmako vimAtAke kAraNa
pitA dvArA vanavAsa nahIM diyA jAtA hai  /  ve apane mAmAke AkramaNakI
taiyAriyA~ sunakara svayaM rAjya chor3a dete haiN| isI prakAra cInI tipiTakake
antargata tsA-pau-tsaMga-kiMga nAmaka 121 avadAnoMkA saMgraha hai| yaha saMgraha
472 I. meM cInI bhASAmeM anUdita huA thaa| isameM eka 'dazarathakathAnam' bhI
milatA hai| isameM bhI rAmakathAkA ullekha kiyA gayA hai, vizeSatA yaha hai ki
isameM sItA yA kisI anya rAjakumArIkA ullekha tIna ... 1. tIsarI zatAbdI I.meM
'anAmakaM jAtakam'kA kAMga-seMga-huI dvArA cInI bhASAmeM anuvAda huA thA  /
yadyapi mUla bhAratIya pATha aprApya hai parantu cInI anuvAda 'liyeUlu-sI kiMga'
nAmaka pustakameM surakSita hai| [ dekho cInI tipiTakakA taizo saMskaraNa naM.
152 ] .

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  It has not been done. The description of Dasharatha's four
queens comes - among them, Rama was born to the chief queen, Raman [Roman-
Lakshman] to the second queen, Bharata to the third queen, and Shatrughna to the
fourth. Due to the fear of the length of the writing, I am not giving the story
of 'Anamka Jataka' and 'Dasharathakatha'. _ In this way, we see three forms of
the Ramayana in Hindu and Buddhist literature - one of Valmiki Ramayana, the
second of Adbhut Ramayana, and the third of Buddhist Jataka.  ## Two Forms of
Jain Ramayana  _ Similarly, two streams of Ramayana are available in Jain
literature - one of Vimalsuri's 'Paumachariya' and Ravishena's 'Padmacharit',
and the other of Gunabhadra's 'Uttarapurana'. _ In the Shwetambar tradition,
some facts related to the lives of Tirthankaras and other Shalaka Purushas are
found in the 'Sthananga Sutra', which was taken as the basis for the creation of
'Trishatti Mahapurana' etc. by Shwetambar Acharya Hemchandra etc. In the
Digambar tradition, we find an ancient collection of the characters of
Tirthankaras etc. in the form of a list in the Prakrit language 'Tiloyapannatti'
text. This text also contains the main facts of the lives of 9 Narayana, 9
Pratinarayana, 9 Balabhadra, and 11 Rudras. Based on these and the stories heard
from their Guru Parampara, various Puranakaras have created many Puranas.
Vimalsuri has written in the introduction of 'Paumachariya' that "I, who is
bound in the list and has come from the Acharya Parampara, tell the entire
Padmacharit briefly according to the chronological order." It is clear from his
mention that he created 'Paumachariya' taking 'Namavali' as the main basis. The
character of Tirthankaras and other Shalaka Purushas, which is mentioned in the
form of a list in 'Tiloyapannatti', has also been given a place in their
respective texts by later Puranakaras. Ravishena has assimilated that Bhava in
the twentieth chapter of 'Padmacharit'. The mention of the subject of the
creation of this text at the end of this text proves that it was written in Veer
Nirvana Samvat 530, Vikram Samvat 60, but Western experts like Dr. Herman
Jacobi, Dr. Keith, Dr. Buhler etc., looking at its language style and use of
words, consider it to be written in the third-fourth century AD. After this,
Acharya Ravishena created the Sanskrit 'Padmacharit' in Veer Nirvana Samvat 1204
and Vikram Samvat 734. The stream of the story presented in these two texts can
be divided into the following six parts: [1] Description of the Vidhyadhar Kand,
Rakshas and Vanar lineage, [2] Birth and marriage of Rama and Sita, [3] Forest
wandering, [4] Sita's abduction and search, [5] War, [6] Uttar Charit. Their
brief story summary is as follows:  ## [1] Vidhyadhar Kand  First, King Shrenik
expresses his desire to know the true form of the Ramayana from Gautam Swami,
the first Ganadhar of Bhagwan Mahavira. In response, Gautam Swami tells the
Ramayana. In the beginning, the description of the Vidhyadhar Lok, Rakshas
lineage, Vanar lineage, and Ravana's lineage is given. The Rakshas lineage king
Ratnashrava and Keksi have four children - Ravana, Kumbhakarna, Chandranakha,
and Vibhishan. When Ratnashrava first saw his son Ravana, he saw ten heads in
the infant who was wearing a garland, so he was named Dashanan or Dashà¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤µ. His
maternal uncle's 1. à¤£à¤¾à¤®à¤¾à¤µà¤²à¤¿à¤¯ à¤£à¤¿à¤¬à¤¦à¥à¤§ à¤à¤¯à¤°à¤¿à¤¯ à¤ªà¤°à¤®à¥à¤ªà¤°à¤¾à¤à¤°à¥à¤® à¤¸à¤µà¥à¤µà¤ à¥¤ à¤µà¥à¤à¥à¤à¤¾à¤®à¤¿ à¤ªà¤à¤®à¤à¤°à¤¿à¤¯à¤
à¤à¤¹à¤¾à¤£à¥à¤ªà¥à¤¬à¥à¤¬à¤¿ à¤¸à¤®à¤¾à¤¸à¥à¤£ à¥¥à¥®à¥¥ -'Paumachariya-' Uddesh 1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA nahIM huA hai| dazarathakI cAra rAniyoMkA varNana AtA hai-unameM
pradhAna mahiSIke rAma, dUsarI rAnI ke rAmana [romaNa-lakSmaNa ], tIsarI rAnIke
bharata aura cauthIse zatrughna utpanna hue the| lekha vistArake bhayase
'anAmaka jAtakam' aura 'dazarathakathAnam' ko kathAvastu nahIM de rahA huuN| _
isa taraha hama hindU aura bauddha sAhityameM rAmakathAke tIna rUpa dekhate
haiM-eka vAlmIki rAmAyaNakA, dUsarA adbhuta rAmAyaNakA aura tIsarA bauddha
jaatkkaa| jaina rAmakathAke do rUpa _ isI taraha jaina sAhityameM bhI
rAmakathAkI do dhArAeM upalabdha haiM-eka vimalasUrike 'paumacariya' aura
raviSeNake 'padmacarita' kI tathA dUsarI guNabhadrake 'uttarapurANa' ko| _
zvetAmbara paramparAmeM tIrthakara Adi zalAkApuruSoMke jIvana sambandhI kucha
tathyAMza sthAnAMga sUtra meM milate haiM jise AdhAra mAnakara zvetAmbara AcArya
hemacandra Adine triSaSTi mahApurANa AdikI racanAe~ kI haiN| digambara
paramparAmeM tIrthaMkara Adike caritroMkA prAcIna saMkalana nAmAvalIke rUpameM
hameM prAkRta bhASAke tiloyapaNNatti granthameM milatA hai| isI granthameM 9
nArAyaNa, 9 pratinArAyaNa, 9 balabhadra tathA 11 rudroMke jIvanake pramukha
tathya bhI saMgRhIta haiN| inhIM ke AdhAra tathA apanI guruparamparAse anuzruta
kathAnakoMke balapara vibhinna purANakAroMne aneka purANoMkI racanAeM kI haiN|
vimalasUrine 'paumacariya' ke upodghAta meM likhA hai ki 'maiM, jo nAmAvalImeM
nibaddha hai tathA AcArya paramparAse Agata hai aisA samasta padmacarita
AnupUrvIke anusAra saMkSepase kahatA huuN''| unake isa ullekhase spaSTa hai ki
unhoMne nAmAvalIko mukhyAdhAra mAnakara 'paumacariya' kI racanA kI hai|
tiloyapaNNattimeM jo nAmAvalIke rUpameM tIrthaMkara Adi zalAkApuruSoMkA carita
aMkita kiyA gayA hai-usako uttaravartI purANakAroMne bhI apane-apane granthoMmeM
sthAna diyA hai| raviSeNane padmacaritake bIsaveM parvameM usa bhavako AtmasAta
kiyA hai| isa granthake antameM jo grantha nirmANake viSayameM ullekha kiyA hai
usase yaha vIra nirvANa saM. 530 vikrama saMvat 60 meM racA gayA siddha hai,
para DaoN. harmana jaikobI, DaoN. kItha, DaoN. bulanara Adi pAzcAttya vizeSajJa
isakI bhASAzailI tathA zabdoMke prayogapara dRSTi DAlate hue ise IsAkI tIsarI-
cauthI zatAbdIkA racA huA mAnate haiN| isake uparAnta AcArya raviSeNane vIra
nirvANa saMvat 1204 aura vikrama saMvat 734 meM saMskRta padmacaritakI racanA kI
hai| ina donoM granthoM meM pratipAdita kathAkI dhArA nimnAMkita chaha
vibhAgoMmeM vibhakta kI jA sakatI hai-[1] vidyAdhara kANDarAkSasa tathA vAnara
vaMzakA varNana, [2] rAma aura sItAkA janma tathA vivAha, [3] vanabhramaNa, [4]
sItAharaNa aura khoja [5] yuddha, [6 ] uttara carita  /  inakA saMkSipta
kathAsAra isa prakAra hai [1] vidyAdhara kANDa prathama hI rAjA zreNika bhagavAn
mahAvIrake prathama gaNadhara gautama svAmIse rAmakathAkA yathArtha rUpa jAnane
kI icchA prakaTa karatA hai isake uttarameM gautama svAmI rAmakathA sunAte haiN|
prArambhameM vidyAdhara loka, rAkSasa vaMza, vAnara vaMza aura rAvaNakI
vaMzAvalIkA varNana diyA gayA hai rAkSasa vaMzake rAjA ratnazravA tathA kekasIke
cAra santAna haiM-rAvaNa, kumbhakarNa, candranakhA aura vibhiissnn| jaba
ratnazravAne pahale pahala apane putra rAvaNako dekhA thA taba zizu jo hAra
pahane hue thA usameM use rAvaNake dasa sira dikhe isIlie usakA dazAnana yA
dazagrIva nAma rakhA gyaa| apane mausere bhAIkA 1. NAmAvaliya Nibaddha Ayariya
paramparAgarma savvaM  /  vocchAmi paumacariyaM ahANupubbi samAseNa  // 8 //
-'paumacariya-' uddeza 1

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 16  The Padma Purana describes how Ravana and his brothers went to
learn various sciences. Ravana acquired many sciences and returned. He then
married Mandodari and 6000 other women and conquered many kings in his
Digvijaya. In this account, Indra, Yama, Varuna, etc. are not gods but ordinary
Vidyaadhar kings. During this conquest, Ravana rejected the love proposal of a
woman named Nalakuvar, claiming to be superior. He heard the teachings of a
Kevali and vowed not to enjoy any woman who did not desire him. Ravana shattered
Indra's pride. The arrogance of Bali, a king, turned into detachment due to
Ravana's attack. Bali renounced the world and took the Daigambari initiation,
making Sugriva the king. Hanuman's true birth and his childhood antics amazed
everyone. Hanuman fought against Varuna on Ravana's behalf and married
Anangakusuma, the daughter of Chandra Nakha. Khara Dushan married Ravana's
sister, Chandranakha. Later, they had a son named Shambhuka.  ## [2] Birth and
Marriage of Rama and Sita  This chapter begins with the lineage of Janaka and
Dasharatha, followed by the mention of Dasharatha's three wives: 1. Kaushalya,
2. Sumitra, and 3. Suprabha. One day, Ravana learned that his death would be
caused by the descendants of King Janaka and Dasharatha. Ravana sent his brother
Vibhishan to kill them. However, before Vibhishan arrived, Narada warned both
kings, who left their palaces, leaving behind statues resembling their bodies.
Vibhishan, mistaking the statues for the real kings, killed them and threw their
heads into the salt sea, feeling secure. During his travels, King Dasharatha
reached Kekayi's Swayamvara. Kekayi placed a garland around Dasharatha's neck,
which angered other kings. This led to a war between them and Dasharatha. Kekayi
was a valiant woman and drove Dasharatha's chariot herself. King Dasharatha,
with his prowess and cunning, won the war and returned to Ayodhya to rule.
Dasharatha, cleverly pleasing Kekayi, asked her to ask for a boon, which he
promised to grant. He kept the boon safe in the royal treasury. Dasharatha had
four queens, including Kekayi, and they gave birth to four sons: Rama from
Kaushalya, Lakshmana from Sumitra, Bharata from Kekayi, and Shatrughna from
Suprabha.  King Janaka's wife, the queen of Videha, gave birth to a daughter,
Sita, and a son, Bhamandal. At birth, Bhamandal was abducted by an enemy from
his previous life. Bhamandal was found by a Vidyaadhar, who raised him. Seeing
Sita's portrait through Narada's grace, Bhamandal developed a strong affection
for her. He tricked Janaka into coming to the Vidyaadhar realm. Despite
Bhamandal's father's request, Janaka refused to give him his daughter, as he had
already promised her to Rama, the son of King Dasharatha. Finally, the
Vidyaadhar proposed a condition: if Rama could string the Vajraavarta bow, he
would get Sita; otherwise, they would forcefully take her for their son. Janaka
reluctantly agreed to this condition. The Swayamvara took place, and Rama strung
the bow. He married Sita. Dasharatha decided to give the kingdom to Rama. Then,
Kekayi, using the boon she had saved in the royal treasury, demanded that
Bharata be made the king. Hearing this, Rama, Lakshmana, and Sita left for the
south. They helped many troubled kings along the way. Kekayi and Bharata went to
the forest and requested Rama to return, but their efforts were in vain.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 16 padmapurANe vibhava dekhakara rAvaNa Adi bhAI vidyAe~ siddha karaneke lie
jAte haiM aura rAvaNa aneka vidyAe~ prApta kara lauTatA hai  /  isake bAda
rAvaNa mandodarI tathA 6000 anya kanyAoM ke sAtha vivAha karatA hai aura
digvijayameM bahuta-se rAjAoMko parAsta karatA hai| isa varNanameM indra, yama,
varuNa Adi devatA na hokara sAdhAraNa vidyAdhara rAjA hai| isa vijayayAtrAmeM
rAvaNa nalakUbarako strIkA premaprastAva ThukarAkara apane Apako bahuta U~cA
uThAtA hai aura kevalIkA upadeza sunakara pratijJA karatA hai ki maiM usa
paranArIkA upabhoga nahIM karUMgA jo mujhe svayaM nahIM caahegii| rAvaNa indrakA
ahaMkAra cUra karatA hai| bAlikA ahaMkAra rAvaNake AkramaNase vairAgyarUpameM
pariNata ho jAtA hai jisase bAli virakta hokara daigambarI dIkSA dhAraNa karatA
hai aura sugrIvako rAjA banAtA hai| hanumAna kI yathArtha utpatti tathA usakI
bAlaceSTAe~ sabako cakita kara detI haiN| hanumAn rAvaNakI orase varuNake
viruddha yuddha karake candra nakhAkI putrI anaMgakusumAse sAtha vivAha karatA
hai  /  kharadUSaNa rAvaNako bahana candranakhAse vivAha karatA hai  /  Age
calakara donoMse zambUka kumArako utpatti hotI hai  /  [2] rAma aura sItAkA
janma tathA vivAha isa prakaraNameM janaka tathA dazaratha kI vaMzAvalIke bAda
prArambhameM dazarathakI tIna patniyoMkA ullekha hai.-1. kauzalyA, 2. sumitrA
aura 3. suprabhA  /  eka dina rAvaNako kisIse vidita haA ki marI mRtyu rAjA
janaka aura dazarathakI santAnoMke dvArA hogii| taba rAvaNane apane bhAI
vibhISaNako ina donoMkI hatyA karane ke lie bhejaa| para vibhISaNake Aneke
pahale hI nArada ina donoM rAjAoMko saceta kara jAte haiM jisase ye apane
mahaloMmeM apane zarIrake anurUpa putale chor3akara bAhara nikala jAte haiN|
vibhISaNa putaloMko hI sacamucakA rAjA samajha mArakara tathA zirako lavaNa
samudrameM pheMka hamezAke lie nizcinta ho jAtA hai  /  paradeza-bhramaNake
samaya rAjA dazaratha kekayIke svayaMvara meM pahu~cate haiN| kekayI dazarathake
gale meM mAlA DAlatI hai| isapara anya rAjA bigar3a uThate haiN| phalasvarUpa
unake sAtha dazarathakA yuddha hotA hai| kekayI vIrAMganA thI isalie svayaM
dazarathakA ratha calAtI hai| rAjA dazaratha apane parAkrama aura usakI cAturIse
yuddha meM vijayI hote haiM tathA ayodhyA vApasa Akara rAjya karane lagate haiN|
kekayIko caturAIse rIjhakara dazarathane use manacAhA vara mAMganeko kahA aura
usane varako rAjyabhaNDArameM surakSita karA diyaa| kekayI sameta rAjA
dazarathakI cAra rAniyAM ho jAtI haiM, unase unake cAra putra utpanna hue|
kauzalyAse rAma, inhIMkA dUsarA nAma padma yA, sumitrAse lakSmaNa, kekayIse
bharata aura suprabhAse zatrughna  /  rAjA janakakI videhA rAnIke eka putrI sItA
tathA eka putra bhAmaNDala utpanna huaa| utpanna hote hI prasUtigRhase eka
pUrvabhavakA vairI bhAmaNDalakA apaharaNa kara letA hai  /  apaharaNake bAda
bhAmaNDala eka vidyAdharako prApta hotA hai| usIke yahA~ usakA lAlana-pAlana
hotA hai| nAradakI kRpAse sItAkA citrapaTa dekhakara bhAmaNDalakA usake prati
anurAga bar3hatA hai| chalase janakako vidyAdhara lokameM bulAyA jAtA hai|
bhAmaNDalake pitAke Agraha karanepara bhI janaka usake lie putrI denA svIkRta
nahIM karatA hai kyoMki vaha pahale rAjA dazarathake putra rAmako denA svIkRta
kara cukA thaa| nidAna, vidyAdharane zarta rakhI ki yadi rAma yaha vajrAvarta
dhanuSa car3hA deMge to sItA unheM prApta hogI anyathA hama apane putrake lie
balAt chIna leNge| vivaza hokara janakane yaha zarta svIkRta kara lii|
svayaMvara huA aura rAmane ukta dhanuSa car3hA diyaa| sItAke sAtha rAmakA vivAha
huaa| dazaratha virakta ho rAmako rAjya dene lge| taba kekayIne rAjya-
bhaNDArameM surakSita vara mAMgakara bharatako rAjya dene kI icchA kii| yaha
sunakara rAma lakSmaNa sItAke sAtha dakSiNa dizAkI ora cale gye| bIcameM kitane
hI trasta rAjAoMkA uddhAra kiyaa| kekayI aura bharata vanameM jAkara rAmase
vApasa calanekA anurodha karate haiM para saba vyartha hotA hai  /

Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction [3] Forest Journey This section describes numerous battles
fought by Rama and Lakshmana. In one instance, they save Vajrakarn from
Chandrase, the son of Singhodara, and in another, they free Balakhilya from the
prison of a Mlechchha king. They also disguise themselves as dancers and
humiliate Raja Ativirya, who opposed Bharata. Meanwhile, Lakshmana marries
several princesses along the way. They reside in Dandaka forest, provide food to
the sages, and establish contact with Jatayu. 17 [4] The Abduction and the
Search Shambuka, the son of Chandranala and Saradushan, performs penance for
twelve years in a bamboo grove to attain the Suryahaas sword. As a result of his
penance, the sword appears. Lakshmana, by chance, arrives there and, before
Shambuka can take the sword, tests it by striking the same bamboo grove where
Shambuka is seated. This results in Shambuka's death. Chandranakha, upon
arriving to offer food, witnesses his death and grieves deeply. She becomes
infatuated with Rama and Lakshmana and proposes love, but when she fails, she
returns to her husband and informs him of her son's death. Lakshmana engages in
battle with Khara and Dushan. At Khara's call, Ravana arrives to assist. In the
midst of this, Ravana is captivated by Sita and devises a plan to abduct her.
Using his knowledge of magic, he learns that Lakshmana has established a signal
of a lion's roar to call Rama for help. Ravana, through a deceptive lion's roar,
sends Rama to Lakshmana's side and abducts Sita. Seeing Sita alone, After Sita's
abduction, Rama is deeply distressed. He befriends Sugriva. A Vidyaadhar named
Saahasagati, assuming Sugriva's form through magic, attempts to seize Sugriva's
wife and kingdom. Rama kills him, allowing Sugriva to reclaim his wife and
kingdom, becoming Rama's devotee. Following Sugriva's orders, they search for
Sita. The Vidyaadhar Ratnajaati informs them that Ravana has abducted Sita. At
that time, Ravana was very powerful, so Sugriva and other Vidyaadhars retreat
from battle. However, they recall the words of the Kevali Anantvirya, who said
that whoever lifts the stone will be the one to kill Ravana. Lakshmana lifts the
stone, proving his strength. Sugriva and others are convinced. All the
Vanarvanshi Vidyaadhars stand with Rama against Ravana. Hanuman, carrying Rama's
message, reaches Sita and brings her message back to Rama.  [5] The War With the
help of Sugriva and other Vidyaadhars, the entire army reaches Lanka through the
sky. Ravana demonstrates his mastery of the Bahurupini Vidya (the art of
assuming multiple forms). Hanuman and others try to hinder his mastery, but
Ravana remains steadfast and completes the Vidya. He then engages in a conflict
with Vibhishan, who ultimately abandons Ravana and joins Rama. Rama vows to make
Vibhishan the king of Lanka. A fierce battle ensues on both sides. Lakshmana is
struck by a weapon, but recovers with the water from Vishalya's bath.
Lakshmana's affection for Vishalya deepens. Finally, Ravana throws the
Lakshmanpur Chakra, but it circles around and lands in Lakshmana's hand.
Lakshmana uses the same Chakra to end Ravana's life. Lakshmana, after killing
Prati Narayan, manifests as Narayan. [3]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA [3] vana-bhramaNa isameM rAma-lakSmaNake aneka yuddhoMkA varNana hai
/  kahIM vajrakarNako siMhodara ke candrase bacAte haiM to bAlakhilyako mleccha
rAjAke kArAgRhase unmukta karate haiM, kabhI nartakIkA rUpa dharakara bharata ke
virodha meM khar3e hue rAjA ativIryakA mAna-mardana karate haiN| isI bIcameM
lakSmaNa jagaha-jagaha rAjakanyAoMke sAtha vivAha karate haiN| daNDaka vanameM
vAsa karate haiM, muniyoMko AhAra dAna dete haiM tathA jaTAyuse samparka prApta
karate haiM  /  17 [4] sotAharaNa aura khoja candranalA tathA saradUSaNakA putra
zambUka sUryahAsa khaDgako siddhike lie bAraha varSa taka bA~sake bhir3emeM
baiThakara tapasyA karatA hai usakI sAdhanAsvarUpa use khaDga prakaTa huA
lakSmaNa saMyogavaza vahA~ pahu~cate haiN| aura zambUkake pahale hI usa khaDgako
hAthameM lekara usakI parIkSA karaneke lie usI vaMzake bhir3epara calAte hai
jisameM zambUka baiThA thA, phalataH zambUka mara jAtA hai| jaba candranakhA
bhojana dene ke lie usake pAsa AyI taba usakI mRtyu dekhakara bahuta vilApa
karatI hai| nidAna vaha rAma lakSmaNako dekha unapara mohita hokara prem|
prastAva rakhatI hai para jaba use saphalatA nahIM milatI hai taba vApasa loTa
patike pAsa jAkara putrake maranekA samAcAra sunAtI hai| kharadUSaNa ke sAtha
lakSmaNakA yuddha hotA hai, kharadUSaNa ke AhvAnapara rAvaNa bhI sahAyatAke lie
AtA hai  /  bIcameM rAvaNa sItAko dekha mohita hotA hai aura use apaharaNa
karanekA upAya socatA hai  /  vaha vidyAbalase jAna letA hai ki lakSmaNane
rAmako sahAyatArtha bulAne ke lie siMhanAdakA saMketa banAyA hai| ataH rAvaNa
prapaMcapUrNa siMhanAdase rAmako lakSmaNake pAsa bheja detA hai aura sItAko le
jAtA hai  /  akelI dekha hara sItAharaNa ke bAda rAma bahuta duHkhI hote haiN|
sugrIvake sAtha unakI mitratA hotI hai| eka sAhasagati nAmakA vidyAdhara
sugrIvakA mAyAmaya rUpa banAkara sugrIvakI patnI tathA rAjyapara adhikAra karanA
cAhatA hai  /  rAma use mArate haiM, jisase sugrIva apanI patnI tathA rAjya
pAkara rAmakA bhakta ho jAtA hai  /  sugrIvakI AjJAse vidyApara sItAko khoja
karate haiN| ratnajaTI vidyAdhara ne batAyA ki sItAkA haraNa rAvaNane kiyA hai|
usa samaya rAvaNa bar3A balavAn thA isalie sugrIva Adi vidyAdhara usase yuddha
karaneke lie pIche haTate haiM para unheM anantavIrya kevalI ke vacana yAda Ate
haiM ki jo koI zilAko uThAyegA usIke hAthase rAvaNakA maraNa hogA  /  lakSmaNane
koTizilA uThAkara apanI parIkSA dii| sugrIva Adiko vizvAsa ho gyaa| taba sabake
saba vAnaravaMzI vidyAdhara rAvaNake viruddha rAmake pakSameM khar3e ho jAte
haiN| hanumAn rAmakA saMvAda lekara sItAke pAsa jAte haiM aura sItAkA sandeza
lAkara rAmake pAsa Ate haiM  /  [5] yuddha sugrIva Adi vidyAparoMkI sahAyatAse
samasta senA AkAza mArgase laMkA pahu~catI hai| rAvaNa bahurUpiNI vidyA siddha
karatA hai| hanumAn Adi usako vidyAsiddhimeM bAdhA DAlanekA prayatna karate haiM
para rAvaNa apanI dRr3hatA se vicalita nahIM hotA hai aura vidyA siddha karake
hI uThatA hai| vibhISaNase rAvaNakA saMgharSa hotA hai phalataH vibhISaNa
rAvaNakA sAtha chor3a rAmase A milatA hai| rAma vibhISaNako laMkAkA rAjA banAne
kA saMkalpa karate haiN| donoM orase ghamAsAna yuddha hotA hai| lakSmaNako zakti
lagatI hai para vizalyAke snAna jalase vaha ThIka ho jAtA hai| vizalyA ke sAtha
lakSmaNakA anurAga dRr3ha hotA hai| antameM rAvaNa lakSmaNapura cakra calAtA hai
para vaha pradakSiNA dekara lakSmaNa ke hAthameM A jAtA hai aura lakSmaNa usI
cakrase rAvaNakA kAma samApta karatA hai| lakSmaNa pratinArAyaNakA vadha kara
nArAyaNake rUpameM prakaTa hotA hai| [3]

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 18  [6] Uttara Charit  In Ayodhya, Ram and Lakshman return and begin
ruling. Bharat, renouncing the world, takes initiation. Ram, troubled by public
opinion, abandons pregnant Sita in the forest. Sita takes shelter with King
Vajrangh. There, she gives birth to two sons, Lavana and Ankush. When they grow
up, Lavana and Ankush fight with Ram and Lakshman. Finally, at Narada's request,
father and sons reconcile. At the urging of Hanuman, Sugreev, Vibhishan, etc.,
Ram calls Sita. Sita undergoes the fire ordeal and then becomes an Arhatika.
Through tapasya, she attains the sixteenth heaven and becomes Prati-Indra. One
day, two Devas, Narayana and Balabhadra, come to test the love of Ram and
Lakshman. They falsely tell Lakshman that Ram has died. Hearing this, Lakshman
dies. Overwhelmed by grief for his brother, Ram wanders for six months carrying
Lakshman's body. Finally, through the efforts of the Deva who was the commander
of the army of Krtaantavaktra, the truth is revealed, and Lakshman is cremated.
Ram, renouncing the world, performs tapasya and attains liberation.  **From the
Padma Purana**  This narrative has widespread circulation in the Jain community.
The Jain Ramayana by Hemchandracharya, which is a part of the Trishatisalaaka
Purusha Charit, is developed along the lines of this narrative. The Rama Purana
by Jindas, the Rama Charit by Padmadev Vijay Gani, and the Ramakatha found in
various Kathas are all influenced by this narrative. The Paumachariu in
Apabhramsha language by Svayambhu Deva and the Karnataka Padma Ramayana by
Nagachand are also in line with this narrative.  **The second narrative is from
the Uttara Purana by Gunabhadracharya.** Gunabhadra was a disciple of Jinasena.
The mention "Kavi Parameshvara Nigadit Gadyakatha Matrukam Purocharitam" in
Jinasena's work clarifies that he composed the Adi Purana based on the prose
"Vagartha Sangrah" Purana by Kavi Parameshvara. Jinasena passed away before
completing the Adi Purana, so the remaining Adi Purana and the Uttara Purana
were composed by his enlightened disciple Gunabhadra. It is highly likely that
Gunabhadra also used Kavi Parameshvara's "Vagartha Sangrah Purana" as the basis
for composing the Uttara Purana, but this work is currently unavailable.
Therefore, Gunabhadra's name comes first as the originator of this second
narrative of the Ramakatha. In the 67th and 69th chapters of the Uttara Purana,
in 1167 verses, Ram and Lakshman are described as the eighth Balabhadra and
Narayana. This description differs from the descriptions in the Paumachariu and
Padma Charit. A notable point is that Sita is not considered the daughter of
Janaka but the daughter of Ravana and Mandodari. We will discuss Sita's birth in
a separate section later. It will be clear that "Sita was the daughter of
Ravana" was not only Gunabhadra's opinion but is also mentioned in the Tibetan
Ramayana and other texts. Therefore, it is likely that this second version of
the Ramakatha had gained significant popularity during Gunabhadra's time, and he
received this opinion from his Guru Parampara. Therefore, he has mentioned it
according to the Acharya Parampara. Although reading this narrative after
reading the first narrative of the Padma Charit might seem strange, this
narrative does not seem entirely baseless. In the Apabhramsha language
Mahapurana, the great poet Pushpadanta, in the Kannada language Trishatisalaaka
Purusha Purana, Chamunda Raya, and in the Punyasrava Kathasar, Nagaraj, have all
written their works following Gunabhadra's narrative.  **The brief plot of the
Uttara Purana is as follows:**  King Dasharatha of Varanasi has four sons: Ram
from the womb of Kausalya, Lakshman from the womb of Sumitra, and later, when
Dasharatha establishes his capital in Saketa, Bharat and Shatrughna are also
born from some queen.   1. Although Ravishena has written about Lakshman as the
son of Sumitra, he sometimes mentions him as the son of Kaikeyi, for example, in
this verse:  "Sumitra's son, but sometimes when he refers to him as the son of
Kaikeyi..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 18 [6] uttaracarita  /   /  ayodhyA meM rAma-lakSmaNa lauTakara rAjya karane
lagate haiM  /  bharata virakta ho dIkSA le letA hai  /  rAma lokApavAdase
trasta hokara garbhavatI sItAko vanameM chur3avA dete haiM sItA rAjA
vajrajaMghake AzrayameM rahatI hai  /  vahIM usake lavaNa aura aMkuza nAmaka do
putra utpanna hote haiN| bar3e honepara lavaNa aura aMkuza rAma-lakSmaNa se
yuddha karate haiM  /  antameM nAradake nivedanapara pitA-putroM meM milApa hotA
hai hanumAn, sugrIva, vibhISaNAdike kahane para rAma sItA ko bulAte haiM, sItA
agniparIkSA detI hai aura usake bAda ArthikA ho jAtI hai tathA tapakara
solahaveM svarga meM pratIndra hotI hai| kisI dina do deva nArAyaNa tathA
balabhadrakA sneha parakhane ke lie Ate haiM  /  ve jhUTha-mUTha hI lakSmaNase
kahate haiM ki rAmakA dehAnta ho gayA  /  unakI bAta sunate hI lakSmaNakI mRtyu
ho jAtI hai  /  bhAIke snehase vivaza ho rAma chaha mAsa taka lakSmaNakA zava
liye phirate haiM  /  antameM kRtAntavaktra senApatikA jIva jo deva huA thA,
usakI ceSTAse vastusthiti samajha lakSmaNako antyeSTi karate haiM aura virakta
ho tapazcaryA kara mokSa prApta karate haiM  /  padmapurANe isa dhArA
kathAnakakA jaina samAjameM bhArI pracAra hai| hemacandrAcArya kRta
jainarAmAyaNa, jo triSaSTi zalAkA puruSa caritakA eka aMza hai, isI dhArAke
anurUpa vikasita hai| jinadAsa kRta rAmapurANa, padmadeva vijaya gaNikRta
rAmacarita tathA kathAkoSoMmeM Agata rAmakathAe~ isI dhArAmeM pravAhita huI
haiN| svayaMbhU devakRta apabhraMza bhASAkA paumacariu tathA nAgacandakRta
karnATaka padmarAmAyaNa isI ke anukUla haiM  /  dUsarI dhArA guNabhadrAcAryakRta
uttarapurANakI hai  /  guNabhadra jinasenAcAryake ziSya the| jinasena ke
'kaviparamezvaranigaditagadyakathA mAtRkaM purozcaritam' isa ullekhase yaha
spaSTa kiyA hai ki unhoMne AdipurANa kI racanA kavi paramezvara ke gadyAtmaka '
vAgarthasaMgraha ' purANake AdhArapara kI haiN| jinasena AdipurANakI racanA
pUrNa karaneke pUrva hI divaMgata ho gaye, ataH avaziSTa AdipurANa tathA
uttarapurANako racanA unake prabuddha ziSya guNabhadra kI hai  /  bahuta kucha
sambhava hai ki guNabhadrane bhI uttarapurANakI racanA karate samaya kavi
paramezvara ke 'vAgarthasaMgrahapurANa' ko hI AdhArabhUta mAnA ho para Ajakala
vaha racanA aprApya hai  /  isalie rAmakathA kI isa dvitIya dhArAke
upodghAtakake rUpameM sarvaprathama guNabhadrakA hI nAma AtA hai  /
uttarapurANake 67veM tathA 69 veM parva meM 1167 zlokoMmeM AThaveM balabhadra
tathA nArAyaNake rUpameM rAma tathA lakSmaNakA varNana kiyA gayA hai  /  yaha
varNana 'paumacariu' aura 'padmacarita' ke varNana se bhinna hai  /  isameM
khAsa bAta yaha hai ki sItAko janakakI putrI na mAnakara rAvaNa-mandodarIkI
putrI mAnA hai  /  sItA-janmakI carcA Age calakara pRthak stambhameM kareMge  /
usase spaSTa hogA ki 'sItA rAvaNakI putrI thI' yaha na kevala guNabhadrakA mata
thA kintu tibbatI rAmAyaNa tathA anya granthoM meM bhI vaisA hI ullekha hai  /
ataH sambhavataH rAmakathA kA yaha dUsarA rUpa guNabhadra ke samaya meM paryApta
pracAra pA cukA hogA aura unheM apanI guru-paramparAse yahI mata prApta huA hogA
/  isalie AcArya paramparA ke anusAra unhoMne isIkA ullekha kiyA hai|
padmacaritakI prathama dhArAko par3haneke bAda yadyapi isa dhArAko par3hanemeM
kucha aTapaTA-sA lagatA hai para yaha dhArA sarvathA nirmUla nahIM mAlUma hotI
/  apabhraMza bhASAke mahApurANa meM mahAkavi puSpadantane, karNATaka bhASA ke
triSaSTi zalAkA puruSa purANameM cAmuNDarAya ne aura puNyAsrava kathAsArameM
nAgarAjane guNabhadrakI dhArA meM hI avagAhana kara apane kAvya likhe haiM  /
uttarapurANakA saMkSipta kathAnaka isa prakAra hai vArANasI ke rAjA dazarathake
cAra putra utpanna hote haiM- - rAma subAlA ke garbhase, lakSmaNa kaikeyI ke
garbha se aura bAdameM jaba dazaratha apanI rAjadhAnI sAketameM sthApita karate
haiM taba bharata aura zatrughna bhI kisI rAnIke 1. raviSeNane yadyapi
lakSmaNako likhA hai rUpameM ullikhita kiyA hai, udAharaNa ke lie eka zloka yaha
hai sumitrAkA putra, parantu bIca-bIca meM jaba kabhI unheM kekayI sUnuke

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  19 They are born from the womb. Here, the names of
Bharat and Shatrughna's mother are not given. Dashanan, the destroyer of ten, is
the son of Pulatsya from the Vidhyadhar lineage. One day, he sees Manimati, the
daughter of Amitvega, performing austerities and, becoming attached to her,
tries to obstruct her practice. Manimati resolves, "I will be born as his
daughter and kill him." After death, she enters the womb of Mandodari, Ravana's
queen. After her birth, astrologers tell Ravana that this daughter will destroy
him. Therefore, fearing this, Ravana orders Maricha to abandon her somewhere.
Placing the girl in a casket, Maricha buries it in the Mithila country. Due to
the tip of a plow getting entangled, the casket is revealed and brought to the
king by the people. Janak opens the casket, sees the girl, names her Sita, and
raises her as his daughter. After a long time, Janak invites Rama and Lakshmana
to protect his yagna. After the yagna is completed, Rama and Sita are married.
After this, Rama marries seven other maidens, and Lakshmana marries sixteen
royal princesses, including Prithvi Devi. Both, following Dasharatha's order,
reside in Varanasi.  **Introduction**  Hearing the description of Sita's beauty
from Narada, Ravana resolves to abduct her. To test Sita's mind, Shurpnakha is
sent, but seeing Sita's chastity, she returns to Ravana, saying that it is
impossible to sway Sita's mind. When Rama and Sita are strolling in the
Chitrakoot garden near Varanasi, Maricha, assuming the form of a golden deer,
lures Rama away. Meanwhile, Ravana, taking Rama's form, tells Sita that he has
sent a golden chariot and orders her to board it. This chariot is actually the
Pushpak Vimana, which takes Sita to Lanka. Ravana does not touch Sita because
the touch of a chaste woman destroys his celestial flying ability.  Dasharatha
learns through a dream that Ravana has abducted Sita and sends this news to
Rama. Meanwhile, Sugriva and Hanuman arrive to seek help against the demon.
Hanuman goes to Lanka, consoles Sita, and returns. [There is no mention of the
burning of Lanka.] After this, Lakshmana kills the demon, and Sugriva gains
control of his kingdom. Now, the army of monkeys sets out towards Lanka with
Rama's army. At the end of the detailed description of the war, Lakshmana
beheads Ravana with his chakra. After this, Lakshmana conquers the world,
becomes a semi-universal emperor [Narayana], and returns to Ayodhya. Lakshmana
has sixteen thousand wives, and Rama has eight thousand. Sita has eight sons.
[There is no mention of Sita's abandonment.] Lakshmana dies of an incurable
disease and goes to hell due to the killing of Ravana. Rama, after crowning his
son, Prithvisundar, on the throne and Sita's son, Ajitangaya, as the crown
prince, takes initiation and attains liberation. Sita, along with many queens,
also takes initiation and goes to the heaven of Achyuta.  This Ramayana of the
Uttarapurana is not prevalent in the Shvetambar sect. The Ramayana in Acharya
Hemchandra's Trishatishalaka Purushacharita is completely in line with the story
of the 'Paumachariya' or Padmacharita. It seems that both 'Paumachariya' and
'Padmacharita' were available to Hemchandracharya. Gunabhadracharya  It is said
that Ravana, with his excellent arrows, stopped the son of Kekaya, who was like
a mountain cloud. [Verse 94, Chapter 74] The son of Kekaya, who was seated in
the sky, released the Mahendra weapon. [Verse 100, Chapter 4]  An investigation
of the text reveals that Ravishaena has written the name of Bharat's mother as
'Kekaya' and has referred to Lakshmana's mother with both the names 'Sumitra'
and 'Kekaya'.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 19 garbha se utpanna hote haiM  /  yahA~ bharata aura zatrughnakI mAtAkA nAma
nahIM diyA gayA hai  /  dazAnana vinabhi vidyAdharavaMza ke pulastyakA putra
hai| kisI dina vaha amitavegakI putrI maNimatiko tapasyA karate dekhatA hai aura
usapara Asakta hokara usakI sAdhanA meM vighna DAlanekA prayatna karatA hai  /
maNimati nidAna karatI hai ki maiM 'usakI putrI hokara use mArUMgI'  /  mRtyuke
bAda vaha rAvaNakI rAnI mandodarIke garbha meM AtI hai  /  usake janma ke bAda
jyotiSI rAvaNase kahate haiM ki yaha putrI ApakA nAza karegI  /  ataH rAvaNane
bhayabhIta hokara mArIcako AjJA dI ki vaha use kahIM chor3a de  /  kanyAko eka
maMjUSAmeM rakhakara mArIca use mithilA dezameM gAr3a AtA hai  /  halakI noMkase
ulajha jAneke kAraNa vaha maMjUSA dikhAI par3atI hai aura logoMke dvArA janake
pAsa pahu~cAyI jAtI hai  /  janaka maMjUSAko kholakara kanyAko dekhate haiM aura
usakA sItA nAma rakhakara use putrI kI taraha pAlate haiM  /  bahuta samaya bAda
janaka apane yajJako rakSAke lie rAma aura lakSmaNako bulAte haiM | yajJa ke
samApta honepara rAma aura sItAkA vivAha hotA hai, isake bAda rAma sAta anya
kumAriyoMse vivAha karate haiM aura lakSmaNa pRthvI devI Adi 16 rAjakanyAoMse  /
donoM dazarathakI AjJA lekara vArANasI meM rahane lagate haiM  /  prastAvanA
nArada se sItA ke saundaryakA varNana sunakara rAtraNa use hara lAnekA saMkalpa
karatA hai| sItAkA mana jA~cane ke lie zUrpaNakhA bhejI jAtI hai lekina sItAkA
satItva dekha vaha rAvaNase yaha kahakara loTatI hai ki jItAkA mana calAyamAna
karanA asambhava hai  /  jaba rAma aura sItA vArANasIke nikaTa citrakUTa vATikA
meM vihAra karate haiM taba mArIca svarNamRgakA rUpa dhAraNa kara rAmako dUra le
jAtA hai  /  itane meM rAvaNa rAmakA rUpa dhAraNa karake sItA se kahatA hai ki
maiMne svarNabhRta mahala bhejA hai aura unako pAlakIpara car3hane kI AjJA detA
hai  /  yaha pAlakI vAstavameM puSpaka vimAna hai, jo sItAko laMkA le jAtA hai
/  rAvaNa sItAkA sparza nahIM karatA hai kyoMki pativratA sparzase usakI
AkAzagAminI vidyA naSTa ho jAtI  /  dazarathako svapna dvArA mAlUma huA ki
rAvaNane sItAkA haraNa kiyA hai aura vaha rAmake pAsa yaha samAcAra bhejate haiM
/  itanemeM sugrIva aura hanumAn bAlike viruddha sahAyatA mAMgane ke lie
pahu~cate haiM  /  hanumAn laMkA jAte haiM aura sItAko sAntvanA dekara lauTate
haiM [ laMkAdahanakA koI ullekha nahIM milatA ] isake bAda lakSmaNa dvArA bAlikA
vadha hotA hai aura sugrIva apane rAjyapara adhikAra prApta karatA hai| aba
vAnaroMkI senA rAmakI senA ke sAtha laMkAkI ora prasthAna karatI hai  /
yuddhake vistRta varNanake anta meM lakSmaNa cakrase ravaNakA zira kATate haiM
/  isake bAda lakSmaNa digvijaya karake aura ardhacakravartI [ nArAyaNa ]
banakara ayodhyA lauTate haiM | lakSmaNakI solaha hajAra aura rAmakI ATha hajAra
rAniyA~ haiM  /  sItAke ATha putra hote haiM [ sItAtyAgakA ullekha nahIM milatA
]  /  lakSmaNa eka asAdhya rogase marakara rAvaNa vadhake kAraNa naraka jAte
haiN| rAma, lakSmaNake putra pRthvIsundarako rAjyapadapara aura sItAke putra
ajitaMjayako yuvarAja padapara abhiSikta karake dIkSA lete haiM aura mukti pAte
haiM  /  sItA bhI aneka rAniyoMke sAtha dIkSA letI hai aura acyuta svarga meM
jAtI hai  /  uttarapurANakI yaha rAmakathA zvetAmbara sampradAya meM pracalita
nahIM hai  /  AcArya hemacandra ke triSaSTizalAkApuruSacarita meM jo rAmakathA
hai, vaha pUrNataH 'paumacariya' yA padmacaritakI kathA ke anurUpa hai  /  aisA
jAna par3atA hai ki hemacandrAcArya ke sAmane 'paumacariya' aura 'padmacarita'
donoM hI grantha vidyamAna the  /  guNabhadrAcArya ityukto rAvaNo bANaiH
subANaiH kaikayIsutam  /  prAvRSeNyaghanAkAro girikalpaM niruddhavAn  //  94  //
parva 74 kaikayInandanaH kRtaH mAhendramastramutsRSTaM cakAra gaganAsanam  //
100 //  parva 4 granthakI chAnabIna karanepara patA calA hai ki raviSeNane
bharatakI mAtAkA nAma 'kekayA' likhA hai aura lakSmaNakI mAtAko 'sumitrA' aura
'kekayI' ina do nAmoMse ullikhita kiyA hai  /

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The *Padma Purana* predates Hemachandracharya, so it is likely that he would
have encountered the *Paumachariyu* and *Padmacharit* before him. However, it
remains a mystery why he did not incorporate them into his own narrative.  The
*Paumachariyu* and *Padmacharit* Ramakatha largely follows the Valmiki Ramayana,
as both texts clearly indicate that King Shrenik encouraged Gautam Swami to tell
the true story of Rama. This suggests that a Ramakatha was prevalent in society
at the time, which depicted Ravana, Kumbhakarna, etc. as carnivorous demons, and
Sugriva, Hanuman, etc. as monkeys. Furthermore, historians have placed the
Valmiki Ramayana in the pre-Christian era, making it possible for the authors of
the *Paumachariyu* and *Padmacharit* to have encountered it. The description of
Sita's birth in the *Uttara Purana* resembles the style of the *Vishnu Purana*.
The fact that Dasharatha was the king of Banaras aligns with the Buddhist
Jataka. However, unlike the *Uttara Purana*, the Buddhist Jataka does not
include Sita's abandonment or the birth of Lava and Kusha. In essence, the three
prevalent streams of the Ramakatha in India have existed in the Jain community
since ancient times.  **Various Accounts of Sita's Birth**  These streams
exhibit significant variations regarding Sita's birth, making it appropriate to
compile these differences in this column.  The following beliefs regarding
Sita's birth are available:  [1] Sita is the daughter of Janaka.  This is
mentioned in the Ramakatha of the *Mahabharata* and *Harivansha*, the
*Paumachariyu*, *Padmacharit*, and the *Adi Ramayana*.  [2] Sita is the daughter
of the Earth.  This is mentioned in the Valmiki Ramayana and other Ramakatha
based on it. The northern text of the Valmiki Ramayana also mentions her as the
mental daughter of Janaka and Menaka, but the origin of a human being from the
Earth seems completely incongruous.  [3] Sita is the daughter of Ravana.  This
is mentioned in the *Uttara Purana*, *Vishnu Purana*, *Maha Bhagavata Purana*,
*Kashmiri Ramayana*, *Tibetan Ramayana*, and *Khotanese Ramayana*.  [4] Sita was
born from a lotus.  This is mentioned in the *Adbhuta Ramayana*, and its
detailed story has been previously discussed.  [5] Sita was born from the womb
of Mandodari, who received the blood of a sage.  This is mentioned in the
*Dashavatar Charit*.  [6] Sita was born from fire.  This is mentioned in the
*Anand Ramayana*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe hemacandrAcAryase pUrvavartI hai ataH inake samakSa bhI
'paumacariya' aura 'padmacarita' rahA avazya hogA para unhoMne ise apanI
kathAmeM kyoM nahIM apanAyA yaha eka rahasyapUrNa bAta mAlUma hotI hai|
'paumacariu' aura 'padmacarita' kI rAmakathA adhikAMza vAlmIki rAmAyaNake
AdhArapara calatI hai kyoMki donoM hI granthoMmeM rAjA zreNikane gautamasvAmIse
rAmakI yathArtha kathA kahane kI jo preraNA kI hai usase spaSTa dhvanita hotA
hai ki usa samaya lokameM eka rAmakathA pracalita thI jisameM rAvaNa kumbhakarNa
Adiko mAMsabhakSI rAkSasa, tathA sugrIva, hanumAn Adiko vAnara batAyA gayA thaa|
isake sivAya itihAsavettAoMne vAlmIki rAmAyaNakA samaya bhI IsavIya pUrva
batalAyA hai, taba usakA 'paumacariu' aura 'padmacarita' ke kartAke sAmane
rahanA zakya hI hai| uttarapurANakI dhArAmeM sItAjanmakA jo varNana milatA hai
vaha viSNupurANake DhaMgakA hai| dazaratha banArasake rAjA the yaha bAta
bauddhajAtakase milatI-julatI hai| uttarapurANake samAna bauddha jAtakameM
sItAtyAga tathA lavakuza-janma Adi nahIM haiN| kahanekA sArAMza yaha ki
bhAratavarSa meM rAmakathAkI jo tIna dhArAe~ pracalita haiM ve jaina
sampradAyameM bhI prAcInakAlase calI A rahI haiN| sItAjanmake vividha kathana
ina dhArAoMmeM sItAjanmako lekara paryApta vibhinnatA AyI hai, isalie una
vibhinnatAoMkA isa stambhameM saMkalana kara lenA upayukta pratIta hotA hai|
sItAjanmake viSayameM nimnAMkita mAnyatAeM upalabdha haiM [1] sItA janakakI
putrI hai _isakA ullekha 'mahAbhArata' tathA 'harivaMza' kI rAmakathA,
'paumacariu' tathA 'padmacarita' aura AdirAmAyaNameM milatA hai  /  [2] sItA
pRthivIkI putrI hai isakA ullekha vAlmIki rAmAyaNa tathA usake AdhArase likhI
gayI anya rAmakathAoMmeM pAyA jAtA hai| vAlmIki rAmAyaNake uttarIya pAThameM
janaka tathA menakAkI mAnasI putrI bhI batalAyA hai para pRthivIse mAnavIkI
utpatti ekadama asaMgata pratIta hotI hai| [3] sItA rAvaNakI putrI hai isakA
ullekha uttarapurANa, viSNupurANa, mahAbhAgavatapurANa, kAzmIrIrAmAyaNa, tibbatI
tathA khotAnIrAmAyaNameM milatA hai| [4] sItA kamalase utpanna huI hai isakA
ullekha adbhutarAmAyaNameM hai, isakI vistRta kathA pahale dI jA cukI hai| [5]
sItA RSike raktakA sambandha pAnevAlI mandodarIke garbhase utpanna huI isakA
ullekha dazAvatAra caritameM pAyA jAtA hai| [6] sItA agnise utpanna huI hai yaha
AnandarAmAyaNameM likhA hai|

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction [7] Sita is the daughter of Dasharatha. This Dasharatha Jataka
is written in Java's Ramkeling, Malay's Seriram, and the Hikayat Maharaja
Ravana. The story of Dasharatha Jataka has already been given. I am not giving
other stories due to the fear of writing extensively.  ## The Padmacharita and
Acharya Ravishena The Sanskrit Padmacharita is a very ancient text in Digambar
Katha literature. The protagonists of the text are the eighth Balabhadra Padma
(Rama) and the eighth Narayan Lakshmana. Both these individuals are revered by
the people, so whatever the poet has written about them is like a Mandakini
flowing from the mental Himalayas, as if it were the inner voice of the poet.
Acharya Ravishena, taking the opportunity, has depicted the characters of
Vidhyadharaloka, Anjana-Pavananjay, Hanuman, and Sukoshal, etc., which has
increased the interest of the text so much that one does not feel like leaving
it once they start reading it.  Its author is Acharya Ravishena. He has not
mentioned any of his sangha or ganagachchha, nor has he discussed the place,
etc., but from the name Senant, it seems that he might have belonged to the Sen
sangha. It seems that the full names of his guru parampara would be Indrasen,
Divakarasen, Arhatsen, and Lakshmanasen. He has mentioned his guru parampara in
the latter half of the 167th shloka of the 123rd parva of this Padmacharita as
follows: 'Aasi Dindragurodiwakarayati: Shishyo'sya chahanmuni Tasmal
Lakshmanasenasanmuniradah Shishyo Ravistu Smritam'. Meaning: Divakar Yati was
the guru of Indraguru, Arhatmuni was the disciple of Divakar Yati, Lakshmanasen
was the disciple of Arhatmuni, and Ravishena was the disciple of Lakshmanasen.
Who were all these people from which province? Who were their parents, etc.? And
what was their domestic life like? We do not know any of this. When was the
Padmacharita completed? He has mentioned this in the 181st shloka of the 123rd
parva as follows: "Dwishataabhyadhike sama sahasra
samatite'ardhachaturythavarshayukte. Jinbhaaskara Vardhamanasiddhe Charitam
Padmamuneridaam Nibaddham ||181|| Meaning: This charita of Padmamuni was written
after 1203 years and 6 months had passed since the nirvana of Jin Surya Bhagwan
Mahavira. Thus, its composition was completed in 734 Vikram Samvat. Udyotan
Suri, who came after him, has mentioned Ravishena, the author of Padmacharita,
and Jatilmuni, the author of Varangacharita, in his Kuvalayamala, which was
written in 835 VS. Similarly, Jinsen, the author of Harivansh Purana, has also
mentioned Ravishena well in his Harivansh Purana, which was written in 840 VS.
1. Jehi Kae Ramanijje Varang Paumaanachariya Vitthare. Kahav Na Salaahanijje Te
Kaino Jadieravishene ||41|| 2. Kritpadmodayodyota Pratyahm Parivartita. Murti:
Kavya Bhava Loke Raveriv Rave: Priya ||34||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA [7] sItA dazarathakI putrI hai yaha dazarathajAtaka, jAvAke
rAmakeliMga, malayake serIrAma tathA hikAyata mahArAja rAvaNameM likhA hai  /
inameM dazarathajAtakakI kathA pahale dI jA cukI hai| anya kathAe~ lekha-
vistArake bhayase nahIM de rahA huuN| padmacarita aura AcArya raviSeNa saMskRta
padmacarita, digambara kathA sAhityameM bahuta prAcIna grantha hai| granthake
kathAnAyaka AThaveM balabhadra padma ( rAma ) tathA AThaveM nArAyaNa lakSmaNa
haiN| donoM hI vyakti jana-janake zraddhAbhAjana haiM, isalie unake viSayameM
kavine jo bhI likhA hai vaha kaviko antarvANIke rUpameM usakI mAnasa-
himakandarAse niHsRta mAno mandAkinI hI hai| prasaMga pAkara AcArya raviSaNane
vidyAdharaloka, aMjanA-pavanaMjaya, hanumAna tathA sukozala AdikA jo caritra-
citraNa kiyA hai, usase granthakI rocakatA itanI adhika bar3ha gayI hai ki
granthako eka bAra par3hanA zurU kara bIca meM chor3anekI icchA hI nahIM hotii|
isake racayitA AcArya raviSeNa hai, inhoMne apane kisI saMgha yA gaNagacchakA
koI ullekha nahIM kiyA hai aura na sthAnAdikI hI carcA ko hai parantu senAnta
nAmase anumAna hotA hai ki sambhavataH sena saMghake hoN| inakI guruparamparAke
pUre nAma indrasena, divAkarasena, arhatsena aura lakSmaNasena hoMge, aisA jAna
par3atA hai| apanI guruparamparAkA ullekha inhoMne isI padmacaritake 123veM
parvake 167veM zlokake uttarArdhameM isa prakAra kiyA hai 'AsI
dindragurodivAkarayatiH ziSyo'sya cAhanmuni stasmAllakSmaNasenasanmuniradaH
ziSyo ravistu smRtam'  /  arthAt idraguruke divAkara yati, divAkara yatike
arhanmuni, arhanmunike lakSmaNasena aura lakSmaNasenake raviSeNa ziSya the| ye
saba kisa prAntake the ? inake mAtA-pitA Adi kauna the ? tathA inakA gArhasthya
jIvana kaisA rahA ? ina sabakA patA nahIM hai  /  padmacaritakI racanA kaba
pUrNa huI ? isakA ullekha inhoMne 123 veM parvake 181 veM zloka meM isa prakAra
kiyA hai| "dvizatAbhyadhike samA sahasra samatIte'rddhacaturthavarSayukte  /
jinabhAskaravarddhamAnasiddhe caritaM padmamuneridaM nibaddham  // 181 //
arthAt jinasUrya-bhagavAn mahAvIrake nirvANa honeke 1203 varSa 6 mAha bIta
jAnepara padmamunikA yaha carita nibaddha kiyA gyaa| isa prakAra isakI racanA
734 vikrama saMvata meM pUrNa huii| inake uttaravartI udyotanasUrine apanI
kuvalayamAlAmeM-jo vi. saM. 835 kI racanA hai varAMgacaritake kartA jaTilamuni
tathA padmacaritake kartA ravipeNakA smaraNa kiyA hai| isI prakAra
harivaMzapurANake kartA jinasenane bhI vi. saM. 840 kI racanA-harivaMza purANa
meM raviSeNakA acchI taraha smaraNa kiyA hai  /  1. jehi kae ramaNijje varaMga
paumANacariya vitthAre  /  kahava Na salAhaNijje te kaiNo jaDiyaraviseNe  // 41
//  2. kRtapadmodayodyotA pratyahaM parivartitA  /  mUrtiH kAvyabhavA loke
raveriva raveH priyA  // 34 //

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 22: The Basis of the Padmacharita  This chapter discusses the basis
of the Padmacharita. Ravishena himself, in the 41st and 42nd verses of the first
chapter, mentions this as follows:  "This meaning, spoken by Vardhamana
Jinendra, was received by Indrabhuiti, the Gautama Ganadhara. Then it was
received by Sudharma, the son of Dharini, then by Prabhava, and then by the best
speaker, the Anuttarvagmi, the great orator,  Kitidhara Acharya. After that,
Ravishena Acharya, having obtained their writings, made this effort manifest."
(41-42)  In the 166th verse of the 123rd chapter, he also mentions this in the
same way:  "The truth that was spoken by the revered Vardhamana Jinendra, who is
worshipped by all the worlds, was spoken by Indrabhuiti, the Gautama Ganadhara,
for Sudharma and Jambuswami. This was later revealed by his disciple, the
Anuttarvagmi, the great orator, Kitidhara Muni. This account of the Padma Muni
is a cause for welfare, for the growth of the meditation of the virtuous, and is
the best auspiciousness." (166)  Here, one should understand that Kitidhara is
referred to by the epithet Anuttarvagmi.  The self-born poet, in his Apabhramsha
language 'Paumachariu', composed his work based on Ravishena's Padmacharita.
Ravishena, while mentioning the basis of the literary tradition in the
Padmacharita, wrote the 41st and 42nd verses in the first chapter. Keeping these
verses in mind, the self-born poet also wrote the following verse:  "From the
mouth of Vardhamana, this story of Rama has come."  1. While translating the
41st and 42nd verses of the first chapter, the reading 'tato'anuttarvagminam'
was imagined for the sake of the meaning of the word Anuttarvagmi in the 167th
verse of the 123rd chapter. However, all the manuscripts have the reading
'tato'anuttarvagminam'. Therefore, it seems appropriate to consider
'Anuttarvagminam' as an epithet of Kiti. 'Anuttarvagminam' means the best
speaker. In the 167th verse of the 123rd chapter, one should understand that
Kitidhara is referred to by this epithet Anuttarvagmi, because Kiti is not
mentioned separately there. The self-born poet, in his Apabhramsha
'Paumachariu', also considered 'Anuttarvaae' as an epithet of Kitidhara in the
phrase 'Kittinarena Anuttarvaae'. According to this correction, the reader
should correct the translation of the 41st and 42nd verses of the first chapter.
I am grateful to the honorable Dr. A.N. Upadhyaya for bringing this to my
attention.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 22 papapurANe padmacaritakA AdhAra padmacarita ke AdhArakI carcA karate hue
svayaM raviSeNane prathama parvake 41-42 veM zlokameM isa prakAra carcA kI hai
varddhamAnajinendroktaH so'yamarthoM gaNezvaram  /  indrabhUti pariprAptaH
sudharma dhAriNIbhavam  // 41 //  prabhavaM kramataH kIti tato'nuttaravAgminam
/  likhitaM tasya saMprApya raveryatno'yamudgataH  // 42 /  /  arthAt
zrIvarddhamAna jinendra ke dvArA kahA huA yaha artha indrabhUti nAmaka
gautamagaNadharako prApta huA, phira dhAriNIke putra sudharmAcAryako prApta huA,
phira prabhavako prApta huA, phira anuttaravAgmI arthAt zreSTha vaktA kotidhara
AcAryako prApta huaa| tadanantara unakA likhA prApta kara yaha raviSeNAcAryakA
prayatna prakaTa huA hai|' granthAntameM 123 parvake 166veM zlokameM bhI inhoMne
isI prakAra ullekha kiyA hai "nirdiSTaM sakalainatena bhuvanaiH zrIvarddhamAnena
yat tattvaM vAsavabhUtinA nigaditaM jamboH praziSyasya ca  /
ziSyeNottaravAgminA prakaTitaM padmasya vRttaM muneH zreyaH
sAdhusamAdhivRddhikaraNaM sarvottamaM maGgalam"  // 166 /  /  arthAt samasta
saMsArake dvArA namaskRta zrIvardhamAna jinendrane padmamunikA jo carita kahA
thA vahI indrabhUti-gautama gaNadharane sudharmA aura jambU svAmI ke lie khaa|
vahI Age calakara unake ziSya uttaravAgmI zreSThavaktA zrIkItidhara munike dvArA
prakaTa haa| padmamanikA yaha carita kalyANa tathA sAdhu samAdhikI vRddhikA
kAraNa hai aura sarvottama maMgalasvarUpa hai| yahA~ AcArya kIrtidharakA unake
uttaravAgmI vizeSaNase ullekha samajhanA caahie| svayambhU kavine apabhraMza
bhASAke 'paumacariu' kI racanA raviSeNake padamacaritake AdhArapara kI hai aura
padmacaritameM raviSeNane grantha paramparAkA AdhAra batalAte hae jo prathama
parvameM 41-42 zloka likhe haiM unheM hI sAmane rakhakara svayambhU kavine bhI
nimnAMkita padya likhe haiM  /  vaDDhamANa-muha-kuharaviNiggaya  /  rAmakahANae
eha kamAgaya  /  1. prathama parvake 41-42veM zlokakA anuvAda karate samaya
123veM parvake 167veM zlokameM Agata uttara vAgmIpadakI sArthakatAke liye
(tato'nUttaravAgminam) 'tataH anu uttaravAgminam' isa pAThakI kalpanA kI gayI
thI, para saba pratiyoMmeM 'tato'nuttaravAgminam' yahI pATha hai isalie
'anuttaravAgminam'ko kItikA vizeSaNa mAna lenA ucita jAna par3atA hai|
'anuttaravAgminam'kA artha zreSTha vaktA hotA hai  /  123 parvake 167 veM
zlokameM uttaravAgmI isa vizeSaNase kIrtidharakA ullekha samajhanA cAhie kyoMki
vahA~ kIrtikA alagase ullekha nahIM hai| svayambhU kavine bhI apane apabhraMza
'paumacariu' meM 'kittihareNa aNuttaravAe' isa ullekhase 'aNuttaravAe' ko
kIttidharakA vizeSaNa hI mAnA hai| isa saMzodhanake anusAra pAThaka prathama
parvake 41-42veM zlokakA anuvAda ThIka kara leN| mAnanIya DaoN. e. ena.
upAdhyAyane isa ora merA dhyAna AkaSita kiyA thA ataH unakA AbhArI hai|

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  This is a stream of the Ramayana story, which originated from
the cave of the mouth of Vardhamana Jina. It then reached Indrabhuti Acharya,
then Gunalankrita Sudharma Acharya, then Prabhava, then the eloquent and supreme
speaker Koti Dhar. After that, it was immersed in the same Ramayana stream by
the grace of Ravishena Acharya.  This way, the mention of Ravishena, who is
supported by the self-existent, indicates that the basis of his Padmacarita is
the Ramayana story narrated by Acharya Koti Dhar. But who is this Kirti Dhar?
His mention is not found in the Acharya tradition. And where did his Ramayana
go? Nothing is known about it. It is possible that it was lost like the 'Vagarth
Sangrah Parana' of the poet Parameshwar.  ## Paumachariya and Padmacarita  On
the one hand, we know that the basis of Ravishena's Padmacarita, which he
presented, is the Ramayana story presented by Muni Kirti Dhar. On the other
hand, when we see the same story, the same style of presentation, the same
purpose, the same name, and the same meaning of the verses in many places in the
Prakrit 'Paumachariya' of Vimal Suri, a kind of doubt arises. The time of the
creation of the Paumachariya, as given by Vimal Suri, indicates that it was
written in Vikram Samvat 60, and Ravishena's Padmacarita appears 674 years
later. If Ravishena used the Paumachariya as a basis for his Padmacarita, then
he should have mentioned the name of the Jain Acharya with gratitude. But he has
mentioned someone else's name... This is a matter of consideration.  I don't
want to believe that the Paumachariya was created at the time mentioned by Vimal
Suri. In the Anekant Varsh 5 Kiran 10-11, a significant article titled
'Paumachariya ka Antah Parikshan' was published by Shri Pan. Paramanandji
Shastri Sarsawa. With the permission of Shastriji, I am presenting that article
here in his own words, so that readers can get the right material for
consideration.  ## Internal Examination of Paumachariya  'Paumachariya' is a
biography written in Prakrit language, which depicts the story of Ramachandra
well. The author of this book is Vimal Suri. The author has not given any
special introduction of himself in this book, but has only stated that - "Vijay
was the disciple of Acharya 'Rah', who accepted the harmony of his own time and
the time of others, and I, 'Vimal', the disciple of Vijay, the descendant of
Nail-Kul-Nandikara, have composed this book." Although many story books have
been written by different poets about this story, but all the available ones are
considered to be later than the composition of Paumachariya. Because this book
mentions the time of creation of the book as 530 years after the Nirvana of
Veer, i.e. Vikram Samvat 60. The author has stated that in this book, he has
narrated the same Ramayana story in Prakrit language with sutras and verses,
which was told by Lord Mahavira in ancient times, which later...  1. Rah
namayario sasamaya parasamaya gahiya sabbhavo. Vijay yo tassa siso nailkul vansa
nandiyaroo. ||117|| Sisen tassa raiyan rahavchariyam tu suri vimalena. -
Paumachariya, Uddes 103

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA pacchai idaMbhUi aayrieN| puNu dhammeNa guNAlaMkarieM  /  puNu
pahave saMsArArAeM  /  kittihareNa aNuttaravAeM  /  puNu raviSeNAyariyapasAeM  /
buddhie avagAhiya kairAeM  /  arthAt yaha rAmakathArUpI saritA varddhamAna
jinendra ke mukharUpI kandarAse avatIrNa huI hai"tadanantara indrabhUti
AcAryako, phira guNAlaMkRta sudharmAcAryako, phira prabhavako, phira
anuttaravAgmI zreSThavaktA kotidharako prApta huI hai  /  tadanantara
raviSaNAcArya ke prasAdase usI rAmakathA-saritAmeM avagAhana kara........ isa
prakAra svayambhU dvArA samarthita raviSeNake ullekhase jAna par3atA hai ki
unake padmacaritakA AdhAra AcArya kortidhara munike dvArA saMdRbdha rAmakathA
hai  /  para yaha kIrtidhara kauna haiM ? inakA AcArya paramparAmeM ullekha
dekhane meM nahIM aayaa| tathA inakI rAmakathA kahA~ gayI ? isakA kucha patA
nahIM cltaa| ho sakatA hai ki kavi paramezvarake 'vAgarthasaMgrahaparANa' ke
samAna lapta ho gayI ho| paumacariya aura padmacarita udhara jaba raviSeNake
dvArA pratipAdita apane padmacaritakA AdhAra kIrtidhara munike dvArA pratipAdita
rAmakathAko jAnate haiM aura idhara jaba vimalasUrike usa prAkRta 'paumacariya'
ko jisakI kathAvastu pratipAdana zailI, uddeza athavA poMke samAnAnta nAma evaM
kitane hI sthaloMpara padyoMkA arthasAmya bhI dekhate haiM taba kucha dvividhA-
sI utpanna hotI hai| paumacariyameM vimalasUrine grantha nirmANakA jo samaya
diyA hai usase vaha vikrama saMvat 60 kA grantha sUcita hotA hai aura raviSeNakA
padmacarita usase 674 varSa pIchekA prakaTa hotA hai| yadi raviSeNa
paumacariyako sAmane rakhakara apane padmacaritameM usakA pallavana karate haiM
to phira eka jainAcAryako isa viSayameM umakA kRtajJa hokara unakA nAmollekha
avazya karanA cAhie thA para nAmollekha unhoMne dUsarekA hI kiyA hai....yaha eka
vicAraNIya bAta hai| 'paumacariya' kA nirmANa samaya vahI hai jisakA ki
vimalasUrine ullekha kiyA hai, isapara vizvAsa karaneko jI nahIM caahtaa|
anekAnta varSa 5 kiraNa 10-11 meM zrI paM. paramAnandajI zAstrI sarasAvAkA
'paumacariyakA antaHparIkSaNa' zIrSaka eka mahattvapUrNa lekha chapA thaa|
zAstrIjIkI AjJA lekara unhIM ke zabdoMmeM maiM yahA~ vaha lekha de rahA hai
jisase pAThakoMko vicArArtha ucita sAmagrI sulabha ho jaayegii| paumacariya kA
antaHparIkSaNa 'paumacariya' prAkRta bhASAkA eka carita grantha hai, jinameM
rAmacandrakI kathAkA acchA citraNa kiyA gayA hai| isa granthake kartA vimalasUri
haiN| granthakartAne prastuta granthameM apanA koI vizeSa paricaya na dekara
sirpha yahI sUcita kiyA hai ki-"svasamaya aura parasamayake sadbhAvako grahaNa
karanevAle 'rAha' AcAryake ziSya vijaya the, una vijayake ziSya nAila-kula-
nandikara mujha 'vimala' dvArA yaha grantha racA gayA hai| yadyapi makI kathAke
sambandhameM vibhinna kaviyoM dvArA aneka kathAgrantha race gaye haiM parantu
unameM jo upalabdha haiM ve saba paumacariyakI racanAse arvAcIna kahe jAte haiN|
kyoMki isa granthameM granthakA racanAkAla vIra nirvANase 530 varSa bAda arthAta
vikrama saMvat 60 sUcita kiyA hai| granthakArane isa granthameM usI rAmakathAko
prAkRtabhASAmeM sUtroM sahita gAthAbaddha kiyA batalAyA hai jise prAcInakAlameM
bhagavAn mahAvIrane kahA thA, jo bAdako 1. rAha nAmAyario sasamaya parasamaya
gahiya sabbhAvo  /  vijayo ya tassa sIso nAilakUla vaMsa nandiyaro  // 117 //
sIseNa tassa raiyaM rAhavacariyaM tu sUri vimaleNaM  /  -paumacariya, uddesa 103

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Padma Purana  **Chapter 24**  This was spoken by Indra-bhuiti, the chief
Ganadhara, to the disciples from the Dharma-shaya, and it remained in the world
through the Sadhu-parampara until that time.  **Time of Composition**  **3**
There is a great difference of opinion among scholars regarding the time of
composition of this text. Some scholars, like Dr. Winternitz, consider the time
specified in the text to be correct. However, Western scholars like Dr. Herman
Jacobi, etc., based on the style of composition, language, literature, etc.,
consider its time of composition to be the 3rd-4th century CE. Some scholars,
like Dr. Keith, etc., point to the presence of words like "Dinar" and some Greek
words related to astrology in the text, and therefore consider it to be from 300
CE or later. And the expert in prosody, Shri Diwan Bahadur Keshav Lal Dhruva,
expresses strong doubts about the said time of composition, considering it to be
a much later composition. In his writing, he has stated that the use of the
Gahini, Sharabha, etc., meters at the end of each chapter, the Yamaka in the
Giti, and the word "Vimala" at the end of the chapters, are all indicative of
its modern nature. Apart from these, many other scholars are doubtful about its
time of composition - they hesitate to accept the time specified in the text,
and thus its time of composition remains in the realm of doubt. In such a
situation, the time mentioned in the text cannot be readily accepted.  **4**
After examining the available opinions of scholars regarding the time of the
text, I have examined the internal literature of the text, and based on that, I
have reached the conclusion that the said time of composition of the text is not
correct - it is definitely the result of some mistake or error by the author or
scribe. And it is also possible that the incorrect propagation of the number of
years of Vira Nirvana, like the Saka era, is the reason for this. But whatever
it may be, the internal examination of the text has revealed to me other
specific reasons for the incorrectness of the said time, which are divided into
three parts:  **(1)** The Paumachariya was not composed before the Digambara-
Svetambara sect split.  **(2)** The text adopts the beliefs of the Digambara
Acharya Kundakunda.  **(3)** The text follows the Tattvartha Sutra of Umashvatik
very closely.  Now I will explain these three types of reasons in order.
**(1)** According to the Digambara belief, the Digambara-Svetambara sect split
occurred in Vikram Samvat 136, and according to the Svetambara belief, it
occurred in Samvat 139. Before this split, in the Jain literature, for the Jain
Sadhus:  1. "Panchaiva ya vasasaya dusamae tis varis sanjutta. Vire siddhimupgae
tao nibaddham imam chariyam || 103 || Eyam virajinena ramchariyam siddham
mahattham pura, Pacchakhandalabhuina u kahiyam sisas dhammasayam. Bhuo
sahuparamparae sayalam loe tie payadam Etta he vimalena suttasahyam
gahanibaddham kayam || 102 ||"  2. See, "Encyclopedia of Religion and Ethics",
December 1914.  3. See, Keith's "History of Sanskrit Literature", page 34, 59.
4. "Introduction to Prakrit".  - Paumachariya, Uddesa 103 Part 7, page 437 and
"Modern Review"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANeM 24 unake pramukha gaNadhara indrabhUti dvArA dharmAzaya se
ziSyoMke prati kahI gayI aura jo sAdhu-paramparAse sakala loka meM usa samaya
taka sthita rahI  /  racanAkAla 3 vidvAnoM meM isa granthake racanAkAlake
sambandha meM bhArI matabheda pAyA jAtA hai| DaoN. viNTaranIja Adi kucha vidvAn
to grantha meM nirdiSTa samayako ThIka mAnate haiM  /  kintu pAzcAttya vidvAn
DaoN. harmana jaikobI vagairaha isakI racanAzailI, bhASA-sAhityAdi parase isakA
racanAkAla IsavIya tIsarI-cauthI zatAbdI mAnate haiM  /  kucha vidvAn DaoN.
kItha Adi isameM 'dInAra' aura jyotiSazAstra sambandhI kucha grIka bhASA ke
zabdoMke pAye jAne ke kAraNa ise IsavIyase 300 varSa yA usake bhI bAdakA
batalAte haiM  /  aura chandazAstra ke vizeSajJa zrI dIvAna bahAdura kezavalAla
dhruva ukta racanAkAlapara bhArI sandeha vyakta karate hue ise bahuta bAdakI
racanA batalAte haiM  /  Apane apane lekhameM prakaTa kiyA hai ki isa grantha ke
pratyeka uddezake antameM gAhiNI, zarabha, Adi chandoMkA, gIti meM yamaka aura
sargAntimeM vimala zabdakA prayoga bhI isakI arvAcInatAkA hI dyotaka hai  /
inake sivAya, aura bhI kitane hI vidvAn isake racanAkAlapara saMdigdha haiM -
grantha meM nirdiSTa samayako ThIka mAnane meM hicakicAte haiM, aura isa taraha
isakA racanAkAla abataka sandehakI koTimeM hI par3A huA hai  /  aisI sthiti meM
granthollikhita samayako sahasA svIkAra nahIM kiyA jA sakatA  /  4 granthake
samaya-sambandha meM vidvAnoMke upalabdha matoMkA parizIlana karate hue, maiMne
granthake antaH sAhityakA jo parIkSaNa kiyA hai usa parase meM isa natIjeko
pahu~cA hU~ ki granthakA ukta racanAkAla ThIka nahIM hai-vaha jarUra kisI bhUla
athavA lekhaka upalekhakakI galtIkA pariNAma hai  /  aura yaha bhI ho sakatA hai
ki zakakAlakI taraha vIra nirvANake varSoMkI saMkhyAkA tatkAlIna galata pracAra
hI isakA kAraNa ho, parantu kucha bhI ho, granthake antaHparIkSaNase mujhe ukta
samayake ThIka na honeke jo dUsare vizeSa koraNa mAlUma hue haiM ve nimna tIna
bhAgoM meM vibhakta haiM ( 1 ) digambara zvetAmbara ke sampradAya bhedase pahale
paumacariyakA na racA jAnA  /  ( 2 ) grantha meM digambarAcArya kundakundakI
mAnyatAkA apanAyA jAnA  /  3 ) umAsvAtike tattvArthasUtroM kA bahuta anusaraNa
kiyA jAnA  /  aba maiM ina tInoM prakAra ke kAraNoMkA kramazaH spaSTIkaraNa
karake batalAtA hU~  /  (1) jainoM meM digambara zvetAmbarakA sampradAya bheda
digambaroM kI mAnyatAnusAra vikrama saMvat 136 meM aura zvetAmbaroMkI
mAnyatAnusAra saMvat 139 meM huA hai  /  isa bhedase pahale ke sAhitya meM
jainasAdhuoMke lie 1. paMcaiva ya vAsasayA dusamAe tIsa varisa saMjuttA  /  vIre
siddhimupagae tao nibaddhaM imaM cariyaM  //  103  //  eyaM vIrajiNeNa
rAmacariyaM siddhaM mahatthaM purA, pacchAkhaNDalabhUiNA u kahiyaM sIsAsa
dhammAsayaM  /  bhUo sAhuparaMparAe sayalaM loe Tie pAyaDaM ettA he vimaleNa
suttasahiyaM gAhAnibaddhaM kayaM  //  102  //  2. dekho, 'insAiklopIDiyA oNpha
glijIna eNDa ethiksa' disambara san 1914  /  3. dekho, kIthakA saMskRta
sAhityakA itihAsa, pRSTha 34, 59  /  4. inTroDakzana Tu prAkRta  /  -
paumacariya, uddesa 103 bhAga 7, pRSTha 437 aura 'moDarna rinyU'

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction 25 The terms 'Digambar' and 'Svetambar' are not explicitly used
anywhere. If the word 'Svetambar' (Siyambar) is found in this text for a Jain
monk, it indicates that this text was not written before Vikram Samvat 136, the
time when the Digambar and Svetambar sects were not yet established. There is a
clear example of such usage in the 22nd chapter of the text. For example: >
Pechchha paribhamantÅ dÄhiá¹adesÄ siyamvaram paá¹ao | > Tassa sagÄsÄ dhammam
suá¹Ä«Å«á¹ tao samÄá¸hatto ||78|| > Aha bhai muni varadÅ ÅiÅuá¹ sudhammam jiá¹ehi
parikahyam | Jeá¹­ho ya samaá¹adhammo sÄvayadhammo ya aá¹ujeá¹­ho || 79 ||  This
passage describes a Jain monk who was encountered by the dethroned king SaudÄs
while traveling in the south, and from whom he took the vows of a lay follower.
This monk is referred to as a Svetambar monk. Therefore, this text cannot be a
composition from before Vikram Samvat 136.  Here, I would like to point out that
the Svetambar scholar Muni Kalyanvijayji, in his book 'Shraman Bhagwan
Mahavira', writes that before the 7th century Vikram era, neither the Digambar
nor the Svetambar traditions used the terms 'Digambar' and 'Svetambar' for each
other. This is evident from his following statement: > "It was from this time
(from the beginning of the 7th century Vikram era to the end of the 10th
century) that the practice of calling each other Digambar and Svetambar began."
|| Page 307  If Muni Kalyanvijayji's research is accurate, then the composition
of the Paumachariy cannot be before the 7th century Vikram era, not just Vikram
Samvat 136. The oldest mention of this text so far is found in the text
'Kuvalayamala', which was written in Shaka Samvat 700, equivalent to Vikram
Samvat 835.  (2) Shri Kundakunda is the chief Acharya of the Digambar sect. In
his 'Charitpahuá¸', while describing the Sagara Dharma, he mentions Sallekhana as
the fourth Shikshavrata. This belief is not mentioned in any text before him,
and therefore it is considered to be his unique belief. This belief of his has
been adopted by Vimalsuri, the author of 'Paumachariy'. This belief is not
mentioned anywhere in the Svetambar Agam Sutras. The following statement from a
letter received by Mukhtar Sahib from Muni Punyavijayji also reveals the same: >
"Sallekhana is not included as a Shikshavrata in the twelve vows in any of the
Svetambar Agams."  There is a lot of similarity between the verses of
'Charitpahuá¸' related to Sagara Dharma and those found in 'Paumachariy', as
evident from the comparison below: â [4]  > Pancheá¹uvvayÄ guá¹avvayÄÄ« havanti tah
tiá¹£á¹i | Sikkhavay cattÄriy sanjamacaraá¹am ca sÄyaram ||23|| > TasakÄya hÄ thÅ«lÄ
mÅsÄ adattalÄ ya | ParihÄro para mahilÄ pariggahÄrambha parimÄá¹am || 24 || >
Disavidisamaá¹apaá¸hamaá¹ aá¹atya iá¹á¸assa vajjaá¹am vidiyam | Bhogopabhoga parimÄ
iyameva guá¹avvayÄ tiá¹£á¹i || 25 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA 25 'digambara' - 'zvetAmbara' zabdoMkA spaSTa prayoga kahIM bhI
nahIM dekhA jaataa| aisI sthiti hote hue yadi isa grantha meM kisI jainasAdhuke
lie zvetAmbara ( siyaMbara) zabdakA spaSTa prayoga pAyA jAtA hai to vaha isa
bAtako sUcita karatA hai ki yaha grantha vi. saMvat 136 se pahalekA banA huA
nahIM hai jisa vakta taka digambara zvetAmbara ke sampradAya bhedako kalpanA
rUr3ha nahIM huI thI  /  granthake 22veM uddezameM eka sthalapara aisA prayoga
spaSTa hai  /  yathA pecchas paribhamaMto dAhiNadese siyaMvaraM paNao  /  tassa
sagAse dhammaM suNiUNa tao samADhatto  // 78 //  aha bhai muNivarado zisuNa
sudhammaM jiNehi parikahiyaM  /  jeTho ya samaNadhammo sAvayadhammo ya aNujeTho
//  79  //  isameM rAjacyuta saudAsa rAjAko dakSiNa dezameM bhramaNa karate hue
jisa jaina munikA darzana huA thA aura jisake pAsase usane zrAvakake vrata liye
the use zvetAmbara muni likhA gayA hai  /  ataH yaha grantha vi. saMvat 136 se
pahalekI racanA nahIM ho sakatA  /  yahA~ para maiM itanA aura bhI batalA denA
cAhatA hU~ ki zvetAmbarIya vidvAn muni kalyANavijayajI to apanI 'zramaNa
bhagavAn mahAvIra' pustakameM yahA~ taka likhate haiM kivikramakI sAtavIM
zatAbdI se pahale digambara zvetAmbara donoM sthavira paramparAoM meM eka
dUsareko digambara zvetAmbara kahane kA prArambha nahIM huA thA  /  jaisA ki
unake nimna vAkyase prakaTa hai "isI samaya (vikramakI sAtavIM zatAbdI ke
prArambhase dasavIM ke anta taka ) se eka dUsareko digambarazvetAmbara kahane kA
bhI prArambha huA"  /  /  pRSTha 307 muni kalyANavijayajIkA yaha anusandhAna
yadi ThIka hai to paumacariyakA racanAkAla vikrama saMvat 136 se hI nahIM kintu
vikramakI sAtavIM zatAbdI se bhI pahalekA nahIM ho sakatA  /  isa granthakA
sabase prAcIna ullekha bhI abhI taka 'kuvalayamAlA' nAmake granthameM hI
upalabdha huA hai jo zaka saMvat 700 arthAt vikrama saMvat 835 kA banA huA hai|
( 2 ) zrI kundakunda digambara sampradAya ke pradhAna AcArya haiM  /  Apane
cAritapAhuDameM sAgAra dharmakA varNana karate hue sallekhanAko caturtha
zikSAvrata batalAyA hai  /  Apase pUrvake aura kisI bhI grantha meM isa
mAnyatAkA ullekha nahIM hai aura isIlie yaha khAsa ApakI mAnyatA samajhI jAtI
hai  /  ApakI isa mAnyatA ko 'paumacariya' ke kartA vimalasUrine apanAyA hai|
zvetAmbarIya Agama sUtroMmeM isa mAnyatAkA kahIM bhI ullekha nahIM hai  /
mukhtAra sAhaba ko prApta hue munizrI puNyavijayajI ke patrake nimna vAkyase bhI
aisA hI prakaTa hai-- 'zvetAmbara AgamoMmeM kahIM bhI bAraha vratoM meM
sallekhanAkA samAveza zikSAvrata ke rUpameM nahIM kiyA gayA hai  /  cArita
pAhuDake isa sAgAra dharmavAle padyoMkA aura bhI kitanA hI sAdRzya isa
paumacariyameM pAyA jAtA hai, jaisA ki nIce kI tulanApara se prakaTa hai -- [4]
paMceNuvvayA guNavvayAI havaMti taha tiSNi  /  sikkhAvaya cattAriya
saMjamacaraNaM ca sAyAraM  // 23 //  tasakAya he thUle mose adattale ya  /
parihAro para mahilA pariggahAraMbha parimANaM  //  24  //
disavidisamANapaDhamaM aNatya iNDassa vajjaNaM vidiyaM  /  bhogopabhogaparimA
iyameva guNavvayA tiSNi  //  25  //

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
26 Padmapurana Samaiya, the first, Vidiya, the second, and Posaha, the third,
are said. The fourth is Sallekhana at the end. ||26|| -Charittrapahuá¸ Five are
the Anuvvaya, three are the Gunavvaya, it is said. Four are the Sikkhavaani, the
Jina's wishes. ||112|| Thullayaram, Panivahan, Musavaayam, Adattadaan, and
Parajuvaai's Nivatti, Santoshavayam, the fifth. ||113|| Disivi-disa's Niyamo,
Anaththadandas's Vajjan, and Uvabhog-parimaanam, these three are the Gunavvaya.
||114|| Samaiya, Uvvaas-Posaha, Atihisanvibhaago, and Samahimaran at the end,
these four are the Sikkhaasuvaya. ||115|| -Paumcharia U.14 Apart from this, the
following verse from Acharya Kundakunda's Pravachnasara is also available in
Paumcharia with some word changes. The karma that the ignorant one eats, with
thousands of crores of births, that karma the wise one eats with a single
breath. ||38|| -Pravachnasara A. 3 The karma that the ignorant tapaswi eats,
with thousands of crores of births, that karma the wise one eats with a single
breath, the great one. ||177|| -Paumcharia U. 102 In such a situation, the
composition of Paumcharia cannot be before Kundakunda. The time of Kundakunda is
found to be approximately the latter half of the first century and the early
half of the second century of the Vikram era. It cannot be said to be after the
third century in any way. In such a situation, the time of the creation of
Paumcharia, which is said to be 6 CE, does not seem to be consistent. Muni
Kalyanvijayji has stated the time of Kundakunda to be the sixth century CE.
According to his belief, he will either have to state Paumcharia to be a text
after the sixth century CE or show Sallekhana (Samadhimaran) as the fourth
Sikkhaavrat in some Shvetambara text written before 60 CE. Otherwise, the time
of Kundakunda will have to be accepted as before 60 CE. [3] Comparing the sutras
of the Tattvarth Sutra written by Umashvati with some places in Paumcharia, a
great similarity in words and a good understanding of the style of the statement
sequence is found. And this similarity of words, etc., does not have as much
connection with the Shvetambara commentary-accepted text as it seems to have
with the Digambara Sutra text. Not only this, but also the sutras which have not
been given a place in the commentary-accepted text and about which the
commentators of the commentary, Haribhadra and Siddhasena Gani, state in their
commentary that here some other scholars put many new sutras on their own for
the sake of expansion, many of these sutras are found in this text according to
the Digambara tradition-accepted Sutra text. Here, for the information of the
readers, some comparisons of the sutras of Tattvarth Sutra and the verses of
Paumcharia are given below. 1. See, Anekanta Varsh 2 Kiran 1 First Article, 'Who
is the predecessor in Shri Kundakunda and Yativrisham?' and The English
introduction of Pravachnasara by Prof. A.N. Upadhyay. 2. Apere Punarvidvanso'ti
Bahuni Swayam Virchayasmin Prastave Sutraanyadhiyate Vistardarshanabhipraayena
Siddhasena Gani, Tattva. Bha. T. 3, 11 Page 261.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 26 padmapurANe sAmAiyaM ca paDhamaM vidiyaM ca taheva posahaM bhaNiyaM  /
taiyaM ca atihipujjaM cauttha sallehaNA aMte  // 26 //  -cArittapAhuDa paMca ya
aNuvvayAI tiNNeva guNavvayAI bhaNiyAI  /  sikkhAvayANi etto cattAri
jiNovaiTThANi  // 112 /  /  thUlayaraM pANivahaM mUsAvAyaM adattadANaM ca  /
parajuvaINa nivattI saMtoSavayaM ca paMcamayaM  // 113 //  disividisANa ya
niyamo aNatthadaMDassa vajjaNaM ceva  /  uvabhogaparImANaM tiNNeva guNavvayA
ee||114|| sAmAiyaM ca uvavAsa-posaho atihisaMvibhAgo ya  /  aMte samAhimaraNaM
sikkhAsuvayAi cattAri  // 115 //  -paumacariya u.14 isake sivAya, AcArya
kundakundake pravacanasArakI nimna gAyA bhI paumariyameM kucha zabdaparirtanake
sAtha upalabdha hotI hai jaM aNNANI kamma khavedi bhavasayasahassakoDIhiM  /
taM gANI tihigutto khavedI ussAsametteNa  // 38 //  -pravacanasAra a. 3 jaM
annANatapassI khavei bhvsyshsskoddiihiN| kammaM taM tihigutto khavei gANI
mahattaNaM  // 177 /  /  -paumacariu u. 102 aisI sthitimeM paumacariyakI racanA
kundakundase pahale kI nahIM ho sktii| kundakundakA samaya prAyaH vikramakI
pahalI zatAbdIkA uttarArdha aura dUsarI zatAbdIkA pUrvArdha pAyA jAtA hai-tIsarI
zatAbdI ke bAdakA to vaha kisI taraha bhI nahIM kahA jA sktaa| aisI hAlatameM
paumacariyake nirmANakA jo samaya vi. saM. 6. batalAyA jAtA hai vaha saMgata
mAlUma nahIM hotaa| muni kalyANavijayajIne to kundakundakA samaya vi. kI chaThI
zatAbdI batalAyA hai| unheM apanI isa dhAraNAke anusAra yA to paumacariyako
vikramako chaThI zatAbdIke bAdakA grantha batalAnA hogA yA vi. saMvata 60 se
pahaleke bane hae kisI zvetAmbara granthameM sallekhanA ( samAdhimaraNa ) ko
caturtha zikSAvratake rUpameM vihita dikhalAnA hogA aura nahIM to kundakundakA
samaya vikrama saMvat 60 se pUrvakA mAnanA hogaa| [3] umAsvAti viracita
tattvArthasUtrake sUtroMkI paumacariyake katipaya sthaloMke sAtha tulanA
karanese donoM meM bhArI zabdasAmya aura kathanakramakI zailIkA acchA patA
calatA hai| aura yaha zabda sAmyAdika zvetAmbarIya bhASyamAnya pAThake sAtha
utanA sambandha nahIM rakhatA jitanA ki digambarIya sUtrapAThake sAtha rakhatA
huA jAna par3atA hai| itanA hI nahIM, kintu jina sUtroMko bhASyamAnya pATha meM
sthAna nahIM diyA gayA hai aura jinake viSayameM bhASyake TIkAkAra haribhadra
aura siddhasena gaNI apanI bhASya vRtti meM yahA~ taka sUcita karate haiM ki
yahA~para kucha dUsare vidvAn bahuta-se naye sUtra apane Apa banAkara vistArake
lie rakhate haiM unameM se kitane hI sUtroMkA gAthAbaddha kathana bhI
digambarIya paramparAsammata sUtrapAThake anusAra isameM pAyA jAtA hai|
yahAMpara pAThakoMkI jAnakArIke lie tattvArthasUtroMkI aura paumacariyakI
gAthAoMkI kucha tulanA nIce dI jAtI hai1. dekho, anekAnta varSa 2 kiraNa 1
prathama lekha, 'zrIkundakunda aura yativRSamameM pUrvavartI kauna' ? tathA
pravacanasArakI pro. e. ena. upAdhyAyakI aMgarejI prstaavnaa| 2. apare
punarvidvAnso'ti bahUni svayaM viracyAsmin prastAve sUtrANyadhIyate
vistAradarzanAbhiprAyeNa siddhasena gaNI, tattvA. bhA. TI. 3, 11 pRSTha 261  /

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Preface 27 The nature of Upayoga (Utilization). à¥¥8à¥¥ It is of two kinds, with
eight and four divisions. à¥¥9à¥¥ - Tattvartha Sutra Ch. 2 The Upayoga (Utilization)
of the Jivas is of two kinds - Nana (Knowledge) and Darsana (Faith). The Nana
(Knowledge) is of eight types and the Darsana (Faith) is of four types. à¥¥96à¥¥ -
Pumacariya Uddesa 102 The immovable beings are the earth, water, fire, air, and
plants. à¥¥13à¥¥ - Tattvartha Sutra Ch. 2 The earth, water, fire, air, and plants -
these are the immovable beings. The one-sensed beings are also included in them.
à¥¥13à¥¥ - Pumacariya Uddesa 102 The embryonic, oviparous, and sweat-born beings
have a womb. à¥¥33à¥¥ The birth of the celestial and infernal beings. à¥¥34à¥¥ The
spontaneous origination of the remaining beings. à¥¥35à¥¥ - Tattvartha Sutra Ch. 2
The egg-born, womb-born, and sweat-born beings are mentioned. The celestial and
infernal beings, and the spontaneously originating beings are also stated. à¥¥17à¥¥
- Pumacariya Uddesa 102 The Audarika, Vaikriyika, Aharaka, Taijasa, and Karmana
bodies. à¥¥36à¥¥ The subtler ones are successively more subtle. à¥¥37à¥¥ - Tattvartha
Sutra Ch. 2 The Audarika (gross), Vaikriyika (transformable), Aharaka (food-
made), Taijasa (fiery), and Karmana (karmic) bodies. The subtler ones are
successively more subtle in qualities. à¥¥298à¥¥ - Pumacariya Uddesa 102 The seven
regions below are the realms of gems, gravel, sand, mud, smoke, great darkness,
and absolute darkness. à¥¥1à¥¥ - Tattvartha Sutra Ch. 3 The realms of gem-luster,
gravel, mud, smoke, and great darkness - these are the seven lower realms,
increasingly more terrible. à¥¥66à¥¥ - Pumacariya Uddesa 102 Among them, there are
thirty-five, twenty-five, fifteen, ten, and five Narakas (hells) respectively.
à¥¥2à¥¥ - Tattvartha Sutra Ch. 3 There are thirty, twenty-five, fifteen, ten, and
five Narakas (hells) respectively. The three, five, and five are the Anuttara
Naraka (supreme hells). à¥¥36à¥¥ - Pumacariya Uddesa 2 The ultimate abode of the
beings with one, three, seven, seventeen, seventeen, twenty-two, and thirty-
three Sagaropama (ocean-like) lifespans. à¥¥6à¥¥ - Tattvartha Sutra Ch. 3 There are
one, three, seven, seventeen, seventeen, twenty-two, and thirty-three Sagaropama
(ocean-like) lifespans respectively. à¥¥83à¥¥ - Pumacariya Uddesa 102 The auspicious
named islands and oceans are Jambudvipa, Lavanoda, etc. à¥¥7à¥¥ They are twice as
wide as the previous ones, in the form of concentric circles. à¥¥8à¥¥ - Tattvartha
Sutra Ch. 3 The islands like Jambudvipa and the oceans like Lavanoda - they are
mutually separated and their number is innumerable. à¥¥101à¥¥ - Pumacariya Uddesa
102 Among them, Jambudvipa has a diameter of one hundred thousand Yojanas
(ancient unit of length) with Meru as its center. à¥¥9à¥¥ - Tattvartha Sutra Ch. 3
In its center is the Meru mountain, which is ten thousand Yojanas high and wide.
à¥¥103à¥¥ - Pumacariya Uddesa 102

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA 27 upayogo lakSaNam  /  / 8 //  sa dvividho'STacaturbhedaH  // 9 //
-tattvArthasUtra a. 2 jIvANaM uvaogo nANaM taha daMsaNaM jiNakkhAyaM  /  nANaM
aTThaviyappaM caubvihaM daMsaNaM bhaNiyaM  // 96 //  -paumacariya uddesa 102
pRthivyaptejovAyuvanaspatayaH sthAvarAH  // 13 //  -tattvArthasUtra a. 2 puDhavi
jalajalaNa mAruya vaNassaI ceva thAvarA ee  /  kAyAekkAya puNo havai to
paMcabheyajuo  // 13 //  -paumacariya uddesa 102 jarAyujANDajapotAnAM garbhaH  /
/ 33 /  /  devanArakANAmupapAdaH  /  / 34 //  zeSANAM sammUrcchanam  // 35 //
-tattvArthasUtra a. 2 aNDAuya poyAuya jarAuyA gabbhajA ime bhaNiyA  /
suranArayaubavAyA ime ya saMmucchimA jIvA  // 17 //  -paumacariya u.102
audArika-vaikriyikAhArakataijasakArmaNAni zarIrANi  // 36 //  paraM paraM
sUkSmam  // 37 //  -tattvArthasUtra a. 2 orAliyaM viuvvaM AhAraM tejasaM
kammaiyaM  /  suhumaM paraMparAe guNehiM saMpajjai sarIraM  // 298 //
-paumacariya u. 102 ratnazarkarAbAlukApaGkadhUmatamomahAtamaHprabhA bhUmayo
ghanAmbuvAtAkAzapratiSThAH saptAdho'dhaH  /  / 1 /  /  -tattvArthasUtra a. 3
rayaNappabhAyasakkaravAluyapaMkappabhA ya dhuumpbhaa| eto tamA tamatamA
sattamiyA havai ai ghorA  // 66 //  -paumacariya u. 102 tAsu trizatpaJcaviMzati-
paJcadazadazatripazcona kanarakazatasahasrANi pazca caiva yathAkramama  // 2 //
-tattvArtha. a. 3 tIsA ya pannabIsA paNarasa dasa ceva hoMti nrkaauu| tiNNekaM
paMcUNaM paMceva aNuttarA narayA  // 36 //  -paumacariya u. 2
teSvekatrisaptadaza-saptadazadvAviMzatitrayastriMzatsAgaropamasattvAnAM parA
sthitiH  // 6 //  -tattvArtha. a. 3 ekkaM ca tiNNi satta ya dasa sattarasaM
taheva bAvIsA  /  tettIsa uvahinAmA AU syaNappabhAdAsuM  // 83 /  /
-paumacariya u. 102 jambudvIpalavaNodAdayaH zubhanAmAno dvIpasamudrAH  // 7 //
dvidviviSkambhAH pUrvapUrvaparikSepiNo valayAkRtayaH  // 8 //  -tattvArtha. a. 3
jambUdvIpAIyA dIvA lavaNAiyA ya slilnihii| egantariyA te puNa duguNA asaMkhejjA
// 101 //  -paumacariya u. 102 tanmadhye merunAbhirvatto
yojanazatasahasraviSkambho jambUdvIpaH  // 9 //  -tattvArtha. a. 3 tassa vi
havai majjhe nAhagiri maMdaro sayasahassaM  /  savvapamANeNacco vitthiNNo
dsshssaaii||103|| -paumariya u.102

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Padma Purana describes the following regions: Bharat, Hemvaya, Harivasa,
Mahavideha, Rammaya, Herannava, and Eravaya.  - **Tattvarth. A. 3.106:** Bharat,
Hemvaya, Harivasa, Mahavideha, Rammaya, Herannava, and Eravaya are the regions.
- **Paumachariy U. 102:** The regions are divided into the following: Purva,
Apara, Himavan, Mahahimavan, Nishadha, Nila, Rukmi, and Shikharin.  -
**Tattvarth. A. 3.105:** Himavan, Mahahimavan, Nishadha, Nila, Rukmi, and
Shikharin are the seven mountains.  - **Paumachariy U. 102:** The rivers are
Ganga, Sindhu, Rohini, Hariddhari, Kanta, Sita, Sitoda, Nari, Narakanta,
Suvarna, Rupya, Kula, Rakta, and Raktoda.  - **Tattvarth. A. 3.107-108:** Ganga,
Sindhu, Rohini, Hariddhari, Kanta, Sita, Sitoda, Nari, Narakanta, Suvarna,
Rupya, Kula, Rakta, and Raktoda are the rivers.  - **Paumachariy U. 102:** The
regions of Bharat and Eravaya experience growth and decline due to the six types
of time cycles: Utsarpini and Avasarpini.  - **Tattvarth. A. 3.41:** The regions
of Bharat and Eravaya experience growth and decline due to the six types of time
cycles: Utsarpini and Avasarpini.  - **Paumachariy U. 3:** The regions of
Bharat, Eravaya, and Videha are the realms of karma, while the regions of
Devakuru, Uttarakuru, and other regions are the realms of enjoyment.  -
**Tattvarth. A. 3.111-112:** The regions of Bharat, Eravaya, and Videha are the
realms of karma, while the regions of Devakuru, Uttarakuru, and other regions
are the realms of enjoyment.  - **Paumachariy U. 102:** The inhabitants of the
world are Asuras, Nagas, Vidyuts, Suparnas, Agnis, Vatas, Tanitas, Udadhis,
Dvipas, Dikkumara, Kinnaras, Kimpurushas, Mahoragas, Gandharvas, Yakshas,
Rakshasas, Bhutas, and Pishachas.  - **Tattvarth. A. 4.32:** The inhabitants of
the world are Asuras, Nagas, Suvannas, Divas, Samuddas, Disakumaras, Vayaggis,
Vidyuthaniyas, Bhavananiwasis, and Dasaviyappas.  - **Paumachariy U. 75:** The
inhabitants of the world are Kinnaras, Kimpurushas, Mahoragas, Gandharvas,
Yakshas, Rakshasas, Bhutas, and Pishachas.  - **Tattvarth. A. 4.32:** The
inhabitants of the world are Kinnaras, Kimpurushas, Mahoragas, Gandharvas,
Yakshas, Rakshasas, Bhutas, and Pishachas.  - **Paumachariy U. 75:** The
celestial bodies are Surya, Chandra, Grahas, Nakshatras, and Tarikayas.  -
**Tattvarth. A. 4.14:** The celestial bodies are Surya, Chandra, Grahas,
Nakshatras, and Tarikayas.  - **Paumachariy U. 102:** The five types of actions
are Irya, Bhasha, Eshan, Adana, Nikshepa, Utsarga, and Samiti.  - **Tattvarth.
A. 9:** The five types of actions are Irya, Bhasha, Eshan, Adana, Nikshepa,
Utsarga, and Samiti.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe bharatahamavataharivideharamyakaharaNyavatairAvatavarSAH kSetrANi
//  -tattvArtha. a. 3 bhArataM hemavayaM puNa harivAsaM taha mahAvidehaM ca  /
ramamaya heraNNavayaM uttarao havai eravayaM  // 106 //  -paumacariya u. 102
tadvibhAjinaH pUrvAparAyatA himavanmahAhimavanniSadhanIlarukmizikhariNo
varSadharaparvatAH  //  -tattvArtha. a. 3 himavo ya mahAhimavo nisaDho nIlo ya
ruppi siharI ya  /  eehi vihattAI satteva havaMti vAsAI  // 105 //  -paumacariya
u. 102 gaGgAsindhurohidrohitAsyA hariddharikAntA sItA sItodA nArI
narakAntAsuvarNarUpyakUlA raktAraktodAH saritastanmadhyagAH  // 20 //
-tattvArtha, a. 3 gaMgA ya paDhama sariyA sindhU puNa rohiyA munneybbaa| taha
ceva rohiyasA hari nadI ceva harikaMtA  // 107 //  soyA viya sIoyA nArI ya
taheva hoi nrkNtaa| rUppaya suvaNNakUlA rattA rattAvaI bhaNiyA  // 108 //
-paumacariya u. 102 bharatairAvatayorvRddhihrAso
SaTrAmayAbhyAmutsapiNyavasarpiNIbhyAm  // 27 //  tAmyAmaparA bhUmayo'vasthitAH
// 28 //  -tattvArtha. a. 3 bharaheravae su tahA hANI buDDI sesesu ya hoi
khettesu  // 41 //  -paumacariya u.3 bharatairAvatavidehAH karmabhUmayo'nyatra
devakurUttarakurubhyaH  // 37 //  -tattvArtha. a.3 paMcasu paMcasu paMcasu
bharaheravaesu taha videhesu  /  bhaNiyA kammabhUmI tIsaM puNabhogabhUmIo  //
111 //  hemavayaM harivAsaM uttarakuru taha ya devakuru  /  rammaya heraNNavayaM
evAo bhogabhUmIo  // 112 //  -paumacariya a. 102
bhavanavAsino'suranAgavidyutsuparNAgnivAtastanitodadhidvIpadikkumArAH  // 10 //
-tattvArtha. a. 4 asurA nAgasuvaNNA dIvasamuddA disAkumArA ya  /
vAyaggivijjuthaNiyA bhavaNaNivAsI dasaviyappA  // 32 //  -paumacariya u.75
vyantarAH kinnarakiMpuruSamahoragagandharvayakSarAkSasabhUtapizAcAH  // 10 //
-tattvArtha a. 4 kinnarakiMpurisamahoragA ya gandhabba rakkhasA jakkhA  /  bhUyA
ya pisAyA vi ya avihA vANamantariyA  // 32 -paumacariya u.75 sUryAcandramasau
grahanakSatraprakIrNakatArakAzca  /  / 12 /  /  -tattvArtha. a. 4 vantarasUrANa
uvariM paMcavihA joisA to devA  /  candA sUrA ya gahA nakkhattA tArayA neyA  //
14 //  -paumacariya u. 102 IryAbhASeSaNAdAnanikSepotsargAH samitayaH  // 5 //
-tattvArtha. a. 9

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  The language of the Iriya is the same as that of the Aayana.
The pronunciation is the same as the Panchamiya, which is 71.  - Paumachariy U.
14:  "External austerities are:  abstinence from food, beauty, occupation,
counting, taste, renunciation, secluded bed and seat, and bodily afflictions.
||19||  Penance, humility, conduct, self-study, renunciation, meditation, and
higher austerities are the internal ones. ||20||"  Tattvarth. A. 9: "Anasana
means bodily affliction, which is the same as the twenty-two kinds of bodily
afflictions. Renunciation of taste is the same as secluded bed and seat. ||74||
Penance, humility, conduct, self-study, renunciation, meditation, and higher
austerities are the internal ones. ||75||"  - Paumachariy U. 14:  It is clear
from this comparison that many of the verses of the Paumachariy are based on the
sutras of the Tattvarth Sutra. At the end of the book, the author has also
stated in the sentence "Ettahe Vimaleá¹a Sutta Sahiyam Gaahanivaddham Kayam" that
he has compiled the sutras into verses. In such a situation, it is certain that
this book was written after the Tattvarth Sutra. The author of the Tattvarth
Sutra, Acharya Umasvati, was also a follower of Shri Kundakunda Acharya - he was
in the lineage of Kundakunda, as is evident from many inscriptions in
Shravanabelagola, etc. And therefore, the time of its composition given in the
Paumachariy becomes even more objectionable and certainly appears to be the
result of some mistake or error.  Some special features of the book:  On
examining the Paumachariy, it appears that some of the points are specifically
related to the beliefs of the Digambara sect, some are specifically related to
the beliefs of the Svetambara sect, and some are different from the beliefs of
both. Here I would like to present all of them for the consideration of
scholars, so that they can be helped in deciding which sect this book actually
belongs to; because it has not yet been fully decided whether the author of this
book was a Digambara, Svetambara, or Yapaniya Acharya. Some scholars consider
this book to be Svetambara, some Digambara, and some Yapaniya.  [A]  Digambara
sect related:  [1]  In the first chapter of the book, a verse describing the
origin of the story is found as follows:  "VÄ«rasas Pavaá¹á¹­hÄá¹am Vipulagirimatthae
Maá¹abhirÄme. TÄha IndabhÅ«i Kahiyam Seá¹iya Raá¹assa NÄ«sesam. ||34||"  This states
that when the Samavasaran of the Veer Bhagwan was situated on the Vipulachal
mountain, then Indra-bhuiti, the Gautam Ganadhar, told all this to King Shrenik.
This method of introducing the story is specifically related to the Digambara
sect. Almost all the books of the Digambara sect, in which the origin of the
story is mentioned, 1. See, Shravanabelagola inscriptions no. 40, 105, 108. 2.
This has also been accepted by the Svetambara historical scholar Shri Mohanlal
Dalichandraji Desai, Advocate Bombay, in his article "KumarapalanÄ SamyanÄ Ek
Apbhraá¹Åa KÄvya" and has also been given as a reason for considering the author
of the said poetic work "Pradyumna Charit" to be a Digambara. See, "Jainacharya
Shri Atmanand-Janma Shatabdi-SmÄrak Granth" Gujarati article, p. 260.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA iriyA bhASA taha esaNA ya AyANameva nikkhevo  /  uccArAI samii
paMcamiyA hoi nAyabbA 71 /  /  -paumacariya u. 14
anazanAvamaudaryavRttiparisaMkhyAnarasaparityAgaviviktazayyAsanakAyaklezA bAhyaM
tapaH  // 19 //  prAyazcittavinayavaiyAvRttyasvAdhyAyavyutsargadhyAnAnyuttaram
// 20 //  tattvArtha. a. 9 aNasaNa bhaNoiriyA vittIsaMkheva kAya paripIDA  /
rasaparicAgo ya tahA vivittasayaNAsaNaM ceva  // 74 /  /  pAyacchittaM viNao
veyAvaccaM taheva sjjhaao| jhANaM ciya ussaggo tavo ya abbhataro eso  /  / 75 /
/  -paumacariya u. 14 isa tulanApara-se spaSTa hai ki paumacariyakI bahata-sI
gAthAe~ tattvArtha sUtrake sUtroMpara-se banAyI gayI hai| granthake anta meM
granthakArane 'ettAhe vimaleNa sutta sahiyaM gAhAnivaddhaM kayaM' isa vAkyake
dvArA aisI sUcanA bhI kI hai ki usane sUtroMko gAthAnibaddha kiyA hai  /  aisI
hAlatameM isa granthakA tattvArtha sUtrake bAda bananA asandigdha hai|
tattvArtha sUtrake kartA AcArya umAsvAti zrI kundakundAcAryake bhI bAda hue hai-
ve kundakundakI baMzaparamparAmeM hae haiM jaisA ki zravaNavelagolAdike aneka
zilAlekhoM Adipara-se prakaTa hai| aura isalie paumacariyameM usakI racanAkA jo
samaya diyA hai vaha aura bhI adhika Apattike yogya ho jAtA hai aura jarUra hI
kisI bhUla tathA galatokA pariNAma jAna par3atA hai  /  granthako kucha khAsa
bAteM paumacariyake antaHparIkSaNapara-se kula bAteM aisI mAlUma hotI haiM jo
khAsa taurapara digambara sampradAyakI mAnyatAdise sambandha rakhatI haiM, kucha
aisI haiM jinakA zvetAmbara sampradAyakI mAnyatAdise vizeSa sambandha hai aura
kucha aisI bhI haiM jo donoMkI mAnyatAoMse kucha bhinna prakArakI jAna par3atI
haiM  /  yahA~ maiM una sabako vidvAnoMke vicArArtha de denA cAhatA hU~, jisase
unheM isa bAtakA nirNaya karanemeM madada mile ki yaha grantha vAstava meM
kauna-se sampradAya vizeSa kA hai; kyoMki abhI taka yaha pUre taurapara nirNaya
nahIM ho sakA hai ki isa grantha ke kartA digambara, zvetAmbara athavA yApanIya
Adi kauna-se sampradAyake AcArya the| kucha vidvAn isa granthako zvetAmbara,
kucha digambara aura kucha yApanIya saMghakA batalAte haiN| [ka] digambara
sampradAya sambandhI [1] grantha ke prathama uddezameM kathAvatAra varNanakI eka
gAthA nimna prakArase pAyI jAtI hai vIrassa pavaraThANaM vipulagirimatthae
maNabhirAme  /  taha iMdabhUi kahiyaM seNiya raNassa nIsesaM  // 34 //  isameM
batalAyA hai ki jaba vIra bhagavAn kA samavasaraNa vipulAcala parvatapara sthita
thA taba vahA~ indrabhUti nAmaka gautama gaNadharane yaha saba rAmacarita rAjA
zreNikase kahA hai| kathAvatArakI yaha paddhati khAsa taurapara digambara
sampradAya se sambandha rakhatI hai| digambara sampradAyake prAyaH sabhI
grantha, jinameM kathAke avatAra1. dekho, zravaNavelagolake zilAlekha naM. 40,
105, 108  /  2. isa bAtako zvetAmbarIya aitihAsika vidvAn zrI mohanalAla
dalIcandrajI desAI, eDavokeTa bambaIne bhI 'kumArapAlanA samayaneM eka
apabhraMza kAvya' nAmaka apane lekhameM svIkAra kiyA hai aura ise bhI 'pradyumna
carita' nAmaka ukta kAvya granthake kartAko digambara batalAne meM eka hetu diyA
hai| dekho, 'jainAcArya zrI AtmAnanda-janma zatAbdI-smAraka grantha' gujarAtI
lekha, pa. 260  /

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **30**  The Padma Purana mentions the event of the Veer
Bhagwan's Samavasaran on the Vipulachal mountain and the narration of the story
by Indrabhuiti-Gautam to King Shrenik in response to his question. However, the
tradition of the Svetambara scriptures differs from this. They mention the
story's origin as being told by Sudharma Swami to Jambu Swami, as evident in the
following verse from the Vasudeva Hindi of Sanghadas Gani:  "Tath tatra
Suhammasamina Jambu namas padhamanuyogay titthayarachchakkavatti
dasaravansaparuvangayam Vasudevachariyam kahiyam tti tasseva........tti."  The
Svetambaras claim that the original Agam scriptures were composed by Sudharma
Swami, while the Digambara tradition attributes their creation to Gautam
Ganadhar-Indrabhuiti.  **[2]** In the second chapter of the text, while
describing the Shikshavrata, the Samadhimaran Sallekhana Vrata is mentioned as
the fourth Shikshavrata. As stated:  "Samadhyam cha upavasaposaho
atihisanvibhago ya. Ante samahimaran sikkha suvayai chattari || 115 ||"  This
belief of considering Samadhimaran Sallekhana Vrata as a Shikshavrata is
specific to the Digambara sect. Clear evidence of this is found in the
Charitpahuá¸ of Acharya Kundakunda, the Adipurana of Jinsen, the Ratnamala of
Shivkotika, the Bhavasangrah of Devasen, and the Shravakachar of Vasunandi. This
is also mentioned in the Varang Charit of Jayasimhanandi. The Svetambara Agam
Sutras do not mention this as a Shikshavrata anywhere, as evident in the
following statement from a letter written by Muni Shri Punyavijayaji to Mukhtar
Shri Jugalkishor:  "The Svetambara Agam does not include Sallekhana as a
Shikshavrata among the 12 Vratas anywhere." Therefore, this belief is
specifically associated with the Digambara sect.  **[b] Svetambara Sect
Related**  **[1]** The 82nd verse of the second chapter of this text mentions 20
reasons for the bondage of the Tirthankara nature. Although their names are not
mentioned in the text, this belief of 20 reasons is associated with the
Svetambara sect because their knowledgeable scriptures like Dharmakatha, etc.,
list 20 reasons. The Digambara sect's Shatkhandadi scriptures universally
mention 16 reasons.  **[2]** The 58th verse of the fourth chapter of the text
mentions 64,000 queens of Bharat Chakravarti. This number of queens is also
associated with the Svetambara sect. The Digambara sect mentions 96,000 queens.
**[3]** The 34th verse of the 73rd chapter of the text mentions the death of
Ravana on Jyeshtha Krishna Ekadashi. This belief seems to be in accordance with
the Svetambara sect, as Hemchandra Acharya also mentions this in his
"Trishashtisalakapurushacharitra."  1. See, Mukhtar Shri Jugalkishor's book
"Jainacharyon ka Shasan Bhed" chapter "Gunavrata and Shikshavrata." 2. "Vinsam
Jin Karanahan Bhaveo." 3. "Chausatthi Sahasssai Juwainam Paramruvadharinam." 4.
"Jettsass Bahulpakkhe Divassass Chauthbhagammi. Egarisi Divase Ravanamaaranam
Viyanahhi."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 30 padmapurANe kA prasaMga diyA huA hai- vipulAcala parvatapara vIra bhagavAnkA
samavasaraNa Ane aura usameM indrabhUti - gautama dvArA rAjA zreNikako -- usake
praznapara kathAke kahe jAnekA ullekha karate haiM; jaba ki zvetAmbarIya
kathAgranthoMkI paddhati isase bhinna hai - ve sudhamaM svAmI dvArA jambU
svAmIke prati kathAke avatArakA prasaMga batalAte haiM, jaisA ki saMghadAsa
gaNIkI vasudevahiNDIke nimna vAkyase prakaTa hai-- " tattha tAtra suhammasAmiNA
jaMbUnAmassa paDhamANuyoge titthayaracakkavaTTi dazAravaMzaparUvaNagayaM
vasudevacariyaM kahiyaM tti tasseva........tti  / " zvetAmbaroMke yahA~ mUla
Agama granthoMkI racanA bhI sudharmA svAmIke dvArA huI batalAyI jAtI hai jaba ki
digambara paramparAmeM unakI racanAkA sambandha gautama gaNadhara - indrabhUtike
sAtha nirdiSTa hai  /  [2] grantha ke dvitIya uddeza meM zikSAvratoM kA varNana
karate hue samAdhimaraNa nAmaka sallekhanA vratako caturtha zikSAvrata batalAyA
hai  /  yathA sAmAdhyaM ca upavAsaposaho atihisaMvibhAgo ya  /  aMte
samAhimaraNaM sikkhA suvayAI cattAri  //  115  //  samAdhimaraNa rUpa sallekhanA
vratako zikSAvratoM meM parigaNita karane kI yaha mAnyatA digambara sampradAyakI
hai - AcArya kundakundake cAritapAhuDa meM, jinasenake AdipurANa meM zivakoTikI
ratnamAlA meM, devasena ke bhAvasaMgrahameM aura vasunandI ke zrAvakAcAra jaise
granthoM meM isakA spaSTa vidhAna pAyA jAtA hai  /  jayasiMhanandI ke varAMga
caritameM bhI yaha ullikhita hai  /  zvetAmbarIya Agama sUtroMmeM isako kahIM
bhI zikSAvratoMke rUpameM varNita nahIM kiyA hai, jaisA ki mukhtAra zrI
jugalakizorako likhe gaye muni zrI puNyavijayajI ke eka patrake nimna vAkya se
bhI prakaTa hai - 'zvetAmbara AgamameM kahIM bhI 12 vratoM meM sallekhanAkA
samAveza zikSAvratake rUpameM nahIM kiyA gayA hai'  /  ataH yaha mAnyatA khAsa
taurapara digambara sampradAya ke sAtha sambandha rakhatI hai  /  [kha]
zvetAmbara sampradAya sambandhI [1] isa granthake dUsare uddezyakI 82vIM
gAthAmeM tIrthaMkara prakRtike bandhake bIsa kAraNa batalAye haiM re  /  yadyapi
inake nAma grantha meM kahIM bhI prakaTa nahIM kiye, phira bhI 20 kAraNoMkI yaha
mAnyatA zvetAmbara sampradAya se sambandha rakhatI hai kyoMki unake jJAtA
dharmakathAdi granthoMmeM 20 kAraNa ginAye | digambara sampradAya ke SaTkhaNDAdi
granthoM meM sarvatra 16 kAraNa ho batalAye gaye haiM  /  [2] grantha meM
caturtha uddezakI 58vIM gAthAmeM bharata cakravartIko 64 hajAra rAniyoMkA
ullekha hai| rAniyoMkI yaha saMkhyA bhI zvetAmbara sampradAya se sambandha
rakhatI hai  /  digambara sampradAya meM 96 hajAra rAniyoM kA ullekha hai  /
[3] granthake 73veM uddezakI 34vIM gAthAmeM rAvaNakI mRtyu jyeSTha kRSNa
ekAdazIko likhI hai  /  yaha mAnyatA zvetAmbara sampradAyasammata jAna par3atI
hai, kyoMki hemacandra AcAryane bhI apane 'triSaSTizalAkA 1. dekho, mukhtAra zrI
jugalakizora viracita 'jainAcAryoM kA zAsana bheda' nAmaka pustakakA 'guNavrata
aura zikSAvrata' prakaraNa  /  2. 'vIsaM jiNa kAraNAhaM bhAveo'  /  3.
'causaTThi sahassAI juvaINaM paramarUvadhArINaM'  /  4. 'jeTTassa bahulapakkhe
divasassa cautthabhAgammi  /  egarisi divase rAvaNamaraNaM viyANAhi  /  / '

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  [31] The *Parushcharitra* mentions this date. It is also
possible that Hemachandracharya followed this text in his own work. Whatever the
case may be, there is no mention of this date in the Digambara sect, nor is it
found in the Valmiki Ramayana.  [4] In the 22nd chapter of the text (previously
quoted verses no. 77-78), the meat-eating king Soudasa is described as a
Shvetambara while he receives the Dharma-upadesha from the Jina Muni Maharaj
while traveling in the south.  In addition to these points, the text also
mentions the 12 Kalpas (Swagas) as a belief. Some scholars have pointed out this
as a Shvetambara belief; however, ancient texts like *Tiloyapannatti* and
*Varangacharitra* of the Digambara sect also mention 12 Swargas. The Digambara
sect accepts both the beliefs of 12 and 16 Swargas, along with their respective
Indras and their territories. This is clearly explained in the three verses no.
452, 453, 454 of *Triloksar*.  [5] In the 102nd chapter of this text, after
mentioning the Kalpas and Navagraha, the mention of Aditya and other Anudishas
is found as follows:  > *Kappanam pun uri navagevejjai manabhiramai. > Tan vi
anuddhisai pureo aiccha pamuhai.* ||145||  This belief of Anudishas is also
specifically related to the Digambara sect. All the texts of the Digambara sect
like *Patkhandagam*, *Dhavla*, *Tiloyapannatti*, *Lokavibhag*, and *Triloksar*
have the provision of Anudishas, while there is no mention of them in the
Shvetambara Agamas. Upadhyaya Muni Shri Atmaramji, in his book *Tattvarthsutra
Jainagam Samanvay*, published with Hindi translation, has clearly accepted on
page 119 that "the existence of nine Anudishas is not accepted in the Agam
texts."  [6] In the second chapter of this text, while narrating the birth story
of Veer Bhagwan, there is no mention of his being married. Instead, it clearly
states that when he left his childhood and turned thirty years old, he attained
*Vairagya* (dispassion) and took *Deeksha* (renunciation).  Furthermore, in the
twentieth chapter, he is counted among the Kumar Shramanas - the Jain
Tirthankaras who were celibate - along with Vasupujya, Malli, Arishtanemi, and
Parshva, who left their homes and became monks during their childhood. This
belief of Veer Prabhu not being married is also specifically related to the
Digambara sect, as there is no provision of his marriage in any Digambara text.
They unanimously declare him as unmarried, while the Shvetambara texts generally
describe him as married. In *Kalpasutra*:  > *Trishathi. Pu. Ch. 7-376 > 1. Tada
cha jyeshtha krishna kadashiyamhna shcha paschime. > Yame mato dashgreeva
shchatutham narakam yayau. ||2|| > See, Anekant Varsh 4, Kiran 11-12 p. 624. >
3. Ummaka balabhava tisai variso jino jao. ||28|| > Ah annayaya kayai
sanvegadaro jino muniyadoso. > Logantiya parikinnho panvajjamuvaago viro. ||29||
> 4. Malli ariththanemi paso viro ya vasupujjo ya. ||57|| > Eae kumara siha
gehao niggaya jinavarina. Sesha vi hu raayano puhai bhottuun nikkhanta. ||58||*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA 31 paruSacaritrama' meM isa tithikA ullekha kiyA hai| yaha bhI ho
sakatA hai ki hemacandrAcAryane apane granthameM isa granthakA anusaraNa kiyA ho
/  kucha bhI ho, digambara sampradAyameM isa tithikA koI ullekha nahIM hai aura
na vAlmIki rAmAyaNa meM hI yaha upalabdha hotI hai| [4] granthake 22veM uddeza
(pUrvoddhRta gAthA naM. 77-78 ) meM mAMsabhakSI rAjA saudAsako dakSiNa deza meM
bhramaNa karate hue jinamuni mahArAjakA dharmopadeza milA unheM zvetAmbara likhA
hai  /  ina bAtoM ke atirikta 12 kalpoM (svagoM) ko bhI eka mAnyatAkA isa
granthameM ullekha hai. jise kucha vidvAnoMne zvetAmbara mAnyatA batalAyA hai;
parantu digambara sampradAyake tiloyapaNNatti aura varAMgacaritra jaise parAne
granthoM meM bhI 12 svargokA ullekha hai| digambara sampradAyako indroM aura
unake adhikRta pradezoMkI apekSA 12 aura 16 svargoM kI donoM mAnyatAe~ iSTa haiM
jisakA spaSTIkaraNa trilokasArakI tIna gAthAoM naM. 452, 453, 454 se bhale
prakAra ho jAtA hai  /  [5] isa granthake 102veM uddezameM kalpoM tathA
navagraMveyakoMke anantara AdityAdi anudizoMkA ullekha nimna prakArase pAyA jAtA
hai kappANaM puNa uri navagevejjAI mnnbhiraamaaii| tANa vi aNuddisAI pureo Aicca
pamuhAI  // 145 /  /  anudizoMkI yaha mAnyatA bhI khAsa taurapara digambara
sampradAyase sambandha rakhatI hai-digambara sampradAyake paTkhaNDAgama,
dhavalA, tiloyapaNNatti, lokavibhAga aura trilokasAra-jaise sabhI granthoM meM
anudizoMkA vidhAna hai jaba ki zvetAmbarIya AgamoMmeM inakA kahIM bhI ullekha
nahIM hai  /  upAdhyAya muni zrI AtmArAmajIne 'tattvArthasUtra jainAgama
samanvaya' nAmaka jo grantha hindI anuvAdAdike sAtha prakAzita kiyA hai usameM
pRSTha 119 para yaha spaSTa svIkAra kiyA hai ki 'Agaga granthoM meM nava
anudizoMkA astitva nahIM mAnA hai| [6] isa granthake dvitIya uddezameM vIra
bhagavAnke janmAdikA kathana karate hue unake vivAhita honekA koI ullekha nahIM
kiyA, pratyuta isameM sApha likhA hai ki jaba ve bAlabhAvako chor3akara tIsa
varSake ho gaye taba vairAgya [ saMvega ] ko prApta karake unhoMne dIkSA [
pravrajyA ] le lI  /  isake sivAya bIsaveM uddezameM unakI gaNanA vAsupUjya,
malli, ariSTanemi aura pArzva ke sAtha una kumArazramaNoMmeM-bAlabrahmacArI
jaina tIrthaMkaroMmeM kI hai jo bhoga na bhogakara kumArakAlameM hI gharase
nikalakara dIkSita hue haiN| vIra prabhuke vivAhita na honekI yaha mAnyatA bhI
khAsa taurapara digambara sampradAyase sambandha rakhatI hai, kyoMki digambara
granthoM meM kahIM bhI unake vivAhakA vidhAna nahIM hai-sarvatra eka svarase
unheM avivAhita ghoSita kiyA hai, jabaki zvetAmbara granthoMmeM Ama taurapara
unheM vivAhita batalAyA hai| kalpasUtra meM -triSaSTi. pu. ca. 7-376 1. tadA ca
jyeSThakRSNakAdazyAmahnazca pazcime  /  yAme mato dazagrIvazcaturthaM narakaM
yayau  /  /  2. dekho, anekAnta varSa 4, kiraNa 11-12 pR. 624  /  3. ummakA
bAlabhAvo tIsaivariso jiNo jAo  // 28 //  aha annayA kayAI saMvegadaro jiNo
muNiyadoso  /  logaMtiya parikiNNo panvajjamuvAgao vIro  // 29 /  /  4. mallI
ariThThaNemI pAso vIro ya vAsupUjjo ya  // 57 /  /  ee kumArasIhA gehAo niggayA
jiNavariMdA  /  sesA vi hu rAyANo puhaI bhottUNa NikkhaMtA  // 58 /  /

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  32 Padmapurana  The text mentions the names of their
wives, daughters, and granddaughters. This is another point that the necessary
appointment [Verse No. 221-222], whose time of creation is not before the sixth
century, also mentions. Veer Bhagwan has been included in the Kumar Shramanas,
but this seems to be an acceptance of the Digambar belief. [7] In this text, in
the 83rd chapter, while describing the initiation of King Bharat, a verse is
given as follows: ``` Aá¹á¹ao gurÅ«á¹am bharhao kÄuá¹ tatth'alaá¹kÄram. NisÅesasanga
rahi'o luÃ±cai dhÄ«ro á¹ipayakese || 5 || ``` This actually mentions Bharat Maharaj
renouncing all possessions and cutting his hair, giving up clothes and
ornaments, but the reading "kÄuá¹ tatth'alaá¹kÄra" here seems to be the result of
some mistake or change, otherwise, it would be incongruous to talk about being
free from all attachments while wearing ornaments and adorning oneself. Also,
the word "tatth" seems redundant. Therefore, this mention points towards the
Digambar belief.  Some different types: [1] This text mentions 15 dreams that
Marudevi, the mother of Bhagwan Rishabhdev, had, while the Svetambar sect
mentions 14 and the Digambar sect mentions 16. According to the Digambar belief,
there is a lack of a dream called "Simhasan" and according to the Svetambar
belief, there should be either "Viman" or "Bhawan". [2] In the following verse
of the 105th chapter of the text, the time difference between the Mahabharata
and the Ramayana is mentioned as 64,000 years. As follows: ``` C'ausatthi
sahas'sÄiá¹ varisa'á¹am antaraá¹ samakkhÄyam. Titth'ayare hi mahÄyas'a
bharatarÄmÄyaá¹Ätu || 16 || ``` This time difference is not supported by either
tradition, and it contradicts the time difference between the Tirthankaras
described by the author himself, because the Ramayana originated in the time of
the 20th Tirthankara Muni Suvrat, and the Mahabharata originated in the time of
the 22nd Tirthankara Neminath, and the author himself has mentioned the time
difference between the two Tirthankaras as 11 lakhs in the 20th, as follows: ```
Ch'ac'ceva samasaha'ss'a vÄ«s'aiyam antaraá¹ samuddiá¹­á¹­haá¹. PaÃ±ceva hava'i lak'khÄ
jiá¹antaraá¹ ega vÄ«s'aimam || 81 || ``` [3] In the following verse of the second
chapter, the origin of Kevalgyan from the destruction of Ashtakarma is mentioned
by Bhagwan Mahavira, as is evident from the following verse: ``` Aha aá¹­á¹­ha karma
rahi'assa tassa jhÄá¹ovajogajutta'ssa. Sayaljagajjoyakaram kevalaá¹Äá¹am samuppanaá¹
|| 30 || ``` This statement is contradicted by both sects, because both sects
believe that Kevalgyan originates from the destruction of four ghatiyas karmas,
while moksha occurs from the destruction of Ashtakarma.  It is hoped that
scholars will consider all these points and be inclined to make a special
decision regarding the time of creation of the text and the relationship of the
author.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 32 padmapurANeM unakI bhAryA, putrI tathA dohatI takake nAmoMkA ullekha hai  /
yaha dUsarI bAta hai ki Avazyaka niryukti [ gAthA naM. 221-222 ] meM bhI jisakA
nirmANa kAla chaThI zatAbdIse pUrvakA nahIM hai  /  vIra bhagavAnko
kumArazramaNoM meM parigaNita kiyA hai parantu yaha eka prakArase digambara
mAnyatAkA hI svIkAra jAna par3atA hai  /  [ 7 ] isa granthase 83veM uddezameM
rAjA bharatakI dIkSAkA varNana karate hue eka gAthA nimna prakArase dI hai aNNao
gurUNaM bharaho kAUNa tattha'laMkAraM  /  nissesasaMgarahio luMcai dhIro
Nipayakese  //  5  //  isameM vastutaH vastra tathA alaMkAroMkA tyAga karake
bharata mahArAjake sampUrNa parigrahase rahita hone aura kezaloMca karanekA
ullekha hai, parantu 'kAUNa tattha'laMkAra' ke sthAnapara yahA~ 'kAUNa
tatthaalaGkAra' aisA jo pATha diyA hai vaha kisI galatI athavA parivartanakA
pariNAma jAna par3atA hai, anyathA alaMkAra dhAraNa karakezrRMgAra - karake
niHzeSa saMgase rahita hone kI bAta asaMgata jAna par3atI hai| sAtha hI 'tattha'
zabda aura bhI nirarthaka jAna par3atA hai  /  ataH yaha ullekha apane mUlameM
digambara mAnyatAko ora saMketako liye hue hai| kucha bhinna prakArakI - [1] isa
grantha meM bhagavAn RSabhadevakI mAtA marudevIko AnevAle svapnoMkI saMkhyA 15
ginAyI hai, jabaki zvetAmbara sampradAya meM vaha 14 aura digambara sampradAya
meM 16 batalAyI gayI hai  /  isameM digambara mAnyatAnusAra 'siMhAsana' nAmake
eka svapnakI kamI hai aura zvetAmbara mAnyatAnusAra 'vimAna' aura 'bhavana'
donoM meM se koI eka honA caahie| [ 2 ] granthake 105veM uddezake nimna padya
meM mahAbhArata aura rAmAyaNakA antarakAla 64000 varSa batalAyA hai  /  yathA -
causaTThi sahassAIM varisANaM aMtaraM samakkhAyaM  /  titthayare hi mahAyasa
bhAratarAmAyaNAtu  // 16 //  isa antarakAlakA samarthana donoM paramparAoM meM
kisIse bhI nahIM hotA, svayaM granthakAra dvArA varNita tIrthaMkaroMke
antarakAlase bhI viruddha par3atA hai, kyoMki rAmAyaNakI utpatti 20 veM
tIrthaMkara muni suvratake kAlameM huI hai aura mahAbhAratako utpatti 22veM
tIrthaMkara neminAtha ke samaya meM huI hai aura donoM tIrthaMkaroMkA antarakAla
granthakArane svayaM 20veM meM 11 lAkha batalAyA hai, yathA chacceva samasahassA
vIsaiyaM aMtaraM samuddiTThaM  /  paMceva havai lakkhA jiNaMtaraM ega vIsaimaM
//  81  //  [ 3 ] dUsare uddezakI nimna gAthAmeM bhagavAn mahAvIrako aSTakarmake
vinAzase kevalajJAnakI utpatti batalAyI hai jaisA ki usake nimna padyase prakaTa
hai aha aTTha kamma rahiyassa tassa jhANovajogajuttassa  /  sayalajagajjoyakaraM
kevalaNANaM samuppaNaM  // 30 //  yaha kathana donoM hI sampradAyase vAdhita
hai, kyoMki donoM hI sampradAyoM meM cAra ghAtiyA karmake vinAzase
kevalajJAnotpatti mAnI hai, aSTakarmake vinAzase to mokSa hotA hai  /  AzA hai
vidvajjana ina saba bAtoMvara vicAra karake granthake nirmANa samaya aura
granthakArake sambandha meM vizeSa nirNaya karane meM pravRtta hoMge  /

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction ## Main Characters of Padmacharit  Although the main protagonist
of Padmacharit is the eighth Balabhadra Padma (Rama), the interaction with him
brings forth the beautiful character portrayals of many characters in the story,
which are extremely helpful for humans to achieve humanity. In this column, I am
introducing ten such characters briefly.  [1] **Ravana**  After losing to Indra,
the Vidhyadhar, he starts living in Mali Alankarpur (Patal Lanka). There, he has
a son named Ratna Shrava, who gets married to Kekasi when he grows up. This
couple, Ratna Shrava and Kekasi, are the parents of Ravana. Ravana was a brave
warrior from childhood. Kumbhakarna and Vibhishan were his younger brothers, and
Chandranakha was his younger sister. One day, Ravana was sitting in Kekasi's lap
when Vaishravana Vidhyadhar's chariot passed by in the sky. Seeing its grandeur,
Ravana asked his mother, "Mother! Who is this influential man going by?" His
mother, while introducing him, said, "He is your maternal uncle, very powerful.
He killed your father's brother and took Lanka from him. We are forced to spend
our days in this Patal Lanka." The vision of past glory starts dancing before
Kekasi's eyes, and thinking about the present situation, tears start flowing
from her eyes. Seeing his mother's sorrowful state, Ravana and Kumbhakarna
console her. Ravana goes to the dense forest to master various skills. The
unclothed Yaksha of Jambu Dwip tests him rigorously. He presents various
obstacles, troubles, and terrifying scenes. Sometimes, he tries to weaken his
resolve by showing him the miserable state of his mother and father, and
sometimes, he tries to frighten him by showing him the terrifying forms of
lions, tigers, snakes, etc. But, blessed is Ravana! He endures all the troubles
and does not deviate from his goal even for a moment. He returns after mastering
many skills. He was handsome, so he had relationships with many princesses. He
marries a pure and thoughtful girl like Mandodari. Ravana takes a vow from
Anantvirya Kevali that he will not touch any woman who does not want him.
Ravana's wisdom attracts the reader when he rejects the love proposal of
Nalakuvar's wife and gives her a beautiful lesson. Hearing the news of Narada's
plight in King Marutvak's violent Yagna, Ravana rushes to protect him and
destroys his hypocritical Yagna, promoting true Dharma. In the war with Varuna,
Kumbhakarna brings the women and children of Varuna's city as prisoners before
Ravana. Ravana reprimands Kumbhakarna, and his words are very touching. He says,
"Good man! You had a fight with Varuna, but why did you put innocent citizens'
women in such trouble? Why did you insult them? If you want your well-being,
return them to their homes with respect." After defeating many kings in his
conquest, Ravana captures Indra. The next day, Indra's father comes to his
residence. Ravana treats him with such humility as if he is the embodiment of
humility. The way Acharya Ravishena portrays his humility at that time touches
the heart. In this way, we see that Ravana eliminates the arrogant rival
Vidhyadharas and establishes his rule over the three parts of the southern
region of Bharat Kshetra and the Vijayadhar mountain. He was not a Rakshasa, but
a descendant of the Rakshasa clan. Valmiki has declared him a Rakshasa, stating
the facts.  According to the principle of "Bhavitavyaata Baliyasi", Ravana sees
Rama's wife Sita and becomes infatuated with her. He abducts her by deceit. He
keeps Sita in the Ashoka Vatika of Lanka and tries to win her over in every way
possible...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA padmacaritake mukhya kathA pAtra yadyapi padmacaritake mukhya nAyaka
AThaveM balabhadra padma ( rAma) hai tathApi unake samparkase isameM aneka
pAtroMkA sundara caritra-citraNa huA hai jo mAnavako mAnavatAkI prAptike lie
atyanta sahAyaka haiN| isa stambhameM maiM nimnAMkita 10 pAtroMkA saMkSipta
paricaya de rahA hai [1] rAvaNa indra vidyAdharase hArakara mAlI alaMkArapura (
pAtAla laMkA ) meM rahane lagatA hai  /  vahA~ usake ratnazravA nAmakA putra
hotA hai, taruNa honepara ratnazravAkA kekasIke sAtha vivAha hotA hai| yahI
ratnazravA aura kekasIkA yugala rAvaNake janmadAtA haiN| rAvaNa bAlya avasthAse
hI zUravIra thaa| kumbhakarNa tathA vibhISaNa isake anuja the aura candranakhA
isakI laghu bahana thii| eka dina kekasI kI godameM rAvaNa baiThA thA usI samaya
AkAzase vaizravaNa vidyAdharakI savArI nikalatI hai, usake ThATa-bATako
dekhakara rAvaNa mAse pUchatA hai ki mA~! yaha kauna prabhAvazAlI puruSa jA rahA
hai| mA~ usakA paricaya detI haI kahatI hai ki yaha terI mausIkA lar3akA hai,
bar3A pratApI hai, isane tere bAbAke bhAIko mArakara laMkA chIna lI hai aura
hama logoMko isa pAtAlalaMkA meM vipattike dina kATanA par3a rahA hai| pichale
vaibhavakA dRzya kekasIkI dRSTi ke sAmane jhUmane lagatA hai aura vartamAna
dazAkA cintana karate-karate usake netroMse A~sU Dhalakane lagate haiN| mAtAko
dIna dazA dekha rAvaNa aura kumbhakarNa use sAntvanA dete haiN| rAvaNa vidyAeM
siddha karaneke lie saghana aTavImeM jAtA hai  /  jambU dvIpakA anAvRta yakSa
usako kaThina parIkSA letA hai  /  taraha-tarahake upasarga-upadrava evaM
bhayaMkara dRzya upasthita karatA hai  /  kabhI usakI mAtA aura pitAkI durdazAke
dRzya sAmane upasthita kara usakI dRr3hatAko kama karanA cAhatA hai, to kabhI
siMha, vyAghra, sarpa Adike bhayAvaha rUpa pradarzita kara use bhIta banAnA
cAhatA hai para dhanya re rAvaNa ! vaha saba upadrava sahanakara raMca mAtra bhI
apane lakSyase vicalita nahIM hotA hai aura anekoM vidyAe~ siddha kara vApasa
lauTatA hai  /  sundara to thA hI isalie aneka rAjakumAriyoMke sAtha usakA
sambandha hotA hai| mandodarI-jaisI pavitra aura vicArazIlA kanyAke sAtha usakA
pANigrahaNa hotA hai| anantavIrya kevalI ke pAsa rAvaNa pratijJA letA hai ki jo
strI mujhe nahIM cAhegI maiM use hAtha nahIM lgaauuNgaa| rAvaNakA viveka usa
samaya pAThakako barabasa AkRSTa kara letA hai jaba vaha nalakUbarakI strIkA
prema-prastAva ThukarA detA hai aura use sundara zikSA detA hai| rAjA marutvake
hiMsApUrNa yajJameM nAradakI durdazAkA samAcAra sunate hI rAvaNa usakI rakSAke
lie daur3a par3atA hai aura usakA pAkhaNDapUrNa yajJa naSTa kara saddharmakI
prabhAvanA karatA hai  /  varuNake yuddha meM kumbhakarNa varuNake nagarameM
prajAko baha-beTiyoMko bandI banAkara rAvaNake sAmane upasthita karatA hai, taba
rAvaNa kumbhakarNako phaTakAra lagAtA hai vaha bar3I mArmika hai| vaha kahatA
hai bhale AdamI ! varuNake sAtha terI lar3AI thI, tUne niraparAdha nAgarikoMkI
striyoMko isa taraha saMkaTa meM kyoM DAlA ? kyoM tune unakA apamAna kiyA? tu
yadi apanI kuzala cAhatA hai to sammAnake sAtha inheM inake ghara vApasa kara  /
aneka rAjAoMko digvijayameM parAsta kara rAvaNa indrako bandI banAtA hai| usake
nivAsa sthAnapara dUsare dina indrakA pitA AtA hai| usake sAtha rAvaNa kitanI
namratAse prastuta hotA hai mAno vinayakA avatAra hI ho| AcArya raviSeNane usa
samaya usakI vinaya pradarzita kara jo use UMcA uThAyA hai vaha hRdayako gadgada
kara detI hai  /  isa taraha hama dekhate haiM ki rAvaNa ahaMkArI pratidvandvI
vidyAdharoMkA unmUlana kara bharatakSetrake dakSiNa disthita tIna khaNDoM evaM
vijayAdha parvatapara apanA zAsana sthApita karatA hai| yaha rAkSasa nahIM thA
rAkSasavaMzI thaa| vAlmIkine ise rAkSasa ghoSita kara vastusthitikA apalApa kiyA
hai| 'bhavitavyatA balIyasI ke siddhAntAnusAra rAvaNa rAmakI strI sItAko dekha
usapara mohita hotA hai aura chalase usakA haraNa karatA hai| laMkAkI azoka
vATikAmeM sItAko rakhatA hai, saba prakArase anunaya-vinaya

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **34** **Padma Purana**  He remains steadfast in the
vow he took before the Kevali even at that time and does not even touch his body
against Sita's wishes. With the rise of sin, Ravana's power of discernment is
lost, he becomes intoxicated with pride, rejects the wise counsel of Mandodari,
and scorns his brother Vibhishana, a wise and righteous man, forcing him to
leave Lanka. The army of Rama and the Vidyadharas surround Lanka from all sides.
Ravana demonstrates the Bahurupini Vidya in the temple of Shantinath. Inspired
by Lakshmana, many Vidyadharas create havoc in Lanka, but Ravana remains
steadfast like a mountain and demonstrates the Bahurupini Vidya. In the end, his
merit does not stand by him. The Sudarshan Chakra of Vishnu reaches Lakshmana,
and he kills Ravana. With Ravana's death, the first chapter of Rama's life ends.
**[2] Mandodari**  In the city of Asurasangeet, located on the southern range of
Vijay Parvat, King May, also known as Hemavati, resides. Mandodari is his
daughter. When King May, after consulting with his ministers, decides to marry
Mandodari to Ravana, Ravana was staying in the Bhima forest. May takes Mandodari
with him to meet Ravana. Mandodari's beauty captivates Ravana's heart. Their
marriage takes place according to the rituals. Mandodari becomes Ravana's queen
due to her virtues. We see that Mandodari is a very intelligent and wise woman.
She repeatedly guides Ravana towards the right path by giving him wise counsel.
Just as a single offering of water calms the rising milk, Mandodari's advice has
calmed Ravana's anger on many occasions. While Ravana was away from Lanka, Khara
and Dushana abducted Ravana's sister, Chandranakha. Upon returning to Lanka,
Ravana, upon hearing this news, becomes enraged and prepares to attack Khara and
Dushana. At that time, Mandodari's gentle and wise counsel calms Ravana's anger
in an instant. Acharya Ravishena's depiction of Mandodari's foresight and wisdom
is truly remarkable, as the reader will see for themselves by reading this
chapter. When Ravana returns to Lanka after abducting Sita, Mandodari tries in
various ways to bring her misguided husband back to the right path, which is
truly astonishing. Indrajit and Meghvahan are her sons. After Ravana's death,
when her two sons take initiation from the great sage Anantvirya, she is deeply
saddened, but the Arya named Shashikanta consoles her with her peaceful words,
leading her to become an Aryika along with many other women. Now, the queen of
the three-world-ruling Ravana adorns herself with only a white saree. In the
end, she performs penance and ascends to heaven.  **[3] King Dasharatha**  King
Dasharatha is the son of King Anaranya of Ayodhya. He is known for his simple
nature, handsome physique, and courageous spirit. He has four wives: Kaushalya
(Aparajita), Kekaya, Sumitra, and Suprabha, and they give birth to four sons:
Rama, Bharata, Lakshmana, and Shatrughna. He is a true friend, a veritable ocean
of friendship. The Mlechchas attack King Janaka. Upon hearing the news of his
friend's plight, King Dasharatha, with full preparation, rushes to Janaka's aid,
and the Mlechchas, defeated and destroyed, flee their country. Inspired by King
Dasharatha's support and friendship, King Janaka decides to give his daughter
Sita to Dasharatha's son, Rama. Due to the Narad's Lila, Janaka has to face many
struggles with the Vidyadharas in this matter.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34 padmapurANe karatA hai para kevalI ke samakSa lI pratijJApara usa samaya bhI
dRr3ha rahatA hai aura sItAkI icchA ke viruddha usake zarIrapara a~gulI bhI
nahIM lagAtA hai| pApakA udaya Anese rAvaNakI viveka zakti lupta ho jAtI hai,
vaha mAnake madameM matta ho mandodarI ke kAntAsammita upadezako ThukarAtA hai
aura vibhISaNa-jaise nItijJa tathA dharmajJa bhAIkA tiraskAra kara use laMkAse
bAhara jAne ke lie vivaza karatA hai  /  rAma tathA vidyAdharoMkI senA laMkAko
cAroM orase ghera letI hai  /  rAvaNa zAntinAtha ke mandirameM bahurUpiNI vidyA
siddha karatA hai  /  lakSmaNakI preraNA se aneka vidyAdhara laMkA meM upadrava
karate haiM para rAvaNa parvatakI taraha sthira rahakara bahurUpiNI vidyA siddha
kara uThatA hai  /  anta meM usakA puNya usakA sAtha nahIM detA hai  /  hAthakA
sudarzanacakra lakSmaNa ke pAsa pahu~ca jAtA hai aura lakSmaNake dvArA usakI
mRtyu hotI hai  /  rAvaNake marate hI rAmake jIvanakA prathamAdhyAya samApta ho
hai| [2] mandodarI rahatA hai  /  usakI strIkA vijaya parvatakI dakSiNa
zreNIpara asurasaMgIta nAmaka nagarI meM rAjA maya nAma hemavatI hai  /
mandodarI unhIM kI putrI hai  /  jaba mantriyoMke sAtha salAha kara rAjA maya
rAvaNa ke sAtha mandodarI kA vivAha karanA nizcita karatA hai usa samaya rAvaNa
bhIma vanameM ThaharA thA  /  maya mandodarIko sAtha le rAvaNase milane ke lie
jAtA hai  /  mandodarIko rUpa mAdhurI rAvaNakA mana mohita kara letI hai  /
vidhipUrvaka donoMkA vivAha hotA hai  /  mandodarI apanI guNagarimAke kAraNa
rAvaNakI paTTarAnI banatI hai  /  hama dekhate haiM ki mandodarI bar3I
pratibhAzAlinI vivekavatI strI hai  /  vaha rAvaNako samaya- samayapara aneka
hitAvaha upadeza dekara sumArgavara lAtI rahI hai  /  jisa prakAra uphanate
dUdhameM pAnIkI eka aMjali chor3a dI jAtI hai to uphAna zAnta ho jAtA hai, usI
prakAra mandodarIke upadezane kitanI hI jagaha rAvaNakA uphAna zAnta kiyA hai  /
rAvaNa laMkA se bAhara gayA thA itanemeM kharadUSaNa rAvaNa kI bahana
candranakhAko hara le jAtA hai  /  laMkA meM vApasa Anepara rAvaNa jaba yaha
samAcAra sunatA hai taba usakA krodha ubala par3atA hai aura vaha
kharadUSaNapara car3hAI karane ke lie udyata hotA hai  /  usa samaya mandodarIkA
komala kAnta upadeza rAvaNake krodhako kSaNa-bhara meM zAnta kara detA hai |
AcArya raviSeNakA vaha citraNa mandodarI kI dIrghadarzitA aura sadvicArakatAko
kitanA adhika nikhAra detA hai yaha pAThaka isa prakaraNako par3ha svayaM dekheM
/  rAvaNa sItAko harakara laMkA meM vApasa pahu~catA hai usa samaya bhI
mandodarI kitane DhaMgase kupathagAmI patiko supathapara lAnekA prayatna karatI
hai yaha AzcaryameM DAla denevAlI bAta hai  /  indrajit aura meghavAhana isake
putra haiM  /  rAvaNavadhake bAda jaba isake donoM putra anantavIrya mahAmunike
pAsa dIkSA lete haiM taba yaha adhika duHkhI hotI hai parantu zazikAntA nAmakI
AryA apane zAntipUrNa vacanoM se use prakRtistha kara detI hai jisase vaha aneka
striyoMke sAtha AryikA ho jAtI hai  /  aba tIna khaNDa ke adhipati rAvaNakI
paTTarAnIke zarIrapara kevala eka zukla sAr3I ho suzobhita hotI hai  /  antameM
tapazcaraNa kara svarga jAtI hai  /  [ 3 ] rAjA dazaratha rAjA dazaratha ayodhyA
ke rAjA anaraNyake putra haiM, svabhAvake sarala, zarIrake sundara tathA
sAhasake avatAra haiM  /  inakI cAra rAniyA~ kauzalyA ( aparAjitA ), kekayA,
sumitrA aura suprabhAse rAma, bharata, lakSmaNa tathA zatrughna ye cAra putra
utpanna hote haiM  /  mitravatsalatA ke mAno sAgara hI haiM  /  rAjA janakake
Upara mlecchoMkA AkramaNa hotA hai  /  mitrakA samAcAra pAte hI rAjA dazaratha
pUrI taiyArIke sAtha janakakI sahAyatA ke lie daur3a par3ate haiM aura mleccha
naSTa-bhraSTa hokara unake dezase bhAga jAte haiM  /  rAjA dazaratha ke isa
sahayoga evaM mitravAtsalya se prerita ho rAjA janaka apanI putrI sItAko
dazaratha suta rAmake lie denA nizcita kara lete haiM  /  nAradIya lIlAke kAraNa
yadyapi janakako isa viSaya meM vidyAdharoMke sAtha kAphI 1 saMgharSa uThAnA
par3atA hai|

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction 35 However, according to destiny, everything happens as it
should. Rama, after stringing the bow, marries Sita. King Dasharatha is very
pleased with Kekaya's skill in warfare and grants her her desired boon. This
leads to her detachment. The opportunity to give Rama the kingdom arises.
Kekaya's rebellious spirit surges, and she demands that her son Bharata be given
the kingdom. Dasharatha, bound by his promise to grant her a boon, agrees to
Kekaya's request. Rama, Lakshmana, and Sita leave for the forest. The
lamentations of Rama and Lakshmana's mothers and the bitter criticisms of the
people do not deter King Dasharatha from his truth. After Rama's departure, he
takes initiation and seeks self-liberation. In this episode, Valmiki criticizes
King Dasharatha for his lust for Kekaya, but Ravishena, in his portrayal of
Rama's father, does not allow anything to be said that would make him fall from
the pinnacle of glory.  [4] Kekaya Kekaya is a woman skilled in all arts.
Acharya Ravishena has dedicated an entire chapter to describing her skills. Her
son's name is Bharata. She is a complete scholar of psychology. When Rama and
Lakshmana are married with great pomp and ceremony in Mithila, she understands
Bharata's state of mind and tells King Dasharatha in private to arrange
Bharata's marriage to the daughter of Kanak, Janak's brother. King Dasharatha
does as Kekaya commands. Although Kekaya's heart is filled with jealousy towards
her co-wife, she later regrets her actions. She goes to the forest with Bharata
and many other vassals to bring Rama and Lakshmana back. She pleads and begs,
but Rama does not budge. Instead, he explains the situation and reinstates
Bharata as king. Kekaya, repenting her actions, returns.  [5] King Janak Janak,
the king of Mithila, is Sita's father. He is very wise and protective of his
self-respect. Due to Narada's playfulness, Bhamandala, a Vidyadhara who was
Janak's son born from a previous life, saw Sita's portrait and was captivated by
her. A Vidyadhara, taking the form of a magical horse, enters Janak's court. The
Vidyadhara says, "You should marry off your daughter." But Janak, with courage,
says, "I have already promised Sita to Dasharatha's son." In this episode,
Janak's self-respect is evident as he criticizes the earth-bound beings and the
Vidyadharas. In the presence of the Vidyadharas, he scolds them, saying, "If the
Vidyadharas are proud of their ability to fly in the sky, then even crows fly in
the sky. If the Vidyadharas are superior, then why don't they take birth as
Tirthankaras?" Acharya Ravishena's immediate outburst is very intriguing.
Finally, Janak accepts the condition of stringing the Vajravart bow and returns
to Mithila. The Swayamvara takes place, Rama strings the bow, and he marries
Sita. The Vidyadharas return with their faces downcast. Bhamandala, angered by
his father's silence, decides to abduct Sita and comes with his army. But
remembering his lineage, his heart changes. He hears about his past life from a
sage. In Ayodhya, Bhamandala meets his sister Sita. King Dasharatha summons
Janak. Who can describe the joy that King Janak and Queen Videha experience at
the reunion with their son born from a previous life after a long separation?
Yet, the stream of affection that Acharya Ravishena pours out at that time is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA 35 tathApi bhavitavyatA ke anusAra saba kArya ThIka ho jAtA hai|
rAma vastrAvarta ghanuSako car3hAkara sItAke sAtha vivAha karate haiM  /
kekayAkI raNakalAse rAjA dazaratha usapara adhika prasanna hote haiM, usake lie
icchita vara dete haiM  /  kAraNa pAkara unheM vairAgya AtA hai  /  rAmako rAjya
denekA avasara AtA hai  /  kekayAkI vidrohAtmaka bhAvanA umar3atI hai aura vaha
apane putra bharatako rAjya dene kI bAta sAmane rakhatI hai  /  dazaratha
manacAhA vara deneke lie vacanabaddha honese kekayAkI bAta mAna lete haiM  /
rAma, lakSmaNa aura sItAke sAtha vanako cale jAte hai  /  rAma-lakSmaNakI
mAtAoMke vilApa evaM prajAjanoMkI kaTuka AlocanAe~ rAjA dazarathako apane isa
satya se vimukha nahIM kara pAtI haiM  /  rAmake cale jAnepara ve dIkSA lekara
AtmakalyANa karate haiM  /  isa prakaraNa meM vAlmIkine rAjA dazarathakA
kekayAke prati kAmAsakti AdikA varNana kara unakI paryApta bhartsanA kI para
raviSeNane rAmapitA ke citraNa meM aisI koI bAta nahIM Ane dI ki jisase ve
gaurava ke zikharase nIce gira sakeM  /  [ 4 ] kekayA Shahar nikhila kalA
pAraMgata nArI hai| AcArya raviSeNane isakI kalAoMkA varNana karaneke lie eka
pUrA kA pUrA parva samApta kiyA hai  /  isake putrakA nAma bharata hai|
manovijJAnakI yaha pUrNa paNDitA hai  /  mithilAmeM jaba rAma aura lakSmaNakA
zAna-zaukata ke sAtha vivAha hotA hai taba ise bharatakI manodazAkA bhAna hotA
hai jisase yaha rAjA dazarathase ekAntameM kahatI hai ki janakake bhAI kanakakI
putrI ke sAtha bharata ke vivAhakA Ayojana karo  /  kekayAko AjJAnusAra rAjA
dazaratha vaisA hI karate haiM  /  yadyapi avasara pAkara kekayAke hRdaya
vimAtAkI IrSyA jAgRta hotI hai para vaha pIche calakara bahuta pachatAtI hai  /
bharata tathA aneka sAmantoMko sAtha lekara vaha vanameM sthita rAma-lakSmaNako
lauTAne ke lie svayaM jAtI hai  /  bahuta anunaya-vinaya karatI hai para rAma
Tasa se masa nahIM hote haiM pratyuta samajhA-bujhAkara bharatakA hI punaH
rAjyAbhiSeka karate haiM  /  kekayA apanI karanIpara pazcAttApa karatI huI
vApasa A jAtI hai  /  [5] rAjA janaka lokameM hara le jAtA hai  /  sItAkA
bhAmaNDala ke sAtha rAmake lie denA nizcita prazaMsA karate haiM  /  jise
mithilA ke rAjA janaka sItAke pitA haiN| bahuta hI vivekI aura svAbhimAnako
rakSA karanevAle haiM  /  nAradIya lIlAke kAraNa sItAkA citrapaTa dekha
bhAmaNDala vidyAdhara jo inhIMkA janmahRta putra thA, sItApara mohita ho gayA
thA  /  eka vidyAdhara mAyAmaya azvakA rUpa rakha janakako vidyAdhara janaka
vidyAdharakI sabhA meM praviSTa hote haiM, vidyAvara kahate haiM tuma apanI
putrI vivAha kara do para janaka sAhasake sAtha kahate haiM ki hama to sItA
dazaratha ke putra kara cuke haiM  /  isa prakaraNameM vidyAdhara
bhUmigocariyoMkI nindA aura vidyAdharoMko sunakara janakakA Atmateja prakaTa
hotA hai aura vidyAdharoMkI bharI sabhA meM DaoNTa lagAte haiM ki yadi
vidyAdharoM ko AkAza meM calanekA ghamaNDa hai to AkAzameM koA bhI calatA hai  /
vidyAdhara yadi uttama haiM to unameM tIrthaMkara janma kyoM nahIM lete ? AcArya
raviSeNakI kalamake tAtkAlika udgAra bahuta hI kautukAvaha haiM  /  anta meM
vajrAvarta dhanuSa car3hAnekI zarta svIkRta kara janaka mithilA vApasa Ate haiM,
svayaMvara hotA hai, rAma dhanuSa car3hA dete haiM aura sItAke sAtha unakA
vivAha hotA  /  vidyAdhara mu~ha kI khAkara vApasa jAte haiM  /  bhAmaNDalako
vidyAdhara pitAkI isa cuppIpara roSa AtA hai, vaha svayaM hI sItAharaNakI bAta
soca senAke sAtha AtA hai| lekina jAti smaraNa honese usakA hRdaya parivartita
ho jAtA hai  /  munike mukhase bhavAntara sunatA hai  /  ayodhyA meM bahana
sItAke sAtha bhAmaNDalakA milAna hotA hai  /  rAjA dazaratha janakako bulAte
haiM  /  cirakAlake bichur3e janmahRta putrake sammelanase rAjA janaka aura rAnI
videhAko jo Ananda utpanna hotA hai usakA kauna varNana kara sakatA hai ? phira
bhI usa samaya AcArya raviSeNane vAtsalya rasakI jo dhArA bahAyI hai vaha to

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
36   In the Padma Purana   The heart-wrenching nature of the story is
extraordinary. After this, King Janaka of Mithila sets out for conquest with
Kanaka, along with Bhamaá¹á¸ala.   [6] RÄma   RÄma is the rightful son of Queen
Kausalya, the undefeated wife of King DaÅaratha. He is the protagonist of this
text. By nature, he is simple and valiant. King DaÅaratha, desiring to renounce
worldly life, prepares to take initiation, but Bharata wishes to renounce before
him. Father DaÅaratha and RÄma try to explain to him, and RÄma, with the
affection and tenderness befitting his importance, persuades Bharata. Somehow,
Bharata calms down.   Preparations for RÄma's coronation are made. Kekaya wishes
to crown her son Bharata. Due to his promise, DaÅaratha feels compelled. When
RÄma learns of this, he immediately departs for the forest with equanimity. "Our
father is the rightful king; we must obey his command," reflects RÄma, and there
is no turmoil in his heart. Although a seed of rebellion arises in Laká¹£maá¹a's
heart, thinking their father is unjustly swayed by a woman, he remains silent
after witnessing RÄma's calmness.   When RÄma is called for the coronation, no
signs of joy appear on his face, and when he receives the order to go to the
forest, no mark of sorrow shows. RÄma departs for the forest with SÄ«tÄ and
Laká¹£maá¹a, yet his heart harbors not even a trace of resentment toward Bharata.
King AmitavÄ«rya, campaigning against Bharata, becomes known. When RÄma learns
this, he secretly attempts to protect Bharata. At that time, he openly speaks to
Laká¹£maá¹a, SÄ«tÄ, and Laká¹£maá¹a's brothers, delivering a long discourse that
reveals there is none like those who, like clouds in the night, conceal
themselves yet do good for others. Consequently, he enters AmitavÄ«rya's court
disguised as a dancer, first enchanting him with his art, then defeating him. In
the yajnashÄlÄ of Kapila the Brahmin, weary RÄma wishes to rest but is met with
such hostility by the Brahmin that he sets off straight for the forest. Although
Laká¹£maá¹a, enraged, wishes to overpower Kapila, there is no sign of diminishment
in RÄma's seriousness. He explains to Laká¹£maá¹a beautifully.   RÄma's stay in the
city created by the YÄká¹£as and his rescue of the same Kapila Brahmin reminds one
of SudÄma's story. After SÄ«tÄ's abduction, despite some agitation within RÄma,
there arises a time during the RÄma-RÄvaá¹a war when some people request RÄma's
command to obstruct RÄvaá¹a; RÄma disapproves, considering such an act abhorrent.
Victory is attained in battle. RÄma says, "Brother! Enmity toward RÄvaá¹a was
only until death, now what is the reason for hostility?" Saying this, he
performs the last rites and advises everyone. By saying, "This is how it is
meant to be," he pacifies them all. He assumes the throne. Due to fear of public
opinion, SÄ«tÄ is abandoned. RÄma remains sorrowful within like a covered pot,
while outwardly everything continues as usual. Thus we see that RÄma, despite
suffering, desires to uphold societal norms, earning him the name of MaryÄdÄ
Puruá¹£ottama in the world. He orders SÄ«tÄ for the Agni ParÄ«ká¹£Ä, yet upon seeing
the towering flames, he becomes overwhelmed with compassion and says to
Laká¹£maá¹a, "Laká¹£maá¹a! May SÄ«tÄ not get burned!" After the death of Laká¹£maá¹a, his
love makes him almost mad for six months. Afterward, he becomes alert and
assumes initiation. In the meantime, SÄ«tÄ completes her penance and takes birth
in the celestial realm of Acyuta. She is seen to be very composed in her efforts
to distract him with her changeable nature, in the mastery of the disguise arts.
Upon the return of VibhÄ«á¹£aá¹a, Maá¹á¸odarÄ«, and others to Ayodhya...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 36 padmapurANe hRdayako ekadama gadgada kara denevAlI hai  /  tadanantara rAjA
janaka mithilAkA rAjya kanakako de bhAmaNDala ke sAtha vijayArdhaM cale jAte
haiM  /  [6] rAma rAma rAjA dazarathakI aparAjitA [ kauzalyA ] rAnIke suyogya
putra haiM  /  yahI isa granthake kathAnAyaka haiM  /  prakRtyA sarala evaM
zUravIra haiN| rAjA dazaratha virakta hokara dIkSA lenekI taiyArI kara rahe haiM
para bharata unase pahale hI virakta ho dIkSA lenA cAhate haiM, pitA dazaratha
unheM samajhAte haiM aura rAma bhI  /  rAma jisa mamatA aura vAtsalyase bharata
ko samajhAte haiM vaha unakI mahattA ke anurUpa hai  /  jisa kisI taraha bharata
zAnta ho jAte haiM  /  rAmake rAjyAbhiSekakI taiyArI hotI hai  /  kekayA apane
putra bharatako rAjya dilAnA cAhatI hai  /  dazaratha vacanabaddha honese vivaza
ho jAte haiM  /  jaba rAmako patA calatA hai taba ve vahIM hI samatAse vanake
lie ravAnA ho jAte haiM  /  'rAjyake adhikArI pitA haiM, hameM unakI AjJA pAlana
karanI cAhie' yaha vicArakara rAmake hRdayameM kucha bhI uthala-puthala nahIM
hotI hai  /  yadyapi lakSmaNake hRdayameM krAntike kaNa utpanna hote haiM ki
pitAjI eka strI ke vaza ho anyAya karane jA rahe haiM para rAmakI zAnti dekha
cupa raha jAte | abhiSekake lie jaba rAma bulAye jAte haiM taba unake mukhapara
prasannatA ke cihna prakaTa nahIM hote aura jaba vana jAnekA Adeza pAte haiM
taba viSAdakI rekhA nahIM khicatI  /  rAma sItA aura lakSmaNake sAtha vanako
jAte haiM para rAmake hRdaya meM bharatake prati raMcamAtra bhI vidveSa paidA
nahIM hotA  /  rAjA amitavIrya bharata ke viruddha abhiyAna karatA hai, jaba
rAmako isa bAtakA patA calatA hai taba ve guptarUpase bharatakI rakSA karanekA
prayatna karate haiM  /  usa samaya ve lakSmaNa, sItA tathA lakSmaNake sAloMke
sAmane eka lambA vyAkhyAna dekara prakaTa karate haiM ki jo rAtrimeM megha ke
samAna chupakara dUsaroMkA bhalA karate haiM unake samAna koI nahIM hai  /
phalasvarUpa ve nartakI ke rUpa meM amitavIryakI sabhA meM jAkara use prathama
apanI kalAse mohita karate haiM aura phira parAsta  /  kapila brAhmaNakI
yajJazAlA meM thake-mA~de rAma vizrAma karanA cAhate haiM para brAhmaNa itanI
ugratAse peza AtA hai ki ve sIdhe vanake lie ravAnA ho jAte haiM, yadyapi
lakSmaNa roSa meM Akara kapilako pachAr3anA cAhate haiM para rAmakI gambhIratA
meM koI nyUnatA dRSTigocara nahIM hotI  /  ve lakSmaNako bar3e sundara DhaMgase
samajhAte haiM  /  yakSanirmita rAmanagarI meM rAmakA rahanA aura unake dvArA
usI kapila brAhmaNakA uddhAra honA sudAmA caritakI smRti dilAtA hai  /  sItAke
haraNa ke bAda yadyapi rAmameM kucha vihvalatA AtI hai phira bhI ve bahuta rAma-
rAvaNa yuddhake samaya jaba kucha loga rAmase AjJA cAhate haiM ki rAvaNakI bAdhA
dI jAye taba rAma isa kRtyako ghRNita kAma samajha kara manA karate haiM
yuddhameM vijaya hotI hai| rAma kahate haiM ki bhAI ! rAvaNase vaira to
maraNAnta hI thA aba baira kisa bAtakA ? aisA kahakara ve usakA antima saMskAra
karate haiM, sabhI ko samajhAte haiM  /  'IdRzI bhavitavyatA' kahakara ve sabako
zAnta karate haiM  /  rAjyabhAra sa~bhAlate haiM  /  lokApavAdake bhayase sItAkA
parityAga hotA hai| rAma puTapAkakI taraha bhItara hI bhItara duHkhI rahate haiM
para bAhyameM saba kAma yathAvat calate rahate haiM  /  isa taraha hama dekhate
haiM ki rAma svayaM kaSTa uThAkara bhI lokamaryAdAkI rakSA karanA cAhate haiM
isalie ve loka meM maryAdA puruSottama ke nAmase prasiddha hote haiM |
agniparIkSA ke lie sItAko Adeza dete haiM para jaba gaganacumbI jvAlAoMkI rAzi
dekhate haiM taba karuNAkula ho lakSmaNase kahate haiM- - lakSmaNa ! kahIM sItA
jala na jAye ? lakSmaNake maraNake bAda to chaha mAha taka unakA sneha unheM
mAno pAgala hI banA detA hai  /  anantara ve saceta ho dIkSA dhAraNa karate haiM
/  isa bIca meM sItA tapazcaraNa kara acyuta svarga meM utpanna ho cukatI hai  /
vaha unheM caMcalacitta karaneke lie bahuta sa~bhale hue dRSTigocara hote haiM
/  bahurUpiNI vidyA siddha karanemeM  /  vibhISaNa- mandodarI Adi ayodhyA vApasa
Anepara

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The introduction tries but all is in vain. After all, only those who attain
**Keval Jnana** become consumers of the path of liberation. Every event in
Rama's life and each of his actions are meant to elevate humanity. This is why
even after such a long interval, Rama remains the object of faith for everyone.
[7] Sita Sita, the daughter of Janaka, is the ideal wife of Rama. If Rama is an
ocean of seriousness, then Sita is a river of compassion. Sita is famous for her
character. When Sita sees Lakshmana and his brothers agitated against King
Amitaviry, she delivers a profound discourse. Rama supports her and tells
Lakshmana that what Sita has said is heart-touching, full of foresight, and
worthy of consideration. Lakshmana tightly binds the enemy of Vajrakarma,
Singhordar, and throws him before Rama and Sita. Seeing his condition, the
tenderness of a woman bursts forth through her words, making Singhordar tremble.
37 Indeed This is In the Dandaka forest, on the banks of the Karnarava river,
Sita prepares food. Seeing the arrival of the **Charan** and **Riddhi-dhari**
sages, her joy knows no bounds. She shows Rama the sages and, with devotion,
offers them food. The machinations of Chandranakha become the cause of Sita's
abduction. Ravana, through deceit, abducts Sita. In Ravana's Ashoka Vatika,
various temptations are presented before Sita, but she rejects them all. With
the vow, "Until Rama's message arrives, I will abstain from food and water," she
sits like a goddess. Hanuman arrives with Rama's message. His joy knows no
bounds. War ensues, Ravana is killed, Sita is reunited with Rama, and upon
returning to Ayodhya, Sita becomes pregnant after some time. Fearing public
opinion, Rama sends her away to a dense forest. Even then, not a single word
against Rama escapes her lips. She says, "It is the fault of my destiny." She
sends a message through Lakshmana, "Just as you have abandoned me due to
people's words, do not abandon the **Lokottara Dharma**. **Samyagdrishti** men
do not struggle with external causes but with their inner causes." This is why
Sita, even in the face of this great humiliation, saw her own fault, not Rama's.
What would she do alone in a deserted forest? Rama did not even consider this.
He takes Sita home as his sister, and there, Sita, through her valiant sons,
reveals the identity of Rama and Lakshmana to her valiant father. Sita undergoes
the fire ordeal. Lakshmana returns. The pregnant woman is alone. Hearing Sita's
lament, King Vajranjangh arrives there. She gives birth to twin sons. The sons
are raised with great love. | They introduce themselves by fighting their father
and defeating him. Narada arrives, and this reunion of father and sons fills the
heart with emotion. Due to Sita's **Sati** character, the fire pit becomes a
pool of water. This divine miracle spreads the glory of Sita's character
everywhere. Rama says, "Beloved, let's go home," but Sita says, "I have seen
home, now I will see the forest." She goes to the forest and becomes an
**Aryika**. Sita's pure soul, through the influence of **Tap**, becomes **Prati-
Indra** in the **Achyut** heaven. In this way, we find Sita as an ideal woman.
[8] Lakshmana Lakshmana is the son of Queen Sumitra, wife of King Dasharatha. He
has a natural love for Rama. Behind this love, we find Lakshmana sacrificing all
his happiness. Seeing Rama ready for exile, Lakshmana follows him. Although
initially, he feels some resentment towards his father, he later finds
satisfaction in thinking, "My elder brother understands what is right and wrong.
My duty is to go with him."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA prayatna karatI hai para saba bekAra hai  /  Akhira kevalajJAna
prApta kara mokSapadake upabhoktA hote haiM  /  rAmake jIvanakI pratyeka
ghaTanAe~ aura unakI pratyeka pravRttiyA~ mAnava mAtrako U~cA uThAnevAlI haiM,
kAraNa hai ki Aja itanA bhArI antarAla bIta jAnepara bhI rAma jana-jana ke
zraddhAbhAjana bane hu haiM  /  [7] sItA janakanandinI sItA rAmakI Adarza patnI
haiN| rAma gambhIratAke samudra haiM to sItA dayAkI saritA hai  /  sItA apane
zIla ke lie prasiddha hai  /  rAjA amitavIryake viruddha jaba sItA, lakSmaNa
tathA unake sAloMko uttejita dekhatI hai taba sotA jo gambhIra pravacana karatI
hai Akhira rAma usakA samarthana hI karate haiM aura lakSmaNase kahate haiM ki
sItAne jo kahA hai vaha hRdayahArI hai, dUradarzitA se bharA hai aura vicAraNIya
hai  /  vajrakarNake zatru siMhodarako lakSmaNa kasakara bA~dha lAte haiM aura
sItA tathA rAmake sAmane DAla dete haiM  /  usakI dazA dekha nArIkI komalatA
vacanadvArase phUTa par3atI hai jise dekha siMhodara pAnI-pAnI ho jAtA hai | 37
vAstava meM yahI to daNDaka vana meM karNaravA nadI ke kinAre sItA bhojana
banAtI hai  /  cAraNa RddhidhArI muniyoMko Ate dekha usakI prasannatAkA ThikAnA
nahIM rahA hai, vaha rAmako muniyoMke darzana karAtI hai aura bhakti se
par3agAhakara AhAra detI hai | candranakhAkA prapaMca sItAharaNakA kAraNa banatA
hai  /  rAvaNa chalase sItAkA haraNa karatA hai  /  rAvaNakI azoka vATikAmeM
sItAke sAmane taraha-taraha ke pralobhana Ate haiM para una sabako vaha ThukarA
detI hai  /  'jabataka rAmakA sandeza na milegA tabataka AhAra- pAnIkA tyAga
hai' aisA niyama lekara vaha devIko bhA~ti baiTha jAtI hai  /  hanumAn rAmakA
sandeza lekara pahu~cate haiM  /  usakI prasannatAkA pArAvAra nahIM rahatA  /
yuddha hotA hai, rAvaNa mArA jAtA hai, sItAkA rAmase milApa hotA hai, ayodhyA
meM vApasa Anepara kucha samaya bAda sItA garbhavatI hotI hai  /  lokApavAda ke
bhayase rAma use bIhar3a aTavI meM chur3avA dete haiM, phira bhI rAmake
pratikUla usake mukhase eka zabda bhI nahIM nikalatA hai  /  vaha yahI kahatI
hai ki mere bhAgyakA doSa hai | lakSmaNake hAtha sandeza bhejatI hai ki 'jisa
prakAra logoMke kahanese Apane merA tyAga kiyA hai usa prakAra lokottara
dharmakA tyAga nahIM kara denA  /  samyagdRSTi puruSa bAhyanimittoMse na
jUjhakara apane antaraMga nimittase jUjhate haiM' isI kAraNa sItAne isa bhArI
apamAnake samaya bhI apanA ho doSa dekhA, rAmakA nahIM  /  chor3akara nirjana
vanameM kyA karegI ? yaha bhI rAmane nahIM vicArA | sItAko bahana ke rUpameM
ghara le jAtA hai aura vahIM sItA zUra-vIra pitAke zUra-vIra hI putra dvArA
rAma-lakSmaNako putroMkA patA sItAkI agni parIkSA hotI hai| lakSmaNa vApasa cale
Ate haiM  /  garbhavatI strI akelI, sItAkA vilApa suna vajrajaMgha rAjA vahA~
pahu~catA hai, yugalaputroM ko janma detI hai  /  putroMkA lAlana-pAlana bar3e
pyArase hotA hai  /  | pitAse yuddha kara tathA unheM parAsta kara apanA
paricaya dete haiM, nAradake calatA hai, yaha pitA aura putroMkA milana hRdayako
gadgada kara detA hai  /  satI ke zIlase agni kuNDa jala-kuNDa ho jAtA hai  /
isa devakRta atizayase sItAke zIlako mahimA sarvatra phaila jAtI hai| rAma
kahate haiM ki priye ! ghara calo, para sItA kahatI hai ki maiM ghara dekha
cukI, aba to vana dekhU~gI aura vanameM jAkara AryikA ho jAtI hai, sItAkI
niHzalya AtmA tapake prabhAvase acyuta svarga meM pratIndra huii| isa taraha
hama sItAko Adarza nArIke rUpa meM pAte haiM  /  [ 8 ] lakSmaNa lakSmaNa rAjA
dazarathakI sumitrA rAnIke putra haiM  /  rAmake sAtha inakA naisargika prema
hai, unake premake pIche hama lakSmaNako apanA samasta sukha nyochAvara karate
hue pAte haiM  /  rAmako vanavAsake lie udyata dekha, lakSmaNa unake pIche ho
lete haiM  /  yadyapi pahale pitAke prati unheM kucha roSa utpanna hotA hai,
para bAdameM yaha socakara santoSa kara lete haiM ki 'nyAya-anyAya bar3e bhAI
samajhate haiM, merA kartavya to inake sAtha jAnA hai  / '

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **38** In the forest exile, Lakshmana takes utmost care
of Rama and Sita's well-being. He arranges for their food and other necessities.
He is an embodiment of valor, with no trace of fear in his heart. He is
completely devoted to Rama's commands. If there is any talk of marriage or other
such matters at any king's court during the exile, he clearly states, "Ask my
elder brother." During the war in Lanka, when Lakshmana is injured, Rama is
deeply distressed and weeps in sorrow. However, his grief is alleviated by
bathing in the waters of the Vishalya river. He obtains Ravana's chakra and uses
it to destroy Ravana. Through his conquests, he establishes his dominion over
the three divisions of Bharat. He is so devoted to Rama that he leaves his body
only upon hearing the false news of Rama's death. Although he has a fiery
nature, his fierceness is considered admirable in the presence of his elder
brother, who is an ocean of composure.  **[9] Bharat** King Bharat is the son of
Dasharatha and Kaikeyi. He is far removed from his mother's deceit and
pettiness. Kaikeyi did everything to make him king, but he refused to accept the
throne. He is always seen with a melancholic expression, longing for home.
During Rama's exile, he diligently ruled the kingdom. He is a protector of
social conduct and decorum. After Rama's return from exile, he renounced worldly
life and embraced asceticism.  **[10] Hanuman** Hanuman's association with
Rama's story is like a jewel-studded ornament. Valmiki's description of Hanuman
is incongruous and an inadequate portrayal of a great soul. He is the crown
jewel of the Vanara lineage, a Tadbhava-Moksha-gami (one who is destined for
liberation) Vidhyadhara (celestial being). Describing him as a mere monkey is an
unwise and unappealing choice. His father is Pavananjay (the wind god) and his
mother is Anjana. Anjana endured immense suffering for 22 years due to her
husband's absence, and later faced the harsh treatment of her mother-in-law,
Ketumati, in the forest. Reading about her hardships would move any
compassionate person to tears. Acharya Ravishena's portrayal of Anjana's
character evokes a powerful stream of pathos, significantly enhancing the
grandeur of the original text. After Sita's abduction, Hanuman comes into
contact with Rama and serves him with utmost dedication until Rama's return to
Ayodhya. Hanuman is a great soul with a long lifespan.  **[11] Vibhishana**
Vibhishana is Ravana's younger brother. He is an embodiment of righteousness and
ethics. Having learned from a seer that "Ravana's death will be at the hands of
Dasharatha and Janaka's descendants," he comes to Bharat to destroy them.
However, Narada's grace ensures that Dasharatha and Janaka are informed
beforehand, so they leave their palaces and install effigies of themselves.
Vibhishana, mistaking the effigies for the real Dasharatha and Janaka, cuts off
their heads with his sword, feeling satisfied. But when his conscience awakens,
he deeply regrets his actions. When Ravana abducts Sita and takes her to Lanka,
Vibhishana tries to reason with him, urging him to release her. But Ravana
refuses to listen and even insults Vibhishana. This leads Vibhishana to leave
Ravana and join Rama. Rama is deeply impressed by Vibhishana's morality. Thus,
we see Ravana and Vibhishana, born from the same mother, as contrasting figures,
representing darkness and light respectively.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 38 padmapurANe vanavAsameM lakSmaNa rAma tathA sItAko sukha-suvidhAkA pUrA
khyAla rakhate haiM  /  AhArAdiko vyavasthA yahI juTAte haiM  /  zUravIratAke to
mAno avatAra hI haiN| bhayakA aMza bhI inake hRdayameM nahIM dikhatA hai| rAmake
ananya AjJAkArI haiM  /  vanavAsa meM yadi kahIM kisI rAjAke yahAM vivAha AdikI
carcA AtI hai to Apa sApha kaha dete haiM ki hamAre bar3e bhAIse pUcho  /
laMkAmeM yuddhake samaya jaba inheM zakti lagatI hai taba rAma bar3e duHkhI ho
jAte haiM, karuNa-vilApa karate haiM, para vizalyAke snAna jalase unakI vyathA
dUra ho jAtI hai| rAvaNakA cakra inake hAthameM AtA hai aura usIse ye rAvaNakA
nAza karate haiM  /  digvijayake dvArA bharatake tIna khaNDoMmeM apanA Adhipatya
sthApita karate haiN| rAmake itane anarAgI haiM ki unake maraNakA jhaThA
samAcAra pAkara hI zarIra chor3a dete haiN| prakRti meM yadyapi ugratA hai para
gAmbhIryake sAgara bar3e bhAIke samakSa choTe bhAIkI yaha ugratA zobhAspada hI
dIkhatI hai| [9] bharata bharata rAjA dazarathako kekayA rAnIke suta haiN|
mAtAkI chala-kSudratAse kosoM dUra haiN| inheM rAjA banAne ke lie kekayAne saba
kucha kiyA para inhoMne rAjA bananA svIkRta nahIM kiyaa| gRhavAsase sadA udAsa
dRSTigata hote haiN| rAmake vanavAsake samaya dRr3hatAse rAjyakA pAlana karate
haiN| lokavyavahAra aura maryAdAke rakSaka hai  /  rAmake vanavAsase Aneke bAda
virakta ho pravrajyA le lete haiM  /  [10] hanumAn rAmake kathAnakameM
hanumAnakA saMyoga maNikAMcana saMyoga hai| vAlmIkine hanumAnakA jo varNana kiyA
hai vaha asaMgata tathA mahApuruSakA avarNavAda hai, ye vAnara vaMzake ziromaNi
tadbhava-mokSagAmI vidyAdhara haiM, inakA sAkSAt vAnarake rUpa meM varNana
karanA avicArita ramya hai| inake pitAkA nAma pavanaMjaya aura mAtAkA nAma
aMjanA hai  /  aMjanAne 22 varSa taka patike vipralambhameM jo lambA kaSTa sahA
hai aura usake bAda sAsa ketumatIke kaTuka vyavahArase vanameM jo duHkha bhoge
haiM unheM par3hakara koI bhI sahRdaya vyakti A~sU bahAye binA nahIM raha sktaa|
aMjanAke caritra-vitraNameM AcArya raviSeNane karuNa rasakI jo dhArA bahAyo hai
usase prakRta granthakA paryApta gaurava bar3hA hai| sItAharaNake bAdase
hanumAna rAmake samparka meM Ate haiM aura rAmako ayodhyA vApasa bheja dene taka
bar3I tatparatAse unakI sevA karate haiN| hanumAn caramazarIrI mahApuruSa haiN|
[11] vibhISaNa vibhISaNa rAvaNake choTe bhAI haiN| dharmajJatA aura nItijJatAke
mAno avatAra hI haiN| 'rAvaNakA maraNa dazaratha aura janakakI santAnoMse hogA'
kisI nimittajJAnIse aisA jAnakara Apa dazaratha tathA janakakA nAza karane ke
lie bhArata meM Ate haiM para nAradakI kRpAse dazaratha aura janakako pahalese
hI yaha samAcAra mAlUma ho jAtA hai, isalie ve apane mahaloMmeM apane hI jaise
putale sthApita kara bAhara nikala jAte haiN| vibhISaNa una putaloMko sacamucake
dazaratha aura janaka samajha talavArase unake sira kATakara santoSa kara lete
haiM para jaba unakI antarAtmAmeM viveka jAgRta hotA hai taba ve apane isa
kukRtyase bahuta pachatAte haiN| rAvaNa sItAko harakara laMkA le jAtA hai taba
vibhISaNa use zakti-bhara samajhAte haiN| anta meM jaba nahIM samajhatA hai aura
ulaTA vibhISaNakA tiraskAra karatA hai taba use choDa rAmale A milate haiM. rAma
unakI naitikatAse bahata pra hote haiM  /  isa prakAra hama eka mA~ke udarase
utpanna rAvaNa aura vibhISaNako andhakAra aura prakAzake samAna vibhinna rUpameM
pAte haiN| -

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Introduction  **The Literary Form of Padmacarita**  The language of
Padmacarita is imbued with grace and is extremely captivating. After seeing the
Padmacarita published in the Manikchand Granthamala, I initially believed that
it had a greater looseness in language compared to Valmiki Ramayana. However,
when I compared it with the manuscripts, the pure text came to light, and my
belief was eradicated. The poet has done a remarkable job in describing the
forest, river, army, and war. The description of Chitrakoot mountain, Ganga
river, and seasons like spring, as done by Acharya Ravishena, is not seen even
in epics. The introduction is getting lengthy, otherwise, I would have presented
all those verses before the readers where the poet's pen has done wonders. After
reading Vimal Suri's 'Paumchariy', when we read Ravishena's Padmacarita, it
becomes clear how he has made his work so elegant and suitable for poetry.
**This Translation and Acknowledgement**  In the introduction of Mahapurana, I
wrote that in the Digambar Jain sect, Mahapurana, Padmapurana, and
Harivanshpurana, all three are the crown jewels of Purana literature. While
experiencing joy in editing and translating Mahapurana, I had drawn the
attention of society towards the editing and publication of the remaining two
Puranas. It is a matter of joy that the organizers of the Bharatiya Gyanpeeth
liked my point, and they agreed to publish these two Puranas from Gyanpeeth.
Pandit Foolchandji, a connoisseur of Jain principles and a compassionate
scholar, also drew the attention of the organizers of Gyanpeeth towards this.
Therefore, I am very grateful to all these great souls. The editing of the book
cannot be done without manuscripts, so I wrote to my fellow scholar friend
Pandit Parmanandji Delhi for manuscripts. He brought two manuscripts from the
Delhi repositories, one with Shri Chandra's annotations and one from his
personal library, 'Paumchariy', and came to Sagar himself. The remaining two
manuscripts were also obtained from Bombay and Jaipur, so I am very grateful to
those great souls who provided this resource material. I have taken textual
variations based on four manuscripts and one printed copy. This time, I had to
work alone in taking textual variations, so it took a lot of time and effort.
From the beginning to the 28th chapter, I prepared the manuscript of the
original verses myself, but due to the strict demand of the authorities of the
'B' manuscript to send it quickly, I had to mark the textual variations of other
books on the printed original copy from Manikchand Granthamala. Book editing is
a practice of literary service. Scholars can do it according to their
convenience, and then someone like me, who has to be constantly involved in many
other tasks, takes a little longer. In the meantime, the repeated demand to send
it quickly from the authorities of the manuscripts starts to bother. I consider
it better if their manuscript is used in the creation of a book rather than
being kept in the shelves of Saraswati Bhavan. Thus, I have made full use of the
manuscript for the time it was received, and I express my sincere gratitude to
the senders and protectors of those manuscripts. The eleventh chapter of
Padmacarita is full of philosophical ideas. I did not understand the meaning of
three or four verses, which Pandit Foolchandji has explained, so I am grateful
to him.  Writing an introduction requires historical knowledge, and I consider
myself completely ignorant in this subject. Whatever has been written in the
introduction is based on the knowledge of the learned scholar Shri Nathuramji
Premi, Bombay.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prastAvanA padmacaritakA sAhityika rUpa padmacaritakI bhASA prasAdaguNase ota-
prota tathA atyanta manohAriNI hai| mANikacandra granthamAlAse prakAzita
padmacaritako dekhane ke bAda pahale mere mana meM dhAraNA jama gayI thI ki
isameM vAlmIki rAmAyaNake samAna bhASA sambandhI zithilatA adhika hai para jaba
hastalikhita pratiyoMse milAna karane para zuddha pATha sAmane Aye taba hamArI
ukta dhAraNA unmUlita ho gayI  /  vana, nadI, senA, yuddha AdikA varNana karate
hue kavine bahuta hI kamAla kiyA hai| citrakUTa parvata, gaMgA nadI tathA
vasanta Adi RtuoMkA varNana AcArya raviSeNane jisa khUbIse kiyA hai vaisA to
hama mahAkAvyoMmeM bhI nahIM dekhate haiN| prastAvanA lekha lambA huA jA rahA
hai nahIM to maiM ve saba avataraNa uddhRta kara pAThakoMke sAmane rakhatA
jinameM kaviko lekhanIne kamAla kiyA hai| vimala sUrike 'paumacariya' ko
par3haneke bAda jaba hama raviSeNake padmacaritako par3hate haiM taba spaSTa
jAna par3atA hai ki inhoMne apanI racanAko kitanI sarasa aura kAvyake anukUla
banAyA hai| yaha anuvAda aura AbhAra pradarzana mahApurANake prastAvanA lekhameM
maiMne likhA thA ki digambara jaina sampradAyameM mahApurANa, padmapurANa aura
harivaMzapurANa ye tInoM hI parANa sAhityake ziromaNi haiN| mahApurANakA
sAnuvAda sampAdana kara prasannatAkA anubhava karate hae maiMne zeSa do purANoM
ke sampAdana tathA prakAzanakI ora samAjakA dhyAna AkarSita kiyA thaa|
prasannatAkI bAta hai ki bhAratIya jJAnapIThake saMcAlakoMko mero vaha bAta
pasanda par3a gayI jisase unhoMne jJAnapIThase ina donoM purANoMkA bhI prakAzana
svIkRta kara liyaa| jaina siddhAntake marmajJa, sahRdaya ziromaNi paM.
phUlacandrajIne bhI jJAnapIThake saMcAlakoMkA dhyAna isa ora AkRSTa kiyaa|
isalie maiM ina saba mahAnubhAvoMkA atyanta AbhArI huuN| granthakA sampAdana
hastalikhita pratiyoMke binA nahIM ho sakatA, isalie maiMne apane sahAdhyAyI
mitra paM. paramAnandajI dehalIko hastalikhita pratiyoM ke lie likhA, to ve
dehalIke bhANDAroMse do mala pratiyAM eka zrIcandra ke TippaNako prati tathA
apanI nijI lAibrerIse 'paumacariya' lekara svayaM sAgara Akara de gye| zeSa do
pratiyA~ bhI bambaI tathA jayapurase prApta huI isalie maiM isa sAdhana sAmagrI
ke jaTAnevAle mahAnubhAvoMkA atyanta AbhArI huuN| cAra hastalikhita aura eka
mudrita pratike AdhArapara maiMne pATha-bheda liye haiN| abakI bAra pATha-bheda
lenemeM akele hI zrama karanA par3A, isalie samaya aura zakti paryApta lagAnI
pdd'ii| prArambhase lekara 28 parva taka to mUla zlokoMkI pANDulipi maiMne
svayaM taiyAra kI parantu 'ba' pratike adhikAriyoMkA sakhta takAjA jaldI
bhejanekA honese usake bAda mANikacandra granthamAlAse madrita mUla pratipara hI
anya pustakoM ke pATha-bheda aMkita karane pdd'e| grantha sampAdana, sAhityika
sevAkA anuSThAna hai  /  vidvAn ise suvidhAnusAra hI kara pAte haiM aura phira
mujha-jaise vyaktiko jise anyAnya aneka kAryoM meM nirantara ulajhA rahanA
par3atA hai, kucha samaya jyAdA laga jAtA hai isa bIca meM pratiyoM ke
adhikAriyoMkI orase bAra-bAra jaldI bhejanekA takAjA akharane lagatA hai|
sarasvatI bhavanakI AlamAriyoM meM rakhe rahanekI apekSA yadi unakI pratikA kisI
grantha ke nirmANameM upayoga ho rahA hai to maiM ise uttama hI samajhatA huuN|
astu, jo prati jitane samayake lie prApta huI usakA maiMne pUrNa upayoga kiyA
hai aura maiM una pratiyoM ke preSakoM tathA saMrakSakoM ke prati atyanta AbhAra
prakaTa karatA huuN| padmacaritakA gyArahavAM parva dArzanika vicAroMse bharA
hai, ke tIna-cAra zlokoMkA bhAva hamArI samajhameM nahIM AyA jise paM.
phalacandrajIne milAyA hai isalie maiM inakA AbhArI huuN| prastAvanA likhane meM
itihAsajJatAkI AvazyakatA hai aura isa viSayameM maiM apane Apako bilakula
anabhijJa samajhatA huuN| prastAvanAmeM jo kucha likhA gayA hai vaha zradveSa
vidvAn zrI nAthUrAmajI premI, bambaI,

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Padma Purana, This work is based on the Ramayana story written by Mà¤¿à¤¤à¥à¤°à¤µà¤° à¤µà¤.
à¤ªà¤°à¤®à¤¾à¤¨à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¤à¥ à¤¶à¤¾à¤¸à¥à¤¤à¥à¤°à¥ and Dr. Reverend Father Kamil Bulke M.J.M.A., D.Phil., Head
of the Hindi Department, St. Xavier's College Ranchi. In many places, we have
adopted their words, so I express my gratitude to these scholars. The Hindi
translation by the poet Daulatramji is widely circulated in the Jain community.
There is hardly any Jain temple where this commentary on the Padma Purana is not
found. Although this commentary is not perfect, it is written with a simple
approach, but it has provided significant help in translation and connecting the
story. Therefore, I express my deep gratitude to the late poet Daulatramji. I am
a very ignorant and insignificant human being, so it is possible that there are
errors in the editing and translation. Therefore, I apologize to the scholars
for this. 40 Sagar Phalguna Shukla 3. Veer Nirvana 2284  }  Vinit - Pannalal
Jain

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe , mitravara vaM. paramAnandajI zAstrI aura DaoN. revareMDa phAdara
kAmila bulke ema. je. ema. e., DI. phil. adhyakSa hindI vibhAga, santa jeniyara
kaoNleja rAMcI ke dvArA likhita rAmakathAke AdhArase likhA gayA hai aura kitanI
jagaha to hamane unake hI zabda AtmasAt kara liye haiM isalie maiM ina
vidvAnoMke prati apanI kRtajJatA prakaTa karatA hU~  /  kavivara daulatarAmajI
kRta hindI anuvAdakA pracAra jaina samAjameM ghara-ghara hai zAyada hI aisA koI
di. jaina mandira ho jahA~ padmapurANakI isa TIkAkA sadbhAva na ho  /  yadyapi
vaha TIkA avikala nahIM hai sirpha kAkA bhAva lekara likhI gayI hai para to bhI
anuvAdameM tathA kathA sambandha jor3anemeM usase paryApta sahAyatA milI hai|
ataH maiM sva. kavivara daulatarAmajI ke prati apanI agAdha dhaddhA prakaTa
karatA hU~ maiM atyanta alpajJAnI kSudra mAnava hU~ isalie mujhase sampAdana
tathA anuvAda meM truTiyoMkA raha jAnA saba taraha sambhava hai| ata: maiM isake
lie vidvAnoMse kSamA prArthI hU~  /  40 sAgara phAlguna zuklA 3. bIra nirvANa
2284 } vinIta - pannAlAla jaina

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Table of Contents  **First Part** Topics: Salutations, Author's Pledge,
Praise of Good Stories, Praise of Good People, Criticism of Bad People,
Introduction of the Book, Summary of Topics Covered in the Book  **Second Part**
The story takes place in the Bharat Kshetra of Jambudvipa, in the city of
Rajgriha, ruled by King Shrenik. Description of his kingdom. Arrival of Lord
Mahavira near Rajgriha. Description of Mahavira's greatness, creation of the
Samvasarana, etc. King Shrenik goes to pay respects to Lord Mahavira, hears the
divine sound, etc. King Shrenik enters his city, description of the night, King
Shrenik lying on his bed contemplates the false beliefs prevalent in the
Ramayana.  **Third Part** King Shrenik goes back to the Samvasarana in the
morning and expresses his desire to hear the Ramayana from Gautam Swami. Gautam
Swami assures him that he will tell the story. Gautam Swami describes the
region, time period, and the fourteen Kulkaras. Description of the fourteenth
Kulkara, Nabhiray, and his wife, Marudevi. Description of the service rendered
to Marudevi by the goddesses. Description of Marudevi's dream. Description of
Lord Rishabhdev's conception, birth, and initiation ceremonies. Description of
Nami-Vinamika coming to Lord Adinath while he was in meditation, and Dharanendra
giving him the kingdom of the north and south rows of Vijayardha.  **Fourth
Part** Lord Rishabhdev takes food at the homes of King Soma Prabha and Shreyans.
The origin of Kevalgyan and the creation of the Samvasarana, description of the
divine sound. Description of Bharat Bahubali, and the creation of the Brahmin
caste by Bharat.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSayAnukramaNikA prathama parva viSaya maMgalAcAraNa granthakartapratijJA,
satkathA prazaMsA sajjanaprazaMsA, durjananindA granthakA avataraNa granthameM
nirUpyamANa viSayoMkA sUtrarUpase saMkalana dvitIya parva jambUdvIpake
bharatakSetrameM magadha deza hai, usake rAjagRha nagara meM rAjA zreNika rAjya
karatA hai| usake rAjyakA varNana  /  rAjagRhake samIpa bhagavAn mahAvIrakA
Agamana  /  mahAvIrakA mAhAtmyavarNana, samavasaraNakI racanA Adi rAjA zreNikakA
vandanArtha jAnA, bhagavAn mahAvIrako divyadhvani khiranA Adi magadharAja
zreNikakA nagarameM praveza, rAtrikA varNana, zayyApara par3e-par3e rAjA
zreNikakA rAmakathAmeM pracalita mithyA mAnyatAoMkA cintana tRtIya parva
prAtaHkAla honepara rAjA zreNikakA samavasaraNameM punaH jAnA aura
gautamasvAmIse rAmakathA zravaNakI icchA prakaTa karanA aura gautamasvAmIke
dvArA rAmakathA kahanekA AzvAsana gautamasvAmI dvArA kSetra, kAla tathA caudaha
kulakaroMkA varNana caudahaveM kulakara nAbhirAya aura unakI strI marudevIkA
varNana  /  deviyoMke dvArA marudevIkI sevAkA varNana  /  marudevIkA svapna
varNana  /  bhagavAn RSabhadevakA garbhArohaNa janma kalyANaka tathA dIkSA
kalyANakakA varNana bhagavAna AdinAthako dhyAnArUr3ha rahane ke samaya nami-
vinamikA AnA, dharaNendrake dvArA unheM vijayArdhakI uttara-dakSiNa zreNiyoMkA
rAjya diyA jAnA caturtha parva bhagavAna RSabhadevakA rAjA somaprabha aura
zreyAnsake yahA~ AhAra lenaa| kevalajJAnakI utpatti tathA samavasaraNakI racanA,
divyadhvanikA varNana bharata bAhubalIkA varNana, bharatake dvArA brAhmaNa
varNakI sRSTi

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Padma Purana: A Summary of Chapters 5-8  **Chapter 5**  This chapter
briefly describes the four great lineages: 1) Ikshvaku, 2) Rishi or Chandra, 3)
Vidyaadhara, and 4) Hari. It focuses on the Vidyaadhara lineage, specifically
mentioning the sages Vidyudh and Sanjayant. It also includes descriptions of
Ajitanatha Bhagwan, Sagar Chakravarti, Purnadhan, Sulochana, Sahasranayan, and
Meghvahan. The chapter details the animosity between Meghvahan and Sahasranayan
in their previous lives. It concludes with the story of how the demons Bheem and
Subheem helped Meghvahan acquire the Rakshas Dweep (Demon Island) and the
expansion of the Rakshas lineage.  **Chapter 6**  This chapter provides a
detailed account of the Vanar (monkey) lineage.  **Chapter 7**  This chapter
narrates the birth of Indra Vidyaadhara in the city of Rathnapura, the capital
of King Sahasrar. It describes his influence, power, and achievements.
**Chapter 8**  This chapter focuses on the demon king Mali, ruler of Lanka, and
his conflict with Indra. It describes their battle, Mali's death, the emergence
of the Lokapalas (Guardians of the World), and Vaishravana's residence in Lanka.
It also recounts how Sumali, defeated by Indra, settled in Alankarpur and
fathered a son named Ratna Shrava. Ratna Shrava's wife, Caikasi, gave birth to
Dasanan, Kumbhakarna, Chandranakha, and Vibhishan. The chapter further details
how Vaishravana, witnessing their aerial journey, helped them acquire various
skills. It also describes how the Anavrit Yaksha (Uncovered Yaksha) caused
trouble, but Dasanan and his siblings remained steadfast and mastered many
skills. The chapter concludes with the rise of Dasanan's influence within the
Rakshas lineage.  **Chapter 8 (Continued)**  This chapter continues with the
story of King May, ruler of Asursangeetnagar, and his daughter Mandodari. It
describes Mandodari's marriage to Dasanan. The chapter then narrates Dasanan's
water-play with six thousand maidens in the Vapi (pond) built on the Meghrav
mountain and his subsequent marriage to them. It also describes the marriages of
Kumbhakarna and Vibhishan. The chapter concludes with Kumbhakarna's destruction
of Vaishravana's cities, Vaishravana's complaint to Sumali, Dasanan's harsh
reply to Vaishravana's messenger, the ensuing battle between them, and
Vaishravana's defeat. It also mentions Vaishravana's initiation and his journey
on the Pushpak Vimana (flying chariot) to conquer the southern direction with
his family. The chapter ends with Sumali's description of Harishen Chakravarti,
Dasanan's subjugation of the Trilokmandan elephant, his victory over the Yama
Lokapala (Lord of Death), and his entry into the city of Lanka.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe paMcama parva cAra mahAvaMza-1 ikSvAkuvaMza, 2 RSivaMza athavA
candravaMza, 3 vidyAdharoMkA vaMza tathA harivaMzake nAmollekhaparvaka inakA
saMkSipta varNana  /  vidyAdhara vaMzake antargata vidyur3ha aura saMjayanta
munikA varNana ajitanAtha bhagavAnakA varNana sagara cakravartIkA varNana,
pUrNadhana, sulocana, sahasranayana tathA meghavAhana AdikA varNana meghavAhana
aura sahasranayanake pUrvajanma sambandhI vairakA varNana rAkSasoMke indra bhIma
aura subhImake dvArA meghavAhanake lie rAkSasa dvIpakI prApti tathA
rAkSasavaMzake vistArakA varNana SaSTha parva vAnara vaMzakA vistRta varNana
saptama parva rathanapuranagarameM rAjA sahasrArake yahA~ indra vidyAdharakA
janma tathA usake prabhAva, pratApa AdikA varNana 139 141 146 laMkAke rAjA
mAlIkA indra ke viruddha abhiyAna tathA yuddhakA varNana, mAlIkA mArA jAnA
lokapAloMkI utpatti tathA vaizravaNakA laMkAmeM nivAsa indrase hArakara sumAlIkA
alaMkArapurameM rahanA, usake ratnazravA nAmakA putra honA, usakI kaikasI nAmaka
strIse dazAnana, kumbhakarNa, candranakhA aura vibhISaNakI utpattikA varNana
vaizravaNako gagana-yAtrA dekha dazAnana AdikA vidyAeM siddha karanA, anAvRta
yakSake dvArA upadrava honA para avicalita rahakara unheM aneka vidyAoMkA siddha
ho jAnA rAkSasa vaMzameM dazAnanakA prabhAva phailanA 148 155 15 aSTama parva
168 174 178 179 asurasaMgItanagarameM rAjA maya aura usakI putrI mandodarIkA
varNana  /  mandodarIkA dazAnanake sAtha vivAha megharava parvatapara banI
vApikAmeM chaha hajAra kanyAoM ke sAtha rAvaNakI jala-krIr3A tathA unake sAtha
usake vivAhakA varNana kumbhakarNa tathA vibhISaNa ke vivAhakA varNana
kumbhakarNake dvArA vaizravaNake nagaroMkA vidhvaMsa, vaizravaNa dvArA sumAlIse
kumbhakarNakI zikAyata dazAnanake dvArA vaizravaNake dUtako karArA uttara tathA
donoM ora ghamAsAna yuddha aura vaizravaNakA parAjaya  /  vaizravaNakA dIkSA
lenA vaizravaNake puSpaka vimAnapara ArUr3ha ho rAvaNakI saparivAra dakSiNa
dizAkI vijayayAtrA sumAlI dvArA hariSeNa cakravartIkA varNana rAvaNake dvArA
trilokamaNDana hAthIkA vaza karanA rAvaNa dvArA yamalokapAlakA vijaya aura laMkA
nagarI meM praveza 180 186 187 197 .

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Table of Contents  **Ninth Chapter:** Description of the birth of Bali,
Sugriva, Nal, Neel, etc. The abduction of Ravana's sister Chandranakha by
Kharadushan, the birth of Viradhika, the struggle with the infant Dasanan, the
infant's initiation, the marriage of Sugriva's sister with Dasanan, the stopping
of Dasanan's plane on Mount Kailash due to the influence of the infant, Ravana
lifting Mount Kailash, Bali's protection of it, Ravana's praise of the Jina, and
the Nagraj's donation of the invincible power of victory.  **Tenth Chapter:**
Sugriva's marriage with Sutara, the birth of his sons Ang and Angad from her.
The desire to obtain Sutara, the attainment of knowledge by the courageous
Vidyaadhar in the inaccessible cave of the Himalayas, Ravana's departure for his
conquest, Indra's departure to attack the Vidyaadhar, meeting Kharadushan on the
way, description of Ravana's vast army, the sight of the Narmada on the way,
description of King Sahasrarashmi of Mahishmati's water sports in the Narmada,
obstruction in Dasanan's worship, Dasanan's war with Sahasrarashmi,
Sahasrarashmi's capture, his release by his father Shatabahu Muni after his
advice, Sahasrarashmi and Ayodhya's King Anaranya's initiation.  **Eleventh
Chapter:** Ravana's advance towards the north, his anger towards the arrogant
king of Rajpur, the beginning of the story of the sacrifice, the story of
Ayodhya's Kshirakadambak Guru, his wife Swastimati, King Vasu, and the dispute
over the meaning of the word 'Ajairayastavyam' on Mount Narada. Vasu's false
judgment and his downfall, Dasanan's arrival in Rajpur city, description of King
Marutvan's sacrifice, the story of Narada's birth, Narada's arrival in King
Marutvan's sacrificial hall, and his long debate with the priest, the defeat of
the Brahmins and their beating of Narada, Ravana's knowledge of this incident
through his messenger, Ravana's protection of Narada, suppression of the
Brahmins, and destruction of Marutvan's sacrifice, King Marutvan's apology and
giving his daughter Kanakaprabha to Ravana, Ravana's travels to many countries.
**Twelfth Chapter:** Ravana's daughter Kritachitra's marriage with Madhu, the
son of King Harivahan of Mathura, Madhu's acquisition of the Shul Ratna from
Chamendra, Ravana's war with Nalakuvara, description of his wife Uparambha's
love for Ravana, etc., Ravana's arrival at the point of victory, Indra's
consultation with his father Sahasrar, Sahasrar's appropriate advice, Indra's
reply to his father, Indra's preparation for war, the fierce battle, and
Ravana's defeat of Indra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSayAnukramaNikA navama pavaM bAli, sugrIva, nala, nIla Adiko utpattikA
varNana kharadUSaNake dvArA rAvaNakI bahana candranakhAkA haraNa, virAdhikakA
janma bAlikA dazAnanake sAtha saMgharSa, bAlikA dIkSAgrahaNa, sugrIva dvArA
apanI bahanakA dazAnanake sAtha vivAha bAlike prabhAvase kailAsa parvatapara
dazAnanakA vimAna ruknaa| rAvaNa dvArA kailAzako uThAnA, bAli dvArA usakI rakSA,
rAvaNa dvArA jinendra stuti tathA nAgarAjake dvArA amogha vijayA zaktikA 207 208
210 dAna 224 225 dazama parva sugrIvakA sutArAke sAtha vivAha, usase aMga aura
aMgada nAmaka putroMkA janma  /  sutArAko prApta karane kI icchAse sAhasagati
vidyAdharakA himavat parvatako durgama guhAmeM vidyA siddha karanA rAvaNakA
digvijayake lie nikalanA indra vidyAdharapara AkramaNake lie jAnA, bIcameM
kharadUSaNake sAtha milApa honA, rAvaNako vizAla senAkA varNana, mArgameM
narmadAkA dRzya mAhiSmatIke rAjA sahasrarazmikA narmadAmeM jalakrIr3AkA varNana;
dazAnanakI pUjAmeM bAdhA, sahasrarazmi ke sAtha dazAnanakA yuddha,
sahasrarazmikA pakar3A jAnA, tadanantara usake pitA zatabAhu munirAjake
upadezase chor3A jAnA, sahasrarazmi aura ayodhyAke rAjA anaraNyakA dIkSA lenA
226 229 ekAdaza parva rAvaNakA uttara dizAkI ora bar3hanA, bIca meM rAjapurake
ahaMkArI rAjAke prati usakA roSa, prakaraNa pAkara yajJakA prArambhika itihAsa
batalAte hue ayodhyAke kSIrakadambaka guru, svastimatI nAmaka unakI strI, rAjA
vasu tathA nArada parvatakA 'ajairyaSTavyam' zabdake arthako lekara vivAda  /
vasu dvArA mithyA nirNaya tathA usakA patana rAjapura nagarameM dazAnanakA
pahu~canA, rAjA marutvAnake yajJakA varNana, nAradakI utpattikA kathana nAradakA
rAjA marutvAnako yajJazAlAmeM paha~canA aura usake purohita ke sAtha lambA
zAstrArtha karanA, brAhmaNoMkA parAsta hokara nAradako pITanA, rAvaNako dUtake
dvArA isa kANDakA patA calanA, rAvaNake dvArA nAradakI rakSA tathA brAhmaNoMkA
damana aura marutvAnke yajJakA vidhvaMsa rAjA marutvAnakA kSamA yAcanA kara
apanI kanakaprabhA kanyA rAvaNake lie denaa| rAvaNakA aneka dezoMmeM bhramaNa
238 245 dvAdaza parva rAvaNakI kRtacitrA kanyA kA mathurAke rAjA harivAhanake
putra madhuke sAtha vivAha honA madhuko camarendrase zUla ratna prApta honA
nalakUbarake sAtha rAvaNakA yuddha, usakI strI uparambhAkA rAvaNake prati
anurAga AdikA varNana rAvaNakA vijayArdhapara pahu~canA, indrakA apane pitA
sahasrArase salAha pUchanA, sahasrArakI ucita salAha, indrakA pitAko uttara
yuddhake lie indrakI taiyArI tathA ghanaghora yuddha aura rAvaNake dvArA indrakI
parAjaya 269 270 273 279 281

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Padma Purana:  **Chapter Thirteen:** Indra, bound by Ravana, is freed by
his father Sahasraraka in Ravana's court. Indra shows humility towards
Sahasraraka. Indra sits in a Jain temple, where he encounters the Nirvanasangama
Muni. Indra inquires about his past lives, receives initiation, and attains
Nirvana.  **Chapter Fourteen:** Ravana returns from Mount Meru with his
entourage. On the way, on the Suvarnagiri mountain, Anantbal Muni attains
Kevalgyan. He describes the Dharma, stating, "I will not force a woman who does
not desire me." Ravana accepts this vow.  **Chapter Fifteen:** The story of
Hanuman. In Aditya-pur, King Prahlad and his wife Ketumati have a son,
Pavananjay. The chapter describes King Mahendra on Mount Dantagiri (also known
as Mahendra-giri). Due to a heart-wrenching incident, Mahendra's queen gives
birth to Anjana. The chapter details the marriage of Pavananjay and Anjana,
including the incident where Mishrakeshi, a messenger, sows discord between
Pavananjay and Anjana.  **Chapter Sixteen:** Anjana's suffering due to
separation from Pavananjay. Ravana fights with Varuna, and Pavananjay joins the
battle. On the way, he sees a Chakwai bird mourning for its mate at Manasarovar,
reminding him of Anjana's plight. He secretly goes to her. A friend informs
Anjana of Pavananjay's arrival. Pavananjay apologizes and they reunite. The
chapter describes their love and intimacy.  **Chapter Seventeen:** Anjana's
pregnancy becomes evident, and Ketumati accuses her of disgrace and throws her
out. Anjana goes to her father's house, but he refuses to shelter her after
learning about her pregnancy. Anjana, accompanied by her friend Vasantmalini,
goes to a forest and reaches a mountain. They encounter a Muni who tells them
about their past lives. The Muni consoles them and leaves. Anjana and her friend
stay in a cave. A lion approaches, but a Gandharva protects them. The Gandharva
plays music. Anjana gives birth to a son. A Vidhyadhara named Prati-Surya
arrives and they meet. An astrologer predicts the future of Hanuman based on his
birth chart. They all travel in a flying chariot with Prati-Surya. Hanuman falls
from the chariot, shattering a rock.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe trayodaza parva Indrake pitA sahasrArakA rAvaNakI sabhAmeM
upasthita hokara indrako bandhanase chur3AnA, rAvaNakA sahasrAra ke prati
namratA pradarzana Adi indra jinAlaya meM baiThA thA, vahA~ nirvANasaMgama
munirAjakA AnA, unase indrakA pUrva bhava vRttAnta pUchanA, dIkSA lenA tathA
nirvANa prApta karanA 297 caturdaza parva rAvaNakA parikarake sAtha sumeruse
lauTanA, mArgameM suvarNagiri parvatapara anantabala munirAjako kevalajJAna
utpanna huA jAna vahA~ pahu~canA  /  unake mukhase dharmakA vistArake sAtha
varNana jo strI mujhe nahIM cAhegI maiM use balAt nahIM cAhU~gA... isa prakAra
rAvaNakA pratijJA grahaNa 306 331 paMcadaza parva hanumAn kathA-usake antargata
AdityapurameM rAjA prahlAda aura unakI strI ketumatIke pavanaMjaya putrakA honA
/  dantI giri ( dUsarA nAma mahendra-giri ) para rAjA mahendrakA varNana  /
usako hRdayavegA rAnIse aMjanAkI utpatti, pavanaMjaya aura aMjanAke vivAhakA
vistRta varNana, usake antargata mizrakezI dUtIke bakavAdake kAraNa
pavanaMjayakA aMjanAke prati vidveSa utpanna honA 334 351 353 SoDaza parva
aMjanAkI virahadazAkA varNana rAvaNakA varuNake sAtha yaddha tathA pavanaMjayakA
usameM jAnA mArgameM mAnasasarovarapara cakavAke binA tar3apatI haI cakavIko
dekha pavanaMjayako aMjanAkI dazAkA smaraNa honA, tathA chipakara usake pAsa
AnA; prahasita mitrake dvArA aMjanAko pavanaMjayake AnekA samAcAra,
pavanaMjayakA kSamA yAcana sambhoga zRGgArakA varNana 358 364 saptadaza parva
370 aMjanAkA garbhake cihna prakaTa honepara ketumatI ke dvArA use kalaMkita
kara gharase nikaalnaa| usakA pitAke gharapara jAnA, kaMcukI dvArA usake
garbhakA samAcAra pA use Azraya nahIM denaa| phalataH aMjanA apanI vasantamAlinI
sakhIke sAtha vanameM jAkara eka parvatake samIpa pahu~canAguphAmeM munirAjake
darzana aura unake dvArA aMjanA tathA hanumAnke pUrvabhavoMkA varNana,
munirAjakA sAntvanA dekara anyatra jAnA aura usa guphAmeM sakhIke sAtha aMjanAkA
rahanA, rAtrike samaya siMhakA Agamana, gandharva dvArA unakI rakSA  /
gandharva dvArA saMgIta aMjanAke putra janma, pratisUrya vidyAdharakA AnA,
parasparakA paricaya, jyotiSIke dvArA hanamAnake zubhAzubha grahoMkA vicAra  /
vimAnameM baiThakara sabakA pratisUryake sAtha jAnA, hanumAnkA nIce giranA,
patyarakA cUra-cUra honA Adi 378 392 :

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Table of Contents  **Eighteenth Chapter**  Pavananjay returns home from the
war with Varuna, but doesn't find Anjana. He leaves home in search of her.
Pavananjay decides to die in the forest called Bhutarav.  The Vidyaadharas
search for him and his reunion with Anjana is described. **401**  **Nineteenth
Chapter**  Ravana summons all the kings to fight against Varuna. Hanuman goes to
Ravana. Ravana praises Hanuman greatly. Hanuman and others fight with Varuna and
defeat him. Varuna is captured.  Kumbhakarna captures the women of Varuna's
city. Ravana scolds Kumbhakarna when he learns about it. Ravana explains things
to Varuna.  He gives the daughter of Chandranakha to Hanuman.  Ravana's empire
is described. **411** **417**  **Twentieth Chapter**  Description of the twenty-
four Tirthankaras and other Shalaka Purushas. **424** **444**  **Twenty-first
Chapter**  Description of Bhagwan Munisuvratnath and his lineage.  Description
of the beginning of the Ikshvaku dynasty.  Description of King Vajrabah and
Udayasundar's state of attachment and detachment.  Description of King
Kirtidhar.  Sukoshal's birth and Kirtidhar's initiation. **448**  **Twenty-
second Chapter**  Kirtidhar Muni is expelled from the city by his wife.
Sukoshal learns the truth through the cries of the wounded.  Sukoshal takes
initiation.  His mother dies and becomes a tigress.  Sukoshal is in the state of
Varshayog and is eaten by the tigress.  Kirtidhar Muni addresses the tigress and
describes her liberation.  Kirtidhar Muni attains Nirvana.  Description of King
Hiranyagarbha, Nahusha, and Soudas.  King Soudas develops a habit of eating
human flesh.  Later, the birth of Dasharatha, son of King Anaranya, is described
in the same lineage. **472**  **Twenty-third Chapter**  Narada informs King
Dasharatha and King Janaka about Ravana's evil intentions and warns them to be
cautious.  King Janaka and Dasharatha leave their homes and spend time outside.
Vibhishana cuts off the heads of their effigies.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSayAnukramaNikA aSTAdaza parva varuNake yuddhase lauTakara pavanaMjayakA
ghara AnA para vahA~ aMjanAko na dekha usakI khojameM gharase nikala jAnA  /
pavanaMjayakA bhUtarava nAmaka vanameM maranekA nizcaya  /  anantara vidyAdharoM
dvArA unakI khoja aura aMjanAse milApakA varNana 401 ekonaviMzatitama parva
varuNake viruddha honepara rAvaNakA saba rAjAoMko bulaanaa| hanumAnkA jAnA,
rAvaNake dvArA hanu. mAnkI bahuta prazaMsA, hanumAna AdikA varuNake sAtha yuddha
aura varuNako parAjaya, varuNakA pakar3A jAnA, kumbhakarNa dvArA varuNake
nagarako striyoMkA pakar3A jAnA tathA rAvaNako patA calane para usake dvArA
kumbhakarNako phaTakAra Adi rAvaNakA varuNako samajhAnA, hanumAna ke lie
candranakhAkI putrIkA denA, tathA rAvaNake sAmrAjyakA varNana 411 417
viMzatitama parva caubIsa tIrthaMkaroM tathA anya zalAkA puruSoMkA varNana 424
444 ekaviMzatitama parva bhagavAn munisuvratanAtha tathA unake vaMzakA varNana
ikSvAku vaMzake prArambhakA varNana, usI antargata rAjA vajrabAha tathA
udayasundarake sarAga tathA virAga dazAkA varNana-tathA rAjA kIrtidharakA
varNana, sUkozalakA janma aura kItigharakA dIkSA lenA 448 dvAviMzatitama parva
kIrtidhara munikA unakI strI dvArA nagarase nikAlA jAnA, ghAyake rodanase
sukozalako yathArtha bAtakA patA calanA, sukozalakA dIkSA lenA, mAtAkA marakara
vyAghrI honA aura varSAyogameM sthita sukozalakA bhakSaNa karanA, kIrtidhara
munike dvArA vyAghrIkA sambodhana tathA usakI sadgati AdikA varNana, kItidhara
munikA nirvANa gamana rAjA hiraNyagarbha, nahuSa tathA saudAsa AdikA varNana  /
rAjA saudAsako naramAMsa khAnekI Adata par3anA Adi  /  tadanantara isI vaMzameM
rAjA anaraNyake dazarathakI utpattikA varNana trayoviMzatitama parva nArada
dvArA rAjA dazaratha aura rAjA janakako rAvaNake durvicAra sunAkara saceta
rahanekA varNana  /  rAjA janaka aura dazarathakA gharase bAhara nikalakara
samaya kATanA aura vibhISaNa dvArA inake putaloMkA zira kATanA Adi 472

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
46 Padma Purana Twenty-fourth Parva: Detailed description of Kekaya's skills,
Dasaratha being chosen in the Swayamvara, Dasaratha's war with other kings,
Dasaratha's victory with Kekaya's help. King Dasaratha's boon to Kekaya in
happiness. 478 485 Twenty-fifth Parva: Description of the birth of Rama and his
three brothers to King Dasaratha. 489 Index of Shlokas, Authors, etc. 494

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46 padmapurANe caturviMzatitama parva kekayAkI kalAoMkA vistRta varNana aura
svayaMvarameM dazarathako varA jAnA dazarathakA anya rAjAoMke sAtha yuddha,
kekayAke sahayogase dazarathakI jIta  /  prasanna hokara rAjA dazarathakA
kekayAke lie varadAna 478 485 paMcaviMzatitama parva rAjA dazarathake rAma Adi
cAra putroMkI utpattikA varNana 489 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukrama 494

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Padma Purana Part One

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANam prathamo bhAgaH

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Padma Purana, Composed by Acharya Shrimad Ravishena  **First Chapter**
**Perfect, Complete, and Meaningful, the Cause of Perfection is Supreme. It is a
treatise on Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct.** ||1||  I bow to
the Great Hero, Mahavira, whose saffron-colored hair, like rays of light, adorn
the crowns of the Indra, and who is the source of auspiciousness in all three
worlds. ||2||  I bow to the first Tirthankara of the descending time cycle,
Rishabha Jinendra, the best among the Jinas, the Yogi, the creator of all
knowledge, and the self-existent. ||3||  I bow to Ajitanatha, the victor over
all internal and external enemies, and to Sambhavanatha, who bears the
meaningful name, from whom peace (sham) is attained. ||4||  I bow to Abhinandan,
who brings joy to the entire world, and to Sumatinatha Jinendra, the holder of
Right Knowledge, who refutes other doctrines. ||5||  I bow to Padma Prabha,
whose radiance is like the lotus blossoms bathed in the rays of the rising sun,
and to Supaashva, the omniscient, whose ribs were very beautiful. ||6||  I bow
to the supreme Chandra Prabha, whose body shone like the full moon of the autumn
season, and to Pushpadanta, whose teeth were radiant like blooming white lotus
flowers. ||7||  I bow to Sheetalanatha Jinendra, who was cool, the giver of
peaceful meditation, and to Shreyans, the auspicious one, the teacher of Dharma.
||8||  **The essence of the Padma Purana is according to the Shruti, which is
the eternal knowledge, and it is the repository of infinite virtues of
knowledge, bliss, and consciousness.** - Daulatramji  **Those who are self-
fulfilled, whose grace fulfills the desires of the noble souls, who expound
Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct, whose saffron-colored hair,
like rays of light, adorn the crowns of the Indras, and who are the source of
auspiciousness in all three worlds, to such Mahavira, I bow.** ||1-2||  **Those
who were Yogis, the creators of all knowledge, and self-existent, to such
Rishabha Jinendra, the first Tirthankara of the descending time cycle, I bow.**
||3||  **Those who have conquered all internal and external enemies, to such
Ajitanatha, and those who bear the meaningful name, from whom peace (sham) is
attained, to such Sambhavanatha, I bow.** ||4||  **Those who bring joy to the
entire world, to such Abhinandan, and those who are the holders of Right
Knowledge, and who refute other doctrines, to such Sumatinatha Jinendra, I
bow.** ||5||  **Those whose radiance is like the lotus blossoms bathed in the
rays of the rising sun, to such Padma Prabha, and those whose ribs were very
beautiful, to such Supaashva, the omniscient, I bow.** ||6||  **Those whose body
shone like the full moon of the autumn season, to such supreme Chandra Prabha,
and those whose teeth were radiant like blooming white lotus flowers, to such
Pushpadanta, I bow.** ||7||  **Those who were cool, the givers of peaceful
meditation, to such Sheetalanatha Jinendra, and those who were auspicious, the
teachers of Dharma, to such Shreyans, I bow.** ||8||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zrImadraraviSeNAcAryakRtaM padmacaritAparanAmadheyaM padmapurANam prathamaM
parva siddhaM saMpUrNamavyarthaM siddheH kAraNamuttamam  /
prazastadarzanajJAnacAritrapratipAdinam ||1|| surendra
mukuTAzliSTapAdapadmAMzukezaram  /  praNamAmi mahAvIraM lokatritayamaGgalam
||2|| prathamaM cAvasarpiNyAmRSabhaM jinapuGgavam  /  yoginaM sarvavidyAnAM
vidhAtAraM svayaMbhuvam  // 3 //  ajitaM vijitAzeSabAhya zArIrazAtravam  /
zambhavaM zaM bhavatyasmAdityabhikhyAmupAgatam  // 4 //  abhinandita
niHzeSabhuvanaM cAbhinandanam  /  sumatiM sumatiM nAthaM matAntaranirAsinam
||5|| udyadarkakarAlIDhapadmAkarasamaprabham  /  padmaprabhaM supAkhaM ca
supArzva sarvavedinam  //  6 //  zaratsakalacandrAbhaM paraM candraprabhaM
prabhum  /  puSpadantaM ca saMphullakundapuSpaprabhadvijam  //  7 //  zItalaM
zItaladhyAnadAyinaM parameSThinam  /  zreyAMsaM mavyasattvAnAM zreyAMsaM
dharmadezinam ||8|| cidAnanda caitanya ke guNa ananta ura dhAra  /  bhASA
padmapurANa kI bhAg zruti anusAra  //  - daulatarAmajI jo svayaM kRtakRtya haiM,
jinake prasAdase bhavyajIvoMke manoratha pUrNa hote haiM, jo samyagdarzana,
samyagjJAna aura samyakcAritrakA pratipAdana karanevAle haiM, jinake
caraNakamaloMkI kiraNarUpI kezara indroMke mukuToMse, AzliSTa ho rahI hai tathA
jo tInoM lokoMmeM maMgalasvarUpa haiM aise mahAvIra bhagavAnko maiM namaskAra
karatA hU~  //  1-2  //  jo yogI the, samasta vidyAoMke vidhAtA aura svayambhU
the aise avasarpiNI kAlake prathama tIrthaMkara zrI RSabhajinendrako namaskAra
karatA hU~ || 3 || jinhoMne samasta antaraMga aura bahiraMga zatruoM para vijaya
prApta kara lI aise ajitanAtha bhagavAnko tathA jinase zam arthAt sukha prApta
hotA hai aise sArthaka nAmako dhAraNa karanevAle zambhavanAtha bhagavAnko
namaskAra karatA hU~  //  4  //  samasta saMsArako Anandita karanevAle
abhinandana bhagavAnko evaM samyagjJAnake dhAraka aura anya mata-matAntaroMkA
nirAkaraNa karanevAle sumatinAtha jinendrako namaskAra karatA hU~ ||5|| udita
hote hue sUryakI kiraNoMse vyApta kamaloMke samUha ke samAna kAntiko dhAraNa
karanevAle padmaprabha bhagavAnko tathA jinakI pasalI atyanta sundara thIM aise
sarvajJa supAzvanAtha jinendrako namaskAra karatA hU~ || 6 || jinake zarIrakI
prabhA zaradaRtuke pUrNaM candramAke samAna thI aise atyanta zreSTha
candraprabha svAmIko ora jinake dA~ta phUle hue kunda puSpa ke samAna kAnti ke
dhAraka the aise puSpadanta bhagavAnko namaskAra karatA hU~ || 7 | jo zItala
arthAt zAntidAyaka dhyAnake denevAle the aise zItalanAtha jinendrako tathA jo
kalyANa rUpa the evaM bhavya

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
I bow to the glorious Shreyansanath Bhagwan, who taught the Dharma. ||8||  I bow
to Vasupujya Bhagwan, who was the lord of the righteous and was worshipped by
Kubera, and to Vimala Nath Bhagwan, who was free from the impurities of the root
of birth, such as false beliefs and other defilements. ||9||  I bow to Anantnath
Jinendra, who possessed infinite knowledge and whose vision was extremely
beautiful, to Dharmanath Swami, who was the permanent foundation of Dharma, and
to Shanti Nath Tirthankara, who conquered his enemies through peace. ||10||  I
bow to Kunthunath Bhagwan, who revealed the benefit for all beings, including
Kunthu, and to Aranath Jinendra, who attained infinite bliss after being
liberated from all suffering. ||11||  I bow to Mallinath Bhagwan, who was the
unparalleled wrestler to destroy the world, and to Naminath Swami, who was free
from impurities and was worshipped by all beings, and was the guru of both gods
and demons. ||12||  I bow to the twenty-second Tirthankara, Arishtanemi, who was
like a wheel (nemi) to destroy the heavy burden of suffering (arisht), and who
possessed extraordinary radiance, and to Parshvanath Bhagwan, who was the lord
of all beings and near whom the king of snakes (Dharanendra) sat. ||13||  I bow
to Muni Suvratnath Bhagwan, who taught the highest vows, who destroyed the
defects of hunger, thirst, etc., and whose tirtha (pilgrimage site) gave rise to
the auspicious story of Padma (Ramachandra). ||14||  I bow again and again with
my mind, speech, and body to all other great beings, including the Ganadharas
and other Muni Rajas. ||15||  Thus, I will narrate the story of Ramachandra,
whose chest was embraced by Padma (Lakshmi or the lotus symbol), whose face was
like a blooming lotus, who possessed vast merit, who was wise, who was the
embodiment of infinite virtues, and who had noble and excellent actions.
Although only a Shruta Kevali is capable of narrating his story, even a small
person like me is narrating this excellent story, which has come down through
the teachings of the Acharya tradition. The reason for this is clear. ||16-18||
Even deer walk on the path traversed by intoxicated elephants, and ordinary
warriors enter battle when led by great warriors. ||19||  Just as objects
illuminated by the sun are easily seen by people, and a gem emerges from the
mouth of a needle and enters a thread,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe vAsupUjyaM satAmIzaM vasupUjyaM jitadviSam  /  vimalaM janmamUlAnAM
malAnAmatidUragam  // 9 //  anantaM dadhataM jJAnamanantaM kAntadarzanam  /
dharma dharmadhruvAdhAraM zAnti zAntijitAhitam  // 10 //  kunthuprabhRtisatvAnAM
kundhuM hitanirUpitam  /  azeSaklezanirmokSapUrvasaukhyAraNAdaram  // 11 //
saMsArasya nihantAraM mallaM malli malojjhitam  /  narmi ca praNatAzeSaM
surAsuraguru vibhum  /  / 12 /  /  ariSTanemimanyUnAriSTanemi mahAdyutim  /
pAzvaM nAgendrasaMsaktaparipAvaM vizAM patim  // 13 //  sunataM suvratAnAM ca
dezakaM doSadAriNam  /  yasya tIrthe samutpannaM padmasya caritaM zubham  // 14
//  anyAnapi mahAbhAgAn munIn gaNadharAdikAn  /  praNamya manasA vAcA kAyena ca
punaH punaH  // 15 //  padmasya caritaM vakSye padmAliGgitavakSasaH  /
praphullapadmavaktrasya purupuNyasya dhImataH  /  / 16 /  /  anantaguNagehasya
tasyodAraviceSTinaH  /  gadituM caritaM zaktaH kevalaM zrutakevalI  // 17 //
yAdRzo'pi vadatyeva caritaM yasya yatpumAn  /  taccaritaM kramAyAtaM paramaM
dezadezanAt  // 18 //  mattavAraNasaMkSuNNe vrajanti hariNAH pathi  /
pravizanti bhaTA yuddhaM mhaabhttpurssraaH||19|| bhAsvatA bhAsitAnarthAn
sukhenAlokate janaH  /  sUcImukhavinirminnaM maNiM vizati sUtrakam  // 20 //
jIvoMko dharmakA upadeza dete the aise zreyAMsanAtha bhagavAnko namaskAra karatA
hU~ |8|| jo sajjanoMke svAmI the evaM kuberake dvArA pUjya the aise vAsupUjya
bhagavAnko aura saMsArake mUlakAraNa mithyAdarzana Adi maloMse bahuta dUra
rahanevAle zrIvimalanAtha bhagavAnko namaskAra karatA hU~  //  9  //  jo ananta
jJAnako dhAraNa karate the tathA jinakA darzana atyanta sundara thA aise
anantanAtha jinendrako, dharmake sthAyI AdhAra dharmanAtha svAmIko aura zAntike
dvArA hI zatruoMko jItanevAle zAntinAtha tIrthaMkarako namaskAra karatA
huuN||10|| jinhoMne kunthu Adi samasta prANiyoMke lie hitakA nirUpaNa kiyA thA
aise kunthunAtha bhagavAnko aura samasta duHkhoMse mukti pAkara jinhoMne
anantasukha prApta kiyA thA aise aranAtha jinendrako namaskAra karatA hU~  // 11
//  jo saMsArako naSTa karaneke lie advitIya malla the aise malarahita
mallinAtha bhagavAnako aura jinheM samasta loga praNAma karate the tathA sura-
asura sabhIke guru the aise naminAtha svAmIko namaskAra karatA hU~  // 12 //  jo
bahuta bhArI ariSTa arthAt duHkhasamUhako naSTa karaneke lie nemi arthAt
cakradhArAke samAna the sAtha hI atizaya kAntike dhAraka the aise ariSTanemi
nAmaka bAIsaveM tIrthaMkarako tathA jinake samIpameM dharaNendra Akara baiThA
thA sAtha hI jo samasta prajAke svAmI the aise pArzvanAtha bhagavAnko namaskAra
karatA hU~  // 13 //  jo uttama vratoMkA upadeza denevAle the, jinhoMne kSudhA,
tRSA Adi doSa naSTa kara diye the aura jinake tIrtha meM padma arthAt
kathAnAyaka rAmacandrajIkA zubhacarita utpanna huA thA aise muni suvratanAtha
bhagavAnko namaskAra karatA hU~  // 14 /  /  inake sivAya mahAbhAgyazAlI
gaNadharoM Adiko lekara anyAnya munirAjoMko mana, vacana, kAyase bAra-bAra
praNAma karatA hU~  // 15 //  isa prakAra praNAma kara maiM una rAmacandrajIkA
caritra kaha~gA jinakA ki vakSaHsthala padmA arthAt lakSmI athavA padma nAmaka
cihnase AliMgita thA, jinakA mukha praphullita kamalake samAna thA, jo vizAla
puNyake dhAraka the, buddhimAn the, ananta guNoMke gRhasvarUpa the aura udAra-
utkRSTa ceSTAoMke dhAraka the| unakA caritra kahane meM yadyapi zrutakevalI hI
samartha haiM to bhI AcArya-paramparAke upadezase Aye hue usa utkRSTa caritrako
mere jaise kSudra puruSa bhI kara rahe haiM so usakA kAraNa spaSTa hI hai  /  /
16-18|| madonmatta hAthiyoMke dvArA saMcarita mArgameM hariNa bhI cale jAte haiM
tathA jinake Age bar3e-bar3e yoddhA cala rahe haiM aise sAdhAraNa yoddhA bhI
yuddhameM praveza karate hI haiM  // 19 //  sUryake dvArA prakAzita padArthoMko
sAdhAraNa 1. vasunA kubereNa pUjyaM vasupUjyaM 'vasurmayUkhAgnidhanAdhipeSu' iti
koSaH  /  2. gurupuNyasya. ma. puMsaH puNyasya  /  :

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Chapter  The biography of Ramagochara, which is in the order of the
planets, is ready to be asked by my mind, which is inspired by devotion. ||21||
The great merit that is obtained from the contemplation of distinguished men, by
that very merit, my speech has attained beauty. ||22||  Speech that is adorned
with vowels like 'a' etc., but which does not convey the stories of virtuous
men, is useless for that person and only leads to the accumulation of sin.
||23||  By chanting the glories of great men, knowledge increases, pure fame
spreads, and evil goes away. ||24||  This body of living beings is filled with
diseases and is only temporary, but the fame that arises from the stories of
virtuous men lasts as long as the sun, moon, and stars. ||25||  Therefore, a
self-knowing man should make every effort to make his body permanent, that is,
to attain fame, by chanting the glories of great men. ||26||  The person who
narrates a delightful story that brings joy to the virtuous, obtains the fruits
of both worlds. ||27||  I consider those ears to be ears that listen to the
stories of virtuous men, the others are like the ears of a jester, only having
the shape of ears. ||28||  The letters that revolve in the head where the
description of the actions of virtuous men is narrated, that is the real head,
the others are like the hard outer shell of a coconut. ||29||  The tongue that
is engrossed in savoring the nectar of the chanting of virtuous men, I consider
that to be the tongue, the others are like the blade of a knife that speaks
harsh words. ||30||  The best lips are those that are engaged in chanting the
glories of virtuous men, the others are like the back of a leech that has been
eaten from the mouth of a creature called Shambuka. ||31||  The teeth that are
always stained with the association of the stories of peaceful men, those are
the real teeth, the others are like coverings that only serve to block the exit
of phlegm. ||32||  The mouth that is the main cause of attaining good fortune
and is always engaged in telling the stories of great men, that is the real
mouth, the others are filled with dirt and infested with tooth-like insects.
||33||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathamaM parva budhapaGktikramAyAta caritaM rAmagocaram  /  bhaktyA praNoditA
buddhiH praSTuM mama samudyatA  // 21 //  viziSTacintayAyAtaM yacca zreyaH
kSaNAnmahat  /  tenaiva rakSitA yAtA cArutAM mama bhAratI  // 22 //
vyaktAkArAdivarNA vAg lambhitA yA na satkathAm  /  sA tasya niSphalA jantoH
pApAdAnAya kevalam  /  / 23 /  /  vRddhiM brajati vijJAnaM yazazcarati nirmalam
/  prayAti duritaM dUraM mahApuruSakIrtanAt  // 24 //  alpakAlamidaM jantoH
zarIraM roganirbharam  /  yazastu satkathAjanma yAvaccandrArkatArakam  // 25 //
tasmAtsarvaprayatnena puruSeNAtmavedinA  /  zarIraM sthAsnu karttavyaM
mahApuruSakIrtanam  // 26 //  lokadvayaphalaM tena labdhaM bhavati jantunA  /
yo vidhatte kathA ramyAM sajjanAnandadAyinIm  // 27 //  satkathAzravaNau yau ca
zravagau tau matau mama  /  anyau vidUSakasyeva zravaNAkAradhAriNau  // 28 //
sacceSTAvarNanA varNA ghUrNante yatra mUrdhani  /  ayaM mUrdhA'nyamUrddhA tu
nAlikerakaraGkavat  /  / 29 /  /  /  satkIrtanasudhAsvAdasaktaM ca rasanaM
smRtam  /  anyacca durvacodhAraM kRpANaduhituH phalam  // 30 //  zreSThAvoSThau
ca tAveva yau sukIrtanavartinau  /  na zambUkAsyasaMbhuktajalaukApRSThasaMnibhau
// 31 //  dantAsta eva ye zAntakathAsaMgamarajitAH  /  zeSAH
sazleSmanirvANadvArabandhAya kevalam  // 32 //  mukhaM zreyaHpariprAptermukhaM
mukhyakathAratam  /  anyattu malasaMpUrNa dantakITAkulaM vilam  // 33 //
manuSya sukhapUrvaka dekha lete haiM aura suIke agrabhAgase bidAre hue maNimeM
sUta anAyAsa hI praveza kara letA hai  /  / 20 /  /  rAmacandrajIkA jo caritra
vidvAnoMkI paramparA se calA A rahA hai use pUchaneke lie merI buddhi bhaktise
prerita hokara hI udyata huI hai  // 21 //  viziSTa puruSoMke cintavanase
tatkAla jo mahAn puNya prApta hotA hai usIke dvArA rakSita hokara merI vANI
sundaratAko prApta huI hai  /  / 22 /  /  jisa puruSakI vANI meM akAra Adi
akSara to vyakta hai para jo satpuruSoMkI kathAko prApta nahIM karAyI gayI hai
usakI vaha vANI niSphala hai aura kevala pApa-saMcayakA hI kAraNa hai  // 23 //
mahApuruSoMkA kIrtana karanese vijJAna vRddhiko prApta hotA hai, nirmala yaza
phailatA hai aura pApa dUra calA jAtA hai  // 24 //  . jIvoMkA yaha zarIra
rogoMse bharA huA hai tathA alpa kAla taka hI ThaharanevAlA hai parantu
satpuruSoMkI kathAse jo yaza utpanna hotA hai vaha jabataka sUrya, candramA aura
tAre raheMge tabataka rahatA hai  /  / 25 /  /  isalie AtmajJAnI puruSako saba
prakArakA prayatna kara mahApuruSoMke kIrtanase apanA zarIra sthAyI banAnA cAhie
arthAt yaza prApta karanA cAhie  /  / 26 /  /  jo manuSya sajjanoMko Ananda
denevAlI manohAriNI kathA karatA hai vaha donoM lokoMkA phala prApta kara letA
hai  /  / 27 /  /  manuSyake jo kAna satpuruSoMkI kathAkA zravaNa karate haiM
maiM unheM hI kAna mAnatA hU~ bAkI to vidUSakake kAnoMke samAna kevala kAnoMkA
AkAra hI dhAraNa karate haiM  // 28 //  satpuruSoMkI ceSTAko varNana karanevAle
varNa-akSara jisa mastakameM ghUmate haiM vahI vAstava meM mastaka hai bAkI to
nAriyalake karaMkakar3e AvaraNake samAna haiM  /  / 29 //  jo jihvA satpuruSoMke
kIrtana rUpI amRtakA AsvAda lene meM lIna hai maiM unheM hI jihvA mAnatA hU~
bAkI to durvacanoMko kahanevAlI churIkA mAno phalaka ho hai  // 30 //  zreSTha
oMTha ve hI haiM jo ki satpuruSoMkA kIrtana karanemeM lage rahate haiM bAkI to
zambUka nAmaka jantuke mukhase bhukta joMkake pRSThake samAna hI haiM  // 31 //
dA~ta vahI haiM jo ki zAnta puruSoMkI kathAke samAgamase sadA raMjita rahate
haiM-usImeM lage rahate haiM bAkI to kapha nikalaneke dvArako rokanevAle mAno
AvaraNa hI haiM  // 32 /  /  mukha vahI hai jo kalyANakI prAptikA pramukha
kAraNa hai aura zreSTha puruSoMkI kathA kahane meM sadA anurakta rahatA hai bAkI
to malase bharA evaM dantarUpI kIr3oMse

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
* In the Padma Purana, The man who speaks or listens to words of merit is truly
a man, the rest are like puppets made by a sculptor. ||34|| Just as a swan in a
mixture of milk and water drinks only the milk, so do the virtuous take only the
good from a mixture of good and bad. ||35|| And just as crows take only the meat
from the temples of elephants, leaving the pearls, so do the wicked take only
the bad from a mixture of good and bad. ||36|| Just as owls see the form of the
sun as black as a tamala leaf, so do wicked men see even blameless creations as
flawed. ||37|| Just as a net at the entrance of a lake does not stop the water
but only the debris, so do wicked men not stop the good but only hold onto the
bad, like debris. ||38|| Considering the nature of the virtuous and the wicked,
the virtuous engage in the creation of stories with the purpose of their own
benefit. ||39|| The happiness that arises in men from listening to good stories
is the self-interest of the wise, and it is the cause of earning merit. ||40||
This meaning, spoken by the Jina Vardhamana, was received by the Gautama
Ganadhara named Indra-bhuuti. Then it was received by Sudharma-acharya, the son
of Dharini. Then it was received by Prabhava, then by Kirti-dhara Acharya. After
them, it was received by the Uttara-vagmi Muni. After that, this effort of
Ravishena Acharya was revealed, having obtained his writing. ||41-42|| In this
Purana, there are seven chapters: (1) Lokasthiti, (2) Origin of lineages, (3)
Departure for the forest, (4) War, (5) Origin of Lavana-ankusha, (6) Description
of Bhavan-tara, and (7) Nirvana of Ramachandra. All seven chapters are
accompanied by many beautiful and wonderful sections. ||43-44|| To explain the
connection of the story of Ramachandra, I will also tell the brief story of
Bhagavan Mahavira, which is as follows. 1 1. Doshoktam ma. 2. Charayanti ka. 3.
Swartha ka. 4. Granthanta api 123 tamaparvanah 166 tamashloke granthakartra
granthanupurvimuddisya nimnankita shloko dattah - "Nirdishtam sakalairnatena
bhuvanaih Shrivardhamanena yattatvam vasavabhuutina nigaditam jambo:
prashiá¹£yasya cha. Shishyenottaravagmina prakatitam padmasya vruttam munÄh
shreyah sadhusamadhibruddhikaranaá¹ sarvottamaá¹ mangalam." 5. Dharini ma. 6.
Tavadatrakha, ma. 7. Yatnam ma. 8. Kulkarinim ma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 * padmapurANe ditA yo'thavA zrotA zreyasAM vacasAM naraH  /  pumAn sa eva
zeSastu zilpikalpitakAyavat  // 34 //  guNadoSasamAhAre guNAn gRhNanti sAdhavaH
/  kSIravArisamAhAre haMsaH kSIramivAkhilam ||35|| guNadoSasamAhAre doSAn
gRhNantyasAdhavaH  /  muktAphalAni saMtyajya kAkA mAMsamiva dvipAt  /  /  36  /
adoSAmapi doSAtAM pazyanti racanAM khalAH  /
ravimUrtimivolukAstamAladalakAlikAm  // 37 //  saro-jalAgamadvArajAlakAnIva
durjanAH  /  dhArayanti sadA doSAn guNabandhanavarjitAH ||38|| svabhAvamiti
saMcintya sajjanasyetarasya ca  /  pravartante kathAbandhe svArthamuddizya
sAdhavaH  //  39 //  satkathAzravaNAd yacca sukhaM saMpadyate nRNAm  /  kRtinAM
svArtha evAsau puNyopArjanakAraNam ||40|| 'varddhamAna jinendroktaH so'yamartho
gaNezvaram  /  indrabhUrti pariprAptaH sudharma dhAraNIbhavam  // 41 //
prabhavaM kramataH kIrtiM tato'nu ( nU ) ttaravAgminam  /  likhitaM tasya
saMprApya rakheryalo'yamudgataH  // 42 //  sthitirvaMzasamutpattiH prasthAnaM
saMyugaM tataH  /  lavaNAGkuzasaMbhUtirbhavoktiH parinirvRtiH  // 43 //
bhavAntarabhavairbhUriprakAraizcAruparvabhiH  /  yuktAH sapta
purANe'sminnadhikArA ime smRtAH ||44 //  padmaceSTitasaMbandhakAraNaM tAvadeva
ca  /  traizalAdigataM vakSye sUtraM saMkSepi tadyathA  //  45|| vIrasya
samavasthAnaM kuzAgragirimUrddhani  /  zreNikasya paripraznamindra
bhUtermahAtmanaH  //  46  //  tatra prazne yuge ya~ttAmutpatti kurlakAriNAm  /
bhItIzca jagato duHkhakAraNAkasmikekSaNAt ||47 || vyApta mAno gaDDhA hI hai
||33|| jo manuSya kalyANakArI vacanoMko kahatA hai athavA sunatA hai vAstava meM
vahI manuSya hai bAkI to zilpakAra ke dvArA banAye hue manuSyake putale ke
samAna haiM ||34|| jisa prakAra dUdha aura pAnI ke samUha meM se haMsa samasta
dUdhako grahaNa kara letA hai usI prakAra satpuruSa guNa aura doSoMke samUhameM-
se guNoM ko hI grahaNa karate haiM ||35|| aura jisa prakAra kAka hAthiyoMke
gaNDasthalase muktA phaloMko chor3akara kevala mAMsa hI grahaNa karate haiM usI
prakAra durjana guNa aura doSoMke samUha se kevala doSoM ko hI grahaNa karate
haiM ||36|| jisa prakAra ulUka pakSI sUryakI mUrtiko tamAlapatra ke samAna kAlI
kAlI hI dekhate haiM usI prakAra duSTa puruSa nirdoSa racanAko bhI doSayukta hI
dekhate haiM ||37|| jisa prakAra kisI sarovarameM jala Aneke dvArapara lagI huI
jAlI jalako to nahIM rokatI kintu kUr3A-karkaTako roka letI hai usI prakAra
duSTa manuSya guNoM ko to nahIM roka pAte kintu kUr3A-karkaTake samAna doSoM ko
hI rokakara dhAraNa karate haiM ||38|| sajjana aura durjanakA aisA svabhAva hI
hai yaha vicArakara satpuruSa svArtha - Atmaprayojanako lekara hI kathAkI racanA
karanemeM pravRtta hote haiM ||39|| uttama kathAke sunanese manuSyoM ko jo sukha
utpanna hotA hai vahI buddhimAn manuSyoM kA svArtha - Atmaprayojana kahalAtA hai
tathA yahI puNyopArjanakA kAraNa hotA hai ||40|| zrI vardhamAna jinendra ke
dvArA kahA huA yaha artha indrabhUti nAmaka gautama gaNadharako prApta huaa|
phira dhAriNIke putra sudharmAcAryako prApta huaa| phira prabhavako prApta huA,
phira kIrtidhara AcAryako prApta huA  /  unake anantara uttaravAgmI muniko
prApta huA  /  tadanantara unakA likhA prApta kara yaha raviSeNAcAryakA prayatna
prakaTa huA hai || 41-42  /  /  isa purANa meM nimnalikhita sAta adhikAra haiM -
( 1 ) lokasthiti, ( 2 ) vaMzoM kI utpatti, ( 3 ) vanake lie prasthAna, ( 4 )
yuddha, (5) lavaNAMkuzakI utpatti, (6) bhavAntara nirUpaNa aura ( 7 )
rAmacandrajIkA nirvANa  /  ye sAtoM hI adhikAra aneka prakArake sundara-sundara
parvoMse sahita haiM ||43 - 44|| rAmacandrajIkI kathAkA sambandha batalAneke lie
bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmIkI bhI saMkSipta kathA kahU~gA jo isa prakAra hai  /  1
1. doSoktAM ma  /  2. cArayanti ka.  /  3. svartha ka.  /  4. granthAnte'pi 123
tamaparvaNaH 166 tamazloke granthakartrA granthAnupUrvImuddizya nimnAGkitaH
zloko dattaH - "nirdiSTaM sakalairnatena bhuvanaiH zrIvarddhamAnena yattatvaM
vAsavabhUtinA nigaditaM jambo : praziSyasya ca  /  ziSyeNottaravAgminA
prakaTitaM padmasya vRttaM muneH zreyaH sAdhusamAdhibRddhikaraNaM sarvottamaM
maGgalam  /  /  " 5. dhAriNI ma.  /  6. tAvadatra kha., ma.  /  7. yatnAM ma  /
8. kulakAriNIm ma.  /

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Chapter  **Verse 48:** The birth of Rishabha, his coronation on Mount
Meru, and his diverse teachings to eradicate the suffering of the world.
**Verse 49:** His renunciation, the attainment of Kevala Jnana, his
extraordinary power, the arrival of all the Indras, and his attainment of
liberation.  **Verse 50:** The great battle between Bharata and Bahubali, the
birth of the Brahmanas, and the emergence of the Kutithiks who spread false
doctrines.  **Verse 51:** The lineage of Ikshvaku and others, their praise, the
birth of the Vidyadharas, and the affliction of Sanjayanta Muni by the
Vidyadhara named Vidyudamstra.  **Verse 52:** Sanjayanta Muni, despite the
affliction, attained Kevala Jnana and liberation. This caused great anger in
Dharanendra, who took away Vidyudamstra's knowledge and subjected him to severe
punishment.  **Verse 53:** The birth of Ajitanatha, the happiness of Purna Megha
and his daughter, the Vidyadhara Kumar's seeking refuge in Ajitanatha, the
arrival of Vyantara, the ruler of the Rakshasa Island, and his granting the
island to Purna Megha.  **Verse 54:** The birth of Sagar Chakravarti, his grief
at the death of his sons, his renunciation, and his attainment of liberation.
**Verse 55:** The birth of Maharaksha in the lineage of Purna Megha, and a
detailed account of the birth of the Vidyadharas of the monkey lineage.  **Verse
56:** The story of Vidyutkesha, followed by the stories of Uddhava Vikrama and
Amar Vikrama, the birth of Kishkindha and Andhraka among the monkey lineage, and
the union of Sri Mala Vidyadhari.  **Verse 57:** The anger of Asani Vega at the
death of Vijay Singh, the killing of Andhraka, and the monkey lineage settling
in the city of Kishkindha on the peak of Madhu Parvat.  **Verse 58:** The
arrival of the sons of Sukeshi in Lanka.  **Verse 59:** The great wealth
acquired by Mali due to the death of Nirghata, the birth of Indra, the ruler of
all Vidyadharas, in the city of Rathnapur in the southern part of Vijayadha
Parvat.  **Verse 60:** The death of Mali and the birth of Vaishravana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathamaM parva RSabhasya samutpattimabhiSekaM nagAdhipe  /  upadezaM ca
vividhaM lokasyAtivinAzanam  // 48 //  zrAmaNyaM kevalotpattimaizvayaM
viSTapAtigam  /  sarvAmarAdhipAyAnaM nirvANasukhasaMgamam  /  / 49 /  /
pradhanaM bAhubalino maratena samaM mahat  /  samudbhavaM dvijAtInAM
kutIrthikagaNasya ca  // 50 //  ikSvAkuprabhRtInAM ca vaMzAnAM guNakIrtanam  /
vidyAdharasamudbha tiM vidyuiMSTrasamudbhavam  // 51 //  upasarga jayantasya
kevalajJAnasaMpadam  /  nAgarAjasya saMkSobhaM vidyAharaNatarjane  // 52 /  /
ajitasyAvataraNaM pUrNAmbudasutAsukham  /  vidyAdharakumArasya zaraNaM
pratisaMzrayam  /  / 53 /  /  rakSonAthapariprAptiM rakSodvIpasamAzrayam  /
sagarasya samudra tiM duHkhadIkSaNanivRtI  // 54 //  atikrAntamahArakSojanmanaH
parikIrtanam  /  zAkhAmRgadhvajAnAM ca prajJaptimativistarAt  // 55 /  /
taDitkezasya caritamudadheramarasya ca  /  kiSkindhAndhrakhagotpAdaM
zrImAlAkhecarAgapam  // 56 //  vadhAd vijayasiMhasya kopaM cAzanivegajam  /
andhrakAntamariprAptiM purasya vinivezanam  // 57 /  /  kiSkindhapuravinyAsaM
madhuparvatamUrddhani  /  sukezanandanAdInAM laGkAprAptinirUpaNam  // 58 //
nirdhAtavadhahetaM ca mAlinaH saMpadaM parAm  /  dakSiNe vijayAdhasya bhAge ca
rathanUpure  // 59 //  pure jananamindrasya sarvavidyAbhRtAM vibhoH  /  mAlinaH
paJcatAvAptiM janma vaizravaNasya ca  // 60 //  eka bAra kuzAgra parvata-
vipulAcala ke zikharapara bhagavAn mahAvIra svAmI samavasaraNa sahita Akara
virAjamAna hue| jisameM rAjA zreNikane jAkara indrabhUti gaNadharase prazna
kiyaa| usa praznake uttarameM unhoMne sarvaprathama yugoMkA varNana kiyaa| phira
kulakaroMkI utpattikA varNana huaa| akasmAta da:kha ke kAraNa dekhanese jagatake
jIvoMko bhaya utpanna haA isakA varNana kiyA  /  / 45-47 /  /  bhagavAn
RSabhadevakI utpatti, sumeru parvatapara unakA abhiSeka aura lokakI pIDAko naSTa
karanevAlA unakA vividha prakArakA upadeza batAyA gayA  // 48 //  bhagavAn
RSabhadevane dIkSA dhAraNa kI, unheM kevalajJAna utpanna huA, unakA lokottara
aizvarya prakaTa huA, saba indroMkA Agamana huA aura bhagavAnko mokSa-sukhakA
samAgama huA  /  / 49|| bharatake sAtha bAhubalIkA bahuta bhArI yuddha huA,
brAhmaNoMkI utpatti aura mithyAdharmako phailAnevAle kutIthiyoMkA AvirbhAva huA
/  / 50 /  /  ikSvAku Adi vaMzoMkI utpatti, unakI prazaMsAkA nirUpaNa,
vidyAdharoM kI utpatti tathA unake vaMzameM vidyudaMSTra vidyAdharake dvArA
saMjayanta muniko upasarga huaa| munirAja upasarga saha kevalajJAnI hokara
nirvANa isa ghaTanAse dharaNendrako vidyudaMSTrake prati bahuta kSobha utpanna
haA jisase usane usakI vidyAe~ chIna lI tathA use bahuta bhArI tajaMnA dI  /  /
51-52 //  tadanantara zrI ajitanAtha bhagavAnkA janma, pUrNamegha vidyAdhara
aura usakI putrIke sukhakA varNana, vidyAdhara kumArakA bhagavAn ajitanAthakI
zaraNameM AnA, rAkSasa dvIpake svAmI vyantara devakA AnA tathA prasanna hokara
pUrNameghake lie rAkSasa dvIpakA denA, sagara cakravartIkA utpanna honA,
putroMkA maraNa suna usake duHkhase unhone dIkSAdhAraNa kI tathA nirvANa prApta
kiyA  // 53-54 /  /  pUrNameghake vaMzameM mahArakSakA janma tathA vAnaravaMzI
vidyAdharoMkI utpattikA vistArase varNana  /  / 55 /  /  vidyutkeza vidyAdharakA
caritra, tadanantara udadhivikrama aura amaravikrama vidyAdharakA kathana,
vAnara-vaMziyoMmeM kiSkindha aura andhraka nAmaka vidyAdharoMkA janma lenA,
zrImAlA vidyAdharIkA saMgama honA  // 56|| vijayasiMhake vadhase azanivegako
krodha utpanna honA, andhrakakA mArA jAnA aura vAnaravaMziyoMkA madhuparvatake
zikharapara kiSkindhapura nAmaka nagara basAkara usameM nivAsa karanA  /
sukezIke putra Adiko laMkAkI prApti honA  /  / 57-58 /  /  nirghAta vidyAdharake
vadhase mAlIko bahuta bhArI sampadAkA prApta honA, vijayAdha parvatake
dakSiNabhAga sambandhI rathanUpura nagarameM samasta vidyAdharoMke adhipati
indranAmaka vidyAdharakA janma lenA, mAlIkA mArA jAnA aura vaizravaNakA utpanna
honA  /  / 59-10|| sumAlIke putra ratnazravAkA puSpAntaka 1. sarjane ma.  /  2.
nirvRtim ma.  /  3. vistarAm ma.  /  4. purasundaravezanam ma.  /

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The birth of Ravana and his pursuit of knowledge, the disturbance of the deity
Anavrita, and the arrival of Sumali. ||62|| Ravana's union with Mandodari, the
observation of other maidens, and the anger of Vaishravana due to the actions of
Bhanukarna. ||63|| The battle between the Yakshas and Rakshasas, the penance of
Dhanada, Ravana's arrival in Lanka, and his observation of the great Chaityas.
||64|| The greatness of the virtuous Harishena, a destroyer of sins, and the
sight of the Triloka-mandana elephant. ||65|| The expulsion of Yama from his
abode, the meeting of Suryaraja, the king of the Vanaras, with Kishkindha, the
abduction of Surpanakha by Khara and Dushana, and their marriage. ||66|| The
death of Chandrodara in battle, the great sorrow of his queen Anuradha, the
downfall of Viradhit's city, and the attainment of the kingdom by Sugriva.
||67|| The initiation of the young girl, Ravana's lifting of Mount Kailasa,
Sugriva's acquisition of Sutara, the distress of the Sahasagati Vidyadhara due
to the non-acquisition of Sutara, and Ravana's journey to Mount Vijaya.
||68-69|| The renunciation of King Anaranya and Sahasrarashmi, the account of
Ravana's destruction of the Yajna, the explanation of Madhu's previous births,
and the conversation between Ravana's daughter Uparambha and Madhu. ||70||
Ravana's acquisition of knowledge, the decline of Indra's kingdom, Ravana's
journey to Mount Sumeru, and his return. ||71|| The attainment of Kevalgyan by
the Muni Anantavirya, Ravana's acceptance of the rule before him, "I will not
desire a woman who does not desire me," and the account of the birth of the
great Vanara, Hanuman. ||72|| On Mount Kailasa, the conversation between King
Mahendra, the father of Anjana, and King Prahlada, the father of Pavananjay,
regarding the union of their children, the marriage of Anjana with Pavananjay,
the anger of Pavananjay, his happiness upon seeing the separation of
Chakwachakvi, Anjana's pregnancy, and her expulsion from her home by her mother-
in-law. ||73|| The Muni's account of Hanuman's previous birth, Hanuman's birth
in a cave, 1. Prajanam M. 2. Bhikhyam M. 3. Charanam M. 4. Kaikeyaasch M. 5.
Chandrodya M. 6. Jannaashanam K. 7. Niyamgraham M. 8. Sajjaya Kh. 9.
'Sutistanurahapraapti pratisuryena karitam' M.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 papurANe puSpAntakasamAvezaM tanayasya sumAlinaH  /  kaikasyA saha saMyogaM
cArusvapnAvalokanam  // 6 //  dazAnanasya prajani vidyAnAM samupAsanam  /
anAvRtasya saMkSobhamAgamaM ca sumAlinaH  // 12 //  mandodaryAH pariprAptiM
kanyakAnAM nirIkSaNam  /  ceSTitairbhAnukarNasya kopaM vaizravaNodbhavam  // 63
//  yakSarAkSasasaMgrAmaM dhanadasya tapasyanam  /  laGkAgamaM dazAsyasya prazna
pratna] caityAvalokanam  // 6 //  zrImato hariSeNasya mAhAtmyaM pApanAzanam  /
trijagagaSaNAbhikhya dviradendra vilokanam  // 65 //  yamasthAnacyuti cArkarajaH
kiSkindhasaMgamam  /  coraNaM kaikaseyyAzca kharAlaGkArasaMzrayam  // 66 //
anurAdhAmahAduHkhaM candrodaraviyogataH  /  virAdhitapurabhraMzaM
sugrIvazrIsamAgamam  // 67 /  /  vAle pravrajanaM kSobhamaSTApadamahIbhRtaH  /
sugrIvasya sutArAyA lAbhaM sAhasagAminaH  // 6 //  saMtApaM vijayA drigamanaM
rAvaNasya ca  /  ..... ........................ // 69 /  /
anaraNyasahasrAMzuvairAgyaM yajJanAzanam  /
madhuparvabhavAkhyAtamuparammAbhimASaNam  // 7 //  vidyAlArma mahendrasya
rAjyalakSmIparikSayam  /  dazAsyamerugamanaM punazca vinivartanam  // 7 //
anantavIryakaivalyaM dazAsyaniyamakriyAm  /  hanUmataH samutpattiM
kapiketormahAtmanaH  // 72 //  aSTApade mahendreNa prahlAdasyAbhibhASaNam  /
vAyoH kopaM prasAdaM ca taMjAyAprajanojjhane  // 73 //  digambareNa kathanaM
hanUmatpUrvajanmanaH  /  sUtiM hanUruhaprApti pratisUryeNa kAritAm  // 7 //
nAmaka nagara basAnA, kaikasIke sAtha usakA saMyoga honA, aura kekasIkA zubha
svapnoMkA dekhanA  // 61 /  /  rAvaNakA utpanna honA aura vidyAoMkA sAdhana
karanA, anAvRta nAmaka devako kSobha honA tathA sumAlIkA Agamana honA  // 62 //
rAvaNako mandodarIkI prApti honA, sAtha hI anya aneka kanyAoMkA avalokana honA
aura bhAnukarNakI ceSTAoMse vaizravaNakA kupita honA  // 63 //  yakSa aura
rAkSasa nAmaka vidyAdharoMkA saMgrAma, vaizravaNakA tapa dhAraNa karanA,
rAvaNakA laMkAmeM AnA aura zreSTha caityAlayoMkA avalokana karatA  // 64||
pApoMko naSTa karanevAlA hariSeNa cakravartIkA mAhAtmya, trilokamaNDana hAthI kA
avalokana  // 65 //  yamanAmaka lokaSAlako apane sthAnase cyuta karanA tathA
vAnaravaMzI rAjA sUryarajako kiSkindhApurakA saMgama krnaa| tadanantara rAvaNakI
bahana zUrpaNakhAko khara-dUSaNa dvArA hara le jAnA aura usIke sAtha vivAha denA
aura khara-dUSaNakA pAtAla laMkA jAnA  // 66 /  /  candrodarakA yuddha meM mArA
jAnA aura usake viyogase usako rAnI anurAdhAko bahuta duHkha uThAnA,
candrodarake putra virAdhitakA nagarase bhraSTa honA tathA sugrIvako
rAjyalakSmIkI prApti honA  /  / 67|| bAlikA dIkSA lenA, rAvaNakA
kailAsaparvatako uThAnA, sugrIvako sUtArAkI prApti honA, sutArAkI prApti na
honese sAhasagati vidyAdharako santApakA honA tathA rAvaNakA vijayAdhaM
parvatapara jAnA  // 68-69|| rAjA anaraNya aura sahasrarazmikA virakta honA,
rAvaNake dvArA yajJakA nAza huA usakA varNana, madhuke pUrvabhavoMkA vyAkhyAna
aura rAvaNakI putrI uparambhAkA madhuke sAtha abhibhASaNa  // 70 //  rAvaNako
vidyAkA lAbha honA, indrakI rAjyalakSmIkA kSaya honA, rAvaNakA sumeru
parvatapara jAnA aura vahA~se vApasa lauTanA  // 71 /  /  anantavIrya muniko
kevalajJAna utpanna honA, rAvaNakA unake samakSa yaha niyama grahaNa karanA ki
'jo parastrI mujhe nahIM cAhegI maiM use nahIM cAhU~gA', tadanantara vAnaravaMzI
mahAtmA hanumAnke janma kA varNana ||72 /  /  kailAsa parvatapara aMjanAke pitA
rAjA mahendrakA pavanaMjayake pitA rAjA prahlAdase yaha bhASaNa honA ki hamArI
putrIkA tumhAre putrase sambandha ho, pavanaMjayake sAtha aMjanAkA vivAha,
pavanaMjayakA kupita honA  /  tadanantara cakavAcakavIkA viyoga dekha prasanna
honA, aMjanAke garbha rahanA aura sAsu dvArA usakA gharase nikAlA jAnA  /  / 73
/  /  munirAjake dvArA hanumAnke pUrvajanmakA kathana honA, guphAmeM hanumAnkA
janma honA 1. prajanaM m.| 2. bhikhyaM m.| 3. cAraNaM m.| 4. kaikaseyAzca ma.  /
5. candrodaya m.| 6. janyanAzanam ka.  /  7. niyamagraham ma.  /  8. sajjAyA
kha.  /  9. 'sUtistanUrahaprApti pratisUryeNa kAritam' m.|

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Chapter  **75.** The entry of Vayu into the Bhutatavi forest, his
encounter with the elephant, the arrival of the Vidyadhara Prati-Surya, and
Vayu's immense joy upon seeing Anjana.  **76.** Hanuman's assistance to Ravana,
and his fierce battle with Varuna. A description of Ravana's vast kingdom, and
the height and intervals of the Tirthankaras.  **77.** The activities of
Balabhadra, Narayana, and their enemies, Prati-Narayana, etc., in six sections.
The birth of King Dasharatha, and the boon granted to Kaikeyi.  **78.** The
birth of Rama, Lakshmana, Shatrughna, and Bharata to King Dasharatha. The birth
of Sita to King Janaka, and the grief of her mother due to the theft of the
Bhamandala.  **79.** The infatuation of Bhamandala upon seeing Sita depicted in
a painting by Narada. The account of Sita's Swayamvara, and the appearance of
the Dhanush-ratna (bow-jewel) at the Swayamvara.  **80.** King Dasharatha's
initiation by the Muni-raja, Sarvabhutasharanaya. Bhamandala's knowledge of
other births upon seeing Sita.  **81.** Bharata's acquisition of the kingdom due
to Kaikeyi's boon. Sita, Rama, and Lakshmana's journey towards the south.
**82.** The story of Vajrakarna, Lakshmana's acquisition of the Kalyanamaala
woman, the subjugation of Rudrabhuti, and the release of the Balakhilya.
**83.** Rama's arrival in the Arun village, his residence in the city of Rampuri
established by the gods, Lakshmana's union with Vanamala, and the advancement of
Ativirya.  **84.** Lakshmana's acquisition of Jitapadama, the story of the
Kulabhushana and Devabhushana Munis, and the description of the Jain temples
built by Rama on the Vanshasthal mountain.  **85.** The attainment of the vow by
the bird Jatayu, the glory of the fruits of giving alms, Rama, Lakshmana, etc.,
riding on chariots drawn by large elephants, and the killing of Shambuka.
**86.** The story of Shurpankha, the battle of Rama with Khara and Dushana, and
Rama's immense grief due to the separation from Sita.  **87.** The arrival of
the Vidyadhara Viradhit, the death of Khara and Dushana, and Ravana's
destruction of the knowledge of the Ratna-jati Vidyadhara.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathamaM parva bhUtATavIM praviSTasya vAyoribhavilokanam  /
vidyAdharasamAyogamaJjanAdarzanotsavam  // 75 //  vAyuputrasahAyatvaM dAruNaM
paramaM raNam  /  rAvaNasya mahArAjyaM jainamutsedhamantaram  //  76  //
rAmakezava tacchatruSaTkhaNDapariceSTitam  /  dazasyandanasaMbhUtiM kaikayyA
varasaMpadam  // 77 //  padmalakSmaNazatrughnabharatAnAM samudbhavam  /
sItotpattiM prabhAcakrahRtiM tanmAtRzocanam  //  78  //  nAradAlikhitAM sItAM
dRSTvA bhrAturvimUDhatAm  /  svayaMvarAya vRttAntaM cAparatnasya codbhavam  //
79 //  sarvabhUtazaraNyasya dazasyandanadIkSaNam  /  mAcakrAnyabhavajJAnaM
videhAyAzca darzanam  //  80  //  kaikayyA varato rAjyaprApaNaM bharatasya ca  /
vaidehIpadma saumitrigamanaM dakSiNAzayA  //  81  //  ceSTitaM vajrakarNasya
lAbhaM kalyANayoSitaH  /  rudrabhUtivazIkAraM bAlikhilya vimocanam  //  82  //
nikAramaruNagrAme rAmapuyya nivezanam  /  saMgamaM vanamAlAyA ativIryasamunnatim
// 83 //  prAptiM ca jitapadmAyAH kauladezavibhUSaNam  /  caritaM kAraNaM
rAmacaityAnAM vaMzaparvate  // 84 //  jaTAyuniyamaprAptiM pAtradAnaphalodayam  /
mahAnAgarathArohaM zambUkavinipAtanam  //  85  //  kaikaseyyAzva vRttAntaM
kharadUSaNavigraham  /  sItAharaNazokaM ca zokaM rAmasya durdharam ||86||
virAdhitasyAgamanaM kharadUSaNapaJcatAm  /  vidyAnAM ratnajaTinazchedaM
sugrIvasaMgamam  //  87 //  aura aMjanA ke mAmA pratisUrya ke dvArA aMjanA tathA
hanumAnako hanuruha dvIpameM le jAnA ||74 || tadanantara pavanaMjayakA bhUtATavI
meM praveza, vahA~ usakA hAthI dekha pratisUryaM vidyAdharakA Agamana aura
aMjanAko dekhanekA pavanaMjayako bahuta bhArI harSa huA isakA varNana ||75 ||
hanumAna ke dvArA rAvaNako sahAyatAkI prApti tathA varuNake sAtha atyanta
bhayaMkara yuddha honA  /  rAvaNake mahAn rAjyakA varNana tathA tIrthaMkaroMkI
U~cAI aura antarAla AdikA nirUpaNa || 76 || balabhadra, nArAyaNa aura unake
zatru pratinArAyaNa AdikI chaha khaNDoMmeM honevAlI ceSTAoMkA varNana, rAjA
dazarathakI utpatti aura kaikayIko varadAna denekA kathana ||77|| rAjA
dazarathake rAma, lakSmaNa, zatrughna aura bharatakA janma honA, rAjA janakake
sItAkI utpatti aura bhAmaNDalake haraNase usakI mAtAko zoka utpanna honA  //  78
//  nAradake dvArA citrameM likhI sItAko dekha bhAI bhAmaNDalako moha utpanna
honA, sItA ke svayaMvara kA vRttAnta aura svayaMvarameM dhanuSaratnakA prakaTa
honA || 79 || sarvabhUtazaraNya nAmaka munirAja ke pAsa rAjA dazarathakA dIkSA
lenA, sItAko dekhakara bhAmaNDalako anya bhavoMkA jJAna honA ||80|| kaikayIke
varadAna ke kAraNa bharatako rAjya milanA aura sItA, rAma tathA lakSmaNakA
dakSiNa dizA kI ora jAnA  // 81 //  vajrakarNakA caritra, lakSmaNako kalyANamAlA
strIkA lAbha honA, rudrabhUtiko vaza meM karanA aura bAlakhilyako chur3AnA  //
82  //  aruNa grAma meM zrIrAmakA AnA, vahA~ devoM ke dvArA basAyI huI rAmapurI
nagarI meM rahanA, lakSmaNakA vanamAlAke sAtha samAgama honA aura ativIryako
unnatikA varNana || 83|| tadanantara lakSmaNako jitapadmAkI prApti honA,
kUlabhUSaNa aura devabhUSaNa munikA caritra, zrIrAmane vaMzasthala parvatapara
jinamandira banavAye unakA varNana  // 84 //  jaTAyu pakSIko vrataprApti,
pAtradAna ke phalako mahimA, bar3e-bar3e hAthiyoMse jute rathapara rAma-lakSmaNa
Adi kA ArUr3ha honA, tathA zambUkakA mArA jAnA ||85  //  zUrpaMgakhAkA vRttAnta,
khara-dUSaNa ke sAtha zrIrAma ke yuddhakA varNana, sItAke viyogase rAmako bahuta
bhArI zokakA honA ||86|| virAdhita nAmaka vidyAdharakA Agamana, kharadUSaNakA
maraNa, rAvaNake dvArA ratnajaTI vidyAdharakI vidyAoMkA 1. vilokane ma.  /  2.
pariveSTitam ma  /  3. dUtaM ( ? ) ma  /  4 vajrakaraNasya ma  /  5.
rAmapuryAbhivezanam ma.  /  6. rAmaM ma.  /  7. zaGkakavinipAtanam ma.  /

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Padma Purana:  **Chapter 88:**  The death of Sahasagata, leaving behind his
son Sitodanta. The arrival of Vibhishana's chariot, the acquisition of the Vidya
of Haripadma.  **Chapter 89:**  Indrajit, Kumbhakarna, and Meghanada bound by
the Naga-pasha. Lakshmana struck by the Shakti, and the removal of the arrow by
Vishalya.  **Chapter 90:**  The entry of Ravana into the Jineshvara temple and
his praise. The attack on Lanka by the Vidhyadhara Kumaras of Kà¤à¤. The return of
the Vidhyadhara Kumaras to Kà¤à¤ due to the influence of the Devas.  **Chapter
91:**  The acquisition of the Chakra-ratna by Lakshmana. The death of Ravana.
The lamentations of his wives. The arrival of the Kevali.  **Chapter 92:**  The
initiation of Indrajit and others. The reunion of Rama and Sita. The arrival of
Narada. The return of Rama to Ayodhya.  **Chapter 93:**  The description of the
previous birth of Bharata and the elephant Trilokamandana. The renunciation of
Bharata. The expansion of the kingdom of Rama and Lakshmana.  **Chapter 94:**
The acquisition of Manorama by Lakshmana, whose chest was embraced by
Rajalakshmi. The death of Madhu and Lavana in the battle.  **Chapter 95:**  The
outbreak of the disease Mariroga in Mathura and other countries due to the wrath
of Dharanendra. The removal of the disease by the influence of the Saptarshis.
The expulsion of Sita from her home and her lamentations.  **Chapter 96:**  The
protection of Sita by King Vajrajangha. The birth of Lavanakusha. The conquest
of other kings by Lavanakusha upon growing up, leading to the expansion of
Vajrajangha's kingdom. Finally, their battle with their father, Ramachandraji.
**Chapter 97:**  The arrival of the Devas to celebrate the attainment of
Kevalgyan by the Sarvabhusana Muni. The removal of the accusation against Sita
through the Agnipariksha. The description of the future births of Vibhishana.
**Chapter 98:**  The penance of the army commander, Krtaantavakra. The anger of
Rama and Lakshmana's sons during the Swayamvara. The initiation of Lakshmana's
sons. The death of Bhamandala due to lightning.  **Chapter 99:**  The initiation
of Hanuman. The death of Lakshmana. The penance of Rama's sons. The immense
grief of Rama due to the separation from his brother.  **Chapter 100:**  The
initiation of Rama due to the enlightenment provided by his friend, the Deva of
his previous birth. The attainment of Kevalgyan. The attainment of Nirvana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe nidhanaM sAhasagateH sItodantaM vihAyasA  /  yAnaM vibhISaNAyAnaM
vidyAtiM haripadmayoH ||88 || indrajitkumbhakarNAbdasvarapannagabandhanam  /
saumitrazaktinirbhedavizalyAzalyatAkRtim  // 89 //  rAvaNasya pravezaM ca
jinezvaregRhe stutim  /  laGkAbhibhavanaM prAtihAryaM devaiH prakalpitam  // 90
//  cakrotpattiM ca saumitreH kaikaseyasya hiMsanam  /  vilApaM tasya nArINAM
kaivalyAgamanaM tataH ||11|| 5 mindrajidAdInAM sItayA saha saMgamam  /
nAradasya ca saMprAptimayodhyAyA nivezanam ||12|| pUrvajanmAnucaritaM gajasya
bharatasya ca  /  tatpravrajyaM mahArAjyaM sIracakraprahAriNoH  // 93 //  lAbhaM
manoramAyAzca lakSmyAliGgitavakSasaH  /  saMyuge maraNaprAptiM sumadhorlavaNasya
ca  //  94  //  mathurAyAM sadezAyAmupasargavinAzanam  /  saptarSisaMzrayAt
sItAnirvAsaparidevane  //  95  //  vajrajaGghaparitrANaM lavaNAMkuzasaMbhavam  /
anyarAjyaparAbhUtiM ' pitrA saha mahAhavam ||16|| sarvabhUSaNakaivalya
saMprAptAvamarAgamam  /  prAtihAryaM ca vaidehyA vibhISaNabhavAntaram ||17||
tapaH kRtAntavakrasya parikSobhaM svayaMvare  /  zramaNatvaM kumArANAM
prabhAmaNDaladurmRtim ||18|| dIkSAM pavanaputrasya nArAyaNaparAsutAm  /
rAmAtmajatapaH prAptiM padmazokaM ca dAruNam  // 99 //  pUrvAptadevajanitAd
bodhAnnirpranthatAzrayam  /  kevalajJAnasaMprAptiM nirvANapadasaMgatim  // 100
//  chedA jAnA tathA sugrIvakA rAmake sAtha samAgama honA || 87|| sugrIvake
nimitta rAma sAhasa mArA, ratnajaTIne sItAkA saba vRttAnta rAmase kahA, rAmane
AkAzamArga se laMkApara car3hAI kI, vibhISaNa rAmase Akara milA aura rAma tathA
lakSmaNako siMhavAhinI garuDavAhinI vidyAoM kI prApti huI ||88|| indrajit
kumbhakarNa aura meghanAdakA nAgapAzase bA~dhA jAnA, lakSmaNako zakti laganA
aura vizalyAke dvArA zalyarahita honA ||89 || bahurUpiNI vidyA siddha karaneke
lie rAvaNakA zAntinAtha bhagavAn ke mandira meM praveza kara stuti karanA,
rAmake kaTakake vidyAdharakumAroMkA laMkApara AkramaNa karanA, devoMke
prabhAvase vidyAdhara kumAroMkA pIche kaTakameM vApasa AnA  // 90 //  lakSmaNako
cakraratnakI prApti honA, rAvaNakA mArA jAnA, usakI striyoMkA vilApa karanA
tathA kevalIkA Agamana ||9|| indrajit AdikA dIkSA lenA, rAmakA sItAke sAtha
samAgama honA, nAradakA AnA aura zrIrAmakA ayodhyA meM vApasa Akara praveza
karanA  //  92  //  bharata aura trilokamaNDana hAthI ke pUrvabhavakA varNana,
bharatakA vairAgya, rAma tathA lakSmaNake rAjyakA vistAra ||23|| jisakA
vakSaHsthala rAjalakSmIse AliMgita ho rahA thA aise lakSmaNake lie manoramAkI
prApti honA, yuddha meM madhu aura lavaNakA mArA jAnA ||14|| aneka dezoMke sAtha
mathurA nagarImeM dharaNendra ke kopase marIrogakA upasagaM aura saptarSiyoMke
prabhAvase usakA dUra honA, sItAko gharase nikAlanA tathA usake vilApakA varNana
|| 95|| rAjA vajrajaMghake dvArA sItAkI rakSA honA, lavaNAMkuzakA janma lenA,
bar3e honepara lavaNAMkuzake dvArA anya rAjAoMkA parAbhava hokara vajrajaMdhake
rAjyakA vistAra kiyA jAnA aura antameM unakA apane pitA rAmacandrajI ke sAtha
yuddha honA ||16|| sarvabhUSaNa munirAjako kevalajJAna prApta honeke
upalakSyameM devoMkA AnA, agniparIkSA dvArA sItAkA apavAda dUra honA,
vibhISaNake bhavAntaroMkA nirUpaNa ||17|| kRtAntavakra senApatikA tapa lenA,
svayaMvara meM rAma aura lakSmaNake putroMmeM kSobha honA, lakSmaNake putroMkA
dIkSA dhAraNa karanA aura vidyutpAta se bhAmaNDalakA durmaraNa honA ||98 ||
hanumAnkA dIkSA lenA, lakSmaNakA maraNa honA, rAmake putroMkA tapa dhAraNa
karanA aura bhAIke viyogase rAmako bahuta bhArI zokakA utpanna honA ||19||
pUrvabhavake mitra devake dvArA utpAdita pratibodhase rAmakA dIkSA lenA, kevala
1. jinazAntigRhaM zubham ma.  /  2. saumitraH [?]  /  3. tatprAvrajyAM ma  /  4
prahAriNaH ma  /  5. parAbhUti: ma.  /  6. vaktrasya ma.  /  7. durmatim ma.  /

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## First Chapter  **This entire [text] is a ladder to the attainment of the
state of a Siddha, and is full of bliss. Therefore, O noble ones, with your
minds fixed, listen.** (101)  **[This is a] ShÄrdÅ«lavikrÄ«á¸ita [verse]**  **Those
who remember the great sages like Padma, etc., and with their minds free from
worldly attachments, experience supreme joy. The sins accumulated for a long
time, are shattered into thousands of pieces. What to say of those who listen to
the completely pure and bright character of [these sages]?** (102)  **This
[character] was performed by those [sages] and this [sinful] karma was destroyed
by them. Therefore, O wise and intelligent people, serve this supremely pure
character, which was served by the ancient sages, to the best of your ability.
When the right path is revealed by the sun, who with good vision will stumble?**
(103)  **Thus ends the first chapter of the Padma-charita, composed by the
Acharya Ravishena, which is known as the Ärá¹£a [tradition] and which outlines the
topics to be discussed.**  **Footnotes:**  1. Moksha (liberation) 2. This (text)
3. Everywhere 4. The right path revealed by the sun  **[End of Chapter]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prathamaM parva etatsarvaM samAdhAya manaH zRNuta sajjanAH  /
siddhAspadapariprApteH sopAnamabhisaukhyadam  // 101 //  zArdUlavikrIDitam
padmAdIn munisattamAn smRtipathe tAvannRNAM kurvatAM dUraM bhAvabharAnatena
manasA modaM paraM bibhratAm  /  pApaM yAti bhidAM sahasragaNanaiH khaNDaizciraM
saJcitaM niHzeSaM caritaM tu candradhavalaM kiM zRNvatAmucyate  //  102  //
etattaiH kRtamuttamaM parihRtaM taizcedamenaskaraM karmAtyantavivekacittacaturAH
santaH prazastA janAH  /  3 sevadhvaM caritaM purANapuruSairAsevitaM zaktitaH
sanmArge prakaTIkRte hi raviNA kazcArudRSTiH skhalet  //  103  //  ityArSe
raviSeNAcAryaprokte padmacarite sUtravidhAnaM nAma prathamaM parva  /  0 jJAna
prApta honA aura nirvANapadakI prApti karanA  //  100  //  he satpuruSo !
rAmacandrakA yaha caritra mokSapadarUpI mandirakI prAptike lie sIr3hIke samAna
hai tathA sukhadAyaka hai isalie isa saba caritra - . ko tuma mana sthira kara
suno  //  101  //  jo manuSya zrIrAma Adi zreSTha muniyoMkA dhyAna karate haiM
aura unake prati atizaya bhakti - bhAvase namrIbhUta hRdayase pramodakI dhAraNA
karate haiM unakA cirasaMcita pApa karma hajAra TUka hokara nAzako prApta hotA
hai phira jo unake candramAke samAna ujjvala samasta caritrako sunate haiM unakA
to kahanA hI kyA hai ? || 102 || AcArya raviSeNa kahate haiM ki isa taraha yaha
caritra unhIM indrabhUti gaNadhara ke dvArA kiyA huA hai aura pApa utpanna
karanevAlA yaha azubha karma unhIM ke dvArA naSTa kiyA gayA hai, isalie he
vivekazAlI catura puruSo, prAcIna puruSoMke dvArA sevita isa parama pavitra
caritrakI tuma saba zaktike anusAra sevA karo - isakA paThana-pAThana karo
kyoMki jaba sUryake dvArA samIcIna mArga prakaTa kara diyA jAtA hai taba aisA
kauna bhalI dRSTikA dhAraka hogA jo skhalita hogA - cUkakara nIce giregA || 103
|| isa prakAra ArSa nAma se prasiddha raviSeNAcAryanirmita padma-caritameM
varNanIya viSayoMkA saMkSepa meM nirUpaNa karanevAlA prathama parva pUrNa huA  /
N 1. mokSaM ma  /  2. etadyaH ma  /  3. sarvataH ma  /  4. sanmArgaprakaTIkRte
ma.  /  2

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Chapter  In the Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Kshetra, there is a very
bright country known as Magadha. || 1 || It is the abode of those who are full
of merit, resembling the abode of Indra, and it maintains the order of the world
through its generous conduct. || 2 || In this country, the fields, plowed by the
tips of plows, hold the roots of the earth-lotuses, as if the earth itself were
holding the best qualities. || 3 || The nearby land is always covered with
forests of trees and sugarcane, which seem to have sprung from the watering of
milk and whose leaves are swaying in the gentle breeze. || 4 || The surrounding
areas of this country are always filled with large piles of grain, like
mountains, which are arranged in a beautiful way, and are different from each
other. || 5 || The earth of this country, watered by the drops of time, is
adorned with very green cumin and jute, as if it were wearing a garland of hair.
|| 6 || The land is very fertile, adorned with the best paddy fields, and its
regions are yellow with the pods of mung and moth. || 7 || The regions are
constantly covered with the seeds of lentil or vati, whose pods have turned red
due to the heat, and it seems as if the sprouts of grass will not grow there. ||
8 || This country is endowed with fields that produce the best wheat, and it is
full of other excellent grains, free from obstacles. || 9 || The roads are
followed by herons, who raise their necks due to the greed of insects, and the
roads are guarded by cowherds who sing while sitting on the backs of large
buffaloes. || 10 || The roads are adorned with bells tied with colorful threads,
which sound very pleasant, and the cows, whose udders are overflowing with milk,
seem to be discarding the milk they have already drunk, fearing indigestion. ||
11 || The land is covered with grass, which is full of sweet juice and so
delicate that it breaks with just the breath of the mouth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIyaM parva atha jambUmati dvIpe kSetre bharatanAmani  /  magadhAbhikhyayA
khyAtI viSayo'sti samujjvalaH || 1|| nivAsaH pUrNapuNyAnAM vAsavAvAsasaMnibhaH
/  vyavahArairasaMkIrNaiH kRtalokavyavasthitiH ||2|| kSetrANi dadhate
yasminnutkhAtAn lAGgalAnanaiH  /  sthalAbjamUlasaMghAtAn mahIsAraguNAniva || 3
|| kSIrasekAdivodbhUtairmandAnilacaladdalaiH  /
puNDrekSuvATasaMtAnairvyAptAnantarabhUtalaH  // 4 //  apUrva
parvatAkArairvibhaktaiH khaladhAmabhiH  /  sasyakUTaiH suvinyastaiH sImAntA
yasya saGkaTAH  // 5 //  udghATaka ghaTIsitairyatra jIrakajUTakaiH  /
nitAntaharitairuva jaTAleva virAjate || 6 || urvarAyAM varIyobhiH yaH
zAleyairalaMkRtaH  /  mudgakozIpuTairyasminnuddezAH ' kapilatviSaiH  //  7 //
tApasphuTitakozI rAjamASairnirantarAH  /  uddezA yasya kimIrA
nikSetriyatRNodgamAH ||8|| adhiSThitaH zreSThagodhUmadhAmabhiH  /
prazasyairanyasaMsyaizva yuktaH pratyUhavarjitaiH  // 9 //
mahAmahiSapRSThasthagAyadgopAlapAlitaiH  /
kITAtilampaTodgrIvavalAkAnugatAdhvabhiH ||10|| vivarNasUtra
saMbaddhaghaNTAraTitahAribhiH  /  kSaradbhirajaratrAsAt pItakSIrodavat payaH  //
11  //  athAnantara--- jambU dvIpake bharata kSetra meM magadha nAmase prasiddha
eka atyanta ujjvala deza hai  //  1  //  vaha deza pUrNa puNyake dhAraka
manuSyoMkA nivAsasthAna hai, indrakI nagarIke samAna jAna par3atA hai aura
udAratApUrNa vyavahArase logoMkI saba vyavasthA karatA hai || 2 || jisa dezake
kheta haloM ke agrabhAgase vidAraNa kiye hue sthala-kamaloMkI jar3oMke samUhako
isa prakAra dhAraNa karate haiM mAna pRthivI zreSTha guNoMko hI dhAraNa kara
rahe hoM  //  3  //  jo dUdhake siMcanase hI mAno utpanna hue the aura manda
manda vAyu se jinake patte hila rahe the aise paur3oM aura IkhoMke vanoMke
samUha se jisa dezakA nikaTavartI bhUmibhAga sadA vyApta rahatA hai || 4 || jisa
deza ke samIpavartI pradeza khalihAnoMmeM judI - judI lagI huI apUrvaM
parvatoMke samAna bar3I-bar3I dhAnyakI rAziyoMse sadA vyApta rahate haiM  //  5
//  jisa dezakI pRthivI ra~haTakI ghar3iyoMse sIMce gaye atyanta hare-bhare
jIroM aura dhAnoMke samUha se aisI jAna par3atI hai mAno usane jaTAe~ hI dhAraNa
kara rakhI hoM  /  /  6  /  jahA~ kI bhUmi atyanta upajAU hai, jo dhAnake
zreSTha khetoMse alaMkRta hai aura jisake bhU-bhAga mU~ga aura mauThakI
phaliyoMse pIle-pIle ho rahe haiM  //  7  //  garmI ke kAraNa jinakI phalI
caTaka gayI thI aise roMsA athavA vaTI ke bIjoMse vahA~ke bhU-bhAga nirantara
vyApta hokara citra-vicitra dikha rahe haiM aura aise jAna par3ate haiM ki vahA~
tRNake aMkura utpanna hI nahIM hoMge  //  8  //  jo deza uttamottama gehu~oM kI
utpatti sthAnabhUta khetoMse sahita hai tathA vighna-rahita anya aneka prakArake
uttamottama anAjoMse paripUrNa hai  /  /  9  /  /  bar3e-bar3e bhaiMsoM kI
pIThapara baiThe gAte hue gvAle jinakI rakSA kara rahe haiM, zarIra ke bhinna-
bhinna bhAgoM meM lage hue kIr3oM ke lobhase Uparako garadana uThAkara
calanevAle bagale mArga meM jinake pIche laga rahe haiM, raMga-viraMge sUtroM
meM ba~dhe hue ghaNTAoMke zabdase jo bahuta manohara jAna par3atI haiM, jinake
stanoMse dUdha jhara rahA hai aura usase jo aisI jAna par3atI haiM mAno pahale
piye hue kSIrodakako ajIrNake bhayase chor3atI rahatI haiM, madhura rasase
sampanna tathA itane komala ki mu~hakI bhApa mAtra se TUTa jAveM aise sarvatra
vyApta tRNoMke dvArA jo atyanta 1. nnuddezAn ma.  /  2. kapilatviSA ma  /  3.
yatra ma  /  4. adhiSThite ma.  /  5. sthalI pRSThaM ma  /  6. anyazasyaiH ma  /
7 yuktapratyUha ma., ka.  /  8 gatadhvaniH ma.  /

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Chapter  The land is white with the dust of the Ketaki flower, its
elevated regions resembling the banks of the Ganga, frequented by people.  || 14
||  In some places, the land is adorned with the verdant beauty of fields of
vegetables, while in others, it is graced by coconut trees, savored by the
forest guardians. || 15 ||  The land is filled with pomegranate groves, their
flowers resembling the beaks of parrots and the faces of monkeys, creating an
illusion. || 16 ||  The land is adorned with arbors of grapes, their leaves
smeared with the juice of the Bijaura fruit, crushed by the hands of the forest
guardians, and embellished with clusters of saffron flowers.  Here, travelers
find solace, sleeping peacefully after enjoying the taste of fruits and the
coolness of water. These arbors resemble the resting places of the forest
goddess. || 17-18 ||  The land is abundant with date palm trees, their fruits
plucked and consumed by travelers, and with banana trees, their fruits scattered
by monkeys. || 19 ||  The land is adorned with lakes, their banks covered with
dense forests of Arjuna trees. The lakes resound with the cries of herds of
cows, their waters teeming with leaping fish, their eyes wide open, resembling
blooming white lotuses. The lakes are adorned with waves, their movements
resembling a dance, and with swans, their melodious calls echoing like a song.
The banks of these lakes are frequented by joyous crowds, and the lakes
themselves are adorned with lotuses, their beauty enhanced by the presence of
cranes. || 20-23 ||  The entire land is filled with flocks of sheep, camels, and
calves, their beautiful bodies engaged in playful activities, protected by
benevolent guardians. || 24 ||  Their backs are smeared with saffron paste, as
if to attract the horses of the sun god's chariot, and their faces, with their
playful movements, seem to be blowing the wind. || 25 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIyaM parva susvAdarasasaMpannairbASpaccheyeranantaraiH  /  tRNaistRptiM
pariprAptairgodhanaiH sitakakSabhUH  //  12  //  sArIkRtasamuddezaH
kRSNasArairvisAribhiH  /  sahasrasaMkhyairgIrvANasvAmino locanairiva  // 13 //
ketakIdhUlidhavalA yasya dezAH samunnatAH  /  gaGgApulinasaMkAza vibhAnti
janasevitAH  //  14  //  zAkakandalavATena zyAmala zrIdharaH kvacit  /  vanapAla
kRtAsvAdairnAlikerairvirAjitaH ||15|| koTibhiH zukacaJcanAM tathA
zAkhAmRgAnanaiH  /  saMdigdhakusumairyuktaH pRthubhirdADimIvanaiH ||16|| vatsa
[vana] pAlIkarASTraSTamAtuliGgIphalAmbhasA  /  liptAH kuGkumapuSpANAM
prakarairupazobhitAH ||17|| phalasvAdapayaHpAnasukhasaMsuptamArgagAH  /
vanadevIprapAkArA drAkSANAM yatra maNDapAH || 18 || vilupyamAnaiH pathikaiH
piNDakharjUrapAdapaiH  /  kapibhizca kRtAcchoTairmocAnAM nicitaH phalaiH ||19||
tuGgArjunavanAkIrNa taTadezairmahodaraiH  /  gokulAkalitodeM
risvaravatkUladhAribhiH  // 20 //  visphuracchapharInAlairvikasallocanairiva  /
hasadbhiriva zuklAnAM paGkajAnAM kadambakaiH  // 21 //
tuGgaistaraGgasaMghAtairnartanaprasRtairiva  /  gAyadbhiriva saMsate haMsAnAM
madhurasvanaiH  // 22 //  sAmodajanasaMghAtaiH samAsevitasattaTaiH  /  sarobhiH
sArasAkoNairvanarandhreSu bhUSitaH  //  23 //  [ kalApakam ]
saMkrIDanairvapuSmadbhirAvikoSTrakatAkaiH  /  kRtasaMbAdhasarvAzo
hitapAlakapAlitaiH  // 24 //  divAkararathAzvAnAM lobhanArthamivocitaiH  /
pRSThaiH kuGkumapaGkena calatprothapuTairmukhaiH  // 25 //  11 tRptiko prApta
thIM aisI gAyoMke dvArA usa dezake vana sapheda-sapheda ho rahe haiM  /  /
10-12  /  /  jo indrake netroMke samAna jAna par3ate haiM aise idhara-udhara
caukar3iyA~ bharanevAle hajAroM zyAma hariNase usa dezake bhU-bhAga citra-
vicitra ho rahe haiM || 13 || jisa dezake U~ce-U~ce pradeza ketakIkI dhUlise
sapheda-sapheda ho rahe haiM aura aise jAna par3ate haiM mAno manuSyoMke dvArA
sevita gaMgAke pulina hI hoM ||14|| jo deza kahIM to zAkake khetoMse harI-bharI
zobhAko dhAraNa karatA hai aura kahIM vanapAloMse AsvAdita nAriyaloM se
suzobhita hai || 15 || jinake phUla totAoMkI cocoMke agrabhAga tathA vAnaroM ke
mukhoM kA saMzaya utpanna karanevAle haiM aise anArake bagIcoMse vaha deza yukta
hai ||16|| jo vanapAliyoM ke hAthase mardita bijaurAke phaloM ke rasase lipta
haiM, kezarake phUloMke samUha se zobhita haiM, tathA phala khAkara aura pAnI
pIkara jinameM pathika jana sukhase so rahe haiM aise dAkhoMke maNDapa usa
dezameM jagahajagaha isa prakAra chAye hue haiM mAno vanadevIke pyAUke sthAna hI
hoM  //  /  17 - 18 || jinheM pathika jana tor3a-tor3akara khA rahe haiM aise
piNDa kharjUrake vRkSoMse tathA vAnaroMke dvArA tor3akara girAye hue kelA phaloM
se vaha deza vyApta hai || 19|| jinake kinAre U~ce-U~ce arjuna vRkSoMke vanoMse
vyApta haiM, jo gAyoMke samUha ke dvArA kiye hue utkaTa zabdase yukta kUloMko
dhAraNa kara rahe haiM, jo uchalatI huI machaliyoMke dvArA netra khole hue ke
samAna aura phUle hue sapheda kamaloMke samUhase ha~sate hue ke samAna jAna
par3ate haiM, U~cI-U~cI laharoMke samUha se jo aise jAna par3ate haiM mAno
nRtyake lie hI taiyAra khar3e hoM, upasthita haMsoMkI madhura dhvanise jo aise
jAna par3ate haiM mAno gAna hI kara rahe hoM, jinake uttamottama taToM para
harSase bhare manuSyoMke jhuNDake jhuNDa baiThe hue haiM aura jo kamaloMse
vyApta haiM aise sarovaroMse vaha deza pratyeka vana khaNDoM meM suzobhita hai
/  20-23  /  /  hitakArI pAlaka jinakI rakSA kara rahe haiM aise khelate hue
sundara zarIra ke dhAraka bher3a, U~Ta tathA gAyoMke bachar3oMse usa dezakI
samasta dizAoM meM bhIr3a lagI rahatI hai ||24|| sUryake rathake ghor3oMko
lubhAne ke lie hI mAno jinake pIThake pradeza kezarakI paMkase lipta haiM aura
jo caMcala agrabhAgavAle mukhoMse vAyukA svacchandatApUrvaka isalie 1. saMkAzo
ma  /  2. jinasevitAH ma  /  3. kRtAcoTaH ma  /  4. kalitAdAra ma.  /  5.
saMsaktaH ma  /  saMsaktaM ka.  /  6. sAmodajanasaMghAta samAsitasarittaTaiH ma
/  (?) 7. sarvAzA ma.  /  8. pAlakaiH ma  /  9. mitrocitaiH ma.  /

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The land is filled with groups of mares, as if they are teaching their foals the
speed of motion.  [26]  The land is sometimes very white, with flocks of swans
that seem like a great mass of human virtues, and whose voices attract the minds
of people. [27]  The sky is always filled with the sound of drums, mixed with
the sounds of music and peacocks. [28]  The land is always adorned with virtuous
people, who are as pure as the white circle of the autumn moon, like pearls, and
clever at giving joy. [29]  The land is always accessible to people, because it
is filled with great householders who have satisfied groups of travelers with
food and other provisions, and who are like the best trees because of their
fruits. [30]  The land is inhabited by great people who are like the peaks of
the Himalayas, covered with musk and other fragrant substances, and various
kinds of clothes. [31]  In that land, the defects of false vision are removed by
the collyrium of Jain teachings, and the forest of sin is burned by the fire of
the great sages' austerities. [32]  In that Magadha country, there is a city
called Rajagriha, beautiful in all directions, and fragrant with flowers, as if
it were the youth of the world. [33]  That city of Rajagriha always attracts the
mind, like the inner palace of Dharma, the god of justice, because just as the
inner palace of Dharma is filled with thousands of queens, whose bodies are
adorned with saffron, so too is the city of Rajagriha adorned with thousands of
queens, whose bodies are adorned with saffron.  [34]  The outskirts of that city
are adorned with small fans, and the wind makes the yak-tails tremble, so the
city is like the splendor of Indra, because the outskirts of Indra's palace are
also adorned with small fans, and the wind makes the yak-tails tremble there.
[35]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe udarasthakizorANAM javAyeva prabhaJjanam  /  svacchandamApibantInAM
vaDavAnAM gaNaizcitaH  // 26 //  [yugmam
caradbhihasasaMghAtairghanairjanaguNairiva  /
raveNAkRSTacetobhiratyantadhavalaH kvacit  // 27 //
saMgItasvanasaMyuktairmayUraravamizritaiH  /  yasminmurajanirghoSairmukharaM
gaganaM sadA  // 28 //  zarannizAkarazvetavRttarmuktAphalopamaiH  /
AnandadAnacaturairguNavadbhiH prasAdhitaH  // 29 //  tarpitAdhvagasaMghAtaiH
phalairvaratarUpamaiH  /  mahAkuTumbibhinityaM prApto'bhigamanIyatAm  // 30 //
sAraGgamRgasadgandhamRgaromabhirAvRtaiH  /  himavatpAdadezIyaH kRtasthairyo
mahattaraiH  // 31 //  hatAH kudRSTayo yasmin jinapravacanAJjanaiH  /
pApakakSaM ca nirdagdhaM mahAmunitapo'gnibhiH  // 32 //  tatrAsti sarvataH
kAntaM nAmnA rAjagRhaM puram  /  kusumAmodasubhagaM bhuvanasyevaM yauvanam  //
33 //  mahiSINAM sahasrairyatkukamAJcitavigrahaH  /  dharmAntaHpuranirbhAsaM
dhatte mAnasakarSaNam  // 34 //  marududdhRtacamarairbAlavyajanazobhitaiH  /
prAntairamararAjasya cchAyAM yadavalambate  /  / 35 /  /  pAna kara rahI haiM
mAno apane udarameM sthita baccoMko gatike vegakI zikSA hI denI cAhatI hoM aisI
ghor3iyoMke samUhase vaha deza vyApta ho  /  / 25-26 /  /  jo manuSyoMke bahuta
bhArI guNoMke samUhake samAna jAna par3ate haiM tathA jo apane zabdase logoMkA
citta AkarSita karate haiM aise calate-phirate haMsoMke jhuNDoMse vaha deza
kahIM-kahIM atyadhika sapheda ho rahA hai  /  / 27 /  /  saMgItake zabdoMse
yukta tathA mayUroMke zabdase mizrita mRdaMgoMkI manohara AvAjase usa dezakA
AkAza sadA zabdAyamAna rahatA hai  // 28 //  jo zarad Rtuke candramAke samAna
zvetavRtta arthAt nirmala caritrake dhAraka haiM ( pakSameM zvetavarNa golAkAra
haiM ), muktAphalake samAna haiM, tathA Anandake dene meM catura haiM aise guNI
manuSyoMse vaha deza sadA suzobhita rahatA hai  // 29 //  jinhoMne AhAra Adi kI
vyavasthAse pathikoMke samUhako santuSTa kiyA hai tathA jo phaloMke dvArA
zreSTha vRkSoMke samAna jAna par3ate haiM aise bar3e-bar3e gRhasthoMke kAraNa
usa dezameM logoMkA sadA AvAgamana hotA rahatA hai  // 30 //  kastUrI Adi
sugandhita dravya tathA bhA~ti-bhA~tike vastroMse veSTita honeke kAraNa jo
himAlayake pratyanta parvatoM (zAkhA) ke samAna jAna par3ate haiM aise
bar3e-bar3e loga usa dezameM nivAsa karate haiM  // 31 //  usa dezameM
mithyAtvarUpI dRSTike vikAra jainavacanarUpI aMjanake dvArA dUra hote rahate
haiM aura pAparUpI vana mahA-muniyoMkI taparUpI agnise bhasma hotA rahatA hai
// 32 //  usa magadha dezameM saba orase sundara tathA phUloMko sugandhise
manohara rAjagRha nAmakA nagara hai jo aisA jAna par3atA hai mAno saMsArakA
yauvana hI ho  // 33 //  vaha rAjagRha nagara dharma arthAt yamarAjake
antaHpurake samAna sadA manako apanI ora khIMcatA rahatA hai kyoMki jisa prakAra
yamarAjakA antaHpura kezarase yukta zarIrako dhAraNa karanevAlI hajAroM
mahiSiyoM arthAt bhaiMsoMse yukta hotA hai usI prakAra vaha rAjagRha nagara bhI
kezarase lipta zarIrako dhAraNa karanevAlI hajAroM mahiSiyoM arthAt rAniyoMse
suzobhita hai| bhAvArtha-mahiSI nAma bhaiMsakA hai aura jisakA rAjyAbhiSeka kiyA
gayA aisI rAnIkA bhI hai| lokameM yamarAja mahiSavAhana nAmase prasiddha haiM
isalie usake antaHpurameM mahiSoMkI striyoM-mahiSiyoMkA rahanA ucita hI hai aura
rAjagRha nagarameM rAjAkI rAniyoMkA sadbhAva yuktiyukta hI hai  // 34 //  usa
nagarake pradeza jahA~-tahA~ bAlavyajana arthAt choTe-choTe paMkhoMse suzobhita
the aura jahA~-tahA~ unameM maruta arthAt vAyuke dvArA camara kampita ho rahe
the isalie vaha nagara indrakI zobhAko prApta ho rahA thA kyoMki indrake
samIpavartI pradeza bhI bAlavyajanoMse suzobhita hote haiM aura unameM marut
arthAt devoMke 1. puraja ma.  /  2. prasAdhitaM kha.  /  3. bhuvanasyaiva ma.  /
-

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Second Chapter  **36.** The city, as if desiring to conquer the city of
Tripura, was not afflicted by the pain inflicted by the arrows of Shiva, but by
the pleas of the wealthy. The people of this city were all prosperous and
enjoyed great happiness.  **37.** The city seemed to be adorned with rows of
white palaces, gleaming with lime, as if it were built with moonstones set in
silver.  **38.** The city was always filled with the sound of the ornaments of
intoxicated women, making it seem like a second Alka Puri, the city of Kubera.
**39.** The best of the sages considered it a place of penance, the courtesans a
temple of love, the dancers a dance hall, and the enemies a city of Yama, the
god of death.  **40.** The warriors considered it a home for heroes, the beggars
a place of wish-fulfilling gems, the students a house of their teacher, and the
prisoners a city of rogues.  **41.** The learned in music and the arts
considered it the city of Gandharva, and those eager to learn science considered
it the abode of Vishwakarma, the divine architect.  **42.** The righteous
considered it a place of good company, the merchants a land of profit, and those
seeking refuge a safe haven built of diamond wood.  **43.** The news-bearers
considered it a mysterious place like the lair of the Asuras, the clever
considered it a gathering of fools, and those who followed the right path
considered it the fruit of a good deed.  **44.** The bards considered it a place
of festivals, the lustful a city of Apsaras, and the happy a realm of Siddhas.
**45.** The women of this city, though they were called Matangagamini, meaning
they walked with the Chandals, were still considered virtuous. They were
beautiful like elephants, and adorned with the virtue of chastity. Though they
were dark-skinned, they were radiant like rubies. They were also fair-skinned,
and possessed great wealth.  **46.** Their bodies were made of moonstones, and
they were as delicate as the Sirisha tree. They were inaccessible to snakes, and
their bodies were not made of false fabric.  **35.** The doors and fly whisks
kept shaking.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIyaM parva 'saMtApamapariprAptaiH kRtamIzvaramArgaNaiH  /
manujairyatkarotIva tripurasya jigISutAm  //  36  //
sudhArasasamAsaMgapANDurAgArapaGktibhiH  /  TaGkakalpitazItAMzuzIlAbhiriva
kalpitam ||37|| madirAttava nitAbhUSaNasvanasaMbhRtam  /  kuberanagarasyeva
dvitIyaM saMnivezanam ||38|| tapovanaM munizreSThezyAbhiH kAmamandiram  /
lAsakairnR ttabhavanaM zatrubhiryamapattanam ||39||
zastribhirvIranilayo'bhilASamaNirarthimiH  /  vidyArthibhirguroH sadma
vandibhidhUrtapattanam  //  40  //  gandharvanagaraM gItazAstrakauzala kovidaiH
/  vijJAnagrahaNodyuktairmandiraM vizvakarmaNaH  //  41  //  sAdhUnAM saMgamaH
sadbhirbhUbhirlAbhasya vANijaiH  /  paJjaraM zaraNaprAptairvajradAruvinirmitam
// 42 //  vArtikerasuracchidraM vidagdhairviTamaNDalI  /  pariNAmo manojJasya
karmaNo mArgavartibhiH  //  43  //  cauraNairutsavAvAsaH kAmukairapsaraH puram |
siddhalokazca viditaM yatsadA sukhibhirjanaiH  //  44  //  yatra mAtaGgagAminyaH
zIlavatyazca yoSitaH  /  zyAmAzca padmarAgiNyo gauryazca vibhavAzrayAH  //  45
//  candrakAntazarIrAzca zirISa sukumArikAH  /  bhujaGgAnAmagamyAzca
kaJcukAnRtavigrahAH  //  46  //  dvArA camara kampita hote rahate haiM || 35 ||
vaha nagara, mAno tripura nagarako jItanA hI cAhatA hai kyoMki jisa prakAra
tripura nagarake nivAsI manuSya IzvaramArgaNaiH arthAt mahAdevake bANoMke dvArA
kiye hue santApako prApta haiM usa prakAra usa nagarake manuSya IzvaramArgaNaiH
arthAt dhanikavargakI yAcanAse prApta santApako prApta nahIM the - sabhI sukhase
sampanna haiM || 36 || vaha nagara cUnAse pute sapheda mahaloMkI paMktise lasA
jAna par3atA hai mAno TA~kiyoMse gar3he candrakAnta maNiyoMse hI banAyA gayA ho
//  37  //  vaha nagara madirA ke nazA meM masta striyoMke AbhUSaNoMkI
jhanakArase sadA bharA rahatA hai isalie aisA jAna par3atA hai mAno kuberakI
nagarI arthAt alakApurIkA dvitIya pratibimba hI ho ||38|| usa nagarako zreSTha
muniyoMne tapovana samajhA thA, vezyAoMne kAmakA mandira mAnA thA, nRtyakAroMne
nRtyabhavana samajhA thA aura zatruoMne yamarAjakA nagara mAnA thA  //  39  //
zastradhAriyoMne vIroMkA ghara samajhA thA, yAcakoMne cintAmaNi, vidyArthiyoMne
gurukA bhavana aura vandIjanoM dhUrtoM kA nagara mAnA thA ||40|| saMgIta zAstra
ke pAragAmI vidvAnoMne usa nagarako gandharvakA nagara aura vijJAna ke grahaNa
karane meM tatpara manuSyoMne vizvakarmAkA bhavana samajhA thA  //  41  //
sajjanoMne satsamAgamakA sthAna mAnA thA, vyApAriyoMne lAbhakI bhUmi aura
zaraNAgata manuSyoMne vajramaya lakar3Ise nirmita- surakSita paMjara samajhA thA
|| 42 || samAcAra preSaka use asuroMke bilajaisA rahasyapUrNa sthAna mAnate the,
catura jana use viTamaNDalI - viToMkA jamaghaTa samajhate the, aura samIcIna
mArgameM calanevAle manuSya use kisI manojJa - utkRSTa karmakA suphala mAnate
the  //  43  //  cAraNa loga use utsavoMkA nivAsa, kAmIjana apsarAoMkA nagara
aura sukhIjana siddhoM kA loka mAnate the  //  44  //  usa nagarakI striyA~
yadyapi mAtaMgagAminI thIM arthAt cANDAloMke sAtha gamana karanevAlI thIM phira
bhI zIlavatI kahalAtI thIM ( pakSameM hAthiyoMke samAna sundara cAlavAlI thIM
tathA zIlavatI arthAt pAtivratya dharmase suzobhita thIM  /  ) zyAmA arthAt
zyAmavarNavAlI hokara bhI padmarAgiNyaH arthAt padmarAga maNi-jaisI lAla
krAntise sampanna thIM ( pakSameM zyAmA arthAt navayauvana se yukta hokara
padmarAgiNyaH arthAt kamaloMmeM anurAga rakhanevAlI thIM athavA padmarAga moMse
yukta thIM )  /  sAtha hI gaurI arthAt pArvatI hokara bhI vibhavAzrayA arthAt
mahAdevake Azrayase rahita thIM ( pakSameM gaurya: arthAt gaura varNa hokara
vibhavAzrayAH arthAt sampadAoMse sampanna thIM )  //  45  //  una striyoMke
zarIra candrakAnta maNiyoMse nirmita the phira bhI ve zirISake samAna 1.
saMtApamaparaiH ma  /  2. caraNa-kha  /  3. sarvalokazca ma  /  13

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 14  **47.** The women were endowed with great beauty, and were eager
to speak sweetly. Their faces were radiant and cheerful, and their movements
were free from any frivolity.  **48.** Though poor, they possessed the wealth of
a husband, and though round in form, they were tall and graceful. They were
beautiful, well-behaved, and possessed a bright future.  **49.** The city had a
rampart like the mountain at the end of the world, and a moat like the ocean,
surrounding it.  **50.** In that city lived a renowned king named Shrenik, who,
like Indra, bore a bow that could control all the castes (or, who wore a bow of
all colors).  **51.** He was of a benevolent nature, like Mount Sumeru, and his
mind was always fearful of transgressing the limits of righteousness, like the
ocean.  **52.** King Shrenik was like the moon in his mastery of the arts, like
the earth in his ability to sustain the world, like the sun in his brilliance,
and like Kubera in his wealth.  **53.** He protected all the worlds with his
valor, yet his mind was always guided by righteousness. He was united with
Lakshmi, but never tainted by the vice of pride.  **54.** Though he had
conquered all his enemies, he never neglected his military training. He remained
calm in times of adversity, and honored those who bowed before him.  **55.** He
considered only the virtuous, free from faults, as jewels, and regarded stones
as mere transformations of the earth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14 padmapurANe mahAlAvaNyayuktAzca madhurAbhASatatparAH  /
prasannojjvalavaktrAzca pramAdarahitehitAH  // 47 //  kalavasya pRthorlakSmIM
dadhate'tha ce durvidhAH  /  manojJA nitarAM madhye suvRttAzcAyatiM gatAH  // 48
//  lokAntaparvatAkAraM yatra prAkAramaNDalam  /  samudrodaranirmAsaparikhAkRta
veSTanam  // 49 //  AsIttatra pure rAjA zreNiko nAma vizrutaH  /  devendra iva
bibhrANaH sarvavarNadharaM dhanuH  // 50 //  kalyANaprakRtitvena yazca
parvatarAjavat  /  samudra iva maryAdAlaGghanatrastacetasA  // 51 //  kalAnAM
grahaNe candro lokanRtyA dharAmayaH  /  divAkaraH pratApena kubero dhanasaMpadA
// 52 //  zauryarakSitaloko'pi nayAnugatamAnasaH  /  lakSmyApi kRtasaMbandho na
garvagrahadUSitaH  // 53 //  jitajeyo'pi no zastravyAyAmeSu parAGmukhaH  /
vidhureSvapyasaMbhrAntaH praNateSvapi pUjakaH  // 54 //  ratnabuddhirabhUd yasya
malamukteSu sAdhuSu  /  pRthivIbhedavijJAnaM pASANazakaleSu tu  // 55 //
sukumAra thIM ( pakSameM unake zarIra candramAke samAna kAntasundara the aura ve
zirISake phUlake samAna komala zarIravAlI thiiN| ve striyA~ yadyapi bhujaMgoM
arthAt soke agamya thIM phira bhI unake zarIra kaMcuka arthAt kA~caliyoMse yukta
the ( pakSameM bhujaMgoM arthAt viTapuruSoMke agamya thIM aura unake zarIra
kaMcuka arthAt coliyoMse suzobhita the)  // 46|| ve striyAM yadyapi mahAlAvaNya
arthAt bahuta bhArI khArApanase yukta thIM phira bhI madhurAbhAsa-tatparA arthAt
miSTa bhASaNa karane meM tatpara thI ( pakSameM mahAlAvaNya arthAt bahuta bhArI
saundaryase yukta thIM aura priya vacana bolanemeM tatpara thiiN)| unake mukha
prasanna tathA ujjvala the aura unakI ceSTAe~ pramAdase rahita thIM  // 47 /  /
ve striyA~ atyanta sundara thIM, sthUla nitamboMkI zobhA dhAraNa karatI thIM,
unakA madhyabhAga atyanta manohara thA, ve sadAcArase yukta thIM aura uttama
bhaviSyase sampanna thiiN| (isa zlokameM bhI Uparake zlokoMke samAna
virodhAbhAsa alaMkAra hai jo isa prakAra ghaTita hotA hai-vahA~ kI striyA~
duvidhA arthAt daridra hokara bhI kalatra arthAt strI-sambandhI bhArI lakSmI
sampadAko dhAraNa karatI thIM aura suvRtta arthAt golAkAra hokara bhI AyatiM
gatA arthAt lambAIko prApta thiiN| ( isa virodhAbhAsakA parihAra arthameM kiyA
gayA hai)||48|| usa rAjagRha nagarakA jo koTa thA vaha (manuSya) lokake antameM
sthita mAnuSottara parvatake samAna jAna par3atA thA tathA samudrake samAna
gambhIra parikhA use cAroM 1 ghere haI thii|||49|| usa rAjagaha nagarameM
zreNika nAmakA prasiddha rAjA rahatA thA jo ki indrake samAna sarvavarNadhara
arthAt brAhmaNAdi samasta varNoM kI vyavasthA karanevAle ( pakSameM lAla-pIle
Adi samasta raMgoMko dhAraNa karanevAle ) dhanuSako dhAraNa karatA thA  // 50 //
vaha rAjA kalyANaprakRti thA arthAt kalyANakArI svabhAvako dhAraNa karanevAlA
thA (pakSameM suvarNamaya thA ) isalie sumeruparvatake samAna jAna par3atA thA
aura usakA citta maryAdAke ullaMghanase sadA bhayabhIta rahatA thA ataH vaha
samudrake samAna pratIta hotA thA  /  / 51 /  /  rAjA zreNika kalAoMke grahaNa
karanemeM candramA thA, lokako dhAraNa karane meM pRthivIrUpa thA, pratApase
sUrya thA aura dhana-sampattise kubera thA  // 52 //  vaha apanI zUravIratAse
samasta lokoMkI rakSA karatA thA phira bhI usakA mana sadA nItise bharA rahatA
thA aura lakSmIke sAtha usakA sambandha thA to bhI ahaMkArarUpI grahase vaha
kabhI dUSita nahIM hotA thA  // 53 /  /  usane yadyapi jItane yogya zatruoMko
jIta liyA thA to bhI vaha zastra-viSayaka vyAyAmase vimukha nahIM rahatA thaa|
vaha Apattike samaya bhI kabhI vyagra nahIM hotA thA aura jo manuSya usake
samakSa namrIbhUta hote the unakA vaha sammAna karatA thA  // 54 //  vaha
doSarahita sajjanoMko hI ratna samajhatA thA, pASANake Tukar3oMko to kevala
pRthvIkA eka vizeSa pariNamana hI mAnatA thA  // 55 /  /  1. madhurAlApa m.| 2.
caturvidhAH m.| 3. vizrANaH  /  4. iti k.| 5. tyaanu-m.| navAnu-ka.  /  6.
rtnbhuuti-m.| orase

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The second chapter deals with the great means of attaining liberation, which are
actions involving charity. He considered a large insect to be equal to an
elephant in its pride. ||56|| He had great love for fame, which was the foremost
of all things. He considered perishable life to be like withered grass. ||57||
He always considered the directions that brought wealth to be his adornment. He
was always averse to women. ||58|| He considered the bow bent by the string of
virtue to be his helper. He never considered a group of servants who were
satisfied with food alone and were harmful to be helpful. ||59|| In his kingdom,
even the wind did not take anything from anyone, let alone others. Similarly,
even a group of wicked animals did not engage in violence, let alone humans.
||60|| The actions of Hari, i.e., Vishnu, were to destroy the bull-killer, i.e.,
Vrishaasura, but his actions were not to destroy the bull-killer, i.e., Dharma.
Similarly, the glory of Mahadeva, i.e., Shiva, was to cause suffering to the
family of King Daksha, but his glory was not to cause suffering to the group of
clever people. ||61|| Just as Indra's actions were to destroy the lineage, i.e.,
mountains, his actions were not to destroy the lineage, i.e., family. And just
as the king of the south, Yama, had a great love for punishment, he did not have
a great love for punishment. ||62|| Just as Varuna's wealth was free from
crocodiles and other wicked aquatic creatures, his wealth was not protected from
wicked people, i.e., everyone could enjoy it. And just as it is futile to obtain
the proximity of Kubera, i.e., the best treasure, it was not futile to obtain
his proximity, i.e., the treasure of virtuous people. ||63|| Just as the
Buddha's vision, i.e., the philosophy of reality, was devoid of wealth, his
vision, i.e., realization, was not devoid of wealth. And just as the moon is
also affected and destroyed by the dark fortnight, his was not affected and
destroyed by great faults. ||64|| The beggars could not attain the fullness of
his virtue of charity, i.e., there were not enough beggars to receive all the
charity he wanted to give. The scriptures could not attain the fullness of his
intellect, i.e., his intellect was very great and the scriptures were few.
Similarly, Saraswati could not attain the fullness of his poetic power. ||65||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIyaM parva kriyAsu dAnayuktAsu mahAsAdhanadarzanam  /  bRhatkITaparijJAnaM
madotkaTagajeSu tu  // 56 //  sarvasyAgresare prItiryazasyatyantamunnatA  /
jarattRNasamA buddhirjIvite tu vinazvare  // 57 //  prasAdhanamatiH
prAptakarAsvAzAsu saMtatam  /  AtmIyAsu tu mAryAsu vibodhazcAryaputrakaH  // 5
//  guNAvanamite cApe pratipattiH sahAyajA  /  na piNDamAtrasaMtuSTe
bhRtyavarge'pacAriNi  // 59 //  vAto'pi nAharatkiMcidyatra rakSati medinIm  /
prAvartanta na hiMsAyAM karAH pazugaNA api  /  / 60 //  vRSaghAtIni no yasya
caritAni hareriva  /  naizvaryaceSitaM dakSavargatApi pinAkivat  // 6 //
gotranAzakarI ceSTA nAmarAdhipateriva  /  nAtidaNDagrahaprItirdakSiNAzAvimoriva
// 62 //  varuNasyeva na dravyaM niriMzagrAharakSitam  /  niHphalA
saMnidhiprApti!ttarAzApateriva  // 63 //  buddhasyeva na nirmuktamarthavAdena
darzanam  /  na zrIbahuladoSopadhAtinI zItagoriva  // 6 //  tyAgasya nArthino
yasya paryAptiM samupAgatAH  /  prajJAyAzca na zAstrANi kavitvasya na mAratI  //
65 //  jinameM dAna diyA jAtA thA, aisI kriyAoMko dhArmika anuSThAnoMko hI vaha
kAryakI siddhikA zreSTha sAdhana samajhatA thaa| madase utkaTa hAthiyoMko to
vaha dIrghakAya kIr3A hI mAnatA thA  // 56 //  sabake Age calanevAle yazameM hI
vaha bahuta bhArI prema karatA thaa| nazvara jIvanako to vaha jIrNa tRNake
samAna tuccha mAnatA thA  /  / 57|| vaha Aryaputra kara pradAna karanevAlI
dizAoMko hI sadA apanA alaMkAra samajhatA thaa| striyoMse to sadA vimukha rahatA
thA  /  / 58 /  /  guNa arthAt DorIse jhuke dhanuSako hI vaha apanA sahAyaka
samajhatA thaa| bhojanase santuSTa honevAle apakArI sevakoMke samUhako vaha
kabhI bhI sahAyaka nahIM mAnatA thA  /  / 59 //  usake rAjyameM vAyu bhI kisIkA
kucha haraNa nahIM karatI thI phira dUsaroMkI to bAta hI kyA thii| isI prakAra
duSTa pazuoMke samUha bhI hiMsAmeM pravRtta nahIM hote the phira manuSyoMkI to
bAta hI kyA thI  // 60 //  hari arthAt viSNukI ceSTAe~ to vRSaghAtI arthAt
vRSAsurako naSTa karanevAlI thIM para usakI ceSTAe~ vRSaghAtI arthAt dharmakA
ghAta karanevAlI nahIM thiiN| isI prakAra mahAdevajIkA vaibhava dakSavagaMtApi
arthAt rAjA dakSake parivArako santApa pahu~cAnevAlA thA parantu usakA vaibhava
dakSavargatApi arthAt catura manuSyoM ke samUhako santApa pahu~cAnevAlA nahIM
thA  // 61 /  /  jisa prakAra indrakI ceSTA gotranAzakarI arthAt parvatoMkA nAza
karanevAlI thI usa prakAra usakI ceSTA gotranAzakArI arthAt vaMzakA nAza
karanevAlI nahIM thI aura jisa prakAra dakSiNa dizAke adhipati yamarAjake
atidaNDagrahaprIti arthAt daNDadhAraNa karane meM adhika prIti rahatI hai usa
prakAra usake atidaNDagrahaprIti arthAt bahuta bhArI sajA dene meM prIti nahIM
rahatI thI  // 62 /  /  jisa prakAra varuNakA dravya magaramaccha Adi duSTa
jalacaroMse rahita hotA hai usa prakAra usakA dravya duSTa manuSyoMse rakSita
nahIM thA arthAt usakA saba upabhoga kara sakate the aura jisa prakAra kuberakI
sannidhi arthAt uttamanidhikA pAnA niSphala hai usa prakAra usako sannidhi
arthAt sajjanarUpI nidhikA pAnA niSphala nahIM thA  // 63 //  jisa prakAra
buddhakA darzana arthAt arthavAda-vAstavikavAdase rahita hotA hai usa prakAra
usakA darzana arthAt sAkSAtkAra arthavAda-dhanaprAptise rahita nahIM hotA thA
aura jisa prakAra candramAkI bhI bahuladoSopaghAtinI arthAta kRSNapakSakI
rAtrise upahata-naSTa ho jAtI hai usa prakAra usakI bhI bahaladoSopaghAtinI
arthAt bahuta bhArI doSoMse naSTa honevAlI nahIM thI  // 6 //  yAcakagaNa usake
tyAgaguNakI pUrNatAko prApta nahIM ho sake the arthAt vaha jitanA tyAga-dAna
karanA cAhatA thA utane yAcaka nahIM milate the| zAstra usakI buddhikI pUrNatAko
prApta nahIM the, arthAt usakI buddhi bahuta bhArI thI aura zAstra alpa the| isI
prakAra sarasvatI usakI kavitva zaktikI pUrNatAko prApta nahIM thI 1.
karAzvAsAsu ma.  /  2. vibodhAzcanyaputrikA m.| 3. prajJAyAzca ma.  /

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Padma Purana:  **Verse 66:** His valorous deeds could not exhaust his
glory, his efforts could not reach the limit of his enthusiasm, the directions
could not contain his fame, and numbers could not encompass his wealth of
virtues.  **Verse 67:** The hearts of all beings on earth could not contain
their love for him, the arts could not exhaust his skill, and his enemies could
not fathom his power and brilliance.  **Verse 68:** How can we, who are so
insignificant, describe the virtues of King Shrenik, whose perfect knowledge is
discussed in the assembly of Indra?  **Verse 69:** He was like a thunderbolt to
the arrogant enemies, but he treated the virtuous, who were rich in penance,
with the gentleness of a cane.  **Verse 70:** He protected the entire earth with
his strong arm. The fortifications and moats around the city were merely for
show.  **Verse 71:** His wife's name was Chelna. She was adorned with the
ornaments of virtue, pure in her right faith, and a devotee of the teachings of
the Shravakas.  **Verse 72:** Once, the great Mahavira, who was blessed with
infinite wealth and whose feet were worshipped by gods and demons, arrived near
the city of Rajagriha.  **Verse 73:** Even in his mother's womb, he possessed
the three knowledges - Mati, Shruta, and Avadhi, and enjoyed a pleasure equal to
that of Indra.  **Verse 74:** Before and after his birth, at the command of
Indra, Kubera filled his father's house with a shower of jewels.  **Verse 75:**
At his birth ceremony, the gods, along with Indra, celebrated with great pomp on
the peak of Mount Meru.  **Verse 76:** He shook Mount Meru effortlessly with his
toes and received the name "Mahavira" from Indra.  **Verse 77:** Even as a
child, he performed deeds beyond his age. His body was sustained by the nectar
that Indra had poured on his toe.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe sAhasAni mahimno na notsAhasya ca ceSTitam  /  digAnanAni no
'kIrterna saMkhyA guNasaMpadaH  //  66  //  cittAni nAnurAgasya
janasyAkhilabhUtale  /  kalA na kuzalatvasya na pratApasya zatravaH ||67 ||
kathamasmadvidhaistaiya zakyante gadituM guNAH  /  yasyendrasadasi jJAtaM
samyagdarzanamuttamam  //  68  //  uddhateSu satA tena vajradaNDena zatruSu  /
tapodhanasamRddheSu naimatA vetasAyitam ||69 //  rakSitA bAhudaNDena sakalA
tasya medinI  /  purasya sthitimAtraM tu prAkAraparikhAdikam  // 70 //  tatpatnI
celanAnAmnI' zolAmbaravibhUSaNA  /  samyagdarzanasaMzuddhA zrAvakAcAravedinI  //
71  //  ekadA tu purasyAsya samIpaM jinasattamaH  /  zrImAn prApto mahAvIraH
surAsuranatakramaH  // 72 //  mAturapyudare yasya dikkumArIvizodhite  /
jJAnatrayasametasya sukhamAsIt surendrajam  // 73 //  janmano'rvAkpurastAcca
yasya zakranidezataH  /  apUrayat pituH sadma dhanado ratnavRSTibhiH  // 74 ||
jananAbhiSave yasya nagarAjasya mUrddhani  /  cakre mahotsavo
devairAkhaNDalasamanvitaiH  // 75|| pAdAGguSThena yo merumanAyAsena kampayan  /
lebhe nAma mahAvIra iti nAkAlayAdhipAt  //  76  //  amRtena niSiktena
yasyAGguSTe'marezinA  /  vRttirAsIccharIrasya bAlasyAbAlakarmaNaH ||77|| 16
arthAt vaha jitanI kavitA kara sakatA thA utanI sarasvatI nahIM thI - utanA
zabda bhaNDAra nahIM thA ||65 || sAhasapUrNa kArya usakI mahimAkA anta nahIM pA
sake the, ceSTAe~ usake utsAhakI sImA nahIM prApta kara sakI thIM, dizAoMke anta
usakI kIrtikA avasAna nahIM pA sake the aura saMkhyA usakI guNarUpa sampadAkI
pUrNatA prApta nahIM kara sakI thI arthAt usakI guNarUpI sampadA saMrakSAse
rahita thI - aparimita thI ||66 || samasta pRthivItalapara manuSyoMke citta
usake anurAgakI sImA nahIM pA sake the, kalA caturAI usakI kuzalatAko avadhi
nahIM prApta kara sakI thIM aura zatru usake pratApa-tejakI pUrNatA prApta nahIM
kara sake the || 67 || indrakI sabhA meM jisake uttama samyagdarzanakI carcA
hotI thI usa rAjA zreNikake guNa hamAre jaise tuccha zaktike dhAraka puruSoM ke
dvArA kaise kahe jA sakate haiM ||68 || vaha rAjA, uddaNDa zatruoMpara to
vajradaNDake samAna kaThora vyavahAra karatA thA aura taparUpI dhanase samRddha
guNI manuSyoMko namaskAra karatA huA unake sAtha beMta ke samAna AcaraNa karatA
thA || 69 || usane apane bhujadaNDase hI samasta pRthivIkI rakSA kI thI ---
nagarake cAroM ora jo koTa tathA parikhA Adika vastue~ thIM vaha kevala zobhAke
lie hI thIM ||70 || rAjA zreNikakI patnIkA nAma celanA thA  /  vaha zIlarUpI
vastrAbhUSaNoM se sahita thI  /  samyagdarzanase zuddha thI tathA zrAvakAcArako
jAnanevAlI thI  //  71  //  kisI eka samaya, ananta catuSyarUpI lakSmIse
sampanna tathA sura aura asura jinake caraNoMko namaskAra karate the aise
mahAvIra jinendra usa rAjagRha nagara ke samIpa Aye ||72 || ve mahAvIra
jinendra, jo ki dikkumAriyoMke dvArA zuddha kiye hue mAtAke udarameM bhI mati,
zruta tathA avadhi ina tIna jJAnoMse sahita the tathA jinheM usa garbhavAsake
samaya bhI indrake samAna sukha prApta thA || 73 || jinake janma lene ke pahale
aura pIche bhI indrake Adezase kuberane unake pitAkA ghara ratnoMkI vRSTise
bhara diyA thA ||74 || jinake janmAbhiSekake samaya devoMne indroMke sAtha
milakara sumeru parvata ke zikharapara bahuta bhArI utsava kiyA thA || 75 ||
jinhoMne apane paira ke a~gUThoMse anAyAsa hI sumeru parvatako kampita kara
indrase 'mahAvIra' aisA nAma prApta kiyA thA ||76 || bAlaka honepara bhI
abAlakocita kArya karanevAle jina mahAvIra jinendrake zarIrakI vRtti indrake
dvArA a~gUThemeM sIMce hue amRta se hotI 1. kIrti - ma.  /  2. zAtravaH ma.  /
3. -masmadvidhestasya ma  /  4. na matA cetasAyati ( 1 ) ma.  /  5. eSa zloka:
'ka.' pustake nAsti  /

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The second chapter was served by beautiful celestial princes, sent by Indra, who
were like young boys, with charming humility.  ||7||  With them, the parents,
the family, and the three worlds attained supreme happiness. ||79||  At his
birth, all the powerful kings who were his father's long-time enemies became
submissive, bowing their heads. ||80||  The courtyard of his father's palace was
always filled with chariots, intoxicated elephants, horses swift as the wind,
caravans of camels laden with gifts, and many kings, lords of their realms,
eager to see the king of kings, abandoning their umbrellas, fly whisks, and
vehicles. ||81-83||  Just as a lotus is not attached to water, so his mind was
not attached to pleasurable objects, being free from the taint of karma. ||84||
Knowing that all wealth is fleeting like lightning, he renounced the world,
becoming self-enlightened, and his initiation was attended by the gods of the
heavens. ||85||  He worshipped the three jewels - right faith, right knowledge,
and right conduct - and destroyed the four destructive karmas. ||86||  Having
attained omniscience, illuminating both the world and the beyond, he established
the Dharma-tirtha for the benefit of the world, and he himself became fulfilled.
||87||  Having attained all that was attainable and accomplished all that was to
be done, his every effort, like the sun, was solely for the benefit of others.
||88||  He possessed a body that was naturally free from impurities and sweat,
white as milk, with blood like red sandalwood, with a perfect form, a pleasant
fragrance, and a strong constitution, endowed with infinite strength, adorned
with beautiful marks, speaking words that were beneficial and appropriate, and a
treasure house of immeasurable virtues. ||89-90||  Within two hundred yojanas of
his dwelling, there could be no famine, no suffering of others, no excessive
rain, no drought, or any other calamity. ||91||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIya parva 'sutrAmaprahitairyasya kAntaiH surakumArakaiH  /
kumAraceSTitaizcAruvinItare nusevitam  // 7 //  AnandaH paramAM vRddhiM yena
sArdhamupAgataH  /  pitrorbandhusamUhasya trayasya bhuvanasya ca  // 79 //
yatra jAte pituH sarve nRpAzciravirodhinaH  /  mahApramAvasaMpannA jAtA
praNatamastakAH  // 40 //  rathairmattagajendrazca vAyuvegaizca vAjibhiH  /
prAbhRtadravyasaMyuktaH kramelakakulaistathA  /  / 81 //
utsRSTacAmaracchatravAhanAdiparicchadaiH  /  kAGkSadbhiH pratisAmantai
rAjendrAlokanotsavam  // 42 //  nAnAdezasamAyAtamahattaragaNaistathA  /
pituryasyAnubhAvena cukSobha bhavanAjiram  /  / 83 //  alpakarmakalaGkatvAdyasya
bhogeSu hAriSu  /  cittaM na saGgamAyAtaM payaHsviva saroruham  // 8 //
vidyadvilasitAkArAM jJAtvA yaH sarvasaMpadam  /  pravavrAja svayaMbuddhaH
kRtalaukAntikAgamaH  // 85 /  /  samyagdarzanasaMbodhacAritratritayaM prabhuH  /
yaH samArAdhya ciccheda ghAtikarmacatuSTayam  // 86 //  saMprApya kevalajJAnaM
lokAlokAvalokakam  /  dharmatIthaM kRtaM yena lokArtha kRtinA satA  // 87 /  /
avAptaprApaNIyasya kRtaniSThAtmakarmaNaH  /  bhAskarasyeva yasyAbhUt parakRtyAya
ceSTitam  /  / 88 //  malasvedavinirmukta kSIrasapramazoNitam  /
svAkArargandhasaMghAtaM zaktyA yuktamanantayA  // 89 /  /  cArulakSaNasaMpUrNa
hitasaMmita bhASaNam  /  aprameyaguNAgAraM yo babhAra paraM vapuH  // 10 //
yasmin viharaNaprApta yojanAnAM zatadvaye  /  durbhikSaparapIDAnAmItInAM ca na
saMbhavaH  // 11 //  thI  // 77|| bAlakoM jaisI ceSTA karanevAle, manohara
vinayake dhAraka, indrake dvArA bheje hue sundara devakUmAra sadA jinakI sevA
kiyA karate the  /  / 78|| jinake sAtha hI sAtha mAtA-pitAkA, bandhasamUhakA
aura tInoM lokoMkA Ananda parama vRddhiko prApta huA thA  // 79|| jinake utpanna
hote hI pitAke ciravirodhI prabhAvazAlI samasta rAjA unake prati natamastaka ho
gaye the  /  / 80 /  /  jinake pitAke bhavanakA A~gana rathoMse, madonmatta
hAthiyoMse, vAyuke samAna vegazAlI ghor3oMse, upahArake aneka dravyoMse yukta
UMToMke samUhase, chatra, camara, vAhana Adi vibhUtikA tyAga kara rAjAdhirAja
mahArAjake darzanakI icchA karanevAle aneka maNDalezvara rAjAoMse tathA nAnA
dezoMse Aye hue anya aneka bar3e-bar3e logoMse sadA kSobhako prApta hotA rahatA
thA  // 81-83 //  jisa prakAra kamala jalameM Asaktiko prApta nahIM hotA-usase
nilipta hI rahatA hai usI prakAra jinakA citta karmarUpI kalaMkakI mandatAse
manohArI viSayoMmeM Asaktiko prApta nahIM huA thA-usase nirlipta hI rahatA thA
// 84 /  /  jo svayaMbuddha bhagavAn samasta sampadAko bijalIkI camakake samAna
kSaNabhaMgura jAnakara virakta hue aura jinake dIkSAkalyANakameM laukAntika
devoMkA Agamana huA thA  // 85 /  /  jinhoMne samyagdarzana, samyagjJAna aura
samyak cAritra ina tInoMkI ArAdhanA kara cAra ghAtiyA karmokA vinAza kiyA thA  /
/ 86|| jinhoMne loka aura alokako prakAzita karanevAlA kevalajJAna prApta kara
lokakalyANake lie dharmatIrthakA pravartana kiyA thA tathA svayaM kRtakRtya hue
the  // 87 /  /  jo prApta karane yogya samasta padArtha prApta kara cuke the
aura karane yogya samasta kArya samApta kara cuke the isIlie jinakI samasta
ceSTAe~ sUryake samAna kevala paropakArake lie hI hotI thIM  // 88|| jo janmase
hI aise utkRSTa zarIrako dhAraNa karate the, jo ki mala tathA pasInAse rahita
thA, dUdhake samAna sapheda jisameM rudhira thA, jo uttama saMsthAna, uttama
gandha aura uttama saMhananase sahita thA, ananta balase yukta thA, sundara-
sundara lakSaNoMse pUrNa thA, hita mita vacana bolanevAlA thA aura aparimita
guNoMkA bhaNDAra thA  // 89-90 /  /  jinake vihAra karate samaya do sau yojana
taka dubhikSa Adi dUsaroMko pIr3A pahu~cAnevAle kArya tathA ativRSTi, anAvRSTi
Adi ItiyoMkA honA sambhava 1. sutraamaa-m.| 2. -riva m.| 3. uddhRSTa m.| 4.
-mAyAtaH m.| 5. matA m.| 6. saMgha ma.  /  7. saMmata m.| 8. guNAdhAraM m.|

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
18 Padmapurana He who attained the supreme state of all knowledge, whose body,
like pure crystal, did not cast a shadow. ||12|| Whose eyes were serene, free
from the flicker of eyelids, whose nails, hair, and body were all of a uniform,
deep blue, and lustrous hue. ||13|| Whose heart was filled with universal
compassion, whose gentle breeze brought joy to all beings, whose very presence
was the cause of happiness in the world. ||94|| Whose presence caused all trees
to bear fruits and flowers of every season, and the earth to become like a
mirror. ||15|| Whose fragrant wind, extending for a yojana, cleansed the earth
of dust, stones, thorns, and other impurities. ||96|| Whose presence was adorned
by lightning-like flashes, accompanied by thunderous roars, and showered with
fragrant water by enthusiastic and respectful clouds. ||97|| Whose footsteps
caused lotus flowers to bloom on the earth, as he moved through the sky. ||98||
Whose presence caused the earth to be adorned with abundant fruits, humble rice,
and other crops, and to become the source of all sustenance. ||19|| Whose
presence caused the sky to become clear like a autumnal lake, and the directions
to be free from smoke and other impurities, appearing beautiful and serene.
||100|| Whose presence was adorned by a radiant Dharmachakra, shining with a
thousand rays, and having conquered the sun. ||101|| He, the Lord Vardhamana
Jina, resided on the vast and magnificent Vipulachala mountain, near Rajagriha,
where the sweet sound of numerous waterfalls filled the air, where every place
was adorned with flowers, where trees were embraced by creepers, where lions,
tigers, and other animals were absent, allowing for peaceful meditation, where
the swaying trees seemed to bow in reverence, and where the leaping waterfalls
sparkled with purity. ||102-104|| There is no end to his glory. ||91||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 18 padmapurANe vidyAnAM yaH samastAnAM paramezvaratAM gataH  /
vizuddhasphaTikacchAyaM chAyAmapi na yadvapuH ||12|| pakSmaspandavinirmukte
prazAnte yasya locane  /  samA nakhA mahAnIlasnigdhacchAyAzca mUrddhajA ||13||
maitrI samastaviSayA vihArAnugavAyutA  /  vihRtizca prabhoryasya
bhuvanAnandakAraNam  //  94  //  sarvartuphalapuSpANi dhArayanti mahIruhAH  /
yasminnAsannamAyAte dharaNI darpaNAyate ||15|| sugandhimaruto yasya
yojanAntarabhUtalam  /  kurvate pAMsupASANakaNTakAdibhirujjhitam  // 96 //
vidyunmAlAkRtAbhikhyaistadeva stanitAmaraiH  /  sugandhisalilaiH siktaM
sotsAhairyasya sAdaraiH ||97|| aprameyamRdutvAni yasya padmAni gacchataH  /
dharaNyAmupajAyante yasya vyomavihAriNaH  //  98  //
atyantaphalasaMpattinamrazAlyAdibhUSitA  /  dharaNI jAyate yasmin samete
sasyakAraNam ||19|| zaratsaraHsamAkAraM jAyate vimalaM nabhaH  /
dhUmakAdivinirmuktA dizastu sukhadarzanAH ||100 || sphuritArasahasreNa
prabhAmaNDalacAruNA  /  yatpuro dharmacakreNa sthIyate ' jitabhAnunA  //  105
//  avasthAnaM cakArAsau vipule vipulAhvaye  /
nAnAnirjharanisyandamadhurArAvahAriNi  //  102  //  puSpopazobhitoddeze
latAliGgitapAdape  /  adhityakAsu visrabdhanirvairanyAlasevite  //  103  //
namatIva sadAyAnaM ghUrNitodArapAdapaiH  /  hasatIva
samutsarpanirjharAmalazIkaraiH  //  104 //  nahIM thA  //  91  //  jo samasta
vidyAoMkI paramezvaratAko prApta the, sphaTikake samAna nirmala kAntivAlA jinakA
zarIra chAyAko prApta nahIM hotA thA arthAt jinake zarIrakI parachAI nahIM
par3atI thI || 12 || jinake netra TimakArase rahita atyanta zAnta the, jinake
nakha aura mahAnIla maNike samAna snigdha kAntiko dhAraNa karanevAle bAla sadA
samAna the arthAt vRddhise rahita the ||93|| samasta jIvoMmeM maitrIbhAva rahatA
thA, vihArake anukUla manda manda vAyu calatI thI, jinakA vihAra samasta
saMsArake AnandakA kAraNa thA || 94 || vRkSa saba RtuoMke phala-phUla dhAraNa
karate the aura jinake pAsa Ate hI pRthivI darpaNa ke samAna AcaraNa karane
lagatI thI || 15 || jinake eka yojanake antarAlameM vartamAna bhUmiko sugandhita
pavana sadA dhUli, pASANa aura kaNTaka Adise rahita karatI rahatI thI ||16||
bijalI kI mAlAse jinakI zobhA bar3ha rahI hai aise stanitakumAramegha kumAra
jAtike deva bar3e utsAha aura Adara ke sAtha usa yojanAntarAlavartI bhUmiko
sugandhita jalase sIMcate rahate the ||97|| jo AkAzameM vihAra karate the aura
vihAra karate samaya jinake caraNoMke tale deva loga atyanta komala kamaloMkI
racanA karate the || 18 || jinake samIpa Anepara pRthivI bahuta bhArI phaloMke
bhArase namrIbhUta dhAna Adike paudhoMse vibhUSita ho uThatI thI tathA saba
prakArakA anna usameM utpanna ho jAtA thA || 19|| AkAza zarad Rtuke tAlAbake
samAna nirmala ho jAtA thA aura dizAe~ dhUmaka Adi doSoMse rahita hokara bar3I
sundara mAlUma hone lagatI thIM  // 100 //  jisameM hajAra Are dedIpyamAna haiM,
jo kAntike samUhase jagamagA rahA hai aura jisane sUryako jIta liyA hai aisA
dharmacakra jinake Age sthita rahatA thA  //  101  //  'duSTa Upara kahI huI
vizeSatAoMse sahita bhagavAn vardhamAna jinendra rAjagRhake samIpavartI usa
vizAla vipulAcalapara avasthita hue jo ki nAnA nirjharoMke madhura zabda se
manohara thA, jisakA pratyeka sthAna phUloM se suzobhita thA, jisake vRkSa
latAoMse AliMgita the, siMha, vyAghra Adi jIva rahita hokara nizcintatAse jisakI
adhityakAoM (uparitanabhAgoM) para baiThe the, vAyu se hilate hue vRkSoM se jo
aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno namaskAra hI kara rahA ho, Upara uchalate hue
jharanoM ke 1. mapanayadvapuH ma.  /  2. sabhA ka, kha  /  3. vibhUtizca ma  /
4 yatra ma  /  5. kandakAdibhirutthitam ma.  /  6. sapta k., kha.  /  7. tasmin
ma.  /  8. jinabhAnunA ma.  /  9. yAta ghUrNitAdarapAdapaiH ma.  /  10. nirbharA
ma.  /

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The second chapter  The birds' chirping seemed like a sweet conversation, the
buzzing of the bees seemed like a song of intoxication, the fragrant breeze
seemed like an embrace. The mountain peaks were adorned with a multitude of
shining metals, the mouths of lions were visible in the caves, the elephants
were seated beneath the dense trees, and the mountain covered the entire sky
with its glory. Just as Lord Vrishabhadeva was seated on the beautiful Mount
Kailasa, in the same way, Lord Vardhamana Jineendra was seated on the vast
mountain. ||102-108||  On that vast mountain, there was a land called
Samavasarana, which was one yojana in extent. ||109||  When the victorious
Vardhamana Jineendra, the conqueror of the enemy called the world, ascended the
throne in that Samavasarana land, Indra's throne trembled. ||110||  Indra
thought at that time, "By whose power has my throne trembled?" As he thought, he
knew everything through his knowledge of the past, present, and future. ||111||
Indra remembered his commander, and the commander immediately stood with folded
hands. Indra ordered him, "Inform all the gods that Lord Vardhamana Jineendra is
seated on the vast mountain, so all of you should gather and go to pay your
respects to him." ||112-113||  Then Indra himself mounted his elephant,
Airavata, which looked like a large group of autumn clouds, whose tusks were
yellowed by the impact of golden shores, which was adorned with golden garlands,
and which was surrounded by a river whose water seemed to be yellowed by the
pollen of lotuses, like Mount Kailasa itself. The elephant was adorned with the
cheeks of intoxicated bees, its fragrance filled the entire world with the
pollen of Kadamba flowers, it had a conch shell ornament near its ears, and it
seemed to be spitting out forests of lotuses with its red tongue. ||114-117||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIyaM pavaM kUjitaiH pakSisaMghAnAM jalpatIva manoharam  /  bhramarANAM
ninAdena gAyatIva madazritAm ||105 || AliGgatIva sarvAzAH 'samIreNa sugandhinA
/  nAnAdhAtuprabhAjAlamaNDitottuGgazRGgake  // 106 //  guhAmukhasukhAsIna
dRSTAnanasRgAdhipe  /  dhanapAdapakhaNDAdhaH sthitayUthapatidvipe  /  /  107 //
mahimnA sarvamAkAzaM saMchAdyeva vyavasthite  /  parvate'STApade ramye
bhagavAniva nAbhijaH ||108  //  tatrAsya jagatI jAtA yojanaM parimANataH  /
nAmnA samavapUrveNa saraNena prakIrtitA  //  109 //  AsanAbhimukhe tatra jine
jitabhavadviSi  /  cukSobha tridazendrasya mRgendrarUDhamAsanam ||11|| prabhAvAt
kasya me kampaM siMhAsanamidaM gatam  /  ityAlokya vibuddho'sau jJAnenAvadhinA
tataH  /  /  111 /  /  AjJApayardenudhyAtakSaNAyAtaM kRtAJjalim  /  senApatiM
yathA devAH kriyantAmiti vedinaH  //  112  //  jinendroM bhagavAn vIraH sthito
vipulabhUdhare  /  tadvandanAya yuSmAbhiH sametairgamyatAmiti  // 113 //  tataH
zAradajImRtamahAnicayasaMnibham  /  jambUnadataTAghAtapiGga koTimahAradam  //
114 //  suvarNakakSA yuktaM kailAsamiva jaGgamam  /  sairitA rajasAbjAnAM
piJjarIkRtatoyayA  /  /  115 || madAndhamadhupazreNIzritagaNDavirAjitam  /
dhUlIkadambasaMvAdi saurabhavyAptaviSTapam  //  116 //
karNatAlasamAsaktasamIpAlakSyazaGkhakam  /  vamantamiva padmAnAM
vanAnyaruNatAlunA  //  117  //  nirmala chIMToMse jo aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno
ha~sa hI rahA ho, pakSiyoMke kalaravase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno madhura
bhASaNa hI kara rahA ho, madonmatta bhramaroM kI guMjArase aisA jAna par3atA thA
mAno gA hI rahA ho, sugandhita pavanase jo aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno AliMgana
hI kara rahA ho| jisake U~ce-U~ce zikhara nAnA dhAtuoMkI kAntike samUhase
suzobhita the, jisakI guphAoMke agrabhAgameM sukhase baiThe hue siMhoM ke mukha
dikha rahe the, jisakI saghana vRkSAvalI ke nIce gajarAja baiThe the aura jo
apanI mahimAse samasta AkAzako AcchAdita kara sthita thaa| jisa prakAra atyanta
ramaNIya kailAsa parvatapara bhagavAn vRSabhadeva virAjamAna hue the usI prakAra
ukta vipulAcalapara bhagavAn vardhamAna jinendra virAjamAna hue ||102 - 108  //
usa vipulAcalapara eka yojana vistAravAlI bhUmi samavasaraNake nAmase prasiddha
thI || 109 || saMsArarUpI zatruko jItanevAle vardhamAna jinendra jaba usa
samavasaraNa bhUmimeM siMhAsanArUr3ha hue taba indrakA Asana kampAyamAna huA  //
110 //  indrane usI samaya vicAra kiyA ki merA yaha siMhAsana kisake prabhAvase
kampAyamAna huA hai  /  vicAra karate hI use avadhijJAnase saba samAcAra vidita
ho gayA || 11 || indra ne senApatikA smaraNa kiyA aura senApati tatkAla hI hAtha
jor3akara khar3A ho gayA  /  indrane use Adeza diyA ki saba devoMko yaha
samAcAra mAlUma karAo ki bhagavAn vardhamAna jinendra vipulAcalapara virAjamAna
haiM isalie Apa saba loga ekatrita hokara unakI vandanA ke lie calie  /  /
112-113 /  /  tadanantara indra svayaM usa airAvata hAthIpara ArUr3ha hokara
calA jo ki zarada Rtuke meghoMke kisI bar3e samUha ke samAna jAna par3atA thA,
suvarNamaya taToMke AghAtase jisakI khIsoMkA agrabhAga pIlA-pIlA ho rahA thA, jo
suvarNakI mAlAoMse yukta thA aura usase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno kamaloM kI
parAgase jisakA jala pIlA ho rahA hai aisI nadIse parivRta kailAsa giri hI ho  /
jo madAndha bhramaroM kI paMktise yukta gaNDasthaloMse suzobhita thA, kadambake
phUloM kI parAgase milatI-julatI sugandhise jisane samasta saMsArako vyApta kara
liyA thA, jisake kAnoMke samIpa zaMkha nAmaka AbharaNa dikhAI de rahe the, jo
apane lAla tAluse kamaloMke vanako ugalatA huA-sA jAna par3atA thA, jo darpake
kAraNa aisA 19 1. samIraNa sugandhinA ma.  /  2 sInaM dRSTvAnana ma  /  3.
vibudho'sau ma  /  4. danujJAta ma  /  5. yuktaH ka.  /  6. saritArasajAbjAnAM
piJjarAntaM tato yayA - ma.  /  (?) 7. saurabhya ma.  /

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
He appeared to be breathing, like a mirror reflecting, and his valor was like a
sigh. He seemed to be fainting from pride, and his youth was like a secret.
||118|| His nail beds were smooth, but his hair was rough. He seemed like a
worthy disciple, acquiring humility, and his face was that of a supreme guru.
||119|| His head was soft, but he was very firm in grasping knowledge. He was
long-lived, but his shoulders were short. ||120|| He was poor in his belly, but
always engaged in giving. He was like Narada in his love for strife, and like
Garuda in his destruction of snakes. ||121|| He appeared like the evening,
adorned with a beautiful constellation of stars. He was loud like a great bell,
and adorned with red fly whisks. ||122|| His head was adorned with a beautiful,
red, towering mound of hair. He mounted Airavata and set out. ||123|| He
arrived, accompanied by the gods, riding their own vehicles. Their faces were
radiant with the enthusiasm of seeing the Jina. ||124|| The chief of the
celestial beings, Kamalayudha and others, arrived with their consorts, adorned
with various ornaments. ||125|| Then Indra praised him with words that were full
of wonder. He said, "Your divine qualities are true and pure." ||126|| "O Lord,
you have awakened this entire world, which was asleep in the night of great
delusion, with the sun of knowledge, the orb of your great brilliance." ||127||
"Salutations to you, O Lord, who are free from attachment, omniscient, and
great. You have reached the inaccessible shore of the ocean of existence."
||128|| "With you as the merchant, the merchants of the noble mind will reach
the abode of liberation, and they will not be robbed by the thieves of vices
along the way." ||129|| "You have opened the pure path for the Siddhas. The web
of karma has been burnt by the fire of your blazing meditation." ||130||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe dalantamiva darpaNa zvasantamiva zauryataH  /
madAnmUrchAmivAyAntaM guhyantamiva yauvanAt  /  / 118 //  snigdhaM
nakhapradezeSu paruSaM romagocare  /  sacchiSyaM vinayAvAptau paramaM gurumAnane
// 119 //  mRdumUrdhAnamatyantadRDhaM paricayagrahe  /  dIrghamAyuSi hasvatvaM
dadhataM skandhabandhane  // 120 //  daridramudare nityaM pravRttaM dAnavamani
/  nAradaM kalahaprItI garuDaM nAganAzane  /  / 121 //  pradoSamiva rAjantaM
caarunksstrmaalyaa| mahAghaNTAkRtArAvaM raktacAmaramaNDitam  /  / 122 //
sindUrAruNitottuGgakumbhakUTamanoharam  /  airAvataM samAruhya prAvartata
surAdhipaH  /  / 123 //  prAptazca sahito devairArUDhanijavAhanaiH  /
jinendrAdarzanotsAhotphullAnanasaroruhaiH  // 124 //  kamalAyudhamukhyAzca
nabhazcarajanAdhipAH  /  saMprAptAH sahapalIkA nAnAlaMkAradhAriNaH  // 125 //
tatastuSTAva devendro vacasAzcaryamIyuSA  /
guNairavitathairdivyairatyantavimalairiti  // 126 //  tvayA nAtha jagatsutaM
mahAmohanizAgatam  /  jJAnabhAskarabimbena bodhitaM purutejasA  /  / 127 /  /
namaste vItarAgAya sarvajJAya mahAtmane  /  yAtAya durgamaM kUlaM
saMsArodanvataH param  // 128 //  bhavatA sArthavAhena bhavyacetanavANijAH  /
yAsyanti vitanusthAnaM doSacArairaluNTitAH  // 129 //  pravartitastvayA panthA
vimala: siddhagAbhinAm  /  karmajAlaM ca nirdagdhaM jvalitadhyAnavahninA  /  /
130 //  jAna par3atA thA mAno sA~sa hI le rahA ho, madase aisA pratIta hotA thA
mAno mUrchAko hI prApta ho rahA ho aura yauvanase aisA vidita hotA thA mAno
mohita hI ho rahA ho| jisake nakhoke pradeza cikane aura zarIrake roma kaThora
the, vinayake grahaNa karanemeM jo samIcIna ziSyake samAna jAna par3atA thA, jo
mukhameM parama guru thA arthAt jisakA mukha bahuta vistRta thA, jisakA mastaka
komala thA, jo paricayake grahaNa karane meM atyanta dRr3ha thA, jo AyumeM
dIrghatA aura skandhameM hrasvatA dhAraNa karatA thA arthAt jisakI Ayu vizAla
thI aura garadana choTI thI, jo udarameM daridra thA arthAt jisakA peTa kaza
thA. jo dAnake mArgameM sadA pravatta rahatA thA arthAta jisake gaNDasthaloMse
sadA mada jharatA rahatA thA, jo kalahasambandhI premake dhAraNa karanemeM
nArada thA arthAt nAradake samAna kalahapremI thA, jo nAgoMkA nAza karaneke lie
garur3a thA, jo sundara nakSatramAlA ( sattAIsa dAnoMvAlI mAlA pakSameM
nakSatroMke samUha ) se pradoSa-rAtrike prArambhake samAna jAna par3atA thA, jo
bar3e-bar3e ghaNTAoMkA zabda kara rahA thA, jo lAlaraMgake camaroMse vibhUSita
thA aura jo sindUrake dvArA lAla-lAla dikhanevAle unnata gaNDasthaloMke
agrabhAgase manohara thA  // 114-123 //  jinendra bhagavAnke darzana sambandhI
utsAhase jinake mukhakamala vikasita ho rahe the aise samasta deva apane-apane
vAhanoMpara savAra hokara indrake sAtha A mile  // 124 //  devoMke sivAya nAnA
alaMkAroMko dhAraNa karanevAle kamalAyudha Adi vidyAdharoMke rAjA bhI apanI-
apanI patniyoMke sAtha Akara ekatrita ho gaye  /  / 125 /  /  tadanantara
bhagavAnke vAstavika, divya tathA atyanta nirmala guNoMke dvArA Azcaryako prApta
hue vacanoMse indrane nimna prakAra stuti kI  // 126 //  he nAtha ! mahAmoharUpI
nizAke bIca sote hue isa samasta jagatko Apane apane vizAla tejake dhAraka
jJAnarUpI sUryake bimbase jagAyA hai  // 127 /  /  he bhagavan ! Apa vItarAga
ho, sarvajJa ho, mahAtmA ho, aura saMsArarUpI samudrake durgama antima taTako
prApta hue ho ataH Apako namaskAra ho  // 128|| Apa uttama sArthavAha ho, bhavya
jIvarUpI vyApArI Apake sAtha nirvANa dhAmako prApta kareMge aura mArgameM
doSarUpI cora unheM nahIM lUTa sakeMge  // 129|| Apane mokSAbhilASiyoMko nirmala
mokSakA mArga -ka., m.| 1. rAmagocare m.| 2. nAgazAsane ma.  /  3. pArAvataM ma.
/  4. samAsAdya ma.  /  5. -tsAhaphullA 6. supte ma.  /  7. yato'dya ma.  /

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Second Canto The boundless and helpless ones, who are being scorched by the fire
of suffering, you are their kinsman and the supreme refuge. How can we praise
your qualities, which are beyond comparison, free from all analogies, and
accessible only to the Omniscient ones? Â¹Â¹Â³Â¹Â¹  Having thus offered praise and
obeisance, he (Indra) stood with his head, knees, and the lotuses of his hands
touching the ground. Â¹Â¹Â³à¥©Â¹Â¹  In brief, the description of that place is as
follows: Indra's attendants had constructed the three-fold structure of the
assembly hall, which was made of various precious gems and excellent gold.
Â¹Â¹à¥©à¥«Â¹Â¹  It was endowed with four lofty gateways facing the four directions,
adorned with great pools, and covered with the radiance of jewels. Â¹Â¹à¥©à¥¬Â¹Â¹  That
place was embellished with the eight auspicious substances and possessed a
splendor that transcended speech. Â¹Â¹à¥©à¥­Â¹Â¹  There, twelve chambers made of crystal
walls were situated in a circumambulatory path. Â¹Â¹à¥©à¥®Â¹Â¹  In the first of those,
the Ganadhara monks were seated; in the second, the consorts of Indra along with
the celestial nymphs of the Kalpa-vÄsin devas; in the third, the assembly of
ÄryikÄs accompanied by the Gaá¹inÄ«s; in the fourth, the celestial nymphs of the
Jyotiá¹£ka devas; in the fifth, the consorts of the Vyantara devas; in the sixth,
the consorts of the BhavanavÄsin devas; in the seventh, the Jyotiá¹£ka devas; in
the eighth, the Vyantara devas; in the ninth, the BhavanavÄsin devas; in the
tenth, the Kalpa-vÄsin devas; in the eleventh, the humans; and in the twelfth,
the TiryaÃ±c beings who were free from enmity and abiding in happiness.
Â¹Â¹à¥©à¥¯-Â¹Â¹à¥ªà¥¨Â¹Â¹  Thereafter, the mighty King Åreá¹ika, whose mind was filled with
wonder at the arrival of the multitude of devas, also emerged from his city.
Â¹Â¹à¥ªà¥©Â¹Â¹

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIyaM parva nirbandhUnAmanAthAnAM duHkhAgniparivartinAm  /  bandhu thazca
jagatAM jAto'si paramodayaH  // 131 //  kathaM kuryAttava stotraM
yasyAntaparivarjitAH  /  upamAnena nirmuktA guNAH kevaligocarAH  /  / 132 //
Iti stutiM prayujyAsau vidhAya ca namaskRtim  /
mUrddhajAnukarAmbhojamukulaprAptabhUtalaH  // 133 //  vismayaM prAptavAn dRSTvA
sthAnaM tajinapuGgavam  /  iti yasya samAsena kathyate rUpavarNanam  // 134 //
indrasya puruSarasya prakAratritayaM kRtam  /
nAnAvarNamahAratnasuvarNamayamuttamam  // 135 //
pradhAnAzAmukhaistuGgairmahAvApIsamanvitaiH  /  caturmigopurairyuktaM
ratnacchAyApaiTAvRtaiH  /  / 136 //  AvRtaM tena tatsthAnamaSTamaGgalakAcitam  /
vacasAM gocarAtItAmadadhat kAmapi zriyam  /  / 137 //  tatra sphaTikabhittyaGgA
vimAgA dvAdazAbhavan  /  prAdakSiNyapathatyatapradezasamavasthitAH  // 138 //
tasthurekatra nirgranthA gaNanAthairadhiSThitAH  /  anyatra sendra patnIkAH
kalpavAsisurAGganAH  /  / 139 /  /  aparatrAryikAsaMgho gaNapAlIsamanvitaH  /
dyotiSAM yoSito'nyatra vaiyanto'paratra ca  // 14 //  ekatra
bhAvanastrINAmanyatra dyotiSAM gaNaH  /  vyantarANAM gaNo'nyatra saGgho'nyatra
ca bhAvanaH  /  / 14 /  /  kalpavAsina ekasminnaparatra ca mAnuSAH  /  '
vairAnubhAvanirmuktAstiryaJco'nyatra susthitAH  /  / 142 //  tato magadharAjo'pi
nizcakrAma mahAbalaH  /  saMpatatsurasaMghAtajAta vismayamAnasaH  /  / 143 /  /
dikhAyA hai aura dhyAnarUpI dedIpyamAna agnike dvArA karmoMke samUhako bhasma
kiyA hai  // 130 /  /  jinakA koI bandha nahIM aura jinakA koI nAtha nahIM aise
daHkharUpI agni meM vartamAna saMsArake jIvoMke Apa hI bandhu ho, Apa hI nAtha
ho tathA Apa hI parama abhyudayake dhAraka ho  // 131 /  /  he bhagavan ! hama
Apake guNoMkA stavana kaise kara sakate haiM jaba ki ve ananta haiM, upamAse
rahita haiM tathA kevalajJAniyoMke viSaya haiM  // 132 /  /  isa prakAra stuti
kara indrane bhagavAnko namaskAra kiyaa| namaskAra karate samaya usane mastaka,
ghuTane tathA donoM hastarUpI kamaloMke kuDamaloMse pRthivItalakA sparza kiyA
thA  /  / 133 /  /  vaha indra bhagavAnkA samavasaraNa dekhakara Azcaryako
prApta huA thA isalie yahA~ saMkSepase usakA varNana kiyA jAtA hai||134|| _
indrake AjJAkArI puruSoMne sarvaprathama samavasaraNake tIna koToMkI racanA kI
thI jo aneka varNake bar3e-bar3e ratnoM tathA suvarNase nirmita the  /  / 135 /
/  una koToMko cAroM dizAoMmeM cAra gopura dvAra the jo bahuta hI UMce the,
bar3I-bar3I bAvar3iyoMse suzobhita the, tathA ratnoMkI kAntirUpI paradAse AvRta
the  /  / 136 /  /  gopuroMkA vaha sthAna aSTa maMgaladravyoMse yukta thA tathA
vacanoMse agocara koI adbhuta zobhA dhAraNa kara rahA thA  // 137 /  /  usa
samavasaraNameM sphaTikakI dIvAloMse bAraha koThe bane hue the jo pradakSiNA
rUpase sthita the  // 138 //  una koThoM se prathama koThemeM gaNadharoMse
suzobhita munirAja baiThe the, dUsaremeM indrANiyoMke sAtha-sAtha kalpavAsI
devoMkI devAMganAe~ thIM, tIsaremeM gaNiniyoMse sahita AyikAoMkA samaha baiThA
thA, 'cauthemeM jyotiSI devoMkI devAMganAe~ thoM pA~caveM meM vyantara devoMkI
aMganAe~ baiThI thIM. chaThemeM bhavanavAsI devoMkI aMganAe~ baiThI thIM.
sAtavameM jyotiSI deva the, AThaveMmeM vyantara deva the, nauveMmeM bhavanavAsI
deva the, dasaveMmeM kalpavAso deva the, gyArahaveM meM manuSya the aura
bArahaveM meM vairabhAvase rahita tithaMca sukhase baiThe the  /  / 139-142 /  /
tadanantara saba orase AnevAle devoMke samUhase jisake manameM Azcarya utpanna
ho rahA thA aisA mahAbalavAn athavA bahuta bar3I senAkA nAyaka rAjA zreNika bhI
apane nagarase bAhara nikalA 1. kuryAstava m.| 2. paristuti kh.| 3. tjjain-m.|
4. paTairvRtaH m.| 5. -kAnvitam ma.  /  6. anyatrAsan sapatnIkAH ka., kha.  /
7. jyotiSAM m.| 8. jyotiSAM m.| 9. gaNo m.| 10. vairAnubhava ma.  /

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
22 Padmapurana Having abandoned his vehicle and other royal paraphernalia from
afar, he bowed to the Jina with reverence and entered his own place. || 144 ||
The compassionate Varisena, the fearless Kumar, Vijayavahana, and other princes,
having bowed with folded hands and touched their foreheads, paid homage to the
Lord. Then, with great humility, they all sat down in their respective places.
|| 145-146 || The Lord Vardhamana was seated on a throne beneath an Ashoka tree
in the Samavasarana. Its branches were made of vaidurya (blue) gems, and it was
adorned with delicate leaves. Its flowers, radiant with brilliance, filled all
directions. It was extremely beautiful, as pleasing as a Kalpa tree, and it
dispelled the sorrows of mankind. Its leaves were green and dense, and it
resembled a mountain made of various gems. His throne also produced a rainbow
from the light of various gems. It was covered with divine garments, pleasing to
the mind with its soft touch, and it obstructed the spread of the brilliance of
the gems on Indra's head. It was adorned with three umbrellas, signifying his
sovereignty over the three worlds, and it was filled with flowers showered by
the gods. It stood on the surface of the earth, adorned with fluttering chowries
held by the Yaksha king, and the sound of the Dundubhi drums echoed peacefully
from it. || 147-152 || The divine sound that emanated from the Lord transformed
into the language of beings of the three realms, and its loud voice was like the
dense roar of clouds. || 153 || In the midst of a halo that eclipsed the sun's
light, the Lord was seated. When questioned by the Ganadhara, he preached the
Dharma to the people as follows: || 154 || He said that first and foremost,
there is one reality, and then, with the distinction between Jiva and Ajiva,
there are two types of reality. Among them, too, there are two distinctions:
Siddha and Samsari. || 155 || Besides these, there are two more distinctions
among Jivas: Bhavy and Abhavy. Just as there are some grains like urad, etc.,
that ripen and mature, and some that do not ripen or mature even with effort, so
too, there are two types of Jivas: 2. Pranamam cha ma. 3. Janitendrayudhodgame
ma. 4. Parichchhanne 1. Vijayavahananama cha tatha anyanripasunanavaha ma. ma.
5. Sapim ma. 6. Jivaasca ma.   .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 22 padmapurANe dUrAdeva hi saMtyajya vAhanAdiparicchadam  /  stutipUrvaM jinaM
natvA svadeze samupAvizat  //  144 //  akrUro vAriSeNo'tha kumAro'bhayapUrvakaH
/  'vijayAvahanAmA ca tathA'nye nRpasUnavaH  /  / 145 /  /  stutiM kRtvA
praNemuste mastakanyastapANayaH  /  upaviSTA yathAdezaM dadhAnA vinayaM param  /
/ 146 || cairya vipasyAdho mRdupallavazobhinaH  /  puSpastabaka
bhAjAlavyAptAzasya vilAsinaH  //  147  //  kalpapAdaparamyasya janazokApahAriNaH
/  haridvanapalAzasya nAnAratnagireriva  //  148  //  azokapAdapasyAdho niviSTaH
siMhaviSTare  /  nAnAratnasamudyotajanitendra zarAsane  // 149 //
divyAMzukaparicchannaimRdu sparza manohare  /  amarendra
ziroratnaprabhotsarpavighAtini  /  /  150  /  /
trilokezvaratAcihnacchatratritayarAjite  /  surapuSpasamAkIrNe
bhUmimaNDalavartini  //  151  //  yakSarAjakarAsaktacalaccAmaracAruNi  /
dundubhidhvanitobhUtaprazAntapratizabdake  //  152  //
gatitryagataprANibhASArUpanivRttayA  /  ghanAghanadhanadhvAna dhIranirghoSayA
girA  //  153  //  paribhUtaravidyotaprabhAmaNDalamadhyagaH  /  lokAyetyavadad
dharmaM pRSTo gaNabhRtA jinaH  //  154  //  sattaikA prathamaM tattvaM jIvAjIvau
tataH param  /  siddhAH saMsAravantazca jIvAstu dvividhAH smRtAH  /  / 155 /  /
|| 143 | | usane vAhana Adi rAjAoMke upakaraNoMkA dUrase hI tyAga kara diyA,
phira samavasaraNa meM praveza kara stutipUrvaka jinendradevako namaskAra kara
apanA sthAna grahaNa kiyA  //  144  //  dayAlu vAriSeNa, abhayakumAra,
vijayAvaha tathA anya rAjakumAroMne bhI hAtha jor3akara mastakase lagAye, stuti
par3hakara bhagavAnko namaskAra kiyA  /  tadanantara bahuta bhArI vinayako
dhAraNa karate hue ve saba apane yogya sthAnoMpara baiTha gaye  /   /  145 - 146
/  /  bhagavAn vardhamAna samavasaraNa meM jisa azoka vRkSake nIce siMhAsana
para virAjamAna the usakI zAkhAe~ vaiDUrya (nIla ) maNikI thIM, vaha komala
pallavoM se zobhAyamAna thA, phUloMke gucchoMkI kAntise usane samasta dizAe~
vyApta kara lI thIM, vaha atyanta suzobhita thA, kalpavRkSake samAna ramaNIya
thA, manuSyoMke zokako haranevAlA thA, usake patte hare raMgavAle tathA saghana
the, aura vaha nAnA prakArake ratnoMse nirmita parvatake samAna jAna par3atA thA
/  unakA vaha siMhAsana bhI nAnA ratnoMke prakAzase indradhanuSako utpanna kara
rahA thA  /  divya vastrase AcchAdita thA, komala sparza se manohArI thA,
indrake sirapara lage hue ratnoMkI kAntike vistArako rokanevAlA thA, tIna lokakI
IzvaratAke cihnasvarUpa tIna chatroMse suzobhita thA, devoMke dvArA barasAye hue
phUloMse vyApta thA, bhUmimaNDalapara vartamAna thA, yakSarAjake hAthoMmeM
sthita caMcala camaroMse suzobhita thA, aura dundubhibAjoMke zabdoMkI zAntipUrNa
pratidhvani usase nikala rahI thI  /  /  147-152  /  /  bhagavAnkI jo
divyadhvani khira rahI thI vaha tIna gati sambandhI jIvoMkI bhASArUpa pariNamana
kara rahI thI tathA meghoMkI sAndra garjanAke samAna usakI bulanda AvAja thI ||
153 //  vahA~ sUryake prakAzako tiraskRta karanevAle prabhAmaNDalake madhya meM
bhagavAn virAjamAna the  /  gaNadhara ke dvArA prazna kiye jAnepara unhoMne
logoMke lie nimna prakAra se dharmakA upadeza diyA thA ||154  //  unhoMne kahA
thA ki sabase pahale eka sattA hI tattva hai usake bAda jIva aura ajIvake
bhedase tattva do prakArakA hai  /  unameM bhI jIvake siddha aura saMsArI ke
bhedase do bheda mAne gaye haiM  /  /  155  /  /  inake sivAya jIvoMke bhavya
aura abhavya isa prakAra do bheda aura bhI haiM  /  jisa prakAra ur3ada Adi
anAjameM kucha to aise hote haiM jo paka jAte haiM-sIjha jAte haiM aura kucha
aise hote haiM ki jo prayatna karanepara bhI nahIM pakate haiM-nahIM sIjhate
haiM  /  usI prakAra jIvoM meM 2. praNAmaM ca ma  /  3. janitendrAyudhodgame ma
/  4. paricchanne 1. vijayavAhanAmA ca tathAnyanRpasUnavaH ma  /  ma.  /  5.
sapiM ma  /  6. jIvAzca ma  /  .

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Chapter 23  **156.**  Just as beans are divided into edible and
inedible, so too are living beings divided into two categories: **Bhavyas**
(those who can attain liberation) and **Abhavyas** (those who cannot attain
liberation).  **157.**  The second division of living beings is based on the
differences in Dharma (righteousness), Adharma (unrighteousness), etc.
**Bhavyas** are those who are destined to attain liberation, while **Abhavyas**
are not.  **158.**  The characteristic of **Bhavyas** is their faith in the
principles taught by the Jinas, while the characteristic of **Abhavyas** is
their lack of faith.  Further divisions of **Bhavyas** and **Abhavyas** are
based on the number of senses they possess: one-sensed, two-sensed, three-
sensed, four-sensed, and five-sensed.  **159.**  Living beings are further
divided based on their: * **Gati** (type of birth) * **Kaya** (body) * **Yoga**
(type of karma) * **Veda** (knowledge) * **Leshya** (mental disposition) *
**Kasaya** (passions) * **Jnana** (knowledge) * **Darshan** (right view) *
**Charitra** (conduct) * **Gunasthan** (stages of spiritual progress) *
**Nisarga** (natural) and **Adhigata** (acquired) **Samyag Darshan** (right
view) * **Namadi Nikshepa** (deposits of karma)  **160.**  Living beings are
also divided based on the eight **Anuyoga** (principles): * **Sat** (existence)
* **Sankhya** (number) * **Kshetra** (space) * **Sparshan** (touch) * **Kala**
(time) * **Antar** (interior) * **Bhaava** (state of being) * **Alp** (few) and
**Bahutva** (many)  **161.**  Of these two types of living beings, **Siddhas**
(liberated souls) and **Samsaris** (bound souls), only **Samsaris** experience
suffering.  **Samsaris** mistakenly perceive the pleasures derived from the five
senses as true happiness.  **162.**  Even for a moment as short as the blink of
an eye, **Narakas** (hell beings) do not experience happiness.  **163.**
**Tiryachas** (animals) constantly experience suffering due to: * **Daman**
(suppression) * **Tadan** (punishment) * **Dovan** (exploitation) * **Vahan**
(being used as a vehicle) * **Sheeta** (cold) * **Atapa** (heat) * **Varsha**
(rain)  **164.**  **Manushyas** (humans) experience great suffering due to: *
**Priyanam ViprYogena** (separation from loved ones) * **Anishta Samagamaat**
(association with undesirable things) * **Ipsitanam Alaabhaat** (failure to
obtain desired things)  **165.**  **Devas** (gods) experience suffering due to:
* **Utkrisht Suraanam Cha Drishta Bhagam Mahagunam** (seeing the great pleasures
of superior gods) * **Chyavanaat Cha Param Duhkham** (falling from their
heavenly abode)  **166.**  When living beings in all four **Gatis** (types of
birth) are bound by great suffering, it is best to attain the **Karmabhoomi**
(human birth) and strive for **Dharma** (righteousness).  **167.**  Those who
attain the human birth but do not practice **Dharma** are like those who have
lost the nectar that has come into their hands.  **168.**  In this world filled
with countless births, it is very difficult to attain the human birth after
wandering through many births.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIyaM parva 23 pAkyApAkyatayA mASasasyavatpravibhAgataH  /  setsyanto gaditA
bhavyA abhavyAstu tato'nyathA  /  / 156 //  bhavya bhavyadvayenAtra jIvArthAH
parikIrtitAH  /  dharmAdharmAdibhirbhedairdvitIyo bhidyate punaH  //  157  //
jinadezitatattvAnAM zraddhA zraddhAnametayoH  /  lakSaNaM tatprabhedaHzca
punarekendriyAdayaH || 158 || gatyA kAyaistathA yogairvedairlezyA kaSAyataH  /
jJAnadarzanacAritrairguNazreNyadhirohaNaiH  /  / 159 //
nisargazAstrasamyaktvairnAmAdinyAsabhedataH  /  sadAdyaSTAnuyogaizca bhidyate
cetanaH punaH  //  160 //  tatra saMsArijIvAnoM kevalaM duHkhavedinAm  /  sukhaM
saMjJAvamUDhAnAM tatraiva viSayodbhave  // 161 //  cakSuSaH puTasaMkoco
yAvanmAtreNa jAyate  /  tAvantamapi no kAlaM nArakANAM sukhAsanam || 162 ||
damanaistADanairdovAhAdibhirupadravaiH  /  tirazrAM satataM duHkhaM tathA
zItAtapAdibhiH  //  163  //  priyANAM viprayogena tathAniSTasamAgamAt  /
IpsitAnAmalAbhAcca duHkhaM mAnuSagocaram  // 164 //  yathotkRSTasurANAM ca
dRSTvA bhogaM mahAguNam  /  cyavanAcca paraM duHkhaM devAnAmupajAyate  /  /  165
|| gheMnaduHkhAvabaddheSu caturgatigatedhviti  /  karmabhUmiM samAsAdya dharmo
pArjanamuttamam || 166 /  /  manuSya bhAvamAsAdya sukRtaM ye na kurvate  /
teSAM karatalaprAptamamRtaM nAzamAgatam || 167 || saMsAre paryaTanneSa
bahuyonisamAkule | manuSyabhAvamAyAti cireNAtyantaduHkhataH  /  /  168  /  /
bhI kucha jIva to aise hote haiM jo karma naSTa kara siddha avasthAko prApta ho
sakate haiM aura kucha aise hote haiM jo prayatna karanepara bhI siddha
avasthAko prApta nahIM ho skte| jo siddha ho sakate haiM ve bhavya kahalAte haiM
aura jo siddha nahIM ho sakate haiM ve abhavya kahalAte haiM  /  isa taraha
bhavya aura abhavyakI apekSA jIva do taraha ke haiM aura ajIva tattvake dharmaM,
adharmaM, AkAza, kAla tathA pudgala ke bhedase pA~ca bheda haiM || 156 - 157  //
jinendra bhagavAn ke dvArA kahe hue tattvoMkA zraddhAna honA bhavyoM kA lakSaNa
hai aura unakA zraddhAna nahIM honA abhavyoMkA lakSaNa hai  /  ekendriya,
dvIndriya, zrIndriya, caturindriya aura paMcendriya ye bhavya tathA abhavya
jIvoMke uttara bheda haiM || 158 || gati, kAya, yoga, veda, lezyA, kaSAya,
jJAna, darzana, cAritra, guNasthAna, nisargaja evaM adhigamaja samyagdarzana,
nAmAdi nikSepa aura sat, saMkhyA, kSetra, sparzana, kAla, antara, bhAva tathA
alpa bahutva ina ATha anuyogoMke dvArA jIva-tattva ke aneka bheda hote haiM  /
/  159-160  //  siddha aura saMsArI ina do prakArake jIvoM meM saMsArI jIva
kevala duHkhakA hI anubhava karate rahate haiN| paMcendriyoMke viSayoMse jo
sukha hotA hai unheM saMsArI jIva bhramavaza sukha mAna lete haiM  // 169  //
jitanI dera meM netrakA palaka jhapatA hai utanI derake lie bhI nArakiyoMko
sukha nahIM hotA  //  162 ( damana, tADana, dohana, vAhana Adi upadravoMse tathA
zIta, ghAma, varSA Adike kAraNa tiryaMcoMko nirantara duHkha hotA rahatA hai ||
163 || priyajanoMke viyogase, aniSTa vastuoM ke samAgamase tathA icchita
padArthoke na milanese manuSya gatimeM bhArI duHkha hai || 164  //  apanese
utkRSTa devoMke 'bahuta bhArI bhogoM ko dekhakara tathA vahA~se cyuta honeke
kAraNa devoMko duHkha utpanna hotA hai  //  165  //  isa prakAra jaba cAroM
gatiyoMke jIva bahuta adhika duHkhase pIr3ita haiM taba karmabhUmi pAkara
dharmakA upArjana karanA uttama hai  //  166  //  jo manuSya bhava pAkara bhI
dharma nahIM karate haiM mAno unakI hathelI para AyA amRta naSTa ho jAtA hai  //
167 //  aneka yoniyoMse bhare isa saMsAra meM paribhramaNa 1. pAkyApAkyatayA
mASasasyavatpravibhAgataH  /  bhavyAbhavyadvayenAtra jIvArthaH parikIrtitaH  //
156  //  dharmAdharmAdibhirbhededvitIyo bhidyate punaH  /  setsyanto gaditA
bhavyA abhavyAstu tato'nyathA  //  157  //  ma  /  2. bhAvAnAM ka.  /  3. -rdeha
kha.  /  4. tatra duHkhAvanaddheSu ma  /  5 mAnuSyabhAva -kha.  /  6. saMsAraM
paryaTan janturbaM huyonisamAkulam ma.  /

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, it is said: "Among those who are greedy and sinful, like
the Sabaras, one is born. Even if one attains Aryadesha, one is born in a low
family. (16) Even if one is born in a good family, one may have a deformed body,
like a one-eyed or lame person. Even if one has a complete body, it is very
difficult to be free from disease. (17) Even if one attains all the good things,
like the company of virtuous people, it is difficult to have devotion to Dharma
because of the desire to enjoy worldly pleasures. (171) In this world, there are
many people who work for others and earn a living with great difficulty. They
are far from attaining wealth. (172) Some people, controlled by their tongue and
sexual desires, enter into battles that are filled with blood and the rain of
weapons. (173) Some people, burdened with the responsibility of supporting their
families, engage in the difficult task of tilling the land, causing harm to many
creatures, and are constantly oppressed by kings. (174) Thus, those who desire
happiness, whatever they do, they experience great suffering. (175) Even if one
somehow acquires wealth, one suffers greatly protecting it from thieves, fire,
water, and kings, and is always anxious. (176) Even if one has acquired and
protected wealth, one does not find peace in enjoying it, because the fire of
greed keeps burning within. (177) Even if one somehow attains devotion to Dharma
due to the influence of past good deeds, one is led back to the path of Samsara
by other wicked people. (178) Those who have been destroyed by others, destroy
others in turn, leading them astray, and follow only tradition in the name of
Dharma. (179) How can the minds of those who are attached to possessions be
purified? And how can they have a firm foundation in Dharma, which is rooted in
the purity of the mind? (180) This being, after a long time, is born as a human
being with great difficulty. (168) In that human birth, this being is mostly
born among greedy and sinful people, like the Sabaras, and other low-born
people. If by chance, it attains Aryadesha, it is born in a low family. (169) If
by chance, it is born in a good family, it may have a deformed body, like a one-
eyed or lame person. If by chance, it has a complete body, it is very difficult
to be free from disease. (170) In this way, even if one attains all the good
things, like the company of virtuous people, it is difficult to have devotion to
Dharma because of the desire to enjoy worldly pleasures. (171)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe tatra 'lubdheSu pApeSu zabarAdiSu jAyate  /  Aryadeze'pi saMprApte
duHkuleSUpajAyate  // 16 //  labdhe'pi sukule kANakuNThAditanusaMbhavaH  /
saMpUrNakAyabandhe'pi durlabhA hInarogatA  // 17 //  evaM sarvamapi prApya
prazastAnAM samAgamam  /  durlabho dharmasaMvego viSayAsvAdalobhataH  // 17 //
tataH kecida bhRtiM kRtvA jaTharasyApi paraNam  /  kurvate'tyantaduHkhena dUrato
vibhavodbhavaH  // 172 //  raktakardamabIbhatsazastrasaMpAtamISaNam  /  kecida
vizanti saMgrAma jihAkAmavazIkRtAH  // 173 /  /  samastajantusaMbAdhaM kRtvA'nye
bhUmikarSaNam  /  kuTumbabharaNaklezAt kurvate nRpapIDitAH  // 17 //  evaM
yadyaprakurvanti karma saukhyAbhilASiNaH  /  tatra tatra prapadyante jantavo
duHkhamuttamam  // 175 /  /  avApyApi dhanaM kezAcorAgnijalarAjataH  /  pAlayan
paramaM duHkhamavApnotyAkulaH sadA  /  / 176 //  saMprAptaM racitaM dravyaM
bhuJAnasyApi no zamaH  /  prativAsarasaMvRddhagAgniparivartanAt  // 177 //
prApnoti dharmasaMvegaM kathaMcit pUrvakarmataH  /  saMsArapadavImeva
nIyate'nyadurAtmabhiH  // 17 //  anyaiste nAzitAH santo nAzayantyaparAn janAn  /
dharmasAmAnyazabdena sevamAnAH paramparAm  // 179 //  kathaM cetovizuddhiH syAt
parigrahavatAM satAm  /  cetovizuddhimUlA ca teSAM dharme sthitiH kutaH  // 180
//  karatA huA yaha jIva bahuta samayake bAda bar3e duHkhase manuSya bhavako
prApta hotA hai  // 168 /  /  usa manuSya bhavameM yaha jIva adhikAMza lobhI
tathA pApa karanevAle zabara Adi nIca puruSoMmeM hI janma letA hai| yadi kadAcit
AyaM deza prApta hotA hai to vahA~ bhI nIca kulameM hI utpanna hotA hai  // 169
/  /  yadi bhAgyavaza ucca kula bhI milatA hai to kAnA-lUlA Adi zarIra prApta
hotA hai  /  yadi kadAcit zarIrako pUrNatA hotI hai to nIrogatAkA honA atyanta
durlabha rahatA hai  /  / 170 //  isa taraha yadi kadAcit samasta uttama
vastuoMkA samAgama bhI ho jAtA hai to viSayoMke AsvAdakA lobha rahanese
dharmAnurAga durlabha hI rahA AtA hai  // 171 /  /  isa saMsArameM kitane hI
loga aise haiM jo dUsaroMkI naukarI kara bahuta bhArI kaSTase peTa bhara pAte
haiM unheM vaibhavakI prApti honA to dUra rahA  // 172 //  kitane hI loga jihvA
aura kAma indriyake vazIbhUta hokara aise saMgrAmameM praveza karate haiM jo ki
raktakI kocaDase ghaNita tathA zastroMkI varSAse bhayaMkara hotA hai  // 173 /
/  kitane hI loga aneka jIvoMko bAdhA pahu~cAnevAlI bhUmi jotanekI AjIvikA kara
bar3e klezase apane kuTumbakA pAlana karate haiM aura utanepara bhI rAjAoMkI
orase nirantara pIr3ita rahate haiN||174|| isa taraha sukhakI icchA rakhanevAle
jIva jo kArya karate haiM ve usI meM bahuta bhArI duHkhako prApta karate haiM
// 175 /  /  yadi kisI taraha kaSTase dhana mila bhI jAtA hai to cora, agni,
jala aura rAjAse usakI rakSA karatA huA yaha prANI bahuta duHkha pAtA hai aura
usase sadA vyAkula rahatA hai  // 176 //  yadi prApta huA dhana surakSita bhI
rahatA hai to use bhogate hue isa prANIko kabhI zAnti nahIM hotI kyoMki usakI
lAlasArUpI agni prati dina bar3hatI rahatI hai  // 177 //  yadi kisI taraha
pUrvopArjita puNya karmake udayase dharma bhAvanAko prApta hotA bhI hai to anya
duSTajanoMke dvArA punaH usI saMsArake mArgameM lA diyA jAtA hai  // 178 //
anya puruSoMke dvArA naSTa hue satpuruSa anya logoMko bhI naSTa kara dete haiM-
pathabhraSTa kara dete haiM aura dharmasAmAnyakI apekSA kevala rUr3hikA hI
pAlana karate haiM  // 179 //  parigrahI manuSyoMke cittameM vizuddhatA kaise ho
sakatI hai aura jisameM cittakI vizuddhatA hI mUla kAraNa hai aisI dharmakI
sthiti una parigrahI manuSyoM meM 1. labdheSu m.| 2. hi nirogatA kha., ma.  /
3. durlabhaM ka.  /  4. ananta m.| 5. kurvanti ma.  /  6. garbhAgni m.| 7.
paraMparam ka  /  parasparam ma.  /  8. mUlAcca ma.  /  .

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Second Chapter  **180.** As long as there is attachment to possessions,
there will be the oppression of living beings. Violence is the root cause of the
cycle of birth and death, and suffering is known as the cycle of birth and
death.  **181.** From the embrace of possessions, hatred and attachment arise.
Attachment and hatred are the strongest causes of suffering in the cycle of
birth and death.  **182.** Even though many beings attain Right Faith, they are
still veiled by the obscurations of conduct and cannot attain Right Conduct.
**183.** Even those who have attained Right Conduct and perform great
austerities are corrupted by the hardships and are led astray by the suffering.
**184.** Some, corrupted by hardships, practice the minor vows. Others are
content with Right Faith alone and do not observe any vows.  **185.** Some,
clinging to the well of the deep cycle of birth and death, abandon Right Faith
and embrace false beliefs.  **186.** Such beings, bound by false beliefs, wander
continuously in the cycle of birth and death, consumed by the fire of suffering.
**187.** Some, however, are great heroes with virtuous deeds who uphold Right
Conduct throughout their lives.  **188.** They attain Samadhi and, upon shedding
their bodies, attain the state of Narayana and other such states due to the
karmic residue.  **189.** Those who become Narayana are eager to inflict
suffering on others and their minds are cruel. Therefore, they experience great
suffering in the hells after death, which is difficult to overcome.  **190.**
Some, through great austerities, attain the state of Indra. Others attain the
state of Balarama, and others reside in the higher celestial realms.  **191.**
Some, with great fortitude, contemplate the sixteen causes of existence and
attain the state of a Tirthankara, which causes upheaval in the three realms.
**192.** Others, constantly engaged in the worship of Right Faith, Right
Knowledge, and Right Conduct, are liberated from the eight karmic stains within
two or three lifetimes.  **193.** They then attain the supreme state, the
incomparable abode of the liberated, and enjoy infinite, unhindered, supreme
bliss.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIyaM parva yAvatparigrahAsaktistAvatprANinipIDanam  /  hiMsAtaH
saMsRtermUlaM duHkhaM saMsArasaMjJakam  /  / 18 /  /  parigrahapariSvaGgAd dveSo
rAgazca jAyate  /  rAgadveSau ca saMsAre duHkhasyottamakAraNam  // 182 //
labdhvApi darzanaM samyak prazamAdarzanAvRteH  /  cAritraM na prapadyante
cAritrAvaraNAvRtAH  // 183 //  cAritramapi saMprAptAH kurvantaH paramaM tapaH  /
parISahaiH punarbhaGga nIyante "duHkhavikramaiH  // 18 //  aNuvratAni sevante
kecid bhaGgamupAgatAH  /  kecidarzanamAtreNa bhavanti paritoSiNaH  // 185 /  /
kecid gambhIrasaMsArakUpahastAvalambanam  /  samyagdarzanamutsRjya
mithyAdRSTimupAsate  // 18 //  mithyAdarzanasaMyuktAste punarmavasaMkaTe  /
bhrAmyanti satataM jIvA duHkhAgniparivartinaH  // 187 //  kecittu
puNyakarmANazcAritramavalambitam  /  nirvahanti mahAzUrA yAvayANavivarjanam  //
18 //  te samAdhi samAsAdya kRtvA dehavisarjanam  /  vAsudevAditAM yAnti
nidAnakRtadoSataH  /  / 189 //  te punaH parapIDAyAM ratA nirdayacetasaH  /
narakeSu mahAduHkhaM prApnuvanti sudustaram  /  / 190 //  kecittu sutapaH kRtvA
yAnti gIrvANanAthatAm  /  apare baladevatvamanye'nuttaravAsitAm  // 191 //
kecitprApya mahAsattvA jinakarmANi SoDaza  /  tIrthakRttvaM prapadyante
trailokyakSobhakAraNam  /  / 192 //  kecinirantarAyeNa tritayArAdhane ratAH  /
dvitrairbhavairvimucyante karmASTakakalaGkataH  // 193 /  /  saMprAptAH paramaM
sthAnaM muktAnAmupamojjhitam  /  anantaM niHpratidvandvaM labhante sukhamuttamam
// 19 //  kahA~se ho sakatI hai  // 180 /  /  jaba taka parigrahameM Asakti hai
taba taka prANiyoMkI hiMsA honA nizcita hai| hiMsA hI saMsArakA mUla kAraNa hai
aura duHkhako hI saMsAra kahate haiM  // 181 /  /  parigrahake sambandhase rAga
aura dveSa utpanna hote haiM tathA rAga aura dveSa hI saMsAra sambandhI duHkhake
prabala kAraNa haiM  // 182 //  darzanamoha karmakA upazama honese kitane hI
prANI yadyapi samyagdarzana prApta kara lete haiM tathApi cAritra mohake
AvaraNase AvRta rahaneke kAraNa ve samyak cAritrako prApta nahIM kara sakate  //
183 /  /  kitane hI loga samyak cAritrako pAkara zreSTha tapa bhI karate haiM
parantu duHkhadAyI pariSahoMke nimittase bhraSTa ho jAte haiM  // 184 //
pariSahoMke nimittase bhraSTa hue kitane hI loga aNuvratoMkA sevana karate haiM
aura kitane hI kevala samyagdarzanase santuSTa raha jAte haiM arthAt kisI
prakArakA vrata nahIM pAlate haiM  // 185 //  kitane hI loga saMsArarUpI gahare
kueMse hastAvalambana dekara, nikAlanevAle samyagdarzanako chor3akara phirase
mithyAdarzanakI sevA karane lagate haiM  // 186 //  tathA aise mithyAdRSTi jIva
nirantara duHkharUpI agnike bIca rahate hue saMkaTapUrNa saMsArameM bhramaNa
karate rahate haiM  // 187 /  /  kitane hI aise mahAzUravIra puNyAtmA jIva haiM
jo grahaNa kiye hue cAritrako jIvana paryanta dhAraNa karate haiM  // 188 /
aura samAdhipUrvaka zarIra tyAga kara nidAnake doSase nArAyaNa Adi padako prApta
hote haiM  // 189 //  jo nArAyaNa hote haiM ve dUsaroMko pIr3A pahu~cAnemeM
tatpara rahate haiM tathA unakA citta nirdaya rahatA hai isalie ve marakara
niyamase narakoMmeM bhArI duHkha bhogate haiM  // 190|| kitane hI loga sutapa
karake indra padako prApta hote haiN| kitane hI baladeva padavI pAte haiM aura
kitane hI anuttara vimAnoMmeM nivAsa prApta karate haiM  // 191 //  kitane hI
mahAdhairyavAn manuSya SoDaza kAraNa bhAvanAoMkA cintavana kara tInoM lokoMmeM
kSobha utpanna karanevAle tIrthaMkara pada prApta karate haiM  // 192 //  aura
kitane hI loga nirantarAya rUpase samyagdarzana, samyagjJAna tathA samyak
cAritrakI ArAdhanAmeM tatpara rahate hue do-tIna bhavameM hI aSTa karmarUpa
kalaMkase mukta ho jAte haiM  // 193 /  /  ve phira mukta jIvoMke utkRSTa evaM
nirupama sthAnako pAkara ananta kAla taka nirbAdha uttama sukhakA upabhoga 1.
nipIDanA k.| 2. hiMsA ca m.| 3. saMsAraduHkhasyotpattikAraNam ma.  /  4. nIyate
ma.  /  5. duratikramaH m.| 6. visarjanam ma.  /  7. manye tUttaravAsitAm ma.  /

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
26 Padmapurana Then, from the lotus-like face of the Jina, Dharma emerged.
Hearing this, the humans, the animals, and the gods were filled with supreme
joy. || 195 || Some attained Anuvrata, some became Nir-ambara. With minds
troubled by the cycle of birth and death, they began to practice austerities. ||
196 || Some attained Right Faith, some, by their own strength, renounced the
actions that lead to evil. || 197 || Having heard Dharma, praised the Jina, and
prostrated themselves as per the rules, with minds established in Dharma, they
went to their respective places. || 198 || The great king Shrenika, adorned with
royal splendor, his heart filled with joy at hearing the Dharma, entered his
city. || 199 || Then, seeing the glorious radiance of the Tirthankara, the sun,
as if ashamed, wished to hide himself in the ocean. || 200 || As the sun
approached the setting point, it appeared as if it was covered with the rays of
Padmaraga gems, and it became extremely red. || 201 || The rays that always
followed the sun became dim. It is only right, for whose radiance can increase
when the master is in distress? || 202 || Then, the female chakavas looked at
the sun with tear-filled eyes. As if out of compassion, the sun slowly became
invisible. || 203 || The attachment that living beings had given up by hearing
Dharma, as if by the trickery of twilight, covered the circle of directions. ||
204 || Just as a friend, without being asked, is inclined to help people, so
too, the sun, without being asked, is inclined to help us. Therefore, the
setting sun is like a friend setting. || 205 || At that time, the lotuses were
contracting, as if they were swallowing the setting sun's dying red glow. || 206
|| It had made the vastness and height into one, and it could not be described.
Darkness appeared, as if the evil deeds of the wicked were being manifested. ||
207 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 26 padmapurANe tataste nirgataM dharmaM jinavaktrAravindataH  /  zrutvA harSaM
paraM jagmustirya tridazamAnavAH  //  195  //  aNuvratAni saMprAptAH kecit
kecinnirambaram  /  tapazcaritumArabdhAH saMsArodvignamAnasAH || 196 //
samyagdarzanamAyAtAH kecit kecitsvazaktitaH  /  viratiM jagRhuH
pApasamupArjanakarmaNaH  //  197  //  zrutvA dharmaM jinaM stutvA praNamya ca
yathAvidhi  /  dharmasusthitacittAste yAtAH sthAnaM yathAyatham  // 198 //
zreNiko'pi mahArAjo rAjamAno nRpazriyA  /  varNazravaNahRSTAtmA praviveza nijaM
puram  /  / 199  /  /  atha tIrthakarodAratejomaNDaladarzanAt  /  vilakSa iva
tigmAMzurandhimaicchanniSevitum  //  200 //  astAcalasamIpastha :
saroruharucAmiva  /  maNInAM kiraNaizchanno jaggAmAtyantazoNitAm  // 203 //
amandAyanta kiraNA nityamasyAnuyAyinaH  /  kasya vA tejaso vRddhiH svAminyApada
bhAgate  //  202  //  tato vilocanaiH sAkhairIkSitaH kokayoSitAm  /  adarzanaM
yayau mandaM kRpayeva virocanaH || 203  //  dharmazravaNato mukto yo rAgaH
prANinAM gaNaiH  /  sandhyAcchalena tenaiva kakumAM cakramAzritam || 204 ||
upakAre pravRtto'yamasmA svaprArthitaH param  /  itIva cakSurlokasya mitreNeva
samaM gatam || 205 || brajato dinanAthasya rAgaM pralayagAminam  /  saMkucantya
ra vindAni kavalairiva gRhNate || 206 || samIkRtatatottuGgaM nirUpaNavivarjitam
/  tamaH prakaTata mAra durjanasyeva ceSTitam  //  207  //  karate haiM || 194||
isa prakAra jinendra bhagavAnke mukhAravindase nikale hue dharmako sunakara
manuSya, tiryaMca tathA deva tInoM gatike jIva parama harSako prApta hue || 195
|| dharmopadeza sunakara kitane hI logoMne aNuvrata dhAraNa kiye aura saMsArase
bhayabhIta citta hokara kitane hI logoMne digambara dIkSA dhAraNa kI || 196  /
/  kitane hI logoMne kevala samyagdarzana hI dhAraNa kiyA aura kitane hI logoMne
apanI zaktike anusAra pApa kAryoMkA tyAga kiyA || 197 || isa taraha dharma
zravaNa kara sabane zrIvardhamAna jinendrakI stuti kara unheM vidhipUrvaka
namaskAra kiyA aura tadanantara dharmameM citta lagAte hue saba yathAyogya
apane-apane sthAnapara cale gaye || 198  //  dharma zravaNa karanese jisakI AtmA
harSita ho rahI thI aise mahArAja zreNikane bhI rAjalakSmIse suzobhita hote hue
apane nagara meM praveza kiyA || 199  //  tadanantara sUrya ne pazcima
samudrameM avagAhana karanekI icchA kI so aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno bhagavAn ke
utkRSTa teja puMjako dekhakara vaha itanA adhika lajjita ho gayA thA ki samudra
meM DUbakara AtmaghAta hI karanA cAhatA thA  //  200 //  sandhyA ke samaya sUrya
astAcalake samIpa paMcakara atyanta lAlimAko dhAraNa karane lagA thA jisase aisA
jAna par3atA thA mAno padmarAga maNiyoMkI kiraNoMse AcchAdita hokara hI lAlimA
dhAraNa karane lagA thA || 201 || nirantara sUryakA anugamana karanevAlI kiraNeM
bhI manda par3a gayIM so ThIka hI hai kyoMki svAmI ke vipattigrasta rahate hue
kisake tejakI vRddhi ho sakatI hai ? arthAt kisIke nahIM ||202|| tadanantara
cakaviyoMne azru bhare netroMse sUryakI ora dekhA isalie unapara dayA karaneke
kAraNa hI mAno vaha dhIre-dhIre adRzya huA thA || 203 || dharmaM zravaNa
karanese prANiyoMne jo rAga chor3A thA sandhyAke chalase mAno usIne dizAoMke
maNDalako AcchAdita kara liyA thA  //  204 || jisa prakAra mitra binA prArthanA
kiye hI logoM ke upakAra karanemeM pravRtta hotA hai usI prakAra sUrya bhI binA
prArthanA kiye hI hama logoM ke upakAra karane meM pravRtta rahatA hai isalie
sUryakA asta ho rahA hai mAno mitra hI asta ho rahA hai || 205  /  /  usa samaya
kamala saMkucita ho rahe the jisase aise jAna par3ate the mAno astaMgAmI sUryake
pralayonmukha rAga ( lAlimA ) ko grAsa banA banAkara grahaNa hI kara rahe the
//  206  //  jisane vistAra aura U~cAIko eka rUpameM pariNata kara diyA thA,
tathA jisakA nirUpaNa nahIM kiyA jA 1. karmataH ma.  /  2. tarmacchanni -ma.  /
3 samIpasthasaroruha ma  /  4. mitreNaiva sumaGgalam kha  /  5. tataH ma.  /

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
27 The second part of the night was enveloped in deep darkness. The veil of
smoke was extinguishing the fire-like glow. The cluster of Champaka and Kshara
flowers, agitated by the gentle breeze, appeared to be the ear-ornaments of the
night. The swans, satiated with the nectar of lotuses and having their wings
cleansed by the stalks, indulged in scratching and sleep. The evening breeze,
which was the holder of the garland of Dhammilla and Mallika flowers, blew
gently, resembling the exhalation of the night. In the thickets of Kusa grass,
the assemblage of six-legged creatures took shelter. The sky, adorned with the
extremely pure disc of the moon, appeared like the collection of sublime
utterances of the Jina Lord, paying obeisance to the three worlds. The darkness
was dispelled by the moonbeams, just as the words of the ascetics are refuted by
the principles enunciated by the Jina. The moon, welcomed by the people, arose,
bearing a body that trembled as if to ward off the darkness, like the ocean of
milk. In the moonlight, the world became easily graspable, as if it had begun to
sink, weary of the darkness, into the ocean of milk. The lotuses, as if suddenly
awakened, seemed to be carrying the supreme fragrance brought by the hands of
the moon. Thus, the auspicious twilight, which enhanced the joy of the loving
couple and delighted the people, arrived.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 27 dvitIyaM parva pidadhe sAndhyamudyotaM sakalaM bahalaM tamaH  /  paTalaM
dhUmasaMbandhi prazAmyantamivAnalam  // 20 //
caimpakakSArakAkArapradIpaprakaro'gamat  /  kampito mandavAtena
yAminIkarNapuratAm  // 209 //  tRptA rasena padmAnAM dhUtapakSA mRNAlakaiH  /
kRtvA kaNDUyanaM nidrAM rAjahaMsAH siSevire  // 210 //
dhammillamallikAbandhagrAhI sAyaMtano marut  /  vAtuM pravavRte mandaM
nizAniHzvAsasaMnimaH  // 211 /  /  uccakesarakoTInAM saMkaTeSu kadambakaiH  /
kuzezayakuTIreSu zizye SaTpadasaMhatiH  // 212 /  /  nitAntavimalezcakre ramyaM
tArAgaNairnamaH  /  trailokyaM jinanAthasya subhASitacayairiva  // 213 //
tamo'tha vimaleminnaM zazAGkakiraNAGkaraiH  /  ekAntavAdinAM vAkyaM nayairiva
jinoditaiH  /  / 214 //  ujjagAma ca zItAMzurlokanetrAbhinanditaH  /
vapurbibhrat kRtAkaimpaM dhvAntakopAdivAruNam  // 215 /  /  candrAloke tato
lokaH karagrAhyatvamAgate  /  Arebhe tamasA khinnaH kSIrodAGka ivAsitum  // 216
/  /  AmRSTAni karairindorvahantyAmodamuttamam  /  sahasAtIva yAtAni kumudAni
vikAsitAm  // 217 //  iti spaSTe samudbhUte pradoSe jnsaukhyde|
pravRttadampatiprItipravRddhasamadotsave  // 21 //
taraGgabhaGgarAkAragaGgApulinasaMnibhe  /
ratnacchAyApariSvaktaniHzepabhavanodare  // 219 /  /  sakatA thA aisA andhakAra
prakaTatAko prApta huaa| jisa prakAra durjanakI ceSTA ucca aura nIcako eka
samAna karatI hai tathA viSamatAke kAraNa usakA nirUpaNa karanA kaThina hotA hai
usI prakAra vaha andhakAra bhI UMce-nIce pradezoMko eka samAna kara rahA thA
aura viSamatAke kAraNa usakA nirUpaNa karanA bhI kaThina thA  / 207 /  /  jisa
prakAra dhUmakA paTala bujhatI huI agniko AcchAdita kara letA hai usI prakAra
bar3hate hue samasta andhakArane sandhyA sambandhI aruNa prakAzako AcchAdita
kara liyA thA  /  / 208 /  /  campAkI kaliyoMke AkArako dhAraNa karanevAlA
dIpakoMkA samUha vAyuke manda-manda jhoMkese hilatA huA aisA jAna par3atA thA
mAno rAtrirUpI strIke karNaphUloMkA samUha hI ho  /  / 209|| jo kamaloMkA rasa
pIkara tRpta ho rahe the tathA mRNAlake dvArA khujalI kara apane paMkha
phar3aphar3A rahe the aise rAjahaMsa pakSI nidrAkA sevana karane lage  /  / 210
/  /  jo striyoMkI coTiyoMmeM guthI mAlatIkI mAlAoMko haraNa kara rahI thI aisI
sandhyA samayakI vAya rAtrirUpI strIke zvAsocchvAsake samAna dhIre-dhIre bahane
lagI  /  / 211 /  /  UMcI uThI huI kezarakI kaNikAoMke samUhase jinakI
saMkIrNatA bar3ha rahI thI aisI kamalakI koTaroMmeM bhramaroMke samUha sone lage
// 212 /  /  jisa prakAra jinendra bhagavAnke atyanta nirmala upadezoMke
samUhase tInoM loka ramaNIya ho jAte haiM usI prakAra atyanta ujjvala tArAoMke
samUhase AkAza ramaNIya ho gayA thA  // 213 /  /  jisa prakAra jinendra
bhagavAnke dvArA kahe hue nayase ekAntavAdiyoMke vacana khaNDa-khaNDa ho jAte
haiM usI prakAra candramAkI nirmala kiraNoMke prAdurbhAvase andhakAra khaNDa-
khaNDa ho gayA thA  /  / 214|| tadanantara logoMke netroMne jisakA abhinandana
kiyA thA aura jo andhakArake Upara krodha dhAraNa karaneke kAraNa hI mAno kUcha-
kucha kA~pate hae lAla zarIrako dhAraNa kara rahA thA aise candramAkA udaya huA
/  / 215 //  jaba candramAkI ujjvala cAMdanI saba ora phaila gayI taba yaha
saMsAra aisA jAna par3ane lagA mAno andhakArase khinna hokara kSIrasamudrakI
godameM hI baiThanekI taiyArI kara rahA ho  /  / 216 /  /  sahasA kumuda phUla
uThe so ve aise jAna par3ate the mAno candramAkI kiraNoMkA sparza pAkara hI
bahuta bhArI Amoda-harSa ( pakSameM gandha ) ko dhAraNa kara rahe the  // 217 /
/  isa prakAra strI-puruSoMkI prItise jisameM aneka samada-utsavoMko vRddhi ho
rahI thI aura jo janasamudAyako sukha denevAlA thA aisA pradoSa kAla jaba spaSTa
rUpase prakaTa ho cukA taba rAjakArya nipaTAkara jinendra bhagavAnkI kathA
karatA huA zreNika rAjA usa zayyApara sukhase so gayA jo ki taraMgoMke 1.
vidadhe kha., m.| 2. campaka: kaarikaakaar-m.| 3. kampa-ma.  /  4.
lokakaragrAhyatva ma.  /  5. madanotsave m.| 6. bhavanodare m.|

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, The fragrance of the best flowers emanating from the
windows. The courtesans, seated nearby, were captivating with their melodious
songs. ||220|| A lamp, covered with crystal, was burning very close. The guards,
without any negligence, were protecting it. ||221|| The ground was adorned with
a collection of flowers. A soft pillow was placed on it. ||222|| The head of the
bed was facing the direction sanctified by the feet of the Jina. A fine, but
wide, sheet was spread over each foot. ||223|| Having completed his royal
duties, the king, who was devoted to the Jain faith, lay down comfortably on the
bed. ||224|| The king, Shrenik, saw the Jina in his dreams again and again. He
asked him about his doubts and learned the truth from him. ||225|| Then, the
king, Shrenik, was awakened by the sound of the trumpet, which dispelled the
sleep of the intoxicated elephant, echoed in the cave-like chambers of the
palace, and overpowered the thunderous roar of the mighty clouds. ||226-227||
Upon waking, he contemplated with a focused mind the virtuous deeds of the
Chakravarti and other valiant men, as spoken by the Lord Mahavira. ||228|| Then,
his mind turned to the story of Balabhadra, the bearer of the Padma, and he
began to doubt about the demons and monkeys. ||229|| He thought, "Oh! Those who
were the best of men, born in noble families, learned, and whose minds were
illuminated by knowledge, were influenced by the Jain faith. But in the worldly
scriptures, demons like Ravana are described as drinkers and eaters of fat,
blood, and flesh." ||230-231|| Ravana's brother, Kumbhakarna, was very strong
and slept continuously for six months, being overcome by deep sleep. ||232||
Even if he was trampled by intoxicated elephants, his ears were filled with
cauldrons of hot oil, and the sound of drums and conch shells was made, he would
not wake up until the time was complete. ||233-234|| When he woke up, he was
tormented by hunger and thirst, and with his huge belly, he would eat even
elephants and other difficult-to-digest things. ||235||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe gavAkSamukhaniryAtakusumottamasaurabhe  /  pAivasthavAravanitA
kalagItamanorame ||220|| jvalannAtisamIpastha sphaTikacchannadIpake  /
apramattazirorakSigaNakalpitarakSaNe  //  221  //
prasUnaprakarAvAptamaNDanakSmAtalasthite  /
upadhAGgasuvinyastasukumAropadhAnake  // 222 //
jinezapAdapUtozAkRtamastakadhAmani  /  pratipAdakavinyastatanuvistIrNapaTTake
// 223 //  vidhAya bhUbhujaH kRtyaM kRtajainendra saMkathaH  /  zayanIye sukhaM
zizye kuzAgranagarAdhipaH  //  224  //  jinendrameva cApazyat svapne'pi ca punaH
punaH  /  paryapRcchacca saMdehaM papATha ca jinoditam  //  225  //  tato
madakalebhendra nidrAvidrAvakAriNA  /  gehakakSAtigambhIraguhAgocaragAminA  //
226 //  mahAjaladasaMghAtadhIraghoSaNaihAriNA  /  prabhAtasUryavAdena vibuddho
magadhAdhipaH  //  227 //  acintayacca vIreNa bhASitaM dharmahetukam  /
cakravartyAdivIrANAM saMbhavaM praNidhAnataH || 228 || athAsya carite
padmasaMbandhini gataM manaH  /  saMdeha iva cetyAsIdrakSaHsu plavageSu ca  /  /
229  /  /  kathaM jinendradharmeNa jAtAH santo narottamAH  /  mahAkulInA
vidvAMso vidyAdyotitamAnasAH  /  /  230 /  zrUyante laukike granthe rAkSasA
rAvaNAdayaH  /  vasAzoNitamAMsAdipAna bhakSaNakAriNaH || 231|| rAvaNasya kila
bhrAtA kumbhakarNo mahAbalaH  /  ghoranidvAparItaH SaNmAsAn zete nirantaram ||
232 //  mattairapi gajaistasya kriyate mardanaM yadi  /  taptatailakaTA haizca
pUryete zravaNau yadi  //  233  //  bherIzaGkhaninAdo'pi sumahAnapi janyate  /
tathApi kila nAyAti kAle'pUrNe vibuddhatAm  // 234 //  kSuttRSNAvyAkulazcAsau
vibuddhaH sanmahodaraH  /  bhakSayatyagrato dRSTvA hastyAdInapi durddharaH  //
235 /  /  28 kAraNa kSata-vikSata hue gaMgAke pulina ke samAna jAna par3atI
thii| jar3e hue ratnoMkI kAntise jisane mahalake samasta madhyabhAgako AliMgita
kara diyA thA, jisake phUloMkI uttama sugandhi jharoMkhoMse bAhara nikala rahI
thI, pAsameM baiThI vezyAoMke madhuragAnase jo manohara thI, jisake pAsa ho
sphaTikamaNinirmita AvaraNase AcchAdita dIpaka jala rahA thA, aMgarakSaka loga
pramAda chor3akara jisakI rakSA kara rahe the, jo phUloM ke samUhase suzobhita
pRthivItalapara bichI huI thI, jisapara komala takiyA rakhA huA thA, jinendra
bhagavAn ke caraNakamaloMse pavitra dizAkI ora jisakA sirahAnA thA, tathA jisake
pratyeka pAyepara sUkSma kintu vistRta paTTa biche hue the  / 218-224 //  rAjA
zreNika svapna meM bhI bAra-bAra jinendra bhagavAna ke darzana karatA thA, bAra-
bAra unhIMse saMzayakI bAta pUchatA thA aura unhIMke dvArA kathita tattvakA
pATha karatA thA  /  /  225 || tadanantara - madonmatta gajarAjakI nidrAko dUra
karanevAle, mahalakI kakSAoMrUpI guphAoMmeM gU~janevAle evaM bar3e-bar3e
meghoMkI gambhIra garjanAko haranevAle prAtaH kAlIna turahIke zabda sunakara
rAjA zreNika jAgRta huA || 226 - 227 || jAgate hI usane bhagavAn mahAvIrake
dvArA bhASita, cakravartI Adi vIra puruSoMke dharmavardhaka caritakA ekAgracitta
se cintavana kiyA  /  /  228  //  athAnantara usakA citta balabhadra padake
dhAraka rAmacandrajIke caritakI ora gayA aura use rAkSasoM tathA vAnaroMke
viSayameM sandeha - sA hone lagA || 229  /  /  vaha vicArane lagA ki aho ! jo
jinadharmake prabhAvase uttama manuSya the, uccakulameM utpanna the, vidvAn the
aura vidyAoMke dvArA jinake mana prakAzamAna the aise rAvaNa Adika laukika
granthoMmeM carbI, rudhira tathA mAMsa AdikA pAna evaM bhakSaNa karanevAle
rAkSasa sune jAte haiM  /  /  230-231  /  /  rAvaNakA bhAI kumbhakarNa
mahAbalavAn thA aura ghora nidrAse yukta hokara chaha mAha taka nirantara sotA
rahatA thA  /  /  232  /  /  yadi madonmatta hAthiyoMke dvArA bhI usakA mardana
kiyA jAye, tape hue telake kar3AhoMse usake kAna bhare jAveM aura bherI tathA
zaMkhoMkA bahuta bhArI zabda kiyA jAye to bhI samaya pUrNa na hone para vaha
jAgRta nahIM hotA thA  /  /  233-234 || bahuta bar3e peTako 1. pUtAzAMka.  /  2.
nidrAM ma  /  3. ghoSAnuhAriNA ma  /  4. saMbandha ma  /  5. vivAde'pi ma  /

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Second Chapter  The one who holds the vow, Kumbhakarna, when he woke up, was
so overwhelmed by hunger and thirst that he would eat whatever he saw, including
elephants. Thus, he was very formidable. || 235 ||  Having been satiated by the
animals, humans, and gods, he would fall asleep again, and no other man could
stay near him. || 236 ||  Oh! How strange it is that the foolish poets, who
create wicked and flawed texts, have depicted the character of the Vidyaadhara
prince in such a repulsive way. || 237 ||  This kind of text, which narrates all
this, is known as the Ramayana. It is said that listening to it destroys all the
sins of the listener instantly. || 238 ||  For one whose mind is eager to
renounce suffering, this Ramayana is like the union with fire. And for one who
desires to remove coldness, it is like the union with cold wind mixed with snow.
|| 239 ||  Just as churning water is useless for one who desires ghee, and
grinding sand is futile for one who wants oil, so too, relying on the Ramayana
is useless for one who desires to renounce sin. || 240 ||  Even in the
scriptures that depict the characters of great men, wicked people have created
the concept of Dharma Shastra. || 241 ||  The Ramayana also states that Ravana
defeated Indra, the king of the gods, by shooting arrows that pierced his heart
and dragged him by his ears. || 242 ||  Oh! Where is the lord of the gods,
Indra, and where is that insignificant human who could be reduced to ashes by
merely thinking about Indra? || 243 ||  He who had Airavata as his elephant, and
a great weapon like the thunderbolt, and who could effortlessly lift the earth
adorned with Mount Meru and the oceans. || 244 ||  How could such an Indra be
defeated by a Vidyaadhara, who was a mere human with little strength, and who
possessed knowledge? || 245 ||  It is also written that the king of the
Rakshasas, Ravana, captured Indra and kept him in his prison. He remained bound
and confined in the prison of Lanka for a long time. || 246 ||  To say such
things is like saying that a lion is killed by deer, stones are ground by sesame
seeds, a serpent is killed by a snake, and an elephant is subdued by a dog. ||
247 ||  The one who holds the vow...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvitIyaM parva timirmAnuSairdevaiH kRtvA tRptiM tataH punaH  /  svapityeva
vimuktAnyaniHzeSapuruSa sthitiH  /  /  236 //  aho
kukavibhirmUkhairvidyAdharakumArakaH  /  abhyAkhyAnamidaM nIto
duHkRtagranthakatthakaiH  //  237 //  evaMvidhaM kila granthaM rAmAyaNamudAhRtam
/  zRNvatAM sakalaM pApaM kSayamAyAti tatkSaNAt  //  238  //
tApatyajanacittasya so'yamagnisamAgamaH  /  zItApanodakAmasya tuSArAnilasaMgamaH
// 239|| haiyaGgavIna kAGakSasya tadidaM jalamanthanam  /  sikatApIDainaM
tailamavAptumabhivAJchataH  //  240 //  mahApuruSacAritrakUTadoSavibhAviSu  /
pApairadharmazAstreSu dharmazAstramatiH kRtA || 241 //  amarANAM kilAdhIzo
rAvaNena parAjitaH  /  AkarNAkRSTanirmukairbANairmarmavidAribhiH  //  242  //
devAnAmadhipaH kvAsau varAkaH kvaiSa mAnuSaH  /  tasya cintitamAtreNa yAyAd yo
bhasmarAzitAm  // 243 //  airAvato gajo yasya yasya vajraM mahAyudham  /
sameruvAridhiM kSoNIM yo'nAyAsAt samuddharet || 244 //  so'yaM mAnuSamAtreNa
vidyAbhAjA'lpazaktinA  /  AnIyate kathaM bhaGgaM prabhuH svarganivAsinAm || 245
//  bandIgRha gRhIto'sau prabhuNA rakSasAM kila  /  laGkAyAM nivasan kArAgRhe
nityaM susaMyataH || 246 || mRgaiH siMhavadhaH so'yaM zilAnAM peSaNaM tilaiH  /
vadho gaNDUpadenA hergajendra zasanaM zunA ||247  //  I dhAraNa karanevAlA vaha
kumbhakarNaM jaba jAgatA thA taba bhUkha aura pyAsase itanA vyAkula ho uThatA
thA ki sAmane hAthI Adi jo bhI dikhate the unheM khA jAtA thA  /  isa prakAra
vaha bahuta hI durdhara thA  //  235 //  tiryaMca, manuSya aura devoMke dvArA
vaha tRpti kara punaH so jAtA thA usa samaya usake pAsa anya koI bhI puruSa
nahIM Thahara sakatA thA || 236  //  aho ! kitane Azcarya kI bAta hai ki
pApavardhaka khoTe granthoM kI racanA karanevAle mUrkha kukaviyoMne usa
vidyAdhara kumArakA kaisA bIbhatsa carita citraNa kiyA hai || 237 || jisameM
yaha saba caritra-citraNa kiyA gayA hai vaha grantha rAmAyaNake nAmase prasiddha
hai aura jisake viSayameM yaha prasiddhi hai ki vaha sunanevAle manuSyoM ke
samasta pApa tatkSaNa meM naSTa kara detA hai || 238 || so jisakA citta tApakA
tyAga karaneke lie utsuka hai usake lie yaha rAmAyaNa mAno agnikA samAgama hai
aura jo zIta dUra karanekI icchA karatA hai usake lie mAno himamizrita zItala
vAyukA samAgama hai || 239 || ghIkI icchA rakhanevAle manuSyakA jisa prakAra
pAnIkA bilovanA vyartha hai aura tela prApta karanekI icchA rakhanevAle
manuSyakA bAlUkA pelanA niHsAra hai usI prakAra pApa tyAgakI icchA karanevAle
manuSyakA rAmAyaNakA Azraya lenA vyartha hai  // 240 //  jo mahApuruSoMke
cAritrameM prakaTa karate haiM aise adharma zAstroM meM bhI pApI puruSoMne
dharmazAstrakI kalpanA kara rakhI hai || 241 || rAmAyaNa meM yaha bhI likhA hai
ki rAvaNane kAna taka khIMcakara chor3e bANoM devoMke adhipati indrako bhI
parAjita kara diyA thA ||242 || aho ! kahA~ to devoMkA svAmI indra aura kahA~
vaha tuccha manuSya jo ki indrakI cintAmAtra se bhasmakI rAzi ho sakatA hai ?
// 243 //  jisake airAvata hAthI thA aura vajra jaisA mahAn zastra thA tathA jo
sumeru parvata aura samudroMse suzobhita pRthivIko anAyAsa hI uThA sakatA thA
//  244 //  | aisA indra alpa zakti ke dhAraka vidyAdharake dvArA jo ki eka
sAdhAraNa manuSya hI thA kaise parAjita ho sakatA thA  //  245  //  usameM yaha
bhI likhA hai ki rAkSasoMke rAjA rAvaNane indrako apane bandIgRhameM pakar3akara
rakhA thA aura usane bandhanase baddha hokara laMkAke bandIgRhameM cirakAla taka
nivAsa kiyA thA ||246 || so aisA kahanA mRgoM dvArA siMhakA vadha honA, tiloMke
dvArA zilAoMkA pIsA jAnA, paniyA sA~pake dvArA nAgakA mArA jAnA aura kuttA ke
dvArA gajarAjakA damana hone ke samAna hai || 247|| vratake dhAraka 29 1.
kumArakaiH ka.  /  2. kacchakaiH ma  /  3. tApazca jana ( ? ) ma.  /  4. kAmasya
ma.  /  5. pIlanaM kha.  /  6. so'haM ma  /

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
30 Padmapurana Rama, who had obtained the vow, was killed by the golden monkey,
and Sugriva's elder brother, who was like his father, was killed by Janaka for
the sake of his wife. ||248|| All this is unbelievable, devoid of any logic. I
will ask the Lord Gautama, the head of the Ganadharas, tomorrow. ||249|| As the
wise king was thinking this, a great shout of victory was raised by the
prisoners as the sound of the trumpets ceased. ||250|| At that time, the long-
lived son of the family, who was near the king, woke up and, by nature, recited
this verse to the old man: "One should always ask the gurus, even if one knows
the meaning oneself, for the knowledge obtained through their confirmation gives
supreme happiness." ||251-252|| Filled with joy at this auspicious occasion, and
with his wives having performed auspicious rites, King Shrenik rose from his
bed. ||253|| Then - the king Shrenik emerged from his beautiful abode, which was
adorned with a canopy of flowers, and where the sweet humming of bees that had
emerged from their sleep filled one part of the palace, and where the pale lamps
were swaying in the cool breeze of the morning. ||254|| As he emerged, he heard
the victorious sound emanating from the excellent lips of the VÄrÄá¹ganÄs, whose
radiance was like that of Lakshmi, and whose hands, adorned with lotus-like
ornaments, were adorned with the beauty of lotuses. ||255|| Thus, the king
Shrenik, who had attained calmness through the influence of extremely auspicious
thoughts, and who had acquired all the auspicious feelings of the moment,
emerged from his abode, which was as radiant as a white lotus, and shone like
the sun emerging from a cluster of autumn clouds. ||256|| Thus ends the second
chapter of the Padmacharita, composed by the Acharya Ravishena, known as the
Ärá¹£a, which describes the anxieties of King Shrenik. ||2|| 1. From one part of
the interior of the sound. M. | 2. The sound of victory. M. |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 30 padmapurANe vrataprAptena rAmeNa sauvarNo rururAhataH  /  sugrIvasyAgrajaH
stryarthaM janakena samastathA ||248|| azraddheyamidaM sarvaM
viyuktamupapattibhiH  /  bhagavantaM gaNAdhIzaM zvo'haM pRSTAsmi gautamam  //
249 //  evaM cintayatastasya mahArAjasya dhImataH  /  vandibhistUryanAdAnte
jayazabdo mahAn kRtaH || 250  //  kulaputreNa cAsannasvAmino bodhamIyuSA  /
nisargeNaiva paThitaH zloko'yaM jaraThAyuSaH || 251  /  /  praSTavyA guravo
nityamarthaM jJAtamapi svayam  /  sa tairnizcayamAnIto dadAti paramaM sukham  //
252 //  etadAnandaya~zcAru nimittaM magadhAdhipaH  /  zayanIyAt samuttasthau
svastrIbhiH kRtamaGgalaH  // 253 //  mAlinIcchandaH atha
kusumapaTAntaHsuptaniSkrAntabhRGga-prahitamadhuravAdAtyenta ramyaikadezAt  /
jaDapavanavidhUtAkampitApANDudIpAn niragamadavanIzaH zrImato vAsagehAt  //  254
//  radanazikharadaSTaspaSTabimbauSThapRSTha - pratihatajaye nAdaM
zrIsamAnadyutInAm  /  karamu kula nibaddhavyaktapadmAkarANAM
zravaNapathamanaiSIccaiSa vArAGganAnAm || 255|| atizayazubhacintAsaGganiSkampa
bhAvAnnarapatirupanItAzeSatatkAlabhAvaH  /  dhavalakamalabhAso vAsagehAdapeto
raviriva zaradabhrodAravRndAdabhAsIt  //  256  //  ityArSe raviSeNAcAryaprokte
padmacarite zreNikacintAbhidhAnaM nAma dvitIyaM parva  // 2 //  O rAmacandrajIne
suvarNaM mRgako mArA thA, aura strIke pIche sugrIvake bar3e bhAI vAlIko jo ki
usake pitA ke samAna thA, mArA thA || 248 || yaha saba kathAnaka yuktiyoMse
rahita hone ke kAraNa zraddhAna karaneke yogya nahIM hai  /  yaha saba kathA
maiM kala bhagavAn gautama gaNadhara se pUchUMgA ||249 || isa prakAra buddhimAn
mahArAja zreNika cintA kara rahe the ki turahIkA zabda banda hote hI
vandIjanoMne jorase jayaghoSa kiyA  // 250 /  /  usI samaya mahArAja zreNikake
samIpavartI cirajIvI kulaputrane jAgakara svabhAvavaza nimna zloka par3hA ki
jisa padArthako svayaM jAnate haiM usa padArthako bhI gurujanoMse nitya hI
pUchanA cAhie kyoMki unake dvArA nizcayako prApta karAyA huA padArtha parama
sukha pradAna karatA hai  /  /  251 - 252  //  isa sundara nimittase jo Anandako
prApta the tathA apanI striyoMne jinakA maMgalAcAra kiyA thA aise mahArAja
zreNika zayyA se uThe  /  /  253 || tadanantara--puSparUpI paTake bhItara sokara
bAhara nikale hue bhramaroMkI madhura guMjArase jisakA eka bhAga bahuta hI
ramaNIya thA, jisake bhItara jalate hue niSprabha dIpaka prAtaHkAlako zIta
vAyuke jhoMkese hila rahe the aura jo bahuta hI zobhAsampanna thA aise
nivAsagRha se rAjA zreNika bAhara nikale || 254 || bAhara nikalate hI unhoMne
lakSmIke samAna kAntivAlI tathA karakuDmaloke dvArA kamaloM kI zobhAko prakaTa
karanevAlI vArAMganAoMke nukIle dA~toMse daSTa zreSTha bimbase nirgata
jayanAdako sunA  /  /  255 /  /  isa prakAra atyanta zubha dhyAnake prabhAvase
nizcalatAko prApta hue zubha bhAvase jinheM tatkAlake upayogI samasta zubha
bhAvoMkI prApti huI thI aise mahArAja zreNika, sapheda kamalake samAna kAntivAle
nivAsagRhase bAhara nikalakara zarada Rtuke meghoM ke samUha se bAhara nikale
hue sUrya ke samAna suzobhita ho rahe the || 256 //  isa prakAra ArSa nAmase
prasiddha raviSeNAcAryaviracita padma-caritameM mahArAja zreNikakI cintAko
prakaTa karanevAlA dUsarA parva pUrNa huA ||2|| O 1. nAdAbhyantarasyaikadezAt
ma.  /  2. jayanAda ma.  /

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Third Chapter  There, in the assembly hall, he stood, his body perfectly
composed, adorned with all ornaments, and entered the grand hall. ||1|| He was
accompanied by his ministers, who had been ushered in by the doorkeepers, their
fine garments torn by the clash of their armlets, their heads adorned with
garlands that were being buzzed over by bees, their feet touching the ground,
covered by the rays of their anklets, their bodies enveloped in the radiance of
their swaying necklaces, their minds captivated by the multitude of the king's
virtues. ||2-4||   Then, followed by those ministers, mounted on their noble
steeds, the king, Åreá¹ika, ascended the grand elephant, whose back was adorned
with a beautiful howdah, and proceeded towards the assembly of the Jina, ÅrÄ«
VardhamÄna. ||5||   A group of attendants, with swords in their hands, daggers
at their waists, and golden bracelets on their left arms, leaped far into the
sky, following the wind like a herd of deer, and shouted, "Go, go, clear the
path, move aside, why are you standing there?" ||6-8||   The king, listening
intently to the auspicious words recited by the people who were bowing before
him, with a calm mind, proceeded forward. ||9||   He reached the place where the
venerable Gautama was seated, surrounded by many monks, his consciousness
purified by bathing in the waters of all scriptures, absorbed in pure
meditation, devoted to the exposition of the truth, seated on a peacock-shaped
seat, comfortable and endowed with powers, his radiance like that of the moon,
his brilliance like that of the sun, his hands and feet like the leaves of the
Ashoka tree. ||10-12||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIyaM parva AsthAnamaNDape'thAsau kRtAzeSatanusthitiH  /
sarvAlaMkArasaMpanno niviSTo bhadraviSTare  // 1 //  sAmantaizca
pratIhAradattadvArairupAgataH  /  keyUrakoTisaMghaTTapATitapravarAMzukaiH  // 2
//  paladbhamarasaMgItamaulimAlAvataMsakaiH  /
kaTakAMzucayacchannakarAgraspRSTabhUtalaiH  // 3 //
lalapAlambataralaprabhApaTalasAritaiH  /  praNataH
sadguNagrAmasamAvarjitamAnasaiH  // 4 //  tatastairanuyAto'sAvArUDhavaravAhanaiH
/  pRSThAhitakuthAzobhAM bhadrAmAruhya vAsatAm  // 5 //  gRhItamaNDalApreNa
baddhasAyakadhenunA  /  prakopTe dadhatA vAme kaTakaM hemenirmitam  /  / 6 /  /
dUramuDDIyamAnena vAyumArga muhurmuhuH  /  mRgANAmiva yUthena namasvadanugAminA
// 7 //  yAhi yAhi puromArgAdavaisarpa vraja vraja  /  cala kiM stambhito'sIti
pAdAtena kRtaghvaniH  // 8 //  nizcakrAma puro rAjA vandinaH paThato'grataH  /
AkarNayan samAdhAnanyastacittaH subhASitam  // 9 //  prAptazca tamasau dezaM
yasminmunibhirAvRtaH  /  sarvazrutajalasnAna nirmalIkRtacetanaH  /  / 10 /  /
zuddhadhyAnasamAviSTastattvAkhyAnaparAyaNaH  /  upaviSTaH sukhasparza
labdhyutpanne meyUrake  // 11 //  kAntyA tArApatestulyo dIptyA mAskarasaMnimaH
/  azokapallavacchAyapANipAdombujekSaNaH  // 12 //  athAnantara dUsare dina
zarIra sambandho samasta kriyAoMko pUrNa kara sarva AbharaNoMse suzobhita
mahArAja zreNika sabhAmaNDapameM Akara uttama siMhAsanapara virAjamAna hue  // 1
//  usI samaya dvArapAloMne jinheM praveza karAyA thA aise Aye hue sAmantoMne
unheM namaskAra kiyaa| namaskAra karate samaya una sAmantoMke zreSTha vastra,
bAjUbandoMke agrabhAgake saMgharSaNase phaTa rahe the. jinapara bhramara guMjAra
kara rahe the aisI mukuTameM lagI huI zreSTha mAlAeM nIce par3a rahI thIM,
valayakI kiraNoMke samUhase AcchAdita pAgitalase ve pRthivItalakA sparza kara
rahe the, hilatI huI mAlAke madhyamaNi sambandhI prabhAke samUhase vyApta the,
aura mahArAjake uttamottama guNoM ke samUhase unake mana mahArAjakI ora Asakta
ho rahe the  // 2-4 /  /  tadanantara zreSTha vAhanoMpara ArUr3ha hue unhIM saba
sAmantoMse anugata mahArAja zreNika, pIThapara par3I jhulase suzobhita uttama
hathinIpara savAra hokara zrIvardhamAna jinendra ke samavasaraNako ora cale  //
5|| jinhoMne apane hAthameM talavAra le rakhI thI, kamarameM churI bA~dha rakhI
thI, jo bAyeM hAthameM suvarNa nirmita kar3A pahane hue the, bAra-bAra AkAzameM
dUra taka chalAMga bhara rahe the aura isIlie jo vAyuke pIche calanevAle
vAtapramI mRgoMke jhuNDake samAna jAna par3ate the tathA jo 'calo calo, mArga
chor3o, haTo Age kyoM khar3e ho gaye' isa prakArake zabdoMkA uccAraNa kara rahe
the aise bhRtyoMkA samUha unake Age kolAhala karatA jAtA thA  // 6-8 //  Age-Age
vandIjana subhASita par3ha rahe the so mahArAja unheM citta sthira kara zravaNa
karate jAte the| isa prakAra nagarase nikalakara rAjA zreNika usa sthAnapara
pahu~ce jahA~ gautama gaNadhara virAjamAna the| gautama svAmI aneka muniyoMse
ghire hue the, samasta zAstrarUpI jalameM snAna karanese unakI cetanA nirmala ho
gayI thI, zuddha dhyAnase sahita the, tatvoMke vyAkhyAnameM tatpara the, sukhaka
ra sparzase sahita evaM labdhiyoMke kAraNa prApta hue mayUrAkAra Asanapara
virAjamAna the, kAntise candramAke samAna the, dIptise sUryake sadRza the, unake
hAtha aura paira azokake pallavoMke 1. kaTakAMzucayaizchannakarAgraspaSTa- m.|
2. hemanirmite m.| 3. darpasarpa m.| 4. pAThato k.| 5. masUrake ma. atra
'mahAsane' iti pAThaH suSThu pratibhAti  /  6. pAdAmbujekSaNaH kha.,
padmAmbujekSaNaH k.|

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
32 Padmapurana He who pacifies the world with his peaceful body, the Lord of the
ascetics, Gautama, resides there. ||13|| He descended from afar, and walked on
foot. His eyes were filled with joy, and he was humble in his gait. ||14|| Then,
bowing to him with folded hands, the Tri-patya (three-fold) one, was given a
seat on the earth by the Lord of the Ganadharas. ||15|| Then, the king, with the
earth made white by the brilliance of his teeth, asked this question, first
inquiring about his well-being. ||16|| "O Bhagavan, I wish to hear the true
story of Padma. For, the fame of this has been generated by those who follow
evil ways. ||17|| "For, was the Lord of Lanka, Ravana, a Rakshasa, or a human
being? How was he, a creature of the lower realms, defeated by the small
monkeys? ||18|| "How could he, with his extremely foul-smelling human body, eat
human flesh? How was Vali, by deceit, killed by Ramadeva? ||19|| "And, going to
the abode of the gods, and destroying their excellent grove, how was Indra, the
king of the gods, brought to Ravana's prison? ||20|| "And, how could his younger
brother, Kumbhakarna, who was skilled in all the scriptures, and had a disease-
free body, sleep for six months? ||21|| "And, how was the bridge, which was so
high that it was difficult even for the gods to cross, built by the monkeys,
with such heavy mountains? ||22|| "O Bhagavan, be pleased to tell me all this.
By rescuing many beings from the mire of doubt, you will be doing a great
service. ||23|| Thus addressed, Ganesha, with his rays of teachings emanating,
as if washing away the dirt of the world with flowers, ||24|| dancing the
peacocks in the midst of the groves of creepers, with a deep, joyful roar, spoke
these words. ||25|| "Hear, O Ayushman, O King, beloved of the gods, with care.
My words are taught by the Jina, and are dedicated to revealing the true nature
of things. ||26|| "Ravana was not a Rakshasa, nor was he a man-eater. All that
they say is false, for they are the speakers of falsehood. ||27||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 32 padmapurANe prazAntena zarIreNa bhuvanaM zamayanniva  /  patirgaNasya
sAdhUnAM gautamAkhyo'vatiSThate  // 13 //  dUrAdevAvatIrNazca kareNozcaraNAyanaH
/  pramodotphullanayano DuDhauke vinayAnataH ||14|| tatastaM tripatyAsau
praNamya ca kRtAJjaliH  /  dattAzIrgaNanAthena dharAyAM samupAvizat ||15|| atha
dantaprabhAjAladhavalIkRtabhUtalaH  /  paryapRcchadidaM rAjA
kuzalapraznapUrvakam  // 16 //  bhagavan padmacaritaM zrotumicchAmi tattvataH  /
utpAditAnyathaivAsmin prasiddhiH kumatAnugaiH  // 17 //  rAkSasa hi sa~ laGkezo
vidyAvAn mAnava'pi vA  /  tiryagmiH paribhUto'sau kathaM kSudrakavAnaraiH  //
18  //  artti cAtyantadurgandhaM kathaM mAnuSavigraham  /  kathaM vA rAmadevena
vAlizchidreNa nAzitaH ||19|| gatvA vA devanilayaM matvopavanamuttamam  /
vandIgRhaM kathaM nIto rAvaNenAmarAdhipaH  //  20  //  sarvazAstrArthakuzalo
rogavarjitavigrahaH  /  zete ca sa kathaM mAsAn SaDetasya varo'nujaH ||21||
kathaM cAtyantagurumiH parvatairalamunnataH  /  setuH zAkhAmRgairbaddho yaH
surairapi durghaTaH || 22 //  prasIda magavannetatsarvaM kathayituM mama  /
uttArayan bahUn manyAn saMzayodArakardamAt  // 23 //  evamukto gaNezaH sa
nirgatairdezanAMzubhiH  /  kSAlayanniva niHzeSaM kusumairmalinaM jagat  // 24 //
latAmavanamadhyasthAnnartayannuragadviSaH  /
gambhIrAmmodanirghoSadhIrayodAharad girA ||25|| zRNvAyuSman mahIpAla
devAnAMpriya yatnataH  /  mama vAkyaM jinendroktaM tatvazaMsanatatparam  // 26
//  rAvaNo rAkSaso naiva na cApi manujAzanaH  /  alIkameva tatsarvaM yadvadanti
kuvAdinaH ||27|| samAna lAla-lAla the, unake netra kamaloMke samAna the, apane
zAnta zarIrase saMsArako zAnta kara rahe the, aura muniyoMke adhipati the ||9 -
13 //  rAjA zreNika dUrase hI hastinIse nIce utarakara paidala calane lage,
unake netra harSase phUla gaye, aura unakA zarIra vinayase jhuka gayA  /  vahA~
jAkara unhoMne tIna pradakSiNAe~ dIM, hAtha jor3akara praNAma kiyA aura phira
gaNadhara svAmIkA AzIrvAda prApta kara ve pRthvIpara hI baiTha gaye  / 14-15  //
tadanantara-- dA~toMkI prabhAse pRthvI - talako sapheda karate hue rAjA
zreNikane kuzala- prazna pUchane ke bAda gaNadhara mahArAjase yaha pUchA || 16 |
| unhoMne kahA ki he bhagavan ! maiM rAmacandrajIkA vAstavika caritra sunanA
cAhatA hU~ kyoMki kudharmake anugAmI logoMne unake viSayameM anya prakArakI hI
prasiddhi utpanna kara dI hai ||17|| laMkAkA svAmI rAvaNa, rAkSasa vaMzI
vidyAdhara manuSya hokara bhI tiryaMcagatike kSudra vAnaroMke dvArA kisa prakAra
parAjita huA || 18 //  vaha, atyanta durgandhita manuSya zarIrakA bhakSaNa kaise
karatA hogA ? rAmacandrajIne kapaTase bAliko kaise mArA hogA ? devoMke nagara
meM jAkara tathA usake uttama upavanako naSTa kara rAvaNa indrako bandIgRha meM
kisa prakAra lAyA hogA ? usakA choTA bhAI kumbhakarNaM to samasta zAstroMke
arthaM jAnanemeM kuzala thA tathA nIroga zarIrakA dhAraka thA phira chaha mAha
taka kisa prakAra sotA rahatA hogA ? jo devoMke dvArA bhI azakya thA aisA bahuta
U~cA pula bhArI-bhArI parvatoMke dvArA vAnaroMne kaise banAyA hogA ?  // 19 - 22
//  he bhagavan ! mere lie yaha saba kahane ke artha prasanna hUjie aura
saMzayarUpI bhArI kIcar3ase aneka bhavya jIvoMkA uddhAra kIjie ||23|| isa
prakAra rAjA zreNikake pUchanepara gautama gaNadhara apane dA~toMkI kiraNoMse
samasta malina saMsArako dhokara phUloMse sajAte hue aura megha garjanAke samAna
gambhIra vANIke dvArA latAgRhoM ke madhya meM sthita mayUroMko nRtya karAte hue
kahane lage || 24 - 25  //  ki he AyuSman ! he devoMke priya ! bhUpAla ! tU
yatnapUrvaka mere vacana suna  /  mere vacana jinendra bhagavAn ke dvArA
upadiSTa haiM, tathA padArthakA satyasvarUpa prakaTa karanemeM tatpara haiM
||26|| rAvaNa rAkSasa nahIM thA aura na 1. carite kha.  /  2. rAkSaso'pi hi ma.
/  ma.  /  6. uttaraya-ma.  /  7. gaNezasya ma  /  3. sulaGkezI ka.  /  4. ati
cAtyantaM ma  /  50 bhaktvA pavana 8. nirghoSaM ma.  /

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third chapter cannot be written without a foundation. A speech without a
beginning is like a rootless tree. ||28|| Therefore, first listen to the
description of the field and time. Then listen to the stories of great men,
which destroy sins. ||29|| In the midst of the infinite space of the universe,
there are three realms, each surrounded by three rings of wind. This elevated
realm appears as if a large, heavy palm tree is standing in the middle of a
mortar. ||30|| The middle part of this realm, known as the Tiryanch Lok, is
surrounded by countless island-shaped continents and oceans. ||31|| This
Jambudvipa is like a potter's wheel. It is the best of all islands, situated in
the middle of the salt ocean, and extends for one hundred thousand yojanas in
all directions. ||32|| In the middle of this Jambudvipa is Mount Meru. This
mountain is indestructible, its base is made of diamonds, and its upper part is
made of gold, jewels, and gems. ||33|| Its high peak appears like a group of
clouds that are red due to the evening. There is only a space the size of the
tip of a hair between the earth of the Saudharma heaven and the peak of this
mountain. ||34|| It rises ninety-nine thousand yojanas above the earth and
extends one thousand yojanas below the earth. This mountain is made of diamonds
within the earth. ||35|| This mountain is ten thousand yojanas wide on the earth
and one thousand yojanas wide on its peak. It appears as if a rod has been
erected to measure the sky of the middle realm. ||36|| This Jambudvipa is
comprised of seven regions: Bharat, Himavat, Hari, Videha, Ramyak, Hairanyavat,
and Airavat. There are also two Kuru regions in the Videha region, known as
Devakuru and Uttarakuru. Six Kulachala mountains adorn this Jambudvipa, dividing
these seven regions. ||37|| Jambudvipa and Salmali are two great trees. There
are thirty-four Vijayadhara mountains in Jambudvipa, and each Vijayadhara
mountain has one hundred and ten cities of the Vidyadharas. ||38||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIyaM parva na vinA pIThabandhena vidhAtuM sana zakyate  /
kathAprastAvahInaM ca vacanaM chinnamUlakam  // 28 //  yataH zRNa
tatastAvakSetrakAlopavarNanama  /  mahatAM puruSANAM ca caritaM pApanAzanam  //
21 //  anantAlokanamaso madhye lokastridhA sthitaH  /  tAlolUkhelasaMkAzo
'valayasvimirAvRtaH  // 30 //  tiryaglokasya madhye'smin saMkhyAtikramamAgataH
/  veSTito valayAkAradvIpairammodhimistathA  // 31 //  kulAlacakrasaMsthAno
jambUdvIpo'yamuttamaH  /  lavaNAmbhodhimadhyasthaH sarvato lakSayojanaH  // 32
//  tasya madhye mahAmerurmUle vajramayo'kSayaH  /  tato jAmbUnadamayo
maNiratnamayastataH  // 33 //  saMdhyAnuraktameghaughasadRzottuGgazRGgakaH  /
kalApramAtra vivarAspaSTasaudharmabhaumikaH  // 34 //  yojanAnAM sahasrANi
navatirnava cocchritaH  /  sahasramavagAizca sthito vajramayaH kSitau  // 35||
'vipulaM zikhare caikaM dharaNyAM dazasaMguNam  /  rAjate tiryagAkAzaM mAtuM
daNDa ivocchritaH  // 36 //  dvau ca tatra kurudvI kSetraiH saptamiranvite  /
SaT kSetrANAM vibhaktAro "rAjante kulaparvatAH  // 37 //  dvau mahApAdapau
jJeyau vidyAdharapurIzatam  /  adhikaM dazamistatra vijayAddheSvathaikazaH  //
30 //  manuSyoMko hI khAtA thaa| mithyAvAdI loga jo kahate haiM so saba mithyA
hI kahate haiM  /  / 27 /  /  jisa prakAra nIMvake binA bhavana nahIM banAyA jA
sakatA hai usI prakAra kathAke prastAvake binA koI vacana nahIM kahe jA sakate
haiM kyoMki isa tarahake vacana nirmUla hote haiM aura nirmUla honeke kAraNa
unameM prAmANikatA nahIM AtI hai  // 28 //  isalie sabase pahale tuma kSetra
aura kAlakA varNana suno| tadanantara pApoMko naSTa karanevAlA mahApuruSoMkA
caritra suno |29|| ananta alokAkAzake madhyameM tIna vAtavalayoMse veSTita tIna
loka sthita haiN| ananta alokAkAzake bIca meM yaha unnatAkAra loka aisA jAna
par3atA hai mAno kisI udUkhalake bIca bar3A bhArI tAlakA vRkSa khar3A kiyA gayA
ho  // 30 //  isa lokakA madhyabhAga jo ki tiryaglokake nAmase prasiddha hai
cUr3Ike AkAravAle asaMkhyAta dvIpa aura samudroMse veSTita hai  // 31 //
kumbhakArake cakrake samAna yaha jambUdvIpa hai| yaha jambUdvIpa saba dvIpoMmeM
uttama hai, lavaNasamudrake madhyameM sthita hai aura saba orase eka lAkha
yojana vistAravAlA hai  // 32 /  /  isa jambadvIpake madhya meM sumeru parvata
hai| yaha parvata kabhI naSTa nahIM hotA, isakA mUla bhAga vajra arthAt hIroMkA
banA hai aura UparakA bhAga suvarNa tathA maNiyoM evaM ratnoMse nirmita hai  /
/ 33 /  isakI U~cI coTI sandhyAke kAraNa lAla-lAla dikhanevAle meghoMke samUhake
samAna jAna par3atI hai| saudharma svargako bhUmi aura isa parvatake zikharameM
kevala bAlake agrabhAga barAbara hI antara raha jAtA hai  // 34 //  yaha
ninyAnabe hajAra yojana Upara uThA hai aura eka hajAra yojana nIce pRthivImeM
praviSTa hai| pRthivIke bhItara yaha parvata vajramaya hai  // 35 //  yaha
parvata pRthivIpara dasa hajAra yojana aura zikharapara eka hajAra yojana caur3A
hai aura aisA jAna par3atA hai mAno madhyama lokake AkAzako nApaneke lie eka
daNDa hI khar3A kiyA gayA hai  // 36 //  yaha jambUdvIpa bharata, haimavata,
hari, videha, ramyaka, hairaNyavata aura airAvata ina sAta kSetroMse sahita hai|
tathA isIke videha kSetra meM devakuru aura uttarakuru nAmase prasiddha do kuru
pradeza bhI haiN| ina sAta kSetroMkA vibhAga karanevAle chaha kulAcala bhI isI
jambUdvIpameM suzobhita haiM  // 37 //  jambU aura zAlmalI ye do mahAvRkSa haiM
/  jambUdvIpameM cauMtIsa vijayA parvata haiM aura pratyeka vijayAdha
parvatapara eka sau dasa eka sau dasa vidyAdharoMkI nagariyA~ haiM  // 38 //  1.
vanaM ca. ka.  /  2. tAlodUkhala kha.  /  3. valibhistribhi -m.| 4. hIrakamayaH
/  5. bhUmikaH ma.  /  bhaumika vimAnamiti yAvat  /  6. vipula: ma., ka.  /  7.
saMgatam m.| 8. mAnadaNDa m.| 9. dvIpo ka., kh.| 10. -ranvitI ka., kha.  /  11.
rAjate ka., kha.  /  12. -dhvanaikazaH ma.  /

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, thirty-four capitals are mentioned. There are fourteen
great rivers, and a Jain temple on the JambÅ« tree. ||39|| Six Bhoga-Kshetras are
mentioned, and eight Jinagá¹has. Eighty-six caves and the same number of
buildings are also mentioned. ||40|| There are four thrones and thirty chariots.
Two silver Vijayardha mountains are also mentioned. ||41|| In all the mountains
with Vaksara mountains, the temples of the Jinas are adorned with a wealth of
jewels. ||42|| In the JambÅ«meru-Kshetra, in the southern direction, there is a
large Rakshasa island adorned with Jain images. ||43|| In the Mahavideha-
Kshetra, in the western direction, there is a large and auspicious Kinnara
island, shining with Jain images. ||44|| In the Airavata-Kshetra, in the
northern direction, there is an island called Gandharva, adorned with excellent
Chaityalayas. ||45|| In the Videha-Kshetra, east of Mount Meru, in the eastern
direction, the Dharana island shines. This Dharana island is also filled with
Jain temples. ||46|| The Bharat and Airavata Kshetras are both subject to
increase and decrease. The other Kshetras are stable, meaning that the cycle of
time does not change in them. ||47|| In the building on top of the JambÅ« tree,
there lives a god named Anavá¹ta. He is surrounded by many hundreds of gods of
the Kilviá¹£a caste. ||48|| In this Bharat Kshetra, when the first time period,
called Suá¹£amÄ, existed, it was filled with Kalpa trees, like the Uttarakuru.
This means that there was a perfect Bhoga-bhÅ«mi here. ||49|| At that time, the
people here were radiant like the midday sun, two kosas tall, and perfectly
adorned with all auspicious marks. ||50|| Here, couples were born together, and
they lived for three

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe triMzaJcatasRbhiryuktA rAjadhAnyaH prakIrtitAH  /  caturdaza
mahAnadyo jambUvRkSe jinAlayaH  // 39 //  SaD bhogakSitayaH proktA aSTau
jinagRhANi ca  /  aSTaSaSTiguhAmAnaM bhavanAnAM ca tatsmRtam  // 40 //
siMhAsanAni catvAri triMzacca gaditAni tu  /  vijayArddhanagau dvau ca rAjatau
parikIrtitau  // 41 //  vakSAragiriyukteSu samasteSu nageSu tu  /  bhavanAni
jinendrANAM rAjante ratnarAzimiH  // 42 //  jambUmaratasaMjJAyAM kSoNyAM
dkssinnyaashyaa| sumahAn rAkSaso dvIpo jinabimbasamanvitaH  // 43 //
mahAvidehavarSasya jagatyAM pshcimaashyaa| vizAlaH kinnaradvIpo jinabimbojjvalaH
shubhH||44|| tathairAvatavarSasya kSityAmuttarayA dizA  /  gandharvo nAmato
dvIpaH saccaityAlayabhUSitaH  // 45 //  meroH pUrvavidehasya jagatyAM
puurvyaashyaa| rarAja dharaNadvIpo jinAyatanasaMkulaH  // 46 //
bharatairAvatakSetre vRddhihAnisamanvite  /  zeSAstu bhUmayaH
proktAstulyakAlavyavasthitAH  // 47 //  jambUvRkSasya bhavane
suro'nAvRtazabditaH  /  zataiH kilviSakAkhyAnAmAste bahubhirAvRtaH  // 48 //
'asmi~zca bharatakSetraM purottarakurUpamam  /  kalpapAdapasaMkIrNa suSamAyAM
virAjate  // 49 //  taruNAdityasaMkAzA gavyUtitrayamucchitAH  /
sarvalakSaNasaMpUrNAH prajA yatra virejire  // 50 //  yugmamutpadyate tatra
palyAnAM trayamAyuSA  /  premabandhanabaddhaM ca mriyate yugalaM samam  // 51 //
jambUdvIpameM battIsa videha, eka bharata aura eka airAvata aise cauMtIsa kSetra
haiM aura eka-eka kSetrameM eka-eka rAjadhAnI hai isa taraha cauMtIsa
rAjadhAniyA~ haiM, caudaha mahAnadiyA~ haiM, jambUvRkSake Upara akRtrima
jinAlaya hai  // 39 //  haimavata, harivarSa, ramyaka, hairaNyavata, devakuru
aura uttarakuru isa prakAra chaha bhogabhamiyAM haiN| meha, gajadanta. kalAcala.
vakSAragiri.vijayArdha. jambavakSa aura zAlmalIvakSa. ina sAta sthAnoMpara
akRtrima tathA sarvatra kRtrima isa prakAra ATha jinamandira haiN| battIsa
videha kSetrake tathA bharata aura airAvatake eka-eka isa prakAra kula cauMtIsa
vijayAdha parvata haiN| unameM pratyekameM do-do guphAe~ haiM isa taraha
ar3asaTha guphAe~ haiN| aura itane hI bhavanoMkI saMkhyA hai  // 40 //  battIsa
videha kSetra tathA eka bharata aura eka airAvata ina cauMtIsa sthAnoMmeM eka
sAtha tIrthaMkara bhagavAn ho sakate haiM isalie samavasaraNa meM bhagavAnke
cauMtIsa siMhAsana haiN| videhake sivAya bharata aura airAvata kSetrameM
rajatamaya do vijayAdhaM parvata kahe gaye haiM  // 41 //  vakSAragiriyoMse
yukta samasta parvatopara jinendra bhagavAnke mandira haiM jo ki ratnoMkI rAzise
suzobhita ho rahe haiM  // 42 //  jambUdvIpake bharata kSetrako dakSiNa dizAmeM
jina-pratimAoMse suzobhita eka bar3A bhArI rAkSasa nAmakA dvIpa hai  // 43 //
mahAvideha kSetrako pazcima dizAmeM jinabimboMse dedIpyamAna kinnaradvIpa nAmakA
vizAla zubhadvIpa hai  // 44 //  airAvata kSetrako uttara dizAmeM gandharva
nAmakA dvIpa hai jo ki uttamottama caityAlayoMse vibhUSita hai  // 45 //  meru
parvatase pUrvakI ora jo videha kSetra hai usakI pUrva dizAmeM dharaNadvIpa
suzobhita ho rahA hai| yaha dharaNa dIpa bhI jina-mandiroMse vyApta 4aa bharata
aura airAvata ye donoM kSetra vaddhi aura hAnise sahita haiN| anya kSetroMkI
bhamiyAM vyavasthita haiM arthAta unameM kAlacakrakA parivartana nahIM hotA  //
47 //  jambUvRkSake Upara jo bhavana hai usameM anAvRta nAmakA deva rahatA hai
/  yaha deva kilviSa jAtike aneka zata devoMse AvRta rahatA hai  // 48 //  isa
bharata kSetrameM jaba pahale suSamA nAmakA pahalA kAla thA taba vaha
uttarakuruke samAna kalpavRkSoMse vyApta thA arthAt yahA~ uttama bhogabhUmikI
racanA thI  // 49 //  usa samaya yahAMke loga madhyAhnake sUryake samAna
dedIpyamAna, do koza U~ce aura sarvalakSaNoMse pUrNa-suzobhita hote the  // 50
//  yahA~ strI-puruSakA jor3A sAtha-hI-sAtha utpanna hotA thA, tIna 1.
jambUvRkSo ka.  /  'vijayAddhanagAzcApi rAjatAH parikIrtitAH' ityapi pAThaH
TippaNapustake saMkalitaH  /  2. ca. m.| 3. sacaityAlaya ma., k.| 4. 'asmizca
bharatakSetraM purottarakurUpamAm  /  kalpAnAM pAdapAH kINaM suSamAyAM virAjire
// ' k.|

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third section of the text describes a land of unimaginable luxury and
abundance. The ground was paved with gold and precious gems, and it was said to
grant all desires. The land was covered in soft, fragrant grass, and the trees
bore fruit and flowers throughout the year. Animals like cows, buffaloes, and
sheep roamed freely, enjoying their lives.   Lions and other animals were gentle
and peaceful, feeding on the fruits of the Kalpavriksha trees, which granted any
wish. The lakes were filled with lotus flowers and adorned with gold and jewels,
overflowing with honey, milk, and ghee.   The mountains were majestic, adorned
with five colors and studded with precious stones, bringing joy to all
creatures. The rivers were free of crocodiles and other dangerous animals, their
waters tasting like milk, ghee, and honey. The climate was perfect, with no
extreme heat or cold, and no strong winds. The land was free from fear and
filled with constant celebrations.   The sun and moon were hidden behind the
radiant glow of the Kalpavriksha trees, which provided all sensory pleasures.
The land was filled with magnificent palaces, gardens, and comfortable beds, as
well as delicious food, drinks, clothes, perfumes, and music. All these things
were provided by the Kalpavriksha trees.   The couples in this land lived
happily, enjoying the beauty of the ten types of Kalpavriksha trees, just like
the couples in the heavens.   King Shrenik asked Ganadhara about the reason for
the existence of this land of pleasure. Ganadhara explained that those who are
simple-hearted and give food and other things to the monks are reborn in this
land of pleasure.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIyaM parva kAJcanena citA bhUmI ratnaizca maNibhistathA  /
kAlAnumAvatazcitraiH sarvakAmaphalapradA  // 52 //  caturagulamAnaizca
citrairgandhena cArubhiH  /  vimalAtimRdusparzastRNazchannA virAjitA  /  / 53 /
/  sarvartuphalapuSpaizca taravo rejurujjvalAH  /  svatantrAzca
sukhenAsthurgomahiSyAvikAdayaH  // 54 //  kalpavRkSasamutpannaM bhakSayanto
yathepsitam  /  annaM siMhAdayaH saumyA hiMsAM tatra na cakrire  // 55 //
padmAdijalajacchannAH sauvarNamaNizomainAH  /  sampUrNA rejire vApyo
madhuzrIraghRtAdibhiH  // 56 /  /  girayo'tyantamuttuGgAH paJcavarNasamujjvalAH
/  nAnAratnakaracchannAH sarvaprANisukhAvahAH  // 57 //  nadyo nirjantukA ramyAH
kSIrasarpimadhUdakAH  /  atyantasurasAsvAdA ratnodyotitarodhasaH  // 58 //
nAtizItaM na cAtyuSNaM tIvramArutavarjitam  /  sarvapratimayairmuktaM
nityodbhUtasamutsavam  /  / 59 //  jyotirdumapramAjAlacchannenduravimaNDalam  /
sarvendriyasukhAsvAdapradakalpamahAtaru  // 60 //  prAsAdAstatra vRkSeSu
vipulodyAnabhUmayaH  /  zayanAsanamadyaSTa svAdupAnAzanAni ca  // 6 //
vastrAnulepanAdIni tUryazabdA manoharAH  /  AmodinastathA gandhAH sarva
cAnyattarUdbhavam  // 62 /  /  dazabhedeSu teSvevaM kalpavRkSeSu cAruSu  /
remire tatra yugmAni suraloka ivAnizam  // 63 //  evaM prokte gaNezena punaH
zreNikabhUpatiH  /  bhogabhUmau samutpatteH kAraNaM paripRSTavAn  // 6 //
kathitaM ca gaNezena taMtratye praguNA janAH  /  sAdhudAnasamAyuktA bhavantyete
sumAnuSAH  // 65 /  /  palyakI unakI Ayu hotI thI aura prema bandhanabaddha
rahate hue sAtha-hI-sAtha unakI mRtyu hotI thI  // 51 //  yahA~kI bhUmi suvarNa
tathA nAnA prakArake ratnoMse khacita thI aura kAlake prabhAvase sabake lie
manovAMchita phala pradAna karanevAlI thI  // 52 //  sugandhita, nirmala tathA
komala sparzavAlI, caturaMgula pramANa ghAsase vahA~ kI bhUmi sadA suzobhita
rahatI thI  /  /  53  /  /  vRkSa saba RtuoMke phala aura phUloMse suzobhita
rahate the tathA gAya, bhaiMsa, bher3a Adi jAnavara svatantratApUrvaka sukhase
nivAsa karate the  // 54 //  vahAMke siMha Adi jantu kalpavRkSoMse utpanna hue
manavAMchita annako khAte hue sadA saumya-zAnta rahate the| kabhI kisI jIvakI
hiMsA nahIM karate the  /  / 55 /  /  vahA~ kI vApikAe~ padma Adi kamaloMse
AcchAdita, suvarNa aura maNiyoMse suzobhita tathA madhu, kSIra evaM ghRta Adise
bharI huI atyadhika zobhAyamAna rahatI thIM  //  56  //  vahA~ke parvata atyanta
U~ce the, pA~ca prakArake vargoM se ujjvala the, nAnA prakArake ratnoMko kAntise
vyApta the tathA sarvaprANiyoMko sukha upajAnevAle the  /  /  57  //  vahA~ kI
nadiyAM magaramacchAdi jantuoMse rahita thIM, sundara thIM, unakA jala dUdha,
gho aura madhuke samAna thA, unakA AsvAda atyanta surasa thA aura unake kinAre
ratnoMse dedIpyamAna the  /  / 58 //  vahA~ na to adhika zIta par3atI thI, na
adhika garmI hotI thI, na tIvra vAyu calatI thii| vaha saba prakArake bhayoMse.
rahita thA aura vahA~ nirantara nayenaye utsava hote rahate the  // 59 //  vahAM
jyotiraMga jAtike vakSoMkI kAntike samahase sUrya aura candramAke maNDala chipe
rahate the-dikhAI nahIM par3ate the tathA sarva indriyoMko sukhAsvAdake denevAle
kalpavRkSa suzobhita rahate the  // 60 //  vahA~ bar3e-bar3e bAga-bagIce aura
vistRta bhUbhAgase sahita mahala, zayana, Asana, madya, iSTa aura madhura peya,
bhojana, vastra, anulepana, turahIke manohara zabda aura dUra taka phailanevAlI
sundara gandha tathA inake sivAya aura bhI aneka prakArakI sAmagrI kalpavRkSoMse
prApta hotI thI  // 61 //  isa prakAra vahA~ke dampatI, dasa prakArake sundara
kalpavRkSoMke nIce devadampatIke samAna rAta-dina krIr3A karate rahate the  //
62-63  /  /  isa taraha gaNadhara bhagavAnke kaha cukanepara rAjA zreNikane
unase bhogabhUmimeM upajanekA kAraNa pUchA  /  /  64  /  /  uttarameM gaNadhara
bhagavAn kahane lage ki jo saralacittake dhArI manuSya muniyoMke lie AhAra Adi
dAna dete haiM ve hI ina bhoga1. kArya-kha.  /  2. virAjate m.| 3. rodhasaH m.|
4. ratnAkaracchannAH ma.  /  5. jyotiHkrama ma.  /  6. taruH m.| 7. -maSvava m.|
8. vAnyatarodbhavam kh.| 9. tatra ye ma.  /

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
36 In the Papouraana, it is said that one who gives charity out of desire for
enjoyment, even though he may be considered virtuous, will still experience the
fruits of his actions, like an elephant or other animal.  ||66||  Just as a seed
sown in a soft, well-tilled field yields abundant crops, or as water poured on
sugarcane becomes sweet, and milk drunk by a cow turns into milk, so too,
charity given to a sage who is a repository of austerities, adorned with vows,
and free from all attachments, bears great fruit. ||67-69||  Just as a seed sown
in barren land yields little fruit, or as water poured on a neem tree becomes
bitter, and milk drunk by a snake turns into poison, so too, charity given to an
unworthy recipient yields bad fruit. ||70-71||  Gautama Swami says, "O King!
Just as a mirror reflects whatever is placed before it, so too, the fruits of
charity are proportionate to the giver's intentions." ||72||  Just as the white
and black fortnights follow each other in succession, so too, the Utsarpini and
Avasarpini cycles follow each other in succession. ||73||  When the third cycle
came to an end, and the groups of Kalpa trees began to perish in succession,
fourteen Kulakaras (founders of dynasties) arose. Listen, O Shrenik, to the
account of their reign. ||74||  The first Kulakara was named PratiÅruti. His
words brought joy to all the people. ||75||  He remembered his three previous
births, was devoted to good deeds, and guided all aspects of life. ||76||  After
countless millions of years, the second Kulakara, named Sanmati, arose. ||77||
He was followed by Kshemabhrit, Kshemandhara, Simabhrit, and Simadhara. ||78||
Then came Chakshusman. During his reign, the people saw the sun and moon in the
sky and were afraid. They asked, "O Lord! What are these two objects that we see
in the ocean of the sky?" ||79||  Hearing their question, Chakshusman remembered
his past lives.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 36 papapurANe ye punaH kutsite dAnaM dadate bhogtRssnnyaa| te'pi hastyAditAM
gatvA 'bhulate dAnajaM phalam  // 66 //  nitAntaM mRduni kSetre dUraM kRSTe
halAnanaiH  /  kSiptaM bIjaM yathAnantaguNaM sasyaM prayacchati  // 6 //  yathA
cekSuSu nikSiptaM mAdhurya vAri gacchati  /  pItaM ca dhenumistoyaM kSIratvena
vivartate  // 6 //  evaM sAdhau tapo'gAre vratAlaMkRtavigrahe  /
sarvagranthavinirmukte dattaM dAnaM mahAphalam  // 69 /  /  *khile gataM yathA
kSetre bIjamalpaphalaM bhavet  /  nimbeSu ca tathA kSiptaM kaTutvaM vAri
gacchati  /  / 70 //  yathA ca pannagaiH pItaM kSIraM saMjAyate viSam  /
kupAtreSu tathA dattaM dAnaM kuphaladaM mavet  /  / 7 /  /  evaM dAnasya sadRzo
dharendra phalasaMbhavaH  /  yadyadAdhIyate vastu darpaNe tasya darzanam  // 72
/  /  yathA zuklaM ca kRSNaM ca pakSadvayamanantaram  /
utsarpiNyavasarpiNyorevaM kramasamudbhavaH  // 73 //  artha kAlAntyato hAni teSu
yAteSvanukramAt  /  kalpapAdapakhaNDeSu zRNu kaulakarI sthitim  // 7 //
pratizrutiriti jJeya AdhaH kulakaro mahAn  /  zrutvA tasya vacaH sarvAH prajAH
sausthityamAgatAH  /  / 75|| janmatrayamatItaM yo jAnAti sma nijaM vibhuH  /
zubhaceSTAsamudyuktau vyavasthAnAM pradezakaH  // 76 //  tato
varSasahasANAmatikrAntAsu koTiMSu  /  bahISu sa manuH prApto janma
sanmatisaMjJitaH  // 77 //  tataH kSemakaro jAtaH kSemattadanantaram  /  abhUt
sImaMkarastasmAt sImadhcca tataH param  // 7 //  cakSuSmAnaparastasmAttaM gatvA
sabhayAH prajAH  /  apRcchannAtha kAvetau dRzyete gaganArNave  // 79 //  tato
jagAda cakSuSmAn videhe yachutaM jinAt  /  yukto janmAntarasmRtyA
yathAkAlaparikSaye  // 40 //  bhUmiyoMmeM uttama manuSya hote haiM  /  / 65 /  /
tathA jo bhorgokI tRSNAse kupAtrake lie dAna dete haiM ve bhI hastI AdikI
paryAya prApta kara dAnakA phala bhogate haiM  /  /  66  //  jisa prakAra halakI
noMkase dUra taka jute aura atyanta komala kSetrameM boyA huA bIja anantaguNA
dhAnya pradAna karatA hai athavA jisa prakAra IkhoMmeM diyA huA pAnI madhuratAko
prApta hotA hai aura gAyoMke dvArA piyA huA pAnI dUdha rUpameM pariNata ho jAtA
hai usI prakAra tapake bhaNDAra aura vratoMse alaMkRta zarIrake dhAraka
sarvaparigraha rahita munike lie diyA huA dAna mahAphalako denevAlA hotA hai  //
67-69 //  jisa prakAra USara kSetrameM boyA huA bIja alpaphala detA hai athavA
nImake vRkSoMmeM diyA huA pAnI jisa prakAra kar3aA ho jAtA hai aura sA~poMke
dvArA piyA huA pAnI jisa prakAra viSa rUpameM pariNata ho jAtA hai usI prakAra
kupAtroMmeM diyA huA dAna kuphalako denevAlA hotA hai  /  /  70-71  //
gautamasvAmI kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! jo jaisA dAna detA hai use vaisA hI phala
prApta hotA hai| darpaNake sAmane jo-jo vastu rakhI jAtI hai vahI-vahI dikhAI
detI hai  /  / 72 /  /  _ jisa prakAra zukla aura kRSNake bhedase do pakSa ekake
bAda eka prakaTa hote haiM usI prakAra utsarpiNI aura avasapiNI ye do kAla
kramase prakaTa hote haiM  // 73 //  athAnantara tRtIya kAlakA anta honeke
kAraNa jaba kramase kalpavRkSoMkA samUha naSTa hone lagA taba caudaha kulakara
utpanna hue usa samayakI vyavasthA kahatA hU~ so he zreNika! suna ||74|| sabase
pahale pratizruti nAmake prathama kulakara he| unake vacana sunakara prajA
Anandako prApta haI |75 //  ve apane tIna janma pahalekI bAta jAnate the,
zubhaceSTAoMke calAne meM tatpara rahate the aura saba prakArakI vyavasthAoMkA
nirdeza karanevAle the||76  /  /  unake bAda aneka karor3a hajAra varSa
bItanepara sanmati nAmake dvitIya kulakara utpanna hue  // 77 /  /  unake bAda
kSemaMkara, phira kSemandhara, tatpazcAt sImaMkara aura unake pIche sImandhara
nAmake kulakara utpanna hue  // 78 //  unake bAda cakSuSmAn kulakara hue| unake
samaya prajA sUrya candramAko dekhakara bhayabhIta ho unase pUchane lagI ki he
svAmin ! AkAzarUpI samudrameM ye do padArtha kyA dikha rahe haiM ?  // 79 //
prajAkA prazna sunakara cakSuSmAnko apane pUrvajanmakA smaraNa ho aayaa| 1.
bhuJjante ma.  /  2. nivartate ma.  /  3. khale ma.  /  4. atho kha.  /  5.
kAlAntarotpattyA ma.  /  6. kSemabhRt m.|

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third age is nearing its end, and the radiance of the Kalpa trees is fading.
The two celestial deities, Chandra and Aditya, are now clearly visible. They are
known as Chandra and Aditya.   There are four types of deities: Jyotishi,
Bhavanavasi, Vyantara, and Kalpavasis. Beings are born into these realms based
on their karmic merit.   Chandra, the cool one, and Surya, the intense one, are
visible in the sky due to the nature of time. When Surya sets, Chandra's
brilliance increases. The constellations also become visible in the sky.
Knowing this is the nature of time, let go of fear. When Chakshusman, the ruler,
spoke these words, the people, relieved of their fear, returned to their usual
lives.   After Chakshusman ascended to heaven, Yashavi became the ruler. He was
followed by Vipul, Abhichandra, Chandraabha, Marudeva, Prasenajit, and finally,
Nabhi.   These fourteen rulers are considered like fathers to the people. They
were born from virtuous deeds and are all equal in wisdom.   After the
fourteenth ruler, Nabhi, all the Kalpa trees perished except for one. This
remaining Kalpa tree stood in the middle of Nabhi's realm, resembling a
magnificent palace.   The palace was adorned with pearl garlands, had walls made
of gold and jewels, and was embellished with a beautiful garden and a pond. It
was truly unique.   Nabhi's heart was captured by Marudevi, a beautiful queen.
Just as Rohini, the wife of Chandra, is known as Prachalattaraka (the moving
star), Marudevi also had sparkling eyes.   Just as Ganga, the wife of the ocean,
is born from the great mountain Himagiri, Marudevi was also...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIyaM parva kSINeSu dyutivRkSeSu samudbhUtaprabhAvimau  /  candrAdityAviti
khyAtau jyotirdevau sphuTau sthitau  /  / 81 //  jyautiSA bhAvanAH kalpA
vyantarAzca caturvidhAH  /  devA bhavanti yogyena karmaNA jantavo bhave  // 82
//  tatrAyaM candramAH zItastIvragustyeSa bhAskaraH  /  etau kAlasvabhAvena
dRzyate gaganAmarau  // 83 /  /  bhAnAvastaMgate tIvra kAntirbhavati zItagoH  /
vyomni nakSatracakraM ca prakaTatvaM prapadyate  // 84 //  svabhAvamiti kAlasya
jJAtvA tyajata bhItatAm  /  ityuktA bhayamatyasya prajA yAtA yathAgatam  // 85 /
/  cakSuSmati tato'tIte yazasvIti samudgataH  /  vijJeyo
vipulastasmAdabhicandraH parastataH  // 86 //  candrAmazca
parastasmAnmarudevastaduttaraH  /  tataH prasenajijAto nAbhirantyastato'bhavat
// 47 //  ete pitRsamAH proktAH prajAnAM kulakAriNaH  /  zubhaiH
karmabhirutpannAzcaturdaza samA dhiyA  // 8 //  atha kalpadramo nAbherasya
kSetrasya madhyagaH  /  sthitaH prAsAdarUpeNa vibhAtyatyantamunnataH  // 89 /  /
mukkAdAmacito hemaratnakalpitabhittikaH  /  kSitau sa eka
evaasiidvaapyudyaanvibhuussitH||9|| gRhItahRdayA tasya babhUva vanitottamA  /
pracalattArakA bhAryA rohiNIva kalAvataH  // 11 //  gaGgava vAhinIzasya
mahAbhUbhRtkulodgatA  /  haMsIva rAjahaMsasya mAnasAnugamakSabhA  // 92 //  usa
samaya unhoMne videha kSetrameM bhI jinendradevake mukhase jo kucha zravaNa kiyA
thA vaha saba smaraNameM A gyaa| unhoMne kahA ki tRtIya kAlakA kSaya honA nikaTa
hai isalie jyotiraMga jAtike kalpa vRkSoMkI kAnti manda par3a gayo hai aura
candramA tathA sUryakI kAnti prakaTa ho rahI hai| ye candramA aura sUrya nAmase
prasiddha do jyotiSI deva AkAzameM prakaTa dikha rahe haiM  /  / 80-81 //
jyotiSI, bhavanavAsI, vyantara aura kalpavAsIke bhedase deva cAra prakArake hote
haiN| saMsArake prANI apane-apane karmoMkI yogyatAke anusAra inameM janma
grahaNa karate haiM  // 82 //  inameM jo zIta kiraNoMvAlA hai vaha candramA hai
aura jo uSNa kiraNoMkA dhAraka hai vaha sUrya hai| kAlake svabhAvase ye donoM
AkAzagAmI deva dikhAI dene lage haiM  /  / 83 /  /  jaba sUrya asta ho jAtA hai
taba candramAkI kAnti bar3ha jAtI hai| sUrya aura candramAke sivAya AkAza meM
yaha nakSatroMkA samUha bhI prakaTa ho rahA hai  // 84 /  /  yaha saba kAlakA
svabhAva hai aisA jAnakara Apa loga bhayako chodd'eN| cakSuSmAn kulakarane jaba
prajAse yaha kahA taba vaha bhaya chor3akara pahaleke samAna sukhase rahane lagI
// 85 /  /  jaba cakSuSmAn kulakara svargagAmI ho gaye to unake bAda yazasvI
nAmaka kulakara utpanna hue| unake bAda vipula, unake pIche abhicandra, unake
pazcAt candrAbha, unake anantara marudeva, unake bAda prasenajit aura unake
pIche nAbhinAmaka kulakara utpanna hue| ina kulakaroMmeM nAbhirAja antima
kulakara the  /  / 86-87 //  ye caudaha kulakara prajAke pitAke samAna kahe gaye
haiM, puNya karmake udayase inakI utpatti hotI hai aura buddhikI apekSA saba
samAna hote haiM  // 88|| athAnantara caudahaveM kulakara nAbhirAjake samayameM
saba kalpavRkSa naSTa ho gaye  /  kevala inhIMke kSetrake madhyameM sthita eka
kalpavRkSa raha gayA jo prAsAda arthAt bhavanake rUpameM sthita thA aura atyanta
U~cA thA  // 89 //  unakA vaha prAsAda motiyoMkI mAlAoMse vyApta thA. savarNa
aura ra usakI dIvAleM banI thIM, vApI aura bagIcAse suzobhita thA tathA
pRthivIpara eka advitIya hI thA  // 90 /  /  nAbhirAjake hRdayako haranevAlI
marudevI nAmakI uttama rAnI thii| jisa prakAra candramAkI bhAryA rohiNI
pracalattArakA arthAt caMcala tArA rUpa hotI hai usI prakAra marudevI bhI
pracalattArakA thI arthAt usakI A~khoMko putalo caMcala thI  / 91 //  jisa
prakAra samudrakI strI gaMgA mahAbhUbhRtkulodgatA hai arthAt himagiri nAmaka
ucca parvatake kulameM utpanna huI hai usI prakAra marudevI bhI 1. tatrArya kha.
/  2. tIvragureSa ma.  /  3. gaganAmaraiH kha.  /  4. bhItitAm ma.  /  5.
ityuktAstaM samAbhyarcya ma.  /  6. samAdhiyaH ma.  /  7. nAbhirasya k.|

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the translation of the given Sanskrit text into English, while retaining
the Sanskrit words:  ---  38   In the Padma Purana   Arundhati, the ever-
faithful companion of the Lord, is like a swan in her gait and like a cuckoo in
her sweet speech, akin to the well-nourished beloved of the husband. || 93 ||
The reference to the love of the husband (of the Chakravarti) conveys that by
approaching her, she attains a status beyond comparison, devoid of any
inferiority. || 94 || She, who is revered by all the worlds, is well-known as
Marudevi, just like the divine entity of Dharma is honored in all three worlds.
|| 95 || She seemingly was created from the moon's rays, having no trace of
hotness, like a mirror seeking beauty in its reflection. || 96 || Understanding
the sentiments of others, she appeared as if her essence is of the self; her
actions are free from bondage and her nature spreads across the three worlds
like that of a liberated soul. || 97 || Her disposition was one of virtuous
conduct, seemingly creating her identity from the Jain scriptures. She is like a
rain of wealth for those suffering from thirst, appearing as if she embodies the
essence of immortality. || 98 || She was capable of bringing satisfaction to her
friends, appearing as if she is comparable to liberation (nirvriti). Her form,
with gestures and playfulness, made her appear like the very essence of wine
(madira). || 99 || The decoration of her forehead was fulfilled solely by her
eyes; the garlands of blue lotuses were merely an additional adornment. || 100
|| The hair, resembling a bumblebee, was the ornament for her forehead, while
the buds of tamala flowers were merely burdens. || 101 || The tales of the
beloved of life were the true ornaments of her ears; the wearing of gems and
golden earrings was merely ostentation. || 102 || Her cheeks were the cause of
constant clarity of light.  ---  If you have any more text or need further
assistance, feel free to ask!

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 38 padmapurANe arundhatIva nAthasya nityaM pAzrvAnuvartinI  /  haMsIva gamane
vAci parapuSTavadhUsamA  //  93  //  cakrAva patiprItAvityAdisamudAhRtam  /  yAM
prati pratipadyeta sarva hInopamAnatAm  // 94 //  pUjitA sarvalokasya marudevIti
vizrutA  /  yathA trilokavandyasya dharmasya zrutadevatA  //  95  //
USmAbhAvena yA candrakalAbhiriva nirmitA  /  darpaNazrIjigISeva
pratipANigRhItiSu  // 96 //  nirmitAtmasvarUpeva paracittapratItiSu  /
siddhajIvasvabhAveva trilokavyAptakarmaNi  // 97 //  puNyavRttitayA jainyA
zrutyeva parikalpitA  /  amRtAtmeva tRSyatsu bhRtyeSu vasuvRSTivat  //  98  //
sakhISu nirvRtestulyA vilAsAnmadirAtmikA  /  rUpasya paramAvasthA rateriva
tanusthitiH  // 99 //  maNDanaM muNDamAlAyA yasyAzcakSurabhUd varam  /
asitotpaladAmAni kevalaM mAramAtrakam  // 100 //  alakabhramarA eva bhUSA
mAlAntayoH sadA  /  dalAni tu tamAlasya punaruktAni kevalam  // 101 //  prANeza
saMkathA eva subhagaM karNabhUSaNam  /  Dambaro ratnakanakakuNDalAdiparigrahaH
//  102  //  kapolAveva satataM sphuTAlokasya kAraNam  /  ratnaprabhApradIpAstu
vibhavAyaiva kevalam  // 103 //  mahAbhUbhRtkulodgatA arthAt utkRSTa
rAjavaMzameM utpanna huI thI aura rAjahaMsakI strI jisa prakAra
mAnasAnugamakSamA arthAt mAnasa sarovarakI ora gamana karanemeM samartha rahatI
hai usI prakAra marudevI bhI mAnasAnugamakSamA arthAt nAbhirAjake manake anukUla
pravRtti karanemeM samartha thI  // 92|| jisa prakAra arundhatI sadA apane
patike pAsa rahatI thI usI prakAra marudevI bhI nirantara pati ke pAsa rahatI
thI  /  vaha gamana karanemeM haMsI ke samAna thI aura madhura vacana bolane meM
koyala ke anurUpa thI  //  93  //  | vaha pati ke sAtha prema karanemeM cakavIke
samAna thI ityAdi jo kahA jAtA hai vaha saba marudevI ke prati honopamA doSako
prApta hotA hai ||14|| jisa prakAra tInoM lokoMke dvArA vandanIya dharmakI
bhAryA zrutadevatA ke nAmase prasiddha hai usI prakAra nAbhirAjakI vaha bhAryA
marudevI nAmase prasiddha thI tathA samasta lokoMke dvArA pUjanIya thI  /  /  95
/  /  usameM raMca mAtra bhI USmA arthAt krodha yA ahaMkAra garmI nahIM isalie
aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno candramAko kalAoMse hI usakA nirmANa huA ho  /  use
pratyeka manuSya apane hAthameM lenA cAhatA thA- svIkRta karanA cAhatA thA
isalie aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno darpaMNakI zobhAko jItanA cAhatI ho || 96  //
| vaha dUsare ke manogata bhAvako samajhane vAlI thI isalie aisI jAna par3atI
thI mAno AtmAse hI usake svarUpakI racanA huI ho  /  usake kArya tInoM lokoM meM
vyApta the isalie aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno mukta jIvake samAna hI usakA
svabhAva thA  /  / 97 //  usakI pravRtti puNyarUpa thI isalie aisI jAna par3atI
thI mAno jinavANI se hI usakI racanA huI ho| vaha tRSNAse bhare bhUtyoMke lie
dhanavRSTike samAna thI isalie aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno amRta svarUpa hI ho
//  98  //  sakhiyoMko santoSa upajAnevAlI thI isalie aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno
nirvRti arthAt muktike samAna hI ho  /  usakA zarIra hAva-bhAvavilAsa sahita thA
isalie aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno madirAsvarUpa hI ho| vaha saundarya kI parama
kASThAko prApta thI arthAt atyanta sundarI thI isalie aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno
ratikI pratimA hI ho  //  99  //  usake mastakako alaMkRta karane ke lie usake
netra hI paryApta the, nIla kamaloMkI mAlAe~ to kevala bhArasvarUpa hI thIM  //
100  //  bhramara ke samAna kAle keza hI usake lalATake donoM bhAgoM ke AbhUSaNa
the, tamAlapuSpakI kalikAe~ to kevala bhAra mAtra thIM  //  101  //
prANavallabhakI kathA-vArtA sunanA hI usake kAnoMkA AbhUSaNa thA, ratna tathA
suvarNake kuNDala AdikA dhAraNa karanA ADambara mAtra thA  //  102  //  usake
donoM kapola hI nirantara spaSTa prakAzake kAraNa 1. pratiprANigRhItiSu ma  /

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Third Chapter  **104.**  Laughter itself was the fragrant powder, white in
hue, and the camphor particles were only for destroying the luster.  **105.**
Her voice itself was the sweet vina, the curiosity of the sound of the
instrument was only the striking of the strings by the ensemble.  **106.**  The
luster that appeared on her lips was the radiant glow of her body. The unguent
of saffron and the like was devoid of virtue and only a blemish on her beauty.
**107.**  Her delicate arms were sufficient to strike her husband in jest, the
pieces of straw were useless.  **108.**  The drops of sweat born from the heat
of youth were the ornaments of her breasts, the burden of the necklace was only
placed on them in vain.  **109.**  Her hips, wide like a stone slab, were the
cause of wonder, the platform of jewels made in the palace was made without
reason.  **110.**  The bees, mistaking her feet for lotuses, were her ornaments,
the anklets of Indra-blue gems were useless.  **111.**  To describe the glory of
the Marudevi, who enjoyed the pleasures born from the Kalpataru, along with her
navel-jewel, is impossible even with hundreds of thousands of books.  **112.**
When the time for the birth of Lord Rishabhadeva arrived, the Dikkumari Devis,
pleased by the command of Indra, began to serve Marudevi with great respect.
**113.**  Lakshmi, Shri, Dhriti, Kirti, and other Devis, uttering the words "May
you prosper," "Give your command," "May you live long," with great excitement,
awaited her command.  **114.**  At that time, some Devis praised her with heart-
stealing qualities, and some Devis, endowed with excellent knowledge, sang her
praises by playing the vina.  **115.**  Some sang a wonderful song, like nectar
to the ears, and some, with soft hands, stroked her feet.  **116.**  Some
offered betel nut, some offered a seat, and some, with swords in hand, were
always ready to protect her.  **117.**  Some stood at the inner door, and some
at the outer door, holding spears, golden staffs, clubs, and swords.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIyaM parva hAsA eva ca sadgandhAH paTavAsAH sittvissH| kapUrapAMzavaH
kAntivyAghAtAyaiva kevalam  // 104 //  vANyeva madhurA vINA vAdyazrutikutUhalam
/  kRtaM tu parivargeNa tantrInikaratADanam  /  / 105 //  kAntirevAvarobhUtA
rAgo'Ggasya samujjvalaH  /  nirguNaH kaukumaH paGko lAvaNyasya kalaGkanam  //
106 //  parihAsaprahArAya bhujAveva.sukomalau  /  prayojanamatItAni
mRNAlazakalAni tu  /  / 107 /  /  yauvanoSmasamudra tA maNDanaM svedabindavaH  /
kucayorhArabhArastu vRthaiva parikalpitaH  // 10 //  zilAtalavizAlA ca zroNI
vismayakAraNam  /  'nimittena vinA jAtA bhavane maNivedikA  // 10 //  bhUSaNaM
bhramarA eva nilInAH kamalAzayA  /  pAdayorendranIle ca nU pure niHprayojane  //
110 //  tasyA nAmisametAyA bhogaM kalpatarUdbhavam  /  bhunAnAyA durAkhyAnaM
granthakodizatairapi  /  / 111 //  indrAjJAparituSTAbhirdikkumArImirAdarAt  /
kasmiMzcitsamaye prApta paricaryA pravartitA  /  / 112 /  /  nandAjJApaya jIveti
kRtazabdAH sasaMbhramam  /  pratIyuH zAsanaM tasyA lakSmIzrIdhatikIrtayaH  //
113 //  stuvanti kAzcittatkAle tAM guNairhRdayaMgamaiH  /  kAzcitparamavijJAnA
upagAyanti vINayA  // 11 //  atyantamadbhutaM kAzcidgAyanti zravaNAmRtam  /
pAdayorloTanaM kAzcitkurvate mRdupANikAH  // 115 /  /  tAmbUladAyinI
kAcitkAcidAsanadAyinI  /  maNDalAyakarA kAcit satataM pAlanodyatA  // 116 //
kAzcidabhyantaradvAre bAhyadvAre tathA parA  /
gRhItakuntasauvarNavetradaNDAsihetayaH  // 117 //  the, ratnamaya dIpakoMkI
prabhA kevala vaibhava batalAneke lie hI thI  // 10.3 //  usakI manda musakAna
hI uttama gandhase yukta sugandhita cUrNa thI, kapUrakI sapheda raja kevala
kAntiko naSTa karanevAlI thii||104|| usakI vANI hI madhura vINA thI, parikarake
dvArA kiyA huA jo bAjA sunanekA kautUhala thA vaha mAtra tAroMke samUhako tADana
karanA thA  // 105 //  usake adharoSThase prakaTa huI kAnti hI usake zarIrakA
dedIpyamAna aMgarAga thaa| kuMkuma AdikA lepa guNarahita tathA saundaryako
kalaMkita karanevAlA thA  // 106 //  usakI komala bhujAe~ hI parihAsake samaya
patipara prahAra karaneke lie paryApta thIM, maNAlake Tukar3e niSprayojana
the||107|| yauvanakI garamIse utpanna huI pasInekI bUMdeM hI usake donoM
stanoMkA AbhUSaNa thIM, unapara hArakA bojha to vyartha hI DAlA gayA thA  /  /
108 //  zilAtalake samAna vizAla usakI nitambasthalI hI AzcaryakA kAraNa thI,
mahalake bhItara jo maNiyoMkI vedI banAyI gayI thI vaha binA kAraNa hI banAyI
gayI thii||109|| kamala samajhakara baiThe hue bhramara hI usake donoM caraNoMke
AbhUSaNa the, unameM jo indranIla maNike nUpura pahanAye gaye the ve vyartha the
// 110 //  nAbhirAjake sAtha, kalpavRkSase utpanna hue bhogoMko bhoganevAlI
marudevIke puNyavaibhavakA varNana karanA karor3oM granthoMke dvArA bhI azakya
hai  // 11 //  jaba bhagavAn RSabhadevake garbhAvatArakA samaya prApta huA taba
indrakI AjJAse santuSTa haI dikkUmArI deviyA~ bar3e Adarase marudevIkI sevA
karane lagIM  // 112 //  vRddhiko prApta hoo', 'AjJA deo', 'cirakAla taka jIvita
raho' ityAdi zabdoMko sambhramake sAtha uccAraNa karanevAlI lakSmI, zrI, dhRti
aura kIrti Adi deviyA~ usakI AjJAkI pratIkSA karane lagIM  // 113 //  usa samaya
kitanI hI deviyAM hRdayahArI guNoMke dvArA usakI stuti karatI thIM, aura utkRSTa
vijJAnase sampanna kitanI hI deviyA~ vINA bajAkara usakA guNagAna karatI thIM
// 114 //  koI kAnoMke lie amRtake samAna Ananda denevAlA AzcaryakAraka uttama
gAna gAtI thIM aura komala hAthoMvAlI kitanI hI deviyA~ usake paira paloTatI
thIM  // 115 /  /  koI pAna detI thI, aura koI Asana detI thI aura koI talavAra
hAthameM lekara sadA rakSA karane meM tatpara rahatI thI  // 116 /  /  koI
mahalake dvArapara aura koI mahalake bAharI dvArapara bhAlA, suvarNakI char3I,
daNDa aura talavAra Adi hathi 1. nirmitena ma., kh.| 2. prAptA kha., prApta k.|

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, Some were waving chamaras, some were holding the edge of a
cloth, some were blind, some were bringing ornaments. ||118|| Some were engaged
in preparing the bed, some were busy cleaning, some were scattering flowers,
some were applying fragrant substances. ||119|| Some were engaged in serving
food and drink, some were busy with the task of calling. Thus, all the goddesses
were performing her duties. ||120|| The beloved of the king of the Nagas,
Marudevi, did not experience any distress even in her thoughts. One day, she was
sleeping on a very soft bed, covered with a fine cloth, with pillows on either
side. She was experiencing the pleasure of her own virtuous deeds. ||121-122||
She was being served by goddesses with pure weapons. She saw sixteen dreams,
which were auspicious. ||123|| In the first dream, she saw an elephant, white
like the moon, with a deep roar, whose trunk was dripping with the scent of
intoxicating nectar, and on which bees were buzzing. ||124|| In the second
dream, she saw a bull, whose shoulder was like a Dundubhi drum, who was wearing
a beautiful garland, who was roaring, and whose form was like a mass of autumn
clouds. ||125|| In the third dream, she saw a lion, adorned with a mane as white
as the rays of the moon, and with two fangs like the lines of the moon. ||126||
In the fourth dream, she saw Lakshmi, being bathed by elephants with golden and
silver pitchers, and who was sitting motionless on a blooming lotus. ||127|| In
the fifth dream, she saw two very large garlands, made of Punnaga, Malati,
Kunda, and Champa flowers, and which attracted bees with their fragrance.
||128|| In the sixth dream, she saw the sun, situated on the peak of the eastern
mountain, destroying the darkness, and giving fearless vision, free from the
troubles of clouds. ||129|| In the seventh dream, she saw the moon, who was the
friend of the lotuses, who caused them to bloom, who was like an ornament of the
night, who made all directions white with his rays, and who was the lord of the
stars. ||130|| In the eighth dream, she saw a pair of fish, who were connected
by mutual love, swimming in clear water, and whose form was like a thunderbolt.
||131|| Who was taking care of her? ||117|| Some were waving chamaras, some were
bringing clothes, and some were bringing ornaments. ||118|| Some were engaged in
preparing the bed, some were busy cleaning, some were scattering flowers, and
some were applying fragrant substances. ||119|| Some were engaged in serving
food and drink, and some were busy with the task of calling. Thus, all the
goddesses were performing her duties. ||120|| Thus, Marudevi, the beloved of the
king of the Nagas, did not have to worry about anything. All her tasks were
completed without any worry. One day, she was sleeping on a very soft bed,
covered with a fine cloth, with pillows on either side. She was experiencing the
pleasure of her own virtuous deeds. ||121-122|| Goddesses with pure weapons were
serving her. At that time, she saw sixteen auspicious dreams. ||123|| In the
first dream, she saw an elephant, white like the moon, with a deep roar, whose
trunk was dripping with the scent of intoxicating nectar, and on which bees were
buzzing. ||124|| In the second dream, she saw a bull, whose shoulder was like a
Dundubhi drum, who was wearing a beautiful garland, who was roaring, and whose
form was like a mass of autumn clouds. ||125|| In the third dream, she saw a
lion, adorned with a mane as white as the rays of the moon, and with two fangs
like the lines of the moon. ||126|| In the fourth dream, she saw Lakshmi, being
bathed by elephants with golden and silver pitchers, and who was sitting
motionless on a blooming lotus. ||127|| In the fifth dream, she saw two very
large garlands, made of Punnaga, Malati, Kunda, and Champa flowers, and which
attracted bees with their fragrance. ||128|| In the sixth dream, she saw the
sun, situated on the peak of the eastern mountain, destroying the darkness, and
giving fearless vision, free from the troubles of clouds. ||129|| In the seventh
dream, she saw the moon, who was the friend of the lotuses, who caused them to
bloom, who was like an ornament of the night, who made all directions white with
his rays, and who was the lord of the stars. ||130|| In the eighth dream, she
saw a pair of fish, who were connected by mutual love, swimming in clear water,
and whose form was like a thunderbolt. ||131||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe cAmaragrAhiNI kAcitkAcicchantrasya dhArikA  /  AnetrI vAsasA kAcid
bhUSaNAnAM tataH parA  // 118 //  zayanIyavidhau kAcit satA sanmArjane parA  /
puSpaprakaraNe kAcitkAcidgandhAnulepane  // 119 //  pAnAzanavidhau kAcit
kAcidAhvAnakarmaNi  /  evaM kartavyatAM tasyAH sarvAH kurvanti devatAH  // 120
//  cintAyA api na klezaM prapede nRpavallabhA  /  anyadA zayanIye sve suptA
sAtyantakomale  // 12 //  paTAMzukaparicchanne prAntayoH sopadhAnake  /  tasyA
madhye sukhaM labdhA svapuNyaparipAkataH  // 122 //  gRhItAmalazastrAbhirdevImiH
paryupAsitA  /  adrAkSIt SoDaza svapnAniti zreyovidhAyinaH  // 123 //
karaTacyutadAnAmbugandhasaMbaddhaSaTpadam  /  vAraNaM candradhavalaM
mandragarjitakAraNam  // 12 //  vRSabhaM dundubhiskandhaM dadhataM kakudaM zumam
/  nadantaM zaradambhodasaMghAtAkAradhAriNam  // 125 //
zItAMzukiraNazvetakesarAlIvirAjitam  /  zazirekhAsadRgdaMSTrAdvandvayuktaM
mRgAdhipam  // 126 //  sicyamAnAM zriyaM nAgaiH kumbhaiH sauvarNarAjitaiH  /
utphullapuNDarIkasya sthitAmupari nizcalAm  /  / 127 //
punnAgamAlatIkundacampakAdiprakalpite  /  nitAntaM dAmanI dIrdhe
sauramAkRSTaSaTpade  /  / 128 //  udayAcalamUrddhasthaM pradhvastatimirodbhavam
/  vizrabdhadarzanaM mArnu muktaM meghAyupadravaiH  /  / 129 /  /  badha
kamadakhaNDAnAM maNDanaM rAtriyoSitaH  /  dhavalIkratasarvAza kiraNastArakApatim
// 130 //  anyonyapremasaMbandhaM prasphuradvimale jale  /  vidyuddaNDasamAkAraM
mInayoryugalaM zubham  // 131 //  yAra lekara paharA detI thIM  // 117 //  koI
camara DholatI thIM, koI vastra lAkara detI thI aura koI AbhUSaNa lAkara
upasthita karatI thii||118|| koI zayyA bichAneke kAryameM lagI thI, koI
buhAraneke kAryameM tatpara thI, koI puSpa bikheranemeM lIna thI aura koI
sugandhita dravyakA lepa lagAnemeM vyasta thI  // 119 //  koI bhojana-pAnake
kAryameM vyagra thI aura koI balAne Adike kAryameM lIna thii| isa prakAra
samasta deviyA~ usakA kArya karatI thIM  // 120 //  isa prakAra nAbhirAjakI
priyavallabhA marudevIko kisI bAtakI cintAkA kleza nahIM uThAnA par3atA thA
arthAt binA cintA kiye hI samasta kArya sampanna ho jAte the| eka dina vaha
cInavastrase AcchAdita tathA jisake donoM ora takiyA rakhe hue the, aisI atyanta
komala zayyApara so rahI thI aura usake bIca apane puNyakarmake udayase sukhakA
anubhava kara rahI thI  // 121-122 //  nirmala zastra lekara deviyA~ usakI sevA
kara rahI thIM usI samaya usane kalyANa karanevAle nimnalikhita solaha svapna
dekhe  // 123 /  /  pahale svapnameM gaNDasthalase cyuta madajalakI gandhase
jisapara bhramara laga rahe the aisA tathA candramAke samAna sapheda aura
gambhIra garjanA karanevAlA hAthI dekhA  // 124 //  dUsare svapnameM aisA baila
dekhA jisakA ki skandha dundubhi nAmaka bAjeke samAna thA, jo zubha kAndIlako
dhAraNa kara rahA thA, zabda kara rahA thA aura zaradaRtuke megha samUhake
samAna AkArako dhAraNa karanevAlA thA  // 125 //  tIsare svapna meM candramAkI
kiraNoMke samAna dhavala saTAoMke samUhase suzobhita evaM candramAkI rekhAke
samAna donoM dA~r3oMse yukta siMhako dekhA  // 126 //  cauthe svapnameM hAthI,
suvarNa tathA cA~dIke kalazoMse jisakA abhiSeka kara rahe the, tathA jo phUle
hue kamalapara nizcala baiThI huI thI aisI lakSmI dekhI  // 127 //  pA~caveM
svapna meM punnAga, mAlato, kunda tathA campA Adike phUloMse nirmita aura apanI
sugandhise bhramaroMko AkRSTa karanevAlI do bahuta bar3I mAlAe~ dekhIM  // 128 /
/  chaThaveM svapnameM udayAcalake mastakapara sthita, andhakArake samUhako
naSTa karanevAlA, evaM megha Adike upadravoMse rahita, nirbhaya darzanako
denevAlA sUrya dekhA  // 129 /  /  sAtaveM svapnameM aisA candramA dekhA ki jo
kumudoMke samUhakA bandhu thA-unheM vikasita karanevAlA thA, rAtrirUpI strIkA
mAno AbhaSaNa thA, kiraNoMke dvArA samasta dizAoMko safeda karanevAlA thA aura
tArAoMkA pati thaa||130|| AThaveM svapnameM jo parasparake premase sambaddha
the, nirmala jalameM taira rahe the, bijalIke 1. zayane ca sve k.| 2. ma pustake
anayoH zlokayoH kramabhedo'sti  /  3. kakubham ma.  /

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Third Canto  **132.** A radiant pot, adorned with a garland of flowers,
its neck embellished with a necklace, filled with five-colored gems.  **133.** A
vast lake, covered with lotuses and blue lotuses, filled with pure water,
teeming with various birds, and adorned with beautiful steps.  **134.** An
ocean, with waves rising high from the movement of fish and large crocodiles,
adorned with clouds, and appearing like the sky itself.  **135.** A magnificent
throne, adorned with lions, shining with various gems, made of gold, and
towering high.  **136.** A celestial chariot, shaped like the peak of Mount
Meru, vast in size, adorned with gems, and embellished with bubbles, mirrors,
and fly whisks.  **137.** A palace, shaped like a Kalpavriksha tree, with many
floors, adorned with pearl garlands, and covered with a sheet of gems.  **138.**
A very high pile of five-colored precious stones, generating a rainbow from the
intermingling of their rays.  **139.** A fire, blazing with flames, devoid of
smoke, revolving clockwise, and without fuel.  **140.** After seeing these
dreams, the beautiful Marudevi awoke to the auspicious sounds of victory cries.
**141.** The attendants said, "O Goddess! This moon has become devoid of light,
due to the shame arising from the radiance of your face."  **142.** "This sun,
on the peak of the rising mountain, appears like a pot anointed with vermilion,
for auspiciousness."  **143.** "Your smile will now dispel the darkness, and the
lamps have become dim, as if realizing their own uselessness."  **144.** "This
group of birds, dwelling happily in their nests, is making a delightful noise,
as if celebrating your auspiciousness."  **145.** "These trees in the house,
united with the cool and gentle morning breeze, appear as if they are still..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIyaM parva hAropazobhitagrIvaM puSpamAlApariSkRtam  /  maNimiH kalazaM pUrNa
paJcavarNaiH samujjvalam  // 132 //  panendIvarasaMchannaM vimalAmbumahAsaraH  /
nAnApakSigaNAkINaM cArusopAnamaNDitam  // 133 //
calanmInamahAnakrajanitottuGgavIcikam  /  meghapaGktisamAsaktaM namastulyaM
nadIpatim  // 13 //  sATopaharimiryuktaM nAnAratnasamujjvalam  /  cAmIkaramayaM
cAru viSTaraM dUramunnatam  // 135 //  sumeruzikharAkAraM sumAna ratnarAjitam  /
vimAnaM budbudAdarzacAmarAdivibhUSaNam  // 136 //  kalpadrusagRhAkAraM bhAvanaM
bahubhUmikam  /  muktAdAmakRtacchAyaM ratnAMzupaTalAvRtam  // 137 //
paJcavarNamahAratnarAzimatyantamunnatam  /
anyo'nyakiraNodyotajanitendrazarAsanam  // 13 //  jvAlAjaTAlamanalaM
dhUmasaMbhavavarjitam  /  pradakSiNakRtAvartamanindhanasamudbhavam  // 139 //
anantaraM ca svapnAnAM darzanAcArudarzanA  /  sA prabodhaM samAyAtA
jayamaGgalanisvanaiH  // 140 //  tvadvaktrakAntisaMbhUtatrapayeva nizAkaraH  /
eSa saMprati saMjAtaH chAyayA parivarjitaH  // 14 //  ayaM bhAti
sahasrAMzurudayAcalamastake  /  kalazo maGgalArthaM ca sindUreNeve guNThitaH  //
142 //  saMprati vasmitenaiva timiraM yAsyati kSayam  /  itIva svasya
vaiyarthyAt pradIpAH pANDutAM gatAH  // 143 //  kulametacchakuntAnAM
kalakolAhalAkulam  /  maGgalaM te karotIva nijanIDasukhasthitam  // 144 //  amI
prabhAtavAtena jaDamandena saMgatAH  /  nidrAzeSAdivedAnI ghUrNante gRhapAdapAH
// 145 //  daNDake samAna jinakA AkAra thA aise mInoMkA zubha jor3A dekhA  // 13
//  nauMve svapnameM jisakI grIvA hArase suzobhita thI, jo phUloMkI mAlAoMse
susajjita thA aura jo paMcavarNake maNiyoMse bharA huA thA, aisA ujjvala kalaza
dekhA  /  /  132  //  dasaveM svapnameM kamaloM aura nIla kamaloMse AcchAdita,
nirmala jalase yukta, nAnA pakSiyoMse vyApta tathA sundara sIr3hiyoMse suzobhita
vizAla sarovara dekhA  // 133 /  /  gyArahaveM svapnameM, calate hue mIna aura
bar3e-bar3e nakroMse jinameM UMcI-U~cI lahareM uTha rahI thIM, jo meghoMse yukta
thA tathA AkAzake samAna jAna par3atA thA aisA sAgara dekhA  // 134 //
bArahaveM svapnameM bar3e-bar3e siMhoMse yukta, aneka prakArake ratnoMse
ujjvala, suvarNanirmita, bahuta U~cA sundara siMhAsana dekhA  // 135 /  /
terahaveM svapnameM aisA vimAna dekhA ki jisakA AkAra sameru parvatake zikharake
samAna thA. jisakA vistAra bahata thA, jo ratnoMse suzobhita thA tathA gole
darpaNa aura camara Adise vibhUSita thA  //  136  //  caudahaveM svapna meM aisA
bhavana dekhA ki jisakA AkAra kalpavRkSanirmita prAsAdake samAna thA, jisake
aneka khaNDa the, motiyoMkI mAlAoMse jisakI zobhA bar3ha rahI thI aura jo
ratnoMkI kiraNoMke samUhase AvRta thA  // 137|| pandrahaveM svapna meM,
parasparakI kiraNoMke prakAzase indradhanuSako utpanna karanevAlI, atyanta U~cI
pA~ca prakArake ratnoMkI rAzi dekhI  // 138 //  aura solahaveM svapnameM
jvAlAoMse vyApta, dhUmase rahita, dakSiNa dizAko ora AvataM grahaNa karanevAlI
evaM IndhanameM rahita agni dekhI  // 139 /  /  svapna dekhaneke bAda hI
sundarAMgI marudevI vandIjanoMkI maMgalamaya jaya-jaya dhvanise jAga uThI  //
140 //  usa samaya vandIjana kaha rahe the ki he devi ! yaha candramA tumhAre
mukhako kAntise utpanna huI lajjAke kAraNa hI isa samaya chAyA arthAt kAntise
rahita ho gayA hai  // 141 //  udayAcalake zikharapara yaha sUrya aisA jAna
par3atA hai mAno maMgalake lie sindUrase anuraMjita kalaza hI ho  // 142 //  isa
samaya tumhArI musakAnase hI andhakAra naSTa ho jAyegA isalie dIpaka mAno apane
ApakI vyarthatAkA anubhava karate hue hI niSprabha ho gaye haiM  // 143 //  yaha
pakSiyoMkA samUha apane ghoMsaloMmeM sukhase Thaharakara jo manohara kolAhala
kara rahA hai so aisA jAna par3atA hai mAno tumhArA maMgala hI kara rahA hai  //
144 //  ye gharake vRkSa prAtaHkAlakI zItala aura manda vAyuse saMgata hokara
aise jAna par3ate haiM mAno avaziSTa 1. budabudAdarza m.| 2. sindUreNaiva ma.  /
3. tvatsitenaiva ma.  /  4. mukhasthitam ma.  /  6

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
42 Padmapurana I This one, entering your house, is looking at the sun's orb. The
Chakravaki, with sweet sounds, calls out to her beloved. ||146|| These swans,
seeing your gait, are now filled with anticipation. They make their cooing
sounds, a reason to banish sleep. ||147|| The great sound, like that produced by
a carved bronze, is a beautiful display of the Sarasa birds' cries. ||148|| It
is clear that the night has ended, O pure-deeds one, Goddess, now give up sleep.
Thus, the one who was praised, the Marudevi, left her bed, which was like a wave
rising from a contraction of the sheet, and was filled with flowers, making it
like the sky filled with clouds and stars. ||149-150|| Leaving her dwelling,
she, who had completed all her tasks, went near the navel-king, like the Lakshmi
of the day goes to the sun. ||151|| There, sitting on a lower seat, she, with
folded hands, gradually narrated her dreams to her beloved, who was seated on a
magnificent throne. ||152|| Thus, the king, overwhelmed with joy at hearing the
queen's dreams, said, "O auspicious one, the Lord of the three worlds has taken
birth in your womb." ||153|| Hearing this, the lotus-eyed Marudevi was filled
with supreme joy, and she appeared like the beautiful form of the moon,
possessing a collection of radiance. ||154|| When six months were left for the
birth of the Jina, by the order of Indra, Kubera, with great respect, began to
shower down jewels. ||155|| Since the earth became golden while the Lord was in
the womb, Indra praised him with the name "Hiranyagarbha." ||156|| The Lord,
even in the womb, was endowed with the three knowledges: Mati, Shruta, and
Avadhi. And, with the thought that his movements should not cause any discomfort
to his mother, he did not move or stir in the womb. ||157|| Just as fire,
reflected in a mirror, does not cause any change, similarly, the Lord, while
residing in the womb, did not cause any change in the body of his mother,
Marudevi. ||158||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 42 padmapurANeM I aiSApi gRhavApyante bhAnubimbAvalokanAt  /  hRSTAhvayati
jIvezaM cakravAkI kalesvanam  // 146 //  tvadgatiprekSaNenaite kRtotkaNThA
ivAdhunA  /  kurvanti kUjitaM haMsA nidrAnirvAsakAraNam  // 147|| ullikhyamAna
kaMsotthaniHsvanapratimo mahAn  /  alaM sArasacakrANAM kreGkAro'yaM virAjate  //
148  //  nizAnta ityayaM spaSTa "jAto nirmalaceSTite  /  devi muJcAdhunA
nidrAmiti vandikRtastavA  // 149 //  amuJcacchayanIyaM ca samudbhUtataraGgakam
/  sumanobhiH samAkIrNa sAmratAraM nabhaH samam  //  150  //  vAsagehAcca
niHkrAntA pratyAtmakRtakarmikA  /  yayau nAbhisamIpaM sA dinazrIriva mAskaram
//  151  //  bhadrAsananiviSTAya tasmai kharvAsanasthitA  /  karAbhyAM kuDmalaM
kRtvA kramAt svapnAnyavedayat  // 152 //  iti cintApramodena parAyattIkRtaH
patiH  /  jagAda tvayi saMbhUtastrailokyasya guruH zubhe  /  153 || ityuktA sA
paraM harSaM jagAma kamalekSaNA  /  mUrtirindorivodArA dadhatI kAntisaMhatIH  //
154 //  saMbhaviSyati SaNmAsAjjine zakrAjJayAmucat  /  ratnavRSTiM dhanAdhIzo
"mAsAnpaJcadazAdRtaH  //  155 //  tasmin garbhasthite yasmAjAtA vRSTirhiraNmayI
/  hiraNyagarbhanAmnAsau stutastasmAt surezvaraiH  //  156  //
jJAnairjinastribhiryuktaH kukSau tasyAzcacAla na  /  mAbhUt saMcalanAdasyAH
pIDeti kRtamAnasaH  /  /  157|| yathA darpaNasaMkrAntachAyAmAtreNa pAvakaH  /
AdhAtA na vikArasya tathA tasyA babhUva saH  //  158  //  11 nidrA ke kAraNa hI
jhUma rahe haiM  //  145  //  gharakI bAvar3I ke samIpa jo yaha cakavI khar3I
hai vaha sUryakA far dekhakara harSita hotI huI madhura zabdoMse apane
prANavallabhako bulA rahI hai || 146  //  ye haMsa tumhArI sundara cAlako
dekhaneke lie utkaNThita ho rahe haiM isIlie mAno isa samaya nidrA dUra karane
ke lie manohara zabda kara rahe haiM || 147|| jisakI tulanA ukere jAnevAle
kA~sese utpanna zabda ke sAtha ThIka baiThatI hai aise yaha sArasa pakSiyoMkA
kreMkAra zabda atyadhika suzobhita ho rahA hai || 148 || he nirmala ceSTAkI
dhAraka devi ! aba spaSTa hI prAtaH kAla ho gayA hai isalie isa samaya nidrAko
chodd'o| isa taraha vandIjana jisakI stuti kara rahe the aisI marudevIne,
jisapara caddarakI sikur3ana se mAno lahareM uTha rahI thIM tathA jo phUloMse
vyApta honeke kAraNa megha aura nakSatroMse yukta AkAza samAna jAna par3atI thI,
aisI zayyA chor3a dI  /  /  149 - 150 || nivAsagRhase nikalakara jisane samasta
kAryaM sampanna kiye the aisI marudevI nAbhirAjake pAsa isa taraha pahu~cI jisa
taraha fa dinakI lakSmI sUrya ke pAsa pahu~catI hai  //  151  //  | vahA~ jAkara
vaha nIce Asanapara baiThI aura uttama siMhAsanapara ArUr3ha hRdayavallabhake
lie hAtha jor3akara kramase svapna nivedita karane lagI  //  152  //  isa
prakAra rAnIke svapna sunakara harSase vivaza hue nAbhirAjane kahA ki he devi !
tumhAre garbha meM trilokInAthane avatAra grahaNa kiyA haiM || 153|| nAbhirAjake
itanA kahate hI kamalalocanA marudevI parama harSako prApta huI aura candramAkI
utkRSTa mUrtike samAna kAntike samUhako dhAraNa karane lagI  // 154 //  jinendra
bhagavAn ke garbhastha honemeM jaba chaha mAha bAkI the tabhI indrakI AjJAnusAra
kubera se bar3e Adara ke sAtha ratnavRSTi karanA prArambha kara diyA thA  //
155  //  | cU~ki bhagavAn ke garbhasthita rahate hue yaha pRthivI suvarNamayI ho
gayI thI isalie indrane 'hiraNyagarbha' isa nAmase unakI stuti thI  //  156  //
bhagavAn, garbhaMmeM bhI mati, zruta aura avadhi ina tIna jJAnoMse yukta the
tathA hamAre halana calanase mAtAko kaSTa na ho isa abhiprAyase ve garbha meM
cala-vicala nahIM hote the  /  157  /  /  jisa prakAra darpaNa meM agnikI chAyA
par3ane se koI vikAra nahIM hotA hai usI prakAra bhagavAnke garbha meM sthita
rahate hue bhI mAtA marudevIke zarIrameM kucha bhI vikAra nahIM huA thA  //  158
//  1. eSA tvadgRhavApyante ma  /  2. kalasvanaiH ma  /  3. jhaMkAro'yaM ma  /
4. virAjitaH ma.  /  5. jyoti - nirmala ma.  /  6. tArA ma.  /  7. karmakA ka.
/  8. svapnAnyavedayat ma.  /  9 saMhitam k| 10. padmAsye jine ka.  /  11.
mAsAtpaJca dazAditaH ma.  /

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
43 The Supreme Jina, free from the touch of impurities, emerged from the womb
like a crystal, when the time was ripe. ||159|| Then, a great festival was
celebrated by the name of the son's birth, with all the people rejoicing as
prescribed. ||160|| The three worlds were shaken, Indra's throne trembled, and
all the gods and demons exclaimed, "What is this?" ||161|| Then, without being
blown, the conch shell sounded in the abodes of the celestial beings. The drums
roared spontaneously in the houses of the Vyantaras. In the abode of the
celestial astrologers, the roar of lions was heard suddenly, and in the houses
of the Kalpa-dwelling gods, the sound of bells echoed. ||162-163|| With such
auspicious omens and the bowing of the crowns, the Indras, using their knowledge
of the future, came to know about the birth of the Tirthankara. ||164|| Then,
the Indras, filled with great enthusiasm and adorned with ornaments, mounted
their elephant king, Airavata, and set out for the house of Nabhiraj. ||165|| At
that time, some of the gods were dancing with love, some were clapping their
hands, some were raising their armies, some were roaring like lions, spreading
their sound throughout the world, some were making various costumes with skill,
and some were singing beautifully. ||166-167|| At that time, this world, filled
with great sounds, seemed to be falling apart due to the gods going up and down.
||168|| Then, Kubera created the city of Ayodhya. That city of Ayodhya was
surrounded by a huge fort, the size of Mount Vijaya. ||169|| A deep moat,
reaching down to the netherworld, encircled it on all sides, and the tops of the
tall towers extended far into the sky. ||170|| The Indras, filled with great
blessings, reached the house of Nabhiraj in an instant, which was covered with a
garment of light from various jewels. ||171|| Indra, along with the gods,
circumambulated the city three times and then entered the delivery room,
bringing the Jina from the abode of the Pauloma. ||172||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 43 tRtIyaM parva nizcakrAma tato garmAt pUrNe kAle jinottamaH  /
malasparzavinirmuktaH sphoTikAdiva samataH  // 159 //  tato mahotsavazcakre
nAminA sutajanmani  /  samAnanditaniHzeSajano yuktyA yathoktayA  // 16 //
trailokyaM zobhamAyAtamaindraM kampitamAsanam  /  surAsurAzca saMjAtAH
kiMkimetaditisvanAH  // 16 //  anAdhmAtastataH zaGkho dadhvAna bhavanazritAm  /
vyantarAdhipageheSu rarATa paTahaH svayam  // 162 //  jyotiSAM nilaye
jAtamakasmAta siMhaghaMhitam  /  kailpAdhipagrahe spaSTaM ghaNTAratnaM rairANa
ca  // 13 //  evaM vidhazubhotpAtaititIrthakarodbhavAH  /  pracalaniH kirITaizca
prayuktAvadhayastataH  // 16 //  prAtiSThanta mahotsAhA indrA nAmIyamAlayam  /
vAraNendrasamArUDhAH kRtamaNDanavigrahAH  // 165 /  /  tataH kandarpiNaH kecit
surA nRtyaM pracakrire  /  cakrurAsphoTanaM kecid balAnAM kecidunnatam  /  / 166
/  /  kecit kesariNo 'nAdaM mumucuAptaviSTapam  /  vikurvanti bahUn veSAn kecit
kecijagurvaram  // 167 //  utpatabhiH patanizca tato devairidaM jagat  /
mahArAvasamApUrNa sthAnabhraMzamivAgatam  // 16 //  tataH sAketanagaraM
dhanadena vinirmitam  /  vijayArddhanagAkAraprAkAreNa samAvRtam  /  / 169 //
pAtAlodaragambhIraparikhAkRtaveSTanam  /  tuGgagopurakUTAgradUranaSTAntarikSakam
// 170 //  nAnAratnakarodyotapaTaprAvRtasamakam  /  indrAH kSaNena
saMprApurmahAbhUtisamanvitAH  // 17 //  puraM pradakSiNIkRtya triH zakraH
sahito'maraiH  /  praviSTaH prasavAgArAt paulomyAnAyayajinam  /  / 172 /  /
jaba samaya pUrNa ho cukA taba bhagavAn malakA sparza kiye binA hI garbhase isa
prakAra bAhara nikale jisa prakAra ki kisI sphaTikamaNi nirmita gharase bAhara
nikale hoM  // 159 //  tadanantara-nAbhirAjane putrajanmakA yathokta mahotsava
kiyA jisase samasta loga harSita ho gaye  // 160 //  tIna loka kSobhako prApta
ho gaye, indrakA Asana kampita ho gayA aura samasta sura tathA asura 'kyA hai ?'
yaha zabda karane lage  // 161 //  usI samaya bhavanavAsI devoMke bhavanoMmeM
binA bajAye hI zaMkha bajane lage. vyantaroMke bhavanoMmeM apane Apa hI
bheriyoMke zabda hone lage, jyotiSI devoMke gharameM akasmAt siMhoMkI garjanA
hone lagI aura kalpavAsI devoMke gharoMmeM apane-apane ghaNTA zabda karane lage
// 162-163 //  isa prakArake zubha utpAtoMse tathA mukuToMke namrIbhUta honese
indroMne avadhijJAnakA upayoga kiyA aura usake dvArA unheM tIrthaMkarake janmakA
samAcAra vidita ho gayA  // 164 //  tadanantara jo bahuta bhArI utsAhase bhare
hue the tathA jinake zarIra AbhUSaNoMse jagamagA rahe the aise indrane gajarAja-
airAvata hAthIpara ArUDha hokara nAbhirAjake gharakI ora prasthAna kiyA  // 165
//  usa samaya kAmase yukta kitane hI deva natya kara rahe the, kitane hI
tAliyAM bajA rahe the, kitane hI apanI senAko unnata banA rahe the, kitane hI
samasta lokameM phailanevAlA siMhanAda kara rahe the, kitane hI vikriyAse aneka
veSa banA rahe the, aura kitane hI utkRSTa gAnA gA rahe the  // 166-167 /  usa
samaya bahuta bhArI zabdoMse bharA huA yaha saMsAra Upara jAnevAle aura nIce
AnevAle devoMse aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno svakIya sthAnase bhraSTa hI ho gayA
ho  // 168 /  /  tadanantara kuberane ayodhyA nagarIkI racanA kii| vaha ayodhyA
nagarI vijayA parvatake samAna AkAravAle vizAla koTase ghirI huI thI  // 169 //
pAtAla taka gaharI parikhA use cAroM orase ghere hue thI aura U~ce-U~ce
gopuroMke zikharoMke agrabhAgase vahA~kA AkAza dUra taka vidIrNa ho rahA thA  //
170 /  /  mahAvibhUtise yukta indra kSaNabharameM nAbhirAjake usa ghara jA
pahu~ce jo ki nAnA ratnoMkI kiraNoMke prakAzarUpI vastrase AvRta thA  // 171 //
indrane pahale devoMke sAtha-sAtha nagarakI tIna 1. sphaTikAdiva ma.  /  2.
vyantarAdhipatergehe ma.  /  3. rarAva ca kha.  /  4. nRttaM kha., ma.  /  5.
balAnaM kha., m.| 6. nAdAn ma.  /  7. viSTapAn m.| 8. varAm m.| 9.-nApayajjinam
m.|

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
44 In the Padma Purana, I bow down to the mother of the Jina, who, having made
the illusory child, took the real child in her arms. The mother, having given
the child to Indra's wife, Shachi, in her hands, bowed down.  ||173|| Seeing the
form of the Jina, even Indra, with his thousand eyes, did not attain
satisfaction, for the Jina's form was beyond the limits of the three worlds.
||174|| Then, placing the Jina on his lap, Indra mounted the elephant king,
Airavata. The other gods, with great devotion, held the fly whisk, umbrella,
etc. ||175|| Thus, accompanied by all the gods, Indra reached the peak of Mount
Meru, which was resplendent with the brilliance of the collection of gems like
vaidurya, etc. ||176|| There, on a rock called Pandukambala, where a natural
throne was situated, Indra placed the Jina and stood behind him. ||177|| Then,
the gods sounded the conch shells, which made a sound like the agitated ocean,
and they also made the loud sound of the mridanga and conch. ||178|| The
Yakshas, Kinnaras, Gandharvas, Tumburu, Narada, and Visvavasu, along with their
wives, sang beautiful songs that captivated the mind and ears, while performing
excellent fainting spells. Lakshmi also played the vina with great respect.
||179-180|| The Apsaras, adorned with ornaments and filled with gestures,
performed excellent dances, performing the Angahara as it should be. ||181||
Thus, when there was singing, playing, and dancing by the best of the gods,
Indra took a auspicious pot in his hand for the abhisheka. ||182|| Then, Indra
performed the abhisheka of the Jina with a thousand and eight pots, which were
filled with the water of the ocean of milk, which were very heavy to carry,
which were made of gold, whose mouths were covered with lotuses, and whose
beauty was enhanced by red leaves. Indra, by the power of his karma, created
many forms of himself. ||183-184|| Yama, Vaishravana, Soma, Varuna, and other
gods, as well as all the remaining Indras, performed the abhisheka of the Jina
with devotion. ||185|| Indra's wife and other goddesses, with their hands as
soft as leaves, anointed the Jina with fragrant unguents. ||186||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 44 padmapurANe jinamAtustataH kRtvA mAyAbAlaM praNAminI  /  bAlamAnIya zakrasya
zacI cakre karadvaye  // 173 /  /  rUpaM pazyan jinasyAsau sahasranayano'pi san
/  tRptimindro na saMprApa trailokyAtizayasthitam  // 17 //  tatastamaGkamAropya
samAruhya gajAdhipam  /  gRhItacAmaracchatro bhaktyA paramayA svayam  /  / 175
//  avApa meruzikharaM sarvadevaiH samanvitaH  /
baiDaryAdimahAratnamarIcinicayojjvalam  /  /  176 //  pANDukambalasaMjJAyAM
zilAyAM siMhaviSThare  /  tato jinaH surezena sthApitaH pRSThavartinA  // 177 //
tataH samAhatA' bheyaH kSubdhasAgaraniHsvanA  /  mRdaGgazaGkhazabdAzca sAdRhAsAH
kRtAH suraiH  // 17 //  yakSakinnaragandharvAH saha tumburunAradAH  /
vizvAvasusamAyuktAH kurvANA mUrchanA verAH  // 179 /  /  gAyanti saha
patnIbhirmanaHzrotraharaM tadA  /  vINAvAdanamArabdhA katu lakSmIzca sAdarA  //
10 //  hAvabhAvasametAzca nRtyansyapsaraso varam  /  aGgahAraM yathAvastu
kurvANAH kRtabhUSaNAH  // 181 //  evaM tatra mahAtoye janite'marasattamaiH  /
abhiSekAya devendro jagrAha kalazaM zubham  // 18 //  tataH kSIrArNavAmbhobhiH
pUrNaH kumbhamahodaraiH  /  cAmIkaramayaiH padmaccha navaktraiH sapallavaiH  //
183 //  abhiSekaM jinendrasya cakAra tridazAdhipaH  /  kRtvA
caikriyasAmarthyAdAtmAnaM bahuvigraham  // 184 //  yamo vaizravaNaH somo
varuNo'nye ca nAkinaH  /  zeSazakrAdayaH sarve cakrurbhaktyAbhiSecanam  // 185
//  indrANIpramukhA devyaH sadgandhairanulepanaiH  /  cakrurudvartanaM maktyA
karaiH pallavakomalaH  // 186 //  pradakSiNAe~ dii| phira nAbhirAjake ghara meM
praveza kiyA aura tadanantara indrANIke dvArA prasUtikA-gRhase jina-bAlakako
bulavAyA  // 172 //  indrANIne prasUtikA-gRhameM jAkara pahale jina-mAtAko
namaskAra kiyA  /  phira mAtAke pAsa mAyAmayI bAlaka rakhakara jina-bAlakako
uThA liyA aura bAhara lAkara indrake hAthoM meM sauMpa diyA  /  / 173 /  /
yadyapi indra hajAra netroMkA dhAraka thA tathApi tInoM lokoMmeM atizaya pUrNa
bhagavAnkA rUpa dekhakara vaha tRptiko prApta nahIM huA thaa||174|| tadanantara-
saudharmendra bhagavAnko godameM baiThAkara airAvata hAthIpara ArUr3ha huA aura
zreSTha bhaktise sahita anya devoMne camara tathA chatra Adi svayaM hI grahaNa
kiye  // 175 //  isa prakAra indra samasta devoMke sAtha calakara vaiDUrya Adi
mahAratnoMkI kAntike samUhase ujjvala sumeru parvatake zikharapara pahu~cA  /  /
176 //  vahA~ pANDukambala nAmakI zilApara jo akRtrima siMhAsana sthita hai
usapara indrane jina-bAlakako virAjamAna kara diyA aura svayaM unake pIche
khar3A ho gayA  // 177 /  /  usI samaya devoMne kSabhita samadrake samAna zabda
karanevAlI bheriyAM bajAyIM, mRdaMga aura zaMkhake joradAra zabda kiye  // 178
//  yakSa, kinnara, gandharva, tumburu, nArada aura vizvAvasu utkRSTa
mUrcchanAe~ karate hue apanI-apanI patniyoMke sAtha mana aura kAnoMko haraNa
karanevAle sundara gIta gAne lge| lakSmI bhI bar3e Adarake sAtha vINA bajAne
lagI  /  / 179-180 //  hAva-bhAvoMse bharI evaM AbhUSaNoMse suzobhita apsarAe~
yathAyogya aMgahAra karatI huI utkRSTa nRtya karane lagIM  // 181 /  /  isa
prakAra jaba vahAM uttamottama devoMke dvArA gAyanavAdana aura nRtya ho rahA thA
taba saudharmendrane abhiSeka karane ke lie zubha kalaza hAthameM liyaa||182||
tadanantara jo kSIrasAgarake jalase bhare the, jinakI avagAhanA bahuta bhArI
thI, jo suvarNa nirmita the, jinake mukha kamaloMse AcchAdita the tathA lAla-
lAla pallava jinakI zobhA bar3hA rahe the, aise eka hajAra ATha kalazoMke dvArA
indrane vikriyAke prabhAvase apane aneka rUpa banAkara jina lakakA abhiSeka
kiyaa||183-184|| yama. vaizravaNa, soma. varuNa Adi anya devoMne aura sAtha hI
zeSa bace samasta indroMne bhaktipUrvaka jina-bAlakakA abhiSeka kiyA  /  / 185 /
/  indrANI Adi deviyoMne pallavoMke samAna komala hAthoMke dvArA samIcIna
gandhase yukta anulepanase bhagavAnko 1. samAhitA m.| 2. ravAH kh.| -3.
mArabdhIkartuM kha.  /  4. meSavaktrAdayaH kha., ma.  /  .

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Third Chapter  **187.** Just as a mountain is consecrated by clouds, so
too was the Lord consecrated by large pitchers, and the gods were eager to adorn
him.  **188.** At that moment, Indra adorned his ears with earrings like the
moon and the sun, fashioned from a vajra needle.  **189.** A pure padmaraga gem
was placed on his crown, making his head appear adorned with matted hair due to
its rays.  **190.** A crescent-shaped mark was made on his forehead with
sandalwood, and his arms were adorned with golden armlets.  **191.** His chest,
adorned with the Srivatsa mark, was decorated with a necklace made of large
pearls like stars, radiating with brilliance.  **192.** He was adorned with a
large garland of green gems and padmaraga gems, whose large rays seemed to
sprout like leaves.  **193.** His two full wrists, adorned with auspicious
ornaments, were adorned with beautiful bracelets studded with gems, adding to
their splendor.  **194.** His hips, adorned with a silken waist-band, appeared
like the shore of a mountain adorned with the red line of twilight.  **195.**
His fingers were adorned with excellent rings, made of gold and studded with
various gems.  **196.** All this adornment was done by the gods out of devotion.
For him, who was the ornament of the three worlds, what other adornment could be
superior?  **197.** His body was smeared with sandalwood, and yellow spots of
saffron were applied, making him appear as if golden lotuses were placed on a
crystal surface.  **198.** A shawl, embroidered with flowers, was placed on his
body, shining like a clear sky adorned with stars.  **199.** A large crown, made
of the flowers of the Parijata and Santanaka trees, was placed on his head,
attracting swarms of bees.  **200.** The middle of his eyebrows was adorned with
fragrant sandalwood paste. He, who was the tilak of the three worlds, was
adorned with beautiful gestures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIyaM parva mahImiva taM nAthaM kumbhairjaladharairiva  /  abhiSicya
samArabdhAH kartuM masya vibhUSaNam  //  187 //  candrAdityasame tasya karNayoH
kuNDale kRte  /  tatkSaNaM suranAthena vajrasUcIvibhinnayoH  //  188  //
padmarAgamaNiH zuddhazcUDAyAM vinivezitaH  /  jaTAlamiva saMpannaM ziro yasya
marIcibhiH  //  189  //  arddhacandrAkRtirnyastA candanena lalATikA  /  bAhumUle
kRte jAtya hema keyUramaNDite  //  190 //  nakSatrasthUlamuktAbhiH kalpitena
mayUkhinA  /  hAreNa bhUSitaM vakSaH zrIvatsakRtabhUSaNam  /  / 191 /  /
harinmaNisaroja zrI ratnasthUlamarIcibhiH  /  saMjAtapallaveneva prAlambena
virAjitaH  /  / 192 /  /  lakSaNA maraNazreSThau prakoSThau dadhatuH zriyam  /
maNibandhanacArubhyAM kaTakAbhyAM susaMhatI  /  / 193 /  /  paTTAMzuko
parinyastakaTisUtreNa rAjitam  /  nitambaphalakaM saMdhyAdAmnevAvanibhRttaTam
//  194  //  sarvAGgulISu vinyastaM mudrikAbhUSaNaM varam  /
nAnAratnapariSvaktacAmIkaravinirmitam  //  /  195|| bhaktyA kRtamidaM devaiH
sarvamaNDanayojanam  /  trailokyamaNDanasyAsya kuto'nyanmaNDanaM param  //  196
//  candanena samAlabhya rocanAH sthAsakAH kRtAH  /  rejuste sphaTikakSoNyAM
kanakAmbUdgamA iva  // 197 //  uttarIyaM ca vinyastamaMzukaM kRtapuSpakam  /
atyantanirmalaM reje satAramiva tannabhaH || 198 || pArijAtaka saMtAna kusumaiH
parikalpitam  /  SaTpadAlIpariSvaktaM pinaddhaM sthUlazekharam  /  / 199 ||
tilakena bhruvormadhyaM sagandhena vibhUSitam  /  tilakatvaM trilokasya
bibhratazcAruceSTinaiH  //  200 //  2 udvartana kiyA || 186  //  jisa prakAra
meghoMke dvArA kisI parvatakA abhiSeka hotA hai usI prakAra vizAla kalazoMke
dvArA bhagavAnkA abhiSeka kara deva unheM AbhUSaNa pahanAneke lie tatpara hue
//  187 //  indrane tatkAla hI vajrakI sUcIse vibhinna kiye hue unake kAnoMmeM
candramA aura sUryake samAna kuNDala pahanAye  // 188  /  /  coTIke. sthAnapara
aisA nirmala padmarAgamaNi pahanAyA ki jisakI kiraNoMse bhagavAnkA sira jaTAoMse
yukta ke samAna jAna par3ane lagA  //  189 //  bhAlapara candanake dvArA
ardhacandrAkAra lalATikA banAyI  /  bhujAoMke mUlabhAga uttama suvarNanirmita
keyUroMse alaMkRta kiye  //  190 //  zrIvatsa cihnase suzobhita vakSaHsthalako
nakSatroMke samAna sthUla muktAphaloMse nirmita evaM kiraNoMse prakAzamAna
hArase alaMkRta kiyA || 191  //  haritamaNi aura padmarAga maNiyoMkI bar3I moTI
kiraNoMse jisameM mAno pallava hI nikala rahe the aisI bar3I mAlAse unheM
alaMkRta kiyA thA  // 192 //  lakSaNarUpI AbharaNoMse zreSTha unakI donoM bharI
kalAiyA~ ratnakhacita sundara kar3oM se bahuta bhArI zobhAko dhAraNa kara rahI
thIM  //  193 //  rezamI vastrake Upara pahanAyI huI karadhanI se suzobhita
unakA nitambasthala aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno sandhyAkI lAla-lAla rekhAse
suzobhita kisI parvatakA taTa hI ho  // 194 //  unakI samasta aMguliyoM meM nAnA
ratnoMse khacita suvarNamaya aMgUThiyA~ pahanAyI gayI thIM  //  195  //  devoMne
bhagavAn ke lie jo saba prakArake AbhUSaNa pahanAye the ve bhaktivaza hI
pahanAye the vaise bhagavAn svayaM tIna lokake AbharaNa the anya padArtha unakI
kyA zobhA bar3hAte ?  // 196 //  unake zarIrapara candanakA lepa lagAkara jo
rocanake pIle-pIle bindu rakhe gaye the, ve aise suzobhita ho rahe the mAno
sphaTikakI bhUmipara suvarNa kamala hI rakhe gaye hoM  //  197 //  jisapara
kasIdAse aneka phUla banAye gaye the aisA uttarIya vastra unake zarIrapara
pahanAyA gayA thA aura vaha aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno tArAoMse suzobhita
nirmala AkAza hI ho  //  198  //  pArijAta aura santAnaka nAmaka kalpavRkSoMke
phUloMse jisakI racanA huI thI, tathA jisapara bhramaroMke samUha laga rahe the
aisA bar3A seharA unake sirapara bA~dhA gayA thA  //  199  //  cU~ki sundara
ceSTAoMko dhAraNa karanevAle bhagavAn tIna lokake tilaka the isalie unakI donoM
bhauMhoMkA madhyabhAga sugandhita tilaka se 1. bhUSakam ma.  /  2. bhuvomaMdhyaM
ma.  /  3. ceSTitam kha.  /  41

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
46 In the Padma Purana, the Lord, adorned with ornaments, the embellishment of
the three worlds, was thus praised by the gods, led by Indra. ||201|| In this
world devoid of Dharma, enveloped in the darkness of ignorance, you have risen
like the sun for the noble beings who wander about. ||202|| With the pure rays
of your words, like the moon of the Jinas, the noble beings, like the lotus,
will now attain enlightenment. ||203|| O Lord, you are the great lamp that burns
in this house of the world, born from the fire of perfect knowledge, for the
purpose of the noble beings seeing the true nature of the soul and non-soul.
||204|| You are the sharp arrow born to destroy the enemy of sin. You are the
one who will burn the forest of existence with the fire of meditation. ||205|| O
Lord, you have risen like Garuda to subdue the great serpents of evil passions,
and you are like the mighty wind that disperses the clouds of doubt. ||206|| The
noble beings, like the chatakas, thirsty for the drops of the water of Dharma,
look up to you, the Lord, the great treasure of nectar. ||207|| Salutations to
you, whose pure fame is sung by the three worlds. Salutations to you, the tree
adorned with the flowers of virtues, the giver of desired fruits. ||208||
Salutations to you, the sharp axe that cleaves the wood of karma. Salutations to
you, who are always the thunderbolt that shatters the mountain of delusion.
||209|| Salutations to you, the water that quenches the fire of suffering, the
sky that is free from the dust of attachment. ||210|| Thus, praising the Lord
with proper rites and bowing down again and again, the gods, with joyful faces,
placed him on the elephant and set out for Ayodhya. ||211|| Then, Indra, having
placed the Jina child in the lap of his mother, the queen, performed the great
celebration of joy and then went to his own abode with the other gods. ||212||
Then, the Lord was adorned with divine ornaments and anointed with fragrant
perfumes that filled the air with delight. ||213||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46 padmapurANe tatastaM bhUSitaM santaM trilokasya vibhUSaNam  /
tuSTAstuSTuvuritthaM te devAH zakrapurassarAH  // 201 //  naSTadharma
jagatyasminnajJAnatamasAvRte  /  bhrAmyatAM bhavyasattvAnAmuditastvaM divAkaraH
// 202 //  kiraNairjinacandrasya vimalaistava vAGmayaiH  /  prabodhaM
yAsyatIdAnI bhavyasattvakumudatI  // 20 //  bhavyAnAM satvadRSTayartha
kevalAnalasaMbhavaH  /  jvalitastvaM pradIpo'si svayameva jagadgRhe  // 204 /  /
pApazatrunighAtAya jAtastvaM zitasAyakaH  /  kartA bhavATavIdAhaM tvameva
dhyAnavahninA  // 205 //  duSTendriyamahAnAgadamanAya tvamudataH  /  vainateyo
mahAvAyuH saMdehadhanasaMpadAm  /  / 206 //  dharmAmbubindusaMprAptitRSitA
bhavyacAtakAH  /  unmukhAstvAmudIkSante nAthAmRtamahAdhanam  // 207 //  namaste
trijagadgItanitAntAmalakIrtaye  /  namaste guNapuSpAya tarave kAmadAyine  // 208
//  karmakASThakuThArAya tIkSNadhArAya te namaH  /  namaste
mohatuGgAdvimaGgavajrAtmane sadA  // 209 //  vidhmApakAca duHkhAgnernamaste
salilAtmane  /  rajaHsaGgavihInAya namaste gaganAtmane  // 210 //  iti stutvA
vidhAnena praNamya ca punaH punH| tamAropya gajaM jaggurayodhyAmimukhAH
suraaH||211|| mAturaka tataH kRtvA zakraH zacyA jinArbhakam  /  vidhAya
paramAnandaM svasthAnaM sasuro'gamat  // 212 //  tatastamambe
rairdivyairalaGkAraizca bhUSitam  /  digdhaM ca paramAmodaghrANahAryAnulepanaiH
// 213 //  alaMkRta kiyA gayA thA  // 200 //  isa prakAra tIna lokake
AbharaNasvarUpa bhagavAn jaba nAnA alaMkAroM se alaMkRta ho gaye taba indra Adi
deva unakI isa prakAra stuti karane lage  // 201 //  he bhagavan ! dharmarahita
tathA ajJAnarUpI andhakArase AcchAdita isa saMsArameM bhramaNa karanevAle
logoMke lie Apa sUryake samAna udita hue ho  // 202 //  he jinarAja ! Apa
candramAke samAna ho so Apake upadezarUpI nirmala kiraNoMke dvArA aba bhavya
jIvarUpI kumudinI avazya hI vikAsako prApta hogI  // 203 /  /  he nAtha ! Apa
isa saMsArarUpI gharameM 'bhavya jIvoMko jIva-ajIva Adi tattvoMkA ThIka-ThIka
darzana ho' isa uddezyase svayaM hI jalate hae vaha mahAna dIpaka ho ki jisakI
utpatti kevalajJAnarUpI agnise hotI hai  /  / 204 //  pAparUpI zatruoMko naSTa
karaneke lie Apa tIkSNa bANa haiM  /  tathA Apa hI dhyAnarUpI agnike dvArA
saMsArarUpI aTavIkA dAha kareMge  // 205 /  /  he prabho ! Apa duSTa indriyarUpa
nAgoMkA damana karaneke lie garur3ake samAna udita hue ho, tathA Apa hI
sandeharUpI meghoMko ur3Ane ke lie pracaNDa vAyuke samAna ho  // 206 //  he
nAtha ! Apa amRta pradAna karaneke lie mahAmegha ho isalie dharmarUpI jalakI
bUMdoMkI prAptike lie tRSAtura bhavya jIvarUpI cAtaka UparakI ora mukha kara
Apako dekha rahe haiM  // 207 //  he svAmin ! ApakI atyanta nirmala kIrti tInoM
lokoMke dvArA gAyI jAtI hai isalie Apako namaskAra ho  /  he nAtha! Apa guNarUpI
phUlose suzobhita tathA manovAMchita phala pradAna karanevAle vRkSasvarUpa haiM
ataH Apako namaskAra ho  // 208 //  Apa karmarUpI kASThako vidAraNa karane ke
lie tIkSNa dhAravAlI kuThArake samAna haiM ataH Apako namaskAra ho| isI prakAra
Apa moharUpI unnata parvatako bhedaneke lie vajrasvarUpa ho isalie Apako
namaskAra ho  // 209 /  /  Apa duHkharUpI agniko bujhAneke lie jalasvarUpa
rajake saMgamase rahita AkAzasvarUpa ho ataH Apako namaskAra ho  // 210 //  isa
taraha devoMne vidhi-pUrvaka bhagavAnkI stuti kI, bAra-bAra praNAma kiyA aura
tadanantara unheM airAvata hAthIpara savAra kara ayodhyAkI ora prayANa kiyA  //
21 //  ayodhyA A jina-bAlakako indrANIke hAthase mAtAkI godameM virAjamAna karA
diyA, Ananda nAmakA utkRSTa nATaka kiyA aura tadanantara vaha anya devoMke sAtha
apane sthAnapara calA gayA  // 212 //  athAnantara 1. lekhaH kRtvA ma.  /  2.
tamamarai-ka.  /  3. liptaM ca ma.  /

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the translation of the provided text while retaining the Sanskrit words:
---  7   In the third section, seeing her son sitting in her lap, the mother,
Marudevi, was very pleased at that time. With her own shadow embraced and
decorated by brilliance, she had covered the directions. (21) Embracing him, her
heart overflowing with gentle touch and curiosity, she descended into the ocean
of happiness. (215) Due to having obtained her son, she glowed like the newly
risen sun illuminating the eastern direction. (216) Seeing her son adorned with
divine ornaments and endowed with excellent beauty, she thought of him as her
own supreme radiance connected with the wealth of the three worlds. (217) The
mind of Rajanabhi, who had experienced the manifestation of happiness associated
with the body of his son, melted, as the third part of his eyes closed in bliss.
(218) The Jinendra, having attained prominence due to the worship performed by
Indra, was given the name 'Rishabha' by his parents. (219) The mutual love
between the parents, which had grown towards the child, Rishabha Deva, was
concentrated at that time. (220) While drinking the nectar placed on the thumb
of the Lord by Indra, he gradually attained physical growth. (221) Thereafter,
together with the divine boys, similarly approved by Indra, the Lord began to
play a flawless game that brought happiness to his parents. (222) Everything he
owned, whether it be a seat, bed, vehicle, food, clothing, or the retinue of
others, was received from Indra. (223) In a short time, he attained supreme
growth. His chest became as broad and elevated as the Meru mountain. (224) His
arms, resembling the wish-fulfilling trees for the entire world, took the form
of pillars to confine the giants of hope. (225) His two shoulders held the
application of beauty bestowed by himself, appearing as if two pillars had been
erected to support the house of the three worlds. (226)  ---   Please note that
the translation is a compact rendition of the original Sanskrit, aimed at
retaining the essence and structure of the text while presenting it in English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 7 tRtIyaM parva tuSTA saMvIkSya tanayamaGkasthaM jananI tadA  /
nijacchAyApariSvaGgapiJjarIkRtadiGmukham  // 21 //  AliGgantI mRdusparza
kautukavyAptamAnasA  /  durAkhyAnaparAvasthamavatIrNA sukhArNavam  // 215 /  /
aGkaprAptena sA tena rarAja pramadottamA  /  navoditena pUrvAzA bimbena
savituryathA  // 216 //  nAmizca tatsutaM dRSTvA divyAlaGkAradhAriNam  /
prailokyaizvaryasaMyuktaM mene svaM paramadyutim  // 217 //
sutagAtrasamAsaMgasaMjAtasukhasaMpadaH  /  mIlitAkSatribhAgasya mano'sya
dravatAM gatam  // 218 //  surendra pUjayA prAptaH pradhAnatvaM jino yataH  /
tatastamRSabhAbhikhyAM ninyatuH pitarau sutam  // 219 //  tayoranyonyasaMbaddhaM
prema yad vRddhimAgatam  /  tajAtamadhunA bAle pUrvavacca tayorapi  /  / 220 //
karAGguSThe tato nyastamamRtaM vajrapANinA  /  piban krameNa saMprApa
dehasyopacayaM jinaH  // 22 //  tataH kumArakairyukto vayasyairindranoditaiH  /
anavadyAM cakArAsau krIDAM pitroH sukhAvahAm  // 222 //  AsanaM zayanaM yAnaM
bhojanaM vasanAni ca  /  cAraNAdikamanyacca sakalaM tasya zakrajam  // 223 //
kanIyasaiva kAlena parAM vRddhimavApa saH  /  merubhittisamAkAraM bibhradvakSaH
samunnatam  // 224 //  AzAratambaramAlAnastambhasaMsthAnatAM gatau  /  bAhU
tasya samastasya jagataH kalpapAdapau  // 225 //  jaldaNDadvayaM dadhe
svakAntikRtacarcanam  /  trailokyagRhakRtyarthaM stambhadvayasamucchritam  //
226 //  divya vastroM aura alaMkAroMse alaMkRta, tathA utkRSTa sugandhike kAraNa
nAsikAko haraNa karanevAle vilepanase lipta evaM apanI kAntike samparkase
dizAoMke agrabhAgako pIlA karanevAle aMkastha putrako dekhakara usa samaya mAtA
marudevI bahuta hI santuSTa ho rahI thI  // 213-214 //  jisakA hRdaya kautukase
bhara rahA thA aisI marudevI komala sparzavAle putrakA AliMgana karatI huI
varNanAtIta sukharUpI sAgarameM jA utarI thI  // 215 //  vaha uttama nArI
marudevI goda meM sthita jina-bAlakase isa prakAra suzobhita ho rahI thI jisa
prakAra ki navIna udita sUryake bimbase pUrva dizA suzobhita hotI hai  // 216 //
nAbhirAjane divya alaMkAroMko dhAraNa karanevAle evaM utkRSTa kAntise yukta usa
putrako dekhakara apane Apako tIna lokake aizvaryase yukta mAnA thA  // 217 //
putrake zarIrake sambandhase jinheM sukharUpa (sampadA utpanna huI hai tathA usa
sukhakA AsvAda karate samaya jinake netrakA tRtIya bhAga nimIlita ho rahA hai
aisA nAbhirAjakA mana usa putrako dekhakara dravIbhUta ho gayA thA  // 218 //
cUMki ve jinendra indrake dvArA kI huI pUjAse pradhAnatAko prApta hue the isalie
mAtA-pitAne unakA 'RSabha' yaha nAma rakhA  // 219 /  /  mAtApitAkA jo paraspara
sambandhI prema vRddhiko prApta huA thA vaha usa samaya bAlaka RSabhadevameM
kendrita ho gayA thA  /  / 220 //  indrane bhagavAnke hAthake aMgUThe meM jo
amRta nikSipta kiyA thA usakA pAna karate hue ve kramazaH zarIra sambandhI
vRddhiko prApta hue the  // 221 /  /  tadanantara, indrake dvArA anumodita
samAna avasthAvAle deva-kumAroMse yukta hokara bhagavAn mAtA-pitAko sukha
pahu~cAnevAlI nirdoSa krIr3A karane lage  // 222 //  Asana, zayana, vAhana,
bhojana, vastra tathA cAraNa Adika jitanA bhI unakA parikara thA vaha saba unheM
indrase prApta hotA thA  // 223 /  /  ve thor3e hI samayameM parama vRddhiko
prApta ho gye| unakA vakSaHsthala meru parvatako bhittike samAna caur3A aura
unnata ho gayA  /  / 224 //  samasta saMsArake lie kalpavRkSake samAna jo unakI
bhujAe~ thIM, ve AzArUpI diggajoMko bA~dhaneke lie khambhoMkA AkAra dhAraNa kara
rahI thIM  // 225 /  /  unake donoM UrudaNDa apanI nijako kAntike dvArA kiye hae
lepanako dhAraNa kara rahe the aura aise jAna par3ate the mAno tIna lokarUpI
gharako dhAraNa karaneke lie do khambhe ho khar3e kiye gaye hoM  /  / 226 /  /
unake 1. dehasyopazamaM m.| 2. sukhAvahAH ka.  /

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, He bore two things in his mouth, which were mutually
opposed. He had conquered the moon by his radiance and the sun by his
brilliance. ||227|| His hands, though soft as tender leaves, were of a reddish
hue. They were capable of pulverizing all the mountains and defeating all the
kings. ||228|| His hair was thick and glossy, and it looked as if a blue
sapphire was placed on the peak of Mount Meru. ||229|| Though he was a righteous
soul, he had stolen the eyes of all beings with his incomparable beauty. ||230||
At that time, all the Kalpa trees had perished, and the whole earth was adorned
with spontaneously grown grains, without being sown or cultivated. ||231|| The
people of that time were devoid of trade, commerce, and crafts. They had no
concept of religion and were free from hypocrisy. ||232|| The food of the people
was sugarcane juice, which was full of six flavors. It was self-cut and fell
from the stalk, and it was capable of providing strength, vigor, and other
qualities. ||233|| But due to the influence of time, it stopped flowing on its
own. People did not know how to extract juice from sugarcane using machines.
||234|| Even though they saw the grains, they were ignorant of the method of
processing them. They were tormented by hunger and were in great distress.
||235|| Then, they came together in great pain and sought refuge in the Lord of
the Navel. They bowed down and praised him, saying: ||236|| "O Lord! The Kalpa
trees, which sustained us, have all perished. We are tormented by hunger and
have come to you for refuge. Please protect us." ||237|| "We see something
growing on the earth, which is full of fruits. It may be fit for eating after
being processed, but we do not know the method." ||238|| "This substance is
coming out from the breasts of cows that roam freely. Is it edible or inedible?
How should we consume it? Please tell us, O Lord." ||239||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe dvayaM babhAra tadvaktramanyonyasya virodhakam  /  kAntyA
jitanizAnAthaM dIptyA ca jitabhAskaram  // 227 //  karau tasyAruNacchAyau
pallavAdapi komalau |'dhuuliikaare samastAnAM bhUbhRtAmatha ca kSamau  // 228 //
niviDaH kezasaMghAtaH snigdho'tyantaM babhUva c| nIlAanazilAkAro muni
hemagireriva  // 229 //  dharmAtmanApi lokasya tena sarvasya locane  /
upamAnamatItena hRte rUpeNa zaMbhunA  // 23 //  tasmin kAle praNaSTeSu
kalpavRkSeSvazeSataH  /  akRSTapacyasasyena mahI sarvA virAjate  // 23 //
vANijyavyavahAreNa zilpaizca rahitAH prajAH  /  abhAvAda dharmasaMjJAyAH
pAkhaNDaizca vivarjitAH  // 232 //  AlIdikSarasastAsAmAhAraH SaDrasAnvitaH  /
svayaM chinnacyutaH kAntivIryAdikaraNakSamaH  // 233 //  so'pi kAlAnubhAvena
stayaM galati no ydaa| yantraniSpIDanajJazca na loko'nupadezataH  // 234 //
pazyantyo'pi tadA sasyaM tatsaMskAravidhau jaDAH  /  sudhAsaMtApitAH satyaH
prajA vyAkulatAM gatAH  // 235 //  tataH zaraNamIyustA nAbhi saMghAtamAgatAH  /
Ucuzceti vacaH stutvA praNamya ca mahAtayaH  // 236 //  nAtha yAtAH samastAste
prakSayaM kalpapAdapAH  /  kSudhA saMtApitAnasmAMstrAyasva zaraNAgatAn  // 237
//  bhUmijaM phalasaMpannaM kimapyetacca dRzyate  /  vidhimasya na jAnImaH
saMskAre bhakSaNocitam  // 23 //  svachandacAriNAmetadgokulAnAM stanAntarAt  /
kSarabhakSyamamakSyaM kiM kathaM ceti vada prabho  // 239 //  mukhane kAntise
candramAko jIta liyA thA aura tejane sUryako parAsta kara diyA thA isa taraha
vaha parasparake virodhI do padArthoM-candramA aura sUryako dhAraNa kara rahA
thA  // 227 /  yadyapi lAla-lAla kAntike dhAraka unake donoM hAtha pallavase bhI
adhika komala the tathApi ve samasta parvatoMko cUrNa karanemeM ( pakSameM
samasta rAjAoMkA parAjaya karanemeM ) samartha the  // 228 //  unake kezoMkA
samUha atyanta saghana tathA sacikkaNa thA aura aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno meru
parvatake zikharapara nIlAMjanakI zilA hI rakhI ho  /  / 229 //  yadyapi ve
bhagavAn dharmAtmA the-haraNa Adiko adharma mAnate the tathApi unhoMne apane
anupama rUpase samasta logoMke netra haraNa kara liye the| bhAvArthabhagavAnkA
rUpa sarvajananayanAbhirAma thA  /  / 230 /  /  usa samaya kalpavRkSa
pUrNarUpase naSTa ho cuke the isalie samasta pRthivI akRSTapacya arthAt binA
jote, binA boye hI apane Apa utpanna honevAlI dhAnyase suzobhita ho rahI thI  //
231|| usa samayakI prajA vANijya-lena-denakA vyavahAra tathA zilpase rahita thI
aura dharmakA to nAma bhI nahIM thA isalie pAkhaNDase bhI rahita thI  /  / 232
//  jo chaha rasoMse sahita thA, svayaM hI kaTakara zAkhAse jhar3ane lagatA thA
aura bala-vIrya Adike karane meM samartha thA aisA ikSurasa hI usa samayakI
prajAkA AhAra thA  // 233 /  /  pahale to vaha jharasa apane Apa nikalatA thA
para kAlake prabhAvase aba usakA svayaM nikalanA banda ho gayA aura loga binA
kucha batAye yantroMke dvArA Ikhako pelanekI vidhi jAnate nahIM the  /  / 234 /
/  isI prakAra sAmane khar3I huI dhAnako loga dekha rahe the para usake
saMskArakI vidhi nahIM jAnate the isalie bhUkhase pIr3ita hokara atyanta vyAkula
ho uThe  // 235 //  tadanantara bahuta bhArI pIr3Ase yukta ve loga ikaTThe
hokara nAbhirAjakI zaraNameM pahuMce aura stuti tathA praNAma kara nimnalikhita
vacana kahane lage  // 236 //  he nAtha ! jinase hamArA bharaNa-poSaNa hotA thA
ve kalpavRkSa aba sabake saba naSTa ho gaye haiM isalie bhUkhase santapta hokara
ApakI zaraNameM Aye hue hama saba logoMkI Apa rakSA kIjie  // 237 /  /
pRthivIpara utpanna huI yaha koI vastu phaloMse yukta dikhAI de rahI hai, yaha
vastu saMskAra kiye jAnepara khAne ke yogya ho sakatI hai para hama loga isakI
vidhi nahIM jAnate haiM  // 238 /  /  svacchanda vicaranevAlI gAyoMke stanoMke
bhItarase yaha kucha padArtha nikala rahA hai so 1. parAjaye  /  2. pazyanto'pi
ma.  /  3. sadyaH m.| .

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Third Chapter 49 Lions, tigers, and other animals were once suitable for
embracing during play, but now they are intent on strife and terrify the people.
||24|| We see many beautiful and divine things in the sky, on land, and in
water, but we do not know how we can be happy with them. ||241|| Therefore, O
God, tell us the means to reform them, so that we may live happily, protected by
your grace. ||242|| Thus addressed, Sannabhi, the king, whose heart was filled
with compassion, spoke words that revealed the cause of the situation. ||243||
At the time of his birth, there was a shower of jewels for a long time, and the
arrival of the gods caused turmoil in the world. ||244|| Let us go to the great
and extraordinary Rishabhadeva and ask him the cause of life-giving sustenance.
||245|| There is no human being in this world like him. His soul is beyond all
darkness of ignorance. ||246|| Thus spoken to, Sannabhi, along with his people,
went to the presence of Rishabhadeva. Seeing his father, the god performed the
appropriate rites. ||247|| Then, Sannabhi and Rishabhadeva sat on their
respective seats. Then, the people, with prostrations, began to praise the god.
||248|| O Lord, your body, filled with all auspicious marks, is shining
brightly, overwhelming the entire world with its brilliance. ||249|| Your
extremely pure qualities, like the rays of the moon, bring joy and pervade the
entire world. ||250|| We came to your father, carrying our tasks, but these are
the qualities born of your knowledge that he speaks of. ||251|| You are a great
being, a great soul, endowed with extraordinary qualities. Even a wise king like
Sannabhi comes to you to seek certainty. ||252|| Therefore, you, being such,
protect us who are afflicted by hunger, and tell us the means to overcome the
fear of lions and other evil animals. ||253|| 1. Sannabhi, K., M. | 2. -sten
saakm te M. | 3. tatra M. |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIyaM parva 49 vyAghrasiMhAdayaH pUrva krIDAsvAliGganocitAH  /  adhunA
trAsayantyete prajAH kalahatatparAH  // 24 //  manoharANi divyAni sthalAni
jalajAni ca  /  dRzyante na tu jAnImaH sukhamebhiryathA bhavet  // 241 //  ataH
saMskaraNopAyameteSAM vada deva naH  /  yataH sukhena jIvAmastvatprasAdena
rakSitAH  // 242 //  evamuktaH prajAmiH saM nAmiH kaarunnysNgtH| jagAda vacanaM
dhIro vRtterdarzanakAraNam  // 243 //  utpattisamaye yasya ratnavRSTirabhUciram
/  Agamazca surendrANAM lokakSomanakAraNam  // 244 //  mahAtizayasaMpannaM
tamupetya samaM vayam  /  RSabhaM paripRcchAmaH kAraNaM jIvanapradam  // 245 //
tasya devasya loke'smin sadRzo nAsti mAnavaH  /  sarveSAM tamasAmante tasyAtmA
saMpratiSThitaH  // 246 //  ityuktAstenaM tAH sAkaM nAbheyasyAntikaM gtaaH|
dRSTvA ca pitaraM devo vidhiM cakre yathocitam  // 247 //  upaviSTastato nAbhi
bheyazca yathAsanam  /  athainaM stotumArabdhAH prajAH praNatipUrvakam  // 248
//  lokaM sarvamatikramya tejasA jvalitaM vapuH  /  sarvalakSaNasaMpUrNa
tavaitannAtha zomate  // 249 //  guNastava jagatsarva vyAptamatyantanirmaleH  /
prahAdakaraNodyaktaiH zazAGkakiraNeriva  // 250 //  vayaM prabhuM samAyAtAH
pitaraM tava kAryiNaH  /  guNAn jJAnasamudbhUtAn sa caiSa tava bhASate  // 251
//  sa tvaM ko'pi mahAsattvo mahAtmAtizayAnvitaH  /  evaM vidho'pi yaM gatvA
nizcayArtha niSevate  // 252 //  sa tvamevaMvidho bhUtvA rakSa naH
kSutprapIDitAn  /  upAyasyopadezena siMhAdibhayatastathA  // 253 //  vaha
bhakSya hai yA abhakSya hai ? he svAmin ! yaha batalAie  // 239 /  /  ye siMha,
vyAghra Adi jantu pahale krIr3AoMke samaya AliMgana karane yogya hote the para
aba ye kalahameM tatpara hokara prajAko bhayabhIta karane lage haiM  /  / 240 /
/  aura ye AkAza, sthala tathA jalameM utpanna hue kitane hI mahAmanohara
padArtha dikha rahe haiM so inase hameM sukha kisa taraha hogA yaha hama nahIM
jAnate haiM  // 241 /  /  isalie he deva ! hama logoMko inake saMskAra karanekA
upAya batalAie jisase ki prasAdase surakSita hokara hama loga sukhase jIvita
raha sakeM  // 242 /  /  prajAke aisA kahanepara nAbhirAjAkA hRdaya dayAse bhara
gayA aura ve AjIvikAke upAya dikhalAne ke lie dhIratAke sAtha nimna prakAra
vacana kahane lage  /  / 243 /  /  jinakI utpattike samaya cirakAla taka ratna-
vRSTi huI thI aura lokameM kSobha utpanna karanevAlA devoMkA Agamana huA thA  //
244 //  mahAn atizayoMse sampanna RSabhadevake pAsa calakara hama loga unase
AjIvikAke kAraNa pUche  // 245|| isa saMsArameM unake samAna koI manuSya nahIM
hai| unakI AtmA sarva prakArake ajJAnarUpI andhakAroMse pare hai  /  / 246  //
nAbhirAjAne jaba prajAse ukta vacana kahe to vaha unhIMko sAtha lekara
RSabhanAtha bhagavAnke pAsa gyii| bhagavAnne pitAko dekhakara unakA yathAyogya
satkAra kiyA  // 247|| tadanantara nAbhirAjA aura bhagavAn RSabhadeva jaba
apane-apane yogya AsanoMpara ArUr3ha ho gaye taba prajAke loga namaskAra kara
bhagavAnkI isa prakAra stuti karaneke lie tatpara hue  // 248 //  he nAtha!
samasta lakSaNoMse bharA huA ApakA yaha zarIra tejake dvArA samasta jagatko
AkrAnta kara dedIpyamAna ho rahA hai  /  / 249 /  /  candramAkI kiraNoMke samAna
Ananda utpanna karanevAle Apake atyanta nirmala guNoMse samasta saMsAra vyApta
ho rahA hai  // 250 /  /  hama loga kArya lekara Apake pitAke pAsa Aye the
parantu ye jJAnase utpanna hue Apake guNoMkA bakhAna karate haiM  /  / 251 //
jabaki aise vidvAn mahArAja nAbhirAja bhI Apake pAsa Akara padArthakA nizcaya
kara dete haiM taba yaha bAta spaSTa ho jAtI hai ki Apa atizayoMse suzobhita,
dhairyako dhAraNa karanevAle koI anupama mahAtmA haiM  /  / 252 /  /  isalie
Apa, bhUkhase pIr3ita hue hama logoMkI rakSA kIjie tathA siMha Adi duSTa
jantuoMse jo bhaya ho rahA hai usakA bhI upAya batalAie  // 253 /  /  1.
sannAbhiH ka., ma.  /  2. -stena sAkaM te m.| 3. tatra m,|

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
50 Padmapurana Then, Nabhinandan, whose heart was filled with compassion, ruled
over his subjects, who, with folded hands, had fallen at his feet. ||254|| He
taught his people hundreds of crafts, the planning of cities, the establishment
of villages and settlements, and the construction of houses and other buildings.
||255|| Those men whom he appointed to protect the land were known in the world
as Kshatriyas, because of their virtues. ||256|| Those who were engaged in
trade, agriculture, cattle-raising, and other occupations were known in the
world as Vaishyas. ||257|| Those who were engaged in low-caste work and who were
far from the scriptures were called Shudras. They had many divisions, such as
servants, slaves, etc. ||258|| This era, which brought happiness to all, was
established by Lord Rishabhadeva. It was an era of prosperity, and so the people
called it the Krita Yuga. ||259|| Lord Rishabhadeva had two wives, Sunanda and
Nanda. From them were born his mighty sons, Bharat and others. ||260|| His
hundred sons were all beautiful in their virtues and relationships. They adorned
the earth, which was constantly filled with festivals. ||261|| As the Lord of
the world, Nabhinandan, enjoyed his unparalleled wealth, a great deal of time
passed. ||262|| Then, one day, while the celestial maiden, Neelanjana, was
dancing, a thought arose in his mind, which was the cause of his detachment.
||263|| He thought, "Alas! These people of the world are striving to please
others, and they are getting nothing but ridicule in return. Their actions are
like the antics of madmen, and they are only causing themselves pain." ||264||
"What a strange world this is! Some are forced to become servants, while others,
with arrogant words, give orders to them." ||265|| "Curse this world, where
deluded beings create only suffering, and mistake it for happiness!" ||266||
"Therefore, I will abandon this perishable and artificial happiness, and strive
to attain the happiness of the Siddhas." ||267|| As these thoughts were passing
through his mind, the celestial beings came to him and spoke. ||268||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 50 padmapurANe tataH kRpAsamAsaktahRdayo nAbhinandanaH  /  zazAsa caraNeprAptA
baddhAJjalipuTAH prajAH  // 254 //  zilpAnAM zatamuddiSTaM nagarANAM ca kalpanam
/  grAmAdisannivezAzca tathA vezmAdikAraNam  // 255 //  kSetatrANe niyuktA ye
tena nAthena mAnavAH  /  kSatriyA iti te loke prasiddhiM guNato gatAH  //  256
//  vANijya kRSigorakSAprabhRtau ye nivezitAH  /  vyApAre vaizyazabdena te loke
parikIrtitAH  //  257 //  ye tu zrutAd drutaM prAptA nIcakarmavidhAyinaH  /
zUdrasaMjJAmavApuste bhedaiH preSyAdibhistathA  //  258 //  yugaM tena kRtaM
yasmAditthametatsukhAvaham  /  tasmAtkRtayugaM proktaM prajAbhiH prAptasaMpadam
//  259  //  nAbheyasya sunandA'bhUnnandA ca vanitAdvayam  /  bharatAdaya
utpannAstayoH putrA mahaujasaH  //  260  //  zatena tasya putrANAM
guNasaMbandhacAruNA  /  abhUdalaMkRtA kSoNI nityaprAptasamutsavA  // 261 //
tasyAnupamamaizvaryaM bhuJjAnasya jagadguroH  /  prayAtaH sumahAn kAlo
nAbheyasyAmitasviSaH  // 262 //  atha nIlAJjanAkhyAyAM nRtyantyAM surayoSiti  /
iyaM tasya samutpannA buddhirvairAgyakAraNam  // 263 //  aho janA viDambayante
paratoSaNaceSTitaiH  /  unmattacaritAkAraiH svavapuH khedakAraNaiH  //  264  //
atra kazcit parAdhIno loke bhRtyatvamAgataH  /  AjJAM dadAti kazciczca tasmai
garvaskhaladvacAH  // 265 //  evaM dhigastu saMsAraM yasminnutpAdyate paraiH  /
duHkhameva sukhAbhikhyAM nItaM saMmUDhamAnasaiH  //  266 //  tasmAdidaM
parityajya kRtrimaM kSayavatsukham  /  siddhU saukhyasamAvAptyai karomyAzu
viceSTitam  //  267 //  yAvadevaM manastasya pravRttaM zubhacintane  /
tAvalaukAntikairdevairidamAgatya bhASitam  //  268  //  tadanantara - jinakA
hRdaya dayAse yukta thA aise bhagavAn vRSabhadeva hAtha jor3akara caraNoM meM
par3I huI prajAko upadeza dene lage || 254 || unhoMne prajAko saikar3oM
prakArako zilpakalAoMkA upadeza diyA  /  nagaroMkA vibhAga, grAma AdikA basAnA,
aura makAna Adike banAnekI kalA prajAko sikhAyI || 255 || bhagavAn ne jina
puruSoMko vipattigrasta manuSyoMkI rakSA karanemeM niyukta kiyA thA ve apane
guNoMke kAraNa lokameM 'kSatriya' isa nAmase prasiddhiko prApta hue || 256 ||
vANijya, khetI, gorakSA Adike vyApArameM jo lagAye gaye the ve lokameM vaizya
kahalAye || 257|| jo nIca kArya karate the tathA zAstrase dUra bhAgate the unheM
zUdra saMjJA prApta huI  /  inake preSya dAsa Adi aneka bheda the || 258 || isa
prakAra sukhako prApta karAnevAlA vaha yuga bhagavAn RSabhadevake dvArA kiyA
gayA thA tathA usameM saba prakArako sampadAe~ sulabha thIM isalie prajA use
kRtayuga kahane lagI thI || 259 || bhagavAn RSabhadevake sunandA aura nandA
nAmakI do striyA~ thiiN| unase unake bharata Adi mahApratApI putra utpanna hue
the || 260 || bharata Adi so bhAI the tathA guNoMke sambandhase atyanta sundara
the isalie yaha pRthvI unase alaMkRta huI thI tathA nirantara hI aneka utsava
prApta karatI rahatI thI || 261 || aparimita kAntiko dhAraNa karanevAle
jagadguru bhagavAn RSabhadevako anupama aizvaryaMkA upabhoga karate hue jaba
bahuta bhArI kAla vyatIta ho gayA || 262|| taba eka dina nIlAMjanA nAmaka devIke
nRtya karate samaya unheM vairAgyakI utpattimeM kAraNabhUta nimna prakArakI
buddhi utpanna huI || 263 || ve vicArane lage ki aho ! saMsArake ye prANI
dUsaroMko santuSTa karanevAle kAryoMse viDambanA prApta kara rahe haiM  /
prANiyoM ke ye kAryaM pAgaloMkI ceSTAke samAna haiM tathA apane zarIrako kheda
utpanna karaneke lie kAraNasvarUpa haiM || 264 || saMsArakI vicitratA dekho,
yahA~ koI to parAdhIna hokara dAsavRttiko prApta hotA hai aura koI gava~se
skhalita vacana hotA huA use AjJA pradAna karatA hai || 265 || isa saMsArako
dhikkAra ho ki jisameM mohI jIva duHkhako hI, sukha samajhakara, utpanna karate
haiM  //  266  //  | isalie maiM to isa vinAzIka tathA kRtrima sukhako
chor3akara siddha jIvoMkA sukha prApta karaneke lie zIghra hI prayatna karatA
hU~ || 267 || isa 1. zaraNaM prAptA ka.  /  2. kSatitrANe ma.  /  3 zrutA kha  /
zrutvA hRti ma  /  4 prAptasammadam ma.  /  5. nIlAMJjasA- ma., kha  /  6.
paritoSaka ma.  /  7. siddhi kha  /

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The third chapter, the virtuous Lord, is enlightened, the cause of the welfare
of the three worlds. The path to liberation, which had been interrupted, is now
open. ||269|| These beings are revolving in the great ocean of worldly
suffering. They are not being reformed without a teacher. ||270|| Let the beings
now walk the path shown by you. They will attain the position of the liberated
beings, which is filled with eternal happiness and is at the forefront of the
world. ||271|| Thus, the words spoken by the gods were repeated before the self-
enlightened Lord, the great soul, Adi Nath. ||272|| As soon as the Lord decided
to leave his home, the gods, led by Indra, arrived as before. ||273|| Arriving,
all the gods praised the Lord with salutations and repeatedly said, "O Lord, you
have made a very good decision." ||274||  Then, the Lord, mounted on a
palanquin, which was adorned with a canopy of jewels that filled the directions,
with beautiful fly whisks on either side, like the rays of the moon, shining
with the reflection of a full moon, adorned with jeweled bells, half-moon
shaped, decorated with banners of cloth, fragrant with divine garlands, adorned
with pearl necklaces, beautiful to behold, resembling a celestial chariot, with
small bells ringing, and on which Indra had placed his shoulder, made by divine
sculptors, left his home. ||275-278|| Then, the space between the three worlds
was filled with the sound of the instruments and the dancing gods. ||279||
Accompanied by the gods, filled with great splendor and devotion, the Lord
reached the garden called Tilaka. ||280|| The Lord Vrishabhadeva went to that
garden called Tilaka, away from the people, so that place became known as
"Prajag." Or, the Lord performed a great sacrifice, or renunciation, at that
place, so it became known as "Prayag." ||281|| Arriving there, the Lord asked
permission from his parents and relatives to take initiation, and then said,
"Namaha Siddhebhyah" - salutations to the Siddhas. ||282||  Here, the Lord's
mind was engaged in good thoughts, when at that very moment, the celestial gods
arrived and began to make the following request. ||268|| They said, "O Lord, the
thought you have had to benefit the beings of the three worlds is very good. The
path to liberation has been closed for a long time." ||269|| These beings are
diving into the ocean of worldly suffering without a teacher. ||270|| At this
time, the beings will walk the path shown by you and attain the position of the
liberated beings, which is filled with eternal happiness and is at the forefront
of the world. ||271||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIyaM parva sAdhu nAthAvabuddhaM te trailokyahitakAraNam  /  vicchinnasya
mahAkAlo mokSamArgasya vartate  // 269 //  ete viparivartante
bhavaduHkhamahArNave  /  upadezasya dAtAramantareNAsudhAriNaH  // 27 //
vrajantu sAMprataM jIvA dezitena pathotvayA  /  yuktamakSayasaukhyena
lokAgre'vasthitaM padam  // 271 //  iti tasya prabuddhasya svayameva mahAtmanaH
/  surairu dAhRtA vAcaH prayAtAH punaruktatAm  // 272 //  iti niSkramaNe tena
cintite tadanantaram  /  AgatAH pUrvavaddevAH purandarapurassarAH  // 273 //
Agatya ca suraiH sarvaiH stutaH praNatipUrvakam  /  cintitaM sAdhu nAtheti
bhASitaM ca punaH punaH  // 27 //  'tato ratnapramAjAlajaTilIkRtadiGmukhAm  /
candrAMzunikarAkArapracalaccArucAmarAm  // 275 //  pUrNacandranimAdarzakRtazobhA
sabubudAm  /  arddhacandrakasaMyuktAmaMzukadhvajabhUSitAm  // 276 //
divyasragbhiH kRtAmodAM muktAhAravirAjitAm  /  sudarzanAM vimAnAmA kiGkiNIbhiH
kRtasvanAm  // 277 //  saranAthApita skandhAM devazilpivinirmitAm  /  Aruhya
zivikAM nAtho nirjagAma nijAlayAt  // 27 //  tataH zabdena tUryANAM nRtyatAM ca
divaukasAm  /  trilokavivarApUrazcakre pratininAdinA  // 279 //
tato'syantamahAbhatyA bhaktyA devaiH smnvitH| tilakAha tamadyAna saMprApa
jinapuGgavaH  // 28 //  prajAga iti dezo'sau prajAbhyo'smin gato yataH  /
prakRSTo vA kRtastyAgaH prayAgastena kIrtitaH  // 281 //  ApRcchanaM tataH kRtvA
pitro bandhujanasya ca  /  namaH siddhebhya ityuktvA zrAmaNyaM pratyapadyata  //
282 //  taraha yahA~ bhagavAnkA citta zubha vicArameM lagA huA thA ki vahA~ usI
samaya laukAntika devoMne Akara nimna prakAra nivedana karanA prArambha kara
diyA  // 268 /  /  ve kahane lage ki he nAtha! Apane jo tIna lokake jIvoMkA hita
karanekA vicAra kiyA hai so bahuta hI uttama bAta hai| isa samaya mokSakA mArga
banda hae bahata samaya ho gayA hai||269|| ye prANI upadeza-dAtAke binA
saMsArarUpI mahAsAgarameM gotA lagA rahe haiM  /  / 270 /  /  isa samaya prANI
Apake dvArA batalAye hue mArgase calakara avinAzI sukhase yukta tathA lokake
agrabhAgameM sthita mukta jIvoMke padako prApta hoM  // 271 /  /  isa prakAra
devoMke dvArA kahe hue vacana svayambuddha bhagavAn AdinAthake samakSa
punaruktatAko prApta hue the  // 272 //  jyoM hI bhagavAnne gRhatyAgakA nizcaya
kiyA tyoM hI indra Adi deva pahalekI bhA~ti A pahuMce  // 273 /  /  Akara
samasta devoMne namaskArapUrvaka bhagavAnkI stuti kI aura 'he nAtha ! Apane
bahuta acchA vicAra kiyA hai' yaha zabda bAra-bAra kahe  /  / 274 /  /
tadanantara, jisane ratnoMkI kAntike samUhase dizAoMke agrabhAgako vyApta kara
rakhA thA, jisake donoM ora candramAkI kiraNoMke samUhake samAna sundara camara
Dhole jA rahe the, pUrNa candramAke samAna darpaNase jisakI zobhA bar3ha rahI
thI, jo buvudake AkAra maNimaya go sahita thI, arddhacandrAkArase sahita thI,
patAkAoMke vastrase suzobhita thI, divya mAlAoMse sugandhita thI, motiyoMke
hArase virAjamAna thI, dekhane meM bahuta sundara thI, vimAnake samAna jAna
par3atI thI, jisameM lagI huI choTI-choTI ghaNTiyA~ runa-jhuna zabda kara rahI
thIM, aura indrane jisapara apanA kandhA lagA rakhA thA aisI devarUpI zilpiyoMke
dvArA nirmita pAlakIpara savAra hokara bhagavAn apane gharase bAhara nikale  //
275-278|| tadanantara bajate hue bAjoM aura nRtya karate hue devoMke pratidhvani
pUrNa zabdase tInoM lokoMkA antarAla bhara gayA  /  / 279 /  /  bahuta bhArI
vaibhava aura bhaktise yukta devoMke sAtha bhagavAn tilaka nAmaka udyAnameM
pahu~ce  /  / 280 //  bhagavAn vRSabhadeva prajA arthAt jana samahase dUra ho
usa tilaka nAmaka udyAna meM pahuMce the isalie usa sthAnakA nAma 'prajAga'
prasiddha ho gayA athavA bhagavAnne usa sthAnapara bahuta bhArI yAga arthAt
tyAga kiyA thA, isalie usakA nAma 'prayAga' bhI prasiddha huA  /  / 281 /  /
vahA~ pahu~cakara bhagavAnne mAtA-pitA tathA bandhujanoMse dIkSA lenekI AjJA lI
aura phira 'namaH siddhebhyaH'-siddhoMke lie 1. trailokye m.| 2. yathA ma.  /
3. tAraratna- kh.| 4. pratipadyata ma.  /

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Certainly! Here is the translation of the provided text into English while
keeping the Sanskrit words intact:  ---  In the Padma Purana, The great sage,
having given up his adornments and garments, uprooted his hair with five
fingers.  (283)   Then, King Indra placed those hair into a treasure chest and
afterward cast them on his head in the ocean of milk. (284)   Having established
his glory for the purpose of Jain initiation, the divine beings and thoughtful
humans departed as they had arrived. (285)   Thousands of kings, who could not
comprehend the Lord's intent, attained the state of nakedness driven solely by
their devotion to their masters. (286)   Then, after half a year, the Lord
Vá¹á¹£abhadeva remained steadfast in the practice of fasting like the Sumeru
mountain. (287)   His disheveled hair, blown by the wind, appeared like the
smokey formations of karmic bondage burning in the fire of meditation. (288)
Then, before six months had passed, the group of kings who had taken initiation
together was defeated by the great warriors known as ParÄ«á¹£hads. (289)   Some of
those kings fell to the ground, struck by the wind of suffering, while some, due
to their strong vitality, sat on the earth. (290)   Some, tormented by hunger,
abandoned their fasting to eat fruits. Others, tortured by their bodies, entered
cool water. (291)   Some, breaking the bonds of righteousness, began to enter
the caves of the mountains like maddened elephants, while others, regaining
their senses, prepared to see Lord Jinendra. (292)   Among all those kings, the
son of Bharata, MÄrÄ«chi, was quite arrogant, and so he donned saffron robes and
became an ascetic, along with many others wearing the bark garments. (293)
When those kings, in the form of naked individuals, were about to collect fruits
and other things, the invisible gods pronounced the following words in the sky:
"O kings! Do not perform this action while being naked, for it will indeed
become a source of great suffering for you." (294-295)   Hearing the words of
the deities, many individuals donned leaves of trees.    ---  This translation
maintains the original structure and includes explanations where necessary for
clarity.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe alaMkAraiH samaM tyaktvA vasanAni mahAmuniH  /  cakArAsau
parityAgaM kezAnAM paJcamuSTibhiH  // 283 //  tato renapuTe kezAn pratipadya
surAdhipaH  /  cikSepa mastake kRtvA kSIrAkUpAravAriNi  // 284 //  mahimAnaM
tataH kRtvA jina dIkSAnimittakam  /  yathA yAtaM surA dharmanuSyAzca vicetasaH
// 285 //  sahasrANi ca catvAri nRpANAM svAmibhaktitaH  /  tadAkUtamajAnanti
pratipannAni nagnatAm  // 286 //  tato varSArddhamAnaM sa kAyotsargeNa nizcalaH
/  dharAdharendravattasthau kRtendriyasamasthitiH  // 287 //  vAtodhUtA
jaTAstasya rejurAkulamUrtayaH  /  dhUmAlya iva saddhyAnavahnisaktasya karmaNaH
// 28 //  tataH SaDapi no yAvanmAsA gacchanti bhUbhRtAm  /  bhagnastAbadasau
saGghaH parISahamahAmaTaiH  // 289 //  kecinnipatitA bhUmau duHkhAnilasamAhatAH
/  kecit sarasavIryatvAdupaviSTA mahItale  // 290 //  kAyotsarga parityajya
gatAH kecit phalAzanam  /  saMtaptamUrtayaH kecit praviSTAH zItala jalam  // 291
//  kecinnAgA iboddhRttA vivizurgiriMgahvaram  /  parAvRtya manaH kecit
prArabdhA jinamIkSitum  // 292 //  mAnI tana marIcistu dadhatkASAyavAsasI  /
paribADAsanaM cakre valkibhiH pratyavasthitaH  // 293 //  tataH phalAdikaM teSAM
nagnarUpeNa gRhyatAm  /  vicerugaMgane vAco'darzanAnAM sudhAbhujAm  // 294 //
anena nagnarUpeNa na vartata idaM nRpAH  /  samAcaritumatyarthaM duHkhaheturayaM
hi vaH  // 295 //  tataH paridadhuH kecit patrANyanye tu valkalam  /  carmANi
kecidanye tu vAsaH prathamamujjhitam  // 296 //  M namaskAra ho yaha kaha dIkSA
dhAraNa kara lI  /  / 282 //  mahAmuni vRSabhadevane sava alaMkAroMke sAtha hI
sAtha vastroMkA bhI tyAga kara diyA aura paMcamuSTiyoMke dvArA keza ukhAr3akara
pheMka diye  // 283 /  /  indrane una kezoMko ratnamayI piTAremeM rakha liyA
aura tadanantara mastakapara rakhakara unheM kSIrasAgara meM kSepa AyA  /  /
284|| samasta deva dIkSAkalyANaka sambandhI utsava kara jisa prakAra Aye the usI
prakAra cale gaye, sAtha hI manuSya bhI apanA hRdaya harAkara yathAsthAna cale
gaye  /  / 285 /  /  usa samaya cAra hajAra rAjAoMne jo ki bhagavAnke
abhiprAyako nahIM samajha sake the kevala svAmibhaktise prerita hokara nagna
avasthAko prApta hue the  // 286 //  tadanantara indriyoMkI samAna avasthA
dhAraNa karanevAle bhagavAn vRSabhadeva chaha mAha taka kAyotsargase sumeru
parvatake samAna nizcala khar3e rahe  /  / 287 /  /  havAse ur3I huI unakI asta-
vyasta jaTAe~ aisI jAna par3atI thIM mAno samIcIna dhyAnarUpI agnise jalate hue
karmake dhUmakI paMktiyA~ hI hoM  /  / 288 //  tadanantara chaha mAha bhI nahIM
ho pAye the ki sAtha-sAtha dIkSA lenevAle rAjAoMkA samUha parISaharUpI
mahAyoddhAoMke dvArA parAsta ho gayA  /  / 289 /  /  unameM se kitane hI rAjA
duHkharUpI vAyuse tADita hokara pRthivIpara gira gaye aura kitane hI kucha
sabala zaktike dhAraka honese pRthivIpara baiTha gaye  // 290 /  /  kitane hI
bhUkhase pIr3ita ho kAyotsarga chor3akara phala khAne lge| kitane hI santapta
zarIra honeke kAraNa zItala jalameM jA ghuse  // 291 //  kitane hI cAritrakA
bandhana tor3a unmatta hAthiyoMkI taraha pahAr3oMkI guphAoMmeM ghusane lage aura
kitane hI phirase manako lauTAkara jinendradevake darzana karaneke lie udyata
hue  // 222 /  /  una saba rAjAoMmeM bharatakA putra marIci bahuta ahaMkArI thA
isalie vaha geruA vastra dhAraNa kara parivrAjaka bana gayA tathA valkaloMko
dhAraNa karanevAle kitane hI loga usake sAtha ho gaye  // 293 /  /  ve rAjA loga
nagnarUpameM hI phalAdika grahaNa karaneke lie jaba udyata hae taba adRzya
devatAoMke nimnAMkita vacana AkAzameM prakaTa he| he rAjAo! tuma loga
nagnaveSameM rahakara yaha kArya na karo kyoMki aisA karanA tumhAre lie atyanta
duHkhakA kAraNa hogA  // 294-295 /  /  devatAoMke vacana sunakara kitane hI
logoMne vRkSoMke patte pahana 1. ratnapaTe ma., k.| 2. kSIrakUpAra-ma.  /  3.
zaktasya ma., kha., zaktisya ( ? ) ma.  /  4. ivoddhatA ma.  /  5. parivATa
zAsanaM m.|

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Many people took to wearing tree bark, some covered themselves in leather, and
some even put back on the clothes they had previously discarded. ||296||
Feeling ashamed of their nakedness, many people took to wearing kusha grass
garments. Having thus donned leaves and such, they were all satiated by fruits
and cool water. ||297||  Thereafter, all the kings who had fallen into bad ways
gathered together and, without fear, began to consult with each other, having
gone far away. ||298||  One of them addressed the other kings, saying, "Did the
Lord say anything to any of you?" ||299||  The other kings replied, "He did not
say anything to any of us." Hearing this, a king who desired pleasures said,
"Then what is the point of staying here? Let us rise and go to our respective
countries, and enjoy the happiness that comes from seeing the faces of our sons
and wives." ||300-301||  Another one of them said, "Since we are in sorrow, we
are ready to go. There is no task that we cannot do because of our sorrow. But
we must remember that when Bharat sees us returning alone, without our master,
he will be angry and will surely take our countries away from us." ||302-303||
"Or, when the Lord Rishabhadeva regains his kingdom and returns to rule after
leaving the forest, how will we, without shame, look him in the face?" ||304||
"Therefore, let us stay here, eating fruits and such, and serving him, wandering
about in happiness." ||305||  Now, the Lord Rishabhadeva was seated in a posture
of meditation, when Nami and Vinami, eager to beg for boons, bowed down at his
feet and stood there. ||306||  At that time, the king of the Naga serpents,
Dharanendra, realized that Nami and Vinami were begging the Lord for boons,
because he felt the seat tremble. Knowing this, he quickly arrived there.
||307||  Dharanendra, assuming the form of the Lord, gave Nami and Vinami two
excellent vidyas. Having received those vidyas, they both immediately went to
the Vijayardha mountain. ||308||  Ascending ten yojanas, they found there vidya-
filled abodes, filled with various kinds of boons, equal to those of the
Mogakshita, scattered throughout different countries and cities. ||309||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIyaM parva lajitAH svena rUpeNa kecittu kuzacIvaram  /
prAptAmImistatastRptiH phalaiH zItajalena ca  // 297 //  saMbhUya te tato bhagnA
durdazAcAravartinaH  /  vizrabdhAH kartumArabdhA dUraM gatvA pradhAraNam  // 298
//  teSAM kenacidityuktAstato bhUpena te nRpAH  /  etena kathitaM
kiMcitkasmaicidbhavatAmiti  // 299 //  naitena kathitaM kiMcidasmabhyamiti te
dhravam  /  tato'nyenoditaM vAkya miti bhogAbhilASiNA  // 30 //  uttiSThata
nijAna dezAn brajAmo'tra sthitena kim  /  prApnumaH putradArAdivaktrAlokanajaM
sukham  // 301 //  apareNeti tatroktaM vrajAmo vihvalA vayam  /  nahi
kiMcidakartavyaM vidyate'smAkamArtitaH  // 302 //  nAthena tu vinAyAtAnnirIkSya
bharato russaa| mArayiSyati no'vazyaM dezAn vApahariSyati  // 303 //  nAbheyo vA
punaryasmin kAle rAjyaM prapatsyate  /  tadAsya darzayiSyAmo nistrapAH
kathamAnanam  // 304 //  tasmAdatraiva tiSThAmo bhakSayantaH phalAdikam  /
sevAmasyaiva kurvANA bhrAmyantaH sukhamicchayA  // 305 //  pratimAsthasya
tasyAtha namizca vinamistathA  /  tasthatuH pAdayonatvA mogayAcanatatparau  //
306 //  "yAcamAnau viditvA tAvAsanasya prakampanAt  /  AyAto dharaNo nAmnA
nAgarAjasvarAndhitaH  /  / 307 /  /  vikRtya jinarUpaM sa tAbhyAM vidye vare
dadau  /  prApya vidya vare yAtau vijayArddhanage kSaNAt  // 308 //  yojanAni
dazAruhya tatra vidyAbhRdAlayAH  /  nAnAdezapurAkIrNAmogairmogakSiteH samAH  //
309 //  liye, kitane hI logoMne vRkSoMke valkala dhAraNa kara liye, kitane hI
logoMne camar3ese zarIra AcchAdita kara liyA aura kitane hI logoMne pahale
chor3e hue vastra hI phirase grahaNa kara liye  // 296|| apane nagna veSase
lajjita hokara kitane hI logoMne kuzAoMkA vastra dhAraNa kiyaa| isa prakAra
patra Adi dhAraNa karaneke bAda ve saba phaloM tathA zItala jalase tRptiko
prApta hue  /  / 297 /  /  tadanantara jinakI burI hAlata ho rahI thI aise
bhraSTa hue saba rAjA loga ekatrita ho dUra jAkara niHzaMka bhAvase parasparameM
salAha karane lage  /  / 298 /  /  unameMse kisI rAjAne anya rAjAoMko sambodhita
karate hue kahA ki Apa logoMmeMse kisIse bhagavAnne kucha kahA thA  // 299||
isake uttarameM anya rAjAoMne kahA ki inhoMne hama logoMmeM-se kisIse kucha bhI
nahIM kahA hai  /  yaha sunakara bhogoMkI abhilASA rakhanevAle kisI rAjAne kahA
ki to phira yahA~ rukanese kyA lAbha hai ? uThie, hama loga apane-apane deza
caleM aura putra tathA strI AdikA mukha dekhanese utpanna huA sukha prApta kareM
// 300-301|| unhIMmeM se kisIne kahA ki cUMki hama loga duHkhI haiM ataH
calaneke lie taiyAra haiN| isa samaya aisA koI kArya nahIM jise duHkhake kAraNa
hama kara na sakeM parantu yaha smaraNa rakhanA cAhie ki hama logoMko svAmIke
vinA akelA hI vApisa AyA dekhakara bharata mAregA aura avazya hI hama logoMke
deza chIna legA  // 302-303 /  /  athavA bhagavAn RSabhadeva jaba phirase rAjya
prApta kareMgevanavAsa chor3akara punaH rAjya karane lageMge taba hama loga
nirlajja hokara inheM mukha kaise dikhAveMge?  // 304 /  isalie hama loga
phalAdikA bhakSaNa karate hue yahIM para raheM aura icchAnusAra sukhapUrvaka
bhramaNa karate hue inhIMkI sevA karate raheM  // 305 /  /  _ athAnantara-
bhagavAn RSabhadeva pratimAyogase virAjamAna the ki bhogoMkI yAcanA karane meM
tatpara nami aura vinami unake caraNoMmeM namaskAra kara vahIM para khar3e ho
gaye  // 306|| usI samaya Asanake kampAyamAna honese nAgakumAroMke adhipati
dharaNendrane yaha jAna liyA ki nami aura vinami bhagavAnse yAcanA kara rahe
haiN| yaha jAnate hI vaha zIghratAse vahA~ A pahu~cA  /  / 307 /  /
dharaNendrane vikriyAse bhagavAnkA rUpa dharakara nami aura vinamike lie do
utkRSTa vidyAe~ diiN| una vidyAoMko pAkara ve donoM usI samaya vijayArddha
parvatapara cale gaye  // 308 //  samAna bhUmi1. prApyAmIbhiH m.| 2. kRtvA m.|
3. bhgvtaa| 4. tasthutaH m.| 5. yAcyamAnI ma., ka.  /  6.-kSitaH ma.  /

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, ten yojanas above the Vijayadhar mountain, there are the
abodes of the Vidyadharas. These abodes are filled with various countries and
cities, and they appear like a land of enjoyment.    Ten yojanas above the
Vidyadharas' abodes, there are thousands of cities of the Gandharvas and
Kinnaras.   Five yojanas above that, the mountain is covered with the temples of
the Arhats, and it appears like the mountain of Nandishvara.   In those temples
of the Arhats, there are always present the Muni Rajas, who are devoted to
study, possess the wealth of the Charanas, and are supremely radiant.   On the
southern slope of the Vijayadhar mountain, there are fifty cities, starting with
Rathanupura and ending with Sandhyabhra. On the northern slope, there are sixty
cities, starting with Gaganavallabha.   Each of these cities is superior to the
next, filled with various countries and villages, crowded with monasteries,
adorned with wide open spaces and courtyards, decorated with large gateways and
balconies, embellished with golden walls and arches, filled with ponds and
gardens, offering the enjoyment of heaven, filled with trees bearing all kinds
of fruits that grow without being sown, filled with all kinds of medicinal
herbs, and fulfilling the desires of all.   Their earth always shines like a
land of enjoyment. The springs there always flow with honey, milk, ghee, and
other juices. The lakes there are filled with lotuses and adorned with swans and
other birds. The steps of the ponds there are made of jewels and gold, and they
are filled with water as clear and sweet as honey. They are covered with the
pollen of lotuses. In the sheds there, there are herds and herds of Kamadhenu
cows, whose radiance is like that of the full moon, whose hooves and horns are
yellow like gold, and who are pleasing to the eyes.   There are cows there whose
dung and urine are fragrant and have the power to increase radiance and vitality
like a tonic. What can be compared to their milk?   In those cities, there are
groups of queens with their sons, all of whom are dark like blue lotuses and
radiant like lotuses.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe uparyatha samAruhya yojanAni punardaza  /  gandharvakinnarAdInAM
nagarANi sahasrazaH  // 310 //  ato'pi samatikramya paJcayojanamantaram  /
arhadbhavanasaMchanno bhAti nandIzvarAdrivat  // 31 //  bhavaneSvahatAM teSu
svAdhyAyagatacetasaH  /  munayazcAraNA nityaM tiSThanti paramIjasaH  // 312 //
dakSiNe vijayArddhasya bhAge paJcAzadAhitAH  /  sthanuparasaMdhyAbhraprabhutInAM
purAM tataH  // 313 //  uttareNa tathA SaSTirnagarANAM nivezitA  /
AkAzavallabhAdIni yAni nAmAni bibhrati  // 314 //  dezagrAmasamAkIrNa
bAkArasaMkulam  /  sakheTakarvaTATopaM tatrekaikaM purottamam  // 315 //
udAragopurADAlaM hemaprAkAratoraNam  /  vApyudyAnasamAkIrNa ]
svargabhogotsavapradam  // 316 //  akRSTasarvasasyAnyaM sarvapuSpaphaladrumam  /
savauSadhisamAkIrNa sarvakAmaprasAdhanam  // 317 //  bhogabhUmisamaM zazvad
rAjate yatra bhUtalam  /  madhukSIraghRtAdIni vahante tatra nirjharAH  // 318 //
sarAMsi padmayuktAni haMsAdikalitAni ca  /  maNikAJcanasopAnAH
svacchamiSTamadhUdakAH  // 319 //  saroruharajazchannA virejustatra dIrghikAH  /
savatsakAmadhenUnAM saMpUrNendusamaviSAm  // 320 //  suvarNakhurazRGgANAM
saMghAH zAlAsu tatra ca  /  [netrAnandakarINAM ca vasanti yatra dhenavaH ]  //
32 //  yAsAM varcazca mUtraM ca zubhagandhaM tu ruSkavat  /  kAntivIryapradaM
tAsAM payaH kenopamIyate  // 322 //  nIlanIrajavarNAnAM tathA padmasamatviSAm  /
mahiSINAM saputrANAM sarvAsAmatra paktayaH  // 323 //  talase daza yojana Upara
calakara vijayA parvatapara vidyAdharoMke nivAsa-sthAna bane hue haiN| unake ve
nivAsa sthAna nAnA deza aura nagaroMse vyApta haiM tathA bhogoMse bhogabhUmike
samAna jAna par3ate haiM  // 309|| vidyAdharoMke nivAsa sthAnase daza yojana
Upara calakara gandharva aura kinnara devoMke hajAroM nagara base hue haiM  //
310 //  vahA~se pAMca yojana aura Upara calakara vaha pavaMta ahaMnta bhagavAnke
mandiroMse AcchAdita hai tathA nandIzvara dvIpake parvatake samAna jAna par3atA
hai  /  / 311 //  arhanta bhagavAnke una mandiroMmeM svAdhyAyake premI,
cAraNaRddhike dhAraka parama tejasvI munirAja nirantara vidyamAna rahate haiM  /
/ 312 /  /  usa vijayAdhaM parvatakI dakSiNa zreNIpara rathanUpura tathA
sandhyAbhrako Adi lekara pacAsa nagariyA~ haiM aura uttara zreNIpara
gaganavallabha Adi sATha nagariyA~ haiM  // 313-314 //  ye pratyeka nagariyAM
ekase eka bar3hakara haiM, nAnA dezoM aura gAMvoMse vyApta haiM, maTamboMse
saMkIrNa haiM, kheTa aura karvaToMke vistarase yukta haiM  // 315 /  /
bar3ebar3e gopuroM aura aTTAlikAoMse vibhUSita haiM, suvarNamaya koToM aura
toraNoMse alaMkRta haiM, vApikAoM aura bagIcoMse vyApta haiM, svarga sambandhI
bhogoMkA utsava pradAna karanevAlI haiM, binA jote hI utpanna honevAle sarva
prakArake phaloMke vRkSoMse sahita haiM, sarva prakArako auSadhiyoMse AkIrNa
haiM, aura sabake manorathoMko siddha karanevAlI haiM  // 316-3,17 /  /  unakA
pRthivItala hamezA bhogabhUmike samAna suzobhita rahatA hai, vahA~ke nirjhara
sadA madhu, dUdha, ghI Adi rasoMko bahAte haiM, vahA~ke sarovara kamaloMse yukta
tathA haMsa Adi pakSiyoMse vibhUSita haiN| vahA~ko vApikAoMkI sIr3hiyA~ maNiyoM
tathA suvarNase nirmita haiM, unameM madhuke samAna svaccha aura mIThA pAnI
bharA rahatA hai. tathA ve svayaM kamaloMkI parAgase AcchAdita rahatI haiN|
vahA~kI zAlAoMmeM bachaDoMse suzobhita una kAmadhenuoMke jhuNDake jhuNDa baMdhe
rahate haiM jinakI ki kAnti pUrNa candramAke samAna hai, jinake khura aura sIMga
suvarNake samAna pIle haiM tathA jo netroMko Ananda denevAlI haiM  /  / 318-321
/  /  vahA~ ve gAyeM rahatI haiM jinakA ki gobara aura mUtra bhI sugandhise
yukta hai tathA rasAyanake samAna kAnti aura vIryako denevAlA hai, phira unake
dUdhakI to upamA hI kisase dI jA sakatI hai ?  // 322 //  una nagariyoMmeM nIla
kamalake samAna zyAmala tathA kamalake samAna 1. koSThAntargataH pAThaH ka. kha.
pustakayo sti  /  2. koSThakAntargataH pAThaH ka. kha. pustakayo sti  /  3.
sugandhaM tu saruSkavat m.|

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Third Chapter  **32.** Rows of buffaloes with their calves, adorned with
a reddish hue, roam freely. Mountains of grain, inexhaustible stores in
granaries, palaces radiating brilliance, surrounded by pools and gardens.
**325.** Roads free of dust and thorns, offering comfort, shaded by great trees,
and watering places filled with all kinds of flavors.  **326.** For four months,
clouds with melodious voices, pleasing to the ears, shower nectar-like rain upon
the land at the right time.  **327.** The winter season, devoid of icy winds,
brings joy to those who enjoy its pleasantness. People are well-dressed,
fulfilling their desires.  **328.** Even in the summer, the sun, as if hesitant,
radiates a gentle warmth. It illuminates the lotus blooms, adorned with the
brilliance of various gems.  **329.** All other seasons are also conducive to
obtaining desired objects. The clear directions are free from mist and other
impurities, shining brightly.  **330.** There is not a single place that lacks
happiness. People constantly revel in their enjoyment, as if in a land of
pleasure.  **331.** The women are delicate, adorned with all kinds of ornaments,
skilled in understanding gestures, and possessors of fame, fortune, modesty,
patience, and radiance.  **332.** Some have the radiance of a lotus bud, some
the dark glow of a blue lotus, some the soft green of a shirisha flower, and
some the yellow brilliance of lightning.  **333.** They are fragrant, as if
created by the wind of Nandana, and adorned with beautiful flowers, as if born
from the spring season.  **334.** Others, with bodies like moonstone, constantly
fill the lakes with their radiant moonlight.  **335.** Their eyes are adorned
with three colors - red, black, and white. They walk gracefully like swans,
their breasts are full, their waists slender, and their movements resemble those
of celestial beings.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 tRtIyaM parva 15 dhAnyAnAM parvatAkArAH palyaughAH kSayavarjitAH  /
vApyudyAnaparikSiptAH prAsAdAzca mahAprabhAH  // 32 //  reNukaNTakanirmuktA
rathyAmArgAH sukhAvahAH  /  mahAtarukRtacchAyAH prapAH sarvarasAnvitAH  // 325
//  mAsAMzca caturastatra zrotrAnandakaradhvaniH  /  deze kAle ca parjanyaH
kurute'mRtavarSaNam  // 326 //  himAnilavinirmukto hemantaH sukhamAginAm  /
yathepsitapariprAptavAsasA sAdhu vartate  // 327 //  mRdutApo nidAghe'pi
zaGkAvAniva bhAskaraH  /  nAnAratnaprabhAkrAnto bodhakaH padmasaMpadAm  // 328
//  Rtavo'nye'pi cetHsthvstusNpraapnnocitaaH| nIhArAdivinimuktAH zomante nirmalA
dizaH  // 329 //  na kazcidekadezo'pi tasminnasti sukho na yaH  /  ramante
satataM sarvA bhogabhUmiSviva prajAH  // 330 //  yoSitaH sukumArAGgAH
sarvAbharaNabhUSitAH  /  iGgitajJAnakuzalAH kIrtizrIhIdhatipramAH  // 331 //
kAcitkamalagarbhAbhA kaacidindiivrprbhaa| kAcicchirISasaMkAzA
kAcidvidyatsamadyatiH  // 332 //  nandanasyeva vAtena nirmitAstAH sugandhataH  /
vasantAdiva saMbhUtAzcArupuSpavibhUSaNAt  // 333 //  candrakAnta vinirmANazarIrA
iva cAparAH  /  kurvanti satataM rAmA nijajyotsnAsarastarAm  // 334 //
trivarNanetrazobhinyo gatyA haMsavadhUsamAH  /  pInastanyaH kRzodaryaH
surastrIsamavibhramAH  // 335 //  lAla kAntiko dhAraNa karanevAlI bhaiMsoMkI
paMktiyAM apane bachar3oMke sAtha sadA vicaratI rahatI haiM  /  / 323 //  vahA~
parvatoMke samAna anAjakI rAziyA~ haiM, vahA~ko khattiyoM ( anAja rakhanekI
khor3iyoM) kA kabhI kSaya nahIM hotA, vApikAoM aura bagIcoMse ghire hue vahA~ke
mahala bahuta bhArI kAntiko dhAraNa karanevAle haiM  /  / 324 //  vahA~ke mArga
dhUli aura kaNTakase rahita, sukha upajAnevAle haiN| jinapara bar3e-bar3e
vRkSoMkI chAyA ho rahI hai tathA jo sarvaprakArake rasoMse sahita haiM aisI
vahA~ko pyAU~ haiM  // 325 /  /  jinakI madhura AvAja kAnoMko Anandita karatI
hai aise megha vahA~ cAra mAsa taka yogya deza tathA yogya kAlameM amRtake
samAna madhura jalakI varSA karate haiM  // 326 /  /  vahA~ko hemanta Rtu
himamizrita zItala vAyuse rahita hotI hai tathA icchAnusAra vastra prApta
karanevAle sukhake upabhogI manuSyoMke lie AnandadAyI hotI hai  // 327 //  vahA~
grISma Rtu meM bhI sUrya mAno zaMkita hokara hI manda tejakA dhAraka rahatA hai
aura nAnA ratnoMkI prabhAse yukta hokara kamaloMko vikasita karatA hai  // 328||
vahA~kI anya Rtue~ bhI manovAMchita vastuoMko prApta karAnevAlI haiM tathA
vahA~kI nirmala dizAe~ nIhAra ( kUharA ) Adise rahita hokara atyanta suzobhita
rahatI haiM  // 329 //  vahA~ aisA eka bhI sthAna nahIM hai jo ki sukhase yukta
na ho  /  vahA~kI prajA sadA bhogabhUmike samAna krIr3A karatI rahatI hai  /  /
330|| vahA~kI striyA~ atyanta komala zarIrako dhAraNa karanevAlI haiM, saba
prakArake AbhUSaNoMse suzobhita haiM, abhiprAyake jAnanemeM kuzala haiM, kIrti,
lakSmI, lajjA, dhairya aura prabhAko dhAraNa karanevAlI haiM  // 331 //  koI
strI kamalake bhItarI bhAgake samAna kAntivAlI hai, koI nIla kamalake samAna
zyAmala prabhAkI dhAraka hai, koI zirISake phUlake samAna komala tathA harita
varNakI hai aura koI bijalIke samAna pIlI kAntise suzobhita hai  /  / 332 //  ve
striyA~ sugandhise to aisI jAna par3atI haiM mAno nandana vanakI vAyuse hI racI
gaI hoM aura manohara phUloMke AbharaNa dhAraNa karaneke kAraNa aisI
pratibhAsita hotI haiM mAno vasanta Rtuse hI utpanna huI hoM  /  / 333 /  /
jinake zarIra candramAkI kAntise bane hue ke samAna jAna par3ate the aisI kitanI
hI striyA~ apanI prabhArUpI cA~danIse nirantara sarovara bharatI rahatI thIM  //
334 //  ve striyA~ lAla, kAle aura safeda isa taraha tIna raMgoMko dhAraNa
karanevAle netroMse suzobhita rahatI haiM, unakI cAla haMsiyoMke samAna hai,
unake stana atyanta sthUla haiM, udara kRza haiM, aura unake hAva-bhAva-vilAsa
devAMganAoMke samAna haiM  /  / 335 /  /  vahA~ke manuSya bhI 1. sukhayatIta
sukhaH  /  tasminnasyasukhAlayaH m.| 2. sarastaram ma., ka.  /

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, the men have faces like the moon, are valiant, have chests
like lions, and long arms. They are capable of flying in the sky and possess
excellent qualities, virtues, and actions. ||336|| They are always content with
righteous conduct, have radiance like the gods, are beautiful like desire, and
roam freely with women as they please. ||337|| Thus, these earth-dwelling gods,
the Vidyadharas, with their minds attached to Vidya (knowledge) personified as
women, enjoy their desired pleasures in the two beautiful ranges of the
Vijayadha mountain, free from obstacles, as a result of their Dharma. ||338|| In
this way, all beings attain their pleasures and possessions through Dharma.
Therefore, O noble beings! Just as the sun destroys darkness in the sky, so too
should you strive to attain one Dharma, destroying the darkness of ignorance
within yourselves. ||339||  Thus ends the third chapter of the Padma Charita,
known as the Vidyadhara Loka, narrated by the Acharya Ravishena. ||3||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe narAzcandramukhAH zUrAH siMhoraskA mahAbhujAH  /  AkAzagamane
zaktAH sulakSaNaguNakriyAH  // 336 //  nyAyavartanasaMtuSTAH svrgvaasismprmaaH|
vicaranti sanArIkA yatheSTaM kAmarUpiNaH  // 337 //  zAlinIcchandaH zreNyorevaM
ramyayostannitAntaM vidyAjAyAsaMpariSvaktacittAH  /  iSTAn bhogAn bhuJjate
bhUmidevA dharmAsaktAnantarAyeNa muktAH  // 338 //  evaMrUpA dharmalAbhena sarve
saMprApyante prANinAM bhogalAbhAH  /  tasmAtkatu dharmamekaM yatadhvaM bhitvA
dhvAnta khe ravestulyaceSTAH  // 339 //  ityA raviSeNAcAryaprokta padmacarite
vidyAdharalokAbhidhAnaM nAma tRtIyaM parva  // 3 //  candramAke samAna sundara
mukhavAle haiM, zUravIra haiM, siMhake samAna caur3e vakSaHsthalase yukta haiM,
lambI bhujAoMse vibhUSita haiM, AkAzameM calane meM samartha haiM, uttama
lakSaNa, guNa aura kriyAoMse sahita haiM  /  / 336 //  nyAyapUrvaka pravRtti
karanese sadA santuSTa rahate haiM, devoMke samAna prabhAke dhAraka haiM, kAmake
samAna sundara haiM aura icchAnusAra striyoM sahita jahA~-tahA~ ghUmate haiM  //
337 //  isa prakAra jinakA citta vidyArUpI striyoMmeM Asakta rahatA hai aise
bhUminivAsI deva arthAt vidyAdhara, antarAya rahita ho vijayAdha parvatakI donoM
manohara zreNiyoMmeM dharmake phalasvarUpa prApta hue manovAMchita bhogoMko
bhogate rahate haiM  // 338 //  isa prakArake samasta bhoga prANiyoMko dharmake
dvArA hI prApta hote haiM isalie he bhavya jIvo ! jisa prakAra AkAzameM sUrya
andhakArako naSTa karatA hai, usI prakAra tuma loga bhI apane antaraMga
sambandhI ajJAnAndhakArako naSTa kara eka dharmako hI prApta karanekA prayatna
karo  // 339|| isa prakAra ArSanAmase prasiddha tathA raviSeNAcAryake dvArA kahe
hue padmacaritameM vidyAdhara lokakA varNana karanevAlA tIsarA parva samApta huA
// 3 //  1. saktAH kh.| 2. prANino ma., ka.  /  3. naSTaM dhvAntaM ma.  /  4.
svaM ma., k.| 5. tulyaceSTam m.|

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fourth Chapter  Thus, the Lord, the Dhyani, Shatakumbha Prabhu, the
Master, was ready to perform the act of charity for the benefit of the world.
||1||  Free from all defects, he had embraced the vow of silence and, after
completing the image-yoga for six months, the valiant Lord began to wander the
earth. ||2||  The people saw the Lord wandering, his form towering, his body
radiating light, as if a second sun were moving. ||3||  Wherever the Lord placed
his feet, it seemed as if lotuses were blooming on the earth. ||4||  His
shoulders were as high as Mount Meru, radiant, adorned with long, flowing locks
of hair, and the Lord, with great care, looked down as he walked. ||5||  One
day, while wandering, the Lord, who seemed like Mount Meru himself in his
splendor, entered Hastinapur at midday. ||6||  Seeing the Lord, who shone like
the midday sun, all the men and women of Hastinapur were struck with wonder and
lost consciousness. ||7||  People brought him various colored clothes, different
kinds of jewels, elephants, horses, chariots, and other vehicles. ||8||  Some
men brought beautiful maidens, with faces like the full moon, eyes like lotuses,
and adorned with graceful attire. ||9||  But these virtuous maidens were not
pleasing to the Lord, and they, feeling rejected, cast away their ornaments and
stood there, meditating on the Lord. ||10||  Then, the king, Shreyans, standing
on the top of his palace, looked at the Lord with affection and remembered his
past life. ||11||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha parva athAsau bhagavAn dhyAnI 'zAtakumbhaprabhaH prabhuH  /  hitAya
jagate kartuM dAnadharmaM samudyataH  //  1  //  niHzeSadoSanirmukto
maunamAzritya naiSThikam  /  saMhRtya pratimAM dhIro babhrAma dharaNItalam  // 2
//  dadRzustaM prajA devaM bhrAmyantaM tuGgavigraham  /  dehaprabhAparicchannaM
dvitIyamiva mAskaram  // 3 //  yatra yatra padanyAsamakarot sa jinezvaraH  /
tasmin vikacapadmAni bhavantIva mahItale  // 4 //  merukUTasamAkAramAsurAMsaH
samAhitaH  /  sa reje bhagavAn dIrghajaTAjAlahRtAMzumAn  // 5 //  anyadA
hAstinapuraM viharan sa samAgataH  /  avizacca dinasyArthe gate meruriva zriyA
//  6  //  madhyAhnaravisaMkAzaM dRSTvA taM puruSottamam  /  sarve narAzca
nAryazca mumUrccharativismayAt  // 7 //  nAnAvarNAni vakhANi ratnAni vividhAni
ca  /  hastyazvarathayAnAni tasmai DhaukitavAn janaH  //  8  //  mugdhAH
pUrNenduvadanAH kanyAstAmarasekSaNAH  /  upaninyurnarAH kecid vinItAkAradhAriNaH
// 9 //  tasmai na rucitAH satyaH svasyApyapriyatAM gatAH  /  kanyAstA
niralaMkArA dhyAyantyastaM vyavasthitAH  //  10  //  atha prAsAdazikhare sthitaH
zreyAn mahIpatiH  /  dRSTvainaM snigdhayA dRSTyA pUrvajanma samasmarat  //  11
//  athAnantara suvarNake samAna prabhAke dhAraka dhyAnI bhagavAn RSabhadeva
prabhu jagat ke kalyANake nimitta dAna dharmakI pravRtti karaneke lie udyata hue
||1|| dhIra-vIra bhagavAn ne chaha mAhake bAda pratimA yoga samApta kara pRthivI
talapara bhramaNa karanA prArambha kiyA  /  bhagavAn samasta doSoMse rahita the
aura mauna dhAraNa kara hI vihAra karate the ||2|| jinakA zarIra bahuta hI U~cA
thA tathA jo apane zarIrakI prabhAse Asa-pAsake bhUmaNDalako Alokita kara rahe
the aise bhramaNa karanevAle bhagavAn ke darzana kara prajA yaha samajhatI thI
mAno dUsarA sUrya hI bhramaNa kara rahA hai || 3 || ve jinarAja pRthivItalapara
jahA~-jahA~ caraNa rakhate the vahA~ aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno kamala hI khila
uThe hoM  // 4 //  unake kandhe meruparvatake zikharake samAna U~ce tathA
dedIpyamAna the, unapara bar3I-bar3I jAe~ kiraNoMkI bhA~ti suzobhita ho rahI
thIM aura bhagavAn svayaM bar3I sAvadhAnI se IryAsamitise nIce dekhate hue
vihAra karate the ||5|| jo zobhAse meru parvata ke samAna jAna par3ate the aise
bhagavAn RSabhadeva kisI dina vihAra karate-karate madhyAhnake samaya
hastinApura nagara meM praviSTa hue || 6 || madhyAhna ke sUryake samAna
dedIpyamAna una puruSottama ke darzana kara hastinApurake samasta strI-puruSa
bar3e Azcaryase mohako prApta ho gaye arthAt kisIko yaha dhyAna nahIM rahA ki
yaha AhArakI velA hai isalie bhagavAnko AhAra denA cAhie ||7|| vahA~ke loga nAnA
varNoMke vastra, aneka prakArake ratna aura hAthI, ghor3e, ratha tathA anya
prakArake vAhana lA lAkara unheM samarpita karane lage ||8|| vinIta veSako
dhAraNa karanevAle kitane hI loga pUrNacandramAke samAna mukhavAlI tathA
kamaloMke samAna netroMse suzobhita sundara-sundara kanyAe~ unake pAsa le Aye
||9|| jaba ve pativratA kanyAe~ bhagavAn ke lie rucikara nahIM huIM taba ve
nirAza hokara svayaM apane Apase hI dveSa karane lagIM aura AbhUSaNa dUra pheMka
bhagavAnkA dhyAna karatI huI khar3I raha gayIM  // 10 //  athAnantara--mahalake
zikharapara khar3e hue rAjA zreyAMsane unheM snehapUrNa dRSTise dekhA aura 1.
zAtakaumbhaprabhaH ma. ka.  /  2. jagAma ma.  /  3. paricchinnaM kha.  /  4.
bhAsurAMzaH ma  /  8

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, Nrisimha, surrounded by his inner palace friends, stood
with folded hands, a lotus of praise and hymns. ||12|| The king,
circumambulating him, shone like the sun revolving around the Meru mountain.
||13|| Then, with his hair, he cleansed the Lord's feet, washing them with tears
of joy. ||14|| Offering a golden vessel, he performed the foot-washing ceremony,
placing him in a pure place, according to the highest ritual. ||15|| Taking a
cool drink of sugarcane juice from a pitcher, he performed the supreme Parana,
his mind drawn to the Lord's virtues. ||16|| Then, the delighted gods, with a
chorus of "Sadhu" and "Dhannya," filled the sky with the sound of drums. ||17||
The lords of the Pramathas, showering down five-colored flowers, exclaimed with
joy, "Oh, what a gift! Oh, what a gift!" ||18|| The wind, fragrant and sweet,
blew through the directions, while a stream of jewels poured down, filling the
sky. ||19|| Thus, King Shreyans received divine honors that astonished the three
worlds, while Emperor Bharat, filled with great joy, worshipped him. ||20||
Then, initiating the practice of the Panipatra Vrata, he, the conqueror of the
senses, immersed himself in auspicious meditation. ||21|| From that pure
meditation, his delusion vanished, and he attained Kevala Jnana, the knowledge
that illuminates both the world and the beyond. ||22|| With this, a great halo
of light arose, dispelling the distinction between night and day, its radiance
illuminating all. ||23|| In that place, a magnificent Ashoka tree appeared, its
trunk thick, adorned with jeweled flowers, and its leaves a vibrant red. ||24||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe utthAya ca nRsiMho'sau sAntaHpurasuhRjanaH  /  kutAJjalipuTaH
stotravyagoSThapuTapaGkajaH  // 12 //  tasya pradakSiNAM kurvan rarAja sa
narAdhipaH  /  meronitambamaNDalyA bhrAmyagniva divAkaraH  // 13 //  tataH
kuntalabhAreNa pramRjya caraNadvayam  /  tasyAnandAzrumiH pUrva kSAlitaM tena
bhUbhRtA  // 14 //  ratnapAtreNa datvAdhaM kRtatatpadamArjanaH  /  zucau deze
sthitAyAsmai vidhinA parameNa saH  // 15 //  rasamikSoH samAdAya kalazasthaM
suzItalam  /  cakAra paramaM zrAddhaM tadguNAkRSTamAnasaH  // 16 //  tataH
pramuditairdevaiH sAdhuzabdaughamizritaH  /  nabhogairdundubhidhvAnazcakre
dikcakrapUraNaH  // 17 //  puSpANAM paJcavarNAnAM vRSTIzca pramathAdhipAH  /
aho dAnamaho dAnamityuktvA vavRSurmudA  // 18 //  anilo'rimukhaspoM dizaH
surabhayan vavau  /  pUrayantI nabhomAgaM vasudhArA papAta ca  // 19 //
saMprAptaH surasanmAnaM trijagadvismayapradam  /  pUjito bharatasyApi zreyAn
prItisamutkaTam  // 20 //  atha pravartanaM kRtvA pANipAtravratasya sH|
zubhadhyAnaM samAviSTo bhUyo'pi vijitendriyaH  // 21 //  tatastasya sitadhyAnAd
gate mohe parikSayam  /  utpannaM kevalajJAnaM lokAlokAvalokanam  // 22 //
tenaivaM tacca saMjAtaM tejaso maNDalaM mahat  /  kAlaM (lasya) vikirabhedaM
rAtrivAsarasaMbhavam  // 23 //  taddeze vipulaskandho ratnapuSpairalaMkRtaH  /
azokapAdapo'bhUcca vilasadraktapallavaH  // 24 //  dekhate hI use pUrvajanmakA
smaraNa ho AyA  // 11 //  rAjA zreyAMsa mahalase nIce utarakara antaHpura tathA
anya mitrajanoMke sAtha unake pAsa AyA aura hAtha jor3akara stuti-pATha karatA
huA pradakSiNA dene lgaa| bhagavAnkI pradakSiNA detA huA rAjA zreyAMsa aisA
suzobhita ho rahA thA mAno meruke madhya bhAgakI pradakSiNA detA huA sUrya hI ho
// 12-13 /  /  sarvaprathama rAjAne apane kezoMse bhagavAnke caraNoMkA mArjana
kara Anandake A~suoMse unakA prakSAlana kiyA  // 14 //  ratnamayI pAtrase argha
dekara unake caraNa dhoye, pavitra sthAnameM unheM virAjamAna kiyA aura
tadanantara unake guNoMse AkRSTa citta ho, kalazameM rakhA huA ikSukA zItala
jala lekara vidhipUrvaka zreSTha pAraNA karAyI-AhAra diyA  // 15-16 //  usI
samaya AkAzameM calanevAle devoMne prasanna hokara sAdhu-sAdhu, dhanya-dhanya
zabdoMke samUhase mizrita evaM digmaNDalako mukharita karanevAlA dundubhi
bAjoMkA bhArI zabda kiyA  // 17 //  pramatha jAtike devoMke adhipatiyoMne 'aho
dAnaM aho dAnaM' kahakara harSake sAtha pA~ca raMgake phUla barasAye  /  / 18 /
/  atyanta sukhakara sparzase sahita, dizAoMko sugandhita karanevAle vAyu bahane
lagI aura AkAzako vyApta karatI huI ratnoMkI dhArA barasane lagI  // 19 //  isa
prakAra udhara rAjA zreyAMsa tInoM jagatko AzcaryameM DAlanevAle devakRta
sammAnako prApta huA aura idhara samrATa bharatane bhI bahuta bhArI prItike
sAtha usakI pUjA kI  /  / 20 /  /  _ athAnantara indriyoMko jItanevAle bhagavAn
RSabhadeva, digambara muniyoMkA vrata kaisA hai ? unheM kisa prakAra AhAra diyA
jAtA hai ? isakI pravRtti calAkara phirase zubhadhyAnameM lIna ho gaye  // 21 //
tadanantara zukladhyAnake prabhAvase mohanIya karmakA kSaya ho jAnepara unheM
loka aura alokako prakAzita karanevAlA kevalajJAna utpanna ho gayA  // 22 //
kevalajJAnake sAtha hI bahata bhArI bhAmaNDala utpanna huaa| unakA vaha
bhAmaNDala rAtri aura dinake kAraNa honevAle kAlake bhedako dUra kara rahA thA
arthAt usake prakAzake kAraNa vahAM rAta-dinakA vibhAga nahIM raha pAtA thA  //
23 /  /  jahA~ bhagavAnko kevalajJAna huA thA vahIM eka azoka vRkSa prakaTa ho
gyaa| usa azoka vRkSakA skandha bahuta moTA thA, vaha ratnamayI phUloMse
alaMkRta thA tathA usake lAla-lAla pallava 1. puraH ma.  /  puTastotra ka.  /
2. kRtaM tatpadamarcanam kh.| 3. nabhauryaH m.| 4. ca samaM ma.  /  5.
viksdrkt-m.|

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sky was filled with fragrant flowers, attracting swarms of bees, falling in
various forms.  Salutations to the one who traverses the realms of existence,
adorned with the forms of the steadfast immortals. ||25||  Great drums
resounded, their sound like the roar of a churning ocean, struck by the palm
leaves of invisible gods. ||26||  Two Yakshas, their eyes like lotus buds,
adorned with all ornaments, waved their white, moon-bright fly whisks at will.
||27||  A throne arose, resembling the peak of Mount Meru, a crown for the
earth-goddess, eclipsing the sun with its radiance. ||28||  A triple umbrella
emerged, a symbol of dominion over the three realms, adorned with strings of
pearls, its brilliance like the pure glory of the Lord. ||29||  Only the Kevali,
the Perfect One, can describe the beauty of the Lord seated on the throne amidst
the assembly.  We, mere mortals, are incapable of such a task. ||30||   * Then,
knowing of the Lord's attainment of Kevala Jnana, all the Indras, accompanied by
their families, arrived swiftly to pay their respects. ||31||  First among them
was the renowned Ganadhara, the Muni Raja, Vrishabhasena.  After him, other Muni
Rajas, adorned with great dispassion, became Ganadharas. ||32||  When the Munis,
Shravakas, and Devas were all seated in their respective places in the assembly,
the Ganadhara urged the Lord to preach. ||33||  The Lord, silencing the sound of
the divine drums with his own voice, spoke the following words, revealing the
essence of truth. ||34||  He said, "In this entire three-world universe, for
those seeking the welfare of all beings, Dharma is the ultimate refuge, and from
it comes the highest happiness." ||35||  "All actions are undertaken for
happiness, and happiness arises from Dharma.  Knowing this, O noble ones, strive
to accumulate Dharma." ||36||  "Without clouds, how can there be rain?  Without
seeds, how can there be crops?  Similarly, without Dharma, how can there be
happiness for beings?" ||37||  "Just as a lame man desires to walk, a mute man
desires to speak, and a blind man desires to see, so too, without Dharma, there
is no happiness." ||38||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturva prakIrNA sumanovRSThiramodAkRSTaSaTpadA  /  namaH
sthairamarairnAnArUpasaM bhavagAminI  //  25 //  mahAdundubhayo neduH
kSubdhasAgaranisvanAH  /  adRSTavigrahairdevairAhatAH karapallavaiH  // 26 //
yakSa padmapalAzAkSau sarvAlaGkArabhUSitau  /  cAlayAJcakratuH svairaM cAmare
candrahAsinI  //  27  //  merumastakasaMkAzaM mukuTaM bhUmiyoSitaH  /
siMhAsanaM samutpannaM karAhatadivAkaraMm  //  28 //  trilokavibhutAcihnaM
muktAjAlakabhUSitam  /  chatratrayaM samudbhUtaM tasyeva vimalaM yazaH ||29||
siMhAsana sthitasyAsya saraNaM samavAnvitam  /  prAptasya gadituM zobhAM kevalI
kevalaM prabhuH  //  30  //  tatastamavadhijJAnAdavagamya surAdhipAH  /
vandituM sapadi prAptAH parivArasamanvitAH  //  31  //  khyAto vRSamaseno'sya
saMjAto gaNabhRtataH  /  anye ca zramaNA jAtA mahAMbairAgyayoginaH ||32||
yathAsthAnaM tatasteSu saraNe samavAnvite  /  yatyAdiSu niviSTeSu gaNezena
pracoditaH ||33|| chAdayantIM svanAdena devadundubhi niHsvanam  /  jagAda
bhagavAn vAcaM tattvArthaparizaMsinIm  // 34 //  asmiMstribhuvane kRtsne jIvAnAM
hitamicchatAm  /  zaraNaM paramo dharmastasmAcca paramaM sukham  // 35 //
sukhArthaM ceSTitaM sarvaM tacca dharmanimittakam  /  evaM jJAtvA janA yatnAt
kurudhvaM dharmasaMgraham  //  36  //  vRSTirvinA kuto mevaiH kva sasyaM
bIjavarjitam  /  jIvAnAM ca vinA dharmAt sukhamutpadyate kutaH  //  37 //
gantukAmo yathA paGgurbhUko vaktuM samudyataH  /  andho darzanakAmazca tathA
dharmAdRte sukham ||38|| bahuta ho adhika suzobhita ho rahe the ||24|| AkAzameM
sthita devoMne sugandhise bhramaroM ko AkarSita karanevAlI evaM nAnA AkArameM
par3anevAlI phUloM kI varSA kI ||25|| jinake zabda, kSobhako prApta hue samudra
zabda samAna bhArI the aise bar3e-bar3e dundubhi bAje, adRzya zarIrake dhAraka
devoMke dvArA karapallavoMse tADita hokara vizAla zabda karane lage ||26||
jinake netra kamalakI kalikAoMke samAna the tathA jo sarva prakAra ke
AbhUSaNoMse suzobhita the aise donoM ora khar3e hue do yakSa, candramAkI ha~sI
ur3AnevAle - sapheda camara icchAnusAra calAne lage ||27|| jo meruke zikhara ke
samAna U~cA thA, pRthivIrUpI strIkA mAno mukuTa hI thA, aura apanI kiraNoMse
sUryako tiraskRta kara rahA thA aisA siMhAsana utpanna huA  //  28  //  jo tIna
lokakI prabhutAkA cihnasvarUpa thA, motiyoMkI lar3iyoM se vibhUSita thA aura
bhagavAn ke nirmala yazake samAna jAna par3atA thA aisA chatratraya utpanna huA
||29|| AcArya raviSeNa kahate haiM ki samavasaraNake bIca siMhAsanapara
virAjamAna hue bhagavAna kI zobhAkA varNana karaneke lie mAtra kevalajJAnI hI
samartha haiM, hamAre jaise tuccha puruSa usa zobhAkA varNana kaise kara sakate
haiM ||30|| * tadanantara avadhijJAnake dvArA, bhagavAnko kevalajJAna utpanna
honekA samAcAra jAnakara saba indra apane-apane parivAroMke sAtha vandanA
karaneke lie zIghra hI vahA~ Aye ||31|| sarva prathama vRSabhasena nAmaka
munirAja inake prasiddha gaNadhara hue the| unake bAda mahAverAgyako dhAraNa
karanevAle anya anya munirAja bhI gaNadhara hote rahe the ||32|| usa
samavasaraNameM jaba muni, zrAvaka tathA deva Adi saba loga yathAsthAna apane-
apane koThoMmeM baiTha gaye taba gaNadharane bhagavAn se upadeza denekI preraNA
kI ||33|| bhagavAn apane zabdase deva-dundubhiyoM ke zabdako tirohita karate
evaM tattvArthako sUcita karanevAlI nimnAMkita vANI kahane lage ||34|| unhoMne
kahA ki isa trilokAtmaka samasta saMsAra meM hita cAhanevAle logoMko eka dharmaM
hI parama zaraNa haiM, usIse utkRSTa sukha prApta hotA hai| ||35|| prANiyoMkI
samasta ceSTAe~ sukhake lie haiM aura sukha dharmake nimittase hotA hai, aisA
jAnakara he bhavya jana ! tuma saba dharmaMkA saMgraha karo || 36 || binA meghoM
ke vRSTi kaise ho sakatI hai aura binA bIja anAja kaise utpanna ho sakatA hai|
isI taraha binA dharmaMke. jIvoMko sukha kaise utpanna ho sakatA hai ? ||37||
jisa prakAra paMgu manuSya calaneko icchA kare, gU~gA manuSya bolanekI icchA
kare, 1. nisvanAm ma.  /

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, it is said that there is nothing smaller than an atom and
nothing bigger than the sky. Similarly, there is no friend greater than Dharma
for embodied beings. (39)  When Dharma alone brings about worldly enjoyments,
heaven, and the bliss of the liberated, what is the use of engaging in other
activities? (40)  Those wise ones who serve Dharma, purified by non-violence,
attain liberation. Others, however, go to the animal realm or lower realms. (41)
Even if those who have renounced the world, like swans, great swans, and
wandering ascetics, attain higher realms through the power of their austerities,
they still serve other gods as servants. (42)  Even after attaining the status
of gods, they suffer the misery of hell due to their karmas and fall from
heaven, returning to the animal realm in sorrow. (43)  Those who are endowed
with right faith and have diligently studied the teachings of the Jinas, attain
heaven and, upon falling from there, attain the supreme liberation by obtaining
the three jewels. (44)  This Dharma is of two types: for householders and for
monks. Those who believe in a third type of Dharma are burnt by the fire of
delusion. (45)  Five Anuvratas, three Gunavratas, and four Shikshavrata
constitute the Dharma for householders. (46)  Those householders who, at the
time of death, renounce all beginnings, become detached from their bodies, and
die with equanimity, attain a glorious destiny. (47)  Five Mahavratas, five
Samitis, and three Guptis constitute the Dharma for monks. (48)  Those who are
united with Dharma and are devoted to auspicious meditation, abandon this foul-
smelling, repulsive body and attain heaven or liberation. (49)  Those who praise
the great Brahmachari Digambara monks with devotion also attain Dharma. (50)  By
the influence of that Dharma, they do not fall into evil destinies, but attain
the three jewels, which liberate them from the bondage of karma. (51)  Thus,
having heard this supreme Dharma spoken by the Lord of Gods, Lord Rishabhadeva,
both gods and humans were filled with supreme joy. (52)  Just as a blind person
desires to see, so too, it is to seek happiness without Dharma. (38)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe paramANoH paraM svalpaM na cAnyanamaso mahat  /  dharmAdanyazca
loke'smin suhRnnAsti zarIriNAm  // 39 //  manuSyabhogaH svargazca siddhasaukhyaM
ca dharmataH  /  prApyate yattadanyena gyApAreNa kRtena kim  // 40 //
ahiMsAnirmalaM dharma sevante ye vipazcitaH  /  teSAmevorddhavagamanaM yAnti
tiryagadho'nyathA  // 4 //  yadyapyUvaM tapaHzaktyA vrajeyuH paraliGginaH  /
tathApi kiGkarA bhUtvA te devAn samupAsate  // 42 //  devadurgatiduHkhAni prApya
karmavazAttataH  /  svargacyutAH punastiryagyonimAyAnti duHkhinaH  // 43 //
samyagdarzanasaMpannAH svabhyastajinazAsanAH  /  divaM gatvA cyutA bodhi prApya
yAnti paraM zivam  // 44 //  sAgArANAM yatInAM ca dharmo'sau dvividhaH smRtaH  /
tRtIyaM ye tu manyante dagdhAste mohavahinA  // 45 //  aNuvratAni paJca
syustriprakAraM guNavratam  /  zikSAvratAni catvAri dharmo'yaM gRhamedhinAm  //
46 //  sarvArambhaparityAgaM kRtvA dehe'pi niHspRhAH  /  kAladharmeNa saMyuktA
gatiM te yAnti zobhanAm  // 47 //  mahAvratAni paJca syustathA samitayo matAH  /
guptayastisra udiSTA dharmo'yaM vyomavAsasAm  // 48 //  dharmaNAnena saMyuktAH
zumadhyAnaparAyaNAH  /  yAnti nAkaM ca mokSaM ca hisvA pUtikalevaram  // 49 //
ye'pi jAtasvarUpANAM paramabrahmacAriNAm  /  stutiM kurvanti bhAvena te'pi
dharmamavApnuyuH  // 50 //  tena dharmaprabhAveNa kugatiM na vrajanti te  /
lamante bodhilAmaM ca mucyante yena kilviSAt  // 51 //  ityAdi devadevena
bhASitaM dharmamuttamam  /  zrutvA devA manuSyAzca paramAmodamAgatAH  // 52 //
aura andhA manuSya dekhanekI icchA kare usI prakAra dharmake binA sukhaprApta
karanA hai  // 38 //  jisa prakAra isa saMsArameM paramANuse choTI koI cIja
nahIM hai aura AkAzase bar3I koI vastu nahIM hai usI prakAra prAgiyoMkA dharmase
bar3A koI mitra nahIM hai  // 39 /  /  jaba dharmase hI manuSya sambandhI bhoga,
svarga aura mukta jIvoMko sukha prApta ho jAtA hai taba dUsarA kArya karanese
kyA lAbha hai ?  // 40 //  jo vidvajjana ahiMsAse nirmala dharmakI sevA karate
haiM unhIMkA UdhvaMgamana hotA hai anya jIva to tiryagloka athavA adholokameM hI
jAte haiM  /  / 41|| yadyapi anyaliMgI-haMsa-paramahaMsa-parivrAjaka Adi bhI
tapazcaraNakI zaktise Upara jA sakate haiM-svargoM meM utpanna ho sakate haiM
tathApi ve vahA~ kiMkara hokara anya devoMkI upAsanA karate haiM  // 42 //  ve
vahAM deva hokara bhI karmake vaza durgatike duHkha pAkara svargase cyuta hote
haiM aura du:khI hote hue tiryaMca yoni prApta karate haiM  // 43 //  jo
samyagdarzanase sampanna haiM tathA jinhoMne jinazAsanakA acchI taraha abhyAsa
kiyA hai ve svarga jAte haiM aura vahA~se cyuta honepara ratnatrayako pAkara
utkRSTa mokSako prApta karate haiM  // 44 //  vaha dharma gahasthoM aura
muniyoMke bhedase do prakArakA hai| ina doke sivAya jo tIsare prakArakA dharma
mAnate haiM ve moharUpI agnise jale hue haiM  // 45 //  pA~ca aNuvrata, tIna
guNavrata aura cAra zikSAvrata, yaha gRhasthoMkA dharma hai  // 46 //  jo
gRhastha anta samaya saba prakArake ArambhakA tyAga kara zarIrameM bhI niHspRha
ho jAte haiM tathA samatA bhAvase maraNa karate haiM ve uttama gatiko prApta
hote haiM  // 47 //  pAMca mahAvrata, pA~ca samitiyAM aura tIna guptiyAM yaha
muniyoMkA dharma hai  // 48 //  jo manuSya muni dharmase yukta hokara zubha
dhyAnameM tatpara rahate haiM ve isa durgandhipUrNa bIbhatsa zarIrako chor3akara
svarga athavA mokSako prApta hote haiM  // 49 /  /  jo manuSya utkRSTa
brahmacArI digambara muniyoMkI bhAvapUrvaka stuti karate haiM ve bhI dharmako
prApta ho sakate haiM  // 50 //  ve usa dharmake prabhAvase kugatiyoMmeM nahIM
jAte kintu usa ratnatrayarUpI dharmako prApta kara lete haiM jisake ki
prabhAvase pApabandhanase mukta ho jAte haiM  // 51 //  isa prakAra devAdhideva
bhagavAn vRSabhadevake dvArA kahe hue uttama dharmako sunakara deva aura manuSya
sabhI parama harSako prApta hue  // 52 //  1. zarIriNaH ma.  /  2. gRhasevinAm
ma.  /  3. zobhatAm ma.  /  4. devamanuSyAzca ma.  /  5. paramaM moda- ma.  /

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fourth Chapter  Some attained Right Faith and embraced the householder's
dharma, while others, following their own strength, adopted the life of an
ascetic. ||53||  Then, ready to depart, the gods and demons bowed to the Jina,
praised him, and adorned with dharma, went to their respective abodes. ||54||
Wherever the Omniscient went, by virtue of his power of movement, a hundred
yojanas around became like heaven. ||55||  Wandering through many lands, the
Jina, with the gift of the Three Jewels, liberated countless beings from the
ocean of samsara. ||56||  He had eighty-four Ganadharas and eighty-four thousand
virtuous, tapasvi Sadhus. ||57||  These Sadhus were of the purest mind, radiant
like the sun and moon. Surrounded by them, the Jina wandered the earth. ||58||
The king, Bharat, son of Rishabhadeva, attained the fortune of a Chakravarti,
and this land became known as Bharat Kshetra in the world. ||59||  Rishabhadeva
had a hundred sons, each more radiant and brilliant than the last, who,
embracing the ascetic vow, attained the supreme state. ||60||  Among them,
Bharat Chakravarti was the firstborn, residing in the beautiful city of Ayodhya,
served by a multitude of virtuous people. ||61||  He possessed nine
inexhaustible treasures filled with precious gems, ninety thousand mines, three
crore cows, one crore ploughs, eighty-four lakh noble elephants, eighteen crore
horses swift as the wind, thirty-two thousand mighty kings, thirty-two thousand
lands adorned with cities, fourteen jewels eternally protected by the gods, and
ninety-six thousand women. It is impossible to describe his complete wealth.
||62-66||  In the city of Podanpur, Bharat's half-brother, King Bahubali,
resided. He was immensely powerful and, driven by the ego, "Bharat and I are two
sons of the same father," always opposed Bharat. ||67||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha parva kecit samyagmatiM bhejurgRhidharmamathApare  /  anagAravrataM
kecit svazakteranugAminaH  // 53 //  tataH samudyatA gantuM jinaM natvA
surAsurAH  /  stutvA ca nijadhAmAni gatA dharmavibhUSitAH  // 54 //  yaM yaM
dezaM sa sarvajJaH prayAti gatiyogataH  /  yojanAnAM zataM tatra jAyate
svargavibhramam  // 55 //  sa bhraman bahudezeSu mavyarAzInupAgatAn  /
ratnatritayadAnena saMsArA'dudatIrat  // 56 //  tasyAsIda
gaNapAlAnAmazItizcaturuttarA  /  sahastrANi ca tAvanti sAdhUnAM sutapobhRtAm  //
57 /  /  atyantazuddhacintAste ravicandrasamapramAH  /  ebhiH parivRtaH savA
jino viharate mahIm  // 58 //  cakravartizriyaM tAvatprApto maratabhUpatiH !
yasya kSetramidaM nAmnA jagatprakaTatAM gatam  // 59 //  RSamasya zataM
putrAstejaskAntisamanvitAH  /  zramaNavratamAsthAya saMprAptAH paramaM padam  //
6 //  tanmadhye bharatazcakrI babhUva prathamo bhuvi  /  vinItAnagare ramye
sAdhulokaniSevite  // 61 //  akSayA nidhayastasya navaratnAdisaMbhRtAH  /
AkarANAM sahasrANi navatirnavasaMyutAH  // 62 //  trayaM suramikoTInAM
halakoTistathoditAH  /  caturmiradhikAzItirlakSANAM naradantinAm  /  / 63 /  /
koThyazcASTau dazodiSTA vAjinAM vAtaraMhasAm  /  dvAtriMzacca sahasrANi
pArthivAnAM mahaujasAm  // 6 //  tAvantyeva sahasrANi dezAnAM purasaMpadAm  /
caturdaza ca ratnAni rakSitAni sadA suraiH  // 65 //  purandhrINAM sahasrANi
navatiH SabhiranvitAH  /  aizvayaM tasya niHzeSaM gaditaM naiva zakyate  // 66
//  podanAkhye pure tasya sthito bAhubalI nRpaH  /  pratikUlo
mahAsattvastulyotpAdakamAnataH  // 67 //  tasya yuddhAya saMprApto
bharatazcakragarvitaH  /  sainyena caturaGgeNa chAdayan dharaNItalam  // 6 //
kitane hI logoMne samyagdarzana aura samyagjJAnako dhAraNa kiyaa| kitane hI
logoMne gRhastha dharma aMgIkAra kiyA aura apanI zaktikA anusaraNa karanevAle
kitane hI logoMne manivrata svIkAra kiyA  // 53 /  /  tadanantara jAneke lie
udyata hue sura aura asuroMne jinendra devako namaskAra kiyA, unakI stuti kI
aura phira dharmase vibhUSita hokara saba loga apane-apane sthAnoMpara cale gaye
// 54 //  bhagavAnkA gamana icchAvaza nahIM hotA thA phira bhI ve jisa-jisa
dezameM pahuMcate the vahAM sau yojana takakA kSetra svargake samAna ho jAtA thA
/  / 55 /  /  isa prakAra aneka dezoMmeM bhramaNa karate hue jinendra bhagavAnne
zaraNAgata bhavya jIvoMko ratnatrayakA dAna dekara saMsAra-sAgarase pAra kiyA
thA  // 56 /  /  bhagavAnke caurAsI gaNadhara the aura caurAsI hajAra uttama
tapasvI sAdhu the  // 57 /  /  ve saba sAdhu atyanta nirmala hRdayake dhAraka
the tathA sUrya aura candramAke samAna prabhAse saMyukta the| ina sabase
parivRtta hokara bhagavAnne samasta pRthivIpara vihAra kiyA thA  // 58 /  /
bhagavAn RSabhadevakA putra rAjA bharata cakravartIkI lakSmIko prApta huA thA
aura usIke nAmase yaha kSetra saMsArameM bharata kSetrake nAmase prasiddha huA
thA  // 59|| bhagavAn RSabhadevake sau putra the jo ekase eka bar3hakara teja
aura kAntise sahita the tathA jo antameM zramaNapada-munipada dhAraNa kara
paramapadanirvANadhAmako prApta hue the  // 60 //  una sau putroMke bIca bharata
cakravartI prathama putra thA jo ki sajjanoMke samUhase sevita ayodhyA nAmakI
sundara nagarImeM rahatA thA  // 61 /  /  usake pAsa nava ratnoMse bharI huI
akSaya nau nidhiyA~ thIM, ninyAnabe hajAra khAneM thIM, tIna karor3a gAyeM thIM,
eka karor3a hala the, caurAsI lAkha uttama hAthI the, vAyuke samAna vegavAle
aThAraha karor3a ghor3e the, battIsa hajAra mahApratApI rAjA the, nagaroMse
suzobhita battIsa hajAra hI deza the, deva loga sadA jinakI rakSA kiyA karate
the aise caudaha ratna the, aura chiyAnabe hajAra striyA~ thiiN| isa prakAra
usake samasta aizvayaMkA varNana karanA azakya hai-kaThina kArya hai  /  / 62-66
/  /  podanapura nagarameM bharatakA sautelA bhAI rAjA bAhubalI rahatA thaa|
vaha atyanta zaktizAlI thA tathA 'maiM aura bharata eka hI pitAke do putra haiM'
isa ahaMkArase sadA bharatake viruddha rahatA thA  // 67 /  /  cakraratnake 1.
-dudatItaran m.| 2. ca tapobhRtAm ma.  /  3. potanAkhye ma.  /  4. mAnasaH ma.
/

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 62 of the Padma Purana  62 Padma Purana 1  The first battle, filled
with the din of elephants, chariots, and weapons, arose, causing great
destruction. || 69 ||  Then, laughing, the mighty Bahubali said to Bharata,
"What purpose is served by killing these innocent creatures? What do we gain
from this?" || 70 ||  "If you have defeated me with your unwavering gaze, then I
consider myself defeated. Let us engage in a battle of vision." || 71 ||
Bharata was defeated in the battle of vision, and then in the water battle and
the battle of arms. Finally, Bharata hurled the Chakra Ratna to kill his
brother. || 72 ||  But Bahubali was in his final body, and the Chakra Ratna was
unable to kill him. It returned to Bharata, its mission unsuccessful. || 73 ||
Understanding the root of their conflict, the magnanimous Bahubali renounced all
worldly desires. || 74 ||  He abandoned all possessions, stripped himself of his
ornaments, and stood motionless like Mount Meru for a year, practicing the image
yoga. || 75 ||  He was surrounded by many snakes that emerged from the burrows
of the creepers, and by the vines of the Shyama plant. In this state, he
attained Kevala Jnana. || 76 ||  When his lifespan ended, he attained the state
of Shiva. He was the first to purify the path to liberation in this descending
age. || 77 ||  Bharata ruled his kingdom, free from thorns, dividing the entire
land of Bharata into six parts. || 78 ||  All the villages in his kingdom were
like the cities of the Vidyadharas, filled with all kinds of pleasures. All the
cities were like the heavenly realms, filled with the finest treasures. || 79 ||
The people in his kingdom were like the gods, always adorned, and they received
whatever they desired in their minds. || 80 ||  The lands were like pleasure
gardens, the kings were like the guardians of the world, and the women were like
Apsaras, the abode of love. || 81 ||  Thus, the king of the earth, like
Aakhandala in heaven, enjoyed the fruits of his good karma. || 82 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 62 padmapurANe 1 tayogajaghaTATopasaMghaTTaravasaMkulam  /  saMjAtaM prathamaM
yuddhaM bahulatvakSayAvaham  //  69  //  athovAca vihasyaivaM bharataM
bAhuvikramI  /  kiM varAkena lokena nihatenAmunAvayoH  // 70 //  yadi
niHspandayA dRSTyA bhavatAhaM parAjitaH  /  tato nirjita evAsmi dRSTiyuddhe
pravartyatAm  // 71 //  dRSTiyuddhe tato bhagnastathA bAhuraNAdiSu  /
vadhArthaM marato bhrAtuzcakraratnaM visRSTavAn  // 72 //
tattasyAntyazarIratvAdakSamaM vinipAtane  /  tasyaiva punarAyAyaM samIpaM
viphalakriyam  // 73 //  tato bhrAtrA samaM vairamavabudhya mahAmanAH  /
saMprApto bhogavairAgyaM paramaM bhujavikramI ||74 || saMtyajya sa tato bhogAn
bhUtvA nirvastrabhUSaNaH  /  varSaM pratimayA tasthau meruvaniHprakampakaH
||75|| valmIkavivarodhAtairatyuyaiH sa mahoragaiH  /  zyAmAdInAM ca vallIbhiH
veSTitaH prApa kevalam  //  76  //  tataH zivapadaM prApadAyuSaH karmaNaH kSaye
/  prathamaM so'vasarpiNyAM muktimArgaM vyazodhayat  //  77  //
bharatastvakarod rAjyaM kaNTakaiH parivarjitam  /  SaDbhirbhAgairvibhaktAyAM
sarvasyAM bharatakSitau  // 78 //  vidyAdharapurAkArA grAmAH sarva sukhAvahAH  /
devalokaprakArAzca puraH paramasaMpadaH ||79 || devA iva janAsteSu rejuH
kRtayuge sadA  /  manoviSaya saMprAptavicitrAmbarabhUSaNAH ||80|| dezA
bhogabhuvA tulyA lokapAlopamA nRpAH  /  apsaraH sadRzo nAryo madanAvAsabhUmayaH
//  81  //  evamekAtapatrAyAM pRthivyAM bhairato'dhipaH  /  AkhaNDala iva svarge
bhukke karmaphalaM zubham  //  82  //  ahaMkArase cakanAcUra bharata apanI
caturaMga senAke dvArA pRthivItalako AcchAdita karatA huA usake sAtha yuddha
karaneke lie podanapura gayA  /  /  68  /  /  vahA~ una donoMmeM hAthiyoMke
samUhakI Takkara se utpanna hue zabdase vyApta prathama yuddha huA  /  usa
yuddha meM aneka prANI mAre gaye || 69 //  yaha dekha bhujAoMke balase
suzobhitaM bAhubalIne ha~sakara bharatase kahA ki isa taraha niraparAdha dIna
prANiyoM ke vadhase hamArA aura ApakA kyA prayojana siddha honevAlA hai ||70 ||
yadi Apane mujhe nizcaladRSTise parAjita kara diyA to maiM apane Apako parAjita
samajha lUMgA ataH dRSTiyuddha meM pravRtta honA cAhie ||71|| bAhubalI ke kahe
anusAra donoMkA dRSTiyuddha huA aura usameM bharata hAra gayA  /  tadanantara
jala-yuddha aura bAhu-yuddha bhI hue unameM bhI bharata hAra gayA  /  antameM
bharatane bhAIkA vadha karaneke lie cakraratna calAyA  // 72 //  parantu
bAhubalI caramazarIrI the ataH vaha cakraratna unakA vadha karanemeM asamartha
rahA aura niSphala ho lauTakara bharatake samIpa vApasa A gayA || 73||
tadanantara bhAIke sAtha bairakA mUla kAraNa jAnakara udAracetA bAhubalI
bhogoMse atyanta virakta ho gaye ||14|| unhoMne usI samaya samasta bhogoMkA
tyAgakara vastrAbhUSaNa utArakara pheMka diye aura eka varSaM taka meru parvata
ke samAna niSprakampa khar3e rahakara pratimA yoga dhAraNa kiyA || 75 || unake
pAsa aneka vAmiyA~ laga gayIM jinake biloMse nikale hue bar3e-bar3e sA~poM aura
zyAmA AdikI latAoMne unheM veSTita kara liyaa| isa dazAmeM unheM kevalajJAna
prApta ho gayA || 76  //  tadanantara AyukarmakA kSaya honepara unhoMne mokSa
pada prApta kiyA aura isa avasarpiNI kAlameM sarvaprathama unhoMne mokSamArgaM
vizuddha kiyA - niSkaNTaka banAyA || 77 || bharata cakravartIne chaha bhAgoMse
vibhakta bharata kSetrakI samasta bhUmipara apanA niSkaNTaka rAjya kiyA || 78||
unake rAjya meM bharata kSetrake samasta gA~va vizAdharoMke nagaroMke samAna
sarva sukhoMse sampanna the, samasta nagara devalokake samAna utkRSTa
sampadAoMse yukta the ||79 || aura unameM rahanevAle manuSya, usa kRta yugameM
devoMke samAna sadA suzobhita hote the  /  usa samayake manuSyoMko manameM icchA
hote hI taraha-tarahake vastrAbhUSaNa prApta hote rahate the ||80|| vahA~ ke
deza bhogabhUmiyoMke samAna the, rAjA lokapAloMke the aura striyA~ apsarAoMke
samAna kAmakI nivAsabhUmi thIM  //  81  //  isa taraha jisa prakAra 1. mArge ma.
/  2. bharatAdhipaH ma.  /  tulya

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fourth, Subhadra, a jewel of all sensual pleasures, shone brightly,
protected by a thousand Yakshas with great effort. ||83||  Five hundred sons of
his, by whom this land called Bharata was enjoyed by division, given by his
father, free from thorns. ||84||  Then, thus spoken by the great Gautama, the
Shrenika, curious, again spoke these words. ||85||  "O Bhagavan, you have told
me the origin of the three varnas (Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra). Now I wish to
know the origin of the Sutrakantas (Brahmanas). ||86||  They, desiring good
karma, perform acts like killing of animals, etc., and carry a great pride, for
the sake of attaining Dharma. ||87||  Therefore, you are worthy to speak of the
origin of those of opposite tendencies. And also tell me how the people of these
household Brahmanas become devotees." ||88||  Thus questioned, Ganesha, whose
heart was embraced by the grace of women, and who had destroyed envy, spoke
these words. ||89||  "O Shrenika, listen to this, how the origin of those of
opposite tendencies, whose minds are bound by delusion, came about. ||90||  In
the region near the city of Saketa, the first Jina, surrounded by gods, humans,
and animals, once resided. ||91||  Knowing him, Bharata was pleased, and having
prepared excellent food for the sake of the ascetics, he went to the Jina.
||92||  Prostrating to the Jina with devotion, and to all the Digambaras,
placing both hands on the ground, he spoke these words. ||93||  "O Bhagavans, I
request you to be pleased with me, and accept this excellent alms prepared by
me." ||94||  On hearing this, the Bhagavan said, "O Bharata, this is not
suitable. Such alms, prepared for the sake of the ascetics, are not suitable for
them." ||95||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha pa rakSitaM yasya yakSANAM sahasreNa prayatnataH  /  sarvendriyasukhaM
ratnaM subhadrAkhyaM vyarAjata  // 83 //  paJca putrazatAnyasya yairidaM
bharatAhvayam  /  kSetraM vibhAgato bhuktaM pitrA dattamakaNTakam  // 84 //
athaivaM kathitaM tena gautamena mahAtmanA  /  zreNikaH punarapyAha
vAkyametatkutUhalI  // 85 //  varNatrayasya bhagavansaMbhavo me tvayoditaH  /
utpattiM sUtrakaNThAnAM jJAtumicchAmi sAMpratam  // 86 //  prANighAtAdikaM kRtvA
karma sAdhujugupsitam  /  paraM vahantyamI gavaM dharmaprAptinimittakam  // 87
//  tadeSAM viparItAnAmutpattiM vaktumarhasi  /  kathaM caiSAM gRhasthAnAM
bhakto lokaH pravartate  // 88 //  evaM pRSTo gaNezo'sAvidaM vacanamabravIt  /
kRpAGganApariSvaktahRdayo hatamatsaraH  //  89  //  zreNika zrUyatAmeSA
yathAjAtasamudbhavaH  /  viparItapravRttInAM mohAvaSTabdhacetasAm  //  90  //
sAketanagarAsane pradeze prathamo jinaH  /  AsAJcakre'nyadA
devatiryagmAnavaveSTitaH  // 91 //  jJAtvA taM bharatastuSTo prAhayitvA
susaMskRtam  /  annaM jagAma yatyarthaM bahubhedaprakalpitam  // 92 //  praNamya
ca jinaM bhaktyA samastAMzca digambarAn  /  bhUmau karadvayaM kRtvA
vANImetAmabhASata  //  93  //  prasAdaM bhagavanto me kartumarhatha yAcitAH  /
pratIcchata mayA bhikSAM zobhanAmupapAditAm  // 94 //  ityukte bhagavAnAha
bharateyaM na kalpate  /  sAdhUnAmIdRzI bhikSA yA taduddezasaMskRtA  // 95 //
indra svarga meM apane zubhakarmakA phala bhogatA hai usI prakAra bharata
cakravartI bhI ekachatra pRthivIpara apane zubhakarmakA phala bhogatA thA ||
82|| eka hajAra yakSa prayatnapUrvaka jisakI rakSA karate the aisA samasta
indriyoM ko sukha denevAlA usakA subhadrA nAmaka strIratna atizaya zobhAyamAna
thA  //  83  //  bharata cakravartIke pA~ca sau putra the jo pitAke dvArA
vibhAga kara diye hue niSkaNTaka bharata kSetrakA upabhoga karate the ||84 //
isa prakAra mahAtmA gautama gaNadharane bhagavAn RSabhadeva tathA unake putra
aura pautroMkA varNana kiyA jise sunakara kutUhalase bhare hue rAjA zreNikane
phirase yaha kahA ||85 || he bhagavan ! Apane mere lie kSatriya, vaizya aura
zUdra ina tIna varNoM kI utpatti to kahI aba maiM isa samaya brAhmaNoM kI
utpatti aura jAnanA cAhatA hU~ || 86  //  ye loga dharmaprAptike nimitta,
sajjanoMke dvArA nindita prANihiMsA Adi kArya kara bahuta bhArI garvako dhAraNa
karate haiM  // 87 //  isalie Apa ina viparIta pravRtti karanevAloM kI utpatti
kahaneke yogya haiN| sAtha hI yaha bhI batalAie ki ina gRhastha brAhmaNoM ke
loga bhakta kaise ho jAte haiM ? ||88 || isa prakAra dayArUpI strI jinake
hRdayakA AliMgana kara rahI thI tathA matsara bhAvako jinhoMne naSTa kara diyA
thA aise gautama gaNadhara ne rAjA zreNika ke pUchanepara nimnAMkita vacana kahe
||89|| he zreNika ! jinakA hRdaya mohase AkrAnta hai aura isIlie jo viparIta
pravRtti kara rahe haiM aise ina brAhmaNoM kI utpatti jisa prakAra huI vaha maiM
kahatA hU~ tU suna ||20|| eka bAra ayodhyA nagarIke samIpavartI pradeza meM
deva, manuSya tathA tiryaMcoMse veSTita bhagavAn RSabhadeva Akara virAjamAna hue
/  unheM AyA jAnakara rAjA bharata bahuta hI santuSTa huA aura muniyoM ke
uddezya se banavAyA huA nAnA prakArakA uttamottama bhojana naukaroMse livAkara
bhagavAn ke pAsa pahu~cA  /  vahA~ jAkara usane bhaktipUrvaka bhagavAn
RSabhadevako tathA anya samasta muniyoMko namaskAra kiyA aura pRthvIpara donoM
hAtha Tekakara yaha vacana kahe ||91-93  /  /  he bhagavan ! maiM yAcanA karatA
hU~ ki Apa loga mujhapara prasanna hoie aura mere dvArA taiyAra karAyI huI yaha
uttamottama bhikSA grahaNa kIjie | || 94 || bharatake aisA kahanepara bhagavAnne
kahA ki he bharata ! jo bhikSA muniyoMke uddezyase taiyAra kI jAtI hai vaha
unake yogya nahIM hai - munijana uddiSTa bhojana grahaNa nahIM 1. virAjate ma.
/  2. hRdayodgatamatsaraH ma  /  3. bhramau ma  /  4. prabhASata ma.  /

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
64 Padmapurana These are free from greed, having conquered their senses,
enemies. They are great in virtue, having observed fasts for many months. ||96||
They stand in silence, free from fault. They eat for the sake of preserving
life, for life is the cause of Dharma. ||97|| They practice Dharma for the sake
of liberation, where there is no suffering for any beings. They desire the well-
being of all beings. ||98|| Hearing these words, the king pondered for a long
time. "Oh, what a great hardship this vow of the Jains is!" ||99|| The sages
dwell there, free from desire even in their own bodies. They are steadfast,
wearing the form of the sky, compassionate to all beings. ||100|| Now I will
feed these who have taken refuge in the vow of the house-holder. I will mark
them with a golden thread, with great devotion. ||101|| I will give them other
gifts as well, out of devotion. The Dharma that they have embraced is a younger
brother of the Dharma of the monks. ||102|| Then he sent his trusted men with
great speed to invite all the right-seeing people on earth. ||103|| A great
commotion arose throughout the land. People said, "Oh, people! King Bharata is
eager to make a great gift." ||104|| "Therefore, rise up, let us go, bring
clothes, jewels, and other wealth. See, these servants have been sent by him
with respect." ||105|| Hearing this, some of them said, "This Bharata only
honors his own right-seeing people, so it is useless for us to go there."
||106|| Hearing this, the right-seeing people, filled with great joy, went to
Bharata with their wives and children, and stood with humility. ||107|| The
wrong-seeing people also came, driven by greed for wealth, pretending to be
right-seeing, to the palace of King Bharata, which resembled the palace of
Indra. ||108|| King Bharata had the courtyard of his palace decorated with
sprouts of rice, green gram, black gram, etc., and honored all the right-seeing
people with these decorations. ||109||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 64 padmapurANe ete hi tRSNayA muktA nirjitendriyazatravaH  /  vidhAyApi bahUn
mAsAnupavAsaM mahAguNAH  // 96 //  frri re movi nirdoSAM maunamAsthitAH  /
bhuJjate prANaSTatyarthaM prANA dharmasya hetavaH  // 97 //  dharmaM caranti
mokSArthaM yatra pIDA na vidyate  /  kathaMcidapi sattvAnAM sarveSAM
sukhamicchatAm  // 98 //  zrutvA tadvacanaM samrAr3acintayadidaM ciram  /  aho
vata mahAkaSTaM jainezva ramidaM vratam  //  99  //  tiSThanti munayo yatra
svasmin dehe'pi niHspRhAH  /  jAtarUpadharA dhIrAH sarvabhUtadayAparAH  // 100
//  idAnIM bhojayAmyetAn sAgAravratamAzritAn  /  lakSaNaM hemasUtreNa kRtvaitena
mahAndhasA  // 101 //  prakAmamanyadapyebhyo dAnaM yacchAmi bhaktitaH  /
kanIyAn munidharmasya dharmo'mIbhiH samAzritaH  //  102 //  samyagdRSTijanaM
sarvaM tato'sau dharaNItale  /  nyamantrayan mahAvegaiH puruSaiH svasya
saMmataiH  //  103  //  mahAn kalakalo jAtaH sarvasyAmavanau tataH  /  mo mo
narA mahAdAnaM marataH kartumudyataH  /  /  104  /  /  uttiSThatAzu gacchAmo
vastraratnAdikaM dhanam  /  AnayAmo narA hyete preSitAstena sAdarAH  /  /  105
|| uktamanyairidaM tatra pUjayatyeSa saMmatAn  /  samyagdRSTijanAn rAjA gamanaM
tatra no vRthA  //  106  //  tataH samyagdRzo yAtA harSaM paramamAgatAH  /
samaM putraiH kalatraizca puruSA vinayasthitAH  //  107 //  mithyAdRzo'pi
saMprAptA mAyayA vasutRSNayA  /  bhavanaM rAjarAjasya zakraprAsAdasannibham  //
108 //  aGgaNoptayavabrIhimudmASAGkurAdibhiH  /  uccitya lakSaNaiH sarvAn
samyagdarzanasaMskRtAn  //  109 //  ra || 95|| ye muni tRSNAse rahita haiM,
inhoMne indriyarUpI zatruoMko jIta liyA hai, tathA mahAn guNoMke dhAraka haiM  /
ye eka-do nahIM aneka mahInoMke upavAsa karaneke bAda bhI zrAvakoMke ghara hI
bhojana ke lie jAte haiM aura vahAM prApta huI nirdoSa bhikSAko mauna se khar3e
rahakara grahaNa karate haiM  /  unakI yaha pravRtti rasAsvAda ke lie na hokara
kevala prANoMkI rakSAke lie hI hotI hai kyoMki prANa dharmake kAraNa haiM  // 96
- 27 //  ye muni mokSa - prApti ke lie usa dharmakA AcaraNa kara rahe haiM
jisameM ki sukhakI icchA rakhanevAle samasta prANiyoMko kisI bhI prakArakI pIr3A
nahIM dI jAtI hai ||18|| bhagavAn ke ukta vacana sunakara samrAT bharata
cirakAla taka yaha vicAra karatA rahA aura kahatA rahA ki aho ! jinendra
bhagavAnkA yaha vrata mahAn kaSToMse bharA hai  /  isa vrata ke pAlana
karanevAle muni apane zarIra meM niHspRha rahate haiM, digambara hote haiM,
dhIravIra tathA samasta prANiyoMpara dayA karanemeM tatpara rahate haiM  /  / 92
- 100 //  isa samaya jo yaha mahAn bhojana-sAmagrI taiyAra kI gayI hai isase
gRhasthakA vrata dhAraNa karanevAle puruSoMko bhojana karAtA hU~ tathA ina
gRhasthoMko suvarNasUtra se cihnita karatA ||| 101 || bhojana ke sivAya anya
Avazyaka vastue~ bhI inake lie bhaktipUrvaka acchI mAtrAmeM detA hU~ kyoMki ina
logoMne jo dharmaM dhAraNa kiyA hai vaha muni dharmakA choTA bhAI hI to hai  //
102  //  tadanantara -- samrAT bharatane mahAvegazAlI apane iSTa puruSoMko
bhejakara pRthivItalapara vidyamAna samasta samyagdRSTijanoMko nimantrita kiyA
|| 103 || isa kAryaMse samasta pRthivIpara bar3A kolAhala maca gayA  /  loga
kahane lage ki aho ! manuSyajana ho ! samrAT bharata bahuta bhArI dAna karane ke
lie udyata huA hai  //  104  //  isalie uTho, zIghra caleM, vastra-ratna Adika
dhana lAveM, dekho ye Adarase bhare sevakajana usane bheje haiM  //  105  //
yaha sunakara unhIM logoM meM se koI kahane lage ki yaha bharata apane iSTa
samyagdRSTijanoM kA hI satkAra karatA hai isalie hama logoM kA vahA~ jAnA vRthA
hai || 106 || yaha sunakara jo samyagdRSTi puruSa the ve parama harSako prApta
ho strI -putrAdikoM ke sAtha bharata ke pAsa gaye aura vinayase khar3e ho gaye
|| 107 || jo mithyAdRSTi the ve bhI dhanakI tRSNAse mAyAmayI samyagdRSTi
banakara indrabhavanakI tulanA karanevAle samrAT bharata ke bhavana meM pahu~ce
|| 108 || samrAT bharatane bhavanake A~ganameM boye hue jo, dhAna, mU~ga, ur3ada
Adike aMkuroMse 1. zAntaprazamamUrtayaH ma  /  2. nyAmantrayan ka.  /  2. jAtAH
ka., kha.  /

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
### Fourth Chapter  Chaturtha Parva  The house was entered by that one marked
with the beautiful golden thread, adorned with countless gems. Those afflicted
with delusion and desire, agitated by contemplation, were speaking pitiable
words and were plunged into the ocean of suffering.   Then, as desired, the king
Bharat gave donations to those ÅrÄvakas. In the hearts of those who received the
honor, a sense of ego arose, and they began to think, "We are indeed great
purifiers and the benefactors of the world; that is why the king of kings Bharat
worships us with great reverence."   Consequently, filled with this pride, they
spread across the entire surface of the earth and began to beg when they saw
some wealthy individuals. Later, on a certain day, the minister Matismudra said
to king Bharat, "Today I have heard the following words in the assembly of the
Lord."   It was said that what Bharat had created for these BrÄhmaá¹as would
become hypocritical and very audacious in the impending age of Kali following
the rise of the flourishing TÄ«rthankara.   Those deluded by the essence of
Dharma would kill living beings, filled with great passion and ever eager to
commit sins. They would proclaim the false scriptures, the Vedas, as devoid of
their creators, misleading all beings.   Engaged in great endeavours, they would
accept donations and would always slander the teachings of Lord Jinendra.
Seeing the naked Munis ahead, the sinners would become filled with anger and
would be like the seedlings of a poisonous tree, harmful to the world,
constantly producing misfortune.   Hearing the words of Minister Matismudra,
Bharat, angered, prepared to kill all those BrÄhmaá¹as. Subsequently, they,
frightened, sought refuge with Lord á¹á¹£abhadeva.   Lord á¹á¹£abhadeva, saying, "O
son! Do not harm them (ma hananam kÄrÌ¥á¹£Ä«á¸¥)," protected them, and henceforth they
became known by the title 'MÄhana.'   Since these BrÄhmaá¹as, who had taken
refuge in Lord Jinendra, were protected by him, the gods and the wise revered
the Lord.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturtha parva alakSayat saratnena sUtracihvena caarunnaa| cAmokaramayenAsau
prAvezayadatho gRham  // 11 //  mithyAdRzo'pi tRSNArtAzcintayA vyAkulIkRtAH  /
jalpanto dInavAkyAni praviSTA duHkhasAgaram  // 11 //  tato yathepsitaM dAnaM
zrAvakenyo dadau nRpaH  /  pUjitAnAM ca cinteyaM teSAM jAtA darAtmanAma  // 11
//  vayaM ke'pi mahApUtA jagate hitakAriNaH  /  pUjitA yannarendraNa
zraddhayA'tyantataGgayA  // 113 //  tataste tena garveNa samaste dharaNItale  /
pravRttA yAcituM lokaM dRSTvA dravyasamanvitam  // 114 //  tato matisamudreNa
bharatAya niveditam  /  yathAyeti mayA jaine vacanaM sadasi zrutam  // 115||
varddhamAnajinasyAnte maviSyanti kalau yuge  /  ete ye bhavatA sRSTAH pAkhaNDino
mahoddhatAH  // 116 //  prANino mArayiSyanti dharmabunyA vimohitaaH|
mahAkaSAyasaMyuktAH sadA pApakriyodyatAH  // 117 //  kugranthaM vedasaMzaM ca
hiMsAmASaNatatparam  /  vakSyanti kartRnirmuktaM mohayanto'khilAH prajAH  // 118
//  mahArambheSu saMsaktAH pratigrahaparAyaNAH  /  kariSyanti sadA nindAM
jinabhASitazAsane  /  / 119 /  /  nirgranthamagrato dRSTvA krodhaM yAsyanti
pApinaH  /  upadravAya lokasya viSavRkSAGkurA iva  // 120 //  tacchutvA bharataH
kruddhaH tAn sarvAn hantumudyataH  /  brAsitAste tatastena nAbheyaM zaraNaM
gatAH  // 121 //  yasmAnmA hananaM putra kArSIriti 'nivAritam  /  RSabheNa tato
yAtA 'mAhanA' iti te zrutim  /  /  122 /  /  rakSitAste yatastena jinena
zaraNAgatAH  /  vAtAramindramityuccaistatastaM vibudhA jaguH  /  / 123 //
samasta samyagdRSTi puruSoMkI chA~Ta alaga kara lI tathA unheM jisameM ratna
piroyA gayA thA aise suvarNamaya sundara sUtrake cihnase cihnita kara bhavanake
bhItara praviSTa karA liyA  // 109-110 //  tRSNAse pIr3ita mithyAdRSTi loga bhI
cintAse vyAkula ho dona vacana kahate hue duHkharUpI sAgarameM praviSTa hura  //
111 //  tadanantara-rAjA bharatane una zrAvakoMke lie icchAnusAra dAna diyaa|
bharatake dvArA sammAna pAkara unake hRdayameM durbhAvanA utpanna huI aura ve
isa prakAra vicAra karane lage  // 112 //  ki hama loga vAstavameM mahApavitra
tathA jagatkA hita karanevAle koI anupama puruSa haiM isIlie to rAjAdhirAja
bharatane bar3I zraddhAke sAtha hama logoMkI pUjA kI hai  // 113 //  tadanantara
ve isI garvase samasta pRthivItalapara phaila gaye aura kisI dhana-sampanna
vyaktiko dekhakara yAcanA karane lage  // 114|| tatpazcAt kisI dina matisamudra
nAmaka mantrIne rAjAdhirAja bharatase kahA ki Aja maiMne bhagavAnke
samavasaraNameM nimnAMkita vacana sunA hai  /  / 115 /  /  vahA~ kahA gayA hai
ki bharatane jo ina brAhmaNoMkI racanA kI hai so ve varddhamAna tIrthaMkarake
bAda kaliyuga nAmaka paMcama kAla Anepara pAkhaNDI evaM atyanta uddhata ho
jAyeMge  // 116 //  dharma buddhise mohita hokara arthAt dharma samajhakara
prANiyoMko mAreMge, bahuta bhArI kaSAyase yukta hoMge aura pApa kAryake karane
meM tatpara hoMge  // 117 //  jo hiMsAkA upadeza dene meM tatpara rahegA aise
veda nAmaka khoTe zAstrako kartAse rahita arthAt Izvara praNIta batalAveMge aura
samasta prajAko mohita karate phireMge  // 118 //  bar3e-bar3e ArambhoMmeM lIna
raheMge, dakSiNA grahaNa kareMge aura jinazAsanakI sadA nindA kareMge  // 119||
nirgrantha muniko Age dekhakara krodhako prApta hoMge aura jisa prakAra
viSavRkSake aMkura jagatke upadrava arthAt apakArake lie haiM usI prakAra ye
pApI bhI jagatke upadravake lie hoMge-jagatmeM sadA anartha utpanna karate
raheMge  // 120 /  /  matisamudra mantrIke vacana sunakara bharata kupita ho una
saba viproMko mAraneke lie udyata huaa| tadanantara ve bhayabhIta hokara
bhagavAn RSabhadevakI zaraNa meM gaye  /  / 121!! bhagavAn RSabhadevane 'he
putra ! inakA ( mA hananaM kArSIH ) hanana mata karo' yaha zabda kahakara inakI
rakSA kI thI isalie ye Age calakara 'mAhana' isa prasiddhiko prApta ho gaye
arthAt 'mAhana' kahalAne lage  // 122 /  /  cUMki ina zaraNAgata brAhmaNoMkI
RSabha jinendrane rakSA ko thI isalie devoM athavA vidvAnoMne bhagavAnko 1.
nivAritaH ma..

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The kings who followed the path of the Lord, having fallen from their kingdom,
established different vows according to their own intellect. ||12|| Their
disciples and grand-disciples, intoxicated with pride, misled the world with
false arguments and created many false scriptures. ||125|| Bhrigu, Angishiras,
Agni, Kapila, Atri, and Vid, along with many others, became ascetics, wearing
bark due to ignorance. ||126|| Seeing women, their minds became polluted, and
they saw lust in their genitals. Therefore, those low, deluded beings covered
their genitals with a loincloth. ||127|| The Brahmanas, who were created by the
Chakravarti Bharat like seeds, with the sacred thread (Yajnopaveet) around their
necks, have now spread throughout the earth like progeny. ||128|| Gautama
Ganadhar says to King Shrenik, "O King! I have told you about the creation of
the Brahmanas as per the context. Now listen attentively as I tell you the main
point." ||129|| Lord Rishabhdev, having liberated countless beings from the
ocean of existence, attained liberation on the peak of Mount Kailash. ||130||
After that, Chakravarti Bharat, abandoning his kingdom, which was a cause of
wonder for the world, like a blade of grass, also attained initiation. ||131|| O
Shrenik! I have briefly explained to you the authority of the state. Now, listen
respectfully as I tell you about the authority of the lineage, O noble man.
||132|| Thus ends the fourth chapter of the Padmacharita, composed by Acharya
Ravishena, known as the Arsha-nama, which describes the greatness of Rishabhdev.
||4|| 1. Naradhipas: Kh. | 2. -Muttir: K. |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 papapurANe ye ca te prathamaM bhagnA nRpA nAthAnugAminaH  /  vratAntaramamI
cakruH svabuddhiparikalpitam  // 12 //  teSAM ziSyAH praziSyAzca mohayantaH
kuhetumiH  /  jagad garvaparAyattAH kuzAstrANi pracakrire  // 125 //
bhRguraGgizirA vahniH kapilo'trirvidastathA  /  anye ca bahavo'jJAnAjAtA
valkalatApasAH  // 126 /  /  sviyaM dRSTvA kucittAste puMliGga prAptavikriyam  /
pidadhurmohasaMchamAH kaupInena narAdhamAH  // 127 //  sUtrakaNThA purA tena ye
sRssttaashckrvrtinaa| bIjavatprasRtAste'tra saMtAnena mahItale  // 28 //
prastAvagatametatte kathitaM dvijakalpanam  /  idAnIM prakRtaM vakSye rAjan zRNu
samAhitaH  /  / 129 //  athAsau lokamuttArya prabhUtaM bhavasAgarAt  /
kailAsazikhare prApa nirvRtiM nAminandanaH  // 130 //  tato bharatarAjo'pi
pravrajyA pratipannavAn  /  sAmrAjyaM tRNavat tyaktvA lokavismayakAraNam  // 131
/  /  AryAcchandaH sthityadhikAro'yaM te zreNika gaditaH samAsatastvenam  /
vaMzAdhikAramadhunA puruSarave viddhi sAdaraM vacmi  // 132 //  ityAce
raviSeNAcAryaprokta padmacarite RSabhamAhAtmyAbhidhAnaM nAma caturtha parva  //
4 //  trAtA arthAt rakSaka kahakara unakI bahuta bhArI stuti kI thI  // 123 //
dIkSAke samaya bhagavAn RSabhadevakA anukaraNa karanevAle jo rAjA pahale hI
cyuta ho gaye the unhoMne apanI-apanI buddhike anusAra dUsare-dUsare vrata
calAye the  // 124 //  unhIMke ziSya-praziSyoMne ahaMkArase cUra hokara
khoTIkhoTI yuktiyoMse jagatko mohita karate hue aneka khoTe zAstroMkI racanA kI
// 125 //  bhRgu, aMgizirasa, vahni, kapila, atri tathA vida Adi aneka sAdhu
ajJAnavaza valkaloMko dhAraNa karanevAle tApasI hue  // 126 //  strIko dekhakara
unakA citta dUSita ho jAtA thA aura jananendriyameM vikAra dikhane lagatA thA
isalie una adhama mohI jIvoMne jananendriyako laMgoTase AcchAdita kara liyA  //
127|| kaNThameM sUtra arthAt yajJopavItako dhAraNa karanevAle jina brAhmaNoMko
cakravartI bharatane pahale bIjake samAna thor3I hI racanA kI thI ve aba
santatirUpase bar3hate hue samasta pRthvI talapara phaila gaye  // 128 /  /
gautama gaNadhara rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! yaha brAhmaNoMkI
racanA prakaraNavaza maiMne tujhase kahI hai| aba sAvadhAna hokara prakRta bAta
kahatA hU~ so suna  // 129 /  /  bhagavAn RSabhadeva saMsAra-sAgarase aneka
prANiyoMkA uddhAra kara kailAsa parvatakI zikharase mokSako prApta hue  // 130
//  tadanantara cakravartI bharata bhI logoMko AzcaryameM DAlanevAle sAmrAjyako
tRNake samAna chor3akara dIkSAko prApta hue  // 131 //  he zreNika ! yaha sthiti
nAmakA adhikAra maiMne saMkSepase tujhe kahA hai, he zreSTha puruSa ! aba
vaMzAdhikArako kahatA hU~ so Adarase zravaNa kara  // 132 //  isa prakAra
ArSanAmase prasiddha raviSeNAcArya praNIta padmacaritameM RSabhadevakA mAhAtmya
varNana karanevAlA caturtha parva pUrNa huA  // 4 //  1. narAdhipAH kha.  /  2.
-muttIrya ka.  /

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Fifth Chapter  In this world, four great dynasties are renowned, O king.
Their subdivisions, replete with mysteries, have been expounded in many ways.
||1||  The first among them is the illustrious Ikshvaku dynasty, the ornament of
the world. The second is the spotless Rishivamsha or Chandravamsha. ||2||  The
third is the extremely captivating dynasty of the learned, and the fourth is the
renowned Harivamsha. ||3||  From the Ikshvaku dynasty was born Bhagavan
Rishabhadeva, whose son was the mighty Bharata. From him arose Sitayasha, whose
son was Balanka. ||4||  From him was born the mighty Subalah, and from him the
extremely powerful Amritashabdita. ||5||  Subhadra, Sagara, Bhadra, Ravitejas,
Shashi, Prabhutatejas, Tejasvi, Tapana, the mighty Ativivarya, Suveerya, the
renowned for his prowess, Mahendravikrama, Surya, Indradyumna, Mahendrajit,
||6-7||  Prabhu, Vibhu, Avidhvamsi, Vitabhee, Rishabhadhvaja, Garudanka,
Mriganka, and other great kings of the earth - ||8||  Relinquishing their
kingdoms to their sons, fearful of the ocean of worldly existence, they became
detached even from their bodies, embracing the vow of non-attachment. ||9||
Thus, I have narrated to you the lineage of the Solar dynasty, O king. Now, the
origin of the Lunar dynasty is described. ||10||  Rishabhadeva had a son named
Bahubali. From him was born the gentle Somayasha. ||11||  Then was born the
mighty Mahabala, and from him came Subalah, known as Bhujabali. These were the
initial kings of this dynasty. ||12||  Those born in the Lunar dynasty, with
pure conduct, quickly attained the supreme state of asceticism. ||13||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcamaM parva jagatyasmin mahAvaMzAzcatvAraH prathitA nRpa  /  eSAM
rahasyasaMyuktAH prabhedA bahudhoditAH ||1|| ikSvAkuH prathamasteSAmunnato
lokabhUSaNaH  /  RSivaMzo dvitIyastu zazAGkakaranirmalaH  //  2  //  vidyAbhRtAM
tRtIyastu vaMzo'tyantamanoharaH  /  harivaMzo jagarakhyAtazcaturthaH
parikIrtitaH  //  3  //  tasyAdityayazAH putro bharatasyodapadyata  /  tataH
sitayazA jAto valAGkastasya cAbhavat ||4|| jajJe ca subalastasmAttatazcApi
mahAbalaH  /  tasmAdatibalo jAtastatazcAmRtazabditaH ||5|| subhadraH sAgaro
bhadro ravitejAstathA zazI  /  prabhUtatejAstejasvI tapano'tha pratApavAn  // 6
//  ativIryaH suvIryazca tathoditaparAkramaH  /  mahendravikramaH sUrya
indradyumno mahendrajit ||7|| prabhurvibhuravidhvaMsI vItabhIrRSabhadhvajaH  /
garuDAko mRgAGkazca tathAnye pRthivIbhRtaH ||8|| rAjyaM suteSu nikSipya
saMsArArNava bhIravaH  /  zarIreSvapi niHsaMgA nirmanthavratamAzritAH ||9||
ayamAdityavaMzaste kathitaH kramato nRpe  /  utpattiH somavaMzasya sAmprataM
parikIrtyate  // 10 //  RSabhasyAbhavat putro nAmnA bAhubalIti yaH  /  tataH
somayazA nAma saumyaH sUnurajAyata ||11|| tato mahAbalo jAtastato'sya
subalo'bhavat  /  smRto bhujabalI tasyAdevamAdyA nRpAdhipAH  //  12  //  "
zazivaMze samutpannAH krameNa sitaceSTitAH  /  zrAmaNyamanubhUyAzu saMprAptAH
paramaM padam ||13||  /  athAnantara, gautama svAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM
ki he rAjan ! isa saMsArameM cAra mahAvaMza prasiddha haiM aura ina mahAvaMzoM
ke aneka avAntara bheda kahe gaye haiM  /  ye sabhI bheda aneka prakAra ke
rahasyoMse yukta haiM  //  1  //  una cAra mahAvaMzoM meM pahalA ikSvAkuvaMza
hai jo atyanta utkRSTa tathA lokakA AbhUSaNasvarUpa hai  /  dUsarA RSivaMza
athavA candravaMza hai jo candramAkI kiraNoMke samAna nirmala hai || 2 || tIsarA
vidyAdharoMkA vaMza hai jo atyanta manohara hai aura cauthA harivaMza hai jo
saMsArameM prasiddha kahA gayA hai || 3 || ikSvAkuvaMzameM bhagavAn RSabhadeva
utpanna hue, unake bharata hue aura unake akaMkIrti mahApratApI putra hue| arka
nAma sUryakA hai isalie inakA vaMza sUryavaMza kahalAne lagA  /  arkakIrtike
sitayazA nAmA putra hue, unake balAMka, balAMkake subala, subalake mahAbala,
mahAbalake atibala, atibalake amRta, amRtake subhadra, subhadrake sAgara, sAgara
ke bhadra, bhadrake raviteja, ravitejake zazI, zazIke prabhUtateja,
prabhUtatejake tejasvI, tejasvI ke pratApI tapana, tapanake ativIryaM,
ativIryaMke suvArya, suvIryaka uditaparAkrama, uditaparAkramake mahendravikrama,
mahendravikramake sUrya, sUryake indradyumna, indradyumnake mahendrajit,
mahendrajit ke prabhu, prabhuke vibhu, vibhu vidhvaMsa, avidhvaMsa ke vItabhI,
vItabhIke vRSabhadhvaja, vRSabhadhvajake garuDAMka aura garuDAMkake mRgAMka
putra hue| isa prakAra isa vaMzameM anya aneka rAjA hue| ye sabhI saMsArase
bhayabhIta the ataH putroMke lie rAjya sauMpakara zarIra se bhI niHspRha ho
nirgrantha vratako prApta hue ||4 - 9 || he rAjan ! maiMne kramase tujhe
sUryavaMzakA nirUpaNa kiyA hai aba somavaMza athavA candravaMzakI utpatti kahI
jAtI hai  // 10 //  bhagavAn RSabhadevakI dUsarI rAnIse bAhubalI nAmakA putra
huA thA, usake somayaza nAmakA sundara putra utpanna huA thA  /  soma nAma
candramAkA hai so usI somayazase somavaMza athavA candravaMzakI paramparA calI
hai  /  somayazake mahAbala, mahAbalake subala aura subala ke bhujabala isa 1.
nRpaH ma.  /  2. zazivaMzasamutpannAH kha., ma.  /

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Padmapurane  Some, with diminished karmas, enjoy the fruits of austerities. They
dwell in svarga and then quickly attain liberation. 14  This is the Somavamsha
that I have told you about. Now I shall narrate the lineage of the Vidyadharas
in brief. 15  Nami, the king of the Vidyadharas, had a son named Ratnamali. From
him was born Ratnavajra, then Ratnaratha, then Ratnacitra, then Candraratha,
then Vajrajangha, then Vajrasena, then Vajradamstra, then Vajradhvaja, then
Vajrayudha, then Vajra, then Suvajra, then Vajrabhrt, then Vajrabha, then
Vajrabahu, then Vajrasaá¹jÃ±aka, then VajrÄsya, then Vajrapani, then Vajrajatu,
then Vajravan. 16-19  Then there were Vidyunmukha, Suvaktra, Vidyudamstra,
Vidyudvan, Vidyudama, and Vidyudvega, also known as Vaidyuta. 20  Many such
heroic Vidyadhara kings have, in due course of time, attained the appropriate
abodes according to their deeds. 21  Some of them, entrusting their subjects to
their sons, took Jina diksha and attained siddhi, abandoning hatred and
attachment. 22  Some, unable to break free from the bondage of karma, enjoyed
the pleasures of celestial enjoyments through the mere proximity created by
their resolve. 23  Some, bound by the noose of karma due to strong attachment,
met their end there itself, like deer trapped in a net. 24  Then there was a
lord named Vidyudha, who was the master of both lineages, empowered by the
strength of his knowledge, and of lofty valor. 25  One day, while in the sky, he
saw the unattached Yogin SaÃ±jayanta, established in the immovable posture, in
Videha. 26  Bringing him, Vidyudha established him on the mountain called
PaÃ±cagiri, and urged the knowledgeable ones to kill him. 27

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe . kecittu tanukarmANo bhuJjAnAstapasaH phalam  /  svarge
cakruravasthAnamAsannabhavanirgamAH  //  14 //  eSa te somavaMzo'pi kathitaH
pRthivIpate  /  vaidyAdharamato vaMzaM kathayAmi samAsataH ||15||
namervidyAdharendrasya ratnamAlI suto'bhavat  /  ratnavajrastato jAtastato
ratnaratho'bhavat  //  16  //  ratnacitro'bhavattasmAjjAtazcandrarathastataH  /
jajJe'to vajrajaGghAkhyo vajrasenazrutistataH ||17|| udbhUto vajradaMSTo'tastato
vajradhvajo'bhavat  /  vajrAyudhazca vajrazca suvajro vajrabhRttathA  // 18 //
vajrAbho vajrabAhuca vajrAGko vajrasaMjJakaH  /  vajrAsyo vajrapANizca
vajrajAtuzca vajravAn  //  19  //  vidyunmukhaH suvaktrazca vidyudaMSTrazca
tatsutaH  /  vidyudvAn vidyudAmazca vidyudvego'tha vaidyutaH ||20|| ityAdyA
bahavaH zUrA vidyAdharapurAdhipAH  /  gatA dIrgheNa kAlena ceSTitocitamAzrayam
// 21 //  suteSu prabhutAM nyasya jinadIkSAmupAzritAH  /  hitvA dveSaM ca rAgaM
ca kecitsiddhimupAgatAH ||22|| kecidvinAzamaprApte samaste karmabandhane  /
saMkalpakRtasAMnidhyaM saurabhogamabhuJjata  //  23  //  kecittu karmapAzena
baddhAH snehagarIyasA  /  tatraiva nidhanaM yAtA vAgurAyAM mRgA iva  //  24 //
atha vidyuDho nAmnA prabhuH zreNyordvayorapi  /  vidyAbalasamunnaddho
babhUvonnatavikramaH ||25|| anyadA sa gato'pazyad videhaM gaganasthitaH  /
nirgranthaM yogamArUDhaM zailanizcalavigraham  // 26 //  sthApitastena nItvAsau
nAmnA paJcagirau girau  /  kurudhvaM vadhamasyeti vidyAvantazca coditAH  // 27
//  prakAra inheM Adi lekara aneka rAjA isa vaMzameM kramase utpanna hue haiM  /
ye sabhI rAjA nirmala ceSTAoMke dhAraka the tathA munipadako dhAraNa kara hI
paramapada ( mokSa ) ko prApta hue  /  /  11-13 /  /  kitane hI alpakarma
avaziSTa raha jAneke kAraNa tapakA phala bhogate hue svagaMmeM deva hue tathA
vahA~se Akara zIghra hI mokSa prApta kareMge ||14|| he rAjan ! yaha maiMne tujhe
somavaMza kahA aba Age saMkSepase vidyAdharoMke vaMzakA darNana karatA hU~
||15|| vidyAdharoMkA rAjA jo nami thA usake ratnamAlI nAmakA putra huA  /
ratnamAlIke ratnavajra, ratnavajra ke ratnaratha, ratnarathake ratnacitra,
ratnacitra ke candraratha, candrarathake vajrajaMgha, vajrajaMghake vajrasena,
vajrasenake vajradaMSTa, vajradaMSTra ke vajradhvaja, vajradhvajake vajrAyudha,
vajrAyudha ke vajra, vajrake suvajra, suvajrake vajrabhRt, vajrabhRt ke
vajrAbha, vastrAbhake vajrabAhu, vajrabAhuke vajrasaMjJa, vajrasaMjJake
vajrAsya, vajrAsyake vajrapANi, vajrapANike vajrajAtu, vajrajAtuke vajravAn
vajravAn ke vidyunmukha, vidyunmukhake suvaktra, suvaktra ke vidyudaMSTra,
vidyudaMSTrake vidyutvAn, vidyutvAn ke vidyudAbha, vidyudAbha vidyudvega aura
vidyudvega vaidyuta nAmaka putra hue| ye hI nahIM, inheM Adi lekara aneka
zUravIra vidyAgharoMke rAjA hue| ye sabhI dIrgha kAla taka rAjya kara apanI-
apanI ceSTAoMke anusAra sthAnoMko prApta hue  /  / 16 - 21  /  /  inameM se
kitane hI rAjAoMne putroMke lie rAjya sauMpakara jinadIkSA dhAraNa kI aura rAga-
dveSa chor3akara siddhipada prApta kiyA ||22|| kitane hI rAjA samasta
karmabandhanako naSTa nahIM kara sake isalie saMkalpa mAtra se upasthita
honevAle devoMke sukhakA upabhoga karane lage ||23|| kitane hI loga snehake
kAraNa gurutara karmarUpI pAzase ba~dhe rahe aura jAlameM ba~dhe hariNoMke
samAna usI karmarUpI pAzameM ba~dhe hue mRtyuko prApta hue ||24|| athAnantara
isI vidyAdharoMke vaMzameM eka vidyudRr3ha nAmakA rAjA huA jo donoM zreNiyoMkA
svAmI thA, vidyAbalameM atyanta uddhata aura vipula parAkramakA dhArI thA || 25
|| kisI eka samaya vaha vimAna meM baiThakara videha kSetra gayA thA vahA~ usane
AkAzase hI nirgrantha mudrAke dhArI saMjayanta muniko dekhA, usa samaya ve
dhyAnameM ArUr3ha the aura unakA zarIra parvatake samAna nizcala thA ||26||
vidyudRr3ha vidyAdharane una munirAjako lAkara paMcagiri nAmaka parvatapara
rakha diyA aura 1. -mAzramam ma.  /  2. vidyuSTro ma.  /  68

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Chapter  The yogi, being struck by the Vidyaadharas with stones and
other things, remained equanimous, his mind not even slightly disturbed. ||28||
Then, while enduring this unbearable torment, the great sage Sanjayanta attained
the supreme knowledge, illuminating all things. ||29||  At that time,
Dharanendra, the sage's brother from a previous life, arrived. He took away all
the Vidyaadharas' knowledge, leaving them devoid of it and attaining complete
peace. ||30||  Then, filled with sorrow at the loss of their knowledge, they
humbly folded their hands and asked Dharanendra, "How can we regain our
knowledge?" Dharanendra replied, "You can regain your knowledge by enduring the
hardships of penance at the feet of Sanjayanta Muni. However, if you commit any
wrong deeds, even if you attain knowledge, it will be lost again. If you go
above the temple of the Arhat's image and the saints, even by mistake, your
knowledge will be lost instantly." ||31-33||  Following Dharanendra's
instructions, the Vidyaadharas performed penance at the feet of Sanjayanta Muni
and regained their knowledge. ||31-33||  After all this, Dharanendra, out of
curiosity, asked Sanjayanta Muni, "O Bhagavan! Why did the Vidyaadharas behave
in such a way towards you? Why did they take you away and why did they torment
you?" ||34||  Hearing Dharanendra's question, Bhagavan Sanjayanta Kevali said,
"While wandering in this world of four gatis, I was once a merchant named
Hitakar in a village called Shakat. I was very sweet-spoken, compassionate,
honest in nature, and devoted to the service of the saints." ||35-36||  "Later,
I became King Shrivardhan in the city of Kumudavati, dedicated to upholding
righteousness." ||37||  "In the same village, there lived a Brahmin who
practiced wrong penance and became a Kudev. He was expelled from there and
became my, Shrivardhan's, minister named Vahnishik. Although he was known as a
truth-speaker, he was very wicked and secretly engaged in wrong deeds."
||38-39||  "Once, this minister..." ||40||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcamaM parva tasya loSTumiranyaizca hanyamAnasya yoginaH  /  babhUva
samacittasya saMklezo na manAgapi  // 28 //  tato'sya sahamAnasya saMjayantasya
duHsaham  /  upasarga samutpannaM kevalaM sarvabhAsanam  // 29 //  dharaNena
tato vidyA hRtA vidyudRDhasthitAH  /  tato'sau hRtavidyaH san yayAvupazamaM
param  // 30 //  tato'nayA punarlabdhA vidyAnena vyavasthayA  /  praNatenAJjaliM
kRtvA saMjayantasya pAdayoH  // 31 //  tapaHklezena bhavatAM vidyAH setsyanti
bhUriNA  /  siddhA api tathA satyazchedaM yAsyanti duSkRtAt  // 32 //
arhadvimbasanAthasya caityasyopari gacchatAm  /  sAdhUnAM ca pramAde'pi vidyA
naMkSyanti vaH kSaNAt  // 33 //  dharaNena tata: pRSTaH saMjayantaH kutUhalAt  /
vidyudRDhena bhagavan kasmAdevaM viceSTitam  /  / 34 //  uvAca bhagavAnevaM
saMsAre'smin caturgatau  /  bhrAmyannahaM samutpanno grAme zakaTanAmani  // 35
//  vaNigdhitakaro nAmnA priyavAdI dayAnvitaH  /  svabhAvArjavasaMpannaH
sAdhusevAparAyaNaH  // 36 //  kAladharma tataH kRtvA rAjA zrIvarddhanAhvayaH  /
abhavat kumudAvatyAM vyavasthApAlanodyataH  // 37 /  /  grAme tatraiva
vipro'bhat sa kRtvA kutsitaM tapaH  /  kudevo'tra tatazcyutyA rAjJaH
zrIvarddhanasya tu  // 38 //  khyAto vahnizikho nAmnA satyavAdIti vizrutaH  /
abhUt purohito raudro guptAkAryakaro mahAn  // 39 /  /  vaNiniyamadattasya saM
ca dravyamapAta  /  rAzyA dyUtaM tataH kRtvA nirjitaH so'GgulIyakam  // 40 //
'inakA vadha karo' isa prakAra vidyAdharoMko prerita kiyA  /  / 27 /  /  rAjAkI
preraNA pAkara vidyAdharoMne unheM patthara tathA anya sAdhanoMse mAranA zurU
kiyA parantu ve to sama cittake dhArI the ataH unheM thor3A bhI saMkleza utpanna
nahIM huA  // 28 //  tadanantara duHsaha upasargako sahana karate hue una
saMjayanta munirAjako samasta padArthoM ko prakAzita karanevAlA kevalajJAna
utpanna ho gayA  /  / 29 //  usI samaya munirAjakA pUrva bhavakA bhAI
dharaNendra aayaa| usane vidyudRr3hakI saba vidyAe~ hara lI jisase vaha
vidyArahita hokara atyanta zAnta bhAvako prApta huA  // 30 //  vidyAoMke
abhAvameM bahuta duHkhI hokara usane hAtha jor3akara namra bhAvase dharaNendrase
pUchA ki aba hameM kisI taraha vidyAe~ siddha ho sakatI haiM yA nahIM ? taba
dharaNendrane kahA ki tumheM inhIM saMjayanta munirAjake caraNoMmeM tapazvaraNa
sambandhI kleza uThAnese phira bhI vidyAe~ siddha ho sakatI haiM parantu khoTA
kArya karanese ve vidyAe~ siddha honepara bhI punaH naSTa ho jaayeNgii|
jinapratimAse yukta mandira aura muniyoMkA ullaMghana kara pramAdavaza yadi
Upara gamana karoge to tumhArI vidyAe~ tatkAla naSTa ho jaayeNgii| dharaNendrake
dvArA batAyI huI vyavasthAke anusAra vidyudRr3hane saMjayanta munirAjake
pAdamUlameM tapazcaraNa kara phira bhI vidyA prApta kara lI  /  / 31-33 /  /
yaha saba hone ke bAda dharaNendrane kutUhalavaza saMjayanta munirAjase pUchA ki
he bhagavan ! vidyudRr3hane Apake prati aisI ceSTA kyoM kI hai ? vaha kisa
kAraNa Apako hara kara lAyA aura kisa kAraNa vidyAdharoMse usane upasarga karAyA
?  // 34 //  dharaNendrakA prazna sunakara bhagavAn saMjayanta kevalI isa
prakAra kahane lage-isa caturgatirUpa saMsArameM bhramaNa karatA huA maiM eka
bAra zakaTa nAmaka gA~vameM hitakara nAmaka vaizya huA thaa| maiM atyanta
madhurabhASI, dayAlu, svabhAvasambandhI saralatAse yukta tathA sAdhuoMkI sevAmeM
tatpara rahatA thA  /  / 35-36 /  /  tadanantara maiM kumudAvatI nAmakI
nagarImeM maryAdAke pAlana karane meM udyata zrIvaddhaMna nAmakA rAjA huA  // 37
/  /  usI grAmameM eka brAhmaNa rahatA thA jo khoTA tapa kara kudeva huA thA
aura vahA~se cyuta hokara mujha zrIvarddhana rAjAkA vahnizikha nAmakA purohita
huA thaa| vaha purohita yadyapi satyavAdI rUpase prasiddha thA parantu atyanta
duSTapariNAmI thA aura chipakara khoTe kArya karatA thA ||38-39|| usa purohitane
eka bAra 1. caitasyopari ma.  /  2. svaM ca kha., svayaM ka.  /  3. rAjJA ma.,
k.|

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, that merchant, by giving him knowledge, went to his house
as a slave. He brought the jewels to the merchant, who was suffering. ||4||
Then, taking all his possessions, the wicked Brahmin was expelled from the city.
He was poor and performed great austerities. ||42|| After dying, he became a god
in the Maheindra heaven, and from there he was cast down. He is the king of the
Vidyadharas, named Vidyudridha, with a strong voice. ||43|| My soul,
Srivardhana, also died after performing austerities and became a god in heaven.
From there, I was cast down to the Videha region and became Sanjayanta. ||44||
Due to the influence of that previous sin, this Vidyadhara, seeing me, became
enraged and fainted. He has done this transgression, being under the control of
his karma. ||45|| That merchant named Niyamadutta, after performing austerities,
was born as you, the king of the Nagakumaras, with a noble mind. ||46|| Then,
Vidyudridha had a son named Dridharatha. Vidyudridha left his kingdom to him and
went to heaven after performing austerities. ||47|| From Dridharatha came
Ashvadharma, from Ashvadharma came Ashvayur, from Ashvayur came Ashvadhwaja,
from Ashvadhwaja came Padmanibha, from Padmanibha came Padmamali, from Padmamali
came Padmaratha, from Padmaratha came Singhaayana, from Singhaayana came
Mrigodharma, from Mrigodharma came Singhasaprabhu, from Singhasaprabhu came
Singhketu, from Singhketu came Shashankamukha, from Shashankamukha came Chandra,
from Chandra came Chandrashekhara, from Chandrashekhara came Indra, from Indra
came Chandraratha, from Chandraratha came Chakradharma, from Chakradharma came
Chakraayudha, from Chakraayudha came Chakradhwaja, from Chakradhwaja came
Manigriva, from Manigriva came Manyanka, from Manyanka came Manibhasura, from
Manibhasura came Manisyandana, from Manisyandana came Manyasyau, from Manyasyau
came Bimbostha, from Bimbostha came Lambitadhara, from Lambitadhara came
Raktosta, from Raktosta came Harichandra, from Harichandra came Puschandra, from
Puschandra came Purnachandra, from Purnachandra came Balendu, from Balendu came
Chandrachuda, from Chandrachuda came Vyomeendu, from Vyomeendu came Udupalana,
from Udupalana came Ekachuda, from Ekachuda came Dwichuda, from Dwichuda came
Trichuda, from Trichuda came Vajrachuda, from Vajrachuda came Bhurichuda, from
Bhurichuda came Arkachuda, from Arkachuda came Vahnijati, from Vahnijati came
Vahniteja. In this way, many others also perished in time. ||54|| The merchant
named Niyamadutta hid his wealth and then won the queen's ring by gambling with
her. ||40|| The queen's maid took the ring to the priest's house and showed it
to his wife, who gave her jewels in exchange. The queen returned those jewels to
the merchant Niyamadutta, who was very sad. Then, I took away all the wealth of
that wicked Brahmin and expelled him from the city. That poor Brahmin became
wise and performed excellent austerities. ||41-42|| Finally, after dying, he
became a god in the Maheindra heaven, and from there he was cast down. He is the
king of the Vidyadharas, named Vidyudridha. ||43|| My soul, Srivardhana, also
died after performing austerities and became a god in heaven. From there, I was
cast down to the Videha region and became Sanjayanta. ||44|| Due to the
influence of that previous sin, this Vidyadhara, seeing me, became enraged and
fainted. He has done this transgression, being under the control of his karma.
||45|| That merchant named Niyamadutta, after performing austerities, was born
as you, the king of the Nagakumaras, with a noble mind. ||46|| Then, Vidyudridha
had a son named Dridharatha. Vidyudridha left his kingdom to him and went to
heaven after performing austerities. ||47|| From Dridharatha came Ashvadharma,
from Ashvadharma came Ashvayur, from Ashvayur came Ashvadhwaja, from Ashvadhwaja
came Padmanibha, from Padmanibha came Padmamali, from Padmamali came Padmaratha,
from Padmaratha came Singhaayana, from Singhaayana came Mrigodharma, from
Mrigodharma came Singhasaprabhu, from Singhasaprabhu came Singhketu, from
Singhketu came Shashankamukha, from Shashankamukha came Chandra, from Chandra
came Chandrashekhara, from Chandrashekhara came Indra, from Indra came
Chandraratha, from Chandraratha came Chakradharma, from Chakradharma came
Chakraayudha, from Chakraayudha came Chakradhwaja, from Chakradhwaja came
Manigriva, from Manigriva came Manyanka, from Manyanka came Manibhasura, from
Manibhasura came Manisyandana, from Manisyandana came Manyasyau, from Manyasyau
came Bimbostha, from Bimbostha came Lambitadhara, from Lambitadhara came
Raktosta, from Raktosta came Harichandra, from Harichandra came Puschandra, from
Puschandra came Purnachandra, from Purnachandra came Balendu, from Balendu came
Chandrachuda, from Chandrachuda came Vyomeendu, from Vyomeendu came Udupalana,
from Udupalana came Ekachuda, from Ekachuda came Dwichuda, from Dwichuda came
Trichuda, from Trichuda came Vajrachuda, from Vajrachuda came Bhurichuda, from
Bhurichuda came Arkachuda, from Arkachuda came Vahnijati, from Vahnijati came
Vahniteja. In this way, many others also perished in time. ||54||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe tenAmijJAnadAnena dAsyA gatvA tadAlayam  /  upanItAni ratnAni
vaiNije duHkhavartine  // 4 //  tato gRhItasarvasvaH khalIkRtya dvijAdhamaH  /
puro nirvAsito dInastapaH paramamAcarat  // 42 //  mRtvA kalpaM sa mAhendra
prAptastasmAtparicyutaH  /  khecarANAmadhIzo'yamadviAdRDhadhvaniH  /  / 3 /  /
zrIvarddhanastapaH kRtvA mRtvA kalpamupAgataH  /  saMjayantazrutirjAto
'videhe'haM tatazcyutaH  // 44 //  tena doSAnubandhena dRSTvA mAM
krodhamUrcchitaH  /  upasarga vyadhAdeSa karmaNAM vazatAM gataH  // 45 //
yo'sau niyamadatto'bhUt sa kRtvA tapaso'rjanam  /  rAjA nAgakumArANAM jAtastvaM
zubhamAnasaH  // 46 /  /  atha vidyu dRDhasyAbhannAmnA dRDharathaH sutaH  /
tatra rAjyaM sa nikSipya tapaH kRtvA gato divam  // 47 //
azvadharmA'bhavattasmAdazvAyurabhavattataH  /  azvadhvajastato jAtastato
padmanibho'bhavat  // 48 //  padmamAlI tato bhUto'bhavat pArathastataH  /
siMhayAno mRgoddharmA meghAstraH siMhasaprabhuH  /  / 19 /  /  siMhaketuH
zazAGkAsyazcandrAhvazcandrazekharaH  /  indracandrarathAbhikhyau cakradharmA
tadAyudhaH  // 50 //  cakradhvajo maNigrIvo maNyako maNibhAsuraH  /
maNisyandanamaNyAsyau bimboSTho lambitAdharaH  // 51 //  raktoSTho haricandrazca
pUzcandraH puurnncndrmaaH| bAlenduzcandramazcUDo vyomenduruDupAlanaH  // 52 //
ekacUDo dvicUDazca tricUDazca tato'bhavat  /
vajracUDastatastasmAdbharicUDArkacUDakau  // 53 //  tasmAdvahnijaTI jAto
vahnitejAstato'bhavat  /  bahavazcaivamanye'pi kAlena kSayamAgatAH  // 54 //
niyamadatta nAmaka vaNikkA dhana chipA liyA taba rAnIne usake sAtha juA
khelakara usakI aMgUThI jIta lI  // 40 //  rAnIkI dAsI aMgaThI lekara pUrohitake
ghara gayI aura vahA~ usakI strIko dikhAkara usase ratna le aayo| rAnIne ve
ratna niyamadatta vaNikko jo ki atyanta duHkhI thA vApasa de diye  /
tadanantara maiMne usa duSTa brAhmaNakA saba dhana chIna liyA tathA use
tiraskRta kara nagarase bAhara nikAla diyaa| usa dIna-hIna brAhmaNako subuddhi
utpanna huI jisase usane utkRSTa tapazcaraNa kiyA  // 41-42 /  /  antameM
marakara vaha mAhendra svargameM deva huA aura vahA~se cyuta hokara yaha
vidyudRr3ha nAmaka vidyAdharoMkA rAjA huA hai  /  / 43 /  /  merA jIva
zrIvarddhana bhI tapazcaraNa kara marA aura svargameM deva huaa| vahA~se cyuta
hokara maiM videha kSetrameM saMjayanta huA hUM  // 44 //  usa pUrvokta doSake
saMskArase ho yaha vidyAdhara mujhe dekhakara krodhase ekadama macchita ho gayA
aura karmoMke vazIbhUta hokara usI saMskArase isane yaha upasagaM kiyA hai  //
45 /  /  aura jo vaha niyamadatta nAmaka vaNik thA vaha tapazcaraNa kara usake
phalasvarUpa ujjvala hRdayakA dhArI tU nAgakumAroMkA rAjA dharaNendra huA hai
// 46 //  athAnantara-vidyudRr3hake dRDha ratha nAmaka putra huA so vidyudRr3ha
usake lie rAjya sauMpakara tathA tapazcaraNa kara svagaM gayA  // 47 /  /
idhara dRDharathake azvadharmA, azvadharmAke azvAyu, azvAyuke azvadhvaja,
azvadhvajake padmanibha, padmanibhake padmamAlI, padmamAloke padmaratha,
padmarathake siMhayAna, siMhayAnake mRgoddharmA, mRgoddhaka siMhasaprabhu,
siMhasaprabhuke siMhaketu, siMhaketuke zazAMkamukha, zazAMkamukhake candra,
candrake candrazekhara, candrazekharake indra, indrake candraratha,
candrarathake cakradharmA, cakradharmAke cakrAyudha, cakrAyudhake cakradhvaja,
cakradhvajake maNigrIva, maNigrIvake maNyaMka, maNyaMkake maNibhAsura,
maNibhAsurake maNisyandana, maNisyandanake maNyAsya, maNyAsyake bimboSTha,
bimboSThake lambitAdhara, lambitAdharake raktoSTha, raktoSThake haricandra,
haricandrake pUzcandra, pUzcandrake pUrNacandra, pUrNacandrake bAlendu,
bAlenduke candracUDa, candracUDake vyomendu, vyomenduke uDupAlana, uDupAlanake
ekacUDa, ekacUDake dvicUDa, dvicUDake tricUDa, tricUDake vanacUDa, vajracUDake
bhUricUDa, bhUricUDake arkacUDa, akaMcUDake vahnijaTI, vahnijaToke vahniteja
nAmakA putra huaa| isI prakAra aura bhI bahuta-se 1. vANije ma., ka.  /  2.
-mAcaran ma.  /  3. jAtA ma., kha.  /  4. padmanabho ma.  /  5. mRgadvarmA m.|
mRgAdharmAn kha.  /  6. lavitAdharaH ma., kha.  /  ,

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fifth festival was celebrated, and some of them, having bestowed their
wealth on their sons, attained the state of liberation after having destroyed
their karmas. ||55|| Thus, O King, this lineage of the Vidyadharas has been
described. Now, the avatar of the second Yuga is being described. ||56|| At the
end of the Yuga of the Lord Rishabhadeva, the ancient noble qualities on this
earth became degraded, the people's interest in the activities of the other
world became slack, and their supreme intellect became engrossed in the pursuit
of pleasure and wealth. ||57-58|| Then, when the kings born in the Ikshvaku
dynasty had passed away in due course, a king named Dharanidhara was born in the
city of Ayodhya. He had a son named Tridashanjay, who was a renowned holder of
Lakshmi, born to his queen, Sri Devi. His wife's name was Indurekha, and they
had a son named Jitashatru. ||59-60|| In the city of Podanpur, there lived a
king named Vyananda, who had a daughter named Vijaya, born to his queen,
Ambhojamala. King Tridashanjay arranged the marriage of Jitashatru with Vijaya,
and then he renounced the world and attained liberation on Mount Kailasa through
penance. ||61-62|| Then, according to the previous decree, Lord Ajitanatha was
born to them. Indra and the other gods performed the abhisheka and other
ceremonies just as they had done for Lord Rishabhadeva. ||63|| Since his father
had conquered all his enemies at the time of his birth, he became known as
'Ajita' on earth. ||64|| Lord Ajitanatha had many queens, including Sunayana,
Nanda, and others. All of them were so beautiful that even Indrani could not
match their beauty. ||65|| Once, Lord Ajita went to a beautiful garden with his
inner court. In the morning, he saw a large forest of blooming lotuses. ||66||
When he saw the same forest shrinking as the sun was about to set, he realized
the impermanence of Lakshmi and attained supreme detachment. ||67|| Then, after
asking his father, mother, and brothers, he renounced the world according to the
previous decree. ||68||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcamaM parva pAlayitvA zriyaM kecinnyasya putreSu tAM punaH  /  kRtvA
karmakSayaM yAtAH siddharadhyAsitAM mahom  // 55 //  evaM vaidyAdharo'yaM te
rAjan vaMzaH prakIrtitaH  /  avatAro dvitIyasya yugasyAtaH pracakSyate  // 56 //
asya nAbheyacihnasya yugasya vinivartane  /  hInAH purAtanA mAvAH prazastA ana
bhUtale  // 57 //  zithilAyitumArabdhA paralokakriyAratiH  /  kAmArthayoH
samutpannA janasya paramA matiH  // 5 //  athekSvAkukulottheSu teSvatIteSu
rAjasu  /  putraH zriyAM samutpanno dharaNIdharanAmataH  // 59 //  ayodhyAnagare
zrImAn prakhyAtastridazaMjayaH  /  indurekhA priyA tasya jitazatrastayoH sutaH
// 60 //  pure podanasaMjJe'tha vyAnandasya mahIpateH  /  jAtAmambhojamAlAyAM
nAmato 'vijayAM sutAm  // 61 //  jitazatroH samAyojya pravrajya tridazaMjayaH  /
nirvANaM ca pariprAptaH kailAsadharaNIdhare  // 6 //  athAjitajino jAtastayoH
pUrvavidhAnataH  /  amiSekAdidevendraH kRtaM nAbheyavarNitam  // 63 //  tasya
pitrA jitAH sarve tajanmani yato dvissH| tato'sAvajitAbhikhyAM saMprApto
dhrnniitle||64|| Asan sunayanAnandetyAdayastasya yoSitaH  /  yAsAM zacyapi
rUpeNa zaktA nAnukRti prati  // 65 //  anyadA ramyamudyAnaM gataH
sAntaHpuro'jitaH  /  pUrvAhne phullamaikSiSTaM paGkajAnAM vanaM mahat  // 66 //
tadeva saMkucadvIkSya bhAskare'staM yiyAsati  /  anityatAM zriyo gatvA nivedaM
paramaM gataH  // 67 //  tataH pitaramApRcchaya mAtaraM ca sa bAndhavAn  /
nAthaH pUrvavidhAnena pravrajyAM pratipannavAn  // 18 //  putra hue jo
kAlakramase mRtyuko prApta hote gaye  // 48-54 /  /  inameM se kitane hI
vidyAdhara rAjA lakSmIkA pAlana kara tathA antameM putroMko rAjya sauMpakara
karmoMkA kSaya karate hue siddhabhUmiko prApta hue  // 55 /  /  gautamasvAmI
kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! isa prakAra yaha vidyAdharoMkA vaMza khaa| aba dvitIya
yugakA avatAra kahA jAtA hai so suna  // 56 /  /  bhagavAn RSabhadevakA yuga
samApta honepara isa pRthivIpara jo prAcIna uttama bhAva the ve hIna ho gaye,
logoMkI paraloka sambandhI kriyAoMmeM prIti zithila hone lagI tathA kAma aura
artha puruSArthameM hI unakI pravara buddhi pravRtta hone lagI  // 57-58 //
athAnantara ikSvAku vaMzameM utpanna hue rAjA jaba kAlakramase atIta ho gaye
taba ayodhyA nagarImeM eka dharaNIdhara nAmaka rAjA utpanna hue| unakI zrIdevI
nAmaka rAnIse prasiddha lakSmIkA dhAraka tridazaMjaya nAmakA putra huaa| isakI
strIkA nAma indurekhA thA, una donoMke jitazatru nAmakA putra huA ||59-60 //
podanapura nagarameM vyAnanda nAmaka rAjA rahate the, unakI ambhojamAlA nAmaka
rAnIse vijayA nAmakI putrI utpanna huI thii| rAjA tridazaMjayane jitazatrukA
vivAha vijayAke sAtha karAkara dIkSA dhAraNa kara lI aura tapazcaraNa kara
kailAsa parvatase mokSa prApta kiyA  // 61-62 /  /  athAnantara rAjA jitazatru
ra rAnI vijayAke ajitanAtha bhagavAnakA janma huaa| indrAdika devoMne bhagavAna
RSabhadevakA jaisA abhiSeka Adi kiyA thA vaisA hI bhagavAn RSabhadevakA kiyA  //
63 /  /  cU~ki unakA janma hote hI pitAne samasta zatru jIta liye the isalie
pRthivItalapara unakA 'ajita' nAma prasiddha huA  // 64 //  bhagavAn
ajitanAthakI sunayanA, nandA Adi aneka rAniyA~ thiiN| ve saba rAniyA~ itanI
sundara thIM ki indrANI bhI apane rUpase unakI samAnatA nahIM kara sakatI thI
// 65 /  /  athAnantara-bhagavAn ajitanAtha eka dina apane antaHpurake sAtha
sundara upavanameM gaye  /  vahAM unhoMne prAtaHkAlake samaya phUlA huA
kamaloMkA eka vizAla vana dekhA  /  /  66  //  usI vanako unhoMne jaba sUrya
asta honeko huA taba saMkucita hotA dekhaa| isa ghaTanAse ve lakSmIko anitya
mAnakara parama vairAgyako prApta ho gaye  /  /  67  //  tadanantara-pitA, mAtA
aura bhAiyoMse pUchakara 1. -mArabdhAH ma., k.| 2. vijayA k.| 3.
pravrajyastridazaMjayaH m.|

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, ten thousand Kshatriyas, along with their kingdoms,
families, and possessions, renounced the world and took the vows. ||69||
Brahmadatta, the king of Ayodhya, offered a **Parana** (a meal after a fast) to
the Lord, who had observed a three-day fast. ||70|| After fourteen years, he
attained **Kevalgyan** (omniscience) and became an **Arhant** (a liberated
soul), revered by the entire world. ||71|| Just as Lord Rishabhdeva had
manifested thirty-four **Atishayas** (miraculous powers) and eight
**Pratiharayas** (miracles), so too did this Lord. ||72|| Ninety **Ganadharas**
(disciples) resided at his feet, and one hundred thousand **Sadhus** (ascetics)
shone like the sun. ||73|| Jitashatru had a younger brother named Vijay Sagar,
whose wife was Sumangala. They had a son named Sagar. ||74|| This Sagar, with
his auspicious form, became the second **Chakravarti** (universal monarch) and
gained immense fame throughout the world due to the nine **Nidhanas**
(treasures). ||75|| O Shrenik, listen to the story that unfolded during his
reign. In the southern region of the Bharat Kshetra, there was a city called
Chakravala. ||76|| In this city, there lived a king of the **Vidyadharas**
(celestial beings) named Purnnaghana. He was endowed with great power and
excelled in knowledge. He requested the hand of the daughter of Vihayastilka,
the king of the city of Vihayastilka. However, Vihayastilka, following the
advice of a **Nimittgyani** (a wise person who interprets omens), gave his
daughter to Sagar Chakravarti instead. ||77-78|| Meanwhile, a fierce battle
raged between King Vihayastilka and Purnnaghana. During this time,
Vihayastilka's son, Sahasranayan, fled with his sister. ||79|| After defeating
Vihayastilka, Purnnaghana entered the city but could not find the princess. He
then returned to his own city. ||80|| Upon hearing of his father's death,
Sahasranayan, filled with rage, was unable to do anything due to his weakness.
He lived in a forest infested with ferocious animals like Ashtapada, constantly
watching for Purnnaghana. ||81|| A magical horse carried Sagar Chakravarti to
the same forest where Sahasranayan resided. By chance, Sahasranayan's sister,
Utpalmati, saw the Chakravarti and informed her brother. ||82|| Sahasranayan was
overjoyed to hear this news and, with his sister's help, was brought before the
Chakravarti. ||83||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe kSatriyANAM sahasrANi dazAnena samaM tataH  /  niSkrAntAni
parityajya rAjyabandhuparigraham  /  / 69 //  SaSTopavAsayuktAya tasmai nAthAya
'pAraNAm  /  brahmadatto dadau maktyA sAketanagarodbhavaH  // 70 //
caturdazasvatIteSu varSeSvasya tato'bhavat  /  kevalajJAnamArhantyaM tathA
vizvasya pUjitam  // 7 //  tatazcAtizayAstasya catustriMzatsamutthitAH  /  aSTau
ca prAtihAryANi draSTavyAnIha pUrvavat  // 72 //  navatistasya saMjAtA gaNezAH
pAdasaMzritAH  /  sAdhUnAM coditaM lakSa divAkarasamatviSAm  // 73 //  kanIyAn
jitazatrostu khyAto vijayasAgaraH  /  patnI sumaGgalA tasya tatsutaH
sagaro'bhavat  // 74 //  babhUvAsau zubhAkAro dvitIyazcakravartinAm  /
nidhAnanavamiH khyAti yo gato vasudhAtale  // 75 //  asmin yadantare vRtta
zreNikedaM nizamyatAm  /  astIha cakravAlAkhyaM puraM dakSiNagocaram  // 76 /  /
tatra pUrNaghano nAma vibhuyomavihAriNAm  /  mahApramAvasaMpanno
vidyAbalasamunnataH  // 77 //  vihAyastilakezaM sa yayAce varakanyakAm  /
naimittikAjJayA dattA sagarAya tu tena sA  // 78 //  yuddhaM sulocanasyograM
yAvatpUrNadhanasya ca  /  gRhItvA bhaginoM tAvatsahasranayano'gamat  // 79 //
nipUdya ca sunetraM sa puraM pUrNaghano'vizat  /  adRSTvA ca sa tAM kanyAM
svapuraM punarAgataH  // 8 //  tataH pitRvadhAt kraddhaH sahasranayano'balaH  /
araNye zaramAkrAnte sthitazchidrekSaNAvRteH  // 8 //  tatazcakradharo'zvena
hRtastaM dezamAgataH  /  diSTyA cotpalamatyAsau dRSTvA bhrAtre niveditaH  /  /
82 /  /  tuSTena tena sA tasmai dattA sagaracakriNe  /  cakriNApyayamAnIto
vidyAdharamahIzatAm  /  / 83 /  /  unhoMne pUrva vidhike anusAra dIkSA dhAraNa
kara lI  // 68|| inake sAtha anya dasa hajAra kSatriyoMne bhI rAjya, bhAI-bandhu
tathA saba parigrahakA tyAga kara dIkSA dhAraNa kI thI  /  /  69  //  bhagavAnne
telAkA upavAsa dhAraNa kiyA thA so tIna dina bAda ayodhyA nivAsI brahmadatta
rAjAne unheM bhaktipUrvaka pAraNA karAyI thI-AhAra diyA thaa||70|| caudaha varSa
honepara unheM kevalajJAna tathA samasta saMsArake dvArA pUjanIya arhantapada
prApta huA  /  /  71  //  jisa prakAra bhagavAn RSabhadevake cauMtIsa atizaya
aura ATha prAtihArya prakaTa hue the usI prakAra inake bhI prakaTa hue  /  72
//  inake pAdamalameM rahanevAle nabbe gaNadhara the tathA sUryake samAna
kAntiko dhAraNa karanevAle eka lAkha sAdha the  /  /  73  /  /  jitazatruke
choTe bhAI vijayasAgara the, unakI strIkA nAma sumaMgalA thA, so una donoMke
sagara nAmakA putra utpanna huA |74 //  yaha sagara zubha AkArakA dhAraka dUsarA
cakravartI huA aura pRthvItalapara nau nidhiyoMke kAraNa parama prasiddhiko
prApta huA thA  /  75  /  /  he zreNika ! isake samaya jo vRttAnta huA use tU
suna  /  bharatakSetrake vijayAcaMkI dakSiNa zreNI meM eka cakravAla nAmakA
nagara hai  /  / 76 /  /  usameM pUrNadhana nAmakA vidyAdharoMkA rAjA rAjya
karatA thaa| vaha mahAprabhAvase yukta tathA vidyAoMke balase unnata thaa| usane
vihAyastilaka nagarake rAjA sulocanase usakI kanyAkI yAcanA kI para sulocanane
apanI kanyA pUrNaghanako na dekara nimittajJAnIkI AjJAnusAra sagara cakravartIke
lie dI  // 77-78|| idhara rAjA sulocana aura pUrNadhanake bIca jabataka
bhayaMkara yuddha hotA hai tabataka sulocanakA pUtra sahasranayana apanI
bahanako lekara anyatra calA gayA  // 79 //  pUrNadhanane sulocanako mArakara
nagarameM praveza kiyA parantu jaba kanyA nahIM dekhI to apane nagarako vApasa
lauTa AyA  // 8 //  tadanantara pitAkA vadha sunakara sahasranayana
pUrNameghapara bahuta hI kupita huA parantu nirbala honese kucha kara nahIM
skaa| vaha aSTApada Adi hiMsaka jantuoMse bhare vana meM rahatA thA aura sadA
pUrNameghake chidra dekhatA rahatA thA  /  /  81  //  tadanantara eka mAyAmayI
azva sagara cakravartIko hara le gayA so vaha usI vanameM AyA jisameM ki
sahasranayana rahatA thaa| saubhAgyase sahasranayanakI bahana utpalamatIne
cakravartIko dekhakara bhAIse yaha samAcAra kahA  /  /  82  /  /  sahasranayana
yaha samAcAra sunakara bahuta hI santuSTa huA aura usane utpalamatI, 1. pAraNam
m.,kh.| 2. vRte ka., dRtaH ma.  /  ..

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Pkarma Parva  The king Sagara, the ruler of six continents, was greatly
pleased after obtaining the woman (Sthrirathna).  He was obeyed by all the
kings. ||8||  After obtaining the Vidyaadharas, Sahasranayan surrounded the city
of Poornadhan with a fortress like wall. ||45||  Then a great war broke out,
resulting in the destruction of many people. Sahasranayan killed Poornamegh.
||86||  The son of Poornadhan, named Toyadavaahan, was exiled from the city of
Chakravaala by his enemies and wandered in the sky. ||7||  He was pursued by
many angry Kshecharas.  He was very distressed and sought refuge in Ajitanath,
the cause of happiness for the three worlds. ||48||  Then Vajradhara asked him
the reason for his fear.  Sagara reached the ocean and said that his relatives
had been killed. ||89||  There was a feud between our fathers, which resulted in
the destruction of many lives.  Due to the influence of that karma,
Sahasranayan, with a cruel heart, ||10||  has been harassing me with the power
of Sagara Chakravarti.  I have quickly come here from the palace, flying with
the swans. ||11||  Then the kings who were pursuing Meghavaahan told
Sahasranayan that he was near Ajitanath and they could not capture him.  Hearing
this, Sahasranayan, filled with anger, went himself and thought to himself, "Who
else is stronger than me who can protect him?"  Thinking this, he reached the
Samavasaran of the Jina. ||12-13||  As soon as he saw the halo of the Jina from
afar, all his pride was shattered.  He abandoned all his arrogance and bowed to
the great Ajitanath. ||14||  Both Sahasranayan and Meghavaahan, abandoning their
enmity, stood near the feet of the Jina.  Then the Ganadhara asked the Jina
about the history of their fathers.  The Jina said, ||15|| "In the Jambudvipa,
in the Bharat Kshetra, there was a city called Sadrutu.  There lived a merchant
named Bhavan.  He had a wife named Aataki and a son named Haridas.  Although
Bhavan was very wealthy, he was very troubled. ||16||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pakrama parva strIratna tadasau labdhvA paraM toSamupAgataH  /
SaTkhaNDAdhipatiH sarvaiH pArthivaiH kRtazAsanaH  // 8 //
prAptavidyAbhRdaizyena puraM paurNadhanaM tataH  /  ruddhaM sahasranetreNa
prAkAreNeva sarvataH  // 45 //  tato mahati saMgrAme pravRtte janasaMkSaye  /
nItaH sahasranetreNa pUrNameghaH parAsutAm  // 86 //  putraH pUrNaghanasyAtha
nAmnA toyadavAhanaH  /  parairudvAsitazcakravAlAd bhrAmyan namo'GgaNe  // 7 //
khecarairbahubhiH kruddharanuyAtaH suduHkhitaH  /  ajitaM zaraNaM
yAtastrailokyasukhakAraNam  // 48 //  tato vajradhareNAsau praSTasvAsasya
kAraNam  /  abravIt sagaraM prApya mama bandhukSayaH kRtaH  // 89 //
asmatpitrorabhUd vairaM naikajIvavinAzanam  /  tenAnubandhadoSeNa
nitAntakaracetasA  // 10 //  sahasranayanenAhaM vAsitaH zatruNA bhRzam  /
haMsaiH samaM samutpatya prAsAdAdAgato drutam  // 11 //  tato jinasamIpe taM
gRhItumasahaina paiH| nivedite sahasrAkSaH saMpratasthe svayaM ruSA  // 12 //
ko'paro'sti madudvIryo yenAsau parirakSyate  /  iti saMcintayan prApto jinasya
dharaNImasau  // 13 //  prabhAmaNDalamevAsau dRSTvA dUre jinodbhavam  /  sarva
gavaM parityajya praNanAmAjitaM vibhum  // 14 //  jinapAdasamIpe to muktavairau
tataH sthitau  /  tatpitrozcaritaM pRSTo gaNinA ca jinAdhipaH  // 15 //  idaM
provAca bhagavAn jambUdvIpasya mArate  /  pure sadRtusaMjJAke bhAvano nAma
vANijaH  // 16 //  sagara cakravartI ke lie pradAna kara dii| cakravartIne bhI
pUrNadhanako vidyAdharoMkA rAjA banA diyaa||83|| jo chaha khaNDakA adhipati thA
tathA samasta rAjA jisakA zAsana mAnate the aisA cakravartI sagara usa strIko
pAkara bahuta bhArI santoSako prApta huA ||84|| vidyAdharoMkA Adhipatya pAkara
sahasranayanane pUrNaghanake nagarako cAroM orase koTake samAna ghera liyA ||85
/  /  tadanantara donoMke bIca manuSyoMkA saMhAra karanevAlA bahuta bhArI yuddha
huA jisameM sahasranayanane pUrNameghako mAra DAlA  /  / 8 /  /  tadanantara
pUrNaghanake pUtra meghavAhanako zatruoMne cakravAla nagarase nirvAsita kara
diyA so vaha AkAzarUpI AMganameM bhramaNa karane lagA  // 87 //  use dekhakara
bahuta-se kupita vidyAdharoMne usakA pIchA kiyA so vaha atyanta duHkhI hokara
tIna lokake jIvoMko sukha utpanna karanevAle bhagavAn ajitanAthakI zaraNameM
pahuMcA  /  / 88 //  vahAM indrane usase bhayakA kAraNa puuchaa| taba
meghavAhanane kahA ki hamAre pitA pUrNadhana aura sahasranayanake pitA
sulocanameM aneka jIvoMkA vinAza karanevAlA vaira-bhAva calA A rahA thA so usI
saMskArake doSase atyanta krUracittake dhAraka sahasranayanane sagara
cakravartIkA bala pAkara mere bandhujanoMkA kSaya kiyA hai| isa zatrune mujhe
bhI bahuta trAsa pahu~cAyA hai so maiM mahalase haMsoMke sAtha uDakara zIghra hI
yahA~ AyA haiN||89-91|| tadanantara jo rAjA meghavAhanakA pIchA kara rahe the
unhoMne sahasranayanase kahA ki vaha isa samaya bhagavAn ajitanAthake samIpa hai
ataH hama use pakar3a nahIM skte| yaha sunakara sahasranayana roSavaza svayaM hI
calA aura mana hI mana socane lagA ki dekheM mujhase adhika balavAn dUsarA kauna
hai jo isakI rakSA kara ske| aisA socatA huA vaha bhagavAnke samavasaraNameM AyA
/  / 92-93 /  /  sahasranayanane jyoM hI dUrase bhagavAnkA prabhAmaNDala dekhA
tyoM hI usakA samasta ahaMkAra cUra-cUra ho gyaa| usane bhagavAn ajitanAthako
praNAma kiyaa| sahasranayana aura meghavAhana donoM hI parasparakA vairabhAva
chor3akara bhagavAnke caraNoMke samIpa jA baitthe| tadanantara gaNadharane
bhagavAnase una donoMke pitAkA caritra pUchA so bhagavAn nimna prakAra kahane
lage  // 94-95 /  /  jambUdvIpake bharata kSetrameM sadRtu nAmakA nagara thaa|
usameM bhAvana nAmakA eka vaNik rahatA thaa| usakI AtakI nAmaka strI aura
haridAsa nAmaka putra thaa| vaha bhAvana yadyapi cAra karor3a bhArI trAsa 1.
meghavAhanaH  /  2. saduHkhitaH m.| 3. vAsaka m.| 4. bandhuH kSayaM kRtaH m.| 5.
kopare'sti ma.  /

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
74 Padma Purana Bhakiityaá¹ganÄ tasya haridÄsaÅca tatsutÄá¸¥ | Catur koá¹­Ä«Åvaro
bhÅ«tvÄ yÄtrodyuktaá¸¥ sa bhÄvanaá¸¥ || 97 || PutrÄya sakalaá¹ dravyaá¹ nyÄsatvena
samarpayan | DyÅ«tÄdivarjanÄrthaá¹ ca Åiká¹£Äm asmai dadau param || 98 || Sahetu
sarvadoá¹£ebhya upadÄ«Åya nivartanam | PutrÄya vÄá¹ijo yÄtaá¸¥ potena dhanatá¹á¹£á¹ayÄ ||
99 || UpacÄreá¹a veÅyÄyÄá¹ ÄsaktyÄ dyÅ«tamaá¹á¸ale | SurÄyÄá¹ abhimÄnena catur koá¹­yo
'pi nÄÅitÄá¸¥ || 100 || Yadasau nirjito ca te tadÄ rÄjÃ±o gá¹haá¹ gataá¸¥ | HaridÄso
durÄcÄro draviá¹Ärthaá¹ surangayÄ || 101 || ÄnÄ«yÄsa u tato dravyaá¹ kriyÄá¸¥ sarvÄÅca
kÄra saá¸¥ | Sa bhÄvano 'nyadÄ gehabhÄyÄto ne ká¹£ate sutam || 102 || HaridÄso gataá¸¥
kveti tena pá¹á¹£á¹­Ä kuá¹­umbinÄ« | SÄvocad anayÄ yÄtaÅ caurÈ³Äthaá¹ ca suranganyÄ || 103
|| Tato 'sau tasya maraá¹aá¹ Åaá¹kamÄnaá¸¥ surangayÄ | PrasthitaÅ cauryaÅÄntyÄrthaá¹
gá¹hÄbhyantara dattayÄ || 104 || ÄgacchatÄ ca putrÄá¹a ko 'pi vairÄ« mamety asau |
Maá¹á¸alÄgreá¹a pÄpena varÄko vinipÄtitaá¸¥ || 105 || VijÃ±Äto 'sau tatas tena
nakhaÅmaÅrusatÄdi bhiá¸¥ | Spá¹á¹£á¹­vÄ mama pitety eá¹£a prÄpto duá¸¥khaá¹ ca duá¸¥saham ||
106 || Janakasyato má¹tyuá¹ ká¹tvÄsa u bhayavidrutaá¸¥ | Paryatan duá¸¥khato deÅÄn
yÄtaá¸¥ kÄlena paÃ±catÄm || 107 || Atment Åá¹gÄlÄu ca vá¹á¹£adaá¹Åau vá¹á¹£au tathÄ |
NakulÄu mahiá¹£ÄvetÄu jÄtau ca vá¹á¹£abhau punaá¸¥ || 108 || Anyo 'nyasya tato ghÄtaá¹
ká¹tvÄ tau bhavasaá¹kaá¹­e | Videhe puá¹£kalÄvasyÄá¹ manuÅyatvam upÄgatau || 109 ||
Ugraá¹ ká¹tvÄ tapas tasmin nuttarÄnuttara Ähvayau | GatvÄ satÄrÄm ÄyÄtau janakau
bhavator imau || 110 || Aisi bhÄvananÄmÄsi jÄto 'sau pÅ«rá¹atoyadaá¸¥ | ÄsÄ«t tasya
tu yaá¸¥ putraá¸¥ saá¹jÄtaá¸¥ sa sulocaá¹aá¸¥ || 111 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 74 padmapurANe bhAkItyaGganA tasya haridAsazca tatsutaH  /  catuH koTIzvaro
bhUtvA yAtrodyuktaH sa bhAvanaH  //  97  //  putrAya sakalaM dravyaM nyAsatvena
samarpayan  /  dyUtAdivarjanArthaM ca zikSAmasmai dadau param  // 98 //
sahetusarvadoSebhya upadizya nivartanam  /  putrAya vANijo yAtaH potena
dhanatRSNayA  // 99 //  upacAreNa vezyAyAmAsaktyA dyUtamaNDale  /
surAyAmabhimAnena catuH kokyo'pi nAzitAH  //  100  //  yadAsau nirjito ca te
tadA rAjJo gRhaM gataH  /  haridAso durAcAro draviNArthaM suraGgayA  //  101  //
AnIyAsau tato dravyaM kriyAH sarvAzcakAra saH  /  sa bhAvano'nyadA gehabhAyAto
nekSate sutama  //  102  //  haridAso gataH kveti tena pRSTA kuTumbinI  /
sAvocadanayA yAtazcauryAthaM ca suraGganyA  // 103 //  tato'sau tasya maraNaM
zaGkamAnaH suraGgayA  /  prasthitazcauryazAntyarthaM gRhAbhyantaradattayA  //
104  //  AgacchatA ca putreNa ko'pi vairI mametyasau  /  maNDalAgreNa pApena
varAko vinipAtitaH  //  105  //  vijJAto'sau tatastena nakhazmazrusaTAdibhiH  /
spRSTvA mama pitetyeSa prApto duHkhaM ca duHsaham  // 106 //  janakasya tato
mRtyuM kRtvAsau bhayavidrutaH  /  paryaTan duHkhato dezAn yAtaH kAlena paJcatAm
// 107 //  atment zRgAlau ca vRSadaMzau vRSau tathA  /  nakulau mahiSAvetau
jAtau ca vRSabhau punaH  //  108  //  anyo'nyasya tato ghAtaM kRtvA tau
bhavasaMkaTe  /  videhe puSkalAvasyAM manuSyatvamupAgatau  // 109 //  ugraM
kRtvA tapastasminnuttarAnuttarAhvayau  /  gatvA satAramAyAtau janakau
bhavatorimau  // 110 //  aisi bhAvananAmAsIjAto'sau pUrNatoyadaH  /  AsIttasya
tu yaH putraH saMjAtaH sa sulocanaH  //  111  //  dravyakA svAmI thA to bhI
dhana kamAnekI icchAse dezAntarakI yAtrAke lie udyata huA  /  / 96-97 /  /
usane apanA saba dhana dharoharake rUpameM putrake lie sauMpate hue, juA Adi
vyasanoMke chor3ane kI utkRSTa zikSA dI  /  usane kahA ki 'he putra ! ye juA Adi
vyasana samasta doSoMke kAraNa haiM isalie inase dUra rahanA hI zreyaskara hai'
aisA upadeza dekara vaha bhAvana nAmakA vaNik dhanakI tRSNAse jahAja meM
baiThakara dezAntarako calA gayA  //  98-99  //  pitAke cale jAnepara haridAsane
vezyAsevana, juAkI Asakti tathA madirAke ahaMkAravaza cAroM karor3a dravya naSTa
kara diyA || 100 || isa prakAra jaba vaha juAmeM saba kucha hAra gayA aura anya
juvAr3iyoMkA denadAra ho gayA taba vaha durAcArI dhanake lie suraMga lagAkara
rAjAke gharameM ghusA tathA vahA~se dhana lAkara apane saba vyasanoMkI pUrti
karane lagA  /  athAnantara kucha samaya bAda jaba usakA pitA bhAvanA
dezAntarase ghara lauTA taba usane putrako nahIM dekhakara apanI strIse pUchA ki
haridAsa kahA~ gayA hai ? strIne uttara diyA ki vaha isa suraMgase corI karaneke
lie gayA hai  //  101 - 103  /  /  tadanantara bhAvanako zaMkA huI ki kahIM isa
kAryameM isakA maraNa na ho jAve isa zaMkAse vaha corI chur3Aneke lie gharake
bhItara dI huI suraMgase calA || 104 || udharase usakA putra haridAsa vApasa
lauTa rahA thA, so usane samajhA ki yaha koI merA vairI A rahA hai aisA
samajhakara usa pApIne becAre bhAvanako talavArase mAra DAlA ||105  //  pIche
jaba nakha, dAr3hI, mU~cha tathA jaTA Adike sparzase use vidita huA ki are !
yaha to merA pitA hai, taba vaha duHsaha duHkhako prApta huA || 106 || pitAkI
hatyA kara vaha bhayase bhAgA aura aneka dezoMmeM duHkhapUrvaka bhramaNa karatA
huA marA  //  107 //  pitA-putra donoM zvAna hue, phira zRgAla hue, phira
mArjAra hue, phira baila hue, phira nevalA hue, phira bhaiMsA hue aura phira
baila hue| ye donoM hI parasparameM eka dUsarekA ghAta kara mare aura
saMsArarUpI vanameM bhaTakate rahe  /  antameM videha kSetrakI puSkalAvatI
nagarImeM manuSya hue || 108 - 109  /  /  phira ugra tapazcaraNa kara zatAra
nAmaka gyArahaveM svargaMmeM uttara aura anuttara nAmaka deva hue| vahA~se Akara
jo bhAvana nAmakA pitA thA vaha pUrNamegha vidyAdhara huA aura jo usakA putra
thA vaha sulocana 1. so'bhayavidrutaH  /

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Fifth Chapter  Knowing thus the suffering of their fathers, they (Sahastra-
nayan and Meghavahan) abandoned the enmity, the cause of worldly existence,
which had been aroused in them. ||112||  Then the Chakravarti asked them about
the cause of their enmity in their previous birth. The Lord, the master of the
Dharmachakra, explained the cause of their enmity as follows. ||113||  He said
that in the city of Padmaka, in the Bharat Kshetra of Jambudvipa, there lived a
famous man named Rambha, who was a scholar of Sankhya Shastra and very wealthy.
||114||  He had two disciples, Chandra and Avalli, who were both very famous,
wealthy, and virtuous, and were united in friendship. ||115||  Rambha, who was
skilled in the science of politics, thought that if these two remained united,
his position would be threatened, so he created a rift between them. ||116||
One day, Chandra wanted to buy a cow and went to the Gopalaka to negotiate the
price. He was on his way home when, by chance, he met Avalli, who was also
coming from the village after buying the same cow. In a fit of anger, Chandra
killed him. Avalli died and became a Mlechchha. ||117-118||  Chandra died and
became a bull, and the Mlechchha, due to the bond of enmity, killed him and ate
him. ||119||  The Mlechchha, being a Tiryanchnaraka, was born as a rat. Chandra,
who had become a bull, was reborn as a cat, and the cat killed and ate the rat.
||120||  Due to their evil deeds, both were born in hell, where they suffered
great pain in the ocean of existence. ||121||  After being released from hell,
they were born in Kashi as the sons of a slave woman named Sambhramadevi. Their
names were Kutta and Karpatika. They were both slaves and worked as servants.
Sambhramadevi appointed them to the Jina temple. After their death, due to their
good deeds, they were reborn as Vyantara Devas named Rupananada and Surupa.
||122-123||  Rupananada was the soul of Chandra and Surupa was the soul of
Avalli. Rupananada was born as a son of a noble family named Kulandhara in the
city of Rajoavali, and Surupa was born as the son of a priest named Pushpabhuti.
||124||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcamaM parva pitrorevaM parijJAya mayaduHkhavivartanam  /  bhejataM
mamamujitvA vairaM saMsArakAraNam  // 112 //  cakravartI tato'pRcchadetayoH
pUrvajanmani  /  bairakAraNamevaM ca mASitaM dharmacakriNA  // 13 //
jambUdvIpasya bharate pure padmakanAmani  /  sAMkhyiko rambhanAmAsId viSaye
prathito dhanI  // 114 //  zazyAvalisamAhvAnau tasya maitrIsamanvitau  /
ziSyAvatyantavikhyAtau dhanavantau guNotkaTau  // 115 //  mA bhUdAbhyAM
mamodvartaH saMhatAbhyAmiti drutam  /  tayoH se bhedamakaronayazAstravicakSaNaH
// 116 //  gopAlakena saMmanya zazI mUlyArthamanyadA  /  cikrISugAM gRhaM
yAvadAyAto nijalIlayA  // 117 //  krItvA devaniyogAttAmAgacchannAvalI puram  /
gacchatA zazinA krodhAnnihato mlecchatAmitaH  // 118 //  mRtaH zazI balIva> jAto
mlecchena tena ca  /  hatvA vairAnubandhena bhakSyatAmupapAditaH  // 119 //
tiryagnArakapAnthaH sanmleccho mUSakatAM gtH| abhUcchazyapi mArjArastena hatvA
sa makSitaH  // 12 //  pApakarmaniyogena prAptI narakabhUmiSu  /  prApyate
sumahad duHkhaM jantumirbhavasAgare  // 12 //  bhUyaH saMsRtya kAzyAM tau dAsau
jAtau sahodarau  /  dAsyAH saMbhramadevasya kUTakArpaTikAyau  // 122 //
jinavezmani tau tena niyuktau pretya puNyataH  /  rUpAnandaH surUpazca jAtau
bhUtagaNAdhipau  // 123 //  zazipUrvo rajovalyAM cyutvA'bhUt kulaputrakaH  /
kulaMdharo'paraH puSpabhUtiH putraH purodhasaH  // 124 //  nAmakA vidyAdhara
huaa| isI vairake kAraNa pUrNameghane sulocanako mArA hai  /  / 110-111 /  /
gaNadhara devane sahasranayana aura meghavAhanako samajhAyA ki tuma donoM isa
taraha apane pitAoMke sAMsArika duHkhamaya paribhramaNako jAnakara saMsArakA
kAraNabhUta vairabhAva chor3akara sAmyabhAvakA sevana karo  // 112 //
tadanantara sagara cakravartIne pUchA ki he bhagavan ! meghavAhana aura
sahasranayanakA pUrva janmameM vaira kyoM huA? taba dharmacakrake adhipati
bhagavAnne unake vairakA kAraNa nimna prakAra samajhAyA  // 113 /  unhoMne kahA
ki jambUdvIpake bharata kSetra sambandhI padmaka nAmaka nagarameM gaNita
zAstrakA pAThI mahAdhanavAn rambha nAmakA eka prasiddha puruSa rahatA thA  //
114 /  /  usake do ziSya the-eka candra aura dUsarA aavli| ye donoM hI paraspara
maitrI bhAvase sahita the| atyanta prasiddha dhanavAn aura guNoMse yukta the  //
115 /  /  nItizAstrameM nipuNa rambhane yaha vicArakara ki yadi ye donoM
parasparameM mile raheMge to hamArA pada bhaMga kara deMge, donoMmeM phUTa DAla
dI  /  / 116 /  /  eka dina candra gAya kharIdanA cAhatA thA so gopAlake sAtha
salAha kara mUlya lene ke lie vaha sahaja hI apane ghara AyA thA ki bhAgyavaza
Avali usI gAyako kharIdakara apane gAMvakI ora A rahA thaa| bIcameM candrane
krodhavaza use mAra ddaalaa| Avali marakara mleccha huA  /  / 117-118 /  /  aura
candra marakara baila huA so mlecchane pUrva vairake kAraNa use mArakara khA
liyA  // 119 /  /  mleccha tithaMca tathA naraka yonimeM bhramaNa kara cUhA huA
aura candrakA jIva baila marakara bilAva huA so bilAvane caheko mArakara
bhakSaNa kiyA  /  / 120 //  pApa karmake kAraNa donoM hI marakara narakameM
utpanna hue so ThIka hI hai kyoMki prANI saMsArarUpI sAgarameM bahuta bhArI
duHkha pAte hI haiM  // 121 //  narakase nikalakara donoM hI banArasameM
saMbhramadevakI dAsIke kUTa aura kApaMTika nAmake putra hue| ye donoM hI bhAI
dAsa the-dAsavRttikA kAma karate the so saMbhramadevane unheM jinamandira meM
niyukta kara diyA  /  antameM marakara donoM hI puNyake prabhAvase rUpAnanda
aura surUpa nAmaka vyantara deva hue  // 122-123 /  /  rUpAnanda candrakA jIva
thA aura surUpa AvalikA jIva thA so rUpAnanda caya kara rajovalI nagarImeM
kulandhara nAmakA kulaputraka huA aura surUpa, purohitakA putra puSpabhUti
huaa|124|| 1. bhajataH m.| 2. saMbheda m.| 3. purA kh.| 4. rUpAnandasurUpazca
s.| 5. rajovAlyAm ma.  /  6. putrapurodhasaH k.|

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
76 Padmapurana Although Kulandhara and Pushpabhuti were both friends, they
became enemies because of a cart driver. As a result, Kulandhara was determined
to kill Pushpabhuti. || 125 || On the way, he met a Muni Raja seated under a
tree and became peaceful after listening to Dharma from him. The king tested him
and made him a Mandaleshwar due to the influence of punya. || 126 || Pushpabhuti
saw that Kulandhara had attained wealth through the influence of Dharma, so he
also became a Jain and died, becoming a deva in the third heaven. || 127 ||
Kulandhara also became a deva in the same third heaven. Both of them fell and
were born as sons of Arija and Jayavati in the Dhaatki Khand island, in the
western Videha region. One was named Kruramara and the other Dhanshrusti. Both
these brothers were very brave and famous servants, trusted by the king
Sahasrashirsha. || 128 - 129 || One day, King Sahasrashirsha went to the forest
with both his servants to catch an elephant. There, he saw lions and deer, who
were naturally enemies, loving each other. || 130 || "Why are these violent
creatures peaceful?" Wondering this, as soon as King Sahasrashirsha entered the
great forest, his eyes fell upon the great Muni Kevali Bhagwan. || 131 || After
that, King Sahasrashirsha, along with both his servants, took initiation from
Kevali Bhagwan. As a result, the king attained moksha, and Kruramara and
Dhanshrusti went to the Shatar heaven. || 132 || Of these, the Chandra jiva
Kruramara became Meghavahana after falling from heaven, and the Avali jiva
Dhanshrusti became Sahasranayana. Thus, there is enmity between them due to
their previous birth. || 133 || After that, Sagar Chakravarti asked Bhagwan, "O
Prabhu! Why do I have more affection for Sahasranayana?" In reply, Bhagwan said,
"The one named Rambha, who was a scholar of Ganit Shastra, became an Arya in the
deva kul due to feeding the Munis. Then he went to the Saudharma heaven, and
from there, he fell and was born as a beloved son named Vratakirtan of King Hari
and Queen Dhara in the Chandrapur city. He attained the Muni pad and went to
heaven, and from there, he fell and was born as a son named Payobal of King
Mahaghoosha and Queen Chandrini in the Ratna Sanchay city of the western Videha
region. He became a Muni 1. Sthiti M., Sthita K. 2. Jayavati M, Jayavati K. 3.
Shuchishruti K. 4. Anyadesha M., Anyada + Isha iti padchheda.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 76 padmapurANe mitrau tau sairikasyArthe prAptau vairaM tataH sthitam  /
puSpabhUrti tato hantuM prAvartata kulaMdharaH  //  125 //
vRkSamUlasthasAdhozca dharmaM zrutvA prazAntavAn  /  rAjJA parIkSitazcAbhUt
sAmantaH puNyayogataH  //  126  //  puSpabhUtirimaM dRSTvA dharmAd
vibhavamAgatam  /  jaino bhUtvA mRto jAtastRtIye suraviSTape  // 127 //
kuladharo'pi tatraiva cyutau tau mandarAvare  /  videhe dhAtakIkhaNDe
jayavasyAmajiye  //  128  //  sahasraziraso bhRtyo krUrAmaradhanazrutI  /
jAtAvasyantavikrAntAvantaraGgau suvizrutau  //  129  //  anyadezaH samaM tAbhyAM
badhuM prAtiSThata dvipam  /  prItimaikSiSTa sattvAnAM janmanaiva virodhinAm  //
130 //  zamino mI kathaM vyAlA iti vismayamAgataH  /  avizat sa
mahAraNyamapazyacca mahAmunim  //  131  //  tato rAjA samaM tAbhyAM tasya
kevalino'ntike  /  pravrajya nirvRtiM prApacchatAraM tu gatAvimau  // 132 //
zazipUrvastatazcyutvA jAto'yaM meghavAhanaH  /  AvalI tu sahasrAkSo vairaM
tenAnayoridam  // 133 //  prItirmamAdhikA kasmAt sahasranayane vibho  /  iti
pRSTo jino'vocat sagareNa tataH punaH  //  134 //  bhikSAdAnena sAdhUnAM
rambho'marakuruM gataH  /  saudharmaM ca tatazcyutvA jAtazcandrapure hareH  //
135  //  narendrasya dharAdevyAM dayitavratakIrtanaH  /  zrAmaNyAnnAkamAruhya
videhe tvavare cyutaH  // 136 //  mahAghoSeNa candriNyAmutpanno ratnasaMcaye  /
payobalo munIbhUya prANataM kalpamAzritaH  //  137  //  yadyapi kulandhara aura
puSpabhUti donoM hI mitra the tathApi eka halavAhaka ke nimittase una donoMmeM
zatrutA ho gayI  /  phalasvarUpa kulandhara puSpabhUtiko mAraneke lie pravRtta
huA  /  /  125  /  /  mArga meM use eka vRkSa ke nIce virAjamAna munirAja mile
so unase dharmaM zravaNa kara vaha zAnta ho gayA  /  rAjAne usakI parIkSA lI
aura puNyake prabhAva se use maNDalezvara banA diyA || 126|| puSpabhUtine dekhA
ki dharmaM prabhAvase hI kulandhara vaibhavako prApta huA hai isalie vaha bhI
jainI ho gayA aura marakara tIsare svargameM deva huA || 127|| kulandhara bhI
usI tIsare svargameM deva huaa| donoM hI cyuta hokara dhAtakI khaNDa dvIpa ke
pazcima videha kSetra meM arijaya pitA aura jayavatI mAtAke putra hue  /  ekakA
nAma krUrAmara, dUsarekA nAma dhanazruti thA  /  ye donoM bhAI atyanta zUravIra
evaM sahasrazIrSaM rAjA ke vizvAsapAtra prasiddha sevaka hue  /  /  128 - 129 ||
kisI eka dina rAjA sahasrazIrSa ina donoM sevakoM ke sAtha hAthI pakar3aneke lie
vanameM gayA  /  vahA~ usane janmase hI virodha rakhanevAle siMhamRgAdi jIvoMko
paraspara prema karate hue dekhA || 130 || 'ye hiMsaka prANI zAnta kyoM haiM ?'
isa prakAra Azcaryako prApta hue rAjA sahasrazIrSane jyoM hI mahAvanameM praveza
kiyA tyoM hI usakI dRSTi mahAmuni kevalI bhagavAnke Upara par3I  //  131  //
tadanantara rAjA sahasrazIrSane donoM sevakoM ke sAtha kevalI bhagavAn ke pAsa
dIkSA dhAraNa kara lI  /  phalasvarUpa rAjA to mokSako prApta huA aura krUrAmara
tathA dhanazruti zatAra svargaM gaye || 132 || inameM candrakA jIva krUrAmara to
svargase cayakara meghavAhana huA hai aura AvalikA jIva dhanazruti sahasranayana
huA hai| isa prakAra pUrvabhavake kAraNa ina donoMmeM vairabhAva hai  // 133 //
tadanantara sagara cakravartIne bhagavAn se pUchA ki he prabho !
sahasranayanameM merI adhika prIti hai so isakA kyA kAraNa hai ? uttara meM
bhagavAnne kahA ki jo rambha nAmA gaNita zAstrakA pAThI thA vaha muniyoMko
AhAradAna deneke kAraNa devakulameM Arya huA, phira saudharma svarga gayA,
vahA~se cyuta hokara candrapura nagarameM rAjA hari aura dharA nAmakI rAnIke
vratakIrtana nAmakA pyArA putra huaa| vaha munipada dhAraNa kara svarga gayA,
vahA~se cyuta hokara pazcima videha kSetrake ratnasaMcaya nagara meM rAjA
mahAghoSa aura candriNI nAmakI rAnIke payobala nAmakA putra huaa| vaha muni 1.
sthitI ma., sthitaH ka  /  2. jayAvatyA ma, jAyAvatyA kha  /  3. zucizrutau kha
/  4. anyadeSa: ma., anyadA + Iza: iti padacchedaH  /

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Chapter  Having fallen from the fourteenth heaven called Pranata,
he was born as Jayakirtana, the son of King Yashodhara and Queen Jaya in the
city of Prithvipura in the Bharat Kshetra. || 138 ||  He took initiation from
his father and was born in the Vijay Vimana, and from there he fell and became
the Chakravarti Sagra. || 139 ||  When you were Rambha, you had great affection
for Avali. Now Avali has become Sahasranayan. Therefore, due to past karma, you
still have a strong affection for him. || 140 ||  Thus, both Meghavahana and
Sahasraksha, having learned about their past lives from the mouth of the Jina,
developed a great interest in Dharma. || 141 ||  Due to that religious interest,
both of them remembered their past lives. Then, filled with faith, Meghavahana
and Sahasranayan began to praise the Jina, Ajitanatha, in this way: || 142 ||
"O Bhagavan! You, without any reason, do good to those worldly beings who are
devoid of intelligence and have no protector. What greater wonder can there be
than this?" || 143 ||  "Your form is beyond comparison, and you are the
possessor of immeasurable strength. O Lord! In these three worlds, who is there
who has been satisfied by seeing you?" || 144 ||  "O Bhagavan! Although you have
attained all that is attainable, are accomplished, all-seeing, blissful,
inconceivable, and have known all that is knowable, yet you are still engaged in
the welfare of the world." || 145 ||  "O Supreme Jina! You are the giver of the
hand of support to the beings who are falling into the abyss of existence, in
the form of the teachings of the essence of Dharma." || 146 ||  Thus,
Meghavahana and Sahasranayan, whose speech was choked with emotion and whose
eyes were filled with tears, having attained supreme joy, bowed down and sat in
their respective places. || 147 ||  The Munis like Simhaviriya, the Devas like
Indra, and the Kings like Sagra, all attained supreme wonder. || 148 ||  Then,
in the Samavasarana of the Jina, the Indra of the Rakshasas, Bhima and Subhima,
happily said to Meghavahana: "O child of the Vidyadharas! You are blessed to
have come to the refuge of the all-knowing Ajita Jina. We are both pleased with
you. Therefore, we will tell you what will ensure your well-being in all ways.
Listen carefully. You are worthy of our protection." || 149 - 151 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcamaM parva pracyutya bharate jAto nagare pRthivIpure  /
yazodharanarendreNa jayAyAM jayakIrtanaH  //  138  //  pravrajya ca pituH pArzve
mRtvA vijayamAzritaH  /  cyutvA tato bhavAn jAtaH sagarazcakralAnchanaH  //  139
//  rambhasya bhavato yasmAdAvalI dayito'bhavat  /  tatpUrvo'yaM priyo'dyApi
sahasrAkSastatastava  //  140 //  avagamya jinendrasyAdAtmapitrorbhavAntaram  /
utpanno dharmasaMvegastayoratyantamunnataH  //  141  //  mahato
dharmasaMvegAjjAtau jAtismRtau tataH  /  zraddhAvantau samArabdhau stotuM
tAvajitaM jinam  // 142 //  vAlizAnAmanAthAnAM sattvAnAM kAraNAd vinA  /
upakAraM karoSi tvamAzcarya kimataH param  //  143  //  upamAmuktarUpasya
vIryeNApramitasya te  /  nirIkSaNena kastRpto vidyate'smin jagattraye  // 144 //
labdhArthaH kRtakRtyo'pi sarvadarzI sukhAtmakaH  /  acintyo jJAtavijJeyastathApi
jagate hitaH  //  145  //  "sAradharmopadezAkhyaM jIvAnAM tvaM jinottama  /
patatAM bhavapAtAle hastAlambaM prayacchasi  // 146 //  iti tau gadgadAlApa
vASpavipluta locanau  /  paramaM harSamAyAtau praNamya vidhivasthitau  //  147
//  zakrAdyA devavRSabhAH sagarAdyA nRpAdhipAH  /  sAdhavaH siMhavIryAdyA yayuH
paramamadbhutam  //  148 //  sadasyatha jinendrasya rakSasAmadhipAvidam  /
UcaturvacanaM bhImasubhImAviti vizrutau  //  149  //  khecarArbhaka dhanyo'si
yastvaM zaraNamAgataH  /  sarvajJamajitaM nAthaM tuSTAvAvAmatastava  //  150  //
zRNu saMprati te svAsthyaM yathA bhavati sarvataH  /  taM prakAraM pravakSyAvaH
pAlanIyastvamAvayoH  //  151  //  hokara prANata nAmaka caudahaveM svargameM
deva huA  /  /  134 - 137 /  /  vahA~se cyuta hokara bharata kSetrake
pRthivIpura nagara meM rAjA yazodhara aura jayA nAmakI rAnIke jayakIrtana nAmakA
putra huA || 138  //  vaha pitA ke nikaTa jinadIkSA le vijaya vimAnameM utpanna
huA aura vahA~se caya kara tU sagara cakravartI huA hai  // 139 // | jaba tU
rambha thA taba Avalike sAtha terA bahuta sneha thA  /  aba Avali hI
sahasranayana huA hai  /  isalie pUrvasaMskAra ke kAraNa aba bhI terA usake
sAtha gAr3ha sneha hai  // 140 //  isa prakAra jinendra bhagavAn ke mukhase
apane tathA pitAke bhavAntara jAnakara meghavAhana aura sahasrAkSa donoM ko
dharma meM bahuta bhArI ruci utpanna huI  //  141  //  usa dhArmika rucike
kAraNa donoMko jAtismaraNa bhI ho gayA  /  tadanantara zraddhAse bhare
meghavAhana aura sahasranayana ajitanAtha bhagavAnkI isa prakAra stuti karane
lage || 142 || he bhagavan ! jo buddhise rahita haiM tathA jinakA koI
nAtharakSaka nahIM hai aise saMsArI prANiyoMkA Apa binA kAraNa hI upakAra karate
haiM isase adhika AzcaryaM aura kyA ho sakatA hai || 143 || ApakA rUpa upamAse
rahita hai tathA Apa atulya vIryake dhAraka haiM  /  he nAtha ! ina tInoM
lokoMmeM aisA kauna puruSa haiM jo Apake darzanase santRpta huA ho  //  144  //
he bhagavan ! yadyapi Apa prApta karane yogya samasta padArtha prApta kara cuke
haiM, kRtakRtya haiM, sarvadarzI haiM, sukhasvarUpa haiM, acintya haiM, aura
jAnane yogya samasta padArthoMko jAna cuke haiM tathApi jagatkA hita karane ke
lie udyata haiM || 145 || he jinarAja ! saMsArarUpI andhakUpameM par3ate hue
jIvoMko Apa zreSTha dharmopadezarUpI hastAvalambana pradAna karate haiM ||146 ||
isa prakAra jinakI vANI gadgada ho rahI thI aura netra A~suoM se bhara rahe the
aise parama harSako prApta hue meghavAhana aura sahasranayana vidhipUrvaka stuti
aura namaskAra kara yathAsthAna baiTha gaye || 147 || sihavIryaM Adi muni, indra
Adi deva aura sagara Adi rAjA parama Azcaryako prApta hue || 148 || athAnantara
- jinendra bhagavAn ke samavasaraNameM rAkSasoMke indra bhIma aura subhIma
prasanna hokara meghavAhana se kahane lage ki he vidyAdharake bAlaka ! tU dhanya
hai jo sarvajJa ajita jinendrakI zaraNameM AyA hai, hama donoM tujhapara
santuSTa hue haiM ataH jisase terI sarva prakAra se svasthatA ho sakegI vaha
bAta hama tujhase isa samaya kahate haiM so tU dhyAnase suna, tU hama donoMkI
rakSAkA pAtra hai  //  149 - 151  /  /  1. sAraM kha.  /  77

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the salt ocean, filled with fearsome crocodiles, there are thousands of
extremely inaccessible and beautiful continents. || 152 || In some of these
continents, Gandharvas play, in some, groups of Kinnaras, in some, hordes of
Yakshas, and in some, Kimpurusha Devas. || 153 || Among these continents, there
is a continent called Rakshasa Dweep, which is a place of auspicious play for
Rakshasas. It is said to be seven hundred yojanas long and wide. || 154 || In
the middle of this Rakshasa Dweep, there is a huge mountain called Trikutachal,
similar to Mount Meru. This mountain is extremely difficult to enter and
provides refuge to all with its excellent cave-like houses. || 155 || Its peak
is as beautiful as the top of Mount Sumeru, nine yojanas high and fifty yojanas
wide. || 156 || Its golden shores are always covered with a multitude of various
gems, and Kalpavriksha trees, embraced by various creepers, stand there in
abundance. || 157 || Below this Trikutachal, there is a city called Lanka,
thirty yojanas wide, inhabited by the Rakshasa lineage. Its palaces are made of
various gems and gold. || 158 || With its captivating gardens, lotus-filled
lakes, and large Jain temples, this city seems like Indrapuri. || 159 || This
Lanka city is like an ornament of the southern direction. O Vidyadhar! Go to
that city with your relatives and be happy. || 160 || Saying this, the king of
the Rakshasas, Bheem, gave him a garland adorned by Devas. This garland was
emitting moonlight with its millions of rays. || 161 || He gave him this garland
out of love for his son from a previous birth and said, "O Vidyadhar! You are
the last-bodied and the best person of this age, therefore, this garland is
given to you." || 162 || Besides this garland, he also gave him a natural city
hidden within the earth, six yojanas deep and one hundred and thirty-five
yojanas and one and a half kalas wide. || 163 || It was impossible for enemies
to enter this city, even with their minds. It had large palaces, its name was
Alankaroday, and its beauty was like heaven. || 164 || If you are ever attacked
by the Parachakra, take refuge in this city and stay safe. This is a secret safe
place for your lineage. || 165 || Thus, the king of the Rakshasas, Bheem, 1.
Mahee Dweepa: M. 2. Sharan: M. 3. Laya: M. 4. Rasi M., K.  78

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe santyatra lavaNAmbhodhAvatyugragrAhasaMkaTe  /  atyantadurgamA
ramyA 'mahAdvIpAH sahasrazaH  //  152  //  kacit krIDanti gandharvAH kinnarANAM
kvacid gaNAH  /  kvacicca yakSasaMghAtAH kvacikiMpuruSAmarAH  //  153  //  tatra
madhye'sti sa dvIpo rakSasAM krIDanaH zubhaH  /  yojanAnAM zatAnyeSa sarvataH
sapta kIrtitaH  //  154 //  tanmadhye meruvad mAti trikUTAkhyo mahAgiriH  /
atyantaduHpravezo yaH zaraNyaH sadguhAgRhaiH  //  155 //  zikharaM tasya
zailendracUDAkAraM manoharam  /  yojanAni navottuGgaM paJcAzadvipulatvataH  //
156 //  nAnAratnaprabhAjAlacchanna hemamahAtaTam  /
citravallIpariSvaktakalpadrumasamAkulam  // 157 //  triMzadyojanamAnAdhaH
sarvatastasya rAkSasI  /  laGketi nagarI bhAti ratnajAmbUnadAlayA  //  158 //
manohAribhirudyAnaiH sarobhizca savArijaiH  /  mahadbhizcaitya gehaizca sA
mahendrapurIsamA  // 159 //  gacchatAM dakSiNAzAyAM maNDanatvamupAgatAm  /
samaM bAndhavavargeNa vidyAdhara sukhI bhava  //  160 //  evamuktvA dadAvasmai
hAraM rAkSasapuGgavaH  /  devatAdhiSThitaM jyotsnAM kurvANaM karakoTibhiH  //
161  //  janmAntarasutaprItyA bhImazcaivaM tamabravIt  /  hAro'yaM
te'ntyadehasya yugazreSThasya coditaH  //  162 //  dharaNyantargataM
cAnyaddattaM svAbhAvikaM puram  /  vistIrNa bharatArddhArdhamadhaH
SaDyojanIgatam  // 163 //  duHpravezamarAtInAM manasApi mahadgRham  /
alaMkArodayAbhikhyaM svargatulyamabhikhyayA  // 164 //  paracakrasamAkrAntaH
kadAciccedbhaverasim | Azritya tattadA tiSThe rahasyaM vaMzasaMtateH  //  165
//  bahuta bhArI magaramacchoM se bhare hue isa lavaNasamudra meM atyanta
durgamya tathA atizaya sundara hajAroM mahAdvIpa haiM || 152  //  una
mahAdvIpoMmeM kahIM gandharva, kahIM kinnaroMke samUha, kahIM yakSoM ke jhuNDa
aura kahIM kiMpuruSadeva krIr3A karate haiM || 153 || una dvIpoMke bIca eka aisA
dvIpa hai jo rAkSasoMkI zubha krIr3AkA sthAna honese rAkSasa dvIpa kahalAtA hai
aura sAta sau yojana lambA tathA utanA hI caur3A hai  /  / 154 /  /  usa rAkSasa
dvIpake madhya meM meru parvata ke samAna trikUTAcala nAmaka vizAla parvata hai
/  vaha parvata atyanta duHpraveza hai aura uttamottama guhArUpI gRhoMse sabako
zaraNa denevAlA hai || 155  //  usakI zikhara sumeru parvata kI cUlikAke samAna
mahAmanohara hai, vaha nau yojana U~cA aura pacAsa yojana caur3A hai || 156 | |
usake suvarNamaya kinAre nAnA prakAra ke ratnoMkI kAntike samUha se sadA
AcchAdita rahate haiM tathA nAnA prakArakI latAoMse AliMgita kalpavRkSa vahA~
saMkIrNatA karate rahate haiM || 157 //  usa trikUTAcala ke nIce tIsa yojana
vistAravAlI laMkA nagarI hai, usameM rAkSasa vaMziyoMkA nivAsa hai, aura usake
mahala nAnA prakArake ratnoM evaM suvarNase nirmita haiM  //  158  //  manako
haraNa karanevAle bAgabagIcoM, kamaloMse suzobhita sarovaroM aura bar3e-bar3e
jina-mandiroMse vaha nagarI indrapurI ke samAna jAna par3atI hai || 159  //
vaha laMkA nagarI dakSiNa dizAkI mAno AbhUSaNa hI hai  /  he vidyAdhara ! tU
apane bandhuvarga ke sAtha usa nagarImeM jA aura sukhI ho  //  160 //  aisA
kahakara rAkSasoMke indra bhImane use devAdhiSThita eka hAra diyaa| vaha hAra
apanI karor3oM kiraNoMse cA~danI utpanna kara rahA thA  // 161 //  janmAntara
sambandhI putrakI prItike kAraNa usane vaha hAra diyA thA aura kahA thA ki he
vidyAdhara ! tU caramazarIrI tathA yugakA zreSTha puruSa hai isalie tujhe yaha
hAra diyA hai || 162 || usa hArake sivAya usane pRthvoke bhItara chipA huA eka
aisA prAkRtika nagara bhI diyA jo chaha yojana gaharA tathA eka sau sAr3he
ikatIsa yojana aura Der3ha kalApramANa caur3A thA || 163 | | usa nagara meM
zatruoMkA zarIra dvArA praveza karanA to dUra rahA manase bhI praveza karanA
azakya thA  /  usameM bar3e-bar3e mahala the, alaMkArodaya usakA nAma thA aura
zobhAse vaha svargake samAna jAna par3atA thA || 164 || yadi tujhapara kadAcit
paracakrakA AkramaNa ho to isa nagara meM khaDgakA Azraya le sukha se rahanA  /
yaha terI vaMza-paramparAke lie rahasya-surakSita sthAna hai || 165 || isa
prakAra rAkSasoMke indra bhIma 1. mahI dvIpA : ma  /  2. zaraNaH ma  /  3. layAH
ma  /  4. rasi ma., ka.  /  78

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Chapter  Thus addressed by the Rakshasa chiefs, the son of Purnghana
attained supreme joy. He bowed down to the Lord Ajita.  ||166||  Having obtained
the Rakshasa knowledge and mounting the swift, desired-going chariot named
Kamaga, he set out for that city. ||167||  Knowing that this boon had been
granted to him by the Rakshasas, all his relatives were filled with joy, like a
cluster of lotuses blooming at dawn. ||168||  Vimala, Amala, Kanta, and others,
with their wealth of knowledge, arrived quickly, filled with joy, and greeted
him with sweet words. ||169||  Surrounded by his joyful relatives, he set out
for Lanka. Some of the Vidyadharas walked beside him, some behind, some ahead,
some riding on elephants, some on horses. Some chanted victory cries, some
played melodious drums, some provided shade with white umbrellas, and some were
adorned with flags and garlands. ||170-171||  The assembly of Vidyadharas,
showering blessings and paying respects, accompanied him. As he traveled through
the sky, he saw the salty ocean, vast like the sky, deep like the netherworld,
dark like a Tamala forest, and filled with waves. ||172-173||  Those traveling
with him said, "Look, there is a mountain in the water, there is a great
crocodile leaping, and there is a huge fish swimming nearby." ||174||  Gazing at
the beauty of the ocean, Meghavahana entered Lanka, situated below the peak of
Trikuta mountain. Lanka was adorned with massive ramparts and towers, its red
hue staining the sky like twilight, adorned with white flags like Kunda flowers,
and decorated with Jain temples, complete with walls and arches. ||175-176||
Entering Lanka, he first went to the Jain temple and paid homage to the Jina.
Then, he resided in his own suitable palace, filled with auspiciousness. ||177||
His other relatives also stayed in their respective palaces, their eyes and rows
of eyes captivated by the splendor of jewels. ||178||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcamaM parva ityukto rAkSasezAbhyAM prApa pUrNaghanAtmajaH  /  pramodaM
paramaM devaM praNanAma ca so'jitam  // 166 //  labdhvA ca rAkSasI
vidyAmAruhyapsitagatvaram  /  vimAnaM kAmagaM nAma prasthitastAM purImasau  //
167 //  jJAtvA labdhavaraM caitaM rakSobhyAM sarvabAndhavAH  /  yAtA
vikAsamambhojasaMghA iva divAnane  // 168 //  vimalAmalakAntAdyA
vidyaamaajstmRddhibhiH| suprItAH zIghramAyAtA nandayantaH subhASiteH  // 169 //
veSTito'sau tatastuSTaiH pArzvataH pRSTato'grataH  /  kaizcid
dviradapRSThasthaiH kaizcitturagayAyibhiH  // 17 //  jayazabdakRtArAvaiH
prAptadunduminisvanaiH  /  zvetacchatrakRtacchAyairdhvajamAlAvibhUSitaiH  // 171
//  vidyAdharANAM saMghAtaiH kRtAzIrna manakriyaH  /
gacchannabhastale'pazyallavaNArNavamAkulam  // 172 //  AkAzamiva vistIrNa
pAtAlamiva nistalam  /  tamAlavanasaMkAzamUrmimAlAsamAkulam  // 173 //  ayaM
jalagataH zailo grAho'yaM prakaTo mahAn  /  calito'yaM mahAmInaH samIpairiti
bhASitaH  // 17 //  trikUTazikharAdhastAnmahAprAkAragopurAm  /  sandhyAmiva
"vilimpantI chAyayAruNayA namaH  // 175 //  kundazubhaiH
samuttaGvaijayantyupazobhitaiH  /  maNDitAM caityasaMghAtaiH saprAkAraiH
satoraNaiH  // 176 //  praviSTo nagarI laGkAM pravizya ca jinAlayam  /  vanditvA
svocitAgAramadhyuvAsa samaGgalam  // 177 //  itare'pi yathA sadma niviSTAstasya
bAndhavAH  /  ratnazobhAsamAkRSTamanonayanapatayaH  // 178 //  aura subhImane
pUrNaghanake putra meghavAhanase kahA jise sunakara vaha parama harSako prApta
huaa| vaha ajitanAtha bhagavAnko namaskAra kara uThA  // 166 /  /  rAkSasoMke
indra bhImane use rAkSasI vidyA dii| use lekara icchAnusAra calanevAle kAmaga
nAmaka vimAnapara ArUr3ha ho vaha laMkApurIkI ora calA  //  167  /  /
'rAkSasoMke indrane ise varadAnasvarUpa laMkA nagarI dI hai' yaha jAnakara
meghavAhanake samasta bhAI bAndhava isa prakAra harSako prApta hue jisa prakAra
ki prAtaHkAlake samaya kamaloMke samUha vikAsa bhAvako prApta hote haiM  /  /
168  //  vimala, amala, kAnta Adi aneka vidyAdhara parama prasanna vaibhavake
sAtha zIghra hI usake samIpa Aye aura aneka prakArake mIThe-mIThe zabdoMse usakA
abhinandana karane lage  // 169 //  santoSase bhare bhAI-bandhuoMse veSTita
hokara meghavAhanane laMkAkI ora prasthAna kiyaa| usa samaya kitane hI
vidyAdhara usakI bagalameM cala rahe the kitane hI pIche cala rahe the, kitane
hI Age jA rahe the, kitane hI hAthiyoMkI pIThapara savAra hokara cala rahe the,
kitane hI ghor3oMpara ArUr3ha hokara cala rahe the, kitane hI jaya-jaya zabda
kara rahe the, kitane hI dundubhiyoMkA madhura zabda kara rahe the, kitane hI
logoMpara sapheda chatroMse chAyA ho rahI thI tathA kitane hI dhvajAoM aura
mAlAoMse suzobhita the| pUrvokta vidyAdharoMmeM koI to meghavAhanako AzIrvAda de
rahe the aura koI namaskAra kara rahe the| una sabake sAtha AkAzameM calate hue
meghavAhanane lavaNasamudra dekhA  //  170-172  //  vaha lavaNasamudra AkAzake
samAna vistRta thA, pAtAlake samAna gaharA thA, tamAlavanake samAna zyAma thA
aura laharoMke samUhase vyApta thA  //  173  //  meghavAhanake samIpa calanevAle
loga kaha rahe the ki dekho yaha jalake bIca parvata dIkha rahA hai, yaha bar3A
bhArI makara chalAMga bhara rahA hai aura idhara yaha bahadAkAra maccha cala
rahA hai|| 174  //  isa prakAra samudrako zobhA dekhate hue meghavAhanane
trikUTAcalake zikharake nIce sthita laMkApurImeM praveza kiyaa| vaha laMkA
bahuta bhArI prAkAra aura gopuroMse suzobhita thI, apanI lAla-kAntike dvArA
sandhyAke samAna AkAzako lipta kara rahI thI, kundake samAna sapheda, U~ce
patAkAoMse suzobhita, koTa aura toraNoMse yukta jinamandiroMse maNDita thii|
laMkAnagarImeM praviSTa ho sarvaprathama usane jinamandirameM jAkara
jinendradevakI vandanA kI aura tadanantara maMgalopakaraNoMse yukta apane yogya
mahalameM nivAsa kiyA  /  /  175-177  //  ratnoMkI zobhAse jinake netra aura
netroMke paMktiyA~ AkarSita ho rahI thIM aise anya bhAI-bandhu bhI yathAyogya
mahaloMmeM Thahara gaye  // 178 //  1. kAntyAdyA m.| 2. nidhvanaiH k.| 3.
-'pshyNllv-m.| 4. vilapantI (?) ma.  /

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Purana, known as the Kinnara Gita, there was a princess named Suprabha,
born to King Ratimuyukha and Queen Anumati.  She was a thief of hearts and eyes,
a dweller in the abode of love, a moon-like being who blossomed like a Kumudini,
a lake of beauty, an ornament of ornaments, and a bringer of joy to all beings.
King Meghavahana married her with great pomp and splendor.  [179-181]  After
that, Meghavahana, the king whose command was obeyed by all the celestial
beings, resided in Lanka for a long time, just as Indra resides in heaven.
[182]  Some time later, King Meghavahana, who desired a son, was blessed with a
son.  This son, following the family tradition, was named Maharaks.  [183]  One
day, King Meghavahana went to the Samavasarana of Ajitanatha Bhagwan to pay his
respects.  After offering his salutations, he sat down in his designated place
with great humility.  [184]  When the other stories had come to an end, Emperor
Sagar, with his hands folded in respect, asked Ajitanatha Jinendra, [185]  "O
Bhagwan! In this Avasarpini, how many more Tirthankaras will there be, like you,
who are the masters of the Dharmachakra?"  [186]  "And how many Tirthankaras
have already passed, who brought happiness to the three worlds?  Indeed, the
birth of beings like you is a wonder in the three worlds."  [187]  "How many
Chakravartis will there be, adorned with fourteen jewels and the Sudarshan
Chakra, the holders of Lakshmi?  Similarly, how many Balabhadra, Narayana, and
Pratinarayana will there be?"  [188]  Thus, when Emperor Sagar asked these
questions, Bhagwan Ajitanatha replied with the following words.  His words were
like the deep sound of a divine drum, rejecting the great path and bringing joy
to the ears.  [189]  The language of the Bhagwan was Ardhamagadhi, and his lips
did not move while he spoke.  This was a great wonder.  [190]  He said, "O
Sagar! In every Utsarpini and Avasarpini, there are twenty-four Tirthankaras,
each of whom establishes the Dharma Tirtha."  [191]  At the time when this
entire world was enveloped in the dense darkness of delusion, devoid of the
awareness of Dharma, a home for all hypocrisy, and without a king, [192]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 papurANe atha kinnaragItAkhye pure ratimayUkhataH  /  anumatyAM samutpannA
'supramA nAma kanyakAm  // 179 //  cakSurmAnasayozcaurI vasatiM puSpadhanvanaH
/  kaumudI zrIkumudvatyA lAvaNyajaladIrghikAm  // 18 //  saMpadA parayovAha
bhUSaNAnAM vibhUSaNIm  /  hRSIkANAmazeSANAM pramodasya vidhAyikAm
||181||(vishesskm) tataH khecaralokena mastakopAttazAsanaH  /  purandara iva
svarge tatrAsAvavasacciram  // 182 //  atha tasyAbhavat putraH
putrajanmAmikAkSiNaH  /  mahArakSa iti khyAti yo gataH kauladevatIm  // 183 //
vandanAyAnyadA yAto'jitaM toyadavAhanaH  /  vanditvA ca nijasthAne sthito
vinayasaMnataH  // 184 //  tAvadanyakathAcchede praNamya sagaro'jitam  /
pRcchatIdaM ziraH kRtvA pANipaGkajadanturam  // 185 //  bhagavannavasarpiNyAM
bhavadvidhajinezvarAH  /  svAmino dharmacakrasya bhaviSyantyapare kati  // 186
//  kati vA samatikrAntA jagattrayasukhapradoH  /  mavadvidhanarotpattirAzcarya
bhuvanatraye  // 18 //  kati vA ratnacakrAGkalakSmImAjaH prakIrtitAH  /  halino
vAsudevAzca kiyantastadviSastathA  // 18 //  evaM pRSTo jino vAkyamuvAca
suradundubheH  /  tiraskurvanmahAdhvAnaM janitazravaNotsavam  // 189 //
bhASA'rddhamAgadhI tasya bhASamANasya nAdharau  /  cakAra spandasaMyuktAvaho
citramidaM param  // 19 //  utsarpiNyavasarpiNyodharmatIrthapravartinaH  /
caturviMzatisaMkhyAnAH pratyekaM sagaroditAH  // 19 //
mohAndhadhvAntasaMchannaM kRtsnamAsIdidaM jagat  /  dharmasaMcetanAmuktaM
niSpAkhaNDamarAjakam  // 192 //  vApikA athAnantara-kinnaragIta nAmA nagarameM
rAjA ratimayUkha aura anumati nAmaka rAnIke suprabhA nAmaka kanyA thii| vaha
kanyA netra aura manako curAnevAlI thI, kAmakI vasatikA thI, lakSmIrUpI
kumudinIko vikasita karaneke lie cA~danIke samAna thI, lAvaNyarUpI jalakI kA
thI. AbhaSaNoMkI AbhaSaNa thI. aura samasta inTiyoMko harSa utpanna karanevAlI
thii| rAjA meghavAhanane bar3e vaibhavase usake sAtha vivAha kiyA  // 179-181
//  tadanantara samasta vidyAdhara loga jisakI AjJAko sirapara dhAraNa karate
the aisA meghavAhana laMkApurImeM cira kAla taka isa prakAra rahatA rahA jisa
prakAra ki indra svargameM rahatA hai  //  182  //  kucha samaya bAda
putrajanmakI icchA karanevAle rAjA meghavAhanake putra utpanna huaa| vaha putra
kula-paramparAke anusAra mahArakSa isa nAmako prApta huA  //  183  /  /  kisI
eka dina rAjA meghavAhana vandanAke lie ajitanAtha bhagavAnke samavasaraNameM
gyaa| vahA~ vandanA kara bar3I vinavase apane yogya sthAnapara baiTha gayA  //
184 //  vahA~ jaba calatI huI anya kathA pUrNa ho cukI taba sagara cakravartIne
hAtha mastakase lagA namaskAra kara ajitanAtha jinendrase pUchA  // 185 //  ki
he bhagavan ! isa avasarpiNI kAlameM Age calakara Apake samAna dharmacakrake
svAmI anya kitane tIrthaMkara hoMge?  //  186  //  aura tInoM jagatke jIvoko
sukha denevAle kitane tIrthaMkara pahale ho cuke haiM ? yathArthameM Apa jaise
manuSyoMko utpatti tInoM lokoMmeM Azcarya utpanna karanevAlI hai  // 187 /  /
caudaha ratna aura sudarzana cakrase cihnita lakSmIke dhAraka cakravartI kitane
hoMge? isI taraha balabhadra, nArAyaNa aura pratinArAyaNa bhI kitane hoMge  //
188  //  isa prakAra sagara cakravartIke pUchanepara bhagavAn ajitanAtha
nimnAMkita vacana bole  /  usake ve vacana deva-dundubhike gambhIra zabdakA
tiraskAra kara rahe the tathA kAnoMke lie parama Ananda utpanna karanevAle the
// 189 /  /  bhagavAnko bhASA ardhamAgadhI bhASA thI aura bolate samaya unake
oThoMko caMcala nahIM kara rahI thii| yaha bar3e Azcarya kI bAta thii||190||
unhoMne kahA ki he sagara! pratyeka utsarpiNI aura avasarpiNImeM dharmatIrthakI
pravRtti karanevAle caubIsa-caubIsa tIrthaMkara hote haiM  // 191 //  jisa
samaya yaha samasta saMsAra moharUpI gAr3ha andhakArase vyApta thA, dharmakI
cetanAse zUnya thA, samasta pAkhaNDoMkA ghara aura rAjAse rahita thA usa samaya
1. suprabhA nAma ma.  /  3. pradA m.| 3. cakrAkA lakSmI -m.| 4. saMkhyAkAH kha.
/

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Fifth Chapter  When, at that time, the great Jina, NÄbheya, arose, O King,
by him was established the "former time," the Ká¹tayuga. ||193|| Three castes
were conceived by him, according to the difference in actions. The origin of
grains arose from the rain of the Kalpa. ||194|| In his time were created the
great ones, the SÅ«tradhÄras, by his son, Bharata, of equal brilliance to him.
||195|| The ÄÅrama also arose, distinguished as sÄgara and anÄgara. Knowledge
and arts were taught by NÄbheya himself. ||196|| Embracing initiation, by him,
those who were destined for liberation, were freed from the fire of birth-
suffering, and led to happiness by the water of peace. ||197|| Even if the three
worlds were to gather together, they would not be able to comprehend the
incomparable qualities of NÄbheya, who was adorned with the brilliance of his
own self. ||198|| He who ascended the eight-stepped mountain for the shedding of
his body, was seen by the gods and demons, with wonder, like a golden peak.
||199|| Taking refuge in that Lord, the sages, Bharata and others, attained the
state of liberation, having embraced the great vows. ||200|| Some, having
acquired merit, attained the happiness of heaven. Others, endowed with natural
simplicity, attained the highest human state. ||201|| Others, though his
doctrine was most brilliant, did not see it, being bound by the delusion of
attachment, like owls who cannot see the sun. ||202|| They, embracing evil
conduct, becoming evil gods, wander in the hells, again as animals, with evil
deeds. ||203|| After a long time had passed, when the ocean-like profound
NÄbheya's yuga-tirtha was broken, and the religious festival was destroyed, I,
the second Jina, AjitanÄtha, arose, to establish the Ká¹tayuga, for the benefit
of all beings. ||204-205|| When the proper Dharma becomes weak, due to the
violation of the rules of conduct and the prosperity of the deluded, the Jinas
arise and revive it. ||206|| Having attained him, again, the beings, the best of
friends, embrace him again, and become destined for the state of liberation.
||207||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcamaM parva yadA tadA samutpano nAbheyo jinapuGgavaH  /  rAjan tena kRtaH
'pUrvaH kAlaH kRtayugAmidhaH  // 193 //  kalpitAzca trayo varNAH
kriyAbhedavidhAnataH  /  sasyAnAM ca samutpattirjAyate kalpatoyataH  // 19 //
sRSTAH kAle ca tasyaiva mAhanAH sUtradhAriNaH  /  sutena bharatAkhyena tasya
tatsamatejasA  // 195 //  Azramazca 'samutpannaH sAgAretarabhedataH  /
vijJAnAni kalAzcaiva nAbheyenaiva dezitAH  // 196 //  dIkSAmAsthAya tenaiva
janmaduHkhAnalAhatAH  /  bhavyAH kRtAtmakRtyena nItAH saukhyaM zamAmbunA  // 197
//  trailokyamapi saMbhUya yasyaupamyAdaipeyuSAm  /  guNAnAmazakaM
gantumantamAtmasamudyateH  // 198 //  aSTApadanagArUDho yaH zarIravisRSTaye  /
dRSTaH surAsurairhemakUTAkAraH savismayaiH  // 199 //  zaraNaM prApya taM nAthaM
munayo bharatAdayaH  /  mahAvratadharA yAtAH padaM siddheH samAzritAH  // 20 //
puNyaM kecidupAdAya svargasaukhyamupAgatAH  /  svabhAvArjavasaMpannAH
kecinmAnuSyakaM param  // 201 //  nitAntojjvalamapyanye dadRzustasya no matam  /
kudRSTirAgasaMyuktAH kauzikA iva bhAskaram  /  / 202 //  te kudharma samAsthAya
kudevatvaM prapadya ca  /  punastiryakSu duzceSTA bhramanti narakeSu ca  // 203
/  /  aneke'tra tato'tIte kAle ratnAlayopame  /  nAbheyayugavicchede jAte
naSTasamutsave  // 20 //  avatIrya divo mUrdhnaH katu kRtayugaM punaH  /
udbhato'smi hitAdhAyI jagatAmajito jinaH  // 205 /  /  AcArANAM vighAtena
kudRSTInAM ca saMpadA  /  dharma glAnipariprAptamucchrayante jinottamAH  // 206
//  te taM prApya punardhama jIvA bAndhavamuttamam  /  prapadyante punarmAga
siddhasthAnAmigAminaH  // 207 //  rAjA nAbhike putra RSabhadeva nAmaka prathama
tIrthaMkara hue the, he rAjan ! sarvaprathama unhIM ke dvArA isa kRta yugakI
sthApanA huI thI  // 192-193 /  /  unhoMne kriyAoMmeM bheda honese kSatriya,
vaizya aura zadra ina tIna varSoM kI kalpanA kI thii| unake samayameM meghoMke
jalase dhAnyoMkI utpatti huI thI  // 194 /  /  unhIMke samaya unake samAna
tejake dhAraka bharataputrane yajJopavItako dhAraNa karanevAle brAhmaNoMkI bhI
racanA kI thI  // 195 /  /  sAgAra aura anagArake bhedase do prakArake Azrama
bhI unhIMke samaya utpanna hue the| samasta vijJAna aura kalAoMke upadeza bhI
unhIM bhagavAn RSabhadevake dvArA diye gaye the  // 196|| dIkSA lekara bhagavAn
RSabhadevane apanA kArya kiyA aura janma sambandhI duHkhAgnise pIr3ita anya
bhavya jIvoMko zAntirUpa jalake dvArA sukha prApta karAyA  // 197|| tIna lokake
jIva milakara ikaTThe ho jAveM to bhI Atmatejase suzobhita bhagavAn RSabhadevake
anupama guNoMkA anta prApta karaneke lie samartha nahIM ho sakate  // 128 /  /
zarIra tyAga karaneke lie jaba bhagavAn RSabhadeva kailAsa parvatapara ArUr3ha
hue the taba Azcaryase bhare sura aura asuroMne unheM suvarNamaya zikharake
samAna dekhA thA  // 199 /  /  unakI zaraNa meM jAkara mahAvrata dhAraNa
karanevAle kitane hI bharata Adi mani nirvANa dhAmako prApta hue haiM  // 200||
kitane hI puNya upArjana kara svarga sukhako prApta haiM, aura svabhAvase hI
saralatAko dhAraNa karanevAle kitane hI loga utkRSTa manuSya padako prApta hue
haiM  /  / 201 //  yadyapi unakA mata atyanta ujjvala thA to bhI
mithyAdarzanarUpI rAgase yukta manuSya use usa taraha nahIM dekha sake the jisa
taraha ki ullU sUryako nahIM dekha sakate haiM  // 202 /  /  aise mithyAdRSTi
loga kudharmakI zraddhA kara nIce devoMmeM utpanna hote haiN| phira tiyaMcoMmeM
duSTa ceSTAe~ kara narakoMmeM bhramaNa karate haiM  // 203 /  /  tadanantara
bahuta kAla vyatIta ho jAnepara jaba samudrake samAna gambhIra RSabhadevakA
yaga-tIrtha vicchinna ho gayA aura dhArmika utsava naSTa ho gayA taba
sarvArthasiddhise cayakara phi kRtayugakI vyavasthA karaneke lie jagatkA hita
karanevAlA maiM dUsarA ajitanAtha tIrthaMkara utpanna huA hU~  // 204-205 /  /
jaba AcArake vighAta aura mithyAdRSTiyoMke vaibhavase samIcIna dharma glAniko
prApta ho jAtA hai-prabhAvahIna hone lagatA hai taba tIrthaMkara utpanna hokara
usakA udyota karate haiM  /  / 206 /  /  1. pUrva kha.  /  2. samutpannAH ma.  /
3. -dupeyuSAm kha.  /  4. -maMzakaM kha.  /  5. hitAdhyAyI kha.  /

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, after my departure, twenty-two Jinas will arise,
illuminating the three worlds in succession.  ||20|| They will all be adorned
with brilliance, valor, and other qualities, like me. They will be worshipped by
the beings of the three worlds, serving as an example. ||209|| After enjoying
the wealth of a Chakravartin, the Jinas among them will attain the kingdom of
knowledge, the cause of infinite happiness. ||210|| I will now speak of the
names of all these great souls, names that are auspicious in the three worlds
and, O King Sagar, will purify your mind. ||211||  Rishabha, the best among men,
was the first Jina, who has already passed. I am Ajita, the present Jina, and
the remaining twenty-two are the future Jinas. ||212|| Sambhava, the cause of
liberation, Abhinandana, the delight of the worthy beings,  Sumati, Padma
Prabha,  Suparshva, Chandra Prabha, Pushpadanta, the destroyer of the eight
karmas,  Shitala, the ocean of good conduct, Shreyans, the benefactor through
excellent deeds, Vasupujya, worshipped by the virtuous,  Vimala, Ananta, Dharma,
Shanti, Kuntha, Ara, Mallinatha, Suvrata, Naminatha,  Neminatha, Parshvanatha,
and Vira, the upholder of the Jina path. These are the twenty-four Tirthankaras
of this Avasarpini Yuga. They will all be the lords of the gods and the
benefactors of beings. ||213-216|| The birth and descent of all of them will be
celebrated with a shower of jewels, and the gods will anoint them with the water
of the ocean of milk on Mount Meru. ||217|| Their brilliance, form, happiness,
and strength will be beyond comparison, and all of them will destroy the enemy
of birth in this world, that is, they will attain liberation. ||218|| When the
sun in the form of Lord Mahavira sets, many fireflies of hypocrisy will appear
in this world. ||219|| These hypocrites will fall into the well of the four
gatis of this world, and they will also cause other ignorant beings to fall.
||220|| One Chakravartin, like you, with the mark of the wheel, the lord of
wealth, will arise. One Mahavira, with great strength, will be born in the ten
future kalpas. ||221||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe tato mayi gate mokSamutpatsyante jinaadhipaaH| dvAviMzatiH
kramAdanye trilokodyotakAriNaH  // 20 //  te ca matsadRzAH sarve
kAntivIryAdibhUSitAH  /  trailokyapUjanaprAptenidarzanarUpataH  // 209 //
cakrAhitAM zriyaM bhuktvA teSAM madhye yo jinAH  /  prApsyanti
jJAnasAmrAjyamanantasukhakAraNam  // 210 //  teSAM nAmAni sarveSAM maGgalAni
jagattraye  /  mahAtmanAmahaM vakSye manaHzuddhikarANi te  // 211 //  RSabho
vRSabhaH puMsAmatItaH prathamo jinaH  /  vartamAno'jitazcAhaM parizeSAstu
mAvinaH  // 212 //  saMbhavaH saMbhavo muktarmavyanaMnyAminandanaH  /  sumatiH
padmatejAzca supAzrvazcandrasaMnimaH  // 213 //  puSpadanto'STakarmAntaH zItalaH
zIlasAgaraH  /  zreyAn zreyAn suceSTAsu vAsupUjyo'rcitaH satAm  // 214 /  /
vimalAnantadharmAzca zAntikunthvarakIrtitAH  /  mallisuvratanAmAnau naminemI ca
vizrutau  // 215 //  pAzcoM vIrajinendrazca jinazailIdhuraMdharaH  /
devAdhidevatA ete jIvasvAtmyavyavasthitAH  // 216 /  /  janmAvatAraH sarveSAM
ratnavRSTaya minanditaH  /  merau janmAbhiSekazca suraiH kSIrodavAriNA  // 217
//  upamAnavivirmaktaM tejorUpaM sakhaM balam  /  sarve janmariporloke
vidhvaMsanavidhAyinaH  // 218 //  astaM yAte mahAvIrajinatigmAMzumAlini  /  loke
pAkhaNDakhadyotAstejaH prApsyanti bhUrayaH  /  / 219 //  caturgatikasaMsArakUpe
te patitAH svayam  /  pAtayiSyanti mohAndhAnanyAnapyasudhAriNaH  // 220 //
ekastvatsadRzo'tItazcakracihnaH zriyaH patiH  /  mavAneko mahAvIryo janiSyanti
dazApare  // 221 //  saMsArake prANI utkRSTa bandhusvarUpa samIcIna dharmako
punaH prApta kara mokSamArgako prApta hote haiM aura mokSa sthAnakI ora gamana
karane lagate haiM arthAt vicchinna mokSamAgaM phirase cAlU ho jAtA hai  /  /
207 /  /  tadanantara jaba maiM mokSa calA jAUMgA taba kramase tInoM lokoMkA
udyota karanevAle bAIsa tIrthaMkara aura utpanna hoMge  /  / 208 /  /  ve sabhI
tIrthakara mere hI samAna kAnti, vIrya Adise vibhUSita hoMge, mere hI samAna
tIna lokake jIvoMse pUjAko prApta hoMge aura mere hI samAna jJAnadarzanake
dhAraka hoMge  // 209|| una tIrthaMkaroMmeM tIna tIrthakara (zAnti, kuntha, ara
) cakravartIkI lakSmIkA upabhoga kara ananta sukhakA kAraNa jJAnakA sAmrAjya
prApta kareMge  // 210 //  aba maiM una sabhI mahApuruSoMke nAma kahatA hai|
unake ye nAma tInoM jagatmeM maMgalasvarUpa haiM tathA he rAjan sagara ! tere
manakI zuddhatA karanevAle haiM  // 211 //  puruSoMmeM zreSTha RSabhanAtha
prathama tIrthaMkara the jo ho cuke haiM, maiM ajitanAtha vartamAna tIrthaMkara
hU~ aura bAkI bAIsa tIrthaMkara bhaviSyat tIrthaMkara haiM  // 212 /  /  muktike
kAraNa sambhavanAtha, bhavya jIvoMko Anandita karanevAle abhinandananAtha,
sumatinAtha, padmaprabha, supArzvanAtha, candraprabha, aSTakarmoko naSTa
karanevAle puSpadanta, zIlake sAgarasvarUpa zItalanAtha, uttama ceSTAoMke dvArA
kalyANa karanevAle zreyonAtha. satparuSoMke dvArA pajita vAsapajya. vimalanA
anantanAtha, dharmanAtha, zAntinAtha, kunthunAtha, aranAtha, mallinAtha,
suvratanAtha, naminAtha, neminAtha, pArzvanAtha aura jinamArgake dhurandhara
viirnaath| ye isa avasarpiNI yugake caubIsa tIrthaMkara haiN| ye sabhI
devAdhideva aura jIvoMkA kalyANa karanevAle hoMge  // 213-216 /  /  ina sabhIkA
janmAvataraNa ratnoMkI varSAse abhinandita hogA tathA deva loga kSIrasAgarake
jalase sumeru parvatapara sabakA janmAbhiSeka kareMge  // 217 /  /  ina sabhIkA
teja, rUpa, sukha aura bala upamAse rahita hogA aura sabhI isa saMsArameM
janmarUpI zatrukA vidhvaMsa karanevAle hoMge arthAt mokSagAmI hoMge  // 218 //
jaba bhagavAn mahAvIrarUpI sUrya asta ho jAyegA taba isa saMsArameM bahuta-se
pAkhaNDarUpI juganU tejako prApta kareMge  // 219|| ve pAkhaNDa pUruSa isa
catUgA~tarUpa saMsAra kapameM svayaM gireMge tathA mohase andhe anya prANiyoMko
bhI girAveMge  // 220 /  /  tumhAre samAna cakrAMkita lakSmIkA adhipati eka
cakravartI to ho 1. dvAviMzati m.| 2. bhUtayaH ka., kh.| 3. jJAta m.| 4.
bhavyAnandhabhi-ma,  /  5. vRSTa yabhivanditaH ka.  /  6. cihnazriyaH m.|

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Chapter  **The First Chakravarti, Bharata, has passed away, and you,
Sagara, are the second. There will be ten more Chakravartis, all marked by the
wheel.** (222)  **The Chakravartis are:** 1. Sanatkumara, 2. Maghava, 3. Shanti,
4. Kunthu, 5. Ara, 6. Subhumi, 7. Mahapadma, 8. Harishena, 9. Jayasena, and 10.
Brahmadatta. (223)  **There will be nine Vasudevas, accompanied by nine
Pratishwaras. There will also be nine Balabhadra, all with minds devoted to
Dharma.** (224-225)  **O King! Just as we have described the Tirthankaras,
Chakravartis, etc. in the Avasarpini Kala, so too will there be Tirthankaras,
etc. in the Utsarpini Kala, in the realms of Bharata and Airavata.** (226)
**Hearing about the cycle of birth and death due to karma, the rise of great
souls, and the transformation of time, the wise Meghavahana pondered in his
mind:** (227-228)  **Alas! It is a great sorrow that this living being,
intoxicated by the intoxicating wine of delusion, is driven by the very karmas
that cause him suffering.** (229)  **What is the point of loving things that
appear pleasant at first but are like poison in the end, or whose very nature is
to cause suffering?** (230)  **Even after spending a long time attached to
wealth, women, and relatives, one must journey through the world alone.** (231)
**Just as a puppy follows its master as long as it receives food, so too do all
beings in this world remain attached to those who give them something.** (232)
**So much time has passed, yet who has gone to the other world with their
relatives, spouses, friends, or loved ones?** (233)  **The pleasures of the five
senses are like the body of a snake, terrifying and leading to hell. What
sentient being would be attached to such things?** (234)  **Oh, what a great
wonder it is that Lakshmi, when she is approached with devotion, deceives those
who rely on her. What could be more wicked than this?** (235)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcamaM parva prathamo bharato'tItassagarastvaM ca vartase  /
cakralAnchitamogezA bhaviSyanti pare nRpAH  // 222 //
sanatkumAravikhyAtirmaghavA nAmato'paraH  /  zAntikunthvaranAmAnaH
subhUmadhvanikIrtitaH  // 223 //  mahApadmaH prasiddhazca hariSeNadhvanistathA
/  jayasenanRpazcAnyo brahmadatto bhaviSyati  // 224 //  vAsudevA bhaviSyanti
nava sAdhaM pratIzvaraiH  /  baladevAzca tAvanto dharmavinyastacetasaH  // 225
//  proktA ete'vasarpiNyAM jinaprabhRtayastathA  /  tathaivotsarpiNIkAle
bharatairAvatAkhyayoH  // 226 //  evaM karmavazaM zrutvA jIvAnAM bhavasaMkaTam
/  mahApuruSabhUtiM ca kAlasya ca vivartanam  // 227 //  aSTakarmavimuktAnAM
sukhaM copamayojjhitam  /  jImUtavAhanazcakre cetasIdaM vicakSaNaH  // 228 //
kaSTaM yaireva jIvo'yaM karmabhiH paritapyate  /  tAnyevotsahate katu' mohitaH
karmamAyayA  // 229 //  ApAtamAtraramyeSu viSavad duHkhadAyiSu  /  viSayeSu
ratiH kA vA duHkhotpAdanavRttiSu  // 230 //  kRtvApi hi ciraM saGgaM dhane
kAntAsu bandhuSu  /  ekAkinaiva kartavyaM saMsAre parivartanam  // 231 //
tAvadeva janaH sarvaH 'priyatvenAnuvartate  /  dAnena gRhyate
yAvatsArameyazizuryathA  // 232 //  iyatA cApi kAlena ko gataH saha bandhubhiH
/  paralokaM kalatrairvA suhRdbhirbAndhavena vA  // 233 //  nAgabhogopamA mogA
bhImA narakapAtinaH  /  teSu kuryAnaraH saGga ko vA yaH syAtsacetanaH  // 234 //
aho paramidaM ciH sadbhAvena yadAzritAn  /  lakSmIH pratArayatyeva duSTatvaM
kimataH param  // 235 //  cukA hai, atyanta zaktizAlI dvitIya cakravartI tuma ho
aura tuma do ke sivAya dasa cakravartI aura hoMge  // 221|| cakravartiyoMmeM
prathama cakravartI bharata ho cuke haiM, dvitIya cakravartI sagara tuma
vidyamAna hI ho aura tuma doke sivAya cakracihnita bhogoMke svAmI nimnAMkita
dasa cakravartI rAjA aura bhI hoMge  // 222 /  /  3 sanatkumAra, 4 maghavA, 5
zAnti, 6 kunthu, 7 ara, 8 subhUma, 9 mahApadma, 10 hariSeNa, 11 jayasena aura 12
brahmadatta  // 223 /  /  nau pratinArAyaNoMke sAtha nau nArAyaNa hoMge aura
dharmameM jinakA citta laga rahA hai aise balabhada bhI nau hoMge  // 224-225 //
he rAjana! jisa prakAra hamane avasarpiNI kAlameM honevAle tIrthaMkara,
cakravartI AdikA varNana kiyA hai usI prakArake tIrthaMkara Adi utsarpiNI
kAlameM bhI bharata tathA airAvata kSetrameM hoMge  // 226 /  /  isa prakAra
karmoMke vaza honevAlA jIvoMkA saMsArabhramaNa, mahApuruSoMkI utpatti,
kAlacakrakA parivartana aura ATha karmose rahita jIvoMko honevAlA anupama sukha
ina sabakA vicArakara buddhimAn meghavAhanane apane manameM nimna vicAra kiyA  /
/ 227-228 //  hAya hAya, bar3e duHkhakI bAta hai ki jina karmoke dvArA yaha jIva
AtApako prApta hotA hai kamarUpI madirAse unmatta huA yaha unhIM karmoko
karaneke lie utsAhita hotA hai  // 229 //  jo prArambhameM hI manohara dikhate
haiM aura antameM viSake samAna duHkha dete haiM athavA duHkha utpanna karanA hI
jinakA svabhAva hai| aise viSayoMmeM kyA prema karanA hai ?  // 230 //  yaha
jIva dhana, striyoM tathA bhAI-bandhuoMkA cirakAla taka saMga karatA hai to bhI
saMsArameM ise akele hI bhramaNa karanA par3atA hai  /  / 231 /  /  jisa prakAra
kuttAke pilleko jabataka roTIkA Tukar3A dete rahate haiM tabhI taka vaha prema
karatA huA pIche lagA rahatA hai isI prakAra ina saMsArake sabhI prANiyoMko jaba
taka kucha milatA rahatA hai tabhI taka ye premI banakara apane pIche lage
rahate haiM  // 232 /  /  itanA bhArI kAla bIta gayA para isameM kauna manuSya
aisA hai jo bhAI-bandhuoM, striyoM, mitroM tathA anya iSTa janoMke sAtha
paralokako gayA ho  // 233 /  /  ye paMcendriyoMke bhoga sA~pake zarIrake samAna
bhayaMkara evaM narakameM girAnevAle haiN| aisA kauna sacetana-vicAraka puruSa
hai jo ki ina viSayoMmeM Asakti karatA ho ?  // 234 //  aho, sabase bar3A
Azcarya to isa bAtakA hai ki jo manuSya lakSmIkA 1. vartate ma.  /  2. priyatve
mAnuvartate ka.  /  3. padAzritAn ma.  /

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, The gathering of relatives is like a dream, fleeting like a
rainbow. The happiness derived from it is like a fleeting moment, like the arc
of Indra. ||236|| The body is like a water bubble, devoid of essence, and life
is like a flash of lightning, fleeting. ||237|| Therefore, abandoning all this,
the cause of worldly existence, I embrace Dharma, the unwavering companion.
||238|| Leaving behind the kingdom for his son, Maharaksasa, the wise
Meghavahana, adorned with the armor of detachment, went to the presence of
Ajitanatha. ||239|| Along with him, one hundred and ten other celestial beings,
having attained detachment, left their homes, the prison of worldly life.
||240|| This Maharaksasa, like the moon, illuminated the celestial court with
the rays of his generosity, stirring the ocean of relatives. ||241|| Such was
his influence that even in dreams, the lords of the great celestial beings
received his commands, waking up in a state of awe, joining their hands and
touching their foreheads. ||242|| His beloved, Vimalaabha, was like a shadow,
always by his side. ||243|| He had three sons, Amararaks, Uddharaks, and
Bhanuraks, all of whom were perfect in every way. ||244|| They were filled with
diverse deeds, noble in character, and expansive in their wealth and
possessions, making them seem like the three worlds themselves. ||245||
Ajitanatha, the Lord, having guided the liberated souls towards liberation,
reached the summit of Sammed Shikhar, where he attained his true nature, the
state of Siddha. ||246|| Like the queen of Indra, Sagar Chakravarti had ninety-
six thousand wives, all possessing radiant brilliance, and sixty thousand sons,
all endowed with supreme power and shining like jeweled pillars. These sons also
had numerous offspring. ||247-248|| Once, all these sons went to Kailasa to pay
their respects, their footsteps shaking the earth like mountains. ||249||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe svapne samAgamo yadvattadvad bandhusamAgamaH  /  indracApasamAnaM
ca kSaNamAtraM ca taiH sukham  // 236 //  jalabubudavaskAyaH sAreNa parivarjitaH
/  vidyulatAvilAsena sadRzaM jIvitaM calam  // 237 //  tasmAtsarvamidaM hitvA
saMsArAvAsakAraNam  /  sahAyaM parigRhNAmi dharmamanyamicAriNam  // 238 //
mahArakSasi nikSipya rAjyamAraM tataH kRtii| prAbajat so'jitasyAnte
mahAvairAgyakaGkaTaH  // 239 //  dazAdhikaM zataM tena sAkaM khecaramoginAm  /
nirvedamApya niSkrAntaM gehacArakavAsataH  // 24 //  mahArakSaHzazAGko'pi
vizrANanakarotkaraiH  /  pUrayan bAndhavAmbhodhi reje lakAnamo'GgaNe  // 24 //
prApya svapne'pi tasyAjJA mahAvidyAdharAdhipAH  /  saMbhramAd bodhamAyAnti
kRtamastakapANayaH  // 42 //  prathitA vimalAmAsya jAtA prANasamapriyA  /
yasyAnuvartanaM cakre chAyeva satatAnugA  // 243 //  amarodadhibhAnubhyaH parAM
rakSaHzrutiM zritAH  /  tasya tasyAM samutpannAH putrAH sarvArthasaMmitAH  //
244 //  vicitrakarmasaMpUrNAstuGgA vistAramAjinaH  /  prasiddhAstasya te
putrAstrayo lokA ivAmavan  // 245 //  pravAjitanAtho'pi bhavyAnAM muktigAminAm
/  panthAna prApa saMmede nijAM prakRtimAtmanaH  // 246 //  sagarasya ca
patnInAM sahasrANAM SaDuttarAH  /  navatiH zakrapatnInAmabhavan tulyatejasAm  //
247 //  saMputrANAM ca putrANAM bibhratAM zaktimuttamAm  /  jAtAH SaSTiH
sahasrANAM ratnastambhasamatviSAm  // 248 //  te kadAcidatho yAtAH kailAsaM
vandanArthinaH  /  kampayantaH padanyAsairvasudhAM parvatA iva  // 249 //
sadbhAvanAse Azraya lete haiM yaha lakSmI unheM hI dhokhA detI hai-ThagatI hai,
isase bar3hakara duSTatA aura kyA hogI?  // 235|| jisa prakAra svapna meM
honevAlA iSTa janoMkA samAgama asthAyI hai usI prakAra bandhujanoMkA samAgama
bhI asthAyI hai  /  tathA bandhujanoMke samAgamase jo sukha hotA hai vaha
indradhanuSake samAna kSaNamAtrake lie hI hotA hai  /  / 236 //  zarIra pAnIke
babUleke samAna sArase rahita hai tathA yaha jIvana bijalIkI camakake samAna
caMcala hai  /  / 337 /  /  isalie saMsAra-nivAsake kAraNabhUta isa samasta
parikarako chor3akara maiM to kabhI dhokhA nahIM denevAle eka dharmarUpa
sahAyakako hI grahaNa karatA haiM ||238 //  tadanantara aisA vicArakara
vairAgyarUpI kavacako dhAraNa karanevAle baddhimAna meghavAhana vidyAdharane
mahArAkSasa nAmaka putrake lie rAjyabhAra sauMpakara ajitanAtha bhagavAnke
samIpa dIkSA dhAraNa kara lI  // 239 /  /  rAjA meghavAhanake sAtha anya eka sau
dasa vidyAdhara bhI vairAgya prApta kara ghararUpI bandIgRhase bAhara nikale  //
240 //  isa mahArAkSasarUpI candramA bhI dAnarUpI kiraNoMke samUhase
bandhujanarUpI samudrako hulasAtA huA laMkArUpI AkAzAMgaNake bIca suzobhita hone
lagA  /  / 241 /  /  usakA aisA prabhAva thA ki bar3ebar3e vidyAdharoMke
adhipati svapnameM bhI usakI AjJA prApta kara har3abar3Akara jAga uThate the
aura hAtha jor3akara mastakase lagA lete the  /  / 242 //  usakI vimalAbhA
nAmakI prANapriyA vallabhA thI jo chAyAke samAna sadA usake sAtha rahatI thI  //
243 /  /  usake amararakSa, udadhirakSa aura bhAnurakSa nAmaka tIna putra hue|
ye tInoM hI putra saba prakArake arthoMse paripUrNa the  // 244 //  vicitra-
vicitra kAryoMse yukta the, uttuMga arthAt udAra the aura jana-dhanase vistArako
prApta the isalie aise jAna par3ate mAno tIna loka hI hoM  // 245 /  /  bhagavAn
ajitanAtha bhI muktigAmI bhavya jIvoMko mokSakA mArga pravartAkara sammeda
zikharapara pahu~ce aura vahA~se AtmasvabhAvako prApta hae-siddha padako  /  /
246 /  /  sagara cakravartIke indrANIke samAna tejako dhAraNa karanevAlI
chayAnabe hajAra rAniyA~ thIM aura uttama zaktiko dhAraNa karanevAle evaM
ratnamayI khambhoMke samAna dedIpyamAna sATha hajAra putra the| una putroMke bhI
aneka putra the  /  / 247-248 /  /  kisI samaya ve sabhI putra vandanAke lie
kailAsa 1. vimalAbhasya ma.  /  2. pravRtya ma.  /  3. prApya ma., k.| 4.
suputrANAM ma., kha.  /  5. kampayatAM ma.  /

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Fifth Chapter  Having paid homage to the Siddha images with great reverence,
they began to dig a trench around the mountain with their Danda-ratna. || 250 ||
Seeing the earth dug down to the roots of the earth, the Naga-indra, inflamed
with anger, looked at them. || 251 || The sons of the Chakravarti, whose bodies
were consumed by the flames of the Naga-indra's anger, were reduced to ashes. ||
252 || Just as there is a life-giving power amidst the deadly power of poison,
which sometimes acts as a medicine and becomes the cause of life, so also in the
anger of the Naga-indra, where there was the power to burn, there was also a
compassionate outcome. Due to this compassionate outcome, two sons, Bhima and
Bhagiratha, were somehow not burnt to ashes. || 253 || Seeing this sudden death
of the sons of the Chakravarti Sagar, both of them were grieved and went to
Sagar. || 254 || Fearing that the Chakravarti might suddenly lose his life upon
hearing this news, the learned men forbade Bhima and Bhagiratha from telling the
Chakravarti this news. || 255 || Then the king, the hereditary ministers, the
learned men who were experts in various scriptures, and the wise men who were
connoisseurs of entertainment, gathered together and went to the Chakravarti. At
that time, there was no difference in the radiance of their faces, and their
attire was also the same as before. All of them went to the Chakravarti Sagar
with reverence, just as before. || 256-257 || After paying their respects and
sitting in their respective places, an elder, prompted by their gestures, began
to speak these words. || 258 ||  O King Sagar! You see the impermanence of the
world, seeing which the mind does not turn towards the world. || 259 || Before
you, there was a king named Bharat, who was equal to you in prowess, who had
subdued this six-part earth, making it like a slave. || 260 || He had a son
named Arka-kirti, who was a great warrior, and whose name this solar dynasty is
still known by. || 261 || Arka-kirti also had a son, and his son also had a son,
but now all of them have gone beyond the reach of sight. || 262 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcamaM parva vidhAya siddhabimbAnAM vandanAM prazrayAnvitAH  /  gireste
daNDaratnena parikSepaM pracakrire  //  250  //  ArasAtalamUlAM tAM dRSTvA
khAtAM vasuMdharAm  /  teSAmAlocanaM cakre nAgendraH krodhadIpitaH  //  251||
krodhavahnestatastasya jvAlAbhilaDhavigrahAH  /  bhasmasAdbhAvamAyAtAH sutAste
cakravartinaH  //  252  //  teSAM madhye na dagdhau dvau kathamapyanukampayA  /
jIvitAtmakayA zaktyA viSato jAtayA yathA  //  253 //  "sAgarINAmimaM mRtyuM
dRSTvA yugapadAgatam  /  duHkhitau sagarasyAntaM yAtau bhImabhagIrathau  //  254
//  akasmAt kathite mAyaM prANAMstyAkSItkSaNAditi  /  paNDitairiti saMcintya
niSiddhau tau nivedane  // 255 //  tataH saMbhUya rAjAno mantriNazca kulAgatAH
/  nAnAzAstravibuddhAzca vinodajJA manoSiNaH  //  256 //  avibhinnamukhacchAyAH
pUrvaveSasamanvitAH  /  vinayena yathApUrvaM sagaraM samupAgatAH  //  257  //
namaskRtyopaviSTaistairyathAsthAnaM pracoditaH  /  saMjJayA pravayAH kazcididaM
vacanamabravIt  /  /  258  //  rAjan sagara pazya tvaM jagatImAmanityatAm  /
saMsAraM prati yAM dRSTvA mAnasaM na pravartate  //  259  //  rAjAsIdbharato
nAmnA tvayA samaparAkramaH  /  dAsIva yena SaTkhaNDA kRtA vazyA vasuMdharA  //
260 //  tasyAdityayazAH putro babhUvonnatavikramaH  /  prasiddho yasya nAmnAyaM
vaMzaH saMprati vartate  //  261 //  evaM tasyApyabhUt
putrastasyApyanyo'parastataH  /  gatAste cAdhunA sarve darzanAnAmagocaram  //
262 //  parvata para gaye  /  usa samaya ve caraNoMke vikSepase pRthivIko ka~pA
rahe the aura parvatoMke samAna jAna par3ate the |249 || kailAsa parvatapara
sthita siddha pratimAoM kI unhoMne bar3I vinayase vandanA kI aura tadanantara ve
daNDaratnase usa parvatake cAroM ora khAI khodane lage  // 250 //  unhoMne
daNDaratnase pAtAla taka gaharI pRthivI khoda DAlI yaha dekha nAgendrane
krodhase prajvalita ho unakI ora dekhA || 251 || nAgendrakI krodhAgnikI
jvAlAoMse jinakA zarIra vyApta ho gayA thA aise ve cakravartIke putra
bhasmIbhUta ho gaye || 252 || jisa prakAra viSakI mAraka zaktike bIca eka jIvaka
zakti bhI hotI hai aura usake prabhAvase vaha kabhI-kabhI auSadhike samAna
jIvanakA bhI kAraNa bana jAtI hai isI prakAra usa nAgendrakI krodhAgnimeM bhI
jahA~ jalAnekI zakti thI vahAM eka anukampArUpa pariNati bhI thI  /  usI
anukampArUpa pariNatike kAraNa una putroMke bIca meM bhIma, bhagIratha nAmaka do
putra kisI taraha bhasma nahIM hue || 253 //  sagara cakravartIke putroM kI isa
Akasmika mRtyuko dekhakara ve donoM hI duHkhI hokara sagara ke pAsa Aye || 254
//  sahasA isa samAcArake kahane para cakravartI kahIM prANa na chor3a deM aisA
vicArakara paNDitajanoMne bhIma aura bhagIrathako yaha samAcAra cakravartIse
kahane ke lie manA kara diyA || 255  //  tadanantara rAjA, kula kramAgata
mantrI, nAnA zAstroMke pAragAmI aura vinodake jAnakAra vidvajjana ekatrita
hokara cakravartI ke pAsa gaye  /  usa samaya una sabake mukhakI kAntimeM kisI
prakArakA antara nahIM thA tathA vezabhUSA bhI sabakI pahale ke hI samAna thI  /
saba loga vinayase jAkara pahale hI ke samAna cakravartI sagara ke samIpa
pahu~ce  /  /  256 - 257 || namaskAra kara saba loga jaba yathAsthAna baiTha
gaye taba unake saMketase prerita ho eka vRddhajanane nimnAMkita vacana kahanA
zurU kiyA || 258 || he rAjan sagara ! Apa saMsArakI isa anityatAko to dekho jise
dekhakara phira saMsArakI ora mana pravRtta nahIM hotA || 259 || pahale tumhAre
hI samAna parAkramakA dhArI rAjA bharata ho gayA hai jisane isa chakhaNDako
pRthvIko dAsIke samAna vaza kara liyA thA || 260 || usake mahAparAkramI
arkakIrti nAmaka aisA putra huA thA ki jisake nAmase yaha sUryavaMza aba taka
cala rahA hai ||261|| arkakIrti ke bhI putra huA aura usake putra ko bhI putra
huA parantu isa samaya ve saba dRSTigocara "ata iJ itInpratyayaH  /  2.
kathitenAyaM ma., kha. 1 1. sagarasyApatyAni pumAMsaH sAgarayasteSAm 3.
pracoditAm ma.  /  85

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 86  **Verse 263:** Even if they are the lords of the celestial realms,
adorned with splendor, they are reduced to ashes by sorrow in an instant.
**Verse 264:** Even the Tirthankaras, the ones who bring joy to the three
worlds, abandon their bodies when their lifespan ends.  **Verse 265-266:** Just
as birds, after spending the night on a large tree, fly in all directions at
dawn, similarly, many beings, after gathering together in a family, go their
separate ways according to their karma.  **Verse 267:** Some have witnessed the
actions and beautiful bodies of those ancient beings with their own eyes, but we
only know them through stories.  **Verse 268:** Death is stronger than all the
powerful beings, for it has conquered all the powerful.  **Verse 269:** Oh, what
a wonder! Our chests don't burst when we remember the destruction of great souls
like Bharata and others.  **Verse 270:** The wealth, loved ones, and bodies of
beings are like foam, waves, rainbows, dreams, lightning, and acacia blossoms.
**Verse 271:** There is no human in the world who can be compared to this, that
just as this is immortal, so are we.  **Verse 272-273:** Those who are capable
of drying up the ocean filled with crocodiles, or grinding Mount Meru to dust
with their hands, or lifting the earth and swallowing the moon and sun, even
they have entered the mouth of Yama, the god of death, in due time.  **Verse
274:** All beings in the three worlds are subject to this insurmountable death.
Only the Siddhas, born from the Jain Dharma, are free from it.  **Verse 275:**
Just as many kings have met their end due to time, so shall we also meet our
end. This is the common law of the world.  **Verse 276:** When this common
thing, death, comes to all beings in the three worlds, who, with a wise mind,
will grieve for the cause of existence?  **Verse 277:** As this discussion was
going on, the wise Chakravarti, skilled in observing actions, saw only two sons
in front of him. Seeing them, he began to think in his mind.  **Note:** The term
"Tirthankara" is a Jain term referring to a spiritual teacher who has attained
liberation and guides others to do the same. The term "Siddha" refers to a
liberated soul who has attained perfect knowledge and is free from the cycle of
birth and death.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 86 padmapurANe AsatAM tAvadete vA nAkalokezvarA api  /  jvalitA vimavairyAtAH
kSaNAd duHkhena bhasmatAm  // 263 //  ye'pi tIrthakarA nAma
trailokyasyAbhinandakAH  /  zarIraM te'pi saMtyajya gacchantyAyuHparikSaye  //
264 //  mahAtarau yathaikasminnuSitvA rajanI punaH  /  prabhAte pratipadyante
kakubho daza pakSiNaH  // 265 /  /  evaM kuTumba ekasmin saMgama prApya jantavaH
/  punaH svAM svAM prapadyante gatiM karmavazAnugAH  // 266 //
kaizcittacceSTitaM teSAM vapuzcAtyantazobhanam  /  viSayIkRtamakSibhyAmasmAkaM
tu kathAgatam  // 267 /  /  balavadbhayo hi sarvebhyo mRtyureva mahAbalaH  /
AnItA nidhanaM yena balavanto balIyasA  // 26 //  kathaM sphuTati no vakSaH
smRtvA teSAM mahAtmanAm  /  vinAzaM bharatAdInAmaho citramidaM param  // 269 //
phenormIndradhanuHsvapnavidyububudasaMnimAH  /  saMpadaH priyasaMparkA
vigrahAzca zarIriNAm  // 270 //  nAsti kazcinnaro loke yo vrajedupamAnatAm  /
yathAyamamarastadvadvayaM mRtyUjjhitA iti  // 27 //  ye'pi zoSayituM zakkAH
samudraM grAmasaMkulam  /  kuryurvA karayugmena cUrNa merumahIdharam  // 272 //
uddhartuM dharaNI zaktA grasituM 'candrabhAskarau  /  praviSTAste'pi kAlena
kRtAntavadanaM narAH  // 273 //  mRtyordurlakitasyAsya trailokye vazatAM gate  /
kevalaM vyujjhitAH siddhA jinadharmasamudbhavAH  // 27 //  yathA te bahavo yAtAH
kAlena nidhanaM nRpAH  /  yAsyAmo vayamapyevaM sAmAnya jagatAmidam  // 275 //
tatra trilokasAmAnye vastunyasmin samAgate  /  zokaM kuryAdvibuddhAtmA ko naro
bhavakAraNam  /  / 276 //  kathAyAmiti jAtAyAM vIkSyApatyadvayaM punaH  /
mAnase cakravartIdaM cakAreGgitakovidaH  // 277 //  nahIM haiM  /  / 262 /  /
athavA ina sabako rahane do, svargalokake adhipati bhI jo ki vaibhavase
dedIpyamAna rahate haiM kSaNabharameM duHkhase bhasma ho jAte haiM  /  / 263 /
/  athavA inheM bhI jAne do, tIna lokako Anandita karanevAle jo tIrthaMkara haiM
ve bhI Ayu samApta honepara zarIrako chor3akara cale jAte haiM  /  / 264 /  /
jisa prakAra pakSI rAtrike samaya kisI bar3e vRkSapara basakara prAtaHkAla dazoM
dizAoMmeM cale jAte haiM usI prakAra aneka prANI eka kuTumbameM ekatrita hokara
karmoM ke anusAra phira apanI gatiko cale jAte haiM  /  / 265-266 /  /  kinhIMne
una pUrva puruSoMkI ceSTAe~ tathA unakA atyanta sundara zarIra apanI AMkhoMse
dekhA hai parantu hama kathAmAtrase unheM jAnate haiM  /  / 267 /  /  mRtyu
sabhI balavAnoMse adhika balavAn hai kyoMki isane anya sabhI balavAnoMko parAsta
kara diyA hai  /  / 268 /  /  aho ! yaha bar3A Azcarya hai ki bharata Adi
mahApuruSoMke vinAzakA smaraNa kara hamArI chAtI nahIM phaTa rahI hai  /  / 269
//  jIvoMkI dhanasampadAe~, iSTasamAgama aura zarIra, phena, taraMga,
indradhanuSa, svapna, bijalI aura babUlAke samAna haiM  // 270|| saMsArameM aisA
koI bhI manuSya nahIM hai jo isa viSayameM upamAna ho sake ki jisa taraha yaha
amara hai usI taraha hama bhI amara raheMge ||271 /  /  jo magaramacchoMse bhare
samudrako sukhAneke lie samartha haiM athavA apane donoM hAthoMse sumeru
parvatako cUrNa karanemeM samartha haiM athavA pRthvIko Upara uThAnemeM aura
candramA tathA sUryako grasane meM samartha haiM ve manuSya bhI kAla pAkara
yamarAjake mukhameM praviSTa hue haiM  // 272-273 /  /  tInoM lokoMke prANI isa
dulaMghanIya mRtyuke vaza ho rahe haiN| yadi koI bAkI chUTe haiM to jinadharmase
utpanna hue siddha bhagavAn hI chUTa haiM  // 274 /  /  jisa prakAra bahuta-se
rAjA kAlake dvArA vinAzako prApta hue haiM usI prakAra hama loga bhI vinAzako
prApta hoNge| saMsArakA yaha sAmAnya niyama hai  /  / 275 /  /  jo mRtyu tIna
lokake jIvoMko samAna rUpase AtI hai usake prApta honepara aisA kauna vivekI
puruSa hogA jo saMsArake kAraNabhUta zokako karegA  // 276 /  /  isa prakAra
vRddha manuSyake dvArA yaha carcA cala rahI thI idhara ceSTAoMke jAnane meM
nipuNa cakravartIne sAmane sirpha do putra dekhe  /  unheM dekhakara vaha
manameM vicAra karane lagA 1. candrabhAskarA m.| .

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fifth festival, all the sons always used to salute me together. Today, only
two sons are seen, and even their faces are very humble. It seems that the
remaining sons have attained destruction. ||278|| These arrived kings are not
able to speak this great sorrow directly, so they are speaking through other
means. ||279|| After that, even though Sagara Chakravarti was bitten by the
snake of sorrow, he did not give up his life, receiving comfort from the words
of the assembly members. ||280|| Knowing the world's happiness to be as empty as
the core of a banana, he gave the kingdom's wealth to Bhagiratha and took
initiation himself. ||281|| When this great-souled king was leaving this earth,
this earth adorned with various cities and mines of gold, etc., seemed as
insignificant as dry grass to his mind. ||282|| After that, Sagara Chakravarti,
along with his son Bhimratha, took refuge in Ajitanatha Bhagwan. There, he took
initiation, attained omniscience, and then took refuge in the Siddha-pad, i.e.,
he became liberated. ||283|| Sagara Chakravarti's son Jahnu's son Bhagiratha
became the king. One day, he asked Shruta Sagar Muni Raja. ||284|| "Why did all
my grandfather Sagara's sons attain death together due to the rise of what
karma, and why am I saved from that karma even though I was among them?" ||285||
Bhagwan Ajitanatha said, "Once, the four-fold assembly was going to pay homage
to Sammed Shikhar, and on the way, they reached a village called Antik." ||286||
Seeing the assembly, all the people of that Antik village started laughing at
the assembly, speaking abusive words. But there was a potter in that village,
who stopped all the villagers and praised the assembly. ||287|| A man living in
that village had committed theft, so the unwise king thought that this village
itself is committing many crimes, so he surrounded it and burnt the whole
village. ||288|| On the day that village was burnt, the potter, who was the
holder of the middle results, was invited somewhere and had gone out. ||289||
When the potter died, he became a very wealthy merchant, and all the villagers
died and became cowries. The merchant bought all those cowries. ||290|| After
that, the potter's soul died and became a king, and the souls of the villagers
died and became 1. Ath M. ||291||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcamaM parva sarvadA yugapatsarve mAM namanti sma dehajAH  /  adya dvau
dInavadanau nUnaM zeSA gatAH kSayam  // 278 //  ete cAnyApadezena kathayanti
samAgatAH  /  nRpAH kathayituM sAkSAdudAraM duHkhamakSamAH  // 279 //  tataH
zokorageNAsau daSTo'pi na samatyajan  /  prANAn sabhyavacomantraH pratipadya
pratikriyAm  // 28 //  kadalIgarbhaniHsAramavetya bhavajaM sukham  /  bhagIrathe
zriyaM nyasya dIkSA sa samazizriyat  // 281 //  tyajato'sya dharitrIyaM
nagarAkaramaNDitA  /  manasyudAttalIlasya jarattaNasamAbhavat  // 282 //  sAddha
bhImarathenAsau pratipadyAjitaM vibhum  /  kevalajJAnamutpadya siddhAnAM
padamAzrayat  // 283 //  tanayaH sAgarejahvoH kurvan rAjyaM bhagIrathaH  /
zrutasAgarayogIndraM pRSTavAnevamanyadA  // 28 //  pitAmahasya me nAtha tanayA
yugapatkutaH  /  karmaNo maraNaM prAptA madhye teSAmahaM tu na  // 285 //
avocad bhagavAn saMgho vandanArtha caturvidhaH  /  saMmedaM
prasthito'vApadantikagrAmadarzanam  // 286 //  dRSTvA tamantikagrAmo durvacAH
sakalo'hasat  /  kumbhakArastu tatraiko niSidhya kRtavAn stutim  /  / 287 //
tadgrAmavAsinaikena kRte caurye sa bhUbhRtA  /  pariveSTyAkhilo dagdho grAmo
bhUryaparAdhakaH  // 288 /  /  bhasmasAdbhAvamApanno yasmin grAmo'tra vaasre|
kumbhakAro gataH kvApi madhyacetA nimantritaH  // 289 /  /
kummakAro'bhavanmRtvA vANijaH sumahAdhanaH  /  varATakasamUhastu grAmaH
prAptazca tena saH  // 29 //  kumbhakAro'bhavadrAjA grAmo'sau mAtRvAhakAH  /
hastinA cUrNitAstasya te ciraM bhavamabhraman  // 29 //   // 277|| ki hamezA
saba putra mujhe eka sAtha namaskAra karate the para Aja do hI putra dikha rahe
haiM aura utanepara bhI inake mukha atyanta dIna dikhAI dete haiN| jAna par3atA
hai ki zeSa putra kSayako prApta ho cuke haiM  // 278 //  ye Agata rAjA loga isa
bhArI duHkhako sAkSAt kahane meM samartha nahIM hai isalie anyokti-dUsareke
bahAne kaha rahe haiM  // 272 /  /  tadanantara sagara cakravartI yadyapi
zokarUpI sarpase DaeNsA gayA thA to bhI sabhAsadajanoMke vacanarUpI mantroMse
pratikAra-sAntvanA pAkara usane prANa nahIM chor3e the  /  / 280|| usane
saMsArake sUkhako keleke garbhake samAna niHsAra jAnakara bhagIrathako
rAjyalakSmI sauMpI aura svayaM dIkSA dhAraNa kara lI  // 28 //  utkRSTa lIlAko
dhAraNa karanevAlA rAjA sagara jaba ra jaba isa pRthvIkA tyAga kara rahA thA
taba nAnA nagara aura savarNAdikI khAnoMse suzobhita yaha pRthvI usake manameM
jIrNatRNake samAna tuccha jAna par3atI thii||282|| tadanantara sagara cakravartI
bhImaratha nAmaka putrake sAtha ajitanAtha bhagavAnkI zaraNameM gyaa| vahA~
dIkSA dhAraNa kara usane kevalajJAna prApta kiyA aura tadanantara siddhapadakA
Azraya liyA arthAt mukta huA  /  / 283 /  /  sagara cakravartIkA putra jahna kA
lar3akA bhagIratha rAjya karane lgaa| kisI eka dina usane zrutasAgara munirAjase
pUchA  /  / 284 //  ki hamAre bAbA sagarake putra eka sAtha kisa kamake udayase
maraNako prApta hue haiM aura unake bIcameM rahatA huA bhI maiM kisa karmase
baca gayA hU~  // 285 /  /  bhagavAn ajitanAthane kahA ki eka bAra
caturvidhasaMgha sammedazikharakI vandanAke lie jA rahA thA so mArgameM vaha
antika nAmaka grAmameM pahuMcA  // 286|| saMghako dekhakara usa antika grAmake
saba loga kuvacana kahate hue saMghakI ha~sI karane lage parantu usa grAmameM
eka kumbhakAra thA usane gAMvake saba logoMko manA kara saMghakI stuti kI  /  /
287 //  usa gA~vameM rahanevAle eka manuSyane corI kI thI so avivekI rAjAne socA
ki yaha gA~va hI bahuta aparAdha karatA hai isalie gherA DAlakara sArAkA sArA
gA~va jalA diyA  /  / 288 /  /  jisa dina vaha gA~va jalAyA gayA thA usa dina
madhyastha pariNAmoMkA dhAraka kumbhakAra nimantrita hokara kahIM bAhara gayA
thA  /  / 289 /  /  jaba kumbhakAra marA to vaha bahuta bhArI dhanakA adhipati
vaizya haA aura gAMvake saba loga marakara kaur3I hae  /  vaizyane una saba
kaur3iyoMko kharIda liyA  // 290 /  /  tadanantara kumbhakArakA jIva marakara
rAjA huA aura gA~vake jIva marakara 1. atha m.|

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, The king, having become a Shraman, was cast down from the
position of a deity. He was born as Bhagiratha, and the villagers became the
sons of Sagara. ||292|| By slandering the Sangha, one meets death in every
birth. Therefore, that entire village was destroyed at once, while you, by
praising the Sangha, have become prosperous and long-lived. ||293|| Having heard
this account of his past life from the Lord, Bhagiratha became calm and,
becoming the chief of the sages, attained a position suitable for penance.
||294|| Gautama Swami says to King Shrenik, "O King! Having obtained the
opportunity, I have told you this story of Sagara. Now, I will tell you the
present story, so listen." ||295|| There was a great Rakshasa named Maharaksha,
who ruled Lanka without any obstacles. He was endowed with great knowledge and
power. One day, he went to a pleasure garden with his wives, adorned with lotus-
covered ponds, a play-mountain towering with the brilliance of various gems,
adorned with groups of trees bearing blooming flowers, filled with groups of
birds flitting about with indistinct sweet sounds, surrounded by a gem-studded
earth, where various kinds of radiance were blooming, and adorned with arbors of
creepers with the appropriate shade of dense foliage. ||296-300|| King
Maharaksha began to play in that pleasure garden with his wives. Sometimes the
women would tease him with flowers, and sometimes he would tease the women with
fruits. ||301|| If any woman became angry due to jealousy because of another
woman going near him, he would appease her by bowing at her feet. Similarly, if
he himself became angry, a woman full of playfulness would appease him. ||302||
Sometimes he would inspire a woman with his chest, which was as beautiful as the
shore of Trikuta Mountain, and another woman would inspire him with the embrace
of her full breasts. ||303|| Seeing the hidden bodies of the women immersed in
play, he was like the king of the gods in Nandana, in the midst of the ocean of
love. ||304|| The king, having become a Jain, was reduced to dust by the
elephant, and all those Jains wandered in the cycle of births and deaths.
||291|| The potter's soul, having become a sage, attained the position of a
deity, and from there, having been cast down, you became Bhagiratha, and all the
villagers, having died, became the sons of Sagara. ||292|| By slandering the
Sangha, one meets death in every birth. Therefore, that entire village was
destroyed at once, while you, by praising the Sangha, have become prosperous and
long-lived. ||293|| Having heard this account of his past life from the Lord,
Bhagiratha became calm and, becoming the chief of the sages, attained a position
suitable for penance. ||294|| Gautama Swami says to King Shrenik, "O King!
Having obtained the opportunity, I have told you this story of Sagara. Now, I
will tell you the present story, so listen." ||295|| There was a great Rakshasa
named Maharaksha, who ruled Lanka without any obstacles. He was endowed with
great knowledge and power. One day, he went to a pleasure garden with his wives,
adorned with lotus-covered ponds, a play-mountain towering with the brilliance
of various gems, adorned with groups of trees bearing blooming flowers, filled
with groups of birds flitting about with indistinct sweet sounds, surrounded by
a gem-studded earth, where various kinds of radiance were blooming, and adorned
with arbors of creepers with the appropriate shade of dense foliage. ||296-300||
King Maharaksha began to play in that pleasure garden with his wives. Sometimes
the women would tease him with flowers, and sometimes he would tease the women
with fruits. ||301|| If any woman became angry due to jealousy because of
another woman going near him, he would appease her by bowing at her feet.
Similarly, if he himself became angry, a woman full of playfulness would appease
him. ||302|| Sometimes he would inspire a woman with his chest, which was as
beautiful as the shore of Trikuta Mountain, and another woman would inspire him
with the embrace of her full breasts. ||303|| Seeing the hidden bodies of the
women immersed in play, he was like the king of the gods in Nandana, in the
midst of the ocean of love. ||304||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe rAjA ca zramaNo bhUtvA devIbhUya cyuto bhavAn  /  bhagIrathaH
samutpanno grAmastu sagarAGgajAH  // 292 /  /  saMghasya nindanaM kRtvA
mRtyumeti bhave bhave  /  tenAsau yugapadgrAmo jAtaH stutyA svamIdRzaH  // 293 /
/  zrutvA pUrvamavAnevamupazAnto bhagIrathaH  /  babhUva munimukhyazca
tapoyogyaM padaM yayau  // 294 //  vRttAntagatametatte caritaM sagarAzritam  /
kathitaM prastutaM vakSye zRNu zreNika sAMpratam  // 295 //  yo'sau tatra
mahArakSo nAma vidyAdharAdhipaH  /  laGkAyAM kurute rAjyaM kaNTakaiH
parivarjitam  // 296 //  so'nyadA kamalacchannadIrghikAkRtamaNDanam  /
nAnAratnapramottuGgakrIDAparvatakAritam  // 297 //  AmodikusumonAsi
tarukhaNDavirAjitam  /  kalakUjitavibhrAntazakuntagaNasaMkulam  // 298 //
ratnabhUmiparikSiptaM vikAsivividhA ti  /
ghanapallavasacchAyalatAmaNDapamaNDitam  /  / 299 //  agamat
pramadodyAnamantaHpurasamanvitaH  /  mahatyA saMpadA yukto vidyAbalasamucchrayaH
// 30 //  tatra krIDitumArebhe vanitAbhirasau samam  /  kusumaistADyamAnazca
tADayaMzca yathocitam  // 301 //  kAJcitpAdapraNAmena kupitA moya'yA striyam  /
sAnvayananyayA tena sAnvyamAnaH sulIlayA  // 302 //  urasA prerayan
kAJcistrikUTataTazobhinA  /  pIvarastanaramyeNa preryamANastathAnyayA  // 30 //
pazyan pracchannagAtrANi krIDAvyAkulayoSitAm  /  ratisAgaramadhyastho
nandane'mararAjavat  // 304 //  gijAI hue so rAjAke hAthIse cUrNa hokara ve saba
giMjAiyoMke jIva saMsArameM bhramaNa karate rahe  // 291 /  /  kumbhakArake jIva
rAjAne muni hokara devapada prApta kiyA aura vahA~se cyuta hokara tU bhagIratha
huA hai tathA gA~vake saba loga marakara sagara cakravartI ke putra hue haiM  //
292 /  /  muni saMghakI nindA kara yaha manuSya bhava-bhavameM mRtyuko prApta
hotA hai| isI pApase gA~vake saba loga bhI eka sAtha mRtyuko prApta hue the aura
saMghakI stuti karanese tU isa taraha sampanna tathA dIrghAyu huA hai  // 293 //
isa prakAra bhagIratha bhagavAnke mukhase pUrvabhava sunakara atyanta zAnta ho
gayA aura muniyoMmeM mukhya banakara tapake yogya padako prApta huA  // 224||
gautama svAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! prakaraNa pAkara yaha
sagarakA caritra maiMne tujhase khaa| aba isa samaya prakRta kathA kahU~gA so
suna  /  / 295 //  athAnantara-jo mahArakSa nAmA vidyAdharoMkA rAjA laMkAmeM
niSkaNTaka rAjya karatA thA vidyAbalase samunnata vaha rAjA eka samaya
antaHpurake sAtha krIr3A karaneke lie bar3e vaibhavase usa pramadavanameM gayA
jo ki kamaloMse AcchAdita vApikAoMse suzobhita thA, jisake bIcameM nAnA ratnoMkI
prabhAse U~cA dikhanevAlA krIr3Aparvata banA huA thA, khile hue phUloMse
suzobhita vRkSoMke samUha jisakI zobhA bar3hA rahe the, avyakta madhura zabdoMke
sAtha idhara-udhara maMDarAte hue pakSiyoMke samUhase vyApta thA, jo ratnamayI
bhUmise veSTita thA, jisameM nAnA prakArakI kAnti vikasita ho rahI thI, aura jo
saghana pallavoMkI samIcIna chAyAse yukta latAmaNDapoMse suzobhita thA  //
296-300 /  rAjA mahArakSa usa pramadavanameM apanI striyoMke sAtha kIr3A karane
lgaa| kabhI striyA~ use phUloMse tAr3anA karatI thIM aura kabhI vaha phaloMse
striyoMko tAr3anA karatA thA  // 301 /  /  koI strI anya strIke pAsa jAneke
kAraNa yadi IrSyAse kupita ho jAtI thI to use vaha caraNoMmeM jhukakara zAnta
kara letA thaa| isI prakAra kabhI Apa svayaM kupita ho jAtA thA to lIlAse bharI
strI ise prasanna kara leto thI  // 302 /  /  kabhI yaha trikUTAcalake taTake
samAna suzobhita apane vakSaHsthalase kisI strI ko preraNA detA thA to anya strI
use bhI apane sthala stanoMke AliMganase preraNA detI thI  // 303 /  /  isa
taraha kror3AmeM nimagna striyoMke pracchanna zarIroMko dekhatA huA yaha 1. duti
ma.  /  2. -gIrSayA m.|

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifth Chapter  Then, as the lotus buds began to close their petals, the
king saw a dead bee trapped within a lotus bud.    Seeing this, a thought arose
in his heart, a thought that would destroy his worldly attachments.  He thought,
"This foolish bee, intoxicated by the nectar, did not find satisfaction and thus
met its death.  The Acharya says, "May this endless desire be cursed!"  Just as
this bee, attached to the lotus, met its death, so too shall we, attached to the
lotus-like faces of women, meet our death.  If this bee died due to its sense of
smell and taste, then what of us, who are enslaved by all five senses?  Or
perhaps this bee, being a member of the lower species, is ignorant, and so its
actions are understandable.  But we, who are endowed with knowledge, why are we
still attached to these objects?  What pleasure is there in licking the blade of
a honey-coated sword, which, upon contact, shatters the tongue into a hundred
pieces?  What kind of happiness can arise from objects that, far from offering
pleasure, only bring forth a continuous stream of suffering?  I bow down to
those great souls who have turned away from objects like the fruit of the
*kipaak* tree, with their body, speech, and mind.  Alas, how unfortunate! I have
been deceived, cheated for a long time by these wicked objects, whose
attachments are extremely harmful and deadly like poison.  At that moment, a
great sage named Shruta Sagar, bearing a meaningful name, arrived in that
garden.  Shruta Sagar Muni was endowed with a most beautiful form, his radiance
put the moon to shame, his brilliance scorned the sun, and his steadfastness
defeated Mount Meru.  His soul was always absorbed in meditation on Dharma, free
from attachment and aversion.  He was a devotee of the *kshaayas* (passions),
and his association was like a broken staff.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcamaM parva atha vaktre triyAmAyAH paraM saMkocamIyuSi  /
rAjIvasaMpuTe'pazyad dvirephaM sa nipIDitam  //  305  //  dRSTvA cAsya
samutpannA cinteyaM mavanAzinI  /  karmaNo mohanIyasya yAte zithilatAM guNe  //
306  //  makarandarasAsakto mUDhastRptimanAgataH  /  mRrti madhukaraH prApto
vigicchAmantavarjitAm  // 307 //  yathAyamatra saMsaktaH' prApto mRtyuM
madhuvrataH  /  prApsyAmo vayamapyevaM saMktAH strImukhapaGkaje  //  308  //
yadi tAvadayaM dhvasto ghrANena rasanena ca  /  kaitra vArtA tadAsmAsu
paJcendriyavazAtmasu  // 309 || tiryagjAtisametasya yuktaM vAsyedamIhitum  /
vayaM tu jJAnasaMpannAH saGgamatra kathaM gatAH  //  310  //  madhudigdhA
sidhArAyA lene kIdRzaM sukham  /  rasanaM pratyutAyAti zatadhA yatra khaNDanam
// 311 //  viSayeSu tathA saukhyaM kIdRzaM nAma jAyate  /  yatra pratyuta
duHkhAnAmuparyupari saMtatiH || 312 || kimpAkaphala tulyebhyo viSayebhyaH
parAGmukhAH  /  ye narAstAnnamasyAmi kAyena vacasA dhiyA ||313 || hA kaSTaM
vaJcitaH pApo dIrghakAlamahaM khalaiH  /
viSayairviSamAsaGgairviSavanmAraNAtmakaiH  //  314  //  athA samaye
prAptastadudyAnaM mahAmuniH  /  arthAnugatayA yuktaH zrutasAgarasaMjJayA  // 315
//  pUrNaH paramarUpeNa dvepayan kAntito vidhum  /  tiraskurvan raviM dIptyA
jayaM sthairyeNa mandaram  //  316  //  dharmadhyAnaprasaktAtmA
rAgadveSavivarjitaH  /  bhagnastridaNDasaMparkaH kaSAyANAM zaime rataH  //
317|| rAjA ratirUpa sAgarake madhya meM sthita hotA huA pramadavanameM isa
prakAra krIr3A karatA rahA jisa prakAra ki nandana vanameM indra krIr3A karatA
hai || 304|| athAnantara sUrya asta huA aura rAtrikA prArambha hote hI kamaloMke
sampuTa saMkocako prApta hone lage  /  rAjA mahArakSane eka kamala sampuTake
bhItara marA huA bhauMrA dekhA || 305 || usI samaya mohanIya karmakA udaya
zithila honese usake hRdayameM saMsAra - bhramaNako naSTa karanevAlI nimnAMkita
cintA utpanna huI ||306|| vaha vicAra karane lagA ki dekho makarandake rasameM
Asakta huA yaha mUr3ha bhauMrA tRpta nahIM huA isalie maraNako prAma huA  /
AcAryaM kahate haiM ki isa antarahita ananta icchAko dhikkAra ho ||307 || jisa
prakAra isa kamalameM Asakta huA yaha bhauMrA mRtyuko prApta huA hai usI prakAra
striyoM ke mukharUpI kamaloMmeM Asakta hue hama loga bhI mRtyuko prApta hoMge ||
308 || To fo yaha bhauMrA ghrANa aura rasanA indriyake kAraNa hI mRtyuko prApta
huA hai taba hama to pA~coM indriyoM ke vazIbhUta ho rahe haiM ataH hamArI bAta
hI kyA hai ? || 309  //  athavA yaha bhauMrA tiyaMca jAtikA hai - ajJAnI hai
ataH isakA aisA karanA ThIka bhI hai parantu hama to jJAnase sampanna haiM phira
bhI ina viSayoMmeM kyoM Asakta ho rahe haiM ? || 310 || zahada lapeTI talavArakI
usa dhArake cATane meM kyA sukha hotA hai ? jisapara par3ate hI jIbhake
saikar3oM Tukar3e ho jAte haiM ||311 || viSayoM meM kaisA sukha hotA hai so jAna
par3atA hai una viSayoMmeM jinameM ki sukhakI bAta dUra rahI kintu duHkhakI
santati hI uttarottara prApta hotI hai || 312  //  kipAka phalake samAna
viSayoMse jo manuSya vimukha ho gaye haiM maiM una saba mahApuruSoMko mana-
vacana-kAyase namaskAra karatA hU~ || 313|| hAya-hAya, bar3e kheda kI bAta hai
ki maiM bahuta samaya taka ina duSTa viSayoMse vaMcita hotA rahA- dhokhA khAtA
rahA  /  ina viSayoMkI Asakti atyanta viSama hai tathA viSake samAna mAranevAlI
hai ||314|| athAnantara usI samaya usa vanameM zrutasAgara isa sArthaka nAmako
dhAraNa karanevAle eka mahAmunirAja vahA~ Aye || 315 || zrutasAgara munirAja
atyanta sundara rUpase yukta the, ve kAnti candramAko lajjita karate the,
dIptise sUryaMkA tiraskAra karate the karate the ||316|| unakI AtmA sadA
dharmaMdhyAnameM lIna rahatI thI, aura dhairyaMse sumeruko parAjita ve rAga-
dveSase rahita the, unhoMne 1. saMzaktaH ma0  /  2. zaktAH ma0  /  3. dagdhA -
ma0  /  4 same ma0  /  12 89

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
90 Padmapurana 1 He was a subduer of the senses, affectionate towards all beings
of the six categories, free from the seven fears and eight intoxications. || 318
|| It seemed as if Dharma itself had come into union with his body. He was
accompanied by a large and beautiful assembly of monks. || 319 || He was seated
on the vast, pure, and animal-free earth, his body casting a shadow that covered
the entire direction. || 320 || When the king, the great protector, learned of
his presence from the mouths of the forest guards, he went to him with a
troubled mind. || 321 || Then, the king, the great protector, washed the feet of
the Muni with the water of his radiant face, which was filled with joy. || 322
|| He bowed to the assembly of monks, inquired about their well-being and
Dharma, and then, after staying for a moment, asked about the nature of Dharma
with devotion. || 323 || Then, the Muni, whose heart was like a calm moon,
spoke, his words shining like the rays of a thousand suns. || 324 || "O King!
The Jina has declared non-violence and its virtues to be Dharma. Truthfulness
and other qualities are its family." || 325 || "Beings, due to the influence of
their karmas, go to different states of existence, and, being deluded by life,
they develop attachment to them." || 326 || "These beings, fearing death,
abandon the gains of the three worlds and desire life. Nothing is dearer to them
than life." || 327 || "What is the use of saying much? This can be known only
through one's own experience. Just as we cherish our own life, so do all beings
cherish their own lives." || 328 || "Therefore, those foolish beings who destroy
the precious lives of others through cruel actions, what sin have they not
committed?" || 329 || "Having taken the lives of beings, they become burdened
with the weight of their karmas and fall into hell, like iron balls in water."
|| 330 ||  The three dandas, which are the forms of useless activity of mind,
speech, and body, were broken. They were always eager to pacify the passions. ||
317 || They were masters of their senses, affectionate towards beings of the six
categories, free from the seven fears and eight intoxications. || 318 || It
seemed as if Dharma itself had come into union with their body. They were
accompanied by a large and beautiful assembly of monks. || 319 || They were
seated on the vast, pure, and animal-free earth, their bodies casting a shadow
that covered the entire direction. || 320 || When the king, the great protector,
learned of their presence from the mouths of the forest guards, he went to them
with a troubled mind. || 321 || Then, the king, the great protector, washed the
feet of the Muni with the water of his radiant face, which was filled with joy.
|| 322 || He bowed to the assembly of monks, inquired about their well-being and
Dharma, and then, after staying for a moment, asked about the nature of Dharma
with devotion. || 323 || Then, the Muni, whose heart was like a calm moon,
spoke, his words shining like the rays of a thousand suns. || 324 || "O King!
The Jina has declared non-violence and its virtues to be Dharma. Truthfulness
and other qualities are its family." || 325 || "Beings, due to the influence of
their karmas, go to different states of existence, and, being deluded by life,
they develop attachment to them." || 326 || "These beings, fearing death,
abandon the gains of the three worlds and desire life. Nothing is dearer to them
than life." || 327 || "What is the use of saying much? This can be known only
through one's own experience. Just as we cherish our own life, so do all beings
cherish their own lives." || 328 || "Therefore, those foolish beings who destroy
the precious lives of others through cruel actions, what sin have they not
committed?" || 329 || "Having taken the lives of beings, they become burdened
with the weight of their karmas and fall into hell, like iron balls in water."
|| 330 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 90 padmapurANe 1 vazIkartA hRSIkANAM SaTkAyaprANivatsalaH  /  bhItibhiH
saptabhirmukto madASTakavivarjitaH || 318 || sAkSAdiva zarIreNa dharmaH
saMbandhamAgataH  /  sahito yatisaGghana mahatA cAruceSTinA  /  /  319  /  /  sa
tatra vipule zuddhe bhUtale jantuvarjite  /  upaviSTastanucchAyAstha
gitAzeSadiGmukhaH  //  320  //  tatrAsInaM viditvainaM mukhebhyo vanarakSiNAm  /
abhIyAya mahArakSo bibhradutkaNThitaM manaH  // 321 //
athAsyAtiprasannAsyakAntitoyena pAdayoH  /  kurvan prakSAlanaM rAjA papAta
zivadAyinoH  //  322  //  praNamya zeSasaGgha ca pRSTvA kSemaM ca dharmaMgam  /
avasthAya kSaNaM dharmaM paryapRcchat sa bhaktitaH  //  323||
athopazamacandrasya cittasthasyeva nirmalaiH  /  dantAMzupaTalaiH kurvan
jyotsnAM munirabhASata  //  324  //  ahiMsA nRpa sadbhAvo dharmasyokto
jinezvaraiH  /  parivAro'stu zeSo'sya satyabhASAdiriSyate  //  325 //  yAM yAM
jIvAH prapadyante gatiM karmAnubhAvataH  /  tatra tatra ratiM yAnti jIvanaM
pratimohitAH  // 326 //  trailokyaisya parityajya lAbhaM maraNabhIravaH  /
icchanti jIvanaM jIvA nAnyadasti tataH priyam  //  327 //  kimatra bahunoktena
svasaMvedyamidaM nainu  /  yathA svajIvitaM kAntaM sarveSAM prANinAM tathA  //
328 || tasmAdevaMvidhaM mUDhA jIvitaM ye zarIriNAm  /  haranti raudrakarmANaH
pApaM tairna ca kiM kRtam  // 329|| jantUnAM jIvitaM nItvA karmabhAragurUkRtAH
/  patanti narake jIvA lohapiNDavadambhasi ||330|| mana-vacana-kAyako nirarthaka
pravRttirUpI tIna daNDoMko bhagna kara diyA thA, kaSAyoMke zAnta karane meM ve
sadA tatpara rahate the ||317 || ve indriyoMko vaza karanevAle the, chaha kAyake
jIvoMse sneha rakhate the, sAta bhayoM aura ATha madoMse rahita the || 318 ||
unheM dekhakara aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno sAkSAt dharmaM hI zarIra ke sAtha
sambandhako prApta huA hai  /  ve munirAja uttama ceSTAke dhAraka bahuta bar3e
saMgha sahita || 319 || jinhoMne apane zarIrakI kAntise samasta dizAoMke
agrabhAgako AcchAdita kara diyA thA aise ve munirAja usa udyAnake vistRta,
zuddha evaM nirjantuka pRthivItalapara virAjamAna ho gaye || 320|| jaba rAjA
mahArakSako vanapAloMke mukhase vahA~ virAjamAna ina munirAjakA patA calA to
vaha utkRSTa hRdayako dhAraNa karatA huA unake sammukha gayA || 321||
athAnantara - atyanta prasanna mukhako kAntirUpI jalake dvArA prakSAlana karatA
huA rAjA mahArakSa munirAja ke kalyANadAyI caraNoMmeM jA par3A || 322|| usane
zeSa saMghako bhI namaskAra kiyA, sabase dharmaM sambandhI kuzala-kSema pUchI
aura phira kSaNabhara Thaharakara bhaktibhAvase dharmakA svarUpa pUchA || 323||
tadanantara munirAjake hRdayameM jo upazama bhAvarUpI candramA vidyamAna thA
usakI kiraNoMke samAna nirmala dA~toMkI kiraNoMke samUhase cA~danIko prakaTa hue
munirAja kahane lage || 324 || unhoMne kahA ki he rAjan ! jinendra bhagavAnne
eka ahiMsAke sadbhAvako hI dharmaM kahA hai, bAkI satyabhASaNa Adi sabhI isake
parivAra haiM || 325 || saMsArI prANI karmoMke udayase jisa-jisa gatimeM jAte
haiM jIvanake prati mohita hote hue ve usI usImeM prema karane lagate haiM ||
326 || eka ora tIna lokakI prApti ho rahI ho aura dUsarI ora maraNako sambhAvanA
ho to maraNase DaranevAle ye prANI tIna lokakA lobha chor3akara jIvita rahanekI
icchA karate haiM isase jAna par3atA hai ki prANiyoMko jIvanase bar3hakara aura
koI vastu priya nahIM hai || 327|| isa viSayameM bahuta kahane se kyA lAbha hai
? yaha bAta to apane anubhavase hI jAnI jA sakatI hai ki jisa prakAra hameM
apanA jIvana pyArA hai usI prakAra samasta prANiyoM ko bhI apanA jIvana pyArA
hotA hai || 328 || isalie jo krUrakarma karanevAle mUrkha prANI, jIvoMke aise
priya jIvanako naSTa karate haiM unhoMne kauna-sA pApa nahIM kiyA ? || 329 ||
jIvoM ke jIvanako naSTa kara prANI karmoMke bhArase itane vajanadAra ho jAte
haiM ki ve pAnImeM lohapiNDa 1. - mAgatAH ma0  /  2. athAsyApti ma0  /  3.
trailokyaM ma0  /  4. vatu ma0  /

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Western Chapter  Those whose words are like honey but whose hearts are
filled with poison, who are controlled by their senses and whose minds are
immersed in the three periods of the day, are like cows that are milked three
times a day. (331)  Those who are devoid of proper conduct and act according to
their desires, these wicked beings wander in the cycle of animal births. (332)
It is rare for a being to obtain human birth, even rarer to be born beautiful,
even rarer to be wealthy, even rarer to be born into a noble family, even rarer
to acquire knowledge, even rarer to understand the nature of things, and even
rarer to attain the path of Dharma. (333-334)  Some, after practicing Dharma,
attain happiness in heaven, enjoying the company of gods and goddesses. (335)
But after falling from heaven, they are born in a womb, covered in excrement and
urine, filled with wriggling worms, foul-smelling and unbearable. (336)  In the
womb, these beings are covered in a membrane, surrounded by bile, phlegm, etc.,
and they lick the fluids of the mother's food that leak out through the
umbilical cord. (337)  Their entire body is compressed, and they are constantly
tormented by the weight of suffering. After living there, they are born again as
humans. (338)  From birth, these cruel beings are devoid of discipline, conduct,
and right vision. They are filled with sin and indulge in worldly pleasures.
(339)  Those who are enslaved by lust and have abandoned right conduct,
experience great suffering and wander in the ocean of existence. (340)  Words
that cause pain to others should be avoided with all effort, for such words lead
to violence, and violence is the cause of rebirth. (341)  Similarly, stealing,
adultery, and the desire for great wealth should all be abandoned, for they are
the causes of suffering. (342)  Hearing the teachings of Dharma from the mouth
of the sage, the king of the Vidyadharas, Maharaks, attained dispassion. He then
bowed to the sage and asked:  "How do some people directly fall into hell?"
(330)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pazca parva madhu sravanti ye vAcA hRdaye viSadAruNAH  /  vaze sthitA hRSIkANI
triHsaMdhyA dugdhamAnasAH  // 331 //  sAdhvAcAravinirmuktA yathAkAmavidhAyinaH
/  te bhramanti durAtmAnastiryaggarbhaparamparAm  // 332 //  durlabhaM sati
jantutve manuSyatvaM zarIriNAm  /  tasmAdapi surUpatvaM tato dhanasamRddhatA  //
333 //  tato'pyAryatvasaMbhUtistato vidyAsamAgamaH  /  tato'pyarthajJatA
tasmAddurlabho dharmaMsaMgamaH  //  334 //  kRtvA dharmaM tataH kecit sukhaM
prApya surAlaye  /  devyAdiparivAreNa kRtaM mAnasagocaram  // 335 //  cyutvA
garbhagRhe bhUyo viNmUtrakRtalepane  /  calatkRmikulAkIrNe
durgandhe'tyantadussahe  // 336 //  carmajAlakasaMchannAH pittazleSmAdimadhyagAH
/  jananyAhAraniSyandaM lihanto nADikAcyutam  //  337 //  piNDIkRtasamastAGgA
duHkhamArasamerditAH  /  uSitvA nirgatA labdhvA manuSyatvamaninditam  //  338
//  janmanaH prabhRti krUrA niyamAcAravarjitAH  /  sadRSTirahitAH pApA viSayAn
samupAsate  // 339 //  ye kAmavazatAM yAtAH samyaktvaparivarjitAH  /
prApnuvanto mahAduHkhaM te bhramanti mavArNave  //  340  //  parapIDAkaraM
vAkyaM varjanIyaM prayatnataH  /  hiMsAyAH kAraNaM taddhi sA ca saMsArakAraNam
|| 341  //  tathA steyaM striyAH saGgaM mahAdraviNavAnchanam  /
sarvametatparityAjyaM pIDAkAraNatAM gatam  //  342 //  zrutvA dharma samAviSTo
vairAgyaM khecarAdhipaH  /  papraccha praNatiM kRtvA vyatItaM bhavamAtmanaH  //
343  //  ke samAna sIdhe naraka meM hI par3ate haiM ||330 || jo vacanase to mAno
madhu jharate haiM para hRdayameM viSake samAna dAruNa haiM  /  jo indriyoMke
vazameM sthita haiM aura bAharase jinakA mana traikAlika sandhyAoMmeM nimagna
rahatA hai ||331|| jo yogya AcArase rahita haiM aura icchAnusAra manacAhI
pravRtti karate haiM aise duSTa jIva tiryaMcayoni meM paribhramaNa karate haiM
||332|| sarvaprathama to jIvoMko manuSyapada prApta honA durlabha hai, usase
adhika durlabha sundara rUpakA pAnA hai, usase adhika durlabha dhanasamRddhikA
pAnA hai, usase adhika durlabha AryakulameM utpanna honA hai, usase adhika
durlabha vidyAkA samAgama honA hai, usase adhika durlabha heyopAdeya padArthako
jAnanA hai aura usase adhika durlabha dharmakA samAgama honA hai ||333-334  //
91 kitane hI loga dharma karake usake prabhAvase svarga meM deviyoM Adike
parivArase mAnasika sukha prApta karate haiM ||335  //  | vahA~se cayakara,
viSThA tathA mUtrase lipta bilabilAte kIr3AoMse yukta, durgandhita evaM atyanta
duHsaha garbhagRhako prApta hote haiM ||336 || garbha meM yaha prANI camake
jAlase AcchAdita rahate haiM, pitta, zleSmA Adike bIca meM sthita rahate haiM
aura nAladvArase cyuta mAtA dvArA upabhukta AhAra dravakA AsvAdana karate rahate
haiM ||337|| vahA~ unake samasta aMgopAMga saMkucita rahate haiM, aura duHkhake
bhArase ve sadA pIr3ita rahate haiM  /  vahA~ rahaneke bAda nikalakara uttama
manuSya paryAya prApta karate haiM ||338|| so kitane hI aise pApI manuSya jo ki
janmase hI krUra hote haiM, niyama, AcAra-vicArase vimukha rahate haiM aura
samyagdarzanase zUnya hote haiM, viSayoMkA sevana karate haiM ||339|| jo manuSya
kAmake vazIbhUta hokara samyaktva se bhraSTa ho jAte haiM ve mahAdu:kha prApta
karate hue saMsArarUpI samudra meM paribhramaNa karate haiM || 340 || dUsare
prANiyoMko pIr3A utpanna karanevAlA vacana prayatnapUrvaka chor3a denA cAhie
kyoMki aisA vacana hiMsAkA kAraNa hai aura hiMsA saMsArakA kAraNa hai ||341||
isI prakAra corI, parastrIkA samAgama tathA mahAparigrahakI AkAMkSA, yaha saba
bhI chor3aneke yogya hai kyoMki yaha sabhI pIr3Ake kAraNa haiM || 342||
'vidyAdharoMkA rAjA mahArakSa, munirAjake mukhase dharmakA upadeza sunakara
vairAgyako prApta ho gayA  /  tadanantara usane namaskAra kara munirAjase 1.
trInvArAn, trisandhyA-ma  /  2. samAditAH ma0  /

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Shruta Sagar Muni, adorned with the four knowledges, sat humbly before the
Maharaksha Vidyadhara and said briefly:  "O King! In the city of Podanpur in the
Bharat Kshetra, there lived a man named Hit. His wife's name was Madhavi, and
you were their son, named Priti.  "In the same city of Podanpur, there reigned a
king named Hemarath, born to King Udayachala and Queen Arhacchee.  "One day, he
performed a grand puja in the Jain temple with great devotion, astonishing
everyone.  "Hearing the loud chants of 'Jai' during the puja, you too, filled
with joy, exclaimed 'Jai'.  "Overwhelmed with joy, you couldn't stay inside the
house and went out to dance in the courtyard, like a cloud dances at the sound
of thunder.  "As a result of the merit you accumulated from this act, you died
and became a Yaksha, bringing joy to the eyes of the Yakshas.  "Later, in the
city of Kanchanpur in the western Videha Kshetra, enemies began to harass the
monks.  "You separated those enemies and protected the monks engaged in their
religious practices. By doing so, you accumulated a vast amount of merit.  "From
there, you transmigrated to the Vidyadhara mountain, Taddidangad, and were born
as the son of the Vidyadhara, Udit, and Vidyadhari, Shri Prabha.  "Once, the
king of the Vidyadharas, named Amaravikram, came to pay homage to the monks.
Seeing him, you wished for such grandeur for yourself.  "After performing severe
austerities, you became a god in the Aishana heaven. From there, you
transmigrated and became the son of Meghavahana, the Maharaksha.  "Just as the
wheel of the sun's chariot constantly rotates, you too, under the influence of
your senses, the tongue and the female, have wandered through the world.  "If
all the bodies you have acquired and abandoned in other births were to be
gathered together, they would never fit in the three worlds.  "You were not
satisfied with the pleasures of the gods, which are enjoyed for millions of
kalpas, nor with the pleasures of the Vidyadharas, who can create their own
desires.  "Tell me about your previous birth."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe caturjJAnopagUDhAtmA vinayenopaseduSe  /  iti tasmai samAsena
jagAda zrutasAgaraH  // 344 //  bharate podanasthAne hito nAmadharo'bhavat  /
mAdhavIti ca bhAryAsya protyAkhyastvaM tayoH sutaH  // 345 /  /  atha tatraiva
nagare nRpo'bhadudayAcalAt  /  arhacchriyAM samutpanno nAmnA hemaratho mahAn  //
346 //  prAsAde so'nyadA jaine zraddhayA parayAnvitaH  /  cakAra mahatI pUjAM
lokavismayakAriNIm 347 //  tasmAdusthitamAkarNya jayazabdaM janaiH kRtam  /
jayetyAnandapUrNena tvayApi parighoSitam  /  / 348 //  amAte ca tatastasmin
gRhAbhyantarato mudA  /  zikhineva dhanadhvAnAnnartanaM kRtamaGgaNe  // 349 //
tasmAdupAttakuzalo gataH kAlena paJcatAm  /  ajAyata mahAn yakSo
yakSanetrasamutsavaH  // 350 //  avarasmin videhe'tha pure kAJcananAmani  /
sAdhUnAM zatrubhiH kartumupasargaH pravartitaH  // 351 //  nirdhATya tAn tvayA
zatrUn munInAM dharmasAdhanam  /  zarIraM rakSitaM tasmAt puNyarAzirupArjitaH
// 352 //  vijayAH tatazcyutvA taDidaGgadakhecarAt  /  zrIprabhAyAM samudbhUta
udito nAma vizrutaH  // 353 //  vandanAya samAyAtaM nAmnA cAmaravikramam  /
dRSTavAnasi vidyezaM nidAnamakarottataH  // 354 //  tato mahattapastaptvA
kalpamaizAnamAzritaH  /  eSa pracyutya bhUto'si sAMprataM dhAnavAhaniH  // 355 /
/  bhAskarasyandanasyeva cakreNa parivartanam  /  kRtaM tvayA tu saMsAre
strIjihvAvazavartinA  // 356 //  yAvantaH samatikrAntAstava dehA bhavAntare  /
piNDyante yadi te loke saMmaveyuna jAtucit  // 357 /  /  kalpAnAM koTibhistRpti
surabhogairna yo gataH  /  khecarANAM ca mogena svecchAkalpitavRttinA  // 358 //
apanA pUrva bhava pUchA  // 343 /  /  cAra jJAnake dhArI zrutasAgaramuni
vinayase samIpameM baiThe hue mahArakSa vidyAdharase saMkSepapUrvaka kahane lage
// 344 //  he rAjan ! bharata kSetrake podanapura nagarameM eka hita nAmakA
manuSya rahatA thaa| mAdhavI usakI strIkA nAma thA aura tU una donoMke prIti
nAmakA putra thA  /  / 345 /  /  usI podanapura nagarameM udayAcala rAjA aura
arhacchI nAmako rAnIse utpanna huA hemaratha nAmakA rAjA rAjya karatA thA  //
346 /  /  eka dina usane jinamandirameM, bar3I zraddhAke sAtha, logoMko
AzcaryameM DAlanevAlI bar3I pUjA kI  // 347|| usa pUjAke samaya logoMne bar3e
jorase jaya-jaya zabda kiyA, use sunakara tUne bhI Anandavibhora ho jaya-jaya
zabda uccAraNa kiyA  // 348|| tU isa Anandake kAraNa gharake bhItara Thahara
nahIM sakA isalie bAhara nikalakara A~ganameM isa taraha natya karane lagA jisa
prakAra ki mayara meghakA zabda sunakara nRtya karane lagatA hai  /  / 349 /  /
isa kAryase tUne jo puNya bandha kiyA thA usake phalasvarUpa tU marakara
yakSoMke netroMko Ananda denevAlA yakSa huA  // 350 /  /  tadanantara kisI dina
pazcima videhakSetrake kAMcanapura nagarameM zatruoMne muniyoMke Upara upasarga
karanA zurU kiyA  // 351 //  so tane una zatruoMko alaga kara dharmasAdhanameM
sahAyabhata maniyoMke zarIrakI rakSA kii| isa kAryase tane bahata bhArI paNyakA
saMcaya kiyA  // 352 //  tadanantara vahA~se cyata hokara tu vijayAdha
parvatapara taDidaMgada vidyAdhara aura zrIprabhA vidyAdharIke udita nAmakA
putra utpanna huA  /  / 353 /  /  eka bAra amaravikrama nAmaka vidyAdharoMkA
rAjA muniyoMkI vandanAke lie AyA thA so use dekhakara tUne nidAna kiyA ki mere
bhI aisA vaibhava ho  // 354 //  tadanantara mahAtapazcaraNa kara tU dUsare
aizAna svargameM deva huA aura vahAMse cyuta hokara meghavAhanakA putra
mahArakSa huA hai  // 355 /  /  jisa prakAra sUryake rathakA cakra nirantara
bhramaNa karatA rahatA hai isI prakAra tUne bhI strI tathA jihvA indriyake
vazIbhUta hokara saMsArameM paribhramaNa kiyA hai  /  / 356 /  /  tUne dUsare
bhavoMmeM jitane zarIra prApta kara chor3e haiM yadi ve ekatrita kiye jAveM to
tInoM lokoMmeM kabhI na samAveM  // 357 //  jo karor3oM kalpa taka prApta
honevAle devoMke bhogoMse tathA vidyAdharoMke manacAhe bhoga-vilAsase santuSTa
nahIM ho sakA 1. nAma naro'bhavat m.| 2. -mutthitaH m.| 3. meghavAhanaputraH  /

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Fifth Chapter  How will you be satisfied with pleasures that are like a
dream or a magic show, lasting only eight days? Therefore, abandon the desire
for pleasures and embrace peace. ||359||  The Muni did not feel sorrow at the
approaching end of his life, but he did feel some regret, knowing that he would
have to take many more births in this cycle of existence. ||360||  He then
established his eldest son, Amarraksha, on the throne and made his younger son,
Bhanuraksha, the crown prince. ||361||  Renouncing all possessions, he became
devoted to the ultimate truth, becoming as steadfast as a pillar, free from
greed. ||362||  He abandoned all food and drink, maintaining his body only
through the power of his mind, remaining equanimous towards both friend and foe,
his mind unwavering. ||363||  He took the vow of silence and sat in the middle
of the Jina temple, performing a grand puja, a magnificent abhisheka. ||364||
His consciousness purified by the contemplation of the Arhat's feet, he became a
supreme deva, entering samadhi. ||365||  Later, Amarraksha married Rati, the
daughter of King Shridhara and Queen Vidya, in the city of Kinnarageeta. ||366||
Bhanuraksha married Gandharva, the daughter of King Surasannibha and Queen
Gandhari, in the city of Gandharvageeta. ||367||  Amarraksha had ten beautiful
sons and six daughters, adorned with virtues and beauty, like celestial nymphs.
||368||  Similarly, Bhanuraksha had ten sons and six daughters, whose fame
spread throughout the world. ||369||  O Shrenika, these victorious princes
established great and beautiful cities, each named after themselves. ||370||
Listen to the names of these cities: Sandhyakara, Suvela, Manohlada, Manohara,
Hansadwipa, Hari, Yodha, Samudra, Kanchana, and Ardhaswargotakrishta. These ten
cities, resembling heaven, were established by the sons of Amarraksha, who
possessed great intelligence and valor. ||371-372||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcamaM parva aSTabhirdivasaH sa tvaM kathaM prApsyasi tarpaNam  /
svapnajAlopamairmogairadhunA bhajyatAM zamaH  // 359 //  tatastasya
viSAdo'bhUmAyuHkSayasamutthitaH  /  kiMtu saMsAracakrasthajanmAntaravivartanAt
// 360 //  sthApayitvA tato rAjye tanayaM devarakSasam  /  yuvarAjapratiSThAyAM
tathA bhAskararakSasam  // 361 //  tyaktvA parigrahaM sarva paramArthaparAyaNaH
/  stammatulyo mahArakSA lobhenAbhavadujhitaH  // 362 /  /  pAnAhArAdikaM
tyaktvA sarva dehasya pAlanam  /  samaH zatrau ca minne ca manaH kRtvA
sunizcalam  // 36 //  maunavrataM samAsthAya jinaprAsAdamadhyagaH  /  kRtvA
samahatI pUjAmahaMtAmabhiSekiNIm  // 364 //
arhatpadaparidhyAnapavitrIkRtacetanaH  /  kRtvA samAdhinA kAlaM sa babhUva
surottamaH  // 365|| atha kinneragItAkhye pure zrIdharanAmataH  /  vidyAjAtAM
ratiM jAyAM devarakSAH prapannavAn  // 366 //  gandharvagItanagare
surasaMnimanAmataH  /  gAndhArIgarmasaMbhUtAM gandharvA mAnurUDhavAn  // 367 /
/  sutA daza samutpannA manojJA devarakSasaH  /  devAGganAsarUpAzca SaT kanyA
guNabhUSaNAH  // 368 //  tAvanta eva cotpannAH sutAH kanyAzca tatsamAH  /
AdityarakSaso rAjJaH kIrtivyAptadigantarAH  // 369 /  /  svanAmasahanAmAni
mahAnti nagarANi naiH  /  nivezitAni ramyANi zreNikaitAni jitvaraiH  // 370 //
sandhyAkAraH suvelazca manohlAdo manoharaH  /  haMsadvIpo hariyodhaH samudraH
kAJcanastathA  // 371 //  ardhasvargotkaTazcApi nivizAH svargasaMnibhAH  /
gIrvANarakSasaH putrarmahAbuddhiparAkramaiH  // 372 //  vaha tU kevala ATha dina
taka prApta honevAle svapna athavA indrajAla sadRza bhogoMse kaise tRpta hogA?
isalie aba bhogoMkI abhilASA choDa aura zAnti bhAva dhAraNa kara  // 358-359 /
/  tadanantara munirAjake mukhase apanI AyukA kSaya nikaTastha jAnakara use
viSAda nahIM huA kintu 'isa saMsAracakrameM aba bhI mujhe aneka bhava dhAraNa
karanA hai' yaha jAnakara kucha kheda avazya huA ||360 /  /  tadanantara usane
amararakSa nAmaka jyeSTha putrako rAjyapadapara sthApita kara bhAnurakSa nAmaka
laghu putrako yuvarAja banA diyA  // 361 /  /  aura svayaM samasta parigrahakA
tyAga kara paramArthameM tatpara ho stambhake samAna nizcala hotA huA lobhase
rahita ho gayA  // 362 /  /  zarIrakA poSaNa karanevAle AhArapAnI Adi samasta
padArthoMkA tyAga kara vaha zatru tathA mitrameM sama-madhyastha bana gayA aura
manako nizcala kara mauna vrata le jina-mandirake madhya meM baiTha gyaa| ina
saba kAryoMke pahale usane arhanta bhagavAnkI abhiSekapUrvaka vizAla pUjA kI  //
363-364 //  arhanta bhagavAnke caraNoMke dhyAnase jisakI cetanA pavitra ho gayI
thI aisA vaha vidyAdhara samAdhimaraNa kara uttama deva huA  // 365 /  /
athAnantara amararakSane, kinnaragIta nAmaka nagarameM zrIdhara rAjA aura vidyA
rAnIse samutpanna rati nAmaka strIko prApta kiyA arthAt usake sAtha vivAha kiyA
// 366 /  /  aura bhAnurakSane gandharvagIta nagarameM rAjA surasannibha aura
gAndhArI rAnIke garbhase utpanna, gandharvA nAmakI kanyAke sAtha vivAha kiyA  //
367|| amararakSake atyanta sundara dasa putra aura devAMganAoMke samAna sundara
rUpavAlI, guNarUpa AbhUSaNoMse sahita chaha putriyA~ utpanna huIM  // 368 /  /
isa prakAra bhAnurakSake bhI apanI kIrtike dvArA didigantako vyApta karanevAle
dasa putra aura chaha putriyAM utpanna huI  // 369 /  /  he zreNika ! una vijayI
rAjaputroMne apane nAmake samAna nAmavAle bar3e-bar3e sundara nagara basAye  //
370 //  una nagaroMke nAma suno-1 sandhyAkAra, 2 suvela, 3 manohlAda, 4
manohara, 5 haMsadvIpa, 6 hari, 7 yodha, 8 samudra, 9 kAMcana aura 10
ardhasvargotkRSTa  /  svargakI samAnatA rakhanevAle ye dasa nagara, mahAbuddhi
aura parAkramako dhAraNa karanevAle amararakSake putroMne basAye the  // 371-372
/  /  1. tapyaMNam m.| 2. kinnaradAntAkhye kha., kinnaranAdAkhye ma.  /  3.
jAtAmarijAyAM ma.  /  4. nagare'marasannibha k.| 5. surUpAzca k.| 6. divazcApi
ja., dazazcApi k.|

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, ten cities were established by the sons of Bhanurakshaka:
1. Avarta, 2. Vighata, 3. Ambhoda, 4. Utkat, 5. Sphuta, 6. Durgraha, 7. Tat, 8.
Toya, 9. Avali, and 10. Ratnadvipa. ||373|| These cities were adorned with
various jewels and shone with the brilliance of golden walls, serving as the
abodes of the Rakshasas who desired amusement. ||374|| In those very islands,
the celestial beings residing in other islands constructed numerous cities with
great enthusiasm. ||375|| Subsequently, both Amararakska and Bhanurakshaka,
after bestowing their kingdom upon their sons, embraced the path of initiation
and, becoming possessors of the wealth of great austerities, attained the
eternal, liberated state. ||376|| Thus, the lineage of King Meghavahana,
characterized by great men who first ruled their kingdoms and then embraced
initiation, continued in an orderly manner. ||377|| In that lineage, a powerful
son named Rakshasa was born to a Rakshasa named Manovega, and from his name, the
lineage came to be known as the Rakshasa lineage. ||378|| King Rakshasa had a
queen named Suprabha, and from her, he had two sons: Adityagati and Brihatkirti.
Both these sons possessed a radiance like that of the sun and the moon. ||379||
King Rakshasa, like a bull bearing the burden of the chariot of the kingdom,
entrusted his two sons with the responsibility of ruling and then, embracing
austerity, attained heaven. ||380|| The elder brother was Adityagati, the king,
and the younger brother was Brihatkirti, the crown prince. Adityagati's wife was
named Sadanpadma, and Brihatkirti's wife was known as Pushpanakha. ||381||
Adityagati had a son named Bhimaprbha, who had a thousand wives, all possessing
a radiance like that of celestial nymphs. ||382|| From these wives, he had one
hundred and eight powerful sons, who, like pillars, supported their kingdom from
all sides. ||383|| Subsequently, King Bhimaprbha, after bestowing his kingdom
upon his eldest son, embraced initiation and, through continuous austerity,
attained the supreme state. ||384|| Thus, numerous celestial beings of the
lineage of Meghavahana, upon whom the Rakshasa Indra, Bhima-Subhima, had
bestowed his grace, resided happily in the Rakshasadvipa. ||385|| These
Rakshasa-born celestial beings, protected by the merit of their deeds, guarded
the Rakshasadvipa, which became known as such. ||386||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe AvartavighaTAmbhodA utkaTasphuTadurgrahAH  /
taTatoyAvalIratnadvIpAzcAbhAnti rAkSasaiH  // 373 //  nAnAratnakRtodyotA
hemamittiprabhAsurAH  /  rAkSasAnAM babhUvuste nivAsAH krIDanArthinAm  // 37 //
tatraiva khecarairemiTTIpAntarasamAzritaiH  /  saMnivezA mahotsAhairnagarANAM
prakalpitAH  // 375 //  tatastau putrayo rAjyaM datvA dIkSAM samAzritau  /
mahAtapodhanau bhUtvA padaM yAtau sanAtanam  // 376 /  /  evaM mahati saMtAne
pravRtte ghAnavAhane  /  mahApuruSanibyUDharAjyaprAvrajyavastuni  // 377 //
rakSasastanayo jAto menovegAGkadhAriNaH  /  rAkSaso nAma yasyAyaM nAmnAM vaMzaH
prakIrtyate  // 378 /  /  tasyAdityagati to bRhatkIrtizca nandanaH  /  yoSAyAM
suprabhAkhyAyAM ravicandrasamaprabhau  // 379 //  vRSabhau tau saMmAsajya
rAjyasyandanaje mare  /  zramaNatvaM samArAdhya devalokaM samAzritaH  // 380 //
jAtA sadanapadmAkhyA bhAyaryAdityagatevarA  /  bRhatkotistathA puSpanakhota
parikIrtitA  // 38 //  athAdityagateH putro nAmnA bhImaprabho'bhavat  /
sahasraM yasya patnInAmabhadevAGganArucAm  // 382 /  /  AsIdaSTottaraM tasya
putrANAM zatamUrjitam  /  stambhairiva nijaM rAjyaM dhArita yaiH samantataH  //
383 //  AtmajAya tato rAjyaM vitIrya jyAyase prbhuH| bhImaprabhaH pravavrAja
prAptazra paramaM padam  // 38 //  devena rAkSasendreNa rAkSasadvIpamaNDale  /
kRtAnukampanA USuH sukhenAmbaragAminaH  // 385 /  /  rakSanti rakSasAMdvIpaM
puNyaMna parirakSitAH  /  rAkSasA nAmato dvIpaM prasiddhaM tadupAgatam  // 386 /
isI prakAra 1 Avarta, 2 vighaTa, 3 ambhoda, 4 utkaTa, 5 sphuTa, 6 durgraha, 7
taTa, 8 toya, 9 AvalI aura ratnadvIpa ye dasa nagara bhAnurakSake putroMne
basAye the  // 373 /  /  jinameM nAnA ratnoMkA udyota phaila rahA thA tathA jo
suvarNamayI dIvAloMke prakAzase jagamagA rahe the aise ve sabhI nagara krIr3Ake
abhilASI rAkSasoMke nivAsa hue the  /  / 374 //  vahIMpara dUsare dvIpoMmeM
rahanevAle vidyAdharoMne bar3e utsAhase aneka nagaroMkI racanA kI thI  // 375 //
athAnantara-amararakSa aura bhAnurakSa donoM bhAI, putroMko rAjya dekara dIkSAko
prApta hue aura mahAtamarUpI dhanake dhAraka ho sanAtana siddha padako prApta
hue  // 376 /  /  isa prakAra jisameM bar3ebar3e puruSoM dvArA pahale to rAjya
pAlana kiyA gayA aura tadanantara dIkSA dhAraNa kI gayo aisI rAjA meghavAhanakI
bahuta bar3I santAnakI paramparA kramapUrvaka calatI rahI  // 377|| usI santAna-
paramparAmeM eka manovega nAmaka rAkSasake, rAkSasa nAmakA aisA prabhAvazAlI
putra huA ki usake nAmase yaha vaMza hI rAkSasa vaMza kahalAne lagA  /  / 378 //
rAjA rAkSasake suprabhA nAmakI rAnI thI, usase usake Adityagati aura bRhatkIrti
nAmake do putra hue| ye donoM ho putra sUrya aura candramAke samAna kAntise
yakta the||379|| rAjA rAkSasa, rAjyarUpI rathakA bhAra uThAnemeM vaSabhake
samAna una donoM patroM saMlagna kara tapa dhara svargako prApta hue  // 380 //
una donoM bhAiyoMmeM bar3A bhAI Adityagati rAjA thA aura choTA bhAI bRhatkIrti
yuvarAja thaa| AdityagatikI strIkA nAma sadanapadmA thA aura bRhatkIrtiko strI
puSpanakhA nAmase prasiddha thI  // 381 //  Adityagatike bhImaprabha nAmakA
putra huA jisakI devAMganAoMke samAna kAntivAlI eka hajAra striyA~ thIM  // 382
/  /  una striyoMse usake eka sau ATha balavAn putra hue the| ye putra
stambhoMke samAna cAroM orase apane rAjyako dhAraNa kiye the  // 383 /  /
tadanantara rAjA bhImaprabhane apane bar3e putrake lie rAjya dekara dIkSA
dhAraNa kara lI aura kramase tapazcaraNa kara paramapada prApta kara liyA  /  /
384 //  isa prakAra rAkSasa devoMke indra bhIma-subhImane jinapara anukampA kI
thI aise meghavAhanakI vaMza-paramparAke aneka vidyAdhara rAkSasadvIpameM
sukhase nivAsa karate rahe  // 385 /  /  puNya jinakI rakSA kara rahA thA aise
rAkSasavaMzI vidyAdhara cUMki usa rAkSasajAtIya devoMke 1. rAkSasam ma.  /  2.
yavovegAGgadhAritaH k.| manovegAGgadhAriNaH m.| 3. to m.| 4. samAsAdya kha.  /
5. rAkSaso kh.|

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Lineage of the Rakshasas  This is the origin of the Rakshasa lineage. I
will now describe the prominent men of this lineage.   Bhima Prabha's first son
was known as Pujarha. He renounced the world and gave the kingdom to his son,
Jitbhaaskar.   Jitbhaaskar, in turn, gave the kingdom to his son, SamparikÄ«rti,
and became a monk. SamparikÄ«rti then gave the kingdom to SugrÄ«va and received
initiation.   SugrÄ«va, placing HarigrÄ«va on his throne, performed intense
austerities and became a great god.   HarigrÄ«va, giving the kingdom to ÅrÄ«grÄ«va,
embraced the life of a monk and went into the forest.   ÅrÄ«grÄ«va, giving the
kingdom to Sumukha, followed the path chosen by his father. The powerful Sumukha
then gave the kingdom to Savyakta and received initiation.   Savyakta gave the
Rakshasa wealth to Amritvega, who then gave it to Bhanugati, and Bhanugati gave
it to Chintaagati, all of them embracing the path of a monk.   Thus, Indra,
Indra Prabha, Megha, Mrigari Daman, Pavi, Indrajit, Bhanuvarma, Bhanu, Bhanu
Prabha, Surari, Trijata, Bhima, Mohan, Uddharaka, Ravi, Chakara, Vajramadhya,
Pramoda, Singha Vikrama, Chamund, Marana, Mishma, Dwipavaha, Ari Mardana,
Nirvanabhakti, Ugrashri, Arhad Bhakti, Anuttar, Gatabhram, Anil, Chanda,
Lankashoka, Mayuravan, Mahabahu, Manorama, Bhaskarabha, Brihadgati, Brihatkanta,
Arisantraas, Chandraavarta, Maharava, Meghadhvana, Grihakshobha, and Nakshatra
Daman, and countless other Vidyaadharas, were born in this lineage. All these
Vidyaadharas were endowed with magic and prowess, and possessed knowledge,
strength, and great brilliance.   All of them were skilled in the application of
knowledge, their chests adorned with Lakshmi, beautiful, and mostly born in
Lanka after falling from heaven.   These Rakshasa kings, fearing the world, gave
the wealth inherited from their lineage to their sons and embraced the life of a
monk.   Some, due to the residue of their karma, went to the peak of the three
worlds. Others, due to the ripening of their good deeds, ascended to heaven.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 patra parva eSa rAkSasavaMzasya saMbhavaH parikIrtitaH  /  vaMzapradhAnapuruSAn
kIrtayiSyAmyataH param  // 387n putro mImapramasyAyaH pUjA) nAma vizrutaH  /
pravavrAja zriyaM nyasya tanaye jitamAskare  // 38 //  so'pi saMparikIAkhye
sthApayitvA zriyaM sute  /  prAvajat so'pi sugrIve nidhAya prApa dIkSaNam  //
389 //  sagrIvo'pi harigrIvaM saMnivezya nije pade  /  ugraM tapaH samArAdhya
babhUva surasattamaH  // 39 //  harigrIvo'pi nikSipya zrIgrIve rAjyasaMpadam  /
gRhItazramaNAcAro vanAntaramazizriyat  // 39 //  Aropya sumukhe rAjyaM zrIgrIvo
janakAzritam  /  mArgamAzritavAn vIraH suvyakte sumukhastathA  // 392 //
suvyakto'mRtavegAkhye nyastavAn rAkSasIM zriyam  /  sa cApi mAnugatyAhe sa ca
cintAgatau sute  // 393 //  indra indrapramo megho mRgAridamanaH paviH  /
indrajidbhAnuvarmA ca mAnurbhAnusamapramaH  // 39 //  surAristrijaTo bhImo
mohanodvArako raviH  /  cakAro vajramadhyazca pramodaH siMhavikramaH  // 395 //
cAmuNDo mAraNo mISmo dvipavAhorimardanaH  /
nirvANabhaktiruyazrIrahadbhaktiranuttaraH  // 396 //  gatabhramo'nilazcaNDo
laGkAzoko mayUravAn  /  mahAbAhurmanoramyo bhAskarAmo bRhadgatiH  // 397 //
bRhtkaanto'risNtraasshcndraavto mahAravaH  /
meghavAnagRhakSobhanakSatradamanAdayaH  // 398 //  'abhidhAH koTizasteSAM
draSTavyAmbaracAriNAm  /  mAyAvIryasametAnA vidyAbalamahArucAm  // 399 //
vidyAnuyogakuzalAH sarve zrIsaktavakSasaH  /  laGkAyAM svAminaH kAntAH prAyazaH
sa vagaMtazcyutAH  // 40 //  sveSu putreSu nikSipya lakSmI vaMzakramAgatAm  /
saMvignA rAkSasAdhIzA mahAprovajyamAsthitAH  // 401 //  kecita karmAvazeSeNa
trilokazikharaM gtaaH| divamIyuH pare kecit puNyapAkAnumAvataH  // 402 //
dvIpakI rakSA karate the isalie vaha dvIpa rAkSasa nAmase prasiddhiko prApta huA
aura usa dvIpake rakSaka vidyAdhara rAkSasa kahalAne lage  // 386 /  /
gautamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! yaha rAkSasavaMzakI
utpatti maiMne tujhase kahI  /  aba Age isa vaMzake pradhAna puruSoMkA ullekha
kruuNgaa| so sana ||387 //  bhImaprabhakA prathama pUtra pUjArha nAmase
prasiddha thA so vaha apane jitabhAskara nAmaka putrake lie rAjyalakSmI
sauMpakara dIkSita huA  /  / 388 //  jitabhAskara samparikIrti nAmaka putrako
rAjya de muni huA aura samparikIrti sugrIvake lie rAjya sauMpa dIkSAko prApta
huA  // 389 /  /  sugrIva, harigrIvako apane padapara baiThAkara ugra
tapazcaraNakI ArAdhanA karatA huA uttama deva huA  // 390 //  harigrIva bhI
zrIgrIvake lie rAjyasampatti dekara munivrata dhAra vanameM calA gayA  // 391 //
zrIgrIva samakhake lie rAjya dekara pitAke dvArA aMgIkRta mArgako prApta haA
aura balavAna samakhane savyakta nAmaka patrako rAjya dekara dIkSA dhAraNa kara
lI  // 392 //  savyaktane amatavega nAmaka patrake lie rAkSasavaMzakI sampadA
sauMpakara tapa dhAraNa kiyaa| amRtavegane bhAnugatiko aura bhAnugatine
cintAgatiko vaibhava samarpita kara sAdhupada svIkRta kiyA  // 393 /  /  isa
prakAra indra, indraprabha, megha, mRgAridamana, pavi, indrajit, bhAnuvarmA,
bhAnu, bhAnuprabha, surAri, trijaTa, bhIma, mohana, uddhAraka, ravi, cakAra,
vajramadhya, pramoda, siMhavikrama, cAmuNDa, mAraNa, bhISma, dvipavAha,
arimardana, nirvANabhakti, ugrazrI, arhadbhakti, anuttara, gatabhrama, anila,
caNDa, laMkAzoka, mayUravAn, mahAbAhu, manoramya, bhAskarAbha, bRhadgati,
bRhatkAnta, arisantrAsa, candrAvarta, mahArava, meghadhvAna, gRhakSobha aura
nakSatradamana Adi karor3oM vidyAdhara usa vaMzameM hue| ye sabhI vidyAdhara
mAyA aura parAkramase sahita the tathA vidyA, bala aura mahAkAntike dhAraka the
// 394-399|| ye sabhI laMkAke svAmI, vidyAnuyogameM kuzala the, sabake
vakSaHsthala lakSmIse suzobhita the, sabhI sundara the aura prAyaH svargase
cyuta hokara laMkAmeM utpanna hue the  /  / 400 /  ye rAkSasavaMzI rAjA,
saMsArase bhayabhIta ho vaMzaparamparAse Agata lakSmI apane putroMke lie
sauMpakara dIkSAko prApta hue the||401|| kitane hI rAjA 1. saMkhyevaM m0| 2.
mahAprAvAjyamAzritAH m0|

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Padma Purana  **Chapter 5: The Lineage of the Rakshasas**  **Verse 403:**
Thus, many kings passed by. Among them, a king named Dhanaprabha ruled Lanka.
His son, Kirtidhavala, renowned and born from his wife Padma, was born.  **Verse
404:** He was born from the Padma Agama, ruled by the Kshecharas, and enjoyed
supreme sovereignty in Lanka, just as Indra enjoys it in heaven.  **Verse 405:**
Thus, by the power of their past tapas, men attain enjoyment in the human and
divine realms. Those adorned with excellent qualities and possessing bodies
adorned with various virtues, having burnt away the karmic stains, become
Siddhas.  **Verse 406:** Those whose minds are attached to evil deeds receive
great condemnation in this world and after death fall into hell, experiencing
various kinds of suffering. Knowing this, O noble beings!  Embrace the sun-like
path to destroy the darkness of sin.  **Conclusion:** Thus ends the fifth
chapter of the Padma Charita, composed by the Acharya Ravishena, known as the
Arsha, which describes the lineage of the Rakshasas.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe evaM teSvapyatIteSu dhanapramasuto'bhavat  /  laGkAyAmadhipaH
kIrtidhavalo nAma vizrutaH  //  403 || padmAgame samudbhUtaH khecaraiH
kRtazAsanaH  /  saMbhuGkte paramaizvayaM sunAsIro yathA divi  //  404 ||
vasantatilakAvRttam evaM bhavAntarakRtena tapobalena saMprApnuvanti puruSA
manujeSu bhogAn  /  deveSu cottamaguNA guNabhUSitAGgA nirdagdhakarmapaTalAzca
bhavanti siddhAH ||405|| duSkarma saktamatayaH paramAM labhante nindAM janA iha
bhave maraNAtparaM ca  /  duHkhAni yAnti bahudhA patitAH kuyonau jJAsveti
pApatamaso ravitAM bhajadhvam ||406  //  ityArSe raviSeNAcArya prokte
padmacarite rAkSasavaMzAdhikAraH paJcamaM parva  // 5 //  karmoMko naSTa kara
trilokake zikharako prApta hue, aura kitane hI puNyodayake prabhAvase svarga meM
utpanna hue the || 402 || isa prakAra bahuta-se rAjA vyatIta hue| unameM laMkAkA
adhipati eka ghanaprabha nAmaka rAjA huA  /  usakI padmA nAmaka strIke garbha
meM utpanna huA kIrtidhavala nAmakA prasiddha putra huA  /  samasta vidyAdhara
usakA zAsana mAnate the aura jisa prakAra svargaMmeM indra paramezvaryakA
anubhava karatA hai usI prakAra vaha kIrtidhavala bhI laMkA meM paramaizvayaMkA
anubhava karatA thA ||403-404|| isa taraha pUrvabhavameM kiye tapazcaraNake
balase puruSa, manuSyagati tathA devagatimeM bhoga bhogate haiM, vahA~ uttama
guNoMse yukta tathA nAnA guNoMse bhUSita zarIrake dhAraka hote haiM, kitane hI
manuSya karmoMke palaTako bhasma kara siddha ho jAte haiM, tathA jinakI buddhi
duSkarmameM Asakta hai aise manuSya isa loka meM bhArI nindAko prApta hote haiM
aura maraneke bAda kuyonimeM par3akara aneka prakArake duHkha bhogate haiM  /
aisA jAnakara he bhavya jIvo! pAparUpI andhakArako naSTa karaneke lie sUryakI
sadRzatA prApta karo ||405-406|| isa prakAra ArSanAmase prasiddha raviSeNAcArya
viracita padmacaritameM rAkSasavaMzakA nirUpaNa karanevAlA paMcama parva samApta
huA  // 5 //  0

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter  The lineage of the Rakshonas and Bhogas has been narrated by
me to you. Now, O King, listen to the lineage of the Vanaras. ||1||  In the
southern range of the Vijaya mountain, resembling heaven, there is a city named
Meghapur, adorned with lofty palaces. ||2||  In that city, there lived a
renowned king of the Vidyadharas named Ateeindra, who, by his wealth and
possessions, surpassed even Indra. ||3||  His wife, named Shrimati, was
beautiful and graceful, her face always radiant like the moon. ||4||  They had a
son named Shreekant, well-versed in scriptures. The wise rejoiced at the mere
mention of his name. ||5||  He had a younger sister, beautiful and named Devi.
Her eyes were like the arrows of Kamadeva. ||6||  There was a beautiful city
named Ratnapura, where resided a powerful Vidyadhara king named Pushpottara.
||7||  He had a son named Padmottara, whose beauty captivated everyone, making
them forget everything else. ||8||  Pushpottara requested Shreekant for his
daughter Devi for his son Padmottara many times, but Shreekant, due to his
karma, did not give her to him. ||9||  Instead, he gave her to Kirtidhaval, the
king of Lanka, following the advice of his relatives, and performed her marriage
with great pomp and ceremony. ||10||  Pushpottara was enraged. He thought,
"There is no fault in our lineage, no poverty in me, no ugliness in my son, and
no enmity between us. Still, Shreekant did not give his sister to my son."
||11-12||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva vaMzo rakSonabhogAnAM mayA te parikIrtitaH  /  zRNu vAnaraketUnAM
saMtAnamadhunA nRpa  // 1 //  vijayA gire ge dakSiNe svrgsNnibhe| puraM
meghapuraM nAmnA tuGgaprAsAdazobhitam  // 2 //  vidyAbhRtAM patistasminnatIndro
nAma vizrutaH  /  'atikramyeva yaH zakraM sthito bhogAdisaMpadA  // 3 //
zrImatI nAma tasyAsIt kAntA shriismvibhrmaa| yasyAH sati mukhe pakSo jyotsnayeva
sadAbhavat  /  / 4 /  /  tayoH zrIkaNThanAmAbhat sutaH zrativizAradaH  /  yasya
nAmni gate karNa harSamIyarvicakSaNAH  // 5 //  svasA tasyAbhavaccArvI devI nAma
kanIyasI  /  bANatAM nayane yasyA gate kusumadhanvanaH  // 6 //  atha ratnapuraM
nAma puraM tatra manoharam  /  tatra puSpottaro nAma vidyAdhArI mahAbaleH  // 7
//  tasya padmottarAmikhyaH suto yena vilocane  /  viSayAntarasaMbandhAjanAnAM
vinivartite  // 8 //  tasmai puSpottaraH kanyAM bahuzastAmayAcata  /
zrIkaNThena na sA tasmai dattA karmAnubhAvataH  // 9 //  sA tena kIrtizubhrAya
dattA baandhvvaakytH| vivAhaM ca pareNAsyA vidhinA niravartayat  // 10 //  na
me'mijanato doSo na me dAridrayasaMbhavaH  /  na ca putrasya vairUpyaM na
kiMcidverakAraNam  // 11 //  tayApi mama putrAya vitIrNa tena na svsaa| iti
puSpottaro dhyAtvA kopAvezaM paraM gataH  // 12 //  athAnantara-gautama svAmI
kahate haiM ki he rAjan zreNika ! maiMne tere lie rAkSasavaMzI vidyAdharoMkA
vRttAnta to kahA, aba tU vAnaravaMziyoMkA vRttAnta suna  // 1 //  svargake
samAna vijayA parvatakI jo dakSiNa zreNI hai usameM eka meghapura nAmakA nagara
hai| yaha nagara UMce-U~ce mahaloMse suzobhita hai  // 2 //  vahA~ vidyAdharoMkA
rAjA atIndra nivAsa karatA thaa| rAjA atIndra atyanta prasiddha thA aura bhoga-
sampadAke dvArA mAno indrakA ullaMghana karatA thA  // 3 //  usakI lakSmIke
samAna hAva-bhAva-vilAsase sahita zrImatI nAmakI strI thii| usakA mukha itanA
sundara thA ki usake rahate hue sadA cA~danIse yukta pakSa hI rahA karatA thA  /
/ 4 /  una donoMke zrIkaNTha nAmakA putra thA  /  vaha putra zAstroMmeM nipuNa
thA aura jisakA nAma kaNaMgata hote hI vidvAn loga harSako prApta kara lete the
// 5 //  usake mahAmanoharadevI nAmakI choTI bahana thii| usa devIke netra kyA
the mAno kAmadevake bANa hI the  // 6 //  athAnantara-ratnapura nAmakA eka
sundara nagara thA jisameM atyanta balavAn puSpotara nAmakA vidyAdhara rAjA
nivAsa karatA thA  // 7 //  apane saundaryarUpI sampattike dvArA devakanyAke
samAna sabake manako Anandita karanevAlI padmAbhA nAmakI putrI aura padmottara
nAmakA putra thaa| yaha padmottara itanA sundara thA ki usane anya manuSyoMke
netra dUsare padArthoMke sambandhase dUra haTA diye the arthAt saba loga use hI
dekhate rahanA cAhate the  // 8 //  rAjA puSpottarane apane putra padmottarake
lie rAjA atIndrakI putrI devIkI bahuta bAra yAcanA kI parantu zrIkaNTha bhAIne
apanI bahana padmottarake lie nahIM dI, laMkAke rAjA kIrtidhavalake lie dI aura
bar3e vaibhavake sAtha vidhipUrvaka usakA vivAha kara diyA  /  / 9-10 //  yaha
bAta suna rAjA puSpottarane bahuta kopa kiyaa| usane vicAra kiyA ki dekho, na to
hamAre vaMzameM koI doSa hai, na mujhameM daridratArUpI doSa hai, na mere
putrameM kurUpapanA hai aura na merA unase kucha vaira bhI hai phira bhI
zrIkaNThane mere putrake lie apanI bahana nahIM dI  // 11-12 //  1. atikramya ca
m.| atikramyaiva kh.| 2. saMpadaH k.| 3. cAryA k.| 4. saptamazlokAdanantaraM ma.
pustake nimnAGkitaH zloko'dhiko vartate  /  'padmAbhAsItsutA tasya
mnohlaadnkaarinnii| devakanyeva sarveSAM ruuplaavnnysNpdaa'| 5. vidhina ma.I:

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, Shrikantha, to pay homage to the idols, went to Mount
Sumeru in a beautiful, swift, wind-like chariot. ||13|| Returning from there, he
heard a beautiful song, a melody that stole the minds and ears, like the buzzing
of bees. ||14|| The song, mixed with the sweet sound of the veena, made his body
still, as if bound by a straight rope. ||15|| Then, looking around, he saw
Padmaabha, the daughter of Pushpottara, sitting in the courtyard of the music
house, with her guru. ||16|| Seeing her, Shrikantha's mind quickly sank into the
ocean of Padmaabha's beauty, unable to extricate itself. Just as one cannot
catch elephants, he could not steady his mind. ||17|| Shrikantha stood in the
sky near the maiden. Shrikantha, with his handsome body and broad shoulders, was
attracted by Padmaabha's captivating blue eyes. ||18|| Then, the mutual, sweet
gaze of the two, signified their acceptance of each other, their love for each
other. ||19|| Then, knowing her intentions, Shrikantha took Padmaabha, who was
standing in the middle of his arms, and flew away. At that time, Padmaabha's
touch made his eyes close slightly. ||20|| The people, shouting and crying,
informed King Pushpottara that Shrikantha had abducted his daughter. ||21||
Hearing this, Pushpottara became very angry. In his anger, he bit his lips and,
fully prepared, went after Shrikantha. ||22|| Shrikantha was going ahead, and
Pushpottara was running after him, making Shrikantha look beautiful in the
middle of the sky, like the moon behind a cloud. ||23|| Seeing Pushpottara, the
mighty, coming after him, Shrikantha, the expert in the science of politics,
quickly went towards Lanka. ||24|| There, he sought refuge with his brother-in-
law, Koti Dhaval. It is right, because those who practice the right conduct at
the right time, achieve success. ||25|| Knowing that he was the brother of his
wife, Koti Dhaval embraced him with great affection and welcomed him. ||26||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe caityAnAM vandanAM katu zrIkaNThaH suraparvatam  /  gato'nyadA
vimAnena vAyuvegena cAruNA  // 13 //  tasmAnnivartamAno'sau cetaHzrotrApahAriNam
/  bhRGgANAmiva jhaMkAramazRNod gItaniHsvanam  // 14 //  ramyaprakvaNamizreNa
tena gItasvanena saH  /  to RjuguNeneva baddhvA nizcalavigrahaH  /  / 15 /  /
alokanamatho cakre tato'pazyat sa kanyakAm  /  guruNAdhiSThitAM kAntAM
saMgItakagRhAGgaNe  // 16 //  tasyA rUpasamudre'sau nimagnaM mAnasaM drutam  /
na zazAka samuddhartu dhartuM nAgAniva prabhuH  // 17 //
sthitazcaiSo'ntikavyomni tayA nIlotpalAbhayA  /  vadhveva pIvaraskandho
dRSTayAkRSTo manomuSA  // 18 //  tato darzanamanyonyaM tayormAdhuryapezalam  /
cakAra varaNaM premabaddhabhAvasya sUcanam  // 19 //  tatastAmiGgitAbhijJo
bhujapaJjaramadhyagAm  /  kRtvA namastale yAtaH sparzAmIlitalocanaH  // 20 //
parivargastatastasyAH pralApamukharIkRtaH  /  puSpottarAya kanyAyAH zrIkaNThena
hRti jagau  // 21 //  sarvodyogena saMnaya tataH puSpottaro ruSA  /
tasyAnupadavIM yAto dantadaSTaradacchadaH  // 22 //  tenAnudhAvamAnena vrajatA
sunabhastale  /  zazIva dhanavRndena zrIkaNThaH zuzubhe'dhikam  // 23 //
AyAntaM pRSThato dRSTA zrIkaNThastaM mahAbalam  /  tvarita prasthito laGkA
nItizAstravizAradaH  // 24 //  tatra svasuH patiM gatvA zaraNaM sa samAzrayat  /
kAlaprAptaM nayaM santo yuJjAnAM yAnti tuGgatAm  // 25 //  sodaro mama kAntAyA
iti sa sneha nimaram  /  saMbhrameNa pariSvajya taM cakArAptapUjanam  // 26 //
kisI eka dina zrIkaNTha akRtrima pratimAoMko vandanA karane ke lie vAyuke samAna
vegavAle sundara vimAnake dvArA sumeruparvata para gayA thA ||13|| vahA~se jaba
vaha lauTa rahA thA taba usane mana aura kAnoMko haraNa karanevAlA, bhramaroMkI
jhaMkArake samAna sundara saMgItakA zabda sunA  // 14|| vINAke svarase mile hue
saMgItake zabdase usakA zarIra aisA nizcala ho gayA mAno sIdhI rassIse hI
bA~dhakara use roka liyA ho  // 15 /  /  tadanantara usane saba ora dekhA to use
saMgItagRhake AMganameM guruke sAtha baiThI huI puSpottarakI putrI padmAbhA
dikhI  // 16 //  use dekhakara zrIkaNThakA mana padmAbhAke saundaryarUpI
sAgarameM zIghra hI aisA nimagna ho gayA ki vaha use nikAlanemeM asamartha ho
gyaa| jisa prakAra koI hAthiyoMko pakar3anemeM samartha nahIM hotA usI prakAra
vaha manako sthira karane meM samartha nahIM ho sakA ||17|| zrIkaNTha usa
kanyAke samIpa hI AkAzameM khar3A raha gyaa| zrIkaNTha sundara zarIrakA dhAraka
tathA sthUla kandhoMse yukta thaa| padmAbhAne bhI cittako curAnevAlI apanI nIlI-
nIlI dRSTise use AkarSita kara liyA thA  // 18 //  tadanantara donoMkA
parasparameM jo madhura avalokana huA usIne donoMkA varaNa kara diyA arthAta
madhara avalokanase hI zrIkaNThane padmAbhAko aura padmAbhAne zrIkaNThako vara
liyaa| unakA yaha varanA pArasparika prema bhAvako sUcita karanevAlA thA  /  /
19 /  /  tadanantara abhiprAyako jAnanevAlA zrIkaNTha padmAbhAko apane
bhujapaMjarake madhyameM sthita kara AkAzameM le claa| usa samaya padmAbhAke
sparzase usake netra kuchakacha banda ho rahe the  // 20 //  pralApase cillAte
hae parijanake logoMne rAjA puSpottarako khabara dI ki zrIkaNThane ApakI kanyAkA
apaharaNa kiyA hai  /  / 21 /  /  yaha suna puSpottara bhI bahuta kruddha huaa|
vaha krodhavaza dA~toMse oTha cAbane lagA aura saba prakArase taiyAra ho
zrIkaNThake pIche gayA  // 22 //  Age-Age jA rahA thA aura puSpottara usake
pIche-pIche daur3a rahA thA jisase AkAzake bIca zrIkaNTha aisA suzobhita ho rahA
thA mAno meghasamUha jisake pIche ur3a rahA hai aisA candramA hI ho  // 23 /  /
nItizAstrameM nipuNa zrIkaNThane jaba apane pIche mahAbalavAn puSpottarako AtA
dekhA to vaha zIghra hI laMkAkI ora cala par3A  /  / 24 /  /  vahA~ vaha apane
bahanoI kotidhavalakI zaraNa meM pahu~cA so ThIka hI hai| kyoMki jo samayAnukUla
nItiyoga karate haiM ve unnatiko prApta hote hI haiM  /  / 25 /  /  'yaha merI
strIkA bhAI hai' yaha jAnakara kIrtidhavalane bar3e snehase usakA AliMgana kara
1. sukanyakAm kh.| 2. nAGgAni ca ma.  /

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter  While the exchange of pleasantries between the two continued,
Pushpottar arrived with a massive army. ||27||  Kirti-Shukla then looked up at
the sky, which was filled with a multitude of Vidyadharas, radiating a brilliant
light. ||28||  The army, with its fearsome weapons like swords and spears, and
the thunderous roar, seemed to be shaking the very ground, as if it were being
displaced by the gathering of celestial beings. ||29||  Seeing the northern
direction filled with horses as swift as the wind, elephants like clouds,
magnificent flying chariots, and lions with their manes flowing, Kirti-Shukla,
with a mixture of laughter and anger, gave the order for battle to his
ministers. ||30-31||  Then, overwhelmed with shame for his own wrongdoings,
Srikantha, with a sense of urgency, spoke to Kirti-Shukla: ||32|| "Protect my
beloved while I defeat the enemy with your support." ||33||  Hearing this,
Kirti-Shukla, with a sense of righteousness, replied: "It is not appropriate for
you to say this, having found refuge in me, the one who dispels fear." ||34||
"If this wicked man does not seek peace through diplomacy, then you will surely
see him enter the jaws of Yama, guided by me." ||35||  Having reassured his
sister's husband, the king sent his most valiant and wise messengers to
Pushpottar. ||36||  These messengers, highly intelligent and skilled in eloquent
speech, approached Pushpottar and spoke to him in turn: ||37||  "Pushpottar,
Kirti-Shukla, with words placed on our lips with respect, says to you: ||38||
You are born of a noble lineage, a man of pure actions, renowned throughout the
world, and a master of the scriptures. ||39||  O great intellect, what is there
that we haven't already conveyed to your ears, that we should now bring to your
attention?" ||40||  "Srikantha too is born of a pure lineage, like the rays of
the moon, wealthy, humble, handsome, and endowed with all virtues." ||41||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva tayoH kuzalavRttAntaprazno yAvatpravartate  /  tAvarapuSpottaraH
prApto mahAbalasamanvitaH  // 27 //  kIrtizuklastato'pazyad gaganaM
sarvatazcitam  /  vidyAdharasamUhena pradIptamurutejasA  // 28 //  asikuntAdimiH
zastravikarAlaM mahAravam  /  sthAnabhraMzamivAgacchad balaM khecarasaMgamAt  //
29 //  vAjibhirvAyurahobhirgajaizca jaladopamaiH  /  vimAnaizca mahAmAnaiH
siMhazca pracalatsaTaiH  // 30 //  dRSTvottarAM dizaM vyApta vihasya
krodhamizritam  /  sacivAnAM samAdezaM kIrtizuklo yudhe dadau  // 31 //  akAyaNa
tataH svena zrIkaNTho'yaM pAnataH  /  kIrtizubhramidaM vAkyaM jagAda
tvarayAnvitam  // 32 //  eta bandhujanaM rakSa tvaM mdiiymihaadhunaa| karomi
nirjitaM yAvatpratipakSaM tavAzrayAt  // 33 //  evamukta jagAdAsau vacanaM
nayasaMgatam  /  tavAyuktamidaM vaktuM prApyaM mAM bhItibhedanam  // 34 //  yadi
nAmaiSa no sAmnA zamaM yAsyati durjanaH  /  tataH pazya praviSTo'yaM
mRtyorvaktraM madIritaH  // 35 //  sthApayitveti vizrabdhaM priyAyAH sodaraM
nRpaH  /  utkRSTavayaso dhIrAn dUtAn drutamajIgamat  // 36 //  uparyupari te
gatvA krameNedaM babhASire  /  puSpottaraM mahAprAjJA madhurAlApakovidAH  // 37
//  puSpottara vadatyetadbhavantaM kIrtinirmalaH  /  asmadvadanavinyastaiH
padairAdarasaMgataiH  // 38 //  mahAkulasamutpanno bhavAn vimalaceSTitaH  /
sarvasmin jagati khyAtiM gataH zAstrArthakoSidaH  // 39 //  AgatA gocaraM kA te
na maryAdA mahAmate  /  karNajAha nidhIyeta yAsmAbhiradhunA tava  // 40 //
zrIkaNTho'pi kule jAtaH zazAGkakaranirmale  /  vittavAn vinayopetaH kAntaH
srvklaanvitH||41|| atithisatkAra kiyA  // 26 //  jabataka una donoMke bIca
kuzala-samAcArakA prazna calatA hai ki tabataka bar3I bhArI senAke sAtha
puSpottara vahA~ jA pahu~cA  // 27 //  tadanantara kIrtidhavalane AkAzakI ora
dekhA to vaha AkAza saba orase vidyAdharoMke samahase vyApta thA. vizAla tejase
dedIpyamAna ho rahA thA  // 28 //  talavAra, bhAle Adi zastroMse mahAbhayaMkara
thA, bar3A bhArI zabda usameM ho rahA thA, vidyAdharoMke samAgamase vaha senA
aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno apane sthAnase bhraSTa honeke kAraNa hI usameM vaha
mahAzabda ho rahA thA  // 29 //  vAyuke samAna vegavAle ghor3oM, meghoMkI upamA
rakhanevAle hAthiyoM, bar3e-bar3e vimAnoM aura jinakI garadanake bAla hila rahe
the aise siMhoMse uttara dizAko vyApta dekha kIrtidhavalane krodhamizrita ha~sI
ha~sakara mantriyoMke lie yuddhakA Adeza diyA  // 30-31 //  tadanantara apane
akArya-khoTe kAryake kAraNa lajjAse avanata zrIkaNThane zIghratA karanevAle
kIrtidhavalase nimnAMkita vacana kahe  // 32 //  ki jabataka maiM Apake Azrayase
zatruko parAsta karatA hU~ tabataka Apa yahA~ mere iSTajana (strI) kI rakSA karo
// 33 //  zrIkaNThake aisA kahanepara kIrtidhavalane usase nItiyukta vacana kahe
ki bhayakA bhedana karanevAle mujhako pAkara tumhArA yaha kahanA yukta nahIM hai
// 34 //  yadi yaha durjana sAmyabhAvase zAntiko prApta nahIM hotA hai to tuma
nizcita dekhanA ki yaha mere dvArA prerita hokara yamarAjake hI mukhameM praveza
karegA  // 35 //  aisA kaha apanI strIke bhAIko to usane nizcinta kara mahalameM
rakhA aura zIghra hI utkRSTa avasthAvAle dhIra-vIra dUtoMko puSpottarake pAsa
bhejA  // 36 //  atizaya buddhimAna aura madhurabhASaNa karanemeM nipuNa dUtoMne
lage hAtha jAkara puSpottarase yathAkrama nimnAMkita vacana khe|||37|| he
paSpottara ! hama logoMke mukhameM sthApita evaM AdarapUrNa vacanoMse
kIrtidhavala rAjA Apase yaha kahatA hai  // 38 //  ki Apa uccakulameM utpanna
haiM, nirmala ceSTAoMke dhAraka haiM, samasta saMsArameM prasiddha haiM aura
zAstrArthameM catura haiM  // 39 //  he mahAbuddhimAn ! kauna-sI maryAdA Apake
kAnoMmeM nahIM par3I hai jise isa samaya hama loga Apake kAnoMke samIpa rakheM
// 40 //  zrIkaNTha bhI candramAkI kiraNoMke samAna nirmala kulameM utpanna huA
hai, dhanavAn hai, vinayase yukta hai, sundara hai, aura saba kalAoMse sahita
hai  /  / 41 //  1. bhItibhedinam  /  2. dhIro ma0  /

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, it is ordained that a union should be made between two
individuals who are equal in terms of their virtues, lineage, and the girl's
beauty. ||42|| There is no reason for the destruction of the armies of both
sides, as it is the nature of girls to serve their husbands. ||43|| While the
messenger was speaking thus, a messenger sent by Padma arrived and spoke to
Pushpottar. ||44|| She said, "O Lord, Padma prostrates before your feet and says
that she is unable to come to you herself due to shyness." ||45|| "Father, there
is no fault of Shrikant in this matter. I myself was motivated by the influence
of my past actions." ||46|| "For women born in noble families, this is the path.
It is my rule to renounce any other man." ||47|| Thus, informed by the
messenger, Pushpottar was filled with anxiety. He was bewildered and distressed,
wondering what to do. ||48|| He thought, "The most important virtue for a groom
is to be born in a pure lineage. Shrikant possesses this virtue, and he has also
sought refuge in a powerful faction." ||49|| "Although I have the power to
overcome his pride, what can be done when the girl herself desires him?" ||50||
Knowing Pushpottar's intentions, the messengers, filled with joy, returned with
the messenger and reported everything to King Kirti Dhaval as it was. ||51||
Pushpottar, who had shed the burden of anger due to his daughter's words, was
proud and a knower of the ultimate truth. He returned to his own place. ||52||
On the first day of the bright fortnight of Margashirsha, in an auspicious hour,
the wedding ceremony of the two took place according to the scriptures. ||53||
One day, Kirti Dhaval, motivated by great love, spoke to Shrikant with
certainty. ||54|| "You have many enemies on Mount Vijaya. How long can you
remain vigilant?" ||55|| "Therefore, stay here in this beautiful palace filled
with jewels, in a place of your choice, and act as you please." ||56|| "You will
never be abandoned by me. How can you leave, having broken the promise of my
love?" ||57||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe tasya yogyA guNaiH kanyA rUpeNa ca kulena ca  /  samAnayoH
samAyogaM karotu vidhiriSyatAm  // 42 //  na cAsti kAraNaM kiMcit senayoH
saMkSaye kRte  /  svabhAva evaM kanyAnAM yatparAgArasevanam  // 43 //  dUto
yAvadbravItyevaM tAvadUtI samAgatA  /  padmayA preSitA tasya duhitredamabhASata
// 44 //  bravIti deva padmedaM kRtvA caraNavandanam  /  svayaM te gadituM zaktA
apayA neti nAgatA  // 45 //  tAta svalpApi nAstyatra zrIkaNThasyAparAdhitA  /
mayA karmAnumAvena svayameva pracoditaH  // 46 //  yataH satkulajAtAnAM
gatireSaiva yoSitAm  /  vimucyainamato'nyasya narasya niyamo mama  // 47 //  iti
vijJApito dUtyA cintAmetAmasau zritaH  /  kiMkartavyaM vimUDhena cetasA
viklavIkRtaH  // 48 //  'zuddhAbhijanatA mukhyA guNAnAM varabhAjinAm  /
tasmi~zca saMbhavatyeSe pakSaM ca balinaM zritaH  // 49 //  abhimAnAttathApyenaM
vinetuM zaktirasti me  /  svayameva tu kanyAyai rocate kriyate'tra kim  // 50 //
abhiprAyaM tatastasya jJAtvA te harSanirbharAH  /  samaM dUtyA gatA dUtA
zazAsuzca yathoditam  // 51 //  sutAvijJApanAt tyaktakrodhabhAro'bhimAnavAn  /
puSpottaro gataH sthAnamAtmIyaM paramArthavit  // 52 //  zuklAyAM mArgazIrSasya
pakSatAvatha zobhane  /  muhUrte vidhinA vRttaM pANigrahaNametayoH  // 53 //
iti zrIkaNThamAhedaM priityaatyntmudaaryaa| preritaH kIrtidhavalo vacanaM
kRtanizcayam  // 54 //  vairiNo bahavaH santi vijayA girau tava  /
apramattatayA kAlaM kiyantaM gamayiSyasi  // 55 //  atastiSTha tvamatrava ramye
ratnAlayAntare  /  nijAbhirucite sthAne svecchayA kRtaceSTitaH  // 56 //
paryApnoti parityaktaM na ca tvAM mama mAnasam  /  matprItivAgurAM chitvA kathaM
vA tvaM gamiSyasi  // 57 //  tumhArI kanyA guNa, rUpa tathA kula sabhI bAtoMmeM
usake yogya hai| isa prakAra anukUla bhAgya, do samAna vyaktiyoMkA saMyoga karA
de to uttama hai  // 42 //  jaba ki dUsareke gharakI sevA karanA yaha kanyAoMkA
svabhAva hI hai taba donoM pakSakI senAoMkA kSaya karane meM koI kAraNa dikhAI
nahIM detA  // 43 //  dUta isa prakAra kaha hI rahA thA ki itane meM putrI
padmAbhAke dvArA bhejI huI dUtI Akara puSpottarase kahane lgii||44|| ki he deva
! padmA Apake caraNoMmeM namaskAra kara kahatI hai ki maiM lajjAke kAraNa Apase
svayaM nivedana karaneke lie nahIM A sakI huuN||45|| he tAta ! isa kAryameM
zrIkaNThakA thor3A bhI aparAdha nahIM hai| karmoM ke prabhAvase maiMne ise
svayaM prerita kiyA thA  // 46 //  cUMki satkulameM utpanna huI striyoMkI yahI
maryAdA hai ataH ise chor3akara anya puruSakA mere niyama hai-tyAga hai  // 47
//  isa prakAra dUtIke kahanepara 'aba kyA karanA cAhie' isa cintAko prApta
huaa| usa samaya vaha apane kiMkartavyavimUr3ha cittase bahuta duHkhI ho rahA
thA  // 48 //  usane vicAra kiyA ki varameM jitane guNa honA cAhie unameM zuddha
vaMzameM janma lenA sabase pramukha hai  /  yaha guNa zrIkaNThameM hai hI usake
sivAya yaha balavAn pakSakI zaraNameM A pahu~cA hai  // 49 //  yadyapi isakA
abhimAna dUra karanekI mujhameM zakti hai, para jaba kanyAke lie yaha svayaM
rucatA hai taba isa viSayameM kyA kiyA jA sakatA hai ?  // 50 //  tadanantara
puSpottarakA abhiprAya jAnakara harSase bhare dUta, dUtIke sAtha vApasa cale
gaye aura sabane jo bAta jaisI thI vaisI hI rAjA kIrtidhavalase kaha dI  // 51
//  putrIke kahanese jisane krodhakA bhAra chor3a diyA thA aisA abhimAnI tathA
paramArthako jAnanevAlA rAjA pUSpottara apane sthAnapara vApasa calA gayA  // 52
//  athAnantara mArgazIrSa zukla pakSakI pratipadAke dina zubhamuhUrta meM
donoMkA vidhipUrvaka pANigrahaNa saMskAra huA  // 53 //  eka dina udAra premase
prerita kIrtidhavalane zrIkaNThase nizcayapUrNa nimnAMkita vacana kahe  // 54 //
cU~ki vijayA parvatapara tumhAre bahuta-se vairI haiM ataH tuma sAvadhAnIse
kitanA kAla bitA sakoge  // 55 /  /  lAbha isImeM hai ki tumheM jo sthAna
rucikara ho vahIM svecchAse kriyA karate hue yahIM atyanta sundara ratnamayI
mahaloMmeM nivAsa karo  // 56 //  merA mana 1. zraddhAbhijanitA ma.  /  2.
-tyeSA ma.  /  3. zritA  /  4. pakSe tAvatsuzobhane kha.  /

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter 101 Having said this to Shrikanth, Kotidhavala called his
minister, Anand, who was wise and had come from the lineage of his forefathers.
He said, "You have known the essence and non-essence of my cities for a long
time. Therefore, tell me which city is the most essential for Shrikanth." The
minister, with his heart filled with devotion, replied, his white beard swaying
like a fly whisk, as if he were fanning his lord. "O King, there is not a single
city in your kingdom that is not beautiful. However, let Shrikanth choose
whichever city he finds pleasing." "In the middle of this ocean, there are many
islands, some of which are as large as Kalpa trees, with trees that extend in
all directions." "These islands have mountains that are adorned with various
jewels, with high peaks, and are very bright. These are the places where the
gods play." "The demons Bhima, Atibhima, and all the other gods have given these
islands and mountains to your lineage, as we have heard from ancient tradition."
"In these islands, there are many beautiful cities, adorned with golden palaces,
filled with great jewels, and so bright that they eclipse the sun." "The names
of these cities are Sandhyakar, Manohlad, Suvel, Kanchan, Hari, Yodhan,
Jaladhidhvan, Hansadvip, Bharakshama, Ardhasvargotkat, Avarta, Vighat, Rodhan,
Amal, Kant, Sphutatat, Ratnadvip, Toyavali, Sar, Alanghan, Nabhobhanu, and
Kshema, and many other beautiful places. Even the gods cannot cause trouble in
these places." "These cities, which are filled with great merit and whose earth
is adorned with various jewels, are now under your control." "In the northwest
direction, there is a large island called Vanaradvip, which is three hundred
yojanas in extent. This island is famous in all three worlds, and it has
thousands of beautiful Avantaar islands." "This island, in some places, shines
with the red light of Pushparaga gems, and in other places, it is covered with
vegetation, like a green jewel."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva 101 zrIkaNThamamidhAyaivaM saciva nijamabravIt  /
pitAmahakramAyAtamAnandAkhyaM mahAmatim  // 58 //  sArAsAraM tvayA dRSTaM
madIyAnAM ciraM purAm  /  upadizyatAmataH sAra zrIkaNThAyAtra yatpuram  // 59 //
ityuktaH sacivaH prAha sitena hRdayasthitam  /  kUrcena svAminaM bhaktyA
cAmareNeva bIjayan  // 60 //  narendra tava nAstyeva puraM yanna manoharam  /
tathApi svayamanviSya gRhNAtu rucidarzanam  // 61 //  madhye sAgarametasmin
dvIpAH santyatibhUrayaH  /  kalpadrumasamAkAraiH pAdapaiAptadiGmukhAH  // 62 //
AcitA vividhai ratnaistuGgazRGgA mahaujasaH  /  girayo yeSu devAnAM santi
krIDanahetavaH  // 63 //  bhImAtibhImadAkSiNyAtte cAnyairapi vaH kule  /
anujJAtAH suraiH sarvaiH pUrvamityevamAgamaH  // 6 //  purANi teSu ramyANi santi
kAJcanasamabhiH  /  saMpUrNAni mahAratnaiH karadaSTadivAkaraiH  // 65 //
saMdhyAkAro manohAdaH suvelaH kAJcano hariH  /  yodhano jaladhidhvAno haMsadvIpo
mrkssmH||66|| arddhasvargotkaTAvatI vighaTo rodhano'malaH  /  kAntaH sphuTataTo
ratnadvIpastoyAvalI saraH  // 67 //  alaGghano namomAnuH kSemamityevamAdayaH  /
Asan ye ramaNodezA devAnAM nirupadravAH  // 68 //  ta eva sAMprataM jAtA
bhUripuNyairupArjitAH  /  purANAM saMnivezA vo nAnAratnavasuMdharAH  // 69 //
dUto'varottare bhAge samudvapariveSTite  /  zatatrayamatikramya yojanAnAmalaM
pRthuH  // 7 //  atizAkhAmRgadvIpaH prasiddho bhuvanatraye  /
yasminnavAntaradvIpAH santi ramyAH sahasrazaH  // 7 //  puSparAgamaNerbhAbhiH
kvacit prajvalatIva yaH  /  sasyairiva kvacicchanno harinmaNimarIcimiH  // 72 //
tumheM chor3aneko samartha nahIM hai aura tuma bhI mere premapAzako chor3akara
kaise jAoge  // 57 /  /  zrIkaNThase aisA kahakara kotidhavalane apane
pitAmahake kramase Agata mahAbuddhimAn Ananda nAmaka mantrIko bulAkara kahA  //
58 //  .ki tuma cirakAlase mere nagaroMkI sAratA aura asAratAko acchI taraha
jAnate ho ataH zrIkaNThake lie jo nagara sArabhUta ho so kaho  // 59 //  isa
prakAra kahanepara vRddha mantrI kahane lgaa| jaba vaha vRddha mantrI kaha rahA
thA taba usakI sapheda dAr3hI vakSaHsthalapara hila rahI thI aura usase aisA
jAna par3atA thA mAno hRdayameM virAjamAna svAmIko camara hI Dhora rahA ho  //
60 /  usane kahA ki he rAjan ! yadyapi Apake nagaroMmeM aisA eka bhI nagara
nahIM hai jo sundara na ho tathApi zrIkaNTha svayaM hI khojakara icchAnusAra-jo
inheM rucikara ho, grahaNa kara leM  // 61 //  isa samudrake bIcameM aise
bahutase dvIpa haiM jahA~ kalpavRkSoMke samAna AkAravAle vRkSoMse dizAeM vyApta
rahI haiM  // 6 //  ina dvIpoMmeM aise aneka parvata haiM jo nAnA prakArake
ratnoMse vyApta haiM, U~ce-U~ce zikharoMse suzobhita haiM, mahAdedIpyamAna haiM
aura devoMkI krIDAke kAraNa haiM  // 6 //  rAkSasa bhIma, atibhIma tathA unake
sivAya anya sabhI devoMne Apake vaMzajoMke lie ve saba dvIpa tathA parvata de
rakhe haiM aisA pUrva paramparAse sunate Ate haiM  // 64 //  una dvIpoMmeM
suvarNamaya mahaloMse manohara aura kiraNoMse sUryako AcchAdita karanevAle
mahAratnoMse paripUrNa aneka nagara haiM  //  65  /  /  una nagaroMke nAma isa
prakAra haiM-sandhyAkAra, manohlAda, suvela, kAMcana, hari, yodhana,
jaladhidhvAna, haMsadvIpa, bharakSama, ardhasvargotkaTa, Avarta, vighaTa,
rodhana, amala, kAnta, sphUTataTa, ratnadvIpa, toyAvalI, sara, alaMghana,
nabhobhAnu aura kSema ityAdi aneka sundara-sundara sthAna haiN| ina sthAnoMmeM
deva bhI upadrava nahIM kara sakate haiM  /  / 66-68 //  jo bahuta bhArI puNyase
prApta ho sakate haiM aura jahA~kI vasudhA nAnA prakArake ratnoMse prakAzamAna
hai aise ve samasta nagara isa samaya Apake AdhIna haiM  //  69  //  yahA~
pazcimottara bhAga arthAt vAyavya dizAmeM samudrake bIca tIna sau yojana
vistAravAlA bar3A bhArI vAnara dvIpa hai| yaha vAnara dvIpa tInoM lokoMmeM
prasiddha hai aura usameM mahAmanohara hajAroM avAntara dvIpa haiM  // 70-71 //
yaha dvIpa kahIM to puSparAga maNiyoMkI lAla-lAla prabhAse aisA jAna par3atA hai
1. vaightto| 2. maNibhAbhiH ma.  /

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,  72. The water is sometimes covered with green gems, making
it look like it's covered with lush paddy plants.  73. Sometimes, it appears as
if it's enveloped in darkness due to the brilliance of Indranila gems, and
sometimes, it seems to be adorned with the splendor of the Kamalakar due to the
radiance of Padma raga gems.  74. Where fragrant winds roam in the sky, birds,
carried away, don't realize they are falling.  75. In ponds where clusters of
lotuses bloom, their movement is recognized by their brilliance, which is like
that of Padma raga gems set amidst crystal.  76. The islands, where intoxicated
birds, filled with the taste of nectar-like wine, make melodious sounds, seem to
be engaged in conversation with nearby islands.  77. Where the darkness is
banished by the brilliance of medicinal plants, night finds no place, even in
the darkest fortnight.  78. Where trees are shaped like umbrellas, adorned with
fruits and flowers, their trunks are massive, and birds perched on them make
sweet sounds.  79. Where the earth, covered with paddy plants, naturally endowed
with vigor and radiance, is gently swayed by the soft breeze, appears to be
wearing a green garment.  80. Where blue lotuses, adorned with swarms of bees,
bloom in the ponds, they seem to be gazing with eyes adorned with the movement
of eyebrows.  81. Where regions are devoid of wind due to the vast groves of
reeds and ponds, their sounds, produced by the movement of the wind, are
pleasing to the ears.  82. In the middle of that monkey island, there is a huge
mountain called Kishku, adorned with a vast expanse of gems and gold.  83. Like
the Trikuta mountain, this Kishku mountain, with its long arms like peaks,
embraces the directions, which are like beautiful women, bestowing upon them
supreme beauty.  84. Hearing such words of joy from the Minister of Joy,
Shrikantha, filled with supreme joy, said to his brother-in-law, Kirti Dhaval,
"I accept what you say."  85. Then, on the auspicious first day of the month of
Chaitra, Shrikantha, along with his family, went to the monkey island.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe indranIlapramAjAlaistamaseva citaH kvacit  /  padmAkarazriyaM
dhatte padmarAgacayaiH kvacit  // 73 //  bhramatA yatra vAtena gagane
gandhacArugA  /  hRtA jAnanti no yasminpatAma iti pakSiNaH  // 74 //
sphaTikAntaravinyastaiH padmarAgaiH samatviSaH  /  jJAyante calanAdyatra saraHsu
kamalAkarAH  // 75 //  mattairmadhvAsavAsvAdAcchakuntaiH kalanAdibhiH  /
saMbhASata iti dvIpAn yaH samIpavyavasthitAn  // 76 //
yatrauSadhiprabhAjAlaistamo dUraM nirAkRtam  /  cakre bahulapakSe'pi samAvezaM
na rAtriSu  // 77 //  yatracchatrasamAkArAH phalapuSpasamanvitAH  /  pAdapA
vipulaskandhAH kalasvanazakuntayaH  // 78 //  sasyaiH
svabhAvasaMpannaivIryakAntivitAribhiH  /  caladbhirmandavAtena mahI yatra
sakanukA  // 79 //  cikacendIvarairyatra SaTpadaughasamanvitaiH  /  nayanairiva
vIkSante' dIrghikA bhrUvilAsibhiH  // 80 //  pavana kampanAdyasmin
sAtkArazrotrahAribhiH  /  puNDreorvipulairvAdaiH pradezAH pavanojjhitAH  //  81
//  ratnakAJcanavistIrNazilAsaMghAtazobhanaH  /  madhye tasya mahAnasti
kiSkurnAma mahIdharaH  //  82  //  trikUTeneva tenAsau zRGgabAhubhirAyataH  /
AliGgitA dizaH kAntAH zriyamAropitAH parAm  // 83 //  AnandavacanAdeva sAnandaM
paramaM gataH  /  zrIkaNThaH kIrtidhavalaM prAhaivamati bhAratIm  // 84 //
tatazcaitrasya divase prathame maGgalArcite  /  yayau saparivAro'sau dvIpaM
vAnaralAnchitam  // 85 //  102 mAno jala hI rahA ho, kahIM hare maNiyoMkI
kiraNoMse AcchAdita hokara aisA suzobhita hotA hai mAno dhAnake hare-bhare
paudhoMse hI AcchAdita ho  // 72 //  kahIM indranIla maNiyoMke kAntise aisA
lagatA hai mAno andhakArake samUhase vyApta hI ho, kahIM padmarAga maNiyoMkI
kAntise aisA jAna par3atA hai mAno kamalAkarakI zobhA dhAraNa kara rahA ho  //
73  //  jahA~ AkAzameM bhramatI huI sugandhita vAyuse hare gaye pakSI yaha nahIM
samajha pAte haiM ki hama gira rahe haiM  //  74 //  sphaTikake bIcabIcameM lage
hue padmarAga maNiyoMke samAna jinakI kAnti hai aise tAlAboM ke bIca praphullita
kamaloMsamUha jahA~ halana calanarUpa kriyAke dvArA hI pahacAne jAte haiM || 75
//  jo dvIpa makarandarUpI madirA ke AsvAdana se manohara zabda karanevAle
madonmatta pakSiyoMse aisA jAna par3atA hai mAno samIpameM sthita anya dvIpoMse
vArtAlApa hI kara rahA ho  //  76  //  jahA~ rAtrimeM camakanevAlI auSadhiyoMkI
kAntike samUhase andhakAra itanI dUra khader3a diyA gayA thA ki vaha kRSNa
pakSakI rAtriyoM meM bhI sthAna nahIM pA sakA thA  //  77 //  jahA~ke vRkSa
chatroMke samAna AkAravAle haiM, phala aura phUloMse sahita haiM, unake skandha
bahuta moTe haiM aura unapara baiThe hue pakSI manohara zabda karate rahate haiM
/  78 /  /  svabhAvasampanna - apane Apa utpanna, vIrya aura kAntiko denevAle,
evaM manda manda vAyuse hilate dhAnake pauMdhoMse jahA~kI pRthivI aisI jAna
par3atI hai mAno usane hare raMgakI colI hI pahana rakhI ho ||79 || jahA~kI
vApikAoMmeM bhramaroMke samUha se suzobhita nIla kamala phUla rahe haiM aura
unase ve aisI jAna par3atI haiM mAno bhauMhoMke saJcArase suzobhita netroMse hI
dekha rahI hoM  //  80  //  havA calane se samutpanna avyakta dhvanise kAnoMko
haranevAle pauMDoM aura IkhoMke bar3e-bar3e bagIcoMse jahA~ke pradeza vAyuke
saMcArase rahita haiM arthAt jahA~ pauMDe aura Ikhake saghana vanoMse vAyukA
AvAgamana rukatA rahatA hai  //  81  //  usa vAnaradvIpake madhyameM ratna aura
suvarNakI lambI-caur3I zilAoMse suzobhita kiSku nAmakA bar3A bhArI parvata hai
//  82  //  jaisA yaha trikUTAcala hai vaisA hI vaha kiSku parvata hai so usakI
zikhararUpI lambI-lambI bhujAoM se AliMgita dizArUpI striyA~ parama zobhAko
prApta ho rahI haiM || 83  //  Ananda mantrIke aise vacana sunakara parama
Anandako prApta huA zrIkaNTha apane bahanoI kIrtidhavalase kahane lagA ki jaisA
Apa kahate haiM vaisA mujhe svIkAra hai || 84  //  tadanantara caitra mAsake
maMgalamaya prathama dinameM zrIkaNTha apane parivAra ke sAtha vAnaradvIpa 1.
vIkSyante ma.  /  2. sItkAra ma  /  3. AliGgatA ma.  /

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter 103 Seeing the sea, which was like a blue gem, spread over the
earth, he was filled with wonder. The sea was trembling due to the movement of
huge crocodiles. ||86|| Then he reached the monkey island, which was like
another heaven. The sound of waterfalls was like a welcome address. ||87|| The
waterfalls were so large that their spray reached the sky. The island seemed to
be laughing with joy at the arrival of Shrikantha. ||88|| The island was adorned
with beautiful groups of various gems, which looked like tall arches. ||89||
Then Shrikantha descended on the island, which was full of wonders. He looked in
all directions with his blue lotus-like eyes. ||90|| The island was adorned with
date palms, gooseberry trees, neem trees, kitha trees, agarwood trees,
sandalwood trees, banyan trees, koha trees, kadamba trees, mango trees, achar
trees, banana trees, pomegranate trees, betel nut trees, kankol trees, clove
trees, and many other beautiful trees. ||91-92|| The trees were so beautiful
that they looked like gem-studded trees that had emerged from the earth. They
did not allow their gaze to wander away from themselves. ||93|| The trunks of
the trees were straight, and their branches were very thick. The dense foliage
above looked like umbrellas. The branches were bright and slightly drooping, and
they were adorned with clusters of flowers and sweet fruits. They seemed to have
attained the best lineage. ||94-95|| The trees were not very tall, nor were they
very short. They were just the right height for women to easily reach their
flowers, fruits, and leaves. ||96|| The creeper-like women, who were beautiful
with their cluster-like breasts, whose eyes were like bees, and whose hands were
like fluttering leaves, were embracing the trees with great affection. ||97||
The trees seemed to be talking to each other with the sweet sound of birds, and
they were adorned with the sweet humming of bees, as if they were singing.
||98|| Some trees were white like conch shells, some were yellow like gold, some
were pink like lotuses, and some were blue like lapis lazuli. ||99|| 1.
à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤¾à¤ªà¥à¤¤à¤¸à¥à¤µà¤°à¥à¤- à¤®. à¥¤ 2. à¤à¤à¥à¤à¤¿à¤¤à¤¾ à¤®. à¥¤ 3. à¤à¤¿à¤à¥à¤·à¤¿à¤ªà¤¨à¥ à¤®. à¥¤ 4. à¤¸à¤®à¤¾à¤²à¤¾à¤ªà¤ à¤. à¥¤

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva 103 pazyanIlamaNicchAyaM gataM nama iva kSitim  /
mahAgrAhakRtAkampaM samudraM vismayAkulaH  // 86 //  tatazca taM varadrIpaM
prAptaH svargamivAparama  /  vyAharantamivAsyaccaiH svAgataM nirjharasvanaiH  //
8 //  nirjharANAmatisthUlaiH zIkarairyomagAmibhiH  /  hasantamiva toSeNa
zrIkaNThAgamajanmanA  // 8 //  vicitramaNisaMbhUtaprabhAjAlena caarunnaa|
ucchritA iva saMghAtAstoraNAnAM samunnatAH  // 89 //  tatastamavatIrNo'sau
dvIpamAzcaryasaMkulam  /  vikSipan dikSu sarvAsu dRSTiM nIlotpaladyutim  // 10
//  kharjurAmalakInIpakapitthAgurucandanaiH  /
plakSArjunakadambAmrapriyAlakadalIdhavaiH  // 91 //
dADimIpUgakaGkolalavaGgavakulaistathA  /  ramyairanyaizca vividhaiH
pAdapairupazobhitam  // 92 //  maNivRkSA ivodbhiya kSitiM te tatra niHsRtAH  /
svasmin nipatitAM dRSTiM netumanyatra no daduH  // 13 //  praguNAH kANDadezeSu
vistIrNAH skandhabandhane  /  uparicchatrasaMkAzA ghanapallavarAzayaH  // 9 //
zAkhAmiH suprakAzAminatAmiH kusumotkaraiH  /  phalaizca sarasAH svAdaiH prAptAH
saMtAnamuttamam  // 95 //  nAtyantamunnatiM yAtA na ca yAtA nikharvatAm  /
anAyAsAGganAprApya prasUnaphalapallavAH  // 16 //
stabakastanaramyAmirbhaGganetrAbhirAdarAt  /  AliGgitAH
suvallIbhizcalapallavapANimiH  // 97 //  parasparasamullApaM kurvANA iva
pakSiNAm  /  manohareNa nAdena gAyanta iva SaTpadaiH  // 9 //
kecicchasadalacchAyAH keciddhemasamaviSaH  /  kecitpaGkajasaMkAzAH keci
raiDUryasaMnibhAH  // 99 //  gayA  // 85 //  prathama hI vaha samudrako
dekhakara Azcaryase cakita ho gyaa| vaha samudra nIlamaNike samAna kAntivAlA thA
isase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno nIlA AkAza hI pRthivIpara A gayA ho tathA
bar3e-bar3e magaramaccha usameM kampana paidA kara rahe the||86|| tadanantara
usane vAnaradvIpameM praveza kiyaa| vaha dvIpa kyA thA mAno dUsarA svarga hI
thA, aura jharanoMke ucca svarase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno svAgata zabdakA
uccAraNa hI kara rahA thA  // 87 //  jharanoMke bar3e-bar3e choTe uchalakara
AkAza meM pahu~ca rahe the unase vaha dvIpa aisA lagatA thA mAno zrIkaNThake
Agamanase utpanna santoSase ha~sa hI rahA ho  // 48 //  nAnA maNiyoMkI sundara
kAntike samUhase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno U~ce-U~ce toraNoM ke samUha hI vahAM
khar3e kiye gaye hoM  /  / 89 //  tadanantara samasta dizAoMmeM apanI nIlI dRSTi
calAtA huA zrIkaNTha Azcaryase bhare hue usa vAnaradvIpameM utarA  // 90 //
vaha dvIpa khajUra, A~valA, nIpa, kaiMthA, agaru candana, bar3a, kohA, kadamba,
Ama, acAra, kelA, anAra, supArI, kaMkola, lauMga tathA anya aneka prakArake
sUndara-sundara vakSoMse suzobhita thA  // 91-92 /  /  vahA~ ve saba vakSa itane
sundara jAna par3ate the mAno pRthivIko vidIrNa kara maNimaya vRkSa hI bAhara
nikale hoM aura isIlie ve apane Upara par3I huI dRSTiko anyatra nahIM le jAne
dete the  // 93 /  /  una saba vRkSoMke tane sIdhe the, jahA~se DAliyA~ phUTatI
haiM aise skandha atyanta moTe the, Upara saghana pattoMkI rAziyA~ chatroMke
samAna suzobhita thIM, dedIpyamAna tathA kucha nIce kI ora jhukI huI zAkhAoMse,
phUloMke samUhase aura madhura phaloMse ve saba uttama santAnako prApta hue-se
jAna par3ate the||94-95|| ve saba vRkSa na to atyanta U~ce the, na atyanta nIce
the, hA~, itane avazya the ki striyA~ unake phUla, phala aura pallavoMko anAyAsa
hI pA letI thIM  // 96 //  jo guccherUpI stanoMse manohara thIM, bhramara hI
jinake netra the, aura caMcala pallava hI jinake hAtha the aisI latArUpI striyA~
bar3e Adarase una vRkSoMkA AliMgana kara rahI thIM  // 97 /  pakSiyoMke manohara
zabdase ve vRkSa aise jAna par3ate the mAno parasparameM vArtAlApa hI kara rahe
hoM aura bhramaroM kI madhura jhaMkArase aise suzobhita ho rahe the mAno gA hI
rahe hoM  // 98 //  kitane hI vRkSa zaMkhake Tukar3oMke samAna sapheda kAntivAle
the, kitane hI svarNake samAna pIle raMgake the. kitane dI kamalake samAna
gulAbI raMgake the aura kitane hI vaidUryamaNike samAna nIle varNake the  // 19
//  1. prAptasvarga- ma.  /  2. icchitA ma.  /  3. cikSipan ma.  /  4. samAlApaM
kha.  /

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
104. In that Padma Purana, the land was adorned with various kinds of trees, so
beautiful that even heaven would seem inferior. 10. The conversation of the male
and female chakora birds, as clear as human speech, with the mynas, was a wonder
in that land. 101. Then, seated on the jeweled and golden platforms, under the
shade of various trees, fragrant with flowers, Srikantha, along with his army,
enjoyed the pleasures of the body. 102-103. Then, amidst the garlands of various
flowers, the swans and sarasa birds singing, the clear water filled with fish,
the trees showering flowers, the majestic trees with their loud cries of
victory, and the beautiful land adorned with various jewels, Srikantha wandered
happily. 104-106. Then, wandering in that forest, resembling the Nandana forest,
Srikantha saw many monkeys playing at will. 107. Seeing this extraordinary
creation, he wondered, "These monkeys are born in the animal realm, yet why are
they so similar to humans?" 108. They have a face, hands, feet, and other limbs
like humans, and their actions are also similar to humans. 109. Then, a great
desire to play with them arose in Srikantha. Although he was a steady king, he
became very eager. 110. With a surprised mind, he said to the men standing
nearby, looking at his face, "Bring these monkeys here quickly." 111. As soon as
he said this, the Vidyadharas brought hundreds of monkeys and stood them near
him. All the monkeys were making joyful sounds. 112. The king, Srikantha, with
his good nature, began to play with those monkeys. Sometimes he would dance them
by clapping his hands, sometimes he would touch them with his arms, and
sometimes... 1. Chakora yugalam. 2. Mahatvisham. 3. -Mivoddatam. 4.
Manushakaran. 5. Samutthita. 6. Vadanekshan.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 104 padmapurANe evaM nAnAvidhAstasmin dezA vividhapAdapaiH  /  maNDitA yAn
samAlokya svargabhUrapi nekSyate  // 10 //  'jIvaMjIvakayugmAnA vyaktavAcAM
samaM zukaiH  /  AlApaH sArikAbhizca tasminnadbhutakAraNam  // 10 //  tataH
nAnAtarucchAyAmaNDalastheSu hAriSu  /  ratnakAJcanadeheSu puSpAmodAnulepiSu  //
102 //  zilAtaleSu vizrabdhaM niviSTaH senayA samam  /  karaNIyaM ca niHzeSaM sa
cakre vapuSaH sukham  /  / 103 //  tato nAnAprasUnAnAM haMsasArasanAdinAm  /
vimalodakapUrNAnAM sarasA mInakampinAm  // 104 //  kiratAM puSpanikaraM tarUNAM
ca mahAtviSAm  /  jayazabdamivodAttaM kurvatAM pakSiniHsvanaiH  // 105 //
nAnAratnacitAnAM ca bhUmAgAnAM suzobhayA  /  yuktaM bhramati sa dvIpamita
zcetazca taM sukhI  // 106 //  tataH sa viharaMstasminvane nandanasaMnibhe  /
yathecchaM krIDato'pazyad vAnarAn bahuvibhramAn  // 107 //  acintayacca
dRSTvaitAM sRSTerativicitratAm  /  tiryagyonigatA hyete kathaM mAnuSasaMnibhAH
// 108 //  vadanaM pANipAdaM ca zeSAMzcAvayavAnamI  /  dadhate
mAnuSAkArAMzceSTAM teSAM ca saMnimAm  // 109 //  tatastaimahatI rantaM
prItirasya samucchritA  /  yathA sthiro'pyasau rAjA nitAntaM pravaNIkRtaH  //
110 //  jagAda ca samAsannAn puruSAn vadanekSiNaH  /  etAnAnayata kSipramiti
vismitamAnasaH  // 11 //  ityuktaiH zatazastasya plavaGgA gaganAyanaiH  /
upanItAH pramodena kRtakelikalasvanAH  // 112 //  suzIlaistairasau sAkaM rantuM
pravavRte nRpaH  /  nartayan tAlazabdena bAhubhyAM ca parAmRzan  // 113 //  isa
taraha nAnA prakArake vRkSoMse suzobhita vahA~ke pradeza nAnA raMgake dikhAI
dete the| ve pradeza itane sundara the ki unheM dekhakara phira svargake
dekhanekI icchA nahIM rahatI thii||100|| totAoMke samAna spaSTa bolanevAle
cakora aura cakorIkA jo mainAoMke sAtha vArtAlApa hotA thA vaha usa
vAnaradvIpameM sabase bar3A AzcaryakA kAraNa thaa||101|| tadanantara vaha
zrIkaNTha, nAnA prakArake vRkSoMkI chAyAmeM sthita, phUloMkI sugandhise
anulipta, ratnamaya tathA suvarNamaya zilAtaloMpara senAke sAtha baiThA aura
vahIM usane zarIrako sukha pahuMcAnevAle samasta kArya kiye  // 102-103 //
tadanantara-jinameM nAnA prakArake puSpa phUla rahe the, haMsa aura sArasa pakSI
zabda kara rahe the, svaccha jala bharA huA thA aura jo machaliyoMke saMcArase
kucha-kucha kampita ho rahe the aise mAlAoMkI, tathA phUloMke samUhakI varSA
karanevAle, mahAkAntimAn aura pakSiyoMkI bolIke bahAne mAno jora-jorase jaya
zabdakA uccAraNa karanevAle vRkSoMkI, evaM nAnA prakArake ratnoMse vyApta
bhUbhAgoM-pradezoMkI suSamAse yukta usa vAnara dvIpameM zrIkaNTha jahA~-tahA~
bhramaNa karatA huA bahuta sukhI huA  // 104-106 //  tadanantara nandana vanake
samAna usa vanameM vihAra karate hae zrIkaNThane icchAnusAra krIr3A karanevAle
aneka prakArake vAnara dekhe||107|| saSTiko isa vicitratAko dekhakara zrIkaNTha
vicAra karane lagA ki dekho ye vAnara tiryaMca yonimeM utpanna hue hai phira bhI
manuSyake samAna kyoM haiM ?  // 108 //  ye vAnara mukha, paira, hAtha tathA
anya avayava bhI manuSyake avayavoMke samAna hI dhAraNa karate haiN| na kevala
avayava hI, inakI ceSTA bhI manuSyoMke samAna hai  // 109 /  /  tadanantara una
vAnaroMke sAtha krIr3A karanekI zrIkaNThake bahuta bhArI icchA utpanna huii|
yadyapi vaha sthira prakRtikA rAjA thA to bhI atyanta utsuka ho uThA  // 110 /
/  usane vismita citta hokara mukhakI ora dekhanevAle nikaTavartI puruSoMko AjJA
dI ki ina vAnaroMko zIghra hI yahA~ lAo  // 111 //  kahanekI dera thI ki
vidyAdharoMne saikar3oM vAnara lAkara unake samIpa khar3e kara diye| ve saba
vAnara harSase kala-kala zabda kara rahe the  // 112 //  rAjA zrIkaNTha uttama
svabhAvake dhAraka una vAnaroMke sAtha krIr3A karane lgaa| kabhI vaha tAlI
bajAkara unheM nacAtA thA, kabhI apanI bhujAoMse unakA sparza karatA thA aura
kabhI 1. cakorayugalAm  /  2. mahatviSAm m.| 3. -mivoddAtaM m.| 4. mAnuSAkArAM
m.| 5. samutthitA ma.  /  6. vadanekSaNa: ma. !

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter 109 He saw their white teeth, red like pomegranate blossoms,
in their mouths, which were adorned with shining golden earrings. || 114 || He
saw the monkeys removing lice from each other with courtesy, and engaging in a
delightful playful quarrel with love, making a sound of laughter. || 115 ||
Their hair, like the husk of rice, was soft, very delicate, and moved gently in
the soft breeze, adorned with a parting. || 116 || Their ears, shaped like the
ears of a jester, were extremely soft and smooth, and their bodies were
motionless. || 117 || He straightened the disordered hairs on their bellies,
which were as large as a fist, and raised their eyebrows and the lines on their
faces. || 118 || Then he entrusted many of them to the servants, to be nourished
with sweet food and drink, for the sake of pleasure. || 119 || Having taken
them, he, whose mind was filled with the sight of the young ones, ascended Mount
Kishku, with its peaks, vines, waterfalls, and trees. || 120 || There he saw a
vast, level land, protected by great mountains on the outskirts, adorned with
tall trees. || 121 || In that land, he established a city known as Kishkupura,
which was inaccessible even to the mind, let alone the bodies of enemies. || 122
|| This city was fourteen yojanas long and wide, and its circumference was
forty-two yojanas, a little more. || 123 || The Vidhyadharas had built
magnificent palaces with high entrances, walls made of jewels and gold, adorned
with beautiful balconies, and supported by pillars of jewels. || 124 || The part
near the pigeon-houses was made of large lapis lazuli gems, and it seemed as if
the darkness had been driven away by the brilliance of the jewels, as if it had
been given a place there out of compassion. || 125 || The doorways of the
palaces were made of ruby gems, which made them appear red, as if they were
wearing lips whose redness had been enhanced by chewing betel. Above the doors
were hung garlands of many pearls.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva 109 'vIkSamANaH sitAn dantAn dADimopuSpalohite  /  avaTITe mukhe
teSAM bhAsvatkAJcanatArake  //  114  //  yUkApanayanaM pazyan vinayena
parasparam  /  premNA ca kalahaM ramyaM kRtakhotkAraniHsvanam  //  115  //
zAlizukasamacchAyAnmRdimAtizayAnvitAn  /  vidhUtAn mRduvAtena kezAn
sImantamAjinaH  //  116  //  karNAn vidUSakAsaktazravaNAkAradhAriNaH  /
nitAntakomalazlakSNAnacaladvapuSAM spRzan  // 117 //  vilomAni naya~ lomAnyudare
muSTamApini  /  utkSipazca bhruvo'pAGgadezAn rekhAvatastathA  //  118  //
tataste tena bahavaH puruSANAM samarpitAH  /  mRSTAzanAdibhiH kartuM poSaNaM
ratihetavaH  //  119  //  grAhayitvA ca tAn kiSkumArohadRSTatamAnasaH  /
prAtrakUTairlatAbhizca nirjharaistarubhistathA  // 120 //  tatrApazyat sa
vistIrNAM vaiSamyarahitAM bhuvam  /  guptAM prAnte mahAmAnairgrAvabhiH
sonnatadrumaiH  // 121 //  puraM tatra mahecchena khyAtaM kiSkupurAkhyayA  /
nivezitamarAtInAM mAnasasyApi durgamam  //  122  //  pramANaM yojanAnyasya
caturdaza samantataH  /  triguNaM pariveSeNa lezatazcAdhikaM bhavet  //  123  //
saMmukhadvAravinyAsA maNikAJcanabhittayaH  /  pragrIvakasamAyuktA
ratnastambhasamucchritAH  //  124  //  kapotapAlyupAnteSu mahAnIlavinirmitAH  /
ratnabhAbhirnirastasya dhvAntasyevAnukampitAH  //  125  //  anArake phUla ke
samAna lAla, capaTI nAkase yukta evaM camakIlI sunahalI kanInikAoMse yukta unake
mukhameM unake sapheda dA~ta dekhatA thA  //  113 - 114|| ve vAnara parasparameM
vinayapUrvaka eka dUsare jue~ alaga kara rahe the, aura premase kho-kho zabda
karate hue manohara kalaha karate the  /  rAjA zrIkaNThane yaha saba dekhA ||
195 || una vAnaroMke bAla dhAnake chilake ke samAna pIle the, atyanta komala
the, manda manda vAyuse hila rahe the aura mAMgase suzobhita the  /  isI prakAra
unake kAna vidUSakake kAnoMke samAna kucha aTapaTA AkAravAle, atyanta komala
aura cikane the  /  rAjA zrIkaNTha unakA bar3e premase sparza kara rahA thA aura
isa mohanI surasurIke kAraNa unake zarIra niSkampa ho rahe the  /  116-117 //
una vAnaroMke kRza peTapara jo-jo roma astavyasta the unheM yaha apane sparzaMse
ThIka kara rahA thA, sAtha hI bhauMhoMko tathA rekhAse yukta kaTAkSa- pradezoM
ko kucha-kucha Upara kI ora uThA rahA thA  //  118  //  tadanantara zrIkaNThane
prItike kAraNabhUta bahuta-se vAnara madhura anna-pAna Adike dvArA poSaNa
karaneke lie sevakoMko sauMpa diye  //  119  //  isake bAda pahAr3a ke zikharoM,
latAoM, nirjharanoM aura vRkSoMse jisakA mana harA gayA thA aisA zrIkaNTha una
vAnaroM ko livAkara kiSku parvatapara car3hA || 120|| vahA~ usane lambI-caur3I,
viSamatArahita tathA antameM U~ce-U~ce vRkSoMse suzobhita uttuMga pahAr3oMse
surakSita bhUmi dekhI  //  121  //  usI bhUmipara usane kiSkupura nAmakA eka
nagara bsaayaa| yaha nagara zatruoMke zarIrakI bAta to dUra rahe manake lie bhI
durgama thA  //  122  //  yaha nagara caudaha yojana lambA-caur3A thA aura isakI
paridhi - golAI bayAlIsa yojanase kucha adhika thI  //  123  //  isa nagara meM
vidyAdharoMne mahaloMkI aisI-aisI U~cI zreNiyA~ banAkara taiyAra kI thIM ki
jinake sAmane uttuMga daravAje the, jinakI dIvAleM maNi aura suvarNase nirmita
thIM, jo acche-acche baraNDoMse sahita thIM, ratnoMke khambhoMpara khar3I thiiN|
jinakI kapotapAlI ke samIpakA bhAga mahAnIla maNiyoMse banA thA aura aisA jAna
par3atA thA ki ratnoMkI kAntine jisa andhakArako saba jagahase khader3akara dUra
kara kiyA thA mAno use yahA~ anukampAvaza sthAna hI diyA gayA thaa| jina
mahaloMkI deharI padmarAgamaNiyoMse nirmita honeke kAraNa lAla-lAla dikha rahI
thIM isalie aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno tAmbUlake dvArA jisakI lAlI bar3ha gayI
thI aisA oTha hI dhAraNa kara rahI hoM  /  jinake daravAjoMke Upara aneka
motiyoMkI mAlAeM laTakAyI gayI thIM 1. vIkSyamANa: ma., kha.  /  2. nate  /  3.
kRtapotkAra niHsvanaM kha.  /  4. vidUSakAn sakta ka.  /  5. dUdhRtamAnasaH ma
/  6. kapola -ma.  /  14

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, it is said that the Dehli Pindaka was made of Panarag, and
it was adorned with a Tambula-like shade, like a Radachhada.  The doors were
adorned with a string of pearls, and the beauty of the buildings was such that
it seemed to mock the beauty of other buildings. The peaks were adorned with
jewels that resembled the moon, and they caused doubt in the minds of people at
night, as to which was the real moon. The buildings were illuminated by the
light of Chandrakanta gems, and the ornate doorways were adorned with various
jewels, which made them seem like they were made of gold. The floors of the
buildings were made of jewels, and the ceilings were adorned with paintings of
lotus flowers. The roads were made of jewels and gold, and they were as wide as
a dry ocean. The city was surrounded by a wall made of jewels, and the towers
were so high that they seemed to touch the heavens. The gates were adorned with
jewels, and they were so high that they seemed to touch the clouds. The city was
so beautiful that it was like the city of Indra. The king, Shrikant, lived in
this city with his beloved Padmaabha, and they enjoyed themselves like Indra and
Indrani. There was nothing in the Bhadrasala forest, the Saumanasa forest, or
the Nandana forest that was not available to him. One day, Shrikant was sitting
on the roof of his palace when he saw Indra going to the Nandishvara island to
worship. Indra was adorned with a crown that made the sky look yellow, and he
was playing music that made everyone deaf. He was riding on an elephant, a
horse, a swan, a ram, a camel, a wolf, and a deer, and he was surrounded by a
divine fragrance. Shrikant had heard about the Nandishvara island from the
sages, and he remembered that it was a place of joy for the gods. He decided to
go to the Nandishvara island with the gods, and he boarded a chariot that was
made of jewels and had a bird made of jewels on it. He was stopped by a mountain
that was made of jewels, and he was unable to proceed.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Aw padmapurANe dehalIpiNDikAmAgaM panarAgavinirmitam  /  tAmbUleneva sacchAyaM
dhArayantyo radacchadam  // 26 //  dvAropari samAyuktamuktAdAmAMzusaMpadA  /
hasansya iva zeSANAM bhavanAnAM surUpatAm  // 127 //
zazAGkasadRzAkArairmaNibhiH zikharAhitaiH  /  rajanISvapi kurvANA saMdehaM
rajanIkare  // 128 //  candrakAntamaNicchAyAkalpitodAracandrikAH  /
nAnAratnapramApaktisaMdigdhottagatoraNAH  // 129 //
maNikuTimavinyastaratnapamAvalikriyAH  /  patayastatra gehAnA
khecarairvinivezitAH  // 130 //  zuSkasAgaravistIrNA maNikAJcanavAlukAH  /
rAjamArgAH kRtAstasmin kauTilyaparivarjitAH  // 13 //  prAkArastatra vinyasto
ratnacchAyAkRtAvRtiH  /  zikharApraiH zriyA daryAta saudharmamiva tADayan  //
132 //  gopurANi ca tuGgAni nyastAnyana marIcibhiH  /  maNInAM yAni lakSyante
sthagitAnIva sarvadA  // 133 //  purandarapurAkAre pure tasmin cirAya saH  /
panayA sahito reme zacyeva 'vibudhAdhipaH  // 13 //  bhadrazAlavane yoni tathA
saumanase vane  /  nandane vA na tAnyasya dravyANyApurdurApatAm  // 135 //
kadAcidatha tatrAsau tiSThan prAsAdamUrdhani  /  vrajantaM vandanAmaktyA dvIpaM
nandIzvarazrutim  // 136 //  pAkazAsanamaikSiSTa satrA devazcaturvidhaiH  /
mukuTAnAM pramAjAlaiH pizaGgitanabhastalam  // 137 //  kurvantaM vadhiraM lokaM
samastaM tUryaniHsvanaiH  /  hastibhirvAjimihaMsaimeSairuSTra karmagaiH  /  /
138 //  anyaizca vividhairyAnaiH parivagairadhiSThitaH  /  anvIyamAnaM divyena
gandhena vyAptaviSTapam  /  / 139 /  /  tatastena zrutaM pUrva munibhyaH
saMkathAgatam  /  smRtaM nandIzvaradvIpaM nandanaM svargavAsinAm  // 14 //
smRtvA ca vibudhaiH sArcamakarod gamane matim  /  khecaraizca samaM sarvaH
samArUDho marutpatham  // 14 //  sa gacchan krauJcayuktena vimAnena sahAGganaH
/  mAnuSottarazailena nivAritagatiH kRtaH  // 142 //  aura jinakI kiraNoMse ve
aisI jAna par3atI thIM mAno anya bhavanoMkI sundaratAkI ha~sI hI ur3A rahI hoN|
zikharoMke Upara candramAke samAna AkAravAle maNi lage hue the unase jo rAtrike
samaya asalI candramAke viSayameM saMzaya utpanna kara rahe the| arthAt loga
saMzayameM par3a jAte the ki asalI candramA kauna hai ? candrakAnta maNiyoMkI
kAntise jo bhavana uttama cA~danIkI zobhA prakaTa kara rahe the tathA jinameM
lage nAnA ratnoMkI prabhAse UMce-UMce toraNadvAroMkA sandeha ho rahA thA jinake
maNinirmita pharzopara ratnamayI kamaloMke citrAma kiye gaye the  // 124-130 //
usa nagarameM kuTilatAse rahita-sIdhe aise rAjamArga banAye gaye the jinameM ki
maNiyoM aura suvarNakI dhUli bikhara rahI thI tathA jo sUkhe sAgarake samAna
lambe-caur3e the  // 131 //  usa nagarameM UMce-UMce gopura banAye gaye the jo
maNiyoMkI kiraNoMse sadA AcchAdita-se rahA karate the  // 132 //  indrapurake
samAna sundara usa nagarameM rAjA zrIkaNTha apanI padmAbhA priyAke sAtha, indra-
indrANIke samAna cirakAla taka krIr3A karatA rahA  // 133 //  bhadrazAlavana,
saumanasavana tathA nandanavanameM aisI koI vastu nahIM thI jo use durlabha rahI
ho  // 134 //  athAnantara kisI eka dina rAjA zrIkaNTha mahalako chatapara
baiThA thA usI samaya nandIzvara dvIpakI vandanA karaneke lie caturvidha devoMke
sAtha indra jA rahA thaa| vaha indra mukuToMkI kAntise AkAzako pItavarNa kara
rahA thA, turahI bAjoMke zabdase samasta lokako badhira banA rahA thA, apane-
apane svAmiyoMse adhiSThita hAthI, ghor3e, haMsa, mer3hA, U~Ta, bher3iyA tathA
hariNa Adi anya aneka vAhana usake pIche-pIche cala rahe the, aura usakI divya
gandhase samasta loka vyApta ho rahA thA  // 135-139 /  /  zrIkaNThane pahale
muniyoMke mukhase nandIzvara dvIpakA varNana sunA thA so devoMko Anandita
karanevAlA vaha nandIzvara dvIpa usakI smatimeM A gayA  // 140 //  smRtimeM Ate
hI usane devoMke sAtha nandIzvara dvIpa jAnekA vicAra kiyaa| vicArakara vaha
samasta vidyAdharoMke sAtha AkAzameM ArUr3ha huA  // 141 //  jisameM
vidyAnirmita krauMcapakSI jute the aise vimAnapara apanI 1. indraH  /  2. yAti
ma., kh.| 3. vandanAM m.| 4. munibhiH ma.  /  -

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter ### 107  Seeing the celestial beings crossing the Manushottara
mountain, Srikantha was filled with immense sorrow.  He lamented, "Alas, what a
pity! The progress of humans with their limited powers is deplorable!"  He had a
vision of worshipping the magnificent images of the Jinas in Nandishvara, with
pure devotion, offering them various flowers, incense, and garlands, and bowing
down with his head touching the ground.  He wondered, "How could my beautiful
aspirations, made with such a simple heart, be shattered by the evil karmas
accumulated in my past lives?"  He had heard many times that humans cannot cross
the Manushottara mountain, but his faith, which had grown immensely, had made
him forget this.  He was eager to go, despite his limited powers.  Therefore, he
decided to perform actions that would ensure his journey to Nandishvara in his
next life, without any obstacles.  With this firm resolve, he entrusted his
kingdom to his son and became a great sage, renouncing all possessions.  ###
152-155  His son, Vajrakantha, was enjoying the exquisite wealth of Kishkupura
with his beloved Charunya, when he heard the story of his father's past life
from the elders.  This ignited his dispassion, and he renounced his kingdom and
embraced Jain initiation.  King Shrenik, hearing this, asked Gautam Ganadhar
about the story of Srikantha's past life, which had made Vajrakantha renounce
the world.  Ganadhar replied, "In their previous life, there were two brothers
who were merchants.  They were very close, but their wives separated them.  The
younger brother was poor, while the elder was wealthy.  The elder brother was
obedient to a wealthy merchant, and through his association, he attained the
status of a Shravaka.  However, the younger brother was addicted to hunting and
other vices.  The elder brother was always saddened by his younger brother's
condition."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva 107 atikrAntA~stato dRSTvA mAnuSottaraparvatam  /  gIrvANanivahAn
sarvAn paramaM zokamAgataH  // 13 //  paridevamatho cakre bhagnotsAho gatadyutiH
/  hA kaSTaM kSudrazaktInAM manuSyANAM dhigunnatim  // 14 //  nandIzvare
jinendrANAM pratimAnAM mahAtviSAm  /  akRtrimeNa bhAvena kariSyAmIti darzanam
// 145 //  pUjAM ca vividhaiH puSpai-- pairgandhaizca hAribhiH  /  namaskAraM ca
zirasA dharAsaMsaktamaulinA  // 16 //  ye kRtA mandamAgyena mayA cArumanorathAH
/  kathaM te karmabhirbhagnA azubhaiH pUrvasaMcitaiH  // 17 //  athavA
zrutamevAsInmayA mAnuSaparvatam  /  atikramya na gacchanti mAnuSA ityanekazaH
// 148 //  tathApi zraddhayA tanme nitAntaM vRddhiyktyaa| vismRtaM gantamadyakto
yato'smi svalpazaktikaH  // 14 //  tasmAt karomi karmANi tAni yairanyajanmani  /
yAtuM nandIzvaraM dvIpaM gatimeM na vihanyate  // 150 //  iti nizvitya manasA
nyasya rAjyabharaM sute  /  abhUnmahAmunirdhArastyaktasarvaparigrahaH  // 15 //
vajrakaNThastataH sArdhaM cAruNyA zriyamuttamAm  /  bhuktvA kiSkupure ramye
zrutvopAkhyAnakaM pituH  // 152 //  'aizvayaM tanaye kSiptvA prApa daigambarI
kriyAm  /  kIdRzaM tadupAkhyAnamityukto gaNabhRjagau  // 153 //  vaNijau
bhrAtarAvAstA prItI strIbhyAM viyojitau  /  kanIyAn durvidho jyeSThaH svApateyo
gRhiitvaak||15|| zreSThinaH saMgamAdeva prAptaH zrAvakatAM parAm  /
mRgayAjIvinA bhrAtrA paramaM duHkhito'bhavat  // 155 //  priyA padmAbhAke sAtha
baiThakara rAjA zrIkaNTha AkAzamArgase jA rahA thA parantu jaba mAnuSottara
parvatapara pahu~cA to usakA Age jAnA ruka gayA  // 143 /  /  isakI gati to ruka
gayI parantu devoMke samUha mAnuSottara parvatako ullaMgha kara Age nikala gye|
yaha dekha zrIkaNTha parama zokako prApta huA  // 144|| usakA utsAha bhagna ho
gayA aura kAnti naSTa ho gyii| tadanantara vaha vilApa karane lagA ki hAya-hAya,
kSudrazaktike dhArI manuSyoMkI unnatiko dhikkAra ho  // 145 //  'nandIzvara
dvIpameM jo jinendra bhagavAnkI mahAkAntizAlI pratimAe~ haiM meM nizchalabhAvase
usake darzana karUMgA, nAnA prakArake puSpa, dhUpa aura manohArI gandhase unakI
pUjA karU~gA tathA pRthvIpara mukuTa jhukAkara zirase unheM namaskAra karUMgA'
mujha mandabhAgyane aise jo sundara manoratha kiye the ve pUrvasaMcita azubha
karmoMke dvArA kisa prakAra bhagna kara diye gaye ?  // 146-147 /  /  athavA
yadyapi yaha bAta maiMne aneka bAra sunI thI ki manuSya mAnuSottara parvatakA
ullaMghana kara nahIM jA sakate haiM tathApi atizaya vRddhiko prApta huI
zraddhAke kAraNa maiM isa bAtako bhUla gayA aura alpazaktikA dhArI hokara bhI
jAneke lie tatpara ho gayA  // 148-149 /  /  isalie aba maiM aise kArya karatA
hU~ ki jisase anya janmameM nandIzvara dvIpa jAneke lie merI gati roko na jA
sake  // 150 /  /  aisA hRdayase nizcaya kara zrIkaNTha, putrake lie rAjya
sauMpakara, samasta parigrahakA tyAgI mahAmuni ho gayA  // 151 //  tadanantara
zrIkaNThakA putra vajrakaNTha apanI cAruNo nAmaka vallabhAke sAtha mahAmanohara
kiSkapurameM utkRSTa rAjyalakSmIkA upabhoga kara rahA thA ki usane eka dina
vRddhajanoMse apane pitAke pUrvabhava sune  /  sunate hI usakA vairAgya bar3ha
gayA aura putrake lie aizvarya sauMpakara usane jinadIkSA dhAraNa kara lii| yaha
sunakara rAjA zreNikane gautama gaNadharase pUchA ki zrIkaNThake pUrvabhavakA
varNana kaisA thA jise sunakara vanakaNTha tatkAla virakta ho gyaa| uttara meM
gaNadhara bhagavAn kahane lage  // 152-153 //  ki pUrvabhavameM do bhAI vaNik
the, donoMmeM parama prIti thI parantu siyoMne unheM pRthakpRthak kara diyaa|
unameM choTA bhAI daridra thA aura bar3A bhAI dhanasampanna thaa| bar3A bhAI
kisI seThakA AjJAkArI thA so usake samAgamase vaha zrAvaka avasthAko prApta huA
parantu choTA bhAI zikAra Adi kuvyasanoMmeM phaMsA thaa| choTe bhAIkI isa dazAse
bar3A bhAI sadA duHkhI rahatA thA 1. aizvarya m.| 2. tanayaM m.| 3. prIte m.| 4.
svApateyaM dhanamasti yasya sa svApateyI dhanavAnityarthaH  /  5. gRhItavAn kh.|

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, 'When the Alokasvahat Swami Purusha was released, after
testing his brother's affection, he gave him great wealth. || 156 || Then,
abandoning his wicked wife, he took initiation after instructing his younger
brother. The elder brother became Indra, while the younger brother died in
peace. || 157 || The younger brother's soul, having fallen from heaven, became
Shrikant. To guide him, the elder brother's soul, who had become the glorious
Indra, went to Nandishwar Dweep, revealing himself. || 158 || Seeing Indra, your
father Shrikant regained his memory of his past life. The elders told this story
to Vajrakant. || 159 || Hearing this story, Vajrakant became a muni, giving his
kingdom to his son Vajra Prabha. Vajra Prabha also became a muni, giving his
kingdom to his son Indramat. || 160 || Then, Indramat had a son named Meru, Meru
had a son named Mandar, Mandar had a son named Samiranagati, Samiranagati had a
son named Raviprabha, and Raviprabha had a son named Amaraprabha. Amaraprabha
brought Gunavati, the daughter of the king of Lanka, to his city for marriage.
|| 161 - 162 || The ground where the wedding altar was built was as clear as a
mirror. The wives of the Vidyadharas had created many wondrous paintings with
jewels. In one place, there was a forest of lotuses embraced by bees, in
another, a forest of blue lotuses, in another, a forest of half red and half
blue lotuses, in another, pairs of swans with lotus stalks in their beaks, and
in another, pairs of cranes, sarasa birds, and other birds. The Vidyadharas had
also created images of monkeys with very smooth, five-colored, jeweled powder.
Seeing these, the king of the Vidyadharas, Amaraprabha, was filled with great
joy. It is right, for beautiful forms often captivate the hearts of even brave
and noble men. || 163 - 167 || While King Amaraprabha was overjoyed, the bride
Gunavati was terrified at the sight of the monkeys with their distorted faces.
Her whole body trembled, and all her ornaments shook. || 168 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe 'alokasvAhatasvAmipuruSasya visarjane  /  parIkSya bhrAtaraM prItaM
dadAvasmai mahaddhanam  //  156  //  duSTAM tataH khiyaM tyaktvA
saMgIryAnujabodhanam  /  pravrajyAyamabhUdindraH kanIyAMstu zamI mRtaH  //  157
//  devIbhUyazcyuto jAtaH zrIkaNThastatprabuddhaye  /  AtmAnaM darzayannindraH
zrImAnnandIzvaraM gataH  //  158  //  surendraM vIkSya pitrA te
jAtasmaraNamIyuSA  /  idaM kathitamasmAkamiti vRddhAstamUcire  //  159  //
etadAkhyAnakaM zrutvA vajrakaNTho'bhavanmuniH  /  indrAyudhaprabho'pyevaM nyasya
rAjyaM zarIraje  //  160  //  tata indramato jAto merustasmAcca mandaraH  /
samIraNagatistasmAttasmAdapi raviprabhaH  //  161  //  tato'maraprabho
jAtastrikUTendra sutAsya ca  /  pariNetuM samAnItA nAmnA guNavatI zubhA  //  162
//  athAsau darpaNacchAye vedIsaMbandhibhUtale  /  maNibhiH kalpitaM citraM
pazyannAzcarya kAraNam  //  163  //  bhramarAlIpariSvaktamAravidaM kvacidvanam
/  aindIvaraM vanaM cArddhapadmendIvarakaM tathA  //  164 //  capAttamRNAlAnAM
haMsAnAM yugalAni ca  /  krauJcAnAM sArasAnAM ca tathA'nyeSAM patatriNAm  // 165
//  ratnacUrNairatizlaNaiH paJcavarNasamanvitaiH  /  racitAn khecarastrIbhiH
tatrApazyat plavaGgamAn  // 166 //  sa tAn dRSTvA paraM toSaM
jagAmAmbaragAdhipaH  /  manojJaM prAyazo rUpaM dhIrasyApi manoharam  // 167 //
pANigRhItyasya dRSTvA tAn vikRtAnanAn  /  pratyaGgavepathuM prAptA
pracalatsarvabhUSaNA  //  168  //  1 108  /  /  154 - 155  /  /  eka dina usane
apane svAmIkA eka sevaka choTe bhAIke pAsa bhejakara jhUTha-mUTha hI apane Ahata
honekA samAcAra bhejaa| use sunakara premase bharA choTA bhAI daur3A AyA  /  isa
ghaTanA se bar3e bhAIne parIkSA kara lI ki yaha hamase sneha rakhatA hai  /
yaha jAnakara usane choTe bhAIke lie bahuta dhana diyA  /  dhana denekA samAcAra
jaba bar3e bhAIkI strIko milA to vaha bahuta hI kupita huI  /  isa anabana ke
kAraNa bar3e bhAIne apanI duSTa strIkA tyAga kara diyA aura choTe bhAIko upadeza
dekara dIkSA le lii| samAdhise marakara bar3A bhAI indra huA aura choTA bhAI
zAnta pariNAmoMse marakara deva huA  /  vahA~se cyuta hokara choTe bhAIkA jIva
zrIkaNTha huA  /  zrIkaNThako sambodhane ke lie bar3e bhAIkA jIva jo
vaibhavazAlI indra huA thA apane Apako dikhAtA huA nandIzvaradvIpa gayA thA  /
indrako dekhakara tumhAre pitA zrIkaNThako jAtismaraNa ho gayA  /  yaha kathA
muniyoMne hamase kahI thI aisA vRddhajanoMne vajrakaNThase kahA  //  156 - 159
//  yaha kathA sunakara vajrakaNTha apane vajraprabha putrake lie rAjya dekara
muni ho gayA  /  vajraprabha bhI apane putra indramata ke lie rAjya dekara muni
huA  /  tadanantara indramatase meru, meruse mandara, mandarase samIraNagati,
samIraNagatise raviprabha aura raviprabhase amaraprabha nAmaka putra huA  /
amaraprabha laMkAke dhanIkI putrI guNavatIko vivAhaneke lie apane nagara le gayA
//  160 - 162  //  jahA~ vivAhako vedI banI thI vahA~kI bhUmi darpaNake samAna
nirmala thI tathA vahA~ vidyAdharoMkI striyoM maNiyoMse AzcaryaM utpanna
karanevAle aneka citra banA rakhe the  /  kahIM to bhramaroMse AliMgita
kamaloMkA vana banA huA thA, kahIM nIla kamaloMkA vana thA, kahIM Adhe lAla aura
nIle kamaloMkA vana thA, kahIM coMcase mRNAla dabAye hue haMsoMke jor3e bane the
aura kahIM krauMca, sArasa tathA anya pakSiyoMke yugala bane the  /  unhIM
vidyAdharoMne kahIM atyanta cikane pA~ca varNake ratnamayI cUrNaMse vAnaroMke
citra banAye the so inheM dekhakara vidyAdharoMkA svAmI rAjA amaraprabha parama
santoSako prApta huA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki sundararUpa prAyaHkara dhIra-vIra
manuSyake bhI manako hara letA hai  // 163-167 /  /  idhara rAjA amaraprabha to
parama santuSTa huA, udhara vadhU guNavatI vikRta mukhavAle una vAnaroMko
dekhakara bhayabhIta ho gayI  /  usakA pratyeka aMga kAMpane lagA, saba AbhUSaNa
1. vyalIkaM svAhitaM ba.  /  2. visarjanam ma.  /  3. pANigRhItAsyaM ma, kha.  /

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter  109. Her eyes, filled with fear, wandered about, unable to
focus on anything. Her body trembled, as if she were showing the fear of a
mortal. 169. The tilak on her forehead, smeared by drops of sweat, spread out.
Though she was afraid, her actions were still graceful. Finally, she was so
terrified that she clung to King Amaraprabha. 170. King Amaraprabha, who had
been delighted by the monkeys earlier, was now filled with anger towards them.
This is understandable, because even a beautiful object becomes distasteful when
one sees the intention behind it. 171. Then he said, "Who painted these monkeys,
with their various forms and fear-inducing appearances, for our wedding?" 172.
"Surely, there is someone who envies me and is behind this. I will find him
quickly and kill him myself." 173. Seeing the king consumed by anger, the wise
old ministers spoke to him in soothing words. 174. "My lord, there is no one who
hates you. How could anyone who hates you possibly live?" 175. "Be happy, and
listen to the reason why the rows of monkeys were painted for the wedding
celebration." 176. "In your lineage, there was a famous king named Shrikhantha,
who created this beautiful city of Kishkupura, which is like heaven." 177. "Just
as the root cause of actions is the cycle of desires and attachments, so too,
this country, with its diverse forms, was created by King Shrikhantha." 178.
"Even today, the Kinnaras, dwelling in the groves of the forests, sing the
praises of that king, having attained the highest position." 179. "That king,
with his steady nature and strength like Indra, removed the disgrace brought
upon Lakshmi by her fickleness." 180. "It is said that he was amazed when he
first saw these monkeys in this city, with their beautiful forms and human-like
appearances." 181. "He played joyfully with these monkeys, who had various ways
of behaving, and he made them comfortable by providing them with delicious food
and drink." 182.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva 109 niHzeSadRzyavibhrAntatArakAkulalocanA  /  darzayantIva
romAJcaprodgamAdehavadbhayam  // 169 //  svedodabindusaMbaddhavisarpattilakAlikA
/  bhIrurapyatisacceSTA prAvizabhujapaaram  // 17 //  dRSTA yAn muditaH pUrva
tebhyo'kupyat punarvaraH  /  kAntAbhiprAyasAmarthyAt surUpamapi neSyate  // 17
//  tato'sAvabravIt kena vivAhe mama citritAH  /  kapayo vividhAkArA amI
vitrAsakAriNaH  // 172 //  nUnaM kazcinmamAste'smin jano matsarasaMgataH  /
kSipramanviSyatAmeSa karomyasya vadhaM svayam  // 173 //  tatastaM
kopagambhIraguhAgahvaravartinam  /  varSIyAMso mahAprAjJA madhuraM
mantriNo'bravan  // 17 //  tAta nAsmina janaH ko'pi vidveSTA tava vidyate  /
tvayi vA yasya vidveSaH kutastasyAti jIvitam  // 175 //  sa tvaM bhava
prasannAtmA zrayatAmatra kAraNam  /  vivAhamaGgale nyastA yataH
plvgpngktyH||176|| anvaye mavatAmAsIcchIkaNTho nAma vizrutaH  /  yenedaM
nAkasaMkAzaM sRSTaM kiSkupurottamam  // 177 //  sakalasyAsya dezasya
vividhAkArabhAjinaH  /  abhavat sa nRpaH sraSTA prapaJcaH karmaNAmiva  // 178 //
yasyAdyApi vanAnteSu latAgRhasukhasthitAH  /  guNAn gAyanti kinnaryaH sthAnakaM
prApya kinnarAH  // 179 //  caJcalatvasamudbhUtamayazo yena zodhitam  /
sthiraprakRtinA lakSmyA vAsavopamazaktinA  // 18 //  sa etAn prathamaM dRSTvA
vAnarAnatra rUpiNaH  /  mAnuSAkArasaMyuktAn jagAma kila vismayam  // 18 //  reme
ca madito'mIbhiH samaM vividhaceSTitaiH  /  mRSTAzanAdimizcAmI nitAntaM
musthitAH kRtAH  // 182 //  caMcala ho uThe, sabake dekhate-dekhate hI usakI
A~khoMkI putaliyAM bhayase ghUmane lagIM, usake sAre zarIrase romAMca nikala Aye
aura unase vaha aise jAna par3ane lagI mAno zarIradhArI bhayako hI dikhA rahI
ho| usake lalATapara jo tilaka lagA thA vaha svedajalakI bUMdoMse milakara
phaila gyaa| yadyapi vaha bhayabhIta ho rahI thI to bhI usakI ceSTAe~ uttama
thiiN| antameM vaha itanI bhayabhIta huI ki rAjA amaraprabhase lipaTa gayI  //
168-170 //  rAjA amaraprabha pahale jina vAnaroMko dekhakara prasanna huA thA
aba unhIM vAnaroMke prati atyanta krodha karane lagA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki
strIkA abhiprAya dekhakara sundara vastu bhI rucikara nahIM hotI  // 171 //
tadanantara usane kahA ki hamAre vivAhameM aneka AkAroMke dhAraka tathA bhaya
utpanna karanevAle ye vAnara kisane citrita kiye haiM ?  // 172 /  /  nizcita hI
isa kAryameM koI manuSya mujhase IrSyA karanevAlA hai so zIghra hI usakI khoja
kI jAye, maiM svayaM hI usakA vadha karU~gA  // 173 /  /  tadanantara rAjA
amaraprabhako krodharUpI gaharI guhAke madhya vartamAna dekhakara mahAbuddhimAn
vRddha mantrI madhura zabdoMmeM kahane lage  // 174 //  ki he svAmin ! isa
kAryameM Apase dveSa karanevAlA koI bhI nahIM hai  /  bhalA, Apake sAtha jisakA
dveSa hogA usakA jIvana hI kaise raha sakatA hai ?  // 175 /  /  Apa prasanna
hoie aura vivAha-maMgalameM jisa kAraNase vAnaroMkI paMktiyAM citrita kI gayI
haiM vaha kAraNa sunie  // 176 //  Apake vaMzameM zrIkaNTha nAmakA prasiddha
rAjA ho gayA hai jisane svargake samAna sundara isa kiSkupura nAmaka uttama
nagarakI racanA kI thI  // 177 /  /  jisa prakAra karmoMkA mUla kAraNa rAgAdi
prapaMca haiM usI prakAra aneka AkArako dhAraNa karanevAle isa dezakA mUla
kAraNa vahI zrIkaNTha rAjA hai  /  / 178 //  vanoMke bIca nikuMjoMmeM sukhase
baiThe hue kinnara uttamottama sthAna pAkara Aja bhI usa rAjAke guNa gAyA karate
haiM  /  / 179 //  jisakI prakRti sthira thI tathA jo indratulya parAkramakA
dhAraka thA aise usa rAjAne caMcalatAke kAraNa utpanna huA lakSmIkA apayaza dUra
kara diyA thA  // 180 /  /  sunate haiM ki vaha rAjA sarvaprathama isa nagarameM
sundara rUpake dhAraka tathA manuSyake samAna AkArase saMyukta ina vAnaroMko
dekhakara Azcaryako prApta huA thA  // 181 /  /  vaha rAjA nAnA prakArakI
ceSTAoMko dhAraNa karanevAle ina vAnaroMke sAtha bar3I prasannatAse krIr3A
karatA thA tathA usIne ina vAnaroMko madhura AhAra-pAnI 1. darzayantI ca ma.  /
2. kinnarAt ma.  /  kinnarAn k.|

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  110 In the Padma Purana, it is said that from that
time onwards, all those who were born in the lineage of that great one, the best
of men, developed devotion and love for those monkeys. ||183||  Since your
ancestors had established these monkeys as auspicious objects, they are now
present in this auspicious event. ||184|| In any lineage where a particular
object is worshipped as auspicious by the ancestors, if it is disregarded, then
obstacles and hindrances arise. ||185|| However, if the same action is performed
with devotion, it brings good fortune. Therefore, O King, you, who are wise and
have a noble heart, should also worship these monkeys. ||186|| Upon hearing this
from his ministers, Amaraprabha, the king, replied with great comfort. He
discarded the anger that had arisen on his face while speaking. ||187|| He said,
"If our ancestors worshipped these monkeys as auspicious, then why are they
depicted on the earth where the feet and other parts of the body are placed?"
||188|| Out of respect for the elders, I will bow to them and wear them on my
head. Make their images with jewels and other materials and place them on the
crowns, flags, peaks of palaces, arches, and on the tops of umbrellas. Do this
quickly." ||189|| The ministers, upon receiving this order, said "So be it" and
carried out everything according to the king's wishes. Wherever you looked,
there were monkeys everywhere. ||190-191|| Then, after enjoying great happiness
with his queen, the desire to conquer Vijayaditya mountain arose in the heart of
King Amaraprabha. So, he set out with his four-armed army. At that time, his
flags bore the mark of the monkeys, and all the monkey-descendants praised him.
||192-193|| In the battle, which was a crushing defeat for the enemies, he
conquered both armies, but he did not take their wealth. ||194|| This is right,
because it is the vow of proud men to subdue their enemies, not to desire their
wealth. ||195|| Then, King Amaraprabha, accompanied by the leading men of
Vijayaditya mountain, returned to Kishku city after conquering the world.
||196||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 110 padmapurANe tataH prabhRti ye jAtAH kule tasya mahAdyuteH  /  tasya bhaktyA
ratiM te'pi cakrurebhirnarottamAH  // 183 //  yuSmAkaM pUrvajairyasmAdamI
maGgalavastuSu  /  prakalpitAH tataste'pi maGgale saMnidhApitAH  // 18 //
maGgalaM yasya yatpUrva puruSaiH sevita kule  /  pratyavAyena saMbandhe nirAse
tasya jAyate  // 185 //  kriyamANaM tu tadbhaktyA karoti zubhasaMpadam  /
tasmAdAsevyatAmetadbhavatApi sucetasA  // 18 //  ityukte mantribhiH sAntvaM
pratyuvAcAmarapremaH  /  tyajan kSaNena kopotthavikAraM vadanArpitam  // 187 //
maGgala sevitAH pUrvairyathasmAkamamI tataH  /  kimityAlikhitA bhUmau yasyAM
pAdAdisaMgamaH  // 18 //  namaskRtya vahAmyetAn zirasA gurugauravAt  /
ratnAdighaTitAn kRtvA lakSaNAnmaulikoTiSu  // 189 //  dhvajeSu gRhazRGgeSu
toraNAnAM ca mUrddhasu  /  zirassu cAtapatrANAmetAnAzu prayacchata  // 19 //
tatastaistatpratijJAya tathA sarvamanuSThitam  /  yathA digIkSyate yA yA tatra
tatra plavaGgamAH  // 19 //  arthatasya samaM dezyA bhubhAnasya paraM sukham  /
vijayAIjigISAyAmakaronmAnasaM pratasthe ca tato yuktaH senayA caturaGgayA  /
kapidhvajaH kapicchatraH kapimauliH kapistutaH  // 193 //  zreNidvayaM
vijityAsau raNe sattvavimardini  /  AsthApaya_ze rAjA jagrAha na dhanaM tayoH
// 19 //  abhimAnena tuGgAnAM puruSANAmidaM vratam  /  namayantyeva yaccha-
draviNe' vigatAzayAH  // 195 //  tato'sau punarAgacchat puraM kiSku prakIrtitam
/  vijayAcapradhAnena janenAnugatAyanaH  // 19 //  Adike dvArA sukhI kiyA thA
// 182 //  tadanantara mahAkAntike dhAraka rAjA zrIkaNThake vaMzameM jo
uttamottama rAjA hue ve bhI usakI bhaktike kAraNa ina vAnaroMse prema karate
rahe  // 183 /  /  cUMki Apake pUrvajoMne inheM mAMgalika padArthoM meM nizcita
kiyA thA arthAt inheM maMgalasvarUpa mAnA thA isalie ye saba citrAmarUpase isa
maMgalamaya kAryameM upasthita kiye gaye haiM  // 184 //  jisa kulameM jisa
padArthakI pahalese puruSoMke dvArA maMgalarUpameM upAsanA hotI A rahI hai yadi
usakA tiraskAra kiyA jAtA hai to niyamase vighna-bAdhAe~ upasthita hotI haiM  //
185 /  /  yadi vahI kArya bhaktipUrvaka kiyA jAtA hai to vaha zubha sampadAoMko
detA hai| he rAjan  /  Apa uttama hRdayake dhAraka haiM-vicArazIla haiM ataH Apa
bhI ina vAnaroMke citrAmakI upAsanA kiijie||186|| mantriyoMke aisA kahanepara
rAjA amaraprabhane bar3I sAntvanAse uttara diyaa| krodhake kAraNa usake
mukhapara jo vikAra A gayA thA uttara dete samaya usane usa vikArakA tyAga kara
diyA thA  // 187 /  /  usane kahA ki yadi hamAre pUrvajoMne inakI maMgalarUpase
upAsanA kI hai to inheM isa taraha pRthivIpara kyoM citrita kiyA gayA hai jahA~
ki paira AdikA saMgama hotA hai  /  / 188 //  gurujanoMke gauravase maiM inheM
namaskAra kara zirapara dhAraNa kruuNgaa| ratna Adike dvArA vAnaroMke cihna
banavAkara mukuToMke agrabhAgameM, dhvajAoMmeM, mahaloMke zikharoMmeM, toraNoMke
agrabhAgameM tathA chatroMke Upara inheM zIghra hI dhAraNa kro| isa prakAra
mantriyoMko AjJA dI so unhoMne 'tathAstu' kahakara rAjAko AjJAnusAra saba kucha
kiyaa| jisa dizAmeM dekho usI dizAmeM vAnara hI vAnara dikhAI dete the  //
189-191 //  _athAnantara rAnIke sAtha parama sukhakA upabhoga karate hue rAjA
amaraprabhake manameM vijayA parvatako jItanekI icchA huI so caturaMga senAke
sAtha usane prasthAna kiyaa| usa samaya usakI dhvajAmeM vAnaroMkA cihna thA aura
saba vAnaravaMzI usakI stuti kara rahe the||192-193|| prANiyoMkA mAna mardana
karanevAle yuddha meM donoM zreNiyoMko jItakara usane apane vaza kiyA para unakA
dhana nahIM grahaNa kiyA  // 194 //  so ThIka hI hai kyoMki abhimAnI manuSyoMkA
yaha vrata hai ki ve zatruko namrIbhUta hI karate haiM, usake dhanakI AkAMkSA
nahIM karate  // 195 /  /  tadanantara vijayAddha parvatake pradhAna puruSa
jisake poche-pIche A rahe the aisA rAjA amaraprabha digvijaya kara kiSku nagara
vApasa 1. svAntaM kha.  /  2. -maraprabhuH  /  3. kapismRtiH ka., kh.| 4. -dvazo
ma.  /  5. vigatAzayA ma.  /  -

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter  111. Having attained the sovereignty of all the Vidyadharas,
he enjoyed Lakshmi for a long time. Lakshmi was fickle, so he bound her with
chains as if to make her steady. ||197||  Then a son was born to him named
Kapiket. His queen was Sri-Prabha, who was the embodiment of virtues. ||198||
Seeing his son's prowess, Amaraprabha entrusted him with the kingdom and left
the confines of his home. ||199||  Kapiket also left home, giving the kingdom to
his son, Pratibala. This is quite common, as the former kings often saw the
kingdom as a poisonous vine. ||200||  Those who have earned merit in their
previous lives do not have a great attachment to the kingdom gained through
their efforts. ||201||  Since virtuous men obtain Lakshmi effortlessly with
little effort, they do not suffer when they abandon it. ||202||  Even if
virtuous men somehow enjoy worldly pleasures, they soon become detached from
them and desire the supreme state of liberation. ||203||  That happiness which
is not achieved through means, but is dependent on the soul, is continuous,
great, and without end - who would not desire such happiness? ||204||  Pratibala
had a son named Gagan-ananda. Gagan-ananda had a son named Kshechar-ananda, and
Kshechar-ananda had a son named Giri-nanda. ||205||  Thus, in the lineage of the
Vanara-ketus, there were countless kings. Some of them attained heaven according
to their karma, while others attained liberation. ||206||  Gautama Swami said to
King Srenika, "O King! This is merely a description of the shadow of those born
in the lineage. Who is capable of mentioning the names of all these men?"
||207||  In the world, one is known by one's characteristics. For example, a
servant is known for his service, a farmer for his farming, an archer for his
archery, a righteous person for his righteousness, a warrior for his protection
of the suffering, and a Brahmin for his celibacy. ||208||  Just as those born in
the Ikshvaku lineage are called Ikshvaku, and those born in the Nami-Vinamika
lineage are called Vidyadharas because they possess knowledge, so too... ||209||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva 111 AdhipatyaM samastAnAM prApya vidyaabhRtaamsau| nizcalA
bubhuje lakSmI nigaDairiva saMyutAm  // 197 //  tatastasya suto jAtaH
kapiketurabhikhyayA  /  zrIprabhA kAminI yasya babhUva guNadhAriNI  // 198 //
tato vikramasaMpalaM sa taM vIkSya zarIrajam  /  rAjyalakSmyAM samAyojya niragAd
gRhabandhanAt  // 199 //  dattvA pratibalAkhyAya lakSmIM so'pi viniryayo  /
prAyazo viSavallIva dRSTA pUrva padyutiH  // 20 //  pUrvopArjitapuNyAnAM
puruSANAM prayatnataH  /  saMjAtAsu na lakSmISu bhAvaH saMjAyate mahAn  // 20 //
yathaiva tAH samutpannAsteSAmalpaprayatnataH  /  tathaiva tyajatAmeSAM pIDA tAsu
na jAyate  // 202 //  tathA kathaMcidAsAtha santo viSayajaM sukham  /  teSu
nirvedamAgatya vAJchanti paramaM padam  // 203 //  yannopakaraNaH
sAdhyamAtmAyattaM nirantaram  /  mahadanteva nirmuktaM sukhaM tat ko na vAJchati
// 204 //  sutaH pratibalasyApi gaganAnandasaMjJitaH  /  tasyApi
khecarAnandastasyApi girinandanaH  // 205 /  /  evaM vAnaraketUnAM vaMze saMkhyA
vivarjitAH  /  AtmIyaH karmamiH prAptAH svarga mokSaM ca mAnavAH  // 206 /  /
vaMzAnusaraNacchAyA mAtrametatprakIya'te  /  nAmAnyeSAM samastAnAM zaktaH kaH
parikIrtitum  // 2.7 //  lakSaNaM yasya yalloke sa tena parikIrtyate  /  sevakaH
sevayA yuktaH karSakaH karSaNAttathA  // 20 //  dhAnuSko dhanuSo yogAd dhArmiko
dharmasevanAt  /  kSatriyaH kSatatastrANAd brAhmaNo brahmacaryataH  // 209 /  /
ikSvAkavo yathA caite namezca vinamestathA  /  kule vidyAdharA jAtA
vidyAdharaNayogataH  // 210 //  AyA  // 196|| isa prakAra samasta vidyAdharoMkA
Adhipatya pAkara usane cirakAla taka lakSmIkA upabhoga kiyA  /  lakSmI caMcala
thI so usane ber3I DAlakara hI mAno use nizcala banA diyA thA  // 197 //
tadanantara rAjA amaraprabhake kapiketu nAmakA putra huaa| usake aneka guNoMko
dharanevAlI zrIprabhA nAmakI rAnI thI  /  / 198 /  /  putrako parAkramI dekha
rAjA amaraprabha use rAjyalakSmI sauMpakara gRharUpI bandhanase bAhara nikalA
// 199 //  tadanantara kapiketu bhI pratibala nAmaka putrake lie rAjyalakSmI
dekara gharase calA gayA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki pUrva puruSa rAjyalakSmIko
prAyaH viSakI velake samAna dekhate the  /  / 200 /  /  jinhoMne pUrva
paryAyameM puNya upArjita kiyA hai aise puruSoMkA prayatnopArjita lakSmImeM
bar3A anurAga nahIM hotA  // 201 //  puNyAtmA manuSyoMko cUMki lakSmI thor3e hI
prayatnase anAyAsa hI prApta ho jAtI hai isalie usakA tyAga karate hue unheM
pIr3A nahIM hotI  // 202 /  /  satpuruSa, viSaya sambandhI sukhako kisI taraha
prApta karate bhI haiM to usase zIghra hI virakta ho parama pada-mokSakI icchA
karane lagate haiM  // 203 //  jo sukha upakaraNoMke dvArA sAdhyaM na hokara
AtmAke AdhIna hai, antararahita hai, mahAn hai tathA antase rahita hai usa
sukhakI bhalA kauna nahIM icchA karegA  // 204 /  /  pratibalake gaganAnanda
nAmakA putra huA, gaganAnandake khecarAnanda aura khecarAnandake girinandana
putra huA  /  / 205 /  /  isa prakAra dhvajAmeM vAnaroMkA cihna dhAraNa
karanevAle vAnaravaMziyoMke vaMzameM saMkhyAtIta rAjA hue so unameM apane-apane
karmAnusAra kitane hI svargako prApta hue aura kitane hI mokSa gaye  /  / 206 /
/  gautama svAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki rAjan ! yaha to vaMzameM utpanna
hae paruSoMkA chAyA mAtrakA nirUpaNa hai| ina saba puruSoMkA nAmollekha karaneke
lie kona samathaM hai ?  // 207 /  /  lokameM jisakA jo lakSaNa hotA hai usakA
usI lakSaNase ullekha hotA hai  /  jaise sevA karanevAlA sevaka, khetI
karanevAlA kisAna, dhanuSa dhAraNa karanevAlA dhAnuSka, dharma sevana karanevAlA
dhArmika, duHkhI jIvoMkI rakSA karanevAlA kSatriya aura brahmacarya dhAraNa
karanevAlA brAhmaNa kahA jAtA hai| jisa prakAra ikSvAku vaMzameM utpanna hue
puruSa ikSvAku kahalAte haiM aura nami-vinamike vaMzameM utpanna hue puruSa
vidyA dhAraNa karaneke kAraNa vidyAdhara 1. yatnopa -m.| 2. mahadaM tena ma.  /

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, A king who abandons his kingdom and becomes a Shraman is
considered great. He attains connection with tapasya, which is called shram.
||211|| This word is clearly distinct and has other uses. Just as one who holds
a staff is called a "yashti" and one who holds a spear is called a "kunta,"
similarly, those who sit on a platform are called "mancha." ||212|| In the same
way, those who have the mark of a monkey on their umbrellas and other things are
known as "vanara" in the world. ||214|| The great Shreyansnath and Vasupujya, in
their time, had the mark of a monkey on their crowns, and those who came after
them in their lineage also followed this tradition. Indeed, following the
practices of one's ancestors brings great joy. ||215-216|| Thus, the origin of
the monkey lineage has been briefly explained. Now, I will tell you another
story. ||217|| In the excellent city of Kishkun, there was a king of the vanara
lineage named Mahodadhi. His wife was named Vidyutprakasha, who was a treasure
trove of feminine qualities. She captivated her husband's heart with her
actions. She was the crown jewel of hundreds of beautiful women, due to her good
fortune, beauty, knowledge, and other actions. ||218-220|| This king, Mahodadhi,
had one hundred and eight valiant sons. He entrusted the burden of the kingdom
to them and enjoyed his pleasures. ||221|| In the tirtha of Muni Suvratnath,
Mahodadhi was a famous vidyadhara. He always kept the vidyadharas captivated
with his wondrous deeds. ||222|| At that time, in Lanka, there was a famous king
named Vidyutkesha, who was like the moon in the sky of the Rakshasa lineage and
was very dear to the people. ||223|| Mahodadhi and Vidyutkesha had great
affection for each other, which grew due to their frequent visits to each
other's places. Their minds were one, only their bodies were separate. ||224||
Knowing the greatness of Shramanhood, Vidyutkesha, who was like the sound of the
ocean, embraced Shramanhood and became a master of the ultimate truth. ||225||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe parityajya nRpo rAjyaM zramaNo jAyate mahAn  /  tapasA prApya
saMbandhaM tapo hi zrama ucyate  // 211 //  ayaM tu vyakta evAsti zabdo'nyatra
prayogavAn  /  yaSTihasto yathA yaSTiH kuntaH kuntakarastathA  //  212  //
maJcasthAH puruSA maJcA yathA ca parikIrtitAH  /
sAhacaryAdibhirdharmairevamAdyA udAhRtAH  /  / 213|| tathA vAnaracihnena
chatrAdivinivezinA  /  vidyAdharA gatAH khyAtiM vAnarA iti viSTape || 214  //
zreyaso devadevasya vAsupUjyasya cAntare  /  amaraprabhasaMjJena kRtaM
vAnaralakSaNam  //  215  //  taskRtAt sevanAjAtAH zeSA api tathAkriyAH  /  parAM
hi kurute prItiM pUrvAcarita sevanam  /  / 216  /  /  evaM saMkSepataH proktaH
kapivaMzasamudbhavaH  /  pravakSyAmi parAM vArtAmimAM zreNika te'dhunA  //  217
//  mahodadhiravo nAma khecarANAmabhUt patiH  /  kule vAnaraketUnAM kiSkunAmni
purUttame || 218|| vidyuprakAzA nAmAsya patnI strIguNasaMpadAm  /
nidhAnamabhavad bhAvagRhItapati mAnasA ||219|| rAmANAmabhirAmANAM zatazo yopari
sthitA  /  saubhAgyena tu rUpeNa vijJAnena tu karmabhiH || 220  //  putrANAM
zatametasya sASTakaM vIryazAlinAm  /  yeSu rAjyabharaM nyasya sa bhogAn bubhuje
sukham ||221|| munisuvratanAthasya tIrthe yaH parikIrtitaH  /
vyApArairadbhutairnityamanuraJjita khecaraH || 222|| laGkAyAM sa tadA svAmI
rakSovaMzenamovidhuH  /  vidyutkeza iti khyAto babhUva janatApriyaH  // 223 //
gatyAgavAnasaMvRddhamabhUt prema paraM tayoH  /  yatazcittamamUdekaM pRthaktvaM
dehamAtrataH  //  224  //  taDikezasya vijJAya zrAmaNyamudadhisvanaH  /
zramaNatvaM pariprAptaH paramArthavizAradaH || 225 || 112 kahe gaye haiN| jo
rAjA rAjya chor3akara tapake sAtha apanA sambandha jor3ate haiM ve zramaNa
kahalAte haiM kyoMki zrama kare so zramaNa aura tapazcaraNa hI zrama kahA jAtA
hai  /  /  208 - 211  //  isake sivAya yaha bAta to spaSTa hI hai ki zabda kucha
hai aura usakA prayoga kucha anya arthameM hotA hai jaise jisake hAthameM yaSTi
hai vaha yaSTi, jisake hAthameM kunta hai vaha kunta aura jo maMcapara baiThA
hai vaha maMca kahalAtA hai  /  isa taraha sAhacayaM Adi dharmoke kAraNa
zabdoMke prayogameM bheda hotA hai isake udAharaNa diye gaye haiM ||212-213 //
| isI prakAra jina vidyAdharoMke chatra AdimeM vAnarake cihna the ve lokameM
'vAnara' isa prasiddhiko prApta hue || 214 || devAdhideva zreyAnsanAtha aura
vAsupUjya bhagavAn ke antarAlameM rAjA amaraprabhane apane mukuTa AdimeM
vAnarakA cihna dhAraNa kiyA thA so usakI paramparAmeM jo anya rAjA hue ve bhI
aisA hI karate rahe  /  yathArtha meM pUrvajoM kI paripATIkA AcaraNa karanA
parama prIti utpanna karatA hai || 215 - 216  //  gautama svAmI rAjA zreNikase
kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! isa taraha saMkSepase vAnara - vaMzakI utpatti kahI
hai aba eka dUsarI bAta kahatA hU~ so suna || 217 //  athAnantara kiSkunAmaka
uttama nagarameM isI vAnara-vaMzameM mahodadhi nAmaka vidyAdhara rAjA huaa|
isakI vidyutprakAzA nAmakI rAnI thI jo striyoMke guNarUpI sampadAoMkI mAno
khajAnA thI  /  usane apanI ceSTAoMse patikA hRdaya vaza kara liyA thA, vaha
saubhAgya, rUpa, vijJAna tathA anya ceSTAoMke kAraNa saikar3oM sundarI striyoMkI
ziromaNi tho  // 218-220 //  rAjA mahodadhike eka sau ATha parAkramI putra the
so unapara rAjyabhAra sauMpakara vaha sukhase bhogoMkA upabhoga karatA thA ||
221|| muni suvrata bhagavAn ke tIrthaMmeM rAjA mahodadhi prasiddha vidyAdhara
thA  /  vaha apane Azcaryajanaka kAryoMse sadA vidyAdharoMko anurakta rakhatA
thA  //  222 //  usI samaya laMkA meM vidyut keza nAmaka prasiddha rAjA thaa| jo
rAkSasa vaMzarUpa AkAzakA mAno candramA thA aura logoMkA atyanta priya thA ||
223 || mahodadhi aura vidyutkezameM parama sneha thA jo ki eka dUsare ke yahA~
Ane-jAne ke kAraNa parama vRddhiko prApta huA thA  /  una donoMkA citta to eka
thA kevala zarIra mAtrase hI donoMmeM pRthakpanA thA || 224 || vidyutkezane
munidIkSA dhAraNa kara lI 1. ca ma.  /  2. rakSovaMze nabhovidhuH ma.  /

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter  **113**  The à¤¶à¥à¤°à¥à¤£à¤¿à¤ asked the à¤à¤£à¤¨à¤¾à¤¯à¤, "Why did Tadditkesha
take such a difficult vow?"   **226** The à¤à¤£à¤¨à¤¾à¤¯à¤ replied, "Once, Tadditkesha
went to play in the beautiful forest called Pramda, which had many places for
recreation."  **227** "He would play in the lovely lakes filled with clear
water, adorned with lotuses and blue lotuses, where large waves rose and boats
moved gracefully."  **228** "He would swing on the magnificent swings, with
comfortable seats, tied to tall trees, that soared high."  **229** "He would
climb the golden mountains, with steps leading to their peaks, adorned with
jewels, and surrounded by groves of trees."  **230** "He would play among the
groves of trees, beautiful with fruits and flowers, adorned with swaying leaves,
and embraced by vines."  **231** "He would play among women whose graceful
movements and playful gestures could even disturb the minds of the munis. Their
hands, like blooming buds, were busy plucking flowers. Their bodies, bearing
heavy hips, were marked with drops of sweat. Their large pearl necklaces bounced
with the movement of their breasts, adding to their beauty. Their waists,
adorned with delicate lines, sometimes disappeared and sometimes reappeared.
Their minds were distracted, trying to shoo away the intoxicated bees attracted
by their breath. They held their loose garments with their hands, and their eyes
darted about."  **232-235** "Thus, the king of the Rakshasas, Tadditkesha, was
enjoying himself among many women."  **236** "Then, while Tadditkesha's queen,
Shrichandra, was engrossed in play, a monkey came and tore her breasts with his
sharp claws."  **237** "The monkey, naturally disrespectful, was filled with
extreme remorse and his eyes were distorted with anger."  **238** "Tadditkesha,
seeing his beloved bleeding, comforted her and then, drawing his bow, killed the
monkey."  **225**  Upon hearing this news, the à¤®à¤¹à¤¾à¤à¤¦à¤§à¤¿, a seeker of the ultimate
truth, took the muni-diksha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTha parva 113 taDitkezaH kuto hetorAzrito durddharAkRtim  /  saMpRSTaH
zreNikenaivamuvAca gaNanAyakaH  // 226 //  anyadAtha taDitkezaH pramadAkhyaM
manoharam  /  niSkAnto rantumudyAnaM kRtakrIDanakAlayam  // 227 //
pamendIvararamyeSu saraHsu svacchavAriSu  /  udyattaraGgabhaGgeSu
droNIsaMcAracAruSu  // 228 //  dolAsu ca mahArhAsu racitAsanabhUmiSu  /
tuGgapAdapasatAsu dUrapreGkhApravRddhiSu  // 229 //  sataH sopAnamArgeSu
ratnaraJjitasAnuSu  /  drumakhaNDaparIteSu hemaparvatakeSu ca  // 230 //
phalapuSpamanojJeSu calatpallavazAliSu  /  latAliGgitadeheSu mahIruhacayeSu ca
// 231 //  munikSomanasAmarthyayuktavibhramasaMpadAm  /
puSpAdipracayAsaktapANipallavazominAm  // 232 //
nitambavahanAyAsajAtasvedAmbuvipraSAm  /
kucakampocchalatsthUlamuktAhArapuruviSAm  // 233 //
nimajadudbhavatsUkSmavalimadhya virAjitAm  /
niHzvAsAkRSTamattAlivAraNAkulacetasAm  // 23 //  srastAmbarasamAlambikarANAM
calacakSuSAm  /  madhyamAsthAya dArANAM sa reme rAkSasAdhipaH  // 235 //  atha
krIDanasaktAyA devyAstasya payodharau  /  zrIcandrAkhyAM dadhAnAyAH kapinA
nakhakoTibhiH  // 236 //  vipATitau svabhAvena vinayapracyutAtmanA  /  nitAntaM
khedyamAnena ruSA vikRtacakSuSA  // 237 //  samAzvAsya tataH kAntAM
pragalatstanazoNitAm  /  nihato bANamAkRSya taDitkezena vAnaraH  // 238 //  yaha
samAcAra jAnakara paramArthake jAnanevAle mahodadhine munidIkSA dhAraNa kara lI
/  / 225 /  /  yaha kathA sunakara zreNika rAjAne gautama gaNadharase pUchA ki
he svAmin ! vidyutkezane kisa kAraNa kaThina dIkSA dhAraNa kii| isake uttarameM
gaNadhara bhagavAn isa prakAra kahane lage  // 226 /  /  ki kisI samaya
vidyutkeza jisameM krIr3Ake aneka sthAna bane hue the aise atyanta sundara
pramadanAmaka vanameM krIr3A karaneke lie gayA thA so vahA~ kabhI to vaha una
sarovaroMmeM krIr3A karatA thA jo kamala tathA nIla kamaloMse manohara the.
jinameM svaccha jala bharA thA. jinameM baDI-baDI lahareM uTha rahI thIM tathA
nAvoMke saMcArase mahAmanohara dikhAI dete the  // 227-228 /  /  kabhI una
bezakImatI jhUloMpara jhUlatA thA jinameM baiThanekA acchA Asana banAyA gayA
thA, jo UMce vRkSase baMdhe the tathA jinakI uchAla bahuta lambI hotI thI  //
229 /  /  kabhI una suvarNamaya parvatoMpara car3hatA thA jinake Upara jAneke
lie sIr3hiyoMke mArga bane hue the, jinake zikhara ratnoMse raMjita the, aura jo
vRkSoMke samUhase veSTita the  // 230 //  kabhI una vRkSoMkI jhuramuTameM krIr3A
karatA thA jo phala aura phUloMse manohara the, jo hilate hue pallavoMse
suzobhita the aura jinake zarIra aneka latAoMse AliMgita the  // 231 //  kabhI
una striyoMke bIca baiThakara krIr3A karatA thA ki jinake hAva-bhAva-vilAsarUpa
sampadAe~ muniyoMko bhI kSobhita karanekI sAmarthya rakhatI thIM, jo phUla Adi
tor3anekI kriyAmeM lage hue hastarUpI pallavoMse zobhAyamAna thIM, sthUla
nitamba dhAraNa karaneke kAraNa jinake zarIrapara sveda jalakI bUMdeM prakaTa ho
rahI thIM, stanoMke kampanase UparakI ora uchalanevAle bar3e-bar3e motiyoMke
hArase jinakI kAnti bar3ha rahI thI, jisakI sUkSma rekhAeM kabhI antahita ho
jAtI thIM aura kabhI prakaTa dikhAI detI thIM aisI kamarase jo sazobhita thIM.
zvAsocchavAsase AkarSita matta bhauMroMke nirAkaraNa karane meM jinakA citta
vyAkala thA, jo nIce khisake hue vastrako apane hAthase thAme huI thI tathA
jinake netra idhara-udhara cala rahe the| isa prakAra rAkSasoMkA rAjA vidyutkeza
aneka striyoMke bIca baiThakara krIr3A kara rahA thA  /  / 232-235 /  /
athAnantara rAjA vidyutkezakI rAnI zrIcandrA idhara krIr3AmeM lIna thI udhara
kisI vAnarane Akara apane nAkhUnoMke agrabhAgase usake donoM stana vidIrNa kara
diye  // 236|| jisa vAnarane usake stana vidIrNa kiye the vaha svabhAvase hI
avinayI thA, krodhase atyanta khedako pApta ho rahA thA, usake netra vikRta
dikhAI dete the  // 237 /  /  tadanantara jisake stanase khUna jhar3a rahA thA
aisI vallabhAko sAntvanA 1. kampojjvalat ma.  /  2. pura ma.  /  3. vidyamAnena
ma.  /

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
114 Padma Purana !  He quickly went there and fell to the ground. Where the
sages, the aerial beings, reside. ||239|| Seeing the monkey trembling and
wounded, the sages, who knew the state of the world, felt compassion. ||240||
They taught him the five prostrations, along with the renunciation of all
possessions, and the wealth of austerities, which are accompanied by righteous
giving. ||241|| Then, abandoning his deformed monkey form, he became the
Mahoudadhi Kumar, a celestial being with a magnificent form, in an instant.
||242|| Then, as the celestial being was about to kill the other monkeys, the
Mahoudadhi Kumar, knowing his past life, arrived there. He worshipped his former
body. ||243|| Seeing the group of monkeys being killed by cruel men, he, with
the power of his karma, created a great army of monkeys. ||244|| Their mouths
were terrible with sharp fangs, their brows were furrowed, their color was like
red ochre, and they made fearsome sounds. ||245|| Some were lifting mountains in
their hands, some were uprooting trees, some were pounding the earth with their
hands, and others were shaking the earth. ||246|| Their bodies were filled with
the weight of anger, making them appear like the great Rudra, and they were
leaping far and wide. These magical monkeys, filled with rage, spoke to the
monkey king, the celestial being, Vidhyutkesh, who was filled with delusion.
||247|| "Stop, stop, you wicked one! You are now in the grip of death. O sinner!
Having killed the monkey, where will you go for refuge now?" ||248|| Saying
this, they filled the entire sky with their hands, which held mountains, so much
so that even a needle could not be seen. ||249|| Then, filled with wonder,
Vidhyutkesh thought, "This is not the power of the monkeys, it must be something
else." ||250|| Then, abandoning hope for his body, Vidhyutkesh, the wise in the
science of ethics, spoke to the monkeys with sweet words and humility. ||251||
"O virtuous ones! Tell me, who are you? Your bodies are shining brightly. This
power of yours does not seem to be the natural power of monkeys." ||252||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 114 padmapurANe ! vegena sa tato gatvA patitastatra bhUtale  /  tiSThanti
munayo yatra vihAyastalacAriNaH  // 239 //  tatastaM vepathugrastaM savANaM
vIkSya vAnaram  /  munInAmanukampA'bhUt saMsArasthitivedinAm  //  240 //  tasmai
paJcanamaskAraH sarvatyAgasamanvitaH  /
dharmadAnasamudyuktairupadiSTastapodhanaiH  // 241  //  tataH sa vikRtAM tyaktvA
tanuM vAnarayonijAm  /  mahodadhi kumAro'bhUt kSaNenottamavigrahaH  // 242 //
tato yAvadasau hantuM khecaro'nyAn samudyataH  /  kapIMstAvadayaM prAptaH
kRtasva tanupUjanaH  // 243 //  hanyamAnAM naraiH krUrairdRSTvA vAnarasaMhatim
/  cakre vaikriyasAmarthyAt kapInAM mahatIM camUm ||244||
daMSTrAGkurakarAlaistairvadanairRvikAribhiH  /  sindUrasadRzacchAyaiH
kRtabhISaNaniHsvanaiH  /  /  245  /  /  utkSipya parvatAn kecit kecidunmUlya
pAdapAn  /  Ahatya dharaNIM kecit pANinAsphAlya cApare  //  246 //
krodhasaMbhAraraudrAGgA dUrotplavanakAriNaH  /  babhaNurvAnarAdhyakSaM khecaraM
bhinnacetasam  //  247 //  tiSTha tiSTha durAcAra mRtyoH saMprati gocare  /
nihatya vAnaraM pApa tavAdya zaraNaM kutaH || 248  //  abhidhAyeti taiH sarvaM
vyoma parvatapANibhiH  /  vyAptaM tathA yathA tasmin sUcIbhedo'pi nekSyate  //
249 //  tato vismayamApanastaDitkezo vyacintayat  /  nedaM balaM plavaGgAnAM
kimapyanyadidaM bhavet  //  250  //  tato nirIha deho'sau mAdhuryamitayA girA  /
vAnarAnvinayenedamabravInnayapaNDitaH  // 251 //  santo vadata ke yUyaM
mahAbhAsuravigrahAH  /  na prakRtyA plavaGgAnAM zaktireSA samIkSyate  //  252 //
dekara usane bANa dvArA vAnarako mAra DAlA ||238 || ghAyala vAnara vegase
bhAgakara vahA~ pRthvIpara par3A jahA~ ki AkAzagAmI munirAja virAjamAna the ||
|| 239 || jisake zarIra meM ka~paka~pI chUTa rahI tathA bANachidA huA thA aise
vAnarako dekhakara saMsArakI sthitike jAnakAra muniyoMke hRdaya meM dayA utpanna
huI || 240 || usI samaya dharmaMdAna karanemeM tatpara evaM taparUpI dhanake
dhAraka muniyoMne usa vAnara ke lie saba padArthoMkA tyAga karAkara
paMcanamaskAra mantrakA upadeza diyA || 241 | usake phalasvarUpa vaha vAnara
yoni meM utpanna hue apane pUrvavikRta zarIrako chor3akara kSaNabhara meM uttama
zarIrakA dhArI mahodadhikumAra nAmaka bhavanavAsI deva huA || 242|| tadanantara
idhara rAjA vidyutkeza jabataka anya vAnaroMko mAraneke lie udyata huA tabataka
avadhijJAnase apanA pUrvaMbhava jAnakara mahodadhikumAra deva vahA~ A phuNcaa|
Akara usane apane pUrvaM zarIrakA pUjana kiyA ||243 || duSTa manuSyoM ke dvArA
vAnaroMke samUha mAre jA rahe haiM yaha dekha usane vikriyA kI sAmarthyaMse
vAnaroM kI eka bar3I bhArI senA banAyI || 244 || una vAnaroMke mukha dA~r3hoMse
vikarAla the, unakI bhauMheM car3hI huI thIM, sindUrake samAna lAla-lAla unakA
raMga thA aura ve bhayaMkara zabda kara rahe the || 245 || koI vAnara parvata
ukhAr3akara hAthameM liye the, koI vRkSa ukhAr3akara hAthameM dhAraNa kara rahe
the, koI hAthoMse jamIna kUTa rahe the aura koI pRthvI jhulA rahe the || 246 ||
krodhake bhArase jinake aMga mahArudra - mahAbhayaMkara dikha rahe the aura jo
dUra-dUra taka lambI chalAMgeM bhara rahe the aise mAyAmayI vAnaroMne atizaya
kupita vAnaravaMzI rAjA vidyutkeza vidyAdharase kahA ||247 //  ki are durAcArI !
Thahara-Thahara, aba tU mRtyu vaza A par3A hai, are pApI ! vAnarako mArakara aba
tU kisakI zaraNa meM jAyegA ? || 248 || aisA kahakara hAthoM meM paryaMta
dhAraNa karanevAle una mAyAmayI vAnaroMne samasta AkAzako isa prakAra vyApta
kara liyA ki suI rakhaneko bhI sthAna nahIM dikhAI detA thA || 249|| tadanantara
Azcaryako prApta huA vidyutkeza vicAra karane lagA ki yaha vAnaroMkA bala nahIM
hai, yaha to kucha aura hI honA cAhie || 250 || taba zarIrakI AzA chor3a
nItizAstrakA paNDita vidyutkeza madhuravANI dvArA vinayapUrvaka vAnaroMse bolA
|| 251|| ki he satpuruSo ! kaho Apa loga kauna ho ? tumhAre zarIra atyanta
dedIpyamAna ho rahe haiM, tumhArI yaha zakti vAnaroMkI svAbhAvika zakti to nahIM
dikhAI 1. yathAsmizca ma.  /

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter  115. Seeing the celestial leader adorned with humility, the
great ocean prince spoke these words:  253. You, being of the nature of the
animal species, are extremely fickle. The monkey who was killed by you for
offending his wife, was I.  254. By the grace of the virtuous, I have attained
this divine state, endowed with great power and possessing all desired wealth.
255. Seeing my glory, you should know this, and saying so, he revealed his
supreme fortune to him.  256. Then, overcome with fear, he trembled throughout
his body. His heart was shattered, his hair stood on end, and his eyes rolled.
257. The great ocean prince said to him, "Do not be afraid."  Distressed, he
spoke in a choked voice, "What should I do?"  258. Then, that celestial being
took him to the venerable one who had given him the five prostrations mantra.
After circumambulating him, they both prostrated at his feet.  259. The monkey,
by virtue of his good deeds, has attained this divine state. By attaining you,
the compassionate one, as my guru, I have attained this divine state.  260.
Addressing him as "Devendra," he praised him again and again. He was also
worshipped with great offerings and prostrated at his feet.  261. Seeing this
wonder, the celestial being, the repository of austerities, asked, "What should
I do?" He spoke words of benefit.  262. "My guru, who is endowed with the four
knowledges, is near here. Let us go to him, for this is the eternal Dharma."
263. "He who, while dwelling near the Acharya, does not go to him and instead
acts as the Acharya himself, is a foolish disciple who abandons discipleship
from afar.  264. He is neither a disciple nor an Acharya, he is devoid of
Dharma, he is a follower of the wrong path, he is corrupted in all his conduct,
and he is condemned by the virtuous."  265. Hearing this, the celestial being
and the Vidyadhara were filled with wonder. They both, along with their
families, thought this.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva 115 tatastaM vinayopetaM dRSTvA khecarapuGgavam  /
mahodadhikumAreNa vAkyametadudAhRtam  // 253 //  tiryagjAtisvabhAvena nitAntaM
cplstvyaa| aparAddhaH svajAyAyAM hato yo'sau plavaGgamaH  // 254 //  so'haM
sAdhuprasAdena saMprApto devatAmimAm  /  mahAzaktisamAyuktAM
yathecchAvAptasaMpadAm  // 255 //  vibhUtiM mama pazya tvamiti coktvA parAM
zriyam  /  sa tasmai prakaTIcakre mahodadhisurocitAm  // 256 //  tato'sau
vepathu prApto bhayAt sarvazarIragam  /  vidIrNahRdayo dRSTaromA
vibhrAntalocanaH  // 257 //  mahodadhikumAreNa mA bhaiSIriti coditaH  /  jagAda
gadgadaM vAkyaM kiM karomIti duHkhitaH  // 258 //  tatastena sureNAsau
gurvantikamupAhRtaH  /  tAbhyAM pradakSiNIkRtya kRtaM tasyAMghrivandanam  // 259
/  /  vAnareNa satA prAsaM mayA devatvamIdRzam  /  guruM bhavantamAsAdya
vatsalaM sarvadehinAm  // 260 /  /  devenetyabhidhAyAsau stuto vAgbhiH punaH
punaH  /  arcitazca mahAtragbhiH pAdayoH praNatastathA  // 26 //  tadAzcarya
tato dRSTvA khecareNa tapodhanaH  /  saMpRSTaH kiM karomIti jagAda vacanaM hitam
// 262 //  caturjJAnopagUDhAtmA mamAstyatra samIpagaH  /  gurustasyAntikaM yAma
eSa dharmaH sanAtanaH  // 263 //  AcArya dhriyamANe ystisstthtyntikgocre|
karotyAcAryakaM mUDhaH ziSyatAM dUramRtsRjan  // 26 //  nAsau ziSyo na cAcAryoM
nirdharmaH sa kumArgagaH  /  sarvato bhraMzamAyAtaH svAcArAt sAdhuninditaH  //
265 //  ityukte vismayopetau jAtau devanabhazcarau  /  cakratuzcetasIdaM ca
parivArasamanvitau  // 266 //  par3atI  // 252 //  tadanantara vidyAdharoMke
rAjA vidyutkezako vinayAvanata dekhakara mahodadhikumArane yaha vacana kahe  //
253 //  ki pazujAtike svabhAvase jo atyanta capala thA tathA isI capalatAke
kAraNa jisane tumhArI strIkA aparAdha kiyA thA aise jisa vAnarako tUne mArA thA
vaha maiM hI huuN| sAdhuoMke prasAdase isa devatva paryAyako prApta huA huuN|
yaha paryAya mahAzaktise yukta hai tathA icchAnusAra isameM saMpadAe~ prApta
hotI haiM  /  / 254-255 /  /  tuma merI vibhUtiko dekho yaha kaha kara usane
manodadhi kumAradevake yogya apanI utkRSTa lakSmI usake sAmane prakaTa kara dI
// 256 /  /  yaha dekha bhayase vidyutkezakA sarva zarIra kA~pane lagA, usakA
hRdaya vidoNaM ho gayA, romAMca nikala Aye aura A~khe ghUmane lagIM  // 257 /  /
taba mahodadhikumArane kahA ki Daro mata  /  devakI vANI suna, duHkhI hote hue
vidyutkezane gadgada vANImeM kahA ki maiM kyA karUM? jo Apa AjJA karo so karUM
// 258|| tadanantara vaha deva rAjA vidyutkezako jinhoMne paMca namaskAra mantra
diyA thA una guruke pAsa le gayA  /  vahA~ jAkara deva tathA rAjA vidyutkeza
donoMne pradakSiNA dekara guruke caraNoMmeM namaskAra diyA  // 259 //
mahodadhikumAra devane munirAjako yaha kahakara bAra-bAra stuti kI ki maiM
yadyapi vAnara thA to bhI samasta prANiyoMse sneha rakhanevAle Apa aise guruko
pAkara maiMne yaha deva paryAya prApta kI hai| yaha kahakara usane mahAmAlAoM se
munirAja kI pUjA kI tathA caraNoMmeM namaskAra kiyaa||260-261|| yaha Azcarya
dekhakara vidyAdhara vidyutkezane munirAjase pUchA ki he deva ! maiM kyA karU~?
merA kyA kartavya hai ? isake uttarameM munirAjane nimnAMkita hitakArI vacana
kahe ki cAra jJAnake dhArI hamAre guru pAsa hI vidyamAna haiM so hama loga
unhIMke samIpa caleM, yahI sanAtana dharma hai  // 262-263 /  /  AcAryake samIpa
rahane para bhI jo unake pAsa nahIM jAtA hai aura svayaM upadezAdi dekara
AcAryakA kAma karatA hai vaha mUrkha ziSya, ziSyapanAko dUrase hI chor3a detA
hai  /  vaha na to ziSya rahatA hai aura na AcArya hI kahalatA hai, vaha
dharmarahita hai, kumArgagAmI hai, apane samasta AcArase bhraSTa hai aura
sAdhujanoMke dvArA nindanIya hai  /  / 264-265 /  /  munirAjake aisA kahanepara
deva aura vidyAghara donoM hI parama Azcaryako prApta hue| apane-apane
parivArake sAtha unhoMne manameM 1. aparAdhaH ma., kha.  /  2. mahodadhiH suro-
ma.  /

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 116  **116**  Oh, the supreme greatness of the Papuraana, surpassing
even the merit of austerities! Even for a sage like this, there exists another
Guru. ||267||  Then, in the outskirts of his hermitage, there were those who
were guided by the virtuous, and also gods and celestial beings, whose minds
were filled with a longing for Dharma. ||268||  Going there, they
circumambulated the sage with reverence and prostrated themselves before him.
They did not stand too far away, nor too close. ||269||  Then, seeing the
supreme form of the sage, blazing with the brilliance born of his austerities,
the gods and celestial beings were filled with a certain anxiety arising from
their devotion to Dharma. Their lotus-like eyes were filled with joy and wonder,
and they were all imbued with great humility. ||270-271||  Then, the gods and
celestial beings, with folded hands, asked the sage about Dharma and its
appropriate fruits. ||272||  Then, the sage, whose mind was always engaged in
the welfare of beings, and whose actions were always far removed from the causes
of worldly existence, spoke in a voice as deep as the roar of a rain-laden
cloud, explaining the supreme Dharma that brings about the welfare of the world.
||273-274||  As he spoke, the groups of peacocks, dwelling in the arbors, danced
in joy, their cries echoing like thunder. ||275||  The sage said, "O gods and
celestial beings! Listen attentively, with your minds fixed on Dharma, as I
explain its nature as revealed by the Jinas, the bringers of joy to the world."
||276||  "Many lowly beings, whose minds are dull and incapable of reflection,
in the name of Dharma, actually indulge in Adharma." ||277||  "A deluded person,
who, without knowing the direction, thinks, 'This is the way,' and goes in the
opposite direction, will not reach his desired destination, even after a long
time." ||278||  "Those who are attached to worldly pleasures, with minds devoid
of reflection, indulge in Adharma, which is called Dharma in stories and myths,
born of acts like killing beings." ||279||  "Those who, with such intentions,
indulge in Adharma, contaminated by false beliefs, become destined for the
suffering of the animal and hell realms." ||280||  "Deluded by the meaning of
scriptures filled with a web of false arguments and the punishments of their
gurus, they strike their foreheads in the hope of attaining Dharma." ||281||
**Commentary:**  This passage highlights the importance of true Dharma and the
dangers of false beliefs and actions. It emphasizes the need for reflection,
understanding, and guidance from a true Guru. The passage also describes the joy
and wonder that arises from witnessing the supreme form of a sage who has
attained liberation through austerities.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 116 papapurANe aho paramamAhAtmyaM tapaso bhuvanAtigam  /  munerevaMvidhasyApi
yadanyo vidyate guruH  // 267 //  tatastasyopakaNThe te sAdhunAdhiSThitA yayaH
/  devAzca vyomayAnAzca dharmotkaNThitacetasaH  // 268 //  gatvA pradakSiNIkRtya
praNamyAdarato munim  /  nAtidUre na cAtyantasamIpe sthitimAzritAH  // 269 //
tatastA paramAM mUrti taporAzisamutthayA  /  prajvalantI munerdIptyA' dRSTvA
devanabhazcarAH  // 27 //  cintAM kAmapi saMprAptA dharmAcArasamudbhavAm  /
praphullanayanAmbhojA mahAvinayasaMgatAH  // 27 //  tato devanabhoyAnAvaJjaliM
nyasya mastake  /  papracchaturmuni dharma phalaM cAsya yathocitam  // 272 /  /
tato jantuhitAsaMganityaprasthitamAnasaH  /  saMsArakAraNAsaMgadUrIkRtasamIhitaH
// 273 //  sajalAmbhodagambhIradhIrayA zramaNo giraa| jagAda paramaM dharma
jagato'bhyudayAvaham  // 274 /  /  tasmin gadati taddeze ltaamnnddpsNshritaaH|
nanRtuH zikhisaMghAtA meghanAdavizakkinaH  // 275 //  samAdhAya mano dharmaH
zrUyatAM surakhecarau  /  yathA jinaiH samuddiSTo bhuvanAnandakAribhiH  // 26 //
dharmazabdanamAtreNa bahavaH prANino'dhamAH  /  adharmameva sevante
vicaarjddcetsH||277|| mArgo'yamiti yo gacched dizamajJAya mohavAn  /
drAdhIyasApi kAlena neSTaM sthAnaM sa gacchati  // 27 //
kathAkalpitadharmAkhyamadharma maindamAnasAH  /  prANighAtAdibhirjAtaM sevante
viSayAzritAH  // 279 //  te taM bhAvena saMsevya mithyAdarzanadUSitAH  /
tiryagnarakaduHkhAnAM prapadyante nidhAnatAm  // 280 //
kuhetujAlasaMpUrNagranthArthairgurudaNDakaiH  /  dharmopalipsayA mUDhAstADayanti
namastalam  // 28 //  vicAra kiyA ki aho tapakA kaisA lokottara mAhAtmya hai ki
aise sarvaguNasampanna munirAjake bhI anya guru vidyamAna haiM  // 266-267||
tadanantara dharmake lie jinakA citta utkaNThita ho rahA thA aise deva aura
vidyAdhara ukta munirAjake sAtha unake guruke samIpa gaye  // 268 //  vahA~
jAkara unhoMne bar3e Adarake sAtha pradakSiNA dekara guruko namaskAra kiyA aura
namaskArake anantara na to atyanta dUra aura na atyanta pAsa kintu kucha dUra
haTa kara baiTha gaye  /  / 269 /  /  tadanantara tapakI rAzise utpanna dIptise
dedIpyamAna munirAjakI usa utkRSTa mudrAko dekhakara deva aura vidyAdhara
dharmAcArase samudbhata kisI adbhuta cintAko prApta hue| usa samaya harSa aura
Azcaryase sabake netra-kamala praphullita ho rahe the tathA sabhI mahAvinayase
yukta the  // 270-271 //  tatpazcAt deva aura vidyAdhara donoMne hAtha jor3a
mastakase lagAkara munirAjase dharma tathA usake yathAyogya phalako pUchA  //
272 //  tadanantara jinakA mana sadA prANiyoMke hitameM lagA rahatA thA tathA
jinakI samasta ceSTAe~ saMsArake kAraNoMke samparkase sadA dUra rahatI thIM aise
munirAja sajala meghako garjanAke samAna gambhIra vANIse jagatkA kalyANa
karanevAle utkRSTa dharmakA nirUpaNa karane lage  /  / 273-274 //  jaba munirAja
bola rahe the taba latAmaNDapameM sthita mayUroMke samUha megha garjanAkI zaMkA
kara harSase nRtya karane lage the  // 275 /  /  munirAjane kahA ki he deva aura
vidyAdharo! saMsArakA kalyANa karanevAle jinendra bhagavAnne dharmakA jaisA
svarUpa kahA hai vaisA hI maiM kahatA hU~ Apaloga mana sthira kara suno  // 276
/  /  jinakA citta vicAra karane meM jar3a hai aise bahuta-se adhama prANI
dharmake nAma para adharmakA hI sevana karate haiM  /  / 277 //  jo mohI prANI
gantavya dizAko jAne binA 'yahI mArga hai' aisA samajha viruddha dizAmeM jAtA
hai vaha dIrghakAla bIta jAne para bhI iSTa sthAna para nahIM pahuMca sakatA hai
/  / 278 //  vicAra karaneko kSamatAse rahita viSayalampaTI manuSya, kathA-
kahAniyoM dvArA jise dharma saMjJA dI gaI hai aise jIvaghAta Adise utpanna
adharmakA hI sevana karate haiM  // 279 /  /  mithyAdarzanase dUSita manuSya
aise adharmakA abhiprAyapUrvaka sevanakara tiryaMca tathA narakagatike duHkhoMke
pAtra hote haiM  // 280 //  kuyuktiyoMke jAlase paripUrNa granthoMke arthase
mohita 1. dIptA ma.  /  2. vizaGkitAH ma.  /  3. madamAnasAH ma.  /  4. te te
ma.  /

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter  117. Even if there is a little bit of Dharma in some false
teachings, which are devoid of violence and other sins, and which preach bodily
labor, it is still rootless because of the absence of Right Faith. Such beings
have a small, ignorant character, which is not a means of liberation.  282-283.
A lump of clay is also earthly, and a Vaidurya gem is also earthly. But, due to
the commonality of being earthly, their qualities are not equal.  284. Dharma as
described by the wrong-sighted is like a lump of clay, while Dharma as described
by the Jina is like a Vaidurya gem, even though the name "Dharma" is the same
for both.  285. The root of Dharma is compassion, and the root of compassion is
non-violence. For those who are attached to possessions, violence is constantly
arising.  286. Besides compassion, truthful speech is also Dharma, but truthful
speech is that which does not cause suffering to others.  287. Renunciation of
taking what is not given, avoidance of another's wife, contentment in acquiring
wealth, restraint of the senses, thinning of the passions, and humility of the
wise, are the vows of the Right-Faithful householders. Listen to the Dharma of
those who are without homes.  288-289. Those who ride on the elevated back of
the elephant of the five great vows, whose bodies are covered with the strong,
impenetrable armor of the three guptas, who are accompanied by the five groups
of foot soldiers, and who are equipped with a multitude of sharp weapons of
various austerities, are the great kings, the Digambaras, who are surrounded by
ministers of passions and ride on the elephant of delusion, and who destroy the
enemy of the world.  290-292. When all beginnings are renounced and Right Faith
is embraced, then the Dharma of the monks is attained. This is the essence of
Dharma.  293. This Dharma is the cause of attaining the wealth of the three
worlds. The best of men have declared this Dharma to be the supreme
auspiciousness.  294. What other quality of Dharma can be spoken of that is
greater than this, by which the peak of the three worlds is attained, along with
great happiness?  295. Beings, desiring to attain Dharma, strike the sky with
great punishments, meaning they consider actions that have no trace of Dharma to
be Dharma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva 117 yadyapi syAt kvacitkiJci dharma preti kuzAsane  /
hiMsAdirahitAcAre zarIrazramadezini  // 282 //
samyagdarzanahInatvAnmUlacchinnaM tathApi tt| 'nAjJAnaM kSudracAritraM teSAM
bhavati muktaye  // 283 //  pArthivo loSTalezo'pi vaiDUryamapi pArthivam  /  na
pArthivatvasAmAnyAttayostulyaM guNAdikam  // 384 //  loSTulezasamo dharmo
mithyAdRgbhiH prakIrtitaH  /  vaiDUryasadRzo jaino dharmasaMjJA tu sarvagA  //
285 /  /  dharmasya hi dayA mUlaM tasyA mUlamahiMsanam  /  parigrahavatAM puMsA
hiMsanaM satatodbhavam  // 286 //  tathA satyavaco dharmastacca yanna parAsukham
/  adattAdAnamuktizca paranAryAzca varjanam  /  / 287 //  draviNAptiSu saMtoSo
hRSIkANAM nivAraNam  /  tanUkRtiH kaSAyANAM vinayo jJAnasevinAm  // 288 //
vratametad gRhasthAnAM samyagdarzanacAriNAm  /  AgArarahitAnAM tu zRNu dharma
yathAvidhi  // 289 /  /  paJcodAravratottuGgamAtaGgaskandhavartinaH  /
triguptidRDhanIrandhrakaGkaTacchannavigrahAH  // 290 //  pAdAtena samAyuktAH
samityA paJcabhedayA  /  nAnAtapomahAtIkSNazastrayuktamanaskarAH  // 29 //
vRttaM kaSAyasAmantairmohavAraNavartinam  /  bhavArAtiM vinighnanti
nirambaramahAnRpAH  // 292 //  sarvArambhaparityAge samyagdarzanasaMgate  /
dharmaH sthito'nagArANAmeSa dharmaH samAsataH  // 293 //  trilokazrIpari
prAptadharmo'yaM hetutAM gataH  /  eSa eva paraM prokto maGgalaM puruSottamaiH
// 294 //  anyaH kastasya kathyeta dharmasya paramo guNaH  /  trilokazikharaM
yena prApyate sumahAsukham  // 295 //  prANI dharma prApta karanekI icchAse
bar3e-bar3e daNDoMke dvArA AkAzako tADita karate haiM arthAt jina kAryoM meM
dharmakI gandha bhI nahIM unheM dharma samajhakara karate haiM  /  / 281 //
jisameM pratipAdita AcAra, hiMsAdi pApoMse rahita hai tathA jisameM zarIra-
zrama-kAyaklezakA upadeza diyA gayA hai aise kisI mithyAzAsanameM bhI yadyapi
thor3A dharmakA aMza hotA hai to bhI samyagdarzanase rahita honeke kAraNa vaha
nirmUla hI hai| aise jIvoMkA jJAnarahita kSudra cAritra muktikA kAraNa nahIM hai
/  / 282-283 //  miTTIkA DhelA bhI pArthiva hai aura vaiDUrya maNi bhI pArthiva
hai so pArthivatva sAmAnyakI apekSA donoMke guNa Adika eka samAna nahIM ho jAte
// 284 /  /  mithyAdRSTiyoMke dvArA nirUpita dharma miTTIke Dheleke samAna hai
aura jinendra bhagavAnke dvArA nirUpita dharma vaidUrya maNike samAna hai jaba
ki dharma saMjJA donoMmeM hI samAna hai  /  / 285 //  dharmakA mUla dayA hai
aura dayAkA mUla ahiMsA rUpa pariNAma hai| parigrahI manuSyoMke hiMsA nirantara
hotI rahatI hai  /  / 286 //  dayAke sivAya satya vacana bhI dharma hai parantu
satya vacana vaha kahalAtA hai ki jisase dUsareko duHkha na ho| adattAdAnakA
tyAga karanA, parastrIkA chor3anA, dhanAdikameM santoSa rakhanA, indriyoMkA
nivAraNa karanA, kaSAyoMko kRza karanA aura jJAnI manuSyoMkI vinaya karanA, yaha
samyagdRSTi gRhasthoMkA vrata arthAt dharmakA vidhipUrvaka nirUpaNa karatA hU~
so suno  // 287-289 /  /  jo paMca mahAvrata rUpI unnata hAthIke skandhapara
savAra haiM, tIna gupti rUpI majabUta tathA nizchidra kavacase jinakA zarIra
AcchAdita hai, jo paMca samitirUpI paidala sipAhiyoMse yukta hai, aura jo nAnA
taparUpI mahAtIkSNa zastroMke samUhase sahita haiM aise digambara yati rUpI
mahArAjA, kaSAya rUpI sAmantoMse parivRta tathA moha rUpI hAthIpara savAra
saMsAra rUpI zatruko naSTa karate haiM  /  / 290-292 /  /  jaba saba prakArake
ArambhakA tyAga kiyA jAtA hai aura samyagdarzana dhAraNa kiyA jAtA hai tabhI
muniyoMkA dharma prApta hotA hai| yaha saMkSepameM dharmakA svarUpa samajho  //
293 //  yaha dharma hI triloka sambandhI lakSmIkI prAptikA kAraNa hai| uttama
puruSoMne isa dharmako hI utkRSTa maMgalasvarUpa kahA hai  /  / 294 //  jisa
dharmake dvArA mahAsukhadAyI trilokakA 1. dharmasya leza: dharma prati
(avyyiibhaavsmaasH)| 2. dezine ma., kh.| 3. ca m.| 4. na jJAnaM ma.  /  5. sa
tadodbhavam m.| 6. trigupta ma.  /  7. padAtInAM samUhaH pAdAtaM tena  /  8.
mahItIkSNa m.| 9. dharmasthitA. nagArANA -ma,  /  10. prApte dharmo'yaM m.|

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  **118**  **296.** In the Padma Purana, it is said that
a person enjoys great merits in heaven by the virtue of the householder's path.
These merits are accumulated by the mind, while residing amidst the group of
deities.  **297.** However, through the path of renunciation (Jain monasticism),
a human being attains liberation, which is unparalleled, free from suffering,
and eternal bliss.  **298.** Those who are excellent beings, even after falling
from heaven, attain the path of Jain monasticism and achieve the supreme state
(liberation) within two or three lifetimes.  **299.** Even though those who are
sinful and have wrong views may attain heaven by chance, they fall from there
and wander in lower births.  **300.** The teachings of the Jinas are the best
words, the austerities prescribed by them are the best, the religion they preach
is the supreme religion, and the philosophy they teach is the ultimate
philosophy.  **301.** Just as a person going to a city finds the confluence of
tree roots, etc., effortlessly, similarly, a person who sets out on the path of
liberation guided by the teachings of the Jinas, effortlessly obtains the
blessings of deities, celestial beings, etc.  **302.** It is not surprising that
the Jain religion is the cause of the enjoyments of Indra and others, because
even ordinary merit can lead to such enjoyments.  **304.** Any conduct or
knowledge that is contrary to the householder's path and the path of
renunciation is called "adharma" (unrighteousness).  **305.** Due to this
unrighteousness, a being wanders in various hellish realms, where it experiences
various kinds of suffering caused by vehicles, beatings, cutting, piercing, and
exposure to cold and heat.  **306.** Due to this unrighteousness, a being
wanders in numerous hells filled with perpetual darkness. Some of these hells
are characterized by constant shivering due to icy winds, while others are
engulfed in flames of fire that appear terrifying due to sparks.  **307.** Some
hells are filled with various kinds of machines that make loud noises, while
others are filled with lions, tigers, wolves, jackals, and vultures created by
karma.  **308.** Some hells are filled with trees that rain down discs, axes,
spears, swords, etc.  **295.** What other excellent quality can be attributed to
a religion that leads to liberation (moksha)? This is the supreme quality of
religion: it leads to liberation.  **296-297.** Through the householder's path,
a human being resides amidst a group of deities in heaven and enjoys the best of
pleasures simply by willing them. However, through the path of renunciation, he
attains liberation, which is unparalleled, free from suffering, and eternal
bliss.  **298.** Excellent beings who fall from heaven, upon taking the path of
Jain monasticism, attain the supreme state (liberation) within two or three
lifetimes.  **299.** However, sinful beings with wrong views, even if they
attain heaven by chance, fall from there and wander in lower births.  **300.**
The teachings of the Jinas are the best words, the austerities prescribed by
them are the best, the religion they preach is the supreme religion, and the
philosophy they teach is the ultimate philosophy.  **301-302.** Just as a person
going to a city finds the confluence of tree roots, etc., effortlessly,
similarly, a person who sets out on the path of liberation guided by the
teachings of the Jinas, effortlessly obtains the blessings of deities, celestial
beings, etc.  **303.** It is not surprising that the Jain religion is the cause
of the enjoyments of Indra and others, because even ordinary merit can lead to
such enjoyments.  **304.** Any conduct or knowledge that is contrary to the
householder's path and the path of renunciation is called "adharma"
(unrighteousness).  **305.** Due to this unrighteousness, a being wanders in
various hellish realms, where it experiences various kinds of suffering caused
by vehicles, beatings, cutting, piercing, and exposure to cold and heat.
**306.** Due to this unrighteousness, a being wanders in numerous hells filled
with perpetual darkness. Some of these hells are characterized by constant
shivering due to icy winds, while others are engulfed in flames of fire that
appear terrifying due to sparks.  **307.** Some hells are filled with various
kinds of machines that make loud noises, while others are filled with lions,
tigers, wolves, jackals, and vultures created by karma.  **308.** Some hells are
filled with trees that rain down discs, axes, spears, swords, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 118 padmapurANe sAgAreNa janaH svarge bhukte bhogAnmahAguNAn  /
devInivahamadhyastho mAnasena samAhRtAn  // 296 //  nirvAsasA tu dharmeNa mokSaM
prApnoti mAnavaH  /  anaupamyamanAbAdhaM sukhaM yatrAntavarjitam  // 297 //
svargagAstu punazcyutvA prApya daigambarI kriyAm  /  dvivaiH prapadyante
prakRSTAH paramaM padam  // 298 //  kAkatAlIyayogena prAptA api surAlayam  /
kuyoniSu punaH pApA bhramantyeva kutIrthinaH  // 299 //  jainamevottamaM vAkyaM
jainamevottamaM tapaH  /  jaina eva paro dharmo jainameva paraM matam  // 30 //
nagaraM vrajataH puMso vRkSamUlAdisaMgamaH  /  nAntarIyakatAmeti yathA
khedanivAraNaH  // 30 //  prasthitasya tathA mokSaM jinazAsanavarmanA  /
devavidyAdharAdizrIranuSaGgeNa jAyate  // 302 /  vibudhendrAdibhogAnAM hetutvaM
yatprapadyate  /  jinadharmo na taccitraM te hyasmAt sukRtAdapi  // 30 //
viparItaM yadetasmAd gRhizramaNadharmataH  /  caritaM tasya saMjJAnamaidharma
iti kIrtitam  // 304 /  /  bhramanti yena tiryakSu nAnAduHkhapradAyiSu  /
vAhanAttADanAcchedAbhedAcchItoSNasaMgamAt  // 305 /  /  nityAndhakArayukteSu
narakeSu ca bhUriSu  /  tuSArapavanAghAtakRtakampeSu keSucit  // 306 //
sphuratsphuliGgaraudrAgnijvAlAlIDheSu keSucit  /  nAnAkAramahArAvayantravyApteSu
keSucit  // 30 //  siMhavyAghrakazyenagRddharuddheSu keSucit  /
cakrakrakacakuntAsimocivRkSeSu keSucit  // 30 //  zikhara arthAt mokSa prApta ho
jAtA hai usa dharmakA aura dUsarA kauna utkRSTa guNa kahA jAve? arthAt dharmakA
sarvopari guNa yahI hai ki usase mokSa prApta ho jAtA hai  /  / 295 /  /
gRhastha dharmake dvArA yaha manuSya svargameM devIsamUhake madhyameM sthita ho
saMkalpa mAtrase prApta uttamottama bhogoMko bhogatA hai aura muni dharmake
dvArA usa mokSako prApta hotA hai jahA~ ki ise anupama, nirbAdha tathA ananta
sukha milatA hai  /  / 296-297 /  /  svargagAmI utkRSTa manuSya svargase cyuta
hokara punaH munidIkSA dhAraNa karate haiM aura do tIna bhavoMmeM ho parama
pada-mokSa prApta kara lete haiM  /  / 298 //  parantu jo pApImithyAdRSTi jIva
haiM ve kAkatAlIyanyAyase yadyapi svarga prApta kara lete haiM to bhI vahA~se
cyuta ho kuyoniyoMmeM hI bhramaNa karate rahate haiM  /  / 299|| jinendra
bhagavAnke dvArA kathita vAkya arthAt zAstra hI uttama vAkya haiM, jinendra
bhagavAna ke dvArA nirUpita tapa hI uttama tapa hai, jinendra bhagavAnke dvArA
prokta dharma hI parama dharma hai aura jinendra bhagavAnke dvArA upadiSTa mata
hI parama mata hai  // 300 /  jisa prakAra nagarakI ora jAnevAle puruSako kheda
nivAraNa karanevAlA jo vRkSamUla AdikA saMgama prApta hotA hai vaha anAyAsa hI
prApta hotA hai usI prakAra jina zAsana rUpI mArgase mokSakI ora prasthAna
karanevAle puruSako jo deva tathA vidyAdhara AdikI lakSmI prApta hotI hai vaha
anuSaMgase hI prApta hotI hai usake lie manuSyako prayatna nahIM karanA par3atA
hai  // 301-302 /  /  'jinadharma, indra Adike bhogoMkA kAraNa hotA hai' isameM
AzcaryakI bAta nahIM hai kyoMki indra Adike bhoga to sAdhAraNa puNya mAtrase bhI
prApta ho jAte haiM  // 303 /  /  isa gRhastha aura munidharmake viparIta jo bhI
AcaraNa athavA jJAna hai vaha adharma kahalAtA hai  /  / 304|| isa adharmake
kAraNa yaha jIva vAhana, tADana, chedana, bhedana tathA zIta uSNakI prApti Adi
kAraNoMse nAnA duHkha denevAle tithaMcoMmeM bhramaNa karatA hai  // 305 /  /
isI adharmake kAraNa yaha jIva nirantara andhakArase yukta rahanevAle aneka
narakoMmeM bhramaNa karatA hai| ina narakoMmeM kitane hI naraka to aise haiM
jinameM ThaNDI havAke kAraNa nirantara zarIra kA~patA rahatA haiN| kitane hI
aise haiM jo nikalate hue tilagoMse bhayaMkara dikhanevAlI agnikI jvAlAoMse
vyApta haiN| kitane hI aise haiM jo nAnA prakArake mahAzabda karanevAle
yantroMse vyApta haiM  /  kitane hI aise haiM jo vikriyAnirmita siMha, vyAghra,
vRka, vAja tathA gIdha Adi jIvoMse bhare hue haiM  /  kitane hI aise haiM jo
cakra, karauMta, bhAlA, talavAra AdikI varSA 1. nivAriNaH ma., ka.  /  2.
jinadharmAnna kha.  /  3. saMjJA na dharma ma.  /  ,

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter 119 Some are given molten lead, tin, etc. to drink. Some are
tormented by sharp-beaked flies, etc. Some are filled with worms and blood-
soaked mud. Some are tormented by each other.  ||309-310|| In such ways, the
suffering that living beings experience in hell is impossible to describe.
||311|| Just as you both wandered through many painful births in the past, so
too will you wander again if you remain devoid of Dharma. ||312|| Thus
questioned by the Dev and the Vidyadhara, the supreme Shraman said, "Tell me,
how did you both wander through these miserable births?" ||313|| Then, adorned
with the ornament of restraint, the Shraman spoke these sweet words, "My dear
ones, calm your minds." ||314|| You both wandered in this world of suffering,
driven by delusion, killing each other. ||315|| You both attained human birth
through karma, but it is very difficult to find Dharma in this world. ||316||
One of you became a minister named Suyashodata in the city of Sravasti in the
land of Kashi. Suyashodata was very handsome, and he took initiation and
wandered the earth, engaged in great austerities. ||317|| While wandering,
Suyashodata Muni arrived in Kashi and sat in a secluded place. Many women of the
right faith came to worship him. Seeing the Muni surrounded by women, the wicked
hunter, wielding weapons of sharp words, began to frighten him. ||318-320||
"This shameless, naked, and unbathed man, covered in filth, is a great
misfortune for me, who is out hunting." ||321|| As the hunter, wielding a
fearsome bow, spoke these words, the Muni's meditation became clouded with
sorrow. ||322|| Thinking, "I will crush this sinful hunter to dust with a single
blow of my fist," he became filled with anger. ||323||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva 119 vilInatripusIsAdipAnadAyiSu keSucit  /
tIcNatuNDasphuraskaramakSikAdiSu keSucit  // 309 /  /
kRmiprakArasaMmizraraktapaGkeSu keSucit  /  parasparasamudbhUtabAdhAhetuSu
keSucit  // 310 //  evaM vidheSu jIvAnAM sadA duHkhavidhAyiSu  /  duHkhaM
yannarakeSu syAt kaH zaktastaprakIrtitum  // 311 //  yato yathA purA bhrAntau
yuvAM duHkhAsu yoniSu  /  tathA paryaTanaM bhUyaH prApsyato dharmavarjitau  //
312 //  ityuktAbhyAM paripRSTastAbhyAM zramaNasattamaH  /  kathaM kuyoniSu
bhrAntAvAvAmiti mune vada  // 31 //  janmAntaraM tato'vocattayoH saMyamamaNDanaH
/  mano nidhIyatAM vatsAvityuktvA madhuraM vacaH  // 314 //  paryaTantau
yuvAmatra saMsAre duHkhadAyini  /  parasparasya kurvANau vadhaM mohaparAyaNau
// 315 //  mAnuSyamAvamAyAtau kathaMcit karmayogataH  /  ayaM hi durbalo loke
dharmopAdAnakAraNam  // 316 //  vyAdhastayorabhUdeko viSaye kAzinAmani  /
zrAvastyAmaparo'mAtyapade sthairyamupAgataH  // 357 /  /  suyazodattanAmAsau
pravRjyAmAzritaH kSitau  /  cacAra tapasA yukto mahatAtyantarUpavAn  // 318 //
tatastaM susthitaM deze kAzyAM prANavivarjite  /  pUjanArtha samAyAtAH
samyagdRSTikulAGganAH  // 319 /  /  strIbhistataH parItaM taM vyAdho'sau vIkSya
yoginam  /  atakSNodvAbhirugrAbhiH zastraiH kurvan vibhItikAm  // 320 nirlajo
vastramukto'yaM snAnavarjitavigrahaH  /  mRgayAyAM pravRttasya jAto me'maGgalaM
mahat  // 321 //  vadatyevaM tato vyAdhe dhanurbhISaNakAriNi  /  muneH kaluSatAM
prAptaM dhyAnaM duHkhena saMbhRtam  // 322 /  /  iti vAcintayat
krodhAnmuSTighAtena pApinam  /  kaNazazcUrNayAmyenaM vyAdhaM rUkSavacomucam  //
323 //  karanevAle vRkSoMse yukta haiN| kitane hI aise haiM jinameM pighalAyA
huA rAMgA, sIsA Adi pilAyA jAtA hai| kitane hI aise haiM jinameM tIkSNamakhavAlI
daSTa makkhiyA~ Adi vidyamAna haiN| kitane hI aise haiM jinameM raktakI kIcameM
kRmike samAna aneka choTe-choTe jIva bilabilAte rahate haiM aura kitane hI aise
haiM jinameM paraspara-eka dUsareke dvArA duHkhake kAraNa utpanna hote rahate
haiM  // 306-310 //  isa prakArake sadA duHkhadAyI narakoMmeM jIvoMko jo duHkha
prApta hotA hai use kahaneke lie kona samartha hai ?  // 311 //  jisa prakAra
tuma donoMne pahale duHkha denevAlI aneka kuyoniyoMmeM bhramaNa kiyA thA yadi
aba bhI tuma dharmase vaMcita rahate ho to punaH aneka kuyoniyoMmeM bhramaNa
karanA par3egA  // 312 /  /  munirAjake yaha kahanepara deva tathA vidyAdharane
unase pUchA ki he bhagavan ! hama donoMne kisa kAraNa kuyoniyoMmeM bhramaNa kiyA
hai ? so kahie  // 313 /  /  tadanantara-'he vatso! mana sthira karo' isa
prakArake madhura vacana kahakara saMyamarUpI AbhUSaNase vibhUSita munirAja una
donoMke bhavAntara kahane lage  // 314 /  /  isa duHkhadAyI saMsArameM mohase
unmatta ho tuma donoM eka dUsarekA vadha karate hue cirakAla taka bhramaNa
karate rahe  // 315 /  /  tadanantara kisI prakAra karmayogase manuSya bhavako
prApta hue| nizcayase saMsArameM dharmaprAptikA kAraNabhUta manuSyabhavakA
milanA atyanta kaThina hai  /  / 316 /  /  unameM se eka to kAzI dezameM
zrAvastI nagarImeM rAjAkA suyazodattanAmA mantrI huaa| suyazodatta atyanta
rUpavAn thA, kAraNa pAkara usane dIkSA le lI aura mahAtapazcaraNase yukta ho
pRthvIpara vihAra karane lagA  // 317 //  vihAra karate hue suyazodattamuni kAzI
dezameM Akara kisI nirjantu sthAnameM virAjamAna ho gye| unakI pUjAke lie aneka
samyagdRSTi striyA~ AyI thIM so pApI vyAdha, striyoMse ghire una muniko dekha
tIkSNa vacanarUpI zastroMse bhaya utpanna karatA huA bedhane lagA  // 318-320 //
yaha nirlajja nagna, tathA snAnarahita malina zarIrakA dhAraka, zikArake lie
pravRtta hue mujhako mahA amaMgalarUpa huA hai  // 321 //  dhanuSase bhaya
utpanna karanevAlA vyAdha jaba ukta prakArake vacana kaha rahA thA taba duHkhake
kAraNa munikA dhyAna kucha kaluSatAko prApta ho gayA  // 322 /  /  krodhavaza ve
vicArane lage ki rukSa vacana kahanevAle isa pApI vyAdhako maiM eka muTThIke
prahArase kaNa-kaNa kara cUrNa kara DAlatA hU~  // 323 /  /

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  120 The merit that Kapishtha had earned, which would
have enabled him to attain heaven, was lost in a moment due to his anger. ||32||
After that, he became a Jyotish-deva (celestial being associated with light) due
to some equanimity. From there, you became a Vidyutkesha (lightning-haired)
Vidyadhara. ||325|| And the Vyadha (hunter) wandered for a long time in the
forest of Samsara (cycle of birth and death) and became a monkey in the pleasure
garden of Lanka. ||326|| Due to his fickleness, he killed him with an arrow for
a woman. Finally, he attained the Panchanamaskaara mantra and became a deva
named Mahodadhi. ||327||  Knowing this, O Deva Vidyadharas! Abandon your mutual
enmity so that you may not have to wander in Samsara again. ||328|| O Bhadra-
purushas (noble beings)! You are devoted to Bhadra-achara (noble conduct),
therefore aspire for the happiness of the Siddhas (perfected beings), which
cannot be praised by any human. ||329||  Salute Munisuvrata Bhagavan, who is
worshipped by Indra and other Devas, with utmost devotion. ||330||  Having
attained refuge in him, who has completed his own welfare and is engaged in the
welfare of others, you will attain supreme happiness. ||331||  Then,
Vidyutkesha, like a lotus, was awakened by the rays of the sun, which emerged
from the mouth of the Muni (sage). ||332||  He, the valiant, transferred his
position to his son, Sukesha, and became a disciple of the Muni, who is adorned
with the fourfold virtues. ||333||  Then, he worshipped the three jewels -
Samyagdarshan (right faith), Samyagjnana (right knowledge), and Samyakcharitra
(right conduct) - and became a supreme deva due to the power of Samadhi
(meditation). ||334|| Meanwhile, Mahodadhi, the lord of Kishkupura, was sitting
on the peak of a magnificent palace, adorned with beautiful women who shone like
lightning, and bathed in the rays of the moon, enjoying the nectar of a
beautiful gathering, like Indra. ||335-336||  At that time, a Vidyadhara,
wearing white clothes, arrived with great speed, stood before him, and
respectfully bowed. Then, he informed Vidyutkesha about his desire to take
Diksha (initiation). Hearing this, Mahodadhi, being detached from worldly
pleasures, decided to take Diksha. ||337-338||  1. à¤à¥à¤·à¤£à¤¾à¤¦à¥à¤­à¤¸à¥à¤®à¤®à¥à¤ªà¤¾à¤à¤¤à¤®à¥ à¤®à¥¦ à¥¤ 2.
à¤µà¤¾à¤à¤à¤¿à¤¤à¤ à¤à¤ à¥¤ 3. -à¤¦à¥à¤µà¥à¤°à¥ à¤®à¥¦ à¥¤

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 120 padmapurANe tataH kApiSThagamanaM muninA yadupArjitam  /  tadasya
krodhasaMbhArAt bhaiNAd bhraMzamupAgatam  // 32 //  tato'sau kAladharmeNa yukto
jyotiHsuro'bhavat  /  tataH pracyusya jAtastvaM vidyutkezo namazcaraH  // 325 //
vyAdho'pi suciraM bhrAntvA bhavadgumamahAvane  /  laGkAyAM pramadodyAne
zAkhAmRgagatiM gataH  // 326 //  tato'sau nihataH styartha svayA bANena cApalAt
/  prApya paJcanamaskAraM jAto'yaM sAgarAmaraH  // 327 //  evaM jJAtvA
punarvairaM muJcataM devakhecarau  /  mA bhUd bhUyo'pi saMsAre bhavatoH
parihiNDanam  // 328 //  vocchataM naramAtreNa zakyaM yanna prazaMsitum  /
siddhAnAM tatsukhaM bhadrau bhadrAcAraparAyaNau  // 329 //  namitaM paNataM
devairAkhaNDalapurassaraiH  /  bhaktyA paramayA yuktI munisuvratamIzvaram  //
330 //  zaraNaM prApya taM nArtha niSThitAtmapratikriyam  /
parakRtyasamudyuktaM prApsyathaH paramaM sukham  // 33 //  tato
munimukhAdityAnirgatena vo'zunA  /  paraM prabodhamAnItastaDitkezaH sarojavat
// 332 //  sukezasaMjJake putre saMkramayya nijaM padam  /  ziSyatAmagameddhIro
munerambaracAriNaH 333 //  samyagdarzanasaMjJAnasaccAritratrayaM tataH  /
samArAdhyagataH kAlaM babhUvAmarasattamaH  // 334 //  tataH kiSkupurasvAmI
mahodadhiravAbhidhaH  /  kAntAmiH sahitastiSThan vidyutsadRzadIptibhiH  // 335
//  candrapAdAzraye ramye mahAprAsAdamUrddhani  /  cArugoSThIsudhAsvAdaM vindan
devendravatsukham  /  / 336 //  vegena mahatAgatya dhavalAmbaradhAriNA  /
khecareNApato bhUtvA kRtvA praNatimAdarAt  // 337 /  /  niveditastaDikezaH
pravrajyA kAraNAnvitAm  /  prApya bhogeSu nirvedaM dIkSaNe matimAdadhe  // 338
//  munine tapazcaraNake prabhAvase kApiSTha svarga meM jAne yogya jo puNya
upArjana kiyA thA vaha krodhake kAraNa kSaNabharameM naSTa ho gayA  // 324 //
tadanantara kucha samatAbhAvase marakara vaha jyautiSIdeva huaa| vahA~se Akara
tU vidyutkeza nAmaka vidyAdhara huA hai  // 325 //  aura vyAdhakA jIva cirakAla
taka saMsArarUpI aTavImeM bhramaNakara laMkAke pramadavanameM vAnara huA  // 326
/  /  so capalatA karaneke kAraNa strIke nimitta tUne ise bANase maaraa| vahI
antameM paMcanamaskAra mantra prApta kara mahodadhi nAmakA deva haA hai||327||
aisA vicArakara he deva vidyAdharo ! tuma donoM aba apanA vaira-bhAva chor3a do
jisase phira bhI saMsArameM bhramaNa nahIM karanA par3e  // 328|| he bhadra-
puruSo! tuma bhadra AcaraNa karane meM tatpara ho isalie siddhoMke usa sakhakI
abhilASA karo jisakI manuSyamAtra prazaMsA nahIM kara sakatA  // 329 //  indra
Adi deva jinheM namaskAra karate haiM aise munisuvrata bhagavAnko paramabhaktise
yukta ho namaskAra karo  // 330 //  ve bhagavAn AtmahitakA kArya pUrNa kara cuke
haiM  /  aba parahitakArI kArya karanemeM hI saMlagna haiM so tuma donoM unako
zaraNameM jAkara parama sukhako prApta karoge  // 331 //  tadanantara munirAjake
mukharUpI sUryase nirgata vacanarUpI kiraNoMse vidyutkeza kamalake samAna parama
prabodhako prApta huaa||332|| phalasvarUpa vaha dhIra vIra, sukeza nAmaka
putrake lie apanA pada sauMpakara cAraNa Rddhi dhArI munirAjakA ziSya ho gayA
arthAt unake samIpa usane dIkSA dhAraNa kara lI  // 333 /  /  tadanantara
samyagdarzana, samyagjJAna aura samyakcAritra ina tInoMkI ArAdhanA kara vaha
antameM samAdhike prabhAvase uttama deva huA  // 334 //  idhara kiSkapurakA
svAmI mahodadhi, bijalIke samAna kAntiko dhAraNa karane vAlI striyoMke sAtha,
jisa para candramAkI kiraNeM par3a rahI thIM aise mahAmanohara uttuMga bhavanake
zikharapara sundara goSThI rUpI amRtakA svAda letA huA indrake samAna sukhase
baiThA thA  // 335-336 /  /  ki usI samaya zukla vastrako dhAraNa karane vAle
eka vidyAdharane bar3e vegase Akara tathA sAmane khar3e hokara Adara pUrvaka
praNAma kiyA aura tadanantara vidyutkeza vidyAdharake dIkSA lenekA samAcAra
khaa| samAcAra sunate hI mahodadhine bhogoMse virakta hokara dIkSA lenekA vicAra
kiyA  // 337-338 //  1. kSaNAdbhasmamupAgatam ma0  /  2. vAMchitaM khaH  /  3.
-dvIro ma0  /  ,

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
When he said, "I am taking the vows," a great wail arose from the inner palace.
The echo of that lament reverberated throughout the entire palace. ||339|| The
lament of the women, a mixture of the sounds of the veena, flute, and mridanga,
was so powerful that it even moved the mind of the muni, causing him to be
filled with compassion. ||340|| At that time, the Yuvaraja also arrived there.
With tears that could not be contained flowing in torrents, he said
respectfully, "Vidutkesa, your son, Sukesa, has been entrusted to you out of
great love. He has ascended the new throne and is now worthy of your
protection." ||341-342|| The wise ministers, whose hearts were filled with
sorrow, also encouraged him by citing many examples from the scriptures, saying,
"Enjoy this magnificent, unhindered kingdom like Indra, and make your youth
successful with excellent pleasures." ||343-344|| The women, whose heads were
bowed at his feet, who were expressing their intense love through their virtues,
and whose eyes were streaming with tears, tried to please him by saying, "O
Lord! You are leaving us all as orphans, like a tree leaving its vines behind.
Where are you going?" ||345-346|| "O Lord! This beautiful kingdom, like a
devoted wife, has been bound to you for a long time by your excellent virtues.
Where are you going, leaving her behind?" The Samantas, whose cheeks were wet
with tears, also pleaded together, but even all of them together could not
change his mind. ||347-348|| Finally, he severed the bonds of affection,
renounced all possessions, and entrusted the kingdom to his son, Pratichandra.
He then embraced the difficult Daigambari Lakshmi, the monastic vows, with a
detached mind. He was a man of great intellect, extremely serious, and his
gentleness made him seem like the moon, eternally fixed on the surface of the
earth. ||349-350|| Then, mounted on the elephant of meditation, the Muni
Maharaj, with the sharp arrow of the ocean of knowledge, severed the head of the
enemy, the world, and entered the Siddhavana, the realm of liberation. ||351||
After that, Pratichandra also gave the kingdom to his elder son, Kishkindha, and
the Yuvaraja position to his younger son, Andhrakarudi. ||352||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ra SaSThaM parva pravrajAmIti cAnena gadite'ntaHpurAnmahAn  /  udatiSThad
gRhAnteSu vilApaH pratinAdavAn  // 339 //
tantrIvaMzAdisaMmizramRdaGgadhvanitopamaH  /  pravilApaH sunArINAM
munerapyaharanmanaH  // 340 //  tavArpitaH paraprItyA taDitkezena bAlakaH  /
sukezo navarAjyasthaH pAlanIyaH suto'dhunA  // 34 //  iti vijJApyamAno'pi
yuvarAjena sAdaram  /  'netrAmeyajalasthUladhArAvarSavidhAyinA  // 342 //
niSkaNTakamidaM rAjyaM bhuva tAvanmahAguNam  /  purandara ivodArai gairmAnaya
yauvanam  // 343 //  evaM saMcocamAno'pi mntriminmaansaiH| bahubhedAnyudAhRtya
zAstrANi nayakovidaH  // 344 //  anAthAnAtha naH kRtvA svanmanaHsthitamAnasAn  /
vihAya prasthitaH kAsi latA iva mahAtaruH  // 345 //  iti prasAdhamAno'pi
caraNAnatamUrddhamiH  /  guNothapriyakArIbhi rImiH kSaradazrumiH  // 346 //
guNairnAtha tavodArairbaddho kAlaM ciraM satIm  /  pratibhajya mahAlakSmI
yojitAM lalitAM sadA  // 347 //  brajasi kveti sAmantairgaNDAntairazrudhArimiH
/  samaM vijJApyamAno'pi nRpATopavivarjitaiH  // 348 //  chitvA snehamayAn pAzAn
syaktvA sarvaparigraham  /  praticandrAbhidhAnAya dattvA putrAya saMpadam  //
349 //  vigrahe'pi nirAsaGgo jagrAhogrAM samagradhIH  /  dhIro daigambarI lakSmI
kSmAtalasthiracandramAH  // 350 //  tato dhyAnagajArUDhastapastIkSNapatatriNA  /
zirazchitvA bhavArAteH praviSTaH siddhakAnanam  // 35 //  pratIndurapi putrAya
kiSkindhAya dadau zriyam  /  yauvarAjyaM kaniSThAya tasmai cAndhrakarUDhaye  //
352 //  mahodadhike yaha kahate hI ki maiM dIkSA letA hU~ antaHpurase vilApakA
bahuta bhArI zabda uTha khar3A huaa| usa vilApakI pratidhvani samasta mahaloMmeM
gUMjane lgii||339|| vINA-bA~surI Adike zabdoMse mizrita mRdaMga dhvanikI tulanA
karanevAlA striyoMkA vaha vilApa sAdhAraNa manuSyakI bAta jAne do munike bhI
cittako hara rahA thA arthAt karuNAse dravIbhUta kara rahA thA  // 340 //  usI
samaya yuvarAja bhI vahA~ A gyaa| vaha netroMmeM nahIM samAnevAle jalakI bar3I
moTI dhArAko barasAtA huA AdarapUrvaka bolA ki vidyutkeza apane putra sukezako
paramaprItike kAraNa Apake lie sauMpa gayA hai  /  vaha navIna rAjyapara ArUr3ha
huA hai isalie Apake dvArA rakSA karane yogya hai  // 341-342 //  jinakA hRdaya
dukhI ho rahA thA aise nItinipuNa mantriyoMne bhI aneka zAstroMke udAharaNa
dekara preraNA kI ki isa mahAvaibhavazAlI niSkaNTaka rAjyakA indrake samAna
upabhoga karo aura utkRSTa bhogoMse yauvanako saphala kro||343-344|| jinake
mastaka caraNoMmeM namrIbhUta the, jo apane guNoMke dvArA utkaTa prema prakaTa
kara rahI thI tathA jinakI A~khoMse A~sU jhara rahe the aisI striyoMne bhI yaha
kahakara use prasanna karanekA prayatna kiyA ki he nAtha ! jinake hRdaya Apake
hRdayameM sthita haiM aisI hama sabako anAtha banAkara latAoMko chor3a vRkSake
samAna Apa kahA~ jA rahe haiM ?  // 345-346 //  he nAtha ! yaha manohara
rAjyalakSmI pativratA strIke samAna cirakAlase Apake utkRSTa guNoMse baddha hai-
ApameM Arakta hai ise chor3akara Apa kahA~ jA rahe haiM ? aura jinake
kapoloMpara azru baha rahe the aise sAmantoMne bhI rAjakIya ADambarase rahita ho
eka sAtha prArthanA kI para saba milakara bhI usake mAnasako nahIM badala
ske||347-348|| antameM usane sneharUpI pAzako chedakara tathA samasta
parigrahakA tyAga kara praticandra nAmaka putrake lie rAjya sauMpa diyA aura
zarIra meM bhI niHspRha hokara kaThina daigambarI lakSmI-munidIkSA dhAraNa kara
lii| vaha pUrNa buddhiko dhAraNa karanevAlA atizaya gambhIra thA aura apanI
saumyatAke kAraNa aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno pRthivI talapara sthira rahanevAlA
candramA hI ho  // 349-350 //  tadanantara dhyAnarUpI hAthIpara baiThe hue
munirAja mahodadhi taparUpI tIkSNa bANase saMsArarUpI zatrukA zira chedakara
siddhavana arthAt mokSameM praviSTa hue  // 351 //  tadanantara praticandra bhI
apane jyeSTha putra kiSkindhake lie rAjyalakSmI aura andhrakarUDhi nAmaka choTe
putrake lie yuvarAja 1. netramegha ma.  /  2. guNaughapriya ma.  /  16

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,  One day, having taken the Jain path, he became steadfast.
He went to the place frequented by the Siddhas, pure in his yoga. ||353|| Then,
both brothers, eager to perform their duty, roamed the earth. They were both
radiant, like the sun and the moon, their brilliance clashing. ||354||
Meanwhile, in the southern part of the mountain range, in the sky, there was a
city named Rathanupura, resembling a city of the gods. ||355|| There, the lord
of both the clans was a mighty warrior, named Asanivega, who instilled fear in
his enemies. ||356|| His son was Vijayasimha. He desired to marry the daughter
of the king of Aditya-pura, named SrimalÄ, who was born to the Vidya-dhara king
Vidya-mandara and his queen Vegavati. She was so beautiful that she eclipsed the
sky with her radiance. Seeing his daughter in her youth, Vidya-mandara, with the
consent of his relatives, arranged a Swayamvara. Vijayasimha, the son of
Asanivega, desired SrimalÄ, and thus, driven by his love for her beauty, he went
to the Swayamvara. ||357-359|| All the other celestial beings, adorned with
their bodies, filled the sky with their jeweled chariots, quickly arriving to
pay their respects. ||360|| Then, on beautiful platforms, supported by pillars
of jewels, adorned with lofty seats, and radiating with the brilliance of
embedded gems, the chief celestial beings sat in their respective places. They
were accompanied by a limited retinue, useful for their bodily needs.
||361-362|| Then, in the midst of all the celestial beings, the eyes of all,
like blue lotuses, fell upon SrimalÄ, who was seated in the center. ||363||
Then, the celestial beings, whose hopes were set on the Swayamvara, and whose
minds were captivated by desire, displayed beautiful gestures. ||364|| One
celestial being, though his crown on his head was steady, was making it steady
with his hand, covered in the radiance of jewels. ||365|| Another, placing his
elbow near his waist, was twisting his body, yawning. His action made the joints
of his body crackle. ||366|| Another, with his hand, was pushing away a bright,
sword-like ray of light, which was standing in his path, and looking at it with
a sidelong glance. ||367||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe anyedyuH pratipannazca jainamArga nirambaram  /  siddhairAsevitaM
sthAnaM gatazcAmalayogataH  // 353 //  tatastAvudyatau kRtyaM bhrAtarau bhuvi
cakratuH  /  anyonyAkrAntatejaskau sUryAcandramasAviva  //  354  //  atrAntare
nabhogAnAM parvate dakSiNakSitau  /  rathanUpuranAmAsti puraM surapurAkRti  //
355 //  AsIttatrobhayoH zreNyoH svAmI bhUriparAkramaH  /  dadhAvazanivegAkhyAM
yaH zatrutrAsakAriNIm  //  356  //  putra vijayasiMho'sya nAmnA''dityapuraM
param  /  vAJchan rUpAvalepena prayAto'tha svayaMvaram  // 357 //
vidyAmandarasaMjJasya sutAmambaracAriNaH  /  vegavatyAM samutpannAM
kAntidigdhanabhastalAm  // 358 //  teri atarrptAM vIkSya putrIM manoharAm  /
svajanAnumato mohAt svayaMvaramarIracat  // 359 //  apare'pi khagAH sarve
vimAnairmaNizAlibhiH  /  pUrayanto namaH zIghraM gatA bhUSitavigrahAH  //  360
//  tato maJceSu ramyeSu ratnastambhaSTatAtmasu  /  tuGgAsanasamRddheSu
sphuranmaNimarIciSu  //  361  //  mitena parivAreNa yuktA dehopayoginA  /
upaviSTA yathAsthAnaM pradhAnA vyomacAriNaH  // 362 //  zrImAlAyAM tatasteSAM
sarveSAM vyomacAriNAm  /  madhyasthAyAM samaM peturdRSTIndI rapaGktayaH  // 363
//  atha svayaMvarAzAnAM pravRttA vyomacAriNAm  /  madanAzliSTacittAnAmiti
sundaravibhramAH  //  364 //  niSkampamapi mUrddhasthaM mukuTaM kazcidunnatam |
akarot kila niSkampaM ratnAMzucchannapANinA  // 365 //  kazcit kUrparamAdhAya
kaTipAve sajummaNaH  /  cakradehasya valanaM sphuTatsandhikRtastranam  // 366 //
pradeze'pi sthitAM kazcidujjvalAmasiputrikAm  /  asArayat karAgreNa kaTAkSakRta
vIkSaNAm  // 367 //  122 pada dekara nirgrantha dIkSA ko prApta huA aura nirmala
dhyAnake prabhAvase siddhAlaya meM praviSTa ho gayA arthAt mokSa calA gayA  //
352 - 353 //  tadanantara - jinakA teja eka dUsare meM AkrAnta ho rahA thA aise
sUrya-candramA ke samAna tejasvI donoM bhAI kiSkindha aura andhrakarUDhi
pRthivIpara apanA kAryabhAra phailAneko udyata hue || 354 || isa samaya
vijayArdhaM parvatakI dakSiNazreNI meM indra ke samAna rathanUpura nAmakA nagara
thA  /  /  355 | usameM donoM zreNiyoMkA svAmI mahAparAkramI tathA zatruoMko
bhaya utpanna karanevAlA rAjA azanivega rahatA thA  //  356  //  azanivegakA
putra vijayasiMha thA  /  Adityapurake rAjA vidyAmandara vidyAdharakI vegavatI
rAnI se samutpanna eka zrImAlA nAmakI putrI thI  /  vaha itanI sundarI thI ki
apanI kAntise AkAzatalako lipta karatI thI  /  vidyAmandarane putrIko
yauvanavatI dekha AtmIyajanoMkI anumatise svayaMvara racavAyA  /  azanivegakA
putra vijayasiMha zrImAlAko cAhatA thA isalie rUpake gavaMse prerita ho
svayaMvara meM gayA || 357 - 459  /  /  jinake zarIra bhUSita the aise anya
samasta vidyAdhara bhI maNiyoMse suzobhita vimAnoMke dvArA AkAzako bharate hue
svayaMvara meM pahu~ce || 360 //  tadanantara jo ratnamaya khambhoM para khar3e
the, U~ce-U~ce siMhAsanoMse yukta the tathA jinameM khacita maNiyoMkI kiraNeM
phaila rahI thIM aise manohara maMcoMpara pramukha pramukha vidyAdhara
yathAsthAna ArUr3ha hue| una vidyAdharoMke sAtha unakI zarIra rakSA ke lie
upayogI parimita parivAra bhI thA || 361 - 362  //  tadanantara madhya meM
virAjamAna zrImAlA putrIpara saba vidyAdharoMke netrarUpI nIlakamala eka sAtha
par3e || 363|| tadanantara jinakI AzA svayaMvara meM laga rahI thI aura jinakA
citta kAmase AliMgita thA aise vidyAdharoMmeM nimnAMkita sundara ceSTAe~ prakaTa
huIM || 364 || kisI vidyAdhara ke mastakapara sthita unnata mukuTa, yadyapi
nizcala thA to bhI vaha use ratnoMkI kiraNoMse AcchAdita hAthake dvArA nizcala
kara rahA thA || 365|| koI vidyAdhara kohanI kamarake pAsa rakha jamuhAI letA
huA zarIrako mor3a rahA thA - a~gar3AI le rahA thaa| usakI isa kriyAse zarIra ke
sandhi-sthAna caTakakara zabda kara rahe the || 366 || koI 1. dakSiNe sthitau ma
/  2. kRti: ma., kha.  /  3. siMhazca ma  /  4. dRSTenduvara ma.  /

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sixth Chapter**   123 A certain man on the side was moving a chÄmara, casting
occasional sidelong glances at it. The chÄvara, with its soft, silky appearance,
revolved gently in the hands of the performer. (368) Covering his face with his
left hand, one man with an elevated arm drew back his right arm and released a
fist. (369) Gradually lifting a foot from the seated position, another one
placed it gently on the left thigh, engaging in the pleasure of the right side.
(370) A certain youth, who was observed by a young woman with his toe directed
at her, was scratching his foot resting on the palm of his hand. (371) Someone
managed the tightly bound waist string, resembling a cluster of jewels like the
serpent Åeá¹£a, releasing it firmly and once again binding it slowly. (372) One
particular youth was intertwining his fingers, tilting them upward, while
puffing up his chest to raise an arch of his arms. (373) Another youth, with
eyes wandering towards the young woman, was smiling as he took the hand of a
friend beside him, engaging in light-hearted conversation. (374) A young man,
upon whose chest was smeared sandalwood paste and on whom saffron was applied,
was gazing down at that expansive chest. (375) Another vidyÄdhar was entangling
the curly hair hanging down on his forehead with the fingers of his left hand.
(376) One young man, with red lips from chewing clean betel, was slowly pulling
them with his left hand, raising his eyebrows. (377) Another young one was
spreading the pollen of grains with his right hand while twirling a lotus upon
which bees were hovering. (378) At that time, within the assembly of svayamvara,
a great sound was being generated by the veenas, flutes, conches, mridangas, and
the musical instruments known as kahala, bheri, and mardaka. (379) Observing the
actions of great individuals, who were inwardly pleased and had formed separate
groups, the musical offerings were being recited. (380) After that, as the great
clamor subsided, the auspicious woman named SumangalÄ, holding a golden staff in
her right hand, spoke the following words to the bride. At that time: 1.
Åaá¹á¸aá¹£á¹­aá¸¥. 2. mÅ«rdhni kha. 3. maá¹á¸alaiá¸¥ ma., muá¸á¸ukaiá¸¥ ka. 4. vá¹ddha-m.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva 123 pArzvage puruSe kazciccalayatyeva cAmaram  /
salIlamaMzukAntena cakre vIjanamAnane  // 368 //  savyena vaktramAcchAdya
kAzcaduttalapANinA  /  saMkocya dakSiNaM bAhu vyAkSipad baddhamuSTikam  /  / 369
/  /  pAdAsanasthitaM kazcidudyamya caraNaM zanaiH  /  vAmoruphalake cakre
dakSiNaM ratidakSiNaH  // 370 //  pAdAGguSTena kazcicca netrAntekSitakanyakaH  /
kRtvA pANitale gaNDaM lilekha caraNAsanam  // 371 //  gADhamapyaparo
baddhamunmucya kaTisUtrakam  /  babandha zanakaiyaH zeSANamapi cakrakam  // 372
//  sphuTadanyo'nyasaMdaSTaprottAnavikarAGguliH  /  vakSaH kazcitsamudyamya
bahutoraNamUrdhvayan  // 373 //  pArzvasthasyAparo hastaM sakhyurAsphAlya
sasmitam  /  kathAM cakre vinA hetoH kanyAkSiptacalekSaNaH  // 37 //
kRtacandanacarce'nyaH kukumasthAsakAcite  /  cakSurvakSasi cikSepa vizAle
kRtahastake  // 375 /  /  kazcitkuntalamAlasthAM gRhItvA kezavallarIm  /
kuTilAmapi vAmAyAM pradezinyAmayojayat  // 376 /  /  adharaM kazcidAkRSya
vAmahastena mantharam  /  svacchatAmbUlasacchAyamaikSiSTa dhruvamunnayan  // 377
//  aparo'bhramayat padma baddhabhramaramaNDalam  /  savyetareNa hastena
visarpana karNikArajaH  // 378 //  vINAbhirveNubhiH zaGkhadaGgajhallaraistathA
/  janito'tha mahAnAdaH kAhalAnakaimardakaiH  // 379 //  maGgalAni prayuktAni
vandibhirvarddhavRndakaiH  /  mahApuruSaceSTAbhirnibaddhAni pramodibhiH  // 380
//  mahAnAdasya tasyAnte dhAtrI nAmnA sumaGgalA  /
vAmetarakaropAttahemavetralatA tataH  // 381 //  hAthoMkI vidyAdhara bagala meM
rakhI huI dedIpyamAna churIko hAthake agrabhAgase calA rahA thA tathA bAra-bAra
usakI ora kaTAkSase dekhatA thA  // 367 /  /  yadyapi pAsameM khar3A puruSa
camara Dhora rahA thA to bhI koI vidyAdhara vastrake aMcalase lIlApUrvaka
mukhake Upara havA kara rahA thA  // 368 //  koI eka vidyAdhara, jisakI hathelI
UparakI ora thI aise bAyeM hAthase muMha DhaMkakara, jisakI muTThI ba~dhI thI
aisI dAhinI bhujAko saMkucita kara phailA rahA thA  // 369 /  /  koI eka
ratikuzala vidyAdhara, pAdAsanapara rakhe dAhine pA~vako uThAkara dhIre-se bAyIM
jA~ghapara rakha rahA thA  // 370 //  kanyAkI ora kaTAkSa calAtA huA koI eka
yuvA hathelIpara kapola rakhakara pairake aMgUThese pAdAsanako kureda rahA thA
// 371 /  /  jisameM lagA huA maNiyoMkA samUha zeSanAgake samAna jAna par3atA
thA aise kasakara baMdhe hue kaTisUtrako kholakara koI yavA use phira se dhIre-
dhIre bAMdha rahA thaa||372|| koI eka yavA dona caTacaTAtI a~galiyoMko eka
dUsaremeM phaMsAkara UparakI ora kara rahA thA tathA sInA phalAkara bhujAoMkA
toraNa khar3A kara rahA thA  // 373 //  jisakI caMcala A~kheM kanyAkI ora par3a
rahI thIM aisA koI eka yuvA bagalameM baiThe hue mitrakA hAtha apane hAthameM le
musakarAtA huA niSprayojana kathA kara rahA thA-gapa-zapa lar3A rahA thaa||374||
koI eka yuvA, jisapara candanakA lepa lagAneke bAda kezarakA tilaka lagAyA thA
tathA jisapara hAtha rakhA thA aise vizAla vakSasthalapara dRSTi DAla rahA thA
// 375 /  /  koI eka vidyAdhara lalATapara laTakate hue ghugharAle bAloMko bAyeM
hAthakI pradezinI aMgulImeM phaMsA rahA thaa||376|| koI eka yuvA svaccha tAmbUla
khAnese lAla-lAla dikhanevAle oThako dhIre-dhIre bAyeM hAthase khIMcakara
bhauMha Upara uThAtA huA dekha rahA thA  // 377 //  aura koI eka yuvA kaNikAkI
parAgako phailAtA huA dAhine hAthase jisapara bhauMre ma~DarA rahe the aisA
kamala ghumA rahA thA  // 378 //  usa samaya svayaMvara maNDapameM vINA, bA~surI
zaMkha, mRdaMga, jhAlara, kAhala, bherI aura mardaka nAmaka bAjoMse utpanna
mahAzabda ho rahA thA  // 379|| mahApuruSoMkI ceSTAe~ dekha jo mana hI mana
prasanna ho rahe the tathA jinhoMne alaga-alaga apane jhuNDa banA rakhe the aise
bandojanoMke dvArA maMgala pAThakA uccAraNa ho rahA thA  // 380 //  tadanantara
mahAzabdake zAnta hone ke bAda dAhine hAthameM svarNamaya char3Iko dhAraNa
karanevAlI sumaMgalA dhAya kanyAse nimna vacana bolii| usa samaya 1. saMdaSTaH
/  2. mUrddhani kha.  /  3. maNDalaiH ma., muDDukaiH k.| 4. vRddh-m.|

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
124 In the Padma Purana, the words of the girls with bowed heads and adorned
with jewels, resembling the wish-fulfilling tree, were spoken.  [382] Their
friendship, with soft hands like lotus flowers, was abandoned. They were
standing on a palanquin, adorned with the color of the Makara flag.  [383] The
king of this city, named Nabhastilaka, was born to the queen Vimala, the
daughter of the king Chandra Kundala.  [384] His name is Martanda Kundala, he
conquers the sun with his brilliance, he is endowed with qualities like peace,
war, etc., and for all these reasons, he has attained supreme prominence in his
circle.  [385] When the qualities of kings are discussed in assemblies, wise men
first mention his name, and due to excessive joy, their bodies become filled
with thorns of goosebumps.  [386] Daughter, if you have a desire to enjoy with
him, then accept this Martanda Kundala, who has seen the essence of all
scriptures.  [387] Then, the king of the Vidyadharas, whose youth had somewhat
faded, was rejected by Sri Mala simply by lowering her face.  [388] Then,
Sumangala, the nurse, said to her daughter, "Look at this prince, who is the
lord of all men, with his brilliance, radiance, and glory."  [389] He is the
lord of Ratnapura, the son of King Vidyanga and Queen Lakshmi, his name is
Vidyasamudhata, and he is the lord of all Vidyadharas.  [390] When his name is
heard, enemies tremble like the leaves of a peepal tree shaken by the wind,
fearing his prowess.  [391] Lakshmi, who was tired of wandering among many petty
kings, has found rest, as it were, on his broad chest, adorned with a necklace
as a pillow.  [392] Daughter, if you have a desire to sit in his lap, then
accept him. May lightning unite with Mount Meru.  [393] Then, Sri Mala looked at
him with simple eyes, and he was rejected. This is right, because a girl's gaze
becomes unsteady when she looks at the one she desires as her husband.  [394]
Then, Sumangala, knowing her intention, told her that she would see the king
again.  [395] The girl, with her humility and adorned with jewels, appeared like
a wish-fulfilling tree.  [381-382] Although her soft lotus-like hands were
resting on her friend's shoulder, they were slipping down. She was seated on a
palanquin and was ready to reveal her choice.  [383] Sumangala, the nurse,
introducing the arriving princes, said, "Daughter, this is the king of
Nabhastilaka, born to Queen Vimala, the daughter of King Chandra Kundala."
[384] His name is Martanda Kundala, he conquers the sun with his brilliance, he
is endowed with qualities like peace, war, etc., and for all these reasons, he
has attained supreme prominence in his circle.  [385] When the qualities of
kings are discussed in assemblies, wise men first mention his name, and due to
excessive joy, their bodies become filled with thorns of goosebumps.  [386]
Daughter, if you have a desire to enjoy with him, then accept this Martanda
Kundala, who has seen the essence of all scriptures.  [387] Then, the king of
the Vidyadharas, whose youth had somewhat faded, was rejected by Sri Mala simply
by lowering her face.  [388] Then, Sumangala, the nurse, said to her daughter,
"Look at this prince, who is the lord of all men, with his brilliance, radiance,
and glory."  [389] He is the lord of Ratnapura, the son of King Vidyanga and
Queen Lakshmi, his name is Vidyasamudhata, and he is the lord of all
Vidyadharas.  [390] When his name is heard, enemies tremble like the leaves of a
peepal tree shaken by the wind, fearing his prowess.  [391] Lakshmi, who was
tired of wandering among many petty kings, has found rest, as it were, on his
broad chest, adorned with a necklace as a pillow.  [392] Daughter, if you have a
desire to sit in his lap, then accept him. May lightning unite with Mount Meru.
[393] Then, Sri Mala looked at him with simple eyes, and he was rejected. This
is right, because a girl's gaze becomes unsteady when she looks at the one she
desires as her husband.  [394] Then, Sumangala, knowing her intention, told her
that she would see the king again.  [395]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 124 padmapurANe jagAda vacanaM kanyAM vinayAdAnatAnanAm  /
prAptakalpalatAkArAM maNihemavibhUSaNeH  // 382 //  sakhyaM
sanyastavizraMsimRdupANisaroruhAm  /  UrdhvasthitA sthitAmUvaM
makaradhvajavarNinIm  // 383 //  nabhastilakanAmno'yaM nagarasya patiH sute  /
utpano vimalAyAM ca candra kuNDalabhUpateH  // 384 //  mArtaNDakuNDalo nAmnA
mArtaNDavijayI rucA  /  prakANDatAM parAM prApto maNDalAyo guNAtmakaH  // 385 //
guNacintApravRttAsu goSThISvasyAdito budhAH  /  nAma gRhNanti
romAJcakaNTakavyAptavigrahAH  // 386 //  sAkametena rantuM cedasti te manasaH
spRhA  /  vRNISvainaM tato dRSTasamastagranthagarmakam  // 387 //  tatastaM
yauvanAdISatpracyutaM khecarAdhipam  /  AnanAnatimAtreNa pratyAkhyAtavatI zumA
// 388 //  bhUyo'vadattato dhAtrI tanaye yaccha locane  /  puruSANAmadhIze'smin
kAntidIptivibhUtimiH  // 389 //  ayaM ratnapurAdhIzo lakSmIvidyAGgayoH sutaH  /
nAmnA vidyAsamuddhAto bahuvidyAdharAdhipaH  // 390 //  asya nAmni gate
karNajAhaM vIrapravartane  /  zatravo gRhNate vAyuMdhUtAzvatthadalasthitam  //
391 //  asya vakSasi vistIrNe kRtahAropadhAnake  /  kunRpabhrAntimiH khinnA
lakSmIvizrAntamAgatA  // 392 //  asyAGke yadi te prItiH sthAtumasti manohare  /
gRhANenaM taDinmAlA yujyatAM mandarAdriNA  // 393 //  tataH pratyAcacakSe taM
cakSuSaivarjudarzanAt  /  vAJchite hi varatvena dRSTizcaJcalatAM vrajet  // 394
/  /  tato'sau tadamiprAyavedinI tAM sumaGgalA  /  aparaM darzanaM nitye
narezamiti cAvadat  // 395 //  kanyAkA sukha vinayase avanata thA maNimayI
AbhUSaNoMse vaha kalpalatAke samAna jAna par3atI thI  // 381-382 /  /  vaha
apanA komala hastakamala yadyapi sakhIke kandhepara rakhI thI to bhI vaha nIcekI
ora khisaka rahA thaa| vaha pAlakIpara savAra thI aura kAmako prakaTa karanevAlI
thI  // 383 /  /  Agata rAjakumAroMkA paricaya detI huI sumaMgalA dhAya bolI ki
he putri! yaha nabhastilaka nagarakA rAjA, candrakuNDala bhUpAlakI vimalA nAmaka
rAnIse utpanna huA hai  // 384 //  mArtaNDakuNDala isakA nAma hai, apanI kAntise
sUryako jIta rahA hai, sandhi, vigraha Adi guNoMse yukta hai tathA inhIM saba
kAraNoMse yaha apane maNDalameM parama pramukhatAko prApta huA hai  // 385 /
jaba goSThiyoMmeM rAjAoMke guNoMkI carcA zurU hotI hai taba vidvajjana sabase
pahale isIkA nAma lete haiM aura harSAtirekake kAraNa usa samaya vidvajjanoMke
zarIra romAMcarUpI kaNTakoMse vyApta ho jAte haiM  // 386 //  he putri ! yadi
isake sAtha ramaNa karanekI tere manakI icchA hai to jisane samasta zAstroMkA
sAra dekhA hai aise isa mArtaNDakuNDalako svIkRta kara  // 387 //  tadanantara
jisakA yauvana kucha Dhala cukA thA aise vidyAdharoMke rAjA mArtaNDakuNDalakA
zrImAlAne mukha nIcA karane mAtrase hI nirAkaraNa kara diyA  // 388 //
tadanantara sumaMgalA dhAya bolI ki he putri ! kAnti, dIpti aura vibhUtike dvArA
jo samasta puruSoMkA adhIzvara hai aise isa rAjakumArapara apanI dRSTi DAlo  //
389 /  /  yaha ratnapurakA svAmI hai, rAjA vidyAMga aura rAnI lakSmIkA putra
hai, vidyAsamudghAta isakA nAma hai tathA samasta vidyAdharoMkA svAmI hai  //
390|| vIroMmeM halacala macAnevAlA isakA nAma sunate hI zatru bhayase vAyuke
dvArA kampita pIpalake pattekI dazAko prApta hote haiM arthAt pIpalake patteke
samAna kA~pane lagate haiM  // 391 //  aneka kSudra rAjAoMke pAsa bhramaNa
karanese jo thaka gayI thI aisI lakSmI, hArarUpI takiyAse suzobhita isake
vistRta vakSaHsthalapara mAno vizrAmako prApta huI hai  // 392 /  /  yadi isakI
godameM baiThanekI terI abhilASA hai to ise svIkAra kr| bijalI sumeruparvatake
sAtha samAgamako prApta ho  // 393 /  /  zrImAlA use apane netroMse
saralatApUrvaka dekhatI rahI isIse usakA nirAkaraNa ho gayA so ThIka hI hai
kyoMki kanyA jise vararUpase pasanda karatI hai usapara usakI dRSTi caMcala ho
jAtI hai  /  / 324 //  tadanantara usakA abhiprAya jAnanevAlI sumaMgalA use
dUsare 1. prakIrtane ma.  /  2. vAta- ma.  /  3. sthitam kha. 4. darzayantI na
-reza ma.  /

Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter  This is the son of Vajrayudha, born of Vajrashila. He is the
king of the city named Vajrapanjara. || 396 ||   On both his arms, Lakshmi,
shining like the sun, resides, though fickle by nature, she remains steadfast.
|| 397 ||  There are others who are called Khecharas, but they are merely in
name. This one, however, shines like the sun, surpassing those who are like
fireflies. || 398 ||  His head, naturally tall, has attained the highest height.
The crown adorned with sparkling gems, is only for further enhancement. || 399
||  Beautiful one, accept this lord of the Vidya-bhrutas, if you desire all the
pleasures like Shachi. || 400 ||  Seeing the Khechara-bhanu, the sun-like
Khechara, the maiden Kumudvati felt extreme shyness. Seeing this, the nurse
spoke again. || 401 ||  This is the son of Chitramvara and Padma-shri, born from
her womb. He is the eternal king of Chandra-pura, known as Chandra-nana. || 402
||  See, his chest is broad, adorned with beautiful sandalwood. It is embraced
by the rays of the moon, resembling the banks of Kailasa. || 403 ||  His chest
is adorned with a necklace of leaping pearls, like a waterfall cascading from
Kailasa. || 404 ||  The letters of his name, like rays, embrace the mind of even
an enemy, bringing supreme joy, free from sorrow and pain. || 405 ||  If your
heart finds joy in his beautiful form, then like the night with the moon, you
should unite with him. || 406 ||  But her mind did not find joy in him, just as
the lotus does not find joy in the moon, which brings delight to the eyes. ||
407 ||  Then the nurse said, "Daughter, look at this Purandara. He has descended
to earth, desiring your union. He is indeed Purandara, Indra himself." || 408 ||
This is the son of Merukanta and Shrir-ambha, born from her womb. He is the lord
of Mandara-kunja, his voice like thunder. || 409 ||  Taking her to the king, she
said, || 395 ||  "This king, Khechara-bhanu, the son of Vajrayudha and
Vajrashila, resides in the city named Vajrapanjara." || 396 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva vajrAyudhasya putro'yaM vajrazIlAGgasaMbhavaH  /
vajrapaJjaranAmAnamadhitiSThati pattanam  //  396  //  asya bAhudvaye
lakSmIrdinezakarabhAsure  /  caJcalApi svabhAvena saMyatevAvatiSThate  //  397
//  satyamanye'pi vidyante nAmamAtreNa khecarAH  /  teSAM khadyotatulyAnAmayaM
bhAskaratAM gataH  // 398 //  mAnena tuGgatAmasya prAptasya zirasaH parAm  /
saMprAptaM punarutkarSa mukuTaM sphuTaratnakam  // 399 //  rUpe pratipadyasva
patiM vidyAbhRtAmimam  /  viSayAMzcetsamAn zacyA moktuM dhIstava vidyate  // 100
//  tataH khecarabhAnuM taM dRSTvA kanyA kumudvatI  /  saMkocaM paramaM yAtA
dhAtryeti gaditA punaH  // 401  //  citrAmbarasya putro'yaM
padmazrIkukSisaMbhavaH  /  nityaM candrapurAdhIzo nAmnA candrAnano nRpaH  //
402  //  pazya vakSo'sya vistIrNa cArucandanacarcitam  /  candrarazmipariSvaktaM
kailAsataTasaMnibham  // 103 //  ucchalatkarabhAro'sya hAro vakSasi rAjate  /
utsarpassIkaro dUraM kailAsa iva nirjharaH  //  404  //  nAmAkSarakarairasya
manaH zliSTamarerapi  /  prayAti paramaM hlAdaM duHkhatApavivarjitam  // 405 //
yAti cediha te cetaH prasAdaM saumyadarzane  /  rajanIva zazAGkena labhasvetena
saMgamam  // 406 //  tatastasminnapi prItiM na mano'syAH samAgatam  /  kamalinyA
yathA candre nayanAnandakAriNi  //  407 || punarAha tato dhAtrI kanye pazya
purandaram  /  avatIrNaM mahImetaM bhavatIsaMgalAlasam  // 408 //  suto'yaM
merukAntasya zrIrambhAgarbhasaMbhavaH  /  svAmI mandarakuJjasya
purasyAmbhodharadhvaniH  //  409  //  rAjAke pAsa le jAkara bolI || 395  //  ki
yaha rAjA vajrAyudha aura rAnI vajrazIlAkA putra khecarabhAnu vajrapaMjara
nAmaka nagara meM rahatA hai  //  396  //  | lakSmI yadyapi svabhAvase caMcala
hai to bhI sUryakI kiraNoMke samAna dedIpyamAna isakI donoM bhujAoMpara ba~dhI
huI ke samAna sadA sthira rahatI hai ||397|| 125 yaha saca hai ki nAmamAtrake
anya vidyAdhara bhI haiM parantu ve saba juganUke samAna haiM aura yaha unake
bIca sUryake samAna dedIpyamAna hai  //  398  //  yadyapi isakA mastaka
svAbhAvika pramANase hI parama U~cAIko prApta hai phira bhI isapara jo
jagamagAte ratnoMse suzobhita mukuTa bA~dhA gayA hai so kevala utkarSaM prApta
karaneke lie hI bAMdhA gayA hai  //  399  //  he sundari ! yadi indrANIke samAna
samasta bhoga bhogI terI icchA hai to isa vidyAdharoMke adhipatiko svIkRta kara
// 400 //  tadanantara usa khecarabhAnurUpI sUryako dekhakara kanyArUpI kumudinI
parama saMkocako prApta ho gayI  /  yaha dekha sumaMgalA dhAyane kucha Age
bar3hakara kahA ||401 || ki yaha rAjA citrAmbara aura rAnI padmazrIkA putra
candrAnana hai, candrapura nagarakA svAmI hai| dekho, sundara candanase carcita
isakA vakSaHsthala kitanA caur3A hai ? yaha candramAkI kiraNoMse AliMgita
kailAsa parvatake taTake samAna kitanA bhalA mAlUma hotA hai ? ||402-403 ||
chalakatI huI kiraNoMse suzobhita hAra isake vakSaHsthalapara aisA suzobhita ho
rahA hai jaisA ki uThate hue jalakaNoMse suzobhita nirjhara kailAsake taTapara
suzobhita hotA hai ||404 /  /  isake nAmake akSararUpI kiraNoMse AliMgita
zatrukA bhI mana parama harSako prApta hotA hai tathA usakA saba duHkharUpI
santApa chUTa jAtA hai  //  405 || he saumyadarzane ! yadi terA citta isapara
prasannatAko prApta hai to candramAke sAtha rAtrike samAna tU isake sAtha
samAgamako prApta ho || 406 || tadanantara netroMko Anandita karanevAle
candramApara jisa prakAra kamalinIkA mana prItiko prApta nahIM hotA usI prakAra
rAjA candrAnanapara zrImAlAkA mana prItiko prApta nahIM huA || 407 || taba dhAya
bolI ki he kanye ! isa rAjA purandarako dekho| yaha purandara kyA hai mAno
tumhAre saMgamakI lAlasAse pRthivIpara avatIrNaM huA sAkSAt purandara arthAt
indra hI hai ||408|| yaha rAjA merukAnta aura rAnI zrIrambhAkA putra hai,
mandarakuMja nagarakA svAmI hai, meghake samAna isakI joradAra AvAja 1. svarUpe
ma.  /

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
126 Padma Purana Those who are afflicted with fear in battle are unable to bear
the sight of him who has come face to face. How then can they withstand the
arrows of those who are skilled in warfare? || 410 || I believe that even Indra,
the lord of the gods, would be afraid of him. Indeed, his unbroken prowess roams
the entire earth. || 411 || O beautiful one with shapely hips, during the time
of loving conflict, strike his exalted head with your foot. || 412 || Even
Purandara, the king, could not find a place in his heart. This is because the
minds of people are diverse due to their own actions. || 413 || Just as a wave
in a lake carries a lotus to another lotus, so too did the nurse take the girl
to another Vidyadhara in the lake of all virtues, saying, "O daughter, look at
this king, Mahabala. This king was born to the queen named Vegini by the power
of Manojava. His speed is like that of the wind." || 414 - 415 || He is the lord
of the city of Naka, his pure qualities are beyond calculation. || 416 || By the
wind generated by the speed of his own body, he makes the entire earth revolve,
causing mountains to fall. || 417 || By the power of his knowledge, he can make
the earth ascend to the sky and show all the planets to those who dwell on the
earth. || 418 || Or he can create a fourth world besides the three worlds, make
the sun as cool as the moon, pulverize Mount Meru, make the wind still, dry up
the ocean, and give form to the sky. Or what more to say? Whatever he desires,
it happens. || 419-420 || The nurse said all this correctly, but the girl's mind
did not find a place in him. The girl knew all the scriptures, so she understood
that the nurse was exaggerating - there was no truth in her words. || 421 ||
Thus, the girl abandoned many Vidyadharas who were endowed with the power of
knowledge, whose wealth had been described by the nurse. || 422 || Thereafter,
just as the moonbeam leaves the mountains and they become dark, so too did the
girl leave the Vidyadharas, and they became filled with sorrow. || 423 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 126 padmapurANe zaktA yasya na saMgrAme dRSTiM saMmukhamAgatAm  /  pratipattuM
kuto bANAn zatravo mayadAritAH  //  410  //  saMbhAvayAmi devAnAM nAtho'pyasmAd
vrajed bhayam  /  abhagnaprasaro hyasya pratApo bhramati kSitim  //  411  //
unnataM caraNenAsya zirastADaya susvane  /  prastAve premayukteSu kalaheSu
nitambini  //  412  //  asAvapi tatastasyA na lebhe mAnase padam  /  citrA hi
cetaso vRttiH prajAnAM karmahetukA  // 413 //  amApayadimAM bAlAM tato'nyaM
vyomacAriNam  /  dhAtrI madaHsarasyabjaM haMsImutkalikA yathA  //  414  //
uvAca ca sute pazya nRpametaM mahAbalam  /  manojavena veginyAM saMbhUtaM
vAyuraMhasam  //  415  //  nAkArddhasaMjJakasyAyaM purasya parirakSitA  /
atikramya sthitA yasya gaNanAM vimalA guNAH  //  416  //  samutkSepamAtreNa
sarvaM yaH kSitimaNDalam  /  bhrAmyati svAGgavegotthavAtapAtitabhUdharaH  // 417
//  vidyAbalena yaH kuryAd bhUmiM gaganamadhyagAm  /  darzayedvA grahAn sarvAn
dharaNItalacAriNaH  // 418 //  turIyaM vA sRjellokaM sUryaM vA candrazItalam  /
cUrNayedvA gharAzIzaM sthApayedvAnilaM sthiram  // 419 //  zoSayed vAmbhasAM
nAthaM mUrtaM kurvIta vA nabhaH  /  bhASitenoruNA kiM vA bhavedyasya yatrepsitam
// 420 //  tatrApi na manastasyAzcakre sthAnamayuktikam  /  vadatyepeti cAjJAsIt
sarvazAstrakRtazramA  //  421|| anyAnapi bahUnevaM dhAtrIdarzita saMpadaH  /
vidyAbalasamAyuktAn kanyA tatyAja khecarAn  //  422 //  tato'sau candralekheva
vyatItA yAnnabhazcarAn  /  parvatA iva te prAptAH zyAmatAM lokavAhinaH  // 423
//  hai || 409 || yuddha meM bhaya se pIr3ita zatru isakI sammukhAgata dRSTiko
sahana karane meM asamartha rahate haiM phira ariat to bAta hI alaga hai  //
410  //  mujhe to lagatA hai ki devoMkA adhipati indra bhI isase bhayabhIta ho
sakatA hai, vAstava meM isakA akhaNDita pratApa samasta pRthvImeM bhramaNa
karatA hai ||411|| he sundara zabdoMvAlI nitambini ! premapUrNa kalaha ke samaya
tUM isake unnata mastakako apane caraNa se tADita kara ||412|| rAjA purandara
bhI usake hRdaya meM sthAna nahIM pA sakA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki apane-apane
karmoMke kAraNa logoMkI cittavRtti vicitra prakArakI hotI hai || 413|| jisa
prakAra sarovara meM taraMga haMsI ko dUsare kamalake pAsa le jAtI hai usI
prakAra dhAya usa kanyAko sabhArUpI sarovara meM kisI dUsare vidyAdharake pAsa
le jAkara bolI ki he putri ! isa rAjA mahAbalako dekha  /  yaha rAjA manojavake
dvArA veginI nAmaka rAnIse utpanna huA hai  /  vAyuke samAna isakA vega hai
||414 - 415  /  /  nAkApurakA svAmI hai, isake nirmala guNa gaNanA se pare haiM
||416 || apane zarIra ke vegase utpanna vAyuke dvArA parvatoM ko girA denevAlA
yaha rAjA bhauMha uThAte hI samasta pRthivImeM cakkara lagA detA hai ||417 ||
yaha vidyA se pRthivIko AkAzagAminI banA sakatA hai aura samasta grahoM ko
pRthivI - talacArI dikhA sakatA hai || 418  /  /  athavA tIna lokake sivAya
caturthaM lokakI racanA kara sakatA hai, sUryako candramAke samAna zItala banA
sakatA hai, sumeru parvatakA cUrNa kara sakatA hai, vAyuko sthira banA sakatA
hai, samudrako sukhA sakatA hai aura AkAzako mUrtika banA sakatA hai  /  athavA
adhika kahane se kyA ? isakI jo icchA hotI hai vaisA hI kArya ho jAtA hai
||419-420  //  dhAne yaha saba kahA sahI, para kanyAkA mana usameM sthAna nahIM
pA sakA  /  kanyA sarvazAstroMko jAnane vAlI thI isalie usane jAna liyA ki yaha
dhAya atyuktiyukta kaha rahI hai - isake kahane meM satyatA nahIM hai || 421 ||
isa taraha dhAyake dvArA jinake vaibhavakA varNana kiyA gayA thA aise bahuta-se
vidyAbaladhArI vidyAdharoMkA parityAga kara kanyA Age bar3ha gayI ||422||
tadanantara jisa prakAra candralekhA jina parvatoMko chor3akara Age bar3ha jAtI
hai ve parvata andhakArase malina ho jAte haiM usI prakAra kanyA zrImAlI jina
vidyAdharoMko chor3akara Age bar3ha gayI thI ve zokako 1. mAnasaMpadAm ka.  /
2. gaNatAM ma.  /  3. vyatIyAya nabhazcarAn ma.  /

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Sixth Chapter**  Seeing the unique *khecharas* [sky-dwellers] and their mutual
gaze, the intention was to enter the earth, as if the earth itself were cracked
and about to swallow them (*strÄpÄvatÄm*). ||424|| Then, the *DhÄtrÄ«*
[nurturer], adorned with the light of the *khecharas*, was heard, and her gaze
fell upon *Kishkindha-kumÄra* [the prince of Kishkindha] with great respect.
||425|| Then, the ornament of wreaths appeared in the sight of those present,
and affectionate conversations were exchanged through this wreath. ||426||
Thereafter, the glances of *Vijaya-Siá¹ha* [Victorious Lion] fell upon
*Kishkindha* and *Andhaka*, filled with pride due to their mastery of knowledge
(*vidyÄ-vÄ«rye*). ||427|| "What is this *vidyÄdhara* society here? Where have you
two *khecharas* come?" said the prideful *Vijaya-Siá¹ha*, observing their
deformed appearance: "You are insignificant, monkeys, devoid of humility."
||428|| "Here there is no lovely forest filled with fruits, nor are there
beautiful mountains with waterfalls." ||429|| "The groups of *vanarÄ«s* [monkey-
like beings] with faces red like flesh do not engage in ill deeds as desired."
||430|| "Who has called these monstrous *vanar* [monkey-shaped beings]? Today, I
shall destroy that wretched messenger!" ||431|| "Let us eradicate these wicked
beings from this place, and drive away their faith in achieving the
*vidyÄdhari*." ||432|| Angered by this harsh speech from *Vijaya-Siá¹ha*, both
*Kishkindha* and *Andhaka* became highly disturbed, like elephants disturbed by
a lion. ||433|| Then, the *Åakti* (energy/power) of the remarks made about their
lord caused the *vidyÄdhara* army to engage in fierce actions, as if acting
madly aloud. ||434|| Some *sÄmanta* (chief) began to strike the left shoulder
with his right hand, causing those around to be splattered with blood. ||435||
Another chief, his mind deeply disturbed, cast a fierce gaze upon the enemies
with anger, his eyes reddened like the fire of destruction. ||436|| A soldier,
trembling with rage, touched his chest with his right hand, while...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva khecarANAM vilakSANAM dRSTvAnyonyaM gatasviSAm  /  praveSTuM
dharaNImAsIdabhiprAya strepAvatAm ||424  //  apakarNya tato dhAtrIM
khecaradyutivarNinIm  /  tasyAH papAta kiSkindhakumAre dRSTirAdarAt ||425 ||
tato mAlAguNaH kaNThe dRSThe evAsya saMgataH  /  anyo'nyaM ca samAlApaH
snigdhayA racito'nayA ||426 //  tato vijayasiMhasya kiSkindhAndhakayorgatA  /
dRSTirAhUya tAvevaM vidyAvIryeNa garvitaH ||27|| vidyAdharasamAjo'yaM kva
bhavantAvihAgatau  /  virUpadarzanI kSudrau vAnarau vinayacyutau ||428|| neha
deze vanaM ramyaM phalairasti kRtAnati  /  na vA nirjharadhAriNyaH sundarA
girikandarAH || 429|| vRndAni vAnarINAM vA kurvanti kuviceSTitam  /
mAMsalohitavaktrANAM pravRttAnAM yathepsitam ||430 //  AhUtAviha nai pezU
kapinizAcarau  /  dUtAdhamasya tasyAdya karomi vinipAtanam ||431  //  nirghATaye
tAmimAvasmAddezAcchAkhAmRgau khalau  /  vRthA vidyAdharIzraddhAM dUraM nayata
cAnayoH || 432 || ruSTau tato vacobhistau paruSairvAnaradhvajau  /  mahAntaM
kSobhamAyAtI siMhAviva gajAn prati  //  433 || tataH svAmiparIvAda mahAtrAtAhatA
satI  /  gatA kSobhaM camUvelA raudraceSTAvidhAyinI  //  434  //
kazcidAsphAlayadvAmamaMsaM dakSiNapANinA  /  vegAghAtasamutsarpadrakta
sIkarajAlakam ||435|| kazcid dRSTiM vicikSepa kSepIyaH kSubdhamAnasaH  /
kopAvezAruNAM bhImAM pralayolkAmivAriSu  // 436 //  kazcidakSiNahastena vakSaH
kampreNa kopataH  /  aspRkSat sakalaM krUrakarma vAJchan mahAspadam ||437|| 127
dhAraNa karate hue malina mukha ho gaye || 423 || eka dUsareko dekhanese jinakI
kAnti naSTa ho gayI thI aise lajjAyukta vidyAdharoMke manameM vicAra uTha rahA
thA ki yadi pRthivI phaTa jAye to usameM hama praviSTa ho jAveM ||424||
tadanantara vidyAdharoMkI kAntikA varNana karanevAlI dhAyakI upekSA kara zrImAlI
dRSTi bar3e Adarase kiSkindhakumArake Upara par3I || 425  //  usane logoMke
dekhate-dekhate hI varamAlA kiSkindhakumArake galemeM DAla dI aura usI samaya
snehase bharI zrImAlAne paraspara vArtAlApa kiyA ||426|| tadanantara kiSkindha
aura andhrakarUDhipara vijayasiMha kI dRSTi par3I | vidyA balase garvita
vijayasiMha una donoMko bulAkara kahA ||427|| ki are ! yaha to vidyAdharoMkA
samUha hai, yahA~ Apa loga kahA~ A gaye ? tuma donoMkA darzana atyanta virUpa
hai  /  tuma kSudra ho, vAnara ho aura vinayase rahita ho || 428|| na to yahA~
phaloMse namrIbhUta manohara vana hai aura na nirjharoMko dhAraNa karanevAlI
pahAr3akI guphAe~ hI haiM ||429|| tathA jinake mukha mAMsa ke samAna lAla-lAla
haiM aisI icchAnusAra pravRtti karanevAlI vAnariyoMke jhuNDa bhI yahA~ kuceSTAe~
nahIM kara rahe haiM || 430 /  /  ina pazurUpa vAnara nizAcaroMko yahA~ kauna
bulAkara lAyA hai ? 'Aja usa nIca dUtakA nipAtaghAta karU~ ||431 //  yaha kaha
usane apane sainikoMse kahA ki ina duSTa vAnaroMko isa sthAna se nikAla do tathA
inheM vRthA hI jo vidyAdharI prApta karanekI zraddhA huI hai use dUra kara do
//  432  //  tadanantara vijayasiMha ke kaThora zabdoMse ruSTa ho kiSkindha aura
andhrakarUDhi donoM vAnaravaMzI usa taraha mahAkSobhako prApta hue jisa taraha
ki hAthiyoM ke prati siMha mahAkSobhako prApta hote haiM ||433  //  tadanantara
svAmIkI nindArUpI mahAvAyuse tAr3ita vidyAdharoMkI senArUpI velA rudra-
bhayaMkara ceSTA karatI huI parama kSobhako prApta huI || 434|| koI sAmanta
dAhine hAthase bAyeM kandheko pITane lagA  /  usa samaya usake vegapUrNa
AghAtake kAraNa bAyeM kandhese raktake chIMToMkA samUha uchaTane lagA thA ||
435|| jisakA citta atyanta kSubhita ho rahA thA aisA koI eka sAmanta zatruoMpara
krodhake Aveza se lAla-lAla bhayaMkara dRSTi DAla rahA thA  /  usakI vaha lAla
dRSTi aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno pralaya kAlakI ulkA hI ho ||436|| koI sainika
krodhase kA~pate hue dAhine hAthase vakSaHsthalakA sparza kara rahA thA aura 1.
trapAvataH ma.  /  2. dRSTirevAsya ma  /  3. garvitA kha  /  4. kRtAnatiH ma.  /
5. pazukapi ma  /  6. svakSAraNAkRtI ka., kha.  /  7. aghRkSat ka.

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
128 In the Padma Purana, someone struck another's hand with a smile, so much so
that the traveler became deaf for a long time. ||438|| Someone uprooted a branch
of a great tree whose roots were firmly bound to the earth, and which was
bearing tender leaves. ||439|| A monkey took the pillar of a stage and broke it
on his shoulder, so that the sky was filled with its scattered fragments.
||440|| Someone twisted his body so violently that his healed wounds burst open
again, and his body, drenched in copious streams of blood, resembled the havoc
of a deluge. ||441|| Someone laughed with a wide open mouth, as if he wanted to
fill the entire universe with sound. ||442|| Someone shook his matted hair so
violently that it filled all directions, and it seemed as if night had fallen
for a long time. ||443|| Someone struck his left arm with his right hand,
clenched tight, making a terrible, thunderous sound. ||444|| "O wicked
Vidyadharas! Suffer this destruction as the fruit of your harsh words!" Thus,
someone's mouth was filled with sound, that is, someone was shouting these
words. ||445|| Then, because of that unprecedented insult, the monkey-race came
forward to destroy the army of the Vidyadharas. ||446|| Then, elephants fought
with elephants, charioteers with charioteers, and foot soldiers with foot
soldiers, engaging in a terrible battle. ||447|| Thus, a great battle took place
between the two armies, a battle so great that it filled the group of gods
standing afar with wonder. ||448|| Hearing the news of the battle, the king of
the Rakshasas, named Sukesha, a friend of Kishkindha and Andhraka, arrived there
immediately, like a wish fulfilled. ||449|| Just as there was a great battle
before for the sake of Akompana's daughter, Sulochana, so too is this battle
happening now, for women are the cause of war. ||450|| 1. à¤¸à¤à¤à¥à¤à¤¿à¤¤à¥ à¤®.à¥¤ 2.
à¤¸à¤¾à¤®à¥à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤¤à¤®à¥ à¤®.à¥¤ 3. à¤¦à¥à¤·à¥à¤à¤µà¤¿à¤¦à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤§à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¥¤ 4. à¤®à¥à¤à¤°à¤¾à¤¨à¤¨à¤¾à¤ à¤®à¤à¥¤ 5. à¤¸à¤¹à¤¨à¤¾à¤¤à¥ à¤®.à¥¤

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 128 padmapurANe karaM kareNa kazciJca smitayuktamatADayat  /  tathA yathA gataH
pAnthaH zrutairvadhiratAM ciram  // 438 //  mUlajAladRDhAbaddhamahApIThasya
zAkhinaH  /  kazcidunmUlanaM cakre calatpallavadhAriNaH  // 439 //  maJcasya
stambhamAdAya bamajAMse paraH kapiH  /  kSudramaMgainamastasya
vyAptamantaravarjitaiH  // 440 //  gAtraM balitamekena sphuTadRDhavRNAGkitam  /
zoNitodAradhArAbhirUpAtadhanasaMnibham  // 441 //  kRtATTahAsamanyena hasitaM
vivRtAnanam  /  zabdAtmakamivAzeSaM kurvatA bhuvanAntaram  // 442 //
dhUto'nyena jaTAmArazchannAzeSadigAnanaH  /  chAyayA tasya saMjAtA zarvarIva
tadA ciram  // 443 //  'saMkocinA bhuje kazcidvAme dakSiNapANinA  /  cakAra
tADanaM ghoraM nirghAtApAtabhISaNam  // 444 //  sahadhvaM dhvaMsanaM vAcaH
paruSAyAH phalaM khalAH  /  duHkhaMgA iti tAreNa dhvaninA muMkharAnanaH  // 445
//  apUrvAyAH parAbhUtestataste sahasA bhRzam  /  kapayo'bhimukhIbhUtA hantuM
khecaravAhinIm  // 446 //  gajA gajaistatA sArddha rathArUDhA rathasthitaiH  /
padAtayazca pAdAtaizcakruryuddhaM sudAruNam  // 447 //
senayorubhayorjAtastatastatra raNo mahAn  /
dUrasthitAmaravAtajanitodAravismayaH  // 448 //  zrutvA ca tatkSaNaM yuddhaM
sukezo rAkSasAdhipaH  /  manoratha ivAyAtaH kiSkindhAndhrakayoH suhRt  // 449 //
akampanasutAhetoryathA yuddhamamat param  /  tathedamapi saMvRttaM bIjaM
yuddhasya yoSitaH  // 450 //  usase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno samasta krUra
karma karaneke lie kisI bar3e sthAnakI khoja hI kara rahA ho  // 437 /  /
kisIne musakarAte hue apane eka hAthase dUsare hAthako itane jorase pITA ki
usakA zabda sunakara pathika cirakAlake lie baharA ho gayA  // 438 //  jisakA
mahApITha jar3oMke samUhase pRthvIpara majabUta baMdhA thA aura jo caMcala
pallava dhAraNa kara rahA thA aise kisI vRkSako koI sainika jar3ase ukhAr3ane
lagA  // 439 /  /  kisI vAnarane maMcakA khambhA lekara kandhepara itane jorase
tor3A ki usake nirantara bikhare hue choTe-choTe Tukar3oMse AkAza vyApta ho gayA
// 440 /  /  kisIne apane zarIrako itane jorase mor3A ki usake pure hue ghAva
phirase phaTa gaye tathA khUnakI bar3I moTI dhArAoMse usakA zarIra utpAta-kAlake
medhake samAna jAna par3ane lagA  /  / 441 //  kisIne mu~ha phAr3akara itane
jorase aTTahAsa kiyA ki mAno vaha samasta saMsArake antarAlako zabdamaya hI
karanA cAhatA thA  // 442 //  kisIne apanI jaTAoMkA samUha itanI jorase hilAyA
ki usase samasta dizAe~ vyApta ho gayIM aura usase aisA jAna par3ane lagA mAno
cirakAlake lie rAtri hI ho gayI ho  // 443 //  koI sainika dAhine hAthako
saMkucita kara usase bAyIM bhujAko itanI jorase pITa rahA thA ki usase
vajrapAtake samAna bhayaMkara ghora zabda ho rahA thA  // 444 //  'are duSTa
vidyAdharo! tumane jo kaThora vacana kahe haiM usake phalasvarUpa isa
vidhvaMsako sahana karo' isa prakArake ucca zabdoMse kisIkA mukha zabdAyamAna ho
rahA thA arthAt koI cillA-cillAkara ukta zabda kaha rahA thA  // 445 /  /
tadanantara usa apUrva tiraskArake kAraNa vAnaravaMzI, vidyAdharoMkI senAko
naSTa karaneke lie sammukha Aye  // 446 /  /  tatpazcAt hAthI hAthiyoMse,
rathoMke savAra rathake savAroMse aura paidala sipAhI paidala sipAhiyoMke sAtha
bhayaMkara yuddha karane lage  // 447|| isa prakAra donoM senAoMmeM vahAM
mahAyuddha huaa| aisA mahAyuddha ki jo dUra khar3e devoMke samUhako mahAn
Azcarya utpanna kara rahA thA  /  / 448 //  kiSkindha aura andhrakakA mitra jo
sukeza nAmakA rAkSasoMkA rAjA thA vaha yuddhakA samAcAra suna tatkAla ho
manorathake samAna vahA~ A pahu~cA  /  / 449 /  /  pahale akampanakI putrI
sulocanAke nimitta jaisA mahAyuddha huA thA vaisA hI yuddha usa samaya huA so
ThIka hI hai kyoMki yuddhakA kAraNa striyAM hI haiM  /  / 450 /  /  1. saMkocite
m.| 2. sAmpratam m.| 3. duSTavidyAdharAH  /  4. mukharAnanAH mH| 5. sahanAt m.|

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter  129. While the fierce battle raged between the Vidyadharas and
Rakshasas, Kishkindha, having abducted the maiden, fled the battlefield. ||451||
Upon seeing the Vidyadhara king, Vijayasimha, approach, Andhrakabhu, with a
mocking laugh, struck down his head with his sword. ||452||  Just as a body
without a soul becomes a mere collection of senses, so too did the Vidyadhara
army become scattered without Vijayasimha. ||453||  Hearing of his son's death,
Asanivega was struck with grief, like a man struck by lightning. He was
enveloped in the darkness of unconsciousness. ||454||  After a while, his chest
soaked with the tears of his wives, Asanivega regained consciousness, his face
contorted with rage. ||455||  His retinue could not bear to look upon his form,
which resembled the blazing sun at the time of the apocalypse. ||456||
Surrounded by Vidyadharas, their weapons gleaming, he marched towards
Kishkupura, like a towering mountain. ||457||  Knowing the city was besieged,
the two brothers, Kishkindha and SukeÅa, accompanied by Taá¸ikeÅi, marched out,
eager for battle. ||458||  The Vanara and Rakshasa armies, armed with maces,
javelins, arrows, nooses, spears, and swords, destroyed the Vidyadhara forces.
||459||  Wherever Andhrak, Kishkindha, or SukeÅa went, the path was littered
with the corpses of slain Vanaras. ||460||  Fueled by the fire of his son's
death, Asanivega, with a thunderous roar, charged towards Andhrak. ||461||
Seeing the young and wicked Andhrak, and the arrogant Asanivega, Kishkindha, the
embodiment of thunder, rose to meet them. ||462||  Asanivega's son,
Vidyudvahana, stood before him, and a fierce battle ensued. For it is said that
all defeat in the world is caused by women. ||463||  While the terrible battle
between Kishkindha and Vidyudvahana raged, Asanivega slew Andhrak. ||464||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva 129 yAvaJca tumulaM teSAM vartate khagarakSasAm  /  tAvadAdAya
tAM kanyAM kiSkindhaH kRtitAM gataH  // 451 //  AhUya cAbhiyAtasya
tAvadandhrakabhUbhRtA  /  kRpANena zirastuGgaM jayasiMhasya pAtitam  /  / 452 //
tenaikena vinA sainyamitazcetazca tadagatam  /  Atmaneva vinA dehe hRSIkANAM
kulaM dhanam  // 453 /  /  tataH sutavadhaM zrutvA vajreNeva samAhataH  /
zokenAzanivego'bhUnmUrchAndhatamasAvRtaH  // 454 //  tataH
svadAranetrAmbusiktavakSaHsthalazcirAt  /  gataH prabodhamAkAraM babhAra
krodhamISaNam  // 455 //  tatastasya samAkAraM parivargo'pi nekSitum  /  zazAka
pralayotpAtabhAskarAkArasannibham  // 456 //  sarvavidyAdharaiH sAI tato'sau
zastrabhAsuraiH  /  gatvA kiSkupurasyAbhUttuGgazAla ivAparaH  // 457 //  viditvA
nagaraM ruddhaM tatastau vAnaradhvajau  /  taDikezisamAyuktau niSkrAntau
raNalAlasau  // 45 //  gadAmiH zaktibhirbANaH pAzaiH prAsaimahAsibhiH  /  tato
dAnavasainyaM taddhvastaM vAnararAkSasaiH  // 459 /  /  dizA yayAndhako yAtaH
kiSkindho vA mahAhave  /  sukezo vA tayA yAtA mArgAcUrNitakhecarAH  // 460 //
tatra putravadhakrodhavahnijvAlApradIpitaH  /  andhrakAbhimukho jAto vajravegaH
kRtadhvaniH  // 461 //  bAlo'yamandhrakaH pApo'zanivego'yamuddhataH  /  iti
jJAtvotthito yoddhaM kiSkindho'zaniraMhaso  // 462 //  vidyudvAhananAmnAsau
tatsutena puraskRtaH  /  abhavacca tayoryuddhaM dArajAtaM parAbhavam  // 463 //
yAvacca tattayoyuddhaM vartate'tyantabhISaNam  /  nihato'zanivegena
tAvadandhrakavAnaraH  // 464 //  idhara jabataka vidyAdhara aura rAkSasoMke bIca
bhayaMkara yuddha hotA hai udhara tabataka kanyAko lekara kiSkindha kRtakRtya ho
gayA arthAt use lekara yuddhase bhAga gayA  // 451 //  vidyAdharoMkA rAjA
vijayasiMha jyoM hI sAmane AyA tyoM hI andhrakarUDhine lalakArakara usakA unnata
mastaka talavArase nIce girA diyaa||452|| jisa prakAra eka AtmAke binA zarIrameM
indriyoMkA samUha jahA~-tahA~ bikhara jAtA hai usI prakAra eka vijayasiMhake
vinA samasta senA idhara-udhara bikhara gayI  // 453 /  /  jaba azanivegane
putrake vadhakA samAcAra sunA to vaha zokake kAraNa vajrase tAr3ita hueke samAna
parama dukhI ho mUrchArUpI gAr3ha andhakArase AvRta ho gayA  /  / 454 //
tadanantara apanI striyoMke nayana jalase jisakA vakSaHsthala bhIga rahA thA
aisA azanivega, jaba prabodhako prApta huA taba usane krodhase bhayaMkara AkAra
dhAraNa kiyA  // 455 /  /  tadanantara pralayakAlake utpAtasUcaka bhayaMkara
sUrya ke samAna usake AkArako parikarake loga dekhane meM bhI samartha nahIM ho
sake  // 456 /  /  tadanantara usane zastroMse dedIpyamAna samasta vidyAdharoMke
sAtha jAkara kisI dUsare U~ce koTake samAna kiSkupurako ghera liyA  // 457 /  /
tadanantara nagarako ghirA jAna donoM bhAI yaddhakI lAlasA rakhate hae sUkezake
sAtha bAhara nikale  // 458 //  phira vAnara aura rAkSasoMkI senAne gadA, zakti,
bANa, pAza, bhAle tathA bar3I-baDI talavAroMse vidyAdharoMkI senAko vidhvasta
kara diyA  // 459 //  usa mahAyuddhameM andhraka, kiSkindha aura sukeza jisa
dizAmeM nikala jAte the usI dizAke mArga cUrNIkRta vAnaroMse bhara jAte the  //
460 //  tadanantara putravadhase utpanna krodharUpI agnikI jvAlAoMse pradIpta
huA azanivega jorakA zabda karatA huA andhrakake sAmane gayA  // 461 //  taba
kiSkindhane vicArA ki andhraka abhI bAlaka hai aura yaha pApI azanivega mahA
uddhata hai, aisA vicArakara vaha azanivegake sAtha yuddha karaneke lie svayaM
uThA  /  / 462 /  /  so azanivegake putra vidyudvAhanane usakA sAmanA kiyA aura
phalasvarUpa donoMmeM ghora yuddha huA so Thoka hI hai kyoMki saMsArameM jitanA
parAbhava hotA hai vaha strIke nimitta hI hotA hai  /  / 453 //  idhara jabataka
kiSkindha aura vidyudvAhanameM bhayaMkara yuddha calatA hai udhara tabataka
azanivegane andhrakako 1. kRtino bhAvaH kRtitA tAm  /  kRtyatAM m.| 2. bhUtinA
k.| 3. balam m.| 4. azanivegaH  /  5. azanivegena  /  17

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
130 In the Padma Purana, the young Andhrak fell to the earth, devoid of
radiance. He lay lifeless, resembling the pale light of the morning moon.
||465||   Kishkindha, struck by a stone thrown at his chest by the lightning-
chariot, fainted. But regaining consciousness, he hurled the same stone at
Kishkindha's chest, causing him to fall unconscious. ||466-467|| Then, filled
with love, the king of Lanka, Lakenndra, took him to Kishkupur, neglecting his
own safety. After a long time, Kishkindha regained consciousness. ||468|| When
he opened his eyes and did not see Andhrak, he asked those standing nearby,
"Where is my brother?" ||469|| At that moment, like the ocean churned by the
winds of destruction, he heard the cries of the inner palace, caused by
Andhrak's demise. ||470|| Overwhelmed by grief, Kishkindha lamented for a long
time, his heart filled with waves of sorrow born from the contemplation of his
brother's virtues. ||471|| "Oh brother! How could you die while I am alive? Your
death has broken my right arm." ||472|| "How could that wicked, evil man strike
you, a mere child, with a weapon? A curse upon that unjust villain!" ||473|| "I,
who would become anxious even if I didn't see you for a moment, how can I bear
to live now?" ||474|| "Or perhaps my heart is made of iron, for even knowing
your death, it refuses to leave my body." ||475|| "Remembering your gentle
smile, born from gatherings of valiant men, your radiant joy, I am consumed by
unbearable sorrow." ||476|| "Every playful act, every joy we shared, was like a
shower of nectar upon my entire being." ||477|| "But now, the memory of those
moments, instead of bringing joy, feels like a deadly poison, piercing my
heart." ||478|| Mar dala ||464||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 130 padmapurANe tato'sau patito bAlaH kSitau tejovivarjitaH  /
pratyUSazazinazchAyAM babhAra gatacetanaH  // 465 //  kiSkindhenApi nikSiptA
vidyudvAhanavakSasi  /  zilA sa tADito mUchAM prApya bodhaM punargataH  // 466
//  AdAya tAM zilAM tena tato vakSasi tADitaH  /  kiSkindho'pi gato mUchAM
ghUrNitekSaNamAnasaH  // 467 //  lakendreNa tato nItaH premasaMsaktacetasA  /
kiSku pramAdamurikSapya cirAt prAptazca cetanAm  // 468 //  unmIlya sa tato
netre yadA nApazyadandhrakam  /  tadApRcchanmama bhrAtA vartate kveti pArzvagAna
// 469 //  tataH pralayavAtena kSobhitasyAmbudheH samam  /
zuzrAvAntaHpurAkrandamandhrakadhvaMsahetukam  // 470 //  vigralApaM tatazcakre
prataptaH shokvhninaa| ciraM bhrAtRguNadhyAnakRtaduHkhormisaMtatiH  // 17 //  hA
bhrAtarmayi satyevaM kathaM prApto'si paJcatAm  /  dakSiNaH patito bAhustvayi me
pAtamAgate  // 472 //  durAtmanA kathaM tena pApena vinipAtitam  /  zastraM bAle
tvayi ra dhika tamanyAyavartinam  // 473 //  apazyannAkulo'bhUvaM yo bhavantaM
nimeSataH  /  so'haM vada kathaM prANAn dhArayiSyAmi sAMpratam  // 474 //
athavA nirmitaM ceto vajreNa mama dAruNam  /  yajjJAtvApi bhavanmRtyuM zarIraM
na vimuJcati  // 475 //  bAla te smitasaMyuktaM vIragoSTIsamudbhavam  /  smaran
sphuTasamullAsaM duHkhaM prApnomi duHsaham  // 476 //  yadyadviceSTitaM sAI
kriyamANaM tvayA purA  /  prasekamamRteneva kRtavatsarvagAtrakam  // 477 //
smaryamANaM tadevedamadhunA maraNaM katham  /  prayacchati viSeNeva sekaM
marmavidAraNam  /  / 478 //  mAra DAlA  // 464 //  tadanantara bAlaka andhraka,
tejarahita pRthivIpara gira par3A aura niSprANa ho prAtaHkAlake candramAkI
kAntiko dhAraNa karane lagA arthAta prAtaHkAlIna candramAke samAna kAntihIna ho
gayA  // 465 //  idhara kiSkindhane eka zilA vidyudvAhanake vakSaHsthalapara
pheMkI jisase taDit ho vaha macchita ho gayA parantu kucha hI samayameM saceta
hokara usane vahI zilA kiSkindhake vakSaHsthalapara pheMkI jisase vaha bhI
mUrchAko prApta ho gyaa| usa samaya zilAke AghAtase usake netra tathA mana donoM
hI ghUma rahe the  // 466-467 /  /  tadanantara premase jisakA citta bhara rahA
thA aisA laMkAkA rAjA sukeza use pramAda chor3akara zIghra hI kiSkapura le gyaa|
vahA~ cirakAlake bAda use cetanA prApta huI  // 468 /  /  jaba usane A~kheM
kholI aura sAmane andhraka ko nahIM dekhA taba samIpavartI logoMse pUchA ki
hamArA bhAI kahA~ hai ?  // 469 /  /  usI samaya usane pralayakI vAyuse kSobhita
samudrake samAna, andhrakakI mRtyuse utpanna antaHpurake ronekA zabda sunA  /  /
470 //  tadanantara jisake hRdayameM bhAIke guNoMke cintavanase utpanna duHkhakI
lahareM uTha rahI thIM aisA kiSkindha zokAgnise santapta ho cirakAla taka vilApa
karatA rahA  /  / 471 /  /  he bhAI ! mere rahate hue tU mRtyuko kaise prApta ho
gayA ? tere maranese merI dAhinI bhujA hI bhaMgako prApta huI  // 472 //  usa
pApI duSTane tujha bAlakapara zastra kaise calAyA ? anyAyameM pravRtti
karanevAle usa duSTako dhikkAra hai  // 473 /  /  jo tujhe nimeSa mAtra bhI
nahIM dekhatA thA to Akula ho jAtA thA vahI maiM aba prANoMko kisa prakAra
dhAraNa karU~gA so kaha  // 474 //  athavA merA kaThora citta vajrase nirmita
hai isIlie to vaha terI mRtyu jAnakara bhI zarIra nahIM chor3a rahA hai  /  /
475 /  /  he bAlaka ! manda-manda musakAnase yukta, vIra puruSoMko goSThImeM
samutpanna jo terA prakaTa harSollAsa thA usakA smaraNa karatA huA maiM duHsaha
duHkha prApta kara rahA hU~  /  / 476 /  /  pahale tere sAtha jo-jo
ceThAe~-kautuka Adi kiye the ve samasta zarIrameM mAno amRtakA hI siMcana karate
the  // 477 //  para Aja ve hI saba smaraNameM Ate hI viSake siMcanake samAna
marmaghAtaka maraNa kyoM pradAna kara rahe haiM arthAt jo pahale amRtake samAna
sukhadAyI the ve hI Aja viSake samAna 1. kiSku pramoda, -kha., ma.  /  kiSkuH
ja., ga.  /  '

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter  131. Then, overwhelmed with grief for his brother, Kishkindha
lamented greatly. He was consoled by SukeÅa and others, who explained to him the
nature of true wisdom. ||479||  It is not fitting for the wise to engage in
petty actions like grieving. Indeed, the wise have recognized grief as a demon
with a different name. ||480||  When separation from loved ones occurs due to
the workings of karma, grief only brings further suffering. ||481||  A being who
acts with deliberation should always engage in activities that have a purpose.
Grief is purposeless and therefore not worthy of a wise person. ||482||  If
grief could bring back the deceased, then it would be appropriate to gather
others and grieve. ||483||  Grief, however, only serves to deplete the body. It
is a catalyst for sin and leads to deep delusion. ||484||  Therefore, abandon
this enemy, grief, and clear your mind. Focus your attention on what needs to be
done, for the enemy never abandons its nature. ||485||  Fools, immersed in the
mire of grief, destroy even their remaining actions. Their grief intensifies
when those who depend on them look at them with pity. ||486||  The force of
destruction, like the thunderbolt, is powerful and always present. We must
consider how to counter it now. ||487||  If the enemy is stronger, a wise person
should find a place to hide and wait for the opportune moment. This will prevent
defeat at the hands of the enemy. ||488||  When the time is right, even a foe
twice as powerful can be subdued. After all, prosperity does not always favor
the same person. ||489||  Therefore, the ancestral home of our lineage,
AlankÄrapura (PÄtÄla Laá¹kÄ), has come to my mind. ||490||  The elders of our
clan praise it highly, and even our enemies are unaware of its existence. It is
so beautiful that even after attaining heaven, one would not desire to leave it.
||491||  Why have you become sorrowful? ||478||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva 131 tato'sau vilapan bhUri bhrAtRsnehAtiviklavaH  /
sukezAdibhirAnItaH prabodhamiti bhASaNAt  // 479 //  yuktamatanna dhIrANAM
kartuM kSudraviceSTitam  /  zoko hi paNDitairdRSTaH pizAco bhinnanAmakaH  // 480
/  /  karmaNAM viniyogena viyogaH saha bandhunA  /  prApte tatrAparaM duHkhaM
zoko yacchati saMtatam  // 481 //  'prekSApUrvapravRttena jantunA saprayojanaH
/  vyApAraH satataM kRtyaH zokazcAyamanarthakaH  // 482 //  pratyAgamaH kRte
zoke pretasya yadi jAyate  /  tato'nyAnapi saMgRhya vidadhIta janaH zucam  //
483 //  zokaH pratyuta dehasya zoSIkaraNamuttamam  /  pApAnAmayamudreko
mahAmohapravezanaH  // 484 //  tadevaM cairiNaM zoka parityajya prasannadhIH  /
kRtye kuru matinyAsaM nAnubandhaM tyajatyariH  // 485 //  mUDhAH zokamahApaGke
magnAH zeSAmapi kriyAm  /  nAzayanti tadAyattajIvitaiIkSitA janaiH  // 486 //
balIyAn vajravego'yamasmannAzasya cintakaH  /
pratikartavyamasmAbhizcintanIyamihAdhunA  // 487 //  balIyasi ripo gupti prApya
kAlaM nayed budhaH  /  tatra tAvadavApnoti na nikAramarAtikam  // 488 //  prApya
tatra sthitaH kAlaM kutazcid dviguNaM ripum  /  sAdhayannahi bhUtInAmekasmin
sarvadA ratiH  // 489 //  ataH paramparAyAtamasmAkaM kulagocaram  /
alaGkArapurai nAma sthAnaM me smRtimAgatam  // 490 //  kulavRddhAstadasmAkaM
zaMsantyaviditaM praiH| prApya tat svargaloke'pi na kurvIta padaM manaH  // 491
//  duHkhadAyI kyoM ho gaye ? ||478 //  isa prakAra bhAIke snehase duHkhI huA
kiSkindha bahuta vilApa karatA rahA  /  tadanantara sukeza Adine use isa prakAra
samajhAkara prabodhako prApta karAyA  // 479 /  /  unhoMne kahA ki dhIra-vIra
manuSyoMko kSudra puruSoMke samAna zoka karanA ucita nahIM hai| yathArthameM
paNDitajanoMne zokako bhinna nAmavAlA pizAca hI kahA hai  // 480|| karmoke
anusAra iSTajanoMke sAtha viyogakA avasara Anepara yadi zoka hotA hai to vaha
Age ke lie aura bhI duHkha detA hai  /  / 481 /  /  vicArapUrvaka kArya
karanevAle manuSyako sadA vahI kArya karanA cAhie jo prayojanase sahita ho| yaha
zoka prayojanarahita hai ataH buddhimAn manuSyake dvArA karane yogya nahIM hai
// 482 /  /  yadi zoka karanese mRtaka vyakti vApasa lauTa AtA ho to dUsare
logoMko bhI ikaTThA kara zoka karanA ucita hai  /  / 483 /  /  zokase koI lAbha
nahIM hotA balki zarIrakA utkaTa zoSaNa hI hotA hai| yaha zoka pApoMkA tIvrodaya
karanevAlA aura mahAmohameM praveza karAnevAlA hai||484|| isalie isa vairI zo ko
chor3akara buddhiko svaccha karo aura karane yogya kAryameM mana lagAo kyoMki
zatru apanA saMskAra chor3atA nahIM hai  /  / 485 /  /  mohI manuSya zokarUpI
mahApaMkameM nimagna hokara apane zeSa kAryoMko bhI naSTa kara lete haiN| mohI
manuSyoMkA zoka taba aura bhI adhika bar3hatA hai jabaki apane Azrita manuSya
unako ora dInatA-bharI dRSTise dekhate haiM  // 486 //  hamAre nAzakA sadA
dhyAna rakhanevAlA azanivega cU~ki atyanta balavAn hai isalie isa samaya hama
logoMko isake pratikArakA vicAra avazya karanA cAhie  /  / 487 /  /  yadi zatru
adhika balavAn hai to buddhimAn manuSya kisI jagaha chipakara samaya bitA detA
hai| aisA karanese vaha zatruse prApta honevAle parAbhavase baca jAtA hai  /  /
488|| chipakara rahanevAlA manuSya jaba yogya samaya pAtA hai taba apanese dUnI
zaktiko dhAraNa karanevAle zatruko bhI vaza kara letA hai so ThIka hI hai kyoMki
sampadAoMkI sadA eka hI vyaktimeM prIti nahIM rahatI  // 489 /  /  ataH
paramparAse calA AyA hamAre vaMzakA nivAsasthala alaMkArapura (pAtAla laMkA) isa
samaya mere dhyAnameM AyA hai  /  / 490 /  /  hamAre kulake vRddhajana usakI
bahuta prazaMsA karate haiM tathA zatruoMko bhI usakA patA nahIM hai| vaha itanA
sundara hai ki use pAkara phira mana svargalokakI AkAMkSA 1.
prekSApUrvaprayatnena jantunAzaprayojana:-kha.  /  2. vikAra ma.  /  3. bhIruNA-
kha.  /

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
132 From that, arise, let us go to that city, the enemy's fort. For it is a
great injustice to not spend time in this situation. ||492|| Thus, searching,
"There is no sorrow when it is intense, it subsides. From the sight of Sri Mala,
that sorrow of his, then, subsides." ||493|| Then, the two, with their entire
entourage, set out. They reached the sight of the enemy, the hater of the
electric chariot. ||494|| Then, he, being asked to go, set out, running after
the two. Enraged by the fratricide, he was determined to root out the enemy.
||495|| "Broken ones should not be pursued, enemies should not be pursued," it
is said. A man, knowledgeable in the body of the science of polity, with pure
intellect, ||496|| "He who killed your brother, the wicked enemy, I have made
him attain great sleep with arrows, the Andhrak." ||497|| "Therefore, son,
return, these are not our wrongdoers. Compassion should be shown to a greatly
distressed person." ||498|| "What should a wise man do to one who, by showing
his back, caused the sight of his own death? He is like a living dead." ||499||
While thus, the son was being instructed by Vajravega, the monkey and the demon
reached Alankarpur. ||500|| There, in the city situated in the netherworld,
illuminated by jewels, they stayed, bearing both sorrow and joy, free from fear.
||501|| Then, one day, Ashanivega, seeing the cloud of autumn, dissolving in an
instant, became detached from worldly possessions. ||502|| The happiness that
comes from the association of objects is fleeting, and it is very rare to obtain
human birth in the midst of the eighty-four lakh births. ||503|| Knowing this,
he gave the kingdom to his son, Sahasrar, according to the rules, and himself,
along with Vidhyutkumar, became a great Shraman, a renunciate. ||504|| In the
meantime, a celestial being named Nirghat, appointed by Ashanivega, ruled Lanka.
He was endowed with great knowledge and prowess. ||505||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 132 padmapurANe tasmAduttiSTha gacchAmastatpuraM ripudurgamam  /  anayo hi
mahAneSa yatkAlasya ne yApanam  // 492 //  evamanviSya 'no zoko yadA tIvro
nivartate  /  zrImAlAdarzanAdasya tato'sau vinivartinaH  // 493 //  tatastau
parivargeNa samastena samanvitau  /  prasthitI darzanaM prAptau
vidyudvAhanavidviSaH  // 494 //  tato'sau pRSTato gantaM pravRtto dhAvatostayoH
/  bhrAtRghAtena saMkruddhaH zatrunirmUlanodyataH  // 495 //  bhagnAH
kilAnusatavyAH zatravo neti mASitam  /  nItizAstrazarIrajJaH puruSaiH
zuddhabuddhibhiH  /  / 496 //  nihatazca tava bhrAtA yena pApena vairiNA  /
prApito'sau mahAnidrAM vizikhairandhrako mayA  // 497 /  /  tasmAtputra
nivartasva naite'smAkaM kRtAgasaH  /  anukampA hi kartavyA mahatA duHkhite jane
// 498 /  /  pRSTasya darzanaM yena kAritaM kAtarAtmanA  /  jIvanmRtasya
tasyAnyakriyatAM kiM manasvinA  // 499 //  yAvadevaM sutaM zAsti vajravego
vazasthitim  /  alaGkArapuraM prAptAstAvadvAnararAkSasAH  // 500 //
pAtAlAvasthite tatra ratnAlokacite pure  /  tasthuH zoka pramodaM ca vahanto
bhayavarjitAH  // 501 //  anyadAzanivego'tha dRSTvA zaradi toyadam  /
kSaNAdvilayamAyAtaM virakko rAjyasaMpadi  /  / 502 //  sukhaM viSayayogena
vijJAya kSaNabhaGgaram  /  manuSyajanma cAtyantadurlabhaM bhavasaMkaTe  /  / 503
/  /  sahastrAraM sutaM rAjya sthApayitvA vidhaantH| samaM vidyutkumAreNa
babhUva zramaNo mahAn  // 504 //  zazAsAtrAntare laGkAM nirghAto nAma khecaraH
/  niyukto'zanivegena mahAvidyAparAkramaH  // 505 /  /  nahIM karatA  /  / 491 /
/  isalie uTho hama loga zIghra hI zatruoMke dvArA agamya usa alaMkArapura
nagarameM cleN| isa sthitimeM yadi vahA~ jAkara saMkaTakA samaya nahIM nikAlA
jAtA hai to yaha bar3I anIti hogI  // 492 /  /  isa prakAra laMkAke rAjA
sukezane kiSkindhako bahuta samajhAyA para usakA zoka dUra nahIM huaa| antameM
rAnI zrImAlAke dekhanese usakA zoka dUra ho gayA  // 493 /  /  tadanantara rAjA
kiSkindha aura sukeza apane samasta parivArake sAtha alaMkArapurakI ora cale
parantu vidyudvAhana zatrune unheM dekha liyA  // 424|| vaha bhAI vijayasiMhake
ghAtase atyanta kruddha thA tathA zatrukA nirmUla nAza karane meM sadA udyata
rahatA thA isalie bhAgate hue sukeza aura kiSkindhake pIche laga gayA  // 495 /
/  yaha dekha nItizAstrake marmajJa tathA zuddha buddhiko dhAraNa karanevAle
puruSoMne vidyudvAhanako samajhAyA ki bhAgate hue zatruoMkA pIchA nahIM karanA
cAhie  /  / 496 /  /  pitA azanivegane bhI usase kahA ki jisa pApI vairIne
tumhAre bhAI vijayasiMhako mArA thA usa andhrakako maiMne bANoMke dvArA
mahAnidrA prApta karA dI hai arthAt mAra DAlA hai  // 497 /  /  isalie he putra!
lauTo, ye hamAre aparAdhI nahIM haiN| mahApuruSako duHkhI janapara dayA karanI
cAhie  // 498 //  jisa bhIru manuSyane apanI pITha dikhA dI vaha to jIvita
rahanepara bhI mRtakake samAna hai, tejasvI manuSya bhalA usakA aura kyA kareMge
/  / 499 /  /  idhara isa prakAra azanivega jabataka pUtrako apane adhIna
rahanekA upadeza detA hai udhara tabataka vAnara aura rAkSasa alaMkArapura
(pAtAlalaMkA) meM pahu~ca gaye  / 500|| vaha nagara pAtAlameM sthita thA tathA
ratnoMke prakAzase vyApta thA so usa nagarameM ve donoM zoka tathA harSako
dhAraNa karate hue rahane lage  /  / 501 //  athAnantara eka dina azanivega
zaradaRtuke meghako kSaNabharameM vilIna hotA dekha rAjyasampadAse virakta ho
gayA  // 502 //  viSayoMke saMyogase jo sukha hotA hai vaha kSaNabhaMgura hai
tathA caurAsI lAkha yoniyoMke saMkaTameM manuSya janma pAnA atyanta durlabha hai
/  / 503 /  /  aisA jAnakara usane sahasrAra nAmaka putrako to vidhipUrvaka
rAjya diyA aura svayaM vidyutkumArake sAtha vaha mahAzramaNa arthAt nirgrantha
sAdhu ho gayA  // 504 /  isa antarAlameM azanivegake dvArA niyukta 1.
syAtipAtanam ma.  /  2. naH kha.  /  .

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sixty-Fourth Chapter  133  Seeing the earth-sphere slowly from the depths
of the underworld, like a sacrifice to the One, He saw the earth adorned with
forests and mountains. ||506||  Knowing that his enemies had attained peace,
free from fear, Srimal went to Mount Meru to worship the Jina. ||507||
Returning from there, he saw on the banks of the southern ocean, A forest called
Prithvi-Karna-Tata, beautiful like the Devas. ||508||  He spoke to Srimal, whose
voice was as sweet as a vina, Who was seated close to his chest and held by his
left arm. ||509||  "My dear, see this beautiful forest, with trees adorned with
flowers, Whose waters flow gently, like a woman with a parting in her hair."
||510||  "This mountain, called Dharani-Mauli, stands tall, Like a cloud in the
autumn sky, with its high peaks." ||511||  "It is adorned with waterfalls,
shining with laughter, With foam like the white petals of the kunda flower."
||512||  "This forest of trees, swaying in the wind, Seems to offer us a flower
garland with its branches, as if in welcome." ||513||  "The wind, rich with the
fragrance of flowers, fills our nostrils, And the bowing trees seem to greet
us." ||514||  "This mountain, with its virtues, has bound me fast, I cannot
cross it and go further." ||515||  "I will build a palace here, inaccessible to
earth-dwellers, My happy mind indicates that this is auspicious." ||516||  "My
heart, which was saddened by dwelling in Alankarpur, in the depths of the
underworld, Will find joy here." ||517||  Having said this, he was encouraged by
his beloved, filled with wonder, And descended upon the mountain, scattering the
dense clouds. ||518||  The Mahavidya and Mahaparakrama-bearer, the Vidyadhara
named Nirghata, ruled Lanka. ||505||  One day, the Vidyadhara Nirghata, who was
like a sacrifice to the One, emerged from the underworld city of Alankarpur,
which was like the city of Bali, and slowly surveyed the earth-sphere, adorned
with forests and mountains. At that time, he learned that his enemies had
attained peace. Knowing this, he became fearless and, with his queen Srimal,
went to Mount Meru to worship the Jina. ||506-507||  After worshipping, while
returning, he saw a forest called Prithvi-Karna-Tata on the banks of the
southern ocean. This forest was as beautiful as the Devas. ||508||  Kishkindha,
whose voice was as sweet as a vina, who was seated close to his chest and held
by his left arm, said to his queen Srimal, ||509||  "My dear, see this beautiful
forest, with trees adorned with flowers, and whose waters flow gently, like a
woman with a parting in her hair." ||510||  "This mountain, called Dharani-
Mauli, stands tall, like a cloud in the autumn sky, with its high peaks."
||511||  "It is adorned with waterfalls, shining with laughter, with foam like
the white petals of the kunda flower." ||512||  "This forest of trees, swaying
in the wind, seems to offer us a flower garland with its branches, as if in
welcome." ||513||  "The wind, rich with the fragrance of flowers, fills our
nostrils, and the bowing trees seem to greet us." ||514||  "It seems that this
mountain, with its virtues, has bound me fast, and I cannot cross it and go
further." ||515||  "I will build a palace here, inaccessible to earth-dwellers.
My happy mind indicates that this is auspicious." ||516||  "My heart, which was
saddened by dwelling in Alankarpur, in the depths of the underworld, will find
joy here." ||517||  Having said this, he was encouraged by his beloved, filled
with wonder, and descended upon the mountain, scattering the dense clouds.
||518||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSTa parva 133 ekadotthAya balivatpAtAlanagarodarAt  /  savanakSmAdharaM
pazyan zanairavanimaNDalam  // 506 //  viditvopazamaprAptAn zatrun
bhayavivarjitaH  /  sazrImAlo gato meruM kiSkindho vandituM jinam  // 507 //
pratyAgacchaMstato'pazyaddakSiNodanvatastaTe  /  aTavIM surakurvAmAM
pRthvIkarNataTAbhidhAm  // 508 //  zrImAlAM cAbravIdevaM vINAmiva sukhasvarAm  /
vakSaHsthalasthitAM vAmabAhunA kRtadhAraNAm  // 509 //  devi pazyATavIM ramyAM
kusumAJcitapAdapAm  /  sImantinImiva svacchamandagatyApagAmbhasAm  // 510 //
zarajaladharAkAro rAjate'yaM mahIdharaH  /  madhye'syAH
shikhraistunggairdhrnniimaulisNjnyitH||511||
kundazubhrasamAvartaphenamaNDalamaNDitaiH  /  nirjharahasatAvAyamaTTahAsena
bhAsuraH  // 512 /  /  puSpAJjaliM prakIryAyaM taruzAkhAbhirAdarAt  /
abhyutthAnaM karotIva calattaruvanena nau  // 513 //  puSpAmodasamRddhena vAyunA
ghrANalepinA  /  pratyudgatiM karotIva namanaM ca namattaruH  // 514 //
badhveva kRtavAn gADhaM vajantaM mAmayaM gunnH| atikramya na zaknomi gantumenaM
mahIdharam  // 515 //  AlayaM kalpayAmyatra bhUcararatidurgamam  /  prasAda
mAnasaM gacchatsUcayatyeva me zubham  // 516 //  alaGkArapurAvAse
pAtAlodaravartini  /  khinnaM khinnaM mama svAntaM ratimatra prayAsyati  // 517
//  ityuktvAnumatAlApaH priyayA vismayAkulaH  /  utsArayan ghanavAtamavatIrNo
dharAdharam  // 518 //  mahAvidyA aura mahAparAkramakA dhArI nirghAta nAmakA
vidyAdhara laMkAkA zAsana karatA thA  // 505 /  /  eka dina kiSkindha balike
samAna pAtAlavartI alaMkArapura nagarase nikalakara vana tathA parvatoMse
suzobhita pRthivImaNDalakA dhIre-dhIre avalokana kara rahA thaa| isI avasarapara
use patA calA ki zatru zAnta ho cuke haiN| yaha jAnakara vaha nirbhaya ho apanI
zrImAlA rAnIke sAtha jinendradevakI vandanA karaneke lie sumeru parvatapara gayA
/  / 506-507 //  vandanA kara vApasa lauTate samaya usane dakSiNasamudrake
taTapara pRthivI-karNataTA nAmakI aTavI dekhii| yaha aTavI devakuruke samAna
sundara thI  /  / 508 /  /  kiSkindhane, jisakA svara vINAke samAna sukhadAyI
thA, jo vakSaHsthalase saTakara baiThI thI aura bAyIM bhujAse apaneko pakar3e
thI aisI rAnI zrImAlAse kahA  // 509 /  /  ki he devi ! dekho, yaha aTavI kitanI
sundara hai, yahA~ke vRkSa phUloMse suzobhita haiM, tathA nadiyoMke jalakI
svaccha evaM manda gatise aisI jAna par3atI hai mAno isane sImanta-mA~ga hI
nikAla rakhI ho  /  / 510 /  /  isake bIca meM yaha zaraRtuke meghakA AkAra
dhAraNa karanevAlA tathA UMcI-U~cI zikharoMse suzobhita dharaNImauli nAmakA
parvata suzobhita ho rahA hai  /  / 511 //  kundake phUlake samAna zukla
phenapaTalase maNDita nirjharanoMse yaha dedIpyamAna parvata aisA jAna par3atA
hai mAno aTTahAsa ho kara rahA ho  /  / 512 /  /  yaha vRkSakI zAkhAoMse
AdarapUrvaka puSpAMjali bikherakara vAyukampita vRkSoMke vanase hama donoMko AtA
dekha Adarase mAno uTha hI rahA hai  /  / 513 /  /  phUloMkI sugandhise samRddha
tathA nAsikAko lipta karanevAlI vAyuse yaha parvata mAno hamArI agavAnI hI kara
rahA hai tathA jhukate hue vRkSoMse aisA jAna par3atA hai mAno hama logoMko
namaskAra hI kara rahA hai  /  / 514 //  aisA jAna par3atA hai ki Age jAte hue
mujhe isa parvatane apane guNoMse majabUta bA~dhakara roka liyA hai isIlie to
maiM ise lAMghakara Age jAneke lie samartha nahIM hU~  // 515 /  /  maiM yahA~
bhUmigocariyoMke agocara sundara mahala banavAtA huuN| isa samaya cUMki merA
mana atyanta prasanna ho rahA hai isalie vaha AgAmI zubhakI sUcanA detA hai  /
/ 516 /  /  pAtAlake bIcameM sthita alaMkArapurameM rahate-rahate merA manna
khinna ho gayA hai so yahA~ avazya hI prItiko prApta hogA  // 517 /  /  priyA
zrImAlAne kiSkindhake isa kathanakA samarthana kiyA taba Azcaryase bharA
kiSkindha meghasamUhako cIratA huA parvatapara 1. svastha kha.  /  2. AvayoH  /
3. kha. pustake atra 'sthApayatveva nibhrAntaH prIti tadgatacetasA' ityadhikaH
pAThaH  /  4. metuM m.|

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
134 The king, adorned with all his kinsmen, built a city on the peak of the
mountain, a city like heaven, in a moment, with great joy. ||519|| He named it
after himself, the glorious one. That is why it is still called Kishkindhapur on
earth. ||520|| The mountain itself is also known as Kishkindha, from its
association with the city. Earlier, its name was Madhu, known throughout the
world. ||521|| The king, endowed with right vision and devoted to the worship of
the Jinas, enjoyed the highest pleasures and lived happily for a long time.
||522|| From him, two sons were born to Queen SrimalÄ. The elder was named
Suryaraja, and the younger was known as YajÃ±araja. ||523|| And a daughter,
Suryakamala, was born, with a body as soft as a lotus. She, with her beauty,
made all the Vidyadharas restless. ||524|| Now, in the city of Meghapur, there
reigned a Vidyadhara king named Meru. To him, a son named MrigÄridaman was born
by his queen, MaghonÄ«. ||525|| While wandering, he saw Suryakamala, the daughter
of Kishkindha. He was so smitten by her that he found no peace, neither by day
nor by night. ||526|| His friends, with respect, pleaded for her hand. The king
of Kishkindha, after consulting with Queen SrimalÄ, agreed to give her to him.
||527|| In the beautiful city of Kishkindha, adorned with flags and other
decorations, the auspicious marriage of MrigÄridaman and Suryakamala was
performed according to the rites. ||528|| Returning with her, he stayed on the
mountain called Karna. There, he built a city called Karnakundala. ||529|| To
the king of Alankarapur, SukeÅa, three mighty sons were born by his queen,
IndrÄá¹Ä«. ||530|| The eldest was named MÄli, the middle one was called SumÄli,
and the youngest was known as MÄlyavÄn. All three sons were highly knowledgeable
and adorned with virtues. ||531||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 134 padmapurANe sarvabAndhavayuktena tena svargasamaM puram  /
kSaNAttuGgapramodena racitaM girimUrddhani  // 519 /  /  abhidhAnaM kRtaM cAsya
nijameva yazasvinA  /  yato'dyApi pRthivyAM tat kiSkindhapuramucyate  // 520 //
parvato'pi sa kiSkindhaH prakhyAtastasya saMgamAt  /  pUrva tu madhurityAsInnAma
tasya jagadgatam  // 52 //  samyagdarzanayukto'sau jinapUjAsamudyataH  /
bhuJjAnaH paramAn bhogAn sukhena nyavasaciram  // 522 //  tasmAcca saMbhavaM
prApa zrImAlAyAM sutadvayam  /  jyeSThaH sUryarajA nAma khyAto' yajJarajAstathA
// 523 /  /  sutA ca sUryakamalA jAtA kamalakomalA  /  yayA vidyAdharAH sarve
zobhayA viklavIkRtAH  // 524 //  atha meghapure rAjA merurnAma nabhazcaraH  /
maghonyAM tena saMbhUto mRgAridamanaH sutaH  /  / 525 /  /  tena paryaTatA dRSTA
kiSkindhatanayAnyadA  /  tasyAmutkaNThito lebhe na sa naktaMdivA sukham  // 526
//  abhyarthitA suhRdbhiH sA tadartha sAdaraistataH  /  saMpradhArya samaM devyA
dattA kiSkindhabhUbhRtA  // 527 //  nivRttaM ca vidhAnena tayorvIvAhamaGgalam  /
kiSkindhanagare ramye dhvajAdikRtabhUSaNe  // 528 //  pratigacchan sa tAmUvA
nyavasatkarNaparvate  /  karNakuNDalametena nagaraM tatra nirmitam  // 529 //
alaGkArapurezasya sukezasyAtha sUnavaH  /  indrANyA janma saMprApuH krameNa
puruvikramAH  // 530 //  amISAM prathamo mAlI sumAlI ceti madhyamaH  /  kanIyAn
mAlyavAn khyAto vijJAnaguNabhUSaNaH  /  / 531 /  /  utarA  // 518 /  /  samasta
bAndhavoMse yukta, bhArI harSako dhAraNa karanevAle rAjA kiSkindhane parvatake
zikharapara kSaNa-bharameM svarNake samAna nagarakI racanA kI ||519|| jo apanA
nAma thA yazasvI kiSkindhane vahI nAma usa nagarakA rkhaa| yahI kAraNa hai ki
vaha pRthivImeM Aja bhI kiSkindhapura kahA jAtA hai  /  / 520 //  pahale usa
parvatakA 'madhu' yaha nAma saMsArameM prasiddha thA parantu aba kiSkindhapurake
samAgamase usakA nAma bhI kiSkindhagiri prasiddha ho gayA  // 521 //
samyagdarzanase sahita tathA jinapUjAmeM udyata rahanevAlA rAjA kiSkindha
utkRSTa bhogoMko bhogatA huA cira kAla taka usa parvatapara nivAsa karatA rahA
// 522 //  tadanantara rAjA kiSkindha aura rAnI zrImAla do putra utpanna hue|
unameM bar3ekA nAma sUryaraja aura choTekA nAma yakSaraja thA  // 523 //  ina do
putroMke sivAya unake kamalake samAna komala aMgako dhAraNa karanevAlI
sUryakamalA nAmakI putrI bhI utpanna huii| vaha putrI itanI sundarI thI ki usane
apanI zobhAke dvArA samasta vidyAdharoMko becaina kara diyA thA  // 524 //
athAnantara meghapuranagarameM meru nAmakA vidyAdhara rAjA rAjya karatA thaa|
usakI maghonI nAmakI rAnIse mRgAridamana nAmakA putra utpanna huA  // 525 /  /
eka dina mRgAridamana apanI icchAnusAra bhramaNa kara rahA thA ki usane
kiSkindhakI pUtrI sUryakamalAko dekhaa| use dekha magAridamana itanA utkaNThita
huA ki vaha na to rAtameM sukha pAtA thA aura na dinameM hI  // 526 //
tadanantara mitroMne Adarake sAtha usake lie sUryakamalAkI yAcanA kI aura rAjA
kiSkindhane rAnI zrImAlAke sAtha salAha kara denA svIkRta kara liyA  // 527 /  /
dhvajA-patAkA Adise vibhUSita, mahAmanohara kiSkindha nagara meM vidhipUrvaka
mRgAridamana aura sUryakamalAkA vivAha-maMgala pUrNa huA  // 528 /  /
mRgAridamana sUryakamalAko vivAhakara jaba vApasa jA rahA thA taba vaha karNa
nAmaka parvatapara ThaharA  /  vahA~ usane karNakuNDala nAmakA nagara basAyA  //
529 //  alaMkArapurake rAjA sukezakI indrANI nAmaka rAnIse kramapUrvaka tIna
mahAbalavAn putroMne janma prApta kiyA ||530 /  /  unameM-se pahalekA nAma mAlI,
majhalekA nAma sumAlI aura sabase choTekA nAma mAlyavAn thA  /  ye tInoM hI
putra paramavijJAnI tathA guNarUpI AbhUSaNoMse sahita the  /  / 531 //  1.
khyAto'kSarajA m.| 2. saMcArya ka.  /  3. tAmUDhA ma.  /  4. madhyagAH m.|

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sixth Chapter  The play of the princes was as wonderful as that of the gods,
and it captivated the minds of their parents, relatives, and enemies alike.
||532||  Their actions, born of the power emanating from their perfected
knowledge, were extremely bold. Their parents repeatedly tried to restrain them.
||533||  "O sons, if you go to the Kishkindha mountain for play due to your
youthful exuberance, never go near the southern ocean."  ||534||  Driven by
their youthful exuberance and the abundance of their curiosity, the princes
bowed and asked their parents the reason.  ||535||  "This is not something to be
spoken of, O sons," their parents replied.  ||536||  The princes, with their
sweet words, repeatedly pressed them.  ||536||  Then Sukesha told them, "Listen,
O sons. If you absolutely need to know the reason, then listen.  ||537||  Long
ago, in Lanka, a powerful and cruel Vidhyadhara named Nirghata was appointed to
rule by the force of lightning.  ||538||  That Lanka city, our auspicious city,
came to us through lineage.  ||539||  Though it was dear to us as our own lives,
we abandoned it out of fear of that powerful enemy.  ||539||  That wicked one
has appointed spies in every land, who are constantly vigilant in searching for
our weaknesses.  ||540||  He has set up devices in every place that kill those
who play in the sky.  ||541||  Those devices lure people in with their beauty
and then destroy them, just as the distractions that arise during meditation
destroy an incapable yogi.  ||542||  Hearing this, Mali sighed deeply, his eyes
filled with tears, thinking of his parents' sorrow.  ||543||  His mind filled
with anger, he smiled proudly for a long time.  ||544||  Looking at his strong
arms, he spoke, "Father, why did you not tell us this for so long?  ||545||  It
is amazing that you deceived us with such great affection.  ||545||  Those who
do not act but only roar uselessly, even if they are powerful, are considered
very weak in the world."  ||546||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva aharanmAnasaM pitrorbandhUnAM dviSatAM tathA  /  teSAM krIDA
kumArANAM devAnAmiva sodbhutA  // 532 //
siddhavidyAsamudbhUtavIryovRtrtakriyAstataH  /  nivAritAH pitRbhyAM te yatnAditi
punaH punaH  // 533 //  rantuM cedyAta kiSkindhaM putrAH kaumAracApalAt  /  mA
brAjiSTa samIpaM tvaM jAtucidakSiNAmbudheH  // 534 //  tataH praNamya taiH
pRSTau pitarau tatra kAraNam  /  kutUhalasya bAhulyAdvIryazaizavasaMbhRtAn  //
535 //  anAkhyeyamidaM vatsA iti tau vihitottrau| sutarAmanubandhena sutaiH
pRSTau sacATubhiH  // 536 //  tatastebhyaH sukezena kathitaM zRNutAtmajAH  /
hetunA viditenAtra yadyavazyaM prayojanam  // 537 //  puryAmazanivegena laGkAyAM
sthApitaH purA  /  nirghAto nAmataH karaH khecaro balavAnalam  // 538 //
kulakrameNa sAsmAkamAgatA nagarI shubhaa| ripostasmAda bhayAttyaktA
nitAntamasuvat priyA  // 539 //  deze deze carAstena niyuktAH pApakarmaNA  /
dattAvadhAnAH satatamasmacchidragaveSaNe  //  540  //  yantrANi ca prayuktAni
yAni kurvanti mAraNam  /  viditvA ramaNAsantAn bhavato gaganAGgaNe  // 541 //
nighnanti tAni randhreSu kRtvA rUpeNa lobhanam  /  pramadAcaraNAnIvAzakaM tapasi
yoginam  // 542 //  evaM nigaditaM zrutvA pitRduHkhAnucintanAt  /  niHzvasya
mAlinA dIrgha samudbhUtAzrucakSuSA  // 543 //  krodhasaMpUrNacittena kRtvA
garvasmitaM ciram  /  nirIkSya bAhuyugalaM pragalbhamiti bhASitam  // 544 //
iyantaM samayaM tAta kasmAnno na niveditam  /  aho snehApadezena guruNA vaJcitA
vayam  // 545 //  avidhAya narAH kArya ye garjanti nirarthakam  /  mahAntaM
lAghavaM loke zaktimanto'pi yAnti te  // 546 //  una kumAroMkI krIr3A devoMkI
krIr3Ake samAna adbhuta thI tathA mAtA-pitA, bandhujana aura zatruoMke bhI
manako haraNa karatI thI  // 532 /  /  siddha huI vidyAoMse samutpanna
parAkramake kAraNa jinakI kriyAe~ atyanta uddhata ho rahI thIM aise una
kumAroMko mAtA-pitA bar3e prayatnase bAra-bAra manA karate the ki he putro !
yadi tuma loga apanI bAlacapalatAke kAraNa krIr3A karaneke lie kiSkindhagiri jAo
to dakSiNa samudrake samIpa kabhI nahIM jAnA  // 533-534|| parAkrama tathA bAlya
avasthAke kAraNa samutpanna kutUhalakI bahulatAse ve putra praNAma kara mAtA-
pitAse isakA kAraNa pUchate the to ve yahI uttara dete the ki he putro! yaha
bAta kahanekI nahIM hai| eka bAra putroMne bar3e anunayavinayake sAtha Agraha
kara pUchA to pitA sukezane unase kahA ki he putro! yadi tumheM isakA kAraNa
avazya hI jAnanekA prayojana hai to suno  // 535-537|| bahuta pahalekI bAta hai
ki azanivegane laMkAmeM zAsana karaneke lie nirghAta nAmaka atyanta krUra evaM
balavAn vidyAdharako niyukta kiyA hai| vaha laMkA nagarI kula-paramparAse calI
AyI hamArI zubha nagarI hai| vaha yadyapi hamAre lie prANoMke samAna priya thI
to bhI balavAn zatruke bhayase hamane use chor3a diyA  // 538-539 /  /  pApa
karmameM tatpara zatrune jagaha-jagaha aise guptacara niyukta kiye haiM jo sadA
hama logoMke chidra khojane meM sAvadhAna rahate haiM  /  / 540 //  usane
jagaha-jagaha aise yantra banA rakhe haiM ki jo AkAzAMgaNameM krIr3A karate hue
Apa logoMko jAnakara mAra dete haiM  /  / 541 /  /  ve yantra apane saundaryase
pralobhana dekara darzakoMko bhItara bulAte haiM aura phira usa taraha naSTa
kara dete haiM ki jisa taraha tapazcaraNake samaya honevAle pramAdapUrNa AcaraNa
asamartha yogIko naSTa kara dete haiM  /  / 542 /  /  isa prakAra pitAkA kahA
suna aura unake duHkhakA vicArakara mAlI lambI sA~sa chor3ane lagA tathA usakI
A~khoMse A~sU bahane lage  /  / 543 /  /  usakA citta krodhase bhara gayA, vaha
cirakAla taka garvase manda-manda ha~satA rahA aura phira apanI bhujAoMkA yugala
dekha isa prakAra gambhIra svarase bolA ||544 /  /  he pitAjI ! itane samaya
taka yaha bAta tumane hama logoMse kyoM nahIM kahI ? bar3e AzcaryakI bAta hai ki
Apane bar3e bhArI snehake bahAne hama logoMko dhokhA diyA  /  / 545 /  /  jo
manuSya kArya na kara kevala niSprayojana garjanA karate 1. cAdbhutA m.| 2.
vIryoddhata kha.  /  vIryoddhRta ma.  /  3. to ma.  /  4. tyaktvA ma.  /  5.
asmabhyam  /

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
136 Even though they are powerful in the world, they receive great disrespect.
||546|| Or let it be, what is the point of saying all this? O father! You will
attain peace by seeing the results. Until this task is completed, I will keep my
hair loose. ||547|| Then, the parents, frightened by the inauspicious omen, did
not dissuade them with words. They only looked at them with affectionate eyes
and said, "O sons! Go." ||548|| Then, the three brothers, like the dwellers of
the celestial abodes, emerged from the netherworld and marched towards the
enemy. At that time, the three brothers were filled with enthusiasm and were
ablaze with weapons. ||549|| Then, a river of demons, a host of demons, with a
torrent of moving weapons, spread across the sky, following them. ||550|| The
three sons marched on, and their hearts were filled with affection, and their
parents watched them with auspicious blessings as long as they were visible to
their eyes. ||551|| Then, from the peak of Trikuta mountain, they saw Lanka, and
with their mature vision, they thought, "We have already taken it." ||552|| As
they went, they killed many demons, subdued many, and displaced many from their
positions. ||553|| The vassals of the enemy side, humbled, joined the army, and
the three princes, who were the bearers of great strength, became endowed with a
large army. ||554|| Hearing of the arrival of the enemy, Nirghata, who was
skilled in warfare and whose shadow, cast by his moving umbrella, covered the
sun, emerged from Lanka. ||555|| Then, there was a great battle between the two
armies. Their great battle was a destroyer of beings, with horses, maddened
elephants, and countless chariots. ||556|| The sky seemed to be made of earth,
with the multitude of elephants, the water flowing from their cheeks seemed to
be made of water, the wind generated by their ear-shaped fans seemed to be made
of wind, and the fire generated by their mutual blows seemed to be made of fire.
||557-558|| What is the use of killing other, insignificant Vidyadharas in the
battle? Where is that wicked Nirghata? Where is he? Thus, he urged. 1. à¤ªà¥à¤°à¥à¤¢à¥à¤¯à¤¾
à¤®.à¥¤

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 136 papapurANe AstAM tataH phalenaiva zamatAM tAta yAsyasi  /  tanmaryAdaM
kRtaM cedaM mayA cUDAvimokSaNam  // 547 //  athAmaGgalamItAbhyAM vAcA te na
nivAritAH  /  pitRbhyAM tanayA yAta snigdhadRSTayAnuvIkSitAH  // 548 //
pAtAlAdatha nirgatya yathA bhavanavAsinaH  /  jagmuH pratyari sosAhA bhrAtaraH
zastramAsurAH  // 549 //  teSAmanupadaM lagnA tato rAkSasavAhinI  /
caladAyudhadhAromimAlA vyApya nabhastalam  // 550 //  nirIkSitAH pitRbhyAM te
yAvalocanagocaram  /  vrajantaH snehasaMpUrNamAnasAbhyAM samaGgalam  // 551 //
trikUTazikhareNAsau tatastairupalakSitA  /  dRSTayaiva prauDhayA jJAtA gRhIteti
purI varA  // 552 //  vajagireva taiH kecidaityA mRtyuvazIkRtAH  /
kecitpravaNatAM nItAH kecit sthAnAnimocitAH  // 553 //  vizadbhiH sainyamAgatya
praNataiH zatrugocaraiH  /  te sAmantaralaM jAtA mahAntaH pRthukIrtayaH  // 554
//  zatruNAmAgamaM zrutvA nirghAto niryayau tataH  /
yuddhauNDazcalacchatracchAyAcchannadivAkaraH  // 555 //  tato'bhavanmahAyuddhaM
senayoH sattvadAraNam  /  vAjimiriNamattairvimAnaH syandanaistathA  // 556 //
mahImayamivotpannaM gaganaM dantinAM kulaiH  /  tathA jalAtmakaM jAtaM teSAM
gaNDacyutAmbhasA  // 557 //  vAtAtmakaM ca ttkrnntaalsNjaatvaayunaa| tejomayaM
tathAnyo'nyazastrAghAtotthavahninA  // 558 //  dInaiH kimaparairatra nihataiH
kSudrakhecaraiH  /  kvAsau kvAsau gataH pApo nirghAta iti codayan  // 559 //
haiM ve lokameM zaktizAlI honepara bhI mahAn anAdarako pAte haiM  /  / 546 /  /
athavA rahane do, yaha saba kahanese kyA ? he tAta ! Apa phala dekhakara hI
zAntiko prApta hoNge| jabataka yaha kArya pUrA nahIM ho jAtA hai tabatakake lie
maiM yaha coTI kholakara rakhUgA  // 547 //  athAnantara amaMgalase bhayabhIta
mAtA-pitAne unheM vacanoMse manA nahIM kiyaa| kevala snehapUrNa dRSTise unakI
ora dekhakara kahA ki he putro! jAo  /  / 548 /  /  tadanantara ve tInoM bhAI
bhavanavAsI devoMke samAna pAtAlase nikala. kara zatruko ora cle| usa samaya ve
tInoM bhAI utsAhase bhara rahe the tathA zastroMse dedIpyamAna ho rahe the  /  /
549 /  /  tadanantara caMcala zastroMkI dhArA hI jisameM laharoMkA samUha thA
aisI rAkSasoMkI senArUpI nadI AkAzatalako vyApta kara unake pIche laga gayI  //
550 //  tInoM putra Age bar3he jA rahe the aura jinake hRdaya snehase paripUrNa
the aise mAtA-pitA unheM jaba taka ve netroMse dikhate rahe taba taka
maMgalAcAra pavaMka dekhate rhe||55|| tadanantara trikaTAcalakI zikharase
upalakSita laMkApurIko unhoMne gambhIra dRSTi se dekhakara aisA samajhA mAno
hamane use le hI liyA hai  // 552 /  /  jAte-jAte hI unhoMne kitane hI daitya
mautake ghATa utAra diye, kitane hI vaza kara liye aura kitane hI sthAnase cyuta
kara diye  // 553 //  zatrupakSake sAmanta namrIbhUta hokara senAmeM Akara
milate jAte the isase vizAlakItike dhAraka tInoM hI kumAra eka bar3I senAse
yukta ho gaye the  // 554 //  yuddha meM nipuNa tathA caMcala chatrakI chAyAse
sUryako AcchAdita karanevAlA nirghAta zatruoMkA Agamana suna laMkAse bAhara
nikalA  // 555 //  tadanantara donoM senAoMmeM mahAyuddha huaa| unakA vaha
mahAyuddha ghor3oM, madonmatta hAthiyoM tathA aparimita rathoMse jIvoMko naSTa
karanevAlA thA  // 556 //  hAthiyoMke samUhase AkAza aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno
pRthvImaya hI ho, unake gaNDasthalase cyuta jalase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno
jalamaya hI ho, unake karNarUpI tAlapatrase utpanna vAyuse aisA jAna par3atA thA
mAno vAyurUpa hI ho aura parasparake AghAtase utpanna agnise aisA jAna par3atA
thA mAno agnirUpa hI ho  // 557-558 //  yuddha meM dIna-hIna anya kSudra
vidyAdharoMke mAranese kyA lAbha hai ? vaha pApI nirghAta kahA~ hai ? kahA~ hai
? isa prakAra preraNA karatA huA 1. prauDhyA m.|

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixth Chapter  Seeing NirghÄta without his chariot, MÄli struck him with
sharp arrows and then finished him off with a sword strike.  ||560|| Knowing
NirghÄta was killed, the DÄnavas with their minds corrupted went to their
respective abodes on VijayÄrddha mountain. ||561|| Many DÄnavas, fearful of
battle, hung swords around their necks and quickly sought refuge with MÄli.
||562|| Then the three brothers, MÄli and the others, entered LankÄ, adorned
with auspicious things. They met with their parents and other loved ones.
||563|| Then MÄli, according to the proper rites, married Candravati, a
beautiful daughter born to HemÄ, the queen of HemÄpura, and HemÄvidyÄdhara.
Candravati brought joy to MÄli's heart and was naturally fickle-minded, like a
net to capture deer-like senses. ||564-565|| SumÄli obtained PrÄ«ti, the daughter
of PrÄ«tikÄnta, the king of PrÄ«tikÅ«á¹­apura, and PrÄ«timati. ||566|| MÄlyavÄn
married KanakÄvalÄ«, the daughter of Kanaka, the king of KanakÄbha, and KanaknÄ«.
||567|| These were their first wives, always dwelling in their hearts. Each of
them had a thousand other wives. ||568|| Then the two ranges of VijayÄrddha
mountain, subdued by their prowess, bowed their heads in submission, like the
remaining grains of rice. ||569|| Finally, having established their sons firmly
in their positions and entrusted their wealth to them, SukeÅa and Kiá¹£kiá¹dhÄ,
with peaceful minds, became liberated sages. ||570||  Thus, many great kings of
the RÄká¹£asa and VÄnara lineages, having enjoyed worldly pleasures, finally
attained the path of liberation, taught by the Jinas, which destroys the
hundreds of faults of the world. They were freed from the bonds of affection
born from the qualities of their loved ones. ||571||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SaSThaM parva dRSTvA mAlI 'zitairbANaiH kRtvA syandanavarjitam  /
nirghAtamasinirghAtAccakre saMprAptapaJcartam  // 560 //  nirghAtaM nihataM
jJAtvA dAnavA bhraSTacetasaH  /  yathAsvaM nilayaM yAtA vijayArddhanagAzritam
||561 /  /  cikaNThe samAsAdya kRpANaM kRpaNodyatAH  /  mAlinaM tvarayA yAtAH
zaraNaM raNakAtarAH ||562  /  /  praviSTAste tato laGkAM bhrAtaro maGgalAcitam |
samAgamaM ca saMprAptAH pitRprabhRtibAndhavaiH  /  / 563  /  /  tato
hemapurezasya sutAM hemakhacAriNaH  /  bhogavatyAM samutpannAM nAmnA candravatIM
zubhAm  // 564 //  uvAha vidhinA bhAlI mAnasotsavakAriNIm  /
svabhAvacapalasvAntahRSIkamRgavAgurAm  //  565 //  prIti kUTapurezasya
prItikAntasya cAtmajAm  /  prItimatyaGgajAM lebhe sumAlI prItisaMjJitAm ||566 //
kanakAbhapurezasya kanakasya sutAM yathA  /  uvAha kanakazrIjAM mAlyavAn
kanakAvalIm  // 567 //  eteSAM prathamA jAyA etA hRdayasaMzrayAH  /  aGganAnAM
sahastraM tu pratyekamadhikaM smRtam ||568  //  zreNIdvayaM tatasteSAM
parAkramavazIkRtam  /  zeSAmiva babhArAjJAM zirasA racitAJjalim ||569||
dRDhabaddhapadApatyaniyukta nijasaMpadau  /  jAtau sukeza kiSkindhau nirgranthau
zAntacetasau  // 570  //  3 mandAkrAntAcchandaH bhuktvA bhuktvA viSayajanitaM
saukhyamevaM mahAnto labdhvA jainaM bhavazata maladhvaMsanaM muktimArgam  /
yAtAH prAyaH priyajanaguNasnehapAzAdapetAH siddhisthAnaM nirupamasukhaM rAkSasA
vAnarAzca  //  571 //  mAlI Age bar3ha rahA thA || 559 || antameM mAlIne
nirghAtako dekhakara pahale to use tIkSNa bANoMse ratharahita kiyA aura phira
talavArake prahArase use samApta kara diyA || 560|| nirghAtako marA jAnakara
jinakA citta bhraSTa ho gayA thA aise dAnava vijayArdha parvatapara sthita
apane-apane bhavanoM meM cale gaye || 561  //  yuddhase DaranevAle kitane hI
dIna-hIna dAnava kaNThameM talavAra laTakAkara zIghra hI mAlIkI zaraNa meM
pahu~ce || 562|| tadanantara mAlI Adi tInoM bhAiyoMne maMgalamaya padArthoMse
suzobhita laMkAnagarI meM praveza kiyaa| vahIM mAtA-pitA Adi iSTa janoMke sAtha
samAgamako prApta hue  // 563  //  tadanantara hemapurake rAjA hemavidyAdharakI
bhogavatI rAnIse utpanna candravatI nAmaka zubha putrIko mAlIne vidhipUrvaka
vivAhA  /  candravatI mAlIke manameM Ananda utpanna karanevAlI thI tathA
svabhAva se hI capala mana aura indriyarUpI mRgoM ko bA~dhane ke lie jAlake
samAna thI  /  564 - 565 //  prItikUTapura ke svAmI rAjA prItikAnta aura rAnI
prItimatIkI putrI prItiko sumAlIne prApta kiyA ||566|| kanakAbhanagarake svAmI
rAjA kanaka aura rAnI kanakanIkI putrI kanakAvalIko mAlyavAn 137 vivAhA  // 567
|| sadA hRdaya meM nivAsa karanevAlI ye inakI prathama striyA~ thIM vaise
pratyeka kI kucha adhika eka-eka hajAra striyA~ thIM ||568|| tadanantara
vijayArdhaM parvatakI donoM zreNiyA~ unake parAkrama se vazIbhUta ho zeSAkSatake
samAna unakI AjJAko hAtha jor3akara zirase dhAraNa karane lagIM ||569|| antameM
apane-apane padoMpara acchI taraha ArUr3ha putroMke lie apanI-apanI sampadA
sauMpakara sukeza aura kiSkindha zAnta citta ho nirgrantha sAdhu ho gaye  /  /
570 || isa prakAra prAyaH kitane hI bar3ebar3e rAkSasavaMzI aura vAnaravaMzI
rAjA viSaya sambandhI sukhakA upabhoga kara antameM saMsAra ke saikar3oM doSoM
ko naSTa karanevAlA jinendra praNIta mokSa mArgaM pAkara, priyajanoMke
guNotpanna sneha rUpI bandhana se 1. sitai ma  /  2. paJcatAm ma.  /  3. prItikA
tasya ma.  /  4. prathamaM ma.  /  18

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1388 In the Padma Purana, even though many had committed great sins in the
householder stage, they had burnt them all through the yoga of meditation, and
had fixed their minds on liberation. Knowing the effect of right conduct, O
devotees, attain peace, destroy delusion, attain the sun of victory, and finally
attain the kingdom of knowledge. ||572|| Thus ends the sixth chapter of the
Padma Charita, known as the Vanaravansha, spoken by Acharya Ravishena. ||6|| Far
away, incomparable, blissful, and liberated, the place of liberation has been
attained. ||571|| How many people, even though they had committed great sins in
the householder stage, had burnt them all through the yoga of meditation, and
had fixed their minds on liberation. Knowing the effect of right conduct, O
devotees, attain peace, destroy delusion, attain the sun of victory, and finally
attain the kingdom of knowledge. ||572|| Thus ends the sixth chapter of the
Padma Charita, known as the Vanaravansha, spoken by Acharya Ravishena, famous as
the Arsha. ||6|| 1. Vidhadhitapadam M. (?) 2. Shanta M.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 1388 padmapurANe kRtvApyevaM subahu duritaM dhyAnayogena dagdhvA siddhAvAse
'nihitamatayo yoginastyaktasaMgAH  /  evaM jJAtvA sudharitaguNaM prANino yAta
zAnti mohocchedAt kRtajayaraviH prApnuta jJAnarAjyam  // 572 //  ityAce
raviSeNAcAryaprokta padmacarite vAnaravaMzAbhidhAnaM nAma SaSThaM parva  // 6 //
dUra haTa anupama sukhase sampanna mokSa sthAnako prApta hue  // 571 //  kitane
hI logoMne yadyapi gRhastha avasthAmeM bahuta bhArI pApa kiyA thA to bhI use
nirgrantha sAdhu ho dhyAnake yogase bhasma kara diyA thA aura mokSameM apanI
buddhi lagAyI thii| isa prakAra samyakcAritrake prabhAvako jAnakara he bhakta
prANiyo ! zAntiko prApta hoo, mohakA uccheda kara vijayarUpI sUryako prApta hoo
aura antameM jJAnakA rAjya prApta kro||572|| isa prakAra ArSa nAmase prasiddha,
raviSeNAcArya prokta padmacaritameM vAnaravaMzakA . kathana karanevAlA chaThA
parva pUrNa huA  // 6 //  1. vidadhitapadaM ma. ( ? )  /  2. zAntaM ma.  /

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**The Seventh Chapter**  In the city, there was a king named RathanÅ«pur,
renowned as SahasrÄra, who was exceedingly valorous. ||1|| His beloved wife was
referred to as MÄnasa-SundarÄ«. MÄnasa-SundarÄ« was beautiful in both mind and
body and endowed with numerous excellent qualities. ||2|| She became pregnant.
Due to her pregnancy, her entire body became emaciated, and all her ornaments
loosened. Seeing her with great respect, the king SahasrÄra asked, "O beloved,
why do your limbs exhibit such extreme thinness? What is your desire that is
rare in my kingdom?" ||3-4||   "O dear one, who is more precious than life! Tell
me, what is your desire? Today, I shall fulfill it completely." ||5|| "O
darling! I am capable of commanding even the queen of the divine, IndrÄá¹Ä«, so
that she may massage your feet with her hands." ||6|| Upon hearing this, MÄnasa-
SundarÄ«, who was seated in his beautiful lap, spoke playfully and humbly: ||7||
"O lord! Since someone has entered my womb, my wish is to enjoy the wealth of
Indra." ||8|| "O master! Out of great helplessness, I have revealed these
desires to you without shame." ||9||   As soon as the beloved spoke this,
SahasrÄra, enriched with the power of knowledge, immediately prepared the wealth
of enjoyment like that of Indra for her. ||10|| Thus, upon the completion of her
pregnancy, her entire body became robust, and she began to embody a radiance and
beauty that was beyond description. ||11|| Her brilliance increased to such an
extent that she grew displeased even with the sun as it rose in the sky, and she
felt the urge to command all directions. ||12|| When the time came, she gave
birth to a son, who possessed all auspicious signs and was the best cause of joy
and wealth for her relatives. ||13||   Thereafter, the joyful SahasrÄra
celebrated the grand festival of the son's birth. At that time, the sounds of
conch shells and trumpets filled all the directions. ||14|| The women of the
city danced,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptamaM parva atrAntare pure rAjA rathanUpuranAmani  /  sahasrAra iti khyAto
babhUvAtyantamuddhataH ||1|| tasya bhAryA vabhUveSTA nAmnA mAnasasundarI  /
sundarI mAnasenAlaM zarIreNa ca sadguNA  // 2 //  antarvatnI
satImetAmatyantakRzavigrahAm  /  bhartASTacchat zlathAzeSabhUSaNAM vIkSya
sAdaram  //  3  //  bibhratyaGgAni te kasmAnnitAntaM tanutAM priye  /  kiM
tavAkAGkSita rAjye mama jAyeta durlabham ||4|| 1 pragalbhatAM brUhi tavAdyaiva
samIhitam  /  saMpAdayAmi niHzeSaM devi prANagarIyasi  //  5  //  kartuM
zakto'smi te kAnte surastrIkRta zAsanAm  /  zacImapi karAgrAbhyAM
pAdasaMvAhakAriNIm ||6|| ityuktA sA tatastena varArohAGkasaMzritA  /  jagAda
vinayAdevaM vacanaM lIlayAnvitam ||7|| yasmAdArabhya me garbhe saMbhavaM
ko'pyayaM gataH  /  tataH prabhRti vAJchAmi bhoktumindrasya saMpadam ||8|| ime
manorathA nAtha parityajya mayA trapAm  /  parAyattatayAtyantaM bhavato
viniveditAH || 9 || ityukte kalpitA bhogasaMpattasyAH surendrajA  /
vidyAbalasamRddhena sahasrAreNa tatkSaNAt  // 10 //  saMpUrNa dohadA' jAtA sA
tataH pUrNavigrahA  /  dhArayantI durAkhyAnAM dyutiM kAnti ca bhAminI  //  11
//  vrajatA raviNAyUrdhva khedaM jagrAha tejasA  /  abhyavAJchcca sarvAsAM
dAtumAjJAM dizAmapi  //  12  //  kAle pUrNe ca saMpUrNalakSaNAGgamasUta sA  /
dArakaM bAndhavAnandasaMpaduttamakAraNam ||13|| tato mahotsavaM cakre sahasrAraH
pramodavAn  /  zaGkhatUryaninAdena vadhirIkRtadiGmukham  // 14 //  san
puraraNatkAracaraNanyAsakuTTanaiH  /  nRtyantIbhiH purastrIbhiH
kRtabhUtalakampanam  //  15  //  athAnantara rathanUpura nagarameM atyanta
parAkramakA dhArI rAjA sahasrAra rAjya karatA thA  // 1 //  usakI mAnasasundarI
nAmaka priya strI thI  /  mAnasasundarI mana tathA zarIra donoMse hI sundara thI
aura aneka uttamottama guNoMse yukta thI ||2|| vaha garbhiNI huI  /  garbhake
kAraNa usakA samasta zarIra kRza ho gayA aura samasta AbhUSaNa zithila par3a
gaye  /  use bar3e Adara ke sAtha dekhakara rAjA sahasrAra ne pUchA ki he priye
! tere aMga atyanta kRzatAko kyoM dhAraNa kara rahe haiM? terI kyA abhilASA hai
? jo mere rAjya meM durlabha ho  // 3-4 || he prANoMse adhika pyArI devi ! kaha
terI kyA abhilASA hai ? maiM Aja hI use acchI taraha pUrNa karU~gA ||5|| he
kAnte ! devAMganAoMpara zAsana karanevAlI indrANIko bhI maiM aisA karanemeM
samartha hU~ ki vaha apanI hatheliyoMse tere pAdamardana kare ||6|| patike aisA
kahanepara usakI sundara godameM baiThI mAnasasundarI, vinaya se lIlApUrvaka isa
prakAra vacana bolI ||7|| he nAtha ! jabase yaha koI bAlaka mere garbhameM AyA
hai tabhIse indrakI sampadA bhoganekI merI icchA hai || 8|| he svAmin! atyanta
vivazatA ke kAraNa hI maiMne lajjA chor3akara ye manoratha Apake lie prakaTa
kiye haiM || 9 || vallabhA ke aisA kahate hI vidyAbalase samRddha sahasrArane
tatkSaNa hI usake lie indra jaiso bhoga sampadA taiyAra kara dI ||10|| isa
prakAra dohada pUrNa honese usakA samasta zarIra puSTa ho gayA aura vaha kahane
meM na Ave aisI dIpti tathA kAnti dhAraNa karane lagI  //  11  //  usakA itanA
teja bar3hA ki vaha Upara AkAzameM jAte hue sUryase bhI khinna ho uThatI thI
tathA samasta dizAoMko AjJA denekI usakI icchA hotI thI || 12 || samaya pUrNa
honepara usane, jisakA zarIra samasta lakSaNoMse yukta thA tathA jo
bAndhavajanoM ke harSa aura sampadAkA uttama kAraNa thA aisA putra utpanna kiyA
|| 13|| tadanantara harSase bhare sahasrArane putra janmakA mahAn utsava kiyaa|
usa samaya zaMkha aura turahIke zabdoMse dizAe~ bahirI ho gayI thIM || 14 ||
nagarakI striyA~ nRtya karate 1. dohalA kha.  /

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
140 In the Padma Purana, wealth was given freely, without any thought. Even the
elephants danced with their swaying trunks. ||16|| Disasters occurred in the
homes of enemies, signifying sorrow. In the homes of relatives, auspicious omens
arose, indicating great wealth. ||17|| Because the mother desired to enjoy the
pleasures of Indra while the child was still in her womb, the father named him
Indra. ||18|| Even as a child, his games were those of a powerful young man,
conquering his enemies, humbling their pride, and engaging in noble deeds.
||19|| Gradually, he attained youth, surpassing the sun in brilliance, the moon
in radiance, and the mountains in steadfastness. ||20|| His chest was as broad
as an elephant's trunk, his arms round, and his vast chest seemed to encompass
all directions. ||21|| His thighs, strong as pillars, were round and with hidden
knees, achieving ultimate stability by supporting the edifice of his chest.
||22|| Through his victory, all the Vidhyadhara kings on Mount Vijayadhagi were
subdued, their pride humbled, and they became obedient to him, thanks to his
immense power and wealth. ||23|| He built a palace as magnificent as Indra's,
with forty-eight thousand wives. Twenty-six thousand dancers performed, and
there was an endless procession of elephants and horses that flew through the
sky. ||24-25|| There was a king of elephants, white as the moon, tall,
traversing the celestial courtyard, invincible, mighty, adorned with eight
tusks, with a large, round trunk that seemed to sweep through the directions,
renowned for his qualities on earth. He was named Airavata. ||26-27|| He
appointed four Lokapalas, each possessing supreme power in their respective
directions, his queen was named Sachi, and his assembly was called Sudharma.
||28|| He had a weapon called Vajra, three assemblies, groups of Apsaras, a
commander named Harinakeshi,  1. ShaktÄ M. I ShaktÄ Kh. 2. SatvarÄ« M. 3.
NirahasÄm M. 4. KhyÄtÄ RamyÄ tatha SabhÄ K. 5. Vakra K.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 140 padmapurANe yathecchaM draviNaM dattaM vicAraparivarjitam  /  pracalo
karairnRttaM gajairapi sahitam  // 16 //  utpAtAH zatrugeheSu saMjAtAH
zokasUcinaH  /  bandhugeheSu cotpannAH sUcikA bhUrisaMpadaH  // 17 //  abhilASo
yatastasminmAturgarbhasthite'bhavat  /  indrabhoge tataH pitrA kRtaM
tasyendrazabdanam  // 18 //  bAlakrIDA babhUvAsya zaktayUno'pi jitvarI  /
midurA ripudarpANAM sRtvarI cArukarmaNi  // 19 //  kramAt sa yauvanaM
prAptastejonirjitabhAskaram  /  kAntinirjitarAtrIzaM sthairya nirjitaparvatam
// 20 //  grastA iva dizastena suvistIrNana vksssaa|
diGnAgakumbhatuGgAMsasthavIyo vRttabAhunA  // 21 //  UrustambhadvayaM tasya
suvRttaM gUDhajAnukam  /  jagAma paramasthairya vakSobhavanadhAraNAt  // 22 //
vijayAddhagirI tena sarva vidyAdharAdhipAH  /  grAhitA caitasI vRttiM
mahAvidyAbaladdhinA  // 23 //  indramandirasaMkAzaM bhavanaM tasya nirmitam  /
catvAriMzatsahASTAbhiH sahasrANi ca yoSitAm  // 24 //  SaDviMzatisahasrANi
nanRturnATakAni ca  /  dantinAM vyomamArgANAM vAjinAM ca nirantatA  // 25 /  /
zazAGkadhavalastuGgo gaganAGgaNagocaraH  /  durnivAryo mahAvIryo
daMSTrASTakavirAjitaH  // 26 //  dantirAjo mahAvRttakarArgalitadiGamukhaH  /
airAvatAbhidhAnena guNazca prathito bhuvi  // 27 //  zaktyA paramayA yuktaM
lokapAlacatuSTayam  /  zacI ca mahiSI ramyA suMdharmAkhyA tathA sabhA  // 28 //
vajra praharaNaM trINi sadAMsyapsarasAM gaNAH  /  nAmnA hariNakezI ca
senAyAstasya cAdhipaH  // 29 /  /  samaya jaba nUpuroMkI jhanakArake sAtha apane
paira pRthivIpara paTakatI thIM to pRthivItala kA~pa uThatA thA  /  / 15 /  /
binA vicAra kiye icchAnusAra dhana dAnameM diyA gyaa| manuSyoM kI bAta dUra rahI
hAthiyoMne bhI usa samaya apanI caMcala sUMr3a Upara uThAkara garjanA karate hue
nRtya kiyA thA  // 16 /  /  zatruoMke gharoMmeM zokasUcaka utpAta hone lage aura
bandhujanoMke gharoMmeM bahuta bhArI sampadAoMkI sUcanA denevAle zubha zakuna
hone lage  // 17 //  cU~ki bAlaka ke garbha meM rahate hue mAtAko indrake bhoga
bhoganekI icchA huI thI isalie pitAne usa bAlakakA indra nAma rakhA  // 18 //
vaha bAlaka thA phira bhI usakI krIDAe~ zaktisampanna taruNa manuSyako
jItanevAlI thIM, zatraoMkA mAna khaNDita karanevAlI thIM aura uttama kArya meM
pravRtta thIM  // 19 /  /  krama-kramase vaha usa yauvanako prApta huA jisane
tejase sUryako, kAntise candramAko aura sthairyase parvatako jIta liyA thA  //
20 //  usake kandhe diggajake gaNDasthalake samAna sthUla aura bhujAe~ gola thIM
tathA usane vizAla vakSaHsthalase samasta dizAe~ mAno AcchAdita hI kara rakhI
thIM  // 21 //  jinake ghuTane mAMsapeziyoMmeM gUr3ha the aisI usakI donoM gola
jA~ghe stambhoMkI taraha vakSaHsthalarUpI bhavanako dhAraNa karaneke kAraNa
parama sthiratAko prApta huI thIM  // 22 //  bahuta bhArI vidyAbala aura Rddhise
sampanna usa taruNa indrane vijayAdha parvatake samasta vidyAdhara rAjAoMko
beMtake samAna namravRtti dhAraNa karA rakhI thI arthAt saba usake AjJAkArI the
// 23 //  usane indrake mahalake samAna sundara mahala bnvaayaa| ar3atAlIsa
hajAra usakI striyA~ thiiN| chabbIsa hajAra nRtyakAra natya karate the  /
AkAzameM calanevAle hAthiyoM aura ghor3oMkI to ginatI hI nahIM thI  // 24-25 //
eka hAthI thA, jo candramAke samAna sapheda thA, U~cA thA, AkAzarUpI A~gana meM
calanevAlA thA, jise koI roka nahIM sakatA thA, mahAzaktizAlI thA, ATha dA~toMse
suzobhita thA, bar3I moTo gola sUMDase jo dizAoMmeM mAno argala lagA rakhatA
thA, tathA guNoMke dvArA pRthivIpara prasiddha thA, usakA usane airAvata nAma
rakhA thA  // 26-27 /  /  cAroM dizAoMmeM parama zaktise yukta cAra lokapAla
niyukta kiye, paTTarAnIkA nAma zacI aura sabhAkA nAma sudharmA rakhA  // 28 //
vajra nAmakA zastra, tIna sabhAeM, apsarAoMke samUha, hariNakezI senApati, 1.
zaktyA ma. I zaktA khaH  /  2. satvarI m.| 3. nirahasAm m.| 4. khyAtA ramyA
tathA sabhA k.| 5. vakra k.|

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The seventh festival is in Ashwin, the eight Vasus, the four types of gods,
Narada, Tumburu, Visvavasu and other singers, Urvashi, Menaka, Manjuswani and
other Apsaras, and Brihaspati the minister, all these glories he had established
like Indra. ||29-31|| After that, he became the lord of all the Vidyadharas,
possessing the glory of Indra, obtained through the auspicious rise of Nami the
Vidyadhara. ||32|| At that time, Mali, the lord of Lanka, was a great and
powerful king, and he ruled over all the Vidyadharas as before. ||33|| Residing
in Lanka, Mali, proud of his brothers' strength, ruled over all the cities on
Mount Vijayad. ||34|| Whatever excellent things were reported by the spies in
both categories, such as courtesans, vehicles, airplanes, girls, clothes, and
ornaments, the brave and powerful Mali immediately brought them to his place. He
considered himself the best because of his strength, knowledge, and glory.
||35-36|| Now, having taken refuge in Indra, the Vidyadharas began to disobey
Mali's orders. Hearing this news, the mighty Mali, along with his brothers and
the sons of Kishkindha, set out for Mount Vijayad. ||37|| Some were riding on
airplanes of various hues, as high as the evening clouds, some were riding in
golden chariots resembling large palaces, some were riding on black elephants
like clouds, some were riding on horses that moved as fast as beads, some were
riding on tigers, some on cheetahs, some on bulls, some on lions, some on
camels, some on donkeys, some on buffaloes, some on swans, some on wolves, and
some on other vehicles. Thus, Mali, with his radiant body, covered the entire
sky with his various vehicles and approached Mount Vijayad. ||38-40|| Then,
Sumali, full of brotherly affection, said to Mali, "Brother, let us stay here
today, let us not go further, or let us return to Lanka. The reason is that we
have seen bad omens on the way again and again. ||41-42|| Look, there, a crow is
sitting on the top of a dry tree, with one leg contracted, flapping its wings
repeatedly. Its mind seems very disturbed, it is holding a dry stick in its
beak, looking towards the sun, and making a harsh sound.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptamaM parva azvinau vasavazcASTau caturbhedA divaukasaH  /  nAradastumburU'
vizvAvasuprabhRtigAyakAH  // 30 //  urvazI menakA majusvanyAdyapsaraso varAH  /
mantrI bRhaspatiH sarvamevaM tasya surendravat  // 31 //  tato'sau namivajjAtaH
sarvavidyAbhRtAM patiH  /  aizvayaM suranAthasya bibhrANaH puNyasaMbhRtam  // 32
//  atrAntare mahAmAno mAlI laGkApurIpatiH  /  pUrvayaiva dhiyA sarvAn zAsti
khecarapuGgavAn  // 33 //  vijayAInagastheSu samasteSu pureSu vA  /  laGkAgataH
karotyaizyaM svabhrAtRbalagarvitaH  // 34 //  vezyA yAnaM vimAnaM vA kanyA
vAsAMsi bhaSaNam  /  yadyacchaNIdvaye sAraM vastu cAranivedyate  /  / 35 /  /
tattatsarvaM balAddhIraH kSipramAnayayatyasau  /  pazyannAtmAnamevaikaM
balavidyAvibhUtibhiH  // 36 //  indrAzrayAt khagairAjJAM bhagnAM zrutvAsya
cAnyadA  /  prasthito bhrAtRkiSkindhasutaiH sAkaM mahAbalaH  // 37 //
vimAnairvividhacchAyaiH saMdhyAmedhairivonnataiH  /  mahAprAsAdasaMkAzaH
syandanaiH kAJcanAJcitaiH  // 38 //  garghanAghanAkAraiH saptibhizcittagAmimiH
/  zArdUlaimaMgarairgobhirmRgarAjaiH kramelakaiH  // 39 //  vAleyarma
hipaihaMsaikairanyaizca vAhanaH  /  khAGgaNaM chAdayansarva mahAmAsuravigrahaH
// 40 //  atha mAlinamityUce sumAlI bhrAtRvatsalaH  /  pradeze'traiva tiSThAmo
bhrAtaradya na gamyate  // 41 //  laGkAM vA pratigacchAmaH zRNu kAraNamatra me
/  animittAni dRzyante punaH punarihAyane  // 42 //  eka saMkocya
caraNamatyantAkulamAnasaH  /  sthitaH zuSkadrumasyAgre dhunvan pakSAn punaH
punaH  // 43 //  azvinIkamAra vaidya, ATha vasa, cAra prakArake deva, nArada,
tambaru, vizvAvasa Adi gAyaka, urvazI, menakA, maMjusvanI Adi apsarAe~, aura
bRhaspati mantrI Adi samasta vaibhava usane indrake samAna hI nizcita kiyA
thaa||29-31|| tadanantara yaha, nami vidyAdharake puNyodayase prApta indrakA
aizvarya dhAraNa karatA huA samasta vidyAdharoMkA adhipati huA  // 32 //  isI
samaya laMkApurIkA svAmI mahAmAnI mAlI thA so samasta vidyAdharoMpara pahale hI
ke samAna zAsana karatA thA  // 33 //  apane bhAiyoMke balase garvako dhAraNa
karanevAlA mAlI, laMkAmeM rahakara hI vijayAdha parvatake samasta nagaroM meM
apanA zAsana karatA thA  /  / 34 /  /  vezyA, vAhana, vimAna, kanyA, vastra
tathA AbhUSaNa Adi jo-jo zreSTha vastu, donoM zreNiyoMmeM guptacaroMse ise
mAlUma hotI thI usa sabako dhIra-vIra mAlI jabaradastI zIghra hI apane yahA~
bulavA letA thaa| vaha bala, vidyA, vibhUti Adise apane Apako hI sarvazreSTha
mAnatA thA  // 35-36 /  /  aba indrakA Azraya pAkara vidyAdhara mAlIkI AjJA
bhaMga karane lage so yaha samAcAra suna mahAbalavAn mAlI bhAI tathA kiSkindhake
putroMke sAtha vijayA giriko ora calA  // 37 //  koI aneka prakArakI kAntiko
dhAraNa karanevAle tathA sandhyAkAlake meghoMke samAna U~ce vimAnoMpara
baiThakara jA rahe the, koI bar3ebar3e mahaloMke samAna suvarNajaTita rathoMmeM
baiThakara cala rahe the, koI meghoMke samAna zyAmavaNaM hAthiyoMpara , koI
manake samAna zIghra gamana karanevAle ghoDoMpara savAra the. koI zArdaloMpara,
koI cItoMpara, koI bailoMpara, koI siMhoMpara, koI U~ToMpara, koI gadhoMpara,
koI bhaiMsoMpara, koI haMsoMpara, koI bher3iyoMpara tathA koI anya vAhanoMpara
baiThakara prasthAna kara rahe the| isa prakAra mahAdedIpyamAna zarIrake dhAraka
anyAnya vAhanoMse samasta AkAzAMgaNako AcchAdita karatA huA mAlI vijayAdhake
nikaTa pahu~cA  // 38-40 //  athAnantara bhAIke snehase bhare sumAlIne mAlIse
kahA ki he bhAI ! hama saba Aja yahIM ThahareM, Age na caleM athavA laMkAko
vApasa lauTa cleN| isakA kAraNa yaha hai ki Aja mArga meM bAra-bAra apazakuna
dikhAI dete haiM  /  / 41-42 /  /  dekho udhara sUkhe vRkSake agrabhAgapara
baiThA kauA eka paira saMkacita kara bAra-bAra paMkha phar3aphar3A rahA hai|
usakA mana atyanta vyAkula dikhAI detA hai, sUkhA kATha coMcameM dabAkara
sUryakI ora dekhatA huA krUra zabda kara rahA 1. tumbaro ma.  /  2. azvaiH  /
3. kharaiH  /  4. mArge  /  baiThe the

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
142 In the Padma Purana, the dry wood and curd, seeing the sun, are preventing
our movement. ||44|| This jackal, with a face like a blazing fire, is roaring
terribly, with her hair standing on end, on our right side. ||45|| Look, in the
orb of the sun, surrounded by its rays, that terrible Kabantha is visible, and a
mass of blood drops is raining from him. ||46|| On the other side, terrible
forests are falling, shaking all the mountains, while on this side, all the
women with their hair loose are visible in the sky. ||47|| Look, on the right
side, that donkey is raising its head upwards, making the sky resound with its
loud voice, and digging the earth with its forelegs, making a terrible sound.
||48|| Then, the gardener, pressing his arms firmly with his armlets, smiled and
answered Sumali clearly, saying, "How can he who has set out to kill the enemy,
mounted on a victorious elephant, and bearing the mark of valor, return?"
||49-50|| He who is shaking the tusks of the intoxicated elephant, who has
terrified the enemies with his eyes alone, who is filled with sharp arrows, who
has bitten his lower lip, whose face is distorted with furrowed brows, and whom
the gods are watching in amazement, does such a warrior return? ||51-52|| I have
roamed in the caves of Mount Meru and in the beautiful Nandana forest, and have
built sky-touching Jain temples. ||53|| I have given whatever gifts were
desired, enjoyed the best of pleasures, and earned fame that illuminates the
entire world. ||54|| I have fulfilled the purpose of my birth, so what if I have
to give up my life in battle? I have no need for anything else. ||55|| "He ran
away from the battle in fear," how can a brave man listen to such words from the
people? ||56|| Saying this, the gardener, whose face was blazing with anger,
went to the peak of the victory mountain in an instant, without anyone knowing.
||57||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 142 padmapurANe zuSkakASTaM dadhaJcaJcco 'vIkSamANo divAkaram  /  resan
krUramayaM dhvAlakSo nivArayati no gatim  // 44 //  jvAlAraudramukhI ceyaM zivA
no bhujadakSiNe  /  ghoraM virauti romANi dRSTA nidadhatI muhuH  // 45 //  ayaM
pataGgabimbe ca parivaSiNi dRzyate  /  kabandho bhISaNo vRSTakIlAlalavajAlakaH
// 46 //  ghorAH patanti nirdhAtAH kampitAkhilaparvatAH  /  dazyante vanitAH
kRtsnA muktakezyo nabhastale  // 47 //  kharaM kharaH khamukSipya mukhaM
mukharayannabhaH  /  kSitiM khanan khurAgreNa dakSiNaH kurute svaram  // 48 //
pratyuvAca tato mAlI subhAlinamiti sphuTam  /  kRtyA smitaM dRDhaM bAhU
keyUrAbhyAM nipIDayan  /  / 49 /  /  abhipretya vadhaM zatrorAruhya jayinaM
dvipam  /  prasthitaH pauruSaM bibhratkathaM bhUyo nivartate  // 50 //
daMSTrayoH prezaNaM kurvan kSaradAnasya dantinaH  /  cakSurvitrAsitArAtiH
'pUryamANa: zitaiH zaraiH  // 51 //  dantadaSTAdharo baddhabhrakuTIkuTilAnanaH
/  vismitairamarairdRSTo bhaTaH kiM vinivartate  // 52 /  /  kandarAsu rataM
meronandane cArunandane  /  caityAlayA jinendrANAM kAritA gaganaspRzaH  // 53 //
dattaM kimicchakaM dAnaM bhuktA bhogA mahAguNAH  /  yazo dhavalitAzeSabhuvanaM
samupArjitam  // 54 //  janmanetthaM kRtArtho'smi yadi prANAnmahAhave  /
parityajAmi kiyatA kRtamanyena vastunA  // 55 //  apo palAyito bhIto varAka iti
bhASitam  /  kathamAkarNayadvIro janatAyAH sucetasaH  // 56 //  iti
saMbhASamANo'sau bhrAtaraM bhAsurAnanaH  /  vijayAdrasya mUrdhAnaM
kSaNAdaviditaM yayau  // 57 /  /  hai mAno hama logoM ko Age jAnese roka rahA
hai  // 43-44 /  /  idhara jvAlAoMse jisakA mukha atyanta rudra mAlUma hotA hai
aisI yaha zRgAlI dakSiNa dizAmeM romAMca dhAraNa karatI huI bhayaMkara zabda
kara rahI hai  /  / 45 /  /  dekho, pariveSase yukta sUryake bimbameM vaha
bhayaMkara kabandha dikhAI de rahA hai aura usase khUnakI bUMdoMkA samUha barasa
rahA hai  // 46 /  /  udhara samasta pavaMtoMko kampita karanevAle bhayaMkara
vana gira rahe haiM to idhara AkAzameM khule keza dhAraNa karanevAlI samasta
striyA~ dikhAI de rahI haiM  /  / 47 /  /  dekho. dAhinI ora vaha gardabha
Uparako makha uThAkara AkAzako baDI tIkSNatAse mukharita kara rahA hai tathA
kharake agrabhAgase pathivIko khodatA haA bhayaMkara zabda kara rahA hai  // 48
//  tadanantara bAjUbandoMse donoM bhujAoMko acchI taraha pIr3ita karate hue
mAlIne musakarAkara sumAlIko isa prakAra spaSTa uttara diyA ki zatruke vadhakA
saMkalpa kara tathA vijayI hAthIpara savAra ho jo puruSArthakA dhArI yuddhake
lie cala par3A hai vaha vApasa kaise lauTa sakatA hai  /  / 49-50 //  jo
madamatta hAthokI dAr3hoMko hilA rahA hai, apanI A~khoMse hI jisane zatruoMko
bhayabhIta kara diyA hai, jo tIkSNa bANoMse paripUrNa hai, dA~toMse jisane
adharoSTha cAba rakhA hai, tanI huI bhrakuTiyoMse jisakA mu~ha kuTila ho rahA
hai tathA deva loga jise Azcaryacakita ho dekhate haiM aisA yoddhA kyA vApasa
lauTatA hai ?  // 51-52 /  /  maiMne meru parvatakI kandarAoM tathA sundara
nandana vanameM ramaNa kiyA hai, gaganacumbI jinamandira banavAye haiM  // 53 /
/  kimicchaka dAna diyA hai, uttamottama bhoga bhoge haiM aura samasta saMsArako
ujjvala karanevAlA yaza upArjita kiyA hai  /  / 54 /  /  isa prakAra janma
lenekA jo kArya thA use maiM kara cukA hU~-kRtakRtya huA hU~, aba yuddha meM
mujhe prANa bhI chor3anA par3e to isase kyA? mujhe anya vastukI AvazyakatA nahIM
/  / 55 /  /  'vaha becArA bhayabhIta ho yuddhase bhAga gayA' janatAke aise
zabdoMko dhIravIra manuSya kaise suna sakatA hai  // 56|| krodhase jisakA mukha
tamatamA rahA thA aisA mAlI bhAIse isa prakAra kahatA huA tatkSaNa binA jAne hI
vijayArdhake zikharapara calA gayA  // 57 /  /  tadanantara jina-jina
vidyAdharoMne usakA zAsana nahIM mAnA thA 1. vIkSyamANa: ma., kha.  /  2.
rasakrUramayaM m.| 3. hRSTayA m.| 4. munyctkiilaal-m.| 5. AkAzaM  /  6.
kezarAbhyAM ma.  /  7. bhUpo m.| 8. prekSaNaM m.| tato hi prekSaNaM k.| 9.
taryamANaH ma. (?) /  10. cAruvandine ma.  /  cAranandanaH k.|

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Seventh Chapter 143. The king of the aerial beings, enraged, destroyed those
cities with his fierce followers, which had insulted his rule. ||50|| Just as
intoxicated elephants destroy lotus groves, so did those angry aerial beings
destroy the gardens. ||59|| Then, oppressed by the aerial beings, the people,
trembling with fear, went to the shelter of the Sahasrar. ||60|| Prostrating at
his feet, they spoke these humble words: "O Lord, protect us, for the sons of
SukeÅa have destroyed all our people." ||61|| Then the Sahasrar said to the
aerial beings: "Go to my son Indra and tell him your plight." ||62|| Just as
Indra, the protector of the heavens, protects his strong rule, so does my son,
the destroyer of evil, protect this world. ||63|| Thus, having received the
answer of the Sahasrar, the aerial beings went to Indra, and, joining their
hands in salutation, narrated the whole story. ||64|| Then Indra, with a proud
smile and a face shining white, looked at the thunderbolt held in his hand, his
eyes red with anger, and said: ||65|| "I am eager to find and destroy those
thorns of the world, and now you have come to me yourselves, and I am called the
protector of the world." ||66|| Then, to announce the battle, he sounded a
terrible trumpet, the sound of which made even the maddened elephants break
their chains. ||67|| Hearing this, the aerial beings, adorned with armor,
weapons in their hands, and filled with the joy of battle, came out of their
homes. ||68|| They rode on magical chariots, horses, elephants, camels, lions,
tigers, wolves, deer, swans, goats, bulls, rams, airplanes, peacocks, and
donkeys. ||69|| Besides these, the Lokapalas, adorned with the brilliance of
various weapons, and with their faces distorted by the frown of their brows,
came out with their retinues. ||70|| Indra, whose body was covered with armor,
and over whom a white umbrella was held, mounted his elephant Airavata and went
forth with the gods. ||71|| 1. à¤¶à¤¾à¤¸à¤¯à¤¾à¤®à¤¾à¤¸ à¤., à¤. à¥¤ 2. à¤°à¤à¥à¤·à¤¸à¥à¤¯à¥à¤à¤¿à¤¤ à¤®. à¥¤ 3.
à¤µà¥à¤¤à¥à¤¤à¤¸à¥à¤¦à¤¨à¤ à¤®., à¤. à¥¤ à¤ªà¤¾à¤ªà¤¹à¤¾à¤°à¤à¤ à¥¤ 4. à¤¨à¤¿à¤°à¤à¤à¥à¤à¤¤à¥ à¥¤

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptamaM parva 143 tato'pamAnitaM yaiH zAsanaM khecarAdhipaH  /  tatpurANi sa
sAmantairdhvasayAmAsa dAruNaH  // 50 //  udyAnAnAM mahAdhvaMso janitaH
krodhibhiH khagaiH  /  yathA kamalakhaNDAnAM mAtaGgairmadamantharaiH  // 59 //
tataH saMbAdhyamAnA sA prajA gaganacAriNAm  /  jagAma zaraNaM prastA sahasrAraM
savepathuH  // 6 //  pAdayozca praNamyoce vaco dInamidaM bhRzam  /  sukezasya
sutairdhvastAM samastAM nAtha pAlaya  // 61 /  /  sahasrArastato'vocat khagA
gacchata matsutam  /  vijJApayata yuSmAkaM saparitrANakAraNam  // 62 /  /
triviSTapaM yathA zakro rakSatyUrjitazAsanaH  /  evaM lokamimaM pAti sa sarva
trasUdanaH  // 63 //  evamuktAstato jagmurindrAbhyAsaM nabhazcarAH  /
kRtvAJjaliM praNemuzca vRttAntaM ca nyavedayan  // 6 //  indrastato'vadat Rddho
darpasmitasitAnanaH  /  pAveM vyavasthite vaje dayA lohitalocane  // 65 //
yatnena mahatAnviSya hantavyA lokknnttkaaH| kiM punaH svayamAyAtAH samIpaM
lokapAlinaH  // 66 //  tato mattadvipAlAnastambhamaGgasya kAraNam  /
raNasaMjJAvidhAnArtha viSamaM tUryamAhatam  // 67 /  /  saMnAhamaNDanopetA
nirIyuzca nabhazcarAH  /  hetihastAH paraM harSa bibhrANA raNasaMbhramam  // 68
//  sthairazvairgajairuSTra: siMhAvRkairmagaiH  /
haMsacchAgairvRSaiSairvimAnairvahaNaiH kharaiH  // 69 /  /  lokapAlAzca
nirjagmunijavargasamanvitAH  /  nAnAhetiprabhAzliSTA bhrUbhaGgaviSamAnanAH  // 7
//  airAvataM samAruhya kaGkaTacchannavigrahaH  /  samucchritasitacchatro
niraidindraH samaM suraiH  /  / 71 //  una sabake nagara usane krUra sAmantoMke
dvArA naSTa-bhraSTa kara diye  // 58 //  jisa prakAra madamAte hAthI kamala
vanoMko vidhvasta kara dete haiM usI prakAra krodhase bhare vidyAdharoMne
vahA~ke udyAna-bAga-bagIce vidhvasta kara diye  /  / 59 /  /  tadanantara mAloke
sAmantoM dvArA pIr3ita vidyAdharoMko prajA bhayase kA~patI huI sahasrArakI
zaraNameM gayI  // 60 /  aura usake caraNoMmeM namaskAra kara isa prakAra
donatA-bhare zabda kahane lagI-he nAtha! sukezake putroMne samasta prajAko
kSata-vikSata kara diyA hai so usakI rakSA karo  // 61 /  /  taba sahasrArane
vidyAdharoMse kahA ki Apa loga mere putra-indrake pAsa jAo aura usase apanI
rakSAkI bAta kaho  // 62 //  jisa prakAra baliSTha zAsanako dhAraNa karanevAlA
indra svargakI rakSA karatA hai usI prakAra pApako naSTa karanevAlA merA putra
isa samasta lokakI rakSA karatA hai  // 63 //  isa prakAra sahasrArakA uttara
pAkara vidyAdhara indrake samIpa gaye aura hAtha jor3a praNAma karaneke bAda
saba samAcAra usase kahane lage  // 64 //  tadanantara garvapUrNa musakAnase
jisakA mukha sapheda ho rahA thA aise kruddha indrane pAsameM rakhe vajrapara
lAla-lAla netra DAlakara kahA ki||65|| jo lokake kaNTaka haiM maiM unheM bar3e
prayatnase khoja-khojakara naSTa karanA cAhatA hU~ phira Apa loga to svayaM hI
mere pAsa Aye haiM aura maiM lokakA rakSaka kahalAtA hU~  // 66 //  tadanantara
jise sunakara madonmatta hAthI apane bandhanake khambhoMko tor3a dete the aisA
turahIkA viSama zabda usane yuddhakA saMketa karaneke lie karAyA  // 67|| use
sunate ho jo kavacarUpI AbhUSaNase sahita the, hathiyAra jinake hAthameM the
aura jo yuddha sambandhI parama harSa dhAraNa kara rahe the aise vidyAdhara
apane-apane gharoMse bAhara nikala par3e  // 68 /  /  ve vidyAdhara mAyAmayI
ratha, ghor3e, hAthI, U~Ta, siMha, vyAghra, bher3iyA, mRga, haMsa, bakarA,
baila, mer3hA, vimAna, mora aura gardabha Adi vAhanoMpara baiThe the  // 69 /  /
inake sivAya jo nAnA prakArake zastroMkI prabhAse AliMgita the tathA bhauMhoMke
bhaMgase jinake mukha viSama dikhAI dete the aise lokapAla bhI apaneapane
parikarake sAtha bAhara nikala par3e  // 70 //  jisakA zarIra kavacase AcchAdita
thA, aura jisake Upara sapheda chatra phira rahA thA aisA indra vidyAdhara bhI
airAvata hAthIpara ArUr3ha ho devoMke sAtha 1. zAsayAmAsa ka., kha.  /  2.
rakSasyUjita ma.  /  3. vRttasUdanaH ma., ka.  /  pApahArakaH  /  4. niragacchat
/

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, a terrible battle erupted between the gods and demons, a
sight of cruelty and horror. Horses fell upon horses, chariots crushed chariots,
elephants trampled elephants, and foot soldiers destroyed foot soldiers. The sky
was covered with weapons: spears, maces, discs, swords, muskets, maces, arrows,
clubs, gold, and nooses. The gods, led by the valiant Vidyaadharas, formed an
army filled with great enthusiasm, skilled in advancing, generous, and capable
of disrupting the enemy's efforts. The gods' army, led by Vidyuutvaan,
Charudaan, Chandra, Nityagati, and Chalajyoti Prabhaadhya, devastated the demon
army. Then, the valiant Rishyaraj and Suryaraj, leaders of the monkey clan,
prepared to fight, seeing the demons being destroyed. These two heroes possessed
such speed that they appeared in different places every moment. They struck the
gods so hard that they turned their backs. The demons, emboldened by the
strength of these two, prepared to fight, filling the sky with darkness with
their weapons. Seeing the god's army being destroyed by the demons and monkey
clan, Indra, filled with rage, rose to fight himself. Then, the monkey and demon
clouds, raining weapons and roaring loudly, surrounded the mountain-like Indra.
Protecting the guardians of the world, Indra roared loudly and began to destroy
the monkeys and demons with arrows shot from all sides. Seeing his army in
disarray, Mali rose himself, his anger-born radiance illuminating the entire
sky. Then, a fierce battle ensued between Mali and Indra, watched with awe by
both armies, whose minds were filled with wonder. Then, Indra shot an arrow,
pulled back to the ear and marked with his name, into Mali's forehead. Mali,
suppressing the pain, struck Indra on the forehead with a swiftly released
weapon.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe yugAntaghanamImAnAM tataH pravavRte raNaH  /  devAnAM rAkSasAnAM ca
duHprekSyaH krUraceSTitaH  // 72 //  saptanApAtyate vAjI rathena kSodyate rathaH
/  bhajyate dantinA dantI pAdAtaM ca padAtibhiH  // 73 //
prAsamudgaracakrAsibhuSaNDImusaleSubhiH  /  gadAkanakapAzaizva channaM kRtsnaM
nabhastalam  // 74 || mahotsAhamatho sainyaM purassaraNadakSiNam  /  dakSiNaM
calitodyogaM devAnAM nivahaiH kRtam ||75|| vidyudvAn cAruyAnazca candro
nityagatistathA  /  caladyotiH prabhAvyazca rakSasAmakSiNod balam  // 76 //
atharkSa sUrya rajasAvuttuGgakapiketukau  /  sIdato rAkSasAn vIkSya durddharau
yoddhumudyatau  // 77 //  darzitAH pRSThametAbhyAM sarve te surapuGgavAH  /
kSaNAdanyatra dRSTAbhyAM dadhaddbhyAM vaidyutaM javam  // 78 //  yAtudhAnA api
prApya balaM tAbhyAM samudyatA  /  yoddhuM zastrasamUhena kurvANA dhvAntamambare
/  /  79  /  /  dhvaMsyamAnaM tataH sainyaM daivaM yAtukapidhvajaiH  /  dRSTvA
kruddhaH samuttasthau svayaM yoddhuM surAdhipaH ||80 kapiyAtudhanairvyAptastato
devendra bhUdharaH  /  zastravarSaM vimuJcadbhistAragarjanakAribhiH  //  81  //
nijagAda tataH zakraH pAlayan lokapAlinaH  /  sarvato vizikhairmuktairbabhaJja
kapirAkSasAn  //  82  //  atha mAlI samuttasthau sainyaM dRSTvA samAkulam  /
tejasA krodhajAtena dIpayan sakalaM namaH  // 83 //  abhavacca tato yuddhaM
mAlIndramatidAruNam  /  vismayavyAptacittAbhyAM senAbhyAM kRtadarzanam ||84  //
mAlino mAladeze'tha svakanAmAGkitaM zaram  /  AkarNAkRSTanirmuktaM nicakhAna
surAdhipaH || 85 || saMstAmbhya vedanAM krodhAnmAlinApyamarottamaH  /  lalATasya
taTe zaktyA hato vegavimuktayA  //  86 //  144 bAhara nikalA  //  71  //
tadanantara pralayakAla ke meghoMke samAna bhayaMkara devoM aura rAkSasoMke bIca
aisA vikaTa yuddha huA ki jo bar3I kaThinAIse dekhA jAtA thA tathA krUra
ceSTAoMse bharA thA || 72 || ghor3A ghor3Ako girA rahA thA, ratha rathako cUrNa
kara rahA thA, hAthI hAthIko bhagna kara rahA thA aura paidala sipAhI paidala
sipAhIko naSTa kara rahA thA || 73 || bhAle, mudgara, cakra, talavAra, bandUka,
musala, bANa, gadA, kanaka aura pAza Adi zastroMse samasta AkAza AcchAdita ho
gayA thA ||74 || tadanantara deva kahAnevAle vidyAdharoMne eka aisI senA banAyI
jo mahAn utsAhase yukta thI, Age calane meM kuzala thI, udAra thI aura zatruke
udyogako vicalita karanevAlI thI || 75 || devoMkI senAke pradhAna vidyutvAn,
cArudAna, candra, nityagati tathA calajjyoti prabhADhya Adi devoMne rAkSasoMkI
senAko kSatavikSata banA diyA  /  taba vAnaravaMziyoMmeM pradhAna durdhara
parAkramake dhArI RkSaraja aura sUryaraja rAkSasoMko naSTa hote dekha yuddha
karaneke lie taiyAra hue  /  / 76-77 /  /  ye donoM hI vIra vijayI jaise vegako
dhAraNa karate the isalie kSaNa-kSaNa meM anyatra dikhAI dete the  /  ina
donoMne devoMko itanA mArA ki unase pITha dikhAte hI banI || 78|| idhara rAkSasa
bhI ina donoMkA bala pAkara zastroMke samUhase AkAza andhakAra phailAte hue
yuddha karaneke lie udyata hue || 79 || udhara jaba indrane dekhA ki rAkSasoM
aura vAnaravaMziyoMke dvArA devoMkI senA naSTa kI jA rahI hai taba vaha kruddha
ho svayaM yuddha karane ke lie uThA ||80|| tadanantara zastra varSA aura
gambhIra garjanA karanevAle vAnara tathA rAkSasarUpI meghoMne usa indrarUpI
parvatako ghera liyA  // 81 //  taba lokapAloMkI rakSA karate hue indrane jorase
garjanA kI aura saba ora chor3e hue bANoMse vAnara tathA rAkSasoMko naSTa karanA
zurU kara diyA ||82|| tadanantara senAko vyAkula dekha mAlI svayaM uThA  /  usa
samaya vaha krodhase utpanna tejase samasta AkAzako dedIpyamAna kara rahA thA
||83|| tadanantara mAlI aura indrakA atyanta bhayaMkara yuddha huA  /  AzcaryaM
se jinake citta bhara rahe the aisI donoM ora kI senAe~ unake usa yuddhako bar3e
gauravase dekha rahI thIM  //  84  //  tadanantara indrane, jo kAna taka
khIMcakara chor3A gayA thA tathA apane nAmase cihnita thA aisA eka bANa mAlIke
lalATapara gAr3a diyA  //  85  //  idhara mAlIne bhI usako pIr3A rokakara vegase
chor3I huI 1. jAtu kapi ma.  /

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Seventh Chapter  The enraged Mali, whose body was reddened with blood, rushed
towards Indra, just as the sun approaches the setting horizon.  || 87 ||  As
Mali approached, Indra severed his head with his chakra, which shone like the
sun. || 88 ||  Seeing his brother slain, Sumali was deeply distressed.  He
pondered that Indra, the chakra-wielding king of the Vidyadharas, was immensely
powerful, and it was impossible to stand against him.  Thus, the wise and
skillful Sumali, along with his entire family, fled the battlefield immediately.
|| 89-90 ||  As Indra was about to slay Sumali, Soma, devoted to his master,
bowed and said, "My Lord, why do you exert yourself when a servant like me is
present to kill the enemy?  Please allow me to do it." || 91-92 ||  Indra
replied, "So be it."  Soma then followed the enemy, showering him with a volley
of arrows, like a swarm of bees attacking their target. || 93 ||  The army of
the monkey-demons, struck by the arrows, was thrown into disarray, like a herd
of cows caught in a downpour. || 94 ||  "You are surrounded by fools and
ignorant of the rules of war, you wicked one!"  Mali, blazing with anger, turned
to Soma and, with his weapon called Bhindimala, struck him deeply in the chest,
rendering him unconscious. || 95-96 ||  While Soma lay unconscious, his eyes
closed, the demons and monkeys vanished. || 97 ||  They returned to their abode,
Alankarodayapur (Patal Lanka), safe from Soma's wrath, as if they had been
reborn. || 98 ||  When Soma regained consciousness, he saw the battlefield empty
of enemies.  He was praised for his victory and returned to Indra. || 99 ||
Indra, pleased with his chakra-wielding warrior, praised Soma, who had
vanquished his enemies.  He was also honored by the Lokapalas. || 100 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptamaM parva raktAruNitadehaM ca mAlI drAk tamupAgataH  /  krodhAruNaH
sahasrAMzuryathAstadharaNIdharam  // 87 //  mAnubimbamAnena cakreNAsya tataH
ziraH  /  Abhimukhyamupetasya lUnaM patyA divaukasAm  //  88  //  bhrAtaraM
nihataM dRSTvA nitAntaM duHkhitastataH  /  cintayitvA mahAvIryaM cakriNaM
vyomagAminAm ||89  //  parivAreNa sarveNa nijena sahitaH kSaNAt  /  raNAt
palAyanaM cakre sumAlI nayapezalaH  //  90  //  dhArthaM gataM zakramanumArgeNa
getvaram  /  uvAca praNataH somaH svAmibhaktiparAyaNaH  //  91  //  vidyamAne
prabho bhRtye mAdRze zatrumAraNe  /  prayatnaM kuruSe kasmAt svayaM me yaccha
zosanam  //  92  //  evamastviti cokte'sAvanumArga riporgataH  /  bANapunjaM
vimuJcaJca karaughamiva zatrugam  //  93  //  tatastadAhataM sainyaM vizikhaiH
kapirakSasAm  /  dhArAhataM gavAM yadvatkulamAkulatAM gatam  // 94 //  pApa na
kSatramaryAdAM tvaM jAnAsi manAgapi  /  jaDavargaparikSipta ityuktA prAptakAriNA
||15|| nivRtya krodhadIptena tato mAlyavatA zeMzI  /  gADhaM stanAntare bhinno
bhiNDimAlena mUcchitaH ||16|| ayaM tvAzvAsyate yAvanmUrcchAmIlitalocanaH  /
antarddhAnaM gatAstAvad yAtudhAnaplavaGgamAH ||90  //  punarjanmeva te prAptA
alaMkArodayaM puram  /  siMhasyeva viniHkrAntA jaTharAdAgatAH sukham ||18||
pratibuddhaH zazAGko'pi dizo vIkSya ripUjjhitAH  /  stUyamAno jayenAryayau
maghavato'ntikam ||19|| dhvastazatruzca sutrAmA vandinA nivahaiH stutaH  /
anvito lokapAlAnAM cakravAlena toSiNA  // 100 //  zaktike dvArA indrake lalATa
ke samIpa hI jamakara coTa pahu~cAyI  //  86  //  khUnase jisakA zarIra lAla ho
rahA thA aisA krodhayukta mAlI zIghra hI indrake pAsa isa taraha pahu~cA jisa
taraha ki sUryaM astAcala ke samIpa pahu~catA hai || 87 || tadanantara mAlI jyoM
hI sAmane AyA tyoM hI indrane sUryabimbake samAna cakra se usakA sira kATa DAlA
||88 || bhAIko marA dekha sumAlI bahuta duHkhI huaa| usane vicAra kiyA ki
vidyAdharoMkA cakravartI indra mahAzaktizAlI hai ataH isake sAmane hamArA sthira
rahanA asambhava hai  /  aisA vicArakara nItikuzala sumAlI apane samasta
parivArake sAtha usI samaya yuddha se bhAga gayA || 82 - 90  /  /  usakA vadha
karaneke lie indra usI mArgase jAneko huA taba svAmibhakti meM tatpara somane
namra hokara prArthanA kI ki he prabho ! zatruko mAranevAle mujha jaise bhRtya
ke rahate hue Apa svayaM kyoM prayatna karate haiM ? mujhe AjJA dIjie  / 91-92
/  /  'aisA hI ho' isa prakAra indrake kahate hI soma zatruke pIche usI mArga se
cala par3A  /  vaha zatru taka pahu~canevAlI kiraNoke samUhake samAna bANoMke
samUhakI varSA karatA jAtA thA || 13|| tadanantara jisa prakAra jalavRSTise
pIr3ita gAyoMkA samUha vyAkulatAko prApta hotA hai usI prakAra somake pIr3ita
vAnara aura rAkSasoMkI senA vyAkulatAko prApta huI ||14|| tadanantara avasarake
yogya kAryaM karanevAle, krodhase dedIpyamAna mAlyavAnne mur3akara somase kahA
ki are pApI ! tU mUrkha logoM se ghirA hai ataH tU yuddhakI maryAdAko nahIM
jAnatA  /  yaha kahakara usane bhiNDimAla nAmaka zastrase somake vakSaHsthala
meM itanI gaharI coTa pahu~cAyI ki vaha vahIM mUcchita ho gayA  /  95-96 //
mUrcchA ke kAraNa jisake netra nimIlita the aisA soma jaba taka kucha vizrAma
letA hai tabataka rAkSasa aura vAnara antarhita ho gaye ||17|| jisa prakAra koI
siMhake udarase surakSita nikala Ave usI prakAra ve bhI somakI capeTase
surakSita nikalakara alaMkArodayapura arthAt pAtAla laMkAmeM vApasa A gaye  /
usa samaya unheM aisA lagA mAno punarjanmako hI prApta hue hoM || 18 || idhara
jaba somakI mUrcchA dUra huI to usane dizAoMko zatruse khAlI dekhA  /  nidAna,
zatruko vijayase jisakI stuti rahI thI aisA soma indrake samIpa vApasa pahu~cA
||19|| jisane zatruoM ko naSTa kara diyA thA 1. satvaram kha.  /  gatvarA ka.  /
2 zAsatam ma.  /  3. prAptakAraNam ka.  /  4. somaH  /  5. alaGkArAhvayaM ma  /
6. mukham kha.  /  19 145

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
146 Indra, mounted on Airavata, with chamaras waving, shaded by a white
umbrella, with dancing gods in front, entered the city of Rathnapur. The city
was adorned with banners of jewels, and high arches, and the streets were strewn
with flowers up to the ankles, and sprinkled with saffron water. The women in
the windows looked on with their eyes. He entered the city with great
prosperity. He bowed to his parents with folded hands, and they touched his body
with trembling hands. Having conquered his enemies, he came to great joy,
enjoying the highest pleasures, and devoted to the protection of his subjects.
He became famous in the world, and the mountain of Vijay was called heaven.  I
will now tell you the origin of the Lokapalas. Listen with your mind focused, O
Shrenika.  Soma, the Lokapala, was born from the womb of Aditi, the wife of
Makaradhwaja, a Vidyadhara, who had fallen from heaven. He was very radiant.
Indra placed him in the east of the city of Dyotisanga, and he enjoyed his time
with great prosperity.  Varuna, the Lokapala, was born from the womb of Varuna,
the wife of Megha-ratha, a Vidyadhara. Indra placed him in the west of the city
of Meghapur. His weapon was the noose, and his enemies were afraid of it from
afar.  Kubera, the Lokapala, was born from the womb of Kanakavali, the wife of
the great Kisury, a Vidyadhara. He was endowed with great prosperity. Indra
placed him in the north of the city of Kanchanapur. He was famous in the world
for his wealth, and enjoyed the highest pleasures.  Yama, the Lokapala, was born
from the womb of Shri-prabha, the wife of Kala-agni, a Vidyadhara. He was a
fierce Rudra-karma, and very powerful. Indra placed him in the south of the city
of Kishkun, on the island of Dakshina-udanta. He enjoyed the fruits of his good
deeds.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 146 padmapurANe airAvataM samArUDhazcAmara nilavIjitaH  /
sitacchatrakRtacchAyo nRtyatsurapuraHsaraH  // 101 //
ratnAMzukadhvajanyastazobhamucchritatoraNam  /  AgulphapuSpavizikhaM siktaM
kuGkumavAriNA  // 102 //  gavAkSanyastasannArInayanAlInirIkSitaH  /  yuktaH
paramayA bhUtyA viveza rathanUpuram  // 103 /  /  pitrIzca vinayAt pAdau
praNanAma kRtAJjaliH  /  tau ca paspRzaturgAtraM kampinA tasya pANinA  // 104 //
zatranevaM sa nirjitya paramAnandamAgataH  /  AsvAdayan paraM mogaM
prajApAlanatatparaH  /  / 105 //  sutarAM sa tato loke prasiddhiM zakratAM gataH
/  prAptaH svargaprasiddhiM ca vijayAIzca bhUdharaH  // 106 //  utpattiM
lokapAlAnAM tasya vakSyAmi sAMpratam  /  ekAgraM mAnasaM kRtvA zreNikaiSAM
nibudhyatAm  // 107 /  /  svargalokAccyuto jAto makaradhvajakhecarAt  /
saMbhUto jaThare'dityA lokapAlo'bhavacchazI  // 10 //  kAntimAneSa zakreNa
dyotiHsaGge purottame  /  pUrvasyAM kakubhi nyasto mumude paramarddhikaH  // 109
//  jAto megharathAbhikhyAvaruNAyAM mahAbalaH  /  khecaro varuNo nAma saMprApto
lokapAlatAm  /  / 110 //  pure meghapure nyastaH pazcimAyAmasau dizi  /  pAzaM
praharaNaM zratvA yasya bibhyati zatravaH  // 111 //  saMbhUtaH kanakAvalyAM
kiMsUryeNa mahAtmanA  /  kuberAkhyo namogAmI vibhUtyA parayAnvitaH  // 112 //
kAJcanAkhye pure cAyamudIcyAM dizi yojitaH  /  saMprApa paramaM bhogaM prakhyAto
jagati zriyA  // 113 //  saMbhataH zrIpramAgarbha kAlAgnivyomacAriNaH  /
caNDakarmA yamo nAma tejasvI paramo'bhavat  /  / 114|| dakSiNodanvato dvIpe
kiSkunAmni purottame  /  sthApito'sau svapuNyAnAM prApnuvannUjitaM phalam  //
115 /  /  tathA vandIjanoMke samUha jisakI stuti kara rahe the aise indra
vidyAdharane santoSase bhare lokapAloMke sAtha rathanUpura nagarameM praveza
kiyaa| vaha airAvata hAthIpara savAra thA, usake donoM ora camara Dhole jA rahe
the, sapheda chatrakI usapara chAyA thI, nRtya karate hue deva usake Age-Age
cala rahe the, tathA jharokhoMmeM baiThI uttama striyA~ apane nayanoMse use
dekha rahI thiiN| usa samaya ratnamayI dhvajAoMse rathanUpura nagarakI zobhA
bar3ha rahI thI, usameM U~ce-U~ce toraNa khar3e kiye gaye the, usakI galiyoMmeM
ghuTanoM taka phUla bichAye gaye the aura kezarake jalase samasta nagara sIMcA
gayA thaa| aise rathanUpura nagarameM usane bar3I vibhUtike sAtha praveza kiyA
// 100-103|| rAjamahala meM pahuMcanepara usane hAtha jor3akara mAtA-pitAke
caraNoMmeM namaskAra kiyA aura mAtA-pitAne bhI kAMpate hue hAthase usake
zarIrakA sparza kiyA  /  / 104 /  isa prakAra zatruoMko jItakara vaha parama
harSako prApta huA aura utkRSTa bhoga bhogatA huA prajApAlanameM tatpara rahane
lagA  // 105 //  tadanantara vaha lokameM indrakI prasiddhiko prApta huA aura
vijayArddha parvata svarga kahalAne lagA  // 106 /  /  gautama svAmI rAjA
zreNikase kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! aba lokapAloMkI utpatti kahatA hU~ so manako
ekAgra kara suno  // 107 /  /  svarga lokase cyuta hokara makaradhvaja
vidyAdharakI aditi nAmA strIke udarase soma nAmakA lokapAla utpanna haA thaa|
yaha bahata hI kAntimAna thaa| indrane ise dyotiHsaMga nAmaka nagarakI pUrva
dizAmeM lokapAla sthApita kiyA thaa| isa taraha yaha parama RddhikA dhArI hotA
huA harSase samaya vyatIta karatA thaa|||108-109|| megharatha nAmA vidyAdharakI
varuNA nAmA strIse varuNa nAmakA lokapAla vidyAdhara utpanna huA thaa| indrane
ise meghapura nagarakI pazcima dizAmeM sthApita kiyA thaa| isakA zastra pAza thA
jise sunakara zatru dUrase hI bhayabhIta ho jAte the  // 110-111 /  /  mahAtmA
kisUrya vidyAdharakI kanakAvalI strIse kubera nAmakA lokapAla vidyAdhara utpanna
huA thaa| yaha parama vibhUtise yukta thaa| indra ne ise kAMcanapura nagarakI
uttara dizAmeM sthApita kiyA thaa| yaha saMsArameM lakSmI ke kAraNa prasiddha
thA tathA utkRSTa bhogoMko prApta thA  /  / 112-113 /  /  kAlAgni nAmA
vidyAdharakI zrIprabhA strIke garbhase yama nAmakA lokapAla vidyAdhara utpanna
huA thaa| yaha rudrakarmA tathA parama tejasvI thA  /  /  114  /  /  indrane ise
dakSiNa 1. vijayA?'sya kha.  /  vijayAdhassa k.|

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Seventh Chapter  **147**  The city whose name was renowned on earth, the king
of the city was known by the same name. ||116||  Those who reside in the city of
Asura, the celestial beings, are known as Asuras throughout the earth. ||117||
The Yakshas in the city of Yaksha-geet are called Yakshas, the Kinnaras in the
city of Kinnara are called Kinnaras, and those in the city of Gandharva are
known as Gandharvas. ||118||  Ashwini, Vasu, Vishwe, and Vaishvanara, along with
their followers, engage in divine play, endowed with knowledge and strength.
||119||  Having attained a human birth, and obtaining vast wealth on earth, he
considered himself the king of the gods, worshipped by all beings. ||120||
Indra, heaven, and other gods were all forgotten by him. He was delighted with
his wealth and constantly celebrated festivals. ||121||  He considered himself
Indra, Mount Meru as heaven, the celestial beings as guardians of the realms,
and all his subjects as gods, filled with pride. ||122||  There is no one
greater than me in the three worlds. I am the creator of this universe, the
knower of all things. ||123||  Having attained the position of a Chakravarti, he
was filled with pride, experiencing the fruits of his good deeds from past
lives. ||124||  Listen to the story of how Dhanada came to be, the one who
transgressed in this chapter, as it is known to the Shreniks. ||125||  In the
city of Kautukamangal, there lived a celestial being named Vyombinda. His wife,
Nandavati, gave birth to two daughters. ||126||  The elder was named Kaushiki,
and the younger was Kekasi. The elder daughter was given to Vishrava, the
wealthy Yaksha of Yakshapur. ||127||  From her was born Vaishravana, with
auspicious features. He had a hundred eyes, was wealthy, and a delight to the
eyes of women. ||128||  Thus, Indra called Vaishravana and honored him, saying,
"Go to Lanka and rule over my celestial beings. You are dear to me." ||129||
From today onwards, you shall be the fifth guardian of the four realms, endowed
with great strength by my grace. ||130||  The city of Kishku was situated in the
southern direction of the island in the ocean. Thus, he spent his time enjoying
the powerful fruits of his good deeds. ||115||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptamaM parva 147 purasya yasya yannAma pRthivyAM khyAtimAgatam  /  tenaiva
khyApitA nAmnA paurAstatra surezinA  // 116 /  /  asurAkhya nabhogAnAM nagare
nivasanti ye| asurAkhyA ime jAtAH sakale dharaNItale  // 117 //  yakSagIte pure
yakSAH kinnarAhve ca kinnarAH  /  gandharvasaMjJayA khyAtAH pure gandharvanAmani
// 118 //  azvinI vasavo vizve vaizvAnarapurassarAH  /  kurvanti tridazakrIDAM
vidyAbalasamanvitAH  // 119 /  /  avApya saMmavaM yonau prApya zrIvistaraM bhuvi
/  praNato bhUrilokena manyate svaM surezvaram  // 120 //  indraH svargaH
surAzcAnye samastAstasya vismRtAH  /  saMpanI ratimetasya nityotsava vidhAyinaH
/  / 121 //  svAmindaM parvataM svarga lokapAlAn khagezvarAn  /  nijAMzca
sakalAn devAn sa mene bhUtigarvitaH  // 122 /  /  matto'sti na mahAn
kazcitpuruSo bhuvanatraye  /  ahamevAsya vizvasya praNetA viditAkhilaH  /  / 123
//  vidyAbhRccakravartitvamiti prApya sa garvitaH  /  phalamanvabhavat
pUrvajanmopAttasukarmaNaH  /  / 12 /  /  bhAge'tra yo vyatikrAntastaM
vRttAntamataH zRNu  /  dhanadasya samutpattiH zreNika jJAyate yathA  // 125 /  /
vyomabinduriti khyAtaH pure kautukamaGgale  /  bhAryA nandavatI tasyAmutpannaM
duhitadvayam  // 126 /  /  kauzikI jyAyasI tatra kekasI ca kanIyasI  /  jyeSTA
vizravase dattA pure yakSavinirmite  /  / 127 /  /  tasyAM vaizravaNo jAtaH
zubhalakSaNavigrahaH  /  zatapatrekSaNaH zrImAnaGganAnayanotsavaH  /  / 128 //
evamuktaH sa cAhUya zakreNa kRtapUjanaH  /  braja laGkApurIM zAdhi priyastvaM
mama khecarAn  /  / 129 //  caturNA lokapAlAnAmadya prabhRti paJcamaH  /
lokapAlo bhava tvaM me matprasAdAnmahAbalaH  // 130 //  sAgarake dvIpameM
vidyamAna kiSku nAmaka nagarakI dakSiNa dizAmeM sthApita kiyA thaa| isa prakAra
yaha apane puNyake prabala phalako bhogatA huA samaya vyatIta karatA thA  // 115
/  /  jisa nagarakA jo nAma pRthivIpara prasiddha thA indrane usa nagarake
nivAsiyoMko usI nAmase prasiddha karAyA thA  // 116 //  vidyAdharoMke asara
nAmaka nagara meM jo vidyAdhara rahate the pathivItalapara ve asara nAmase
prasiddha hue  // 117 //  yakSagIta nagarake vidyAdhara yakSa khlaaye| kinnara
nAmA nagarake nivAsI vidyAdhara kinnara kahalAye aura gandharvanagarake
rahanevAle vidyAdhara gandharva nAmase prasiddha hue  // 118 /  /  azvinIkumAra,
vizvAvasu tathA vaizvAnara Adi vidyAdhara vidyAbalase sahita ho devoMkI krIr3A
karate the  // 119 /  /  indra yadyapi manuSya yonimeM utpanna huA thA phira bhI
vaha pRthivIpara lakSmIkA vistAra pAkara apane Apako indra mAnane lgaa| saba
loga use namaskAra karate the  // 120 //  sampadAoMse parama prItiko prApta
tathA nirantara utsava karanevAle usa indra vidyAdharakI samasta prajA yaha
bhUla gayI thI ki yathArthameM koI indra hai, svarga hai athavA deva haiM  //
121 /  /  vabhavaka gavarma phaMsA indra, apane Apako indra, vijayAddhaM giriko
svarga, vidyAdharoMko lokapAla aura apanI samasta prajAko deva mAnatA thA  //
122 /  /  tInoM hI lokoMmeM mujhase adhika mahApuruSa aura koI dUsarA nahIM hai|
maiM hI isa samasta jagatkA praNetA tathA saba padArthoMko jAnanevAlA hU~  //
123 /  /  isa prakAra vidyAdharoMkA cakravartIpanA pAkara garvase phUlA indra
vidyAdhara apane pUrva janmopArjita puNya karmakA phala bhogatA thA  // 124 //
gautama svAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! isa bhAgakA jo vRttAnta
nikala cukA hai use suno jisameM dhanadakI utpattikA jJAna ho sake 5||
kautUkamaMgala nAmA nagarameM vyomabinda nAmakA vidyAdhara rahatA thaa| usakI
nandavatI bhAryAke udarase do putriyA~ utpanna huIM  // 126 /  /  unameM bar3IkA
nAma kauzikI aura choTIkA nAma kekasI thaa| bar3I putrI kauzikI yakSapurake
dhanI vizravasake lie dI gyo| usase vaizravaNa nAmakA putra huaa| isakA samasta
zarIra zubha lakSaNoMse sahita thA, kamalake samAna usake netra the, vaha
lakSmIsampanna thA tathA striyoMke netroMko Ananda denevAlA thA  // 127-128 //
indra vidyAdharane vaizravaNako bulAkara usakA satkAra kiyA aura kahA ki tuma
mujhe bahuta priya ho isalie laMkA nagarI jAkara vidyAdharoMpara zAsana karo  //
129 /  /  tuma cU~ki mahAbalavAna ho ataH mere prasAdake kAraNa Ajase ||125

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Translation preserving Jain terms:  148 Having said "As you have commanded", and
having paid obeisance at the feet, he took leave of his parents. The auspicious
one (RathnaÅravÄ) departed. (131)  Freed from doubts, he resided in Laá¹kÄ with
great delight. The assembly of VidyÄdharas held his command on their heads.
(132)  He who was born to the beloved SumÄlÄ«'s wife, the valorous, generous, and
world-beloved RathnaÅravÄ by name. (133)  Whose life was for the benefit of
friends, whose lordship was for the service of servants, and whose brilliance
was great. (134)  Whose skill was for the aid of those with destroyed evil
intentions, whose protection of Laká¹£mÄ« was for the benefit of kinsmen. (135)
Whose divinity was elevated for the aid of the destitute, whose all was for the
aid of the virtuous protector of all. (136)  Whose mind was for the remembrance
of good deeds, whose life was the instrument of Dharma, whose body was for the
aid of valor. (137)  Who was compassionate towards the class of living beings
like a father, and is still remembered by creatures as a past auspicious time.
(138)  For whom other women were like mothers due to his virtuous conduct,
other's wealth was like grass, and others' bodies were like his own. (139)  Who
was counted first among the virtuous by the wise, and was not even remembered by
creatures among the faulty. (140)  His body was made by other great elements,
otherwise how could such unique beauty have arisen in him? (141)  He made
conversation like nectar, and performed great donations as if they were his
nature. (142)  Among the affairs of Dharma, Artha, and KÄma, for that great-
minded one, Dharma alone was the great endeavor in the next birth. (143)  He was
the fifth LokapÄla, besides the four LokapÄlas. (130)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 148 padmapurANe yadAjJApayasItyuktvA kRtvA caraNavandanAm  /  ApRcchaya pitarI
navA 'nirgato'sau sumaGgalam  // 131 /  /  adhyatiSTacca madito lar3AM
zaGkAvivarjitaH  /  vidyAdharasamahena zirasA tazAsanaH  /  / 132 //
prItimatyAM samutpannaH sumAlitanayastu yH| nAmnA ratnazravAH zUrastyAgI
bhuvanavatsalaH  /  / 133 /  /  mitropakaraNaM yasya jIvitaM tuGgacetasaH  /
bhRtyAnAmupakArAya prabhutvaM bhUritejasaH  // 134 //  labdhavarNopakArAya
vaidagdhyaM dagdhadurmateH  /  bandhUnAmupakArAya lakSmyAzca paripAlanam  /  /
135 /  /  IzvaratvaM daridrANAmupakArArthamunnatam  /  sAdhUnAmupakArArtha
sarvasvaM sarvapAlinaH  /  / 136 //  sukRtasmaraNArthaM ca mAnasaM mAnazAlinaH
/  dharmopakaraNaM cAyuH vIryopakRtaye vapuH  /  / 137 /  /  piteva
prANivargasya yo babhUvAnukampakaH  /  sukAla iva cAtItaH smaryate'dyApi
jantubhiH  /  / 138 //  parastrI mAtRvad yasya zIlabhUSaNadhAriNaH  /
paradravyaM ca tRNavatparazca svazarIravat  /  / 139 //  guNinAM gaNanAyAM yaH
prathamaM gaNito budhaiH  /  doSiNAM ca samullApe sa smRto naiva jantubhiH  //
40 //  anyairiva mahAbhUtaH zarIraM tasya nirmitam  /  anyathA sA kutaH zobhA
babhUvAsya tathAvidhA  // 141 //  prasekamamRteneva cakre saMbhASaNeSu saH  /
mahAdAnamivodAttacarito vitatAra ca  // 142 /  /  dharmArthakAmakAryANAM madhye
tasya mahAmateH  /  dharma eva mahAn yatno janmAntaragatAvabhUt  /  / 143 //
lekara cAra lokapAloMke sivAya paMcama lokapAla ho  // 130 //  'jo ApakI AjJA
hai vaisA hI karU~gA' yaha kahakara vaizravaNane usake caraNoMmeM namaskAra
kiyaa| tadanantara mAtA-pitAse pUchakara aura unheM namaskAra kara vaizravaNa
maMgalAcArapUrvaka apane nagarase nikalA  // 131 //  vidyAdharoMkA samUha jisakI
AjJA sirapara dhAraNa karate the aisA vaizravaNa niHzaMka ho bar3I prasannatAse
laMkAmeM rahane lagA  // 132 /  /  indrase hArakara sumAlI alaMkArapura nagara
(pAtAlalaMkA) meM rahane lagA thaa| vahA~ usakI prItimatI rAnose ratnazravA
nAmakA putra huaa| vaha bahuta hI zUravIra, tyAgI aura lokavatsala thA  // 133 /
/  usa udArahRdayakA jIvana mitroMkA upakAra karaneke lie thA, usa tejasvIkA
teja bhRtyoMkA upakAra karaneke lie thA  // 134 /  /  durbuddhiko naSTa
karanevAle usa ratnazravAkA cAturya vidvAnoMkA upakAra karaneke lie thA, vaha
lakSmIkI rakSA bandhujanoMkA upakAra karane ke lie karatA thA  // 135 /  /
usakA bar3hA-car3hA aizvarya daridroMkA upakAra karaneke lie thaa| sabakI rakSA
karanevAle usa ratnazravAkA sarvasva sAdhuoMkA upakAra karaneke lie thA  // 136
/  /  usa svAbhimAnIkA mana puNya kAryoMkA smaraNa karaneke lie thaa| usakI Ayu
dharmakA upakAra karanevAlI thI aura usakA zarIra parAkramakA upakAra karaneke
lie thA  // 137 //  vaha pitAke samAna prANiyoMke samUhapara anukampA karanevAlA
thaa| bIte hue sukAlako taraha Aja bhI prANI usakA smaraNa karate haiM  // 138||
zIlarUpI AbhUSaNako dhAraNa karanevAle usa ratnazravAke lie parastro mAtAke
samAna thii| para-dravya taNake samAna thA aura para-puruSa apane zarIrake
samAna thA arthAta jisa prakAra vaha apane zarIrakI rakSA karatA thA usI prakAra
para-puruSakI bhI rakSA karatA thA  // 139|| jaba guNI manuSyoMkI gaNanA zurU
hotI thI taba vidvAn loga sabase pahale isIko ginate the aura jaba doSoMkI carcA
hotI thI taba prANI isakA smaraNa hI nahIM karate the  // 140 /  /  usakA zarIra
mAno pRthivI Adise atirikta anya mahAbhUtoMse racA gayA thA anyathA usakI vaha
anokhI zobhA kaise hotI ?  // 141 /  /  vaha jaba vArtAlApa karatA thA taba aisA
jAna par3atA thA mAno amRta hI sIMca rahA ho| vaha itanA udAttacarita thA ki
mAno hamezA mahAdAna hI detA rahatA ho  // 142 /  /  janmAntarameM bhI usa 1.
nirgatAsI m.|

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Seventh Chapter 149 Fame is the ornament of ornaments, the best of all
ornaments. Virtues reside in him like family members along with fame. ||144||
Desiring the highest prosperity, he came from his lineage. He was displaced from
his position by Indra, the king of the gods. ||145|| Abandoning fear, the brave
one was capable of achieving knowledge. He went to the forest of flowers, where
ghosts, goblins, and other such beings were roaring. ||146|| While he was
learning knowledge, Vyombindu sent his daughter, who was already knowledgeable
about knowledge and who was destined to become Ratnashrava's wife, to serve him
during his penance. ||147|| She stood respectfully near the yogi, her hands
folded, waiting for his command. ||148|| Then, when Ratnashrava's penance was
completed, he bowed to the perfected Lord. At that time, his eyes fell upon
Kekasi, who was standing alone. Simplicity was dripping from her eyes. ||149||
Her eyes were like blue lotuses, her face like a lotus, her teeth like buds of
jasmine, her arms like garlands of shirisha flowers, and her lower lip like a
rose. ||150|| The fragrance of jasmine flowers emanated from her breath, her
complexion was like that of a champak flower, and her entire body seemed to be
made of flowers. ||151|| Kekasi, standing near Ratnashrava, seemed as if
Lakshmi, captivated by his form, had left her lotus-shaped home and come to him
with great longing, her eyes fixed on his feet. ||152|| Her body was bending
downwards due to the shame caused by seeing the extraordinary man, and her
breasts were trembling with the fear-filled breaths she was taking. ||153|| She
was touching the nearby leaves with her beauty, and the fragrance of her breath
was attracting a swarm of intoxicated bees, making the forest restless. ||154||
She was bending so low due to her extreme delicacy that youth was embracing her
with fear. Kekasi was like the ultimate creation. ||155|| To gather all the
wonders of the world, as if...  1. Pushpantakam ma.  2. Madyodnabhavini k. kh.
j. (Mandodyotodbhavini)  3. Sutam ma.  4. Vasasam ma.  5. Vilpanti ma.  6.
Nantikigatan ma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptamaM parva 149 yazo vibhUSaNaM tasya bhUSaNAnAM subhUSaNam  /  guNAH kIrtyA
samaM tasmin sakuTumbA iva sthitAH  // 144 //  sabhUtiM paramAM vAJchan kramAd
gotrasamAgatAm  /  saMtyAjito nijaM sthAnaM patyA svarganivAsinAm  //  145 //
parityajya bhayaM dhIro vidyAM sAdhayituM kSamaH  /  raudraM bhUtapizAcAdinAdi
puSpAdikaM vanam  // 146 //  vidyAyAM viditAM pUrvamathoM tadbhAminIM sutAm  /
vyomabindurdadAvasmai tapase paricArikAm  //  147  //  tasya sA yoginaH pArce
vinItA samavasthitA  /  kRtAJjalipuTAdezaM vAJchantI tanmukhodgatam  //  148  //
tataH samAptaniyamaH kRtasiddhanamaskRtiH  /  ekAkinAM satAM bAlAM dRSTA
saralalocanAm  //  149  //  nIlotpalekSaNAM padmavaktrAM kundadala dvijAm  /
zirISamAlikAbAhu pATalAdantavAsasam  //  150 //  bakulAmodaniHzvAsAM
campakatviksamatviSam  /  kusumairiva niHzeSAM nirmitAM dadhatIM tanum  //  151
//  padmAlayA padmAM rUpeNaiva vazIkRtAm  /  paramotkaNThayAnItAM
pAdavinyastalocanAm  // 152 //  apUrvapuruSA lokalajjitAnatavigrahAm  /
sasAdhvasavinikSiptaniHzvAsotkampitastanIm  //  153  //  lAvaNyena vilimpantIM
pallavAnantikAgatAm  /  niHzvAsAkRSTamattAlikulavyAkulitAnanAm  //  154  //
saukumAryAdivodAsad bibhyatAnatinirbharam | yauvanena kRtAzleSAM saMbhUtiM
yoSitaH parAm  //  155  //  gRhItvevAkhila straiNaM lAvaNyaM trijagadgatam  /
karmabhirnirmitAM kartumadbhutaM sArvalaukikam  // 156 //  mahAbuddhimAnne
dharma, artha, kAma meM se eka dharmaM meM hI mahAn prayatna kiyA thA  //  143
//  saba AbhUSaNoMkA AbhUSaNa yaza hI usakA AbhUSaNa thA  /  guNa usameM kIrti
ke sAtha isa prakAra raha rahe the mAno usake kuTumbI hI hoM  //  144 //  vaha
ratnazravA, apanI vaMza-paramparAse calI AyI utkRSTa vibhUtiko prApta karanA
cAhatA thA para indra vidyAdhara ne use apane sthAnase cyuta kara rakhA thA  //
145  //  nidAna, vaha dhIra-vIra vidyA siddha karaneke lie, jahA~ bhUta-pizAca
Adi zabda kara rahe the aise mahAbhayaMkara puSpa vanameM gayA || 146 || so
ratnazravA to idhara vidyA siddha kara rahA thA udhara vidyAke viSaya meM pahale
se hI parijJAna rakhanevAlI tathA jo bAdameM ratnazravAkI patnI honevAlI thI
aisI apanI choTI kanyA kekasIko vyomabindune usakI tapakAlIna paricaryA ke lie
bhejA || 147 || so kasI usa yogI ke samIpa bar3e vinayase hAtha jor3e khar3I huI
usake mukhase nikalanevAle AdezakI pratIkSA kara rahI thI || 148|| tadanantara
jaba ratnazravAkA niyama samApta huA taba vaha siddha bhagavAnko namaskAra kara
uThA  /  usI samaya usakI dRSTi akelI khar3I kekasIpara par3I  /  kekasIkI
A~khoM se saralatA Tapaka rahI thI || 149 || usake netra nIlakamalake samAna
the, mukha kamalake samAna thA, dA~ta kundakI kalIke samAna the, bhujAe~
zirISako mAlAke samAna thIM, adharoSTha gulAbake samAna thA || 15 || usakI
zvAsase maulizrI ke phUloMkI sugandhi A rahI thI, usakI kAnti campeke phUla ke
samAna thI, usakA sArA zarIra mAno phUloMse hI banA thA  /  /  151  /  /
ratnazravAke pAsa khar3I kekasI aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno usake rUpase
vazIbhUta ho lakSmI hI kamalarUpI gharako chor3akara bar3I utkaNThAse usake pAsa
AyI ho aura usake caraNoM meM netra gar3Akara khar3I ho  //  /  152 || apUrva
puruSa ke dekhanese utpanna lajjAke kAraNa usakA zarIra nocekI ora jhuka rahA
thA tathA bhayasahita nikalate hue zvAsocchvAsase usake stana kampita ho rahe
the || 153 || vaha apane lAvaNyase samIpameM par3e pallavoMko lipta kara rahI
thI tathA zvAsocchvAsakI sugandhise AkRSTa madonmatta bhramaroMke samUha vanako
Akulita kara rahI thI || 154 || vaha atyadhika saukumArya ke kAraNa itanI adhika
nIce ko jhuka rahI thI ki yauvana Darate-Darate hI usakA AliMgana kara rahA thA
/  kekasI kyA thI mAno arrant parama sRSTi thI || 155 || samasta saMsAra
sambandhI Azcarya ikaTThA karaneke lie hI mAno 1. puSpAntakaM ma  /  2.
madyonAdbhAvinIM ka. kha. ja. ( mandodyotodbhAvinIm )  /  3. sutAM ma  /  4.
vAsasAm ma.  /  5. vilapantIM ma  /  6 -nantikIgatAn ma.  /

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
150 In the Padma Purana, she appeared as if Vidya herself had taken a physical
form, subdued by the great austerity of RatnaÅrava, and radiant with brilliance.
||157|| With loving words, RatnaÅrava, compassionate by nature, and especially
kind to women, and even more so to young girls, asked, "O child, whose daughter
are you? And why are you standing alone in this great forest, like a deer
separated from its herd?" ||158-159|| "O one with virtuous aspirations, what are
the letters of your name?" RatnaÅrava asked Kekasi. This was appropriate, for
even among the virtuous, there is partiality towards the noble. ||160|| With a
voice choked with emotion, and possessing infinite sweetness, capable of
stealing hearts, Kekasi replied, "I am the daughter of King VyomÄbindhu, born
from the body of Mandavati. My name is Kekasi, and I have come to serve you, as
instructed by my father." ||161-162|| At that very moment, the Vidya named
Manasastambhini, possessing great power, became manifest to RatnaÅrava. ||163||
Then, by the power of that Vidya, in that very forest, RatnaÅrava instantly
established a city named PushpÄntaka. ||164|| Taking Kekasi as his wife
according to the proper rites, he enjoyed the pleasures of the city, fulfilling
all his desires. ||164-165|| Between them, there arose an unparalleled love,
such that they could not bear even a moment's separation. ||166|| If Kekasi was
out of sight of RatnaÅrava's eyes, even for a moment, he would think she was
dead. And if Kekasi did not see him for a moment, she would become pale, her
facial radiance fading. Such was her tender heart. ||167|| RatnaÅrava's eyes
were always fixed on Kekasi's moon-like face, or rather, Kekasi was like a bond
for all of RatnaÅrava's senses. ||168|| Their bond was based on unparalleled
beauty, youth, wealth, the power of knowledge, and the virtue they had
accumulated in the past. ||169|| When she walked, she walked with him; when she
stood, she stood with him. Like a shadow, she followed her husband everywhere.
||170|| Karma had created her beauty, gathering the beauty of all women in the
three worlds. ||156|| She, Kekasi, seemed as if Vidya herself had taken a
physical form, adorned with the brilliance of a gem, subdued by the great
austerity of RatnaÅrava. ||157||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 150 padmapurANe zarIreNeva saMyuktAM sAkSAdvidyAmupAgatAm  /  vazIkRtAmudAreNa
tapasA kAntizAlinIm  // 157 //  papraccha priyayA vAcA karuNAvAn svamAvataH  /
pramadAsu vizeSeNa kanyakAsu tato'dhikam  // 15 //  kasyAsi duhitA bAle kimartha
vA mahAvane  /  ekAkinI mRgIvAsmin yUthAd bhraSTAvatiSThase  // 159 //  ke vA
bhajanti te varNA nAma puNyamanorathe  /  pakSapAto bhavatyeva yoginAmapi sajane
// 16 //  tasmai sAkathayad vAcA gadgadatvamupetayA  /  dadhatyAtyantamAdhurya
cetazcoraNadakSayA  // 16 //  utpannA mandavatyaGge vyomabindorahaM sutA  /
kekasIti bhavatsevAM kartuM pitrA nirUpitA  // 162 //  tatraiva samaye tasya
siddhA vidyA mahaujasaH  /  mAnasastambhinI nAmnA kSaNadarzitavigrahA  // 163 //
tato vidyAprabhAveNa tasminneva mahAvane  /  puraM puSpAntakaM nAma kSaNAttena
nivezitam  // 16 //  kRtvA pANigRhItAM ca kekasI vidhinA ttH| reme tatra pure
prApya bhogAn mAnasakalpitAn  // 165 //  babhUva ca tayoH prItirjAyA
patyoranuttarA  /  kSaNArddhamapi no sehe viyoga yA sucetasoH  // 166 //
mRtAmiva sa tAM mene locanAgocarasthitAm  /  nimeSAdarzanAnmlAniM vrajantIM
mRdumAnasAm  // 167 //  vaktracandre'kSiNI tasyAstasya nityaM vyavasthite  /
sarveSAM vA hRSIkANAM sA babhUvAsya bandhanam  // 168 //  'ananyajena rUpeNa
yauvanena dhanazriyA  /  vidyAbalena dharmaNa saktirAsItparaM tayoH  // 169 /  /
vrajantI vrajyayA yukne tiSThantI sthitimAgate  /  chAyeva sAbhavat
patyAvanuvartanakAriNI  // 170 //  tribhuvanasambandhI samasta striyoMkA
saundarya ekatrita kara karmoMne usakI racanA kI thI  // 156 /  /  vaha kekasI
aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno ratnazravAke utkRSTa tapase vazIbhUta huI kAntise
suzobhita sAkSAt vidyA hI zarIra dharakara sAmane khar3I ho  // 157 //
ratnazravA svabhAvase hI dayAlu thA aura vizeSakara striyoMpara tathA unase bhI
adhika kanyAoMpara adhika dayAlu thA ataH usane priya vacanoMse pUchA ki he bAle
! tU kisakI lar3akI hai ? aura isa mahAvanameM jhuNDase bichur3I hariNIke samAna
kisa lie khar3I hai ?  // 158-159|| he puNya manorathe ! kauna-se akSara tere
nAmako prApta haiM ? ratnazravAne kekasIse aisA pUchA so ucita hI thA kyoMki
sajjanake Upara sAdhuoMkA bhI pakSapAta ho hI jAtA hai  // 160 /  isake
uttarameM ananta mAdhuryako dhAraNa karanevAlI evaM cittake curAne meM samartha
gadgada vANIse kekasIne kahA ki maiM mandavatIke zarIrase utpanna rAjA
vyomabindukI putrI hU~, kekasI merA nAma hai aura pitAkI preraNAse ApakI sevA
karaneke lie AyI hU~  // 161-162 //  usI samaya mahAtejasvI ratnazravAko
mAnasaMstambhinI nAmakI vidyA siddha ho gayI so usa vidyAne usI samaya apanA
zarIra prakaTa kara dikhAyA  // 163 /  /  tadanantara usa vidyAke prabhAvase
usane usI vanameM tatkSaNa hI puSpAntaka nAmakA nagara basAyA  // 164 /  /  aura
kekasIko vidhipUrvaka apanI strI banAkara usake sAtha manacAhe bhoga bhogatA huA
vaha usa nagarameM krIr3A karane lagA  // 164-165 /  /  zobhanIya hRdayako
dhAraNa karanevAle una donoM dampatiyoMmeM aisI anupama prIti utpanna huI ki
vaha Adhe kSaNake lie bhI unakA viyoga sahana nahIM kara sakatI thI  // 166 /  /
yadi kekasI kSaNa-bharake lie bhI ratnazravAke netroMke ojhala hotI thI to vaha
use aisA mAnane lagatA thA mAno mara ho gayI ho| aura kekasI bhI yadi use pala-
bharake lie nahIM dekhatI thI to mlAniko prApta ho jAtI thI-usakI mukhako kAnti
murajhA jAtI thii| komala cita to usakA thA hI  // 167 /  ratnazravAke netra
sadA kekasIke mukhacandrapara hI gar3e rahate the athavA yoM kahanA cAhie ki
kekasI, ratnazravAkI samasta indriyoMkA mAno bandhana hI thI  // 168 /  /
anupama rUpa, yauvana, dhana-sampadA, vidyAbala aura pUrvopArjita dharmake 1.
tvmihaavnau.| 2. puNyamanorathaiH  /  3. darzanamlAni ma.  /  4.
ananyajakarUpeNa ma.  /  5. vrajayA ma., k.|

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Chapter  Then the queen KekasÄ« lay on a magnificent bed that was
expansive, beautiful, and as white as the ocean of milk, illuminated by the
light of jewel lamps, soft as silken fabric. (171) Upon it was a comfortable
mattress laid out, adorned with colorful pillows, surrounded by humming bees
awakened by the fragrance of her breath. (172) Around her were women standing
guard, viewing her with sleepless eyes; by her side was a small pedestal made of
ivory, such was the grandeur of the bed on which KekasÄ«, while contemplating the
qualities of her husband who binds the mind, and desiring the birth of a son,
joyfully lay sleeping. (173-174)  At that time, while being still and
meditative, the attentive friends of hers, scrutinizing her body, saw distinct
and wondrous dreams produced by KekasÄ«. (175) Then, following the sound of
conch-like morning horns and the soothing voices of the bards, KekasÄ« awoke to
consciousness. (176) After engaging in auspicious activities and adopting a
favorable and superior demeanor, captivating her mind, she approached her
husband with her friends. (177) There, with folded hands, displaying gestures,
she sat next to her husband on an elegantly draped seat and recounted her
dreams. (178)  She said, "O Lord! Last night during the last watch of the night,
I beheld three dreams; please rejoice upon hearing them." (179) In the first
dream, I saw a lion, radiant with great splendor, descending from the sky and
entering my body through the mouth. (180) In the second dream, I beheld the sun
in the mid-sky, removing the dark gloom, resembling a herd of elephants with its
rays. (181) In the third dream, I saw a charming moonlight dispeller standing
before us, milking darkness with its rays. (182) Upon seeing these dreams, my
mind was captivated.  (Note: The translation retains the original structure and
boldness of the Sanskrit words for context, while adapting the prose for clarity
in English.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptamaM parva athAsau vipule kAnte kSIrAkUpArapANDure  /  ratnadIpakRtAloke
dukUlapaTakomale  // 171 //  yatheSTegalake nyastanAnAvarNopadhAnake  /
niHzvAsAmodanirNidvirephasamupAsite  // 172 //  paritaH
sthitayAmastrIvinidranayanekSite  /  tanudanta vinirmANapaTTake zayanottame  //
173 //  cintayantI guNAn patyumanobandhanakAriNaH  /  vAJchantI ca sutotpattiM
sukhaM nindrAmupAgatA  // 17 //  IkSAMcakre parAn svapnAn mahAvismayakAriNaH  /
avyaktacalanAdhyAyisakhIvIkSitavigrahA  // 175 //  tataH prabhAtatUryeNa
zaGkhazabdAnukAriNA  /  mAgadhAnAM ca vANIbhiH suprabodhanamAgatA  // 176 //
kRtamaGgalakAryArthyaM nepathyaM dadhatI zubham  /  sakhIbhiranvitAgacchan
manojJA bharturantikam  // 177 //  AsInA cAJjaliM kRtvA patyuH pAveM suvibhrmaa|
bhadrAsaneM'zukacchanne kramAt svapnAnnyavedayat  // 178 //  adya rAtrau mayA
yAme carame nAtha vIkSitAH  /  trayaH svapnAH zrutau teSAM prasAdaM kartumarhasi
// 179 //  bRhadvandaM gajendrANAM dhvaMsayan paramaujasA  /  kukSimAsyena me
siMhaH praviSTo nabhasastalAt  // 180 //  vidrAvayan mayUkhaizca dhvAntaM
gajakulAsitam  /  sthito vihAyaso madhyAdaGke kamalabAndhavaH  // 181 //
kurvanmanoharA lIloM dUrayan timiraM karaiH  /  akhaNDamaNDalo dRSTaH puraH
kumudanandanaH  // 182 //  dRSTamAtreSu caiteSu vismayAkrAntamAnasA  /
prabhAtatUryanAdena gatAhaM vItanidratAm  //  183 //  kAraNa una donoMmeM
paraspara parama Asakti thI  // 169|| jaba ratnazravA calatA thA taba kekasI bhI
calane lagatI thI aura jaba ratnazravA baiThatA thA to kekasI bhI baiTha jAtI
thii| isa taraha vaha chAyAke samAna patikI anugAminI thI  // 170 //
athAnantara-eka dina rAnI kekasI ratnoMke mahala meM aisI zayyApara par3I thI ki
jo vizAla thI, sundara thI, kSIrasamadrake samAna sapheda thI, ratnoMke
dIpakoMkA jisapara prakAza phaila rahA thA. jo rezamI vastrase komala thI,  //
171 /  jisapara yatheSTa gaddA bichA huA thA, raMgabiraMgI takiyA~ rakhI huI
thI, jisake Asa-pAsa zvAsocchvAsakI sugandhise jAgarUka bhauMre ma~DarA rahe the
/  / 172 /  /  cAroM ora paharepara khar3I striyA~ jise nidrArahita netroMse
dekha rahI thIM, aura jisake samIpa hI hAthI-dA~takI banI choTI-sI caukI rakhI
huI thI aisI uttama zayyApara kekasI manakA bandhana karanevAle patike guNoMkA
cintavana karatI aura putrotsattikI icchA rakhatI huI sukhase so rahI thI  //
173-174 /  /  usI samaya sthira hokara dhyAna karanevAlI arthAt sUkSma dekha-
rekha rakhanevAlI sakhiyA~ jisake zarIrakA nirIkSaNa kara rahI thIM aisI
kekasIne mahAAzcarya utpanna karanevAle utkRSTa svapna dekhe ||175 /  /
tadanantara zaMkhoMke zabdakA anukaraNa karanevAlI prAtaHkAlIna turahIkI madhura
dhvani aura cAraNoMkI ramya vANIse kekasI prabodhako prApta huI  // 176 /  /  so
maMgala kArya karaneke anantara zubha tathA zreSTha nepathyako dhAraNa kara
manako haraNa karatI huI, sakhiyoMke sAtha patike samIpa pahu~cI  // 177 //
vahA~ hAtha jor3a, hAva-bhAva dikhAtI huI, patike samIpa, uttama vastrase
AcchAdita sophApara baiThakara usane svapna dekhanekI bAta kahI  /  / 178 //
usane kahA ki he nAtha ! Aja rAtrike pichale pahara maiMne tIna svapna dekhe
haiM so unheM sunakara prasannatA kIjie  // 179 /  /  pahale svapnameM maiMne
dekhA hai ne utkRSTa tejase hAthiyoMke baDe bhArI jhaNDako vidhvasta karatA haA
eka siMha AkAzatalase nIce utarakara mukha-dvArase mere udarameM praviSTa huA
hai  // 180 //  dUsare svapna meM dekhA hai ki kiraNoMse hAthiyoMke samUhake
samAna kAle andhakArako dUra haTAtA huA sUrya AkAzake madhya bhAgameM sthita hai
// 181 /  /  aura tIsare svapnameM dekhA hai ki manohara lIlAko karatA aura
kiraNose andhakArako dUra haTAtA huA pUrNa candramA hamAre sAmane khar3A hai  //
182 /  /  ina svapnoMke dikhate hI merA mana 1. yatheSTadehavinyasta- ma.  /  2.
samupAsate ma.  /  3. yAmazrI m.| 4. tatra danta ma.  /  5. avyaktacalanAdAyi
ma.  /  avyaktavalanAdAyi k.| 6. sApi prabodha ma.  /

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
152 "O Lord, what is this? You are the one who should know this now. For in
matters concerning women, the husband's mind is the authority." (184) Then,
RatnaÅrava, skilled in the eightfold auspicious signs and proficient in the
Jina's teachings, explained the meaning of the dream in detail with joy. (185)
"O Devi, you will have three sons whose fame will spread throughout the three
worlds. They will be great heroes and bring prosperity to your lineage." (186)
"Due to their good deeds accumulated in past lives, they will perform noble
actions, be equal to the gods, and even be beloved by them." (187) "Their
radiance will eclipse the moon, their brilliance will outshine the sun, their
depth will surpass the oceans, and their steadfastness will rival the
mountains." (188) "After enjoying the fruits of their virtuous deeds in heaven,
they will experience the ripening of the remaining karma. They will be
invincible, even to the gods." (189) "They will be like clouds that fulfill
desires through their generosity, they will be as wealthy as emperors, and they
will captivate the hearts and eyes of the most beautiful women." (190) "Their
chests will be adorned with the auspicious ÅrÄ«vatsa mark, and the mere mention
of their names will destroy powerful enemies." (191) "The first of these sons
will be a great benefactor to the world. He will be deeply devoted to acts of
courage and will be like the moon, closing the lotus of his enemies." (192) "He
will be so passionate about war that when he goes to battle, his entire body
will be covered in standing hairs, like thorns." (193) "He will be a storehouse
of terrible deeds, and once he has set his mind on something, even Indra cannot
stop him." (194) Hearing these words, Keksi, filled with immense joy, smiled
softly and, looking at her husband's face, spoke with humility: "O Lord, our
minds are purified by the taste of the nectar of the Jina's teachings. How then
can this son, born to us, be a cruel doer?" (195-196) "Surely, our marrow has
been refined by the words of the Jina. How can a son of ours be born who is like
poison? Does poison ever sprout from the vine of nectar?" (197) RatnaÅrava
replied: "My dear, O beautiful-faced one, listen. Karma is the cause of this,
not us. We are not the agents of the action." (198)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 152 padmapurANe kimetaditi nAtha tvaM jJAtumarhasi sAMpratam  /  jJAtavyeSu hi
nArINAM pramANaM priyamAnasam  // 184 //  tato'STAGganimittajJaH kuzalo
jinazAsane  /  ratnazravAH pramodena svapnArthAn vyavRNot kramAt  // 185 //
utpatsyante trayaH putrAstrijagadgatakIrtayaH  /  tava devi mahAsattvAH
kulavRddhividhAyinaH  // 186 //  bhavAntaranibaddhana sukRtenottamakriyAH  /
vallabhatvaM prapatsyante sureSvapi suraiH samAH  // 187 //  kAntyutsAritatArezA
diiptyutsaaritbhaaskraaH| gAmbhIryajitatoyezAH sthairyotsAritabhUdharAH  // 188
//  cArukarmaphalaM bhuktvA svarga zeSasya karmaNaH  /  paripAkamavApsyanti
surairapyaparAjitAH  // 189 //  dAjena kAmajaladAzcakravartisamarddhayaH  /
varasImantinIcetolocanAlImalimlucAH  // 190 //
zrIvatsalakSaNAtyantarAjitottuGgavakSasaH  /
nAmamAtrazrutidhvastamahAsAdhanazatravaH  // 191 //  bhavitA prathamasteSAM
nitAntaM jagate hitaH  /  sAhasaikarasAsaktaH zatrapadmakSapAkaraH  // 192 //
saMgrAma gamanAttasya bhaviSyati samantataH  /  zarIraM nicitaM
cAroccaromAJcakaNTakaiH  // 193 //  nidhAnaM karmaNAmeSa dAruNAnAM bhaviSyati  /
vastunyUrIkRte tasya na zakro'pi nivartakaH  // 194 //  kRtvA smitaM tato devI
paramapramadAJcitA  /  bhatarAnanamAlokya vinayAdityabhASata  /  / 195 /  /
arhanmatAmRtAsvAdasucitAbhyAM kathaM prabho  /  AvAbhyAM prApya janmAyaM
krUrakarmA bhaviSyati  // 196 //  Avayonana majApi jinavAkyena bhAvitA  /
mavedamRtavallIto viSasya prasavaH katham  // 197 /  /  pratyuvAca sa tAmevaM
priye zRNu varAnane  /  karmANi kAraNaM tasya na vayaM kRtyavastuni  // 198 //
Azcaryase bhara gayA aura usI samaya prAtaHkAlIna turahIkI dhvanise merI nidrA
TUTa gayI  /  / 183|| he nAtha ! yaha kyA hai ? ise Apa hI jAnaneke yogya haiM
kyoMki striyoMke jAnane yogya kAryoM meM patikA mana hI pramANabhUta hai  /  /
184 //  tadanantara aSTAMga nimittake jAnakAra evaM jina-zAsanameM kuzala
ratnazravAne bar3e harSase kramapUrvaka svapnoMkA phala kahA  /  / 185 /  /
unhoMne kahA ki he devi ! tumhAre tIna putra hoNge| aise putra ki jinakI kIrti
tInoM lokoMmeM vyApta hogI, jo mahAparAkramake dhArI tathA kulakI vRddhi
karanevAle hoMge  // 186 /  /  ve tInoM hI putra pUrva bhavameM saMcita
puNyakarmase uttama kArya karanevAle hoMge, devoMke samAna hoMge aura devoMke
bhI prItipAtra hoMge  /  / 187 /  /  ve apanI kAntise candramAko dUra haTAveMge,
tejase sUryako dUra bhagAveMge aura sthiratAse parvatako ThakarAveMge  // 188 //
svargameM puNya karmakA phala bhoganeke bAda jo kucha karma zeSa bacA hai aba
usakA phala bhogeNge| ve itane balavAn hoMge ki deva bhI unheM parAjita nahIM
kara sakeMge  // 189 //  ve dAnake dvArA manorathako pUrNa karanevAle megha
hoMge, cakravartiyoMke samAna Rddhike dhAraka hoMge, aura zreSTha striyoMke mana
tathA netroMko curAnevAle hoMge  // 190 //  unakA unnata vakSaHsthala zrIvatsa
cihnase atyanta suzobhita hogA, aura unakA nAma sunate hI bar3I-bar3I senAoMke
adhipati zatru naSTa ho jAveMge  // 191 //  una tInoM putroMmeM prathama putra
jagatkA atyanta hitakArI hogA, sAhasake kAryameM vaha bar3e premase Asakta [
zatrurUpI kamaloMko nimIlita karane ke lie candramAke samAna hogA  // 192 //
vaha yuddhakA itanA premI hogA ki yuddha meM jAte hI usakA sArA zarIra khar3e
hue romAMcarUpI kaMTakoMse vyApta ho jAvegA  /  / 193 /  /  vaha ghora
bhayaMkara kAryoMkA bhANDAra hogA tathA jisa kAryako svIkRta kara legA usase use
indra bhI dUra nahIM haTA sakegA  // 194|| patike aise vacana suna parama
pramodako prApta huI kekasI, manda hAsakara tathA patikA mukha dekhakara
vinayase isa prakAra bolI ki he nAtha! hama donoM kA citta to jinamatarUpI
amRtake AsvAdase atyanta nirmala hai phira hama logoMse janma pAkara yaha putra
krUrakarmA kaise hogA ?  // 195-196 /  /  nizcayase hama donoMkI majjA bhI
jinendra bhagavAnke vacanoMse saMskArita hai phira hamase aise putrakA janma
kaise hogA ? kyA kahIM amRtakI velase viSakI bhI utpatti hotI hai ?  // 197 /  /
isake uttarameM rAjA ratnazravAne kahA ki he priye ! he utkRSTamukhi ! 1.
sthairyAtsAdita m.| 2. nizcitaM m.| 3. ca ma.  /  ,

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Seventh Chapter 153 Karma is the root cause of the nature of karma, while
parents are merely the instruments in the plan of the world. ||199|| His two
younger brothers will be experts in the path of the Jinas, filled with a
multitude of virtues, possessors of excellent conduct, and oceans of good
character. ||200|| Fearing a fall in the world, they will be firmly attached to
virtuous deeds, devoted to truthful speech, and compassionate to all beings.
||201|| O gentle-voiced and compassionate one! The good karma accumulated by
those two sons is the cause of their nature, for the fruit is always equal to
the cause. ||202|| Having said this, the parents, ever vigilant, performed the
worship of the Jina with a joyful heart. ||203|| Then, when the first child was
in the womb, the mother's conduct became extremely cruel. She desired to conquer
the group of men by force. She wished to place her foot on the heads of her
enemies, who were smeared with blood and mud and were writhing in pain.
||204-205|| She even intended to command the king of the gods, Indra. Her mouth
roared without any reason. ||206|| Her body became hard, she toiled excessively
in conquering her enemies, her voice was harsh and grating, and her glances were
sharp and silent. ||207|| Even though a mirror was present, she looked at the
sword, and even in bowing to her teachers, her head bent with great difficulty.
||208|| Then, when the time was full, the child emerged from the mother's womb,
shaking the seats of his enemies. What creature was as cruel as he in that
entire time? ||209|| The radiance of the child, difficult to look at like the
sun, caused the eyes of the people working in the delivery room to become as if
covered by a dense forest. ||210|| Because of the beating by the spirits, a very
loud sound arose from the drums, and headless bodies danced in the houses of the
enemies, signifying destruction. ||211|| Then, the father held a grand birth
celebration for his son. It was such a celebration that the people were like
madmen, doing whatever they pleased. ||212||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptamaM parva 153 mUlaM hi kAraNaM karmasvarUpaviniyojane  /
nimittamAtramevAsya jagataH pitarau smRtau  /  / 199 //  bhaviSyato'nujAvasya
jinamArgavizAradau  /  guNagrAmasamAkINI suceSTau zIlasAgarau  // 20 //
sudRDhaM sukRte lagnau bhavaskhalanamItitaH  /  satyavAkyaratau
sarvasattvakAruNyakAriNau  // 201 //  tayorapi puropAttaM saumyakarma mRdusvane
/  kAraNaM karuNopete yato hetusamaM phalam  /  / 202 /  /  evamuktvA
jinendrANAM tAbhyAM pUjA pravartitA  /  manasApi
pratItena'prayatAbhyAmahardivama  // 23 //  tato garbhasthite sattve prathame
mAturIhitam  /  babhUva krUramatyantaM haThanirjitapauruSam  // 20 //
abhyavAJchatpadanyAsaM kartuM mUrdhasu vidviSAm  /  raktakardamadigdheSu
parisphuraNakAriSu  // 205 //  AjJAM dAtumabhiprAyaH surarAje'pyajAyata  /
huGkAramukharaM cAsyamantareNApi kAraNam  // 206 //  niSThuratvaM zarIrasya
nirjitazramavattarA  /  kaThorA ghargharA vANI dRSTipAtAH parisphuTAH  // 207 //
darpaNe vidyamAne'pi sAyake'pazyadAnanam  /  kathamapyAnamanmUrddhA gurUNAmapi
vandane  // 20 //  pratipakSAsanAkampaM kurvannatha vinirgtH| saMpUrNa samaye
tasyAH kaH prANI sadAruNaH  // 201 //  prabhayA tasya jAtasya divAkaradurIkSayA
/  parivargasya netraughAH 'suvanasthagitA iva  // 210 //  bhUtaizca tADanAd
bhUto dundubheruddhato dhvaniH  /  kabandhaiH zatrugeheSu kRtamutpAtanartanam
// 211 //  tato janmotsavastasya mahAn pitrA pravartitaH  /  unmattikeva
yatrAsIt prajA svecchAvidhAyinI  // 212 //  www AANAawana isa kAryameM kama hI
kAraNa haiM hama nahIM  // 198 /  /  saMsArake svarUpakI yojanAmeM karma hI mUla
kAraNa haiM mAtA-pitA to nimitta mAtra haiM  // 199 /  /  isake donoM choTe bhAI
jinamArgake paNDita, guNoMke samUhase vyApta, uttama ceSTAoMke dhAraka tathA
zIlake sAgara hoMge  // 200 //  saMsArameM kahIM merA skhalana na ho jAye isa
bhayase ve sadA puNya kAryameM acchI taraha saMlagna raheMge, satya vacana
bolane meM tatpara hoMge aura saba jIvoMpara dayA karanevAle hoMge  // 201 //
he komala zabdoMvAlI tathA dayAse yukta priye ! una donoM putroMkA pUrvopArjita
puNya karma hI unake isa svabhAvakA kAraNa hogA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki kAraNake
samAna hI phala hotA hai  // 202 /  /  aisA kahakara rAta-dina sAvadhAna
rahanevAle mAtA-pitAne prasanna cittase jinendra bhagavAnkI pUjA kI  // 203 /  /
tadanantara jaba garbhameM prathama bAlaka AyA taba mAtAkI ceSTA atyanta kara ho
gyii| vaha haThapUrvaka puruSoMke samUhako jItanekI icchA karane lgii| vaha
cAhane lagI ki maiM khUnakI kIcar3ase lipta tathA chaTapaTAte hue zatruoMke
mastakoMpara paira rakhU  // 204-205 /  /  devarAja-indrake Upara bhI AjJA
calAnekA usakA abhiprAya hone lgaa| binA kAraNa hI isakA mukha huMkArase mukhara
ho uThatA  /  / 206 /  /  usakA zarIra kaThora ho gayA thA, zatruoMko jItanemeM
vaha adhika zrama karatI thI, usakI vANI karkaza tathA gharghara svarase yukta
ho gayI thI, usake dRSTipAta bhI niHzabda honese spaSTa hote the  // 207 /  /
darpaNa rahate hue bhI vaha kRpANameM mukha dekhatI thI aura gurujanoMko
vandanAmeM bhI usakA mastaka kisI taraha bar3I kaThinAIse jhukatA thA  // 208||
tadanantara samaya pUrNa honepara vaha bAlaka zatruoMke Asana kaeNpAtA huA
mAtAke udarase bAhara nikalA arthAt utpanna huA  // 209 /  /  sUryake samAna
kaThinAIse dekhane yogya usa bAlakakI prabhAse prasUti-gRhameM kAma karanevAle
parijanoMke netra aise ho gaye jaise mAno kisI saghana vanase hI AcchAdita ho
gaye hoM  // 210 /  /  bhUtajAtike devoM dvArA tADita honeke kAraNa dundubhi
bAjoMse bahuta bhArI zabda utpanna hone lagA aura zatruoMke gharoMmeM sirarahita
dhar3a utpAtasUcaka nRtya karane lage  // 211 /  /  tadanantara pitAne putrakA
bar3A bhArI janmotsava kiyaa| aisA janmotsava ki jisameM prajA pAgalake samAna
apanI1. prayAtAbhyA- m.| 2. padaM nyAsaM m.| 3. surarAjye'pyajAyata m.| 4.
sudAruNaH m.| 5. saghanasthagitA iva ma.  /  sughanasthagitA iva kha.  /  20

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 154 of the Padma Purana  **Verse 213:** In the womb-like Meru cave,
the child lay smiling, his red feet twitching, his gaze directed upwards.
**Verse 214:** He playfully shook the ground near his bed, shining like the
rising sun.  **Verse 215:** The necklace, given by the Rakshasa king to the
cloud-chariot rider, guarded by a thousand Naga princes, radiating brilliance,
was never worn by anyone else due to fear of the Rakshasas.  **Verse 216:** The
child, without any effort, pulled the necklace with his hand, out of sheer
affection.  **Verse 217:** Seeing the necklace in the child's fist, the mother
was alarmed. She embraced him with great love and kissed his head.  **Verse
218:** The father, seeing the child with the necklace, was filled with wonder.
He thought, "This must be a great man."  **Verse 219:** Who else could play with
this necklace, guarded by Naga kings, unless he possessed extraordinary power?
**Verse 220:** The words spoken by the Charana sage in the past were true, for
the words of the sages never fail.  **Verse 221:** Seeing this wonder, the
mother, free from fear, adorned the child with the necklace. The necklace, with
its cluster of rays, illuminated the ten directions.  **Verse 222:** The child
was named Dashaanan (Ten-faced) because the large, clear gems in the necklace
reflected nine additional faces, besides the real one.  **Verse 223:** After
Dashaanan, Bhanukarna was born. His cheeks were so beautiful that it seemed as
if the sun itself was adorned on his ears.  **Verse 224:** Then, Chandranakha,
whose face was like the full moon, was born. Her nails, shining like the rising
half-moon, illuminated all directions.  **Verse 225:** After Chandranakha,
Vibhishana was born. He was gentle and virtuous, and his very birth instilled
fear in the wicked.  **Verse 226:** Vibhishana seemed like the embodiment of
Dharma itself, and his fame, born of his virtues, remains pure in the world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 154 padmapurANe atha meruguhAkAre tasmin sUtigRhodare  /  zayane
sasmitastiSThan raktapAdatalazcalaH  // 213 //  uttAnaH kampayan bhUmi lIlayA
zayanAntikAm  /  sadyaH samutthitAdityamaNDalopamadarzanaH  // 214 //  dattaM
rAkSasanAthena meghavAhanarUDhaye  /  purA nAgasahasreNa rakSitaM
prasphuraskaram  // 215 //  pinaddhaM rakSasAM bhItyA na kencidihaantre| AdareNa
vinA hAraM kareNAkarSadarbhakaH  // 216 //  hAramuSTiM tato bAlaM dRSTvA mAtA
sasaMbhramA  /  cakArAGke mahAsnehAt samAjaghau ca mUrdhani  // 217 //  dRSTvA
pitA ca taM bAlaM sahAraM paramAdabhutam  /  mahAneSa naraH ko'pi bhaviteti
vyacintayat  // 218 //  nAgendrakRtarakSeNa hAreNa rmte'munaa| ko'nyathA yasya
no zaktirbhaviSyati janAtigA  // 219 //  cAraNena samAdiSTaM sAdhunA yadvacaH
purA  /  idaM tadvitathaM naiva jAyate yatibhASitam  // 220 //  dRSTAzcarya sa
hAro'sya jananyA bhItimuktayA  /  pinaddho mAsayannAzA daza jAlena rociSAm  //
221 //  sthUlasvaccheSu ratneSu navAnyAni mukhAni yat  /  hAre dRSTAni yAto'sau
taddazAnanasaMjJitAm  // 222 //  bhAnukarNastato jAtaH kAle'tIte kiyatyapi  /
yasya bhAnuriva nyastaH karNayorgaNDazobhayA  // 223 //  tatazcandranakhA jAtA
pUrNacandrasamAnanA  /  udyadarddhazazAGkAbhanakhabhAsitadiGamukhA  // 224 //
tato vibhISaNo jAtaH kRtaM yena vibhISaNam  /  jAtamAtreNa pApAnAM saumyAkAreNa
sAdhunA  // 225 //  dehavattvaM jagAmAsau sAkSAddharma ivottamaH  /  adyApi
guNajA yasya kIrtirjagati nirmalA  // 226 //  apanI icchAke anusAra vibhinna
prakArake kArya karatI thI  // 212 //  athAnantara jisake pairake talue lAla-
lAla the aisA vaha bAlaka meruparvatakI guhAke samAna AkAravAle prasUtikAgRhameM
zayyAke Upara manda-manda ha~satA huA par3A thaa| hAtha-paira hilAnese caMcala
thA, citta arthAt UparakI ora mukha kara par3A thA, apanI lIlAse zayyAkI
samIpavartI bhUmiko kampita kara rahA thA, aura tatkAla udita hue sUryamaNDalake
samAna dedIpyamAna thA  // 213214 /  /  bahuta pahale meghavAhanake lie
rAkSasoMke indra bhImane jo hAra diyA thA, hajAra nAgakumAra jisakI rakSA karate
the, jisakI kiraNeM saba ora phaila rahI thIM aura rAkSasoMke bhayase isa
antarAlameM jise kisIne nahIM pahanA thA aise hArako usa bAlakane anAyAsa hI
hAthase khIMca liyA  // 215-216 /  /  bAlakako muTThI meM hAra liye dekha mAtA
ghabar3A gyii| usane bar3e snehase use uThAkara godameM le liyA aura zIghra hI
usakA mastaka saMgha liyA  // 217|| pitAne bhI usa bAlakako hAra liye bar3e
Azcaryase dekhA aura vicAra kiyA ki yaha avazya hI koI mahApuruSa hogA  // 218
//  jisakI zakti lokottara nahIM hogI aisA kauna puruSa nAgendroMke dvArA
surakSita isa hArake sAtha krIr3A kara sakatA hai  /  / 219|| cAraNaRddhidhArI
munirAjane pahale jo vacana kahe the ve yahI the kyoMki muniyoMkA bhASaNa kadApi
mithyA nahIM hotA  // 220 /  /  yaha Azcarya dekha mAtAne nirbhaya hokara vaha
hAra usa bAlakako pahanA diyaa| usa samaya vaha hAra apanI kiraNoMke samUhase
dasoM dizAoMko prakAzamAna kara rahA thA  // 221 /  /  usa hArameM jo
bar3e-bar3e svaccha ratna lage hue the unameM asalI mukhake sivAya nau mukha
aura bhI pratibimbita ho rahe the isalie usa bAlakakA dazAnana nAma rakhA gayA
// 222 //  dazAnanake bAda kitanA hI samaya bIta jAnepara bhAnukarNa utpanna
huaa| bhAnukarNake kapola itane sundara the ki unase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno
usake kAnoMmeM bhAnu arthAt sUrya hI pahanA rakhA ho  // 223 /  /  bhAnukarNake
bAda candranakhA nAmA putrI utpanna huii| usakA mukha pUrNa candramAke samAna
thA aura ugate hue ardhacandramAke samAna sundara nakhoMkI kAntise usane samasta
dizAoM ko prakAzita kara diyA thA  // 224 //  candranakhAke bAda vibhISaNa huaa|
usakA AkAra saumya thA tathA vaha sAdhu prakRtikA thaa| usane utpanna hote hI
pApI logoMmeM bhaya utpanna kara diyA thA  // 225 //  vibhISaNa aisA jAna
par3atA thA mAno sAkSAt utkRSTa dharma hI zarIravattAko prApta huA .

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Seventh Chapter  Even the playful activities of the young Dashagriva were
terrifying, while the playful activities of his two younger brothers brought joy
even to his enemies. || 227 || Among her brothers, the beautiful Chandra-nakha
shone like the evening twilight, adorned with excellent deeds, amidst the sun
and moon. || 228 || Then, the young Dashagriva, adorned with a tuft of hair, sat
in his mother's lap, spreading moonlight with the rays of his teeth, as it were,
in all ten directions. At that time, Vaishravana was going somewhere in the sky.
He was illuminating the directions with his brilliance, adorned with a group of
Vidyadharas, endowed with glory and power, and surrounded by those elephant-like
clouds that were shining with lightning-like garlands, releasing streams of
intoxicating water, and whose ears seemed like conch shells hanging from the
sky. Vaishravana was making the group of directions resound with the great sound
of his trumpet, which deafened the ears. He was the bearer of great power, and
with his huge army, he seemed to be swallowing and releasing the sky in front of
him. Dashagriva looked at him with a serious gaze. || 229 - 233 || Dashagriva,
being playful due to his childhood, saw the glory of Vaishravana and, laughing,
asked his mother, "O Mother! Who is this, going from here, considering the whole
world as grass, surrounded by a huge army?" || 234 - 235 || Then his mother said
to him, "This is your maternal uncle's son. He has mastered many arts, is
endowed with great wealth, is famous in the world, is endowed with great wealth,
and, like a second sun, makes enemies tremble as he wanders the world." || 236 -
237 || Indra, the Vidyadhara, killed your grandfather's brother, Mali, in
battle, and gave Lanka, which had been taken away from your father, to him, so
he protects Lanka. || 238 || For the sake of this Lanka, your father thinks of
hundreds of desires, and neither finds peace in the day nor sleep at night. ||
239 || O son! I am also consumed by this thought, and for a man, death is better
than the loss of his home. || 240 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptamaM pavaM bAlakrIDApi bhImAbhUddazagrIvasya bhAsvataH  /  kanIyasostu
'sAnandaM vidadhe vidviSAmapi  //  227 //  zuzubhe bhrAtRmadhye sA kanyA
sundaravigrahA  /  divasArkazazAGkAnAM madhye saMdhyeva satkriyA  // 228 //
mAturaGke sthito'thAsau ghRtacUDaH kumArakaH  /  dazAnano dazAzAnAM kurvan
jyotsnAM dvijatviSA  // 229 //  namasA prasthitaM kvApi dyotayantaM dizastviSA
/  yuktaM khecaracakreNa vibhUtibalazAlinA  // 230|| kakSA
vidyutkRtodyatairmadadhArAvisarjimiH  /  veSTitaM dantijImUtaiH karNazaGkha
balAhakaiH  // 231 //  mahatA sUryanAdena zrutivAdhiryakAriNA  /  kurvANaM
mukharaM cakraM dizAmuruparAkramam  //  232 //  grasitveva vimuJcantaM balena
purato nabhaH  /  dhIro vaizravaNaM vIkSAMcakre dRSTyA pragalmayA  // 233 //
mahimAnaM ca dRSTvAsya papraccheti sa mAtaram  /  nighnazcapalabhAvasya
bAlabhAvena sasmitaH ||234|| amba ko'yamito yAti manyamAno nijaujasA  /
jagantRNamivAzeSaM balena mahatA vRtaH  //  235 //  tataH sAkathayattasya
mAtRSvasIya eSa te  /  siddhavidyaH zriyA yukto mahatyA lokakIrtitaH  //  236 //
zatrUNAM janayan kampaM paryaTatyeSa viSTapam  /  mahAvibhavasaMpanno dvitIya
iva bhAskaraH ||237 //  bhavaskulamAyAtAM tavodvAsya pitAmaham  /  ayaM pAti
purIM laGkAM dattAmindreNa vairiNA  //  238  //  manorathazatAneSa janakastava
cintayan  /  tadarthaM na divA nidrAM na ca naktamavApnute ||239 || ahamapyanayA
putra cintayA zoSabhAgatA  /  avAptaM maraNaM puMsAM svasthAnabhraMzato varam ||
240  //  155 ho  /  usake guNoMse utpanna usako nirmala kIrti Aja bhI saMsAra
meM sarvatra chAyI huI hai || 226 || tejasvI dazAnanakI bAlakrIr3A bhI
bhayaMkara hotI thI jabaki usake donoM choTe bhAiyoMkI bAlakrIr3A zatruoM ko bhI
Ananda pahu~cAtI thI ||227|| bhAiyoMke bIca sundara zarIrako dhAraNa karanevAlI
kanyA candranakhA, aisI suzobhita hotI thI mAno dina sUrya aura candramAke bIca
uttama kriyAoMse yukta sandhyA hI ho || 228  //  athAnantara coTIko dhAraNa
karanevAlA dazAnana eka dina mAtAkI goda meM baiThA huA apane dA~toMkI kiraNoMse
mAno dazoM dizAoM meM cAMdanI phailA rahA thA, usI samaya vaizravaNa AkAza mArga
se kahIM jA rahA thA  /  vaha apanI kAntise dizAoMko prakAzamAna kara rahA thA,
vaibhava aura parAkrama se suzobhita vidyAdharoMke samUhase yukta thA tathA una
hAthIrUpI meghoMse ghirA thA jo ki mAlArUpI bijalI ke dvArA prakAza kara rahe
the, madarUpI jalakI dhArAko chor3a rahe the, aura jinake kAnoMmeM laTakate hue
zaMkha valAkAoM ke samAna jAna par3ate the  /  vaizravaNa kAnoMko baharA
karanevAle turahI ke vizAla zabdase dizAoMke samUhako zabdAyamAna kara rahA thA
/  vizAla parAkramakA dhAraka thA aura apanI bar3I bhArI senAse aisA jAna
par3atA thA mAno sAmaneke AkAzako grasakara chor3a hI rahA ho  /  dazAnanane use
bar3I gambhIra dRSTise dekhA || 229 - 233 || dazAnana lar3akapanake kAraNa
caMcala to thA hI ataH usane vaizravaNakI mahimA dekha ha~sate-ha~sate mAtA se
pUchA ki he mA ! apane pratApase samasta saMsArako tRNake samAna samajhatA huA,
bar3I bhArI senAse ghirA yaha kauna yahA~se jA rahA hai ||234235|| taba mAtA
usase kahane lagI ki yaha terI mausIkA lar3akA hai  /  ise aneka vidyAe~ siddha
huI haiM, yaha bahuta bhArI lakSmI se yukta hai, lokameM prasiddha hai,
mahAvaibhava se sampanna huA dUsare sUrya ke samAna zatruoMko ka~paka~pI utpanna
karatA huA saMsArameM ghUmatA phiratA hai  // 236- 237 /  /  indra vidyAdharane
tere bAbAke bhAI mAlIko yuddhameM mArA aura bAbAko terI kula paramparAse calI
AyI laMkApurIse dUra haTAkara ise dI so usI laMkAkA pAlana karatA hai || 238 ||
isa laMkAke lie tumhAre pitA saikar3oM manorathoMkA cintavana karate hue na
dinameM caina lete haiM na rAtrimeM nIMda || 239 || he putra ! 1. sA krIDA  /
2. dizAM suraparAkramam ma  /  3. vIkSyAJcakre ma  /  4. capalabhAvazca ma.  /

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
156 In the Padma Purana, O son, when will you attain the Lakshmi befitting your
lineage? Seeing whom, our minds will be free from sorrow, like a wound that has
been healed. ||241|| When will I see these two brothers of yours, adorned with
prosperity, roaming freely in the world, free from thorns? ||242|| Hearing his
mother's sorrowful words, Vibhishana, with the sprouts of anger like poison
rising within him, smiled proudly and said, ||243|| "O Mother! Whether he is a
Dhanada or a Deva, what power have you seen in him that makes you lament like
this? ||244|| You are a mother of heroes, yourself a hero, and knower of all
human endeavors. Why then, being such, do you speak like other women? ||245||
Just consider, whose chest is marked with the Srivatsa symbol, who bears a vast
body, whose daily actions are always filled with wonder, who is mighty, and who,
like fire covered with ashes, is capable of burning the entire universe. Has
this Dasananan never entered your mind? ||246-247|| This one, by the power of
his speed born of disrespect, can conquer the mind and shatter the peaks of
Sumeru with the clap of his hands. ||248|| You do not know that his arms are the
paved roads of his prowess, the pillars of the house of the universe, and the
sprouts of the tree of pride. ||249|| Thus praised by his brother Vibhishana, a
knower of virtues and arts, Ravana attained great power, like fire from ghee.
||250|| He said, "Mother, what is the benefit of praising yourself so much? But
I will tell you the truth, listen. ||251|| Even if all the Vidhyadharas, puffed
up with pride in their knowledge, come together in the battlefield, they will
not be enough for even one of my arms. ||252|| Still, the worship of knowledge
is befitting our lineage, therefore, we should not be ashamed to do it. ||253||
Just as the virtuous diligently worship penance, so too, the descendants of the
Vidhyadharas should diligently worship knowledge.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 156 padmapurANe putra lakSmI kadA tu tvaM prApsyasi svakulocitAm  /
vizalyamiva yAM dRSTvA bhaviSyatyAvayormanaH  // 241 //  kadA nu bhrAtarAvetau
vibhUtyA tava saMgatau  /  drakSyAmi vihitacchandau viSTape vItakaNTake  // 242
//  mAturdInavacaH zrutvA kRtvA garvasmitaM tataH  /  vibhISaNo
babhANedamudyatkrodhaviSAGkuraH  /  / 243 /  /  dhanado vA bhavatyeSa devo vA
ko'sya vIkSitaH  /  prabhAvo yena mAtastvaM karoSi paridevanam  // 244 /  /
vIraprasavinI vIrA vijJAtajanaceSTitA  /  evaMvidhA satI kasmAd vadasi tvaM
yathetarA  // 245 /  /  zrIvatsamaNDitorasko 'dhyAyatAtatavigrahaH  /
adbhutaikaresAsaktanityaceSTo mahAbalaH  // 246 /  /
bhasmacchannAgnivadmasmIkatu zakto'khilaM jagat  /  na manogocaraM prApto
dazagrIvaH kimamba te  // 247 /  /  gatyA jayedayaM cittamanAdarasamutthayA  /
taTAni girirAjasya pATayecca capeTayA  // 248 //  rAjamArgoM pratApasya stambhau
bhuvanavezmanaH  /  aGkurau darpavRkSasya na jJAtAvasya te bhujau  // 249 /  /
evaMkRtastavo'thAsau bhrAtrA guNakalAvidA  /  tejobahutaraM prApa sarpiSeva
tanUnapAt  // 250 //  jagAda ceti kiM maatraatmno'tiviktthyaa| vadAmi zRNu
yatsatyaM vAkyametadanuttaram  // 25 //  garvitA api vidyAbhiH saMbhaya mama
khecarAH  /  ekasyApi na paryAptA bhujasya raNamUrddhani  // 25 //  kulocitaM
tathApIdaM vidyArAdhanasaMjJakam  /  karma kartavyamasmAmistatkurvANarna
laGghayate  // 253 /  /  kurvantyArAdhanaM yatnAt sAdhavastapaso ythaa|
ArAdhanaM tathA kRtyaM vidyAyAH khagagotrajaiH  // 254 //  maiM bhI isI cintAse
sUkha rahI huuN| apane sthAnase bhraSTa honekI apekSA puruSoMkA maraNa ho jAnA
acchA hai  // 240 /  /  he putra ! tU apane kulake yogya lakSmIko kaba prApta
karegA ? jise dekha hama donoMkA mana zalyarahita-sA ho sake  // 241 /  /  maiM
kaba tere ina bhAiyoMko vibhUtise yukta tathA niSkaNTaka vizva meM svacchanda
vicarate hue dekhUgI ? ||242 /  /  mAtAke dIna vacana sunakara jisake krodharUpI
viSake aMkura utpanna ho rahe the aisA vibhISaNa garvase musakarAtA huA bolA  //
243 /  /  ki he mA! yaha dhanada ho cAhe deva ho, tumane isakA aisA kauna-sA
prabhAva dekhA ki jisase tuma isa prakAra vilApa kara rahI ho  // 244 /  /  tuma
to vIraprasU ho, svayaM vIra ho, aura manuSyoMkI samasta ceSTAoMko jAnanevAlI ho
/  phira aisI hokara bhI anya strIkI taraha aisA kyoM kaha rahI ho  // 245 //
jarA dhyAna to karo ki jisakA vakSaHsthala zrIvatsake cihnase cihnita hai,
vizAla zarIrako dhAraNa karanevAlA hai, jisakI pratidinakI ceSTAe~ eka Azcarya
rasase hI sanI rahatI haiM, jo mahAbalavAn hai aura bhasmase AcchAdita agnike
samAna samasta saMsArako bhasma karane meM samartha hai aisA dazAnana kyA kabhI
tumhAre manameM nahIM AyA ? 246-247|| yaha anAdarase hI utpanna gatike dvArA
manako jIta sakatA hai aura hAthakI capeTAse sumeruke zikhara vidIrNa kara
sakatA hai  /  / 248 /  /  tumheM patA nahIM ki isakI bhujAe~ pratApakI pakkI
sar3aka haiM, saMsArarUpI gharake khambhe haiM, aura ahaMkAra rUpI vRkSake
aMkura haiM  // 249 /  /  isa prakAra guNa aura kalAke jAnakAra vibhISaNa bhAIke
dvArA jisakI prazaMsA kI gayI thI aisA rAvaNa, ghIke dvArA agnike samAna bahuta
adhika pratApako prApta huA  // 250 /  /  usane kahA ki mAtA ! apanI bahuta
prazaMsA karanese kyA lAbha hai ? parantu saca bAta tumase kahatA hU~ so suna
// 251 //  vidyAoMke ahaMkArase phUle yadi sabake saba vidyAdhara milakara
yuddhake maidAnameM AveM to merI eka bhujAke lie bhI paryApta nahIM haiM  /  /
252 /  /  phira bhI vidyAoMkI ArAdhanA karanA yaha hamAre kulake yogya kArya hai
ataH use karate hue hameM lajjita nahIM honA cAhie  // 253 /  /  jisa prakAra
sAdhu bar3e prayatnase tapakI ArAdhanA karate haiM usI prakAra vidyAdharoMke
gotraja puruSoMko bhI bar3e prayatnase vidyAkI ArAdhanA 1. dhyAyitA tatavigraham
ma.  /  2. rasAsikta ma.  /  3. sumacchayA ma.  /  4. agniH  /  5. laGghayate
ka., kha.  /  .

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Seventh Chapter 157 Having said this, Ravana, holding his pride, went out
with his two younger brothers. He was kissed on the head by his parents and
offered salutations to the Siddhas.  ||255|| He received the auspicious rites,
his mind firm in his resolve.  He left the house joyfully, his steps light and
his head bowed in reverence. ||256|| In a moment, he reached and entered the
great forest called Bhima, filled with the roars of cruel creatures with
fearsome fangs. ||257|| The great trees were shaken by the breaths of sleeping
serpents, and the earth trembled under the steps of dancing Vyantaras. ||258||
The dense darkness, impenetrable even to a needle, filled the great caves of
that land.  Time itself seemed to dwell in that fearsome forest. ||259|| Even
the gods, afraid, did not go above it, and it was famous throughout the three
worlds for its terror. ||260|| The mountains there were inaccessible, their
caves filled with darkness, and the strong trees seemed ready to swallow the
world. ||261|| With unwavering minds, they took up the supreme peace, their
souls free from greed, clad in white garments. ||262|| Their faces were as
beautiful as the full moon, adorned with jeweled tiaras.  The three brothers
began their great penance. ||263|| They mastered the eight-syllabled Vidya
called Sarva-Kama-Annada, completing a lakh of repetitions in half a day.
||264|| This Vidya brought them whatever food they desired, so they were free
from the suffering of hunger. ||265|| Then, with pure hearts, they began to
chant the sixteen-syllabled mantra, whose ten thousand crore repetitions are
mentioned in the scriptures. ||266|| Then, the king of Jambudvipa, the Yaksha
called Anaavrita, surrounded by his wives, came to that forest, desiring to
play. ||267|| The three brothers, their souls absorbed in penance, came into the
sight of the Yaksha's wives, who were playing with abandon. ||268||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptamaM parva 157 ityuktvA dhArayanmAnamanujAbhyAM samanvitaH  /  pitRbhyAM
cumbito mUrdhni kRtasiddhanamaskRtiH  // 255 //  prAptamaGgalasaMskAro
nizcayasthiramAnasaH  /  nirgatya mudito gehAdulpapAta namastalam  // 256 //
kSaNAt prAptaM praviSTazca bhImaM nAma mahAvanam  /  daMSTrAkarAlavadanaiH
krUrasatvairninAditam  // 257 //  suptAjagaranizvAsapreGkitodArapAdapam  /
nRtyadvyantarasaMghAtapAdakSobhitabhUtalam  // 25 //  mahAgahvaradezasya
sUcyabhedatamazcayam  /  kAlenaiva svayaM klaptasaMnidhAnaM subhISaNam  // 259
//  yasyopari na gacchanti surAzcApi bhayArditAH  /  yacca bhImatayA prApa
prasiddhiM bhuvanatraye  // 26 //  girayo durgamA yatra dhvAntavyAptaguhAnanAH
/  sArAzca taravo lokaM grasituM prodyatA iva  // 261 //  aminnacetasastatra
gRhItvA zamamuttamam  /  durAzAdUritAtmAno dhavalAmbaradhAriNaH  // 262 //
pUrNendusaumyavadanAH zikhAmaNivirAjitAH  /  tapazcaritumArabdhAstrayo'pi
bhrAtaro mahat  // 263 //  vidyA cASTAkSarA nItA varzatAM japalakSayA  /
sarvakAmAnnadA nAma divasADhena taistataH  // 264 //  annaM yathepsitaM tebhyaH
sopaninye yatastataH  /  kSadhAjanitameteSAM saMbabhUva na pIDanam  // 265 //
tato japitumArabdhAH sucittAH SoDazAkSaram  /  mantraM koTisahasrANi yasyAvRtti
dshoditaa||266|| jambUdvIpapatiryakSastamatha strIbhirAvRtaH  /  anAvRta iti
khyAtaH prAptaH krIDitumicchayA  // 267 //  aGganAnAM tatastasya krIDantInAM
suvibhramam  /  te taponihitAtmAnaH sthitA locanagocare  // 26 //  karanI cAhie
// 254 //  isa prakAra kahakara mAnako dhAraNa karatA huA rAvaNa apane donoM
choTe bhAiyoMke sAtha vidyA siddha karane ke lie gharase nikalakara AkAzakI ora
calA gyaa| jAte samaya mAtA-pitAne usakA mastaka cUmA thA, usane siddha
bhagavAnko namaskAra kiyA thA, mAMgalika saMskAra use prApta hue the, usakA mana
nizcayase sthira thA tathA prasannatAse bharA thA  // 255 - 256 /  /  kSaNa-
bharameM hI vaha bhIma nAmaka mahAvana meM jA phuNcaa| jinake mukha dAr3hoMse
bhayaMkara the aise duSTa prANI usa vanameM zabda kara rahe the  // 257 //  sote
hue ajagaroMke zvAsocchvAsase vahA~ bar3e-bar3e vRkSa kampita ho rahe the tathA
nRtya karate hue vyantaroMke caraNa-nikSepase vahA~kA pRthivItala kSobhita ho
rahA thA  // 258 //  vahA~ kI bar3I-bar3I guphAoMmeM sUcIke dvArA durbhedya
saghana andhakArakA samUha vidyamAna thaa| vaha vana itanA bhayaMkara thA ki
mAno sAkSAt kAla hI sadA usameM vidyamAna rahatA thaa||259|| deva bhI bhayase
pIr3ita hokara usake Upara nahIM jAte the, tathA apanI bhayaMkaratAke kAraNa
tInoM lokoMmeM prasiddha thA  // 26 //  jinakI gaphAoMke agrabhAga andhakArase
vyApta the aise vahA~ ke parvata atyanta durgama the aura vahA~ ke sudRr3ha
vRkSa aise jAna par3ate the mAno lokako grasane ke lie hI khar3e hoM  // 261 /
/  jinake cittameM kisI prakArakA bhedabhAva nahIM thA, jinakI AtmAe~ khoTI
AzAoMse dUra thIM, jo zukla vastra dhAraNa kara rahe the, jinake mukha
pUrNacandramAke samAna saumya the aura jo cUr3AmaNise suzobhita the aise tInoM
bhAiyoMne usa bhIma mahAvana meM uttama zAnti dhAraNa kara mahAn tapazcaraNa
karanA prArambha kiyA  // 262-263 //  unhoMne eka lAkha japa kara sarvakAmAnnadA
nAmakI ATha akSaroMvAlI vidyA Adhe hI dinameM siddha kara lI  // 264|| yaha
vidyA unheM jahA~tahA~se manacAhA anna lAkara detI rahatI thI jisase unheM
kSudhA sambandhI pIr3A nahIM hotI thI  // 265 //  tadanantara hRdayako svastha
kara unhoMne solaha akSaravAlA vaha mantra japanA zurU kiyA ki jisakI dasa
hajAra karor3a AvRttiyA~ zAstroMmeM kahI gayI haiM  // 266 /  /  tadanantara
jambUdvIpakA adhipati anAvRta nAmakA yakSa apanI striyoMse AvRta ho icchAnusAra
krIr3A karaneke lie usa vanameM AyA  // 267 /  /  jinakI AtmA tapazcaraMNameM
lIna thI aise tInoM bhAI, hAva-bhAva-pUrvaka krIr3A karanevAlI usa yakSakI
striyoMke dRSTigocara hue  // 268|| 1. vidAritam ma.  /  2. dezasthaM ma.  /  3.
cASTAkSarI m.| 4. vazyatAM ma.  /  5. -ditAH ma.  /

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  158 In the Padma Purana, the goddesses were brought near,
their minds filled with curiosity, as if their beauty had seized their very
essence.  ||269|| Some of them, with their faces adorned with curled hair,
spoke, their beauty resembling that of a lotus. ||270|| Their bodies were
extremely delicate, their radiance and brilliance spreading everywhere, yet they
had not renounced their garments. Why are you performing austerities? ||271||
Such radiance of the body cannot be attained without enjoyment. And with such
bodies, you cannot be afraid of anyone. ||272|| Where is the weight of these
matted locks, and where is this youthful prime? Surely you were born to create a
union of opposites. ||273|| Why do you subject your hands, which are fit for the
pleasure of soft, full breasts, to the pain of contact with stones and other
rough objects? ||274|| Oh, what a foolish mind you have, you beautiful ones! To
inflict such suffering on a body fit for enjoyment! ||275|| Arise, let us go
home. What are you waiting for, wise men? Enjoy the sight of beautiful things,
and partake in great pleasures with us. ||276|| They spoke thus, but their words
did not find a place in the minds of the three brothers, just as drops of water
do not find a place on the petals of a lotus. ||277|| Then other goddesses said
to each other, "My friends, these are surely made of wood, puppets! That is why
their entire bodies are motionless." ||278|| Saying this, and filled with anger,
they approached and struck the three brothers' large hearts with their earrings.
||279|| Yet, the three brothers, with their keen minds, did not become agitated.
This is fitting, for cowards are easily swayed from their intended purpose.
||280|| Then, the lord of Jambudvipa, the Yaksha, whose mind was filled with
wonder at the goddesses' words, smiled at the three brothers and said, ||281||
"Oh, good men, why are you performing such difficult austerities? Or, which god
are you worshipping? Tell me quickly." ||282||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 158 padmapurANe rUpeNa tAstatasteSAM samAkRSya kaceSviva  /  devyaH
samIpamAnItAH kautukAkulacetasaH  // 269 //  ucustAsAmidaM
kAzcitkuJcitAlakalAsinA  /  vaktreNa sadvirepheNa padmasya zriyamAzritAH  // 27
//  nitAntaM sukumArAGgA visarpakAntitejasaH  /  tapazcarata kiM
kAyamaparityaktavAsasaH  // 27 //  bhogavinA na gAtrANAmIdRzI jAyate ruciH  /
IdRgdehatayA nApi zakyate parato bhayam  // 272 //  jaTAmukuTamAraH kva kva
cedaM prathamaM vayaH  /  viruddhasaMprayogasya sraSTAro yUyamudgatAH  // 273 //
piinestntttaasphaalsukhsNgmnocitau| karau zilAdisaMgena kimartha prApitau
vyathAma  // 274 //  aho hasIyasI buddhiryuSmAkaM rUpazAlinAm  /  bhogocitasya
dehasya yatkRtaM duHkhayojanam  // 275 //  uttiSThata gRhaM yAmaH kimadyApi
gataM budhAH  /  sahAsmAbhirmahAbhogAn prApnuta priyadarzanAn  // 276 //
tAbhirityuditaM teSAM na cakre mAnase padam  /  yathA sarojinIpatre payaso
bindujAlakam  // 277 //  evamUcustatazcAnyAH sakhyaH kASThamayA ime  /
nizcalatvaM tathA hyeSAM sarveSvaGgeSu dRzyate  // 278 //  abhidhAyeti
saMkrudhya rabhasAdupasRtya ca  /  vizAle hRdaye cakruravataMsena tADanam  //
279 //  tathApi te gatAH pravaNacetasaH  /  yataH kApuruSA eva skhalanti
prastutAzayAt  // 28 //  devInivedanAd 'jambUdvIpezinA tataH  /  kRtvA ca
smitamityuktAH prAptavismayacetasA  // 281 //  bho bhoH supuruSAH
kasmAttapazcarata duSkaram  /  ArAdhayata vA devaM kataraM vadatAcirAt  // 282
//  tadanantara kautukase jinakA citta Akula ho rahA thA aisI deviyA~ zIghra hI
unake pAsa isa prakAra AyIM mAno unake saundaryane coTI pakar3akara hI unheM
khIMca liyA ho  // 269 /  /  una deviyoMmeM kucha deviyA~ dhuMgharAle bAloMse
suzobhita mukhase bhramarasahita kamalakI zobhA dhAraNa kara rahI thiiN| unhoMne
kahA ki jinake zarIra atyanta sukumAra haiM, jinakI kAnti aura teja saba ora
phaila rahA hai tathA vastrakA jinhoMne tyAga nahIM kiyA hai aise Apa loga kisa
lie tapazcaraNa kara rahe haiM  /  / 270271 /  /  zarIroMkI aisI kAnti bhogoMke
binA nahIM ho sktii| tathA Apake aise zarIra haiM ki jisase Apako kisI anyase
bhaya bhI utpanna nahIM ho sakatA  // 272 //  kahA~ to yaha jaTArUpa mukuToMkA
bhAra aura kahA~ yaha prathama tAruNya avasthA ? nizcita hI Apa loga viruddha
padArthoM kA samAgama sRjaneke lie hI utpanna hue haiM  // 273 /  /  sthUla
stana-taToMke AsphAlanase utpanna sukhakI prAptike yogya apane ina hAthoMko Apa
loga zilA Adi karkaza padArthoMke samAgamase pIr3A kyoM pahu~cA rahe haiM  //
274 /  /  aho Azcarya hai ki rUpase suzobhita Apa logoMkI buddhi bar3I halakI
hai ki jisase bhogoMke yogya zarIrako Apa loga isa taraha duHkha de rahe haiM  /
/ 275 /  /  uTho ghara caleM, he vijJa puruSo ! aba bhI kyA gayA hai ? priya
padArthoMkA avalokana kara hama logoMke sAtha mahAbhoga prApta karo  // 276 /  /
una deviyoMne yaha saba kahA avazya, para unake cittameM ThIka usa taraha sthAna
nahIM pA sakA ki jisa taraha kamalinIke patrapara pAnIke bUMdoMkA samUha sthAna
nahIM pAtA hai  // 277 /  /  tadanantara kucha dUsarI deviyA~ parasparameM isa
prakAra kahane lagI ki he sakhiyo! nizcaya hI ye kASThamaya haiM-lakar3Ike
putale haiM isIlie to inake samasta aMgoMmeM nizcalatA dikhAI detI hai  // 278
//  aisA kahakara tathA kucha kupita ho pAsameM jAkara una deviyoMne unake
vizAla hRdayameM apane karNaphUloMse coTa pahu~cAyI  /  / 279 /  /  phira bhI
nipuNa cittako dhAraNa karanevAle tInoM bhAI kSobhako prApta nahIM hue so ThIka
hI hai kyoMki kAyara puruSa hI apane prakRta lakSyase bhraSTa hote haiM  /  /
280 //  tadanantara deviyoMke kahanese jisake cittameM Azcarya utpanna ho rahA
thA aise jambUdvIpAdhipati anAvRta yakSane bhI harSita ho una tInoM bhAiyoMse
musakarAte hue kahA  /  / 281 //  ki he satpuruSo! Apa loga kisa prayojanase
kaThina tapazcaraNa kara rahe ho ? athavA kisa devakI ArAdhanA kara rahe ho ? so
zIghra hI kaho 1. pItastana -ma.  /  2. naivaM m.| 3. nAd dRSTA ma.  /

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Saptamaá¹ Parva**  When the yaká¹£as spoke thus and remained immovable like clay
figures, the lord of the yaká¹£as became angry and spoke in this manner: 283.
"Forgetful of me, they are eager to meditate on some other god. Alas! how
capricious these fools are!" 284. Thereupon, the fierce yaká¹£a, having uttered
harsh words, commanded his servants who were awaiting orders to disturb these
three brothers. 285. By their very nature, they were cruel, and having received
such orders from their lord, they began to perform various acts in different
forms before them. 286. One of the yaká¹£as leapt energetically, higher than a
mountain, and fell before them as if all directions were being struck by
thunderbolts. 287. Another yaká¹£a, coiling itself like a serpent, wrapped around
their entire bodies, and yet another appeared as a lion, wide-mouthed and
fierce. 288. They made a dreadful sound near the ears, rendering all directions
deaf, while some adopted the forms of biting devils, elephants, thunderstorms,
wildfires, and oceans, creating disturbances in varied forms. 289. When the
three brothers, whose minds were steadfast like a pillar of meditation, did not
get disturbed by these diversions as mentioned above, 290. a great fearful army
of mlecchas was manifested through agitation. This army, filled with exceedingly
wrathful chandÄlas, appeared fierce with sharp weapons, akin to a mass of
darkness. 291. Then they showed that, having won the war, they had destroyed the
city of Puá¹£pÄntaka and captured your father RatnaÅrava along with his relatives.
292. The inner palaces were also lamenting with a heart-wrenching cry,
proclaiming that even in the presence of sons like you, they had achieved
suffering. 293. The father was thus creating a great obfuscation before them,
exclaiming, "O sons! In this great forest, the mlecchas are killing me, so
protect me!" 294. They demonstrated that your mother was being beaten by
chandÄlas, bound in chains, dragged by her locks, and she was shedding a stream
of tears. 295. The mother said, "O sons! Behold the state I am in the forest.
Not only this, but the Shabara people are taking me to their settlement right
before you!" 296. "You had previously claimed falsely that even those empowered
by knowledge..."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptamaM parva ityuktAste yadA tasthuH pustakarmagatA iva  /  tadA kopena
yakSANAM patirevamabhASata  //  283  //  vismRtya mAmi devaM kamanyaM
dhyAtumudyatAH  /  aho capalatAmISAM parameyamamedhasAm  //  284 //
upadravArthameteSAM tatkSaNaM ca pracaNDavAk  /
kiGkarANAmadAdAjJAmAjJAdAnapratIkSiNAm  //  285  //  svabhAvenaiva te krUrAH
prApya tvAjJAM tato'dhikAm  /  nAnArUpadharAzcakruH purasteSAmiti kriyAH  //
286  //  kazcidutplutya vegena gRhItvA parvatonnatim  /  puraH papAta nirghAtAn
ghAtayanniva sarvataH  //  287  //  sarpeNa veSTanaM kazciccakre sarvazarIragam
/  bhUtvA ca kesarI kazcid vyAdAyAsyaM samAgataH  //  288 //  caranye ravaM
karNe vadhirIkRtadiGmukham  /  daMzahastimarudAvasamudratvaM gatAstathA  //  289
//  evaMvidhairupAyaiste yadA jagmurna vikriyAm  /
dhyAnastambhasamAsaktanizcalasvAntadhAraNAH  //  290 //  tadA mlecchabalaM
bhImaM caNDacaNDAlasaMkulam  /  karAlamAyudhairuyairvikRtaM taistamonimam  //
291  //  kRtvA puSpAntakaM dhvastaM vijitya ca kilAhave  /  baddhvA
ratnazravAsteSAM darzito bAndhavaiH samam  // 292 //  antaHpuraM ca kurvANaM
vipralApaM manazchidam  /  yuSmAsu satsu putreSu duHkhaprAptamiti dhvanat  //
293 //  putrA rakSata mAM mlecchairhanyamAnaM mahAvane  /  teSAmiti puraH pitrA
prayukto bhUriviplavaH  //  294  //  tADyamAnA ca caNDAlairmAtA nigaDasaMyutA  /
kacAkRSTA vimuJcantI dhArA nayanavAriNaH  //  295  //  jagAda
pazyatAvasthAmIdRzIM me sutA vane  /  nItAhaM zabaraiH pallIM kathaM
yuSmAkamagrataH  // 296 //  saMbhUya mama sarve'pi labdhavidyAbalA api  /
ekasyApi na paryAptA bhujasya vyomacAriNaH  //  297  //   /   //  282  //
yakSake aisA kahanepara bhI jaba ve miTTIse nirmita putaloMkI taraha nizcala
baiThe rahe taba vaha kupita ho isa prakAra bolA ki || 283|| ye loga mujhe
bhulAkara anya kisa devakA dhyAna karane ke lie udyata hue haiM  /  aho ! ina
mUrkhokI yaha sabase bar3I capalatA hai || 284|| isa taraha kaThora vacana
bolanevAle usa yakSendrane AjJA denekI pratIkSA karanevAle apane sevakoMko ina
tIna bhAiyoMpara upadrava karanekI AjJA de dI || 285 || ve kiMkara svabhAvase hI
krUra the phira usase bhI adhika svAmIkI AjJA pA cuke the isalie nAnA rUpa
dhAraNa kara unake sAmane taraha-tarahakI kriyAe~ karane lage ||286|| koI yakSa
vegase parvata ke samAna U~cA uchalakara unake sAmane aisA girA mAno saba orase
vajra hI gira rahA ho ||287 || kisI yakSane sA~pa banakara unake samasta
zarIrako lapeTa liyA aura koI siMha banakara tathA mu~ha phAr3akara unake sAmane
A pahu~cA ||288  //  kinhoMne kAnoMke pAsa aisA bhayaMkara zabda kiyA ki usase
samasta dizAe~ baharI ho gayIM  /  tathA koI daMzamazaka banakara, koI hAthI
banakara koI A~dhI banakara, koI dAvAnala banakara aura koI samudra banakara
bhinna-bhinna prakArake upadrava karane lage ||289 || dhyAnarUpI khambhe meM
baddha rahaneke kAraNa jinakA citta atyanta nizcala thA aise tInoM bhAI jaba
pUrvokta upAyoMse vikArako prApta nahIM hue ||290 || taba unhoMne vikriyA se
mlecchoM kI eka bar3I bhayaMkara senA bnaayii| vaha senA atyanta krodhI
cANDAloMse yukta thI, tIkSNa zastroMse bhayaMkara thI aura andhakArake samUhake
samAna jAna par3atI thI || 291 || taba unhoMne dikhAyA ki yuddha meM jItakara
puSpAntaka nagarako vidhvasta kara diyA hai tathA tumhAre pitA ratnazravAko
bhAIbandhuoM sahita giraphtAra kara liyA gayA hai || 292 || antaHpura bhI
hRdayako tor3a denevAlA vilApa kara rahA hai aura sAtha hI sAtha yaha zabda kara
rahA hai ki tumhAre jaise putroMke rahate hue bhI hama duHkhako prApta hue haiM
||293 || pitA isa prakAra cillA-cillAkara unake sAmane bahuta bhArI bAdhA
utpanna kara rahA hai ki he putro ! isa mahAvanameM mleccha mujhe mAra rahe haiM
so merI rakSA karo ||294 || unhoMne dikhAyA ki tumhArI mAtAko cANDAla ber3I meM
DAlakara pITa rahe haiM, coTI pakar3akara ghasITa rahe haiM aura vaha A~suoM kI
dhArA chor3a rahI hai || 295 || mAtA kaha rahI hai ki he putro ! dekho, vanameM
maiM aisI avasthAko prApta ho rahI hU~  /  yahI nahIM tuma logoMke sAmane hI
zabara loga mujhe apanI pallI-vasatimeM liye jA rahe haiM || 296 || tuma yaha
pahale jhUTha-mUTha hI kahA karate the ki vidyAbalako 159

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
160 It has been said in the Papouraana that even one Mlechchha is too much, but
now you three are so weak that you are not even enough for one Mlechchha.
||297-298|| O Dashagreva, Vibhishana was praising you in vain, because you are
not even able to protect your own mother. Then I understand that you do not have
even one head. ||299|| You have been devoid of any sense of honour for as long
as you have been in my womb and have come out. It would have been better if I
had carried even excrement for that long. ||300|| It seems that this Bhanukarna
is also devoid of ears, because I am shouting and he is not listening to my
sorrowful words. Look, how he has become motionless. ||301|| This Vibhishana is
also carrying this name Vibhishana in vain, and he has become so inactive like a
corpse that he is not even able to defeat one Mlechchha. ||302|| Look, these
Mlechchhas are making my sister Chandranakha irreligious, why don't you show any
compassion towards her? A brother's love for his sister is greater than that of
parents, but where is your concern for this? ||303|| O sons! Vidya is attained
for the prosperity of one's own people, so parents are superior to those people,
and a sister is superior to parents. This is the eternal order. ||304|| Just as
trees are burnt to ashes by the sight of a venomous snake, so too can these
Mlechchhas be burnt to ashes by the mere movement of your eyebrows. ||305|| I
carried you all in my womb out of a desire for happiness, because sons are those
who carry their parents like a palanquin - they protect them. ||306|| Even after
doing all this, when their attention did not waver, those gods started doing a
very terrible work of illusion. ||307|| They cut off the heads of their parents
in front of them with the edge of a sword, and they cut off the heads of
Ravana's other two brothers in front of Ravana. ||308|| Similarly, they cut off
Ravana's head in front of those two brothers. Due to this act, Vibhishana and
Bhanukarna became slightly agitated in their meditation due to anger. ||309||
But Dashagreva, holding onto the purity of his emotions, remained steady like
Mount Meru. He was mighty and steadfast in his faith. ||310|| He restrained the
movement of his senses within himself, and made his mind, which was as fickle as
lightning, obedient like a servant. 1. Avavady Kh. !

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 160 papapurANe ityuktaM vitathaM pUrvamekasyApi yato'dhunA  /  yUyaM mlecchasya
paryAptA na yo'pi hataujasaH  // 298 //  dazagrIva vRthA stotramakarotte
vibhISaNaH  /  ekApi nAsti te grIvA jananI yo na rakSati  // 299 //  kAlena
yAvatA yAtastvaM me mAnena varjitaH  /  niSkAnto jaTharAdasmAduccArastAvatA
varam  // 30 //  bhAnukarNo'pyayaM muktaH karNAbhyAM yo na me svaram  /  Ata
zRNoti kurvatyA vigatakriyavigrahaH  // 301 //  vibhISaNo'pyayaM vyartha nAma
dhatte vibhISaNaH  /  zakto yo naikakasyApi zabarasya mRtAkRtiH  // 302 //
mlecchairvidharmyamANAyAM dayAM kuruta no katham  /  svasari prema hi prAyaH
pitRbhyAM sodare param  // 303 //  vidyA hi sAdhyate putraH svajanAnAM
samRddhaye  /  teSAM ca pitarau zreSThau tayozcaiSA vyavasthitiH  // 304 //
bhrUkSepamAtrato'pyete zabarA yAnti masmatAm  /  bhavatAM
dRgviSavyAlacakSuHpAtAdiva drumAH  // 305 //  jaThareNa mayA yUyaM dhAritAH
sukhlipsyaa| putrA hi gaditAH pitroH prArohA iva dhArakAH  // 306 /  /
yadaivasapi na dhyAnabhaGgasteSAmajAyata  /  tadeti taiH samArabdhaM
mAyAkarmAtidAruNam  // 307 //  chinnaM pitroH zirasteSAM puraH sAyakadhArayA  /
puro dazAnanasyApi mUrdA bhrAtronipAtitaH  // 308 //  tayorapi puro mUrdA
dazagrIvasya pAtitaH  /  yena tau kopataH prAptAvISaddhyAnavikampanam  // 309 //
dazagrIvastu bhAvasya dadhAno'tyantazuddhatAm  /  mahAvIryo dadhasthaiyaM
mandarasya mahAruciH  // 310 //  avabhajya hRSIkANAM prasAraM nijagocare  /
acirAmAcalaM cittaM kRtvA dAsamivAzravam  // 311 //  prApta saba vidyAdhara
milakara bhI merI eka bhujAke lie paryApta nahIM haiN| parantu isa samaya to
tuma tInoM hI itane nisteja ho rahe ho ki eka hI mlecchake lie paryApta nahIM ho
// 297-298 /  /  he dazagrIva. yaha vibhISaNa terI vyartha hI stuti karatA thaa|
jabaki tu mAtAkI rakSA nahIM kara pA rahA hai taba to maiM samajhatI hU~ ki tere
eka bhI grIvA nahIM hai  /  / 299|| mAnase rahita tU jitane samaya taka mere
udarameM rahakara bAhara nikalA hai utane samaya taka yadi maiM malako bhI
dhAraNa karatI to acchA hotA  // 300 /  jAna par3atA hai yaha bhAnukarNa bhI
karNo se rahita hai isalie to maiM cillA rahI hU~ aura yahA~ mere duHkha-bhare
zabdako suna nahIM rahA hai| dekho, kaisA nizcala zarIra dhAraNa kiye haiM  //
301 //  yaha vibhISaNa bhI isa vibhISaNa nAmako vyartha hI dhAraNa kara rahA hai
aura murdA jaisA itanA akarmaNya ho gayA hai ki eka bhI mlecchakA nirAkaraNa
karanemeM samartha nahIM hai  // 302 //  dekho, ye mleccha bahana candranakhAko
dharmahIna banA rahe haiM so isapara bhI tuma dayA kyoM nahIM karate ho? mAtA-
pitAkI apekSA bhAIkA bahanapara adhika prema hotA hai para isakI tumheM cintA
kahA~ hai ?  // 303 //  he putro ! vidyA siddha kI jAtI hai AtmIyajanoMkI
samRddhike lie so una AtmIyajanoMko apekSA mAtA-pitA zreSTha haiM aura mAtA-
pitAkI apekSA bahana zreSTha hai yahI sanAtana vyavasthA hai  // 304 /  /  jisa
prakAra viSadhara sarpakI dRSTi par3ate ho vRkSa bhasma ho jAte haiM usI prakAra
tumhArI bhauMhake saMcAra mAtrase mleccha bhasma ho sakate haiM  // 305 /  /
maiMne tuma logoMko sukha pAnekI icchAse hI udarameM dhAraNa kiyA thA kyoMki
putra vahI kahalAte haiM jo pAyekI taraha mAtA-pitAko dhAraNa karate haiM-unakI
rakSA karate haiM  // 306 /  /  itanA saba kucha karanepara bhI jaba unakA
dhyAna bhaMga nahIM huA, taba una devoMne atyanta bhayaMkara mAyAmayo kArya
karanA zurU kiyA  // 307|| unhoMne una tInoMke sAmane talavArakI dhArase mAtA-
pitAkA sira kATA tathA rAvaNake sAmane usake anya do bhAiyoMkA sira kATakara
girAyA  // 308|| isI prakAra una do bhAiyoMke sAmane rAvaNa kA sira kATakara
giraayaa| isa kAryase vibhISaNa aura bhAnukarNake dhyAnameM krodhavaza kucha
caMcalatA A gayI  /  / 309|| parantu dazAnana bhAvoMkI zuddhatAko dhAraNa karatA
huA meruke samAna sthira banA rhaa| vaha mahAzaktizAlI tathA dRr3hazraddhAnI jo
thA  // 310 //  usane indriyoMke saMcArako apane ApameM hI rokakara bijalIke
samAna caMcala manako dAsake samAna AjJAkArI banA 1. avavadya kha. !

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Seventh Chapter  **161**  Then, with the thorn of desire and the armor of
conquered senses protecting him, Dashaanan, free from the defects of meditation,
diligently meditated on the mantra. ||312||  If a great soul desires to enter
meditation, then, for protection, he should immediately sever the eight karmas.
||313||  Meanwhile, thousands of embodied Vidyaas, with folded hands, stood
before Dashaanan, becoming his. ||314||  Before the count of mantra recitations
was complete, all the Vidyaas became his. This is certain, for what cannot be
attained with firm determination? ||315||  Firm determination is also attained
through the brilliance of past karma. Indeed, it is karma that creates obstacles
and experiences of suffering. ||316||  A being without virtue cannot attain the
three jewels, the fruit of right knowledge, the knowledge of names, or the three
treasures, even if he gives charity at the right time, to the right recipient,
and in the right place, or if his lifespan is about to end. ||317||  For some,
Vidyaas are attained in ten years, for some in a month, and for some in a
moment, all due to the influence of karma. ||318||  Even if a being sleeps on
the earth, renounces food for a long time, immerses himself in water day and
night, falls from the top of a mountain, and even dies, he cannot achieve his
desires if he is devoid of virtue. ||319-320||  Those who have performed good
deeds in past lives attain Siddhi effortlessly. Practices like austerities are
merely instruments. But those who have not performed good deeds in past lives
die in vain, their lives are meaningless. ||319-320||  Therefore, a human being
should serve the Acharya with utmost respect and always accumulate virtue, for
how can Siddhi be attained without virtue? ||322||  Gautama Swami says, "O
Shrenik! See the power of virtue! Even though Dashaanan, with his great mind,
did not have the full time, he still attained the Siddhi of Vidyaas." ||323||
Now, I will briefly mention the names of the Vidyaas. These names are derived
from their meaning and power, and are commonly used. O Shrenik! Listen with an
attentive mind. ||324||  Sà¤à¤à¤¾à¤°à¤¿à¤£à¥, à¤à¤¾à¤®à¤¦à¤¾à¤¯à¤¿à¤¨à¥, à¤à¤¾à¤®à¤à¤¾à¤®à¤¿à¤¨à¥, à¤¦à¥à¤°à¥à¤¨à¤¿à¤µà¤¾à¤°à¤¾, à¤à¤à¤¤à¥à¤à¤®à¥à¤ªà¤¾,
à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤à¥à¤à¤ªà¥à¤¤à¤¿, à¤­à¤¾à¤¨à¥à¤®à¤¾à¤²à¤¿à¤¨à¥. ||325||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptamaM parva 161 kaNTakena kRtavANaH saMmbareNa samaM tataH  /
dhyAnavaktavyAtAhIno dadhyau mantraM prayatnataH  // 312 //  yadi nAma tadA
dhyAnAvizecchumaNottamaH  /  aSTakarmasamucchedaM tataH kurvIta tarakSaNAt  //
313 //  atrAntare sadehAnAM kRtAJjalipuTasthitam  /  sahasraM tasya
vidyAnAmanekaM vazatAmitam  // 314 //  samAplimeti no yAvarasaMkhyA
mantravivartane  /  tAvadevAsya tAH siddhA nizcayAt kiM na labhyate  // 315 //
nizcayo'pi puropAttAllabhyate karmaNaH sitAt  /  karmANyeva hi yacchanti vighnaM
duHkhAnubhAvinaH  // 316 //  kAle dAnavidhi pAtre kSeme cAyuHsthitikSayam  /
samyagbodhiphalAM vidyA nAmavyo labdhumarhati  // 317 //  kasyaciddazabhirvarSe
vidyA mAsena kasyacit  /  kSaNena kasyacitsiddhiM yAnti karmAnubhAvataH  // 318
//  dharaNyAM svapitu tyAgaM karotu ciramandhasaH  /  majjatvapsu divAnaktaM
gireH patatu mastakAt  // 319 //  vidhattAM paJcatAyogyAM kriyAM vigrahazoSiNIm
/  puNyairvirahito jantustathApi na kRtI bhavet  // 320 //  annamAtraM kriyAH
puMsAM siddheH sukRtakarmaNAm  /  akRtottamakarmANo yAnti mRtyu nirarthakAH  //
321 //  sarvAdarAnmanuSyeNa tasmAdAcAryasevayA  /  puNyameva sadA kArya siddhiH
puNyairvinA kutaH 322 //  pazya zreNika puNyAnAM pramAvaM yaddazAnanaH  /
asaMpUrNa gataH kAle vidyAsiddhiM mahAmanAH  // 323 //  saMkSepeNa kariSyAmi
vidyAnAM nAmakIrtanam  /  arthasAmarthyato labdhaM bhavAvahitamAnasaH  // 324 //
namaHsaMcAriNI kAyadAyinI kAmagAminI  /  durnivArA jagatkampA
prajJaptirbhAnumAlinI  // 325 //  liyA thA  // 311 /  /  zatruse badalA lenekI
icchArUpI kaNTaka tathA jitendriyatArUpI saMvara donoM hI jisakI rakSA kara rahe
the aisA dazAnana dhyAnasambandhI doSoMse rahita hokara prayatnapUrvaka mantrakA
dhyAna karatA rahA  // 312 //  AcArya kahate haiM ki yadi aisA dhyAna koI
munirAja dhAraNa karate to vaha usa dhyAnake prabhAvase usI samaya aSTakarmokA
viccheda kara dete  // 313 //  isI bIca meM hAtha joDakara sAmane khar3I huI
aneka hajAra zarIradhAriNI vidyAe~ dazAnanako siddha ho gayIM  // 314 /  /
mantra japanekI saMkhyA samApta nahIM ho pAyI ki usake pahale hI samasta vidyAe~
use siddha ho gayIM, so ThIka hI hai kyoMki dRr3ha nizcayase kyA nahIM milatA
hai ?  // 315 /  /  dRr3ha nizcaya bhI pUrvopAjita ujjvala karmase hI prApta
hotA hai| yathArthameM karma hI duHkhAnubhavameM vighna utpanna karate haiM  //
315 //  yogya samaya pAtrake lie dAna denA, kSetrameM AyukI sthiti samApta honA
tathA ratnatrayakI prAptirUpI phalase yukta vidyA prApta honA, ina tIna kAryoMko
abhavya jIva kabhI nahIM pAtA hai  // 317 /  /  kisIko dasa varSameM, kisIko eka
mAhameM aura kisIko eka kSaNameM hI vidyAeM siddha ho jAtI haiM so yaha saba
karmoM kA prabhAva hai  // 318 //  bhale hI pRthivIpara sove, cirakAla taka
bhojanakA tyAga rakhe, rAta-dina pAnImeM DUbe rahe, pahAr3akI coTIse gire, aura
jisase maraNa bhI ho jAve aisI zarIra sukhAnevAlI kriyAe~ kare to bhI
puNyarahita jIva apanA manoratha siddha nahIM kara sakatA  // 319-320|| jinhoMne
pUrva bhavameM acche kArya kiye haiM unheM siddhi anAyAsa hI prApta hotI hai|
tapazcaraNa Adi kriyAe~ to nimitta mAtra haiM para jinhoMne pUrvabhavameM uttama
kArya nahIM kiye ve vyartha hI mRtyuko prApta hote haiM-unakA jIvana nirarthaka
jAtA hai  /  / 321 /  /  isalie manuSyako pUrNa Adarase AcAryakI sevA kara sadA
puNyakA hI saMcaya karanA cAhie kyoMki puNya ke binA siddhi kaise ho sakatI hai
?  // 322 //  gautama svAmI kahate haiM ki he zreNika ! puNyakA prabhAva dekho
ki mahAmanasvI dazAnana, samaya pUrNa na honepara bhI vidyAoMkI siddhiko prApta
ho gayA  // 323 /  /  aba maiM saMkSepase vidyAoMkA nAmollekha karatA huuN|
vidyAoMke ye nAma unake artha-kAryakI sAmarthyase hI prApta hue haiM-pracalita
haiN| he zreNika ! sAvadhAna citta hokara suno  // 324 //  saMcAriNI,
kAmadAyinI, kAmagAminI, durnivArA, 1. zabareNa ma.  /  2. -mAvizacchuma ma.  /
3. vaddhAt  /  4. kAmadAminI ma.  /  5. kAyagAminI m.| 21

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Padmapurana 162  **Verse 326:**  Anima, Laghima, Kshobhya,
Manahstambhanakarini, SamvahinÄ«, Suradhvamsi, Kaumari, Vadhakarini.  **Verse
327:** Suvidhana, Taporupa, Dahani, Vipulodari, Shubhapraday, Rajorupa,
Dinaratrividhayini.  **Verse 328:** Vajrodari, Samaavrusti, Adarshanyajaramara,
Analaastambhani, Toyastambhani, Giridarani.  **Verse 329:** Avalokani,
Arihdvamsi, Ghora, Dhira, Bhujangini, Varuni, Bhuvanavadhya, Daruna, Madanasini.
**Verse 330:** Bhaskari, Bhaysambhutis, Aishani, Vijaya, Jaya, Bandhani,
Mochani, Varahi, Kutilaakriti.  **Verse 331:** Chittodhavakari, Shanti, Kauberi,
Vashkarini, Yogeshwari, Balotsadi, Chanda, Bhiti, Pravarshini.  **Verse 332:**
Thus, Dasanana, with his past good deeds, obtained these great Vidya's in a
short time, with unwavering results.  **Verse 333:** Sarvaha, Ratisamvridhi,
Jrimbhini, Vyomgamini, and Nidrani, these five Vidya's were obtained by
Bhanukarna.  **Verse 334:** Siddhartha, Shatrudamani, Nirvyaghata, and
Khagamini, these four Vidya's were obtained by Vibhishana, like beloved wives.
**Verse 335:** Thus, obtaining the power of Vidya, these three brothers, due to
great joy, felt like they had obtained a new birth.  **Verse 336:** Then, the
king of the Yakshas, Anavrita Yaksha, seeing these Vidya's, worshipped the three
brothers with great splendor and adorned them with divine ornaments.  **Verse
337:** Dasanana, with the power of Vidya, established a city called
"Swayamprabha". This city was adorned with rows of houses as high as the peak of
Mount Meru.  **Verse 338:** The windows of these houses were adorned with
strings of pearls, they were very high, and their pillars were made of jewels
and gold. The city was adorned with Jain temples.  **Verse 339:** The city was
always illuminated by jewels, which produced rainbows due to the interaction of
their rays, and whose brilliance was like that of constant lightning.  **Verse
340:** In the sky-touching palace of that city, Dasanana, endowed with the power
of Vidya, lived happily with his two brothers.  **Verse 341:** Then, the king of
Jambudvipa, Anavrita Yaksha, filled with wonder, said to Dasanana one day: "I am
amazed by your valor, O great-minded one, and I am pleased with you."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe 162 aNimA laghimA kSobhyA manaHstambhanakAriNI  /  saMvAhinI
suradhvaMsI kaumArI vadhakAriNI  // 326 /  /  suvidhAnA taporUpA dahanI
vipulodarI  /  zubhapradA rajorUpA dinarAtrividhAyinI  // 327 /  /  vajrodarI
samAvRSTiradarzanyajarAmarA  /  analastambhanI toyastambhanI giridAriNI  // 328
//  avalokanyaridhvaMsI ghorA dhIrA bhujngginii| vAruNI bhuvanAvadhyA dAruNA
madanAzinI  // 329 //  bhAskarI bhayasaMbhUtiraizAnI vijayA jayA  /  bandhanI
mocanI cAnyA varAhI kuTilAkRtiH  // 330 //  cittodbhavakarI zAntiH kauberI
vshkaarinnii| yogezvarI balotsAdI caNDA bhItiH pravarSiNI  // 33 //  evamAdyA
mahAvidyAH purAsukRtakarmaNA  /  svalpaireva dinaiH prApa dazagrIvaH 'sunizcalaH
// 332 //  sarvAhA ratisaMvRddhijRmbhiNI vyomagAminI  /  nidrANI ceti paJcaitA
bhAnukarNa samAzritAH  // 333 /  /  siddhArthA zatrudamanI nirvyAghAtA khagAminI
/  vidyA vibhISaNaM prAptAzcatasro dayitA iva  // 334 //  IzvaratvaM tataH
prAptA vidyAyAM te suvibhramAH  /  janmAnyadivasaM prApurmahAsaMmadakAraNam  //
335 //  tataH patyApi yakSANAM dRSTvA vidyAH samAgatAH  /  pUjitAste mahAbhUtyA
divyAlaMkArabhUSitAH  // 336 //  svayaMprabhamiti khyAtaM nagaraM ca nivezitam
/  meruzRGgasamucchrAyasadmapativirAjitam  /  / 337 //
muktAjAlaparikSiptagavAkSerdU ramunnataiH  /  ratnajAmbUnadastambhairaJcitaM
caityavezmabhiH  /  / 338 //  anyonyakarasaMbandhajanitendrazarAsanaiH  /
ratnaiH kRtasamudyotaM nityavidyutsamaprabhaiH  /  / 339 /  /  bhrAtRbhyAM
sahitastatra prAsAde gaganaspRzi  /  vidyAbalena saMpannaH sukhaM tasthau
dazAnanaH  // 340 /  /  jambUdvIpapatiH prAha tata evaM dazAnanam  /
vismitastava vIryeNa prasanno'haM mahAmate  // 341 //  jagatkampA, prajJapti,
bhAnumAlinI, aNimA, laghimA, kSobhyA, manaHstambhanakAriNI, saMvAhinI,
suradhvaMsI, kaumArI, vadhakAriNI, suvidhAnA, taporUpA, dahanI, vipulodarI,
zubhapradA, rajorUpA, dinarAtrividhAyinI, vajrodarI, samAkRSTi, adarzanI, ajarA,
amarA, analastambhinI, toyastambhinI, giridAraNI, avalokinI, aridhvaMsI, ghorA,
dhIrA, bhujaMginI, vAruNI, bhuvanA, avadhyA, dAruNA, madanAzinI, bhAskarI,
bhayasaMbhUti, aizAnI, vijayA, jayA, bandhanI, mocanI, vArAhI, kuTilAkRti,
cittodbhavakarI, zAnti, kauberI, vazakAriNI, yogezvarI, balotsAdI, caNDA, bhIti
aura pravarSiNI Adi aneka mahAvidyAoMko nizcala pariNAmoMkA dhArI dazAnana
pUrvopArjita pUNya karmake udayase thor3e hI dinoMmeM prApta ho gayA  // 325-332
//  sarvAhA, ratisaMvRddhi, jRmbhiNI, vyomagAminI aura nidrANI ye pA~ca vidyAe~
bhAnukarNako prApta huI  // 333 /  /  siddhArthA, zatrudamanI, nirvyAghAtA aura
AkAzagAminI ye cAra vidyAe~ priya striyoMke samAna vibhISaNako prApta huIM  //
334 /  /  isa prakAra vidyAoMke aizvaryako prApta hue ve tInoM bhAI mahAharSake
kAraNabhata nUtana janmako hI mAno prApta hue the  // 335 /  /  tadanantara
yakSoMke adhipati anAvRta yakSane bhI vidyAoMko AyA dekha mahAvaibhavase una
tInoM bhAiyoMkI pUjA kI aura unheM divya alaMkAroMse alaMkRta kiyA  // 336 /  /
dazAnanane vidyAke prabhAvase svayaMprabha nAmakA nagara bsaayaa| vaha nagara
meruparvatake zikharake samAna U~ce-U~ce makAnoMkI paMktise suzobhita thA  //
337 //  jinake jharokhoMmeM motiyoMkI jhAlara laTaka rahI thI, jo bahuta UMce
the tathA jinake khambhe ratna aura svarNake bane the aise jinamandiroMse
alaMkRta thA  // 338 /  /  parasparakI kiraNoMke sambandhase jo indradhanuSa
utpanna kara rahe the, tathA nirantara sthira rahanevAlI bijalIke samAna jinakI
prabhA thI aise ratnoMse vaha nagara sadA prakAzamAna rahatA thA  // 339 //  usI
nagarake gaganacumbI rAjamahalameM vidyAbalase sampanna dazAnana apane donoM
bhAiyoMke sAtha sukhase rahane lagA  // 340 /  /  tadanantara Azcaryase bhare
jambUdvIpake adhipati anAvRta yakSane eka dina dazAnanase kahA ki 1. sunizcayaH
ma., ka.  /  2 samucchAyaM ma.  /  -

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Seventh Chapter  163. "O great one, I am very pleased with your valor.
Therefore, dwell in this Jambudvipa, which is surrounded by four oceans, east,
west, north, and south, and is filled with Nagakumara and Vyantara Devas, as you
please." (342) "I am the lord of this entire island, and I have no rival.
Therefore, I grant you the boon to roam freely in this Jambudvipa, as you wish,
vanquishing your enemies." (343) "O dear one, I am pleased with you, and I will
always be present in your memory. Even Indra would not be able to hinder your
desires under my influence, let alone ordinary mortals." (344) "May you live a
long life, filled with happiness, along with your brothers. May your divine
powers always increase, and may your relatives always serve them." (345)   With
these heartfelt blessings, the Yaksha, accompanied by his family, returned to
his abode. (346)  Hearing of Ratnashrava, whose form was adorned with knowledge,
groups of Rakshasas, filled with joy, approached him from all sides. (347) Some
danced, some played instruments, and some were so overwhelmed with joy that they
could not contain themselves. (348) Some roared loudly, terrifying the enemy,
while others laughed for a long time, smearing the sky with lime. (349) Sumali,
Malyavan, Suryaraj, and Riksharaj, filled with joy, arrived in their magnificent
chariots. (350) All their relatives, some in flying vehicles, some on horses,
and some on elephants, came from their respective lands, free from fear. (351)
Then, Ratnashrava, whose heart was filled with love for his son, arrived,
continuously making the sky white with flags, adorned with great power. Groups
of captives praised him, and he was riding in a chariot as beautiful as a grand
palace. (352-353)  As they all traveled together, they spent the night on a
mountain called Panchasangama, filled with sorrow due to the fear of their
enemies. (354)  Then, the sons of Kekasi, with reverence, greeted their elders
and friends, and with affectionate eyes, they welcomed their servants. (355)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptamaM parva 163. catuHsamudraparyante nAgamyantarasaMkule  /  tiSThatvatra
yathAcchandaM jambUdvIpatale bhavAn  // 342 //  dvIpasyAsya samastasya
vasitAhamakaNTakaH  /  yathepsitaM carestasminuddharan zatrusaMhatim  // 343 //
prasanne mayi te vassa smRtimAtrapuraHsthite  /  IpsitavyAhatau zakto na
zakro'pi kuto'pare  // 344 //  drASiSThaM jIva kAlaM tvaM bhrAtRbhyAM sahitaH
sukhI  /  varddhantAM bhUtayo divyA bandhusevyAH sadA tava  // 345 //
ityAzIbhiH samAnandha satyAbhistAn punaH punaH  /  jagAma svAlayaM yakSaH
parivArasamanvitaH  // 346 //  taM ratnazravasaM zrutvA vidyAliGgitavigraham  /
sarvato rakSasAM saGghAH prAptAH kRtamahotsavAH  // 347 //  unnataM nanRtuH
keciccakrurAsphoTanaM tathA  /  kecit pramodasaMpUrNAH saMbhUtA na svavigrahe
// 348 //  'udAttaM naditaM kaizcicchatrupakSamayaMkaram  /  sudhayeva namaH
kaizcilimpanirhasitaM ciram  // 349 //  sumAlI mAlyavAn sUryarajA RkSarajAstathA
/  AgatA nitarAM prItAH samAruhyottamAn rathAn  // 350 //  anye ca svajanAH
sarve vimAnairvAjibhirgajaiH  /  svadezebhyo viniSkrAntAstrAsena parivarjitAH
// 351 //  atha ratnazravAH putrasnehasaMpUrNamAnasaH  /  vaijayantImirAkAzaM
zuklIkurvanirantaram  // 352 //  vibhUtyA parayA yukto vandivRndairabhiSTutaH  /
saMprApto rathamArUDho mahAprAsAdasaMnimam  // 353 //  ekIbhUya vrajanto'mI
paJcasaMgamaparvate  /  duHkhena rajanIM ninyurarAtimayayogataH  // 354 //  tato
gurUn praNAmena samAzleSaNataH sakhIn  /  snigdhena cakSaSA bhRtyAn jagRhuH
kaikasIsutAH  // 355 //  he mahAbuddhiman ! maiM tumhAre vIryase bahuta prasanna
hU~  // 341 //  ataH jisake antameM pUrva, pazcima, uttara, dakSiNa isa prakAra
cAra samudra haiM tathA jo nAgakumAra aura vyantara devoMse vyApta hai aise isa
jambUdvIpameM icchAnusAra rho||342|| maiM isa samasta dIpakA adhipati hU~, merA
koI bhI pratidvandvI nahIM hai ataH tumheM varadAna detA hU~ ki tuma
zatrusamUhako ukhAr3ate hue isa jambUdvIpameM icchAnusAra sarvatra vicaraNa karo
// 343 /  /  he vatsa ! maiM tujhapara prasanna haiM aura tere smaraNa mAtrase
sadA tere sAmane khar3A rhuuNgaa| mere prabhAvase tere manorathameM bAdhA
pahuMcAne ke lie indra bhI samartha nahIM ho sakegA phira sAdhAraNa manuSyakI to
bAta hI kyA hai ?  // 344 //  tU apane donoM bhAiyoMke sAtha sukhI rahatA huA
dIrgha kAla taka jIvita raha  /  terI divya vibhUtiyA~ sadA bar3hatI raheM aura
bandhujana sadA unakA sevana karate raheM  // 345 //  isa prakAra yathArtha
AzIrvAdase una tInoM bhAiyoMko Anandita kara vaha yakSa parivArake sAtha apane
sthAnapara calA gayA  // 346 /  /  tadanantara dazAnanako vidyAoMse AliMgita
suna cAroM orase rAkSasoMke samUha mahotsava karate hue usake samIpa Aye ||347||
unameM koI to nRtya karate the, koI tAla bajAte the, koI harSase itane phUla
gaye the ki apane zarIra meM hI nahIM samAte the  // 348|| kitane hI loga
zatrupakSako bhayabhIta karanevAlA jorakA siMhanAda karate the, koI AkAzako
cUnAse lipta karate hue ko taraha cirakAla taka ha~sate rahate the  // 349||
prItise bhare sumAlI, mAlyavAn, sUryaraja aura RkSaraja uttamottama rathoMpara
savAra ho usake samIpa Aye ||350 //  inake sivAya anya sabhI kuTumbIjana, koI
vimAnoMpara baiThakara, koI ghor3oMpara savAra hokara aura koI hAthiyoMpara
ArUr3ha hokara aaye| ve saba bhayase rahita the  // 351 /  /  athAnantara
putrake snehase jisakA mana bhara rahA thA aisA ratnazravA patAkAoMse AkAzako
nirantara zukla karatA huA bar3I vibhUtike sAtha aayaa| bandIjanoMke samUha
usakI stuti kara rahe the, aura vaha kisI bar3e rAjamahalake samAna sundara
rathapara savAra thA  // 352-353 /  /  ye saba milakara sAtha hI sAtha A rahe
the so mArga meM paMcasaMgama nAmaka parvatapara unhoMne zatruke bhayake kAraNa
bahuta hI dukhase rAtri bitAyI  // 354 /  /  tadanantara kekasIke putra dazAnana
1. bhramaNaM kuryAH  /  2. zravajaM m.| 3. prazazaMsuzca rAvaNam m.| 4.
candrakAnti tiraskurvat m.| 5. mahAprasAda -m.|

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, there is a story about the questioning of the well-being of
the body and the attainment of Siddhi. It is not considered inappropriate to
repeatedly ask about such matters when they are relevant.  ||356|| The Rakshasas
and Vanaras, filled with wonder, beheld the self-illuminated city, which was
like the celestial realm. ||357|| Their parents, their eyes filled with joy,
touched the bodies of Dasanana and the others with trembling hands, offering
their salutations. ||358|| When the sun was in the middle of the sky, the divine
women began the bathing ceremony of the three Kumaras with great festivity.
||359|| They were seated on bathing platforms adorned with pearls and rich with
various jewels, made of pure gold. ||360|| Their feet, with their reddish hue
like the tender leaves, were placed on footrests, making them appear like the
rising sun on the peak of Mount Meru. ||361|| Then, they were bathed with
pitchers made of jewels, gold, and silver, their mouths covered with leaves,
adorned with garlands, their forms veiled by a radiance that rivaled the moon
and the sun, filled with fragrant water that perfumed the entire sky, with one
main mouth and many smaller ones, around which swarms of bees hovered, and which
roared like thunderous clouds due to the cascading water. ||362-364|| Then, they
were anointed with fragrant water and other substances that enhanced their
radiance, accompanied by the auspicious sounds of trumpets and other
instruments. ||365|| Afterwards, their bodies were adorned with divine garments
and ornaments, and the women of the clan performed various auspicious rituals
with great respect. ||366|| Then, the three Kumaras, who resembled divine
princes and brought joy to their loved ones, respectfully offered their
salutations to their teachers. ||367|| Seeing the wealth of knowledge they had
attained, the teachers blessed them, saying, "May you live long and prosper."
||368||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe zarIrakSemapRcchAdisidvivRttAntasaMkathA  /  na teSAmavagItatvaM
prAptArabdhA punaH punaH  // 356 //  dadRzurvismayApannAH svayaMprabhapurottamam
/  devalokapraticchandaM yAtudhAnaplavaGgamAH  // 357 //  savepathukareNaiSAM
gAtramaspRzatAM ciram  /  pitarau sapraNAmAnAmAnandAccAkulekSaNau  // 35 //
namomadhye gate mAnau teSAM snAnavidhistataH  /  divyAbhiH kartumArabdho
vanitAmimahotsavaH  // 359 //  muktAjAlaparIteSu snAnapITheSu te sthitAH  /
nAnAratnasamRddhaSu jAtyAjAmbUnadAtmasu  // 360 //  pAdapITheSu caraNau nihitau
pallavacchavI  /  udyaadvishirovrtidivaakrsmaakRtii||36|| tato ratnavinirmANaiH
sauvaNe rAjatAtmakaiH  /  kumbhaiH pallavasaMchannavakrerivirAjitaiH  // 362 /
/  candrAdityapratisparddhi chAyAvacchAditAtmabhiH  /
AmodavAsitAzeSadikcakrajala pUritaiH  // 363 //  ekAnekamukhaiH
prAntabhrAntabhramaramaNDalaiH  /  garjanirjalapAtena gaMbhIrajaladairiva  //
364 //  gandhairudvartanaiH kAntividhAnakuzalaistathA  /  abhiSekaH kRtasteSAM
tUryanAdAdinanditaH  // 365 /  /  alaMkRtastato deho divyavastravibhUSaNaiH  /
maGgalAni prayuktAni kulanArIbhirAdarAt  /  / 366 //  tato devakumArAbhaiH
svajanAnandadAyibhiH  /  gurUNAM vinayAdetaiH kRtaM caraNavandanam  // 367 /  /
atyAziSastato dRSTvA teSAM vidyotthasaMpadaH  /  jIvatAtiviraM kAlamiti tAn
guravo'bruvan  // 368 //  Adine Age jAkara una sabakI agavAnI kii| unhoMne
gurujanoMko praNAma kiyA, mitroMkA AliMgana kiyA aura bhRtyoMkI ora snehapUrNa
dRSTise dekhA  // 355 /  /  gurujanoMne bhI dazAnana Adise zarIrakI kuzala-kSema
pUchI, vidyAe~ kisa taraha siddha huIM Adi kA vRttAnta bhI bAra-bAra pUchA so
aise avasarapara kisI bAtako bAra-bAra pUchanA nindanIya nahIM hai  // 356 //
rAkSasa tathA vAnaravaMziyoMne devalokake samAna usa svayaMprabhanagarako bar3e
Azcarya ke sAtha dekhA  // 357|| jinake netra Anandase vyApta the aise mAtA-
pitAne praNAma karate hue dazAnana Adike zarIrakA kA~pate hue hAthoMse cirakAla
taka sparza kiyA  // 358|| jaba sUrya AkAzake madhyabhAgameM thA taba divya
vanitAoMne bar3e utsavake sAtha una tInoM kumAroMkI snAnavidhi prArambha kI  //
359  //  jinake cAroM ora motiyoMke samUha vyApta the tathA jo nAnA prakArake
ratnoMse samRddha the aise utkRSTa svarNanirmita snAnakI caukiyoMpara ve AsIna
hue  // 360 //  pallavoMke samAna lAla-lAla kAntike dhAraka donoM paira unhoMne
pAdapIThapara rakhe the aura usase ve aise jAna par3ate the mAno udayAcalake
zikharapara vartamAna sUrya hI ho  // 361 /  /  tadanantara ratnamayI,
suvarNamayI aura rajatamayI una kalazoMse unakA abhiSeka zurU huA ki jinake
mukha pallavoMse AcchAdita the, jo hAroMse suzobhita the, candramA tathA sUryake
sAtha spardhA karanevAlI kAntise jinakA Atma-svarUpa AcchAdita thA, jo apanI
sugandhise diGmaNDalako suvAsita karanevAle jalase pUrNa the, jinameM eka to
pradhAna mukha thA tathA anya choTechoTe aneka mukha the, jinake Asa-pAsa
bhramaroMke samUha ma~DarA rahe the aura jo jalapAtake kAraNa gambhIra meghake
samAna garaja rahe the  // 362-364 /  /  tadanantara zarIrakI kAnti bar3hAne meM
kuzala ubaTanA Adi lagAkara sugandhita jalase unakA abhiSeka kiyA gyaa| usa
samaya turahI Adi vAditroMke maMgalamaya zabdoMse vahA~kA vAtAvaraNa Anandamaya
ho rahA thA  // 365 /  /  tatpazcAt divya vastrAbhUSaNoMse unake zarIra alaMkRta
kiye gaye aura kulAMganAoMne bar3e Adarase aneka maMgalAcAra kiye  // 366 /  /
tadanantara jo devakumAroMke samAna jAna par3ate the aura AtmIyajanoMko Ananda
pradAna kara rahe the aise una tInoM kumAroMne bar3I vinayase gurujanoMko
caraNavandanA kI  //  367  //  tadanantara gurujanoMne dekhA ki inheM jo
vidyAoMse sampadAeM prApta huI haiM ve hamAre AzIrvAdase 1. prAptAkhyA m.| 2.
chAyayA chAditAtmabhiH kha.  /

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Seventh Chapter  Sumali, Malyaavan, Suryaraj, Riksharaj and Ratnashrava
embraced them again and again out of affection. ||369||  They all, surrounded by
their relatives and servants, who had all the desired wealth, ate together.
||370||  Then Dashaanan worshipped the gurus by giving them clothes and other
things, and also honored the servants as per their worth. ||371||  The gurus,
whose eyes were filled with joy, were reassured.  They asked them, "O sons, have
you all been well for so many days?" ||372||  Then Dashaanan and the other
princes, joining their hands and bowing their heads, said, "By your grace, we
are all well." ||373||  Then, in the course of the conversation, the death of
Mali was mentioned, and Sumali was so grief-stricken that he fainted
immediately. ||374||  Then Dashaanan, the eldest son of Ratnashrava, touched him
with his cool hand and brought him back to consciousness. ||375||  He also
cheered him up with words as cool as ice and as powerful as the sprouting of
seeds that would destroy all enemies. ||376||  Seeing Dashaanan, whose eyes were
like lotuses, Sumali immediately forgot his grief and was filled with joy again.
||377||  He then spoke to Dashaanan with heartfelt words, "O son, your noble
character is truly pleasing to the gods. ||378||  O, your radiance surpasses the
sun.  Your dignity surpasses the ocean. ||379||  O, your prowess, combined with
your beauty, is unmatched.  O son, you are a special jewel of the Rakshasa clan.
||380||  Just as Jambudvipa is adorned by Mount Sumeru, and the sky is adorned
by the moon and the sun, so too is this Rakshasa clan adorned by you, O son,
whose actions are a wonder to the world. ||381-382||  Your ancestors, like
Meghavahan, ruled Lanka and then attained liberation after performing
austerities. ||383||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptamaM parva sumAlI mAlyavAn sUryarajA RkSarajAstathA  /  ratnazravAzca tAn
snehAdAliliGguH punaH punaH  // 369 //  samaM bAndhavalokena bhRtyavargeNa
cAvRtAH  /  cakrurabhyavahAraM te svecchAkalpitasaMpadaH  // 370 //  gurupu
prAptapUjeSu tato vastrAdidAnataH  /  yathArha bhRtyabarge ca
saMprAptapratimAnane  // 371 //  vizrabdhA guravo'pRcchaMstAn prItivikacekSaNAH
/  divasA niyato vatsAH sukhena susthitA iti  // 372 //  tataste mastake kRtvA
karayugmaM praNAminaH  /  UcunaH kuzalaM nityaM prasAdAd bhavatAmiti  // 373 //
mAlinaH saMkathAprAptaM kathayan maraNaM tataH  /  sumAlI zokabhAreNa sadyo
mUcchA smaagtH||374|| ratnazravaHsutenAsau tataH zItalapANinA  /  saMspRzya
punarAnIto jyeSThena vyakacetanAm  // 375 //  Ananditazca
tadvAkyairUrjitairhimazItalaiH  /  samastazatrusaMghAtaghAtabIjAGkurodgamaiH  //
376 /  /  puNDarIkekSaNaM pazyan sumAlI taM tato'rbhakam  /  zokaM
kSaNAtsamutsRjya punarAnandamAgatAH  // 377 /  /  iti covAca taM
hRdyairvacobhirvitathetaraiH  /  aho vatsa tavodAraM sattvaM toSitadaivatam  //
378 //  aho dyutiriyaM jitvA sthitA tava divAkaram  /  aho gAmbhIryamutsAya
sthitametannadIpatim  // 379 /  /  aho parAkramaH kAntyA sahito'yaM jenAtigaH  /
aho rakSaHkulasyAsi jAtastAta vizeSakaH  // 380 //  mandareNa yathA jambUdvIpaH
kRtavibhUSaNaH  /  namastalaM zazAGkena yathA tigmakareNa ca  // 381 //
suputreNa tathA rakSaHkulametaddazAnana  /  tvayA lokamahAzcaryakAriceSTena
bhUSitam  // 382 /  /  AsaMmtoyadavAhAdyA narAstvatkulapUrvajAH  /  bhuktvA
lakApurIM kRtvA sukRtaM ye gatAH zivam  // 383 /  /  bhI adhika hai ataH unhoMne
yahI kahA ki tuma loga cirakAla taka jIvita raho  // 368 /  /  sumAlI, mAlyavAn,
sUryaraja, RkSaraja aura ratnazravAne snehavaza unakA bAra-bAra AliMgana kiyA
thA  /  / 369|| tadanantara icchAnusAra jinheM saba sampadAe~ prApta thIM aise
una saba logoMne bandhujanoM tathA bhRtyavargase AvRta hokara bhojana kiyA  /  /
370 /  /  tadanantara dazAnanane vastra Adi dekara gurujanoMkI pUjA kI aura
yathAyogya bhRtyavargakA bhI sammAna kiyA  // 371 /  /  tatpazcAt prItise jinake
netra phUla rahe the aise samasta gurujana nizcintatAse baiThe the| prakaraNa
pAkara unhoMne kahA ki he putro ! itane dina taka tuma saba sukhase rahe ?  //
372 /  /  taba dazAnana Adi kumAroMne hAtha jor3a sirase lagAkara praNAma karate
hue kahA ki Apa logoMke prasAdase hama sabakI kuzala hai  // 373 /  /
tadanantara prakaraNavaza mAlIke maraNakI carcA karate hue sumAlI itane
zokagrasta hue ki unheM tatkAla hI mUrchA A gayI  // 374 /  /  tatpazcAt
ratnazravAke jeSTha putra dazAnanane apane zItala hAthase sparza kara unheM
punaH saceta kiyA  // 375 /  /  tathA barpha ke samAna ThaNDe aura samasta
zatrusamUhake ghAtarUpI bojake aMkurodgamake samAna zaktizAlI vacanoMse unheM
Anandita kiyA  /  / 376 /  /  taba kamalake samAna netroMse suzobhita dazAnanako
dekha, sumAlI tatkAla hI saba zoka chor3akara punaH Anandako prApta ho gaye  //
377|| aura dazAnanase hRdayahArI satya vacana kahane lage ki aho vatsa !
sacamuca hI tumhArA udAra bala devatAoMko santuSTa karanevAlA hai  // 378|| aho!
tumhArI yaha kAnti sUryako jItakara sthita hai tamhArA gAmbhIrya samadrako dara
haTAkara vidyamAna hai||379|| aho ! tamhArA yaha kAntisahita parAkrama
sarvajanAtigAmI hai arthAt saba logoMse bar3hakara hai| aho putra ! tuma
rAkSasavaMzake tilakasvarUpa utpanna hue ho  /  / 380 //  he dazAnana ! jisa
prakAra sumeruparvatase jambUdvIpa suzobhita hai aura candramA tathA sUryase
AkAza suzobhita hotA hai usI prakAra logoMko mahAn Azcarya meM DAlanevAlI
ceSTAoMse yukta tujha suputrase yaha rAkSasavaMza suzobhita ho rahA hai  /  /
381-382 /  /  meghavAhana Adi tumhAre kulake pUrvapuruSa the jo laMkApurIkA
pAlana kara tathA antameM tapazcaraNa kara mokSa gaye haiM 1. -dAliliGga ma.,
ka.  /  2. jinAtigaH ma.  /  3. jAtastata ma.  /

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
166 You have been born now by the merit of the severance of our vices. How can I
describe the joy I feel, O son, with just one mouth? ||384|| These celestial
beings had given up hope of life, but now, with your birth, they have renewed
their hope. ||385|| Once, we went to Mount Kailasa to worship the Jina. There,
we bowed to the supreme sage, the possessor of omniscience, and asked, "O Lord,
when will we again reside in Lanka?" The compassionate sage replied, ||386-387||
"The son born to you from the daughter of Viyabindu will be the one who will
bring you back to Lanka." ||388|| That son will be endowed with strength and
valor, and will be the sole refuge of virtue, prowess, humility, wealth, fame,
and beauty. He will rule over three parts of the Bharata land. ||389|| He will
also liberate the wealth that has been seized by the enemy. This is not
surprising, for he will attain supreme wealth in Lanka. ||390|| So, you have
been born as a cause for celebration for the family, and all your signs are
auspicious. You have captivated everyone's eyes with your incomparable form.
||391|| Upon hearing this, Dasanana bowed his head in shame, and said, "So be
it," and folded his hands and touched his head, paying homage to the Siddha.
||392|| Thereafter, due to the influence of that child, all the relatives lived
happily in their respective places, free from fear of enemies. ||393|| Then,
Gautama Swami said to King Shrenik, "O King, in this way, men attain wealth
through fame, which spreads throughout the world, due to the influence of their
past good deeds. Age is not the cause of this. Does not a single spark of fire
instantly burn a vast forest? Does not a lion cub tear apart a herd of maddened
elephants? ||394|| A single ray of the moon quickly brings coolness to the lotus
flowers, and the rays of the sun dispel the heat generated in living beings.
||383||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 166 padmapurANe asmadvayasanavicchedapuNyairjAto'si sAMpratam  /  vaktreNaikena
te toSAt kathayAmi kathaM kathAm  // 384 //  nabhazcaragaNairemiH pratyAzA
jIvitaM prati  /  muktA satI punarbaddhA tvayyutsAhaparAyaNe  // 385 //
kailAsamandarAyAterasmAbhirvandituM jinam  /  praNamyAtizayajJAnaH pRSTaH
zramaNasattamaH  // 386 //  bhavitA punarasmAkaM kadA nAtha samAzrayaH  /
laGkAyAmiti sadvAkyamevamAhAnukampakaH  // 387 /  /  lapsyate bhavataH
putrAjanma yaH puruSottamaH  /  saMbhUtAyAM viyabindoH sa laGkAyAM pravezakaH
// 388 //  bharatasya sa khaNDAMstrIn bhokSyate balavikramaH  /
sattvapratApavinayazrIkIrtirucisaMzreyaH  // 389 //  gRhItAM ripuNA lakSmI
mocayiSyatyasAvapi  /  naitaccitraM yatastasyAM sa prApsyati parAM zriyam  //
390 //  sa tvaM mahotsavo jAtaH kulasya zubhalakSaNaH  /  upamAnavimuktena
rUpeNa hRtalocanaH  // 391 //  ityukto'sau jagAdevamastviti praNatAnataH  /
zirasyaJjalimAdhAya kRtasiddhanamaskRtiH  // 392 //  prabhAvAttasya bAlasya
bandhuvargastataH sukham  /  adhyuvAsa yathAsthAnamarAtibhayavarjitaH  // 393 //
zArdUlavikrIDitam evaM pUrvabhavArjitena puruSAH puNyena yAnti zriyaM
kIrticchannadigantarAlabhuvanA nAsmin vayaH kAraNam  /  agneH kiM na kaNaH
karoti vipulaM bhasma kSaNAt kAnanaM mattAnAM kariNAM bhinatti nivahaM siMhasya
vA nArbhakaH  // 394 //  bodhaM hyAzu kumudatISu kurute zItAMzurocirlavaH
saMtApaM praNudana divAkarakarairutpAditaM prANinAm  /   // 383 /  /  aba hamAre
duHkhoMko dUra karanevAle puNyase tU utpanna huA hai  /  he putra! eka tere
mukhase mujhe jo santoSa ho rahA hai usakA varNana kaise kara sakatA huuN||384||
ina vidyAdharoMne to jIvita rahanekI AzA chor3a dI thI aba tujha utsAhIke
utpanna honepara phirase AzA bAMdhI hai  // 385 /  /  eka bAra hama jinendra
bhagavAnkI vandanA karaneke lie kailAsa parvatapara gaye the| vahA~
avadhijJAnake dhArI munirAjako praNAma kara hamane pUchA thA ki he nAtha !
laMkAmeM hamArA nivAsa phira kaba hogA ? isake uttarameM dayAlu munirAjane kahA
thA  /  / 386-387 /  /  ki tumhAre putrase viyabindukI putrImeM jo uttama puruSa
janma prApta karegA vahI tumhArA laMkAmeM praveza karAnevAlA hogA  // 388 //
vaha putra bala aura parAkramakA dhArI tathA sattva, pratApa, vinaya, lakSmI,
kIrti aura kAntikA ananya Azraya hogA tathA bharatakSetrake tIna khaNDoMkA
pAlana karegA  // 389|| zatruke dvArA apane adhIna kI huI lakSmIko yahI putra
usase mukta karAvegA isameM AzcaryakI bhI koI bAta nahIM hai kyoMki vaha
laMkAmeM parama lakSmIko prApta hogA  // 390 /  /  so kulake mahotsavasvarUpa tU
utpanna ho gayA hai, tere saba lakSaNa zubha haiM tathA anupamarUpase tU sabake
netroMko haranevAlA hai  /  / 391 /  /  sumAlIke aisA kahanepara dazAnanane
lajjAse apanA mastaka nIcA kara liyA aura 'evamastu' kaha hAtha jor3a sirase
lagAkara siddha bhagavAnko namaskAra kiyA  // 392 /  /  tadanantara usa bAlakake
prabhAvase saba bandhujana zatruke bhayase rahita ho yathAsthAna sukhase rahane
lage  // 393 /  /  tadanantara gautamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he
rAjan ! isa prakAra pUrvopArjita puNyakarmake prabhAvase manuSya kItike dvArA
digdigantarAla tathA lokako AcchAdita karate hue lakSmIko prApta hote haiM  /
isameM manuSyakI Ayu kAraNa nahIM hai| kyA agnikA eka kaNa kSaNabharameM vizAla
vanako bhasma nahIM kara detA athavA siMhakA bAlaka madonmatta hAthiyoMke
jhaNDako vidIrNa nahIM kara detA ?  // 394 /  /  candramAkI kiraNoMkA eka aMza,
sUryako kiraNoMse utpAdita prANiyoMke 1. vicchedaH ma., kha.  /  2. samAzrayaH
ma.  /  3. -rocelavaH ma,  /

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Seventh Chapter 167 The sun, shining brightly, quickly dispels the darkness,
like a garland of clouds, and removes sleep, causing joy in the lotuses. ||395||
Thus ends the seventh chapter of the Padmacharita, composed by the Acharya known
as Ravishena, which describes Dashagriva. ||7||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptamaM parva 167 nidrAvidrutihetumizca samaye jImUtamAlAnirbha dhvAntaM
dUramapAkaroti kiraNairudyotamAtro raviH  // 395 /  /  ityA raviSeNAcAryaprokta
padmacarite dazagrIvAbhidhAnaM nAma saptamaM parva  // 7 //  santApako dUra
karatA huA zIghra hI kumudiniyoMmeM ullAsa paidA kara detA hai aura sUrya udita
hote hI nidrAko dUra haTAnevAlI apanI kiraNoMse meghamAlAke samAna malina
andhakArako dUra kara detA hai  /  / 395 //  isa prakAra ArSa nAmase prasiddha
raviSeNAcAryaviracita padmacaritameM dazAnanakA varNana karanevAlA sAtavA~ parva
pUrNa huA  // 7 //

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter  Now, in the southern range of the Vijayardha mountain,
there was a city called Asura-Sangita. There lived a powerful warrior named
Maya, a Vidyadhara, whose brilliance was like that of the sun. He was known as a
Daitya in the world. He had a wife named Hemavati, who possessed all the virtues
of womanhood.    They had a daughter named Mandodari, whose every limb was
beautiful. She had a slender waist, large eyes, and a beauty that flowed like a
stream of water.   One day, seeing his daughter, now fully blossomed with youth,
the father was overwhelmed with worry and spoke to his wife with great respect,
saying, "My dear, our daughter Mandodari has reached the age of youth. Seeing
this, my anxiety about this matter has multiplied."  Someone has rightly said
that at the onset of a girl's youth, which ignites the fire of anxiety, parents,
along with other relatives, become fuel for that fire.   Therefore, wise men,
with hearts filled with sorrow, offer water with their eyes as an offering to a
daughter at her birth.   Alas, the separation from a child born from one's own
body, taken away by strangers, pierces the heart.   Therefore, my dear, tell me,
to whom shall we give this young girl? Who, with his virtues, lineage, and
beauty, would be a suitable match for her?  Hearing this, Queen Hemavati said,
"Mothers are suitable for protecting the bodies of their daughters, while
fathers are suitable for giving them away."  "Where you find it pleasing to give
her away, it is pleasing to me as well. Daughters of noble families follow the
wishes of their husbands."  Hearing this, the king, along with his ministers,
began to deliberate. One minister suggested a certain Vidyadhara.   Then,
another minister suggested Indra, the lord of all Vidyadharas. All Vidyadharas
fear him, for he is invincible.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTamaM parva athAsIdakSiNazreNyA bhAskarapratimo dyutau  /
suvIro'surasaMgIte' pure mayakhagezvaraH  // 1 //  daityatvena prasiddhasya
samaste tasya bhuutle| nAmnA hemavatI mAryA yoSidguNasamanvitA  // 2 //  sutA
mandodarI nAma sarvAvayavasundarI  /  tanUdarI vizAlAkSI lAvaNyajalaveNikA  // 3
//  navayauvanasaMpUrNAM dRSTvA tAmanyadA pitA  /  cintAvyAkulitaH prAha
dayitAmiti sAdaram  // 4 //  ArUDhA navatAruNyaM vatsA mandodarI priye  /
guNitevaitadIyA me cintAmAnasamAzritA  // 5 //  kanyAnAM yauvanArambhe
saMtApAgnisamudbhave  /  indhanatvaM prapadyante pitarau svajanaiH samam  // 6
//  evamayaM dadatyasyA janmano'nantaraM budhAH  /  locanAJjalibhistoyaM
duHkhAkulitacetasaH  // 7 //  aho bhinatti marmANi viyogo dehaniHsRtaiH  /
apatyairjanito nItairAgatyA saMstutairjanaiH  // 8 //  tabrUhi taruNI kasmai
dadAmaitAM priye vayam  /  guNaiH kulena kAntyA ca ka etasyAH samo bhavet  // 9
//  ityuktA prAha taM devI kanyAnAM dehapAlane  /  jananya upayujyante pitaro
dAnakarmaNi  // 10 //  yatra te rucitaM dAnaM mahyaM tatraiva rocate  /
bhartRcchandAnuvartinyo bhavanti kulabAlikAH  // 11 //  ityukto mantribhiH
sAdhaM cakArAsau pradhAraNam  /  kenacinmantriNA kazciduddiSTaH khecarastataH
// 12 //  anyenendraH samudiSTaH sarvavidyAdharAdhipaH  /  tasmAddhi khecarAH
sarve bibhyati pratikUlane  // 13 //  athAnantara vijayArdha parvatakI dakSiNa
zreNImeM asura-saMgIta nAmakA nagara hai| vahA~ kAnti meM saryakI upamA dhAraNa
karanevAlA prabala yoddhA maya nAmakA vidyAdhara rahatA thaa| talameM daitya
nAmase prasiddha thaa| usakI hemavatI nAmakI strI thI jo striyoMke samasta
guNoMse sahita thI  // 1-2 //  usakI mandodarI nAmakI putrI thii| usake samasta
avayava sundara the, udara kRza thA, netra vizAla the aura vaha saundaryarUpI
jalakI dhArAke samAna jAna par3atI thii||3|| eka dina navayauvanase sampUrNa usa
putrIko dekhakara pitA cintAse vyAkula ho apanI strIse bar3e Adarake sAtha bolA
ki he priye ! putrI mandodarI navayauvanako prApta ho cukI hai| ise dekha merI
isa viSayakI mAnasika cintA kaI guNI bar3ha gayI hai  // 4-5 //  kisIne ThIka hI
kahA hai ki santAparUpI agniko utpanna karanevAle kanyAoMke yauvanArambhameM
mAtA-pitA anya parijanoMke sAtha hI sAtha Indhanapaneko prApta hote haiM  // 6 /
/  isIlie to kanyA janmake bAda duHkhase Akulita hai citta jinakA aise
vidvajjana isake lie netrarUpI aMjalike dvArA jala diyA karate haiM  // 7 //
aho, jinheM aparicita jana Akara le jAte haiM aise apane zarIrase samutpanna
santAna ( putrI ) ke sAtha jo viyoga hotA hai vaha marmako bhedana kara detA hai
// 8 //  isalie he priye ! kaho, yaha tAruNyavatI putrI hama kisake lie deveM  /
guNa, kula aura kAntise kauna vara isake anurUpa hogA  // 9 //  patike aisA
kahanepara rAnI hemavatIne kahA ki mAtAe~ to kanyAoMke zarIrakI rakSA karane meM
hI upayukta hotI haiM aura unake dAna karane meM pitA upayukta hote haiM  // 10
//  jahA~ Apake lie kanyA denA rucatA ho vahIM mere lie bhI rucegA kyoMki
kulAMganAe~ patike abhiprAyake anusAra hI calatI haiM  //  11  //  rAnIke aisA
kahane para rAjAne mantriyoMke sAtha salAha kI to kisI mantrIne kisI
vidyAdharakA ullekha kiyA  //  12 //  tadanantara kisI dUsare mantrIne kahA ki
isake lie indra vidyAdhara ThIka hogA kyoM ki vaha samasta vidyAdharoMkA
adhipati hai 1. saMgItipure m.| 2. samasti m.| 3. niHsute m.| ,

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter  169  Then, King Maya himself said, "I do not know the
minds of you all. But I am pleased with the renowned Dashaanan, who has mastered
all the Vidyaas." 14  "He is destined to be a great one, a cause of wonder in
the world. Otherwise, how could he have mastered so many Vidyaas at such a young
age?" 15  Hearing this, all the ministers, led by Maricha, who were experts in
Mantras, were filled with joy. 16  Maricha and his powerful brothers, along with
the other ministers, urged King Maya to act quickly. 17  King Maya, considering
that time was slipping away, decided to act. He chose a favorable day, when the
auspicious planets were in the ascendant, the inauspicious planets were in the
opposite direction, and the ascendant was auspicious. He then set out with his
daughter in the Pushpantak Vimana. As they departed, the sound of trumpets
filled the air, and the women sang auspicious songs. When the trumpets fell
silent, the sky echoed with the women's songs, as if it were filled with sound
itself. 18-20  "Dashaanan is in the Bhimavana," reported the young men who had
gone ahead, returning to King Maya after disembarking from the Pushpantak
Vimana. 1  King Maya, after consulting with the local spies, set out for the
Bhimavana. There, he saw the forest, dark as a black cloud. 21-22  One of the
spies, pointing out the specific location of Dashaanan, said, "O King! Just as
there is the Mandaruna forest between the Sammedachala and Kailasa mountains, so
too is this excellent forest between the Valahka and Sandhyavarta mountains. See
how beautiful this forest is, like a mass of soft darkness, with its tall, dense
trees." 23-24  "In the middle of this forest, you can see a city adorned with
large, white houses like conch shells. It is as beautiful as a cluster of autumn
clouds." 25  "Near this city, you can see a very tall palace. It is so
magnificent that it seems to touch the sky with its peaks." 26  1.  Maricha and
his brothers. 2.  The sound of the trumpets ceased, and the sky was filled with
sound. 3.  The young men who had gone ahead. 4.  Between the Valahka and
Sandhyavarta mountains.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTamaM parva 169 tataH svayaM mayenoktaM yuSmAkaM vedmi no manaH  /  mahyaM tu
rucitaH khyAtaH siddhavidyo dazAnanaH  //  14  //  bhavitAsau mahAn ko'pi
jagato'dbhutakAraNam  /  anyathA jAyate siddhirvidyAnAmAzu nAlpake  // 15 //
tato'numenire tasya tadvAkyaM pramudAnvitAH  /  mArIcapramukhAH sarve mantriNo
mantrakovidAH  //  16  //  mantriNo bhrAtarazcAsya mArIcAdyA mahAbalAH  /
mArIco'sya tatazcakre mAnasaM tvarayAnvitam  // 17 //  graheSvabhimukhastheSu
saumyeSu divase zubhe  /  krUragraheSvapazyatsu lagne kuzalatAvahe ||18  //
kRtyaM kAlAtipAtena neti jJAtvA tato mayaH  /  puSpAntakavimAnena prasthitaH
kanyayAnvitaH  //  19 //  tato maGgalagItena pramadAnAM namastalam  /
tUryanAdasya vicchede' zabdAtmakamivAbhavat  // 20 //  puSpAntakAd viniSkramya
mImAraNye sthitA iti  /  yuvabhiH kathitaM tasya nirvRtya prathamAgataH  //  21
//  taddezavedibhizvAraiH kathitaM tadvanaM tataH  /  calito'sAvapazyacca
meghAnAmitra saMcayam  // 22 //  cAraH kazciduvAceti pazyedaM deva sadvanam  /
snigdhadhvAntacayAkAraM niviDottuGgapAdapam  //  23  //  advervalAhakAkhyasya
sandhyAvartasya cAntare  /  mandAruNamivAraNyaM saMmedASTApada gayoH  //  24  //
vanasya pazya madhye'sya zaGkhazubhra mahAgRham  /  nagaraM
zaradambhodamahAvRndasamadyuti  //  25  //  samIpe ca purasyAsya pazya
prAsAdamunnatam  /  saudharmamiva yaH praSTumIhate zRGgakoTibhiH  //  26  //
aura saba vidyAdhara usake viruddha jAnemeM bhayabhIta bhI raheMge || 13|| taba
rAjA mayane svayaM kahA ki maiM Apa logoM ke manakI bAta to nahIM jAnatA para
mujhe jise samasta vidyAe~ siddha huI haiM aisA prasiddha dazAnana acchA lagatA
hai || 14 || nizcita hI vaha jagat meM koI adbhuta kAryaM karanevAlA hogA
anyathA use choTI hI umarameM zIghra hI aneka vidyAe~ siddha kaise ho jAtIM  //
15 //  tadanantara mantra karane meM nipuNa mArIca Adi samasta pramukha
mantriyoMne bar3e harSa ke sAtha rAjA maya kI bAtakA samana kiyA  //  16  //
tadanantara mahAbalavAn mArIca Adi mantriyoM aura bhAiyoMne rAjA mayake manako
zIghratA se yukta kiyA arthAt preraNA kI ki isa kAryako zIghra hI sampanna kara
lenA cAhie  // 17 //  taba rAjA mayane bhI vicAra kiyA ki samaya bIta jAnese
kAryaM siddha nahIM ho pAtA hai aisA vicArakara vaha kisI zubha dina, jabaki
saumyagraha sAmane sthita the, krUra graha vimukha the aura lagna maMgalakArI
thI, kanyA ke sAtha puSpAntaka vimAnameM baiThakara calA  /  prasthAna karate
samaya turahIkA madhura zabda ho rahA thA aura striyA~ maMgalagIta gA rahI
thiiN| bIca-bIca meM jaba turahIkA zabda banda hotA thA to striyoMke
maMgalagItoMse AkAza aisA gU~ja uThatA thA mAno zabdamaya hI ho gayA ho  // 1820
//  dazAnana bhImavanameM hai, yaha samAcAra, puSpAntaka vimAnase utarakara jo
javAna Age gaye the unhoMne lauTakara rAjA mayase kahA  /  taba rAjA maya usa
dezake jAnakAra guptacaroM se patA calAkara bhImavanakI ora claa| vahA~ jAkara
usane kAlI ghaTAke samAna vaha vana dekhA  //  21-22  //  dazAnanake khAsa
sthAnakA patA batAte hue kisI guptacarane kahA ki he rAjan ! jisa prakAra
sammedAcala aura kailAsa parvata ke bIca meM mandAruNa nAmakA vana hai usI
prakAra valAhaka aura sandhyAvataM nAmaka parvatoMke bIca meM yaha uttama vana
dekhie  /  dekhie ki yaha vana snigdha andhakArakI rAzike samAna kitanA sundara
mAlUma hotA hai aura yahA~ kitane U~ce tathA saghana vRkSa laga rahe haiM ||23 -
24 || isa vanake madhyameM zaMkhake samAna sapheda bar3e-bar3e gharoMse
suzobhita jo vaha nagara dikhAI de rahA hai vaha zarad Rtu bAdaloMke samUha ke
samAna kitanA bhalA jAna par3atA hai ||25|| usI nagarake samIpa dekho eka bahuta
U~cA mahala dikhAI de rahA hai  /  aisA mahala ki jo apane zikharoM ke
agrabhAgase mAno 1. mArIcazca ma  /  2. vicchedazabdAtmaka-ma.  /  3. prathamA
gatiH ma  /  4. cAntaram ma.  /  22

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
170 Padmapurana Having descended from the sky, the army of King Maya rested near
the palace as was appropriate. ||27|| Abandoning the pomp of trumpets and other
instruments, the king of the demons, Maya, approached the palace, adorned with
the attire of a refined man, accompanied by a few close associates. ||28||
Seeing the palace, Maya's pride vanished and he was filled with wonder. He was
announced by the gatekeeper and ascended the palace. ||29|| He reached the
seventh floor, step by step, with careful steps. There he saw a beautiful
maiden, like a forest goddess in human form. ||30|| She was Chandranakha, the
sister of Dashaanan, and she performed the rites of welcome. It is only right
that those who are well-versed in their lineage do not fail in proper
hospitality. ||31|| Then, seated comfortably, Maya asked the maiden, who was
seated on a seat fit for a princess, with humility and respect: ||32||
"Daughter, who are you? Why do you reside in this terrifying forest? And whose
is this grand palace?" ||33|| "How do you endure being alone in this palace?
Your beautiful body is not fit for suffering." ||34|| Asked thus, the young
girl, with the natural shyness of women, lowered her head, like a timid deer in
the forest, and spoke softly: ||35|| "My brother, Dashaanan, has gone to Mount
Meru to worship the Jina, having perfected this Chandrahas sword through the
sixth vow (tela). He has entrusted me with the protection of this sword. So, O
noble one, I reside in this temple adorned by the radiance of Chandra Prabha. If
you have come to see Dashaanan, please rest here for a moment." ||36-38|| While
this sweet conversation was taking place, a circle of light appeared in the sky.
||39|| At that moment, the maiden said, "It seems that Dashaanan, the ten-headed
one, has arrived, making the sky radiant with his thousand rays." ||40||
Soudharma heaven is what he desires. ||26||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 170 padmapurANe avatIrya namobhAgAt samIpe tasya vezmanaH  /  sAnIkinI
vizazrAma cakAra ca yathocitam  // 27 //  tUryAdiDambaraM tyaktvA
daityAnAmadhipastataH  /  AptaH katipayairyukto vinItAkalpazobhitaH  // 28 //
abhimAnodayaM muktvA sakanyaH praaptvismyH| taM prAsAdaM
samArukSatpratIhAraniveditaH  // 29 //  saptamaM ca talaM prAptaH krameNa
nibhRtakramaH  /  vanadevImivaikSiSTa mUrtAmuttamakanyakAm  // 30 //
athendunakhayA tasya kRtAbhyAgatesatkriyA  /  prapadyante paribhraMzaM kulajJA
nopacArataH  // 31 //  tataH sukhAsanAsInaH sthitAM kanyocitAsane  /  apRcchat
prazrayAdevaM tAM mayo vinayAnvitAm  // 32 //  vatse kAsi kuto vAsi kasmAdvA
kAraNAdiha  /  vasasi prabhaye'raNye kasya cedaM mahAgRham  // 33 //  ekAkinyA
kathaM cAsmin tirutpadyate tava  /  vapuruskRSTametatte pIDAnAM naiva bhAjanam
// 34 //  evaM pRSTA satI bAlA strINAM svAbhAvikI trapA  /  mandaM vanamRgI
mugdhA jagAdeti natAnanA  // 35 //  SaSThabhaktena saMsAdhya candrahAsamimaM
mama  /  zailarAjaM gato bhrAtA vandituM jinapuGgavAn  // 36 //  dazavaktreNa
tenAhaM pAlanArtha niruupitaa| Arya tiSThAmi caitye'smin candraprabhavirAjite
// 37 //  yadi ca syurbhavanto'pi draSTumeta samAgatAH  /  kSaNamAtraM
tato'traiva sthAnaM kurvantu sajanAH  // 38 //  yAvadevaM samAlApo vartate
madhurastayoH  /  tejasA maNDalaM te sma namastale  // 39 //  uktaM ca kanyayA
nUnamAgato'yaM dazAnanaH  /  sahasrakiraNaM kurvan prabhayA vigataprabham  // 40
//  saudharma svargako hI chUnA cAhatA hai  // 26 //  rAjA mayakI senA AkAzase
utarakara usI mahalake samIpa yathAyogya vizrAma karane lagI  // 27 //
tadanantara daityoMkA adhipati rAjA maya turahI Adi vAditroMkA ADambara
chor3akara tathA vinIta manuSyoMke yogya veSa-bhUSA dhAraNakara kucha
AptajanoMke sAtha usa mahalake samIpa phuNcaa| kanyA mandodarI usake sAtha thii|
mahalako dekhate hI rAjA mayakA jahA~ ahaMkAra chUTA vahA~ use Azcarya bhI kama
nahIM haa| tadanantara dvArapAlake dvArA samAcAra bhejakara vaha mahalake Upara
ca  // 28-29 /  /  sAvadhAnIse paira rakhatA huA jaba vaha kramase sAtaveM
khaNDameM pahu~cA taba vahA~ usane mUrtidhAriNI vanadevIke samAna uttama kanyA
dekhI  // 30 //  vaha kanyA dazAnanakI bahana candranakhA thI so usane sabakA
atithi-satkAra kiyA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki kulake jAnakAra manuSya yogya
upacArase kabhI nahIM cUkate  // 31 /  /  tadanantara jaba maya sukhakArI
Asanapara baiTha gayA aura candranakhA bhI kanyAoMke yogya Asanapara baiTha cukI
taba vinaya dikhAtI huI usa kanyAse mayane bar3I namratAse pUchA  // 32 //  ki
he putri! tU kauna hai ? aura kisa kAraNase isa bhayAvaha vanameM rahatI hai
tathA yaha bar3A bhArI mahala kisakA hai ?  // 33 /  /  isa mahalameM akelI
rahate hue tujhe kaise dhairya utpanna hotA hai| terA yaha utkRSTa zarIra pIDAkA
pAtra to kisI taraha nahIM ho sakatA  // 34 //  striyoMke lajjA svabhAvase hI
hotI hai isalie mayake isa prakAra pUchanepara usa satI kanyAkA mukha lajjAse
nata ho gyaa| sAtha hI vanakI hariNIke samAna bholo thI hI ataH dhIre-dhIre isa
prakAra bolI ki merA bhAI dazAnana SaSThopavAsa arthAt telAke dvArA isa
candrahAsa khaDgako siddha kara jinendra bhagavAnko vandanA karane ke lie sumeru
parvatapara gayA hai  /  dazAnana mujhe isa khaDgakI rakSA karaneke lie kaha
gayA hai so he Arya ! maiM candraprabha bhagavAnse suzobhita isa caityAlayameM
sthita huuN| yadi Apa loga dazAnanako dekhaneke lie Aye haiM to kSaNa mAtra
yahIMpara vizrAma kIjie  /  / 35-38|| jabataka una donoMmeM isa prakArakA
madhura AlApa cala rahA thA tabataka AkAzatalameM tejakA maNDala dikhAI dene
lagA  // 39 /  /  usI samaya kanyAne kahA ki jAna par3atA hai apanI 1. samAruhya
ma.  /  2. -myAgama m.| 3. prapadyAntapArabhraza kulajAtopacArata: m.| 4. sa
cAsanAmIna: ma.  /  5. -mevaM ma.  /  6. dadazAte m.|

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter  171  Seeing him approaching, like a mass of clouds
accompanied by lightning, Maya, filled with anxiety, rose from his seat. ||41||
Having performed the appropriate rituals, they sat down again on their seats.
Their bodies were darkened by the brilliance of their swords. ||42||  Marichi,
Vajramadhya, Vajra-netra, Nabhastaddit, Ugra-nak, Marud-vaktra, Medhavi, Sarasa,
and Shuka, and others like them, having seen Dasha-nan, were filled with great
joy. They spoke these auspicious words to Maya, the minister of the Daitya king:
||43-44||  "O Daitya king, your wisdom is superior to all others. It is because
of you that this best of men has been placed in our hearts." ||45||  They said
to Dasha-griva, "Oh, how brilliant your form is! Oh, how great is your humility
and your strength!" ||46||  "This Daitya king, known as Maya throughout the
world, resides in the city of Asarasangeet in the southern region. He has been
attracted by your virtues, O Kumar. Who would not be eager to see you?"
||47-48||  Then Ratna-shrava's son, Dasha-nan, said, "Welcome! The wise say that
sweet speech is the family knowledge of the virtuous." ||49||  "The Daitya king,
a noble man, has shown us his love. I wish that he would bestow his favor on
these people with appropriate orders." ||50||  Then Maya said, "Father, it is
right for you to say this. The virtuous never engage in harmful conduct." ||51||
Seeing Dasha-nan, Maya's ministers, whose minds were filled with curiosity, were
filled with joy and spoke to him again with words full of affection. ||52||
Then, with good intentions, Dasha-nan entered the beautiful inner sanctum of the
Chandra-prabha Jinalaya. There he performed great worship, especially to the
Jina-endras. ||53||  He recited various hymns that caused the hair to stand on
end. He folded his hands and placed them on his head, which was adorned with a
jewel. ||54||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTamaM parva 171 vidyuddaNDena saMyuktaM meghAnAmiva taM cayam  /  avalokya
samAsannamuttasthau saMbhramAnmayaH  // 41 //  kRtvA yathocitAcAramAsaneSu punaH
sthitAH'  /  maNDalAgrapramAjAlazyAmalIkRtavigrahAH  // 42 //  mArIcI
vajramadhyazca vajranetro namastaDit  /  ugranako maruddhako medhAvI sAraNaH
zukaH  // 43 //  evamAdyA gatAstoSaM paraM dRSTvA dazAnanam  /  ityUcurmaGgalaM
vAkyaM daityanAthasya mantriNaH  // 44 //  asmabhyaM tava daityeza
dhiSaNAtigarIyasI  /  narANAmuttamo yena manasyeSa nivezitaH  // 45 /  /  iti
cAhurdazagrIvamaho te rUpamujjvalam  /  aho prazrayasaMbhAro vIyaM
cAtizayAnvitam  // 46 //  dakSiNasyAmayaM zreNyAmasuraprathite pure  /
daityAnAmadhipo nAmnA mayo bhuvanavizrutaH  // 47 //  guNaireSa samAkRSTaH
kumAra tava nirmalaiH  /  AyAtaH kaM na kurvanti sajjanA darzanotsukam  // 48 //
svAgatAdikamityAha tato ratnazravaHsutaH  /  satAM hi kulavidyeyaM
yanmanoharabhASaNam  // 19 //  sAdhunA detyanAthena premadarzanakAriNA  /
ucitena niyogena jano'yamanugRhyatAm  // 50 //  vacaH so'yaM tataH prAha tAta
yuktamidaM tava  /  pratikUlasamAcArA na bhavantyeva sAdhavaH  // 51 //
dRSTo'sI sacivestasya kautukaakraantmaanseH| kRtAnandazca sadvAkyaH punaruktaH
samAkulaiH  // 52 //  tato garbhagRhaM ramyaM praviSTo'yaM subhAvanaH  /  cakAra
mahatI pUjAM jinendrANAM vizeSataH  // 53 //  stavAMzca vividhAnuktvA
romaharSaNakAriNaH  /  mastake'alimAsthAya cUDAmaNivibhUSite  // 54 //  prabhAse
sUryako niSprabha karatA huA dazAnana A gayA hai  // 40 //  bijalIke sahita
megharAzike samAna usa dazAnanako nikaTavartI dekha maya har3abar3Akara Asanase
uTha khar3A huA  /  / 41 //  yathAyogya AcAra pradarzita karaneke bAda saMba
punaH AsanoMpara ArUr3ha hue| talavArakI kAntise jinake zarIra zyAmala ho rahe
the aise mArIca, vajramadhya, vajranetra, nabhastaDit, ugranaka, marudvaktra,
medhAvI, sArasa aura zuka Adi mayake mantrI loga dazAnanako dekhakara parama
santoSako prApta hue aura nimnalikhita maMgala vacana mayase kahane lage ki he
daityarAja! ApakI buddhi hama sabase adhika zreSTha hai kyoMki Apane hI isa
puruSottamako hRdayameM sthAna diyA thaa| arthAt hama logoMkA isakI ora dhyAna
nahIM gayA jabaki Apane isakA apane manameM acchI taraha vicAra rakhA  // 42-45
//  mayase itanA kahakara una mantriyoMne dazAnanase kahA ki aho tumhArA ujjvala
rUpa AzcaryakArI hai, tumhArA vinayakA bhAra adbhuta hai aura tumhArA parAkrama
bhI atizayase sahita hai  /  / 46 //  yaha daityoMkA rAjA dakSiNazreNIke
asarasaMgIta nAmA nagarakA rahanevAlA hai tathA saMsArameM maya nAmase prasiddha
hai| yaha Apake gaNoMse AkarSita hokara yahA~ AyA hai so ThIka hI hai kyoMki
sajjana puruSa kise darzanake lie utkaNThita nahIM krte?||47-48|| taba
ratnazravAke putra dazAnanane kahA ki ApakA svAgata hai| AcArya kahate haiM ki
jo madhura bhASaNa hai vaha satpuruSoMkI kulavidyA hai  /  / 49 //  daityoMke
adhipati uttama puruSa haiM jinhoMne ki hameM premapUrvaka darzana diye| maiM
cAhatA hU~ ki ye ucita Adeza dekara isa janako anugRhIta kareM  // 50 //
tadanantara mayane kahA ki he tAta! tumheM yaha kahanA ucita hai kyoMki jo
uttama puruSa haiM ve viruddha AcaraNa kabhI nahIM karate  // 51 //  jinakA
citta kautukase vyApta thA aise mayake mantriyoMne bhI dazAnanake darzana kiye
aura AkulatAse bhare tathA bAra-bAra kahe hue uttama vacanoMse use Anandita kiyA
// 52 //  tadanantara acchI bhAvanAse yukta dazAnanane candraprabha jinAlayake
mahAmanohara garbhagRhameM praveza kiyaa| vahAM usane pradhAnarUpase jinendra
bhagavAnkI bar3I bhArI pUjA kI  /  / 53 /  /  romAMca utpanna karanevAle aneka
prakArake stavana par3he, hAtha jor3akara cUr3AmaNise suzobhita mastakapara
lagAye, aura 1. sthitaH ma.  /  2. vigrahaH ma.  /  3. daityasya ma.  /  4. cAha
m.| 5. idaM mayastataH kha.  /  idaM mayasutaH ma.  /  6. svabhAvataH m.|

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,  He touched the ground with his forehead and knees, and
bowed low to the feet of the Jinas for a long time. || 55 || Then, the one who
had attained the highest liberation, left the Jina's house, accompanied by the
king of the Daityas, and sat down comfortably on a seat. || 56 || While
inquiring about the news of the celestial beings who lived on the Vijayardha
mountain, he saw Mandodari. || 57 || She was adorned with beautiful features,
and her body was like a land of jewels of good fortune. Her feet were small, but
her nails were long and smooth. || 58 || Her thighs were like the trunks of
banana trees, or like the quiver of Kamadeva, or like streams of beauty. || 59
|| Her hips were well-proportioned, high, and like the assembly hall of
Kamadeva, and they were adorned with a beautiful curve. || 60 || Her waist was
strong like a thunderbolt, and her breasts were like golden pots. Her face was
downcast in shyness, and her arms were soft like garlands of Shirisha flowers.
|| 61 || Her neck was adorned with lines like a conch shell, and it was slightly
bent. Her face was like the full moon, and her nose was like a bridge built
across a river of the brilliance of her eyes. || 62 || Her cheeks were adorned
with the red hue of her teeth, and her voice was like the sound of a vina, a
bumblebee, and a cuckoo in ecstasy. || 63 || Her eyes were like the messengers
of Kamadeva, and she seemed to scatter blue lotuses, red lotuses, and white
lotuses in all directions. || 64 || Her forehead was like the moon on the eighth
day, her ears were beautiful, and her hair was smooth, black, and fine. || 65 ||
She was conquering the lotus flower with the beauty of her face and feet, the
elephant with the beauty of her hands, and the swan and the lioness with her
grace and movement. || 66 || The knowledge had embraced Dashaanan, and I
remained like this, filled with envy, as if Lakshmi had left her lotus abode and
come in the form of Mandodari. || 67 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe spRza~llalATapaTTena jAnubhyAM ca mahItalam  /  pAvanau sa
jinendrANAM nanAma caraNau ciram  //  55  //  tato gehAjinendrANAM niSkrAntaH
paramodayaH  /  sehito daityanAthena niviSTaH sukhamAsane  // 56 //
vijayArdhagiristhAnAM pRcchan vArtAM khagAminAm  /  cakSuSo gocarIbhAvaM ninye
mandodarImasau  //  57  //  cArulakSaNasaMpUrNAM saubhAgyamaNibhUmikAm  /
tanusnigdhanakhottuGgapRSThapAdasaroruhAm  // 58 //  rambhAstambhasamAnAbhyAM
tUNAbhyAM puSpadhanvanaH  /  lAvaNyAmbhaH pravAhAbhyAmUrubhyAmatirAjitAm  // 59
//  yuktavistAramuttuGgaM manmathAsthAnamaNDapam  /  nitamvaM dadhatImaM
prakukundara manoharam  // 60 //  vajramadhyAmadhovaktrAM hemakumbhanibhastanIm
/  zirISasumanomAlAmRdu bAhulatAyugAm  //  61  //  kamburekhAnatagrIvAM
pUrNacandrasamAnanAm  /  netrakAntinadI setubandhasaMnibhanAsikAm  //  62  //
raktadantacchadacchAyAcchuritAcchakapolakAm  /
vINAbhramarasonmAdaparapuSTasamasvanAm  // 63 //  indIvarAravindAnAM kumudAnAM
ca saMhatIH  /  vimuJcantImivAzAsu dRSTyA dUtyA manobhuvaH  //  64  //
aSTamIzarvarInAthasamAnAlikapaTTikAm  /  saMgatazravaNAM
snigdhanIlasUkSmaziroruhAm  // 65 //  zobhayAsyAMghrihastAnAM jaGgamAmiva
padminIm  /  jayantIM kariNIM haMsIM siMhIM ca gativibhramaiH  //  66  //
vidyAliGganajAmIyAM dhArayantIM dazAnane  /  padmAlayaM parityaja lakSmImiva
samAgatAm  //  67 //  172 lalATataTa tathA ghuTanoMse pRthvItalakA sparza kara
jinendra bhagavAn ke pavitra caraNoMko dera taka namaskAra kiyA  /  /  54-55  //
tadanantara parama abhyudayako dhAraNa karanevAlA dazAnana jinamandirase bAhara
nikalakara daityarAja mayake sAtha Asanapara sukhase baiThA  //  56  //  |
vArtAlApake prakaraNa meM jaba vaha vijayArdhaM parvata para rahanevAle
vidyAdharoMkA samAcAra pUcha rahA thA taba mandodarI usake dRSTigocara huI
||17|| mandodarI sundara lakSaNoMse pUrNa thI, saubhAgyarUpI maNiyoMkI mAno
bhUmi thI, usake caraNakamaloMkA pRSTha bhAga choTe kintu snigdha nakhoMse
Uparako uThA huA jAna par3atA thA || 58 || vaha jina UruoMse suzobhita thI ve
keleke stambhake samAna the, kAmadevake tarakasake samAna jAna par3ate the
athavA saundaryarUpI jala pravAhake samAna mAlUma hote the || 59 || vaha jisa
nitambako dhAraNa kara rahI thI vaha yogya vistAra se sahita thA, U~cA uThA thA,
kAmadeva ke sabhAmaNDapake samAna jAna par3atA thA aura kucha U~ce uThe hue
kUlhoM se manohara thA  //  60  //  usakI kamara vajrake samAna majabUta athavA
horAke samAna dedIpyamAna thI, lajjAke kAraNa usakA mukha nIcekI ora thA,
svarNakalazake samAna usake stana the, aura zirISake phUloMkI mAlAke samAna
komala usakI donoM bhujAe~ thIM  //  61  //  usakI garadana zaMkha jaisI
rekhAoMse suzobhita tathA kucha nIce kI ora jhukI thI, mukha pUrNacandramAke
samAna thA aura nAka to aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno netroMkI kAntirUpI nadIke
bIcameM pula hI bA~dha diyA gayA ho  //  62  //  usake svaccha kapola oThoM kI
lAla-lAla kAntise vyApta the tathA usakI AvAja vINA, bhramara aura unmatta
koyalakI AvAjake samAna thI || 63 || usakI dRSTi kAmadevakI dUtI ke samAna thI
aura usase vaha dizAoMmeM nIlakamala, lAlakamala tathA sapheda kamaloMkA samUha
hI mAno bikhetI thI || 64 || usakA lalATa aSTamIke candramAke samAna thA, kAna
sundara the, tathA cikane, kAle aura bArIka bAla the ||65 || vaha mukha tathA
caraNoM kI zobhAse calatI-phiratI kamalinIko, hAthoM kI zobhAse hastinIko tathA
gati aura vibhramake dvArA kramazaH haMsI aura siMhanIko jIta rahI thI ||66 ||
vidyAoMne dazAnanakA AliMgana prApta kara liyA aura meM aisI hI raha gayI isa
prakAra IrSyAko dhAraNa karatI huI lakSmI hI mAno kamalarUpI gharako chor3akara
mandodarIke bahAne A gayI thI || 67  //  1. sahito ma  /  2. mAna kha.  /  3.
adRzyakaTIpArzva sundaram iti kha. pustake TippaNam  /  jaGghAnAmiva ma.  /  4.
mAlAM ma.  /

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter  173  A creation, unprecedented, devoid of any flaws, was
brought forth by Karma, as if gathering all the beauty of the world. ||68||
She, like a radiant light, had come to earth, abandoning the Moon, fearing the
touch of the Sun's rays and the fear of Rahu's attack. ||69||  The cluster of
gems adorning her forehead served as a veil for her face, and the necklace she
wore was like a bridge over the stream of her facial beauty. ||70||  She wore
earrings adorned with pearls, which seemed like a garland of white sandalwood.
||71||  Her hips, unable to bear the agitation caused by the pride of Kama, were
adorned with a girdle studded with gems. ||72||  Seeing her, so beautiful,
Dashaanan was filled with sorrow and thought, "Even those with fortitude are
often subdued by worldly desires." ||73||  His gaze, falling upon her, filled
with sweetness, became intoxicated, as if drunk with honey, even when withdrawn.
||74||  He wondered, "Who is this supreme woman? Is she Hri, Sri, Lakshmi,
Dhriti, Kirti, or Saraswati?" ||75||  "Is she married or unmarried? Or is this
some illusion created by someone? Oh, this is the most excellent creation, the
crown jewel of all women!" ||76||  "If I could obtain this woman, who steals the
senses, my birth would be fulfilled. Otherwise, it is as worthless as a blade of
grass." ||77||  Thinking thus, May, the knower of intentions, brought his
daughter Mandodari before Dashaanan and said, "She is yours." ||78||  Dashaanan,
drenched by these words, as if by nectar, felt a surge of joy, his body tingling
with delight. ||79||  Then, in a moment, all things came together, and the
wedding ceremony of these two, filled with the joy of their families, was
completed. ||80||  Then, Dashaanan, his purpose fulfilled, went to his city,
Swayamprabha, with Mandodari, believing he had obtained the fortune that resided
in all the worlds. ||81||  Karma, the creator, had gathered all the beauty of
the world and, under the guise of a woman, had created this unprecedented
creation. ||68||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTamaM parva 173 aGgAnAviSayAM sRSTi mapUrvAmiva karmaNA  /  AhRtya
jagato'zeSaM lAvaNyamiva nirmitAm  // 6 //
divAkarakarasparzasvarbhAnugrahabhItitaH  /  tArApatiM parityajya kSitiM
kAntimivAgatAm  // 69 /  /  sImantamaNibhAjAlaracitAsyAvaguNThanAm  /  hAreNa
vaktralAvaNyasetuneva vibhUSitAm  // 7 //
karNayorbAlikAlokAnmuktAphalasamutthitA  /  sitasya sinduvArasya maJjarImiva
bibhratIm  // 7 //  kandarpadarpasaMkSobhaM sahate jaghanaM na yat  /  itIva
veSTitaM kAJcyA maNicakrakakAntayA  // 72 //  manojJAmapi tAM dRSTvA
duHkhito'bhUt sa cintayA  /  nIyante viSayaiH prAyaH satvavanto'pi vazyatAm  //
73 //  tasyAM mAdhuryayuktAyAM dRSTistasya gatA satI  /  abhavanmadhumatteva
pratyAnItApi dhUrNitA  // 7 //  acintayattadA nAma syAdiyaM vanitottamA  /  hIH
zrIlakSmIrdhatiH kIrtiH prAptamUrtiH sarasvatI  // 75 //  kimUDheyamutAnUDhA
mAyA vA kenacitkRtA  /  aho sRSTiriyaM mUrdhni sthitA nikhilayoSitAm  // 76 //
prApnuyAd yadi mAmaitAM kanyAmindriyahAriNIm  /  kRtArtha nastato janma jAyate
tRNamanyathA  // 77 //  cintayanta mimaM caivaM mayo'bhiprAyakovidaH  /  upanIya
sutAmAha prabhurasyA bhavAniti  // 78 //  tena vAkyena sikto'sAvamRteneva
tatkSaNAt  /  toSasyevAkarAn jAtAn dadhe romAJcakaNTakAn  // 79 //  tato'nayoH
kSaNodbhutasarvavastusamAgamam  /  svajanAnanditaM vRttaM pANigrahaNamaGgalam
// 8 //  samaM tayA tato yAtaH svayaMprabhapuraM kRtI  /  manyamAnaH zriyaM
prAptAM samastabhuvanAzritAm  // 81 //  karmarUpI vidhAtAne saMsArake samasta
saundaryako ikaTThA kara usake bahAne strIviSayaka apUrva sRSTi hI mAno racI thI
// 68 //  vaha sUryako kiraNoMkA sparza tathA rAhugrahake AkramaNake bhayase
candramAko chor3akara pRthvIpara AyI huI kAntike samAna jAna par3atI thI  // 69
//  usane apane sImanta ( mA~ga ) meM jo maNi pahana rakhA thA usakI kAntikA
samUha usake mukhapara ghUghaTakA kAma detA thaa| vaha jisa hArase suzobhita thI
vaha mukhake saundaryake pravAhake samAna jAna par3atA thA  // 70 /  /  usane
apane kAnoMmeM motIjar3ita bAliyA~ pahana rakhI thIM so unakI prabhAse aisI jAna
par3atI thI mAno sapheda sinduvAra (nirguNDI) kI maMjarI hI dhAraNa kara rahI ho
// 71 //  cUMki jaghanasthala kAmake darpajanya kSobhako sahana nahIM karatA thA
isalie hI mAno use maNisamUhase suzobhita kaTisUtrase veSTita kara rakhA thA  //
72 //  vaha mandodarI atyanta sundara thI phira bhI dazAnana use dekha cintAse
duHkhI ho gayA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki dhairyavAn manuSya bhI prAyaH viSayoMke
adhIna ho jAte haiM  /  / 73 //  mandodarI mAdhuryase yukta thI isalie usapara
par3I dazAnanakI dRSTi svayaM bhI mAno madhuse matta ho gayI thI, yahI kAraNa
thA ki vaha usapara-se haTA lenepara bhI nazAmeM jhUmatI thI  // 74|| dazAnana
vicArane lagA ki yaha uttama strI kauna ho sakatI hai ? kyA hrI, zrI, lakSmI,
dhRti, kIrti athavA sarasvatI hai ?  // 75 //  yaha vivAhita hai yA avivAhita ?
athavA kisIke dvArA kI huI mAyA hai ? aho, yaha to samasta striyoMkI zirodhArya
sarvazreSTha sRSTi hai  // 76 /  /  yadi maiM indriyoMko haranevAlI isa kanyAko
prApta kara sakU~ to merA janma kRtakRtya ho jAye anyathA tRNake samAna tuccha
hai hI  /  / 77 //  isa prakAra vicAra karate hue dazAnanase abhiprAyake
jAnanevAle mayane putrI mandodarIko pAsa le jAkara kahA ki isake svAmI Apa haiM
/  / 78 //  mayake isa vacanase dazAnanako itanA Ananda huA mAno tatkSaNa
amRtase hI sIMcA gayA ho| usake sAre zarIrameM romAMca uTha Aye mAno santoSake
aMkura hI utpanna hue hoM  // 79 //  tadanantara jahA~ kSaNabharameM hI samasta
vastuoMkA samAgama ho gayA thA aura kuTumbIjana jahAM Anandase phUla rahe the
aisA ina donoMkA pANigrahaNa-maMgala sampanna huA  // 80 //  tadanantara
dazAnana kRtakRtya hotA huA mandodarIke sAtha svayaMprabhanagara gyaa| vaha
mandodarIko pAkara aisA 1. -masarvA ma.  /  2. jagatAzeSa m.| 3. lokAM m.| 4.
samutthitAm m.| 5. maNicakrAkAntayA kh.| 6. bhuvanadhitAm m.|

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, King Maya, though filled with joy at the removal of the
thorn of worry about his daughter, was also filled with sorrow at her
separation. He resided in his own abode.  ||42|| Mandodari, with her charming
demeanor, gradually became the most prominent among thousands of goddesses,
captivating the heart of the king with her virtues. ||43||  Like Indra with his
consort Indrani, Dashaanan, accompanied by Mandodari, delighted in his desired
places. ||8||  Desiring to know the power of his knowledge, Dashaanan, with his
radiant brilliance, engaged in numerous activities. ||85||  He, being one,
became many, uniting with all women.  He sometimes generated heat like the sun,
and sometimes emitted moonlight like the moon. ||86||  He sometimes emitted
flames like fire, and sometimes rained like clouds.  He sometimes moved
mountains like the wind, and sometimes exerted the power of Indra. ||87||  He
sometimes became the ocean, sometimes a mountain, sometimes a maddened elephant,
and sometimes a swift horse. ||88||  He was near in an instant, far in an
instant, visible in an instant, invisible in an instant, great in an instant,
subtle in an instant, terrifying in an instant, and not terrifying in an
instant. ||89||  Thus, while roaming, he reached a mountain called Meghrav and
saw a clear water pond there. ||90||  In that pond, there were lotus flowers,
blue lotuses, red lotuses, white lotuses, and other types of lotuses.  On its
banks, there were cranes, swans, ducks, and herons. ||91||  Its banks were
covered with soft green grass, and its steps enhanced its beauty.  Its water
seemed as if the sky had melted and filled it with the rays of the sun. ||92||
Its banks were filled with tall trees like Arjuna (a type of tree).  Whenever
groups of fish jumped up in it, water droplets flew up from them. ||93||  With
its waves, which were like fleeting moments, it seemed to be making sounds like
the chirping of birds, which were pleasing to the ears. ||94||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe mayo'pi tanayAcintA zalyoddhArAsasaMmadaH  /  tadviyogAt sazokazca
sthitaH svocitadhAmani  // 42 //  prApaddevIsahasrasya prAdhAnyaM cAruvibhramA
/  kramAnmandodarI marturguNairAkRSTamAnasA  // 43 //  abhipreteSu dezeSu sa
reme sahitastayA  /  purandara ivendrANyA sarvendriyamanojJayA  // 8 //
prabhAvaM veditaM vAJchan vidyAyAmapi bhuurishH| vyApArAnityasau cakre sametaH
parayA rucA  // 85 /  /  eko bhavatyanekazca sarvasvIkRtasaMgamaH  /
vitanotyarkavattApaM jyotsnA muJcati candravat  // 86 //  vahivanmuJcati jvAlAM
varSanambudharo yathA  /  vAyuvaJcalayatyadrIn kurute suranAthatAm  // 87 /  /
ApagAnAthatAM yAti parvatatvaM prapadyate  /  mattavAraNatAmeti bhavatyazvo
mahAjavaH  // 8 //  kSaNAdArAt kSaNAddUre kSaNAd dRzyaH kSaNAca no  /
kSaNAnmahAn kSaNAtsUkSmaH kSaNAdrImo na ca kSaNAt  // 49 //  evaM ca
ramamANo'sau nAmnA megharavaM girim  /  prApattatra ca sadvApImapazyad
vimalAmbhasam  // 10 //  kumudairutpalaiH padmaH svacchairanyaizca vArijaiH  /
paryantasaMcaratkrauJcahaMsacakrAhasArasAm  // 11 //  mRduzaSpapaTacchannataTAM
sopAnamaNDitAm  /  namaseva vilInena pUritAM savituH karaiH  /  / 12 /  /
arjunAdimahottuGgapAdapavyAptarodhasam  /
prasphuracchapharIcakrasamucchalitasIkarAm  /  / 93 //  bhrakSepAniva kurvANAM
taraGgaratimaGguraiH  /  jalpantImiva nAdena pakSiNAM zrotrahAriNAm  /  / 94 //
mAna rahA thA mAno samasta saMsArakI lakSmI hI mere hAtha laga gayI hai  // 81||
putrIkI cintArUpI zalyake nikala jAnese jise harSa ho rahA thA tathA sAtha hI
usake viyogase jise zoka ho rahA thA aisA rAjA maya bhI apane yogya sthAnameM
jAkara rahane lagA  /  / 82 /  /  jisake hAva sandara the tathA jisane apane
gaNoMse patikA mana AkRSTa kara liyA thA aisI mandodarIne kramase hajAroM
deviyoMmeM pradhAnatA prApta kara lI  // 83 //  samasta indriyoMko priya
laganevAlI usa rAnI mandodarIke sAtha dazAnana, icchita sthAnoMmeM indrANIke
sAtha indrake samAna krIr3A karane lagA  /  / 84 /  /  utkRSTa kAntise sahita
dazAnana apanI vidyAoMkA prabhAva jAnaneke lie nimnAMkita bahata sAre kArya
karatA thA  // 85|| vaha eka hokara bhI aneka rUpa dharakara samasta striyoMke
sAtha samAgama karatA thaa| kabhI sUryake samAna santApa utpanna karatA thA to
kabhI candramAke samAna cA~danI chor3ane lagatA thA  /  / 86 //  kabhI agnike
samAna jvAlAeM chor3atA thA to kabhI meghake samAna varSA karane lagatA thaa|
kabhI vAyuke samAna bar3e-bar3e pahAr3oMko calA detA thA to kabhI indra-jaisA
prabhAva jamAtA thA  /  / 87|| kabhI samudra bana jAtA thA, kabhI parvata ho
jAtA thA, kabhI madonmatta hAthI bana jAtA thA aura kabhI mahAvegazAlI ghor3A ho
jAtA thA  /  / 88|| vaha kSaNa-bharameM pAsa A jAtA thA, kSaNa-bharameM dUra
pahu~ca jAtA thA, kSaNa-bharameM dRzya ho jAtA thA, kSaNa-bhara meM adRzya ho
jAtA thA, kSaNa-bharameM mahAn ho jAtA thA, kSaNa-bharameM sUkSma ho jAtA thA,
kSaNa-bharameM bhayaMkara dikhAI dene lagatA thA aura kSaNa bharameM bhayaMkara
nahIM rahatA thA  /  / 89 /  /  isa prakAra ramaNa karatA huA vaha eka bAra
megharava nAmaka parvatapara gayA aura vahA~ svaccha jalase bharI vApikA pahu~cA
// 90 /  /  usa vApikAmeM kumuda, nIlakamala, lAlakamala, sapheda kamala tathA
anyAnya prakArake kamala phUla rahe the aura usake kinArepara krauMca, haMsa,
cakavA tathA sArasa Adi pakSI ghUma rahe the||11|| usake taTa harI-harI komala
ghAsa-rUpI vastrase AcchAdita the, sIr3hiyA~ usakI zobhA bar3hA rahI thI aura
usakA jala to aisA jAna par3atA thA, mAno sUryakI kiraNoMse pighalakara AkAza hI
usameM bhara gayA ho  // 92 //  arjuna ( kohA) Adi bar3e-bar3e U~ce vRkSoMse
usakA taTa vyApta thaa| jaba kabhI usameM machaliyoMke samUha Uparako uchalate
the taba unase jalake chIMTe Upara ur3ane lagate the  // 13 //  atyanta bhaMgura
arthAt jaldI-jaldI utpanna hone aura miTanevAlI taraMgoMse vaha aisI jAna 1.
zalyodgArAt ma.  /  2. vimalAmbhasAm m.| 3. rodhasAm ma.  /

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Aá¹£á¹­ama Parva**  175   There, among those engrossed in play, the son of KekasÄ«
saw the supreme prosperity of those holding six thousand maidens. à¥¥95à¥¥ Some
played in the water jets flown from afar by the distant girl. "The well-formed
maidens roamed far, having fulfilled their friendships." à¥¥96à¥¥ One of them, named
Padmapaá¹á¸a, sat there, showing her teeth while making the water lily suspicious
among her companions, lingering there for a long time. à¥¥97à¥¥ Another, producing
sounds like a má¹daá¹ga with a slow tempo in the water, was singing in six
measures. à¥¥18à¥¥ At that moment, the young maidens saw RÄtri, the son of
RatnaÅrava, and for a moment forgot their playful water games, as if they were
petrified. à¥¥19à¥¥ In the middle of them was DaÅagrÄ«va, who, yearning for pleasure,
became attached to that gathering of maidens, allowing them all to indulge in
delight. à¥¥10à¥¥ With arrows like flowers drawn from the flower-archers, they were
all struck equally, and thus their gazes were fixed upon that glorious son.
à¥¥101à¥¥ Mixed in the flavor of desire, their minds were like the swaying of a
fast-moving chariot, filled with restless excitement. à¥¥10à¥¥ Among them was a
maiden of great beauty, named PadmÄvatÄ«, whose eyes resembled the buds of a
large blue lotus. à¥¥10à¥¥ Another maiden named AÅokalata, the daughter of Buddha,
was born anew with the beauty of a young AÅoka flower. à¥¥10à¥¥ In the evening, the
daughter of the king Kanaka, named VidyutprabhÄ, was so beautiful that she made
lightning feel shy before her splendor. à¥¥105à¥¥ These maidens were born of a great
lineage and were the most beautiful amongst all, seeming to embody the beauty of
the three worlds. à¥¥106à¥¥ The aforementioned three maidens, along with all others,
approached DaÅagrÄ«va, as modesty persists until the pain of desire becomes
unbearable. à¥¥107à¥¥ Thereafter, without any doubt, DaÅagrÄ«va encountered all those
maidens in playful pursuits, filled with joy.    (Note: Certain Sanskrit words
and phrases have been kept in their original language to preserve their
significance and context.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama parva 175 tatra krIDAprasaktAnAM dadhatInAM parAM zriyam  /  SaT
sahasrANi kanyAnAmapazyat kekasIsutaH  // 95 //  kAzcicchIkarajAlena remire
dUragAminA  /  'paryaTanti sma satkanyA dUraM sakhyA kRtAgasaH  // 96 //
pradaya radanaM kAcitpadmapaNDe sazaivale  /  kurvantI paGkajAzaGkA sakhInAM
suciraM sthitA  // 97 //  mRdaGganisvanaM kAciccakre karatalAhatam  /  kurvANA
salilaM mandaM gAyantI SaTpadaiH samam  // 18 //  tatastA yugapad dRSTA kanyA
ratnazravaHsutam  /  kSaNaM tyaktajalakrIDA babhUvuH stambhitA iva  // 19 //
madhyaM tAsAM dazagrIvo gato ramaNakAGkSayA  /  rantumetena sAkaM tA
vyApAriNyo'bhavan mudA  // 10 //  AhatAzca samaM sarvA vizikhaiH puSpadhanvanaH
/  dRSTirAsAmabhUdasmin baDhevAnanyacAriNI  // 101 //  mizre kAmarase tAsAM payA
pUrvasaMgamAt  /  mano dolAmivArUDhaM babhUvAsyantamAkulam  // 10 //
surasundarato jAtA nAmnA padmavatI shubhaa| sarvazrIyoSiti
sphItanIlotpaladalekSaNA  // 10 //  kanyA'zokalatA nAma budhasya duhitA varA  /
manovegA samutpannA navAzokalatAsamA  // 10 //  saMdhyAyAM kanakAjAtA nAmnA
vidyutpramA parA  /  vidyutaM prabhayA lajAM yA nayeccArudarzanA  // 105 //
mahAkulasamudbhUtA jyeSThAstAsAmimAH zriyA  /  vibhUtyA ca trilokasya mUrtAH
sundaratA iva  // 106 //  AkalpakaM ca saMprAptAstaM yayustAH sahetarAH  /  sa
tApatrapA tAvad duHsahAH smaravedanAH  /  / 107 //  gAndharvavidhinA sarvA
nirAzaGkena tena tAH  /  pariNItAH zazAGkena tArANAmiva saMhatiH  // 10 //
par3atI thI mAno bhauMheM hI calA rahI ho tathA pakSiyoMke madhura zabdase aisI
mAlUma hotI thI mAno vArtAlApa hI kara rahI ho  // 94 //  usa vApikApara parama
zobhAko dhAraNa karanevAlI chaha hajAra kanyAe~ krIDAmeM lIna thIM so dazAnanane
una sabako dekhA  // 95 /  /  unameM se kacha kanyAe~ to Tara taka ur3anevAle
jalake phavvArese krIr3A kara rahI thIM aura kucha aparAdha karanevAlI
sakhiyoMse dUra haTakara akelI-akelI hI ghUma rahI thIM  // 16 //  koI eka kanyA
zevAlase sahita kamaloMke samUhameM baiThakara dA~ta dikhA rahI thI aura usakI
sakhiyoMke lie kamalakI AzaMkA utpanna kara rahI thii||97|| koI eka kanyA pAnIko
hathelIpara rakha dUsare hAthakI hathelIse use pITa rahI thI aura usase mRdaMga
jaisA zabda nikala rahA thaa| isake sivAya koI eka kanyA bhramaroMke samAna gAnA
gA rahI thii| tadanantara ve sabakI saba kanyAe~ eka sAtha dazAnanako dekhakara
jalakrIr3A bhUla gayoM aura Azcaryase cakita raha gayIM  // 98-99|| dazAnana
krIr3A karanekI icchAse unake bIca meM calA gayA tathA ve kanyAe~ bhI usake
sAtha krIr3A karaneke lie bar3e harSase taiyAra ho gayIM  // 10 //  krIr3A
karate-karate hI ve saba kanyAe~ eka sAtha kAmake bANoMse Ahata (ghAyala ) ho
gayIM aura dazAnanapara unakI dRSTi aisI baMdhI ki vaha phira anyatra saMcAra
nahIM kara sakI  /  / 101 /  /  usa apUrva samAgamake kAraNa una kanyAoMkA
kAmarUpI rasa lajjAse mizrita ho rahA thA ataH unakA mana dolApara ArUr3ha hue
ke samAna atyanta Akula ho rahA thA  // 102 //  aba una kanyAoMmeM jo mukhya
haiM unake nAma suno| rAjA surasundarase sarvazrI nAmakI strImeM utpanna huI
padmAvatI nAmakI zubha kanyA thii| usake netra kisI bar3e nIlakamalakI kalikAke
samAna the  // 103 //  rAjA budhakI manovegA rAnIse utpanna azokalatA nAmakI
kanyA thI jo nUtana azokalatAke samAna thii||104|| rAjA kanakase saMkhyA nAmaka
rAnIse utpanna huI vidyutprabhA nAmakI zreSTha kanyA thI jo itanI sundarI thI ki
apanI prabhAse bijalIko bhI lajjA prApta karA rahI thI  // 105 /  /  ye kanyAe~
mahAkulameM utpanna huI thI aura zobhAse una sabameM zreSTha thiiN| vibhUtise to
aisI jAna par3atI thIM mAno tInoM lokakI sundaratA hI rUpa dharakara ikaTThI huI
ho  // 106 /  /  ukta tInoM kanyAe~ anya samasta kanyAoMke sAtha dazAnanake
samIpa AyIM so ThIka hI hai kyoMki lajjA tabhI taka sahI jAtI hai jaba taka ki
kAmako vedanA asahya na ho uThe  // 107 /  /  tadanantara kisI prakArako zaMkAse
rahita dazAnanane una saba kanyAoMko 1. palAyante sma ma.  /  2. punaH ma.  /
3. samutpannA kha.  /  4. saMhatI: ma., kha.  /

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
176 In the Padma Purana, Dasagriva, with those women, again engaged in play.
They, being mutually attracted, became agitated at the first approach. ||109||
Indeed, that play is being performed by him, so it is fitting. The beauty of the
stars is due to the moon. ||110|| Then, the Kanchukis, having quickly gone to
them, informed the Janakas of this incident, which happened due to RatnaÅrava.
||111|| Then, those cruel men, sent by them for his destruction, with their lips
bitten and their brows furrowed, were full of anxiety. ||112|| They, all
together, released various weapons, but they were defeated by KaitakeÅaya with a
mere glance. ||113|| Then, those, with their whole bodies trembling with fear,
and their hands having released their weapons, approached the beautiful
Amarasundara. ||114|| "Take our lives, O Lord, or cut off our hands and feet, or
our necks, we are unable to destroy that man." ||115|| In the midst of the group
of women, a certain valiant man, shining with beauty, equal to that of the moon,
was seated. ||116|| Even the gods, headed by Indra, cannot bear the sight of him
when he is angry, what to speak of us, who are mere mortals? ||117|| We have
seen many excellent men, like the king of Rathnapura, Indra, etc., but this one
is the most revered of all. ||118|| Hearing this, Amarasundara, whose face was
red with great anger, went out, accompanied by Kanaka and Budha. ||119|| Other
valiant husbands of the celestial women, making the sky brilliant with the rays
of their weapons, also went out. ||120|| Then, seeing them coming, those
celestial women, whose minds were filled with fear, said to RatnaÅrava: "O Lord,
you have come to great danger on our account. In truth, we are all devoid of
merit and auspicious signs." ||121-122||  The Gandharva married in the same way
as the moon marries the group of stars. ||108||  After that, they, the women,
started playing again with Dasanana, competing with each other, saying, "I will
reach first, I will reach first." ||109|| The woman who plays with Dasanana
seems to be good, and it is right, because what is the beauty of the stars
without the moon? ||110|| After that, the Kanchukis, who had come back with
these women, quickly went and told the fathers of the women about this incident
of Dasanana. ||111|| Then, the fathers of the women sent such cruel men to
destroy Dasanana, who were biting their lips in anger and looked terrible with
their furrowed brows. ||112|| They were all releasing various kinds of weapons
together, but Dasanana defeated them with a mere glance. ||113|| Then, those
whose whole bodies were trembling with fear and whose hands had released their
weapons, went to King Surasundara and said, ||114|| "O Lord! Take our lives, or
cut off our hands and feet, or our necks, we are not able to destroy that man."
||115|| A valiant man, beautiful like Indra and shining with the beauty of the
moon, was sitting among the women. ||116|| Even the gods, headed by Indra,
cannot bear the sight of him when he is angry, what to speak of us, who are mere
mortals? ||117|| We have seen many excellent men, like the king of Rathnapura,
Indra, etc., but this one is the most revered of all. ||118|| Hearing this, King
Surasundara, whose face was red with great anger, went out, accompanied by
Kanaka and Budha. ||119|| Besides them, many other valiant husbands of the
celestial women, making the sky brilliant with the rays of their weapons, also
went out. ||120|| Then, seeing them coming, those celestial women, whose minds
were filled with fear, said to Dasanana: "O Lord! You have come to great danger
on our account. In truth, we are all devoid of merit and auspicious signs."
||121-122||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 176 padmapurANe dazagrIveNa sAdha tAH punaH krIDA pracakrire  /
anyonyAhaMyutAM prApya prathamopagamAkulAH  // 109 /  /  saMpratyeva hi sA krIDA
kriyate tena yA samam  /  zazAGkena vimuktAnAM tArANAM kAmirUpatA  // 110 //
tataH kancukibhistAsAmAzu gatvA niveditam  /  janakebhya idaM vRttaM
ratnazravasasaMbhavam  // 11 //  tatasteH prahitAH krUrAH puruSAstadvinAzane  /
saMdaSTauSTapuTA baddhabhrakuTIkoTisaMkaTAH  // 112 //  vividhAni vimuJcantaste
zastrANi samaM tataH  /  bhrakSepamAtrakeNaiva kaikaseyena nirjitAH  // 113 //
bhayavepitasarvAGgAstataste'marasundaram  /  vyajJApayan samAgasya
zastranirmuktapANayaH  // 114 //  gRhANa jIvanaM nAtha hara vA naH kulAGganAH  /
chindhi tA caraNI pANI grIvAM vAna vayaM kSamAH  /  / 115 //
kanyAnivahamadhyasthaH ko'pi dhIro virAjate  /  sarendrasundaraH kAntyA samAno
rajanIpateH  // 11 //  kraddhasya tasya no daSTi devAH zakrapurassarAH  /
saheran kimuta kSudrA aspattalyAH zarIriNaH  // 117 /  /
rthnpurnaathendrprbhRtyuttmmaanvaaH| vIkSitA bahavo'smAbhirayaM tu paramAdataH
// 11 //  evaM zrutvA mahAkrodharaktAsyo'marasundaraH  /  nirait saMnA saMyukto
budhena kanakena ca  // 119 //  anye ca bahavaH zUrAH patayo vyomagAminAm  /
nizcakramurviyaddIptaM kurvANAH zastrarazmibhiH  // 12 //  tatastAnAyato dRSTA
tA bhayAkulamAnasAH  /  vidyAdharasutA UcuridaM ratnazravaHsutam  // 121 /  /
asmatprayojanAnAtha prApto'syatyantasaMzayam  /  puNyahInA vayaM kaSTaM sarvA
apyapalakSaNAH  // 122 //  gandharva vidhise usa prakAra vivAha liyA ki jisa
prakAra candramA tArAoMke samUhako vivAha letA hai  /  / 108 //  tadanantara
'maiM pahale pahu~cU~, maiM pahale pahu~cU~' isa prakAra parasparameM hor3a
lagAkara ve kanyAe~ dazAnanake sAtha punaH krIDA karane lagIM  // 109 //  jo
kanyA dazAnanake sAtha krIr3A karatI thI vahI bhalI mAlUma hotI thI so ThIka hI
hai kyoMki candramAse rahita tArAoMkI kyA zobhA hai ?  // 110 //  tadanantara jo
kaMcukI ina kanyAoMke sAtha vApikApara Aye the unhoMne zIghra hI jAkara
kanyAoMke pitAse dazAnanakA yaha vRttAnta kaha sunaayaa||111|| taba kanyAoMke
pitAne dazAnanako naSTa karaneke lie aise krUra puruSa bheje ki jo krodhavaza
oThoMko DaMsa rahe the tathA baddha bhauMhoMke agrabhAgase bhayAnaka mAlUma hote
the  // 112 //  ve saba eka hI sAtha aneka prakArake zastra calA rahe the para
dazAnanane unheM bhauMha uThAte hI jIta liyA  // 113 /  /  tadanantara jinakA
sArA zarIra bhayase kAMpa rahA thA tathA jinake hAthase zastra chUTa gaye the
aise ve saba puruSa rAjA surasundarake pAsa jAkara kahane lage  // 114 //  ki he
nAtha ! cAhe hamArA jIvana hara lo, cAhe hamAre hAtha-paira tathA garadana kATa
lo para hama usa puruSako naSTa karanemeM samartha nahIM haiM  /  / 115 /  /
indrake samAna sundara tathA kAntise candramAkI tulanA karanevAlA koI eka dhIra-
vIra manuSya kanyAoMke bIcameM baiThA huA suzobhita ho rahA hai  // 116 /  /  so
jaba vaha kruddha hotA hai taba usakI dRSTiko indra Adi deva bhI sahana nahIM
kara sakate phira hamAre jaise kSudra prANiyoMkI to bAta hI kyA hai ?  // 117 /
/  rathanUpura nagarake rAjA indra Adi bahuta-se uttama puruSa hamane dekhe haiM
para yaha una sabameM parama Adarako prApta hai  // 118 //  yaha sunakara,
bahuta bhArI krodhase jisakA muMha lAla ho rahA thA aisA rAjA surasundara rAjA
kanaka aura budhake sAtha taiyAra hokara bAhara nikalA  // 119 //  inake sivAya
aura bhI bahuta-se zUravIra vidyAdharoMke adhipati zastroMkI kiraNoMse AkAzako
dedIpyamAna karate hue bAhara nikale  // 120 //  tadanantara unheM AtA dekha,
jinakA mana bhayase vyAkula ho rahA thA aisI ve vidyAdhara kanyAe~ dazAnanase
bolI ki he nAtha ! Apa hamAre nimittase atyanta saMzayako prApta hue haiN|
yathArthameM hama saba puNyahIna tathA zubhalakSaNoMse rahita haiM  // 121-122
//

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter  177  Arise, O Lord, and seek refuge in someone. Be
gracious to us. Fly up to the sky quickly and protect our precious lives.
||123||  Or, remain hidden in this Jain temple until these cruel men see your
form. ||124||  Hearing these pitiful words and seeing the approaching army,
Dashaanan turned his eyes, white like the moon and red like the lotus. ||125||
He said to the maidens, "Surely you do not know our prowess, therefore you speak
thus. Consider this: what can many crows do to a Garuda, even if they gather
together?" ||126||  "A lone lion cub, with his mane flowing, does not destroy a
herd of maddened elephants?" ||127||  Hearing Dashaanan's words filled with
valor, the maidens said again, "O Lord, if you think so, then protect our
father, brothers, and relatives. Do not kill them in battle." ||128||  "My dear
ones, it shall be so. Do not fear. I will comfort you until this army arrives."
||129||  Then, mounting a chariot created by knowledge, Ravana ascended to the
sky and began to chew his lips with his teeth. ||130||  His very limbs, upon
experiencing the festival of battle, swelled so much and became so rough with
excitement that they could barely fit in the sky. ||131||  Then, just as clouds
pour down thick streams of water on a mountain, all the warriors began to hurl
weapons at Dashaanan. ||132||  Dashaanan then began to rain down stones. With
some, he blocked the enemy's weapons, and with others, he terrified the enemy
army. ||133||  "What good will it do me to kill these wretched, lowly
Vidyadharas?" Thinking this, he turned his gaze upon the three chief
Vidyadharas: Surasunder, Kanak, and Budh. ||134||  Then, with a weapon of
darkness, he blinded them, rendering them motionless. He bound them with a
serpent's noose and brought them before the three maidens. ||135||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama parva 177 uttiSTha zaraNaM gaccha kaMcinnAtha prasIda naH  /  utpatya
gaganaM kSipraM rakSa prANAn sudurlabhAn  // 123 //  asmin vA bhavane jaine
bhUtvA pracchanna vigrahaH  /  tiSTha yAvadime karA nekSante bhavatastanum  //
124 //  zrutvA vAkyamidaM dInaM dRSTvA ca nikaTaM balam  /  site kumudavattena
netre padmanibhe kRte  // 125 //  uvAca ca na mAM nUnaM vicchayadvadathedazam  /
kimemiH kriyate kAkaiH saMbhayApi garutmataH  // 126 //  ekAkI pRthukaH siMhaH
prasphuratsitakesaraH  /  kiM vA nAnayate dhvaMsaM yUthaM samadadantinAm  // 127
//  idaM tAH punarUcustaM yadyevaM nAtha manyase  /  tato'smAkaM pitRna rakSa
bhrAtazca svajanAMstathA  // 128 //  evamastu priyA yUyaM mA bhaiSTati sa
sAntvanam  /  kurute yAvadetAsAM tAvabalamupAgatam  // 129 //  tato
vimAnamAruhya kSaNAdvidyAvinirmitam  /  khamAruhya dazagrIvo
dantadaSTaradacchadaH  // 13 //  ta evAvayavAstasya prApya yuddhamahotsavam  /
duHkhena mAnamAkAze prAptA romAJcakarkazAH  // 531 //  tasyopari tato
yodhAzcikSipuH shstrsNhtiiH| dhArA iva ghanasthUlAH parvatasya ghanAghanAH  //
132 //  tato'sau zastrasaMghAtaM kAmizcid vinyavArayat  /  kAmizcitta ripuvAtaM
zilAbhirbhayamAnayat  // 133 //  varAkainihatairemiH khecaraiH kiM mametyasau  /
cintayitvA pradhAnAMstrIn tAMzcakre netragocaram  /  / 134 /  /  tAmasena
tato'streNa mohayitvA gatakriyAH  /  nAgapAzestrayo'pyete baddha vA
tAsAmupAhRtAH  /  / 135 //  mocitAste tatastAbhiH pUjAM ca parilambhitAH  /
zUrasvajanasaMprApta saMmadaM ca samAgatAH  /  / 136 /  /  he nAtha ! uTho aura
kisIkI zaraNameM jaao| hama logoMpara prasanna hoo aura zIghra hI AkAzameM
ur3akara apane durlabha prANoMkI rakSA karo  // 123 /  /  athavA ye krUrapuruSa
jabataka ApakA zarIra nahIM dekha lete haiM usake pahale hI isa jina-mandirameM
chipakara baiTha raho  /  / 124 /  /  kanyAoMke yaha dona vacana sunakara tathA
senAko nikaTa dekha dazAnanane apane kumudake samAna sapheda netra kamalake
samAna lAla kara liye  // 125 //  usane kanyAoMse kahA ki nizcaya hI Apa hamArA
parAkrama nahIM jAnatI ho isalie aisA kaha rahI hoN| jarA soco to sahI, bahuta-
se kaue eka sAtha milakara bhI garur3akA kyA kara sakate haiM ?  // 126 //
jisakI sapheda jaTAe~ phaharA rahI haiM aisA akelA siMhakA bAlaka kyA madonmatta
hAthiyoMke jhuNDako naSTa nahIM kara detA?  // 127|| dazAnanake vIratA bhare
vacana suna una kanyAoMne phira kahA ki he nAtha ! yadi Apa aisA mAnate haiM to
hamAre pitA, bhAI tathA kuTumbIjanoM kI rakSA kIjie, arthAt yuddha meM unheM
nahIM mArie  // 128|| 'he priyA jano! aisA hI hogA, tuma saba bhayabhIta na hoo'
isa prakAra dazAnana jabataka una kanyAoMko sAntvanA detA hai ki tabataka vaha
senA A paha~cI  // 129|| tdnntr| vidyA nirmita vimAnapara ArUr3ha hokara rAvaNa
AkAzameM jA pahu~cA aura dA~toMse oTha cabAne lagA  // 130 //  dazAnanake ve hI
saba avayava the para yuddharUpI mahotsavako pAkara itane adhika phUla gaye aura
romAMcoMse karkaza ho gaye ki AkAzameM bar3I kaThinAIse samA sake  /  / 131 /  /
tadanantara jisa prakAra megha kisI parvatapara bar3I moTI jalakI dhArAe~
chor3ate haiM usI prakAra saba yodhA dazAnanake Upara zastroMke samUha chor3ane
lage  // 132 /  /  taba dazAnanane zilAe~ varSAnA zurU kiyaa| usane kitanI hI
zilAoMse to zatraoMke zastrasamahako rokA aura kitanI ho zilAoMse zatrasamUhako
bhayabhIta kiyA  // 133 /  /  ina becAre dIna-hIna vidyAdharoMko mAranese mujhe
kyA lAbha hai ? aisA vicArakara usane surasundara, kanaka aura budha ina tIna
pradhAna vidyAdharoMko apanI dRSTikA viSaya banAyA arthAt unakI ora dekhA  //
134 //  tadanantara usane tAmasa zastrase mohita kara unheM nizceSTa banA diyA
aura nAgapAzameM bA~dhakara tInoMko tIna kanyAoMke sAmane rakha diyA  /  / 135 /
/  taba 1. kaM ca m.| 2. tate m.| 3. sNmd-m.| 4. khacaraiH m.| sevakaiH k.| 5.
pradhAnAM strI tAM cake netragocarAm ma.(?)  /  trIn pradhAnAn matvA tAn
dRSTipathamAninAyetyarthaH  /  6. saMprApte ma.  /  23

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
137. Then, in the Padma Purana, there was a wedding ceremony for them, and a
great festival lasting three days, celebrating knowledge.  138. They all
departed, with his permission, to their respective homes. He, attracted by the
virtues of Mandodari, went to the city of Swayamprabha. 139. Seeing him, adorned
with great splendor, accompanied by his wives, his relatives were overjoyed,
their eyes wide with delight. 140. From afar, Bhanukarna and Vibhishana, along
with other friends and relatives, came out to greet him. 141. Surrounded by
them, he entered the magnificent city of Swayamprabha. They all enjoyed
themselves there, attaining supreme happiness. 142. In the city of Kumbhapura,
there was a beautiful daughter named Taá¸inmÄlÄ, born to the king, MahÅdara. 143.
Bhanukarna, delighted, obtained her as his wife. Immersed in the ocean of love,
he enjoyed her charming and playful nature. 144. In Kumbhapura, a loud noise was
made by an enemy. Hearing the cries of his father-in-law, Bhanukarna was deeply
affected. 145. From then on, he became known in the world as Kumbhakarna. He was
a valiant warrior, devoted to righteousness, and a master of the arts. 146.
Wicked people have misrepresented him. They say he lived on flesh and blood and
slept for six months. 147. His food was pure, sweet, and prepared according to
his desire. It was fragrant and he always entertained his guests first, before
eating with his family. 148. He slept at dusk and woke at dawn. The rest of his
time was spent in religious activities. 149. Those who are devoid of the
knowledge of the Supreme Truth, and who slander the virtuous, are destined for
hell. Shame on them! 150. In the southern region, there is a city called
Jyotiprabha. There, the king, Mayamahasuhrit, is as pure as a lotus.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe tataH pANigrahazcake tasya tAsAM ca taiH punaH  /  divasAnAM trayaM
vidyAjanitazca mahotsavaH  // 137 //  gatAzcAnumatAstena yathA svaM nilayAnamI
/  mandodarIguNAkRSTaH sa ca yAtaH svayaMprabham  // 138 //  tatastaM parayA
dyutyA yuktaM dRSTvA sayoSitam  /  bAndhavAH paramaM harSa jagmurvistAritekSaNAH
// 139 //  dUrAdeva ca taM dRSTvA bhAnukarNavibhISaNau  /  amigatyA viniSkrAntau
suhRdo'nye ca bAndhavAH  // 140 //  'veSTitazca praviSTastaiH
svayaMprabhapurottamam  /  reme ca svecchayA te'tra prApnuvan sukhamuttamam  //
141 //  atha kumbhapure rAjamahodarasutAM varAm  /  surUpAkSIsamudbhUtAM
taDinmAlAbhidhAnakAm  // 14 //  bhAskarazravaNo lebhe suprItaH sa tayA samam  /
cAruvibhramakAriNyA nimagno ratisAgare  // 143 //  tatra kumbhapure tasya
kenacit kRtazabdane  /  zvasurasnehataH karNo satataM petaturyataH  // 14 //
kumbhakarNa iti khyAtiM tato'sau bhuvane gataH  /  dharmasaktamativIraH
kalAguNavizAradaH  // 145 //  ayaM sa prakhalaiH khyAtimanyathA gamito janaiH  /
mAMsAsRgjIvanatvena tathA SaNmAsanidrayA  // 146 //  AhAro'sya zuciH
svAduryathAkAmaprakalpitaH  /  surabhirbandhuyuktasya prathamaM tarpitAtithiH
// 147 //  saMdhyAsaMvezanotthAnamadhyakAlapravartinI  /  nidrAsya zeSakAlastu
dharmavyAsaktacetasaH  // 148 //  paramArthAvabodhena viyuktAH pApacetasaH  /
kalpayantyanyathA sAdhUn dhik tAn durgatigAminaH  // 149 //  athAsti
dakSiNazreNyAM nAmnA jyotiHprabhaM puram  /  vizuddhakamalastatra rAjA
mayamahAsuhRt  // 150 //  kanyAoMne unheM chur3avAkara unakA satkAra karAyA aura
tumheM zUravIra vara prApta huA hai isa samAcArase unheM harSita bhI kiyA  //
136 /  /  tadanantara unhoMne dazAnana aura una kanyAoMkA vidhipUrvaka punaH
pANigrahaNa kiyaa| isa upalakSyameM tIna dina taka vidyAjanita mahotsava hote
rahe  // 137 /  /  tatpazcAt ye saba dazAnanakI anumati lekara apane-apane ghara
cale gaye aura dazAnana bhI mandodarIke guNoMse AkRSTa huA svayaMprabhanagara
calA gyaa||138|| tadanantara zreSTha kAntise yukta dazAnanako aneka striyoM
sahita AyA dekha, bAndhavajana parama harSako prApta hue| harSAtirekase unake
netra vistRta ho gaye  /  / 139 /  /  bhAnukarNa aura vibhISaNa tathA anya mitra
aura iSTajana dUrase hI use dekha agavAnI karaneke lie nagarase bAhara nikale
// 140 //  una sabase ghirA dazAnana, svayaMprabhanagarameM praviSTa ho manacAhI
krIr3A karane lagA aura bhAnukarNa-vibhISaNa Adi bandhujana bhI uttama sukhako
prApta hue  /  / 141 /  /  athAnantara kumbhapura nagarameM rAjA mahodarakI
surUpAkSI nAmA strIse utpanna taDinmAlA nAmakI kanyA thI so bhAnukarNane bar3I
prasannatAse prApta kii| sundara hAva-bhAva dikhAnevAlI taDinmAlAke sAtha
bhAnukarNa ratirUpI sAgarameM nimagna ho gayA  // 142-143 //  eka bAra
kumbhapura nagarapara kisI prabala zatrune AkramaNa kara hallA macAyA taba
zvasurake snehase bhAnukaNake kAna kambhapUrapara paDe arthAta vahA~ke
daHkhabhare zabda isane sane tabase saMsAra meM isakA kambhakarNa nAma prasiddha
huaa| isakI buddhi sadA dharmameM Asakta rahatI thI, yaha zUravIra thA tathA
kalAoMmeM nipuNa thA  // 144-145 /  /  duSTajanoMne isake viSayameM anyathA hI
nirUpaNa kiyA hai| ve kahate haiM ki yaha mAMsa aura khUnakA bhojana kara jIvita
rahatA thA tathA chaha mAhakI nidrA letA thA so isakA AhAra to icchAnusAra
parama pavitra madhura aura sugandhita hotA thaa| prathama hI atithiyoMko
santuSTa kara bandhujanoMke sAtha AhAra karatA thA  // 146-147 //  sandhyAkAla
zayana karane kA aura prAtaHkAla uThanekA samaya hai so bhAnukarNa isake bIcameM
hI nidrA letA thaa| isakA anya samaya dhArmika kAryoMmeM hI vyatIta hotA thA  /
/ 148 /  /  jo paramArthajJAnase rahita pApI manuSya, satpuruSoMkA anyathA
varNana karate haiM ve durgatimeM jAnevAle haiM  /  aise logoMko dhikkAra hai
// 149 /  /  _ athAnantara dakSiNazreNI meM jyotiHprabha nAmakA nagara hai|
vahA~ vizuddhakamala rAjA rAjya 1. veSTitAzca praviSTAste m.| 2. atha sa m.| ,

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighth Canto  179 From his Nandana Mala, a beautiful daughter was born,
named Rajiva Sarasi, who was given to Vibhishana in marriage. ||15|| The wise
Vibhishana, with his divine form, did not find pleasure with the beautiful
Rajiva Sarasi, like a lotus with a lotus. ||152|| Then Mandodari, due to the
auspicious time, conceived. Her mind was filled with thoughts, and her desires
were fulfilled instantly. Her movements were captivating. ||153|| She was taken
to her father's house, where she gave birth to a noble son, who was known
throughout the earth as Indrajit. ||154|| Indrajit, the delight of his people,
grew up in his grandfather's house. He played like a young lion, full of joy.
||155|| Then Mandodari, with her son, was brought back to her husband. She
brought sorrow to her father, due to the separation from her son. ||156||
Dashanan, seeing his son, was filled with immense joy. There is no greater
happiness than that of a son. ||157|| In due course, Mandodari conceived again
and was sent back to her father. There, she gave birth to a son named
Meghavahana. ||158|| Then she was brought back to her husband, and she immersed
herself in the ocean of pleasure, her mind captivated by her husband. ||159||
The two boys, with their charming movements, brought joy to their family. They
reached their youth, their eyes as vast as those of a great bull. ||160|| Then
Kumbhakarna, going to the cities ruled by Vaishravana, destroyed them thousands
of times. ||161|| From those cities, the valiant Kumbhakarna brought back
beautiful jewels, clothes, women, and courtesans to his own city, Swayamprabha.
||162|| When Vaishravana, the powerful Indra, learned of Kumbhakarna's mischief,
he sent a messenger to Sumali, filled with pride. ||163|| The messenger entered
the city and was announced to the guards. He received a welcome befitting a
guest, according to the customs of the world. ||164||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTamaM parva 179 tasya nandanamAlAyAmutpannA varakanyakA  /  rAjIvasarasI
nAmnA pati prAptA vibhISaNam  // 15 //  kAntayA kAntayA sAkaM na sa prApa rati
kRtI  /  devavat paramAkAraH padmayA padmayA tayA  // 152 //  atha mandodarI
garbha kAlayogAdadIdharat  /  sadyaH kalpitacittasthadohadAhArivibhramA  // 153
//  nItA ca janakAgAraM prasUtA 'bAlakaM varam  /  indra jitkhyAtimAyAto yaH
samastamahItale  // 15 //  mAtAmahagRhe vRddhi prAptazca jananandanaH  /  sa
kurvan nirmarakrIDAM siMhazAva ivottamAm  // 155 /  /  tato'sau punarAnItA
saputrA bharturantikam  /  dattaduHkhA pituH svasya putrasya ca viyogataH  //
156 //  dazagrIvo'tha putrAsyaM dRSTvA paramamAgataH  /  AnandaM putrato
nAnyatprIterAyatanaM param  // 157 //  kAlakramAt punargama dadhAnA piturantikam
/  nItA sukhaM prasUtA ca meghavAhanabAlakam  /  / 158 //  bharturantikamAnItA
punaH sA bhogasAgare  /  patitA svecchayAtiSThad gRhItapatimAnasA  // 159 /  /
dArako svajanAnandaM kurvANau cAruvibhramau  /  tau yuvatvaM pariprAptI
mahokSavipulekSaNau  /  / 160 //  atha vaizravaNo yAsAM kurute svAmitA purAm  /
vyadhvaMsayadimA gatvA kumbhakarNaH sahasrazaH  /  / 161 //  tAsu ratnAni
vastrANi kanyakAzca manoharAH  /  gaNikAzcAnayadvIraH svayaMprabhapurottamam  /
/ 162 //  atha vaizravaNaH Rddho jJAtvA pRthukaceSTitam  /  sumAlino'ntikaM
dUtaM prajighAyAtigarvitaH  // 16 //  praviveza tato dUtaH pratihAraniveditaH  /
upacAraM ca saMprAptaH kRtakaM lokamArgataH  // 164 //  karatA thA jo mayakA
mahAmitra thA  /  / 150 /  usakI nandanamAlA nAmakI strIse rAjIvasarasI nAmakI
kanyA utpanna huI thI vaha vibhISaNako prApta huI  // 151|| devoMke samAna
utkRSTa AkArako dhAraNa karanevAlA buddhimAn vibhISaNa, lakSmIke samAna sundarI
usa rAjIvasarasI strIke sAtha krIr3A karatA huA tRptiko prApta nahIM huaa||152||
tadanantara samaya pAkara mandodarIne garbha dhAraNa kiyaa| usa samaya usake
cittameM jo dohalA utpanna hote the unakI pUrti tatkAla kI jAtI thii| usake
hAvabhAva bhI manako haraNa karanevAle the  // 153|| rAjA maya putrIko apane
ghara le AyA vahA~ usane usa uttama bAlakako janma diyA jo samasta pRthvItalameM
indrajit nAmase prasiddha huaa||154|| logoMko Anandita karanevAlA indrajit apane
nAnAke ghara hI vRddhiko prApta huaa| vahA~ vaha siMhake bAlakake samAna uttama
krIr3A karatA huA sukhase rahatA thA  // 155 /  /  tadanantara mandodarI putrake
sAtha apane bhartA dazAnanake pAsa lAyI gayI so apane tathA putrake viyogase
vaha pitAko duHkha pahu~cAnevAlI huI  /  / 156 /  /  dazAnana putrakA mukha
dekha parama Anandako prApta huaa| yathArthameM putrase bar3hakara prItikA aura
dUsarA sthAna nahIM hai  /  / 157|| kAlakramase mandodarIne phira garbha dhAraNa
kiyA so punaH pitAke samIpa bhejI gyii| abakI bAra vahA~ usane sukhapUrvaka
meghavAhana nAmaka putrako janma diyA ||158|| tadanantara vaha punaH patike pAsa
AyI aura patike manako vaza kara icchAnusAra bhogarUpI sAgarameM nimagna ho gayI
// 159|| sundara ceSTAoMke dhArI donoM bAlaka AtmIyajanoMkA Ananda bar3hAte hue
taruNa avasthAko prApta hue| usa samaya unake netra kisI mahAvRSabhake netroMke
samAna vizAla ho gaye the  /  / 160|| _ athAnantara vaizravaNa jina nagaroMkA
rAjya karatA thA, kumbhakarNa hajAroM bAra jA-jAkara una nagaroMko vidhvasta
kara detA thA  // 161 /  /  una nagaroMmeM jo bhI manohara ratna, vastra,
kanyAe~ athavA gaNikAeM hotI thIM zUravIra kumbhakarNa unheM svayaMprabhanagara
le AtA thA  // 162 //  tadanantara jaba vaizravaNako kumbhakarNako isa
bAlaceSTAkA patA calA taba usane kupita hokara sumAlIke pAsa dUta bhejaa|
vaizravaNa indrakA bala pAkara atyanta garvita rahatA thA ||163 //  tadanantara
dvArapAlake dvArA 1. bAlakaMdalam ma.  /  2. -stasya kha.  /  3. svayaM ma.  /
4. tiSThan ma.  /  5. gRhItA ma.  /  6. maNikA kha.  /

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
180 In the Padma Purana, this was said by the messenger, known as Vakyalankara.
He spoke to Dashaanan (Ravana) in the presence of Sumali, in this order. ||165||
"O Maharaj, remember what Vaishravana (Kubera), whose fame pervades the entire
universe, has said to you." ||166|| "He said that you are a scholar, a noble, a
man of the world, a great man, afraid of wrongdoing, and a guide on the right
path." ||167|| "It is fitting for you to restrain your reckless grandson, who is
like a playful child." ||168|| "This is the main difference between animals and
humans: animals do not know the difference between right and wrong, while humans
do." ||169|| "Even when they gain some fleeting power, those with firm minds do
not forget their past." ||170|| "The entire family should find peace in the
death of the head gardener. Who would do something that would lead to the
complete destruction of their own family?" ||171|| "Why have you forgotten the
power of Indra, who destroys his enemies and whose glory is spread throughout
the ocean waves? Why are you trying to do something inappropriate?" ||172|| "You
are like a frog playing in the mouth of a snake, which is full of sharp teeth
and spews fire-like venom." ||173|| "If you are unable to control this thief-
like child, then hand him over to me today. I will take control of him myself."
||174|| "If you do not do this, then you will see your grandson in prison, bound
in chains and suffering various tortures." ||175|| "It seems you have been away
from Alankarodaya (Patalaloka) for a long time. Now you want to enter that same
den again." ||176|| "Be sure that if I or Indra become angry, you will have no
refuge on earth. Just as a bubble of water disappears with a slight breeze, so
will you." ||177|| Then, the water of Dashaanan's mind, which was like an ocean,
was agitated by the strong wind of the messenger's harsh words. ||178|| The
messenger entered after delivering the message. He was well-versed in social
etiquette and behaved with appropriate humility. ||164|| The messenger's name
was Vakyalankara. He began to speak to Dashaanan in the presence of Sumali, in
this order. ||165|| "O Maharaj, remember what Vaishravana (Kubera), whose fame
pervades the entire universe, has said to you." ||166|| "He said that you are a
scholar, a noble, a man of the world, a great man, afraid of wrongdoing, and a
guide on the right path." ||167|| "It is fitting for you to restrain your
reckless grandson, who is like a playful child." ||168|| "This is the main
difference between animals and humans: animals do not know the difference
between right and wrong, while humans do." ||169|| "Even when they gain some
fleeting power, those with firm minds do not forget their past." ||170|| "The
entire family should find peace in the death of the head gardener. Who would do
something that would lead to the complete destruction of their own family?"
||171|| "Why have you forgotten the power of Indra, who destroys his enemies and
whose glory is spread throughout the ocean waves? Why are you trying to do
something inappropriate?" ||172|| "You are like a frog playing in the mouth of a
snake, which is full of sharp teeth and spews fire-like venom." ||173|| "If you
are unable to control this thief-like child, then hand him over to me today. I
will take control of him myself." ||174|| "If you do not do this, then you will
see your grandson in prison, bound in chains and suffering various tortures."
||175|| "It seems you have been away from Alankarodaya (Patalaloka) for a long
time. Now you want to enter that same den again." ||176|| "Be sure that if I or
Indra become angry, you will have no refuge on earth. Just as a bubble of water
disappears with a slight breeze, so will you." ||177|| Then, the water of
Dashaanan's mind, which was like an ocean, was agitated by the strong wind of
the messenger's harsh words. ||178||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 180 padmapurANe uvAcedaM tathA dUto vAkyAlaGkArasaMjJitaH  /  samakSaM
dazavaktrasya sumAlinamiti kramAt  // 165 //
samastabhuvanavyApikIrtivaizravaNazrutiH'  /  vadatIdaM mahArAjo bhavantaM kuru
cetasi  // 166 //  paNDito'si kulIno'si lokajJo'si mahAnasi  /
akAryasaMgabhIto'si dezako'si suvartmasu  // 167 //  evaMvidhasya te yuktaM
kurvantaM zizucApalam  /  pramattacetasaM pautraM nivArayitumAtmanaH  // 16 //
tirazcAM mAnuSANAM ca prAyo bhedo'yameva hi  /  kRtyAkRtyaM na jAnanti
yadeke'nyattu tadvidaH  // 169 //  vismaranti ca no pUrva vRttAntaM dRDhamAnasAH
/  jAtAyAmapi kasyAJcidbhUtau vidyutsamadyutau  // 170 //  zAntiaulivadhenaiva
zeSasya syAt kulasya te  /  ko hi svakulanirmUladhvaMsahetukriyAM bhajet  // 17
//  samudrIcisaMsaktaH zakrasya dhvastavidviSaH  /  pratApo vismRtaH kiM te
yato'nucitamIhate  // 172 //  sa tvaM krIDasi maNDUko daMSTrAkaNTakasaMkaTe  /
vaktrarandhre bhujaGgasya viSAgnikaNamocini  // 173 //  niyantumatha zaknoSi
naitaM taskaradArakam  /  tato mamArpayAyava karomyasya niyantraNam  // 17 //
naivaM cet kurute pazya tatazcArakavezmani  /  nigaDaiH saMyutaM pautraM
yAtyamAnamanekadhA  // 175 //  alaMkArodayaM tyaktvA ciraM kAlamavasthitaH  /
tadeva vivaraM bhUyaH praveSTumabhivAnchasi  // 176 /  /  kupite mayi zake vA na
te'sti zaraNaM bhuvi  /  jalabudabudavadvAtAdacirAdeva nazyasi  // 177|| tataH
paruSavAgvAtavegAhatamanojalaH  /  kSobhaM paramamAyAto dazAnanamahArNavaH  /  /
178 //  samAcAra bhejakara dUtane bhItara praveza kiyaa| dUta lokAcArake anusAra
yogya vinayako prApta thA  // 164 /  /  dUtakA nAma vAkyAlaMkAra thA so usane
dazAnanake samakSa hI sumAlIse isa prakAra kramase kahanA zurU kiyA  // 165 /  /
jinakI kIrti samasta saMsArameM phaila rahI hai aise vaizravaNa mahArAjane Apase
jo kahA hai use cittameM dhAraNa karo  // 166 /  /  unhoMne kahA hai ki tuma
paNDita ho, kulIna ho, loka vyavahArake jJAtA ho, mahAn ho, akAryake samAgamase
bhayabhIta ho aura sumArgakA upadeza denevAle ho  /  / 167 //  so tumheM
lar3akoM jaisI capalatA karanevAle apane pramAdI pautrako manA karanA ucita hai
// 168 //  tiryaMca aura manuSyoMmeM prAyaH yahI to bheda hai ki tiryaMca kRtya
aura akRtyako nahIM jAnate haiM para manuSya jAnate haiM  /  / 169 /  /  jinakA
citta dRr3ha hai aise manuSya bijalIke samAna bhaMgura kisI vibhUtike prApta
honepara bhI pUrva vRttAntako nahIM bhUlate haiM  // 170 /  /  tumhAre kulakA
pradhAna mAlI mArA gayA isIse samasta kulako zAnti dhAraNa karanA cAhie thI
kyoMki aisA kauna puruSa hogA jo apane kulakA nirmUla nAza karanevAle kAma
karegA  // 171 //  zatruoMko naSTa karanevAle indrakA vaha pratApa jo ki
samudrakI lahara-laharameM vyApta ho rahA hai tumane kyoM bhulA diyA? jisase ki
anucita kAma karanekI ceSTA karate ho  // 172 /  /  tuma meMDhakake samAna ho
aura indra bhujaMgake samakakSa hai, so tuma indrarUpI bhujaMgake usa mukharUpI
bilameM krIr3A kara rahe ho jo dAr3harUpI kaNTakoMse vyApta hai tathA viSarUpI
agnike tilage chor3a rahA hai  // 173|| yadi tuma isa cora bAlakapara niyantraNa
karane meM samartha nahIM ho to Aja hI mujhe sauMpa do maiM svayaM isakA
niyantraNa karU~gA  // 174 /  /  yadi tuma aisA nahIM karate ho to apane
pautrako jelakhAneke andara ber3iyoMse baddha tathA aneka prakArakI yAtanA
sahate hue dekhoge  // 175 /  /  jAna par3atA hai ki tumane alaMkArodayapura
(pAtAlalaMkA ) ko chor3akara bahuta samaya taka bAhara raha liyA hai aba phirase
usI bilameM praveza karanA cAhate ho  /  / 176 /  /  yaha nizcita samajha lo ki
mere yA indra ke kupita honepara pRthvImeM tumhArA koI zaraNa nahIM hai. jisa
prakAra jarA-sI havA calanese pAnIkA babalA naSTa ho jAtA hai usI prakAra tuma
bhI naSTa ho jAoge  // 177|| tadanantara usa dUtake kaThora vacanarUpI vAyuke
vegase jisakA manarUpI jala AghAtako prApta 1. vizravaNazrutiH ma.  /  2.
caratIdaM ma.  /  3. saMsaktazakrasya-ma., kha.  /  ,

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter  2  As the messenger spoke, the ocean of ten heads was
filled with agitation. || 178 ||  Hearing the messenger's words, the ten-headed
one was shaken as if someone had grabbed him and shaken him violently. Sweat
poured from every pore of his body, and his eyes, blood-red, stained the entire
sky. || 179 ||  Then, deafening the directions with his voice that echoed
through the sky, the ten-headed one, making the elephants lose their madness
with his roar, spoke. || 180 ||  "Who is this Vaishravana, or who is called
Indra, who has seized our city, inherited through generations?" || 181 ||  "This
shameless, low-born man, acting like Indra in front of his servants, is like a
crow pretending to be a hawk, and a jackal acting like a Sarabha." || 182 ||
"Oh, messenger! You speak harsh words in front of us without fear. I will offer
your head as a sacrifice to my anger." || 183 ||  Saying this, he drew his sword
from its sheath, making the sky, like a vast lake, appear as if it were filled
with a forest of blue lotuses. || 184 ||  His sword, making a humming sound,
trembled as if from the wind's anger, appearing as if Yama himself had come in
the form of a sword, or as if it were the son of violence. || 185 ||  The ten-
headed one had just raised his sword when Vibhishana intervened, calming him
with great respect. || 186 ||  "What is the fault of this servant, this
wretched, degraded soul, who has sold his body and repeats whatever he is told,
like a parrot?" || 187 ||  "The messengers speak whatever they do, driven by
their master, who resides in their hearts, like a demon. In reality, the
messengers are like puppets, controlled by others." || 188 ||  "Therefore, O
noble one, be pleased and show mercy to the suffering creature. By killing a
small being, the earth will be filled with infamy in the world." || 189 ||
"Your sword will fall only on the heads of your enemies, for Garuda does not
attack the non-poisonous snakes that live in water." || 190 ||  Thus, the fire
of anger in the ten-headed one was quelled by the water of good counsel from
Vibhishana, the righteous speaker, until others pulled the messenger's feet and
quickly dragged him out of the assembly hall.  The Acharya says:  1.
Karabhaayate M. 2. Neet M. 3. Mivaasannam M. 4. Yatra M.  || 181 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTamaM parva 2 pratIkAgrAhavaccAsya prasphuratsvedamocinaH  /
cakSuSAtyantaraktena digdhaM sakalamambaram  // 179 //  tato vadhirayannAzAH
svareNAmbaragAminA  /  kariNo nirmadIkurvan babhANa pratinAdinA  //  180  //
ko'sau vaizravaNo nAma ko vendraH paribhASyate  /  asmadgotrakramAyAtA nagarI
yena gRhyate  //  181  //  so'yaM zyenAyate kAkaH zRgAlaH zarabhAyate  /
indrAyate svabhRtyAnAM nistrapaH puruSAdhamaH  //  182 //  AH kudUta puro'smAkaM
gadataH paruSaM vacaH  /  niHzaGkasya zirastAvat pAtayAmi ruSe valim  // 183 //
ityuktvA 'kozataH khaDgamAcakarSa kRtaM viyat  /  indIvaravaneneva yena vyAptaM
mahAsaraH  //  184 //  kurvANaM kvaNanaM vAtAdroSAdiva sakampanam  /  nItaM
kAlamivAsitvaM hiMsAyA iva zAvakam  //  185  //  udgUrNazcAyametena vegAdAgatya
cAntaram  /  vibhISaNena saMruddhaH sAntvitazceti sAdaram  // 186 //
bhRtyasyAsyAparAdhaH kaH klIbasyApahatAtmanaH  /  vikrItanijadehasya
zukasyevAnubhASiNaH  //  187 //  hRdayasthena nAthena pizAceneva coditAH  /
dUtA vAci pravartante yentradehA ivAvazAH  //  388  //  tatprasIda dayAmArya
kuru prANini duHkhite  /  akIrtirudravatyurvIloke kSudravadhe kRte  //  189  //
zirassu vidviSAmeva tava khaDgaH patiSyati  /  na hi gaNDUpadAn hantuM
vainateyaH pravartate  //  190  //  evaM kopAnalastasya yAvatsadvAkyavAriNA  /
zamamAnIyate tena sAdhunA nyAyavAdinA  // 191 //  huA thA aisA dazAnanarUpI
mahAsAgara parama kSobhako prApta huA || 178  //  dUtake vacana sunate hI
dazAnanakI aisI dazA ho gayI mAno kisIne usake aMga pakar3akara jhakajhora diyA
ho, usake pratyeka aMgase pasInA chUTane lagA aura usakI atyanta lAla dRSTine
samasta AkAzako lipta kara diyA 1)179|| tadanantara AkAzameM gU~janevAle svarase
dizAoMko baharA karatA huA dazAnana, pratidhvanise hAthiyoM ko madarahita karatA
huA bolA  //  180 //  ki yaha vaizravaNa kauna hai ? athavA indra kauna kahalAtA
hai ? jo ki hamArI vaMza-paramparAse calI AyI nagarIpara adhikAra kiye baiThA
hai ? ||181|| nirlajja nIcapuruSa apane bhRtyoMke sAmane indra jaisA AcaraNa
karatA hai so mAno kauA bAja bana rahA hai aura zRgAla aSTApadake samAna AcaraNa
kara rahA hai  /  /  182  //  are kudUta ! hamAre sAmane niHzaMka hokara kaThora
vacana bola rahA hai so maiM abhI krodhake lie tere mastakakI bali car3hAtA hU~
|| 183  //  | yaha kahakara usane myAnase talavAra khIMcI jisase AkAzarUpI
sarovara aisA dikhane lagA mano nIlakamalarUpI vanase hI vyApta ho gayA ho  //
184  //  dazAnanakI vaha talavAra havAse bAta kara rahI thI, krodhase mAno kA~pa
rahI thI, aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno talavArakA rUpa dharakara yamarAja hI vahA~
AyA ho, athavA mAno hiMsAkA beTA hI ho || 185|| dazAnanane vaha talavAra Uparako
uThAyI hI thI ki vibhISaNane bIcameM Akara roka diyA aura bar3e Adara se isa
prakAra samajhAyA ki  //  /  186 || jisane apanA zarIra beca diyA hai aura jo
tote ke samAna kahI bAtako hI duharAtA ho aise isa pApI dIna-hIna bhRtyakA
aparAdha kyA hai ? || 187 || dUta jo kucha vacana bolate haiM so pizAca kI
taraha hRdayameM vidyamAna apane svAmIse preraNA pAkara hI bolate haiM  /
yathArtha - meMdUta yantramayI puruSa samAna parAdhIna hai  //  188 || isalie he
Arya ! prasanna hoo aura du:khI prANI para dayA karo  /  kSudrakA vadha karanese
saMsArameM akIrti hI phailatI hai  //  189  //  ApakI talavAra to zatruoMke hI
sira para par3egI kyoMki garur3a jalameM rahanevAle nirviSa sA~poMko mAraneke
lie pravRtta nahIM hotA || 190 || isa prakAra nyAya-nItiko jAnanevAle satpuruSa
vibhISaNa, sadupadezarUpI jalase jabataka dazAnanakI krodhAgniko zAnta karatA
hai tabataka anya logoMne usa dUtake paira khIMcakara use sabhAbhavana se zIghra
hI bAhara nikAla diyA  /  AcArya kahate haiM ki duHkhake lie 1. karabhAyate ma.
/  2. nIta ma. 3 - mivAsannaM ma  /  4. yatra ma.  /  181

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  182 In the Padma Purana, the messenger, having been
treated well by others, was dragged by his feet. He was quickly expelled from
the house. Shame on the servant who created this sorrow!  ||192||  Going to
Vaishravana, he informed him of this situation. He also told him of the harsh
words spoken by Dashagriva. ||193||  Fueled by this information, Vaishravana's
anger ignited like a fire.  He, like a minister, shared this anger with his
servants. ||194||  He declared war with a harsh sound of the trumpet.  Mani-
bhadra and others were immediately prepared for battle. ||195||  Vaishravana,
surrounded by Yaksha warriors wielding shining swords, spears, and chakra,
marched forth. ||196||  He was accompanied by elephants resembling the size of
Anjan mountain, chariots resembling the color of the evening sky, horses with
waving chamaras, and swift winds of victory.  His celestial vehicles, resembling
the abode of the gods, soared high in the sky. ||197||  He was also accompanied
by infantry, whose strength was like a rushing torrent, surpassing even the
horses, chariots, elephants, and celestial vehicles. ||198||  Meanwhile,
Dashagriva, the mighty one, had already emerged with his brothers, Bhanukarna
and others, ready for the great battle. ||199||  The two armies clashed on the
peak of the mountain called Gunja.  The clash of weapons created a fiery blaze.
||201||  The sound of clashing swords, the neighing of horses, the roar of the
infantry, the trumpeting of elephants, the beautiful sound of chariots
colliding, the loud sound of the trumpets, and the whistling of arrows, all
combined to create a unique and mixed sound.  The echo reverberated between the
sky and the earth, filling the warriors with a supreme intoxication. ||202-204||
The warriors wielded swords resembling the jaws of Yama, spears resembling the
teeth of Yama, arrows resembling the threats of Yama, shields resembling the
arms of Yama, and maces resembling the fists of Yama. ||205-206||  Shame on such
a servant who created this situation! ||191-192||  The messenger went and
informed Vaishravana of this situation and also told him about the harsh words
spoken by Dashagriva. ||193||  Fueled by this information, Vaishravana's anger
ignited like a fire.  He, like a minister, shared this anger with his servants.
||194||  He declared war with a harsh sound of the trumpet.  Mani-bhadra and
others were immediately prepared for battle. ||195||  Vaishravana, surrounded by
Yaksha warriors wielding shining swords, spears, and chakra, marched forth.
||196||  He was accompanied by elephants resembling the size of Anjan mountain,
chariots resembling the color of the evening sky, horses with waving chamaras,
and swift winds of victory.  His celestial vehicles, resembling the abode of the
gods, soared high in the sky. ||197||  He was also accompanied by infantry,
whose strength was like a rushing torrent, surpassing even the horses, chariots,
elephants, and celestial vehicles. ||198||  Meanwhile, Dashagriva, the mighty
one, had already emerged with his brothers, Bhanukarna and others, ready for the
great battle. ||199||  The two armies clashed on the peak of the mountain called
Gunja.  The clash of weapons created a fiery blaze. ||201||  The sound of
clashing swords, the neighing of horses, the roar of the infantry, the
trumpeting of elephants, the beautiful sound of chariots colliding, the loud
sound of the trumpets, and the whistling of arrows, all combined to create a
unique and mixed sound.  The echo reverberated between the sky and the earth,
filling the warriors with a supreme intoxication. ||202-204||  The warriors
wielded swords resembling the jaws of Yama, spears resembling the teeth of Yama,
arrows resembling the threats of Yama, shields resembling the arms of Yama, and
maces resembling the fists of Yama. ||205-206||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 182 padmapurANe pAdayostAvadAkRSya dUto'nyaiH sukhalIkRtaH  /  kSipraM
niSkAsito gehAd dhig bhRtyaM duHkhanirmitam  // 1921. gatvA
vaizravaNAyeyamavasthA tena veditA  /  dazagrIvAdviniSkrAntA vANI
cAsyantaduHkathA  // 193 //  tayendhanavibhUtyAsya kopavahniH samutthitaH  /
amAta iva so'nena bhRtyacetaHsu vaNTitaH  // 194 //  acIkaracca saMgrAmasaMjJAM
paruSatUryataH  /  raNasajA yayA sadyo maNibhadrAdayaH kRtAH  // 195 //  nired
vaizravaNo yoddhayakSayodhaistato vRtaH  /
vilasatsAyakaprAsacakrAdyAyudhapANibhiH  // 196 //  sa
nirbharAJjanakSoNIdharAkArairmataGgajaiH  /
saMdhyArAgasamAviSTamedhAkArairmahArathaiH  /  / 197 /  /
prasphuraccAmarairazvairjayanirjavato'nilam  /
surAvAsasamAkArairvimAnaidUramunnataiH  // 198 //
laddhitAzvavimAnemasyandanenorutejasA  /  pAdAtena ca saMghaTTamIyuSArNavarAviNA
/  / 199 /  /  pUrvameva ca niSkrAnto dazagrIvo mahAbalaH  /  bhAnukarNAdibhiH
sArdhaM sthito raNamahotsavaH  // 20 //  guJjAkhyasya tato mUrdhina parvatasya
tayorabhUt  /  saMpAtaH senayoH zastrasaMpAtodgatapAvakaH  // 201 //  kvaNanena
tato'sInAM saptInAM heSitena ca  /  padAtInAM ca nAdena gajAnAM garjitena ca  /
/ 202 //  anyo'nyasaMgamodabhUtarathazabdena cAruNA  /  tUryasvareNa cogreNa
zItkAreNa ca patriNAm  /  / 203 /  /  dhvaniH ko'pi vimizro'bhUt pratinAdena
bodhitaH  /  vyApnuvan rodasI kurvan bhaTAnAM madamuttamam  /  / 204 //
kRtAntavandanAkAraizcakraH sphuritadhArakaiH  /  khaDgaistadrasanAkArai
raktasIkaravarSimiH  // 205 /  /  tadromasaMnibhaiH kuntaistattarjanyupamaiH
zaraiH  /  pariSaistadbhujAkArai stanmuSTisamamudgaraiH  // 206 /  /  hI jisakI
racanA huI hai aise bhRtyako dhikkAra ho  /  / 191-192 //  dUtane jAkara apanI
yaha saba dazA vaizravaNako batalA dI aura dazAnanake mukhase nikalI vaha
abhadravANI bhI sunA dI  // 193 //  dUtake vacanarUpI iMdhanase vaizravaNako
krodhAgni bhabhaka utthii| itanI bhabhakI ki vaizravaNake manameM mAno samA
nahIM sakI isalie usane bhRtyajanoMke cittameM bA~Ta dI arthAt dUtake vacana
sunakara vaizravaNa kupita huA aura sAtha hI usake bhRtya bhI bahuta kupita hue
/  / 194 //  usane turahIke kaThora zabdoMse yuddhakI sUcanA karavA dI jisase
maNibhadra Adi yoddhA zIghra hI yuddha ke lie taiyAra ho gaye  // 195 /  /
tadanantara jinake hAthoMmeM kRpANa, bhAle tathA cakra Adi zastra suzobhita ho
rahe the aise yakSarUpI yodhAoMse ghirA huA vaizravaNa yuddhake lie nikalA  //
196 /  /  idhara aMjanagirikA AkAra dhAraNa karanevAle-bar3e-bar3e kAle
hAthiyoM, sandhyAkI lAlimAse yukta meghoMke samAna dikhanevAle bar3e-bar3e
rathoM, jinake donoM ora camara Dhula rahe the tathA jo vegase vAyuko jIta rahe
the aise ghor3oM, devabhavanake samAna sundara tathA U~cI ur3Ana bharanevAle
vimAnoM, tathA jo ghor3e, vimAna, hAthI aura rathasabhIko ullaMghana kara rahe
the arthAt ina sabase Age bar3hakara cala rahe the, jinakA pratApa bahata bhArI
thA, jo adhikatAke kAraNa eka dUsareko dhakkA de rahe the tathA samudrake samAna
garaja rahe the aise paidala sainikoM aura bhAnukarNa Adi bhAiyoMke sAtha
mahAbalavAn dazAnana, pahalese hI bAhara nikalakara baiThA thaa| yuddhakA
nimitta pAkara dazAnanake hRdayameM bar3A utsava-ullAsa ho rahA thA  // 197
tadanantara guMja nAmaka parvatake zikharapara donoM senAoMkA samAgama huaa|
aisA samAgama ki jisameM zastroMke par3anese agni utpanna ho rahI thI  // 201 //
tadanantara talavAroMkI khanakhanATa, ghor3oMkI hinahinAhaTa, paidala sainikoMkI
AvAja, hAthiyoMko garjanA, parasparake samAgamase utpanna rathoMkI sundara
cItkAra, turahIkI bulanda AvAja aura bANoMkI sanasanAhaTase usa samaya koI
mizritavilakSaNa hI zabda ho rahA thaa| usakI pratidhvani AkAza aura pRthivIke
bIca gUMja rahI thI tathA yoddhAoMmeM uttama mada utpanna kara rahI thI 202-204
/  isa taraha jinakA AkAra yamarAjake 1. -rmukhalakSitaH m.| 2. sotena m.| 3.
taddazanAkAraiH k.| 4. kumbhaiH m.| 5. tattarjanyopamaiH ma.  /  6.
tanumuSTibhirmudgaraiH m.| .

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter  A great battle ensued, filled with valor and courage. The
cowardly were struck with fear, while the brave sought glory by sacrificing
their lives. ||207|| Seeing his army demoralized by the Yakshas, Dashaanan
(Ravana) took charge, determined to hold the battlefield. ||208|| As he
approached, his white umbrella shielded him from the sun, making him appear like
a dark cloud with the moon shining upon it. His bow, adorned with Indra's
rainbow, resembled a dark cloud charged with lightning. His crown, adorned with
countless jewels, made him look like a thunderous cloud, veiled in brilliance.
||209-211|| The Yakshas, their eyes wide with fear, lost their strength and
turned away, their resolve crumbling in an instant. ||212|| The Yaksha foot
soldiers, their hearts filled with terror, began to flee in disarray, creating a
deafening roar. Many Yaksha leaders rushed to the front of their armies,
rallying their troops to face the enemy once more. ||213-214|| Dashaanan, like a
lion leaping through the sky to destroy enraged elephants, set out to destroy
the Yaksha leaders. ||215|| Fueled by the wind of his anger, the fire of
Dashaanan's weapons blazed through the forest of the enemy army. ||216|| There
was not a single man left on earth, in a chariot, on a horse, an elephant, or in
a flying machine, who had not been pierced by Ravana's arrows. ||217|| Seeing
Dashaanan approaching, Vaishravana (Kubera) was instantly filled with brotherly
love. ||218|| He was overcome with sorrow and despair, just as the mighty Bhallu
(Bhima) had been in the past, when he had engaged in the act of peace. ||219||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTamaM parva babhUva sumahajjanyaM kRtavikrAntasaMmadam  /
kAtarotpAditatrAsaM ziraHkrItayazodhanam  // 207 //  tato nijaM balaM nItaM
khedaM yakSamaTaizvirAt  /  sa dhArayitumArabdho dazAsyo raNamastakam  // 208 //
abhyAyAntaM ca taM dRSTvA sitAtapanivAraNam  /  kAlameghamivordhva
stharajanIkaramaNDalam  // 209 //  sacApaM tamivAsaktazacIpatizarAsanam  /
hemakaNTakasaMvItaM 'vidyutAlamivAcitam  // 210 //  kirITaM bibhrataM
nAnAratnasaGgavirAjitam  /  yuktaM tamiva vajreNa chAdayantaM nabhasviSA  //
211 //  vilakSAzcAbhavan yakSA viSaNNAkSAH kSataujasaH  /  parAGmukhakriyAyuktAH
kSaNAt kSINaraNAzayAH  // 212 //  trAsAkulitacitteSu tato yakSapadAtiSu  /
Arvatamiva yAteSu bhramatsu sumahAravam  // 213 //  svasenAmukhatAM jagmurya
kSANAM bahavo'dhipAH  /  punarebhiH kRtaM sainyaM raNasyAbhimukhaM tathA  // 214
//  tata ucchettumArabdho yakSanAthAn dazAnanaH  /  utpayotpatya gagane siMho
mattagajAniva  //  215  //  preritaH kopavAtena dazAnanatanUnapAt  /
zastrajvAlAkulaH zatrusainyakakSe vyajRmbhata  //  216  //  na so'sti puruSo
bhUmau rathe vAjini vAraNe  /  vimAne vA na yarichadraH kRto dAzAnanaiH zaraiH
//  217 //  tato'bhimukhamAyAtaM dRSTvA dazamukhaM raNe  /
abhajadvAndhavasnehaM paraM vaizravaNaH kSaNAt  //  218|| viSAdamatulaM
cAgAnnirvedaM ca nRpazriyaH  /  yathA bAhubalI pUrva zamakarmaNi saMgataH  //
219  //  mukhake samAna thA tathA jinakI dhAra painI thI, aise cakroM,
yamarAjakI jihvAke samAna dikhane vAlI tathA khUnakI bU~deM barasAnevAlI
talavAroM, usake romake samAna dikhanevAle bhAle, yamarAjakI pradezinI aMgulIkI
upamA dhAraNa karanevAle bANoM, yamarAjakI bhujAke AkAra parigha nAmaka zastroM
aura unakI muTThI ke samAna dikhanevAle mudgaroMse donoM senAoM meM bar3A bhArI
yuddha huA  /  usa yuddha jahA~ parAkramI manuSyoMko harSaM ho rahA thA vahA~
kAtara manuSyoMko bhaya bhI utpanna ho rahA thaa| donoM hI senAoMke zUravIra
apanA sira de-dekara yazarUpI mahAdhana kharIda rahe the  /  205 - 207 /  /
tadanantara cirakAla taka yakSarUpI bhaToMke dvArA apanI senAko kheda khinna
dekha dazAnana use sa~bhAlaneke lie tatpara huA || 208|| tadanantara jisake
Upara sapheda chatra laga rahA thA aura usase jo usa kAle megha ke samAna dikhAI
detA thA jisapara ki candramAkA maNDala camaka rahA thA, jo dhanuSase sahita thA
aura usase indradhanuSa sahita zyAma meghake samAna jAna par3atA thA,
suvarNamaya kavacase yukta hone ke kAraNa jo bijalI se yukta zyAma meghake
samAna dikhAI detA thA, jo nAnA ratnoMke samAgamase suzobhita mukuTa dhAraNa
kara rahA thA aura usase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno kAntise AkAzako AcchAdita
karatA huA vajrase yukta zyAma megha hI ho| aise dazAnanako AtA huA dekha
yakSoMkI A~kheM cauMdhiyA gayIM, unakA saba oja naSTa ho gayA, yuddhase vimukha
ho bhAganekI ceSTA karane lage aura kSaNa-bhara meM unakA yuddhakA abhiprAya
samApta ho gayA  //  209 - 212  //  tadanantara jinake citta bhayase vyAkula ho
rahe the aise yakSoMke paidala sainika mahAzabda karate hue jaba bhramara meM
par3e ke samAna ghUmane lage taba yakSoMke bahuta sAre adhipati apanI senAke
sAmane Aye aura unhoMne senAko phirase yuddha ke sammukha kiyA  //  213 - 214
//  tadanantara jisa prakAra siMha AkAzameM uchala-uchalakara matta hAthiyoM ko
naSTa karatA hai usI prakAra dazAnana yakSAdhipatiyoMko naSTa karaneke lie
tatpara huA  // 215 //  zastrarUpIM jvAlAoMse yukta dazAnanarUpI agni,
krodharUpI vAyuse prerita hokara zatrusenArUpI vanameM vRddhiko prApta ho rahI
thI || 216 | usa samaya pRthivI, ratha, ghor3e, hAthI athavA vimAnapara aisA eka
bhI AdamI nahIM bacA thA jo rAvaNake bANoMse sachidra na huA ho || 217 ||
tadanantara yuddha meM dazAnanako sAmane AtA dekha vaizravaNa, kSaNa-bhara meM
bhAIke uttama snehako prApta huA || 218 || sAtha 3. sitAtapatravAraNam ma  /  4
vidyutAta- ma  /  5. mAyAntaM ma  /  1. sAdhArayitu ma  /  2. abhyAyAtaM ma  /
6. saMgate kha. ma.  /  183

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
184 The world, full of suffering and misery, is indeed despicable.  Living
beings are constantly reborn in different wombs, like a wheel turning.  ||220||
"Look, blinded by wealth, what have I started?  I am destroying my own brother
out of pride." ||221||  "Oh, Dashaanan, listen to these noble words.  What sin
are you committing, driven by fleeting worldly glory?" ||222||  "I am your
maternal uncle's son, and I love you like a brother.  It is not right to behave
so badly towards your own kin." ||223||  "A being who kills other beings, driven
by the desire for pleasurable objects, goes to a terrible hell, filled with
immense suffering." ||224||  "Just as a man who gains a kingdom for a day, but
dies as a result a year later, similarly, this being enjoys fleeting pleasures,
but suffers for an immeasurable time." ||225||  "Life is truly fleeting, like
the blink of an eye.  Don't you know, Dashaanan, why you are doing this, for the
sake of fleeting pleasures?" ||226||  Dashaanan, devoid of compassion, laughed
and said, "Vaishravaan, this is not the time to listen to Dharma." ||227||  "Men
mounted on intoxicated elephants, with swords in their hands, kill their
enemies, not preach Dharma." ||228||  "Why are you talking so much?  Either
stand in the path of my sword, or bow down to me.  There is no third option for
you." ||229||  "Or, since you are the guardian of wealth, protect my wealth.  A
man is not ashamed to do his own duty." ||230||  Vaishravaan then said to
Dashaanan, "Surely your lifespan is short, that's why you are speaking like
this." ||231||  Dashaanan, his mind filled with anger, replied, "If you have the
strength, then kill me." ||232||  Vaishravaan then said, "You are the elder, so
kill me first.  The strength of brave men with unblemished bodies does not
increase." ||233||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 184 papapurANe vivedeti ca dhikkaSTaM saMsAraM duHkhamAjanam  /
cakravatparivartante prANino yatra yoniSu  // 220 //  'pazyaizvaryavimUDhena kiM
vastu prastutaM myaa| bandhuvidhvaMsanaM yatra kriyate garvavattayA  // 221 //
udAttamiti cAvocada bho bho zRNa dazAnana  /  kimidaM kriyate pApaM
kSaNikazrIpracoditam  // 22 //  mAtRSvasuH suto'haM te sodaraprItisaMgataH  /
tato bandhuSu no yuktaM vyavahartumasAMpratam  // 223 //  kRtvA prANivadhaM
jnturmnojnyvissyaashyaa| prayAti narakaM bhImaM sumahAduHkhasaMkulam  // 224 //
yathaikadivasaM rAjyaM prApta saMvatsaraM vadham  /  prApnoti sadRzaM tena
nizcaye viSayaiH sukham  // 225 //  cakSuHpakSmapuTAsaGgakSaNikaM nanu jIvitam
/  na velsi kiM yataH karma kurute bhogakAraNam  /  / 226 //  tato
hasannuvAcedaM dazAsyaH karuNojjhitaH  /  dharmazravaNakAlo'yaM na vaizravaNa
vartate  // 227 //  mattastamberamArUDaimaNDalAgrakarairnaraiH  /  kriyate
mAraNaM zatrorna tu dharmanivedanam  // 228 //  mAge tiSTha kRpANasya kiM
vyartha bahu bhASase  /  kuru vA praNipAtaM me tRtIyAsti na te gatiH  // 229 //
athavA dhanapAlastvaM draviNaM mama pAlaya  /  kurvANo hi nijaM karma puruSo
naiva lajate  // 230 //  tato vaizravaNo bhUya uvAceti dazAnanam  /
nUnamAyustava svalpaM kara yeneti bhASase  // 23 //  bhUyo'pi mAnasaM
bibhrattato roSaNarUSitam  /  asti cettava sAmarthya jahItyAha dazAnanaH  // 232
//  jagAda sa tato jyeSTastvaM mAM prathamamAjahi  /  vIryamakSatakAyAnAM
zUrANAM nahi vardhate  // 233 //  hI anupama viSAda aura rAjyalakSmIse
udAsInatAko prApta huaa| jisa prakAra pahale bAhubali apane bhAI bharatase dveSa
kara pachatAye usI prakAra vaizravaNa bhI bhAI dazAnanase virodha kara
pchtaayaa| vaha mana hI mana zAnta avasthAko prApta hotA huA vicAra karane lagA
ki jisa saMsArameM prANI nAnA yoniyoMmeM cakrakI bhA~ti parivartana karate
rahate haiM vaha saMsAra duHkhakA pAtra hai, kaSTa svarUpa hai, ataH use
dhikkAra ho  // 219-220 /  /  dekho, aizvaryameM matta hokara maiMne yaha kauna-
sA kArya prArambha kara rakhA hai ki jisameM ahaMkAravaza apane bhAIkA vidhvaMsa
kiyA jAtA hai  // 221 //  vaha isa prakAra utkRSTa vacana kahane lagA ki he
dazAnana ! suna, kSaNika rAjyalakSmIse prerita hokara yaha kauna-sA pApakarma
kiyA jA rahA hai ?  // 222 //  maiM terI mausIkA putra hU~ ataH tujhapara sage
bhAI-jaisA sneha karatA huuN| bhAiyoMke sAtha anucita vyavahAra karanA ucita
nahIM hai  /  / 223 /  /  yaha prANI manohara viSayoMkI AzAse prANiyoMkA vadha
kara bahuta bhArI duHkhoMse yukta bhayaMkara narakameM jAtA hai  // 224 /  /
jisa prakAra koI manuSya eka dinakA to rAjya prApta kare aura usake phalasvarUpa
varSa-bhara mRtyuko prApta ho usI prakAra nizcayase yaha prANI viSayoMke dvArA
kSaNasthAyI sukha prApta karatA hai aura usake phalasvarUpa aparimita kAla taka
duHkha prApta karatA hai  /  / 225 //  yathArthameM yaha jIvana netroMkI
TimakArake samAna kSaNabhaMgura hai so he dazAnana ! kyA tU yaha jAnatA nahIM
hai jisase bhogoMke nimitta yaha kArya kara rahA hai ?  // 226 //  taba dayAhIna
dazAnanane haMsate hue kahA ki he vaizravaNa! yaha dharmazravaNa karanekA samaya
nahIM hai  // 227|| madonmatta hAthiyoMpara car3he tathA talavArako hAthameM
dhAraNa karanevAle manuSya to zatrukA saMhAra karate haiM na ki dharmakA upadeza
// 228|| vyartha hI bahuta kyoM baka rahA hai ? yA to talavArake mArga meM
khar3A ho yA mere lie praNAma kr| terI tIsarI gati nahIM hai  /  / 229 /  /
athavA tU dhanapAla hai so mere dhanakI rakSA kr| kyoMki jisakA jo apanA kArya
hotA hai use karatA huA vaha lajjita nahIM hotA  // 230 //  taba vaizravaNa
phira dazAnanase bolA ki nizcaya hI terI Ayu alpa raha gayI hai isIlie tU isa
prakAra kara vacana bola rahA hai  // 231 /  /  isake uttarameM roSase rUSita
manako dhAraNa karanevAle dazAnanane phira kahA ki yadi terI sAmathyaM hai to
mAra  /  / 232 /  /  taba vaizravaNane kahA ki tU bar3A hai isalie prathama tU
hI mujhe mAra kyoMki jinake zarIrameM 1. pazyaizvaryamUDhena ma.  /  2. viSayI
ma.  /

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Chapter  Then, Vaishravana released his arrows towards the ten-headed
one. The lord of the luminaries, like the sun showering its rays upon the earth
at noon, aimed his arrows at the head of the ten-headed one. ||234|| The ten-
headed one then cut those arrows with his own arrows. He created a canopy of
arrows, dense and impenetrable, in a moment, without any fear. ||235||
Vaishravana, seizing the opportunity, struck the ten-headed one's bow with his
crescent-shaped arrow, causing him to fall from his chariot. ||236|| Then, the
ten-headed one, with his indomitable spirit, mounted another chariot, which
roared like a cloud, and swiftly approached Vaishravana, his chariot shining
like the Pushpaka. ||237|| With great anger, he rained down thunderbolts, shaped
like meteors, upon Vaishravana, shattering his armor into pieces. ||238|| The
one with the white garland, with his swift Bhindimala, struck Vaishravana's
heart, causing him to faint. ||239|| A great cry arose in Vaishravana's army,
while the Rakshasa army rejoiced with loud cheers. ||240|| Vaishravana, greatly
distressed, was lifted by his servants and placed on a hero's bed. He was then
swiftly taken to Yakshapura. ||241|| Ravana, seeing his enemy defeated, withdrew
from the battle. For the victory of heroes lies in the defeat of their enemies,
not in the acquisition of wealth. ||242|| Then, Vaishravana's physicians treated
him, and he regained his former health. As he regained consciousness, he thought
to himself, ||243|| "I am now like a tree without flowers, a broken pot, or a
lotus-less pond." ||244|| "As long as a man possesses honor, he enjoys happiness
in this world while alive. Now, my honor is lost, so I strive for liberation."
||245|| "The wise do not desire worldly pleasures, for they are impermanent,
fleeting, full of obstacles, and filled with sorrow." ||246|| "This is not
anyone's fault, but the result of the actions performed by living beings in
their previous births." ||247||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTamaM parva UrdhvaM tato dazAsyasya zarAn vaizravaNo'mucat  /
karAnivAvanermUrdhina madhyAhne yotiSAM patiH ||234|| ciccheda sAyakAn tasya
tato bANairdazAnanaH  /  maNDapaM ca ghanaM cakre kSaNamAtrAdanAkulaH  //  235
//  randhaM vaizravaNaH prApya zazAGkArgheSuNA tataH  /  dazAsyasyAcchitaccApaM
cakre caitaM rathacyutam  //  236  //  tato'nyaM rathamAruhya
vegAdammodanisvanam  /  tathAsattvo dazagrIvo duDhauke puSpakAntikam || 237  /
/  ulkAkAraistatastena vajradaNDairghaneritaiH  /  kaNazaH kavacaM kIrNaM
dhanadasya mahAruSA  //  238  //  hRdaye zuklamA'tha miNDimAlena veginA  /
jaghAna kaikaseyastaM tathA mUrcchAmito yataH || 239 || tato jAto mahAkrandaH
sainye vaizravaNAzrite  /  toSAca rakSasAM sainye jAtaH kalakalo mahAn  //  240
//  tato bhRtyaiH samuddhRtya vIrazayyApratiSTitaH  /  kSipraM yakSapuraM nIto
dhanado bhRzaduHkhitaH || 241 || dazAsyospi jitaM zatruM jJAtvA nivavRte raNAt
/  vIrANAM zatrubhaGgena kRtatvaM na dhanAdinA  //  242  //  atha pratikriyA
cakre dhanadasya cikitsakaiH  /  prAptazca pUrvavadehamiti cakre sa cetasi ||243
|| drumasya puSpamuktasya bhagnasya vRSabhasya ca  /  sarasazcApyapadmasya
varte'haM sadRzo'dhunA  //  244  //  mAnamudvahataH puMso jIvataH saMsRtau
sukham  /  tacca me sAMprataM nAsti tasmAnmuktyarthamAryete || 245|| etadarthaM
na vAJchanti santo viSayajaM sukham  /  yadetadadhruvaM stokaM sAntarAyaM
saduHkhakam  // 246  /  /  nAgaH kasyacidapya karmaNAmidamohitam  /  samastaM
prANijAtasya kRtAnAmanyajanmani  // 247 //  185 ghAva nahIM lagatA aise zUra
vIroMkA parAkrama vRddhiko prApta nahIM hotA ||233|| tadanantara madhyAhnake
samaya jisa prakAra sUryaM apanI kiraNaM pRthivIke Upara chor3atA hai usI
prakAra vaizravaNane dazAnanake Upara bANa chor3e ||234|| tatpazcAt dazAnanane
apane bANoMse usake bANa cheda DAle aura binA kisI AkulatAke lagAtAra chor3e hue
bANoMse usake Upara maNDapa sA tAna diyA || 235|| tadanantara avasara pAkara
vaizravaNane ardhacandra bANase dazAnanakA dhanuSa tor3a DAlA aura use rathase
cyuta kara diyA || 236 || tatpazcAt adbhuta parAkramakA dhArI dazAnana meghake
samAna zabda karanevAle meghanAda nAmA dUsare rathapara vegase car3hakara
vaizravaNake samIpa pahu~cA ||237|| vahA~ bahuta bhArI krodhase usane jora-jora
se calAye hue ulkAke samAna AkAravAle vajradaNDoMse vaizravaNa kA kavaca cUra-
cUra kara DAlA ||238|| aura sapheda mAlAko dhAraNa karanevAle usake hRdayameM
vegazAlI bhiNDimAlase itane jamakara prahAra kiyA ki vaha vahIM mUrchita ho gayA
|| 239 || yaha dekha vaizravaNakI senAmeM rudanakA mahAzabda hone lagA aura
rAkSasoMkI senAmeM harSake kAraNa bar3A bhArI kala-kala zabda hone lagA || 240
|| taba atizaya duHkhI aura vIrazayyApara par3e vaizravaNako usake bhRtyagaNa
zIghra hI yakSapura le gaye || 241 || rAvaNa bhI zatruko parAjita jAna yuddha se
vimukha ho gayA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki vIra manuSyoM kA kRtakRtyapanA zatruoMke
parAjayase hI ho jAtA hai  /  dhanAdikI prAptise nahIM || 242  //  athAnantara
vaidyoMne vaizravaNakA upacAra kiyA so vaha pahale ke samAna svastha zarIrako
prApta ho gayA  /  svastha honepara usane manameM vicAra kiyA ||243 || ki isa
samaya maiM puSparahita vRkSa, phUTe hue ghaTa athavA kamalarahita sarovara ke
samAna hU~ || 244 || jabataka manuSya mAnako dhAraNa karatA hai tabhI taka
saMsAra meM jIvita rahate hue use sukha hotA hai  /  isa samaya merA vaha mAna
naSTa ho gayA hai isalie mukti prApta karaneke lie prayatna karatA hU~ || 245 ||
cU~ki yaha viSayajanya sukha anitya hai, thor3A hai, sAntarAya hai aura
duHkhoMse sahita hai isalie satpuruSa usakI cAha nahIM rakhate  // 246|| isameM
kisIkA aparAdha nahIM hai, yaha to prANiyoMne anya janmameM jo karma kara rakhe
haiM unhIMkI 1. ghaneritaH ma  /  2. muktapuSpasya  /  3. ghaTasya  /  4 A
samantAd yatnaM karomi  /  5. nAparAdhaH  /  6. kasyacidapyasya ma.  /  24

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
186 In the Padma Purana, wise ones who know the state of the world do not get
angry at others, for they are merely the cause of their happiness or suffering.
||24||  The son of Kekasi has become my friend, who has freed me from the great
bondage of household life. ||249|| Bhanukarna is also my well-wisher now, who
has caused the war that has led to my supreme detachment. ||250|| Thinking thus,
he took the Digambara initiation and, by proper worship of the austerities,
attained the supreme abode. ||251|| Having washed away the stain of defeat upon
his family, Dashaanan (Ravana) lived happily on earth, and all his relatives
considered him their leader. ||252|| Then the beautiful Dhanada (Kubera)'s
Pushpaka Vimana was brought to Ravana by his servants. That Pushpaka Vimana was
very beautiful, Dhanada was its owner, its peak was studded with various kinds
of jewels, its windows were its eyes, the garland of pearls that was attached to
it emitted a group of pure radiance, and it seemed as if it were constantly
shedding tears due to the separation from its owner. Its front part was made of
Padmaraga gems, so when he wore it, it seemed as if he had beaten his heart a
lot due to grief, which is why he was wearing a very red hue. In some places,
the radiance of Indranila gems was covering it, which made it seem as if he had
attained a very dark complexion due to grief. It seemed like a city, being
accompanied by Chaitya temples, forests, the front parts of houses, wells, and
palaces. Various weapons had inflicted wounds on that Vimana, it was very high,
it seemed like a divine abode, and it was like an ornament of the sky.
||253-258|| Dashaanan wanted to keep that Pushpaka Vimana with him, considering
it a sign of the defeat of his enemies, otherwise, what vehicle made by
knowledge did he not have? ||259|| He mounted that Vimana, along with his
ministers, vehicles, citizens, sons, parents, and relatives. ||260|| All efforts
are... ||245|| Suffering or happiness are merely causes for others, therefore,
wise ones who know the state of the world do not get angry at them, meaning they
do not experience joy or sorrow towards the cause. ||248|| He, the ten-headed
one, is my well-wisher, who has freed me, the foolish one, from the great
bondage of household life. ||249|| Bhanukarna is also my well-wisher now, who
has caused the war that has led to my supreme detachment. ||250|| Thinking thus,
he took the Digambara initiation and, by proper worship of the austerities,
attained the supreme abode. ||251|| _Here, Dashaanan also washed away the stain
of defeat upon his family and lived happily on earth, and all his relatives
considered him their leader. ||252|| Then the beautiful Dhanada (Kubera)'s
Pushpaka Vimana was brought to Ravana by his servants. That Pushpaka Vimana was
very beautiful, Dhanada was its owner, its peak was studded with various kinds
of jewels, its windows were its eyes, the garland of pearls that was attached to
it emitted a group of pure radiance, and it seemed as if it were constantly
shedding tears due to the separation from its owner. Its front part was made of
Padmaraga gems, so when he wore it, it seemed as if he had beaten his heart a
lot due to grief, which is why he was wearing a very red hue. In some places,
the radiance of Indranila gems was covering it, which made it seem as if he had
attained a very dark complexion due to grief. It seemed like a city, being
accompanied by Chaitya temples, forests, the front parts of houses, wells, and
palaces. Various weapons had inflicted wounds on that Vimana, it was very high,
it seemed like a divine abode, and it was like an ornament of the sky.
||253-258|| Dashaanan wanted to keep that Pushpaka Vimana with him, considering
it a sign of the defeat of his enemies, otherwise, what vehicle made by
knowledge did he not have? ||259|| He mounted that Vimana, along with his
ministers, vehicles, citizens, sons, parents, and relatives. ||260|| 1. Durvi
K., Kh. | 2. Athapatitam M. | 3. Param M. | 4. Kritam Pravaranam M. | 5.
Garvayuktah.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 186 padmapurANe nimittamAtratAnyeSAmasukhasya sukhasya vA  /  budhAstebhyo na
kupyanti saMsArasthitivedinaH  // 24 //  kalyANamitratAM yAtaH kekasItanayo mama
/  gRhAvAsamahApAzAdyanAhaM mocito'matiH  // 249 /  /  bAndhavo bhAnukarNo'pi
saMvRttaH sAMprataM mama  /  saMgrAmakAraNaM yena kRtaM paramasaMvide  // 250 /
/  iti saMcintya jagrAha dIkSAM daigambarImasau  /  ArAdhya ca tapaH samyaka
kramAddhAma paraM gataH  /  / 251 //  prakSAlya dazavaktro'pi parAbhavamalaM
kule  /  sukhAsikAmagAduvyAM bandhubhiH zekharIkRtaH  // 252 //  atha
pravartitaM tasya manojJaM dhAnadAdhipam  /  pratyuptaratnazikharaM
vAtAyanavilocanam  // 253 //  muktAjAlapramuktena samUhenAmalatviSAm  /
samutsRjadivAjasramazru svAmiviyogataH  // 254 //  padmarAgavinirmANamagradezaM
dadhacchucA  /  tADanAdiva saMprApta hRdayaM raktatAM parAm  // 255 //
indranIlapramAjAlakRtaprAvaraNaM kvacit  /  zokAdiva pariprAptaM
zyAmalatvamudArataH  // 256 //  caitykaannbaadhaaliivaapyntrbhvnaadibhiH|
sahitaM nagarAkAraM nAnAzastrakRtakSatam  // 257 //  bhRtyairupAhRtaM tuGgaM
suraprAsAdasaMnibham  /  vimAnaM puSpakaM nAma vihAyastalamaNDanam  // 258 //
arAtibhaGgacihvatvAdiyeSedaM sa mAnavAn  /  anyathA tasya kiM nAsti yAnaM
vidyAvinirmitam  // 259 //  sataM vimAnamAruhya sAmAtyaH sahavAhanaH  /
sapauraH sAtmajaH sAdha pitRbhyAM sahabandhubhiH  // 26 //  samasta ceSTA hai  /
/ 245|| duHkha athavA sukhake dUsare loga nimitta mAtra haiM, isalie saMsArakI
sthitike jAnanevAle vidvAn unase kupita nahIM hote haiM arthAt nimittake prati
harSa-viSAda nahIM karate haiM  // 248 /  /  vaha dazAnana merA kalyANakArI
mitra hai ki jisane mujha durbuddhiko gRhavAsarUpI mahAbandhanase mukta karA
diyA  // 249 /  /  bhAnukarNa bhI isa samaya merA parama hitaiSI haA hai ki
jisake dvArA kiyA huA saMgrAma mere parama vairAgyakA kAraNa huA hai  // 250 /
/  isa prakAra vicArakara usane daigambarI dIkSA dhAraNa kara lI aura samIcIna
tapakI ArAdhanA kara parama dhAma prApta kiyA  // 251 /  /  _idhara dazAnana bhI
apane kulake Upara jo parAbhavarUpI maila jamA huA thA use dhokara pRthivImeM
sukhase rahane lagA tathA samasta bandhujanoMne use apanA ziramaura mAnA  // 252
/  /  athAnantara vaizravaNakA jo puSpaka vimAna thA use rAvaNake bhRtyajana
rAvaNake samIpa le Aye  /  vaha puSpaka vimAna atyanta sundara thA, vaizravaNa
usakA svAmI thA, usake zikharameM nAnA prakArake ratna jar3e hue the, jharokhe
usake netra the, usameM jo motiyoMkI jhAlara lagI thI usase nirmala kAntikA
samUha nikala rahA thA aura usase vaha aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno svAmIkA viyoga
ho jAneke kAraNa nirantara A~sU hI chor3atA rahatA ho| usakA agrabhAga padmarAga
maNiyoMse banA thA isalie use dhAraNa karatA huA vaha aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno
zokake kAraNa usane hRdayako bahuta kucha pITA thA isIlie vaha atyanta lAlimAko
dhAraNa kara rahA thaa| kahIM-kahIM indranIla maNiyoMkI prabhA usapara AvaraNa
kara rahI thI jisase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno zokake kAraNa hI vaha atyanta
zyAmalatAko prApta huA ho  /  caityAlaya, vana, makAnoMke agrabhAga, vApikA
tathA mahala Adise sahita honeke kAraNa vaha kisI nagarake samAna jAna par3atA
thaa| nAnA zastroMne usa vimAnameM coTeM pahu~cAyI thIM, vaha bahuta hI U~cA
thA, devabhavanake samAna jAna par3atA thA aura AkAzatalakA mAno AbhUSaNa hI thA
// 253-258|| mAnI dazAnanane zatrukI parAjayakA cihna samajha usa puSpaka
vimAnako apane pAsa rakhanekI icchA kI thI anyathA usake pAsa vidyAnirmita
kauna-sA vAhana nahIM thA ?  // 259 //  vaha usa vimAnapara ArUr3ha hokara
mantriyoM, vAhanoM, nAgarikajanoM, putroM, mAtA-pitAoM 1. durvI ka., kha.  /  2.
athApatitaM ma.  /  3. param ma.  /  4. kRtaM prAvaraNaM ma.  /  5. garvayuktaH
/

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Eighth Chapter  187.  He was happy, situated in the midst of the Mahapadma
Khanda, the inner palace. His movement was unimpeded, adorned with gestures of
his own making. ||26||  262.  With his hands holding a bow, trident, sword,
spear, and noose, he was followed by servants who had performed wondrous deeds.
||262||  263.  He was surrounded by vassals who had destroyed the armies of his
enemies, who stood in a circular formation, whose minds were inclined towards
virtue, and who were adorned with great splendor. ||263||  264.  He was fanned
by beautiful chamaras held by the hands of the best Vidyaadharis, his body
smeared with sandalwood paste and other fragrant substances. ||264||  265.  He
was adorned with a magnificent umbrella, shining like the moon, as if he were
adorned by the glory born from the defeat of his enemies. ||265||  266.  He
possessed a radiant brilliance like the sun, and was receiving the fruits of his
virtuous deeds. He was equal in glory to Indra, and was proceeding towards the
southern ocean. ||266||  267.  Kumbhakarna, mounted on an elephant, and
Vibhishana, mounted on a chariot, both filled with pride and splendor, followed
him. ||267||  268.  The great demon Maya, along with his brothers and vassals,
also followed him, riding in chariots drawn by lions, tigers, and other animals.
||268||  269.  Maricha, Ambaravidyut, Vana, Vajrodara, Budha, Vajraksha,
Kruranakra, Saran, and Sunaya, the ministers of King Maya, and other celestial
kings adorned with great splendor, followed him. ||269-270||  271.  Having
subdued the entire southern region, he then proceeded towards other directions,
observing the earth with its forests, mountains, and oceans. ||271||  272.
Then, one day, Dashaanan, whose body was bent in humility, ascended high into
the sky and asked his grandfather, Sumali, in astonishment, "O venerable one!
There is no lake on the peak of this mountain, but a forest of lotuses is
flourishing. Look at this great wonder!" ||272-273||  274.  "O master! How is it
that these large, colorful clouds are standing still on the earth here?" ||274||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTamaM parva 187 antaHpuramahApadmakhaNDamadhyagataH sukhI  /  avyAhatagatiH
svecchAkRtavibhramabhUSaNaH  // 26 //  cApatrizUlanistriMzaprAsapAzAdipANimiH  /
bhRtyairanugato bhaktairvihitAdbhutakarmabhiH  // 262 //  kRtazatrusamUhAntaiH
sAmantabaddhamaNDalaiH  /  guNapravaNacetomirmahAvibhavazobhitaH  // 263 //
varavidyAdharIpANigRhItaizcArucAmaraH  /  vIjyamAno viliptAGgo
gozIrSAdivilepanaiH  // 26 //  ucchitenAtapatreNa rjniikrshobhinaa|
yazasevAgataH zomAM labdhenArAtibhaGgataH  // 265 //  udAraM bhAnuvattejo
dadhAnaH puNyajaM phalam  /  vindan dakSiNamambhodhiM yayAvindra samaH zriyA  //
266 //  tasyAnugamanaM cakra kumbhakarNo gajasthitaH  /  vibhISaNo rathasthazca
svagarva vibhavAnvitaH  // 267 //  mahAdaityo mayo'pyenamanviyAya sabAndhavaH  /
sAmantaiH sahitaH siMhazarabhAdiyutai rathaiH  // 26 //  mArIco'mbaravidyucca
vajro vajrodaro budhaH  /  vajrAkSaH ranakrazca sAraNaH sunayaH zukaH  // 269 //
mayasya mantriNo'nye ca bahavaH khecarAdhipAH  /  anujagmurudAreNa vibhavena
samanvitAH  // 27 //  dakSiNAzAmazeSAM sa vazIkRtya tato'nyataH  /  vijahAra
mahIM pazyan savanAdvisamudragAm  // 271 //  athAsAvanyadApRcchat
sumAlinasudadbhutaH  /  uccagaMganamArUDho vinayAnatavigrahaH  // 272 //
sarasIrahite'mubmin pUjyaparvatamUrddhani  /  vanAni pazya padmAnA
jAtAnyetanmahAdbhutam  // 273 //  tiSTanti nizcalAH 'svAmin kathamatra mahItale
/  patitA vividhacchAyAH sumahAntaH payomucaH  // 274 //  tathA bandhujanoMke
sAtha calA  // 260 //  vaha usa vimAnake andara antaHpurarUpI mahAkamalavanake
bIcameM sukhase baiThA thA, usakI gatiko koI nahIM roka sakatA thA, tathA apanI
icchAnusAra usane hAvabhAvarUpI AbhUSaNa dhAraNa kara rakhe the  // 261 /  /
cApa, trizUla, talavAra, bhAlA tathA pAza Adi zastra jinake hAtha meM the tathA
jinhoMne aneka Azcaryajanaka kArya karake dikhalAye the aise aneka sevaka usake
pIche-pIche cala rahe the  // 262 //  jinhoMne zatruoMke samUhakA anta kara diyA
thA, jo cakrAkAra maNDala banAkara pAsa khar3e the, jinakA citta guNoMke AdhIna
thA tathA jo mahAvaibhavase zobhita the aise aneka sAmanta usake sAtha jA rahe
the  // 263 //  gozIrSa Adi vilepanoMse usakA sArA zarIra lipta thA tathA
uttamottama vidyAdhariyA~ hAthameM liye hue sundara camaroMse use havA kara rahI
thIM  // 264 //  vaha candramAke samAna suzobhita Upara tane hue chatrase aisA
suzobhita ho rahA thA mAno zatrukI parAjayase utpanna yazase hI suzobhita ho
rahA ho  // 265 /  /  vaha sUryake samAna utkRSTa tejako dhAraNa kara rahA thA
tathA lakSmIse indrake samAna jAna par3atA thaa| isa prakAra puNyase utpanna
phalako prApta hotA huA vaha dakSiNasamudrakI ora calA  // 266 /  /  hAthIpara
baiThA huA kumbhakarNa aura rathapara baiThA tathA svAbhimAna rUpI vaibhavase
yukta vibhISaNa isa prakAra donoM bhAI usake pIchepIche jA rahe the  /  / 267||
bhAI-bAndhavoM evaM sAmantoMse sahita mahAdaitya maya bhI, jinameM siMha-zarabha
Adi jantu jute the aise rathoMpara baiThakara jA rahA thaa||268|| marIca,
ambaravidyut, vana, vajrodara, budha, vajrAkSa, krUranakra, sAraNa aura sunaya
ye rAjA mayake mantrI tathA utkRSTa vaibhavase yukta anya aneka vidyAdharoMke
rAjA usake pIche-pIche cala rahe the  // 269-270 //  isa prakAra samasta dakSiNa
dizAko vaza kara vaha vana, parvata tathA samudrase sahita pRthvIko dekhatA huA
anya dizAkI ora calA  // 27 //  _ athAnantara eka dina vinayase jisakA zarIra
jhuka rahA thA, aisA dazAnana AkAzameM bahuta U~ce car3hakara apane dAdA
sumAlIse Azcaryacakita ho pUchatA hai ki he pUjya ! idhara isa parvatake
zikharapara sarovara to nahIM hai para kamaloMkA vana lahalahA rahA hai so isa
mahAAzcaryako Apa dekheM  // 272-273 /  /  he svAmin ! yahA~ pRthvItalapara
par3e raMgabiraMge bar3e-bar3e megha nizcala hokara kaise khar3e 1.
yazasA+iva+AgataH  /  2. utkaTAzcaryayuktaH  /  3. nizcalAzcAmI ma., ka.  /

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, After saying "Salutations to the Siddhas," Sumali said to
Dasanana, "These are not lotuses, O son, nor are they clouds. || 275 || They are
adorned with white banners, with thousands of arches, and these Jina temples are
shining on the peaks of the mountains. || 276 || These were built by the
virtuous and great-souled Harishena. O son, you should bow to them and purify
your heart in an instant. || 277 || Then, standing there, Dasanana, the crusher
of Dhanada, bowed to the Jina temples and, filled with wonder, said, "O
venerable one, what was the greatness of Harishena, for which you have spoken of
him in this way?" || 278-279 || Then Sumali said, "O Dasanana, you have asked a
very good question. Now listen to the story of Harishena, the destroyer of sin.
|| 280 || In the city of Kampilya, there lived a great king named Mrigapati-
dhvaja, who was renowned throughout the world. || 281 || His queen was named
Prahva, who was adorned with the qualities of women and, by her good fortune,
had attained the position of being the most beautiful among hundreds of queens.
|| 282 || From them was born a son named Harishena, who was the embodiment of
supreme good fortune. He was endowed with sixty-four auspicious marks and was a
destroyer of evil. || 283 || Once, on the occasion of the Ashtahnika festival,
the virtuous queen Vatra desired to have a chariot of the Jina Tirthankara taken
out in procession in the city. || 284 || King Singh-dhvaja had another queen
named Mahalakshmi, who was always intoxicated with pride in her good fortune.
Mahalakshmi, filled with many evil intentions, was Vatra's co-wife, and she
raised her voice against her, saying, "First, my Brahma-ratha will go through
the streets of the city, and then the Jina-ratha built by queen Vatra can go."
|| 285-286 || Hearing this, Vatra was so grieved that it was as if a thunderbolt
had struck her heart. Filled with sorrow, she vowed, "If my chariot goes first
in the city, then I will eat again as before, otherwise not." || 287-288 ||
Saying this, she bound herself by this vow, and, deprived of all business, she
became pale and her face was like a lotus covered in mud. || 289 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe namaH siddhebhya ityuktvA sumAlI tamathAgadat  /  nAmUni
zatapatrANi na caite vatsa toyadAH  //  275 //  sitaketukRtacchAyAH
sahasrAkAratoraNAH  /  zRGgeSu parvatasyAmI virAjante jinAlayAH  //  276 //
kAritA hariSeNena sajjanena mahAtmanA  /  etAn vatsa namasya tvaM bhava
pUtamanAH kSaNAt  //  277 //  tatastatrastha evAsau namaskRtya jinAlayAn  /
uvAca vismayApanno dhanadasya vimardakaH  // 278 //  AsotkiM tasya mAhAtmyaM
hariSeNasya kathyatAm  /  pratIkSyatama yenAsau bhavadbhiriti kIrtitaH  //  279
//  sumAlI nyagadaccaivaM sAdhu pRSTaM dazAnana  /  caritaM hariSeNasya zRNu
pApavidAraNam  //  280  //  kAmpilyanagare rAjA nAmnA mRgapatidhvajaH  /
babhUva yazasA vyAptasamastabhuvano mahAn  // 281 //  mahiSI tasya prahvA
pramadAguNazAlinI  /  abhUt saubhAgyataH prAptA penIzatalai lAmatAm  // 282 //
hariSeNaH samutpannaH sa tAbhyAM paramodayaH  /  catuHSaSTyA zubhairyukto
lakSaNaiH kSataduSkRtaH  // 283 //  vaprayA cAnyadA jaine mate bhramayituM
raithe  /  ASTAhnikamahAnande nagare dharmazIlayA  //  284  //  mahAlakSmIriti
khyAtA saubhAgyamadavihvalA  /  avRttamavadattasyAH sapatnI durviceSTitA  //
285 //  pUrvaM brahmaratho yAtu madIyaH puravartmani  /  bhramiSyati tataH
pazcAdumayA kArito rathaH  //  286 //  iti zrutvA tato vA kulizeneva tADitA  /
hRdaye duHkhasaMtaptA pratijJAmakarodimAm  // 287 //  bhramiSyati ratho'yaM me
prathamaM nagare yadi  /  pUrvavatpunarAhAraM kariSye'to'nyathA tu na  // 288 //
ityuktvA ca babandhAsau pratijJAlakSmatreNikAm  /  vyApArarahitAvasthA
zokaglAnAsyapaGkajA  //  289  //  188 haiM ? || 274 || taba sumAlIne 'namaH
siddhebhyaH' kahakara dazAnanase kahA ki he vatsa ! na to ye kamala haiM aura na
megha hI haiM || 275  //  kintu sapheda patAkAe~ jinapara chAyA kara rahI haiM
tathA jinameM hajAroM prakArake toraNa bane hue haiM aise aise ye jina-mandira
parvata ke zikharoMpara suzobhita ho rahe haiM || 276  //  ye saba mandira
mahApuruSa hariSeNa cakravartIke dvArA banavAye hue haiM  /  he vatsa ! tU inheM
namaskAra kara aura kSaNa-bhara meM apane hRdayako pavitra kara || 277||
tadanantara vaizravaNakA mAnamardana karanevAle dazAnanane vahIM khar3e rahakara
jinAlayoMko namaskAra kiyA aura Azcaryacakita ho sumAlIse pUchA ki pUjyavara !
hariSeNakA aisA kyA mAhAtmya thA ki jisase Apane unakA isa taraha kathana kiyA
hai ?  /  / 278-279  /  /  taba sumAlIne kahA ki he dazAnana ! tUne bahuta acchA
prazna kiyA  /  aba pApako naSTa karanevAlA hariSeNakA caritra suna || 280  //
kAmpilya nagara meM apane yazake dvArA samasta saMsArako vyApta karanevAlA
siMhadhvaja nAmakA eka bar3A rAjA rahatA thA || 281  /  /  usakI vaprA nAmakI
paTarAnI thI jo striyoM ke yogya guNoMse suzobhita thI tathA apane saubhAgyake
kAraNa saikar3oM rAniyoM meM AbhUSaNapanAko prApta thI || 282  //  una donoMse
parama abhyudayako dhAraNa karanevAlA hariSeNa nAmakA putra huaa| vaha putra
uttamottama cauMsaTha lakSaNoMse yukta thA tathA pApoMko naSTa karanevAlA thA ||
283 //  kisI eka samaya ASTAhnika mahotsava AyA so dharmazIla vatrA rAnIne
nagara meM jinendra bhagavAnkA ratha nikalavAnA cAhA || 284|| rAjA siMhadhvajakI
mahAlakSmI nAmaka dUsarI rAnI thI jo ki saubhAgyake garvase sadA vihvala rahatI
thI  /  aneka khoTI ceSTAoMse bharI mahAlakSmI vaprAkI sauta thI isalie usane
usake viruddha AvAja uThAyI ki pahale merA brahmaratha nagarako galiyoM meM
ghuumegaa| usake pIche vaprA rAnIke dvArA banavAyA huA jainaratha ghUma sakegA
||285 - 286  //  yaha sunakara vaprAko itanA duHkha huA ki mAno usake hRdayameM
vajrakI hI coTa lagI ho  /  duHkhase santapta hokara usane pratijJA kI ki yadi
merA yaha ratha nagara meM pahale ghUmegA to maiM pUrva kI taraha punaH AhAra
karU~gI anyathA nahIM ||287-288  /  /  1. atizayena pUjya  /  2. patnI sA
lalAmatAm ma.  /  3. AbharaNatAm  /  4. catuHSaSTizubhe ma., kha.  /  5. ratham
ma., vaprayA jaine rathe bhramayituM mate iSTe satItyarthaH  /  6, pratijJAM
lakSya ma.  /

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter  Then, she, releasing breaths and tears incessantly, her
face wilted with sorrow. Seeing her, Harishena said, "Mother, why have you begun
this inauspicious weeping, which you have never even dreamt of before? Please
stop and tell me the reason." || 290-291 ||  Hearing her words, he pondered the
reason. "What should I do? This heavy burden has come upon me. How can I tell my
father?" || 292 ||  "He is my father and she is my mother. Both are my supreme
gurus. Whom should I hate? Alas, I am caught in a great predicament." || 293 ||
Unable to bear the sight of his tearful mother, he left the palace and went to
the forest, teeming with wild animals. || 294 ||  There, he wandered fearlessly,
eating roots and fruits in the desolate forest, drinking water from the lakes.
|| 295 ||  Seeing his form, even the cruel animals were pacified for a moment.
Indeed, who does not love a noble being? || 296 ||  Even in the secluded forest,
the memory of his mother's weeping tormented him. The words she uttered with a
choked voice, all of it was a constant burden. || 297 ||  Despite the beautiful
landscapes of the forest, he found no peace. His gentle heart was constantly
restless, wandering aimlessly. || 298 ||  "Is this a forest deity?" he wondered
incessantly, his eyes fixed on the deer who watched him from afar. || 299 ||
Wandering thus, he reached the hermitage of Shatamanyu, a disciple of Angiras,
where creatures of the forest lived in peace, their animosity forgotten. || 300
||  Meanwhile, a king named Kalakalpa, mighty and fearsome, with a vast army,
besieged the city of Champa. || 301 ||  Janamejaya, the king of Champa, fought
against him, while Nagavati, his mother, along with her daughter, escaped
through a long tunnel built beforehand, and reached the hermitage of Shatamanyu.
|| 302 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTamaM parva tataH zvAsAn vimuJcantImazrubindUnanAratam  /  hariSeNaH
samAlokya jananomityavocata  //  290 //  mAtaH kasmAdidaM pUrva svapne'pi na
niSevitam  /  tvayA rodanamArabdhamamaGgalamalaM vada  //  291  //  tayoktaM sa
tataH zrutvA hetumevaM vyacintayat  /  kiM karomi guroH pIDA prApteyaM
kathamoritA  //  292  //  pitAyaM jananI caiSA dvAvapyetau mahAgurU  /  karomi
kaM pratidveSamaho magno'smi saMkaTe  //  293 //  asamarthastato draSTuM mAtaraM
sAzrulocanAm  /  niSkramya bhavanAdyAto vanaM vyAlasamAkulam  // 294 //  tatra
mUlaphalAdIni bhakSayan vijane vane  /  sarassu ca pivannambho vijahAra
bhayojjhitaH  //  295  //  rUpametasya taM dRSTvA pazavo'pi sunirdayAH  /
kSaNenopazamaM jagmurbhavyaH kasya na saMmataH  //  296  //  tatrApi smaryamANaM
tatkRtaM mAtrA prarodanam  /  'vavAdhe taM pralApazca kRto gadgadakaNThayA  //
297 //  ramyeSvapi pradezeSu vane tatrAsya no dhRtiH  /  babhUva kurvato nityaM
bhramaNaM mRducetasA  // 298 //  vanadeva iti bhrAnti kurvANo'sAvanAratam  /
dUravistAritAkSIbhirmRgImiH kRtavIkSaNaH  //  299 //  "samiyAyAGgiraH
ziSyazatamanyuvanAzramam  /  virodhaM dUramujjhitvA vanaprANibhirAzritam  // 300
//  campAyAmatha ruddhAyAM kAlakalpAkhyabhUbhRtA  /  rudreNa sAdhanaM bhUri
bibhratA purutejasA  // 301 //  yAvattena samaM yuddhaM cakAra janamejayaH  /
pUrvaM racitayA tAvatsudUragasuraGgayA  //  302  //  yaha kahakara usane
pratijJAke cihnasvarUpa veNI bA~dha lI aura saba kAma chor3a diyA  /  usakA
mukhakamala zokase murajhA gayA, vaha nirantara mukhase zvAsa aura netroMse A~sU
chor3a rahI thI  /  mAtAkI aisI dazA dekha hariSeNane kahA ki he mAtaH ! jisakA
pahale kabhI svapna meM bhI tumane sevana nahIM kiyA vaha amAMgalika rudana
tumane kyoM prArambha kiyA ? aba basa karo aura rudanakA kAraNa kaho || 289 -
291  /  /  tadanantara mAtAkA kahA kAraNa sunakara hariSeNane isa prakAra vicAra
kiyA ki aho ! maiM kyA karU~ ? yaha bahuta bhArI pIr3A prApta huI hai so pitAse
ise kaise kahU~ ? || 292 || vaha pitA haiM aura yaha mAtA haiM  /  donoM hI mere
lie parama guru haiN| maiM kisake prati dveSa karU~ ? Azcarya hai ki maiM bar3e
saMkaTa meM A par3A hU~ || 293 || kucha bhI ho para maiM rudana karatI mAtAko
dekhane meM asamartha huuN| aisA vicArakara vaha mahalase nikala par3A aura
hiMsaka jantuoMse bhare hue vanameM calA gayA || 294 || vahA~ vaha nirjana
vanameM mUla, phala Adi khAtA aura sarovara meM pAnI pItA huA nirbhaya ho
ghUmane lagA  //  295  //  hariSeNakA aisA rUpa thA ki use dekhakara duSTa pazu
bhI kSaNa-bhara meM upazama bhAvako prApta ho jAte the so ThIka hI hai kyoMki
bhavya jIva kise nahIM priya hotA hai ? || 296 || nirjana vanameM bhI jaba
hariSeNako mAtAke dvArA kiye hue rudanakI yAda AtI thI taba vaha atyanta duHkhI
ho uThatA thA  /  mAtAne gadgada kaNThase jo bhI pralApa kiyA vaha saba smaraNa
Anepara use bahuta kucha bAdhA pahu~cA rahA thA || 297|| komala cittase
nirantara bhramaNa karanevAle hariSeNako banake bhItara eka-se-eka bar3hakara
manohara sthAna milate the para unameM use dhaiyaM prApta nahIM hotA thA || 298
|| kyA yaha vanadeva hai ? isa prakArakI bhrAnti vaha nirantara karatA rahatA
thA aura hariNiyA~ use dUra taka A~kha phAr3a-phAr3akara dekhatI rahatI thIM
||299 || isa prakAra ghUmatA huA hariSeNa, jahA~ vanameM prANI parasparakA
vairabhAva dUra chor3akara zAntise rahate the aise aMgirasa RSike ziSya
zatamanyuke Azrama meM pahu~cA ||300 || 189 athAnantara eka kAlakalpa nAmakA
rAjA thA jo mahAbhayaMkara, mahApratApI aura bahuta bar3I senAko dhAraNa
karanevAlA thA so usane cAroM orase campA nagarIko ghera liyA || 301 || campAkA
rAjA janamejaya jabataka usake sAtha yuddha karatA hai tabataka pahalese
banavAyI huI lambo suraMgase mAtA nAgavatI apanI putrIke sAtha nikalakara
zatamanyu RSike usa Azrama meM pahalese 1. vavAdhataM ma. ka.  /  2. sa iyAya ma
/

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the translation of the provided text into English, while retaining the
Sanskrit words:  ---  In the **PadmapurÄá¹a**:  NÄmnÄ NÄgavati tasyÄ mÄtÄ
tanujÄya samam |  PÅ«rvameva gatÄ deÅaá¹ Åatamanyu-yatiÅritam || 303 ||  Seeing
the beautiful and charming son of NÄgavati,  he was struck by the arrows of
KÄmadeva, which caused restlessness in his body. || 304 ||  Then, seeing her in
distress, NÄgavati said to her,  "O daughter! Be cautious; remember the words of
the great sage." || 305 ||  Previously, the sage had stated that you would be
the gem among the women of the chakkravarti. || 306 ||  Knowing this, the
ascetics, feeling quite frightened,  banished Hará¹£eá¹a from their hermitage. ||
307 ||  Then, humiliated, Hará¹£eá¹a, holding the maiden in his heart,  wandered
aimlessly, as though embracing the knowledge of BhrÄmari. || 308 ||  In his
heavy yearning, Hará¹£eá¹a remained constantly sorrowful.  Neither in eating, nor
lying on a bed made of flowers and leaves,  nor in the joy of fruits, nor in
drinking the water of a lake,  nor in the village, nor in the city, nor in the
charming groves,  did he find any peace. || 309-310 ||  He saw the cluster of
lotuses as being like a forest fire,  and the rays of the moon appeared to him
like needles of diamond. || 311 ||  Rivers adorned with vast banks and holding
pure waters attracted his mind  because their banks resembled the curves of the
maiden he yearned for. || 312 ||  The scent of the ketakÄ« flower pierced his
heart like a spear,  and the fragrant flowers of the kadamba trees pierced him
like a wheel. || 313 ||  The flowers of the kuta trees, swaying in the gentle
breeze,  constantly pierced his sensitive spots like the arrows of KÄmadeva. ||
314 ||  Hará¹£eá¹a kept thinking that if he could acquire that gem of a woman,  he
would undoubtedly alleviate his mother's sorrow. || 315 ||  If that maiden were
obtained, he would consider himself  the sovereign of all Bharatavará¹£a, for her
form is not meant for  a scanty enjoyment. || 316 ||  If I acquire her, I will
build temples on the banks of rivers,  in forests, in villages, in cities, and
on mountains. || 317 ||  If I do not see her, then being tormented by my
mother's sorrow,  my life shall be in vain. || 318 ||  ---   This translation
keeps the original essence and structure of the text while providing clarity in
English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 190 padmapurANe nAmnA nAgavatI tasyA mAtA tanujayA samam  /  pUrvameva gatA
dezaM zatamanyuyatizritam  // 303 //  nAgavatyAH sutA tasmina dRSTvA taM
rUpazAlinam  /  bhanmathasya zarairviddhA tanuviklavatAkaraiH  // 304 //
tatastAmanyathAbhUtAM dRSTvA nAgavatI jgii| sute bhava vinItA tvaM smara vAkyaM
mahAmuneH  // 305 //  pUrva hi muninA proktaM yathA tvaM cakravartinaH  /
bhavitA vanitAratnamiti saMjJAnacakSuSA  // 306 //  raktAM ca tasya tAM jJAtvA
bhRzaM bhItairakIrtitaH  /  AzramAttApasaimUhariSeNo nirAkRtaH  // 307 //  tato
dagdho'pamAnena kanyAmAdAya cetasA  /  babhrAma satataM zliSTo bhrAmayaiva sa
vidyayA  // 308 //  nAzane zayanIye na puSpapallavakalpite  /  phalAnAM bhojane
naiva pAne vA saraso'mbhasaH  // 309 //  na grAme nagare nopavane ramyalatAgRhe
/  tiM lebhe samutkaNThabharAkrAntaH sa zokavAn  // 31 //  dAvAgnisadRzAstena
padmakhaNDA nirIkSitAH  /  vajrasUcIsamAstasya bamavuzcandrarazmayaH  // 31 //
vizAlapulinAzcAsya svacchatoyAH smudrgaaH| mano vahanti
cAkRSTakanyAjaghanasAmyataH  // 312 //  mano'sya ketakIsUcI kuntayaSTirivAminat
/  cakravaJca kadambAnAM puSpaM surabhi cicchide  // 313 //  kuTajAnAM vidhUtAni
kusumAni namasvatA  /  marmANi cicchidustasya manmathasgeva sAyakAH  /  / 314 //
iti cAcintayallapsye strIratnaM yadi nAma tat  /  tataH zokamahaM
mAturapaneSyAmyasaMzayam  // 315 //  prAptaneva tato manye patitvaM
bharate'khile  /  AkRtina hi sA tasyAH stokabhogavidhAyinI  // 316 /  /
nadIkuleSvaraNyepu grAmeSu nagareSu ca  /  parvatepu ca caityAni kArayiSyAmyahaM
tataH  // 317 //  mAtuH zokena saMtapto mRtaH syAM yadi tAmaham  /  na pazyeyaM
dhRto jIvo mama tatsaMgamAzayA  // 318 //  hI pahuMca gayI thI  /  / 302-303 /
/  vahA~ nAgavatIkI putrI sundara rUpase suzobhita hariSeNako dekhakara
zarIrameM becainI utpanna karanevAle kAmadevake bANoMse ghAyala ho gayI  // 304
/  /  tadanantara putrIko anyathA dekha nAgavatone kahA ki he putrI ! sAvadhAna
raha, tU mahAmunike vacana smaraNa kara  // 305 /  /  samyagjJAnarUpI cakSuko
dhAraNa karanevAle munirAjane pahale kahA thA ki tU cakravartIkA strIratna hogI
/  / 306 //  tapasviyoMko jaba mAlUma huA ki nAgavatIkI putrI hariSeNase bahuta
anurAga rakhatI hai to apakItise Darakara una mUr3ha tapasviyoMne hariSeNako
Azramase nikAla diyA  /  / 307 /  /  taba apamAnase jalA hariSeNa hRdayameM
kanyAko dhAraNa kara nirantara idhara-udhara ghUmatA rahA  /  aisA jAna par3atA
thA mAno vaha bhrAmarI vidyAse AliMgita hokara hI nirantara ghUmatA rahatA thA
/  / 308|| utkaNThAke bhArase dabA hariSeNa nirantara zokagrasta rahatA thaa|
use na bhojanameM, na puSpa aura pallavoMse nirmita zayyAmeM, na phaloMke
bhojanameM, na sarovarakA jala pInemeM, na gAMvameM, na nagara meM aura na
manohara nikuMjoMse yukta upavana meM dhIraja prApta hotA thA  // 309-310 //
kamaloMke samUhako vaha dAvAnalake samAna dekhatA thA aura candramAkI kiraNeM
use vajrakI suIke samAna jAna par3atI thIM  // 311 /  /  vizAla taToMse
suzobhita evaM svaccha jalako dhAraNa karanevAlI nadiyAM isake manako isalie
AkarSita karatI thI, kyoMki unake taTa, isake prati AkarSita kanyAke nitamboMko
samAnatA rakhate the  // 312|| ketakIkI anI bhAleke samAna isake manako bhedatI
rahatI thI aura kadambavRkSoMke sugandhita phUla cakrake samAna chedate rahate
the  /  / 313 /  /  vAyuke manda-manda jhoMkese hilate hue kuTaja vRkSoMke phUla
kAmadevake bANoMke samAna usake marmasthala chedate rahate the  // 314 /  /
hariSeNa aisA vicAra karatA rahatA thA ki yadi maiM usa strIratnako pA sakA to
niHsandeha mAtAkA zoka dUra kara dUMgA  // 315 /  /  yadi vaha kanyA mila gayI
to maiM yahI samajhaMgA ki mujhe samasta bharata kSetrakA svAmitva mila gayA
hai| kyoMki usakI jo AkRti hai vaha alpabhogoMko bhoganevAlI nahIM hai  // 316||
yadi maiM use pA sakA to nadiyoMke taToMpara, vanoMmeM, gA~voMmeM, nagaroMmeM
aura parvatoMpara jina-mandira banavAU~gA  // 317 /  /  yadi maiM use nahIM
dekhatA to mAtAke zokase santapta hokara 1. nAgamatI m.| 2. nadyaH  /  3.
puSpANi ca nabhasvatA ka.  /  4. yadi caa-m.| 5. gato ka.  /

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter  His mind filled with sorrow, he wandered about,
forgetting his mother's grief, like a man possessed. (319) He traveled through
many lands and reached the city of Sindhu. Though in such a state, he was still
endowed with great strength and vigor. (320) As he went out to play, the women
of the city saw him and stood motionless, their eyes wide with wonder. (321) His
eyes were like lotus petals, his chest broad as the Meru mountain, his shoulders
like the tusks of an elephant, and his thighs like pillars. (322) The women,
their minds lost in wonder, could not take their eyes off him, and their desire
to see him was never satisfied. (323) Then, a wild elephant, its body covered in
dust and its eyes filled with rage, charged towards the women. (324) The
elephant's mahout shouted, "Run, women! I cannot hold the elephant back. If you
have any strength, flee!" (325) But the women, their minds fixed on the noble
Harishena, could not hear the mahout's words, nor could they flee. (326) The
mahout continued to shout, and the women, their hearts filled with fear, turned
their attention to him. (327) Trembling with fear, they sought refuge in
Harishena. Their desire to be with him had brought them this unexpected
protection. (328) Harishena, filled with compassion and his body tingling from
the touch of the beautiful women, thought to himself, (329) "On this side is a
deep river, on that side a wall, and on the other side an elephant. In this time
of danger, I must protect these creatures." (330) Just as a bull digs a mound
with its horns, not a mountain, and a man pierces a banana tree with an arrow,
not a rock, (331) so too, this world, filled with wicked deeds, overcomes the
weak. Even if one tries to help, one does not wish to be involved with the
harsh. (332)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTamaM parva cintayaniti cAnyacca bahuduHkhitamAnasaH  /  vismRto jananIzokaM
sa babhrAma grahI yathA  // 319 //  paryaTazca bahUn dezAn prAptaH sindhunadaM
puram  /  tadavastho'pi vIryeNa tejasA 'coruNAnvitaH  // 320 //  bahiH
krIDAviniSkrAntastatra taM vIkSya yoSitaH  /  stammitA iva nizceSTAH spaSTAkSyaH
zatazo'bhavan  // 32 //  puNDarIkekSaNaM merukaTakodAravakSasam  /
diGmataGgajakummAMsamibhastambhasamorukam  // 322 //
unmattatvamupetAnAmananyagatacetasAm  /  pazyantInAM na taM tRptirbabhUva
purayoSitAm  // 323 //  athAJjanagiricchAyaH pragaladdAnanirbharaH  /  AjagAma
gajastAsAM strINAmabhimukho balAt  // 324 //  na zaknomi gajaM dhatu kurutAzu
palAyanam  /  yadi zaktiyutAH nArya ityAroheNa coditam  // 325 //
naravRndArakAsaktacetanAstA na tadvacaH  /  cakruH zravaNayornApi samarthAH
prapalAyitum  // 326 //  muhuH pracaNDamArohe tato raTati cetitam  /
vanitAbhirbabhUvuzca bhavyavyAkulacetasaH  // 327 //  tatastAH zaraNaM jagmustaM
naraM kRtakampanAH  /  bhayenopakRtaM tAsAM tatsamAgamacetasAm  // 328 //  tataH
sa karuNAyukto hariSeNo vyacintayat  /  saMbhrAntottamarAmAGgasaMgamAt
pulakAJcitaH  // 329 //  itaH sindhurgabhIro'yamitaH zAlo gajo'nyataH  /
saMkaTe tu pariprApta karomi prANipAlanam  // 33 //  vRSaH khanati valmIkaM
zRGgAbhyAM na tu bhUdharam  /  puruSaH kadalIM chinte sAyakena zilA tu na  // 33
//  mRduM parAbhavatyeSa lokaH prakhalaceSTitaH  /  uddhRtyApyasukhaM kartuM
nAbhivAJchati karkaze  // 332 //  kabhIkA mara jaataa| vAstavameM mere prANa
usoke samAgamakI AzAse ruke hue haiM  // 318 //  jisakA mana atyanta duHkhI thA
aisA hariSeNa isa prakAra tathA anya prakArakI cintA karatA huA mAtAkA zoka
bhUla gayA  /  aba to vaha bhUtAkrAnta mAnavake samAna idhara-udhara ghUmane
lagA  // 319|| isa prakAra aneka dezoMmeM ghUmatA huA sindhunada nAmaka
nagarameM phuNcaa| yadyapi usakI vaisI avasthA ho rahI thI to bhI vaha bahata
bhArI parAkrama aura vizAla tejase yakta thaa||320|| usa nagarakI ja krIr3A
karane ke lie nagarake bAhara gayI thIM ve hariSeNako dekhakara AzcaryacakitakI
taraha nizceSTa ho gyiiN| ve saikar3oM bAra AMkheM phAr3a-phAr3akara use dekhatI
thiiN||321|| jisake netra kamalake samAna the, jisakA vakSaHsthala meruparvatake
kaTakake samAna lambA-caur3A thA, jisake kandhe diggajake gaNDasthalake samAna
the, aura jisakI jA~ghe hAthI bA~dhaneke khambheke samAna supuSTa thIM aise
hariSeNako dekhakara ve striyA~ pAgala-sI ho gayIM, unake citta ThikAne nahIM
rahe tathA use dekhane-dekhate unheM tRpti nahIM huI  // 322-323 /  /
athAnantara-aMjanagirike samAna kAlA aura jharate hue madase bharA eka hAthI
balapUrvaka una striyoM ke sAmane AyA  /  / 324|| hAthIkA mahAvata jora-jorase
cillA rahA thA ki he striyo ! yadi tuma logoMmeM zakti hai to zIghra hI bhAga
jAo, maiM hAthIko rokanemeM asamartha hU~  // 325 //  para striyA~ to zreSTha
puruSa hariSeNake dekhanemeM Asakta thIM isalie mahAvatake vacana nahIM suna
sakI aura na bhAgane meM hI samartha huI  // 326 /  /  jaba mahAvatane bAra-bAra
jorase cillAnA zurU kiyA taba striyoMne usa ora dhyAna diyA aura taba ve bhayase
vyAkula ho gayIM  // 327 /  /  tadanantara kA~patI huI ve striyA~ hariSeNakI
zaraNameM gyiiN| isa taraha usake sAtha samAgamakI icchA karanevAlI striyoMkA
bhayane upakAra kiyA  /  / 328 /  /  tatpazcAt ghabar3AyI huI uttama striyoMke
zarIrake samparkase jise romAMca uTha Aye the aise hariSeNane dayAyakta ho
vicAra kiyA  // 329|| ki isa ora gahara hai. usa ora prAkAra hai aura udhara
hAthI hai isa taraha saMkaTa upasthita honepara maiM prANiyoMkI rakSA avazya
karU~gA  /  / 330 /  jisa prakAra baila apane sIMgoMse vAmIko khodatA hai
parvatako nhiiN| aura puruSa bANase keleke vRkSako chedatA hai zilAko nahIM  /
/ 331 /  /  isI prakAra duSTa ceSTAoMse bharA mAnava 1. ca+UruNA = vizAlena,
cAruNA m.| 2. spaSTAkSAH  /  2. zaknuvato m.| 4. hastipake  /  5. jJAtam  /  6.
zAlo'yamekataH ka.  /  7. udvatyApya m.| 8. karkaza: ka.  /

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the English translation of the provided text, retaining the Sanskrit
terms:  ---  **192** In the **Padmapurana**   Those who are disabled (à¤à¥à¤²à¥à¤¬) are
indeed very humble; I have shown them forgiveness (à¤à¥à¤·à¤®à¤¾). Although those
ascetics (à¤¤à¤¾à¤ªà¤¸) were driven out, their nature was as gentle as that of deer
(à¤¸à¤¾à¤°à¤à¥à¤). Therefore, it was extremely virtuous for me to bear with them, as they
resided in the houses of gurus (à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤à¥à¤¹à¥à¤·à¥). Truly, the forgiveness I granted
them has been exceedingly beneficial for me and has resulted in supreme bliss
(à¤ªà¤°à¤®à¥à¤¦à¤¯à¤¾). *[333-334]*   Then, with a harsh voice, Hariá¹£ena said, "Hey, great
elephant driver (à¤¹à¤¸à¥à¤¤à¤¿à¤ªà¤), take the elephant away from this place!" *[335]*
Acknowledging this, the elephant driver (à¤¹à¤¸à¥à¤¤à¤¿à¤ªà¤à¥) replied, "Indeed! Your
audacity (à¤§à¥à¤·à¥à¤à¤¤à¤¾) is immense; you regard the elephant (à¤à¤) as a human and
consider yourself the elephant!" *[336]* You certainly appear to be near death,
as you carry such pride regarding the elephant, or perhaps you are under the
influence of some spirit. If you wish well for yourself, leave this place
immediately! *[337]*   Then, in a fit of anger, Hariá¹£ena, dancing playfully,
laughed loudly, comforted the women (à¤à¤à¤à¤¨), and went in front of the elephant.
*[338]* After that, like a flash of lightning, he leapt into the sky and mounted
the elephant (à¤®à¤¤à¤à¥à¤à¤), placing his foot on its ear. *[339]* Subsequently, he
began to sport (à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤¡à¤¿à¤¤à¥à¤®à¤¾à¤°à¤®à¥à¤­à¥) playfully with the elephant, at times becoming
visible and at times disappearing. He played upon the entire body of the
elephant and then descended to the ground, continuing various playful acts with
the elephant. *[340]*   Hearing this grand din (à¤à¤²à¤à¤²à¤) through tradition, all
the people of the city emerged to witness this wonderful spectacle. *[341]* The
great women (à¤®à¤¹à¤¾à¤à¥à¤à¤¨à¤¾à¤) sat in the windows, observing him while the maidens
(à¤à¤¨à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤¸à¥à¤¤à¤¤à¥à¤¸à¤®à¤¾à¤à¤®à¤¸à¤à¤à¤¤) expressed desires to engage with him. *[342]* Through
patting (à¤à¤¸à¥à¤«à¤¾à¤²à¤¨à¥à¤), loud reprimands (à¤®à¤¹à¤¾à¤¶à¤¬à¥à¤¦à¥à¤), and repeated shaking of the
body, Hariá¹£ena quickly rendered that elephant free from intoxication
(à¤¨à¤¿à¤°à¥à¤®à¤¦à¤¸à¥à¤¤à¥à¤¨) in just a moment. *[343]*   The king of the city, Sindhu, who was
seated on the palace roof, observed this wonder. He was so delighted that he
sent his entire entourage to call Hariá¹£ena. *[344]* Then, adorned with colorful
trinkets and embellished with various colored paintings, he rode on that
elephant in grand splendor.   ---   This translation aims to faithfully
represent the original text while ensuring clarity for contemporary readers. Let
me know if you need further assistance!

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 192 padmapurANe klIbAste tApasA yena kSamA teSAM mayA kRtA  /
sAraGgasamavRttInAM nirvAsena kRtAgasAm  //  333 //  vasatAM gurugeheSu
kSamAtyantagarIyasI  /  kRtA sA hi hitAtyantaM saMjAtA paramodayA  //  334  //
uktameva tatastena tAraniSThurayA girA  /  bho bho hastipakAnyena naya dezena
vAraNam  //  335 //  tato hastipakenoktamaho te dhRSTatA parA  /  yanmanuSyaM
gajaM vetsi svaM ca vetsi mataGgajam  // 336 //  nUnaM mRtyusamIpo'si yanmadaM
vahase gaje  /  greheNa vA gRhIto'si brajAsmAdAzu gocarAt  // 337 //  vihasya sa
tataH kopAllIlayA kRtanartanaH  /  sAntvayitvAGganAH kRtvA pRSTato gajamabhyagAt
//  338  //  vidyudvilasitenAsau karuNena tato nabhaH  /  utpatya dazane pAdaM
kRtvA'rukSanmataGgajam  // 339 //  tataH krIDitumArebhe gajena saha lIlayA  /
dRSTanaSTaiH samasteSu gAtreSvasya punarbhuvi  // 340 //  pAramparyaM tataH
zrutvA kRtvA kalakalaM mahat  /  viniSkrAntaM puraM sarva draSTumetanmahAdbhutam
// 341 //  vAtAyanagatAzcekSAMcakrire taM mahAGganAH  /  cakrurmanorathAn
kanyAstatsamAgamasaMgatAn  // 342 //  AsphAlanairmahAzabdairmu
hurgAtravidhUnanaiH  /  kRto'sau nirmadastena kSaNamAtreNa vAraNaH  //  343  //
harmyapRSThagato dRSTvA tadAzcaryaM purAdhipaH  /  sindhunAmAkhilaM tasmai
prajighAya paricchadam  // 344 //  tataH kuthAkRtacchAye nAnAvarNakamAsure  /
ArUDhaH sa gaje tasmin vibhUtyA parayAnvitaH  //  345 //  komala prANIkA hI
parAbhava karatA hai, kaThora prANIko duHkha pahu~cAnekI vaha icchA bhI nahIM
karatA ||332|| ve tapasvI to atyanta dIna the isalie maiMne unapara kSamA
dhAraNa kI thI  /  una tapasviyoMne Azrama se nikAlakara yadyapi aparAdha kiyA
thA para unakI vRtti hariNoMke samAna dIna thI sAtha hI ve guruoMke ghara rahate
the isalie unapara kSamA dhAraNa karanA atyanta zreSTha thA  /  yathArtha meM
maiMne unapara jo kSamA kI thI vaha mere lie atyanta hitAvaha tathA
paramAbhyudayakA kAraNa huI hai || 333 - 334|| tadanantara hariSeNane bar3e
jorase cillAkara kahA ki re mahAvata ! tU hAthI dUsare sthAnase le jA ||335||
taba mahAvatane kahA ki aho ! terI bar3I dhRSTatA hai ki jo tU hAthIko manuSya
samajhatA hai aura apaneko hAthI mAnatA hai || 336 || jAna par3atA hai ki tU
mRtyuke samIpa pahu~canevAlA hai isalie to hAthIke viSaya meM garva dhAraNa kara
rahA hai athavA tujhe koI bhUta laga rahA hai  /  yadi bhalA cAhatA hai to
zIghra hI isa sthAnase calA jA  /  ||337|| tadanantara krodhavaza lIlApUrvaka
nRtya karate hue hariSeNane jorase aTTahAsa kiyA, striyoMko sAntvanA dI aura
svayaM striyoMko apane pIche kara hAthIke sAmane gayA ||338|| tadanantara bijalI
kI camaka ke samAna zIghra hI AkAzameM uchalakara aura khIzapara paira rakhakara
vaha hAthIpara savAra ho gayA ||339|| tadanantara usane lIlApUrvaka hAthI ke
sAtha krIr3A karanA zurU kiyA  /  krIr3A karate-karate kabhI to vaha dikhAI detA
thA aura kabhI adRzya ho jAtA thA  /  isa taraha usane hAthI ke samasta
zarIrapara krIr3A kI pazcAt pRthvIpara nIce utarakara bhI usake sAtha nAnA
krIr3Ae~ kIM  //  340  //  tadanantara paramparAse isa mahAn kala-kalako
sunakara nagara ke saba loga isa mahAAzcaryako dekhane ke lie bAhara nikala Aye
|| 341 || bar3I-bar3I striyoMne jharokhoMmeM baiThakara use dekhA tathA
kanyAoMne usake sAtha samAgamakI icchAe~ kIM ||342 || AsphAlana arthAt pIThapara
hAtha pheranese, joradAra DA~Ta-DapaTake zabdoMse aura bAra-bAra zarIrake
kampanase hariSeNane usa hAthIko kSaNa-bhara meM madarahita kara diyA || 343 ||
nagarakA rAjA sindha, mahalakI chatapara baiThA huA yaha saba Azcarya dekha rahA
thA  /  vaha itanA prasanna huA ki usane hariSeNako bulAneke lie apanA samasta
parikara bhejA || 344 || tadanantara raMga-biraMgI jhUlase jisakI zobhA bar3ha
rahI thI tathA nAnA raMgoM ke citrAMmase jo zobhAyamAna thA aise usI hAthIpara
vaha bar3e vaibhavase 1. -mevaM ma.  /  2. gRheNa ma.  /  3. dRSTanaSTasamasteSu
ma.  /

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter  193  **346.**  Entering the city, Harishena, adorned with
drops of sweat like pearls, captivated the hearts of the city women with his
handsome form.  **347.**  He then married a hundred daughters of the king. Thus,
the story of Harishena spread everywhere.  **348.**  Though he received great
honor from the king, he considered a year as a night without the jewel of a
woman he had seen in the hermitage.  **349.**  He thought, "Surely, she is now
in the desolate forest, tormented like a deer, bereft of me."  **350.**  "If
this night ends even once, I will immediately rush to that young girl to show
compassion."  **351.**  Lying on that exquisitely decorated bed, he pondered
these thoughts. After a long time, he finally fell asleep with great difficulty.
**352.**  Even in his dreams, he saw the same lotus-eyed woman. Indeed, she had
become the sole object of his mind.  **353.**  Then, in an instant, Vegavati, a
skilled woman in all arts and virtues, the friend of the daughter of the king of
the sky-dwellers, carried him away.  **354.**  Awakening from his sleep and
seeing himself being carried away, he angrily said to Vegavati, "You wicked
woman! Why are you taking me away?"  **355.**  Harishena, whose eyes shone with
all their pupils and whose lips were clenched, clenched his fist to strike her,
like a thunderbolt-bearing mace.  **356.**  Seeing Harishena enraged, Vegavati,
though endowed with the power of knowledge, was frightened. She said to him, "O
long-lived one! Just as a man climbing a tree branch cuts its root, so you,
having mounted me, are destroying me."  **357.**  "O father! You will know the
truth of my words when you reach the place I am taking you. Be assured, your
body will not suffer even a bit there."  **358.**  Hearing Vegavati's words,
Harishena thought, "This woman is gentle and sweet-tongued. Her appearance
speaks of her desire to end the suffering of others."  **359.**  He had
mounted...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTamaM parva 193 manAMsi pauranArINAmuccinvan ruuppaanninaa| praviveza puraM
svedabindumuktAphalAnvitaH  // 346 //  narAdhipasya kanyAnAM pariNItaM tataH
zatam  /  tena sarvatra cAsaktA hariSeNamayI kathA  // 347 //  mahAntamapi
saMprAptaH saMmAnaM sa narezvarAt  /  strIratnena vinA mene tAM varSamiva
zarvarIma  // 34 //  acintayacca nUnaM sA mayA virahitAdhunA  /  mRgIvAkulatA
prAptA paramAM viSame vane  // 349 /  /  sakRdeSA kathaMciccet triyAmA
kSayameSyati  /  gamiSyAmi tato bAlAmatAM dAganukampitum  // 350 //
vicintatyevametasmin zayanIye'tizobhane  /  cireNa nidrayA labdhaM
padamatyantakRcchutaH  // 35 //  svapne'pi ca sa tAmeva dadarzAmbhojalocanAm  /
prAyo hi mAnasasyAsya saiva gocaratAmagAt  // 352 /  /  atha vegavatI nAmnA
kalAguNavizAradA  /  khecarAdhipakanyAyAH sakhI tamaharat kSaNAt  // 353 /  /
tato nidrAkSaye dRSTvA hriyamANaM svamambare  /  pApe harasi mAM kasmAditi
vyAhRtya kopataH  // 354 //  dRSTaniHzeSatArAkSaH saMdaSTaradanacchadaH  /
muSTiM babandha tAM hantuM vajramudgarasaMnimAm  // 355 /  /  tatastaM kupitaM
dRSTA puruSaM cArulakSaNam  /  vidyAbalasamRdvApi zaGkitA setyabhASata  // 356
//  ArUDhastaruzAkhAyAM chinte tasyA yathA naraH  /  mUlaM tathA karoSi tvaM
mamAyuSman vihiMsanam  // 257 /  /  yadartha nIyate tAta vaM mayA tadgato bhavAn
/  satyaM jJAsyasi nahyasya vapuSastava duHkhitA  // 358 //  acintayacca
bhadreyaM vanitA cArubhASiNI  /  AkRtiH kathayatyasyAH parapIDA nivRttatAm  //
359 //  ArUr3ha huA  // 345 /  /  jo pasInekI bUMdoMke bahAne mAno motiyoMse
sahita thA aisA hariSeNa apane saundaryarUpI hAthase nagarakI striyoMkA mana
saMcita karatA huA nagarameM praviSTa huA  // 34 //  tadanantara usane rAjAkI
sau kanyAoMke sAtha vivAha kiyaa| isa prakArase jahA~ dekho vahIMsarvatra
hariSeNakI carcA phaila gayI ||347|| yadyapi usane rAjAse bahuta bhArI sammAna
prApta kiyA thA to bhI tapasviyoMke AzramameM jo strIratna dekhA thA usake binA
usane eka rAtako varSake samAna samajhA  // 348|| vaha vicAra karane lagA ki isa
samaya nizcaya hI vaha kanyA mere binA viSama vanameM hariNIke samAna parama
AkalatAko prApta hotI hogI  // 349 //  yadi yaha rAtri kisI eka bAra bhI samApta
ho jAye to maiM zIghra hI usa bAlApara dayA karaneke lie daur3a par3eM gA ||350
//  yaha atyanta suzobhita zayyApara par3A huA aisA vicAra karatA rhaa| vicAra
karate-karate bar3I dera bAda bahuta kaThinAIse use nIMda Ayo  // 351 /  /
svapnameM bhI yaha usI kamala-locanAko dekhatA rahA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki
prAyaH karake isake manakA vahI eka viSaya raha gayI thii||352|| athAnantara
vidyAdhara rAjAkI kanyAkI sahelI vegavatI jo ki sarva prakArakI kalAoM aura
guNoMmeM vizArada thI, sote hue hariSeNako kSaNa ekameM hara kara le gayI  //
353 /  /  jaba usakI nidrA bhagna huI to usane apane Apako AkAzameM harA jAtA
dekha krodhapUrvaka vegavatIse kahA ki ro pApini! tU.mujhe kisa lie hara liye jA
rahI hai ?  // 354 //  jisake netroMkI samasta putaliyA~ dikha rahI thIM tathA
jisane oMTha Isa rakhA thA aise hariSeNane usa vegavatIko mAraneke lie vajramaya
madagarake samAna maTI bA~dhI  // 355 /  /  tadanantara sandara lakSaNoMke
dhAraka hariSeNako kupita dekha vegavatI yadyapi vidyAbalase samRddha thI to bhI
bhayabhIta ho gyii| usane usase kahA ki he AyuSman ! jisa prakAra vRkSakI
zAkhApara car3hA koI manuSya usIkI jar3ako kATatA hai usI prakAra mujhapara
ArUr3ha hue tuma merA hI ghAta kara rahe ho  // 356-357 //  he tAta! maiM tujhe
jisa lie le jA rahI hU~ tuma jaba usako prApta hooge taba mere vacanoMkI
yathArthatA jAna skoge| yaha nizcita samajho ki vahA~ jAkara tumhAre isa
zarIrako raMcamAtra bhI duHkha nahIM hogA  // 358 /  /  vegavatIkA kahA sunakara
hariSeNane vicAra kiyA ki yaha strI mandra tathA madhurabhASiNI hai| 1. zarvarI
ma.  /  2. drAganucintanam ma.  /  3. vicintayatyeva ma.  /  4. chinne ma.  /  -
25

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The text appears to be a passage from the "Padma Purana," a significant work in
Jain literature. Here is the translation to English while retaining the Sanskrit
terms:  ---  194   In the "Padma Purana"   Just as this right eye of mine is
currently twitching, it is surely an indication that it will lead to a meeting
with dear ones. (360) Then, Harisheá¹a asked her once again, "O auspicious one!
Tell me the precise reason and please satisfy my ears with a delightful story."
(361) In response, the swift one said, "In the excellent city known as
SÅ«ryodaya, there resides King Åakradhanu. His wife is known as DhÄ«. They have a
daughter named JayacandrÄ, who is possessed by pride of her qualities and
beauty, harbors hatred for men, and disregards her father's words." (362-363)
Among all the excellent men in the entire Bharat Ká¹£etra, I had previously shown
her the images, but none pleased her. (364) Then, I displayed your image to her,
and upon seeing it, she was pierced by the intense dart of longing and said, "If
I do not unite with this man, who is like Kamadeva, I would rather meet death
than accept any lowly man." (365-366) Seeing the immense grief that was stealing
away her heart due to his qualities, I made this difficult vow before her: "If I
do not bring this man, who captivates your heart, to you quickly, O friend! I
will enter the fire with flames." (367-368) It was only after making such a vow
that I met you due to great merit. Now, by your grace, I will surely fulfill my
vow. (369) Saying this, she reached the city of SÅ«ryodaya. Upon arriving there,
she informed King Åakradhanu and the daughter JayacandrÄ that Harisheá¹a, the one
who would steal their hearts, had arrived. (370) Subsequently, the marriage was
arranged between the twoâa remarkable couple who bore extraordinary appearances.
All the relatives, who were filled with wonder, congratulated them on their
marriage. (371) Having fulfilled my vow, the swift one received great respect
from both the king and the daughter, and there was no limit to her joy and fame.
(372) Considering, "This daughter has chosen a worldly man, abandoning us," ...
---  This translation strives to accurately reflect the meaning of the original
text while preserving the significance of the Sanskrit terms.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 194 padmapurANe yathedaM spandate cakSurdakSiNaM mama sAMpratam  /  tathA ca
kalpayAmyeSA priyasaMgamakAriNI  // 360 //  punazcAnena sA pRSTA bhane vedaya
kAraNam  /  lalAmasaMkathAsaMgAta kareM tAvatpratapaya  // 361 //  jagAda ceti
rAjAsti pure sUryodaye vare  /  nAmnA zakradhanustasya bhAryA dhIriti kIrtitA
// 362 /  /  guNarUpamadagrastA jayacandrA tayoH sutA  /  puruSadveSiNI jAtA
pitRvAkyApakarNinI  // 363 /  /  yo yastasyA mayAlikhya paTake darzitaH purA  /
sakale bharatakSetre nAsau tasyA rucau sthitaH  // 364 //  tato bhavAn mayA
tasyA darzitaH pttttksthitH| gADhAkalpakazalyena zalyitA cedamabravIt  // 365 /
/  kAmabhogopamAnena samaM yadi na yujyate  /  mRtyu tataH prapatsye'haM na
tvanyamadhamaM varam  /  / 366 //  pratijJA ca purastasyA mayeyaM duSkarA kRtA
/  zokamatyutkaTaM dRSTvA tadguNAkRSTacittayA  // 367 /  /  yadi taM nAnaye
zIghraM tvanmAnasamalimlucam  /  jvAlAjaTAlamanilaM pravizAmi tataH sakhi  //
368 //  pratijJAyeti puNyena prApto'si mahatA myaa| tvatprasAdAkariSyAmi
pratijJAM phalasaMgatAm  // 369 /  /  sUryodayapuraM caiSA prAptA sa ca
niveditaH  /  AnItaH zakracApAya kanyAyai ca manoharaH  // 370 //  tataH
pANigrahazcakre tayoradbhutarUpayoH  /  vismayApannacetomiH
svajanairabhinanditaH  // 371 //  saMpAditapratijJA ca prAptA vegavatI param  /
saMmAnaM rAjakanyAbhyAM pramadaM ca tathA yazaH  // 372 /  /  tyaktvA nau
dharaNIvAso gRhItaH puruSo'nayA  /  iti saMcintya kupitau tasyAmaithunikau ca
tau  // 373 /  /  isakI AkRti hI batalA rahI hai ki yaha para-pIr3Ase nivRtta
hai arthAt kabhI kisIko pIr3A nahIM pahuMcAtI  // 359 //  aura cU~ki isa samaya
merI dAhinI A~kha phar3aka rahI hai isase nizcaya hotA hai ki yaha avazya hI
priyajanoMkA samAgama karAvegI  // 360 //  taba hariSeNane usase phira pUchA ki
he bhadre ! tU ThIka-ThIka kAraNa batA aura manohara kathA sunAkara mere kAnoMko
santuSTa kara  // 361 //  isake uttarameM vegavatIne kahA ki sUryodaya nAmaka
zreSTha nagarameM rAjA zakradhanu rahatA hai| usakI strI dhI nAmase prasiddha
hai| una donoMke jayacandrA nAmakI putrI hai jo ki guNa tathA rUpake ahaMkArase
grasta hai, puruSoMke sAtha dveSa rakhatI hai aura pitAke vacanoMkI avahelanA
karatI hai  // 362-363 //  samasta bharata kSetrameM jo-jo uttama puruSa the una
sabake citrapaTa banAkara maiMne pahale use dikhalAye haiM para usakI rucimeM
eka bhI nahIM AyA  // 364 //  taba maiMne ApakA citrapaTa use dikhalAyA so use
dekhate hI vaha tIvra utkaNThArUpI zalyase viddha hokara bolI ki kAmadevake
samAna isa puruSake sAtha yadi merA samAgama na hogA to maiM mRtyuko bhale hI
prApta ho jAU~gI para anya adhama manuSyako prApta nahIM hoU~gI  // 365-366 /  /
usake guNoMse jisakA citta AkRSTa ho rahA thA aisI maiMne usakA bahuta bhArI
zoka dekhakara usake Age yaha kaThina pratijJA kara lI ki tumhAre manako
curAnevAle isa puruSako yadi maiM zIghra nahIM le AU~ to he sakhi ! jvAlAoMse
yukta agnimeM praveza kara jaauuNgii||367-368|| maiMne aisI pratijJA kI hI thI
ki bar3e bhArI puNyodaya se Apa mila gaye  /  aba Apake prasAdase apanI
pratijJAko avazya hI saphala banAU~gI  // 369 //  aisA kahatI huI vaha
sUryodayapura A phuNcii| vahA~ Akara usane rAjA zakradhanu aura kanyA
jayacandrAke lie sUcanA de dI ki tumhAre manako haraNa karanevAlA hariSeNa A
gayA hai  // 370 //  tadanantara AzcaryakArI rUpako dhAraNa karanevAle donoM-
varakanyAkA pANigrahaNa kiyA gyaa| jinakA citta Azcaryase bhara rahA thA aise
sabhI AtmIya janoMne unake usa pANigrahaNakA abhinandana kiyA thA  // 371 //
jisakI pratijJA pUrNa ho cukI thI aisI vegavatIne rAjA aura kanyAdonoMkI orase
parama sanmAna prApta kiyA thaa| usake harSa aura suyazakA bhI ThikAnA nahIM thA
// 372 /  /  'isa kanyAne hama logoMko chor3akara bhUmigocarI puruSa svIkRta
kiyA' aisA vicArakara 1. pitRvAkyApakarSiNI ma.  /  2. gADhAkalpakazilpena m.|
3-4. ma. pustake'nayoH zlokayoH kramabhedo vartate  /  5. maithunikAcitau m.| -

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The eighth chapter:    The two, Ganga-Dhar and Mahi-Dhar, were filled with great
resources and desired to wage war, being tainted by insult. ||374||   Then,
Sakra-Dhanu, with his son, Su-Chapa, spoke to Hari-Shena, his heart filled with
compassion. ||375||   "Stay here, brother-in-law, I will go to fight. For your
sake, two enraged enemies, filled with sorrow, are enraged." ||376||   Smiling,
Hari-Shena replied, "How can one who is always engaged in the affairs of others
be indifferent to his own affairs?" ||377||   "Do me the honor, grant me your
command for battle. Having obtained a servant like me, why do you fight
yourself?" ||378||   Then, Ganga-Dhar, though desiring to stop him, was
prevented by his fear of ill omen.  He mounted a chariot, drawn by swift horses,
filled with various weapons, led by a valiant charioteer, and surrounded by a
circle of warriors. ||379-380||   Behind him, the Vidyadharas, riding horses and
elephants, made a great clamor, unbearable to the enemy's mind. ||381||   Then,
a great battle, arranged by valiant men, began. Seeing his army defeated, Hari-
Shena rose to fight. ||382||   Wherever his excellent chariot went, no horse, no
elephant, no man, no chariot remained. ||383||   With his arrows, he struck the
enemy's force, so that they fled in disarray, without looking back. ||384||
Some, trembling greatly, said in fear, "Ganga-Dhar and Mahi-Dhar have done a
great evil." ||385||   "This one shines in battle like the sun, a great man. He
releases arrows from his hands, many in all directions." ||386||   Seeing his
army destroyed by that great soul, Ganga-Dhar and Mahi-Dhar fled in fear.
||387||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTamaM parva AvAgchatA raNaM kartuM mahAsAdhanasaMyutau  /  dUSitAvapamAnena
gaGgAdharamahIdharau  // 374 //  tataH zakradhanuH sAkaM sucApAkhyena sUnunA  /
hariSeNaM jagAdaivaM karuNAsaktacetanaH  // 375 //  tiSTha tvamiha jAmAtaH
'saMkhyaM kartuM vrajAmyaham  /  tvannimittaM ripU kruddhAvuddhatau
duHkhacAriNau  // 376 //  smitvA tato jagAdAsau parakAryeSu yo rataH  /  kArye
tasya kathaM svasminnaudAsInyaM bhaviSyati  // 377 //  kuru pUjya prasAdaM me
yaccha yuddhAya zAsanam  /  bhRtyaM matsadRzaM prApya svayaM kimiti yudhyase  //
378 //  tato'maGgalabhItena vAgchatApyanivAritaH  /  zvasureNa kRtAsaGgamazvaiH
pavanagAmibhiH  // 379 //  astrairnAnAvidhaiH pUrNazUrasArathinetRkam  /
veSTitaM yodhacakreNa hariSeNo rathaM yayau  // 380 //  tasya cAnupadaM
jagmurazvairnAgaizca khecarAH  /  kRtvA kalakalaM tuGgaM zatrumAnasaduHsaham  //
381 //  tato mahati saMjAte saMyuge zUradhArite  /  magnaM zakradhanuHsainyaM
dRSTA vApreya utthitaH  // 382 //  tato yayA dizA tasya prAvartata rathottamaH
/  tasyAM nAzvo na mAtaGgo na manuSyo ratho na ca  // 383 //  zaraistena samaM
yuktararAtibalamAhatam  /  jagAma kvApyanAlokyaM pRSThaM skhalitajUtikam  // 384
//  pRthuvepathavaH kecididmuucurbhyaarditaaH| kRtaM gaGgAdhareNedaM bhUdhareNa
ca durmatam  // 385 //  ayaM ko'pi raNe bhAti sUryavatpuruSottamaH  /  karAniva
zarAnmuJcan sarvAzAsu samaM bahUn  // 386 /  /  dhvaMsyamAnaM tataH sainyaM
dRSTvA tena mahAtmanA  /  gatau kvApi bhayagrastau gaGgAdharamahIdharau  // 387
//  kanyAke mAmAke lar3ake gaMgAdhara aura mahIdhara bahuta.hI kupita hue|
kupita hI nahIM hue apamAnase prerita ho bar3I bhArI senA lekara yuddha karaneko
bhI icchA karane lage  // 373-374 //  tadanantara karuNAmeM Asakta hai citta
jisakA aise rAjA zakradhanune apane sucApa nAmaka putrake sAtha hariSeNase isa
prakAra nivedana kiyA ki he jAmAtaH! tuma yahIM Thaharo, maiM yuddha karaneke
lie jAtA huuN| tumhAre nimittase do utkaTa zatru kupita hokara duHkhakA anubhava
kara rahe haiM  // 375-376 /  /  taba haMsakara hariSeNane kahA ki jo parakIya
kAryoM meM sadA tatpara rahatA hai usake apane hI kAryameM udAsInatA kese ho
sakatI hai ?  // 377 //  he pUjya ! prasannatA karo aura mere lie yuddhakA Adeza
do| mere jaisA bhRtya pAkara Apa isa prakAra svayaM kyoM yuddha karate ho ?  //
378 //  tadanantara amaMgalase bhayabhIta zvasurane cAhate hue bhI use nahIM
rokA  /  phalasvarUpa jisameM havAke samAna zIghragAmI ghor3e jute the, jo nAnA
prakArake zastroMse pUrNa thA, jisakA sArathi zUravIra thA aura jo yoddhAoMke
samUhase ghirA thA aise rathako hariSeNa prApta huaa||379-380|| usake pIche
vidyAdhara loga zatruke manako asahanIya bahuta bhArI kolAhala kara ghor3oM aura
hAthiyoMpara savAra hokara jA rahe the||381|| tadanantara zUravIra manuSya
jisakI vyavasthA banAye hue the aisA mahAyuddha pravRtta huA so kucha ho samaya
bAda zakradhanukI senAko parAjita dekha hariSeNa yuddhake lie uThA  // 382 /  /
tadanantara jisa dizAse usakA uttama ratha nikala jAtA thA usa dizAmeM na ghor3A
bacatA thA, na hAthI dikhAI detA thA, na manuSya zeSa rahatA thA aura na ratha
hI bAkI bacatA thA  /  / 383 /  /  usane eka sAtha DorIpara caDhAye hae bANoMse
zatrakI senAko isa prakAra mArA ki vaha pIche binA dekhe hI ekadama sarapaTa
kahIMpara bhAga khar3I huI  // 384|| jinake zarIrameM bahuta bhArI ka~paka~pI
chUTa rahI thI aise bhayase pIr3ita kitane hI yoddhA kaha rahe the ki gaMgAdhara
aura mahIdharane yaha bar3A aniSTa kArya kiyA hai  // 385 /  /  yaha koI adbhata
puruSa yuddha meM sUryakI bhAMti suzobhita ho rahA hai  /  jisa prakAra sUrya
samasta dizAoMmeM kiraNeM chor3atA hai usI prakAra yaha bhI samasta dizAoMmeM
bahuta bANa chor3a rahA hai  // 386 /  /  tadanantara apanI senAko usa mahAtmAke
dvArA naSTa hotI dekha bhayase grasta hue gaMgAdhara aura mahIdhara 1. yuddhm|
2. ripukruddho durvRttI duHkhacAraNo ma.  /  3. svAmin ma.  /  4. vAJchito'pyani
-kha.  /  5. sUri -ma.  /  6. dRSTvA ma.  /  7. tasya ma.  /  8. mahIdhareNa  /

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
196 Padmapurana Then, when those jewels appeared, at that very moment, due to
the rise of good karma, Harishena, the tenth Chakravarti, became famous for his
great rise. || 388 || Even though he was adorned with the supreme Lakshmi marked
by the Chakra jewel, he considered himself as insignificant as a blade of grass,
devoid of pride. || 389 || Then, leading his army, which stretched for twelve
yojanas, he humbled all his enemies and reached the hermitage of the ascetics.
|| 390 || When the ascetics realized that this was the same person they had
expelled from the hermitage, they were terrified. Finally, holding fruits in
their hands, they offered him Arghya and honored him with words filled with
blessings. || 391 || Shatamanyu's son, Janamejaya, and his mother, Nagavati,
were pleased and offered their daughter to him. || 392 || Then, according to the
rituals, their auspicious wedding took place. Obtaining this daughter, the king
Harishena considered it his rebirth. || 393 || Then, adorned with the Lakshmi of
the Chakravarti, he came to the city of Kampilya. Thirty-two thousand crowned
kings accompanied him. || 394 || With his head bowed, adorned with a crown
studded with a cluster of gems, and with folded hands, he respectfully
prostrated at his mother's feet. || 395 || Sumali says to Dasanana, "O Dasanana!
At that time, seeing such a son, VaprÄ was overwhelmed with joy. She could not
contain herself, and her eyes filled with tears of joy." || 396 || Then, he
drove his magnificent chariots, shining like the sun, through the city of
Kampilya, thus fulfilling his mother's desire. || 397 || This act brought great
joy to the monks and the Shravakas, and many people embraced the Jina Dharma. ||
398 || The numerous, multi-colored, tall Jinalayas, which adorn the earth,
mountains, confluence of rivers, cities, and villages, were all built by him. ||
399 || After ruling for a long time, the noble-hearted Harishena renounced the
world and, through intense penance, attained the peak of the three worlds, the
Siddhalaya. || 400 || Hearing the story of Harishena Chakravarti, Dasanana was
filled with wonder. Then, after paying homage to the Jina, he continued on his
journey. || 401 || 1. MadanavalyÄ : M.  2. VaivÄha - M.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 196 padmapurANe tato jAteSu ratneSu tatkSaNaM sukRtodayAt  /  dazamo
hariSeNo'bhUccakravartI mahodayaH  //  388  //  tathApi parayA
yuktazcakralAJchanayA zriyA  /  rahitaM medanAvalyA svaM sa mene tRNopamam  //
389  //  tataH saMvAhayan prApto balaM dvAdazayojanam  /  satApasavanoddezaM
namayan sarvavidviSaH  //  390 //  tataH sa tApasaibhItairvijJAya phalapANibhiH
/  dattArthaH pUjito vAkyai zIrdAna purassaraiH  // 391 //  zatamanyozca putreNa
janamejayarUDhinA  /  tuSTayA nAgavatyA ca sA kanyAsmai samarpitA ||392  //
vidhinA ca tato vRttaM tayorvIvAha maGgalam  /  prApya caitAM punarjanma prAptaM
mene nRpottamaH || 393 //  tataH kAmpilya mAgatya yuktazcakradharazriyA  /
dvAtriMzatA narendrANAM sahasrANAM samanvitaH  //  394 //  zirasA
mukuTamyastamaNiprakarabhAsinA  /  nanAma caraNau mAturvinIto racitAJjaliH ||
395 | tatastaM tadvidhaM dRSTvA putraM vaprA dazAnana  /  saMbhUtA na svagAtreSu
toSAvyAptalocanA  //  396  //  tato bhrAmayatA tena sUryavarNAn mahArathAn  /
kAmpilyanagare mAtuH kRtaM saphalamIpsitam  // 397 //  zramaNazrAvakANAM ca
jAtaH paramasaMmadaH  /  bahavazca pariprAptAH zAsanaM jinadezitam  //  398  //
tenAmI kAritA bhAnti nAnAvarNajinAlayAH  /  bhUparvatanadIsaGga
puragrAmAdiSUnnatAH  //  399  //  kRtvA ciramasau rAjyaM pravrajya sumahAmanAH
/  tapaH kRtvA paraM prAptastrilokazikharaM vibhuH || 400  //  hariSeNasya
caritaM zrutvA vismayamAgataH  /  kRtvA jinanamaskAraM dazAsyaH prasthitaH punaH
|| 401 /  /  donoM hI kahIM bhAga khar3e hue || 387 || tadanantara usI samaya
puNyodayase ratna prakaTa ho gaye jisase hariSeNa mahAn abhyudayako dhAraNa
karanevAlA dasavA~ cakravartI prasiddha huA || 388|| yadyapi vaha cakraratnase
cihnita parama lakSmIse yukta ho gayA thA to bhI madanAvalIse rahita apane Apako
tRNake samAna tuccha samajhatA thA || 389 || tadanantara bAraha yojana lambI-
caur3I senAko calAtA aura samasta zatruoMko namrIbhUta karatA huA vaha
tapasviyoM ke Azrama meM pahu~cA ||390 || jaba tapasviyoMko isa bAta kA patA
calA ki yaha vahI hai jise hama logoMne Azramase nikAla diyA thA to bahuta hI
bhayabhIta hue  /  nidAna, hAthoMmeM phala lekara unhoMne hariSeNako argha diyA
aura AzIrvAda se yukta vacanoMse usakA sammAna kiyA || 391 || zatamanyuke putra
janamejaya aura mAtA nAgavatIne santuSTa hokara vaha kanyA isake lie samarpita
kara dI  //  392  //  tadanantara una donoMkA vidhipUrvaka vivAhotsava huA  /
isa kanyAko pAkara rAjA hariSeNane apanA punarjanma mAnA ||393 //  tadanantara
cakravartIkI lakSmIse yukta hokara vaha kAmpilyanagara AyA  /  battIsa hajAra
mukuTabaddha rAjA usake sAtha the || 394 | | usane mukuTameM lage maNiyoMke
samUha se suzobhita zira jhukAkara tathA hAtha jor3akara bar3I vinayase mAtAke
caraNoMmeM namaskAra kiyA  //  395  //  sumAlI dazAnanase kahate haiM ki he
dazAnana ! usa samaya ukta prakArake putrako dekhakara vaprAke harSakA pAra
nahIM rahA  /  vaha apane aMgoMmeM nahIM samA sakI tathA harSake A~suoMse usake
donoM netra bhara gaye  // 396 //  tadanantara usane sUryake samAna tejasvI
bar3e-bar3e ratha kAmpilyanagara meM ghumAye aura isa taraha apanI mAtAkA
manoratha saphala kiyA  //  397|| isa kAryase muni aura zrAvakoM ko parama harSa
huA tathA bahuta se logoMne jina dharmaM dhAraNa kiyA  //  398  //  pRthivI,
parvata, nadiyoMke samAgama sthAna, nagara tathA gA~va AdimeM jo nAnA raMgake
U~ce-U~ce jinAlaya zobhita ho rahe haiM ve saba usIke banavAye haiM  /  /  399
//  udAra hRdayako dhAraNa karanevAle hariSeNane cira kAla taka rAjya kara dIkSA
le lI aura parama tapazcaraNa kara tIna lokakA zikhara arthAt siddhAlaya prApta
kara liyA  // 400  //  isa prakAra hariSeNa cakravartIkA caritra sunakara
dazAnana Azcaryako prApta huA  /  tadanantara jinendra bhagavAnko namaskAra kara
vaha Age bar3hA ||401  //  1. madanAvalyA : ma.  /  2. vaivAha - ma.  /

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Chapter  Then, knowing the victory of the ten-faced one, the sun, as
if out of fear, abandoned the sight of his eyes. || 402 || The entire universe
was covered with the red hue of the evening, as if filled with the immense love
born from the ten-faced one. || 403 || The twilight was gradually consumed by
darkness, as if it was meant to serve the ten-faced one. || 404 || Then,
descending from the sky, the ten-faced one made his camp at the foot of the
Sammed mountain, on the mountain called Sansthali. || 405 || A sound like the
roar of a thunderclap from a cloud burst, filled the entire army with fear. ||
406 || The elephants, with their mighty trunks, broke the trees with their
tusks, and the horses, with their ears erect and their skin trembling, neighed
loudly. || 407 || Hearing this sound, the ten-faced one quickly asked, "What is
this? What is this? Who is ready to die today under the guise of an offense?" ||
408 || "Surely, it is Vaishravana who has arrived, or Soma, instigated by the
enemy, or perhaps some other enemy of mine, thinking I am secure and at ease."
|| 409 || Then, following his orders, the minister Prahasta went to that place
from where the sound was coming. There, he saw an elephant, playing, with a body
as large as a mountain. || 410 || Returning from there, Prahasta informed the
ten-faced one with great astonishment, "O God! Look at that elephant, like a
great mountain of clouds!" || 411 || "I have seen this elephant before, even
Indra, the king of gods, was unable to capture him, and so he left him. Or, let
Indra be, even the king of gods himself is unable to capture him, no one can
bear him. I don't know if this is an elephant or a collection of the combined
strength of all living beings!" || 412-413 || Then, laughing confidently, the
ten-faced one said, "Prahasta! Although it is not right to praise oneself, I
must say this much, if I don't capture this elephant in a moment, then I will
cut off these two arms of mine, which are afflicted by the armlet." || 414 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTamaM parva atha vijJAya jayinaM dazavaktraM divAkaraH  /
netrayorgocarIbhAvaM bhayAdiva samatyajat  //  402  //  saMdhyArAgeNa cacchannaM
samastaM bhuvanAntaram  /  saMjAtenAnurAgeNa kaikaseyAdivoruNA ||403  //
dhvastasaMdhyena ca vyAptaM dhvAntena kramato namaH  /  dazAsyasyeva kAlena
kartumetena sevanam ||404|| saMmedabhUdharasyAnte tataH saMsthalibhUbhRtaH  /
cakAra ziviraM kukSAvavatIrya nabhastalAt  // 405 //  ghanaughAdiva nirghAtaH
prAvRSeNyAdatha dhvaniH  /  yena tatsakalaM sainyaM kRtaM sAdhvasapUritam ||406
|| bhaGgamAlAnavRkSANAM cakruH stamberamottamAH  /  heSitaM
saptayazcoccairutkarNAH sphurattvacaH ||407 || kiM kimetaditi kSipraM jagAda ca
dazAnanaH  /  aparAdhanibhenAyaM matuM ko'dya samudyataH || 408 || nUnaM
vaizravaNaH prAptaH somo vA ripucoditaH  /  vizrabdhaM vA sthitaM matvA mamAnyaH
zatrugocaraH ||409|| tadAdiSTaH prahasto'tha taM dezaM samupAgataH  /
apazyatparvatAkAraM lIlAyuktamanekapam ||410  //  niveditaM tatastena dazAsyAya
savismayam  /  mahArAzimivAvdAnAM deva pazya mataGgajam ||411 /  /  IkSitaH
pUrvamapyeSa dantivRndArako mayA  /  indreNApyujjhito dhartumasamarthena vAraNaH
/  / 412 || manye purandarasyApi durgraho'yaM sudussahaH  /  gajaH kimuta
tuGgaujAH zeSANAM prANadhAriNAm ||413 //  tataH prahasya vizrabdhaM jagAda
"dhanadArdanaH  /  Atmano yujyate kartuM na prahasta prazaMsanam ||414 || 197
athAnantara sandhyA kAla AyA aura sUrya DUba gayA so aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno
sUryane dazAnanako vijayI jAnakara bhayase hI usake netroMkA gocara-sthAna
chor3a diyA thA  //  402  //  sandhyAkI lAlimAse samasta loka vyApta ho gayA so
aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno dazAnanase utpanna hue bahuta bhArI anurAga se hI
vyApta ho gayA thA ||403  /  /  krama-krama se sandhyAko naSTa kara kAlA
andhakAra AkAzameM vyApta ho gayA so aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno dazAnanakI sevA
karaneke lie hI vyApta huA thA  //  404|| tadanantara dazAnanane AkAzase
utarakara sammedAcalake samIpa saMsthali nAmaka parvatake Upara apanA DerA DAlA
||405  //  athAnantara - jisa prakAra varSAkAlIna meghoMke samUhase vajrakA
zabda nikalatA hai isI prakAra kahIM se aisA bhayaMkara zabda nikalA ki jisane
samasta senAko bhayabhIta kara diyA  // 406  //  bar3e-bar3e hAthiyoMne apane
AlAnabhUta vRkSa tor3a DAle aura ghor3e kAna khar3e kara pharUrI lete hue
hinahinAne lage ||407 || vaha zabda sunakara dazAnana zIghratAse bolA ki yaha
kyA hai ? kyA hai ? aparAdhake bahAne maraneke lie Aja kauna udyata huA hai ?
||408|| jAna par3atA hai ki vaizravaNa AyA hai athavA zatruse prerita huA soma
AyA hai athavA mujhe nizcinta rUpase ThaharA jAnakara zatru pakSakA koI dUsarA
vyakti yahA~ AyA hai || 409  /  /  tadanantara dazAnanakI AjJA pAkara prahasta
nAmA mantrI usa sthAnapara gayA jahAMse ki vaha zabda A rahA thA  /  vahA~
jAkara usane parvatake samAna AkAravAlA, krIr3A karatA huA eka hAthI dekhA  //
410  //  vahA~se lauTakara prahastane bar3e Azcaya~ke sAtha dazAnanako sUcanA dI
ki he deva ! meghoMkI mahArAzike samAna usa hAthIko dekho || 411 || aisA par3atA
hai ki isa hAthIko maiMne pahale bhI kabhI dekhA hai, indra vidyAdhara bhI ise
pakar3ane meM samarthaM nahIM thA isIlie usane ise chor3a diyA hai, athavA indra
vidyAdharakI bAta jAne do sAkSAt devendra bhI ise pakar3anemeM asamarthaM hai,
ise koI sahana nahIM kara sakatA  /  nahIM jAna par3atA ki yaha hAthI hai yA
samasta prANiyoMkA ekatrita tejakA samUha hai ? || 412 - 413  //  | taba
dazAnanane ha~sakara kahA ki prahasta ! yadyapi apanI prazaMsA svayaM karanA
ThIka nahIM hai phira bhI maiM itanA to kahatA hI hU~ ki yadi maiM isa hAthIko
kSaNa bharameM na pakar3a lU~ to bAjUbandase pIr3ita apanI ina donoM bhujAoMko
kATa 1. kakSA - ma.  /  2. niryAtAH ma  /  3. miSeNAyaM ma  /  4. vidhutvaM vA
ka, kha  /  5. kuberavijetA  /

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, "These two arms of mine are weighed down by armlets. If I
take even a single step, cut me down immediately." ||415|| Then, mounting the
celestial chariot Pushpaka, which moves at will, he went and saw the elephant,
endowed with excellent marks. ||416|| The elephant was like a smooth, dark blue
gem, his palate was red like a lotus, he bore long, round, white teeth like the
foam of nectar. ||417|| He was seven cubits high, ten cubits wide, and nine
cubits long. His eyes were somewhat yellow, like honey. ||418|| His backbone was
submerged in flesh, his forepart was high, his tail was long, his trunk was
huge, and his nail-like shoots were smooth and yellow. ||419|| His head was
round and thick, his feet were firmly planted, he was strong himself, his mighty
roar was sweet and deep from within, and he stood with humility. ||420|| The
intoxicating nectar that dripped from his temples attracted rows of bees. He
made a great sound like a drum, with the beating of his ear-shaped flaps.
||421|| He made the sky seem empty with his bulk, and he was playing a game that
stole hearts and eyes. ||422|| Seeing him, the son of RatnaÅrava attained
supreme joy. He considered himself successful, and his every hair stood on end
with delight. ||423|| Then, abandoning the chariot, he firmly tied his weapons
and blew a conch shell in front of him, filling the world with sound. ||424||
Then, the elephant, whose heart was agitated by the sound of the conch, and who
was filled with pride in his strength, roared and moved towards Dashaanan.
||425|| As the elephant rushed towards him with speed, Dashaanan, who was clever
at turning, quickly threw his white sheet in front of him. ||426|| While the
elephant was sniffing at the sheet, Dashaanan jumped up and touched his two
cheeks with his sharp teeth, which were like the sound of a swarm of bees.
||427|| While the elephant was wishing to wrap Dashaanan in his trunk, the
latter, endowed with lightness, slipped out between his teeth. ||428||
Dashaanan, who was as swift as lightning in his movements, touched his limbs on
all sides, repeatedly struck his teeth, and sometimes his tusks. ||429||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe etAvantu bravImyetau bhujau keyUrapIDitau  /  chinadhi na
kSaNAdenaM yadi gRhNAmyanekapam ||415  /  tataH kAmagamAruhya vimAnaM
puSpakAbhidham  /  gatvA pazyati taM nAgaM sallakSaNasamanvitam  //  416  /  /
snigdhendranIlasaMkAzaM rAjIvaprabhatAlukam  /  dIrghavRttau sudhAphenavalakSau
bibhrataM radau ||417 || hastAnAM saptakaM tuGgaM dazakaM pariNAhataH  /
AyAmatazca navakaM madhupiGgalalocanam  // 418 //
nimagnavaMzamagrAGgatuGgamAyatabAladhim  /  drAdhiSThakaramatyantasnigdhapiGga
nakhAGkuram ||419|| vRttapIna mahAkumbhaM supratiSThAGghrimUrjitam  /
antarmadhuradhIrorugarjitaM vinayasthitam  // 420 //
galadgaNDasthalAmodasamAkRSTAliveNikam  /  kurvantaM dundubhidhvAnaM
karNatAlAntatADanaiH  // 421 //  bhagnAvakAzamAkAzaM kurvANamiva pArthavAt  /
lIlAM vidadhataM cittacakSuzcoraNakAriNIm  //  422 //  dRSTvA ca taM parAM
prItiM prAparatnazravaH sutaH  /  kRtArthamiva cAtmAnaM mene hRSTatanUruhaH  //
423 //  tato vimAnamujjhitvA baddha vA parikaraM dRDham  /  zaGkha tasya puro
dadhmau zabdapUritaviSTapam  // 424 //  tataH zaGkhasvanodbhUtacittakSobhaH
sagarjitaH  /  karI dazamukhoddezaM calito balagarvitaH  // 425 //
vegAdabhyAyatasyAsya piNDIkRtya sitAMzukam  /  uttarIyaM ca cikSepa kSipraM
vibhramadakSiNaH  //  426 //  dantI jiprati taM yAvattAvadutpatya gaNDayoH  /
aspRzadyakSamardastaM bhRGgaughadhvanicaNDayoH  //  427  //  kareNa veSTituM
yAvaccakre vAJchAM mataGgajaH  /  tAvaddaMSTAntareNAsau niHsRto lAghavAnvitaH
// 428 //  aGgeSu ca caturdhvasya spRzan dantatale muhuH  /
bhrAntividyuccalazcakre preGkhaNaM radanAprayoH  // 429 //  198
ddaaluuN||414-415|| tadanantara vaha icchAnusAra calanevAle puSpaka vimAnapara
savAra ho, jAkara uttama lakSaNoMse yukta usa hAthIko dekhatA hai  //  416  //
vaha hAthI cikane indranIla maNike samAna thA, usakA tAlu kamalake samAna lAla
thA, vaha lambe, gola tathA amRtake phenake samAna sapheda dA~toM ko dhAraNa
kara rahA thA  // 417 //  vaha sAta hAtha U~cA, dasa hAtha cor3A aura nau hAtha
lambA thA  /  usake netra madhuke samAna kucha pItavarNake the ||418 //  usakI
pIThakI haDDI mAMsapeziyoM meM nimagna thI, usake zarIrakA agalA bhAga U~cA thA,
pU~cha lambI thI, sU~r3a vizAla thI, aura nakharUpI aMkura cikane tathA pIle the
// 419|| usakA mastaka gola tathA sthUla thA, usake caraNa atyanta jame hue the,
vaha svayaM balavAn thA, usakI vizAla garjanA bhItara se madhura tathA gambhIra
thI aura vaha vinaya se khar3A thA  // 420 //  usake gaNDasthalase jo mada cU
rahA thA usakI sugandhike kAraNa bhramaroMkI paMktiyA~ usake samIpa khiMcI calI
A rahI thiiN| vaha karNarUpI tAlapatroM kI phaTakAra se dundubhike samAna vizAla
zabda kara rahA thA  // 421 //  vaha apanI sthUlatA ke kAraNa AkAzako mAno
niravakAza kara rahA thA aura citta tathA netroM ko curAnevAlI krIr3A kara rahA
thA  /  /  422  //  usa hAthIko dekha dazAnana parama prItiko prApta huA  /
usane apane Apako kRtakRtya-sA mAnA aura usakA roma-roma harSita ho uThA  // 423
//  tadanantara dazAnanane vimAna chor3akara apanA parikara majabUta bA~dhA aura
usake sAmane zabdase lokako vyApta karanevAlA zaMkha phU~kA  // 424 || tatpazcAt
zaMkhake zabda se jisake cittameM kSobha utpanna huA thA tathA jo balake garvase
yukta thA aisA hAthI garjanA karatA huA dazAnanake sammukha calA ||425 || jaba
hAthI vegase dazAnanake sAmane daur3A to ghUmane meM catura dazAnanane usake
sAmane apanA sapheda caddara ghariyAkara pheMka diyA  //  426  //  hAthI
jabataka usa caddarako sU~ghatA hai tabataka dazAnanane uchalakara
bhramarasamUhake zabdoMse tIkSNa usake donoM kapoloMkA sparza kara liyA  // 427
//  hAthI jabataka dazAnanako sU~r3ase lapeTanekI icchA karatA hai ki tabataka
zIghratAse yukta dazAnana usake dAMtoMke bIcase bAhara nikala gayA ||428||
ghUmanemeM bijalIke samAna caMcala dazAnana usake cAroM orake aMgoM kA sparza
karatA thaa| bAra-bAra dA~toMpara Takkara lagAtA thA aura kabhI khoMsoMpara 1.
pRyorbhAvaH pArthavaM tasmAt sthaulyAt, pArthavAM (?) ma. 1

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Eighth Chapter  Then, adorned with splendor, Dasanana mounted the back of
the elephant. The elephant, like a devoted disciple, stood respectfully.
||430||  Then, the gods showered flowers and offered salutations repeatedly. The
celestial army, filled with joy, resounded with their voices. ||431||  Dasanana
bestowed upon the elephant the name "Trilokamandan" (Adorner of the Three
Worlds).  Indeed, the elephant adorned the three worlds, and Dasanana, filled
with joy, considered the name fitting. ||432||  A grand festival was held in
honor of the acquisition of this supreme elephant. The celestial beings, adorned
with flowers, danced on the beautiful mountain. ||433||  Even though everyone
was awake due to this event, the morning trumpet sounded a loud and resonant
note, marking the boundary between night and day, echoing through every cave of
the mountain. ||434||  Then, the sun rose, as if the day, skilled in service,
had presented a auspicious pot to Dasanana. ||435||  Dasanana, seated
comfortably, engaged in his bodily rituals, surrounded by the celestial beings
who discussed the elephant. ||436||  Suddenly, a man descended from the sky,
trembling violently, covered in sweat, burdened with sorrow, bearing wounds from
attacks, shedding tears, and revealing his frail body. He joined his hands,
placed them on his forehead, and with great distress, pleaded. ||437-438||  "O
Lord! Ten days ago, trusting in your strength, my brothers, Suryaksharajas and
Riksharajas, driven by their lineage, left Alankarpur, the netherworld Lanka,
with great enthusiasm to conquer the city of Kishka. ||439-440||  Both brothers
were filled with pride, accompanied by a massive army, and fearless. They
considered the world as insignificant as a blade of grass, due to their faith in
your power. ||441||  Inspired by these two brothers, a vast multitude, filled
with anger, descended upon Kishka and began to plunder. ||442||  Then, the
valiant warriors of Yama, the guardian of the underworld, armed with various
weapons, rose to fight. In the middle of the night, a great battle ensued among
them. ||443||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTamaM parva athAsya pRSThamArUDhaH savilAsaM dazAnanaH  /  vinItazca sthito
dantI sacchiSya iva tarakSaNAt  // 430 //  tataH sakusumA muktAH sAdhuvAdAH
muhuH suraiH  /  sazabdA ca mahAmodaM prAptA khecaravAhinI  // 43 //
trilokamaNDanAmikhyAM prApAyaM dazavaktrataH  /  trailokyaM maNDitaM tena yato
mene sa modavAn  // 432 //  mahotsavaH kRtastasya lAbhe paramadantinaH  /
nRtyadbhiH parvate ramye khecaraiH puSpasaMkulaiH  // 433 //  tathaiSAM
jAgratAmeSa maryAdAmAtrakAraNam  /  kRtaH prabhAtatUryeNa nAdo gaharapezalaH  //
43 //  divasena tato bimbaM raveH kalazamaGgalam  /  upanItaM dazAsyAya
sevAkauzalavedinA  // 435 /  /  tataH sukhAsanAsIne vihitasvAGgakarmaNi  /
sthite dazamukhe dantikathayA khecarAvRte  // 436 //  sahasA viyataH prAptaH
puruSaH puru vepathuH  /  svedabindusamAkIrNaH saMbhrAntaH khedamuddvahan  //
437 //  saprahAravraNaH sAzrurdarzayajarjarAM tanum  /  vyajJApayaJca kRcchraNa
lalATe dhArayan karau  /  / 438 //  dazame'hni dinAdasmAJcitte kRtvA mavabalam
/  alaMkArapurAvAsAnniSkramyotsAhato'dhikAt  // 439 //  nijagotrakramAyAtaM
nagaraM kiM kusaMjJakam  /  gRhItuM bhrAtarau yAtau sUryakSarajasAvubhau  // 440
//  mahAbhimAnasaMpannau mahAbalasamanvitau  /  vizrabdhau mavato
garvAnmanyamAnau tRNaM jagat  // 441 //  etAbhyAM coditaH kSubdho litAntaM
vipulo janaH  /  avaskandena saMpatya pracakre kiGkaluNTanam  /  / 442 /  /
kRtAntasya tato yoddhamusthitAM bhttsttmaaH| svapnavadyatpuroddiSTa (?)
hetivyApRtapANayaH  // 443 //  jhUlA jhUlane lagatA thA  // 429 //  tadanantara
dazAnana vilAsapUrvaka usakI pIThapara car3ha gayA aura hAthI usI kSaNa uttama
ziSyake samAna vinItabhAvase khar3A ho gayA  // 430 //  usI samaya devoMne
phUloMkI varSA kI, bAra-bAra dhanyavAda diye, aura vidyAdharoMkI senA kala-kala
karatI huI parama harSako prApta huI  // 431 //  vaha hAthI, dazAnanase
'trilokamaNDana' isa nAmako prApta huaa| yathArthameM usa hAthIse tInoM loka
maNDita hue the isalie dazAnanane bar3e harSase usakA 'trilokamaNDana' nAma
sArthaka mAnA thaa||432|| phUloMse vyApta usa ramaNIya parvatapara nRtya karate
hue vidyAdharoMne usa zreSTha hAthIke milanekA mahotsava kiyA thA  // 433 //
isa hAthIke prakaraNase yadyapi saba loga jAga rahe the to bhI rAtri aura
divasakI maryAdA batalAneke lie prabhAtakAlIna turahIne aisA joradAra zabda kiyA
ki vaha parvatakI pratyeka guphAmeM gaMja uThA  // 434 //  tadanantara sUrya
bimbakA udaya huA so aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno caturAIko jAnanevAle divasane
dazAnanake lie maMgala-kalaza hI samarpita kiyA ho  // 435 //  tadanantara
dazAnana zArIrika kriyAe~ kara sophApara baiThA thaa| sAtha hI anya vidyAdhara
bhI hAthokI carcA karate hue use gherakara baiThe the  // 436 /  /  usI samaya
AkAzase utarakara eka puruSa vahA~ aayaa| vaha puruSa atyanta kA~pa rahA thA,
pasInekI bUMdoMse vyApta thA, khedako dhAraNa kara rahA thA, prahArajanya
ghAvoMse sahita thA, A~sU chor3a rahA thA aura apanA jarjara zarIra dikhalA rahA
thaa| usane hAtha jor3a mastakase lagA bar3e duHkhake sAtha nivedana kiyA  //
437-438 //  ki he deva ! Ajase dasa dina pahale hRdayameM Apake balakA bharosA
kara sUryaraja aura RkSaraja donoM bhAI, apanI vaMza-paramparAse cale Aye kiSka
nagarako leneke lie bar3e utsAhase alaMkArapura arthAt pAtAla laMkAse nikalakara
cale the  // 439-440 //  donoM hI bhAI mahAn abhimAnase yukta, bar3I bhArI
senAse sahita tathA niHzaMka the| ve Apake gavaMse saMsArako taNake samAna
tuccha mAnate  // 441 /  /  ina donoM bhAiyoMkI preraNAse atyanta kSobhako
prApta hue bahuta-se loga eka sAtha kara kiSkupurako lUTane lage  // 442 //
tadanantara jinake hAthoMmeM nAnA prakArake zastra camaka rahe the aise yama
nAmA dikpAlake uttama yoddhA yuddha karaneke lie uThe so madhya rAtrimeM una
sabake bIca bar3A 1. -mAruhya ma.  /  2. dantI ma.  /  3. khecarAvRtaH ma.  /
4. -mucchritA ma.  /  5. svapnayadyatpuro dRSTA m.|

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
200 In the Padma Purana, there was a great battle between the two armies, with
many soldiers dying from the clash of weapons.  Hearing the sound of the battle,
Yama, the Lord of Death, himself went out to fight, his anger as fierce as the
ocean.  His immense power overwhelmed our army, leaving them wounded and
defeated.  The messenger, while narrating this, fainted.  He was revived by
fanning him with the edge of a cloth.  When asked what had happened, he placed
his hand on his heart and said, "Oh Lord, I felt like I was there, witnessing it
all, and fainted."   Then, Ravana, the son of Ratna Shrava, who was filled with
wonder, asked, "What happened next?"  After a moment of rest, the messenger
continued, "Oh Lord, when Rishyaraja saw our army defeated and in despair, he,
filled with love, prepared to fight himself."  He fought for a long time against
Yama, who was immensely powerful.  Though his heart did not break, he was
tricked and captured by the enemy.   While Rishyaraja was fighting, Suryaraja
also joined the battle.  He fought bravely for a long time, but eventually, he
was struck by a powerful blow and fainted.  His followers quickly carried him to
the forest called Mekhala, where he was revived with cool water mixed with
sandalwood.  Yama, believing himself to be the true Lord of Death, had created a
place of torment outside the city, including the river Vaitarani.  All those who
were defeated by him or by Indra, the King of the Gods, were sent to this place
of suffering, where they are now dying in pain.   Seeing this, I am deeply
troubled.  I am a loyal servant of the Rishyaraja lineage.  My name is
Shakhavali, and I am the son of Sushreni and Ranadaks.  Since you are our
protector, I managed to escape and come to you.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 200 padmapurANe tatasteSAM mahAn jAto madhyazarvari saMyugaH  /
anyonyazastrasaMpAtakRtabhUrijanakSayaH  // 444 //  zrutvA kalakaladhvAnaM
svayaM yoddhamathAdarAt  /  yamaH krodhena niSkrAntaH saMkSubdhArNavadAruNaH  //
445 //  AyAtamAtrakeNaiva tena dussahatejasA  /  asmadIyaM balaM bhagnaM
vividhAyudhavikSatam  // 446 /  /  athAsau kathayannevaM dUto. mUrchAmupAgataH
/  bIjitazca paTAntena prabodhaM punarAgataH  // 447 //  kimetaditi pRSTazca
hRdayasthakaro'vadat  /  jAnAmi deva tatraiva varte'hamiti mUJchitaH  /  / 448 /
/  tatastata iti prokta tato vismayavAhinA  /  ratnazravaHsutenAsau vizramya
punarabravIt  /  / 449 /  /  tato nAtha balaM dRSTvA nitAntAtaravAkulam  /
nijabhRkSarajA bhagnaM vatsalo yoddhumusthitaH  /  / 450 //  ciraM ca
kRtasaMgrAmo yamenAtibalIyasA  /  cetasA bhedamaprApto gRhItaH zatravaJcitaH  //
45 //  utthito yudhyamAne'sminnatha sUryarajA api  /  ciraM kRtaraNo
gADhaprahAro mUJchito bhRzam  // 452 //  udyamya kSipramAtmIyaiH sAmantaimakhalA
vanam  /  nItvA sa zvAsamAnItaH zItacandanavAriNA  // 453 //  yamena
svayamAtmAnaM satyamevAvagacchatA  /  kAritaM yAtanAsthAnaM vaitaraNyAdi
puurbhiH||454|| tato ye nirjitAstena saMyatIndreNa vA jitAH  /  preSitAH
duHkhamaraNaM prApyante tatra te nraaH||455|| vRttAntaM tamahaM dRSTvA
kathamapyAkulAkulaH  /  saMbhUto dayito bhRtyaH kramAdRkSarajaHkule  // 456 //
nAmnA zAkhAvalI putraH suzreNIraNadakSayoH  /  kRtvA palAyanaM prApto
bhavatastrAturantikam  // 457 //  bhArI yuddha huaa| usa yuddha meM parasparake
zastra prahArase aneka puruSoMkA kSaya huA  // 443-444 //  athAnantara bar3I
gaurase unakA kala-kala zabda sunakara yaha dikpAla svayaM krodhase yuddha
karaneke lie niklaa| usa samaya vaha yama kSobhako prApta hue samudrake samAna
bhayaMkara jAna par3atA thA  // 445 //  jisakA teja atyanta duHsaha thA aise
yamane Ate hIke sAtha hamArI senAko nAnA prakArake zastroMse ghAyala kara bhagna
kara diyA  // 446 /  /  athAnantara vaha dUta isa prakAra kahatA-kahatA bIcameM
hI mUcchita ho gayA  /  vastrake chorase havA karanepara punaH saceta huA  //
447 //  yaha kyA hai ? isa prakAra pUche jAnepara usane hRdayapara hAtha
rakhakara kahA ki he deva ! mujhe aisA jAna par3A ki meM vahIM para huuN| usI
dRzyako sAmane dekha maiM mUcchita ho gayA  // 448 //  _ tadanantara Azcaryako
dhAraNa karanevAle rAvaNane pUchA ki 'phira kyA huA ?' isa praznake uttarameM
vaha kucha vizrAma kara phira kahane lagA  // 449 //  ki he nAtha ! jaba
RkSarajane dekhA ki hamArI senA atyanta duHkhapUrNa zabdoMse vyAkula hotI huI
parAjita ho rahI hai-naSTa huI jA rahI hai taba snehayukta ho vaha yuddha
karaneke lie svayaM udyata huA  // 450 //  vaha atyanta balavAn yamake sAtha
cirakAla taka yuddha karatA rhaa| yuddha karate-karate usakA hRdaya nahIM TUTA
thA phira bhI zatrune chalase use pakar3a liyA  // 451 /  /  tadanantara jaba
RkSaraja yuddha kara rahA thA usI samaya sUryaraja bhI yuddhake lie utthaa|
usane bhI cirakAla taka yuddha kiyA para antameM vaha zastrakI gaharI coTa
khAkara mUcchita ho gayA  /  / 452 //  AtmIya loga use uThAkara zIghra hI
mekhalA nAmaka vanameM le gye| vahA~ vaha candana mizrita zItala jalase zvAsako
prApta ho gayA arthAt zItalopacArase usakI mUrchA dUra huI  // 453 //  lokapAla
yamane apane Apako sacamuca hI yamarAja samajhakara nagarake bAhara vaitaraNI
nadI Adi kaSTa deneke sthAna banavAye  // 454 //  tadanantara usane athavA indra
vidyAdharane jinheM yuddha meM jItA thA una sabako usane usa kaSTadAyI sthAnameM
rakhA so ve vahA~ duHkhapUrvaka maraNako prApta ho rahe haiM  // 455 //  isa
vRttAntako dekha maiM bahata hI vyAkUla haiN| maiM RkSarajakI vaMzaparamparAse
calA AyA pyArA naukara huuN| zAkhAvalI merA nAma hai, maiM suzroNI aura
raNadakSakA putra huuN| Apa cU~ki rakSaka ho isalie kisI taraha bhAgakara 1.
-mucchritaH ma.  /  2. ucchritaH ma.  /  3. nItvA-zvAsana ma.  /  4. nagarAd
bahiH, pUrvakam ma.  /  :

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eighth Chapter  ~  Having understood the plight of my own people, I have
informed you.  Now, you are the authority in this matter, do as you deem fit. I
am satisfied having informed you.   Then, the great wrathful Ravana, with great
affection, ordered his people to heal the wounds of the branch.  Smiling, the
ten-headed one then addressed his people, saying, "I will rescue those who have
fallen into the ocean of suffering, those who have been cast into the torment of
the Vaitarani and other such places."  The valiant kings, led by Prahasta,
rushed forward, their weapons blazing, illuminating the sky.  They rode on
various vehicles, adorned with umbrellas and flags, their great enthusiasm
resonating with the sound of trumpets.  They were mighty warriors.  The lords of
the Vidyadharas descended from the sky and landed on earth, near the city.  They
were filled with wonder at the sight of the rows of palaces.  Then, Ravana saw
the group of humans who had been cast into the artificial hell in the southern
direction of Kishkindha.  He destroyed the guardians of hell and rescued all the
people, just as a relative would rescue their loved ones from suffering.
Hearing of the enemy's strength, the powerful Yama, the guardian of the
underworld, named Satop, emerged with his entire army, like a churning sea.  He
was accompanied by elephants, tall as mountains, fierce and spreading darkness
with their maddening roars; horses, adorned with beautiful, waving fly whisks;
chariots, shining like the sun, decorated with rows of flags; and valiant
warriors, clad in armor and armed with weapons.  Then, Vibhishana, mounted on
his chariot and skilled in the art of war, laughed and instantly killed Satop
with his arrows.  The lowly servants of Yama, struck by the arrows, fled in all
directions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ~ aSTama parva 201 iti svapakSadauHsthityamavagamya mayoditam  /  deva
pramANamatrArthe kRtyahaM tvanivedanAt  // 45 //  vraNabhaGga tatastasya
kartumAdizya sAdaram  /  uccacAla mahAkrodhaH smitaM kRtvA dazAnanaH  // 459 //
jagAda codyatAn klezamahArNavamupAgatAn  /  vaitaraNyAdinikSiptAn
vArayAmyasudhAriNaH  // 460 //  agraskandhena codArAH prahastapramukhA nRpAH  /
pravRttAH zastratejomiH kurvANA jvalitaM namaH  // 461 //
vicitravAhanArUDhAzchatradhvajasamAkulAH  /  tUryanAdasamudbhatamahotsAhA
mahaujasaH  // 462 //  nAthA gaganayAtrANAM kSitiM prAptAH purAntikAm  /
zobhayA gRhapaGktInAM paramaM vismayaM gatAH  // 463 //  dizi kiSkupurasyAtha
dakSiNasyAM dazAnanaH  /  dadarza narakAvAsagAMkSiptA nRsaMhatIH  // 46 //
kRtvA marakapAlAnAM dhvaMsanaM duHkhasAgarAt  /  uttAritAstataH sarva
bandhunevAmunA janAH  // 465 /  /  zrutvA parabalaM prApta sATopo nAma vIryavAn
/  niryayau sarvasainyena prakSubdha iva sAgaraH  // 466 //
dvipairgirinibhai(mainidhArAndhakAribhiH  /  turaGgazca
calaJcArucAmaraprAptabhUSaNaiH  // 467 //
rathairAdityasaMkAzairdhvajapaGktivibhUSitaiH  /  pinaddhakavacaiH
zastrairmaTaivIM rairadhiSThitaiH  // 46 //  tatastaM syandanArUDho hasan
yamamarTa kSaNAt  /  maGgaM vibhISaNo ninye bANai raNavizAradaH  // 469 //
yamasya kiGkarA dInAH kurvANAH khamAyatam  /  bANaiH samAhatAzcakruH kSipraM
kvApi palAyanam  /  / 470 //  Apake pAsa AyA huuN||456-457|| isa prakAra apane
pakSake logoMkI durdazA jAnakara maiMne Apase kahI hai| isa viSayameM aba Apa hI
pramANa haiM arthAt jaisA ucita samajheM so kreN| maiM to Apase nivedana kara
kRtakRtya ho cukA  /  / 458 //  tadanantara mahAkrodhI rAvaNane apane pakSake
logoMko bar3e Adarase Adeza diyA ki isa zAkhAvalIke ghAva ThIka kiye jaaveN|
tadanantara musakarAtA huA vaha uThA aura sAtha hI uThe anya logoMse kahane lagA
ki maiM kaSTarUpI mahAsAgarameM par3e tathA vaitaraNI Adi kaSTadAyI sthAnoMmeM
DAle gaye logoMkA uddhAra karU~gA  // 459-460 /  /  prahasta Adi bar3e-bar3e
rAjA senAke Age daudd'e| ve zastroMke tejase AkAzako dedIpyamAna kara rahe the
// 461 //  nAnA prakArake vAhanoMpara savAra the, chatra aura dhvajAoMko dhAraNa
karanevAle the| turahIke zabdoMse unakA bar3A bhArI utsAha prakaTa ho rahA thA
aura ve mahAtejasvI the hI  // 462 /  /  isa prakAra vidyAdharoke adhipati
AkAzase utarakara pRthivIpara Aye aura nagara ke samIpa mahaloMkI paMktikI zobhA
dekha parama Azcaryako prApta hue  // 463 /  /  tadanantara rAvaNane kiSkupura
nagarakI dakSiNa dizAmeM kRtrima narakake garta meM par3e manuSyoMke samUhako
dekhA  // 464 //  dekhate hI usane narakakI rakSA karanevAle logoMko naSTa kiyA
aura jisa prakAra bandhujana apane iSTa logoMko kaSTase nikAlate haiM usI
prakAra usane saba logoMko narakase nikAlA  /  / 465 /  /  tadanantara
zatrusenAko AyA sunakara bar3e bhArI ADambarako dhAraNa karanevAlA, zaktizAlI
yama nAma lokapAlakA sATopa nAmakA pramukha bhaTa yuddha karaneke lie apanI saba
senAke sAtha bAhara niklaa| usa samaya vaha aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno kSobhako
prApta huA sAgara hI ho  // 466 /  /  pahAr3ake samAna U~ce, bhayaMkara aura
madakI dhArAse andhakAra phailAnevAle hAthI, calate hue sundara cAmararUpI
AbhUSaNoMko dhAraNa karanevAle ghor3e, sUryake . . samAna dedIpyamAna tathA
dhvajAoMkI paMktise suzobhita ratha, aura kavaca dhAraNa karanevAle evaM
zastroMse yukta zUravIra yoddhA isa prakAra caturaMga senA usake sAtha thI  //
467-468 //  tadanantara rathapara ArUr3ha evaM raNakalAmeM nipuNa vibhISaNane
ha~sate-ha~sate hI bANoMke dvArA usa sATopako kSaNa-bharameM mAra girAyA  // 469
//  yamake jo dIna hIna kiMkara the ve bhI bANoMse tAr3ita ho AkAzako lambA 1.
kRtI + aham, kRtyo'haM m.| kRto'haM tannivedanAt ka., kh.| 2. tathA m.| 3.
haMsanaiH subhaTaM ma.  /  4. dInaM k.,kh.| 26

Page #252 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
202 Having heard that he had freed the sons of Surya from Naraka and killed
Saatop, Yama, the lord of death, became very angry. He was as fierce as Yama
himself, and he mounted his chariot, his hand on his bow, his face filled with
rage. He was a mighty warrior, his banner flying high, his brow furrowed like a
serpent's, his eyes blazing red, as if he were burning the forest of the world.
He was surrounded by his own reflections, his vassals, and his chariot was
enveloped in a blaze of light. 471-474  Seeing Yama emerge, Dasanana restrained
Vibhishana and, filled with rage, prepared for battle. 475  Yama, his face
contorted with fury, was consumed by the death of Saatop and engaged Dasanana in
battle. 476  Seeing Yama, the Rakshasa army was terrified. Their movements
became sluggish, and they retreated in dismay to Dasanana's side. 477  Dasanana,
mounted on his chariot, then advanced towards Yama, showering him with arrows.
Yama responded in kind. 478  The sky was filled with the sound of their arrows,
as dense as a cloud of thunderheads. 479  Kaisika's son struck Yama's charioteer
with an arrow, and he fell to the ground like a fallen star. 480  Yama, struck
by a sharp arrow, was left without his chariot. He was so terrified that he
vanished into the sky in an instant. 481  Then, trembling with fear, Yama
returned to his inner palace, accompanied by his son and ministers. 482  He
bowed to Indra and said, "O God, hear my plea. I have no further use for the
game of Yama. 483  "Be pleased, or be angry, or take my life, or do whatever you
wish. I will not oppose the will of Yama." 484

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 202 padmapurANe mocitAn nArakAt zrutvA sATopaM cAvasAditam  /  yamo yama iva
karo mahAzastroTavegataH  // 471 //  rathotsAhaH samAruhya cApaM kopaM ca
dhArayan  /  ucchitena pratApena dhvajena ca mahAbalaH  // 17 //
AkulAsitasarpAmabhrakuTIkuTilAlakaH  /  cakSuSAtyantaraktena dahanniva
jagadvanam  // 473 //  pratibimbairivAtmIyaiH sAmantaiH kRtaveSTanaH  /  yoddhaM
vegAgnicakrAma chAdayan tejasA nabhaH  // 47 //  tatastaM nirgataM dRSTvA
vinivArya vibhISaNam  /  dazAnano raNaM kartumutthitaH kopamudvahan  /  / 475 //
sATopavyasanenAtidIpito'tha yamaH samam  /  dazAsyena raNaM kartumArebhe
mISaNAnanaH  // 476 //  'dRSTvA ca taM tato bhItA jAtA rAkSasavAhinI  /
dazAnanasamIpaM sA DuDhauke mandaceSTitA  // 477 //  rathArUDhastatastasya
dazAsyo'bhimukhaM yayau  /  vimuJcan zarasaMghAtaM muJcataH zarasaMhatIH  // 478
//  tatastayoH zaraizchannaM bhImanisvanakAribhiH  /  nabho ghanairivAzeSa
ghanabaddhakadambakaiH  // 479 //  kaikasInandanenAtha zareNa kRtatADanaH  /
bhUmau graha ivApuNyaH papAta yamasArathiH  // 480 //  tADitastIkSNabANena
kRtAnto'pyarathIkRtaH  /  utpapAta ravermArgamantarhitatanuH kSaNAt  // 481 //
tataH sAntaHpuraH putrasahito'mAtyasaMyutaH  /  kampamAnatanurbhAtyA yAto'sau
rathanUpuram  // 482 //  namaskRtya ca saMbhrAnta indramevamabhASata  /  zRNu
vijJApanaM deva kRtaM me yamalIlayA  // 483 //  prasIda vraja vA kopaM hara vA
jIvana vimo| kuru vA vAJchitaM yatte yamatAM na karomyaham  // 484 //  karate
hue zIghra hI kahIM bhAga khar3e hue  // 470 /  /  jaba yama nAma lokapAlako
patA calA ki sUryaraja, RkSaraja Adiko narakase chur3A diyA hai tathA sATopa
nAmaka pramukha bhaTako mAra DAlA hai taba yamarAjake samAna krUra tathA
mahAzastroMko dhAraNa karanevAlA vaha yama lokapAla bar3e vegase rathapara
savAra ho yuddha karane ke lie bAhara nikalA  /  vaha dhanuSa tathA krodhako
dhAraNa kara rahA thA, bar3he hue pratApa aura U~cI uThI dhvajAse yakta thA,
mahAbalavAna thA, kAle sake samAna bhayaMkara bhauMhoMse usakA lalATa kuTila ho
rahA thA, vaha apane lAla-lAla netroMse aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno jagatarUpI
vanako jalA hI rahA ho| apane hI pratibimbake samAna dikhanevAle anya sAmanta
use ghere hue the tathA tejase vaha AkAzako AcchAdita kara rahA thA  / 471-474
//  tadanantara yama lokapAlako bAhara nikalA dekha dazAnanane vibhISaNako manA
kiyA aura svayaM hI krodhako dhAraNa karatA huA yuddha karaneke lie uThA  /  /
475 //  sATopake mAre jAnese jo atyanta dedIpyamAna dikha rahA thA aise
bhayaMkara mukhako dhAraNa karanevAle yamane dazAnanake sAtha yuddha karanA zurU
kiyA  /  / 476 //  yamako dekha rAkSasoMkI senA bhayabhIta ho uThI, usakI
ceSTAe~ manda par3a gayIM aura vaha nirutsAha ho dazAnanake samIpa bhAga khar3I
huI  // 477 //  tadanantara rathapara baiThA huA dazAnana bANoMkI varSA karatA
haA yamake sammukha gyaa| yama bhI bANoMkI varSA kara rahA thA  // 478 /  /
tadanantara saghana maNDala bA~dhanevAle meghoMse jisa prakAra samasta AkAza
vyApta ho jAtA hai usI prakAra una donoMke bhayaMkara zabda karanevAle bANoMse
samasta AkAza vyApta ho gayA  // 479 /  /  athAnantara dazAnanake bANakI coTa
khAkara yamakA sArathi puNyahIna grahake samAna bhUmipara gira par3A  // 480 /
/  yama lokapAla bhI dazAnanake tIkSNa bANase tAr3ita ho ratharahita ho gyaa|
isa kAryase vaha itanA ghabar3AyA ki kSaNa-bharameM chipakara AkAzameM jA ur3A
// 481|| tadanantara bhayase jisakA zarIra kA~pa rahA thA aisA yama apane
antaHpura, putra aura mantriyoMko sAtha lekara rathanUpura nagarameM pahu~cA  //
482 /  /  aura bar3I ghabarAhaTake sAtha indrako namaskAra kara isa prakAra
kahane lagA ki he deva ! merI bAta sunie| aba mujhe yamarAjakI lIlAse prayojana
nahIM hai  /  / 483 //  he nAtha ! cAhe Apa prasanna hoM, cAhe krodha kareM,
cAhe merA jIvana haraNa kareM athavA cAhe jo ApakI 1. mahAzastrATavIM gataH ma.
( mhaashstrotivegtH)| 2. dRSTvaivaM m.| 3. bhImanizcalakAribhiH m.| 4. idamevA-
ma.  /

Page #253 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighth Chapter  203  The valiant Dashaanan, who had defeated Vaishravana
in battle, had also defeated me, and I was defeated for a long time. ||485||
His body, like that of a valiant warrior, was made of pure valor. He was like
the sun in the middle of the sky, impossible to look at. ||486||  Hearing this,
the king of the gods, Indra, was ready for battle, but he was stopped by his
council of ministers, who knew the truth of the matter. ||487||  Hearing this,
Indra, smiling, said to Yama, his brother-in-law, "Where will Dashaanan go?
Don't be afraid, be at ease and sit comfortably on this seat." ||488||  Thus,
reassured by his brother-in-law's words, Yama, free from fear of his enemy,
lived happily in the city designated by Indra. ||489||  Honoring Yama, Indra
went to his inner palace, where he was immersed in the ocean of sensual
pleasures. ||490||  Yama had told Indra about Dashaanan's character, and how
Vaishravana had been exiled to the forest after being defeated by Dashaanan in
battle. All this was forgotten by Indra, who was intoxicated by his power, just
as a learned scripture is forgotten when it is not studied. ||491-492||  Even a
dream-like experience leaves some trace in the memory, but Indra had completely
forgotten what had been told to him earlier. ||493||  Meanwhile, Yama, having
become the lord of the city called "Surasangeet," completely forgot the
humiliation he had suffered at the hands of Dashaanan. ||494||  He thought, "My
daughter, Sarvasri, is extremely beautiful and even more dear to Indra than his
own life." ||495||  "My relationship with this great man is very close.
Therefore, my birth has been fulfilled by receiving Indra's respect." ||496||
Then, Dashaanan, full of great prosperity and enthusiasm, gave the city of
Kishkindha to Suryaraja, replacing Yama. ||497||  And he gave the city of
Kishkupura, a place of great wealth, to Riksharaja. Yama, having come to this
city in accordance with his lineage, lived happily there. ||498||  I wish to do
so, but I will no longer be Yama, the guardian of the realm. ||484||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTamaM parva 203 yuddhe vaizravaNo yena nirjitaH purutejasA  /  ahamapyamunA
nIto bhaGga kRtaraNazciram  // 485 //  sRSTaM vIraraseneva vapustasya mahAtmanaH
/  'durIkSyo vyomamadhyasthasaviteva nidAghajaH  // 486 //  iti zrutvA
surAdhIzaH saMgrAmAya kRtodyatiH  /  niruddho mantrivaNa naya yAthAtmyavedinA
// 487 //  jagAda ca smitaM zrutvA mAtulaM kva sa yAsyati  /  bhayaM muJca
suvizrabdho mavAsminnAsane sukham  // 48 //  jAmAturatha vAkyena parityajya
riporbhayam  /  puraM suravarodgItamadhyuvAsa yamaH sukhI  // 489 //
vidhAyAntakasaMmAnaM surezo'ntaHpuraM yayau  /  kAmabhogasamudre'sau tatra magno
mahAmadaH  // 490 //  dazAsyacaritaM tasmai yatapatinoditam  /  vanavAso
dhanapaterbhanino yazca saMyuge  // 491 //  sarvamaizvaryamattasya vismRtaM
tasya tatkSaNAt  /  abhyagrapaThitaM zAstraM yathAbhyasanavarjitam  // 492 //
kRtopalammaM svapne'pi jJAyate vastulezataH  /  niranvayaM tu tasyedaM vismRtaM
pUrvacoditam  // 493 //  prApya vA surasaMgItapurasya patitAM yamaH  /
visasmAra pariprAptAM paribhUtiM dazAnanAt  // 494 //  mene ca mama
sarvazrIduhitA rUpazAlinI  /  sA ca gIrvANanAthasya prANebhyo'pi garIyasI  //
495 //  atyantamantaraGgo'yaM saMbandho mahatA saha  /  ato janma kRtArtha me
prApya zakrapratIkSyatAm  // 496 //  tato mahodayotsAhaH zrImAnudvAsitAntakaH  /
nagaraM sUryarajase dadau kiSkindhasaMjJakam  // 197 //  tathAkSarajase
kiSkupuraM paramasaMpadam  /  prApya gotrakramAyAte nagare to sukhaM sthitau  //
498 //  icchA ho so kareM parantu aba maiM yamapanA arthAt yama nAmA lokapAlakA
kArya nahIM karU~gA  /  / 484 /  /  vizAla tejako dhAraNa karanevAle jisa
yodhAne pahale yuddha meM vaizravaNako jItA thA usI yoddhA dazAnanane mujhe bhI
parAjita kiyA hai| yadyapi maiM cirakAla taka usake sAtha yuddha karatA rahA
para sthira nahIM raha sakA  // 485 /  /  usa mahAtmAkA zarIra aisA jAna par3atA
hai mAno vIra rasase hI banA ho| vaha AkAzake madhyameM sthita grISmakAlIna
sUryake samAna dunirIkSya hai arthAt usakI ora koI A~kha uThAkara bhI nahIM
dekha sakatA hai  /  / 486 /  /  yaha sunakara indra yuddhake lie udyata huA
parantu nItiko yathArthatAko jAnanevAle mantrimaNDalane use roka diyA  // 487 //
indra, yamakA jAmAtA thA so yamakI bAta suna manda hAsya karate hue usane kahA
ki he mAtula! dazAnana kahA~ jAyegA ? tuma bhayako chor3o aura nizcinta hokara
isa Asanapara sukhase baiTho  // 488 //  isa prakAra jAmAtAke vacanase zatrukA
bhaya chor3akara yama indrake dvArA batalAye hue nagarameM sukhase rahane lagA
// 489 //  bahata bhArI garvako dhAraNa karanevAlA indra yamakA sanmAnakara
antaHparameM calA gayA aura vahA~ jAkara kAmabhogarUpI samudra meM nimagna ho
gayA  // 490 //  yamane dazAnanakA jo caritra indrake lie kahA thA tathA yuddha
meM dazAnanase parAjita hokara vaizravaNako jo vanavAsa karanA par3A thA,
aizvaryake madameM masta rahanevAle indrake lie vaha saba kSaNa-bharameM usa
prakAra vismRta ho gayA jisa prakAra ki pahale par3hA zAstra abhyAsa na
karanepara vismRta ho jAtA hai  /  / 491-492 //  svapnameM upalabdha vastukA
kucha to bhI smaraNa rahatA hai parantu indrake lie pUrva kathita bAtakA nirmUla
vismaraNa ho gayA  // 493 /  /  idhara indrakA yaha hAla huA udhara yama
surasaMgIta nAmA nagarakA svAmitva pAkara dazAnanase prApta hue tiraskArako
bilakula bhUla gayA  /  / 494 /  /  vaha mAnatA thA ki merI putrI sarvazrI
atyanta rUpavatI hai aura indrako prANoMse bhI adhika priya hai  /  / 495 //
isa prakAra eka bar3e puruSake sAtha merA antaraMga sambandha hai isalie indrakA
sammAna pAkara merA janma kRtakRtya arthAt saphala huA hai  // 496 /  /
tadanantara mahAn abhyudaya aura utsAhako dhAraNa karanevAle dazAnanane yamako
haTAkara kiSkindha nAmA nagara sUryarajake lie diyA  // 497 //  aura RkSarajake
lie parama sampattiko 1. durIkSo m.|

Page #254 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
204 Padma Purana They, both, having attained supreme prosperity, entered their
respective cities, Kishkindha and Ayodhya, which were like the city of Indra,
adorned with golden mansions and endowed with worthy rulers. || 499 ||   Ravana,
bearing great prosperity and fame, was proceeding towards the peak of Trikuta,
with his ministers bowing down to him. He was the best, and like the moon in the
bright fortnight, he was constantly filled with the wealth of his devotees. He
was riding on the beautiful Pushpaka Vimana, which could travel at will, adorned
with a garland of jewels and a row of lofty peaks. He was endowed with supreme
patience and had attained the fruits of his good deeds. || 500-503 || Then,
hordes of Rakshasas, filled with joy, adorned with various ornaments and wearing
the finest clothes, followed him, shouting auspicious words like, "Victory to
you, O Lord! May you prosper, live long, grow, and continue to attain progress."
|| 504-505 || They were mounted on various vehicles like lions, tigers,
elephants, horses, and swans. They were filled with various illusions, their
eyes were wide with joy, and they were adorned with the forms of the gods. Their
brilliance filled the directions, and their radiance illuminated all the
directions. They were moving through forests, mountains, and oceans. || 506-507
|| They saw the ocean, which was deep and boundless, filled with huge
crocodiles, dark like a Tamala forest, with waves as high as mountains,
terrifying with many large serpents like those in the netherworld, and adorned
with various jewels. They were filled with wonder and exclaimed, "Oh! Indeed!"
and other words of wonder. Thus, many Rakshasas followed Ravana. || 508-510 ||
1. Sadmani à¤®. 2. Bandha à¤®.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 204 padmapurANe te zakranagarAbhikhye pure kAJcanasadmanI'  /
ucitasvAmisaMyukte jagmatuH paramAM zriyam  //  499  //  saumAlirapi bibhrANaH
zriyaM kIrtiM ca bhUyasIm  /  pratyavasthitasAmantaiH praNamadbhiH samuttamaH
//  500  //  pUryamANaH sadA sevyairvibhavaiH prativAsaram  /  bandhuH
kumudakhaNDAnAM sitapakSe karairiva  //  501  //  ratnadAmAkulaM tuGgaM
zRGgapaGktivirAjitam  /  Aruhya puSpakaM cAru vimAnaM kAmagatvaram  // 502"
yuktaH paramadhairyeNa prAptapuNyaphalodayaH  /  trikUTazikharaM bhUtyA parayA
prasthitaH kRtI  //  503  //  tato rakSogaNAstasya pramodaM paramaM zritAH  /
citrAlaMkArasaMpannA varIyovastradhAriNaH  //  504  //  jaya nanda ciraM jIva
vardhasvodehi saMtatam  /  iti maGgalavAkyAni prayuJjAnA mahAravAH  //  505  //
siMhazArdUlamAtaGgavAjihaMsAdisaMzritAH  /  nAnAvibhramasaMyuktAH
pramodavikacekSaNAH  //  506  //  vibhrANAstridazAkAraM tejovyAptavihAyasaH  /
AlokitasamastAzAH kAnanAdisamudragAH  //  507  //  adRSTapAragambhIraM
mahAgrAhasamAkulam  /  tamAlavanasaMkAzaM girituGgormisaMhatim  //  508  //
rasAtalamivAne kanAganAyaka bhISaNam  /  nAnAratnakaravAtaraJjitoddezarAjitam
//  509  //  pazyanto vismayApUrNAH samudraM vividhAdbhutam  /  anujagmuraho
hIti muhurmukharitAnanAH  // 510 //  dhAraNa karanevAlA kiSkupura nagara diyaa|
isa prakAra sUryaraja aura RkSaraja donoM hI apanI kulaparamparAse Agata
nagaroMko pAkara sukhase rahane lage || 498 || jinakI zobhA indrake nagarake
samAna thI, aura jinameM suvarNamaya bhavana bane hue the aise ve donoM nagara
yogya svAmIse yukta hokara parama lakSmIko prApta hue ||499 || bahuta bhArI
lakSmI aura kIrtiko dhAraNa karanevAle dazAnanane kRtakRtya hokara bar3e
vaibhavake sAtha trikUTAcalake zikharakI ora prasthAna kiyaa| usa samaya zatru
rAjA praNAma karate hue usase mila rahe the| vaha svayaM uttama thA aura jisa
prakAra zukla pakSameM candramA kiraNoMse pratidina pUrNa hotA rahatA hai usI
prakAra vaha bhI pratidina sevanIya vaibhavase pUrNa hotA rahatA thA  /
ratnamayI mAlAoMse yukta, UMce zikharoMkI paMktise suzobhita, sundara aura
icchAnusAra gamana karanevAle puSpaka vimAnapara ArUr3ha hokara vaha jA rahA
thaa| vaha parama dhairyaMse yukta thA tathA puNyake phalasvarUpa aneka
abhyudaya use prApta the  /  / 500 - 503  /  /  tadanantara parama harSako
prApta, nAnA alaMkAroMse yukta evaM uttamottama vastra dhAraNa karanevAle
rAkSasoM ke jhuNDa ke jhuNDa jora-jorase nimnAMkita maMgala vAkyoMkA uccAraNa
kara rahe the ki he deva ! tumhArI jaya ho, tuma samRddhiko prApta hoo, cirakAla
taka jIte raho, bar3hate raho aura nirantara abhyudayako prApta hote raho  /  /
504- 505  /  /  ve rAkSasa, siMha, zArdUla, hAthI, ghor3e tathA haMsa Adi
vAhanoMpara ArUr3ha the  /  nAnA prakArake vibhramoMse yukta the  /  harSase
unake netra phUla rahe the  /  ve devoMjaisI AkRtiyoMko dhAraNa kara rahe the|
apane tejase unhoMne dizAoMko vyApta kara rakhA thA  /  unakI prabhAse samasta
dizAe~ jagamagA rahI thIM aura ve vana, parvata tathA samudra Adi sarvaM
sthAnoMmeM cala rahe the  /  / 506-507 || jisakA kinArA nahIM dIkha rahA thA, jo
atyanta gaharA thA, bar3e-bar3e grAha - magaramacchoM se vyApta thA, tamAla
vanake samAna zyAma thA, parvatoM jaisI U~cI-U~cI taraMgoM ke samUha uTha rahe
the, jo rasAtalake samAna aneka bar3e-bar3e nAgoM - sarpoMse bhayaMkara thA,
aura nAnAprakArake ratnoMkI kiraNoMke samUhase anurakta sthaloMse suzobhita thA
aise aneka AzcaryoMse yukta samudrako dekhate hue ve rAkSasa AzcayaMse bhara
rahe the  /  aho, hI, Adi AzcaryavyaMjaka zabdoMse unake mukha bAra-bAra
mukharita ho rahe the  /  isa prakAra aneka rAkSasa dazAnanake pIche-pIche cala
rahe the  //  508-510 //  1. sadmani ma  /  2. bandhaH ma.  /

Page #255 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Eighth Chapter 205 Then, in the great hall of Maswan, surrounded by a deep
moat, adorned with white Kund gems, dark blue Mahaniil gems, red Padmarag gems,
bright Pushparag gems, and deep blue Garuda gems, the city of Lanka, naturally
beautiful, was further embellished by the devoted citizens, filled with wonder
and joy, at the arrival of their protector, the Rakshasa king, Dasanana.
Dasanana, the benevolent and generous ruler, entered his city, free from doubt,
like Indra himself.  As he entered, he enhanced the splendor of Lanka with
towering elephants like mountains, chariots adorned with jewels, resembling
grand palaces, with golden bridles that clinked and waved chamaras, colorful
flying machines that soared high into the sky, moon-like umbrellas, and flags
whose ends fluttered far and wide.  The sound of auspicious chants echoed from
the throngs of bards.  The vast sound of trumpets, mixed with the notes of the
veena, flute, and conch, filled the entire space and sky.  ||511-518|| Then,
those who were eager to see their lord, who had arrived in accordance with the
lineage, and who were adorned with beautiful clothes and ornaments, all the
citizens, accompanied by groups of captivating dancers, came before Dasanana,
holding offerings made of fruits, flowers, leaves, and jewels.  They bowed to
Dasanana, with the elders in front, and offered their salutations.  ||519-521||
Dasanana honored them all and dismissed them.  They all went to their homes,
praising his virtues.  ||522|| Then, Dasanana's house was filled with women,
whose minds were filled with curiosity and who were adorned with various
ornaments, eager to see him.  ||523|| Some of these women were coming to the
windows, their clothes loosened due to haste, and their ornaments were
disarranged due to the jostling.  ||524||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTama parva 205 atha mAsvanmahAzAlA gambhIraparikhAvRttAn  /
kundazubhairmahAnIlanIlairjAlakakukSiSu  // 511 //  panarAgArameruddhaH
kvacitpuSpamaNiprabhaiH  /  garutmamaNisaMkAzairanyatra nicitAM gRhaiH  // 512
//  zobhamAnAM nisargeNa punazca kRtabhUSaNAm  /  rakSonAthAgame bhaktaH
paurairadbhutasaMmadaiH  // 513 //  atyantamadhikAM kurvan zomAM
girinibhairgajaiH  /  mahAprAsAdasaMkAzaiH syandanai ratnaraJjitaiH  // 514 //
azvavRndaiH kvaNaddhamacakrakaizcalacAmaraiH  /  vimAnaiH
zikharArUDhadUrAkAzabahuprabhaiH  // 515 //  chatraiH
zazAGkasaMkAzairdhvajairuddhRtakoTibhiH  /  vandivRndArakaugheNa
kRtamaGgalanisvanaH  // 516 //  vINAveNuvimizreNa zaGkhanAdAnugAminA  /
tUryanAdena niHzeSa dinamoviditAtmanA  // 517 //  praviveza nijAmIzo laGkA
zaGkAvivarjitaH  /  tridazeza ivodAro dazAsyaH zAsitA hitaH  // 518 //  tato
gotrakramAyAtanAthadarzanalAlasAH  /  gRhItvAgha' phalaiH puSpaiH patrai
ratnaizca kalpitam  // 519 //  gRhItabhUSaNAtyantacAruvastrAdisaMpadaH  /
nRtyadbhirgaNikAsaGgharanvitA netrahAribhiH  // 520 //  sarve paurAH samAgatya
prayuktAzIgiro muhuH  /  AnarcuH sanamaskArA yathAvRddhapurassarAH  // 521 //
visarjitAzca te tena saMprAptapratimAnanAH  /  yathAsvaM nilayaM
jagmustadguNoktigatAnanAH  // 522 //  atha tadbhavanaM tasya
kautukavyAptabuddhimiH  /  nArIbhiH kRtabhUSAbhiH pUrita tadidRkSumiH  // 523 //
gavAkSAmimukhAH kAzcitvarAvinastavAsasaH  /
anyo'nyavAdhavicchinnamukkAhAravibhUSaNAH  // 524 //  athAnantara jisameM
bar3I-bar3I zAlAe~ dedIpyamAna ho rahI thIM, jo gambhIra parikhAse Avata thI, jo
jharokhoMmeM lage hue maNiyoMse kahIM to kundake samAna sapheda, kahIM mahAnIla
maNiyoMke samAna nIla. kahIM padmarAgamaNike samAna lAla, kahIM
pUSparAgamaNiyoMke samAna prabhAsvara aura kahIM garur3amaNiyoMke samAna gahare
nIla varNavAle mahaloMse vyApta thI  /  jo svabhAvase hI suzobhita thI phira
rAkSasoMke adhipati dazAnanake zubhAgamanake avasarapara AzcaryakArI harSase
bhare bhakta nAgarikajanoMke dvArA aura bhI adhika suzobhita kI gayI thI aisI
apanI laMkA nagarImeM hitakArI udAra zAsaka dazAnanane niHzaMka ho indrake
samAna praveza kiyaa| praveza karate samaya dazAnana, parvatoMke samAna U~ceU~ce
hAthiyoM, bar3e-bar3e mahaloMke samAna ratnoMse raMjita rathoM, jinakI lagAmake
svarNamayI challe zabda kara rahe the evaM jinake AjUbAjU camara Dhole jA rahe
the aise ghor3oM, jinake zikhara dUra taka AkAzameM cale gaye the aise
raMgabiraMge vimAnoM, candramAke samAna ujjvala chatroM, aura jinakA aMcala
AkAzameM dUra-dUra taka phaharA rahA thA aisI dhvajAoMse laMkAkI zobhAko atyanta
adhika bar3hA rahA thaa| uttamottama cAraNoMke jhuNDa maMgala zabdoMkA uccAraNa
kara rahe the| vINA, bA~surI aura zaMkhoMke zabdase mizrita turahIkI
vizAladhvanise samasta dizA aura AkAza vyApta ho rahe the  // 511518||
tadanantara kulakramase Agata svAmIke darzana karanekI jinakI lAlasA bar3ha rahI
thI, jinhoMne maSaNa tathA atyanta sundara vastrAdi sampadAe~ dhAraNa kara rakhI
thIM aura jo nRtya karatI huI nayanAbhirAma gaNikAoMke samUhase yukta the, aise
samasta puravAsI jana, phaloM-phUloM, pattoM aura ratnoMse nirmita argha lekara
bAra-bAra AzIrvAdakA uccAraNa karate hue dazAnanake samakSa aaye| una
puravAsiyoMne vRddhajanoMko apane Age kara rakhA thaa| unhoMne Ate hI dazAnanako
namaskAra kara usakI pUjA kI  // 519-521 /  /  dazAnanane sabakA sammAna kara
unheM vidA kiyA aura saba apane mukhoMse usIkA guNagAna karate hue apane-apane
ghara gaye  // 522 /  /  athAnantara jinakI buddhi kautukase vyApta ho rahI thI
aura jinhoMne taraha-tarahake AbhUSaNa dhAraNa kara rakhe the aisI usakI
darzanAbhilASI striyoMse dazAnanakA ghara bhara gayA  // 523 /  /  una
striyoMmeM kitanI hI striyA~ jharokhoMke sammukha A rahI thiiN| zIghratAke
kAraNa unake vastra khula rahe the aura parasparakI dhakkAdhUmIse unake 1.
gRhItA, ma.  /  2. AnartuH ma.  /  3. pratimAnatAH m.| 4. tvarA vizrasta ma.  /

Page #256 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Padma Purana  **Verse 525:**  The necklaces of the women were falling apart,
their breasts were heavy and they were pushing each other. The women were making
a lot of noise with their anklets and feet, as they moved around.  **Verse
526:**  "Mother, can't you see? Move aside, you are blocking my way!"  "Get out
of here, you don't belong here!"  These were the words being spoken by the
women.  **Verse 527:**  Their faces were blooming with joy, and they had
abandoned all other activities, their eyes fixed only on Dashaanan.  **Verse
528:**  Dashaanan, the vanquisher of Yama, resided in his beautiful palace,
adorned with jewels, like the jewel of Lanka, along with his inner court,
enjoying his happiness.  **Verse 529:**  The other Vidyaadhara kings, like the
Devas, were also experiencing great joy and remained in their respective places.
**Verse 530:**  Gautama Swami said to King Shrenik, "O Shrenik! Those who
perform pure actions, obtain various kinds of wealth, including jewels, their
powerful enemies are destroyed, and they attain glorious fame that spreads
throughout the world."  **Verse 531:**  "The five senses are the most powerful
enemies. Those who perform pure actions, even these powerful enemies lose their
memory in all three worlds, meaning they are destroyed to the point that they
are not even remembered. Similarly, the group of external enemies constantly bow
down at the feet of those who perform pure actions. In essence, both internal
and external enemies are destroyed for those who perform pure actions."  **Verse
532:**  "Therefore, O men of noble minds, it is not right to worship the enemies
in the form of worldly desires. Those who worship them fall into the abyss of
hell, filled with darkness, and do not attain the supreme state illuminated by
the rays of the sun."  **End of the Eighth Chapter of the Padma Charita,
composed by Ravishenaacharya, known as Aarsha, which narrates the story of
Dashaanan.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANeM pInastanakRtAnyonyapIDanAJcalakuNDalAH  /  raNetkAri
tulAkoTivAcAlacaraNadvayAH  //  525 //  kiM na pazyasi hA mAtaH pArzvato bhava
durbhage  /  dehi mArga vrajAmuSmAdapi nAri na zobhale  // 526||
nigadatyevamAdIni vikacAmburuhAnanAH  /  muktvA vyApArajAtAni tamaikSanta
purAGganAH  // 527 //  puracUDAmaNI gehe svasmin satkRtabhUSaNe  /  sukhaM
sAntaH purastasthau kRtAntasya vimardakaH  //  528  //  zeSA api yathAsthAnaM
sthitA vidyAdharAdhipAH  /  prApnuvanto mahAnandaM satataM tridazA iva  //  529
//  drutavilambitavRttam vividharatnasamAgamasaMpadaH prabala
zatrusamUlavimardanam  /  sakalaviSTapagAmi yazaH sitaM bhavati
nirmitanirmalakarmaNAm  // 530 //  ripava ugratarA viSayAhvayA apanayanti
bhuvakhitaye smRtim  /  bahiravasthitazatrugaNaH punaH satatamAnamete
padanantaram  // 531  //  iti vicintya na yuktamupAsituM viSayazatrugaNaM
purucetasaH  /  avaTameti janastamasA tataM na tu raveH kiraNairavabhAsitam  //
532 //  ityArSe raviSeNAcAryaprokte padmacarite dazagrIvAbhidhAnaM nAmASTamaM
parva  //  8  //  206 motiyoMke hAra tathA anya AbhUSaNa TUTa-TUTakara gira rahe
the || 524 || kitanI hI striyA~ apane sthUla stanoMse eka dUsareko pIr3A pahu~cA
rahI thIM aura usase unake kuNDala hila rahe the  /  kitanI hI striyoMke donoM
paira runajhuna karate hue nUpuroMse jhaMkRta ho rahe the || 525 || koI strI
sAmane khar3I dUsarI se kaha rahI thI ki he mAtA ! kyA dekha nahIM rahI ho ? arI
dubhaMge ! jarA bagalameM ho jA, mujhe bhI rAstA de de  /  koI kaha rahI thI arI
bhalI Adamina ! tU yahA~se calI jA, tU yahA~ zobhA nahIM detI || 526 || ityAdi
zabda ve striyA~ kara rahIM thIM  /  usa samaya unake mukhakamala harSase khila
rahe the  /  ve anya saba kAma chor3akara eka dazAnanako hI dekha rahI thIM
||527|| isa prakAra yamakA mAnamardana karanevAlA dazAnana, laMkA nagarI meM
sthita nUr3AmaNike samAna manohara apane susajjita mahala meM antaHpura sahita
sukhase rahane lagA || 528|| isake sivAya anya vidyAdhara rAjA bhI devoMke
samAna nirantara mahAAnandako prApta hue yathAyogya sthAna meM rahane lage ||
529 || gautamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he zreNika ! jo nirmala kArya
karate haiM unheM nAnA prakArake ratnAdi sampadAoMkI prApti hotI hai, unake
prabala zatruoMkA samUha naSTa hotA hai aura samasta saMsAra meM phailanevAlA
ujjvala yaza unheM prApta hotA hai ||530|| paMcendriyoMke viSaya sabase prabala
zatru haiM so jo nirmala kArya karate haiM unake ye prabala zatru bhI tInoM
lokoMmeM apanI smRti naSTa kara dete haiM arthAt isa prakAra naSTa ho jAte haiM
ki unakA smaraNa bhI nahIM rhtaa| isI prakAra bAhyameM sthita honevAlA jo
zatruoM kA samUha hai vaha bhI nirmala kArya karanevAle manuSyoMke caraNoMke
samIpa nirantara namaskAra karatA rahatA hai  /  bhAvArtha - nirmala kArya
karanevAle manuSyoMke antaraMga aura bahiraMga donoM hI zatru naSTa ho jAte haiM
||531|| aisA vicArakara he zreSTha cittake dhAraka puruSo ! viSayarUpI
zatrusamUhakI upAsanA karanA ucita nahIM hai  /  kyoMki unakI upAsanA karanevAlA
manuSya andhakArase yukta narakarUpI gartameM par3atA hai na ki sUryakI
kiraNoMse prakAzamAna uttama sthAnako prApta hotA hai  /  / 532 //  isa prakAra
ArSa nAma se prasiddha raviSeNAcAryanirmita padmacarita granthameM dazAnanakA
kathana karanevAlA aSTama parva samApta huA  //  8  //  O 1. raNatkari ma.  /
2. pure cUDAmaNI ma, purazcUDAmaNI ba  /  3. zeSAzcApi ma  /  4. suvastunaye
ma., ba.  /  5. mAnayate ma.  /  6. yatataM naram ma., ba.  /

Page #257 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Chapter  And the Sun King begot a son named Bali from his queen
Chandramalini, a woman full of virtues. || 1 || He was always benevolent,
virtuous, wise, skillful, patient, blessed with fortune, valiant, knowledgeable,
adorned with arts, possessed of right vision, immensely strong, a master of
statecraft, a hero, compassionate, learned, radiant, and endowed with great
brilliance. || 2-3 || Just as the birth of excellent sandalwood is rare in the
world, so too is the birth of exceptional men like Bali. || 4 || Bali, with his
doubts dispelled, was devoted to the worship of all the Jina images, with pure
devotion. || 5 || He could circumambulate Jambudvipa, surrounded by four oceans,
thrice in a moment and return to his city of Kishkindha. || 6 || Bali, with his
extraordinary prowess, was a destroyer of the enemy forces, like the moon
blossoming the lotus-like eyes of the citizens, and he was always free from
doubt. || 7 || In the beautiful city of Kishkindha, adorned with colorful
palaces and gateways, filled with learned men, and teeming with elephants and
horses, and bustling with various markets, Bali enjoyed himself just as Indra,
adorned with a garland of jewels, enjoys himself in the heavenly abode of
Aishana. || 8-9 ||   Bali had a younger brother named Sugriva, who was also a
valiant hero, endowed with a charming form. || 10 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navamaM parva atha sUryarajAH putraM bAlisaMjJamajIjanat  /  indu
mAlinyabhikhyAyAM guNasaMpUrNayoSiti  //  1  //  paropakAriNaM nityaM tathA
zIlayutaM budhaim  /  dakSaM dhIraM zriyA yuktaM zUraM jJAnasamanvitam  // 2 //
kalAkalApasaMyuktaM saimyagdRSTiM mahAbalam  /  rAjanItividaM vIraM
kRpArdrIkRtacetasam  //  vidyAsamUhasaMpanaM kAntimantaM sutejarsam  // 3 //  11
12 viralastAdRzAM loke puruSANAM samudbhavaH  /  candanAnAmivodAraH prabhAvaH
prathitAtmanAm  // 4 //  samastajinabimbAnAM namaskArArthamudyataH  /
trikAlatIrNaM saMdeho bhaktyA yukto'yudArayA  // 5 //  catuHsamudraparyantaM
jambUdvIpaM kSaNena yaH  /  triH parikSipya kiSkindhaM nagaraM punarAgamat  // 6
//  parAkramAH zatrupakSasya mardakaH  /  pauranetrakumudvatyAH zazAGkaH
zaGkayojjhitaH  // 7 //  kiSkindha nagare ramye citraprAsAdatoraNe  /
vidvajjanasamAkIrNe dvipavAjivarAkule  // 8 //
nAnAsaMvyavahArAbhirApaNAlIbhirAkule  /  reme kalpe tathaizAne ratnamAlaH
surottamaH  //  9  //  anukramAcca tasyAbhUt sugrIvAmikhyayAnujaH  /  vIro dhIro
manojJena yukto rUpeNa saMnayaH  //  10  //  athAnantara sUryarajane apanI
candramAlinI nAmaka guNavatI rAnImeM bAlI nAmakA putra utpanna kiyA  // 1 //
vaha putra paropakArI thA, nirantara zIlavratase yukta rahatA thA, vidvAn thA,
kuzala thA, dhIra thA, lakSmIse yukta thA, zUra-vIra thA, jJAnavAn thA, kalAoMke
samUha se yukta thA, samyagdRSTi thA, mahAbalavAn thA, rAjanItikA jAnakAra thA,
vIra thA, dayAlu thA, vidyAoMke samUhase yukta thA, kAntimAn thA aura uttama
tejase yukta thA  // 2- 3 || jisa prakAra lokameM utkRSTa candanakI utpatti
virala arthAt kahIM-kahIM hI hotI hai usI prakAra bAlI jaise utkRSTa puruSoMkA
janma bhI virala arthAt kahIM-kahIM hotA hai  // 4 //  jisakA samasta sandeha
dUra ho gayA thA aisA bAlI utkRSTa bhaktise yukta hokara tInoM hI kAla samasta
jina pratimAoM kI vandanA karaneke lie udyata rahatA thA  //  5  //  jisakI
cAroM dizA meM samudra ghirA huA hai aise jambUdvIpakI vaha kSaNa bharameM tIna
pradakSiNAe~ dekara apane kiSkindha nagara meM vApasa A jAtA thA || 6 || isa
prakArake adbhuta parAkramakA AdhArabhUta bAlI zatruoMke pakSakA mardana
karanevAlA thA, puravAsI logoMke netrarUpI kumudiniyoMko vikasita karane ke lie
candramAke samAna thA aura nirantara zaMkAse dUra rahatA thA ||7|| jahA~ raMga-
biraMge mahaloMke toraNadvAra the, jo vidvajjanoMse vyApta thA, ekase eka
bar3hakara hAthiyoM aura ghor3oMse yukta thA, aura aneka prakArake vyApAroMse
yukta bAjAroMse sahita thA aise manohara kiSkindha nagara meM vaha bAlI isa
prakAra krIr3A karatA thA jisa prakAra ki aizAna svarga meM ratnoMkI mAlA
dhAraNa karanevAlA indra krIr3A kiyA karatA hai  //  8-9  //  anukrama se bAlI
sugrIva nAmakA choTA bhAI utpanna huA  /  sugrIva bhI atyanta dhIra vIra, 1.
sUryarajA ma.  /  sUryarajaH kha  /  2. candramAlinya -ma.  /  3. dayAzIla ma.
/  yathAzIla -ma.  /  4. budhAH ka. 5. zUraM jJAnasamanvitam ma  /  6.
samyagdRSTi mahAbalam ma.  /  7. vidyAsamUhasaMpannaM kAntimantaM sutejasam ka.,
kha. ma.  /  8. eSa zlokaH SaTpAdAtmakaH, rAmAyaNamahAbhAratAdiSu SaTpAdAtmakA
api anuSTupazlokA dRzyante  /  9. puruSANAM ca samudbhavaH ma.  /  10. trikAle
ka.  /  11. triH parItya ma., ma pustake eSa zlokaH 'trikAlatIrNa saMdeha -
ityArabhya - punarAgamat paryantaM SaTpAdAtmako vartate  /  12.
zatrupakSavimardakaH kha  /

Page #258 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  208 In the Papuraana, Bali and Sugreeva, the ornaments
of the Kishkindha lineage, are to be known.  Their virtues, headed by humility,
were their ornaments. ||11|| After Sugreeva, a daughter named Shree-Prabha was
born, who was unparalleled in beauty on earth. She appeared like Shri (Lakshmi)
herself. ||12|| In the city of Kishku-Pramodanagara, Rishyaraja, the younger
brother of Suryaraja, had two sons, Nal and Neel, born to him by the queen
Harikanta. ||13|| These two sons brought joy to their kin, instilled fear in
their enemies, were adorned with noble qualities, and were like ornaments to
Kishku-Pramodanagara. ||14|| The wise Suryaraja, skilled in appropriate actions,
seeing that his son had attained the age of youth and was capable of upholding
the family tradition, renounced the kingdom for the sake of upholding Dharma and
gave it to Bali, making Sugreeva the crown prince. ||15-16|| Suryaraja, a
virtuous man, considered his kin and others as equal, and realizing the world of
four births (humans, animals, gods, and hell beings) to be afflicted by great
suffering, became a disciple of the Muni named Pihithamoha. He followed the
conduct of the Jina, as described by the Munis. He was free from desire even in
his body. His heart was as pure as the sky, he was free from attachment like the
wind, devoid of anger, and wandered the earth with the desire for liberation.
||17-19|| Then, Bali took as his wife a virtuous woman named Dhruva. Due to her
virtues, she was the foremost among his hundred wives. ||20|| Bali, adorned with
a beautiful crown bearing the mark of a monkey, whose commands were obeyed with
respect by the celestial kings, enjoyed great prosperity with queen Dhruva.
||21|| Meanwhile, Kharadushan, the son of Meghaprabha, who was constantly
seeking deceit, desired to abduct Chandranakha, the sister of Dashaanan
(Ravana). ||22|| From the moment Kharadushan saw Chandranakha, whose entire body
was beautiful, his body was consumed by lust. ||23||  1. Rupeá¹a pratima m. 2.
Samataá¸¥ k. 3. Yoá¹£itÄ m. 4. Chandranakhaá¹.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 208 papapurANe vijJeyau bAlisugrIvau kiSkindhakulabhUSaNau  /  tayostu
bhUSaNIbhUtA vinayapramukhA guNAH  // 11 //  sugrIvAnantarA kanyA 'rUpeNApratimA
bhuvi  /  zrIprabheti samudbhUtA kramazaH zrIriva svayam  // 12 //
kiSkupramodanagare harikAntAkhyayoSiti  /  kramAdRkSarajAH putrau
nalanIlAvajIjanat  // 13 //  vitIrNasvajanAnandau ripuzaGkAvitAriNau  /
udAttaguNasaMmArau bhUtau tau kiSkumaNDanau  // 14 //  yauvanazriyamAlokya
sutasya sthitipAlinIm  /  viSamizrAnnasadRzAnviditvA viSayAn budhaH  // 15 //
vitIrya bAlaye rAjyaM dharmapAlanakAraNam  /  sugrIvAya ca sacceSTo
yuvarAjapadaM kRtI  // 16 //  avagamya paraM svaM ca jana sAmyena sajanaH  /
caturgati jagajjJAtvA mahAduHkhanipIDitam  // 17 //  muneH pihitamohasya ziSyaH
sUryarajA abhUt  /  yathoktacaraNAdhAraH zarIre'pi gataspRhaH  // 18 //
nabhovadamalasvAntaH saGgamuktaH samIravat  /  vijahAra sa niSkrodho dharaNyAM
muktilAlasaH  // 19 //  atha bAledhaMvA nAmnA sAdhvI pANigRhItyabhat  /
aGganAnAM zatasyApa prAdhAnyaM yA guNodayAt  // 20 //  tayA saha mahaizvarya
so'nvabhUcAruvibhramaH  /  zrIvAnarAGkamukuTaH pUjitAjJaH khagAdhipaiH  // 21 //
atrAntare chalAnveSI meghaprabhazarIrajaH  /  hartumicchati tAM kanyA lakezasya
sahodarAm  // 22 //  yadaiva tena sA dRSTA sarvagAnamanoharA  /  tadA
prabhRtyayaM dehamadhattAnaGgapIDitam  // 23 //  nItijJa evaM manohara rUpase
yukta thA  // 10 //  bAlI aura sugrIva-donoM hI bhAI kiSkindha nagarake
kulabhUSaNa the aura vinaya Adi guNa una donoMke AbhUSaNa the  // 11 //
sugrIvake bAda zrIprabhA nAmakI kanyA utpanna huI jo pRthvImeM rUpase anupama
thI tathA sAkSAt zrI arthAt lakSmIke samAna jAna par3atI thI  // 12 //
sUryarajakA choTA bhAI RkSaraja kiSkupramodaM nAmaka nagarameM rahatA thaa| so
usane vahAM harikAntA nAmaka rAnImeM kramase nala aura nIla nAmaka do putra
utpanna kiye  /  / 13 /  /  ye donoM hI pUtra AtmIya janoMko Ananda pradAna
karate the, zatruoMko bhaya utpanna karate the, utkRSTa guNoMse yukta the aura
kiSkupramoda nagarake mAno AbhUSaNa hI the  // 14 //  vidvAn, kuzala evaM
samIcIna ceSTAoMko dhAraNa karanevAle sUryarajane jaba dekhA ki putrako yovana
lakSmI kula-maryAdAkA pAlana karanemeM samartha ho gayI hai, taba usane
paMcendriyoMke viSayoMko viSamizrita annake samAna tyAjya, samajhakara dharma
rakSAkA kAraNabhUta rAjya bAlIke lie de diyA aura sugrIvako yuvarAja banA diyA
// 15-16 /  /  satpuruSa sUryaraja svajana aura parijanako samAna jAna tathA
caturgati rUpa saMsArako mahAduHkhoMse pIr3ita anubhava kara pihitamoha nAmaka
munirAjakA ziSya ho gyaa| jinendra bhagavAnne muniyoMkA jaisA cAritra batalAyA
hai sUryaraja vaise hI cAritrakA AdhAra thaa| vaha zarIrameM bhI niHspRha thaa|
usakA hRdaya AkAzake samAna nirmala thA, vaha vAyuke samAna niHsaMga thA,
krodharahita thA aura kevala muktikI hI lAlasA rakhatA huA pRthivImeM vihAra
karatA thA  // 17-19 /  /  /  athAnantara bAlIkI dhruvA nAmakI zIlavatI strI
thii| vaha dhruvA apane guNoMke abhyudayase usakI anya sau striyoMmeM
pradhAnatAko prApta thI  // 20 //  jisake mukuTameM vAnarakA cihna thA, tathA
vidyAdhara rAjA jisakI AjJA bar3e sammAnake sAtha mAnate the aisA sundara
vibhramako dhAraNa karane vAlA bAlI usa dhruvA rAnIke sAtha mahAn aizvaryakA
anubhava karatA thA  //  21  //  isI bIcameM meghaprabhakA putra kharadUSaNa jo
nirantara chalakA anveSaNa karatA thA dazAnanakI bahana candranakhAkA apaharaNa
karanA cAhatA thA  /  / 22 /  /  jisakA sarva zarIra sundara thA aisI
candranakhAko jisa samayase kharadUSaNane dekhA thA usI samayase usakA zarIra
kAmase pIr3ita ho gayA thA  /  / 23 /  /  1. rUpeNa pratimA ma. 2. samataH ka.
/  3. yoSitA m.| 4. candranakhAm  /

Page #259 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Ninth Chapter  The ten-headed king, Ravana, who was known to crush his
enemies, went to steal the daughter named Tanudari, born from the queen of the
Pravarajya, Avali. ||24|| Knowing that Lanka was devoid of the ten-headed king,
the skilled Kharadushana, proficient in both Vidya and Maya, easily abducted
Chandranakha. ||25|| What could the valiant Bhanukarna and Vibhishana do in
Lanka, when the enemy, using his Maya, was abducting the girl? ||26|| Seeing
that the army following him could not capture him alive in battle, Bhanukarna
and Vibhishana returned. ||27|| Hearing this news, the son of Kaikasi, Ravana,
became furious and his eyes became unbearable to look at. ||28|| Then, driven by
pride, he was ready to go back, even though the sweat from the fatigue of his
journey had not dried. ||29|| He took only a sword, not seeking help from anyone
else, for in battle, the only true companion of the powerful is the sword.
||30|| As Ravana was about to leave, Mandodari, who clearly understood the state
of the world, joined her hands and said, ||31|| "My Lord, it is certain that the
girl is meant for another, for that is the way of the world." ||32||
Kharadushana has fourteen thousand celestial beings, all powerful and never
retreating from battle. ||33|| Besides, he has mastered many thousands of Vidya,
haven't you heard this from the people? ||34|| If a fierce battle ensues between
you two, both equally powerful, there will be doubt about who will win. ||35||
Even if he is killed somehow, the girl, tainted by the act of abduction, cannot
be given to another, she will only become a widow. ||36|| Moreover, the sun's
rays have returned to your city, and the moon, known as "Alankaro-daya," shines
brightly in the sky. ||37||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navamaM parva AvalyAM pravarAjjAtAM kanyAM nAmnA tandurIm  /  gataH 'stenayituM
yAvadyaimasya parimardakaH  // 24 //  jJAtvAtha' niSprabhistAvallaGkAM
vItadazAnanAm  /  sukhaM candranakhAM jahe vidyAmAyApravINadhIH  //  25 //
zUrau kiM kurutAmatra bhAnu karNavibhISaNau  /  yatrArizchidramAsAdya kanyAM
harati mAyayA  //  26  //  4 pRSThatazca tataH saiyaM gacchattAbhyAM nivartitam
/  jIvanneSa raNe zakto gRhItuM neti cetasA  // 27 //  zuzrAva cAgato vArtAM
tAdRzIM kaikasIsutaH  /  jagAma ca 'durIkSyatvaM kopAvezAt subhISaNAt  // 28 //
tata AgamanodbhUtazramaprasvedabinduSu  /  sthiteSveva punargantumudyato
mAnacoditaH  //  29  //  sahAyaM khaDgamekaM ca jaggrAhAnyaparAGmukhaH  /
antaraGgaH sa evaikaH saMgrAme vIryazAlinAm  // 30 //  tAvanmandodarI baddhvA
karadvayasaroruham  /  vyajJApayaditi vyaktajJAtalaukikasaMsthitiH  //  31  //
kanyA nAma prabho deyA parasmAyeva nizcayAt  /  utpattireva tAsAM hi tAdRzI
sArvalaukikI  // 32 //  khecarANAM sahasrANi santi tasya caturdaza  /  ye vIrya
kRtasaMnAhAH samarAdanivartinaH  //  33  //  bahUnyasya sahasrANi vidyAnAM
darpazAlinaH  /  siddhAnIti na kiM lokAdbhavatA zravaNe kRtam  // 34 //
pravRtte dAruNe yuddhe bhavatoH samazauryayoH  /  saMdeha eva jAyeta
jayasyAnyataraM prati  // 35 //  kathaMcicca hate'pyasmin kanyAharaNadUSitA  /
anyasmai naiva vizrANyA kevalaM ' vidhavIbhavet  // 36 //  kiM ca sUryarajomukte
tvatpure 'pratyavasthitam  /  alaMkArodaye nAmnA candrodaranabhazvaram  // 37 //
eka dina yamakA mAna mardana karanevAlA dazAnana rAjA pravarakI AvalI rAnIse
samutpanna tanUdarI nAmA kanyAkA apaharaNa karaneke lie gayA thA ||24|| so vidyA
aura mAyA donoM meM hI kuzala kharadUSaNane laMkAko dazAnanase rahita jAnakara
candranakhAkA sukhapUrvaka - 3 - anAyAsa hI apaharaNa kara liyA ||25|| yadyapi
zUravIra bhAnukarNa aura vibhISaNa donoM hI laMkA meM vidyamAna the para jaba
zatru mAyAse chidra pAkara kanyAkA apaharaNa kara rahA thA taba ve kyA karate ?
||26|| usake pIche jo senA jA rahI thI bhAnukarNa aura vibhISaNane use yaha
socakara lauTA liyA ki yaha jindA yuddha meM pakar3A nahIM jA sakatA ||27||
laMkA meM vApasa Anepara dazAnanane jaba yaha bAta sunI to bhayaMkara krodha se
vaha durIkSya ho gayA arthAt usakI ora dekhanA kaThina ho gayA ||28||
tadanantara bAhara se Aneke kAraNa utpanna parizrama se usake zarIrapara pasIne
kI jo bU~deM utpanna huI thIM ve sUkha nahIM pAyI thIM, ki abhimAna se prerita
ho vaha puna: jAneke lie udyata ho gayA ||29|| usane anya kisIkI apekSA na kara
sahAyatA ke lie sirpha eka talavAra apane sAtha lI, so ThIka hI hai kyoMki
yuddhameM zaktizAlI manuSyoMkA antaraMga sahAyaka vahI eka talavAra hotI hai
||30|| jyoMhI dazAnana jAneke lie udyata huA tyoMhI spaSTa rUpase lokakI
sthitiko jAnanevAlI mandodarI donoM hastakamala jor3akara isa prakAra nivedana
karane lagI ||31|| ki he nAtha! nizcayase kanyA dUsareke lie hI dI jAtI hai
kyoMki samasta saMsArameM unakI utpatti hI isa prakArakI hotI hai ||32||
kharadUSaNa ke pAsa caudaha hajAra vidyAdhara haiM jo atyadhika zaktizAlI tathA
yuddhase kabhI pIche nahIM haTanevAle haiM ||33|| isake sivAya usa ahaMkArIko
kaI hajAra vidyAe~ siddha huI haiM yaha kyA Apane logoMse nahIM sunA ? ||34||
Apa donoM hI samAna zaktike dhAraka ho ataH donoMke bIca bhayaMkara yuddha
honepara eka dUsare ke prati vijayakA sandeha hI rahegA ||35|| yadi kisI taraha
vaha mArA bhI gayA to haraNake doSase dUSita kanyA dUsareke lie nahIM dI jA
sakegI, use to mAtra vidhavA hI rahanA par3egA ||36|| isake sivAya dUsarI bAta
yaha hai ki tumhAre 1. corayitum  /  gataste nayitum ma  /  2. rAvaNaH  /  3.
kharadUSaNaH  /  4. gataM ma.  /  5. gacchatAbhyAM ma  /  6. durIkSatvaM ma.  /
7. avidhavA vidhavA saMpadyamAnA bhavediti vidhavIbhavet  /  vidhavA bhavet ma.,
ba. vidhavIkRtA kha.  /  8. pratyavasthitaH ba.  /  27 209.

Page #260 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, It is said that Kharadushana, a mighty warrior, resides
with your sister in the city of Padmapura. Your family has benefited from him.
||38|| Then Dashaanan said, "My dear, I am not afraid of war. However, I am
abiding by your words due to other reasons." ||39|| Then, due to the workings of
fate, Chandrodara, the Vidyadhara, met his end. His pregnant wife, Anuradha, was
left without shelter and, devoid of the power of knowledge, wandered aimlessly
in the forest like a deer. ||40-41|| Wandering, she reached the mountain called
Manikant. There, on a smooth rock covered with soft leaves and flowers, she gave
birth to a beautiful son. ||42|| Thereafter, the forest-dwelling mother, whose
mind was constantly troubled and whose life was sustained by the hope of her
son, raised him gradually. ||43|| Since the enemy had attacked the son while he
was still in the womb, the mother named him Viradhit, meaning "attacked," as he
was deprived of worldly pleasures. ||44|| Just as no one respects a hair that
has fallen from its place on the head, no one on earth respected Viradhit.
||45|| Unable to retaliate against his enemy, he harbored resentment in his
heart. Following traditional customs, he wandered through the lands he desired.
||46|| He enjoyed himself on the peaks of mountains, in beautiful forests, and
in extraordinary places where the gods visited. ||47|| He wandered, observing
the exploits of valiant men in battles filled with elephants and other
creatures, amidst beautiful banners, umbrellas, and other adornments. ||48||
Meanwhile, Dashaanan, resplendent and enjoying great pleasures, resided in the
city of Lanka like Indra himself. ||49|| Bali, a powerful warrior, served by
extraordinary knowledge, defied his orders. ||50|| Then Dashaanan sent a wise
messenger to Bali. Carrying the pride of his master, the messenger went to Bali
and said, "Dashaanan...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe nirvAsyAsau sthitaH sArdhaM tava svastrA mahAbalaH  /
upakAritvametasmAtsaMprAptaH svajanaH sa te  //  38  //  tato dazAnano'vAdIt
priye yuddhAd bibhemi na  /  sthitastvadvacane kintu zeSairevAsmi kAraNaiH  //
39 //  atha candrodare kAlaM prApte karmaniyogataH  /  vanitAsyAnura/dhAkhyA
varAkI zaraNojjhitA  // 40 //  itazvetazca vidyAyA balenAtha vivarjitA  /
antarvatnI vane bhIme babhrAma hariNI yathA  //  41  //  asUta ca sutaM kAntaM
maNikAntamahIdhare  /  mRdupallavapuSpaughacchanne samazilAtale  // 42 //
tato'sau kramato vRddhiM nIto vipinavAsayA  /  udvignacittayA mAtrA
tadAzAsthitajIvayA  //  43  //  yato'yaM pratipakSeNa garbha eva virAdhitaH  /
tato virAdhitAbhikhyAM prApito bhogavarjitaH  // 44 //  na tasya gauravaM cakre
kazcidapyavanau naraH  /  pracyutasya nijasthAnAt kezasyavottamAGgataH  // 45 //
pratikartumazakosit vairaM cittena dhArayan  /  AcArAgatavRttistho dezAn paryATa
vAJchitAn  // 46 //  reme varSadharAgreSu kAnaneSu ca cAruSu  /
tathAtizayadezeSu gIrvANAgamaneSu ca ||47 || dhvajacchatrAdiramyeSu saMkuleSu
gajAdibhiH  /  vIrANAM vibhramaM pazyan saMgrAmeSu samaM suraiH || 48  //
nagaryA matha laGkAyAM surezasyeva tiSThataH  /  parAn prApnuvato bhogAn
dazavaktrasya bhAsvataH ||49| pratikUlitavAnAjJAM vAlirbalasamanvitaH  /
vidyAbhiradbhutaM karma kurvatIbhirupAsitaH ||50|| dazAsyena tato dUtaH
preSito'smai mahAmatiH  /  jagAda vAnarAdhIzaM svAmino mAnamudvahan  // 51 //
210 alaMkArodaya nagarako jaba rAjA sUryarajane chor3A thA taba candrodara nAmA
vidyAdhara tumhArI icchA ke pratikUla usa nagara meM jama gayA thA so use
nikAlakara mahAbalavAn kharadUSaNa tumhArI bahana ke sAtha usameM raha rahA hai
isa prakAra tumhAre svajana usase upakArako bhI prApta hue haiM ||37-38 || yaha
kahakara jaba mandodarI cupa ho rahI taba dazAnanane kahA ki he priye ! yadyapi
maiM yuddhase nahIM DaratA hU~ to bhI anya kAraNoM ko dekhatA huA maiM tumhAre
vacanoMmeM sthita hU~ arthAt tumhAre kahe anusAra usakA pIchA nahIM karatA hU~
||39|| athAnantara karmoMke niyogase candrodara vidyAdhara kAlako prApta huA so
usakI dIna-hIna anurAdhA nAmakI garbhavatI strI zaraNarahita ho tathA vidyAke
balase zUnya ho hariNIkI nAMI bhayaMkara vanameM idhara-udhara bhaTakane lagI
||40 - 41|| vaha bhaTakatI bhaTakatI maNikAnta nAmaka parvatapara pahu~cI  /
vahA~ usane komala pallava aura phUloM ke samUhase AcchAdita samazilAtalapara
eka sundara putra utpanna kiyA || 42|| tadanantara jisakA citta nirantara
udvigna rahatA thA, aura putrakI AzAse hI jisakA jIvana sthita thA aisI usa
vanavAsinI mAtAne kramakramase usa putrako bar3A kiyA ||43|| cU~ki zatrune usa
putrako garbhameM hI virAdhita kiyA thA isalie bhogoM se rahita usa putrakA
mAtAne virAdhita nAma rakhA || 44 || jisa prakAra apane sthAna - mastaka se
cyuta hue kezakA koI Adara nahIM karatA usI prakAra usa virAdhitakA pRthivIpara
koI bhI Adara nahIM karatA thA || 45|| vaha zatruse badalA lene meM samartha
nahIM thA isalie manameM hI vaira dhAraNa karatA thA aura kucha paramparAgata
AcArakA pAlana karatA huA icchita dezoM meM ghUmatA rahatA thA ||46|| vaha
kulAcaloM ke Upara, manohara vanoM meM tathA jahA~ devoMkA Agamana hotA thA aise
atizayapUrNa sthAnoM meM krIr3A kiyA karatA thA ||47|| vaha dhvajA, chatra Adise
sundara tathA hAthiyoM Adi vyApta devoMke sAtha honevAle yuddhoM meM vIra
manuSyoMkI ceSTAe~ dekhatA huA ghUmatA phiratA thA || 48 || athAnantara utkRSTa
bhogoMko prApta karatA huA dedIpyamAna dazAnana laMkAnagarI meM indrake samAna
rahatA thA || 49 || so Azcaryajanaka kArya karanevAlI vidyAoMse sevita balavAn
bAlI usakI AjJAkA atikrama karane lagA ||50 //  tadanantara dazAnanane bAlIke
pAsa mahAbuddhimAn dUta bhejA  /  so svAmIke garvako dhAraNa karatA huA dUta
bAlIke pAsa jAkara kahane lagA ki dazAnana isa 1. -nurodhAkhyA ma  /  2 ato'yaM
ma  /  3. vRttastho kha.  /

Page #261 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The ninth chapter  In the land of Bharata, I stand unmatched, a mighty warrior,
possessing immense strength, radiant brilliance, and a master of strategy. I am
blessed with great resources, wield a formidable weapon, and am destined for
greatness. The slayer of demons, Dasanana, commands you. ||52-53||  I, who had
vanquished Yama, the enemy of your father, the Sun-born, and established him as
the king of Kishkindha in the lineage of the Vanaras, ||54||  You, forgetting
the great favor done to you, are acting against your father. O virtuous one,
this is not right. ||55||  I will shower upon you the same love as your father,
or even more. Come to me today and pay your respects, so that you may dwell in
comfort. ||56||  Or, give me your sister, Sri Prabha, to be my wife. By forming
a bond with me, everything will become auspicious for you. ||57||  Seeing Bali
turn away from paying respects to Dasanana, the messenger, his face contorted
with anger, spoke again. ||58||  What is the point of saying more? Listen, O
Shakha-mriga! Hear my firm words. You are merely a pretender to a small fortune.
||59||  Prepare yourself to either give or take a weapon. Quickly, either take a
chamara (fly whisk) and become a servant to Dasanana, or take the direction-
mandala (the compass) and flee to the ends of the earth. ||60||  Either bow your
head or bend your bow. Either heed my command or place the unbearable string of
the bow, which can give you life, in your ears. ||61||  Either place the dust
from my feet on your head or wear a helmet to protect your head. Either fold
your hands in supplication or gather a large herd of elephants to beg for mercy.
||62||  Either release an arrow or embrace the earth. Either take a staff or a
garland. Either look into the nails of my feet or look into the mirror of my
sword. ||63||  Then, his mind inflamed by the messenger's harsh words, the
valiant warrior, known as Vyagravilambi, spoke. ||64||  O messenger! What has
Bali, the king of the earth, who is unmatched in his valor, done to you, that
you speak so harshly? ||65||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navamaM pavaM ananyasadRzaH kSetre bharate'smin pratApavAn  /  mahAbalo
mahAtejAH zrImAnnayavizAradaH ||52 || mahAsAdhanasaMpanna ugradaNDo mahodayaH  /
AjJApayati devastvAM zatrumardo dazAnanaH  //  53  //  mArAtiM samudvAsya
bhavato'rkarajAH pitA  /  yayA kiSkindhanAthatve sthApito vAnarAnvaye  // 54 //
vismRtya sukRtaM kRtyaM sa tvaM janayituH paramaM  /  kuruSe pratyavasthAnamiti
sAdho na yujyate  //  55  //  pituste sadRzIM prItimadhikAM vA karomyaham |
adyApyehi praNAmaM me kuru sthAtuM yathAsukham  // 56 //  svasAraM ca
prayacchemAM zrIprabhAkhyAM mayA saha  /  saMbandhaM prApya te sarvaM bhaviSyati
sukhAvaham ||57|| ityukte vimukhaM jJAtvA baliM praNamanaM prati  /  Ananasya
vikAreNa dUtaH punarudAharat  // 58 //  kimatra bahunoktena kuru zAkhAmRga
zrutau  /  madIyaM nizcitaM vAkyamalpalakSmIviDambiH  //  99  //  kuru sajjau
karaM dAtumAdAtuM vAyudhaM karau  /  gRhANa caumaraM zIghraM kakubhAM vA
kadambakam || 60  //  ziro namaya cApaM vA nayAjJAM karNapUratAm  /  maurvI vA
dussahArAvAmAtmajIvitadAyinIm  //  61  //  matpAdajaM rajo mUrdhni
zirastramathavA kuru  /  ghaTayAJjalimudvRtya kariNAM vA mahAcayam ||62 ||
vimuJceSaM dharitrIM vA majaikaM vetrakuntayoH  /  pazya me'Gghrinakhe
vaktramathavA khaDgadarpaNe  /  /  63  /  /  tataH paruSavAkyena
dUtasyodrdhUtamAnasaH  /  nAmnA vyAghravilambIti bamANa bhaTasattamaH  //  64
//  samastadharaNIvyApiparAkramaguNodayaH  /  bAlidevo na kiM yAtaH karNajAhaM
kurakSasaH ||65|| bharata kSetrameM apanI zAnI nahIM rakhatA  /  vaha atizaya
pratApI, mahAbalavAn, mahAtejasvI, lakSmIsampanna, nItimeM nipuNa, mahAsAdhana
sampanna, ugradaNDa denevAlA, mahAn abhyudayase yukta, aura zatruoMkA mAna
mardana karanevAlA hai  /  vaha tumheM AjJA detA hai ki ||51-53 /  maiMne
yamarUpI zatruko haTAkara Apake pitA sUryarajako vAnaravaMzameM kiSkindhapurake
rAjapadapara sthApita kiyA thA || 54 || tuma usa upakArako bhUlakara pitAke
viruddha kArya karate ho  /  he satpuruSa ! tumheM aisA karanA yogya nahIM hai
// 55 //  | maiM tere sAtha pitAke samAna athavA usase bhI adhika pyAra karatA
huuN| tU Aja bhI A aura sukhapUrvaka rahaneke lie mujhe praNAma kara  //  56  //
athavA apanI zrIprabhA nAmaka bahana mere lie pradAna kara  /  yathArtha meM
mere sAtha sambandha prApta kara lenese tere lie samasta padArtha sukhadAyaka ho
jAyeMge || 57 || itanA kahanepara bhI bAlI dazAnanako namaskAra karanemeM
vimukha rahA  /  taba mukhakI vikRti roSa prakaTa karatA huA dUta phira kahane
lagA ki are vAnara ! isa viSaya meM adhika kahanese kyA lAbha hai ? tU mere
nizcita vacana suna, tU vyartha hI thor3I-sI lakSmI pAkara viDambanA kara rahA
hai ||58-59 || tU apane donoM hAthoMko yA to kara deneke lie taiyAra kara yA
zastra grahaNa karane ke lie taiyAra kara  /  tU yA to zIghra hI cAmara grahaNa
kara arthAt dAsa banakara dazAnanake lie cAmara Dhola yA dizAmaNDalako grahaNa
kara arthAt dizAoMke anta taka bhAga jA || 60|| tU yA to zirako namra kara yA
dhanuSako namrIbhUta kara  /  yA to AjJAko kAnoMmeM pUrNa kara yA asahanIya
zabdoMse yukta tathA apanA jIvana pradAna karanevAlI dhanuSakI DorIko kAnoMmeM
pUrNa kara arthAt kAnoM taka dhanuSa kI DorI khIMca  //  61  //  yA to merI
caraNarajako mastakapara dhAraNa kara athavA sirakI rakSA karanevAlA Topa
mastakapara dhAraNa kara  /  yA to kSamA mA~gane ke lie hAtha jor3akara
aMjaliyA~ hAthiyoM bar3A bhArI samUha ekatrita kara ||62|| yA to bANa chor3a yA
pRthivIko prApta - kara  /  yA to vetra grahaNa kara yA mAlA grahaNa kara  /  yA
to mere caraNoMke nakhoMmeM apanA mukha dekha yA talavArarUpI darpaNa meM mukha
dekha || 63|| tadanantara dUtake kaThora vacanoMse jisakA mana udbhUta ho rahA
thA aisA vyAghravilambI nAmaka pramukha yoddhA kahane lagA ||64 || ki re dUta !
jisake parAkrama 1. ananyasadRze ma  /  sadRza kha  /  2. kurute ma  /  3.
sAdhorna ma  /  4. viDambita ma  /  5. cAparaM ba., ma.  /  6. karNayoH
samIpamiti karNajAham 'tazya mUle kuNabjAhacI' iti jAhac pratyayaH  /  211

Page #262 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  212 In the Padma Purana, it is clearly stated that he
was captured by the planet. But you are healthy, why are you praising him so
much, you lowly messenger? ||66||  Having said this, VyÄghravilombÄ« became
enraged, his face was difficult to look at, and his body trembled visibly. In
this state, he was about to shoot an arrow at the messenger, but BÄlÄ« stopped
him, saying ||67|| What is the benefit of killing a poor messenger who is merely
conveying the words of his master? These people are just echoes of their
master's words. ||68|| Whatever is in his mind, DaÅÄnana should do it. Surely,
DaÅÄnana's lifespan is short, that's why he is speaking such harsh words. ||69||
Then, the terrified messenger went and reported everything to DaÅÄnana, and the
wrath of DaÅÄnana, who possessed unbearable power, was ignited. ||70|| He
immediately prepared his army and set out for Kiá¹£kindhÄ, for he was made of
atoms of pride. ||71|| Hearing the roar of the enemy army, which covered the
sky, BÄlÄ«, skilled in warfare, decided to leave the palace. ||72|| Then, BÄlÄ«,
who was burning with anger, was pacified by the wise ministers like
SÄgaravá¹ddhi, who poured out words like water, saying, "O Lord, let there be no
unnecessary war, forgive him. Many kings who loved war have perished without
reason." ||73-74|| Even those who were protected by the gods, who had the
support of the rays of the sun, and who were known as the eight lunar mansions,
perished by the arrows of JayakumÄra. ||75|| A vast army, difficult to look at,
armed with swords and maces, was also destroyed. Therefore, you should not get
on the unparalleled scale of doubt. ||76|| Hearing the words of his ministers,
BÄlÄ« said, "Although it is not proper to praise oneself, I will tell you the
truth, O ministers. ||77|| I am capable of crushing DaÅÄnana, along with his
army, with just the flick of my eyebrow, with a blow from the palm of my left
hand." ||78||  Then 1. BhÄá¹£a from M., Kh., K. 2. Duá¸¥preká¹£aá¸¥ M. 3. Gá¹hÄá¹a M. 4.
BhÄ«ti M. 5. Krodaá¸¥ M. 6. MeghaÅvaraÅarotkaraiá¸¥ Kh., JayakumÄra BÄá¹asamÅ«haiá¸¥.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 212 padmapurANe yadyevaM bhASate vyaktaM gRhIto vA graheNa saH  /  tvaM tu
svasthaH kimityevaM dUtAdhama vikatthase  // 66 //  krodhamUrcchita ityuktvA
duHprekSyaH spaSTavepathuH  /  gRhNAnaH sAyakaM ruddho bAlineti ca coditaH  //
67 //  ki datena varAkeNa hatena preSakAriNA  /  kurvantyete hi nAthIyavacasaH
pratizabdakam  // 68 //  dazAsyasyaiva kartavyaM yadabhiprAyamAzritam  /
AyunUnamiyattasya kurute yatkubhASitam  // 69 //  tato bhIto bhRzaM dUto gatvA
vRttAntavaMdanAt  /  dazAsyasya paraM krodhaM cakraM duHsahatejasaH  // 70
sainyAvRtazca saMnahya prasthitastvarayA puram  /  paramANubhirArabdhaH sa hi
darpamayairiva  // 71 //  tataH parabaladhvAnaM zrutvA vyomapidhAyinam  /
nirgantaM mAnasaM cakre bAliH saMgrAmadakSiNaH  // 72 //
tAvatsAgaravRddhayAdimantribhinayazAlibhiH  /  jvalatkrodhena nIto'sAviti
vAgambumiH zamam  // 73 //  akAraNena devAla vigraheNa kSamAM kuru  /  aneke hi
kSayaM yAtAH svacchandaM saMyugapriyAH  // 74 //  arkakIrtibhujAdhArA
rakSyamANAH surairapi  /  aSTacandrAH kSayaM prAptA meghezvarazarotkaraiH  // 75
//  bahusainyaM durAlokamasiratnagadAdharam  /  atulAM saMzayatulAM tato
nAroDhumarhasi  // 76 //  jagAdeti tato bAliyuktaM nAtmaprazaMsanam  /  tathApi
paramArtha vo mantriNaH kathayAmyaham  // 77 //  bhralatotkSepamAtreNa
dazavaktraM sasainyakam  /  zakto'smi kaNazaH katu vAmapANitalAhatam  // 78 //
Adi guNoMkA abhyudaya samasta pRthivImeM vyApta ho rahA hai aisA bAlI rAjA kyA
duSTa rAkSasake karNamUlako prApta nahIM huA hai ? arthAt usane bAlIkA nAma kyA
abhI taka nahIM sunA hai ?  // 65 //  yadi vaha rAkSasa aisA kahatA hai to vaha
nizcita hI bhUtoMse AkrAnta hai| are adhama dUta ! tU to svastha hai phira kyoM
isa taraha tArIpha hA~ka rahA hai ?  // 66 //  isa prakAra kahakara
vyAghravilambI kodhase macchita ho gyaa| usakI ora dekhanA bhI kaThina ho gyaa|
usakA zarIra spaSTa rUpase kA~pane lgaa| isI dazAmeM vaha dUtako mArane ke lie
bANa uThAne lagA to bAlIne kahA  // 67 //  ki kathita bAtako kahanevAle becAre
dUtake mAranese kyA lAbha hai ? yathArthameM ye loga apane svAmIke vacanoMkI
pratidhvani hI karate haiM  // 68 //  jo kucha manameM AyA ho vaha dazAnanakA hI
karanA caahie| nizcaya hI dazAnanakI Ayu alpa raha gayI hai isIlie to vaha
kuvacana kaha rahA hai  /  / 69 /  /  tadanantara atyanta bhayabhIta dUtane
jAkara saba samAcAra dazAnanako sunAye aura duHsaha tejake dhAraka usa
dazAnanake krodhako ddhigata kiyA  // 70 //  vaha baDI zIghratAse taiyAra sAtha
le kiSkindhapurakI ora calA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki usakI racanA ahaMkArake
paramANuoMse hI huI thI  /  / 71 /  /  tadanantara AkAzako AcchAdita karanevAlA
zatrudalakA kala-kala zabda sunakara yuddha karane meM kuzala bAline mahalase
bAhara nikalanekA mana kiyA  // 72 /  /  taba krodhase prajvalita bAliko
sAgaravRddhi Adi nItijJa mantriyoMne vacanarUpI jalake dvArA isa prakAra zAnta
kiyA ki he deva! akAraNa yuddha rahane do, kSamA karo, yuddhake premI anekoM
rAjA anAyAsa hI kSayako prApta ho cuke haiN||73-74|| jinheM arkakItikI bhajAoMkA
Alambana prApta thA tathA deva bhI jinakI rakSA kara rahe the aise aSTacandra
vidyAdhara jayakumArake bANoMke samUhase kSayako prApta hue the  /  / 75 //
sAtha hI jise dekhanA kaThina thA, tathA jo uttamottama talavAra aura gadAoMko
dhAraNa karanevAlI thI aisI bahuta bhArI senA bhI naSTa huI thI isalie saMzayakI
anupama tarAjUpara ArUr3ha honA ucita nahIM hai  // 76 /  /  mantriyoMke vacana
sunakara bAlIne kahA ki yadyapi apanI prazaMsA karanA ucita nahIM hai tathApi he
mantrigaNo ! yathArtha bAta Apa logoMko kahatA hU~  /  / 77 /  /  maiM
senAsahita dazAnanako bhrakuTirUpI latAke utkSepamAtrase bAyeM hastatalakI
capeTase hI cUrNa karanemeM samartha huuN||78|| phira 1. bhASase ma., kha., k.|
2. duHprekSaH ma.  /  3. gRhANa m.| 4. bhItI ma.  /  5. krodhaH ma.  /  6.
meghasvarazarotkaraiH kha., jayakumArabANasamUhaiH  /  :

Page #263 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Ninth Chapter  What then, if the mind is inflamed by the fire of anger? What
is the use of actions that bring about fleeting pleasures? || 79 || Having
obtained these pleasures, which are like the pith of a banana tree, deluded
beings fall into hell, filled with great suffering. || 80 || What is the benefit
of inflicting pain on a group of beings who hold their lives dear, and then
claiming to have gained happiness? || 81 || These beings, like the buckets of an
*arhat* (water-lifting device), are constantly revolving in the well of
existence, filled with great suffering. || 82 || Having bowed down to the feet
of the Jinas, who are the cause of liberation from this world, how can I bow
down to anyone else? || 83 || When I was enlightened, I made a vow that I would
not bow down to anyone other than the lotus feet of the Jinas. || 84 || I will
not break this vow, nor will I harm any living beings. I accept the *pravrajya*
(renunciation), which grants liberation. || 85 || Those hands that were fit to
touch the breasts of the most beautiful women, and those arms that were adorned
with beautiful jeweled bracelets and were fit to embrace the most beautiful
women, are now used by that man to fold his hands in submission to his enemies.
What kind of wealth does he have? What kind of life does he have? || 86-87 ||
Saying this, he called his younger brother Sugriva and said, "Listen, my dear
boy! You are now the king, so bow down to Dasanana or don't, give him your
sister or don't, it doesn't matter to me. I am leaving home today. Do what you
think is best." || 88-89 || Saying this, Bali left his home and became a
*digambar* (sky-clad), like the moon in the sky, who is superior in virtues. ||
90 || He had now dedicated his mind to the ultimate truth. He had attained many
*abhyudaya* (spiritual progress) such as *riddhis* (supernatural powers). He was
always absorbed in one pure state of mind, he was a hero in enduring hardships,
he was pure in his *samyag darshan* (right faith), his soul was always absorbed
in *samyag jnana* (right knowledge), he was devoted to *samyag charitra* (right
conduct), and he contemplated his soul through *anupreksha* (reflection), free
from delusion. || 91-92 || He wandered only in those lands that were free from
subtle beings and were fit for the practice of *dharma* (righteousness), and
were served by great *munis* (ascetics) who had pure conduct. ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navamaM pavaM kiM tarhi dAruNaM kRtvA krodhAgnijvalitaM manaH  /  karmaNA yena
labhyante bhogAH kSaNavinazvarAH  // 79 //  prApya tAn kadalIstambhanissArAn
mohavAhitAH  /  patanti narake jIvA mahAduHkhamahAkule  //  80  //  hiMsitvA
jantusaMghAtaM nitAntaM priyajIvitam  /  duHkhaM kRtasukhAbhikhyaM prApyate tena
ko guNaH  //  81  //  'araghaTTaghaTIyantrasadRzAH prANadhAriNaH  /
zazvadbhavamahAkUpe bhramantyatyanta duHkhitAH  //  82  //  pAdayaM jinendrANAM
mavanirgamakAraNam  /  praNamya kathamanyasya kriyate praNatirmayA  //  83  //
prabuddhena satA ceyaM kRtA saMsthA mayA purA  /  anyaM na praNamAmIti
jinapAdAbjayugmataH  // 84 //  bhaGgaM karomi nAsthAyA na ca prANinipAtanam  /
gRhNAmi saMganirmuktAM pravrajyAM muktidAyinIm  //  85  //  aau karau
varanArINAM kRtau stanataTocitau  /  bhujau cAliGgitau cAruratnakeyUralakSaNI
//  86  //  arAryaH prayuGkte tau puruSo'Jjalibandhane  /  aizvaryaM kIdRzaM
tasya jIvitaM vA hatAtmanaH  //  87  //  ityuktvAhUya sugrIvamuvAca zRNu bAlaka
/  kuru tasya namaskAraM mA vo rAjyapratiSThitaH  // 88 //  svasAraM yaccha mA
vAsmai na mamAnena kAraNam  /  eSo'smi nirgato'dyaiva pathyaM yattava tatkuru
//  89  //  ityuktvA nirgato gehAd babhUva ca nirambaraH  /  pArzva
gaganacandrasya gurorguNagarIyasaH  //  90  //  paramArthahitasvAntaH
saMprAptaparamodayaH  /  ekabhAvarato vIraH samyagdarzana nirmalaH  //  91  //
samyagjJAnAbhiyuktAtmA samyak cAritratatparaH  /  anuprekSAbhirAtmAnaM
bhAvayanmohavarjitaH ||92  //  phira kaThina manako krodhAgnise prajvalita kiyA
jAye to kahanA hI kyA hai ? phira bhI mujhe usa karmakI AvazyakatA nahIM jisase
ki kSaNabhaMgura bhoga prApta hote haiM || 79 || mohI jIva kelAke stambhake
samAna niHsAra bhogoMko prApta kara mahAduHkhase bhare naraka meM par3ate haiM
||80|| jinheM apanA jIvana atyanta priya hai aise jIvoMke samUhako mArakara
sukha nAmako dhAraNa karanevAlA duHkha hI prApta hotA hai, ata: usase kyA lAbha
hai ? || 81 || ye prANI arahaTa (rahaTa ) kI ghaTI ke samAna atyanta duHkhI hote
hue saMsArarUpI kUpameM nirantara ghUmate rahate haiM  //  82|| saMsArase
nikalane meM kAraNabhUta jinendra bhagavAnke caraNa yugalako namaskAra kara aba
maiM anya puruSake lie namaskAra kaise kara sakatA hU~ ? ||83 || jaba pahale
mujhe samyagjJAna prApta huA thA taba maiMne pratijJA kI thI ki maiM
jinendradeva ke caraNakamaloMke sivAya anya kisIko namaskAra nahIM karU~gA ||
84|| maiM na to isa pratijJAkA bhaMga karanA cAhatA hU~ aura na prANiyoMkI hiMsA
hI  /  maiM to mokSa pradAna karanevAlI nirgrantha dIkSA grahaNa karatA hU~ ||
85  //  jo hAtha uttamottama striyoM ke stanataTakA sparza karanevAle the tathA
manohara ratnamayI bAjUbandoMse suzobhita jo bhujAe~ uttamottama striyoMkA
AliMgana karanevAlI thIM unheM jo manuSya zatruoM ke samakSa aMjali bA~dhane meM
prayukta karatA hai usa adhamakA aizvaryaM kaisA ? aura jIvana kaisA ? ||86-87 /
/  isa prakAra kahakara usane choTe bhAI sugrIvako bulAkara kahA ki he bAlaka !
tU rAjyapara pratiSThita hokara dazAnanako namaskAra kara athavA na kara aura
isake lie apanI bahana de athavA na de, mujhe isase prayojana nhiiN| maiM to Aja
hI ghara se bAhara nikalatA huuN| jo tujhe hitakara mAlUma ho vaha kara
||88-89|| itanA kahakara bAlI gharase nikala gayA aura guNoMse zreSTha
gaganacandra samIpa digambara ho gayA ||10|| aba to usane apanA mana paramArtha
meM hI lagA rakhA thA  /  use aneka Rddhi Adi abhyudaya prApta hue the  /  vaha
eka zuddha bhAvameM hI sadA rata rahatA thA, parISahoMke sahana karanemeM
zUravIra thA, samyagdarzanase nirmala thA arthAt zuddha samyagdRSTi thA, usakI
AtmA sadA samyagjJAnameM lIna rahatI thI, vaha samyak cAritrameM tatpara rahatA
thA aura mohase rahita ho anuprekSAoMke dvArA AtmAkA cintavana karatA rahatA thA
/  91 - 92  //  sUkSma jIvoMse rahita tathA nirmala AcArake dhArI mahAmuniyoMse
sevita dharmArAdhanake yogya bhUmiyoMmeM hI vaha vihAra karatA thA  /  1.
krodhAgni jvalitaM ma  /  2. arahaTTa ba.  /  3. sadRzaM kha., sadRze ma.  /
213

Page #264 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, (93) He, dwelling in subtle, pure, and Dharma-aligned
lands, was served by great souls, the Munis of immaculate conduct. (94) He, like
a father, showed compassion to all beings, constantly nurturing inner tapas with
external tapas. (95) He, with a tranquil mind, attained the abode of great
wealth, embraced by the splendor of tapas, radiant with supreme beauty. (96) He,
striving to ascend the steps of high and higher virtues, was free from all knots
of the scriptures, his inner self being untied. (97) He, with great qualities,
saw everything through the scriptures, discerning right and wrong actions,
endowed with great restraint, destroying the lineage of karma. (98) He, for the
sole purpose of sustaining life, partook of food as prescribed by the Sutras,
sustaining life for Dharma, and acquiring Dharma for liberation. (99) He,
performing excellent deeds, brought joy to the world of the blessed, becoming a
model for the ascetics through his conduct. (100) Sugriva, having given Sri
Prabha to Dashagriva, happily ruled the kingdom inherited from his lineage, with
his permission. (101) Dashagriva, through his prowess, married all the beautiful
daughters of the Vidyadharas on earth. (102) Then, in the city of Nityaloka,
Dashagriva married Ratnavalli, the daughter born to the queen of Nityaloka, and
set out for his own city with great joy. (103) The sky was adorned with the rays
of the jewels adorning his crown. (104) Just as a great wind stops upon reaching
the shore of Mount Meru, so too did the Pushpaka chariot, as fickle as the mind,
suddenly stop. (105) When the Pushpaka chariot stopped, and the sound produced
by the bells and other things was broken, it seemed as if, due to the loss of
its brilliance, it had become silent out of shame. (106) Seeing the chariot
stop, the son of Kaikasi, filled with anger, asked, "Who is here? Who is here?"
(107) Then Maricha, knowing all things, said, "O Deva, listen! This is the Muni,
the image of the one who resides on Mount Kailasa."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe sUkSmAsu madviyuktAsu dharmAnuguNabhUmiSu  /  munibhirvimalAcAraiH
sevitAsu mahAtmabhiH  //  93  //  viharan sarvajIvAnAM dayamAnaH pitA yathA  /
bAhyena tarpasAntaHsthaM varddhayan satataM tapaH  // 94 //  AvAsatAM
maharddhAnAM pariprAptaH prazAntadhIH  /  tapaH zriyA pariSvaktaH parayA
kAntadarzanaH  //  95  //  uccairuccairguNasthAna sopAnArohaNodyataH  /
bhinnAdhyAtmAkhila granthagranthirgranthavivarjitaH  // 96 //  zrutena sakalaM
pazyan kRtyAkRtyaM mahAguNaH  /  mahAsaMvarasaMpannaH zAtayan karmasaMtatim  //
97 //  prANadhAraNamAtrArthaM bhuJjAnaH sUtradezitam  /  dharmArthaM dhArayan
prANAn dharmaM mokSArthamarjayan  //  98  //  AnandaM bhavyalokasya
kurvannuttamavikramaH  /  caritenopamAnatvaM jagAmAsau tapasvinAm  // 99 //
dazagrIvAya sugrIvo vitIrya zrIpramAM sukhI  /  cakArAnumatastena
rAjyamAgatamanvayAt  // 100 //  vidyAdharakumAryo yA dyAvAbhUmau mnohraaH|
dazAnanaH samastAstAH pariNinye parAkramAt  // 101 //  nityAloke'tha nagare
nityAlokasya dehajAm  /  zrIdevI labdhajanmAnaM ' nAmnA ratnAvalIM sutAm  //
102  //  upayamya purIM yAto nijAM paramasaMmadaH  /  nabhasA
mukuTanyastaratnarazmivirAjinA  //  103  //  sahasA puSpakaM
stambhamAraimAnasacaJcalam  /  meroriva taTaM prApya sumahadvAyumaNDalam ||104
//  tasyocchinnagateH zabde N bhagne ghaNTAdijanmani  /  vailakSyAdiva saMjAtaM
maunaM piNDitatejasaH  //  105  //  4 pravRttimAlokya vimAnaM kaikasIsutaH  /
kaH ko'tra bho iti kSipraM babhANa krodhadIpitaH  //  106  //  mArIcastata AkSau
sarvavRttAntakovidaH  /  zRNu devaiSa kailAse sthitaH pratimayA muniH  //  107
//  214 vaha jIvoMpara pitA ke samAna dayA karatA thA  /  bAhya tapase antaraMga
tapako nirantara bar3hAtA rahatA thA ||93-94 || bar3I-bar3I RddhiyoMkI AvAsatAko
prApta thA arthAt usameM bar3I-bar3I RddhiyA~ nivAsa karatI thIM, prazAnta citta
thA, utkRSTa taparUpI lakSmIse AliMgita thA, atyanta sundara thA ||15||
U~ce-U~ce guNasthAnarUpI sIr3hiyoMke car3hane meM udyata rahatA thA, usane apane
hRdaya meM samasta granthoMkI granthiyA~ arthAt kaThina sthala khola rakhe the,
samasta prakAra ke parigrahase rahita thA ||26|| vaha zAstrake dvArA samasta
kRtya aura akRtyako samajhatA thA  /  mahAguNavAn thA, mahAsaMvarase yukta thA,
aura santatiko naSTa karanevAlA thA || 97|| vaha prANoMkI rakSAke lie hI
Agamokta vidhise AhAra grahaNa karatA thA, dharmake lie hI prANa dhAraNa karatA
thA aura mokSake lie hI dharmakA arjana karatA thA || 98 || vaha bhavya jIvoMko
sadA Ananda utpanna karatA thA, utkRSTa parAkramakA dhArI thA aura apane
cAritrase tapasvIjanoMkA upamAna ho rahA thA || 19|| idhara sugrIva dazAnanake
lie zrIprabhA bahana dekara usakI anumatise sukhapUrvaka vaMzaparamparAgata
rAjyakA pAlana karane lagA || 100  //  pRthvIpara vidyAdharoMko jo sundara
kumAriyA~ thIM dazAnanane apane parAkramase una sabake sAtha vivAha kiyA || 101
//  athAnantara eka bAra dazAnana nityAloka nagara meM rAjA nityAlokakI zrIdevI
se samutpanna ratnAvalI nAmakI putrIko vivAha kara bar3e harSa ke sAtha
AkAzamArgaMse apanI nagarIkI ora A rahA thA  /  usa samaya usake mukuTameM jo
ratna lage the unakI kiraNoMse AkAza suzobhita ho rahA thA || 102 - 103 || jisa
prakAra bar3A bhArI vAyumaNDala meruke taTako pAkara sahasA ruka jAtA hai usI
prakAra manake samAna caMcala puSpaka vimAna sahasA ruka gayA ||104 || jaba
puSpaka vimAnakI gati ruka gayI aura ghaNTA Adise utpanna honevAlA zabda bhaMga
ho gayA taba aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno tejahIna honese lajjAke kAraNa usane
mauna hI le rakhA thA ||105|| vimAnako rukA dekha dazAnanane krodhase damakate
hue kahA ki are yahA~ kauna hai ? kauna hai ? ||106|| taba sarvaM vRttAntako
jAnanevAle mAsecane kahA ki he deva ! suno, yahA~ kailAsa parvata para 1.
sUkSmaprANirahitAsu  /  2. tapasAntasthaM ma  /  3. parikramAt ma.  /  4.
rambhAvalIM ma  /  5. virAjitAm ma.  /  6. jagAma  /  7. zabdabhagne  /

Page #265 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Chapter  **215**  A single Muni Raja statue, adorned with yoga, stands
there. ||107||  Facing the sun, his hands are like rays of light. On the level
ground of stone, he stands like a pillar of jewels. ||108||  This is a great
hero, bearing a terrible penance. He desires liberation quickly. This is the
story that has come to pass. ||109||  I will return the Vimana from this land
without delay. By the power of the Muni, it will come back piece by piece.
||110||  Hearing Maricha's words, the ten-headed one, proud of his own power,
looked towards Mount Kailasa. ||111||  Filled with various metals, adorned with
thousands of ganas, adorned with golden ornaments, and adorned with rows of
steps. ||112||  Adorned with natural elements, filled with transformations,
filled with various sounds, and comparable to grammar. ||113||  With sharp
peaks, it seems to break the sky. With clear waterfalls, it seems to laugh.
||114||  Drunken with nectar-like wine, filled with bees, the sky is covered
with a multitude of trees. ||115||  Adorned with flowers that bloom in all
seasons, filled with thousands of happy creatures. ||116||  Free from the fear
of medicines, filled with a multitude of snakes, it always holds youth with its
pleasant fragrance. ||117||  With a heart of vast stone, with thick trees as
arms, with a deep cave as a mouth, and with an unprecedented human form. ||118||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navamaM parva 215 AdityAbhimukhastasya karAnAtmakaraiH kiran  /  same zilAtale
ratnastambhAkAro'vatiSThate  // 108 //  ko'pyayaM sumahAn vIraH sughoraM
dhArayaMstapaH  /  muktimAkAGkSati kSipraM vRttAnto'yamato'bhavat  // 109 //
nivartayAmyato dezAdvimAnaM nirvilambitam  /  munerasya prabhAveNa yAvannAyAti
khaNDazaH  // 110 //  zrutvA mArIcavacanamatha kailAsabhUdharam  /  IkSAJcakre
yamadhvaMsaH svaparAkramagarvitaH  // 111 //  nAnAdhAtusamAkIrNa 'gaNairyuktaM
sahasrazaH  /  suvarNaghaTanAramya padapaktibhirAcitam  // 112 //
prakRtyanugatairyuktaM vikAravilesaMyutam  /  svarairbahuvidhaiH pUrNa
labdhavyAkaraNopamam  // 113 //  tIkSNaiH zikharasaMghAtaiH
khaNDayantamivAmbaram  /  utsarpacchIkaraiH spaSTaM hasantamiva nirjharaiH  //
11 //  makarandasurAmattamadhuvratapadhitam  /  zAlaughavitatAkAzaM
nAnAnokahasaMkulam  // 115 //  sarvartujamanohArikusumAdimirAcitam  /
caratpramodavatsattvasahasrasadupatyakam  // 116 //
auSadhatrAsadUrasthavyAlajAlasamAkulam  /  manohareNa gandhena dadhataM yauvanaM
sadA  // 117 //  zilAvistIrNahRdayaM sthUlavRkSamahAbhujam  /
guhAgambhIravadanamapUrvapuruSAkRtim  // 11 //  eka munirAja pratimA yogase
virAjamAna haiM  // 107|| ye sUryake sammukha vidyamAna haiM aura apanI
kiraNoMse sUryako kiraNoMko idhara-udhara prakSipta kara rahe haiN| samAna
zilAtalapara ye ratnoMke stambhake samAna avasthita haiM  // 108 //  ghora
tapazcaraNako dhAraNa karanevAle ye koI mahAn vIra puruSa haiM aura zIghra hI
mokSa prApta karanA cAhate haiN| inhIMse yaha vattAnta haA hai ||109 /  /  ina
manirA ke prabhAvase jabataka vimAna khaNDa-khaNDa nahIM ho jAtA hai, tabataka
zIghra hI isa sthAnase vimAnako lauTA letA huuN||110|| athAnantara mArIcake
vacana sunakara apane parAkramake garvase garvita dazAnanane kailAsa parvatakI
ora dekhA  // 111 /  vaha kailAsa parvata vyAkaraNakI upamA prApta kara rahA thA
kyoMki jisa prakAra vyAkaraNa bhU Adi aneka dhAtuoM se yukta hai usI prakAra
vaha parvata bhI sonA-cA~dI aneka dhAtuoMse yukta thaa| jisa prakAra vyAkaraNa
hajAroM gaNoM-zabda-samUhoMse yukta hai usI prakAra vaha parvata bhI hajAroM
gaNoM arthAt sAdhu-samUhoMse yukta thaa| jisa prakAra vyAkaraNa suvarNa arthAt
uttamottama varNoM kI ghaTanAse manohara hai usI prakAra vaha parvata bhI
suvarNa arthAt svarNakI ghaTanAse manohara thaa| jisa prakAra vyAkaraNa padoM
arthAt subanta tiGantarUpa zabdasamudAyase yukta hai usI prakAra vaha parvata
bhI aneka padoM arthAt sthAnoM yA pratyanta parvatoM athavA caraNacihnoMse yukta
thA  // 112 /  /  jisa prakAra vyAkaraNa prakRti arthAt mUla zabdoMke anurUpa
vikAroM arthAt pratyayAdijanya vikAroMse yukta hai usI prakAra vaha parvata bhI
prakRti arthAt svAbhAvika racanAke anurUpa vikAroMse yukta thaa| jisa prakAra
vyAkaraNa vila arthAt mUlasUtroMse yukta hai usI prakAra vaha parvata bhI vila
arthAt USarapRthivI athavA garta Adise yukta thaa| aura jisa prakAra vyAkaraNa
udAtta-anudAttasvarita Adi aneka prakArake svaroMse pUrNa hai usI prakAra vaha
parvata bhI aneka prakArake svaroM arthAt prANiyoMke zabdoMse pUrNa thA  // 113
//  vaha apane tIkSNa zikharoMse aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno AkAzake khaNDa hI
kara rahA thaa| aura UparakI ora uchalate hue chIMToMse yukta nirjharoMse aisA
jAna par3atA thA mAno ha~sa hI rahA ho  // 114 //  makarandarUpI madirAse matta
bhramaroMke samUhase vaha parvata kucha bar3hatA huA-sA jAna par3atA thaa|
zAlAoMke samUhase usane AkAzako vyApta kara rakhA thaa| sAtha hI nAnA prakArake
vRkSoMse vyApta thA  // 115 /  /  vaha sarva RtuoMmeM utpanna honevAle puSpa
Adise vyApta thA tathA usakI upatyakAoMmeM harSase bhare hajAroM prANI calate-
phirate dikha rahe the  // 116 //  vaha parvata auSadhiyoMke bhayase dUra sthita
sarpoke samUhase vyApta thA tathA manohara sugandhise aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno
sadA yauvanako ho dhAraNa kara rahA ho  // 117 /  /  bar3I-bar3I 1. guNa -ba.  /
2. vilam-uSaraM mUlasUtraM ca ( TippaNam )  /  3. -mivAdharam ma.  /  4.
paristhitam kha.  /

Page #266 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The mountain was covered with a multitude of white shores like the clouds of
autumn, and it seemed to be washing the entire world with its rays of light, as
if with milk. ||119|| In some of its caves, lions were sleeping without fear,
and in others, trees were swaying in the wind caused by the breath of sleeping
serpents. ||120|| In some of its forests, herds of deer were playing, and in
others, herds of intoxicated elephants were standing. ||121|| In some places, it
seemed as if its hairs were standing on end, due to the abundance of flowers,
and in others, its form was terrifying due to the long manes of ferocious bears.
||122|| In some places, it seemed as if it were covered with a forest of
lotuses, due to the red mouths of monkeys, and in others, the fragrance of
sandalwood was spreading due to the water flowing from the trees that had been
broken by rhinoceroses and elephants. ||123|| In some places, clouds were being
born, embraced by lightning-like vines, and in others, the sky was shining with
peaks that were as bright as the sun. ||124|| With its dense forests of tall
trees, adorned with fragrant flowers, the mountain seemed to be eager to conquer
the Pandu forest. ||125|| Descending upon the mountain, Dasanana saw the great
sage, who was immersed in the ocean of meditation and surrounded by a halo of
brilliance. ||126|| His two arms were hanging down like the trunks of elephants,
and he seemed to be a large sandalwood tree embraced by serpents. ||127|| He was
sitting motionless on a stone seat, engaged in the practice of sun-worship, and
he was causing doubt in the minds of living beings, as to whether they were
alive or not. ||128|| Recognizing him as Bali, Dasanana was consumed by the fire
of anger, remembering their past enmity. ||129|| With his brows furrowed, his
lips chewing, and his voice harsh, Dasanana, who was radiant in form, spoke to
the sage without fear. ||130|| "Oh, what a fine penance you have begun! Even
now, my chariot is being held back by your pride." ||131||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe zaratpayodharAkArataTasaMghAtasaMkaTam  /  kSIreNeva jagatsarva
kSAlayantaM karotkaraiH  // 119 //  kvacidvizrabdhasaMsuptamRgAdhipadarImukham
/  kvacitsuptazayuzvAsavAtAghUrNitapAdapam  // 120 //
kvacitparisarakrIDaskuraGgakakadambakam  /
kvacinmattadvipavAtakalitAdhityakAvanam  // 121 //  kvacitpulakitAkAraM
prasUnaprakarAcitam  /  kvacidRkSasaTAbhArairuddha taiISaNAkRtim  // 122 //
kvAcitpAvaneneva yuktaM zAkhAmRgAnanaiH  /
kvacikhaiGgikSatasyandisAlAdisurabhIkRtam  // 123 //
kvacidvidyullatAzliSTasaMbhavadghanasaMtatim  /
kvaciddivAkarAkArazikharodyotitAmbaram  // 12 //  pANDukasyeva kurvANaM
vijigISAM kvacidvanaiH  /  suramiprasavottuGgavistIrNaghanapAdapaiH  // 125 //
avatIrNazca tatrAsAvapazyattaM mahAmunim  /  dhyAnArNavasamAviSTaM
tejasAbaddhamaNDalam  /  / 126 //  AzAkarikarAkArapralambitabhujadvayam  /
pannagAbhyAmivAzliSTaM mahAcandanapAdapam  // 127 //
AtApanazilApIThamastakasthaM sunizcalam  /  kurvANaM prANiviSayaM saMzayaM
prANadhAriNam  // 128 //  tato bAlirasAveSa iti jJAtvA dazAnanaH  /  atItaM
saMsmaran vairaM jajvAla krodhavahninA  // 129 //  baddhavA ca bhRkuTIM bhImA
daSToSTaH prakharasvaraH  /  babhANa bhAsurAkAro munimevaM sunirbhayaH  // 130
//  aho zobhanamArabdhaM tvayA kartamidaM tapaH  /  yadadyApyabhimAnena vimAnaM
stambhyate mama  // 13 //  zilAe~ hI usakA lambA-caur3A vakSaHsthala thA,
bar3e-bar3e vRkSa hI usakI mahAbhujAe~ thIM aura guphAe~ hI usakA gambhIra mukha
thIM, isa prakAra vaha parvata apUrva puruSakI AkRti dhAraNa kara rahA thA  //
118 //  vaha zaradaRtuke bAdaloMke samAna sapheda-sapheda kinAroMke samUhase
vyApta thA tathA kiraNoMke samUhase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno samasta saMsArako
dUdhase hI dho rahA ho  // 119 /  /  kahIM usakI guphAoMmeM siMha niHzaMka
hokara so rahe the aura kahIM soye hue ajagaroMkI zvAsocchvAsakI vAyuse vRkSa
hila rahe the  /  / 120 //  kahIM usake kinAroMke vanoMmeM hariNoMkA samUha
krIr3A kara rahA thA aura kahIM usakI adhityakAke vanoMmeM madonmatta hAthiyoMke
samUha sthita the  // 121 //  kahIM phUloMke samUhase vyApta honeke kAraNa aisA
jAna par3atA thA mAno usake romAMca hI uTha rahe hoM aura kahIM uddhata rIkSoMkI
lambI-lambI saTAoMse usakA AkAra bhayaMkara ho rahA thA  // 122 /  /  kahIM
bandaroMke lAla-lAla mu~hoMse aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno kamaloMke vanase hI
yukta ho aura kahIM geMDA-hAthiyoMke dvArA khaNDita sAla Adi vRkSoMse jo pAnI
jhara rahA thA usase sugandha phaila rahI thI  // 123 /  /  kahIM bijalIrUpI
latAoMse AliMgita meghoMkI santati utpanna ho rahI thI aura kahIM sUryake samAna
dedIpyamAna zikharoMse AkAza prakAzamAna ho rahA thA  // 124 //  jinake lambe-
caur3e saghana vRkSa sugandhita phUloMse U~ce uThe hue the aise vanoMse vaha
parvata aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno pANDakavanako jItanA hI cAhatA ho  // 125 //
dazAnanane usa parvatapara utarakara una mahAmunike darzana kiye| ve mahAmuni
dhyAnarUpI samudra meM nimagna the aura tejake dvArA cAroM ora maNDala bA~dha
rahe the  /  / 126 //  diggajoMke zuNDAdaNDake samAna unakI donoM bhujAe~ nocekI
ora laTaka rahI thIM aura unase ve aise jAna par3ate the mAno sarpose AveSTita
candanakA bar3A vRkSa hI ho  // 127 /  /  ve AtApana yogameM zilApIThake Upara
nizcala baiThe the aura prANiyoMke prati aisA saMzaya utpanna kara rahe the ki
ye jIvita haiM bhI yA nahIM  // 128 //  tadanantara 'yaha bAli hai' aisA
jAnakara dazAnana pichale vairakA smaraNa karatA huA krodhAgnise prajvalita ho
uThA  // 129|| jo oMTha cabA rahA thA, jisakI AvAja atyanta karkaza thI, aura jo
atyanta dedIpyamAna AkArakA dhAraka thA aisA dazAnana bhrakuTI bA~dhakara bar3I
nirbhayatAke sAtha munirAjase kahane lagA  // 130 //  ki aho ! tumane yaha bar3A
acchA tapa karanA prArambha kiyA hai ki aba bhI abhimAnase merA vimAna 1.
parisarat ma.  /  2. banenaiva ma.  /  3. khiGgakRtasyandi ma.  /
khaGgikRtasparza ba.  /  4. saMbhavadhvanisantati ma.  /  5.
zikharadyotitAmbaram ma,  /

Page #267 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Ninth Canto 217 Where is Dharma and where is anger? You are laboring in
vain, O foolish one! You wish to make the immortal and the poison one. ||132||
Therefore, I will destroy your arrogant pride today. I will uproot the Kailasa
mountain and throw it into the ocean along with you. ||133|| Then, he meditated
on all the Vidyaas, and they surrounded him. Then, Dashaanan, like Indra,
assumed a terrifying form. Entering the Patala, breaking through the earth, with
the forest of his mighty arms, he spread darkness all around. He was intent on
doing evil. ||134-135|| Then, Dashaanan, whose eyes were red with anger, and
whose face was filled with anger, began to lift Kailasa with his arms. ||136||
Finally, the Kailasa mountain, which was shaking the earth violently, moved from
its place. At that time, it was holding long, hanging snakes that were spitting
poison. The intoxicated elephants that had fallen into the clutches of lions
were escaping. The frightened groups of deer were standing with their ears
erect, looking around. The cracked earth had drunk all the water of the springs,
so their streams had dried up. The great trees were falling down all around,
making a loud noise. The groups of rocks were breaking and making a loud
cracking sound. And large stones were falling down with a thud, filling the
entire world with their sound. ||137-140|| The broken earth had drunk all the
water of the ocean, so it dried up. The rivers that flowed towards the ocean
were flowing backwards, devoid of purity. ||141|| The Pramathas looked in all
directions in fear, and were filled with great wonder. They began to say, "What
is this? What is this? Ha-ha-hum-hi!" ||142|| The Apsaras, frightened, left
their beautiful arbors of vines. The flocks of birds flew up into the sky,
making a chattering sound. ||143|| With the laughter of Dashaanan's ten mouths,
which were constantly emerging from the Patala, the sky split open along with
the directions. ||144|| 1. Mahavaayuvanenaath M. | 2. Nispheet Kh. | 3. Sattvai:
Saduscharah M. | 4. Bhuktvaa M. | 5. Mandapat M. |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navamaM parva 217 kva dharmaH kva ca saMkrodho vRthA zrAmyasi durmate  /
icchasyekatvamAdhAtumamRtasya viSasya ca  // 132 //  tasmAdapanayAmyenaM
darpamadya tavoddhatam  /  kailAsanagamunmUlya kSipAmyabdhau samaM tvayA  // 133
//  tato'sau sarvavidyAmiAtAmistatkSaNAdvRtaH  /  vikRtya sumahadrUpaM surendra
iva mISaNam  // 134 //  'mahAbAhuvanenAndhaM dhvAnta kRtvA samantataH praviSTo
dharaNI bhittvA pAtAlaM pAtakodyataH  // 135 //  Arebhe ca samuddhatu
bhujairbhUriparAkramaH  /  krodhapracaNDaraktAkSo huGkAramukharAnanaH  // 136 //
tato viSakaNakSepilambamAnoragAdharaH  /
kesarikramasaMprAptabhrazyanmattamataGgajaH  // 137 //
saMbhrAntanizcalotkarNasAraGgakakadambakaH  /  sphuTitoddeza-
niSpItatruTitAkhilanijharaH  // 138 //  paryasyaduddhatArAvamahAnokahasaMhatiH
/  sphuTIkRtazilAjAlasandhizabdaiH suduHsvaraH  // 139 //
patadvikaTapASANaravApUritaviSTapaH  /  calitazcAlayan kSoNI bhRzaM
kailAsaparvataH  // 140 //  sphuTitAvanipItAmbuH prApa zoSaM nadIpatiH  /  uhuH
svacchatayA muktA viparItaM samudragAH  // 11 //  jastA vyalokayanAzAH pramathAH
pRthuvismayAH  /  kiM kimetadaho hA-hA-hu~-hIti prasRtasvarAH  // 142 //
jaharapsaraso mItA latApravaramaNDapam  /  vayasAM nivahAH prAptAH kRtakolAhalA
namaH  // 143 //  pAtAlAdusthitaiH krUrairaTTahAsairanantaraiH  /  dazavaktraiH
samaM digbhiH pusphoTe ca nabhastalam  // 14 //  rokA jA rahA hai  // 131 /  /
dharma kahA~ aura krodha kahA~ ? are durbuddhi ! tU vyartha hI zrama kara rahA
hai aura amRta tathA viSako eka karanA cAhatA hai  // 132 /  /  isalie maiM tere
isa uddhata ahaMkArako Aja hI naSTa kiye detA huuN| tU jisa kailAsa parvatapara
baiThA hai use ukhAr3akara tere hI sAtha abhI samadra meM pheMkatA hU~  // 133 /
/  tadanantara usane samasta vidyAoMkA dhyAna kiyA jisase Akara unhoMne use
ghera liyaa| aba dazAnanane indrake samAna mahAbhayaMkara rUpa banAyA aura
mahAbAhurUpI vanase saba ora saghana andhakAra phailAtA huA vaha pRthivIko
bhedakara pAtAlameM praviSTa huaa| pApa karanemeM vaha udyata thA hI  // 134-135
//  tadanantara krodhake kAraNa jisake netra atyanta lAla ho rahe the, aura
jisakA mukha krodhase mukharita thA aise prabala parAkramI dazAnanane apanI
bhujAoMse kailAsako uThAnA prArambha kiyA  // 136|| Akhira, pRthivIko atyanta
caMcala karatA huA kailAsa parvata svasthAnase calita ho gyaa| usa samaya vaha
kailAsa viSakaNoMko chor3anevAle lambe-lambe laTakate hue sA~poMko dhAraNa kara
rahA thaa| siMhoMkI capeTa meM jo matta hAthI A phaMse the ve chUTakara alaga ho
rahe the| ghabar3Aye hue hariNoMke samUha apane kAnoMko UparakI ora nizcala
khar3A kara idhara-udhara bhaTaka rahe the| phaTI huI pRthivIne jharanoMkA
samasta jala pI liyA thA isalie unakI dhArAe~ TUTa gayI thiiN| bar3e-bar3e
vRkSoMkA jo samUha TUTa-TUTakara cAroM ora gira rahA thA usase bar3A bhArI zabda
utpanna ho rahA thaa| zilAoMke samUha caTakakara caTa-caTa zabda kara rahe the
isase vahA~ bhayaMkara zabda ho rahA thaa| aura baDe-baDe patthara TaTa-TaTakara
nIce gira rahe the tathA usase utpanna honevAle zabdoMse samasta loka vyApta ho
rahA thA  // 137-140 //  vidIrNa pRthivIne samudrakA saba jala pI liyA thA
isalie vaha sUkha gayA thaa| samudrakI ora jAnevAlI nadiyA~ svacchatAse rahita
hokara ulaTI bahane lagI thIM  // 141 //  pramatha loga bhayabhIta hokara
dizAoMkI ora dekhane lage tathA bahuta bhArI AzcaryameM nimagna ho 'yaha kyA hai
? kyA hai ? hA-hA-hu~-hI Adi zabda karane lage  // 142 //  apsarAoMne bhayabhIta
hokara uttamottama latAoMke maNDapa chor3a diye aura pakSiyoMke samUha kalakala
zabda karate hue AkAzameM jA ur3e  // 143 /  /  pAtAlase lagAtAra nikalanevAle
dazAnanake dasamukhoMko aTTahAsase dizAoMke sAtha-sAtha AkAza phaTa par3A  //
144 /  /  1. mahAvAyuvanenAtha ma.  /  2. nisphIta kha.  /  3. sattvaiH
saduzcaraH ma.  /  4. bhuktvA ma.  /  5. maNDapAt ma.  /

Page #268 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
218 When the entire universe was agitated by the wind named Samvartaka, the Lord
Balimuni, knowing the demon by his knowledge, recognized him. ||145|| Although
he himself was not suffering and his entire body was still as before, he, being
a wise and fearless man, free from anger, thought in his mind: ||146|| The
Chakravarti Bharat has built these magnificent, high-rise Jain temples, made of
all kinds of precious jewels. Devotees, filled with devotion, both gods and
demons, worship them every day. If this mountain were to move, these Jain
temples might be destroyed. ||147|| Thinking thus, the Muni Balimuni, whose
consciousness was close to the auspicious meditation, pressed the top of the
mountain with his big toe. ||148-149|| Then, the demon, whose forest of arms was
heavily burdened and was breaking excessively, who was overwhelmed with sorrow,
whose red, beautiful eyes were restless, became extremely distressed. His crown
fell off and the weight of the mountain fell on his bare head. He knelt on the
sinking earth. Due to his bulk, his thighs were submerged in his muscles.
||150-151|| Immediately, a stream of sweat flowed from his body and washed the
netherworld. His whole body contracted like a tortoise. ||152|| At that time,
since he had shouted with all his might and made the whole universe resound, he
later became known as 'Ravana', a name that is prevalent everywhere. ||153||
Hearing that mournful, unprecedented sound of their lord, the group of Ravana's
wives became distressed and began to wail. ||154|| The ministers were
bewildered. They were ready for war and wandered around aimlessly. Their words
kept stumbling and their weapons fell from their hands. ||155|| Due to the power
of the Muni's strength, the drums of the gods began to sound and a shower of
flowers, along with bees, covered the sky. ||156|| The divine princes, whose
nature it was to play, danced in the sky and the melodious sound of the
goddesses echoed with the sweet sound of the flute. ||157|| 1. This verse is not
in the M. book. 2. Shirogadham B. 3. Sannadha- M. 4. Sudundubhayo M. 5.
Sashatpada: M.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 218 padmapurANe tataH saMvartakAbhikhyavAyunevAkulIkRte  /  bhuvane bhagavAn
bAliravadhijJAtarAkSasaH  // 145 //  aprAptaH poDanaM svasya dhIraH
kopavivarjitaH  /  tathAvasthitasarvAGgazcetasIdaM nyavezayat  // 146 //
kAritaM bharatenedaM jinAyatanamuttamam  /  sarvaratnamayaM tuGgaM
bahurUpavirAjitam  /  / 147 //  pratyahaM bhaktisaMyuktaiH kRtapUrja surAsuraiH
/  mA vinAzi calasyasmin parvate minaparvaNi  // 14 //  dhyAtveti
caraNAguSThapIDitaM girimastakam  /  cakAra zobhanadhyAnAdadUrIkRtacetanaH  //
149 //  tato mahAbharAkrAntabhagnabAhuvano bhRzam  /
duHkhAkulazcaladraktaspaSTamaJjulalocanaH  /  / 150 //
bhagnamaulizirogADheniviSTadharaNIdharaH  /
nimajadbhUtalanyastajAnurnirbhugnajaGakaH  // 15 //  sadyaH
pragalitasvedadhArAdhautarasAtalaH  /  babhUva saMkucadgAtraH kUrmAkAro
dazAnanaH  // 152 /  /  ravaM ca sarvayatnena kRtvA rAvitavAn jagat  /
yatastato gataH pazcAdrAvaNAkhyAM samastagAm  // 153 //  zrutvA taM dInabhArAvaM
svAminaH pUrvamazrutam  /  vidyAdharavadhUloko vilalApa samAkulaH  // 15 //
mUDhAH saMnaddhamArabdhAH saMbhrAntAH sacivA vRthA  /  punaH punaH skhaladvAco
gRhItagaladAyudhAH  // 155 /  /  munivIryaprabhAveNa suradundubhayo'nadan  /
papAta sumanovRSTiH khamAcchAdya saSaTpadA  // 156 //  nanRturgagane krIDAzIlA
devakumArakAH  /  gItadhvaniH surastrINAM vaMzAnugatamughayau  // 157 //
tadanantara jaba samasta saMsAra saMvataMka nAmaka vAyuse hI mAno Akulita ho
gayA thA taba bhagavAn bAlo munirAjane avadhijJAnase dazAnana nAmaka rAkSasako
jAna liyA  // 145 //  yadyapi unheM svayaM kucha bhI pIr3A nahIM huI thI aura
pahalekI taraha unakA samasta zarIra nizcala rUpase avasthita thA tathApi ve
dhIravIra aura krodhase rahita ho apane cittameM isa prakAra vicAra karane lage
ki  // 146 /  /  cakravartI bharatane ye nAnA prakArake sarvaratnamayI UMce-U~ce
jina-mandira banavAye haiN| bhaktise bhare sura aura asura pratidina inakI pUjA
karate haiM so isa parvatake vicalita ho jAnepara kahIM ye jina mandira naSTa na
ho jAveM  // 147 //  aisA vicArakara zubhadhyAnake nikaTa hI jinakI cetanA thI
aise munirAja bAlIne parvatake mastakako apane pairake a~gUThese dabA diyA  //
148-149 /  /  tadanantara jisakI bhujAoMkA vana bahuta bhArI bojhase AkrAnta
honeke kAraNa atyadhika TUTa rahA thA, jo dukhase Akula thA, jisakI lAla-lAla
manohara A~kheM caMcala ho rahI thIM aisA dazAnana atyanta vyAkula ho gyaa|
usake sirakA mukuTa TUTakara nIce gira gayA aura usa naMge sirapara parvatakA
bhAra A pdd'aa| nIce dhaMsatI huI pRthivIpara usane ghuTane Teka diye  /  sthUla
honeke kAraNa usakI jaMghAe~ mAMsapeziyoMmeM nimagna ho gayIM  // 150-151 /
usake zarIrase zIghra hI pasInAkI dhArA baha nikalI aura usase usane rasAtalako
dho diyaa| usakA sArA zarIra kachueke samAna saMkucita ho gayA  // 152 /  /  usa
samaya cU~ki usane sarva prayatnase cillAkara samasta saMsArako zabdAyamAna kara
diyA thA isalie vaha pIche calakara sarvatra pracalita 'rAvaNa' isa nAmako
prApta huA  // 153 /  /  rAvaNako striyoMkA samUha apane svAmIke usa azrutapUrva
dIna-hIna zabdako sunakara vyAkula ho vilApa karane lagA  // 154 //  mantrI loga
kiMkartavyavimUr3ha ho gye| ve yuddha ke lie taiyAra ho vyartha hI idhara-udhara
phirane lge| unake vacana bAra-bAra bIcameM hI skhalita ho jAte the aura
hathiyAra unake hAthase chUTa jAte the  // 155 //  munirAjake vIryake prabhAvase
devoMke dundubhi bajane lage aura bhramarasahita phUloMkI vRSTi AkAzako
AcchAdita kara par3ane lagI  // 156|| krIr3A karanA jinakA svabhAva thA aise
devakumAra AkAzameM nRtya karane lage aura deviyoMkI saMgIta dhvani vaMzIkI
madhura dhvanike sAtha sarvatra 1. eSa zlokaH ma. pustake nAsti  /  2.
zirogADhaM ba.  /  3. saMnaddha- ma.  /  4. sudundubhayo ma.  /  5. saSaTpadA:
ma.  /

Page #269 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Ninth Chapter 219 'Then Mandodari, humbled, bowed to the sage and requested,
"O Muni, possessor of wondrous prowess, grant me husband-alms." ||158|| Then,
moved by compassion, the great sage loosened his toe. Ravana, freed from the
mountain, emerged from the wilderness of suffering. ||159|| Going and bowing,
repeatedly seeking forgiveness, he, knowing the power of his penance, began to
praise the Lord of Yoga. ||160|| "I do not offer obeisance to anyone else,
having renounced the feet of the Jina. This is the fruit of my strength, as I
myself have said." ||161|| "Oh, your penance is truly powerful, O Lord, by which
you are able to make the three worlds otherwise." ||162|| "Even the Indras do
not possess such power, O Lord, as is born from the slight effort of those who
are rich in penance." ||163|| "Oh, your qualities, your form, your radiance,
your strength, your brilliance, your patience, your character, and your penance
are all wondrous." ||164|| "It seems as if your body, the foundation of merit,
has been created by karma, bringing all the beautiful things from the three
worlds." ||165|| "You, who are endowed with such extraordinary power, have
renounced the earth. This is a truly wondrous deed that you have done, O good
man." ||166|| "I, being powerless, have only brought about the bondage of sin by
desiring to do something wrong to you, who are endowed with such power." ||167||
"Curse this body, this mind, and this speech of mine, which, being sinful, has
become inclined towards falsehood." ||168|| "The difference between you, such
noble gems, and us, wicked people, is as great as that between Mount Meru and a
mustard seed." ||169|| "O Muni, you have given me life when I was dying. What
can be said about one whose mind is so wicked as to repay kindness with harm?"
||170|| "I hear, I know, and I see that the world is only a source of suffering.
Yet, I am so sinful that I do not renounce worldly attachments." ||171|| "Those
who are virtuous, great in character, and close to the fortune of liberation,
have renounced worldly pleasures in their youth and stand firm in the path of
liberation." ||172||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navamaM parva 219 'tato mandodarI dInA yayAceti munIzvaram  /  praNamya
bhartRmikSAM me prayacchAdbhutavikrama  /  / 158 //  tato'nukampayAGguSThaM
mahAmunirazazlathat  /  rAvaNo'pi vimucyAdriM klezakAntArato nirait  /  / 159 //
gatvA ca praNatiM kRtvA kSamayitvA punaH punaH  /  yogezaM stotumArabdhaH
parijJAtatapobalaH  // 16 //  jinendracaraNau muktvA karomi na namaskRtim  /
anyasyeti svayoktaM yatsAmarthyasyAsya tatphalam  // 16 //  aho nizcayasaMpannaM
tapasaste mahadabalam  /  bhagavan yena zakto'si trailokyaM kartamanyathA  // 16
//  indrANAmapi sAmarthyamIdRzaM nAtha nekSyate  /  yAdRk tapaHsamRddhAnAM
munInAmalpayatnajam  // 163 //  aho guNA ahorUpamaho kAntiraho balam  /  aho
dIptiraho dhairyamaho zIlamaho tapaH  // 16 //  trailokyAdatha niHzeSaM
vastvAhRtya manoharam  /  karmabhiH sukRtAdhAraM zarIraM tava nirmitam  // 165
//  yuktastyaktavAnasi yakSitim  /  idamatyadbhutaM karma kRtaM supuruSa tvayA
/  / 166 //  evaMvidhasya te katu yadasAdhu mayepsitam  /  tadazaktasya saMjAtaM
pApabandhAya kevalam  // 16 //  dhikazarIramidaM ceto vacazca mama pApinaH  /
vRttAvamimukhaM jAtaM yadasatyAmalaM purA  // 168 //  bhavAdRzAM nRratnAnAM
madvidhAnAM ca durvizAm  /  antaraM vigatadveSa merusarSapayoriva  /  / 169 //
mahyaM vipadyamAnAya dattAH prANAstvayA mune  /  apakAriNi yasyeyaM matistasya
kimucyatAm  // 17 //  zRNomi vedmi pazyAmi saMsAraM duHkhabhAvakam  /
pApastathApi nirvedaM viSayebhyo na yAmyaham  /  / 171 //  puNyavanto mahAsattvA
muktilakSmIsamIpagAH  /  tAruNye viSayAMstyaktvA sthitA ye muktivarmani  /  /
172 /  /  sAmartha uThane lagI  // 157 //  tadanantara mandodarIne dIna hokara
munirAjako praNAma kara yAcanA kI ki he adbhuta parAkramake dhArI! mere lie
patibhikSA dIjie  // 158|| taba mahAmunine dayAvaza pairakA aMgUThA DholA kara
liyA aura rAvaNa bhI parvatako jahAMkA tahA~ chor3a klezarUpI aTavIse bAhara
nikalA  /  / 159 /  /  tadanantara jisane tapakA bala jAna liyA thA aise
rAvaNane jAkara munirAjako praNAma kara bAra-bAra kSamA mA~gI aura isa prakAra
stuti karanA prArambha kiyaa||160|| ki he pUjya ! Apane jo pratijJA kI thI ki
maiM jinendradevake caraNoMko chor3akara anyake lie namaskAra nahIM karU~gA yaha
usIkI sAmarthyakA phala hai  /  / 161 /  /  he bhagavan ! Apake tapakA mahAphala
nizcayase sampanna hai isIlie to Apa tIna lokako anyathA karane meM samartha
haiM  // 162 //  tapase samRddha muniyoMko thor3e ho prayatnase utpanna jaisI
sAmarthya dekho jAtI hai he nAtha! vaiso sAmarthya indroMkI bhI nahIM dekhI jAtI
hai  /  / 163 /  /  Apake guNa, ApakA rUpa, ApakI kAnti, ApakA bala, ApakI
dIpti, ApakA dhairya, ApakA zola aura ApakA tapa sabhI AzcaryakArI haiM  // 164
//  aisA jAna par3atA hai mAno karmoMne tInoM lokoMse samasta sundara padArtha
lA-lAkara puNyake AdhArabhUta Apake zarIrakI racanA kI hai  // 165 /  /  he
satpuruSa ! isa lokottara sAmarthyase yukta hokara bhI jo Apane pRthivIkA tyAga
kiyA hai yaha atyanta Azcaryajanaka kArya hai  /  / 166 /  /  aisI sAmarthyase
yukta Apake viSayameM jo maiMne anucita kArya karanA cAhA thA vaha mujha
asamarthake lie kevala pApa-bandhakA hI kAraNa huA  // 167 /  /  mujha pApIke
isa zarIrako, hRdayako aura vacanako dhikkAra hai ki jo ayogya kArya karaneke
sammukha hue  // 168|| he dveSarahita ! Apa-jaise nara-ratnoM aura mujha-jaise
duSTa puruSoMke bIca utanA ho antara hai jitanA ki meru aura sarasoMke bIca hotA
hai  // 169|| he munirAja! mujha marate hueke lie Apane prANa pradAna kiye haiM
so apakAra karanevAlepara jisakI aisI buddhi hai usake viSayameM kyA kahA jAve ?
// 170 /  /  maiM sunatA hU~, jAnatA hU~ aura dekhatA hU~ ki saMsAra kevala
duHkhakA anubhava karAnevAlA hai phira bhI maiM itanA pApI hU~ ki viSayoMse
vairAgyako prApta nahIM hotA  // 171 /  /  jo taruNa 1. eSa zlokaH ka. kha.
pustakayo sti  /  2. bhartRbhikSaM ma.  /  3. -razazlathan m.| 4. duHkhATavItaH
/  5. vRttAntAbhimukhaM jAtaM yadasatyamalaM purA ka.  /  6. duSTaprajAnAm  /

Page #270 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
220 Having praised the Muni in this way, Ravana bowed down to him thrice,
circumambulated him, and, utterly condemning himself, wept with a face full of
sorrow. ||173|| Filled with shame and detached from worldly attachments, the son
of Kaikasi entered the Jain temple near the Muni. ||174|| Throwing his sword,
Chandras, on the ground in disregard, he, accompanied by his wives, performed
worship to the Jina. ||175|| Pulling the string of his arm, which was like a
musical instrument, he played the Veena and praised the Jina with hundreds of
hymns. ||176|| "Salutations to you, the Lord of Lords, the observer of all
worlds, who have transcended all worlds with your brilliance, who are fulfilled,
the great soul. ||177|| You are worshipped by the three worlds, you have
destroyed the great enemy, delusion. You are the holder of a multitude of
qualities beyond the reach of words. ||178|| You are endowed with great power,
the guide to the path of liberation, rich in the ultimate happiness, you have
removed all evil. ||179|| You are the cause of liberation and prosperity for all
beings, the root of great auspiciousness, the creator of all actions. ||180||
You have burnt all sins with the fire of meditation, you are the destroyer of
birth, the Guru, you have no Guru, all bow down to you, and you bow down to
none. ||181|| You are free from beginning and end, you are a continuous, eternal
yogi, your ultimate truth is unknown, but you know all ultimate truths. ||182||
You have declared the soul to be devoid of all attachments, you have taught the
doctrine of existence for all. You have shown that all things are momentary
according to the Nayavada, and you have also shown that all things are eternal
according to the Dravyavada. ||183|| You have said that our soul is a single,
undivided substance, distinct from all external objects. You are the advocate of
the Anekantavada for all, the conqueror of all enemies, the knower of all
things, therefore, you are the one who grants liberation. ||184||  Those who
have abandoned worldly attachments and are established in the path of liberation
are blessed souls, they are powerful, and they dwell near the liberated Lakshmi.
||172||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 220 padmapurANe iti stutvA muni bhUyaH praNamya triHpradakSiNam  /  nitAntaM
svaM ca ninditvA zUtkAramukharAnanaH  // 173 /  upakaNThaM munezcaityabhavanaM
trapayAnvitaH  /  virako viSayAsaGge praviSTaH kaikasIsutaH  // 174 //
anAdareNa vikSipya candrahAsamasiM bhuvi  /  AvRto nijanArI mizcakre
jinavarArcanam  // 175 //  niSkRSya ca snasAtantroM bhuje vINAmavIvadat  /
bhaktinirbharabhAvazca jagau stutizatairjinam  // 176 //  namaste devadevAya
lokAlokAvalokine  /  tejasAtItalokAya kRtArthAya mahAtmane  // 177 //
trilokakRtapUjAya naSTamohamahAraye  /  vANIgocaratAmuktaguNasaMghAtadhAriNe  //
178 //  mahaizvaryasametAya 'vimuktipathadezine  /  sukhakASThAsamRddhAya
dUrIbhUtakuvastave  // 179 //  niHzreyasasya bhUtAnAM hetave'bhyudayasya ca  /
mahAkalyANamUlAya vedhase sarvakarmaNAm  // 18 //  dhyAnanirdagdhapApAya
janmavidhvaMsakAriNe  /  gurave gurumuktAya praNatAyAnatAtmane  // 181 //
AdyantaparimuktAya saMtatAdyantayogine  /  ajJAtaparamArthAya
paramArthAvabodhine  // 182 //  sarvazUnyapratijJAya sarvAstikyopadezine  /
sarvakSaNikapakSAya kRtsnanityatva zine  // 183 //  pRthaktvaikatvavAdAya
sarvAnekAntadezine  /  jinezvarAya sarvasmA ekasmai zivadAyine  // 184 //
avasthAmeM hI viSayoMko chor3akara mokSa-mArgameM sthita hue haiM ve puNyAtmA
haiM, mahAzaktizAlI hai aura maktilakSmIke samIpameM vicaranevAle haiM  // 172 /
isa prakAra stuti kara usane manirAjako praNAma kara tIna pradakSiNAeM dIM,
apane ApakI bahuta nindA kI aura duHkhavaza mu~hase sU-sU zabda kara rudana kiyA
// 173 //  munirAjake samIpa jo jina-mandira thA lajjAse yukta aura viSayoMse
virakta rAvaNa usIke andara calA gayA  // 174 /  /  vahAM usane candrahAsa
nAmaka khaDgako anAdarase pRthivIpara pheMka diyA aura apanI striyoMse yukta
hokara jinendradevakI pUjA kI  // 175 //  usake bhAva bhaktimeM itane lIna ho
gaye the ki usane apanI bhujAkI nAr3IrUpI tantrIko khIMcakara vINA bajAyI aura
saikar3oM stutiyoMke dvArA jinarAjakA guNagAna kiyA  // 176 /  /  vaha gA rahA
thA ki nAtha ! Apa devoMke deva ho, loka aura alokako dekhanevAle ho, Apane
apane tejase samasta lokako atikrAnta kara diyA hai, Apa kRtakRtya haiM, mahAtmA
haiN| tInoM loka ApakI pUjA karate haiM, Apane moha rUpI mahA zatruko naSTa kara
diyA hai, Apa vacanAgocara guNoMke samUhako dhAraNa karanevAle haiN| Apa mahAn
aizvaryase sahita haiM, mokSamArgakA upadeza denevAle haiM, sUkhakI parama
sImAse samaddha haiM, Apane samasta katsita vastuoMko dUra kara diyA hai| Apa
prANiyoMke lie mokSa tathA svargake hetu haiM, mahAkalyANoMke mUla kAraNa haiM,
samasta kAryoMke vidhAtA haiN| Apane dhyAnAgnike dvArA samasta pApoMko jalA diyA
hai, Apa janmakA vidhvaMsa karanevAle haiM, guru haiM, ApakA koI guru nahIM hai,
saba Apako praNAma karate haiM aura Apa svayaM kisIko praNAma nahIM krte| Apa
Adi tathA antase rahita haiM, Apa nirantara Adi tathA antima yogI haiM, Apake
paramArthako koI nahIM jAnatA para Apa samasta paramArthako jAnate haiN| AtmA
rAgAdika vikAroMse zUnya hai aisA upadeza Apane sabake lie diyA hai, 'AtmA hai',
'paraloka hai' ityAdi AstikyavAdakA upadeza bhI Apane sabake lie diyA hai,
paryAyArthika nayase saMsArake samasta padArtha kSaNika haiM isa pakSakA
nirUpaNa Apane jahA~ kiyA hai vahA~ dravyArthika nayase samasta padArthoMko
nitya bhI Apane dikhalAyA hai| hamArI AtmA samasta parapadArthose pRthak akhaNDa
eka dravya hai aisA kathana Apane kiyA hai, Apa sabake lie anekAnta dharmakA
pratipAdana karanevAle haiM, kamarUpa zatruoMko jItanevAloMmeM zreSTha haiM,
sarva padArthoM ko jAnanevAle honese sarvarUpa haiM, avaNDa caitanya puMjake
dhAraka honese ekarUpa haiM aura mokSa pradAna karanevAle haiM ataH Apako 1.
vimuktapatha -m.| 2. dUrobhUta-durIhita b.| 3. na jJAtaH paramArtho yasya sa
tasmai  /  4. dezine ma.  /  5. -mAdAya ka., ba,  /  6. -dazine k.|

Page #271 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Ninth Chapter  Salutations to Rishabha, eternal and unconquered, salutations
to Him. Salutations to Sambhava, forever adorned with the auspicious mark.
||185|| Salutations to Sumati, the radiant one, salutations to Him. Salutations
to Suparshva, forever shining like the moon. ||186|| Salutations to Pushpadanta,
the cool one, salutations to Him. Salutations to Shreyansa, the worthy of
worship, salutations to the one who has attained spiritual brilliance. ||187||
Salutations to Vimala, salutations to the infinite, forever. Salutations to
Dharma, the root cause of happiness, salutations to Shanti, the one who brings
peace. ||188|| Salutations to Kunthu Jinendra, salutations to Aranatha, forever.
Salutations to Malli Maharaja, salutations to Munisuvrata. ||189|| Salutations
to all the other Tirthankaras of the past and future, salutations to them.
Salutations to the Sadhus, forever. ||190|| Salutations to the one who is
endowed with right faith, knowledge, and the destruction of the path of
isolation. Salutations to the vision, forever. Salutations to the Siddhas,
forever. ||191|| Thus, the Lord of Lanka, Ravana, chanted these sacred words.
The seat of the Nagaraja, Dharanendra, trembled. ||192|| Then, the Nagaraja,
with a noble heart, emerged from the netherworld, his soul illuminated by the
light of knowledge, his eyes wide with joy, his raised hoods adorned with gems
that dispelled the darkness, and his face radiant like the full, pure moon.
||193-194|| He bowed to the Jinendras and then performed a ritualistic worship,
in which all wealth was obtained through meditation alone. ||195|| He said to
Ravana, "O virtuous one, you have sung a very good song, connected to the praise
of the Jinendras. Your song is a cause of excitement." ||196|| "See, my body is
filled with dense and rough goosebumps due to joy. Even though I live in the
netherworld, I still do not find peace." ||197|| "O Lord of the Rakshasas, you
are blessed to praise the great Jinendras. Your devotion has forcefully drawn me
here." ||198|| "I am very pleased with your devotion to the Jinendras. Ask for a
boon, I will give you your desired object, which is rare even for the wicked."
||199|| Then,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navamaM parva RSabhAya namo nityamajitAya namo namaH  /  saMbhavAya
namo'jasramaminandanarUDhaye  // 185 //  namaH sumataye padmapramAya satataM
namaH  /  supAzrvAya namaH zazvannamazcandrasamatviSe  // 186 //  namo'stu
puSpadantAya zItalAya namo namaH  /  zreyase vAsupUjyAya namo labdhAtmatejase
// 187 //  vimalAya namastredhA namo'nantAya saMtatam  /  namo dharmAya
saukhyAnAM namo malAya zAntaye  // 18 //  namaH kunthujinendrAya namo'rasvAmine
sadA  /  namo mallimahezAya namaH suvratadAyine  // 189 //  anyebhyazca
bhaviSyadbhayo bhUtebhyazca sumAvataH  /  namo'stu jinanAthebhyaH zramaNebhyazca
sarvadA  // 19 //  namaH samyaktvayuktAya jJAnAyakAntanAzine  /  darzanAya
namo'jatraM siddhebhyo'nArataM namaH  // 191 //  pavitrANyakSarANyevaM
laGkAsvAmini gAyati  /  calitaM nAgarAjasya viSTaraM dharaNazruteH  // 192 //
tato'vadhikRtAlokastoSavistAritekSaNaH  /
sphuratphaNAmaNicchAyAdUradhvastatamazcayaH  // 193 //
sakalAmalatArezaprasannamukhazobhitaH  /  pAtAlAdudyayau kSi nAgarAjaH sumAnasaH
// 194 //  vidhAya ca namaskAraM jinendrANAM vidhAnataH  /  pUjAM ca
dhyAnasaMjAtasamastadravyasaMpadam  // 195 //  jagAda rAvaNaM sAdho
sAdhugItamidaM tvyaa| jinendrastutisaMbaddhaM romaharSaNakAraNam  // 196 //
pazya topeNa me jAtaM pulakaM ghanakarkazam  /  pAtAlasthasya yacchAntirnAdyApi
pratipadyate  // 197 //  rAkSasezvara dhanyo'si yaH stauSi jinapuGgavAn  /
balAdAkRSya bhAvena tvadIyenAhamAhRtaH  // 198 //  varaM vRNISva tuSTo'smi tava
bhaktyA jinAnprati  /  dadAmyabhIpsitaM vastu sadyaH kunaradurlabham  // 199 //
tataH kailAsakampana prokto'sau vidito mama  /  dharaNo nAgarAjastvaM
pRSTastAvanivedaya  // 20 //  namaskAra ho  // 177-184|| RSabha, ajita,
sambhava, abhinandana, sumati, padmaprabha, supArzva, candraprabha, puSpadanta,
zItala, zreyonAtha, vAsupUjya, vimala, ananta, dharma, saukhyoMke mUla kAraNa
zAntinAtha, kunthu jinendra, aranAtha, malli mahArAja aura munisuvrata bhagavAn
ina vartamAna tIrthaMkaroMko mana-vacana-kAyase namaskAra ho  /  inake sivAya jo
anya bhUta aura bhaviSyat kAla sambandhI tIrthakara haiM unheM namaskAra ho  /
sAdhuoMke lie sadA namaskAra ho| samyaktvasahita jJAna aura ekAntavAdako naSTa
karanevAle darzanake lie nirantara namaskAra ho, tathA siddha paramezvarake lie
sadA namaskAra ho  // 185-191|| laMkAkA svAmI rAvaNa jaba isa prakArake pavitra
akSara gA rahA thA taba nAgarAja dharaNendrakA Asana kampAyamAna huA ||192 /  /
tadanantara uttama hRdayako dhAraNa karanevAlA nAgarAja zIghra hI pAtAlase
nikalakara bAhara aayaa| usa samaya avadhijJAnarUpI prakAzase usakI AtmA
prakAzamAna thI, santoSase usake netra vikasita ho rahe the, Upara uThe huai
phaNoMmeM jo maNi lage hue the unakI kAntise vaha andhakArake samUha dUra haTA
rahA thA aura pUrNa tathA nirmala candramAke samAna prasanna mukhase zobhita thA
// 193-194 //  usane Akara jinendra bhagavAnko namaskAra kiyA aura tadanantara
dhyAna mAtrase hI jisameM samasta dravyarUpI sampadA prApta ho gayI thI aisI
vidhipUrvaka pUjA kI  /  / 195 /  /  pUjAke bAda usane rAvaNase kahA ki he
satpuruSa ! tumane jinendradevakI stutise sambandha rakhanevAlA yaha bahuta
acchA gIta gAyA hai| tumhArA yaha gIta romAMca utpanna honekA kAraNa hai  /  /
196 //  dekho, santoSake kAraNa mere zarIrameM saghana evaM kaThora romAMca
nikala Aye haiN| maiM pAtAlameM rahatA thA phira bhI tujhe aba bhI zAnti prApta
nahIM ho rahI hai  // 197 /  /  he rAkSasezvara ! tU dhanya hai jo jinendra
bhagavAnkI isa prakAra stuti karatA hai| terI bhAvanAne mujhe balapUrvaka
khIMcakara yahA~ bulAyA hai  /  / 198 //  jinendradevake prati jo terI bhakti
hai usase maiM bahuta santuSTa huA huuN| tU vara mA~ga, maiM tujhe zIghra hI
kupuruSoMko durlabha icchita vastu detA hU~  // 199 //  tadanantara 1.
zravaNebhyazca m.| 2. -Nyeva m.| 3. pAtAlasya m.| 4. yastoSi ma.  /  5. rAvaNena
/

Page #272 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
222 In the Padma Purana, what is more auspicious than the worship of the Jinas?
I am eager to give you something, so tell me what you desire. ||201|| Then the
Nagapati said, "Listen, Ravana, there is no other auspicious thing equal to the
worship of the Jinas." ||202|| The worship of the Jinas, when performed with
devotion, bestows the bliss of liberation. There has never been and never will
be anything equal to it. ||203|| Then Dasamukha said, "If there is nothing
greater than the worship of the Jinas, and I have attained it, then what else
should I ask for, O wise one?" ||204|| The Nagapati said, "Your words are true.
What is unattainable by the power of the Jinas does not exist." ||205|| Those
like you, those like us, and those like Indra and the others, who are the
foundations of happiness, all have attained it through devotion to the Jinas.
||206|| Let this worldly happiness, which is small and fraught with obstacles,
remain. Through devotion to the Jinas, the supreme bliss of liberation is
attained. ||207|| Although you are a renunciant, endowed with great humility,
strength, supreme wealth, and adorned with virtues, let my sight of you not be
in vain. I beg you to accept something from me. ||208-209|| O LankeÅa, accept
this Vidya called Amoghavijaya, which has the power to transform into any form.
Do not break my affection. ||210|| O good man, whose time passes in a single
Dasha? After misfortune comes prosperity, and after prosperity comes misfortune.
||211|| Therefore, if misfortune approaches you from any source, this Vidya will
protect you, causing harm to your enemies. ||212|| Even the gods, who possess
immense power, are afraid of this Vidya, which is enveloped in flames of fire.
||213|| In the end, Ravana could not break the affection of the Nagapati, and
with great difficulty, he accepted the gift. ||214|| Then, with folded hands and
bowing, Ravana, who had spoken to Dasanana, went to his own place, filled with
joy. ||215||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 222 padmapurANe jinavandanayA tulyaM kimanyadvidyate zubham  /  vastu
yaspArthayiSye'haM bhavantaM dAtumudyatam  // 201 //  tato nigaditaM nAgapatinA
zRNu rAvaNa  /  jinendravandanAttulyaM kalyANaM naiva vidyate  // 202 //  dadAti
parinirvANasukhaM yA samupAsitA  /  'jinanatyA tayA tulyaM na bhUtaM na
bhaviSyati  // 203 //  tato dazamakhenoktaM nAsti cejinavandanAt  /  adhikaM
kiMvataH prApta tasmin yAce mahAmate  // 20 //  uktaM ca nAgapatinA
satyametatsuceSTitam  /  asAdhyaM jinamakteryatsAdhu tatraiva vidyate  // 205 //
tvAdRzA mAdRzA ye ca vAsavAdyaizca sNnimaaH| saMpaTAnte sukhAdhArA sarve te
jinabhaktitaH  // 206 //  AstAM tAvadidaM svalpaM vyAghAti mavarja sukham  /
mokSajaM labhyate maktyA jinAnAmuttamaM sukham  // 207 //  nitAntaM yadyapi
tyAgI mahAvinayasaMgataH  /  vIryavAnuttamaizvaryo bhavAn guNavibhUSitaH  // 208
//  madarzanaM tathApyetattava mA bhUdanarthakam  /  amoghamiti yAce'haM
bhavantaM grahaNaM prati  // 209 //  amoghavijayA nAma zakti rUpavikAriNIm  /
vidyAM gRhANa lakeza mA vadhIH praNayaM mama  // 210 //  ekayA dazayA kasya kAlo
gacchati sajane  /  vipado'nantarA saMpat saMpado'nantarA vipat  // 211 //  ato
vipadi jAtAyAmAsannAyAM kuto'pi te  /  kurvatI parasaMbAdhaM pAlikeyaM
bhaviSyati  // 22 //  AsatAM mAnuSAstAvadvibhyatyasyAH surA api  /
vahnijvAlAparItAyAH zaktervipulazaktayaH  // 213 //  azaknuvaMstataH katu
praNayasyAsya maiJjanam  /  gRhItRlAghavaM lebhe kRcchAt kailAsakampana  // 21
//  kRtvAJjaliM namasyAM ca saMbhASitadazAnanaH  /  jagAma dharaNaH sthAnaM
nijaM prakaTasaMmadaH  // 215 //  kailAsako kampita karanevAle rAvaNane kahA ki
mujhe mAlUma hai-Apa nAgarAja dharaNendra haiN| so maiM Apase hI pUchatA hU~
bhalA Apa hI batalAie  /  / 200 //  ki jina-vandanAke samAna aura kauna-sI zubha
vastu hai jise dene ke lie udyata hue Apase maiM mA~gU  // 201 /  /  taba
nAgarAjane kahA ki he rAvaNa! suna, jinendra-vandanAke samAna aura dUsarI vastu
kalyANakArI nahIM hai  // 202 //  jo jina-bhakti acchI taraha upAsanA karanepara
nirvANa sukha pradAna karatI hai usake tulya dUsarI vastu na to huI hai aura na
hogI  // 203|| yaha sana rAvaNane kahA ki jaba jinendra-vandanAse baDhakara aura
kucha nahIM hai aura vaha mujhe prApta hai taba he mahAbuddhimAn ! tumhIM kaho
isase adhika aura kisa vastukI yAcanA tumase karUM  // 204 //  nAgarAjane phira
kahA ki tumhArA yaha kahanA saca hai| vAstavameM jo vastu jina-bhaktise asAdhya
ho vaha hai hI nahIM  // 205 //  tumhAre samAna, hamAre samAna aura indra Adike
samAna jo bhI sukhake AdhAra haiM ve saba jina-bhaktise hI hue haiM  // 206 //
yaha saMsArakA sukha to atyanta alpa tathA bAdhAse sahita hai ataH ise rahane
do, jina-bhaktise to mokSakA bhI uttama sukha prApta ho jAtA hai  /  / 207 /  /
yadyapi tU tyAgI hai, mahAvinayase yukta hai, vIryavAn hai, uttama aizvaryase
sahita hai aura guNoMse vibhUSita hai tathApi tere lie merA jo amogha darzana
huA hai vaha vyartha na ho isalie maiM tujhase kucha grahaNa karanekI yAcanA
karatA hU~  // 208209 //  he laMkeza ! jisase manacAhe rUpa banAye jA sakate
haiM aisI amoghavijayA zakti nAmakI vidyA maiM tujhe detA hU~ so grahaNa kara,
merA sneha khaNDita mata kara  // 210 //  he bhalemAnuSa ! eka hI dazAmeM kisakA
kAla bItatA hai ? vipattike bAda sampatti aura sampattike bAda vipatti sabhIko
prApta hotI hai  /  / 211 //  isalie yadi kadAcit kisI kAraNavaza vipatti tere
samIpa AyegI to yaha vidyA zatruko bAdhA pahu~cAtI huI terI rakSaka hogI  /  /
212 /  /  manuSya to dUra raheM agnikI jvAlAoMse vyApta isa zaktise vipula
zaktike dhAraka deva bhI bhayabhIta rahate haiM  // 213 /  /  Akhira, rAvaNa
nAgarAjake isa snehako bhaMga nahIM kara sakA aura usane bar3I kaThinAIse
grahaNa karanevAleko laghutA prApta kI  // 214 //  tadanantara hAtha jor3akara
aura pUjA kara rAvaNase 1. jinendrAjJA ba.  /  2. sajjanaH ma.  /  3. bhAjanam
ma.  /  .

Page #273 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ninth Chapter  The Naga King, having conversed, went to his own place with
great joy. ||215||  Having stayed on Mount Kailasa for twenty-two and a half
months, Ravana also, after paying homage to the Jina, went to the desired place.
||216||  Knowing the turmoil of his mind, Bali, the Muni, considered himself
bound by evil karma and went to the Guru to perform penance. ||217||  Just as
Vishnu Kumar, the great Muni, became happy after performing penance, so too did
Bali, the Muni, become happy after the removal of the thorn from his heart
through penance. ||218||  Through conduct, secrecy, religion, non-observation,
assemblies, and endurance of the Pariá¹£aha, Bali, the Muni, attained MahÄsamvara.
He stopped the creation of new karmas and began to destroy the accumulated
karmas through tapas. In this way, through Samvara and Nirjara, he attained
Kevala Jnana. ||219-220||  Finally, having destroyed the eight karmas, he went
to the peak of the three worlds, where infinite happiness is attained. ||221||
Knowing, "I am defeated by one who is capable of conquering the senses," Ravana
became humble before the Sadhus. ||222||  Possessing right faith, with firm
devotion to the Jina, Ravana, not satisfied with supreme pleasures, remained as
he desired. ||223||  Gautama Swami said to King Åreá¹ika, "O Åreá¹ika! The noble
person who, being devoted to good qualities, listens to this story of Bali, the
Muni, will never be defeated by others and will attain the radiant position like
the sun." ||224||  Thus, the ninth chapter of the Padmacharita, composed by the
Acharya Ravishena, known as Ärá¹£a, which narrates the Nirvana of Bali, is
complete. ||9||  **Notes:**  * **Samvara:** Cessation of the inflow of new
karmas. * **Nirjara:** Destruction of accumulated karmas. * **Kevala Jnana:**
Omniscience. * **Pariá¹£aha:** A group of people who are hostile to the Jain
faith. * **MahÄsamvara:** A state of complete spiritual purity. * **Jina:** A
victorious one, a title given to the Tirthankaras. * **Sadhus:** Holy men,
ascetics. * **Ärá¹£a:** A term used to describe something that is ancient or
traditional.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 navamaM parva 223 mAsamAtra dazAsyo'pi sthitvA kailAsamUrdhani  /  preNipatya
jinaM dezaM prayayAvabhivAJchitam  // 216 //  vijJAya manasaH kSobhAdAtmAnaM
baddhaduSkRtam  /  prAyazcittaM gurordezaM gatvA bAlirazizriyat  // 217 //
nirgatasvAntazalyazce babhUva sukhitaH punaH  /  bAliniyamanaM kRtvA yathA
viSNumahAmuniH  // 218 //  cAritrAd guptito dharmAdanuprekSaNataH sadA  /
samitibhyaH parAbhUteH parISahagaNasya ca  // 219 //  mahAsaMvaramAsAdya
karmApUrvamanarjayan  /  nAzayaMstapasA cAttaM prAptaH kevalasaMgatam  // 220 //
karmASTakavinirmukto yayau trailokyamastakam  /  sukhaM nirupama yasminnavasAna
vivarjitam  // 221 //  indriyANAM jaye zakto yastenAsmi parAjitaH  /  iti
vijJAya laGkazaH sAdhUnAM praNato'bhavat  // 222 //  samyagdarzanasaMpanno
dRDhabhaktirjinezvare  /  atRptaH prmainogairtissttht sa yathepsitam  // 223 /
/  rathoddhatAvRttam bAliceSTitamidaM zRNoti yo bhAvatatparamatiH zubho janaH  /
naiSa yAti parataH parAmavaM prApnute ca ravimAsuraM padam  // 224 //  ityArSe
raviSeNAcAryaprokta padmacarite bAlinirvANAbhidhAnaM nAma navamaM parva  // 9 //
vArtAlApa karatA huA nAgarAja bar3e harSase apane sthAnapara calA gayA  // 215
//  rAvaNa bhI eka mAha taka kailAsa parvatapara rahakara tathA jinendradevako
namaskAra kara icchita sthalako calA gayA  /  / 216|| munirAja bAlIne manameM
kSobha utpanna honese apane Apako pApa karmakA bandha karanevAlA samajha garuke
pAsa jAkara prAyazcitta grahaNa kiyA  // 217|| jisa prakAra viSNakumAra mahAmuni
prAyazcitta kara sukhI hae the usI prakAra bAlI manirAja bhI prAyazcitta dvArA
hRdayakI zalya nikala jAnese sukhI hue  /  / 218 /  /  cAritra, gupti, dharma,
anuprekSA, samiti aura parISaha sahana karanese bAlI munirAja mahAsaMvarako
prApta hue  /  navIna karmokA ajaMna unhoMne banda kara diyA aura pahaleke
saMcita karmokA tapake dvArA nAza karanA zurU kiyaa| isa taraha saMvara aura
nirjarAke dvArA ve kevalajJAnako prApta hue  // 219-220 /  /  anta meM ATha
karmoko naSTa kara ve tIna lokake usa zikharapara jA pahuMce jahAM ananta sukha
prApta hotA hai  /  / 221 //  jo indriyoMko jItane meM samartha hai maiM usase
hArA hU~ yaha jAnakara aba rAvaNa sAdhuoMke samakSa namra rahane lagA  // 222 //
jo samyagdarzanase sampanna thA, aura jinendra devameM jisakI dRr3ha bhakti thI
aisA rAvaNa parama bhogoMse tRpta na hotA huA icchAnusAra rahane lagA  // 223 /
/  gautama svAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he zreNika ! jo uttama manuSya
zubhabhAvoMmeM tatpara hotA huA bAlI munike isa caritrako sunatA hai vaha kabhI
parase parAbhavako prApta nahIM hotA aura sUryake samAna dedIpyamAna padako
prApta hotA hai  // 224 /  /  isa prakAra ArSanAmase prasiddha raviSeNAcArya
viracita padmacaritameM bAli nirvANakA kathana karanevAlA navama parva pUrNa huA
// 9 //  4. -manirjayana m.| 5. cAttaprApta: kevala. 1. pratipatya ma.  /  2.
zalyasya m.| 3. -danupreSaNataH ma., kh.| saMgamam ma. | cAntamante
kevalasaMgamaH k.|

Page #274 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
### The Tenth Chapter  Thus, O Shrenika, you have come to know this story. Now,
I will speak further; listen to what I hold dear. à¥¥1à¥¥  In Jyotipur, the daughter
of the flame, a girl named Sutara was born from the womb of Queen HrÄ«. She was
renowned throughout the earth for her beauty and seemed to have come straight
from the abode of the lotus, like Lakshmi herself. à¥¥2-3à¥¥  One day, the wicked
Vidyadhara named Sahasagati, born of King Chakranka and Queen Anumati, was
wandering about at his will and saw Sutara. à¥¥4à¥¥  Upon seeing her, he was pierced
by the arrow of desire and was immensely troubled. Mind always enveloped with
the thought of Sutara, he behaved as if he were mad. à¥¥5à¥¥  He sent messenger
after messenger, pleading for her, while on the other side, Sugriva was also
requesting the lovely maiden. à¥¥6à¥¥  'To whom should I give my daughter?' With
this doubt arising in him, King Agnishikha was unable to decide, and his soul
remained in a state of turmoil. Finally, he inquired of the great sage. à¥¥7à¥¥  The
great sage Munichandra then spoke: "Sahasagati will not live long; he is of
short life, while Sugriva, on the other hand, is of long life and bearer of
supreme prosperity." à¥¥8à¥¥  Due to the strength of the side of Chakranka, the
father of Sahasagati, King Agnishikha could not resolve his doubts about
Munichandraâs words. Then, Munichandra caused his words to be firmly established
by taking two lamps, two bulls, and a royal elephant as a sign. à¥¥9à¥¥  Afterward,
knowing the words of the sage to be like nectar, King Agnishikha brought his
daughter Sutara and, with auspicious rites, gave her to Sugriva. à¥¥10à¥¥  Sugriva,
whose merit was great, married the maiden and obtained abundant wealth along
with excellent enjoyments of carnal pleasures. à¥¥11à¥¥  Subsequently, Sugriva and
Sutara had two sons in due course, both of whom were exceedingly handsome. The
elder son was named Anga, and the younger son became renowned as Angada. à¥¥12à¥¥

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaM parva evaM tAvadidaM vRtaM tava zreNika veditam  /  ataH paraM
pravakSyAmi zRNu te paramIhitam  //  1 //  hutAzanazikhasyAsIt sutA 'jyotiHpure
varA  /  hIsaMjJAyAM samutpannA yoSiti strIguNAnvitA  // 2 //  sutAreti gatA
khyAtiM zobhayA sakalAvanau  /  padmavAsaM parityajya lakSmIriva samAgatA ||3||
cakrAGkatanayo'pazyat paryaTan svecchayAnyadA  /  tAM sAhasagatirnAmnA
duSTo'numatisaMbhavaH ||4|| tato'sau kAmazalyena zalyito'tyantaduHkhitaH  /
sutArAM manasA nityamuvAhonmattavibhramaH ||5|| uparyupari yAtaizca tAM sa
dUtairayAcata  /  sugrIvo'pi tathaivaitAM yAcate sma manoharAm  // 6 //
dvaidhIbhAvamupetena hutAzanazikhena ca  /  pRSTo munirmahAjJAnI
nizcayavyAkulAtmanA  // 7 //  uktaM ca municandreNa na sAhasagatizviram  /
jIviSyati cirAyustu sugrIvaH paramodayaH  //  8  //  cakrApakSasaMprItyA
hutAzastu vinizvayaH  /  dIpau vRSau gajendrau ca nimittamakarod dRDham ||9||
tato munigiraM jJAtvA niyatAmamRtopamAm  /  sugrIvAya sutA dattAnIya pitrA
samaGgalam  // 10 //  kRtvA pANigRhItAM tAM sugrIvaH puNyasaMcayaH  /  iyAya
kAmaviSayaM sAravattaM susaMpadam  //  11 //  tataH kramAttayoH putrau jAtau
rUpamahotsavau  /  jyAyAnaGgo'nujastasya prathito'GgadasaMjJayA ||12|| 1
athAnantara---- gautamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he zreNika ! isa
taraha tumane bAlIkA vRttAnta jAnA  /  aba isake Age tere lie sugrIva aura
sutArAkA zreSTha carita kahatA hU~ so suna  // 1 //  jyotiHpura nAmA nagara meM
rAjA agnizikhakI rAnI hrI devIke udarase utpanna eka sutArA nAmakI kanyA thI  /
zobhAse samasta pRthivImeM prasiddha thI aura aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno
kamalarUpI AvAsako chor3akara lakSmI hI A gayI ho  // 2- 3 || eka dina rAjA
cakrAMka aura anumati rAnIse utpanna sAhasagati nAmaka duSTa vidyAdhara apanI
icchAse idhara-udhara bhramaNa kara rahA thA so usane sutArA dekhI ||4|| use
dekhakara vaha kAmarUpI zalyase viddha hokara atyanta du:khI huA  /  vaha
sutArAko nirantara apane manameM dhAraNa karatA thA aura unmatta jaisI usakI
ceSTA thI ||5|| idhara vaha ekake bAda eka dUta bhejakara usakI yAcanA karatA
thA udhara sugrIva bhI usa manohara kanyAko yAcanA karatA thA || 6 || 'apanI
kanyA do meM se kise dU~' isa prakAra dvaidhIbhAvako prApta huA rAjA agnizikha
nizcaya nahIM kara sakA isalie usakI AtmA nirantara vyAkula rahatI thI  /
Akhira mahAjJAnI munirAja se pUchA ||7|| taba mahAjJAnI municandrane kahA ki
sAhasagati cirakAla taka jIvita nahIM rahegA - alpAyu hai aura sugrIva isake
viparIta parama abhyudayakA dhAraka tathA cirAyu hai ||8|| rAjA agnizikha,
sAhasagatike pitA cakrAMkakA pakSa prabala honese municandra ke vacanoMkA
nizcaya nahIM kara sakA taba municandrane do dIpaka, do vRSa aura gajarAjoMko
nimitta banAkara use apanI bAtakA dRr3ha nizcaya karA diyA ||9|| tadanantara
munirAjake amRta tulya vacanoMkA nizcaya kara pitA agnizikhane apanI putrI
sutArA lAkara maMgalAcArapUrvaka sugrIvake lie de dI ||10|| jisakA puNyakA
saMcaya prabala thA aisA sugrIva usa kanyAko vivAha kara bar3I sampadAke sAtha
zreSTha kAmopabhogako prApta huA  // 11 //  tadanantara sugrIva aura sutArAke
kramase do putra utpanna hue| donoM hI atyanta sundara the  /  unameM se bar3e
putrakA nAma aMga thA aura choTA putra aMgadake nAmase prasiddha thA  //  12 //
1. parva ma.  /  2. dyotiHpure ma, ba  /  3. duSTAnumati ma.  /  4. yuktaM ca ma
/  5. nItvA ma  /  6. susaMmadam ma., ka., kha.  /

Page #275 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Chapter Ten**  Even now, the shameless son of the celestial architect does not
abandon his hope for the daughter. How shameful, this tainted hope born from
desire! || 13 || This lustful man, consumed by the fire of passion, constantly
reflects on how he can obtain that bliss-giving maiden. || 14 || When shall I
kiss her face, which outshines the moon, her lips adorned with a resplendent red
hue? || 15 || When shall I play with her in the gardens of Nandana, and when
shall I partake in the joy that comes from the touch of her ample breasts? || 16
|| Thus, contemplating the reasons for their union, he recalled the
transformative power of the ShÄrmuÅÄ« knowledge. || 17 || Just as a dear friend
continuously worships his sorrowful companion, the son of the celestial
architect ascended the great Himalayas, seeking refuge in its inaccessible cave
and began to engage in the worship of that knowledge. || 18 || Meanwhile,
Ravana, having set out to conquer the directions, wandered around gazing at the
earth adorned with mountains and forests. || 19 || After defeating the kings of
the Vidyadhara residing in various islands, the mighty Ravana appointed them
back in their respective kingdoms. || 20 || His heart was tender towards the
kings he had subdued, just as a father feels affection for his sons. Truly so,
for great souls are easily satisfied with mere respects. || 21 || He had
subjugated all those bold kings of the Rakshasa and vanara lineages. || 22 ||
When Ravana traveled the skies with his vast army, his wind-like speed rendered
the other Vidyadharas incapable of withstanding it. || 23 || The kings such as
SandhyÄkÄra, Suvela, HemÄpÅ«rá¹a, Suyodhana, Haá¹sadvÄ«pa, and ParihÄlÄda came
forth, presenting gifts and bowing with folded hands, honoring him with their
foreheads. Ravana, in return, satisfied them with sweet words and restored their
fortunes to their former state. || 24 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaM parva adyApi naiva nirlajacakAGkasya zarIrajaH  /  parityajati tatrAzAM
dhiGmanobhavadUSitAm  //  13  //  dadhyau 'ceti sa kAmAgnidagdho nissAramAnasaH
/  kenopAyena tAM kanyAM lapsye nirvRtidAyinIm  //  14  //  kadA nu vadanaM
tasyAH zobhAjitanizAkaram  /  cumbiSyAmi sphuracchoNacchavicchannaradacchadam
// 15 //  yAmi kadA sArdhaM tayA nandanavakSasi  /  kadA vApsyAmi
tatpInastanasparzasukhotsavam  // 16 //  u ityabhidhyAyatastasya
tatsamAgamakAraNam  /  sasmAra zemuSIvidyAmAkRteH parivartinIm  // 17 //
himavantaM tato gatvA guhAmAzritya durgamAm  /  ArAdhayitumArebhe duHkhitaM
priyamitravat  //  18  //  atrAntare viniSkrAnto dizo jetuM dazAnanaH  /
babhrAma dharaNIM pazyan girikAntArabhUSitAm  // 19 //  jitvA vidyAdharAdhIzAn
dvIpAntaragatAn vazI  /  bhUyo nyayojayat sveSu rASTreSu pRthuzAsanaH  // 20 //
vazIkRteSu tasyAsIt khagasiMheSu mAnasam  /  putreSviva mahecchA hi
tuSyantyAnatimAtrataH  //  21  //  rakSasAmanvaye yo'bhUd yo vA zAkhAmRgAnvaye
/  udbalaH khecarAdhIzaH sarvaM taM vazamAnayat  // 22 //  mahAsAdhanayuktasya
vrajato'sya vihAyasA  /  vegamArutamapyanye khecarAH sodumakSamAH  // 23 //
saMdhyAkArAH suvelAzca hemApUrNAH suyodhanAH  /  haMsadvIpAH parihlAdA ityAdyA
janatAdhipAH  // 24 //  gRhItaprabhRtA gatvA mustaM mUrdhapANayaH  /  AzvAsitAH
suvANIbhistathAvasthitasaMpadaH  //  25 //  rAjA cakrAMkakA putra sAhasagati
itanA nirlajja thA ki vaha aba bhI sutArAkI AzA nahIM chor3a rahA thA so AcAryaM
kahate haiM ki isa kAmase dUSita AzAko dhikkAra ho ||13|| jo kAmAgnise jala rahA
thA aisA, sArahIna manakA dhAraka sAhasagati nirantara yahI vicAra karatA rahatA
thA ki maiM sukha denevAlI usa kanyAko kisa upAya se prApta kara sakU~gA ||14||
jisane apanI zobhAse candramAko jIta liyA hai aura jisakA oMTha sphurAyamAna
lAla kAntise AcchAdita haiM aise usake mukhakA kaba cumbana karU~gA ? ||15||
nandanavanake madhya meM usake sAtha kaba krIr3A karU~gA, aura usake sthUla
stanoMke sparzajanya sukhotsavako kaba prApta hoU~gA || 16 || isa prakAra usake
samAgama - ke kAraNoMkA dhyAna karate hue usane rUpa badalanevAlI zemuSI nAmaka
vidyAkA smaraNa kiyA || 17 | jisa prakAra priya mitra apane duHkhI mitrakI
nirantara ArAdhanA karatA hai usI prakAra sAhasagati himavAn parvatapara jAkara
usakI durgaMma guhAkA Azraya le usa vidyAkI ArAdhanA karane lagA ||18||
athAnantara isI bIcameM rAvaNa digvijaya karaneke lie nikalA so parvata aura
vanoMse vibhUSita pRthivIko dekhatA huA bhramaNa karane lagA || 19|| vizAla
AjJAko dhAraNa karanevAle jitendriya rAvaNane dUsare dUsare dvIpoMmeM sthita
vidyAdhara rAjAoMko jItakara unheM phirase apaneapane dezoM meM niyukta kiyA
||20|| jina vidyAdhara rAjAoMko vaha vazameM kara cukA thA una saba - para usakA
mana putroMke samAna snigdha thA arthAt jisa prakAra pitAkA mana putroMpara
snehapUrNaM hotA hai usI prakAra dazAnanakA mana vazIkRta rAjAoMpara snehapUrNa
thA  /  so ThIka hI hai kyoMki mahApuruSa namaskAra mAtra se santuSTa ho jAte
haiM ||21|| rAkSasavaMza aura vAnaravaMzameM jo bhI uddhata vidyAdhara rAjA the
una sabako usane vaza meM kiyA thA ||22|| bar3I bhArI senAke sAtha jaba rAvaNa
AkAzamArga se jAtA thA taba usakI vegajanya vAyuko anya vidyAdhara sahana
karanemeM asamarthaM ho jAte the ||23|| sandhyAkAra, suvela, hemApUrNaM,
suyodhana, haMsadvIpa aura parihlAda Adi jo rAjA the ve saba bheMTa le-lekara
tathA hAtha jor3a mastakase lagA-lagAkara use namaskAra karate the aura rAvaNa
bhI acche-acche vacanoMse unheM santuSTa kara unakI sampadAoMko pUrvavat 225 1.
cetasi ma.  /  2 nandanavanamadhye  /  3. ityabhidhAvatastasya ma  /  4.
hemApUrNAzca yodhanAH ka., ba.  /  5. tathAvasitasaMpadaH ma.  /  29

Page #276 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, Even though they were dwelling in very difficult places,
the lords of the sky bowed down to his feet with auspicious previous deeds.
||26|| The Acharya says that among all strengths, the strength created by
actions is the greatest. With its rise, what king could not be conquered by him?
That is, he was capable of conquering everyone. ||27|| Then, as he was about to
go to conquer Indra, the king of the Vidhyadharas of Rathnapur, he remembered
his sister Chandra-nakha and her husband Khar-dushan with great affection.
||28|| He set out and reached the vicinity of Patala-lanka. When his sister
heard that her beloved brother was near and had arrived, she was filled with
excitement. ||29|| It was the last watch of the night, and Khar-dushan was
sleeping peacefully. Chandra-nakha woke him up with great love. ||30|| Then,
Khar-dushan, emerging from Alankar-odayapur (Patala-lanka), worshipped Ravana
with great devotion and with great celebration. ||31|| Ravana, in turn,
worshipped his sister with affection. It is true that there is no love greater
than the love of a brother. ||32|| Khar-dushan showed Ravana fourteen thousand
Vidhyadharas who could change their forms at will. ||33|| Ravana made Khar-
dushan, who was very skilled, a valiant warrior, and who had attracted the minds
of all his vassals with his qualities, his equal in command. ||34|| Just as the
Chamarendra, surrounded by a host of Asuras, emerges from Patala, so Ravana,
accompanied by Khar-dushan and other Vidhyadharas, who were skilled in all kinds
of weapons, set out from Patala-lanka. ||35|| Hidamba, Haihido, Dimba, Vikata,
Trijata, Haya, Makota, Sujata, Tanka, the king of Kishkindha, Tripura, Malaya,
Hemapala, Kola, and Vasundhara, and other kings were riding on various vehicles.
All these kings were adorned with various weapons. ||36-37|| Just as the month
of Shravana is filled with clouds filled with lightning and rainbows, so was
Dasanan filled with all those Vidhyadhara kings. ||38|| Thus, shaking Kailasa,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe zritA yespi sudurgANi sthAnAnyambaragAdhipAH  /  namitAste'pi
tatpAdau zobhanaiH pUrvakarmabhiH  //  26  //  balAnAM hi samastAnAM balaM
karmakRtaM param  /  tasyodaye sa kaM jetu na samartho 'narezvaraH  //  27 //
athendrajitaye gantuM pravRttenAmunA smRtA  /  svasAtyantaghanasnehAt
pAraMparyAcca tatpatiH ||28|| prasthitazca sa taM dezaM zrutaH svasrA samutkayA
/  prAptaH sthitaH samAsanne deze prItisamutkaTaH  // 29 //  tatazcaramayAmAdau
kSapAyAH zayitaH sukham  /  kaikaseyyA paraprItyA bodhitaH kharadUSaNaH  // 30
//  tato nirgatya tenAsAvalaMkArodayAt purAt  /  dazavaktro mahAbhaktyA pUjitaH
paramotsabaiH  //  31 //  rAvaNo'pi svasuH prItyA cakre'sya pratipUjanam  /
prAyo hi sodarasnehAt paraH sneho na vidyate ||32|| caturdazasahasrANi
kAmarUpavikAriNAm  /  darzitAni dazAsyAya tena vyomavicAriNAm  // 33 //
dUSaNAkhyazva senAyAH patirAtmasamaH kRtI  /  zUro
guNasamAkRSTasarvasAmantamAnasaH ||34|| etaizca prasthitaH sAkaM
kRtasarvAstrakauzalaiH  /  AvRto'surasaMghAtaiH pAtAlAccAmaro yathA ||35||
hiDambo haihiDo Dimbo vikaTatrijaTo hayaH  /  sAkorTaH sujaTaSTaGkaH
kiSkindhAdhipatistathA  // 36 //  tripuro malayo hemapAlakolavasundharAH  /
nAnAyAnasamArUDhA nAnAzastravirAjitAH || 37  //  evamAdyaiH khagAdhIzairApupUre
sa nirgataH  /  vidyudindradhanuryuktairghanaudhaiH zrAvaNo yathA  //  38  //
sahasramadhikaM jAtaM vihAyastalacAriNAm | akSauhiNIpramANAnAM
"kailAsollAsakAriNaH || 39 //  226 avasthita rakhatA thA || 24 - 25 || jo
vidyAdhara rAjA atyanta durgama sthAnoMmeM rahate the unhoMne bhI uttamottama
ziSTAcAra ke sAtha rAvaNake caraNoMmeM namaskAra kiyA thA ||26|| AcArya kahate
haiM ki saba baloMmeM karmoMke dvArA kiyA huA bala hI zreSTha bala hai so usakA
udaya rahate hue rAvaNa kise jItane ke lie samarthaM nahIM huA thA ? arthAt vaha
sabhIko jItanemeM samarthaM thA ||27|| athAnantara - rAvaNa rathanUpura nagarake
rAjA indra vidyAdharako jItaneke lie pravRtta huA so usane isa avasara para
apanI bahana candranakhA aura usake pati kharadUSaNakA bar3e bhArI snehase
smaraNa kiyA ||28|| prasthAna kara pAtAlalaMkAke samIpa pahu~cA  /  jaba
bahanako isa bAtakA patA calA ki prIti se bharA hamArA bhAI nikaTa hI Akara
sthita hai taba vaha utkaNThAse bhara gayI ||29|| usa samaya rAtrikA pichalA
pahara thA aura kharadUSaNa sukhase so rahA thA so candranakhAne bar3e premase
use jagAyA ||30|| tadanantara kharadUSaNane alaMkArodayapura ( pAtAlalaMkA ) se
nikalakara bar3I bhakti aura bahuta bhArI utsavase rAvaNa kI pUjA kI  //  31  //
rAvaNane bhI badale meM prItipUrvaka bahanakI pUjA kI so ThIka hI hai kyoMki
saMsArameM bhAIke snehase bar3hakara dUsarA sneha nahIM hai ||32|| kharadUSaNane
rAvaNa ke lie icchAnusAra rUpa badalanevAle caudaha hajAra vidyAdhara dikhalAye
||33|| jo atyanta kuzala thA, zUravIra thA aura jisane apane guNoMse samasta
sAmantoMke manako apanI ora khIMca liyA thA aise kharadUSaNako rAvaNane apane
samAna senApati banAyA ||34|| jisa prakAra asuroMke samUha se AvRta cAmarendra
pAtAla se nikalakara prasthAna karatA hai usI prakAra rAvaNane sarvaprakArake
zastroM meM kauzala prApta karanevAle kharadUSaNa Adi vidyAdharoMke sAtha
pAtAlalaMkA se nikalakara prasthAna kiyA ||35|| hiDamba, haihiDa, Dimba, vikaTa,
trijaTa, haya, mAkoTa, sujaTa, TaMka, kiSkindhAdhipati, tripura, malaya,
hemapAla, kola aura vasundhara Adi rAjA nAnA prakArake vAhanoMpara ArUr3ha
hokara sAtha jA rahe the  /  ye sabhI rAjA nAnA prakArake zastroMse suzobhita
//  36-37  //  jisa prakAra bijalI aura indradhanuSase yukta meghoMke samUhase
sAvanakA mAha bhara jAtA hai usI prakAra una samasta vidyAdhara rAjAoMse
dazAnana bhara gayA thA ||38|| isa prakAra kailAsako kampita 1 1. narezvara ma.
/  2. smRtaH ma kha  /  3. candranakhayA  /  4. mAkoTa strijaTaSTaMka: ma.  /
5. kelAzo - llAsakAriNAm ma.  /

Page #277 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Vashma Parva **227**  Ravana had gathered an army of more than a thousand
Akshauhinis of Vidyadharas.  Each of them was protected by thousands of Devas,
adorned with jewels, and bearing the weight of countless virtues.  They were
fanned by chamaras resembling clusters of moonbeams, and Ravana himself was
adorned with a white umbrella, his long arms graceful and beautiful.  He rode
atop the Pushpaka Vimana, which shone like the sun on Mount Meru, and his aerial
chariot covered the sky like a celestial canopy.  Ravana, filled with the desire
to destroy Indra, marched forward with his army, driven by his ambition.  The
sky resembled an ocean, filled with the brilliance of countless jewels.  The
chamaras, like waves, rippled across the heavens.  The sky was filled with
celestial beings, like fish in the sea, and the celestial chariots, like
whirlpools, swirled through the air.  The army, like crocodiles, consisted of
horses, elephants, and foot soldiers, and the weapons, like waves, crashed
through the sky.  The sky was adorned with towering banners, adorned with
peacock feathers, resembling a sky filled with diamonds and sapphires.  The
celestial chariots, adorned with jewels and soaring peaks, made the sky resemble
a celestial realm.  King Shrenik, the ruler of Magadha, said to Gautam Swami,
"What more needs to be said? I believe even the Devas are terrified at the sight
of Ravana's army."  Among Ravana's forces were Indrajeet, Meghavahan,
Kumbhakarna, Vibhishan, Kharadushan, Nikumbha, and Kumbha, along with countless
other warriors skilled in battle, all blessed with divine knowledge and mastery
of weapons and scriptures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vazamaM parva 227 amarANAM sahasreNa pratyekaM kRtapAlanaiH  /  ratnairanugato
nAnAguNasaMghAtadhArimiH  // 40 //  candrarazmicayAkAraizcAmarairupavIjitaH  /
samucchritasitacchatrazcArurUpamahAbhujaH  // 41 //  puSpakAgraM samArUDho
mandarastharavidyutiH  /  tigmAMzumAlino mArga chAdayan yAnasaMpadA  // 42 //
indradhvaMsanamAdhAya mAnase puruvikramaH  /  prayANakairabhipretaiH prayAti sma
dazAnanaH  // 43 //  nAnAratnakRtacchAyaM cAmarormisamAkulam  /
taddaNDamInasaMghAtaM chatrAvartazatAcitam  // 44 //
vAjimAtaGgapAdAtagrahasaMghAtamISaNam  /  ullasacchasnakallolamakarot sa
khamarNavam  // 45 //  tunggvrhinnpicchaughshirobhirmaasurairdhvjaiH| vajreriva
kvacid vyAptaM sutrAmopAyanainamaH  // 46 //
nAnAratnakRtodyotaistuGgazRGgavirAjitaiH  /  saMcaratsuralokAbhaM vimAnanivahaiH
kvacit  // 47 //  pRthvyA kiM magadhAdhIza girAtra prikiirnnyaa| manye
tatsainyamAlokya bibhuyustridazA api  // 48 //  indra jinmeghavAhazca
kumbhakarNo vibhISaNaH  /  kharadUSaNanAmA ca nikumbhaH kummasaMjJakaH  // 49 //
ete cAnye ca bahavaH svajanA rnnkovidaaH| siddhavidyAmahAbhAsaH
zastrazAstrakRtazrayAH  // 50 //  karanevAle rAvaNake kucha adhika eka hajAra
akSauhiNI pramANa vidyAdharoMkI senA ikaTThI ho gayI thI  // 39 /  /  pratyekake
hajAra-hajAra deva jinakI rakSA karate the aura jo nAnA guNoMke samUhako dhAraNa
karanevAle the aise ratna usake sAtha calate the  // 40 //  candramAkI kiraNoMke
samUhake samAna jinakA AkAra thA aise camara usapara Dhole jA rahe the| usake
sirapara sapheda chatra laga rahA thA aura usakI lambI-lambI bhujAe~ sundara
rUpako dhAraNa karanevAlI thIM  // 41 //  vaha puSpaka vimAnake agrabhAgapara
ArUr3ha thA jisase meruparvatapara sthita sUryake samAna kAntiko dhAraNa kara
rahA thaa| vaha apanI yAnarUpI sampattike dvArA sUryakA mArga arthAt AkAzako
AcchAdita kara rahA thA  // 42 //  prabala parAkramakA dhArI rAvaNa manameM
indrake vinAzakA saMkalpa kara icchAnukUla prayANakoMse nirantara Age bar3hatA
jAtA thA  // 43 /  /  usa samaya vaha AkAzako ThIka samadrake samAna banA rahA
thA kyoMki jisa prakAra samudra meM nAnA prakArake ratnoMko kAnti vyApta hotI
hai usI prakAra AkAzameM nAnA prakArake ratnoMkI kAnti phaila rahI thii| jisa
prakAra samudra taraMgoMse yukta hotA hai usI prakAra AkAza cAmararUpI
taraMgoMse yukta hotA thaa| jisa prakAra samudrameM mIna arthAt machaliyoMkA
samUha hotA hai usI prakAra AkAza meM daNDarUpI machaliyoMkA samUha thaa| jisa
prakAra samudra saikar3oM AvartoM arthAt bhramaroMse sahita hotA hai usI prakAra
AkAza bhI chatrarUpI saikar3oM bhramaroMse yukta thaa| jisa prakAra samudra
magaramacchoMke samUhase bhayaMkara hotA hai usI prakAra AkAza bhI ghor3e, hAthI
aura paidala yoddhArUpI magaramacchoMse bhayaMkara thA tathA jisa prakAra
samudrameM aneka kallola arthAt taraMga uThate rahate haiM usI prakAra AkAzameM
bhI aneka zastrarUpI taraMga uTha rahe the  /  / 44-45|| jinake agrabhAgapara
mayUrapicchoMkA samUha vidyamAna thA aisI camakIlI U~cI dhvajAoMse kahIM AkAza
aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno indranIlamaNiyoMse yukta hIroMse hI vyApta ho  //
46|| jinameM nAnA prakArake ratnoMkA prakAza phaila rahA thA aura jo U~ce-U~ce
zikharoMse suzobhita the aise vimAnoMke samUhase AkAza kahIM calate-phirate
svargalokake samAna jAna par3atA thA  // 47 //  gautamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase
kahate haiM ki magadhezvara ! isa viSayameM bahuta kahanese kyA ? mujhe to aisA
lagatA hai ki rAvaNakI senA dekhakara deva bhI bhayabhIta ho rahe the  // 48 //
jinheM vidyArUpI mahAprakAza prApta thA aura zakhna tathA zAstrameM jinhoMne
parizrama kiyA thA aise indrajit, meghavAhana, kumbhakarNa, vibhISaNa,
kharadUSaNa, nikumbha aura kumbha, ye tathA inake sivAya yuddha meM kuzala anya
aneka AtmIyajana rAvaNake pIche1. mandarasthira-vidyutiH m.|
mandarasthitavidyutiH kha., k.| 2. indradhvaMsaM samAdhAya kha., k.| 3.
taddaNDamAna ma.  /  4. suralokAttaM m.|

Page #278 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
228 In the Padma Purana, the Hepayantas, possessing great wealth and fortune,
followed Ravana, filled with joy, being renowned for their vast glory. ||51||
Then, as the sun set near the Vindhyas, it seemed to be eclipsed by Ravana's
brilliance, as if ashamed. ||52|| Ravana then stationed his army on the peak of
the Vindhyas, where they found shelter due to their knowledge and power. ||53||
As if fearing Ravana, the moon, the lord of the Rohini constellation, arose,
dispelling the darkness with his rays. ||54|| The night, adorned with stars like
flowers on her head and the moon as her face, arrived before Ravana, like a
beautiful woman wearing a pure sky-colored garment. ||55|| The night was spent
by the celestial beings in pleasant conversation, filled with diverse stories
and appropriate activities. ||56|| Then, awakened by the morning trumpets and
auspicious sounds of the attendants, Ravana performed all the actions of his
body. ||57|| As if having wandered through the entire universe without finding
another refuge, the sun returned to Ravana's shelter. ||58|| Then, Ravana saw
the Narmada River, which seemed to be engaged in a lively conversation with a
multitude of birds, their sweet voices echoing. ||59|| The river, adorned with
foam, appeared to be laughing, her water as pure as crystal, and she was graced
by elephants. ||60|| The Narmada, with her flowing waves like eyebrows, her
whirlpool like a navel, her fish like eyes, her vast banks like hips, adorned
with various flowers, and her pure water like a garment, appeared like a
beautiful woman, filling Ravana with great joy. ||61-62|| The Narmada, sometimes
deep due to the presence of fierce crocodiles, sometimes flowing swiftly,
sometimes moving slowly, and sometimes winding like a serpent, ||63|| was full
of diverse movements, and though fearsome, was also beautiful. Ravana, whose
mind was filled with curiosity, entered the Narmada River with great respect.
||64|| 1. -Uttamaange na ma. | 2. -Miva abhrashta maryadaam kurvati mamuum ma.,
ba. |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 228 padmapurANe mahAsAdhanasaMpannA hepayantaH surazriyam  /  anujagmuratiprItA
rAvaNaM pRthukIrtayaH  // 51 //  tato vindhyAntike tasya jagAmAstaM divAkaraH  /
bailakSyAdiva nicchAyo jito rAvaNatejasA  // 52 //  'uttamAGge ca vindhyasya
tena sainyaM nivezitam  /  vidyAbalasamudbhutai nAkRtasamAzrayam  // 53 //
pradIpa iva cAnItaH kSapayA tasya bhItayA  /  karadUrIkRtadhvAntapaTalo
rohiNIpatiH  // 54 //  tArAgaNaziraHpuSpA zazAGkavadanA nizA  /  prAptA
varAGganevaitaM vimalAmbaradhAriNI  // 55 //  saMkathAbhirvicitrAbhirvyApAraizca
tathocitaH  /  sukhena rajanI nItA nidyA ca nabhazcaraiH  // 56 //  tataH
prabhAtatUryaNa maGgalaizca prabodhitaH  /  cakAra rAvaNaH karma sakalaM
tanugocaram  // 57 //  bhrAntveva bhuvanaM sarvamadRSTvAnyaM samAzrayam  /
punaH zaraNamAyAto rAvaNaM padmabAndhavaH  // 5 //  tato nAnAzakuntaudhaH
kurvadbhirmadhurasvaram  /  saMbhASaNamiva bhraSTamaryAdaM kurvatImayam  // 55
//  dadarza narmadA phenapaTalaiH sasmitAmiva  /  zuddhasphaTikasaMkAzasalilA
dvipabhUSitAm  // 6 //  taraGgabhrUvilAsADhyAmAvartottamanAmikAm  /
visphuracchapharInetrAM pulinorukalatrikAm  // 61 //  nAnApuSpasamAkINoM
vimalodakavAsasam  /  varAGganAmivAlokya mahAprItisupAgataH  // 62 //
ugranakrakulAkrAntAM gambhIrAM veginI kvacit  /  kvacicca prasthitAM mandaM
kvacitkuNDalagAminIm  // 63 //  nAnAceSTitasaMpUrNAM kautukavyAptamAnasaH  /
avatIrNaH sa tAM bhImA ramaNIyAM ca sAdaraH  // 6 //  pIche cala rahe the| ye
sabhI loga baDI-baDI senAoMse sahita the. indrakI lakSmIko lajAte the. atyanta
prItise yukta the aura vizAla kItike dhAraka the  // 49-51 //  tadanantara jaba
rAvaNa vindhyAcalake samIpa pahuMcA taba sUrya asta ho gayA so rAvaNake tejase
parAjita honeke kAraNa lajjAse hI mAno prabhAhIna ho gayA thA  // 52 //
sUryAsta hote hI usane vindhyAcalake zikharapara senA ThaharA dii| vahA~ vidyAke
balase senAko nAnA prakArake Azraya prApta hue the  // 53 //  kiraNoMke dvArA
andhakArake samUhako dUra karanevAlA candramA udita huA so mAno rAvaNase DarI
huI rAtrine uttama dIpaka hI lAkara upasthita kiyA thA  /  / 54 //  tArAgaNa hI
jisake sirake pUSpa the, candramA hI jisakA mukha thA, aura jo nirmala ambara
(AkAza) rUpI ambara (vastra) dhAraNa kara rahI thI aisI uttama nAyikAke samAna
rAtri rAvaNake samIpa AyI  // 55 //  vidyAdharoMne nAnA prakArakI kathAoMse,
yogya vyApAroMse tathA anukUla nidrAse vaha rAtri vyatIta kI  // 56 /  /
tadanantara prAtaHkAlakI turahI aura vandIjanoMke mAMgalika zabdose jAgakara
rAvaNane zarIra sambandhI samasta kArya kiye  // 57 /  /  sUryodaya huA so mAno
sUrya samasta jagaha bhramaNa kara anya Azraya na dekha punaH rAvaNakI zaraNa
meM AyA  /  / 58 //  tadanantara rAvaNane narmadA nadI dekhii| narmadA madhura
zabda karanevAle nAnA pakSiyoMke samUhake sAtha mAno atyadhika vArtAlApa hI kara
rahI thI  // 59 /  /  phenake samUhase aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno ha~sa hI rahI
ho| usakA jala zuddha sphaTikake samAna nirmala thA aura vaha hAthiyoMse
suzobhita thI  // 60 //  vaha narmadA taraMgarUpI bhrakuTIke vilAsase yukta thI,
AvartarUpI nAbhise sahita thI, tairatI huI machaliyA~ hI usake netra the, donoM
vizAla taTa ho sthUla nitamba the, nAnA phUloMse vaha vyApta thI aura nirmala
jala hI usakA vastra thaa| isa prakAra kisI uttama nAyikAke samAna narmadAko
dekha rAvaNa mahAprItiko prApta huA  // 61-62 //  vaha narmadA kahIM to ugra
magaramacchoMke samUhase vyApta honeke kAraNa gambhIra thI, kahIM vegase bahatI
thI, kahIM manda gatise bahatI thI aura kahIM kuNDalakI taraha Ter3hI-mer3hI
cAlase bahatI thI  // 63 /  /  nAnA ceSTAoMse bharI huI thI, tathA bhayaMkara
honepara bhI ramaNIya thii| jisakA citta kautukase vyApta thA aise rAvaNane
bar3e Adarake sAtha usa narmadA nadImeM praveza kiyA  // 64 //  1. -uttamAGgena
ma.  /  2. -mivAbhraSTamaryAdAM kurvatI mamUm ma., ba.  /

Page #279 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the English translation of the provided verse, preserving the Sanskrit
terms:  ---  **10th Pavan**   Then, the king of Mahishmati, known for his
strength, entered the Narmada from another direction. He, known as
Sahasraramshi, descended to this place. || 65 || That Sahasraramshi was truly
very beautiful, as he was accompanied by thousands of women adorned with
splendid beauty. || 66 || He had ordered various water mechanisms crafted by
expert artisans, and taking their shelter, he was delightfully engaged in
diverse sports at that moment. || 67 || Having with him many men skilled in
crafting machinesâwho were also capable of holding back the oceanâs watersâhe
wandered in the Narmada as per his wishes, undeterred by its currents. || 68 ||
Due to the application of these mechanisms, the waters of the Narmada were
halted instantly, allowing skilled women to move about near its banks, fully
engrossed in play. || 69 || The extremely fine and bright garments of the women
clung to their forms as they splashed in the water, causing them to feel bashful
whenever their husbands glanced their way. || 70 || One woman, whose breasts
were displayed by the marks of her nails, was creating jealousy in her co-wife.
|| 71 || Another excellent woman, whose entire body was visible, bashfully
splashed water towards her husband with both hands, full of longing. || 72 ||
One woman, spotting the marks from claws on her rival's hips, playfully struck
her husband with the water splashed from the lotus-like hands. || 73 || A woman
of an angry disposition stood silently, unmoving; her husband then bowed at her
feet and in some way earned her pleasure. || 74 || As long as the king
Sahasraramshi pleased one woman, another would end up perturbed. As a result, he
found it exceptionally challenging to satisfy all the women. || 75 || Surrounded
by the finest women and possessing a charming appearance, the king displayed
various expressions of anger, joy, and reverence towards othersâshowing
affection by throwing water and other gestures. || 76 ||   ---   This
translation integrates the original Sanskrit terms while interpreting the
literary and narrative aspects from the text.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaM pavaM mAhiSmatIpurezo'tha balena prathito bhuvi  /
sahasrarazmirapyetAmavatIrNo'nyayA dizA || 65 || sahasrarazmirevaiSa satyaM
paramasundaraH  /  sahasraM tasya dArANAM yadatyantasutejasAm  // 66 //
jalayantrANi citrANi kRtAni varazilpibhiH  /  samAzritya sa reme'syAmadbhutAnAM
vidhAyakaH ||67  //  sAgarasyApi saMroddhumambhaH zaktairnarairvRtaH  /
yantrasaMvAhanAmijJaH svecchayAsyAM cacAra saH  // 68 //  jale yantraprayogeNa
kSaNena viSTate sati  /  bhramanti puline nAryo nAnAkrIDanakovidAH  //  69  //
kalatraniviDAzliSTasusUkSma vimalAMzukAH  /  babhUvuH satrapA dRSTA ramaNena
varAGganAH  //  70  //  'vigatAlepanA kAcit kucau nakhapadAGkitau  /  darzayantI
cakAreyAM pratipakSasya kAminI  // 71 //  kAcidRzyasamastAGgA varayoSit
trapAvatI  /  abhipriyaM nicikSepa karAbhyAM jalamAkulA  // 72 //  pratipakSasya
dRSTvAnyA jaghane karajakSatIH  /  lIlAkamalanAlena jaghAna pramadA priyam  //
73  //  kAcit kopavatI maunaM gRhItvA nizcalA sthitA  /  patyA pAdapraNAmena
dayitA toSamAhRtA  // 74 || yAvatprasAdayasyekAM tAvadetyaparA ruSam  /
yathAkathaMcidAninye toSaM sarvAH punarnRpaH  // 75 || darzanAt sparzanAt kopAt
prasAdAdvividhoditAt  /  praNAmAdvArinikSepAdavataMsakatADanAt  // 76 //
vaJcanAdaMzukAkSepAnmekhalAdAmabandhanAt  /  palAyanAnmahArAvAt saMparkAt
kucakampanAt  // 77 //  hAsAbhUSaNa nikSepAt preraNAd bhrUvilAsataH  /
antardhAnAt samudbhUteranyasmAcca suvibhramAt  //  78  //  reme bahurasaM tasyAM
sa manoharadarzanaH  /  AvRto varanArIbhirdevIbhiriva vAsavaH  //  79  //
athAnantara jo apane balase pRthivIpara prasiddha thA aisA mAhiSmatIkA rAjA
sahasrarazmi bhI usI samaya anya dizAse narmadA meM praviSTa huA ||65 || yaha
sahasrarazmi yathArtha meM parama sundara thA kyoMki utkRSTa kAntiko dhAraNa
karanevAlI hajAroM striyAM usake sAtha thIM ||66 || usane utkRSTa kalAkAroMke
dvArA nAnA prakArake jalayantra banavAye the so una sabakA Azraya kara Azcaryako
utpanna karanevAlA sahasrarazmi narmadA meM utarakara nAnA prakArakI krIr3A kara
rahA thA ||67 | usake sAtha yantra nirmANako jAnanevAle aise aneka manuSya the
jo samudrakA bhI jala rokane meM samartha the phira nadIkI to bAta hI kyA thI  /
isa prakAra apanI icchAnusAra vaha narmadA meM bhramaNa kara rahA thA || 68  //
yantroM ke prayogase narmadAkA jala kSaNa-bhara meM ruka gayA thA isalie nAnA
prakArakI krIr3A meM nipuNa striyA~ usake taTapara bhramaNa kara rahI thIM ||69
|| una striyoMke atyanta patale aura ujjvala vastra jalakA sambandha pAkara
unake nitamba sthaloMse ekadama zliSTa ho gaye the isalie jaba pati unakI ora
A~kha uThAkara dekhatA thA taba ve lajjAse gar3a jAtI thIM || 70 || zarIrakA
lepa dhula jAneke kAraNa jo nakhakSatoM se cihnita stana dikhalA rahI thI aisI
koI eka strI apanI sautake lie IrSyA utpanna kara rahI thI || 71 || jisake
samasta aMga dikha rahe the aisI koI uttama strI lajAtI huI donoM hAthoMse bar3I
AkulatA ke sAtha patikI ora pAnI uchAla rahI thI || 72 || koI anya strI sauta ke
nitamba sthalapara nakhakSata dekhakara krIr3AkamalakI nAlase patipara prahAra
kara rahI thI ||73 || koI eka svabhAvakI krodhinI strI mauna lekara nizcala
khar3I raha gayI thI taba patine caraNoM meM praNAma kara use kisI taraha
santuSTa kiyA ||74 || rAjA sahasrarazmi jabataka eka strIko prasanna karatA thA
tabataka dUsarI strI roSako prApta ho jAtI thI  /  isa kAraNa vaha samasta
striyoMko bar3I kaThinAI santuSTa kara sakA thA || 75  //  uttamottama striyoMse
ghirA, manohara rUpakA dhAraka vaha rAjA, kisI strIkI ora dekhakara, kisIkA
sparza kara, kisIke prati kopa prakaTa kara, kisIke prati aneka prakArakI
prasannatA prakaTa kara, kisIko praNAma kara, kisIke Upara pAnI uchAlakara,
kisIko karNA 229 1. bhavanti ka, kha  /  2. dRSTvA ma  /  3. vigatAlekhanA ma  /
4 tAvat + eti + aparA, tAvadetya parA ruSam ma.  /

Page #280 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,  Women, like ornaments on a sandy shore, did not wish to
pick up their ornaments that had fallen, their hearts filled with great
compassion. ||80|| One woman made the water white with sandalwood paste, while
another made it golden yellow with saffron. ||81|| The lips of the women, whose
red betel stain had faded, and the eyes, whose kohl had smudged, had a unique
beauty. ||82|| Then, in the water released by the mechanism, the king, with many
excellent women who aroused desire, enjoyed himself as he pleased. ||83|| The
sound of the women playing in the water, like the chirping of birds on the
shore, seemed to be the sound of their ornaments. ||84|| Meanwhile, Ravana,
having bathed comfortably and wearing clean, fine clothes, carefully adorned his
head with a white cloth. ||85|| Ravana, with great effort, established the image
of the Arhant, made of gold and jewels, which was always carried by appointed
men, on the bank of the river. The bank was new, beautiful, white, radiant,
adorned with a high platform made of sand, where a canopy was spread on sticks
of lapis lazuli, with strings of pearls hanging from it, and filled with
attendants eager to gather all kinds of equipment. ||86-88|| Having established
the image, he performed a great puja with incense, sandalwood, flowers, and
beautiful offerings, which attracted the senses with their strong fragrance, and
sat in front, for a long time, filling his mouth with the pure words of praise.
||89-90|| Suddenly, Ravana, engrossed in the puja, was struck by the foam and

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe patitAn sikatApRSThe nAlaMkArAn punaH striyaH  /
AcakAGkSurmahAcittA nirmAlyagguNAniva  // 80 //  kAciccandanalepena cakAra
dhavalaM jalam  /  anyA kuGkumapaGkena drutacAmIkaraprabham  // 81 //
dhautatAmbUlarAgANAmadharANAM suyoSitAm  /  cakSuSAM vyajjanAnAM ca
lakSmIrabhavaduttamA  // 82 //  punazca yantranirmuktevArimadhye yathepsitam  /
reme samaM varastrIbhirnarezaH smairahetubhiH  //  83  //  krIDantIbhirjale
strIbhirbhUSaNAnAM varo vaH  /  zakunteSviva vinyastaH kUlakIlAlacAriSu ||84||
rAvaNo'pi sukhaM snAtvA vasAno dhautavAsasI  /  vidhAya prayato 'mauliM
zuklakarpaTasaMyutam ||85|| niryuktaiH sarvadA pumbhiruhyamAnAM prayatnataH  /
pratimAmarhato ratna hemanirmitavigrahAm  //  86  //  "taraGgiNInave ramye
puline zubhrabhAsure  /  sikatAracito tuGgapIThabandhavirAjite  //  87  //
vaiDUryadaNDikAsaktamuktAphalavitAnake  /  sarvopakaraNavyagraparivargasamAvRte
// 88 //  sthApayitvA ghanAmodasamAkRSTamadhuvrataiH  /  dhUpairAlepanaiH
puSpairmanojJairbahubhaktibhiH  // 89 //  vidhAya mahatIM pUjAM saMniviSTaH
puro'vanau  /  'sagarbha vadanaM cakre pUtaiH stutyakSaraizciram ||10||
akasmAdatha pUreNa hatA pUjA samantataH  /  phenabubudayuktena kaluSeNa
tarasvinA  // 91 //  230 bharaNase tAr3ita kara, kisIkA dhokhese vastra
khIMcakara kisIko mekhalAse bA~dhakara, kisIke pAsase dUra haTakara, kisIko
bhArI DA~Ta dikhAkara, kisIke sAtha samparka kara, kisIke stanoMmeM kampana
utpanna kara, kisIke sAtha ha~sakara, kisIke AbhUSaNa girAkara, kisIko
gudagudAkara, kisIke prati bhauMha calAkara kisI se chipakara, kisIke samakSa
prakaTa hokara tathA kisIke sAtha anya prakArake vibhrama dikhAkara narmadA nadI
meM bar3e Anandase usa taraha krIr3A kara rahA thA jisa prakAra ki deviyoMke
sAtha indra krIr3A kiyA karatA hai ||76-79  //  udAra hRdayako dhAraNa
karanevAlI una striyoMke jo AbhUSaNa bAlUke Upara gira gaye the unhoMne
nirmAtyakI mAlAke samAna phira unheM uThAnekI icchA nahIM kI thI ||80|| kisI
strIne candanake lepase pAnIko sapheda kara diyA thA to kisIne kezarake dravase
use suvarNake samAna pIlA banA diyA thA ||81 || jinakI pAnakI lAlimA dhula gayI
thI aise striyoMke oMTha tathA jinakA kAjala chUTa gayA thA aise netroMkI koI
adbhuta hI zobhA dRSTi gocara ho rahI thI  //  82 //  tadanantara yantrake dvArA
chor3e hue jalake bIca meM vaha rAjA, kAma utpanna karanevAlI aneka utkRSTa
striyoMke sAtha icchAnusAra krIr3A karane lagA ||83 | usa samaya taTake
samIpavartI jalameM vicaraNa karanevAle pakSI manohara zabda kara rahe the so
aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno jala ke bhItara krIr3A karanevAlI striyoMne apane
AbhUSaNoMkA zabda unake pAsa dharohara hI rakha diyA ho ||84|| udhara yaha saba
cala rahA thA idhara rAvaNane bhI sukhapUrvaka snAna kara dhule hue uttama
vastra pahane aura apane mastakako bar3I sAvadhAnI se sapheda vastrase yukta
kiyA || 85 || jise niyukta manuSya sadA bar3I sAvadhAnI se sAtha liye rahate the
aisI svarNaM tathA ratnanirmita arhanta bhagavAnkI pratimAko rAvaNane nadIke usa
tIrapara sthApita karAyA jo ki nadIke bIca nayA nikalA thA, manohara thA,
sapheda tathA dedIpyamAna thA, bAlUke dvArA nirmita U~ce cabUtarese suzobhita
thA, jahA~ vaiDUryamaNikI char3iyoMpara candovA tAnakara usapara motiyoMkI
jhAlara laTakAyI gayI thI, aura jo saba prakArake upakaraNa ikaTThe karanemeM
vyagra parijanoMse bharA thA  / 86-88|| pratimA sthApita kara usane bhArI
sugandhise bhramako AkarSita karanevAle dhUpa, candana, puSpa tathA manohara
naivedyake dvArA bar3I pUjA aura sAmane baiThakara cirakAla taka stutike pavitra
akSaroMse apane mukhako sahita kiyA  //  89-90  /  athAnantara rAvaNa pUjAmeM
nimagna thA ki acAnaka hI usakI pUjA saba orase phena tathA 1. kajjalarahitAnAm
/  2. nirmukti - ka., kha.  /  nirmuktaM ma  /  3. surahetubhi: ka., kha. ba.  /
4. mUlaM ma.  /  5. taraGgiNIjave ma.  /  6. sagarbhavadanaM ma.  /  stahetubhi:
ma.,

Page #281 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Tenth Canto **6**  Then, Dashaanan (Ravana) quickly picked up the statue
and, enraged, asked the immortals, "What is this?" || 92 ||  Then, following
swiftly, the men returned and reported, "O Lord, there is a great man here. ||
93 ||  He sits amidst beautiful women, the epitome of joy, surrounded by men
wielding swords, standing at a distance. || 94 ||  There are many large machines
of various kinds. Surely, this feat was accomplished by them. || 95 ||  We
believe that the men with him are merely for show. His true strength is
formidable, unbearable to others. || 96 ||  It is said that there is a king
named Indra in heaven or on Mount Meru. But we have seen this Indra before our
very eyes. || 97 ||  Hearing the sound of the mridanga, mixed with the sounds of
the veena, flute, and the shouts of victory, and the sounds of elephants,
horses, and men, all urging the kings to action, Dashaanan became furious and
commanded, "Capture this wicked man quickly!" || 98-99 ||  Following the
command, Dashaanan performed the highest worship of the Jina statue on the
riverbank, with offerings of jewels, gold, and flowers. || 100 ||  The
Vidhyadhara kings, taking Dashaanan's command as a sacred duty, rushed towards
the enemy, fully armed. || 101 ||  Seeing the enemy forces approaching,
Sahasrakirana (the hero) was enraged. He gave assurance to the women and quickly
emerged from the lake. || 102 ||  Hearing the commotion and knowing the news
from the crowd, the warriors of Mahishmati, filled with fear, rushed out. || 103
||  Mounted on elephants, horses, and chariots, surrounded by foot soldiers, and
accompanied by their vassals wielding various weapons, they rushed towards
Sahasrakirana, filled with immense devotion. || 104-105 ||  Seeing the
approaching army of Vidhyadharas, the vassals of Sahasrakirana, abandoning their
fear of death, rushed to meet them. || 106 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaM parva 6 tato dazAnanaH kSipraM gRhItvA pratiyAtanAm  /  kruddho jagAda
kinsvetaditi vijJAyatAmaram  // 92 //  tato'nusRtya vegena naraiH pratinivRtya
ca  /  niveditamidaM nAtha ko'pyayaM puruSo mahAn  // 93 //  madhye
lalAmanArINAM lalAmaparamodayaH  /  dUrasthena nRlokena veSTitaH khaDgadhAriNA
// 94 || nAnAkArANi yantrANi bRhanti subahUni ca  /  vidyante tasya nUnaM taiH
kRtametadvi ceSTitam  // 95|| vyavasthAmAtrakaM tasya puruSA iti no matiH  /
avaSTambhastu yastasya sa evAnyasya duHsahaH ||96  //  vArtayA zrUyate ko'pi
zakraH svarge tathA girau  /  ayaM tu vIkSito'smAbhiH zunAsIraH samakSataH  //
97 //  zrutvA saMkucitazca ravaM murajasaMbhavam  /  vINAvaMzAdibhiryuktaM
jayazabdavimizritam ||18|| gajavAjinarANAM ca dhvAnamAjJapayannRpAn  /  tvaritaM
gRhyatAmeSa durAtmeti dazAnanaH ||99|| davA cAjJAM punazcakre pUjAM rodhasi
sattamAm  /  ratnakAJcananirmANaiH puSpairjina varAkRtau  // 100 //  zeSAmiva
dazAsyAjJAM kRtvA zirasi sNbhrmaat| abhyamitraM sasannaddhAH prasatuyamagAdhipAH
//  101  //  dRSTvA parabalaM prAptaM sahasrakiraNaH kSaNAt  /  kSubdho
datvAbhayaM strINAM nirjagAma jalAzayAt  // 102 //  tataH kalakalaM zrutvA
viditvA ca naraughataH  /  saMnahya niryayurvIrA mAhiSmatyAH sasaMbhramam  //
103 //  gajavAjisamArUDhAH pAdAtena samAvRtAH  /  rathArUDhAzca sAmantA
vividhAyudhadhAriNaH  //  104 //  sahasrakiraNaM prAptA nitAntamanurAgiNaH  /
RtavaH kramanirmuktAH saMmedamiva parvatam  // 105 //  ApatantIM tato dRSTvA
vidyAdharavarUthinIm  /  sahasrarazmisAmantAstyaktvA jIvitalobhitAm  // 106 //
no bUloMse yukta, malina evaM vegazAlI jalake pUra se naSTa ho gayI  //  91  //
taba rAvaNane zIghra hI pratimA Upara uThAkara kupita ho logoMse kahA ki mAlUma
karo kyA bAta hai ? || 92|| tadanantara logoMne are jAkara aura vApasa lauTakara
nivedana kiyA ki he nAtha ! AbhUSaNoMse parama abhyudayako prakaTa karanevAlA
koI manuSya sundara striyoMke bIca baiThA hai  /  talavArako dhAraNa karanevAle
manuSya dUra khar3e rahakara use ghere hue haiM  /  nAnA prakAra ke bar3e-bar3e
yantra usake pAsa vidyamAna haiN| nizcaya hI yaha kArya una saba yantroM kA kiyA
hai || 93-95 || hamArA dhyAna hai ki usake pAsa jo puruSa haiM ve to vyavasthA
mAtra ke lie haiM yathArtha meM usakA jo bala hai vahI dUsaroMke lie duHkhase
sahana karane yogya hai  // 96 //  loka-kathA se sunA jAtA hai ki svarga meM
athavA sumeru parvatapara indra nAmakA koI vyakti rahatA hai para hamane to yaha
sAkSAt hI indra dekhA hai || 97|| usI samaya rAvaNane vINA, bA~surI Adise yukta
tathA jaya-jaya zabdase nizcita mRdaMgakA zabda sunaa| sAtha hI hAthI, ghor3e
aura manuSyoMkA zabda bhI usane sunA  /  sunate hI usakI bhauMha car3ha gayI  /
usI samaya usane rAjAoMko AjJA dI ki isa duSTako zIghra hI pakar3A jAye  //
98-99 || AjJA dekara rAvaNa phira nadIke kinAre ratna tathA suvarNaM nirmita
puSpoMse jinapratimAkI uttama pUjA karane lagA || 100 || vidyAdhara rAjAoMne
rAvaNakI AjJA zeSAkSatake samAna mastakapara dhAraNa kI aura taiyAra ho ve
zIghra hI zatruke sammukha daur3a par3e || 101 || tadanantara zatrudalako AyA
dekha sahasrarazmi kSaNa-bhara meM kSubhita ho gayA aura striyoM ko abhaya
dekara zIghra hI jalAzayase bAhara nikalA ||102|| tatpazcAt kala-kala sunakara
aura janasamUhase saba samAcAra jAnakara mAhiSmatIke vIra zIghra hI taiyAra ho
bAhara nikala par3e || 103 || jisa prakAra vasanta Adi Rtue~ sammedAcala ke pAsa
eka sAtha A pahu~catI haiN| usI prakAra nAnA tarahake zastroMko dhAraNa
karanevAle bahuta bhArI anurAgase bhare sAmanta sahasrarazmi pAsa eka sAtha A
pahu~ce  /  ve sAmanta hAthiyoM, ghor3oM aura rathoMpara savAra the tathA
paidala calanevAle sainikoMse yukta the ||104 - 105  //  231 1. pratimAM  /  2.
asmAkam  /  3. balam  /  4. zaktaH ma  /  5. pratyakSam  /  6. dhvanimAjJApayan
ma.  /  7. padAtInAM samUhastena  /

Page #282 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
232 Puranas Seeing the army of the Vidyadharas approaching, the Samantas of
Sahasrarashmi, who were eager to protect each other and filled with enthusiasm,
abandoned their desire for life, formed a cloud formation, and rose to fight
without waiting for their lord's command. ||106-107|| Meanwhile, when Ravana's
army was ready to fight, the following words of the gods suddenly echoed in the
sky. ||108|| The gods said, "Oh! These brave men want to commit a great
injustice by engaging in battle with the Vidyadharas, who are earth-dwellers."
||109|| "These poor earth-dwellers are few in number and simple-minded, while
the Vidyadharas, on the other hand, are masters of knowledge and illusion and
are very numerous." ||110|| Hearing these words of anxiety, which were repeated
again and again in the sky, the Vidyadharas, who were of good character, were
filled with shame and descended to the earth. ||111|| Then, in the battle that
was started by equal warriors, Ravana's men began to strike each other with
swords, arrows, maces, and spears. ||112|| The charioteers fought with the
charioteers, the horsemen with the horsemen, the elephant riders with the
elephant riders, and the foot soldiers with the foot soldiers. ||113|| Those who
were being defeated one after another and whose weapons were clashing, creating
fire, began to fight justly. ||114|| When Sahasrarashmi saw his army on the
verge of destruction, he immediately mounted his excellent chariot and arrived.
||115|| Sahasrarashmi, adorned with an excellent crown and armor, possessed
extraordinary brilliance, and therefore, seeing the army of the Vidyadharas, he
was not afraid in the least. ||116|| Then, those who had regained their strength
due to being united with their lord, whose umbrellas were open, and who had
forgotten the pain of their wounds, entered the army of the Rakshasas like
intoxicated elephants entering a deep sea. ||117-118|| Just as the wind drives
away the clouds, so too did Sahasrarashmi, filled with great anger, drive away
the enemies with a shower of arrows. ||119|| Seeing this, the gatekeeper said to
Ravana, "Oh, God! Look,  1. Vaani m. | 2. Sardaham | 3. Nishshesh kh., m. | 4.
Shreshtham | Rathmudhvamsamagatha m. | 5. Prasfurachchhatra k. |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 232 papurANe viracayya ghanavyUhamanyo'nyaM pAlanodyatAH  /  vinApi
bhartRvAkyena sotsAhA yoddhamutthitAH  // 107 //  bale ca rAkSasezasya raNaM
karta' samudyate  /  vicerurambare vAcaH surANAmiti satvarAH  // 108 //  aho
mahAnayaM vIrairanyAyaH kartumIpsitaH  /  bhUgocaraiH samaM yo mudyatA
yannabhazvarAH 109 //  amI bhUgocarAH svalpA varAkA RjucetasaH  /
vidyAmAyAkRto'tyantaM bahavazva namazcarAH  // 110 //  iti zrutvAtha khe zabdaM
punaruktaM samAkulam  /  trapAyuktA bhuvaM yAtAH khecarAH sAdhuvRtta yaH  // 111
//  asivANagadAprAsairatha jaghnuH parasparam  /  tulyapratibhaTArabdhe raNe
rAvaNamAnavAH  // 112 //  rathino rathibhiH sAdhaM turaGgAsturagairamo  /  sArka
gajairgajAH satrA pAdAtaM ca padAtimiH  // 113 //  nyAyena yoddhamArabdhAH
kramAnItaparAjayAH  /  zastrasaMpAtaniSpeSasamutthApitavahnayaH  // 11 //
bhaGgAsannaM tataH sainyaM nijaM vIkSya parairdutam  /  sahasrarazmirAruhya
rathamuddhaM samAgataH  // 115 //  kirITI kavacI cApi tejo bibhradanuttamam  /
vidyAdharabalaM dRSTvA sa na bibhye manAgapi  // 116 //  svAminAdhiSThitAH
santastataH pratyAgataujasaH  /  udguNavisphuracchanA vismRtakSatavedanAH  //
117 //  praviSTA rakSasAM sainyaM raNazauNDA mahIcarAH  /  stambaramA
ivodabhUtamadA gambhIramarNavam  // 11 //  tataH sahasrakiraNo bibhrANaH
koSamunnatam  /  parAMzcikSepa bANaudhairdhanAniva sadAgatiH  // 11 //
pratIhAreNa cAkhyAtamiti kailAsakampine  /  deva pazya narendraNa kenApyetena te
balam  // 120 //  paraspara eka dUsarekI rakSA karanemeM tatpara tathA utsAhase
bhare sahasrarazmike sAmantoMne jaba vidyAdharoMkI senA AtI dekhI to ve jIvanakA
lobha chor3a meghavyUhakI racanA kara svAmIkI AjJAke binA hI yuddha karaneke lie
uTha khar3e hue  // 106-107|| idhara jaba rAvaNakI senA yuddha karaneke lie
udyata huI taba AkAzameM sahasA devatAoMke nimnAMkita vacana vicaraNa karane
lage  // 108 /  /  devatAoMne kahA ki aho ! vIra loga yaha bar3A anyAya karanA
cAhate haiM ki bhUmigocariyoMke sAtha vidyAdhara yuddha karaneke lie udyata hue
haiM  /  / 109 //  ye becAre bhUmigocarI thor3e tathA sarala citta haiM aura
vidyAdhara inake viparIta vidyA tathA mAyAko karanevAle evaM saMkhyA meM bahuta
hai  /  / 110 //  isa prakAra AkAzameM bAra-bAra kahe hue isa AkUlatApUrNa
zabdako sUnakara acchI pravRttivAle vidyAdhara lajjAse yukta hote hue
pRthivIpara A gaye  // 111 //  tadanantara samAna yoddhAoMke dvArA prArambha
kiye hue yuddha meM rAvaNake puruSa paraspara talavAra, bANa, gadA aura bhAle
Adise prahAra karane lage  // 112 /  /  rathoMke savAra rathoMke savAroMke
sAtha, ghur3asavAra ghur3asavAroMke sAtha, hAthiyoMke savAra hAthiyoMke
savAroMke sAtha, aura paidala sainika paidala sainikoMke sAtha yuddha karane
lage  // 113 /  /  jinheM krama-kramase parAjaya prApta ho rahA thA aura jinake
zastra-samUhakI Takkarase agni utpanna ho rahI thI aise yoddhAoMne nyAyapUrvaka
yuddha karanA zurU kiyaa||114|| jaba sahasrarazmine apanI senAko zIghra hI naSTa
honeke nikaTa dekhA taba uttama rathapara savAra ho tatkAla A pahu~cA  /  / 115
/  /  uttama kirITa aura kavacako dhAraNa karanevAlA sahasrarazmi utkRSTa tejako
dhAraNa karatA thA isalie vidyAdharoMkI senA dekha vaha jarA bhI bhayabhIta
nahIM huA  // 116 /  /  tadanantara svAmIse sahita honeke kAraNa jinakA teja
punaH vApasa A gayA thA, jinake Upara khule hue chatra laga rahe the aura
jinhoMne ghAvoMkA kaSTa bhulA diyA thA aise raNanipuNa bhUmigocarI rAkSasoMkI
senAmeM isa prakAra ghusa gaye jisa prakAra ki madonmatta hAthI gahare
samudrameM ghusa jAte haiM  // 117-118 /  /  jisa prakAra vAyu meghoMko ur3A
detA hai usI prakAra atyadhika krodhako dhAraNa karanevAlA sahasrarazmi bANoMke
samUhase zatruoMko ur3Ane lagA  /  / 119 /  /  yaha dekha dvArapAlane rAvaNase
nivedana kiyA ki he deva ! dekho 1. vANi ma.  /  2. sArdham  /  3. nizzeSa kha.,
ma.  /  4. zreSTham  /  rathamudhvaMsamAgataH ma.  /  5. prasphuracchatrA ka.  /

Page #283 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The king, seated on his chariot and wielding a bow, made the world seem like
mere grass, driving back your army a yojana with a shower of arrows.
||120-121|| Seeing Sahasrarashmi approaching, Dashaanan mounted his elephant,
Trilokamanadan.  ||122||  Ravana, whose brilliance was unbearable, was seen by
his terrified enemies, and he released a shower of arrows, leaving Sahasrarashmi
chariotless.  ||123|| Then Sahasrarashmi, mounted on a superior elephant,
charged again, filled with wrath, towards the Rakshasa king.  ||124||  The
arrows released by Sahasrarashmi pierced the armor and tore apart the limbs of
Dashaanan, whose faces were sharp as blades.  ||125||  Ravana, pulling the
arrows from his body, laughed and said to Sahasrarashmi, "Oh Ravana, you seem to
be a great archer. From whom did you receive this skill?"  ||126||  "My boy,
first learn the art of archery and practice, then you can fight me. You seem to
be devoid of wisdom."  ||128||  Enraged by these harsh words, Ravana struck
Sahasrarashmi on the forehead with a spear.  ||129||  A stream of blood flowed,
and his eyes spun.  ||130||  While Sahasrarashmi was dazed and regaining his
senses, Ravana, with a swift leap, captured the valiant warrior.  ||131||
Ravana bound him and took him to his camp.  ||132||  The celestial beings
watched in amazement, wondering who could capture him if he were to escape.
||132||  The sun, surrounded by the ramparts of twilight, set, as if
Sahasrarashmi had learned a lesson from this incident.  ||133||  The world was
enveloped in darkness, making good and evil indistinguishable, as if it were
shrouded by the immense anger of Ravana.  ||134||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaM parva dhAnuSkeNa rathasthena pazyatA tRNavajagat  /  yojanaM
yAvadadhvAnaM zaraudhairapasAritam  // 12 //  tato'bhimukhamAyAtaM tamAlokya
yamAInaH  /  Aruhya 'trijagadbhUSanAmAnaM mattavAraNam  // 122 //  parairAlokito
bhItairvimuktazarasaMhatiH  /  sahasrakiraNaM cakre virathaM duHsahadyutiH  //
123 //  tataH sahasrakiraNaH samAruhya dvipottamam  /  abhIyAya punaH
RddhastarasA rAkSasAdhipam  // 12 //  sahasrarazminA muktA bANA nirmidya
kaGkaTam  /  aGgAni dazavaktrasya bimidurnizitAnanAH  // 125 //
ratnazravaHsutenAstAnbANAnAkRSya dehataH  /  sahasrakiraNo hAsaM
kRtvetyavadadunnatam  // 126 //  aho rAvaNa dhAnuSko mahAnasi kutastava  /
upadezo'yamAyAto guroH paramakauzalAt  // 127 //  vatsa tAvaddhanurvedamadhISva
kuru ca zramam  /  tato mayA samaM yuddha kariSyasi nayojjhitaH  // 128 //
tataH paruSavAkyena prAptaH saMrambhamuttamam  /  bibheda yakSamardastaM
kuntenAlikapaTTake  // 129 //  galadudhiradhAro'sau ghUrNamAnanirIkSaNaH  /
mohaM gatvA samAzvasto yAvad gRhNAti sAyakam  // 130 //  tAvadurapatya vegena
tamaSTApadakampanaH  /  anujjhitamahAdhaiya jIvagrAhaM gRhItavAn  // 13 //
nItaH svanilayaM baddhvA khagairdRSTaH savismayaiH  /  yadi nAmotpatet so'pi
kena gRhyeta jantunA  // 132 //  sahasrarazmivRttAntAdiva nItimupAgataH  /
sahasrarazmiraidastaM saMdhyAprAkAraveSTitaH  // 133 //  dazavaktravimuktena
kopeneva ca bhUriNA  /  tamasA pihito lokaH sadasatsamatAkRtA  // 13 //  *
jagatko tRNake samAna tuccha dekhanevAle, rathapara baiThe dhanuSadhArI isa kisI
rAjAne bANoMke samUhase tumhArI senAko eka yojana pIche khader3a diyA hai  //
120-121 /  /  tadanantara sahasrarazmiko sammukha AtA dekha dazAnana
trilokamaNDana nAmaka hAthIpara savAra ho claa| zatru jise bhayabhIta hokara
dekha rahe the tathA jisakA teja atyanta duHsaha thA aise rAvaNane bANoMkA
samUha chor3akara sahasrarazmiko ratharahita kara diyA  // 122-123 /  /  taba
sahasrarazmi uttama hAthIpara savAra ho kruddha hotA huA vegase punaH rAvaNake
sammukha AyA  // 124 /  /  idhara sahasrarazmike dvArA chor3e hue paine bANa
kavacako bhedakara rAvaNake aMgoMko vidIrNa karane lage  // 125 //  udhara
rAvaNane sahasrarazmike prati jo bANa chor3e the unheM vaha zarIrase khIMcakara
ha~satA huA jorase bolA  // 126 //  ki aho rAvaNa! tuma to bar3e dhanurdhArI
mAlUma hote ho| yaha upadeza tumheM kisa kuzala guruse prApta huA hai ?  // 127
//  are chokar3e ! pahale dhanurveda par3ha aura abhyAsa kara, phira mere sAtha
yuddha krnaa| tU nItise rahita jAna par3atA hai  /  / 128 /  /  tadanantara ukta
kaThora vacanoMse bahuta bhArI krodhako prApta hue rAvaNane eka bhAlA
sahasrarazmike lalATapara mArA  // 129|| jisase rudhirakI dhArA bahane lagI
tathA A~kheM ghUmane lgiiN| mUchita ho punaH sAvadhAna hokara jabataka vaha bANa
grahaNa karatA hai tabataka rAvaNane vegase uchalakara usa dhairyazAlIko jIvita
hI pakar3a liyA  // 130-131 //  rAvaNa use bAMdhakara apane Derepara le gyaa|
vidyAdhara use bar3e Azcaryase dekha rahe the| ve soca rahe the ki yadi yaha
kisI taraha uchalakara chUTatA hai to phira ise kauna pakar3a sakegA?  // 132 //
tadanantara sandhyArUpI prAkArase veSTita hotA huA sUrya asta ho gayA so aisA
jAna par3atA thA mAno sahasrarazmike isa vRttAntase usane kucha nItiko prApta
kiyA thA arthAt zikSA grahaNa kI thii||133|| acche aura bureko samAna karanevAle
andhakArase loka AcchAdita ho gayA so aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno rAvaNake dvArA
chor3e hue bahuta bhArI krodhase hI AcchAdita huA ho  // 134 //  1. rAvaNaH  /
2. trilokamaNDananAmadheyam  /  3. zrutiH kha.  /  4. nayojjhataH ma.  /  5.
bhaalttte| 6. samAsvastho m.| 7. kailAsakampano rAvaNaH  /  8. maho dhairya ma.,
ba., k.| 9. sUryaH, sahasrarazmi +ait + astam  /  ait % agacchat  /

Page #284 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 234  135. The moon-like disc of the extremely pure fame of Ravana,
obtained from the battle, rose, like a learned scholar dispelling darkness.
136. Some were applying ointment to the wounds of the soldiers, some were
describing the valor of the warriors, some were searching for the missing
soldiers, and some, who were not wounded, were sleeping. Thus, the night of
Ravana's army passed according to the appropriate tasks.  137. When the morning
dawned, Ravana was awakened by the sound of the morning trumpets.  138. Then,
the sun, bearing extreme anger, rose trembling, as if it had come to know the
news of Ravana.  139. Hearing that his son was bound, the thousand-rayed, the
Digambara, the lord of the Jhangharacharan Siddhi, the great-armed, the great-
penitent, came to Ravana.  140. He was as beautiful as the moon, as radiant as
the sun, as steady as Mount Meru, and as deep as the ocean.  141. Having
completed his bodily duties, he sat comfortably in the midst of the assembly,
his mind calm and full of love for the people.  142. Seeing the Muni from afar,
Ravana stood up and bowed his head to the ground.  143. When the Muni sat on the
excellent throne, Ravana sat on the ground, his hands joined in humility, his
whole body bowed in reverence.  144. Ravana said, "O Lord! You are accomplished,
so there is no other reason for your coming here except to purify me."  145.
Then, praising Ravana's lineage, valor, and glory, the Muni, like a stream of
nectar, said, "O long-lived one! This is indeed the result of your good
intentions. However, I have something to say, listen."  146. "For Kshatriyas,
victory over their enemies is the only fulfillment. Therefore, release my son,
Sahasrarashmi."  147. Then, after consulting with his ministers through
gestures, Ravana, bowing to the Muni, said, "O Lord! My request is as follows. I
am currently infatuated with the royal fortune and have offended our ancestors,
the lord of the Vidyadharas, Mudyot."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 234 padmapurANe tato raNAdiva prAptamatyantavimalaM yazaH  /
zazAGkabimbamudyAta' tamoharaNapaNDitam  // 135 //  vraNamaGgavidhAnena bhaTAnAM
vIryavarNanaiH  /  gaveSaNaizca bhinnAnAM nidrayA cAkSatAtmanAm  // 136 //  gatA
rAkSasasainyasya rajanI sA yathAyatham  /  vibuddhazca dazagrIvaH
pramAtahatatUryataH  // 137 //  tato vArtAmiva jJAtuM dazavaktrasya bhAskaraH  /
bibhrANaH paramaM rAgaM kampamAnaH samAgataH  // 138 //  zatabAhuratha zrutvA
sutaM baddhaM nirambaraH  /  jaGghAcAraNalabdhIzo mahAbAhurmahAtapAH  // 139 //
rajanIpativarakAnto dIptastigmamarIcivat  /  meruvat sthairyasaMpanno dhIro
ratnAlayo yathA  // 140 //  kRtapratyaGgakarmANaM saMbhAmadhyasukhasthitam  /
prazAntamAnasaH prApa rAvaNaM lokavatsalaH  // 14 //  dUrAdeva tato dRSTvA muni
kailAsakampanaH  /  abhyuttasthau praNAmaM ca cakre bhUmisthamastakaH  // 142 //
varAsanopaviSTe ca yatau bhUmAvupAvizat  /  karadvayaM samAsAdya
vinayAnatavigrahaH  // 13 //  jagAda ceti bhagavan kRtakRtyasya vidyte| na
tavAgamane heturvihAya mama pAvanam  // 14 //  tataH prazaMsanaM kRtvA
kulavIryavibhUtimiH  /  kSaranivAmRtaM vAcA jagAdeti digambaraH  // 145 //
AyuSmannidamastyeva zubhasaMkalpatastava  /  nAntarIyakametattu vadAmi yadidaM
zRNu  // 146 //  parAmibhavamAtreNa kSatriyANAM kRtArthatA  /  yataH
sahasrakiraNaM tato muJca mamAGgajam  /  / 147 //  saMpradhArya tataH
sArdhamiGgitaireSa mantribhiH  /  uvAca kaikasIputraH praNato munipuGgavam  //
148 //  tadanantara andhakArake haranemeM nipuNa candramAkA bimba udita huA so
aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno yuddhase utpanna huA rAvaNakA atyanta nirmala yaza hI
ho  // 135 /  /  usa samaya koI to ghAyala sainikoMke ghAvoMpara marahamapaTTI
lagA rahe the, koI yoddhAoMke parAkramakA varNana kara rahe the, koI gume hue
sainikoMkI talAza kara rahe the aura koI, jinheM ghAva nahIM lage the so rahe
the| isa prakAra yathAyogya kAryoMse rAvaNakI senAkI rAtri vyatIta huii|
prabhAta huA to prabhAta sambandhI turahIke zabdase rAvaNaM jAgRta huA  //
136-137 /  /  tadanantara parama rAgako dhAraNa karatA huA sUrya kA~patAkA~patA
udita huA so aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno rAvaNakA samAcAra jAnaneke lie udita huA
ho  // 138 //  athAnantara sahasrarazmike pitA zatabAhu, jo digambara the,
jinheM jaMghAcAraNa Rddhi prApta thI, jo mahAbAhu, mahAtapasvI, candramAke
samAna sundara, sUryake samAna tejasvI, meruke samAna sthira aura samudrake
samAna gambhIra the, putrako ba~dhA sunakara rAvaNake samIpa aaye| usa samaya
rAvaNa apane zarIrasambandhI kAryoMse nipaTakara sabhAke bIca meM sukhase baiThA
thA aura munirAja zatabAhu prazAntacitta evaM logoMse sneha karanevAle
the||139-141|| rAvaNa, munirAjako dUrase hI dekhakara khar3A ho gyaa| usane
sAmane jAkara tathA pRthvIpara mastaka Tekakara namaskAra kiyA  // 142 //  jaba
munirAja utkRSTa prAsuka Asanapara virAjamAna ho gaye taba rAvaNa pRthvIpara
donoM hAtha jor3akara baiTha gyaa| usa samaya usakA sArA zarIra vinayase
namrIbhUta thA  // 143 //  rAvaNane kahA ki he bhagavan ! Apa kRtakRtya haiM
ataH mujhe pavitra karaneke sivAya Apake yahAM AnemeM dUsarA kAraNa nahIM hai
// 144 //  taba kula, vIrya aura vibhUtike dvArA rAvaNakI prazaMsA kara
vacanoMse amRta jharAte hue kI taraha munirAja kahane lage ki  /  / 145 //  he
AyuSman ! tumhAre zubha saMkalpase yahI bAta hai phira bhI maiM eka bAta kahatA
hU~ so suna  // 146 //  yatazca zatruoMkA parAbhava karane mAtrase kSatriyoMke
kRtakRtyapanA ho jAtA hai ataH tuma mere putra sahasrarazmiko chor3a do  // 147
/  /  tadanantara rAvaNane mantriyoMke sAtha izAroMse salAha kara namra ho
munirAjase kahA ki he nAtha ! merA nimna prakAra nivedana hai| maiM isa samaya
rAjalakSmIse unmatta evaM hamAre pUrvajoMkA aparAdha karanevAle
vidyAdharAdhipati 1. -mudyotaM ma., kha., ba.  /  2. bibhrANaM m.| 3.
sabhAmadhye ma.  /  4. -reva kha.  /  -riva ma.  /  .

Page #285 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Tenth Canto 235 I declare, O Lord, that I have set out to subdue the King of
the aerial beings. I have done what my ancestors did to subdue the proud Sri.
||149|| On my way, I performed the worship of the Jina on the beautiful bank of
the Reva, with a wheel of gems, on a pure platform of sand. ||150|| That
worship, along with its paraphernalia, was carried away by the swift current of
water, created by the device of this Moghi. ||151|| Then, due to the destruction
of the image of the Jina, I was filled with great anger. I have done this deed
for a purpose, and I do not hate any human being without reason. ||152|| Nor did
this proud and careless one say to me, "I did not know, therefore forgive me,"
when I arrived. ||153|| He who is not able to conquer the earth-dwellers, how
can he conquer the aerial beings, who are skilled in various arts? ||154||
Therefore, I will first subdue the arrogant earth-dwellers. Then, in due course,
I will subdue Indra, the King of the aerial beings. ||155|| Now that I have
subdued him, it is only right to release him. What more can be said, when you,
whose vision is only for the virtuous, are giving your command? ||156|| Then
Indrajit, the son of Ravana, said, "Well spoken, O Lord! Who, except a wise king
like you, can know how to release him?" ||157|| Then, at the command of Ravana,
Maricha, the minister, brought Sahasrarashmi to the assembly, with officers,
with naked swords in their hands. ||158|| Sahasrarashmi bowed at the feet of his
father and sat down on the ground. Ravana, without anger, spoke to him with
great respect. ||159|| "From today, you are my fourth brother. Since you are
very powerful, I will conquer Indra, the king who mocks Indra, with your help."
||160|| "I will give you, for your service, the younger sister of Mandodari,
Swayamprabha. O beautiful one, what you have done is proof to me." ||161||
Sahasrarashmi said, "Damn this fleeting kingdom of mine! The objects of
enjoyment, which seem pleasant at first, are later filled with sorrow and fear."
||162||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaM parva 235 vijJApayAmi nAthAhaM prasthitaH khecarAdhipam  /  vazIkartu
zriyA mattaM kRtAsmatpUrvajAgasam  // 149 //  tatra yAte hi revAyAM ramyAyAM
jinapUjanam  /  mayA taTasthacakreNa kRtaM vimalasaikate  // 150 //
sehopakaraNazcAsau nItA pUjA suraMhasA  /  sahasA payasA yantraracitenAsya
moginaH  // 15 //  tato mayA jinendrArcAdhvaMsodbhUtamahAruSA  /  kRtaM
karmedamarthena na vinA dveSmi mAnavAn  // 152 //  na cAnenoditaM mahyaM
saMprAptAya pramAdinA  /  yathA jJAtaM mayA nedaM kSamyatAmiti maaninaa||153||
bhUcarAnmAnuSAjetuM yo na zaktaH sa khecarAn  /  kathaM jeSyAmi vidyAbhiH
kRtanAnAviceSTitAn  // 15 //  vazIkaromyatastAvadbhucarAnmAnazAlinaH  /  tato
vidyAdharAdhIzaM sopAnakramayogataH  // 155 //  tato vazIkRtasyAsya
muktiyA'yyaiva kiM punaH  /  bhavatsvAjJAM prayacchatsu puNyavadRzyamUrtiSu  //
156 //  athendrajiduvAcedaM sAdhu devena bhASitam  /  ko vA nayavidaM nAthaM
muktvA jAnAti mASitum  // 157 //  vato dazamukhAdiSTo mArIco'dhikRtairnaraiH  /
AnAyayatsahasrAMzuM nagnasAyakapANibhiH  // 15 //  tAtasya caraNau natvA bhUmau
cAsAvupAvizat  /  saMmAnya ca dazAsyena viroSeNeti bhASitaH  // 159 /  /  adya
prabhRti me bhrAtA turIyastvaM mahAbalaH  /  jeSyAmi bhavatA sAkaM
kRtAkhaNDalavibhramam  // 16 //  svayaMpramA ca te dAsye mandodaryAH kanIyasIm
/  kRtaM yadbhavatA tacca pramANaM me varAkRte  // 16 //  sahasrarazmirUce ca
dhiGme rAjyamazAzvatam  /  ApAtamAtraramyaoNzca viSayAn duHkhabhayasaH  // 162
//  indrako vaza karaneke lie prayANa kara rahA hU~  // 148-149 /  /  so isa
prayANakAlameM manohara revA nadIke kinAre cakraratna rakhakara maiM bAlUke
nirmala cabUtarepara jinendra bhagavAnkI pUjA karaneke lie baiThA thA so isa
bhogI-vilAsI sahasrarazmike yantraracita vegazAlI jalase upakaraNoMke sAtha-
sAtha merI vaha saba pUjA acAnaka baha gayI  // 150-151 /  /  jinendra
bhagavAnkI pUjAke naSTa ho jAnese mujhe bahuta krodha utpanna huA so isa
krodhake kAraNa hI maiMne yaha kArya kiyA hai| prayojanake binA maiM kisI
manuSyase dveSa nahIM karatA  // 152 /  /  jaba maiM pahuMcA taba isa mAnI evaM
pramAdIne yaha bhI nahIM kahA ki mujhe jJAna nahIM thA ataH kSamA kIjie  // 153
//  jo bhUmigocarI manuSyoMko jItaneke lie samartha nahIM hai vaha vidyAoMke
dvArA nAnA prakArakI ceSTAe~ karanevAle vidyAdharoMko kaise jIta skegaa?||154||
yahI socakara maiM pahale ahaMkArI bhUmigocariyoMko vaza kara rahA huuN| usake
bAda zreNIke kramase vidyAdharAdhipati indrako vaza karU~gA  // 155 //  ise maiM
vaza kara cukA hU~ ataH isako chor3anA nyAyocita hI hai phira jinake darzana
kevala puNyavAn manuSyoMko hI ho sakate haiM aise Apa AjJA pradAna kara rahe
haiM ataH kahanA hI kyA hai ?  // 156 /  /  tadanantara rAvaNake putra
indrajitne kahA ki Apane bilakula ThIka kahA hai so ucita hI hai kyoMki Apa
jaise nItijJa rAjAko chor3akara dUsarA aisA kauna kaha sakatA hai ?  // 157 /  /
tadanantara rAvaNakA Adeza pAkara mArIca nAmA mantrIne hAthameM naMgI talavAra
liye hue adhikArI manuSyoMke dvArA sahasrarazmiko sabhAmeM bulavAyA  // 158 //
sahasrarazmi pitAke caraNoMmeM namaskAra kara bhUmipara baiTha gyaa| rAvaNane
krodharahita hokara bar3e sammAnake sAtha usase kahA  // 159 /  /  ki Ajase tuma
mere cauthe bhAI ho| cUMki tuma mahAbalavAn ho ataH tumhAre sAtha maiM indrakI
viDambanA karanevAle rAjA indrako jItUMgA  // 160 //  maiM tumhAre lie
mandodarIkI choTI bahana svayaMprabhA duuNgaa| he sundara AkRtike dhAraka !
tumane jo kiyA hai vaha mujhe pramANa hai  // 161 /  /  sahasrarazmi bolA ki
mere isa kSaNabhaMgura rAjyako dhikkAra hai| jo prArambhameM ramaNIya dikhate 1,
jAte kha., ka.  /  2. mahopakaraNa -ma., b.| 3. aphRtaa| 4. kathitam  /  5.
bhavatsu + AjJA  /  6. ApAtaramyAMzca viSayAnpazcAdaduHkhabhUyasaH ka., kh.|

Page #286 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
236 Padmapurana I curse this heaven from which there is inevitable fall. I curse
this body, the receptacle of suffering. I curse myself, who has been cheated for
a long time by evil deeds. ||163|| Now I will do that which will prevent me from
falling into the ocean of existence. I am very tired of wandering in paths that
are extremely painful. ||164|| Ravana said in reply, "O noble one! Renunciation
is becoming for old men, but you are still in your youth." ||165|| Sahasrarashmi
interrupted Ravana and said, "Death does not have such discrimination that it
only takes the old and not the young. This body, like a cloud in the autumn
season, is suddenly destroyed." ||166|| "Ravana, if there were any essence in
pleasures, then my father, who was a holder of excellent wisdom, would not have
renounced them." ||167|| Having said this, he handed over the kingdom to his son
with firm determination. Ravana, seeking forgiveness, allowed his father
Shatabahu to take renunciation. ||168|| Sahasrarashmi had earlier told his
friend, the king of Ayodhya, Anaranya, "When I take the Digambara renunciation,
I will inform you." Anaranya had also said the same to Sahasrarashmi. So,
according to this agreement, Sahasrarashmi sent men to inform Anaranya.
||169-170|| When the men told Anaranya about Sahasrarashmi's renunciation, his
eyes filled with tears. Remembering the virtues of that great man, he wept for a
long time. ||171|| When his sorrow subsided, the wise Anaranya said, "Ravana has
come to him, as if a brother in the guise of an enemy." ||172|| "He is Ravana,
who, being extremely kind, has freed this man-like bird, who was trapped in the
cage of wealth and was deluded by worldly pleasures for a long time." ||173||
"The king of Mahishmati, Sahasrarashmi, is blessed, who, taking refuge in the
boat of right knowledge, which was created by Ravana, wants to cross the ocean
of existence." ||174|| "What is there to ask about his fulfillment, who has
renounced the sin of the kingdom, which gives immense suffering in the end, and
has attained the vows ordained by the Jinas?" ||175|| 1. Suviyogena b. |
Dyutiyogena m. | 2. Pravrajyaam m. | 3 Tato naiv na me m. | Tate naiv hi me kh.,
n. | 4. Yamadhvamsam k., kh. | Yamadhvamse na Ravana na nimittena bodhapotam
samyaggyanatarani samashritah praptah ity arthah.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 236 padmapurANe svargaM dhikcyu'tiyogena dhigdehaM duHkhabhAjanam  /  dhiG mAM
vaJcitamatyantaM cirakAlaM kukarmabhiH  // 163 /  /  tatkaromi punaryena na
patAmi bhavArNave  /  gatiSvatyantaduHkhAsu nirviNNaH paryaTanaham  // 164 //
uvAceti dazAsyazca nanu pravayasAM nRNAm  /  pravrajyA zobhate madra tvaM ca
pratyaprayauvanaH || 165 || sahasrAMzuruvAceti naiva mRtyurvivekavAn  /
zaradhana ivAkasmAddeho nAzaM prapadyate  //  166  /  /  yadi nAma bhavet sAraH
kazcidbhogeSu rAvaNa  /  tAtenaiva na me vyaktAste syuruttamabuddhinA  /  /  167
/  /  ityuktA tanaye nyasya rAjyaM paramanizcayaH  /  kSamito dazavaktreNa
prAvrajatpiturantike  //  168  //  tena cAbhihitaH pUrvamayodhyAyAH patiH suhRt
/  anaraNyo'nagAratvaM prapatsye'haM yadA tadA  /  /  169  /  /  tubhyaM
vedayitAsmIti tathAyaM tena bhASitaH  /  jJApanArthamato'nena tasmai saMpreSitA
narAH  /  /  170 || tato'sau kathite pumbhiH zrutvA vASpAkulekSaNaH  /  vilalApa
ciraM smRtvA guNAMstasya mahAtmanaH  //  171 /  /  viSAde ca gate
mAndyamityuvAca mahAbudhaH  /  bandhustasya samAyAto ripuveSeNa rAvaNaH  /  /
172  //  aizvaryapaJjarAntastho viSayairmohitazviram  /  yenAtyantAnukUlena
narapakSI vimocitaH  /  /  173  /  /  mAhiSmatIpatirdhanyaH sAMprataM yo
bhavArNavam  /  titIrSati yamadhvaMsabodhapotasamAzritaH  //  174 /  /
kRtArthaH sAMprataM jAto yadante'tyantaduHkhadam  /  pApaM rAjyAkhyamujjhitvA
vrataM jainezvaraM zritaH || 175  /  /  haiM aura antameM jo duHkhoMse bahula
hote haiM una viSayoMko dhikkAra hai || 162 | | usa svargake lie farara hai
jisase ki cyuti avazyambhAvI hai  /  duHkhake pAtrasvarUpa isa zarIrako dhikkAra
hai aura jo cirakAla taka duSTa karmoMse ThagA gayA aise mujhe bhI dhikkAra hai
|| 163|| aba to maiM vaha kAma karU~gA jisase ki phira saMsArameM nahIM par3e  /
atyanta duHkhadAyI gatiyoMmeM ghUmatA- ghUmatA maiM bahuta khinna ho cukA hU~ ||
164  /  /  isake uttarameM rAvaNane kahA ki he bhadra ! dIkSA to vRddha manuSyoM
ke lie zobhA detI hai abhI to tuma navayauvanase sampanna ho  //  165  //
sahasrarazmine rAvaNakI bAta kATate hue bIca meM hI kahA ki mRtyuko aisA viveka
thor3A hI hai ki vaha vRddha janako hI grahaNa kare yauvanavAleko nahIM  /  are
! yaha zarIra zaradaRtu ke bAdala ke samAna akasmAt hI naSTa ho jAtA hai  /  /
166  /  rAvaNa ! yadi bhogoM meM kucha sAra hotA to uttama buddhike dhAraka
pitAjIne hI unakA tyAga nahIM kiyA hotA  //  167 //  aisA kahakara usane dRr3ha
nizcayake sAtha putrake lie rAjya sauMpA aura dazAnana kSamA yAcanA kara pitA
zatabAhuke samIpa dIkSA dhAraNa kara lI  //  /  168  /  /  sahasrarazmine apane
mitra ayodhyA ke rAjA anaraNyase pahale kaha rakhA thA ki jaba maiM digambara
dIkSA dhAraNa karU~gA taba tumhAre lie khabara dU~gA aura anaraNyane bhI
sahasrarazmise aisA hI kaha rakhA thA so isa kathana ke anusAra sahasrarazmine
khabara deneke lie anaraNyake pAsa AdamI bheje  /  /  169 - 170  //  gaye hue
puruSoMne jaba anaraNya se sahasrarazmike vairAgyako vArtA kahI to use sunakara
usake netra A~suoMse bhara gaye  /  usa mahApuruSake guNoMkA smaraNakara vaha
cirakAla taka vilApa karatA rahA || 171 | | jaba viSAda kama huA to
mahAbuddhimAn anaraNyane kahA ki usake pAsa rAvaNa kyA AyA mAno zatruke veSameM
bhAI hI usake pAsa AyA || 172 || vaha rAvaNa ki jisane atyanta anukUla hokara
viSayoMse mohita ho cirakAla taka aizvaryarUpI pijar3eke andara sthita
rahanevAle isa manuSyarUpI pakSIko mukta kiyA hai  // 173 //  mAhiSmatI ke rAjA
sahasrarazmiko dhanya hai jo rAvaNa ke samyagjJAnarUpI jahAjakA Azraya le
saMsArarUpI sAgarako tairanA cAhatA hai || 174  //  jo antameM atyanta duHkha
denevAle rAjya nAmaka pApako chor3akara jinendrapraNIta vratako prApta huA hai
aba usakI kRtakRtyatAkA kyA pUchanA || 175  //  1. suviyogena ba.  /
dyutiyogena ma  /  2. pravrajyAM ma  /  3 tato naiva na me ma.  /  tAtenaiva hi
me kha., n.  /  4. yamadhvaMsaM ka., kha.  /  yamadhvaMsena rAvaNena nimittena
bodhapotaM samyagjJAnataraNi samAzritaH prAptaH ityarthaH  /

Page #287 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Tenth Chapter  **237**  Anaranaya, filled with anxiety, entrusted the
kingdom's wealth to his son and became a Muni, accompanied by his eldest son.
||176||  **177**  A mind is attained to the highest good by any means, whether
by a noble deed, a cause, or an enemy, but not by a base deed. ||177||  **178**
He who engages another's mind in good is truly his friend, but he who engages
another's mind in objects of enjoyment is his true enemy. ||178||  **179**  He
who meditates on the thousand-rayed one, and hears the story of King Anaranaya,
endowed with the wealth of the conduct of a Shraman, attains purity like the
sun. ||179||  Thus ends the tenth chapter of the Padmacharita, narrated by the
Acharya Ravishena, known as the Arsha, describing the initiation of King
Sahasrarashmi and Anaranaya at the time of Dasanan's departure. ||10||  1. Son.
2. Base - M. 3. Restrained K..Kh., M. 4. Wealth of the conduct of a Shraman M.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dazamaM parva 237 abhinanyeti saMvignaH kSiptvA lakSmI zarIraje  /  sutena
jyAyasA sAkamanaraNyo'bhavanmuniH  // 176 //  rathoddhatAvRttam yena
kenacidudAttakarmaNA kAraNena ripuNetareNa vaa| nirmitena samavApyate matiH
zreyasI na tu nikRSTakarmaNA  // 177 //  yaH prayojayati mAnasaM zubhe yasya
tasya paramaH sa bAndhavaH  /  bhogavastuni tu yasya mAnasaM yaH karoti
paramArirasya saH  // 178 //  mAvayanniti sahasradIdhitiM yo'naraNyanRpati
zRNoti ca  /  saMyutaM zramaNazIlasaMpadA sa bajatyamalatAM yathA raviH  // 179
//  ityArSe raviSeNAcAryaprokta padmacarite dazagrIvaprasthAne
sahasrarazmyanaraNya-zrAmaNyAbhidhAnaM nAma dazamaM parva  // 10 //  isa prakAra
sahasrarazmikI prazaMsAkara anaraNya bhI saMsArase bhayabhIta ho putrake lie
rAjyalakSmI sauMpa bar3e putrake sAtha muni ho gayA  // 176 /  /  gautama svAmI
rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! jaba utkRSTa karmakA nimitta milatA hai
taba zatru athavA mitra kisIke bhI dvArA isa jIvako kalyANakArI buddhi prApta ho
jAtI hai para jabataka nikRSTa karmakA udaya rahatA hai tabataka prApta nahIM
hotI  // 177 //  jo jisake manako acche kAryameM lagA detA hai yathArtha meM
vahI usakA bAndhava hai aura jo jisake manako bhogopabhogako vastuoMmeM lagAtA
hai vahI usakA vAstavika zatru hai  /  / 178 //  isa prakAra sahasrarazmikA
dhyAna karatA huA jo manuSya muniyoMke samAna zIlarUpI sampadAse yukta rAjA
anaraNyakA caritra sunatA hai vaha sUryake samAna nirmalatAko prApta hotA hai  /
/ 179 /  /  isa prakAra ArSanAmase prasiddha raviSaNAcArya ke dvArA kathita
padmacaritameM dazAnanake prayANa ke samaya rAjA sahasrarazmi aura anaraNyakI
dIkSAkA varNana karanevAlA dazama parva pUrNa huA  // 10 //  1..putre  /  2.
vikRSTa -ma.  /  3. saMyataM ka..kha., m.| 4. zravaNazIlasaMpadA m.|

Page #288 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eleventh Chapter  **Thus, the Jain King Ravana, who had subdued all the
human kings, heard of them and bowed down to all of them.** (1) **Surrounded by
the kings he had subdued and honored, he saw the earth filled with prosperous
cities and, like a righteous Chakravarti, he toured the land.** (2) **He was
surrounded by people of various origins, shapes, adorned with various ornaments,
with diverse manners and riding various vehicles.** (3) **He had the dilapidated
Jain temples renovated and performed the worship of the Jina, the Lord of Lords,
with great devotion.** (4) **He destroyed the wicked humans who were hostile to
the Jain faith, and with compassion, he filled the poor with wealth.** (5) **He
worshipped with affection those who were pure in their right faith, and he bowed
down to the ascetics, even those who only wore the Jain symbol.** (6) **Like the
sun in the Uttarayana, radiating unbearable heat, he set out towards the north,
his own glory radiating.** (7) **Then, Ravana heard that the king of Rajapura
was very powerful, arrogant, and never bowed down to anyone.** (8) **He was
wicked from birth, deluded by the worldly path, and had committed the great sin
of Yajna Diksha, which involves the destruction of living beings.** (9)
**Hearing the sound of the Yajna, King Shrenik asked Gautam Ganadhar, "Oh, Lord,
let the story of Ravana wait. I want to know the origin of this Yajna, in which
wicked people are engaged in the destruction of living beings."** (10-11) **The
Ganadhar replied, "Oh, Shrenik, listen, you have asked a very good question.
Many people are deluded by this Yajna."** (12)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekAdaza parva atha kailAsasaMkSomo yAn yAn mAnavato nRpAn  /  zRNoti
dharaNIyAtAMstAMstAnsarvAnanInamat  //  1 //  vazIkRtaizca saMmAnaM
prApitairveSTito nRpaiH  /  pazyan sphItapurAmurvI subhUmazcakrabhRdyethA  //  2
//  nAnAdezasamutpannairnAnAkArairnarairvRtaH  /
nAnAbhUSAdharairnAnAmASairvividhavAhanaiH  // 3 //  kArayan 'jIrNacaityAnAM
saMskArAn paramAM tathA  /  pUjAM devAdhidevAnAM jinendrANAM subhAvitaH  // 4 //
dhvaMsayan jinavidveSakAriNaH khalamAnavAn  /  'durvidhAn karuNAyukto dhanena
paripUrayan  // 5 //  samyagdarzanasaMzuddhAn vatsalaH pUjayaJjanAn  /  praNaman
zramaNAn bhaktyA rUpamAtrazritAnapi  //  6  //  udIcIM prasthitaH kASThAM
pratApaM dussahaM kiran  /  yathottarAyaNe mAnuH puNyakarmAnubhAvataH  // 7 //
balavAMzca zrutastena rAjA rAjapurAdhipaH  /  abhimAnaM paraM
bibhratparapraNativarjitaH ||8|| "janmaprabhRti duzcetA laukikonmArgamohitaH  /
praviSTaH prANividhvaMsaM yajJadIkSAkhyapAtakam ||9|| atha yajJadhvaniM zrutvA
zreNiko gaNapAlinam  /  ityapRcchad vibho tAvadAstAM rAvaNakIrtanam  // 10 //
utpatti bhagavannasya yajJasyecchAmi veditum  /  pravRtto dAruNo yasmin jaino
jantuvinAzane  // 11 //  uvAca ca gaNAdhIzaH zRNu zreNika zobhanam  /  bhavatA
pRSTametena bahavo mohitA janAH ||12|| athAnantara rAvaNane pRthvIpara jina-jina
rAjAoMko mAnI sunA una sabako namrIbhUta kiyA ||1|| jina rAjAoMko isane vaza
kiyA thA unakA sammAna bhI kiyA aura aise una samasta rAjAoMse veSTita hokara
usane bar3e-bar3e grAmoMse sahita pRthvIko dekhate hue subhUmacakravartIke
samAna bhramaNa kiyA  // 2 //  isake sAtha nAnA dezoMmeM utpanna hue nAnA AkAra
ke manuSya the  /  ve manuSya nAnA prakAra ke AbhUSaNa pahane hue the, nAnA
prakArakI unakI ceSTAe~ thIM aura nAnA prakArake vAhanoMpara ve ArUr3ha the || 3
|| vaha jINaM mandiroMkA jIrNoddhAra karAtA jAtA thA aura devAdhideva
jinendradevakI bar3e bhAvase pUjA karatA thA  // 4 //  jainadharmake sAtha dveSa
rakhanevAle duSTa manuSyoMko naSTa karatA thA aura daridra manuSyoMko dayAse
yukta ho dhanase paripUrNa karatA thA  // 5 //  samyagdarzanase zuddha janoMkI
bar3e snehase pUjA karatA thA aura jo mAtra jainamudrAko dhAraNa karanevAle the
aise muniyoM ko bhI bhaktipUrvaka praNAma karatA thA || 6 || jisa prakAra
uttarAyaNake samaya sUrya duHsaha pratApa bikheratA huA uttara dizAkI ora
prasthAna karatA hai usI prakAra rAvaNane bhI puNya karmake udayase duHsaha
pratApa bikherate hue uttara dizAkI ora prasthAna kiyA ||7|| athAnantara
rAvaNane sunA ki rAjapurakA rAjA bahuta balavAn hai  /  vaha bahuta bhArI
ahaMkArako dhAraNa karatA huA kabhI kisIko praNAma nahIM karatA hai  // 8 //
janmase hI lekara duSTa- citta hai, laukika mithyA mArgase mohita hai, aura
prANiyoMkA vidhvaMsa karAnevAle yajJa dIkSA nAmaka mahApApako prApta hai arthAt
yajJakriyAmeM pravRtta hai ||9|| tadanantara yajJakA kathana suna rAjA zreNikane
gautama gaNadhara se pUchA ki he vibho ! abhI rAvaNakI kathA rahane diijie|
pahale maiM isa yajJakI utpatti jAnanA cAhatA hU~ ki jIvoMkA vighAta karanevAle
jisa yajJameM duSTajana pravRtta hue haiM  // 10-11 //  taba gaNadhara bole ki
he zreNika ! suna, tUne bahuta acchA prazna kiyA hai  /  isa yajJake dvArA
bahuta se jana mohita ho rahe haiM  //  12  //  1. cakravadyathA ma.  /  2.
zIrNa ka., kha., ma.  /  3. sabhAvitaH ka, kha  /  subhAvitAm ma  /  4. daridrAn
/  5. janmanaH prabhRti ma  /  6. duzceto -ka., kha.  /  7. janA ma.  /

Page #289 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Eleventh Chapter  231. In Ayodhya city, Yayaati, the ornament of the
Ikshvaku dynasty, was the king, and his queen was Surakanta. ||13|| They had a
son named Vasu. When he was fit for learning, he was entrusted to the guru,
Kshirakadambaka. Kshirakadambaka's wife was named Svastimati. ||14|| One day,
Kshirakadambaka, who was well-versed in all the scriptures, was teaching the
Aranyakashastra to his disciples, Narada and others, in the forest. ||15|| At
that time, a group of Charanas, who were traveling through the sky, were present
there. One of them, a compassionate Muni, said, "One of these four beings will
go to hell." Hearing this, Kshirakadambaka was greatly frightened. ||16-17||
Then, he sent his three disciples, Narada, Parvata, and Vasu, to their
respective homes. They were happy to go, like calves released from their
tethers. ||18|| When Parvata reached home alone, his mother, Svastimati, asked
him, "Son, where is your father? Why have you come alone?" ||19|| Parvata
replied to his mother, "He said he would come later." Svastimati waited for her
husband's arrival, and the day passed. ||20|| When the day ended and darkness
enveloped everything, he still did not come. Svastimati, overwhelmed with grief,
fell to the ground. ||21|| She lamented like a cuckoo, "Alas, I am unfortunate,
abandoned by my husband!" ||22|| "Has my husband been killed by some wicked
person? Or has he gone to a foreign land for some reason?" ||23|| "Or, being
skilled in all the scriptures, has he embraced renunciation, abandoned all
attachments, and taken to the life of a mendicant?" ||24|| As she lamented, the
night passed. In the morning, Parvata went to search for his father. ||25||
After searching for several days, Parvata saw his father, a Muni, in a garden on
the bank of a river. He was sitting humbly near his guru, surrounded by his
disciples. ||26|| Seeing him from afar, Parvata was overjoyed. He approached his
father and said, "Father, my mother, Nivritti, is waiting for you." ||27||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekAdazaM parva 231 vinItAyAM mahAnAsIdikSvAkukulabhUSaNaH  /  yayAti ma rAjAsya
surakAnteti bhAminI  // 13 //  vasurnAmAbhavattasya guroryogyaH sa cArpitaH  /
nAmnA kSIrakadambasya yasya svastimatI priyA  /  / 14 //  anyadAraNyaka zAstraM
sarvazAstravizAradaH  /  adhyApayatyasau ziSyAnnAradAdIn vanAntare  // 15 //
atha cAraNasAdhUnAM sthitAnAM vihAyasA  /  ekena yatinA proktamevaM
kAruNyakAriNA  // 16 //  caturNAM prANinAmeSAmeko narakabhAgiti  /  zrutvA
kSIrakadambastadvaco bhIto'bhavad bhRzam  // 17 //  tato'ntevAsinastena preSitAH
svasvamAlayam  /  yayustuSTA yathA vatsA muktA dAmakabandhanAt  // 18 //
svastimatyatha papraccha putraM parvatasaMjJakam  /  kva tavAsau pitA putra
yenaikAkI svamAgataH  /  / 19 /  /  'pazcAdemIti tenoktamiti tasyai jagAda saH
/  tadAgarma ca kAkSatyAstasyA yAtamahAkSayam  // 20 //  nAyAtaH sa dinAnte'pi
yadA timiragahvare  /  tadA zokamarAkrAntA patitAsau mahItale  // 21 //
cakravAkIva duHkhArtA vilApaM cAkaroditi  /  hA hatA mandabhAgyAsmi prANAnAM
svAminojjhitA  // 22 //  pApena kenacinmRtyaM kimasau prApito bhavet  /  kiM vA
dezAntaraM yAtaH kAntaH kenApi hetanA  // 23 //  sarvazAstrArthakuzalaH kiM vA
vairAgyamAzritaH  /  sarvasaMgAna parityajya pravrajyAM samazizriyat  // 24 //
vilApamiti kurvantyAstasyAH sA rajanI gtaa| anveSTuM pitaraM cAdAvahvaH
parvatako gataH  // 25 //  dRSTvA sarittaTodyAne dinaiH kaizcid guruM munim  /
guroH saGghasametasya samIpe vinayasthitam  // 26 //  ArAdeva
nivRttyAkhyanmAtaraM ca pitA mama  /  vipralabdho'bhavannagnaH
zramaNaistatparAyaNaiH  // 27 //  ayodhyAnagarImeM ikSvAkukulakA AbhUSaNasvarUpa
eka yayAti nAmakA rAjA thA aura surakAntA nAmakI usakI rAnI thI  /  / 13 /  /
una donoMke vasu nAmakA putra huaa| jaba vaha par3haneke yogya huA taba
kSIrakadambaka nAmaka guruke lie sauMpA gyaa| kSIrakadambakakI strIkA nAma
svastimatI thA ||14|| kisI eka dina sarvazAstroMmeM nipUNa kSIrakadambaka,
vanake madhya meM nArada Adi ziSyoMko AraNyakazAstra paDhA rahA thA  // 15 //
vahIM AkAzamArgase vihAra karanevAle cAraNa kA saMgha virAjamAna thaa| unameM se
eka dayAlu munine isa prakAra kahA ki ina cAra prANiyoMmeM se eka narakako
prApta hogaa| munike vacana suna kSIrakadambaka atyanta bhayabhIta ho gayA  //
16-17|| tadanantara usane nArada, parvata aura vasu ina tInoM ziSyoMko apane-
apane ghara bheja diyA aura ve ziSya bhI bandhanase chor3e gaye bachar3oMke
samAna santuSTa hote hue apane-apane ghara gaye  // 18 //  jaba pavaMta akelA hI
ghara pahuMcA taba usakI mAtA svastimatIne pUchA ki he putra ! tumhAre pitA
kahA~ haiM ? jisase ki tuma akele hI Aye ho ||19|| parvatane mAtAko uttara diyA
ki unhoMne kahA thA ki pIche Ate haiM  /  patike AgamanakI pratIkSA karate hue
svastimatIkA dina samApta ho gayA  // 20 //  jaba dinakA bilakula anta ho gayA
aura saghana andhakAra phaila cukA phira bhI vaha nahIM AyA taba svastimatI
zokake bhArase AkrAnta ho pRthvIpara gira par3I  // 21 //  vaha duHkhase pIr3ita
ho cakavIke samAna isa prakAra vilApa karane lagI ki hAya-hAya maiM bar3I
mandabhAgya hU~ jo patike dvArA chor3I gayI  // 22 //  kyA merA pati kisI pApI
manuSyake dvArA matyako prApta haA hai athavA kisI kAraNa paradezako calA gayA
hai ?  // 23 /  /  athavA samasta zAstroMmeM kuzala honese vairAgyako prApta ho
savaM parigrahakA tyAga kara munidIkSAko prApta huA hai ?  // 24 //  isa prakAra
vilApa karate-karate svastimatIkI rAtri bhI vyatIta ho gyii| jaba prAtaHkAla huA
taba parvata pitAko khojane ke lie gayA  // 25 //  lagAtAra kucha dinoM taka
khoja karaneke bAda parvatane dekhA ki hamAre pitA nadIke taTavartI udyAnameM
muni hokara vidyamAna haiN| saMghasahita guruke samIpa vinayase baiThe haiM  /
/ 26 /  /  usane dUrase hI lauTakara 1. nAmA ka., kh.| 2. vizAradaM ma., ba.  /
3. prathitAnAM m.| 4 dAmakabandhanAn m.| 5. pazcAdAgati ka., kha.  /  6.
anveSTaM ma.  /

Page #290 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
240 Padmapurana Then, knowing for sure that her husband would not return, she
was overcome with sorrow. She beat her breasts with both hands and cried out
loud. ||28|| Hearing this account, Narada, the devotee of Dharma, came to see
his teacher, overwhelmed with grief. ||29|| Seeing him, she beat her breasts and
cried even more. It is natural for sorrow to increase in the presence of loved
ones. ||30|| Narada said, "Mother, why are you grieving in vain? Your grief will
not bring back the pure-minded Guru now." ||31|| "He has been blessed by his
good deeds, and knowing the impermanence of life, he has become eager to perform
austerities." ||32|| Thus, comforted by Narada, her sorrow gradually subsided.
Sometimes she would criticize her husband, saying that he had left her helpless,
a weak woman, and sometimes she would praise his virtues, thinking how high his
detachment was. Thus, criticizing and praising, she remained at home. ||33|| It
was from this incident that Yayaati, the knower of truth, entrusted the kingdom
to Vasu and became a great ascetic. ||34|| Vasu became a well-established king,
renowned throughout the earth. His throne was situated on a large slab of
crystal, and it was said that Vasu, by the power of truth, was situated in the
sky without any support. ||35|| Then, one day, Narada and the mountain had a
discussion about the true meaning of the scriptures. ||36|| Narada, the
omniscient and all-seeing, said, "The Arhant Bhagavan has described two types of
Dharma, Anuvrata and Mahavrata, based on their subtle and grand distinctions."
||37|| "To be free from the five sins of violence, falsehood, stealing, lust,
and attachment is called a Vrata. This Vrata is accompanied by five different
intentions for each Vrata." ||38|| "Those who are able to renounce these sins
completely in all places are called Mahavratins, and the rest, who live in
homes, are called Anuvratins." ||39|| "The Jina Bhagavan has described one Vrata
for householders, called Atithisambhaga, which is of many types, based on the
differences in the recipient, etc." ||40||  Mother, my father has been tricked
by the naked ascetics and their devotees and has become naked. ||27||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 240 padmapurANe tato nizcayavijJAtatadasaGgamadu:khitA  /  karAbhyAM
bhRzamAdhnAnA stanAvarurudat svanam  // 28 //  nAradastamatha zrutvA vRttAntaM
dhrmvtslH| draSTumAgAdupAdhyAyIM kSaNaM zokasamAkulaH  // 29 //  taM dRSTvA
sutarAM cakre stanatADanarodanam  /  nisargo'yaM yadAptasya puraH zoko
vivardhate  // 30 //  jagAda nArado mAtaH kiM zoka kuruSe vRthA  /  kRte
zoke'dhunA nAsAvAgacchati vizuddhadhIH  // 31 //  karmaNAnugRhIto'sau cAruNA
cAruceSTitaH  /  jIvitaM caJcalaM jJAtvA yastapaH kartamuthataH  // 32 //
tanutAM bodhyamAnAyAH zokastasyA gataH kramAt  /  dviSatI ca stuvAnA ca
bhartAraM sA sthitA gRhe  // 33 //  etasmAdeva codantAd yayAtistattvakovidaH  /
rAjyabhAraM vasonyasya babhUva zramaNo mahAn  // 34 //  supratiSTho'bhavad rAjA
pRthivyAM prathito vasuH  /  namaHsphaTikavistIrNa zilAsthahariviSTaraH  // 35
//  samaM parvatakenAtha nAradasyAnyadAbhavat  /  katheyaM
zAstratattvArthanirUpaNaparAyaNA  // 36 //  jagAda nArado'haniH sarvajJaH
sarvadarzimiH  /  dvividho vihito dharmaH sUkSmodAravizeSataH  // 37 //  hiMsAyA
anRtAt steyAt smarasaMgAt parigrahAt  /  viratevratamuddiSTaM bhAvanAmiH
samanvitam  // 38 //  viratiM sarvataH kartuM ye zaktAste mahAvratam  /
sevante'NuvrataM zeSA jantavo gRhamAzritAH  // 39 //  saMvibhAgo'tithInAM ca
teSAmukto jinAdhipaiH  /  yajJAkhyAvasthitAstasmin bhedaiH pAtrAdibhiryutaiH  //
40 //  mAtAse kahA ki merA pitA nagnamuniyoM aura unake bhaktoM dvArA pratArita
ho nagna ho gayA hai  // 27 //  tadanantara svastimatIne jaba nizcayase yaha
jAna liyA ki aba patikA samAgama mujhe prApta nahIM honevAlA hai taba vaha
atyanta duHkhI huii| vaha donoM hAthoMse stanoMko pITatI evaM jorase cillAtI huI
rudana karane lagI  // 28 //  yaha vRttAnta suna dharmasnehI nArada zokase
vyAkula hotA huA apanI gurAnIko dekhaneke lie AyA  // 29 //  use dekha vaha aura
bhI adhika stana pITakara rone lagI so ThIka hI hai kyoMki yaha svAbhAvika bAta
hai ki AptajanoMke samakSa zoka bar3hane lagatA hai  // 30 //  nAradane kahA ki
he mAtAjI! vyartha hI zoka kyoM karatI ho ? kyoMki isa samaya zoka karanese
nirmala buddhike dhAraka gurujI vApasa nahIM AveMge  // 31 //  sundara ceSTAoMke
dhAraka gurujIpara puNyakarmane bar3A anugraha kiyA hai ki jisase ve jIvanako
caMcala jAnakara tapa karaneke lie udyata hue haiM  // 32 //  isa prakAra
nAradake samajhAnepara usakA zoka krama-kramase halakA ho gyaa| svastimatI kabhI
to patikI nindA karatI thI ki ve eka abalAko asahAya chor3akara cala diye aura
kabhI unake guNoMkA cintavana kara stuti karatI thI ki inakI nirlepatA kitanI
uccakoTikI thii| isa prakAra nindA aura stuti karatI huI vaha gharameM rahane
lagI  // 33 //  _ isI ghaTanAse tattvoMkA jAnakAra yayAti rAjA bhI vasUke lie
rAjyabhAra sauMpakara mahAmani gayA  // 34 //  navIna rAjA vasakI pathivIpara
baDI pratiSThA bddhii| AkAzasphaTikakI lambI-cauDI zilApara usakA siMhAsana
sthita thA so lokameM aisI prasiddhi huI ki satyake balapara vasu AkAzameM
nirAdhAra sthita hai  // 35 //  athAnantara eka dina nAradakI parvatake sAtha
zAstrakA vAstavika artha prakaTa karanepara tatpara nimnalikhita carcA huI  //
36 /  /  nAradane kahA ki sabako jAnane-dekhanevAle arhanta bhagavAnne aNuvrata
aura mahAvratake bhedase dharma do prakArakA kahA hai  // 37 //  hiMsA, jhUTha,
corI, kuzIla aura parigraha ina pAMca pApoMse virakta honeko vrata kahate haiN|
yaha vrata pratyeka vratakI pA~ca-pAMca bhAvanAoMse sahita hotA hai  // 38|| jo
ukta pApoMkA sarvadeza tyAga karane meM samartha haiM ve mahAvrata grahaNa
karate haiM aura jo gharameM rahate haiM aise zeSajana aNuvrata dhAraNa karate
haiM  // 39 //  jinendra bhagavAnne gRhasthoMkA eka vrata atithisaMvibhAga
batalAyA hai jo pAtrAdike bhedase aneka prakArakA 1. dRSTA ma.  /  2. kRzatAm  /
3. dviSatIva ka., ma., ba.  /  4. dRdbhiH (?) m.| 5. aNuvratamahAvratavizeSataH
/  6. hiMsayA ma.  /  7. steyA ma.  /  8. dArasaMgAt ma.  /

Page #291 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Chapter  The meaning of the phrase "Ajairyastavyam" is related to
compassion. This has been explained by the wise sages, who are the unravelers of
the knots of the scriptures. ||41||  Aja refers to the old rice that does not
sprout even when the cause is present. It is decided that such rice should be
used for the sacrifice. ||42||  Parvata, being arrogant, said that Aja refers to
animals, and therefore, their killing should be done, and this is called
sacrifice. ||43||  NÄrada, angered by this, said to the wicked Parvata, "Do not
speak like this, because by speaking like this, you will fall into a terrible
hell." ||44||  Asserting the strength of his side, NÄrada also vowed, "Let us
both go to King Vasu, and the one who is defeated will have his tongue cut off."
||45||  "The time to meet King Vasu has passed today, so this matter will be
decided tomorrow," saying this, Parvata went to his mother. ||46||  The proud
Parvata explained the root cause of the conflict to his mother. In response, his
mother said, "O son! You have spoken falsely. ||47||  "I have heard from your
father, who explained it many times, that Aja refers to the rice that does not
sprout." ||48||  "You have gone to another country and become a meat-eater, and
out of pride, you have spoken this falsehood. This will cause you sorrow."
||49||  "O son! Your tongue will surely be cut off. What will I, a helpless
woman, do without my husband and son?" ||50||  At that moment, she remembered
that King Vasu had once asked her for a guru-dakshina (gift to the teacher), and
she had kept it with him as a deposit. Remembering this, she immediately went to
King Vasu, filled with anxiety. ||51||  Thinking, "This is our teacher," King
Vasu treated her with great respect, bowed to her, and when she sat comfortably
on the seat, he asked her with folded hands, ||52||  "O teacher! Please tell me
why you have come. I will fulfill your wish immediately. Why do you look so
sad?" ||53||  In response, Swastimati said, "O son! I am constantly in sorrow.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekAdazaM parva 241 ajairyaSTavyamityasya vAkyasyArtho dayAparaH  /  ayaM
munibhirAkhyAto granthArthagranthibhedibhiH  /  / 41 /  /  ajAste jAyate yeSAM
nAGkuraH sati kAraNe  /  sasyAnAM yajanaM kAryametairiti vinizcayaH  /  / 42 //
ajAH pazava uddiSTA iti parvatako'vadat  /  teSAmAlambhanaM kArya 'taJca
yAgo'bhidhIyate  // 43 //  nAradaH kupito'vocattataH parvatakaM khalam  /
maivaM vocaH patasyevaM narake ghoravedane  // 44 //  pratijJAM
cAkarodevamAvayoryo'vasIdati  /  vasuM prAznikamAsAdya tasya jihvA nikRtyate  /
/ 45 /  /  atikrAntA vasuM draSTuM velAdya zvo vinizcayaH  /
bhavitetyabhidhAyAgAt parvato mAturantikam  // 46 //  tasyai cAkathayanmUlaM
kalahasyAbhimAnavAn  /  tato jagAda sA putra tvayA nigaditaM mRSA  // 47 //
kurvato'nekazo vyAkhyAM mayA tava pituH zrutam  /  ajAH kilAbhidhIyante vrIhayo
ye'prarohakAH  // 48 //  dezAntaraM prayAtena maaNsbhkssnnkaarinnaa| mAnAcca
vitathaM proktaM tavedaM duHkhakAraNam  // 49 //  rasanAcchedanaM putra niyataM
te bhaviSyati  /  apuNyA kiM kariSyAmi patiputravivarjitA  // 50 //  sasmAra sA
purA proktA vasunA gurudakSiNAm  /  nyAsabhUtAM gatA cAzu vasorantakamAkulA  //
51 //  upAdhyAyIti codAramAdaraM vidadhe vasuH  /  praNamya ca sukhAsInAM
papraccha racitAJjaliH  // 52 //  upAdhyAyi niyacchAjJAmAyAtA yena hetunA  /
sarva saMpAdayAmyAzu duHkhiteva ca dRzyate  // 53 //  uvAca svastimatyevaM
nityaM putrAsmi duHkhitA  /  prANanAthaparityaktA kA vA strI sukhamRcchati  //
54 //  hai| yajJakA antarbhAva isI atithisaMvibhAga vratameM hotA hai  // 40 //
granthoMke arthakI gA~Tha kholanevAle dayAlu muniyoMne 'ajairyaSTavyam' isa
vAkyakA yaha artha batalAyA hai  // 41 //  ki aja usa purAne dhAnako kahate haiM
jisameM ki kAraNa milanepara bhI aMkura utpanna nahIM hote| aise dhAnase hI
yajJa karanA cAhie  // 42 //  nAradakI isa vyAkhyAko sunakara tamakakara parvata
bolA ki nahIM aja nAma pazukA hai ataH unakI hiMsA karanI cAhie yahI yajJa
kahalAtA hai  // 43 //  isake uttara meM nAradane kupita hokara duSTa parvatase
kahA ki aisA mata kaho kyoMki aisA kahanese bhayaMkara vedanAvAle narakameM
par3oge  // 44 //  apane pakSakI prabalatA siddha karate hue nAradane yaha
pratijJA bhI kI ki hama donoM rAjA vasuke pAsa caleM, vahAM jo parAjita hogA
usakI jihvA kATa lI jAve  // 45 //  'Aja rAjA vasuke milanekA samaya nikala cukA
hai isalie kala isa bAtakA nizcaya hogA' itanA kahakara parvata apanI mAtAke
pAsa gayA  // 46|| abhimAnI parvatane kalahakA mUla kAraNa mAtAke lie kaha
sunaayaa| isake uttara meM mAtAne kahA ki he pUtra! tUne mithyA bAta kahI hai  /
/ 47|| anekoM bAra vyAkhyA karate hue tere pitAse maiMne sunA hai ki aja usa
dhAnako kahate haiM ki jisameM aMkura utpanna nahIM hote  // 48 /  /  tU
dezAntarameM jAkara mAMsa bhakSaNa karane lagA isalie abhimAnase tUne yaha
mithyA bAta kahI hai| yaha bAta tujhe duHkhakA kAraNa hogI  // 49 //  he putra !
nizcita hI terI jihvAkA cheda hogaa| maiM abhAginI pati aura putrase rahita
hokara kyA karU~gI?  // 50 //  usI kSaNa use smaraNa AyA ki eka bAra rAjA vasune
mujhe guru dakSiNA denA kahA thA aura maiMne use dharoharake rUpameM unhIMke
pAsa rakha diyA thaa| smaraNa Ate ho vaha tatkAla ghabar3AyI huI rAjA vasuke
pAsa pahuMcI  // 51 //  'yaha hamArI gurAnI hai' yaha vicArakara rAjA vasune
usakA bahuta satkAra kiyA, use praNAma kiyA aura jaba vaha Asanapara sukhase
baiTha gayI taba hAtha jor3akara vinayase pUchA  // 52 //  ki he gurAnI ! mujhe
AjJA diijie| jisa kAraNa Apa AyI haiM maiM use abhI siddha karatA huuN| Apa
duHkhIsI kyoM dikhAI detI haiM ?  // 53 /  /  isake uttara meM svastimatIne kahA
ki he putra ! maiM to nirantara duHkhI 1. sa ca m.| 2. vidhIyate m.| 3. chidyate
/  nikRntyate m.| 4. dRSTaM m.| 5. vyAkhyA m.| 6.ye prarohakAH m.| 7. sasmAra ca
ka., kha.  /  sasmAra purA s.| 8. nyAya -ma.  /  9. upAdhyAyoti ma..

Page #292 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
242 There are two types of relationships: one based on sexual desire and the
other based on scriptures. I consider the latter to be superior, as it is free
from impurities. ||55|| Therefore, you are my son, as you are my husband's
disciple. Seeing your prosperity brings me joy. ||56|| Son, you had once said,
"Accept the Dakshina." I had replied, "I will accept it later." Remember this.
||57|| Kings who are dedicated to protecting the earth always speak the truth.
Those who are dedicated to protecting living beings are truly called Rishis.
||58|| You are known for your truthfulness in the world, so give me that
Dakshina. Upon hearing this, the king, with utmost humility, bowed his head and
said, ||59|| "Mother, I am willing to do even the most despicable act at your
command. Tell me what is in your heart, do not think otherwise." ||60|| Then,
Swastimati narrated the entire story of the dispute between Narada and Parvata,
and urged him to support her son's side, even though it was false. ||61||
Although King Vasu knew the true meaning of the scriptures, Swastimati, through
repeated persuasion, kept him on her side. In this way, the king, blinded by his
foolish adherence to truth, accepted her words. ||62|| After this, Swastimati,
filled with joy, showered King Vasu with many blessings and returned home.
||63|| On the next day, early in the morning, Narada and Parvata went to King
Vasu. Many people, filled with curiosity, accompanied them. ||64|| People from
four different regions, various types of people, Samantas, and ministers quickly
arrived at the place of the debate. ||65|| Then, a great dispute arose between
Narada and Parvata in the presence of the righteous. Narada argued that "Aj"
means seedless rice, while Parvata argued that "Aj" means animal. ||66|| When
the dispute could not be settled, they asked King Vasu, "O King! Tell us what
your Guru, Kshirakadambaka, had said on this matter. You are known for your
truthfulness." ||67|| In response, King Vasu said, "Parvata had said...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 242 padmapurANe saMbandho dvividho yaunaH zAstrIyazca tayoH param  /
zAstrIyameva manye'hamayaM malavivarjitaH  // 55 //  ato nAthasya me ziSyaH
putra eva bhavAnapi  /  pazyantI bhavato lakSmIM karomi timAtmanaH  // 56 //
dakSiNAM ca gRhANeti putra proktaM tvayA suta  /  mayA coktaM gRhISyAmi
kAle'nyasminniti smara  // 57 //  satyaM vadanti rAjAnaH pRthiviipaalnodytaaH|
RSayaste hi mASyante ye sthitA jantupAlane  // 58 //  'satyena zrAvitaH sa tvaM
mahyaM tAM yaccha dakSiNAm  /  ityuktazcAvadadvAjA vinayAnatamastakaH  // 59 //
amba te vacanAdadya karomyatha jugupsitam  /  vada yatte sthitaM citte mA kRthA
matimanyathA  // 6 //  tamudantaM tato'zeSaM nivedyAsmai jagAda saa|
putrasyAnRtamapyetadanumAnyaM tvayA mama  // 61 //  jAnatApi tato rAjJA nItena
sthiratAM punaH  /  mUDhasatyagRhItena pratipannaM tayoditam  // 62 //
punaruktaM priyaM bhUri bhASitvAzIHpurassaram  /  Anache nilayaM tuSTA bhRzaM
svastimatI tataH  // 63 //  athAnyasya dinasyAdau gatau nAradaparvatau  /
samIpaM kSitipAlasya kutUhalijanAvRtI  // 6 //  caturvidho janapado nAnA
prakRtayastathA  /  sAmantA mantriNazcAzu vivizurjalpamaNDalam  // 65 //
tatastayoH satAM madhye vivAdaH sumahAnabhUt  /  brIhayo'jA vibIjA ye
pazavazceti vastuni  // 66 //  tatastAbhyAM vasuH pRSTo yadupAdhyAya uktavAn  /
tattvaM vada mahArAja satyena zrAvito bhavAn  // 67 //  yadetatparvatenoktaM
tadupAdhyAya uktavAn  /  ityukte sphaTikaM yAtaM vasoH kSipraM mahItale  // 6 //
rahatI hU~ kyoMki patike dvArA chor3I huI kauna-sI strI sukha pAtI hai ? ||54 /
/  sambandha do prakArakA hai eka yonisambandhI aura dUsarA shaastrsmbndhii| ina
donoMmeM maiM zAstrIya sambandhako hI uttama mAnatI hU~ kyoMki yaha nirdoSa
sambandha hai  /  / 55 //  cU~ki tuma mere patike ziSya ho ataH tuma bhI mere
putra ho| tumhArI lakSmIko dekhate hue mujhe santoSa hotA hai  // 56 //  he
putra ! eka bAra tumane kahA thA ki dakSiNA le lo taba maiMne kahA thA ki phira
kisI samaya le luuNgii| smaraNa karo  // 57 /  /  pRthivIkI rakSA karanemeM
tatpara rAjA loga sadA satya bolate haiN| yathArthameM jo jIvoMkI rakSA karane
meM tatpara haiM ve hI RSi kahalAte haiM  /  / 58|| tuma satyake kAraNa jagat
meM prasiddha ho ataH mere lie vaha dakSiNA do| garAnIke aisA kahanepara rAjA
vasUne vinayase mastaka jhakAte hue kahA  // 59|| ki he mAtA ! tumhAre kahanese
maiM Aja ghRNita kArya bhI kara sakatA huuN| jo bAta tumhAre manameM ho so kaho
anyathA vicAra mata karo  // 60 //  tadanantara svastimatIne usake lie nArada
aura parvatake vivAdakA saba vRttAnta kaha sunAyA aura sAtha hI isa bAtakI
preraNA kI ki yadyapi mere putrakA pakSa mithyA hI hai to bhI tuma isakA
samarthana karo  // 61 /  /  rAjA vasu yadyapi zAstrake yathArtha arthako jAnatA
thA para svastimatIne use bAra-bAra preraNA dekara apane pakSameM sthira rkhaa|
isa taraha mUrkha satyake vaza ho rAjAne usakI bAta svIkRta kara lI  // 62 //
tadanantara svastimatI rAjA vasuke lie bAra-bAra anekoM priya AzIrvAda dekara
atyanta santuSTa hotI huI apane ghara gayo  // 63 /  /  _athAnantara dUsare dina
prAtaHkAla hI nArada aura parvata rAjA vasuke pAsa gye| kutUhalase bhare anekoM
loga unake sAtha the  // 64 //  cAra prakArake janapada, nAnA prajAjana, sAmanta
aura mantrI loga zIghra hI usa vAdasthalameM A pahuMce  // 65 //  tadanantara
sajjanoMke bIca nArada aura parvatakA bar3A bhArI vivAda huaa| unameM se nArada
kahatA thA ki ajakA artha bIjarahita dhAna hai aura parvata kahatA thA ki ajakA
artha pazu hai  /  / 66 /  /  jaba vivAda zAnta nahIM huA taba unhoMne rAjA
vasuse pUchA ki he mahArAja ! isa viSayameM guru kSIrakadambakane jo kahA thA so
Apa kho| Apa apanI satyavAditAse prasiddha haiN||67|| isake uttarameM rAjA
vasUne kahA ki parvatane 1. pazyanto m.| 2. dakSiNAM ca gRhISyAmi purA proktaM
ca yA suta m.| 3. RSayasnehi ( ? ) m.| 4. satyeva ma.  /  5. kutUhala -ma.  /  :

Page #293 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The passage you've provided is a portion of Jain literature, written in a
mixture of Sanskrit and Hindi, recounting a narrative involving themes of
morality, the consequences of actions, and the concept of dharma (righteousness)
and adharma (unrighteousness). Here's the English translation preserving the
Sanskrit words:  ---  243  The eleventh chapter speaks of how the realm (loka)
became aware of the crystal (sphatika) in the sky. There was a throne
(singhasana) that was situated there; then it was said: "Due to your false
capability, O Vasu, the throne has descended. This is suitable in light of your
true nature" (paramartha-nivedanam). Then, filled with delusion (moha), he again
spoke. Just then he entered the earth, immediately accompanied by the throne
(singhasana) (71).   Plagued by terrible sin (maha-papa) due to promoting the
dharma of violence (hinsa-dharma), he fell into extreme darkness (tama) and
entered the seventh earth (prithivi), which is known for its severe agony (72).
Then, loud cries of "Alas! Alas!" resounded, creating a significant uproar in
the realm of beings (73). Narada had attained reverence from giving teachings on
non-violence (ahimsa), and thus, this expression emerged from the mouths of all:
"Where there is dharma, there is victory" (74).  The sinful mountain (parvata),
struck by the punitive scorn (danda) in the world, became despondent and caused
the suffering body to suffer extremely (75). Finally, having caused death, the
wicked (rakshasa) who held great valor remembered the humiliation and strife he
faced in the previous life (76).   He reflected, âPeople have caused me great
disgrace previously; therefore, I will take a revenge that brings painâ (77). "I
shall create deceitful (dambha-racita) scriptures and perform actions that lead
the deluded people into terrible realms (naraka) (78).â  Thereafter, that
rakshasa assumed the guise of a human, wore the sacred thread (yajnopavita) on
his left shoulder, and carried a water pot (kamandalu) and garland (akshamalÄ)
among other items (79).   Thus, he began wandering about the earth, intent on
instigating acts of violence (hinsa-karman), reciting an extremely unfriendly
(amangalak) tone of the fearsome scriptures (80). He was inherently cruel and
constantly engaged in the entrapment of ignorant ascetics (tapasya) and
brahmanas (81).   Afterward, those foolish beings who were destined to suffer in
the future began to align with him, just like moths (shalabha) drawn to the
light (82).  ---  This translation retains the essence of the original text,
highlighting the themes of delusion, moral downfall, and the consequences of
one's actions, as rooted in Jain philosophy.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 243 ekAdazaM parva nAjJAsIt kila tallokaH sphaTikaM gagane tataH  /  sthitaM
siMhAsana tasya vivedeti tato'vadat  // 69 //  vaso vitathasAmarthyAttava
siMhAsanaM gatam  /  bhUmimadyApi te yuktaM paramArthanivedanam  // 7 //  tato
mohamadAviSTastadaiva punarabhyadhAt  /  praviSTo dharaNoM sadyaH
siMhAsanasamanvitaH  // 71 //  mahApApamarakrAnto hiMsAdharmapravartanAt  /
gatastamastamo'bhikhyAM pRthivIM ghoravedanAm  // 72 //  tato dhiga dhiga
dhvaniH prAyo jAtaH kalakalo mahAn  /  janAnAM pApabhItAnAmuddizya vasuparvatau
// 73 //  saMprApto nAradaH pUjAmahiMsAcAradezanAt  /  evameva hi sarveSAM yato
dharmastato jayaH  // 74 //  pApaH parvatako loke dhigdhigdaNDasamAhataH  /
duHkhitaH zeSayan dehamakarot kutsitaM tapaH  // 75 //  kAlaM kRtvAmavat karo
rAkSasaH puruvikramaH | apamAnaM ca sasmAra dhigdaNDAdhikamAtmanaH  // 76 //
acintayacca lokena mamAnena parAmavaH  /  kRtastataH kariSyAmi pratikarmAsya
duHkhadam  // 77 //  vitAnaM dambharacitaM kRtvA karma karomi tat  /  yatrAsakto
jano yAti tiryaDanarakadurgatIH  // 78 //  tato mAnuSaveSastho
vAmaskandhasthasUtrakaH  /  kamaNDalvakSamAlAdinAnopakaraNAvRtaH  // 79 //
hiMsAkarmaparaM zAstraM ghoraM karajanapriyam  /  adhIyAnaH suduSTAramA
nitAntAmaGgalasvaram  // 40 //  tApasAn durvidhAn buddhayA
sUtrakaNThAdikAMstathA  /  vyAmohayitumudhukto hiMsAdharmeNa nirdayaH  // 81 //
tasya pakSe tataH petuH prANino mUDhamAnasAH  /  bhaviSyaduHkhasaMbhArAH zalabhA
iva pAvake  // 82 //  jo kahA hai vahI gurujI ne kahA thaa| itanA kahate hI rAjA
vasukA sphaTika pRthivIpara gira par3A  //  68  //  loga usa sphaTikako nahIM
jAnate the isalie yahI samajhate the ki rAjA vasukA siMhAsana AkAzameM nirAdhAra
sthita hai  // 66 //  nAradane rAjAko sambodhate hue kahA ki vaso ! mithyA
pakSakA samarthana karanese tumhArA siMhAsana pRthivIpara A par3A hai| ataH aba
bhI satya pakSakA samarthana karanA tumheM ucita hai  /  / 70 //  parantu rAjA
vasu to moharUpI madirAke nazAmeM itanA nimagna thA ki usane phira bhI vahI bAta
khii| isa pApake phalasvarUpa rAjA vasu zIghra hI siMhAsanake sAtha hI sAtha
pRthivImeM dhaMsa gayA  // 71 //  hiMsAdharmakI pravRtti calAnese vaha bahuta
bhArI pApake bhArase AkrAnta ho bahuta bhArI vedanAvAlI tamastamaHprabhA nAmaka
sAtavIM pRthivImeM gayA  // 72 //  tadanantara pApase bhayabhIta manuSya rAjA
vasu aura parvatako lakSya kara dhik-dhika kahane lage jisase bar3A bhArI
kolAhala utpanna huA |73 /  /  ahiMsApUrNa AcArakA upadeza deneke kAraNa nArada
sammAnako prApta huaa| saba logoMke mukhase yahI zabda nikala rahe the ki 'yato
dharmastato jayaH' jahA~ dharma vahA~ vijaya  /  / 74|| pApI parvata, lokameM
dhikkArarUpI daNDakI coTa khAkara duHkhI ho zarIrako sukhAtA huA kutapa karane
lagA  /  / 75 /  /  antameM maraNa kara prabala parAkramakA dhAraka duSTa
rAkSasa huaa| use pUrva paryAyameM jo apamAna aura dhikkArarUpI daNDa prApta huA
thA usakA smaraNa ho AyA  // 76 //  vaha vicAra karane lagA ki logoMne merA
parAbhava kiyA thA isalie maiM isakA duHkhadAyI badalA lUMgA  // 77 /  /  maiM
kapaTapUrNa zAstra racakara aisA kArya karU~gA ki jisameM Asakta hue manuSya
tithaMca athavA naraka-jaisI durgatiyoMmeM jAveMge  // 78 //  tadanantara usa
rAkSasane manuSyakA veSa rakhA, bAyeM kandhepara yajJopavIta pahanA aura hAthase
kamaNDalu tathA akSamAlA Adi upakaraNa liye  // 79 /  /  isa prakAra hiMsA
kAryoM kI pravRtti karAnemeM tatpara tathA krUra manuSyoMko priya bhayAvaha
zAstrakA atyanta amAMgalika svarameM uccAraNa karatA haA vaha daSTa rAkSasa
pathivIpara bhramaNa karane lagA  // 8 //  vaha svabhAvase nirdaya thA tathA
baddhihIna tapasviyoM aura brAhmaNoMko mohita karane meM sadA tatpara rahatA thA
||81 //  tadanantara jinheM bhaviSyameM duHkha prApta honevAlA thA aise mUrkha
prANI usake pakSameM isa prakAra par3ane lage jisa prakAra 1. siMhAsane m.| 2.
dhvanistAvajjAtaH m.| 3. saMsmAra m.| 4. vidhAnaM -DhambhacaritaM ma.
kaMDabharataM ()kh.| 5. yatrAzakto m.|

Page #294 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, I myself declared the purpose of the Yajna. I am Brahma,
who created this world of moving and unmoving beings. I created animals for the
sake of the Yajna, out of my own grace. The Yajna is the source of prosperity
and heaven, therefore the killing in the Yajna is not killing. In the SautrÄmaá¹i
Yajna, drinking of liquor is not a sin, and in the Gosava Yajna, the use of an
agamya (unapproachable) woman is permissible. In the Matá¹medha Yajna, the mother
should be killed, and in the Pitá¹medha Yajna, the father should be killed. This
should be done within the vedi (altar), and there is no fault in it. The JuhÅ«ka,
a deity, should be satisfied with offerings of ghee, placed on the back of a
tortoise, while chanting "Svaha" with great effort. If a tortoise is not
available, then a pure twice-born man, with a bald head and a yellow complexion,
should be immersed in pure water up to his mouth, leaving only his head above
the water, resembling a tortoise. A blazing fire should be kindled on his head
and offerings should be made into it. All that has been, is, and will be, is the
Purusha, the Lord of immortality, who lives on food. Since there is only one
Purusha, who kills whom? Therefore, kill beings in the Yajna as you please. The
Yajna performer should eat the flesh of those beings, because it is purified by
the Yajna and is made for the purpose of the gods. Thus, showing such extremely
sinful acts, that Rakshasa made beings inclined towards Yajna on earth. Then,
believing his words, those who entered the land of the Yajna, seeking happiness,
were bound by him like logs of wood, and he flew up into the sky. At that time,
their bodies trembled with fear, their pupils rolled, and he turned them upside
down, so that their thighs were on their backs and their necks were on their
feet.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe tebhyo jagAda yajJasya vidhAnArthamahaM svayam  /  brahmA lokamimaM
prApto yena sRSTaM carAcaram  // 83 //  yajJArtha pazavaH sRSTAH svayameva
mayAdarAt  /  yajJo hi bhUtyai svargasya tasmAdyajJe vadho'vadhaH  // 84 //
sautrAmaNividhAnena surApAnaM na duSyati  /  agamyAgamana kAryaM yajJe
gosavanAmani  // 85 //  mAtRmedhe vadho mAtuH pitRmedhe vadhaH pituH  /
antarvedi vidhAtavyaM doSastatra na vidyate  // 86 //  AzuzukSaNimAdhAva' pRSThe
kUrmasya tarpayet  /  haviSA juhakAkhyAya svAhetyuktvA prayatnataH  // 87 //
yadA na prAptuyAt kUrma tadA zuddhadvijanmanaH  /  khalateH piGgalAbhasya
viklavasya zucau jale  // 8 //  "Asyadadhne'vatIrNasya mastake kUrmasaMnibhe  /
prajvAlya jvalanaM dIptamAhutiM nikSiped dvijaH  // 89 //  sarva puruSa evedaM
yadbhUtaM yadbhaviSyati  /  IzAno yo'mRtatvasya yadannenAtirohati  // 10 //
evamekatra puruSe kiM kenAtra vipAdyate  /  kurutAto yathAbhISTaM yajJe
prANinipAtanam  // 11 //  mAMsasya bhakSaNaM teSAM kartavyaM yajJakarmaNi  /
yAyajUkena pUtaM hi devoddezyena tatkRtam  // 12 //
evaMprakAramatyantapApakarma pradarzayan  /  prANinaH pravaNAMzcakre rAkSaso
dharaNItale  // 13 //  adhAnAstato bhUtvA jantavaH sukhvaagchyaa|
hiMsAyajJasthalI bhUmi 'dIkSitA pravizanti ye  // 94 //  kASThabhAraM yathA
sarva prAdhvaMkRtya sa tAn dRDham  /  mayodbhutamahAkampAn calattArakalocanAn
// 15 //  pRSTaskandhazirojaGghA-pAdAprasthAnvidhAya kham  /  utpapAta
patadraktadhArAnikaraduHkhitAn  // 96 //  ki agnipara pataMge par3ate haiM  /  /
82 //  vaha una logoMse kahatA thA ki maiM vaha brahmA hU~ jisane isa carAcara
vizvakI racanA kI hai| yajJakI pravRtti calAneke lie maiM svayaM isa lokameM AyA
huuN||83|| maiMne bar3e Adarase svayaM hI yajJake lie pazuoMkI racanA kI haiN|
yathArthameM yajJa svargakI vibhUti prApta karAnevAlA hai isalie yajJameM jo
hiMsA hotI hai vaha hiMsA nahIM hai  // 84|| sautrAmaNi nAmaka yajJameM madirA
pInA doSapUrNa nahIM hai aura gosava nAmaka yajJameM agamyA arthAt parastrIkA
bhI sevana kiyA jA sakatA hai  // 85|| mAtamedha yajJameM mAtAkA aura pitamedha
yajJameM pitAkA vadha vedIke madhyameM karanA cAhie isameM doSa nahIM hai  /  /
86 //  kachuekI pIThapara agni rakhakara juhvaka nAmaka devako bar3e prayatnase
svAhA zabdakA uccAraNa karate hue sAkalyase santRpta karanA cAhie  /  / 87 //
yadi isa kAryake lie kachuA na mile to eka gaMje siravAle pIle raMgake zuddha
brAhmaNako pavitra jalameM mukha pramANa nIce utAre arthAt usakA zarIra mukha
taka pAnImeM DUbA rahe Upara kevala kachuAke AkArakA mastaka nikalA rahe usa
mastakapara pracaNDa agni jalAkara Ahuti denA caahie|||88-89|| jo kucha ho cukA
hai athavA jo Age hogA, jo amRtatvakA svAmI hai arthAt devapakSIya hai aura jo
annajIvI hai arthAt bhUcArI hai vaha saba puruSa hI hai  // 90 /  isa prakAra
jaba sarvatra eka hI puruSa hai taba kisake dvArA kauna mArA jAtA hai ? arthAt
koI kisIko nahIM mAratA isalie yajJameM icchAnusAra prANiyoMkI hiMsA karo  // 91
/  /  yajJameM yajJa karanevAleko una jIvoMkA mAMsa khAnA cAhie kyoMki devatAke
uddezyase nirmita honeke kAraNa vaha mAMsa pavitra mAnA jAtA hai  /  / 92 //
isa prakAra atyanta pApapUrNa kArya dikhAtA huA vaha rAkSasa pRthivI talapara
prANiyoMko yajJAdi kAryoMmeM nipuNa karane lagA  // 93 /  /  tadanantara usakI
bAtoMkA vizvAsa kara jo loga sukhakI icchAse dIkSita ho hiMsAmayI yajJakI
bhUmimeM praveza karate the una sabako vaha lakar3iyoMke bhArake samAna majabUta
bA~dhakara AkAzameM ur3a jAtA thaa| usa samaya unake zarIra bhayase kA~pa uThate
the, unakI A~khoMkI putaliyA~ ghUmane lagatI thiiN| unheM vaha ulaTA kara aisA
jhukAtA thA ki unakI jaMghAeM pITha tathA grIvApara 1. -mAdAya m.| 2.
haviSyajuhvakAkhyAya  /  3. khalvATasya m.| 4. mukhapramANe  /  5. mRtastasya
ka., ja.  /  6. kiM kiM nAtra ka.  /  7. kuruta + ato| 8. yAjakena m.| 9.
zraddadhAnastato ma.  /  10. vIkSitAH k.| 11. javAn m.|

Page #295 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Eleventh Chapter  Then they cried out, "O Visvarodar, why are you angry with us?
Why are you trying to kill us?" ||97|| "Please be merciful and release us, we
are innocent, O great and powerful God. We are all your devotees and will obey
all your commands." ||98|| Then the Rakshasa said to them, "Just as the animals
you killed go to heaven, so too will you go to heaven after being killed by me."
||99|| Saying this, he threw some of them into another island where there was no
human presence. He threw others into the vast ocean, and some into the midst of
cruel animals like lions. ||100|| He spun some of them around and around,
smashing them against the rocky ground, making a sound like a washerman beating
clothes. ||101|| They were all in a state of agony and fear of death. They
remembered their parents, children, and brothers, and then met their end.
||102|| Those who remained were deluded by the false scriptures and increased
the violence of the Yajna shown to them by the Rakshasa. ||103|| Those who do
not perform this terrible Yajna of violence do not go to the terrible hell that
brings great suffering. ||104|| The origin of this Yajna of violence that I have
described to you was a king named Shrenik, who was wise and the son of Ratna
Shrava. ||105|| Then Ravana arrived at the royal city, which was like heaven.
Outside the city, a king named Marutvan was sitting in the Yajna hall. ||106|| A
famous Brahmin named Samvarta, who was well-versed in the religion of violence,
was the chief priest of the Yajna and was giving instructions to the king
according to the scriptures. ||107|| All the Brahmins on earth were invited to
this Yajna, and they came with their wives, children, and other relatives,
driven by greed. ||108|| The entire Yajna was filled with the sounds of
auspicious chants and the eager faces of those who were hoping for rewards. The
earth trembled with the power of the Yajna. ||109||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekAdazaM parva tataste 'visvarodAraM krozanto'bhidadhuH svaram | kimarthaM deva
ruSTo'si yenAsmAn hantumudyataH  // 97 //  prasIda muJca nirdoSAnasmAn deva
mahAbala  /  bhavadAjJAM vayaM sarvAM kurmaH praNatamUrtayaH  //  98  //  tato
babhANa tAn rakSaH yathaiva pazavo hatAH  /  bhavadbhiripUrti svargaM tathA
yUyaM mayA hatAH  //  99  //  ityuktvA vijane kAMzcid dvIpe'nyasminnirakSipat  /
mahArNave parAnanyAnkrUraprANigaNAntare  //  100  //  ekAnAsphAlayan
kSoNIdharamUrdhina zilAtale  /  kurvan bahuvidhaM zabdaM vAsAMsi rajako yathA
// 101 //  duHkhena maraNAvasthAM prAptAste trastacetasaH  /  pitarau tanayAn
bhrAtRRn smaranto mRtyumApitAH  // 102 //  tadvyApAditazeSA ye mUDhAH
kugranthakanyayA  /  rakSasA darzito hiMsAyajJastairvRddhimAhRtaH  // 103 //
hiMsAyajJamimaM ghoramA caranti na ye jandAH  /  durgatiM te na gacchanti
mahAduHkhavidhAyinIm  // 104 //  udAhRto mayA yastai hiMsAyajJasamudbhavaH  /
zreNikainaM purAjAsIt prAjJo ratnazravAsutaH  //  105  //  atha rAjapuraM prApto
rAvaNaH svargasaMnibham  /  bahiryasya 'marutvAkhyo yajJavATe sthito nRpaH  //
106 //  hiMsAdharmapravINazca saMvarto nAma vizrutaH  /  Rtvik tasmai dadau
kRtsnamupadezaM yathAvidhi  //  107  //  sUtrakaNThAH pRthivyAM ye sarve te'tra
nimantritAH  /  putradArAdibhiH sArdhamAgatA lobhavAhitAH  // 108 //  sA
tairyajJamahI sarvA devamaGgalaniHsvanaiH  /  lAbhAkAGkSA prasannAsyairvRtA
kSubhyatsubhUribhiH  //  109  //  aura paira ke paMje sirapara A lagate the
tathA par3atI huI khUnakI dhArAoMse ve bahuta duHkhI ho jAte the ||94-96 /  /
isa kAryase ve saba bahuta bhayaMkara zabda karate hue cillAte the aura kahate
the ki he deva ! tuma kisa lie ruSTa ho gaye ho jisase hama sabako mAraneke lie
udyata hue  // 97 //  he deva ! tuma mahAbalavAn ho, prasanna hoo, hama saba
nirdoSa haiM ataH hama logoM ko chodd'o| hama saba Apake samakSa natazarIra haiM
aura Apa jo AjJA deMge usa sabakA pAlana kareMge  // 98 //  tadanantara rAkSasa
unase kahatA thA ki jisa prakAra tumhAre dvArA mAre hue pazu svarga jAte haiM
usI prakAra mere dvArA mAre gaye Apa loga bhI svargaM jAveMge  //  669 || aisA
kahakara usane kitane hI logoMko jahA~ manuSyoMkA sadbhAva nahIM thA aise dUsare
dvIpoMmeM DAla diyA  /  kitane hI logoM ko samudra meM pheMka diyA, kitane hI
logoMko siMhAdika duSTa jIvoMke madhya DAla diyA aura jisa prakAra dhobI aneka
prakArake zabda karatA huA zilAtalapara vastra pachAr3atA hai usI taraha kitane
hI logoMko ghumA ghumAkara parvatakI coTI para pachAr3a diyA || 100 - 101  //
duHkhase ve maraNAsanna avasthAko prApta ho gaye the, una sabake citta
bhayabhIta the, aura antameM mAtA pitA, putra aura bhAI AdikA smaraNa karate hue
mRtyuko prApta ho gaye  //  102  //  jo maranese bAkI bace the ve mithyA
zAstrarUpI kanyAse mohita the ataH unhoMne rAkSasake dvArA dikhalAye hue
hiMsAyajJakI vRddhi kI  //  103  //  | gautama svAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM
ki he rAjan ! jo manuSya isa bhayaMkara hiMsAyajJako nahIM karate ve mahAduHkha
denevAlI durgatimeM nahIM jAte haiM ||104  //  he zreNika ! maiMne yaha tere lie
hiMsAyajJakI utpatti khii| rAvaNa ise pahale se hI jAtA thA || 105 //
athAnantara rAvaNa, svargakI tulanA karanevAle usa rAjapura nagara meM pahu~cA
jahA~ marutvAn nAmakA rAjA nagarake bAhara yajJazAlA meM baiThA thA  //  106  //
hiMsAdharmameM pravINa saMvarta nAmakA prasiddha brAhmaNa usa yajJakA pradhAna
yAjaka thA jo rAjAke lie vidhipUrvaka saba upadeza de rahA thA  // 107 //
pRthvI meM jo brAhmaNa the ve saba isa yajJa meM nimantrita kiye gaye the isalie
lobhake vazIbhUta strI-putrAdike sAtha vahA~ Aye the || 108 //  lAbhakI AzAse
jinake mukha prasanna the tathA jo vedakA 245 1. vizvarodAraM ma., ba, ka, kha
/  2. R gatI ityasya laGbahuvacane rUpam  /  bahulaM chandasItyeva siddhe
'atipipartyozcetItva - vidhAnAdayaM bhASAyAmapi  /  'abhyAsasyAsavarNe' itIyaG
iryAta iyUtaH iyUti  /  gacchantItyarthaH  /  riyati ma  /  3. nirakSipet ma  /
4. mIyUti ma  /  moprati ka, kha  /  5. rakSitA kha.  /  6. pAsta ma.  /  7.
zreNikena kha.  /  8. maruttAkhyo ma  /  9. yakSavAde ka, kha  /  10.
lokavAhitAH ma.  /

Page #296 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
246 In the Padma Purana, it is said that many animals were tied there, their
hearts filled with sorrow. Hundreds of boars were bound, their bellies heaving
with fear. ||110|| Meanwhile, Narada, traveling through the sky at will, saw a
gathering of people on the back of a mountain. ||111|| Seeing this, he was
filled with wonder, his mind bewildered, and his body moved with curiosity.
||112|| He thought, "Whose is this excellent city? Whose army is this? And whose
people, like the ocean in size, are standing here?" ||113|| "I have seen many
cities, many crowds of people, and many armies, but never such a gathering of
people." ||114|| Driven by curiosity, he descended from the sky. For it was his
nature to be curious and to see. ||115|| The king, Shrenik, asked, "O Lord, who
is this Narada? What is his origin, and what are his qualities?" ||116|| The
head of the assembly replied, "O Shrenik, there was a Brahmin named Brahmaruchi,
and his wife was named Kurmi." ||117|| "That Brahmin, being a devotee, lived in
the forest, subsisting on fruits and roots. His wife lived with him, and he
conceived a child in her womb." ||118|| "Then, one day, the liberated sages, who
were devoted to self-control, were traveling somewhere. By chance, they came to
that place." ||119|| "They rested for a while in that hermitage, which was a
place of peace. There, they saw the Brahmin couple, whose appearance was good,
but whose actions were blameworthy." ||120|| "Seeing the woman, whose body was
pale, whose breasts were large, who was weak, who was exhausted from the burden
of pregnancy, and who was breathing like a serpent, the great-souled sages, who
knew the nature of the world, were filled with compassion and decided to teach
them Dharma." ||121-122|| "The eldest of them, a wise sage, spoke in sweet
words. He said, 'It is a pity to see how these creatures are controlled by their
karma.' ||123|| "O ascetic, you have abandoned your family and your Dharma,
hoping to cross the ocean of existence. What is your soul doing in this forest?"
||124||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 246 padmapurANe upanItAzca tatraiva pazavo dInamAnasAH  /  varAkAH zatazo
baddhAH zvasatkukSipuTA bhayAt  // 110 //  nArado'thAntare tasminnicchayA
nabhasA vrajan  /  apazyad dhanapRSThastho janaM taM tatra saMgatam  // 111 //
acintayacca dRSTvaivaM vismayAkulamAnasaH  /  kurvan vibhramamaGgasya
kutUhalasamudbhavam  // 112 //  etatsunagaraM kasya kasya ceyamanIkinI  /  iyaM
ca sAgarAkArA prajA' kasmAdiha sthitA  // 13 //  nagarANi janaudhAzca
varUthinyazca bhUrizaH  /  mayekSAJcakrire jAtu nedRgdRSTo janoskaraH  // 11 //
kutUhalAditi dhvAtvA'vatIrNo'sau vihaaysH| kamaitadeva
tasyAsIdyatkutUhaladarzanam  // 115 //  papraccha mAgadhezo'tha bhagavan kaH sa
nAradaH  /  utpattirvA kutastasya guNA vA tasya kIdRzAH  /  / 116 //  jagAda ca
gaNAdhIzaH zreNika brAhmaNo'bhavat  /  nAmnA brahmarUcistasya kUrmI nAma
kuttumbinii||17|| tApasena satA tena zritena vanavAsitAm  /  etasyAmAhito
garbhaH phalamUlAdivRttinA  // 118 //  vItasaGgAstamuddezamathAjagmurmaharSayaH
/  yAnto mArgavazAt kvApi saMyamAsaktamAnasAH  // 119 //  vizazramuH kSaNaM
tasminnAzrame zramanodini  /  apazyan dampatI tau ca svAkArI karmagarhitau  //
12 //  AgaNDurazarIrAM ca dRSTvA yoSAM pRthustanIm  /  kRzAM garbhabharamlAnAM
zvasantI pannagImiva  // 12 //  saMsAraprakRtijJAnAM zramaNAnAM mahAtmanAm  /
kRpayA saMbabhUvaitau dharma bodhayituM matiH  // 122 //  teSAM madhye tato
jyeSTho jagAda madhuraM yatiH  /  kaSTaM pazyata naya'nte karmabhirjantavaH
katham  //  123 //  tyaktvA dharmadhiyA bandhUn sNsaarottrnnaashyaa| svayaM
khalIkRto'raNye kimAtmA tApasa tvayA  // 124 //  maMgalapATha kara rahe the aise
bahuta sAre brAhmaNoMse yajJakI samasta bhUmi AvRta hokara kSobhako prApta ho
rahI thI  // 109 /  /  saikar3oM dInahIna pazu bhI vahA~ lAkara bA~dhe gaye gaye
the| bhayase una pazuoMke peTa duHkhakI sA~seM bhara rahe the  // 110 /  /  uso
samaya apanI icchAse AkAzameM bhramaNa karate hue nArata ne vahA~ ekatrita
logoMkA samUha dekhA  // 111 //  use dekha nArada Azcaryase cakita ho,
kutUhalajanita zarIrakI ceSTAoMko dhAraNa karatA huA isa prakAra vicAra karane
lagA  // 112 //  yaha uttama nagara kauna hai ? yaha kisakI senA hai ? aura yaha
sAgarake AkAra kisakI prajA yahAM kisa prayojanase ThaharI huI hai ?  // 113 //
maiMne bahutase nagara, bahutase logoMke samUha aura bahuta sArI senAe~ dekhIM
para kabhI aisA janasamUha nahIM dekhA  // 114 //  aisA vicArakara nArada
kutUhalavaza AkAzase nIce utarA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki kutUhala dekhanA hI usakA
khAsa kAma hai  /  / 115 //  yaha sunakara rAjA zreNikane gautamasvAmIse pUchA
ki bhagavan ! vaha nArada kauna hai ? usakI utpatti kisase huI hai aura usake
kaise guNa haiM ?  // 116|| isake uttarameM gaNadhara kahane lage ki zreNika !
brahmaruci nAmakA eka brAhmaNa thA aura usakI kUrmI nAmaka strI tho||117||
brAhmaNa tApasa hokara vanameM rahane lagA aura phala tathA kandamUla Adi
bhakSaNa karane lgaa| brAhmaNI bhI isake sAtha rahatI thI so brAhmaNane isameM
garbha dhAraNa kiyA  // 118 //  athAnantara kisI dina saMyamake dhAraka
nirgranthamuni kahIM jA rahe the so mArgavaza usa sthAnapara Aye  // 119 /  /
aura zramako dUra karanevAle usa AzramameM thor3I derake lie vizrAma karane lge|
usI AzramameM una muniyoMne usa brAhmaNa dampatIko dekhA jinakA ki AkAra to
uttama thA para kArya nindanIya thA  // 120 /  /  jisakA zarIra pIlA thA, stana
sthUla the, jo durbala thI, garbhake bhArase mlAna thI aura sA~seM bharatI huI
sarpiNIke samAna jAna par3atI thI aisI strIko dekhakara saMsArake svabhAvako
jAnanevAle udAra hRdaya muniyoMke manameM dayAvaza ukta dampatIko dharmopadeza
denekA vicAra utpanna huaa||121-122|| una muniyoMke bIca meM jo bar3e muni the
ve madhura zabdoM meM upadeza dene lge| unhoMne kahA ki baDe khedako bAta hai
dekho.ye prANI karmoke dvArA kaise nacAye jAte haiM ?  // 123 /  /  he tApasa !
tUne saMsAra-sAgarase pAra honekI AzAse dharma samajha bhAI1. thAntare yasminni
-ma.  /  2. apazyadyAna -m,| 3. prajAH m.| 4. sthitA: ma.  /  5. kasmaicideva
kh.| 6. ke'pi ma.  /  7. apazyaM ma.  /  8. dampatI  /

Page #297 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Chapter  **247**  A wandering ascetic is born, what is the
difference between him and a householder? He has merely changed his attire, but
his conduct is contrary to his vows. (125)  Just as humans do not eat vomited
food, so too, the wise do not desire what they have renounced. (126)  A
renunciate who, after renouncing women, indulges in them again, is a sinner and
will become a wolf in a terrible forest after death. (127)  One who, while
engaged in all kinds of activities, indulges in unrighteous conduct and is
intoxicated with pride, and yet considers himself initiated, is utterly deluded.
(128)  What kind of renunciation is that of one who is consumed by jealousy and
lust, whose vision is evil, whose soul is corrupt, and who is engaged in all
kinds of activities? Tell me. (129)  One who is proud with an evil eye, a
renunciate who is addicted to sensual pleasures, and who claims to be an
ascetic, is a liar. How can he be a renunciate? (130)  One who enjoys
comfortable seating and movement, and whose mind is always attached to food and
clothing, and yet considers himself a Siddha, is a fool who deceives himself.
(131)  Just as one who escapes from a burning house, but then throws himself
back into it, is considered foolish. (132)  Or, just as a bird, having escaped
from a cage through a hole, returns to it again due to ignorance, is foolish.
(133)  Similarly, one who, after becoming a renunciate, falls under the sway of
the senses, is condemned in the world and does not attain his own good. (134)
Only a Muni, whose mind is one-pointed and free from all attachments, can
meditate on the true essence. Not those who are beginners like you. (135)  From
the association of attachments, arise the passions of attachment and aversion in
a being. From attachment arises lust, and from aversion, the destruction of
living beings. (136)  One who is overwhelmed by lust and anger, whose mind is
clouded by delusion, and who is confused about right and wrong actions, cannot
have a discerning mind. (137)  Why have you, abandoning your relatives,
subjected yourself to hardship in this forest? (124)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekAdazaM parva 247 bhadra pravrajito jAtaH kaste bhedo gRhasthataH  /  cAritraM
pratiyAtasya kevalaM veSamanyathA  // 125 //  yayA hi charditaM nAnnaM bhujyate
mAnuSaiH punaH  /  tathA tyakteSu kAmeSu na kurvanti matiM budhAH  // 126 //
tyaktvA liGgI punaH pApo yoSitaM yo niSevate  /  subhImAyAmaraNyAnyAM vRkatAM sa
samaznute  // 127 //  sarvArambhasthitaH kurvannabrahma madanirmaraH  /
dIkSito'smIti yo vetti svaM nitAntaM sa mohavAn  // 128 //
IrSyAmanmathadagdhasya duSTadRSTerdurAtmanaH  /  Arambhe vartamAnasya pravrajyA
vada kIdRzI  // 129 //  kudRSTyA garvito liGgI viSayAsravamAnasaH  /
bruvannahaM tapasvIti mithyAvAdI kathaM vratI  // 130 //  sukhAsanavihAraH san
sadAkazipusaktadhIH  /  siddhamanyo vimUDhAtmA jano'yaM svasya vaJcakaH  // 131
//  'dahyamAne yathAgAre kathaJcidapi niHsRtaH  /  tatraiva punarAtmAnaM
prakSipenmUDhamAnasaH  // 132 //  yathA ca vivaraM prApya niSkrAntaH paJjarAt
khagaH  /  nivRtya pravized bhUyastatraivAjJAnacoditaH  // 133 //  tathA
pravrajito bhUtvA yo yAtIndriyavazyatAm  /  ninditaH sa bhavelloke na ca svArtha
samaznute  // 13 //  dhyeyamekAgracittena sarvagranthavivarjinA  /  muninA
dhyAyate tatvaM sArambhaina bhavadvidhaiH  // 135 //  prANino granthasaGgena
rAgadveSasamudbhavaH  /  rAgAt saMjAyate kAmo dveSAjantuvinAzanam  // 136 //
kAmakrodhAbhibhUtasya mohenAkramyate mnH| kRtyAkRtyeSu mUDhasya matirna
syAdvivekinI  // 137 /  /  bandhuoMkA tyAga kara svayaM apane Apako isa vanake
madhya kyoM kaSTameM DAlA hai ?  // 124 //  are bhalemAnuSa ! tUne pravrajyA
dhAraNa kI hai para tujhameM gRhasthase bheda hI kyA hai ? tUne jo cAritra
dhAraNa kiyA thA usake tU pratikUla cala rahA hai| kevala veSa hI terA dUsarA
hai para cAritra to gRhastha-jaisA hI hai  // 125 /  /  jisa prakAra manuSya
vamana kiye hae annako phira nahIM khAte haiM usI prakAra vijJajana jina
viSayoMkA parityAga kara cukate haiM phira unakI icchA nahIM karate  // 126 /  /
jo liMgadhArI sAdhu eka bAra strIkA tyAga kara punaH usakA sevana karatA hai
vaha pApI hai aura marakara bhayaMkara aTavImeM bher3iyA hotA hai  /  / 127 //
jo saba prakArake ArambhameM sthita rahatA huA, abrahma sevana karatA huA aura
nazAmeM nimagna rahatA huA bhI 'maiM dIkSita hU~' aisA apane Apako jAnatA hai
vaha atyanta mohI hai  /  / 128 //  jo IrSyA aura kAmase jala rahA hai, jisakI
dRSTi duSTa hai, jisakI AtmA dUSita hai, aura jo ArambhameM vartamAna hai arthAt
jo saba prakArake Arambha karatA hai usakI pravrajyA kaisI ? tumhI kaho  // 129
/  /  jo kudRSTi se gavita hai, mithyAvezadhArI hai, aura jisakA mana viSayoMke
AdhIna hai phira bhI apane Apako tapasvI kahatA hai vaha jhUTha bolanevAlA hai
vaha vratI kaise ho sakatA hai ?  // 130 //  jo sukhapUrvaka uThatA-baiThatA
aura vihAra karatA hai tathA jo sadA bhojana evaM vastroMmeM buddhi lagAye
rakhatA hai phira bhI apane Apako siddha mAnatA hai vaha mUrkha apane Apako
dhokhA detA hai  // 131 //  jisa prakAra jalate hue makAnase koI kisI taraha
bAhara nikale aura phirase apane Apako usI makAna meM pheMka de to vaha mUrkha
hI samajhA jAtA hai  /  / 132 /  /  athavA jisa prakAra koI pakSI chidra pAkara
piMjaDese bAhara nikala Ave aura ajJAnase prerita ho punaH usI meM lauTa Ave to
yaha mUrkhatA hI hai  // 133 //  usI prakAra koI manuSya dIkSita hokara punaH
indriyoMkI AdhonatAko prApta ho jAve to vaha lokameM nindita hotA hai aura
AtmakalyANako prApta nahIM hotA  // 134 //  jinakA citta ekAgra hai aise
sarvaparigrahakA tyAga karanevAle muni hI dhyAna karane yogya tattvakA dhyAna
kara sakate haiM tumhAre jaise ArambhI manuSya nahIM  /  / 135 /  /  parigrahakI
saMgatise prANIke rAgadveSakI utpatti hotI hai| rAgase kAma utpanna hotA hai
aura dveSase jIvoMkA vighAta hotA hai  /  / 136 //  jo kAma 1. prApnoti  /  2.
vybhicaarN| kurvana na brahma- m.| 3. bhojnaacchaadnmgnmnaaH| 4. dahyamAno ba.
/  5. ythaangkaarHkh.| 6. tatraiva jJAna- ma.  /  7. kRtyakRtyeSu ma.  /

Page #298 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
248 Whoever does anything in this world, earns karma, and his journey in this
terrible ocean of samsara never ends. ||138|| Knowing these faults arising from
association, the wise, controlling themselves by themselves, attain dispassion.
||139|| Thus, being instructed by the words of the ultimate truth, the Brahmin
Brahmaruchi, freed from delusion, attained the ShramanÄ« initiation. ||140||
Being free from attachment, he, with great dispassion, happily wandered with his
Guru, who was dear to him. ||141|| The Kurmi, with a pure mind, also realized
that the cycle of birth and death of a being is due to attachment. Knowing this,
she renounced sinful deeds and immersed herself in pure conduct. ||142||
Abandoning the association of the wrong path, she became devoted to the Jina and
shone like a lioness in the forest, even though she was without a husband.
||143|| In the tenth month, the patient woman gave birth to a good son. Seeing
the child, the Kurmi, who knew the workings of karma, thought. ||144|| That
since the great sages have said that this association is the cause of
misfortune, I will abandon this association, that is, the company of the son,
and do what is good for the soul. ||145|| This child will also experience the
good or bad fruits of the law of karma that he has earned in his previous
births. ||146|| The deeds done by oneself protect one in the dense forest, the
ocean, or in the cage of enemies, not others. ||147|| When the time comes, even
a being who is in the womb of his mother, being subject to his own karma, is
taken away by death. ||148|| Knowing this truth, the ascetic, with a detached
mind, abandoned the child in the forest. Then, with great urgency, she sought
refuge in the city of Anjaloka, with the patient AryÄ IndumÄlini, the beautiful
and virtuous one. ||149-150||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 248 papapurANe yatkiMcitkurvatastasya karmopArjayato'zumam  /  saMsArasAgare
ghore bhramaNaM na nivartate  // 138 //  etAn saMsargajAna doSAnviditvAzu
vipazcitaH  /  vairAgyamadhigacchanti niyamyAtmAnamAtmanA  // 139 //  evaM
saMbodhito vAkyaiH paramArthopadezanaiH  /  upetaH zrAmaNI dIkSA mohAd
brahmarucizcyutaH  // 14 //  nirakSepamatiH kUmyAM mahAvairAgyasaMmataH  /
vijahAra sukhaM sAdhaM guruNA guruvatsalaH  // 14 //  sApi zuddhamatiH kurmI
karmaNaH kRSNataicyutA  /  jJAtvA rAgavazaM jantoH saMsAraparivartanam  // 142
//  kumArgasaGgamutsRjya jinabhaktiparAyaNA  /  siMhIva zobhate'raNye bhA
virahitA satI  // 143 //  mAse ca dazame dhIrA prasUtA dArakaM zubham  /
acintayaJca vIkSyainaM jJAtakarma viceSTitA  // 14 //  saMparko'yamanartho'sau
kathito yanmaharSibhiH  /  tasmAnmuktvAdhunA saGgaM karomi hitamAramane  // 145
//  anenApi bhave svasminyaH karmavidhirajitaH  /  phalaM tasya shishubhoktaa
manojJamarthavetarat  /  / 146 //  araNyAnyAM samudra vA sthitaM vArAtipAre  /
svayaMkRtAni karmANi rakSanti na paro janaH  // 147 //  yaH punaH prAptakAlaH
syAnanyaGkagato'pi saH  /  hiyate mRtyunA jIvaH svakarmavazatAM gataH  // 148 //
evaM viditatatvA sA buddhayAtinirapekSayA  /  bAlakaM vipine tyaktvA tApasI
vItamatsarA  // 149 //  Anaz2alokanagare kSAntyAryAmindumAlinIm  /  zaraNaM
bhUrisaMvegAd "bhUtAryA cAruceSTitA  // 150 //  aura krodhase abhibhUta hI rahA
hai usakA mana mohase AkrAnta ho jAtA hai aura jo karane yogya tathA na karane
yogya karmoMke viSayameM mUr3ha hai usakI buddhi vivekayukta nahIM ho sakatI  //
137 /  /  jo manuSya icchAnusAra cAhe jo kArya karatA huA azubha karmakA
upArjana karatA hai isa bhayaMkara saMsAra-sAgarameM usakA bhramaNa kabhI bhI
banda nahIM hotA  // 138 //  ye saba doSa saMsargase hI utpanna hote haiM aisA
jAnakara vidvAn loga apane Apake dvArA apane ApakA niyantraNa kara vairAgyako
dhAraNa karate haiM  /  / 139 /  /  isa prakAra paramArthakA upadeza denevAle
vacanoMse sambodhA gayA brahmaruci brAhmaNa mithyAtvase cyuta ho daigambarI
dIkSAko prApta huA aura apanI kUrmI nAmaka strIse niHspRha ho mahAvairAgyase
yukta hotA huA guruke sAtha sukhapUrvaka vihAra karane lgaa| usakA gurusneha
aisA hI thA  // 140-141 /  /  kUrmIne bhI jAna liyA ki jIvakA saMsArameM jo
paribhramaNa hotA hai vaha rAgake vaza hI hotA hai| aisA jAnakara vaha
pApakAryase virata ho zuddhAcArameM nimagna ho gayI  // 142 /  /  vaha
mithyAmAgiyoMkA saMsarga chor3akara sadA jina-bhakti meM hI tatpara rahane lagI
aura patise rahita honepara bhI nirjana vanameM siMhanIke samAna suzobhita hone
lagI  // 143 //  usa dhairyazAlinIne dasaveM mAsameM zubha putra utpanna kiyaa|
putrako dekhakara karmokI ceSTAko jAnanevAlI kUrmIne vicAra kiyA  // 144 /  /
ki cUMki maharSiyoMne isa samparkako anarthakA kAraNa kahA thA isalie maiM isa
samparka arthAt putrakI saMgatiko chor3akara AtmAkA hita karatI hU~  // 145 /  /
isa zizune bhI apane bhavAntarameM jo karmokI vidhi arjita kI hai usakA yaha
acchA yA burA phala bhogegA  // 146 //  ghanaghora aTavI, samudra athavA
zatruoMke piMjar3emeM sthita jantukI apane Apake dvArA kiye hue karma hI rakSA
karate haiM anya loga nahIM  /  / 147 //  jisakA kAla A jAtA hai aisA svakRta
karmokI AdhInatAko prApta huA jIva mAtAkI godameM sthita hotA huA bhI mRtyuke
dvArA hara liyA jAtA hai  // 148 /  isa prakAra tattvako jAnanevAlI tApasIne
nirapekSa buddhise usa bAlakako vanameM chor3a diyaa| tadanantara 1. daigambarIm
/  2. ka., kha., ma. pustakeSu 'mohAd brahmarucizcyutaH' iti pATha upalabhyate,
na. pustake tu prAg 'mohAbrahmarucizcyutaH' ityeva pAThaH svIkRtaH pazcAtkenApi
TippaNa kI mohAta-iti pAThaH zodhitaH  /  3. saMpadaH ma.  /  4. yo maharSibhiH
ka., kha., b.| 5. bhavedyasmin m.| 6. mabhavetaram m.| mathavetaraM ka., kha.,
b.| 7. svayaM m.| 8. janmanyaGkagato- m.| 9. kAntyAyamindu ka., kha., m.| 10.
bhUrisaMvegA ma.  /  11. cAruceSTitA AryA bhUtA = babhUveti bhAvaH  /

Page #299 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
A rai festival 2 That virtuous boy, free from crying, etc., was seen by the gods
called Já¹mbhaka, who were bowing down. || 151 || He was taken by them with
compassion and nurtured with love. He was taught all the scriptures, including
the secrets. || 152 || Having become learned, he obtained the knowledge that
travels through the sky. He attained supreme youth and firmly held the Anuvrata.
|| 153 || Seeing his mother, whose mark was a sign of recognition, he went to
her with joy and, devoted to right faith, saw his father, the Nirgrantha Guru.
|| 154 || Having attained the Ksullaka conduct, he wore the matted hair crown,
becoming like the Avadvara, i.e., neither a householder nor a monk, but between
the two. || 155 || He was very fond of love, beauty, and eloquence. He always
desired to see quarrels. He was a lover of music and influential. || 156 || The
kings honored him, and there was never any obstacle to his coming and going. He
wandered through the sky and earth, constantly looking at things with curiosity.
|| 157 || He was nurtured by the gods, so his actions were like those of the
gods. He was known as the Devà¤°à¥à¤·à¤¿, brilliant with knowledge and wondrous. || 158
|| Wandering at will, he somehow reached the sacrificial hall of the city of
Rajapur. Standing near the sky, he saw the sacrificial ground filled with
people. || 159 || Seeing the animals tied up, he was filled with compassion and
descended to the sacrificial ground. He was a master of debate. || 160 || He
said to King Marutvan, "O King! What have you begun? This act of violence
against the animal kingdom is like a door for those who are going to hell." ||
161 || The king, who knew the meaning of all the scriptures, replied, "I know
what fruit I will obtain from this action. || 162 || Without any feeling of
envy, she went to the city of light, Alok Nagar, and took refuge with the Aryika
named Indramalini. She became an Aryika, a bearer of excellent conduct, with
great emotion. || 149-150 || 249 Then - the god called Já¹mbhaka was going
through the sky, and he saw that virtuous boy, free from crying, etc. || 151 ||
Those compassionate gods took him with respect and nurtured him. They taught him
all the scriptures, including the secrets. || 152 || Having become learned, he
obtained the knowledge that travels through the sky. He attained supreme youth
and firmly held the Anuvrata. || 153 || He saw his mother, whose mark was a sign
of recognition, and with joy he also saw his father, the Nirgrantha Guru, and
embraced right faith. || 154 || Having attained the Ksullaka conduct, he wore
the matted hair crown, becoming like the Avadvara, i.e., neither a householder
nor a monk, but between the two. || 155 || He was very fond of love, beauty, and
eloquence. He always desired to see quarrels. He was a lover of music and
influential. || 156 || The kings honored him, and there was never any obstacle
to his coming and going. He wandered through the sky and earth, constantly
looking at things with curiosity. || 157 || He was nurtured by the gods, so his
actions were like those of the gods. He was known as the Devà¤°à¥à¤·à¤¿, brilliant with
knowledge and wondrous. || 158 || Wandering at will, he somehow reached the
sacrificial hall of the city of Rajapur. Standing near the sky, he saw the
sacrificial ground filled with people. || 159 || Seeing the animals tied up, he
was filled with compassion and descended to the sacrificial ground. He was a
master of debate. || 160 || He said to King Marutvan, "O King! What have you
begun? This act of violence against the animal kingdom is like a door for those
who are going to hell." || 161 || The king, who knew the meaning of all the
scriptures, replied, "I know what fruit I will obtain from this action. || 162
||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekarai parva 2 satkarmA bAlakazcAsau rodanAdivivarjitaH  /  vrajadbhirnamasA
dRSTaH suraijU mbhakasaMjJakaiH  //  151  //  gRhItvA ca kRpAyuktairAdarAt
paripAlitaH  /  adhyApitazca zAstrANi sarahasyAnyazeSataH  //  152  //  lebhe ca
labdhavarNaH san vidyAmAkAzagAminIm  /  yauvanaM ca paraM prAptaH sthitiM
cANuvatIM dRDhAm  //  153  //  dRSTvA ca mAtaraM cihnaH pratyabhijJAnakAriNIm  /
tatprItyopetya nirgranthaM samyagdarzanatatparaH  //  154  //  prApya
kSullakacAritraM jaTAmukuTamudvahan  /  'avadvArasamo jAto na gRhastho na
saMyataH  //  155  //  yazca kandarpako kucya maukharyyAtyantavatsalaH  /
kalahaprekSaNAkAGkSI 'gItacucuH prabhAvavAn  // 156 //  pUjito rAjalokasya
parairavyAhatAyatiH  /  cacAra rodasIM nityaM kutUhalagatekSaNaH  //  157  //
devaiH saMvardhitatvAcca devasaMnibhavibhramaH  /  devarSiH prathitaH so'bhUd
vidyAvidyotitAdbhutaH  //  158  //  kathaMcitsaMcaraMzcAsAvicchayA tAM
makhAvanIm  /  samIpagaganoddezasthito'pazyajjanAkulAm  // 159 //  dRSTvA ca tAn
pazUn baddhAn samAzliSTo'nukampayA | avatIrNo makhakSoNIM jalpAkapathapaNDitaH
//  160 //  uvAceti ma~rutvaJca kiM prArabdhamidaM nRpa  /  hiMsanaM
prANivargasya dvAraM durgatigAminAm  // 161  //  uvAcAsAvayaM vetti
sarvazAstrArthakovidaH  /  Rtvig mama yadetena karmaNA prApyate phalam  //  162
//  matsara bhAvase rahita hokara vaha bar3I zAntise Aloka nagara meM
indramAlinI nAmaka AryikAkI zaraNameM gayI aura unake pAsa bahuta bhArI
saMvegase uttama ceSTAkI dhAraka AryikA ho gayI || 149 - 150  //  249
athAnantara - AkAzameM jRmbhaka nAmaka deva jAte the so unhoMne rodanAdi kriyAse
rahita usa puNyAtmA bAlakako dekhA || 151  /  /  una dayAlu devoMne Adarase le
jAkara usakA pAlana kiyA aura use rahasyasahita samasta zAstra par3hAye || 152
|| vidvAn honepara usane AkAzagAminI vidyA prApta kI aura parama yauvana prApta
kara atyanta dRr3ha aNuvrata dhAraNa kiye || 153 || usane cihnoMse
pahacAnanevAlI mAtAke darzana kiye aura usakI prItise apane pitA nirgrantha
guruke bhI darzana kara samyagdarzana dhAraNa kiyA || 154 || kSullakakA cAritra
prApta kara vaha jaTArUpI mukuTako dhAraNa karatA huA avadvArake samAna ho gayA
arthAt na gRhastha hI rahA aura na muni hI kintu una donoMke madhyakA ho gayA ||
155 || vaha kandarpa kautkucya aura maukhayryyase adhika sneha rakhatA thA,
kalaha dekhanekI sadA use icchA banI rahatI thI, vaha saMgItakA premI aura
prabhAvazAlI thA || 156 || rAjAoM ke samUha usakA sammAna karate the, usake
Agamana meM kabhI koI rukAvaTa nahIM karate the arthAt vaha rAjAoMke antaHpura
Adi surakSita sthAnoMmeM bhI binA kisI rukAvaTake A-jA sakatA thA  /  aura
nirantara kutUhaloMpara dRSTi DAlatA huA AkAza tathA pRthivImeM bhramaNa karatA
rahatA thA || 157 || devoMne usakA pAlana-poSaNa kiyA thA isalie usakI saba
ceSTAe~ devoMke samAna thIM  /  vaha devarSi nAmase prasiddha thA aura vidyAoMse
prakAzamAn tathA AzcaryakArI thA || 158  //  apanI icchAse saMcAra karatA huA
vaha nArada kisI taraha rAjapura nagarakI yajJazAlA ke samIpa pahu~cA aura vahA~
pAsa hI AkAzameM khar3A hokara manuSyoMse bharI huI yajJabhUmiko dekhane lagA
||159 || vahA~ ba~dhe hue pazuoMko dekhakara vaha dayAse yukta ho yajJabhUmimeM
utarA  /  vAda-vivAda karane meM vaha paNDita thA hI || 160 || usane rAjA
marutvAn se kahA ki he rAjan ! tumane yaha kyA prArambha kara rakhA hai ?
tumhArA yaha prANisamUhako hiMsAkA kAryaM durgatimeM jAnevAloMke lie dvArake
samAna hai  // 161 //  isake uttarameM rAjAne kahA ki isa kAryase mujhe jo phala
prApta hogA vaha samasta 1. sarahasyANyazeSataH ma., ba  /  2. aNuvratAnAmiyam
ANuvratI tAm  /  3. vRDhAm ma  /  4. na yatirna gRhasthaH kintu tayormadhyagataH
avadvArasamaH  /  5. kAndarpa -kha., ma.  /  6. gItena vitto gItacuJcuH 'tena
vittazcuJcupcaNapI' iti caJcupapratyayaH  /  gItacaJcuH ma., ka., kha., ba. 7.
marutaJca ma.  /  32

Page #300 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, The Ojain man said, "What is this that is presented, seen
by all-knowing ones, as the cause of suffering?" ||163|| Sanvarta, angered,
said, "Oh, your extreme foolishness! You speak in a way that is completely
unconnected and without reason." ||164|| "Your opinion, that there is some all-
knowing being free from attachment, is not true. Because of the existence of
individuality and other things, that being is not like that." ||165|| "Words
spoken by impure doers, those with attachment and aversion, are polluted. And
there is no one different from them, because there is no proof of such a being."
||166|| "Therefore, the Veda, which is not created by any doer, is the proof for
the things beyond the senses. In it, the karma of the three varnas (castes) and
the yajna (sacrifice) are described." ||167|| "The eternal dharma, called
'Apuurva', is revealed through the yajna. It gives the fruit, born from
desirable objects, in heaven." ||168|| "The killing of animals in the middle of
the vedi (altar) is not a cause of sin, because it is described in the
scriptures. Therefore, one should perform yajna and other rituals without
worry." ||169|| "The self-born Brahma created the animals for the sake of the
yajna. Therefore, there is no fault in destroying them for the purpose for which
they were created." ||170|| Hearing this, Narada said, "You have spoken all
falsehood. Listen, your soul is polluted by the wrong understanding of the
scriptures, that is why you have spoken like this." ||171|| "You say that there
is no all-knowing being. If there is no all-knowing being of any kind, then why
have you yourself spoken of three kinds of all-knowing beings: the one who knows
words, the one who knows meaning, and the one who knows the mind? You are
contradicted by your own words." ||172|| "If you say that there is the one who
knows words and the one who knows the mind, but there is no one who knows
meaning, then that is not right. Because in all things, like cows, etc., all
three, words, meaning, and mind, are seen together." ||173|| "If there is
absolutely no meaning, then where will the mind and words stand? That is, what
will be the support for that kind of mind, and how will that kind of word be
spoken? And that kind of meaning will be obtained by the contradiction of the
mind and the word." ||174||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe ojInaM tatosvAdIdaho mANavaka svayA  /  kimidaM prastutaM dRSTaM
sarvajJairduHkhakAraNam  // 163 //  saMvartaH kupito'vocadaho'tyantavimUDhatA  /
yadatyantamasaMbaddhaM bhASase hetuvarjitam  //  164  //  bhavato yo mataH ko'pi
sarvajJo rAgavarjitaH  /  vaiktRtvAdyupapattibhyo nAsAvevaM tathetaraH  //  165
//  azuddhaiH kartRbhiH proktaM vacanaM syAnmalImasam  /  anIdRzaM ca no
kazcidupapatterabhAvataH  // 166 //  tasmAdakartRko vedaH pramANaM syAdatIndriye
/  varNatrayasya yajJe ca karma tena prakIrtitam  //  167 //  apUrvAkhyo dhruvo
dharmo yAgena prakaTIkRtaH  /  prayacchati phalaM svarge manojJaviSayotthitam
// 168 //  antarvedi pazUnAM ca pratyavAyAya no vadhaH  /  zAstreNa codito
yasmAdyAyAdyAgAdisevanam || 169|| pazUnAM ca vitAnArthaM kRtA sRSTiH svayaMbhuvA
/  tasmAttadarthasargANAM ko doSo vinipAtane  /  /  170 || ityukte
nArado'vocadavaidyaM nikhilaM tvayA  /  bhASitaM zRNu
durgranthabhAvanAdUSitAtmanA  //  171  //  yadi sarvaprakAro'pi sarvajJo nAsti
sa tridhA  /  zabdArthabuddhibhedena svavAcA sthitito hatAH  //  172  //  atha
zabdazca buddhizca vidyate'rthastu neSyate  /  naitrametattrayaM dRSTaM yasmAt
sarvagavAdiSu || 173 || asatyarthe nitAntaM ca kurute kva padaM matiH  /  zabdo
vA sa tathAbhUto vrajedvIvAgvyatikramam  //  174 //  250 zAstroMkA artha
jAnanemeM nipuNa yaha yAjaka (purohita) jAnatA hai || 162 || nAradane yAjakase
kahA ki are bAlaka ! tUne yaha kyA prArambha kara rakhA hai ? sarvajJa
bhagavAnne tere isa kAryako duHkhakA kAraNa dekhA haiM || 163 || nAradakI bAta
suna saMvarta nAmaka yAjakane kupita hokara kahA ki aho, terI bar3I mUrkhatA hai
jo isa taraha binA kisI hetuke atyanta asambaddha bAta bolatA hai || 164 ||
tumhArA jo yaha mata hai ki koI puruSa sarvajJa vItarAga hai so vaha sarvajJa
vaktA Adi honese dUsare puruSa ke samAna sarvajJa vItarAga siddha nahIM hotA  /
kyoMki jo sarvajJa vItarAga hai vaha vaktA nahIM ho sakatA aura jo vaktA hai
vaha sarvajJa vItarAga nahIM ho sakatA || 165  //  azuddha arthAt rAga-dveSI
manuSyoM ke dvArA kahe hue vacana malina hote haiM aura inase vilakSaNa koI
sarvajJa hai nahIM, kyoMki usakA sAdhaka koI pramANa nahIM pAyA jAtA  /  isalie
akartRka veda hI tIna varNoMke lie atIndriya padArtha ke viSaya meM pramANa hai
/  usImeM yajJa karmakA kathana kiyA hai  /  yajJake dvArA apUrva nAmaka
dhruvadharmaM prakaTa hotA hai jo jIvako svarga meM iSTa viSayoMse utpanna phala
pradAna karatA hai || 166-168 //  vedI ke madhya pazuoM kA jo vadha hotA hai
vaha pApakA kAraNa nahIM hai kyoMki usakA nirUpaNa zAstrameM kiyA gayA hai
isalie nizcinta hokara yajJa Adi karanA cAhie || 169 || brahmAne pazuoM kI sRSTi
yajJake lie hI kI hai isalie jo jisa kAryaMke lie race gaye haiM usa kAryaMke
lie unakA vighAta karanemeM doSa nahIM hai | 170  //  saMvartake itanA kaha
cukanepara nAradane kahA ki tUne saba mithyA kahA hai  /  terI AtmA mithyA
zAstroMkI bhAvanAse dUSita ho rahI hai isIlie tUne aisA kahA hai suna  //  171
//  tU kahatA hai ki sarvajJa nahIM hai so yadi sarvaM prakArake sarvajJakA
abhAva hai to zabdasarvajJa, arthasarvajJa aura buddhisarvajJa isa prakAra
sarvajJake tIna bheda tUne svayaM apane zabdoM dvArA kyoM kahe ? svavacanase hI
tU bAdhita hotA hai || 172  //  | yadi tU kahatA hai ki zabdasarvajJa aura
buddhisarvajJa to hai para artha sarvajJa koI nahIM hai to yaha kahanA nahIM
banatA kyoMki go Adi samasta padArthoM meM zabda, artha aura buddhi tInoM sAtha
hI sAtha dekhe jAte haiM  //  73  //  | yadi padArthakA bilakula abhAva hai to
usake binA buddhi aura zabda kahA~ TikeMge arthAt kisake Azrayase usa prakArako
buddhi hogI aura usa prakAra zabda bolA jAvegA  /  aura usa prakArakA artha
buddhi aura vacanake vyatikramako prApta ho I 1. hotAram  /  atijInaM ka, kha  /
atijInaM ma  /  2. hotA  /  saMdhartA ma  /  3. yatkRtvAdyupa ( ? )  /  4.
syAdatIndriyaiH ma.  /  5. yajJArtham  /  6. kutsitam  /  7. svavAcA sthAnato
hatAH ma., svavAvAsthA hatotA kha.  /

Page #301 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Chapter 251  The term "omniscient" applied to the Buddha is a
secondary usage, based on qualities. It is dependent on the primary, just as the
sound of a lion in Chaitra is dependent on the actual lion. ||175||  This
inference contradicts your claim that the Buddha is not omniscient. In our view,
the complete absence of omniscience is not accepted. ||176||  "Where does this
omniscient, who pervades the earth with his glory, reside?" To this question, it
is said that he resides in the divine Brahma-pura, with a soul as pure as the
sky. ||177||  Your scripture also contradicts your claim. If the Buddha were
completely devoid of omniscience, why would your scripture mention his location,
etc.? And thus, when the object of the argument is established in multiple ways,
i.e., established in some way, it becomes a valid argument for us, because this
is what we claim. ||178||  The argument you have presented for the absence of
omniscience is based on the concept of "speech." Speech can be of three types:
completely inappropriate speech, appropriate speech, and general speech.
Completely inappropriate speech is not valid, because it is not established
against the opponent. If you take speech according to the Syadvada, then your
argument becomes invalid, because it would establish the validity of a speaker
without any flaws. Secondly, we do not accept the interpretation of the Vedas by
Jaimini, etc., as valid. They, like Devadatta, are also flawed speakers based on
the argument of speech. Therefore, your argument based on speech becomes
contradictory, as it proves the opposite meaning. ||179-180||  And the teachings
given by Prajapati, etc., cannot be considered evidence, because they are also
like Devadatta, etc., being influenced by attachment and aversion. And any
scripture coming from such attached and averse individuals will also be flawed.
Therefore, the absence of a flawless scripture is established in your view.
||181||  One who knows one thing knows all things in their true form. Therefore,
the example you have given to prove the absence of omniscience is flawed by you,
because since he knows one thing, he knows everything is established. ||182||
Furthermore, according to your view, there is no person who speaks completely
appropriate words as an example. Therefore, you should show the absence of the
means in the absence of the object in the example. Just as you show the
occurrence of the object in the example of analogy by establishing the
pervasiveness of the analogy, similarly, you should show the occurrence of the
absence in the example of absence by establishing the pervasiveness of the
absence. Only then can the object be established, otherwise not. ||183||  And in
your view, hearing about an unseen object and the evidence coming from the
scriptures...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekAdazaM parva 251 buddheH sarvajJa ityeSa vyavahAro guNAgataH  /  mukhyApekSo
yathA caitre siMhazabdapravartanam  // 175 //  etena cAnumAnena pratijJeyaM
virodhinI  /  amAvazca mamAtyantaM prasiddhiM na kvacid gataH  // 176 //
sarvajJaH sarvadukkvAso yasyaiSa mahimA bhuvi  /  divi brahmapure hyeSa
'vyomnAtmA supratiSThitaH  // 177 //  Agamena tavAnena visedhaM yAti saMgaraH  /
anekAnte ca sAdhye'rthe bhavesiddhaprasAdhakam  // 178 //  vaktRtvaM
sarvathA'yuktaM na paraM pratiSidhyati  /  asiddhaM ca bhavet svasya syAdvAdena
samAgatam  // 179 //  'nAsAvabhimato'smAkaM vaktRtvAddevadattavat  /  ityAdyapi
bhavesiddhaM viruddhaM sAdhanaM yataH  // 180 //  prajApatyAdimizcAyamupadezo na
nishcyH| te'pyevamiti caitebhyo doSavAnAgamo bhavet  // 181 //  eka yo veda tena
syAjjJAtaM sattAtmanAkhilam  /  ataH sAdhyavihIno'yaM dRSTAnto gaditastvayA  //
182 //  atha caikAntayuktoktidRSTAnto vo yatastataH  /
sAdhyasAdhanavaikalyamudAhArya 'sadharmaNi  // 183 //  zrutvA vastunyadRSTe ca
pramANaM vedamAgatam  /  na samAzrayaNaM yuktaM hetoH sarvajJadUSaNe  // 184 //
jAyegA  // 174 //  buddhi meM jo sarvajJakA vyavahAra hotA hai vaha gauNa hai
aura gauNa vyavahAra sadA mukhyakI apekSA karake pravRtta hotA hai| jisa prakAra
caitrake lie siMha kahanA mukhya siMhakI apekSA rakhatA hai usI prakAra
buddhisarvajJa vAstavika sarvajJakI apekSA rakhatA hai  // 175 //  isa prakAra
isa anumAnase tumhArI 'sarvajJa nahIM hai' isa pratijJAmeM virodha AtA hai tathA
hamAre matameM sarvathA abhAva mAnA nahIM gayA hai||176|| 'pRthivImeM jisakI
mahimA vyApta hai aisA yaha sarvadarzI sarvajJa kahA~ rahatA hai' isa praznake
uttarameM kahA gayA hai ki divya brahmapurameM AkAzake samAna nirmala AtmA
supratiSThita hai  // 177 //  tumhAre isa Agamase bhI pratijJAvAkya virodhako
prApta hotA hai| yadi sarvathA sarvajJakA abhAva hotA to tumhAre AgamameM usake
sthAna Adiko carcA kyoM kI jAtI ? aura isa prakAra sAdhya arthake anekAnta ho
jAnepara arthAt kathaMcit siddha ho jAnepara vaha hamAre lie siddhasAdhana hai
kyoMki yahI to hama kahate haiM  // 178 //  sarvajJake abhAvameM tumane jo
vaktRtva hetu diyA hai so vaktRtva tIna prakArakA hotA hai-
sarvathAayuktavaktRtva, yukta vaktRtva aura sAmAnya vkttv| unameM se
sarvathAayaktavaktatva to banatA nahIM, kyoMki prativAdIke prati vaha siddha
nahIM hai| yadi syAdvAdasammata vaktRtva lete ho to tumhArA hetu asiddha ho jAtA
hai, kyoMki isase nirdoSa vaktAko siddhi ho jAtI hai| dUsare Apake jaimini Adika
vedArtha vaktA hama logoMko bhI iSTa nahIM haiN| vaktRtva hetuse devadattake
samAna ve bhI sadoSa vaktA siddha hote haiM, isalie ApakA yaha vaktRtva hetu
viruddha arthako siddha karanevAlA honese viruddha ho jAtA hai  // 179-180 //
tathA prajApati Adike dvArA diyA gayA yaha upadeza pramANa nahIM ho sakatA,
kyoMki ve bhI devadattAdike samAna rAgI-dveSI hI haiM aura aise rAgI-dveSI
puruSoMse jo Agama kahA jAvegA vaha bhI sadoSa hI hogA ataH nirdoSa AgamakA
tumhAre yahA~ abhAva siddha hotA hai  // 181 /  /  ekako jisane jAna liyA usane
sadrUpase akhila padArtha jAna liye, ataH sarvajJake abhAvakI siddhi meM jo
tumane dUsare puruSakA dRSTAnta diyA hai use tumane hI sAdhyavikala kaha diyA
hai, kyoMki vaha cUMki ekako jAnatA hai isalie vaha sabako jAnatA hai isakI
siddhi ho jAtI hai  // 182 //  dUsare tumhAre matase sarvathA yukta vacana
bolanevAlA puruSa dRSTAnta rUpase hai nahIM, ataH Apako dRSTAntameM sAdhyake
abhAvameM sAdhanakA abhAva dikhalAnA caahie| arthAt jisa prakAra Apa anvaya
dRSTAntameM anvayavyApti karake ghaTita batalAte haiM usI prakAra vyatireka
dRSTAntameM vyatirekavyApti bhI ghaTita karake batalAnI cAhie  /  tabhI sAdhyakI
siddhi ho sakatI hai, anyathA nahIM  // 183 /  /  tathA Apake yahA~ sunakara
adRSTa vastuke 1. divyabrahmapure m.| 2. vyomAtmA m.| 3. AgamenAnumAnena kh.| 4.
na zocati tato'smAkaM kh.| 5. tathaivamiti j.| 6. samiNi ma., ka., kha.  /

Page #302 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Padma Purana  **Verse 185:** What is equal to omniscience in opposition to
eloquence? If there is a possibility of omniscience, then the speaker would be
even more eloquent.  **Verse 186:** What does one who does not know speak? He is
a fool with a confused mind. Without the absence of difference and non-
difference, there would be no means of knowing.  **Verse 187:** Our view is that
just as the impurities of gold and other metals are completely destroyed, so too
are ignorance and the impurities of attachment, aversion, etc., destroyed in a
person due to a cause. The one in whom they are destroyed is called omniscient.
**Verse 188:** According to our doctrine, the qualities (dharma) of substances
are necessarily dependent on their opposites, just as the blue quality of a
lotus flower implies that there are also lotuses that are not blue. Similarly,
the quality of being non-omniscient, which you attribute to humans, proves that
there are also humans who are not non-omniscient, i.e., omniscient. In reality,
a quality is meaningful only when there is both possibility and variation, as
stated elsewhere: "A quality is meaningful due to possibility and variation.
Fire is never characterized by coldness, nor by heat." That is, a quality is
meaningful only because of possibility and variation. Coldness is not attributed
to fire because it is not possible, and heat is not attributed to fire because
it is always hot. Similarly, according to your doctrine, if humans were always
non-omniscient, then attributing the quality of non-omniscience to them would be
meaningless. It is meaningful only when a human is considered omniscient.
**Verse 189:** The statement "There is no creator of the Vedas" cannot be proven
due to the lack of logic, i.e., it does not fit with the concept of non-
creation. On the other hand, there are many reasons to believe that "The Vedas
have a creator." Just as visible objects like pots and pans have a cause, so too
are there many reasons to believe that "The Vedas have a creator."  **Verse
190:** Since the Vedas are in the form of words and sentences, and are filled
with the meaning of injunctions and prohibitions, they have a creator. Just as a
poem by Maitra is created because it is in the form of words and sentences, so
too are the Vedas created because they are in the form of words and sentences.
**Verse 191:** It is heard in the world that the Vedas originated from Brahma,
Prajapati, and other beings. This well-known fact cannot be refuted.  **Verse
192:** Perhaps you think that Brahma, etc., are not the creators of the Vedas...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe vaktRtvasya virodho vA sarvajJatvena kaH samam  /  sati
sarvajJatAyoge vaktA hi sutarAM bhavet  //  185  //  yo na vetti sa kiM vakti
varAko matidurvidhaH  /  vyatirekAvinAbhAvo bhAvAcca syAnna sAdhanam  // 186 //
svapakSo'yamavidyeyaM tathA 'rAgAdikaM malam  /  kSIyate'laM kvaciddhetordhAtu
hemamalaM yathA  //  187 //  asmadAdimate 'dharmA apekSitaviparyayAH  /
dharmatvAdutpaladravye yathA nIlavizeSaNam  //  188  //  kartrabhAvazca vedasya
yuktyabhAvAnna yujyate  /  kartRmatve tu saMsAdhye dRzyavaddhetusaMbhavaH  //
189 //  "yuktizca, kartRmAn vedaH padavAkyAdirUpataH  /  vidheya
pratiSedhyArthayuktatvAnmaitrakAvyavat  //  190 //  brahmaprajApatiprAyaH
puruSebhyazca saMbhavaH  /  zrUyate vedazAstrasya nApanetuM sa zakyate  // 191
//  syAtte matirna kartAraH pravaktAraH zruteH smRtAH  /  tathA nAma pravaktAro
rAgadveSAdibhiryutAH  // 192 //  252 viSayameM vedameM pramANatA AtI hai, ataH
vaktRtva hetuke balase sarvaMjJake viSayameM dUSaNa upasthita karane meM isakA
Azraya karanA ucita nahIM hai arthAt vedArthaMkA pratyakSa jJAna na honese usake
balase sarvaMjJake abhAvakI siddhi nahIM kI jA sakatI  //  184  //  | phira
thor3A vicAra to karo ki sarvajJatAke sAtha vaktRtvakA kyA virodha hai ? maiM to
kahatA hU~ ki sarvajJatAkA suyoga milanepara yaha puruSa adhika vaktA apane Apa
ho jAtA hai || 185 || jo becArA svayaM nahIM jAnatA hai vaha buddhikA daridra
dUsaroMke lie kyA kaha sakatA hai ? arthAt kucha nahIM  /  isa prakAra vyatireka
aura avinAbhAvakA abhAva honese vaha sAdhaka nahIM ho sakatA || 186 | | hamArA
pakSa to yaha hai ki jisa prakAra ki suvarNAdika dhAtuoMkA mala kisI meM
bilakula hI kSINa ho jAtA hai usI prakAra yaha avidyA arthAt ajJAna aura
rAgAdika mala kAraNa pAkara kisI puruSameM atyanta kSINa ho jAte haiM  /
jisameM kSINa ho jAte haiM vahI sarvajJa kahalAne lagatA hai || 187|| hamAre
siddhAnta se padArthoMke jo dharma arthAt vizeSaNa haiM ve apane se viruddha
dharmakI apekSA avazya rakhate haiM jisa prakAra ki utpala Adike lie jo nIla
vizeSaNa diyA jAtA hai usase yaha siddha hotA hai ki koI utpala aisA bhI hotA
hai jo ki nola nahIM hai  /  isI prakAra puruSake lie jo Apake yahA~ asarvajJa
vizeSaNa hai vaha siddha karatA hai ki koI puruSa aisA bhI hai jo asarvajJa
nahIM hai arthAt sarvajJa hai  /  yathArthameM vizeSaNakI sArthakatA sambhava
aura vyabhicAra rahate hI hotI hai jaisA ki anyatra kahA hai-
'sambhavavyabhicArAbhyAM syAdvizeSaNamarthavat  /  na zaityena na cauSNyena
vahniH kvApi viziSyate  // ' arthAt sambhava aura vyabhicArake kAraNa hI
vizeSaNa sArthaka hotA hai  /  agni ke lie kahIM bhI zIta vizeSaNa nahIM diyA
jAtA kyoMki vaha sambhava nahIM hai isI prakAra kahIM bhI uSNa vizeSaNa nahIM
diyA jAtA kyoMki agni sarvatra uSNa hI hotI hai  /  isI prakAra tumhAre
siddhAntAnusAra yadi puruSa asarvajJa hI hotA to usake lie asavaMjJa vizeSaNa
denA nirarthaka thA  /  usakI sArthakatA tabhI hai jaba kisI puruSako sarvajJa
mAnA jAve || 188|| 'vedakA koI kartA nahIM hai' yaha bAta yukti ke abhAvameM
siddha nahIM hotI arthAt akartRtvako saMgati nahIM baiThatI jaba ki 'vedakA
kartA hai' isa viSaya meM aneka hetu sambhava haiM  /  jisa prakAra dRzyamAna
ghaTapaTAdi padArthaM sahetuka hote haiM usI prakAra 'veda sakartA hai' isa
viSaya meM bhI aneka hetu sambhava haiM  /  /  189 || cU~ki veda pada aura
vAkyAdi rUpa hai tathA vidheya aura pratiSedhya arthase yukta hai ataH kartRmAn
hai, kisIke dvArA banAyA gayA hai| jisa prakAra maitrakA kAvya padavAkya rUpa
honese kartRka hai usI prakAra veda bhI padavAkya rUpa honese sakartRka hai ||
190 || isake sAtha lokameM yaha sunA jAtA hai ki vedakI utpatti brahmA tathA
prajApati Adi puruSoMse huI hai so isa prasiddhikA dUra kiyA jAnA zakya nahIM
hai || 191 || sambhavataH tumhArA yaha vicAra ho ki bahmA Adi veda 1. yAgAdikaM
ma  /  2. dharme ApekSita viparyayaH ma., kha., ba.  /  3. yuktezca ma  /
yuktazca kha.  /  4. kRtrimo kha.  /  5. vidheyapratiSedhArthaM ma.  /

Page #303 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Chapter  **What would a perfect knower do other than explain the
scriptures?**  Because the meaning of a perfect knower is that their statement
is proof, they would not explain the scriptures in any other way. (193)  **The
fourfold division of castes is not justified without reason.**  The knowledge of
the specific body (caste) is not due to the Vedic verses or the fire rituals, as
it is claimed. (194)  **The difference in castes is seen wherever there is a
difference in the body.**  Just as there is a difference in the body of a human,
elephant, donkey, cow, horse, etc. (195)  **A man of one caste does not
impregnate a woman of another caste.**  Except for the Brahmanas, etc., where it
is seen. This proves that there is no difference in castes among the Brahmanas,
etc. (196)  **If you say that a donkey can impregnate a mare, then this argument
is not valid.**  Because the donkey and the horse are not entirely different
castes, as there is similarity in their bodies, such as having hooves. (197)
**Or, if you say that they are different castes, then their offspring would be
different.**  For example, the offspring of a donkey and a mare would be neither
a horse nor a donkey, but a mule. However, such a difference in offspring is not
seen among the Brahmanas, etc. This proves that the caste system is based on
qualities, not on birth. (198)  **Furthermore, the statement that Brahmanas are
born from Brahma's mouth, Kshatriyas from his arms, Vaishyas from his thighs,
and Shudras from his feet is baseless.**  Such a statement is only suitable for
one's own home, not for everyone. (199)  **The Brahmanhood of Rishi Shrunga,
etc., is attributed to their qualities, not to their birth in a Brahman
family.** (200)  **Because of the growth of all qualities, Lord Rishabhadeva is
called Brahma.**  And those good men who are his devotees are called Brahmanas.
(201)  **Kshatriyas are called so because they protect from destruction
(kshatra).**  Vaishyas are called so because they engage in trade and crafts
(shilpa). And those who are quick to learn from the scriptures (shruta) are
called Shudras. (202)  **If the speaker is not the doer, but only the speaker,
then they will be influenced by attachment and aversion.** (192)  **If they are
perfect knowers, then how would they explain the scriptures in any other way?**
Because their statement is proof, they would not explain the scriptures in any
other way. This proves the existence of perfect knowers. (193)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekAdazaM pavaM susarvajJAzca kiM kuryuranyathA granthadezanam | arthasya
'vAnyathAkhyAnaM pramANaM tanmataM yataH  //  193 //  cAturvidhyaM ca yajjAtyA
tena yuktamahetukam  /  jJAnaM dehavizeSasya ne ca zlokAgnisaMbhavAt  //  194 //
dRzyate jAtibhedastu yatra tatrAsya saMbhavaH  /  manuSyahastivAleyagovA
jiprabhRtau yathA  //  195  //  na ca jAtyantarasthena puruSeNa striyAM kvacit
/  kriyate garbhasaMbhUtirviprAdInAM tu jAyate  //  /  196  //  azvAyAM
rAsabhenAsti saMbhavo'syeti cenna saH  /  nitAntamanyajAtisthaH
zaphAditanusAmyataH  //  197 //  yadi vA tadvadeva syAd dvayorvisadRzaH sutaH  /
nAtra dRSTaM tathA tasmAd guNairvarNavyavasthitiH  // 198 //
mukhAdisaMbhavazcApi brahmaNo yo'bhidhIyate  /  nirhetuH svagehe'sau zomate
bhASamANakaH  //  199 //  RSizTaGgAdikAnAM ca mAnavAnAM prakIrtyate  /
brAhmaNyaM guNayogena na tu tadyonisaMbhavAt  //  200 //  bRhattvAd bhagavAn
brahmA nAbheyastasya ye janAH  /  bhaktAH santastu pazyanti brAhmaNAste
prakIrtitAH  //  201  //  kSatriyAstu kSatatrANAd vaizyAH zilpapravezanAt  /
zrutAt sadAgamAd ye tu drutAste zUdrasaMjJitAH  //  202 //  253 kartA nahIM haiM
kintu pravaktA arthAt pravacana karanevAle haiM to ve pravacanakartA Apake
matase rAgadveSAdise yukta hI ThahareMge || 192|| aura yadi sarvajJa haiM to ve
granthakA anyathA upadeza kaise deMge aura anyathA vyAkhyAna kaise kareMge,
kyoMki sarvajJa honese unakA mata pramANa hai  /  isa prakAra vicAra karanepara
sarvajJakI hI siddhi hotI hai  //  193 //  brAhmaNa, kSatriya, vaizya aura
zUdrake bhedase jo jAtike cAra bheda haiM ve binA hetuke yuktisaMgata nahIM haiM
/  yadi kaho ki vedavAkya aura agnike saMskArase dUsarA janma honeke kAraNa
unake dehavizeSakA jJAna hotA hai so yaha kahanA bhI yukta nahIM hai || 194||
hA~, jahA~-jahA~ jAti-bheda dekhA jAtA hai vahA~-vahA~ zarIra meM vizeSatA
avazya pAyI jAtI hai jisa prakAra ki manuSya, hAthI, gadhA, gAya, ghor3A AdimeM
pAyI jAtI hai || 195 || isake sivAya dUsarI bAta yaha hai ki anya jAtIya
puruSake dvArA anya jAtIya strI meM garbhotpatti nahIM dekhI jAtI parantu
brAhmaNAdika meM dekhI jAtI hai  /  isase siddha hai ki brAhmaNAdika meM
jAtivaicitrya nahIM hai || 196 || isake uttarameM yadi tuma kaho ki gadheke
dvArA ghor3ImeM garbhotpatti dekhI jAtI hai, isalie ukta yukti ThIka nahIM hai ?
to aisA kahanA ucita nahIM hai kyoMki gadhA aura ghor3A donoM atyanta bhinna
jAtIya nahIM hai kyoMki eka khura Adiko apekSA unake zarIrameM samAnatA pAyI
jAtI hai  //  197 //  athavA donoMmeM bhinnajAtIyatA hI hai yadi aisA pakSa hai
to donoMkI jo santAna hogI vaha visadRza hI hogI jaise ki gadhA aura ghor3Ike
samAgamase jo santAna hogI vaha na ghor3A hI kahalAvegI aura na gadhA hI  /
kintu khaccara nAmakI dhAraka hogI kintu isa prakAra santAnakI visadRzatA
brAhmaNAdimeM nahIM dekhI jAtI isase siddha hotA hai ki varNavyavasthA guNoMke
AdhIna hai jAtike AdhIna nahIM hai ||198|| 'isake atirikta jo yaha kahA jAtA hai
ki brAhmaNakI utpatti brahmA ke mukha se huI hai, kSatriyakI utpatti bhujAse huI
hai, vaizyakI utpatti jaMghAse huI hai aura zUdrakI utpatti paira se huI hai so
aisA hetuhIna kathana karanevAlA apane gharameM hI zobhA detA hai sarvatra nahIM
|| 199|| tathA RSizRMga Adi mAnavoMmeM jo brAhmaNatA kahI jAtI hai vaha guNoMke
saMyogase kahI jAtI hai brAhmaNa yonimeM utpanna honese nahIM kahI jAtI || 200||
vAstavameM samasta guNoM ke vRddhigata honeke kAraNa bhagavAn RSabhadeva brahmA
kahalAte haiM aura jo satpuruSa unake bhakta haiM ve brAhmaNa kahe jAte haiM
||201 //  kSata arthAt vinAzase trANa arthAt rakSA karaneke kAraNa kSatriya
kahalAte haiM, zilpa arthAt 1. cAnyathAkhyAnaM kha.  /  arthasyevAnyathAkhyAnaM
ba  /  2. tanmayaM ka., ba. 3. tatra ma.  /  4. jJAnaM deha-ma. 'ja'
jJAnadehasya zeSasya na ca - kha.  /  5. na zlokasyAgnisaMbhavAt ka.  /  6.
jAtisthazaphAdi ma. 7. vRSabhajinendraH  /

Page #304 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana:  No caste is inherently blameworthy, virtues are the cause
of well-being. Even a Chandala who observes vows is considered a Brahman by the
gods.  A learned person sees equality in a Brahman, a cow, an elephant, a dog,
and a Chandala.  The four varnas (Brahmana, Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra) and the
distinctions like Chandala, etc., are all known in the world due to differences
in conduct.  You said that the *apÅ«rva* (unseen) dharma is manifested through
sacrifice. This is not correct, because *apÅ«rva* dharma is eternal like the sky,
how can it be manifested? And if it is manifested, then it will not be eternal,
but impermanent like a pot.  Just as the knowledge of form is the fruit after
the manifestation of a lamp, similarly, the fruit in the form of heaven, etc.,
should occur only after the manifestation of *apÅ«rva* dharma. But this is not
the case.  You said that the killing of animals in the middle of the vedi
(altar) is not a cause of sin because it is ordained by the scriptures. This is
incorrect, listen to the reason.  Firstly, it is not proven that the Vedas are
scriptures. A scripture is that which teaches the good of the whole world like a
mother.  It is not appropriate to speak of atonement for a deed that is
blameless. But atonement is mentioned in this sacrificial killing, therefore it
is blameworthy. Here is a description of that atonement.  He who performs the
Soma sacrifice, which is symbolic of the Soma, the king of the gods, is
considered to kill the Soma. The *dakshina* (offering) for this sacrifice is one
hundred and twelve cows.  Out of these one hundred and twelve *dakshinas*, one
hundred *dakshinas* purify the Soma, the king of the gods, ten *dakshinas* are
for the satisfaction of the vital breaths, the eleventh *dakshina* is for the
soul, and the twelfth *dakshina* is only a *dakshina*.  The other *dakshinas*
are for the removal of faults.  People who engage in the business of
manufacturing goods are called Vaishyas, and those who are far from the *shruti*
(sacred texts) are called Shudras.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padamapurANe na jAtirgarhitA kAcidaguNAH kalyANakAraNam  /  vratasthamapi
cANDAlaM taM devA brAhmaNaM vidaH  // 20 //  vidyAvinayasaMpanne brAhmaNe gavi
hastini  /  zuni caiva zvapAke ca paNDitAH samadarzinaH  // 20 //  cAturvaNyaM
yathAnyacca cANDAlAdivizeSaNam  /  sarvamAcArabhedena prasiddhiM bhuvane gatam
// 205 /  /  apUrvAkhyazca dharmo na vyajyate yAgakarmaNA  /  nityatvAd vyomavad
vyaktaranityo vA ghaTAdivat  // 206 //  phalaM rUpaparicchedaH
pradIpavyaktyanantaram  /  dRSTaM yatheha cApUrvavyaktikAlaM phalaM bhavet  //
207 //  zAstreNa coditatvAcca vedImadhye pazorvadhaH  /  pratyavAyAya
netyetadayuktaM yena tacchaNu  /  / 208 //  vedAgamasya zAstratvamasiddhaM
zAstramucyate  /  taddhi yanmAtRvacchAsti sarvasmai jagate hitam  // 209 /  /
prAyazcittaM ca nirdoSe vaktuM karmaNi nocitam  /  atra tUktaM tato duSTaM
taccedama bhidhIyate  // 210 //  rAjAnaM hantyasau somaM vIraM vA nAkavAsinAm  /
somena yo yajettasya dakSiNA dvAdazaM zatam  // 21 //  zodhayatyatra devAnAM
zataM vIraM pratarpaNam  /  prANAnAM daza kurvanti yaikAdazyAtmanastu sA  // 212
//  dvAdazI dakSiNA yA tu dakSiNA saiva kevalam  /  itarAsAM ca doSANAM vyApAro
vinivartane  // 213 //  vastunirmANa yA vyApArameM praveza karanese loga vaizya
kahe jAte haiM aura zruta arthAt prazasta Agamase jo dUra rahate haiM ve zUdra
kahalAte haiM  // 202 /  /  koI bhI jAti nindanIya nahIM hai, guNa hI kalyANa
karanevAle haiM  /  yahI kAraNa hai ki prata dhAraNa karanevAle cANDAlako bhI
gaNadharAdi deva brAhmaNa kahate haiM  /  / 203 //  vidyA aura vinayase sampanna
brAhmaNa, gAya, hAthI, kuttA aura cANDAla Adike viSayameM jo samadarzI haiM ve
paNDita kahalAte haiM athavA jo paNDitajana haiM ve ina sabameM samadarzI hote
haiM  // 204 /  isa prakAra brAhmaNAdika cAra varNa aura cANDAla Adi vizeSaNoMkA
jitanA anya varNana hai vaha saba AcArake bhedase ho saMsArameM prasiddhiko
prApta huA hai  // 205 //  isake pUrva tumane kahA thA ki yajJase apUrva athavA
adRSTa nAmakA dharma vyakta hotA hai so yaha kahanA ThIka nahIM hai kyoMki
apUrva dharma to AkAzake samAna nitya hai vaha kaise vyakta hogA? aura yadi
vyakta hotA hI hai to phira vaha nitya na rahakara ghaTAdike samAna anitya hogA
// 206 /  /  jisa prakAra dIpakake vyakta honeke bAda rUpakA jJAna usakA phala
hotA hai usI prakAra svargAdikI prAptirUpI phala bhI apUrvadharmake vyakta
honeke bAda hI honA cAhie para aisA nahIM hai  /  / 207|| tumane kahA hai ki
vedIke madhyameM pazuoMkA jo vadha hotA hai vaha zAstra nirUpita honese pApakA
kAraNa nahIM hai so aisA kahanA ayukta hai usakA kAraNa suno  /  / 208 /  /
sarvaprathama to veda zAstra haiM yahI bAta asiddha hai kyoMki zAstra vaha
kahalAtA hai jo mAtAke samAna samasta saMsArake lie hitakA upadeza de  // 209 /
/  jo kArya nirdoSa hotA hai usameM prAyazcittakA nirUpaNa karanA ucita nahIM
hai parantu isa yAjJika hiMsAmeM prAyazcitta kahA gayA hai isalie vaha sadoSa
hai| usa prAyazcittakA kucha varNana yahAM kiyA jAtA hai  /  / 210 //  jo
somayajJameM soma arthAt candramAke pratIka rUpa soma latAse yajJa karatA hai
jisakA tAtparya hotA hai ki vaha devoMke vIra soma rAjAkA hanana karatA hai
usake isa yajJakI dakSiNA eka sau bAraha gau hai  /  / 21 /  /  ina eka sau
bAraha dakSiNAoMmeM-se sau dakSiNAe~ devoMke vIra somakA zodhana karatI haiM,
dasa dakSiNAeM prANoMkA tarpaNa karatI haiM, gyArahavIM dakSiNA AtmAke lie hai
aura jo bArahavIM dakSiNA hai vaha kevala dakSiNA hI 1. -mavidhIyate ma.  /  2.
'asmAka' somo rAjA' iti zrutyA vizeSaNavizeSyabhAvaH  /  3. dvAdazA ka.  /
'gavAM zataM dvAdazaM vA'tikrAmati' kA. zrI. 1012 / 10 /  'yathArambhaM dvAdaza
dvAdazAyebhyaH SaT SaT dvitIyebhyazcatasrazcatasrastutIyebhyastisrastisra
itrebhyH|' kAtyAyanazrautasUtra, 10 / 2 / 24  /  4. zubhA k.|

Page #305 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Chapter 255 'And if the animal, not having been consecrated, cries
out or strikes its chest with its feet, O Fire, free me from all the sins
arising from this.' ||21||  Thus, many atonements for sins have been mentioned.
But there is a contradiction in this matter with other Agamas. ||215|| Just as
the killing done by a hunter is the cause of suffering and therefore leads to
bondage, so too, the killing of animals in the Vedas, being the cause of
suffering, is also the cause of bondage. ||216|| To say that Brahma created the
world is also not true, because upon reflection, such a statement appears as
useless as dry grass. ||217|| We ask, if Brahma is already accomplished, what is
the purpose of his creating the world? If you say that he creates the world for
amusement, then where is his accomplishment? Just as a child who desires
amusement is not accomplished, so too, Brahma, who desires amusement, will be
called unaccomplished. ||218|| Then why doesn't Brahma attain pleasure without
other things? Why does he have to create the world? Besides this, another
question arises: when Brahma creates the world, what are the supporting
instruments, objects, etc.? ||219|| Furthermore, not all people in the world are
alike; some are seen to be happy and some are seen to be unhappy. From this, it
must be assumed that some people are benefactors of Brahma and some are
malefactors. He makes those who are benefactors happy and those who are
malefactors unhappy. ||220|| To avoid all this contradiction, if it is assumed
that God is not accomplished, then he will not be called God because he is
subject to karma, just as you are not God because you are subject to karma.
||221|| Just as chariots, houses, etc., are considered to be created by the
effort of an intelligent human being because they are endowed with a specific
form, so too, lotuses, etc., should be considered to be created by the effort of
an intelligent human being because they are endowed with a specific form. "The
one whose intelligence creates all this is God." This inference leads to the
establishment of God as the creator. But this is not correct, because the
argument of the absolutist is not appropriate. ||223||   ##  The business of
other offerings is to remove sins. ||212-213||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekAdazaM parva 255 'tayA ca yatpazurmAyumakRtorodavAhanA (?)  /
pAdAbhyAmenasastasmAdvizvasmAnmuJca vanalaH  // 21 //  evamAdi ca baDheva
gaditaM doSanodanam  /  Agamena tato'nyena vyabhicAro'tra vidyate  // 215 //
pazomadhye vadho vedyAH pratyavAyAya kalpyate  /  tasya duHkhanimittatvAd yathA
vyAdhakRto vadhaH  // 216 //  svayaMbhuvA ca lokasya sagoM neyarti satyatAm  /
vicAryamANametaddhi purANatRNadurbalam  // 217 //  kRtArtho yadyasau sRSTau
tasyAM kiM syAtprayojanam  /  krIDeti cetkRtArtho'sau na bhavatyarbhako yathA
// 218 //  sAkSAdeva ratiM kasmAnna sRjet sa vinetaraiH  /  sRjato vAsya ke
bhAvA bajeyuH karaNAditAm  // 219 //  kiMcopakAriNaH kecit kecidvAsyApakAriNaH
/  sukhinaH kurute kAMzcid yena kAzciJca duHkhinaH  // 220 //  atha naiva
kRtArtho'sAvevaM tarhi sa nezvaraH  /  karmaNAM paratantratvAd yathA kazcid
bhavadvidhaH  // 221 //  subuddhinarayatnotthasaMsthAnAH kamalAdayaH  /
viziSTAkArayuktatvAd rathavezmAdayo yathA  // 222 //  yadabuddhipUrvakA ete
bhaviSyanti sa IzvaraH  /  ityetacca na samyaktvaM vrajatyekAntavAdinaH  // 223
//  hai| anya dakSiNAoMkA vyApAra to doSoMke nivAraNa karane meM hotA
hai||212-213|| tathA pazu-yajJameM yadi pazu yajJake samaya zabda kare yA apane
agale donoM pairoMse chAtI pITe to he anala ! tuma mujhe isase honevAle samasta
doSase mukta karo  // 214|| ityAdi rUpase jo doSoMke bahuta-se prAyazcitta kahe
gaye haiM unake viSayameM anya Agamase prakRtameM virodha dikhAI detA hai  /  /
215 //  jisa prakAra vyAdhake dvArA kiyA huA vadha duHkhakA kAraNa honese
pApabandhakA nimitta hai usI prakAra vedoke bIcameM pazukA jo vadha hotA hai
vaha bhI use duHkhakA kAraNa honese pApabandhakA hI nimitta hai  // 216 /  /
'brahmAke dvArA lokakI sRSTi huI hai' yaha kahanA bhI satya nahIM hai kyoMki
vicAra karanepara aisA kathana jIrNatRNake samAna nissAra jAna par3atA hai  //
217 /  /  hama pUchate haiM ki jaba brahmA kRtakRtya hai to use sRSTikI racanA
karanese kyA prayojana hai ? kaho ki krIr3Avaza vaha sRSTikI racanA karatA hai
to phira kRtakRtya kahA~ rahA ? jisa prakAra krIDAkA abhilASo bAlaka akRta-kRtya
hai usI prakAra krIr3AkA abhilASI brahmA bhI akRtakRtya kahalAyegA  // 218 //
phira brahmA anya padArthoMke binA svayaM hI ratiko kyoM nahIM prApta ho jAtA ?
jisase sRSTi nirmANakI kalpanA karanI pdd'ii| isake sivAya eka prazna yaha bhI
uThatA hai ki jaba brahmA sRSTikI racanA karatA hai to isake sahAyaka karaNa,
adhikaraNa Adi kauna-se padArtha haiM ?  // 219 //  phira saMsArameM saba loga
eka sadRza nahIM haiM, koI sukhI dekhe jAte haiM aura koI duHkhI dekhe jAte
haiN| isase yaha mAnanA par3egA ki koI loga to brahmAke upakArI haiM aura koI
apakArI haiN| jo upakArI haiM unheM yaha sukhI karatA hai aura koI apakArI haiM
unheM yaha duHkhI karatA hai  /  / 220 //  _ isa saba visaMvAdase bacaneke lie
yadi yaha mAnA jAye ki Izvara kRtakRtya nahIM hai to vaha karmoke paratantra
hone ke kAraNa Izvara nahIM kahalAvegA jisa prakAra ki Apa karmoke paratantra
honeke kAraNa Izvara nahIM haiM  /  / 221 /  /  jisa prakAra ratha, makAna Adi
padArtha viziSTa AkArase sahita honeke kAraNa kisI buddhimAn manuSyake
prayatnase nirmita mAne jAte haiM usI prakAra kamala Adi padArtha bhI viziSTa
AkArase yukta honeke kAraNa kisI buddhimAn manuSyake prayatnase racita honA
caahie| "jisakI buddhise ina sabakI racanA hotI hai vahI Izvara hai" isa
anumAnase sRSTikartA IzvarakI siddhi hotI hai so yaha kahanA ThIka nahIM hai
kyoMki ekAntavAdIkA ukta anumAna samIcInatAko prApta 1. tathApi kh.| 2. mAya m.|
3. muzcAtanala: m.| 4. nala k.| 'yatpazurmAyumakRtoro vA padbhirAhate  /
agnirmA tasmAdenaso vizvAn muJcatva hasaH  /  ( kAtyAyana zrautasUtra 25 / 9 /
13) /  5. ca naiva kha.  /

Page #306 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **256**  It is not true that chariots and other objects are
created solely by the effort of a wise human being.  Because the materials like
wood, etc., which are present in chariots, etc., are the ones that give rise to
the form of a chariot, etc.  **[224]**  Just as a carpenter, etc., has to endure
hardship in making chariots, etc., similarly, God would have to endure hardship
in creating the universe.  This would hinder his happiness.  In reality, the one
you call God is just a name.  **[225]**  Another question arises: Is God
embodied or disembodied?  If he is disembodied, then the creation of material
objects is not possible.  If he is embodied, then who created his body with its
specific form?  If he created it himself, then why don't other objects create
themselves?  If it is assumed that he was created by another God, then the
question arises: Who created that other God's body?  This leads to an infinite
regress.  To avoid this contradiction, if it is assumed that God has no body,
then how can he be the creator of the universe, being disembodied?  Just as the
sky, being disembodied, is not the creator of the universe, similarly, God,
being disembodied, cannot be the creator of the universe.  If God is considered
to be a creator like a carpenter, then he would be embodied, not disembodied.
**[226-228]**  And what you said that Brahma created animals for the purpose of
sacrifice, if this is true, then why are animals used for carrying loads, etc.?
This creates a contradiction.  Not only a contradiction, but it would be
considered theft.  **[229]**  This proves that due to the karmas acquired
through passions, etc., all beings experience diverse conditions in the endless
ocean of existence.  **[230]**  Does karma come first or the body?  It is not
right to ask such a question because the relationship between the two has been
going on since time immemorial, like the relationship between a seed and a tree.
**[231]**  It is also not right to say that the relationship between karma and
the body is eternal, because just as the absence of a tree is seen when the seed
is destroyed, similarly, the absence of a body is also seen when karma is
destroyed.  **[232]**  Therefore, some hateful person, by performing evil deeds,
has created a false scripture and propagated this sacrificial practice.
**[233]**  You have been born in a noble family and are a wise human being,
therefore, refrain from this evil practice, like the work of hunters.  **[234]**
If killing beings were the cause of attaining heaven, then this world would
become empty in a few days.  **[235]**  **[222-223]**  Upon reflection, it
becomes clear that it is not true that all objects like chariots, etc., are
created solely by the effort of a wise human being.  Because the materials like
wood, etc., which are present in chariots, etc., are the ones that give rise to
the form of a chariot, etc.  **[224]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 256 padmapurANe subuddhinarayatnotthAH sarvathA na rathAdayaH  /  vyavasthitaM
yatastatra dravyaM caivopajanyate  // 224 //  klezAdiyuktatA cAsya vyaznute
takSakAdivat  /  nAmakarma ca maivaM syAdIzvaro yastvayeSyate  // 225 //
viziSTAkArasaMbaddhamIzvarasya punarvapuH  /  IzvarAntarayasnotthamiSyate'to na
nizcayaH  // 226 //  aparezvarayatnotthamathaitadapi kalpyate  /
satyevamanavasthA syAnna ca svasyAbhisarjanam  // 227 //  zarIramatha naivAsya
vidyate naiSa sarjakaH  /  amUrtasvAd yathAkAzaM takSavad vA savigrahaH  // 228
//  yajanArtha ca sRSTAnAM pazUnAM vAhanAdikam  /  kriyamANaM viruddha yeta
taddhi steyaM prakalpyate  // 229 //  sataH karmabhirevedaM rAgAdibhirupArjitaiH
/  vaicitryaM vyaznute vizvamanAdau bhavasAgare  // 230 //  karma kiM
pUrvamAhosviccharIramiti nedRzaH  /  yuktaH prazno bhave'nAdau
bIjapAdapayoryathA  // 231 //  anto'pi tarhi na syAccattama bIjavinAzataH  /
dRSTvA hi pAdapodbhuterasaMbhUtiridaM tathA  // 232 //  tasmAd dviSTena kenApi
prANinA pApakarmaNA  /  kugrantharacanAM kRtvA yajJakarma pravartitam  // 233 //
saMprApto'si kule janma buddhimAnasi mAnavaH  /  nivartasva tataH pApAdetasmAd
vyAdhakarmaNaH  // 23 //  yadi prANivadhaH svargasaMprAptau kAraNaM bhavet  /
tataH zUnyo bhavedeSa loko'lpaireva vAsaraiH  // 235 //  nahIM hai  // 222-223
//  vicAra karanepara jAna par3atA hai ki ratha Adi jitane padArtha haiM ve saba
ekAntase buddhimAn manuSyake prayatnase hI utpanna hote haiM aisI bAta nahIM
hai| kyoMki ratha Adi vastuoMmeM jo lakar3I Adi padArtha avasthita hai vahI
rathAdirUpa utpanna hotA hai  /  / 224 //  jisa prakAra ratha Adike banAnemeM
bar3haI Adiko kleza uThAnA par3atA hai usI prakAra Izvarako bhI sRSTike
banAnemeM kleza uThAnA par3atA hogaa| isa taraha usake sukhI honemeM bAdhA
pratIta hotI hai| yathArthameM tuma jise Izvara kahate ho vaha nAma kama hai  /
/ 225 //  eka prazna yaha bhI uThatA hai ki Izvara sazarIra hai yA azarIra ?
yadi azarIra hai to usase mUrtika padArthoMkA nirmANa sambhava nahIM hai| yadi
sazarIra hai to usakA vaha viziSTAkAravAlA zarIra kisake dvArA racA gayA hai ?
yadi svayaM racA gayA hai to phira dUsare padArtha svayaM kyoM nahIM race jAte ?
yadi yaha mAnA jAya ki vaha dUsare Izvarake yatnase racA gayA hai to phira yaha
prazna upasthita hogA ki usa dUsare IzvarakA zarIra kisane racA? isa taraha
anavasthA doSa utpanna hogaa| isa visaMvAdase bacane ke lie yadi yaha mAnA jAye
ki Izvarake zarIra hai hI nahIM to phira amUrtika honese vaha sRSTikA racayitA
kaise hogA ? jisa prakAra amUrtika honese AkAza sRSTikA kartA nahIM hai usI
prakAra amUrtika honese Izvara bhI sRSTikA kartA nahIM ho sktaa| yadi bar3haIke
samAna Izvarako kartA mAnA jAye to vaha sazarIra hogA na ki azarIra  // 226-228
/  aura tumane jo kahA ki brahmAne pazuoMkI sRSTi yajJake lie hI kI hai so yadi
yaha satya hai to phira pazuoMse bojhA DhonA Adi kAma kyoM liyA jAtA? isameM
virodha AtA hai virodha hI nahIM yaha to corI kahalAvegI  // 229 //  isase yaha
siddha hotA hai ki rAgAdi bhAvoMse upArjita karmoMke kAraNa hI samasta loga
anAdi saMsArasAgarameM vicitra dazAkA anubhava karate haiM  // 230 //  karma
pahale hotA hai ki zarIra pahale hotA hai ? aisA prazna karanA ThIka nahIM hai
kyoMki ina donoMkA sambandha bIja aura vRkSake samAna anAdi kAlase calA A rahA
hai  // 231 //  karma aura zarIrakA sambandha anAdi hai isalie isakA kabhI anta
nahIM hogA aisA kahanA bhI ucita nahIM hai kyoMki jisa prakAra bIjake naSTa ho
jAnese vRkSakI utpattikA abhAva dekhA jAtA hai usI prakAra karmake naSTa honese
zarIrakA abhAva bhI dekhA jAtA hai  /  / 232 /  /  isalie pApa kArya karanevAle
kisI dveSI puruSane khoTe zAstrakI racanA kara isa yajJa kAryako pracalita kiyA
hai  /  / 233 /  /  tuma ucca kulameM utpanna hue ho aura buddhimAn manuSya ho
isalie zikAriyoMke kAryake samAna isa pApa kAryase virata hoo  // 234 //  yadi
prANiyoMkA vadha svargaprAptikA kAraNa hotA to thor3e hI dinoMmeM

Page #307 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Eleventh Chapter 257. What is the benefit of attaining heaven, if one has to
fall from it again? The happiness derived from external objects is mixed with
sorrow and is also small in quantity. ||236|| If humans go to heaven by killing
living beings, then why did Vasu fall into hell just by approving of the killing
of living beings? ||237|| Vasu went to hell, the proof of this is that even
today, wicked Brahmanas, who are evil-minded, who do harm to themselves and
others, and who are pleased by the support of their own side, shout loudly, "O
Vasu! Get up, go to heaven," and offer oblations into the fire. If Vasu had not
gone to hell, then what was the need to offer oblations with the above mantra?
||238-239|| Those who killed animals by making them into flour also went to
hell, then what to say about those who kill other animals with an evil
intention? ||240|| Firstly, there is no purpose in the concept of Yajna, i.e.,
it is useless to even think about Yajna. Secondly, even if one has to think
about it, then wise people should not think about such a violent Yajna. ||241||
They should perform Dharma Yajna. The soul is the Yajamana, the body is the
Vedi, contentment is the Saakalya, renunciation is the Homa, the hair on the
head is the Kusa, the protection of living beings is the Dakshina, white
meditation is Pranayama, attaining the Siddha Pada is the fruit, speaking truth
is the Yupa, penance is the Agni, the fickle mind is the Pashu, and the senses
are the Samidhas. One should perform Yajna with all these, this is called Dharma
Yajna. ||242-244|| If you think that Yajna satisfies the Gods, then this is not
correct, because the Gods have divine food available to them as they desire.
||245|| Those who have a pleasing diet of touch, taste, smell, and form, what is
the use of this meat, etc., for them? ||246|| How do the Gods eat meat, which is
born from semen and blood, is impure, is the birthplace of worms, and whose
smell and appearance are both extremely disgusting? They do not eat it at all.
||247|| There are three fires in the body, namely, the fire of knowledge, the
fire of vision, and the fire of the stomach. Wise people should perform the
three fires, namely, Dakshinagni, Garhapatyagni, and Ahavaniyaagni, in these
three fires. ||248|| This world becomes empty. ||235||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekAdazaM parva 257 prAptena vApi kiM tena cyutiryasmAt punarbhavet  /  duHkhena
ca samAsaktaM sukhaM svalpaM ca bAhya jam  // 236 //  yadi prANivadhAd
brahmalokaM gacchanti mAnavAH  /  tasyAnumananAt kasmAt patito narake vasuH  //
237 //  uttiSTha bho vaso svarga vrajeti kRtanisvanaiH  /
sUtrakaNThairdurAcAraiH svaparAzubhakAribhiH  // 238 //
svapakSAnumatiprIteruqhuSyAdyApi yadvijaiH  /  AhutiH kSipyate vahnau nitAntaM
krUramAnasaiH  // 239 /  /  piSTenApi pazu kRtvA nighnanto narakaM gatAH  /
saMkalpAdazubhAt kaiva kathetarapazorvadhe  // 240 //  yajJakalpanayA naiva
kiMcidasti prayojanam  /  athApi syAttathApyevaM na kartavyA budhottamaiH  //
241 //  yajamAno bhavedAtmA zarIraMtu vitadikA  /  puroDAzastu saMtoSaH
parityAgastathA haviH  // 242 /  /  mUrdhajA eva darmANi dakSiNA prANirakSaNam
/  prANAyAmaH sitaM dhyAnaM yasya siddhapadaM phalam  // 243 /  satyaM yUpastapo
vahnirmAnasaM capalaM pazuH  /  samidhazca hRSIkANi dharmayajJo'yamucyate  //
244 /  /  yajJena kriyate tRptirdevAnAmiti cenmatiH  /  tanna teSAM yato'styeva
divyamannaM yathepsitam  // 245 /  /  sparzato rasato rUpAdagandhAdyeSAM
manoharam  /  annamasti kimetena teSAM mAMsAdivastunA  // 246 //
zukrazoNitasaMbhUtamamedhyaM kRmisaMbhavam  /  durgandhadarzanaM mAMsaM
bhakSayanti kathaM surAH  // 247 //  trayo'gnayo vapuSyeva jJAnadarzanajATharAH
/  dakSiNAgnyAdivijJAnaM kArya teSveva sUribhiH  // 248 //  yaha saMsAra zUnya
ho jAtA  // 235 /  /  aura phira usa svargake prApta honese bhI kyA lAbha hai ?
jisase phira cyuta honA par3atA hai| yathArthameM bAhya padArthoM se jo sukha
utpanna hotA hai vaha duHkhase milA huA tathA parimANameM thor3A hotA hai  /  /
236 //  yadi prANiyoMkA vadha karanese manuSya svarga jAte haiM to phira
prANivadhakI anumati mAtrase vasu narakameM kyoM par3A ? ||237 //  vasu naraka
gayA hai isameM pramANa yaha hai ki durAcArI, nija aura parakA akalyANa
karanevAle duSTacetA brAhmaNa, apane pakSake samarthanase prasanna ho Aja bhI
'he vaso ! uTho, svarga jAo' isa prakAra jora-jorase cillAte hue agnimeM Ahuti
DAlate haiN| yadi vasu naraka nahIM gayA hotA to ukta mantra dvArA Ahuti denekI
kyA AvazyakatA thI?  // 238-239|| cUrNake dvArA pazu banAkara usakA ghAta
karanevAle loga bhI naraka gaye haiM phira azubha saMkalpase sAkSAt anya pazuke
vadha karanevAle logoMkI to kathA hI kyA hai ?  // 240 /  /  prathama to yajJako
kalpanAse koI prayojana nahIM hai arthAt yajJakI kalpanA karanA hI vyartha hai
dUsare yadi kalpanA karanA hI hai to vidvAnoMko isa prakArake hiMsAyajJa kI
kalpanA nahIM karanI cAhie  /  / 241 //  unheM dharmayajJa hI karanA caahie|
AtmA yajamAna hai, zarIra vedI hai, santoSa sAkalya hai, tyAga homa hai,
mastakake bAla kuzA haiM, prANiyoMkI rakSA dakSiNA hai, zukladhyAna prANAyAma
hai, siddhapadakI prApti honA phala hai, satya bolanA stambha hai, tapa agni
hai, caMcala mana paza hai aura indriyA~ samidhAe~ haiN| ina sabase yajJa karanA
cAhie yahI dharmayajJa kahalAtA hai  /  / 242-244 //  _ yajJase devoMkI tRpti
hotI hai yadi aisA tumhArA khyAla hai to yaha ThIka nahIM hai kyoMki devoMko to
manacAhA divya anna upalabdha hai  // 245 /  /  jinheM sparza, rasa, gandha aura
rUpakI apekSA manohara-AhAra prApta hotA hai unheM isa mAMsAdi ghaNita vastase
kyA prayojana hai ?  // 2 raja aura vIryase utpanna hai, apavitra hai, kIr3oMkA
utpattisthAna hai tathA jisakI gandha aura rUpa donoM hI atyanta kutsita haiM
aise mAMsako deva loga kisa prakAra khAte haiM arthAt kisI prakAra nahIM khAte
/  / 247 /  /  jJAnAgni, darzanAgni aura jaTharAgni isa taraha tIna agniyA~
zarIrameM sadA vidyamAna rahatI haiM; vidvAnoMko unhIMmeM dakSiNAgni,
gArhapatyAgni aura AhavanIyAgni ina tIna 1. -mataprItai ma.  /  2. zarIrastu
vitardikaH ma.  /  3. yUpastato ba.  /  4. tatra m.| 5. yathekSitam ma.  /

Page #308 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here's the translation of the provided text into English, while retaining the
Sanskrit words:  ---  In the Padma Purana:  If the Suras are sacrificed, they
attain satisfaction through the offerings made in fire. Why do the Devas not
attain satisfaction themselves, but rely on the offerings made by humans? (249)
One who comes from Brahmaloka and consumes the foul-smelling body that is born
of the yoni becomes like a crow, a jackal, or a dog. (250) Moreover, consider
this: the food placed in the mouths of Brahmins, which is drenched with saliva,
eventually goes to a stomach filled with excrement. How can such food satisfy
the Devas residing in heaven? (251) Thus, Narada, radiating the brilliance of
the Devarshi, seems like the sun of many angles, speaking such words that arise
from the knowledge of the scriptures. (252) Surrounded by the Brahmins, he was
shaken by the heavy weight of anger arising from the defeat of the yajaka. Due
to the study of the meaning of the Vedas, their hearts were devoid of
compassion. (253) Their eyes, like serpent's pupils, appeared to all, and,
agitated, they were making a great tumult from all sides. (254) Those Brahmins,
having girded up their loins, prepared to strike Narada with their hands and
feet, just as crows prepare to attack an owl. (255) Then, Narada began to strike
many of them with fist-like cudgels and others with kicks like thunder bolts.
(256) At that time, all Narada's limbs appeared extremely difficult, like
unbearable weapons. He went around and struck many Brahmins. (257) After a long
time of hitting the Brahmins, he became distressed, caught by many wicked
Brahmins who began to attack him all over his body, leading him to a state of
great agitation. (258) Just as a bird bound tightly by a net becomes extremely
distressed and is unable to fly in the sky, Narada found himself in a state of
doubt about his life. (259) In the meantime, a messenger of Ravana arrived and,
seeing Narada being beaten, recognized him. (260) He quickly returned and said
to Ravana, "O Maharaja! The one to whom I was sent as a messenger, sees the king
alone, being attacked by many wicked Brahmins..."  ---   I hope this translation
meets your expectations! If there are any specific sections you would like
further elaboration on, feel free to ask.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe surA yadi hutenAgnau tRptiM yAnti bubhukSitAH  /  svato nAma tato
devAstRptiM kimiti nAgatAH  /  /  249|| brahmalokAtkilAgatya durgandhaM yonijaM
vapuH  /  cakhAda dhvAGkSagomAyusArameyasamo bhavet  //  250  //  lAlAklinne
mukhe kSiptaM kathaM vAnnaM dvijAtibhiH  /  viTpUrNakukSisaMprAptaM tarpayet
svargavAsinaH || 251  //  evaM tato gantaM tamanekAntadivAkaram  /
devarSitejasA dIptaM zAstrArthajJAnajanmanA  /  /  252  /  /
RtvikparAjayodbhUtakrodhasaMbhArakampitAH  /
vedArthAbhyasanAtyantadayAnirmuktamAnasAH || 253 //
AzIviSasamAzeSadRSTatArakalocanAH  /  AvRtya sarvataH kSubdhAH kRtvA kalakalaM
mahat  //  254  //  baddhvA parikaraM pApAH sUtrakaNThAH samuddhatAH  /
hastapAdAdimirhantuM vAyasA iva kauzikam  //  255  //  nArado'pi tataH
kazcinmuSTimudgaratADanaiH  /  pANinirghAtapAtaizca kAMzcidanyAn yathAgatAn  /
/  256  /  /  zastrAyamANairniHzeSairgAtraireva suduHsahaiH  /  dvijAn javAna
kurvANo recakaM bhramaNaM bahUn  //  257 //  atha ghnan sa cirAkhinnaH
krUrairbahubhirAvRtaH  /  gRhItaH sarvagAtreSu bhaJjannAkulatAM parAm  /  /  258
/  /  pakSIva nibiDaM baddhaH pAzakairatiduHkhitaH  /  viyadutpatanAzaktaH
saMprAptaH prANasaMzayam || 259|| etasminnantare dUto dAzavaktraH samAgataH  /
hanyamAnamimaM dRSTvA pratyabhijJAya nAradam  //  260 //  nivRtya
tvarayAtyantamevaM rAvaNamabravIt  /  yasyAntikaM mahArAja dUto'haM
preSitastvayA || 261  //  258 agniyoMkI sthApanA karanA cAhie || 248 || yadi
bhUkhe deva homa kiye gaye padArtha se tRptiko prApta hote haiM to ve svayaM hI
kyoM nahIM tRptiko prApta ho jAte, manuSyoMke homako mAdhyama kyoM banAte haiM ?
||249|| jo deva brahmalokase Akara yonise utpanna honevAle durgandhayukta
zarIrako khAtA hai vaha kaue, zRgAla aura kutte ke samAna hai || 250|| isake
sivAya tuma zrAddhatarpaNa Adike dvArA mRta vyaktiyoMkI tRpti mAnate ho so jarA
vicAra to karo  /  brAhmaNa loga lArase bhIge hue apane mukhameM jo anna rakhate
haiM vaha malase bhare peTameM jAkara pahu~catA hai  /  aisA anna svargavAsI
devatAoMko tRpta kaise karatA hogA ? || 251  //  isa prakAra zAstroMke
arthajJAnase utpanna, devarSike tejase dedIpyamAna, ukta kathana karate hue
nAradajI anekAntake sUrya ke samAna jAna par3ate the || 252 || brAhmaNoMne unheM
saba orase ghera liyA  /  usa samaya ve brAhmaNa yAjakakI parAjayase utpanna
krodhake bhArase kampita the, vedArthakA abhyAsa karaneke kAraNa unake hRdaya
dayAse rahita the || 253 || sarpa ke samAna unakI A~khoMkI putaliyA~ sabako
dikha rahI thIM aura kSubhita ho saba orase bar3A bhArI kala-kala kara rahe the
|| 254 || ve saba brAhmaNa kamara kasakara hastapAdAdikase nAradako mAraneke lie
ThIka usI taraha taiyAra ho gaye jisa prakAra ki kaue ullUko mArane ke lie
taiyAra ho jAte haiM || 255|| tadanantara nArada bhI unameM se kitane hI logoMko
muTThiyoMrUpI mudgaroMkI mArase aura kitane hI logoMko er3IrUpI vajrapAtase
mArane lagA ||256|| usa samaya nArada ke samasta avayava atyanta duHsaha
zastroMke samAna jAna par3ate the  /  una sabase usane ghUma-ghUmakara bahuta-se
brAhmaNoMko mArA || 257 //  athAnantara cirakAla taka brAhmaNoMko mAratA huA
khedakhinna ho gayA  /  use bahuta-se duSTa brAhmaNoMne ghera liyA, ve use
samasta zarIra meM mArane lage jisase vaha parama AkulatAko prApta huA || 258 ||
jisa prakAra jAlase kasakara ba~dhA pakSI atyanta dukhI ho jAtA hai aura
AkAzameM ur3ane meM asamartha hotA huA prANoMke saMzayako prApta hotA hai ThIka
vahI dazA usa samaya nAradakI thI || 259|| isI bIca meM rAvaNakA dUta A rahA thA
so usane piTate hue nAradako dekhakara pahacAna liyA || 260 | usane zIghra hI
lauTakara rAvaNa se isa prakAra kahA ki he mahArAja ! mujha dUtako Apane jisake
pAsa bhejA thA vaha akelA hI rAjAke dekhate hue bahuta-se duSTa brAhmaNoMke
dvArA usa 1. zveto ma  /  sveno ka.  /  sveto ba  /  2. rAvaNa sambandhI |

Page #309 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Eleventh Chapter 251 Narada saw the king being attacked by many cruel men,
like a snake being killed by many wasps. 261-262 I was powerless and seeing the
king there, I was terrified, so I came running to tell you this terrible news.
263 Hearing this news, Ravana was filled with anger and, mounting his swift
chariot, he was eager to go to the sacrificial ground. 264 Those who were as
swift as the wind, who had drawn their naked swords from their sheaths, and who
were adorned with the sound of "su-su", were already on their way. 265 In the
blink of an eye, they reached the sacrificial ground. There, those merciful men,
with a mere glance, freed Narada from the cage of his enemies. 266 The cruel men
who were protecting the herd of animals, were freed by them with a mere gesture
of their eyes. 267 The sacrificial posts were broken, the Brahmanas were beaten,
and the animals were released from their bonds. All this caused a great uproar.
268 Those who chanted "Abrahmanyam, Abrahmanyam" were beaten one by one until
they fell to the ground, their bodies lifeless. 269 Ravana's warriors asked the
Brahmanas, "Just as you find sorrow unpleasant and happiness pleasant, so too do
these animals." 270 Just as all beings in the three worlds cherish their lives,
so too should you understand the nature of all creatures. 271 The beating you
have received has caused you this painful state. What then must be the condition
of the animals who have been killed with weapons? 272 O wicked men! You have now
received the fruits of your sins. Bear it, so that you will not do such things
again. 273 Even if Indra himself were to come here with the gods, he would not
be able to protect you while our master is angry. 274 Those who were on
elephants, horses, chariots, in the sky, and on the ground, were all killing the
Brahmanas with their weapons. 275 1. Seeing the king. 2. The sacrificial ground.
3. With swords drawn from their sheaths. 4. ... shining. 5. Freeing. 6.
Merciful. 7. The herd of animals was protected for slaughter. 8. They were freed
by them. 9. Uproar. 10. Brahmanas. 11. They said. 12. Your. 13. Pleasant. 14.
Your. 15. The nature and order of creatures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekAdazaM parva 251 rAjJaH pazyata evAsya nArado bahubhirdvijaiH  /  ekAkI
hanyate krUraiH zalabhairiva pannagaH  // 262 //  azaktastatra rAjAnamahaM
dRSTvA bhayArditaH  /  nivedayitumAyAto vRttAntamiti dAruNam  // 263 //
tamudantaM tataH zrutvA rAvaNaH kopamAgataH  /  'vitAnadharaNI gantuM pravRtto
javivAhanaH  // 164 //  samIraraMhasazcAsya puraH saMprasthitA narAH  /
parivAravinirmuktakhaDgAH sUtkAramAsitAH  // 265 //  nimeSeNa makhakSoNI prAptA
darzanamAtrataH  /  vyamocayan dayAyuktA nAradaM zatrupaJjarAta  // 266 //
nistriMzanaravRndaizca rakSitA pazusaMhatiH  /  mocitA taiH sahuMkAraM
cakSunikSepamAtrataH  // 267 //  bhajyabhAnastato yUpaistADyamAnaijiAtibhiH  /
pazubhirmucyamAnazca jAtaM sAMrAviNaM mahat  // 268 //
abrahmaNyakRtArAvAstADyante tAvadekazaH  /  yAvannipatitA bhUmau vizve
nispandavigrahAH  // 269 //  bhaTaizca ' 'paryacodyanta yayA' vo duHkhamapriyam
/  sukhaM ca dayitaM tadvatpazUnAmapi dRzyatAm  // 27 //  yathA hi jIvitaM
kAntaM trailokyasyApi bhaavtH| bhavatAt sarvajantUnAmiyameva 'vyavasthitiH  //
271 //  mavatAM tADyamAnAnAM kaSTA tAvadiyaM vyathA  /  zastrarvizasyamAnAnAM
pazUnAM tu kimucyatAm  // 272 //  duSkRtasyAdhunA pApAH sahadhvaM phalamAgatam
/  yena no punarapyevaM kurudhvaM puruSAdhamAH  // 273 /  /  sutrAmApi samaM
devairyadyAyAti tathApi na  /  asmatsvAmini vaH Rddha jAyate parirakSaNam  //
274 /  /  azvairmataGgajaistatsthai rathasthairgaganasthitaiH  /  bhUmisthaiH
puruSairastrairAhanyante dvijAtayaH  // 275 /  /  taraha mArA jA rahA hai jisa
prakAra ki bahuta-se duSTa pataMge kisI sA~pako mArate haiM  /  / 261-262 /  /
maiM zaktihIna thA aura rAjAko vahA~ dekha bhayase pIr3ita ho gayA isalie yaha
dAruNa vRttAnta Apase kahaneke lie daur3A AyA hU~  // 263 /  /  yaha samAcAra
sunate hI rAvaNa krodhako prApta huA aura vegazAlI vAhanapara savAra ho
yajJabhUmimeM jAneke lie tatpara huA  // 264 //  vAyuke samAna jinakA vega thA,
jo myAnoMse nikalI huI naMgI talavAreM hAthameM liye the aura sU-sU zabdase
suzobhita the aise rAvaNake sipAhI pahale hI cala diye the  // 265 /  /  ve
pala-bharameM yajJabhUmimeM jA pahu~ce  /  vahA~ jAkara una dayAlu puruSoMne
dRSTimAtrase nAradako zatrurUpI piMjar3ese mukta karA diyA  // 266 /  /  krUra
manuSya jisa pazuoMke jhuNDakI rakSA kara rahe the use unhoMne A~khake izAre
mAtrase chur3avA diyA  /  / 267 //  yajJake khambhe toDa DAle, brAhmaNoMko piTAI
lagAyI aura pazaoMko bandhanase chor3a diyaa| ina saba kAraNoMse vahA~ bar3A
bhArI kolAhala maca gayA  /  / 268 //  'abrahmaNyaM' 'abrahmaNyaM' kI raTa
lagAnevAle eka-eka brAhmaNako itanA pITA ki jabataka ve nizceSTa zarIra hokara
bhUmipara gira na par3e tabataka pITate hI gaye  // 269|| rAvaNake yoddhAoMne
una brAhmaNoMse pUchA ki jisa prakAra Apa logoMko duHkha apriya lagatA hai aura
sukha priya jAna par3atA hai usI taraha ina pazuoMko bhI lagatA hogA  /  / 270 /
/  jisa prakAra tIna lokake samasta jIvoMko hRdayase apanA jIvana acchA lagatA
hai usI prakAra ina samasta jantuoMkI bhI vyavasthA jAnanI cAhie  // 271 /  /
Apa logoMko jo piTAI lagI hai usase Apa logoMkI yaha kaSTakArI avasthA huI hai
phira zastroMse mAre gaye pazuoMkI kyA dazA hotI hogI so Apa ho kahA~  /  / 272
/  /  ara pApo noca puruSI ! isa samaya tumhAre pApakA jA phala prApta huA hai
usa sahana karo jisase phira aisA na karoge  // 273 /  /  devoMke sAtha indra
bhI yahA~ A jAye to bhI hamAre svAmIke kupita rahate tuma logoMkI rakSA nahIM ho
sakatI  // 274 //  hAthI, ghor3e, ratha, AkAza aura pRthivIpara jo bhI jahA~
sthita thA vaha vahIMse zastroM dvArA brAhmaNoMko mAra rahA thA  // 275 /  /  1.
pazyataH sataH  /  2. yajJabhUmim  /  3. kozabahirgatakRpANAH  /  4.
........bhAsinaH m.| 5. vimocayan ma.  /  6. dayAyukto m.| 7. vadhAya dhutA
rakSitAH pazusaMhatIH m.| 8. mocitAstaiH m.| 9. kalakalam  /  10. viprAH ma.,
b.| 11. paryavocyanta k.| 12. yuSmAkam  /  13. priyam  /  14. bhavatAM ka.,
kha., ba, ma.. 15 -jantUnAM niyame ca vyavasthitiH kha.  /

Page #310 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
260 The Brahmins were crying out, "Abrahmanyam, what a disaster! Oh King, oh
Mataryajnapali, protect us! Oh warriors, spare us, we will not do this again!"
||276|| Thus, they were crying out in misery, like worms, and the warriors were
beating them. ||277|| Seeing the group of Brahmins being beaten, Narada said to
Ravana, ||278|| "Oh King, may you be blessed. I was being killed by these wicked
hunters, and you saved me from them." ||279|| "This was bound to happen, so it
happened. Now, have mercy on them. Let these small creatures live, their lives
are dear to them." ||280|| "Oh King, do you not know how these Kupakhandas were
born? Listen, I will tell you. When the fourth time period of this Avasarpini
Yuga was about to come, Lord Rishabhadeva became the Tirthankara. All beings in
the three worlds bowed to him. He established the Krta Yuga and spread hundreds
of arts." ||281-282|| "When Rishabhadeva was born, the Devas took him to the top
of Mount Mandara and, pleased, anointed him with the water of the Kshiroda
Ocean. He was the bearer of great radiance." ||283|| "The divine story of Lord
Rishabhadeva, which destroys sin, is present throughout the three worlds. Have
you not heard his Purana?" ||284|| "Lord Rishabhadeva, who was affectionate
towards all beings, became the lord of this earth after his childhood. His
qualities were so great that even Indra could not describe them in detail."
||285|| "He abandoned the earth, which was like a woman with high breasts, the
Vindhya and Himachala mountains, whose face was towards the Aryan country, which
was beautiful with rings of cities, whose waist was the ocean, whose hair was
the green forests, whose radiance was enhanced by various jewels, and who was
very skilled. He became a Shraman, a pure soul, for the benefit of the world."
||286-288||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 260 padmapurANe abrahmaNyamaho rAjan hA mAtaryajJapAlaye'  /  jIvAmi muJca mAM
naivaM kariSyAmi punarbhaTAH  /  / 276 //  evaMvidhamalaM dInaM vilapanto
viceSTitam  /  gaNDapadA iva prAptAH samatADyanta te bhaTaiH  // 277 //
hanyamAnaM tato dRSTvA sUtrakaNThakadambakam  /  sahasrakiraNagrAhamityavocata
nAradaH  // 278 /  /  kalyANamastu te rAjan yenAhaM mocitastvayA  /  hanyamAna
imaiAdhaH sUtrakaNThairdurAtmamiH  // 279 /  /  avazyamevametena bhavitavyaM
yatastataH  /  kuvaiteSAM dayAM kSudrA jIvantu priyajIvitAH  // 28.0 //  jJAtaM
kiM na tathotpannAH kupAkhaNDA yathA nRpa  /  zRNvasyAmavasarpiNyAM
turIyasamayAgame  // 28 //  RSabho nAma vikhyAto babhUva trijagannataH  /  kRtvA
kRtayugaM yena kalAnAM kalpitaM zatam  // 282 //  jAtamAtrazca yo devairnItvA
mandaramastakam  /  kSIrodavAriNA tuSTairabhiSikto mahAdyutiH  // 283 /  /
RSabhasya vibhordivyaM caritaM pApanodanam  /  sthitaM lokatrayaM vyApya
purANaM' na zrutaM tvayA  // 28 //  bhartA babhUva kaumAraH sa bhuvo
bhUtavatsalaH  /  guNAMstasya kSamo vaktuM na surendro'pi vistarAt  // 285 //
udvahantIM stanau tuGgo vindhyaprAleyaparvatau  /  AryadezamukhI
ramyAM'nagarIvalayairyutAm  // 286 /  /  abdhikAJcIguNAM nIlasatkAnanaziroruhAm
/  nAnAratakRtacchAyAmatyantapravaNAM satIm  // 287 /  /  yaH parityajya
bhUbhAryAM mumukSurbhavasaMkaTam  /  pratipede vizuddhAtmA zrAmaNyaM jagate
hitam  // 288 /  aura brAhmaNa cillA rahe the ki 'abrahmaNyam' bar3A anartha
huaa| he rAjan ! he mAtA yajJapAli ! hamArI rakSA kro| he yoddhAo! hama jIvita
raha sakeM isalie chor3a do, aba aisA nahIM kareMge'  // 276 /  /  isa prakAra
dInatAke sAtha atyanta vilApa karate hue ve brAhmaNa keMcue-jaisI dazAko prApta
the phira bhI rAvaNake yoddhA unheM pITate jAte the  // 277 //  tadanantara
brAhmaNoMke samUhako piTatA dekha nAradane rAvaNase isa prakAra kahA  // 278||
ki he rAjan ! tumhArA kalyANa ho| maiM ina duSTa zikArI brAhmaNoMke dvArA mArA
jA rahA thA jo Apane mujhe inase chur3AyA  // 279 /  /  yaha kArya cU~ki aisA hI
honA thA so huA aba inapara dayA kro| ye kSudra jIva jIvita raha sakeM aisA
karo, apanA jIvana inheM priya hai  // 280|| he rAjan ! ina kupAkhaNDiyoMkI
utpatti kisa prakAra huI hai ? yaha kyA Apa nahIM jAnate haiN| acchA suno maiM
kahatA huuN| isa avasarpiNI yugakA jaba cauthA kAla AnevAlA thA taba bhagavAn
RSabhadeva tIrthaMkara hue| tInoM lokoMke jIva unheM namaskAra karate the|
unhoMne kRtayugakI vyavasthA kara saikar3oM kalAoMkA pracAra kiyA  // 281-282 /
/  jisa samaya RSabhadeva utpanna hue the usI samaya devoMne sumeru parvatake
mastakapara le jAkara santuSTa ho kSIrasAgarake jalase unakA abhiSeka kiyA thaa|
ve mahAkAntike dhAraka the  // 283 //  bhagavAn RSabhadevakA pApApahArI caritra
tInoM lokoMmeM vyApta hokara sthita hai kyA tumane unakA purANa nahIM sunA?  //
284 /  /  prANiyoMke sAtha sneha karanevAle bhagavAn RSabhadeva kumAra-kAlake
bAda isa pRthvIke svAmI hue the| unake guNa itane adhika the ki indra bhI unakA
vistArake sAtha varNana karane meM samartha nahIM thA  // 285 /  /  jaba unheM
vairAgya AyA aura ve saMsArarUpI saMkaTako chor3anekI icchA karane lage taba jo
vindhyAcala aura himAcalarUpI unnata stanoMko dhAraNa kara rahI thI, Arya deza
hI jisakA mukha thA, jo nagarIrUpI caDiyoMse yukta hokara bahata manohara jAna
par3atI thI, samadra hI jisakI karadhanI thI, hare bhare vana jisake sirake bAla
the, nAnA ratnoMse jisakI kAnti bar3ha rahI thI aura jo atyanta nipuNa thI aisI
pRthivIrUpI strIko chor3akara unhoMne vizuddhAtmA ho jagatke lie hitakArI
munipada 1. pAlaye ma.  /  2. jIvaM vimuJca mA naiva kha.  /  3. viprasamUham  /
4. rAvaNam  /  5. apANinIya eSa prayogaH  /  6. kuru + etessaaN| 7. jJAnaM m.|
8. caturthakAlAgame  /  9. trijagatonnataH (?) m.| 10. mandira -ma.  /
sumeruzikharam  /  11. purANAM ma.  /  12. nagarI vly-m.|

Page #311 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The one who stood for a thousand years, with a body like a thunderbolt, holding
the steady yoga, with long arms, and a matted hair reaching the earth. || 289 ||
He was embraced by his devotees, the fierce kings, like Kacha and others, who
had taken the vow of nakedness. But, afflicted by the severe austerities, they
finally abandoned the vow and took to wearing bark and other things. || 290 ||
Those who did not know the ultimate truth, afflicted by hunger and other
miseries, were content with fruits and other food. It was they who created the
ascetics and others. || 291 || When the Lord Rishabhadeva was near the great
banyan tree, he attained the omniscient knowledge, which illuminates all things.
|| 292 || At that time, the gods worshipped him at that place, and even today,
people follow the same method of worship. That is, the worship of the banyan
tree today originates from the omniscient knowledge and auspiciousness of Lord
Rishabhadeva. || 293 || The gods with noble hearts established his images in
that place, and humans with great festivals installed his images in beautiful
temples. || 294 || The Brahmanas, who were created by the emperor Bharata, the
son of Lord Rishabhadeva, and his son Marichi, due to their pride and arrogance,
spread throughout the world, causing suffering to living beings like poison
drops in water. || 295-296 || Those who have established a tradition of evil
conduct, who are full of pride, who wear various kinds of deceitful garments,
and who hold fierce and sharp weapons, have deluded this world. || 297 || This
entire world is filled with the darkness of extremely cruel actions, which are
constantly in motion. Its light of merit has been extinguished, and it is eager
to disrespect the virtuous. || 298 || The emperor Subhumi destroyed these
Brahmanas twenty-one times on this earth, yet they did not attain complete
annihilation. || 299 || Therefore, O Dasanana, how can you pacify them? Tell me
yourself. Be pacified yourself. There is no purpose in killing living beings. ||
300 || When even the omniscient Jinas could not free this world from evil, then
how can we, ordinary people, do it? || 301 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekAdazaM pa sthito varSasahasraM ca vajrAGgo sthirayogabhRt  /
pralambitamahAbAhuH prAptabhUmijaTAcayaH  //  289  //  svAminazcAnurAgeNa
gRhItograparISahaiH  /  kacchAdyairnagnatA muktA valkalAdisamAzritam  //  290
//  ajJAta paramArthaistaiH kSudhAdiparipIDitaiH  /  phalAdyAhArasaMtuSTaiH
praNItAstApasAdayaH  // 291 //  RSabhasya tu saMjAtaM kevalaM sarvabhAsanam  /
mahAnyagrodhavRkSasya sthitasyAsannagocare  // 292 //  tatpradeze kRtA
devaistasmin kAle vibhoryataH  /  pUjA tenaiva mArgeNa loko'dyApi pravartate  //
293 //  pratimAzca suraistasya tasmindeze sumAnasaiH  /  sthApitA ramyacaityeSu
manujaizca mahotsabaiH  //  294 //  bharatenAsya putreNa sRSTA ye cakravartinA
/  purA marIcinA ye ca pramAdasmayayogataH  //  295  //  visarpaNamime
sUtrakaNThastu bhuvane gatAH  /  prANinAM duHkhadA yadvatsalile viSabindavaH  //
296 //  'udvRttakuhukA cArairbahudembhaiH kuliGgakaH  /  pracaNDadaNDairatyantaM
tairidaM mohitaM jagat  //  297 //  jAtaM zazvatpravRttAtikrUrakarmatamazcitam
/  pranaSTasukRtAlokaM sAdhvasatkAratatparam  // 298 //  ekaviMzativArAn ye
nidhanaM prApitAH kSitau  /  subhUmacakriNA prAptA na nitAntamabhAvatAm  //  299
//  te kathaM vada zAmyante tvayA viprA dazAnana  /  upazAmyAnayA kiMcinna
kRtyaM prANihiMsayA  //  300  //  jinairapi kRtaM naitatsarvajJairniH kumArgakam
/  jagat kimuta zakyeta kartumasmadvidhairjanaiH  //  301  //  dhAraNa kiyA thA
||286-288  /  /  unakA zarIra vajramaya thA, ve sthira yogako dhAraNa kara eka
hajAra varSaM taka khar3e rhe| unakI bar3I-bar3I bhujAe~ nIce kI ora laTaka rahI
thIM aura jaTAoM kA samUha pRthivoko chU rahA thA || 289 || svAmIke anurAgase
kaccha Adi cAra hajAra rAjAoMne bhI unake sAtha nagna vrata dhAraNa kiyA thA
parantu kaThina parISahoMse pIr3ita hokara antameM unhoMne vaha vrata chor3a
diyA aura valkala Adi dhAraNa kara liye || 290 || paramArthako nahIM jAnanevAle
una rAjAoMne kSudhA Adi pIr3ita honepara phala Adike AhAra se santoSa prApta
kiyA  /  unhIM bhraSTa logoMne tApasa Adi logoM kI racanA kI || 291 | | jaba
bhagavAn RSabhadeva mahA vaTavRkSake samIpa vidyamAna the taba unheM samasta
padArthoM ko prakAzita karanevAlA kevalajJAna prakaTa huA || 292 | | usa samaya
usa sthAnapara cU~ki devoMke dvArA bhagavAn kI pUjA kI gayI thI isalie usI
paddhatise Aja bhI loga pUjA karanemeM pravRtta haiM arthAt Aja jo vaTavRkSako
pUjA hotI hai usakA mUla srota bhagavAn RSabhadevake kevalajJAnakalyANakase hai
/  /  293 || uttama hRdayake dhAraka devoMne usa sthAnapara unakI pratimA
sthApita tathA mahAn utsavoMse yukta manuSyoMne manohara caityAlayoMmeM unakI
pratimAe~ virAjamAna kIM  // 294 //  bhagavAn RSabhadevake putra bharata
cakravartIne tathA inake putra marIcine pahale pramAda aura ahaMkAra ke yogase
jina brAhmaNoMkI racanA kI thI ve pAnI meM viSakI bU~doMke samAna prANiyoMko
duHkha dete hue saMsArameM sarvatra phaila gaye  /  295 - 296  /  /  jinhoMne
kutsita AcArakI paramparA calAyI hai, jo aneka prakArake kapaToMse yukta haiM,
jo nAnA prakAra ke khoTe-khoTe veSa dhAraNa karate haiM aura pracaNDaatyanta
tIkSNa daNDake dhAraka haiM aise ina brAhmaNoMne isa saMsArako mohita kara rakhA
hai- bhrama meM DAla rakhA hai  /  / 227|| yaha samasta saMsAra nirantara
pravRtta rahanevAle atyanta krUra kAryarUpI andhakArase vyApta hai, isakA
puNyarUpI prakAza naSTa ho cukA hai aura sAdhujanoMkA anAdara karane meM tatpara
hai || 298 || isa pRthivIpara subhUma cakravartIne ikkIsa bAra ina brAhmaNoMkA
sarvanAza kiyA phira bhI ye atyantAbhAvako prApta nahIM hue  /  /  292  /  /
isalie he dazAnana ! tumhAre dvArA ye kisa taraha zAnta kiye jA sakeMge--so
tumhIM kho| tuma svayaM upazAnta hoo| isa prANihiMsA se kucha prayojana nahIM
hai ||300|| jaba sarvajJa jinendra bhI isa saMsArako kumAgaM se rahita nahIM
kara sake taba phira hamAre 1. pravRtta kutsitAcArai:  /  2. bahuDimbhaiH ma.  /
5. upazAnto bhava  /  6. kRtim -kha  /  7 zakyate ma.  /  3. kuliGgikaiH kha.  /
261 4. sAdhusatkAra - ka., kha., ma.  /

Page #312 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
262 In the Padma Purana, it is said that, "Hearing the words of Devyati, Kaikeyi
conceived. Pleased by the story of the Purana, he bowed to the Lord of the
Jinas." ||302|| He remained for a while, happy with Narada, engaged in
delightful stories and the births of great men, full of variety. ||303|| Then
Marutva, with folded hands, his head bowed to the ground, bowed to Ravana and
spoke thus. ||304|| "I am your servant, O Lanka! Be pleased with me, O Lord! Due
to ignorance, evil deeds are indeed committed by beings." ||305|| "Please accept
this girl, whose name is Kanakaprabha. You are indeed the recipient of beautiful
things." ||306|| Ravana, who was compassionate to the humble, accepted her and,
with continuous progress in his happiness, married her. ||307|| Marutva,
pleased, honored Ravana's vassals and warriors with vehicles, clothes,
ornaments, and other things, as was appropriate. ||308|| While enjoying himself
with Kanakaprabha, a daughter was born to Ravana at the end of a year, named
Kritachitra. ||309|| Because she created wonder with her form, a picture, for
those who saw her, she was aptly named Kritachitra. She, like a living
embodiment of beauty, stole the hearts of all. ||310|| The valiant vassals of
Dashaanan, whose enthusiasm was fueled by victory and whose bodies were full of
brilliance, played here and there on the earth. ||311|| Seeing those powerful
vassals of Dashaanan, he who bore the title of 'king' became extremely humble,
filled with fear at the destruction of his pleasures. ||312|| Seeing the middle
part of Bharatavarsha, adorned with golden mountains and rivers, the Vidyadharas
were filled with wonder. ||313|| Some Vidyadharas said, "It would be good if we
stayed here. Surely, even heaven is not more beautiful than this place." ||314||
Others said, "Seeing this country, we will not have any reason to return to
Lanka, to see our families." ||315|| How can people do this? ||301||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 262 padmapurANe iti 'devayateH zrutvA kaikasIkukSisaMbhavaH  /  purANakathayA
prIto namazcakre jinAdhipam  // 302 //  saMkathAbhizca
ramyAbhirmahApuruSajanmabhiH  /  sthitaH kSaNaM vicitrAbhirnAradena samaM sukhI
// 303 //  marutvo'thAJjaliM baddhvA kSitisaktaziroruhaH  /  praNanAma
yamotsAdaM nayaviccaivamabravIt  // 30 //  bhRtyo'haM tava laGkaza ! bhaja nAtha
! prasannatAm  /  ajJAnena hi jantUnAM bhavatyeva durIhitam  // 305 //  gRhyatAM
kanyakA ceyaM nAmnA me kanakaprabhA  /  vastUnAM darzanIyAnAM bhavAneva hi
bhojanam  // 306 //  praNateSu dayAzIlastAM pratIyeSa rAvaNaH  /  upayeme ca
sAtatyapravRttaparamodayaH  // 307 //  tatsAmantAzca tuSTena 'marutvena
yathocitam  /  maTAzca pUjitA yAnavAso'laMkaraNAdimiH  // 308 //  kanakaprabhayA
sAdhaM ramamANasya cAjani  /  sutA saMvatsarasyAnte kRtacitreti nAmataH  // 309
//  rUpeNa hi kRtaM citraM tayA lokasya pazyataH  /  mUrtiyukteva sA zomA cakre
cittasya coraNam  // 310 //  jayArjitasamutsAhAH zUrAstejasvivigrahAH  /
sAmantA dazavaktrasya remire dharaNItale  // 31 //  dhatte yo nRpatikhyAti tAn
dRSTA sa bliiysH| jagAmAtyantadInatvaM svabhogabhraMzakAtaraH  // 312 //
madhyabhAgaM samAlokya varSasyAmbaragocarAH  /  kanakAdinadIramyaM vismayaM
prApuruttamam  // 313 //  UcaH kecidvaraM bhadrA atrevAvasthitA vayam  /  nUnaM
svargo'pi naitasmAdajate rAmaNIyakam  // 314 //  anye'vadannimaM dezaM dRSTvA
laGkAnivartane  /  kuTumbadarzanaM zuddhaM kAraNaM no bhaviSyati  // 315 //
jaise loga kaise kara sakate haiM ?  // 301 //  isa prakAra nAradake mukhase
purANakI kathA sunakara rAvaNa bahata prasanna huA aura usane jinendra
bhagavAnko namaskAra kiyA  // 302 //  isa prakAra vaha nAradake sAtha
mahApuruSoMse sambandha rakhanevAlI aneka prakArako manohara aura vicitra
kathAe~ karatA huA kSaNabhara sukha se baiThA  // 303 /  /  athAnantara nItike
jAnakAra rAjA marutvane hAtha jor3akara tathA sirake bAla jamInapara lagAkara
rAvaNako praNAma kiyA aura nimnAMkita vacana kahe  // 304 /  /  he laMkeza !
maiM ApakA dAsa huuN| Apa mujhapara prasanna hoie| ajJAnavaza jIvoMse khoTe kAma
bana hI jAte haiM  // 305 /  /  merI kanakaprabhA nAmakI kanyA hai so ise Apa
svIkRta kIjie kyoMki sundara vastuoMke pAtra Apa hI haiM  /  / 306 //  namra
manuSyoMpara dayA karanA jisakA svabhAva thA aura nirantara jisakA abhyudaya
bar3ha rahA thA aise rAvaNane kanakaprabhAko vivAhanA svIkRta kara vidhipUrvaka
usake sAtha vivAha kara liyA  // 307|| rAjA marutvane santuSTa hokara rAvaNake
sAmantoM aura yoddhAoMkA vAhana, vastra tathA alaMkAra Adise yathAyogya satkAra
kiyA  // 308 //  kanakaprabhAke sAtha ramaNa karate hue rAvaNake eka varSa bAda
kRtacitrA nAmakI putrI huI  // 309|| cU~ki usane dekhanevAle manuSyoMko apane
rUpase citra arthAt Azcarya utpanna kiyA thA isalie usakA kRtacitrA nAma
sArthaka thaa| vaha mUrtimatI zobhAke samAna sabakA citta curAtI thI  // 310 //
vijayase jinakA utsAha bar3ha rahA thA tathA jinakA zarIra atyanta tejaHpUrNa
thA aise dazAnanake zUravIra sAmanta pRthvItalapara jahAM-tahA~ krIr3A karate
the  // 311 /  /  jo manuSya 'rAjA' isa khyAtiko dhAraNa karatA thA vaha
dazAnanake una balavAn sAmantoMko dekhakara apane bhogoMke nAzase kAtara hotA
huA atyanta dInatAko prApta ho jAtA thA  // 312 //  vidyAdhara loga suvarNamaya
parvata tathA nadiyoMse manohara bhAratavarSakA madhyabhAga dekhakara parama
Azcaryako prApta hue the  // 313 /  /  kitane hI vidyAdhara kahane lage ki yadi
hama loga yahIM rahane lageM to acchA ho  /  nizcaya hI svarga bhI isa sthAnase
bar3hakara adhika saundaryako prApta nahIM hai  // 314 /  /  kitane hI loga
kahate the ki hama loga isa dezako 1. nAradAt  /  2. etannAmA nRpaH  /
maruto'yA ma.  /  3. yamonmAdaM ma.  /  rAvaNam  /  4. svIcakAra  /  5. sAtyanta
-ma.  /  6. marutena m.| 7. kAna (?) m.| 8. sUrAs m.| 9. bharatakSetrasya  /
10. vidyAdharAH  /  varSasyAntaragocarAH k.| -

Page #313 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
263 Some said, "Staying at home doesn't seem appealing at all. Let's see the
captivating expanse of this land." ||316|| Look, how the army of Ravana, vast as
the ocean, is stationed here, so densely packed that they are not even visible
to each other. ||317|| Oh, the extraordinary courage of this people, captivating
the eyes! This realm, along with the realm of the celestial beings, is
considered the best. ||318|| Wherever Ravana, the destroyer of Marutvamkha's
sacrifice, went, the people of that land made his path beautiful with toranas
and other decorations. ||319|| The earth-dwelling women, with faces as beautiful
as the moon, eyes like lotuses, and bodies filled with beauty, were gazing at
Ravana with great respect. Even the celestial beings, driven by curiosity, were
descending to earth to see him. ||320-321|| As Ravana, with his body dark like
the tip of a sharpened arrow or a sword, lips like ripe bimba fruit, forehead
washed with the water of the pearls adorning his crown, hair shining brighter
than the brilliance of an Indranila gem, eyes like lotuses, face like the moon,
adorned with a pair of arched, smooth, and blue eyebrows like a bow with its
string, neck like a conch, shoulders like a lion, broad and thick chest, arms
thick like an elephant's trunk, waist strong and slender like a thunderbolt,
thighs like a serpent's hood, knees submerged in their muscles, feet like
lotuses, body of the right proportion, marked with the thirty-two auspicious
signs like the Srivatsa, his crown gleaming with the rays of gems, his earrings
made of various precious stones, his arms shining with the brilliance of
armlets, his chest adorned with a garland, and holding a half-moon shaped
weapon, was approaching the city, the women were eager to see him. ||322-328||
They abandoned all their previous activities and filled the windows. The women,
filled with love, were crowding each other. ||329||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 263 ekAdazaM parva eke'vocan gRhe vAso na manAgapi zobhate  /  dRzyatAmasya
dezasya pArthavaM cittahAriNaH  // 316 //  samudravipulaM sainyaM pazyatAtra
kathaM sthitam  /  marutvamakhabhaGgasya yathA'nyo'nyaM na dRzyate  // 317 //
aho dhairyamahodAraM lokasyekSaNahAriNaH  /  etasya khecarANAM ca prazasto'yaM
nirUpyate  // 318 //  marutvamakhavidhvaMso yaM yaM dezamupAgataH  /  ramyaM
tasyAkarollokaH panthAnaM toraNAdibhiH  // 319 //  zazAGkasaumyavaktrAbhinetre
sarasijopame  /  bibhratImiH sulAvaNyapUrNadehAbhirAdarAt  // 320 //
mahIgocaranArIbhirvidyAdharakutUhalAt  /  vIkSyamANA yayurbhUmyAM
khecarAstaddidRkSayA  // 321 //  nagarasya samIpena vrajantaM kaikasIsutam  /
nirdItasAyakazyAmaM pakvabimbaphalAdharam  // 322 //
mukuTanyastamuktAMzusalilakSAlitAlikam  /
indranIlapramodArasphuratkuntalabhArakam  // 323 /  /  sahasrapatranayanaM
zarvarItilakAnanam  /  saijyacApAnatasnigdhanIlabhrUyugarAjitam  // 32 //
kambugrIvaM hariskandhaM pInavistIrNavakSasam  /  dignAganAsikAbAhuM
vajravanmadhyadurvidham  // 325 //  nAgabhogasamAkAraprasRtaM magnajAnukam  /
sarojacaraNaM nyAyyapramANasthitavigraham  // 326 //
zrIvatsaprabhRtistutyadvAtriMzallakSaNAJcitam  /  ratnarazmijvalanmauliM
vicitramaNikuNDalam  // 327 //  keyUrakara dIptAMsaM hArarAjitavakSasam  /
pratyardhacakrabhRdbhogaM draSTumutsukamAnasAH  // 328 //  ApUrayan
parityaktasamastaprastutakriyAH  /  vAtAyanAni sadveSAH striyo'nyo'nyavipIDitA
// 329 //  dekhakara laMkA lauTeMge isameM apane kuTumbakA darzana hI mukhya
kAraNa hogA  /  / 315 /  /  kucha loga kahate the ki gharameM rahanA to kucha
bhI zobhA nahIM detaa| jarA isa manohara dezakA vistAra to dekho  // 316 //
dekho, rAvaNakI samudra ke samAna vizAla senA yahA~ kisa prakAra Thahara gayo ki
parasparameM dikhAI hI nahIM detI  // 317 //  netroMko haraNa karanevAle isa
lokake dhairyakI mahAnatA AzcaryakArI hai  /  isa loka tathA vidyAdharoMke
lokakA jaba vicAra karate haiM to yaha loka hI uttama mAlUma hotA hai  // 318||
rAjA marutvake yajJako naSTa karanevAlA rAvaNa jisa-jisa dezameM jAtA thA
vahIMke nivAsIjana toraNa Adike dvArA usake mArgako manohara banA dete
the.||319|| jinake mukha candramAke samAna sundara the, jo kamalatulya netra
dhAraNa kara rahI thIM aura jinakA zarIra saundaryase paripUrNa thA aisI
bhamigocarI striyAM vidyAdharoMke katahalase jinheM baDe Adarase dekha rahI thIM
aisA vidyAdhara bhI rAvaNako dekhanekI icchAse pRthvIpara cala rahe the  //
320-321 //  jo atyanta dhule hue bANake agrabhAga athavA talavArake samAna
zyAmavarNa thA, jisake oTha pake hue bimba phalake samAna the, mukuTameM lage
hue motiyoMkI kiraNoMrUpI jalase jisakA lalATa dhulA huA thA, jisake dhuMgharAle
bAloMkA samUha indranIlamaNikI prabhAse bhI adhika camakIlA thA, jisake netra
kamalake samAna the, mukha candramAke samAna thA, jo pratyaMcA sahita dhanuSake
samAna Ter3hI, cikanI evaM nIlI-nIlI bhauMhoMke yugalase suzobhita thA, jisakI
grIvA zaMkhake samAna thI, kandhe siMhake samAna the, jisakA vakSaHsthala moTA
aura caur3A thA, jisakI bhujAe~ diggajakI sUMDake samAna moTI thIM, jisakI
kamara vajrake samAna majabUta evaM patalI thI, jisakI jaMghAe~ sA~pake phaNake
samAna thIM, jisake ghuTane apanI mAMsapeziyoMmeM nimagna the, paira kamalake
samAna the, jisakA zarIra yogya U~cAIse sahita thA, jo zrIvatsa Adi uttamottama
battIsa lakSaNoMse yukta thA, jisakA mukuTa ratnoMkI kiraNoMse jagamagA rahA
thA. jisake kuNDala citravicitra maNiyoMse nimita the, jisake kandhe
bAjubandoMkI kiraNoMse dedIpyamAna the jisakA vakSaHsthala hArase sazobhita thA
aura jise ardhacakrIke bhoga prApta the aisA rAvaNa jaba nagarake samIpameM
gamana karatA huA Age jAtA thA taba use dekhane ke lie striyAM atyanta
utkaNThita1. pRthutvaM vistAram  /  pArthivaM ma., kha., ba.  /  2. lokasya
kSaNahAriNaH ma.  /  3. rAvaNaH  /  4. tArakam ma.  /  5. candramukham  /  6.
sadya ma., kha.  /  7. 'jaGghA tu prasRtA same' ityamaraH  /  8. dIptAMzaM ma.
/

Page #314 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
264 In the Padma Purana, the women, adorned with flowers, showered their love
upon Ravana. They expressed their admiration in various ways.  [330]  Some said,
"Behold, this is the same Ravana who conquered Vaishravana, the son of his
maternal aunt, and Yama. He who was ready to lift Mount Kailasa. He who freed
Sahasrarashmi from the burden of kingship. He is a valiant warrior." [331-332]
"Oh, what a wonderful union of qualities has been brought about by fate in
Ravana after a long time. His beauty and his virtues are a source of joy for the
world." [333]  "That woman is blessed who carried this noble son in her womb.
And that father is fortunate who gave birth to him." [334]  "Those relatives are
praiseworthy who are the objects of his affection. And what can be said of the
women who are married to him?" [335]  The women, engaged in conversation,
continued to gaze at him until he was no longer visible to their wide eyes.
[336]  When Ravana, the thief of hearts, disappeared from their sight, the women
stood motionless for a moment, like paintings. [337]  "Their minds were
captivated by Ravana, and for some time they were lost in their thoughts, unable
to focus on anything else." [338]  Wherever Ravana went, the stories of men and
women in that land were overshadowed by his legend. [339]  The men who held
positions of authority in the country, city, village, or shepherd's settlement,
went to Ravana, bearing gifts. [340]  The people of the villages, carrying
appropriate gifts, went to Ravana, bowed down with folded hands, and expressed
their satisfaction. [341]  They said, "O King! All the beautiful treasures in
the forests of Nandana and others are readily available to you, as if by your
mere wish." [342]  "Since you are worthy of great wealth, what would be the
point of having no son? We offer you these gifts to bring you joy." [343]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 264 padmapurANe nizcikSipuzca puSpANi 'sametAni madhuvrataH  /  tuSTAzca
vividhAlApAMzcakrustadvarNanAmiti  // 330 //  ayaM sa rAvaNo yena jito
mAtRSvasuH sutaH  /  yamazca yazca kailAsaM samutkSeptuM samudyataH  // 331 //
nItaH sahasrarazmizca rAjyamAravimuktatAm  /  marutvasya ca vidhvasto vitAnaH
zauryazAlinA  // 332 //  aho samAgamaH sAdhuH kRto'yaM karmamizcirAt  /  rUpasya
kekasIsUnau guNAnAM ca janotsavaH  // 333 //  yoSitpuNyavatI so'yaM to garbhe
yayottamaH  /  pitApyasau kRtArthatvaM prAptaH kRtvAsya saMbhavam  // 334 //
ilAdhyaH sa bandhuloko'pi yasyAyaM premagocaraH  /  anenopayatA yAstu tAsAM
strINAM kimucyate  // 335 //  AlApamiti kurvantyastAvadekSanta tAH striyaH  /
gocaratvamavApAyaM yAvadvitatacakSuSAm  // 336 //  gate tasminmanazcaure
cakSurgocaratAtyayam  /  muhUrtamabhavanAryaH pustakarmagatA iva  // 337 //
'tenApahatacittAnAM vAnchantInAM manogatama  /  kartamanyadabhatkarma
kiyatAcidanehasA  // 338 //  babhUveti dazagrIve deze tatsaMgamojjhite  /
nArINAM puruSANAM ca tyaktAnyAzeSasaMkathA  // 339 //  viSaye nagare grAme ghoSe
vA ye pradhAnatAm  /  bhajante puruSAste tamupAyanabhRto'gaman  // 340 //  gatvA
janapadAzcaivamupanIya yathocitam  /  racitAJjalayo natvA parituSTA vyajijJapan
// 341 //  nandanAdiSu ramyANi yAni dravyANi pArthiva  /  sulabhatvaM prapannAni
tava tAnyapi cintanAt  // 342 /  /  mahAvibhavapAtrasya kimapUtraM bhavettava  /
upanIya pramodaM te yatkurmo draviNaM vayam  // 343 //  citta ho jAtI thiiN|
uttama veSako dhAraNa karanevAlI striyA~ paraspara eka dUsareko pIr3A pahu~cAtI
huI prArabdha samasta kAryoMko chor3akara jharokhoMmeM A DaTI thIM  // 322-329 /
/  ve santuSTa hokara bhauMroMse sahita phUla rAvaNapara pheMka rahI thIM aura
vividha prakArake zabdoMse usakA isa prakAra varNana kara rahI thIM  // 330 /  /
koI kaha rahI thI ki dekho yaha vahI rAvaNa hai jisane mausIke lar3ake
vaizravaNa aura yamako jItA thaa| jo kailAsa parvatako uThAneke lie udyata huA
thaa| jisane sahasrarazmiko rAjyabhArase vimukta kiyA thA yaha bar3A parAkramI
hai  // 331-332 //  aho, bar3e AzcaryakI bAta hai ki karmoMne cirakAla bAda
rAvaNameM rUpa tathA aneka guNoMkA lokAnandakArI samAgama kiyA hai| arthAt jaisA
isakA sundara rUpa hai vaise hI isameM guNa vidyamAna haiM  // 333 //  vaha strI
puNyavatI hai jisane isa uttama putrako garbha meM dhAraNa kiyA hai aura vaha
pitA bhI kRtakRtyapanAko prApta hai jisane ise janma diyA hai  // 334 /  /  ve
bandhujana prazaMsanIya haiM jinakA ki yaha premapAtra hai, jo striyA~ isake
sAtha vivAhita haiM unakA to kahanA hI kyA hai ?  // 335 //  vArtAlApa karatI
huI striyA~ use tabataka dekhatI rahIM jabataka ki vaha unake vistRta netroMkA
viSaya rahA arthAt netroMke ojhala nahIM ho gayA  // 336 /  /  manako curAnevAlA
rAvaNa jaba netroMse adRzya ho gayA taba muhUrta-bharake lie striyA~
citralikhitako taraha nizceSTa ho gayIM  // 337|| rAvaNake dvArA una striyoMkA
citta harA gayA thA isalie kucha dina taka to unakA yaha hAla rahA ki unake
manameM kucha kArya thA aura ve kara baiThatI thIM koI dUsarA hI kArya  // 338
//  rAvaNa jisa dezakA samAgama chor3a Age bar3ha jAtA thA usa dezake strI-
puruSoMmeM eka rAvaNakI hI kathA zeSa raha jAtI thI anya sabakI kathA chUTa jAtI
thI  // 339 /  /  deza, nagara, grAma athavA ahIroMkI bastI meM jo puruSa
pradhAnatAko prApta the ve upahAra le-lekara rAvaNake samIpa gaye  /  / 340 /  /
janapadoMmeM rahanevAle loga yathAyogya bheMTa lekara rAvaNake pAsa gaye aura
hAtha jor3a namaskAra kara santuSTa hote hue nimna prakAra nivedana karane lage
// 341 /  /  unhoMne kahA ki he rAjan ! nandana Adi vanoMmeM jo bhI manohara
dravya haiM ve icchA karane mAtrase hI Apako sulabha haiM arthAt anAyAsa hI
prApta ho jAte haiM  // 342 /  /  cUMki Apa mahAvaibhavake pAtra haiM isalie
aisA 1. samedhAni ma.  /  2. vividhAlApAzcakru -m.| 3. vaizravaNaH  /  4.
marutasya ma.  /  5. pariNItA vivAhitA ityarthaH  /  6. -daikSyanta ma.  /
daikyaM gatAH striyaH ka., kha.  /  7. dArunimitA kh.| 8. tenopahRta -ma.  /

Page #315 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Eleventh Chapter 265  Even though we have empty hands, we have come to see
you. It is not right to come without anything. ||344||  The gods worshipped the
Jina with golden lotuses. How can we, ordinary people, not worship him with
flowers from trees? ||345||  People from various regions and powerful Samantas
worshipped him. He, in turn, honored them with kind words. ||346||  Seeing the
beautiful earth, adorned with various jewels, like his own beloved, he felt
immense joy. ||347||  Wherever he went, due to his path, the land became
abundant with unplanted, self-growing crops. ||348||  The people of that land,
bearing the burden of the earth, showered his pure fame with the water of their
affection. ||349||  The farmers said, "We are blessed, for the son of Ratna
Shrava has come to this land." ||350||  "Until now, we farmers were rough,
wearing tattered clothes, with rough hands and feet, experiencing pain. We spent
our time in misery, never tasting happiness. But now, due to the influence of
this great being, we are prosperous in every way." ||351-352||  The lands where
this benevolent Ravana wanders are blessed with virtue and adorned with wealth.
||353||  "What use are brothers who cannot alleviate suffering? This Ravana is
the elder brother of all beings." ||354||  Thus, increasing the affection of the
people through his virtues, Ravana made the winter and summer seasons pleasant
for them. ||355||  Even inanimate objects, let alone sentient beings, became
beneficial to people, as if they were afraid of Ravana. ||356||  As he continued
his journey, the rainy season arrived, as if it had come to welcome Ravana with
joy. ||357||  Clouds, adorned with lightning bolts, thundered like mountains,
creating a deep, resonant sound. ||358||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekAdazaM parva 265 tathApi zUnyahastAnAmasmAkaM tava darzanam  /  na yuktamiti
yatkicidupAdAya samAgatAH  // 344 //  jinendraH prApitaH pUjAmamaraiH
kanakAmbujaiH  /  dumapuSpAdibhiH kinna pUjyate'smadvidhairjanaiH  // 345 //
nAnAjanapadairavaM sAmantaizca maharddhimiH  /  pUjitaH pratisaMmAnaM teSAM
cakre priyoditaiH  // 346 //  parAM prItimavApAsau pazyana ramyAM vasundharAm  /
kAntAmiva nijAM nAnAratnalakArazAlinIm  // 347 //  saMgaM dezena yenAsau yayau
mArgavazAdvibhuH  /  akRSTapacyasasyADhyaM tatrAsId vasudhAtalam  // 348 //
pramodaM paramaM bibhrajano'sya dharaNItalam  /  anurAgAmbhasA kIrtimabhyasiJcat
sunirmalAm  // 349 //  kRSIbalajanAzcaivamUcuH puNyajuSo vayam  /  yena
dezamimaM prApto devo ratnazravaHsutaH  // 350 //  anyadA kRSisatAnAM
rUkSAGgAnAM kuvAsasAm  /  vahatAM karkazasparza pANipAdaM savedanam  // 351 //
klezAt kAlo gato'smAkaM sukhasvAdavivarjitaH  /  prabhAvAdasya mavyasya
sAMprataM vayamIzvarAH  // 352 //  puNyenAnugRhItAste dezAH saMparasamAzritAH  /
yeSu kalyANasaMbhAro vicaratyeSa rAvaNaH  // 353 /  /  kRtyaM kiM bAndhavaiye na
samarthA duHkhanodane  /  ayameva mahAbandhuH sarveSAM prANinAmabhUt  // 354 //
anurAgaM guNarevaM sa lokasya pravardhayan  /  cakAra tasya hemantaM nidAghaM ca
sukhapradam  // 355 //  AsatAM cetanAstAvadye'pi bhAvA vicetnaaH| te'pi bhItA
ivAmuSmAd babhUvurlokasaukhyadAH  // 356 //  tAvacca vrajanastasya
prAdurAsIddhanAgamaH  /  abhyutthAnaM dazAsyasya kurvanniva sasaMbhramaH  // 357
//  balAkAvidyudindrAstrakRtabhUSA ghanAghanAH  /  mahAnIlagiricchAyAH kurvantaH
paTunisvanam  // 358 //  kauna-sA apUrva dhana hai jise bheMTa dekara hama Apako
prasanna kara sakate haiN||343|| phira bhI hama logoMko khAlI hAtha ApakA
darzana karanA ucita nahIM hai isalie kucha to bhI lekara samIpa Aye haiM  //
344 /  /  devoMne jinendra bhagavAnkI suvarNa kamaloMse pUjA kI thI to kyA
hamAre jaise loga unakI sAdhAraNa vRkSoMke phUloMse pUjA nahIM karate ? arthAt
avazya karate haiM  // 345 //  isa prakAra nAnA janapadavAsI aura bar3I-bar3I
sampadAoMko dhAraNa karanevAle sAmantoMne rAvaNakI pUjA kI tathA rAvaNane bhI
priya vacana kahakara badale meM unakA sammAna kiyA  // 346|| nAnA ratnamayo,
alaMkAroMse suzobhita apanI strIke samAna sundara pRthivIko dekhatA huA rAvaNa
parama prItiko prApta huA 1347 /  /  rAvaNa mArgake kAraNa jisa-jisa dezake
sAtha samAgamako prApta huA thA vahAMkI pRthivI akRSTapacya dhAnyase yukta ho
gayI thii||348|| parama varSako dhAraNa karanevAle loga rAvaNake dvArA choDe hae
pathivItala talako tathA usakI atyanta nimaMla kIrtiko anurAgarUpI jalase
sIMcate the  // 349 /  /  kisAna loga isa prakAra kaha rahe the ki hama loga
bar3e puNyAtmA haiM jisase ki rAvaNa isa dezameM AyA  // 350 /  /  hama loga aba
taka khetImeM lage rahe, hama logoMkA sArA zarIra rUkhA ho gyaa| hameM phaTe-
purAne vastra pahananeko mile, hama kaThora sparza aura tIvra vedanAse yukta
hAtha-pairoMko dhAraNa karate rahe aura Aja taka kabhI sukhase acchA bhojana
hameM prApta nahIM huaa| isa taraha hama logoMkA kAla bar3e klezase vyatIta huA
parantu isa bhavya jIvake prabhAvase hama loga isa samaya sarva prakArase
sampanna ho gaye haiM  // 351-352 //  jina dezoMmeM yaha kalyANakArI rAvaNa
vicaraNa karatA hai ve deza puNyase anugRhIta tathA sampattise suzobhita haiM
// 353 /  /  mujhe una bhAiyoMse kyA prayojana jo ki duHkha dUra karane meM
samartha nahIM haiN| yaha rAvaNa hI hama saba prANiyoMkA bar3A bhAI hai  // 354
//  isa prakAra guNoMke dvArA logoMke anurAgako bar3hAte hue rAvaNane hemanta
aura grISma Rtuko bhI logoMke lie sukhadAyI banA diyA thA  // 355 /  /  cetana
padArtha to dUra rahe jo acetana padArtha the ve bhI mAno rAvaNase bhayabhIta
hokara hI logoMke lie sukhadAyI ho gaye the||356|| rAvaNakA prayANa jArI thA ki
itane meM varSA Rtu A gayI jo aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno harSake sAtha rAvaNakI
agavAnI karaneke lie hI AyI thI  // 357 //  balAkA 1. janapadareva ma.  /  2.
sunirmalam kha., ba., ma.  /  34

Page #316 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, it is said that the clouds, adorned with golden halos and
banners, appeared as if Indra had sent them as gifts to Ravana, like elephants
adorned with golden ornaments.  || 358-359 || The clouds, with their dark
masses, shrouded all directions, making it impossible for people to distinguish
between night and day. || 360 || It is fitting for those who are stained with
impurities to make all things in the world appear the same, both light and dark.
|| 361 || The thick, uninterrupted streams of water, clinging to the earth and
sky, were so dense that it was impossible to tell whether they were rising or
falling. || 362 || The store of pride that the women had held in their minds for
a long time was destroyed in an instant by the thunderous roar of the clouds. ||
363 || The women, whose arms were adorned with jingling bangles, were terrified
by the thunder and clung tightly to their husbands. || 364 || The cool, soft
drops of rain, released by the clouds, were like a balm to the spectators, even
though they pierced the hearts of the travelers. || 365 || The heart of the
distant traveler, whose soul was filled with anxiety, was shattered by the
torrent of rain, as if it had been pierced by a sharp wheel. || 366 || The
traveler, captivated by the new flower of the Kadamba tree, became motionless
for a moment, like a clay doll. || 367 || It seemed as if the clouds, which
drank from the ocean of milk, had entered the cows. Otherwise, how could they
continuously pour out streams of milk? || 368 || The farmers, who were wealthy
due to Ravana's influence, were not troubled by the rains at that time. || 369
|| The food prepared by the housewife for one person was consumed by the entire
family, yet it never ran out. || 370 || Thus, Ravana was a festival for all
living beings. Who can describe the good fortune of those who are blessed with
virtue? || 371 || Ravana, dark as a cluster of blue lotuses, with his thunderous
voice, aroused the curiosity of the women. || 372 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe hemakakSAbhRtaH kambudhvajabhUSitavigrahAH  /  prahitAbhA ve
zakreNa rAvaNasya gajA iva  // 359 //  dizo'ndhakAritAH sarvA
jImUtapaTalaistathA  /  rAtrindivasya na jJAto bheda eva yathA janaiH  //  360
//  athavA yuktamevedaM kartuM malinatAbhRtAm  /  yathprakAzatamoyuktAn kurvanti
bhuvane samAn  // 361 //  bhUmijImUtasaMsaktAH sthUlA vicchedavarjitAH  /
nAjJAyanta ghanA dhArA utpatanti patanti nu  // 362 //  mAnase mAnasaMbhAro
mAninIbhizviraM dhRtaH  /  paTuno megharaTitIt kSaNena dhvaMsamAgataH  // 363 //
ghanadhvanitavitrastA mAninyo ramaNaM bhRzam | AliliGga raNatkAri
valayAkulabAhavaH  //  364 //  zItalA mRdavo dhArAH pathikAnAM ghanojjhitAH  /
draSTRNAM samatAM jagmuH kurvantyo marmadAraNam  //  365 //  bhinnaM
dhArAkadambena hRdayaM dUravartinaH  /  cakreNeva sutIkSNena
pathikasthAkulAtmanaH  // 366 //  266 to navena nIpena mUDhatAM pathiko yathA  /
pustakarmasamo jAto varAkaH kSaNamAtrakam  //  367 //  kSIrodapAyino meghA
praviSTA iva dhenuSu  /  anyathA kSIradhArAstAzcakSaruH satataM katham  //  368
//  varSANAM samaye tasminna babhUvuH kRSIvalAH  /  samAkulAH prabhAveNa
rAvaNasya mahAdhanAH  //  369  //  annamekasya hetorya kuTumbinyA prasAdhitam  /
bhujyamAnaM kuTumbena na tanniSThAmupAgamat  //  370  //  mahotsavo dazagrIvo
babhUva prANadhAriNAm  /  puNyasaMpUrNadehAnAM saubhAgyaM kena kathyate  // 371
//  indIvaracayazyAmaH strINAmautsukyamAharan  /  sAkSAdiva babhUvAsau varSAkAlo
mahAdhvaniH  //  372 //  bijalI aura indradhanuSase zobhita, mahAnIlagirike
samAna kAle-kAle megha joradAra garjanA karate hue aise jAna par3ate the mAno
suvarNamAlAoMko dhAraNa karanevAle zaMkha aura patAkAoM se suzobhita hAthI hI
indra rAvaNake lie upahAra meM bheje hoM  /  /  358 - 359 || meghoMke samUhase
samasta dizAe~ isa prakAra andhakArayukta ho gayI thIM ki logoMko rAta-dinakA
bheda hI nahIM mAlUma hotA thA || 360  //  athavA jo malinatAko dhAraNa
karanevAle haiM unheM aisA hI karanA ucita hai ki ve saMsAra meM prakAza aura
andhakArase yukta sabhI padArthoMko eka samAna kara dete haiM || 361 || pAnIkI
bar3I moTI dhArAe~ rukAvaTarahita pRthivI aura AkAzake bIcameM isa taraha
saMlagna ho rahI thIM ki patA hI nahIM calatA thA ki ye moTI dhArAe~ Uparako jA
rahI haiM yA Uparase nIce phira rahI haiM || 362 || mAnavatI striyoMne jo mAnakA
samUha cirakAlase apane manameM dhAraNa kara rakhA thA vaha meghoM kI joradAra
garjanAse kSaNa-bhara meM naSTa ho gayA thA || 363 || jinakI bhujAe~ runajhuna
karanevAlI cUr3iyoMse yukta thIM aisI mAnavatI striyA~ meghagarjanAse Darakara
patikA gAr3ha AliMgana kara rahI thIM || 364 || meghoMke dvArA chor3I huI jalakI
dhArAe~ yadyapi zItala aura komala thIM tathApi pathika janoM kA mamaM vidAraNa
karatI huI darzakoMkI samAnatAko prApta ho rahI thIM || 365 //  jisakI AtmA
atyanta vyAkula thI aise dUravartI pathikakA hRdaya dhArAoMke samUhase isa
prakAra khaNDita ho gayA thA mAno atyanta paine cakrase hI khaNDita huA ho ||
366 || kadambake naye phUlase becArA pathika itanA adhika mohita ho gayA ki vaha
kSaNa bharake lie miTTI ke putale ke samAna nizceSTa ho gayA || 367 || aisA jAna
par3atA thA ki kSIrasamudrase jala grahaNa karanevAle megha mAno gAyoMke bhItara
jA ghuse the  /  yadi aisA na hotA to ve nirantara dUdhakI dhArAe~ kaise jharAte
rahate ?  //  368  //  usa samaya ke kisAna rAvaNake prabhAvase mahAdhanavAn ho
gaye the isalie usa varSAke samaya bhI ve vyAkula nahIM hue the || 369 ||
gharakI mAlakina eka vyakti ke lie jo bhojana taiyAra karatI thI use sArA
kuTumba khAtA thA phira bhI vaha samApta nahIM hotA thA || 370  //  isa prakAra
rAvaNa samasta prANiyoM ke lie mahotsavasvarUpa thA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki
puNyAtmA jIvoMkA saubhAgya kauna kaha sakatA hai ? ||371 //  rAvaNa nIla
kamaloMke samUhake samAna zyAma varNaM thA aura joradAra zabda karatA 1 1. va
pAdapUrtI  /  prahitA bhAnti zakreNa ma.  /  2. megharaTitAn ma.  /  3. vanena
pItena ma  /  4. kadambakusumena  /  5. kuTumbena tanniSThAM samupAgamat ma.  /
6. - mAharat ma.  /

Page #317 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Eleventh Chapter 267 As if by the command of Ravana, the waters roared, and
all the kings bowed down in obeisance. ||373|| The maidens, with their
captivating eyes, reached the ten-faced one for the swayamvara. They were like
lightning, having abandoned the sky and descended to the earth. ||374|| They
rejoiced, having attained the one who bore the weight of the earth, like the
clouds, laden with water, delighting in the mountains. ||375|| Seeing the
supreme radiance of the conqueror, the vanquisher of the Yakshas, the sun fled
somewhere, overwhelmed with fear and shame. ||376|| The moon, thinking,
"Whatever I do, the ten-faced one's mouth does the same," went away somewhere.
||377|| Knowing that their lord, the moon, had been conquered by the mouth of
the ten-faced one, the stars, filled with fear, fled somewhere. ||378|| Knowing
that the hands and feet of the women of Kaikesi were more red than theirs, the
lotus-like assembly disappeared somewhere. ||379|| The women, adorned with
lightning-like girdles and weapons of rainbow-colored cloth, and laden with
breasts (or clouds), were like the rainy season for Ravana. ||380|| Ravana, with
his breath, which attracted swarms of buzzing bees, could not distinguish
between the fragrance of the Ketki flowers and the women. ||381|| Having
attained the extremely beautiful and extensive bank of the Ganges, where
abundant, beautiful grass grew far and wide, and where the fragrance of various
flowers filled the air, Ravana spent the rainy season in comfort. ||382||
Gautama Swami says to King Shrenik, "O King! The name of the virtuous man is..."
1. Laden with breasts (or clouds, in the context of the previous verses).  2.
Ravana's.  3. Adorned with lightning-like girdles.  4. Laden with breasts (or
clouds).  5. Disciple.  6. Ravana.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekAdazaM parva 267 garjitena payodAnAM rAvaNasyeva zAsanAt  /  ghoSaNena kRtA
sarveH praNatiH patibhirnRNAm  // 373 //  kanyA dRSTiharAH prApurdazavaktraM
svayaMvarAH  /  bhUgocarAH parityaktagaganA iva vidyutaH  // 374 //  remire
tAstamAsAdya mahIdharaNatatparam  /  payodharabharAkrAntA sadvarSA iva bhUbhRtam
// 375 //  jigISoryakSamardasya dRSTvaiva paramAM dyutim  /  bhAsvAn palAyitaH
kvApi trapAtrAsasamAkulaH  // 376 //  dazAnanasya yadvaktraM tadeva kurute
kriyAm  /  madIyAmiti matveva jagAma kvApi candramAH  // 377 //  dazavaktrasya
vaktreNa jitaM jJAtvA nijaM patim  /  mayeneva samAkrAntAstArAH kvApi palAyitAH
// 378 //  suraktaM pANicaraNaM kaikaseyasya yoSitAm  /  viditveva pAyuktA
tiro'bhUdabjasaMhatiH  // 379 //  zanAvidyutA yuktA raktAMzukasurAyudhAH  /
nAryaH payodharAkrAntAstasya varSA ivAbhavan  // 380 //  Amoda rAvaNo jajJe
ketakInAM na yoSitAm  /  niHzvAsamarutAkRSTaguJjabhramarapaGktinA  // 381 //
mandAkrAntAvRttam bhAgIrathyAstaTamatitarAM ramyamAsAdya dUra
prAntodbhutapracuravilasatkAntizappaM vizAlam  /
nAnApuSpaprabhavaniviDaghrANasaMrodhigandhaM 'kSoNIbandhurjaladasamayaM
sarvasaukhyena ninye  // 382 /  /  thA isase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno
striyoMko utsuka karatA huA sAkSAt varSAkAla hI ho  // 372 /  /  meghoMko
garjanAke bahAne mAno rAvaNakA Adeza pAkara hI samasta rAjAoMne rAvaNako
namaskAra kiyA thA  // 373 /  /  netroMko haraNa karanevAlI bhUmigocariyoMkI
aneka kanyAe~ rAvaNako prApta huI so aisI jAna par3atI thIM mAno AkAzako
chor3akara bijaliyA~ hI usake pAsa AyI hoM  // 374 /  /  jisa prakAra
payodharabharAkAntA arthAt meghoMke samUhase yukta uttama varSAe~ kisI parvatako
pAkara krIr3A karatI haiM usI prakAra payodharabharAkrAntA arthAt stanoMke
bhArase AkrAnta kanyAe~ pRthivIkA bhAra dhAraNa karanemeM samartha rAvaNako
pAkara krIr3A karatI thIM  // 375 /  /  varSA RtumeM sUrya chipa gayA so aisA
jAna par3atA thA mAno vijayAbhilASI rAvaNakI utkRSTa kAnti dekha lajjA aura
bhayase vyAkula hotA huA kahIM bhAga gayA thA  // 376 /  /  candramAne dekhA ki
jo kAma meM karatA hU~ vahI rAvaNa kA mukha karatA hai aisA mAnakara hI mAno
vaha kahIM calA gayA thA  // 377 //  tArA bhI antahita ho gaye the so aisA jAna
par3atA thA mAno tArAoMne dekhA ki rAvaNake mukhase hamArA svAmI-candramA jIta
liyA gayA hai isa bhayase yukta hokara hI ve kahIM bhAga gayI thIM  // 378 /  /
rAvaNakI striyoMke hAtha aura paira hamase kahIM adhika lAla haiM aisA jAnakara
hI mAno kamaloMkA samUha lajAtA huA kahIM chipa gayA thA  // 379 //  jo
mekhalArUpI bijalIse yukta thIM tathA raMgabiraMge vastrarUpI indradhanuSako
dhAraNa kara rahI thoM aura payodhara arthAt stanoM ( pakSameM meghoM ) se
AkrAnta thIM aisI rAvaNakI striyA~ ThIka varSA Rtuke samAna jAna par3atI thIM
// 380 //  jisane gUMjatI huI bhramarapaMktiko AkRSTa kiyA thA aise
zvAsocchvAsakI vAyuse rAvaNa ketakIke phUla aura striyoMkI gandhako alaga-alaga
nahIM pahacAna sakA thA  // 381 //  jisake dUra-dUra taka pracura mAtrAmeM
sundara ghAsa utpanna huI thI aura jahA~ nAnA phUloMse samutpanna gandha
ghrANako vyApta kara rahI thI aise gaMgA nadIke lambe-caur3e sundara taTako
pAkara rAvaNane sukhapUrvaka varSA kAla vyatIta kiyA  /  / 382 //  gautama svAmI
rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! puNyAtmA manuSyoMkA nAma 1.
stanabhArAvanatAH pakSe meghasamUhAkrAntAH  /  2. rAvaNasya  /  3. rasanA
vidyutA yuktA ma.  /  4. krAntA tasya ma.  /  5. ziSyaM ma.  /  saMkhyaM kha.  /
sevyaM ka.  /  6. rAvaNaH  /

Page #318 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
268 Upon hearing the name Padma Purana, virtuous men bow down, they obtain
groups of beautiful women who grant all desires. Abodes of wonder, filled with
supreme wealth, are born to them. Even the sun becomes cool due to their
influence, therefore everyone should strive for virtuous bonds. ||383|| Thus
ends the eleventh chapter, titled "The Destruction of Marutvaya's Sacrifice," in
the Padma Purana, narrated by the sage Ravisha. ||11|| 1.
Nikhilvishayapraapyasangho m. | 2. Yaatrad m. |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 268 padmapurANe nAma zrutvA praNamati janaH puNyabhAjA narANAM cArustrINAM
nikhilaviSayaprApisaGghA bhavanti  /  utpadyante paramavibhavA vismayAnAM
nivAsAH zaityaM yAyAd ravirapi tataH puNyabandhe yatadhvam  // 383 //  ityArSe
raviSeNAcAryaprokta padmacarite marutvayajJadhvaMsanapadAnugAbhidhAnaM
nAmaikAdazaM parva  // 11 //  sunakara hI loga unheM praNAma karane lagate haiM,
aneka viSayoMko prApta karAnevAle sundara striyoMke samUha unheM prApta hote
rahate haiM, Azcaryake nivAsabhUta aneka aizvarya unake ghara utpanna hote haiM
aura kahA~ taka kahA jAye sUrya bhI unake prabhAvase zItala ho jAtA hai isalie
sabako puNyabandhake lie prayatna karanA cAhie  /  / 383 //  isa prakAra
ArSanAmase prasiddha raviSeNAcAryake dvArA kathita padmacaritameM rAjA marutvake
yajJake vidhvaMsakA varNana karanevAlA gyArahavA~ parva samApta huA  // 11 //
1. nikhilaviSayaprApyasaGgho ma.  /  2. yAtrAd ma.  /  .

Page #319 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Chapter  I  The king, along with his ministers, pondered in
private: "To whom should this daughter be given?" ||1||  There is no certainty
of survival in a battle with Indra. Therefore, it is auspicious to perform the
daughter's marriage ceremony first. ||2||  Knowing that he was troubled by the
search for a suitable groom for his daughter, King Harivahana summoned his son,
Madhu, to his presence. ||3||  Seeing him, handsome and respectful, Ravana was
pleased and decided to give his daughter to him. ||4||  Seated on a suitable
throne, surrounded by his ministers, the wise Ravana, the ten-headed one,
pondered: "The king of Mathura, Harivahana, is born of a noble lineage. His mind
is always engrossed in hearing praise of our virtues. This son, Madhu, is the
lifeblood of him and his relatives. He is praiseworthy, well-mannered, and
worthy of being entrusted with our happiness." ||5-7||  Knowing this, his
actions seem beautiful. His collection of virtues is renowned. It is good that
he has come to me. ||8||  Then, Madhu's minister said, "O King, the virtues of
this valiant man are difficult to describe. However, I will try to describe them
so that you may know them." ||9-10||  This prince, who brings joy to all, truly
embodies the word "Madhu" because he always possesses a sweet, excellent
fragrance. ||11||  His virtues are sufficient to describe him. The Asura king
has bestowed upon him the great, virtuous, spear-jewel. ||12||  This spear-jewel
is never wasted, it is extremely brilliant, and when thrown at the enemy army,
it brings thousands of enemies to their knees before you. ||13||  **Note:** The
text uses several Jain terms, such as "Asura" (demon) and "Indra" (king of the
gods). These terms are not translated as they are specific to Jain cosmology.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazaM parva I tanAtha mantribhiH sArdhaM cakre'sau saMpradhAraNam  /  kasmai
tu dIyatAmeSA kanyeti rahasi sthitaH  //  1  //  indreNa saha saMgrAme jIvite
nAsti nizcayaH  /  ato varaM kRtaM bAlApANigrahaNamaGgalam ||2|| taM ca
cintAparaM jJAtvA kanyAvaragaveSaNe  /  harivAhanarAjene sUnurohnAnito'ntikam
//  3 //  dRSTvA taM sundarAkAraM praNataM toSamAgataH  /  dazAnanaH sutAM
cAsmai dAtuM cakre manoratham ||4|| ucite cAsane tasminnAsIne sacivAnvite  /
acintayaddazagrIvo nayazAstravizAradaH ||5|| mathurAnagarInAthaH sugotro
harivAhanaH  /  asmadguNagaNo skortisatatAsaktamAnasaH  // 6 //  asya ca
prANabhUto'yaM bandhUnAM ca madhuH sutaH  /  zlAghyo vinayasaMpanno yogyaH
prItyanuvartane  // 7 //  jJAtvA cetova vRttAntamayaM sundaravibhramaH  /
prakhyAtaguNasaMghAtaH pariprApto madantikam ||8|| art madhoridaM prAha mantrI
deva tavAgrataH  /  asya duHkhena varNyante guNA vikramazAlinaH ||9|| tathApi
bhavatu jJAtA svAmino'sya yathAtmanA  /  ityAvedayituM kiMcit kriyate prakramo
mayA  //  10  //  AmodaM paramaM bibhratsarvalokamanoharaH  /  madhuzabdamayaM
dhatte yathArtha pRthivIgatam  // 11 //  guNA etAvataivAsya nanu
paryAptavarNanAH  /  asurendreNa yaddattaM zUlaratnaM mahAguNam ||12||
yatpratyaribalaM kSiptamamoghaM mAsuraM bhRzam  /  dviSatsahastraM nItvAntaM
karaM pratinivartate  // 13 //  athAnantara - usI gaMgA taTapara rAvaNane
ekAntameM mantriyoMke sAtha salAha kI ki yaha kRtacitrA kanyA kisake lie dI jAye
? ||1|| indra ke sAtha saMgrAmameM jIvita rahanekA nizcaya nahIM hai isalie
kanyAkA vivAharUpa maMgala kArya prathama hI kara lenA yogya hai ||2|| taba
rAvaNako kanyAke yogya vara khojane meM cintAtura jAnakara rAjA harivAhanane
apanA putra nikaTa bulAyA || 3 || sundara AkArake dhAraka usa vinayavAn putrako
dekhakara rAvaNako bar3A santoSa huA aura usane usake lie putrI denekA vicAra
kiyA  // 4 //  jaba vaha mantriyoMke sAtha yogya Asanapara baiTha gayA taba
nItizAstrakA vidvAn rAvaNa isa prakAra vicAra karane lagA ki yaha mathurA
nagarIkA rAjA harivAhana uccakulameM utpanna huA hai, isakA mana sadA hamAre
guNa-kathana karanemeM Asakta rahatA hai aura yaha isakA tathA isake
bandhujanoMkA prANabhUta madhu nAmakA putra hai  /  yaha atyanta prazaMsanIya,
vinayasampanna aura protike nirvAha karane meM yogya hai  // 5-7 //  yaha
vRttAnta jAnakara hI mAno isakI ceSTAe~ sundara ho rahI haiN| isake guNoMkA
samUha atyanta prasiddha hai  /  yaha mere samIpa AyA so bahuta acchA huA  // 8
//  tadanantara rAjA madhukA mantrI bolA ki he deva ! isa parAkramI ke guNa
bar3e duHkha varNana kiye jAte haiM arthAt unakA varNana karanA sarala phira bhI
Apa kucha jAna sakeM isalie kucha to bhI varNana karanekA prayatna karatA hU~
//  10 //  saba logoMke manako haraNa karanevAlA yaha kumAra vAstavika madhu
zabdako dhAraNa karatA hai kyoMki yaha sadA madhu jaisI utkRSTa gandhako dhAraNa
karanevAlA hai ||11|| isake guNoMkA varNana itanese hI paryApta samajhanA cAhie
ki asurendra ne isake lie mahAguNazAlI zUlaratna pradAna kiyA hai || 12 || aisA
zUlaratna ki jo kabhI vyarthaM nahIM jAtA, atyanta dedIpyamAna hai aura
zatrusenAkI ora pheMkA jAye jo hajAroM zatruoMko Apake Age nahIM hai  //  9  //
1. 'rAjAhaH sakhibhyaSTac' iti Tac samAsAntaH  /  2. AhvAnaM prApitaH AhnAnita:
/  3. asmadguNagaNe kIrtima., kha.  /  4. prItyanuvartate ma., ba, kha.  /
prIteranuvartanaM tasmin  /  5. guNaparyAptavarNanA ma.  /  6. nItvA taM ma.  /

Page #320 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 270: The Five Puranas  **14.**  "Indeed, you will soon know his
qualities through his actions.  To reveal them through words would only be a
cause for laughter."  **15.** "Therefore, let the Supreme Lord grant you the
wisdom to consider this union.  By obtaining this connection, he will be
fulfilled."  **16.**  Having been convinced by the minister's words, Ravana,
with wisdom, decided to accept him as his son-in-law.  He then arranged all the
necessary preparations for the wedding.  **17.**  The wedding ceremony was
filled with joy and happiness, as all the necessary causes for the union were
effortlessly fulfilled.  **18.**  Just as the spring season, adorned with
countless, captivating flowers, brings joy and fragrance to the world, so too
did Madhu, the prince, find immense happiness upon obtaining the beautiful and
captivating Kritachitra.  **19.**  Driven by curiosity, King Shrenik, with
utmost respect, asked Gautama Swami, "O great sage, why did the Asura king give
the rare Shula Ratna to Madhu?"  **20.**  Upon hearing this, Gautama Swami,
blessed with immense power and devotion to Dharma, explained the reason for the
Shula Ratna's acquisition.  **21.**  He said, "In the city of Shatadvara,
located in the Airavata region of the Dhataki island, there lived two friends
bound by a bond of love."  **22.**  "One was named Sumitra, and the other,
Prabhava.  Both were highly learned, having studied under the same teacher."
**23.**  "Due to the influence of his past virtuous deeds, Sumitra gained a
kingdom served by all his vassals and enjoyed the highest prosperity."  **24.**
"Although Prabhava, due to the effects of his past misdeeds, was born into a
poor family, Sumitra, out of great affection, made him a king as well."  **25.**
"One day, a wicked horse carried Sumitra away to the forest.  There, he was seen
by a savage, wild Mlechchha king named Dvirada-damshthra."  **26.**  "The
Mlechchha king brought Sumitra to his city and, at an opportune moment, forced
him to marry his daughter."  **27.**  "The lost hand returns to the owner."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 270 paMcapurANe kriyayaiva ca devo'sya guNAn jJAsyati vAcirAt  /  vAcA hi
prakaTIkArasteSAM hAsyasya kAraNam  // 14 //  tadasya yuktaye buddhiM karotu
paramezvaraH  /  saMbandhaM bhavato labdhvA kRtArtho'yaM bhaviSyati  // 15 //
ityukte nizcito buddhayA jAmAtAsau nirUpitaH  /  samastaM ca yathAyogyaM 'kRtyaM
tasya prakalpitam  // 16 //  cintitaprAptaniHzeSakAraNazca tayorabhUt  /
vivAhavidhiratyantaprItalokasamAkulaH  // 17 //  puSpalakSmImiva prApya
durAkhyAnAM samAgataH  /  AmodaM jagato hRdyaM madhustAM netrahAriNIm  // 18 //
indrabhUtimihoddeze pratyutpannakutUhalaH  /  apRcchanmagadhAdhIzaH
kRtvAminavamAdaram  // 19 //  asurANAmadhIzena madhave kena hetunA  /
zUlaratnaM munizreSTha ! dattaM durlabhasaMgamam  // 20 //  ityuktaH puruNA
yuktastejasA dharmavatsalaH  /  zUlaratnasya saMprApteH kAraNaM gautamo'vadat
// 21 //  dhAtakIlakSmaNi dvIpe kSetre cairAvatazrutau  /  zatadvArapure'bhUtAM
mitre supremabandhane  // 22 //  ekaH sumitranAmAsIdaparaH pramavazrutiH  /
upAdhyAyakule caitau jAtAvativicakSaNau  // 23 //  sumitrasyAbhavad rAjyaM
sarvasAmantasevitam  /  puNyopArjitasatkarmaprabhAvAt paramodayam  // 24 //
daridrakulasaMbhUtaH karmamirduSkRtaH purA  /  sumitreNa mahAsnehAprabhavo'pi
kRtaH prabhuH  // 25 //  sumitro'thAnyadAraNye hRto duSTena vAjinA  /  dRSTo
dviradadaMSTreNa mlecchena svairacAriNA  // 26 //  AnIyAsau tataH pallIM
saMprApya samayaM dRDham  /  patyA mlecchavarUthinyAstanayAM pariNAyitaH  // 27
//  naSTa kara hAthameM vApasa lauTa AtA hai  /  / 13 /  /  athavA Apa kAryake
dvArA hI zIghra isake guNa jAnane lgeNge| vacanoMke dvArA unakA prakaTa karanA
hAsyakA kAraNa hai  // 14 //  isalie Apa isake sAtha putrIkA sambandha karanekA
vicAra kiijie| ApakA sambandha pAkara yaha kRtakRtya ho jAyegA  // 15 //
mantrIke aisA kahanepara rAvaNane use buddhipUrvaka apanA jAmAtA nizcita kara
liyA aura jAmAtAke yathAyogya saba kArya kara diye  // 16 //  icchA karate hI
jisake samasta kAraNa anAyAsa mila gaye the aisA una donoMkA vivAha atyanta
prasanna logoMse vyApta thA arthAt unake vivAhotsava meM prItise bhare aneka
loka Aye the ||17|mdhu nAma usa rAjakumArakA thA aura vasantaRtukA bhii| isI
prakAra AmodakA artha sugandhi hai aura harSa bhI  /  so jisa prakAra vasantaRtu
netroMko haraNa karane vAlI akathanIya puSpasampadAko pAkara jagatpriya
sugandhiko prApta hotI hai usI prakAra rAjakumAra madhu bhI netroMko haraNa
karanevAlI kRtacitrAko pAkara parama harSako prApta huA thA  // 18 //  isI
avasarapara jise kutUhala utpanna huA thA aise rAjA zreNikane phirase namaskAra
kara gautama svAmIse pUchA  /  / 19 /  /  ki he munizreSTha ! asurendrane
madhuke lie durlabha zUlaratna kisa kAraNa diyA thA ?  // 20 //  zreNikake aisA
kahanepara vizAla tejase yukta tathA dharmase sneha rakhanevAle gautama svAmI
zUlaratnakI prAptikA kAraNa kahane lage  // 21 //  unhoMne kahA ki dhAtakIkhaNDa
dvIpake airAvatakSetra sambandhI zatadvAra nAmaka nagarameM prItirUpI bandhanase
ba~dhe do mitra rahate the||22|| unameM se ekakA nAma sumitra thA aura dUsarekA
nAma prabhava  /  so ye donoM eka guruko caTazAlAmeM par3hakara bar3e vidvAn hue
// 23 //  kaI eka dinameM puNyopArjita satkarmake prabhAvase sumitrako sarva
sAmantoMse sevita tathA parama abhyudayase yukta rAjya prApta huaa||24|| yadyapi
prabhava pUrvopArjita pApakarmake udayase daridra kulameM utpanna huA thA
tathApi mahAsnehake kAraNa sumitrane use bhI rAjA banA diyA  // 25 //  _
athAnantara eka dina eka duSTa ghor3A rAjA sumitrako harakara jaMgalameM le gayA
so vahA~ apanI icchAse bhramaNa karanevAle dviradadaMSTra nAma mlecchoMke rAjAne
use dekhA  // 26 //  dvirada1. kRtAntasya m.| 2. durAkhyAnAM b.| dUrAnmAnaM
samAgataH ka., kh.| 3. dusskulai-m.| 4. palli ka., ba., ma.  /  5. -virUthinyA
ma.  /  :

Page #321 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Chapter  271  Having obtained that maiden, who was like the very
embodiment of forest prosperity, and who was known as Vanamala, King Sumitra
stayed there for a month.   28  Then, having been granted permission by the
Dvirada-Danstra (the two-tusked one), he set out for the city of Shatadvara,
accompanied by his beloved and surrounded by the Shabara army.  29  Meanwhile,
Prabhava had set out in search of his friend, and he saw him, accompanied by his
beloved, who was like the flag of Kamadeva (the god of love).  30  Prabhava,
whose mind had been rendered devoid of all sense of right and wrong by the rise
of evil deeds, developed a desire for his friend's wife.  31  Tormented on all
sides by the sharp arrows of Kamadeva, his mind was greatly agitated, and he
found no solace anywhere.  32  Kamadeva, the destroyer of the mind, is the
greatest of all diseases, for it does not destroy the body of men, but it causes
them to suffer.  33  Just as the sun is the chief of all luminaries, so is
Kamadeva the chief of all diseases.  34  When his friend asked him, "Why are you
so restless?" he replied, "Seeing the beautiful woman is the cause of my
restlessness."  35  Hearing that his friend, who was dearer to him than life,
was suffering because of his wife, the wise and affectionate Sumitra quickly
sent her to Prabhava's house.  36  Then, hiding himself in a window, he watched
to see what Vanamala would do.  37  He thought to himself, "If this Vanamala
does not favor him, then I will surely punish her."  38  "And if she favors him
and fulfills his desire, then I will worship this beautiful woman with a
thousand villages."  39  When the evening arrived and the sky was adorned with
clusters of stars, Vanamala approached Prabhava with great eagerness.  40
Sumitra seated Vanamala on a beautiful seat and sat opposite her, his heart
pure. Then, with great respect, he asked her, "O noble lady, who are you?"  41
Vanamala then recounted the entire story of her life, from her birth to her
marriage.   42  Having heard this, Prabhava was filled with shame and went to
the Dvirada-Danstra.   The Dvirada-Danstra took him to his village (the
settlement of the Bhils) and, after making a firm agreement, gave his daughter,
Vanamala, in marriage to King Sumitra.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazaM parva 271 tAM ca kanyAM samAsAdya sAkSAdiva vanazriyam  /
vanamAlAzrutiM tatra sthito'sau bhAsamAtrakam  // 28 //  anujJAtastatastena
zatadvArapurottamam  /  prasthitaH kAntayA sAkaM vRtaH zabarasenayA  // 29 //
gaveSaNe viniSkrAntaH prabhavo'tha tadaikSata  /  kAntayA sahitaM mitraM
smarasyeva patAkayA  // 30 //  cakre ca mitrabhAryAyAM mAnasaM pApakarmaNaH  /
udayAnnaSTaniHzeSakRtyAkRtyavicetanaH  // 31 //  manobhavazarairuGgastADyamAnaH
samantataH  /  avApa na kvacitsaukhyaM manasA bhRzamAkulaH  // 32 //  jyeSTho
vyAdhisahasrANAM madano matisUdanaH  /  yena saMprApyate duHkhaM
narairakSatavigrahaH  // 33 //  pradhAnaM divasAdhIzaH sarveSAM jyotiSAM yayA  /
tathA samastarogANAM madano mUni vartate  // 34 // . vicitto'si
kimityevamityuktaH suhRdA ca sH| jagAda sundarIM dRSTvA viklavasvasya kAraNam
// 35 /  /  zrutvA prANasamasyAsya duHkhaM svastrInimittakam  /  tAmAzuprAhiNot
prAjJaH sumitro mitravatsalaH  // 36 //  prekSya ca prabhavAgAraM gavAkSe
gUDhavigrahaH  /  sa tAmaikSata kiM kuryAdiyamasyeti tatparaH  // 37 //
acintayacca yoSA bhavennAsyAnakalikA  /  tato nigrahametasyAH kartAsmi
suvinizcitam  // 38 //  arthatasyAzravo bhUtvA kAmaM saMpAdayiSyati  /  tato
grAmasahasreNa pUjayiSyAmi sundarIm  // 39 /  /  samIpaM prabhavasyApi vanamAlA
ca sotsukA  /  pradoSasamaye spaSTe tArAprakaramaNDite  // 40 //  AsInAM cAsane
ramye purodoSavivarjitaH  /  tAmapRcchadaho madre kA tvmityutkttaadrH||41|| tato
vivAhaparyantaM tasyAH zrutvA viceSTitam  /  prabhavo niSNamo jAto nivedaM ca
gataH param  // 42 //  daMSTra use apanI pallI (bhIloMkI bastI) meM le gayA aura
eka pakkI zarta kara usane apanI putrI rAjA sumitrako vivAha dI  // 27 //  jo
sAkSAt vanalakSmIke samAna jAna par3atI thI aisI vanamAlA nAmA kanyAko pAkara
rAjA sumitra vahA~ eka mAha taka rahA  // 28 //  tadanantara dviradadaMSTrako
AjJA lekara vaha apanI kAntAke sAtha zatadvAra nagarakI ora vApasa A rahA thaa|
bhIloMkI senA usake sAtha thI  // 29 //  idhara prabhava apane mitrakI khojake
lie nikalA thA so usane kAmadevakI patAkAke samAna suzobhita kAntAse sahita
mitrako dekhA  // 30 //  pApakarmake udayase jisake samasta karane aura na
karane yogya kAryoMkA vicAra naSTa ho gayA thA aise prabhavane mitrakI strImeM
apanA mana kiyA  /  / 31 //  saba orase kAmake tIkSNa bANoMse tAr3ita honeke
kAraNa usakA mana atyanta vyAkula ho rahA thA isalie vaha kahIM bhI sukha nahIM
pA rahA thA  // 32 /  /  buddhiko naSTa karanevAlA kAma hajAroM bImAriyoMmeM
sabase bar3I bImArI hai kyoMki usase manuSyoMkA zarIra to naSTa hotA nahIM hai
para ve duHkha pAte rahate haiM  // 33 //  jisa prakAra sUrya samasta
jyotiSiyoMmeM pradhAna hai usI prakAra kAma samasta rogoMmeM pradhAna hai||34||
'becaina kyoM ho rahe ho 'isa taraha jaba mitrane becainIkA kAraNa pUchA taba
usane sundarIko dekhanA hI apanI becainIkA kAraNa kahA  // 35|| mitravatsala
sumitrane jaba sunA ki mere prANatulya mitrako jo duHkha ho rahA hai usameM merI
strI hI nimitta hai taba usa buddhimAnne use prabhavake ghara bheja diyA aura
Apa jharokhemeM chipakara dekhane lagA ki dekheM yaha vanamAlA isakA kyA karatI
hai  // 36-37 //  sAtha hI vaha yaha bhI socatA jAtA thA ki yadi yaha vanamAlA
isake anukUla nahIM huI to maiM nizcita hI isakA nigraha karU~gA arthAt ise
daNDa dUMgA  // 38 /  /  aura yadi anukUla hokara isakA manoratha pUrNa karegI
to hajAra grAma dekara isa sundarIkI pUjA karU~gA  // 39 //  tadanantara jaba
rAtrikA prArambha ho gayA aura AkAzameM tArAoMke samUha chiTaka gaye taba
vanamAlA bar3I utkaNThAke sAtha prabhakke samIpa pahu~cI  // 40 //  vanamAlAko
usane sundara Asanapara baiThAyA aura svayaM nirdoSa bhAvase usake sAmane baiTha
gyaa| tadanantara usane bar3e Adarake sAtha usase pUchA ki he bhadre ! tU kauna
hai ? ||41 /  /  vanamAlAne vivAha takakA saba samAcAra 1. satI maikSata ma.  /
2. vazaMvadA AjJAkAriNIti yAvat  /  3. spRSTe ma., kha.  /  .

Page #322 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
272 "Oh, how wretched I am! I have desired my friend's wife. What a disgrace for
me, this senseless being!" ||43|| "Except by self-destruction, I cannot be freed
from this sin. What use is this life stained with such a blemish?" ||44|| Thus
pondering, he drew his sword from its sheath, its dense shadow obscuring the
space between the directions. ||45|| He brought the sword near his throat, but
his friend, Sumitra, quickly intervened. ||46|| Embracing his friend, he spoke
in a voice filled with concern, "You are wise, do you not know the sin of self-
destruction?" ||47|| "Those who destroy their bodies untimely suffer for a long
time in the womb, unable to be born." ||48|| Saying this, Sumitra took the sword
from his friend's hand and destroyed it, then consoled him with soothing words
for a long time. ||49|| The Acharya says, "The mutual affection of these two
friends, bound by their virtues, will reach its end. This shows that the world
is impermanent." ||50|| Beings, bound by their own karma, attain different
paths, some leading to happiness, others to sorrow. Who is a friend to whom in
this world? ||51|| Later, Sumitra, whose soul was enlightened, embraced the life
of a Shraman and eventually became the lord of the Aishana heaven. ||52|| After
falling from there, he was born in Mathura, on the island of Jambudvipa, as the
son of King Harivahana and Queen Madhavi. He was named Madhu, as he was as
captivating as honey and shone like the moon in the sky of the Harivaá¹Åa.
||53-54|| The Mithyadá¹á¹£á¹­i Prabhava, after dying, suffered in a hellish realm and
was reborn as the son of Jyotishmati, named ShikhisruÈi. ||55|| He became a
Shraman, a DravyalingÄ«, and through intense penance, became the lord of the
Asuras, known as Chamarendra. ||56|| Then, remembering his past lives through
his knowledge of the future, he recalled the virtues of his friend Sumitra and
kept them pure in his mind. ||57||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 272 papurANe acintayacca hA kaSTaM mayA mitrasya kAminI  /  kimapi prArthitA
katuM ghilmAmucchinacetanam  // 43 //  pApAdasmAna mucye'hamRte svasya vipAdanAt
/  kiM vA kalaGkayuktena jIvitena mamAdhunA  // 44 //  iti saMcintya mardhA svaM
lalUSyaM cakarSa sH| kozataH sAyakaM sAndracchAyAdigdhadigantaram  // 45 //
upakaNThaM ca kaNThasya yAvaMdenaM cakAra saH  /  nipatya sahasA tAvatsumitreNa
nyarudhyate  // 46 //  jagAda ca svarAyuktaM pariSvajya sa taM suhRd  /
AtmaghAtitayA doSa prAjJaH kiM nAma budhyase  // 47 //  "AmagarmeSu duHkhAni
prApnuvanti ciraM janAH  /  ye zarIrasya kurvanti svasyAvidhinipAtanam  /  / 48
//  ityuktvA suhRdaH khaDgaM karAnAiya' sucetasA  /  sAnvitazca ciraM
vAkyairmanoharaNakAribhiH  // 49 //  IdazI ca tayoH prItiranyo'nyaguNayojitA  /
prApsyatyantamaho kaSTaH saMsAraH sArava jitaH  // 50 //  pRthaka-pRthaka
prapadyante sukhadu:khakarI gatim  /  jIvAH svakarmasaMpajJAH ko'tra kasya
suhRjanaH  // 51 //  anyadAtha vibuddhAtmA zramaNasvaM samAzritaH  /  IzAnakalpa
IzatvaM sumitraH prAptavAn sukhI  // 52 //  tatazcyutveha saMbhUto dvIpe
jambUpadAntike  /  harivAhanarAjasya mathurAyAM suraH puri  // 53 //
mAdhavyAstanayo nAmnA madhuH sa madhumohitaH  /  namaso harivaMzasya
yazcandrasvamupAgataH  // 5 //  mithyAdRk prabhavo mRtvA duHkhamAsAdya durgatau
/  vizvAvasArabhUt putro jyotiSmatyAM zikhizrutiH  // 55 /  /  zramaNatvadharaH
kRtvA tapaH kaSTaM nidAnataH  /  daityAnAmadhipo jAtazcamarAkhyo'bhamAmaraH  //
56 //  tato'vadhikRtAlokaH smRtvA pUrvamavAn nijAn  /  guNAn sumitramitrasya
cakre manasi nirmalAn  // 57 //  kaha sunaayaa| use sunakara prabhava prabhAhIna
ho gayA aura parama nirvedako prApta huA  // 42 //  vaha vicAra karane lagA ki
hAya-hAya bar3e kaSTakI bAta hai ki maiMne mitrakI strIse kucha to bhI karanekI
icchA kii| mujha avivekIke lie dhikkAra hai  // 43 //  AtmaghAtake sivAya anya
taraha maiM isa pApase mukta nahIM ho sktaa| athavA mujhe aba isa kalaMkI
jIvanase prayojana hI kyA hai ?  // 44 //  aisA vicArakara usane apanA mastaka
kATaneke lie myAnase talavAra khiiNcii| usakI vaha talavAra apanI saghana
kAntise dizAoMke antarAlako vyApta kara rahI thI  // 45 //  vaha isa talavArako
kaNThake pAsa le hI gayA thA ki sumitrane sahasA lapakakara use roka diyA  // 46
//  sumitrane zIghratAse mitrakA AliMgana kara kahA ki tuma to paNDita ho,
AtmaghAtase jo doSa hotA hai use kyA nahIM jAnate ho ? ||47|| jo manuSya apane
zarIrakA avidhise ghAta karate haiM ve cirakAla taka kacce garbha meM dukha
prApta karate haiM arthAt garbha pUrNa hue binA hI asamaya meM mara jAte haiM
// 48 //  aisA kahakara usane mitrake hAthase talavAra chInakara naSTa kara dI
aura cirakAla taka use manohArI vacanoMse samajhAyA  // 49 //  AcArya kahate
haiM ki parasparake guNoMse sambandha rakhanevAlI una donoM mitroMkI prIti isa
taraha antako prApta hogI isase jAna par3atA hai ki yaha saMsAra asAra hai  /  /
50|| apane-apane karmose yukta jIva sukha-duHkha utpanna karanevAlI pRthak-
pRthak gatiko prApta hote haiM isalie isa saMsArameM kauna kisakA mitra hai ?
// 51 //  tadanantara jisakI AtmA prabuddha thI aisA rAjA sumitra muni dIkSA
dhAraNa kara antameM aizAna svargakA adhipati ho gayA  // 52 //  vahA~se cyuta
hokara jambUdvIpakI mathurA nagarImeM rAjA harivAhanakI mAdhavI rAnIse madhu
nAmakA putra huaa| yaha putra madhuke samAna moha utpanna karanevAlA thA aura
harivaMzarUpI AkAzameM candramAke samAna suzobhita thA  // 53-54 /  /
mithyAdRSTi prabhava marakara durgatimeM duHkha bhogatA rahA aura antameM
vizvAvasukI jyotiSmatI strIke zikhI nAmA putra huA  // 55|| so dravyaliMgI muni
ho mahAtapa kara nidAnake prabhAvase asuroMkA adhipati camarendra huA  // 56 //
tadanantara avadhijJAnake dvArA apane pUrva bhavoMkA smaraNa kara sumitra 1.
mAraNAt  /  2. khaDgam  /  3. nirudhyate m.| 4. doSaH m.| 5. aparipUrNagarbheSu
/  6. karAttasya ma.  /  7. mathurAyAmurau puri ka., kha.  /  8. zravaNatva -ma.
/

Page #323 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Twelve  **273** Remembering the excellent character of Sumitra Raja,
his heart became like a broken leaf. **58**  He thought, "Sumitra was a good and
virtuous man. He was my best friend, my helper in all matters." **59**  "We
studied together at the Guru's house. I was born into a poor family, but he made
me equal to him." **60**  "My wife, with a heart free from hatred, was sent to
me by that compassionate one, free from desire, because sin had entered my
mind." **61**  "Knowing that she was the wife of my friend, I was filled with
extreme anxiety and was about to cut off my head with a sword, but he protected
me." **62**  "Without faith in the Jina's teachings, I died and went to hell,
experiencing such suffering that even remembering it is unbearable." **63**
"The consequences of my actions, the condemnation of the virtuous group who
follow the path of liberation, I have received in the form of suffering in many
births." **64**  "And he, Sumitra, having lived a pure life, enjoyed supreme
happiness in the heaven of Aishana. Now he has fallen from there and become
Madhu." **65**  "Attracted by the kindness of his friend, Madhu, whose heart was
filled with love, came out of his palace." **66**  "With great respect, he
worshipped his friend with precious jewels and gave him a spear-jewel called
Sahasrantaka." **67**  "Madhu, the son of Harivahana, received the spear-jewel
and was filled with great joy on earth. He became the master of the art of
weapons." **68**  "Whoever reads or hears this story of Madhu will attain great
brilliance, wealth, and long life." **69**  "Then, followed by many vassals,
Ravana, who destroyed the world, spread his influence, subduing his enemies and
creating many wonders, filled with love." **70**  "He spent eighteen years,
creating wonders in the world, just like Indra in the heavens." **71**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazaM parva 273 sumitrarAjacaritaM smaryamANaM supezalam  /  asurendrasya
hRdayaM cakartta karapatravat  // 58 //  dadhyau ceti punarmadaH samitro'sau
mahAguNaH  /  AsInmama mahAmitraH sahAyaH sarvavastuSu  // 59 //  tena sAdhaM
mayA vidyA gRhItA guruvezmani  /  daridrakulasaMbhUtastenAhaM svasamaH kRtaH  //
60 //  AtmIyA tena meM patnI dveSavarjitacetasA  /  preSitA pApacittasya
vitRSNena dayAvatA  // 6 //  jJAtvA vayasyapatnIti paramudvegamAgataH  /  ziraH
svamasinA chindastenAhaM parirakSitaH  // 62 //  azraddhajjinendrANAM zAsanaM
paJcatAM gataH  /  prApto'smi durgatI duHkhaM smaraNenApi duHsaham  // 63 //
nindanaM sAdhuvargasya siddhimArgAnuvartinaH  /  yatkRtaM tasya tatprAptaM
phalaM duHkhAsu yoniSu  // 6 //  sa cApi caritaM kRtvA nirmalaM sukhamuttamam  /
aizAnanilaye bhuktvA cyuto'yaM vartate madhuH  // 65 //
upakArasamAkRSTastato'sau mavanAzijAt  /  nirjagAma kSaNodbhutaparapremAmAnasaH
// 66 //  dRSTvAdareNa kRtvA ca mahAratnAdipUjanam  /  zUlaratnaM dadAvasmai
sahasrAntakasaMjJitam  // 67 //  zalaratnaM sa tatprApya parAM prItiM gataH
kSitau  /  astravidyAdhirAjazca siMhavAhanajo'bhavat  // 68 //
etanmadhorupAkhyAnamadhIte yaH zRNoti vA  /  dIptimathaM paraM cAyuH
so'dhigacchati mAnavaH  // 69 //  sAmantAnugato'thAsau marutvamakhanAzakRt  /
prabhAva prathayalloke pravaNIkRtavidviSam  // 7 //  saMvatsarAn dazASTau ca
viharaJjanitAdbhutam  /  bhuvane janitapremNi devendrastridive yathA  // 71 //
nAmaka mitrake nirmala guNoMkA hRdayameM cintavana karane lagA  // 57 /  /  jyoM
hI use sumitra rAjAke manohara caritrakA smaraNa AyA tyoMhI vaha karoMtake
samAna usake hRdayako vidIrNa karane lagA  // 58 //  vaha vicAra karane lagA ki
sumitra bar3A hI bhalA aura mahAguNavAn thaa| vaha samasta kAryoM meM sahAyatA
karanevAlA merA parama mitra thA  /  / 59|| usane mere sAtha guruke ghara vidyA
par3hI thii| maiM daridrakula meM utpanna huA thA so usane mujhe apane samAna
dhanavAn banA liyA thA  // 60 //  mere cittameM pApa samAyA so dveSarahita
cittake dhAraka usa dayAlune tRSNArahita hokara mere pAsa apanI strI bhejI  //
61 //  'yaha mitrakI strI hai' aisA jAnakara jaba maiM parama udvegako prApta
hotA huA talavArase apanA zira kATaneke lie udyata huA to usIne merI rakSA kI
thI  // 62 /  /  maiMne jinazAsanako zraddhA binA marakara durgatimeM aise
duHkha bhoge ki jinakA smaraNa karanA bhI duHsaha hai  // 63 /  /  maiMne
mokSamArgakA anuvartana karanevAle sAdhuoMke samUhakI jo nindA kI thI usakA
phala aneka duHkhadAyI yoniyoM meM prApta kiyA  // 64 //  aura vaha sumitra
nirmala cAritrakA pAlana kara aizAna svarga meM uttama sukhakA upabhoga
karanevAlA indra huA tathA aba vahA~se cyuta hokara madhu huA hai  // 65 //  isa
prakAra kSaNabharameM utpanna hue parama premase jisakA ana Ardra ho rahA thA
aisA camarendra sumitra mitrake upakAroMse AkRSTa ho apane bhavanase bAhara
nikalA  // 66 //  usane bar3e Adarake sAtha milakara mahAratnoMse mitrakA pUjana
kiyA aura usake lie sahasrAntaka nAmaka zUlaratna bheTameM diyA  // 67 //
harivAhanakA putra madhu camarendrase zUlaratna pAkara pRthivIpara parama
prItiko prApta huA aura astravidyAkA svAmI kahalAne lagA  // 68 //  gautama
svAmI rAjA zreNika se kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! jo manuSya madhuke isa caritrako
par3hatA athavA sunatA hai vaha vizAla dIpti, zreSTha dhana aura utkRSTa Ayuko
prApta hotA hai  // 69 //  athAnantara aneka sAmanta jisake pIche-pIche cala
rahe the aisA rAvaNa lokameM zatruoMko vazIbhUta karanevAlA apanA prabhAva
phailAtA aura aneka Azcarya utpanna karatA huA premase bhare 1. ciccheda  /  2.
madartham  /  3. zrutvA m.| 4. bhuvanAnni-ma.  /  5. mahAratnAtipUjanam m.| 6.
sahasrAMzaka kha.  /  sahasrAntika ma.  /  7. rAvaNaH  /  8. pralayaM ma.  /  35

Page #324 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, The lord of the earth, leaving the ocean, reached the
eight-peaked Kailasa mountain, adorned with Jina temples, after a long time. ||
72 || There, the Mandakini river, with its clear waters, was adorned with golden
lotus pollen, the queen of the lord of the Sindhu. || 73 || Having stationed his
army nearby, he engaged in delightful pastimes in the caves of Kailasa. || 74 ||
The celestial beings, then the earth-dwellers, in turn, relieved their weariness
in the clear, comfortable, crystal-like waters of the Mandakini. || 75 || The
horses, having their dust removed by the new leaves of the Meru tree, and having
been given water, stood in humility, having been bathed. || 76 || The elephants,
their bodies wet with water spray, having accumulated thick dust, and having had
their great weariness removed by the river, were bathed for a long time by their
keepers. || 77 || Remembering the story of the young girl, Ravana bowed
respectfully to all the Jina temples and performed actions in accordance with
Dharma. || 78 || Then, Indra had appointed Nalakubara as the guardian of the
city called Durlagha, and when he learned from his spies that Ravana, with his
army like a sea, was approaching with the desire to conquer, he, with a fearful
mind, wrote a letter with all the news and sent it to Indra by a swift celestial
being. || 79-81 || When Indra was going to the Meru mountain to worship the Jina
images, the letter-carrier celestial being, bowing, placed Nalakubara's letter
before him. || 82 || Having read the letter and understanding its meaning
completely, Indra, by means of a letter, commanded, "You must remain here with
great effort. You are the holder of the infallible weapon, until I return after
worshipping the Jinas in the Panduka forest." || 83-84 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe muJcannArAtsamudrasya dharaNIM dharaNIpatiH  /  cireNa
jinacaisyADhyaM prApASTApadabhUdharam  //  72  //  prasannasalilA tatra mAti
mandAkinI bhRzam  /  mahiSI sindhunAthasya kanakAbjarajastatA  // 73 //
sannivezya samIpe'syA vAhinIM paramApa tAm  /  manojJaM ramaNaM cakre kailAsasya
sa kukSiSu  // 74 //  nunuduH khecarAH khedaM bhUcarAzca yathAkramam  /
mandAkinyAH sukhasparzasalile sphaTikAmale  //  75  //  na
merupallavApAstaloThanopAttapAMzavaH  /  snapitAH saptayaH pItapayaso
"vinayasthitAH  // 76 //  zIkarArdvitadehatvAd grAhitAH sudhanaM rajaH  /
taTinyastamahAkhedAH snapitAH kuJjarAzciram  // 77 //  smRtvAnu bAlivRttAntaM
namaskRta jinAlayaH  /  yamadhvaMsaH sthitaH kurvazceSTAM dharmAnugAminIm  // 78
//  atha yo'sau surendreNa niyukto nalakUbaraH  /  lokapAlatayA khyAtaH pure
durlaGyasaMjJake  // 79 //  upazalyaM sa vijJAya rAvaNaM caravargataH  /
jigISayA samAyAtaM sainyasAgaravartinam  // 80 //  lekhAropitavRttAntaM
prAhiNodAzugAminam  /  khecaraM suranAthAya nAsAdhyAsitamAnasaH  //  81  //
'mandaraM prasthitAyAsmai vandituM jinapuGgavAn  /  praNamya lekhavAhena
lekho'vasthApitaH puraH  //  82  //  vAcayitvA ca taM kRtvA hRdaye'rthamazeSataH
/  AjJApayat surAdhIzo 'vastvidaM lekhadAnataH  //  83 //  yatnAttAvadihAssva
tvamamoghAsya pAlakaH  /  jinAnAM pANDuke kRtvA vandanAM yAvademyaham  //  84
//  7 10 274 saMsAra meM aThAraha varSa taka isa prakAra bhramaNa karatA rahA
jisa prakAra ki indra svarga meM bhramaNa karatA hai  /  / 70-71 /  /
tadanantara rAvaNa krama-kramase samudrako nikaTavartinI bhUmiko chor3atA huA
cirakAla ke bAda jinamandiroMse yukta kailAsa parvatapara pahu~cA ||72 || vahA~
svaccha jalase bharI samudrakI patnI evaM suvarNa kamaloMkI parAgase vyApta
gaMgAnadI atyadhika suzobhita ho rahI thI ||73 || so usake samIpa hI apanI
vizAla senA ThaharAkara kailAsakI kandarAoM meM manohara krIr3A karane lagA  //
74 //  pahale vidyAdhara aura phira bhUmigocarI manuSyoMne yathAkramase gaMgA
nadIke sphaTikake samAna svaccha sukhakara sparzaMvAle jalameM apanA kheda dUra
kiyA thA arthAt snAnakara apanI thakAvaTa dUra kI thI  /  / 75 //  pRthvIpara
loTaneke kAraNa lagI huI jinakI dhUli nameruvRkSake naye-naye pattoMse
jhAr3akara dUra kara dI gayI thI aura pAnI pilAneke bAda jinheM khUba nahalAyA
gayA thA aise ghor3e vinayase khar3e the  // 76 //  jalake chIMToMse gIlA zarIra
honeke kAraNa jinapara bahuta gAr3hI dhUli jamI huI thI tathA nadI dvArA jinakA
bar3A bhArI kheda dUra kara diyA gayA thA aise hAthiyoMko mahAvatoMne cirakAla
taka nahalAyA thA ||77|| kailAsapara Ate hI rAvaNako bAlikA vRttAnta smRta ho
uThA isalie usane samasta caityAlayoMko bar3I sAvadhAnI se namaskAra kiyA aura
dharmAnukUla kriyAoMkA AcaraNa kiyA || 78|| athAnantara indrane durlaghayapura
nAmA nagarameM nalakUbarako lokapAla banAkara sthApita kiyA thA so guptacaroMse
jaba use yaha mAlUma huA ki senA rUpI sAgarake madhya vartamAna rahanevAlA
rAvaNa jItane kI icchA se nikaTa hI A pahu~cA hai taba usane bhayabhotacitta
hokara patrameM saba samAcAra likha eka zIghragAmI vidyAdhara indrake pAsa
pahu~cAyA  // 72-81  /  so indra jisa samaya jina - pratimAoM kI vandanA
karaneke lie sumeru parvatapara jA rahA thA usI samaya patravAhaka
vidyAdharapraNAmakara nalakUbarakA patra usake sAmane rakha diyA  // 82 //
indrane patra bA~cakara tathA samasta arthaM hRdayameM dhAraNakara pratilekha
dvArA AjJA dI ki maiM jabataka pANDukavana meM sthita jina-prativandanA kara
vApasa AtA hU~ tabataka tuma bar3e yatnase rahanA  /  tuma amogha astra dhAraka
1. kailAsagirim  /  2. rajastathA ma.  /  3 pallavAyAsta ma  /  4. namitAH ma  /
5 vinayAsthitAH ma. 1 6. taTinyA nadyA asto mahAkhedo yeSAM te  /
tadanyastamahAbhedAH ka, kha  /  taTanyastamahAkhedA: va.  /  7. samIpaM  /  8.
merum  /  mandiraM ma., ba.  /  9. vAstvidaM ma  /  10. iha + Assva  /  dihAsva
ma.  /  dihasya ba.  /

Page #325 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Twelve 275  Thus, having given this message, Indra, his mind filled
with devotion to worship, went to the Pandu forest, not taking the enemy army
seriously. ||85||  Meanwhile, Nalakubara, ever-ready to act according to the
situation, along with all his trusted advisors, diligently planned the defense
of the city. ||86||  He had a fortress built, known as Vajrasala, a hundred
yojanas high, with a circumference three times its width, using the power of his
knowledge. ||87||  Knowing that the city was under the control of the enemy,
Ravana sent his commander, Prahasta, to collect tribute. ||88||  Returning to
Ravana, Prahasta said, "O Lord! The enemy city is surrounded by a very high
fortress, making it impossible to capture." ||89||  "Look, you can see the
terrifying fortress from here, extending in all directions. It is very high,
with deep moats, and its mouth resembles that of a fearsome dragon with sharp
fangs." ||90||  "It is filled with a multitude of flames, whose sparks are
difficult to look at, resembling a dense, burning forest of bamboo. ||91||
"There are huge machines, resembling fearsome Vetalas with sharp fangs, attached
to the fortress, which can capture many men within a yojana's distance." ||92||
"Those who fall into the mouths of these machines, their bodies will only
reunite in another birth." ||93||  "Knowing this, you should devise a skillful
strategy to capture the city. Only a farsighted person can truly be a
conqueror." ||94||  "It seems best to flee from this place quickly, as there is
a great and insurmountable danger here." ||95||  Then, the wise ministers of the
ten-headed Ravana, who resided in the caves of Kailasa, began to think of a
solution. ||96||  Meanwhile, Nalakubara's famous wife, Uparambha, whose beauty
and form were like that of the celestial nymph Rambha, heard that Ravana was
nearby. ||97||  She had been attracted to Ravana's qualities from the beginning,
and just as a cluster of moonflowers yearns for the moon, she went to him.
||98||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazaM parva 275 iti saMdizya garveNa senAmagaNayad dviSaH  /  gato'sau
pANDukodyAnaM vandanAsaktamAnasaH  // 85 //  samastAptasametazca
prayatnAnnalakUbaraH  /  purasyAcintayad rakSAmiti kartavyatatparaH  // 86 //
yojanAnAM zataM tuGgaH prAkAro vidyayA kRtH| vajrazAla iti khyAtaH
paridhistriguNAnvitaH  // 87 //  rAvaNena ca vijJAya nagaraM zatrugocaram  /
'gRhItaM preSito daNDa prhsto'niikiniiptiH||48|| nivRtya rAvaNAyAsAvAkhyadeva na
zakyate  /  gRhItuM tatpuraM tuGgaprAkArakRtaveSTanam  // 89 //  pazya dRzyata
evAyaM dikSu sarvAsu dAruNaH  /  zikharI vivarI daMSTrAkarAlAsyazayUpamaH  // 10
//  dahyamAnamivodAraM kIcakAnAM ghanaM vanam  /
sphuliGgarAziduSprekSyajvAlAjAlasamAkulam  // 9 //
daMSTrAkarAlavetAlarUpANyasya narAn bahUn  /  harantyudArayantrANi
yojanAbhyantarasthitAn  // 12 //  teSAM vaktrANi ye prAptA yantrANAM prANinAM
gaNAH  /  teSAM janmAntare bhUyaH zarIreNa samAgamaH  // 13 //  iti vijJAya
kartavyastvayA kuzalasaMgamaH  /  upAyo vijigISutvaM kriyate dIrghadarzinA  //
94 //  niHsarpaNamaraM tAvadasmAddezAd virAjate  /  saMzayaH paramo'pyatra
dRzyate duniraakRtH||15|| tataH kailAsakukSisthA dazavaktrasya mantriNaH  /
upAyaM cintayAJcakrurna yazAstravizAradAH  // 96 /  /  atha rambhAguNAkArA
nlkuubrkaaminii| uparambheti vikhyAtA zuzrAvAnte dazAnanam  // 97 /  /
pUrvameva guNa raktA tatrotkaNThAM parAmasau  /  jagAma rajanInAthe yathA
kumudasaMhatiH  // 98 //  ho  // 83-84 //  aisA sandeza dekara jisakA mana
vandanAmeM Asakta thA aisA indra garvavaza zatrukI senAko kucha nahIM ginatA huA
pANDukavana calA gayA  // 85 //  idhara samayAnusAra kArya karane meM tatpara
rahanevAle nalakUbarane samasta AptajanoMke sAtha milakara bar3e prayatnase
nagarakI rakSAkA upAya socA  // 86 //  usane sau yojana UMcA aura tigunI
paridhise yukta vajrazAla nAmA koTa, vidyAke prabhAvase nagarake cAroM ora
khar3A kara diyA  // 87|| yaha nagara zatruke adhIna hai aisA jAnakara rAvaNane
daNDa vasUla karaneke lie prahasta nAmA senApati bhejA  // 88 //  so usane
lauTakara rAvaNase kahA ki he deva ! zatrukA nagara bahuta U~ce prakArase ghirA
huA hai isalie vaha nahIM liyA jA sakatA hai  /  / 8 /  /  dekho vaha bhayaMkara
prAkAra yahA~ se hI samasta dizAoMmeM dikhAI de rahA hai| vaha bar3I U~cI
zikharoM aura gambhIra vilose yukta hai tathA jisakA mukha dA~DhoMse bhayaMkara
hai aise ajagarake samAna jAna par3atA hai  /  / 90 //  ur3ate hue tilagoMse
jinakI ora dekhanA bhI kaThina hai aisI jvAlAoMke samUhase vaha prAkAra bharA
huA hai tathA bA~soMke jalate hue kisI saghana bar3e vanake samAna dikhAI detA
hai  // 11 //  isa prAkArameM bhayaMkara dAr3hoMko dhAraNa karanevAle vetAloMke
samAna aise-aise vizAla yantra lage hue haiM jo eka yojanake bhItara rahanevAle
bahutase manuSyoMko eka sAtha pakar3a lete haiM  // 12 //  prANiyoMke jo samUha
una yantroMke mukhameM pahuMca jAte haiM phira usake zarIrakA samAgama dUsare
janmameM hI hotA hai  // 93 /  /  aisA jAnakara Apa nagara leneke lie koI kuzala
upAya socie  /  yathArthameM dIrghadarzI manuSyake dvArA hI vijigISupanA kiyA
jAtA hai arthAt jo dIrghadarzI hotA hai vahI vijigISu ho sakatA hai  /  / 14 /
/  isa sthAnase to zIghra hI nikala bhAganA zobhA detA hai kyoMki yahA~ para
jisakA nirAvaraNa nahIM kiyA jA sakatA aisA bahuta bhArI saMzaya vidyamAna hai
// 95 /  /  tadanantara kailAsakI guphAoM meM baiThe rAvaNake nItinipuNa mantrI
upAyakA vicAra karane lge||96|| athAnantara jisake guNa aura AkAra rambhA nAmaka
apsarAke samAna the aisI nalakUbarakI uparambhA nAmaka prasiddha strI ne sunA ki
rAvaNa samIpa hI Akara ThaharA huA hai  / 17 /  /  vaha rAvaNake guNoMse pahale
hI anurakta thI isalie jisa prakAra kUmadoMkI paMkti candramAke viSayameM 1.
gRhItaM preSito daNDaH prahasto nAkinIpatiH m.| 2. sthitaM m.| sthitA kh.| 3.
dazitA ma., zinA kha. b.| dazinaH j.| 4. zIghram  /

Page #326 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
276 In the Padma Purana, the friend named Vichitramala said in private, "Listen,
beautiful one, besides you, who else is a friend like my life?" 19 The word
"friend" is used for one who shares the same opinion, therefore, you are not
worthy of knowing my mind, O beautiful one. 10 Because you are skillful and
worthy of being worshipped, you will surely do what I ask. Therefore, I say that
friends are the greatest support of life. 10 Hearing this, she said, "Why do you
say so, Goddess? I am your servant, use me for whatever you desire." 10 I do not
praise myself, for it is condemned in the world. But I do say this, I am the
embodiment of Siddhi. 103 Speak freely, whatever is in your mind. You are
worrying in vain, for I am true. 104 Then, taking a long, slow breath, she
placed her hand, like a lotus, on her cheek, beautiful as the moon. 105 The
words that came out of her mouth were interrupted by shyness, so she encouraged
them again and again. Her mind was constantly rising and falling in boldness, so
she was struggling to keep it steady. 106 She said, "Friend, since childhood, my
mind has been on Ravana. Although I have heard of his beautiful qualities that
spread throughout the world, I could not meet him. But, on the contrary, due to
my bad luck, I have been united with Nalakuvara, and I constantly suffer from
the pain of unhappiness." 107-108 "O beautiful one, although I know this is not
praiseworthy, O speaker of good words, I am not able to bear death." 109 "He who
stole my heart, Ravana, is now nearby. Please be pleased, friend, and somehow
bring me together with him." 110 Saying, "I bow to your feet," she was about to
bow her head, but her friend stopped her due to her confusion. 111 She was
overcome with longing, just as she was overcome with longing for Ravana. 98

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 276 padmapurANe sakhI vicitramAlAkhyAmekAnte cetyabhASata  /  zRNu sundari
kA'styanyA sakhI prANasamA mama  // 19 //  samAnaM khyAti yenAtaH sakhizabdaH
pravartate  /  ato na me matabhedaM kartamarhasi zobhane  // 10 //  niyamAt
kuruSe yasmAddakSe maskAryasAdhanam  /  tato bravImi sakhyo hi jIvitAlambanaM
param  // 10 //  evamuktA jagAdAsau kimevaM devi bhASase  /  bhRtyAhaM
viniyoktavyA tvayA vAJchitakarmaNi  // 10 //  na karomi stutiM svasya sA hi
loke'tinindito  /  etAvannu bravImyeSA siddhirevAsmi rUpiNI  // 103 /  /  vada
vizrabdhikA bhUtvA yatte manasi vartate  /  mayi satyAM vRthA khedaH svAminyA
dhAryate tvayA  // 10 //  uparambhA tato'vAdInizvasyAyatamantharam  /  padmAbhe
candramAkAntaM kare nyasya kapolakam  /  / 105 /  /  niSkrAntastambhitAn varNAn
prerayantI punaH punH| ArUDhapatitaM dhAya kRcchAnidadhatI mnH||106|| sakhi
bAlyata Arabhya rAvaNe menmano gatam  /  lokAvatAyinastasya guNAH kAntA mayA
zrutAH  // 107 //  apragalbhatayA prAptA sAhamapriyasaMgamam  /  vahAmi
paramaprIteH pazcAttApamanAratam  // 10 //  jAnAmi ca tathA naitatprazasyamiti
rUpiNi  /  tathApi maraNaM soDhuM nAsmi zaktA subhASite  // 109 //  so'yamAsanna
dezastho vartate me manoharaH  /  kathaMcidamunA yogaM prasIda kuru me sakhi  //
110 //  eSA namAmi te pAdAvityuktA tAvadudyatA  /  ziro namayituM tAvatsakhyA
tatsaMbhramAddhetam  // 111 //  utkaNThAko prApta rahatI hai usI prakAra vaha
bhI rAvaNake viSayameM parama utkaNThAko prApta huI  // 98 //  usane ekAntameM
vicitramAlA nAmaka sakhIse kahA ki he sundari, sun| tujhe chor3akara merI prANa
tulya dUsarI sakhI kauna hai ?  // 99|| jo samAna bAta kahe vahIM sakhI zabda
pravRtta hotA hai arthAt samAna bAta kahanevAlI hI sakhI kahalAtI hai isalie he
zobhane ! tU merI manasAkA bheda karaneke yogya nahIM hai  // 100 /  /  he
cature ! tU avazya hI merA kArya siddha karatI hai isalie tujhase kahatI huuN|
yathArthameM sakhiyA~ hI jIvanakA bar3A Alambana haiM-sabase bar3A sahArA haiM
// 101 //  aisA kahanepara vicitramAlAne kahA ki he devi! Apa aisA kyoM kahatI
haiN| maiM to ApakI dAsI hU~, mujhe Apa icchita kAryameM lagAie  // 102 //  maiM
apanI prazaMsA nahIM karatI kyoMki lokameM use nindanIya batAyA hai para itanA
avazya kahatI hU~ ki maiM sAkSAt rUpadhAriNI siddhi ho hU~  // 103 //  jo kucha
tumhAre manameM ho use niHzaMka hokara kaho mere rahate Apa kheda vyartha ho
uThA rahI haiM  // 104 //  tadanantara uparambhA lambI aura dhImI sA~sa lekara
tathA kamala tulya hathelIpara candramAke samAna sundara kapola rakhakara kahane
lagI  /  / 105 //  jo akSara uparambhAke mukhase nikalate the ve lajjAke kAraNa
bIcabIca meM ruka jAte the ataH vaha unheM bAra-bAra prerita kara rahI thI-tathA
usakA mana dhRSTatAke Upara bAra-bAra car3hatA aura bAra-bAra giratA thA so use
vaha bar3e kaSTase dhaSTatAke Upara sthita kara rahI thii||106| usane kahA ki he
sakhi ! bAlya avasthAse hI merA mana rAvaNameM lagA huA hai  /  yadyapi maiMne
usake samasta lokameM phailanevAle manohara guNa sune haiM to bhI maiM usakA
samAgama prApta nahIM kara skii| kintu usake viparIta bhAgyakI mandatAse maiM
nalakUbarake sAtha apriya saMgamako prApta huI hU~ so aprItike kAraNa nirantara
bhArI pazcAttApako dhAraNa karatI rahatI huuN||107-108|| he rUpiNi ! yadyapi
maiM jAnatI hU~ ki yaha kArya prazaMsanIya nahIM hai tathApi he subhASite ! maiM
maraNa sahana karaneke lie bhI samartha nahIM hU~  // 109 /  /  mere manako
haraNa karanevAlA vaha rAvaNa isa samaya nikaTa hI sthita hai isalie he sakhi !
mujhapara prasanna ho aura isake sAtha kisI taraha merA samAgama karA  // 110 /
/  'yaha maiM tere caraNoMmeM namaskAra karatI hU~' itanA kahakara jyoMhI vaha
zira jhukAneke 1. kAstyanyasakhI kha., m.| 2. ninditAH ma.  /  3. nishcintaa| 4.
candravatsundaraM  /  5. me mano m.| 6. lokAvagAminaH ma.  /  lokavistAriNaH  /
7. param + apriiteH| paramaM prIteH kha., ba., ma... 8. namAyitaM m.| 9.
saMbhramAvRtam m.| .

Page #327 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Canto  **277**  The messenger, knowing all things, said, "O
mistress, I will fulfill your desire in an instant," and departed from the
house.  [112]  She, veiled in a fine garment like a rain-cloud, flew through the
sky and reached the abode of the lord of the Rakshasas in a moment. [113]  She
entered the inner apartments and informed the doorkeeper.  Having made her way
in, she sat down with humility on the seat given by Ravana. [114]  Then she
spoke, "O god, the entire world is filled with your faultless qualities.  It is
fitting that a man like you should be the cause of such an effect." [115]
"Because your generous wealth satisfies the supplicants on earth, I know that
you are devoted to the welfare of all." [116]  "I know that you, who have
assumed this form, will not violate my request.  Indeed, the wealth of people
like you is the cause of **paropkar** (benevolence)." [117]  "O lord, for a
moment, dismiss all your retinue and, with your attention focused, grant me your
favor." [118]  When all the retinue had been dismissed and there was complete
solitude, the messenger, who knew all things, told Ravana the whole story of the
past. [119]  Then, hearing the messenger's words, Ravana covered his ears with
both hands.  He shook his head for a long time and contracted his eyes. [120]
Ravana, who was devoted to good conduct, became troubled for a moment by the
thought of the desire of the woman. [121]  He smiled and said, "O lady, how
could such a thing, which brings about the union of sin, come to your mind?"
[122]  "You have spoken this, abandoning pride.  I am extremely poor in
fulfilling such a request.  What can I do?" [123]  "Whether she is a widow, or
accompanied by her husband, or a respectable woman, or even a courtesan endowed
with beauty, one should strive to avoid all women." [124]  "This act is contrary
both in this world and in the next.  What kind of man is he who is corrupted by
both worlds?" [125]  The friend, who had become eager, quickly caught her head
in the middle. [111]  **Notes:**  1. **Paropkar** is a Jain term meaning
"benevolence" or "doing good to others." 2. **Paramanayant** is a Sanskrit word
meaning "contracting" or "shrinking." 3. **Kulabalika** is a Sanskrit word
meaning "a respectable woman" or "a woman of good family."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazaM parva 277 varaM svAmini kAmaM te sAdhayAmi kSaNAditi  /  gaditvA
nirgatA gehAda dUtI jJAtAkhilasthitiH  // 112 //
sAmbhojImUtasaMkAzasUkSmavastrAvaguNThitA  /  khamutpatya kSaNAtprApa vasatiM
rakSasAM prabhoH  // 113 //  antaHpuraM praviSTA ca pratIhAryA niveditA  /
kRtvA pragatimAsInA datte savinayAsane  // 11 //  tato jagAda devasya bhuvanaM
sakalaM guNaiH  /  doSasaMgojjhitairvyAptaM yattadyuktaM tavedRzaH  // 115 //
udAro vibhavo yaste yAcakAMstarpayan bhuvi  /  kAraNenAmunA vedmi sarveSAM tvAM
hite sthitam  // 116 //  AkArasyAsya jAnAmi na te prArthanamaJjanam  /
bhUtirmavadvidhAnAM hi 'paropakRtikAraNam  // 117 //  sa
svamutsAritAzeSaparivargo vimo kSaNam  /  avadhAnasya dAnena prasAdaM
kartumarhasi  // 18 //  tathA kRte tataH karNe dazavaktrasya sA jagau  /
sakalaM pUrvavRttAntaM sarvavRttAntavedinI  // 119 //  tataH pidhAya pANibhyAM
zravaNau puruSottamaH  /  dhunvan zirazciraM cakSuHsaMkocaM paramAnayan  // 120
//  vicitravanitAvAJchAcintAkhinnamatiH kSaNam  /  babhUva kekasIsUnuH
sadAcAraparAyaNaH  // 121 //  jagAda ca smitaM kRtvA bhadre cetasi te katham  /
sthitamIdRgidaM vastu pApasaMgamakAraNam  // 122 //  Idaze yAcite'tyantaM
daridraH kiM karomyaham  /  abhimAna parityajya tathedamuditaM tvayA  // 123 //
vidhavA bhartRsaMyuktA pramadA kulbaalikaa| vezyA ca rUpayuktApi parihAryA
prayatnataH  // 124 //  virodhavadidaM karma paratreha ca janmani  /
lokadvayaparibhraSTaH kIdRzo vada mAnavaH  // 125 //  lie udyata huI tyoMho
sakhIne bar3I zIghratAse usakA zira bIcameM pakar3a liyA  // 111 //  'he svAminI
! maiM ApakA manoratha zIghra hI siddha karatI hU~' yaha kahakara saba sthitiko
jAnanevAlI dUtI gharase bAhara nikalI  // 112 /  /  sajala meghake samAna sUkSma
vastrakA ghUghaTa dhAraNa karanevAlI dUtI AkAzameM ur3akara kSaNa-bharameM
rAvaNake DeremeM jA pahuMcI  // 113 /  /  dvArapAlinIke dvArA sUcanA dekara vaha
antaHpurameM praviSTa huii| vahA~ praNAma kara, rAvaNake dvArA diye Asanapara
vinayase baiThI  // 114 //  tadanantara kahane lagI ki he deva ! Apake nirdoSa
guNoMse jo samasta saMsAra vyApta ho rahA hai vaha Apake samAna prabhAvaka
puruSake anurUpa hI hai  // 115 /  /  cUMki ApakA udAra vaibhava pRthivIpara
yAcakoMko santuSTa kara rahA hai isa kAraNa maiM jAnatI hU~ ki Apa sabakA hita
karanemeM tatpara haiM  // 116 /  /  maiM khUba samajhatI hU~ ki isa AkArako
dhAraNa karanevAle Apa merI prArthanAko bhaMga nahIM kreNge| yathArthameM Apa-
jaise logoMkI sampadA paropakArakA hI kAraNa hai  /  / 117 //  he vibho! Apa
kSaNa-bharake lie samasta parijanako dUra kara dIjie aura dhyAna dekara
mujhapara prasannatA kIjie  // 118 //  tadanantara jaba sarva parijana dUra kara
diye gaye aura bilakula ekAnta ho gayA taba saba vRttAnta jAnanevAlI dUtIne
rAvaNake kAnameM pahalekA saba samAcAra kahA  // 119 /  /  tadanantara dUtIkI
bAta suna rAvaNane donoM hAthoMse donoM kAna Dhaka liye| vaha cira kAla taka
sira hilAtA rahA aura netra sikor3atA rahA  // 120 //  sadAcArameM tatpara
rahanevAlA rAvaNa parastrIko vAMchA suna cintAse kSaNa-bharameM khinna citta ho
gayA  /  / 121 /  /  usane ha~sate hue kahA ki he bhadre ! pApakA saMgama
karAnevAlI yaha aisI bAta tumhAre mana Ayau hI kaise ?  // 122 /  /  tUne yaha
bAta abhimAna chor3akara kahI hai| aisI yAcanAke pUrNa karane meM maiM atyanta
daridra hU~, kyA karU~ ?  // 123 /  /  cAhe vidhavA ho, cAhe patise sahita ho,
cAhe kulavatI ho aura cAhe rUpase yukta vezyA ho parastrI mAtrakA prayatna
pUvaka tyAga karanA cAhie  /  / 124 /  /  yaha kArya isa loka tathA paraloka
donoM hI jagaha viruddha hai  /  tathA jo manuSya donoM lokoMse bhraSTa ho gayA
vaha manuSya hI kyA so tU 1. paropakRtikAriNAm kha.  /  paropakRtikarmaNAm ka.
/  2. paramAnayat ma., ba.  /  3. kulabAlike kha.  /

Page #328 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, Who would desire to eat food that is full of the saliva of
another man's mouth and has been touched by another man's body? || 126 ||
Vibhishana, who was dear to Ravana, heard this with pleasure. Vibhishana, who
was a knower of policy and always a leader among the councilors, said this: ||
127 || O God! Since this is the way things are, a king who knows policy must
always tell a lie, even if it is a small one. || 128 || Perhaps, by accepting,
she will be pleased and, having gained confidence, will tell some way to take
the city. || 129 || Then, following Vibhishana's words, Ravana, who was a
follower of deceit, said to the messenger: O Bhadra! What you have said is
right. || 130 || That poor woman's life is stuck in me, and she is in great
distress. She is worthy of being protected by me. Indeed, generous people are
compassionate. || 131 || Therefore, go and bring her back, even if it costs you
your life. It is heard in the world that it is Dharma to protect living beings.
|| 132 || Having said this, Ravana sent the messenger, who went and brought back
Uparambha in a moment. Ravana honored her greatly upon her arrival. || 133 ||
Then, when Uparambha, who was under the sway of Kama, reached Ravana, Ravana
said: O Devi! My intense desire is to enjoy myself in the city of Durlagha. ||
134 || Tell me, what pleasure is there in this forest? And what is the cause of
Kama? O Devi! Do something so that I can enjoy myself with you in the city. ||
135 || Women are naturally easily deceived, so Uparambha did not understand
Ravana's cunning. In short, she, being afflicted by Kama, gave him the knowledge
called Ashalika, which stood as a rampart, and various weapons, which were
protected by Vyantara Devas, with great respect. || 136-137 || As soon as she
received the knowledge, that illusory rampart disappeared, and in its absence,
the city remained surrounded only by its natural rampart. || 138 || Ravana, with
a large army, reached near the city. Hearing the noise of the city, Nalakuvara
became agitated. || 139 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe narAntaramukhakledapUrNe'nyAGgavimardite  /  ucchiSTabhojane
bhoktuM bhadre vAnchati ko naraH  //  126 //  mitho vibhISaNAyedaM prItyAnenAtha
veditam  /  nayajJaH sa jagAdaivaM satataM mantrigaNAgraNIH  //  127 //  deva
prakrama evAyamIdRzo vartate yataH  /  alIkamapi vaktavyaM rAjJA nayavatA sadA
//  128  //  tuSTAbhyupagamAt kiMcidupAyaM kathayiSyati  /  uparambhA
pariprAptau vizrambhaM paramAgatA  /  /  129|| tatastadvacanAttena dUtI
chadmAnugAminA  /  ityabhASyata tannAma bhadre yaducitaM tvayA  //  130  //
varAkI madgataprANA vartate sA suduHkhitA  /  rakSaNIyA mamodArA bhavanti hi
dayAparAH  //  131  //  tatazcAnaya tAM gatvA prANairyAvanna mucyate  /
prANinAM rakSaNe dharmaH zrUyate prakaTo bhuvi  //  132  //  2 3 4 ' ityuktvA
parisRSTA sA gatvA tAmAnayat kSaNAt  /  Adarazca mahAnasyAH kRto yamavimardinA
// 133 //  tato madanasaMprAptA sA tenaivamabhASyata  /  durlaGghayanagare devi
rantuM mama parA spRhA  //  134  //  aTavyAmi kiM saukhyaM kiM vA madanakAraNam
/  tathA kuru yathaitasmiMstvayA saha pure rame  //  135  //  tatastattasya
kauTilyamavijJAya smarAturA  /  strINAM svabhAvamugdhatvAtpurasyAgamanAya sA  //
136 //  dadAvAzAlikAM vidyAM prAkAratvena kalpitAm  /  vyantaraiH kRtarakSANi
nAnAstrANi ca sAdarA  //  137  //  apayAtazca zAlo'sau vidyAlAmAdanantaram  /
sthitaM prakRtizAlena kevalenAvRtaM puram  // 138 //  babhUva rAvaNaH sAkaM
sainyena mahatAntikaiH  /  purasya ninadaM zrutvA kSubdhazca nalakUbaraH  //
139 //  278 hI kaha || 125 || he bhadre ! dUsare manuSya ke mukhakI lArase pUrNa
tathA anya manuSya ke aMgase mardita jUThA bhojana khAnekI kauna manuSya icchA
karatA hai ?  //  126  //  tadanantara rAvaNane yaha bAta prItipUrvaka
vibhISaNase bhI ekAntameM kahI so nItiko jAnane vAle evaM nirantara
mantrigaNoMmeM pramukhatA dhAraNa karanevAle vibhISaNane isa prakAra uttara diyA
//  127 //  ki he deva ! cU~ki yaha kArya hI aisA hai ataH sadA nItike
jAnanevAle rAjAko kabhI jhUTha bhI bolanA par3atA hai || 128|| sambhava hai
svIkAra kara lenese santoSako prApta huI uparambhA utkaTa vizvAsa karatI huI,
kisI taraha nagara lenekA koI upAya batA de || 129|| tadanantara vibhISaNa ke
kahane se kapaTakA anusaraNa karanevAle rAvaNane dUtIse kahA ki he bhadre ! tUne
jo kahA hai vaha ThIka hai  //  130  //  cU~ki usa becArIke prANa mujhameM aTaka
rahe haiM aura vaha atyanta duHkhase yukta hai ataH mere dvArA rakSA karaneke
yogya hai  /  yathArtha meM udAra manuSya dayAlu hote haiM  //  131  //  isalie
jabataka prANa use nahIM chor3a dete haiM taba taka jAkara use le A  /
'prANiyoMkI rakSA karanemeM dharmaM hai' yaha bAta pRthivIpara khUba sunI jAtI
hai  //  132  //  itanA kahakara rAvaNake dvArA vidA kI huI dUtI kSaNabharameM
jAkara uparambhAko le AyI  /  Anepara rAvaNane usakA bahuta Adara kiyA  //  133
//  tadanantara kAmake vazIbhUta ho jaba uparambhA rAvaNake samIpa pahu~cI taba
rAvaNane kahA ki he devi ! merI utkaTa icchA durlaghyanagarameM hI ramaNa
karanekI hai || 134|| tumhIM kaho isa jaMgala meM kyA sukha hai ? aura kyA
kAmavardhaka kAraNa hai ? he devi ! aisA karo ki jisase maiM tumhAre sAtha
nagara meM hI ramaNa karU~ || 135|| striyA~ svabhAvase hI mugdha hotI haiM
isalie uparambhA rAvaNakI kuTilatAko nahIM samajha sako  /  nidAna, usane kAmase
pIr3ita ho use nagara meM Aneke lie AzAlikA nAmakI vaha vidyA jo ki prAkAra
banakara khar3I huI thI tathA vyantara deva jinakI rakSA kiyA karate the aise
nAnA zastra bar3e Adara ke sAtha de diye  /  /  136- 137 //  vidyA milate hI
vaha mAyAmaya prAkAra dUra ho gayA aura usake abhAva meM vaha nagara kevala
svAbhAvika prAkArase hI AvRta raha gayA  /  /  138 || rAvaNa bar3I bhArI senA
lekara nagarake nikaTa pahu~cA so usakA kalakala 1. vaktuM ma  /  2. ityuktA
ma., ba. ka.  /  3. parihRSTA ka., ma., ba  /  4. mahA tasyAH ma.  /  5
madanasaMprAptI ka., kha., ma.  /  6. nikaTastha:  /  7. nindanaM ma  /

Page #329 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Canto  271  Seeing this, the Lokapala, Nalakuvara, was filled
with despair. He thought that the city had been taken by the Yaksha, Ravana.
||14||  Despite this, he, bearing the spirit of a warrior, went out to fight,
even though it meant certain death. He was accompanied by all his loyal vassals.
||140-141||  Then, in the midst of a great battle, filled with weapons and
thunderous sounds, where even the rays of the sun could not penetrate,
Vibhishana, with great speed, attacked Nalakuvara's chariot, breaking its axle
with a kick, and captured him alive. ||142-143||  Vibhishana, filled with rage,
did to Nalakuvara what Ravana had done to King Sahasrakirana. ||144||  At that
time, Ravana obtained the Sudarshana Chakra, a jewel-studded disc, which was
capable of striking fear into the hearts of both gods and demons, and was
associated with Indra. ||145||  Then, Ravana, in private, said to Uparambha, "O
Pravarangane, by teaching me, you have become my guru." ||146||  "It is not
proper for you to do this while your husband is alive. And I, who am a teacher
of the path of righteousness, am even less worthy of such an act." ||147||
After this, Ravana, having comforted Nalakuvara, took him to his wife.
Nalakuvara, whose armor was torn and whose body was wounded, was brought before
her. ||148||  Ravana said, "Enjoy all the pleasures you desire with this
husband. What difference is there between me and him in the matter of
enjoyment?" ||149||  "My reputation will be tarnished by this act, and others
will follow my example." ||150||  "You are the daughter of King Akashadhvaja and
Mridunakanta, born into a pure lineage. It is your duty to protect your virtue."
||151||  Hearing this, Uparambha was filled with shame and realized her mistake.
She became content with her husband. ||152||  Nalakuvara, unaware of his wife's
infidelity, continued to enjoy her company, having received honor from Ravana.
||153||  **Note:** The numbers in parentheses refer to the verse numbers in the
original text.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazaM parva 271 tamadRSTvA tataH zAlaM lokapAlo viSAdavAn  /  gRhItameva
nagaraM mene yakSavimadinA  // 14 //  tathApi pauruSaM bibhrad yoddhaM
'zramamareNa saH  /  niSkrAnto'tyantavikrAntesarva sAmantaveSTitaH  // 141 //
tato mahati saMgrAme pravRtte zastrasaGkule  /  adRSTapadminInAthakiraNe
krUraniHsvane  // 142 //  vibhISaNena vegena nipatya nalakUbaraH  /  gRhItaH
kUbaraM maMktvA syandanasyAnritADanAt  // 143 //  sahasrakiraNe karma
dazavaktreNa yatkRtam  /  vibhISaNena kruddhena tatkRtaM nalakUbare  // 144 //
devAsurabhayotpAde dakSaM cakraM na rAvaNaH  /  tridazAdhipasaMbandhi prApa
nAmnA sudarzanam  // 145 //  uparambhA dazAsyena rahasIdamathoditA  /
vidyAdAnAd gurutvaM me vartate pravarAGgane !  // 146 //  jIvati prANanAthe te
na yuktaM kartumIdRzam  /  mamApi sutarAmeva nyAyamArgopadezinaH  // 147 //
samAzvAsya tato nIto bhAryAntaM nalakUbaraH  /  zastradAritasaMnAha~
dRSTavikSatavigrahaH  // 148 //  anenaiva samaM mA bhuikSva bhogAn yathepsitAn
/  kAmavastuni ko bhedo mama vAsya ca bhojane  // 149 //  malImasA ca me kIrtiH
karmadaM kurvato bhavet  /  aparo'pi janaH karma kurvItedaM mayA kRtam  // 150
//  sutAkAzadhvajasyAsi saMbhUtA vimale kule  /  saMjAtA mRdukAntAyAM zIlaM
rakSitumarhasi  // 151 //  ucyamAneti sA tena nitAntaM japayAnvitA  /
svabhartari bhRzaM cakre mAnasaM pratibodhinI  // 152 //  vyabhicAramavijJAya
kAntAyA nalakUbaraH  /  reme tayA samaM prAptaH saMmAnaM dazavaktrataH  // 153
//  sunakara nalakUbara kSobhako prApta haA  // 139|| tadanantara usa mAyAmaya
prAkArako na dekhakara lokapAla nalakabara bar3A duHkhI huaa| yadyapi usane
samajha liyA thA ki aba to hamArA nagara rAvaNane le hI liyA to bhI usane udyama
nahIM chodd'aa| vaha puruSArthako dhAraNa karatA huA bar3e zramase yuddha
karaneke lie bAhara niklaa| atyanta parAkramI saba sAmanta usake sAtha the  //
140-141 //  tadanantara jo zastroMse vyapta thA, jisameM sUryako kiraNeM nahIM
dikha rahI thIM aura bhayaMkara kaThora zabda ho rahA thA aise mahAyuddhake
honepara vibhISaNane vegase uchalakara pairake AghAtase rathakA dhurA tor3a diyA
aura nalakUbarako jIvita pakar3a liyA  // 142-143 //  rAvaNane rAjA
sahasrarazmike sAtha jo kAma kiyA thA vahI kAma krodhase bhare vibhISaNane
nalakUbarake sAtha kiyA  // 144|| usI samaya rAvaNane deva aura asuroMko bhaya
utpanna karane meM samartha indra sambandhI sudarzana nAmakA cakraratna prApta
kiyA  /  / 145|| tadanantara rAvaNane ekAntameM uparambhAse kahA ki he
pravarAMgane ! vidyA denese tuma merI guru ho  // 146 /  /  patike jIvita rahate
tumheM aisA karanA yogya nahIM hai aura nItimArgakA upadeza denevAle mujhe to
bilakula hI yogya nahIM hai  // 147|| tatpazcAt zastroMse vidArita kavacake
bhItara jisakA akSata zarIra dikha rahA thA aise nalakUbarako vaha samajhAkara
strIke pAsa le gayA ||148 /  /  aura kahA ki isa bhartAke sAtha manacAhe bhoga
bhogo| kAma-sevanake viSayameM mere aura isake sAtha upabhogameM vizeSatA hI kyA
hai ?  // 149|| isa kAryake karanese merI kIrti malina ho jAyegI aura maiMne
yaha kArya kiyA hai isalie dUsare loga bhI yaha kArya karane laga jAveMge  //
150 /  /  tuma rAjA AkAzadhvaja aura mRdukAntAkI putrI ho, nirmala kulameM
tumhArA janma huA hai ataH zIlakI rakSA karanA hI yogya hai  // 151 //  rAvaNake
aisA kahanepara vaha atyadhika lajjita huI aura pratibodhako prApta ho apane
patimeM hI santuSTa ho gayI  // 152 /  /  idhara nalakUbarako apanI strIke
vyabhicArakA patA nahIM calA isalie rAvaNase sammAna prApta kara vaha pUrvavat
usake sAtha ramaNa karane lagA  // 153 /  /  1. samabhareNa kha., ma., b.| 2.
vikrAntaH ka., ba., ma.  /  3. sAmantazataveSTitaH ka., ba., ma.  /  4. nipAtya
kha., ma.  /  5. prApannAmnA ma., ba.  /  6. bhAyA~ tAM kha., ma., b.| 7. diSTa
kha., ma., b.| 8. cAsya ma.  /  9. bhoge  /  10. samaM cakre m.|

Page #330 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **280**  In the battle, Ravana, having achieved supreme
glory by destroying his enemies, reached the land of Vijayadgiri with increasing
prosperity. ||154||  Hearing of Ravana's approach, Indra, moving from the
assembly of the gods, addressed all of them. ||155||  "O Vasvasvi and other
gods! Why are you sitting relaxed? The lord of the Rakshasas, Ravana, has
arrived here." ||156||  Saying this, Indra went to his father to seek counsel.
He sat down on the earth, bowing respectfully. ||157||  He said, "What should I
do in this situation? This enemy, whom I have defeated many times, has returned,
now powerful." ||158||  "O father! I have committed a great injustice against my
own duty by not destroying this enemy when he was weak." ||159||  "Even a common
man can break a thorn when it is just emerging, but when it grows strong, it
requires great effort." ||160||  "When a disease arises, it is easily destroyed,
but when it takes root and spreads, it can only be countered after death."
||161||  "I have tried many times to destroy him, but you stopped me. You have
made me forgive him in vain." ||162||  "O father! I am speaking this following
the path of righteousness. It is the duty of a family to consult elders, and
that is why I asked you. I am not incapable of killing him." ||163||  Hearing
his son's words, filled with pride and anger, Sahasrar said, "O son! Do not be
hasty." ||164||  "First, consult with wise ministers, for the work of those who
act without deliberation becomes futile." ||165||  "Mere effort is not the cause
of success, for what can a farmer achieve without rain? Similarly, what can a
hardworking person achieve without the right circumstances?" ||166||  "Those who
have equal effort and equal respect, some achieve success, while others fail due
to the nature of their karma." ||167||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 280 papapurANe rAvaNaH saMyuge labdhvA paradhvaMsAtparaM yazaH  /
vardhamAnazriyA prApa vijayAIgiremahIm  // 154 //  abhyaNaM rAvaNaM zrutvA
zakraH pracalituM tataH  /  devAnAsthAnasaMprAptAn samastAnidamabhyadhAt  // 155
//  vesvazvipramukhA devAH saMnahyate kimAsatAm  /  vizrabdhaM kuruta prAptaH
prabhureSa sa rakSasAm  // 156 //  ityuktvA jainakoddezaM saMpradhArayituM yayau
/  upaviSTo namaskRtya dharaNyAM vinayAnvitaH  // 157 //  uvAca ca vidhAtavyaM
kimasminnantare myaa| prabalo'yamariH prApto bahuzo vijitAhitaH  // 158 //
AtmakAryaviruddho'yaM tAtAtyantaM mayA kataH  /  anayaH svalpa evAsau pralayaM
yanna lambhitaH  // 159 //  uttiSThato mukhaM bhaktamadhareNApi zakyate  /
kaNTakasyApi yatnena pariNAmamupeyuSaH  // 16 //  utpattAveva rogasya kriyate
dhvaMsanaM sukham  /  vyApI tu baddhamUlaH syAdUrdhva sa kSetriyo'thavA  // 16
//  anekazaH kRtodyogastasyAsmi vinipaatne| nivAritastvayA vyartha yena
zAntirmayA kRtA  // 162 //  nayamArga prapannena mayedaM tAta bhASyate  /
maryAdeSeti pRSTo'si na svazakto'smi tadvadhe  // 163 //  smayaroSavimizraM
tacchrutvA vAkyaM suteritam  /  sahasrAro'gadata putra tvarAvAniti mA sma bhUH
// 164 //  tAvadvimRzya kAryANi pravarairmannibhiH saha  /  jAyate viphalaM
karmAprekSApUrvakAriNAm  // 165 //  bhavatyarthasya saMsiddhaya kevalaM ca na
pauruSam  /  karSakasya vinA vRSTyA kA siddhiH karmayoginaH  // 166 //
samAnamahimAnAnAM paThatAM ca samAdaram  /  arthabhAjo bhavantyeke nApare
karmaNAM vazAt  // 167 //  tadanantara rAvaNa yuddhameM zatruke saMhArase parama
yazako prApta karatA huA bar3hatI huI lakSmIke sAtha vijayAdha girikI bhUmi meM
pahu~cA  // 154 //  athAnantara indrane rAvaNako nikaTa AyA suna sabhAmaNDapameM
sthita samasta devoMse kahA  // 155 //  ki he vasvazvi Adi deva jano! yuddhakI
taiyArI .Apa loga nizcinta kyoM baiTho ho ? yaha rAkSasoMkA svAmI rAvaNa yahA~ A
paha~cA hai  // 156 //  itanA kahakara indra pitAse salAha karaneke lie usake
sthAnapara gayA aura namaskAra kara vinayapUrvaka pRthivIpara baiTha gayA  //
157 /  /  usane kahA ki isa avasarapara mujhe kyA karanA caahie| jise maiMne
aneka bAra parAjita kiyA punaH sthApita kiyA aisA yaha zatru aba prabala hokara
yahA~ AyA hai  // 158 /  /  he tAta ! maiMne Atma kAryake viruddha yaha bar3I
anIti kI hai ki jaba yaha zatru choTA thA tabhI ise ise naSTa nahIM kara diyA
// 159 //  uThate hae kaNTakakA makha eka sAdhAraNa vyakti bhI tor3a sakatA hai
para jaba vahI kaNTaka paripakva ho jAtA hai taba bar3A prayatna karanA par3atA
hai  // 160 //  jaba roga utpanna hotA hai taba usakA sukhase vinAza kiyA jAtA
hai para jaba vaha roga jar3a bAMdhakara vyApta ho jAtA hai taba maraneke bAda
hI usakA pratikAra ho sakatA hai  // 161 /  /  maiMne aneka bAra usake naSTa
karanekA udyoga kiyA para Apake dvArA roka diyA gyaa| Apane vyartha hI mujhe
kSamA dhAraNa karAyI  // 162 /  /  he tAta ! nItimArgakA anusaraNa kara hI maiM
yaha kaha rahA huuN| bar3oMse pUchakara kArya karanA yaha kulako maryAdo hai
aura isalie hI maiMne Apase pUchA hai  /  maiM usake mArane meM asamartha nahIM
hU~  // 163 /  /  ahaMkAra aura krodhase mizrita putrake vacana sunakara
sahasrArane kahA ki he putra ! isa taraha utAvalA mata ho  /  / 164 //  pahale
uttama mantriyoMke sAtha salAha kara kyoMki binA vicAre kArya karanevAloMkA
kArya niSphala ho jAtA hai  // 165 //  kevala puruSArtha hI kAryasiddhikA kAraNa
nahIM hai kyoMki nirantara kArya karanevAle-puruSArthI kisAnake varSAke binA kyA
siddha ho sakatA hai ? arthAt kucha nahIM  // 166 /  /  eka hI samAna puruSArtha
karanevAle aura eka hI samAna Adarase 1. pracalitaM ma.  /  2. vizvAzva ma.  /
3. saMnahyanta kimAsanam m.| 4. janakAdezaM ma.  /  5. tavAtyantaM mayA kRtaH
m.| tato'tyantaM yA kRtaH ba. tAtAtyantamayAkRtaH kha.  /  6. kSatriyo'thavA
ka., kha., ma., ba.  /  zarIrAntare cikitsyaH apratIkArya ityarthaH 'kSetriya
parakSetra cikitsyaH '  /  7. nayamArgaprayatnena ka., nayamArgaprayatnena kha.
/  8. smayaroSavimuktaM m.| 9. kRSTayA ma.  /

Page #331 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
167. Some of the students who are reading will succeed and some will not succeed
due to the compulsion of their karma. 168. Even if such a situation arises, you
should make peace with Ravana, because if peace is made, you can make the whole
world free from thorns. 169. Also, you should give your beautiful daughter,
Rupini, to Ravana. There is no fault in doing so. Rather, your status will
remain the same by doing so. 170. The father, who was the holder of pure
intellect, explained this to Indra, but due to the group of anger, his eyes
turned red in an instant. 171. Indra, whose body was filled with sweat due to
the heat of the fire of anger, spoke as if he was breaking the sky with his
voice, saying, "Father! How is it appropriate to give a daughter to someone who
is worthy of being killed? Or, the intellect of old men is simply diminished."
172. "Father! Tell me, what am I inferior to him in? Because of which you have
spoken these very humble words." 173. "He who is extremely distressed even when
the rays of the sun touch his head, how will he bow down to another man who is a
noble human being?" 174. "I am superior to Ravana in every way in terms of
manhood, then how did it come to your mind that fate is in his favor?" 175. "If
you think that he has conquered many enemies, then does a hunter not kill a lion
who kills many deer?" 176. "In a battle where groups of flames are being
generated by the clash of weapons, it is better to give up one's life than to
bow down to an enemy." 177. "That Indra bowed down to the demon Ravana. I have
never seen such a thing in the world, why haven't you seen it?" 178. "Being a
celestial being is common, and it is not the reason for peace. Just as there is
no unity between a lion and a jackal because of their commonality in living in
the forest, similarly, there can be no unity between us two because of the
commonality of being celestial beings." 179. As he was saying this, the loud
sound of the enemy army, which filled the whole world, entered his ears. 180.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazaM pa 1 evaM gate'pi saMdhAnaM rAvaNena samaM kuru  /  tasmin sati
jagatsarvaM vidhatsvotakaNTakam  // 168 //  rUpiNIM ca sutAM tasmai yaccha
rUpavatIM sutAm  /  evaM sati na doSo'sti tathAvasthA ca rAjatAm  //  169 //
viviktadhiSaNenAsAviti pitrA pracoditaH  /  roSarAzivazodArazoNacakSuH
kSaNAdabhUt  //  170  //  zeSajvalana saMtApasaMjAta svedasaMtatiH  /  vabhANa
bhAsuraH zakraH sphoTayanniva khaM girA  //  171  //  vadhyasya dIyate
kanyetyetattAta kva yujyate  /  prakRSTavayasAM puMsAM dhIryAtyevAthavA kSayam
//  172  //  vada kenAdharastasmAdahaM janaka vastunA  /  atyantakAtaraM vAkyaM
yenedaM bhASitaM tvayA  //  173  //  kherapi kRtasparzaH pAdairmUrdhnAti'
khidyate  /  'yoge sa kathamamyasya tuGgaH praNatimAcaret  // 174 //
pauruSeNAdhikastAvadetasmAnnitarAmaham  /  daivaM tasyAnukUlaM te kathaM
buddhAvavasthitam  //  175  //  vijitA bahavo'nena vipakSA iti venmatiH  /
hatAnekakuraGga kiM zabaro hanti no harim  //  176  //  saMgrAme
zastrasaMpAtajAtajvalanajAlake  /  varaM prANaparityAgo na tu pratinarAnatiH  //
177 //  so'yamindro dazAsyasya rAkSasasyAnatiM gataH  /  iti loke ca hAsyatvaM
na dRSTaM me kathaM tvayA  // 178 //  nabhazcaratva sAmAnyaM na ca
saMdhAnakAraNam  /  vanagocarasAmAnyaM yathA siMhazRgAlayoH  //  179  //  iti
bruvata evAsya zabda: pUritaviSTapaH  /  praviSTaH zrotrayoH zatrubalajo
'vAsarAnane  // 180 //  281 par3hanevAle chAtroM meM se kucha to saphala ho jAte
haiM aura kucha karmoMkI vivazatAse saphala nahIM ho pAte || 167 | aisI sthiti
Anepara bhI tuma rAvaNake sAtha sandhi kara lo kyoMki sandhike honepara tuma
samasta saMsArako niSkaNTaka banA sakate ho  //  168  //  | sAtha hI tU rUpavatI
nAmakI apanI sundarI putrI rAvaNake lie de de  /  aisA karanemeM kucha bhI doSa
nahIM hai| balki aisA karanese terI yahI dazA banI rahegI || 169 || pavitra
buddhike dhAraka pitAne isa prakAra indrako samajhAyA avazya parantu krodhake
samUhake kAraNa usake netra kSaNa-bhara meM lAla-lAla ho gaye ||170  //
krodhAgnike santApase jisake zarIrameM pasIne kI paramparA utpanna ho gayI thI
aisA dedIpyamAna indra apanI vANIse mAno AkAzako phor3atA huA bolA ki he tAta !
jo vadha karane yogya hai usIke lie kanyA dI jAve yaha kahA~ taka ucita hai ?
athavA vRddha puruSoMkI buddhi kSINa ho hI jAtI hai  // 171 - 172 //  he tAta !
kaho to sahI maiM kisa vastu usase hIna hU~ ? jisase Apane yaha atyanta dIna
vacana kahe haiM || 173 || jo mastakapara sUryakI kiraNoMkA sparza honepara bhI
atyanta khedakhinna ho jAtA hai vaha udAra mAnava milanera anya puruSake lie
praNAma kisa prakAra karegA ? || 174 | maiM puruSArtha kI apekSA rAvaNase hara
eka bAta meM adhika hU~ phira ApakI buddhimeM yaha bAta kaise baiTha gayI ki
bhAgya usake anukUla hai ? || 175  /  /  yadi ApakA yaha khyAla hai ki isane
aneka zatruoMko jItA hai to aneka hariNoMko mAranevAle siMhako kyA eka bhIla
nahIM mAra detA ? || 176 || zastroMke prahArase jahA~ jvAlAoMke samUha utpanna
ho rahe haiM aise yuddhameM prANatyAga karanA bhI acchA hai para zatruke lie
namaskAra karanA acchA nahIM hai  //  177 //  ' vaha indra rAvaNa rAkSasake
sAmane namra ho gayA' isa taraha lokameM jo merI ha~sI hogI usa ora bhI Apane
dRSTi kyoM nahIM dI ? || 178 || ' vaha vidyAdhara hai aura maiM bhI vidyAdhara
hU~' isa prakAra vidyAdharapanAkI samAnatA sandhikA kAraNa nahIM ho sakatI  /
jisa prakAra siMha aura zRgAla meM vanacAritvakI samAnatA honepara bhI ekatA
nahIM hotI hai usI prakAra vidyAdharapanAkI samAnatA honepara bhI hama donoMmeM
ekatA nahIM ho sakatI  //  179  //  isa prakAra prAtaHkAla ke samaya indra pitA
ke samakSa kaha rahA thA ki usI samaya samasta saMsArako vyApta karanevAlA zatru
senAkA joradAra zabda usake kAnoMmeM praviSTa huA  //  180  //   /  4. 170 tamaH
zlokaH 1. rAjate ba.  /  rAjyatAM ma.  /  rAjatA ka.  /  2. prabodhitaH ma  /
3. vazoddAra - ma kha. pustake nAsti  /  5. mUrdhnAbhi-kha.  /  6. yo meruH
kha., ma.  /  7. te kathaM mayA ma.  /  8. prAtaHkAle  /  36

Page #332 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1. Having heard his father's call, he went to the armory and sounded the war
trumpet to signal the preparation for battle.  2. "Bring the elephant quickly,
saddle the horses quickly, bring the sword here, bring a good shield, run and
bring the bow, bring the helmet to protect the head, bring the arm band quickly,
bring the dagger quickly, hey, groom, yoke the horses and prepare the chariot."
Thus, the Vidyaadharas, known as Devas, began to move around. 3. Then, when the
valiant warriors were agitated, the drums were beating, the conch shells were
roaring loudly, the elephants were roaring repeatedly, the horses were letting
out long roars as soon as they were touched by the whip, the groups of chariots
were moving, and the groups of bowstrings were humming loudly, the world was
filled with the laughter of the warriors and the victory cries of the
charioteers, as if it were created by sound. 4. The entire direction was covered
with swords, tomars, nooses, flags, umbrellas, and bows, and the sun's influence
was lost. 5. The Devas, who were eager for speed, came out, ready and prepared,
and they pushed and shoved near the gate, listening to the sound of the bells on
the elephants. 6. "Park the chariot over there, this intoxicated elephant is
coming here. Hey, mahout! Quickly remove the elephant from here. Hey, rider! Why
are you stopping here? Quickly take the horse forward. Hey, fool! Leave me and
go back, don't make me anxious for nothing."  Thus, the Devas, filled with
haste, came out of their houses. At that time, they were roaring with pride. 7.
When the army, whose enthusiasm was increasing due to the trumpet that was
sometimes played softly and sometimes loudly, stood in its place after facing
the enemy, the Devas, releasing a group of weapons that covered the sky, broke
the face of the Rakshasa army, that is, they attacked the front part of it with
force.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe 'tato'pakarNanaM kRtvA pituH saMnAhamaNDapam  /  gatvA
saMnAhasaMjJArtha tUrya tAramavIvadat  // 18 //  upAhara gajaM zIghraM saptiM
paryANaya drutam  /  maNDalAgramito dehi paTu cAhara kaGkaTam  // 182 //
dhanurAhara dhAvasva zirastrANamitaH kuru  /  yacchArdhabAhukAM kSipraM dehi
sAyakaputrikAm  // 183 //  ceTa yaccha samAyogaM sajjamAzu rathaM kuru  /
evamAdi kRtArAvaH suralokazcalo'bhavat  // 184 //  atha kSubdheSu vIreSu raTatsu
paTaheSu ca  /  tuGga raNasu zaGkhaSu sAndraM garjatsu dantiSu  // 185 //
muJcatsu dIrghahuGkAraM spRSTavetreSu saptiSu  /  saMkrIDatsu rathaudheSu
jyAjAle paTu guJjati  // 186 //  maTAnAmaTTahAsena jayazabdena vAdinAm  /
abhUttadA jagatsava zabdeneva vinirmitam  // 187 //  asimistomaraiH
pAzailajaizchannaH zarAsanaiH  /  kakubhazchAditAH sarvAH prabhAvo'pahRto raveH
// 18 //  niSkrAntAzca susaMnaddhAH surA ramasarAgiNaH  /  gopure kRtasaMghaTTA
ghaNTAbhirvaradantinAm  // 189 //  syandanaM parato dhehi prApto'yaM
mattavAraNaH  /  AdhoraNa gajaM dezAdasmAtsAraya satvaram  // 19 //
stambhito'sIha kiM sAdinnayAzvaM dUtamagrataH  /  muJca mugdhe nivartasva kuru
mAM mA samAkulam  // 191 //  evamAdisamAlApAH satvarA mandirAt surAH  /
niSkrAntA garvanirmuktazubhArabhaTagarjitAH  // 192 //  AlIne ca yathA
'jAtapratipakSaM camUmukhe  /  viSamAhatatUryeNa paramutsAhamAhRte  // 193 //
tato rAkSasasainyasya mukhamaGgaH kRtaH suraiH  /  muJcadbhiH
zastrasaMghAtamantarhitanamastalam  // 19 //  senAmukhAvasAdena kupitA
rAkSasAstataH  /  adhyUSuH pRtanAvaktraM nijamUrjitavikramAH  // 195 //
tadanantara pitAkI bAta anasunI kara vaha AyudhazAlAmeM gayA aura vahAM yuddhakI
taiyArIkA saMketa karaneke lie usane jorase turahI bajavAyo  // 181 //  'hAthI
zIghra lAo, ghor3Apara zIghra hI palAna bA~dho, talavAra yahA~ deo, acchA-sA
kavaca lAo, daur3akara dhanuSa lAo, sirako rakSA karanevAlA Topa idhara bar3hAo,
hAthapara bA~dhanekI paTTI zIghra deo, churI bhI jaldI deo, are ceTa, ghor3e
jota aura rathako taiyAra karo' ityAdi zabda karate hue deva nAmadhArI
vidyAdhara idhara-udhara calane lage  // 182-184 //  athAnantara-jaba vIra
sainika kSubhita ho rahe the, bAje baja rahe the, zaMkha joradAra zabda kara
rahe the, hAthI bAra-bAra ciMghAr3a rahe the, beMtake chUte hI ghor3e dIrgha
huMkAra chor3a rahe the, rathoMke samUha cala rahe the aura pratyaMcAoMke samUha
joradAra guMjana kara rahe the, taba yoddhAoMke aTTahAsa aura cAraNoMke
jayajayakArase samasta saMsAra aisA ho gayA thA mAno zabdase nirmita ho  //
185-187 /  /  talavAroM, tomaroM, pAzoM, dhvajAoM, chatroM aura dhanuSoMse
samasta dizAeM AcchAdita ho gayIM aura sUryakA prabhAva jAtA rahA  /  / 188 /  /
zIghratAke premI deva taiyAra ho-ho kara bAhara nikala par3e aura hAthiyoMke
ghaNTAoMke zabda suna-sunakara gopurake samIpa dhakkamadhakkA karane lage  //
189 //  'rathako udhara khar3A karo, idhara yaha madonmatta hAthI A rahA hai|
are mahAvata ! hAthIko yahA~se zIghra hI httaa| are savAra! yahIM kyoM ruka gayA
? zIghra hI ghor3A Age le jaa| arI mugdhe! mujhe chor3a tU loTa jA, vyartha hI
mujhe vyAkula mata kara' ityAdi vArtAlApa karate hue zIghratAse bhare deva,
apane-apane makAnoMse bAhara nikala pdd'e| usa samaya ve ahaMkArake kAraNa zubha
garjanA kara rahe the  // 190-192 //  kabhI dhImI aura kabhI jorase bajAyI huI
turahIse jisakA utsAha bar3ha rahA thA aisI senA jaba zatrake sammukha jAkara
yathAsthAna khar3I ho gayI taba AkAzako AcchAdita karanevAle zastrasamUhako
chor3ate hue devoMne rAkSasoMkI senAkA mukha bhaMga kara diyA arthAt usake agra
bhAgapara joradAra prahAra kiyA  // 193-194 //  senAke 1. tatropakarNayan kha.
/  tatopakarNalaM ba.  /  tatopakarNabhaM ma.  /  2. kavacam  /  3.
yacchArdhavAhakAM ma.  /  4. azvam  /  5. kRtArAvaM ma. kha.  /  6. dehi ma.  /
7. mA mAM ma.  /  8. garbhanirmuktasutArabhaTa- ma.  /
garvanirmuktasutArabhaTakha., b.| 9. yAtapratipakSaM kh.| 10. mAdRte ma.  /

Page #333 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Canto  **283**  Vajravega, Prahasta, Hasta, Maricha, Udbhava,
Vajramukha, Shuka, Ghora, Saran, Gaganojjvala, Mahajatara, Sandhyabhra, and
Krura, these fierce Rakshasas stood before their army. All of them were clad in
armor, mounted on excellent steeds, and armed with fine weapons.  **196-197**
Then, these valiant Rakshasas, in a moment, destroyed the army of the gods,
striking fear into their hearts. The weapons they abandoned fell into the hands
of their enemies.  **198**  Seeing the destruction of their army, the great gods
rose to fight. Their bodies were filled with intense anger.  **199**  Meghamali,
Tadipinga, Jvalitaksha, Arisajvara, and Agniratha, these gods appeared,
showering down a torrent of weapons, their bodies ablaze with the fire of their
anger.  **200**  Rising up, they confronted the Rakshasas, who were raining down
a storm of weapons.  **201**  After a long battle, the Rakshasas were defeated.
Each Rakshasa was surrounded by many gods.  **202**  Like insects caught in a
whirlwind, the Rakshasas were tossed about, their weapons falling from their
weakened hands.  **203**  Many Rakshasas turned back from the battle, but those
who were proud, faced their death, refusing to surrender their weapons.  **204**
Seeing the Rakshasa army crumbling under the onslaught of the gods, the mighty
son of King Mahendra, the valiant Kapiketo, who was known for his wisdom and
bore the auspicious name Prasannakirti, advanced towards the enemy army,
striking fear into their hearts.  **205-206**  Protecting his own army, he
turned the enemy army back with a continuous barrage of arrows.  **207**  The
army of the gods who resided on Mount Vijayadhara, shining with their various
weapons, was initially filled with great enthusiasm at the sight of
Prasannakirti.  **208**  But when they saw the mark of the monkey on his banner
and umbrella, their hearts sank.  **209**  Then, with his blazing arrows, he
pierced the hearts of the enemy, like the arrows of Kamadeva pierce the hearts
of those who are infatuated.  **210**  **Notes:**  * **Rakshasa:** A type of
demon in Hindu mythology. * **Deva:** A god in Hindu mythology. *
**Prasannakirti:** A name meaning "one whose fame is pleasing." * **Kapiketo:**
A name meaning "one who has a monkey flag." * **Vijayadhara:** A mountain in
Hindu mythology, said to be the abode of the gods. * **Kamadeva:** The Hindu god
of love.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazaM parva 283 vajravegaH prahasto'tha hasto mArIca udbhavaH  /
vajravaktraH zuko ghoraH sAraNo gaganojjvalaH  // 196 //
mahAjaTharasaMdhyAbhrakaraprabhRtayastathA  /  susaMnaddhAH suyAnAzca
suzastrAzca puraHsthitAH  // 197 //  tatastairusthitaiH sainyaM surANAM
kSaNamAtrataH  /  kRtaM vihatavitrastazastrasaMgatazatrukam  // 198 //
bhajyamAnaM tataH sainyavaktraM dRSTvA mahAsurAH  /  utthitA
yoddhamatyugrakopApUritavigrahAH  // 199 //  meghamAlI taDipiGgo
jvalitAkSo'risaMjvaraH  /  pAvakasyandanAdyAzca surAH prakaTatAM yayuH  // 20 //
utthAya rAkSasAstaiste muJcadbhiH zastrasaMhatim  /  avaSTabdhAH
samudbhutatIvakopAtimAsuraiH  // 201 //  tato bhaGga pariprAptAzciraM
kRtamahAhavAH  /  pratyeka rAkSasA devairbahubhiH kRtaveSTanAH  // 202 //
AvarteSviva nikSiptA rAkSasA vegazAliSu  /
babhramurvigalacchastrazithilasthitapANayaH  // 20 //  parAvRttAstathApyanye
rAkSasA mAnazAlinaH  /  prANAnamimukhIbhUtA muJcanti na tu sAyakAn  // 204 //
tato'vasAdanAd bhagnaM dRSTvA tadrakSasAM balam  /  sUnurmahendrasenasya
kapiketormahAbalaH  // 205 //  dakSaH prasajhakIAkhyAM dhArayannarthasaMgatAm  /
trAsayan dviSatAM sainyaM janyasya zirasi sthitam  // 206 //  rakSatA
balamAtmIyaM tena tatredRzaM balam  /  zUraiH parAGmukhaM cakre
niSkAmagiranantaram  // 207 //  atimAnaM tato bhUri vijayAnivAsinAm  /  sainyaM
prAptaM mahotsAhaM nAnAzastrasamujjvalam  // 208 //  daSdaiva kapilakSmAsya
dhvaje chatre ca mISaNam  /  avApa mAnase bhedaM vijayArdhAdrijaM balam  // 209
//  tattena vizikhaiH pazcAtsphurattejaHzikhaiH kSaNAt  /  bhinnaM
kutIrthahRdayaM yathA manmathavibhramaiH  // 210 //  wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww
agrabhAgakA vinAza dekha prabala parAkramake dhAraka rAkSasa kupita ho apanI
senAke Age A DaTe  // 195 /  /  vajravega, prahasta, hasta, mArIca, udbhava,
vajramukha, zuka, ghora, sAraNa, gaganojjvala, mahAjaThara, sandhyAbhra aura
krUra Adi rAkSasa A-Akara senAke sAmane khar3e ho gaye  /  ye sabhI rAkSasa
kavaca Adise yukta the, uttamottama savAriyoMpara ArUr3ha the aura acche-acche
zastroMse yukta the  // 196-197 /  /  tadanantara ina udyamI rAkSasoMne devoMkI
senAko kSaNamAtrameM mArakara bhayabhIta kara diyaa| usake chor3e hue astra-
zastra zatruoMke hAtha lage  // 198 //  taba apanI senAke agrabhAgako naSTa hotA
dekha bar3e-bar3e deva yuddha karaneke lie utthe| usa samaya una sabake zarIra
atyanta tIvra krodhase bhara rahe the  // 199 /  /  meghamAlI, taDitpiga,
jvalitAkSa, arisaMjvara aura agniratha Adi deva sAmane Aye  // 200 //  jo
zastroMke samUhakI varSA kara rahe the aura utpanna hue tIna krodhase atizaya
dedIpyamAna the aise devoMne uThakara rAkSasoMko rokA  // 201 /  /  tadanantara
cirakAla taka yuddha karaneke bAda rAkSasa bhaMgako prApta hue| eka-eka
rAkSasako bahuta-se devoMne ghera liyA  // 202 /  /  vegazAlI bha~varoMmeM par3e
hueke samAna rAkSasa idhara-udhara ghUma rahe the tathA unake DhIle hAthoMse
zastra chUTa-phUTakara nIce gira rahe the  // 203 //  kitane hI rAkSasa yuddhase
parAGmukha ho gaye para jo abhimAnI rAkSasa the ve sAmane Akara prANa to chor3a
rahe the para unhoMne zastra nahIM chor3e  // 204 /  /  tadanantara devoMkI
vikaTa mArase rAkSasoMkI senAko naSTa hotA dekha vAnaravaMzI rAjA mahendrakA
mahAbalavAn putra, jo ki atyanta catura thA aura prasannakIrti isa sArthaka
nAmako dhAraNa karatA thA, yuddhake agrabhAgameM sthita zatruoMkI. senAko
bhayabhIta karatA huA sAmane AyA  // 205-206 //  apanI senAkI rakSA karate hue
usane nirantara nikalanevAle bANoMse zatruko senAko parAGmukha kara diyA  // 207
//  vijayAdha parvatapara rahanevAle devoMkI jo senA nAnA prakArake zastroMse
dedIpyamAna thI vaha prathama to prasannakItise atyadhika mahAn utsAhako prApta
huI  // 208 /  /  para usake bAda hI jaba usane usakI dhvajA aura chatrameM
vAnarakA cihna dekhA to usakA mana TUka-TUka ho gayA  // 209 /  /  tadanantara
1. susaMbaddhAH m.| 2. supAnAzca m.| 3. suzAstrAzca m.| 4. vihatavitrastaM
zastrasaMghAtazatrukam ma.  /  5. -staistai- kha.  /  6. zithilAsthitapANayaH
ma.  /  7. bhaGgaM m.| 8. chatreNa ma.  /

Page #334 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,   **Verse 211:** Another army, fit for the gods, arrived,
filled with gold, maces, weapons, bows, and maces.  **Verse 212:** Then, from
within their ranks, stood the extremely valiant son of Malyavan, known as Sri
Mali, with a resolute heart.  **Verse 213:** In a moment, he sent the gods,
shining like the sun, to an unknown place, as he released a volley of arrows.
**Verse 214:** Seeing him, the enemy, unstoppable in his might, stirred up the
army of his foes like a great wave,  **Verse 215:**  a mass of maddened elephant
kings, clashing with the enemy ranks, wielding swords, and moving amidst the
chaos.  **Verse 216:** The gods, roused to defend their own strength, their
bodies consumed by great anger, their weapons gleaming,  **Verse 217:**  Shikhi,
Kesari, Danda, Ugra, Kanaka, Pravara, and other warriors of Indra, covered the
sky far and wide, like rain clouds.  **Verse 218:**  And Indra's own sons, like
Mriga-chinha and others, blazing with the brilliance of battle, immensely
powerful, covered the sky far and wide.  **Verse 219:** Then, Sri Mali, with his
crescent-shaped arrows, covered the earth with their severed heads, as if with
lotuses and their stalks.  **Verse 220:**  Indra pondered, "Who among these
gods, or these valiant princes, can stand before this Rakshasa, whose brilliance
is immense, whose power is overwhelming?  **Verse 221:**  Therefore, I myself
will destroy his faith in battle, before he destroys the other gods."  **Verse
222:**  Thinking thus, he reassured his army, trembling with fear, as the lord
of the gods prepared to fight.  **Verse 223:**  Just as the heart of a wicked
teacher is shattered by the arrows of Kama, so too was the army of the gods
shattered by the arrows of Prasanna Kirti, whose blazing flames were like fire.
**Verse 210:**  After that, the army of the gods and another army came face to
face. That army was equipped with gold, swords, maces, weapons, bows, and maces.
**Verse 211:**  After that, the son of Malyavan, Sri Mali, who was extremely
valiant and had a fearless heart, stood in front of the army of the gods.
**Verse 212:**  Where Sri Mali, whose radiance was like that of the sun, and who
was constantly releasing a volley of arrows, sent the gods in a moment, no one
knew.  **Verse 213:**  Then, seeing Sri Mali, who stood before them, unstoppable
in his might, who was stirring up the army of his foes like a great wave, who
was charging his maddened elephant kings against the enemy ranks, and who was
wielding a sword and moving amidst the chaos of the warriors, the gods rose to
defend their own army. At that time, their bodies were consumed by great anger,
and their weapons were gleaming.  **Verse 214-216:**  Shikhi, Kesari, Danda,
Ugra, Kanaka, Pravara, and other warriors of Indra covered the sky far and wide,
like rain clouds.  **Verse 217:**  Besides these, Indra's sons, like Mriga-
chinha and others, who were blazing with the brilliance of battle, immensely
powerful, were covering the sky far and wide.  **Verse 218:**  Then, Sri Mali,
with his crescent-shaped arrows, covered the earth with their severed heads, as
if with lotuses and their stalks.  **Verse 219:**  Then Indra thought, "Who
among these gods, or these valiant princes, can stand before this Rakshasa,
whose brilliance is immense, whose power is overwhelming? Therefore, I myself
will destroy his faith in battle, before he destroys the other gods."  **Verse
220-222:**  Thinking thus, he reassured his army, trembling with fear, as the
lord of the gods prepared to fight.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe tato'nyadapi saMprAptaM sainyaM tridazagocaram  /
kanakAsigadAzakticApamudgarasaMkulam  // 211 //  tato'ntarAla evAtivIro
mAlyavataH sutaH  /  zrImAlIti pratItAtmA puro'sya samavasthitaH  //  212  //
tena te kSaNamAtreNa surAH sUryasamatviSA  /  ka nItA iti na jJAtA muJcatA
zarasaMhatIH  //  213 //  dRSTvA tamabhyamitrINamanivAryarayaM tataH  /
kSobhayantaM dviSAM sainyaM mahAgrAhamivArNavam  //  214 //  mattadvipendra
saMghaTTaghaTitArAtimaNDalam  /  karavAlakarodAramaTamaNDalamadhyagam  // 215 //
amI samutthitA devA nijaM pAlayituM balam  /  mahAkrodhaparItAGgAH
samullAsitahetayaH  //  216  //  zikhikezaridaNDograkanakapravarAdayaH  /
chAdayanto nabho dUraM prAvRSeNyA ivAmbudAH  //  217 //  svastrIyAzca
surendrasya mRgacihnAdayo'dhikam  /  dIpyamAnA raNodbhUtatejasA sumahAbalAH  //
218 //  tataH zrImAlinA teSAM zirobhiH kamalairiva  /  sazaivalairmahI channA
chinnaizcandrArdha sAyakaiH  // 219 //  acintayattataH zakro yenaite
narapuGgavAH  /  kumArAH kSayamAnItAH samamebhirvaraiH suraiH  // 220 //
tasyAsya ko raNe sthAtuM puro vAncheddivaukasAm  /  rAkSasasya ['mahAtejo
durIkSyasyAtivIryavAn  // 221 //  tasmAdsya svayaM yuddhazraddhAdhvaMsaM
karomyaham  /  aparAnamarAn yAvannayate naiSa paJcatAm  // 222 //  iti dhyAtvA
samAzvAsya ] balaM sa trAsakampitam  /  yoddhuM samudyato
yAvastridazAnAmadhIzvaraH  //  223 //  jisa prakAra kAmake bANoMse kugurukA
hRdaya khaNDita ho jAtA hai usI prakAra jinase agnikI dedIpyamAna zikhA nikala
rahI thI aise prasannakIrti ke bANoMse devoMkI senA khaNDita ho gayI  // 210  //
tadanantara devoMkI aura dUsarI senA sAmane AyI  /  vaha senA kanaka, talavAra,
gadA, zakti, dhanuSa aura mudgara Adi astra-zastroMse yukta thI || 211||
tatpazcAt mAlyavAnkA putra zrImAlI jo atyanta vIra aura niHzaMka hRdayavAlA thA
devoMkI senAke Age khar3A ho gayA || 212 || jisakI sUrya ke samAna kAnti thI
tathA jo nirantara bANoMkA samUha chor3a rahA thA aise zrImAlIne devoMko
kSaNamAtrameM kahA~ bheja diyA isakA patA nahIM calA ||213|| tadanantara jo
zatrupakSakI orase sAmane khar3A thA, jisakA vega anivArya thA, jo zatruoMkI
senAko isa taraha kSobhayukta kara rahA thA jisa prakAra ki mahAgrAha kisI
samudrako kSobhayukta karatA hai, jo apanA madonmatta hAthI zatruoMkI senApara
hUla rahA thA aura jo talavAra hAthameM liye uddaNDa yoddhAoMke bIcameM ghUma
rahA thA aise zrImAlIko dekhakara deva loga apanI senAkI rakSA karaneke lie uThe
/  usa samaya una sabake zarIra bahuta bhArI krodhase vyApta the tathA unake
hAthoMmeM aneka zastra camaka rahe the || 214216 //  zikhI, kezarI, daNDa, ugra,
kanaka, pravara Adi indrake yoddhAoMne AkAzako dUra taka aisA AcchAdita kara
liyA jaisA ki varSARtuke megha AcchAdita kara lete haiM ||217|| inake sivAya
mRgacihna Adi indrake bhAneja bhI jo ki raNase samutpanna tejake dvArA atyadhika
dedIpyamAna aura mahAbalavAna the, AkAzako dUra-dUra taka AcchAdita kara rahe
the || 218|| tadanantara zrImAlIne apane arddhacandrAkAra bANoMse kATe hue unake
siroMse pRthivIko isa prakAra Dhaka diyA mAno zevAlasahita kamaloMse hI Dhaka
diyA ho  //  219  //  athAnantara indrane vicAra kiyA ki jisane ina zreSTha
devoMke sAtha-sAtha ina narazreSTha rAjakumAroM kA kSaya kara diyA hai tathA
apane vizAla tejase jisakI ora A~kha aise isa rAkSasake Age yuddhameM devoMke
bIca aisA kauna hai jo sAmane khar3A sake ? isalie jaba taka yaha dUsare devoMko
nahIM mAratA hai usake pahale hI zraddhAkA nAza kara detA hU~  //  220 - 222  //
aisA vicArakara devoMkA uThAnA bhI kaThina hai honekI bhI icchA kara maiM svayaM
isake yuddhakI svAmI indra bhayase 284 1. tviSaH ma  /  2. tamabhramitrINaM ma
/  3. bhAgineyAH  /  4. citracandArdha ma  /  5. zaraiH kha.  /  6.[]
koSThakAntargataH pAThaH ka. pustake nAsti  /  7. mRtyum  /

Page #335 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Chapter  2  Falling to his feet, and touching the ground with his
knees, Jayant, renowned as a great hero, spoke to him: "O Indra, if you engage
in battle while I am alive, then my birth from you will be meaningless."  "When
I was a child, you would play with me in your lap, and you would look at me with
love. Now I want to repay that love, to be free from that debt."  "Therefore,
father, stay at home without worry. I will destroy all your enemies in an
instant."  "Father, what can be cut with a nail with little effort, is pointless
to cut with an axe."  Thus, having persuaded his father, Jayant prepared for
battle. At that time, he seemed to be swallowing the sky itself with his body,
filled with rage.  Protected by his army, shining with weapons, and swift as the
wind, Jayant approached Srimal without any hesitation.  Srimal, seeing his
worthy adversary after a long time, was very pleased. He ran towards him, moving
through the midst of his army.  Then, the two princes, whose bowstrings were
constantly drawn, showered each other with arrows, filled with anger.  The two
armies, standing in their respective lines, watched the battle of the two
princes, their minds filled with wonder.  Then, Srimal, cheering his army, broke
Jayant's chariot with his weapon, Kanak, making him charioteerless.  Jayant fell
unconscious, and seeing him fall, the hearts of his army sank. When he regained
consciousness and rose, the hearts of his army also rose.  Then, Jayant,
wielding the weapon Bhindimala, made Srimal charioteerless. He struck him with
such force, fueled by anger, that Srimal fell unconscious.  Then, a great roar
of joy arose from the enemy army, and a similar sound of lamentation arose from
Jayant's army.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazaM parva 2 nipatya pAdayostAvajAnuspRSTamahItalaH  /  tamuvAca mahAvIro
jayanta iti vizrutaH  // 224 //  satyeva mayi devendra karoSi yadi saMyugam  /
tato bhavatkRtaM janma tvayA mama nirarthakam  // 225 //  bAlako'ke bhejankrIDAM
putraprItyA yadIkSitaH  /  snehasyAnRNyamaMtasya janayAmi tavAdhunA  // 226 //
sa tvaM nirAkulo bhUtvA tiSTha tAta yathepsitam  /  zatrUn kSaNena niHzeSAnayaM
vyApAdayAmyaham  // 227 //  nakhena prApyate chedaM vastu yatsvalpayatnataH  /
vyApAraH parazostatra nanu tAta nirarthakaH  // 228 //  vArayitvetyasau tAtaM
saMyugAya samudyataH  /  kopAvezAccharIreNa asamAna ivAmbaram  // 229 //
pratizrImAli cAyAsIdAyAsaparivarjitaH  /  guptaH pavanavegena
sainyenojjvalahetinA  // 23 //  zrImAlI cApi saMprAptaM cirAdyogyaM pratidviSam
/  dRSTvA tuSTo dadhAvAsya saMmukhaM sainyamadhyagaH  // 23 //  amuJcatAM tataH
kruddhau zarAsAraM parasparam  /  kumArau satatAkRSTadRSTakodaNDamaNDalau  //
232 //  tayoH kumArayoryuddhaM nizcalaM pRtanAdvayam  /  dadarza
vismayaprAptamAnasaM rekhayA sthitam  // 233 //  kanakena tato mittvA jayanto
virathIkRtaH  /  zrImAlinA svasainyasya kurvatA saMmadaM param  // 23 //
mUrcchayA patite tasmin svavargasyApatanmanaH  /  mUrchAyAzca parityAgAdutthite
punarusthitam  // 235 /  /  Ahatya miNDimAlena jayantena tataH kRtaH  /  zrImAlI
viratho roSAtprahAreNAtivarddhitAt  // 236 //  tataH parabale toSani?So nirgato
mahAn  /  nije ca yAtudhAnasya samAkrandadhvanirbale  // 27 //  kA~patI huI
sevAko sAntvanA dekara jyoMhI yuddhake lie uThA tyoMhI usakA mahAbalavAn jayanta
nAmakA putra caraNoMmeM girakara tathA pRthivIpara ghuTane Tekakara kahane lagA
ki he devendra ! yadi mere rahate hue Apa yuddha karate haiM to Apase jo merA
janma huA hai vaha nirarthaka hai  /  / 223-225 /  /  jaba maiM bAlya avasthAmeM
ApakI godameM krIr3A karatA thA aura Apa putrake snehase bAra-bAra merI ora
dekhate the Aja maiM usa snehakA badalA cukAnA cAhatA hU~, usa RNase mukta honA
cAhatA huuN||226|| isalie he tAta! Apa nirAkula hokara gharapara rhie| maiM
kSaNa-bharameM samasta zatruoMkA nAza kara DAlatA hU~  // 227|| he tAta! jo
vastu thor3e hI prayatnase nakhake dvArA chedI jA sakatI hai vahA~ parazukA
calAnA vyartha hI hai  // 228|| isa prakAra pitAko manAkara jayanta yuddhake lie
udyata huaa| usa samaya vaha krodhAvezase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno zarIrake
dvArA AkAzako hI grasa rahA ho  // 229|| pavanake samAna vegazAlI evaM
dedIpyamAna zastroMko dhAraNa karanevAlI senA jisakI rakSA kara rahI thI aisA
jayanta binA kisI khedake sahaja hI zrImAlIke sammukha AyA  // 230 //  zrImAlI
cira kAla bAda raNake yogya zatruko AyA dekha bahuta santuSTa huA aura senAke
bIca gamana karatA huA usakI ora daur3A  // 231 //  tadanantara jinake
dhanurmaNDala nirantara khicate hue dikhAI dete the aise krodhase bhare donoM
kumAroMne eka dUsarepara bANoMkI varSA chor3I  /  / 232 //  jinakA citta
Azcaryase bhara rahA thA aura jo apanI-apanI rekhAoMpara khar3I thIM aisI donoM
orakI senAe~ nizcala hokara una donoM kumAroMkA yuddha dekha rahI thIM  // 233
//  tadanantara apanI senAko harSita karate hue zrImAlIne kanaka nAmaka
hathiyArase jayantakA ratha tor3akara ratharahita kara diyA  /  / 234 //
jayanta mUrchAse nIce gira par3A so use girA dekha usakI senAkA mana bhI gira
gayA aura mUrchA dUra honepara jaba vaha uThA to senAkA mana bhI uTha gayA  /  /
235 //  tadanantara jayantane bhiNDimAla nAmaka zastra calAkara zrImAlIko
ratharahita kara diyA aura atyanta bar3he hue krodhase aisA prahAra kiyA ki vaha
mUcchita hokara gira par3A  /  / 236 /  /  taba zatrusenAmeM bar3A bhArI
harSanAda huA aura 1. jamaspRSTa m.| 2. janakrIDAM m.| 3. tvayAhaM phalametasya
/  4. yathekSitam ma.  /  5. yasamAna ka.  /  6. dadhAva = dhAvati sma  /  7. sa
tadAkRSTa m.| 8. pRtanIdvayam m.| 9. zarmadaM m.| saMmataM kh.| 10. strImAlir
ma.  /  11. vardhitAn ma.  /  12. babhau ma.  /

Page #336 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
286 In the Padma Purana, Sri Mali, enraged after regaining consciousness,
charged towards Jayanta, showering him with a storm of weapons. He appeared
terrifying. ||23|| The two princes, shedding their weapons, shone brightly, like
two lion cubs with their mane ablaze. ||239|| Then, the son of the king of the
gods, Jayanta, struck the son of Malyavan, Sri Mali, with his mace, killing him
instantly. He fell to the ground. ||240|| Blood gushing from his mouth, Sri Mali
fell to the earth, resembling a setting sun. ||241|| After killing Sri Mali,
Jayanta, mounted on his chariot, blew his conch shell in joy. The demons,
terrified, fled in all directions. ||242|| Seeing Sri Mali lifeless and Jayanta,
whose warriors were shouting in victory, ready for battle, Indrajit, the son of
Ravana, came forward to face him. He reassured his fleeing army, his anger
burning fiercely. ||243-244|| Then, like Kali in his wrath, Indrajit, with his
arrows, shattered Jayanta's armor, just as he had shattered his armor, he
shattered his body. ||245|| Seeing Jayanta, whose armor was broken, whose body
was red with blood, and who was covered with arrows like a hedgehog, Indra
himself rose to fight. He covered the sky with his vehicles and his shining,
sharp weapons. ||246-247|| Seeing Indra ready for battle, his charioteer,
Sanmati, said to Ravana, "O God! This is Indra, the lord of the gods, himself."
||248|| The Lokapalas, the guardians of the world, are protecting him from all
sides. He is mounted on his intoxicated elephant, Airavata, adorned with the
brilliance of his crown jewels. He is covered by a white umbrella, shielding the
sun, and surrounded by an army like a raging ocean. ||249-250|| 1. Vivodbhut m.
| 2. Hatah Sri Mali yena sah. Hatah Sri Malikah m., k., b. | 3. Kavachavat. | 4.
'Shwavittu shalyastalloomni shalali shalalam shalam' iti Amarah. Shalali 'sehi'
iti Hindi. Salilatulya tam k., kh., m., b. ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 286 padmapurANe gatamUrchastu saMkruddhaH zrImAlI bhRzabhISaNaH  /  kiran
praharaNavAtaM jayantAbhimukho yayau  // 23 //  muJcantau hetijAlaM tau kumArau
rejatustarAm  /  siMhArbhakAvivoddhRtadIptakesarasaMcayau  // 239 //  tato
mAlyavataH putraH surarAjasya sUnunA  /  stanAntare hato gADhaM gadayA patito
bhuvi  // 24 //  vadanena tato raktaM vimuJcan dharaNIM gataH  /  astaMgata
ivAmAti kamalAkarabAndhavaH  // 241 //  hetazrImAlikaH prApya rathaM
vAsavanandanaH  /  dadhmau zaGkha mudA bhItA rAkSasAzca vidadvavuH  // 24 //
mAlyavattanayaM dRSTvA tato nirgatajIvitam  /  jayantaM ca susannaddhaM
toSamuktabhaTasvanam  // 243 /  /  AzvAsayannijaM sainyaM palAyanaparAyaNam  /
indrajitsaMmukhIbhUto jayantasyotkaTo ruSA  /  / 244 //  tato'mibhavane saktaM
janAnAM taM kaliM ythaa| jayantamindrajiccakre jarjaraM vairbhavaccharaiH  //
245 /  /  dRSTvA ca chinnavarmANaM rudhirAruNavigraham  /  jayantaM
zarasaMghAtaiH prApta zailalitulyatAm  // 246 //  amarendraH svayaM
yoddhamutthitazchAdayannamaH  /  nIrandhra vAhanairugrairAyudhaizca calaskaraiH
// 247 /  /  avAdIt sArathizcaivaM rAvaNaM saMmatizrutiH  /  ayaM sa deva
saMprAptaH svayaM nAtho divaukasAm  /  / 248 //  cakreNa lokapAlAnAM paritaH
kRtapAlanaH  /  mattairAvatapRSThastho mauliratnaprabhAvRtaH  // 249 //
pANDureNoparisthena chatreNAvRtabhAskaraH  /  kSubdhena sAgareNeva sainyena
kRtaveSTanaH  // 250 //  idhara rAkSasoMkI senAmeM rudana zabda sunAI par3ane
lagA  // 237 /  /  jaba mUrchA dUra huI taba zrImAlI atyanta kupita ho
zastrasamUhakI varSA karatA huA jayantake sammukha gyaa| usa samaya vaha atyanta
bhayaMkara dikhAI detA thA  // 238 //  zastrasamUhako chor3ate hue donoM kumAra
aise suzobhita ho rahe the mAno jinakI camakIlI saTAoMkA samUha ur3a rahA thA
aise siMhake do bAlaka hI hoM  // 239 //  tadanantara indrake putra jayantane
mAlyavAnke putra zrImAlIke vakSaHsthalapara gadAkA aisA prahAra kiyA ki vaha
pRthivIpara gira par3A  // 240 //  mukhase khUnako chor3atA pRthivIpara par3A
zrImAlI aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno asta hotA huA sUrya hI ho  // 241 //
zrImAlIko mAraneke bAda jayantane rathapara savAra ho harSase zaMkha phUMkA
jisase rAkSasa bhayabhIta hokara idhara-udhara bhAgane lage  // 242 /
tadanantara zrImAlIko niSprANa aura jisake yoddhA harSanAda kara rahe the aise
jayantako AgAmI yuddhake lie tatpara dekha rAvaNakA putra indrajit apanI bhAgatI
huI senAko AzvAsana detA huA jayantake sammukha aayaa| usa samaya vaha krodhase
bar3A vikaTa jAna par3atA thA  // 243-244 //  tadanantara indrajitne kalikAlakI
taraha logoMke anAdara karane meM saMlagna jayantako apane bANoMse kavacakI
taraha jarjara kara diyA arthAt jisa prakAra bANoMse usakA kavaca jarjara kiyA
thA usI prakAra usakA zarIra bhI jarjara kara diyA  // 245 //  jisakA kavaca
TUTa gayA thA, jisakA zarIra khUnase lAla-lAla ho rahA thA aura jo gar3e hue
bANoMse sehIkI tulanA prApta kara rahA thA aise jayantako dekhakara indra svayaM
yuddha karaneke lie utthaa| usa samaya indra apane vAhanoM aura camakate hue
tIkSNa zastroMse nIrandhra AkAzako AcchAdita kara rahA thA  // 246-247 //
indrako yuddhake lie udyata dekha sanmati nAmaka sArathine rAvaNase kahA ki he
deva ! yaha devoMkA adhipati indra svayaM hI AyA hai  // 248 //  lokapAloMkA
samUha cAroM orase isakI rakSA kara rahA hai, yaha madonmatta airAvata hAthIpara
savAra hai, mukuTake ratnoMkI prabhAse AvRta hai, Upara lage hue sapheda
chatrase sUryako Dhaka rahA hai, tathA kSobhako prApta hue mahAsAgarake samAna
senAse ghirA huA hai  // 249-250|| 1. vivodbhUta ma.  /  2. hataH zrImAlI yena
saH  /  hataH zrImAlikaH ma., ka., ba.  /  3. kavacavat  /  4. 'zvAvittu
zalyastallomni zalalI zalalaM zalam' ityamaraH  /  zalalI 'sehI' iti hindI  /
salilatulyatAm ka., kha., ma., b.|

Page #337 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Canto  **287** This Kumar, Indrajit, is too powerful for this
battle. You yourself should rise and destroy the enemy's pride. **251**  Seeing
Indrajit approaching, strong and unyielding, Ravana, remembering the death of
Mali and burning with the recent slaying of Sri Mali, charged forward in his
chariot, swift as the wind. **252**  Seeing his son surrounded by enemies,
Ravana, filled with rage, rushed forward in his chariot, swift as the wind.
**253**  The battle between these two warriors was thrilling and terrifying. It
was shrouded in the dense darkness created by the clash of weapons. **254**  In
the darkness created by the weapons and the crimson mist, the valiant warriors
could only be identified by their loud roars. **255**  Those warriors who had
previously been hesitant to fight, now, spurred by their devotion to their lord
and fueled by the anger of being struck, fought fiercely. **256**  They fought
with maces, javelins, spears, clubs, swords, arrows, axes, golden discs,
daggers, swords, tridents, nooses, maces, axes, maces, bows, stones,
ploughshares, staffs, arrows, and countless other weapons designed to cut and
kill. The sky was terrifying, filled with the fire of the clashing weapons.
**257-259**  Here the sound of "grasad-grasad", there the sound of "shud-shud",
here the roar of "ran-ran", there the sound of "kin-kin", here the sound of
"trap-trap", there the sound of "dam-dam", here the sound of "chham-chham",
there the sound of "pat-pat", here the sound of "chal-chal", there the sound of
"tadd-tadd", here the sound of "tad-tad", there the sound of "chat-chat", and
here the sound of "ghghghghgh". The battlefield was filled with the sounds of
the clashing weapons. **260-263**  Horses were killing horses, elephants were
killing elephants, charioteers were killing charioteers, elephant riders were
killing elephant riders, and chariots were destroying chariots. **264**  The
infantry, eager to fight, were ready to attack anyone who came before them.
**265**  1. Rise. 2. Pride. 3. Tararavan-b. 4. Purvamara-v m., Purvamara-d b. 5.
Karavali-bhiradhrip: m.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazaM parva 287 mahAbalo'yametasya kumAro nocito raNe  /  'udyaccha
svayameva tvaM jahi zatrorahaMyutAm  // 25 //  tato'bhimukhamAyAntaM
dRSTvAkhaNDalamUrjitam  /  saMsmRtya mAlimaraNaM zrImAlivadhadIpitaH  // 252 //
dRSTvA ca zatrumiH putraM veSvyamAnaM samantataH  /  dadhAva rAvaNaH krodhAd
rathenAnilaraMhasA  // 253 /  /  maTAnAmamavadyuddhametayo romaharSaNam  /
tumulaM zastrasaMghAtaghanadhvAntasamAvRtam  /  / 254 //  tataH
zastrakRtadhvAnte raktanIhAravartini  /  ajJAyanta bhaTAH zUrAstArArAveNa
kevalam  // 255 /  /  preritA svAmino maktyA pUrvAnAdaracoditAH  /
prahArotthena kopena maTA yayadhire bhRzam  // 256 //  gadAbhiH zaktibhiH
kuntairmusalairasibhiH zaraiH  /  paridhaiH kanakaizcakraH
karavAlIbhiraMghripaiH  // 257 //  zUlaiH pAzairmuzuNDIbhiH kuThAraimudrainaiH
/  prAvamirlAGgalairdaNDaiH kauNaiH sAyakaveNumiH  // 25 //  anyaizca vividhaiH
zastraranyonyacchedakArimiH  /  karAlamabhavad vyoma tadAghAtotthitAnalam  /  /
259 //  kvacidgrasaditi dhvAno bhavatyanyatra zUditi  /  kvacidraNaraNArAvaH
kvacitkiNikiNisvanaH  // 26 //  patrapAyate'nyatra tathA damadamAyate  /
chamAchamAyate'nyatra tathA paTapaTAyate  // 26 //  chalachalAyate'nyatra
TaTadAyate tathA  /  taTattaTAyate'nyatra tathA caTacaTAyate  // 262 //
ghagghagghagghAyate'nyatra raNaM zastrotthitaiH svaraiH  /
zabdAtmakamivodbhUtaM tadA tvajiramaNDalam  // 263 //  hanyate vAjinA vAjI
vAraNena mataGgajaH  /  tatrasthena ca tatrastho rathena dhvasyate rathaH  // 26
//  padAtibhiH samaM yuddhaM kartuM pAdAtamudyatam  /  yathA
purogataikaikabhaTapATanatatparam  // 265 //  yaha cUMki mahAbalavAn hai isalie
kumAra indrajit yuddha karaneke lie isake yogya nahIM hai ataH Apa svayaM hI
uThie aura zatrukA ahaMkAra naSTa kIjie  /  / 251 //  tadanantara balavAn
indrako sAmane AtA dekha rAvaNa vAyuke samAna vegazAlI rathase sAmane daudd'aa|
usa samaya rAvaNa mAlIke maraNakA smaraNa kara rahA thA aura abhI hAlameM jo
zrImAlIkA vadha huA thA usase dedIpyamAna ho rahA thaa| usa samaya ina donoM
yoddhAoMkA romAMcakArI bhayaMkara yuddha ho rahA thaa| vaha yuddha zastra
samudAyase utpanna saghana andhakArase vyApta thaa| rAvaNane dekhA ki usakA
pUtra indrajita saba orase zatraoM dvArA ghera liyA gayA hai ataH vaha kupita ho
Age daur3A  // 252-254|| tadanantara jahA~ zastroMke dvArA andhakAra phaila rahA
thA aura rudhirakA kuharA chAyA huA thA aise yuddha meM yadi zUravIra yoddhA
pahacAne jAte the to kevala apanI joradAra AvAja se hI pahacAne jAte the  /  /
255 //  jina yoddhAoMne pahale apekSA bhAvase yuddha karanA banda kara diyA thA
unapara bhI jaba coTeM par3ane lagI taba ve svAmIkI bhaktise prerita ho
prahArajanya krodhase atyadhika yuddha karane lage  // 256 /  /  gadA, zakti,
kunta, musala, kRpANa, bANa, parigha, kanaka, cakra, churI, aMhnipa, zUla, pAza,
bhuzuNDI, kuThAra, mudgara, dhana, patthara, lAMgala, daNDa, kauNa, bAMsake bANa
tathA eka dUsareko kATanevAle anya aneka zastroMse usa samaya AkAza bhayaMkara
ho gayA thA aura zastroMke pArasparika AghAtase usameM agni utpanna ho rahI thI
// 257-259 /  /  usa samaya kahIM to grasad-grasad, kahIM zUd-zUd, kahIM raNa-
raNa, kahIM kiNa-kiNa, kahIM trapa-trapa, kahIM dama-dama, kahIM chamachama,
kahIM paTa-paTa, kahIM chala-chala, kahIM Tadda-Tadda, kahIM tar3a-tar3a, kahIM
caTa-caTa aura kahIM ghagghaghagghakI AvAja A rahI thii| yathArtha bAta yaha thI
ki zastroMse utpanna svaroMse usa samaya raNAMgaNa zabdamaya ho rahA thA  //
260-263 //  ghor3A ghoDAko mAra rahA thA, hAthI hAthIko mAra rahA thA,
ghur3asavAra ghur3asavArako, hAthIkA savAra hAthIke savArako aura ratha rathako
naSTa kara rahA thA  // 264|| jo jisake sAmane AyA usIko cIrane meM tatpara
rahanevAlA paidala sipAhiyoMkA jhuNDa 1. uttiSTha  /  2. garvam  /  3.
tArarAvaNa-ba.  /  4. pUrvamArava ma., pUrvamArada ba.  /  5.
karavAlibhiradhripaH ma.  /

Page #338 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
288 The group of water droplets, like a cluster of pearls, emanating from the
elephant's trunk, extinguished the smoke and fire caused by the clash of
weapons. ||266|| The massive teeth, like statues, falling from the elephant's
mouth, shattered the ranks of the enemy soldiers. ||267||  "Strike, brave
warrior, why are you being cowardly?  O valiant soldier, endure the blow of my
sword for a moment." ||268|| "You are already dead, where can you go now after
coming to me? You are poorly trained, you don't even know how to hold a bow."
||269|| "Run away and protect yourself, your battle-scar is useless. You have
inflicted such a small wound that it hasn't even scratched my skin." ||270||
"You have wasted your master's wages, why are you roaring?  Your bravery will be
revealed when the time comes." ||271|| "Why are you trembling?  Gain some
stability, quickly take the arrow, hold your fist firm, see this sword will slip
and fall." ||272|| Such conversations were repeatedly exchanged between the
valiant warriors, filled with utmost enthusiasm, in front of their masters
during the battle. ||273||  One warrior's arm was heavy with laziness, it
wouldn't move, but when the enemy struck it with a mace, it started dancing in
an instant and became strong. ||274||  Someone's head, profusely bleeding, fell
down, repeatedly thanking the enemy. ||275|| The warriors' chests were pierced
by arrows, but their minds were not broken. Their heads fell, but their pride
remained. They preferred death over life. ||276|| The skilled and powerful
warriors, protecting their honor, fought bravely and gave up their lives in the
face of danger. ||277|| One warrior, filled with anger, was about to die, but he
attacked the enemy's body as he fell. ||278||  One valiant warrior, struck by
the enemy's weapon, retaliated with a fist and a mace, making the enemy fall to
the ground. ||279||  He was ready to fight the infantry. ||265||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 288 padmapurANe gajazUtkRtanissarpacchIkarAsArasaMhatiH  /
zastrapAtasamudbhUtadhUmaketumazIzamat  // 266 //  pratimAguravo dantA bhraSTA
api gajAnanAt  /  patantaH kurvate bhedaM bhaTaparadhomukhAH  // 267 //
prahAraM muJca bho zUra mA bhUH puruSa kAtaraH  /  prahAraM 'maTasiMhAseH
sahasva mama sAMpratam  // 268 //  ayaM mRto'si mAM prApya gatistava kuto'dhunA
/  duHzikSita na jAnAsi gRhItumapi sAyakam  // 269 //  rakSAtmAnaM vrajAmuSmAd
raNakaNDUrmudhA tava  /  kaNDUreva na me bhraSTA kSataM svalpaM tvayA kRtam  //
27 //  mudhaiva jIvanaM bhuktaM paNDakena prabhostvayA  /  kiM garjasi phale
vyaktirbhaTatAyAH karomyaham  // 27 //  kiM kampase bhaMja sthairya gRhANa
tvaritaM zaram  /  dRDhamuSTiM kuru srasatkhaDgo'yaM tava yAsyati  // 272 //
evamAdisamAlApAH paramotsAhavartinAm  /  maTAnAmAhave jAtAH svAminAmagrato muhuH
// 27 //  alasaH kasyacidvAhurAhato gadayA dviSA  /  babhUva vizado'tyantaM
kSaNanartanakAriNaH  // 27 //  prayaccha pratipakSasya sAdhukAraM muhuH ziraH  /
papAta kasyacidveganiSkAmadbharizoNitam  // 275 /  /  amidyata zarairvakSo
maTAnAM na tu mAnasam  /  ziraH papAta no mAnaH kAnto mRtyuna jIvitam  /  / 276
//  kurvANA yazaso rakSA dakSA vIrA mahaujasaH  /  bhaTAH saMkaTamAyAtAH prANAn
zastrabhRto'mucan  // 277 //  niyamANo maTaH kshcicchtrmaarnnkaakssyaa| papAta
dehamAkramya ripoH kopena pUritaH  // 278 //  cyute zastrAntarAghAtAcchasne
kazcidbhaTottamaH  /  muSTimudgaraghAtena cakre zatru gatAsukam  // 279 //
paidala sipAhiyoMke sAtha yuddha karaneke lie udyata thA  // 265 /  /
hAthiyoMkI zUtkArake sAtha jo jalake chIMToMkA samUha nikala rahA thA vaha
zastrapAtase utpanna agniko zAnta kara rahA thA  // 266 /  /  pratimAke samAna
bhArI-bhArI jo dA~ta hAthiyoMke mukhase nIce girate the ve girate-girate hI
aneka yoddhAoMkI paMktikA kacUmara nikAla dete the  /  / 267 /  /  are zUra
puruSa ! prahAra chor3a, kAyara kyoM ho rahA hai ? he sainikaziromaNe ! isa
samaya jarA merI talavArakA bhI to vAra sahana kara  // 268 /  /  le aba tU
maratA hI hai, mere pAsa Akara aba to jA hI kahA~ sakatA hai ? are duHzikSita !
talavAra pakar3anA bhI to tujhe AtA nahIM hai, yuddha karaneke lie calA hai  //
269 /  /  jA yahAMse bhAga jA aura apane ApakI rakSA kara  /  terI raNakI khAja
vyartha hai, tUne itanA thor3A ghAva kiyA ki usase merI khAja hI nahIM gayI  //
270 /  /  tujha napuMsakane svAmIkA vetana vyartha hI khAyA hai, cupa raha, kyoM
garaja rahA hai ? avasara Anepara zUravIratA apane Apa prakaTa ho jAyegI  /  /
271 /  /  kA~pa kyoM rahA hai ? jarA sthiratAko prApta ho, zIghra hI bANa
hAthameM le, muTThIko majabUta rakha, dekha yaha talavAra khisakakara nIce calI
jAyegI ||272saa usa samaya yuddha meM apane-apane svAmiyoMke Age paramotsAhase
yukta yoddhAoMke bAra-bAra ullikhita vArtAlApa ho rahe the  /  / 273 //  kisIkI
bhujA Alasyase bharI thI-uThatI hI nahIM thI para jaba zatrune usameM gadAkI
coTa jamAyI taba vaha kSaNa-bharameM nAca uThA aura usakI bhujA ThIka ho gayI
// 274 /  /  jisase bar3e vegase atyadhika khUna nikala rahA thA aisA kisIkA
sira zatruke lie bAra-bAra dhanyavAda detA huA nIce gira par3A  // 275 /  /
bANoMse yoddhAoMkA vakSaHsthala to khaNDita ho gayA para mana khaNDita nahIM
huaa| isI prakAra yoddhAoMkA sira to gira gayA para mAna nahIM giraa| unheM
mRtyu priya thI para jIvana priya nahIM thA  // 276 //  jo mahAtejasvI kuzala
vIra the unhoMne saMkaTa Anepara zastra liye yazakI rakSA karate-karate apane
prANa chor3a diye the  // 277 /  /  koI eka yoddhA mara to rahA thA para zatruko
mAranekI icchAse krodhayukta ho jaba girane lagA to zatruke zarIrapara AkramaNa
kara girA  // 278 //  zatruke zastrakI coTase jaba kisI 1. zIkarAkAra-ma.  /  2.
bhaTasahAseH m.| 3. klIbena, 'tRtIyA prakRtiH zaNDaH klIbaH paNDo napuMsake'
ityamaraH  /  pANDukena ma.; paNDukena ka., kha., ba.  /  4. bhava ma.  /  5.
kurustraMzaM ma. (?)  /  6. dviSaH ma.  /

Page #339 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Chapter  **289.** A great warrior embraced his enemy like a
friend, squeezing him tightly until he was lifeless. The enemy's blood flowed
freely from the embrace.  **290.** Another warrior, slaying the enemy ranks,
cleared a path for himself in the battle. Fear kept other men from crossing his
path.  **291.** Even as they fell, the best warriors never showed their backs to
the enemy, whose chests swelled with pride.  **292.** Horses, chariots,
warriors, and elephants fell with great force, crushing thousands of horses,
chariots, warriors, and elephants.  **293.** The sky was filled with a mixture
of dust raised by falling weapons, blood, and the intoxicating scent of
elephants.  **294.** One fierce warrior, holding his spilling intestines with
his left hand, raised his sword in his right and charged towards the enemy.
**295.** Another warrior, his lips clenched and his eyes wide open, tightened
his belt with his own intestines and advanced towards the enemy.  **296.** A
warrior, consumed by rage, picked up a large stone with both hands and hurled it
at the enemy's head, who had lost his weapons.  **297.** Another warrior, his
clothes stained with the blood of his fallen enemy, picked up his own severed
bone and charged towards the enemy.  **298.** A warrior, eager for battle and
full of the tricks of war, captured his enemy with a noose, dragged him far
away, and released him.  **299.** Seeing his enemy disarmed and defeated, a
warrior, eager for a fair fight, reluctantly abandoned his own weapon and
approached the enemy.  **300.** One warrior, using a bow with a flaming
arrowhead, rained down a torrent of blood upon the enemy, killing many.
**301.** Another warrior, though his head was severed, still charged at the
enemy with great speed, wielding a stone in his hand.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazaM parva 289 AliGgaya mitravatkazciddobhyAM gADhaM mahAmaTaH  /  cakAra
vigalagaktadhAraM zatru vijIvitam  // 28 //  kazciJcakAra panthAnamRjaM nighnan
bhaTAvalIm  /  samare puruSairanyairbhayAdakRtasaMgamam  // 281 /  /  patanto'pi
na pRSThasya darzanaM bhttsttmaaH| viteruH pratipakSasya garvottAnitavakSasaH
// 282 //  azvai rathairbhaTai gaiH pataddhiratiraMhasA  /  azvA rathA maTA nAgA
nyapAtyanta sahasrazaH  // 283 /  /  rajomiH zastranikSepasamudbhUtaH sazoNitaiH
/  dAnAmbhasA ca saMcchannaM zakracAramannamaH  // 28 //  kazcitkareNa saMrudhya
vAmenAntrANi sadbhaTaH  /  tarasA khaDgamudyamya yayau pratyari mISaNaH  /  /
285 /  /  kazcinnijaiH purItadbhirbaddha vA parikaraM dRDham  /
daSToSTho'miyayau zatru dRSTAzeSakanInikaH  // 286 /  /  kazcitkIlAlamAdAya
nijaM roSaparAyaNaH  /  karAbhyAM dviSato mUrdhni cikSepa galitAyudhaH  // 287 /
/  gRhItvA kIkasaM kazcinnijaM chinnamarAtinA  /  DuDhauke taM
galadraktadhArAMzukavirAjitaH  // 28 //  pAzena kazcidAnIya ripuM
yuddhasamutsukaH  /  mumoca dUranirmuktaM raNasaMbhavasaMbhramaH  // 289 //
kazciccyutAyudhaM dRSTvA pratipakSamanicchayA  /  DuDhauke zastramujjhitvA
nyAyyasaMgrAmatatparaH  // 290 /  /  pinAkAnanalagnena ripUn kazcitpratidviSA  /
jaghAna ghanakIlAladhArAnikaravarSiNA  /  / 291 //  kazcitkabandhatAM prAptaH
zirasA sphuTaraMhasA  /  muJcasta dizi kIlAlaM pratipakSamatADayat  /  / 292 /
/  yoddhAkA zastra chUTakara nIce gira gayA taba usane muTThIrUpI mudgarakI
mArase hI zatruko prANarahita kara diyA  // 279 /  /  kisI mahAyoddhAne mitrakI
taraha bhujAoMse zatrukA gAr3ha AliMgana kara use nirjIva kara diyA-AliMgana
karate samaya zatruke zarIrase khUnako dhArA baha nikalI thI  // 280 //  kisI
yoddhAne yoddhAoMke samahako mArakara yaddhameM apanA sIdhA mArga banA liyA
thaa| bhayake kAraNa anya puruSa usake usa mArgameM Ar3e nahIM Aye the  /  / 281
//  garvase jinakA vakSaHsthala tanA huA thA aise uttama yoddhAoMne girate-
girate bhI zatruke lie apanI pITha nahIM dikhalAyI thI  /  / 282 /  /  bar3e
vegase nIce giranevAle ghor3oM, rathoM, yoddhAoM aura hAthiyoMne hajAroM
ghor3oM, rathoM, yoddhAoM aura hAthiyoMko nIce girA diyA thA  // 283|| zastroMke
nikSepase uThI huI rudhirAkta dhUli aura hAthiyoM ke madajalase AkAza aisA
vyApta ho gayA thA mAno indradhanuSoMse hI AcchAdita ho rahA ho  /  / 284 /  /
koI eka bhayaMkara yoddhA apanI nikalatI huI A~toMko bAyeM hAthase pakar3akara
tathA dAhine hAthase talavAra uThA bar3e vegase zatruke sAmane jA rahA thA  //
285 /  /  jo oTha cAba rahA thA tathA jisake netroMkI pUrNa putaliyAM dikha rahI
thIM aisA koI yoddhA apanI hI AMtoMse kamarako majabUta kasakara zatrukI ora jA
rahA thA  // 286 //  jisake hathiyAra gira gaye the aise kisI yoddhAne
krodhanimagna ho apanA khana donoM hAthoMmeM bharakara zatrake sirapara DAla
diyA thA  // 287 //  jo nikalate hue khUnakI dhArAse lathapatha vastroMse
suzobhita thA aisA koI yoddhA zatruke dvArA kATI huI apanI haDDI lekara zatruke
sAmane jA rahA thA  /  / 288 //  jo yuddha meM utsuka tathA yuddhakAlameM
utpanna honevAlI aneka ceSTAoMoMse yukta thA aise kisI yoddhAne zatruko pAzameM
bAMdhakara dUra le jAkara chor3a diyA  // 289 //  jo nyAyapUrNa yuddha karane
meM tatpara thA aise kisI yoddhAne jaba dekhA ki hamAre zatruke zastra nIce gira
gaye haiM aura vaha nirasna ho gayA hai taba vaha svayaM bhI apanA zastra
chor3akara anicchAse zatruke sAmane gayA thA  // 290 /  /  koI yoddhA dhanuSake
agrabhAgameM lage evaM khUnakI bar3I moTI dhArAoMkI varSA karanevAle zatruke
dvArA hI dUsare zatruoMko mAra rahA thA  // 291 //  koI eka yoddhA sira kaTa
jAnese yadyapi kabandha dazAko prApta huA thA tathApi usane zatruko dizAmeM
vegase 1. saMruhya m.| 2. kniinikaaHm,| 3. channa- m.| 4. virAjitaM b.| 5. taM
dizi ma.  /  37

Page #340 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Padma Purana**  "Even though the head of someone filled with pride was cut
off, he continued to bite his lips and roar, falling down only after a long
time. || 293 || Another warrior, who seemed like a snake, cast a terrifying
glance like a meteor upon his opponent as he fell. || 294 || One valiant warrior
held his half-severed head with his left hand and with his right hand, he cut
off the head of his opponent and threw it down. || 295 || Another warrior, whose
weapon could not reach his enemy, threw it in anger and was ready to kill him
with his long arms like a club. || 296 || One compassionate warrior saw his
enemy lying unconscious. When he could not find water or other means to revive
him, he, filled with anxiety, began to sprinkle his own blood, cooled by the air
from the edge of his garment, upon him. || 297 || When the brave warriors
fainted, they thought they had found rest; when they were wounded by weapons,
they thought they had found pleasure; and when they died, they thought they had
achieved their purpose. || 298 || Thus, a great battle was raging, a battle that
terrified even fear itself and was eager to bring joy to the best of men. || 299
|| Where elephants were pulling valiant men towards them with their trunks, but
those valiant men were cutting off their trunks. Where men were eager to cut the
horses, but those swift horses were throwing them down with the blows of their
hooves. || 300 || Where horses, urged on by their charioteers, were pulling
chariots, but their bodies were being wounded. Where headless elephants lay
fallen and men were walking over them. || 301 || Where the bodies of foot
soldiers were being shattered by the forceful blows of each other. Where valiant
warriors were pulling the tails of horses with their hands so hard that they
stood still. || 302 || Where the temples of elephants were being split by the
blows of hands and pearls were falling out of them. Where chariots were being
broken by falling elephants and many warriors were being injured. || 303 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe "kRtto'pi kasyacinmUrdhA garvanirbhara cetasaH  /
daSTadantacchado'paptadhuGkAramukharazviram  //  293 //  anyenAzIviSeNeva
patatAtyantabhISaNA  /  dRSTirulkAnibhAkSepi pratipakSasya vigrahe  //  294  //
ardhakRttaM ziro'nyena dhRtvA vAmena pANinA  /  pAtitaM pratipakSasya ziro
vikramazAlinA  /  /  295  /  kazcidvikSipya kopena zastramaprAptazatrukam  /
hantuM parighatulyena bAhunaiva samudyataH ||296 /  /  arAtiM mUcchitaM
kazcitsiSeca svAsRjA bhRzam  /  zItIkRtena vastrAntavAyunA saMbhramAnvitaH  //
297 //  vizrAntaM mUrcchayA zaraiH zastraghAtaiH sukhAyitam  /  maraNena
kRtArthasvaM mene kopena kampitaiH  //  298 //  evaM mahati saMgrAme pravRtte
bhItibhISaNe  /  maTAnAmuttamAnandasaMpAdanaparAyaNe  //  299  //
gajanAsAsamAkRSTavIrakalpitatatkare  /  javanAzvakhurAghAtapatattatkartanodyate
||300|| sArathipreraNA kRSTarathavikSatai vAjini  /
jaGghAvaSTambhasaMkrAntakSatakumbhamahAgaje  //  301  /  /
parasparajavAghAtadalatpAdAtavigrahe  /  maTottamakarAkRSTapucchaniSpandavAjini
//  302  //  karAghAtadalatkumbhikumbhaniSThyUtamauktike  /
patanmAtaGganirbhagnarathAhatapatadbhaTe  // 303 //  290 uchalate hue sirake
dvArA hI rudhirakI varSA kara zatruko mAra DAlA thA  //  222 //  jisakA citta
garvase bhara rahA thA aise kisI yoddhAkA sira yadyapi kaTa gayA thA to bhI vaha
oThoMko DasatA rahA aura huMkArase mukhara hotA huA cirakAla bAda nIce girA thA
|| 293 || jo sA~pake samAna jAna par3atA thA aise kisI yoddhAne girate samaya
ulkA ke samAna atyanta bhayaMkara apanI dRSTi zatruke zarIrapara DAlI thI ||294
|| kisI parAkramI yoddhAne zatruke dvArA Adhe kATe hue apane sirako bAyeM hAtha
se thAma liyA aura dAhine hAthase zatrukA sira kATakara nIce girA diyA || 295
//  kisI yoddhAkA zastra zatru taka nahIM pahu~ca rahA thA isalie krodhameM
Akara usane use pheMka diyA aura argala ke samAna lambI bhujAse hI zatruko
mAraneke lie udyata ho gayA || 296 || kisI eka dayAlu yoddhAne dekhA ki hamArA
zatru sAmane mUcchita par3A hai jaba use saceta karaneke lie jala Adi anya
sAdhana na mile taba usane sambhramase yukta ho vastra ke chorakI vAyuse zItala
kiye gaye apane hI rudhirase use bAra-bAra sIMcanA zurU kara diyA  /  /  297 //
krodhase kA~pate hue zUra-vIra manuSyoMko jaba mUrcchA AtI thI taba ve samajhate
the ki vizrAma prApta huA hai, jaba zastroMko coTa lagatI thI taba samajhate the
ki sukha prApta huA aura jaba maraNa prApta hotA thA taba samajhate the ki
kRtakRtyatA prApta huI hai  // 298 //  isa prakAra jaba yoddhAoM ke bIca
mahAyuddha ho rahA thA, aisA mahAyuddha ki jo bhayako bhI bhaya utpanna
karanevAlA thA tathA uttama manuSyoMko Ananda utpanna karanemeM tatpara thA ||
299|| jahA~ hAthI apanI sU~r3oMmeM kasakara vIra puruSoMko apanI ora khIMcate
the para ve vIra puruSa unakI sU~r3eM svayaM kATa DAlate the  /  jahA~ loga
ghor3oMko kATaneke lie udyata hote avazya the para ve vegazAlI ghor3e apane
khuroMke AghAtase unheM vahIM girA dete the || 300 || jahA~ ghor3e sArathiyoM kI
preraNA pAkara ratha khIMcate the para unase unakA zarIra ghAyala ho jAtA thA  /
jahA~ mastakarahita bar3e-bar3e hAthI par3e hue the aura loga unapara paira
rakhate hue calate the || 301 || jahA~ paidala sipAhiyoM ke zarIra eka dUsareke
vegapUrNa AghAtase khaNDita ho rahe the  /  jahA~ uttama yoddhA apane hAthoMse
ghor3oMkI pU~cha pakar3akara itane jorase khIMcate the ki ve nizcala khar3e raha
jAte the ||302 || jahA~ hAthoMkI coTase hAthiyoMke gaNDasthala phaTa jAte the
tathA unase motI nikalane lagate the  /  jahA~ girate hue hAthiyoMse ratha TUTa
jAte the aura unakI capeTameM Akara aneka yoddhA ghAyala 1. kRto'pi ma.  /  2.
garvanirjhara ma.  /  3. bAhuneva ma.  /  4. preraNAt ma.  /  5. vIkSitama.  /

Page #341 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The twelfth battle Where the ground was covered with a layer of blood, and the
sky and directions were covered with blood, and where the roar of the elephants
created a fierce wind. || 304 || The battle was fierce, but the valiant Ravana,
filled with the curiosity of war, was not paying attention to it. He said to his
charioteer, Sumati, the son of Kaikasi, that the chariot should be taken in
front of Indra, for what is the use of killing his other vassals who are not our
equals? || 305 - 306 || My weapon does not rise against these insignificant
vassals, nor does my mind, which is eager to devour the great enemy, turn
towards them. || 307 || This Vidyaadhara, who has made himself a laughingstock,
has made himself invincible out of petty pride. I will remove his Indrahood
today with death. || 308 || This Indra has made himself great, he has made these
Lokapalas. He considers other humans as gods and the Vijayardha mountain as
heaven. || 309 || It is a matter of great wonder that just as a foolish clown,
wearing the guise of a noble man, forgets himself, so this foolish man,
intoxicated by his petty wealth, is forgetting himself and becoming a
laughingstock for the people. || 310 || He has lived for a long time in the womb
of his mother, filled with semen, blood, flesh, bones and marrow, and has come
to consider himself a god. || 311 || This impatient person, who is doing
something with the power of knowledge, considers himself a god, just as a bird
considers itself a Garuda. || 312 || Having said this, Sumati, the charioteer,
entered Ravana's chariot, protected by the mighty vassals, into Indra's army. ||
313 || There, Ravana saw with a clear eye Indra's vassals, who were fleeing,
unable to fight, and whose pathetic movements were like those of insects. || 314
|| Just as the flow of water cannot be stopped by the banks, and just as a man
who observes vows with a false vision cannot stop the momentum of his mind with
anger, so the enemies could not stop Ravana from advancing. || 315 || Just as
darkness is destroyed by the rising of the moon, so the army of the gods was
destroyed. || 316 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazaM pavaM kIlAlapaTalacchanna' gannA sAkadambake  /
gajakarNasamudbhUtatIcA kulasamIraNe  //  304 //  uvAca sArathiM vIraH sumati
kaikasIsutaH  /  na kiMcidiva manvAno raNaM raNakutUhalI  //  305  //  tasyaiva
zakrasaMjJasya saMmukho vAhyatAM rathaH  /  asamAnaiH kimatrAnyaiH
sAmantaistasya mAritaiH  //  306  //  tRNatulyeSu nAmISu mama zastraM pravartate
/  manazca sumahAvIragrAsa grahaNaghasmaram  // 307 //  AkhaNDalatvamasyAdya
kRtaM kSudrAbhimAnataH  /  karomi mRtyunA dUraM svaviDambanakAriNaH  // 308 //
ayaM zakro mahAnete lokapAlAH prakalpitAH  /  anye ca mAnuSA devA nAkazva
dharaNIdharaiH  // 309 //  aho lokAvahAsasyai mattasya kSudrayA zriyA  /  AtmA
vismRta evAsya bhrukuMsasyeva durmateH  //  310 //  zukrazoNita
mAMsAsthimajjAdighaTite ciram  /  uSitvA jaThare pApastridazaMmanyatAM gataH  //
311 //  vidyAbalena yatkiMcitkurvANo dhairyadurvidhaH  /  eSa devAyato dhvAGkSI
vainateyAyate yathA  /  /  312 || evamuktena zakrasya balaM sammatinA rathaH  /
pravezito "mahAzUrasAmanta paripAlitaH || 313 || pazyannindrasya
sAmantAnyuddhAzakta palAyitAn  /  RjunA cakSuSA rAjA kITakopamaceSTitAn  // 314
//  azakyaH zatrubhirdhartta kUlaiH pUro yathAmbhasaH  /  cetovegazca sakrodho
mithyAdRSTivatAzritaiH  //  315|| dRSTvAtapatrametasya kSIrodAvartapANDuram  /
naSTaM surabalaM kvApi tamazcandrodaye yathA  //  316 || hokara nIce gira jAte
the ||303 || jahA~ logoMkI nAsikAoMke samUha par3ate hue khUna ke samUha se
AcchAdita ho rahe the athavA jahA~ AkAza aura dizAoMke samUha khUnake samUhase
AcchAdita the aura jahA~ hAthiyoMke kAnoMkI phaTakArase pracaNDa vAyu utpanna ho
rahI thI || 304 || isa prakAra yoddhAoMke bIca bhayaMkara yuddha ho rahA thA
para yuddhake kutUhala se bharA vIra rAvaNa usa yuddhako aisA mAna rahA thA
jaisA ki mAno kucha ho hI na rahA ho| usane apane sumati nAmaka sArathise kahA
ki usa indrake sAmane hI ratha le jAyA jAye kyoMki jo hamArI samAnatA nahIM
rakhate aise usake anya sAmantoMke mAranese kyA lAbha hai ? ||305 - 306  //
tRNake samAna tuccha inaM sAmantoMpara na to merA zastra uThatA hai aura na
mahAbhaTarUpI grAsake grahaNa karanemeM tatpara merA mana hI inakI ora pravRtta
hotA hai || 307|| apane ApakI viDambanA karAnevAle isa vidyAdharane kSudra
abhimAna ke 291 yaha zIbhUta ho apane Apako jo indra mAna rakhA hai so isake usa
indrapanAko Aja mRtyuke dvArA dUra karatA hU~ ||308|| yaha bar3A indra banA hai,
ye lokapAla isIne banAye haiM  /  yaha anya manuSyoM ko deva mAnatA hai aura
vijayArdha parvatako svargaM samajhatA hai || 309 || bar3e AzcaryakI bAta hai ki
jisa prakAra koI durbuddhi naTa uttama puruSakA veSa dhara apane Apako bhulA
detA hai usI prakAra yaha durbuddhi kSudra lakSmIse matta hokara apane Apako
bhulA rahA hai, tathA logoMkI ha~sIkA pAtra ho rahA hai  //  310 //  zukra,
zoNita, mAMsa, haDDI aura majjA Adise bhare hue mAtAke udara meM cirakAla taka
nivAsa kara yaha apane Apako deva mAnane lagA hai ||311 || vidyAke balase kucha
to bhI karatA huA * adhIra vyakti apane Apako deva samajha rahA hai jo isakA
yaha kArya aisA hai ki jisa prakAra apane Apako garur3a samajhane lagatA hai ||
312 || aisA kahate hI sumati nAmaka sArathine mahAbalavAn sAmantoMke dvArA
surakSita rAvaNake rathako indrakI senAmeM praviSTa kara diyA || 313  //  vahA~
jAkara rAvaNane indrake una sAmantoM ko sarala dRSTise dekhA ki jo yuddha meM
asamartha hokara bhAga rahe the, tathA kIr3oM ke samAna jinakI dayanIya ceSTAe~
thIM ||314 || jisa prakAra kinAre norake pravAhako nahIM roka sakate haiM aura
jisa prakAra mithyAdarzana ke sAtha vratAcaraNa karanevAle manuSya krodhasahita
manake vegako nahIM roka pAte haiM usI prakAra zatru bhI rAvaNako Age bar3hane
se nahIM roka sake the ||315 //  jisa prakAra candramAkA udaya honepara
andhakAra naSTa ho jAtA hai usI prakAra 1. gaganAzA- ma.  /  2. vijayArdhagiriH
/  3. lokApahAsasya ma  /  4. sanmatinA ba  /  5. mahAzUraH sAmantaH ma.  /

Page #342 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Padma Purana  Indra, mounted on an elephant, approached Ravana, who was as
tall as Mount Kailasa, and drew an arrow from his quiver. ||317|| Like a cloud
pouring down a torrent of water on a mountain, Indra rained down arrows on
Ravana. ||318|| Ravana, in turn, pierced Indra's arrows with his own, creating a
canopy of arrows in the sky. ||319|| Arrows pierced arrows, and the rays of the
sun were extinguished, as if they had vanished in fear. ||320|| Narada, filled
with joy at the sight of the battle, danced in a place where arrows could not
reach. ||321||   Realizing that Ravana was invincible to ordinary weapons, Indra
launched an Agni Astra (fire weapon). ||322|| The Agni Astra was so vast that
the sky itself became its fuel. What can be said of bows and other material
objects? ||323|| The roar of the Agni Astra was like the sound of a bamboo
forest burning, its flames blazing fiercely. ||324||   Seeing his army engulfed
in flames, Ravana quickly launched a Varuna Astra (water weapon). ||325|| The
Varuna Astra instantly summoned a vast cloud, which poured down torrential rain
like a mountain, thunderous and majestic. It seemed as if the sky itself had
melted from Ravana's anger. The cloud extinguished Indra's Agni Astra in an
instant. ||326-327||   Indra then unleashed a Tamas Astra (darkness weapon),
which enveloped the sky and all directions in utter darkness. ||328|| The Tamas
Astra engulfed Ravana's army, rendering them unable to see even their own
bodies, let alone the enemy forces. ||329||   Seeing his army in disarray,
Ravana's son, Ratna Shrava, a master of strategy and tactics, launched a Prabha
Astra (light weapon). ||330||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe indro'pi gajamArUDhaH kailAsagirisaMnibham  /  zaraM
samuddharastUNAdabhIyAya dazAnanam  // 317 //  zarAnAkarNamAkRSTAn cikSepa ca
yamadviSi  /  mahIdhara ivAmbhodaH sthUladhArAmahAcayam ||318  //  dazavaktro'pi
tAnbANairAcchittAntaravartinaH  /  tatastairgaganaM cakre nikhilaM maNDapAkRtim
// 319 //  Acchidyanta zarA bANairabhiyanta ca bhUrizaH  /  bhItA iva raveH
pAdAH kvApi naSTA niranvayAH || 320 || antare'sminnarvedvAra gatirniH
zaragocaram  /  nanarta kalaha prekSA saMbhRtapurusaMmadaH || 321  //  asAdhyaM
prakRtAstrANAM tato jJAtvA dazAnanam  /  nikSiptamastramAgneyaM nAthena
svargavAsinAm  //  322 //  indhanatvaM gataM tasya khameva vitatAtmanaH  /
dhanurAdau tu kiM zakyaM vaktuM pudgalavastuni  //  323 //  kIcakAnAmivodAro
dadyamAne vane dhvaniH  /  jvAlAvalIkarAlasya saMbabhUvAzuzukSaNeH || 324  //
tatastenAkulaM dRSTvA svabalaM kaikasIsutaH  /  cikSepa kSepanirmuktamastraM
varuNalakSitam  //  325  //  tena kSaNasamudbhUtamahAjImUtarAzinA  /
parvatasthUladhAraughavarSiNA rAvazAlinA  //  326  //  rAvaNasyeva kopena
bilInena vihAyasA  /  kSaNAttadhUmalakSmIstraM vidhyApitamazeSataH || 327 //
surendreNa tatossarjitAmasAstraM samantataH  /  tenAndhakAritA cakre kakubhAM
nabhasA samam || 328|| tatastena dazAsyasya vitataM sakalaM balam  /
svadehamapi nApazyatkutaH zatroranIkinIm  //  329  //  tato nijabalaM mUDhaM
dRSTvA ratnazravaH sutaH  /  prabhAstramamucatkAlai vastuyojana kovidaH || 330
//  292 kSIrasamudrakI Avartake samAna dhavala rAvaNakA chatra dekhakara devoMkI
senA na jAne kahA~ naSTa ho gayI ||316|| kailAsa parvata ke samAna U~ce
hAthIpara savAra huA indra bhI tarakasa se bANa nikAlatA huA rAvaNa ke sammukha
AyA  //  317 //  jisa prakAra megha bar3I moTI dhArAoMke samUhako kisI
parvatapara chor3atA hai usI prakAra indra bhI kAna taka khIMce hue bANa
rAvaNake Upara chor3ane lagA ||318 || idhara rAvaNane bhI indrake una bANoMko
bIcameM hI apane bANoMse cheda DAlA aura apane bANoMse samasta AkAza meM maNDapa
- sA banA diyA || 319  //  isa prakAra bANoMke dvArA bANa chede bhede jAne lage
aura sUrya kI kiraNeM isa taraha nirmUla naSTa ho gayIM mAno bhayase kahIM jA
chipI hoM  //  320  //  isI samaya yuddhake dekhanese jise bahuta bhArI harSaM
utpanna ho rahA thA aisA nArada jahA~ bANa nahIM pahu~ca pAte the vahA~
Anandavibhora ho nRtya kara rahA thA || 321 || athAnantara jaba indrane dekhA ki
rAvaNa sAmAnya zastroMse sAdhya nahIM hai taba usane Agneya bANa calAyA || 322||
vaha Agneya bANa itanA vizAla thA ki svayaM AkAza hI usakA IMdhana bana gayA,
dhanuSa Adi paudgalika vastuoMke viSaya meM to kahA hI kyA jA sakatA hai ?  //
323  //  jisa prakAra bA~soMke vanake jalanepara vizAla zabda hotA hai usI
prakAra jvAlAoMke samUhase bhayaMkara dikhanevAlI Agneya bANakI agnise vizAla
zabda ho rahA thA || 324 || tadanantara jaba rAvaNane apanI senAko Agneya bANase
Akula dekhA taba usane zIghra hI varuNa astra calAyA || 325 || u bANake
prabhAvase tatkSaNa hI mahAmeghoM kA samUha utpanna ho gayA  /  vaha meghasamUha
parvata ke samAna bar3I samUhakI varSA kara rahA thA, garjanAse suzobhita thA
aura aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno rAvaNa ke krodhase AkAza hI pighala gayA ho|
aise meghasamUhane indrake usa Agneya bANako usI kSaNa sampUrNaM rUpase bujhA
diyA || 326-327|| tadanantara indrane tAmasa bANa chor3A jisase samasta dizAoM
aura AkAzameM andhakAra hI andhakAra chA gayA || 328 || usa bANane rAvaNakI
senAko isa prakAra vyApta kara liyA ki vaha apanA zarIra bhI dekhane meM
asamartha ho gayI phira zatrukI senAko dekhanekI to bAta hI kyA thI ? || 329||
taba avasarake yogya vastukI yojanA 1. tairbANaikha  /  tAM ma., ba. ka.  /  2.
rAcchidantaravartinaH kha., ba, ma.  /  rAcchAdantara - ka., 'chidira
dvaidhIkaraNe' ityasya laGi Atmanepade rUpam, A upasargeNa sahitam  /  3.
bhrAntA iva ma.  /  4. nAradaH  /  gocare ba., nissAragocaraM ma.  /  6.
lakSmAMsaM ma  /  7. kAla vastra - ma.  /  5.

Page #343 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Chapter  **330.** Ravana, skilled in warfare, seeing his army
bewildered, released the Prabhastra, the arrow of light.   **331.** Just as the
truth of the Jina teachings destroys the beliefs of the misguided, so too did
that Prabhastra instantly dispel all darkness.  **332.** Then, in a fit of rage,
Ravana unleashed the Naga Astra, filling the sky with radiant serpents.
**333.** Those arrows, capable of assuming any form at will, went to Indra and
rendered him motionless, clinging to his body.  **334.** Indra was overwhelmed
by fear, surrounded by those serpents, dark as the finest indigo, shaped like
rings, and with flickering tongues.  **335.** Just as a creature trapped in the
ocean of existence is bound by the web of karma, so too was Indra, encircled by
the serpents, rendered helpless.  **336.** Indra then focused his mind on the
Garuda Astra, and instantly the sky turned yellow with the brilliance of golden
wings.  **337.** The wind from Garuda's wings, with its immense speed, caused
Ravana's entire army to sway like a swing, unable to maintain their balance.
**338.** The Naga arrows, struck by the wind of Garuda, vanished without a
trace. Their points of attachment to Indra's body were no longer discernible.
**339.** Embraced by Garuda, freed from all bonds, Indra became as terrifying as
the sun in the summer.  **340.** Seeing Indra freed from the serpent coils,
Ravana mounted his victorious elephant, the Triloka Mandana, whose tusks dripped
with intoxicating nectar.  **341.** In a fit of rage, Indra brought his own
elephant, Airavata, close to Ravana. A great battle ensued between the two proud
elephants.  **342.** Both elephants, dripping with intoxicating nectar, adorned
with lightning-like golden garlands, and roaring continuously, assumed the form
of clouds.  **343.** The clash of their tusks was like the thunder of falling
thunderbolts, shaking the entire world with their resounding roar.  **344.**
With their powerful trunks, they struck each other repeatedly, their movements
swift and fierce.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazaM parva 223 tena tannikhilaM dhvAntaM vidhvastaM kSaNamAtrataH  /
jinazAsanatattvena mataM mithyAdRzAmiva  // 33 //  tato yamavimardena
kopAmAgAstramujjhitam  /  vitene gaganaM tena bhogimI ranabhAsuraiH  // 332 //
kAmarUpabhRto bANAste gatvA vRtravidviSaH  /  ceSTayA rahitaM cakruH zarIraM
kRtaveSTanAH  // 333 //  mahAnIlanibhairemivalayAkAradhAribhiH  /  jagAmAkulatAM
zakrazcaladrasanamISaNaiH  // 334 //  prayayAvasvatantratvaM kailizI
vyAlaveSTitaH  /  veSTitaH karmajAlena yathA janturbhavodadhau  // 335 //
garuDAstraM tato dadhyau surendrastadanantaram  /  hemapakSaprabhAjAlaiH piGgatA
gaganaM gatam  // 336 //  pakSavAtena tasyAbhUnitAntodAraraMhasA  /
dolArUDhamivAzeSaM preGkSaNapravaNaM balam  // 337 //  spRSTA garuDavAtena na
jJAtA nAgasAyakAH  /  kva gatA iti vispaSTabandhasthAnopalakSitAH  // 338 //
garutmatA kRtAzleSo bandhalakSaNavarjitaH  /  babhUva dAruNaH zakro
nidAgharavisaMnimaH  // 339 //  vimuktaM sarpajAlena dRSTvA zakraM dazAnanaH  /
ArUDhastrijagabhUSaM kSaraddAnaM jayadvipam  // 30 //  zakro''pyairAvataM
roSAdasyAtyAsanamAnayat  /  tato mahadabhUdyuddhaM dantinoH purudarpayoH  // 341
//  kSaradAnau sphuradamakakSAvidyudguNAnvitau  /  dadhatustau ghanAkAraM
sAndragarjitakAriNau  // 342 //  paraspararadAghAtanirdhAtairiva dAruNaH  /
patanirbhuvanaM kampaM prayayau zabdapUritam  // 343 //  piNDayitvA sthavIyAnsau
karau capalavigrahau  /  punaH prasArayantau ca tADayantau mahArathau  // 344 //
karane meM nipuNa rAvaNane apanI senAko mohagrasta dekha prabhAstra arthAt
prakAzabANa chor3A  // 330 /  /  so jisa prakAra jina-zAsanake tattvase
mithyAdRSTiyoMkA mata naSTa ho jAtA hai usI prakAra usa prabhAstrase kSaNa-
bharameM hI vaha samasta andhakAra naSTa ho gayA  // 33 /  /  tadanantara
rAvaNane krodhavaza nAgAstra chor3A jisase samasta AkAza ratnoMse dedIpyamAna
sA~se vyApta ho gayA  // 332 //  icchAnusAra rUpa dhAraNa karanevAle una bANoMne
jAkara indrake zarIrako nizceSTa kara diyA tathA saba usase lipaTa gaye  // 333
/  /  jo mahAnIlamaNike samAna zyAma the, valayakA AkAra dhAraNa karanevAle the
aura caMcala jihvAoMse bhayaMkara dikhate the aise sA~se indra bar3I AkulatAko
prApta huA  // 334 //  jisa prakAra karmajAlase ghirA prANI saMsArarUpI
sAgarameM vivaza ho jAtA hai usI prakAra vyAla arthAt sA~se ghirA indra
vivazatAko prApta ho gayA  // 335 /  /  tadanantara indrane garuDAstrakA dhyAna
kiyA jisake prabhAvase usI kSaNa AkAza suvarNamaya paMkhoMkI kAntike samUhase
pIlA ho gayA  // 336 /  /  jisakA vega atyanta tIvra thA aisI garuDake paMkhoMkI
vAyuse rAvaNakI samasta senA aisI caMcala ho gayo mAno hiMDolA hI jhUla rahI ho
// 337 //  garuDakI vAyukA sparza hote hI patA nahIM calA ki nAgabANa kahA~ cale
gye| ve zarIrameM kahAM-kahA~ baMdhe the una sthAnoMkA patA bhI nahIM rahA  //
338|| garuDakA AliMgana honese jisake samasta bandhana dUra ho gaye the aisA
indra grISmaRtuke sUryake samAna bhayaMkara ho gayA  // 339 /  /  jaba rAvaNane
dekhA ki indra nAgapAzase chUTa gayA hai taba vaha jisase mada jhara rahA thA
aise trilokamaNDana nAmaka vijayI hAthIpara savAra huA  // 340 //  udharase
indra bhI krodhavaza apanA airAvata hAthI rAvaNake nikaTa le aayaa| tadanantara
bahuta bhArI garvako dhAraNa karanevAle donoM hAthiyoMmeM mahAyuddha huA  // 341
/  /  jinase mada jhara rahA thA, jo camakatI huI svarNakI mAlArUpI bijalIke
sahita the, tathA jo lagAtAra vizAla garjanA kara rahe the aise donoM hAthI
medhakA AkAra dhAraNa kara rahe the  // 342 /  /  parasparake dAMtoMke AghAtase
aisA lagatA thA mAno bhayaMkara vajra gira rahe hoM aura unase zabdAyamAna ho
samasta saMsAra kampita ho rahA 1. bhoginI ratna ma.  /  sarpaH  /  2. indraH  /
3. vyAlaceSTitaH m.| 4. prekSaNapravaNaM ma.  /  5. zakrajAlena (?) ma.  /  6.
jaitragajamityarthaH  /  jagadviSam ma.  /  7. puradarpayoH ma.  /  8. kAraNo
ma.  /

Page #344 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  294 Padma Purana  The two elephants, whose bodies were
extremely agile and whose speed was immense, were brandishing their thick
trunks, expanding, contracting, and striking. ||344|| With their eyes, whose
pupils were clearly visible and whose gaze was extremely cruel, their ears
erect, and possessing immense strength, the two elephants engaged in a very
fierce battle. ||345||  Then, the powerful Ravana leaped up and placed his foot
on Indra's head. With great speed, he kicked the charioteer down. Repeatedly
assuring Indra, Ravana bound him tightly with a cloth and mounted him on his
elephant. ||346-347||  Meanwhile, Indrajit also bound Jayanta and handed him
over to the servants. Then, Indrajit, whose enthusiasm was fueled by victory and
who was burning with the desire to defeat his enemies, ran towards the army of
the gods. Seeing him run, Ravana, who was causing suffering to his enemies,
said, "O son! Now your efforts are in vain. Retreat from the battle out of
respect for the fight. The head of this army of the mountain dwellers is now in
my hands." ||348-350||  "With him in my grasp, who else can stir? Let these
petty vassals live and go to their desired places." ||351||  "When rice is
extracted from a heap of paddy, the husk is discarded without any reason."
||352||  Thus, Indrajit, discouraged by Ravana's words, retreated from the
battle. At that time, a large group of kings surrounded Indrajit. ||353||  Then,
just as a large, long cloud of the autumn season dissipates in an instant, so
too did Indra's army disperse in a flash, scattering in all directions. ||354||
A great victory cry was raised in Ravana's army by the excellent drums, conch
shells, cymbals, and groups of prisoners. ||355||  Hearing that cry, Ravana's
army became agitated and disheartened, knowing that Indra had been captured.
||356||  Then, Ravana, endowed with supreme power, departed for Lanka, his
chariot covering the sky. He was very pleased at that time. ||357||  His
chariots, resembling the sun's chariot, were adorned with flags and emitted
rainbows from the rays of various jewels. ||358||  1. Sammukham M. | 2.
Mahotsahaparantapah Kh., M. | Mahotsaham K. | 3. Vrindinaam M. |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 294 padmapurANe dantinau dRSTavispaSTatArakAkrUravIkSaNau  /  cakratuH
sumahadyuddhaM stabdhako mahAbalau  // 345 //  tata utpatya vinyasya
pAdamindrebhamUrdhani  /  nitAntaM lAghavopetapAdanidhUtasArathiH  // 346 //
baddha vAMzukena devendra muhurAzvAsayanvibhuH  /  AropayadyamadhvaMso nijaM
vAhanamUrjitaH  // 347 //  rAkSasAdhipaputro'pi gRhItvA vAsavAtmajam  /
samarpya kiGkaraughasya surasainyasya saMmukhaH  // 348 //  dhAvamAno
jayodbhUtamahotsAhaH paraMtapaH  /  ukto dviSatapenaivaM marutvamakhavidviSA  //
349 //  alaM vatsa ! prayatnena nivartasva raNAdarAt  /  ziro gRhItametasyAH
senAyA girivAsinAm  // 350 //  gRhIte'smin pariSyandamatra kaH kurute paraH  /
kSadA jIvantu sAmantA gacchantu sthAnamIpsitam  // 351 //  tanduleSu gRhIteSu
nanu zAlikalApataH  /  tyAgastuSapalAlasya kriyate kAraNAd vinA  // 352 //
ityuktaH samarotsAhAdindrajidvinivartanam  /  cakre cakreNa mahatA nRpANAM
baddhamaNDalaH  // 353 //  tataH sarabalaM sarva vizIrNa kSaNamAtrataH  /
zAradAnAmivAbdAnAM vRndamatyantamAyatam  // 354 //  sainyena dazavaktrasya
jayazabdo mahAn kRtaH  /  paTubhiH paTalaH zaGkhajhI rairvandinA gaNaiH  // 355
//  zabdena tena vijJAya gRhItamamarAdhipam  /  sainyaM rAkSasanAthasya
babhUvAkulitojjhitam  // 356 //  tataH paramayA yukto vibhUtyA kaikasIsutaH  /
pratasthe nivRto laGkAM sAdhanAcchAditAmbaraH  // 357 //
AdityarathasaMkAzairathairdhvajavirAjitaH  /
nAnAratnakarodabhUtasanAsIrazarAsanaiH  // 358 //  ho  // 243 /  /  jinakA
zarIra atyanta caMcala thA tathA vega bhArI thA aise donoM hAthI apanI moTI
sUr3oMko phailAte, sikor3ate aura tAr3ita kara rahe the  // 344 //  sApha-sApha
dikhanevAlI putaliyoMse jinake netra atyanta krUra jAna par3ate the, jinake kAna
khar3e the aura jo mahAbalase yukta the aise donoM hAthiyoMne bahuta bhArI
yuddha kiyA  // 345 /  /  tadanantara zaktizAlI rAvaNane uchalakara apanA paira
indrake hAthoke mastakapara rakhA aura bar3I zIghratAse pairakI Thokara dekara
sArathiko nIce girA diyaa| bAra-bAra AzvAsana dete hue rAvaNane indrako vastrase
kasakara bA~dha apane hAthIpara car3hA liyA  // 346-347 /  /  udhara indrajitne
bhI jayantako bA~dhakara kiMkaroMke lie sauMpa diyaa| tadanantara vijayase
jisakA utsAha bar3ha rahA thA tathA jo zatruoMko santapta kara rahA thA aisA
indrajit devoMkI senAke sammakha dauddaa| use dauDatA dekha zatruoMko santApa
pahu~cAnevAle rAvaNane kahA ki he vatsa ! aba prayatna karanA vyartha hai,
yuddhake Adarase nivRtta hoo, vijayArdhavAso logoMkI isa senAkA sira apane hAtha
laga cukA hai  // 348350 /  isake hAtha laga cukanepara dUsarA kauna halacala
kara sakatA hai ? ye. kSudra sAmanta jIvita raheM aura apane icchita sthAnapara
jAveM  // 351 /  /  jaba dhAnake samUhase cAvala nikAla liye jAte haiM taba
chilakoMke samUhako akAraNa hI chor3a dete haiM  // 352 //  rAvaNake isa prakAra
kahanepara indrajit yuddhake utsAhase nivatta haa| usa samaya rAjAoMkA bar3A
bhArI samaha indrajitako ghere hae thA  // 353 //  tadanantara jisa prakAra
zaradaRtuke bAdaloMkA bar3A lambA samUha kSaNa-bharameM vizIrNa ho jAtA hai usI
prakAra indrakI senA kSaNa-bharameM vizIrNa ho gayI-idhara-udhara bikhara gayI
// 354 /  /  rAvaNakI senAmeM uttamottama paTala, zaMkha, jharjhara bAje tathA
bandIjanoMke samUhake dvArA bar3A bhArI jayanAda kiyA gayA  // 355 /  /  usa
jayanAdase indrako pakar3A jAnakara rAvaNakI senA nirAkula ho gayI  // 356 /  /
tadanantara parama vibhUtise yukta rAvaNa, senAse AkAzako AcchAdita karatA huA
laMkAkI ora calA  /  usa samaya vaha bar3A santuSTa thA  // 357|| jo sUryake
rathake samAna the, dhvajAoMse suzobhita the aura nAnA ratnoMkI kiraNoMse
jinapara indradhanuSa utpanna ho rahe the aise ratha usake 1. saMmukham ma.  /
2. mahotsAhaparaMtapaH kha., ma.  /  mahotsAhaM ka.  /  3. vRndinAM ma.  /  :

Page #345 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twelfth Chapter  Horses adorned with beautiful, fluttering fly whisks,
moving with carefree grace, as if dancing, enhanced his splendor.  ||359||  A
multitude of elephants, their necks adorned with large, resonant bells, from
which flowed streams of intoxicating nectar, their trumpets resonating with a
sweet sound, followed by a swarm of bees, accompanied him. ||360||  Along with
these, the lords of great armies, mounted on their respective steeds, the
celestial beings, the Vidyadharas, followed him.  Thus, in a moment, Ravana
reached the outskirts of Lanka. ||361||  Seeing Ravana approaching, the
protectors of the city, the citizens, and their relatives, filled with
anticipation, came out to receive him, bearing offerings. ||362||  Some
performed rituals for Ravana, while he, in turn, performed rituals for some
elders.  Some bowed to him, while he, free from pride, bowed to some elders.
||363||  Knowing the nature of people, and with affection for the humble, Ravana
honored some with a loving gaze.  He greeted some with a gentle smile, and
others with pleasant words. ||364||  The city of Lanka, naturally beautiful, and
adorned with special embellishments on this occasion, was adorned with tall,
magnificent, gem-studded arches. ||365||  The city was filled with colorful
flags, fluttering in the gentle breeze, and the entire earth was sprinkled with
saffron and other fragrant substances. ||366||  The royal roads were adorned
with flowers of all seasons, and the city was decorated with numerous garlands
made of five-colored powders, black, yellow, blue, red, and green. ||367||  The
city gates were adorned with full, shining pots, and the city was decorated with
garlands of fresh leaves and fine garments, and a grand celebration was
underway.  It was in this city of Lanka that Ravana entered. ||368||  Just as
Indra is surrounded by many gods, so too was Ravana surrounded by many
Vidyadharas.  At that time, he was enjoying the supreme happiness, the result of
his past virtuous deeds. ||369||  Mounted on a beautiful, wish-fulfilling
chariot, with a radiant crown, a magnificent necklace, and strong arms, he...
||370||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAdazaM parva turaGgazcaJcalaccArucAmarAlIvibhUSitaiH  /  nRtyadbhiriva
visrabdhakRtavibhramahAribhiH  // 359 //  mahAninadasaMghaH
pravRttamadanirjharaiH  /  garjadbhirmadhuraM nAgaiH SaTpadAloniSevitaiH  // 360
//  'anuyAnasamArUDhamahAsAdhanakhecaraiH  /  upakaNThaM kSaNAtprApa leGkAyA
rAkSasAdhipaH  // 361 //  tato dRSTvA samAsannaM gRhItA; viniryayuH  /  purasya
pAlakAH paurA bAndhavAzca samutsukAH  // 362 //  kRtapUjastataH
kaizcitkeSAMcitkRtapUjanaH  /  namyamAno'paraiH kAMzcitpraNamanmadavarjitaH  //
363 //  dRSTyA saMmAnayana kAMzcisnigdhayA natavatsalaH  /  smitena
kAMzcidvAcAnyAnparijJAtajanAntaraH  // 364 //  *manoharA nisargeNa vizeSeNa
vibhUSitAm  /  samucchritasamuttuGgaratnanirmitatoraNAm  // 365 //
mandAnilavidhUtAntabahavarNadhvajAkulAm  /
kuGkamAdimanojJAmbusikkaniHzeSabhUtalAm  // 366 //
sarvartukusumavyAptarAjamArgavirAjitAm  /  anekamaktimiH
paJcavaNecUrNairalaMkRtAm  // 367 //  dvAradezasuvinyastapUrNakummA mahAdyutim
/  sarasaiH pallavaiddhamAlA vastravibhUSitAm  // 368 //  vRttau
vidyAdharairdevairyathendro'tyantabhUrimiH  /  sukhamAsAdayan prAjyaM
pUrvopArjitakarmaNA  // 369 //  ArUDhaH paramekAnte puSpake kAmagAmini  /
sphuranmaulimahAratrakeyUradharasadbhujaH  // 370 //  sAtha the  // 358 //  jo
hilate hue sundara camaroMke samUhase suzobhita the, nizcintatAse kiye hue aneka
vilAsoMse manohara the tathA nRtya karate hue se jAna par3ate the aise ghor3e
usakI zobhA bar3hA rahe the  // 359 //  jinake galemeM vizAla zabda karanevAle
ghaNTA ba~dhe hue the, jinase madake nirjharane jhara rahe the, jo madhura
garjanA kara rahe the tathA bhramaroMkI paMkti jinakI upAsanA kara rahI thI aise
hAthI usake sAtha the  // 360 //  inake sivAya apanI-apanI savAriyoMpara baiThe
hue bar3I-bar3I senAoMke adhipati vidyAdhara usake sAtha cala rahe the| ina
sabake sAtha rAvaNa kSaNa-bharameM hI laMkAke samIpa jA pahu~cA  // 361 //  taba
rAvaNako nikaTa AyA jAna nagarakI rakSA karanevAle loga puravAsI aura
bhAIbAndhava utsuka ho argha le-lekara bAhara nikale  // 362 //  tadanantara
kitane hI logoMne rAvaNakI pUjA kI tathA rAvaNane bhI kitane hI vRddhajanoMkI
pUjA kii| kitane hI logoMne rAvaNako namaskAra kiyA aura rAvaNane bhI kitane hI
vaddhajanoMko madarahita ho namaskAra kiyA  // 363 //  logoMkI vizeSatAko
jAnanevAlA tathA namra manaSyoMse sneha rakhanevAlA rAvaNa kitane hI manuSyoMko
snehapUrNa daSTise sammAnita karatA thaa| kitane hI logoMko manda musakAnase
aura kitane hI logoMko manohara vacanoMse samAdRta kara rahA thA  // 364|| _
tadanantara jo svabhAvase hI sundara thI tathA usa samaya vizeSakara sajAyI gayI
thI, jisameM ratnanirmita bar3e UMce-U~ce toraNa khar3e kiye gaye the  // 365 //
jo manda-manda vAyuse hilatI huI raMgabiraMgI dhvajAoMse yukta thI, kezara Adi
manojJa vastuoMse mizrita jalase jahA~kI samasta pRthivI soMcI gayI thI  // 366
/  /  jo saba RtuoMke phUloMse vyApta rAjamArgoMse suzobhita thI, kAle, pIle,
nIle, lAla, hare Adi paMcavarNIya cUrNase nirmita aneka vela-bUToMse jo alaMkRta
thI  // 367 /  /  jisake daravAjoMpara pUrNa kalaza rakhe gaye the, jo
mahAkAntise yukta thI, sarasa pallavoMkI jisameM vandanamAlAeM bAMdhI gayI thIM,
jo uttamottama vastroMse vibhUSita thI tathA jahA~ bahuta bhArI utsava ho rahA
thA aisI laMkAnagarImeM rAvaNane praveza kiyA  // 368 //  jisa prakAra aneka
devoMse indra ghirA hotA hai usI prakAra rAvaNa bhI aneka vidyAdharoMse ghirA
thaa| usa samaya vaha apane pUrvopArjita puNya karmake prabhAvase uttama sukhako
prApta ho rahA thA  // 369|| atyanta sundara tathA icchAnukUla gamana karane1.
anuyAtaH samArUDhaH ma.  /  2. laGkAyAM ma.  /  3. kRtapUjanastataH ma.  /  4.
manoharAn kha., ba.  /  5. vizeSaNama.  /  6. vibhUSitAn ba., kha.  /

Page #346 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the **Papouraana**, He was adorned with a garland of jewels, radiating pure
brilliance, like the spring season adorned with a multitude of blooming flowers.
||371|| He was gazed upon by women filled with insatiable joy, their
**chamaras** gently raised, their expressions full of excitement. ||372|| He was
delighted by the sounds of various instruments and the melodious cries of
victory, accompanied by the finest dancing courtesans. ||373|| Thus, he entered
Lanka, filled with joy and numerous festivities, and was welcomed by his family
and servants, entering his own abode. ||374||  **Gautama Swami** tells King
**Shrenik** that Indra, the **Vidhyadhara**, who had achieved great prosperity
through the power of his past good deeds, having conquered all his enemies,
well-prepared and as insignificant as blades of grass, lost his radiance and
wealth when his **punya karma** diminished. Alas for the fleeting happiness of
mortals! ||375||  And **Ravana**, the **Vidhyadhara**, through the power of his
past good deeds, destroyed all his powerful enemies and achieved great
prosperity. Knowing that all actions in the world are born of **karma**, O noble
ones! Abandon attachment to other things and accumulate the **punya karma** that
shines like the sun. ||376||  Thus ends the twelfth chapter of the
**Padmacharita**, narrated by the **Acharya** **Ravishena**, known as
**Aarsha**, describing the defeat of Indra, the **Vidhyadhara**. ||12||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 papapurANe dadhAno vakSasA hAraM prasphuradvimalaprabham  /  vasanta iva
saMjAtakusumaughavirAjitaH  // 371 //  vitRptiharSapUrNAbhirvadhUmiH
kRtavIkSaNaH  /  svayaM mRdusamuddhRtacAmarAmiH sasaMbhramam  // 372 //
nAnAvAdivazabdena jayazabdena cAruNA  /  AnanditaH suvezyAminRtyantIbhiH
smnvitH||373|| praviSTo mudito laGkA samudbhUtamahotsavAm  /  bhavanaM ca nijaM
bandhubhRtyavargAminanditaH  // 374 /  /  zikhariNIcchandaH susannaddhAn jitvA
tRNamiva samastAnarigaNAn puropAttAt puNyAt samadhigatasuprAjyavibhavaH  /
kSayaM prApte tasmin vigailitarucibhraSTavimavo babhUvAsau zakro dhigaticapalaM
mAnuSasukham  /  / 375 /  /  asau prAptau vRddhi dazamukhakhagaH pUrvacaritA
_cchumAnnidhU yAlaM prabalamahitavAtamakhilam  /  iti jJAtvA bhavyA jagati
nikhilaM karmajanitaM vimuktAnyAsaGgA ravirucikaraM yAtu sukRtam  /  / 376 /  /
ityArSe raviSeNAcAryaprokta padmacarite indraparAbhavAbhidhAnaM nAma dvAdazaM
parva  // 12 //  vAle puSpaka vimAnapara savAra thaa| usake mukuTameM
bar3e-bar3e ratna dedIpyamAna ho rahe the tathA usakI bhujAe~ bAjUbandoMse
suzobhita thIM  // 370 //  jisakI ujjvala prabhA saba ora phaila rahI thI aise
hArako vaha vakSaHsthalapara dhAraNa kara rahA thA aura usase aisA jAna par3atA
thA mAno utpanna hue phUloMke samUhase suzobhita vasanta Rtu hI ho  /  / 371 /
/  jo atRptikara harSase pUrNa thIM tathA dhIre-dhIre camara Upara uThA rahI
thIM aisI striyAM hAva-bhAvapUrvaka use dekha rahI thIM  // 372 //  vaha nAnA
prakArake bAjoMke zabda tathA manohara jaya-jayakArase Anandita ho rahA thA aura
nRtya karatI huI uttamottama vezyAoMse sahita thA  // 373 /  /  isa prakAra
usane bar3I prasannatAse, aneka mahotsavoMse bharI laMkAmeM praveza kiyA aura
bandhujana tathA bhRtyasamUhase abhinandita ho apane bhavanameM bhI padArpaNa
kiyA ||374|| _ gautama svAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki jisane pUrvopArjita
puNya karmake prabhAvase, saba prakArakI taiyArIse yukta samasta zatruoMko
tRNake samAna jItakara uttama vaibhava prApta kiyA thA aisA indra vidyAdhara
puNyakarmake kSINa honepara kAntihIna tathA vibhavase rahita ho gayA so isa
atyanta caMcala manuSyake sukhako dhikkAra hai  // 375 /  /  tathA vidyAdhara
rAvaNa apane pUrvopAjita puNya karmake prabhAvase samasta balavAn zatruoMko
nirmUla naSTa kara vRddhiko prApta huaa| isa prakAra saMsArake samasta kArya
karmajanita haiM aisA jAnakara he bhavyajano! anya padArthoM meM Asakti
chor3akara sUryake samAna kAntiko utpanna karanevAle eka puNya karmakA hI
saMcaya karo  // 376 //  isa prakAra ArSanAmase prasiddha raviSeNAcAryake dvArA
kathita padmacaritameM indra vidyAdharake parAbhavakA varNana karanevAlA
bArahavA~ parva samApta huA  // 12 //  1. AnanditasUvezyAbhiH ma.  /  2.
vigataruciprabhraSTavibhavo m.|

Page #347 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Thirteenth Chapter  Then, the Samantas of Indra, filled with sorrow for
their lord, arrived at Ravana's palace, led by Sahasrar. ||1|| They entered,
respectfully informed the gatekeepers, and stood bowing, seated as befitting
their status. ||2|| Ravana, with great dignity, looked upon Sahasrar. Sahasrar
said to Ravana, "You have conquered my son Indra. Now, release him at my
request." ||3|| "You have shown the greatness of your arms and your virtue. It
is the nature of kings to crush the pride of others." ||4|| This very word,
clear and echoing, arose from the mouths of the Lokapalas. ||5|| Ravana,
laughing, said to the Lokapalas, "There is a condition. Only by fulfilling this
condition will I release Indra." ||6|| "From today onwards, all of you shall
perform the duties of my city, both inside and outside. ||7|| You shall keep
this city free from dust, impurities, stones, grass, and thorns every day."
||8|| "Indra, too, shall take a pitcher and water the earth with fragrant water.
This is his well-known duty in the world." ||9|| "And the adorned, dignified
goddesses shall decorate the city with fragrant flowers of five colors." ||10||
"If you agree to these conditions with respect, I will release Indra. Otherwise,
how can he be released?" ||11|| Saying this, Ravana looked at the Lokapalas, his
head bowed in shame, and laughed repeatedly, striking his hand against his palm.
||12|| Then, with humility, he said to Sahasrar, his words like nectar,
captivating the hearts of the assembly. ||13|| "O father! Just as you are
revered by Indra, so am I. In fact, even more so. Therefore, how can I disobey
your command?" ||14||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 trayodazaM parva tataH zakrasya sAmantAH svAmiduHkhasamAkulAH  /
puraskRtasahasrArAH prAptA rAvaNamandiram  // 1 //  praviSTAzca pratIhArajJApitA
vinyaanvitaaH| praNamya ca sthitA datteSvAsaneSu yathocitam  // 2 //  dRSTo'tha
gauraveNoce sahasrAro dazAnanam  /  jitastAtastvayA zakro maJjedAnI girA mama
// 3 //  bAhvoH puNyasya codAttaM sAmathrya darzitaM tvayA  /  paragarvApasAdaM
hi samIhante narAdhipAH  // 4 //  ityukta lokapAlAnAM vadanebhyaH samutthitaH  /
zabdo'yameva vispaSTaH pratiniHsvanasaMnimaH  // 5 //  lokapAlAnathovAca
vihasyodvAsitAntakaH  /  samayo'sti vimaJcAmi yena nAthaM divaukasAm  // 6 //
adya prabhRti me sarva yUyaM karma yathocitam  /  saMmArjanAdi sevadhvaM
sarvamantarbahiHpuraH  // 7 //  purIyaM sAMprataM kRtyA bhavadbhiH prativAsaram
/  parAgAzucipASANatRNakaNTakavarjitA  // 8 //  gRhItvA kumbhamindro'pi vAriNA
modcaarugaa| mahIM siJcatu kamadamasya loke prakIrtyate  // 9 //  paJcavarNaizca
kurvantu puSpairgandhamanoharaiH  /  saMbhrAntAH prakaraM devyaH
sarvAlaMkArabhUSitAH  // 10 //  samayenAmunA yuktA yadi tiSThanti sAdarAH  /
vimuJcAmi tataH zakraM kuto nirmuktiranyathA  // 11 //  ityuktvA vIkSamANo'sau
lokapAlAMstrapAnatAn  /  jahAsa muhurAtAnAM tADayan pANinA karam  // 12 //  tato
vinayanamraH san sahasrAramavocata  /  samAhRdayahAriNyA kSaranniva girAmRtam  /
/ 13 /  /  yathA tAta pratIkSyastvaM vAsavasya tathA mama  /  adhikaM vA tataH
kuryA kathamAjJAvilavanam  /  / 14 /  /  athAnantara svAmIke duHkhase Akula
indrake sAmanta, sahasrArako Age kara rAvaNake mahala meM pahu~ce  /  / 1 /  /
dvArapAlake dvArA samAcAra dekara bar3I vinayase sabane bhItara praveza kiyA
aura saba praNAma kara diye hue AsanoMpara yathAyogya rItise baiTha gaye  // 2
//  tadanantara rAvaNane sahasrArakI ora bar3e gauravase dekhA  /  taba
sahasrAra rAvaNase bolA ki tUne mere putra indra ko jIta liyA hai aba mere
kahanese chor3a de  // 3 /  /  tUne apanI bhujAoM aura puNyakI udAra mahimA
dikhalAyI so ThIka hI hai kyoMki rAjA dUsareke ahaMkArako naSTa karanekI hI
ceSTA karate haiM  /  / 4 //  sahasrArake aisA kahanepara lokapAloMke mukhase
bhI yahI zabda nikalA so mAno usake zabda kI pratidhvani hI nikalI thI  // 5 //
tadanantara rAvaNane ha~sakara lokapAloMse kahA ki eka zarta hai usa zartase hI
maiM indrako chor3a sakatA hU~  // 6 //  vaha zarta yaha hai ki Ajase lekara
tuma saba, mere nagarake bhItara aura bAhara buhArI denA Adi jo bhI kArya haiM
unheM karo  // 7 //  aba Apa sabako pratidina hI yaha nagarI dhUli,
azucipadArtha, patthara, tRNa tathA kaNTaka Adise rahita karanI hogI  // 8 //
tathA indra bhI ghar3A lekara sugandhita jalase pRthivI siiNceN| lokameM isakA
yahI kArya prasiddha hai  /  / 9 /  /  aura saba prakArake AbhUSaNoMse vibhUSita
inakI sambhrAnta deviyA~ paMcavarNake sugandhita phUloMse nagarI ko sajAveM  //
10 //  yadi Apa loga Adarake sAtha isa zartase yukta hokara rahanA cAhate haiM
to indrako abhI chor3a detA huuN| anyathA isakA chUTanA kaise ho sakatA hai ?
||11|| itanA kaha rAvaNa lajjAse jhuke hue lokapAloMkI ora dekhatA tathA
AptajanoMke hAthako apane hAthameM tADita karatA haA bAra-bAra haMsane lagA  //
12 //  tadanantara usane vinayAvanata hokara sahasrArase khaa| usa samaya rAvaNa
sabhAke hRdayako haranevAlI apanI madhura vANIse mAno amRta hI jharA rahA thA
// 13 /  /  usane kahA ki he tAta ! jisa prakAra Apa indrake pUjya haiM usI
prakAra mere bhI pUjya haiM, balki usase bhI adhik| isalie 1. puraskRtya ba.  /
2. bahoH kha.  /  3. kRtvA m.| 4. mahaM na te ma.  /  38

Page #348 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
298 If there were not great teachers like you, then this earth would sink into
the abyss, like a mountain abandoned by its supports. ||15|| I am fortunate
because a revered person like you is giving me instructions.  Indeed, those who
are worthy of the instructions of people like you cannot be devoid of merit.
||16|| Therefore, O Lord, from today onwards, let us do something that will
bring about harmony between Indra and me. Let Indra be happy and let me also be
happy. ||17|| This powerful Indra is my fourth brother. By gaining him, I will
make the earth free from thorns. ||18|| Let his Lokapalas remain as they were
before, and let his kingdom also remain as it was before, or even let him take
more. What need is there for a difference between us two? ||19|| Just as you
give instructions to Indra, give me instructions on what I should do, because
the instructions of the teachers are like the protection and adornment of the
remaining body. ||20|| Stay here according to your wish, or stay in the city of
Rathnupura, or stay wherever you wish. We are both your servants, who is the
owner of this land? ||21|| Thus, with his mind soaked in the water of these
sweet words, Sahasrar spoke words even sweeter than those of Ravana. ||22|| He
said, "O Blessed One! The birth of noble people like you is accompanied by
qualities that bring joy to all beings." ||23|| O Auspicious One! Your excellent
humility is praised in this world, and it is like an ornament to your valor.
||24|| Your sight has made my birth meaningful. Those parents are blessed who
have you as the cause of their birth. ||25|| You, who are powerful yet
forgiving, and whose fame is as pure as the white lotus, have removed the fear
of the occurrence of faults. ||26|| It is as you say, everything is possible for
you. What cannot your arms, which are as thick as the trunks of elephants, do?
||27|| But just as a mother cannot be abandoned, so too cannot one's birthplace
be abandoned.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 298 padmapurANe guravaH paramArthena yadi na syubhavAdRzAH  /  adhastato
dharitrIyaM brajenmuktA dharairiva  // 15 //  puNyavAnasmi yatpUjyo dadAti mama
zAsanam  /  bhavadvidhaniyogAnAM na padaM puNyavarjitAH  // 16 //  tadadyArabhya
saMcitya manojaM kriyatAM tathA  /  yathA zakrasya sausthityaM jAyate mama ca
prabho  // 17 //  ayaM zakro mama bhrAtA turIyaH sAMprataM blii| enaM prApya
kariSyAmi pRthivIM vItakaNTakAm  // 18 //  lokapAlAstathaivAsya tacca rAjyaM
yathA purA  /  tato'dhikaM vA gRhNAtu vivekena kimAvayoH  // 19 //  AjJA ca mama
zake vA dAtavyA kRtyavastuni  /  gurubhiH sA hi zeSeva rakSAlaMkArakAraNam  //
20 //  AsyatAmiha vA chandAdathavA sthanUpure  /  yatra vecchata kA
bhUmibhRtyayorAvayormatA  // 21 //  iti priyavacovArisamArdIkRtamAnasaH  /
avocata sahasrArastato'pi madhuraM vacaH  // 22 //  nUnaM bhadra samutpattiH
sajjanAnAM bhavAdRzAm  /  samameva guNaiH sarvalokA lAdanakAribhiH  // 23 //
AyuSmannasya zauryasya vinayo'yaM tavottamaH  /  alaMkArasamaste'smin bhuvane
ilAdhyatAM gataH  // 24 //  bhavato darzanenedaM janma me sArthakaM kRtam  /
pitarau puNyavantau tau tvayA yau kAraNIkRtau  // 25 //  kSamAvatA samarthana
kundanirmalakotinA  /  doSANAM saMbhavAzaGkA tvayA daramapAkRtA  // 26 //
evametadyathA vakSiM sarva saMpadyate tvayi  /  kakuSkarikarAkArau kurutaH kiM
na te bhujau  // 27 //  kiMtu mAteva no zakyA tyaktuM janmavasuMdharA  /  sA hi
kSaNAdviyogena kurute cittamAkulam  // 28 //  maiM ApakI AjJAkA ullaMghana kaise
kara sakatA hU~ ?  // 14 //  yadi yathArthameM Apa-jaise gurujana na hote to
yaha pRthivI parvatoMse chor3o gayI ke samAna rasAtalako calI jAtI  // 15 /  /
cUMki Apa-jaise pUjyapuruSa mujhe AjJA de rahe haiM ataH maiM puNyavAn huuN|
yathArthameM Apa-jaise puruSoMkI AjJAke pAtra puNyahIna manuSya nahIM ho sakate
// 16 /  /  isalie he prabho! Aja Apa vicArakara aisA uttama kArya kIjie jisase
indra aura mujhameM sauhAdraM utpanna ho jAye  /  indra sukhase rahe aura maiM
bhI sukhase raha sakU~  // 17 //  yaha balavAn indra merA cauthA bhAI hai, ise
pAkara maiM pRthvIko niSkaNTaka kara dUMgA  // 18 //  isake lokapAla pahalekI
taraha hI raheM tathA isakA rAjya bhI pahalekI taraha hI rahe athavA usase bhI
adhika le le| hama donoMmeM bhedako AvazyakatA hI kyA hai ?  // 19 //  Apa jisa
prakAra indrako AjJA dete haiM usI prakAra mujhameM karane yogya kAryakI AjJA
dete raheM kyoMki gurujanoMkI AjJA hI zeSAkSatakI taraha rakSA evaM zobhAko
karanevAlI hai  // 20 //  Apa apane abhiprAyake anusAra yahA~ raheM athavA
rathanUpura nagarameM raheM athavA jahA~ icchA ho vahAM rheN| hama donoM Apake
sevaka haiM hamArI bhUmi ho kauna hai ?  // 21 //  isa prakArake priyavacanarUpI
jalase jisakA mana bhIga rahA thA aisA sahasrAra rAvaNase bhI adhika madhura
vacana bolA  // 22 //  usane kahA ki he bhadra ! Apa-jaise sajjanoMkI utpatti
samasta logoMko Anandita karanevAle guNoMke sAtha hI hotI hai  // 23 //  he
AyuSman ! tumhArI yaha uttama vinaya isa saMsArameM prazaMsAko prApta hai tathA
tumhArI isa zUravIratAke AbhUSaNake samAna hai  // 24 //  Apake darzanane mere
isa janmako sArthaka kara diyaa| ve mAtA-pitA dhanya haiM jinheM tUne apanI
utpattimeM kAraNa banAyA hai  // 25 //  jo samartha hokara bhI kSamAvAn hai,
tathA jisakI kIrti kundake phUlake samAna nirmala hai aise tUne doSoMke utpanna
honekI AzaMkA dUra haTA dI hai  // 26 //  tU jaisA kaha rahA hai vaha aisA hI
hai| tujhameM sarva kArya sambhava haiN| diggajoMkI sUMr3ake samAna sthUla terI
bhujAe~ kyA nahIM kara sakatI haiM  // 27 //  kintu jisa prakAra mAtA nahIM
chor3I jA sakatI usI prakAra janmabhUmi bhI nahIM chor3I jA sakatI 1.
puNyavajitaH ma.  /  2. bhatyavastuni m.| 3. rkssyaalNkaar-m.| 4. sacchandA m.|
5. nate m.| mate ka.. ba.  /  6. tAto'pi mAdhuraM vacaH ma.  /  7. sujanAnAM
kh.| 8. kathayasi  /  9. saMpAdyate m.| 10. kiMtu m.|

Page #349 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Thirteenth Chapter  299 Unable to leave their own land, their friends and
relatives remained there, like chatakas, filled with anxiety, looking towards
the path. ||29|| O Gunalaya, you too, following your lineage, are serving Lanka
and attaining supreme joy. What can be said about one's birthplace? ||30||
Therefore, we shall go to that very land, the source of great pleasures. May the
forest protect you, beloved of the gods, for a long time. ||31|| Having said
this, Indra, along with his son Sahasrar and the Lokapalas, went to the
Vijayadha mountain, accompanied by Ravana for a short distance. ||32|| All the
Lokapalas remained in their respective places as before, but due to the defeat,
they became devoid of essence, like moving machines. ||33|| Seeing the
Vijayavasi people, the gods, filled with immense shame, did not know where they
were going. Thus, the gods remained constantly depressed by their pleasures.
||34|| Indra did not find joy in the city, nor in the gardens, nor in the ponds
filled with lotus pollen water. In other words, due to the defeat, he found
nothing pleasing. ||35|| He did not even cast his simple gaze upon the women.
What to speak of his body? His mind was always filled with shame. ||36||
Although people, by introducing other topics of conversation, constantly tried
to make him forget his sorrow related to the defeat, his mind did not become
healthy. ||37|| Then, one day, Indra, sitting on the top of a pillar inside his
palace, resembling the peak of Mount Gandhamadana, was seated in the Jinalaya.
||38|| Wise men surrounded him. He, remembering the defeat constantly, was
holding his body with a sense of disrespect. While sitting, he thought: ||39||
Shame on this wealth, connected to knowledge, which, like a very high group of
clouds in the autumn season, vanished in a moment. ||40|| Those weapons, those
elephants, those warriors, and those horses, all became like grass due to my
previous wonder. ||41||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 trayodazaM parva 299 azaktAH svabhuvaM tyaktuM tatra no mitrabAndhavAH  /
cAtakA iva sotkaNThAstiSThantyadhvAvalokinaH  // 29 //  kulakramasamAyAtAM
sevamAno guNAlaya  /  laGkAM yAsi parAM prItiM janmamameH kimucyatAm  // 30 //
tasmAttAmeva gacchAmo mahAbhogodbhavAvanim  /  devAnAMpriya nirvighnaM rakSatA
vanaM ciram  // 31 //  ityuktvAnugato dUraM kailAsakSobhakAriNA  /  sahasrAro
gataH sendro lopapAlaiH samaM girim  // 32 //  yathAsvaM ca sthitAH sarve
pUrvavallokapAlinaH  /  bhaGgAdasAratAM prAptAzcalayantramayA iva  // 33 //
vijayArdhajalokena dRzyamAnA mahAtrapAH  /  nAjJAsiSuH kva gacchAma iti
mogadviSaH surAH  // 34 //  indro'pi na pure prItiM lebhe nodyAnabhUmiSu  /  na
dIrghikAsu rAjIvarajaHpiJjaravAriSu  // 35 //  na dRSTimapi kAntAsu cakre
praguNavartinIm  /  tanau tu sakalA kaiva pAnirbharacetasaH  // 36 //
athApyudvijamAnasya tasya loko'nuvartanam  /  cakArAnyakathAsaGgaiH kurvana
bhaGgasya vismRtim  // 37 //  athaikastambhamUrdhasthe svasamAntaravartini  /
gandhamAdanazRGgAbhe sthito jinavarAlaye  // 38 //  budhaiH parivRto dadhyAviti
zakro niraadrm| vahanaGgaM gatacchAyaM smaran bhaGgamanAratam  // 39 //
dhigvidyAgocarezvarya vilInaM yaditi kSaNAt  /  zAradAnAmivAbdAnAM
vRndamatyantamunnatam  // 40 //  tAni zastrANi te nAgAste bhaTAste turaGgamAH  /
sarva tRNasamaM jAtaM mama pUrva kRtAdbhutam  // 41 //  kyoMki vaha kSaNa-
bharake viyogase cittako Akula karane lagatI hai  /  / 28 /  /  hama apanI
bhUmiko chor3aneke lie asamartha haiM kyoMki vahA~ hamAre mitra tathA bhAI-
bAndhava cAtakakI taraha utkaNThAse yukta ho mArga dekhate hue sthita hoMge  /
/ 29 //  he guNAlaya! Apa bhI to apanI kula-paramparAse calI AyI laMkAkI sevA
karate hue parama prItiko prApta ho rahe haiM so bAta hI aisI hai janmabhUmike
viSayameM kyA kahA jAye ? / 30 /  /  isalie hama jahA~ mahAbhogoMkI utpatti hotI
hai apanI usI bhUmiko jAte haiM  /  he devoMke priya ! tuma cirakAla taka
saMsArakI rakSA karo  // 31 //  itanA kahakara sahasrAra indra nAmA putra tathA
lokapAloMke sAtha vijayAdha parvatapara calA gyaa| rAvaNa bhejaneke lie kucha
dUra taka usake sAtha gayA  // 32 //  saba lokapAla pahalekI taraha hI apane-
apane sthAnoMpara rahane lage parantu parAjayake kAraNa niHsAra ho gaye aura
calate-phirate yantrake samAna jAna par3ane lage  // 33 /  /  bahuta bhArI
lajjAse bhare deva logoMkI ora jaba vijayAvAsI loga dekhate the taba ve yaha
nahIM jAna pAte the ki hama kahAM jA rahe haiM ? isa taraha deva loga sadA
bhogoMse udAsa rahate the  // 34 //  indra bhI na nagarameM, na bAga-bagIcoMmeM
aura na kamaloMkI parAgase pIle jalavAlI vApikAoMmeM hI prItiko prApta hotA thA
arthAt parAjayake kAraNa use kahIM acchA nahIM lagatA thA  // 35 //  aba vaha
striyoMpara bhI apanI sarala dRSTi nahIM DAlatA thA phira zarIrako to ginatI hI
kyA thI ? usakA citta sadA lajjAse bharA rahatA thA  /  / 36 /  /  yadyapi loga
anyAnya kathAoMke prasaMga cher3akara usake parAjaya sambandhI duHkhako bhulA
deneke lie sadA anukUla ceSTA karate the to bhI usakA citta svastha nahIM hotA
thA  // 37 //  _athAnantara eka dina indra, apane mahalako bhItara vidyamAna,
eka khambheke agrabhAgapara sthita, gandhamAdana parvatake zikharake samAna
suzobhita jinAlayameM baiThA thA  // 38 //  vidvAn loga use gherakara baiThe
the| vaha nirantara parAjayakA smaraNa karatA huA zarIrako nirAdara bhAvase
dhAraNa kara rahA thaa| baiThe-baiThe hI usane isa prakAra vicAra kiyA ki  // 39
//  vidyAoMse sambandha rakhanevAle isa aizvaryako dhikkAra hai jo ki zarad
Rtuke bAdaloMke atyanta unnata samUhake samAna kSaNa-bhara meM vilIna ho gayA  /
/ 40 /  /  ve zastra, ve hAthI, ve yoddhA aura ve ghor3e jo ki pahale mujhe
Azcarya 1. guNAlayAM kha.  /  guNAlayaH m.| 2. janmabhUmiH m.| 3. mahAbhAgo
bhavAvanim m.| 4. athApyudvignamanasastasya kh.| 5. vadannaGgaM m.|

Page #350 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
300 In the Padma Purana, or how else can a man describe the diversity of karma?
For all else is strengthened by karma. ||42|| Indeed, the karma I have
accumulated in the past, which is capable of bringing about the enjoyment of
various pleasures, has been exhausted, and that is why this state of affairs
exists. ||43|| It would be better to die in battle, in the midst of danger, than
to be disgraced, for disgrace spreads everywhere. ||44|| How can I, who has
placed his foot on the head of his enemies and lived, now enjoy the wealth
granted by my enemies? ||45|| Therefore, I abandon the desire for worldly
pleasures and worship the causes of attaining the state of liberation. ||46||
Ravana, my great friend, came disguised as an enemy, and he awakened me from my
attachment to the taste of this fleeting pleasure. ||47|| Meanwhile, a sage
named Nirvana Sangama, who was wandering through places suitable for virtuous
people, was traveling through the sky. ||48|| Suddenly, his progress was halted.
Then, looking down, he saw the temple. ||49|| The great sage, endowed with
direct knowledge, quickly descended from the sky to worship the Jina image
enshrined in the temple. ||50|| The king Indra, with great joy, had risen and
worshipped the Jina. The great sage, in accordance with the proper procedure,
paid homage to the Jina image. ||51|| Then, after the sage had worshipped the
Jina and sat down, Indra, bowing to his feet, sat in front of him and began to
criticize himself. ||52|| The sage, who was supremely skilled in making people
experience the course of the entire world, comforted him with excellent words.
||53|| Then Indra asked the sage about his past life. The sage, adorned with a
multitude of virtues, told him about his past life as follows: ||54|| O King!
You have wandered through countless births in the four realms of existence,
experiencing the great forest of suffering. In the city of Shikha Pada, you were
born as a human being. ||55|| You were born into a poor family, associated with
women, and you came with the name "Kulavanta," meaning "noble." ||56||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 300 padmapurANe athavA karmaNAmetadvaicitryaM ko'nyathA naraH  /  katuM zaknoti
teSAM hi sarvamanyabalAdharam  // 42 //  nUnaM purAkRtaM karma
bhogasaMpAdanakSamam  /  parikSayaM mama prAptaM yenaiSA vartate dazA  // 43 //
varaM samara evAsminmRtaH syAcchasaMkaTe  /  nAkIrtiryatra jAyeta sarva
viSTapagAminI  // 44 //  caraNaM zirasi nyasya zatraNAM yena jIvitam  /
zatruNAnumatAM so'haM seve lakSmI kathaM hriH||45|| parityajya sukhe
tasmAdamilApaM bhavodbhave  /  nizreyasaMpadaprAptikAraNAni bhajAmyaham  // 46
//  rAvaNo me mahAbandhurAgataH zatruveSabhRt  /  yenAsArasukhAsvAdasakto'smi
paribodhitaH  // 47 //  atrAntare muniH prApto nAmnA nirvANasaMgamaH  /  viharan
kvApi yogyAni sthAnAni guNavAsasAm  // 48 //  sahasA vrajatastasya gatiH
stambhamupAgatA  /  praNidhAya tatazcakSuradho'sau caityamaikSata  // 49 //
pratyakSajJAnasaMpannastasmizca jinapuGgavam  /  vanditaM namasaH
zIghramavatIrNA mahAyatiH  // 50 //  saMtoSeNa ca zakreNa kRtAbhyutthAnapUjanaH
/  cakre jinanamaskAra vidhinA yatisattamaH  // 51 //  AsInasya tato joSaM
vanditvA caraNau muneH  /  puraH sthitvA harizcakre ciramAtmanigahaNam  // 52 //
sarvasaMsAravRttAntavedanAtyantakovidaiH  /  muninA paramairvAkyaiH
parisAntvanamAhRtaH  // 53 //  apRcchat sa bhavaM pUrvamAtmano munipuGgavam  /
sa cetyakathayattasmai guNagrAmavibhUSitaH  // 54 //
caturgatigatAnekayonidaHkhamahAvane  /  bhrAmyan zikhApadAmikhye nagare mAnuSI
gatim  // 55 /  /  prAto jIvaH kule jAto daridre straiNasaMgataH  /  kulavAnteti
bibhrANA nAmArthena samAgatam  // 56 //  utpanna karate the Aja sabake saba
tRNake samAna tuccha jAna par3ate haiM  // 41 //  athavA karmoMkI isa
vicitratAko anyathA karaneke lie kauna manuSya samartha hai ? yathArthameM anya
saba padArtha karmoM ke balase hI bala dhAraNa karate haiM  // 42 //  nizcaya hI
merA pUrvasaMcita puNyakarma jo ki nAnA bhogoMkI prApti karAne meM samartha hai
parikSINa ho cukA hai isIlie to yaha avasthA ho rahI hai  /  / 43 /  /  zatruke
saMkaTase bhare yuddha meM yadi mara hI jAtA to acchA hotA kyoMki usase samasta
lokameM phailanevAlI apakIrti to utpanna nahIM hotI  // 44 //  jisane zatruoMke
sirapara paira rakhakara jIvana bitAyA vaha maiM aba zatru dvArA anumata
lakSmIkA kaise upabhoga karU~ ?  // 45 /  /  isalie aba maiM saMsAra sambandhI
sukhakI abhilASA chor3a mokSapadakI prAptike jo kAraNa haiM unhIMkI upAsanA
karatA hU~  // 46 //  zatruke vezako dhAraNa karanevAlA rAvaNa merA mahAbandhu
banakara AyA thA jisane ki isa asAra sukhake svAdameM lIna mujhako jAgRta kara
diyA  /  / 47 /  /  isI bIca meM guNI manuSyoMke yogya sthAnoMmeM vihAra karate
hue nirvANasaMgama nAmA cAraNaRddhidhArI muni vahA~ AkAzamArgase jA rahe the  //
48 //  so calate-calate unakI gati sahasA ruka gyii| tadanantara unhoMne jaba
nIce dRSTi DAlI to mandirake darzana hue  // 49 //  pratyakSa jJAnake dhArI
mahAmuni mandirameM virAjamAna jina-pratimA kI vandanA karaneke lie zIghra hI
AkAzase nIce utare  // 50 //  rAjA indrane bar3e santoSase uThakara jinakI pUjA
kI thI aise una munirAjane vidhipUrvaka jinapratimAko namaskAra kiyA  // 51 //
tadanantara jaba munirAja jinendradevakI vandanA kara cupa baiTha gaye taba
indra unake caraNoMko namaskAra kara sAmane baiTha gayA aura apanI nindA karane
lagA  // 52 //  munirAjane samasta saMsArake vRttAntakA anubhava karAnemeM
atizaya nipuNa utkRSTa vacanoMse use santoSa prApta karAyA  // 53 /  /
athAnantara indrane munirAjase apanA pUrvabhava pUchA so guNoMke samUhase
vibhUSita munirAja usake lie isa prakAra pUrvabhava kahane lage  // 54 //  he
rAjan ! catugaMti sambandhI aneka yoniyoMke 1. sarvamanyabalAdvaram ka.  /  2.
bhavedbhuvi m.| 3. nizreyasaH m.| 4. gatistambha- m.| 5. parizAntatva kh.| 6.
jIvaM m.| 7. daridrastraNa m.| 8. kulaM kAnteti m.|

Page #351 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Thirteenth Chapter  A being wandering in the great forest of suffering,
attained the human realm in the city of Shikhapad. Born into a poor family, he
became known as "Kulavanta" due to his association with a woman. || 55-56 ||
Kulavanta's eyes were always filled with mucus, his nose was flat, and his body
was riddled with hundreds of diseases. Despite this, he had no means of
sustenance and survived by eating scraps left by others, a consequence of his
karmic actions. || 57 ||  His clothes were extremely dirty, misfortune followed
him, his entire body was rough, his limbs were torn, and his hair was
disheveled. Wherever he went, people harassed him. He could find no peace
anywhere. || 58 ||  In his final moments, with a good mind, he renounced food
for a moment, practicing non-consumption. Upon leaving his body, he became a
celestial being named "Kimpurusha," the son of a celestial woman named
"Kshiradhara." || 59 ||  From there, he was reborn in the city of Ratnapura as
the son of a couple named Dharani and Gomukha, named "Sahasrabhaga." || 60 ||
There, he attained the highest right faith and practiced the five vows. Upon
death, he became a celestial being named "Shukra" in the highest heaven. || 61
||  From there, he was reborn in the city of Ratnasamchaya in the Mahavideha
region, as the son of a minister named "Mani" and his wife "Gunavali," named
"Samantvardhana." || 62 ||  Samantvardhana renounced his king and became a
practitioner of the great vows. He practiced intense austerities, constantly
focused on the truth, endured hardships, attained pure right faith, and
conquered his passions. Upon death, he went to the Graiveyak heaven, becoming
"Ahamindra" and enjoying its pleasures for a long time. Finally, he was reborn
in the city of Rathanupura as "Indra," the king of the celestial beings, born to
the queen "Hridayasundari" of the celestial being "Sahasrar." || 63-66 ||  Oh
Indra! Though I am filled with knowledge, I was defeated by my enemy. Why are
you filled with sorrow, carrying this disrespect for yourself? || 67 ||  Oh
foolish one! You sow millet and desire rice in vain. Beings always receive
fruits according to their actions. || 68 ||  The actions you performed in the
past are the means for your enjoyment. It is not surprising that there is no
effect without a cause. || 69 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 trayodazaM parva sA 'cillA cipiTI vyAdhizatasaMkulavigrahA  /
kathaMcitkarmasaMyogAlokocchiSTena jIvitA ||57|| duzcelA durbhagA rUkSA
sphuTitAGgA kumUrdhajA  /  uttrAsyamAnA lokena lebhe sA zarma na kvacit  // 58
//  muhUrta parivarjyAnnaM zarIraM ca sumAnasA  /  jAtA kiMpuruSasya strI
kSIradhAreti nAmataH ||59 || cyutA ca ratnanagare dharaNIgomukhAkhyayoH  /
bibhratsahasrabhAgAkhyAM tanayo'bhUtkuTumbinoH || 60  //  labdhvA
paramasamyaktvamaNuvratasamanvitaH  /  paJcatAM prApya zukrAhve jAto
vibudhasattamaH ||61|| cyuto mahAvidehe'tha nagare ratnasaMcaye  /  guNAvalyAM
maNerjAto'mAtyAt sAmantavarddhanaH  /  /  62 //  niSkrAnto vinA sAdhaM
mahAvratadharo'bhavat  /  atitIvratayA nityaM tasvArthaMgatamAnasaH ||63 ||
paroSahagaNasyAlaM SoDhA nirmaladarzanaH  /  kaSAyarahitaH pretya paraM
graiveyakaM gataH  // 64 //  ahamindraH paraM saukhyaM tatra bhuktvA ciraM
cyutaH  /  jAto hRdayasundaryAM sahasrArAkhyakhecarAt  // 65 //  pUrvAbhyAsena
zakrasya sukhe saMsaktamAnasaH  /  indrastvaM khecarAdhIzo nagare rathanUpure
//  66  //  satvamindra viSaNNaH kiM vRthaiva paritapyase  /  vidyAdhiko
jito'smIti vahannAtmanyanAdaram  // 67 //  *nirbuddhe ! kodravAnuptvA zAlIn
prArthayase vRthA  /  karmaNAmucitaM teSAM jAyate prANinAM phalam  // 68 //
kSINaM purAkRtaM karma tava bhogasya sAdhanam  /  hetunA na binA kAryaM
bhavatIti kimadbhutam  //  69  //  duHkharUpI mahAvanameM bhramaNa karatA huA
eka jIva zikhApadanAmA nagarameM manuSya gatiko prApta ho daridra kulameM
utpanna huaa| vahA~ strI paryAyase yukta ho vaha jIva 'kulavAntA' isa sArthaka
nAmako dhAraNa karanevAlA huA || 55 - 56  /  /  kulavAntAke netra sadA kIMcarase
yukta rahate the, usakI nAka capaTI thI aura usakA zarIra saikar3oM bImAriyoMse
yukta thA  /  itanA honepara bhI usake bhojanakA ThikAnA nahIM thA  /  vaha
karmodayake kAraNa jisa kisI taraha logoMkA jUThana khAkara jIvita rahatI thI ||
57 || usake vastra atyanta malina the, daurbhAgya usakA pIchA kara rahA thA,
sArA zarIra atyanta rUkSa thA, hAtha-paira Adi aMga phaTe hue the aura khoTe
keza bikhare hue the  /  vaha jahA~ jAtI thI vahIM loga use taMga karate the  /
isa taraha vaha kahIM bhI sukha nahIM prApta kara sakatI thI  //  58  //  anta
samaya zubhamati ho usane eka muhUrtake lie annakA tyAga kara anazana dhAraNa
kiyA jisase zarIra tyAga kara kiMpuruSanAmA devakI kSIradhArA nAmakI strI huI ||
59 || vahA~se cyuta hokara ratnapura nagarameM dharaNI aura gomukha nAmA dampatI
ke sahasrabhAga nAmaka putra huA ||60|| vahA~ utkRSTa samyagdarzana prApta kara
dhArI huA aura antameM marakara zukra nAmA svarga meM uttama deva huA || 61 ||
vahA~se cyuta hokara mahAvideha kSetrake ratnasaMcayanAmA nagarameM maNinAmaka
mantrIkI guNAvalI nAmaka strI sAmantavardhana nAmaka putra huA || 62||
sAmantavardhana apane rAjAke sAtha virakta ho mahAvratakA dhAraka huaa| vahA~
usane atyanta kaThina tapazcaraNa kiyA, tattvArthake cintana meM nirantara mana
lagAyA, acchI taraha parISaha sahana kiye, nirmala samyagdarzana prApta kiyA
aura kaSAyoMpara vijaya prApta kI  /  anta samaya marakara vaha graiveyaka gayA
so ahamidra hokara cirakAla taka vahA~ke sukha bhogatA rahA  /  anta samaya meM
vahA~se cyuta ho rathanUpura nagarameM sahasrAra nAmaka vidyAdharakI
hRdayasundarI rAnIse indra nAmako dhAraNa karanevAlA tU vidyAdharoMkA rAjA huA
hai  /  pUrva abhyAsake kAraNa hI terA mana indra sukhameM lIna rahA hai  /  /
63-66 || so he indra ! maiM vidyAoMse yukta hotA huA bhI zatruse hAra gayA hU~,
isa prakAra apane Apake viSayameM anAdarako dhAraNa karatA huA tU viSAdayukta ho
vyarthaM hI kyoM santApa kara rahA hai ||67|| are nirbuddhi ! tU kodoM bokara
dhAnako vyartha hI icchA karatA hai  /  prANiyoM ko sadA karmoMke anukUla hI
phala prApta hotA hai ||68|| tumhAre bhogopabhogakA sAdhana 301 1. klinne
cakSuSI yasyAH sA cillA 'klinnasya cil pil lazvAsya cakSuSI' iti vArtikam  /  2.
natA nAsikA yasyAH sA cipiTA 'inac piccika ci ca' iti sUtram  /  3. ahamindra
paraM ma  /  4. nirbuddhi - ma.  /  I

Page #352 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, It is only a cause, Ravana's defeat. What you have done in
this birth, you have received the fruits of it. ||70|| Why don't you remember
the injustice you did while playing? Your pride born of wealth is now destroyed.
Remember that now. ||71|| It seems that because of the long time, the story is
not coming to your mind. Therefore, listen with a focused mind, I say. ||72|| In
the city of Arijaipur, there was a Vidyaadhara king named Vahnivega. He had
arranged the Swayamvara of his daughter named Ahalya, born of Queen Vegavati.
||73|| All the Vidyaadharas, adorned with their respective wealth, came to the
Swayamvara, leaving their ranks out of eagerness. ||74|| You also went there,
endowed with excellent wealth, and so did Anandamal, the king of
Chandraavartapur. ||75|| Leaving all the Vidyaadharas behind, due to the
influence of your past karma, Anandamal was chosen by the beautiful girl. ||76||
After marrying her, he enjoyed the pleasures he desired, just as Indra enjoys
the ever-increasing pleasures in heaven. ||77|| From then on, you became
extremely hostile towards him, driven by intense jealousy. ||78|| Then, due to
the favorable nature of his karma, Anandamal suddenly realized that this body is
impermanent, and therefore, it is of no use to me. ||79|| I will do penance so
that the suffering related to the world will be destroyed. What is the use of
hoping for deceitful pleasures? ||80|| Having realized this deeply with his
enlightened inner self, he renounced all possessions and undertook the highest
penance. ||81|| Once, he was situated on the mountain named Rathaavarta, on the
bank of the Hansavali river, in the state of PratimÄ Yoga. You recognized him.
||82|| The fire of your past anger, fueled by the sight of him, flared up. Then,
mocking him with pride, you laughed repeatedly. ||83|| 302 The karma earned in
the past has now been exhausted. What is the wonder in this, that without a
cause, there is no effect? ||69|| Ravana is only a cause in your defeat. You
have done karma in this birth, and you have received this defeat from them.
||70|| Why don't you remember the injustice you did while playing? Your pride
born of wealth is now destroyed. Therefore, remember the past now. ||71|| It
seems that because of the long time, the story is not coming to your mind.
Therefore, listen with a focused mind, I say. ||72|| I In the city of Arijaipur,
there was a Vidyaadhara king named Vahnivega. He had arranged the Swayamvara of
his daughter named Ahalya, born of Queen Vegavati. ||73|| All the Vidyaadharas,
adorned with their respective wealth, came to the Swayamvara, leaving their
ranks out of eagerness. ||74|| You also went there, endowed with excellent
wealth, and so did Anandamal, the king of Chandraavartapur. ||75|| Leaving all
the Vidyaadharas behind, due to the influence of your past karma, Anandamal was
chosen by the beautiful girl. ||76|| After marrying her, he enjoyed the
pleasures he desired, just as Indra enjoys the ever-increasing pleasures in
heaven. ||77|| From then on, you became extremely hostile towards him, driven by
intense jealousy. ||78|| Then, due to the favorable nature of his karma,
Anandamal suddenly realized that this body is impermanent, and therefore, it is
of no use to me. ||79|| I will do penance so that the suffering related to the
world will be destroyed. What is the use of hoping for deceitful pleasures?
||80|| Having realized this deeply with his enlightened inner self, he renounced
all possessions and undertook the highest penance. ||81|| Once, he was situated
on the mountain named Rathaavarta, on the bank of the Hansavali river, in the
state of PratimÄ Yoga. You recognized him. ||82|| The fire of your past anger,
fueled by the sight of him, flared up. Then, mocking him with pride, you laughed
repeatedly. ||83|| 1. You, M. | 2. Ahalya, K. | 3. Ranks, extremely, M. | 4.
Together, M. | 5. You, jealousy, K., M., B. | 6. Mocking, M. |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe nimittamAtrametasmin rAvaNaste parAbhave  /  janmanyatraiva
yatkarma kRtaM tenaiva lambhitam  // 70 //  kiM na smarasi yatpUrva krIDatA
durnayaM kRtam  /  aizvaryaM janito bhraSTo madaste smara sAMpratam  // 71 //
ciravRttatayA buddhau vRttAntaste 'svayaM kRtaH  /  nArohati
yatastasmAcchRNvekApracetasA  // 72 //  ariMjayapure bahnivegAkhyaH
khecaro'bhavat  /  svayaMvarArthamAhalyAM cakre vegavatIsutAm  // 73 //  tatra
vidyAdharAH sarve yathAvibhavazobhitAH  /  samAgatAH parityajya
zreNyAvasyantamutsukAH  // 74 //  bhavAnapi gatastatra yuktaH paramasaMpadA  /
anyazvAnandamAlAkhyazcandrAvartapurAdhipaH  //  75  //  saMtyajya khecarAn
sarvAn pUrvakarmAnubhAvataH  /  kanyayAnandamAlo'sau vRtaH sarvAGgakAntayA  //
76 //  pariNIya satAM bhogAn prApa cintitasaMgatAn  /  yathAmarAdhipaH svarge
prativAsaravarddhinaH  // 77 //  tataH prabhRti kopena "svamIrSyAjena bhUriNA  /
gRhIto bairitAmasya saMprApto'tigarIyasIm  // 78 //  tato'sya sahasA buddhiriyaM
jAtA svakarmataH  /  deho'yamabhuvaH kiMcitkRtyametena no mama  // 79 //  tapaH
karomi saMsAraduHkhaM yena vinazyati  /  kA vA bhogeSu pratyAzA
vipralambhanakAriSu  //  80  //  avadhAryedamatyantaM vibuddhenAntarAtmanA  /
tyaktvA parigrahaM sarva cacAra paramaM tapaH  //  81  //  haMsAvalInadItIre
sthitaH pratimayAnyadA  /  sa svayA pratyabhijJAto rathAvartamahIdhare  //  82
//  darzanendhanasaMvRddhapUrvakopAgninA tataH  /  svayAsau kurvatA narma
garveNa hasito muhuH  //  83  //  302 jo pUrvopArjita karma thA vaha aba kSINa
ho gayA hai so kAraNake binA kArya nahIM hotA hai isameM Azcarya hI kyA hai ?
||69 || tere isa parAbhavameM rAvaNa to nimittamAtra hai  /  tUne isI janma meM
karma kiye haiM unhIM se yaha parAbhava prApta huA hai  // 70 //  tUne pahale
krIr3A karate samaya jo anyAya kiyA hai usakA smaraNa kyoM nahIM karatA hai ?
aizvayaMse utpanna huA terA mada cU~ki aba naSTa ho cukA hai| isalie aba to
pichalI bAtakA smaraNa kara || 71  //  jAna par3atA hai ki bahuta samaya ho jAne
ke kAraNa vaha vRttAnta svayaM terI buddhimeM nahIM A rahA hai isalie
ekAgracitta hokara suna, kahatA huuN||72|| maiM arijayapura nagarameM vahnivega
nAmA vidyAdhara rAjA thA so usane vegavatI rAnIse utpanna AhalyA nAmaka putrIkA
svayaMvara racA thA  //  73  //  utsukatAse bhare tathA yathAyogya vaibhavase
zobhita samasta vidyAdhara dakSiNa zreNI chor3a-chor3akara usa svayaMvarameM Aye
the ||74 || utkRSTa sampadAse yukta hokara Apa bhI vahA~ gaye the tathA
candrAvataM nagarakA rAjA AnandamAla bhI vahA~ AyA thA  //  75  //
sarvAMgasundarI kanyAne pUrvaM karma ke prabhAvase samasta vidyAdharoMko
chor3akara AnandamAlako varA  // 76 //  so AnandamAla use vivAhakara icchA
karate hI prApta honevAle bhogoMkA usa taraha upabhoga karane lagA jisa taraha
ki indra svarga meM pratidina vRddhiko prApta honevAle bhogoMkA upabhoga karatA
hai  // 77 //  IrSyAjanya bahuta bhArI krodhake kAraNa tU usI samayase usake
sAtha atyadhika zatrutA karane lagA ||78|| tadanantara karmoMkI anukUlatAke
kAraNa AnandamAlako sahasA yaha buddhi utpanna huI ki yaha zarIra anitya hai
ataH isase mujhe kucha prayojana nahIM hai || 79 || maiM to tapa karatA hU~
jisase saMsAra sambandhI duHkhakA nAza hogaa| dhokhA denevAle bhogoMmeM kyA AzA
rakhanA hai ? ||80|| prabodhako prApta huI antarAtmA se aisA vicArakara usane
sarvaM parigrahakA tyAgakara utkRSTa tapa dhAraNa kara liyA  // 81 //  eka dina
haMsAvalI nadI ke kinAre rathAvarta nAmA parvatapara vaha pratimA yogase
virAjamAna thA so tUne pahacAna liyA ||82  //  darzanarUpI Indhanase jisakI
pichalI krodhAgni bhar3aka uThI 1. tvayA ma.  /  2. sAhalyAM kha.  /  3.
zreNyAmatyanta ma  /  4. saMgatA ma.  /  5. tvamIrSyA yena kha., ma., ba. 1 6.
kurvatAM ma.  /

Page #353 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Thirteenth Chapter  303. You, the one who is excessively fond of sensual
pleasures, the husband of Ahalya, why are you sitting here like this?  || 84 ||
You, bound by ropes, yet your body remains unshaken like a mountain, your mind
steadfast in contemplation of the truth. || 85 ||  Seeing you being humiliated,
your brother, the virtuous Kalyan, standing nearby, was filled with sorrow and
anger. || 86 ||  He, possessing the power of the image-assembly, gathered it and
gave it to you. With a long, hot sigh, he cursed you, filled with sorrow. || 87
||  "You have scorned these innocent sages, and you will surely face great scorn
yourself." || 88 ||  He wanted to burn you with his immeasurable breath, but
your wife, Sarvasri, calmed him down. || 89 ||  She, with right vision, is a
worshiper of the virtuous. Even the sages respect her words, for they are of
pure heart. || 90 ||  If that virtuous woman had not calmed him down, who could
have stopped his fire of anger? || 91 ||  There is nothing in the three worlds
that cannot be achieved through penance. Indeed, the power of penance is supreme
over all powers. || 92 ||  Even Indra, the king of the gods, does not possess
the power, radiance, brilliance, or fortitude of a virtuous sage who acts
according to his will. || 93 ||  Those who scorn the virtuous face great
suffering in the animal realm and in hell. || 94 ||  Whoever, even in their
mind, brings about the defeat of the virtuous, receives supreme suffering in
this world and the next. || 95 ||  What can be said about a cruel-minded person
who insults or kills a liberated sage? || 96 ||  Whatever actions humans perform
with their body, mind, or speech, they will surely bear the fruits of those
actions. || 97 ||  Knowing the nature of actions and their consequences, both
good and bad, strengthen your resolve in Dharma and liberate yourself from
suffering. || 98 ||  You were playing and laughing at him out of arrogance. ||
83 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 trayodazaM parva 303 AhalyAramaNaH sa tvaM kAmabhogAtivatsalaH  /  adhunA kiM
sthito'syevamiti bhASaNakAriNA  //  84  //  vaSTito rajjubhiH
kSoNIdharaniSkampavigrahaH  /  tattvArthaM cintanAsaMganitAntasthiramAnasaH  //
85  //  dRSTvAbhibhUyamAnaM taM tvayAsya nikaTasthitaH  /  kalyANasaMjJako
bhrAtA sAdhuH krodhena duHkhitaH  //  86  //  saMhRtya pratimAyogamRddhi prAptaH
sa te dadau  /  zApamevamalaM dIrgha nizvasyoSNaM ca duHkhitaH  // 87 //  ayaM
niraparAdhaH saMstvayA yanmunipuGgavaH  /  tiraskRtastadatyantaM
tiraskAramavApsyasi  //  88  //  nizvAsenAmitenAsIddagdhumeva nirUpitaH  /
sarvazrIsaMjJayA kiMtu zAmitastava kAntayA ||89|| samyagdRSTiralaM sA hi
sAdhupUjanakAriNI  /  munayo'pi vacastasyAH kurvate sAdhucetasaH ||10|| yadi
nAma tayA sAdhvyA nAsau nItaH zamaM bhavet  /  tatastasya sa kopAgniH kena
zakyeta vAritum  // 91 //  lokatraye'pi tannAsti tapasA yaha sAdhyate  /
balAnAM hi samastAnAM sthitaM mUrdhni tapobalam  // 92 //  na sA tridazanAthasya
zaktiH kAntirdyutirdhRtiH  /  tapodhanasya yA sAdhoryathAbhimatakAriNaH  // 93
//  vidhAya sAdhulokasya tiraskAraM janA mahat  /  duHkhamatra prapadyante
tiryakSu narakeSu ca  //  94  //  manasApi hi sAdhUnAM parAbhUtiM karoti yaH  /
tasya sA paramaM duHkhaM paratreha ca yacchati ||15|| yastvAkrozati nirgranthaM
hanti vA krUramAnasaH  /  tatra kiM zakyate vaktuM jantau duSkRtakarmaNi  // 96
//  kAyena manasA vAcA yAni karmANi mAnavAH  /  kurvate tAni yacchanti nikacAni
phalaM dhruvam  // 97 //  karmaNAmiti vijJAya puNyApuNyAtmikAM gatim  /  dRDhAM
kRtvA matiM dharme svamuttAraya duHkhataH ||98|| thI aise tUne krIr3A karate hue
ahaMkAravaza usakI bAra-bAra ha~sI kI thI  // 83 //  tU kaha rahA thA ki are !
tU to kAmabhogakA atizaya premI AhalyAkA pati hai, isa samaya yahA~ isa taraha
kyoM baiThA hai ? || 84|| aisA kahakara tUne unheM rassiyoMse kasakara lapeTa
liyA phira bhI unakA zarIra parvata ke samAna niSkampa banA rahA aura unakA mana
tattvArthako cintanAmeM lIna honese sthira rahA AyA ||85 || isa prakAra
AnandamAla muni to nirvikAra rahe para unhIMke samIpa kalyANa nAmaka dUsare muni
baiThe the jo ki unake bhAI the tere dvArA unheM anAdRta hotA dekha krodha se
duHkhI ho gaye  //  86  //  ve muni RddhidhArI the tathA pratimAyogase
virAjamAna the so tere kukRtyase duHkhI hokara unhoMne pratimAyogakA saMkocakara
tathA lambI aura garama zvAsa bharakara tere lie isa prakAra zApa  // 87 //  ki
cU~ki tUne ina niraparAdha munirAjakA tiraskAra kiyA hai isalie tU bhI bahuta
bhArI tiraskArako prApta hogA || 88 || ve muni apanI aparimita zvAsase tujhe
bhasma hI kara denA cAhate para terI sarvazrInAmaka strIne unheM zAnta kara liyA
|| 89 || vaha sarvazrI samyagdarzanase yukta tathA munijanoM kI pUjA karanevAlI
thI isalie uttama hRdayake dhAraka muni bhI usakI bAta mAnate the ||20|| yadi
vaha sAdhvI una munirAjako zAnta nahIM karatI to unakI krodhAgniko kauna roka
sakatA thA ?  //  91  //  tInoM lokoMmeM vaha kArya nahIM hai jo tapase siddha
nahIM hotA ho  /  yathArtha meM tapakA bala saba baloMke zirapara sthita hai
arthAt sabase zreSTha hai  //  92  //  icchAnukUla kAryaM karanevAle tapasvI
sAdhukI jaisI zakti, kAnti, dyuti, athavA dhRti hotI hai vaisI indrakI bhI
sambhava nahIM hai ||13|| jo manuSya sAdhujanoMkA tiraskAra karate haiM ve
tiyaMca gati aura naraka gatimeM mahAn duHkha pAte haiM ||24|| jo manuSya manase
bhI sAdhujanoMkA parAbhava karatA hai vaha parAbhava use paraloka tathA isa loka
meM parama duHkha detA hai ||15|| jo duSTa cittakA dhArI manuSya nirgrantha
muniko gAlI detA hai athavA mAratA hai usa pApI manuSya ke viSaya meM kyA kahA
jAya ? | | 96 || manuSya mana vacana kAyase jo karma karate haiM ve chUTate
nahIM haiM aura prANiyoM ko avazya hI phala dete haiM ||17|| isa prakAra
karmoMke 1. vajrastvasyAH ma.  /

Page #354 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
304 Padmapurana Thus, remembering his past lives, Indra was filled with wonder.
Bowing down to the Nirgrantha, he said, "O Great One! ||19|| By your grace, I
have attained the supreme enlightenment. Now, I believe all my sins will vanish
in an instant." ||100|| "Nothing is unattainable in this world through the
association of the virtuous. The enlightenment that is not attained in many
births is attained through it." ||101|| Having said this, Indra bowed to the
Muni, who then went as he pleased. Indra also attained supreme detachment from
worldly life. ||102|| Knowing that Ravana attained the highest liberation
through the rise of virtuous karma, he praised the mighty Veerayantra, who
resides on the banks of the great mountains. ||103|| Realizing that human
existence is as fleeting as a water bubble, he made his mind firm in Dharma,
condemning his evil deeds. ||104|| The great Indra bestowed his kingdom upon his
son, Ratnanupura, and along with his sons and the group of Lokapalas, he took
the Jain initiation, which destroys all karma. His mind became completely pure,
and he renounced all possessions. ||105-106|| Even though his body was nurtured
by extraordinary pleasures like Indra's, he bore the burden of austerity that
others could not bear. ||107|| Generally, great beings possess extraordinary
power in their fierce actions, and the same power arises in pure actions.
||108|| After performing austerities for a long time, with pure meditation,
Indra destroyed his karma and attained Nirvana. ||109|| Dodhakavritta Behold
this picture of the deeds of men, full of strength and wonder. The pleasures
acquired over a long time again lead to the path of supreme happiness. ||110||
Consider the fruits of virtuous and sinful actions, and hold your mind in
Dharma, protecting yourself from suffering. ||98||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 304 padmapurANe ityukte pUrvajanmAni smaran vismayasaMgataH  /  zakraH praNamya
nirgranthamidamAha mahAdaraH ||19|| bhagavaMstvatprasAdena labdhvA
bodhimanuttamAm  /  sAMprataM duritaM sarvaM manye vyaktamiva kSaNAt  //  100
//  sAdhoH saMgamanAlloke na kiMcid durlabhaM bhavet  /  bahujanmasu na prAptA
bodhiryenAdhigamyate  //  101  //  ityukvA vanditastena muniryAto yathepsitam  /
zakro'pi paramaM prApto nirvedaM gRhavAsataH  /  /  102  /  /
puNyakarmodayajjJAtvA rAvaNaM paramodayam  /  stutvA ca vIryadaMSTrAya
mahAbhUbhRttaTakSitau  //  103  //  jalabudbudanissArAmavabudhya manuSyatAm  /
kRtvA sunizcalAM dharme matiM nindan durohitam ||104 || zriyamindraH sute nyasya
mahAtmA rathanUpure  /  sasuto lokapAlAnAM samUhena samanvitaH  //  105  //
dIkSAM jainezvarIM prApa sarvakarmavinAzinIm  /  vizuddha mAnaso'tyantaM
tyaktasarvaparigrahaH  //  106  //  tatastattAdRzenApi bhogenApyupalAlitam  /
vapustasya tapobhAramuvAhetaradurvaham  //  107  //  prAyeNa mahatAM
zaktiryAdRzI raudrakarmaNi  /  karmaNyevaM vizuddhe'pi paramA copajAyate || 108
|| dIrghakAlaM tapastA vizuddha dhyAnasaMgataH  /  karmaNAM prakSayaM kRtvA
nirvANaM vAsavo'gamat  /  /  109  /  /  dodhakavRttam pazyata citramidaM
puruSANAM ceSTitamUrjitavIrya samRddham  /  cirakAlamupArjitabhogA yAnti punaH
padamuttamasaukhyam  // 110 //  puNya pAparUpa phalakA vicArakara apanI buddhi
dharma meM dhAraNa karo aura apane Apako du:khoMse bacAo ||98|| isa prakAra
munirAjake kahanepara indrako apane pUrva janmoMkA smaraNa ho AyA  /  unheM
smaraNa karatA huA vaha Azcaryako prApta huA  /  tadanantara bahuta bhArI
Adarase bhare indrane nirgrantha munirAjako namaskAra kara kahA ki ||19|| he
bhagavan ! Apake prasAdase mujhe utkRSTa ratnatrayakI prApti huI hai isalie maiM
mAnatA hU~ ki aba mere samasta pApa mAno kSaNa bharameM hI chUTa jAnevAle haiM
//  100  //  jo bodhi aneka janmoMmeM bhI prApta nahIM huI vaha sAdhu samAgamase
prApta ho jAtI hai salie kahanA par3atA hai ki sAdhusamAgamase saMsAra meM koI
bhI vastu durlabha nahIM raha jAtI  //  101  //  itanA kahakara nirvANa saMgama
munirAja to udhara indrake dvArA vandita ho yatheccha sthAnapara cale gaye
idhara indra bhI gRhavAsase atyanta nirvedako prApta ho gayA  //  102  //  |
usane jAna liyA ki rAvaNa puNyakarmake udayase parama abhyudayako prApta huA hai
/  usane mahAparvatake taTapara vidyamAna vIryadaMSTrakI bAra-bAra stuti kI  //
103  //  manuSya paryAyako jalake babUlAke samAna niHsAra jAnakara usane
dharmameM apanI buddhi nizcala kI  /  apane pApa kAryoMkI bAra-bAra nindA ko  //
104  //  | isa prakAra mahApuruSa indrane rathanU pura nagarameM putrake lie
rAjya sampadA sauMpakara anya aneka putroM tathA lokapAloMke samUha ke sAtha
samasta karmoMko karanevAlI jainezvarI dokSA dhAraNa kara lI  /  usa samaya
usakA mana atyanta vizuddha thA tathA samasta parigrahakA usane tyAga kara diyA
thA  /  /  105 - 106  /  /  yadyapi usakA zarIra indrake samAna lokottara
bhogoMse lAlita huA thA to bhI usane anyajana jise dhAraNa karanemeM asamarthaM
the aisA tapakA bhAra dhAraNa kiyA thA ||107 || prAyaH karake mahApuruSoMkI
rudra kAryoMmeM jesI adbhuta zakti hotI hai vaisI hI zakti vizuddha kAryoM meM
bhI utpanna ho jAtI hai || 108 || tadanantara dIrgha kAla taka tapakara zukla
dhyAnake prabhAvase karmoMkA kSaya kara indra nirvANa dhAmako prApta huA || 109
|| gautama svAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki rAjan ! dekho, bar3e puruSoMke
caritra atizaya zaktise sampanna tathA AzcayaM utpanna karanevAle haiN| ye cira
kAla taka bhogoMkA upArjana karate haiM

Page #355 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Thirteenth Chapter  **305**  There is nothing surprising in this, that
great men, abandoning all attachments, destroy their sins in an instant through
the power of meditation. ||111||  What great fire, fueled by a vast amount of
wood gathered over a long time, does not consume everything in an instant,
attaining immense glory? ||112||  Knowing this, O noble ones! Be diligent and
purify your inner selves. No one can escape the day of death, that is, everyone
must die when the time comes. Therefore, attain the sun of right knowledge.
||113||  Thus ends the thirteenth chapter of the Padmacharita, known as the
Ärá¹£a, narrated by the ÄcÄrya, describing the NirvÄá¹a of Indra. ||13||  And
finally, they attain the state of NirvÄá¹a, filled with supreme bliss. ||110||
**Notes:**  1. *Nà§à¦¯à¦¸à§à¦¤* - abandoned 2. *à¦à§à¦·à¦£à¦®à¦¾à¤¤à¥à¤°* - an instant

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 trayodazaM parva 305 stokamapIha na cAdbhutamasti 'nyasya
samastaparigrahasaGgam  /  yatkSaNato duritasya vinAzaM dhyAnabalAjanayanti
bRhantaH  // 111 //  arjitamatyurukAlavidhAnAdindhanarAzimudAramazeSam  /
prApya paraM kSaNato mahimAnaM kiM na dahatyanilaH keNamAtraH  // 112 //
ityavagamya janAH suvizuddhaM yatnaparAH karaNaM vahatAntaH  /  mRtyudinasya na
kecidapetA jJAnaraveH kuruta pratipattim  // 113 //  ityArSe raviSeNAcAryaprokne
padmacarite indranirvANAbhidhAnaM nAma trayodazaM parva  // 13 //  aura antameM
uttama sukhase yukta nirvANa padako prApta ho jAte haiM  // 110 //  isameM kucha
bhI Azcarya nahIM hai ki bar3e puruSa samasta parigrahakA saMga chor3akara
dhyAnake balase kSaNa-bharameM pApoMkA nAza kara dete haiM  // 111 /  /  kyA
bahuta kAlase ikaTThI ko huI IndhanakI bar3I rAziko kaNamAtra agni kSaNabharameM
vizAla mahimAko prApta ho bhasma nahIM kara detI ?  // 112 //  aisA jAnakara he
bhavya jano! yatnameM tatpara ho antaHkaraNako atyanta nirmala kro| mRtyukA dina
Anepara koI bhI pIche nahIM haTa sakate arthAt mRtyukA avasara Anepara sabako
maranA par3atA hai| isalie samyagjJAnarUpI sUryakI prApti karo  // 113 //  isa
prakAra ArSa nAmase prasiddha raviSeNAcArya kathita padmacaritameM indra ke
nirvANakA kathana karanevAlA terahavA~ parva samApta huA  // 13 //  1. nyasta-
kha.  /  2. kSaNamAtra: m.|

Page #356 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fourteenth Chapter  **Then, Ravana, known as the lord of the gates, whose
mind was engrossed in worldly pleasures, whose actions were difficult for
enemies to achieve, and who was able to obtain whatever he desired, went to
Mount Meru.**  [1] **He worshipped the Jina and then returned at his own will.**
[2] **On his way back, he saw the various mountains that divided the earth,
adorned with diverse trees, and the rivers, more pure than crystal, flowing with
great beauty.** [3] **His chariot, shaped like the sun, was adorned with
exquisite ornaments, and he was accompanied by the supreme Lakshmi. He was eager
to reach Lanka.** [4] **Suddenly, he heard a loud, gentle sound, which filled
him with great excitement. He quickly asked Maricha:** [5] **"Oh Maricha,
Maricha! Where is this great sound coming from? And why are the directions
turning red like gold?"** [6] **Then Maricha said, "Oh Lord! This is the arrival
of the gods, who are going to attend the great auspicious event of a great
sage."** [7] **"The sound of the gods, filled with joy and moving in various
ways, is spreading throughout the world."** [8] **"These directions are filled
with the rays of their crowns and other ornaments, and they are shining with a
brilliance like that of the Kusumbha flower."** [9] **"It seems that the great
sage, Anantabala, who resides on this golden mountain, has attained Kevala Jnana
today."** [10]  **Hearing these words, Ravana, filled with the feeling of right
faith, was overjoyed.** [11] **He descended from the sky, radiating great
brilliance, like a second Indra, to pay homage to the great sage.** [12] **Then,
Indra and the other gods, with folded hands, bowed to the sage, praised him, and
sat down in their respective places, their bodies small and insignificant
compared to the great sage.** [13]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturdazaM parva atha 'nAkAdhipaprakhyo mogasaMmUDhamAnasaH  /
yathAmimatanivRttaH padadurlalitakriyaH  // 1 //  asau devAdhipagrAho' yAto
mandaramanyadA  /  jinendra vandanAM kRtvA pratyAgacchanijecchayA  // 2 //
vibhaktaparvatAn pazyan vAsyAnAM vividhAMghripAn  /  saritazcAticakSuSyAH
sphaTikAdapi nirmalAH  // 3 //  AdityabhavanAkAravimAnasya vibhUSaNaH  /
saMgataH parayA lakSmyA laGkAsaMgamanotsukaH  // 4 //  sahasA ninadaM tuGgaM
zuzrAva puruSataram  /  papraccha ca mahAkSubdho mArIcamatisatvaraH  // 5 //
ayi mArIca mArIca kuto'yaM ninado mahAn  /  etAzca kakubhaH
kasmAnmahArajatalohitAH  // 6 //  tato jagAda mArIco deva ! devagamo muneH  /
mahAkalyAgasaMprAptAveSa kasyApi vartate  // 7 //  devAnAmeSa tuSTAnAM
nAnAsaMpAtakAriNAm  /  Akulo bhuvanavyApI prazastaH zrUyate dhvaniH  // 8 //
etAzca kakumasteSAM mukuTAdimarIcibhiH  /  nicitA dadhate bhAsaM kausummImiva
bhAsvarAm  // 9 //  suvrnnprvte'mussminnnntblsNjnyyaa| kathito munirutpannaM
nUnaM tasyAdya kevalam  // 10 //  tatastad vacanaM zrutvA samyagdarzanamAvitaH
/  paraM puraMdaragrAhaH pramodaM pratipanavAn  // 11 //  avatIrNazva
khaaddeshaadviprkRssttaanmhaadyutiH| dvitIya iva devendro vandanAya mahAmuneH
// 12 //  vanditvA tuSTuvuH sAdhumindraprAgraharAstataH  /  AsInAzca
yathAsthAnaM baddhAalipuTAH surAH  // 13 //  athAnantara jo indra ke samAna
zobhAkA dhAraka thA, jisakA mana bhogoMmeM mUr3ha rahatA thA, jise icchAnusAra
kAryoMkI prApti hotI thI tathA jisakI kriyAe~ zatruoMko prApta honA kaThina thA
aisA rAvaNa eka samaya meruparvatapara gayA thaa| vahA~ jinendradevakI vandanA
kara vaha apanI icchAnusAra vApasa A rahA thA  // 1-2 //  mAgameM vaha bharatAdi
kSetroMkA vibhAga karanevAle evaM aneka prakArake vRkSoMse suzobhita himavat Adi
parvatoMko tathA sphaTikase bhI adhika nirmala evaM atyanta sundara nadiyoMko
dekhatA huA calA A rahA thA  // 3 //  sUryabimbake AkAra vimAnako alaMkRta kara
rahA thA, utkRSTa lakSmIse yukta thA tathA laMkAkI prAptimeM atyanta utsuka thA
/  / 4 //  acAnaka hI usane joradAra komala zabda sunA jise sunakara vaha
atyanta kSubhita ho gyaa| usane zIghra hI mArIcase pUchA bhI  // 5|| are mArIca
! mArIca !! yaha mahAzabda kahA~se A rahA hai ? aura dizAeM suvarNake samAna
lAla-pIlI kyoM ho rahI haiM  /  / 6 /  /  taba mArIcane kahA ki he deva ! kisI
mahAmunike mahAkalyANakameM sammilita honeke lie yaha devoMkA Agamana ho rahA
hai  // 7 //  santoSase bhare evaM nAnA prakArase gamana karanevAle devoMkA yaha
saMsAravyApI prazasta zabda sunAI de rahA hai  // 8 //  ye dizAe~ unhIke mukuTa
AdikI kiraNoMse vyApta hokara kusumbha raMgakI dedIpyamAna kAntiko dhAraNa kara
rahI haiM  // 9 //  isa suvarNagiripara anantabala nAmaka manirAja rahate the
jAna par3atA hai unheM hI Aja kevalajJAna utpanna huA hai  // 10 //  tadanantara
mArIcake vacana sunakara samyagdarzanakI bhAvanAse yukta rAvaNa parama harSako
prApta huA  // 11 //  mahAkAntiko dhAraNa karanevAlA rAvaNa una mahAmunikI
vandanA karaneke lie dUravartI AkAza pradezase isa prakAra nIce utarA mAno
dUsarA indra hI utara rahA ho  // 12 /  /  tatpazcAt indra Adi devoMne hAtha
jor3akara munirAjako namaskAra kiyaa| stuti kI aura phira saba yathAsthAna 1.
nAkAbhidhaprakhyo-ma.  /  paradurlaDitakriyaH ka., kha., ba.  /  3. rAvaNaH  /
4. bharatAdikSetrANAm  /  5. bhAsurAm k.| .

Page #357 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Fourteen  307. Ravana, filled with great devotion, bowed and praised,
then sat down on the suitable ground, surrounded by the Vidyadharas. ||14||
Then, the Muni, revered like a disciple, asked Ravana, praised by the four types
of Devas, the Tiryanchas, and the humans: ||15||  "O Bhagavan! People desire to
know the fruits of Dharma and Adharma, and the cause of liberation for all. You
are worthy of explaining all this." ||16||  Then, the Muni, dear to all, spoke
words that were skillfully crafted, pure, full of meaning, concise, unbreakable,
and beneficial to all. ||17||  "Bound by the eight types of Karma, beginningless
and endless, this being, whose inner power is hidden by the Karma of knowledge-
obscuration, etc., ||18||  continuously experiences pleasure and pain in
countless lakhs of births, arising from various senses. ||19||  As the fruits of
Karma ripen, whether mild, medium, or strong, he becomes attached, hateful, or
deluded, and like a potter's wheel, he keeps revolving through the four states
of existence. ||20||  Even attaining the extremely rare human birth, he does not
understand his own welfare due to the Karma of knowledge-obscuration. ||21||
Subdued by the senses of taste and touch, beings perform highly condemnable
actions, becoming burdened with the weight of sin, and fall into hells, which
inflict great suffering arising from various causes, like stones sinking in
water. ||22-23||  Driven by wealth, etc., some people, condemned by the world,
kill their mothers, fathers, brothers, daughters, wives, and friends. ||24||
Some wicked people kill humans, birds, and deer, including those in the womb,
the old, the young, and women. ||25||  Those with minds deviated from Dharma,
with foolish intellect, kill land and water creatures, and all of them fall into
the terrible hell of Puruvedana. ||26||  Those who kill honeybees, are cruel,
are Chandala, set fire to forests, are devoted to violence, are sinful, are
Kaivarta, and are low-born greedy people, ||27||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturdazaM parva 307 rAvaNo'pi namaskRtya stutvA codAttabhaktitaH  /
vidyAdharajanAkIrNaH sthitaH samucitAvanau  // 14 //
tatazcaturvidhairdevaistiryambhirmanujaistathA  /  kRtazaMsaM munizreSThaH
ziSyeNaivamapRcchayata  // 15 //  bhagavan jJAtumicchanti dharmAdharmaphalaM
janAH  /  samastA muktihetuM ca tatsarva vaktumarhatha  // 16 //  tataH
sunipuNaM zuddhaM vipulArtha mitAkSaram  /  apravRSyaM jagI vAkyaM yatiH
sarvahitapriyam  /  / 17 //  karmaNASTaprakAreNa saMtatena nirAdinA  /
baddhanAntahitAtmIyazaktimyiti cetanaH  // 18 //  subhUrilakSasaMkhyAsu
yoniSvanubhavensadA  /  vedanIyaM yathopAttaM nAnAkaraNasaMbhavam  /  /  19 //
rakto dviSTo'thavA mUDho mandamadhyavipAkataH  /
kulAlacakravatprAptacaturgativivartanaH  // 20 //  budhyate svahitaM nAsau
jJAnAvaraNakarmaNA  /  manuSyatAmapi prApto'tyantadurlamasaMgamAm  // 21 //
rasasparzaparigrAhihRSIkavazatAM gatAH  /  kRtvAtinindivaM karma
pApabhAragurUkRtAH  // 22 //  anekopAyasaMbhUtamahAduHkhavidhAyini  /  patanti
narake jIvA grAvANa iva vAriNi  // 23 //  mAtaraM pitaraM bhrAtan sutAM patnI
suhRjanAn  /  dhanAdicoditAH kecid vizvaninditamAnasAH  // 24 //
garbhasthAnakAn vRddhAstaruNAn yoSito narAH  /  ghnanti kecinmahAkarA mAnuSAn
pakSiNo mRgAn  // 25 //  sthalajAn jalajAn dharmacyutacittAH kumedhasaH  /
mItvA' patanti te sarve narake puruvedane  // 26 //
madhughAtakRtazcaNDAzcANDAlA vanadAhinaH  /  hiMsAparAyaNAH pApAH
kaivartAdhamalubdhakAH  // 27 //  baiTha gaye  // 13 //  vidyAdharoMse yukta
rAvaNa bhI bar3I bhaktise namaskAra evaM stuti kara yogya bhUmimeM baiTha gayA
// 14 //  tadanantara vinIta ziSyake samAna rAvaNane munirAjase isa prakAra
pUchA ki he bhagavan ! samasta prANI dharma-adharmakA phala aura mokSakA kAraNa
jAnanA cAhate haiM so Apa yaha saba kahaneke yogya haiN| rAvaNake isa praznakI
cAroM prakArake devoM, manuSyoM aura tiyaMcoMne bhArI prazaMsA kI  // 15-16 /  /
tadanantara munirAja nimna prakAra vacana kahane lge| unake ve vacana nipuNatAse
yukta the, zuddha the, mahAarthase bhare the, parimita akSaroMse sahita the,
akhaNDanIya the aura sarvahitakArI tathA priya the||17|| unhoMne kahA ki
anAdikAlase ba~dhe hue jJAnAvaraNAdi ATha karmose jisakI AtmIya zakti chipa gayo
hai aisA yaha prANI nirantara bhramaNa kara rahA hai  // 18 //  aneka lakSa
yoniyoMmeM nAnA indriyoMse utpanna honevAle sukha-duHkhakA sadA anubhava karatA
rahatA hai  /  / 19 //  karmoMkA jaba jaisA totra, manda yA madhyama udaya AtA
hai vaisA rAgI, dveSI athavA mohI hotA huA kumhArake cakrake samAna caturgatimeM
ghUmatA rahatA hai  /  / 20 /  yaha jIva atyanta durlabha manuSya paryAyako bhI
prApta kara letA hai phira bhI jJAnAvaraNa karmake kAraNa Atmahitako nahIM
samajha pAtA hai  /  / 21 //  rasanA aura sparzana indriyake vazIbhUta hue prANI
atyanta nindita kArya karake pApake bhArase itane vajanadAra ho jAte haiM ki ve
aneka sAdhanoMse utpanna mahAduHkha denevAle narakoMmeM usa prakAra jA par3ate
haiM jisa prakAra ki pAnImeM patthara par3a jAte haiM-DUba jAte haiM  // 22-23 /
/  jinake manakI sabhI nindA karate haiM aise kitane hI manuSya dhanAdise
prerita hokara mAtA, pitA, bhAI, putrI, patnI, mitrajana, garbhastha bAlaka,
vRddha, taruNa evaM striyoMko mAra DAlate haiM tathA kitane hI mahAduSTa manuSya
manuSyoM, pakSiyoM aura hariNoMkI hatyA karate haiM  // 24-25 //  jinakA citta
dharmase cyuta hai aise kitane hI durbuddhi manuSya sthalacArI evaM jala cArI
jIvoMko mArakara bhayaMkara vedanAvAle narakameM par3ate haiM  // 26 //  madhu
1. sa bhUri-ka.  /  2. -Svanubhavat kha., ma., b.| 3. svahitAnnAsau kh.| 4.
saMjJakam m.| 5. gataH ma.  /  6. kRtaH ma.  /  7. ghnanti nirdayamAnasAH kh.|
8. mAnasAH m.| 9. dharmagatacittAn kucetasaH m.| dharmagatacittAH kumedhasaH
kha., ka.  /  10. mArayitvA  /  11. kRtazcAmI m.|

Page #358 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Padmapurana:  **Verse 28:** Those who are attached to false speech and are
eager to steal others' possessions, fall into a terrible hell, having abandoned
their refuge.  **Verse 29:** In whatever way they consume flesh, in the same way
they are consumed by others in hell.  **Verse 30:** Those who are attached to
great possessions, engage in grand endeavors, and are fiercely determined, dwell
in hell for a long time.  **Verse 31:** Those who hate the virtuous, are wicked,
associated with false views, and die with a fierce mind, surely go to hell.
**Verse 32:** Such beings are torn apart in hells by axes, swords, wheels,
claws, and other various weapons. Birds with sharp beaks peck at them.  **Verse
33:** Lions, tigers, dogs, snakes, scorpions, wolves, and other creatures born
of karma inflict great suffering upon them.  **Verse 34:** Those who are deeply
attached to objects like sound, are illusioned beings and attain the state of
animal life.  **Verse 35:** In that animal realm, beings kill each other, humans
slay them with various weapons, and they themselves experience great suffering
through carrying burdens, pulling carts, and so on.  **Verse 36:** This being,
wandering in the troubles of existence, sleeps on land, in water, on mountains,
on trees, and in other dense places.  **Verse 37:** This being, from time
immemorial, has been born with one sense, two senses, three senses, four senses,
and five senses, experiencing birth and death.  **Verse 38:** There is not even
a sesame seed-sized space where this being, caught in the whirlpool of
existence, has not experienced birth and death.  **Verse 39:** Some beings are
endowed with gentleness and simplicity, and are naturally content, and they
attain the human realm.  **Verse 40:** Even in the human realm, deluded beings,
for the sake of momentary pleasure, abandon the path of liberation and commit
sins, mistaking the cause of ultimate happiness.  **Verse 41:** According to
their past actions, some are Aryans and some are Mlechchas. Some are wealthy,
and some are poor.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe vitathavyAhRtAsaktAH parasvaharaNodyatAH  /  patanti narake ghore
prANinaH zaraNojjhitAH  //  28  //  yena yena prakAreNa kurvate mAMsabhakSaNam
/  tenaiva te vidhAnena makSyante narake paraiH  //  29  //  mahAparigrahopetA
mahArambhAzca ye janAH  /  pracaNDAdhyavasAyAste vasanti narake ciram  // 30 //
sAdhUnAM dveSakAH pApA mithyAdarzanasaMgatAH  /  raudradhyAnamRtA jIvA gacchanti
narakaM dhruvam  // 31 //  kuThArairasibhizcakraH karapatrairvidAritAH  /
anyaizva vividhaiH zastraistIkSNatuNDaizca pakSibhiH  // 32 //  siMhairvyAghraiH
zvabhiH sarvaiH zarabhairvRzvikaikaiH  /  anyaizca prANibhizcitraiH prApyante
duHkhamuttamam  // 33 //  nitAntaM ye tu kurvanti saMgaM zabdAdivastuni  /
mAyinaste prapadyante tiryaktvaM prANadhAriNaH  // 34 //  parasparavadhAstatra
zastraizca vividhaiH 'kSatAH  /  prapadyante mahAduHkhaM vAhadAhAdibhistathA  //
35  //  suptametena jIvena sthale'mbhasi girau tarau  /  gahaneSu ca dezeSu
bhrAmyatA bhavasaMkaTe  // 36 //  ekadvitricatuHpaJcahRSIkakRtasaMgatiH  /
anAdinidhano jantuH sevate mRtyujanmanI  // 37 //  tilamAtro'pi dezo'sau nAsti
yatra na jantunA  /  prAptaM janma vinAzo vA saMsArAvartapAtinA  //  38 //
mArdavenAnvitAH kecidArjavena ca jantavaH  /  svabhAva labdhasaMtoSAH
prapadyante manuSyatAm  // 39 //  kSaNamAtrasukhasyArthe hitvA pApaM prakurvate
/  zreyaH paramasaukhyasya kAraNaM mohasaMgatAH  //  40  //  AryA mlecchAzca
tatrApi jAyante pUrvakarmataH  /  tathA keciddhanenAnyAH kecidasyantadurvidhAH
// 41 //  308 makkhiyoM kA ghAta karanevAle tathA vanameM Aga lagAnevAle duSTa
cANDAla nirantara hiMsA meM tatpara rahanevAle pApI kahAra aura nIca zikArI,
jhUTha vacana bolane meM Asakta evaM parAyA dhana haraNa karane meM udyata prANI
zaraNarahita ho bhayaMkara naraka meM par3ate haiM  // 27-28 || jo manuSya jisa-
jisa prakAra se mAMsa bhakSaNa karate haiM narakameM dUsare prANI usI usI
prakArase unakA bhakSaNa karate haiM ||29|| jo manuSya bahuta bhArI parigrahase
sahita haiM, bahuta bar3e Arambha karate haiM aura tIvra saMkalpa-vikalpa karate
haiM ve cirakAla taka narakameM vAsa karate haiM ||30|| jo sAdhuoMse dveSa
rakhate haiM, pApI haiM, mithyAdarzana se sahita haiM evaM raudradhyAnase jinakA
maraNa hotA hai ve nizcaya hI narakameM jAte haiM ||31|| aise jIva narakoM meM
kulhAr3iyoM, talavAroM, cakroM, karoMtoM tathA anya aneka prakArake zastroMse
cIre jAte haiN| tIkSNa coMcoMvAle pakSI unheM cU~thate haiM  // 32 //  siMha,
vyAghra, kutte, sarpa, aSTApada, bicchU, bher3iyA tathA vikriyAse bane hue
vividha prakArake prANI unheM bahuta bhArI duHkha pahu~cAte haiM ||33|| jo zabda
Adi viSayoMmeM atyanta Asakti karate haiM aise mAyAvI jIva tiyaMca gatiko prApta
hote haiM ||34|| usa tiryaMca gatimeM jIva eka dUsareko mAra DAlate haiM  /
manuSya vividha prakArake zastroMse unakA ghAta karate haiM tathA svayaM bhAra
DhonA evaM dohA jAnA Adi kAryoMse mahAduHkha pAte haiM ||35|| saMsArake saMkaTa
meM bhramaNa karatA huA yaha jIva sthalameM, jalameM, pahAr3apara, vRkSapara
aura anyAnya saghana sthAnoMmeM soyA hai || 36 || yaha jIva anAdi kAlase
ekendriya, dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya aura paMcendriyoMmeM utpanna hotA
huA janma-maraNa kara rahA hai ||37|| aisA tilamAtra bhI sthAna bAkI nahIM hai
jahA~ saMsArarUpI bha~vara meM par3e hue isa jIvane janma aura maraNa prApta na
kiyA ho ||38|| yadi koI prANI mRdutA aura saralatAse sahita hote haiM tathA
svabhAvase hI santoSa prApta karate haiM to ve manuSya gatiko prApta hote haiM
||39|| manuSya gatimeM bhI mohI jIva parama sukhake kAraNabhUta kalyANa mAgaMko
chor3akara kSaNika sukhake lie pApa karate haiM ||40|| apane pUrvopArjita
karmoMke anusAra koI AyaM hote haiM aura koI mleccha hote haiM  /  koI dhanADhya
hote haiM aura koI 1. kRtAH kha., ma., ba  /  2. vAhA dehAdibhistathA ma.  /  3.
vanenAdyAH ma.  /

Page #359 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fourteenth Chapter  **309** Many beings, bound by karma, perform hundreds
of desires and spend their time with great difficulty in the homes of others.
**42** Some are wealthy but ugly, some are beautiful but poor, some have long
lives and some have short lives. **43** Some are beloved and possess fame, some
are extremely disliked, some give orders and some obey them. **44** Some enter
battle, some dive into water, some go to foreign lands, and some engage in
agriculture and other activities. **45** Thus, even in the human realm, there is
a variety of happiness and sorrow. In reality, all is sorrow, and happiness is
merely an illusion. **46**  Some beings are characterized by attachment and
restraint, some by restraint and non-restraint, some practice non-desire and
austerity, and some are deluded by their passions. **47** They attain the state
of godhood, endowed with the four blessings. Even there, some are endowed with
great powers, and some with limited powers. **48**  Based on their state,
radiance, influence, intellect, happiness, lightness, pride, and arrogance, they
again accumulate karma and continuously wander through the four realms of
existence. **49** Just as the wheel of an hourglass constantly turns, so too do
these beings constantly wander. **50**  Through evil intentions, a being
experiences sorrow, and through good intentions, it experiences happiness.
Through the destruction of the eight types of karma, a being attains liberation.
**51**  Through the power of giving, beings attain enjoyment in the realms of
enjoyment. They attain various forms through the specific qualities of their
vessels. **52**  The Jinas declare those who are free from violence, free from
attachment, and devoid of attachment and aversion to be the best vessels. **53**
A vessel that is purified by right faith, even without austerity, is also
praiseworthy, for it purifies the body of the one who holds false beliefs.
**54**  One who protects from calamities is called a vessel (paatiti paatra).
This is the etymological meaning of the word "vessel." Since the monks, through
the power of right faith, protect people, they are vessels. **55**  That which
is endowed with pure right faith, right knowledge, and right conduct is
considered the supreme vessel. **56**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturdazaM parva 309 manorathazatAnyanye kurvate karmaveSTitAH  /  kAlaM
nayanti kRcchaNa prANinaH paravezmasu  // 42 //  nirUpA dhaninaH kecibhirdhanAH
rUpiNo'pare  /  keciddIrghAyuSaH kecidatyantastokajIvinaH  // 13 //  iSTA
yazasvinaH keciskecidatyantadurmagAH  /  kecidAjJAM prayacchanti tAmanye kurvate
janAH  // 44 //  pravizanti raNaM kecitkecidgacchanti vAriNi  /  yAnti
dezAntaraM kecitkecitkRSyAdi kurvate  // 45 //  evaM tatrApi vaicitryaM jAyate
sukhaduHkhayoH  /  sarva tu duHkhamevAtra sukhaM tatrApi kalpitam  // 46 //
sarAgasaMyamAH kecitsaMyamAsaMyamAstathA  /  akAmanirjarAtazca tapasazca
samohataH  // 47 //  devatvaM ca prapadyante caturbhadasamanvitam  /
kecinmahaddhayo'trApi kecidalpaparicchadAH  // 48 //  sthityA tyA prabhAveNa
dhiyA saukhyena lezyayA  /  abhimAnena mAnena te punaH karmasaMgraham  // 49 //
kRtvA caturgatau nityaM bhave bhrAmyanti jantavaH  /
aracaTTaghaTIyantrasamAnatvamupAgatAH  // 50 //  saMkalpAdazubhAd duHkhaM
prApnoti zubhataH sukham  /  karmaNo'STaprakArasya jIvo mokSamupakSayAt  // 51
//  dAnenApi prapadyante jantavo bhogabhUmiSu  /  bhogAn pAtravizeSeNa
vaizvarUpamupAgatAH  // 52 //  prANAtipAtavirataM parigrahavivarjitam  /
uddhamAcakSate pAtraM rAgadveSojjhitaM jinAH  // 53 // . samyagdarzanasaMzuddhaM
tapasApi vivarjitam  /  pAtraM prazasyate mithyAdRSTeH kAyasya zodhanAt  // 54
//  ApadabhyaH pAti yastasmAtpAtramityamidhIyate  /  samyagdarzanazaktyA ca
trAyante munayo janAn  // 55 //  darzanena vizuddhena jJAnena ca yadanvitam  /
cAritreNa ca tatpAtre paramaM parikIrtitam  // 56 //  atyanta daridra hote haiM
// 41 //  karmose ghire kitane hI prANI saikar3oM manoratha karate hue dUsareke
gharoMmeM bar3I kaThinAIse samaya bitAte haiM  // 42 //  koI dhanADhya hokara
bhI kurUpa hote haiM, koI rUpavAn hokara bhI nirdhana rahate haiM, koI dIrghAyu
hote haiM aura koI alpAyu hote haiM  /  / 43 /  /  koI sabako priya tathA yazake
dhAraka hote haiM, koI atyanta apriya hote haiM, koI AjJA dete haiM aura koI usa
AjJAkA pAlana karate haiM  /  / 44|| koI raNameM praveza karate haiM, koI
pAnImeM gotA lagAte haiM, koI videzameM jAte haiM aura koI khetI Adi karate haiM
// 45 //  isa prakAra manuSya gatimeM bhI sukha aura duHkhakI vicitratA dekhI
jAtI hai  /  vAstavameM to saba duHkha hI hai sukha to kalpanA mAtra hai  /  /
46|| koI jIva sarAgasaMyama tathA saMyamAsaMyamake dhAraka hote haiM, koI akAma
nirjarA karate haiM aura koI bAlatapa karate haiM aise jIva bhavanavAsI,
vyantara, jyotiSI aura vaimAnika ina cAra bhedoMse yukta deva gatimeM utpanna
hote haiM so vahA~ bhI kitane hI mahaddhiyoMke dhAraka hote haiM aura kitane hI
alpa RddhiyoMke dhAraka  // 47-48 //  sthiti, kAnti, prabhAva, buddhi, sukha,
lezyA, abhimAna aura mAnake anusAra ve punaH karmokA bandha kara caturgati rUpa
saMsArameM nirantara bhramaNa karate rahate haiM  /  jisa prakAra araghaTakI
ghar3I nirantara ghUmatI rahatI hai isI prakAra ye prANI bhI nirantara ghUmate
rahate haiM  /  / 42-50 /  /  yaha jIva azubha saMkalpase duHkha pAtA hai, zubha
saMkalpase sukha pAtA hai aura aSTakoMke kSayase mokSa prApta karatA hai  // 51
//  pAtrakI vizeSatAse aneka rUpatAko prApta hue jIva dAnake prabhAvase bhoga-
bhUmiyoMmeM bhogoMko prApta hote haiM  /  / 52 /  /  jo prANihiMsAse virata,
parigrahase rahita aura rAga-dveSase zUnya haiM unheM jinendra bhagavAnne uttama
pAtra kahA hai  // 53 //  jo tapase rahita hokara bhI samyagdarzanase zuddha hai
aisA pAtra bhI prazaMsanIya hai kyoMki usase mithyAdRSTi dAtAke zarIrakI zuddhi
hotI hai  /  / 54 /  /  jo ApattiyoMse rakSA kare vaha pAtra kahalAtA hai
(pAtIti pAtram ) isa prakAra pAtra zabdakA niruktyartha hai| cUMki muni,
samyagdarzanakI sAmarthyase logoMkI rakSA karate ataH pAtra haiM  /  / 55|| jo
nirmala samyagdarzana, samyagjJAna aura samyakcAritrase sahita hotA 1.
manorathazatAnanye m.| 2. yathAsvinaH ma. ( ? ) /  3. -mupAgataH m.| 4.
prazastam, uttamAzcakSate ma.  /  5. yadazcitam kh.|

Page #360 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Padma Purana:  "He who is equal in honor and dishonor, in pleasure and pain,
and in grass and gold, is called a virtuous recipient. ||57|| Those who are free
from all attachments, are absorbed in great austerities, and are always devoted
to the contemplation of truth, are called Shramanas (ascetics) and are the best
recipients. ||58|| Whatever food, drink, medicine, or other things useful for
them are given to these Shramanas with devotion and according to their ability,
yield great results. ||59|| Just as a seed sown in fertile land yields abundant
wealth, so too does a gift given to a virtuous recipient with a pure heart yield
abundant wealth. ||60|| A recipient who is filled with attachment, aversion,
etc., is not a true recipient, and does not yield the desired result. Therefore,
it is pointless to think about the result of giving to such a recipient. ||61||
Just as a seed sown in barren land does not produce anything, so too does a gift
given to a sinful recipient who is attached to false views not yield any fruit.
||62|| Water drawn from a polluted well, if drunk by a sugarcane plant, becomes
sweet, but if drunk by a neem tree, becomes bitter. ||63|| Similarly, water from
the same lake, if drunk by a cow, becomes milk, but if drunk by a snake, becomes
poison. In the same way, a gift given to a virtuous recipient yields good
results, while a gift given to a wicked recipient yields bad results. ||64||
Some recipients, though attached to false views, are still imbued with the
spirit of right view. For such recipients, a gift given with devotion yields
mixed results, both good and bad. ||65|| Giving to the poor, the blind, etc., is
called compassionate giving, and though it may yield some results, it is not
considered the best kind of giving. ||66|| All those who wear the garb of
religion strive to preach their own doctrines, but those who have a pure heart
should carefully examine them. ||67|| Wealth given to householders who are equal
to oneself, but who are filled with lust, anger, etc., does not yield any fruit.
||68||"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe " mAnApamAnayostulyastathA yaH sukhaduHkhayoH  /
tRNakAJcanayozcaiSa sAdhuH pAtraM prazasyate  // 57 //  sarvagranthavinirmuktA
mahAtapasi ye ratAH  /  zramaNAste paraM pAtraM tattvadhyAnaparAyaNAH  //  58
//  tebhyo mAvena yaddattaM zaktyA pAnAnnabheSajam  /  yathopayogamanyacca
tadyacchati mahAphalam  //  59  //  kSiptaM yathaiva satkSetre bIjaM tatsaMpadaM
parAm  /  prayacchati tathA dattaM satpAtre zuddhacetasA  //  60  //
rAgadveSAdibhiryuktaM yattu pAtraM na tanmatam  /  prayacchati phalaM dUraM
tatra lAbhavicintitam  // 61 //  kSiptaM yaithoSare bojaM na kiMcirttetra jAyate
/  mithyAdarzanasaMyuktapApapAtrodyataM tathA  //  62  //
kUpAduSTatamekasmAtsalilaM pratipadyate  /  mAdhuryamikSubhiH pItaM nimbapItaM
tu tiktatAm  // 63 //  sarasyAM jalamekasyAM gavAttaM pannagena ca  /
kSIrabhAvamavApnoti viSatAM ca yathA tathA  // 64 //  vinyastaM bhAvato dAnaM
samyagdarzanamAvite  /  mithyAdarzanayukte tu zubhAzubhaphalaM bhavet  //  65 //
dInAndhAdijanebhyastu karuNAparicoditam  /  dAnamuktaM phalaM tasmAd yadyapi
syAna sattamam  //  66  //  vadanti liGginaH sarve svAnukUlaM prayatnataH  /
dharmaM sa tu vizeSeNa parIkSyaH zubhamAnasaiH  //  67  //  dravyaM
yadAtmatulyeSu gRhastheSu visRjyate  /  kAmakrodhAdiyukteSu tatra kA
phalabhogitA  /  /  68  /  /  310 hai vaha uttama kahalAtA hai  //  56  //  jo
mAna, apamAnaM, sukha-duHkha aura tRNa kAMcana meM samAna dRSTi rakhatA hai aisA
sAdhu pAtra kahalAtA hai ||57|| jo saba prakArake parigrahase rahita haiM,
mahAtapazcaraNameM lIna haiM aura tattvoMke dhyAnameM sadA tatpara rahate haiM
aise zramaNa arthAt muni uttama pAtra kahalAte haiM ||18|| una muniyoMke lie
apanI sAmarthya ke anusAra bhAvapUrvaka jo bhI anna, pAna, auSadhi athavA
upayoga meM AnevAle pIchI, kamaNDalu Adi anya padArthaM diye jAte haiM ve
mahAphala pradAna karate haiM ||19|| jisa prakAra uttama kSetra meM boyA huA
bIja atyadhika sampadA pradAna karatA hai usI prakAra uttama pAtrake lie zuddha
hRdayase diyA huA dAna atyadhika sampadA pradAna karatA hai || 60|| jo rAgadveSa
Adi doSoMse yukta hai vaha pAtra nahIM hai aura na vaha icchita phala hI detA
hai ataH usake phalakA vicAra karanA dUrakI bAta hai ||61 || jisa prakAra USara
jamInameM bIja boyA jAya to usase kucha bhI utpanna nahIM hotA usI prakAra
mithyAdarzanase sahita pApI pAtra ke lie dAna diyA jAya to usase kucha bhI phala
prApta nahIM hotA || 62 || eka kue~se nikAle hue pAnIko yadi Ikhake paudhe pIte
haiM to vaha mAdhuryaM prApta hotA hai aura yadi nImake paudhe pIte haiM to
kaDuA ho jAtA hai || 63 || athavA jisa prakAra eka hI tAlAba meM gAyane pAnI
piyA aura sAMpane bhI  /  gAyake dvArA piyA pAnI dUdha ho jAtA hai aura sA~pake
dvArA piyA pAnI viSa ho jAtA hai, usI prakAra eka hI gRhasthase uttama pAtrane
dAna liyA aura nIca pAtrane bhii| jo dAna uttama pAtrako prApta hotA hai usakA
phala uttama hotA hai aura jo nIca pAtrako prApta hotA hai usakA phala nIcA hotA
hai ||64 || koI-koI pAtra mithyAdarzana se yukta hone para bhI samyagdarzanakI
bhAvanAse yukta hote haiM aise pAtroMke lie bhAvase jo dAna diyA jAtA hai usakA
phala zubha-azubha arthAt mizrita prakArakA hotA hai || 65 || dIna tathA andhe
Adi manuSyoMke lie karuNA dAna kahA gayA hai aura usase yadyapi phalakI bhI
prApti hotI hai para vaha phala uttama phala nahIM kahA jAtA ||66 || sabhI
veSadhArI prayatnapUrvaka apane anukUla dharmakA upadeza dete haiM para uttama
hRdayake dhAraka manuSyoMko vizeSakara usakI parIkSA karanI cAhie ||67 || kAma-
krodhAdise yukta tathA apanI samAnatA rakhanevAle gRhasthoMke lie jo dravya 1.
yattu pAtraM na tanmatam ma, kha., ja  /  yattu pAtraM na tatsamam ba  /  2.
tatra lAbhavicintanam ma.  /  3. kSiptaM yadi raNe vIjaM' ma., kha., ka.  /  4.
na kiJcidupajAyate ma.  /  5. mithyAdarzanasaMyuktaM pApaM pAtrodyataM tathA na.
/

Page #361 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Four-Month Festival  **311** Alas! How great is this delusion that people
deceived by false doctrines give their wealth to those who are in all states of
existence! **69**  Shame on those wicked people who have deceived this innocent
creature, and by showing greed, have diverted his mind with the discussion of
false scriptures. **70**  Because it is sweet and forceful, wicked men have
declared meat to be edible, and to show their deceit, they have also determined
the number of those whose flesh should be eaten. **71**  Such cruel and greedy
beings, by feeding others meat and eating it themselves, go to hell along with
the givers, accompanied by terrible suffering. **72**  Many people, who are
under the influence of greed, have wicked intentions, and falsely consider
themselves to be sages, have also declared the donation of elephants, horses,
cows, and other living beings to be virtuous. But those who know the truth have
strongly condemned it. **73**  The reason for this is that the living being who
is given in a living donation has to carry burdens, his body is marked with
sharp tools, and he is beaten with sticks, etc. Due to these reasons, he suffers
great pain, and because of him, many other living beings also have to suffer
greatly. **74**  Similarly, land donation is also condemnable because it causes
suffering to the living beings living in that land. And to desire merit by
accumulating it through the suffering of living beings is like extracting water
from a stone. **75**  Therefore, all living beings should always be given the
gift of fearlessness, as well as knowledge, food, medicine, clothes, etc. **76**
Even the donation that is condemned becomes praiseworthy due to the difference
in the recipient. Just as water drunk through a conch shell becomes a pearl, for
sure. **77**  The donation of animals and land, although condemned, if given
with the intention of offering to the Jina image, etc., grants excellent
enjoyments that last for a long time. **78**  The inner intention is the cause
of merit and demerit. Without it, giving externally is like raining on the top
of a mountain. **79**  Therefore, who is capable of diminishing the fruit of the
donation given with the contemplation of the Jina, who is free from attachment
and omniscient? **80**  Except for the Jina, other gods are hateful, attached,
and deluded because:  1. In all types of recipients. 2. Wealth. 3. Due to pride.
4. The living beings living in it. 5. Knowledge, medicine, food, etc. 6.
Unreleased, released, becomes liberated. 7. Intention.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturvarza parva 311 aho mahAnayaM mohaH 'sarvAvastheSu yajanAH  /  svApateya
vimuJcanti vipralabdhAH kuzAsanaiH  // 69 //  dhigastu tAn khalAneSa jano
yairvipratAritaH  /  lobhAt kugranthakanthAmirvarAko neyamAnasaH  // 70 //
mRSTatvAd balakAritvAnmAMsa bhakSyamudAhRtam  /  pApairdammaprasiddhayartha
parisaMkhyA ca kIrtitA  // 71 //  krUrAste dApayitvA tadbhakSayitvA ca lobhinaH
/  gacchanti narakaM sAdhaM dAtRbhi|ravedanam  // 72 //  jIvadAnaM ca yatproktaM
garbhAvaddhairdurAtmabhiH  /  RSimanyaistadatyantaM ninditaM tattvavedibhiH  //
73 //  tasmin hi dIyamAnasya vahanAGkanatADanaiH  /  saMpadyate mahAduHkhaM
tenAnyeSAM ca bhUyasAm  // 7 //  bhUmidAnamapi kSiptaM tadgataprANipIDanAt  /
prANighAtanimittena puNyaM pASANataH payaH  // 75 //  sarveSAmabhayaM
tasmAddeyaM prANabhRtAM sadA  /  jJAnaM bheSajamannaM ca vastrAdi ca gatAsukam
// 76 //  dAnaM ninditamapyeti prazaMsAM pAtrabhedataH  /  zuktipItaM yathA vAri
'muktImavati nizcayam  // 77 /  /  pazubhamyAdikaM dattaM jinAnuddizya mAvataH
/  dadAti paramAn bhogAnatyantacirakAlagAn  // 78 //  antaraGgaM hi saMkalpaH
kAraNaM puNyapApayoH  /  vinA tena bahirdAnaM varSaH parvatamUrdhani  // 79 //
vItarAgAn samastajJAnato dhyAtvA jinezvarAn  /  dAnaM yaddIyate tasya kaH zakto
mASituM phalam  // 8 //  AyudhagrahaNAdanye devA dveSasamanvitAH  /  rAgiNaH
kAminIsaMgAd bhUSaNAnAM ca dhAraNAt  // 81 diyA jAtA hai usakA kyA phala
bhoganeko milatA hai ? so kahA nahIM jA sakatA  // 68 //  aho ! yaha kitanA
prabala moha hai ki mithyAmatoMse ThagAye gaye loga sabhI avasthAoMvAle logoMko
apanA dhana de dete haiM  // 69 /  /  una duSTajanoMko dhikkAra hai jinhoMne ki
isa bhole prANIko Thaga rakhA hai tathA lobha dikhAkara mithyA zAstroMkI carcAse
usake manako vicalita kara diyA hai  /  / 70 //  mIThA tathA balakArI honese
pApI manuSyoMne mAMsako bhakSya batAyA hai aura apanA kapaTa batAneke lie jinakA
mAsa khAnA cAhie unakI saMkhyA bhI nidhArita kI hai  // 71 //  so aise dRSTa
lobhI jIva dUsaroMko mAMsa dilAkara tathA svayaM khAkara dAtAoMke sAtha-sAtha
bhayaMkara vedanAse yakta naraka narakameM jAte haiM  // 72 //  lobhake
vazIbhUta, duSTa abhiprAyase yukta tathA jhUTha-mUThaM hI apane-Apako RSi
mAnanevAle kitane hI logoMne hAthI, ghor3A, gAya Adi jIvoMkA dAna bhI batalAyA
hai para tattvake jAnakAra manuSyoMne usakI atyanta nindA kI hai  // 73 //
usakA kAraNa bhI yaha hai ki jIvadAnameM jo jIva diyA jAtA hai use bojhA DhonA
par3atA hai, nukIlI arI Adise usake zarIrako A~kA jAtA hai tathA lAThI Adise use
pITA jAtA hai ina kAraNoMse use mahAduHkha hotA hai aura usake nimittase bahuta-
se anya jIvoMko bhI bahuta duHkha uThAnA par3atA hai  // 74 //  isI prakAra
bhUmidAna bhI nindanIya hai kyoMki usase bhUmimeM rahanevAle jIvoMko pIr3A hotI
hai| aura prANipIr3Ake nimitta juTAkara puNyakI icchA karanA mAno pattharase
pAnI nikAlanA hai  // 75 //  isalie samasta prANiyoMko sadA abhayadAna denA
cAhie sAtha hI jJAna. prAsaka. auSadhi, anna aura vastrAdi bhI denA cAhie  // 7
//  jo dAna nindita batAyA hai vaha bhI pAtrake bhedase prazaMsanIya ho jAtA
hai. jisa prakAra ki zukti (sIpa ) ke dvArA piyA huA pAnI nizcayase motI ho jAtA
hai  // 77 /  /  pazu tathA bhUmikA dAna yadyapi nindita dAna hai phira bhI yadi
vaha jina-pratimA Adiko uddezya kara diyA jAtA hai to vaha dIrgha kAla taka
sthira rahanevAle utkRSTa bhoga pradAna karatA hai  // 78 //  bhItarakA saMkalpa
hI puNyapApakA kAraNa hai usake binA bAhya meM dAna denA parvatake zikharapara
varSA karaneke samAna hai  // 79 //  isalie vItarAga sarvajJa jinendra devakA
dhyAna kara jo dAna diyA jAtA hai usakA phala kahaneke lie kona samartha hai ?
// 80 //  jinendrake sivAya jo anya deva haiM ve dveSI, rAgI tathA mohI haiM
kyoMki 1. sarvavidhapAtreSu  /  2. dhanam  /  3. garvAvaddheH kh.| 4. tadgataM
prANi- m.| 5. jJAnabheSajamannaM ma. kha.  /  6. amuktA muktA saMpadyate
muktIbhavati  /  7. saMkalpaM ka.  /  |

Page #362 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
312 Those who hold weapons are considered hateful, those who keep women and wear
ornaments are considered passionate. Their delusion can also be inferred from
their passion and hatred, because delusion is the cause of passion and hatred.
Thus, passion, hatred, and delusion are the three vices that are established in
them, and the rest of the vices are transformations of these. || 42 || Some
people in the world are known as gods, but they are like ordinary people, they
eat, they are tainted by passions, and they indulge in desires like sex, time,
and place. How can such gods be worthy of charity? If they are inferior or equal
to their devotees, how can they give them good results? || 83-84 || Although
their good deeds are seen in the present, how can they bring liberation to other
suffering humans? || 85 || To desire liberation from such false gods is like
wanting to get oil by squeezing a handful of sand, or like wanting to quench
thirst by serving fire. || 86 || If a lame man can take another lame man to a
foreign country, then these gods can also bring results to other suffering
beings. || 87 || This is the story of these gods who commit sinful deeds. Their
devotees, who are far from being worthy, cannot be considered worthy in any way.
|| 88 || Driven by greed, sinful people engage in sacrifices, and people give
them money in the form of offerings. How can this be considered innocent? || 89
|| Therefore, the charity given with the intention of benefiting the Jina is
free from all vices and yields great results. || 90 || Religion is like
business, just as in business, there is always a consideration of more or less,
so in religion, there should always be a consideration of more or less, that is,
one should look at the loss and gain. A householder can accept the religion in
which there is more merit and less sin, because the greater thing overcomes the
lesser thing. || 91 || Just as a single grain of poison does not contaminate the
entire pond when it enters it, so also the slight violence committed by a man
who follows the Jina's religion does not contaminate him. His slight violence is
in vain. || 92 || 1. kechidebhyah m. | 2. bhajanbhajanam kh. | pujanbhajanam m.,
b. | 3. kaladeshakamÄdi-m., kh., b. | 4. drishte'pi kh., m., b., j. | 5. vipÄke
kh., m., b., j. | 6. shivasthÄnam samprÄpti m. | shivasthÄna prÄpti kh. |
shivasthÄnam samprÄpti b. |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 312 papapurANe rAgadveSAnumeyazca teSAM moho'pi vidyate  /  tayohi kAraNaM moho
doSAH zeSAstu tanmayAH  // 42 //  manuSyA eva ye 'keciddevA bhojanamAjanam  /
kaSAyatanavaH kAle dezakAmAdisevinaH  // 83 //  evaMvidhAH kathaM devA
dAnagocaratAM gatAH  /  adhamA yadi vA tulyAH phalaM kuryumanoharam  // 8 //
dRSTo'pi tAvadeteSAM vipAkaH zumakarmaNaH  /  kuta eva
zivasthAnesaMprAptirduHkhitAtmanAm  /  / 85||
tadetasikatAmuSTipIDanAtailavAnchitam  /  vinAzanaM ca tRSNAyA
sevanAdAzuzukSaNeH  // 86 //  paGgunA nIyate paGguryadi dezAntaraM tataH  /
etebhyaH klizyato jantodevebhyaH jAyate phalam  // 8 //  eSAM tAvadiyaM vArtA
devAnAM pApakarmaNAm  /  tadbhaktAnAM tu dUreNa satpAtratvaM na yujyate  // 8 //
lobhena coditaH pApo jano yajJe pravartate  /  kurvato hi tathA loko dhanaM
tarhi prayacchati  // 89 //  tasmAduddizya yaddAnaM dIyate jinapuGgavam  /
sarvadoSavinimuktaM taddadAti phalaM mahat  // 10 //  vANijyasadRzo
dharmastatrAnveSyAlpabhRritA  /  bahunA hi parAmatiH kriyate'lpasya vastunaH  //
11 //  yathA viSakaNaH prAptaH sarasIM naiva duSyati  /  jinadharmodyatasyaivaM
hiMsAlezo vRthodbhavaH  // 12 //  ve zastra liye rahate haiM isase dveSI siddha
hote haiM aura strI sAthameM rakhate haiM tathA AbhUSaNa dhAraNa karate haiM
isase rAgI siddha hote haiN| rAga-dveSake dvArA unake mohakA bhI anumAna ho jAtA
hai kyoMki moha rAga-dveSa kA kAraNa hai| isa prakAra rAga-dveSa aura moha ye
tIna doSa unameM siddha ho gaye bAkI anya doSa inhIMke rUpAntara haiM  /  /
81-82 //  lokameM jo kucha manuSya devake rUpameM prasiddha haiM ve sAdhAraNa
janake samAna hI bhojanake pAtra haiM arthAt bhojana karate haiM, kaSAyase yukta
haiM aura avasarapara AMzika kAmAdikA sevana karate haiM so aise deva dAnake
pAtra kaise ho sakate haiM ? ve kitanI hI bAtoMmeM jaba ki apane bhakta janoMse
gaye-gujare athavA unake samAna hI haiM taba unheM uttama phala kaise de sakate
haiM ?  // 83-84 //  yadyapi vartamAnameM unake zubha karmoM kA udaya dekhA jAtA
hai to bhI unase anya duHkhI manuSyoMko mokSakI prApti kaise ho sakatI hai ?  //
85 //  aise kudevoMse mokSakI icchA karanA bAlUkI muTThI perakara tela prApta
karanekI icchAke samAna hai athavA agnikI sevAse pyAsa naSTa karanekI icchAke
tulya hai  /  / 86 /  /  yadi eka la~gar3A manuSya dUsare la~gar3e manuSyako
dezAntarameM le jA sakatA ho to ina devoMse dUsare duHkhI jIvoMko bhI phalakI
prApti ho sakatI hai  // 87 //  jaba ina devoMkI yaha bAta hai taba pApa kArya
karanevAle unake bhaktoMkI bAta to dUra hI rhii| unameM satpAtratA kisI taraha
siddha nahIM ho sakatI  // 88 //  lobhase prerita hue pApI jana yajJameM
pravRtta hote haiM aura loga aisA karane vAloMko dakSiNA Adike rUpameM dhana
dete haiM so yaha nirdoSa kaise ho sakatA hai ?  // 89 //  isalie jinendra
devako uddezya kara jo dAna diyA jAtA hai vahI sarvadoSa rahita hai aura vahI
mahAphala pradAna karatA hai  // 90 //  dharma to vyApArake samAna hai, jisa
prakAra vyApArameM sadA hInAdhikatAkA vicAra kiyA jAtA hai usI prakAra dharmameM
bhI sadA hInAdhikatAkA vicAra rakhanA cAhie arthAt hAni-lAbhapara dRSTi rakhanA
caahie| jisa dharmameM puNyakI adhikatA ho aura pApakI nyUnatA ho gRhastha use
svIkRta kara sakatA hai kyoMki adhika vastuke dvArA hIna vastukA parAbhava ho
jAtA hai  // 91 //  jisa prakAra viSakA eka kaNa tAlAbameM pahuMcakara pUre
tAlAbako dUSita nahIM kara sakatA usI prakAra jinadharmAnukUla AcaraNa
karanevAle puruSase jo thor3I hiMsA hotI hai vaha use dUSita nahIM kara sktii|
usakI vaha alpa hiMsA vyartha rahatI hai  /  / 12 /  /  1. kecidebhyaH ma.  /
2. bhajanabhAjanam kha.  /  pUjanabhAjanam ma., b.| 3. kAladezakAmAdi-ma., kha.,
ba.  /  4. dRSTe'pi kha., ma., ba., j.| 5. vipAke kha., ma., ba., j.| 6.
zivasthAnaM saMprAptI m.| zivasthAna prAptI kha.  /  zivasthAnaM saMprAptI ba.
/

Page #363 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **Chapter 14**  **Verse 93:**  Devout followers of the Jinas
should construct temples and other structures, and offer garlands, incense,
lamps, and other auspicious offerings.  **Verse 94:**  By offering donations
with the intention of benefiting the Jinas, beings attain the highest pleasures
in both the heavenly and human realms.  **Verse 95:**  Donations given
appropriately to those who have embarked on the path of liberation (like monks)
bestow abundant pleasures and are considered worthy of merit.  **Verse 96:**
Only the donation given with devotion and faith to those who have attained Right
Vision (Samyak Drishti) is true charity. The rest is merely a loss of wealth to
thieves.  **Verse 97:**  The kingdom of perfect knowledge (Kevala Jnana) is
established only through meditation. When one attains this perfect knowledge,
they achieve liberation (Nirvana).  **Verse 98-99:**  Those who have shed all
their karmas, are free from all obstacles, possess infinite bliss, and are
illuminated by infinite knowledge and vision, are the Siddhas. They are without
any physical body, remain in their true nature, reside on the peak of the
universe, are free from rebirth, and their essence cannot be described in words.
**Verse 100:**  Those who are trapped in the fire of suffering fueled by the
wind of greed, constantly suffer without the water of merit.  **Verse 101:**
Those who dwell in the darkness of sin and are under the influence of false
vision, some attain enlightenment through the rays of the sun of Dharma.
**Verse 102:**  Beings who are imprisoned within the strong cage of evil
tendencies and are bound by the ropes of desire, are liberated by the bond of
Dharma.  **Verse 103:**  The word "Dharma" is used in the context of "holding"
or "sustaining" as it is derived from the root "Dhr" (to hold) and is explained
by the example of the country "Lokabindu Sara" (a country mentioned in ancient
texts).  **Verse 104:**  Dharma is called "Dharma" because it sustains a being
from falling into misery, as it is the right conduct.  **Verse 105:**  The root
"Labh" means "to obtain" or "to gain". The benefit derived from Dharma is called
"Dharma Labh" (benefit of Dharma).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturdazaM pa prAsAdAdi tataH kAryaM jinAnAM bhaktitatparaiH  /  mAlyadhUpe
pradIpAdi sarva ca kuzalairjanaiH  // 93 //  svarge manuSyaloke ca
bhogAnatyantamunnatAn  /  jantavaH pratipadyante jinAnuddizya dAnataH  //  94
//  tanmArgaprasthitAnAM ca dattaM dAnaM yathocitam  /  karoti vipulAn bhogAn
guNAnAmiti mAjanam ||15|| yathAzakti tato bhaktyA samyagdRSTiSu yacchataH  /
dAnaM tadekamAtrAsti zeSaM corairviluNThitam ||16|| sthitaM jJAnasya sAmrAjye
kevalaM parikIrtyate  /  nirvANaM tasya saMprAptAvupaiti dhyAnayogataH || 97||
vimuktAzeSakarmANaH sarvavAdhAvivarjitAH  /  anantasukhasaMpannA
anantajJAnadarzanAH ||18|| azarIrAH svabhAvasthA lokamUrdhni pratiSTitAH  /
pratyApattivinirmuktAH siddhA vaktavyavarjitAH || 99  //
"garddhApavanasaMvRddhaduHkhapAvakamadhyagAH  /  klizyante 'pApino nityaM vinA
sukRtavAriNA  //  100  //  pApAndhakAramadhyasthAH kudarzanavazIkRtAH  /  bodhaM
kecitprapadyante dharmAdityamarocimiH  // 101 //
azumAyomayAtyantaidRDhapaJjaramadhyagAH  /  AzApAzavazA jIvA mucyante
dharmabandhunA~  /  / 102 /  /  siddho vyAkaraNAlo kabindu sAraikadezataH  /
dhAraNArtho dhRto 'dharmazabdo vAci paristhitaH ||103 || patantaM durgatau
yasmAtsamyagAcarito 'bhavan  /  prANinaM dhArayatyasmAddharma ityabhidhIyate  //
104 //  mirdhAtuH smRtaH prAptau prAptiH saMparka ucyate  /  tasya dharmasya yo
lAbho dharmalAbhaH sa ucyate  /  /  105  /  /  isalie bhakti tatpara rahanevAle
kuzala manuSyoM ko jina-mandira Adi banavAnA cAhie aura mAlA, dhUpa, dIpa Adi
sabakI vyavasthA karanI cAhie ||13|| jinendra bhagavAnko uddezya kara jo dAna
diyA jAtA hai usake phalasvarUpa jIva svargaM tathA manuSyaloka sambandhI
uttamottama bhoga prApta karate haiM  // 94 //  313 sanmArga meM prayANa
karanevAle muni Adike lie jo yathAyogya dAna diyA jAtA hai vaha utkRSTa bhoga
pradAna karatA hai  /  isa prakAra yahI dAna guNoM kA pAtra hai || 95|| isalie
sAmarthya ke anusAra bhaktipUrvaka samyagdRSTi puruSoMke lie jo dAna detA hai
usIkA dAna eka dAna hai| bAkI to coroMko dhana luTAnA hai || 96 || kevalajJAna
jJAnake sAmrAjya padapara sthita hai  /  dhyAnake prabhAva se jaba kevalajJAnakI
prApti ho cukatI hai tabhI yaha jIva nirvANako prApta hotA hai  // 97|| jinake
samasta karma naSTa ho cukate haiM, jo sarvaM prakArakI bAdhAoMse pare ho jAte
haiM, jo ananta sukha se sampanna rahate haiM, ananta jJAna aura ananta darzana
jinakI AtmAmeM prakAzamAna rahate haiM. jinake tInoM prakArake zarIra naSTa ho
jAte haiM, nizcayase jo apane svabhAvameM hI sthita rahate haiM aura vyavahArase
loka - zikhara para virAjamAna haiM, jo punarAgamanase rahita haiM aura jinakA
svarUpa zabdoM dvArA nahIM kahA jA sakatA ve siddha bhagavAn haiM  //  98-99 ||
lobharUpI pavanase bar3he duHkha rUpI agnike bIca meM par3e pApI jIva puNya rUpI
jalake binA nirantara kleza bhogate rahate haiM  // 100 //  pAparUpI andhakAra
ke bIca meM rahanevAle tathA mithyAdarzanake vazIbhUta kitane hI jIva dharmarUpI
sUryakI kiraNoMse prabodhako prApta hote haiM  //  101  //  jo azubhabhAvarUpI
loheke majabUta piMjareke madhya meM raha rahe haiM tathA AzArUpI pAzake adhIna
haiM aise jIva dharmarUpI bandhuke dvArA hI mukta kiye jAte haiMbandhanase
chur3Aye jAte haiM  //  102  //  jo lokabindusAra nAmaka pUrvakA eka deza hai
aise vyAkaraNase siddha hai ki jo dhAraNa kare so dharmaM hai  /  'dharatIti
dharma:' isa prakAra usakA niruktyarthaM hai || 103 //  aura yaha ThIka bhI hai
kyoMki acchI tarahase AcaraNa kiyA huA dharmaM durgati meM par3ate hue jIvako
dhAraNa kara letA hai - bacA letA hai isalie vaha dharmaM kahalAtA hai || 104 ||
labha dhAtukA artha prApti 1. dhUma ma  /  2. Ananda ma  /  3. gRddhA ma  /  4.
pApataH ka., kha., ma.  /  5. azubhabhAvarUpa - lohanirmita
sudRDhapaJjaramadhyagatAH  /  6. dharmapaJjara ma.  /  7. dharmabandhanA ma. 18.
dharmaH kha.  /  9. bhavet ma.  /  bhavat kha, ba,  /  40

Page #364 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 314  I will briefly explain the Dharma as stated by the Jinas. Listen
attentively, with a focused mind, to the different types of fruits that result
from it.  **Verse 106:**  Non-violence, truthfulness, non-stealing, non-
possession, and non-attachment are called vows. One should definitely practice
these vows.  **Verse 107:**  Walking, speech, desire, taking and giving, and
discarding are the five Samitis. A virtuous person should diligently practice
them.  **Verse 108:**  Complete absence or gentleness in speech, mind, and body
actions is called Gupti. One should practice it with utmost respect.  **Verse
109:**  Anger, pride, deceit, and greed are the four great enemies (Kashaya). It
is through these that a being wanders in the cycle of birth and death.  **Verse
110:**  According to the scriptures, one who acts according to the scriptures
should control anger through forgiveness, pride through gentleness, deceit
through simplicity, and greed through contentment.  **Verse 111:**  All that has
been described above, including vows, Samitis, etc., is called Dharma.  Beyond
this, renunciation is also called a special Dharma.  **Verse 113:**  Touch,
taste, smell, sight, and hearing are the five well-known senses. Conquering
these is called Dharma.  **Verse 114:**  Fasting, austerity, counting breaths,
renunciation of tastes, secluded sleeping and sitting, and bodily exertion are
the six external austerities. External austerities are like a house, protecting
the internal austerities.  **Verse 115:**  Penance, humility, self-reflection,
study, detachment, and meditation are the six internal austerities. All these
austerities are called Dharma.  **Verse 118:**  Through this Dharma, noble
beings achieve the separation (destruction) of karmas and perform many wondrous
actions that transform infinite activities.  **Verse 119:**  Through the
influence of Dharma, this being obtains a body capable of action, which enables
it to obstruct all humans and gods, and to permeate the space of the universe.
**Verse 120:**  Through the influence of Dharma, this being becomes so powerful
that it can conquer the three worlds. It attains the eight types of divine
powers and the rare Yoga.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 314 papapurANe jinairabhihitaM dharma kathayAmi samAsataH  /
kAMzcittatphalabhedAMzca zRNutaikAgramAnasAH  // 106 //  hiMsAto'lIkataH
steyAnadhanAda vyasaMgamAta  /  tititAyi vizeSa ra da dravyasaMgamAt  /
virativratamuddiSTaM vidheyaM tasya dhAraNam  // 107 /  /
IryAvAkyaiSaNAdAnanikSepotsargarUpikA  /  samitiH pAlanaM tasyAH kArya yatnena
sAdhunA  /  / 10 /  /  vAGamanaHkAyavRttInAmabhAvo 'mradimAthavA  /
guptirAcaraNaM tasyAM vidheyaM paramAdarAt  // 109 /  /  krodho mAnastathA mAyA
lobhazceti mahAdviSaH  /  keSAyA yairayaM lokaH saMsAre parivaryate  /  / 110 //
kSamAto mRdutAsaMgAdajutvAddhatiyogataH  /  vidheyo nigrahasteSAM
sUtranirdiSTakAriNA  // 111 //  dharmasaMjJamidaM sarva vratAdi parikIrtitam  /
tyAgazcodito dharmo vizeSo'sya niveditaH  /  / 112 //  rasanasparzana
ghrANacakSuHzrotrAbhidhAnataH  /  prasiddhAnIndriyANyeSAM nirjayo dharma ucyate
// 113 //  upavAso'vamaudarya parisaMkhyAnavRttitA  /  rasAnAM ca parityAgo
viviktaM zayanAsanam  // 114 /  /  kAyakleza iti proktaM bAhyaM SoDhA tapaH
sthitam  /  tapaso'bhyantarasyaitadvRttisthAnIyamipyate  // 115 /  /
prAyazcittaM vinItizca vaiyAvRtyakRtistathA  /  svAdhyAyena ca saMbandho
vyutsago dhyAnamuttamam  /  / 116 //  etadAbhyantaraM SoDhA tapazcaraNamiSyate
/  tapaH samastamapyetaddharma ityabhidhIyate  // 117 /  /  dharmaNAnena
kurvanti bhavyAH karmaviyojanam  /  karma cAdbhutamatyantavyavasthAparivartanam
/  / 118 //  zaknoti bAdhituM sarvAnmAnuSAnamarAMstathA  /  lokAkAzaM ca
saMrodhaM vapuSA vikriyAtmanA  /  / 119 //  ekanAsatvamAnetuM trailokyaM ca
mahAbalaH  /  aSTabhedamahaizvaryaM yogaM cApnoti durlabham  // 120 //  hai aura
prApti samparkako kahate haiM, ataH dharmako prAptiko dharmalAbha kahate haiM
// 105 /  /  aba hama jinabhagavAnke dvArA kahe hue dharmakA saMkSepase nirUpaNa
karate haiN| sAtha hI usake kucha bhedoM aura unake phaloMkA bhI nirdeza kareMge
so tuma ekAgracitta hokara suno  // 106 /  /  hiMsA, jhUTha, corI, kuzIla aura
parigrahase virakta honA so vrata kahalAtA hai| aisA vrata avazya  // 107 /  /
IryA, bhASA, eSaNA, AdAna-nikSepaNa aura utsarga ye pA~ca samitiyA~ haiM  /
sAdhuko inakA prayatnapUrvaka pAlana karanA cAhie  // 108 /  /  vacana, mana
aura kAyakI pravRttikA sarvathA abhAva ho jAnA athavA usameM komalatA A jAnA
gupti hai| isakA AcaraNa bar3e Adarase karanA cAhie  /  / 109 /  /  krodha,
mAna, mAyA aura lobha ye cAra kaSAya mahAzatru haiM, inhIMke dvArA jIva
saMsArameM paribhramaNa karatA hai  /  / 110 //  Agamake anusAra kArya
karanevAle manuSyako kSamAse krodhakA, mRdutAse mAnakA, saralatAse mAyAkA aura
santoSase lobhakA nigraha karanA cAhie  // 111 /  /  abhI Upara jina vrata
samiti AdikA varNana kiyA hai vaha saba dharma kahalAtA hai| isake sivAya tyAga
bhI vizeSadharma kahA gayA hai  // 112 //  sparzana, rasanA, ghrANa, cakSu aura
karNa ye pA~ca indriyA~ prasiddha haiN| inakA jItanA dharma kahalAtA hai  /  /
113 /  /  upavAsa, avamaudarya, vRttiparisaMkhyAna, rasaparityAga,
viviktazayyAsana aura kAyakleza ye chaha bAhyatapa haiN| bAhyatapa antaraMga
tapakI rakSAke lie vRti arthAt bAr3Ike samAna haiM  // 114-115 /  /
prAyazcitta, vinaya, vaiyAvRtya, svAdhyAya, vyutsarga aura dhyAna ye chaha
Abhyantara tapa haiN| yaha samasta tapa dharma kahalAtA hai  /  / 116-117||
bhavya jIva isa dharmake dvArA karmoMkA viyojana arthAt vinAza tathA ananta
vyavasAyoMko parivartita karanevAle aneka Azcaryajanaka kArya karate haiM  //
118 //  yaha jIva dharmake prabhAvase aisA vikriyAtmaka zarIra prApta karatA hai
ki jisake dvArA samasta manuSya aura devoMko bAdhA dene tathA lokAkAzako vyApta
karane meM samartha hotA hai  /  / 119 /  /  dharmake prabhAvase yaha jIva itanA
mahAbalavAn ho jAtA hai ki tInoM 1. -mabhAva iti sAthavA ka., kh..b.| 2.
kaSAyAdyairayaM ma.  /  3. parivartate ma., kh.| 4. madutaH
saMgAdajutvAdvettiyogataH m.| 5. -bhidhAvataH m.| 6. bAhyaM tapo'bhyantaratapaso
rakSaNAya vRtitulyamastIti bhAvaH  /  7. etadabhyantare m.| :

Page #365 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fourteenth vow  1. It destroys the heat of the sun, makes it like frost, and
fills the whole world with rain in an instant. || 121 || It burns the world to
ashes with its mere glance, like the poisonous snake, lifts Mount Meru, and
scatters the ocean. || 122 || It lifts the celestial wheel, frightens Indra,
Rudra, and other gods, rains jewels and gold, and creates groups of mountains.
|| 123 || It pacifies the most severe diseases with the dust of its feet, and
gives humans many other wondrous riches. || 124 || A being can do many other
difficult things through the power of Dharma. In truth, nothing is impossible
for Dharma. || 125 || Those who die with Dharma transcend the celestial wheel
and are born in the heavens of Saudharma and other abodes of virtue. || 126 ||
Some become ordinary gods, some become Indra, and some become Ahminndra, by
acquiring Dharma. || 127 || Through the power of Dharma, beings are born in
palaces made of gold, crystal, and lapis lazuli pillars, with walls of gold and
other precious metals that always shine, very high and with many floors. || 128
|| Their floors are made of various gems like ruby, yogurt-colored, and honey-
colored, with strings of pearls hanging down, and adorned with windows. || 129
|| Their edges are decorated with beautiful paintings of deer, yak, cows, lions,
elephants, and other animals. || 130 || They are equipped with moon-like halls,
adorned with flags and garlands, and their chambers are furnished with beautiful
beds and seats. || 131 || Those who practice Dharma are born in places like
vimanas, which are equipped with musical instruments, travel according to their
will, are accompanied by good companions, adorned with lotus and other
decorations, and whose brilliance eclipses the sun's radiance and the moon's
light. || 132-133 || Through the power of Dharma, beings obtain: 1. The moon. 2.
The dust of the feet. 3. Flags and garlands.  315

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturdazaM pavaM 1 hanti tApaM sahasrAMzostuSAratvamuprabhoH  /  karoti pUraNaM
vRSTyA sarvasya jagataH kSaNAt  //  121  //  masmatAM nayate
lokamAzIviSavadIkSaNAt  /  kurute mandarotkSepaM vikSepaNamudanvatAm  //  122
//  jyotizcakraM samuddhartubhindrarudrAdisAdhvasam  /  ratnakAJcanavarSaM ca
prAvasaMghAtasarjanam  //  123  //  vyAdhInAmatitIvrANAM zamanaM paadpaaNsuno|
nRNAmadbhutahetUnAM vibhavAnAM samudbhavam  //  124  //  jIvaH karoti dharmeNa
tathAnyadapi duSkaram  /  naiva kiMcidasAdhyatvaM dharmasya pratipadyate  //
125  //  dharmeNa maraNaM prAptA jyotizcakratiraskRtim  /  kRtvA
kalpAnprapadyante saudharmAdIn guNAlayAn  //  126 //  sAmAnikAH surAH
kecidbhavantyanye surAdhipAH  /  ahamindrAstathAnye ca kRtvA dharmasya saMgraham
// 127 //  sphaTikavaiDUrya stambhasaMbhAranirmitAn  /  tadbhittimAsurA~stuGgAn
prAsAdAnbahubhUmikAn  //  128  //  ambhojadadhimadhvAdivicitramaNikuTTimAn  /
muktAkalApasaMyuktAn vAtAyanavirAjitAn  //  129  //  rurubhizcamaraiH
siMhairgajairanyaizca cArubhiH  /  rUpairnicitapAirvAbhirvedikAbhiralaMkRtAn  //
130 //  candrazAlAdibhiryuktAn dhvajamAlAvibhUSitAn  /
sopAzrayamanohArizayanAsanasaMgatAn  // 131 //  Atoyavara
saMpUrNAnicchAsaMcArakAriNaH  /  yuktAnsatparivargeNa puNDarIkAdilakSitAn  //
132 //  vimAnaprabhRtIn jIvA nilayAn dharmakAriNaH  /
prapadyante'rkazItAMzudIptikAntya bhibhAvinaH  //  133 //  sukhanidrAkSaye
yadvadvibuddhaM vimalendriyam  /  aciroditatigmAMzudIsaM kAntyA samaM vidhoH  //
134  //  lokako eka grAsa banA sakatA hai| aNimA, mahimA Adi ATha prakArake
aizvaryaM tathA aneka durlabha yoga bhI yaha dharmaMke prabhAvase prApta karatA
hai || 120 || yaha jIva dharmake prabhAvase sUryake santApaChat aura candramAkI
zItalatAko naSTa kara sakatA hai tathA vRSTike dvArA samasta saMsArako
kSaNabhara meM bhara sakatA hai || 121  //  yaha dharmake prabhAvase AzIviSa
sA~pake samAna dRSTimAtra se lokako bhasma kara sakatA hai, meru parvatako uThA
sakatA hai aura samudrako bikhera sakatA hai  //  122  //  dharmake hI
prabhAvase jyotizcakrako uThA sakatA hai, indra, rudra Adi devoMko bhayabhIta
kara sakatA hai, ratna aura suvarNakI varSA kara sakatA hai tathA parvatoMke
samUhakI sRSTi kara sakatA hai  //  123  //  dharmake hI prabhAvase atyanta
bhayaMkara bImAriyoMkI zAnti apane pairakI dhUlise kara sakatA hai tathA
manuSyoMko anya aneka AzcaryakAraka vaibhavakI prApti karA sakatA hai || 124 ||
jIva dharmake prabhAva se aura bhI kitane hI kaThina kArya kara sakatA hai  /
yathArtha meM dharma ke lie koI bhI kArya asAdhya nahIM hai || 125 || jo jIva
dharmapUrvaka maraNa karate haiM ve jyotizcakrako ullaMghana kara guNoMke
nivAsabhUta saudharmAdi svargo meM utpanna hote haiM  //  126  //  dharmakA
upArjana kara kitane hI sAmAnika deva hote haiM, kitane hI indra hote haiM aura
kitane hI ahamindra banate haiM || 127|| dharmake prabhAvase jIva una mahaloMmeM
utpanna hote haiM jo ki svarNa, sphaTika aura vaiDUryaM maNimaya khambhoMke
samUhase nirmita hote haiM jinakI svarNAdinirmita dIvAleM sadA dedIpyamAna
rahatI haiM, jo atyanta U~ce aura aneka bhUmiyoM (khaNDoM) se yukta hote haiM |
|| 128|| jinake pharza padmarAga, dadhirAga tathA madhurAga Adi vicitra-vicitra
maNiyoMse bane hote. haiM, jinameM motiyoM kI mAlAe~ laTakatI rahatI haiM, jo
jharokhoMse suzobhita hote haiM || 129 || jinake kinAroMpara hariNa, camarI
gAya, siMha, hAthI tathA anyAnya jIvoMke sundara-sundara citra citrita rahate
haiM aisI vedikAoMse jo alaMkRta hote haiM || 130  //  jo candrazAlA Adise
sahita hote haiM, dhvajAoM aura mAlAoMse alaMkRta rahate haiM tathA jinakI
kakSAoMmeM manohArI zayyAe~ aura Asana biche rahate haiM  // 131 //  dharmaM
dhAraNa karanevAle loga aise vimAna Adi sthAnoMmeM utpanna hote haiM jo vAditra
Adi saMgIta ke sAdhanoMse yukta rahate haiM, icchAnusAra jinameM gamana hotA
hai, jo uttama parikarase sahita hote haiM, kamala Adi prasAdhana sAmagrIse
yukta rahate haiM aura apanI prabhAse sUryakI dIpti aura candramAko kAntiko
tiraskRta karate rahate haiM  /  /  132 - 133  //  dharmake prabhAvase prANiyoM
ko 1. candrasya  /  2. caraNarajasA  /  3. dhvajAmAlA ma0  /  315

Page #366 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, it is said that a body free from dust, sweat, and disease,
**samoda**, **nayanabhiram**, **upapadaj** in origin, and **digantar** in
radiance, is obtained in the celestial abodes. This body is **samod**,
**nayanabhiram**, **upapadaj** in origin, and **digantar** in radiance. It is
also adorned with ornaments that cover the entire horizon with their brilliance.
Through the power of Dharma, Apsaras are obtained in heaven, whose feet are as
soft as lotus petals, whose nails are radiant, and whose red garments are
entangled in their anklets. Their thighs are as smooth as banana stems, their
knees are hidden within their muscles, their hips are adorned with belts, and
their gait is as graceful as that of an elephant. They are adorned with delicate
trivalis at their waists, and their breasts are like newly risen moons. Their
bodies are constantly bathed in the radiance of jeweled garlands, and they wear
delicate vines of malati flowers. Their hands are adorned with bracelets of
precious stones, and their fingers are as soft as ashoka leaves. Their necks are
like conch shells, their lips are covered with the brilliance of their teeth,
and their cheeks are like pure mirrors reflecting beauty. Their eyes are adorned
with thick, radiant ornaments, and their foreheads are adorned with pearls and
rubies. Their hair is black, fine, and soft like bees, their bodies are as soft
as reeds, and their voices are sweet. They are skilled in all forms of
treatment, their actions are beautiful, and their breath smells like the
fragrance of Nandana. They are skilled in understanding gestures, they bring
pleasure to the five senses, and they are capable of assuming any form. They
obtain these celestial forms through Dharma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe rajaHsvedarujAmuktaM 'svAmodamamalaM mRdu  /  zriyA paramayA yuktaM
cakSuSyamupapAdajam  // 15 //  zarIraM labhyate dharmAt prANimiH surasamasu  /
alaMkArAzca bhrAcakratirohitadigantarAH  // 136 //  saroruhadalasparzacaraNAH
kAntivanakhAH  /  tulAkoTikasaMdaSTaraktAMzukadazAnanAH  // 137 //
rammAstambhasamasparzajaGghAntargatajAnukAH  /  kAjIguNAJcitodAranitambA
dviradakramAH  // 138 //  anudAravalImaGgatanumadhyavirAjitAH  /
navoditakSapAnAthapratimastanamaNDalAH  // 139 //
ratnAvalIprabhAjAlanirmuktaghanacandrikAH  /
mAlatImArdavopetatanubAhulatAbhRtaH  // 140 //
mahArghamaNivAcAlavalayAkulapANayaH  /  azokapallavasparzakarAGgaligalatpramAH
// 141 //  kambukaNThA radacchAyApihitadvijavAsasaH  /
lAvaNyalitasarvAzakapolAmaladarpaNAH  // 142 //
locanAntadhanacchAyAkRtakarNAvataMsakAH  /
muktAparItapadmAmimaNisImantabhUSaNAH  // 143 //
bhramarAsitasUkSmAtimRdukezakalApikAH  /  mRNAlakomalasparzavapuSo madhurasvarAH
// 144 //  atyantamupacArajJA nitAntasubhagakriyAH  /
nandanapramavAmodasamanizvAsasaurabhAH  // 145 //  iGgitajJAnakuzalAH
paJcendriyasukhAvahAH  /  kAmarUpadharA dharmAtprApyante'psaraso divi  // 146 //
deva-bhavanoMmeM aisA vaikriyika zarIra prApta hotA hai jo ki sukhamaya nidrAke
dUra honepara jAgRta hueke samAna jAna paDatA hai. jisakI indriyA~ atyanta
nirmala hotI haiN| jo tatkAla udita samAna dedIpyamAna hotA hai, jo kAntise
candramAkI tulanA prApta karatA hai, raja, pasInA tathA bImArIse rahita hotA
hai. atyanta sagandhita. nirmala aura komala hotA hai. utkRSTa lakSmIse yukta,
nayanAbhirAma aura upapAda janmase utpanna hotA hai| isake sivAya apanI kAntike
samUhase digantarAlako AcchAdita karanevAle AbhUSaNa bhI prApta hote haiM  //
134-136 /  /  dharmake prabhAvase svargameM aisI apsarAe~ prApta hotI haiM
jinake ki caraNoMkA sparzana kamaladalake samAna komala hotA hai, jinake nakha
atyanta kAntimAna hote haiM, jinake lAla-lAla vasroMke aMcala nUpuroMmeM
ulajhate rahate haiM  // 137 //  jinakI jaMghAe~ keleke stambhake samAna snigdha
sparzase yukta hotI haiM, jinake ghuTane mAMsa-peziyoM meM antanihita rahate
haiM, jinake sthUla nitamba mekhalAoMse suzobhita hote haiM, jinakI cAla hAthokI
cAlake samAna mastIse bharI rahatI hai  /  / 138 //  jo sUkSma trivalise yukta
madhyabhAgase suzobhita hotI haiM, jinake stanoMke maNDala navIna udita
candramAke samAna hote haiM  // 139 /  /  jinako ratnAvalIkI kAntise sadA
cA~danI chiTakatI rahatI hai, jo mAlatIke samAna komala aura patalI bhujArUpI
latAoMko dhAraNa karatI haiM  // 140 //  jinake hAtha mahAmUlya maNiyoMkI
khanakatI huI cUr3iyoMse sadA yukta rahate haiM, azoka pallavake samAna komalatA
dhAraNa karanevAlI jinakI aMguliyoMse mAno kAnti cUtI rahatI hai  // 141 //
jinake kaNTha zaMkhake samAna hote haiM, jinake oTha dA~toMkI kAntise AcchAdita
rahate haiM, jinake kapolarUpI nirmala darpaNoMkA samasta bhAga lAvaNyase
saMlipta rahatA hai  // 142 //  jinake nayanAntako saghana kAnti sadA
karNAbharaNakI zobhA bar3hAyA karatI hai, motiyoMse vyApta padmarAga maNi jinakI
mA~gako alaMkRta karate rahate haiM  // 143 //  jinake kezoMke samUha bhramarake
samAna kAle, sUkSma aura atyanta komala haiM, jinake zarIrakA sparza mRNAlake
samAna komala hai, jinakI AvAja atyanta madhura hai  // 144 //  jo saba
prakArakA upacAra jAnatI haiM, jinakI samasta kriyAe~ atyanta manohara haiM,
jinake zvAsocchvAsakI sugandhi nandanavanakI sugandhike samAna hai  // 145 //
jo abhiprAyake 1. sAmoda ma.  /  2. nayanAbhirAmam  /  3. upapAdajanmajAtam  /
4. digantaram m.| 5. saMdRSTa kh.| 6. tulAkoTikagRhItaraktavastrAntAH  /  7.
gajagAminyaH  /  8. dantaprabhAcchAditAdharAH  /

Page #367 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 14  **Verse 147:** The gods, along with the apsaras, enjoy immense
pleasure born from the object of desire, where all the necessary equipment is
created simply by the power of thought.  **Verse 148:** The pleasure that is
experienced in the human realm, as well as in the realm of the Yantrikas, is all
declared by the Jina masters to be the fruit of Dharma.  **Verse 149:** Whatever
is experienced as pleasure in the upper, middle, and lower realms, by the
enjoyers, is all born from Dharma.  **Verse 150:** The protection of thousands
of human beings by a giver, enjoyer, and establisher of order, is to be
understood as the fruit born from Dharma.  **Verse 151:** The dominion of Indra
over thousands of gods adorned with beautiful ornaments is the fruit born from
Dharma.  **Verse 152:** The attainment of the Siddha-loka by those who are
adorned with the three jewels of Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right
Conduct, and who have destroyed the enemy of delusion, is the fruit of pure
Dharma.  **Verse 153:** Without obtaining a human birth, one cannot obtain this
Dharma. Therefore, the attainment of human birth is the most excellent of all
births.  **Verse 154:** Just as a king is the best among humans, a lion among
animals, and Garuda among birds, so too is human birth the best among all
births.  **Verse 155:** Dharma, which is the best in the three worlds and
bestows pleasure on all the senses, is performed only in the human body.
Therefore, the human body is the most excellent.  **Verse 156:** After wandering
through thousands of births as a crawling creature, a being may or may not
obtain a human birth.  **Verse 157:** Having obtained this rare human birth,
which is the cause of liberation from suffering, if a person does not practice
Dharma, they will again fall into the cycle of suffering.  **Verse 158:** Just
as a precious jewel lost in the ocean is difficult to find, so too is it
difficult to regain a lost human birth.  **Verse 159:** By performing Dharma
appropriately in this human life, all living beings attain the fruits of heaven
and beyond.  **Verse 160:** Having heard all this, Bhanukarna was very pleased.
With devotion, he bowed down to the lotus-eyed omniscient being and asked a
question with folded hands.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturdazaM pava saMkalpa mAtra saMbhUta sarvopakaraNaM puru  /  viSayotthaM
sukhaM tAmiH prApnuvanti samaM surAH  //  147  //  sukhaM yantridazAvAse yacca
mAnuSaviSTape  /  phalaM tadgaditaM sarvaM dharmasya jinapuGgavaiH  //  148 //
UrdhvAdhamadhyalokeSu yo nAma sukhasaMjJitaH  /  bhoktRNAM jAyate mAtraH sa
sarvo dharmasaMbhavaH  //  149  //  dAtA bhoktA sthiteH kartA yo naraH
prativAsaram  /  rakSyate nRsahasraughaiH sarvaM taddharmajaM phalam  //  150
//  yattatsurasahasrANAM haribhUSaNadhAriNAm  /  prabhutvaM kurute
zakrastatphalaM dharmasaMbhavam  //  151  //  yanmoharipumudrAsya ratnatraya
samanvitAH  /  siddhasthAnaM prapadyante zuddhadharmasya tatphalam  // 152 //
aprApya mAnuSaM janma e sa ca dharmo na labhyate  /  tasmAnmanuSya saMprAptiH
paramA sarvajanmasu  // 153 //  rAjA zreSTho manuSyANAM mRgANAM kesarI yathA  /
pakSiNAM vinatAputraH bhavAnAM mAnuSo bhavaH  //  154  //  sArastribhuvane
dharmaH sarvendriyasukhapradaH  /  kriyate mAnuSe dehe tato manujatA parA  //
155  //  nRNAnAM zAlayaH zreSThAH pAdapAnAM ca candanAH  /  upalAnAM ca ratnAni
bhavAnAM mAnuSo bhavaH  //  156  //  utsarpiNIsahasrANi paribhramya kathaMcana
/  labhyate vA na vA janma manuSyANAM zarIriNA  //  157  //  avApya durlabhaM
tadyaH klezanirmokSakAraNam  /  jano na kurute dharmaM yAtyasau durgatIH punaH
//  158  //  patitaM tanmanuSyatvaM punardurlabha saMgamam  /  samudrasalile
naSTaM yathA ratnaM mahAguNam  //  159  //  sa mAnuSe loke kRtvA dharmaM
yathocitam  /  svargAdiSu prapadyante sarva prANabhRtaH phalam  //  160  //
sarvoktamidaM zrutvA bhAnukarNaH sasaMmadaH  /  bhaktayA praNamya padmAkSaH
paryapRcchat kRtAJjaliH  //  161  //  samajhane meM kuzala, paMcendriyoMko sukha
pahu~cAnevAlI aura icchAnusAra rUpako dhAraNa karanevAlI haiM || 146 || deva
loga una apsarAoMke sAtha jahA~ saMkalpamAtrase hI samasta upakaraNa upasthita
ho jAte haiM aisA viSayajanya vizAla sukha bhogate haiM || 147 //  athavA
manuSya lokameM jo sukha prApta hotA hai jinendradevane usa sabako dharmakA
phala kahA hai  //  148  //  UrdhvaM, madhya aura adholokameM upabhoktAoMko jo
bhI sukha nAmakA padArtha prApta hotA hai vaha saba dharmaMse hI utpanna hotA
hai  //  149  //  dAna denevAle, upabhoga karanevAle evaM maryAdA sthApita
karanevAle manuSyakI jo hajAroM manuSyoM ke jhuNDa rakSA karate haiM vaha saba
dharmaMse utpanna huA phala samajhanA cAhie || 150 || manohara AbhUSaNa dhAraNa
karanevAle hajAroM devoMpara indra jo zAsana karatA hai vaha dharmaMse utpanna
huA phala hai  /  /  151 samyagdarzanAdi ratnatrayase yukta jo puruSa moharUpI
zatruko naSTa kara mokSasthAna prApta karate haiM vaha zuddha dharmakA phala hai
/  /  152 || manuSya janmake binA anyatra vaha dharmaM prApta nahIM ho sakatA
isalie manuSyabhavakI prApti saba bhavoMmeM zreSTha hai || 153 || jisa prakAra
manuSyoMmeM rAjA, mRgoMmeM siMha aura pakSiyoMmeM garur3a zreSTha hai usI
prakAra saba bhavoMmeM manuSyabhava zreSTha haiM || 154 || tInoM lokoMmeM
zreSTha evaM samasta indriyoMko sukha denevAlA dharmaM manuSyazarIrameM hI kiyA
jAtA hai isalie manuSyadeha hI sarvazreSTha hai || 155  //  jisa prakAra
tRNoMmeM dhAna, vRkSoMmeM candana aura pattharoMmeM ratna zreSTha hai usI
prakAra saba bhavoMmeM manuSyabhava zreSTha hai || 156  //  hajAroM utsarpiNiyoM
meM bhramaNa karaneke bAda yaha jIva kisI taraha manuSya janma prApta karatA hai
aura nahIM bhI prApta karatA hai || 157|| klezoMse chuTakArA denevAle usa
manuSya janmako pAkara jo manuSya dharma nahIM karatA hai vaha punaH
durgaMtiyoMko prApta hotA hai || 158 || jisa prakAra samudrake pAnI meM girA
mahAmUlya ratna durlabha ho jAtA hai usI prakAra naSTa hue manuSya janmakA punaH
pAnA bhI durlabha hai  /  /  159 || isI manuSya paryAyameM yathAyogya dharmaM
kara prANI svargAdika meM samasta phala prApta karate haiM  //  160 //
sarvaMjJa devake dvArA kahe hue isa upadezako sunakara bhAnukarNa bahuta hI
harSita huA  /  usake 1. sattvadharmo ma.  /  2. garuDaH  /  3. sarvaprANabhRtaH
ka, kha, ma.  /  317

Page #368 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Padma Purana  **Chapter 162:** The Blessed One, I am still not satisfied
with the teachings I have received. Therefore, you should explain the Dharma in
detail.  **Chapter 163:** Then, the one with infinite strength, the Kevali,
said, "Listen to the special description of Dharma, by the influence of which,
the worthy beings are liberated from the cycle of birth and death."  **Chapter
164:** Dharma is said to be of two types, Mahavrata and Anuvrata, due to their
importance and the nature of the vows. The first, Mahavrata, is for the monks
who have renounced their household life, and the second, Anuvrata, is for the
householders who live in the world.  **Chapter 165:** I will now describe the
conduct of the great-souled monks who have renounced all possessions, a conduct
that is capable of destroying sins.  **Chapter 166:** In the Tirthankara of Muni
Suvrata Nath, who knows all things, there are many great souls who are filled
with the great fear of birth and death.  **Chapter 167:** Knowing the human
existence to be as useless as the castor oil plant, they have renounced
possessions and embraced the path of a monk.  **Chapter 168:** These virtuous
ones are always absorbed in the five great vows and are dedicated to attaining
the knowledge of the truth until the end of their life.  **Chapter 169:** These
courageous monks, with pure hearts, are always absorbed in the five assemblies
and the three secrets.  **Chapter 170:** Non-violence, truthfulness, non-
stealing, and the Brahmacharaya as prescribed in the scriptures, are only for
those who have no attachment to possessions.  **Chapter 171:** What possessions
can those wise ones have who do not even have attachment to their own bodies and
who rest diligently after sunset?  **Chapter 172:** Even with a possession as
small as a grain of mustard seed, the monks, who are free from attachment, are
extremely courageous and powerful like lions.  **Chapter 173:** They are free
from all restrictions, like the wind. Birds may have possessions, but the monks
do not even have a trace of attachment.  **Chapter 174:** They are free from the
contact of impurities, like the sky, their actions are highly commendable, they
are gentle like the moon and radiant like the sun.  **Chapter 175:** They are
deep like the ocean, courageous like Mount Meru, and like a frightened tortoise,
they keep their senses completely under control.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe bhagavana mamAdyApi jAyate prAptatRptitA  /  ato vidhAnato dharmaM
nivedayitumarhasi  //  162  //  tato'nantabalo'vocadvizeSaM saukRtaM zRNu  /
saMsArAdyena mucyante prANino bhavyatAbhRtaH  //  163 //  dvividho gadito dharmo
mahattvAdANavAttathA  /  Adyo'gAravimuktAnAmanyazca bhavavartinAm  // 164 //
visRSTasarvasaMgAnAM zramaNAnAM mahAtmanAm  /  kIrtayAmi samAcAraM
duritakSodanakSamam  //  165  //  mate suvratanAthasya lInAM nikhilavedinaH  /
mRtyu janmasamudbhUtai mahAtrAsa samanvitAH  //  166 //  eraNDasadRzaM jJAtvA
manuSyatvamasArakam  /  saMgena rahitA dhanyA "zramaNatvamupAzritAH  // 167 //
ratA mahatvayukteSu paJcasaMkhyeSu sAdhavaH  /
vrateSvAvigrahatyAgAttattvAvagamatatparAH  //  168  //  samitiSvapi
tatsaMkhyAsaMgatAsu sucetasaH  /  abhiyuktA mahAsattvAstrisaMkhyAsu ca guptiSu
//  169 //  ahiMsA satyamasteyaM brahmacayaM yathoditam  /  yeSAmasti na teSAM
syAtparigrahasamAzrayaH  //  170  //  dehe'pi yena kurvanti nije rAgaM manISiNaH
/  kaH syAtparigrahasteSAM yatnAstamitazAyinAm  //  171  //  api bAlApramAtreNa
pApopArjanakAriNA  /  granthena rahitA dhIrA munayaH siMhavikramAH  //  172  //
'samastapratibandhena samIraNavadujjhitAH  /  khagAnAmapi saMgaH syAnna tu teSAM
manAgapi  //  173  //  vyomanmalasaMbandharahitAH zlAdhyaceSTitAH  /
rajanInAthavatsaumyA dIptA divasanAthavat  //  174 //  nimnagAnAthagambhIrA
dhIrA bhUdharanAthavat  /  bhItakUrma vadatyanta guptendriya kadambakAH  // 175
//  318 netra kamalake samAna vikasita ho gaye  /  usane bhaktipUrvaka praNAma
kara tathA hAtha jor3akara pUchA fa || 161 || he bhagavAn ! abhI jo upadeza
prApta huA hai usase mujhe tRpti nahIM huI hai ataH bhedaprabhedake dvArA
dharmakA nirUpaNa kIjie || 162 || taba anantabala kevalI kahane lage ki acchA
dharmakA vizeSa varNana suno jisake prabhAvase bhavya prANI saMsArase mukta ho
jAte haiM || 163 || mahAvrata aura ase dharma do prakArakA kahA gayA hai| unameM
se pahalA arthAt mahAvrata gRhatyAgI muniyoM ke hotA hai aura dUsarA arthAt
aNuvrata saMsAravartI gRhasthoMke hotA hai || 164 || aba maiM samasta
parigrahoMse rahita mahAn AtmAke dhArI muniyoMkA vaha caritra kahatA hU~ jo ki
pApoMko naSTa karane meM samartha hai  // 165 //  samasta padArthoMko jAnanevAle
muni suvratanAtha tIrthaMkarake tIrthaMmeM aise kitane hI mahApuruSa haiM jo
janma-maraNa sambandhI mahAbhayase yukta haiM || 166  //  | ye manuSya paryAyako
eraNDa vRkSake samAna niHsAra jAnakara parigrahase rahita ho munipadako prApta
hue haiM  //  167 //  | ve sAdhu sadA paMca mahAvratoM meM lIna rahate haiM aura
zarIratyAgaparyanta tattvajJAna ke prApta karanemeM tatpara hote haiM  /  /  168
/  /  zuddha hRdayako dhAraNa karanevAle ye dhairyazAlo muni pA~ca samitiyoM
aura tIna guptiyoMmeM sadA lIna rahate haiM  //  169 //  ahiMsA, satya, acaurya
aura AgamAnumodita bahmacayaM unhIM ke hotA hai jinake ki parigrahakA Alambana
nahIM hotA || 170 || jo buddhimAn jana apane zarIrameM bhI rAga nahIM karate
haiM aura sUryAsta ho jAnepara yatnapUrvaka vizrAma karate haiM unake parigraha
kyA ho sakatA hai ? arthAt kucha nahIM || 171 || muni pApa upArjana karanevAle
bAlAgramAtra parigrahase rahita hote haiM tathA atyanta dhIra-vIra aura siMha ke
samAna parAkramI hote haiM  //  172  //  ye vAyuke samAna saba prakAra ke
pratibandhase rahita hote haiM  /  pakSiyoMke to parigraha ho sakatA hai para
muniyoMke raMcamAtra bhI parigraha nahIM hotA  /  / 173 /  /  ye AkAMzake samAna
malake saMsargaMse rahita hote haiM, inakI ceSTAe~ atyanta prazaMsanIya hotI
haiM, ye candramAke samAna saumya aura divAkarake samAna dedIpyamAna hote haiM
|| 174  //  ye samudrake samAna gambhIra, sumeruke samAna dhIra-vIra aura
bhayabhIta kachue ke samAna samasta indriyoMke samUhako atyanta 1. sukRtasyedaM
sokRtam  /  2. lIlA- ma.  /  3. mahattrAsa ma  /  4. saMjJena ma.  /  5.
zravaNatva- ma., ba. ka. 6. rAge ma.  /  7. yatrAstamita-ma., yazastamita-kha  /
8 yatnenAstamite zerata ityevaM zIlAnAm  /  9. pratibandharahitatvena

Page #369 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Fourteen  **319**  "Those who are equal to the earth in their
forgiveness, free from the surge of passions, and endowed with eighty-four lakh
virtues, **[176]** who are adorned with eighteen lakh aspects of conduct as
expounded by the Jinas, who are supremely blessed with the power of austerity,
and ever focused on attaining liberation, **[177]** who are absorbed in the
meaning of the Jina's teachings, well-versed in the teachings of other
religions, who have crossed the ocean of scriptures, and who are the upholders
of Yama, **[178]** who are the creators of rules, free from arrogance, endowed
with various powers, and embodiments of great auspiciousness, **[179]** these
monks, adorned with all these virtues, who have subdued their karma, attain the
highest state of godhood. **[180]** Then, in two or three existences, they burn
away all impurities with the fire of meditation and attain the bliss of
liberation. **[181]** Now, I will explain the twelve-fold path of righteousness
for those who are confined in the cage of attachment and dwell in the household
life. Listen carefully. **[182]** For householders, there are five Anuvratas,
four Shikshavrata, three Gunavrata, and thousands of Niyamas to be observed as
far as possible. **[183]** Abstaining from gross violence, gross falsehood,
gross taking of others' possessions, sexual misconduct, and endless craving,
these are the five Anuvratas for householders. The Jina-kings have explained the
following contemplation for the protection of these vows. **[184-185]** Just as
my own body is dear to me, so too is the body of all beings dear to them.
Knowing this, a householder should show compassion to all beings. **[186]** The
Jina-kings have declared compassion to be the ultimate limit of righteousness.
For those whose minds are devoid of compassion, even a little righteousness will
not bear fruit. **[187]** Any speech that causes pain to others is considered
false, for truth is the opposite of this. **[188]** Killing, stealing, etc., in
this life lead to imprisonment, bondage, etc., and after death, they cause
various kinds of suffering in the lower realms. **[189]** Therefore, a wise
person should avoid these with all his might. How can one engage in actions that
lead to conflict between the two worlds?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturdazaM parva 319 'kSamayA kSamayA tulyAH kaSAyodrekavarjitAH  /  azotyA
guNalakSANAM catuHsahitayAnvitAH  // 176 //
aSTAdazajinoddiSTazIlalakSasamanvitAH  /  atyantAbyAstapobhUtyA
siddhyAkAkSaNatatparAH  // 177 //  jinoditArthasaMsaktA viditAparazAsanAH  /
zrutasAgarapArasthA munayo yamadhAriNaH  // 178 //  niyamAnAM vidhAtAraH
samunnatayojjhitAH  /  nAnAlabdhikRtAsaMgA mahAmaGgalamUrtayaH  // 179 //
evaMguNAH samastasya jagataH kRtamaNDanAH  /  zramaNAstanukarmANaH
prayAntyuttamadevatAm  // 18 //  dvitrarbhavezca niHzeSaM kaluSaM dhyAnavahninA
/  nirdA pratipadyante sukhaM siddhasamAzritam  // 181 //  snehapaararuddhAnAM
gRhAzramanivAsinAm  /  dharmopAyaM pravakSyAmi zRNu dvAdazadhA sthitam  // 182
//  vratAnyaNUni paJcaiSAM zikSA coktA caturvidhA  /  guNAstrayo
yathAzaktiniyamAstu sahasrazaH  // 183 //  prANAtipAtataH
sthUlAdviratirvitathAttA  /  grahaNAtparavittasya paradArasamAgamAt  // 184 //
anantAyAzca gardAyAH paJcasaMkhyamidaM vratam  /  bhAvanA ceyameteSAM kathitA
jinapuGgavaH  // 185 //  iSTo yathAtmano dehaH sarveSAM prANinAM tathA  /  evaM
jJAtvA sadA kAryA deyA sarvAsadhAriNAm  // 186 //  eSaiva hi parAkASTA
dharmasyoktA jinAdhipaH  /  dayArahitacittAnAM dharmaH svalpo'pi neSyate  // 187
//  vacanaM parapIDAyAM hetutvaM yatprapadyate  /  alIkameva tatproktaM
satyamasmAdviparyaye  // 18 //  vadhAdi kurate janmanyasmissteyamanuSTitam  /
kartuH paratra duHkhAni vividhAni kuyoniSu  // 189 //  tasmAtsarvaprayatnena
matimAn varjayennaraH  /  lokadvayavirodhasya nimittaM kriyate katham  // 19 //
gupta rakhanevAle hote haiM  // 175 //  ye kSamAdharmake kAraNa kSamA arthAt
pRthvIke tulya haiM, kaSAyoMke udrekase rahita haiM aura caurAsI lAkha guNoMse
sahita haiM  // 176 /  /  jinendra pratipAdita zIlake aThAraha lAkha bhedoMse
sahita haiM, taparUpI vibhUtise atyanta sampanna haiM tathA muktikI icchA karane
meM sadA tatpara rahate haiM  // 177|| ye muni jinendranirUpita padArthoM meM
lIna rahate haiM, anya dharmoM ke bhI acche jAnakAra hote haiM, zrutarUpI
sAgarake pAragAmI aura yamake dhArI hote haiM  // 178 //  ye muni aneka
niyamoMke karanevAle, uddaNDatAse rahita, nAnA RddhiyoMse sampanna aura
mahAmaMgalamaya zarIrake dhAraka hote haiM  // 179|| isa taraha jo pUrvokta
guNoMko dhAraNa karanevAle haiM, samasta jagatke AbharaNa haiM aura jinake karma
kSINa ho gaye haiM aise muni uttama deva padako prApta hote haiM  // 180 //
tadanantara do-tIna bhavoMmeM dhyAnAgnike dvArA samasta kalaSatAko jalAkara
nirvANa-sukhako prApta kara lete haiM  // 181 /  /  aba sneharUpI piMjar3emeM
ruke hue gRhasthAzramavAsI logoMkA bAraha prakArakA dharma kahatA hU~ so suno
// 182 /  /  gRhasthoMko pAMca aNuvrata, cAra zikSAvrata, tIna guNavrata aura
yathAzakti hajAroM niyama dhAraNa karane par3ate haiM  /  / 183 /  /  sthUla
hiMsA, sthUla jhUTha, sthUla paradravyagrahaNa, parastrI samAgama aura
anantatRSNAse virata honA ye gRhasthoMke pA~ca aNuvrata kahalAte haiN| ina
vratoMko rakSAke lie jinendradevane nimnAMkita bhAvanAkA nirUpaNa kiyA hai  //
184-185 //  jisa prakAra mujhe apanA zarIra iSTa hai usI prakAra samasta
prANiyoMko bhI apanA-apanA zarIra iSTa hotA hai aisA jAnakara gRhasthako saba
prANiyoMpara dayA karanI cAhie  // 186 //  jinendradevane dayAko hI dharmako
parama sImA batalAyI hai  /  yathArthameM jinake citta dayArahita haiM unake
thor3A bhI dharma nahIM hotA hai  /  / 187 /  /  jo vacana dUsaroMko pIr3A
pahu~cAnemeM nimitta hai vaha asatya hI kahA gayA hai, kyoMki satya isase
viparIta hotA hai  /  / 188 /  /  kI gayI corI isa janmameM vadha, bandhana Adi
karAtI hai aura maraneke bAda kuyoniyoMmeM nAnA prakArake duHkha detI hai  /  /
189 //  isalie buddhimAn manuSyako cAhie ki vaha 1. kSAntyA  /  2. pathivyA  /
3. sahasrazIlayAnvitAH kh.| zIlasahasracAnvitAH ba., m.| 4. nirdA ma.  /  5.
vratAnyamUni m.| 6. zikhA m.| 7. niryamAstu m.| 8. vitathA m.| 9. sarvaprANinAm
/  10. -masmadviparyaye ma..

Page #370 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Padma Purana  **191.**  A woman should be avoided like a venomous snake, for
she is a destroyer of men, being enslaved by greed.  **192.** Just as one feels
sorrow when another man touches one's wife, so should one understand this
arrangement for all.  **193.** One who indulges in sensual pleasures receives
great scorn in this very life, and after death, suffers unbearable pain in the
animal realm and hell.  **194.** One should always measure one's desires, for if
they are not controlled, they bring great sorrow. The example of Bhadra and
Kanchana is well-known in this regard.  **195.** There was a man named Bhadra
who sold wares. He vowed to possess only one dinar. Once, he found a purse on
the road. Although it contained many dinars, Bhadra, remembering his vow, took
only one out of curiosity and left the rest.  **196.** Another man named
Kanchana saw the purse and took all the dinars. The owner of the dinars was a
king. When he investigated, Kanchana was sentenced to death. Bhadra, however,
returned the dinar he had taken to the king, who honored him for it.  **197.**
**198.**  The three Gunavrata are: renunciation of worldly possessions and
punishments, limiting one's movement to specific directions, and controlling
one's consumption.  **199.** The four Shikshavrata are: performing Samayika with
effort, observing fasts, sharing food with guests, and practicing Sallekhana
when death approaches.  **200.** A Shraman who arrives at a home without giving
prior notice, is free from possessions, and is endowed with virtues like right
faith, is considered a guest.  **201.** One should offer such a guest food and
other necessities according to one's means, with respect and without greed. This
is called Atithisambhaag.  **202.**  A householder should abstain from honey,
alcohol, meat, gambling, eating at night, and sexual intercourse with
prostitutes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe parivarjyA bhujaGgIva vanitA nyasya dUrataH  /  sA hi lobhavazA
pApA puruSasya vinAzikA  // 191 //  yathA ca jAyate duHkhaM rudvAyAmAtmayoSiti
/  narAntareNa sarveSAmiyameva vyavasthitiH  //  192 //  'udArazca tiraskAraH
prApyate'traiva janmani  /  tiryaGanarakayorduHkhaM prApyamevAtidussaham  // 193
//  pramANaM kAryamicchAyAH sA hi dadyAniraGkuzA  /  mahAduHkhamihAkhyeyau
bhadrakAJcanasaMjJakau  // 194 //  vikretA vadarAdInAM madro dInAramAtrakam  /
draviNaM pratyajAnIta dRSTvAto vartmani cyutam  //  195 //
'prasevakamito'gRhNAdInAraM tu kutUhalI  /  tatra kAJcananAmA tu sarvameva
prasevakam  //  196 //  dInArasvAminA rAjA kAJcano vIkSya nAzitaH  /
svayamarpitadInAro bhadrastu paripUjitaH  //  197  //  vigamo'narthadaNDebhyo
digvidikparivarjanam  /  bhogopabhogasaMkhyAnaM trayametadguNavratam  // 198 //
sAmAyikaM "prayatnena proSadhAnazanaM tathA  /  saMvibhAgo'tithInAM ca
saMllekhazcAyuSaH kSaye  //  199 //  saMketo na tithau yasya kRto
yazcAparigrahaH  /  gRhameti guNairyuktaH zramaNaH so'tithiH smRtaH  //  200 //
saMvibhAgo'sya kartavyo yathAvibhavamAdarAt  /  vidhinA lobhamukterna
mijhopakaraNAdibhiH  //  201  //  madhuno madyato mAMsAd dyUtato rAtribhojanAt
/  vezyAsaMgamanAccAsya viratirniyamaH smRtaH  // 202 //  320 corIkA sarvaM
prakArase tyAga kre| jo kArya donoM lokoMmeM virodhakA kAraNa hai vaha kiyA hI
kaise jA sakatA hai ? || 190 //  parastrIkA sarpiNIke samAna dUrase hI tyAga
karanA cAhie kyoMki vaha pApinI lobhake vazIbhUta ho puruSakA nAza kara detI hai
|| 191  /  /  jisa prakAra apanI strIko koI dUsarA manuSya cher3atA hai aura
usase apane Apako duHkha hotA hai usI prakAra sabhIkI yaha vyavasthA jAnanI
cAhie || 192  //  parakhI sevana karanevAle manuSya ko isI janma meM bahuta
bhArI tiraskAra prApta hotA hai aura maranepara tiryaMca tathA narakagatike
atyanta duHsaha duHkha prApta karane hI par3ate haiM  //  193 || apanI icchAkA
sadA parimANa karanA cAhie kyoMki icchApara yadi aMkuza nahIM lagAyA gayA to
vaha mahAduHkha detI hai| isa viSayameM bhadra aura kAMcanakA udAharaNa
prasiddha hai || 194 || vaira Adiko becanevAlA eka bhadra nAmaka puruSa thA  /
usane pratijJA kI thI ki maiM eka dInArakA hI parigraha rkhuuNgaa| eka bAra use
mArga meM par3A huA baTuA milaa| usa baTue meM yadyapi bahuta dInAreM rakhI thIM
para bhadrane apanI pratijJAkA dhyAna kara kutUhalavaza unameM se eka dInAra
nikAla lI  /  zeSa A vahIM chor3a diyA  /  vaha baTuA kAMcana nAmaka dUsare
puruSane dekhA to vaha sabakA saba uThA liyA  /  dInAroMkA svAmI rAjA thaa| jaba
usane jA~ca-par3atAla kI to kAMcanako mRtyukI sajA dI gayI aura bhadrane jo eka
dInAra lI thI vaha svayaM hI jAkara rAjAko vApasa kara dI jisase rAjAne usakA
sammAna kiyA  /  / 195-197 /  /  arthadaNDoM kA tyAga karanA, dizAoM aura
vidizAoMmeM AvAgamanakI sImA nirdhArita karanA aura bhogopabhogakA parimANa
karanA ye tIna guNavrata haiM || 198 || prayatnapUrvaka sAmAyika karanA,
proSadhopavAsa dhAraNa karanA, atithisaMvibhAga aura AyukA kSaya upasthita
honepara sallekhanA dhAraNa karanA ye cAra zikSAvrata haiM || 199 || jisane
apane Agamanake viSayameM kisI tithikA saMketa nahIM kiyA hai, jo parigrahase
rahita hai aura samyagdarzanAdi guNoMse yukta hokara ghara AtA hai aisA muni
atithi kahalAtA hai || 200 || aise atithike lie apane vaibhavake anusAra
AdarapUrvaka lobharahita ho bhikSA tathA upakaraNa Adi denA cAhie yahI
atithisaMvibhAga hai || 201 || inake sivAya gRhastha madhu, madya, mAMsa, juA,
rAtribhojana aura vezyAsamAgamase jo 1. adhikaH 1 2. mahaduHkha- ma.  /  3.
dRSTvA to ba  /  4. baTuA iti hindI  /  5. prapannena ma.  /  6. saMlekha -
vAyuSaH ma  /  7. yuktAH ma  /  8 lobhayuktena ma.  /

Page #371 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
321 Having performed the household dharma, the five who attain samadhi at the
time of death, attain the state of a Sudeva, having fallen from the state of a
Sumanyuá¹£ya. ||203|| Having thus performed the observance within the eight
existences, becoming free from the bonds of the three jewels, they attain
siddhi. ||204|| Having attained the state of a human, which is difficult to
obtain, he who is unable to perform the prescribed conduct, yet has faith in the
teachings of the Jinas, is also a temple of Shiva. ||205|| Even by the
attainment of right faith alone, a human being, being the most excellent of all
beings, is freed from the fear of the terrible path. ||206|| He who naturally
performs prostrations to the Jinas, is the foundation of merit, and even a small
amount of sin does not attach to him. ||207|| He who even remembers the Jinas
with devotion, his evil karma is destroyed. All that was earned through
countless existences is immediately destroyed. ||208|| The houses, dreams, and
birds of omen of that person are always auspicious, who holds the Jina, the
jewel of the three worlds, in his heart. ||209|| He who utters the words "I bow
down to the Arhant," with devotion, is undoubtedly freed from all karma in a
short time. ||210|| The pure heart-lotus of the worthy being blossoms forth from
the contact of the rays of the story of the Jina-chandra. ||211|| He who
performs prostrations to the Arhant, Siddha, and Munis, is to be known as one
who has abandoned the world, dear to the followers of the good teachings.
||212|| He who makes an image of the Jina, draws a picture of the Jina, worships
the Jina, or praises the Jina, will not find anything difficult to obtain in the
world. ||213|| Whether he be a king, a householder, wealthy or poor, he who is
devoted to dharma is worthy of worship in all the worlds. ||214|| Those who are
endowed with great humility and are wise in the knowledge of what should be done
and what should not be done, are the leaders of householders through their
association with dharma. ||215|| Those who do not use honey, meat, and liquor,
are established in the beauty of householders. ||216||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 321 caturdazaM parva gRhadharmamirma kRtvA samAdhiprAptapaJcataH  /  prapadyate
sudevatvaM cyutvA ca sumanuSyatAm  // 203 //  bhavAnAmevamaSTAnAmantaH
kRtvAnuvartanam  /  ratnatrayasya nirgrantho bhUtvA siddhiM samaznute  // 204 //
naratvaM durlabhaM prApya yathoktAcaraNAkSamaH  /  zraddadhAti jinoktaM yaH
so'pyAsanazivAlayaH  // 205 //  samyagdarzanalAbhena kevalenApi mAnavaH  /
sarvalAmavariSThena durgatitrAsamujjhati  // 206 //  kurute yo jinendrANAM
namaskAra svabhAvataH  /  puNyAdhAraH sa pApasya lavenApi na yujyate  // 207 //
yaH smaratyapi bhAvena jinAMstasyAzubhaM kSayam  /  sadyaH samastamAyAti
bhavakoTibhirarjitam  // 20 //  prazastAH satataM tasya grehAH svapnAH
zakuntayaH  /  trailokyasAraratnaM yo dadhAti hRdaye jinam  // 209 //  arhate
nama ityetatprayukre yo vaco janaH  /  bhAvAttasyAcirAt
kRtsnakarmamuktirasaMzayA  // 21 //  jinacandrakathArazmisaMgamAdeti phullatAm
/  siddhiyogyAsumatsvAntaHkumudaM paramAmalam  // 211 //  arhasiddhamunibhyo yo
namasyAM kurute janaH  /  sa parItabhavo jJeyaH suzAsanajanapriyaH  // 212 //
jinabimbaM jinAkAraM jinapUjAM jinastutim  /  yaH karoti janastasya na kiMcid
durlabhaM bhavet  // 213 //  naranAthaH kuTumbI vA dhanADhyo durvidho'thavA  /
jano dharmeNa yo yuktaH sa pUjyaH sarvaviSTape  // 214 //  mahAvinayasaMpannAH
kRtyAkRtyavicakSaNAH  /  janAH gRhAzramasthAnAM pradhAnA dharmasaMgamAt  // 215
//  madhumAMsasurAdInAmupayoga na kurvate  /  ye janAste gRhasthAnAM lalAmatve
pratiSTitAH  // 216 //  virakta hotA hai use niyama kahA hai  // 202 //  isa
gRhastha dharmakA pAlana kara jo samAdhipUrvaka maraNa karatA hai, vaha
uttamadeva paryAyako prApta hotA hai aura vahA~se cyuta hokara uttama manuSyatva
prApta karatA hai  // 203 /  /  aisA jIva adhikase adhika ATha bhavoMmeM
ratnatrayakA pAlana kara antameM nirgrantha ho siddhipadako prApta hotA hai  //
204 /  /  jo durlabha manuSyaparyAya pAkara yathokta AcaraNa karane meM
asamartha hai, kevala jinendradevake dvArA kathita AcaraNakI zraddhA karatA hai
vaha bhI nikaTa kAlameM ta prApta karatA hai  // 205|| jisakA lAbha saba
lAbhoMmeM zreSTha hai aise kevala samyagdarzanake dvArA bhI manuSya dargatike
bhayase chaTa jAtA hai  // 206 /  /  jo svabhAvase hI jinendra bhagavAnako
namaskAra kara hai vaha puNyakA AdhAra hotA hai tathA pApake aMzamAtrakA bhI
usase sambandha nahIM hotA  // 207 /  /  namaskAra to dUra rahA jo jinendra
devakA bhAvapUrvaka smaraNa bhI karatA hai usake karor3oM bhavoMke dvArA saMcita
pApa karma zIghra hI naSTa ho jAte haiM  /  / 208 //  jo manuSya tIna lokameM
zreSTha ratnasvarUpa jinendra devako hRdayameM dhAraNa karatA hai usake saba
graha, svapna aura zakunakI sUcanA denevAle pakSI sadA zubha hI rahate haiM  //
209 //  jo manuSya 'ahaMte namaH' ahaMntake lie namaskAra ho, isa vacanakA
bhAvapUrvaka uccAraNa karatA hai usake samasta karma zIghra hI naSTa ho jAte
haiM isameM saMzaya nahIM hai  // 210|| jinendra candrakI kathArUpI kiraNoMke
samAgamase bhavya jIvakA nirmala hRdayarUpI kumuda zIghra hI praphulla avasthAko
prApta hotA hai  // 211 //  jo manuSya arhanta siddha aura muniyoMke lie
namaskAra karatA hai vaha jinazAsanake bhakta janoMse sneha rakhanevAlA
atItasaMsAra hai arthAt zIghra hI mokSa prApta karanevAlA hai aisA jAnanA cAhie
// 212 //  jo puruSa jinendra devakI pratimA banavAtA hai, jinendra devakA AkAra
likhavAtA hai, jinendra devakI pUjA karatA hai athavA jinendradevakI stuti
karatA hai usake lie saMsArameM kucha bhI durlabha nahIM hotA  // 213 /  /  yaha
manuSya cAhe rAjA ho cAhe sAdhAraNa kuTumbI, dhanADhaya ho cAhe daridra, jo bhI
dharmase yukta hotA hai vaha samasta saMsArameM pUjya hotA hai  // 214 //  jo
mahAvinayase sampanna tathA kArya aura akAryake vicArameM nipuNa haiM ve
dharmake samAgamase gRhasthoMmeM pradhAna hote haiM  // 215 /  /  jo manuSya
madhu, mAMsa aura madirA AdikA upayoga nahIM karate haiM ve gRhasthoMke AbhUSaNa
pada 1. samAdhiprAptamaraNaH  /  2. madhye  /  3. gRhAH sarve zakuntayaH m.| 4.
trailokyaM sAraratnaM ma.  /  5. bhavyaprANihRdayakumudam  /  6. paramAlayam ma.
/  7. alaMkAratve  /

Page #372 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Padma Purana:  **Verse 217:** Those who are filled with doubt, desire,
and uncertainty, whose souls are distant from the praise of others, and who are
devoid of praise for other doctrines, are the ones who hold the primary position
among householders.  **Verse 218:** Those who are adorned with fine garments,
exude a pleasant fragrance, have a pleasing appearance, are praised by the women
of the city, and walk while looking at the earth, having abandoned all vices,
are filled with good intentions, and are eager to perform good deeds, are those
who, while going to pay homage to the Jina, attain infinite merit.  **Verse
219-220:** Those who consider the property of others as insignificant as grass,
other men as equal to themselves, and other women as equal to their mothers, are
blessed.  **Verse 221:** "When will I take initiation and wander the earth? When
will I destroy my karmas and attain the abode of the Siddhas?" The person with a
pure mind who contemplates this every day, finds that his karmas, as if afraid,
do not associate with him.  **Verse 222-223:** Some householders attain
liberation in seven or eight births, while some others, with a pure heart,
achieve liberation in two or three births by performing intense austerities.
**Verse 224:** The average noble beings quickly attain great bliss, that is,
liberation. However, those who are incapable but know the path, attain great
bliss after some rest.  **Verse 225:** A person who does not know the path and
wanders a hundred yojanas a day, keeps wandering and does not reach the desired
place even after a long time.  **Verse 226:** Those whose faith is false, even
if they perform severe austerities, do not attain the state free from birth and
death.  **Verse 227:** Those who are corrupted by the three jewels (right faith,
right knowledge, right conduct), wander in the forest of the world, covered in
the darkness of delusion and filled with snakes of passions.  **Verse 229:** How
can one cross the ocean of existence if one has no virtue, no right faith, and
no noble renunciation?  **Verse 230:** In the flow of the Vindhya mountains,
where elephants as tall as mountains are swept away, the poor rabbits are
undoubtedly swept away.  **Verse 231:** Where even those who preach the wrong
path are swept away by the current of birth, old age, and death, what can be
said of their devotees?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe zaGkayA kAGkSayA yuktA tathA ye vicikitsayA  /  sudUrarahitAtmAnaH
paradRSTiprazaMsayA  // 217 //  anyazAsanasaMbaddhasaMstavena vivarjitAH  /
jantavaste gRhasthAnAM pradhAnapadamAzritAH  // 218 //
sucAruvasano'tyantasurabhiH priyadarzanaH  /  zasyamAnaH purastrIbhiryAti yo
vandituM jinam  //  219  //  kSamANo mahIM muktavikArazvArumAvanaH  /
sAdhukRtya samudyuktaH puNyaM tasyAntavarjitam  //  220  //  tRNopamaM
paradravyaM pazyanti svasamaM param  /  parayoSAM samAM mAturye te dhanyatamA
janAH  //  221 //  pratipadya kadA dIkSAM vihariSyAmi medinIm  /  kSapayitvA
kadA karma prapatsye siddhasaMzrayam  //  222  //  evaM pratidinaM yasya dhyAnaM
vimalacetasaH  /  mItAnIva na kurvanti tena karmANi saMgatim  //  223  //
saptASTajanmabhiH kecitsiddhiM gacchanti jantavaH  /  kecidugratapaH kRtvA
dvitraireva sucetasaH  //  224 //  kSipraM yAnti mahAnandaM madhyamA
bhavyajantavaH  /  asamarthAstu vizramya mArgasya yadi vedakAH  //  225 //
ahno'pi yojanazatamavidvAn vartma yo janaH  /  bhrAmyatISTamavApnoti sa padaM na
cirAdapi  //  226  //  togramapi kurvANAstapo vitathadarzanAH  /  prApnuvanti
padaM naiva janmamRtyuvivarjitam  //  227 //  mohAndhakArasaMchanne
kaSAyoragasaMkule  /  te bhramanti bhavAraNye naSTamuktipathA janAH  //  228 //
na zIlaM na ca samyaktvaM na tyAgaH sAdhugocaraH  /  yasya tasya
bhavAmbhodhitaraNaM jAyate katham  // 229 //  vindhyasya strotasA nAgA
yatrodyante nagonnatAH  /  varAkAH zazakAstatra ciraM nItA visaMzayam  //  230
//  mRtyu janmajarAvartabhavasroto vivartinaH  /  kutIrthyA yatra nIyante
tadbhakteSvatra kA kathA  // 231 //  322 padapara sthita haiM arthAt gRhasthoMke
AbhUSaNa haiM  //  216  //  jo zaMkA, kAMkSA aura vicikitsAse rahita haiM,
jinakI AtmA anyadRSTiyoMkI prazaMsA se dUra hai aura jo anya zAsana sambandhI
stavana se varjita haiM ve gRhasthoM meM pradhAna padako prApta haiM  /  /  217
- 218|| jo uttama vastrakA dhAraka hai, jisake zarIra se sugandhi nikala rahI
hai, jisakA darzana sabako priya lagatA hai, nagarakI striyA~ jisakI prazaMsA
kara rahI haiM, jo pRthivIko dekhatA huA calatA hai, jisane saba vikAra chor3a
diye haiM, jo uttama bhAvanAse yukta hai aura acche kAryoM ke karanemeM tatpara
hai aisA hotA huA jo jinendradevako vandanAke lie jAtA hai use ananta puNya
prApta hotA hai  // 219 - 220  //  jo paradravyako tRNake samAna, parapuruSako
apane samAna aura parastrIko mAtA ke samAna dekhate haiM ve dhanya haiM ||221||
'maiM dIkSA lekara pRthivIpara STa fvahAra karU~gA? aura kaba karmoMko naSTa
kara siddhAlaya meM pahu~cU~gA' jo nirmala cittakA dhArI manuSya pratidina aisA
vicAra karatA hai karma bhayabhIta hokara hI mAno usakI saMgati nahIM karate
||222-223 //  koI-koI gRhastha prANI, sAta-ATha bhavoMmeM mokSa prApta kara lete
haiM aura uttama hRdayako dhAraNa karanevAle kitane hI manuSya tIkSNa tapa kara
do-tIna bhavameM hI mukta ho jAte haiM ||224 || madhyama bhavya prANI zIghra hI
mahAn Ananda arthAt mokSa prApta kara lete haiM para jo asamarthaM haiM kintu
mArgako jAnate haiM ve kucha vizrAma karane ke bAda mahAAnanda prApta kara pAte
haiM ||225|| jo manuSya mAgaMko na jAnakara dina meM sau-sau yojana taka gamana
karatA hai vaha bhaTakatA hI rahatA hai tathA cirakAla taka bhI iSTa sthAnako
nahIM prApta kara sakatA hai || 226 || jinakA zraddhAna mithyA hai aise loga
ugra tapazcaraNa karate hue bhI janma-maraNase rahita pada nahIM prApta kara
pAte haiM || 227 //  jo mokSamArga arthAt ratnatrayase bhraSTa haiM ve moharUpI
andhakArase AcchAdita tathA kaSAyarUpI sarpoMse vyApta saMsArarUpI aTavImeM
bhaTakate rahate haiM ||228 || jisake na zIla hai, na samyaktva hai aura na
uttama tyAga hI hai usakA saMsAra sAgarase santaraNa kisa prakAra ho sakatA hai
? || 229  /  /  vindhyAcala ke jisa pravAha meM pahAr3ake samAna U~ce-U~ce hAthI
baha jAte haiM usameM becAre kharagoza to niHsandeha hI baha jAte haiM ||230||
jahA~ kutIrthaMkA upadeza denevAle kuguru bhI janma-jarA-mRtyurUpI 1. vedanA
kha.  /  2. mithyAdRza:  /  3. girivadunnatAH  /

Page #373 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Fourteen  **323** Just as a stone cannot save another stone in water,
so a householder cannot save a householder who has come to him for refuge.
**232** Those who have burned away their sins through austerity and are light,
knowing the truth, they alone are able to save people through their teachings.
**233** This human realm is like a precious island in the vast ocean of samsara.
It is obtained with great difficulty. **234** Having reached this precious
island, wise people should take hold of the jewels of the vows, for they must
inevitably leave this body and pass through the cycle of existence. **235** Just
as someone grinds up jewels to obtain thread, so people grind up the jewels of
dharma for worldly things. **236** The body and everything else is impermanent,
there is no refuge in anyone, the body is impure, the soul is separate from the
body, it alone experiences pleasure and pain, contemplate the nature of samsara,
consider the diversity of the world, reflect on the vices of the asravas,
contemplate the glory of samvara, think of ways to exhaust past karma, consider
the rarity of enlightenment, and contemplate the greatness of dharma - these
twelve contemplations have been spoken by the Jina, they should be held in the
heart always. **237-239** Whoever practices dharma according to their ability,
will enjoy the fruits of that practice in the realms of gods and humans. **240**
Thus speaking, Bhanukarna asked the omniscient Anantbal, "O Lord, I now wish to
know about the vows and their distinctions." **241** In response, the Lord said,
"O Bhanukarna, pay attention and understand. Vows and austerity are not two
separate things." **242** One who is bound by vows is called an ascetic
according to their strength, therefore, a wise person should be engaged in vows
or austerity in every way. **243** Wise people should accumulate even a little
bit of merit, for just as drops of water falling together create great rivers
that flow to the sea, so too... **244** Whoever gives up food for even a moment
in the day, will receive the same fruit as a month-long fast. **245**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturdazaM parva 323 yathA tArayitaM zaktA na zilA salile zilAm  /  tathA
parigrahAsaktAH kutIrthyAH zaraNAgatAn  // 232 //  taponirdagdhapApA ye
laghavastattvavedinaH  /  ta eva tAraNe zaktA janAnAmupadezataH  // 233 //
saMsArasAgare bhIme ratnadvIpo'yamuttamaH  /  yadetanmAnuSaM kSetraM taddhi
duHkhena labhyate  // 234 //  tasmimiyamaranAni gRhItavyAni dhImatA  /  avazyaM
dehamutsRjya kartavyo bhavasaMkramaH  // 235 //  ato yathAtra sUtrArtha kazcit
saMcUrNayenmaNIn  /  viSayArtha tathA dharmaratnAnAM cUrNako janaH  // 236 //
anityatvaM zarIrAderabhAvaM zaraNasya ca  /  azucitvaM tathAnyatvamAtmano
dehapArAt  // 237 //  ekatvamatha saMsAro lokasya ca vicitratA  /  AsravaH
saMvaraH pUrvakarmaNAM nirjarA tathA  // 238 //
bodhidurlamatAdharmasvAkhyAtattvaM jinezvaraiH  /  dvAdarzavamanuprekSAH
kartavyA hRdaye sadA  // 239 /  /  AtmanaH zaktiyogena dharma yo yAdarza bhajet
/  sa tasya tAdRzaM bhukte phalaM devAdibhUmiSu  // 24 //  evaM vadanasau pRSTo
bhAnukarNana kevlii| sabhedaM niyama nAtha jJAtumicchAmi sAMpratam  // 24 //
tato jagAda bhagavAnbhAnukarNAvadhAraya  /  niyamazca tapazceti dvayametana
midyate  // 242 //  tena yukto janaH zaktyA tapasvIti nigadyate  /  tatra
sarvaprayatnena matiH kAryA sumedhasA  /  / 243 //  svalpaM svalpamapi prAjJaH
kartavya sakRtArjanam  /  patadbhirbindubhirjAtA mahAnadyaH samudragAH  /  / 244
//  ahno muhUrtamAnaM yaH kurute bhuktivarjanam  /  phalaM tasyopavAsena samaM
mAsena jAyate  // 245 //  Avartose yukta saMsArarUpI pravAhameM cakkara kATate
haiM, vahA~ unake bhaktoMkI kathA hI kyA hai ?  // 231 /  /  jisa prakAra
pAnImeM par3I zilAko zilA hI tArane meM samartha nahIM hai usI prakAra parigrahI
sAdhu zaraNAgata parigrahI bhaktoMko tArane meM samartha nahIM haiM  // 232 //
jo tapake dvArA pApoMko jalAkara halake ho gaye haiM aise tattvajJa manuSya hI
apane upadezase dUsaroMko tArane meM samartha hote haiM  // 233 /  /  jo yaha
manuSya kSetra hai so bhayaMkara saMsAra-sAgarameM mAno uttama ratnadvIpa hai|
isakI prApti bar3e duHkhase hotI hai  /  / 234 /  /  isa ratnadvIpameM Akara
buddhimAn manuSyako avazya hI niyamarUpI ratna grahaNa karanA cAhie, kyoMki
vartamAna zarIra chor3akara paryAyAntarameM avazya hI jAnA hogA  /  / 235 /  /
isa saMsArameM jo viSayoMke lie dharmarUpI ratnoMkA cUrNa karatA hai vaha vaisA
hI hai jaisA ki koI sUta prApta karaneke lie maNiyoMkA cUrNa karatA hai  // 236
/  /  zarIrAdi anitya hai, koI kisIkA zaraNa nahIM hai, zarIra azuci hai,
zarIrarUpI piMjar3ese AtmA pRthak hai, yaha akelA hI sukha-duHkha bhogatA hai,
saMsArake svarUpakA cintavana karanA, loka kI vicitratAkA vicAra karanA,
Asravake durguNoMkA dhyAna karanA, saMvarakI mahimAkA cintavana karanA,
pUrvabaddha karmoMkI nirjarAkA upAya socanA, bodhi arthAt ratnatrayakI
durlabhatAkA vicAra karanA aura dharmakA mAhAtmya socanA-jinendra bhagavAnne ye
bAraha bhAvanAe~ kahI haiM so inheM sadA hRdayameM dhAraNa karanA cAhie  //
237-239 /  /  jo apanI zaktike anusAra jaise dharmakA sevana karatA hai vaha
devAdi gatiyoMmeM usakA vaisA hI phala bhogatA hai  /  / 240 //  isa prakAra
upadeza dete hue anantabala kevalose bhAnukarNane pUchA ki he nAtha ! maiM aba
niyama tathA usake bhedoMko jAnanA cAhatA hU~  // 241 /  /  isake uttarameM
bhagavAnne kahA ki he bhAnukarNa ! dhyAna dekara avadhAraNa kro| niyama aura
tapa ye do padArtha pRthak-pRthak nahIM haiM  /  / 242 /  /  jo manuSya niyamase
yukta hai vaha zaktike anusAra tapasvI kahalAtA hai isalie buddhimAn manuSyako
saba prakArase niyama athavA tapameM pravRtta rahanA cAhie  // 243 /  /
buddhimAn manuSyoMko thor3A-thor3A bhI puNyakA saMcaya karanA cAhie kyoMki eka-
eka bUMdake par3anese samudra taka bahanevAlI bar3I-bar3I nadiyA~ bana jAtI haiM
/  / 244 /  /  jo dinameM eka muhartake lie bhI bhojanakA tyAga karatA hai use
eka mahIne meM 1. stokakarmANaH  /  2. zarIram  /

Page #374 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  324 Padmapurana  It is said that there are ten
thousand years in heaven for those who enjoy the fruits of their actions.  ||
246 ||  The time spent in heaven by a great soul who has faith in Jainism and
performs the prescribed duties is equivalent to one *paly*. || 247 ||  After
falling from heaven, he attains excellent enjoyment in the human realm, just as
the *Upvanas* born into the lineage of ascetics did. || 248 ||  There was a girl
named *Upvana* who was unhappy and without family, and she made a living by
eating berries and other fruits. Once, she gave up food for a *muhurta*.  Due to
the influence of this vow, the king honored her greatly and after the vow, he
endowed her with great wealth. This incident made her mind very enthusiastic
about religion. || 249-250 ||  Whoever constantly follows the words of the Jina,
attains uninterrupted happiness in the afterlife. || 251 ||  Whoever gives up
food for two *muhurtas* every day, gets the fruit of two fasts in a month. ||
252 ||  Similarly, whoever gives up food for thirty *muhurtas* by increasing one
*muhurta* at a time, gets the fruit of three, four, etc. fasts. || 253 ||  One
should plan the *muhurtas* in the same way for *tela* and other fasts.  The
fruit of a longer period of abstinence should be said to be greater, according
to the increase in the cause. || 254 ||  Having attained the fruit of this rule
in heaven, beings are born as humans and perform wonderful deeds. || 255 ||  Due
to the remaining merit from enjoying the fruits in heaven, they become husbands
of noble women whose bodies are adorned with beauty, and who captivate minds
with their charming gestures. || 256 ||  Women who have fallen from heaven also
come to the human realm and, being served by great men, attain equality with
Lakshmi. || 257 ||  Whoever gives up food at sunset, especially a
*samyagdarshi*, attains special prosperity. || 258 ||  This being, due to this
religion, resides in a jeweled, radiant chariot in the midst of the Apsaras, for
a time equivalent to many *palyas*. || 259 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 324 padmapurANe tatra svarge sahasrANi samAnAM daza kIrtitam  /  bhuJjAnasya
janasyodyogaM cittopapAditam  //  246  //  zraddadhAno mataM jainaM yaH karoti
puroditam  /  palyaistasyopamAno yaH kAlaH svarge mahAtmanaH  //  247 //  cyutvA
tatra manuSyatve labhate bhogamuttamam  /  yathopavanayA labdhaM
tApasAnvayajAtayA  // 248|| duHkhinyupavanA'bandhurva darAdyupajIvinI  /
AdarAdIkSitA rAjJA muhUrtavratasaMbhavAt  //  249 || kumArI vratakasyAnte parayA
dravyasaMpadA  /  yojitA sutarAM jAtA dharmasaMvignamAnasA ||250  //
jinendravacanaM yastu kurute'ntaravarjitam  /  anantaramasau saukhyaM paraloke
gato'znute  /  /  251|| muhUrtadvitayaM yastu na bhuGkte prativAsaram  /
SaSThopavAsitA tasya jantormAsena jAyate  //  252  //  muhUrtatriMzataM kRtvA
kAle yAvati tAvati  /  AhAravarjanaM janturupavAsaphalaM bhajet  //  253  //
muhUrta yojanaM kAryamevamevASTamAdiSu  /  adhikaM tu phalaM vAcyaM
hetuvRddhyanurUpataH  // 254 //  avApyAsya phalaM nAke niyamasya zarIriNaH  /
manuSyatAM samAsAdya jAyante'dbhutaceSTitAH || 255  /  /  lAvaNyapaGkaliptAnAM
hArivibhramakAriNAm  /  bhavanti kuladArANAM patayo dharmazeSataH  /  /  256  /
/  striyo'pi svargatazcyutvA manuSyamavamAgatAH  /  mahApuruSasaMsevyA pAnti
lakSmIsamAnatAm || 257  /  /  Aditye'stamanuprApte kurute yo'nnavarjanam  /
bhavedabhyudayo'syApi samyagdRSTervizeSataH  //  258  //  apsaromaNDalAntaHstho
vimAne ratnabhAsure  /  bahupalyopamaM kAlaM dharmeNAnena tiSThati  //  259  //
upavAsa ke samAna phala prApta hotA hai || 245  //  saMkalpa mAtrase prApta
honevAle utkRSTa bhogoMkA upabhoga karate hue isa jIvako kamase kama dasahajAra
varSaM to lagate hI haiM || 246 || aura jo jainadharmakI zraddhA karatA huA
pUrvapratipAdita vratAdi dhAraNa karatA hai usa mahAtmAkA svargameM kamase kama
eka patya pramANa kAla bItatA hai || 247|| vahA~se cyuta hokara vaha manuSya
gatimeM usa prakAra uttama bhoga prApta karatA hai jisa prakAra tApasavaMza meM
utpanna huI upavanAne prApta kiye the  //  248  //  eka upavanA nAmakI duHkhinI
kanyA thI jo bhAI-bandhuoMse rahita thI aura bera Adi khAkara apanI jIvikA
karatI thii| eka bAra usane muhUrta-bhara ke lie AhArakA tyAga kiyaa| usa
vratake prabhAvase rAjAne usakA bar3A Adara kiyA tathA vratake anantara use
utkRSTa dhanasampadAse yukta kiyaa| isa ghaTanA se usakA mana dharma meM atyanta
utsAhita ho gayA  /  /  249 - 250 //  jo manuSya nirantara jinendra bhagavAn ke
vacanoM kA pAlana karatA hai vaha paralokameM nirbAdha sukhakA upabhoga karatA
hai ||251 //  jo pratidina do muhUrtake lie AhArakA tyAga karatA hai use mahIne
meM do upavAsakA phala prApta hotA hai  //  252  //  isa prakAra jo eka-eka
muhUtaM bar3hAtA huA tIsa muhUrta taka ke lie AhArakA tyAga karatA hai use tIna-
cAra Adi upavAsoMkA phala prApta hotA  /  /  253|| telA Adi upavAsoMmeM bhI isI
taraha muhUrtakI yojanA kara lenI cAhie  /  jo adhika kAla ke lie tyAga hotA hai
usakA kAraNake anusAra adhika phala kahanA cAhie  //  254  //  prANI svarga meM
isa niyamakA phala prApta kara manuSyoM meM utpanna hote haiM aura vahA~ adbhuta
ceSTAoM ke dhAraka hote haiM  // 255 //  svarga meM phala bhoganese jo puNya
zeSa bacatA hai usake phalasvarUpa ve kulavatI striyoM ke pati hote haiM  /
jinakA ki zarIra lAvaNyarUpI paMkase lipta rahatA hai tathA jo manako haraNa
karanevAle hAva-bhAva vibhrama kiyA karatI haiM  //  256  //  niyamavAlI striyA~
bhI svargase cayakara manuSya bhavameM AtI haiM aura mahApuruSoMke dvArA
sevanIya hotI huI lakSmIko samAnatA prApta karatI haiM  //  257 //  jo sUryAsta
honepara annakA tyAga karatA hai usa samyagdRSTiko bhI vizeSa abhyudayakI prApti
hotI hai  /  /  258  //  yaha jIva isa dharmake kAraNa ratnoMse jagamagAte
vimAnoMmeM apsarAoMke 1. janasyodhvaM bhogaM ma  /  janasyorddha ba. ka.  /  2.
icchAmAtreNa prAptam  /  3. tasyopamAnIyaH maH  /  4. -'stamanaprApte ma.  /

Page #375 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Fourteen  **325** Having attained the rare human birth, one should be
devoted to the path of liberation. The duty of the great lord is to worship the
Jina. ||26||  **26** Whose throne, when occupied, makes a yojana of land golden,
and is served by gods, animals, and humans. ||26||  **262** Whose eight
miraculous powers and thirty-four great wonders manifest, and whose form is
radiant like a thousand suns, bringing joy to the eyes. ||262||  **263** The
wise devotee who bows down to such a great lord, the Jina, crosses the ocean of
existence in a short time. ||263||  **264** There is no other way for beings to
attain peace except by following this path, therefore, one should serve it
diligently. ||264||  **265** There are thousands of other paths, like the Go-
danda, which are associated with Kutirthas, and in which the careless beings are
deluded. ||265||  **266** There is no true compassion in those paths, as they
openly consume honey and meat, but in the path of the Jina, even a speck of
fault is not seen. ||266||  **267** It is completely worthy of abandonment in
this world, to torment one's soul with hunger during the day, and then consume
food at night, destroying the accumulated merit. ||267||  **268** Eating at
night is a sin, yet those who consider it a virtue have hearts hardened by evil
deeds, and their understanding is difficult. ||268||  **269** The lazy and
sinful being who eats when the sun is not visible, does not understand the path
to liberation. ||269||  **270** The sinful being, whose eyes are covered by
darkness and whose mind is filled with sin, eats flies, insects, and hair at
night. ||270||  **271** The one who eats at night eats with Dakinis, Preta,
Bhutas, and other vile creatures. ||271||  **272** The one who eats at night
eats with dogs, rats, cats, and other carnivorous animals. ||272||  **273** Or
what is the point of elaborating further? Eating at night makes everyone impure
and defiled. ||273||  **259** Sitting in the middle, one spends many moments in
contemplation. ||259||  **260** Therefore, those who have attained the rare
human birth and are devoted to the path of liberation, should worship the great
lord, Shri Jinendra Deva. ||260||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturdazaM parva 325 manuSyatvaM samAsAdya durlabhaM tatparAyaNaH  /
mahezAnasya kartavyaM jinasya samupAsanam  // 26 //  yasya kAJcananirmANA
yojanaM jAyate mahI  /  Asane jAyate devatiryagmAnuSasevitA  // 26 //
prAtihAryANi yasyASTau catustriMzanmahAdbhutoH  /  sahasrabhAskarAkAraM rUpaM
locanasaukhyadam  // 262 //  mavyaH preNAmametasya yaH karoti vicakSaNaH  /
samuttarati kAlena sa stokena bhavArNavam  // 263 //  upAyametamujjhitvA
zAntiprAptau zarIriNAm  /  nAnyaH kazcidupAyo'sti tasmAtsevyaH sa yatnataH  //
26 //  mArgA godaNDakAkArAH santyanye'pi sahasrazaH  /  kutIrthasaMzritA yeSu
vimuhyanti pramAdinaH  // 265 //  na samyakkaruNA teSu madhumAsAdisevanAt  /
jaine tu kaNikApyasti na doSasya prarUpaNe  // 266 //  tyAjyametasparaM loke
yatprapoDya divA kSudhA  /  AtmAnaM rajanIbhuktyA gamayatyarjitaM zubham  // 267
//  nizibhuktiradharmo yairdharmatvena prakalpitaH  /  pApakarmakaThorANAM teSAM
duHkhaM prabodhanam  // 268 //  darzanAgocarIbhUte sUrye paramalAlasaH  /
bhuGkte pApamanA janturdurgatiM nAvabudhyate  // 269 //  makSikAkoTakezAdi
bhakSyate pApajantunA  /  tamaHpaTalasaMchannacakSuSA pApabuddhinA  // 27 //
DAkinIpretabhUtAdikutsitaprANibhiH samam  /  bhuktaM tena mavedyena kriyate
rAtribhojanam  // 271 //  sArameyAkhumArjAraprabhRtiprANimiH samam  /
mAMsAhArairmavedbhuktaM tena yo nizi valmate  // 272 //  athavA kiM prapaJcena
pulAkeneha mASyate |ksspaayaamshntaa sarva bhavedazuci makSitam  // 273 //
madhyameM baiThakara aneka palyopamakAla vyatIta karatA hai  /  / 259 /  /
isalie durlabha manuSya paryAya pAkara dharmameM tatpara rahanevAle manuSyoMko
mahAprabhu zrIjinendra devakI upAsanA karanI cAhie  // 260 /  /  jinake
Asanastha honepara deva, tiryaMca aura manuSyoMse sevita eka yojanakI pRthvI
svarNamayI ho jAtI hai  // 261 /  /  jinake ATha prAtihArya aura cauMtIsa
mahAatizaya prakaTa hote haiN| tathA jinakA rUpa hajAra sUryoMke samAna
dedIpyamAna evaM netroMko sukha denevAlA hotA hai  /  / 262 /  /  aise
mahAprabhu jinendra bhagavAnko jo buddhimAn bhavya praNAma karatA hai vaha
thor3e hI samayameM saMsAra-sAgarase pAra ho jAtA hai  /  / 263 //  jIvoMko
zAnti prApta karaneke lie yaha upAya chor3akara aura dUsarA koI upAya nahIM hai
isalie yatnapUrvaka isakI sevA karanI cAhie  // 264 //  inake sivAya
kutothiyoMse sevita godaNDakake samAna jo anya hajAroM mArga haiM unameM pramAdI
jIva mohita ho rahe haiM-yathArtha mArga bhUla rahe haiM  /  / 265 //  una
mArgAbhAsoMmeM samIcIna dayA to nAmamAtrako nahIM hai kyoMki madhu-mAMsAdikA
sevana khuleAma hotA hai para jinendradevakI prarUpaNAmeM doSa kI kaNikA bhI
dRSTigata nahIM hotI  // 266 //  lokameM yaha kArya to bilakula hI tyAgane yogya
hai ki dinabhara to bhUkhase apanI AtmAko pIr3A pahuMcAte haiM aura rAtriko
bhojana kara saMcita puNyako tatkAla naSTa kara dete haiM  // 267 /  /  rAtrimeM
bhojana karanA adharma hai phira bhI ise jina logoMne dharma mAna rakhA hai,
unake hRdaya pApakarmase atyanta kaThora haiM unakA samajhanA kaThina hai  //
268 //  sUryake adRza ho jAnepara jo lampaTI-pApI manuSya bhojana karatA hai
vaha durgatiko nahIM samajhatA  // 269 //  jisake netra andhakArake paTalase
AcchAdita haiM aura buddhi pApase lipta hai aise pApI prANI rAtake samaya
makkhI, kIr3e tathA bAla Adi hAnikAraka padArtha khA jAte haiM  /  / 270 //  jo
rAtrimeM bhojana karatA hai vaha DAkinI, preta, bhUta Adi nIca prANiyoMke sAtha
bhojana karatA hai  // 271 //  jo rAtrimeM bhojana karatA hai vaha kutte, cUhe,
billo Adi mAMsAhArI jIvoMke sAtha bhojana karatA hai  // 272 /  /  athavA adhika
kahanese kyA ? 1. mhaatishyaaH| mahAbhutaM m.| 2. praNAmaM bhAvena b.| 3. mena
-ba.  /  4. saMcitA m.| 5. duHkhaprabodhanam bha.  /  6. prabandhanam ka.  /  7.
durgatinavibudhyate kh.| 8. bhaktaM ma.  /  9. bhuGkte  /  valbha bhojane  /
valgate m.| 10. bhAvyate ma., ka.  /

Page #376 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Padma Purana  **Verse 274:** Those who eat after sunset are considered bound
by humanity, like animals, by the wise.  **Verse 275:**  One who is averse to
the teachings of the Jinas and eats day and night, how can he be happy in the
afterlife, being devoid of discipline and vows?  **Verse 276:**  A person devoid
of compassion, who insults the Jina-endras, will have a foul-smelling mouth in
another life.  **Verse 277:**  Whoever indulges in meat, alcohol, night-eating,
stealing, and another's wife, destroys both his present and future lives.
**Verse 278:**  One who eats at night will have a short lifespan, be poor,
afflicted with diseases, and devoid of happiness in the afterlife.  **Verse
279:**  Due to night-eating, this being experiences birth and death for a long
time, and suffers in the womb.  **Verse 280:**  The night-eater, with a
distorted vision, is born for a long time in the wombs of boars, wolves, cats,
swans, crows, and other species.  **Verse 281:**  The foolish one who eats at
night suffers in many evil wombs for thousands of years during the Utsarpini and
Avasarpini periods.  **Verse 282:**  One who attains Jain teachings and adheres
to the vows, burns all his sins and attains a good place.  **Verse 283:**  Those
who are devoted to the three jewels and the Anuvratas, eat only after sunrise,
free from any faults.  **Verse 284:**  These sinless beings attain the position
of celestial rulers in the heavens, enjoying excellent pleasures. They are
filled with compassion and do not eat at night.  **Verse 285:**  After falling
from there, they attain human birth, free from slander, and enjoy the pleasures
of a Chakravarti king and other such positions.  **Verse 286:**  Those who
perform good deeds attain excellent pleasures and the eight Siddhis
(perfections) in the heavens like Saudharma, etc., which are present as soon as
they are desired.  **Verse 287:**  Those who eat during the day become great
ministers, kings, rulers of the earth, and beloved by all beings, working for
the welfare of the world.  **Verse 288:**  Those who eat during the day become
wealthy, virtuous, beautiful, long-lived, endowed with the three jewels, and
occupy high positions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe virocane'sta saMsargaM gate ye bhuJcate janAH  /  te mAnuSatayA
baddhAH pazavo gaditA budhaiH  //  274  //  naktaM divA ca bhuJjAno vimukho
jinazAsane  /  kathaM sukhI paratra syAnnirvato niyamojjhitaH  //  275 //
dayAmukto jinendrANAM pApaH kutsAmudAharan  /  anyadehaM gato jantuH
pUtigandhamukho bhavet  //  276 //  mAMsaM madyaM nizAbhuktiM steyamanyasya
yoSitam  /  sevate yo janastena bhave janmadvayaM hatam  //  277 //
hasvAyurvittamuktazca vyAdhipIDitavigrahaH  /  paratra sukhahInaH syAnnaktaM yaH
pratyavazyati  //  278  //  prApnoti janmamRtyuM ca dIrghakAlamanantaram  /
pacyate garbhavAseSu duHkhena nizi mojanAt  //  279  //
varAhavRkamArjArahaMsakAkAdiyoniSu  /  jAyate suciraM kAlaM rAtribhojI
kudarzanaH  //  280  //  utsarpiNyavasarpiNyoH sahasrANi kuyoniSu  /
ApanIpadyate duHkhaM kudhIryo nizi valbhate  //  281 //  avApya yo mataM jainaM
niyameSvavatiSThate  /  azeSaM kilviSaM dagdhvA susthAnaM so'dhigacchati  //
282 //  ratnatritayasaMpUrNA aNuvrataparAyaNAH  /  taraNAvudite madhyA bhuJjate
doSavarjitam  //  283 //  apApAste'dhigacchanti vimAnezAstriviSTapAH  /  paraM
bhogaM na ye rAtrau bhuJjate karuNA parAH  //  284  //  tatazcyutvA manuSyatvaM
prApya nindAvivarjitam  /  bhuJjate cakravartyAdivibhavopahRtaM sukham  //  285
//  saudharmAdiSu kalpeSu mAnasAnItakAraNam  /  prApnuvanti paraM bhogaM siddhiM
ca zubhaceSTitAH  //  286 //  jagaddhitA mahAmAtyA rAjAnaH pIThamardinaH  /
saMmatAH sarvalokasya bhavanti dinabhojanAt  // 287 //  dhanavanto guNodArAH
surUpA dIrghajIvitAH  /  jinabodhisamAyuktAH pradhAnapadasaMsthitAH  // 288 //
3 326 saMkSepa meM yahI kahA jA sakatA hai ki jo rAtameM bhojana karatA hai vaha
saba apavitra padArtha khAtA hai ||273 //  sUryake asta ho jAnepara jo bhojana
karate haiM unheM vidvAnoMne manuSyatAse ba~dhe hue pazu kahA hai || 274|| jo
jinazAsanase vimukha hokara rAta-dina cAhe jaba khAtA rahatA hai vaha
niyamarahita avratI manuSya paraloka meM sukhI kaise ho sakatA hai ? || 275 ||
jo pApI manuSya dayArahita hokara jinendra devako nindA karatA hai vaha anya
zarIrameM jAkara durgandhita mukhavAlA hotA hai arthAt parabhavameM usake
mukhase durgaMndha AtI hai || 276 || jo manuSya mAMsa, madya, rAtribhojana, corI
aura parastrIkA sevana karatA hai vaha apane donoM bhavoMko naSTa karatA hai ||
277 || jo manuSya rAtrimeM bhojana karatA hai vaha parabhavameM alpAyu,
nirdhana, rogI aura sukharahita arthAt duHkhI hotA hai || 278  //  rAtrimeM
bhojana karanese yaha jIva dIrgha kAla taka nirantara janma-maraNa prApta karatA
rahatA hai aura garbhavAsa meM duHkha se pakatA rahatA hai || 279 || rAtrimeM
bhojana karanevAlA mithyAdRSTi puruSa zUkara, bher3iyA, bilAva, haMsa tathA kauA
Adi yoniyoMmeM dIrgha kAla taka utpanna hotA rahatA hai || 280 //  jo durbuddhi
rAtri meM bhojana karatA hai vaha hajAroM utsarpiNI - avasarpiNI kAla taka
kuyoniyoM meM duHkha uThAtA rahatA hai || 281|| jo jaina dharma pAkara usake
niyamoM meM aTala rahatA hai vaha samasta pApoMko jalAkara uttama sthAnako
prApta hotA hai  // 282  //  ratnatrayake dhAraka tathA aNuvratoM kA pAlana
karane meM tatpara bhavya jIva sUryodaya honepara hI nirdoSa AhAra grahaNa
karate haiM ||283 || jo dayAlu manuSya rAtrimeM bhojana nahIM karate ve pApahIna
manuSya svarga meM vimAnoMke adhipati hokara utkRSTa bhoga prApta karate haiM
||284  //  vahA~se cyuta hokara tathA uttama manuSya paryAya pAkara cakravartI
Adike vibhavase prApta honevAle sukhakA upabhoga karate haiM  //  285  //  zubha
ceSTAoMke dhAraka puruSa saudharmAdi svargImeM manameM vicAra Ate hI upasthita
honevAle utkRSTa bhogoM tathA aNimA - mahimA Adi ATha siddhiyoMko prApta hote
haiM ||286  //   /  dinameM bhojana karanese manuSya jagatkA hita karanevAle
mahAmantrI, rAjA, pIThamardaM tathA sarva lokapriya vyakti hote haiM ||287 //
dhanavAn, guNavAn, rUpavAn, dIrghAyuSka, ratnatraya se yukta tathA pradhAna
padapara AsIna vyakti bhI dinameM bhojana karane se hI hote haiM  //  288  //
1. nindAm  /  2. bhuGkte, pratyavasyati kha  /  3. sUrye  /  4.
mAnuSAtItakAraNaM ma., mAnuSAnItakAraNaM ba.  /

Page #377 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fourteenth day is the day of the powerful, the rulers of cities and so on,
who are adorned with magnificent vehicles and are honored by their vassals.
||28|| The lords of palaces, the lords of the gods, those who are endowed with
the power of the wheel, and those who are endowed with great auspicious signs,
are born from eating during the day. ||290|| Those who are steadfast in the
renunciation of night-eating are radiant like the sun, gentle like the moon, and
possess enduring pleasures. ||291|| Women who eat at night become orphans,
unfortunate, deprived of parents and brothers, and filled with sorrow and
poverty. ||292|| Those with flat noses, whose appearance inspires disgust, whose
eyes are filled with dirt, and who are marked by many evil omens; ||293|| those
whose bodies emit a foul odor, whose lips are cracked and thick, whose ears are
erect, whose hair is yellow and brittle, whose teeth are like gourd seeds, and
whose bodies are white; those who are blind, weak, and lacking luster, with
rough skin; ||294-295|| those who are filled with many diseases, unclean, and
wear torn clothes; those who live on scraps and depend on the work of others,
are born from the sin of eating at night. ||296|| Women who are devoted to
night-eating obtain husbands who are deaf, lame, and devoid of wealth and
brothers. ||297|| Those who are constantly burdened with sorrow, become widows
in childhood, carry water, wood, and other burdens, struggle to fill their
stomachs, are despised by all, whose minds are destroyed by the weapon of
speech, and whose bodies are covered with hundreds of wounds, are born from the
sin of eating at night. ||298-299|| Women who are peaceful in mind, virtuous,
benevolent to the wise, and abstain from eating at night, obtain desired
pleasures in heaven. They are always surrounded by their families, who stand
with their hands on their heads, awaiting their commands. ||300-301|| Having
fallen from heaven, they are born into a prosperous and noble family, endowed
with auspicious signs and possessing all virtues. ||302|| They are skilled in
many arts, their bodies inspire love in the eyes and minds of others, and they
release nectar through their words, delighting all beings. ||303||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturdazaM parva asatejasaH saMkhye' purAdInAmadhIzvarAH  /  vicitravAhanopetAH
sAmantakRtapUjanAH  // 28 //  bhavanezAH surezAzca cakrAkavibhavAzritAH  /
mahAlakSaNasaMpanA bhavanti dinamojanAt  // 290 //
AdityavasprabhAvantazcandravatsaumyadarzanAH  /  anastamitamogAvyAste
ye'nstmitodytaaH||291|| anAthA dubhaMgA mAtRpitRbhrAtRvivarjitAH  /
zokadAridrayasaMpUrNAH striyaH syunizi bhojanAt  // 292 //
kSasphuTitahastAdisvAGgAzcipiTanAsikAH  /  bImatsadarzanAH klinnacakSuSo
duSTalakSaNAH  // 293 //  durgandhavigrahA magnasumahAdazanacchadAH  /
ulvaNazrutayaH piGgasphuTitAgraziroruhAH  // 29 //  alAbUbIjasaMsthAnadazanAH
zuklavigrahAH  /  kANakuNThagatacchAyA vivarNAH paruSatvacaH  // 295 //
anekarogasaMpUrNamalinAzchidravAsasaH  /  kurisatAzanajIvinyaH
parakarmasamAzritAH  // 29 //  uskRttazravaNaM vigraM dhanabandhuvivarjitam  /
prApnuvanti pati nAryo rAtribhojanatatparAH  // 297 //  duHkhamArasamAkrAntA
bAlavaidhavyasaMgatAH  /  ambukASThAdivAhinyo duHpUrodaratatparAH  // 298 //
sarvalokaparAbhUtA vAgvAsInaSTacetasaH  /  aGkavaNazatAdhArA bhavanti nizi
bhojanAt  // 299 //  upazAntAzayA yAstu nAryaH shiilsmnvitaaH| sAdhuvargahitA
rAtribhojanAdviratAsmikAH  // 30 //  labhante tA yathAbhISTaM bhogaM svarga
samAvRtAH  /  parivAreNa mUrdhasthapANinA zAsanaiSiNI  // 301 //  tatazcyutAH
sphurantyuccaiH kule vimavadhAriNi  /  zubhalakSaNasaMpUrNA guNaH sarvaiH
samanvitAH  // 3.02 //  kalAvizAradA netramAnasasnehavigrahAH  /
vimuJcansyo'mRtaM vAcA nAdayansyo'khilaM janam  // 303 //  jinakA teja yuddha
meM asahya hai, jo nagara Adike adhipati haiM, vicitra vAhanoMse sahita haiM
tathA sAmantagaNa jinakA satkAra karate haiM aise puruSa bhI dinameM bhojana
karanese hI hote haiM  /  / 289 /  /  itanA hI nahIM, bhavanendra, devendra,
cakravartI aura mahAlakSaNoMse sampanna vyakti bhI dinameM bhojana karane se hI
hote haiM  /  / 290 /  /  jo rAtribhojanatyAgavatameM udyata rahate haiM ve
sUryake samAna prabhAvAn, candramAke samAna saumya aura sthAyI bhogoMse yukta
hote haiM  /  / 291 //  rAtrimeM bhojana karane se striyA~ anAtha,
durbhAgyazAlI, mAtApitA bhAIse rahita tathA zoka aura dAridrayase yukta hotI
haiM  /  / 292 /  /  jinakI nAka capaTI hai, jinakA dekhanA glAni utpanna karatA
hai, jinake netra kIcar3ase yukta haiM, jo aneka duSTalakSaNoMse sahita haiM,  /
jinake zarIrase durgandha AtI rahatI hai, jinake oTha phaTe aura moTe haiM, kAna
khar3e haiM, zirake bAla pIle tathA caTake haiM, dA~ta tUMbar3oke bIjake samAna
haiM aura zarIra sapheda hai, jo kAnI, zithila tathA kAntihIna haiM, rUparahita
haiM, jinakA camaM kaThora hai| jo aneka rogoMse yukta tathA malina haiM, jinake
vastra phaTe haiM, jo gandA bhojana khAkara jIvita rahatI haiM, aura jinheM
dUsarekI naukarI karanI par3atI hai, aisI khiyA~ rAtri bhojanake hI pApase hotI
haiM  /  / 293-296 /  /  rAtribhojanameM tatpara rahanevAlI striyA~ bUce nakaTe
aura dhana tathA bhAI-bandhuoMse rahita patiko prApta hotI haiM  // 297 //  jo
duHkhake bhArase nirantara AkrAnta rahatI haiM. bAla avasthAmeM hI vidha ho jAtI
haiM, pAnI, lakar3o Adi Dho-Do kara peTa bharatI haiM, apanA peTa bar3I
kaThinAIse bhara pAtI haiM, saba loga jinakA tiraskAra karate haiM, jinakA citta
vacana rUpI basUlAse naSTa hotA rahatA hai aura jinake zarIrameM saikar3oM ghAva
lage rahate haiM, aisI striyA~ rAtri bhojanake kAraNa hI hotI haiM  // 298-299||
jo striyAM zAnta citta, zIla sahita, munijanoMkA hita karanevAlI aura rAtri
bhojanase virata rahatI haiM ve svargameM yatheccha bhoga prApta karatI haiN|
zirapara hAtha rakhakara AjJAkI pratIkSA karanevAle parivArake loga unheM sadA
ghere rahate haiM  /  / 300-301 /  /  svargase cyuta hokara ve vaibhavazAlI ucca
kulameM utpanna hotI haiM, zubha lakSaNoMse yukta tathA samasta guNIse sahita
hotI haiM  // 302 //  aneka kalAoMmeM nipuNa rahatI haiM, unake zarIra netra
aura manameM sneha utpanna karanevAle 1. yuddhe  /  2. abhaGgurabhogayuktAH  /
3. 'kuNTho mandaH kriyAsu yaH' ityamaraH  /  4. chinnakarNam  /  utkRtazravaNaM
ma., ba.  /  utkRSTazravaNaM kha.  /  5. viratAtmikA ma.  /  6. zAsanaiSiNa:
ma.i

Page #378 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the English translation, preserving the Jain terms:  The lords of the
Vidyadharas are filled with longing for them. Narayana, Baladeva, and the
Chakravartis also [long for them].   They have bodies radiant like lightning and
lotus flowers, with swinging, lovely earrings. They have connections with kings
through marriage.  The compassionate ones who do not eat at night receive their
desired food, prepared by servants.  Through daytime eating, they become like
Sri Kanta, Suprabha, Subhadra, and Lakshmi - women with great beauty.
Therefore, whether man or woman, one should abandon nighttime eating, which is
associated with many dangers, with a mind steadfast in discipline.  With little
effort, happiness is obtained. Who does not desire their own happiness?  Knowing
that "Dharma is the root of happiness, and adharma is the cause of suffering,"
one should engage in dharma and abandon adharma.  It is well known in the world
that through dharma comes happiness, and through its opposite, suffering.
Observe the greatness of dharma, by which humans, fallen from heaven, are born
among humans with great enjoyments and charming bodies.  They are the refuge of
jewels born from water and land. Even when indifferent, they are always happy.
Their storehouses of gold, cloth, grains, and other goods are constantly guarded
by those with diverse weapons in their hands.  They have abundant cows,
buffaloes, elephants, horses, chariots, servants, villages, towns, and palaces.
A large retinue, endowed with great fortune and capable of seizing the objects
of the mind and senses.  They have the gait of swans, bodies of dense beauty,
sweet voices, full breasts, and excellent characteristics.  Their youthful forms
are like fences for the eyes, with charming movements, adorned with various
ornaments, and possessing the nature of meritorious deeds.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 328 padmapurANe mavantyutkaNThayA yuktAstAsu vidyAdharAdhipAH  /  harayo
baladevAzca tathA cakrAtizriyaH  // 30 //  vidyadbhaktospalacchAyAH
sphurlllitkunnddlaaH| narendrakRtasaMbandhA bhavanti dinabhojanAt  // 305 //
annaM yathepsitaM tAsAM jAyate bhRtyakalpitam  /  nizAsu yA na kurvanti bhojanaM
karuNAparAH  // 306 //  zrIkAntAsupramAtulyAH subhadrAsadRzastathA  /
lakSmIsamarivaSo yoSA bhavanti dinamojanAt  // 307 //  tasmAmareNa nAryA vA
niyamasthena cetasA  /  varjanIyA nizAbhuktiranekApAyasaMgatA  // 30 //
atyalpena prayAsena zarmaivamupalabhyate  /  tato majata taM nityaM svasukhaM ko
na vAJchati  // 309 /  /  dharmo mUlaM sukhotpattaradharmo duHkhakAraNam  /  iti
jJAtvA majeddharmamadharma ca vivarjayet  // 310 /  /  AgopAlAGganaM loke
prasiddhimidamAgatam  /  yathA dharmeNa zarmeti viparItena duHkhitam  // 31 //
dharmasya pazya mAhAtmyaM yena nAkacyutA narAH  /  utpadyante mahAbhogA
manuSyasve manoharAH  // 312 //  jalasthalasamudbhUtaratnAnAM te samAzrayAH  /
audAsInyamapi prAptA bhavanti sukhinaH sadA  // 313 //
suvarNavastrasasyAdibhANDAgArANi mAnavaiH  /  rakSyante satataM teSAM
vicitrAyudhapANimiH  // 314 //  prabhUtaM gomahiSyAdivAraNAsturagA rathAH  /
bhRtyA janapadA grAmAH prAsAdA nagarANi ca  // 315 /  /  dAsavargo vizAlA
zrIviSTara haribhirdhatam  /  mAnasasyendriyANAM ca viSayAharaNakSamAH  // 316
//  haMsIvibhramagAminyo ghanalAvaNyavigrahAH  /  mAdhuryayuktanisvAnAH
pInastanyaH sulakSaNAH  // 317 //  cakSuSAM vAgurAtulyAstaruNyo hAriceSTitAH  /
nAnAlaMkAradhAriNyo dAsyaH puNyaphalAtmikAH  // 318 //  hote haiM, apane
vacanoMse mAno ve amRta chor3atI haiM, samasta logoMko Anandita karatI haiM  //
303 /  /  vidyAdharoMke adhipati, nArAyaNa, baladeva aura cakravartI bhI unameM
utkaNThita rahate haiM-unheM prApta karane ke lie utsuka rahate haiM  // 304||
jinake zarIrako kAnti bijalI tathA lAla kamalake samAna manohArI hai, jinake
sundara kuNDala sadA hilate rahate haiM, tathA rAjAoMke sAtha jinake vivAha
sambandha hote haiM aisI striyA~ dinameM bhojana karanese hI hotI haiM  /  / 305
/  /  jo dayAvatI striyA~ rAtrimeM bhojana nahIM karatI haiM unheM sadA bhRtya
janoMke dvArA taiyAra kiyA huA manacAhA bhojana prApta hotA hai  // 306 /  /
dinameM bhojana karanese striyAM zrIkAntA, suprabhA, subhadrA aura lakSmIke
samAna kAntiyukta hotI haiM  /  / 307 /  /  isalie nara ho cAhe nArI, donoMko
apanA citta niyamameM sthirakara aneka duHkhoMse sahita jo rAtri bhojana hai
usakA tyAga karanA cAhie  // 308 //  isa prakAra thor3e hI prayAsase jaba sukha
milatA hai to usa prayAsakA nirantara sevana kro| aisA kona hai jo apane lie
sukhakI icchA na karatA ho  // 309 //  'dharma sukhotpattikA kAraNa hai aura
adharma duHkhotpattikA' aisA jAnakara dharmakI sevA karanI cAhie aura adharmakA
parityAga  // 310 //  yaha bAta gopAlakoM takameM prasiddha hai ki dharmase
sukha hotA hai aura adharmase duHkha  // 311 //  dharmakA mAhAtmya dekho ki
jisake prabhAvase prANI svargase cyuta hokara manuSyoMmeM utpanna hote haiM aura
vahAM mahAbhogoMse yakta tathA manohara zarIrake dhAraka hote haiM  // 312 //
ve jala tathA sthalameM utpanna hue ratnoMke AdhAra hote haiM aura udAsIna
honepara bhI sadA sukhI rahate haiM  // 313 /  /  aise manuSyoMke svarNa, vastra
tathA dhAna Adike bhANDAroMkI rakSA hAthoMmeM vividha prakArake zastra dhAraNa
karanevAle loga kiyA karate haiM  // 314 //  unheM atyadhika gAya, bhaiMsa Adi
pazu, hAthI, ghor3e, ratha, payAde, deza, grAma, mahala, naukaroMke samUha,
vizAla lakSmI aura siMhAsana prApta hote haiN| sAtha hI jo mana aura indriyoMke
viSaya utpanna karanemeM samartha haiM, jinakI cAla haMsIke samAna vilAsa pUrNa
hai, jinakA zarIra atyadhika saundaryase yukta hai, jinakI AvAja mIThI hai,
jinake stana sthUla haiM, jo aneka zubha lakSaNoMse yukta haiM, jo netroMko
parAdhIna karaneke lie jAlake samAna haiM, tathA jinakI ceSTAe~ manohara haiM
aisI aneka taruNa striyAM 1. nArAyaNAH  /  2. niyamastena ma.  /  3. prasiddha
m.| 4. duHkhitA ka., kha., m.| 5. manoramaceSTAyuktAH  /  hAraceSTitAH ma., kh.|
.

Page #379 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Fourteen  **329**  Some ignorant people, unaware of the path to
Dharma, do not strive for it, being foolish and unrighteous. **319**  Due to the
influence of their evil karmas, some humans, even though they are wise, do not
follow the path to Dharma, being engrossed in evil deeds. **320**  When the evil
karmas that hinder good deeds are pacified, some beings, with a sincere desire,
approach a Guru and inquire about Dharma. **321**  The words of the Guru become
meaningful for those who, after the pacification of their impure karmas, engage
in righteous conduct. **322**  Those wise beings who abandon evil deeds and
follow this rule become either the first or the second in heaven, possessing
great virtues. **323**  Those who, out of devotion, spend their time serving the
monks and then eat, are always desired by the gods in heaven to be happy.
**324**  Those with great brilliance become the Indra of the assembly of gods,
or they attain the status of a Samanika, fulfilling their desires. **325**  Just
as a small seed of a banyan tree grows into a tall tree, similarly, even a small
amount of tapasya bears the fruit of great enjoyment. **326**  One who is
constantly devoted to Dharma, due to the influence of their past good deeds,
becomes a handsome person with captivating eyes, like Kubera. **327**  A man
named Sahasrabhata, who had adopted the Munivelavrata (eating after the monks
have finished), once offered food to a Muni. As a result, his house was showered
with jewels, and he became Kubera in his next life. **328**  He was famous
throughout the earth, with a noble character and great strength, possessing
immense wealth and surrounded by servants. **329**  Like the full moon, his body
was extremely beautiful, and he enjoyed the highest pleasures, being
knowledgeable in all scriptures. **330**  Due to the influence of his past good
deeds, he attained supreme dispassion and received the great initiation from the
mouth of Jinendra. **331**  And the beautiful maidservants are obtained as a
result of good deeds. **315-318**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturdazaM parva 329 upAya kecidajJAtvA dharmAkhyaM sakhasaMtateH  /  muDhA
tasya samArambhe na yatante'sadhAriNaH  // 319 //  pApakarmavazAtmAnaH
kecicchrasvApi mAnavAH  /  zarmopAyaM na sevante dharma duSkRtatatparAH  // 320
//  upazAnti gate kecitsacceSTArodhikarmaNi  /  abhigamya guruM dharma
pRcchantyudyatacetasaH  // 321 //  upazAnterazuddhasya karmaNastadgurorvacaH  /
arthavajjAyate teSu zreSThAnuSThAnakAriSu  // 322 //  imaM ye niyamaM prAjJAH
kurvate muktaduSkRtAH  /  eke bhavanti te nAke dvitIyA vA mahAguNAH  // 323 //
samayaM ye'nagArANAM bhuJjate'tItya bhaktitaH  /  teSAM svarge
sukhaprekSAmAkAGkSanti surAH sadA  // 324 //  indratvaM devasaGghAnAM te
prayAnti sutejasaH  /  janAH sAmAnikatvaM vA saMpAditayathepsitAH  // 325 //
nyagrodhasya yathA svalpaM bIjamuccaistarumavet  /  tapo'lpamapi
tadvatsyAnmahAbhogaphalAvaham  // 326 //  samaH kuberakAntasya
netrabandhanavigrahaH  /  dharmasaktamatinityaM jAyate pUrvadharmataH  // 327 //
munivelAvato datvA munemikSA samAgataH  /  ratnavRSTiM sahasrAkhyaH
kuberadayito'bhavat  // 328 //  mahImaNDalavikhyAto nAmodAraparAkramaH  /
dhanena mahatA yukto bhRtyamaNDalamadhyagaH  // 329 //  paurNamAsyAM yathA
candraH kAntadarzanavigrahaH  /  bhuJjAnaH paramaM bhogaM sarvazAstrArthakovidaH
// 330 //  pUrvadharmAnubhAvena paraM nirvedamAgataH  /  amIyAya mahAdIkSA
jinendramukhanirgatAm  // 331 //  aura nAnA alaMkAra dhAraNa karanevAlI dAsiyA~
puNyake phalasvarUpa prApta hotI haiM  // 315-318|| kitane hI mUrkha prANI aise
haiM ki jo sukha-samUhakI prAptikA kAraNa dharma hai use jAnate hI nahIM haiM
ataH ve usake sAdhanake lie prayatna hI nahIM karate  // 319 /  /  aura jinakI
AtmA pApa karmake vazIbhUta hai tathA jo pApa karmoM meM nirantara tatpara
rahate haiM aise bhI kitane hI loga haiM ki jo dharmako sukha prAptikA sAdhana
sunakara bhI usakA sevana nahIM karate  // 320 /  /  uttama kAryoMke bAdhaka
pApakarmake upazAnta ho jAnepara kucha hI jIva aise hote haiM ki jo utsuka citta
ho guruke samIpa jAkara dharmakA svarUpa pUchate haiM  // 321 //  tathA pApa
karmake upazAnta honese yadi ve jIva uttama AcaraNa karane lagate haiM to unameM
sadguruke vacana sArthaka ho jAte haiM  /  / 322 /  /  jo buddhimAn manuSya
pApakA parityAga kara isa niyamakA pAlana karate haiM ve svargameM mahAguNoMke
dhAraka hote hue prathama athavA dvitIya hote haiM  // 323 //  jo manuSya
bhakti-pUrvaka muniyoMke bhojana karanekA samaya bitAkara bAdameM bhojana karate
haiM svargameM deva loga sadA unheM sukhI dekhanekI icchA karate haiM  /  / 324
//  uttama tejako dhAraNa karanevAle ve puruSa devoMke samUhake indra hote haiM
athavA manacAhe bhoga prApta karanevAle sAmAnika padako prApta karate haiM  //
325 //  jisa prakAra vaTa vRkSakA choTA-sA bIja Age calakara UMcA vRkSa ho jAtA
hai usI prakAra choTA-sA tapa bhI Age calakara mahAbhoga rUpI phalako dhAraNa
karatA hai  /  / 326 /  /  jisakI buddhi nirantara dharmameM Asakta rahatI hai
aisA manuSya apane pUrvAcarita dharmake prabhAvase kuberakAntake samAna netroMko
AkarSita karanevAle sundara zarIrakA dhAraka hotA hai  // 327|| eka sahasrabhaTa
nAmakA puruSa thaa| usane munivelAvrata dhAraNa kiyA thA arthAt muniyoMke
bhojana karanekA samaya bIta jAneke bAda hI vaha bhojana karatA thaa| eka bAra
usane munike lie AhAra diyaa| usake prabhAvase usake ghara ratnavRSTi huI aura
vaha marakara parabhavameM kuberakAnta seTha huA  // 328 //  jo ki bhUmaNDalameM
prasiddha, utkRSTa parAkramI, mahAdhanase yukta aura sevaka samUhake madhyameM
sthita rahanevAlA thA  // 329 /  /  pUrNimAke candramAke samAna usakA zarIra
atyanta sundara thA aura vaha utkRSTa bhogoMko bhogatA huA samasta zAstroMkA
artha jAnanemeM nipuNa thaa||330|| pUrva dharmake prabhAvase hI usane parama 1.
radharmasya m.| 2. advitIyAH  /  3. dharme saktamati kh.| dharmazaktamati m.| 4.
bhavet ma., sahasrabhaTo manenaprabhAvAta kuberakAntanAmA zreSThI abhavat  /  5.
candrakAntadarzana m.| candra : kAntidarzana kh..b.| 6. sukha m.| 42

Page #380 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Padma Purana states:  Those who await the time of the great ascetics, they
enjoy pleasures like the Harishena Chakravarti. (332)  Harishena, having waited
for the time of the ascetics, accumulated great merit, and thus attained the
highest Lakshmi. (333)  Those who, with pure vision, are inspired by the thought
of meditation, approach the ascetic and become one-minded, (334)  They spend
their time in unity and attain liberation. They are born in celestial vehicles,
adorned with the brilliance of jewels. (335)  With pure hearts, they dwell in
those celestial vehicles, illuminated by eternal light, and play amidst the
apsaras for a long time. (336)  Those who wear fine garlands, have beautiful
bracelets on their wrists, wear a belt around their waist, a crown on their
head, and are attended by umbrellas and fly whisks, are such gods, due to the
influence of the one-minded vow. (337)  Those who are attached to the highest
vows and observe the Anuvrata, knowing the impermanence of the body, and whose
hearts are peaceful, (338)  They fast on the eighth and fourteenth days with a
pure mind, and thus bind themselves to the long life of Trivishtapa. (339)  Some
of them are born in the heavens of Saudharma, etc., some attain the position of
Indra, and others, due to their purity, attain liberation. (340)  Those who are
constantly humble, endowed with good qualities and character, and whose minds
are always engaged in austerity, undoubtedly go to heaven. (341)  There, they
enjoy pleasures according to their desires, become human, enjoy great kingdoms,
and embrace the Jain faith. (342)  Having embraced the Jain faith, they
gradually adopt the character of the ascetics, and through its influence, attain
the abode of the liberated, free from all karma. (343)  Whoever, with mind,
speech, and body, praises and bows to the Jinas in the three periods of time,
(344)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe anagAramaharSINAM velAmarcanti ye janAH  /  bhogotsavaM prapadyante
paraM te hariSeNavat  // 332 //  munivelApratIkSyatvAdupArya sukRtaM mahat  /
hariSeNaH pariprApto lakSmImatyantamunnatAm  // 333 //  munerantikamAsAdya
samAdhAnapracoditAH  /  ekamataM janA ye tu kurvate zuddhadarzanAH  // 334 //
ekamaktena te kAlaM nItvA paJcatvamAgatAH  /  utpadyante vimAneSu
rasnabhAcakravartiSu  // 335 //  nityAlokeSu te teSu vimAneSu sucetsH| ramante
suciraM kAlamapsaromadhyavartinaH  // 336 //  hAriNaH kaTakAdhAraprekoSTAH
kaTisUtriNaH  /  maulimanto bhavanyete chatracAmariNo'marAH  // 337 //
uttamavratasaMsaktA ye cANuvratadhAriNaH  /  zarIramadhUvaM jJAtvA
prazAntahRdayA janAH  // 338 //  upavAsaM caturdazyAmaSTamyAM ca sumAnasAH  /
sevante te nibadhnanti ciramAyustriviSTape  // 339 //  saudharmAdiSu kalpeSu
yAnti kecitsamudbhavam  /  apare svahamindratvaM muktimanye vizuddhitaH  // 34
//  vinayena pariSvaktA guNazIlasamanvitAH  /  tapaHsaMyojitasvAntA yAnti
nAkamasaMzayam  // 341 //  tatra kAmena bhuktvAsau mogAnprApto manuSyatAm  /
bhukte rAjyaM mahajjaina mataM ca pratipadyate  // 342 //  jinazAsanamAsAdya sa
kramAsAdhuceSTitaH  /  sarvakarmavimuktAnAmAlayaM pratipadyate  // 343 //
stutvA kAlatraye yastu namasyati jinaM tridhA  /  zailarAjavadakSobhyaH
kutIrthamatavAyubhiH  // 344 //  womanamaAANANA ~ ~ vairAgyako prApta ho
jinendra-pratipAdita dIkSAko dhAraNa kiyA thA  // 331 /  /  jo manuSya anagAra
maharSiyoMke kAlakI pratIkSA karate haiM ve hariSeNa cakravartIke samAna utkRSTa
bhogoMko prApta hote haiM  // 332 /  /  hariSeNane munivelAmeM munike AgamanakI
pratIkSA kara bahuta bhArI puNyakA saMcaya kiyA thA isalie vaha atyanta unnata
lakSmIko prApta huA thA  // 333 //  zuddha samyagdarzanako dhAraNa karanevAle jo
manuSya dhyAnakI bhAvanAse prerita ho munike samIpa jAkara ekabhakta karate haiM
arthAt eka bAra bhojana karanekA niyama lete haiM aura eka bhaktase ho samaya
pUrA kara mRtyuko prApta hote haiM ve ratnoMko kAntise jagamagAte hue vimAnomeM
utpanna hote haiM  // 334-335 /  /  zuddha hRdayako dhAraNa karanevAle ve deva,
nirantara prakAzita rahanevAle una vimAnoM apsarAoMke bIca baiThakara cirakAla
taka krIDA karate haiM  // 336 //  jo uttama hAra dhAraNa kiye hue haiM, jinakI
kalAiyoMmeM uttama kar3e suzobhita haiM, jo kamarameM kaTisUtra aura zirapara
mukuTa dhAraNa karate haiM, jinake Upara chatra phiratA hai aura pArzvameM
camara Dhole jAte haiM aise deva, eka bhakta vratake prabhAvase hote haiM  //
337 //  jo mahAvrata dhAraNa karanekI bhAvanA rakhate hue vartamAnameM aNuvrata
dhAraNa karate haiM tathA zarIrako anitya samajhakara jinake hRdaya atyanta
zAnta ho cuke haiM aise jo manuSya hRdayapUrvaka aSTamI aura caturdazIke dina
upavAsa karate haiM ve svargakI dIrghAyukA bandha karate haiM  // 338-339||
unameM se koI to saudharmAdi svargoM meM janma lete haiM, koI ahamindra pada
prApta karate haiM aura koI vizuddhatAke kAraNa mokSa jAte haiM  // 340 /  /  jo
nirantara vinayase yukta rahate haiM, guNa aura zIlavatase sahita hote haiM
tathA jinakA citta sadA tapameM lagA rahatA hai aise manuSya niHsandeha svarga
jAte haiM vahA~ icchAnusAra bhoga bhogakara manuSya hote haiM, bar3e bhArI
rAjyakA upabhoga karate haiM aura jainamatako prApta hote haiM  // 341-342 /  /
jainamatako pAkara krama-kramase muniyoMkA caritra dhAraNa karate haiM aura
usake prabhAvase sarva karmarahita siddhoMkA niketana prApta kara lete haiM  //
343 //  _ jo prAtaHkAla, madhyAhnakAla aura sAyaMkAla ina tInoM kAloMmeM mana,
vacana, kAyase stuti kara jina devako namaskAra karatA hai arthAt trikAla
vandanAkA niyama letA hai vaha sumeruparvatake 1. ramante madhyavatinaH m.| 2.
kaTakAdhArAH prakoSThAH m.| 3. te na vighnanti kha.  /  tena badhnanti ma.  /

Page #381 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Fourteen  **331** Adorned with thirty-three qualities, fragrant with
good character, he enjoys pleasures that conquer all senses in the abode of the
gods. **345**  **346** After dwelling for a while in the two auspicious paths of
humans and gods, he departs for the supreme abode, free from all karmas.
**347** For, the objects of the five senses have been practiced for a long time
by all beings, and thus, blinded by them, they are unable to renounce them.
**347**  **348** Here is a great wonder: even after seeing those objects as
poisonous, the best of men still practice the karma that leads to liberation.
**348**  **349** Even a single renunciation, made by a being with right faith,
while wandering in the world, becomes the seed of liberation. **349**  **350**
Those who have no rules at all are animals, or like broken pots without ropes
(i.e., devoid of virtues like vows and conduct). **350**  **351** A being who is
rich in virtues and vows, and who follows the rules, should be free from
carelessness if he desires to cross the ocean of existence. **351**  **352**
Those humans who are poor in intellect and do not abandon evil deeds wander in
the wilderness of existence like the blind for a long time. **352**  **353**
Then, those who were present there, whether animals, humans, or gods, attained
supreme joy from the contact of the rays of the words of the infinite-powered
Kevali, like the moon. **353**  **354** Some attained right faith, some became
followers of the minor vows, and some became strong upholders of the great vows.
**354**  **355** Then, the Muni named Dharma-ratha spoke to Ravana, saying, "O
worthy one, take some rules according to your ability." **355**  **356** "This
Muni is an island of Dharma-gems, so take at least one gem of rules from him."
**356**  **357** "Why are you sitting here burdened with worry? For the great
ones, renunciation is not a cause of sorrow in their minds." **357**  **358**
"Just as the mind of a man who enters the island of gems wanders, 'Should I take
this or that?' so too, his mind is agitated in this island of conduct." **358**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturdazaM parva 331 guNAlaGkArasaMpannaH suzIlasurabhIkRtaH  /
sarvendriyaharaM bhogaM bhajate tridazAlaye  // 345 //  tataH katicidAvRttIH
kRtvA zubhagatidvaye  /  prayAti paramaM sthAnaM sarvakarmavivarjitaH  // 346 //
viSayA hi samabhyastAzciraM sakalajantumiH  /  tatastaimohitAH kartuM viratiM
vibhavo' na te  // 347 //  idaM tatra paraM citraM ye tAn dRSTvA viSAnnavat  /
nirvANakAraNaM karma sevante puruSottamAH  // 348 //  saMsAre bhramato
jantorekApi viratiH kRtA  /  samyagdarzanayuktasya mukterAyAti bIjatAm  // 349
//  eko'pi nAsti yeSAM tu niyamaH prANadhAriNAm  /  pazavaste'thavA magnakumbhA
guNavivarjitAH  // 350 //  guNavratasamRddhena niyamasthena jantunA  /  bhAvyaM
pramAdayuktena saMsArataraNaiSiNA  // 351 //  duSkarma ye na muJcanti mAnavA
matidurvidhAH  /  bhramanti bhavakAntAraM jAtyandhA iva te ciram  // 352 //
tataste'nantavIryenduvAGmarIcisamAgamAt  /  pramodaM paramaM
prAptAstiryAmAnavanAkajAH  // 353 //  samyagdarzanamAyAtAH kecitkecidaNuvratam
/  mahAvratadharAH kecijjAtA vikramazAlinaH  // 354 //  atha dharmarathAkhyena
muninAbhASi rAvaNaH  /  gRhANa niyamaM bhavya kacidityAtmazaktita:  // 355 //
dvIpo'yaM dharmaratnAnAmanagAramahezvaraH  /  gRhyatAmekamapyasmAdralaM
niyamasaMjJakam  // 356 //  kimarthameva mAsse tvaM cintAbhAravazIkRtaH  /
mahatAM hi nanu tyAgo na mateH khedakAraNam  // 357 //  ratnadvIpaM praviSTasya
yathA bhramati mAnasam  /  idaM vRttaM tathaivAsya paramAkulatAM gatam  // 358
//  samAna mithyAmata rUpI vAyuse sadA akSobhya rahatA hai  // 344|| jo guNarUpI
alaMkAroMse suzobhita hai tathA jisakA zarIra zIlavata rUpI candanase sugandhita
hai aisA vaha puruSa svargameM samasta indriyoMko haranevAle bhoga bhogatA hai
// 345 /  /  tadanantara manuSya aura deva ina do zubhagatiyoMmeM kucha
AvAgamana kara sarvakarmarahita ho parama dhAma (mokSa) ko prApta ho jAtA hai  /
/ 346 /  /  cUMki paMcendriyoMke viSaya saba jIvoMke dvArA cirakAlase abhyasta
haiM isalie inase mohita hue prANI virati (tyAgaAkhar3I) karane ke lie samartha
nahIM ho pAte haiM  // 347 /  /  yahA~ bar3A Azcarya to yahI hai ki phira bhI
uttama puruSa una viSayoMko viSamizrita annake samAna dekhakara mokSa prAptike
sAdhaka kAryakA sevana karate haiM  // 348 /  /  saMsArameM bhramaNa karanevAle
samyagdaSTi jIvako yadi eka hI virati (Akhar3I) prApta ho jAtI hai to vaha
mokSakA bIja ho jAtI hai  // 349 /  /  jina prANiyoM ke eka bhI niyama nahIM hai
ve pazu haiM athavA rassIse rahita (pakSameM vratazIla Adi guNoMse rahita) phUTe
ghar3eke samAna haiM  // 350|| guNa aura vratase samRddha tathA niyamoMkA pAlana
karanevAlA prANI yadi vaha saMsArase pAra honekI icchA rakhatA hai to use
pramAdarahita honA cAhie  // 351 //  jo buddhike daridra manuSya duSkarma-khoTe
kArya nahIM chor3ate haiM ve janmAndha manuSyoMke samAna cirakAla taka
saMsArarUpI aTavImeM bhaTakate rahate haiM  // 352 //  tadanantara vahA~ jo bhI
tiryaMca, manuSya aura deva vidyamAna the ve una anantabala kevalI rUpI
candramAke vacana rUpI kiraNoMke samAgamase parama harSako prApta hue  // 353 //
unameMse koI to samyagdarzanako prApta hue, koI aNuvratI hue aura koI balazAlI
mahAvatoMke dhAraka hue  // 354|| athAnantara dharmaratha nAmaka munine rAvaNase
kahA ki he bhavya ! apanI zaktike anusAra koI niyama le  // 355 /  /  ye
munirAja dharmarUpI ratnoMke dvIpa haiM so inase adhika nahIM to kamase kama eka
hI niyama rUpI ratna grahaNa kara  // 356 /  /  isa prakAra cintAke vazIbhUta
hokara kyoM baiThA hai ? nizcayase tyAga mahApuruSoMkI buddhike khedakA kAraNa
nahIM hai arthAt tyAgase mahApuruSoMko khinnatA nahIM hotI pratyuta prasannatA
hotI hai  // 357 /  /  jisa prakAra ratnadvIpameM praviSTa hue puruSakA citta
'yaha lU~ yA yaha lUM' isa taraha caMcala hokara ghUmatA hai usI prakAra isa
cAritra rUpI dvIpameM 1. samarthAH  /  2. guNavRttasamRddhena ma.  /  3.
niyamastena m.| 4. munirAjaH  /  5. -mArebhe m.|

Page #382 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  332 In the Padma Purana, his mind was overwhelmed with
anxiety. The one who was attached to pleasures was filled with restlessness.
||359|| My food is naturally pure, fragrant, delicious, substantial, and free
from the contact of flesh and other impurities. ||360|| I am not capable of
observing even one of the vows of householders, such as refraining from killing
large animals, etc. What to speak of other vows? ||361|| My mind, like a
maddened elephant, runs after all things. I am not able to control it with my
own will, like a hand. ||362|| One who desires to observe the vow of liberation
wants to drink the flame of fire, bind the wind in cloth, and lift Mount Meru.
||363|| Even though I am a valiant hero, I am not capable of observing the vow
of austerity. How wonderful it is that the best of men observe this austerity!
||364|| Should I adopt this rule: "Even if a woman is beautiful, I will not
force myself upon her if she does not desire me?" ||365|| Or, how can such
strength be in me, a lowly person? I am not even capable of controlling my own
mind. ||366|| Or, is there no woman in the three worlds who, upon seeing me,
would not be overcome with desire and restlessness? ||367|| How can a man, who
is worthy of honor and virtue, find contentment in the body of a woman who is
polluted by the touch of another man, who has lips marked by the wounds of
another man's teeth, who is naturally foul-smelling, and who is a mass of
impurities? ||368-369|| Having considered this, Ravana first bowed down to the
Kevali of infinite power with reverence. Then, in the presence of the gods and
demons, he declared clearly: ||370|| "O Lord! I have made this firm vow: I will
not take a woman who does not desire me." ||371|| Bhanukarna (Kumbhakarna), who
was listening to all this and whose mind was as steady as Mount Meru, also
adopted this vow, taking refuge in the four refuges. ||372|| The man who had
entered the city was wandering around in extreme anxiety, thinking, "Should I
take this vow or that vow?" ||358|| Then, a heavy anxiety arose in the mind of
Ravana, whose mind was always attached to pleasures and who was therefore filled
with restlessness. ||359||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 332 padmapurANe athAsya mAnasaM cintA samArUDheyamutkaTA  /
bhogAnuraktacittasya vyAkulatvamupeyuSaH  // 359 //  svabhAvenaiva me
zuddhamandho gandhamanoharam  /  svAdu vRSyaM parityaktamAMsAdimalasaMgamam  //
360 //  sthUlaprANivadhAdibhyo viratiM gRhavAsinAm  /  ekAmapi na zakto'haM kata
kAnyatra saMkathA  // 36 //  mattemasadRzaM cetastaddhAvassarvavastuSu  /
hastenevAtmamAvena dhattuM na prabhavAmyaham  // 362 //  hutAzanazikhA peyA
baddhavyo vAyuraMzuke  /  utkSeptavyo dharAdhIzo nirgranthatvamabhIpsatA  // 363
//  zUro'pi na samartho'haM sevitaM yattapovratam  /  aho citramidaM tadaye
dhArayanti narottamAH  // 364 //  kimekamAzrayAmyetaM niyamaM zomanAmapi  /
avaSTambhAmi nAnicchAmanyayoSAM balAdibhiH  // 365 //  athavA na nanu kSudre
kutaH zaktiriyaM mayi  /  svasyApyasya na zaknomi voDhuM cittasya nizcayam  //
366 /  /  yadvA lokatraye nAsau vidyate pramadottamA  /  dRSTvA mAM vikalatvaM
yA na bajenmanmathArditA  // 367 //  kA vA narAntarAzleSadUSitapramadAtanau  /
oSTacarmadadhAnAyAM paradantakRtavraNam  // 368 //  durgandhAyAM svabhAvena
varNorAza 1 narasya dadhatazcittaM mAnasaMskArabhAjanam  // 369 //
avadhAryatibhAvena praNamyAnantavikramam  /  devAsurasamakSaM sa
prakAzamidamabhyadhAt  // 370 //  bhagavanna mayA nArI parasyecchAvivarjitA  /
gRhItavyeti niyamo mamAyaM kRtanizcayaH  // 371 /  /  catuHzaraNamAzritya
bhAnukarNo'pi karNavAn  /  imaM niyamamAtasthe mandarasthiramAnasaH  // 372 /  /
praviSTa hue puruSakA bhI citta 'yaha niyama lUM yA yaha niyama lUM' isa taraha
parama AkulatAko prApta ho ghUmatA rahatA hai  // 358 //  athAnantara jisakA
citta sadA bhogoMmeM anurakta rahatA thA aura isI kAraNa jo vyAkulatAko prApta
ho rahA thA aise rAvaNake manameM yaha bhArI cintA utpanna huI ki  /  / 359 /  /
merA bhojana to svabhAvase hI zuddha hai, sugandhita hai, svAdiSTa hai, gariSTha
hai aura mAMsAdike saMsargase rahita hai  /  / 360 /  /  sthUla hiMsA tyAga Adi
jo gRhasthoMke vrata haiM unameMse maiM eka bhI prata dhAraNa karane meM
samartha nahIM hU~ phira anya vratoMkI carcA hI kyA hai ?  // 361 /  /  merA
mana madonmatta hAthIke samAna sarva vastuoMmeM daur3atA rahatA hai so use maiM
hAthake samAna apanI bhAvanAse rokane meM samartha nahIM hU~  // 362 //  jo
nirgrantha vrata dhAraNa karanA cAhatA hai vaha mAno agnikI zikhAko pInA cAhatA
hai, vAyuko vastrameM bA~dhanA cAhatA hai, aura sumeruko uThAnA cAhatA hai  /  /
363 /  /  bar3A Azcarya hai ki maiM zUra vIra hokara bhI jisa tapa evaM vratako
dhAraNa karane meM samartha nahIM hU~ usI tapa evaM vratako anya puruSa dhAraNa
kara lete haiN| yathArthameM ve hI puruSottama haiM  // 364 //  rAvaNa socatA
hai ki kyA maiM eka yaha niyama le lUM ki parastrI kitanI hI sundara kyoM na ho
yadi vaha mujhe nahIM cAhegI to maiM use balapUrvaka nahIM cher3eM gA  // 365 /
/  athavA mujha kSudra vyaktimeM itanI zakti kahA~se AI ? maiM apane hI cittakA
nizcaya vahana karane meM samartha nahIM huuN||366|| athavA tInoM lokoMmeM aisI
uttama strI nahIM hai jo mujhe dekhakara kAmase pIr3ita hotI huI vikalatAko
prApta na ho jaay?||367|| athavA jo manuSya mAna aura saMskArake pAtra svarUpa
manako dhAraNa karatA hai use anya manuSyake saMsargase dUSita strIke usa
zarIrameM dhairyasantoSa ho hI kaise sakatA hai ki jo anya puruSake dA~toM dvArA
kiye hue ghAvase yukta oThako dhAraNa hai. svabhAvase hI dargandhita hai aura
malakI rAzi svarUpa hai||368-369||, aisA vicArakara rAvaNane pahale to
anantabala kevalIko bhAva pUrvaka namaskAra kiyaa| phira devoM aura asuroMke
samakSa spaSTa rUpase yaha kahA ki  // 370 //  he bhagavan ! 'jo parastrI mujhe
nahIM cAhegI maiM use grahaNa nahIM karU~gA' maiMne yaha dRr3ha niyama liyA hai
/  / 371 //  jo samasta bAtoMko suna rahA thA tathA jisakA mana sumeruke samAna
sthira thA aise bhAnukarNa ( kumbhakarNa ) ne bhI arahanta siddha sAdhu aura
jina dharma ina 1. bhojanam  /  2. saMyatavratam ja.  /  3. nanu na ma.  /  nana
na ka., kha.  /  4. bhavedratiH ma.  /  .

Page #383 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Fourteenth Chapter 333 I will rise early every day and perform the daily
rituals. I will praise and worship the Jinas with abhisheka. ||373|| I will not
eat until I have performed the rituals for the Nirgrantha gurus. ||374|| I will
prostrate to the Muni with my knees touching the ground, showing him respect. I
will also take on other great vows. ||375|| Then the gods, the celestial beings,
and the devotees, with their eyes wide open, bowed to the Muni and went to their
respective abodes. ||376|| Ravana, with his great strength, flew up into the
sky, imitating the play of Indra, and went towards Lanka. ||377|| Ravana, who
had been worshipped by a group of beautiful women, entered his city, adorned
with clothes and other ornaments. ||378|| Entering his dwelling, which was
adorned with all kinds of splendor, he stayed there, like the unclothed god in
the deep cave of Mount Meru. ||379|| When the karmas of embodied beings become
pacified, they attain liberation. Then they receive the supreme teachings from
the mouth of their guru. ||380|| Knowing this, O awakened and energetic beings,
you should always be eager to listen to the Jina Dharma. For those who listen to
the Dharma with humility, they attain vast knowledge like the sun. ||381|| Thus
ends the fourteenth chapter of the Padmacharita, known as the Arsha, narrated by
the Acharya Ravishena, which describes the Dharma teachings given by the Kevali
Anantbala. ||14|| 1. Worship. 2. Nirgrantha gurus. 3. Like the unclothed god. 4.
Related to Mount Meru.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturdazaM parva 333 karomi prAtarutthAya sAMprataM prativAsaram  /  stutvA
pUjAM jinendrANAmabhiSekasamanvitAm  // 373 /  /  'varivasyAmavastrANAmakRtvA
vidhinAnvitam  /  adya prabhRti nAhAraM karomIti sasaMmadaH  // 374 /  /
jAnubhyAM bhuvamAkramya praNamya munimAdarAt  /  anyAnapi mahAzaktiniyamAn sa
samArjayat  // 375 /  /  tato devA surA bhaktAH praNamya munipuGgavam  /
yathAsvaM nilayaM jagmuhaSavistAritekSaNAH  // 376 /  /  ami laGkA dazAsyo'pi
pratasthe pRthuvikramaH  /  khamutpatya dadhallIlA suranAthasamudbhavAm  // 377
//  varastrIjanasaMghAtaiH kRtapraNatipUjanaH  /  nagarI svAM vivezAsau
vastrAdikRtabhUSaNAm  // 378 //  pravizya vasatiM svAM ca samastavimavArcitAm  /
anAvRta ivAtiSThadgaMmIrAM mAndarI guhAm  // 379 //  vaMzasthavRttam bhavanti
karmANi yadA zarIriNAM prazAntiyuktAni vimuktimAvinAm  /  tatopadezaM paramaM
gurormukhAdavApnuvanti prabhavaM zumasya te  // 380 //  iti prabuddhodhatamAnasA
janA jinazrutau sajjata bho punaH punaH  /  pareNa dharma vinayena zRNvatAM
bhavatyamando'vagamo yathA raviH  // 38 //  ityArSe raviSeNAcAryaprokte
padmavarite anantabaladharmAbhidhAnaM nAma caturdazaM parva  // 18 //  cArakI
zaraNameM jAkara yaha niyama liyA ki 'maiM pratidina prAtaH kAla uThakara tathA
stuti kara abhiSekapUrvaka jinendra devako pUjA kruuNgaa| sAtha hI jabataka maiM
nirgrantha sAdhaoMkI pUjA nahIM kara la~gA tabataka Ajase lekara AhAra nahIM
kruuNgaa'| bhAnukarNane yaha pratijJA bar3e harSase kI  // 372-374 /  /  isake
sivAya usane pRthivIpara ghuTane Teka munirAjako AdarapUrvaka namaskAra kara
aura bhI bar3e-bar3e niyama liye  // 375 /  /  tadanantara harSase jinake netra
phUla rahe the aise bhakta aura asura munirAjako namaskAra kara apane-apane
sthAnoMpara cale gaye  // 376 /  /  vizAla parAkramakA dhArI rAvaNa bhI AkAzameM
ur3akara indrakI lIlA dhAraNa karatA huA laMkAko ora calA  // 377 //
uttamottama striyoMke samUhane praNAmapUrvaka jisakI pUjA kI thI aise rAvaNane
vastrAdise susajjita apanI nagarImeM praveza kiyA  // 378 //  jisa prakAra
anAvRta deva meruparvatakI gambhIra guhAmeM rahatA hai usI prakAra rAvaNa bhI
samasta vaibhavase yukta apane nivAsagRhameM praveza kara rahane lagA  // 379 //
gautama svAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! jaba bhavya jIvoMke karma
upazama bhAvako prApta hote haiM taba ve suguruke mukhase kalyANakArI uttama
upadeza prApta karate haiM  // 380 //  aisA jAnakara he prabuddha evaM
udyamazIla hRdayake dhAraka bhavya jano! tuma loga bAra-bAra jinadharmake
sunanemeM tatpara hoo kyoMki jo uttama vinayapUrvaka dharma zravaNa karate haiM
unheM sUrya ke samAna vipula jJAna prApta hotA hai  // 381 /  /  isa prakAra
ArSa nAmase prasiddha raviSeNAcAryake dvArA kathita padmacaritameM anantabala
kevalIke dvArA dharmopadezakA nirUpaNa karanevAlA caudahavA~ parva samApta huA
// 14 //  1. pUjAm  /  2. nigranthagurUNAm  /  3. anAvRtadeva iva  /  4.
merusaMbandhinIm  /

Page #384 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifteenth Chapter  The Muni (sage) Gautama, Hanumaan, and Vibhishana,
with their minds firmly set, took the vows of householders. ||1||  The wise do
not praise the stability of Mount Sumeru as much as they praise the unwavering
character and right vision of Hanumaan. ||2||  Thus, when Gautama praised
Hanumaan with words of auspiciousness, the king Shrenik, his body trembling with
excitement, said: ||3||  "O Lord of the assembly! Who is Hanumaan? What are his
special qualities? Where and from whom did he originate? O Lord, I wish to know
his true character." ||4||  Then, the assembly leader, whose heart was filled
with joy at the mention of the virtuous, spoke in a voice that brought delight:
||5||  "O King! In the southern range of the Vijaya mountain, after crossing ten
yojanas, lies a beautiful city called Aditya-pura. There, the king was named
Prahlad and his queen was Ketumati." ||6-7||  "From them was born a son named
Pavana-Gati, whose broad chest was made the dwelling place of Lakshmi." ||8||
"Seeing him in the fullness of youth, his father, fearing the loss of his
lineage, was worried about his marriage." ||9||  "O King! Let this story rest
for now. Hold another story in your heart, so that the discussion of Pavana-
Gati's marriage can continue." ||10||  "At the end of this Bharat-kshetra, near
the ocean, in the southeast direction, lies a mountain called Danta." ||11||
"It is adorned with towering, shining peaks, covered with various trees and
herbs, and its vast shores are filled with excellent waterfalls." ||12||  "On
this mountain, a Vidhyadhara named Mahendra, possessing the prowess of Indra
himself, established a magnificent city." ||13||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcadazaM parva tasyaiva ca muneH pAveM hanUmAn gRhiNAM vratam  /  vimISaNazca
japrAha kRtvA mAtra sunizcitam  // 1 //  na tayA girirAjasya sthiratvaM zasyate
budhaiH  /  hanUmacchIlasamyaktvaM yathA paramanizcalam  // 2 //
saumAgyAdimiratyantaM hanUmati tataH stute  /  ityUce magadhAdhIzo romA
bibhraduskaTam  // 3 //  hanUmAn ko gaNAdhIza kiMviziSTaH kutaH kva vA  /
bhagavanasya tattvena jJAtumicchAmi ceSTitam  // 4 //  tataH
satpuruSAbhikhyArsajAtapurusaMmadaH  /  vAcAhAdanakAriNyA geNaprANaharo'vadat
// 5 //  dakSiNasyAM nRpa zreNyA vijayArdhasya bhUbhRtaH  /
dazayojanamabhvAnamatikramya vyavasthitam  // 6 //  AdityanagarAbhikhyaM
puramasti manoharam  /  prahlAdastatra rAjAsya nAmnA ketumatI priyA  /  / 7 /  /
zumo vAyugatirnAma babhUva tanayo'nayoH  /  lakSmyA vakSasthala yasya vipulaM
nilayIkRtam  // 8 //  saMpUrNayauvanaM dRSTvA taM tadArakriyAM prati  /  cakAra
janakazcintAM saMtAnacchedakAtaraH  // 9 //  AstAM tAvadidaM rAjannidamanyanmatI
kuru  /  vacanaM yena tadArasaMbhavaH parikIrtyate  // 10 //  vAsasya
bharatasyAnte saMnikRSTe mahodadheH  /  pUrvadakSiNadigbhAge dantItyasti
mahIdharaH  // 11 //  vipulA_lihodAratejaHzikharasaMkaTaH  /
nAnAgumauSadhivyAptaH sunirbharamahAtaTaH  // 12 //  yataH prabhRti tatrAsthAsaM
nivezya varaM puram  /  vidyAdharo mahendrAkhyo mahendropamavikramaH  // 13 //
~ athAnantara unhIM munirAjake pAsa hanumAn aura vibhISaNane bhI abhiprAyako
sudRr3ha kara gRhasthoMke vrata grahaNa kiye  // 1 //  gautamasvAmI kahate haiM
ki vidvAn loga sumeruparvatakI sthiratAkI usa prakAra prazaMsA nahIM karate jisa
prakAra ki paramanizcalatAko prApta hae hanumAnake zIla aura samyagdarzanakI
karate haiM  // 2 //  isa prakAra jaba gautamasvAmIne saubhAgya Adike dvArA
hanumAnkI atyadhika prazaMsA kI taba utkaTa romAMcako dhAraNa karatA huA zreNika
bolA ki  // 3 //  he gaNanAtha ! hanumAn kauna ? isakI kyA vizeSatA hai ? kahAM
kisase isakI utpatti huI hai ? he bhagavan ! maiM isakA caritra yathArthameM
jAnanA cAhatA hU~  // 4 //  tadanantara satpuruSakA nAma sunanese jinheM
atyadhika harSa utpanna ho rahA thA aise gaNadhara bhagavAn AhlAda utpanna
karanevAlI vANImeM kahane lage  // 5 //  he rAjan ! vijayA, parvatakI dakSiNa
zreNImeM daza yojanakA mArga lAMghakara Adityapura nAmaka eka manohara nagara
hai  /  vahA~ke rAjA prahlAda aura unakI rAnIkA nAma ketumatI thA  // 6-7 /  /
ina donoMke pavanagati nAmakA uttama putra huaa| pavanagatike vizAla
vakSaHsthalako lakSmIne apanA nivAsasthala banAyA thA  /  / 8 /  use
pUrNayauvana dekha, santAna-vicchedakA bhaya rakhanevAle pitAne usake vivAhakI
cintA kI  // 9 //  gautamasvAmI kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! yaha kathA to aba
rahane do| dUsarI kathA hRdayameM dhAraNa karo jisase ki pavanagatike vivAhakI
carcA sambhava ho sake  // 10 //  isI bharata kSetrake antameM mahAsAgarake
nikaTa Agneya dizAmeM eka dantI nAmakA pavaMta hai  // 11 //  jo bar3I-bar3I
gaganacumbI camakIle zikharoMse yukta hai, nAnA prakArake vRkSa aura
auSadhiyoMse vyApta hai tathA jisake lambe-caur3e kinAre uttamottama jharanoMse
yukta haiM  /  / 12 /  /  mahendrake samAna parAkramako dhAraNa karanevAlA
mahendra vidyAdhara uttama nagara basAkara jabase usa parvatapara 1. tatastute
ka , ma., ba., ja.  /  tatostute kha.  /  2. gaNadharaH  /  3. gRhIkRtam  /  4.
kSetrasya  /  5. tatrasthAt ma.  /

Page #385 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Panchavarsha Parva (Chapter 335)  From that point onwards, the mountain
was called Mahendragiri and the city was known as Mahendranagara. ||14||  King
Mahendra, overcome with joy, had a hundred virtuous sons born to his queen,
starting with Aridam. ||15||  Their younger sister, known as Anjanasundari, was
born. She seemed to be the embodiment of beauty from all three worlds, as if her
form was created from the collective beauty of all the women in the universe.
||16||  Her complexion was as beautiful as a blue lotus, her hands were adorned
with graceful palms, her feet resembled the inner part of a lotus, and her
breasts were like the cheeks of an elephant. ||17||  Her waist was slender, her
hips were full, her legs were well-proportioned with beautiful knees, and her
body was adorned with many auspicious marks. Her arms were as soft as the
garland of a blooming jasmine. ||18||  Her eyes, reaching up to her ears, were
adorned with captivating pupils, and they seemed like the far-reaching arrows of
Kamadeva (the god of love). ||19||  She was knowledgeable in the arts of
Gandharvas and others, and she seemed like Saraswati herself. She was also
endowed with virtues and resembled Lakshmi in her beauty. ||20||  Once, she was
playing with a ball, moving around in circles, when her father saw her. He
noticed that her body was adorned with the beauty of youth. Just as King
Akampan, who was devoted to virtue, was deeply distressed about finding a
suitable husband for his daughter Sulochana, so too was King Mahendra worried
about finding a suitable husband for his daughter. This is natural, as the
sorrow of a daughter is a source of great anxiety for proud men. ||21-23||  A
father is always worried about his daughter: will she find a good husband? Will
he be able to make her happy for a long time? Will she remain free from faults?
Indeed, a daughter is a great source of worry for a man. ||24||  Then, King
Mahendra, adorned with the ornament of knowledge, called all his friends, who
were also adorned with knowledge, and went to a secluded house to decide on a
suitable husband for his daughter. ||25||  There, he addressed his ministers,
saying, "Oh ministers! You are all knowledgeable and wise. Therefore, tell me
who would be a suitable husband for my daughter." ||26||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcavarza parva 335 tata Arabhya saMprApa mahendrAcyA rasAdharaH  /
mahendranagaraM tacca puraM tatra prakIrtitam  // 14 //  nAyaryA
hRdayavegAyAmajAyanta mahendrataH  /  guNavantaH zataM putrA nAmato'riMdamAdayaH
// 15 //  udapAdyanujA teSAM kIrtitAanasundarI  /
trailokyasundarIrUpasaMdohenaiva nirmitA  // 16 //  nIlanIrajanirmAsA
prazastakarapallavA  /  panagarbhAbhacaraNA kumbhikumbhanibhastanI  // 17 //
tanumadhyA pRthuzroNI sujAnUrU: 'sulakSaNA  /
praphullamAlatImAlAmRdubAhulatAyugA  // 18 //  karNAntasaMgate kAntikRtapuLe
suduurge| iSa te kAmadevasya nanu tasyA vilocane  // 19 //  gandharvAdikalAmijJA
sAkSAdiva srsvtii| lakSmIriva ca rUpeNa sA babhUva guNAnvitA  // 20 //  anyadA
kandukenAsau ramamANA sarecakam  /  janakanekSitAbhyagrayauvanAJcitavigrahA  //
21 //  sulocanAsutAbhartRvaracintAtiduHkhinaH  /  akampananRpasyeva
sadguNArpitacetasaH  // 22 //  tadvarAnveSaNe tasya tataH sakAmavanmatiH  /
atyantavyAkulaprAyaH kanyAduHkhaM manasvinAm  // 23 //  gamiSyati pati ilAdhyaM
ramayiSyati taM ciram  /  bhaviSyatyujjhitA doSairaticintA nRNAM sutA  // 24 //
AhUya suhRdaH sarvAstato vijJAnabhUSaNAn  /  rAjA varavinizcityai
rahogehamazizriyat  // 25 //  jagAda mantriNazcaiva maho nikhilavedinaH  /
sUrayo mama kanyAyA vadata pravaraM varam  // 26 //  rahane lagA thA tabhIse usa
parvatakA 'mahendragiri' nAma par3a gayA thA aura usa nagarakA mahendranagara
nAma prasiddha ho gayA thA  // 13-14|| rAjA mahendrako hRdayavegA rAnImeM
aridama Adi sau guNavAna putra utpanna hae  // 15 //  unake aMjanAsundarI nAmase
prasiddha choTI bahana utpanna hii| vaha aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno tIna lokakI
sundara striyoMkA rUpa ikaTThA kara usake samUhase hI usakI racanA huI thI  //
16|| usakI prabhA nIla kamalake samAna sundara thI, hastarUpa pallava atyanta
prazasta the, caraNa kamalake bhItarI bhAgake samAna the, stana hathIke
gaNDasthalake tulya the  // 17 //  usakI kamara patalI thI, nitamba sthUla the,
jaMghAe~ uttama ghuTanoMse yukta thIM, usake zarIrameM aneka zubha lakSaNa the,
usakI donoM bhujalatAeM praphulla mAlatIko mAlAke samAna komala thIM  // 18 //
kAnoM taka lambe evaM kAntirUpI mUThase yukta usake donoM netra aise jAna
par3ate the mAno kAmadevake sudUragAmI bANa hI hoM  // 19 //  vaha gandhavaM Adi
kalAoMko jAnanevAlI thI isalie sAkSAt sarasvatIke samAna jAna par3atI thI aura
rUpase lakSmIke tulya lagatI thii||20|| isa prakAra aneka guNoMse sahita vaha
kanyA kisI samaya golAkAra bhramaNa karatI huI geMda khela rahI thI ki pitAkI
usapara dRSTi pdd'ii| pitAne dekhA ki kanyAkA zarIra nava-yauvanase suzobhita ho
rahA hai| use dekha jisa prakAra uttama guNoMmeM citta lagAnevAle rAjA
akampanako apanI putrI sulocanAke yogya vara DhU~r3hanekI cintA huI thI aura
usase vaha atyanta duHkhI huA thA usI prakAra rAjA mahendrako bhI putrIke yogya
vara DhU~r3hanekI cintA huI so ThIka hI hai kyoMki svAbhimAnI manuSyoMko kanyAkA
duHkha atyanta vyAkulatA utpanna karanevAlA hotA hai  // 21-23 //  kanyAke
pitAko sadA yaha cintA lagI rahatI hai ki kanyA uttama patiko prApta hogI yA
nahIM, yaha use cirakAla taka ramaNa karA sakegI yA nahIM aura nirdoSa raha
sakegI yA nhiiN| yathArthameM putrI manuSyake lie bar3I cintA hai  // 24 //
athAnantara rAjA mahendra jJAnarUpI alaMkArase alaMkRta samasta mitrajanoMko
bulAkara varakA nizcaya karaneke lie ekAnta gharameM gaye  // 25 //  vahAM
unhoMne mantriyoMse kahA ki aho mantrijano! Apa loga saba kucha jAnate haiM
tathA vidvAn haiM ataH merI kanyAke yogya uttama vara batalAie  // 26 //  1.
pRthivIdharaH parvataH  /  2. pratiSu 'jAyata' iti pAThaH  /  3.
udayAdyanujAsteSAM ma.  /  4. nirmitAH ma.  /  5. pathazreNI ma.  /  6.
salakSaNA kha.  /  7. sa bhramaNam  /  8. duHkhitaH ma.  /  9. ekAntagrahama-sa.
/

Page #386 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
One of the ministers, the counselor, spoke up and said, "My firm opinion is that
this maiden should be given to Ravana, the lord of the Rakshasas, the ruler of
the Bharata land." ||27|| "By obtaining Ravana as a relative, the lord of all
the Vidyadharas, your influence will spread throughout the earth, even to the
ends of the oceans." ||28|| "Or, O King, if you wish, give her to Indrajit or
Meghnad, the younger sons of Ravana. Even by giving her to them, Ravana will be
a relative." ||29|| "Or, if this is not to your liking, then let the maiden
choose her own husband, that is, hold a Swayamvara. By doing so, you will not
create any enemies." ||30|| Having said this, the minister of the Amarsagar
remained silent. Then, a wise minister named Sumati spoke clearly. ||31|| He
said, "Ravana has many wives, and he is very arrogant. Even if he gets her, he
will not develop any affection for us." ||32|| "Although this supremely powerful
and pleasure-seeking Ravana has the form of a sixteen-year-old boy, his age is
much greater." ||33|| "Therefore, I do not think it is appropriate to give him
the maiden. On the other hand, if you give the maiden to Meghnad, Indrajit will
be angry, and if you give her to Indrajit, Meghnad will be angry. Therefore,
neither of these suitors is suitable." ||34|| "It is said that there was a great
war between the sons of King Srishena over a courtesan, which caused great
sorrow to their father. It is true, for what cannot happen because of a woman?"
||35|| Then, a minister named Taradharayana, whose heart was filled with good
intentions, approved of the previous minister's words and spoke as follows.
||36|| He said, "To the south of the Vijayadhip mountain range, there is a city
called Kanakpur. There lives King Hiranyabha, whose queen's name is Sumana."
||37|| "They had a son named Saudamini, who was very handsome, with great fame,
brilliance, and age." ||38|| "He is a master of all knowledge and arts, a
festival for the eyes of the people, unparalleled in his qualities, and his
actions are pleasing to all." ||39||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pacapurANe tantra mantrI jagAdaikaH kanyeyaM bharatAdhipe  /  yojyatAM
rakSasAmIza iti me 'nizcitaM matam  // 27 //  rAvaNaM svajanaM prApya
sarvavidyAdharAdhipam  /  jagatyAM sAgarAntAyAM pramAvaste bhramiSyati  // 28 //
athavendrajite yUne meghanAdAya vA nRpa  /  dIyatAmevamapyeSa rAvaNastatra
bAndhavaH  // 29 //  arthatanna tavAbhISTaM tataH kanyA svayaMvarA  /
vimucyatAM na bairI te tathA satyupajAyate  // 30 //  isyuktvA viratiM yAte
mantriNyamarasAgare  /  vidvAnsumatisaMjJAko jagAda vacanaM sphuTam  // 31 //
dazAsyo'nekapatnIko mahAhavAragocaraH  /  imAM prApyApi no tasya prIti rasmAsa
jAyate  // 32 //  SoDazAbdasamAne'pi satyAkAre'sya bhoginaH  /  utkRSTameva
vijJeyaM nayaH paramatejasaH  // 33 //  indrajinmeghavAhAya sati dAne prakupyati
/  meghavAhastathA tasmai tasmAttAvapi no varau  // 34 //  zrISeNasutayorAsId
gaNikAthaM tadA mahat  /  pitRduHkhakara yuddhaM strIhetoH kiM na veSyate  // 35
//  vAkyaM tato'numanyedaM nAmnAM tArAdharAyaNaH  /  jagAda vacanaM cainaM
mAvena tamAnasaH  // 36 //  jayAdridakSiNaM sthAnaM kanakaM nAma vidyate  /
rAjA tatra hiraNyAmaH sumanAstasya bhAminI  // 37 //  abhavattanayastasya nAmnA
saudAminIpramaH  /  mahatA yazasA kAnsyA vayasA cAtizomanaH  // 38 //
sarvavidyAkalApAro lokanetramahotsavaH  /
guNairanupamazceSTAraJjitAkhilaviSTapaH  // 39 //  taba eka mantrIne kahA ki
yaha kanyA bharata kSetrake svAmI rAkSasoMke adhipati rAvaNake lie dI jAnI cAhie
aisA merA nizcita mata hai  // 27 //  samasta vidyAdharoMke svAmI rAvaNa jaise
svajanako pAkara ApakA prabhAva samudrAnta pRthivImeM phaila jAyegA  // 28 //
athavA he rAjan ! rAvaNake putra indrajit aura meghanAda taruNa haiM so inheM
yaha kanyA dIjie kyoMki unheM denepara bhI rAvaNa svajana hogA  /  / 29 /  /
athavA yaha bAta bhI Apako iSTa nahIM hai to phira kanyAko svayaM pati cunaneke
lie chor3a dIjie arthAt isakA svayaMvara kiijie| aisA karanese ApakA koI vairI
nahIM bana sakegA  // 30 //  itanA kahakara jaba amarasAgara mantrI cupa ho gayA
taba sumati nAmakA dUsarA vidvAn mantrI spaSTa vacana bolA  // 31 //  usane kahA
ki rAvaNake aneka patniyAM haiM, sAtha hI vaha mahAahaMkArI hai isalie ise
pAkara bhI usakI hama logoM meM prIti utpanna nahIM hogI  // 32 //  yadyapi isa
parama pratApI bhogI rAvaNakA AkAra solaha varSake puruSake samAna hai to bhI
usakI Ayu adhika to hai hI  // 33 /  /  ataH isake lie kanyA denA meM ucita
nahIM samajhatA  /  dUsarA pakSa indrajit aura meghanAdakA rakhA so yadi
meghanAdake lie kanyA dI jAtI hai to indrajit kupita hotA hai aura indrajitake
lie dete haiM jo meghanAda kupita hotA hai isalie ye donoM vara bhI ThIka nahIM
haiM  // 34 //  pahale rAjA zrISeNake putroMmeM eka gaNikAke nimitta pitAko
duHkhI karanevAlA bar3A yuddha huA thA yaha sunanemeM AtA hai so ThIka hI hai
kyoMki strIkA nimitta pAkara kyA nahIM hotA hai. ?  // 35 //  tadanantara jisakA
hRdaya sadabhiprAyase yukta thA aisA tArAdharAyaNa nAmakA mantrI, pUrva mantrIke
vacanoMkI anumodanA kara isa prakArake vacana bolA ||36 /  /  usane kahA ki
vijayadhiparvatakI dakSiNa zreNImeM eka kanakapura nAmakA nagara hai| vahA~ rAjA
hiraNyAbha rahate haiM unakI rAnIkA nAma sumanA hai  // 37 /  /  una donoMke
vidyutprabha nAmakA putra utpanna huA hai jo bahuta bhArI yaza, kAnti aura
avasthAse atyanta sundara hai  // 38 //  vaha samasta vidyAoM aura kalAoMkA
pAragAmI hai, logoMke netroMkA mAno mahotsava hI hai, guNoMse anupama hai, aura
apanI ceSTAoMse 1. nizcayam-ma.  /  2. atha taM na ka., kha., ma., ba., j.| 3.
yAti m.| 4. prItirasyAM sujAyate kh.| 5. adhikameva  /  6. tArAndharAyaNaH ka.,
m.| 7. svena ka., ma., ba., j.| 8. hatamAnasaH b.| hRtamAnasaH  /  ka., ma., j|
,

Page #387 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The fifteenth chapter  All the celestial beings and vidyadharas, even united,
could not conquer him by any means. It seems as if he was created by gathering
the power of the three worlds. ||40|| If you agree, let this maiden be given to
him, so that a union of worthy couples may be produced for a long time. ||41||
Then the minister named Sandehaparaga, shaking his head and closing his eyes for
a long time, spoke the following words. ||42|| He said, "This one is a future
great being, and he constantly thinks, 'Where did my ancestors go?' So it seems
that knowing the nature of the world, he will attain supreme detachment." ||43||
This young man, whose soul is unattached to worldly objects, will abandon the
householder's state at the age of eighteen, breaking the great illusion of
enjoyment. ||44||  He, with a great mind, will abandon both external and
internal attachments, and attaining perfect knowledge, will attain Nirvana.
||45||  Just as the night becomes devoid of beauty when it is devoid of the
moon, which illuminates the world, so this maiden will become devoid of beauty
when she is separated from him. ||46||  Therefore, listen! There is a city
called Aditya-pura, beautiful like Indra's city, shining like the sun with
jewels. ||47||  In it lives a king named Prahlada, who is full of enjoyments and
appears like the moon among the vidyadharas. Prahlada's queen is Ketumati, who
is adorned like the banner of Kamadeva due to her beauty. ||48||  They have a
son named Pavananjay, who is very powerful, handsome, an ocean of virtues, and
adorned with ornaments like the eyes. ||49||  His very tall body is filled with
many auspicious signs. He is a home of arts, a hero, and free from evil deeds.
||50||  He is enshrined in the hearts of all people, and even in a hundred
years, his entire collection of virtues cannot be described. ||51||  Or, the
knowledge that is imparted through words remains unclear. Therefore, go and show
this one, who has the radiance of a god. ||52||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcadazaM pava suravidyAdharaiH sarvairekIbhUyApi yatnataH  /
ajayyastrijagacchaktisaMgraheNeve nirmitaH  //  40  //  kanyeyaM dIyatAM tasmai
bhavatAM yadi saMmatam  /  cirAdutpadyatAM yogI dampatyoranurUpayoH  // 41 //
uttamAGgaM tato dhUvA' saMmIlya nayane ciram  /  jagAda vacanaM mantrI nAmnA
saMdehapAragaH  //  42  //  bhavyo'yaM pUrvajA yAtA mama kveti vicintayat  /
saMsAraprakRtiM buddhvA nirvedaM parameSyati  // 43 //  viSayeSvaprasaktAtmA
varSe'STAdazasaMkhyaike  /  makva bhogamahAlAnaM gRhitAM parihAsyati  // 44 //
bahirantazca sa saGgaM parityajya mahAmanAH  /  kevalajJAnamutpAdya kila
nirvANameSyati  // 45 //  viyuktAnena bAleyaM bhraSTazobhA maviSyati  /
zarvarIva zazAGkena jagadAlokakAriNA  // 46 //   zRNutAto'sti
nagaramAdityapurasaMjJakam  /  purandarapurAkAraM ratnairAditya bhAsuram  // 47
//  nabhazcarazazAGko'tra prahlAdo nAma bhogavAn  /  tasya ketumatI patnI ketu
manasavAsinaH  // 48 //  tayorvikramasaMbhAro rUpazIlo guNAmbudhiH  /
pavanaJjayanAmAsti tanayo nayamaNDanaH  //  49  //
zubhalakSaNasaMcchannavizAlottuGgavigrahaH  /  kalAnAM nilayo vIro
dUrIbhUtadurIhitaH ||50|| saMvatsarazatenApi yasya vaktuM na zakyate  /
guNagrAmo'khila:' ' prAptasamastajanacetasaH  //  51  //  athavA
vacanajJAnamaspaSTamupajAyate  /  ato gatvaiva vokSadhvamimaM devasamadyutim
||52|| usane samasta lokako anuraMjita kara rakhA hai || 39 || samasta deva -
vidyAdhara eka hokara bhI use prayatnapUrvaka nahIM jIta sakate haiN| aisA jAna
par3atA hai ki mAno vaha tInoM lokoMkI zakti ikaTThI kara hI banAyA gayA hai
||40|| yadi ApakI sammati ho to yaha kanyA use do jAve jisase yogya dampatiyoM
kA cirakAlake lie saMyoga utpanna ho sake ||41 || 337 tadanantara sandehapAraga
nAmakA mantrI sira hilAkara tathA cirakAla taka netra banda kara nimnAMkita
vacana bolA ||42 || usane kahA ki yaha nikaTa bhavya hai tathA nirantara aisA
vicAra karatA rahatA hai ki mere pUrvaja kahA~ gaye ? so isase jAna par3atA hai
ki yaha saMsArakA svabhAva jAnakara parama vairAgyako prApta ho jAyegA ||43||
jisakI AtmA viSayoMmeM anAsakta rahatI hai aisA yaha kumAra aThAraha varSako
avasthAmeM bhogarUpI mahAAlAnakA bhaMga kara gRhastha avasthA chor3a degA ||44||
vaha mahAmanA bahiraMga aura antaraMga parigrahakA tyAga kara tathA kevalajJAna
utpanna kara nirvANako prApta hogA || 45 || so jisa prakAra jagatko prakAzita
karanevAle candramAse rahita honepara rAtri zobhAhIna ho jAtI hai usI prakAra
isase viyukta honepara yaha bAlA zobhAhIna ho jAvegI ||46|| isalie merI bAta
suno, indrake nagarake samAna sundara tathA ratnoMse sUryake samAna dedIpyamAna
eka Adityapura nAmakA nagara hai isameM prahlAda nAmakA rAjA rahatA hai jo
bhogoMse yukta hai tathA vidyAdharoM ke bIca candramAke samAna jAna par3atA hai
/  prahlAdakI rAnI ketumatI hai jo ki saundaryake kAraNa kAmadevakI patAkAke
samAna suzobhita hai || 47-48  //  una donoMke eka pavanaMjaya nAmakA putra hai
jo atyanta parAkramI, rUpavAn guNoMkA sAgara tathA nayarUpI AbhUSaNoMse
vibhUSita hai ||49|| usakA atizaya U~cA zarIra aneka zubha lakSaNoMse vyApta
hai, vaha kalAoMkA ghara, zUravIra tathA khoTI ceSTAoM se dUra rahanevAlA hai
||50 //  vaha saba logoMke cittameM basA huA hai tathA sau varSameM bhI usake
samasta guNoM kA samUha kahA nahIM jA sakatA hai  // 51 //  athavA vacanoMke
dvArA jo kisIkA jJAna karAyA jAtA hai vaha aspaSTa hI rahatA hai isalie
devatulya kAntiko dhAraNa karanevAle isa 1 saMgraheNa vinirmitaH ma  /  2.
kampayitvA  /  3. saMjJake ma  /  4. bhuktvA ma  /  5. mahAlAbhaM ja., ma.  /
mahAlInAM kha.  /  6. gRhe tAM kha.  /  7. zRNuta + ataH + asti  /  8. kAmasya
/  9. vizAlo tuGga ma.  /  10. khilaprAptasamasta ma, ka., ba.  /  43

Page #388 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the English translation of the provided text, while maintaining the
Sanskrit words:  ---  338   In the Pappapurana, thereafter, having reached the
paths of the ears through the qualities of the Kaitan MatÄ, all were filled with
supreme joy, revealing inward delight. 53. Having heard this news, even the
maiden blossomed with delight, like the kumudini (water lily) upon merely seeing
the rays of the moon. 54. Meanwhile, at that very moment, the time of the spring
season arrived, and the cold season was energized to capture the beauty of the
women's lotus-like faces. 55. The Kamalini (lotus) bloomed, and new clusters of
lotuses, having long anticipated, began to mix with the gathering of bumblebees.
56. The dense foliage, flowers, and sprouts were produced abundantly, seemingly
vibrating with the embrace of the goddess of spring. 57. The honey-drenched
blooms created a melody that pierced the hearts of people, akin to the arrows of
Kamadeva (the god of love). 58. The sweet calls of the cuckoos, which disrupt
the pride of women, began to evoke a sense of agitation in the people, as if the
spring itself were engaged in conversation. 59. The lips of the women,
previously affixed with pain from their husbands' bites, now experienced a
refreshing clarity after a long time. 60. A heavy affection began to manifest
among the beings of the world, apparent through their altruistic deeds. 61. The
wandering bumblebee, with the wind of its wings, began to relieve a tired
bumblebee from its exertions. 62. At that time, a buck was uprooting tender
grass for the doe, which brought her delight akin to receiving nectar. 63. The
elephant was scratching itself for the comfort of the female elephant. In this
act, its mouth's foliage fell and the female elephant's eyes closed with
pleasure. 64. The vine-like women, with clusters of breasts leaning down and
hands like leaves swaying, embraced the tree-like men with the bees perched upon
their eyes. 65.   From the southern direction emerged the Malaya (a fragrant
wind).   1. This is Kaitan MatÄ.   2. The qualities of Kaitan MatÄ.   3.
Bumblebee.   4. Of the arrows of love.   5. Manifesting beauty.   6. Emerging.
7. As the buck scratches.   8. The mouth fell.   9. The comfort of the female
elephant.   10. They embraced equally.   11. Emerging from the mouth.    ---

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 338 papapurANe tataH kaitumatasyodye guNaiH zrotrapathaM gataiH  /  sarve te
paramaM prAptAH pramodaM kRtasaMmadAH  // 53 //  zrutvA kanyApi tAM vArtA
vicakAsa pramodataH  /  nizAkarakarAlokamAtrAdiva kumudatI  // 54 //
atrAntare'tyayaM prAptaH kAlo himakaNAnvitaH  /
kAminIvadanAmbhojalAvaNyaharaNodyataH  // 55 /  /  navaM paTalamabjAnAM
nalinInAmajAyata  /  cirotkaNThitamadhvAzasamUhakRtasaGgamam  // 56 //  ghanaH
zAkhAbhRtAM jajJe patrapuSpAGkurodbhavaH  /
madhulakSmIpariSvaGgasaMjAtapulakAkRtiH  // 57 //  cUtasya maJjarIjAlaM
madhuvratakRtasvanam  /  manolokasya vivyAdha paTalaM mArasAyakam  // 5 //
kokilAnAM svanazcakre mAninImAnamaJjanaH  /  janasya vyAkulIbhAvaM
vasantAlApatAM gataH  // 59 //  ramaNadvijadaSTAnAmoSThAnAM vedanAbhRtAm  /
udapadyata vaizA cireNa varayoSitAm  // 60 //  sneho babhUva cAtyantamanyonyaM
jagataH param  /  upakArasamAdhAnaparehAprakaTIkRtaH  // 61 //  bhramarI
bhramaNadhAntA ramaNaH pakSavAyunA  /  parito bhramaNaM kurvazcakAra
vigatazramAm  // 62 //  dUrvApravAlamuddhRtya sAraGgayai pRSato dadau  /
tasyAstenAmRteneva kApi prItirajAyata  // 63 //  kairikaNDUyanaM reje
vadanabhraMzipallavam  /  kariNyAH sukhasaMbhAranimIlitavilocanam  // 64 //
stbkstnnmraamishcltpllvpaannibhiH| samAliGgayanta
vallImirdhamarAkSobhiraGaghripAH  // 65 //  dakSiNAzAmukhodgIrNaH''prAvartata
samIraNaH  /  preryamANa ivAnena rviraasiidudggtiH||66|| yuvAko svayaM jAkara hI
dekha lIjie  // 52 //  tadanantara karNa mArgako prApta hue pavanaMjayake
utkRSTa guNoMse saba loga parama harSako prApta ho Antarika prasannatA prakaTa
karane lage  // 53 /  /  tathA kanyA bhI usa vArtAko sunakara harSase isa taraha
khila uTho jisa taraha ki candramAkI kiraNoMko dekhane mAtrase kumudinI khila
uThatI hai  /  / 54|| athAnantara isI bIcameM vasanta Rtu AyI aura striyoMke
mukha kamalakI sundaratAke apaharaNameM udyata zItakAla samApta huA  // 55 /  /
kamalinI praphullita huI aura naye kamaloMke samUha cirakAlase utkaNThita
bhramara-samUhake sAtha samAgama karane lage arthAt unapara bhramaroMke samUha
gUMjane lage  // 56 //  vRkSoMke patra, puSpa, aMkura Adi ghanI mAtrAmeM utpanna
huai jo aise jAna par3ate the mAno vasanta lakSmIke AliMganase unameM romAMca hI
utpanna hue hoM  // 57 //  jinapara bhramara guMjAra kara rahe the aise Amake
mauroMke samUha kAmadevake bANoM ke paTalake samAna logoMkA mana bedhane lage  /
/ 58|| mAnavatI striyoMke mAnako bhaMga karanevAlA kokilAoMkA madhura zabda
logoMko vyAkulatA utpanna karane lgaa| vaha kokilAoMkA zabda aisA jAna par3atA
thA mAno usake bahAne vasanta Rtu hI vArtAlApa kara rahI ho  // 59|| striyoMke
jo oTha patike dA~toMse DaeNse jAneke kAraNa pahale vedanAse yukta rahate the
aba cirakAla bAda unameM vizadatA utpanna huI  // 60 //  jagatke jIvoMmeM
paraspara bahuta bhArI sneha prakaTa hone lgaa| unakA yaha sneha upakAraparaka
ceSTAoMse spaSTa hI prakaTa ho rahA thA  // 61 //  cAroM ora bhramaNa karatA huA
bhramara apane paMkhoM kI vAyuse, thakI huI bhramarIko zramarahita karane lagA
// 62 /  /  usa samaya hariNa dUrvAke pravAla ukhAr3a-ukhAr3akara hariNIke lie
de rahA thA aura usase hariNIko aisA prema utpanna ho rahA thA mAno amata hI use
mila rahA ho  // 63 /  /  hAthI hathinI ke lie khujalA rahA thaa| isa kAryameM
usake mukhakA pallava chUTakara nIce gira gayA thA aura hathinIke netra sukhake
bhArase nimIlita ho gaye the  // 64 //  jo guccherUpI stanoMse jhuka rahI thIM,
jinake pallavarUpI hAtha hila rahe the aura Upara baiThe hue bhramara hI jinake
netra the aisI latArUpI striyA~ vRkSarUpa puruSoMkA AliMgana kara rahI thIM  //
65 //  dakSiNa dizAke mukhase prakaTa huA malaya1. ketumatyA ayamiti
kaitumatastasya pavanaMjayasya  /  2. kaitumtsyoccai-| 3. bhramara  /  4.
smarapatriNAm ma.  /  5. upapadyata m.| 6. -mudatya ma.  /  7. karikaNDUyitaM
m.| 8. vadanaM bhraMzi m.| 2. kariNyAM m.| 10. samaliGgacanta m.| 11.
mukhodgIrNAH ma.  /  ,

Page #389 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Panchadarsha Parva ### 339  **67.** The saffron-colored flowers, trembling
due to the wind, were falling down. The travelers saw them as the locks of
Madhusinha.  **68.** The saffron of the Ankola tree, shining brightly, was
terrifying to the women, like the fangs of the spring lion or the goad of the
elephant of pride.  **69.** The dense network of Ketaki flowers, buzzing with
bees, seemed to be spread by spring to attract the hearts of the separated
women.  **70.** The Asoka tree, adorned with buds, was swaying with its new
leaves. It seemed like a mass of love, ignited by the abundance of beauty.
**71.** The dense Kinshuka trees, shining brightly in the forests, seemed like
the flames of sorrow that remained in the hearts of the separated women.
**72.** Spring, with its pollen born from flowers, spread across the entire
horizon, as if celebrating a grand festival with fragrant powder.  **73.** When
lovers, bound by the chains of love, cannot bear even a moment's separation, how
can they endure being separated by distance?  **74.** Inspired by devotion to
the Jinas and filled with great joy, the gods, led by Nandishvara, set out to
the island of Nandishvara on the eighth day of the Phalguna month.  **75.** At
that time, the king of the Vidyadharas, accompanied by his servants carrying
offerings, went to Mount Kailasa.  **76.** The mountain was highly revered
because of the liberation of Lord Rishabhadeva. Filled with devotion, King
Mahendra, along with his family, also went there.  **77.** After offering
worship, praise, and salutations to the Jina with devotion, the glorious King
Mahendra sat comfortably on the golden stone platform.  **78.** At that time,
King Prahlada also went to Mount Kailasa to worship the Jina. After completing
his worship, he wandered around and saw King Mahendra.  **79.** Seeing his son,
whose eyes were blooming and whose mind was filled with joy, King Mahendra, with
great affection, welcomed him with open arms.  **80.** King Mahendra, rising up
with joy, embraced Prahlada, the cause of his happiness, with a warm embrace.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcadarza parva 339 samIraNakRtAkampaH' kesaraprakaraH patan  /  madhusiMhasya
pAnthena dadRze kesarotkaraH  // 67 //  daMSTrA vasantasiMhasya
mAnastamberamAGkuzaH  /  aGkolakezaraM reje proSitastrIbhayaGkaram  // 6 //
ghanaM kairavajaM jAlaM kvaNabhRGgakadambakam  /  viyoginImanAMsIva
madhunAkraSTumujjhitam  // 69 //  kuDmaloddIpito'zokaH pracalannavapallavaH  /
prAcuryAdvanitodIrNarAgarAzirivAbabhau  // 7 //  kiMzukaM ghanamatyantaM didIpe
vanarAjiSu  /  viyoginImanaHsthAtiriktaduHkhAnilopamam  // 7 //
vyAptadikcakravAlena rajasA puSpajanmanA  /  vasantaH paTavAsena cakAreva
mahotsavam  // 72 //  nimeSamapi sehAte na strIpuMsAvadarzanam  /  kuta
evAnyadezana saMgama premabandhanau  // 73 //  gantumArebhire devA
jinabhaktipracoditAH  /  nandIzvaraM mahAmodAH phAlgunASTadinotsave  // 74 //
jagmuraSTApade tatra kAle vidyAdharAdhipAH  /
pUjopakaraNavyagrakarabhRtyagaNAnvitAH  // 75 //  pUjyaM nAbheyanirvRtyA tamati
bhaktinirbharaH  /  sameto bandhuvargeNa mahendro'pi samIyivAn  // 76 //  sa
tatra jinamarcitvA stutvA navA ca bhAvataH  /  raukme zilAtale zrImAnAsAJcake
yathAsukham  // 77 //  prahlAdo'pi tadAyAsIttaM giriM vanditaM jinam  /
kRtAbhISTaM bhramannAsInmahendrakSaNagocaraH  // 78 //  mahendrasya tato'bhyAzaM
sutaprItyA mahAdaraH  /  sasapa vikasannetraH prahlAdaH prItimAnasaH  // 79 //
abhyutthAya mahendro'pi muditaH purusaMbhramaH  /  AliGgantaM samAliGgat
prahlAda lAdakAraNam  // 8 //  samIra bahane lagA aura sUrya uttarAyaNa ho gayA
so aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno isa malayasamIrase prerita hokara hI sUrya
uttarAyaNa ho gayA thA  /  / 66 /  /  vAyuse hilate hue maulazrIke phUloMkA
samUha nIce gira rahA thA jise pathika loga aisA samajha rahe the mAno
vasantarUpI siMhako jaTAoMkA samUha hI ho  // 67|| virahiNI striyoMko bhaya
utpanna karanevAlI aMkola vRkSake puSpoMkI kezara aisI suzobhita ho rahI thI
mAno vasantarUpI siMhako daMSTrA arthAt jabar3e hI hoM athavA mAnarUpI hAthIkA
aMkuza hI ho  // 68 //  jisapara bhramara gUMja rahe the aisA kumudoMkA saghana
jAla aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno viyoginI striyoMke manako khIMcaneke lie
vasantane jAla hI choDa rakhA thA  // 69 //  jisake naye-naye patte hila rahe
the aisA boMDiyoMse suzobhita azokakA vRkSa aisA suzobhita ho rahA thA mAno
adhikatAke kAraNa striyoMke dvArA ugalA huA rAgakA samUha hI ho  // 70||
vanazreNiyoMmeM palAzake saghana vRkSa aise suzobhita ho rahe the mAno virahiNI
striyoMke mana meM Thaharanese bAkI bace hue duHkharUpo agnike samUha ho hoM  /
/ 71 /  /  samasta dizAoMko vyApta karanevAlA phUloMkA parAga saba ora phaila
rahA thA usase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno basanta sugandhita cUrNake dvArA
mahotsava ho manA rahA thA  /  / 72 /  /  jaba premarUpI bandhanase ba~dhe strI-
puruSa pala-bharake lie bhI eka dUsarekA adarzana nahIM sahana kara pAte the
taba anya dezameM gamana kisa prakAra sahana karate ? ||73 /  /  phAlguna mAsake
antima ATha dinameM ASTAhnika mahotsava AyA so jinabhaktise prerita tathA
mahAharSase bhare deva nandIzvara dvIpako jAne lage ||74 /  /  usI samaya pUjAke
upakaraNoMse vyagra hAthoMvAle sevakoMse sahita vidyAdhara rAjA kailAsa
parvatapara gaye  // 75 //  vaha parvata bhagavAn RSabhadevake mokSa jAnese
atyanta pUjanIya thA isalie bhaktise bharA rAjA mahendra bhI bandhuvargake sAtha
vahA~ gayA thA  /  / 76 /  /  zrImAna vaha rAjA mahendra vahA~para jina
bhagavAnakI bhAvapUrvaka acaMnA, stuti evaM namaskAra karake svarNamaya
zilAtalapara sakhapUrvaka baiTha gayA ||77|| usI samaya rAjA prahlAda bhI
jinendra devakI vandanA karaneke lie kelAsa parvatapara gayA thA so pUjAke
anantara bhramaNa karatA huA rAjA mahendrako dikhAI diyA  // 78 //  tadanantara
jisake netra vikasita ho rahe the aura mana prItise bhara rahA thA aisA prahlAda
putrako prItise bar3e Adarake sAtha rAjA mahendrake pAsa gayA  // 79 //  so
harSase 1. vakulakusumasamUhaH  /  2. jaTAsamUhaH  /  3. pressit-m.| 4.
kauravajaGghAlaM ja., kh.| kauravakaM jAlaM ma.  /  5. kRSTa-ma.  /  6.
zokapracalannava-ma.  /  7. RSabhadevanirvANena  /  8. raukmye ma.  /  9.
mahenaNa khagocaraH ma.  /

Page #390 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
340 In the Padma Purana, the two kings, Mahendra and Prahlad, sat down
comfortably on a beautiful stone platform and inquired about each other's well-
being. ||8|| Mahendra then said, "My dear friend, how can I be well when my mind
is constantly troubled by the thought of finding a suitable match for my
daughter?" ||82|| "I have a daughter who is ready for marriage, but I am
constantly wondering who I should give her to. My mind is restless." ||83||
"Ravana has many wives, and his sons, Indrajit and Meghanada, would be angry if
I gave my daughter to one of them. Therefore, I am not interested in them."
||84|| "In the city of Hemapura, there is a son of King Kanakadyuti named
Vidyutprabha. He will attain Nirvana in a few days." ||85|| "This news has been
spread by a knowledgeable sage, and it is known throughout the world. I have
also heard about it." ||86|| "Therefore, after consulting with my council of
ministers, I have decided that your son, Pavananjay, should be the one to marry
my daughter." ||87|| "O Prahlad, you have come here and fulfilled my desire. I
am overjoyed to see you." ||88|| Prahlad, who was delighted to have his wish
fulfilled, said, "My dear friend, I am also concerned about finding a suitable
bride for my son." ||89|| "Your words have given me a sense of peace that cannot
be expressed in words." ||90|| Then, the fathers of Anjana and Pavananjay
expressed their desire to hold their wedding ceremony on the beautiful banks of
the Manasa mountain. ||91|| Therefore, their armies, which were equipped with
tents and filled with the sounds of elephants, horses, and foot soldiers, were
stationed there. ||92|| The astrologers, who knew the movements of all the
celestial bodies, declared that the wedding would be auspicious after three
days. ||93|| Pavananjay had heard from his people that Anjana was a beautiful
woman, and he could not bear to wait three days to see her. ||94|| Mahendra
immediately got up and welcomed Prahlad with a warm embrace, expressing his joy.
||80|| After that, both kings sat down comfortably on a beautiful stone platform
and inquired about each other's well-being. ||81||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 340 padmapurANe upaviSTau ca vizrabdhau tau manojJazilAtale  /  parasparaM
zarIrAdikuzalaM paryapRcchatAm  // 8 //  uvAceti mahendro'tha sakhe kiM kuzalaM
mama  /  kanyAnurUpasaMbandhacintAvyAkulitAtmanaH  // 82 //  asti me duhitA
yogyA varaM prAptuM manoharA  /  kasmai tAM pradadAmIti mama bhrAmyati mAnasam
// 83 //  rAvaNo bahupatnIkastassutau 'vrajato ruSam  /  dAnenAnyatarasyAto na
teSu rucirasti me  // 8 //  pure hemapurAbhikhye tanayaH kanakayuteH  /
vidyutprabho dinairalpainirvANaM pratipatsyate  // 45 //  mayeyaM viditA vArtA
prakaTA sarvaviSTape  /  kenApi kathitaM nUnaM saMjJAneneti yoginA  // 86 //
mantrimaNDalayuktasya tato mama vinishcitH| putrastava varatvena nirvAcyaH
pavanaJjayaH  // 8 //  manoratho'yamAyAtA tvayA' prahlAda pUritaH  /
samayenAsmi saMjAtaH kSaNena parinirvRtaH  // 8 //  tato'vocadalaM prItaH
prahlAdo labdhavAnchitaH  /  cintA mamApi putrasya dvitIyAnveSaNaM prati 89 //
tato'hamapi vAkyena svadIyenAmunA suhRt  /  zabdagocaratAyuktAM pariprAptaH
sukhAsikAm  // 10 //  saraso mAnasAkhyasya taTe'thAtyantacAruNi  /  gurubhyAM
vAnchitaM katu tayovavAhamaGgalam  // 9 //  sthite tatrobhayoH sene
kSaNakalpitasaMzraye  /  gajavAjipadAtInAmanukUlaravAkule  // 12 //  dineSu
triSu yAteSu tayoH sAMvatsarA jaguH  /  kalyANadivasaM jJAtanikhilajyotirIhitAH
// 13 //  zrutvA parijanAdeta sarvAvayavasundarIm  /  divasAnAM trayaM sehe na
'prAhAdiH pratIkSitum  // 9 //  bhare mahendrane bhI sahasA uThakara usakI
agavAnI kI aura Anandake kAraNa AliMgana karate hue prahlAdakA AliMgana kiyA
||80 /  /  tadanantara donoM hI rAjA nizcita hokara manohara zilAtalapara baiThe
aura paraspara zarIrAdikI kuzalatA pUchane lage  // 8 //  athAnantara rAjA
mahendrane kahA ki he mitra! merA mana to nirantara kanyAke anurUpa sambandha
DhU~r3hanekI cintAse vyAkula rahatA hai ataH kuzalatA kaise ho sakatI hai ?  //
82 /  /  merI eka kanyA hai jo vara prApta karane yogya avasthA meM hai, kisake
lie use DhU~ isI cintAmeM mana ghamatA rahatA hai  // 83 /  /  rAvaNa
bahupatnIka hai arthAt aneka patniyoMkA svAmI hai aura isake putra indrajit
tathA meghanAda kisI ekake lie denese zeSa roSako prApta hote haiM ataH una
tInoMmeM merI ruci nahIM hai  /  / 84 //  hemapura nagarameM rAjA kanakadyutike
vidyutprabha nAmakA putra hai so vaha thor3e hI dinoMmeM nirvANa prApta karegA
// 85 //  yaha bAta kisI samyagjJAnI munine kahI hai so samasta lokameM
prasiddha hai aura paramparAvaza mujhe bhI vidita huI hai  /  / 86 /  /  ataH
mantrimaNDalake sAtha baiThakara maiMne nizcaya kiyA hai ki Apake putra
pavanaMjayako hI kanyAkA vara cunanA cAhie  /  / 87 //  so he prahlAda ! yahA~
padhArakara tumane mere isa manorathako pUrNa kiyA hai| maiM tumheM dekhakara
kSaNa-bharameM hI santuSTa ho gayA hU~  // 8 //  tadanantara jise abhilaSita
vastukI prApti ho rahI hai aise prahlAdane bar3I prasannatAse kahA ki putrake
anurUpa vadhU DhUMr3hanekI mujhe bhI cintA hai  /  / 89 //  so he mitra! Apake
isa vacanase maiM jo zabdoMse na kahI jAye aisI nizcintatAko prApta huA hU~  //
90 //  athAnantara aMjanA aura pavanaMjayake pitAne vahIM mAnuSottara parvatake
atyanta sundara taTapara unakA vivAha-maMgala karanekI icchA kI  // 11 //
isalie kSaNa-bharameM hI jinake Dere-tambU taiyAra ho gaye the tathA jo hAthI,
ghor3e aura paidala sainikoMke anukUla zabdoMse vyApta thA aisI una donoMkI
senAeM vahIM Thahara gayIM  /  / 92 //  samasta jyotiSiyoMkI gatividhiko
jAnanevAle jyotiSiyoMne tIna dina bItaneke bAda vivAhake yogya dina batalAyA thA
// 96 //  pavanaMjayane parijanoMke mukhase suna rakhA thA ki aMjanAsundarI
sarvAMgasundarI hai isalie use dekhaneke lie vaha tIna dinakA vyavadhAna sahana
nahIM 1. vrajatI ma.  /  2. mAyAtA ja., b.| mAyAtastvayA ma., ka., kh.| 3.
bhAryAnveSaNam  /  4. muktA ma.  /  5. pitRbhyAm  /  6. pavanaMjayaH  /  .

Page #391 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
### Translation to English  **15**  This wind-born (pavananjaya), who is
tormented by the ten passions arising from lust, has become filled up like a
warrior in battle fully struck by arrows.   **96**  In the first passion,
thoughts concerning lust arise, leading to a desire for enjoyment. In the second
passion, there is a craving to see the external form.  **97**  In the third
passion, there is a slow, deep, and hot exhalation. In the fourth, a fever
arises that feels like the burning of sandalwood.   **18**  In the fifth
passion, the body begins to turn on the bed of flowers. In the sixth passion, he
begins to regard various kinds of delicious food as if they were poison.  **99**
In the seventh, being absorbed in conversations regarding the beloved, he
engages in nonsensical talk. In the eighth, madness manifests, causing him to
sing and dance.  **100**  In the ninth passion, this wind-born becomes faint due
to the serpent of desire, and in the tenth, he begins to feel the weight of
suffering that is experienced by oneself.  **101**  Gautama says that although
this wind-born was endowed with discernment, at that moment, his character
became indulgent; thus, he deserves to be condemned for such wicked desire.
**341**  From the aforementioned passions, the patience of the wind-born broke
down. His face became restless due to the continuous exhalation, and he began to
cover it with his palms.  **102**  He constantly kept his cheeks, filled with
sweat, in his palms, which increased their redness. In the pursuit of coolness,
he would sit on the leafy seats while dampening them with long, hot exhalations.
**103**  Enduring unbearable passions caused by deep strikes of arrows, this
wind-born frequently yawned, trembled again and again, and stretched repeatedly.
**104**  By constantly focusing on the woman, his sense faculties became futile,
meaning none of his senses acted properly, and he could find no patience even in
the best of placesâhe remained restless.  **105**  He became empty-hearted,
having abandoned all actions. For a moment, he might have held onto shame but
then quickly discarded it.  **106**  All of his limbs weakened, and he abandoned
all embellishments.  ---  The translation above incorporates the Sanskrit
phrases and maintains the original structure and meaning as accurately as
possible while translating to English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcadazaM pavaM saMgamotkaNThitaH so'yamebhirmanmathasaMbhavaiH  /  pUrito
dazabhirvegairbhaTo bANairivAhave ||15|| A tadviSayA cintA vege samupajAyate  /
dvitIye draSTumAkAro bahiH samabhilaSyate  //  96  //  tRtIye mandadIrghoSNaniH
zvAsAnAM vinirgamaH  /  caturthe saMjvaro dRSTajvalanopamacandanaH || 97 ||
vivartaH paJcame'Ggasya kusumaprastarAdiSu  /  manyate vividhaM svAdu SaSThe
bhaktaM viSopamam ||18|| saptame tarakathAsaktyA vipralApasamudbhavaH  /
unmattatASTame gItanRtyavibhramakAriNI  // 99 //  manoragadaSTasya navame
mUrcchanodbhavaH  /  dazame duHkhasaMmAraH svasaMvedyaH pravartate  //  100  //
vivekino'pi tasyedaM tadA jAtamanaGkuzam  /  caritaM vAyuvegasya hatAzaM
dhiganaGgakam  // 101 //  atha cetobhuvo vegairasau dhairyAtparicyutaH  /
udvartitakaracchanna nizvAsa pracalAnanaH  //  102  //  karasaGgAruNIbhUtasveda
vadgaNDamaNDalaH  /  uSNAtidIrgha nizvAsa glapitAsanapallavaH  //  103  //
jRmbhaNa kampanaM jambhAM mandaM kurvan punaH punaH  /  niHsahaM dhArayankAyaM
gADhAkalpakazalyataH  /  / 104 /  /  rAmAbhidhyAnato moghaM hRSIkapaTalaM dadhat
/  manojJeSvapi dezeSu mahatImadhRtiM vrajan  //  105  //  dadhAnaH
zUnyamAtmAnaM parityaktAkhilakriyaH  /  kSaNamAtraSTatAM bhUyaH
parimuJcanapatrapAm  //  106 //  tainubhUtasamastAGgaH paribhraSTavibhUSaNaH  /
dadhyAviti sacintena parivAreNa vIkSitaH  /  / 107 /  /  kara sakA ||94 ||
nirantara samAgamakI utkaNThA rakhanevAlA yaha pavanaMjaya kAmake dasa vegoM se
isa prakAra pUrNa ho gayA jisa prakAra ki yuddhameM koI yoddhA zatruke bANoMse
pUrNa ho jAtA hai-bhara jAtA hai ||95|| prathama vegameM use aMjanAviSayaka
cintA hone lagI arthAt manameM aMjanAkI icchA utpanna huI  /  dUsare vega samaya
bAhyameM usakI AkRti dekhane kI icchA huI ||96 || tIsare vegameM manda-lambI
aura garama sA~seM nikalane lgiiN| cauthe vegameM aisA jvara utpanna ho gayA ki
jisameM candana agnike samAna santApakArI jAna par3ane lagA ||17|| paMcama
vegameM usakA zarIra phUloMkI zayyApara karavaTeM badalane lagA  /  chaTheM
vegameM aneka prakArake svAdiSTa bhojanako vaha viSake samAna mAnane lagA ||98
//  sAtaveM vegameM usIkI carcA meM Asakta rahakara vipralApa - bakavAda karane
lagA  /  AThaveM vegameM unmattatA prakaTa ho gayI jisase kabhI gAne lagatA aura
kabhI nAcane lagatA thA  //  99  //  kAmarUpI sarpake dvArA ise hue usa
pavanaMjayako nauveM vegameM mUrcchA Ane lagI aura dasaveM vegameM jisakA svayaM
hI anubhava hotA thA aisA duHkhakA bhAra prApta hone lagA  //  100  //  gautama
svAmI kahate haiM ki yadyapi vaha pavanaMjaya vivekase yukta thA to bhI usa
samaya usakA caritra svacchanda ho gayA thA so aise duSTa kAmake lie dhikkAra ho
//  101  //  341 antara kAma uparyukta vegoMke kAraNa pavanaMjayakA dhairyaM
chUTa gyaa| usakA mukha nirantara nikalanevAle zvAsocchvAoMse caMcala ho gayA
aura vaha use apanI hatheliyoMse Dha~kane lagA  // 102 //  vaha svedase bhare
apane kapolamaNDalako sadA hathelIpara rakhe rahatA thA jisase usameM lAlimA
utpanna hI thI  /  vaha zItalatA prApta karaneke uddezyase pallavoMke Asanapara
baiThatA thA tathA use garamagarama lambI zvAsoMse mlAna karatA rahatA thA  //
103  //  bANoMke gahare prahAra se asahanIya kAmako dhAraNa karanevAlA vaha
pavanaMjaya bAra-bAra jamuhAI letA thA, bAra-bAra sihara uThatA thA aura bAra-
bAra a~gar3AI letA thA || 104 || nirantara strIkA dhyAna rakhanese usakI
indriyoM kA samUha vyarthaM ho gayA thA arthAt usakI koI bhI indriya apanA kArya
nahIM karatI thI aura acche-se-acche sthAnoMmeM bhI use dhairyaM prApta nahIM
hotA thA - vaha sadA adhIra hI banA rahatA thA  //  105  //  u zUnya hRdaya
hokara saba kAma chor3a diye the  /  kSaNa bharake lie vaha lajjAko dhAraNa
karatA bhI thA to punaH use chor3a detA thA || 106 || jisake samasta aMga
durbala ho gaye the aura jisane saba AbhUSaNa 1. pavanaMjayasya  /  2. kRzIbhUta
/

Page #392 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
342 Padma Purana I When will I see my beloved seated in my lap, touching her
lotus-like body and engaging in conversation? || 108 || Hearing this, my state
has become so painful. What will happen when I see her in person? I will surely
die. || 109 || Oh, what a wonder! My dear friend, though beautiful, is the cause
of my suffering. || 110 || Oh, good woman, why are you ready to burn the very
heart where you reside with the fire of sorrow? || 111 || Women are naturally
soft-hearted, but this seems contrary in your case, as you are causing me pain.
|| 112 || Oh, Cupid, even without a body, you cause me so much pain. If you had
a body, it would be even more unbearable. || 113 || Though there is no wound on
my body, the pain is immense. I am constantly moving around, even though I am
sitting in one place. || 114 || These three days will not pass peacefully for me
if I do not make her the object of my sight. || 115 || Therefore, what means can
I find to see her, by which my mind will attain peace? || 116 || Or, in all the
tasks to be done in this world, there is no other cause to be seen except my
best friend. || 117 || Thinking thus, Pavananjay spoke to his friend Prahasit,
who was sitting beside him like a shadow, as if another body born from his own
actions, and who was a confidant in all matters. || 118-119 || He said, "Friend,
you know my intentions, so what can I say? My words will only cause you pain."
|| 120 || Oh, friend, to whom can I express this sorrow, having abandoned you,
who has witnessed all the activities of the three worlds? || 121 || Pavananjay
was constantly thinking about the woman, and his family was very worried about
his condition. || 107 || He used to think, "When will I see my beloved seated in
my lap, touching her lotus-like body and engaging in conversation?" || 108 ||
"Hearing this, my state has become so painful. What will happen when I see her
in person? I will surely die." || 109 || "Oh, what a wonder! My dear friend,
though beautiful, is the cause of my suffering." || 110 || "Oh, good woman, why
are you ready to burn the very heart where you reside with the fire of sorrow?"
|| 111 || "Women are naturally soft-hearted, but this seems contrary in your
case, as you are causing me pain." || 112 || "Oh, Cupid, even without a body,
you cause me so much pain. If you had a body, it would be even more unbearable."
|| 113 || "Though there is no wound on my body, the pain is immense. I am
constantly moving around, even though I am sitting in one place." || 114 ||
"These three days will not pass peacefully for me if I do not make her the
object of my sight." || 115 || "Therefore, what means can I find to see her, by
which my mind will attain peace?" || 116 || "Or, in all the tasks to be done in
this world, there is no other cause to be seen except my best friend." || 117 ||
Thinking thus, Pavananjay spoke to his friend Prahasit, who was sitting beside
him like a shadow, as if another body born from his own actions, and who was a
confidant in all matters. || 118-119 || He said, "Friend, you know my
intentions, so what can I say? My words will only cause you pain." || 120 ||
"Oh, friend, to whom can I express this sorrow, having abandoned you, who has
witnessed all the activities of the three worlds?" || 121 || 1. Touching lotus-
like body. 2. I will not see, I will die. 3. Residence is made. 4. In whom you
are pleased. 5. Burn. 6. You are capable. 7. It is not done here. 8. You wander.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 342 padmapurANe I kadA nu tAmahaM kAntAM vIkSe svAGka nivezitAm  /  spRzan
kamalatulyAni gAtrANi kRtasaMkathaH || 108 || zrutvA tAvadayaM jAtA
mamAvasthAtiduHkhadA  /  Alokya tAM tu no pazyan bhaveyaM paJcatAM gataH  //
109  //  aho mahadidaM citraM manojJApi sakhI mama  /  yadasau duHkhamArasya
kAraNatvamupAgatA  // 110 //  ayi bhadre kathaM yasminnuSyate hRdaye tvayA  /
dagdhuM tadeva saktAsi paNDite duHkhavahninA  //  111  //  mRducittAH svabhAvena
bhavanti kila yoSitaH  /  madduHkhadAnato jAtaM viparItamidaM tava  //  112  //
anaGgaH san vyathAmetAmanaGga tvaM karoSi me  /  yadi nAma bhavetsAGgastataH
kaSTatamaM bhavet  //  113  //  taM na cAsti me dehe vedanA ca garIyasI  /
tiSThannekatra codeze bhramAmi kApi saMtatam  /  / 114  //  divasAnAM trayaM
naitanmama kSemeNa gacchati  /  yadi tAM viSayIbhAvamAnayAmi na cakSuSaH  //
115  //  atastadarzanopAyaH kataro me bhaviSyati  /  yasyAdhigamatazcittaM
prazAntimadhiyAsyati  //  116  //  athavA sarvakAryeSu sAdhanIyeSu viSTape  /
mitraM paramamujjhitvA kAraNaM nAnyadIkSyate  //  117  //  iti dhyAtvA sthitaM
pArzve chAyAbimbamivAnugam  /  vikriyAtaH samutpannaM zarIraM svamivAparam  //
118 //  nAmnA prahasitaM mitraM sarvavizrambhabhAjanam  /  mandagadgadayA vAcA
jagAda pavanaJjayaH ||119|| jAnAsyeva mamAkUtamataH kiM te nivedyate  /  kevalaM
mukharatvaM me karotyatyantaduHkhitAm  // 120 //  sakhe kasya vadAnyasya
duHkhametannivedyate  /  muktvA tvAM viditAzeSajagattrayaviceSTitam  //  121  //
utArakara alaga kara diye the aisA pavanaMjaya nirantara strIkA hI dhyAna karatA
rahatA thaa| parivArake loga bar3I cintAse usakI isa dazAko dekhate the || 107
|| vaha socA karatA thA ki maiM usa kAntAko apanI goda meM baiThI kaba dekhUMgA
aura usake kamalatulya zarIrakA sparza karatA huA usake sAtha kaba vArtAlApa
karU~gA || 108 || usakI carcA sunakara to hamArI yaha atyanta duHkha denevAlI
avasthA ho gayI hai phira sAkSAt dekhakara to na jAne kyA hogA ? use dekhakara
to avazya hI mRtyuko prApta ho jAU~gA || 109 || aho ! yaha bar3A Azcarya hai ki
vaha merI sakhI manohara hokara bhI mere lie duHkhakA kAraNa bana rahI hai |
110|| arI bhalI Adamina ? tU to bar3I paNDitA hai phira jisa hRdaya meM nivAsa
kara rahI hai use hI duHkharUpI agnise jalAneke lie taiyAra kyoM baiThI hai
||111|| striyA~ svabhAvase hI komalacitta hotI haiM para mere lie duHkha deneke
kAraNa tumhAre viSaya meM yaha bAta viparIta mAlUma hotI hai ||112 || he anaMga
! jaba tuma zarIrarahita hokara bhI itanI pIr3A utpanna kara sakate ho taba
phira yadi zarIrasahita hote to bar3A hI kaSTa hotA ||113 || mere zarIra meM
yadyapi ghAva nahIM hai to bhI pIr3A atyadhika ho rahI hai aura yadyapi eka
sthAnapara baiThA hU~ to bhI nirantara kahIM ghUmatA rahatA hU~ ||114 || yadi
meM use netroMkA viSaya nahIM banAtA hU~ - use dekhatA nahIM hU~ to mere ye tIna
dina kuzalatApUrvaka nahIM bIta sakeMge  //  115  //  isalie usake darzanakA
upAya kyA ho sakatA hai jise prApta kara citta zAnti prApta karegA  //  116  //
athavA isa saMsAra meM karane yogya samasta kAryoMmeM paramamitrako chor3akara
aura dUsarA kAraNa nahIM dikhAI detA | 117 | aisA vicArakara pavanaMjayane pAsa
hI baiThe hue prahasita nAmaka mitrase dhImI evaM gadgada vANI meM kahA  /  vaha
mitra chAyA ke samAna sadA pavanaMjayake sAtha rahatA thA  /  vikriyAse utpanna
hue unhIM ke dUsare zarIra ke samAna jAna par3atA thA aura sarva vizvAsakA pAtra
thA  /  / 118 - 119  //  usane kahA ki mitra ! tuma merA abhiprAya jAnate hI ho
ataH tumase kyA kahA jAye ? merI mukharatA kevala tumheM duHkhI hI karegI  //
120  //  he sakhe ! tInoM lokoMkI samasta ceSTAoMko 1. spRze kamala ma.  /  2.
no'pazyadbhaveyaM ma  /  3. nivAsa: kriyate  /  yasmin tuSyate ma  /  4. dagdhaM
ma  /  5. zaktAsi ma  /  6. kRtaM na cAtra ma  /  7. bhramasi ma  /

Page #393 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"Fifteen, the family member, is dear to the king as a student is to his teacher.
A wife is dear to her husband, a patient to his physician, a child to his
mother. In the same way, a wise man is dear to his friend. Therefore, I tell you
this.  Since I heard about the flawless beauty, the daughter of King Mahendra, I
have been overwhelmed by the arrows of Kamadeva.  I cannot bear to spend even
three days without seeing that beautiful Priya, who steals my heart.  Therefore,
make an effort so that I can see her. For by seeing her, I will be healthy, and
by my being healthy, you will also be healthy.  Indeed, life is the most desired
thing for all beings, for it is only with life that other things are possible.
Thus, the friend, laughing and joking, as if his heart was fulfilled, quickly
said:  "My friend, what is the point of saying much when the time for action has
passed? Tell me, what should I be done? There is no difference between us.  As
long as this conversation continues between these two good-hearted friends, the
sun has set, as if to do them a favor.  The sun, which was red like the passion
of Prahlada, desired the spread of darkness and was a lover of good deeds, was
driven by the light of the evening.  Seeing the sorrow of the sun, who was
without his beloved, the evening, filled with compassion, followed her husband,
the sun.  Then, the east, as if it had lost its husband, the sun, became dark,
as if it had been stained by the darkness.  The world seemed to be covered in a
blue cloth, or as if the dense pollen of blue collyrium was falling everywhere."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcadazaM pa kuTumbI kSitipAlAya gurave'ntevasan priyA  /  patyai vaidyAya
rogArto mAtre zaizavasaMgataH ||122 || nivedya mucyate
duHkhAdyathAtyantapurorapi  /  mitrAyaivaM naraH prAjJastataste kathayAmyaham
//  123  //  zrutvaiva tAmahaM hRdyaM mahendratanusaMbhavAm  /  manmathasya
zaraidraM vikalasvamupAgataH  //  124 //  tAmadRSTvAticakSuSyAM priyAM
mAnasahAriNIm  /  ativAhayituM nAhaM prabhavAmi dinatrayam  //  125  //  ato
vidhatsva taM yatnaM yena pazyAmi tAmaham  /  tadarzanAdahaM svastho mayi
svasthe bhavAnapi  //  126 //  jIvitaM nanu sarvasyAdiSTaM sarvazarIriNAm  /
sati tatrAnyakAryANAmAtmalAmasya saMbhavaH || 127 || evamuktastato'vocadAzu
prahasito hasan  /  labdhArthamiva kurvANaH sadyo mitrasya mAnasam ||128|| sakhe
kiM bahunoktena kRtyakAlAtipAtinA  /  vada kiM karavANIti nanu nAnyatvamAvayoH
|| 129|| yAvattyoH samAlApo vartate'yaM sucittayoH  /  tAvattadupakArIva
gato'staM dharmadIdhitiH  // 130 //  prAhAdekhi rAgeNa saMdhyAlokena mAnumAn  /
prerito dhvAntasaMbhUtimicchatA priyakAriNA  //  131  //  kAntayA rahitasyAsya
duHkhaM dRSTvaiva saMdhyayA  /  karuNAyuktayA bharttA tejasAmanuvartitaH  // 132
//  tato mAskaranAthasya viyogAdiva 'kRSNatAm  /  AzA paurandarI' prApa
tamasAtyantabhUriNA  //  133 //  neva ca vastreNa kSaNAlo kastiraskRtaH  /  rajo
nIlAjjanasyeva pravRttaM patituM ghanam  // 134 //  jAnanevAle eka Apako
chor3akara dUsarA aisA kauna udAracetA hai jisake lie yaha duHkha batAyA jAye ?
||121|| jisa prakAra gRhastha rAjAke lie, vidyArthI guruke lie, strI patike lie,
rogI vaidyake lie aura bAlaka mAtAke lie prakaTakara bar3e bhArI duHkhase chUTa
jAtA hai usI prakAra manuSya mitra ke lie prakaTakara duHkhase chUTa jAtA hai
isI kAraNa maiM Apase kucha kaha rahA hU~ ||122-123  //  jabase maiMne anavadya
sundarI rAjA mahendrakI putrIkI carcA sunI haiM tabhIse meM kAma ke bANoMse
atyadhika vikalatA prApta kara rahA hU~  //  124  //  343 manako haranevAlI usa
sundarI priyAko dekhe binA maiM tIna dina bitAne ke lie samartha nahIM hU~  //
125  //  isalie aisA prayatna karo ki jisase meM use dekha sakU~  /  kyoMki
usake dekhanese maiM svastha ho sakU~gA aura mere svastha rahanese Apa bhI
svastha raha sakeMge ||126|| nizcayase saba prANiyoM ke lie anya samasta
vastuoMkI apekSA apanA jIvana hI iSTa hotA hai kyoMki usake rahate hue hI anya
kAryoMkA honA sambhava hai  //  127 //  tadanantaramitrake manako mAno kRtakRtya
karatA huA prahasita ha~sakara zIghra hI bolA  // 128 //  ki he mitra ! karane
yogya kAryakA ullaMghana karanevAle bahuta kahane se kyA matalaba hai kaho, maiM
kyA karU~ ? yathArtha meM hama donoMmeM pRthakapanA nahIM haiM  //  129  //
uttama cittake dhAraka una mitroMke bIca jabataka yaha vArtAlApa calatA hai
tabataka sUrya asta ho gayA so mAno unakA upakAra karane ke lie hI asta ho gayA
thA  //  130  //  jo pavanaMjayake rAgake samAna lAla-lAla thA, andhakArake
prasArako cAhatA thA aura priya karanevAlA thA aise sandhyAke Alokase prerita
hokara hI mAno sUrya asta huA thA || 131 //  kAntAse rahita pavanaMjayakA duHkha
dekhakara hI mAno jise karuNA utpanna ho gayI thI aisI sandhyA apanA pati jo
sUrya so usake pIche calane lagI thI-- usake anukUla ho gayI thI  //  132  //
tadanantara pUrva dizA atyadhika andhakArase kRSNatAko prApta ho gayI so mAno
sUryarUpa pati viyogase hI malina avasthAko prApta huI thI || 133 || kSaNa-bhara
meM loka aisA dikhane lagA mAno nIla vastra se hI AcchAdita ho gayA ho athavA
nIlAMjanakI saghana parAga hI saba ora ur3a-ur3akara girane lagI ho  //  134  //
1. sUryaH  /  2. prAhlAderapi ma  /  prAhlAdeneva kha.  /  3. bhAnunA ma  /  4.
kRSNatA ma.  /  5. pUrvA  /

Page #394 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the PÄpurÄá¹a, when the appropriate time for the natural task arrived,
Pavanajaya, filled with enthusiasm, said to his friend as follows:   "Oh friend!
Arise, show the way, let us go to that place where the heart-stealer resides."
After saying this, both friends set out for that location. Their minds had
already started the journey even before their bodies did, moving like fish in
the vast sea resembling the blue sky.   In a moment, they reached the house of
Aá¹janÄ-sundarÄ«. That house was adorned as magnificently as Mount Sumeru,
embellished by the presence of Aá¹janÄ-sundarÄ«.   Climbing the seventh
compartment of the building, the two friends concealed themselves behind a
lattice of pearls and began to observe Aá¹janÄ-sundarÄ« from there.   Aá¹janÄ-
sundarÄ« was rendering the lamps burning within the house fruitless by the rays
of her full moon-like face, and the colors of the directions were being painted
by the light of her white, black, and red eyes.   She had majestic, elevated,
and beautiful breasts which made it seem as if she was holding two pots filled
with the essence of love, awaiting her husbandâs arrival.   Her hands and feet,
adorned with a red radiance reminiscent of new buds and filled with many
auspicious signs, appeared as if they were exuding beauty through beams like
nails.   Her waist was narrow, yet the heavy weight of her breasts rested upon
it, leading her to bind herself tightly with ropes resembling three folds, lest
she break under the burden.   Aá¹janÄ, with her round thighs, resembled the
quiver of Kamadeva, or the pillars binding intoxication and desire, or rivers
that pour forth beauty.   Her radiance was akin to a cluster of blue lotuses,
adorned with stars resembling pearls, and with the moon-like husband nearby, she
appeared like the embodiment of night.   Thus, gazing at Aá¹janÄ who could never
satiate the beholder, Pavanajaya attained supreme bliss with his unwavering
eyes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pApurANe tataH samucite kAle tasmin 'prastutakarmaNaH  /  ityavocata sotsAhaH
suhRdaM pavanaMjayaH  // 135 //  uttiSThAgre sakhe tiSTha kuru mArgopadezanam  /
vajAvastatra sA yatra tiSThati svAntahAriNI  // 136 //  ityukte prasthitau
gantuM pUrvaprasthitamAnasau  /  mInAviva mahAnIlanIlagyomatalArNave  // 137 //
kSaNena ca pariprAptau gRhamoJjanasundaram  /  sundaraM tatsamAsatyA
ratnauSasamamandaram  // 138 //  saptamaM skandhamAruhya tasya vAtAyanasthitau
/  muktAjAlatirodhAnAvaGganAM tAmapazyatAm  // 139 //
saMpUrNavaktracandrAMzuviphalIkRtadIpikAm  /
sitAsitAruNacchAyacakSuHzAritadiGmukhAm  // 140 //  Amoginau samuttuGgau
priyAyeM hAriNau kucau  /  kalazAviva bibhrANAM' zRGgArarasapUritau  // 14 //
navapalavasacchAyaM pANipAdaM sulakSaNam  /  samugiradivAbhAti lAvaNyaM
nakharazmibhiH  // 142 //  stanabhArAdivodArAnmadhyaM maamishngkyaa|
trivalIdAmamirbaddhaM dadhatIM tanutAbhRtam  // 14 //  tUNau manobhuvaH stambhau
bandhanaM madakAmayoH  /  suvRttau bibhratImUrU nadau lAvaNyavAhinau  // 14 //
indIvarAvalIchAyAM yuktA muktAphaloDumiH  /  AsaktAM priyacandreNa mUrtAmiva
vibhAvarIm  // 145 //  AsecanakavIkSyAM taamektaansthitekssnnH| saMprAptaH
sukhitAmurvImaikSiSTa pavanaMjayaH  // 146 //  tadanantara jaba prakRta kAryake
yogya samaya A gayA taba utsAhase bhare pavanaMjayane mitrase isa prakAra kahA
// 135 /  /  he mitra! uTho, mArga dikhalAo, hama donoM vahA~ caleM jahAM ki
vaha hRdayako haranevAlI vidyamAna hai||136|| itanA kahanepara donoM mitra
vahA~ke lie cala pdde| unake mana unake jAneke pUrva hI prasthAna kara cuke the
aura ve mahAnIla maNike samAna nIla AkAzatalarUpI samudra meM machaliyoMkI
taraha jA rahe the  // 137 //  donoM mitra kSaNa-bharameM hI aMjanAsundarIke
ghara jA phuNce| usakA vaha ghara aMjanAsundarIke sannidhAnase aisA suzobhita ho
rahA thA jaisA ki ratnoMke samUhase sumeru parvata suzobhita hotA hai  // 138 //
usa bhavanake sAtaveM khaNDameM car3hakara donoM mitra motiyoMkI jAlIse
chipakara jharokhemeM baiTha gaye aura vahIMse aMjanAsundarIko dekhane lage  //
139 /  /  vaha aMjanAsundarI apane mukharUpI pUrNa candramAkI kiraNoMse
bhavanake bhItara jalanevAle dIpakoMko niSphala kara rahI thI tathA usake
sapheda, kAle aura lAla-lAla netroMkI kAntise dizAeM raMga-biraMgI ho rahI thIM
// 140 //  vaha sthUla, unnata evaM sundara stanoMko dhAraNa kara rahI thI usase
aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno patike svAgatake lie zrRMgAra rasase bhare hae do
kalaza hI dhAraNa kara rahI thI  // 141 /  /  navIna pallavoMke samAna lAla-lAla
kAntiko dhAraNa karanevAle tathA aneka zubha lakSaNoMse paripUrNa usake hAtha
aura paira aise jAna par3ate the mAno nakharUpI kiraNoMse saundaryako hI ugala
rahe hoN||142|| usakI kamara patalI to thI hI Uparase usapara stanoMkA bhArI
bojha par3a rahA hai isalie vaha kahIM TUTa na jAye isa bhayase hI mAno use
trivalirUpI rassiyoMse usane kasakara bA~dha rakhA thA  // 143 /  /  vaha aMjanA
jina gola-gola jA~ghoMko dhAraNa kara rahI thI ve kAmadevake tarakasake samAna,
athavA mada aura kAmake bA~dhaneke stambhake samAna athavA saundaryarUpI jalako
bahAnevAlI nadiyoMke samAna jAna par3atI thIM  // 144 //  usakI kAnti indIvara
arthAt nIla kamaloMke samUhake samAna thI, vaha muktAphala-rUpI nakSatroMse
sahita thI tathA patirUpI candramA usake pAsa hI vidyamAna thA isalie vaha
mUrtidhAriNI rAtrike samAna jAna par3atI thii||145| isa prakAra jisake dekhanese
tRpti hI nahIM hotI thI aisI aMjanAko pavanaMjaya ekaTaka netroMse dekhatA huA
parama sukhako prApta huA  // 146 //  1. prakRtakAryasya  /  2. aJjanasundaryA
idamAJjanasundaram  /  3. aJjanasundarIsaMnidhAnena  /  tatsamA bhaktyA ka.,
ba., ma., j.| 4. saMpUrNavastra -m.| 5. bibhrANA m.| 6. tanutAbhRtAm kha.  /
tanutAM bhRzam ma.  /  7. mUrtAmeva m.|

Page #395 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Five Vows Festival  Meanwhile, her dearest friend, Vasantatilaka, spoke to
Anjana Sundari, saying, "Oh beautiful princess, you are most fortunate! Your
father has given you to the mighty Pavananjay."  "The entire world is filled
with his virtues, pure as the rays of the moon, and he disregards the fame of
other men's qualities."  "It is a joyous occasion that you, adorned with the
brilliance of great jewels, will sit in his lap, like the tide in the ocean,
making a beautiful sound."  "Your connection with him will be like a stream of
jewels flowing on the banks of a mountain of jewels. Indeed, the joy arising
from a praiseworthy relationship is the greatest joy for women."  As her friend
Vasantmala was describing Pavananjay's virtues, Anjana was happy in her heart
and, out of shyness, lowered her head and scratched her toe with her finger.
Pavananjay, whose eyes were filled with blooming lotuses, was carried away by
the current of joy, far, far away.  Then another friend, MishrakeÅÄ«, spoke, her
red lips drawn inwards, and the flower in her braid fell down as she shook her
head.  "Oh, you have revealed your great ignorance by choosing Pavananjay over
Vidutprabha!"  "I have heard many times in the royal palaces that this girl
should be given to Vidutprabha, or not.  "Only he who knows the number of drops
in the ocean can understand the depth of his pure qualities."  "He is young,
gentle, humble, radiant, wise, brave, powerful, a master of knowledge, and the
whole world desires to see him."  "If, by good fortune, Vidutprabha were to
become this girl's husband, then she would receive the fruit of this birth."  "O
Vasantamalika, the difference between Pavananjay and Vidutprabha is known in the
world, just as the difference between a cow and an ocean is known."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcavazaM parva atrAntare priyAtyantaM vasantatilakAmidhA  /  amASata sakhI
vAkyamidamaanasundarIm  // 147 //  aho 'paramadhanyA tvaM surUpe bhartRdArike  /
pitA vAyukumArAya yaddattAsi mahaujase  // 14 //  guNaistasya jagatsarva
zazAGkakiraNAmalaiH  /  vyAptamanyaguNakhyAtitiraskaraNakAraNaiH  // 149 //
kalazabdA mahAratnaprabhApaTalaraJjitA  /  aGke sthAsyati vIrasya tasya veleva
vAridheH  // 150 //  patitA vasudhArA svaM taTe ratnamahIbhRtaH  /
ilAdhyasaMbandhajastoSo vadhUnAmamavatparaH  // 15 //  kIrtayantyAM guNAnevaM
tasya sakhyA sumAnasA  /  lilekha lajayAGgalyA kanyAGgrinakhamAnatA  // 152 //
nitAntaM ca hRto dUraM pUreNAnandavAriNaH  /  vikasannayanAmmojacchannAsyaH
pavanaMjayaH  // 153 //  nAmnAtha mizrakezIti vAkyaM sakhyaparAvadat  /
saMkucatpRSThabimboSTaM dhUtadhammilapallavam  // 154 //  aho paramamajJAnaM
tvayA kathitamAtmanaH  /  vidyutpramaM parityajya vAyorgRhNAsi yadguNAn  // 155
//  kathA vidyutprabhasyAsminmayA svAmigRhe zrutA  /  tasmai deyA na deyeyaM
kanyeti muhurudgatA  // 156 //  udanvadambhaso bindusaMkhyAnaM yo'vagacchati  /
tadaguNAnAM matiH pAraM vrajettasyAmalatviSAm  // 157 //  yuvA saumyo vinItAtmA
dIpto dhIraH pratApavAn  /  pAreviyaM sthitaH sarvajagadvAJchitadarzanaH  // 158
//  vidyatprabho bhavedasyAH kanyAyA yadi puNyataH  /  bhartA tato'nayA labdhaM
janmano'sya phalaM mavet  // 159 //  vasantamAlike bhedo vAyorvidyutprabhasya ca
/  sa gato jagati khyAti goSpadasyAmbudhezca yaH  // 160 //  _ isI bIcameM usakI
vasantatilakA nAmakI atyanta pyArI sakhIne aMjanA sundarIse yaha vacana kahe ki
he sundarI ! rAjakumArI ! tuma bar3I bhAgyazAlinI ho jo pitAne tujhe mahApratApI
pavanaMjayake lie samarpita kiyA hai  // 147-148 //  candramAkI kiraNoMke samAna
nirmala evaM anya manuSyoMke guNoMkI khyAtiko tiraskRta karanevAle usake guNoMse
yaha samasta saMsAra vyApta ho rahA hai  /  / 149 //  bar3I prasannatAkI bAta
hai ki tuma samudrakI belAke samAna mahAratnoMkI kAntike samUhase prabhAsita ho,
manohara zabda karatI huI usakI godameM baiThogI  // 150|| tumhArA usake sAtha
sambandha honevAlA hai so mAno ratnAcalake taTapara ratnoMkI dhArA hI
barasanevAlI hai| yathArthameM striyoMke prazaMsanIya sambandhase utpanna
honevAlA santoSa hI sabase bar3A santoSa hotA hai  // 151 //  isa prakAra jaba
sakhI vasantamAlA pavanaMjayake guNoMkA varNana kara rahI thI taba aMjanA mana
hI mana prasanna ho rahI thI aura lajjAke kAraNa mukha nIcA kara aMgulIse
pairakA nakha kureda rahI thI  // 152 /  /  aura khile hue netrakamaloMse jisakA
mukha vyApta thA aise pavanaMjayako AnandarUpI jalakA pravAha bahuta dUra taka
bahA le gayA thA  // 153 //  athAnantara mizrakezI nAmaka dUsarI sakhIne
nimnAMkita vacana kahe  /  kahate samaya vaha apane lAla-lAla oThoMko bhItarakI
ora saMkucita kara rahI thI tathA sira hilAneke kAraNa usakI coTImeM lagA
pallava nIce gira gayA thA  // 154 //  usane kahA ki cUMki tU vidyutprabhako
chor3akara pavanaMjayake gaNa grahaNa kara rahI hai isase tane apanA baDA ajJAna
prakaTa kiyA hai||155|| maiMne rAjamahaloMmeM vidyutprabhakI carcA kaI bAra sunI
hai ki usake lie yaha kanyA dI jAye athavA nahIM dI jAye  /  / 156 /  /  jo
samudrake jalakI bUMdoMkI saMkhyA jAnatA hai usIkI buddhi usake nirmala guNoMkA
pAra pA sakatI hai  // 157|| vaha yuvA hai, saumya hai, namra hai, kAntimAn hai,
dhIra-vIra hai, pratApI hai, vidyAoMkA pAragAmI hai aura samasta saMsAra usake
darzanako icchA karatA hai  // 158 /  /  yadi puNyayogase vidyutprabha isa
kanyAkA pati hotA to ise isa janmakA phala prApta ho jAtA  // 159 /  /  he
vasantamAlike ! pavanaMjaya aura vidyutprabhake bIca saMsArameM vahI bheda
prasiddha hai jo ki goSpada 1. paramadhanyatvaM n.| 2. kalazabdamahAratna -kha.,
j.| 3. zlAghyA saMbandhajaH m.| 4. pallavA ba.  /  5. pAre vidyAsthitaH ma.  /
pArevidyAM kha.  /

Page #396 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
346 In the Padma Purana, it is said that he will attain the status of a Muni in
a few years. His father abandoned him, which does not seem right to me.  ||16||
Even a moment spent with Vidhyut Prabha is a source of happiness, while an
eternity spent with a lowly creature is not. ||162||  Upon hearing this,
Prahlaadi, inflamed by the fire of anger, trembled and his complexion changed in
an instant. ||163||  He bit his lip, drew his sword from its sheath, and his
eyes, filled with a crimson glow, enveloped the entire horizon. ||164||  He said
to his friend, "Oh, Prahasita! This must be what this girl desires, for this
woman is speaking such vile things in her presence." ||165||  "Therefore, watch
as I sever the heads of both of them. May Vidhyut Prabha, the beloved of my
heart, protect them now." ||166||  Hearing these words, Prahasita, whose
forehead was furrowed with anger, replied, "Friend, friend, stop this pointless
effort, it is not your place. Your sword is meant for destroying enemies, not
women." ||167-168||  "Therefore, see how I will silence this wicked woman with
this rod and make her lifeless." ||169||  Seeing Prahasita's immense rage,
Pavananjay forgot his own anger, sheathed his sword, ||170||  and his entire
body became attuned to its natural state, meaning his anger subsided. Then he
spoke to his friend, who was determined to commit a cruel act. ||171||  "My
friend, calm down. These women are not worthy of your anger, you who are adorned
with victories in countless battles." ||172||  "It is not right for anyone to
kill women, let alone for you, who can cleave the skulls of maddened elephants.
How could it be right for you?" ||173||  "It is not fitting for men born into
noble families and renowned for their virtues to engage in such acts that defile
their reputation." ||174||  "Therefore, rise and let us return by the same path.
The minds of people are diverse, so it is not appropriate to be angry with
them." ||175||  1. Prahlaadimityu -m. | 2. Paravruttam m. | 3. Saayakah m. |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 346 padmapurANe asau saMvatsarairalpairmunitAM yAsyatIti saH  /  asyAH pitrA
parityaktastanme nAbhAti zobhanam  // 16 //  varaM vidyutprabheNAmA kSaNo'pi
sukhakAraNam  /  satrAnanto'pi nAnyena kAlaH kSudrAsudhAriNA  // 162 //  tataH
prAhAdirityukte krodhAnalavidIpitaH  /  kSaNAcchAyAparIvarta saMprAptaH
puruvepathuH  // 163 //  daSTAdharaH saMmAkarSan sAyakaM parivArataH  /
nirIkSaNasphuracchoNacchAyAcchanna digAnanaH  // 16 //  Uce prahasitAvazyamasyA
evedamIpsitam  /  kanyAyA yadadatyevamiyaM nArI jugu pisatam  // 165 //
lunAmyato'nayoH pazya mUdhonamubhayorapi  /  vidyatprabho'dhunA rakSAM karotu
hRdayapriyaH  // 166 //  samAkarNya tato vAkyaM maitraM prahasito ruSA  /
jagAda bhrakuTIbandhamISaNAlikapaTTikaH  // 167 //  sakhe sakhe'lametena
yatnenAgocare tava  /  nanu te sAyakasyArinaranAzaH prayojanam  // 168 //  ataH
pazyata vAkrozaprasanAM duSTayoSitam  /  imAmetena daNDena karomi gatajIvitAm
// 169 //  tato dRSTAsya saMrambhaM mahAntaM pavanaMjayaH  /
vismRtAtmIyasaMrammaH khar3agaM kozaM pratikSipan  // 17 //
nijaprakRtisaMprAptipravaNAzeSavigrahaH  /  jagAda suhRdaM
krUrakarmanizcitamAnasam  // 171 //  ayi mitra zamaM gaccha tavApyeSa na gocaraH
/  kopasyAnekasaMgrAmajayopArjanazAlinaH  // 172 //  itarasyApi no yuktaM kartuM
nArIvipAdanam  /  kiM punastava mattemakumbhadAraNakAriNaH  // 173 //  puMsAM
kulaprasUtAnAM guNakhyAtimupeyuSAm  /  yazo malinatAhetuM kartumevamasAMpratam
// 14 //  tasmAduttiSTa gacchAvastenaiva punaradhvanA  /  vicitrA cetaso
vRttirjanasyAtra na kupyate  // 175 //  aura samudra ke bIca hotA hai  /  / 160
//  vaha thor3e hI varSoM meM munipada dhAraNa kara legA isa kAraNa isake pitAne
usakI upekSA kI hai para yaha bAta mujhe acchI nahIM mAlUma hotI  // 161 /  /
vidyutprabhake sAtha isakA eka kSaNa bhI bItatA to vaha sukhakA kAraNa hotA aura
anya kSadra prANIke sAtha a ananta bhI kAla bItegA to bhI vaha sukhakA kAraNa
nahIM hogA  // 162 /  /  tadanantara mizrakezIke aisA kahate hI pavanaMjaya
krodhAgnise dedIpyamAna ho gayA, usakA zarIra kA~pane lagA aura kSaNa-bharameM
hI usakI kAnti badala gayI  // 163 /  /  oTha cAbate hue usane myAnase talavAra
bAhara khIMca lI aura netroMse nikalatI huI lAla-lAla kAntise dizAoMkA agra
bhAga vyApta kara diyA  // 164 /  /  usane mitrase kahA ki he prahasita ! yaha
bAta avazya hI isa kanyAke lie iSTa hogI tabhI to yaha strI isake samakSa isa
ghRNita bAtako kahe jA rahI hai  /  / 165 /  /  isalie dekho, maiM abhI ina
donoMkA mastaka kATatA huuN| hRdayakA pyArA vidyutprabha isa samaya inakI rakSA
kare  // 166 /  /  tadanantara mitrake vacana sunakara krodhase jisakA
lalATataTa bhauMhoMse 'bhayaMkara ho rahA thA aisA prahasita bolA ki mitra!
mitra ! asthAnameM yaha prayatna rahane do| tumhArI talavArakA prayojana to
zatrujanoMkA nAza karanA hai na ki strIjanoMkA nAza karanA  // 167-168|| ataH
dekho, nindAmeM tatpara isa duSTa strIko maiM ina DaNDese hI nirjIva kiye detA
hU~  // 169 /  /  tadanantara pavanaMjaya, prahasitake mahAkrodhako dekhakara
apanA krodha bhUla gayA, usane talavAra myAnameM vApasa DAla lI  // 170 /  /
aura usakA samasta zarIra apane svabhAvakI prAptimeM nipuNa ho gayA arthAt usakA
krodha zAnta ho gyaa| tadanantara usane krUra kAryameM dRr3ha mitrase kahA  //
171 //  ki he mitra ! zAntiko prApta hoo| aneka yuddhoMmeM vijaya prApta
karanese suzobhita rahanevAle tumhAre krodhakA bhI ye striyA~ viSaya nahIM haiM
// 172 /  /  anya manuSyake lie bhI strojanakA ghAta karanA yogya nahIM hai
phira tuma to madonmatta hAthiyoMke gaNDasthala cIranevAle ho ataH tumheM yukta
kaise ho sakatA hai ?  // 173 /  /  ucca kulameM utpanna tathA guNoMkI khyAtiko
prApta puruSoMke lie isa prakAra yazakI malinatA karanevAlA kArya karanA yogya
nahIM hai  // 174 /  /  isalie uTho usI mArgase punaH vApasa cleN| manuSyakI
manovRtti bhinna prakArakI hotI hai ataH usapara krodha karanA ucita nahIM hai
// 175 /  /  1. prAhlAdimityu -ma.  /  2. parAvRttaM ma.  /  3. sAyakaH ma.  /
.

Page #397 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Fifteen  Surely, this lightning-bright one must be dear to this girl,
for he did not even rebuke her, who was so engrossed in slandering me. ||176||
Then, without anyone knowing, the two friends, who had arrived, went out of the
window and returned to their own camp. ||177||  Then, with a heart full of
peace, Pavana-jaya, who had attained supreme dispassion, began to think: ||178||
One should avoid from afar the river of a woman attached to another man, which
is filled with whirlpools of doubt and crocodiles of evil intentions. ||179||
This woman, who is extremely dense with bad intentions and filled with a swarm
of sensual desires, is like a vast forest; the wise should never serve her.
||180||  What is the benefit of serving a king who associates with his enemies?
Similarly, how can one find happiness with a weak friend and a woman attached to
another man? ||181||  Wise men abandon their beloved friends, relatives, sons,
and wives when they are disrespected, but those who are petty perish by drowning
in the water of defeat. ||182||  A physician who is addicted to alcohol, an
elephant without training, an enemy without cause, a cruel person who follows a
violent religion, a group of fools, a country without morals, a cruel king, a
child, and a woman attached to another man - a wise man should avoid all of
these from afar. ||183-184||  Thinking thus, Pavana-jaya's night, like the night
of the girl's invitation, came to an end, and the instruments that awaken the
world began to play. ||185||  Then, the eastern direction was covered with the
redness of the evening, as if it were continuously covered by the dispassion
abandoned by Pavana-jaya. ||186||  And the sun, which appeared red due to anger,
rose, holding a trembling orb, the cause of the world's activities. ||187||
Then, Pavana-jaya, who was completely indifferent to women, holding a body made
sluggish by dispassion, spoke to his laughing friend: ||188||  "Friend, even if
I am near her, it is not appropriate for me to stay here. Therefore, listen, let
there be no contact with the wind that is attached to her." ||189||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcadazaM parva nUnamasyAH priyo'sau nA kanyAyA yena pArzvagAm  /
majjugupsanasaMsaktAM na manAgapyavIvadat  // 176 //  tataH samAgatau jJAtau na
kenacidinau bhRzam  /  svairaM niHsRtya nirvyahAd gatau vasatimAtmanaH  // 177
//  tataH paramamApanno virAgaM pavanaMjayaH  /  iti cintanamArebhe
prazAntahRdayo bhRzam  // 178 //  saMdehaviSamAvartA durbhAvagrahasaMkulA  /
dUrataH parihartavyA pararaktAGganApagA  // 179 //  kumAvagahanAtyantaM
hRSIkavyAlajAlinI  /  budhena nAryaraNyAnI sevanIyA na jAtucit  // 18 //  kiM
rAjasevanaM zatrusamAzrayasamAgamam  /  ilathaM mitre striyaM cAnyasatAM prApya
kutaH sukham  // 18 //  iSTAn bandhUna sutAn dArAn budhA muJcantyasatkRtAH  /
parAbhavajalAdhmAtAH kSudrAH nazyanti tatra tu  // 182 //  madirArAgiNaM vaidyaM
dvipaM zikSAvivarjitam  /  ahetuvairiNaM krUraM dharma hiMsanasaMgatam  // 183
//  mUrkhagoSThI kumaryAdaM dezaM caNDaM zizuM nRpam  /  vanitAM ca parAsaktAM
sUri(reNa varjayet  /  /  184 //  evaM cintayatastasya kanyAgrItirivAgatA  /
kSayaM vibhAvarI tUryamAhataM ca prabodhakam  // 185 //  tataH saMdhyAprakAzana
kauzikIyA~ digAvatA  /  pavanaMjayanirmuktarAgeNeva nirantaram  // 186 //
udiyAya ca tigmAMzuH strIkopAdiva lohitam  /  dadhAnastaralaM bimbaM
jagacceSTitakAraNam  // 187 //  tato vahandirAgeNa nitAntamalasAM tanum  /  Uce
prahasitaM jAyAvimukhaH pavanaMjayaH  // 188 //  sakhe'tra na samIpe'pi
yujyate'vasthitima  /  tatsaktapavanAsaMgo mAbhUditi tataH zRNu  // 189 //
nizcita hI vaha vidyutprabha isa kanyAke lie pyArA hogA tabhI to pAsa baiThakara
merI nindA karane. vAlI isa strIse usane kucha nahIM kahA  /  / 176 /  /
tadanantara jinake AnekA kisIko kucha bhI patA nahIM thA aise donoM mitra
jharokhese bAhara nikalakara apane DeremeM cale gaye  /  / 177 /  /  tadanantara
jisakA hRdaya atyanta zAnta thA aisA pavanaMjaya parama vairAgyako prApta hokara
isa prakAra vicAra karane lagA ki  // 178 //  jisameM sandeharUpI viSama
bha~vareM uTha rahI haiM aura jo duSTabhAvarUpI magaramacchoMse bharI huI haiM
aisI para-puruSAsakta strIrUpI nadIkA dUrase hI parityAga karanA cAhie  /  /
179|| jo khoTe bhAvoMse atyanta saghana hai tathA jisameM indriyarUpI duSTa
jIvoMkA samUha vyApta hai aisI yaha strI eka bar3I aTavIke samAna hai,
vidvajjanoMko kabhI isakI sevA nahIM karanI cAhie  // 180 /  /  jisakA apane
zatruke sAtha samparka hai aise rAjAkI sevA karanese kyA lAbha hai? isI prakAra
zithila mitra aura paraparuSAsakta strIko pAkara sakha kahA~se ho sakatA hai?
||181 /  /  jo vijJa puruSa haiM ve anAdRta honepara iSTa-mitroM, bandhujanoM,
putroM aura striyoM ko chor3a dete haiM para jo kSudra manuSya haiM ve
parAbhavarUpI jalameM DUbakara vahIM naSTa ho jAte haiM  // 182 //
madirApAnameM rAga rakhanevAlA vaidya, zikSA rahita hAthI, ahetuka vairI,
hiMsApUrNa duSTa dharma, mUlkI goSThI, maryAdAhIna deza, krodhI tathA bAlaka
rAjA aura parapuruSAsakta strI-buddhimAn manuSya ina sabako dUrase hI chor3a
deve  /  / 183-184 //  aisA vicAra karate hue pavanaMjayakI rAtri kanyAkI
protike samAna kSayako prApta ho gayI aura jagAnevAle bAje baja uThe  // 185 /
/  tadanantara sandhyAkI lAlIse pUrva dizA AcchAdita ho gayo so aiso jAna
par3atI thI mAno pavanaMjayake dvArA chor3e hue rAgase hI nirantara AcchAdita ho
gayI thI  /  / 186 /  /  aura jo loke krodhake kAraNa hI mAno lAla-lAla dikha
rahA thA tathA jo jagatkI ceSTAoMkA kAraNa thA aise caMcala bimbako dhAraNa
karatA huA sUrya udita huA  // 187|| tadanantara virAgake kAraNa atyanta alasa
zarIrako dhAraNa karatA strIvimukha pavanaMjaya prahasita mitrase bolA ki  //
188 /  /  he mitra ! usase samparka rakhanevAlI vAyukA sparza na ho jAye isalie
yahA~ samIpameM bhI merA rahanA ucita 1. puruSaH  /  2. nirmUhAd ka., kha., ga.,
ma., ja.  /  gavAkSAt  /  3. dRSTA ma.  /  4. aindrI, pUrvadizetyarthaH  /

Page #398 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
348 In the Padma Purana, "Rise, let us go to our city, it is not right to linger
here. Let the army be alerted by the sound of the conch shell that signals
departure." ||190||  Upon hearing this, the army, which was like a churning sea,
stirred and quickly prepared for departure, having completed all the necessary
tasks. ||191|| Then, a great sound arose from the chariots, horses, elephants,
and foot soldiers, along with the sound of the conch and other instruments, and
it reached the girl's ears. ||192||  The sound, which signaled departure, filled
her with immense sorrow, as if she were pierced by a nail driven in with the
force of a hammer blow. ||193|| She thought, "Alas, what a misfortune! Fate has
given me a treasure and then taken it away. What shall I do? How will this turn
out?" ||194||  The desires I had, to play in the lap of this great man, have all
been turned upside down, my hopes dashed. ||195||  Knowing that this is
happening, somehow this enemy, my friend, has come to hate me. ||196||  Curse
this friendless, sinful, cruel-tongued woman, who has brought this state upon my
beloved. ||197||  My father, if he could bring my beloved back, would do me a
great favor. Perhaps he could even bring him back to his senses. ||198||  If my
beloved truly abandons me, I will give up food and die. ||199||  Thinking this,
she fainted and fell to the ground like a vine uprooted from its roots. ||200||
Then, saying, "What is this?" and overcome with anxiety, her two friends revived
her with cold water. ||201||  They asked her, with great effort, the reason for
her fainting, but she, with her limbs slack and eyes fixed, could not speak a
word. ||202||  Then, the people in the army of Vayu Kumar (Pavananjay) were
bewildered by this unexpected departure and anxiously wondered why he was
leaving without completing his desired task. ||203||  "Listen, and rise! Let us
go to our city, it is not right to linger here. Let the army be alerted by the
sound of the conch shell that signals departure." ||189-190||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 348 padmapurANe uttiSTha svapuraM yAmo na yuktamavalambanam  /  senA
prayANazaGkhana kAryatAmavabodhinI  // 190 //  tatheti kArite tena
kSubdhasAgarasaMnimA  /  cacAla sA camUH kSipraM kRtayAnocitakriyA  // 191 //
tato rathAzvamAtaGgapAdAtaprabhavo mahAn  /  zabdo bheryAdijanmA ca kanyAyAH
zravaNe'vizat  // 19 //  prayANasUcinA tena nitAntaM duHkhitAbhavat  /  vizatA
mudgarAghAtavegataH zaGkaneva sA  // 193 //  acintayaJca hA kaSTaM dattvA me
vidhinA 'hRtam  /  nidhAnaM kiM karomyatra kathametadbhaviSyati  // 19 //
aGke'sya puruSendrasya krIDiSyAmIti ye kRtAH  /  te'nyathaiva parAvRttA mandAyA
me manorathAH  // 195 //  kriyamANamimaM jJAtvA kathaMcinnindametayA  /
vairiNIbhUtayA sakhyA mayi syAd dveSamAgataH  // 196 //  vivekarahitAmetAM
dhikpApAM krUramASiNIm  /  yathA me dayito'vasthAmIdRzImeSa lambhitaH  // 197 //
kuryAnmahyaM hitaM tAto jIvitezaM nivartayet  /  api nAma bhavedasya
buddhiAvartanaM prati  /  / 198 //  tattvato yadi nAtho me parityAgaM kariSyati
/  AhAravarjanaM kRtvA tato yAsyAmi paJcatAm  // 199 /  /  iti saMcintayantI sA
prAptA mUcho mahItale  /  papAtAzcaryanirmuktA lUnamUlalatA yathA  // 20 //
tataH kimidamityuktvA saMbhramaM paramAgate  /  zItalakriyayA sakhyau
cakratustAM 'vimUchitAm  // 201 //  pRcchayamAnA ca yatnena mUrchAhetuM
zlathAGgikA  /  zazAka trapayA vaktuM na sA stimitalocanA  /  / 202 //  atha
vAyukumArasya senAyAmiti mAnavAH  /  AkulA mAnase cakrurahetugativismitAH  //
203 /  /  nahIM hai ataH suno aura uTho-apane nagarakI ora caleM, yahA~ vilamba
karanA ucita nahIM hai| prasthAna kAlameM bajanevAle zaMkhase senAko sAvadhAna
kara do  // 189-190 /  /  tadanantara zaMkhadhvani honepara jo kSubhita sAgarake
samAna jAna par3atI thI tathA jisane prasthAna kAlake yogya sarva kArya kara
liye the aisI senA zIghra hI cala par3I  // 191 /  /  tatpazcAt ratha, ghor3e,
hAthI, paidala sipAhI aura bherI Adise utpanna huA zabda kanyAke kAnameM
praviSTa huA  // 192 /  /  prasthAnako sUcita karanevAle usa zabdase kanyA
atyanta duHkhI huI mAno mudgara prahAra sambandhI vegase praveza karanevAlI
kIlase pIr3ita hI huI thI  // 193|| vaha vicAra karane lagI ki hAya-hAya, bar3e
khedakI bAta hai ki vidhAtAne mere lie khajAnA dekara chIna liyaa| maiM kyA
karU~ ? aba kaisA kyA hogA?  // 194 /  /  isa zreSTha puruSakI godameM kor3A
karUMgI isa prakArake jo manoratha maiMne kiye the mujha abhAginIke ve saba
manoratha anyathA hI pariNata ho gaye aura rUpa hI badala gaye ||195|| isa
vairina sakhIne jo unakI nindA kI thI jAna par3atA hai.ki kisI taraha unheM
isakA jJAna ho gayA hai isIlie ve majhapara dveSa karane lage haiM  // 196 /  /
vivekarahita, pApinI tathA kara vacana bolanevAlI isa sakhIko dhikkAra hai
jisane ki mere priyatamako yaha avasthA prApta karA dI  // 197 //  pitAjI yadi
hRdayavallabhako lauTA sakeM to merA bar3A hita kareMge aura kyA inakI bhI
lauTanekI buddhi hogI  // 198 /  /  yadi sacamuca hI hRdayavallabha merA
parityAga kareMge to maiM AhAra tyAga kara mRtyuko prApta ho jAU~gI  // 199 /  /
isa prakAra vicAra karatI huI aMjanA mUrchita ho chinnamUla latAke samAna
pRthivIpara gira par3o  // 200 //  tadanantara 'yaha kyA hai ?' aisA kahakara
parama udvegako prApta huI donoM sakhiyoMne zItalopacArase use mUrchArahita kiyA
/  / 201 /  /  usa samaya usakA samasta zarIra DhIlA ho rahA thA aura netra
nizcala the| sakhiyoMne prayatnapUrvaka usase mUrchAkA kAraNa pUchA para vaha
lajjAke kAraNa kucha kaha na sakI  /  / 202 /  /  athAnantara vAyukumAra
(pavanaMjaya ) kI senAke loga isa akAraNa gamanase cakita ho bar3I AkulatAke
sAtha-manameM vicAra karane lage ki yaha kumAra icchita kAryako pUrA kiye binA
hI 1. hatam ma.  /  2. nirbhAgyAyAH  /  3. kathaMcidbhedametayA m.| 4.
vidveSamAgataH ma., b.| 5. vimUrchatAm ma. 6. mAnavaH m.| .

Page #399 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Fifteenth Chapter  349  Why is he eager to go? What has caused his anger?
Or who has instigated him otherwise? ||20||  He has all the preparations for
taking the girl, so why has he become indifferent? ||205||  Some laughed and
said, "His name 'Pavananjay' is indeed meaningful, since he has conquered the
wind with his speed." ||206||  Others said, "He still doesn't know the essence
of a woman. That's why he's eager to leave this girl." ||207||  "If he knew the
joy of true love, he would be bound by its ties, like a wild elephant." ||208||
Thus, surrounded by hundreds of courtiers engaged in private conversations,
Pavananjay, mounted on his swift chariot, was ready to depart. ||209||  Then,
the girl's father, learning of his departure, came there in a state of panic,
accompanied by all his relatives. ||210||  He, along with Prahlad, said to the
prince, "O noble one, why are you undertaking this journey, which is the cause
of sorrow? What has someone said to you? O noble man, who is not dear to you? O
wise one, no one even considers what is not pleasing to you." ||211-212||  "Even
if there are faults, it is right for you to heed my words and your father's. And
this act is free from all faults, so how can it be wrong?" ||213||  "Therefore,
O wise one, return and fulfill our desires. For men like you, a father's command
should be a cause of joy." ||214||  Saying this, the father-in-law and father,
moved by love for their son, respectfully took the hand of the bowed hero,
Pavananjay. ||215||  Then, unable to bear the weight of their respect,
Pavananjay turned back and began to ponder the reasons for the anger and sorrow
that caused him to inflict pain on the girl. ||216||  Now, I will marry this
girl, and through this union, I will experience the sorrow born of non-
attachment. This way, she will not find happiness with any other man. ||217||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcadazaM parva 349 avidhAyepsitaM kasmAdayaM gantuM samudyataH  /  kopo'sya
janitaH kena kena vA codito'nyathA  // 20 //  vidyate sarvamevAsya
kanyopAdAnakAraNam  /  ataH kimityayaM kasmAdabhUdapagatAzayaH  // 205 //
hasitvA kecidityUcarnAmAsyedaM sahArthakam  /  pavanaMjaya ityeSa yasmAjetAsya
vegataH  // 206 //  ucuranye'yamadyApi na jAnAtyaGganArasam  /  nUnaM yena
vihAyemAM kanyAM gaMtuM samudyataH  // 207 //  yadi syAdasya vijJAtA ratiH
paramudArajA  /  baddhaH syAtpremabandhena tato vanagajo yathA  // 208 //
ityupAMzukRtAlApasAmantazatamadhyagaH  /  vegavadvAhano gantaM pravRttaH
pavanaMjayaH  // 209 //  tataH kanyApitA jJAtvA prayANaM tasya saMbhramAt  /
samastaibandhubhiH sArdhamAjagAma samAkulaiH  // 210 //  prahlAdena samaM tena
tato'sAvityamASyata  /  bhadredaM gamanaM kasmAskriyate zokakAraNam  // 211 //
nanu kena kimukto'si kasya neSTo'si zobhana  /  cintayatyapi no kazcidyatte
budha na rocate  // 212 //  piturmama ca te vAkyaM doSe satyapi yujyate  /
kartu kimuta niHzeSadoSasaGgavivarjitam  // 213 //  tataH sUre nivartasva
kriyatAM nauvabhIpsitam  /  bhavAdRzAM gurorAjJA nanvAnandasya kAraNam  // 214
//  ityuktvApatyarAgeNa vIro vinatamastakaH  /  zvasureNa kRtaH pANau janakena
ca sAdaram  // 215 //  tatastadgauravaM bhaktumasamartho nyavartata  /
dadhyAviti ca kanyAyAH kopAduHkhasya kAraNam  // 216 //  samuhya zAtayAmyenAM
duHkhenAsaGgajanmanA  /  yenAnyato'pi naiveSA prApnoti puruSAtsukham  // 217 //
Amra jAneke lie udyata kyoM ho gayA hai ? ise kisane krodha utpanna kara diyA ?
athavA kisane ise viparIta preraNA dI hai ?  // 203-204 //  isake kanyA grahaNa
karanekI samasta taiyArI hai ho phira yaha kisa kAraNa udAsIna ho gayA hai ?  //
205 //  kitane hI loga ha~sakara kahane lage ki cUMki isane vegase pavanako jIta
liyA hai isalie isakA 'pavanaMjaya' yaha nAma sArthaka hai  // 206 /  /  kucha
loga kahane lage ki yaha abhI taka strIkA rasa jAnatA nahIM hai isIlie to yaha
isa kanyAko chor3akara jAneke lie udyata huA hai  // 207 //  yadi ise uttama
ratikA jJAna hotA to yaha jaMgalI hAthoke samAna usake premapAzameM sadA ba~dhA
rahatA  /  / 208 /  /  isa prakAra ekAntameM vArtAlApa karanevAle saikar3oM
sAmantoMke bIca khar3A huA pavanaMjaya vegazAlI vAhanapara ArUDha ho calaneke
lie pravRtta huA  // 209 //  tadanantara jaba kanyAke pitAko isake prasthAnakA
patA calA taba vaha har3abar3Akara ghabar3Aye hue samasta bandhujanoMke sAtha
vahAM AyA  // 210 //  usane prahlAdake sAtha milakara kumArase isa prakAra kahA
ki he bhadra ! zokakA kAraNa jo yaha gamana hai so kisalie kiyA jA rahA hai ?
Apase kisane kyA kaha diyA ? he bhadra puruSa ! Apa kise priya nahIM haiM ? he
vidvan ! jo bAta Apake lie nahIM rucatI ho usakA to yahAM koI vicAra hI nahIM
karatA  // 211-212 //  doSa rahate hue bhI Apako mere tathA pitAke vacana mAnanA
ucita hai phira yaha kArya to samasta doSoMse rahita hai ataH isakA karanA
anucita kaise ho sakatA hai ?  // 213 /  /  isalie he vidvan ! lauTo aura hama
donoMkA manoratha pUrNa kro| Apa jaise puruSoMke lie pitAkI AjJA to AnandakA
kAraNa honA cAhie  /  / 214 //  itanA kahakara zvasura tathA pitAne santAnake
rAga vaza natamastaka vIra pavanaMjayakA bar3e Adarase hAtha pakar3A  // 215 //
tatpazcAt 'zvasura aura pitAke gauravakA bhaMga karaneke lie asamartha hotA haA
pavanaMjaya vApisa lauTa AyA aura krodhavaza kanyAko duHkha pahu~cAnevAle kAraNa
prakAra vicAra karane lagA  // 216 /  /  aba maiM isa kanyAko vivAha kara
asamAgamase utpanna duHkhake 1. ityevaM tasmAjjetAsya ma.  /  2. vimuktosi  /
3. saMgavAtavijitam kha.  /  4. he vidvan  /  5. nau AvayoH  /  tAvadIpsitam
kha.  /  navamIpsitam ma.  /  6. natvAnandasya ma.  /  7. bhaktu ma.  /

Page #400 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
350 The Padmapurana states that the friend understood the meaning and spoke
accordingly. This was also understood by the wise Pavananjay. ||21|| Hearing
that her beloved had returned, the girl was overjoyed. Her entire body trembled
with excitement. ||219|| Then, when the time was right, the relatives performed
the auspicious marriage ceremony of the two, fulfilling everyone's desires.
||220|| Although the girl's hand was as cool as the touch of an Ashoka leaf, it
felt like a burning ember to the detached Pavananjay. ||221||  His gaze fell
upon Anjana's body, who was like lightning, involuntarily, but he could not stay
there even for a moment. ||222|| Knowing that Pavananjay did not understand the
girl's feelings, Agni, as if in the guise of a crackling spark, laughed with a
sound. ||223|| Then, with the proper rituals, the marriage of the two was
performed, and all the relatives were filled with joy and made sounds of
celebration. ||224|| In that forest, adorned with various trees and vines, and
blooming with fruits and flowers, they celebrated with great splendor for a
month. ||225|| After exchanging greetings and offering appropriate respects to
each other, they all went their separate ways, feeling a moment of sadness due
to separation. ||226|| The Aryachhandas says: Those who do not know the true
nature of things, perform sacrifices for others, but they are ashamed. The root
cause of this is the sun of karma, which brings suffering. ||227|| Thus ends the
fifteenth chapter of the Padmapurana, known as the Anjanasundari Vivah, narrated
by the sage Ravishena, as told by the Acharya. ||15|| 1.  "Teneti" is spoken by
M. 2.  "Prarabdham" is the reading in M., J., and "Praduhtam" is the reading in
M., J. 3.  "Praaptam sarvasamihitam" is the reading in Kh. 4.  "Vidyuti" is the
reading in K., Kh., J., and M.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 350 padmapurANe cakAra viditArtha ca mitraM tena ca bhASitaH  /  sAdhu te
viditaM buddhayA mayApyetanirUpitam  // 21 //  nivRttaM dayitaM zrutvA kanyAyAH
saMmado'bhavat  /  nirantarasamudbhinnaromAJcAzeSavigrahaH  // 219 //  tataH
samayamAsAdya tayorvavAhamaGgalam  /  prastutaM bandhubhiH kartuM
prAptasarvasamIhitam  // 220 //  azokAlavasparzaH kanyAyAH sa karo'bhavat  /
viraktacetasastasya kRzAnurazanopamaH  // 221 //  anicchato gatA dRSTiH
kathaMcittasya tattanau  /  kSaNamAtramapi sthAtuM na sehe tulya vidyuti  // 222
//  eSa bhAna vettAsyA iti vijJAya pAvakaH  /  sphuTallAjasamUhena jahAsaiva
kRtasvanam  // 223 //  tato vidhAnayogena kRtvopayamanaM tayoH  /  paramaM
pramudaM prAptAH sazabdAH sarvabAndhavAH  // 224 //  nAnAdrumalatAkIrNa
phalapuSpavirAjite  /  mAsaM tatra vane kRtvA vibhUtyA paramotsavam  // 225 //
yathocitaM kRtAlApAH kRtapUjAH parasparam  /  yathAsvaM te yayuH sarve viyogAd
duHkhitAH kSaNam  // 226 //  AryAcchandaH aviditatattvasthitayo vidadhati
yajantavaH pare'zarma  /  tattatra mUlahetau karmaravau tApake dRSTam  // 227 //
ityArSe raviSeNAcAryaprokta padmacarite'JjanAsundarIvivAhAbhidhAnaM nAma
paJcadazaM parva  // 15 //  dvArA sadA duHkhI kruuNgaa| kyoMki vivAhake bAda
yaha anya puruSase bhI sukha prApta nahIM kara sakegI  // 217|| pavanaMjayane
apanA yaha vicAra mitrake lie batalAyA aura usane bhI uttara diyA ki ThIka hai
yahI bAta maiM kaha rahA thA jise tumane apanI buddhise svayaM samajha liyA  /
/ 218|| priyatamako lauTA sunakara kanyAko bahuta harSa huaa| usake samasta
zarIrameM romAMca nikala Aye  // 219 /  /  tadanantara samaya pAkara
bandhujanoMne donoMkA vivAharUpa maMgala kiyA jisase sabake manoratha pUrNa hue
// 220 /  /  yadyapi kanyAkA hAtha azokapallavake samAna zIta sparzavAlA thA
para usa virakta cittake lie vaha agnikI mekhalAke samAna atyanta uSNa jAna
par3A  /  / 221|| bijalIko tulanA karanevAle aMjanAke zarIrapara kisI taraha
icchAke binA ho pavanaMjayakI dRSTi gayI to sahI para vaha usapara kSaNa bharake
lie bhI nahIM Thahara sakI  /  / 222 /  /  yaha pavanaMjaya isa kanyAke bhAvako
nahIM samajha rahA hai yaha jAnakara hI mAno caTakatI huI lAIke bahAne agni
zabda karatI huI ha~sa rahI thI  // 223 /  /  isa taraha vidhipUrvaka donoMkA
vivAha kara zabda karate hue samasta bandhujana parama harSako prApta hue  //
224 /  /  nAnA vRkSa aura latAoMse vyApta tathA phala-phUloMse suzobhita usa
vanameM saba loga bar3e vaibhavase mahotsava karate rahe  // 225 /  /
tadanantara paraspara vArtAlApa aura yathA yogya satkAra kara saba loga yathA
sthAna gye| jAte samaya saba loga viyogake kAraNa kSaNa bharake lie duHkhI ho
uThe the  // 226|| gautama svAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he rAjan !
tattvakI sthitiko nahIM samajhanevAle prANI dUsareke lie jo duHkha athavA sukha
pahuMcAte haiM usameM mUla kAraNa santApa pahu~cAnevAlA karma rUpI sUrya hI hai
arthAt karmake anukUla yA pratikUla rahanepara hI dUsare loga kisIko sukha yA
duHkha pahuMcA sakate haiM  // 227 //  isa prakAra ArSa mAmase prasiddha
raviSaNAcArya kathita padmacaritameM aJjanAsundarIke vivAhakA kathana karanevAlA
pandrahavA~ parva samApta huA  // 15 //  1. teneti bhASitaH m.| 2. prArabdham  /
pradhutaM ma., ja.,  /  3. prAptaM sarvasamIhitam kh.| 4. vidyutiH ka., kha.,
ja. m.|

Page #401 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Sixteenth Chapter  Then, due to the lack of conversation and even a
glance from him, she experienced immense sorrow, her mind unaware of the reason.
||1|| Even at night, she couldn't find sleep, her eyes wide open, her breasts
constantly stained with tears. ||2|| She even greeted the wind, bearing the same
name as her beloved, her ears eagerly listening for his name. ||3|| She kept his
image, as she had seen him at the altar, in her mind, becoming motionless for
moments, her eyes fixed. ||4|| Wishing to see him outside, she would wipe her
eyes, but when she couldn't see him, she would again be filled with sorrow.
||5|| Having seen his form only once, she struggled to draw his image, her hand
trembling, causing the pen to fall. ||6|| She moved her face with difficulty,
her body so frail that her ornaments fell loose, making a clinking sound. ||7||
Her long, hot breaths burned her hands and cheeks, and even the weight of her
thin garment caused her discomfort. ||8|| She severely criticized herself,
constantly remembering her parents, her heart empty, becoming motionless for
moments. ||9|| With her throat choked with tears, she would lament her fate, her
words filled with sorrow. ||10|| She felt a burning sensation even from the rays
of the moon, and even within the palace, she would faint repeatedly. ||11||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SoDazaM parva tato'saMbhASaNAdasyAzcakSuSazcAnipAtanAt  /  cakAra paramaM
duHkhaM vAyurajJAtatanmanAH  // 1 //  rAtrAvapi na sA lebhe nindrA vidrANalocanA
/  anAratagaladvASpamalinau dadhatI stanau  // 2 //  vAyumapyabhinandantI
dayitenaikanAmakam  /  tannAmazravaNotkaNThAvaSTabdhazravaNA bhRzam  // 3 //
kurvatI mAnase rUpaM tasya vedyAM nirUpitam  /  aspaSTaM kSaNanizceSTasthitA
stimitalocanA  // 4 //  antarnirUpya vAJchantI bahirapyasya darzanam  /  kurvatI
locane spaSTe yAtyadRSTe punaH zucam  // 5 //  sakRdaspaSTadRSTatvAccitrakarmANi
kRcchrataH  /  likhantI vepathugrastahastapracyutavartikA  // 6 //  saMcArayantI
kRcchuNa vadanaM karataH karam  /  kRzIbhUtasamastAGgazlathasasvanabhUSaNA  /  /
7 /  /  dIrghoNataranizvAsadagdhapANikapolikA  /  aMzukasyApi bhAreNa
khedamaGgeSu bibhratI  // 8 //  nindantI bhRzamAtmAnaM smarantI pitarau muhuH  /
dadhAnA hRdayaM zUnyaM kSaNaM niSpandavigrahA  // 9 //  duHkhaniHsRtayA vAcA
vAppasaMruddhakaNThataH  /  upAlambhaM prayacchantI daivAyAtyantaviklavA  // 10
//  karaiH zIlakarasyApi vibhratI dAhamuttamam  /  prAsAde'pi viniryAntI yAti
mUcchA punaH punaH  // 11 //  athAnantara pavanaMjayane aMjanAko vivAha kara
aisA chor3A ki usase kabhI bAta bhI nahIM karate the, bAta karanA to dUra rahA
A~kha uThAkara bhI usa ora nahIM dekhate the| isa taraha ve use bahata daHkha
pahu~cA rahe the| isa ghaTanAse aMjanAke mana meM kitanA duHkha ho rahA thA
isakA unheM bodha nahIM thA  /  / 1 /  /  use rAtrimeM bhI nIMda nahIM AtI thI,
sadA usake netra khule rahate the| usake stana nirantara azruoMse malina ho gaye
the  /  / 2 /  /  patike samAna nAmavAle pavana arthAt vAyuko bhI vaha acchA
samajhatI thI-sadA usakA abhinandana karatI thI aura patikA nAma sunaneke lie
sadA apane kAna khar3e rakhatI thI  // 3 //  usane vivAhake samaya vedIpara jo
patikA aspaSTarUpa dekhA thA usIkA manameM dhyAna karatI rahatI thii| vaha
kSaNa-kSaNameM nizceSTa ho jAtI thI aura usake netra nizcala raha jAte the  // 4
//  vaha hRdayameM patiko dekhakara bAhara bhI unakA darzana karanA cAhatI thI
isalie netroMko poMchakara ThIka karatI thI para jaba bAhyameM unakA darzana
nahIM hotA thA to punaH zokako prApta ho jAtI thI  // 5 //  usane eka hI bAra to
patikA rUpa dekhA thA isalie bar3I kaThinAIse vaha unakA citra khIMca pAtI thI
utane para bhI hAtha bIca-bIca meM kAMpane lagatA thA jisase tulikA chaTakara
nIce gira jAtI thA  // 6|| vaha itanI nirbala ho cukI thI ki mukhako eka hAthase
dUsare hAtha para bar3I kaThinAIse le jA pAtI thii| usake samasta aMga itane
kRza ho gaye the ki unase AbhUSaNa DhIle ho hokara zabda karate hue nIce girane
lage the  /  / 7 //  usakI lambI aura atizaya garama sAMsase hAtha tathA kapola
donoM hI jala gaye the| usake zarIra para jo mahIna vastra thA usIke bhArase
vaha khedakA anubhava karane lagI thI  // 8 //  vaha apane ApakI atyadhika nindA
karatI huI bAra-bAra mAtA-pitAkA smaraNa karatI thI tathA zUnya hRdayako dhAraNa
karatI huI kSaNakSaNameM nizceSTa arthAt mUcchita ho jAtI thI  /  / 9 /  /
kaNThake vASpAvaruddha honeke kAraNa duHkhase nikale hue vacanoMse vaha sadA
apane bhAgyako ulAhanA detI rahatI thii| atyanta duHkhI jo vaha thI  // 10 //
vaha candramAkI kiraNoMse bhI adhika dAhakA anubhava karatI thI aura mahalameM
bhI calatI thI to 1. pavanaJjayaH  /  2. spRSTe ma., ja.  /  3. vigrahA m.| 4.
kiraNaiH  /  5. adhikam  /  6. clntii| viniryAti kha.  /  viniyantI ka., j.|

Page #402 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the English translation, preserving the Jain terms:  352 In the Padma
Purana, [the devotee says]: "O Lord, how are your limbs so enchanting to me? The
places in my heart where your limbs reside cause me the utmost anguish." (12)
"Surely, no offense has been committed by me, O Lord. Without any reason, why
have you become so angry with me?" (13) "Be gracious, I am your devotee, relieve
my mind's distress. This folded palms offering has been made to you." (14) "Just
as the sky without the sun, or the night without the moon, I do not shine
without you, bereft of virtues as well." (15) "Reproaching the one residing in
the mind, she sheds large pearls from her eyes." (16) "Even though present on
the delicate flower-beds, by the command of the guru, she maintains her
composure." (17) "Bearing her own whirling like a chakra, wandering due to lack
of samskara, her matted hair." (18) "She appears fiery from the heat of anguish,
watery from the continuous flow of tears, empty like the sky, and motionless
like the earth." (19) "Formed by the continuous flow of vayus, she resembles the
element of air. Devoid of consciousness, she is like the four elements." (20)
"Able to sit on the ground, but unable to rise up, having placed her hands on
the shoulders of her companions." (22) "She envies the clever women who are
always with their beloved, her unmoving eyes fixed on them." (23) "Having
endured the insult of her beloved, without any reason, she passed days of great
difficulty, like years." (24)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 352 padmapurANe ayi nAtha tavAGgAni manojJAni kathaM mama  /  aGgAnAM
hRdayasthAni kurvate tApamuttamam  // 12 //  nanu te 'janitaH kazcinnAparAdho
mayA prabho  /  kAraNena vinA kasmAtkopaM yAto'si me param  // 13 //  prasIda
tava bhaktAsmi kuru me cittanivRtim  /  bahirdarzanadAnena racito'JjalireSa te
// 14 //  dyaurivAdityanirmuktA candrahIneva zarvarI  /  tvayA vinA na zobhe'haM
vidyeva ca guNojjhitA  // 15 //  prayacchantItyupAlambhaM patye mAnasavAsine  /
bindUn muktAphalasthUlAna muJcantI locanAmbhasaH  // 16 //  vidyamAnA
bhradiSTeSu kusumasrastareSvapi  /  guruvAkyAnurodhena kurvatI vapuSaH sthitim
// 17 //  cakrArUDhamivAjakhaM svaM dadhAnA kRtabhramam  /  saMskAravirahAda
bhaM bhramantI kezasaMcayam  // 18 //  tejomayIva saMtApAjalAtmevAzrusaMtateH  /
zUnyatvAdgaganAtmeva pArthivIvAkriyAtmataH  // 19 //
saMtatotkalikAyogAdvAyuneva vinirmitA  /
tiro'vasthitacaitanyAdbhUtamAtropamAsmikA  // 20 //  bhUmau
nikSiptasavogAnopaveSTumapi kssmaa| upaviSTA ca notthAta dehaM noddhartamutthitA
// 21 //  sakhIjanAMsavinyastavigalatpANipallavA  /  bhrAmyantI kuTTimAGke'pi
praskhalaJcaraNA muhaH  // 22 //  spRhayantyanuyAtAbhyaH priyaizrATuvidhAyimiH
/  varAkI chekakAntAbhyastadgatAspandavIkSaNA  // 23 //  priyAtparibhavaM prAptA
kAraNena vivarjitA  /  ninye sA divasAn kRcchrAdInA saMvatsaropamAn  // 24 //
bAra-bAra mUcchita ho jAtI thI  /  / 11 /  /  he nAtha ! tumhAre manohara aMga
mere hRdayameM vidyamAna haiM phira ve atyadhika santApa kyoM utpanna kara rahe
haiM ?  // 12 //  he prabho! maiMne ApakA koI aparAdha nahIM kiyA hai phira
akAraNa atyadhika krodhako kyoM prApta hue ho ?  // 13 //  he nAtha ! maiM ApakI
bhakta hU~ ataH prasanna hoo aura bAhyameM darzana dekara merA citta santuSTa
kro| lo, maiM Apake lie yaha hAtha jor3atI hU~  // 14 //  jisa prakAra sUryase
.rahita AkAza, candramAse rahita rAtri aura guNoMse rahita vidyA zobhA nahIM
detI usI prakAra Apake binA maiM bhI zobhA nahIM detI  // 15 /  /  isa prakAra
vaha manameM nivAsa karane vAle patike lie ulAhanA detI huI muktAphalake samAna
sthUla AsuoMkI ba~deM chor3atI rahatI thI  // 16 //  vaha atyanta komala
puSyazayyA para bhI khedakA anubhava karatI thI aura gurujanoMkA Agraha dekha
bar3I kaThinAIse bhojana karatI thI  // 17 //  vaha cakrapara car3he hueke
samAna nirantara ghUmatI rahatI thI aura tela kaMghI Adi saMskArake abhAvameM jo
atyanta rUkSa ho gaye the aise kezoMke samahako dhAraNa karatI thI  /  usake
zarIrameM nirantara santApa vidyama rahatA thA isalie aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno
tejaHsvarUpa hI hai| nirantara azru nikalate rahanese aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno
jalarUpa hI ho  /  nirantara zUnya manaska rahanese aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno
AkAza rUpa hI ho aura akriya arthAt nizcala hone ke kAraNa aisI jAna par3atI thI
mAno pRthivI rUpa hI ho  // 19 /  /  usake hRdayameM nirantara utkalikAe~ arthAt
utkaNThAe~ ( pakSameM taraMgeM) uThatI rahatI thIM isalie aisI jAna par3atI thI
mAno vAyuke dvArA racI gayI ho aura cetanA zaktike tirobhUta honese aisI jAna
par3atI thI mAno pathivI Adi bhatacataSTaya rUpa hI ho  // 20 //  vaha
pRthivIpara samasta avayava phailAye par3I rahatI thI, baiThaneke lie bhI
samartha nahIM thii| yadi baiTha jAtI thI to uThane ke lie asamartha thI aura
jisa kisI taraha uThatI bhI to zarIra sambhAlane kI usameM kSamatA nahIM raha
gayI thii||21|| yadi kabhI calatI thI to sakhI janoMke kandhoM para hAtha rakha
kara calatI thii| calate samaya usake hAtha sakhiyoMke kandhoMse bAra bAra nIce
gira jAte the aura maNimaya pharza para bhI bAra bAra usake paira lar3akhar3A
jAte the  // 22 //  cApalUsI karanevAle pati sadA jinake sAtha rahate the aisI
catura striyoMko vaha bar3I spRhAke sAtha dekhatI thI aura unhIMkI ora usake
nizcala netra lage rahate the  // 23 //  jo patise tiraskArako prApta thI tathA
akAraNa hI jisakA 1. jAnataH m.| 2. dhorevaa-m.| 3. khidyamAnAtra diSTeSu m.| 4.
atizayena mRduSu  /  5. saMdadhAnA m.| 6.dra pamAtropamAtmikA m.| 7. nodvartu
m.| 8. bhrAmyanti m.| .

Page #403 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixteen Chapters  353. In this state, her entire family was equally
distressed, or even more so, and they were constantly troubled by the question
of what to do. ||25|| They pondered whether this had happened without any
reason, or if it was the result of ripened karma accumulated from past lives.
||26|| Or perhaps it was the consequence of some obstructing karma acquired in a
previous birth, now ready to bear fruit, the result of Vayu Kumar's actions in
the past. ||27|| As a result, he, along with this innocent and virtuous woman,
is unable to enjoy the supreme pleasures that bring happiness to all the senses.
||28|| Listen, Anjana, who had never experienced even a moment of sorrow in her
father's house, is now burdened with this suffering due to the influence of her
karma. ||29|| What remedy can we, who are devoid of fortune, find in this
situation? This is a matter of karma, beyond our reach, beyond our efforts.
||30|| It would be good if this princess, through the merit we have accumulated,
becomes the object of her husband's love. ||31|| Or perhaps we have no merit,
not even a speck, and we are submerged in this vast ocean of sorrow, caused by
this child. ||32|| When will that auspicious moment arrive when her beloved
husband will hold her in his arms and engage in playful conversation with this
child? ||33||  Meanwhile, a conflict arose between Varuna, who possessed immense
pride and strength, and the powerful Rakshasa, Ravana. ||34|| Ravana sent a
messenger to Varuna, who, radiating the supreme brilliance of his master,
addressed Varuna, saying: ||35|| "O Varuna, the glorious lord of the
Vidyadharas, Ravana, commands you to either pay your respects to me or prepare
for battle." ||36|| Varuna, with his naturally steady mind, laughed and said,
"Messenger, who is this Ravana, and what does he do?" ||37|| "I am not Indra,
nor the powerful Vaishravana, nor Sahasrarashmi, nor the Maruts, nor Yama."
||38|| "This one, adorned with jewels bestowed by the gods, is indeed worthy of
respect. Let him come, and I will show him what it means to be rendered
speechless." ||39||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SoDaza parva 353 tasyAmetadavasthAyAM samo'syA duHkhito'thavA  /  adhikaH
parivAro'bhUskikartavyAkulAtmakaH  // 25 //  acintayaJca kitvetatkAraNena
vinAmavat  /  kiM vA janmAntaropAttaM karma syAtpakvamIdazam  // 26 //  kiM
vAntarAyakarma syAjanitaM janmAntare  /  jAtaM vAyukumArasya phaladAnaparAyaNam
// 27 //  yenAyamanayA sAkaM mugdhayA vItadoSayA  /  na bhukte
paramAnmogAnsarvendriyasukhAvahAn  // 28 //  zRNu duHkhaM yathA pUrva na prAptaM
bhavane pituH  /  seyaM karmAnubhAvena duHkhabhAramimaM zritA  // 29 //
upAyamatra ke kumo vayaM bhAgyavivarjitAH  /  asmatprayatanAsAdhyo gocaro muSa
karmaNAm  // 30 //  rAjaputrI bhavatveSA premasaMbhArabhAjanam  /
bharturasmatkRtenApi puNyajAtena sarvathA  // 31 //  athavA vidyate naiva puNyaM
no'tyantamaNvapi  /  nimagnA yena tiSThAmo bAlAduHkhamahArNave  // 32 //
maviSyati kadA ilAdhyaH sa muhUrto'GkavartinIm  /  bAlAmimAM priyo narmagirA
yatra lapiSyati  // 33 //  atrAntare virodho'bhUdakSasAM vibhunA saha  /
varuNasya paraM garva kevalaM bibhrato balam  // 34 //  kaikasIsUnunA dUtaH
preSito'thetyabhASata  /  varuNaM svAminaH zaktyA dadhAnaH paramAM dyutim  // 35
//  zrImAn vidyAdharAdhIzo varuNa svAha rAvaNaH  /  yathA kuru praNAmaM me
sajIbhava raNAya vA  // 36 //  prakRtisthiracitto'tha vihasya varuNo'vadat  /
dUta ko rAvaNo nAma kriyate tena kA kriyA  // 37 //  nAhamindro jagannindhavIryo
vaizravaNo'thavA  /  sahasrarazmisaMjJo vA maruto vAthavA yamaH  // 38 //
devatAdhiSThitaiH ratnairdo'syAmavaduttamaH  /  AyAtu samamemistaM nayAmyadya
visaMjJatAm  // 39 /  /  tyAga kiyA gayA thA aisI dInahIna aMjanA dinoMko
varSoMke samAna bar3I kaThinAIse bitAtI thI  // 24 //  usakI aisI avasthA
honepara usakA samasta parivAra usake samAna athavA usase bhI adhika duHkhI thA
tathA 'kyA karanA cAhie' isa viSayameM nirantara vyAkula rahatA thA  // 25 //
parivArake loga socA karate the ki kyA yaha saba kAraNake binA hI huA hai athavA
janmAntarameM saMcita karma aisA phala de rahA hai  // 26 //  athavA
vAyukumArane janmAntarameM jisa antarAya karmakA upArjana kiyA thA aba vaha
phala dene meM tatpara huA hai  /  / 27 /  jisase ki vaha isa nirdoSa sundarIke
sAtha samasta indriyoMko sukha denevAle utkRSTa bhoga nahIM bhoga rahA hai  //
28 //  suno, jisa aMjanAne pahale pitAke ghara kabhI racamAtra bhI duHkha nahIM
pAyA vahI aba karmake prabhAvase isa duHkhake bhArako prApta huI hai  /  / 22 /
/  isa viSayameM hama bhAgyahIna kyA upAya kareM so jAna nahIM pdd'taa|
vAstavameM yaha karmoMkA viSaya hamAre prayatna dvArA sAdhya nahIM hai  // 30 //
hama logoMne jo puNya kiyA hai usIke prabhAvase yaha rAjaputrI apane patikI
premabhAjana ho jAye to acchA ho  // 31 //  athavA hama logoMke pAsa aNumAtra
bhI to puNya nahIM hai kyoMki hama svayaM isa bAlAke duHkharUpI mahAsAgarameM
DUbe hue haiM  // 32 //  vaha prazaMsanIya muhUrta kaba AvegA jaba isakA pati
ise godameM baiThAkara isake sAtha hAsyabharI vANImeM vArtAlApa karegA  // 33 /
/  isI bIcameM bahata bhArI ahaMkArako dhAraNa karanevAle varuNakA rAvaNake
sAtha virodha ho gayA  // 34 /  /  so rAvaNane varuNake pAsa dUta bhejaa|
svAmIke sAmayaMse parama tejako dhAraNa karanevAlA dUta varuNase kahatA hai ki
// 35 //  he varuNa! vidyAdharoMke adhipati zrImAn rAvaNane tumase kahA hai ki
yA to tuma mere lie praNAma karo yA yuddhake lie taiyAra ho jAo  // 36 //  taba
svabhAvase hI sthira cittake dhAraka varuNane haMsakara kahA ki he dUta ! rAvaNa
kauna hai ? aura kyA kAma karatA hai ?  // 37|| lokanindya vIryako dhAraNa
karanevAlA maiM indra nahIM hU~, athavA vaizravaNa nahIM hU~, athavA
sahasrarazmi nahIM hU~, athavA rAjA marutva yA yama nahIM hU~  // 38 //
devatAdhiSThita ratnoMse isakA gavaM 1. zritAH ma.  /  2. asmatprayatnatAsAdhyo
ba.  /  3. sumuhUrto'Gka ma.  /  4. tvA+Aha 'tvAmI dvitIyAyAH' iti tvAdezaH  /
5. vIryavaizravaNa -m.|

Page #404 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
354 "Surely, your death is imminent, that's why you speak so clearly," said the
messenger. Having said this, he went to Ravana and delivered the message. ||40||
Then, filled with extreme anger, Ravana surrounded the city of Varuna with his
army, which was as vast as the ocean. ||41|| He made a vow, "I will defeat this
fickle one without the divine gems, or I will face death." ||42|| Rajiva,
Paundarika, and the other sons of Varuna were enraged upon hearing of the
enemy's arrival. They came out, fully armed, ready for battle. ||43|| Then, a
fierce battle ensued between Ravana's army and theirs. The various weapons
clashed and shattered, falling to the ground. ||44|| Elephants fought elephants,
horses fought horses, chariots fought chariots, and soldiers fought soldiers.
The warriors roared, their lips were bitten, and their eyes were red with anger.
||45|| Then, the army of Varuna, which had fought for a long time and had been
wounded by the enemy's weapons, turned back. ||46|| Then, Varuna, who was as
fierce as the fire of destruction and was moving amidst the cage of weapons,
rushed towards the army of demons. ||47|| Seeing Varuna approaching the
battlefield with unstoppable speed, Ravana's army, armed with blazing weapons,
protected him. ||48|| Then, reassured by Varuna, his sons again engaged in
fierce battle, destroying the army of demons and elephants. ||49|| Then, Ravana,
whose mind was burning with anger and whose forehead was furrowed, took up his
bow. ||50|| While Ravana was preparing for battle, Khara and Dushana, who had
been fighting for a long time without any weariness, were captured by a hundred
of Varuna's sons. ||51|| Then, Ravana's mind became extremely troubled. He
thought, "How can we be victorious in this battle?" ||52||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 354 padmapurANe nUnamAsannamRtyustvaM yenaivaM bhASase sphuTam  /  amidhAyeti
taM dRto gatvA bhane nyavedayat  // 40 //  tataH paramakopena parito vAruNaM
puram  /  aruNadrAvaNo yuktaH senayodadhikalpayA  // 41 //  pratijJA ca cakAremA
ratnaireSa mayA vinA  /  netavyazcapalo bhaGgaM mRtyu veti sasaMbhramaH  // 42
//  rAjIvapauNDarIkAdyAH kSubdhA varuNanandanAH  /  viniryayuH susannaddhAH
zrutvA prAptaM balaM dviSaH  // 43 //  rAvaNasya balenAmA teSAM
yuddhamabhUtparam  /  anyonyApAtasaMcchinna vividhAyudhasaMhatiH  // 44 //  gajA
gajaiH samaM saktA vAjino'zvai rathA rathaiH  /  bhaTA bhaTaiH kRtArAvA
daSToSThA raktalocanAH  // 45 //  'parAcInaM tataH sainyaM traikUTairvAruNaM
kRtam  /  cirAya kRtasaMgrAma dattasoDhAyudhotkaram  // 46 //  jalakAntastataH
kruddhaH kAlAgniriva dAruNaH  /  adhAvakSasAM sainyaM hetipaJjaramadhyagaH  //
47 //  tato durvAravegaM taM dRSTvAyAntaM raNAGgaNe  /  gopAyitaH svavAhinyA
rAvaNo dIptazastrayA  // 48 //  varuNena kRtAivAsAstatastasya sutAH punaH  /
paramaM yoddhamArabdhA vidhvastabhaTakuJjarAH  // 49 //  tato yAvadazagrIvaH
krodhadIpitamAnasaH  /  gRhNAti kArmukaM krUraH bhrakuTIkuTilAlikaH  // 50 //
datayuddhazciraM taavtkhedvrjitmaansH| vAhaNInAM zatenAzu gRhItaH kharadUSaNaH
// 5 //  tatazcitte dazagrIvazcakArAtyantamAkulaH  /  yathA na
zobhate'smAkamadhunA raNadhIriti  // 52 //  bahuta bar3ha gayA hai isalie vaha
ina ratnoMke sAtha Ave maiM Aja use binA nAmakA kara dU~ arthAt lokase usakA
nAma hI miTA dUM  // 39 //  nizcaya hI tumhArI mRtyu nikaTa A gayI hai isalie
aisA spaSTa kaha rahe ho' itanA kahakara dUta calA gayA aura jAkara usane
rAvaNase saba samAcAra kaha sunAyA  // 40 //  tadanantara samudra ke samAna
bhArI senAse yukta rAvaNane tIvra krodhavaza jAkara varuNake nagarako cAroM
orase ghera liyA  // 41 /  /  aura sahasA usane yaha pratijJA kara lI ki maiM
devopanIta ratnoMke binA hI isa capalako parAjita karU~gA athavA mRtyuko prApta
karAU~gA  // 42 //  rAjIva pauNDarIka Adi varuNake lar3ake bahuta kSobhako
prApta hue aura zatrukI senA Ayo suna taiyAra ho-hokara yuddhake lie bAhara
nikale  // 43 /  /  tadanantara rAvaNakI senAke sAtha unakA ghora yuddha huaa|
yuddha ke samaya nAnA zastroMke samUha parasparakI Takkarase TUTa-TUTakara nIce
gira rahe the  // 44 //  hAthI hAthiyoMse, ghor3e ghor3oMse, ratha rathoMse aura
yoddhA yoddhAoMke sAtha bhir3a gye| usa samaya yoddhA bahuta adhika hallA kara
rahe the, oTha DaeNsa rahe the tathA krodhake kAraNa unake netra lAla-lAla ho
rahe the  /  / 45 /  /  tadanantara jisane cirakAla taka yuddha kiyA thA aura
zastrasamUhakA prahAra kara svayaM bhI usakI coTa khAyI thI aisI varuNakI senA,
rAvaNakI senAse parAGmukha ho gayI  // 46 /  /  tatpazcAt jo kruddha hokara
pralayakAlakI agnike samAna bhayaMkara thA aura zastrarUpI paMjarake bIcameM
cala rahA thA aisA varuNa rAkSasoMkI senAkI ora dauDA  // 47 //  tadanantara
jisakA vega baDI kaThinAIse rokA jAtA thA aise varuNako raNAMgaNa meM AtA dekha
dedIpyamAna zastroMkI dhAraka senAne rAvaNakI rakSA ko  // 48 //  tatpazcAt
varuNakA AzvAsana pAkara usake putra punaH tejIke sAtha yuddha karane lage aura
unhoMne aneka yoddhArUpI hastiyoMko mAra girAyA  /  / 49 /  /  tadanantara
jisakA citta khedase dedIpyamAna ho rahA thA aura lalATa bhauMhoMse kuTila thA
aise krUra rAvaNane jabataka dhanuSa uThAyA tabataka varuNake so putroMne zIghra
hI kharadUSaNako pakar3a liyaa| kharadUSaNa cirakAlase yuddha kara rahA thA
phira bhI usakA citta khedarahita thA  // 50-51|| tadanantara rAvaNane atyanta
vyAkula hokara manameM vicAra 1 parAGmukham  /  2. trikUTAcalavAsibhiH
rAvaNIyairiti yAvat  /  trikUTa -ma.  /  3. saMgrAmasoDhA -m.| 4. varuNaH  /  5.
varuNasyApatyAni pumAMso vAruNayasteSAM vAruNInAm  /  .

Page #405 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixteen Chapters ### 355  It would not be fitting for me to harbor thoughts
of war at this time. ||52|| If the great battle continues, there is a chance of
Kharadushana's death, therefore it is appropriate to maintain peace now. ||53||
Having decided this, Ravana moved away from the forefront of the battle. For the
noble do not abandon their sense of duty, nor do they lose their taste for what
is right. ||54|| Then, after consulting with his ministers, who were skilled in
matters of counsel, he summoned all his vassals, who were stationed in their
respective territories, along with their entire armies. He sent messengers
quickly, those who had traveled long distances and wore letters on their
foreheads. ||55-56|| A man sent by Ravana also arrived at Prahlada's place. He,
out of devotion to his master, treated him with due respect. ||57|| He asked, "O
Bhadra! Is the lord of the Vidyadharas, Ravana, well?" Then, saying "He is
well," with respect, he placed Ravana's letter before Prahlada. ||58|| After
that, Prahlada, in a moment of excitement, took the letter himself, placed it on
his head, and then had it read aloud, conveying its meaning. ||59|| The letter
read: "Greetings! To the king Prahlada, who resides in the city of Aditya Nagar,
the righteous judge, the knower of the laws of time and place, and devoted to
our love. Ravana, the lord of the Vidyadhara kings, who is stationed near the
city of Alankarpur, who is prosperous, the son of Sumali, the moon of the
celestial sphere of the Rakshasa lineage, informs you, after inquiring about
your well-being, that all the Vidyadhara kings, whose hair has turned yellow due
to the radiance of their fingernails, have already come and paid their respects
to me. But Varuna, who resides in the city of Patala, being endowed with his own
power, is opposing me. He is surrounded by a group of Vidyadharas who inflict
pain on the heart, and he lives happily in the middle of the ocean. Due to this
animosity, a fierce battle took place, and Kharadushana was captured by his
hundred sons." ||60-66||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SoDaza parva 355 kharadUSaNamadrasya pravRtte paramAhave  /
mAbhUnmaraNasaMprAptistasmAcchAntirihocitA  // 53 //  iti nizcitya
saMgrAmaziraso'pasasAra saH  /  nodArANAM yataH kRtye mucyate cetasA rasaH  //
54 //  tataH sa mantrimiH sAkaM pravINarmantravastuni  /  saMmantrya
nijasAmantAnsvadezasamavasthitAn  // 55 //  samagrabalasaMyuktAnsarvAn
dIrghAdhvagAmibhiH  /  AhvAyayacchirobaddhalekhabhAlairiti drutam  // 56 //
prahlAdamapi tatrAyAdrAvaNapraSito nrH| svAmibhaktyA kRtaM cAsya karaNIyaM
yathocitam  // 57 //  vidyAvatAM prabhormadra ! bhadramityatha' coditaH  /
sAdaraM bhadramityuktvA sa lekhaM nyakSipatpuraH  // 58 //  tataH svayaM
samAdAya kRtvA zirasi saMbhramAt  /
prahlAdo'gAcayallekhamasyArthasyAbhidhAyakam  // 59 //  svasti sthAne
purasyArAdalaMkArasya nAmataH  /  niviSTapRtanaH kSemI vidyAbhRtsvAminAM patiH
// 6 //  saumAlinandano rakSaHsantAnAmbara candramAH  /  Adityanagare bhadraM
prahlAdaM nyAyavedinam  // 61 //  kAladezavidhAnajJamasmatprItiparAyaNam  /
AjJApayati dehAdikuzalapraznapUrvakam  // 62 //  yathA me praNatAH sarve kSipraM
vidyAdharAdhipAH  /  karAGgalinakhacchAyAkapilIkRtamrdhajAH  // 13 //
pAtAlanagare'yaM tu susaMmaddhaH svazaktitaH  /  varuNaH
pratyavasthAnamakaroditi durmatiH  // 6 //  hRdayavyathavidyAbhRcakreNa
parivAritaH  /  samudramadhyamAsAdya durAtmAyaM sukhI kila  // 65 //
tato'tigahane yuddhe pravRddhe kharadUSaNaH  /  zatenaitasya putrANAM
kathaMcidapavartitaH  // 66 //  kiyA ki isa samaya yuddhakI bhAvanA rakhanA mere
lie zobhA nahIM detI  // 52 //  yadi parama yuddha jArI rahatA hai to
kharadUSake maraNakI AzaMkA hai isalie isa samaya zAnti dhAraNa karanA hI ucita
hai  // 53 //  aisA nizcaya kara rAvaNa yuddhake agrabhAgase dUra haTa gayA so
ThIka hI hai kyoMki udAra manuSyoMkA citta karane yogya kAryameM rasako nahIM
chor3atA arthAt karane na karane yogya kAryakA vicAra avazya rakhatA hai  /  /
54 //  tadanantara mantra kArya meM nipuNa mantriyoMke sAtha salAha kara usane
apane dezameM rahanevAle samasta sAmantoMko sarva prakArakI senAke sAtha zIghra
hI bulvaayaa| balavAneke lie usane lambA mArga taya karanevAle tathA sirapara
lekha bA~dhakara rakhanevAle dUta bheje  /  / 55-56|| rAvaNake dvArA bhejA huA
eka AdamI prahlAdake pAsa bhI AyA so usane svAmIkI bhaktise usakA yathAyogya
satkAra kiyA ||57|| tathA pUchA ki he bhadra ! vidyAdharoMke adhipati rAvaNakI
kuzalatA to hai ? tadanantara usa AdamIne 'kuzalatA hai' isa prakAra kahakara
AdarapUrvaka rAvaNakA patra prahlAdake sAmane rakha diyA  // 58|| tatpazcAt
prahlAdane sahasA svayaM hI usa patrako uThAkara mastakase lagAyA aura phira
prakRta arthako kahanevAlA vaha patra par3havAyA  /  / 59 /  /  patrameM likhA
thA ki alaMkArapura nagarake samIpa jisakI senA ThaharI hai, jo kuzalatAse yukta
hai, somAlIkA putra hai tathA rAkSasa vaMzarUpI AkAzakA candramA hai aisA
vidyAdhara rAjAoMkA svAmI rAvaNa, Aditya nagarameM rahanevAle nyAya-nItijJa,
deza-kAlakI vidhike jJAtA evaM hamAre sAtha prema karane meM nipuNa bhadra
prakRtike dhArI rAjA prahlAdako zarIrAdikI kuzala kAmanAke anantara AjJA detA
hai ki hAthakI aMguliyoMke nakhoMkI kAntise jinake keza pIle ho rahe haiM aise
samasta vidyAdhara rAjA to zIghra hI Akara mere lie namaskAra kara cuke haiM
para pAtAla nagarameM jo durbuddhi varuNa rahatA hai vaha apanI zaktise sampanna
honeke kAraNa pratikUlatA kara rahA hai-virodhameM khar3A hai| vaha hRdayameM
coTa pahu~cAnevAle vidyAdharoMke samUhase ghirakara samudrake madhyameM sukhase
rahatA hai| isI vidveSake kAraNa isake sAtha atyanta bhayaMkara yuddha huA thA
so isake sau putroMne kharadUSaNako kisI taraha pakar3a liyA hai  // 60-66 /  /
1. zirasosamasAhasaH ma.  /  2. svAmibhaktikRtaM kha.  /  3. bharturbhadra ba.
/  bhadraM bhadramityartha ma., ja.  /  4. mityarthacoditaH ma., ba.  /  5. tato
nigRhane m.| 6. veSTitaH  /

Page #406 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
"In the Padma Purana, there was doubt in the battle, 'He might perish,' so it
was decided. The great battle was abandoned, knowing the time was right. [67]
Therefore, you must come here to counter this, for men like you never falter in
their duty. [68] Having decided this with you, we will act accordingly now. Even
the sun performs its duty in conjunction with Arun. [69]  Then, having conveyed
the essence of the letter to Vayu, and having consulted with the wise ministers,
Prahlad decided to depart without delay. [70] Seeing his father ready to depart,
Vayu, kneeling on the ground and joining his hands in salutation, said: [71] "O
Lord, it is not right for you to leave while I am here. Fathers embrace their
sons, and sons must surely repay the fruit of that embrace. [72] If I do not
repay that fruit, I cannot be called a son. Therefore, please be pleased with me
by granting me permission to depart." [73]  Then his father said to him, "You
are still a child, you have not experienced the sorrow of battle, so stay here
happily, I will go." [74]  Then, with his chest as broad as the shore of Mount
Meru, Vayu spoke the following powerful words: [75] "Father, the first sign of
my strength is that I was born of you. Or, is the spark of fire ever tested to
see if it can burn the world?" [76] "My head, purified by the offering of your
command, is capable of defeating even Indra, there is no doubt about it." [77]
Having said this, he saluted his father, and then, filled with joy, he rose and
performed his ablutions, meals, and other bodily functions. [78]  Then, the
elders of the family, with great respect, blessed him, and he, adorned with
auspiciousness, bowed to the Siddhas with reverence, radiating supreme
brilliance. [79]"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe saMgrAme saMzayo mAbhUtpramAdo'syeti nizcayaH  /  parityaktA
mahAyuddhadhiSaNA kAlavedinA  // 67 //  atastatpratikArAya tvayAvazyamihAgamaH
/  kartavyo naiva kartavye praskhalanti mavAdRzAH  // 6 //  avadhArya tvayA
sAdhaM vidhAsyAmo'tra sAMpratam  /  martApi tejasAM kRtyaM kurute'NasaGgataH  //
65 //  tato lekhArthamAvedya vAyave nirvilambitam  /  gamane saMmatiM cakre
kRtamantraH sumantrimiH  // 7 //  atha taM gamane saktaM jAnuspRSTamahItalaH  /
vAyuya'jJApayatkRtvA praNAmaM racitAJjaliH  // 71 //  nAtha te gamanaM yuktaM
vidyamAne kathaM mayi  /  AliGganaphalaM kRtyaM janakasya sutainanu  // 72 //
tato na jAta evAsmi yadi te na karomi tat  /  gamanAjJApradAnena prasAdaM kuru
me tataH  // 73 //  tataH pitA jagAdainaM kumAro'si raNe bhavAn  /  Agato na
kvacitkhedaM tasmAdAssva jAmyaham  // 4 //  unnamayya tato vakSaH
kanakAdvitaTopamam  /  punarojodharaM vAkyaM jagAda pavanaMjayaH  // 75 //  tAta
me lakSaNaM zaktestvayaiva jananaM nanu  /  jagaddAhe sphuliGgasya kiM vA vIrya
parIkSyate  // 76 //  bhavacchAsanazeSAtipavitrIkRtamastakaH  /  bhaGge
purandarasyApi samartho'smi na saMzayaH  // 7 //  abhidhAyeti kRtvA ca praNAmaM
pramadI punaH  /  utthAyAnuSTitasnAnamojanAdivapuHkriyaH  // 78 //  sAdaraM
kulavRddhAbhirdattAzIH kRtamaGgalaH  /  praNamya bhAvataH siddhAn dadhAnaH
paramAM dyutim  // 79 //  'yuddha meM isakA maraNa na ho jAye' isa vicArase
samayakI vidhiko jAnate hue maiMne mahAyuddhakI bhAvanA chor3a dI hai  // 67||
isalie usakA pratikAra karane ke lie tumheM avazya hI yahA~ AnA cAhie kyoMki
Apa-jaise puruSa karane yogya kAryameM kabhI bhUla nahIM karate  // 68|| aba
maiM tumhAre sAtha salAha kara hI AgekA kArya karUMgA aura yaha ucita bhI hai
kyoMki sUrya bhI to aruNake sAtha milakara hI kArya karatA hai  /  / 69||
athAnantara prahlAdane pavanaMjayake lie patrakA saba sAra batalAkara tathA
uttama mantriyoMke sAtha salAhakara zIghra hI jAnekA vicAra kiyA  // 70|| pitAko
gamanameM udyata dekha pavanaMjayane pRthivIpara ghuTane Tekakara tathA hAtha
jor3a praNAma kara nivedana kiyA ki  // 71 /  /  he nAtha! mere rahate hue ApakA
jAnA ucita nahIM hai| pitA putroMkA AliMgana karate haiM so putroMko usakA phala
avazya hI cukAnA cAhie  // 72 //  yadi maiM vaha phala nahIM cukAtA hU~ to putra
hI nahIM kahalA sakatA ataH Apa jAnekI AjJA dekara mujhapara prasannatA kIjie  /
/ 73 /  /  isake tarameM pitAne kahA ki abhI tuma bAlaka hI ho, yuddha meM jo
kheda hotA hai use tumane kahIM prApta nahIM kiyA hai isalie sukhase yahIM
baiTho meM jAtA hai ||74|| _ tadanantara sumeruke taTake samAna caur3A sInA
tAnakara pavanaMjayane nimnAMkita ojasvI vacana kahe  // 75 //  usane kahA ki he
nAtha ! merI zaktikA sabase prathama lakSaNa yahI hai ki merA janma Apase huA
hai| athavA saMsArako bhasma karaneke lie kyA kabhI agnike tilagekI parIkSA kI
jAtI hai ? ||76|| Apako AjJArUpI zeSAkSatase jisakA mastaka pavitra ho rahA hai
aisA maiM indrako bhI parAjita karanemeM samartha hU~ isameM saMzayakI bAta
nahIM hai  /  / 77 //  aisA kahakara usane pitAko praNAma kiyA aura phira bar3I
prasannatAse uThakara usane snAna-bhojana Adi zArIrika kriyAe~ kI  /  / 78 //
tadanantara kulakI vRddhA striyoMne bar3e Adarase AzIrvAda dekara jisakA
maMgalAcAra kiyA thA. jo utkRSTa kAntiko dhAraNa kara rahA thA aura
'maMgalAcArameM bAdhA na A jAye : jinake netra A~suoMse Akulita the aise
AzIrvAda denemeM tatpara mAtA-pitAne jisakA mastaka 1. saMyamo ba.  /
maraNamityarthaH  /  2. parityaktaM mahAyuddhaM dhiSaNAkAlavedinA b.|
mahAyuddhamityatra 'mathA yuddha'mityapi ba. pustake pAThAntaram  /  3. sUryo'pi
/  4. kurute raNAMgataH ma.  /  5. tejaHpUrNam  /  punA rAjyoddharaM m.|

Page #407 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Sixteenth Chapter 357 With eyes filled with tears, and fearing the
destruction of auspiciousness, he was kissed by his parents who were showering
blessings. ||8|| He asked after all his relatives, greeted them all with a
smile, and, bowing down, honored his devoted followers in their entirety. ||8||
By nature, he raised his right foot first. His right arm kept twitching with
joy. ||82|| His eyes fell upon a full pitcher with leaves on its mouth, as he
was leaving the palace. He suddenly saw Anjana. ||83|| Anjana was standing
leaning against the doorpost, her eyes filled with tears. She was supporting her
waist with her arm, but due to weakness, her arm kept slipping down. ||84|| Her
lips were very pale, devoid of the redness of betel nut, and she looked like a
dirty doll carved into the very pillar. ||85||  Then, just as a man quickly
averts his gaze from lightning, Pavananjay quickly averted his gaze from Anjana.
He was angry and said, ||86|| "O you who look far away! Quickly leave this
place. I am not capable of looking at you, like a meteor." ||87|| "Oh, what
great audacity you have, being a woman of noble lineage, to stand in front of me
even when I don't want you to. You are very shameless." ||88|| Although
Pavananjay's words were very harsh, Anjana, being devoted to her husband,
listened to them with great attention, just as a thirsty man drinks water that
he has received after a long time. ||89|| With her eyes fixed on her husband's
feet, and her hands folded, she said. Although she tried to speak clearly, she
kept stumbling, becoming silent, or saying something else altogether. ||90|| She
said, "O Lord! Even though I am living in this palace, I am abandoned by you.
Still, I have been living with great difficulty, finding satisfaction in the
mere fact that I am near you." ||91|| "But O Lord! Now that you are going far
away, how will I, who am constantly in sorrow, live without the taste of your
nectar-like words?" ||92|| "O Lord! While going to a foreign land, you have
spoken to your servants with affection, even though they are not deserving.
||93||  Salute the supreme Siddha, Pavananjay, with devotion. After bidding
farewell to all your relatives, greet your elder brothers, and converse with all
your followers with devotion, smiling gently, and leave the house. ||79-81|| By
nature, he raised his right foot first. His right arm kept twitching with joy.
||82|| And his eyes fell upon a full pitcher with leaves on its mouth, as he was
leaving the palace. He suddenly saw Anjana. ||83|| Anjana was standing leaning
against the doorpost, her eyes filled with tears. She was supporting her waist
with her arm, but due to weakness, her arm kept slipping down. ||84|| Her lips
were very pale, devoid of the redness of betel nut, and she looked like a dirty
doll carved into the very pillar. ||85||  Then, just as a man quickly averts his
gaze from lightning, Pavananjay quickly averted his gaze from Anjana. He was
angry and said, ||86|| "O you who look far away! Quickly leave this place. I am
not capable of looking at you, like a meteor." ||87|| "Oh, what great audacity
you have, being a woman of noble lineage, to stand in front of me even when I
don't want you to. You are very shameless." ||88|| Although Pavananjay's words
were very harsh, Anjana, being devoted to her husband, listened to them with
great attention, just as a thirsty man drinks water that he has received after a
long time. ||89|| With her eyes fixed on her husband's feet, and her hands
folded, she said. Although she tried to speak clearly, she kept stumbling,
becoming silent, or saying something else altogether. ||90|| She said, "O Lord!
Even though I am living in this palace, I am abandoned by you. Still, I have
been living with great difficulty, finding satisfaction in the mere fact that I
am near you." ||91|| "But O Lord! Now that you are going far away, how will I,
who am constantly in sorrow, live without the taste of your nectar-like words?"
||92|| "O Lord! While going to a foreign land, you have spoken to your servants
with affection, even though they are not deserving. ||93||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SoDazaM parva 357 vASpAkulitanetrAbhyAM maGgaladhvaMsabhItitaH  /
AzIrdAnapravRttAbhyAM pitRbhyAM mUni cumbitH||8|| ApRcchaya bAndhavAn
sarvAnabhivAdya ca sasmitaH  /  saMmASya praNataM bhaktaM parivargamazeSataH  //
8 //  dakSiNenAghriNA pUrva kRtoccAlaH svabhAvataH  /  dakSiNena kRtAnandaH
sphuratA bAhunA muhuH  // 82 //  sapallavamukhe pUrNakumbhe nihitalocanaH  /
krAman (ve) mavanAdeSa sahasaikSata gehinIm  // 83 //  dvArastambhaniSaNNAGgAM
vASpasthagitalocanAm  /  nitambanihitabhraMsinirAdaracaladbhujAm  // 8 //
tAmbalarAganirmaktadhUsaradvijavAsasam  /  tasminneva samutkINAM malinAM
sAlabhaJjikAm  // 45 //  vidyutIva tato dRSTiM tasyAmApatitAM kSaNAt  /
saMhRtya kupito'vAdIditi prahlAdanandanaH  // 86 //  amuSmAdapasarpAzu dezAdapi
durIkSaNe  /  ulkAmiva samartho'haM bhavatIM na nirIkSitum  // 87 //  aho
kulAGganAyAste pragalbhatvamidaM param  /  yatpuro'niSyamANApi tiSThasi
payojjhite  // 48 //  tato'tyantamapi raM tadvAkyaM bhartRbhaktitaH  /  tRSiteva
cirAllabdhamamRtaM manasA papau  // 89 //  jagAda cAJjaliM kRtvA
tatpAdagatalocanA  /  saMskhalantI muhurvAcamugirantI prayatnataH  // 10 //
tiSThatApi tvayA nAtha bhavane'tra vivarjitA  /  tvatsAmIpyakRtAzvAsA
jIvitAramyatikRcchataH  // 11 //  jIviSyAmyadhunA svAminkathaM dUraM gate tvayi
/  tvatsadvaco'mRtAsvAdasmaraNena vinAturA  // 12 //  kRtaM chekagaNasyApi tvayA
saMbhASaNaM pramo  /  yiyAsunA paraM dezamatisnehAcetasA  // 93 //  camA thA
aisA pavanaMjaya bhAvapUrvaka siddha parameSThIko namaskAra kara. samasta
bandhajanoMse pachakara. garujanoMkA abhivAdana kara tathA bhaktise namrIbhata
samasta parijanase vArtAlApa kara manda-manda haMsatA huA gharase nikalA ||79-81
//  usane svabhAvase ho sarvaprathama dAhinA paira Upara uThAyA thA  /  bArabAra
phar3akatI huI dAhinI bhujAse usakA harSa bar3ha rahA thA  /  / 82 //  aura
jisake mukhapara pallava rakhe hue the aise pUrNakalazapara usake netra par3a
rahe the| mahalase nikalate hI usane sahasA aMjanAko dekhA  /  / 83 /  /  aMjanA
dvArake khambhese Tikakara khar3I thI, usake netra A~suoMse AcchAdita the,
kamarako sahArA deneke lie vaha apanI bhujA nitambapara rakhatI bhalI thI para
durbalatAke kAraNa vaha bhujA nitambase nIce haTa jAtI thI  /  / 84 //  pAnakI
lAlIse rahita honeke kAraNa usake oTha atyanta dhUsaravarNa the aura vaha aisI
jAna par3atI thI mAno usI khambhemeM ukerI huI eka mailI putalI hI ho  /  / 85 /
/  tadanantara manuSya jisa prakAra bijalIpara par3I dRSTiko sahasA saMkucita
kara letA hai-usase dUra haTA letA hai usI prakAra pavanaMjayane aMjanApara
par3I apanI dRSTiko zIghra hI saMkucita kara liyA tathA kupita hokara kahA ki
||86 /  /  he duravalokane ! tU isa sthAnase zIghra hI haTa jaa| ulkAkI taraha
tujhe dekhaneke lie maiM samartha nahIM huuN||87|| aho, kulAMganA hokara bhI
terI yaha parama dhatA hai jo mere na cAhanepara bhI sAmane khaDI hai| baDI
nirlajja hai||88| pavanaMjayake ukta vacana yadyapi atyanta krUra the to bhI
jisa prakAra cirakAlakA pyAsA manuSya prApta hue jalako bar3e manoyogase pItA
hai usI prakAra aMjanA svAmImeM bhakti honeke kAraNa usake una krUra vacanoMko
bar3e manoyogase sunatI rahI  /  / 89 /  /  usane svAmIke caraNoMmeM netra
gar3Akara tathA hAtha jor3akara khaa| kahate samaya vaha yadyapi prayatnapUrvaka
vacanoMkA uccAraNa karatI thI to bhI bAra-bAra cUka jAtI thI, cupa raha jAtI
thI, athavA kuchakA kucha kaha jAtI thI  // 90 /  /  usane kahA ki he nAtha !
isa mahalameM rahate hue bhI maiM Apake dvArA tyakta hU~ phira bhI 'maiM Apake
samIpa hI raha rahI hU~' itane mAtrase hI santoSa dhAraNakara aba taka bar3e
kaSTase jIvita rahI hU~  // 91 /  /  para he svAmin ! aba jaba ki Apa dUra jA
rahe haiM nirantara duHkhI rahanevAlI maiM Apake sadvacanarUpI amRtake svAdake
binA kisa prakAra jIvita rahU~gI ?  // 92 /  /  he prabho! paradeza jAte samaya
Apane snehase AI citta hokara 1. niSTrayamANApi ma.  /  2. bhuvane'tra ma.  /
3. sevakagaNasyApi  /

Page #408 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
358 In the Padma Purana, I, with my heart solely devoted to you, am tormented by
the pain of separation from you. How is it that you have not spoken to me, even
through another's mouth, O Lord? ||9|| You have abandoned me, my Lord, and in
this entire world, there is no other refuge for me, or else death would be my
refuge. ||15|| Then, with a constricted face, she said, "Die," and, overcome
with grief, she fell to the ground. ||16|| The wind, bearing the highest
prosperity, and devoid of compassion, mounted a magnificent elephant and, along
with his vassals, set out. ||17|| On the first day, he reached the Manasarovar
Lake. Though his vehicles were not weary, he stationed his army on the bank of
the lake. ||18|| As his army descended from the sky, it shone brightly, adorned
with various vehicles and weapons, like a group of gods. ||19|| The
Vidyaadharas, filled with joy, performed all the necessary tasks, such as
bathing, eating, etc., for themselves and their vehicles. ||100|| Then, by the
power of knowledge, a beautiful palace was quickly constructed, with many
sections, and with appropriate length, breadth, and height. On the upper section
of the palace, Pavananjay, seated on a magnificent throne, was engaged in
conversation with his friend, his joy increasing with tales of war. ||101-102||
Pavananjay, through the windows, was looking at the trees on the bank and the
Manasarovar Lake, gently swaying in the soft breeze. ||103|| In the lake,
fearsome turtles, fish, crocodiles, proud alligators, and many other aquatic
creatures were creating waves. ||104|| The water of the lake, clear like
polished crystal, adorned with lotuses and blue lotuses, was further beautified
by swans, cranes, herons, and sarasa birds. ||105|| The deep sound of all these
birds was captivating both the mind and the ears. And within that sound, the
buzzing of bees could be heard. ||106|| Servant people have spoken to you, yet
my mind is fixed only on you, and I am constantly pained by your separation. Why
have you not spoken to me, even through another's mouth? ||93-94|| O Lord! You
have abandoned me, and in this entire world, there is no other refuge for me, or
else death would be my refuge. ||25|| Then, Pavananjay, with a constricted face,
said, "Die." As soon as he said that, she, overcome with grief, fell to the
ground. ||96|| Meanwhile, Pavananjay, bearing the highest prosperity, mounted a
magnificent elephant and, along with his vassals, set out. ||97|| On the first
day, he reached the Manasarovar Lake. Though his vehicles were not weary, he
stationed his army on the bank of the lake. ||98|| As his army descended from
the sky, it shone brightly, adorned with various vehicles and weapons, like a
group of gods. ||99|| The Vidyaadharas, filled with joy, performed all the
necessary tasks, such as bathing, eating, etc., for themselves and their
vehicles. ||100|| Then, by the power of knowledge, a beautiful palace was
quickly constructed, with many sections, and with appropriate length, breadth,
and height. On the upper section of the palace, Pavananjay, seated on a
magnificent throne, was engaged in conversation with his friend, his joy
increasing with tales of war. ||101-102|| Pavananjay, through the windows, was
looking at the trees on the bank and the Manasarovar Lake, gently swaying in the
soft breeze. ||103|| In the lake, fearsome turtles, fish, crocodiles, proud
alligators, and many other aquatic creatures were creating waves. ||104|| The
water of the lake, clear like polished crystal, adorned with lotuses and blue
lotuses, was further beautified by swans, cranes, herons, and sarasa birds.
||105|| The deep sound of all these birds was captivating both the mind and the
ears. And within that sound, the buzzing of bees could be heard. ||106||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 358 padmapurANe ananyagatacittAhaM tvadasaMgamaduHkhitA  /  kathaM
nAnyamukhenApi tvayA saMbhASitA vibho  // 9 //  tyaktAyA me tvayA nAtha
samaste'pyatra viSTape  /  vidyate zaraNaM nAnyadathavA maraNaM bhavet  // 15 //
tatastena mriyasveti saMkocitamukhena sA  /  satI nigaditApaptadviSaNNA
dharaNItale  // 16 //  vAyurapyuttamAmRddhiM dadhAnaH kRpayojjhitaH  /  paramaM
nAgamAruhya sAmantaiH prasthitaH samam  // 17 //  vAsare prathame vAsI saMprApto
mAnasaM srH| AvAsayattaTe tasya senAmazrAntavAhanaH  // 18 //  tasyAvatarataH
senA zuzubhe hi nabhastalAt  /  surasaMtativannAnAyAnazastravibhUSaNA  // 19 //
Atmano vAhanAnAM ca cakre kArya yathocitam  /  snAnapratyavasAnAdividyAbhRdbhiH
sumAnasaiH  /  / 10 /  /  atha vidyAbalAdAzu racite bahubhUmike  /
yuktavistAratuGgatve prAsAde cittahAriNi  // 10 //  sahoparitale kurvat svaraM
mitreNa saMkathAm  /  varAsanagato bhAti saMgrAmakRtasaMmadaH  // 102 //
gavAkSajAlamArgeNa chidreNa taTabhUruhAn  /  IkSAJcakre saro
vAyurmandavAyuvighaTTitam  // 1.3 //  bhImaiH
kUmaiMjhapainakrarmakarairdarpadhArimiH  /  bhinnavIcikamanyaizca yAdobhiriti
bhUribhiH  // 10 //  dhautasphaTikastulyAmbhaH kamalotpalabhUSitam  /  haMsaH
kAraNDavaH krauJcaH sArasaizcopazobhitam  // 105 //  maindrakolAhalAdeSA
manaHzrotramalimlucam  /  tadantarazrutodAttabhramarIkulajhakRtam  // 106 //
sevaka janoMse bhI sambhASaNa kiyA hai phira merA citta to eka ApameM hI laga
rahA hai aura Apake hI viyogase nirantara duHkhI rahatI hU~ phira svayaM na sahI
dUsareke mukhase bhI Apane mujhase sambhASaNa kyoM nahIM kiyA ?  // 93-94 /  /
he nAtha ! Apane merA tyAga kiyA hai isalie isa samasta saMsArameM dUsarA koI
bhI merA zaraNa nahIM hai athavA maraNa ho zaraNa hai  // 25 //  tadanantara
pavanaMjayane mukha sikor3akara kahA ki 'maro'  /  unake itanA kahate hI vaha
khedakhinna ho mUchita hokara pRthivIpara gira par3I  // 96|| idhara uttama
Rddhiko dhAraNa karatA haA nirdaya pavanaMjaya uttama hAthIpara savAra ho
sAmantoMke sAtha Age bar3ha gayA  /  / 97 /  /  prathama dina vaha
mAnasarovarako prApta huA so yadyapi usake vAhana thake nahIM the to bhI usane
mAnasarovarake taTapara senA ThaharA dI  /  / 98 //  _AkAzase utarate hue
pavanaMjayakI nAnA prakArake vAhana aura zastroMse suzobhita senA aisI jAna
par3atI thI mAno devoMkA samUha hI nIce utara rahA ho  // 99|| prasannatAse
bhare vidyAdharoMne apane tathA vAhanoMke snAna-bhojanAdi samasta kArya
yathAyogya rItise kiye  // 100 /  athAnantara vidyAke balase zIghra hI eka aisA
manohara mahala banAyA gayA ki jisameM aneka khaNDa the tathA jisakI lambAI,
caur3AI aura UMcAI anurUpa thI, usa mahalake Uparake khaNDapara mitrake sAtha
svacchanda vArtAlApa karatA huA pavanaMjaya utkRSTa Asanapara virAjamAna thaa|
yuddhakI vArtAse usakA harSa bar3ha rahA thA  // 101-102 //  pavanaMjaya
jharokhoMke mArgase kinAreke vRkSoMko tathA manda-manda vAyuse hilate hue
mAnasarovarako dekha rahA thA  // 103 //  bhayaMkara kachue, mIna, nakra,
garvako dhAraNa karanevAle magara tathA anya aneka jala-janta usa sarovarameM
lahareM utpanna kara rahe the  // 104 //  dhale hae sphaTikake samAna svaccha
tathA kamaloM aura nIla kamaloMse suzobhita usa sarovarakA jala haMsa,
kAraNDava, krauMca aura sArasa pakSiyoMse atyadhika suzobhita ho rahA thA  /  /
105 //  ina saba pakSiyoMke gambhIra kolAhalase vaha sarovara mana aura karNa-
donoMko curA rahA thaa| tathA usake 1. nAnyasukhenApi  /  2. hemabhUmike ma.  /
3. mandakolAhalaM dezaM ma.  /  4. bhramarIkulajhaMkRti kh.|

Page #409 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
On the shore of the lake, Pavanjaya saw a Cakavi. She was alone and deeply
distressed, consumed by the fire of separation. She was making various efforts,
her eyes fixed on the setting sun, repeatedly looking into the holes in the
lotus leaves. She was flapping her wings with speed, flying up and down,
distressed. She was looking at the sweet water with pieces of Mrinala,
sorrowful. Seeing her reflection in the water, she called out to her beloved,
and when he did not come, she was overcome with grief. Hearing the echoes from
various places, she hoped that her beloved was calling out, and she circled
around like a wheel, her eyes beautiful. She climbed onto a tree on the shore
and looked in all directions. When she did not see her beloved there, she
descended with great speed. She was scattering the pollen of the lotuses far and
wide with the flapping of her wings. Pavanjaya, moved by compassion, saw her
sorrowful state and watched her for a long time.  He thought to himself, "This
is a great sorrow that has befallen her. Separated from her beloved, she is
burning with the fire of grief." This beautiful lake, cool like the moon and
sandalwood, has become like a blazing fire for her, having been separated from
her beloved. For a woman separated from her beloved, even a leaf becomes a
sword, the rays of the moon become a thunderbolt, and heaven itself becomes
hell.  Thinking thus, his mind went to his beloved Anjanasundari. Filled with
love, he looked at the places he had served during their marriage. Those places,
now before his eyes, became unbearable sources of sorrow, like those who pierce
the heart. He thought to himself, "Alas, what a terrible thing! She, abandoned
by me, a wicked-minded man, is suffering like this Cakavi." If his friend had
spoken harsh words to her at that time, why did I abandon her because of the
fault of another?

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Soza parva tatra caikAkinImekAmAkulA cakravAkikAm  /  viyogAnalasaMtaptA
nAnAceSTitakAriNIm  // 107 //  astAcalasamAsanamAnubimbagatekSaNAm  /
paminIdalarandhreSu muhuya'stanirIkSaNAm  // 10 //  dhunvAnAM pakSatI
vegApAtopAtakRtabhramAm  /  mRNAlazakalasvAdu pazyantIM duHkhitAM viSam  // 109
//  pratibimbaM nijaM dRSTvA jale dayitazatinIm  /  AhvayantIM tadaprAptyA
vrajatIM paramAM zucam  // 110 //  nAnAdezodbhavaM zrutvA pratizabdaM
priyaashyaa| bhramaM cakramivArUDhAM kurvantIM sAdhulocanAm  // 11 //
taTapAdapamAruhya nyasyantI dikSu locane  /  tatrAdRSTvA punaH pAtamAcarantI
mahAjavam  // 112 //  unnayantI rajo dUraM padmAnAM pakSadhUti miH  /  ciraM
tadgatayA dRSTayA dadarzAsau kRpAhRtaH  // 113 //  iti cAcintayatkaSTaM
prAptamasyA idaM param  /  yastriyeNa vimukteyaM dahyate zokava hinA  // 11 //
tadevedaM saro ramyaM candracandanazItalam  /  dAvakalpamabhUdasyAH prApya
nAthaviyuktatAm  // 115 //  ramaNena viyuktAyAH pallavo'pyeti khaDgatAm  /
candrAMzurapi vajratvaM svargo'pi narakAyate  // 116 //  iti cintayatastasya
priyAyAM mAnasaM gatam  /  tatprItyA caikSatoddezAMstadvivAhe niSevitAn  // 117
//  cakSuSo gocarIbhUtAstasya te zokahetavaH  /  babhUvurmarmabhedAnAM kartAra
iva duHsahAH  // 118 //  adhyAsIcceti hA kaSTaM mayA sA karacetasA  /
mukteyamiva cakrAhvA vaiklavyaM dayitAgamat  // 119 //  yadi nAma tadA tasyAH
sakhyAbhASyata niSThuram  /  tato'nyadIyadoSeNa kasmArasA varjitA mayA  // 120
//  madhyameM bhramariyoMkA utkRSTa jhaMkAra sunAI detA thA  // 106 /  /  usI
sarovarake kinAre pavanaMjayane eka cakavI dekhii| vaha cakavI akelI honese
atyanta vyAkula thI, viyogarUpI agnise santapta thI, nAnA prakArakI ceSTAe~ kara
rahI thI, astAcalake nikaTavartI sUryabimbapara usake netra par3a rahe the, vaha
bAra-bAra kamalinIke pattoMke vivaroMmeM netra DAlatI thI, vegase paMkhoMko
phar3aphar3AtI thI, bAra-bAra Upara ur3akara tathA nIce utarakara khedakhinna ho
rahI thI, mRNAlake Tukar3oMse svAdiSTa jalakI ora dekhakara duHkhI ho rahI thI,
pAnIke bhItara apanA pratibimba dekhakara patikI AzaMkAse use bulAtI thI aura
antameM usake na Anese atyadhika zoka karatI thI, nAnA sthAnoMse jo pratidhvani
AtI thI use sunakara 'kahIM pati to nahIM bola rahA hai' isa AzAse vaha
cakrArUr3hakI taraha gola cakkara lagAtI lagAtA thA, usake netra sundara the,
vaha kinAreke vRkSapara car3hakara saba dizAoM meM netra DAlatI thI aura vahA~
jaba patiko nahIM dekhatI thI taba bar3e vegase punaH nIce A jAtI thI, tathA
paMkhoMkI phar3aphar3AhaTase kamaloMkI parAgako dUra taka ur3A rahI thii|
pavanaMjaya dayAke vazIbhUta ho usakI sora dRSTi lagAkara dera taka dekhatA rahA
// 107-113 //  cakavIko jo atyadhika duHkha prApta ho rahA thA usIkA vaha isa
prakAra cintavana karane lgaa| vaha vicArane lagA ki patise viyukta huI yaha
cakavI zokarUpI agnise jala rahI hai  // 114 //  yaha vahI candramA aura
candanake samAna zItala, manohara sarovara hai para patikA viyoga pAkara ise
dAvAnalake samAna ho rahA hai  /  / 115 /  /  patise rahita striyoMke lie
pallava bhI talavArakA kAma karatA hai, candramAkI kiraNa bhI vajra bana jAtI
hai aura svarga bhI naraka-jaisA ho jAtA hai  // 116|| aisA vicAra karate hue
usakA mana apanI priyA aMjanAsundarIpara gayA aura usI meM prema neke kAraNa
usane vivAhake samaya sevita sthAnoMko baDe gaurase dekhA  // 117 //  ve saba
sthAna usake netroMke sAmane Anepara zokake kAraNa ho gaye aura marma bheda
karanevAloMke samAna duHsaha ho uThe  // 118 //  vaha mana hI mana socane lagA
ki hAya-hAya bar3e kaSTakI bAta hai-mujha duSTa cittake dvArA chor3I huI vaha
priyA bhI isa cakavIke samAna duHkhako prApta ho rahI hogI  // 119 //  yadi usa
samaya usakI sakhIne kaThora zabda kahe the to dUsareke doSase maiMne use kyoM
chor3a diyA?  // 120 /  /  1. kRpAdRtaH m.|

Page #410 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
360 Alas, for fools like me who act without considering the consequences,
bringing suffering upon people without reason. ||12|| My heart, a sinner's
heart, is truly made of iron, for it has remained so long against my beloved.
||122|| What should I do now, father? I left home after asking him. How can I
return now? Alas, I have fallen into great trouble. ||123|| If I go to war, she
will surely not survive, and in her absence, I too will be lost. There is no
greater suffering than this. ||124|| Or perhaps my supreme friend, the one who
unravels all knots of doubt, exists. He is the judge of this auspicious task.
||125|| Therefore, I ask this friend, skilled in all matters, for those who act
with deliberation find happiness, not those who act without it. ||126|| While
Pavananjay was contemplating this, his cheerful friend saw him distracted.
Grieving over his sorrow, he softly asked, ||127|| "My friend, you have set out
to destroy your enemy, why then does your face appear so gloomy today?" ||128||
"O virtuous one, cast aside your shame and quickly tell me the reason. Your
sadness fills me with great anxiety." ||129|| Then Pavananjay, his courage
shattered, spoke with difficulty, having gone far astray. ||130|| "O beautiful
one, listen, to whom else can I speak? You are truly the recipient of all my
secrets." ||131|| "My friend, this is not something you should tell anyone else,
for it brings me great shame." ||132|| In response, the cheerful one said,
"Speak without fear, for what you say is like water on hot iron to me." ||133||
Then Pavananjay said, "My friend, listen, I have never loved Anjana. ||134||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 360 pacapurANe dhigasmatsadRzAnmUrkhAnaprekSApUrvakAriNaH  /  janasya ye vinA
hetuM yatkurvantyasukhAsanam  // 12 //  mama vajramayaM nUnaM hRdayaM
pApacetasaH  /  pratyavasthita yatkAlamiyantaM tAM priyAM prati  // 122 //  kiM
karomyadhunA tAtamApRcchaya nirito gRhAt  /  kathaM nu vinivata'hamaho
prApto'smi saMkaTam  // 123 //  vrajeyaM yadi saMgrAmaM jIvennAsau tataH sphuTam
/  tadamAve mamAbhAvaH svatazca guru nAparam  // 12 //  athavA
sarvasaMdehagranthibheda nakAraNam  /  vidyate me paraM mitraM tatredaM tiSThate
zubhe  // 125 //  tasmAtpRcchAmyamuM tAvatsarvAcAravizAradam  /  nizcitye vihite
kArye labhante prANinaH sukham  // 126 //  iti ca dhyAtametena dRSTvA caivaM
vicetasam  /  mandaM prahasito'pRccha devaM tadduHkhaduHkhitaH  // 127 //  sakhe
! pratinarocchedakRtaye prasthitasya te  /  kasmAdanamadyevaM viSaNNamiva
dazyate  // 128 //  apatrapAM vimucyAzu mahyaM sujana vedaya  /
nitAntamAkulIbhAvo jAto me bhavatIzi  // 129 //  tato'sAvevamuktaH san
kRcchaniHsRtayA girA  /  jagAdeti paribhraMzaM dUraM dhairyA pAgataH  // 130 //
zRNu sundara kasyAnyatkathanIyamidaM mayA  /  nanu sarvarahasyAnAM tvameva mama
bhAjanam  // 13 //  sa tvaM kathayituM naitadanyasmai suhRdaI si  /  trapA hi
vastunAnena jAyate paramA mama  // 132 //  tataH prahasito'vocad vizrabdhastvaM
nivedaya  /  tvayA hi vedito me'rthastaptAyogatavArivat  /  / 133 /  /  tato
vAyuruvAcedaM zRNu mitrAJjanA mayA  /  na kadAcitkRtaprItiriti me duHkhitaM
manaH  /  /  134 //  binA vicAre kAma karanevAle mujha-jaise mUroMke lie
dhikkAra hai| jo binA kAraNa hI logoMko duHkhI karate haiM  // 121 //  nizcaya
hI mujha pApIkA citta vajrakA banA hai isIlie to vaha itane samaya taka priyAke
viruddha raha sakA hai  // 122 //  aba kyA karU~ ? maiM pitAse pUchakara gharase
bAhara nikalA hU~. isalie aba lauTakara vApasa kaise jAU~ ? aho ! maiM bar3e
saMkaTameM A par3A hU~  // 123 //  yadi maiM yuddhake lie jAtA hU~ to nizcita
hai ki vaha jIvita nahIM bacegI aura usake abhAvameM merA bhI abhAva svayameva
ho jaayegaa| isalie isase bar3hakara aura dUsarA kaSTa nahIM hai  // 124 //
athavA samasta sandehakI gA~Thako kholanevAlA merA parama mitra vidyamAna hai so
yahI isa zubha kAryakA nirNAyaka hai  /  / 125 /  /  isalie saba prakArake
vyavahArameM nipuNa isa mitrase pUchatA hU~ kyoMki jo kArya vicArakara kiyA jAtA
hai usI meM prANI sukha pAte haiM sarvatra nahIM  /  / 126 /  /  idhara
pavanaMjaya isa prakAra vicAra kara rahA thA udhara prahasita mitrane use
anyamanaska dekhaa| taba usake duHkhase duHkhI hokara usane svayaM hI dhIrese
pUchA  // 127|| ki he sakhe! tuma to zatrukA uccheda karaneke lie nikale ho
phira Aja isa taraha tumhArA mukha khinna-sA kyoM dikhAI de rahA hai ?  // 128
//  he satpuruSa ! lajjA chor3akara zIghra hI mere lie isakA kAraNa btaao| Apake
isa taraha khinna rahate hue mujhe bahuta AkulatA utpanna ho rahI hai  /  / 129
//  tadanantara jo dhairyase bhraSTa hokara bahuta dUra jA par3A aisA
pavanaMjaya mitrake isa prakAra kahanepara kaThinAIse nikalatI huI vANIse kahane
lagA ki  // 130 //  he sundara ! suno, tumheM chor3akara aura kisase kahU~gA ?
yathArthameM mere samasta rahasyoMke tumhI eka pAtra ho  // 131 //  he mitra !
yaha bAta tuma kisI dUsarese kahaneke yogya nahIM ho kyoMki isase mujhe adhika
lajjA utpanna hotI hai  /  / 132 /  /  isake uttarameM prahasitane kahA ki tuma
niHzaMka hokara kaho kyoMki tumhAre dvArA kahA huA padArtha mere lie santapta
lohepara par3e pAnIke samAna hai  // 133 //  tadanantara pavanaMjayane kahA ki
he mitra ! suno, maiMne Aja taka kabhI aMjanAse prema nahIM 1. jIvinA yuktaM ye
ma.  /  janasyo| vinA ja.  /  2. nirNetRtvenAvalambate  /  3. lajjAm  /  4.
kRcchanistrapayA ma.  /  5. paraM bhraMzaM ma., kh.| 6. dhairyamupAgataH ka.  /
.

Page #411 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixteen Chapters  Even though I am cruel and did not speak to her due to my
cruelty, she kept herself alive by constantly shedding tears due to my
proximity. ||135||  When I arrived, I saw her condition, and I know now that she
will not survive this separation. ||136||  Without any fault of hers, I have
disregarded her for twenty-two years, being like a stone in my heart. ||137||
When I arrived, I saw her face, devoid of the beauty that had been lost due to
the contact of sorrow. ||138||  When her long, blue lotus-like eyes come to my
memory, my heart is pierced like an arrow. ||139||  Therefore, O virtuous one,
find a way so that we can meet, and death may not befall either of us. ||140||
Then, the one whose body was still but whose mind was like a restless swing in
the contemplation of a solution, spoke with a smile, saying: ||141||  Since you
have left after consulting the gurus and wish to conquer the enemy, it is not
appropriate for you to return now. ||142||  Moreover, you have never brought
Anjana to the gurus before, so bringing her here now would be shameful. ||143||
Therefore, it is best that you go secretly and make her worthy of your sight and
the pleasure of conversation. ||144||  Your meeting is the support of her life,
so grant her this for a long time, and then return quickly, having calmed your
mind. ||145||  Then, being free from worry and carrying the best enthusiasm, you
will be able to go and conquer the enemy. This is a sure way. ||146||  Then,
saying "Very well," the swift Pavananjay, appointed Mudgara, the commander, to
protect the army, and taking garlands, ointments, and other fragrant substances,
he went up into the sky, taking the smiling friend with him, under the pretext
of worshipping Meru. ||147-148||  Meanwhile, the sun was setting, as if urged by
compassion, so that the union of these two might take place in the night.
||149||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SoDaza parva krare'pi mayi sAmIpyAdiyantaM samayaM tayA  /  AtmA saMdhArito
nityaM pravRttanayanAmbhasA  // 135 //  AgacchatA mayA dRSTA tasyAzceSTAdhunA tu
yaa| tayA jAnAmi sA nUnaM na prANiti viyoginI  // 136 //  tasyA vinAparAdhena
mayA paribhavaH kRtaH  /  dvayagraM viMzatimabdAnAM pASANasamacetasA  // 137 //
AgacchatA mayA dRSTaM tasyAstanmukhapaGkajam  /  zokapAleyasaMparkAnmuktaM
lAvaNyasaMpadA  // 138 //  tasyAste nayane dIdhai nIlotpalasamaprabhe  /
iSuvatsmRtimArUDhe hRdayaM vidhyate'dhunA  // 139 //  tadupAyaM kuru tvaM
tamAvayoyana saMgamaH  /  jAyeta maraNaM mAbhUdubhayorapi sajjana  // 14 //  Uce
prahasito'thaivaM kSaNaM nizcalavigrahaH  /
upAyacintanAtyantacaladolAsthamAnasaH  // 141 //  kRtvA gurujanApRcchA
nirgatasya tvaadhunaa| zatru nirjetukAmasya sAMprataM na nivartanam  // 142 //
samakSaM gurulokasya nAnItA prathamaM ca yA  /  lajyate
tAmihAnetumadhunAJjanasundarIm  // 143 //  tasmAdavidito gatvA tatraivetAM
tvamAnaya  /  netrayorgocarIbhAvaM saMbhASaNasukhasya ca  // 144 //
jIvitAlambanaM kRtvA cirAttasyAH samAgamam  /  tataH kSipraM nivartasva
zItalIbhUtamAnasaH  // 145 //  nirapekSastato bhUtvA vahannutsAhamuttamam  /
gamiSyasi ripuM jetumupAyo'yaM sunizcitaH  // 146 //  tataH paramamityuktvA
senAnyaM mudgarAbhidham  /  niyujya balarakSAyAM vyAjato meruvandanAt  // 147 //
mAlyAnulepanAdIni gRhItvA tvarayAnvitaH  /  puraH prahasitaM kRtvA
vAyurgaganamudyayau  // 148 //  tAvacca bhAnuraidastaM kRpayeva pracoditaH  /
vizrabdhametayoryogo nizIthe jAyatAmiti  // 149 //  kiyA isalie merA mana dukhI
ho rahA hai  /  / 134 //  yadyapi maiM krUra hU~ aura krUratAvaza usase
bolatAcAlatA nahIM thA to bhI mAtra samIpameM rahane ke kAraNa usane nirantara
A~sa DAla-DAlakara apane Apako jIvita rakhA hai  /  / 135 /  /  parantu usa dina
Ate samaya maiMne usakI jo ceSTA dekhI thI usase jAnatA hU~ ki vaha viyoginI aba
jIvita nahIM rahegI  // 136 /  /  mujha pASANacittane aparAdhake binA hI usakA
bAIsa varSa taka anAdara kiyA hai  /  / 137 /  /  Ate samaya maiMne usakA vaha
mukha dekhA thA jo ki zokarUpI tuSArase samparka honeke kAraNa saundaryarUpI
sampadAse rahita thA  // 138 /  /  usake jaba nIlotpalake samAna nIle evaM
dIrgha netra smRtimeM Ate haiM to bANakI taraha hRdaya biMdha jAtA hai  // 139 /
/  isalie he sajjana ! aisA upAya karo ki jisase hama donoMkA samAgama ho jAye
aura maraNa na ho sake  // 140 //  athAnantara kSaNa-bharake lie jisakA zarIra
to nizcala thA aura mana upAyakI cintanAmeM mAno atyanta caMcala jhUlApara hI
sthita thA aisA prahasita bolA ki  /  / 141 /  /  cU~ki tuma gurujanoMse
pUchakara nikale ho aura zatruko jItanA cAhate ho isalie isa samaya tumhArA
lauTanA ucita nahIM hai  /  / 142 /  /  isake sivAya gurujanoMke samakSa tuma
kabhI aMjanAko apane pAsa nahIM lAye ho isalie isa samaya usakA yahA~ lAnA bhI
lajjAkI bAta hai  // 143 /  /  ataH acchA upAya yahI hai ki tuma gupta rUpase
vahIM jAkara use apane darzana tathA sambhASaNajanya sukhakA pAtra banAo  // 144
//  tumhArA samAgama usake jIvanakA Alambana hai so use cirakAla taka prApta
karAkara tathA apane manako ThaNDA kara zIghra hI vahA~se vApasa lauTa AnA  //
145 /  /  aura isa taraha tuma usa orase nizcinta ho uttama utsAhako dhAraNa
karate hue zatruko jItaneke lie jA sakoge  // 146 //  tadanantara 'bahuta ThIka
hai' aisA kahakara zIghratAse bharA pavanaMjaya, mudgara nAmaka senApatiko
senAkI rakSAmeM niyukta kara mAlA, anulepana Adi anya sugandhita padArtha lekara
aura prahasita mitrako Age kara meruvandanAke bahAne AkAzameM jA ur3A  //
147-148 //  itane meM hI sUrya asta 1. sandhAritA ma.  /  2. prahasito'pyevaM
ma.  /  3. kSaNanizcala ma.  /  4. zatrunirjetu, -ma.  /  5. yuktam  /

Page #412 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
362 In the Padma Purana, it is said, "Due to the destruction of the twilight
glow, the world is enveloped in darkness, and all objects can only be known by
touch." (150) Pavananjay arrived at the house of Anjanasundari and stayed in the
outer courtyard, while Prahasita went inside. (151) Seeing him suddenly in the
dim light of the lamp, Anjanasundari was terrified and exclaimed, "Who is this?
Who is this?" (152) She woke up her sleeping friend, Vasantmala, and the clever
woman, upon waking, calmed her fears. (153) Then, Prahasita, saying, "I am
Prahasita," bowed and informed her of Pavananjay's arrival. (154) Hearing this
news, which was like a dream, of her beloved's arrival, she spoke to Prahasita
in a choked voice, filled with humility, saying: (155) "Oh Prahasita, why do you
laugh at me, who am devoid of merit and abandoned by my beloved? I am myself the
object of ridicule due to my own impure actions." (156) "Knowing that I am
rejected by my beloved, who has not scorned me, the unfortunate and sorrowful
one? (157) "Especially you, with your wicked mind, have encouraged my beloved
and brought me to this state of extreme suffering." (158) "Or perhaps, O noble
one, what fault is yours? For the whole world, under the influence of karma,
experiences both sorrow and happiness." (159) Thus, Anjanasundari, shedding
tears and intent on self-reproach, was addressed by Prahasita, whose heart was
filled with sorrow. (160) He said, "O auspicious one, do not speak thus. Forgive
me, for I am a foolish and sinful being." (161) "Your evil deeds have surely
been destroyed now, for your beloved, drawn by the virtue of love, has come
himself." (162) "Now that he is pleased, what is there that will not bring you
happiness? Indeed, what beauty is there in the night when the moon unites with
the stars?" (163) 1. Sandhyam. 2. TapasÄnvitÄm. 3. PragrÄ«vo. 4. PrasannÄti.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 362 padamapurANe 'saMdhyAlokaparidhvaMsahetunA tamasAnvitam  /  jagat
sparzanavijJeyapadArthamamavattataH  // 150 //  prAptazcAjanasundaryA gRhe
pragrIvakodare  /  vAyurasthAtpraviSTastu tasyAH prahasito'ntikam  // 151 //
tatastaM sahasA dRSTavA mnddviipprkaashtH| anjanA vivyathe'tyartha kaH ko'yamiti
vAdinI  // 152 //  sakhIM vasantamAlAM ca suptAM pAva vyanidrayat  /
kuzalotthAya sA tasyAzcakAra bhayanAzanam  // 153 //  tataH prahasito'smIti
gaditvA'sau namaskRtim  /  prayujyAkathayattasmai pavanaMjayamAgatam  // 15 //
tataH svapnasamaM zrutvA prANanAthasya sAgamam  /  Uce prahasitaM dInamidaM
gadgadayA girA  // 155 //  kiM mAM prahasitApuNyA hasasi priyavarjitAm  /  nanu
karmabhirevAhaM hasitAtimalImasaiH  // 156 //  priyeNa paribhUteti viditvA vada
kena no  /  paribhUtAsmi nirbhAgyA duHkhAvasthAnavigrahA  // 157 /  /
vizeSatastvayA kAntaH protsAhya karacetasA  /  etAmAropito'vasthAM mama
kRcchavidhAyinIm  // 158 //  athavA bhadra te ko'tra doSaH karmavazIkRtam  /
jagatsarvamavApnoti duHkhaM vA yadi vA sukham  // 159 //  iti sAzru vadantI
tAmAtmanindanatatparAm  /  natvA prahasito'vocad duHkhArtIkRtamAnasaH  /  / 160
//  kalyANi mA maNIrevaM kSamasva janitaM myaa| Ago vicArazUnyena
pApAvaSTabdhacetasA  // 161 //  prAptAni vilayaM nUnaM duSkarmANi tavAdhunA  /
yena premaguNAkRSTo jIvitezaH samAgataH  // 162 /  /  adhunAsmina prasanne te
kiM na jAtaM sukhAvaham  /  nanu candraNa zarvaryAH saMgame kA na cArutA  // 163
//  ho gayA so rAtrike samaya ina donoMkA nizcintatAse samAgama ho sake isa
karuNAse prerita hokara hI mAno asta ho gayA thA  // 149 //  tadanantara
sandhyAke prakAzako naSTa karanekA kAraNa jo andhakAra ra usase yakta hokara
samasta saMsAra zyAma varNa ho gayA aura samasta padArtha mAtra sparzana
indriyake dvArA ho jAnane yogya raha gaye  // 105 /  /  aMjanAsundarIke ghara
pahuMcakara pavanaMjaya to bAhya baraNDAmeM raha gayA aura prahasita usake pAsa
gayA  // 15 //  tadanantara dIpakake manda prakAzameM use sahasA dekhakara 'yaha
kauna hai kauna hai' aisA kahatI huI aMjanA atyadhika bhayabhIta huI  // 152 //
usane pAsameM soyI vasantamAlA sakhIko jagAyA so usa caturane uThakara usakA
bhaya naSTa kiyA  // 153 //  tatpazcAt 'maiM prahasita hU~' aisA kahakara usane
namaskAra kiyA aura pavanaMjayake AnekI sUcanA dI  // 154 //  taba vaha svapnake
samAna prANanAthake samAgamakA samAcAra suna gadgada vANImeM dInatAke sAtha
prahasitase kahane lagI ki  // 155 /  /  he prahasita ! mujha puNyahInA tathA
patityaktAkI ha~sI kyoM karate ho ? maiM to apane malina karmoMse svayaM hI
hAsyakA pAtra ho rahI huuN||156|| yaha hRdayavallabhake dvArA tiraskRta hai-
patike dvArA ThukarAyI gayI hai aisA jAnakara mujha abhAginI evaM duHkhinIkA
kisane nahIM tiraskAra kiyA hai ?  // 157 //  khAsakara duSTa cittako dhAraNa
karanevAle tumhIMne prANanAthako protsAhita kara mujhe atyanta duHkha denevAlI
isa avasthA taka pahu~cAyA hai  /  / 158 /  /  athavA he bhadra ! isameM tumhArA
kyA doSa hai ? kyoMki kamake vazIbhUta huA samasta saMsAra duHkha athavA sukha
prApta kara rahA hai  // 159 //  isa prakAra jo azru DhAlatI huI kaha rahI thI
tathA apane ApakI nindA karanemeM tatpara thI aisI aMjanA sundarIko namaskAra
kara prahasita bolaa| usa samaya prahasitakA mana duHkhase dravIbhUta ho rahA
thA  // 160 //  usane kahA ki he kalyANi! aisA mata kaho, mujha nirvicAra tathA
pApayukta cittake dhArakane jo aparAdha kiyA hai use kSamA karo  // 161 /  /
isa samaya tumhAre duSkarma nizcaya hI naSTa ho gaye haiM kyoMki premarUpI
guNase khicA huA tumhArA hRdayavallabha svayaM AyA hai  /  / 162 //  aba isake
prasanna rahanepara tumheM kauna-sI vastu sukhadAyaka nahIM hogI? vAstavameM
candramAke sAtha samAgama honepara rAtrimeM kona-sI sundaratA nahIM A jAtI ?  //
163 //  1. saMdhyAM ma.  /  2. tapasAnvitAm ma.  /  3. pragrIvo mattavAraNaH  /
4. prasanneti  /

Page #413 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Sixteen  Then, after a moment of silence, Anjanasundari spoke, her
words echoing the sentiments expressed by her friend.  || 164 ||  "My dear, it
is impossible for a year to be without rain, just as it is impossible for them
to come. Or perhaps, this is a time when some auspicious deed of mine has borne
fruit, making their arrival possible." || 165 ||  "Very well, if my lord has
come, I welcome him. The tree of my past good deeds has finally borne fruit
today." || 166 ||  As she spoke, her eyes filled with tears of joy, and her
friend, with the same compassion, brought her beloved to her side. || 167 ||
Seeing her beloved, Anjanasundari, whose eyes were as beautiful as those of a
frightened deer, was overcome with joy. She tried to rise from her bed, but her
legs trembled, and she kept placing her hands on her knees, only to have them
slip down again. Her thighs were stiff as pillars, and her whole body shook. ||
168 - 169 ||  Seeing this, Pavananjay, with a voice like nectar, said, "My dear,
let it be. What is the point of this agitation, which only brings distress?" ||
170 ||  Despite his words, Anjanasundari struggled to rise and fold her hands in
greeting. Pavananjay, seeing her effort, took her hand and gently led her back
to the bed. || 171 ||  Her hand, now damp with sweat, was tingling with
excitement, as if it were sprouting new shoots, nourished by the nectar of her
husband's touch. || 172 ||  Vasantmala, after bowing to Pavananjay, spoke to him
with respect. Then, with a smile, she led him to another beautiful room, where
they sat comfortably together. || 173 ||  Pavananjay, however, was ashamed of
his earlier disrespect and could not bring himself to ask about her well-being.
|| 174 ||  Then, with a blush, he said, "My dear, forgive me for the disrespect
I showed you, a result of the influence of my karma. " As he spoke, his mind was
filled with anxiety. || 175 ||  Anjanasundari, her head bowed, replied in a soft
voice, her entire body still. || 176 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SoDazaM pavaM tataH kSaNaM sthitA cedaM jagAdAjjanasundarI  /
pratinisvanavatyevaM sakhyanUditayA girA  //  164 //  asaMbhAvyamidaM bhadra
yayA varSa jalojjhitam  /  bhavatyapyathavA kAle kalyANaM karmacoditam  //  165
//  tathAstu svAgataM tasya jIvitasyeziturmama  /  adya me phalitaH pUrva
zubhAnuSThAnapAdapaH  /  /  166  /  /  vadantyAmevametasyAmAnandasrAptacakSuSi
/  tatsakhyevAntikaM nItastasyAH karuNayA priyaH  //  167 //
trastasAraGgakAntAkSI dRSTvA taM paramotsavam  /  jAnu
dvayAsakRnnyastasrastapANisaroruhA  //  168  //  stambhavatprasRtAkANDA
vepathuzritavigrahA  /  zanairutthAtumArabdhA zayanasthA prayAsinI  //  169  //
athAlamalametena devi klezavidhAyinA  /  saMbhrameNeti vacanaM
vimuJcannamRtopamam  // 170  //  samutthitAM priyAM kRcchrAdaJjaliM
badhumudyatAm  /  gRhItvA dayitaH pANau zayane samupAvizat  // 171 //  * svedI
pANirasau tasyAH paramaM pulakaM vahan  /  priyasparzAmRteneva sikto
vyAmuJcadaGkurAn  /  / 172  /  /  natvA vasantamAlA taM kRtvA bhASaNamAdarAt  /
sAkaM prahasitenAsthAdramye kakSAntare sukham  // 173 //  athAnAdarataH pUrvaM
trapamANaH svayaMkRtAt  /  pavanaH kuzalaM praSTuM na prAvartata cetasA  //  174
//  vilakSastu priye mRSya mayA karmAnubhAvataH  /  nikAraM kRtamityUce
tatkSaNAkulamAnasaH  /  / 175 /  /  AdyasaMbhASaNAtsApi vahantI natamAnanam  /
jagAda mandayA vAcA nizcalAkhilavigrahA  /  / 176 /  /  4 tadanantara
aMjanAsundarI kSaNa-bhara ke lie cupa ho rahI  /  usake bAda usane sakhIke dvArA
anUdita vacanoM ke dvArA uttara diyA  /  sakhI jo vacana kaha rahI thI ve
aMjanAkI pratidhvanike samAna jAna par3ate the || 164|| usane kahA ki he bhadra
! jisa prakAra jalase rahita varSAkA honA asambhava hai usI prakAra unakA AnA
bhI asambhava hai  /  athavA isa samaya mere kisI zubha kAryaMkA udaya huA ho
jisase tumhArA kahanA sambhava bhI ho sakatA hai || 165 //  astu, yadi
prANanAtha Aye haiM to maiM unakA svAgata karatI huuN| merA pUrvopArjita
puNyakarmarUpI vRkSa Aja phalIbhUta huA hai || 166 || isa prakAra netroMmeM
harSaMke A~sU bhare huI aMjanAsundarI yaha kaha hI rahI thI ki sakhI ke samAna
karuNA prANanAthako usake samIpa le AyI || 167 | usa samaya aMjanA zayyApara
baiThI thI  /  jyoM hI usane parama Anandake denevAle prANanAthako samIpa Ate
dekhA tyoM hI vaha uThanekA prayAsa karane lagI  /  usake netra bhayabhIta
hariNake samAna sundara the, vaha khar3I honeke lie apane ghuTanoM para bAra-
bAra hasta- kamala rakhatI thI para ve durbalatAke kAraNa nIce khisaka jAte the
/  usakI jA~gheM khambheke samAna akar3a gayI thIM aura sArA zarIra kA~pane lagA
thA  /  /  168 - 169 || yaha dekha pavanaMjayane amRtatulya nimna vacana kahe ki
he devi ! rahane do, kleza utpanna karanevAle isa sambhramase kyA prayojana hai
? || 170 || itanA kahane para bhI aMjanA bar3e kaSTase khar3I hokara hAtha
jor3anekA udyama karane lagI ki pavanaMjayane usakA hAtha pakar3akara use
zayyApara baiThA diyA || 171 || aMjanAkA vaha hAtha pasInAse yukta ho gayA aura
romAMca dhAraNa karane lagA thA jisase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno patike
spazaMrUpI amRta se sIMcA jAkara aMkura hI dhAraNa kara rahA thA || 172  //
vasantamAlAne pavanaMjayako namaskAra kara AdarapUrvaka usake sAtha vArtAlApa
kiyA  /  tadanantara vaha prahasita ke sAtha eka dUsare sundara kamare meM sukha
se baiTha gayI  //  173  //  athAnantara cU~ki pavanaMjaya apane dvArA kiye hue
anAdarase lajjita ho rahA thA ataH sarvaprathama kuzala samAcAra pUchane ke lie
vaha hRdayase pravRtta nahIM ho sakA || 174  //  tadanantara lajjita hote hue
usane kahA ki he priye ! maiMne karmodayake prabhAvase tumhArA jo tiraskAra kiyA
hai use kSamA karo  /  yaha kahate samaya pavanaMjayakA mana atyanta Akula ho
rahA thA || 175 || aMjanAkA 1. kSaNasthitA kha.  /  2. - mAnandAtprAptacakSuSi
ma.  /  3 jaGghAkANDA  /  4. svedayuktaH  /  5. kSamasva  /  363

Page #414 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the translation of the text with the Sanskrit words retained:  ---  In
the Padmapurana:  364 âO Lord, you have not caused any offense to me at all.
Now, as you are creating that most rare affection, it should be understood that
I have not been disregarded by you.â (177) âThe life I have lived until now is
indeed dependent on your memory. Therefore, even the contempt you have shown me
has become of great joy for me.â (178)   Then, saying this, she placed her
finger on her chin and lifted her face slightly while looking at Pavananjaya. He
said: âO Devi! Forget all offenses, for I bow at your feet. May you attain
supreme bliss.â (179) After saying this, Pavananjaya placed his head at the feet
of Anjana. Anjana quickly attempted to raise him with her lotus-like hands.
(181)  However, Pavananjaya remained in that position and said, âO beloved! I
will only lift my head when you tell me that you are pleased.â (182) Then, when
Anjana said, âI have forgiven,â Pavananjaya immediately raised his head and
embraced her. At that time, her eyes were closing in joy. (183)  Having embraced
her, Anjana seemed to merge into her husbandâs body as if fearing that there
would be no separation again. (184) Pavananjaya released Anjana from the embrace
and began to gaze at her with motionless eyes devoid of the usual playful
glances. (185)  Then, overwhelmed by love, he kissed Anjana on her feet, hands,
navel, breasts, cheeks, forehead, and eyes. (186) Not just once, but repeatedly
touching them with his sweaty hands, he kissed the same spots again, as it is
essential for lovers to engage in the beloved's service by kissing their faces.
(187)  Then, he drank from her lips, which were radiant as a lotus and seemed to
exude nectar. (188)   ---  This translation conveys the essence of the original
text while retaining important Sanskrit terminology. If you need further
elaboration or analysis, feel free to ask!

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 364 padmapurANe na kazvijanito nAtha tvayA paribhavo mama  /  adhunA kurvatA
snehaM manorathasudurlabham  // 177 /  /  svasmRtipratibaddhaM me vahantyA nanu
jIvitam  /  tvadAyatto nikAro'pi mahAnandasamo'bhavat  /  / 178 /  /  athaivaM
bhASamANAyA vidhAya cibuke'Ggalim  /  unnamayya mukhaM pazyan jagAda
pavanaMjayaH  // 179 //  devi sarvAparAdhAnAM vismRtyai tava pAdayoH  /
praNAmameSa yAto'smi prasAdaM paramaM vraja  // 18 //  ityuktvA sthApitaM tena
mUrdhAnaM pAdayoH priyA  /  tvarayA karapadmAbhyAmunnetuM vyApRtAbhavat  // 181
//  tathAvasthita evAsau tato'vocatpriyaM vacaH  /  prasannAsmIti
yenAhamudyacchAmi ziraH priye  // 182 /  /
kSAntamityudito'thAsAvunnamayyAnamuttamam  /  cakre priyAsamAzleSaM
sukhAmolitalocanaH  /  / 183 //  AzliSTA dayitasyAsau tathA gAtreSvalIyata  /
punarviyogamIteva gatAntarvigrahaM yathA  // 18 //  AliGganavimuktAyAstasyAH
stimitalocanam  /  mukha muktanimeSAbhyAM locanAbhyAM papau priyaH  /  / 185 /
/  pAdayoH karayo bhyAM stanayozcibuke'like  /  gnnddyonetryoshvaasyaashcumbnN
madanAturaH  // 186 //  punaH punazcakArAsau svedinA pANinA spRzan  /  AptasevA
hi sA nUnaM kriyate vaktracumbane  // 187 //  tataH
prabuddharAjIvagarmacchadasamaprabham  /  sa papAvadharaM tasyA
vimuJcantamivAmRtam  // 18 //  nIvIvimocanavyagrapANimasya pAvatI  /
rodhumaicchanna sA zaktA pANinA vepathuzritA  // 189 /  /  patike sAtha
vArtAlApa karanekA prathama avasara thA isalie vaha bhI lajjAke kAraNa mukha
nIcA kiye thii| usakA sArA zarIra nizcala thaa| isI dazAmeM usane dhIre-dhIre
uttara diyA  // 176 ki he nAtha ! cU~ki isa samaya Apa jisakI mujhe AzA hI nahIM
thI aisA durlabha sneha kara rahe haiM isalie yahI samajhanA cAhie ki Apane merA
kucha bhI tiraskAra nahIM kiyA hai  // 177 /  maiMne aba taka jo jIvana dhAraNa
kiyA hai vaha eka ApakI smRtike Azraya hI dhAraNa kiyA hai| isalie Apake dvArA
kiyA huA tiraskAra bhI mere lie mahAn AnandasvarUpa hI rahA hai  /  / 178 /  /
athAnantara aisA kahatI huI aMjanAkI cibukapara aMgulI rakha usake mukhako kucha
UMcA uThAkara usIkI ora dekhate hue pavanaMjayane kahA ki  // 179 /  /  he devi
! samasta aparAdha bhUla jAo isalie maiM tumhAre caraNoMmeM praNAma karatA hU~,
parama prasannatAko prApta hoo  // 180 //  itanA kahakara pavanaMjayane apanA
mastaka aMjanAke caraNoMmeM rakha diyA aura aMjanA use apane karakamaloMse
zIghra hI uThAnekA prayatna karane lagI  // 181 /  /  parantu pavanaMjaya usI
dazAmeM par3e rhe| unhoMne kahA ki he priye ! jaba tuma yaha kahogI ki 'maiM
prasanna hU~ tabhI sira Upara uThAU~gA  // 182 //  tadanantara 'kSamA kiyA'
aMjanAke aisA kahate hI pavanaMjayane sira Upara uThAkara usakA AliMgana kiyaa|
usa samaya usake donoM netra sukhase nimIlita ho rahe the||183|| AliMgita aMjanA
patike zarIra meM isa prakAra lIna ho gayI mAno phirase viyoga na ho jAve isa
bhayase zarIrake bhItara hI praviSTa honA cAhatI thI  /  / 184 /  /
pavanaMjayane aMjanAko AliMganase chor3A to nizcala netroMse yukta usake mukhako
apane TimakArarahita netroMse dekhane lage  // 185 //  tadanantara kAmase
vyAkula ho unhoMne aMjanAke pairoM, hAthoM, nAbhi, stana, dAr3hI, lalATa,
kapoloM aura netroMkA cumbana kiyA  // 186 //  eka hI bAra nahIM, kintu pasInAse
yukta hAthase sparza karate hue unhoMne punaH punaH una sthAnoMkA cumbana kiyA
jo Thoka hI hai kyoMki mukhakA cumbana karaneke lie vaha Apta sevA hai so
premIjanoMko karanA hI par3atA hai  /  / 187 //  tadanantara khile hue kamalake
bhItarI dalake samAna jisakI kAnti thI aura mAno jo amRta hI chor3a rahA thA
aise usake adharoSThakA pAna kiyA  // 188 //  nIvIkI gA~Tha kholane 1.
tvatsmRtibaddhaM ma.  /  2. athaiva ma.  /  3. prasanno'smIti ma0, ba.  /  4:
sukhamIlita-ma.  /  5. jJAtAntavigrahaM yathA kha. ma ,ba., j.| 6. na cAzaktA
m.|

Page #415 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the translation of the provided text while retaining the original
Sanskrit words:  ---  **Sixteenth Chapter (à¤·à¥à¤¡à¤¶à¤ à¤ªà¤°à¥à¤µ)** 365  Then, seeing the
broad buttocks (à¤¨à¤¿à¤¤à¤®à¥à¤¬à¤«à¤²à¤à¤) of Anjana bare of clothing, the heart of the wind-
vanquishing (à¤ªà¤µà¤¨à¤à¤à¤¯) became disturbed by the speed of desire (à¤à¤¾à¤®à¤à¥ à¤µà¥à¤) which
was akin to the mindâs own nature (à¤®à¤¨à¤­à¥à¤µà¥à¤à¤°à¤à¥à¤à¤¿à¤¤à¤®à¥)  (à¥¥190à¥¥).   Thereafter,
having been compelled by a wonderful speed, the wind-vanquishing (à¤ªà¤µà¤¨à¤à¤à¤¯),
taking hold of Anjana, who was soft like a lotus (à¤à¤®à¤²), held her tightly
(à¥¥191à¥¥).   Then, as the crafty (à¤µà¥à¤¦à¤à¥à¤§à¥à¤¯à¤) would speak, like Apsara (à¤à¤¾à¤®) giving
commands and providing lessons akin to increased affection (à¤à¤¨à¥à¤°à¤¾à¤à¥), the love
activity of both couples attained a supreme increase (à¤¦à¤®à¥à¤ªà¤¤à¥à¤¯à¥à¤°à¥à¤µà¥à¤¦à¥à¤§à¤¿à¤®à¥à¤¤à¥à¤¤à¤®à¤¾à¤®).
At that time, the emotions in the minds of both (à¤¤à¤¤à¥à¤° à¤¹à¤¿ à¤¯à¥) could not be
expressed in words (à¥¥192-193à¥¥).  The supreme beauty (à¤ªà¤°à¤® à¤¸à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¤°à¥) Anjana,
elevating (à¤à¤¸à¥à¤«à¤¾à¤²à¤¯à¤¨à¥) the cup-like breasts (à¤¸à¥à¤¤à¤¨à¤¯à¥à¤ à¤à¥à¤®à¥à¤­à¤¯à¥à¤°à¥à¤ª) and the
buttocks, was mounted by the elephant (à¤®à¤¹à¤¾à¤à¤à¤®à¥) of desire (à¤à¤¾à¤®à¤¦à¥à¤µà¤°à¥à¤ªà¥ à¤®à¤¤à¥à¤¤)
(à¥¥194à¥¥).   âStop!â âLet go!â, âHold on!ââin various sounds filled with lively
confusion, their love scene appeared like a great war (à¤¨à¤¾à¤¨à¤¾à¤¶à¤¬à¥à¤¦à¤¸à¤®à¤¾à¤à¥à¤²à¤®à¥,
à¤¯à¥à¤§à¥à¤¦à¤®à¥) (à¥¥195à¥¥).   While taking the lower lip (à¤à¤§à¤°à¤à¥à¤°à¤¹à¤£à¥), Anjana, making loud
sounds (à¤¸à¥-à¤¸à¥), waved her hand, which appeared as if the sprout of a creeper
(à¤²à¤¤à¤¾à¤¯à¤¾ à¤à¤µ à¤ªà¤²à¥à¤²à¤µà¤) was shaking (à¥¥196à¥¥).   The new nail indents on Anjanaâs thighs
(à¤à¤à¤¨à¤¸à¥à¤¥à¤²à¤®à¥) appeared as if blue sapphires (à¤¨à¥à¤²à¤®à¤£à¤¿à¤à¥) had emerged from the earth
below (à¥¥197à¥¥).   Gazing at Anjanaâs thighs, the wind-vanquishing (à¤ªà¤µà¤¨à¤à¤à¤¯) was
not satisfied (à¤¤à¥à¤ªà¥à¤¤à¤¿), his eyes (à¤¨à¥à¤¤à¥à¤°) fixed unblinkingly upon them (à¥¥198à¥¥).
With sweet mellifluous sounds, her bangles (à¤à¥à¤¡à¤¼à¤¿à¤¯à¥à¤) produced a delightful
jingling, which resembled a swarm of bees buzzing (à¥¥199à¥¥).   The glances and
pupils of Anjanaâs eyes appeared as if they adorned the elegance of blue lotuses
(à¤¨à¥à¤² à¤à¤®à¤²à¥à¤) joined with restless bees (à¥¥200à¥¥).   After the union (à¤¸à¤®à¥à¤­à¥à¤), a
group of sweat droplets (à¤ªà¤¸à¥à¤¨à¥à¤) appeared upon the face and breasts of Anjana,
which looked like a collection of pure pearls (à¤®à¥à¤¤à¤¿à¤¯à¥à¤) (à¥¥201à¥¥).   Her lower lip
(à¤à¤§à¤°à¥à¤·à¥à¤ ) had turned red due to the biting (à¤¦à¤¨à¥à¤¤à¤¾à¤à¤¾à¤¤), making her look like a
row of blossoming Tesu flowers (à¤à¥à¤¸à¥à¤à¥ à¤µà¤¨à¤à¥ à¤ªà¤à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¿) (à¥¥202à¥¥).   This is due to
the consumption (à¤à¤ªà¤­à¥à¤à¥à¤¤) by her husband (à¤ªà¤¤à¤¿à¤à¥) (à¥¥203à¥¥).   ---  This
translation captures the essence and imagery of the original Sanskrit text while
preserving key terms.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SoDazaM parva 365 tato nitambaphalakaM dRSTvAsyA vasanojjhitam  /  uvAha
hRdayaM vAyurmanobhUvegaraGgitam  // 190 //  atha kegApi vegena
parAyattIkRtAtmanA  /  gRhItA dayitA gADhaM pavanenAbjakomalA  // 191 //  yathA
bravIti vaidagdhyaM yathAjJApayati smaraH  /  anurAgo yathA zikSA prayacchati
mahodayaH  // 192 //  tathA tayo ratiH prAptA dampatyorvRddhimuttamAm  /  kAle
tatra hi yo mAvo naivAkhyAtuM sa pAryate  // 193 //  stanayoH kumbhayorepa
jaghane cAGganottamAm  /  AsphAlayan samArUDho manobhavamahAgajam  // 19 //
tiSTha maJca gRhANeti nAnAzabdasamAkulam  /  tayoryuddhamivodAraM
ratamAsItsavibhramAm  // 195 //  adharagrahaNe tasyAH purusItkArapUrvakam  /
pravidhUtaH karo reje latAyA iva pallavaH  // 196 //  priyadattA navAstasya
nakhAGkA jaghane babhuH  /  vaiDUryajagatIbhAge padmarAgodgamA iva  // 197 //
tasyAH 'secanakatvaM tu jagAma jaghanasthalam  /
nimeSamuktataniSThamukulIbhUtacakSuSaH  // 198 //  valayAnAM raNakAraH
kalAlApasamanvitaH  /  tadA manoharo jajJe bhramarogharavopamaH  // 199 //
tasyAste kAmyamAnAyA netrakekaratArake  /  mukule dadhatuH zobhAM
calAlIndIvarasthitAm  // 20 //  prasvedabindunikarastasyA mukhakucodgataH  /
svacchamuktAphalAkAro ratasyAnte'tyarAjata  // 201 //  radagrahAruNIbhUtaM
sAdharaM bibhratI babhau  /  palAzavanarAjIva samudbhUtaikakiMzukA  // 202 //
priyabhuktA tanustasyA Uhe kAntimanuttamAm  /
kanakAdritaTAzliSTaghanapaGktikRtopamAm  // 203 //  ke lie utAvalI karanevAle
pavanaMjayake hAthako lajjAse bharI aMjanA rokanA to cAhatI thI para usakA hAtha
itanA adhika kA~pa rahA thA ki usase vaha rokane meM samartha nahIM ho sakI  //
189|| tadanantara vastrarahita aMjanAkA nitambaphalaka dekhakara pavanaMjayakA
hRdaya kAmake vegase caMcala ho gayA  // 190 /  /  tatpazcAt kisI adbhuta vegase
jisakI AtmA vivaza ho rahI thI aise pavanaMjayane kamalake samAna komala
aMjanAko kasakara pakar3a liyA  /  / 191 //  tadanantara caturAI jo bAta kahatI
thI, kAma jaisI AjJA detA thA, aura bar3hA huA anurAga jaisI zikSA detA thA
'vaisI hI una donoM' dampatiyoMkI rati-kriyA uttama vRddhiko prApta huii| usa
samaya una donoMke manakA jo bhAva thA vaha zabdoM dvArA nahIM kahA jA sakatA
// 192-193 //  parama sandarI aMjanAke stanarUpI kalaza tathA nitamba-sthalakA
AsphAlana karate hae pavanaMjaya kAmadevarUpI madonmatta hAthIpara ArUr3ha the
// 194 //  'Thaharo', 'chor3o, 'pakar3o' Adi nAnA zabdoMse yukta tathA hAva-
bhAva vibhramase bharA unakA rata kisI mahAyuddhake samAna jAna par3atA thA
||195 /  /  adharoSThako grahaNa karate samaya jorase sI-sI karatI huI aMjanA jo
hAtha hilAtI thI vaha aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno kisI latAkA pallava hI hila
rahA ho  /  / 196 /  /  aMjanAke nitamba-sthalapara pavanaMjayane jo naye-naye
nakhakSata diye the ve aise jAna par3ate the mAno nIlamaNiko bhUmimeM
padmarAgamaNi hI nikala rahe hoM  // 197 /  /  aMjanAkA jaghana-sthala dekhate-
dekhate pavanaMjayako tRpti hI nahIM hotI thii| vaha apane TimakArarahita netra
usIpara gar3Aye baiThe the  // 198|| madhura AlApase sahita usakI cUr3iyoMkI
manohara runajhuna aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno bhramaroMke samUha hI guMjAra kara
rahe hoM  // 199 /  /  aMjanAke netroMke kaTAkSa aura putaliyAM aisI jAna
par3atI thIM mAno caMcala bhramaroMse yukta nIla kamaloMkI zobhA hI dhAraNa kara
rahI ho  // 200 //  sambhogake anantara aMjanAke mukha tathA stanoMke Upara jo
pasInoMkI bUMdoMkA samUha prakaTa huA thA vaha aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno
svaccha motiyoMkA samUha hI ho  /  / 201 //  dantAghAtake kAraNa usakA
adharoSTha lAla-lAla ho gayA thaa| use dhAraNa karatI huI vaha aisI jAna par3atI
thI mAno jisameM eka phUla AyA hai aise TesUke vanakI paMkti hI ho  // 202 //
patike dvArA upabhukta 1. atRptikaratvam  /  2. sthitI ma.  /  3. kiMzukaH ma.
/

Page #416 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the English translation of the provided Sanskrit text, while retaining
the original Sanskrit words:  ---  In the PappapurÄá¹a, after the celebratory
event was concluded, the weary couple, with their bodies fatigued, wished to
indulge in sleep. (20) However, since their minds were absorbed in contemplating
each other's virtues, sleep seemed to have fled out of jealousy. (205) Then,
with the beloved's head resting on the shoulder of the husband, and their arms
mutually embraced, they appeared to be infused with mutual love; their mouths
were fragrant due to the exhalation of sweet-scented breaths, and the expansive
chest had the shape of a lotus due to the close embrace. (206) A man's thigh was
positioned between the thighs of a woman, and in the desired regions, various
kinds of pillows were arranged. In such a state, like a celestial couple, that
ÄnjanÄ and the son of the wind somehow attained sleep. At that time, their
bodies remained still, immersed in the ocean of touch-generated pleasure.
(207-209)  Then, as dawn broke, ÄnjanÄ rose from the bed and began to serve her
husband, who sat nearby. (210) Perceiving the fragrance generated from their
union, she felt shy, yet at the same time, she was filled with joy as her long-
held desires were finally fulfilled. (211) Thus, those couple who previously
were fearful of merely seeing each other spent many nights enjoying each other
without restraint. (212) The senses of the couple, who were likened to the
divine couple with the name Dodunduka, were now preoccupied, detached from other
activities, and fully engaged with one another. (213)  Then, after enjoying the
pleasures, the wise friend, having forgotten the master's command, and being
aware of the heedlessness of his friend, when VasantamÄlÄ entered, softly spoke
as he walked into the palace: (214-215) "O beautiful one! Rise, why are you
still sleeping? It seems as if you have been defeated by the splendor of your
face..."  ---   Please feel free to ask if you have any further questions or
need additional translations!

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 366 papapurANe tataH saMprAptakRtye to samAte suratotsave  /  dampatI sevituM
nidrAM khinnadehAvavAnchatAm  // 20 //  . parasparaguNadhyAnavazamAnasayostu sA
/  Iya'yeva tayordUra kopAt kvApi palAyitA  // 205 //  tataH
priyAMsadezasthadayitAmUrdhadezakam  /  kRtAnyonyabhujAzleSaM paramapremakolitam
// 20 //  mahAsauramanizvAsavAsitAsyasaroruham  /
vikaToraHpariSvaGgacakritastanamaNDalam  // 207 //
narorvantaranikSiptavanitaikorumArakam  /
yatheSTadezavinyastanAnAkAropadhAnakam  // 20 //  nAgIyamiva tatkAntaM mithunaM
kathamapyagAt  /  nidrA sparzasukhAmbhodhinimagnAlInavigraham  // 209 //  jAte
mandaprabhAte'tha zayanIyAtsamusthitA  /  pAzrvAsanasthitA kAntamaJjanA
paryasevata  // 21 //  dRSTvA parimalaM dehe svasmin sAbhUt pAvatI  /  pramadaM
ca pariprAptA cirAllabdhamanorathA  // 21 //  tayorajJAtayorevaM
yathocitavidhAyinoH  /  atIyAya nizAnekA kSaNAdarzanamItayoH  // 212 //
dodundukasuraupamyaM prAptayorubhayostadA  /  indriyANyanyakAryebhyaH prAptAni
vinivartanam  // 213 //  anyadA saukhyasaMmAravismRtasvAmizAsanam  /  mitraM
pramAdavabuddhvA taddhitadhyAnatatparaH  // 214 //  sudhIrvasantamAlAyAM
praviSTAyAM kRtadhvaniH  /  pravizya vAsamavanaM mandaM prahasito'vadat  // 215
//  sundarottiSTha kiM zeSe nanveSa rajanIpatiH  /  jitastvammukhakAntyeva gato
vicchAyatA parAm  // 216 //  aMjanAkA zarIra sumeru parvatake dvArA AliMgita
meghapaMktike samAna uttama kAntiko dhAraNa kara rahA thA  // 203 /  /
tadanantara jisake samasta kArya pUrNa ho cuke the aise suratotsavake samApta
honepara khinna zarIrase yakta donoM dampati nidrA-sevanakI icchA karane lage
// 204 //  parantu una donoMke mana eka dUsareke guNoMkA dhyAna karanemeM
nimagna the isalie nidrA IrSyAke kAraNa hI mAno krodhavaza kahIM bhAga gayI thI
// 205 //  tadanantara jisameM patike kandhepara vallabhAkA sira rakhA thA,
jisameM bhujAoMkA paraspara AliMgana ho rahA thA, jo pArasparika premase mAno
kIlita thA, mahAsugandhita zvAsocchvAsake kAraNa jisameM mukha-kamala suvAsita
the, vizAla vakSa-sthalakI capeTase jisameM stana-maNDala cakrake AkAra capaTe
ho rahe the, jisameM puruSako jAMghoMke bIca meM strIkI eka jA~ghakA bhAra
avasthita thA aura icchita sthAnoMmeM jahAM nAnA prakArake takiyA lagAye gaye
the, aisI avasthAmeM nAgakumAra deva-deviyoMke yugalake samAna vaha aMjanA aura
pavanaMjayakA yugala kisI taraha nidrAko prApta huaa| usa samaya una donoMke
zarIra sparza-janya sukharUpI sAgarameM nimagna honese atyanta nizcala
the||206-209|| athAnantara jaba kucha-kucha prabhAta huA taba aMjanA zayyAse
uThakara tathA bagalameM nikaTa baiThakara patikI sevA karane lagI  // 210||
apane zarIrameM sambhogajanya sugandhi dekhakara vaha lajjita ho gayI aura sAtha
hI cU~ki usake manoratha cirakAla bAda pUrNa hue the isalie harSako bhI prApta
huI  // 211 /  /  isa prakAra jo pahale eka dUsareke darzana-mAtrase bhayabhIta
rahate the aise una dampatiyoMkI ajJAtarUpase yatheccha upabhoga karate hue
aneka rAtriyAM vyatIta ho gayIM  /  / 212 /  /  dodunduka nAmaka devakI upamAko
dhAraNa karanevAle una donoM dampatiyoMkI indriyA~ usa samaya anya kAryoMse
vyAvRtta hokara paraspara eka dUsarekI ora hI lagI huI thIM  /  / 213 //
athAnantara sukhake sambhArase jisane svAmIkA Adeza bhulA diyA thA aise mitrako
pramAdI jAna usake hitakA cintana karane meM tatpara rahanevAlA buddhimAn
prahasita mitra vasantamAlAke praveza karanepara AvAja detA huA mahalake bhItara
praveza kara dhIre-dhIre bolA  // 214-215 /  /  ki he sundara ! uTho, kyoM
zayana kara rahe ho? jAna par3atA hai ki mAno tumhAre mukhakI kAntise parAjita
1. vakrita kha., j.| 2. kutUhaladhAridevasadRzam  /  3. na tveSa ma.  /

Page #417 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The sixteen festivals, as they are called, are a time of great joy and
celebration.  Pavananjay awoke from his slumber, his body still languid from
sleep, his eyes red from the lingering effects of slumber, and a yawn escaping
his lips.  He rubbed his ear with the index finger of his left hand, and then
stretched his right arm, making a cracking sound.  He looked at his beloved, his
eyes cast down in shyness, and said, "Come, my friend."  He then rose from his
bed.  He smiled and asked, "Did you have a pleasant night?"  Pavananjay, in
turn, smiled and asked, "Did you have a good night?"  After this exchange,
Prahasit, who knew all the details and was a master of the art of statecraft,
sat down on a nearby comfortable seat, as directed by Anjana, and said to
Pavananjay, "My friend, get up, let's go.  Many days have passed since you have
been engaged in the work of honoring your beloved."  "It is best to leave now,
before anyone knows we are returning.  Otherwise, it will be embarrassing."
"Your commander, Rathanupuraka, and the king, Kairnaragit, who is eager to go to
your master, are waiting for you."  "Ravan, filled with respect, constantly asks
his ministers, 'Where is Pavananjay?'"  "I have devised this plan for your
departure.  Therefore, you should leave the company of your beloved now."  "You
must obey the orders of your master, Ravan, and your father, Prahlad.  Then,
after returning safely, you should continue to honor your beloved."  "I will do
as you say, my friend," said Pavananjay, and then, after performing the
auspicious rituals of the body, he embraced his beloved in secret, kissed her
trembling lips, and said, "My dear, do not worry, I am going.  I will return
soon, after fulfilling my master's orders."  "Stay," he said in a sweet voice.
And so, the moon, having lost its brilliance, was no more.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SoDaza parva iti vAcAsya jAto'sau prabodhaM zlathavigrahaH  /  kRtvA
vijRmbhaNaM nidrAzeSAruNanirIkSaNaH  // 217 //  zravaNaM vAmatarjanyA
kaNDUyanmukulakSaNaH  /  saMkocya dakSiNaM bAhu nikSipakSanitasvaram  /  / 21 /
/  kAntAyAM nidadhannetre pAvinatacakSuSi  /  ehIti nigadanmitramuttasthau
pavanaMjayaH  // 219 //  kRtvA smitamathApRcchaya sukharAtriM kRtasmitam  /
pRcchantaM rAtrikuzalaM tadvedI tanivedanam  /  / 220 //  nivezya tatpriyoddiSTe
samAsanne sukhAsane  /  suhRdenaM jagAdevaM nayazAstravizAradaH  // 22 //
uttiSTha mitra gacchAvaH sAMprataM bahavo gatAH  /  divasAste prasaktasya
priyAsaMmAnakamaNi  // 222 //  yAvatkazcinna jAnAti prtyaagmnmaavyoH| gamanaM
yujyate tAvadanyathA lajanaM bhavet  // 223 //  tiSThatyudIkSamANazca
rathanUpurakastava  /  nRpaH kaimaragItazca yiyAsuH svAmino'ntikam  // 224 //
mantriNazca kilAjasraM pRcchatyAdarasaMgataH  /  pavano vartate kveti
marutvamakhasUdanaH  // 225 //  upAyo gamanasyAyaM mayA viracitastava  /
dayitAsaMgamastasmAdidAnIM tatra tyajyatAm  // 226 //  AjJeyaM karaNIyA te
svAmino janakasya ca  /  kSemAdAgatya satataM dayitAM mAnayiSyati  // 227 //
evaM karomi sAdhUktaM suhRdetyabhidhAya saH  /  kRtvA tanugataM karma
saMnidhApitamaGgalam  // 228 //  rahasyAliGgaya dayitAM cumbitvA sphuritAdharam
/  jagAda devi mAkArSIrudvegaM tvaM vrajAmyaham  // 229 /  /  acireNeva kAlena
vidhAya svAmizAsanam  /  AgamiSyAmi nivRtyA' tiSTheti madhurasvaraH  // 23 //
hokara hI yaha candramA atyanta niSprabhatAko prApta huA hai  /  /  216 //
mitrake yaha vacana sunate hI pavanaMjaya jAga utthaa| usa samaya usakA zarIra
zithila thA, nidrAke zeSa rahanese usake netra lAla the tathA jamuhAI A rahI thI
// 217 //  usane netra banda kiye hI vAma hastakI tarjanI nAmA aMgulIse kAna
khujAyA tathA dAhinI bhujAko pahale saMkocakara phira jorase phailAyA jisase
caTAkakA zabda huA  /  / 218 /  /  tadanantara lajjAse jisake netra nIce ho rahe
the aise kAntAke mukhapara dRSTi DAlatA huA pavanaMjaya 'Ao mitra' aisA kahatA
huA zayyAse uTha khar3A huA  // 219 /  /  tadanantara prahasitane ha~sakara
pUchA ki rAtri sukhase vyatIta huI ? isake uttarameM pavanaMjayane bhI ha~sate
hue prahasitase pUchA ki tumhArI bhI rAtri kuzalatAse bItI ? isa prakAra
vArtAlApake anantara samasta vRttAntako jAnanevAlA evaM nItizAstrakA paNDita
prahasita aMjanAke dvArA batalAye hue nikaTavartI sukhAsanapara baiThakara
pavanaMjayase isa prakAra bolA ki he mitra ! uTho, aba caleM, priyAke sammAna-
kAryameM lage hue Apake bahuta dina nikala gaye  // 220-222 //  jabataka hama
logoMkA vApasa AnA koI jAna nahIM pAtA hai tabataka calA jAnA ThIka hai anyathA
lajjAkI bAta ho jAyegI  // 223 //  tumhArA senApati rathanUpuraka tathA svAmIke
samIpa jAnekA icchuka rAjA kainnaragIta tumhArI pratIkSA karate hue Thahare haiM
// 224 //  Adarase bharA rAvaNa nirantara mantriyoMse pUchatA rahatA hai ki
pavanaMjaya kahA~ hai ?  // 225|| maiMne tumhAre jAnekA yaha upAya racA thA so
isa samaya vallabhAkA samAgama chor3a diyA jAye  /  / 226 /  /  tumheM svAmI
rAvaNa aura pitA prahlAdakI yaha AjJA mAnanI caahie| tadanantara kuzalatApUrvaka
vApasa Akara nirantara vallabhAkA sammAna karate rahanA  /  / 227 /  isake
uttarameM pavanaMjayane kahA ki he mitra ! aisA hI karatA huuN| tumane bahuta
Thoka kahA hai| aisA kahakara usane maMgalAcArapUrvaka zarIrasambandhI kriyAe~
kI  // 228 //  ekAntameM vallabhAkA AliMgana kiyA, usake phar3akate hue
adharoSThakA cumbana kiyA aura kahA ki he devi ! tuma udvega nahIM karanA, maiM
jAtA hU~ aura zIghra hI svAmIkI AjJAkA pAlana kara vApasa A jaauuNgaa| 1.
prabudhya  /  sukharAtrikRtasmitam m.| 3. tannivedinam ba.  /  4. pRcchantyAdara
m.| 5. rAvaNaH  /  6. saMtoSeNa  /

Page #418 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the translation of the provided text from the Padmapurana into English
while retaining the Sanskrit words:  ---  In the Padmapurana,  368  Then,
grieving (à¤µà¤¿à¤°à¤¹à¤¤à¥), the beautiful (à¤®à¥à¤¤à¤¾) one whose eyes (à¤²à¥à¤à¤¨à¤¾) are on your face
(à¤µà¤à¥à¤¤à¥à¤°) spoke, joining (à¤à¥à¤¤à¥à¤µà¤¾) her lotus-like (à¤à¤°à¤¯à¥à¤à¤¾à¤®à¥à¤­à¥à¤à¤¾à¤) hands: "O
beautiful (à¤¸à¥à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¤°à¥) lady, I am indeed the Arya's son (à¤à¤°à¥à¤¯à¤ªà¥à¤¤à¥à¤°), having united
(à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¸à¤à¤à¤®à¤¾) with you. Therefore, in your absence (à¤µà¤¿à¤°à¤¹à¥), my womb (à¤à¤°à¥à¤­) will
become an object of slander (à¤¨à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¤¾) in the future (à¤­à¤µà¤¿à¤·à¥à¤¯à¤¤à¤¿).â   Thus, lacking
(à¤¨à¤¿à¤µà¥à¤¦à¥à¤¯) you, go (à¤à¤à¥à¤) to the teachers (à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤­à¥à¤¯à¥) of womb birth (à¤à¤°à¥à¤­à¤¸à¤à¤­à¤µà¤®à¥).
For long-term (à¤¦à¥à¤°à¥à¤à¤¦à¤°à¥à¤¶à¤¿à¤¤à¥à¤µà¤) welfare (à¤à¥à¤·à¥à¤®à¤¾à¤¯), it is fit (à¤à¥à¤²à¥à¤ªà¤¤à¥) for the
life-bearers (à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤¾à¤£à¤§à¤¾à¤°à¤¿à¤£à¤¾à¤®à¥).  Having been spoken to in this manner, she said,
âO goddess (à¤¦à¥à¤µà¤¿), earlier (à¤ªà¥à¤°à¥à¤µà¤) I left the house (à¤à¥à¤¹à¤¾à¤¦) without you
(à¤¤à¥à¤µà¤¯à¤¾). Now I am determined (à¤¨à¤¿à¤¶à¥à¤à¤¿à¤¤à¥) and am seeking (à¤¸à¤à¤¨à¤¿à¤§à¤¾à¤µà¤¹à¤®à¥) the meeting.
Now, when going to them (à¤¤à¥à¤­à¥à¤¯à¤), I feel shame (à¤¤à¥à¤°à¤ªà¥) to say (à¤à¤¦à¤¿à¤¤à¥à¤) about
that reason (à¤¤à¤¦à¤°à¥à¤¥à¤). Knowing (à¤µà¤¿à¤à¥à¤à¤¾à¤¯) this strange behavior (à¤à¤¿à¤¤à¥à¤°à¤à¥à¤·à¥à¤à¤),
people (à¤à¤¨à¤) will smirk (à¤¸à¥à¤®à¥à¤°à¤¤à¤¾à¤) at me.   Therefore, as long as my womb (à¤à¤°à¥à¤­)
does not manifest (à¤¨à¥à¤¤à¤¿ à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤à¤¾à¤¶à¤¤à¤¾à¤®à¥) here, until then I shall not disturb
(à¤à¤¿à¤·à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤®à¤¿). Do not become (à¤®à¤¾ à¤¬à¥à¤°à¤¾à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤µà¤¿à¤®à¤¨à¤¸à¥à¤à¤¤à¤¾à¤®à¥) disheartened (à¤µà¤¿à¤®à¤¨à¤¸à¥à¤à¤¤à¤¾à¤®à¥).
For the removal (à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤®à¤¾à¤¦) of this anxiety (à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¤¾à¤¹à¤°à¤£à¤), take (à¤à¥à¤¹à¤¾à¤£) this bracelet
(à¤µà¤²à¤¯à¤) which is marked (à¤à¥à¤¤à¤²à¤à¥à¤·à¤£à¤®à¥) with my name (à¤®à¤¨à¥à¤¨à¤¾à¤®à¤à¥à¤¤à¤²à¤à¥à¤·à¤£à¤®à¥); therein you
shall have peace (à¤¶à¤¾à¤¨à¥à¤¤à¤¿à¤) for now (à¤à¤¤à¤ à¤®à¤µà¤¿à¤·à¥à¤¯à¤¤à¤¿).â  Saying this and giving the
bracelet (à¤µà¤²à¤¯à¤), repeatedly (à¤®à¥à¤¹à¥à¤) soothing her (à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤¿à¤¯à¤¾à¤®à¥), and ordering
(à¤à¤à¥à¤¤à¥à¤µà¤¾) the proper (à¤ à¥à¤-à¤ à¥à¤) worship (à¤¸à¥à¤µà¤¾) of the spring (à¤µà¤¾à¤¸à¤¨à¥à¤¤à¤®à¤¾à¤²à¤¾), he
(à¤ªà¤µà¤¨à¤à¤à¤¯) rose up (à¤à¤¤à¥à¤¤à¤¸à¥à¤¥à¥) from the bed (à¤¶à¤¯à¤¨à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤¤à¥).  At that time, his bed
(à¤¶à¤¯à¥à¤¯à¤¾) was covered (à¤µà¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤ªà¥à¤¤) with broken (à¤à¥à¤à¥ à¤¹à¥à¤) pearls (à¤®à¥à¤¤à¥) from the
garlands (à¤¹à¤¾à¤°) of the pleasure season (à¤¸à¤®à¥à¤®à¤¦à¤à¤¨à¤¸à¥), filled with the fragrant
pollen (à¤à¤¨à¥à¤§à¤¿à¤¤ à¤ªà¤°à¤¾à¤) of flowers (à¤ªà¥à¤·à¥à¤ªà¤à¤¨à¥à¤§) which attracted (à¤à¤¿à¤à¤à¤à¤°) bees
(à¤­à¥à¤à¤°à¥), and the sheet (à¤à¤¦à¥à¤¦à¤°) laid over it was fluttering (à¤²à¤¹à¤°à¤¾ à¤°à¤¹à¤¾ à¤¥à¤¾); it
seemed like (à¤à¤¾à¤¨ à¤ªà¤¡à¤¼à¤¤à¥) the Ksheeradweepa (à¤à¥à¤·à¥à¤° à¤¦à¥à¤µà¥à¤ª) situated amidst the
milky ocean (à¤à¥à¤·à¥à¤°à¤¸à¤®à¥à¤¦à¥à¤°).  Though Pavananjaya stood up (à¤à¤¤à¥à¤¤à¤¸à¥à¤¥à¥), his mind
(à¤®à¤¨à¤¸à¤) was absorbed (à¤²à¤ à¤°à¤¹à¤¾ à¤¥à¤¾) in his beloved (à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤¿à¤¯à¤¾à¤®à¥).  Fearing (à¤­à¤¯à¤¸à¥) that
the falling (à¤à¤¿à¤°à¤¨à¥à¤¸à¥) tears (à¤à¤¶à¥à¤°à¥) on the earth (à¤ªà¥à¤¥à¥à¤µà¥à¤) might affect (à¤¬à¤¾à¤§à¤¾ à¤¨
à¤ à¤à¤¾à¤¯à¥) the auspicious (à¤®à¤à¤à¤²à¤¾à¤à¤¾à¤°) rites, Anjana (à¤à¤à¤à¤¨à¤¾à¤¨à¥) collected (à¤¸à¤®à¥à¤à¤à¤°) her
tearful eyes (à¤à¤¶à¥à¤°à¥ à¤¨à¥à¤¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤à¤®à¥à¤) and, therefore, could not see (à¤¦à¥à¤ à¤¸à¤à¤¤à¥ à¤¥à¥)
Pavananjaya as she left (à¤à¤¾à¤¤à¥ à¤¸à¤®à¤¯). Yet, she flew (à¤à¤¡à¤¼ à¤à¤¯à¤¾) towards the sky
(à¤à¤à¤¾à¤¶) with her friend (à¤®à¤¿à¤¤à¥à¤°).  Gautama Swami speaks to King Shrenika, saying
that in this world (à¤¸à¤à¤¸à¥à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¿), sometimes (à¤à¤¦à¤¾à¤à¤¿à¤¦) the beings (à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤¾à¤£à¤¿à¤¯à¥à¤à¤à¥)
experience the consequences (à¤à¤°à¥à¤®à¤ªà¤¾à¤à¥à¤¦à¤¯à¤¾à¤¤à¥) of their past deeds (à¤¸à¥à¤µà¤à¥à¤¤à¤à¤°à¥à¤®).
---  Note: The translation aims to capture the essence of the verses while
preserving the terminology from the original Sanskrit text. The flow of thoughts
from the original prose has been maintained, and the Sanskrit terms have been
left in their original form for authenticity.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 368 padmapurANe tato virahato mItA tadvaktragatalocanA  /  kRtvA
karayugAmbhojAM jagAdAjjana sundarI || 231  //  Aryaputrartumatyasmi' bhavatA
kRtasaMgamA  /  tatastvadvirahe garbho mamAvAcyo bhaviSyati  //  232 //
tasmAnnivedya gaccha tvaM gurubhyo garbhasaMbhavam  /  kSemAya dIrghadarzitvaM
kailpate prANadhAriNAm  // 233 //  evamukto jagAdAsau devi pUrvaM tvayA vinA  /
niSkrAnto nizcito gehAd gurUNAM saMnidhAvaham  //  234  //  adhunA gamanaM
tebhyastadarthaM gadituM trape  /  citraceSTaM ca vijJAya mAM janaH smeratAM
vrajet  //  235|| tasmAdyAvadayaM garbhastava naiti prakAzatAm  /
tAvadevAtrajiSyAmi mA brAjIrvimanaskatAm  // 236 //  imaM pramAdanodArthaM
mannAmakRtalakSaNam  /  gRhANa valayaM madre zAntiste'to maviSyati  //  237  //
ityuktvA valayaM datvA sAnkhayitvA muhuH priyAm  /  uktvA vasantamAlAM ca
tadarthaM samupAsanam  //  238 //  ratavyatikaracchinnahAramuktAphalAcitAt  /
puSpagandhaparAgorusaurabhAkRSTaSaTpadAt  /  / 239  /  /  taraGgipracchadapaTAd
dugdhAbdhidvIpasaMnimAt  /  zayanIyAt samuttasthau priyAvasthitamAnasaH ||240||
maGgaladhvaMsa bhItyA ca priyayA sAzrunetrayA  /  adRSTigocaraM dRSTaH samitro
viyadudyayau  // 241|| pRthivIcchandaH kadAcidiha jAyate svakRtakarmapAkodayAt
sukhaM jagati saMgamAdabhimatasya sadvastunaH  /  kadAcidapi saMbhavasya
subhRtAmasaukhyaM paraM bhave bhavati na sthitiH samaguNA yataH sarvadA  //  242
//  tuma sukhase raho  /  pavanaMjayane yaha zabda bar3I madhura AvAja se kahe
the  /  /  229-230 //  tadanantara jo virahase bhayabhIta thI tathA jisake netra
pavanaMjayake mukhapara laga rahe the aisI aMjanAsundarI donoM hastakamala
jor3akara bolI ki he AryaM putra ! Rtu kAlake bAda hI maiMne Apake sAtha
samAgama kiyA hai isalie yadi mere garbha raha gayA to vaha Apake viraha -
kAlameM nindAkA pAtra hogA  /  /  231-232 //  ataH Apa gurujanoMko garbha
sambhavatAkI sUcanA dekara jAie  /  dIrghadarzitA manuSyoMke kalyANakA kAraNa
hai ||233|| aMjanAke aisA kahane para pavanaMjayane kahA ki he devi ! maiM
pahale gurujanoMke samIpa tumhAre binA ghara se nikalA thA aura aisA hI sabako
nizcaya haiN| isalie isa samaya unake pAsa jAne aura yaha saba samAcAra kahane
meM mujhe lajjA AtI hai  /  isakI ceSTAe~ vicitra haiM aisA jAnakara loga merI
ha~sI kareMge  /  / 234 - 235 //  ataH jabataka tumhArA yaha garbha prakaTa
nahIM ho pAtA hai tabataka meM dApasa A jAU~gA  /  viSAda mata karo  //  236  //
he bhadre ! pramAda dUra karaneke lie mere nAmase cihnita yaha kar3A le lo
isameM tumheM zAnti rahegI || 237 //  aisA kahakara, kar3A dekara, bAra-bAra
sAntvanA dekara aura vasantamAlAko ThIka-ThIka sevA karanekA Adeza dekara
pavanaMjaya zayyAse uThA  /  usa samaya usakI vaha zayyA suratakAlIna
sammadaMnase TUTe hue hArake motiyoMse vyApta thI, phUloMkI sugandhita parAga
sambandhI bhArI sugandhise bhauMre khiMcakara usapara ikaTThe ho rahe the, usake
Upara bichA huA caddara laharA rahA thA, aura vaha kSIrasamudrake madhya meM
sthita kSIra dvIpake samAna jAna par3atI thI  /  pavanaMjaya uThA to sahI para
usakA mana apanI priyAmeM hI laga rahA thA  //  238240|| pRthvIpara azru
giranese kahIM maMgalAcArameM bAdhA na A jAye isa bhayase aMjanAne apane azru
netroMmeM hI sameTakara rakhe the aura isalie jAte samaya vaha pavanaMjayako
A~kha kholakara nahIM dekha sakatI thI phira bhI mitrake sAtha vaha AkAzakI ora
ur3a gayA || 241  //  gautamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki isa saMsAra meM
prANiyoMko kabhI to apane pUrvo 1. - matyasmin ma  /  2. nindanIya:  /  3.
kalpyate prANadhAraNam ma.  /

Page #419 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sixteen Chapters  Even though happiness is temporary for living beings,
starting from birth, and death is inevitable, even then, there is unhappiness in
this world. Therefore, O noble beings, serve the sun of Dharma, as spoken by the
Jinas, which brings abundant and continuous happiness and destroys the darkness
of worldly suffering. ||243||  Thus ends the sixteenth chapter of the
Padmacharita, composed by the Acharya known as Ravishena, which describes the
union of Pavanajaya and Anjana. ||16||  **Notes:**  * **Pavanajaya and Anjana:**
These are characters from Jain mythology. * **Jinas:** The Jain Tirthankaras,
enlightened beings who have attained liberation. * **Dharma:** The Jain path to
liberation, which emphasizes non-violence, truthfulness, and self-control. *
**Bhavyas:** Souls who are destined to attain liberation. * **Padmacharita:** A
Jain text that narrates the life stories of the Tirthankaras.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 SoDaza parva athApi jananAtprabhRtyavirataM sukhaM prANinAM mRteravirato
bhavennanu tathApyamutrAsukham  /  tato bhajata mo janAH satatabhUrisaukhyAvahaM
bhavAsukhatamazchidaM jinavaroktadharma ravim  // 243 //  ityA
raviSeNAcAryaprokte padmacarite pavanAjanAsaMbhogAbhidhAnaM nAma SoDazaM parva
// 16 //  pAjita puNya-kamaMke udayase iSTa vastukA samAgama honese sukha hotA
hai aura kabhI pApa-karmake udayase parama duHkha prApta hotA hai kyoMki isa
saMsArameM sadA kisIkI sthiti eka-sI nahIM rahatI  /  / 242 /  /  phira bhI
dharma ke prasAdase kitane hI jIvoMko janmase lekara maraNa-paryanta nirantara
sukha prApta hotA rahatA hai aura marane ke bAda paralokameM bhI unheM sukha
milatA rahatA hai| isalie he bhavya jIvo! nirantara atyadhika sukha denevAle
evaM saMsArake duHkharUpI andhakArako chedanevAle jinendrokta dharmarUpI sUryako
sevA karo  // 243 //  isa prakAra ArSa nAmase prasiddha raviSeNAcArya viracita
padmacaritameM pavanaMjaya aura aMjanAke sambhogakA varNana karanevAlA solahavA~
parva samApta huA  // 16 //  1. bhavettanu ma.  /  2. janaH ma.  /

Page #420 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
### Chapter Seventeen  After some time had passed, special signs indicating the
presence of a fetus appeared in the body of Anjana, the daughter of King
Mahendra. 1. Her complexion turned white as if it had been obtained through the
fame of Hanuman residing in her womb. Her gait, filled with the intoxication of
a mighty elephant, became even more sluggish. 2. The breasts, which had turned
dark, became exceedingly elevated, and due to laziness, she only raised an
eyebrow to signal where speech was necessary. 3. Thereafter, noticing these
signs, her envious mother-in-law questioned her, "Who has done this act to you?"
4. In response, Anjana folded her hands in greeting and recounted the entire
previous story. Although the son of the Wind had discouraged her from revealing
this account, when she found no other course, she was compelled to set aside her
shyness and disclose all the news. 5.  Thereupon, Ketumati, angered and with
great cruelty, spoke to her in a tone as hard as stone. When Ketumati was
uttering harsh words to Anjana, it seemed as if she was beating her with sticks.
6. She proclaimed, "O sinner! He who, being filled with extreme hatred, does not
wish to even see your form or allow your words to reach his ears, that
courageous son of the Wind has gone out from the house after asking his own
people. O without shame! How can he engage with you?" 7-8. "Cursed are you, O
sinner, who taints a bright offspring like the rays of the moon and engages in
this despised deed in both worlds!" 9. "It seems that your friend Vasantamala
has given you this wise thought, which is just right, for what do the servants
of courtesans and loose women do aside from this?" 10. At that time, although
Anjana showed the hard evidence given by the son of the Wind, that wicked-
hearted woman did not believe her. Far from believing, she spoke sharply in a
very harsh manner. 11.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptadazaM parva kiyatyapi prayAte'tha kAle garbhasya sUcakAH  /  vizeSAH
prAdurabhavanmahendra tanayAtanau  // 1 //  iyAya pANDutAM chAyA yazaseva
hanUmataH  /  gatirmandataratvaM ca mettadignAgavibhramA  // 2 //  stanAvatyunna
tiM prAptau zyAmalIbhUtacUcukau  /  AlasyAd bhrasamutkSepaM cakAra viSaye giraH
// 3 //  tatastA lakSaNairebhiH zvazrurvijJAya garbhiNIm  /  papraccha tava
kenedaM kRtaM karmetyasUyikA  // 4 //  sAJjaliH sA praNamyoce nikhilaM
pUrvaceSTitam  /  pratiSiddhApi kAntena gatimanyAmavindatI  // 5 //  tataH
ketumatI RddhA jagAdeti suniSThuram  /  vANIbhiAvadehAbhistADayantIva yaSTimiH
// 6 //  yo na tvatsadazaM pApe draSTamAkAramicchati  /  zabdaM vA zravaNe
kartamatidveSaparAyaNaH  // 7 //  sa kathaM svajanApRcchAM kRtvA gehAdvinirgataH
/  bhavatyA saMgama dhIraH kurvIta vigatatrape  // 8 //  dhik tvAM pApAM
zazAGkAMzuzubhrasaMtAnadUSiNIm  /  AcarantI kriyAmetAM lokadvitayaninditAm  // 9
//  sakhI vasantamAlA te sAdhvImetAM matiM dadau  /  vezyAyAH kulaTAnAM kiM
kurvanti paricArikAH  // 10 //  darzite'pi tadA tasminkaTake RramAnasA  /
pratIyAya na sA zvazruzcukopAtyantamugravAk  // 11 //  athAnantara kitanA hI
samaya bItanepara rAjA mahendrakI putrI aMjanAke zarIrameM garbhako sUcita
karanevAle vizeSa cihna prakaTa hue  // 1 //  usakI kAnti safedoko prApta ho
gayI so mAno garbhameM sthita hanumAnke yazase hI prApta huI thii| madonmatta
diggajake samAna vibhramase bharI usakI manda cAla aura bhI adhika manda ho gayI
/  / 2 /  /  jinakA agrabhAga zyAmala par3a gayA thA aise stana atyanta unnata
ho gaye aura Alasyake kAraNa vaha jahA~ bAta karanA Avazyaka thA vahA~ kevala
bhauMha Upara uThA kara saMketa karane lagI  // 3 //  tadanantara ina lakSaNoMse
use garbhavatI jAna IrSyAse bharI sAsane usase pUchA ki tere sAtha yaha kArya
kisane kiyA hai ?  /  / 4 /  isake uttarameM ajanAne hAtha jor3a praNAma kara
pahalekA samasta vRttAnta kaha sunaayaa| yadyapi pavanaMjayane yaha vRttAnta
prakaTa karaneke lie use manA kara diyA thA tathApi jaba usane koI dUsarA upAya
nahIM dekhA taba vivaza ho saMkoca chor3a saba samAcAra prakaTa kara diyA  // 5
//  tadanantara ketumatIne kupita hokara bar3I niSThuratAke sAtha patthara-jaisI
kaThora vANImeM usase kahA  /  jaba ketumatI aMjanAse kaThora zabda bola rahI
thI taba aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno vaha lAThiyoMse use tAr3ita kara rahI thI
// 6 //  usane kahA ki arI pApina ! atyanta dveSase bharA honeke kAraNa jo
tujha-jaisA AkAra bhI nahIM dekhanA cAhatA aura terA zabda bhI kAna meM nahIM
par3ane denA cAhatA vaha dhIra-vIra pavanaMjaya to AtmIya janoMse pUchakara
gharase bAhara gayA huA hai| he nilaMjje ! vaha tere sAtha samAgama kaise kara
sakatA hai ?  // 7-8 //  candramAkI kiraNoMke samAna ujjvala santAnako dUSita
karanevAlI tathA donoM lokoMmeM nindanIya isa kriyAko karanevAlI tujha pApinako
dhikkAra hai  // 9 //  jAna par3atA hai ki sakhI vasantamAlAne hI tere lie yaha
uttama buddhi dI hai so ThIka hI hai kyoMki vezyA aura kulaTA striyoMkI sevikAe~
isake sivAya karatI hI kyA haiM  // 10 //  usa samaya aMjanAne yadyapi
pavanaMjayakA diyA kar3A bhI dikhAyA para usa duSTa hRdayAne usakA vizvAsa nahIM
kiyaa| vizvAsa to dUra rahA tIkSNa zabda kahatI huI atyanta 1. matirmanda m.| 2.
matidignAga m.| 3. viSayo giraH m.| 4. bhavatyAM m.| 5. vezyA vA  /  6.
paricArikA m.| 7. zvazrukopAtyanta ma.  /

Page #421 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter Seventeen 371 Having said this, the cruel one called his servant, Kar.
Kar bowed and stood before her, his eyes red with anger.  âTake this Mahendra-
puri-bound woman, along with her friend, and leave her there. Return
immediately.â  [12-13] Following his masterâs command, Kar, ever-ready to serve,
placed Anjana and her friend, Vasantimala, in the chariot and set off towards
Mahendra-puri. Anjanaâs body trembled with fear, she seemed like a vine uprooted
and tossed about by a fierce wind, she was consumed with worry about the great
sorrow that awaited her, her heart was melting like wax in the fire of grief.
She was speechless with fear, her eyes fixed on her friend, Vasantimala.  She
silently condemned the evil karma that had brought her to this state, and tears
flowed from her eyes like a stream of crystal, their source hidden in her bosom.
[14-18] As the day drew to a close, Kar reached the outskirts of Mahendra-puri.
He bowed to Anjana and spoke to her in a sweet voice, âMy lady, I have done this
for you, as per my mistressâs command.  Do not blame me for your sorrow, for it
is your karma that has brought it upon you.â [19-20] Having said this, he helped
Anjana and her friend out of the chariot and returned to his mistress, reporting
that he had carried out her orders. [21] Seeing Anjana, whose radiance was
dimmed by the weight of her sorrow, the sun seemed to set, its light fading.
[22] The western sky turned red, as if Anjana, with her eyes red from constant
weeping, was looking towards the sun for protection, and her redness had stained
the sky. [23] The directions, as if grieving for Anjanaâs sorrow, released a
torrent of vapor, turning the sky a somber grey. [24]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptadazaM parva 371 ityuktvA krUranAmAnaM karamAhUya kiMkaram  /
kRtapraNAmamityUce kopAruNanirIkSaNA  // 12 //  ayi krarAzu nItvemA
mahendrapuragocaram  /  yAnena sahitAM sakhyA nikSipyaihi nirantaram  // 13 //
tatastadvacanAdetAM pRthuvepathuvigrahAm  /  mahApavananirdhU tA latAmiva
nirAzrayAm  // 14 //  dhyAyantImAkulaM bhUriduHkhamAgAmi niSprabhAm  /
vilInamiva bibhrANAM hRdayaM duHkhavahninA  // 15 //  bhItyA niruttarIbhUtAM
sakhInihitalocanAm  /  nindantImazubhaM karma manasA punarudgatam  // 16 //
azrudhArAM vimuJcantIM zalAkAM sphaTikImiva  /  stanamadhye kSaNaM
nyastaparyantAmanavasthitAm  // 17 //  sakhyA samaM samAropya yAnaM
tatkarmadakSiNaH  /  karaH pravavRte gantaM mahendranagaraM prati  // 18 //
dinAnte tatpurasyAntaM saMprApyovAca sundarIm  /  evaM madhurayA vAcA krUraH
kRtanamaskRtiH  // 19 //  svAminIzAsanAdevi kRtametanmayA tava  /  duHkhasya
kAraNaM karma tato na kroDumarhasi  // 20 //  evamuktvAvatAyaitAM yAnAtsakhyA
samanvitAm  /  svAminyai drutamAgatya kRtAmAjJAM nyavedayat  // 21 //
tato'janAM samAlokya duHkhamArAdivottamAm  /  mandIbhUtaprabhAcakro
ravirastamupAgamat  // 22 //  locanacchAyayevAsyA rodnaatyntshonnyaa| raviM
trANAya pazyantyAH pazcimAzAruNA'bhavat  // 23 //  tatastaduHkhato
muktairvASpairiva ghanairalam  /  digbhinirantaraM cakre zyAmalaM namasastalam
// 24 //  kupita ho uThI  // 11 //  usane usa samaya kara nAmadhArI duSTa
sevakako bulaayaa| sevakane Akara use praNAma kiyaa| tadanantara krodhase jisake
netra lAla ho rahe the aisI ketumatIne sevakase kahA ki he krUra ! tU sakhoke
sAtha isa aMjanAko zIghra hI le jAkara rAjA mahendrake nagarake samIpa
chor3akara binA kisI vilambake vApasa A jA  // 12-13 //  tadanantara AjJA
pAlanameM tatpara rahanevAlA kara ketumatIke vacana suna aMjanAko vasantamAlAke
sAtha gAr3Ipara savAra kara rAjA mahendrake nagarakI ora claa| usa samaya
aMjanAkA zarIra bhayase atyanta kampita ho rahA thA, vaha pracaNDa vAyuke dvArA
jhakajhorakara nIce girAyI huI nirAzraya latAke samAna jAna par3atI thI, AgAmI
kAlameM prApta honevAle bhArI duHkhakA vaha bar3I vyAkulatAse cintana kara rahI
thI, usakA hRdaya duHkharUpI agnise mAno pighala gayA thA, bhayake kAraNa vaha
niruttara thI, sakhI vasantamAlApara usake netra laga rahe the. vaha panaH
udayameM Aye azabha karma karmako manahI-mana nindA kara rahI thI, aura jisakA
eka chora stanoMke bIcameM rakhA huA thA aisI sphaTikakI caMcala zalAkAke samAna
A~suoMko dhArA chor3a rahI thI  // 14-18 //  tadanantara jaba dina samApta
honeko AyA taba krUra rAjA mahendrake nagarake samIpa phuNcaa| vahA~ pahu~cakara
usane aMjanA sundarIko namaskAra kara nimnAMkita madhura vacana kahe  /  / 19 /
/  usane kahA ki he devi ! maiMne tumhAre lie duHkha denevAlA yaha kArya
svAminIkI AjJAse kiyA hai ataH mujhapara krodha karanA yogya nahIM hai  /  / 20
/  /  aisA kahakara usane sakhIsahita aMjanAko gAr3Ise utArakara tathA zIghra hI
vApasa Akara svAminIke lie sUcita kara kiyA ki maiM Apako AjJAkA pAlana kara
cukA  /  / 21 /  /  tadanantara uttama nArI aMjanAko dekhakara hI mAno duHkhake
bhArase jisakA prabhAmaNDala phIkA par3a gayA thA aisA sUrya asta ho gayA  // 22
//  pazcima dizA lAla ho gayI so aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno aMjanA sundarI,
nirantara rotI rahaneke kAraNa atyanta lAla dikhanevAle netroMse rakSA karaneke
uddezyase sUryakI ora dekha rahI thI so unhIMkI lAlIse lAla ho gayI thI  /  / 23
/  /  tadanantara dizAoMne AkAzako zyAmala kara diyA so aisA jAna par3atA thA
mAno aMjanAke daHkhase daHkhI hokara unhoMne atyadhika vASpa hI choDe the,
unhIMse AkAza zyAmala ho gayA thA ||24|| 1. zalAkA m.| zilAnAM kh.| 2. tato'janA
m.| 3. prabhAcakraravi m.| 4. ravitrANAya m.| 5. pazyantyA m.| 6. duHkhito m.|

Page #422 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
372 The birds gathered in nests were making a great commotion, as if they were
crying out in sorrow for Anjana's suffering. ||25|| Then Anjana, forgetting the
pain caused by hunger and thirst, was about to be swept away by the ocean of
slanderous suffering. ||26|| Fearful, she did not cry out loud, but wept
silently within herself. Her friend made a seat for her with the leaves of
trees, and she sat down on it. ||27|| That night, Anjana's eyes did not close in
sleep. It seemed as if the constant flow of hot tears, burning her, had filled
her with fear. ||28|| Her friend, having soothed her with her hand, had spent
the whole night comforting her. Anjana had endured the night with great
difficulty, or rather, she had spent the night like a year, enduring great
hardship. ||29|| Then, as dawn broke, Anjana, whose leaves had withered from
long, hot breaths, left her bed and went to the gate of her father's palace. Her
friend, who was as agreeable as a shadow, followed her, and people looked at her
with compassion. ||30-31|| Anjana's appearance had changed due to her suffering,
so the gatekeeper did not recognize her. Therefore, when she tried to enter, he
stopped her, and she stood there. ||32|| Then her friend told him everything.
Upon hearing this, the gatekeeper, whose name was Shilakapat, left a different
man standing at the gate and went inside. He bowed to the king, touched the
earth with his hand, and went to inform him privately of his daughter's arrival.
||33-34|| Then King Mahendra, who was sitting nearby, ordered his son, Prasanna
Kirti, to bring his daughter in with great pomp. ||35|| Then the king said
again, "Let the city be adorned, and let the army be assembled. I will
personally welcome my daughter." ||36|| Then the gatekeeper, having heard of his
daughter's character, told the king all about it, placing his hand on his mouth.
||37|| 1. Duhkhasanghata, B. 2. Pallave, M. 3. Santvamana, M. 4. Sama Samam, B,
J. Krichchanga Samam Sakam Samam Purna Nisam Niny. 5. Agacchat. 6. Avinjnata
Vyavasthito, B. 7. Nyanaram, M. 8. Prasanna Kortakyam, M. 9. Parisajjatam, M.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 372 padmapurANe taduHkhAdiva saMprAptA 'duHkhaM saMghAtakAriNaH  /
kulAyeSvAkulAzcakurvayaH kolAhalaM param  // 25 //  tato duHkhamavijJAya sA
kSudAdisamudbhavam  /  abhyAkhyAnamahAduHkhasAgaraplavakAriNI  // 26 //
bhItAntarvadanaM sAtha kurvatI paridevanam  /  sakhyA viracite tasthau pallavaiH
saMstare'JjanA  // 27 //  na tasyA nayane nidrA tasyAM rAtrAvaDhaukata  /
dAhAdiva bhayaM prAptA saMtatoSNAzrasaMbhavAt  // 28 //  pANisaMvAhanAt sakhyA
vinirdhUtaparizramA  /  sAntvyamAnA nizAM ninye kRcchraNAsau samaMsamam  // 29
//  tato dIrghoSaNanizvAsanitAntamlAnapallavam  /  prabhAte zayanaM tyaktvA
nAnAzaGkAtiviklavA  // 30 //  kRtAnugamanA sakhyA chaayyevaanukuulyaa|
aitpiturmandiradvAraM sakRpaM vIkSitA janaiH  // 31 //  tatastatpravizantI sA
niruddhA dvArarakSiNA  /  prAptA rUpAntaraM duHkhAdavijJAtA vyavasthitA  // 32
//  tato nikhilametasyAH sakhyA kRtaniveditam  /  vijJAya sthApayisvAnyaM naraM
dvAre sasaMbhramaH  // 33 //  gatvA zilAkavATAkhyo dvArapAlaH kRtAnatiH  /
sutAgamaM mahIpANirupAMzvIzaM vyajijJapat  // 34 //  tataH prasannakIAkhyaM
mahendraH pArzvagaM sutam  /  AjJApayan mahAbhUtyA tasyAH zIghraM pravezanam  //
35 //  purasya kriyatAM zomA sAdhanaM parisaMjjyatAm  /  svayaM pravezayAmIti
punarUce narAdhipaH  // 36 //  jagAdAsau tatastasmai dvArapAlo yathAsthitam  /
sutAyAzcaritaM kRtvA vadane pANipallavam  // 37 //  ghoMsaloMmeM ikaTThe
honevAle pakSI bar3I AkulatAse atyadhika kolAhala karane lage so aisA mAlUma
hotA thA mAno aMjanAke duHkhase duHkhI hokara hI ve cillA rahe hoM  /  / 25 /  /
tadanantara vaha aMjanA bhUkha-pyAsa Adise utpanna honevAlA duHkha to bhUla gayI
aura apavAdajanya mahAduHkharUpI sAgarameM utarAne lagI  // 26 //  vaha
bhayabhIta honeke kAraNa jorase to nahIM cillAtI thI para mukhake bhItara-hI-
bhItara azru DhAlatI huI vilApa kara rahI thii| tatpazcAt sakhIne vRkSoMke
pallavoMse eka Asana banAyA so vaha usIpara baiTha gayI  // 27|| usa rAtrimeM
ajanAke netroMmeM nidrA nahIM AyI so aisA jAna paDatA thA mAno nirantara
nikalanevAle uSNa A~sUoMse samatpanna dAhase Darakara hI nahIM AyI thI  /  / 28
//  sakhIne hAthase dAbakara jisakI thakAvaTa dUra kara dI thI tathA jise
nirantara sAntvanA dI thI aisI aMjanAne bar3e kaSTake sAtha pUrNa rAtri bitAyI
athavA 'samA samAM nizAM kRcchreNa nitye' eka varSake samAna rAtri bar3e kaSTase
vyatIta kI  // 29 //  tadanantara prabhAta huA so lambI aura garama-garama
sA~soMse jisake pallava atyanta murajhA gaye the aisI zayyA chor3akara aMjanA
pitAke mahalake dvArapara phuNcii| chAyAkI taraha anukUla calanevAlI sakhI usake
pIche-pIche cala rahI thI aura loga use dayAbharI dRSTise dekha rahe the  //
30-31 /  /  duHkhake kAraNa ajanAkA rUpa badala gayA thA so dvArapAlakI
pahacAnameM nahIM aayii| ataH dvArameM praveza karate samaya usane use roka
diyaa| jisase vaha vahIM khar3I ho gayI  // 32 //  tadanantara sakhIne saba
samAcAra sunAyA so use jAnakara zilAkapATa nAmakA dvArapAla dvArapara kisI
dUsare manuSyako khaDA kara bhItara gayA aura rAjAko namaskAra kara hAthase
pRthivIko chUtA huA ekAntameM putrIke AnekA samAcAra kahane lgaa||33-34||
tatpazcAta rAjA mahendrane samIpameM baiThe hae prasanna kIrti nAmaka putrako
AjJA dI ki putrIkA bar3e vaibhavake sAtha zIghra hI praveza karAo  // 35 //
tadanantara rAjAne phira kahA ki nagarakI zobhA karAyI jAye tathA senA sajAyI
jAye maiM svayaM hI putrIkA praveza karAU~gA  /  / 36 /  /  tatpazcAt
dvArapAlane putrakA jaisA caritra suna rakhA thA vaisA mu~hapara hAtha lagAkara
rAjAke lie kaha sunAyA  // 37 /  /  1. duHkhasaMghAta ma., b.| 2. pallave ma.  /
3. sAntvamAnA ma.  /  4. samA samam ma., ba., j.| kRcchaMga samaM sAkaM samAM
pUrNA nizAM ninye  /  5. agacchat  /  6. avijJAtA vyavasthito b.| 7. nyannaraM
m.| 8. prasannakortAkhyaM ma.  /  9. parisajjAtam ma.  /  ,

Page #423 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Seventeenth Chapter  Then, hearing this, the father, in order to punish his
daughter, became extremely angry and said to his son, Prasanna Kirti, "Drive
that sinner out of this city. Hearing her story, my ears feel as if they have
been struck by a thunderbolt." ||38||  Then, Mahotsaha, a minister who was very
dear to the king, said, "O King, it is not right to do this to her." ||40||
"Just as Vasantmala has spoken to the gatekeeper, perhaps it is the same in this
case. It is not right to hate her without reason." ||41||  "Ketumati is cruel,
influenced by worldly gossip, and completely thoughtless. She abandoned her
daughter without any fault." ||42||  "Just as this daughter, who is devoted to
virtuous conduct, was abandoned by her wicked mother-in-law, so if you also
reject her, where will she go for refuge?" ||43||  "Like a deer that has seen a
tiger, this innocent woman, terrified by her mother-in-law, has come to you for
refuge, who are like a great forest." ||44||  "This young girl is suffering as
if from the scorching rays of the summer sun, and knowing you to be like a great
tree, she has come to you." ||45||  "This unfortunate woman, like Lakshmi who
has fallen from heaven, is extremely distraught and trembling like a creeper due
to the scorching heat of slander." ||46||  "She has been greatly humiliated by
the gatekeeper's refusal to let her in. Therefore, she has covered her entire
body with her clothes, including her head." ||47||  "This daughter, who was
always pampered by her father's love, is now standing at the gate. O King, the
gatekeeper has told you this news." ||48||  "So, show her mercy and let her in,
for she is innocent. Indeed, everyone knows that Ketumati is wicked." ||49||
Just as a cluster of water droplets does not find a place on the lotus leaf, so
the words of Mahotsaha did not find a place in the king's ears. ||50||  The king
said, "Perhaps the friend, out of affection, has spoken untruthfully. How can we
be certain without knowing the truth?" ||51||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptadazaM pavaM tataH zrutvA trapAhetuM pitA tasyA viceSTitam  /  prasanna
kIrtimityUce paramaM kopamAgataH  //  38  //  nirvAsyatAM purAdasmAdaraM sA
pApakAriNI  /  yasthA me caritaM zrutvA vajreNevAhate zrutI  //  39  //  tato
nAmnA mahotsAhaH sAmanto'syAtivallabhaH  /  jagAda nAtha no kartumevaM
kartumimAM prati  //  40  //  vasantamAlayA khyAtaM yathAsmai dvArarakSiNe  /
evameva na yuktA tu vicikitsA' vikAraNo  //  41  //  ketumatI krUrA
laukikazrutibhAvitA  /  atyantamavicArAsyA vinA doSAtkRtojjhatA  // 42 //
krUrayeyaM yathA tyaktA kalyANAcAratatparA  /  bhavatApi vinitA zaraNaM kaM
prapadyatAm  // 43 //  vyAghradRSTamRgIveyaM mugdhAsyA trAsamAgatA  /
zvazrUtastvAM mahAkakSasamaM zaraNamAgatA  // 44 //  seyaM nidAghasUryAMzu
saMtApAdiva duHkhitA  /  mahAtarUpamaM bAlA viditvA tvAM samAgatA  // 45 //
zrIvat svargAt paribhraSTA varAkI vihvalAtmikA  /  abhyAkhyAnAtayAlIDhA
kalpavallItra kampanI  //  46  //  dvArapAla nirodhena sutarAmAgatA trapAm  /
vailakSyAdaMzukenAGgamavaguNThya samUrddhakam  //  47  //  pitRsnehAnvitaM dvAre
sadA durlaDitAtmikA  /  tiSThatItyamunAkhyAtaM dvArapAlena pArthiva  //  48  //
sa tvaM kuru dayAmasyAM nirdoSeyaM pravezyatAm  /  nanu ketumatI jJAtA krUrA
kasya na viSTape  //  49  //  tasya tadvacanaM zrotre rAjJazcakre na saMzrayam
/  nalinIdalavinyastaM bindujAlamivAmbhasaH  // 50 //  jagAda ca sakhI snehAt
kadAcit satyamapyadaH  /  anyathAkathayatkena nizcayo'nrAvadhAryate  //  51  //
tadanantara pitA putrIkI lajjAjanaka ceSTA sunakara parama krodhako prApta huA
aura prasannakIrti nAmaka putrase bolA ||38|| ki usa pApakAriNIko isa nagarase
zIghra hI nikAla do| usakA caritra sunakara mere kAna mAno vajrase hI tAr3ita
hue haiM ||39|| tadanantara mahotsAha nAmakA sAmanta jo rAjA mahendrako atyanta
pyArA thA bolA, he nAtha ! isake prati aisA karanA yogya nahIM hai  // 40 //
vasantamAlAne dvArapAlake lie jaisI bAta kahI haiM kadAcit vaha vaisI hI ho to
akAraNa ghRNA karanA ucita nahIM hai || 41|| isakI sAsa ketumatI atyanta krUra
hai, laukika zrutiyoMse prabhAvita honevAlI hai aura bilakula hI vicArarahita
hai| usane binA doSake hI isakA parityAga kiyA hai  // 42 //  kalyANarUpa
AcArakA pAlana karanemeM tatpara rahanevAlI isa putrIkA jisa prakAra usa duSTa
sAsane parityAga kiyA hai usI prakAra yadi Apa bhI tiraskAra kara tyAga karate
haiM to phira yaha kisakI zaraNa meM jAyegI ? ||43|| jisa prakAra vyAghrake
dvArA dekhI huI hariNI bhayabhIta hokara kisI mahAvanakI zaraNa meM pahuMcatI
hai usI prakAra yaha mugdha-vadanA sAsase bhayabhIta hokara mahAvanake samAna jo
tuma ho so tumhArI zaraNa meM AyI hai || 44  //  | yaha bAlA mAno grISmaRtuka
sUryakI kiraNoMke santApase hI duHkhI ho rahI hai aura tumheM mahAvRkSake samAna
jAnakara tumhAre pAsa Ayo hai  // 45 //  yaha becArI svargaMse paribhraSTa
lakSmIke samAna atyanta vihvala ho rahI hai aura apavAdarUpI ghAmase yukta ho
kalpalatAke samAna kA~pa rahI hai || 46  //  dvArapAlake rokane se yaha atyanta
lajjAko prApta huI hai  /  isIlie isane lajjAvaza mastaka ke sAtha-sAtha apanA
sArA zarIra vastrase Dha~ka liyA hai ||47 //  pitAke snehase yukta hokara jo
sadA lAr3a-pyAra se bharI rahatI thI vaha aMjanA Aja daravAje para rukI khar3I
hai  /  he rAjan ! isa dvArapAlane yaha samAcAra Apase kahA hai ||48|| so tuma
isapara dayA karo, yaha nirdoSa hai, isalie isakA bhItara praveza karAo  /
yathArtha meM ketumatI duSTa hai yaha loka meM kauna nahIM jAnatA ?  //  49  //
| jisa prakAra kamalinIke patrapara sthita pAnI ke bU~doMkA samUha usapara
sthAna nahIM pAtA hai usI prakAra mahotsAha nAmaka sAmantake vacana rAjA ke
kAnoMmeM sthAna nahIM pA sake  // 50 //  rAjAne kahA ki kadAcit sakhIne snehake
kAraNa isa satya 1. glAni:  /  2. akAraNA  /  vikAriNA ma., ja.  /  3.
kRtojjhitA ma  /  4. abhyAkhyAnatayA loDhA ma.  /  373

Page #424 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
374 Padmapurana Therefore, this woman of questionable character should be
expelled from the city immediately.  A stain does not arise in a pure lineage
like ours. ||52|| A woman of pure conduct, graceful, and with charming actions,
is dearly loved by all.  But where are these qualities in her? ||53|| Those
great souls, possessing immense fortitude, are extremely pure and have not
accepted women as their wives, who are the root cause of faults. ||54|| The
acceptance of women as wives bears such fruit.  If, by chance, a woman becomes
subject to reproach, she desires to enter the earth. ||55|| Those who have been
made to believe in her through great sorrow, let them stay away.  Even my mind
is now filled with doubt in this matter. ||56|| I have heard many times that she
is an object of hatred to her husband, who does not even want to look at her.
Therefore, it is certain that the child in her womb is not his. ||57||
Therefore, if anyone else gives her shelter, I will kill him with my own hands.
This is my vow. ||58|| Thus, enraged, the king, before anyone else knew, had
Anjana expelled from the palace gates along with her friend.  At that time,
Anjana's body was filled with sorrow. ||59|| Seeking shelter, wherever she went
to the homes of her relatives, she found the doors closed by the king's order.
||60|| It is right, for where the father is angry and shows his disapproval,
what trust can be placed in others who act according to his wishes?  What hope
can be placed in them? ||61|| Thus, rejected everywhere, Anjana became extremely
distraught.  Her body was drenched in a torrent of tears.  She said to her
friend, "Mother, why are we wandering here?  O friend, because of our sins, this
whole world has become stone-hearted, that is, everyone's heart has become hard
like stone." ||62-63|| Therefore, let us go to that forest.  Whatever is to be,
let it happen there.  Death is the greatest happiness compared to this
humiliation and the sorrow that arises from it. ||64|| How can one be certain if
someone has spoken otherwise? ||51||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 374 padmapurANe tasmAt saMdigdhazIleyamAzu nirvAsyatAmataH  /
nagarAdyAvadamale kule no jAyate malam  // 52 //  vizuddhavinayA cArvI
cAruceSTAvidhAyinI  /  mavedabhyarhitAtyantaM kasya no kulabAlikA  /  / 53 /  /
puNyavanto mahAsattvA puruSAste'tinirmalAH  /  yaiH kRto doSamUlAnAM dArANAM na
parigrahaH  // 54 //  parigrahe tu dArANAM bhavatyevaMvidhaM phalam  /  yasmin
gate sati khyAti 'bhUpravezo'bhivAnchayate  // 55 //
duHkhapratyAyanasvAntastAvalloko'vatiSThatAm  /  jAtameva mamApyatra mano'dya
kRtazaGkanam  // 56 //  epA bharturacakSuSyA zrutA pUrva mayA'sakRt  /
tatastena  /  pUrva mayA'sakRt  /  tatastena na saMbhUtirasyA garbhasya nizcitA
// 57 //  tasmAdanyo'pi yastasmai prayacchati samAzrayam  /  viyojyaH sa mayA
prANairityeSa mama saMgaraH  // 5 //  kupiteneti sA tena dvArAdaviditA paraiH  /
nirghATitA samaM sakhyA duHkhapUritavigrahA  // 59 //  yadyatsvajanagehaM sA
jgaamaashrykaangkyaa| tatra tatrApyadhIyanta dvArANi nRpazAsanAt  // 60||
yatraiva janakaH kruddho vidadhAti nirAkRtim  /  tatra zeSajane kA''sthA
tacchandakRtaceSTite  // 61 /  /  evaM nirdhATyamAnA sA sarvatrAtyanta viklavA
/  sakhI jagAda vASpaughasamArdIkRtadehikA  /  / 62 //  ambe ihAtra kiM bhrAnti
kurvantyAvAsvahe sakhi  /  pASANahRdayo loko jAto'yaM naH kukarmamiH  // 63 //
vanaM tadeva gacchAvastatraivAstu yathocitam  /  apamAnAttato duHkhAnmaraNaM
paramaM sukham  // 64 //  bAtako bhI anyathA kaha diyA ho to isakA nizcaya kaise
kiyA jAye ?  // 51 //  isalie yaha sandigdhazIlA hai arthAt isake zolameM
sandeza hai ataH jabataka hamAre nirmala kulameM kalaMka nahIM lagatA hai usake
pahale hI ise nagarase zIghra nikAla diyA jAye  // 52 //  nirdoSa, vinayako
dhAraNa karanevAlI, sundara aura uttama ceSTAoMse yukta gharakI lar3akI kise
atyanta priya nahIM hotI ? para ye saba guNa isameM kahA~ rahe ?  // 53 //  ve
mahAn dhairyako dhAraNa karanevAle atyanta nirmala puruSa bar3e puNyAtmA haiM
jinhoMne doSoMke mUla kAraNabhUta striyoMkA parigraha hI nahIM kiyA arthAt unheM
svIkRta hI nahIM kiyA  // 54 //  striyoM ke svIkAra karane meM aisA ho phala
hotA hai  /  yadi kadAcit stro apavAdako prApta hotI hai to pRthivImeM praveza
karanekI icchA hone lagatI hai  /  / 55 //  jinake hRdayameM bar3e duHkhase
vizvAsa utpanna karAyA jAtA hai aise anya manuSya to dUra rahe Aja merA hRdaya
hI isa viSayameM zaMkAzIla ho gayA hai  // 56 //  yaha apane patikI dveSapAtra
hai arthAt isakA pati ise A~khase bhI nahIM dekhanA cAhatA yaha maiMne kaI bAra
sunA hai| isalie yaha to nizcita hai ki isake garbhakI utpatti patise nahIM hai
// 57 //  isa dazAmeM yadi aura koI bhI isake lie Azraya degA to maiM use
prANarahita kara dUMgA aisI merI pratijJA hai  // 58 /  /  isa prakAra kupita
hue rAjAne jaba taka saroMko patA nahIM cala pAyA usake pahale hI aMjanAko
sakhIke sAtha dvArase bAhara nikalavA diyaa| usa samaya ajanAkA zarIra duHkhase
bharA huA thA  // 59 //  Azraya pAneko icchAse vaha jisa-jisa AtmIyajanake ghara
jAtI thI rAjAko AjJAse vaha vahIM-vahIMke dvAra banda pAtI thii||6|| jo ThIka ho
hai kyoMki jahA~ pitA ho kruddha hokara tiraskAra karatA hai vahA~ usIke
abhiprAyake anusAra kArya karanevAle dUsare logoMkA kyA vizvAsa kiyA jA sakatA
hai ?-unameM kyA AzA rakhI jA sakatI hai ?  // 61 /  isa taraha saba jagahase
nikAlI gayI aMjanA atyanta adhIra ho gyii| azruoMke samUhase usakA zarIra gIlA
ho gyaa| usane sakhIse kahA ki he mAtA! hama donoM yahA~ bhaTakatI huI kyoM
par3I haiM ? he sakhi! hamAre pApodayake kAraNa yaha samasta saMsAra
pASANahRdaya ho gayA hai arthAt sabakA hRdaya pattharake samAna kar3A ho gayA
hai  /  / 62-63 //  isalie hama loga usI vanameM caleM  /  jo kucha honA hogA so
vahIM ho legaa| isa apamAnase tathA tajjanya duHkhase to mara 1. bhUpradezo'bhi
-m.| 2. tatrApyadhIyanta m.| 3. nRpazAsanAna m.| 4. nirdhAryamANA ka., kha.,
ba., j.| 5. ambAzabdasya saMbuddhau 'amba' iti rUpaM bhavati  /  atra 'ambe' iti
prayogazcintyaH  /

Page #425 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Seven-Month Festival ### 375  Thus speaking, she entered the same forest
along with her friend. Like a deer, bewildered and frightened by the king of the
deer, she entered the forest.   Weary from the wind and sun, tormented by the
pain of sorrow, she sat down at the edge of the forest and began to lament.
Alas! I am a wretched, unfortunate soul. Fate, the bringer of sorrow, has
destroyed me without reason. What a terrible thing! Where can I seek refuge?
After crossing the ocean of misfortune, my lord somehow attained happiness, but
driven by evil deeds, he has abandoned me.  Women who are tormented by their
mothers-in-law and others, seek refuge in their father's home. But my misfortune
has deprived me even of that.  My mother did not protect me either. It is right,
for noble women follow the wishes of their husbands.  Oh, my lord! You had said
that your womb would not be revealed and I would come to you. Why do you not
remember that promise? You were so compassionate.  Oh, mother-in-law! How could
you abandon me without any examination? Surely, there are many ways to test the
character of those who are doubtful.  Oh, father! You nurtured me in your lap in
my childhood and always kept me with great love and affection. How could you
decide to abandon me without any examination?  Alas, mother! Why did not a
single good word come out of your mouth? Why have you abandoned that
unparalleled love?  Oh, brother! I am your sister, born from the same womb, and
I am in great distress. Why did you not make any effort to protect me? You are
so cruel.  When you, the leaders among our relatives, are in this state, what
can the distant relatives do?  Or what is the fault of all of you? The season of
virtue has ended, and now my tree of sin has borne fruit. I am compelled to
serve it.  Her friend, her heart filled with sorrow and her courage shattered,
echoed her lament.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptavarza parva 375 ityuktvAsau samaM sakhyA tadeva prAvizadvanam  /  mRgIva
mohasaMprAptA mRgarAjavimISitA  // 65 //  vAtAtapaparizrAntA duHkhasaMmArapIDitA
/  upavizya vanasyAntaM sA cakre paridevanam  // 66 //  hA hatA mandabhAgyAsmi
vidhinA duHkhadAyinA  /  ahetuvairiNA kaSTa kaM paritrANamAzraye  // 6 //
daurbhAgyasAgarasyAnte prasAdaM kathamapyagAt  /  nAtho me sa gatastyaktvA
duSkarmaparicoditaH  // 6 //  zvazravAdikRtaduHkhAnAM nArINAM piturAlaye  /
avasthAnaM mamApuNyairidamapyavasAritam  // 69 //  mAtrApi na kRtaM
kiMcitparitrANaM kathaM mama  /  martRcchandAnuvartinyo jAyante ca kulAGganAH
// 7 //  tvayyavijJAtagarmAyAmeSyAmIti svayoditam  /  hA nAtha vacanaM
kasmAtsmaryate na kRpAvatA  // 71 //  aparIkSya kathaM zvazru tyaktuM mAmucitaM
tava  /  nanu saMdigdhazIlAnAM saintyupAyAH parIkSaNe  // 72 //  utsaGgalAlitAM
bAlye sadA durlaDitAtmikAm  /  niSparIkSya pitastyaktuM mAM kathaM
te'bhavanmatiH  // 73 //  hA mAtaH sAdhu vAkyaM te na kathaM nirgataM mukhAt  /
sakRdapyuttamA prItiradhunA sA kimujjhitA  // 7 //  ekodaroSitAM bhrAtastrAtuM
te mAM suduHkhitAm  /  kathaM na kAcidudbhUtA ceSTA niSThuracetasaH  // 75 //
yatra yUyamidaMceSTAH pradhAnA bandhusaMha teH  /  tatra kurvantu kiM zeSA
varAkA durabAndhavAH  // 76 //  athavA ko'tra vo doSaH puNyatauM mama niSThite
/  phalito'puNyavRkSo'yaM niSevyo'vazayA mayA  // 77 //  pratizabdasamaM tasyA
vilApamakarot sakhI  /  tadAkrandavinirdhUtadhairyadUritamAnasA  // 7 //  jAnA
hI parama sukha hai  // 64 //  itanA kahakara aMjanA sakhIke sAtha usI vana meM
praviSTa ho gayI jisameM ketumatIkA sevaka use chor3a gayA thaa| jisa prakAra
koI mRgI siMhase bhayabhIta ho vanase bhAge aura kucha samaya bAda bhrAntivaza
usI vanameM phira jA pahu~ce usI prakAra phirase aMjanAkA vanameM jAnA huA  //
65 /  /  duHkhake bhArase pIr3ita aMjanA jaba vAyu aura ghAmase thaka gayI taba
vanake samIpa baiThakara vilApa karane lagI  // 66 //  hAya-hAya ! maiM bar3I
abhAginI hU~, akAraNa vaira rakhanevAle duHkhadAyI vidhAtAne mujhe yoM hI naSTa
kara DAlA  /  bar3e duHkhakI bAta hai, maiM kisakI zaraNa ghuuN||67||
daurbhAgyarUpI sAgarako pAra karaneke bAda merA nAtha kisI taraha prasannatAko
prApta huA so duSkarmase prerita ho anyatra calA gayA  // 68 //  jinheM sAsa Adi
duHkha pahu~cAtI haiM aisI striyA~ jAkara pitAke ghara rahane lagatI haiM para
mere durbhAgyane pitAke ghara rahanA bhI chur3A diyA  // 69 //  mAtAne bhI merI
kucha bhI rakSA nahIM kI so ThIka hI hai kyoMki kulavatI striyAM apane
bhartArake abhiprAyAnusAra hI calatI haiM  /  / 70 //  he nAtha ! tumane kahA
thA ki tumhArA garbha prakaTa nahIM ho pAyegA aura maiM A jAUMgA so vaha vacana
yAda kyoM nahIM rakhA ? tuma to bar3e dayAlu the  // 71 //  he sAsa ! binA
parIkSA kiye ho kyA merA tyAga karanA tumheM ucita thA ? jinake zIlameM saMzaya
hotA hai unakI parIkSA karaneke bhI to bahuta upAya haiM  // 72 //  he pitA!
Apane mujhe bAlyakAlameM godameM khilAyA hai aura sadA bar3e lAr3a-pyArase rakhA
hai phira parIkSA kiye binA hI merA parityAga karanekI buddhi Apako kaise ho
gayI ? /  / 73 /  /  hAya mAtA ! isa samaya tere mukhase eka bAra bhI uttama
vacana kyoM nahIM nikalA? tUne vaha anupama prIti isa samaya kyoM chor3a dI ?
// 74 //  he bhAI! maiM terI eka hI mAtAke udarameM vAsa karanevAlI atyanta
duHkhinI bahana hU~ so merI rakSA karaneke lie terI kucha bhI ceSTA kyoM nahIM
huI ? tU bar3A niSThura hRdaya hai  // 75 /  /  jaba bandhujanoMmeM pradhAnatA
rakhanevAle tuma logoMkI yaha dazA hai taba jo becAre dUrake bandhu haiM ve to
kara hI kyA sakate haiM ?  // 76 /  /  athavA isameM tuma sabakA kyA doSa hai ?
puNyarUpI Rtuke samApta honepara aba merA yaha pAparUpI vRkSa phalIbhUta huA hai
so vivaza hokara mujhe isakI sevA karanI hI hai  // 77 //  aMjanAkA vilApa
sunakara jisake hRdayakA dhairya dUra ho 1. tvayA vijJAta- m.| 2. santyapAyAH
m.| 3. utsaGgalAlitA m.| 4. bandhusaMhatiH m.| 5. vA doSaH ba., ja..

Page #426 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
376 In the forest, Vasantmala was lamenting, her cries echoing like those of a
distressed animal. Even the deer shed large tears upon hearing her. ||79||
After weeping for a long time, her eyes turned red. Her wise friend embraced her
and said, "My dear, your weeping is in vain. The fruits of your past actions
have ripened, and you must bear them with closed eyes." ||80-81|| "O Goddess,
Karma resides behind, before, and beside all beings. Where then is there room
for sorrow?" ||82|| "Even the gods, whose bodies are adorned with the eyes of
hundreds of Apsaras, experience ultimate suffering when their merit ends."
||83|| "People think differently and receive different fruits. The true Guru is
the Law, who observes the actions of the world." ||84|| "Sometimes, the Law
destroys a beneficial thing in an instant, and sometimes it brings something
unexpected and unimaginable." ||85|| "The paths of Karma are diverse and
unpredictable. Therefore, do not grieve and cause pain to the fetus." ||86|| "O
Goddess, endure the fruits of your own actions, even if it means clenching your
teeth and hardening your heart like stone. This is something you must bear."
||87|| "Indeed, you are enlightened, and my teaching seems like a rebuke. Tell
me, what is it that you do not know?" ||88|| Saying this, the friend, eager to
console her, wiped her red eyes with trembling hands. ||89|| "This place is
devoid of shelter, my dear. Therefore, let us rise and go to the side of this
mountain." ||90|| "Let us find a cave inaccessible to evil creatures, where we
can stay for a while for the well-being of the fetus." ||91|| Following her
friend's advice, she began to walk. However, she was unable to walk far due to
the weight of the fetus. ||92||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 376 papurANe atyantadInamatasyAM rudantyAM tAranisvanam  /  mRgobhirapi
nirmuktAH susthUlA vASpabindavaH  // 79 //  satazciraM
ruditvainAmaruNIbhUtalocanAm  /  sakhI dobhyAM samAliGgaya jagAdevaM vicakSaNA
// 8 //  svAminyalaM ruditvA te nanvavazyaM purAkRtam  /  netre nimIlya
soDhavyaM karma pAkamupAgatam  // 81 /  /  sarveSAmeva jantUnAM pRSThataH
pArvato'grataH  /  karma tiSThati yaddevi tatra ko'vasaraH zucaH  // 8 //
apsaraHzatanetrAlInilayIbhUtavigrahAH  /  prApnuvanti paraM duHkhaM sukRtAnte
surA api  // 83 //  cintayatyanyathA lokaH prApnoti phalamanyathA  /
lokavyApArasaktAramA paramo hi gururvidhiH  // 84 //  hitaMkaramapi prApta
vidhirnAzayati kSaNAt  /  kadAcidanyadA dhatte mAnasasyApyagocaram  // 85 //
gatayaH karmaNAM kasya vicitrA parinizcitAH  /  tasmAttvamasya mA kArSIya'thAM
garbhasya duHkhitA  // 86 //  Akramya dazanairdantAnkRtvA grAvasamaM manaH  /
karma svayaM kRtaM devi sahasvAzakyavarjanam  // 87 //  nanu svayaM vibuddhAyA
mayA te zikSaNaM kRtam  /  adhikSepa ivAmAti vada jJAtaM na kiM tava  // 88 //
abhidhAyeti sA tasyA nayane zoNarociSI  /  nyamATa vepaithuyutapANinA
sAntvatatparA  // 89 //  bhayazcIce pradezo'yaM devi saMzrayavarjitaH  /
tasmAduttiSTha gacchAvaH pArzvamasya mahIbhRtaH  // 10 //  guhAyAmana
kasyAMcidagamyAyAM kujantubhiH  /  sUtikalyANasaMprAptyai samayaM kacidAsvahe
// 11 //  tatastayopadiSTA sA padavIM paadcaarinnii| garbhabhArAda
viyaJcAramasamarthA niSevitum  // 12 //  gayA thA aisI sakhI vasantamAlA bhI
pratidhvanike samAna vilApa kara rahI thii||78|| yaha aMjanA bar3I dInatAke
sAtha itane jora-jorase vilApa kara rahI thI ki use sunakara vanakI hariNiyoMne
bhI A~suoMkI bar3I-bar3I bUMdeM chor3I thIM  /  / 7 /  /  tadanantara cirakAla
taka ronese jisake netra lAla ho gaye the aisI aMjanAkA donoM bhujAoMse AliMgana
kara buddhimatI sakhIne kahA ki he svAmini ! ronA vyartha hai| pUrvopArjita
karma udayameM AyA hai to use A~kha banda kara sahana karanA ho yogya hai  /  /
80-81 /  /  he devi ! samasta prANiyoMke pIche, Age tathA bagalameM karma
vidyamAna haiM isalie yahA~ zokakA avasara hI kyA hai ? ||82 //  jinake
zarIrapara saikar3oM apsarAoMke netra vilIna rahate haiM aise deva bhI puNyakA
anta honepara parama duHkha prApta karate haiM  /  / 83 /  /  loka anyathA
socate haiM aura anyathA hI phala prApta karate haiM  /  yathArthameM logoMke
kAryapara dRSTi rakhanevAlA vidhAtA hI parama guru hai  /  / 84 //  kabhI to
yaha vidhAtA prApta huI hitakArI vastuko kSaNa bharameM naSTa kara detA hai aura
kabhI aisI vastu lAkara sAmane rakha detA hai jisakI manameM kalpanA hI nahIM
thI  /  / 85 /  /  karmoMkI dazAe~ bar3I vicitra haiN| unakA pUrNa nizcaya kauna
kara pAyA hai ? isalie tuma duHkhI hokara garbhako pIr3A mata pahu~cAo  /  / 86
/  /  he devi ! dA~toMse dAMtoMko dabAkara aura manako pattharake samAna
banAkara jisakA ghaTanA azakya hai aisA svopAjita karmakA phala sahana karo  /
/ 87 /  /  vAstavameM Apa svayaM vizuddha haiM ataH Apake lie merA zikSA denA
nindAke samAna jAna par3atA hai| tumhIM kaho ki Apa kyA nahIM jAnatI haiM ? |88
//  itanA kahakara sAntvanA denemeM tatpara rahanevAlI sakhIne apane kA~pate hue
hAthoMse usake lAla-lAla netra poMcha diye  // 89|| phira kahA ki he devi ! yaha
pradeza Azrayase rahita hai arthAt yahA~ Thaharane yogya sthAna nahIM hai isalie
uTho isa parvatake pAsa caleM  // 90|| yahA~ kisI aisI guphAmeM jisameM duSTa
jIva nahIM pahu~ca sakeMge, garbhake kalyANake lie kucha samaya taka nivAsa
kareMgI  // 91 /  /  tadanantara sakhIkA upadeza pAkara vaha paidala hI mArga
calane lgii| kyoMki garbhake bhArake kAraNa 1. zaktAtmA ma.  /  2. duHkhitAH ma.
/  duHsitaH ba.  /  3. vepathoryuktA ma.  /  vepathuryuktA ba.  /  4. kiMcidA-
ma.  /

Page #427 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
### Translation into English  **Chapter on the Sevenfold Path** 377
Accompanying the great forest-holding, the mountain of time,   Filled with the
net of wild beasts, that is endowed with a dreadful sound.   Large as the sun,
held back by the great storm,   Noble in form, and difficult in its path of
righteousness.      With great difficulty, she set foot on the path of the
matanga flower,   In the abode of the matanga flower, she attained a mind that
is inaccessible.   Even as a powerful friend in the sky,   Bound by the ties of
love, she followed like a shadow.      Having reached that dreadful, dense
wilderness,   She trembled as she entered the threatening thicket.   After
knowing her disarray, taking her by the hand,   The friend spoke gently: "Do not
be afraid, my mistress!"      Thus, the friend, placing her supporting hand on
her,   With hair cascading like the soft grass,   Thereupon, in various places
on the ground, she laid her feet down again,   Bearing her body, which was heavy
with the load of sorrow.      She strove to ascend, dispatching the rushing
waterfalls,   Remembering her family, all harsh in their conduct.   She
criticized her own situation and endlessly blamed her fate,   Fearing the bonds
like the tendrils of a creeper that entwined every limb.      With the
frightened eyes of a doe,   She carried the weariness of her efforts, pouring
forth sweat,   Her garments tangled in thorny trees,   She stood there for long,
trying to untangle herself.      Her feet, stained with blood, appeared as
though   Decorated with the color of red lac.   From the burning heat of sorrow,
her body became exceedingly dark,   Even the slightest rustling of leaves
terrified her.      Her body trembled in fear,   Her thighs stiffened from the
weight of dread.   Thus, she found it exceedingly difficult to walk.   The
matanga flower, beset by wild beasts and fearful sounds, was approached with
diligence;  Alas! Although her friend was capable of soaring in the sky,   Bound
by the ties of love, she moved like a shadow on foot alongside her.   When
approached by that dreadful wilderness,   All of Anjana's body quivered in
fearful anticipation.    After observing her restless state,   The friend
grasped her hand and, with great respect,   Encouraged her gently, saying, "My
mistress! Do not fear, come here."    Anjana, wishing to receive support, placed
her hand on her friendâs shoulder,   Yet her hand frequently slipped downwards.
Whenever a thorn pricked her foot,   Poor Anjana would close her eyes and stand
still in distress.    Each time she lifted her foot,   She would cry out and
then replace it down again,   Straining to bear the weight of her body,   She
crossed rushing waterfalls with great difficulty.    She frequently remembered
her own relatives,   Who were entirely indifferent in their dealings.
Sometimes she reproached herself,   At other times, she repeatedly blamed her
fate.    Creepers wrapped around her body, and it seemed,   As if they were
overpowering her with compassion, almost hugging her.   Her eyes, restless like
those of a frightened deer,   Sweat flowed from her weary body,   And when her
garments caught on thorny trees,   She would bend there for a long time, trying
to disentangle herself.    Her feet turned red with blood,   Seeming as if
adorned with red lacquer.   Her body darkened, burned by the fire of sorrow,
And even the movement of a leaf would terrify her.    Her body quaking, she
found it exceedingly difficult to proceed.   This was the narrative of Anjana,
filled with fear and anxiety,   Depicting the struggles of the journey through
the dark wilderness.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptavazaM parva 377 anuyAntI mahAraNyadharaNIM samayAgirim  /
vyAlajAlasamAkINAM tannAdAtyantabhISaNAm  /  / 93 //
mahAnokaharuddhadivAkarakarotkarAm  /  mahIbhRtpAdasaMkINAM darmasUcIsuduzcarAm
// 9 //  yuktAM mAtaGgamAlAbhiya'syantI kRcchrataH padam  /  mAtaGgamAlinI nAma
prApa mAnasadurgamAm  /  / 95 /  /  zaktApi gagane gantuM padbhyAM tasyAH sakhI
yayau  /  premabandhanasaMbaddhA chAyAvRttimupAzritA  // 16 //  bhayAnakAM tataH
prApya tAmasau saMkaTATavIm  /  vepamAnasamastAnA kAMdizIkatvamAgamat  // 97 //
tatastAmAkulAM jJAtvA gRhItvA karapallave  /  AlI jagAda mA bhaiSIH svAminyehIti
sAdarAt  // 98 //  tataH sakhyaMsavinyastavisraMsikarapallavA  /
darbhasUcImukhasparzakUNitekSaNakoNikA  // 19 //  tatra tatraiva bhUdeze
nyasyantI caraNau punaH  /  stanantI duHkhasaMbhArAddehaM kRcchraNa bibhratI  //
10 //  uttarantI prayAsena nirjharAn vegavAhinaH  /  smarantI svajanaM sarva
niSThurAcArakAriNam  // 10 //  nindantI svamupAlambhaM prayacchantI muhurvidheH
/  kAruNyAdiva vallIbhiH zliSyamANAkhilAGgikA  // 102 //  trastasAraGgajAyAkSI
shrmjsvedvaahinii| sataM kaNTakiguccheSu mocayantyaMzukaM cirAt  // 10 //
kSatajenAcitau pAdau lAkSitAviva bibhrtii| zokAgnidAhasaMbhatAM zyAmatAM dadhatI
parAm  // 104 //  tale'pi calite trAsaM vrajantI calavigrahA  /
saMtrAsastambhitAvUrU vahantI khedadurvahau  /  / 105 /  /  vaha AkAzameM
calaneke lie samartha nahIM thI  // 92 //  vaha parvatakI samIpavartinI
mahAvanakI bhUmimeM calatI-calatI mAtaMgamAlinI nAmakI usa bhUmimeM pahuMcI jo
hiMsaka jantuoMse vyApta thI aura unake zabdoMse bhaya utpanna kara rahI thii|
bar3e-bar3e vRkSoMne jahA~ sUryako kiraNoMkA samUha roka liyA thA, jo choTI-
choTI pahAr3iyoMse vyApta thI, DAbhako aniyoMke kAraNa jahA~ calanA kaThina thA,
jo hAthiyoMkI zreNiyoMse yukta thI tathA zarIrakI bAta to dUra rahI manase bhI
jahA~ pahu~canA kaThina thaa| aMjanA bar3e kaSTase eka-eka Daga rakhakara cala
rahI thI  // 93-95 /  /  yadyapi usakI sakhI AkAzameM calane meM samartha thI to
bhI vaha premarUpI bandhanameM baMdhI honese chAyAke samAna paidala hI usake
sAthasAtha cala rahI thI  /  / 16 /  /  usa bhayAnaka saghana aTavIko dekhakara
aMjanAkA samasta zarIra kA~pa utthaa| vaha atyanta bhayabhIta ho gayI  // 97||
tadanantara use vyagra dekha sakhIne hAtha pakar3akara bar3e Adarase kahA ki
svAmini ! Daro mata, idhara Ao  // 98 /  /  aMjanA sahArA pAnekI icchAse sakhIke
kandhepara hAtha rakhakara cala rahI thI para usakA hAtha sakhIke kandhese bAra-
bAra khisakakara nIce A jAtA thaa| calate-calate jaba kabhI DAbhakI anI pairameM
cubha jAtI thI taba becArI AMkha mIMcakara khar3I raha jAtI thI  // 99|| vaha
jahA~se paira uThAtI thI duHkhake bhArase cIkhatI huI vahIM phira paira rakha
detI thii| vaha apanA zarIra bar3I kaThinatAse dhAraNa kara rahI thii||100|
vegase bahate hue jharanoMko vaha bar3I kaThinAIse pAra kara pAtI thii| use
niSThara vyavahAra karanevAle apane samasta AtmIyajanoMkA bAra-bAra smaraNa ho
AtA thA  // 101 /  /  vaha kabhI apanI nindA karatI thI to kabhI bhAgyako bAra-
bAra doSa detI thii| latAe~ usake zarIrameM lipaTa jAtI thIM so aisA jAna
par3atA thA ki dayAse vazIbhUta hokara mAno usakA AliMgana hI karane lagatI thIM
// 102 //  usake netra bhayabhIta hariNIke samAna caMcala the, thakAvaTake
kAraNa usake zarIrameM pasInA nikala AyA thA, kA~TedAra vRkSoMmeM vastra ulajha
jAtA thA to dera taka use hI sulajhAtI khar3I rahatI thI  // 103|| usake paira
rudhirase lAla-lAla ho gaye the, so aise jAna par3ate the mAno lAkhakA mahAvara
hI unameM lagAyA gayA ho| zokarUpI agniko dAhase usakA zarIra atyanta sAMvalA ho
gayA thA  // 104|| pattA bhI hilatA thA to vaha bhayabhIta ho jAtI thI, usakA
zarIra kA~pane lagatA thA, bhayake kAraNa usakI donoM jA~ghe akar3a jAtI thIM
aura 1. kAMdizItvamupAgamat ma.  /  2. kvaNitekSaNa- ma  /  3. kaNTakaguccheSu
m.| 4. dadhatIm ma.  /  48

Page #428 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
378 The very dear-speaking friend, repeatedly making her rest, reached the foot
of the mountain, and Anjana, filled with sorrow, reached there slowly. ||106||
There, she was unable to hold her body, her eyes filled with tears. She ignored
her friend's words and sat down in great sorrow. ||107|| She said, "I am unable
to take even a single step from here. I will stay here, and death is preferable
to me." ||108|| Then, the clever friend, filled with love, comforted her with
words that were dear to her heart. After making her rest, she bowed and said to
her friend with love, ||109|| "Look, look, this excellent cave is nearby. Be
happy, get up, we will both stay comfortably in that cave." ||110|| "Many
creatures roam here, performing actions with their hands, and you also have to
protect your womb. Therefore, O mistress, do not make a mistake." ||111|| Thus
spoken to, Anjana, filled with sorrow, rose to go, urged by her friend and
afraid of the forest. ||112|| At that time, these two women did suffer in the
forest, but they did not go to the conqueror of the wind. This should be
understood as due to their great virtue, lack of command, or shame. ||113||
Then, the friend, supporting her with her hand, somehow crossed that uneven
ground and brought Anjana to the door of the cave with great difficulty. ||114||
They were both very tired from walking on the uneven rocks, and they were also
afraid to enter the cave suddenly, so they sat outside for a moment. ||115||
After resting for a long time, they cast their slow gaze upon the cave. Their
gaze seemed like a garland of withered red, blue, and white lotuses. ||116||
Then, they saw on the pure, even, and clear stone floor, a sage, the possessor
of the wealth of the charanas, seated on a couch. ||117|| The sage's breathing
was steady and regular. He had placed his eyes on the tip of his nose, his body
was relaxed, and he was motionless like a pillar. ||118||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 378 padmapurANe muhurvizramyamAnAlyA' nitAntapriyavAkyayA  /  gireH prApAJjanA
mUlaM zanakairiti duHkhitA'  // 106 //  tatra dhArayitaM dehamasaktA sAzrulocanA
/  apakarNya sakhIvAkyaM mahAkhedAdupAvizat  // 107 //  jagAda ca na zaknomi
prayAtuM padamapyataH  /  tiSTAmyatraiva deze'haM prApnomi maraNaM varam  // 10
//  sAntvayitvA tato vAkyaiH kuzalA hRdayaMgamaiH  /  vizramayya praNamyoce
sakhyevaM prematatparA  // 109 //  pazya pazya guhAmetAM devi nedIyasI parAm  /
kuru prasAdamuttiSTa sthAsyAvo'tra yathAsukham  // 11 //  pradeze saMcarantIha
prANimaH karaceSTitAH  /  nanu te rakSaNIyo'yaM garbhaH svAmini mA muha  // 11
//  ityuktA sAnurodhena sakhyA vanamayena ca  /  gamanAya samuttasthau bhUyo'pi
paritApinI  // 112 //  mahAnubhAvatAyogAdarnujJAterabhAvataH  /  hrIMtazca
nAntikaM vAyorayAsiSTAmime tadA  // 113 //  hastAvalambadAnena tatastAM viSamAM
bhuvam  /  lavayitvA sakhI kRcchAd guhAdvAramupAharat  // 114 //  praveSTuM
sahasA mIte tatra te tasthatuH kSaNam  /  viSamagrAvasaMkrAntisaMjAtavipulazrame
// 115 //  vizrAntAbhyAM cirAd dRSTistatrAbhyAM nyAsi mndgaa|
mlAnaraktazitizvetanIrajasaksamaprabhA  // 116 //  apazyatAM tataH
zuddhasamAmalazilAtale  /  paryasusthitaM sAdhuM cAraNAtizayAnvitam  // 117 //
nibhRtocchvAsanizvAsaM nAsikAgrAhitekSaNam  /  RjuzlathavapuryaSTiM
sthANuvaccalanojjhitam  // 118 //  khedake kAraNa unakA uThAnA kaThina ho jAtA
thA  // 105 //  atyanta priya vacana bolanevAlI sakhI use bAra-bAra baiThAkara
vizrAma karAtI thii| isa prakAra duHkhase bharI aMjanA dhIre-dhIre pahAr3ake
samIpa pahu~cI  /  / 106 /  /  vahA~ taka pahu~canemeM vaha itanI adhika thaka
gayI ki zarIra sambhAlanA bhI dUbhara ho gyaa| usake netroMse A~sU bahane lage
aura vaha bahuta bhArI khedake kAraNa sakhIkI bAta anasunI kara baiTha gayI  //
107 //  kahane lagI ki aba to maiM eka Daga bhI calaneke lie samartha nahIM hai
ataH yahI Thaharo jAtI haiN| yadi yahA~ maraNa bhI ho jAya to acchA hai  // 108
//  tadanantara premase bharI catura sakhI hRdayako priya laganevAle vacanoMse
use sAntvanA dekara tathA kucha dera vizrAma karAkara praNAmapUrvaka isa prakAra
bolI  // 109 /  /  he devi ! dekho-dekho yaha pAsa hI uttama guphA dikhAI de
rahI hai| prasanna hoo, uTho, hama donoM usa guphAmeM sukhase ThahareMgI  // 110
//  yahA~ kara ceSTAoMko dhAraNa karanevAle aneka jIva bicara rahe haiM aura
tumheM garbhakI bhI rakSA karanI hai| isalie he svAmini ! galatI na karo  // 111
/  /  aisA kahanepara santApase bharI aMjanA sakhIke anurodhase tathA vanake
bhayase punaH calaneke lie uThI  // 112 //  usa samaya ye donoM striyA~ vanameM
kaSTa to uThAtI rahIM para pavanaMjayake pAsa nahIM gayIM so isameM unakI
mahAnubhAvatA, AjJAkA abhAva athavA lajjA hI kAraNa samajhanA cAhie  // 113 /  /
tadanantara sakhI vasantamAlA hAthakA sahArA dekara jisa kisI taraha usa UMcI-
nIcI bhUmiko pAra karAkara bar3e kaSTase aMjanAko guphAke dvAra taka le gayI  //
114 //  U~ce-nIce pattharoMmeM calaneke kAraNa ve donoM hI bahuta thaka gayI
thIM aura sAtha hI usa guphAmeM sahasA praveza karaneke lie Dara bhI rahI thI
isalie kSaNabharake lie bAhara hI baiTha gayIM  // 115 /  /  bahuta dera taka
vizrAma karane ke bAda unhoMne apanI mandagAminI dRSTi guphApara ddaalii| unakI
vaha dRSTi murajhAye hue lAla, nIle aura sapheda kamaloM kI mAlAke samAna jAna
par3atI thI  // 116 /  /  tadanantara unhoMne zuddha sama aura nirmala zilA-
talapara paryaMkAsanase virAjamAna cAraNaRddhike dhAraka munirAjako dekhA  //
117|| una munirAjakA zvAsocchvAsa nizcala athavA niyamita thaa| unhoMne apane
netra nAsikAke agrabhAgapara lagA rakhe the, unakI zarIrayaSTi zithila honepara
1. vizramyamAnAtmA m.| 2. duHkhitAH m.| 3. ityuktvA m.| 4. aajnyaayaaH| 5.
mlAnaraktAsitazveta rajatastraksamaprabhA kh.|

Page #429 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Seventeenth Chapter  They were motionless, like a pillar, without any
movement or shaking. ||118|| They had placed their right hand, raised, on the
palm of their left hand, which was resting on their lap. They were still, and
their minds were as deep as the ocean. ||119|| They were meditating on the true
nature of things, according to the teachings of the Jinas, free from all
attachments, pure like the sky, and as light as the wind. ||120|| Seeing them,
one would have felt a fear like that of seeing a mountain peak. They were
endowed with great fortitude, and their bodies, though gentle, were radiant.
After looking at them for a long time, they realized that these were indeed
great Muni-rajas. ||121||  Then, those two women, who had served Muni-rajas many
times before, went to the Muni-raja with joy, and in a moment, they forgot all
their sorrows. ||122|| They circumambulated him three times, with devotion,
joined their hands in salutation, and their eyes sparkled with joy, as if they
had found a dear friend in the Muni-raja. ||123|| It was just at that time that
the Muni-raja ended his meditation, of his own accord. This is how it is for the
blessed ones, their actions are always in accordance with the occasion. ||124||
Then, those two women, whose hands were joined together, and whose tearless,
steady eyes were fixed on the Muni-raja's feet, said, "O Bhagavan! O you who
have a pure mind! O you who are endowed with excellent conduct! Is your body
well? For this body is the root of all our efforts." ||125-126|| "O Ocean of
virtues! Is your tapas increasing day by day? And O you who have conquered your
senses! Is your conduct free from obstacles, and full of great forbearance?"
||127|| "O Lord! We are asking you about your well-being in this way, because
this is the proper way to ask. Otherwise, who would not be worthy of your well-
being? You are the repository of all virtues." ||128|| "Those who take refuge in
men like you become virtuous. But what is the point of discussing good and bad
things about oneself?" ||129||  Saying this, they fell silent, their bodies
bowed in humility. When the Muni-raja looked at them, they were free from all
fear. ||130||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptadazaM parva aGkasthavAmapANyaGkanyastAnyottAnapANikam  /  niSprakampaM
nadInAthagAmbhIryasthitamAnasam  // 119 //  dhyAyantaM vastuyAthAtmyaM
yathAzAsanabhAvanam  /  niHzeSasaMganirmuktaM vAyuvadgaganAmalam  // 120 //
zailakUTagatAzakaM vIkSya tAbhyAM ciraadsau| niracAyi mahAsattvaH
saumyamAsuravigrahaH  // 121 //  tataH pUrvakRtAnekazravaNAsevane mudA  /
samopaM jagmatustasyA kSaNAtte vismRtAsukhe  // 122 //  triHparItya ca bhAvena
nematurvihitAJjalI  /  muniM paramiva prApte bAndhavaM vikacekSaNe  // 123 //
kAle yadRcchayA tatra tena yogaH samApyate  /  bhavatyeva hi bhavyAnAM kriyA
prastAvasaMgatA  // 124 //  te tato'vadatAmevamavibhaktakaradvaye  /
anagArAdhivinyastanirazrusthiralocane  // 125 //  bhagavannapi te dehe kuzalaM
kuzalAzaya  /  mUlameSa hi sarveSAM sAdhanAnAM suceSTita  // 126 //
uparyuparisaMvRddhaM tapaH kaccid guNAmbudhe  /  vihAro'pi damodvAhavyupasargo
mahAkSamaH  // 127 //  AcAra iti pRcchAvo bhavantamidamIdRzam  /  anyathA kasya
no yogyAH kuzalasya bhavadvidhAH  // 128 //  bhavanti kSematAmAjo
bhavadvidhasamAzritAH  /  svasmistu kaiva bhAvAnAM kathA sAdhvitarAtmanAm  //
129 //  ityuktvA te vyaraMsiSTAM vinayAnatavigrahe  /  niHzeSabhayanirmukte tad
dRSTe ca babhUvatuH  // 13 //  bhI sIdhI thI, aura ve svayaM sthANu arthAt
ThUThake samAna halana-calanase rahita the  // 118 //  unhoMne apanI godameM
sthita vAma hAthakI hathelIpara dAhinA hAtha uttAna rUpase rakha chor3A thA, ve
svayaM nizcala the aura unakA mana samudrake samAna gambhIra thA  // 119|| ve
jinAgamake anusAra vastuke yathArtha svarUpakA dhyAna kara rahe the, vAyuke
samAna sarva-parigrahase rahita the aura AkAzake samAna nirmala the  // 120 /  /
unheM dekhakara kisI parvatake zikharakI AzaMkA utpanna hotI thii| ve mahAn
dhairyake dhAraka the tathA unakA zarIra saumya honepara bhI dedIpyamAna thaa|
bahuta dera taka dekhaneke bAda unhoMne nizcaya kara liyA ki yaha uttama
munirAja haiM  // 121 /  /  tadanantara jinhoMne pahale aneka bAra muniyoMkI
sevA kI thI aisI ve donoM striyA~ harSase munirAjake samIpa gayIM aura kSaNa-
bharameM apanA saba duHkha bhUla gayIM  // 122 //  unhoMne bhAvapUrvaka tIna
pradakSiNAe~ dIM, hAtha jor3akara namaskAra kiyA aura parama bandhuke samAna
munirAjako pAkara unake netra khila uThe  // 123 /  /  jisa samaya ye pahuMcIM
usI samaya munirAjane svecchAse dhyAna samApta kiyA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki
bhavya jIvoMkI kriyA avasarake anusAra hI hotI hai  // 124|| tatpazcAt jinake
donoM hAtha jur3e hue the aura jinhoMne apane azrurahita nizcala netra
munirAjake caraNoMmeM lagA rakhe the aisI donoM sakhiyoMne kahA ki he bhagavan !
he kuzala abhiprAyake dhAraka ! he uttama ceSTAoMse sampanna ! Apake zarIrameM
kuzalatA to hai ? kyoMki samasta sAdhanoMkA mUla kAraNa yaha zarIra hI hai  //
125-126 /  /  he guNoMke sAgara! ApakA tapa uttarottara bar3ha to rahA hai| isI
prakAra he indriyavijayake dhAraka! ApakA vihAra upasargarahita tathA
mahAkSamAse yukta to hai ?  // 127 //  he prabho! hama Apase jo isa taraha
kuzala pUcha rahI haiM so aisI paddhati hai yahI dhyAna rakhakara pUcha rahI
haiM anyathA Apa-jaise manuSya kisa kuzalake yogya nahIM haiM ? arthAt Apa
samasta kuzalatAke bhaNDAra haiM  // 128|| Apa-jaise puruSoMko zaraNameM pahuMce
hue loga kuzalatAse yukta ho jAte haiM; kintu svayaM apane-Apake viSayameM acche
aura bure padArthoMko carcA hI kyA hai ?  // 129 /  /  isa prakAra kahakara ve
donoM cupa ho rhoN| usa samaya unake zarIra vinayase namrIbhUta the| munirAjane
jaba unakI ora dekhA to ve sarva prakArake bhayase rahita ho gayIM  // 130 //
1. naravAyi ba., ja.  /  2. samApyate ma., kha., j.| 3. nirasusthira m.| 4.
bhagavanna yi ma., kha.  /  5. apizabdaH praznArthaH  /  6. saMbaddhaM ma.  /
7. 'kaccitkAmapravedane' ityamaraH  /

Page #430 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, The Shraman, with a calm and serene voice, like the nectar
of immortality, raised his right hand and spoke profoundly, saying: "O Kalyani!
All is well with me due to the influence of my past actions. But, my child, all
this is the result of one's own actions." (131-132) "Behold the play of karma,
where this innocent daughter of King Mahendra has been banished by her brothers,
cast out of her home and subjected to great disrespect." (133) Then, the great
sage, who knew everything without being told, was approached by Vasantmala, her
mind filled with curiosity and great respect. Bowing down to him, she eagerly
sought the well-being of her mistress, as if showering his feet with the
radiance of her eyes. (134-135) "O Master! I humbly request you to kindly answer
my question. For the actions of those like you are always for the benefit of
others." (136) "Why did this Anjana's husband remain detached for so long, and
why has he now become attached? Why has Anjana been subjected to suffering in
the great forest? And what unfortunate soul has taken refuge in her womb,
causing this unfortunate woman to face the uncertainty of life?" (137-138) Then,
Amitagati, the sage, well-versed in the three knowledges - Shruta, Avadhi, and
Manahparyaya - spoke about Anjana's story, as it truly was. For this is the
nature of the wise. (139) "My child, listen! I will tell you why this Anjana has
suffered such pain. It is the result of her past sins, now reaching their
fruition." (140) "In the Jambudvipa, in the Bharat Kshetra, there was a city
called Mandara, where a righteous householder named Priyanandi resided." (141)
"His wife was named Jaya. From her, Priyanandi had a son named Damayanta, who
was blessed with great fortune and adorned with auspicious qualities." (142)
"Then, when the spring season arrived, a grand festival took place in the city.
Damayanta, along with his friends, enjoyed himself in the beautiful garden,
which was like the Nandanavana, filled with people from the city." (143) 1.
bhartasyam 2.  kovaasyam 3.  etannamni 4.  stri 5.  mahisobhagya

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe atha prazAntayA vAcA zramaNo'mRtakalpayA  /  gambhIrayA jagAdaivaM
pANimutkSipya dakSiNam  // 131 //  kalyANi kuzalaM sarvaM mama karmAnubhAvataH
/  nanu sarvamidaM bAle naijakarmaviceSTitam  // 132 //  pazyatAM karmaNAM lIlAM
yadihAgovivarjitA  /  bandhunirvAsyatAM yAtA mahendrasyeyamAtmajA  // 133 //
tato'kathitavijJAtatavRttAntaM mahAmunim  /  kutUhalasamAkrAntamAnasA sumahAdarA
// 134 //  natvA vasantamAloce svAminIpriyatatparA  /  pAdayorne trakAntyAsya
kurvatIvAbhiSecanam  //  135 //  vijJApayAmi nAtha tvAM kRpayA vaktumarhasi  /
paropakArabhUyasyo nanu yuSmAdRzAM kriyAH  //  136  //  hetunA ke bhartAsyA
ciraM kAlaM vyarajyata  /  arajyata punarduHkhaM prAptA caiSA mahAvane  //  137
//  ko vAtimandabhAgyo'yaM jIvo'syAH kukSimAzrayat  /  sukhociteyamAnItA yena
jIvitasaMzayam  //  138  //  tataH so'mitagavyAkhyo jJAnatrayavizAradaH  /
yathAvRttaM jagAdAsyA vRttireSA hi dhImatAm  // 139 //  vatse zRNu yataH prAptA
bhavyeyaM duHkhamIdRzam  /  pUrvamAcaritAt pApAt saMprAptaparipAkataH  // 140 //
jambUti dvIpe vAsye bharatanAmani  /  nagare mandarAmikhye priyanandIti sadgRhI
//  141  //  jAyA jAyAsya tatrAbhUddamayantAbhidhaH sutaH  /
mahAsaubhAgyasaMpannaH kalyANaguNabhUSaNaH  //  142  //  athAnyadA madhau krIDA
paramA tatpure'bhavat  /  nandanapratimodyAne pauralokasamAkule  // 143 //  380
athAnantara munirAja dAhinA hAtha Upara uThAkara amRtake samAna prazAnta evaM
gambhIra vANI meM isa prakAra kahane lage ki he kalyANi ! karmoMke prabhAvase
merA sarvaprakAra kuzala hai  /  he bAle ! nizcayase yaha saba apane-apane
karmoMkI ceSTA hai | 131 - 132  //  karmoMkI lIlA dekho jo rAjA mahendrakI yaha
niraparAdhinI putrI bhAiyoM dvArA nirvAsitapanAko prApta huI arthAt gharase
nikAlI jAkara atyanta anAdarako prApta huI || 133|| tadanantara binA kahe hI
jinhoMne saba vRttAnta jAna liyA thA aise mahAmunirAjako namaskAra kara bar3e
Adarase vasantamAlA bolI  /  usa samaya vasantamAlAkA mana kutUhala se bhara
rahA thA, vaha svAminIkA bhalA karane meM tatpara thI  /  aura apane netroMkI
kAntise mAno munirAjake caraNoMkA abhiSeka kara rahI thI  /  /  134 - 135  /  /
usane kahA ki he nAtha ! maiM kucha prArthanA kara rahI hU~ so kRpA kara usakA
uttara khie| kyoMki Apa jaise puruSoMkI kriyAe~ paropakAra-bahula hI hotI haiM
|| 136 || isa aMjanAkA bhartA kisa kAraNase cirakAla taka virakta rahA aura aba
kisa kAraNase anurakta huA hai ? yaha aMjanA mahAvana meM kisa kAraNase duHkhako
prApta huI hai ? aura manda bhAgyakA dhAraka kauna-sA jIva isakI kukSimeM AyA
hai jisane ki sukha bhoganevAlI isa becArIko prANoMke saMzayameM DAla diyA hai
/  /  137-1938 //  tadanantaramati zruta aura avadhi ina tIna jJAnoMmeM nipuNa
amitagati nAmaka munirAja aMjanAkA yathAvat vRttAnta kahane lage  /  so ThIka hI
hai kyoMki buddhimAnoMkI yaha vRtti hai  /  /  1395 unhoMne kahA ki he beTI !
suna, isa ajanAne apane pUrvopArjita pApakarmake udayase jisa kAraNa yaha aisA
duHkha pAyA hai use maiM kahatA hU~ || 140  //  isI jambUdvIpa sambandhI bharata
kSetrake mandara nAmaka nagara meM eka priyanandI nAmakA sadgRhastha rahatA thA
|| 141  /  /  usakI strIkA nAma jAyA thA  /  usa strIse priyanandIke damayanta
nAmakA aisA putra utpanna huA thA jo mahAsaubhAgyase sampanna tathA kalyANakArI
guNarUpI AbhUSaNoMse vibhUSita thA || 142 || tadanantara vasanta Rtu Anepara
nagarameM bar3A bhArI utsava huA so nagaravAsI logoM se vyApta nandanavanake
samAna sundara udyAnameM damayanta bhI apane mitroMke sAtha sukhapUrvaka 1.
bhartAsya ma  /  2. kovAsya ma  /  3 etannAmnI  /  4. strI  /  5. mahIsobhAgya
/

Page #431 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Saptavasa Parva ### 381  The Damyant, adorned with white powder and
ornaments like earrings, was enjoying himself with his friends.  Then, while he
was staying there and playing, he saw the Digambara monks, who were engaged in
meditation, study, and other practices, standing nearby.  Like a ray of light
emanating from the sun, he, shining brightly, left his group and went to the
assembly of monks, who were as steadfast as the peaks of Mount Meru.  Then,
after paying homage to the monks and listening to the teachings of Dharma, he
became endowed with right faith and adhered to the rules.  At one time, he
performed a seven-fold Parana for the monks and, after death, attained the
heavenly abode.  There, due to the influence of his past actions, rules, and
charity, he enjoyed excellent pleasures. He was always adorned with a garland of
blue lotuses, whose brilliance was like the eyes of hundreds of goddesses.  From
there, he was reborn as the son of King Harichandra and Queen Priyangulakshmi in
the city of Mriganka, located on this Jambudvipa. He was named Singhchandra, a
master of arts and skills. Although he was one, he was present in the hearts of
all beings.  Even in that existence, he renounced worldly pleasures after
receiving guidance from the monks and, at the end of his life, went to heaven.
There, he was like the sun, causing the lotus gardens of the goddesses' faces to
bloom, and he enjoyed the supreme happiness that was obtained merely by his
will.  From there, he was reborn as the son of King Sukantha and Queen
Kanakodaya in the city of Arun, located on the Vijayardha mountain in this
Bharat Kshetra. He was named Singhvahana, and his virtues attracted the hearts
of all people.  There, he experienced the supreme joy of embracing women who
could steal the attention of Apsaras, and he enjoyed the generous pleasures like
a god.  At one time, he attained enlightenment in the Tirtha of Sri Vimalnath,
and after entrusting his kingdom and wealth to his son, Meghavahana, he departed
from the world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptavaza parva 381 cikroDa' damayanto'pi tatra mitraiH samaM sukham  /
paTavAsavalakSAGgaH kuNDalAdivibhUSitaH  // 144 //  atha tena sthitenArAskrIDatA
gaganAmbarAH  /  dRSTAstapodhanA dhyAnasvAdhyAyAdikriyoditAH  // 145 /  /
nissRtya maNDalAnmitrAd razmivat so'tibhAsuraH  /  jagAma munisaMghAtaM
meruzRGgaughasaMnimam  // 146 //  tataH sAdhuM sa vanditvA zrutvA dharma
yathAvidhi  /  samyagdarzanasaMpanno babhUva niyamasthitaH  // 17 //  davA
saptaguNopetAmanyadA pAraNAmasau  /  sAdhubhyaH paJcatAM prApya
kalpavAsamazizriyat  // 14 //  niyamAdAnatazcAtra mogamanvabhavat param  /
deviishtekssnncchaayaaniilaabjsrgvibhuussitH||149|| cyutastasmAdiha dvIpe
mRgAGkanagare'bhavat  /  priyaGgulakSmIsaMbhUto haricandranRpAtmajaH  // 150 //
siMhacandra iti khyAtaH kalAguNavizAradaH  /  sthitaH pratyekameko'pi cetaHsu
prANadhAriNAm  // 15 //  tatrApi muktasadbhogaH sAdhubhyo'vApya sanmatim  /
kAladharmeNa saMyukto jagAma tridazAlayam  // 152 //  tatrodAraM sukhaM prApa
saMkalpakRtakalpanam  /  devIvadanarAjIvamahAkhaNDadivAkaraH  // 153 //
cyutvAtraiva tato vAsye vijayArdhamahIdhare  /  nagare'ruNasaMjJAke sukaNThasya
naraprabhoH  // 15 //  jAyAyAM kanakodayAM siMhavAhanazabditaH  /  udapAdi
guNAkRSTasamastajanamAnasaH  // 155 //  tatra deva ivodArasamogamanubhatavAn  /
apsarovibhramastena kAntAliGganalAlitaH  // 156 //  tIrtha vimalanAthasya
so'nyadA jAtasaMmatiH  /  nikSipya tanaye lakSmI dhanavAhananAmani  // 157 //
krIr3A kara rahA thaa| usa samaya usakA zarIra sugandhita cUrNase sapheda thA
tathA kuNDalAdi AbhUSaNa usakI zobhA bar3hA rahe the  // 143-144 //  tadanantara
vahA~ Thaharakara krIr3A karate hue damayantane samIpameM hI vidyamAna dhyAna,
svAdhyAya Adi kriyAoMmeM tatpara digambara munirAja dekhe  // 145 /  /  unheM
dekhate hI jisa prakAra sUryase dedIpyamAna kiraNa nikalatI hai usI prakAra
apanI goSThIse nikalakara atizaya dedIpyamAna damayanta munisamUhake pAsa
pahu~cA  /  vaha muniyoMkA samUha meruke zikharoMke samUhake samAna nizcala thA
// 146 //  tadanantara damayantane munirAjakI vandanA kara unase vidhi-pUrvaka
dharmakA upadeza sunA aura samyagdarzanase sampanna hokara niyama Adi dhAraNa
kiye  // 147 //  kisI eka samaya usane sAdhuoMke lie saptaguNoMse yukta pAraNA
karAyI aura antameM marakara svargameM devaparyAya pAyA  // 148|| vahA~ vaha
pUrvAcarita niyama aura dAnake prabhAvase uttama bhoga bhogane lgaa| saikar3oM
deviyoMke netroMke samAna kAntivAle nIla kamaloMkI mAlAse vaha vahAM sadA
alaMkRta rahatA thA  // 149 //  vahA~se cyuta hokara vaha isI jambUdvIpake
mRgAMkanAmA nagarameM rAjA haricandra aura priyaMgulakSmI nAmaka rAnIse
siMhacandra nAmakA kalA aura gaNoMmeM nipUNa pUtra haa| siMhacandra yadyapi eka
thA to bhI samasta prANiyoM ke hRdayoMmeM vidyamAna thA  /  / 150-151|| usa
paryAyameM bhI usane sAdhuoMse sadbodha pAkara bhogoMkA tyAga kara diyA thA
jisase Ayuke antameM marakara svarga gayA  // 152 //  vahA~ vaha deviyoMke
mukharUpI kamala-vanako vikasita karaneke lie sUryake samAna thA aura saMkalpa
mAtrase prApta honevAle uttama sukhakA upabhoga karatA thA  // 153 //  vahAMse
cyuta hokara isI bharatakSetrake vijayAdha parvatapara aruNa nAmaka nagarameM
rAjA sukaNThakI kanakodarI nAmA rAnIse siMhavAhana nAmakA putra huaa| isa
siMhavAhanane guNoMke dvArA samasta logoMkA mana apanI ora AkarSita kara liyA
thA  // 154-155 /  /  apsarAoMke vibhramako curAnevAlI striyoMke AliMganase
paramAhlAdako prApta huA siMhavAhana vahA~ devoMke samAna udAra bhogoMkA
anubhava karane lagA  // 156 //  kisI eka samaya zrIvimalanAtha bhagavAnke
tIrthameM use sadbodha prApta huA so meghavAhana nAmaka putrake lie rAjya-lakSmI
sauMpa saMsArase 1. cikoDe ma.  /  2. kripoditA ma.  /  3. mRtyum  /  4. vAstho
(?) ma.  /  5. vibhramastenaH kAntA- ma.  /

Page #432 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
382 In the Padma Purana, a sage named Lakshmitilaka, who was filled with great
compassion and had a clear understanding of the impermanence of the world,
became a disciple of the great sage, Singhvahana. ||15|| He diligently followed
the proper vows as prescribed by the Jinas, and through contemplation on
impermanence and other such truths, he purified his mind. ||159|| He practiced
austerities that were beyond the capacity of ordinary people, and he endured the
burning heat of the sun. He always held fast to the three jewels, which are the
source of true liberation. ||160|| Although he was capable of preventing harm
due to the various powers he had attained, he remained calm and endured the
suffering inflicted by his enemies, who were like fierce lions. ||161|| When his
lifespan came to an end, he entered into a state of pure meditation and,
piercing through the celestial realms of the gods, he attained the highest
heaven, the Lantva. ||162|| There, he enjoyed the pleasures of that realm, which
were in accordance with his desires, and he remained aloof from the knowledge
and speech of the deceitful beings. ||163|| Driven by the remaining merit he had
accumulated, this great being, who was destined for ultimate liberation and a
recipient of happiness, left the Lantva heaven and entered the womb of Anjana.
||164|| Thus, I have described the conception that took place in the womb of
your mistress. Now, O Vasantmala, who is devoted to good deeds, listen to the
cause of the sorrow that arises from her separation. ||165|| When this Anjana
was in the realm of Kanakodara, she had a companion named Lakshmi. Her soul was
purified by right faith, and she was always devoted to the worship of the
saints. ||166|| She had a statue of the Jina, the Lord of Lords, installed in a
part of her house, and she worshipped it with devotion, offering praise with a
joyful countenance. ||167|| However, because Kanakodara was a great goddess, she
became filled with pride and anger towards her companion. Not only that, she had
the statue of the Jina thrown out of the house. ||168|| At that time, a nun
named Samyamsri entered her house to beg for alms. Samyamsri was renowned
throughout the world for her austerities. ||169||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 382 padmapurANe purusaMvegasaMpanno viditAsArasaMsmRtiH  /
lakSmItilakasaMjJasya munerAnacche ziSyatAm  // 15 //  anupAlya samIcInaM vrataM
jinavaroditam  /  anityatvAdibhiH kRtvA cetanA bhAvanAmayIm  // 159 //  tapaH
kApuruSAcintyaM taptvA tanvAdarojjhitam  /  ratnatritayato jAtAM dadhAnaH
paramArthatAm  // 16 //  nAnAlabdhisamutpatteH zakto'pyahitavAraNe  /
parISaharipUna ghorAnadhisahya sumAnasaH  // 16 //  AyurvirAmamAsAdya
dhyAnamAsthAya nirmalam  /  jyotiSAM paTalaM bhittvA lAntave'bhat suro mahAn  //
162 /  /  icchAnurUpamAsAdya tatra mogaM parasthitiH  /  chamasthajanadhIvAcAM
sthitaM saMcekSya [saMtyajya] gocaram  /  /  163 //  vyutvA puNyAvazeSeNa
preritaH paramodayaH  /  kukSimasyA vivezAyaM jIvaH saukhyasya bhAjanam  // 16
//  evaM tAvadayaM garbhaH svAminyAste tanuM zritaH  /  hetuM virahaduHkhasya
zRNu kalyANaceSTite  // 165 //  bhave'syAH kanakodaryA lakSmI ma sapatnyabhUt  /
samyagdarzanapUtAsmA sAdhupUjanatatparA  // 166 //  pratimA devadevAnAM pratIke
sadmanastayA  /  sthApayitvArcitA bhaktyA stutimaGgalavaktrayA  // 16 //
mahAdevyabhimAnena sapanyai kruddhayA tayA  /  cakre bAhyAvakAze'sau jinendra
pratiyAtanA  // 168 //  atrAntare'vizad gehamasyA mikSArthamAryikA  /
saMyamazrIriti khyAtA tapasA viSTape'khile  // 169 //  tataH paribhavaM dRSTvA
sApyahatpratiyAtanam  /  yayAvatiparaM duHkhaM pAraNApetamAnasA  // 17 //
virakta ho gyaa| tadanantara jo bahuta bhArI saMvegase yukta thA aura saMsArakI
asAratAko jisane acchI taraha samajha liyA thA aisA siMhavAhana lakSmItilaka
nAmaka munikA ziSya ho gayA arthAt unake pAsa usane dIkSA dhAraNa kara lI  //
157-158 //  jinendra bhagavAn ke dvArA kahe hue uttama vratakA acchI taraha
pAlana kara usane anitya Adi bhAvanAoMke cintavanase apanI AtmAko prabhAvita
kiyA  // 159 /  /  zarIrakA Adara choDakara usane aisA kaThina tapazcaraNa kiyA
ki kA jisakA vicAra bhI nahIM kara sakate the| vaha sadA ratnatrayake prabhAvase
utpanna honevAlI paramArthatAko dhAraNa karatA thA  // 160 //  nAnA prakArakI
RddhiyA~ utpanna honese yadyapi vaha aniSTa padArthoMkA nivAraNa karane meM
samartha thA to bhI zAnta hRdayase usane parISaharUpI ghora zatruoMkA kaSTa
sahana kiyA thA  // 161 //  AyukA anta Anepara vaha nirmala dhyAnameM lIna ho
gayA aura jyotiSI devoMkA paTala bhedana kara arthAt usase Upara jAkara lAntava
svargameM utkRSTa deva huA  // 162 //  vahA~ vaha utkRSTa sthitikA dhArI huA
aura chadmastha jIvoMke jJAna tathA vacana dInoMse pare rahanevAle icchAnukUla
bhogoMkA upabhoga karane lagA  // 163 /  /  parama abhyudayase sahita tathA
sukhakA pAtrabhUta, isI devakA jIva lAntava svargase cyuta hokara bAkI bace
puNyase prerita hotA huA isa aMjanAke garbha meM praviSTa huA hai  // 164 /  /
isa prakAra jo garbha terI svAminIke zarIrameM praviSTa huA hai usakA varNana
kiyaa| aba he zubha ceSTAkI dhAraka vasantamAle ! isake viraha-janya duHkhakA
kAraNa kahatA hU~ so suna  // 165 /  /  jaba yaha ajanA kanakodarAka bhavameM
thI taba isakI lakSmI nAmaka sota tho| usako AtmA samyagdarzanase pavitra thI
aura vaha sadA maniyoMkI pUjA karane meM tatpara rahatI thii||166|| usane
gharake eka bhAgameM devAdhideva jinendra devakI pratimA sthApita karAkara
bhaktipUrvaka mukhase stutiyA~ par3hatI huI usakI pUjA kI thI  // 167 /  /
kanakodarI mahAdevI thI isalie usane abhimAnavaza sotake prati bahuta hI krodha
prakaTa kiyaa| itanA hI nahIM jinendradevakI pratimAko gharake bAharI bhAgameM
phiMkavA diyA  // 168 /  /  isI bIcame saMyamazrI nAmaka AryikAne bhikSAke lie
isake gharameM praveza kiyaa| saMyamazrI apane tapake kAraNa samasta saMsArameM
prasiddha thIM  // 169 /  /  tadanantara jinendradevakI pratimAkA 1. tannAdaro-
ka.  /  taptvA ba, ja.  /  2. jAtaM ma. | 3. samutpannaH ma.  /  4. paristhiti
kha., b.| 5. saMvakSya ja.  /  ullaGghaca iti ba. pustake TippaNam  /  6.
vaapyaavkaashe|

Page #433 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 17  Seeing her (the woman) in such a state, the Sadhu felt great
compassion. For the Sadhu community desires the welfare of all beings. || 171 ||
Even without being asked, the Sadhu, inspired by devotion to the Guru, begins to
preach the Dharma to the ignorant beings for their benefit. || 172 ||  Then, the
one adorned with the ornament of good conduct, spoke to her in these words,
filled with sweetness. || 173 ||  "O Blessed one, listen with an open mind. You
are adorned with the supreme radiance, the king honors you, and your body is a
vessel of pleasures. || 174 ||  Wandering through the four gatis, this being is
always afflicted with suffering. When the effect of the bitter karma subsides,
it attains the state of a human being. || 175 ||  O Radiant one, you have
attained the human birth through the accumulation of merit. Do not engage in
despicable conduct. You are capable of performing good actions. || 176 ||  One
who, having obtained the human birth, does not perform good deeds, loses the
jewel that has come into his hands, due to delusion. || 177 ||  The actions of
body, speech, and mind that are beneficial and conducive to the welfare of
others are the same for all living beings. || 178 ||  Those who engage in good
deeds with the intention of their own welfare are considered superior in this
world, while those who engage in despicable conduct are numerous. || 179 ||
Even those who are self-fulfilled, rescue beings from the ocean of suffering
through their teachings and guidance. Those who are the best of the best, the
Dharma-wheel-turners, the Arhats, those who despise their image, the deluded
beings, experience suffering that extends over countless lifetimes. Who can
fully describe the suffering that they experience? || 180 - 182 ||  The Arhats
are in a state of equanimity. Therefore, they do not feel joy towards those who
seek refuge in them, nor do they feel hatred towards those who harm them. || 183
||  However, beings experience happiness and suffering due to their own good and
bad karma, which arise from their actions towards others. || 184 ||  Just as a
being removes the suffering caused by cold through the use of fire, and the
suffering caused by hunger and thirst through the use of cool water, so too, the
suffering caused by disrespect is removed through the practice of Parana. || 185
||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptadazaM pava imAM ca mohinIM' dRSTvA paraM kAruNyamAgatA  /  sAdhuvargoM hi
sarvebhyaH prANibhyaH zumamicchati  // 171 //  apRSTo'pi janaH
sAdhurgurubhaktipracoditaH  /  ajJaprANihitArthaM ca dharmavAkye pravartate  //
172  //  avocata tataH saivaM zIlabhUSaNadhAriNI  /  tademAmitayA vAcA
mAdhuryamupamojjhitam  // 173 //  bhadre zRNu manaH kRtvA paramaM paramadyute  /
narendrakRtasaMmAne bhogAyatanavigrahe  //  174 //  ve caturgatau bhrAmyan jIvo
duHkhaizcitaH sadA  /  sumAnuSatvamAyAti zame kaTukakarmaNaH  //  175  //
manuSyajAtimApannA sA tvaM puNyena zobhane  /  mAbhUjjugupsitAcArA kartuM
yogyAsi sakriyAm  // 176 //  labdhvA manuSyatAM karma yo nAdatte janaH zubham  /
ratnaM karagataM tasya bhraMzamAyAti mohinaH  //  177 //  kAyavAkcetasAM vRttiH
zubhA hitavidhAyinI  /  saivetaretarAdhAnakAriNI prANadhAriNAm  // 178 //
svasya ye hitamuddizya pravartante sukarmaNi  /  uttamAste janA loke
ninditAcArabhUyasi  //  179  //  kRtArthA api ye santo bhavaduHkhamahArNavAt  /
tArayanti janAn bhadhyAnupadezavidhAnataH  //  180  //  uttamottamatAM teSAM
bibhratAM dharmacakriNAm  /  "arhatAM ye tiraskAraM pratibimbasya kurvate  //
181  //  jantUnAM mohinAM teSAM yadanekabhavAnugam  /  duHkhaM saMjAyate
kastadvaktuM zaknoti kArtsyataH  // 182 //  yeSAM prapaneSu prAsAdo nopajAyate
/  na cApakAraniSTheSu dveSo mAdhyasthyamIyuSAm  // 183 //  svasmAttathApi
jantUnAM pariNAmAcchubhAzubhAt  /  taduddezena saMjAtAt sukhaduHkhasamudbhavaH
//  184  //  yathAgneH sevanAcchItaduHkhaM janturapohate  /  kSutRSNAparipIDAM
ca maktazItAmbusevanAt  //  185  //  anAdara dekha unheM bahuta duHkha huA  /
pAraNA karanese unakA mana haTA gayA || 170  //  tathA isa aMjanakA jIva jo
kanakodarI thA use mithyAtvagrasta dekha unheM parama karuNA utpanna huI so
Thoka hI hai kyoMki sAdhuvarga sabhI prANiyoMkA kalyANa cAhatA hai || 171 ||
guru bhakti se prerita hue sAdhujana binA pUche bhI ajJAnI prANiyoM kA hita
karaneke lie dharmopadeza dene lagate haiM  //  172 //  tadanantara zIlarUpa
AbhUSaNako dhAraNa karanevAlI saMyamazrI AryikA atyanta madhura vANI meM
kanakodarIse bolIM ki he bhadre ! manako udAra kara sun| tU parama kAntiko
dhAraNa karanevAlI hai, rAjA terA sammAna karatA hai, tathA terA zarIra bhogoMkA
Ayatana hai || 173 - 174 //  caturgaMti rUpa saMsAra meM bhramaNa karatA huA
yaha jIva sadA duHkhI rahatA hai  /  jaba azubha karmakA udaya zAnta hotA hai
tabhI yaha uttama manuSyaparyAyako prApta hotA hai || 175 || he zobhane ! tU
puNyodayase manuSya yoniko prApta huI hai ataH ghRNita AcAra karanevAlI na ho  /
tU uttama kriyA karane yogya hai arthAt acche kArya karanA hI tujhe ucita hai
//  176  //  jo prANI manuSyaparyAya pAkara bhI zubha kArya nahIM karatA hai.
usa mohI ke hAthameM AyA huA ratna yoM hI naSTa ho jAtA hai || 177  //  mana,
bacana, kAyakI zubha pravRtti hI prANiyoMkA hita karatI hai aura azubha pravRtti
ahita karatI hai || 178 || isa saMsAra meM nindita AcArake dhAraka manuSyoMkI hI
bahulatA hai para jo AtmahitakA lakSya kara zubha kAryaM pravRtta hote haiM ve
uttama kahalAte haiM  //  179  //  jo svayaM kRtakRtya hokara bhI upadeza dekara
bhavya prANiyoMko saMsArarUpI mahAsAgarase tArate haiM, jo sarvotkRSTa haiM
tathA dharmacakrake pravartaka haiM aise arahanta bhagavAnkI pratimAkA jo
tiraskAra karate haiM una mohI jIvoMko aneka bhavoM taka sAtha jAne vAlA jo
duHkha prApta hotA hai use pUrNa rUpase kahane ke lie kauna samarthaM ho sakatA
?  /  / 180 - 182  /  /  arahanta bhagavAn to mAdhyasthya bhAvako prApta haiM
isalie yadyapi inheM zaraNAgata jIvoMmeM na prasannatA hotI hai aura na apakAra
karanevAloMpara dveSa hI hotA hai  //  183  //  to bhI jIvoMko upakAra aura
apakArake nimittase honevAle apane zubha-azubha pariNAma se sukhaduHkhakI
utpatti hotI hai || 184|| jisa prakAra yaha jIva agnikI sevAse apanA zIta-janya
duHkha 1. mohinIM ja., kha.  /  mehinIM ka.  /  2 sukha ma  /  3 tadimAM mitayA
ma  /  tadA + imAm + itayA iticchedaH  /  4. vikRtAM ma.  /  5. arhato ma.  /
6. prayatneSu ka, kha  /  7. kSuttRSNAM paripIDAM ca ma.  /  383

Page #434 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, it is said that just as the enjoyment of food and water
relieves hunger and thirst, similarly, the worship of the Jinas brings happiness
to beings, and their disregard brings supreme suffering. This is natural.   It
is certain that whatever suffering is seen in the world arises from sin, and
whatever happiness is seen is obtained from past good deeds.   You have obtained
this wealth, a king as your husband, and a son who performs miraculous deeds,
all due to your punya. You are praiseworthy among beings.   Therefore, act in
such a way that you will obtain more happiness. O BhavyÄ! Do not fall into a pit
while the sun is shining, as I have told you.   If I had not instructed you, and
you had fallen into hell with its terrible torments, it would have been a great
negligence on my part.   Upon hearing this, Kanakodari was terrified of the
suffering that would arise in hell. At that very moment, with a pure heart, she
embraced the supreme Samyak Darshan.   She also accepted the dharma of a
householder and performed austerities according to her strength. It seemed to
her as if she had been born anew due to the association with dharma.   She
installed the image of the Arhant Bhagavan in its former place and worshipped it
with various fragrant flowers.   Considering herself fulfilled by having engaged
Kanakodari in dharma, the AryikÄ SamyamshrÄ«, filled with joy, went to her own
place.   Kanakodari, who was attached to her home, also accumulated punya and at
the end of her life went to heaven. There, she enjoyed the highest pleasures and
then, falling from there, she was born as a daughter named AnjanÄ to Queen
ManovegÄ, the wife of King Mahendra in the city of Mahendra.   She was born into
a prosperous and pure family due to the remaining portion of the punya she had
accumulated in a previous life, and she obtained a most excellent husband.   She
had kept the image of the TrikÄlaya-worthy Jina Bhagavan outside her house for
some time, and because of that, she experienced this suffering.   When, before
her marriage, she was praising the qualities of Vidhyutprabha and criticizing
Pavanajaya in front of him, Pavanajaya...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe nisargo'yaM tathA yena jinAnAmarcanAtsukham  /  jAyate prANinAM
duHkhaM paramaM ca tiraskRteH  // 18 //  yannAma dRzyate loke duHkhaM
tatpApasaMbhavam  /  sukhaM ca caritAtpUrvasukRtAditi vidyatAm  // 187 //  sA
tvaM puNyairimA vRddhiM bhartAraM puruSAdhipam  /  putraM cAdbhutakarmANaM
prAptA ilAdhyAsudhAriNAm  // 18 //  tathA kuru yathA bhUyo lapsyase
sukhamAtmanaH  /  madvAkyAdavaTe bhavye ! mA paptaH sati bhAskare  // 189 //
abhaviSyattavAvAso narake ghoravedane  /  ahaM nAbodhayiSyaM cetpramAdo'yamaho
mahAn  // 19 //  ityuktA sA paritrastA duHkhato narakodbhavAt  /  pratyayAditi
zuddhAramA samyagdarzanamuttamam  // 191 //  agRhIda gRhidharmaca zaktazca
sadazaM tapaH  /  janmAnyadiva mene ca sAMprataM dharmasaMgamAt  // 19 //
pratimAM ca pravezyainAM pUrvadeze vyatiSThapat  /  Anarca ca vicitrAbhiH
sumanomiH sugandhibhiH  // 193 //  kRtArtha manyamAnA svaM tasyA dharmaniyojanAt
/  jagAma svocitaM sthAnaM saMyamazrIH pramodinI  // 19 //  kanakodaryapi zreyaH
samupAyaM gRhe ratA  /  kRtvA kAlaM divaM gasvA bhuktvA bhogaM mahAguNam  //
195n cyutvA mahendrarAjasya mahendrapuTabhedane  /  manovegAsamAkhyAyAmaJjaneti
sutAbhavat  // 196 //  seyaM puNyAvazeSena kRtena jananAntare  /  jAtehATyakule
zuddha prAptA ca varamuttamam  // 197 //  pratimAM ca jinendrasya trikAlAya'sya
yadbahiH  /  akArSItsamayaM kaMcittenAto duHkhamAgatam  // 198 //
vidyutpramaguNastotraM kriyamANaM purastava  /  mizrakezyAH svanindA ca samitraH
pavanaMjayaH  //  199 //  dUra kara letA hai aura bhojana tathA jalakA
sevanakara bhUkha-pyAsakI pIr3Ase chuTTI pA jAtA hai yaha svAbhAvika bAta hai
usI prakAra jinendra bhagavAnkI pUjA karanese prANiyoMko sukha utpanna hotA hai
aura unakA tiraskAra karanese parama duHkha prApta hotA hai yaha bhI svAbhAvika
bAta hai  /  / 185-186 /  /  yaha nizcita jAno ki saMsArameM jo bhI duHkha
dikhAI detA hai vaha pApase utpanna huA hai aura jo bhI sukha dRSTigocara hai
vaha pUrvopArjita puNya kamase upalabdha hai  /  / 187 //  tUne jo yaha
vaibhava, rAjA pati aura Azcaryajanaka kArya karanevAlA putra pAyA hai so
pUNyake dvArA hI pAyA hai| tu prANiyoMmeM prazaMsanIya hai  /  / 188 //  isalie
aisA kArya kara jisase phira bhI tujhe sukha prApta ho| he bhavye ! tU mere
kahanese sUryake rahate hue gaDDhe meM mata gira  // 189 /  /  isa pApake kAraNa
ghora vedanAse yukta narakameM terA nivAsa ho aura maiM tujhe sambodhita na
karUM yaha merA bar3A pramAda kahalAyegA  // 190 //  AryikAke aisA kahanepara
kanakodarI narakoMmeM utpanna honevAle duHkhase bhayabhIta ho gyii| usane usI
samaya zuddha hRdayase uttama samyagdarzana dhAraNa kiyA  // 191|| gRhasthakA
dharma aura zakti anusAra tapa bhI usane svIkRta kiyaa| use aisA lagane lagA
mAno dharmakA samAgama honese maiMne dUsarA hI janma pAyA ho  // 192 /  /
arhanta bhagavAnkI pratimAko usane pUrva sthAnapara virAjamAna karAyA aura nAnA
prakArake sugandhita phUloMse usakI pUjA kI  // 193 /  /  kanakodarIko dharmameM
lagAkara apane Apako kRtakRtya mAnatI haI saMyamazrI AryikA harSita ho apane
yogya sthAnapara calI gayIM  // 194 /  /  gharameM anurAga rakhanevAlI
kanakodarI bhI puNyopArjana kara Ayuke anta meM svarga gayI aura vahA~
uttamottama bhoga bhogakara vahA~se cyuta ho mahendra nagarameM rAjA mahendrakI
manovegA nAmA rAnIse yaha aMjanA nAmaka putrI huI hai  /  / 195-196 /  /  isane
janmAntarameM jo puNya kiyA thA usake avaziSTa aMzase yaha yahA~ sampanna evaM
vizuddha kulameM utpanna huI hai tathA uttama varako prApta huI hai  /  / 197 /
/  isane trikAlameM pUjanIya jinendra bhagavAnkI pratimAko kucha samaya taka
gharase bAhara kiyA thA usIse ise yaha duHkha prApta huA hai  // 198 //
vivAhake pUrva jaba isake Age mizrakezI vidyutprabhake guNoMkI prazaMsA aura
pavanaMjayako nindA kara rahI thI taba pavanaMjaya 1. jAnAtu  /  2. bhaktoraM
m.| 3. zlAdhyAsudhAriNam m.| 4. garne  /  5. abhaviSyaM ma.  /  6. pravizyenAM
ma.  /  7. etannAmnI aaryikaa| 8. ratAH ma.  /  9. zrutvA m.|

Page #435 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Here is the English translation of the provided text, preserving the Sanskrit
words:  ---  **Saptavasha Parva**   385  Having heard this, he who was concealed
in the cow-window fell into a rage due to enmity towards her. As he set out for
battle, he saw another lady resembling a Chakravaki, and, struck by separation,
he swiftly sank into the beautiful mind-lake.   201. Just as a friend is kindly
led to his beloved at the appropriate time, having taken the embryo, he left to
fulfill his father's command.   202. Thus saying, the eminent sage, endowed with
great compassion, spoke again, like amrit flowing from the autumnal skies.
203. âYou, suffering child, are afflicted by this sorrow due to the fruits of
your actions. Therefore, do not again engage in this evil act.â   204. The
happiness that arises in this world comes, indeed, primarily from devotion to
the Jineshvara.   205. Therefore, be a devotee of the Jineshvara, who rescues
from worldly existence, and perform puja to the munis according to your
capability.   206. Fortunately, you have attained knowledge through the great
restraint of the noble Arya at that time. That noble one uplifted you, who were
sinking into downfall, as if pulling you up by the hand.   207. This extremely
fortunate embryo has taken refuge in your womb, and will become a recipient of
many great auspiciousness in the future.   208. O beautiful one! From this
embryo, you will attain supreme prosperity. No divine being can diminish its
prowess.   209. In a little while, you will unite with your husband, thus keep
your mind happy and free from negligence, O auspicious one.   210. Upon hearing
this from the sage, the two friends, who were exceedingly joyful and whose
lotus-like eyes blossomed, bowed to the sage repeatedly.   211. After that, the
sage with a pure heart, having bestowed blessings upon both of them, went to a
place suitable for restraint in the sky.   212. That eminent sage remained in
the cave in the posture of Parayankasana; thus, in time, that cave came to be
known on earth as "Payank Cave."   213. Thus, King Mahendra...  1. Thus spoke M.
2. You are referred to M.   3. By devotion M.   4. You (are) K.   5. Having been
well-fed M.   6. Free from negligence B.  ---   Let me know if you need further
assistance or clarifications!

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptavazaM parva 385 zrutvA gavAkSajAlena triyAmAyAM tirohitaH  /  dveSamasyai
pariprApto vaidhuryamakarot puraH  // 20 //  yuddhAya prasthito dRSTvA so'nyadA
cakravAkikAm  /  virahAddIpitA ramye mAnase sarasi drutam  // 201 //  sakhyeva
kRpayA nItaH samaye tAM manoharAm  /  gatazca garbhamAdAya katu janakazAsanam
// 202 //  ityuktvA punarUce'sAvaJjanAM munipuGgavaH  /  mahAkAruNyasaMpannaH
zaranniva girAmRtam  // 203 //  sA tvaM karmAnubhAvena bAle duHkhamidaM zritA  /
tato bhUyo'pi mA kArSIrodazaM karma ninditam  // 204 //  yAni yAni ca saukhyAni
jAyante cAtra bhUtale  /  tAni tAni hi sarvANi jinabhakte vizeSataH  // 205 //
bhaktA bhava jinendrANAM saMsArottArakAriNAm  /  gRhANa niyamaM zaktyAM kuru
zramagapUjanam  // 206 //  diSTyA bodhiM prapannAsi tadA dattAM tadAryayA  /
udahArSIt karAlambAt sA svAM yAntImadhogatim  // 207 //  ayaM ca te mahAbhAgyaH
kukSi garbhaH samAzritaH  /  purA nirloThate samyagbahukalyANabhAjanam  // 208
//  paramAM bhUtimetasmAt sutAt prApsyasi zobhane  /  akhaNDanIyavIryo'yaM
gIrvANaH sakalairapi  // 209 //  alpaireva ca te'hobhiH priyasaMgo bhaviSyati  /
tato bhava sukhasvAnsA pramAdarahitA zubhe  // 210 //  ityuktAbhyAM tatastAbhyAM
tuSTAbhyAM munisattamaH  /  praNato vikasannetrarAjIvAbhyAM punaH punaH  // 21
//  so'pi dattvAziSaM tAbhyAM samutpatya nabhastalam  /  saMyamasyocitaM dezaM
jagAmAmalamAnasaH  // 212 //  paryaGkAsanayogena yasmAttasyAM sa sanmuniH  /
tasthau jagAma paryaGkaguhAkhyAM sA tato bhuvi  // 213 //  itthaM nijabhavAn
zrutvAbhavad vismitamAnasA  /  nindantI duSkRtaM karma pUrva yadadhamaM kRtam
// 214 //  apane mitrake sAtha rAtrike samaya jharokhese chipA khar3A thA so
yaha saba sunakara isase roSako prApta ho gayA aura usa roSake kAraNa hI usane
pahale ise duHkha upajAyA hai  // 199-200|| jaba vaha yuddhake lie gayA to
atyanta manohara mAnasarovarapara tthhraa| vahA~ virahase chaTapaTAtI huI
cakavIko dekhakara aMjanApara dayAlu ho gayA  // 201 //  usake hRdayameM jo dayA
utpanna huI thI vaha sakhIke samAna use zIghra hI samayapara isa sundarIke pAsa
le AyI aura vaha garbhAdhAna karAkara pitAkI AjJA pUrNa karaneke lie calA gayA
// 202 mahAdayAlu munirAja itanA kahakara vANIse amRta jharAte hueke samAna
aMjanAse phira kahane lage ki he beTI ! karmake prabhAvase hI tUne yaha duHkha
pAyA hai isalie phira kabhI aisA nindya kArya nahIM karanA  /  / 203-204 //  isa
pRthvItalapara jo-jo sukha utpanna hote haiM ve saba vizeSakara jinendra devakI
bhaktise hI utpanna hote haiM  // 205 /  /  isalie tu saMsArase pAra karanevAle
jinendra devakI bhakta ho, zaktike anusAra niyama grahaNa kara aura muniyoMkI
pUjA kara  // 206|| bhAgyase tU usa samaya saMyamazrI AryAke dvArA pradatta
bodhiko prApta huI thii| AryAne tujhe bodhi kyA dI thI mAno adhogatimeM jAtI huI
tujhe hAthakA sahArA dekara Upara khIMca liyA thA  // 207 //  yaha
mahAbhAgyazAlI garbha tere udarameM AyA hai so Age cala kara aneka uttamottama
kalyANoMkA pAtra hogA  // 208 //  he zobhane ta isa patrase parama vizratiko
prApta hogii| saba deva milakara bhI isakA parAkrama khaNDita nahIM kara sakeMge
// 209 //  thor3e hI dinoMmeM tumhArA patike sAtha samAgama hogaa| isalie he
zubhe ! cittako sukhI rakho aura pramAdarahita hoo  // 210 //  munirAjake aisA
kahanepara jo atyanta harSita ho rahI thIM tathA jinake netrakamala khila rahe
the aisI donoM sakhiyoMne munirAjako bAra-bAra praNAma kiyA  // 211 //
tadanantara nirmala hRdayake dhAraka munirAja una donoMke lie AzIrvAda dekara
AkAza-mAgaMse saMyamake yogya sthAnapara cale gaye ||212 /  /  ve uttama
munirAja usa guhAmeM paryakAsanase virAjamAna the| isalie Age calakara vaha guhA
pRthivImeM 'payaMka guhA' isa nAmako prApta ho gayI  /  / 213 /  /  isa prakAra
rAjA mahendrakI 1. ityuktA m.| 2. sa tvaM ma.  /  3. bhaktyA ma.  /  4. tvA ka.
/  5.nirloThite m.| 6. pramodarahitA b.|

Page #436 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 386  **386**  In the Padma Purana, Mahendra's daughter, Anjana,
remained in the cave, awaiting the time of her delivery, after the Muni's
assembly had purified her. (215)  Vasantmala, rich in knowledge and strength,
fulfilled her desires regarding food and drink. (216)  Then, the Sun, as if
unable to bear the sight of Anjana, separated from her beloved, desired to set,
out of great compassion. (217)  The Sun's rays, like those depicted in a
painting, became dim, as if they too were saddened by Anjana's sorrow. (218)
The Sun's orb, gathering the rays that were clinging to the peaks of mountains
and trees, suddenly descended, as if it too was overcome by Anjana's grief.
(219)  Then, the evening, red like the angry gaze of an approaching lion,
covered the entire sky in an instant. (220)  After that, as if urged by an
impending calamity, a line of darkness arose, like a Vetali emerging from the
netherworld. (221)  The birds, who had been making a commotion earlier, became
silent and perched on the branches of trees, as if terrified by the sight of the
line of darkness. (222)  The sounds of jackals, fierce like the thunder of a
great thunderbolt, began to echo, as if the approaching calamity had started
beating its drums. (223)  Then, a fearsome lion appeared, shaking its mane, red
with the blood of elephants, and bearing a crooked brow, like the line of a
finger on a death warrant. (224)  It emitted powerful, echoing roars, as if
tearing the entire sky into pieces, and it repeatedly thrust its tongue, as
agile as the flames of a conflagration, into the vast abyss of its mouth,
destroying countless beings. (225)  Anjana, hearing this account of her past
life, was astonished and repeatedly condemned the evil deeds she had committed
in her previous birth. (214)  Gautama Swami said to King Shrenik, "O King!
Anjana, purified by the assembly of the Munis, remained in that cave, awaiting
the time of her delivery." (215)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 386 padmapurANe mahendraduhitA tasyAM sUtikAlavyapekSayA  /  tasthau
magadharAjendrapUtAyAM munisaMgamAt  // 215 //  vasantamAlayA tasyA
vidyaablsmRdyaa| pAnAzanavidhizcakre manasA viSayIkRtaH  // 216 //  atha
priyavimuktAM tAM kAruNyeneva bhUyasA  /  asamartho
raviSTamastamaicchanniSevitum  // 217 //  taduHkhAdiva mandatvaM bhAskarasya
karA yayuH  /  citrakarmAptiAdityakaroskarakRtopamAH  // 218 //  zokAdiva
ravebimbaM sahasA pAtamAgatam  /  girivRkSAgrasaMsaktaM karajAlaM samAharan  //
219 //  athAgantukasiMhasya dRSTayaMva krodhtaamryaa| saMdhyayA pihita sarva
kSaNena nabhasastalam  // 22 //  tato bhAvyupasargeNa preriteva tvarAvatI  /
udiyAya tamolekhA vetAlIva rasAtalAt  // 221 //  kRtakolAhalAH pUrva dRSTvA
tAmiva bhItitaH  /  niHzabdA gahane tasthuvRkSAgreSu patatriNaH  // 222 //
prAvartanta zivArAvo mahAnirghAtabhISaNAH  /  vAditA upasargeNa prakaTAH paTahA
iva  // 223 //  atha dhUtebhakIlAlazoNakesarasaMcayaH  /  mRtyupatrAGgalicchAyAM
bhRkuTi kuTilAM dadhat  // 224 //  vimuJcanviSamacchedAnnAdAn sapratizabdakAn  /
veginaH sakalaM vyoma kurvANa iva khaNDazaH  // 225 //
pralayajvalanajvAlAvilAsAJcalayanmuhuH  /  mahAsyagahvare jihvAM prahAM
bhUrijanakSaye  // 226 //  putrI aMjanA apane bhavAntara suna Azcaryase cakita
ho gyii| usane pUrvabhavameM jo nindya kArya kiyA thA usakI vaha bAra-bAra nindA
karatI rahatI thI  // 214 //  gautama svAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he
rAjan ! munirAjake saMgamase jo atyanta pavitra ho cukI thI aisI usa guphAmeM
aMjanA prasavakAlakI pratIkSA karatI huI rahane lagI  /  / 215 //  vidyA-balase
samRddha vasantamAlA usakI icchAnusAra AhAra-pAnakI vidhi milAtI rahatI thI  //
216 /  /  athAnantara sUrya astAcalake sevanako icchA karane lagA arthAt asta
honeke sammukha huaa| so aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno atyadhika karuNAke kAraNa
bhartArase viyakta aMjanAko dekhane ke lie asamartha ho gayA ho  // 217 //
saryakI kiraNeM bhI citralikhita saryakI kiraNoM ke samAna mandapaneko prApta ho
gayI thIM so aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno aMjanAphA duHkha dekhakara hI manda
par3a gayI hoM  /  / 218 /  /  parvata aura vRkSoMke agrabhAgapara sthita
kiraNoMke samUhako sameTatA huA sUryakA bimba sahasA patanako prApta ho gayA so
aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno aMjanAke zokake kAraNa hI patanako prApta huA ho  /
/ 219 /  /  tadanantara Age AnevAle siMhakI kupita dRSTike samAna lAlavarNakI
sandhyAse samasta AkAza kSaNa-bhara meM vyApta ho gayA  // 220 //  tatpazcAt
bhAvI upasargase prerita hokara hI mAno zIghratA karanevAlI andhakArakI rekhA
utpanna ho gyii| vaha andhakArakI rekhA aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno pAtAlase
vetAlI hI nikala rahI ho  // 221 //  usa vanameM pakSI pahale to kolAhala kara
rahe the para unhoMne jaba andhakArakI rekhA dekhI to mAno usake bhayase hI
ni:zabda hokara ke agrabhAgapara baiTha rahe  // 222 /  /  mahAvajrapAtake
samAna bhayaMkara zRgAloMke zabda hone lage so aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno
AnevAle upasagaMne apane nagAr3e hI bajAnA zurU kara diyA ho  /  / 223 /  /
_athAnantara vahA~ kSaNa-bharameM eka aisA vikarAla siMha prakaTa huA jo
hAthiyoMke rudhirase lAla-lAla dikhanevAle jaTAoMke samUhako bAra-bAra hilA rahA
thA, mRtyuke dvArA bheje hue patrapara par3I aMgulIkI rekhAke samAna kuTila
bhauMhako dhAraNa kara rahA thaa| vIca-bIcameM pratidhvanise yukta vegazAlI
bhayaMkara zabda chor3a rahA thA aura usase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno samasta
AkAzake khaNDa-khaNDa hI kara rahA ho| jo pralayakAlIna agnikI jvAlAke samAna
caMcala evaM aneka prANiyoMkA kSaya karanemeM nipuNa jihvAko mukharUpI
mahAgartameM bAra-bAra calA rahA thaa| jo jIvako 1. kRtopamAt kha., ka., ma.  /
2. samAharat kha., b.| 3. AcchAditam : vihitaM m.| 4. zIghratopetA  /  5. zRgAlI
zabdAH  /  .

Page #437 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The lion was bearing sharp, pointed, dense, crooked, fierce teeth, which were as
sharp as Kusha grass and terrifying even to death. He was carrying a fierce,
red, blazing eye, like the sun at the time of destruction, which was engulfing
all directions. His tail was placed on his head, he was digging the earth with
his claws, his chest was as wide as the banks of Kailasa, and he was carrying a
thick hip-region. All creatures were looking at him with fear, wondering if he
was death itself, or a demon, or the end of time, or the king of the dead, or
the Kali Yuga, or destruction, or the destroyer of even Yama (the god of death),
or the sun, or fire.  The echoes of his roar filled the large caves, and the
mountains seemed to be crying out in fear, their cries deep and profound. The
creatures were struck in their ears by his thunderous roar, like a heavy hammer,
and they began to make various efforts. The lion, who was looking at the
inaccessible mountain in front of him with his eyes, and who was filled with
pride, yawned and showed great anger. The lion, whose body was trembling like
grass flowers, and whose eyes were red-yellow and restless like a gucchi,
entered the cave of the mountain.  The deer, whose mouths had dropped the grass
and tender leaves, and whose bodies had become stiff with fear, stood there as
they were. The flow of the elephants' rut stopped, their eyes were rolling,
their ears were erect, their minds were still, and their bodies were motionless.
The group of female animals, including the deer, stood with their young ones
inside the circle, trembling with fear. All their eyes were fixed on the leader
of their herd. The female monkey, whose body was trembling with fear of the
lion's roar, decided to give up her body and food, thinking, "If I survive this
calamity, I will eat and live, otherwise not."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptadarza parva jIvASa kuzAkArAMSTrAM tIkSNAgrasaMkaTAm  /  kuTilAM dhArayan
raudrAM mRtyorapi bhayaMkarAm  //  227  //  udyatpralayatIbrAMzumaNDalapratime
vahan  /  churayantI dizAM cakraM netre vinAsakAriNI  // 228 //
mastakanyastapucchAgro nakhakoTikSatakSitiH  /  aSTApadataTorasko jaghanaM
ghanamudvahan  //  229  //  mRtyurdaityaH kRtAnto. nu pretezo nu kaliH kSayaH  /
antakasyAntako nu syAdbhAskaro nu tanUnapAt  // 230 //  iti saMjanitAzaGkaM
jantubhirvIkSito'khilaiH  /  AvirbaMbhUva tadeze kesarI vikaTaH kSaNAt  // 231
//  tasya pratininAdena pUtodArakandarAH  /  mItA ivAtigambhIraM
rurudurdharaNIdharAH  //  232 //  mudgareNeva ghorega zabdenAsya tarasvinA  /
zrotrayostADitAzca kuriti ceSTAH zarIriNaH  // 233 //  lovane
mukulIkurvannabhidurge mahIbhRti  /  zArdUlo darpa nirmuktaH saMcukopa
savepathuH  // 234 //  zerapuSpasamAkArahRSTaromAJcasaMbhramaH  /
vaibhrataralaguJjAkSo viveza vivaraM gireH  //  235 //
sAraGgAmukhavibhraMsidUrvA komalapallavAH  /  yathApUrvakSayAstasthurbhaya
stambhitavigrahAH  //  236  //  saMbhrAntababhrunetrANAmutkarNAnAM vicetasAm  /
dAnaughA nizcalAGgAnAM mAtaGgAnAM vicicchiduH  // 237 //  maNDalasyAntare kRtvA
zAvakAn bhayavepitAn  /  tasthuH pazvaGganA saGghA 'yUthapanyastalocanAH  //
238 //  kesaridhvanivitrastA kampamAnazarIrikA  /  vapurAhArayostyAgaM cakre
sAlambamaJjanA  // 239 //  khIMcanevAlI kuzAke samAna tIkSNa, nukIlI, saghana,
kuTila, raudra aura mRtyuko bhI bhaya utpanna karanevAlI DAr3hako dhAraNa kara
rahA thA  /  jo udita hote hue pralayakAlIna sUrya-bimbake samAna lAla varNa
evaM dizAoMko vyApta karanevAle bhayaMkara netroMse yukta thaa| jisakI pU~chakA
agrabhAga mastakapara rakhA huA thA, jo apane nakhAgrase pRthvIko khoda rahA
thA, jisakA vakSaHsthala kailAsake taTa ke samAna caur3A thA, jo sthUla nitamba
- maNDalako dhAraNa kara rahA thA  /  aura jise saba prANI aisI AzaMkA karate
hue dekhate the ki kyA yaha sAkSAt mRtyu hai ? athavA daitya hai athavA kRtAnta
hai, athavA pretarAja hai, athavA kalikAla hai athavA pralaya hai ? athavA
antaka ( yamarAja ) kA bhI anta karanevAlA hai ? athavA sUrya hai ? athavA agni
hai ?  /  /  224 - 231 //  usakI garjanAkI pratidhvanise jinakI bar3I-bar3I
guphAe~ bhara gayI thIM aise parvata, aise jAna par3ate the mAno bhayabhIta ho
atyanta gambhIra rudana hI kara rahe hoM ||232 || usake mudgara ke samAna
bhayaMkara vegazAlI zabdase kAnoM meM tAr3ita hue prANI nAnA prakArakI ceSTAe~
karane lagate the ||233|| jo sAmane bar3e hue durgama pahAr3a para apane donoM
netra lagAye hue thA tathA atyanta ahaMkArase yukta thA aise usa siMhane
aMgar3AI lete hue bahuta hI kopa prakaTa kiyA || 234|| jisake zarIra meM tRNa-
puSpa ke samAna romAMca nikala rahe the tathA jisake netra gumacIke samAna lAla-
pIle evaM caMcala the aise siMhane parvatako guphAmeM praveza kiyA ||235|| use
dekha jinake mukhase dUrvA aura komala pallavoM ke grAsa nIce gira gaye the
tathA bhayase jinakA zarIra akar3a gayA thA aise hariNa jyoM-ke-tyoM khar3e raha
gaye || 236 || jinake pIle-pIle netra ghUma rahe the, kAna khar3e ho gaye the,
manakI gati banda ho gayI thI aura zarIra nizcala ho gayA thA aise hAthiyoM ke
madake pravAha ruka gaye || 237|| hariNI Adi pazu-striyoMke jo samUha the ve
bhayase kA~pate hue baccoM ko bereke bhItara kara khar3e ho gye| una sabake
netra apane jhuNDake mukhiyApara lage hue the || 238|| jo siMhakI garjanAse
bhayabhIta ho rahI thI tathA jisakA zarIra kAMpa rahA thA aisI aMjanAne 'yadi
upasargase jItI bacU~gI to zarIra aura AhAra grahaNa karU~gI anyathA nahIM' isa
387 1. kSati: ma  /  2. daityakRto'nusyAtpretaso'nu ( ? ) ma  /  3. itIrAM
janitA ma  /  4 rurudhuH ma.  /  5. zaratpuSpaM samAkAro ma.  /  6.
babhrustarala ma  /  7 dAnIghanizcalA ma  /  8 purukhagAsaMghA ma  /  9.
yUthavinyasta -ja  /

Page #438 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
388 In the Padma Purana, Vasantmala, unable to bear the grief, quickly flew into
the sky and circled around like a bird, her mind troubled. ||24|| Drawn by her
love and virtues, she repeatedly came close to Anjana, but due to intense fear,
she would again ascend to the sky. ||241|| Seeing them both terrified, with
their hearts shattered, the Gandharva who resided in that cave was filled with
compassion. ||242|| His wife, Ratna Chula, a virtuous woman, with a
compassionate heart and quick speech, addressed her husband, Mani Chula, the
Gandharva. ||243|| "Look, my dear! See, a woman is standing here, terrified by
the lion, and another woman, connected to her, is circling in the sky." ||244||
"Oh, my lord! Please be merciful to me and protect this extremely distressed
woman. This noble lady, born into a good family, has somehow come to this
difficult place." ||245|| Thus addressed, the Gandharva, transforming into the
form of a Sharabha, created as if from all the terrifying substances of the
three worlds, ||246|| stood before the lion, his body covered with a multitude
of peaks, only three hands away from Anjana. ||247|| Then, a terrible battle
ensued between the lion and the Sharabha, filled with thunderous roars, as if
mocking the groups of lightning-illuminated rain clouds. ||248|| Even though
such a time had arrived, a time that instilled fear even in brave men, Anjana
remained fearless, meditating on the Jina in her heart. ||249|| Thus,
Vasantmala, circling in the sky, filled with great sorrow, lamented like a
cuckoo. ||250|| "Alas, princess! You were first afflicted by misfortune, and
then, when you somehow escaped that misfortune with great difficulty, you were
abandoned by all your relatives. ||251|| You have reached this terrible forest,
and somehow you have come to this cave. You have been comforted by the Muni, who
has informed you of the possibility of finding your beloved." ||252||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 388 padmapurANe utpatya tvaritA vyomni sakhyasyAstadgrahAkSamA  /  babhrAma
pakSiNIvAlaM maNDalenAkulAtmikA  // 24 //  bhUyaH samIpamAkAzameti premaguNAhRtA
/  punazca tIvravitrAsAt prayAti nabhasaH ziraH  // 241 //  atha te sabhaye
dRSTvA vizIrNahRdaye zubhe  /  gandharvastadguhAvAsI kAruNyAzleSamIyivAn  // 242
//  tamUce maNicUlAkhyaM ratnacUlA nijAGganA  /  kAruNyenoruNA sAdhvI coditA
dutabhASiNI  // 243 //  pazya pazya priya ! vastAM tAM mRgendrAdiha striyam  /
etatprati samAdiSTAM dvitIyAM ca namo'GgaNe  // 24 //  kuru nAtha prasAdaM me
rakSatAmativipalAm  /  abhijAtAM varAM nArI kuto'pi viSamazritAm  // 245 //
evamukto'tha gandharvo vikRtya zarabhAkRtim  /
trailokyamISaNadravyasaMbhAreNeva nirmitAm  // 246 //
hastatritayamAtrasthAmaJjanAmasamAgatam  /  siMha
puro'karoddehacchannasAnukadambakaH  // 247 //  tayostanAbhavadbhImaH saMghaTTo
ravasaMkulaH  /  vidyududyotitaprAvRdhanasaGgha hasanniva  // 248 //
evaMvidhe'pi saMprApte kAle vIrabhayAvahe  /  aJjanAsundarI cakre hRdaye
jinapuGgavAn  // 249 //  itthaM vasantamAlA ca maNDalena kRtbhrmaa| vilalApa
mahAduHkhA kurIva nabhastale  // 250 //  hA bhartRdArike pUrva daurbhAgyamasi
saMgatA  /  tasminnapi gate kRcchAda varjitA sarvabandhubhiH  // 25 //
saMprAptAsi vanaM bhImaM kathamapyAgatAM guhAm  /
muninAzvAsitAsannapriyAvAptinivedanAt  // 252 //  Alambanake sAtha zarIra aura
AhArakA tyAga kara diyA  // 239|| isakI sakhI vasantamAlA ise uThAnemeM samartha
nahIM thI isalie zIghratAse AkAzameM ur3akara pakSiNIkI taraha vyAkula hotI huI
maNDalAkAra bhramaNa kara rahI thI-cakkara lagA rahI thI  // 240 /  /  vaha
aMjanAke prema aura guNoMse AkarSita hokara bAra-bAra usake pAsa AtI thI para
tIvra bhayake kAraNa punaH AkAzameM Upara calI jAtI thI  // 241 /  /
athAnantara jinake hRdaya vizIrNa ho rahe the aisI una donoM striyoMko
bhayabhIta dekha usa guphAmeM rahanevAlA gandharva dayAke AliMganako prApta huA
arthAt use dayA utpanna huI  /  / 242 /  /  usa gandharvakI strIkA nAma
ratnacUlA thaa| so bahata bhArI dayAse prerita evaM zIghratAse bhASaNa
karanevAlI usa sAdhvI nacUlAna apane pati maNicUla nAmA gandharvase kahA  // 243
//  ki he priya ! dekho dekho, siMhase bhayabhIta huI eka strI yahIM sthita hai
aura usase sambandha rakhanevAlI dUsarI strI AkAzAMgaNameM cakkara kATa rahI hai
/  / 244 //  he nAtha ! mere Upara prasAda karo aura isa atyanta vihvala strIkI
rakSA kro| yaha kulavatI uttama nArI kisI kAraNa isa viSama sthAna meM A par3I
hai  // 245 /  isa prakAra kahanepara gandhavaM devane vikriyAse aSTApadakA rUpa
bnaayaa| usakA vaha rUpa aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno tInoM lokoMmeM jitane
bhayaMkara padArtha haiM una sabako ikaTThA kara hI usakI racanA kI gayI ho  /
/ 246|| aMjanA aura siMhake bIcameM sirpha tIna hAthakA antara raha gayA thA ki
itane meM hI apane zarIrase zikharoMke samUhako AcchAdita karanevAlA aSTApada
siMhake sAmane Akara khar3A ho gayA  /  / 247|| tadanantara vahA~ siMha aura
aSTApadake bIca bhayaMkara yuddha huaa| unakA vaha yuddha bhayaMkara garjanAse
yukta thA aura bijalIse prakAzita varSAkAlika meghoMke samUhakI mAno ha~sI hI
ur3A rahA thA  // 248|| isa prakAra vahA~ zUravIra manuSyoMko bhI bhaya utpanna
karanevAlA samaya yadyapi AyA thA to bhI aMjanA nirbhaya rahakara hRdayameM
jinendra devakA dhyAna karatI rahI  /  / 249 //  AkAzameM maNDalAkAra bhramaNa
karatI tathA mahAduHkhase bharI vasantamAlA kurarIkI taraha isa prakAra vilApa
kara rahI thI  // 250 /  /  hAya rAjaputri ! tuma pahale daurbhAgyako prApta
rahI phira jisa kisI taraha kaSTase daurbhAgya samApta huA to samasta
bandhujanoMne tumhArA tyAga kara diyA  /  / 251 //  bhayaMkara 1. vAlamaNDalena
m.| 2. coditAdbhutabhASiNI ba.  /  3. etadbhItisamA- m.| 4. ApadgatAm  /
viSamAzritAm ma.  /  5. vikriyAM kRtvA  /  6. -Naiva nirmitam m.| 7. gatAm m.|
8. siMharipurakaroddehaM ma.  /  9. kuTumbakam k.| ,

Page #439 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The seventeenth chapter  Now, O Devi, you will go to the mouth of the lion,
which is terrible with its fangs and the cause of the destruction of the proud
elephants. || 253 || Alas, O Devi, your time has passed, due to the will of the
wicked fate and because of my foolish mind. || 254 || O Lord, Pavana-jaya,
protect your wife. O Mahendra, why don't you protect your daughter? || 255 || O
wicked Ketumati, what have you done to her in vain? O compassionate one, why
don't you protect your daughter? || 256 || This princess is dying in the
desolate forest. O forest deities, please protect her. || 257 || What else could
be the meaning of the words of that Muni, who knows the true nature of the
world, and who has given a good omen? || 258 || Thus, weeping and swinging like
a swing, Vasantmala was quickly going and coming near her mistress, that is, she
was coming near with courage and then retreating due to fear. || 259 ||   Then,
struck by the blow of the Sharabha, the lion was destroyed, and the Sharabha,
having accomplished his purpose, disappeared into his own abode. || 260 || Then,
seeing the end of the battle between the two, like a dream, Vasantmala, drenched
in sweat, quickly went back to the cave. || 261 || Inside the cave, Vasantmala,
searching for Anjana with her hands as soft as leaves, was saying, "Where are
you? Where are you?" At that time, her fear had not completely subsided, so her
voice was choked. || 262 || Vasantmala knew by the touch of her hand that she
was lying completely still. Therefore, her mind was filled with anxiety,
wondering if she was alive or not. || 263 || Placing her hand on her chest, she
kept urging her, saying, "O Devi! Devi! Are you alive?" || 264 || Then, when
Anjana regained consciousness from the touch of Vasantmala's hand, and somewhat
understood that it was her friend, she said in a faint voice, "I am here." ||
265 ||   After a long time, she understood, and then the two friends...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptadazaM pavaM sAsvaM kesariNo vaktramadhunA devi yAsyasi  /
daMSTrAkarAlamudvRttadviradakSaya kAraNam  //  253  //  hA devi te gataH kAlo
durjanasya vidhervazAt  /  uparyupariduHkhena mama durmatikAraNAt  // 254 //
paritrAyasva hA nAtha ! pavanaJjaya ! gehinIm  /  hA mahendra ! kathaM nemAM
tanayAM parirakSasi  //  255  //  hAkiM ketumati krUre mu~dhAsyAM tvayakA kRtam
| hA karuNe manovege tanayAM kiM na rakSasi  //  256 //  maraNaM rAjaputrIyaM
prApnoti vijane vane  /  kuruta trANametasyAH kRpayA vanadevatAH  //  257  //
munerapi tathA tasya lokatattvAvabodhinaH  /  zubhArthaM sUcanaM vAkyaM
saMbhavedanyathA kimu  //  258  //  Akrandamiti kurvANA dolArUDheva vihvalA  /
cakre vasantamAlAzu svAminyantaM gatAgatam  // 259 //  atha bhaGgaM gataH siMhaH
zarabheNa talAhataH  /  antardadhe kRtArthazca zarabho nilaye nije  //  260  //
tataH svopamaM dRSTvA virataM yuddhametayoH  /  dutaM vasantamAlAgAt svedigAtrA
punarguhAm  // 261 //  antaHpallavakAntAbhyAM hastAbhyAM kRtamArgaNA  /  kvAsi
kkAsIti bhIzeSAtkRtagadgada nisvanA  // 262 //  jJAtvA vasantamAlA tAM
sparzenAtyantanizcalAm  /  tAM pratiprANanAzaGkAsamA kulitamAnasA  //  263 //
dhiya se devi devIti cAlayantI punaH punaH  /  jagAda
svAminIvakSovinyastakarapallavA  //  264 //  tato'sau taskarasparzAdAgata
spaSTacetanA  /  cirAtsakhIyamasmIti jagAdAspaSTayA girA  //  265 //  tataste
saMgamAtprApya kiyatImapi nirRtim  /  punarjanmeva menAte labdhasaMbhASaNodyate
//  266 //  389 meM Akara kisI taraha isa guphA meM AyI aura 'nikaTa kAlameM hI
patikA samAgama prApta hogA' yaha kahakara munirAjane AzvAsana diyA para aba he
devi ! tuma siMhake usa mukhameM jA rahI ho jo r3hoMse bhayaMkara hai tathA
uddaNDa hAthiyoMke kSayakA kAraNa hai || 252 - 253  //  hAya devi ! duSTa
vidhAtAke vaza aura merI durbuddhi ke kAraNa tumhArA samaya uttarottara duHkhase
hI vyatIta huA || 254 || hA nAtha pavanaMjaya ! apanI gRhiNIkI rakSA karo  /  hA
mahendra ! tuma isa putrIkI rakSA kyoM nahIM karate ho ? || 255  //  hA duSTA
ketumati ! tUne vyarthaM hI isake viSaya meM kyA anarthaM kiyA ? hA dayAvatI
manovege ! apanI putrIkI rakSA kyoM nahIM kara rahI ho ? || 256 || yaha
rAjaputrI nirjana vanameM maraNako prApta ho rahI hai  /  he vanadevatAo ! kRpA
kara isakI rakSA karo || 257 || lokake yathArtha svarUpako jAnanevAle una munike
zubhasUcaka vacana bhI kyA anyathA ho jAyeMge ? || 258 || isa prakAra rudana
karatI tathA jhUlApara car3hI huI ke samAna vihvala vasantamAlA jaldI-jaldI
svAminI ke samIpagamana tathA Agamana kara rahI thI arthAt sAhasa kara samIpa
AtI thI phira bhayakI tIvratA se dUra haTa jAtI thI || 259 || athAnantara
aSTApadakI capeTa se Ahata hokara siMha naSTa ho gayA aura kRtakRtya hokara
aSTApada apane sthAna meM antarhita ho gayA || 260  //  tadanantara svapna ke
samAna donoM kA yuddha samApta huA dekha pasInAse latha-patha vasantamAlA zIghra
hI guhAmeM AyI || 261  //  guhAke bhItara pallavake samAna komala hAthoMse
aMjanAko khojatI huI vasantamAlA kaha rahI thI ki kahA~ ho ? kahA~ ho ? usa
samaya bhI usakA pUrA bhaya naSTa nahIM huA thA isalie AvAja gadgada nikala rahI
thI || 262  //  vasantamAlAne hAtha ke spazaMse jAnA ki yaha bilakula nizcala
par3I huI hai  /  isalie usakA mana 'yaha jIvita hai yA nahIM' isa AzaMkAse
vyAkula ho uThA || 263  //  vaha usake vakSaHsthalapara hAtha rakhakara bAra-
bAra ukasAtI huI kaha rahI thI ki he devi ! devi ! jindA ho ? || 264  //
tadanantara vasantamAlA ke hAtha ke sparzase jaba aMjanAko cetanA AyI aura kucha
- ki yaha sakhI hai taba aspaSTa vANImeM usane kahA ki 'maiM hU~' || 265  //  1.
kAriNam  /  2. durgatikAraNAt ma.  /  3. mudvAsyA tvayi kA kRtA ma  /  4. mAlA
tu ma  /  5. gataH bhaGga sa., kha. dera bAda usane samajha liyA tatpazcAt ve
donoM sakhiyA~

Page #440 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
390 In the Padma Purana, the remaining fear made the women, who were captivated
by the charms of the Chabi, feel as if they had been born anew. They stayed
awake all night, discussing the cruelty of their relatives. ||267|| Then, just
as Garuda destroys a serpent, the Gandharva destroyed the lion, and filled with
joy, he drank the highly potent liquor. ||268|| The learned woman, whose eyes
were sparkling, placed her arm on the Gandharva's thigh and said to him, ||269||
"O Lord! Grant me this opportunity, for I wish to sing now, as it is said that
after drinking liquor, one should sing a beautiful song." ||270|| Hearing this
sweet, divine, and heart-stealing music, the two women would also forget their
remaining fear. ||271|| Then, when midnight arrived and no other sound could be
heard, the Gandharva tuned his ear-captivating Veena and began to play. ||272||
And his wife, Ratnachula, with her eyes fixed on her husband's face, played the
Manjira, singing softly. Her song was capable of causing even the sages to feel
disturbed. ||273|| At that time, they were using four types of musical
instruments: the Ghan, Vady, Sushir, and Tat. The other members of the group
were keeping time with their hands, in a dignified manner. ||274|| The skilled
Dev, playing the Tabla, was concentrating on producing a deep sound, while the
skilled Dev, playing the flute, was moving his eyebrows gracefully. ||275|| The
Yaksha, who possessed a beautiful aura, was playing a Veena, which was as
radiant as coral and adorned with beautiful metaphors, using a Tambura. The
Gandharva, who understood the subtleties of the notes, was playing the seven
notes: Madhyam, Rishabh, Gandhar, Shadja, Panchama, Dhaivat, and Nishad, without
missing a beat. ||276-277|| While singing, the Gandharva used the three types of
rhythms: Druta, Madhy, and Vilambita, in their proper places, and he also used
twenty-one Murcchaanas, which made his eyes dance. ||278|| He sang like the
singers of the Devas, who are known for their "Ha-Ha-Hu-Hu" sounds. ||279||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 390 padmapurANe bhayazeSeNa cAbhIlAM mugdhe tAM jajJaturnizAm  /  samAsamAM
kRtAzeSabandhunaSThuyesaMkathe  // 267 //  tato vidhvasya nAgAriM nAgAririva
pannagam  /  pramodavAnasau madyaM pItavAn sumahAguNam  // 26 //
gandharvakAntayAvAci gandharvo labdhavarNayA  /  tadUrau bAhumAdhAya
tarattArakanetrayA  // 269 //  sthAnakaM yaccha me nAtha 'jigAsAmyadhunocitam  /
upadezo hi gantavyaM kAdambaryAmanuttamam  // 27 //  zeSaM sAdhvasamete ca
vanite parimuJcataH  /  zrutvA nau madhuraM gItaM devIyaM hRdayaMgamam  // 271
//  ardharAtre tatastasminnanyazabdavivarjite  /  saMskRtyAvIvadadvINAM
gandharvaH zrotrahAriNIm  // 272 //  kAMsike vAdayantI ca priyavaktrAhitekSaNA
/  ratnacUlA jagau mandaM munikSomaNakAraNam  // 273 //  tayorghanaM kRtaM
vAdyaM suSiraM ca kRtaM tatam  /  parivargeNa gambhIrakaratalakramocitam  // 274
//  pANidhairekatAnene mandradhvanisamanvitam  /  tathA vaiNavikairvAda
pravINebhrU vilAsimiH  // 275 //  pravINAbhaH pravAlAmAM vINAM cArUpamAnikAm  /
koNenAtADayadyakSo gandharvaH kAkalIbudhaH  // 276 //
madhyamarSabhagAndhAraSaDjapaJcamadhaivatAn  /  niSAdasaptamAMzcakre sa
svarAnkramamatyajan  // 277 //  bheje vRttIyathAsthAnaM drutamadhyavilambitAH  /
ekaviMzatisaMkhyAzca mUrcchanA nartitekSaNAH  // 278 //  hAhAhahasamAnaM sa
gAnaM cakre'thavAdhikam  /  prAyo gandharvadevAnAM prasiddhimidamAgatam  // 279
//  paraspara milakara anirvacanIya sukhako prApta huI aura avasarake anusAra
vArtAlApa karanemeM udyata ho aisA samajhane lagIM mAno hama logoMkA dUsarA hI
janma huA hai  /  / 266 //  bhaya zeSa rahanese una bholIbhAlI striyoMne usa
bhayAvanI rAtriko varSake barAbara bhArI smjhaa| ve sArI rAta jAgakara samasta
bandhujanoMkI niSThuratAko carcA karatI rahIM  // 267 /  /  tadanantara jisa
prakAra garur3a sAMpako naSTa kara detA hai usI prakAra gandharva siMhako naSTa
kara bar3A harSita huA aura harSita hokara usane mahAguNakArI madyakA pAna kiyA
// 268 //  jisake netra caMcala ho rahe the aisI gandharvako viduSI strIne usakI
jA~ghapara apanI bhujA rakha gandharvase kahA ki  // 269 /  /  he nAtha ! mujhe
avasara dIjie maiM isa samaya kucha gAnA cAhatI hU~ kyoMki madyapAnake anantara
uttama gAnA gAnA cAhie aisA upadeza hai  // 270 /  /  sAtha hI hama donoMkA
madhura divya evaM hRdayahArI saMgIta sunakara ye donoM striyA~ avaziSTa bhayako
bhI chor3a deMgI  // 271 /  /  tadanantara jaba ardharAtri ho gayI aura kisI
dUsarekA zabda bhI sunAI nahIM par3ane lagA taba gandharvane kAnoMko haranevAlI
vINA ThIka kara bajAnA zurU kiyA  // 272 //  aura usakI strI ratnacalA patike
mukhapara netra dhAraNa kara maMjIrA bajAtI huI dhIre-dhIre gAne lgii| usakA
vaha gAnA muniyoMko bhI kSobha utpanna karane kA kAraNa thA  // 273 /  /  usa
samaya una donoMke bIca ghana, vAdya, suSira aura tata ina cAroM prakArake
bAjoMkA prayoga cala rahA thA aura parijanake anya loga gambhIra hAthoMse
kramAnusAra yogya tAla de rahe the  // 274 //  tabalA bajAnemeM nipuNa deva
ekacitta hokara gambhIra dhvanike sAtha tabalA bajA rahe the to bA~surI bajAne
meM catura deva bhauMha calAte hue acchI taraha bA~surI bajA rahe the  /  / 275
/  /  uttama AbhAko dhAraNa karanevAlA yakSa pravAlake samAna kAntivAlI tathA
sundara upamAse yukta vINAko tamUrese bajA rahA thaa| to svaroMkI sUkSmatAko
jAnanevAlA gandharva, kramako nahIM chor3atA huA, madhyama, RSabha, gAndhAra,
SaDja, paMcama, dhaivata aura niSAda ina sAta svaroMko nikAla rahA thA  /  /
276-277|| gAte samaya vaha gandharva drutA, madhyA aura vilambitA ina tIna
vRttiyoMkA yathAsthAna prayoga karatA thA aura jinase netra nAca uThate haiM,
aisI ikkIsa mUrcchanAoM kA bhI yathAvasara upayoga karatA thA  // 278|| vaha
devoMke gavaiyA jo hAhA-hUhU haiM unake samAna 1. siMham  /  2. garuDa iva  /
3. sadyaH prItavAn sumahAguNam  /  4. -mAdAya m.| 5. svanakaM ma.  /  6.
jijJAsAmya ma.  /  7. upadaMzA ba., j.| upadaMzo kha.  /  8. vilAsinaH ma.  /

Page #441 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Saptadarsha Parva  **Verse 280:** The seventy-five sounds of the song were
composed of beautiful words connected to the qualities of the Jina.  **Verse
281:** (In Vidyutmala Vrutta) With devotion, I bow to the Arhant, the Lord of
Lords, who is worshipped by gods and demigods with flowers, offerings, and
various fragrances.  **Verse 282:** (In Arya Giti Chhandas) With utmost
devotion, I always bow to the one who is pure, the epitome of excellence in the
three worlds, the Muni Suvrata, whose feet are like the crown of the Indra, and
whose nails are like shining gems.  **Verse 283:** (In Anushtup) Then,
Vasantmala, whose mind was filled with wonder, praised that unprecedented and
extremely beautiful music.  **Verse 284:** Oh, what a song! What a song! Who has
sung this enchanting melody? This sweet-voiced singer has, as it were, drenched
my heart.  **Verse 285:** She said to her mistress, "Oh, Goddess! This is a god
who has protected us by driving away the lion."  **Verse 286:** I think this
melodious song, which is filled with the sweet sound of a woman's voice and all
the elements of music, was sung for us.  **Verse 287:** Oh, Goddess! Oh,
beautiful one! You, who possess excellent character, are not the object of
anyone's compassion? Even in the great forest, there are friends for the noble
ones.  **Verse 288:** With the destruction of this obstacle, it is certain that
you will be reunited with your husband. Or, does the Muni say otherwise?
**Verse 289:** Therefore, having taken refuge in this virtuous god, we should,
in this cave, which is purified by the Muni's seat, install the image of Muni
Suvrata and worship him with fragrant flowers for our happiness.  **Verse 290:**
Let us focus our minds on the happiness of giving birth to this child,
forgetting the pain of separation and the passing of time.  **Verse 291:**
(Verse 279 continued) Or, he was singing a song even more beautiful than that,
and this song is known among the Gandharva gods.  **Verse 291:** (Verse 280
continued) He was singing in seventy-five sounds, and his entire song was
composed of beautiful words connected to the qualities of the Jina.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptadarza parva svanAnyekonapaJcAzatsaMjegau pariniSTitam  /  jinendra
guNasaMbaddhe vaMcanairlalitAkSaraiH  //  280  //  vidyunmAlAvRttam
`devAdevairbhaktiprahvaiH puSpairaghairnAnAgandhaiH  /  arcAmuccainItaM vanyaM
devaM bhaktyA svAmarhantam  //  281  //  AryAgIticchandaH
tribhuvanakuzalamatizaya pUtaM [ nityaM ] namAmi bhaktyA parayA  /
munisuvratacaraNayugaM surapati mukuTapravRttana khamaNikiraNam  //  282  //
anuSTup tato vasantamAlA tadgeyamatyantazobhanam  /  prazazaMsAzrutapUrvaM
vismayavyAptamAnasA  // 283 //  aho gItamaho gItaM kenApyetanmanoharam  /
ArdrAkRtamivAnena hRdayaM me sudhAmucA  //  284  //  svAminIM ca jagAdaivaM devi
ko'pyanukampakaH  /  devo'yaM yena nau rakSA kRtA kesarinodanAt  //  285 //
manye'smadvRttaye'nena gotametacchratipriyam  /  zrutAbalAkaladhvAnamantare
sakalAGgakam  //  286 //  devi zIlavatI kasya nAnukampyAsi zobhane  /
mahAraNye'pi bhavyAnAM bhavanti suhRdo janAH  // 287 //  upasargasya
vidhvaMsAdetasmAtte sunizcitaH  /  bhavitA priyasaMparkaH kiM vA vaktyanyathA
muniH  //  288  //  tasmAtsAdhumimaM devaM samAzritya kRtocitam  /
muniparyaGkapUtAyAM guhAyAmatra' saMkSayAt  //  289  //  munisuvratanAthasya
vinyasya pratiyAtanAm  /  arcayantyau sukhaprAptyai svAmodaiH kusumairalam  //
290 //  sukhaprasUtimetasya garbhasyAdhyAyacetasi  /  vismRtya vairahaM duHkhaM
samayaM kiMcidAsvahai  // 291  //  391 athavA unase bhI adhika uttama gAna gA
rahA thA aura prAya:kara gandharva devoMmeM yahI gAna prasiddhako prApta hai
||279|| vaha unacAsa dhvaniyoMmeM gA rahA thA tathA usakA vaha samasta gAna
jinendra bhagavAn ke guNoMse sambandha rakhanevAle manohara akSaroMse yukta
vacanAvalIse nirmita thA  //  280  //  vaha gA rahA thA ki bhakti namrIbhUta
sura-asura puSpa, argha tathA nAnA prakArakI gandhase jinakI uttama pUjA karate
haiM aise devAdhideva vandanIya arahanta bhagavAnko maiM bhaktipUrvaka namaskAra
karatA hU~ ||281  //  | usane yaha bhI gAyA ki maiM zrI munisuvrata bhagavAn ke
usa caraNa yugalako utkaTa bhaktise namaskAra karatA hU~ jo tribhuvanakI kuzala
karanevAlA hai, atyanta pavitra hai aura indrake mukuTakA sambandha pAkara
jisake nakharUpI maNiyoMse kiraNeM phUTa par3atI haiM  //  282  //  tadanantara
jisakA mana AzcaryaM se vyApta thA aisI vasantamAlAne usa azrutapUrvaM tathA
atyanta sundara saMgItakI bahuta prazaMsA kI || 283 || vaha kahane lagI ki vAha
! vAha ! yaha manohara gAna kisane gAyA hai  /  isa amRtavarSI gavaiyAne to merA
hRdaya mAno gIlA hI kara diyA hai || 284  //  usane svAminIse kahA ki he devi !
yaha koI deva hai jisane siMha bhagAkara hama logoMkI rakSA kI hai  /  / 285 /
/  jisake bIcameM strIkA madhura zabda sunAI detA thA tathA jo saMgItake samasta
aMgoM se sahita thA aisA yaha karNapriya gAnA, jAna par3atA hai isane hama logoM
ke lie hI gAyA hai || 286|| he devi ! he zobhane ! uttama zIlako dhAraNa
karanevAlI ! tU kisakI dayA- pAtra nahIM hai ? bhavya jIvoMko mahAaTavI meM bhI
mitra mila jAte haiM || 287 || isa upasargake dUra honese yaha sunizcita hai ki
tumhArA pati ke sAtha samAgama hogA  /  athavA kyA muni bhI anyathA kahate haiM
? ||288 || isalie isa uttama devakA yathocita Azraya lekara munirAjako padmAsana
se pavitra isa guphA meM zrI munisuvrata bhagavAnkI pratimA virAjamAna kara
sukha prApti ke lie atyanta sugandhita phUloMse usakI pUjA karatI huI hama donoM
kucha samaya taka yahIM raheM  /  isa garbhaMkI sukhase prasUti ho jAye cittameM
isI bAtakA dhyAna rakheM 1. sa jagau ma  /  2. surAsuraiH  /  3 cchrutapriyam
ma.  /  4. kRtvA kalakaladhvAnamantare ma  /  zrutvA balAbaba.  /  5.
-maghasaMkSayAt ma.  /  6. suSThu Amodo yeSAM taiH  /  svamodaiH ma.  /

Page #442 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Padma Purana says, "Having attained supreme joy by meeting you, the mountain
is laughing as if with the swift streams. (292) The trees, bowed down by the
weight of their fruits, with their soft leaves swaying, and laughing with their
flowers, have attained joy. (293) The forest plains of this mountain, with the
sweet sounds of peacocks, mynas, parrots, and cuckoos, seem to be engaged in
conversation. (294) In this mountain, caves adorned with the shadows of various
metals, with groups of trees as their garments, and perfumed with the fragrance
of flowers, are shining like women. (295) In the ponds, lotus flowers, worthy of
being offered to the Jinas, are blooming, resembling your face. (296) O Vamini,
be patient, do not be overcome by anxiety. The gods here will bring you all
kinds of good fortune. (297) Now, at the beginning of the day, the birds are
chirping, as if they are making a joyful noise, knowing your healthy body. (298)
These trees, standing on the tips of their branches, and moved by the gentle
breeze, are releasing cool drops of dew, as if they are shedding tears of joy.
(299) To inform you of this, first, like a messenger, the red-hued evening has
been sent, and now, behind her, the sun is rising. (300) Hearing this, Anjana
replied, "O friend, all of you are my relatives. With you here, this forest is
like a city to me. (301) The person who serves someone in times of distress, in
ordinary times, and in times of celebration, is their true friend, while the one
who brings sorrow is an enemy, even if they are a relative. (302) Saying this,
they both placed the image of the Devadhideva Muni Suvrata Nath in the cave and
continued to worship him. Their food was provided by the power of knowledge.
(303) The Gandharva, filled with compassion, protected these two women from all
sides, making music every day in devotion to the Jina. (304)  1. Do not be
anxious. 2. What is the use of lamenting? 3. Food provided by the power of
knowledge.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe tvatsaMgarma samAsAdya pramodaM paramAgataH  /  nairsaraiH
zIkaraireSa hasatIva mahIdharaH  // 292 //  phalabhAravinamrAmA
lasakomalapallavAH  /  puSpahAsakRto vRkSA ime toSamupAgatAH  // 293 //
mayUrasArikAkIrakokilAdikalasvanaiH  /  kRtajalpA ivaitasya vanAbhomA mahIbhRtaH
// 29 //  nAnAdhAtukRtacchAyAstarasaMghAtavAsasaH  /  asmin guhA virAjante
kusumAmodavAsitAH  // 295 //  jinapUjanayogyAni paGkajAni sarassu hi  /
vidyante tava vaktrasya dhArayanti samAnatAm  // 296 //  vidhatsva timaveze mAma
('zcintAvazAmikA  /  kalyANamatra te sarva janayiSyanti devatAH  // 297 //
adhunA dinavaktre te vijJAyevAnaghaM vapuH  /  kolAhalakRto jAtAH pramodena
patastriNaH  // 298 //  palAzAgrasthitAnete vRkSA mandAnile ritAn  /
muJcantyAnandavAppAbhAnavazyAyakaNAn jaDAn  // 299 //  saMpreSya prathamaM
saMdhyAM datImiva sarAgikAm  /  udantaM te parijJAtumeSa bhAnuH samudgataH  //
30 //  evamukkAJjanAvocatsakhi me sarvabAndhavAH  /  tvameva tvayi satyAM ca
mamedaM vipinaM puram  // 301 //  ApanmadhyotsavAvasthAH sevate yasya yo janaH
/  sa tasya bAndhavo bandhurapi zatrurasaukhyadaH  // 302 //  ityuktvA
devadevasya vinyasya pratiyAtanAm  /  pUjayantyau sthite tatra te
vidyAkRtavartane  // 303 //  gandharvo'pyanayozcakre sarvataH parirakSaNam  /
AtodyaM pratyahaM kurvan kAruNyAjinamaktitaH  // 30 //  aura viraha-sambandhI
saba duHkha bhUla jAveM  // 289-291 /  /  tumhArA samAgama pAkara parama harSako
prApta huaa| yaha parvata jharanoMke jala-kaNoMke bahAne mAno ha~sa hI rahA hai
/  / 292 /  /  jinake agrabhAga phaloMke bhArase jhuka rahe haiM, jinake komala
pallava lahalahA rahe haiM aura jo puSpoMke bahAne ha~sI prakaTa kara rahe haiM
aise ye vRkSa tumhAre samAgamase hI mAno parama santoSako prApta ho rahe haiM  /
/ 293 /  /  isa parvatake jaMgalI maidAna mora, mainA, totA tathA koyala Adiko
madhura dhvanise aise jAna par3ate haiM mAno vArtAlApa hI kara rahe hoM  // 294
/  /  jinameM gerU Adi nAnA dhAtuoMkI kAnti chAyI huI hai, jinapara vRkSoMke
samUha vastrake samAna AvaraNa kiye hue haiM aura jo phUloMkI sugandhise
suvAsita haiM aisI isa parvatakI guphAe~ striyoMke samAna suzobhita ho rahI haiM
/  / 295 //  tAlAboMmeM jinendra devakI pUjA karaneke yogya jo kamala phUla rahe
haiM ve tumhAre mukhakI samAnatA dhAraNa karate haiM  // 296|| he vAmini ! yahA~
dhairya dhAraNa karo, cintAkI vazIbhUta mata hoo| yahA~ devatA tumhArA saba
prakArakA kalyANa kareMge  // 297|| aba dinake prArambhameM pakSI cahaka rahe
haiM so aisA jAna par3atA hai ki tumhAre zarIrakI svasthatA jAnakara harSase
mAno kolAhala hI kara rahe haiM  // 298 /  /  ye vRkSa pattoMke agrabhAgameM
sthita tathA manda-manda vAyuse prerita zItala osake kaNoMko chor3a rahe haiM so
aise jAna par3ate haiM mAno harSake A~sU hI chor3a rahe hoM  // 299 /  /
tumhArA vRttAnta jAnaneke lie sarvaprathama dUtIke samAna rAgavatI ( lAlimAse
yukta ) sandhyAko bhejakara aba pIchese yaha sUrya svayaM udita ho rahA hai  //
30 //  vasantamAlAke aisA kahanepara aMjanAne uttara diyA ki he sakhi ! mere
samasta bAndhava tumhI ho| tere rahate hue mujhe yaha vana nagarake samAna hai
// 301 //  jo manuSya jisake ApattikAla, madhyakAla aura utsavakAla arthAt sabhI
avasthAoMmeM sevA karatA hai vahI usakA bandhu hai tathA jo duHkha detA hai vaha
bandhu hokara bhI zatru hai  // 302 /  /  itanA kahakara ve donoM guphAmeM
devAdhideva muni suvratanAthakI pratimA virAjamAna kara usakI pUjA karatI huI
rahane lgiiN| vidyAke balase unake bhojanakI vyavasthA hotI thI  // 303 /  /
jinendra bhagavAnkI bhaktise pratidina saMgIta karatA huA gandharvadeva bhI
karuNA bhAvase ina donoM striyoMkI sabase rakSA karatA thA  // 304 //  1.
mAbhUcicantA ma,  /  2. kvibantaprayogaH  /  3. vidyAkRtabhojane  /

Page #443 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Seven-Year Festival  393  Then, Anjana said, "My dear friend, my womb is
restless, and I am filled with anxiety. What will happen?" ||305||  Vasantmala
replied, "O beautiful one, the time for your delivery has surely arrived. Sit
comfortably." ||306||  Then, Vasantmala prepared a bed with soft leaves, and
Anjana gave birth to a son, just as the east gives birth to the sun. ||307||  As
soon as the son was born, the cave was filled with his radiant energy,
dispelling all darkness and making it seem as if it were made of gold. ||308||
Although it was a time for joy, Anjana, remembering both her families, felt a
sense of sorrow and wept while holding her son. ||309||  She lamented, "O son,
how can I celebrate your birth in this dense forest, a place of fear for
humans?" ||310||  "If you had been born in your father's or grandfather's house,
there would have been a great celebration, one that would have driven people mad
with joy." ||311||  "Seeing your face, like the moon, adorned with beautiful
eyes, who in the world would not be filled with wonder?" ||312||  "What can I
do? I am unfortunate and deprived of everything. Fate has given me this state of
suffering." ||313||  "All beings desire long life above all else. Therefore, my
son, my blessing is that you live to the highest state." ||314||  "That I am
alive, even in this forest where death is imminent, is a testament to your good
karma." ||315||  Hearing this, her friend, who was always helpful, said, "O
goddess, you are filled with blessings because you have received such a son."
||316||  "He is seen to be full of auspicious signs, and his beautiful body
carries immense wealth." ||317||  "The vines, with their six-petaled flowers and
swaying, delicate leaves, are dancing as if celebrating your son's birth."
||318||  "Because of your son's extraordinary energy, all that is auspicious
will come to pass, and misfortune will be meaningless." ||319||  1. Gocharam M.
| 2. DainyaprÄptÄ M., J., K., Kh. | 3. Kim mayatasmin M. | 50

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptavarza parva 393 athAnyadAanAvocat kukSimeM calitaH sakhi  /  Akuleva ca
jAtAsmi kimidaM nu bhaviSyati  // 305 //  tato vasantamAloce samayaH zobhane
tava  /  avazyaM prasavasyaiSa prApto bhava sukhasthitA  // 306 //  tato
viracite talpe tayA komalapallavaiH  /  asUta sA sutaM cAva: prAcIvAzA virocanam
// 307 //  jAtena sA guhA tena tejasA gAtrajanmanA  /  hiraNmayIva saMjAta.
nitadhvAntasaMcayA  // 308 //  tatastamaGkamAropya pramodasyApi gocare  /
smRtomayakulA dainyaM prAptA praruditAmavat  // 39 //  vilalApa mahAvatsa !
kathaM te jananotsavaH  /  kriyatA maiyakaitasmiJjanasya gahane vane  // 310 //
sthAne'janiSyathAzcatvaM piturmAtAmahasya vA  /  amaviSyanmahAnando
jananonmattakArakaH  // 311 //  mukhacandramimaM dRSTvA tava cAruvilocanam  /
na mavedvismayaM kasya bhuvane zumacetasaH  // 312 //  karomi mandabhAgyA kiM
sarvavastuvivarjitA  /  vidhinAhaM dazAmetAM prApitA duHkhadAyinIm  // 313 //
jantunA sarvavastubhyo vAnchayate dIrghajIvitA  /  yasmAttvaM jIvitAttasmAnmama
vatsa parAM sthitim  // 31 //  IdRze patitAraNye sadyaH prANApanodini  /
yajIvAmi tavaivAyamanumAvaH sukarmaNaH  // 315 //  muJcantImiti tAM vAcaM
jagAdaivaM hitA sakhI  /  devi kalyANapUrNA svaM yA prAptAsIdRzaM sutam  // 316
//  cArulakSaNapUrNo'yaM dRzyate'sya zubhA tanuH  /  atyantamahatImRddhiM
vahatyeSA manoharA  // 317 //  SaTpadaiH kRtasaMgItAzcalatkomalapallavAH  /
tava putrotsavAdetA nRtyantIva latAGganAH  // 318 //  tavAsya cAnubhAvena
bAlasyAbAlatejasaH  /  bhaviSyasyakhilaM bhadraM monmanIbhUranarthakam  // 319
//  athAnantara kisI dina aMjanA bolI ki he sakhi ! merI kUkha caMcala ho rahI
hai aura maiM vyAkula-sI haI jA rahI hai, yaha kyA hogA? ||305 //  taba
vasantamAlAne kahA ki he zobhane! avazya hI tere prasavakA samaya A pahu~cA hai
isalie sukhase baiTha jAo  // 306 //  tadanantara vasantamAlAne komala
pallavoMse zayyA banAyI so usapara, jisa prakAra pUrva dizA sUryako utpanna
karatI hai usI prakAra aMjanA sundarIne putra utpanna kiyA  // 307|| putra
utpanna hote hI usake zarIra sambandhI tejase guphAkA samasta andhakAra naSTa ho
gayA aura guphA aisI ho gayI mAno suvarNakI hI banI ho  // 308 /  /  yadyapi
vaha harSakA samaya thA to bhI aMjanA donoM kuloMkA smaraNa kara dInatAko prApta
ho rahI thI aura isIlie vaha putrako godameM le rone lagI  // 309 /  /  vaha
vilApa karane lagI ki he vatsa ! manuSya ke lie bhaya utpanna karanevAle isa
saghana vanameM maiM terA janmotsava kaise karUM ?  // 310 /  /  yadi tU pitA
athavA nAnAke ghara utpanna huA hotA to manuSyoMko unmatta banA denevAlA mahA-
Ananda manAyA jAtA  // 311 /  /  sundara netroMse suzobhita tere isa
mukhacandrako dekhakara saMsArameM kisa sahRdaya manuSyako Azcarya utpanna nahIM
hogA  // 312 //  kyA karU~ ? maiM mandabhAginI saba vastuoMse rahita huuN|
vidhAtAne mujhe yaha sarvaduHkha-dAyinI avasthA prApta karAyI hai  // 313 /  /
cUMki saMsArake prANI saba vastaoMse pahale dIrghAyaSyakI hI icchA rakhate haiM
isalie he vatsa ! merA AzIrvAda hai ki tU utkRSTa sthiti paryanta jIvita rahe
// 314 //  tatkAla prANa haraNa karanevAle aise jaMgala meM par3I rahakara bhI
jo maiM jIvita hU~ yaha tumhAre puNya karmakA hI prabhAva hai  // 315 /  /  isa
prakAra vacana bolatI huI aMjanAse hitakAriNI sakhIne kahA ki he devi ! cU~ki
tumane aisA putra prApta kiyA hai isalie tuma kalyANoMse paripUrNa ho  // 316 /
/  yaha putra uttama lakSaNoMse yukta dikhAI detA hai| isakA yaha zubha sundara
zarIra atyadhika sampadAko dhAraNa kara rahA hai  // 317 //  jinapara bhramara
saMgIta kara rahe haiM aura jinake komala pallava hila rahe haiM aisI ye latAe~
tumhAre putrake janmotsavase mAno nRtya hI kara rahI haiM  /  / 318 //  utkaTa
tejako dhAraNa karanevAle isa bAlakake prabhAvase saba kucha ThIka hogA  /  tuma
vyartha hI kheda-khinna na ho  // 319 //  1. gocaram ma.  /  2. dainyaprAptA
ma., ja., ka., kh.| 3. kiM mayatasmin m.| 50

Page #444 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
394 Padma Purana While the two friends were thus conversing, a magnificent
chariot, bright as the sun, suddenly appeared in the sky. || 320 || Seeing it,
Vasantmala informed Anjana, who, filled with apprehension, began to speak again,
saying, || 321 || "Is this some enemy of mine, who will take away my son? Or has
some relative of mine arrived?" || 322 || Hearing her words, the chariot
remained stationary for a while, and then a compassionate Vidyaadhara descended
from the sky. || 323 || After parking the chariot at the entrance of the cave,
he entered, accompanied by his wives, his mind filled with anxiety. || 324 ||
Vasantmala welcomed him, and he sat down on a seat provided by his servant. ||
325 || After a moment's pause, he addressed Vasantmala, who was welcoming him
with great humility, in a deep voice, his words stirring the curiosity of the
thirsty chatakas, like the sound of thunder. His speech was adorned with the
brilliance of his teeth, which mingled with the radiance of the child. ||
326-327 || He said, "O Sumaryade! Tell me, whose daughter is this? Whose
auspicious wife is she? And why has she come to this great forest?" || 328 ||
"Her form does not match the character of a woman who has been condemned. How
then has she come to be separated from all her relatives?" || 329 || "Or
perhaps, in this world, there are often enemies without cause, who are driven by
their past deeds, even when they are in a position of neutrality." || 330 ||
Then Vasantmala, her throat choked with tears of sorrow, her eyes fixed on the
earth, spoke slowly, || 331 || "O Great One! Your words reveal your noble and
auspicious heart, for the shade of a tree that is the cause of disease is not
pleasant or joyful." || 332 || "Since you are a virtuous man, worthy of
receiving information, I will tell you what you wish to know. Listen." || 333 ||
"It is a principle that sorrow, when revealed to a virtuous man, is destroyed,
for it is the nature of the great to be the saviors of those who are in
distress." || 334 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 394 padmapurANe evaM tayoH samAlApe vartamAne nabhastale  /
kSaNenAvirabhUttuGgaM vimAnaM bhAskaraprabham  // 320 //  tato vasantamAlA taM
dRSTvA devyai nyavedayad  /  vipralApaM tato bhUyaH saivamAzaGkayAkarot  // 321
//  astekAraNavairI me 'kimeSo'panayet sutam  /  utAho bAndhavaH kazcidbhavedeSa
samAgataH  //  322  //  viprApaM tataH zrutvA tadvimAnaM ciraM sthitam  /
avAtaratkRpAyukto vidyAbhRdviyadaGgaNAt  //  323 //  sthApayitvA guhAdvAra
vimAnaM sa tato'vizat  /  patnIbhiH sahitaH zaGkAM vahamAno mahAnayam  //  324
//  vasantamAlayA datte svAgate'sau sumAnasaH  /  upAvizatsvabhRtyena prApite ca
samAsane  // 325 //  tataH kSaNamitra sthitvA sa bhAratyA gabhIrayA  /
sAraGgAnutsukIkurvan ghanagarjitazaGkinaH  //  326  //  UMce tAM vinayaM
bibhratparaM svAgatadAyinIm  /  dazanajyotsnayA kurvan bAlamAsaM vimizritAm  //
327 //  sumaryAde vadeyaM kA duhitA kasya vA zubhA  /  patnI vA kasya kasmAdvA
mahAraNyamidaM zritA  //  328  //  ghaTate nAkRterasyAH samAcAro vininditaH  /
tataH kathamimaM prAptA virahaM sarvabandhubhiH  //  329  //  bhavantyevAthavA
loke prAyo'kAraNavairiNaH  /  mAdhyasthye'pi niSaNNAnAM preritAH pUrvakarmabhiH
//  330  //  tato duHkhamarodvelavASpa saMruddha kaNThikA  /  kRcchreNovAca 'sA
mandaM bhUtalanyastavIkSaNA  // 331 //  mahAnubhAva vAcaiva te viziSTaM manaH
zubham  /  rogamUlasya hicchAyA na snigdhA jAyate taroH  // 332 //
pravedanasthAnaM guNinastvAdRzA yataH  /  nivedayAmi te tena zRNu jijJAsitaM
padam  //  333  //  duHkhaM hi nAzamAyAti sajjanAya niveditam  /  mahatAM nanu
zailIyaM yadApadgatatAraNam  // 334 //  isa prakAra una donoM sakhiyoMmeM
vArtAlApa cala hI rahA thA ki usI kSaNa AkAzameM sUrya ke samAna prabhAvAlA eka
U~cA vimAna prakaTa huA || 320  //  tadanantara vasantamAlAne vaha vimAna
dekhakara aMjanAko dikhalAyA so aMjanA AzaMkAse punaH aisA vipralApa karane lagI
ki || 321 //  kyA yaha merA koI akAraNa vairI hai jo putrako chIna le jAyegA ?
athavA koI merA bhAI hI AyA hai  /  / 322|| tadanantara aMjanAkA ukta vipralApa
sunakara vaha vimAna dera taka khar3A rahA phira kucha dera bAda eka dayAlu
vidyAdhara AkAzAMgaNase nIce utarA || 323|| guphAke dvArapara vimAna khar3A kara
vaha vidyAdhara bhItara ghusA  /  usakI patniyA~ usake sAtha thIM aura vaha
mana-hI-mana zaMkita ho rahA thA ||324|| vasantamAlAne usakA svAgata kiyA  /
tadanantara apane sevakake dvArA diye hue sama Asanapara vaha sahRdaya
vidyAdhara baiTha gayA || 325|| tatpazcAt kSaNabhara Thaharakara apanI gambhIra
vANIse meghagarjanAkI zaMkA karanevAle cAtakoM ko utsuka karatA huA bar3I
vinayase svAgata karanevAlI vasantamAlAse bolA  /  bolate samaya vaha apane
dA~toMkI kAntise bAlakako kAntiko mizrita kara rahA thA  /  / 326-327 /  /
usane kahA ki he sumaryAde ! batA yaha kisakI lar3akI hai ? kisakI zubhapatnI
hai aura kisa kAraNa isa mahAvanameM A par3I hai ? || 328 || isakI AkRtise
nindita AcArakA mela nahIM ghaTita hotA  /  phira yaha samasta bandhujanoMke
sAtha isa virahako kaise prApta ho gayI ?  // 329|| athavA yaha saMsAra hai
isameM mAdhyasthyabhAvase rahanevAle logoM ke pUrvaM karmoMse prerita akAraNa
vairI huA hI karate haiM ||330|| tadanantara duHkhake bhAra se atyadhika
nikalate hue vASpoMse jisakA kaNTha ruka gayA thA aisI vasantamAlA pRthvIpara
dRSTi DAlakara dhIre-dhIre bolI ||331|| ki he mahAnubhAva ! Apake vacanase hI
Apake viziSTa zubha hRdayakA patA calatA hai kyoMki jo vRkSa rogakA kAraNa hotA
hai usakI chAyA snigdha athavA AnandadAyinI nahIM hotI hai ||332|| cU~ki Apa
jaise guNI manuSya abhiprAya prakaTa karane ke pAtra haiM ataH Apake lie jise
Apa jAnanA cAhate haiM vaha kahatI hU~, sunie ||333 || yaha nIti hai ki
sajjanake lie batAyA huA duHkha naSTa ho jAtA hai kyoMki 1. kimathopanayetsutam
ma.  /  2. -nutsukhIkurvan ma.  /  3. vimizritam ma  /  4. sAnandaM khaM, ja.,
ma., ba. |

Page #445 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Seventeenth Chapter 395 Listen, this is the daughter of King Mahendra, known
as Anjana, who is filled with the glory of the world and has a pure heart. She
is the beloved wife of Pavanavega, the son of King Prahlad, whose mind is an
ocean of virtues. ||335-336|| Once, without informing his relatives, he went to
war, following his father's command, and conceived a child in her womb. He was a
friend of Ravana. ||337|| Although Anjana was innocent, her cruel and heartless
mother-in-law, driven by her wicked nature, sent her back to her father's house.
||338|| Her father, fearing the consequences of her misfortune, did not give her
a place in his home. It is true that noble people are often afraid of false
accusations. ||339|| This noble girl, abandoned by all her relatives, was left
alone in this great forest, like a deer, without any support. ||340|| I, a
servant of this kind-hearted woman, came here following the tradition of our
family. She, always cheerful, has made me her confidante. ||341|| This Anjana
has given birth to a son today in this forest, full of various hardships. I
don't know how this virtuous woman will find happiness and support. ||342|| I
have told you this story briefly, O virtuous one. I am unable to describe all
the suffering she has endured. ||343|| Then, from the heart of that Vidhyadhara,
filled with love that had melted due to Anjana's suffering, a voice emerged, as
if his heart was overflowing with emotion and had no space left for it to stay
inside. ||344|| He said, "O virtuous woman! You are my niece. I couldn't
recognize you because your appearance has changed due to our long separation."
||345|| "My father is Vichitrabhanu, and my mother is Sundaramalini. My name is
PratiSurya, and I live on the island called Hanuruh." ||346|| After saying this,
he recounted all the events of his childhood to Anjana, weeping as he spoke.
||347|| Then, recognizing her uncle from his narration, Anjana embraced him and
wept for a long time, her tears flowing like a river. ||348|| All her sorrow was
released with those tears. Indeed, the stability of the world lies in the
reunion of loved ones. ||349|| It is the nature of great men to rescue those who
are in distress. ||334||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptadazaM parva 395 zRNveSA viSTapaNyApiyazaso vimalAtmanaH  /  sutA
mahendrarAjasya nAmataH prathitAJjanA  // 335 /  /  prahlAdarAjaputrasya
guNAkupAracetasaH  /  patnI pavanavegasya prANebhyo'pi garIyasI  // 336 //
so'nyadA svaravijJAtaH kRtvAsyAM garmasaMmavam  /  zAsanAjanakasyAgAdrAvaNasya
suhRdyudhe  // 337 //  duHsvabhAvatayA zvazravA tataH kaarunnymuktyaa| mUDhayA
jAnakaM gehaM preSiteyaM malojjhitA  // 338 //  tato nAdApitApyasyAH sthAnaM
bhIterakIrtitaH  /  alIkAdapi hi prAyo doSAdvibhyati sajanAH  // 339 //
seyamAlambanairmuktA sakalaiH kulabAlikA  /  mRgIsAmAnyamadhyasthAnmahAraNyaM
samaM mayA  // 30 //  etaskulakramAyAtA bhRtyAsmyasyAH sucetasaH  /
vizrambhapadatAM nItA prasAdaparayAnayA  // 341 //  seyamadya prasUtA nu vane
nAnopasargake  /  na jAnAmi kathaM sAdhvI bhaviSyati sukhAzrayA  // 342 //
niveditamidaM sAdhovRttamasyAH pulAkataH  /  sakalaM tu na zaknomi katu
duHkhanivedanam  // 343 /  /  athaitadIyasaMtApavilInasnehapUritAt  /  amAntIva
niraidasya hRdayAtsAdhu bhAratI  // 344 //  svastrIyA mama sAdhvi tvaM
cirkaalviyogtH| prAyeNa nAbhijAnAmi rUpAntaraparigrahAt  // 345 //  pitA
vicitramAnu, mAtA sundaramAlinI  /  nAmataH pratisUryo'haM dvIpe hanUruhAbhidhe
// 346 //  ityuktvA vastu yavRttaM kaumAre sakalaM sa tat  /  aJjanAyai
patadvASpanayanastamavAdayat  // 347 //  nitimAtulAthAsau pUrvavRttanivedanAt  /
tasya kaNThaM samAsajya ruroda ciramadhvani  // 348 //  tasyAstatsakalaM duHkhaM
vASpeNa saha nirgatam  /  svajanasya hi saMprAptAveSaiva jagataH sthitiH  // 349
//  ApattimeM par3e huekA uddhAra karanA yaha mahApuruSoMko zailI hai  // 334||
sunie, yaha lokavyApI yazase yukta, nirmala hRdayake dhAraka rAjA mahendrakI
putrI hai, aMjanA nAmase prasiddha hai aura jisakA citta guNoMkA sAgara hai aise
rAjA prahlAdake putra pavanavegakI prANoMse adhika pyArI patnI hai  /  / 335336
/  /  kisI eka samaya vaha AtmIyajanoMkI anajAna meM isake garbha dhAraNa kara
pitAkI AjJAse yuddha ke lie calA gyaa| vaha rAvaNakA mitra jo thA  // 337 //
yadyapi yaha aMjanA nirdoSa thI to bhI svabhAvakI duSTatAke kAraNa dayAzUnya
mUrkha sAsane ise pitAke ghara bheja diyA  /  / 238 /  /  parantu apakItike
bhayase pitAne bhI isake lie sthAna nahIM diyA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki prAyaHkara
sajjana puruSa mithyAdoSase bhI Darate rahate haiM  /  / 339|| antameM isa
kulavatI bAlAko jaba saba sahAroMne chor3a diyA taba yaha nirAzraya ho mere
sAtha hariNIke samAna isa mahAvanameM rahane lagI  // 340 /  isa suhRdayAkI maiM
kula-paramparAse calI Ayo sevikA hU~ so sadA prasanna rahanevAlI isane mujhe
apanA vizvAsapAtra banAyA hai  // 341 /  /  isI aMjanAne Aja nAnA upasargose
bhare vanameM putra utpanna kiyA hai| maiM nahIM jAnatI ki yaha sAdhvI pativratA
sukhakA Azraya kaise hogI  /  / 342 //  Apa satpuruSa haiM isalie saMkSepase
maiMne isakA yaha vRttAnta kahA hai| isane jo duHkha bhogA hai use sampUrNa
rUpameM kahaneke lie samartha nahIM hU~  // 343|| athAnantara usa vidyAdharake
hRdayase vANI nikalI so aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno aMjanAke santApase pighale
hue snehase usakA hRdaya pUrNarUpase bhara gayA thA ataH vANIko bhItara
Thaharaneke lie sthAna hI nahIM bacA ho  // 344 /  /  usane kahA ki he pativrate
! tU merI bhAnajI hai| cirakAlake viyogase prAyaH terA rUpa badala gayA hai
isalie maiM pahacAna nahIM sakA hU~  // 345 /  /  mere pitA vicitrabhAnu aura
mAtA sundaramAlinI haiN| merA nAma pratisUrya hai aura hanUruha nAmaka dvIpakA
rahanevAlA hU~  // 346 /  /  itanA kahakara jo-jo ghaTanAe~ kumArakAlameM huI
thIM ve saba usane rote-rote aMjanAse kahalAyIM  // 347|| tadanantara jaba
pUrvavRttAnta kahanese aMjanAne mAmAko pahacAna liyA taba vaha usake galemeM
lagakara cirakAla taka sisaka-sisakakara rotI rahI  // 348 /  /  aMjanAkA vaha
1. janakasyedaM jAnakam  /  janakaM ma., ba.  /  2. sthAnabhIteH ma.  /  3.
sAmAnyam + adhi + asthAt  /  4. bhUtyAsmyasyA ma.  /  5. saMkSepataH  /  6.
saMtApo maH  /  7. samAruhya m.| 8. mUrdhani ma., ba.  /

Page #446 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
396 Padma Purana Thus, overwhelmed with grief, they both wept. Vasantmala,
sitting beside them, also wept loudly. || 350 || Seeing them weep, the
Vidhyadhara women also wept out of compassion. Seeing them weep, the female deer
also wept. || 351 || At that time, a loud echo was coming from the cave-like
mouth, so it seemed as if the mountain was also weeping with large waterfalls.
|| 352 || And the birds, too, were making sounds out of compassion, so the
entire forest was filled with sound at that time. || 353 || After consoling her,
Prati-Surya washed Anjana's face and his own with water brought by a servant. ||
354 || The forest, which had become filled with sound, became silent again in
the same way as before. It seemed as if it had become silent to listen to the
story of these two. || 355 || After staying for a moment, when both of them came
out of the pit of sorrow, they asked each other about their well-being and told
each other about their families. || 356 || After that, Anjana spoke to Prati-
Surya's wives in turn. It is right, because virtuous people never fail in their
duty. || 357 || Anjana said to her maternal uncle, "Respected one! Tell me about
the condition of all the planets of my son." || 358 || Upon hearing this, the
maternal uncle asked the astrologer named Pashvang, who was proficient in
astrology, about the son's birth ceremony, i.e., he asked about the son's
planetary position. || 359 || Then the astrologer said, "Tell me the time of
birth of this auspicious son." Upon being asked this, Anjana told the time. ||
360 || Vasantmala, the friend who dispels all doubts, also said, "The child was
born today at night when half the night was left." || 361 || Then the
astrologer, who knew about auspicious times, said, "His body is adorned with
auspicious signs, which indicates that the child will be blessed with all kinds
of achievements." || 362 || "However, if you are not satisfied or if you think
this is a worldly ritual, then listen, I will tell you about his life in brief."
|| 363 || "Today is the eighth day of the bright fortnight of Chaitra. The star
is Shravana, the lord of the day is Vibhavasu." || 364 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 396 padmapurANe tayoH snehamareNaivaM kurvatoratha rodanam  /
vasantamAlayApyuccairuditaM pArzvayAtayA  //  350  //  rudatsu teSu
kAruNyAdarudaMstadyoSitaH  /  kRtarodAsvathaitAsu rurudU ruruyoSitaH  // 351 //
guhAvadanamuktena pratinAdena bhUyasA  /  parvato'pi rurodaivaM
saMtatairnirjharAzrubhiH  //  352 //  tataH zabdamayaM sarvaM tadbabhUva tadA
vanam  /  zakuntairapi kAruNyAdAkulaiH kRtanisvanam ||353 || sAntvayitvA
tatastasyA dattenodakavAhinA  /  vAriNAkSAlayadvaktraM svasya ca pratibhAskaraH
//  354  //  pAramparyeNa tenaiva tatastatpunarapyabhUt  /  vanaM
muktamahAzabdaM zrotuM vArtAmivAnayoH || 355 || tataH kSaNamiva sthitvA
niSkrAntau duHkhagahvarAt  /  apRcchatAM mitho vArtAM kule'kathayatAM ca tau  /
/  356  /  /  saMbhASaNaM tatazcakre tatstrINAmaJjanA kramAt  /  skhalanti na
vidhAtavye vane'pi guNino janAH  //  357  //  jagAda mAtulaM caivaM pUjya
jAtasya me'khilam  /  nivedaya yathAvasthaM dinadyotiH kadambakam  //  358  //
-ityukte pArzvagaM nAmnA dyotirgarbhavizAradam  /  sAMvatsaramapRcchatsa
jAtakarma yathAsthitam ||359|| tataH sAMvatsaro'vocatkalyANasya nivedaya  /
janmasaMbandhinI velAmityukte cAkhyadaJjanA  // 360 //  ardhayAmAvazeSAyAM
rajanyAmadya bAlakaH  /  prajAta iti sakhyA ca kathitaM niSpramAdayA || 361 //
mauhUrtena tato'vAci yathAsya rvepurAcitam  /  sulakSaNaistathA manye dArakaM
siddhibhAjanam  // 362 //  tathApi yadyasaMtoSaH kriyeyaM laukikIti vA  /  tataH
zRNu pulAkena kathayAmyasya jIvanam  //  363  //  vartate tithiradyeyaM
caitrasya bahulASTamI  /  nakSatraM zravaNaH svAmI vAsarasya vibhAvasuH  //  364
//  samasta duHkha A~suoMke sAtha nikala gayA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki
AtmIyajanoMke milanepara saMsArakI aisI hI sthiti hotI hai || 349 || isa taraha
snehake bhArase jaba donoM ro rahe the taba pAsameM baiThI vasantamAlA bhI
jorase ro par3I || 350 || una sabake ronepara vidyAdharako striyA~ bhI
karuNAvaza rone lagIM aura ina sabako rote dekha hariNiyA~ bhI rone lagIM || 351
| usa samaya guphArUpI mukhase jorakI pratidhvani nikala rahI thI isalie aisA
jAna par3atA thA mAno parvata bhI jharanoMke bahAne bar3e-bar3e DhAlatA huA ro
rahA thA || 352 || aura pakSI bhI dayAvaza Akula hokara zabda kara rahe the
isalie vaha sampUrNa vana usa samaya zabdamaya ho gayA thA  //  353  //
tadanantara pratisUrya vidyAdharane sAntvanA dene ke bAda jala lAnevAle
naukarake dvArA diye hue jalase aMjanAkA aura apanA mu~ha dhoyA || 354 || pahale
jisa kramase vana zabdAyamAna ho gayA thA usI kramase aba punaH zabdarahita ho
gayA so aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno ina donoMkI vArtA sunaneke lie hI cupa ho
rahA ho  /  /  355 //  tadanantara kSaNa-bhara Thaharakara jaba donoM duHkharUpI
gartase bAhara nikale taba unhoMne paraspara kuzala-vArtA pUchI aura apane-apane
kulakA hAla eka dUsareko batAyA || 356 | isake bAda aMjanAne pratisUrya kI
striyoM ke sAtha kramase sambhASaNa kiyA so ThIka ho hai kyoMki guNIjana karane
yogya kAryameM kabhI nahIM cUkate haiM || 357|| aMjanAne mAmAse kahA ki pUjya !
mere putrake samasta graha kaisI dazA meM haiM so batAie || 358 || aisA
kahanepara mAmAne jyotiSa vidyAmeM nipuNa pAzvaMga nAmaka jyotiSI se putrake
yathAvasthita jAtakarmako pUchA arthAt putrakI graha sthiti pUchI  //  359  //
taba jyotiSI ne kahA ki isa kalyANasvarUpa putrakA janma samaya batAo  /
jyotiSIke aisA pUchanepara aMjanAne samaya batAyA || 360|| sAtha hI pramAdako
dUra karanevAlI sakhI vasantamAlAne bhI kahA ki Aja rAtrimeM jaba ardhaprahara
bAkI thA taba bAlaka utpanna huA thA  //  361  //  tadanantara muhUrtake
jAnanevAle jyotiSIne kahA ki isakA zarIra jaisA zubhalakSaNoMse yukta hai usase
jAna par3atA hai ki bAlaka saba prakArakI siddhiyoMkA bhAjana hogA || 362 ||
phira bhI yadi santoSa nahIM hai athavA aisA khyAla hai ki yaha kriyA laukikI
hai to suno maiM saMkSepase isakA jIvana kahatA hU~ || 363 || Aja 1. mRgyaH  /
20 prati sUryaH  /  3. putrasya  /  4. yathAsya ca purAcitam ma.  /

Page #447 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Saptadashama Parva 397 The sun is situated in Aries, occupying a high position.
The moon is situated in the middle of Capricorn. [365] The fiery-bodied Mars is
in the middle of Taurus, and the son of the moon (Mercury) is situated in the
highest part of Pisces. [366] The preceptor of the Daityas (Jupiter) is high in
Pisces, and there Shani (Saturn) also is situated. At that time, the rising of
Pisces occurred for the chief of kings. [367] The sun fully observes Shani, and
the prince, with half his vision, observes the lord of the day. [368] The
preceptor (Jupiter) observes the lord of the day with his vision diminished by a
pada, and the lord of the day (the sun) observes the lord of speech (Jupiter)
with half his vision. [369] The lord of the day (the sun) observes the moon with
his full vision and speech, and the moon also observes him in the same way.
[370] The preceptor (Jupiter) observes Shani with his vision diminished by a
pada, and Shani, in the same way, regards the great one (Jupiter). [371] The
preceptor (Jupiter), seeing the preceptor of the Daityas (Shukra), observes him
with diminished vision, and Shukra also casts such a glance on him. [372] There
is no mutual dependence among the remaining planets. At that time, the strength
of the periods and places of rising of the planets is supreme. [373] The sun and
Mars convey his (the child's) royal dignity, and Shani declares his attainment
of perfection. [374] Even if one Jupiter alone were situated in a high position,
he would become the cause of the attainment of all auspiciousness. How much more
so when all the auspicious planets are situated in high positions! [375] At that
time, there was the Brahma yoga and the auspicious muhurta called Shubhashruti.
These two indicate the attainment of the happiness of the Brahma-sthana (the
state of liberation). [376] Thus, the astrophysical chart of this child
indicates the absence of all defects in the entire universe. [377] "After
worshipping the knower of time with a thousand gold coins, the sun, filled with
joy, said to his daughter (Anjana): [378] 'Come, my child, let us go to the city
of Hanuruhana. There, all the birth rites of this child will be performed.'"
[379] Thus addressed by the sun, Anjana, after bowing to the lord of the place
(the presiding deity) and begging pardon repeatedly, took the child on her lap.
[380]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptadazaM parva 397 Adityo vartate meSe bhavanaM tunggmaashritH| candamA
makare madhye bhavane samavasthitaH  // 365 /  /  lohitAGgo vRSamadhye madhye
mIne vidhoH sutaH  /  kulore dhiSaNo'tyuccairadhyAsya bhavanaM sthitaH  // 36 //
mIne daityagurustuGgastasminneva zanaizcaraH  /  mInasyaivodayo'pyAsIttadA
nRpatipuGgave  // 367 //  anaizcaraM samagrAkSastigmabhAnunirIkSate  /
ardhadRSTyA mahIputro divasasya patiM tathA  // 368 //  guruH pAdonayA dRSTyA
patimaho'valokate  /  ardhadRSTyA girAmIzaM vAsarasyekSate vibhuH  // 369 /  /
candraM samastayA dRSTyA vacasA patirIkSate  /  asAvapyevamevAsya
vidadhAtyavalokanam  // 370 //  guruH zanaizcaraM pAdanyUnayA vIkSate dRzA  /
ardhAvalokanenAsau majate bRhatAM patim  // 371 //  gurudaityaguruM dRSTvA
vIkSate pAdahInayA  /  dRSTiM tathAvidhAmeva pAtayatyeSa tatra ca  // 372 //
grahANAM pariziSTAnAM nAstyapekSA parasparam  /  udayakSetrakAlAnAM balaM cAsti
paraM tadA  // 373 //  rAjyaM nivedayatyasya ravibhaumo gurustathA  /
zanaizvaraH suyogitvaM nivedayati siddhidam  // 37 //  eko'pi bhAratInAtha
stuGgasthAnasthito bhavan  /  sarvakalyANasaMprAptau kAraNatvaM prapadyate  //
375 /  /  brAhmo nAma tadA yogo muhUrtazca zubhazrutiH  /  etau kathayato
brAhmasthAnasaukhyasamAgamam  // 376 //  evametasya jAtasya jyotizcakramidaM
sthitam  /  sUcayatyakhilaM vastu sarvadoSavivarjitam  // 377 /  /  "raizatAnAM
sahasreNa kAlajJaM pUjitaM ttH| pratisUryo vidhAyoce bhAgineyIM sasaMmadaH  //
378 /  /  ehIdAnI puraM yAmo vatse hanUruhaM mama  /  jAtakarmAsya bAlasya tatra
sarva bhaviSyati  /  / 379 /  /  evamuktA vidhAyAGke pRthukaM jinavandanAm  /
kRtvA sthAnapatiM devaM kSamayitvA punaH punaH  // 380 //  yaha caitrake kRSNa
pakSakI aSTamI tithi hai, zravaNa nakSatra hai, sUrya dinakA svAmI hai  /  / 364
/  /  sUrya meSakA hai so ucca sthAnameM baiThA hai aura candramA makarakA hai
so madhyagRhameM sthita hai  // 365 /  /  maMgala vRSakA hai so madhya sthAnameM
baiThA hai| budha mInakA hai so bhI madhya sthAnameM sthita hai aura bRhaspati
karkakA hai so bhI atyanta ucca sthAnameM baiThA hai  // 366|| zukra aura zani
donoM hI mInake tathA ucca sthAnameM ArUDha haiN| he rAjAdhirAja! usa samaya
mInakA hI udaya thA  // 367 //  sUrya pUrNa dRSTise zaniko dekhatA hai aura
maMgala sUryako ardhadRSTise dekhatA hai  // 368 /  /  bRhaspati pauna dRSTise
sUryako dekhatA hai aura sUrya bRhaspatiko ardhadRSTise dekhatA hai  /  / 369 /
/  bRhaspati candramAko pUNa dRSTise dekhatA hai aura candramA bhI ardhadRSTise
bRhaspatiko dekhatA hai  /  / 370 /  /  bRhaspati zaniko pauna dRSTise dekhatA
hai aura zani bRhaspatiko adhaMdRSTise dekhatA hai  // 371 //  bRhaspati zukrako
pauna dRSTise dekhatA hai aura zukra bho bRhaspatipara pauna dRSTi DAlatA hai
// 372 //  avaziSTa grahoMkI pArasparika apekSA nahIM hai| usa samaya isake
grahoMke udaya-kSetra aura kAlakA atyadhika bala hai  // 373 /  /  sUrya,
maMgala aura bRhaspati isake rAjyayogako sUcita kara rahe haiM aura zani
muktidAyI yogako prakaTa kara rahA hai  /  / 374 /  yadi eka bRhaspati hI ucca
sthAnameM sthita ho to samasta kalyANakI prAptikA kAraNa hotA hai phira isake to
samasta zabhagraha ucca sthAnameM sthita haiM  // 375 //  usa samaya
brAhmanAmaka yoga aura zubha nAmakA muhUrta thA so ye donoM hI bAhyasthAna
arthAt mokSa sambandhI sukhake samAgamako sUcita karate haiM  // 376 /  /  isa
prakAra isa putrakA yaha jyotizcakra sarva vastuko sarva doSoMse rahita sUcita
karatA hai  // 377 //  tadanantara rAjAne hajAra mudrA dvArA jyotiSIkA sammAna
kara harSita ho aMjanAse kahA ki  // 378 /  /  Ao beTI! aba hama loga hanUruha
nagara cleN| vahIM isa bAlakakA saba janmotsava hogA  // 379 /  /  mAmAke aisA
kahanepara aMjanA putrako 1. nRpapuGgavaH m.| 2. nirIkSitaH m.| 3. maGgalagrahaH
/  4. gurupAdanayA m.| 5. candrasamastayA m.| 6. bRhaspatiH  /  7.
vidadhatyavalokanam  /  8. vIkSyate ma., j.| 9. rAjyaM nivedayaMstasya
ravibhUmau gurustathA ma.,ba., ka., ja.  /  10. guruH  /  11. dhanazatAnAm  /
12. vidhAyAGkapathakaM ma.  /

Page #448 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, Anjana, accompanied by her family, emerged from the cave.
Standing near the aircraft, she resembled a forest goddess. The aircraft was
adorned with tinkling bells, as if it were filled with waterfalls, and adorned
with strings of pure pearls. It had lanterns hanging from it, and was decorated
with forests of glass bananas. Golden bubbles on it sparkled in the sunlight.
The aircraft was a rainbow of many jewels, and was adorned with hundreds of
colorful flags, making it look like a Kalpavriksha. It was made of precious
stones, and was filled with jewels. It was divine, and seemed to be surrounded
by heaven.  Seeing this, the child, filled with curiosity, jumped out of his
mother's arms and wanted to enter the aircraft. He seemed to have fallen from
his mother's lap into the cave of the mountain. Everyone, including Anjana,
cried out in alarm, trying to find the child. Anjana lamented in a sorrowful
voice, which even moved the hearts of animals. She said, "Oh, my son! What has
happened? What has fate done? After showing him a treasure filled with jewels,
why has it taken him away?" She continued, "I was already grieving for my
husband, and you were my only support. Now, fate has taken you away too."  Then,
everyone saw that the child was lying safely on a rock, which had broken into a
thousand pieces due to the force of the fall. He was playing with his thumb in
his mouth, and his face was adorned with a gentle smile. He was lying on his
back, and his hands and feet were moving. He had a beautiful body, and his
complexion was like a forest of red and blue lotuses, swaying in a gentle
breeze. His radiance illuminated the entire cave with a golden hue. Then,
Anjana, seeing her innocent child, picked him up and held him to her chest,
kissing his head.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe niSkrAntA sA guhAvAsAt svajanaughasamanvitA  /  vanazrIriva jAtA ca
vimAnasyAntikaM sthitA  //  381  //  tatastaskiGkiNIjAlaiH'
prakvaNaspavaneritaiH  /  sanirjharamivodArairmuktAhAraiH sunirmalaiH  //  382
//  lalallambUSakaM kAcakadalIvanarAjitam  /  divAkarakarasparza
sphuratkanakabudbudam ||383|| nAnAratnakarAsaGgajA tAnekasurAyudham  /
baijayantIzatairnAnAvarNaiH kalpatarUpamam  //  384  //  citraratnavinirmANaM
nAnAratnasamAcitam  /  divyaM parivRta svargalokeneva samantataH  /  /  385||
dRSTvA pRthuko mAturaGkAt kautukasasmitaH  /  utpatya pravivikSuH
sannapaptagirigahvare  //  386|| hAhAkAraM tataH kRtvA lokastasya samAtRkaH  /
sa gato'nupadaM jJAtumudantamiti vihvalaH || 387|| cakAra vipralApaM ca
sudInamimamaJjanA  /  tirazcAmapi kurvANA karuNAkomalaM manaH || 388 || hA putra
kimidaM vRttaM daivena kimanuSThitam  /  pradarzya ratnasaMpUrNa nidhAnaM haratA
punaH || 389 || patya saGgamaduHkhena prastAyA me bhavAnabhUt  /  jIvitAlambanaM
chinnaM kathaM tadapi karmaNA  //  390  //  tataH sahasrazaH khaNDairnItAyAM
sumahAsvanam  /  zilAyAM pAtavegena dadazaivaM mukhasthitam  // 391  //
antarAsyakRtAGguSThaM krIDantaM smitazobhitam  /  uttAnaM pracalatpANicaraNaM
zubhavigraham  // 392 //  mandamArutasaMpRktaraktotpalavanaprabham  /  kurvANaM
sakalaM piGgaM tejasA girigahvaram ||393 || tato'naghazarIraM taM jananI
pRthuvismayA  /  gRhItvA zirasi ghrAtvA cakre vakSaHsthalasthitam  //  394  //
goda meM lekara jinendra devakI vandanA kara aura guhAke svAmI gandharvadevase
bAra-bAra kSamA karAkara AtmIyajanoM ke sAtha guhAse bAhara nikalI  /  vimAnake
pAsa khar3I aMjanA vanalakSmIke samAna jAna par3atI thI  /  380 - 381  //  398
tadanantara jo vAyuse prerita kSudraghaNTikAoM ke samUhase zabdAyamAna thA, jo
laTakate hue atizaya nirmala motiyoMke uttama hAroMse aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno
jharanoMse sahita hI ho, jisameM gole phAnUsa laTaka rahe the, jo kAcanirmita
keloMke vanoMse suzobhita thA, jisameM lage hue suvarNake gole sUryakI kiraNoMkA
samparka pAkara camaka rahe the, nAnA ratnoMkI kiraNoMke saMgamase jisameM
indradhanuSa uTha rahA thA, raMga-biraMgI saikar3oM patAkAoMse jo kalpavRkSake
samAna jAna par3atA thA, citra-vicitra ratnoMse jisakI racanA huI thI, jo nAnA
prakArake ratnoMse khacita thA, divya thA aura aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno saba
orase svargalokase ghirA huA hI ho aise vimAnako dekhakara kase musakarAtA huA
bAlaka uchalakara svayaM praveza karanekI icchA karatA mAno mAtAkI godase
chUTakara parvatakI guphA meM jA par3A  /  /  382 - 386 tadanantara mAtA aMjanA
ke sAtha-sAtha saba loga hAhAkAra kara usa bAlakakA samAcAra jAnaneke lie zIghra
hI vihvala hote hue vahA~ gaye ||387|| aMjanAne dInatA se aisA vilApa kiyA ki
jise sunakara tiryaMcoM ke bhI mana karuNAse komala ho gaye || 388 || vaha kaha
rahI thI ki hAya putra ! yaha kyA huA ? ratnoMse paripUrNaM khajAnA dikhAkara
phira use harate hue vidhAtAne yaha kyA kiyA ? || 389 || patike viyoga duHkhase
grasita jo maiM hU~ so mere jIvanakA avalambana eka tU hI thA para daivane use
bhI chona liyA  //  390 //  tadanantara saba logoMne dekhA ki patana sambandhI
vegase hajAra Tukar3e ho jAneke kAraNa jo mahAzabda kara rahI thI aisI zilApara
bAlaka sukhase par3A hai || 399  //  | vaha mukhake bhItara a~gUThA dekara khela
rahA hai, manda musakAnase suzobhita hai, citta par3A hai, hAtha paira hilA rahA
hai, zubha zarIrakA dhAraka hai, manda manda vAyuse hilate hue lAla tathA nIle
kamalavanake samAna usakI kAnti hai, aura apane tejase parvatakI samasta guphAko
pIta varNa kara rahA hai  /  /  392 - 393  /  /  tadanantara nirdoSa 1. jAle ma
/  2. muhanta-ma.  /  3. nIyate ma  /

Page #449 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The seventeenth chapter:  The king, Prati-Surya, then said, "Oh, what a great
wonder this is! Just as if by a thunderbolt, this stone mass has been
pulverized." (395)  "Even as an infant, his power surpasses that of the greatest
gods. What can be said of his youth? This body is surely his last." (396)
Knowing this, Prati-Surya, with his hands clasped in reverence, circumambulated
the child three times and, along with his wives, paid homage to his final body.
(397)  His wives, with their white, black, and red eyes, looked upon him with
smiles, as if they were worshipping him with garlands of white, blue, and red
lotuses. (398)  Then, Prati-Surya, placing his son and Anjana in a chariot,
departed for his own city, adorned with flags and arches. (399)  He then entered
the city, greeted by the townspeople bearing auspicious offerings. The sky was
filled with the sound of trumpets and other musical instruments. (400)  Just as
the gods celebrate the birth of Indra in heaven, so too did the Vidyadharas
celebrate the birth of this child in the city of Hanuruh. (401)  Because the
child was born in a mountain (Shaila) and later pulverized stones (Shaila), his
mother, along with his maternal uncle, named him "Shreeshala." (402)  Because he
received his birth rites in the city of Hanuruh, he became known throughout the
earth as "Hanuman." (403)  His body, whose actions filled the minds and eyes of
all beings with joy, and whose radiance was like that of a divine prince, played
in that city. (404)  Gautama Swami said to King Shrenik, "O King! By the power
of accumulated virtuous deeds from a previous life, even a thunderbolt, which
can pulverize mountains, becomes as soft as a flower. Even fire becomes as cool
as the rays of the moon, and a creeper, even if it is like a sword, becomes soft
and tender in the hands of beautiful women. (405)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saptadazaM parva pratisUryastato'vocadaho citramidaM param  /  vajreNeva
yadetena zilAjAtaM vicUrNitam  // 395 //  arbhakasya sato'pyeSA zaktiH
suravarAtigA  /  yauvanasthasya kiM vAcyaM carameyaM dhruvaM tanuH  // 396 //
iti jJAtvA parItya triH ziraHpANisaroruhaH  /  sahAGganAsamUhena cakArAsyA
namaskRtim  // 397 /  /  asau tasya varastrIbhinetramAmiH kRtasmitam  /
sitAsitAruNAmbhojamAlAbhiriva pUjitam  // 398 //  saputrAM yAnamAropya
bhAgineyIM tato'gamat  /  pratisUryo nijaM sthAnaM dhvajatoraNabhUSitam  // 399
//  tataH pratyudgataH paurai nAmaGgaladhAribhiH  /  sa viveza puraM
tUryanAdavyAptanamastalam  /  / 400 //  tatra janmotsavastasya mahAn
vidyAdharaiH kRtaH  /  AkhaNDalasamutpattau gIrvANastridazaryathA  /  / 401 //
janma lebhe yataH zaile zailaM cAcUrNayattataH  /  zrIzaila iti nAmAsya cakre
mAtrA sasUryayA  // 402 //  pure hanUruhe yasmAjjAtaH saMskAramAptavAn  /
hanUmAniti tenAgAtprasiddhiM sa mahItale  // 403 /  /
sarvalokamanonetramahotsavavapuHkriyaH  /  tasmin surakumArAmaH pure reme
sukAntimAn  /  / 404 /  /  saMbhavatIha bhUdhararipuH pavirapi kusumaM
vatirapInduvAdaziziraM pRthu kamalavanam  /  khaDgalatApi
cAruvanitAsumRdubhujalatA prANiSu pUrvajanmajanitAtsucaritabalataH  // 405 //
zarIrake dhAraka bAlakako Azcaryase bharI mAtAne uThAkara tathA zirapara
sUMghakara chAtIse lagA liyA  // 394 //  rAjA pratisUryane kahA ki aho ! yaha
bar3A Azcarya hai ki bAlakane vajrakI taraha zilAoMkA samUha cUrNa kara diyA  //
395 /  /  jaba bAlaka honepara bhI isakI yaha devAtizAyinI zakti hai taba taruNa
honepara to kahanA hI kyA hai ? nizcita hI isakA yaha zarIra antima zarIra hai
// 396|| aisA jAnakara usane, hasta-kamala zirase lagA, tathA tIna pradakSiNAe~
dekara apanI striyoMke sAtha bAlakake usa carama zarIrako namaskAra kiyA  // 397
/  /  pratisUryako striyoMne apane sapheda, kAle tathA lola netroMkI kAntise use
ha~sate hue dekhA so aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno unhoMne sapheda, nIle aura lAla
kamaloMkI mAlAoMse usakI pUjA hI kI ho  // 398 //  tadanantara pratisUrya
pUtrasahita aMjanAko vimAnameM baiThAkara dhvajAoM aura toraNoMse suzobhita
apane nagarakI ora calA  // 329 /  /  tatpazcAt nAnA maMgaladravyoMko dhAraNa
karanevAle nagaravAsI logoMne jisakI agavAnI kI thI aise rAjA pratisUryane
nagarameM praveza kiyaa| usa samaya nagarakA AkAza turahI Adi vAditroMke zabdase
vyApta ho rahA thA  // 400 /  jisa prakAra indrakA janma honepara svargameM deva
loga mahAn utsava karate haiM usI prakAra hanUruha nagara meM vidyAdharoMne usa
bAlakakA bahuta bhAro janmotsava kiyA  // 401 /  /  cUMki bAlakane zaila arthAt
parvatameM janma prApta kiyA thA aura usake bAda zaila arthAt zilAoMke samUhako
cUrNa kiyA thA isalie mAtAne mAmAke sAtha milakara usakA 'zrIzaila' nAma rakhA
thA  // 402 //  cUMki usa bAlakane hanUruha nagarameM janma saMskAra prApta kiye
the isalie vaha pRthivItalapara 'hanUmAn' isa nAmase bhI prasiddhiko prApta huA
||403 /  /  jisake zarIrakI kriyAe~ samasta manuSyoMke mana aura netroMko
mahotsava utpanna karanevAlI thI, tathA jisakI AbhA devakumArake samAna thI aisA
vaha uttama kAntikA dhArI bAlaka usa nagarameM krIr3A karatA thA  // 404 /  /
gautamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! pUrva janma meM saMcita
puNya karmake balase prANiyoMke lie parvatoM ko cUrNa karanevAlA vajra bhI
phUlake samAna komala ho jAtA hai| agni bhI candramAkI kiraNoMke samAna zItala
vizAla kamalavana ho jAtI hai, aura khaDgarUpI latA bhI sundara 1. vajraNava m.|

Page #450 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
400 Padma Purana Knowing this, be detached from the evil deeds which are skilled
in causing suffering, and be absorbed in the character of the Jina, which is
skilled in giving the best happiness. Oh! This sun of birth, which is endowed
with thousands of rays of disease, is constantly scorching the whole world with
great firmness. ||406|| Thus ends the seventeenth chapter of the Padma Charita,
narrated by the Acharya Ravishena, known as the Arsha, which describes the birth
of Hanuman. ||17|| The delicate arms of women become strong. ||405||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 400 padmapurANe ityavagamya duHkhakuzalAdviramata duritAt sajata
sArazarmacature jinavaracarite  /  eSa tapasyaho paridRDhaM jagadanavarataM
vyAdhisahasrarazminikaro nanu jananaraviH  // 406 //  ityArSe
raviSeNAcAryaprokta padmacarite hanUmatsaMbhavAbhidhAnaM nAma saptadarza parva
// 17 //  striyoMkI sukomala bhujalatA bana jAtI hai  /  / 405 /  /  aisA
jAnakara duHkha dene meM nipuNa jo pApakarma hai usase virata hoo aura zreSTha
sukha denemeM catura jo jinendradevakA carita hai usameM lIna hoo| aho! hajAroM
rogarUpI kiraNoMse yukta yaha janmarUpI sUrya samasta saMsArako nirantara bar3I
dRr3hatAke sAtha santapta kara rahA hai  /  / 406 //  isa prakAra ArSa nAmase
prasiddha raviSeNAcArya dvArA kathita padmacaritameM hanUmAnke janmakA varNana
karanevAlA satrahavA~ parva samApta huA  /  / 17 //

Page #451 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighteenth Chapter  This is the story of the birth of the great Sri Sail.
Now listen to the story of Vayu, the ornament of Magadha. ||1||  Vayu, as swift
as the wind, went to Ravana and, having received his command, engaged in battle
with Varuna in the midst of a battlefield filled with various weapons. ||2||
After fighting for a long time, Varuna was defeated and captured by Vayu. Khar-
Dushan had been captured by Varuna earlier, so he was released. Vayu took Varuna
to Ravana and made a treaty with him, making him subservient to Ravana. Ravana
greatly honored Vayu. ||3, 4||  Then, with Ravana's permission, Vayu, carrying
Kanta in his heart, quickly returned to his city with the great ministers. ||5||
Vayu entered the city, which was adorned with brilliant flags, arches, and
garlands, and was welcomed by the citizens, who were adorned with the finest
ornaments. ||6||  Then, leaving his work unfinished, Vayu went towards his
palace, where he was greeted by a group of city women standing in the windows,
who were overjoyed to see him. ||7||  Then, Vayu entered the palace, honored by
the elders and welcomed by his relatives with auspicious words. ||8||  There, he
paid his respects to the elders and was greeted by others. He sat in the
assembly hall for a while, engaging in pleasant conversation. ||9||  Then,
filled with anxiety, he ascended to Anjana's palace. At that time, he was filled
with his former emotions and was accompanied only by his laughing friend. ||10||
Seeing the palace devoid of his beloved, his mind, like a lifeless body, fell to
the ground in an instant. ||11||  He said to his laughing friend, "Friend, what
is this? Where is Anjana, the beautiful one with lotus eyes?" ||12||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTAdazaM parva idaM te kathitaM janma zrIzailasya mahAtmanaH  /  zRNu saMprati
vRttAntaM vAyormaMgadhamaNDana ||1|| vAyunA vAyunevAzu galvAbhyAzaM khagezineH
/  labdhAdezena saMyudhya nAnAzastrAkule raNe ||2|| kRtayuddhazciraM khinno
jailakAnto'paivartitaH  /  jAtastasya nimAno'sau puSkalaH kharadUSaNaH  // 3 //
bhUyazca jalakAntena ninA kharadUSaNaH  /  kRtvA sandhimahaM prApya paramaM
rAkSasAdhipAt ||4|| anujJAto'vahat kAntAM hRdayena tvarAnvitaH  /
jagAmAbhijanaM sthAnaM mahAsAmantamadhyagaH ||5|| praviSTazca puraM
paurairabhiyAtaH sumaGgalaiH  /  dhvajatoraNamAlAbhirbhAsurAbhirvibhUSitam  //
6 //  jagAma ca nijaM vezma dRSTo vAtAyanasthitaiH  /  muktaprastuta kartavyaiH
pauranArIkadambakaiH ||7|| viveza ca kRtArghAdisaMmAno mAninAM varaH  /
vAgbhirmaGgalasArAbhiH svajanairabhinanditaH  //  8  //  vidhAya praNatiM tatra
gurUNAmitarairjanaiH  /  namaskRtaH kSaNaM tasthau vArtAbhirtraramaNDape ||9||
tataH prAsAdamArukSadujjanAyAH samunmanAH  /  yuktaH prahasitenaiva pUrva
bhAvanayAnvitaH ||10|| riktakaM tasya taM dRSTvA prAsAdaM prANatulyayA  /
cetanAmuktadehAmaM papAteva manaH kSaNAt  //  11  //  Uce prahasitaM caiva
vayasya kimidaM bhavet  /  aJjanAsundarI nAtra dRzyate puSkarekSaNA ||12||
athAnantara gautamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he magadha dezake
maNDanasvarUpa zreNika ! yaha to maiMne tumhAre lie mahAtmA zrIzailake janmakA
vRttAnta khaa| aba pavanaMjayakA vRttAnta suno || 1 || pavanaMjaya vAyuke samAna
zIghra hI rAvaNake pAsa gayA aura usakI AjJA pAkara nAnAzastroMse vyApta yuddha
kSetrameM varuNa ke sAtha yuddha karane lagA ||2|| cirakAla taka yuddha karaneke
bAda varuNa veda - khinna ho gayA so pavanaMjayane use pakar3a liyA  /  khara-
dUSaNako varuNane pahale pakar3a rakhA thA so use chur3AyA aura varuNako
rAvaNake samIpa le jAkara tathA sandhi karAkara usakA AjJAkArI kiyaa| rAvaNane
pavanaMjayakA bar3A sammAna kiyA ||34|| tadanantara rAvaNakI AjJA lekara
hRdayameM kAntAko dhAraNa karatA huA patranaMjaya mahAsAmantoMke sAtha zIghra hI
apane nagarameM vApasa A gayA || 5 || uttamottama maMgala dravyoMko dhAraNa
karanevAle nagaravAsI janoMne jisakI agavAnI kI thI aisA patranaMjaya
dedIpyamAna dhvajAoM, toraNoM tathA mAlAoMse alaMkRta nagarameM praviSTa huA
||6|| tadanantara apanA prArambha kiyA huA karma chor3a jharokhoMmeM Akara
khar3I huI nagaravAsinI striyoM ke samUha jise bar3e harSase dekha rahe the aisA
pavanaMjaya apane mahalakI ora calA ||7|| tatpazcAt jisakA artha Adike dvArA
sammAna kiyA gayA thA aura AtmIyajanoMne maMgalamaya vacanoMse jisakA
abhinandana kiyA thA aise pavanaMjayane mahalameM praveza kiyA ||8|| vahA~
jAkara isane gurujanoMko namaskAra kiyA aura anya janoMne ise namaskAra kiyA  /
phira kuzalavArtA karatA huA kSaNabharake lie sabhAmaNDapa meM baiThA ||9||
tadanantara utkaNThita hotA huA aMjanA ke mahala meM cddh'aa| usa samaya vaha
pahale kI bhAvanA se yukta thA aura akelA prahasita mitra hI usake sAtha thA ||
10|| vahA~ jAkara jaba usane mahalako prANa- vallabhAse rahita dekhA to usakA
man kSaNa ekameM hI nirjIva zarIrakI taraha nIce gira gayA  //  11  //  usane
prahasitase kahA ki mitra ! yaha kyA haiM ? yahA~ kamala nayanA aMjanA sundarI
nahIM dikha 1. pavanaJjayena  /  2. rAvaNasya  /  3. varuNaH  /  4. gRhItaH  /
5 mUlyabhUtaH pratibhUH (jamAnatadAra iti hindI )  /  6. nimAya ka., kha., ja  /
ninAyya ma  /  7. kharadUSaNam ba  /  8. sandhyamahaM ma  /  51

Page #452 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
402 PapPuran Without her, this house seems like a forest or the sky to me.
Therefore, let her news be known quickly. ||13|| Having learned the news from
his close circle, Prahasita spoke to Pavanjaya, telling him all the news, as it
was, that would cause him distress. ||14|| Hearing this, Pavanjaya, leaving his
family, immediately set out for Mahendra Nagar with his friend, filled with
anxiety. ||15|| Reaching near Mahendra Nagar, Pavanjaya, assuming his beloved
was in his arms, spoke to his friend, saying, "My friend, look at the beauty of
this city, where my beloved Anjana resides, adorned with beautiful charms."
||16-17|| "And where rows of palaces, like the peaks of Mount Kailasa, are
hidden by trees of the garden, shining with the brilliance of the monsoon
clouds." ||18|| Speaking thus, the best of men, Pavanjaya, reached the city,
with his friend, his heart filled with love, and speaking with him. ||19|| Then,
hearing of Pavanjaya's arrival, a group of people, led by his father-in-law,
came to greet him with offerings. ||20|| Led by his father-in-law, with a loving
heart, Pavanjaya entered his home, greeted with respect by the people of the
city. ||21|| He entered the house, longing to see his beloved, and sat there for
a while, engaging in conversation. ||22|| But even there, when he did not see
his beloved, he, filled with separation, asked a young girl who lived in the
house, "Little one, do you know if my beloved Anjana is here?" The girl, with a
sorrowful voice, replied, "Your beloved is not here." ||23-24|| Then, by those
words, Pavanjaya's heart was shattered as if by a thunderbolt, his ears filled
with hot, salty water, and he stood still, as if lifeless. His face, touched by
the frost of sorrow, lost its radiance. ||25-26|| Then, he left that city, as if
escaping from a demon, and wandered the earth, seeking news of his beloved.
||27||  1. Conversation. 2. Within reach. 3. Still. 4. From his father-in-law.
5. His beloved.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 402 papapurANe grahametattayA zUnyaM vanaM me pratimAsate  /  AkAzameva vA
kSipraM tasyA vArtAdhigamyatAm  // 13 //  AptavargAt parijJAya vArtA
prahasito'vadat  /  yathAvat sakalAM tasmai hRdaye kSodakAriNIm  // 14 //
vaJcitvA svajanaM so'tha samaM mitreNa tatkSaNam  /  mahendranagaraM tena
pravRtto gantumunmanAH  // 15 //  tasyAsannabhuvaM prApya mitramevamabhASata  /
manyamAno'kasaMprAptAM dayitAM pramadAnvitaH  // 16 /  /  pazya pazya purasyAsya
vayasya ramaNIyatAm  /  aJjanAsundarI yatra vartate cAruvibhramA  // 17 //
kailAsakUTasaMkAzA yatra prAsAdapaGktayaH  /  udyAnapAdapairguptAH
prAvRSeNyadhanaprabhaiH  /  / 18 //  bruvannevaM sa saMprAptaH puraM
puruSasattamaH  /  suhRdAtacittena vihitapratibhASaNaH  // 19 //  tato
janaughataH zratvA saMprAptaM pavanajayama  /  /  arghAdinopacAreNa zvasuro'sya
samAgamat  // 20 //  purassareNa tenAsau prItiyuktena cetasA  /  nijaM
pravezitaH sthAnaM pauraiH sAdaramIkSitaH  // 21 //  viveza bhavanaM cAsya
kAntAdarzanalAlasaH  /  saMkathAmimuhUtaM ca tasthau saMvargaNaM bhajana  // 22
//  tatastatrApyasau kAntAmapazyadvirahAturaH  /  apRcchad bAlikA
kAMcidantarbhavanagocarAm  // 23 //  api bAle'tra jAnAsi mastriyA vartate'JjanA
/  sAvocadeva nAstyatra tvapriyetyasukhAvaham  // 24 //  vajreNeva tatastasya
tena vAkyena cUrNitam  /  hRdayaM pUritau kau~ taptakSArAmbuneva ca  // 25 //
viyukta iva jIvena kSaNaM cAbhUt sa nizcalaH  /
zokapAleyasaMparkavicchAyamukhapaGkajaH  // 26 //  nirgatyAsau
tatastasmAcchadmanA ivAsurAt purAt  /  babhrAma dharaNIM vArtAmadhigantuM
svayoSitaH  // 27 //  lie udyata huA rahI hai  // 12 //  usake binA yaha ghara
mujhe vana athavA AkAzake samAna jAna par3atA hai| ataH zIghra hI usakA samAcAra
mAlama kiyA jaaye||13|| tadanantara Aptavargase saba samAcAra jAnakara
prahasitane hRdayako kSubhita karanevAlA saba samAcAra jyoMkA tyoM pavanaMjayako
sunA diyA  // 14 //  use suna, pavanaMjaya AtmIyajanoMko chor3a usI kSaNa
mitrake sAtha utkaNThita hotA huA mahendranagara jAneke udyata haA  // 15 //
mahendranagarake nikaTa pahu~cakara pavanaMjaya. priyAko godameM AyI samajha
harSita hotA huA mitrase bolA ki he mitra ! dekho, isa nagarakI sundaratA dekho
jahA~ sundara vibhramoMko dhAraNa karanevAlI priyA vidyamAna hai  // 16-17 //
aura jahA~ varSARtuke meghoMke samAna kAntike dhAraka udyAnake vRkSoMse ghirI
mahaloMkI paMktiyA~ kailAsa parvatake zikharoMke samAna jAna par3atI hai  /  /
18 /  isa prakAra kahatA aura abhinna cittake dhAraka mitrake sAtha vArtAlApa
karatA huA vaha mahendranagarameM pahuMcA  // 19 //  tadanantara logoMke
samUhase pavanaMjayako AyA suna isakA zvasura arghAdikI bheMTa lekara AyA  // 20
//  Age calate hue zvasurane premapUrNa manase use apane sthAnameM praviSTa kiyA
aura nagaravAsI logoMne use bar3e Adarase dekhA  // 21 //  priyAke darzanakI
lAlasAse isane zvasurake gharameM praveza kiyaa| vahA~ yaha paraspara vArtAlApa
karatA huA muhUrta bhara baiThA  // 22 //  parantu vahA~ bhI jaba isane kAntAko
nahIM dekhA taba virahase Atura hokara isane mahalake bhItara rahanevAlI kisI
bAlikAse pUchA ki he bAle ! kyA tU jAnatI hai ki yahA~ merI priyA aMjanA hai ?
bAlikAne yahI duHkhadAyI uttara diyA ki yahA~ tumhArI priyA nahIM hai  /  /
23-24 //  tadanantara isa uttarase pavanaMjayakA hRdaya mAno vajrase hI cUNaM ho
gayA, kAna tapAye hue khAre pAnIse mAno bhara gaye aura vaha svayaM nirjIvakI
bhAMti nizcala raha gyaa| zokarUpI tuSArake samparkase usakA mukhakamala
kAntirahita ho gayA  // 25-26|| tadanantara vaha kisI 'chalase zvasurake
nagarase nikalakara apanI priyAkA samAcAra jAnaneke lie pRthivImeM bhramaNa
karane lagA  // 27 //  1. saMbhASaNAm  /  2. gocaram m.| 3. sunizcala: ma., ba.,
kha., ja.  /  4. zvasurAt ma.  /  5. suyoSitaH ma., kha., ja., b.| .

Page #453 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ashtadasham Parva 28. Knowing that Vayukumara was afflicted by the disease of
the wind, the cheerful friend consoled him with kind words, saying, "Why, my
friend, are you so dejected? Compose your mind. You will soon see your beloved,
or how vast is this earth!" 29. He replied, "Go quickly, my friend, to Ravipura
and inform our gurus of this incident." 30. "I will not consider my life worth
living until I find my beloved, the beauty of the earth. I shall wander the
entire world in search of her." 31. Saying this, the dejected one somehow freed
himself from that sorrow and, laughing sadly, went to Adityanagari. 32. The wind
also mounted the celestial elephant and, roaming the entire earth, was filled
with this thought: 33. "Where has my tender-bodied beloved gone, who was
scorched by the fire of separation and carried me in her heart?" 34. "Was she in
the wilderness of widowhood, inflamed by the fire of separation, and now seeking
refuge in some direction?" 35. "Being endowed with truthfulness and simplicity,
and bearing the burden of pregnancy, has she been abandoned by Vasantamala in
the great forest?" 36. "Is she, with her eyes blinded by sorrow, wandering on a
difficult path, and fallen into an ancient well, hungry and surrounded by
pythons?" 37. "Or, distressed by pregnancy, has she, on hearing the terrifying
sound of wild animals, given up her life in fear?" 38. "Alas, parched by thirst,
with a dry palate and throat, has she been abandoned in the forests of Vindhya
and lost her life, which was as dear to me as my own breath?" 39. "Or, has the
innocent Mandakini, entangled in various crocodiles, descended and been swept
away by the fierce current of water?" 40. "With her feet wounded by the thorns
of Darbha grass and bleeding, is she unable to take even a single step and thus
met her death?" 41.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTAdazaM parva 403 www wwwwwwwwwwwww jJAtvA vAyukumAraM ca vAyunevAturIkRtam
/  uce prahasitaH sAntvaM tadduHkhAdamiduHkhitaH  // 28 //  kiM vayasya
viSaNNo'si kuru cittamanAkulam  /  drakSyate dayitA drAkta kiyadvedaM mahItalam
// 29 //  so'vocad gaccha gaccha tvaM sakhe ravipuraM drutam  /  idaM jJApaya
vRttAntaM gurUNAM madanuSThitam  // 30 //  ahaM punarasaMprApyaM dayitAM
kSitisundarIm  /  na manye jIvitaM tasmAtparyaTAmyakhilAM bhuvam  // 31 //
ityuktastena duHkhena vimucya kathamapyamum  /  AdityanagarI dInaH kSipraM
prahasito yayau  // 32 //  pavano'pi samAruhya nAgamambaragocaram  /  vicaran
dharaNI sarvAmevaM cintAmupAgataH  // 33 //  zokAtapaparimlA pdmkomlvigrhaa| va
gatA me mavet kAntA vahantI hRdayena mAm  // 34 //  vaidhurthAraNyamadhyasthA
virahAnaladIpitA  /  varAkI kAMdizIkAsau dizaM syAt kAmupAzritA  // 35 //
satyArjavasametAsau garbhagauravadhAriNI  /  vasantamAlayA syaktA bhavet kinna
mahAvane  // 36 //  zokAndhanayanA kiM nu vrajantI viSame pathi  /  patitA
syAjaratkUpe kSudhitAjagarAnvite  // 37 //  kiM nu garbhaparikliSTA zvApadAnAM
ca bhISaNam  /  zrutvA zabdaM paritrastA prANAnmuktavatI bhavet  // 38 //  aho
tRSNArditA zuSkatAlukaNThA jalojjhite  /  vindhyAraNye vimuktA syAt prANaH
prANasamA mama  // 39 //  kiM vA mandAkinI mugdhA vividhagrAhasaMkulAm  /
avatIrNA bhaveda vyUDhA vAriNA tIvaraMhasA  // 40 //
darbhasUcIvinirminnacaraNasrutazoNitA  /  azaktA padamapyekaM gantuM kiM na mRtA
bhavet  // 41 idhara jaba prahasita mitrako mAlUma huA ki pavanaMjaya mAno
vAyukI bImArIse hI duHkhI ho rahA hai taba usake duHkhase atyanta duHkhI hote
hue usane sAntvanAke sAtha kahA ki he mitra! khinna kyoM hote ho ? cittako
nirAkula kro| tumheM zIghra hI priyA dikhalAI degI, athavA yaha pRthivI hai hI
kitanI-sI ?  // 28-29|| pavanaMjayane kahA ki he mitra ! tuma zIghra hI
sUryapura jAo aura vahA~ gurujanoMko merA yaha samAcAra batalA do  // 30 //
maiM pRthivIkI ananya sundarI priyAko prApta kiye binA apanA jIvana nahIM mAnatA
isalie use khojaneke lie samasta pRthivImeM bhramaNa karUMgA  // 32 //  yaha
kahanepara prahasita bar3e duHkhase kisI taraha pavanaMjayako chor3akara dIna
hotA haA sUryapurakI ora gayA  // 32 //  idhara pavanaMjaya bhI ambaragocara
hAthIpara savAra hokara samasta pRthivImeM vicaraNa karatA huA aisA vicAra
karane lagA ki jisakA kamalake samAna komala zarIra zokarUpI AtApase murajhA
gayA hogA aisI merI priyA hRdayase mujhe dhAraNa karatI huI kahA~ gayI hogI?  //
33-34 //  jo vidhuratArUpI aTavIke madhyameM sthita thI, virahAgnise jala rahI
thI aura nirantara bhayabhIta rahatI thI aisI vaha becArI kisa dizAmeM gayI hogI
?  // 35 /  /  vaha satI thI, saralatAse sahita thI tathA garbhakA bhAra dhAraNa
karanevAlI thii| aisA na huA ho ki vasantamAlAne use mahAvanameM akelI chor3a do
ho  // 36 /  /  jisake netra zokase andhe ho rahe hoMge aisI vaha priyA viSama
mArga meM jAtI huI kadAcit kisI purAne kueM meM gira gayI ho athavA kisI bhUkhe
ajagarake muMhameM jA par3I ho  // 37|| athavA garbhake bhArase klezita to thI
hI jaMgalI jAnavaroMkA bhayaMkara zabda suna bhayabhIta ho usane prANa chor3a
diye hoM  // 38 //  athavA vindhyAcalake nirjala vanameM pyAsase pIr3ita honeke
kAraNa jisake tAlu aura kaNTha sUkha rahe hoMge aisI merI prANatulya priyA
prANarahita ho gayI hogI  // 39 /  /  athavA vaha bar3I bholI thI kadAcit aneka
magaramacchoMse bharI gaMgAmeM utarI ho aura tIvra vegavAlA pAnI use bahA le
gayA ho  // 40 //  athavA DAbhakI aniyoMse vidIrNa hue jisake pairoMse rudhira
baha rahA hogA aisI priyA eka Daga bhI calaneke lie asamartha ho mara gayo hogI
// 41 /  /  1 satvam ma.  /  svAntaM kh.| 2. dayitA sA te ma., ja., kh.| 3.
parimalAnApadma- m.| 4. dIpikA ma.  /  5. zruta- m.| 6. tu ma.  /

Page #454 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
404 Perhaps she was taken away by some wicked Vidyaadhara who travels through
the sky. It is a great sorrow that no one brings me news of her. ||42|| Or
perhaps she has been lost due to the sorrow of a miscarriage and has gone to the
place of the Aryikas? She was a follower of Dharma. ||43|| Thinking thus, the
mind-distracted Pavananjay wandered the earth, but he did not see his beloved,
who captivated all senses and minds. ||44|| Then, consumed by separation, he saw
the whole world as empty and firmly decided to die. ||45|| He found no joy in
the mountains, nor in the trees, nor in the beautiful rivers, for he was
separated from Anjana, who was his everything. ||46|| It is right that
Pavananjay asked the trees for news of her, for those who are in sorrow are
devoid of reason. ||47||  Then, reaching the forest called Bhutarava, he
descended from the elephant and sat still like a sage, meditating on his beloved
for a moment. ||48|| He had thrown his weapons and armor on the ground with
disregard, while the dense branches of the trees above him blocked the sun.
||49|| The elephant named Ambargocar stood before him with great humility, and
Pavananjay, exhausted, spoke to him in a very sweet voice: ||50|| "O King of
Elephants! Now go, roam wherever your heart desires. Forgive me for my defeat,
for I was blinded by my love for Anjana and sought your help to find her."
||51|| "Graze on the green grass and the leaves of the Sallaki trees on the
banks of this river, and roam freely with your herd of elephants." ||52||
Pavananjay said all this, but the elephant, knowing his kindness and generous
nature, did not leave his sorrowful master's side, like a true friend. ||53||
Pavananjay had decided that if he did not find his beloved Anjana, he would die
in this forest. ||54|| For Pavananjay, whose mind was fixed on his beloved, a
night in the forest seemed longer than four years, filled with various thoughts
and anxieties. ||55||  1. Me na vidyate M., Kh., B., J. | 2. Duhkhatsute Kh. |
3. Krishna M. | 4. Viprà¤¯à¥à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¸à¥à¤¯ M. | 5. 'Uraschhadaá¸¥ kaá¹kaá¹­ako'jagaraá¸¥
kavaco'striyaam' ityamarah. -Mastrakantakam M. | 6. Shasya M. | 7. Sarthena K. |
8. Varshachatushtayadapyadhika. 'Hayano'stri sharatsama ityamarah.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 404 padmapurANe kiM vA duSTena kenApi nItA syAt khavicAriNA  /  kaSTaM vArtApi
no tasyAH kenacinme nivedyate  // 42 //  kiM vA duHkhAcyute garbha nirvedaM
paramAgatA  /  AryikANAM padaM prAptA bhaveddharmAnusevinI  // 43 //
cintayanniti paryaTya dharaNI mativihvalaH  /  dadarza na yadA kAntAM
sarvendriyamanoharAm  // 44 //  tadApazyajagatkRtsnaM zUnyaM virahadIpitaH  /
vinizcitamasau cetazcakAra maraNaM prati  // 45 //  na zaileSu na vRkSeSu na
ramyAsu nadISvabhUt  /  tirasya viryuktasya tayA sarvasvabhUtayA  // 46 //
tasyA vArtAsu mugdhena tena pRSTA nagA api  /  vivekena hi niryuktA jAyante
duHkhino janAH  // 47 //  atha bhUtaravAmikhyaM vanaM prApya gjaadsau| avatIrya
kSaNaM sthitvA dhyAyanmuniriva priyAm  // 48 //  anAdareNa nikSipya
dharaNyAmastrakaGkaTam  /  dhanapAdapazAkhAgratirohitamahAtapaH  // 49 //
jagAda gajanAthaM taM vinayena puraHsthitam  /  girA madhurayAtyartha zrameNa
guruNAnvitaH  // 50 //  brajedAnI gajendra tvaM bhava svacchandavibhramaH  /
tasyA vArtAsu mugdhena kSamasva ca parAbhavam  // 51 //  tIre'syAH saritaH
zaSpaM zallakInAM ca pallavAn  /  caran vihara yUthenaM kariNInAM samanvitaH  //
52 //  ityuktaH sukRtajJo'lI svAmivAtsalyadakSiNaH  /  na mumocAntikaM tasya
zokArtasya subandhuvat  // 53 //  lapsye cadi na tAM rAmAmabhirAmamahaM tataH  /
yAsyAmyatra vane mRtyumiti vAyurvinizcitaH  // 54 //  priyAgatamanaskasya tasya
rAtrirabhUdvane  /  zaraJcatuSTayodArA nAnAsaMkalpasaMkulA  // 55 //  athavA koI
AkAzagAmI duSTa vidyAdhara hara le gayA ho| bar3e khedakI bAta hai ki koI mere
lie usakA samAcAra bhI nahIM batalAtA ||42 /  /  athavA duHkhake kAraNa garbha-
bhraSTa ho AryikAoMke sthAnameM calI gayI ho ? dharmAnugAminI to vaha thI hI  //
43 //  isa prakAra vicAra karate hue buddhi-vihvala pavanaMjayane pRthivImeM
vihArakara jaba samasta indriyoM aura manako haranevAlI priyAko nahIM dekhA  //
44 //  taba virahase jalate hue usane samasta saMsArako sUnA dekha cittameM
maranekA dRr3ha nizcaya kiyA  // 45 /  /  aMjanA hI pavanaMjayakI sarvasvabhUta
thI ataH usake binA use na parvatoMmeM Ananda AtA thA, na vRkSoMmeM aura na
manohara nadiyoMmeM hI  // 46 /  /  yoMhI pavanaMjayane usakA samAcAra jAnaneke
lie vRkSoMse bhI pUchA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki duHkhIjana vivekase rahita ho hI
jAte haiM  // 47 //  athAnantara bhUtarava nAmaka vanameM jAkara vaha hAthIse
utarA aura priyAkA dhyAna karatA huA kSaNa-bharake lie munike samAna sthira
baiTha gayA  /  / 48 //  saghana vRkSoMkI zAkhAoMke agrabhAga usapara par3ate
hue ghAmako roke hue the| vahA~ usane zastra tathA kavaca utArakara anAdarase
pRthivIpara pheMka diye  // 49 //  ambaragocara nAmakA hAthI bar3I vinayase
usake sAmane baiThA thA aura pavanaMjaya atyadhika thakAvaTase yukta the|
unhoMne atyanta madhura vANImeM hAthIse kahA ki  // 50 //  he gajarAja ! aba
tuma jAo, jahA~ tumhArI icchA cAhe bhramaNa karo, aMjanAkA samAcAra jAnaneke lie
mohase yukta hokara maiMne tumhArA jo parAbhava kiyA hai use kSamA karo  // 51
//  isa nadIke kinAre harI-harI ghAsa aura zallake vRkSake pallavoMko khAte hue
tuma hastiniyoMke jhuNDake sAtha yatheccha bhramaNa karo  // 52 /  /
pavanaMjayane hAthIse yaha saba kahA avazya para vaha kiye hue upakArako
jAnanevAlA thA aura svAmIke sAtha sneha karanemeM udAra thA isalie usane uttama
bandhukI taraha zokapIr3ita svAmIkA samIpya nahIM chor3A  /  / 53 /  /
pavanaMjayane yaha nizcaya kara liyA thA ki yadi maiM usa manohAriNI priyAko
nahIM pAU~gA to isa vanameM mara jAU~gA  // 54 //  jisakA mana priyAmeM laga
rahA thA aise pavanaMjayakI nAnA saMkalpoMse yukta eka rAtri vanameM cAra
varSase bhI adhika bar3I mAlUma huI 1. me na vidyate ma., kha., ba., ja.  /  2.
duHkhAtsute kha.  /  3. kRSNaM m.| 4. viprayuktasya m.| 5. 'urazchadaH
kaGkaTako'jagaraH kavaco'striyAm' ityamaraH  /  -mastrakaMTakam m.| 6. zasyaM
m.| 7. sArthena k.| 8. vrssctussttyaadpydhikaa| 'hAyano'strI zaratsamA ityamaraH
/

Page #455 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Eighteenth Chapter  Thus, O King Shrenik, listen to this story. I will tell
you what your parents did after Pavananjay left.   When his friend told them
about Pavananjay, all his relatives were overcome with grief.   Then Ketumati,
overwhelmed with grief for her son, spoke with a mocking tone, her voice choked
with tears. "Oh, Prahasit, was it right for you to do this? To leave my son and
come alone?"  Prahasit replied, "Oh, Mother, he sent me with great effort. He
wouldn't let me stay there in any way."  Ketumati asked, "Where did he go?"
Prahasit replied, "Where Anjana is." Ketumati asked again, "Where is Anjana?"
Prahasit said, "I don't know. Those who act hastily without examining things,
they are bound to suffer later, those who are the life-force of people."
Prahasit also told Ketumati, "Your son made a firm vow that if he didn't see his
beloved, he would surely die."  Hearing this, Ketumati was deeply distressed and
began to wail. A group of women, their eyes streaming with tears, surrounded
her.  She cried out, "Without knowing the truth, what have I, a sinner, done?
That my son has been brought to the brink of life and death?"  "With a cruel
heart, a deceitful mind, and acting without thought, what have I, a fool, done?"
"This city, abandoned by Vayukumar, does not shine. Why just this city? Even
Vijayardhagiri does not shine, nor does the army of Ravana without him."  "Who
on earth is equal to my son, who made a pact even with Ravana, a pact that was
difficult even for him?"  "Alas, my son! You were the foundation of humility,
always devoted to honoring your teachers, the most beautiful in the world, with
your virtues known everywhere. Where have you gone?"  "Oh, my son, who loved
your mother like your own life, please soothe your mother's heart, burning with
the fire of your sorrow, with your comforting words, and make her free from
grief."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTAdazaM parva evaM tAvadidaM vRttaM zRNu zreNika te param  /  kathayAmi gate
tasmin yat pitRbhyAM viceSTitam  //  56  //  pavanaMjayavRttAnte tanmitreNa
nivedite  /  samastA bAndhavA vAyoH paramaM zokamAgatAH  //  57  //  atha
ketumatI putrazokenAbhyAvRto bhRzam  /  Uce prahasitaM vASpadhArAjanitadurdinA
//  58  //  yuktaM prahasitedaM te kartumIdRgviceSTitam  /  mama putraM
parityajya yadekAkI samAgataH  //  55  //  sosvocadamba tenaiva preSito'haM
prayatnataH  /  na me kenApi bhAvena dattaM sthAtumupAntike  // 60 //  uvAca sA
gataH kvAsau so'vocadyatra sAJjanA  /  kAJjaneti ca pRSTena ko vettIti niveditam
||61|| aparIkSaNazIlAnAM sahasA kAryakAriNAm  /  pazcAttApo bhavatyeva janAnAM
prANadhAriNAm ||62 //  kAntAM yadi na pazyAmi mRtyumemi tato dhruvam  /
pratikSaitraM kRtAnena svatputreNa sunizcitA  //  63  //  iti zrutvA vilApaM sA
cakAreti suduHkhitA  /  veSTitA strIsamUhena sravalocanavAriNA  //  64  //
ajJAta satyayA kaSTaM pApayA kiM mayA kRtam  /  yena putraH pariprApto jIvanasya
tu saMzayam  //  65  //  " krUrasaMdhAnadhAriNyA vakramAnasayA mayA  /
asamIkSitakAriNyA mandayA kimanuSTitam  //  66  //  muktaM vAyukumAreNa
purametanna zobhate  /  vijayArdhaMgirIzo vA sevA vA rakSasAM vibhoH ||67 ||
goad rAvaNasyApi sandhiryena raNe kRtaH  /  kastasya mama putrasya sadRzo'tra
naro bhuvi  //  68  //  hA vatsa ! vinayAdhAra ! gurupUjanatatpara !
jagatsundara ! vikhyAtaguNa ! kkAsi gato mama  // 69|| bhavaduHkhAgni saMtAM
mAtaraM mAtRvatsala ! prativAkyapradAnena kuru zokavivarjitAm  // 70 //  thI  //
55  //  gotamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! yaha vRttAnta to
maiMne tujhase kahA  /  aba pavanaMjaya ke ghara se cale jAnepara mAtA-pitAkI
kyA ceSTA huI yaha kahatA hU~ so suna  //  56  //  mitrane jAkara jaba
pavanaMjayakA vRttAnta kahA taba usake samasta bhAI-bandhu parama zokako prApta
hue ||57|| athAnantara putrake zokase pIr3ita ketumatI azruoMkI dhArAse durdina
upajAtI huI prahasitase bolI ki he prahasita ! kyA tujhe aisA karanA ucita thA
jo tU mere putrako chor3akara akelA A gayA ||58-59  /  /  isake uttara meM
prahasitane kahA ki he amba ! usIne prayatna kara mujhe bhejA hai| usane mujhe
kisI bhI bhAvase vahA~ nahIM Thaharane diyA  //  60 //  ketumatIne kahA ki vaha
kahA~ gayA ? prahasita ne kahA ki jahA~ aMjanA hai| aMjanA kahA~ hai ? aisA
ketumatIne punaH pUchA to prahasitane uttara diyA ki maiM nahIM jAnatA huuN| jo
manuSya binA parIkSA kiye sahasA kArya kara baiThate haiM unheM pazcAttApa hotA
hI hai  /  /  61-62  //   /  prahasitane ketumatIse yaha bhI kahA ki tumhAre
putrane yaha nizcita pratijJA kI hai ki yadi maiM priyAko nahIM dekhU~gA to
avazya hI mRtyuko prApta hoU~gA ||63|| yaha sunakara ketumatI atyanta duHkhI
hokara vilApa karane lgii| usa samaya jinake netra azrujhara rahe the aisI
striyoMkA samUha use gherakara baiThA thA  //  64 //  | vaha kahane lagI ki
satyako jAne binA mujha pApinIne kyA kara DAlA jisase putra jIvanake saMzayako
prApta ho gayA ||65  //  krUra abhiprAyako dhAraNa karanevAlI kuTilacitta tathA
binA vicAre kArya karanevAlI mujha mUrkhAne kyA kara DAlA ? || 66 ||
vAyukumArake dvArA chor3A huA yaha nagara zobhA nahIM detA  /  yahI nagara kyoM
? vijayArddha parvata hI zobhA nahIM detA aura na rAvaNakI senA hI usake binA
suzobhita hai ||67|| jo rAvaNake lie bhI kaThina thI aisI sandhi yuddhameM
jisane karA dI mere usa putrake samAna pRthvIpara dUsarA manuSya hai ho kauna ?
||68 || hAya beTA ! tU to vinayakA AdhAra thA, gurujanoMkI pUjA karane meM sadA
tatpara rahatA thA, jagat-bhara meM advitIya sundara thA, aura tere guNa
sarvatra prasiddha phira bhI tU kahA~ calA gayA || 69 || he mAtRvatsala ! jo
tere duHkharUpI agnise santapta ho rahI 1. tadvipreNa ma.  /  2. nAbhyAhRtA ma
/  nAbhyAhatA ja  /  3. sadussahA ma  /  4. krUrasAdhana -kha., ja., ma.  /
krUrayAdhAna- ka.  /  405

Page #456 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
406 In the Padma Purana, while lamenting, they beat their chests severely. The
sorrowful-eyed Prahlad, with great difficulty, comforted the women. ||7|| Having
put on a brave face in front of all his relatives, Prahlad, eager to find his
son, left his city. ||72|| He summoned all the Vidyadharas who lived in the two
categories. They all came, filled with love, along with their families. ||73||
They, with their various radiant vehicles, followed the path of the sun. With
their eyes fixed on the deep forests, they diligently searched the earth. ||74||
Having learned this news from Prahlad's messenger, Pratibhana, bearing great
sorrow in his heart, informed Anjana. ||75|| Anjana, already sorrowful, became
even more distressed by this heavy grief. With her face washed with tears, she
began a sorrowful lament. ||76|| "Alas, my lord! You were the bond of my heart.
Where have you gone, leaving me, the one who constantly suffers?" ||77|| "Are
you still not giving up that ancient anger, which has made you invisible to all
the Vidyadharas?" ||78|| "Oh, my lord! Give me even one word, like nectar, for
the great souls never abandon the welfare of those in distress." ||79|| "I have
sustained my life only with the hope of seeing you. What use are these sinful
breaths to me now?" ||80|| "The desires I had made, to be united with my
husband, have been thwarted by fate." ||81|| "My dear one must have attained
that state, which this cruel heart has always feared, because of my bad luck."
||82|| "Vasantamala! See what is happening to me? How am I forced to roll on a
bed of burning coals of unbearable separation?" ||83|| Vasantamala said, "Oh,
goddess! Don't indulge in such inauspicious talk. I say with certainty that your
husband will come to you." ||84||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 406 padmapurANe vilApamapi kurvANAM tADayantImuro bhRzam  /  sAntvayanvanitAM
kRcchAbahAdaH sAzrulocanaH  // 7 //  sarvabandhujanAkIrNaH kRtvA prahasitaM
puraH  /  niryAtaH svapurAt putramupalabdhuM samutsukaH  /  / 72 /  /  sarve
cAhvAyitA tena khagA dvizreNivAsinaH  /  prItyA te tu samAyAtAH
parivArasamanvitAH  // 73 /  /  raveH panthAnamAzritya bhAsvadvividhavAhanAH  /
anveSyaMste mahIM yatnAd gahvaranyastalocanAH  // 7 //  pratibhAnurudantaM taM
jJAtvA prahlAdadUtataH  /  udvahanmanasA zokamajanAyai nyavedayat  // 75 /  /
prathamAdapi sA duHkhAttato duHkhena bhUyasA  /  azrudhautamukhA cakre karuNaM
paridevanam  /  / 76 //  hA nAtha prANasarvastra mama mAnasabandhana  /  kva mAM
tyaktvA prayAto'si klezasaMtatibhAginIm  // 77 //  kiM vAdyApi na taM kopaM
vimuJcasi purAtanam  /  adRzyatvaM yadeto'si sarvavidyAbhRtAmapi  // 78 //
apyakaM prativAkyaM me nAtha yacchAmRtopamam  /  matvApanahitonmuktA mahAtmAno
bhavanti hi  // 79 //  iyantaM dhAritAH kAlaM bhavaddarzanakAjhayA  /  prANA
mayAdhunA kArya kimetaiH pApakarmamiH  // 8 //  samAgamamavApsyAmi priyeNeti
samaM kRtAH  /  kathaM manorathA bhagnA devenAphalitA mama  // 81 //  kRte me
mandabhAgyAyAH priyo'vasthAM gato bhavet  /  tAmidaM hRdayaM varaM yAM
samAzaGkate muhuH  // 82 //  vasantamAlike pazya kimidaM vartate mama  /
asahyavirahAGgArapalyaGkaparivartanam  // 83 //  vasantamAlayA coktA devi
maivamamaGgalam  /  vyaraTIH sarvathAsau te bhartA gocarameSyati  // 4 //  hai
aisI apanI mAtAko pratyuttara dekara zokarahita kara ||70|| isa prakAra vilApa
karatI aura atyadhika chAtI kUTatI huI ketumatIko rAjA prahlAda sAntvanA de rahe
the para zokake kAraNa unake netroMse bhI Tapa-Tapa AMsU girate jAte the  // 71
//  tadanantara putrako pAneke lie utsuka rAjA prahlAda samasta bandhujanoMke
sAtha prahasitako Age kara apane nagarase nikale  // 72 //  unhoMne donoM
zreNiyoMmeM rahanevAle samasta vidyAdharoMko bulavAyA so apane-apane parivAra
sahita samasta vidyAdhara premapUrvaka A gaye  // 73 /  /  jinake nAnA prakArake
vAhana AkAzameM dedIpyamAna ho rahe the aura jinake netra nIce guphAoMmeM par3a
rahe the aise ve samasta vidyAdhara bar3e yatnase pRthvIkI khoja karane lage  //
74 //  idhara prahlAdake dUtase rAjA pratisUryako jaba yaha samAcAra mAlUma huA
to hRdayase zoka dhAraNa karate hue usane yaha samAcAra aMjanAse kahA  // 75 /
/  aMjanA pahalese hI duHkhI thI aba isa bhArI duHkhase aura bhI adhika duHkhI
hokara vaha karuNa vilApa karane lgii| vilApa karate samaya usakA mukha azruoMse
dhula rahA thA  // 76 /  /  vaha kahane lagI ki hAya nAtha ! Apa hI to mere
hRdayake bandhana the phira nirantara kleza bhoganevAlI abalAko chor3akara Apa
kahAM cale gaye ?  // 77 //  kyA Aja bhI Apa usa purAtana krodhako nahIM chor3a
rahe haiM jisase samasta vidyAdharoMke lie adRzya ho gaye haiM  /  / 78 //  he
nAtha ! mere lie amRtatulya eka bhI pratyuttara dIjie kyoMki mahApuruSa
ApattimeM par3e hue prANiyoMkA hita karanA kabhI nahIM chor3ate  // 79 //
maiMne aba taka Apake darzanakI AkAMkSAse hI prANa dhAraNa kiye haiN| aba mujhe
ina pApI prANoMse kyA prayojana hai ? |80|| maiM patike sAtha samAgamako prApta
hoU~gI, aise jo manoratha maiMne kiye the ve Aja daivake dvArA niSphala kara
diye gaye  // 81 //  mujha mandabhAginIke lie priya usa avasthAko prApta hue
hoMge jisakI ki yaha krUra hRdaya bAra-bAra AzaMkA karatA rahA hai  // 82 //
vasantamAle ! dekha to yaha kyA ho rahA hai? mujhe asahya virahake aMgArarUpI
zayyApara kaise loTanA par3a rahA hai ? ||83 /  /  vasantamAlAne kahA ki he devi
! aisI amAMgalika raTa mata lgaao| maiM nizcita kahatI hU~ ki bhartA tumhAre
samIpa AyegA 1. mukhe ma.  /  2. rave ma.  /  3. udvahataM mahAzoka- m.|
tadvahaMtaM mhaashok-k.| 4. karaNaM ma.  /  5. yadetAsi ba.  /  6. mavAkSyAmi (
? ) ma.  /  7. vyupasargapUrvakaraTadhAtorluGamadhyamapuruSaikavacane rUpam  /
vyaraMTI: ma., ba.  /

Page #457 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Ashtavasha Parva  **85.** "O Kalyani, I will bring your husband soon."
Thus, reassuring Anjana with great sorrow, King Prati-Surya, riding a beautiful,
swift chariot like the sun, ascended into the sky.   **86.** Looking down at the
earth, he went on his way, bowing his head in reverence.  **87.** The Vijayavasi
Vidyadharas and the Trikuta-dwelling Rakshasas, accompanied by Prati-Surya,
diligently surveyed the earth from the sky.  **48.** Then, in the forest called
Bhutarava, they saw a huge elephant, whose form resembled a monsoon cloud.
**89.** "This is the elephant called Kalamegha, belonging to Pavankumar," they
recognized him, having seen him many times before.  **90.** "This is the same
elephant," all the Vidyadharas exclaimed with joy, making a great noise.
**91.** "This elephant, whose color is like the Neelagiri or Anjanagiri, and
whose trunk is of the right proportion, is where Pavankumar must be.  **92.**
This elephant, like a friend, always stays by his side."  **93.** Saying this,
they approached the elephant, their minds trembling with fear, for he was
unrestrained.  **94.** The great elephant was disturbed by their loud noise. He
was unstoppable, his entire body was restless, and his speed was immense.
**95.** His cheeks were stained with musk, his ears were erect, and he roared
loudly. The Vidyadharas were terrified and fled in every direction he looked.
**96.** Seeing the crowd, the elephant, devoted to protecting his master, did
not leave Pavankumar's side.  **97.** He circled Pavankumar, playfully swinging
his trunk and terrifying all the Vidyadharas with his sharp tusks.  **98.** The
Vidyadharas, eager to subdue the elephant, surrounded him with female elephants.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTAvazaM parva 407 eSa kalyANi te nAthamAnayAmyacirAditi  /  pratisUryaH
samAzvAsya kRcchraNAJjanasundarIm  // 85 //  manoharaM semAruhya khagayAnaM
manojavam  /  namomUrdhAnamuspasya vIkSamANaH kSitiM yayau  // 86 //
pratimAnusametAste vaijayArdA nabhazcarAH  /  traikUTAzca prayatnena nikSanta
mahItalam  // 47 //  atha bhUtaravATavyAM dedRzuste mahAdvipam  /
prAvRSeNyaghanodArasaMghAtAkAradhAriNam  // 48 //  ayaM sa kAlameghAkhyaH
pavanadvipa itymii| abhyazAsiSarenaM ca pUrvadaSTeranekazaH  // 89 //  ayameSa
sa hastIti jagaduzca parasparam  /  sarva vidyAdharAH hRSTAH samaM kRtamahAravAH
// 10 //  nIlAJjanagiricchAyaH kundarAzisitadvijaH  /  yuktapramANahasto'yaM
hastI yatrAvatiSThate  // 9 //  pavanaMjayavIreNa deze'tra gatasaMzayam  /
mavitavyamayaM tasya mitravatpArzvagocaraH  // 12 //  vadanta iti te yAtAH
samIpaM tasya dantinaH  /  niraGkuzatayA tasya manAgvitrastamAnasAH  // 13 //
raveNa mahatA teSAM cukSobha sa mahAgajaH  /  durnivArazcalanImasamastAGgo
mahAjavaH  // 94 //  madaklinakapolo'sau stabdhakarNaH sugarjitaH  /  dizaM
pazyati yAmeva tatra kSubhyanti khecarAH  // 95 //  dRSTvA janasamUha taM
svAmirakSaNatatparaH  /  pavanaMjayasAmIpyaM na jahAti sa vAraNaH  // 16 //
maNDalena bhramatyasya salIla bhramayan karam  /  dazanenaiva caNDena trAsayan
sarvakhecarAn  // 97 //  kariNImirathAvRtya dvipaM yatnena khecarAH  /
vazIkRsya tamuddezamavatIrNAH samutsukAH  // 9 //   // 84 //  'he kalyANi ! maiM
tere bhartAkI abhI hAla le AtA hU~' isa prakAra aMjanAko bar3e duHkhase AzvAsana
dekara rAjA pratisUrya manake samAna tIvra vegavAle sundara vimAnameM car3hakara
AkAzameM ur3a gyaa| vaha pRthivIko acchI taraha dekhatA huA jA rahA thA  /  /
85-86 /  /  isa prakAra vijayAvAsI vidyAdhara aura trikUTAcalavAsI rAkSasa rAjA
pratisUryake sAtha milakara bar3e prayatnase pRthivIkA avalokana karane lage  //
87|| athAnantara unhoMne bhUtarava nAmaka aTavImeM varSA Rtuke meghake samAna
vizAla AkArako dhAraNa karanevAlA eka bar3A hAthI dekhA  // 48 //  usa hAthIko
unhoMne pahale aneka bAra dekhA thA isalie 'yaha pavanakumArakA kAlamegha nAmaka
hAthI hai' isa prakAra pahacAna liyA  // 89|| 'yaha vahI hAthI hai' isa prakAra
saba vidyAdhara harSita ho jorase hallA karate hue paraspara eka dUsarese kahane
lage  // 90 /  /  jo nIlagiri athavA aMjanagirike samAna sapheda hai tathA
jisakI sUMDa yogya pramANase sahita hai aisA yaha hAthI jisa sthAnameM hai
niHsandeha usI sthAnameM pavanaMjayako honA cAhie yaha hAthI mitrake samAna sadA
usake samIpa hI rahatA hai  // 91-92 /  /  isa prakAra kahate hae saba
vidyAdhara usa hAthIke pAsa gye| cUMki vaha hAthI niraMkuza thA isalie
vidyAdharoMkA mana kucha. kucha bhayabhIta ho rahA thA  // 93 //  una
vidyAdharoMke mahAzabdase vaha mahAn hAthI sacamuca hI kSubhita ho gyaa| usa
samaya usakA rokanA kaThina thA, usakA samasta bhayaMkara zarIra caMcala ho rahA
thA aura vega atyanta tIvra thaa||94|| usake donoM kapola madase bhIge hue the,
kAna khar3e the aura vaha jora-jorase garjanA kara rahA thaa| vaha jisa dizAmeM
dekhatA thA usI dizAke vidyAdhara kSubhita ho jAte the-bhayase bhAgane lagate
the  /  / 95 //  usa janasamUhako dekhakara svAmIkI rakSA karane meM tatpara
hAthI pavanaMjayako samIpatAko nahIM chor3a rahA thA  // 96 //  vaha lIlAsahita
sUMr3ako ghumAtA aura apane tIkSNa dazanase ho samasta vidyAdharoMko bhayabhIta
karatA huA pavanaMjayake cAroM ora maNDalAkAra bhramaNa kara rahA thA  /  / 97
//  tadanantara vidyAdhara yatnapUrvaka hastiniyoMse usa hAthIko gherakara tathA
vazameM kara utsuka 1. samAsahya ma.  /  2. dadRze ma.  /  3. dhAriNAm ma.  /
4. meghAkhyapavana ma.  /  5. abhyazAsiSu ma.  /  6. mahAravaH m.| 7.
bhamayatkaram ma.  /

Page #458 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, Among all the methods of subjugation, there is no other
superior to union with a woman. || 99 || Then the celestial beings saw Vayu,
whose limbs were trembling, whose form was like a painted figure, and who was
sitting in silence. || 100 || Although all the celestial beings treated him
appropriately, he remained immersed in thought like a sage, not speaking to
anyone. || 101 || His parents, filled with love for their son, smelled his head,
embraced him repeatedly, and their eyes were filled with tears of joy. || 102 ||
They said, "Son, why do you behave in such a way, abandoning your parents? You
were the foremost among the virtuous." || 103 || "Your body is worthy of a fine
bed, but why have you placed it in the hollow of a tree in this terrible and
desolate forest?" || 104 || Even when addressed in this way, he did not utter a
word. He simply indicated that he had decided to die. || 105 || "I have taken
this vow that I will not eat or speak until I obtain Anjana. How can I break
that vow now?" || 106 || "Let the matter of my beloved be forgotten. How can I
satisfy these parents while upholding my vow of truth?" He became anxious,
thinking this. || 107 || Then, seeing Vayu, whose head was bowed and who was
sitting in silent contemplation, knowing that he was determined to die, the
celestial beings were filled with grief. || 108 || All the celestial beings,
whose hearts were deeply saddened and who were touching Vayu's body with their
sweat-soaked hands, began to lament with his parents. || 109 || Then, smiling,
Prati-Surya said to the celestial beings, "Do not be distressed. I will call
Vayu Kumar for you." || 110 || And embracing Vayu, he spoke to him in order:
"Kumar, listen, I will tell you everything that happened." || 111 || On the
beautiful mountain called Sandhyabhra, there arose a state of solitary knowledge
in the sage Ananga-Vichi, which caused disturbance among the Indras. || 112 || I
was going there at night, worshipping him with a lamp, when I heard a sound of
weeping, like the sound of women crying. || 113 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe upAyebhyo hi sarvebhyo vazIkaraNavastuni  /  kAminIsaMgamujjhitvA
nAparaM vidyate param  //  99|| athekSAMcakrire vAyuM vitrastAGgaM nabhazvarAH
/  pustakarmasamAkAraM vAcaMyamatayA sthitam  // 100 //  yathArhamupacAraM te
cakrurasya tathApyasau  /  na prayacchati cintAsthaH prativAkyaM muniryathA  //
101  //  putraprItyA tamAghrAya pitarau mastake muhuH  /  AliGgya ca pramodena
vASpasthagitalocanau  // 102 //  Ucaturvatsa saMtyajya pitarau kathamIdRzam  /
ceSTitaM kriyate tvaM hi vinItAnAM dhuristhitaH  //  103  //  varazayyocitaH
kAyastvayAdya vijane vane  /  saMvAhitaH kathaM bhIme rAtrau pAdapagahare  //
104 //  iti saMbhASyamANo'pi nAsau vAcamudAharat  /  maraNe nizcito'smIti
saMjJayaiva nyavedayat  //  105  //  vratametanmayopAttaM yadaprApya mahendrajAm
/  na bhujje na vadAmIti tatkathaM bhajyate'dhunA  //  106  //  AstAM tAvapriyA
satyatrataM saMrakSatA mayA  /  gurU prazvAsitAvetau kathamityAkulo'bhavat  //
107  //  tatastaM natamUrdhAnaM maunavratasamAzritam  /  maraNe nizcitaM jJAtvA
jagmurvidyAdharAH zucam  //  108  //  sametAstatpitRbhyAM te vilepurdInamAnasAH
/  saMspRzantaH karairasya zarIraM svadadhAribhiH  // 109  //  tataH
smitamukho'vocat pratisUryo nabhazvarAn  /  mA bhUta viklavA vAyumeSa vo
bhASayAmyaham  //  110  //  pavanaM ca pariSvajya jagAdAnukramAnvitam  /  kumAra
zRNu yadvRttaM kathayAmi tavAkhilam  //  111  //  saMdhyA parvate ramye muneH
kaivalyamudgatam  /  anaGgavIcisaMjJasya devendrakSobhakAraNam  //  112  //
vanditvA taM pradIpena rAtrAvAgacchatA mayA  /  ruditadhvanirazrAvi
straiNastatrIsvanopamaH  //  113 //  408 hote hue usa sthAnapara utare ||18||
vazIkaraNa ke samasta upAyoMmeM strIsamAgamako chor3akara aura dUsarA uttama
upAya nahIM hai ||19|| athAnantara jisakA samasta zarIra DhIlA ho rahA thA,
citralikhita ke samAna jisakA AkAra thA aura jo monase baiThA thA aise
pavanaMjayako vidyAdharoMne dekhA || 100|| yadyapi saba vidyAdharoMne usakA
yathAyogya upacAra kiyA to bhI vaha munike samAna cintA meM nimagna baiThA rahA
- kisIse kucha nahIM kahA || 101 || mAtA-pitAne putrakI prIti se usakA mastaka
sUMghA, bAra-bAra AliMgana kiyA aura isa harSase unake netra A~suoMse AcchAdita
ho gaye  //  102  //  | unhoMne kahA bhI ki he beTA ! tuma mAtA-pitAko
chor3akara aisI ceSTA kyoM karate ho ? tuma to vinIta manuSyoM meM sabase Age
the || 103|| tumhArA zarIra utkRSTa zayyApara par3ane ke yogya hai para tumane
Aja ise bhayaMkara evaM nirjana vanake bIca vRkSakI koTara meM kyoM DAla rakhA
hai ?  //  104  //  mAtA-pitA ke isa prakAra kahane para bhI usane eka zabda
nahIM kahA  /  kevala izAre se yaha batA diyA ki maiM maranekA nizcaya kara cukA
hU~ || 105 || maiMne yaha vrata kara rakhA hai ki aMjanAko pAye binA maiM na
bhojana karUMgA aura na boluuNgaa| phira isa samaya vaha vrata kaise tor3a dU~ ?
// 106 //  athavA priyA kI bAta jAne do, satya vratakI rakSA karatA huA maiM ina
mAtA-pitAko kisa prakAra santuSTa karU~ yaha socatA huA vaha kucha vyAkula huA
|| 107 //  tadanantara jisakA mastaka nIcekI ora jhuka rahA thA aura jo maunase
cupacApa baiThA thA aise pavanaMjayako maraneke lie kRtanizcaya jAnakara
vidyAdhara zokako prApta hue || 108 || jinake hRdaya atyanta dIna the aura jo
svedako dhAraNa karanevAle hAthoMse pavanaMjaya ke zarIrakA sparzaM kara rahe
the aise saba vidyAdhara usake mAtA-pitA ke sAtha vilApa karane lage||109  //
tadanantara ha~sate hue pratisUryane saba vidyAdharoMse kahA ki Apa loga duHkhI
nahIM  /  Apa logoMse pavana kumArako bulavAtA hU~  //  110 //  tathA
pavanaMjayakA AliMgana kara kramAnusAra usase kahA ki he kumAra ! suno, jo kucha
vRttAnta huA hai vaha saba maiM kahatA hU~  //  111  //  sandhyAbhra nAmaka
manohara parvatapara anaMgavIci nAmaka munirAjako indroMmeM kSobha utpanna
karanevAlA kevala-jJAna utpanna huA thA  /   /  1912 || maiM unakI vandanA kara
dIpaka ke sahAre rAtriko calA A rahA thA 1. prazAsitAvetau ma.

Page #459 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Eighteenth Chapter  "I heard a sound like the notes of a vina, a woman's
weeping." (113)   "I made that sound my target and went to the highest peak of
the mountain. There, in a cave called Paryanka, I saw Anjana." (114)  "Knowing
the reason for her exile, I comforted the young woman, who was weeping in
sorrow." (115)  "In that cave, she gave birth to a son with auspicious signs.
His radiance made the cave seem as if it were made of gold." (116)  "Hearing of
the birth of his daughter, Pavananjay was filled with joy. He quickly asked,
'What happened next? What happened next?'" (117)  "Pratibhanu said, 'After that,
Anjana's son, with his beautiful actions, was being placed in a chariot when he
fell into the mountain cave.'" (118)  "Hearing this, Pavananjay, along with his
army of celestial beings, was again filled with sorrow, crying out in despair."
(119)  "Pratibhanu said, 'Do not grieve. Listen to what happened. O Vayu, the
whole story will dispel your sorrow.'" (120)  "Pratibhanu continued, 'Then, with
cries of sorrow echoing through the directions, we descended and saw the
innocent child in the middle of the mountain.'" (121)  "The child had fallen and
shattered the mountain. We, in awe, praised him as 'Shreeshala.'" (122)  "Then,
I took Anjana, along with her son, in a chariot and brought her to my city."
(123)  "Since he was raised in the island of Hanuruh, he was given the second
name Hanuman." (124)  "So, you should know that the woman you spoke of, Anjana,
with her son who performs wondrous deeds, resides in my city." (125)  "Then, the
joyful celestial beings, eager to see Anjana, quickly went to the city of
Hanuruh, with Vayu leading the way." (126)  "There, a great festival was held
for the reunion of Anjana and Pavananjay. The joy of the couple was palpable,
especially for them, it was indescribable." (127)  "The celestial beings spent
two months there, filled with joy. After receiving their due respect, they
returned to their respective places." (128)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aSTAdazaM pavaM "aDhaukiSi tamuddezaM gireH prasthaM samunnatam  /
paryaGkanAmni dRSTA ca guhAyAmaJjanA mayA  //  114  //  nirvAsakAraNaM cAsyA
vijJAya viniveditam  /  mayA prAzvAsitA bAlA rudatI zokavihvalA  // 115 //
tasyAmasUtaputramanvitaM lakSaNaiH zubhaiH  /  yasya bhAsA guhA sAsIt
suvarNeneva nirmitA  //  116  //  sa toSaM paramaM prAptaH zrutvA tAM
jAtaputrikAm  /  tatastata iti kSipramapRcchacca samIraNaH  // 117 //  avocat sa
tatastasyAH suto'sau cAruceSTitaH  /  vimAne sthApyamAnaH san patitaH
zailagahvare  //  118  //  atrAntare punaH prApto viSAdaM pavanaMjayaH  /
hAkAramukharaH sArddhaM tayA khecarasenayA  //  119  //  pratibhAnuH punazcoce
mA gAH zokaM tataH zRNu  /  yadvRttaM tatsamastaM te vAyo duHkhaM hariSyati  //
120 //  tato hAkArazabdena mukharIkRtadiGmukhAH  /  avatIryAnadhaM
bAlamaikSiSmahi nagAntare  //  121  //  cUrNitazca tataH zailastenAsau
patanAttadA  /  zrIzaila iti tenAsAvasmAbhirvismitaiH stutaH  /  / 122 /  /
vasantamAyA sAkaM tataH putreNa saMyutA  /  vimAnamaJjanAropya mayA nItA nijaM
puram  //  123 //  tato hanUruhAbhikhye pure saMvarddhitaH zizuH  /  hanUmAniti
tenAsya dvitIyaM nAma nirmitam  //  124  //  eSa te kathitA sArka
putreNAdbhutakarmaNA  /  matpure zIlasaMpannA tiSThatIti vibudhyatAm  // 125 //
puraskRtya tato vAyuM hRSTA gaganacAriNaH  /  kSipraM hanUruhaM
jagmuraJjanAdarzanotsukAH  //  126 //  teSAM mahotsavastatra samAgamakRto'bhavat
/  susaMvedyastu dampatyordurAkhyAno vizeSataH  //  127 //  tatra mAsadvayaM
nItvA khecarAH prItamAnasAH  /  Amantrya labdhasaMmAnA yayuH sthAnaM yathAyatham
//  128  //  ki maiMne vINAke zabda samAna kisI strIke ronekA zabda sunA ||113
|| maiM usa zabdako lakSya kara parvatakI U~cI coTI para gyaa| vahA~ mujhe
paryaMka nAmakI guphA meM aMjanA dikhI  //  114  //  | isake nirvAsakA kAraNa jo
batAyA gayA thA use jAnakara zokase vihvala hokara rotI huI usa bAlAko maiMne
sAntvanA dI  //  115  //  usI guphAmeM usane zubha lakSaNoMse yukta aisA putra
utpanna kiyA ki jisakI prabhAse vaha guphA suvarNa se banI huIke samAna ho gayI
//  116  //  aMjanAke putra ho cukA hai yaha jAnakara pavanaMjaya parama
santoSako prApta huA aura 'phira kyA huA ? phira kyA huA ?' yaha zIghratA se
pUchane lagA  //  117  //  pratisUryaMne kahA ki usake bAda aMjanAke usa sundara
ceSTAoMke dhAraka putrako vimAna meM baiThAyA jA rahA thA ki vaha parvatakI
guphA meM gira gayA  //  118  //  yaha sunakara hAhAkAra karatA huA pavanaMjaya
vidyAdharoMkI senAke sAtha punaH viSAdako prApta huA ||119|| taba pratisUryane
kahA ' ki zokako prApta mata hoo| jo kucha vRttAnta huA vaha saba suno| he
pavana ! pUrA vRttAnta tumhAre duHkhako dUra kara degA  //  120 //  pratisUrya
kahatA jAtA hai ki tadanantara hAhAkArase dizAoMko zabdAyamAna karate hue hama
logoMne nIce utarakara parvata ke bIca usa nirdoSa bAlakako dekhA  // 121 //
cU~ki usa bAlakane girakara parvatako cUra-cUra kara DAlA thA isalie hama
logoMne vismita hokara usakI 'zrIzaila' isa nAmase stuti kI  //  122  //
tadanantara putrasahita aMjanAko vasantamAlA - ke sAtha vimAnameM baiThAkara
maiM apane nagara le gayA || 123  /  /  Age calakara cU~ki usakA hanUruha dvIpa
meM saMvardhana huA hai isalie hanUmAn yaha dUsarA nAma bhI rakhA gayA hai  //
124  //  | isa taraha Apane jisakA kathana kiyA hai vaha zIlavatI aMjanA
Azcaryajanaka kAryaM karanevAle putrake sAtha mere nagara meM raha rahI hai so
jJAta kIjie || 125  /  /  tadanantara harSase bhare vidyAdhara aMjanA ke dekhane
ke lie utsukaM ho pavanaMjaya ko Age kara zIghra hI hanUruha nagara gaye || 126
//  vahA~ aMjanA aura pavanaMjayakA samAgama ho jAne se vidyAdharoMko mahAn
utsava huaa| donoM dampatiyoMko jo utsava huA vaha svasaMvedanase hI jAnA jA
sakatA thA vizeSakara usakA kahanA azakya thA  //  127 //  vahA~ vidyAdharoMne
prasanna - 1. aDhokata ma.  /  2. rudantI ka.  /  3. toSaM ca ma., ja, ba, ka  /
4. vAyorduHkhaM ma., ka., ja.  /  52 409

Page #460 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, Even though the wind god, having obtained a wife after a
long time, was well-behaved, he was delighted by the deeds of his son, like the
sage Vyasa. || 129 || Hanuman, having attained the peak of youthful glory there,
stole the hearts of all, and his body shone like the peak of Mount Meru. || 130
|| He was a master of all knowledge, possessed immense power, was humble, and
skilled in the meaning of all scriptures. He was generous in helping others, and
he enjoyed the remaining merit from his heavenly pleasures. He delighted in that
city, being devoted to the worship of his teachers. || 131-132 || The
Shardulavikridita 410 Whoever, with the same love as the wind god, listens to
this union of Anjana and Vayu, which is filled with various flavors and wonders,
will, by the knowledge of all the laws of the world, attain self-knowledge. His
mind will not be inclined towards evil deeds, but will be inclined towards the
good deeds he has begun. || 133 || He will obtain a long life, a beautiful body
free from disease, a mind that can comprehend the ultimate subjects of all
scriptures, fame as pure as the moon, the ability to enjoy heavenly pleasures,
and all the rare things in the world. He will obtain all this as easily as the
sun obtains its radiant halo. || 134 || Thus ends the eighteenth chapter of the
Padma Purana, titled "The Union of Vayu and Anjana," narrated by the sage
Ravisha, as it is known in the tradition of the sages. || 18 || 0 Two months
passed. After that, everyone left, having received their due respect after
asking. || 128 || After a long time, having obtained a wife, the deeds of
Pavananjay also became proper, and he delighted in the deeds of his son, and he
began to roam there like the god Devaki. || 129 || Hanuman also, having obtained
the best youthful fortune there, began to steal the hearts of all, and his body
shone like the peak of Mount Meru. || 130 || He had mastered all knowledge, his
influence was unique, he was a knower of humility, he was mighty, he was skilled
in understanding the meaning of all scriptures, he was generous in helping
others, he was the enjoyer of the remaining merit from his heavenly pleasures,
and he was devoted to the worship of his teachers. In this way, he played with
great joy in that city. || 131-132 || Gautama Swami says to King Shrenik, "O
King! Whoever listens with devotion to this union of Anjana and Pavananjay,
which is filled with various flavors and wonders, will gain knowledge of all the
laws of the world. And by the influence of that knowledge, he will attain self-
knowledge, which will cause him to begin only good deeds, and his mind will not
be inclined towards evil deeds." || 133 || He will obtain a long life, a
beautiful body free from disease, a mind that can comprehend the ultimate
subjects of all scriptures, fame as pure as the moon, the ability to enjoy
heavenly pleasures, and all the rare things in the world. He will obtain all
this as easily as the sun obtains its radiant halo. || 134 || Thus ends the
eighteenth chapter of the Padma Purana, titled "The Union of Vayu and Anjana,"
narrated by the sage Ravisha, as it is known in the tradition of the sages. ||
18 || - 1. The connector is "me". 2. The lotus is "me". 3. The ultimate subject
of all scriptures.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe cirAtsaMprAptapatnIkaH pavano'pi suceSTitaH  /  tatra
gIrvANavadreme sutaceSTAbhinanditaH  //  129  //  hanUmAMstatra saMprApya
yauvanazriyamuttamAm  /  merukUTasa mAnAGgaH stenakaH sarvacetasAm  //  130  //
siddhavidyaH prabhAvADhyo vinayajJo mahAbalaH  /  sarvazAstrArthakuzalaH
paropakRtidakSiNaH  //  131  //  nAkopabhuktapAkasya puNyazeSasya bhojakaH  /
ramate sma pure tatra gurupUjanatatparaH  /  /  132 || zArdUlavikrIDitam 410
zrIzailasya samudbhavena sahitaM vAyoH samaM kAntayA yo bhAvena zRNoti
saGgamamimaM nAnArasairadbhutam  /  jantostasya samastasaMsRtividhijJAnena
labdhAtmano buddhirnAzubhakarmaNi prabhavati prArabdhasatkarmaNaH  // 133 //
AyurdIrghamudAravibhramayutaM kAntaM vapunaruja medhAM sarvakRtAntapAraviSayAM
kIrtiM ca candrAmalAm  /  puNyaM svargasukhopabhogacaturaM loke ca yadurlabhaM
tatsarva sadainute raviriva sphItaprabhAmaNDalam  // 134 //  ityArSe
raviSeNAcAryaproktaM padmacarite pavanAJjanAsamAgamAbhidhAnaM nAmASTAdazaM parva
//  18  //  0 cittase do mahIne vyatIta kiye  /  tadanantara pUchakara sammAna
prApta karate hue saba yathAsthAna cale gaye  // 128 //  cirakAlake bAda patnIko
pAkara pavanaMjayakI ceSTAe~ bhI ThIka ho gayIM aura vaha putrakI ceSTAoMse
Anandita hotA huA vahA~ devakI taraha ramaNa karane lagA  //  129  //  hanUmAn
bhI vahA~ uttama yauvana-lakSmIko pAkara sabake cittako curAne lagA tathA usakA
zarIra meru parvata ke zikharake samAna dedIpyamAna ho gayA  //  130 //  use
samasta vidyAe~ siddha ho gayI thIM, prabhAva usakA nirAlA hI thA, vinayakA vaha
jAnakAra thA, mahAbalavAn thA, samasta zAstroMkA arthaM karanemeM kuzala thA,
paropakAra karane meM udAra thA, svarga meM bhoganese bAkI bace puNyakA
bhoganevAlA thA aura gurujanoMkI pUjA karane meM talara thA  /  isa taraha vaha
usa nagara meM bar3e Anandase krIr3A karatA thA  /  /  131 - 132  //
gautamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! jo hanumAna ke sAtha-sAtha
nAnA rasoMse Azcarya utpanna karanevAle isa aMjanA aura pavanaMnayake saMgamako
bhAvase sunatA hai use saMsArakI samasta vidhikA jJAna ho jAtA hai tathA usa
jJAnake prabhAvase use Atma-jJAna utpanna ho jAtA hai jisase vaha uttama kAryaM
hI prArambha karatA hai aura azubha kAryameM usakI buddhi pravRtta nahIM hotI
// 133 //  vaha dIrgha Ayu, udAra vibhramoMse yukta, sundara nIroga zarIra,
samasta zAstroMke pArako viSaya karanevAlI buddhi, candramAke samAna nirmala
kIrti, svarga-sukhakA upabhoga karanemeM catura, puNya tathA lokameM jo kucha
bhI durlabha padArtha haiM una sabako eka bAra usa taraha prApta kara letA hai
jisa prakAra ki sUrya dedIpyamAna kAntike maNDalako || 134 || isa prakAra
ArSanAmase prasiddha raviSeNAcArya dvArA kathita padmacaritameM pavanaMjaya aura
aMjanA ke samAgamakA varNana karanevAlA aThArahavA~ parva samApta 'huA  // 18 //
- 1. yojakaH ma  /  2. nIrajaM ma  /  3. sarvazAstrapAraviSayAm  /

Page #461 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The nineteenth chapter: Ravana, filled with unfulfilled rage, summoned all the
Vidyadharas again through letter carriers.  ||1|| The king of Kishkindha,
Dundubhi, the lord of Alankarapur, the master of Rathnapur, and all the other
Vidyadharas residing in both ranges of the Vijayarddha mountain, arrived at
Ravana's presence with all preparations. ||2-3||  After that, a man bearing a
mark on his forehead arrived at Hanuruh island, near Pavananjay and Prati-Surya.
||4|| Understanding the meaning of the letter, both decided to go to Ravana, but
before leaving, they were eager to perform the coronation of Hanuman on the
kingdom. ||5|| Great preparations were made for the coronation. The sound of
trumpets and other musical instruments echoed, and men stood before Hanuman with
kalashas in their hands. ||6|| Hanuman asked Pavananjay and Prati-Surya, "What
is this?" They replied, "O son! Now you rule the kingdom of Hanuruh island."
||7|| "Ravana has summoned us to assist him in the war, so we must obey his
command with love and as befits us." ||8|| "Varuna, who resides in Rasatalapur,
stands against him. His army is vast, and he is invincible due to the strength
of his sons and fortresses." ||9|| Hearing this, Hanuman humbly replied, "It is
not proper for you to go to war while I am here." ||10|| "O son! You have not
yet tasted the flavor of battle," they said. Hanuman replied, "What is
liberation, if it is not attained now?" ||11|| When he refused to stay despite
their attempts to dissuade him, both granted permission to the young man to
leave. ||11-12||   Then, after bathing and eating in the morning, he paid homage
to the Arhats and Siddhas with great effort, adorned his body with auspicious
substances, and, filled with great energy, he...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekonaviMzatitamaM parva rAvaNo'tha vahan dIrgha krodhmpraaptnirvRtiH|
'ADuDhaukat punaH sarvAn khecarAn lekhahAribhiH  // 1 //
kiSkindhendrastamabhyAgAttathA dundubhisaMjJakaH  /  alaMkArAdhipo yazca
raithanUpurapastathA  // 2 //  vijayAInage ye ca zreNidvayanivAsinaH  /
sarvodyogena te sarve prAptA ratnazravaHsutam  // 3 //  atho hanUruhadvIpaM naro
mastakalekhakaH  /  prAptaH pavanavegasya pratisUryasya cAntikam  // 4 //
lekhArthamabhigamyaitau prayANanyastamAnasau  /  zrIzailasyodyatau
kartumabhiSekaM nRpAspade  // 5 //  kRtastadarthamATopastUryazabdAdiko mahAn  /
narAH kalazahastAzca zrIzailasya puraH sthitAH  // 6 //  kimetaditi to tena
pRSTAvidamavocatAm  /  rAjyaM hanUruhadvIpe vatsa svaM pAlayAdhunA  // 7 //
yuddhe sahAyatAM kartumAvAmIzena rakSasAm  /  AhUtau tasya kartavyaM
prItyAvAbhyAM yathocitam  // 8 //  rasAtalapure tasya varuNaH pratyavasthitaH  /
durjayo'sau mahAsainyaH putradurgabalotkaTaH  // 9 //  hanUmAnevamuktaH san
vinayenedamabravIt  /  mayi sthite na yuktaM vAM gantumAyodhanaM gurU  // 10 //
avijJAtaraNAsvAdo vatsa tvamiti bhASite  /  jagAda kiM zivasthAnaM
kadAcillabdhamApyate  // 11 //  yadA nivAryamANo'pi na sthAtaM kurute manaH  /
tadA tAbhyAmanujJAtaH sa yuvA gamanaM prati  // 12 //  snAtvA bhuktvA ca
pUrvAhna maGgalArcitavigrahaH  /  kRtapragAmaH siddhAnAmahatAM ca prayatnataH
// 13 //  athAnantara rAvaNako santoSa nahIM huA so usane bahuta bhArI krodha
dhAraNa kara patravAhakoMke dvArA samasta vidyAdharoMko phirase bulAyA  // 1 //
kiSkindhAkA rAjA, dundubhi, alaMkArapurakA adhipati, rathanUpurakA svAmI tathA
vijayArddha parvatakI donoM zreNiyoM meM nivAsa karanevAle anya samasta
vidyAdhara saba prakArakI taiyArIke sAtha rAvaNake samIpa jA pahu~ce  // 2-3 //
tadanantara mastakapara lekhako dhAraNa karanevAlA eka manuSya hanUruha dvIpameM
pavanaMjaya aura pratisUryake pAsa bhI AyA  // 4 //  lekhakA artha samajhakara
donoMne rAvaNake pAsa jAnekA vicAra kiyA so vahAM jAneke pUrva ve rAjyapara
hanUmAnkA abhiSeka karaneke lie udyata hue  // 5 //  rAjyAbhiSekakI bar3I
taiyArI kI gyii| turahI Adi vAditroMkA bar3A zabda hone lagA aura manuSya
hAthameM kalaza lekara hanUmAnke sAmane khar3e ho gaye  // 6 /  /  hanUmAnne
pavanaMjaya aura pratisUryase pUchA ki yaha kyA hai ? taba unhoMne kahA ki he
vatsa ! aba tuma hanUruha dvopake rAjyakA pAlana karo  // 7 //  hama donoMko
rAvaNane yuddha meM sahAyatA karane ke lie bulAyA hai so hameM premapUrvaka
yathocita rUpase AjJA-pAlana karanA cAhie  /  / 8|| rasAtalapurameM jo varuNa
rahatA hai vahI usake viruddha khar3A huA hai| usakI bahuta bar3I senA hai tathA
vaha putra aura durgake balase utkaTa honeke kAraNa durjaya hai  /  / 9 /  /
aisA kahanepara hanUmAnne vinayase uttara diyA ki mere rahate hue Apa
gurujanoMko yuddhake lie jAnA ucita nahIM hai  /  / 10 /  /  'he beTA ! abhI
tumane raNakA svAda nahIM jAnA hai' aisA jaba usase kahA gayA taba usane uttara
diyA ki jo mokSa prApta hotA vaha kyA kabhI pahale prApta kiyA huA hotA hai ?
jaba rokanepara bhI usane rukane kA mana nahIM kiyA taba una donoMne usa yuvAko
jAnekI svIkRti de dI  // 11-12 /  /  tadanantara prAtaHkAla snAna kara jisane
arahanta aura siddha bhagavAnko prayatnapUrvaka praNAma kiyA thA, bhojana kara
zarIrapara maMgaladravya dhAraNa kiye the, jo mahAtejase sahita thA tathA saba
1. aDuDhaukat ma., b.| 2. rathanUpurakastathA ba., ma., j.| 3. sUryazabdAdiko
m.| 4. yuvayoH  /  5. labdhumApyate m.| 6. kRtaH praNAmaH ma.  /

Page #462 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Padma Purana states:  Having paid respects to his father, mother, and
maternal uncle, and having spoken to all, the learned Hanuman, mounted a chariot
that shone like the sun, and, encompassing the ten directions with a multitude
of weapons, proceeded towards Lanka.  Approaching Lanka, he was as resplendent
in his chariot as Indra, the king of the gods, is when he approaches Mount Meru.
As he reached the mountain of water-waves, the sun set, kissing the vast hips of
the ocean.  There, after spending the night in pleasant conversation with his
valiant companions, Hanuman, with great enthusiasm, set his gaze on Lanka and
continued his journey.  He saw various countries, islands, mountains, and
crocodiles churning the ocean, and he entered the army of the Rakshasas.  Seeing
Hanuman's army, the chieftains of the Rakshasas, with eyes fixed on the abode of
Sri Saila, were struck with utter amazement.  Hearing the words, "This is the
same glorious one who pulverized the mountain," Hanuman went to Ravana.  Seeing
Hanuman, who was adorned with flowers, whose buzzing, intoxicated bees were
attracted by the fragrance, and whose chariot was adorned with the radiance of
jewels, Ravana rose from his seat on the stone platform, where he was surrounded
by his ministers.  Embracing Hanuman, whose body was bent in humility, Ravana
sat down beside him, his face beaming with joy.  After inquiring about each
other's well-being and seeing each other's prosperity, the two fortunate ones,
like two Indras, reveled in their meeting.  Then, Ravana, whose mind was filled
with delight, and who was looking at Hanuman with eyes full of affection, said:
"Oh, how much my dear friend, the son of the wind, has increased my love by
sending this son, who is an ocean of renowned virtues!  Having obtained this
great being, adorned with a halo of brilliance, I have no fear of anything in
this vast world."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANeM pitaraM mAtaraM mAturmAtulaM ca mahAdyutiH  /  praNamyAzeSavargaM
ca saMbhASya vidhikovidaH  //  14  //  vimAnaM sUryasaMkAzaM samAruhya dizo daza
/  vyApya zastrasamUhena yayau laGkApurIM prati  //  15  //  trikUTAbhimukho
gacchanvimAne'sAvarAjata  /  mandarAbhimukho yadvadaizAnastridazAdhipaH  //  16
//  jalavIcigirau tasya ravirastamupAgamat  /  samudravIcisaMtAnacumbitoru
nitambake  // 17 //  tatra rAtriM sukhaM nItvA kRtasadbhaTasaMkathaH  /
mahotsAhena saMnahya yayau laGkAhitekSaNaH  //  18  //  nAnAjanapadAn
dvIpAnnagAnUrmisamAhatAn  /  grahAMzca jaladhau pazyan rakSaH sainyamavApa saH
//  19  //  dRSTvA hanUmataH sainyaM pururAkSasapuGgavAH  /  vismayaM paramaM
jagmuH zrIzailAhitailocanAH  // 20 //  cUrNito'nena zailo'sau so'yaM
bhavyajanottamaH  /  iti zabdamasau zRNvan rAvaNasya gato'ntikam  // 21 //
mArutiM rAvaNo vIkSya kusumairabhipUritAt  /
sauramAkRSTasaMbhrAntaguJjanmattamadhuvratAt  // 22 //
uparinyastaratnAMzucchuritAmbaramaNDapAt  /
paryaMntasthitasAmantAdabhyuttasthau zilAtalAt  // 23 //  pariSvajya hanUmantaM
vinayAnatavigraham  /  upaviSTaH samaM tena tatra prItismitAnanaH  //  24 //
anyonyaM kuzalaM pRSTvA dRSTvAnyonyasya saMpadam  /  remAte tau mahAbhAgyau
devendrAviva saMgatau  // 25 //  athAvocaddazagrIvaH pramadAnvitamAnasaH  /
hanUmantaM muhuH pazyannatyantasnigdhayA dRzA  // 26 //  aho saMvarddhitaM prema
vAyunA mama sAdhunA  /  yadayaM preSitaH putraH prakhyAtaguNasAgaraH  // 27 //
enaM prApya mahAsattvaM 'tejomaNDalabhUSitam  /  naiva me dustaraM
kiMcidbhaviSyatyatraviSTape  // 28 //  412 vidhi-vidhAna ke jAnanemeM nipuNa thA
aisA hanUmAn mAtA-pitA tathA mAtA ke mAmAko praNAma kara aura samasta logoM se
sambhASaNa kara sUryake samAna camakate hue vimAnapara baiThakara zastroMke
samUhase dasoM dizAoMko vyApta karatA huA laMkApurIkI ora calA || 13 - 15 ||
vimAnameM baiThakara trikUTAcalake sammukha jAtA huA hanUmAn aisA suzobhita ho
rahA thA jaisA ki meruke sammukha jAtA huA aizAnendra suzobhita hotA hai || 16 |
samudrakI laharoMkI santati jisake vizAla nitambako cUma rahI thI aise jala-vIci
giripara jaba vaha pahuMcA taba sUrya asta ho gayA || 17 || so vahA~ uttama
yoddhAoMke sAtha vArtAlApa karate hue usane sukhase rAtri bitAyI aura prAta:kAla
honepara bar3e utsAhase laMkAkI ora dRSTi rakhakara Age calA || 18 || isa taraha
nAnA dezoM, dvIpoM, taraMgoMse Ahata, parvatoM aura samudra meM kiloleM karate
magaramacchoM ko dekhatA huA rAkSasoMkI senAmeM jA pahu~cA ||19|| hanUmAn kI
senA dekhakara bar3e-bar3e rAkSasoMke ziromaNi hanUmAn kI ora dRSTi lagAkara
parama Azcaryako prApta hue ||20|| jisane parvatako cUrNaM kiyA thA yaha vahI
bhavya janottama hai isa zabdako sunatA huA hanUmAn rAvaNake samIpa gayA || 21 |
| usa samaya rAvaNa usa zilAtalapara baiThA thA jo ki phUloMse vyApta thA,
sugandhike kAraNa khice hue madonmatta bhramaMra jisapara guMjAra kara rahe the,
jisake Upara ratnoMkI kiraNoMse vyApta kapar3ekA uttama maNDapa lagA huA thA
aura jisake cAroM ora sAmanta loga baiThe the  /  rAvaNa hanUmAnko dekhakara usa
zilAtalase uThakara khar3A ho gayA ||22-23 /  /  tadanantara vinayase jisakA
zarIra jhuka rahA thA aise hanumAnakA AliMgana kara vaha prIti ha~satA huA usake
sAtha usI zilAtalapara baiTha gayA ||24|| parasparakI kuzala pUchakara tathA eka
dUsarekI sampadA dekhakara donoM mahAbhAgyazAlI isa taraha ramaNa karane lage
mAno do indra hI paraspara mile hoM ||25|| athAnantara jo prasanna cittakA
dhAraka thA aura atyanta snehabharI dRSTise bAra-bAra usIkI ora dekha rahA thA
aisA rAvaNa hanUmAn se bolA ki ||26|| aho, sajjanottama pavanakumArane mere
sAtha khUba prema bar3hAyA hai jo prasiddha guNoMke sAgarasvarUpa isa putrako
bhejA hai ||27|| isa mahA1. zrIzaila hitalocanAH ma  /  2. hanUmantam  /  3.
churitAvara ma  /  4. tejomaGgala- ma.  /

Page #463 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Nineteenth Canto  413. While the qualities of Hanuman were being described,
Sri Saila, the lord of the mountain, became humble, like a bee that has been
satiated. This is the nature of the virtuous. ||29||  414. The sun, fearing the
impending battle, hastened to set, its rays tinged with a reddish hue. ||30||
415. Evening, carrying the crimson of passion, followed behind, adorned like a
virtuous wife following her beloved. ||31||  416. Then, the night, adorned with
the moon, shone brightly, following her husband, the sun, without ceasing.
||32||  417. The next day, when the world was illuminated by the sun's rays,
Dashagriva, fully armed, stood at the head of his army. ||33||  418. Hanuman,
standing nearby, adorned with auspicious symbols, had crossed the ocean by his
divine power and was approaching the city of Varuna. ||34||  419. As the sun,
aiming at Parashurama, shone with unparalleled brilliance, so too did Ravana,
approaching his enemy, radiate an unmatched light. ||35||  420. The sound of the
army alerted the city of Varuna to the arrival of Dashagriva, and the entire
city was shaken with fear and commotion. ||36||  421. The city of Varuna, known
as Patala-Pundarika, was adorned with strong banners and jeweled gates. But the
arrival of Ravana filled the city with the clamor of war preparations. ||37||
422. In that city, beautiful and captivating like the city of the Asuras, the
women were filled with fear, their eyes wide with terror. ||38||  423. The
warriors of the city, like the gods who dwell in their abodes, came out to
fight. Varuna, proud of his valor, emerged like the lord of the Asuras. ||39||
424. A hundred valiant sons of Varuna, who had blocked the sun's rays with their
weapons, also rose to fight. ||40||  425. Just as the Asura princes easily
defeat the lesser gods, so too did the hundred sons of Varuna quickly vanquish
the Rakshasa army. ||41||  426. The mighty warrior, whose body was enveloped in
a halo of brilliance, declared, "No task in this world will be too difficult for
me." ||28||  427. When Ravana was describing the qualities of Hanuman, he became
humble, like a bee that has been satiated. This is the nature of the great ones.
||29||  428. Then, the sun, whose rays were tinged with red, seemed to set, as
if fearing the impending battle. ||30||  429. Evening, carrying the crimson of
passion, followed behind, adorned like a virtuous wife following her beloved.
||31||  430. The night, adorned with the moon, shone brightly, following her
husband, the sun, without ceasing. ||32||  431. The next day, when the world was
illuminated by the sun's rays, Ravana, fully armed, stood at the head of his
army. ||33||  432. Hanuman, standing nearby, adorned with auspicious symbols,
had crossed the ocean by his divine power and was approaching the city of
Varuna. ||34||  433. As the sun, aiming at Parashurama, shone with unparalleled
brilliance, so too did Ravana, approaching his enemy, radiate an unmatched
light. ||35||  434. The sound of the army alerted the city of Varuna to the
arrival of Dashagriva, and the entire city was shaken with fear and commotion.
||36||  435. The city of Varuna, known as Patala-Pundarika, was adorned with
strong banners and jeweled gates. But the arrival of Ravana filled the city with
the clamor of war preparations. ||37||  436. In that city, beautiful and
captivating like the city of the Asuras, the women were filled with fear, their
eyes wide with terror. ||38||  437. The warriors of the city, like the gods who
dwell in their abodes, came out to fight. Varuna, proud of his valor, emerged
like the lord of the Asuras. ||39||  438. A hundred valiant sons of Varuna, who
had blocked the sun's rays with their weapons, also rose to fight. ||40||  439.
Just as the Asura princes easily defeat the lesser gods, so too did the hundred
sons of Varuna quickly vanquish the Rakshasa army. ||41||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekonaviMzatitamaM parva 413 guNeSu bhASyamANeSu zrIzailo natavigrahaH  /
sabIDa iva saMvRttaH prAyo vRttiriyaM satAm  // 29 //  bhaviSyato'tha
saMgrAmAdbhayeneva divAkaraH  /  astaM sevitumArebhe mandAruNakarotkaraH  // 30
//  saMdhyAsya pRSThato yAntI vahantI rAgamuskaTam  /  zuzubhe prANanAthasya
vinItA ramaNo yathA  // 31 //  tato nizAvadhU reje kRtacandravizeSakA  /
kurvANAnugatiM bharturvAsarasya nirantaram  // 32 //
anyedyurmAnubhirbhAnorujjvale bhuvane kRte  /  dazagrIvaH susannaddhaH
samastabalamadhyagaH  // 23 //  AsannasthahanUmatkaH kRtamaGgalavigrahaH  /
vidyayA jaladhiM mittvA prayAto vAruNaM puram  // 34 //  pratyariM bajato'muSya
dIptirAsIdanuttamA  /  kuThArarAmamuddizya subhUmasyeva cakriNaH  // 35 //
jJAtvA dazAnanaM prAptaM sainyanisvanasUcitam  /  saMculoma puraM sarva
varuNasya mahAravam  // 36 //  pAtAlapuNDarIkAkhyaM tatpuraM prabaladhvajam  /
surattoraNaM jAtaM sannAharavasaMkulam  // 37 //  tatrAsurapurAkAre pure
sarvamanohare  /  AsIccakitanetrANAM strINAmAkulatA parA  // 38 //  yodhAstatra
nirAkrAman samA bhavanavAsinAm  /  camarAsuratulyazca varuNaH zauryagarvitaH  //
39 //  tasya putrazataM tAvadutthitaM yo muddhatam  /  nAnA
praharaNavAtaruddhabhAskaradarzanam  // 40 //  ApAtamAtrakeNava bhagnaM tai
rAkSasaM balam  /  asurANAmivodAraiH kumAraiH kSaudadaivatam  // 41 //  balavAn
tathA tejomaNDalake dhAraka vIrako pAkara mujhe isa saMsArameM koI bhI kArya
kaThina nahIM raha jAyegA  // 28|| jaba rAvaNa hanUmAnke guNoMkA varNana kara
rahA thA taba vaha lajjitake samAna namra zarIrakA dhAraka ho gayA thA so ThIka
hI hai kyoMki mahApuruSoMko yahI vRtti hai  /  / 29 //  tadanantara jisakI
kiraNoMkA samUha lAla par3a gayA thA aisA sUrya mAno honevAle saMgrAmake bhayase
hI asta ho gayA thA  /  / 30 /  /  usake pIche-pIche jAtI aura utkaTa rAga
arthAt lAlimA ( pakSameM prema) ko dhAraNa karatI huI sandhyA aisI suzobhita ho
rahI thI mAno apane prANanAthake pIche-pIche jAtI huI vinIta strI-kulavadhU hI
ho  // 31 //  jo nirantara sUryake pIche-pIche calA karatI thI aisI rAtrirUpI
vadhU candramArUpI tilaka dhAraNa kara atizaya suzobhita hone lagI  // 32 /  /
dUsare dina jaba sUryakI kiraNoMse saMsAra prakAzamAna ho gayA taba rAvaNa
taiyAra hokara varuNake nagarakI ora claa| usa samaya rAvaNa apanI samasta
senAke madhya meM cala rahA thaa| hanUmAn usake pAsa hI sthita aura
maMgaladravya usane zarIrapara dhAraNa kara rakhe the| vaha vidyAke dvArA
samudrako bhedana kara varuNake nagarakI ora calA  // 33-34 //  jisa prakAra
parazurAmako lakSya kara calanevAle subhauma cakravartIko anupama dIpti thI usI
prakAra zatruke sammukha jAnevAle rAvaNakI dIpti bhI anupama thI  // 35 //
senAko kala-kalase dazAnanako AyA jAna varuNakA samasta nagara kSubhita ho gayA
usameM bar3A kuharAma maca gayA  // 36 //  varuNakA vaha nagara pAtAlapuNDarIka
nAmase prasiddha thaa| usameM majabUta dhvajAeM lagI huI thIM aura ratnamayI
toraNa usakI zobhA bar3hA rahe the, para rAvaNake pahuMcanepara sArA nagara
yuddhakI taiyArI sambandhI kala-kalase vyApta ho gayA  // 37 //  asuroMke
nagarake samAna sabake manako haranevAle usa nagarameM khAsakara striyoMmeM
bar3I AkulatA utpanna ho rahI thii| bhayase unake netra trakita ho gaye the  //
38 //  vahAM bhavanavAsI devoMke samAna jo yoddhA the ve bAhara nikala Aye tathA
camarendrake samAna parAkramase garvIlA varuNa bhI nikalakara bAhara AyA  // 39
//  jinhoMne nAnA prakArake zatroMke samUhase sUryakA dikhanA roka diyA thA aise
varuNake sau parAkramI putra bhI yuddha karaneke lie uTha khar3e hue  // 40 //
so jisa prakAra asurakumAra anya kSudra devatAoMko kSaNa ekameM parAjita kara
dete haiM usI prakAra varuNake sau putroMne kSaNa ekameM hI rAkSasoMkI senAko
parA1. varuNaM ma.  /  2. pratyari ma., ja., ka., kh.| 3. parazurAmam  /  4.
prApya m.| 5. -poNDarIkAkhyaM m.| 6. mahAbhavana kha., ja.  /  7. kSudradaivatam
ma., ba.  /

Page #464 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
414 The army of Ravana, which had a hundred brothers displaying their skills,
was shattered by the army of Varuna. The army of Ravana scattered in fear like a
herd of cows. ||42|| The weapons of the Rakshasas, such as the chakra, bow,
mace, spear, and shataghni, fell from their hands, which were slippery with
sweat. ||43|| Seeing his army distressed by the shower of arrows, Ravana,
himself struck by the swift rain of arrows, became enraged. In a moment, he
broke through the enemy ranks and entered their midst, felling the heroes of
Varuna's army like a mighty elephant uproots trees. ||44-45|| Then, the hundred
sons of Varuna surrounded Ravana, like thunderous clouds encircling the sun
during the rainy season. ||46|| Though his body was pierced by arrows coming
from all directions, the proud lion of a man, Ravana, did not abandon the
battlefield. ||47|| On the other side, Varuna had arrayed against him the best
of men, the one with radiant ears, Indrajit, and other lords of the Rakshasas.
||48|| Seeing Ravana, who was marked by the arrows of Varuna's sons and whose
body was stained with blood, resembling a cluster of Palasha flowers, Hanuman
quickly mounted his chariot, which moved among the great men. His heart was
filled with affection for Ravana, as if he were his brother, and he shone like
the sun. ||49-50|| Then, Hanuman, who surpassed the wind in speed, who was
revered for his victories, and who shone like the sun, prepared to fight like
Yama himself. ||51|| Just as a group of high clouds, driven by a mighty wind,
scatters in all directions, so too, the sons of Varuna, driven by Hanuman, fled
in all directions. ||52|| He repeatedly engaged in the sport of cutting through
the Kadali forest with the bodies of his enemies, that is, he effortlessly cut
through the bodies of his enemies, who were like Kadali trees. ||53|| Just as a
man pulls his friend out of affection, so too, he pulled a hero with a noose
made of a Vidya-created Langul. ||54||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 414 padmapurANe antardhAtRzatenaitadrAkSasAnAM bala kSatam  /  goyUthayadaraM
cakre bhramaNaM bhayasaMkulam  // 42 //  cakracApadhanaprAsazataghnIprabhRtIni
ca  /  zastrANi rakSasAM petuH karAtprasvedapicchalAt  // 43 //  tatastaM
zarajAlena samAlokyAkulIkRtam  /  svasainyaM vegavadvarSahato'ruNakaropamam  //
44 //  viMzatyarddhamukhaH kruddho bhittvA ripubalaM kSaNAt  /  praviSTaH
pAtayanvIrAn gajendra iva pAdapAn  // 15 //  tato'sau yugaparaputraiH varuNasya
samAvRtaH  /  Aditya iva garjadbhiH prAvRSeNyabalAhakaiH  // 46 //
tasyeSubhirvapurbhinnaM sarvadigbhyaH samAgataiH  /  tathApi mAnisiMho'sau na
muJcati raNAjiram  // 47 //  bhAskarazravaNaH zreSTho nRNAmindrajitastathA  /
anye ca rakSasAM nAthA varuNenAgrataH kRtAH  // 48 //  tato lakSIkRtaM dRSTvA
zarANAM varuNAtmajaiH  /  rAvaNaM zoNitasrutyA kiMzukotkarasaMnibham  // 49 //
rathamAzu samAruhya mahApuruSamadhyagam  /  bandhuvatprIticetaskaH saM rarAja
tamoraviH  // 50 //  mArutirmArutaM vegAjayan' jayakRtAdaraH  /  udyataH
kAlavadyoddhaM ravimaNDalamAsuraH  // 51 //  tena vAruNayaH sarve preritAH
prapalAyitAH  /  mahArayasamIreNa dhanasaMghA ivonnatAH  // 52 //  praviSTaH
parasainyaM sa dRSTo'nyatra muhurmuhuH  /  kadalIkAnanacchedakrIDAM
cakre'rimUrtiSu  // 53 //  kaMcillAgUlapAzena vidyaarcitmuurtinaa|
AkarSatparamaM vIraM snehana suhRdaM yathA  // 54 //  jita kara diyA  // 41 //
jisake andara sau bhAI apanI kalA dikhA rahe the aisI varuNakI senAse khaNDita
huI rAvaNakI senA gAyoMke jhuNDake samAna bhayabhIta ho titara-bitara ho gayI  /
/ 42 /  /  rAkSasoMke hAtha pasInese gIle ho gaye jisase cakra, dhanuSa, ghana,
prAsa, zataghnI Adi zastra unase chUTa-chUTakara nIce girane lage  // 43 /  /
tadanantara rAvaNane dekhA ki hamArI senA bANoMke samUhase vyAkula hokara
prAtaHkAlIna sUrya kI kiraNoMke samAna lAla-lAla ho rahI hai taba vaha bANoMkI
vegazAlI varSAse svayaM tADita hotA huA bhI kruddha ho kSaNa ekameM zatrudalako
bhedakara bhItara ghusa gayA aura jisa prakAra gajarAja vRkSoMko nIce girAtA hai
usI prakAra varuNakI senAke vIroMko mAra-mArakara nIce girAne lagA  // 44-45 /
/  tadanantara varuNake sau putroMne rAvaNako isa prakAra ghera liyA jisa
prakAra ki varSARtuke garajate hue bAdala sUryako ghera lete haiM  /  / 46 /  /
yadyapi saba dizAoMse AnevAle bANoMse rAvaNakA zarIra khaNDita ho gayA to bhI
vaha abhimAnI yuddhake maidAnako nahIM chor3a rahA thA  // 47|| udhara varuNane
bhI dedIpyamAna kAnoMko dhAraNa karanevAle narazreSTha indrajit tathA rAkSasoMke
anya aneka rAjAoMko apane sAmane kiyA arthAt unase yuddha karane lagA  // 48||
tadanantara varuNake putrane jise apane bANoMkA nizAnA banAyA thA aura jo
rudhirake bahanese palAzake phUloMke samUhake samAna jAna par3atA thA aise
rAvaNako dekhakara hanUmAn zIghra hI mahApuruSoMke bIcameM calanepara rathapara
savAra huaa| usa samaya usakA citta rAvaNake bhAIke samAna prItise yukta thA
tathA vaha sUryake samAna suzobhita ho rahA thA  /  / 49-50|| tatpazcAt jo apane
vegase pavanako jIta rahA thA, vijaya prApta karane meM jisakA Adara thA aura jo
sUryamaNDalake samAna dedIpyamAna ho rahA thA aisA hanUmAn yamarAjake samAna
yuddha karaneke lie udyata huA  // 51 //  so jisa prakAra mahAvegazAlI vAyuse
prerita unnata meghoMkA samUha idhara-udhara ur3a jAtA hai usI prakAra hanUmAnke
dvArA prerita hue varuNake saba putra idhara-udhara bhAga khar3e hue  // 52 //
vaha bAra-bAra zatruoMke zarIroMke sAtha kadalI vanako chedanekI krIr3A karatA
thA arthAt zatruoMke zarIrako kadalI vanake samAna anAyAsa hI kATa rahA thA  /
/ 53 /  /  jisa prakAra koI puruSa snehake dvArA apane mitrako khIMca letA hai
usI prakAra usane kisI vIrako vidyAnirmita lAMgUlarUpI pAzase khIMca liyA thA  /
/ 54 //  aura 1. dazAnanaH  /  2. zoNitazratyA m.| 3. samAsahya  /  4.
parAjitatamo raviH ma.  /  5. -jayaM jaya- ma  /  6. varuNasyApatyAni pumAMsaH,
vAruNayaH  /  7. mahArathasamIreNa m.| .

Page #465 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nineteenth Chapter  **415** Just as someone strikes the head of a deluded
person with a hammer, so too was he being struck on the head by a falling
meteorite. **55** Seeing him playing, Sri Saila, adorned with the banner of the
monkey, approached with eyes red with anger. **56** Seeing Varuna approaching
Sri Saila, the king of the Rakshasas, ran and blocked him like a mountain
blocking the flow of a river. **57** The battle between Varuna and the Rakshasas
raged, filled with horses, elephants, foot soldiers, and a multitude of weapons.
**58** Meanwhile, the son of the wind, Hanuman, had bound a hundred of Varuna's
sons. They were exhausted from the long battle, and their army was decimated.
**59** Hearing that his hundred sons were bound, Varuna was overwhelmed with
grief. He forgot his knowledge and his strength faltered. **60** Seizing this
opportunity, the master of battle, Ravana, pierced through Varuna's knowledge
called "Yogini" and captured him alive. **61** At that time, Ravana acted as
Rahu to the moon, Varuna, whose radiance was lost due to the loss of his sons
and who was devoid of his rising. **62** Varuna, who was trapped in a cage of
weapons, his pride broken, was entrusted to the care of Kumbhakarna, who looked
at him with wonder. **63** After that, Ravana, relieved of his worries, gave his
army rest. He stayed in the excellent garden called "Bhavanonmad". **64** The
weariness of his army, which had taken shelter under the shade of trees, was
dispelled by the cool breeze from the sea. **65** Knowing that their leader was
captured, the entire army of Varuna, filled with fear and anxiety, entered the
city of Poundarika. **66** Although they were the same army and the same great
warriors, they became useless without their leader. **67** Oh, look at the
greatness of punya! When a virtuous person is born, many others rise with him,
and when he falls, many others fall with him. **68**   **Notes:**  * **Punya:**
Merit, virtue, good deeds. * **Yogini:** A type of knowledge or power. *
**Rahu:** A celestial being who is said to cause eclipses. * **Kumbhakarna:**
Ravana's brother, known for his immense size and sleep. * **Bhavanonmad:** A
garden, possibly named after a deity. * **Poundarika:** A city.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekonaviMzatitama parva 415 kaMcidulkAbhighAtena mastakoparyatADayat  /
hetumudgaraghAtena 'mithyAdRSTimivArhataH  // 55 //  krIDantamiti taM dRSTvA
zrIzailaM vAnaradhvajam  /  abhyAjagAma varuNo kopAruNanirIkSaNaH  // 56 //
zrIzailAbhimukhaM dRSTvA vAruNaM rAkSasAdhipaH  /  dhAvamAnaM rurodhAriM
girivanimnagAjalam  // 57 //  varuNasyAbhavad yuddhaM yAvannAthena rakSasAm  /
vAjivAraNApAdAtazastrasaMghAtasaMkulam  // 5 //  tAvatputrazataM tasya baddhaM
pvnsuununaa| ciraM yuddhasamudbhutakhedaM vihatasainikam  // 59 //  zrutvA
putrazataM baddhaM varuNaH zokavihvalaH  /  vidyAsmaraNanirmukto babhUva
zlathavikramaH  // 6 //  prApyAsya rAvaNazchidraM vidyAmucchidya yodhinIm  /
jIvagrAhamimaM kSipraM jagrAha raNakovidaH  // 6 //  tadA varuNacandrayaM
bhraSTaputrakarazriyaH  /  udayena vimuktasya rAvaNo rAhutAmagAt  // 62 //
zastrapaJjaramadhyastho bhagnamAnazca so'rpitaH  /  sAdaraM kumbhakarNasya
rakSituM vismayekSitaH  // 63 //  tato vizramayan sainyaM rAvaNazviranirvRtaH  /
udyAne pravare tasthau bhavanonmAdanAmani  // 6 //  samudrAsaMgazItena vAyunAsya
vyanIyata  /  sainyasya raNajaH khedo vRkSacchAyAnuvartinaH  // 65 //  gRhItaM
nAyakaM jJAtvA varuNasyAkhilaM balam  /  praviveza puraM bhItaM pauNDarIkaM
samAkulam  // 66 //  tadeva sAdhanaM tAvatta eva ca mahAbhaTAH  /  pradhAnasya
viyogena prApurvyarthazarIratAm  // 67 //  puNyasya pazyataudArya yadudbhavati
tadvati  /  bahUnAmudbhavaH puMsAM patite patanaM tathA  // 68 //  jisa prakAra
koI jinabhakta heturUpI mudgarake prahArase mithyAdRSTike mastakapara prahAra
karatA hai usI prakAra vaha kisIke zirapara ulkAke prahArase coTa pahu~cA rahA
thA  // 55 //  isa prakAra vAnarako dhvajAse suzobhita hanUmAnko kor3A karate
dekha krodhase lAla-lAla netra karatA huA varuNa usake sAmane AyA  // 56 /  /
jyoMhI rAvaNane varuNako hanUmAnke sAmane daur3atA AtA dekhA tyoM hI usane
zatruko bIcameM usa prakAra roka liyA jisa prakAra ki pahAr3a nadIke jalako roka
letA hai  // 57 /  /  idhara jabataka varuNakA rAvaNake sAtha ghor3e, hAthI,
paidala sipAhI tathA zastroMke samUhase vyApta yuddha huA  // 58|| tabataka
hanumAnne varuNake sauke sau hI putra bAMdha liye| ve cirakAla taka yuddha
karatekarate thaka gaye the tathA unake sainika mAre gaye the  // 59|| sauke sau
hI putroMko ba~dhA sunakara varuNa zokase vihvala ho gyaa| vaha vidyAkA smaraNa
bhUla gayA aura usakA parAkrama DhIlA par3a gayA  // 60|| raNa-nipuNa rAvaNane
chidra pAkara varuNakI yodhinI nAmA vidyA cheda DAlI tathA use jIvita pakar3a
liyA  // 61 //  usa samaya jisake putrarUpI kiraNoMkI zobhA naSTa ho gayI thI
tathA jo udayase rahita thA aise varuNarUpI candramAke lie rAvaNane rAhukA kAma
kiyA thA  // 62 //  jo zatrurUpI piMjar3eke madhyameM sthita thA, jisakA mAna
naSTa ho gayA thA aura jise loga bar3e Azcaryase dekhate the aisA varuNa rakSA
karaneke lie Adarake sAtha kumbhakarNako sauMpA gayA  // 63 /  /  tadanantara
bahuta dina bAda nizcintatAko prApta huA rAvaNa senAko vizrAma detA huA
bhavanonmAda nAmaka utkRSTa udyAnameM ThaharA rahA  // 64 /  /  vRkSoMko chAyAke
nIce ThaharI huI isakI senAkA yuddhajanita kheda samudrake sambandhase zItala
vAyune dUra kara diyA thA  // 65 //  svAmIko pakar3A jAnakara varuNakI samasta
senA bhayabhIta ho vyAkulatAse bhare puNDarIka nagarameM ghusa gayI  // 66 //
yadyapi vahI senA thI, aura ve hI mahAyoddhA the to bhI pradhAna puruSake binA
saba vyartha ho gaye  /  / 67 //  aho ! puNyakA mAhAtmya dekho ki puNyavAnke
utpanna hote hI aneka puruSoMkA udbhava ho jAtA hai aura usake naSTa honepara
aneka puruSoMkA patana ho jAtA hai  // 68 /  /  1. dulkAsi -m.| 2.
mithyAdRSTirivArhataH m.| 3. cirayuddha kha.  /  4. varuNayodhasya m.| 5.
bhraSTaputrakaraH zriyaH m.| 6. -caranirvRtaH kha., ja, ma.  /

Page #466 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, it is said that Bhaskarakarna, the enemy, destroyed the
city, which was filled with a multitude of bewildered people.  ||65|| The
warriors looted all the wealth, jewels, and other valuables of the city. This
was done out of anger towards the enemy city, not out of greed. ||70|| The
women, who were filled with the delusion of love, with their eyes streaming with
tears, were being taken away, wailing. ||71|| Those women, whose bodies were
bent under the weight of their breasts, with their hands trembling like tender
leaves, were being taken away by the cruel men, crying out for their relatives.
||72|| One woman, who had been thrown inside the chariot, whose moon-like face
was eclipsed by the sorrow of the Rahu, spoke to her friend, her eyes filled
with tears. ||73|| "My friend, if my virtue is destroyed, I will surely die by
hanging myself from a cloth." ||74|| Another woman, whose death was uncertain,
was calling out to her beloved, again and again, her eyes dull with sorrow,
remembering his virtues. ||75|| Those women, whose eyes were streaming with
tears, were calling out to their mothers, fathers, husbands, brothers, uncles,
and sons, causing sorrow even to the sage. ||76|| One woman, whose eyes had
turned green due to the radiance of Kumbhakarna, spoke to her friend, who had
lotus-like eyes, in a secluded place. ||77|| "My friend, seeing this great man,
I have experienced an extraordinary joy, and my whole body feels like it has
become subservient to that joy." ||78|| Thus, due to the strange nature of
karma, both pure and impure thoughts arose in the minds of those women. Indeed,
the actions of people are strange. ||79|| Then, Kumbhakarna, who possessed
wealth like Kubera, who was served by valiant warriors, who was filled with the
sound of victory, and who was adorned with beautiful pastimes, descended from
his chariot and, with great joy, presented the captured women with their pale
lips to Ravana. ||80-81|| Those women were filled with sorrow, their eyes filled
with tears, and their bodies trembling. ||82||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padamapurANe atha bhAskarakarNastanmathnAti sma puraM ripoH  /
vihvalIbhUtanizzeSajanasaMghAtasaMkulam  // 65 //  luNTitaM cAtra sakalaM
dhanaratnAdikaM maTaiH  /  arAtipurakopena na tu lobhavazasthitaiH  // 7 //
rativibhramadhAriNyaH sravadasrAkulekSaNAH  /  vilapantyo varAkAzca gRhyante sma
varAGganAH  // 7 //  stanAvanamradehAstAzcalatpallavapANayaH  /  kUjantyo
bAndhavAn sarvAn gRhItA niSThurairna raiH  // 72 //  vimAnAbhyantaranyastA
kAcidevamabhASata  /  sakhIM zokagrahagrastasamastAsyanizAkarAH  // 73 //  sakhi
! zIlavinAzo me yadi nAma bhavediha  /  ullambyAMzakapaTTena mariSyAmi na
saMzayaH  // 7 //  saMdigdhamaraNaM kAcid vyAharantI muhuH priyam  /  saMsmRtya
tadguNAn mULamAnacche mlAnalocanA  // 75 //  mAtaraM pitaraM kAntaM bhrAtaraM
mAtulaM sutam  /  AhvayantyaH kSaranetrAstA munerapi duHkhadAH  // 76 //
kAcidbhAskarakarNasya zomayA hRtalocanA  /  jagAdopAMzuvinammAt sakhoM
kamalalocanA  // 77 //  sakhi kApi mamotpannA dRSTvaitaM narapuGgavam  /
etiryayA kRtevAha parAyattazarIrikA  // 7 //  iti zuddhA viruddhAzca
vikalpAstatra yoSitAm  /  babhUvuH karmavaicitryAlloko'yaM citraceSTitaH  // 79
//  kubera iva sadabhUtiH pravIrabhaTasevitaH  /  jayanisvAnamukharaH
kAntalIlAsamanvitaH  // 8 //  avatIrya vimAnAntAd bhAskarazravaNo mudA  /  puro
rAkSasanAthasya dhUsaroSThIratiSThapat  // 81 //  tA viSAdevatIrdRSTvA
vASpapUritalocanAH  /  bandhubhI rahitA namrAH savepathuzarIrikAH  // 82 //
athAnantara kumbhakarNa ghabar3Aye hue samasta manuSyoMke samUhase vyApta
zatruke usa nagarako naSTa-bhraSTa karane lagA  // 69 //  yoddhAoMne usa
nagarakI dhana-ratna Adika samasta kImatI vastueM lUTa liiN| yaha lUTa zatruke
nagarapara krodha honeke kAraNa hI kI gayI thI na ki lobhake vazIbhUta hokara
// 70 //  jo ratike samAna vibhramako dhAraNa karanevAlI thIM, jinake netra
jharate hue AMsuoMse vyApta the tathA jo vilApa kara rahI thIM aisI becArI
uttamottama striyAM pakar3akara lAyI gayIM  // 71 //  jinake zarIra stanoMke
bhArase namra the, jinake pallavoMke samAna komala hAtha hila rahe the aura jo
samasta bandhujanoMko cillA-cillAkara pukAra rahI thIM aisI una striyoMko
niSThura manuSya pakar3akara lA rahe the||72|| jisakA makharUpI parNa candramA
zokarUpI rAhake dvArA prasA gayA thA aisI vimAnake bhItara DAlI gayI koI strI
sakhIse kaha rahI thI ki he sakhi ! yadi kadAcit mere zIlakA bhaMga hogA to maiM
vastrakI paTTIse laTakakara mara jAU~gI isameM saMzaya nahIM hai  // 73-74 /  /
jisake maranemeM sandeha thA aise patiko bAra-bAra pukAratI huI mlAna
locanoMvAlI koI strI usake guNoMkA smaraNa kara mUrchAko prApta ho rahI thI  //
75 /  /  jo mAtA, pitA, bhAI, mAmA aura putrako bulA rahI thIM tathA jinake
netroMse A~sU jhara rahe the aisI ve striyA~ munike lie bhI duHkhadAyinI ho rahI
thI arthAt unakI dazA dekha munike hRdayameM bhI duHkha utpanna ho jAtA
thaa||76|| kumbhakarNakI zobhAse jisake netra hare gaye the aisI koI eka kamala-
locanA strI ekAnta pAkara vizvAsapUrvaka sakhIse kaha rahI thI ki he sakhi ! isa
zreSTha narako dekhakara mujhe koI adbhuta hI Ananda utpanna huA hai aura jisa
Anandase mAno merA samasta zarIra parAdhIna hI ho gayA hai  // 77-78 //  isa
prakAra karmokI vicitratAse una khiyoMmeM zuddha tathA viruddha donoM prakArake
vikalpa utpanna ho rahe the so Thoka hI hai kyoMki logoMkI ceSTAe~ vicitra huA
karatI haiM  // 79 //  tadanantara jo kuberake samAna samIcIna vibhUtikA dhAraka
thA, atyanta balavAn yoddhA jisakI sevA kara rahe the, jo jaya-jayakI dhvanise
mukhara thA aura sundara lIlAse sahita thA aise kumbhakarNane vimAnase utarakara
bar3e harSake sAtha una dhUsara oThoMvAlI apahRta striyoMko rAvaNake sAmane
khar3A kara diyA  // 80-81 //  ve striyA~ viSAdase yukta thIM, unake netra
AMsuoMse bhare hue the, 1. lobhakazasthitaiH ma.  /  2. kiraNasya ma.  /  3.
munipuGgavam m.| 4. zuddhaviruddhAzca m.| 5. viSAdavatI dRSTvA m.| 6. -zarIrikA
ma.  /

Page #467 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
They say that the nineteenth chapter is full of compassion, spontaneous, and
somewhat sorrowful. Ravana, filled with compassion, spoke to his brother. ||83||
Oh, this is a terrible deed you have done, my dear brother! You have brought
these noble women as prisoners. ||84|| What fault is there in these innocent
women, who are like precious jewels? Why have you brought them here in vain?
||85|| The duty of protecting the innocent, destroying the enemies, and serving
the teachers, is the duty of the great souls. ||86|| Saying this, he immediately
freed them, and they quickly returned to their homes. The virtuous women were
comforted by his words, and their fear quickly subsided. ||87|| Then Ravana
called Varuna, who was ashamed and whose face had turned pale at the sight of
the warriors. He said, "Do not grieve over being captured in battle, for the
capture of heroes in battle is a cause for their great fame." ||88-89|| A
valiant hero in battle obtains only two things: capture or death. Only cowards
flee. ||90|| You, as before, should protect your entire kingdom, with all your
friends and relatives, free from all troubles, in your own place. ||91|| Thus
addressed, Varuna folded his hands and said to the valiant Ravana, "In this
world, your virtue is vast. He who holds enmity towards you is a fool." ||92||
Oh, this great courage of yours is worthy of thousands of hymns, like that of a
sage. You have defeated me without using divine jewels. Truly, your rule is
exalted. ||93||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekonaviMzatitama parva vadantIH karuNaM svairaM kimapi trapayAnvitAH  /
rAvaNaH karuNAviSTo jagAdeti sahodaram  // 83 //  aho'tyantamidaM bAla tvayA
duzcaritaM kRtam  /  kulanAryo yadAnItA vandIgrahaNapAram  // 84 //  doSaH
ko'tra varAkINAM nArINAM mugdhacetasAm  /  khalIkAramimA yena tvayakA prApitA
mudhA  // 85 //  pAlikA mugdhalokasya zatrulokasya nAzikA  /  guruzuzrUSiNI
ceSTA nanu ceSTA mahAtmanAm  // 86 //  ityuktvA mocitAstena kSipraM tA
yayurAlayam  /  AzvAsitA girA sAdhvyaH sadyaH shithilsaadhvsaaH||87|| AnAyya
varuNo'vAci rAvaNenAtha satrapaH  /  bhaTadarzanamAtreNa kRtarakSonatAnanaH  //
88 //  pravINa mA kRthAH zokaM yuddhagrahaNasaMbhavam  /  grahaNaM nanu vIrANAM
raNe satkIrtikAraNam  // 89 //  dvayameva raNe vIraH prApyate mAnazAlimiH  /
grahaNaM maraNaM vApi kAtarezca palAyitum  // 10 //  purAvadakhilaM sa tvaM
rAjyaM rakSa nije pade  /  mitrabAndhavasaMpannaH sakalopadravojjhitam  // 11 //
upajAtivRttam athaivamukto varuNaH sa voraM kRtvAJjaliM prAvadadetameva  /
vizAlapuNyasya tavAna loke mUDho jano tiSThati vairabhAve  // 12 //  upendra
vajrAvRttam aho mahaddhairya midaM tvadIyaM muneriva stotrasahasrayogyam  /
vihAya ratnAni parAjito'haM tvayA yadabhyunnatazAsanena  // 13 //  bandhujanoMse
rahita thIM, namra thIM, unake zarIra kAMpa rahe the, ve icchAnusAra kucha
dayanIya zabdoMkA uccAraNa kara rahI thIM tathA lajjAse yukta thiiN| una
striyoMko dekhakara rAvaNa karuNAyukta ho kumbhakarNase isa prakAra kahane lagA
// 82-83 /  /  ki aho bAlaka ! jo tU kulavatI striyoMko bandIke samAna
pakar3akara lAyA hai yaha tUne atyanta duzcaritakA kArya kiyA hai  /  / 84 //
ina becArI bholIbhAlI striyoMkA isameM kyA doSa thA jo tUne vyartha hI inheM
kaSTa pahu~cAyA hai ? ||85 /  /  jo ceSTA mugdhajanoMkA pAlana karanevAlI hai,
zatruoMkA nAza karanevAlI hai aura gurujanoMkI zuzrUSA karane pathArthameM vahI
mahAparuSoMkI ceSTA kahalAtI hai  // 86 //  aisA kahakara usane unheM zIghra hI
chur3avA diyA jisase ve apane-apane ghara calI gyiiN| yahI nahIM usane sAdhvI
striyoMko apanI vANIse AzvAsana bhI diyA jisase una sabakA bhaya zIghra hI kama
ho gayA  // 87 //  athAnantara jo lajjAse sahita thA tathA jisane subhaToMke
dekhane mAtrase rAkSasoMkA mukha nIcA kara diyA thA aise varuNako bulAkara
rAvaNane kahA ki he pravINa ! yuddha meM pakar3e jAnekA zoka mata karo kyoMki
yuddha meM vIroMkA pakar3A jAnA to unakI uttama kIrtikA kAraNa hai  /  / 88-89||
mAnazAlI vIra yuddha meM do hI vastue~ prApta karate haiM eka to pakar3A jAnA
aura dUsarA mArA jaanaa| inake sivAya jo kAyara loga haiM ve bhAga jAnA prApta
karate haiM  // 10 //  tuma pahaleke samAna hI samasta mitra aura bandhujanoMse
sampanna ho sakala upadravoMse rahita apane sampUrNa rAjyakA apane hI sthAnameM
rahakara pAlana karo  // 91 /  /  isa prakAra kahanepara varuNane hAtha
jor3akara vIra rAvaNase kahA ki isa saMsArameM ApakA puNya vizAla hai jo Apake
sAtha vaira rakhatA hai vaha mUrkha hai  // 92|| aho! yaha tumhArA bar3A dhairya
hai, yaha munike dhairyake samAna hajAroM stavana karaneke yogya hai, ki jo
tumane divya ratnoMkA prayoga kiye binA hI mujhe jIta liyaa| yathArtha meM
tumhArA zAsana unnata hai  /  / 23 /  /  1. vadantI ma.  /  2. apayAnvitA ma.  /
3. tvayi kA ma.  /  4. kSiprA ma.  /  5. -sAdhvasA m.| 6. saMbhava m,|

Page #468 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 418 of the Padma Purana: The Story of Vayu's Son  How can the
influence of Vayu's son, the wonder-worker Hanuman, be described? For, O
virtuous one, he was also honored by your auspicious presence. ||94||  This
earth, protected by the treasury of valor, is not attainable by anyone through
lineage. It is meant for the enjoyment of the valiant, and you stand at the head
of the valiant, therefore, you should rule the world. ||95||  O lord of great
renown, you are our master. Forgive us for our harsh words. We speak because it
is necessary to speak, O lord, your boundless forgiveness is already evident.
||96||  By forming a bond with you, O one of great effort, I have achieved my
purpose. Therefore, accept my daughter, for you are the most worthy of her.
||97||  Saying this, he offered his daughter, born to the queen Sudevi, a
beautiful maiden with a lotus-like face, known as Satyavati, to Ravana. ||98||
A grand celebration took place at their wedding, honoring all the people. For
both of them possessed all prosperity, and there was nothing left for them to
seek. ||99||  Thus, honored by Ravana, who himself had honored him, and having
followed him, Vayu entered his own capital. There, for some days, his heart was
filled with sorrow due to the separation from his daughter. ||100||  Ravana, who
shook Mount Kailasa, also came to Lanka and, with great honor, gave his
daughter, Chandra-nakha's beautiful daughter, to Hanuman. That daughter was
known throughout the world as Anangapushpa, the queen of virtues. Her eyes were
like the flower-shaped weapon of Kamadeva, the god of love. Obtaining her,
Hanuman was filled with great joy. ||102||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 418 padmapurANe upajAtivRttam vAyoH sutasyaiva kathaM prabhAvo
nigadyatAmadbhutakarmaNo'pi  /  yatastvadIyena zubhena sAdho 'samAdRtaH so'pi
mahAnubhAvaH  // 94 //  na kasyacinnAma mahIyametAM
gotrkrmaadvikrmkoshdhaaritaa| vIrasya bhogyeyamasau bhavAMzca teSAM sthito
mUrdhani zAdhi lokam  // 15 //  svAmI tvamasmAkamudArakIta kSamasva
durvAkyakRtaM nikAram  /  vaktavya mityeva vadAmi nAtha kSamA tu dRSTeva
tavAtyudArA  // 16 //  tena tvayA sArdhamahaM vidhAya
saMbandhamatyugnataceSTitena  /  kRtArthatAmemi tato gRhANa tanme sutAM
yogyatamastvamasyAH  // 17 //  evaM gaditvA tanujAM vinItAM prakIrtitAM
satyavatIti naamnaa| lalAma rUpAM janitAM sudevyAM samarpayattAmarasAbhavaktrAm
// 18 //  tayormahAn saMvavRte vivAhe samutsavaH pUjitasarvalokaH  /  tayohi
niHzeSasamRddhimAjoranveSaNIyaM na samasti kiMcit  // 19 //  saMmAnitastena ca
mAnitena kRtAnuyAnaH katicidinAni  /  /  sutAviyogavyathitAntarAtmA svarAjadhAnI
varuNo viveza  // 10 //  kailAsakampo'pi sametya laGkA vidhAya
saMmAnamatipradhAnam  /  mahAprabhAM candranakhAtanUjAM dadau samIraprabhavAya
kanyAm  // 101 //  anaGgapuSpeti samastaloke gatAM prasiddhiM guNarAjadhAnIm  /
anaGgapuSpAyudhabhUtanetrAM labdhvA sa tAM toSamudAramAre  // 102 //  athavA
AzcaryakArI kArya karanevAle hanumAnakA hI prabhAva kaise kahA jAye? kyoMki he
satpuruSa! vaha mahAnubhAva bhI Apake hI zubhodayase yahA~ AyA thA ||94 //
parAkramarUpI kozase jisakI rakSA kI gayI aisI yaha pRthivI gotrakI paripATIke
anusAra kisIko prApta nahIM huii| yaha to vora manuSyake bhogane yogya hai aura
Apa vIra manuSyoMmeM agrasara ho ataH Apa lokakA pAlana karo  // 95 //  he udAra
yazake dhAraka ! Apa hamAre svAmI ho| mere durvacanoMse Apako jo duHkha huA ho
use kSamA kro| he nAtha ! aisA kahanA cAhie, isIlie kaha rahA huuN| vaise ApakI
atyanta udAra kSamA to dekha hI lI hai  /  / 16 /  /  Apa atyanta ceSTAke
dhAraka ho isalie Apake sAtha sambandha kara maiM kRtakRtya honA cAhatA huuN|
Apa merI putrI svIkRta kIjie kyoMki isake yogya Apa hI haiM  /  / 97 /  /  aisA
kahakara usane sundara rUpakI dhAraka, sudevI rAnIse utpanna, kamalake samAna
mukhavAlI, satyavatI nAmase prasiddha apanI vinIta kanyA rAvaNake lie samarpita
kara dI  // 98 //  una donoMke vivAhameM aisA bar3A bhArI utsava huA thA ki
jisameM saba logoMkA sammAna kiyA gayA to ThIka hI hai kyoMki donoM hI samasta
samRddhiko prApta the, ataH unheM koI bhI vastu khojanI nahIM par3I thI  /  / 99
/  /  isa prakAra sammAnako prApta hae rAvaNane jisakA sammAna kiyA thA tathA
rAvaNa svayaM jise bhejaneke lie pIche-pIche gayA thA aisA varuNa apanI
rAjadhAnImeM praviSTa huaa| vahA~ putrIke viyogase kucha dina taka usakI
antarAtmA duHkhI rahI  // 100 //  kailAsako kampita karanevAle rAvaNane bhI
laMkAmeM Akara tathA bahuta bhArI sammAna kara hanUmAnke lie candranakhAko
kAntimatI putrI samarpita kii| usa kanyAkA nAma lokameM 'anaMgapuSpA' prasiddha
thaa| vaha guNoMkI rAjadhAnI thI aura usake netra kAmadevake puSparUpI zastra
arthAt kamalake samAna the| use pAkara hanUmAn atyadhika santoSako 1. samAhitaH
ma.  /  2. viditvA m.| 3. sudevyA ma.  /  4. tAmrarasAbhavaktrAm ma.  /  5.
hanUmate  /  6. prApa AMAVAVVVV

Page #469 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nineteenth Chapter  **419**  **Vasantatilaka Vritta**  He acquired wealth
and was crowned in the city of Karnakundala, like Indra in the celestial realm,
he enjoyed the best of pleasures. ||10||  Similarly, Nala, the king of
Kishkupura, gave his renowned daughter, Harimalini, to Hanuman, who was
victorious in acquiring Lakshmi through his beauty. ||104||  In the city of
Kinnaragita, he obtained a hundred daughters of the Kinnara race. Thus, the
great one had more than a thousand wives in succession. ||105||  **Upjati
Vritta**  Hanuman, who was known as Shrishaila, wandered and stayed on that
mountain. Thus, the beautiful peak became known as Shrishaila throughout the
earth. ||106||  At that time, in the city of Kishkindha, resided the noble
Sugriva, the king of the Vidhyadharas. His wife, Tara, was like the moon in her
face and resembled Rati in her beauty. ||107||  They had a daughter named Padma
raga, whose complexion was like a fresh lotus. She was renowned throughout the
earth for her virtues and resembled Lakshmi in her beauty. Her eyes were large,
her lotus-like face was adorned with a cluster of radiance, her breasts were
high and full like the temples of a large elephant, her belly was slender like
the grip of Indra's thunderbolt, she moved like a beautiful lake, and she stole
the hearts of all men. ||108-109||  **Upendra Vajra Vritta**  Her parents,
thinking about a suitable match for their beautiful and charming daughter, could
not sleep at night, and during the day, their minds were scattered. ||110||
**Note:** The text mentions that Hanuman received not only a daughter but also a
coronation in the city of Karnakundala. This suggests that he was crowned as the
king of that city.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekonaviMzatitamaM parva 419 vasantatilakAvRttam zriyAM ca saMpAdini
karNakuNDale pure'sya cakre kSitipAbhivecanam  /  sthitaH sa
tatrottamabhogasaMgato yathorddhavaloke bhuvanasya pAlakaH  // 10 //  tathA
nalaH kiSkupure zarIrajAM prasiddhimevA harimAlinI zrutim  /  zriyaM jayantImapi
rUpasaMpadA dadau vibhUtyA parayA hanUmate  // 104 //  pure tathA
kinnaragItasaMjJake sa labdhavAn kinarakanyakAzatam  /  iti krameNAsya babhUva
yoSitAM paraM sahasrAdagaNanaM mahAtmanaH  // 105 //  upajAtivRttam bhramannasau
yena mahIdhare'sthAcchrIzailasaMzo'tra samIrasUnuH  /  zrIzaila ityAgatavAnasau
tat khyAtiM pRthivyAmiti ramyasAnuH  // 106 //  tadAsti kiSkindhapure mahAtmA
sugrIvasaMjJaH purakhecarezaH  /  tAreti tArApati 'kAntavaktrA babhUva rAmAsya
rate samAnA  // 107 //  tayostanUjA navapadmarAgA guNaH pratItA bhuvi padmarAgA
/  padmava rUpeNa vizAlanetrA mAmaNDalaprAvRtavaktrapadmA  // 108 //
upendravajravRttam mahemakummonnatapIvarastenI surendrazastragrahaNopamodarI  /
vizAlalAvaNyataDAgamadhyagA malimlucA sarvajanAntarAtmanAm  // 109 //
upajAtivRttam vicintayantau pitarau ca tasyA yogyaM varaM zobhanavibhramAyAH  /
naktaM na nidrAM sukhato labhetAM divA tu naiva pravikIrNacittau  // 10 //
prApta huA  /  / 101-102 /  /  kanyA hI nahIM dI kintu lakSmIse bharapUra
karNakuNDalanAmA nagarameM usakA rAjyAbhiSeka bhI kiyA so jisa prakAra
svargalokameM indra rahatA hai usI prakAra vaha usa nagarameM uttama bhoga
bhogatA huA rahane lagA  // 103 /  /  kiSkupurake rAjA nalane bhI rUpasampadAke
dvArA lakSmIko jItanevAlI apanI harimAlinI nAmakI prasiddha putrI bar3e
vaibhavake sAtha hanUmAnko dI  /  / 104 //  isI prakAra kinnaragIta nAmA nagara
meM bhI usane kinnarajAtike vidyAdharoMkI sau kanyAe~ prApta kii| isa taraha usa
mahAtmAke yathAkramase eka hajArase bhI adhika striyA~ ho gayIM  // 105 //  caki
zrIzaila nAmako dhAraNa karanevAle hanUmAn bhramaNa karate hue usa parvatapara
Akara Thahara gaye the isalie sundara zikharoMvAlA vaha parvata pRthivImeM
'zrIzaila' isa nAmase hI prasiddha ho gayA  /  / 106 //  athAnantara usa samaya
kiSkindhapura nAmA nagarameM vidyAdharoMke rAjA udAracetA sugrIva rahate the|
unakI candramAke samAna mukhavAlI tathA sundaratAmeM ratikI samAnatA karanevAlI
tArA nAmakI strI thI  /  / 107 /  /  una donoM ke eka padmarAgA nAmakI putrI
thii| usa putrIkA raMga nUtana kamalake samAna thA, guNoMke dvArA vaha
pRthivImeM atyanta prasiddha thI, rUpase lakSmIke samAna jAna par3atI thI, usake
netra vizAla the, usakA mukhakamala kAntike samUhase AvRta thA, usake stana kisI
bar3e hAthIke gaNDasthalake samAna unnata aura sthUla the, usakA udara
indrAyudha arthAt vajrake pakar3aneko jagahake samAna kRza thA, vaha atyadhika
saundaryarUpo sarovarake madhyameM saMcAra karanevAlI thI tathA sarva manuSyoMkI
antarAtmAko curAnevAlI thI  /  / 108-109 /  /  sundara vibhramoMse yukta usa 1.
kAnti m.|

Page #470 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
420 In the Padma Purana, the Vidyaadharas, led by Indrajit, whose lineage and
character were well-known, were depicted in paintings. These beautiful paintings
were shown to the daughter by her parents. ||111|| Looking at them in sequence,
the girl repeatedly narrowed her eyes. When she saw the painting of Hanuman, her
gaze was immediately drawn to it and remained fixed. She looked at him with
affection. ||112|| Seeing Hanuman in the painting, whose entire body was devoid
of any resemblance to others, the girl was struck by five unbearable arrows of
Kamadeva at the same time. ||113|| Seeing her affection for Hanuman, her wise
friend said, "Oh, girl! This is the son of Pavananjay, known as Shrishail."
||114|| "His qualities were known to you before, and his beauty is before your
eyes. Therefore, enjoy the pleasures of love with him and give your parents a
long sleep, that is, let them sleep peacefully." ||115|| "Oh, what a wonder!
Hanuman, even in a painting, has aroused passion in your heart." The girl,
blushing, struck her friend with a lotus flower. ||116|| When the father learned
that his daughter's heart had been stolen by the son of Marut, he immediately
sent her painting to Hanuman. ||117|| The messenger sent by Sugriva reached
Shreenagar. There, he introduced himself, paid his respects, and then showed
Hanuman the painting of Padma raga, the daughter of Tara. ||118|| 1. Looking at
them in sequence, the girl repeatedly narrowed her eyes.  2. By him, the mind...
3. The other... 4. Born...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 420 padmapurANe tataH paTeSvindrajitapradhAnA vidyAdharAH sUcitazIlavaMzAH  /
citrIkRtAzcitraguNA duhitre pradarzitAzcArurucaH pitRbhyAm  // 111 //
anukramAtsAtha nirIkSamANA muhurmuhuH saMhRtanetrakAntiH  /  sadyaH
samAkRSTaviceSTadRSTirbAlA hanUmatpratimAM dadarza  // 112 //  dRSTvA ca taM
vAyusutaM paTasthaM sAdRzyanirmuktasamastadeham  /  atADayatAsau madanasya
bANaiH sudussahaiH paJcabhirekakAlam  // 113 //  tatrAnuraktAmadhigamya
vADhametAmuvAceti sakhI guNajJA  /  ayaM sa bAle pavanaMjayasya zrIzailanAmA
tanayaH pratItaH  // 11 //  guNAstavAsya prathitA puraiva zomA tu duggocaratAM
prayAtA  /  etena sAdhaM bhaja kAmabhogAn pitroH prayacchAticireNa nidrAm  //
115 //  vaMzasthavRttam aho punazcitragatena te satA manovikAro janito hnuumtaa|
sakhIM vadantImiti lajjayA natA jaghAna lIlAkamalena kanyakA  // 16 //
upajAtivRttam tato viditvA janakena tasyA hRtaM mano mArutanandanena  /  *paTaH
samArUDhasutAzarIraH saMpreSito vAyusutAya zIghram  // 117 //  dUto yuvA
zrInagaraM sametya jJAtaH praviSTo vihitapraNAmaH  /  hanamate darzayati sma
bimbaM tArAtmajAyAH paTamadhyayAtam  // 118 //  kanyAke yogya varakI khoja
karate hue mAtA-pitA na rAtameM sukhase nIMda lete the aura na dinameM caina  /
unakA citta sadA isI ulajhanameM ulajhA rahatA thA  // 110 /  /  /  tadanantara
jo nAnA guNoMke dhAraka the, jinakI kAnti atyanta manohara thI, aura sAtha hI
jinake zIla tathA vaMzakA paricaya diyA gayA thA aise indrajit Adi pradhAna
vidyAdharoMke citrapaTa likhAkara mAtA-pitAne putrIko dikhalAye  // 111 //
anukramase una citrapaToMko dekhakara kanyAne bAra-bAra apanI dRSTi saMkucita
kara lo| antameM hanUmAnkA citrapaTa use dikhAyA gayA to usa ora usakI dRSTi
zIghra hI AkarSita hokara nizcala ho gyii| use vaha anurAgase dekhatI rahI  //
112 /  /  tadanantara jisakA samasta zarIra sadRzatAse rahita thA aise
citrapaTameM sthita hanUmAnko dekhakara vaha kanyA eka hI sAtha kAmadevake
pA~coM duHsaha bANoMse tAr3ita ho gayI  // 113 //  use hanUmAnmeM anurakta dekha
guNoMko jAnanevAlI sakhIne kahA ki he bAle! yaha pavanaMjayakA zrIzaila nAmase
prasiddha putra hai  /  / 114 /  /  isake guNa to tumheM pahalese hI vidita the
aura sundaratA tumhAre netroMke sAmane hai isalie isake sAtha kAmabhogako prApta
karo tathA mAtA-pitAko cirakAla bAda nidrA pradAna karo arthAt nizcinta hokara
sone do  // 115 /  /  AzcaryakI bAta hai ki hanUmAnne citragata hokara bhI tere
manameM vikAra utpanna kara diyA aisA kahatI huI sakhIko kanyAne lajjAvanata ho
lIlAkamalase tAr3ita kiyA  /  / 116 /  /  tadanantara jaba pitAko patA calA ki
kanyAkA mana pavanaputra hanUmAnake dvArA harA gayA hai taba usane zIghra hI
hanUmAnke pAsa kanyAkA citrapaTa bhejA  /  / 117 /  /  so sugrIvakA bhejA huA
dUta zrInagara phuNcaa| vahAM jAkara usane apanA paricaya diyA, praNAma kiyA
aura usake bAda hanUmAnke lie tArAkI putrI padmarAgAkA citrapaTa dikhalAyA  //
118 //  1. nirIkSyamANA ma.. kha..ja., b.| 2. tena ma.  /  3. paraH m.| 4 jAtaH
m.|

Page #471 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nineteenth Chapter  It is said in this world that the god of love has
five arrows. If this is true, then how did the daughter of the king wound
Hanuman with a hundred arrows at once?  || 119 ||  Thinking, "My birth is in
vain if I do not obtain this maiden," Hanuman, endowed with great wealth, went
to Sugriva's city in an instant. || 120 ||  Hearing of his approach, King
Sugriva, overjoyed, immediately went out to greet him. Then, Hanuman, who had
been honored with hundreds of offerings, entered the city with his father-in-
law. || 121 ||  At that time, as Hanuman was going towards the royal palace, the
women of the city, abandoning all other tasks, went to the jewel-studded windows
of the palaces. Their lotus-like eyes were filled with longing to see him. ||
122 ||  Padmaraga, the daughter of Sugriva, with her delicate body, gazed from
the window at Hanuman's form. In her mind, she experienced a state beyond
description. || 123 ||  "This is not the same man, this is someone else," or
"No, friend, this is the same one," the women debated amongst themselves. Thus,
Hanuman entered Sugriva's city. || 124 ||  Their marriage was celebrated with
great splendor, with all their relatives present. The two, adorned with
beautiful forms, attained supreme joy through their harmonious union. || 125 ||
Hanuman, his mind at peace, returned to his own place, taking his wife with him.
He left his father-in-law and mother-in-law filled with sorrow, due to the
separation from their daughter and their own separation from her. || 126 ||
With such a glorious son, whose fame spread throughout the world, King Pavana
and Anjana, immersed in the ocean of supreme bliss, reveled in their joy. || 127
||  **Notes:**  1.  "Kanya liyukt" should be "Kanya liyukt**a**" (daughter of
the king) 2.  "Swavargau" should be "Swavarg**a**" (his family)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekonaviMzatitamaM parva satyaM zarAH paJca manobhavasya syuryadya muSmin jagati
prasiddhAH  /  kenyA niyuktaiH kathamekakAlaM tataH zatairvAyusutaM jaghAna  //
119  //  ajAta evAsmi na yAvadenAM prApnomi kanyAmiti jAtacittaH  /
samIrasUnurvibhavena yuktaH kSaNena sugrIvapuraM jagAma  // 120 //  zrutvA
tamAsannataraM pravRSTaH sugrIvarAjo'bhyudiyAya sadyaH  /
prayujyamAno'rdhazatairhanamAn puraM praviSTaH zvasureNa sArdham  //  121  //
tasmiMstadA rAjagRhaM prayAti prAsAdamAlAmaNijAlakasthAH  /
tadarzanavyAkulanetrapadmA muktAnyaceSTA lalanA babhUvuH  // 122 //
gavAkSajAlena nirIkSamANA sugrIvajA vAyusutasya rUpam  /  kAmapyavasthAM manasA
prapannA svavedanIyAM sukumAradehI  //  123  //  ayaM sa nAyaM puruSo'paro'yaM
ko'pyeSa so'sau sakhi so'yameva  /  ityaGganAbhiH paritarkyamANo viveza
sugrIvapuraM hanUmAn  //  124  //  tayorvivAhaH parayA vibhUtyA vinirmitaH
saGgatasarvabandhuH  /  tau dampatI yogyasamAgamena prAptau pramodaM paramaM
surUpau  //  125  //  jagAma badhvA sahito hanumAn sthAnaM nijaM
nirvRtacittavRttiH  /  kRtvA sazokau zvasurau saMvargoM
sutAviyogAtsvaviyojanAcca  //  126 //  tasmiMstathA zrImati vartamAne sute
samasta kSitiyAtakIrtI  /  mahAsukhAsvAdasamudramadhye mamajja vAyuH
kSitipo'JjanA ca  // 127 //  jaisA ki isa saMsAra meM prasiddha hai ki
kAmadevake pAMca bANa haiM yadi yaha bAta satya he to kanyAne eka samaya sau
bANoM dvArA hanumAnako kaise ghAyala kiyA  //  119  //  | yadi maiM isa kanyAko
nahIM prApta karatA hU~ to merA janma lenA vyartha hai aisA manameM vicArakara
hanumAn bar3e vaibhavake sAtha kSaNa ekameM sugrIvake nagarakI ora cala par3A
//  120  //  use atyanta nikaTameM AyA suna sugrIva rAjA harSita hotA huA zIghra
hI usakI agavAnIke lie gayA  /  tatpazcAt jise saikar3oM arghaM diye gaye the
aise hanUmAnne zvasura ke sAtha nagarameM praveza kiyA  //  121  //  | usa
samaya jaba hanUmAn rAjamahalakI ora jA rahA thA taba nagarakI striyA~ anya saba
kAma chor3akara mahaloMke maNimaya jharokhoMmeM jA khar3I huI thIM aura usa
samaya unake netrakamala hanUmAnko dekhaneke lie vyAkula ho rahe the || 122||
sukumAra zarIrakI dhAraka sugrIva kI putrI padmarAgA jharokhe se hanUmAnkA rUpa
dekhakara mana-hI-mana apane Apake dvArA anubhava karane yogya kisI adbhuta
avasthAko prApta huI || 123  //  sakhi ! yaha vaha puruSa nahIM hai, yaha to koI
dUsarA hai, athavA nahIM sakhi ! yaha vahI hai, isa prakAra striyA~ jisake
viSaya meM tarkaNA kara rahIM thI aise hanUmAnne nagara meM praveza kiyA  //
124  //  tadanantara bar3e vaibhava ke sAtha una donoMkA vivAha huA  /  vivAha
meM samasta bandhujana sammilita hue aura atyanta sundara rUpake dhAraka donoM
dampati parama-pramodako prApta hue || 125 || jisakA citta santuSTa ho rahA thA
aise hanUmAn putrI tathA apane Apake viyoga se parivAra sahita sAsa- zvasurako
zokayukta karatA huA navavadhUke sAtha apane sthAnapara calA gayA || 126 || isa
prakAra jisakI kIrti samasta saMsAra meM phaila rahI thI aise zobhA athavA
lakSmI sampanna putrake rahate hue rAjA pavanaMjaya aura aMjanA mahAsukhAnubhava
rUpI sAgara ke madhya meM gotA lagA rahe the ||127|| 1. kanyA liyuktaH ma.  /
2. svavargau  /  421

Page #472 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Hereâs the English translation of the provided text, while keeping the Sanskrit
words intact:  ---  422  In the PadmapurÄá¹a, revered like the ÅrÄ«Åaila by the
king of Khecaras, hailed as one who holds great honor. The master of all
enemies, the lord of the three realms, is equal to Hari in his neck. ||128||
In the great city of Laá¹kÄ, the lord, renowned for his vast splendor, enjoyed
happiness with the pleasures of the earth. Just as the lord of gods provides
fulfillment to the entire world, so did he, like the Surendra in the celestial
abode. ||129||  A great personage, his hands red like the lotus, and who is
adored by the women of pleasure. He did not realize the long passage of time
like a bumblebee delighted by a beloved face. ||130||  If a man had a single
wife who was deformed and constantly quarreling, he still engages in sensual
pleasures, thinking himself the lord of desires while situated in worldly
happiness. ||131||  What to say of that king, who possessed great power, was
adorned with the beauty of eighteen thousand women, the lord of three realms,
and was matchless in his splendor? ||132||  Thus, surrounded by all the
celestial beings, whom people revered with lowered heads in fear, and who was
ceremoniously anointed as the ruler of the three worlds, such was RÄvaá¹a, who
attained that praised sovereignty. ||133||  Worshipped by all celestial beings,
whose body was enchanting with the qualities of glory and beauty, he was like
the moon, captivating the hearts of all. ||134||  His discus, known as
SudarÅana, was divine and faultless, shining like the midday sun, adept at
annihilating hostile kings, and stood out brilliantly, adorned with various
celestial gems. ||135||  The intense energy emanating from him was terrifying,
like the dreadful death that grips the bodies of wicked souls, while he was
praised and honored in the abode of weapons. ||136||  Now, great HanumÄna, the
supreme king of the celestial beings, was honored by all for his great virtues.
---   This translation aims to carry over the meaning and context of the
original text while retaining the significance of the highlighted Sanskrit
terms.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 422 padmapurANe zrIzailatulyairatha khecarezaiH sammAnyamAno bahumAnadhArI  /
abhUzAsya kSatasarvazatruH trikhaNDanAtho harikaNThatulyaH  // 128 //
laGkAnagoM sa vizAlakAntiH sukhena reme pRthubhogajena  /  samastalokasya pUrti
prayacchan yathA surendra suralokapuryAm  // 129 /  /  mahAnubhAvaH
pramadAjanasya staneSvasau lAlitaraktapANiH  /  viveda no dIrghamapi vyatItaM
kAlaM priyAvaktratigiJchabhRGgaH  // 130 //  ekApi yasyeha bhavedvirUpA narasya
jAyA pratikUlaceSTA  /  rateH patitvaM sa naraH karoti sthitaH sukhe
saMsRtidharmajAte  /  / 131 //  yuktaH priyANAM dazamiH sahasrestathASTabhiH
zrIjanitopamAnAm  /  mahAprabhAvaH kimutaiSa rAjA khaNDatrayasyAnupamAnakAntiH
/  / 132 //  vasantatilakAvRttam evaM samastakhagapairaminUyamAnaH
saMbhrAntasaMnataparAGgatAnuziSTiH  /  khaNDatyAdhipatitA vihitAbhiSekaH
sAmrAjyamApa janatAminutaM dazAsyaH  // 133 /  /
vidyAdharAdhipatipUjitapAdapadmaH zrIkIrtikAntiparivAramanojJadehaH  /
sarvagrahaH parivRto dazavaktrarAjo jAtaH zazAGka iva kasya na cittahArI  //
134|| cakraM sudarzanamamoghamamuSya divyaM madhyAhnabhAskarakaropamamadhyajAlam
/  udvRttazatrunRpavargavinAzadakSaM reje'radRSTamatimAsuraratnacitram  // 135 /
/  daNDazca mRtyuriva jAtazarIrabandho duSTAtmanAM bhayakaraH sphuritogrtejaaH|
ulkAsamUha iva saMgatavAn pracaNDo jajvAla zastrabhavane pratipannapUjaH  // 136
//  athAnantara hanUmAn jaise uttamottama vidyAdhara rAjA jisakA sammAna karate
the, jo atyadhika mAnako dhAraNa karanevAlA thA. tIna khaNDakA svAmI thA aura
harikaNThake samAna tha rAvaNa samasta zatraoMse rahita ho gayA  // 128 /  jisa
prakAra indra svargalokameM krIDA karatA hai usI prakAra samasta lokoMko Ananda
pradAna karatA huA vizAla kAntikA dhAraka rAvaNa vizAla bhogoMse samutpanna
sukhase laMkA nagarImeM krIr3A karane lagA  // 122 //  striyoMke mukharUpI
kamalakA bhramara rAvaNa strIjanoMke stanoMpara hAtha calAtA huA bote hue bahuta
bhArI kAlako bhI nahIM jAna pAyA arthAt kitanA adhika kAla bIta gayA isakA use
patA hI nahIM calA  // 130 //  jisa manuSyake pAsa eka hI virUpa tathA nirantara
jhagar3anevAlI strI hotI hai vaha bhI sAMsArika sukhameM nimagna ho apane Apako
ratipati arthAt kAmadeva samajhatA hai  // 131 /  /  phira rAvaNa to lakSmIkI
upamA dhAraNa karanevAlI aThAraha hajAra striyoMse yukta thA, mahAprabhAvazAlI
thA, tIna khaNDakA svAmI thA, anupama kAntikA dhArI thA ataH usake viSayameM kyA
kahanA hai ?  // 132 //  isa prakAra samasta vidyAdhara jisakI stuti karate the,
saba loga ghabar3Akara namrAbhUta mastakapara jisakI AjJA dhAraNa karate the
aura tIna khaNDake rAjyapara jisakA abhiSeka kiyA gayA thA aisA rAvaNa
janasamUhake dvArA stuta sAmrAjyako prApta huA  // 133 /  /  samasta vidyAdhara
rAjA jisake caraNakamaloMkI pUjA karate the aura jisakA zarIra zrI, kIrti aura
kAntise manojJa thA aisA rAvaNa sarvagrahoMse parivRta candramAke samAna kisakA
mana haraNa nahIM karatA thA  // 134|| jisakI madhyajAlI madhyAhnake sUryako
kiraNoMke samAna thI, jo uddaNDa zatru rAjAoMke naSTa karanemeM samartha thA,
jisake ara spaSTa dikhAI dete the, tathA jo atyanta dedIpyamAna ratnoMse citra-
vicitra jAna par3atA thA aisA isakA sudarzana nAmakA amogha devopanIta cakra
atyadhika suzobhita ho rahA thA  /  / 135 //  jisakA ugrateja saba ora phaila
rahA thA 1. priyAmukhakamalamakarandabhramaraH  /  2. rAjA ka.,kha., ma., ba.ja.
/  'rAjAhaHsaptibhyaSTac' iti Tac samAsAntaH  /  na thA aisA .

Page #473 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Nineteenth Chapter  **423**  Thus, Ravana, due to his own karmic actions,
inherited the kingdom of Lanka, a lineage passed down through generations. He
possessed extraordinary wealth and happiness, a protector of the Rakshasas, and
enjoyed the highest worldly pleasures. **(137)**  The Muni Suvrata Tirtha, the
place of attaining Right Faith, Right Knowledge, and Right Conduct, has long
passed. Yet, those who are far from the ultimate truth, those foolish poets,
have spoken of this great man in a different way in the world. **(138)**  Those
poets, enslaved by worldly desires, devoid of true knowledge, extremely cunning,
and constantly attached to sin, with their fabricated, harmful, and deceitful
writings, ensnare the innocent and simple-minded like a flock of deer. **(139)**
Therefore, O Shrenik, you who have understood the true nature of things, who
have destroyed the mire of false doctrines created by those with wrong views,
who shine brighter than the sun, and who are as vast as Lakshmi, worship the
jewel of the Jina's teachings, the one revered by Indra. **(140)**  Thus ends
the nineteenth chapter of the Padmacharita, narrated by the Acharya Ravishena,
which describes the kingdom of Ravana. **(19)**  Thus ends the first chapter,
the Vidhyadhara Kanda.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekonaviMzatitama parva 423 so'yaM svakarmavazataH kulasaMkrameNa saMprApya
caarukiirtiH| aizvaryamadbhutataraM ca samantabhadraM rakSaHpatiH
paramasaMsRtisaukhyametaH  /  / 137 //  sadRSTibodhacaraNapratipattihetau dUraM
gate'tha munisuvratanAthatIrthe  /  atyantamUDhakavibhiH
paramArthadUrairloke'nyathaiva kathitaH puruSaH pradhAnaH  // 138 /  /
mAlinIcchandaH viSayavazamupetainaSTatattvArthabodhaiH
kavimiratikuzIlairnityapApAnuraktaH  /  kuracitagairahetugranthavAgvAgurAmiH
praguNajanamRgaudho vadhyate mandabhAgyaH  // 139 /  /  iti
viditayathAvavRttavastuprapaJca kSatakumatajanoktagranthapaGkaprasaGga  /  bhaja
surapativandhaM zAstraratnaM jinAnAM ravisamadhikatejaH zreNika zrIvizAla  // 14
//  ityA raviSeNAcAryaprokta padmacarite rAvaNasAmrAjyAbhidhAnaM
nAmakonaviMzatitamaM parva  // 19 //  iti vidyAdharakANDaM prathama samAptam  /
aisA rAvaNa, duSTajanoMko to aisA bhaya utpanna kara rahA thA mAno zarIradhArI
daNDa athavA mRtyu hI ho| jaba vaha zastrazAlAmeM zastroMkI pUjA karatA thA taba
aisA jAna paDatA thA mAno ikadA haA pracaNDa ulkAoMkA samUha hI ho  /  / 136 /
/  isa prakAra vizAla tathA sundara kItiko dhAraNa karanevAlA rAvaNa svakIya
karmodayase vaMzaparamparAgata laMkApurIko pAkara sarvakalyANayukta
AzcaryakAraka aizvaryako tathA saMsAra sambandhI zreSTha sukhako prApta huA thA
// 137 //  gautamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he zreNika !
samyagdarzana, samyagjJAna aura samyakcAritrakI prAptikA kAraNa jo munisuvrata
bhagavAnakA tIrtha thA use vyatIta hue jaba bahuta dina ho gaye taba
paramArthase dUra rahanevAle atyanta mUr3ha kaviyoMne isa pradhAna puruSakA
lokameM anyathA hI kathana kara DAlA  // 138 /  /  /  jo viSayoMke adhIna haiM,
jinakA tattvajJAna naSTa ho gayA hai, jo atyanta kuzIla haiM aura nirantara
pApameM anurakta rahate haiM aise kavi loga svaracita pApavadhaMka grantharUpI
jAlase mandabhAgya tathA atyanta sarala manuSyarUpI mRgoMke samUhako naSTa
karate rahate haiN| isalie jisane vastukA yathArthasvarUpa samajha liyA hai,
jisane mithyAdRSTi janoMke dvArA racita kuzAstrarUpI kIcar3akA prasaMga naSTa
kara diyA hai, jisakA sUryake samAna vizAla teja hai aura jo lakSmIse vizAla hai
aise hai zreNika! ta indradvArA vandanIya jinazAstrarUpI ratnakI upAsanA kara-
usIkA adhyayana-manana kara  // 139-140 /  /  isa prakAra ArSa nAmase prasiddha,
raviSeNAcArya kathita padma varitameM rAvaNake sAmrAjyakA kathana karanevAlA
unnIsavA~ parva samApta huA  // 19 //  isa prakAra vidyAdharakANDa nAmaka
prathama kANDa samApta huaa| 1. rAkSasapuraM kh.| 2. puruSapradhAnaH ka., kha  /
3. -paap-| 4. zrIvizAla: ma., ba., j.|

Page #474 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twentieth Chapter  The learned Shrenik, with a humble heart and a clear
mind, having heard this, bowed down at the feet of the Ganadhara and said with
wonder, "O Lord! By your grace, I have come to know the origin of the eighth
Pratinarayana, and the difference between the monkey and demon lineages. Now, O
Lord, I wish to hear the story of the twenty-four Tirthankaras and the twelve
Chakravartis, along with their past lives, as it is the cause of purifying the
mind."  "And, O Lord, who was the eighth Balabhadra, famous throughout the
world, born in what lineage, and what were his deeds?"  "O great sage! I also
wish to know the names of their fathers and others. O Lord, you are worthy of
telling all this."  Thus addressed, the great-souled, expert in ultimate truth,
Ganadhara, pleased by the excellent question, spoke these words: "Listen,
Shrenik, I will tell you the story of the past lives of the Tirthankaras, which
destroys sin and is worshipped by the Indras."  "Rishabha, Ajita, Sambhava,
Abhinandan, Sumati, Padma Prabha, Supaikha, Chandra Prabha, Suvidhi
(Pushpadanta), Sheetal, Shreyans, Vasupujya, Vimala, Ananta, Dharma, Shanti,
Kunthu, Ara, Malli (Muni) Suvrata Nath, Nami, Nemi, Parshva, and Mahavira, these
are the names of the twenty-four Tirthankaras. Mahavira is the last Tirthankara,
and his reign continues even now."  "Now, I will describe their past-life
cities: the most excellent Pundarika, Susima, the very beautiful Kshema, and the
most excellent Ratna Sanchay Puri, shining with precious jewels, these four
cities were very excellent and well-organized. From Rishabha Deva to Vasupujya
Bhagavan, these were the capitals of the Tirthankaras in their past lives, three
by three. In these cities, there were always festivals."  "The past-life
capitals of the remaining twelve Tirthankaras were as follows: Sumahanagar,
Arishtpur, Sumadrika, Pundarika, Susima, Kshema, Vitashoka, Champa, Kaushambi,
1. Padma Nabha, 2. Prabhu, 3. Vimala Nath, 4. Mahan + Ara."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viMzatitamaM parva bhayaivaM zreNikaH zrutvA vinItAtmA prasannadhIH  /
praNamya gaNinaH pAdau punarUce savismayaH  //  1  //  prasAdAttava vijJAtaH
pratizatroH samudbhavaH  /  aSTamasya tathA bhedaH kulayoH kapirakSasAm  // 2 //
sAmprataM zrotumicchAmi caritaM jinacakriNAm  /  nAtha pUrvabhavairyuktaM
buddhizodhanakAraNam  // 3 //  aSTamo yazva vikhyAto halI sakalaviSTape  /
vaMze kasya samudbhUtaH kiM vA tasya viceSTitam  // 4 //  amISAM janakAdInAM
tathA nAmAni sanmune  /  jijJAsitAni me nAtha tatsarvaM vaktumarhasi  // 5 //
ityuktaH sa mahAsattvaH paramArthavizAradaH  /  jagAda gaNabhRdvAkyaM
cArupraznAbhinanditaH  //  6 //  zRNu zreNika vakSyAmi jinAnAM bhavakIrtanam  /
pApavidhvaMsakaraNaM tridazendra namaskRtam  // 7 //  RSabho'jitanAthazca
saMbhavazvAminandanaH  /  sumatiH padmabhAsazca supAirvaH zazabhRtprabhaH  // 8
//  suvidhiH zItalaH zreyAn vAsupUjyo'malaiprabhuH  /  ananto dharmaMzAntI ca
kunthudevo mahAnaraH  // 9 //  maliH suvratanAthazca namineMmizca tIrthakRt  /
pArzvo'yaM pazcimo vIro zAsanaM yasya vartate  //  10 //  nagarI paramodArA
nAmataH puNDarIkiNI  /  susImetyaparA khyAtA kSemetyanyAtizobhanA  // 11 //
tathA ratnavarairdIptA ratnasaMcayanAmikA  /  catasraH paramodArAH suvyavasthA
imAH puraH  //  12  //  vAsupUjya jinAntAnAM jinAnAmRSabhAditaH  /  Asan
pUrvabhave ramyA rAjadhAnyaH sadotsavAH  //  13 //  sumahAnagaraM cAru
tathAriSTapuraM varam  /  sumAdvikA ca vikhyAtA tathAsau puNDarIkiNI  // 14 //
athAnantara jisakI AtmA atyanta namra thI aura buddhi atyanta svaccha thI aisA
zreNika vidyAdharoM kA varNana suna Azcaryacakita hotA huA gaNadhara bhagavAnke
caraNoMko namaskAra kara phira bolA ki ||1|| he bhagavan ! Apake prasAda se
maiMne aSTama pratinArAyaNakA janma tathA vAnara baMza aura rAkSasa vaMzakA
bheda jaanaa| aba isa samaya he nAtha! caubIsa tIrthaMkaroM tathA bAraha
cakravartiyoMkA caritra unake pUrvabhavoMke sAtha sunanA cAhatA hU~ kyoMki vaha
buddhiko zuddha karanekA kAraNa hai  // 2-3 //  inake sivAya jo AThavA~
balabhadra samasta saMsAra meM prasiddha hai vaha kisa vaMza meM utpanna huA
tathA usakI kyA kyA ceSTAe~ huIM ! ||4|| he uttama munirAja ! ina sabake pitA
Adike nAma bhI maiM jAnanA cAhatA hU~ so he nAtha ! yaha saba kahane ke yogya ho
||5|| zreNikake isa prakAra kahane para mahAdhairyazAlI, paramArthake vidvAn
gaNadhara bhagavAn uttama praznase prasanna hote hue isa prakArake vacana bole
ki he zreNika ! suna, maiM tIrthaMkaroMkA vaha bhavopAkhyAna kahU~gA jo ki
pApako naSTa karanevAlA hai aura indroMke dvArA namaskRta hai ||6 - 7 //
RSabha, ajita, sambhava, abhinandana, sumati, padmaprabha, supAkhaM,
candraprabha, suvidhi ( puSpadanta ), zItala, zreyAnsa, vAsupUjya, vimala,
ananta, dharma, zAnti, kunthu, ara, malli, ( muni ) suvratanAtha, nami, nemi,
pAzvaM aura mahAvIra ye caubIsa tIrthaMkaroMke nAma haiN| inameM mahAvIra antima
tIrthaMkara haiM tathA isa samaya inhIMkA zAsana cala rahA hai ||8-10|| aba
inakI pUrva bhavakI nagariyoMkA varNana karate haiM- atyanta zreSTha
puNDarIkiNI, susImA, atyanta manohara kSemA, aura uttamottama ratnoMse
prakAzamAna ratnasaMcayapurI ye cAra nagariyAM atyanta utkRSTa tathA uttama
vyavasthAse yukta thIM  /  RSabhadevako Adi lekara vAsupUjya bhagavAn taka
kramase tIna-tIna tIrthaMkaroMkI ye pUrvaM bhavakI rAjadhAniyA~ thIM  /  ina
nagariyoMmeM sadA utsava hote rahate the  // 11- 13 || avaziSTa bAraha
torthaMkaroMkI pUrvabhavakI rAjadhAniyA~ nimna prakAra thIM - sumahAnagara,
ariSTapura, sumAdrikA, puNDarIkiNI, susImA, kSemA, vItazokA, campA, kauzAmbI, 1.
padmanAbhazva ma.  /  2. -prabhuH ma., ka., ja., ba  /  3. vimalanAthaH  /  4.
mahAn + araH  /

Page #475 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twentieth Chapter  **425**  Susima, Simasampam, Kshema, and Kshemakari,
Vyatitishonama, and Champa, are known in the world. ||15|| Kaushambi, Maha-
bhoga, Nagapur, Saketa, Kantabhavana, and Chatrakarapur. ||16|| These are the
capitals of the Jinas in their previous births, known as heavenly cities. ||17||
Vajranami, Vimala-vahana, Vipula-khyati, Vipula-vahana, Mahabala, Atibala-
kirtan, Aparajita, Nandishena, Padma, Maha-padma, Padmottara, Pankaja-gulma,
Nalin-gulma, Padmasana, Padmaratha, Dridharatha, Maha-megha-ratha, Simha-ratha,
Vaishravana, Shridharma, A-pratistha, Siddhartha, Anand, and Sunanda. ||18-23||
These are the names of the Jinas in their previous births, as told by me, the
king of Magadha. ||24||  Vajrasena, Maha-teja, Ripudama, Swayamprabha, Vimala-
vahana, Simandhara, Pihita-srava, Arindama, Yugandhara, Sarva-jana-ananda,
Abhaya-ananda, Vajradanta, Vajranabhi, Sarvagupta, Guptiman, Chinta-raksha,
Vipula-vahana, Ghana-rava, Sanvara, Sadhu-sanvara, Varadharma, Sunanda,
Vyatitishonka, Domara, and Prosthila. ||25-30||  Sarvartha-siddhi, Vaijayanta,
Urdhva-graiveyaka, Vaijayanta, Vaijayanta, Urdhva-graiveyaka, Madhyama,
Vaijayanta, Aparajita, Aran, Pushpottara, Kapishta, Purushukra, Sahasrar,
Tripushpottara, Muktisthanadhara, Vijaya, Aparajita. ||31-34||  Nagapur, Saketa,
and Chatrakarapur. All these capitals were beautiful, vast, and adorned with
excellent buildings, like heavenly cities. ||14-17||  Now I will tell you their
names in their previous births. 1. Vajranabhi, 2. Vimala-vahana, 3. Vipula-
khyati, 4. Vipula-vahana, 5. Mahabala, 6. Atibala, 7. Aparajita, 8. Nandishena,
9. Padma, 10. Maha-padma, 11. Padmottara, 12. Pankaja-gulma (with a face like a
lotus), 13. Nalin-gulma, 14. Padmasana, 15. Padmaratha, 16. Dridharatha, 17.
Maha-megha-ratha, 18. Simha-ratha, 19. Vaishravana, 20. Shridharma, 21.
A-pratistha (without equal, the best of the gods), 22. Siddhartha, 23. Anand,
and 24. Sunanda. O King of Magadha! These are the names of the previous births
of the twenty-four wise Tirthankaras, told to you. All these names were very
famous in the world. ||18-24||  Now listen to the names of their fathers in
their previous births. 1. Vajrasena, 2. Maha-teja, 3. Ripudama, 4. Swayamprabha,
5. Vimala-vahana, 6. Simandhara, 7. Pihita-srava, 8. Arindama, 9. Yugandhara,
10. Sarva-jana-ananda (possessing the name "benefactor of all"), 11. Abhaya-
ananda, 12. Vajradanta, 13. Vajranabhi, 14. Sarvagupta, 15. Guptiman, 16.
Chinta-raksha, 17. Vipula-vahana, 18. Ghana-rava, 19. Dhira, 20. Sanvara
(possessing the name "good Sanvara"), 21. Trilokiya (possessing the name "best
Dharma"), 22. Sunanda, 23. Vyatitishonka, 24. Domara, and 25. Prosthila. Thus,
you should know the names of the twenty-four fathers of the twenty-four
Tirthankaras in their previous births. ||25-30||  Now listen to the names of the
twenty-four heavens from which the twenty-four Tirthankaras came. 1. Sarvartha-
siddhi, 2. Vaijayanta, 3. Graiveyaka, 4. Vaijayanta, 5. Vaijayanta, 6. Urdhva-
graiveyaka, 7. Madhyama-graiveyaka, 8. Vaijayanta, 9. Aparajita, 10. Aran, 11.
Pushpottara, 12. Kapishta, 13. Purushukra, 14. Sahasrar, 15. Pushpottara, 16.
Pushpottara, 17. Pushpottara, 18. Sarvartha-siddhi, 19. Vijaya, 20. Aparajita.
||31-34||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viMzatitama parva 425 susImA sImasaMpamA kSemA ca kSemakAriNI  /
vyatItazokanAmA ca campA ca viditA bhuvi  /  / 15 //  kauzAmbI ca mahAbhogA
tathA nAgapuraM pRthu  /  sAketA kAntabhavanA chatrAkArapuraM tathA  // 16 //
anukrameNa zeSANAM jinAnAM pUrvajanmani  /  rAjadhAnya imA jJeyAH puryaH
svargapurIsamAH  // 7 //  vajranAmiriti khyAtastathA vimalavAhanaH  /  anyazca
vipulakhyAtiH zrImAn vipulavAhanaH  // 18 //  mahAbalo'paraH
kAntastathAtibalakIrtanaH  /  aparAjitasaMjJazca nandiSeNAbhidho'paraH  // 19 //
padmazcAnyo mahApadmastathA padmottaro bhuvi  /  nAthaH paGkajagulmAkhyaH
paGkajapratimAnanaH  // 20 //  vibhurnalinagulmazca tathA padAsanaH sukhI  /
smRtaH padmaratho nAthaH zrImAn dRDharatho'paraH  // 21 //  mahAmegharatho nAma
zUraH siMharathAbhidhaH  /  svAmI vaizravaNI dhImAn zrIdharmo'nyo mahAdhanaH  //
22 //  apratiSThaH surazreSThaH siddhArthaH siddhazAsanaH  /  Anando
nandanIyo'nyaH sunandazceti vizrutaH  // 23 //  pUrvajanmani nAmAni jinAnAmiti
vissttpe| prakhyAtAni mayoktAni krameNa magadhAdhipa  // 24 //  vajraseno
mahAtejAstathA vIro ripuMdamaH  /  anyaH svayaMprabhAbhikhyaH zrImAna
vimalavAhanaH  /  / 25 /  /  guruH sImandharo jJeyo nAthazca pihitAsravaH  /
mahAtapasvinAvanyAvarindamayugandharau  // 26 /  /  tathA sarvajanAnandaH
sArthakAmikhyayAnvitaH  /  abhayAnandasaMjJazca vajradanto'paraH prabhuH  // 27
//  vajranAbhizca vijJeyaH sarvaguptizca guptimAn  /  cintArakSaprasiddhizca
punarvipulavAhanaH  // 28 //  munirghanaravo dhIraH saMvaraH sAdhusaMvaraH  /
varadharmastrilokIyaH sunando nandanAmabhRt  // 29 //  vyatItazokasaMjJazca
DomaraH proSThilastathA  /  krameNa guravo jJeyA jinAnAM pUrvajanmani  // 30 //
sarvArthasiddhisaMzabdo vaijayantaH sukhAvahaH  /  aveyako mahAmAsaH vaijayantaH
sa eva ca  // 3 //  Urdhvagraiveyako jJeyo madhyamazca prakIrtitaH  /
vaijayanto mahAtejA aparAjitasaMjJakaH  // 32 //  AraNazca samAkhyAtastathA
puSpottarAbhidhaH  /  kApiSTaH puruzukrazca sahasrAro manoharaH  // 33 //
tripuSpottarasaMjJo'to muktisthAnadharasthitaH  /  vijayAkhyastathA
zrImAnaparAjitasaMjJakaH  // 34 //  nAgapura, sAketA aura chtraakaarpur| ye
sabhI rAjadhAniyA~ svargapurIke samAna sundara, mahAvistRta tathA uttamottama
bhavanoMse suzobhita thIM  // 14-17|| aba inake pUrvabhavake nAma kahatA hU~1
vajranAbhi, 2 vimalavAhana,3 vipalakhyAti.4 vipalavAhana. 5 mahAbala, 6 atibala,
7 aparAjita, 8 nandiSeNa, 9 padma, 10 mahApadma, 11 padmottara, 12 kamalake
samAna mukhavAlA paMkajagulma, 13 nalinagulma, 14 padmAsana, 15 padmaratha, 16
dRr3haratha, 17 mahAmegharatha, 18 siMharatha, 19 vaizravaNa, 20 zrIdharma, 21
upamArahita surazreSTha, 22 siddhArtha, 23 Ananda aura 24 sunanda  /  he
magadharAja ! ye buddhimAn caubIsa tIrthaMkaroMke pUrvabhavake nAma tujhase kahe
haiN| ye saba nAma saMsArameM atyanta prasiddha the  // 18-24 //  aba inake
pUrvabhavake pitAoMke nAma suna-1 vajrasena, 2 mahAteja, 3 ripuMdama, 4
svayaMprabha, 5 vimalavAhana, 6 sImandhara, 7 pihitAsrava, 8 arindama, 9
yugandhara, 10 sArthaka nAmake dhAraka sarvajanAnanda, 11 abhayAnanda, 12
vajradanta, 13 vajranAbhi, 14 sarvagupti, 15 guptimAn, 16 cintArakSa, 17
vipulavAhana, 18 ghanarava, 19 dhIra, 20 uttama saMvarako dhAraNa karanevAle
saMvara, 21 uttama dharmako dhAraNa karanevAle trilokIya, 22 sunanda, 23
vItazoka DAmara aura 24 prosstthil| isa prakAra ye caubIsa tIrthaMkaroMke
pUrvabhava sambandhI caubIsa pitAoMke nAma jAnanA cAhie  // 25-30 //  aba
caubIsa tIrthaMkara jisa-jisa svargalokase Aye unake nAma suna-1
sarvArthasiddhi, 2 vaijayanta, 3 graiveyaka, 4 vaijayanta, 5 vaijayanta, 6
Urdhva graiveyaka, 7 madhyama graiveyaka, 8 vaijayanta, 9 aparAjita, 10 AraNa,
11 puSpottara, 12 kApiSTa, 13 mahAzukra, 14 sahasrAra, 15 puSpottara, 16
puSpottara, 17 puSpottara, 18 sarvArthasiddhi, 19 vijaya, 20 aparA 1.
vajradattaH ma., ba., ja., k.| 2. DAmila: m.| 54

Page #476 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
English translation with Jain terms preserved:  426 In the Padma Purana, the
twenty-four Tirthankara's celestial abodes are described as follows: Pranatah,
Anantaratitah, Vaijayantah, and Pushpottarah are the names of the celestial
abodes of the Jinas. ||35|| I shall now narrate the birthplaces, birth stars,
mothers, fathers, sacred trees, and places of liberation of the Jinas. ||36||
Vinita (Ayodhya) is the city, Nabhi is the father, MarudevÄ« is the mother,
Uttarashadha is the birth star, the Banyan tree, Mount Kailash, and the first
Jina Rishabhanatha are auspicious for you, O Shrenika! ||37||  Saketa (Ayodhya)
is the city, Jitashatru is the father, Vijaya is the mother, Rohini is the birth
star, Saptaparna is the sacred tree, and Ajitanatha is the Jina, may these be
auspicious for you, O Shrenika! ||38||  Shravasti is the city, Jitari is the
father, Sena is the mother, Purvashadha is the birth star, the Sal tree, and
Sambhavanatha are auspicious for you. ||39||  Ayodhya is the city, Samvara is
the father, SiddhÄrtha is the mother, Punarvasu is the birth star, the Devadaru
tree, and Abhinandananatha are auspicious for you. ||40||  Saketa (Ayodhya) is
the city, Meghaprabha is the father, Sumangala is the mother, Magha is the birth
star, the Priyangu tree, and Sumatinatha are the supreme auspiciousness for the
world. ||41||  Vatsanagari (Kaushambi) is the city, Dharana is the father,
Susima is the mother, Chitra is the birth star, the Priyangu tree, and
Padmaprabha are auspicious for you. ||42||  Kashi is the city, Supratishtha is
the father, Prithvi is the mother, Vishakha is the birth star, the Shirisha
tree, and Suparsva are auspicious for you, O king! ||43||  Chandrapuri is the
city, Mahasena is the father, LakshmanÄ is the mother, Anuradha is the birth
star, the Naga tree, and Chandraprabha are auspicious for you. ||44||  Kakandi
is the city, Sugriva is the father, Rama is the mother, Mula is the birth star,
the Sal tree, and Pushpadanta or Suvidhinatha are purifiers of the mind. ||45||
BhadrikÄ is the city, Dridharatha is the father, Sunanda is the mother,
Purvashadha is the birth star, the Plaksha tree, and Shitalanatha are the
supreme auspiciousness for you. ||46||  Simhapuri is the city, Vishnuraja is the
father, Vishnushri is the mother, Shravana is the birth star, the Tinduka tree,
and Shreyamsanatha, may they bestow welfare upon you, O king. ||47||  Champa is
the city, Vasupujya is the father, Jaya is the mother, Shatabhisha is the birth
star, the Patala tree, Champapuri as the sacred place, and Vasupujya are
bestowing you with universal veneration. ||48||  Kampilya is the city,
Kritavarma is the father, Sharma is the mother, Uttarabhadrapada is the birth
star, the Jambu tree, and Vimalanatha are purifying the earth. ||49||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 426 padmapurANe prANato'nantarAtIto vaijayanto mahAdhutiH  /  puSpottara iti
jJeyo jinAnAmamarAlayAH  // 35 /  /  jinAnAM janmanakSatra mAtaraM pitaraM puram
/  caityavRkSaM tathA mokSasthAnaM te kathayAmyataH  // 36 //  vinItA nagarI
nAbhirmarudevyuttarA tathA  /  ASADhA vaTavRkSazca kailAzaH prathamo jinaH  //
37 //  sAketA vijayAnAtho jitazarjinottamaH  /  rohiNI saptaparNazca maGgalaM
zreNikAstu te  // 38 //  senA jitArirAjazca zrAvastIsaMbhavo jinaH  /
aindramRkSaM tataH zAlaH paramaM te'stu maGgalam  // 39 //  siddhArthA
saMvaro'yodhyA saralazca punarvasuH  /  abhinandananAthazca bhavantu tava
maGgalam  // 40 //  sumaGgalA priyaGguzca madhA meghaprabhaH purI  /  sAketA
sumati tho jagaduttamamaGgalam  // 41 //  susImA vatsanagarI ca citrA
dhrnnshbditH| padmaprabhaH priyaGgazca bhavantu tava maGgalam  // 42 //
sapratiSTaH purI kAzI vizAkhA pRthivI tthaa| zirISazca supAzrvazca rAjan
paramamaGgalam  // 43 //  nAgavRkSo'nurAdhakSa mahAsenAzca lakSmaNA  /  khyAtA
candrapurI candrapramazca tava maGgalam  // 44 //  kAkandI suvidhimUlaM rAmA
sugrIvapArthivaH  /  sAlastaruzca te santu cittapAvanakAraNam  /  / 45 /  /
plakSo dRDharatho rAjA bhadrikA zItalo jinaH  /  sunandA prathamASADhA santu te
maGgalaM param  // 46 //  viSNuzrIH zravaNo viSNuH siMhanAdaM ca tindukaH  /
satataM nu jinaH zreyAn zreyaH kurvantu te nRpa  /  / 47 /  /  pATalA
vasupUjyazca jayA zatabhiSaM tathA  /  campA ca vAsupUjyazca lokapUjAM dizantu
te  // 4 //  kAmpilyaM kRtavarmA ca zarmA prauSThapadottarA  /
jambUrvimalanAthazca kurvantu khAM malojjhitam  /  / 49 /  /  jita, 21 prANata,
22 Anata, 23 vaijayanta aura 24 puSpottara  /  ye caubIsa tIrthaMkaroMke Aneke
svargoM ke nAma kahe  // 31-35 /  /  aba Age caubIsa tIrthaMkaroMkI
janmanagarI.janmanakSatra. mAtA. pitA. vairAgyakA vRkSa aura mokSakA sthAna
kahatA hU~-vinItA(ayodhyA)nagarI, nAbhirAjA pitA, marudevI rAnI, uttarASAr3hA
nakSatra, vaTa vRkSa, kailAsapavaMta aura prathama jinendra he zreNika ! tere
lie ye maMgalasvarUpa hoM  // 36-37 /  /  sAketA ( ayodhyA ) nagarI, jitazatru
pitA, vijayA mAtA, rohiNI nakSatra, saptaparNa vRkSa aura ajitanAtha jinendra,
he zreNika ! ye tere lie maMgalasvarUpa hoM  // 38|| zrAvastI nagarI, jitAri
pitA, senA mAtA, pUrvASAr3hA nakSatra, zAla vRkSa aura sambhavanAtha jinendra,
ye tere lie maMgalasvarUpa hoM  /  / 39|| ayodhyA nagarI, saMvara pitA,
siddhArthA mAtA, punarvasu nakSatra, sarala arthAt devadAru vRkSa aura
abhinandana jinendra, ye tere lie maMgalasvarUpa hoM  /  / 40 //  sAketA
(ayodhyA) nagarI, meghaprabha rAjA pitA, sumaMgalA mAtA, maghA nakSatra,
priyaMgu vRkSa aura sumatinAtha jinendra, ye jagatke lie uttama maMgalasvarUpa
hoM  // 41 //  vatsanagarI ( kauzAmbIpurI ), dharaNarAjA pitA, susImA mAtA,
citrA nakSatra, priyaMgu vRkSa aura padmaprabha jinendra, ye tere lie
maMgalasvarUpa hoM  // 42 //  kAzI nagarI, supratiSTha pitA, pRthvI mAtA,
vizAkhA nakSatra, zirISa vRkSa aura supAya jinendra, he rAjan ! ye tere lie
maMgalasvarUpa hoM  // 43 //  candrapurI nagarI, mahAsena pitA, lakSmaNA mAtA,
anurAdhA nakSatra, nAga vRkSa aura candraprabha bhagavAn, ye tere lie
maMgalasvarUpa hoM  // 44 /  /  kAkandI nagarI, sugrIva rAjA pitA, rAmA mAtA,
mUla nakSatra, sAla vRkSa aura puSpadanta athavA suvidhinAtha jinendra, ye tere
cittako pavitra karanevAle hoM  // 45 //  bhadrikApurI, dRr3haratha pitA,
sunandA mAtA, pUrvASAr3hA nakSatra, plakSa vRkSa aura zItalanAtha jinendra, ye
tere lie parama maMgalasvarUpa hoM  /  / 46|| siMhapurI nagarI, viSNurAja pitA,
viSNuzrI mAtA, zravaNa nakSatra, teMdUkA vRkSa aura zreyAnsanAtha jinendra he
rAjan ! ye tere lie kalyANa kareM  // 47 //  campApurI, vasupUjya rAjA pitA,
jayA mAtA, zatabhiSA nakSatra, pATalA vRkSa, campApurI siddhakSetra aura
vAsupUjya jinendra, ye tere lie lokapratiSThA prApta karAveM  // 48 //  kAmpilya
nagarI, kRtavarmA pitA, zarmA mAtA, uttarAbhAdrapada nakSatra, jambU vRkSa, 1.
siMhanAdazca m,| .

Page #477 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vishati Parva  50. The holy Ashvattha tree, Simhasena and the virtuous Revati,
the all-famous Natha, and Ananta - may they be auspicious for you.  51. May
Dharma, the Ratnapuri city, Bhanu, Dhadhiparna, and Pushya nourish the righteous
Shrenika's prosperity.  52. May Marani, the Hastinagara, Airani, the Nandapada
tree, and King Vishvasena, the peace-maker, always bring you peace.  53. May the
Sun, Kunthunagara, Tilaka, and Shri be the destroyers of your sins, O king.  54.
May Mitra, Sudarshana, the Cuta tree, and Rajendra, the lord of Rohini, destroy
your impurities.  55. May Mithila, Kumbha, Jineshvara, Mallirashvini, and Ashoka
remove your sorrows, O king.  56. May Padmavati, Kushagra, Sumitra, Shravana,
Champaka, and Suvrateshvara enter your mind.  57. May Virjaya, Mithila, Vapra,
Vakula, the founder of the sacred place, and Ashvini grant you the company of
Dharma.  58. May Samudravijaya, Chitra, Nemi, the lord of Shauripura, and Mesha-
shrunga, the mountain Urjayanta, be the givers of your happiness.  59. May
Varanasi, Vishakha, Parshva, Varma, the lord of Dhava, and Ashvasena direct your
mind.  60. May Sala, Kundapura, Pava, Siddhartha, the benevolent one, and the
supreme Mahavira be auspicious for you.  61. Champapuri is said to be the
liberation place of Vasupujya. The liberation places of the previous three
Tirthankaras - Rishabhadeva, Neminatha, and Mahavira - have already been
mentioned as Kailasa, Urjayanta mountain, and Pavapuri respectively. The
remaining Tirthankaras attained liberation at Sammeda mountain.  62. Shanti,
Kunthurara, and Ara were the Chakravartin kings who became Tirthankaras. The
rest were ordinary kings who became Tirthankaras.  63. Chandraprabha and
Pushpadanta are described as having complexions like the moon and the color of
flowers respectively. Priyangumanjari is said to be the most excellent Jina.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vizatitama parva 427 azvatthaH siMhasenazca vinItA revatI tathA  /  zlAghyA
sarvayazA nAtho'nantazca tava maGgalam  // 50 //  dharmo ratna purI
bhAnurdadhiparNazca suvatA  /  puSyazca tava puSNAtu zriyaM zreNika dharmiNIm
// 5 //  maraNI hAsteinasthAnamairANI nandapAdapaH  /  vizvasenanRpaH zAntiH
zAnti kurvantu te sadA  // 52 /  /  sUryo gajapuraM kunthustilakaH zrIzca
kRttikA  /  bhavantu tava rAjendra pApadravaNahetavaH  // 53 //  mitrA
sudarzanazcUto nagaraM pUrvakIrtitam  /  rohiNyarajinendrazca nAzayantu
rajastava  // 54 //  rakSitA mithilA kumbho jinezo mallirazvinI  /  azokazca
tavAzokaM manaH kurvantu pArthiva  // 55 /  /  padmAvatI kuzAgraM ca sumitraH
zravaNastathA  /  campakaH suvatezazca vajantu tava mAnasam  // 56 //  virjayo
mithilA vaprA vakulo namitIrthakRt  /  azvinI ca prayacchantu tava
dharmasamAgamam  // 57 //  samudravijayazcitrA nemiH zauripura zivA  /
Urjayantazca te meSazRGgazcAstu sukhapradaH  // 50 //  vArANasI vizAkhA ca pAzvo
varmA dhavo'dhipaH  /  azvasenazca te rAjan dizantu manaso tim  /  / 59 /  /
sAlaH kuNDapuraM pAvA siddhArthaH priyakAriNI  /  hastottaraM mahAvIraM paramaM
tava maGgalam  // 6 //  campaiva vAsupUjyasya mokSasthAnamudAhRtam  /
pUrvamuktaM trayANAM tu zeSAH saMmedanivRtAH  // 6 //  zAntiH kunthurarazceti
rAjAnazcakravartinaH  /  saMtastIrthakarA jAtAH zeSAH sAmAnyapArthivAH  // 62 /
/  candrAbhazcandrasaMkAzaH puSpadantazca kIrtitaH  /  priyaGgamaJjarIvarNaH
supAzvo jinasattamaH  // 63 /  /  vimalanAtha jinendra ye tujhe nimala kareM  //
49 //  vinItA nagarI, siMhasena pitA, sarvayazA mAtA, revatI nakSatra, pIpalakA
vRkSa aura anantanAtha jinendra, ye tere lie maMgala svarUpa hoM  // 50 //
ratnapurI nagarI, bhAnurAjA pitA, suvratA mAtA, puSya nakSatra, dadhiparNa vRkSa
aura dharmanAtha jinendra, he zreNika! ye terI dharmayakta lakSmIko paSTa kareM
// 5 //  hastinAgapara nagara. vizvasena rAjA pitA. aira NI mAtA, bharaNI
nakSatra, nanda vRkSa aura zAntinAtha jinendra, ye tere lie sadA zAnti pradAna
kareM  //  52  //  hastinAgapura nagara, sUrya rAjA pitA, zrIdevI mAtA, kRttikA
nakSatra, tilaka vRkSa aura kunthunAtha jinendra, he rAjan ! ye tere pApa dUra
karane meM kAraNa ho  // 53 //  hastinAgapura nagara, sudarzana pitA, mitrA
mAtA, rohiNI nakSatra, Amra vRkSa aura ara jinendra, ye tere pApako naSTa kareM
// 54 //  mithilA nagarI, kumbha pitA, rakSitA mAtA, azvinI nakSatra, azoka
vRkSa aura mallinAtha jinendra, he rAjan ! ye tere manako zokarahita kareM !55 /
/  kuzAgra nagara ( rAjagRha ), sumitra pitA, padmAvatI mAtA, zravaNa nakSatra,
campaka vRkSa aura suvratanAtha jinendra, ye tere manako prApta hoM arthAt tU
hRdayase inakA dhyAna kara  // 56 //  mithilA nagarI, vijaya pitA, vaprA mAtA,
azvinI nakSatra, vakula vRkSa aura neminAtha tIrthaMkara, ye tere lie dharmakA
samAgama pradAna kareM  // 57 //  zauripuranagara, samudravijaya pitA, zivA
mAtA, citrA nakSatra, meSazRMga vRkSa, Urjayanta ( giranAra ) parvata aura nemi
jinendra, ye tere lie sUkhadAyaka hoM  // 58 //  vArANasI (banArasa ) nagarI.
azvasena pitA. varmAdeva vizAkhA nakSatra, dhava (dhau ) vRkSa aura pArzvanAtha
jinendra, ye tere mana meM dhairya utpanna kareM  /  / 59 /  /  kuNDapura
nagara, siddhArtha pitA, priyakAriNI mAtA, uttarAphAlgunI nakSatra, sAla vRkSa,
pAvA nagara aura mahAvIra jinendra, ye tere lie parama maMgalasvarUpa hoM  // 60
/  inameM-se vAsupUjya bhagavAnkA mokSa-sthAna campApurI hI hai| RSabhadeva,
neminAtha tathA mahAvIra inake mokSasthAna kramase kailAsa, Urjayanta giri tathA
pAvApura ye tIna pahale kahe jA cuke haiM aura zeSa bIsa tIrthaMkara
sammedAcalase nirvANa dhAmako prApta hue haiM  // 61 //  zAnti, kunthu aura ara
ye tIna rAjA cakravartI hote hue tIrthaMkara hue| zeSa tIrthaMkara sAmAnya rAjA
hue  // 62 //  candraprabha aura puSpadanta ye candramAke samAna zvetavarNake 1.
-dIdhiparNazca m.| 2. hAstipasthAna- m.| 3. pApavinAzanakAraNAni  /  4. vijeyo
m.|

Page #478 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
428 Padmapurana Parshva, the king of Nagas, was described as having the color of
unripe barley.  Padmagarbha was described as having the color of the inner
petals of a lotus.  He was the best among those who asked questions. ||64||
Vasupujya was described as having the color of the flower of the Kimshuka tree.
Munisuvrata, the Tirthankara, was described as having the color of the blue
mountain. ||65||  Jina, the best of the Yadavas, was described as having the
color of a peacock's neck.  The remaining Jinas were described as having the
color of molten gold. ||66|| Vasupujya, Mahavira, Malli, Parshva, and the best
of the Yadavas, were all described as having left their homes as princes.  The
other Tirthankaras accepted the kingdom and then took initiation. ||67||  These
Tirthankaras were all worshipped, praised, and bowed to by the lords of the gods
and the lords of the earth.  They all received the ultimate abhisheka on the
peak of Mount Meru. ||68||  These twenty-four Tirthankaras, who are the cause of
the attainment of all auspiciousness and who are the greatest wonders of the
three worlds, may they always protect you. ||69|| Then, King Shrenik said to
Gautam Swami, "O Ganadhar! Now, tell me the truth that purifies the mind, the
measure of the lifespan of these twenty-four Tirthankaras." ||70||  "And, O
Venerable One, I also want to know about the Tirthankara during whose time
Ramachandra was born." ||71|| When King Shrenik asked this question with great
respect, the Ganadhar Swami, whose mind was as pure as the ocean of milk, said,
||72|| "O Shrenik! The entity called time transcends the realm of numbers,
meaning it is infinite.  It cannot be perceived directly by the senses.
However, the great ones have described it using an analogy in their minds."
||73|| "Imagine a space the size of a yojana, surrounded on all sides by walls.
It is filled with the tips of the hairs of a sheep that was just born. ||74||
This space is made very hard by pounding it.  This space, which is one yojana
long, wide, and deep, is called a dravyapalya.  Since it has been said that this
is an analogy, then questions like who dug this pit, who filled it, etc., are
meaningless." ||75||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 428 padmapurANe apakvazAlisaMkAzaH pAzvo nAgAdhipastutaH  /
padmagarbhasamacchAyaH praznaprabhajinottamaH  /  / 64 //  kiMzukotkarasaMkAzo
vAsupUjyaH prakIrtitaH  /  nIlAanagiricchAyo munisuvratatIrthakRt  // 65 //
mayUrakaNThasaMkAzo jino yAdavapuGgavaH  /  sutaptakAJcanacchAyAH zeSA jinavarAH
smRtAH  // 66 //  vAsupUjyo mahAvIro malliH pAzvo yadUttamaH  /  kumArA nirgatA
gehAtpRthivIpatayo'pare  /  / 67 /  /  ete surAsurAdhIzaH praNatAH pUjitAH
stutAH  /  amiSekaM paraM prAptAnagapArthivamUrdhani  // 6 //
sarvakalyANasaMprAptikAraNIbhUtasevanAH  /  jinendrAH pAntu vo nityaM
trailokyaparamAdbhutAH  /  / 69 /  /  AyuHpramANabodhArtha gaNeza mama sAMpratam
/  nivedaya paraM tattvaM manaHpAvanakAraNam  // 7 //  yazca rAmo'ntare yasya
jinendrasyodapadyata  /  tatsarva jJAtumicchAmi pratIkSya tvatprasAdataH  // 71
//  ityukto gaNabhRtsaumyaH zreNikena mahAdarAt  /  nivedayAMbabhUvAsau
kssiirodaamlmaansH||72|| saMkhyAyA gocaraM yo'rtho vyatikramya vyavasthitaH  /
buddhau kalpitadRSTAntaH kathito'sau mahAtmabhiH  // 73 //  yojanapratimaM vyoma
sarvato mittiveSTitam  /  aveH prajAtamAtrasya romAH paripUritam  /  / 74 //
dravyapalyamidaM gADhamAhatya kaThinIkRtam  /  kathyate kalpitaM kasya
vyApAro'yaM mudhA bhavet  // 75 //  tatra varSazate'tIte hyekaikasminsamaddhate
/  kSIyate yena kAlena kAlapalyaM taducyate  // 76 /  /  dhAraka the  /
supArzva jinendra priyaMguke phUlake samAna harita varNake the| pArzvanAtha bhI
kaccI dhAnyake samAna harita varNake the| dharaNendrane pArzvanAtha bhagavAnkI
stuti bhI kI thii| padmaprabha jinendra kamalake bhItarI dalake samAna lAla
kAntike dhAraka the  // 63-64 //  vAsupUjya bhagavAn palAza puSpake samUhake
samAna lAlavarNake the| munisuvrata tIrthaMkara nIlagiri athavA aMjanagirike
samAna zyAma- . varNake the  // 65 //  yaduvaMza ziromaNi neminAtha bhagavAn
mayUrake kaNThake samAna nIla varNake the aura bAkIke samasta tIrthaMkara tapAye
hue svarNake samAna lAla-pIta varNake dhAraka the  // 66|| vAsupUjya, malli,
neminAtha, pArzvanAtha aura mahAvIra ye pA~ca tIrthaMkara kumAra avasthAmeM hI
gharase nikala gaye the, bAkI tIrthaMkaroMne rAjyapATa svIkAra kara dIkSA
dhAraNa kI thI  // 67 /  /  ina sabhI tIrthaMkaroMko devendra tathA dharaNendra
namaskAra karate the, inakI pUjA karate the, inakI stuti karate the aura sumeru
parvatake zikharapara sabhI parama abhiSekako prApta hue the  // 68 //  jinakI
sedA samasta kalyANoMkI prAptikA kAraNa hai tathA jo tInoM lokoMke parama
AzcaryasvarUpa the, aise ye caubIsoM jinendra nirantara tuma sabakI rakSA kareM
// 69 /  /  athAnantara rAjA zreNikane gautamasvAmIse kahA ki he gaNanAtha! aba
mujhe ina caubIsa tIrthaMkaroMkI AyukA pramANa jAnaneke lie manakI pavitratAkA
kAraNa jo parama tattva hai vaha kahie  /  / 70 /  /  sAtha hI jisa tIrthakarake
antarAlameM rAmacandrajI hue haiM he pUjya ! vaha saba Apake prasAdase jAnanA
cAhatA hU~  // 71 /  /  rAjA zreNikane jaba bar3e Adarase isa prakAra pUchA taba
kSIrasAgarake samAna nirmala cittake dhAraka parama zAnta gaNadhara svAmI isa
prakAra kahane lage  // 72 //  ki he zreNika ! kAla nAmA jo padArtha hai vaha
saMkhyAke viSayako ullaMghana kara sthita hai arthAt ananta hai, indriyoMke
dvArA usakA pratyakSa nahIM ho sakatA phira bhI mahAtmAoMne buddhimeM dRSTAntakI
kalpanA kara usakA nirUpaNa kiyA hai  /  / 73 /  /  kalpanA karo ki eka yojana
pramANa AkAza saba orase dIvAloMse veSTita arthAt ghirA huA hai tathA tatkAla
utpanna hue bher3ake bAloMke agrabhAgase bharA huA hai  /  / 74 /  ise Thoka-
Thokakara bahuta hI kar3A banA diyA gayA hai, isa eka yojana lambe-caur3e tathA
gahare gartako dravyapalya kahate haiM  /  jaba yaha kaha diyA gayA hai ki yaha
kalpita dRSTAnta hai taba yaha garta kisane khodA, kisane bharA Adi prazna
nirarthaka haiM  // 75 /  /  usa bhare hue romagarnameM se 1. sumeruzikhare  /
2. padyate ma., b.| 3. he pUjya ! pratIta- kha.  /  4. kathite ma.  /

Page #479 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain Terms Preserved:  The 429th chapter describes the 'Ratnakaropama' time
period, which is the time period of the ten Avarsarpini (descending) cycles.
Each Avarsarpini and Utsarpini (ascending) cycle lasts for the same duration,
just like the waxing and waning phases of the moon. These cycles are divided
into six sub-periods by the Mahatmas (great beings) based on the differences in
the potency of the substances involved.  The first sub-period of the Avarsarpini
cycle is called Sushama-Sushama, whose time period is measured in 4 Koá¹­ikodyÄs
of SÄgaropamas. The second sub-period is called Sushama, whose time period is 3
Koá¹­ikodyÄs of SÄgaropamas. The third sub-period is called Sushama-Duhá¹£hama,
whose time period is 2 Koá¹­ikodyÄs of SÄgaropamas. The fourth sub-period is
called Duhá¹£hama-Sushama, whose time period is 1 Koá¹­ikodyÄ of SÄgaropamas minus
42,000 years. The fifth sub-period is called Duhá¹£hama, and the sixth sub-period
is called Duhá¹£hama-Duhá¹£hama, each of whose time periods is 21,000 years as per
the Jinas.  The time intervals between the TÄ«rthaá¹karas are then described.
After BhagavÄn á¹á¹£habhadeva, the second TÄ«rthaá¹kara AjitanÄtha appeared after an
interval of 50 lakh Koá¹­ikodyÄs of SÄgaropamas. The third TÄ«rthaá¹kara
SambhavanÄtha appeared after an interval of 30 lakh Koá¹­ikodyÄs of SÄgaropamas.
The fourth TÄ«rthaá¹kara AbhinandananÄtha appeared after an interval of 10 lakh
Koá¹­ikodyÄs of SÄgaropamas. The subsequent TÄ«rthaá¹karas appeared at intervals of
9 lakh, 90,000, 9,000, 900, 90, and 9 Koá¹­ikodyÄs of SÄgaropamas respectively.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 429 vizatitamaM parva koTIkovyo dazaiteSAM kAlo 'ratnAkaropamaH  /
sAgaropamakoTInAM dazakoTyo'vasarpiNI  // 77 //  utsarpiNIca tAvantyaste
sitAsitapakSavat  /  satataM parivartete rAjan kaalsvbhaavtH||78||
pratyekametayomaMdAH SaDadiSTA mhaatmbhiH|
saMsagivastuvIyodibhedasaMmavavRttayaH  // 79 //  atyantaH suSamaH kAlaH
prathamaH parikIrtitaH  /  koTI kovyazcatasro'sya sAmudonmAnamucyate  // 8 //
kIrtitaH suSamastisro dvayaM sussmduHssmH| vakSyamANadvikAlo'bdairUnA
duHssmsttmH||81|| ukko varSasahasrANAmekaviMzatimAnataH  /  pratyekaM
duHSamo'tyantaduHSamazca jinAdhipaiH  // 12 //  paJcAzadadhikoTonA lakSAH
prathamamucyate  /  triMzaddazanavaitAsAM paripATyA jinAntaram  // 8 //
navatizca sahasrANi nava cAsA vyavasthitaH  /  zatAni ca navaMtAsAM
navatistAstathA nava  // 84 //  shaitvaacikhkhdyossddvissttssddvrssvicyutaa| ekA
koTI samudrANAM jJeyaM dazamamantaram  // 85 //  caturbhiH sahitA jJeyAH
paJcAzatsAgarAstataH  /  triMzannavAtha catvAraH sAgarAH kIrtitAstataH  // 86 //
palyamAgatrayanyUnaM tayo ratnAkaratrayam  /  palyAdha SoDaza proktaM
caturbhAgo'sya tatparam  // 47 //  nyUnaH koTisahasreNa varSANAM parikIrtitaH  /
samAkoTisahasraM ca tatparaM gaditaM budhaiH  // 88 //  sau-sau varSake bAda
eka-eka romakhaNDa nikAlA jAya jitane samayameM khAlI ho jAya utanA samaya eka
palya kahalAtA hai| daza kor3Akor3I palyoMkA eka sAgara hotA hai aura daza
kor3A-kor3I sAgaroMkI eka avasarpiNI hotI hai  /  / 76-77|| utane hI samayakI
eka utsarpiNI bhI hotI hai| he rAjan ! jisa prakAra zukla pakSa aura kRSNa pakSa
nirantara badalate rahate haiM usI prakAra kAla-dravyake svabhAvase avasarpiNI
aura utsarpiNI kAla nirantara badalate rahate haiM  // 78 //  mahAtmAoMne ina
donoMmeM se pratyekake chaha-chaha bheda batalAye haiN| saMsarga meM AnevAlI
vastuoMke vIrya AdimeM bheda honese ina chaha-chaha bhedoMkI vizeSatA siddha
hotI hai  // 79 //  avasarpiNIkA pahalA bheda suSamA-suSamA kAla kahalAtA hai|
isakA cAra kor3A-kor3o sAgara pramANa kAla kahA jAtA hai  /  / 80 //  dUsarA
bheda suSamA kahalAtA hai| isakA pramANa tIna kor3A-kor3I sAgara pramANa hai|
tIsarA bheda suSamA-duHSamA kahA jAtA hai| isakA pramANa do kor3A-kor3I sAgara
pramANa hai| cauthA bheda duHSamA-suSamA kahalAtA hai| isakA pramANa bayAlIsa
hajAra varSa kama eka kor3I-kor3I sAgara pramANa hai| pAMcavAM bheda duHSamA
aura chaThA bheda duHSamA-duHSamA kAla kahalAtA hai inakA pratyekakA pramANa
ikkIsa-ikkIsa hajAra varSakA jinendra devane kahA hai  /  / 81-82 //  aba
tIrthaMkaroMkA antara kAla kahate haiM  /  bhagavAna RSabhadevake bAda pacAsa
lAkha karor3a sAgarakA antara bItanepara dvitIya ajitanAtha tIrthaMkara hue|
usake bAda tIsa lAkha karor3a sAgarakA antara bItanepara tRtIya sambhavanAtha
utpanna hue| unake bAda daza lAkha karor3a sAgarakA antara bItanepara caturtha
abhinandananAtha utpanna hue  // 83 /  /  unake bAda nau lAkha karor3a sAgarake
bItanepara paMcama sumatinAtha hae, unake bAda nabbe hajAra karor3a sAgara
bItanepara chaThe padmaprabha hue, unake bAda nau hajAra karor3a sAgara
bItanepara sAtaveM supArzvanAtha hue, unake bAda nau sau karor3a sAgara
bItanepara AThaveM candraprabha hue, unake bAda nabbe karor3a sAgara bItanepara
naveM puSpadanta hue, unake bAda nau karor3a sAgara bItanepara dazaveM
zItalanAtha hue, unake bAda sau sAgara kama eka karor3a sAgara bItanepara
gyArahaveM zreyAMsanAtha hue, unake bAda cauvana sAgara bItanepara bArahaveM
vAsupUjya svAmI hue, unake bAda tIsa sAgara bItane1. sAgaropamaH  /  2. saMsapi-
kha.  /  3. ma. pustake 85 tamazlokasthAne 'samudrazatahInakA koTIdazamamantaram
/  catubhiH sahitA jJeyaH pazcAzatsAgarAstataH' iti pATho'sti  /  4. ba. pustake
86 tamaH zlokaH SadbhiH pAdairatra samApyate  /  5. ka. pustake 87 tamaH zlokaH
SaDabhiH pAdairatra samApyate  /

Page #480 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
430 Padmapurana 5 ||9 || Forty-five lakhs, then one lakh more, then six lakhs,
then five are declared. ||89|| Eighty thousand, then eight hundred and a half,
then three hundred and a half are declared. ||10|| The Dharma of Vardhamana
Jinendra is touched by suffering. When Mahavira, the great lord of the
Dharmachakra, is gone, ||11|| When the arrival of the gods is freed, when the
extraordinary is gone, ||12|| When the birth of Kevala is lost, when the holder
of the plough-wheel is abandoned, ||13|| When the qualities of a great king like
you are gone, ||14|| The people will become wicked, their minds always eager to
deceive. ||15|| They will be without playfulness, withdrawn, full of pain and
disease, false-sighted, very terrible, and unreformable. ||16|| There will be
excessive rain, no rain, and uneven rain. There will be various unbearable ways
that will cause unbearable suffering to living beings. ||17|| They will be
intoxicated by the intoxicating fog of delusion, their bodies will be like lumps
of attachment and aversion, their eyebrows and hands will always be moving, they
will be very sinful, they will always smile with pride, they will be eager to
speak harsh words, they will be merciless, they will always be engaged in
accumulating wealth, and they will wander on the earth like fireflies or
glowworms in the night, that is, they will be of little influence. ||18-19||
They will be fools themselves, and they will fall into the path of the goad,
which is full of various evil deeds, and they will lead others into it. They
will be of a wicked nature, always engaged in harming others and themselves.
They will know the Self as the Siddha, but they will be destined for hell.
||20||  After the thirteenth, the pure Vimala was born. After nine Sagaras
passed, the fourteenth, Ananta, was born. After four Sagaras passed, the
fifteenth, Shridharmanatha, was born. After three Sagaras less than a quarter of
a Paly passed, the sixteenth, Shanti, was born. After half a Paly passed, the
seventeenth, Kunthunatha, was born. After a thousand years less than a quarter
of a Paly passed, the eighteenth, Aranatha, was born. After a thousand crore
Sagaras less than sixty-five lakhs eighty-four thousand years passed, the
nineteenth, Mallinatha, was born. After fifty-four lakh years passed, the
twentieth, Munisuvratanatha, was born. After six lakh years passed, the twenty-
first, Naminatha, was born. After five lakh years passed, the twenty-second,
Neminatha, was born. After three-quarters of eighty-four thousand years passed,
the twenty-third, Shriparshvanatha, was born. And after two hundred and fifty
years passed, the twenty-fourth, Shree Vardhamana Swami, was born. The Dharma of
Bhagavan Vardhamana Swami is prevalent in this fifth time, whose two feet are
washed by the water of the radiance of the crowns of the Indras, who is the
originator of the Dharma-chakra, and who was the holder of great wealth. After
the departure of Mahavira Swami, who was the holder of great wealth, the fifth
time will come, in which the arrival of the gods will cease, all the
extraordinary will be destroyed, the birth of Kevalajnana will cease, the birth
of Balabhadra, Narayana, and Chakravartis will also cease. And the time will be
devoid of the qualities worthy of a great king like you. Then the people will
become very wicked, their minds will always be eager to deceive each other. The
people of that time will be without playfulness and withdrawn, full of various
pains and diseases, false-sighted and very terrible. ||84-94|| There will be
excessive rain, no rain, and uneven rain. There will be various unbearable ways
that will cause unbearable suffering to living beings. ||95|| The people of that
time will be intoxicated by the intoxicating fog of delusion, their bodies will
be like lumps of attachment and aversion, their eyebrows and hands will always
be moving, they will be very sinful, they will always smile with pride, they
will be eager to speak harsh words, they will be merciless, they will always be
engaged in accumulating wealth, and they will wander on the earth like fireflies
or glowworms in the night, that is, they will be of little influence. ||96-97||
They will be fools themselves, and they will fall into the path of the goad,
which is full of various evil deeds, and they will lead others into it. They
will be of a wicked nature, always engaged in harming others and themselves.
They will know the Self as the Siddha, but they will be destined for hell.
||98||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 430 padmapurANe 5  // 9  //  catuHpaJcAzadAkhyAtaM samA lakSAstu tatparam  /
SaDlakSA uttaraM tasmAttataH paJca prakAzitam  // 89 //  sahasrANi vyazItistu
sArdhASTamazataM param  /  zatAnyarddhatRtIyAni samAnA kIrtitaM tataH  // 10 //
varddhamAnajinendrasya dharmaH saMspRSTaduHSamaH  /  nivRtte tu mahAvIre
dharmacakre mahezvare  /  surendramukuTacchAyApayodhautakramadvaye  // 11 //
devAgamananirmukte kAle'tizayavarjite  /  pranaSTakevalotpAde
halacakradharojjhite  // 12 //  bhavadvidhamahArAjaguNasaMghAtariktake  /
bhaviSyanti prajA duSTA vaJcanodyatamAnasAH  // 13 //  nizlIlA nivratAH prAyaH
kleshbyaadhismnvitaaH| mithyAdRzo mahAghorA bhaviSyantyasudhAriNaH  // 9 //
ativRSTiravRSTizca viSamAvRSTirItayaH  /  vividhAzca bhaviSyanti dussahAH
prANadhAriNAm  // 15 //  mohakAdambarImattA rAgadveSAtmamUrtayaH  /  narti
tabhrakarAH pApA muhurgarvasmitA narAH  // 16 //  kuvAkyamukharAH karA
dhanalAbhaparAyaNAH  /  vicariSyanti khadyotA rAtrAviva mahItale  // 9 //
godaNDapathatulyeSu mUDhAste patitAH svayam  /  kudharmeSu
janAnanyAnpAtayiSyanti durjanAH  // 18 //  apakAre samAsaktAH parasya svasya
cAnizam  /  jJAsyanti siddhamAtmAnaM narA durgatigAminaH  // 19 //  para
terahaveM vimalanAtha hue, unake bAda nau sAgara bItane para caudahaveM
anantanAtha hue, unake bAda cAra sAgara bItanepara pandrahaveM zrIdharmanAtha
hue, unake bAda pauna palya kama tIna sAgara bItanepara solahaveM zAntinAtha
hue, unake bAda AdhA palya bItanepara satrahaveM kunthunAtha hue, unake bAda
hajAra varSa kama pAvapalya bItanepara aThArahaveM aranAtha hue, unake bAda
paiMsaTha lAkha caurAsI hajAra varSa kama hajAra karor3a sAgara bItanepara
unnIsaveM mallinAtha hue, unake bAda cauvana lAkha varSa botanepara bIsaveM
munisuvratanAtha hue, unake bAda chaha lAkha varSa bItanepara ikkIsaveM
naminAtha hue, unake bAda pA~ca lAkha varSa bItanepara bAIsaveM neminAtha hue,
unake bAda paune caurAsI hajAra varSa bItanepara teIsaveM zrIpArzvanAtha hue
aura unake bAda DhAI sau varSa bItanepara caubIsaveM zrI vardhamAnasvAmI hae
haiN| bhagavAna vardhamAna svAmIkA dharma hI isa samaya paMcama kAlameM vyApta
ho indroMke mukuToMkI kAntirUpI jalase jinake donoM caraNa dhula rahe haiM, jo
dharma-cakrakA pravartana karate haiM tathA mahAn aizvaryake dhAraka the, aise
mahAvIra svAmIke mokSa cale jAneke bAda jo paMcama kAla AvegA, usameM devoMkA
Agamana banda ho jAyegA, saba atizaya naSTa ho jAveMge, kevalajJAnakI utpatti
samApta ho jaavegii| balabhadra, nArAyaNa tathA cakravartiyoMkA utpanna honA bhI
banda ho jaayegaa| aura Apa jaise mahArAjAoMke yogya guNoMse samaya zUnya ho
jaayegaa| taba prajA atyanta duSTa ho jAvegI, eka dUsareko dhokhA dene meM hI
usakA mana nirantara udyata rhegaa| usa samayake loga niHzIla tathA nirvata
hoMge, nAnA prakArake kleza aura vyAdhiyoMse sahita hoMge, mithyAdRSTi tathA
atyanta bhayaMkara hoMge  // 84-94 /  /  kahIM ativRSTi hogI, kahIM avRSTi hogI
aura kahIM viSama vRSTi hogii| sAtha hI nAnA prakArakI duHsaha rItiyA~
prANiyoMko duHsaha duHkha pahu~cAveMgI  // 95|| usa samayake loga moharUpI
madirAke nazAmeM cUra raheMge, unake zarIra rAga-dveSake piNDake samAna jAna
par3eMge, unakI bhauMheM tathA hAtha sadA calate raheMge, ve atyanta pApI hoMge,
bAra-bAra ahaMkArase musakarAte raheMge, khoTe vacana bolane meM tatpara hoMge,
nirdaya hoMge, dhanasaMcaya karane meM hI nirantara lage raheMge aura pRthvIpara
aise vicareMge jaise ki rAtrimeM jugunU athavA paTavIjanA vicarate haiM arthAt
alpa prabhAvake dhAraka hoMge ||96-97|ve svayaM mUrkha hoMge aura godaNDa
pathake samAna jo nAnA kudharma haiM unameM svayaM par3akara dUsare logoMko bhI
le jaayeNge| durjaya prakRtike hoMge, dUsareke tathA apane apakArameM 1. kha.
pustake 91 tamaH zlokaH SaDbhiH pAdairatra samApyate  /  ja. pustake mUlataH ma.
pustakavat pATho'sti kiMtu pazcAtkenApi TippaNaka; uJjhitazlokacihna dattvA 85
tamaH zlokaH mUlena yocitaH  /  .

Page #481 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twentieth Chapter  **431**  By the roars of those who have released the
weapon of the scriptures, the Karma-Mlechchas, who are intoxicated with pride,
whose enthusiasm is born of evil, who are covered in the darkness of delusion,
**10**  the rulers of the non-noble, who are constantly engaged in violence,
will be cut down by the axe of the weapon of violence, due to the influence of
the slow time.  **101**  In the beginning of the fifth time, the height of
humans is said to be seven cubits, and then there will be a gradual decrease.
**102**  Then, in the sixth time, they will be twenty cubits tall, with a
lifespan of twenty years. After that, they will be one cubit tall, with a
lifespan of sixteen years.  **103**  They will live like reptiles, earning their
livelihood with great difficulty.  **104**  They will have deformed bodies,
constantly engaged in sinful activities, tormented by delusion and disease, like
animals.  **105**  There will be no order, no connection, no rulers, no
servants. There will be no wealth, no homes, and no happiness, only misery.
**106**  Driven by the pursuit of pleasure, wealth, and dharma, the people will
be empty, like piles of sin.  **107**  Just as the moon wanes in the dark
fortnight and waxes in the bright fortnight, so too, in the Avasarpini time,
there is a decrease in the lifespan and other qualities of people, and in the
Utsarpini time, there is an increase.  **108**  Or, just as the activities of
festivals and other good deeds decrease at night and increase during the day, so
too, one should understand the state of the Avasarpini and Utsarpini times.
**109**  The decrease that has been described in the Avasarpini time should be
understood as an increase in the Utsarpini time.  **110**  Gautama Swami said to
King Shrenik, "O King! I have spoken of the difference between the twenty-four
Tirthankaras. Now, I will speak of their heights in order. Listen carefully."
**111**  The height of the first Tirthankara, Rishabhadeva, is said to be five
hundred bows.  **112**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viMzatitama parva 431 kuzAstramuktahuMkAraiH karmamlecchairmadoddhataiH  /
anarthajanitotsAhaimarmohasaMtamasAvRtaiH  // 10 //  chetsyante
satatodyuktarmandakAlAnubhAvataH  /  hiMsAzAstra kuThAreNa bhavyetara janAdhipAH
// 101 //  AdAvaratnayaH sapta janAnAM duHSame smRtAH  /  pramANaM kramato
hAnistatasteSAM bhaviSyati  // 102 //  dvihastasaMmitA martyA
viMzatyabdAyuSastataH  /  bhaviSyanti pare hastamAtrotsedhAH suduHSame  // 103
//  AyuH SoDazavarSANi teSAM gaditamuttamam  /  vRtyA sarIsRpANAM te
jIviSyantyantadu:khitAH  // 10 //  te virUpasamastAGgA nityaM pApakriyAratAH  /
tiryaJca iva mohArtA bhaviSyanti rujArditAH  // 105 //  na vyavasthA na
saMbandhA nezvarA na ca sevakAH  /  na dhanaM na gRhaM naiva sukhamekAntaduHSame
// 106 //  kAmArthadharma saMbhArahetubhiH pariceSTitaiH  /  zUnyAH prajA
bhaviSyanti pApapiNDacitA iva  // 107 //  kRSNapakSe kSayaM yAti yathA zukle ca
vardhate  /  industathaitayorAyurAdInAM hAnivardhane  // 10 //
utsavAdipravRttInAM raatrivaasryorythaa| hAnivRddhI ca vijJeye
kAlayostadvadetayoH  // 10 //  yenAvasarpiNIkAle krameNodAhRtaH kSayaH  /
utsarpiNyAmanenaiva parivRddhiH prakIrtitA  // 110 //  jinAnAmantaraM
proktamutsedhaM zRNvataH param  /  kramataH kIrtayiSyAmi rAjannavahito bhava  //
111 //  zatAni paJca cApAnAM prathamasya mahAtmanaH  /  utsedho jinanAthasya
vapuSaH parikIrtitaH  // 112 //  rAta-dina lage rheNge| usa samayake loga hoMge
to durgatimeM jAnevAle para apane Apako aisA samajheMge jaise siddha hue jA rahe
hoM arthAt mokSa prApta karanevAle hoM  // 98-99 /  /  jo mithyA zAstroMkA
adhyayana kara ahaMkAravaza huMkAra chor3a rahe haiM, jo kArya karane meM
mlecchoMke samAna haiM, sadA madase uddhata rahate haiM, nirarthaka kAryoMmeM
jinakA utsAha utpanna hotA hai, jo moharUpI andhakArase sadA AvRta rahate haiM
aura sadA dAva-peMca lagAne meM hI tatpara rahate haiM, aise brAhmaNAdikake
dvArA usa samayake abhavya jIvarUpI vRkSa, hiMsAzAstra rUpI kuThArase sadA chede
jaaveNge| yaha saba hIna kAlakA prabhAva hI samajhanA cAhie  // 100-101 //
duHSama nAma paMcama kAlake AdimeM manuSyoMkI U~cAI sAta hAtha pramANa hogI
phira kramase hAni hotI jaavegii| isa prakAra kramase hAni hotehote antameM do
hAtha U~ce raha jaaveNge| bIsa varSakI unakI Ayu raha jaavegii| usake bAda jaba
chaThA kAla AvegA taba eka hAtha U~cA zarIra aura solaha varSakI Ayu raha
jaavegii| usa samayake manuSya sarIsRpoMke samAna eka dUsareko mArakara bar3e
kaSTase jIvana bitAveMge ||102-104 //  unake samasta aMga virUpa hoMge, ve
nirantara pApa-kriyAmeM lIna raheMge, tiryaMcoMke samAna mohase duHkhI tathA
rogase pIr3ita hoMge  // 105|| chaThe kAla meM na koI vyavasthA rahegI, na koI
sambandha raheMge, na rAjA raheMge, na sevaka rheNge| logoMke pAsa na dhana
rahegA, na ghara rahegA, aura na sukha hI rahegA  // 106 //  usa samayakI prajA
dharma, artha, kAma sambandhI ceSTAoMse sadA zUnya rahegI aura aisI dikhegI mAno
pApake samUhase vyApta hI ho  // 107 /  /  jisa prakAra kRSNa pakSameM candramA
hrAsako prApta hotA hai aura zukla pakSameM vRddhiko prApta hotA hai usI prakAra
avasarpiNI kAlameM logoMkI Ayu AdimeM hrAsa hone lagatA hai tathA
utsapiNIkAlameM vRddhi hone lagatI hai  /  / 108 /  /  athavA jisa prakAra
rAtrimeM utsavAdi acche-acche kAryoMkI pravRttikA hrAsa hone lagatA hai aura
dinameM vRddhi hone lagatI hai usI prakAra avasapiNI aura utsapiNIkAlakA hAla
jAnanA cAhie  // 109 //  avasapiNI kAla meM jisa kramase kSayakA ullekha kiyA
hai utsarpiNIkAlameM usI kramase vRddhikA ullekha jAnanA cAhie  // 110 //
gautamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! maiMne caubIsa
tIrthaMkaroMkA antara to kahA  /  aba kramase unakI U~cAI kahU~gA so sAvadhAna
hokara suna  // 111 //  pahale RSabhadeva bhagavAnake zarIrakI UMcAI pA~ca sau
dhanuSa kahI gayI hai  /  / 112 /  /  usake 1. mandA: ma., b.| 2. jinAdhripAH
ma., ja.  /  3. dhrmsNgbhaar-m.| 4. zRNu+ataH  /

Page #482 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, the number of dhanus (bows) of each Tirthankara is
described as follows:  From Rishabhanatha to Padmaprabha, the number of dhanus
decreases by 50 for each Tirthankara. Rishabhanatha had 500 dhanus, Ajitanatha
had 450, Sambhavanatha had 400, Abhinandananatha had 350, Sumatinathanad 300,
Padmaprabha had 250 dhanus.  From Suparsvanatha to Mahavira, the number of
dhanus decreases by 50 for each Tirthankara. Suparsvanatha had 200 dhanus,
Chandraprabha had 150, Pushpadanta had 100, Shitalanatha had 90, Shreyansnatha
had 80, Vasupujya had 70, Vimalanatha had 60, Anantanatha had 50, Dharmanatha
had 45, Shantinatha had 40, Kunthunatha had 35, Aranatha had 30, Mallinatha had
25, Munisuvrata had 20, Naminatha had 15, Neminatha had 10 dhanus.  The height
of Parshvanatha was 9 hastas (cubits) and of Mahavira was 7 hastas.  Regarding
the lifespans of the Kulakara (progenitors) and Tirthankaras:  The lifespan of
the first Kulakara was one-tenth of a palya. The lifespan of each subsequent
Kulakara was one-tenth of the previous one.  The lifespan of the first
Tirthankara Rishabhanatha was 84 lakh years, of Ajitanatha was 72 lakh years, of
Sambhavanatha was 60 lakh years. The next five Tirthankaras had a lifespan
decreasing by 10 lakh years each - Abhinandananatha had 50 lakh years,
Sumatinathanad 40 lakh years, Padmaprabha had 30 lakh years, Suparsvanatha had
20 lakh years, and Chandraprabha had 10 lakh years. Pushpadanta had 2 lakh
years, Shitalanatha had 1 lakh years, Shreyansnatha had 84,000 years, Vasupujya
had 72,000 years, Vimalanatha had 60,000 years, Anantanatha had 30,000 years,
Dharmanatha had 10,000 years, Shantinatha had 1 lakh years, Kunthunatha had
95,000 years, Aranatha had 30,000 years, Mallinatha had 25,000 years,
Munisuvrata had 20,000 years, Naminatha had 15,000 years, Neminatha had 10,000
years.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 432 padmapurANe paJcAzaccApahAnyAtaH pratyekaM parikIrtitam  /  zItalAt
prAjinendrANAM navatiH zItalasya ca  // 113 //  tato dharmajinAt pUrva
dazacApaparikSayaH  /  pratyekaM dharmamAthasya catvAriMzassapaJcikAH  // 11 //
tataH pArvajinAt pUrva pratyekaM paJcabhiH kSayaH  /  navAranimitaH pAzvo
mahAvIro dvivarjitaH  // 115 //  palyopamasya dazamo bhAga Adyasya kIrtitam  /
misyA kulakarasyAyulokAlokAvalokimiH  // 116 //  dazamo dazamo bhAgaH
paurastyasya tataH smRtaH  /  pramANamAyuSo rAjan zeSANAM kulakAriNAm  // 117 //
caturbhiradhikAzItiH pUrvalakSAH prakIrtitAH  /  prathamasya jinendra sya
dvitIyasya dvisaptatiH  // 11 //  paSTizca paJcasu jJeyaH krameNa dazabhiH
kSayaH  /  vijJeye pUrvalakSe dve tathaikaM parikIrtitam  // 119 //
caturbhiradhikAzItirabdI lakSA dvisaptatiH  /  SaSTistriMzaddazaikA ca samA
lakSAH prakIrtitAH  // 120 //  navatiH paJcamiH sArdhamazItizcaturuttarAH  /
paJcAzatpaJcabhiryuktAstriMzadaza ca kIrtitaH  // 12 //  bAda zItalanAthake
pahale-pahale taka arthAt puSpadanta bhagavAn taka pratyekakI pacAsa-pacAsa
dhanuSa kama hotI gayI hai| zItalanAtha bhagavAnkI UMcAI nabbe dhanuSa hai|
usake Age dharmanAthake pahale-pahale taka pratyekakI daza-daza dhanuSa kama
hotI gayI hai| dharmanAthakI paiMtAlIsa dhanuSa pramANa hai| unake Age
pAzvanAthake pahale-pahale taka pratyekakI pA~ca-pA~ca dhanuSa kama hotI gayI
hai| pAzvaM vadhamAna svAmIke unase do hAtha kama arthAt sAta hAthakI UMcAI hai|
bhAvArtha-1 RSabhanAthakI 500 dhanuSa, 2 ajitanAthakI 450 dhanuSa, 3
sambhavanAthakI 400 dhanuSa, 4 abhinandananAthakI 350 dhanuSa, 5 sumatinAthakI
300 dhanuSa, 6 padmaprabhakI 250 dhanuSa, 7 supArzvanAthako 200 dhanuSa, 8
candraprabhakI 150 dhanuSa, 9 puSpadantakI 100 dhanuSa, 10 zItalanAthako 90
dhanuSa, 11 zreyAnsanAthakI 80 dhanuSa, 12 vAsupUjyako 70 dhanuSa, 13
vimalanAthako 60 dhanuSa, 14 anantanAthako 50 dhanuSa, 15 dharmanAthakI 45
dhanuSa, 16 zAntinAthakI 40 dhanuSa, 17 kunthunAthakI 35 dhanuSa, 18 aranAthakI
30 dhanuSa, 19 mallinAthakI 25 dhanuSa, 20 munisuvratanAthako 20 dhanuSa, 21
naminAthakI 15 dhanuSa, 22 neminAthako 10 dhanuSa, 23 pArzvanAthakI 9 hAtha aura
24 vardhamAna svAmIko 7 hAthako U~cAI hai  // 113-115 //  aba kulakara tathA
tIrthaMkaroMkI AyukA varNana karatA hU~-he rAjan ! loka tathA alokake
dekhanevAle sarvajJadevane prathama kulakarakI Ayu palyake dazaveM bhAga
batalAyo hai| usake Age pratyeka kulakarakI Ayu dazaveM-dazaveM bhAga batalAyI
gayI haiM arthAt prathama kulakarakI AyumeM dazakA bhAga denepara jo labdha Aye
vaha dvitIya kulakarako Ayu hai aura usameM dazakA bhAga denepara jo labdha Ave
vaha tRtIya kulakarakI Ayu hai| isa taraha caudaha kulakaroMkI Ayu jAnanA cAhie
// 116-117 /  /  prathama tothaMkara zrI RSabhadeva bhagavAnkI caurAsI lAkha
pUrva, dvitIya tIrthaMkara zrI ajitanAtha bhagavAnkI bahattara lAkha pUrva,
tRtIya tIrthaMkara zrI sambhavanAthakI sATha lAkha pUrva, unake bAda pAMca
tIrthaMkaroMmeM pratyekako daza-daza lAkha pUrva, kama arthAt caturtha
abhinandananAthako pacAsa lAkha pUrva, paMcama sumatinAthakI cAlIsa lAkha pUrva,
SaSTha padmaprabhakI tIsa lAkha pUrva, saptama supArzvanAthakI bIsa lAkha pUrva,
aSTama candraprabhakI daza lAkha pUrva, navama puSpadantakI do lAkha pUrva,
dazama zItalanAthako eka lAkha pUrva, gyArahaveM zreyAnsanAthakI caurAsI lAkha
varSa, bArahaveM vAsupUjyakI bahattara lAkha varSa, terahaveM vimalanAthakI
sATha lAkha varSa, caudahaveM anantanAthakI tIsa lAkha varSa, pandrahaveM
dharmanAthakI daza lAkha varSa, solahaveM zAntinAthakI eka lAkha varSa,
satrahaveM kunthunAthakI paMcAnabe hajAra varSa, aThArahaveM 1. sapazcikA ka.,
ja.  /  2. atra kha. pustake evaM pATha:-catubhiradhikAzItiH
pUrvalakSAdvisaptatiH  /  SaSTilakSANi pUrvANi paJcAzallakSakaM tathA  /  / 118
//  catvAriMzattu lakSANi trizallakSANi caiva hi  /  tathA viMzatilakSANi daza
dve caikameva hi  // 119 //  3. zotirabdAH lakSA ma,  /  4. samA lakSAH kh.|

Page #483 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Twentieth Chapter 433 One thousand years and seventy-two years are mentioned
as the lifespan of the twenty-fourth Tirthankara, Mahavira.   The lifespans of
the Tirthankaras are mentioned in order. Listen now to the details of the
Chakravartis who were born in between the Tirthankaras.  The first Chakravarti,
Bharat, was born to King Rishabhadeva and Queen Yashovati. This Chakravarti's
name made this region known as Bharat in all three worlds.  This Bharat was a
prince named Pitha in the city of  Pundarika in his previous birth. He attained
Sarvarthasiddhi after becoming a disciple of Kushasen Muni. After that, he
became the Chakravarti Bharat. He was constantly filled with dispassion, and
after shedding his hair and nails, he attained Kevala Jnana and reached Nirvana.
The second Chakravarti, Sagar, was born in the city of Prithvipur. He was a
disciple of the Muni Yashodhar. After attaining the highest state of liberation,
he was reborn in Ayodhya as the son of King Vijay and Queen Sumangala. He was so
powerful that even the gods respected his commands. He enjoyed the highest
pleasures and then, due to the grief of losing his sons, he renounced the world
and took the Jain initiation. He attained Kevala Jnana and reached Siddhalaya.
The third Chakravarti, Maghava, was born in the city of Shravasti. He was the
son of King Sumitra and Queen Bhadravati. He was a disciple of the Muni Vimala
in the city of Pundarika. He enjoyed the highest pleasures of the world in the
city of Greveyak. He was a tree for the creeper of Lakshmi, the goddess of
wealth. He was born between the Tirthankaras Dharmanatha and Shantiantha. He
took the vows of a monk and was born in the Saudharma heaven according to his
meditation.  After this, the fourth Chakravarti, Sanatkumar, was praised by
Gautam Swami. King Shrenik asked, "O Bhagavan, by what virtue did he become so
beautiful?"  The lifespans of the Tirthankaras were: Aranatha - 84,000 years,
Naminatha - 10,000 years,  Mallinatha - 55,000 years,  Muni Suvrata - 30,000
years,  Neminatha - 1,000 years,  Parshvanatha - 100 years, and Mahavira - 72
years.  O Shrenik, I have thus described the lifespans of the Tirthankaras in
order. Now listen to the details of the Chakravartis who were born in between
the Tirthankaras.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vizatitamaM parva 433 ekaM cAbda sahasrANAM saMkhyeyaM parikIrtitAH  /
varSANAM ca zataM dvAbhyAmadhikA saptatistathA  // 122 //  krameNeti
jinendrANAmAyuH zreNika kIrtitam  /  zRNu saMprati yo yatra
jAtazcakradharo'ntare  // 123 //  RSabheNa yezovatyA jAto bharatakIrtitaH  /
yasya nAmnA gate khyAtimetadvAsyaM jagattraye  // 12 //  abhUdu yaH puNDarIkiNyA
pIThaH pUrvatra janmani  /  sarvArthasiddhimaitkRtvA kuzasenasya ziSyatAm  /  /
125 //  locAnantaramutpAdya mahAsaMvegayogataH  /  sarvAvabhAsanaM jJAnaM
nirvANaM sa samIyivAn  // 126 //  babhUva nagare rAjA pRthivIpuranAmani  /
vijayo nAma ziSyo'bhUda yazodharagurorasau  // 127 //  sa mRto vijayaM gatvA
bhuktvA mogamanuttamam  /  vinItAyAmiha cyutvA vijayasyApya putratAm  // 128 //
saumaGgalo babhUvAsI cakrI sagarasaMjJitaH  /  bhuktvA mogaM mahAsAraM
surapUjitazAsanaH  // 129 //  prabuddhaH putrazokena pravrajya jinazAsane  /
utpAdya kevalaM nAthaH siddhAnAmAlayaM gataH  // 30 //  zazibhaH puNDarIkiyAM
ziSyo'bhUda vimale gurau  /  gatvA greveyakaM bhuktvA saMsArasukhamuttamam  /  /
131 /  /  cyutvA sumitrarAjasya madravatyAmabhUt sutaH  /  zrAvastyAM maghavA
nAma cakralakSmIlatAtaruH  // 132 /  /  zrAmaNyavatamAsthAya
dhrmshaantijinaantre| samAdhAnAnurUpeNa gataH saudharmavAsitAm  /  / 133 //
sanatkumAracakreze stute magadhapuMgavaH  /  bravIti kena puNyena jAto'sAviti
rUpavAn  /  / 134 //  aranAthakI caurAsI hajAra varSa, unnIsaveM mallinAthakI
pacapana hajAra varSa, bIsaveM munisuvratanAthakI tIsa hajAra varSa, ikkIsaveM
naminAthakI daza hajAra varSa, bAIsaveM neminAthakI eka hajAra varSa, teIsaveM
pAzvanAthakI sau varSa aura caubIsaveM mahAvIrakI bahattara varSako Ayu thI  //
118-122 /  /  he zreNika ! maiMne isa prakAra kramase tIrthaMkaroMkI AyukA
varNana kiyaa| aba jisa antarAlameM cakravartI hue haiM unakA varNana suna  //
123 /  /  bhagavAn RSabhadevakI yazasvatI rAnIse bharata nAmA prathama
cakravartI huaa| isa cakravartIke nAmase hI yaha kSetra tInoM jagatmeM bharata
nAmase prasiddha huA  // 124 //  yaha bharata pUrva janmameM puNDarIkiNI
nagarImeM pITha nAmakA rAjakumAra thaa| tadanantara kuzasena munikA ziSya hokara
sarvArthasiddhi gyaa| vahA~se Akara bharata cakravartI huaa| isake pariNAma
nirantara vairAgyamaya rahate the jisase kezaloMcake anantara hI lokAlokAvabhAsI
kevalajJAna utpanna kara nirvANa dhAmako prApta huA  // 125-126 //  phira
pRthvIpura nagarameM rojA vijaya thA jo yazodhara gurukA ziSya hokara muni ho
gyaa| antameM sallekhanAse marakara vijaya nAmakA anuttama vimAnameM gayA  /
vahA~ uttama bhoga bhogakara ayodhyA nagarImeM rAjA vijaya aura rAnI sumaMgalAke
sagara nAmakA dvitIya cakravartI huaa| vaha itanA prabhAvazAlI thA ki deva bhI
usakI AjJAkA sammAna karate the| usane uttamottama bhoga bhogakara antameM
putroMke zokase pravRtti ho jina dIkSA dhAraNa kara lI aura kevalajJAna utpanna
kara siddhAlaya prApta kiyA  // 127-130 //  tadanantara puNDarIkiNI nagarImeM
zaziprabha nAmakA rAjA thaa| vaha vimala gurukA ziSya hokara greveyaka gyaa|
vahA~ saMsArakA uttama sukha bhogakara vahA~se cyuta ho zrAvastI nagarImeM rAjA
sumitra aura rAnI bhadravatIMke maghavA nAmakA tRtIya cakravartI huaa| yaha
cakravartIko lakSmIrUpI latAke lipaTaneke lie mAno vRkSa hI thaa| yaha
dharmanAtha aura zAntinAtha tIrthaMkarake bIcameM huA thA tathA munivrata
dhAraNa kara samAdhike anurUpa saudharma svargameM utpanna huA thA  /  / 131-133
//  isake bAda gautamasvAmI caturtha cakravartI sanatkumArakI bahuta prazaMsA
karane lage taba rAjA zreNikane pUchA ki he bhagavan ! vaha kisa puNyake kAraNa
isa taraha atyanta rUpavAn huA thA  /  / 134 /  /  1. cakradharAntare ma.  /  2.
yazasvatyAmiti bhavitavyam  /  3. kurusenasya ma.  /  4. luJcAnantara ja.,
locanAntara ma.  /  5. gataM m.|

Page #484 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana, the great sage narrated the essence of the Purana, saying
that even a hundred years would not be enough to tell it all. (135) He said that
until a being attains Jainism, it continues to suffer in the animal realms,
hell, and the human realm. (136) Describing the past life, he said that there
was a village called Govardhana, full of people, where a great householder named
Jinadatta lived. (137) Just as the ocean is the chief among all water bodies,
Mount Meru with its beautiful caves is the chief among all mountains, the sun is
the chief among all planets, sugarcane is the chief among all grasses, the
Nagavalli is the chief among all creepers, and the sandalwood tree is the chief
among all trees, so too, the lineage of the Shravakas is the chief among all
lineages, for it is purified by conduct and dedicated to attaining the best
path. (138-140) That householder, born into the lineage of Shravakas, followed
the conduct of a Shravaka, adorned with virtues, and attained the best path.
(141) His wife, Vinayavati, was a devoted wife, dedicated to the dharma of
householders, and was very sad at the loss of her husband. (142) She built a
magnificent temple for the Jina in her home and, after taking the vows of an
Aryika, attained the divine path through her excellent austerities. (143) In the
same city, there lived a great householder named Hemabahu, who was a believer,
very enthusiastic, and averse to evil conduct. (144) Vinayavati, who had built
the Jain temple and performed great worship there, received his approval and, at
the end of his life, became a Yaksha deity. (145) That Yaksha was always
dedicated to the service of the fourfold sangha, possessed right faith, and was
always dedicated to the worship of the Jina. (146) From there, he became a noble
human, then a deity. Thus, he went through three transformations of human and
divine paths and became a king named Dharma-ruchi in the great city of Maha-
puri. This Dharma-ruchi was born from the heavens, being the son of Sanatkumara.
His father's name was Suprabha and his mother's name was Tilakasundari.
Tilakasundari was like a treasure chest of the virtues of excellent women.
(147-148) King Dharma-ruchi became a disciple of the sage Suprabha and became a
charaka, observing the five great vows, the five samitis, and the three guptis.
(149)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe tasmai samAsato'vocat purANArtha mahAmuniH  /  yasa varSazatenApi
sarva kathayituM kSamam  // 135 //  tiryagnarakadaHkhAni kumaanussbhvaaNstthaa|
jIvaH prapadyate tAvadyAvannAyAti jainatAm  /  / 136 //  asti govardhanAbhikhyo
grAmo janasamAkulaH  /  jinadattAbhidhAno'tra babhUva gRhiNAM varaH  /  / 137 /
/  yathA sarvAmbudhAnAnAM sAgaro mUrddhani sthitaH  /  bhadharANAM ca sarveSAM
mandarazcArukandaraH  /  / 138 /  /  grahANAM haridazvazca' tRNAnAmikSurarcitaH
/  tAmbUlAkhyA ca vallInAM tarUNAM haricandanaH  // 139 //  kulAnAmiti sarveSAM
zrAvakANAM kulaM stutam  /  AcAreNa hi tatpUtaM sugatyarjanatatparam  // 14 //
sa gRhI tatra jAtaH san kRtvA zrAvakaceSTitam  /  guNabhUSaNasaMpannaH
prazastAmAzrito gatim  // 141 /  /  bhAryA vinayavatyasya tadviyogena duHkhitA
/  zIlazekharasadgandhA gRhidharmaparAyaNA  // 142 //  svaniveze jinendrANAM
kArayitvA varAlayam  /  pravrajya sutapaH kRtvA jagAma gatimarcitAm  // 143 //
tatraivAnyo'mavad grAme hemabAhumahAgRhI  /  AstikaH paramotsAho
durAcAraparAGmukhaH  // 144 /  /  tayA vinayavatyAsau kAritaM jainamAlayam  /
anumodya mahApUjA yakSo'bhUdAyuSaH kSaye  // 145 /  /  caturvidhasya saMghasya
nirataH paryupAsane  /  samyagdarzanasaMpanno jinavandanatatparaH  // 146 //
tataH sumAnuSo deva iti triH parivartanam  /  kurvannasau
mahApuryAmAsIddharmarucirnRpaH  /  / 147 /  /  asya sAnatkumArasya pitAsIt
suprbhaahvyH| varastrIguNamaJjUSA mAtA tilakasundarI  // 18 //  kRtvA
suprabhaziSyatvaM mahAvratadharastataH  /  mahAsamitisaMpannazcAruguptisamAvRtaH
/  / 149 /  /  isake uttara meM gaNadhara bhagavAnne saMkSepase hI purANakA sAra
varNana kiyA kyoMki usakA pUrA varNana to sau varSameM bhI nahIM kahA jA sakatA
thA  // 135 /  /  unhoMne kahA ki jabataka yaha jIva jainadharmako prApta nahIM
hotA hai tabataka tiryaMca naraka tathA kumAnuSa sambandhI duHkha bhogatA rahatA
hai  // 136|| pUrvabhavakA varNana karate hue unhoMne kahA ki manuSyoMse bharA
eka govardhana nAmakA grAma thA usameM jinadatta nAmakA uttama gRhastha rahatA
thA  // 137 //  jisa prakAra samasta jalAzayoMmeM sAgara, samasta parvatoMmeM
sundara guphAoMse yukta sumeru parvata, samasta grahoMmeM sUrya, samasta
tRNoMmeM ikSu, samasta latAoMmeM nAgavallI aura samasta vakSoMmeM haricandana
vRkSa pradhAna hai, usI prakAra samasta kUloMmeM zrAvakoMkA kula sarvapradhAna
hai kyoMki vaha AcArako apekSA pavitra hai tathA uttama gati prApta karAnemeM
tatpara hai  // 138-140 /  /  vaha gRhastha zrAvaka kulameM utpanna ho tathA
zrAvakAcArakA pAlanakara guNarUpI AbhUSaNoMse yukta hotA huA uttama gatiko
prApta huA  // 141 /  /  usakI vinayavatI nAmakI pativratA tathA gRhasthakA
dharma pAlana karane meM tatpara rahanevAlI strI thI so patike viyogase bahuta
duHkhI huI  // 142 //  usane apane gharameM jinendra bhagavAnkA uttama mandira
banavAyA tathA antameM AryikAkI dIkSA le uttama tapazcaraNa kara devagati prApta
kI  // 143 /  /  usI nagarameM hemabAhu nAmakA eka mahAgRhastha rahatA thA jo
Astika, paramotsAhI aura durAcArase vimukha thA  // 144 //  vinayavatIne jo
jinAlaya banavAyA thA tathA usameM jo bhagavAnkI mahApUjA hotI thI usakI
anumodanA kara vaha Ayuke antameM yakSa jAtikA deva huA  // 145 /  /  vaha yakSa
caturvidha saMghakI sevAmeM sadA tatpara rahatA thaa| samyagdarzanase sahita thA
aura jinendradevakI vandanA karane meM sadA tatpara rahatA thA  // 146 /  /
vahA~se Akara vaha uttama manuSya huA, phira deva huaa| isa prakAra tIna bAra
manuSyadevagatimeM AvAgamana kara mahApurI nagarImeM dharmaruci nAmakA rAjA
huaa| yaha dharmaruci sanatkumAra svargase Akara utpanna huA thaa| isake pitAkA
nAma suprabha aura mAtAkA nAma tilakasundarI thaa| tilakasundarI uttama
striyoMke guNoMkI mAno maMjUSA hI thI  /  / 147-148 /  /  rAjA dharmaruci
suprabha munikA ziSya hokara pA~ca mahAvratoM, pAMca samitiyoM aura tIna
guptiyoMkA cAraka ho gayA  /  / 149 /  /  1. sUryaH  /  2. haricandanam m.| 3.
yakSIbhUdA m.| 4. yasya ma., j.| 5. pitA cAsItprabhAhvayaH kha.  /

Page #485 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Twentieth Chapter  He was always devoted to self-criticism, patient in
enduring afflictions, completely detached from his body, compassionate, self-
controlled, wise, a bearer of the burden of virtue, far removed from the eight
defects of right faith, and constantly engaged in the proper conduct of the
virtuous. ||150-151|| At the end of his lifespan, he was born in the Mahendra
heaven and, residing amidst a group of goddesses, attained supreme enjoyments.
||152|| Subsequently, he was born in Hastinapur as the fourth Chakravarti, named
Sanatkumar, to King Vijay and Queen Sahadevi. ||153||  Once, in his assembly,
Saudharmendra praised the form of Sanatkumar Chakravarti in the course of a
narrative. Some gods came to see his form, which was a cause of wonder. ||154||
When those gods secretly observed him, he had just finished his exercise, his
body's radiance was obscured by the dust of the arena, his head was smeared with
fragrant gooseberry paste, his body was very tall, he was wearing a single
garment suitable for bathing, he was seated on a seat suitable for bathing, and
he was situated amidst a circle of pitchers filled with fragrant water of
various colors. ||155-156|| Seeing him, the gods said, "Oh! Indra has rightly
praised his form. Even though he is a human, his form is a cause of attraction
for the minds of the gods." ||157|| When Sanatkumar learned that the gods wanted
to see his form, he said to them, "Please stay here for a while. Let me bathe,
eat, and adorn myself, then you can see me." ||158|| "So be it," said the
Chakravarti Sanatkumar, and after performing all his duties properly, he sat on
his throne. At that time, he appeared like the peak of a mountain made of
jewels. ||159||  Thereafter, seeing his form again, the gods began to criticize
each other, saying, "The beauty of humans is worthless and fleeting, so it is to
be condemned." ||160|| How is it that the beauty that we saw in his youth at the
first glance, like lightning, has become fleeting and decayed in an instant?
||161|| Knowing that Lakshmi is fleeting, Chakravarti Sanatkumar, free from
attachment to the gods, attained the state of a Shraman, adorned with intense
austerities. ||162||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vizatitamaM parva AtmanindAparo dhIraH svadehe'tyantaniHspRhaH  /  yAdamaparo
dhImAna zIlavaivadhikaH paraH  // 150 //
shngkaadissttidossaannaamtiduurvyvsthitH| sAdhUnAM satataM sakto vaiyAvRttye
yathocite  // 15 //  saMyuktaH kAladharmeNa mAhendraM kalpamAzritaH  /  avApa
paramAn bhogAn devInivahamadhyagaH  // 152 //  cyuto nAgapure jAtaH sohadevaH sa
vaijeyiH  /  sanatkumArazabdena khyAtazcakrAGkazAsanaH  // 153 //
saMkathAnukramAd yasya saudharmeNa kIrtitam  /  rUpaM draSTuM samAjagmuH surA
vismayakAraNam  // 154 //  kRtazramaH sa tairdRSTo bhUrajodhU saradyutiH  /
gandhAmalakapaDkena digdhamaulimahAtanuH  // 155 //  snAnaikazATakaH zrImAn
sthitaH snAnocitAsane  /  nAnAvarNapayaHpUrNakumbhamaNDalamadhyagaH  // 156 //
uktaH sa tairaho rUpaM sAdhu zukreNa vartitam  /  mAnuSasya sato
devacittAkarSaNakAraNam  // 157 //  tenoktAste kRtasnAnaM bhuktavantaM
sabhUSaNam  /  surA drakSyatha mAM stokAM velAmatraiva tiSTata  // 158 //
evamityudite kRtvA yaH samastaM yathocitam  /  sthitaH siMhAsane
ralazelakUTasamadyutiH  // 15 //  dRSTvA tasya punArUpaM ninindu kavAsinaH  /
asArAM dhigimA zomAM mAnAM kSaNikAmiti  // 16 //  prathame darzane yA'sya
yauvanena samanvitA  /  seyaM kSaNAt kathaM hAsaM prAptA saudAminItvarI  // 16
//  vijJAya kSaNikAM lakSmI surebhyo rAgavarjitaH  /  zramaNatvaM pariprApya
mahAghoratapo'nvitaH  // 16 //  vaha sadA AtmanindAmeM tatpara rahatA thA, Agata
upasargAdike sahane meM dhIra thA, apane zarIrase atyanta niHspRha rahatA thA,
dayA aura damako dhAraNa karanevAlA thA, buddhimAn thA, zIlarUpI kA~varakA
dhAraka thA, zaMkA Adi samyagdarzanake ATha doSoMse bahuta dUra rahatA thA, aura
sAdhuoMkI yathAyogya vaiyAvRttyameM sadA lagA rahatA thA  // 150-151 /  /
antameM Ayu samApta kara vaha mAhendra svargameM utpanna huA aura vahA~
deviyoMke samUhake madhyameM sthita ho parama bhogoMko prApta huaa|||152||
tadanantara vahA~te cyuta hokara hastinApurameM rAjA vijaya aura rAnI sahadevIke
sanatkumAra nAmakA caturtha cakravatI huA  /  / 153 /  /  /  eka bAra
saudharmendrane apanI sabhAmeM kathAke anukramase sanatkumAra cakravartIke
rUpakI prazaMsA kii| so AzcayaM utpanna karanevAle usake rUpako dekhaneke lie
kucha deva Aye  // 154 //  jisa samaya una devoMne chipakara use dekhA usa
samaya vaha vyAyAma kara nivRtta huA thA, usake zarIrakI kAnti akhAr3ekI dhUlise
dhUsarita ho rahI thI, zirameM sugandhita A~valekA paMka lagA huA thA, zarIra
atyanta UMcA thA, snAnake samaya dhAraNa karane yogya eka vastra pahane thA,
snAnake yogya Asanapara baiThA thA, aura nAnA varNake sugandhita jalase bhare
hue kalazoMke bIca meM sthita thA  /  / 155156 /  /  use dekhakara devoMne kahA
ki aho ! indrane jo isake rUpakI prazaMsA kI hai so ThIka hI kI hai  /  manuSya
honepara bhI isakA rUpa devoMke cittako AkarSita karanekA kAraNa banA huA hai
// 157 /  /  jaba sanatkumArako patA calA ki deva loga hamArA rUpa dekhanA
cAhate haiM taba usane unase kahA ki Apa loga thoDI dera yahIM tthhrie| majhe
snAna aura bhojana karaneke bAda AbhaSaNa dhAraNa kara lene dIjie phira Apa loga
mujhe dekheM  // 158 //  'aisA hI ho' isa prakAra kahanepara cakravartI
sanatkumAra saba kArya yathAyogya kara siMhAsana para A baiThA  /  usa samaya
vaha aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno ratnamaya parvatakA zikhara hI ho  // 159 /  /
tadanantara punaH usakA rUpa dekhakara deva loga ApasameM nindA karane lage ki
manuSyoMkI zobhA asAra tathA kSaNika hai, ataH ise dhikkAra hai  // 160 //
prathama darzanake samaya jo isakI zobhA yauvanase sampanna dekhI thI vaha
bijalIke samAna nazvara hokara kSaNa-bharameM hI hrAsako kaise prApta ho gayI?
// 161|| lakSmI kSaNika hai aisA devoMse jAnakara cakravartI sanatkumArakA rAga
chUTa 1. sahadevIputraH  /  2. vijayasyApatyaM pumAn vaijayiH  /  3. bhUsara ma.
/

Page #486 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **436** **Padma Purana**  **163.**  Even though he was
afflicted with many severe illnesses, he endured them with great peace. He
attained many Siddhis through his austerities. Finally, through the power of his
meditation, he became a Deva in the Sanatkumara heaven.  **164-165.** Now, the
description of the fifth Chakravarti. King Megha Rath lived in the city of
Pundarikin. He was a disciple of his father, the Tirthankara Dhanarath, and
attained Sarvarth Siddhi. From there, he was born as a son of King Vishvasen and
Queen Airadevi in Hastinapur. He was known as Shanti Nath, a renowned son who
brought peace to mankind.  **166.**  As soon as he was born, the Devas performed
his coronation on Mount Sumeru. Indra praised him, and thus he became the master
of the enjoyments of a Chakravarti.  **167.** He was the fifth Chakravarti and
the sixteenth Tirthankara. Finally, he renounced his kingdom, which was like a
blade of grass, and took Diksha.  **168.** After him, Kunth Nath and Ar Nath
became the sixth and seventh Chakravartis respectively. They had accumulated the
sixteen Karana Bhavanas in their previous births, and therefore attained the
Tirthankarahood.  **169.** Sanatkumara, the fourth Chakravarti, lived between
the Tirthankaras Dharmanath and Shanti Nath. One should know that the time
difference between these three Tirthankaras and Chakravartis is their own
individual time.  **170.** Now, the description of the eighth Chakravarti. King
Kanakabh lived in the city of Dhanyapur. He was a disciple of the Muni,
Vichitragupta, and was born in the Uttara Vimana as Jayant.  **171-172.** From
there, he was born as the eighth Chakravarti, Subhum, in the city of Ishavati,
to King Kartavirya and Queen Tara. He was a possessor of excellent virtues and
made the earth excellent. Therefore, his name Subhum was meaningful.  **173.**
In a battle, Parashuram had killed his father. So, he killed Parashuram.
Parashuram had killed the Kshatriyas and collected their teeth. A Nitijnanee
told him that the one who would see these teeth transformed into Kheer would be
the cause of his death. Subhum went to Parashuram's Yajna. When he was about to
eat, Parashuram showed him all the teeth in a vessel.  **174.** Due to the power
of his punya, the teeth turned into Kheer, and the vessel transformed into a
Chakra. Subhum ate the Kheer.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 436 padmapurANe adhisahya mahArogAn mahAlabdhiyuto'pi san  /
sanatkumAramArUDhaH svadhyAnasthitiyogataH  // 163 //  babhUva puNDarIkiNyAM
nAmnA megharatho nRpaH  /  sarvArthasiddhimato'sau ziSyo dhanarathasya san  //
164 //  cyutvA nAgapure vizvasenasyairAzarIrajaH  /  tanayaH prathito jAtaH
zAntiH zAntikaro nRNAm  // 165 //  jAtamAtro'bhiSekaM yaH surebhyaH prApya
mandire  /  abhUccakAGkamogasya nAtho'sAvindrasaMstutaH  // 166 //  vihAya
tRNavarAjyaM prAvAjyaM smshishriyt| cakriNAM paJcamo matvA jinAnAM SoDazo'bhavat
// 167 //  kunthvarI paratastasya saMjAtau cakravartinau  /  jinendratvaM ca
saMprAptau pUrvasaMcitakAraNau  // 168 //
sanatkumArarAjo'bhUdharmazAntijinAntare  /  nijamevAntaraM jJeyaM trayANAM
jinacakriNAm  // 169 //  kanakAma iti khyAto nAmnA dhAnyapure nRpaH  /
vicitraguptaziSyaH san sa jayantaM samAzrayat  // 17 //  IzAvatyAM narendrasya
kArtavIryasya bhAminI  /  tAreti tanayastasyAmabhUnAkAdupAgataH  // 171 //
sumama iti cAkhyAtazcakrAGkAyAH zriyaH patiH  /  yeneyaM zobhanA bhUmiH kRtA
paramaceSTinA  // 172 //  pituryo vadhakaM yuddhe jAmadagnyamamImarat  /
bhuJjAnaH pAyasaM pAcyA cakratvaparivRttayA  // 173 //  jAmadagnyAhatakSAvadantA
evAsya pAyasam  /  satre kilAinato jAtA naimittoktaM samantataH  // 174 //
gyaa| phalasvarUpa vaha muni-dIkSA lekara atyanta kaThina tapa karane lagA  /  /
162 /  /  yadyapi usake zarIrameM aneka roga utpanna ho gaye the to bhI vaha
unheM bar3I zAntise sahana karatA rhaa| tapake prabhAvase aneka RddhiyA~ bhI use
prApta huI thiiN| antameM AtmadhyAnake prabhAvase vaha sanatkumAra svargameM
deva huA  /  / 163 //  aba paMcama cakravartIkA varNana karate haiM puNDarIkiNI
nagarameM rAjA megharatha rahate the| ve apane pitA ghanaratha tIrthaMkarake
ziSya hokara sarvArthasiddhi gye| vahA~se cyuta hokara hastinAgapUrameM rAjA
vizvasana aura rAnI airAdevIke manuSyoMko zAnti utpanna karanevAle zAntinAtha
nAmaka prasiddha putra hue  // 164-165 /  /  utpanna hote hI devoMne sumeru
parvatapara inakA abhiSeka kiyA thaa| indrane stuti kI thI aura isa taraha ve
cakravartIke bhogoMke svAmI hue  // 166 //  ye paMcama cakravartI tathA
solahaveM tIrthaMkara the| antameM tRNake samAna rAjya chor3akara inhoMne dIkSA
dhAraNa ko thI  // 167 /  /  inake bAda kramase kunthunAtha aura aranAtha nAmake
chaThe tathA sAtaveM cakravartI hue| ye pUrvabhavameM solaha kAraNa bhAvanAoMkA
saMcaya karaneke kAraNa tIrthakara padako bhI prApta hue the  // 168 //
sanatkumAra nAmakA cauthA cakravartI dharmanAtha aura zAntinAtha tIrthaMkarake
bIca meM huA thA aura zAnti, kunthu tathA ara ina tIna tIrthaMkara tathA
cakravatiyoM kA antara apanA-apanA hI kAla jAnanA cAhie  // 169|| aba AThaveM
cakravartIkA varNana karate haiM dhAnyapura nagarameM rAjA kanakAbha rahatA
thaa| vaha vicitragupta munikA ziSya hokara jayanta nAmakA anuttara vimAnameM
utpanna huA  // 170|| vahA~se Akara vaha IzAvatI nagarImeM rAjA kArtavIrya aura
rAnI tArAke subhUma nAmakA AThavAM cakravartI huaa| yaha uttama ceSTAoMko
dhAraNa karanevAlA thA tathA isane bhUmiko uttama kiyA thA isalie isakA subhUma
nAma sArthaka thaa||171-172|| parazurAmane yuddha meM isake pitAko mArA thA so
isane use maaraa| parazurAmane kSatriyoMko mArakara unake danta ikaTThe kiye
the| kisI nimittajJAnIne use batAyA thA ki jisake dekhanese ye danta khIra
rUpameM parivartita ho jAyeMge usoke dvArA tero mRtyu hogii| subhUma eka
yajJameM parazurAmake yahA~ gayA thaa| jaba vaha bhojana karaneko udyata huA
taba parazurAmane ve saba danta eka pAtrameM rakhakara use dikhaaye| ke pUNya
prabhAvase ve danta khIra bana gaye aura pAtra cakrake rUpameM badala gyaa|
subhamane usI 1. kRtvA ma.  /  2. paramaceSTanA kha.  /  usake

Page #487 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twentieth Chapter  437  **175.** It is said that the earth was filled
with enemies of the Kshatriyas for seven cycles. He who made the earth devoid of
Kshatriyas for twenty-one cycles,   **176.** Due to his extremely strict rule,
the Brahmanas, obtaining great fear, hid themselves in the families of
washermen, etc., like the Kshatriyas.  **177.** This Chakravarti, named SubhÅ«m,
lived between AranÄth and MallinÄth. He was not detached from worldly pleasures
and therefore went to the seventh hell after death.  **178.** Now we describe
the ninth Chakravarti. In the city of VÄ«tashoka, there was a king named Chinta.
He became a disciple of Suprabhamuni and attained Brahma heaven.  **179.** From
there, he was born as the ninth Chakravarti, named Mahapadmin, in Hastinapur, to
King Padmaratha and Queen Mayuri.  **180.** He had eight daughters who were
proud of their beauty and did not desire any husband on earth. Once, the
Vidyadharas took them away.  **181.** After finding them, the Chakravarti
brought them back, but they, being detached, took initiation and attained heaven
after achieving self-liberation.  **182.** The eight Vidyadharas who had taken
them away also became initiated due to their separation and fear of the
unpredictable nature of the world.  **183.** This incident made the Chakravarti,
who possessed great virtues, realize the truth. He left his kingdom for his son,
Padma, and went with his son, Vishnu, to become a monk.  **184.** Mahapadmin,
after performing intense austerities, attained Kevala Jnana and finally reached
the peak of the universe. This Chakravarti lived between AranÄth and MallinÄth.
**185.** Now we describe the tenth Chakravarti. In the city of Vijay, there
lived a king named Mahendradatta. He became a disciple of Nandan Muni and was
born in Mahendra heaven.  **186.** From there, he was born as the tenth
Chakravarti, named Harishena, in Kampilya, to King Hariketu and Queen VaprÄ.
**187.** He adorned his entire kingdom with Jina images and attained Siddha-pada
in the Tirtha of Muni Suvrata Nath.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vizatitamaM parva 437 saptavArAn kRtAkSatrAripUrNA kila bhUriti  /  cakre
trisaptavArAn yaH kSitiM niSkaNThasUtrikAm  //  175  //  atyuprazAsanAttasmAd
vibhA prApya mahAmayam  /  kuleSu rajakAdInAM kSatriyA iva lilyire  //  176  //
aramallyantare cakrI bhogAdaviratAtmakaH  /  kAladharmeNa saMyuktaH saptamIM
kSitimAzritaH  //  177 //  nagaryAM vItazokAyAM cintAhnaH pArthivo'bhavat  /
bhUtvA supramaziSyo'sau brahmAhvaM kalpamAzriteH  //  178 //  cyuto nAgapure
padmarathasya dharaNIpateH  /  mayUryAM tanayo jAto mahApadmaH prakIrtitaH  //
179 //  aSTau duhitarastasya rUpAtizayagarvitAH  /  necchanti bhuvi martAraM
hRtA vidyAdharairimAH  //  180  //  upalabhya samAnItA nirvedinyaH pravavrajuH
/  samArAdhitakalyANA devalokaM samAzritAH  // 181 //  te'dhyaSTau tadviyogena
pravrajyAM vyomacAriNaH  /  cakrurvicitrasaMsAradarzanatrAsamAgatAH  //  182  //
hetunA tena cakrezaH pratibuddho mahAguNaH  /  sute nyasya zriyaM padme
niSkrAnto viSNunA samam  //  183 //  mahApadmastapaH kRtvA paraM saMprApta
kevalaH  /  lokaprAgmAramArukSadaramallijinAntare  //  184  //
mahendradattanAmAsIt pure vijayanAmani  /  kRtvA nandana ziSyatvaM mAhendraM
kalpamudyayau  // 185 //  kAmpilyanagare cyutvA vaprAyAM hariketutaH  /
hariSeNa iti khyAto jajJe cakrAGkitezataH  //  186 //  sakRtvA dharaNIM sarvA
nijAM caityavibhUSaNAm  /  tIrthe suvratanAthasya siddhAnAM padamAzritaH  //
187 //  cakra dvArA parazurAmako mArA thA  /  parazurAmane pRthvIko sAta bAra
kSatriyoMse rahita kiyA thA isalie usake badale isane ikkIsa bAra pRthvIko
brAhmaNarahita kiyA thA ||173 - 175  /  /  jisa prakAra pahale parazurAmake
bhayase kSatriya dhobI Adike kuloMmeM chipate phirate the usI prakAra atyanta
kaThina zAsana ke dhAraka subhUma cakravartIse brAhmaNa loga bhayabhIta hokara
dhobI Adike kuloMmeM chipate phirate the || 176  //  | yaha subhUma cakravartI
aranAtha aura mallinAthake bIca meM huA thA tathA bhogoM se virakta na hone ke
kAraNa marakara sAtaveM naraka gayA thA ||177 || aba nauveM cakravartIkA varNana
karate haiM vItazokA nagarImeM cinta nAmakA rAjA thA  /  vaha suprabhamunikA
ziSya hokara brahmasvarga gayA || 178 || vahA~se cyuta hokara hastinAgapura meM
rAjA padmaratha aura rAnI mayUrIke mahApadma nAmakA navA~ cakravartI huA || 172
//  isakI ATha putriyA~ thIM jo saundayaMke atizaya se garvita thIM tathA
pRthvIpara kisI bhartAkI icchA nahIM karatI thiiN| eka samaya vidyAdhara inheM
harakara le gaye  /  patA calAkara cakravartIne unheM vApasa bulAyA parantu
virakta hokara unhoMne dIkSA dhAraNa kara lI tathA Atma-kalyANa kara svargaloka
prApta kiyA || 180-181  /  /  jo ATha vidyAdhara unheM harakara le gaye the ve
bhI unake viyoga tathA saMsArakI vicitra dazAke dekhanese bhayabhIta ho dIkSita
ho gaye || 182  //  isa ghaTanA se mahAguNoM kA dhAraka cakravartI pratibodhako
prApta ho gayA tathA padma nAmaka putrake lie rAjya de viSNu nAmaka putrake
sAtha gharase nikala gayA arthAt dIkSita ho gayA || 183 || isa prakAra mahApadma
munine parama tapa kara kevalajJAna prApta kiyA tathA antameM lokake zikhara meM
jA pahu~cA  /  yaha cakravartI aranAtha aura mallinAtha ke bIca meM huA thA ||
184|| aba dazaveM cakravartIkA varNana karate haiM vijaya nAmaka nagara meM
mahendradatta nAmakA rAjA rahatA thaa| vaha nandana munikA ziSya banakara
mahendra svarga meM utpanna huA || 185 || vahA~se cyuta hokara kAmpilyanagara
meM rAjA hariketu aura rAnI vaprAke hariSeNa nAmakA dazavA~ prasiddha cakravartI
huA || 186 | usane apane rAjyakI samasta pRthivIko jina-pratimAoMse alaMkRta
kiyA thA tathA munisuvratanAtha bhagavAn ke tIrthaM meM siddhapada prApta kiyA
thA ||187 || 1. -mAzritA ma  /  2. mahendraM ma  /

Page #488 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
438 In the Padma Purana, there was a king named Amitanka in the city of
Rajapura. He became a disciple of Sudharma Mitra and went to Brahmaloka. ||18||
From there, he was born as Vijay in the same city of Kampilya, to queen
Yashovati. He was known as Jayasen, the ruler with the wheel-kissed edict.
||189|| Abandoning his great kingdom, he took the Digambara initiation and
worshipped the Triratna, attaining the Siddha state. ||190|| This happened
between the times of Munisuvratnath and Naminath.  Now, we describe the twelfth
Chakravarti.  In the city of Kashi, there was a king named Sambhuta. He became a
disciple of the Muni named Svatantralinga and was born in a Vimana called
Kamalagulma. ||191|| From there, he was born as Brahmadutta, the twelfth
Chakravarti, in the city of Kampilya, to king Brahmaratha and queen Chula.
||192|| This Chakravarti enjoyed Lakshmi but did not renounce her, and in that
unrestrained state, he died and went to the seventh hell. This happened between
the times of Neminath and Parshvanath. ||193||  Gautamswami tells king Shrenik,
"O king of Magadha! Thus, I have described the six-section rulers, the
Chakravartis. They were so powerful that even the gods and demons could not stop
their progress." ||194|| "I have spoken of the fruits of virtue and vice
directly. Why do people not do the right thing after hearing, experiencing, and
seeing it?" ||195|| "Just as a traveler does not go to another village without
taking food like appu, so too, this being does not go to another world without
the food of virtue and vice." ||196|| "Those who dwell in excellent mansions,
filled with the best women and as high as Mount Kailasa, are the fruit of the
tree of virtue." ||197|| "And those who are immersed in the mud of poverty,
dwelling in crooked houses with the hardships of cold, heat, and wind, are the
fruit of the tree of vice." ||198|| "Those kings and emperors who ride on
elephants as tall as the peak of Vindhyachala, with fly whisks waving over them,
are the fruit of the virtuous paddy." ||199|| "Those who ride on beautiful
horses with fly whisks waving on either side, and who have a beautiful body, are
the result of the virtuous king's actions." ||200||  Now, we describe the
eleventh Chakravarti.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 438 padmapurANe amitAGko'bhavad rAjA pure rAjapurAbhidhe  /
sudharmamitraziSyatvaM kRtvA brahmAlayaM yayau  // 18 //  tatazcyuto yazovatyAM
jAtastatraiva vaijayiH  /  jayasena iti khyAtazcakracumbitazAsanaH  // 189 //
parityajya mahArAjyaM dIkSA daigambarImitaH  /  ratnatritayamArAdhya saiddhaM
padamazizriyat  // 190 //  svatantraliGgasaMjJasya saMbhUtaH prApya ziSyatAm !
kAzyAM kamalagulmAkhyaM vimAnaM samupAzritaH  // 191 //  cyuto
brahmarathasyAbhUt pure kAmpilyanAmani  /  cUlAhrAsaMbhavaH putro brahmadattaH
prakIrtitaH  // 192 //  cakracihnAmasau bhuktvA zriyaM virativarjitaH  /
saptamI kSitimazlikSannemipArzvajinAntare  // 193 /  /  ete SaTkhaNDamUnAthAH
kIrtitA magadhAdhipa  /  gatirna zakyate yeSAM rorbu devAsurairapi  // 19 //
pratyakSamakSamuktaM ca phalametacchubhAzubham  /  zrutvAnubhUya dRSTvA ca
yuktaM na kriyate katham  // 195 //  na pAtheyamapUpAdi gRhItvA kazcidRcchati  /
lokAntaraM na cAyAti kintu tatsukRtetaram  // 196 /  /  kailAsakUTakalpeSu
varastrIpUrNakukSiSu  /  yadvasanti svagAreSu tatphalaM puNyavRkSajam  /  / 197
//  zItoSNavAtayukteSu kugRheSu vasanti yat  /
dAridrayapaGkanimagnAstadadharmataroH phalam  /  / 198 //
vindhyakUTasamAkArAraNendravrajanti yat  /  narendrAzcAmarodbhUtAH
puNyazAleridaM phalam  // 199 /  /  turaGgairyadalaM svaGgairgamyate
calacAmaraiH  /  pAdAtamadhyagaiH puNyanRpatestadviceSTitam  // 20 //  aba
gyArahaveM cakravartIkA varNana karate haiM rAjapura nAmaka nagarameM eka
amitAMka nAmakA rAjA rahatA thaa| vaha sUdharma mitra nAmaka munirAjakA ziSya
hokara brahma svarga gayA  /  / 188 //  vahA~se cyuta hokara uso
kAmpilyanagarameM rAjA vijayako yazovatI rAnIse jayasena nAmakA gyArahavA~
cakravartI huA  // 189|| vaha antameM mahArAjyakA parityAga kara paigambarI
dIkSAko dhAraNa kara ratnatrayakI ArAdhanA karatA huA siddhapadako prApta huA
// 190 /  yaha munisuvratanAtha aura naminAthake antarAlameM huA thaa| aba
bArahaveM cakravartIkA varNana karate haiM kAzI nagarImeM sambhUta nAmakA rAjA
rahatA thaa| vaha svatantraliMga nAmaka munirAjakA ziSya ho kamalagulma nAmaka
vimAnameM utpanna huA  // 191 //  vahA~se cyuta hokara kAmpilyanagarameM rAjA
brahmaratha aura rAnI cUlAke brahmadatta nAmakA bArahavAM cakravartI huA  // 192
//  yaha cakravartI lakSmIkA upabhogakara usase virata nahIM huA aura usI
avirata avasthAmeM marakara sAtaveM naraka gyaa| yaha neminAtha aura pArzvanAtha
tIrthakarake bIca meM huA thaa|||193|| gautamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM
ki he magadharAja ! isa prakAra maiMne chaha khaNDake adhipati-cakravatiyoMkA
varNana kiyaa| ye itane pratApI the ki inakI gatiko deva tathA asura bhI nahIM
roka sakate the  // 194|| yaha maiMne puNyapApakA phala pratyakSa kahA hai, use
sunakara, anubhava kara tathA dekhakara loga yogya kArya kyoM nahIM karate haiM
? ||195 /  /  jisa prakAra koI pathika apUpa Adi pAtheya ( mArga hitakArI
bhojana ) liye binA grAmAntarako nahIM jAtA hai usI prakAra yaha jIva bhI puNya-
pAparUpI pAtheyake binA lokAntarako nahIM jAtA hai  // 196 /  /  uttamottama
striyoMse bhare tathA kailAsake samAna UMce uttama mahaloMmeM jo manuSya nivAsa
karate haiM vaha puNyarUpI vRkSakA hI phala hai  // 197|| aura jo daridratArUpI
kIcar3ameM nimagna ho saradI, garamI tathA havAkI bAdhAse yukta khoTe gharoMmeM
rahate haiM vaha pAparUpI vRkSakA phala hai  /  / 198 //  jinapara camara dula
rahe haiM aise rAjA mahArAjA jo vindhyAcalake zikharake samAna U~ce-UMce
hAthiyoMpara baiThakara gamana karate haiM vaha puNyarUpI zAli (dhAna ) kA phala
hai  /  / 199 /  /  jinake donoM ora camara hila rahe haiM aise sundara zarIrake
dhAraka ghor3oMpara baiThakara jo paidala senAoMke 1. asitAhaH ma.  /  2.
camArodbhUtA m.| 3. pAdAnta-ma.  /

Page #489 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twentieth Chapter  **A stream of sweet nectar flows from the mountain of
merit, as the devotees ascend the chariot resembling a celestial palace.** (20)
**Those who wander with their feet covered in dirt, their steps unsteady, are
the fruits of the tree of sin, poisoned by evil.** (202)  **The food that is
consumed like nectar in golden vessels is the effect of the Dharma-rasa, as
declared by the great sages.** (203)  **The attainment of the position of Indra,
the Chakravarti, and the ordinary king, by the noble souls, is the fruit of the
vine of non-violence.** (204)  **The wealth attained by Rama and Keshava, O
à¤¶à¥à¤°à¥à¤£à¤¿à¤, is also the fruit of Dharma. Now, I shall speak of Rama and Keshava.**
(205)  **First, listen to the names of the nine cities associated with the
previous births of the nine Narayanas in the Bharata region: 1. The beautiful
Hastinapur, 2. Ayodhya adorned with flags, 3. The vast Shravasti, 4. Kaushambi
adorned with a clear sky, 5. Podanpur, 6. Shailanagar, 7. Singhapur, 8.
Kaushambi, and 9. Hastinapur. These nine cities are mentioned in order. All
these cities were filled with all kinds of wealth and grain, free from fear, and
adorned with the residences of the Vasudevas, i.e., Narayanas, in their previous
births.** (206-208)  **Now, listen to the names of these Vasudevas in their
previous births: 1. The mighty Vishvanandi, 2. Parvata, 3. Dhanamitra, 4.
Sagardatta, who, having attained the position of a king, made a sound like the
ocean, 5. Vikata, 6. Priyamitra, 7. Manasacheshtita, 8. Punarvasu, and 9.
Gangadeva. These are the names of the Narayanas in their previous births.**
(209-211)  **In their previous births, they were all extremely deformed and
unfortunate. They became monks due to the following reasons: 1. Loss of capital,
2. Defeat in battle, 3. Abduction of a woman, 4. Playing in gardens and forests,
5. Desire for forest games, 6. Extreme attachment to worldly pleasures, 7.
Separation from loved ones, 8. Fire disaster, and 9. Misfortune. They practiced
austerities with the desire for future enjoyments, and were devoid of true
knowledge. After death, they became Narayanas. All these Narayanas are younger
brothers of Balabhadra.** (212-214)  **O à¤¶à¥à¤°à¥à¤£à¤¿à¤! The desire for future
enjoyments should be avoided with great effort, as it is the cause of great
suffering and a harsh teacher.** (215)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vizatitama parva kalpaprAsAdasaMkAzaM rathamAruhya yajanAH  /  vrajanti
puNyazailendrAt' sruto'sau svAdunirbharaH  // 20 //  sphuTitAbhyAM padAghribhyAM
malagrastapaTaJcaraiH  /  bhramyate puruSaiH pApaviSavRkSasya tatphalam  /  /
202 /  /  annaM yadamRtaprAya hemapAtreSu bhujyate  /  sa pramAvo
munizreSTherukto dhArmarasAyanaH  // 20 //  devAdhipatitA cakracumbitA yacca
rAjatA  /  labhyate bhavyazArdUlaistadahiMsAlatAphalam  /  / 204 //
rAmakezavayorlakSmIlabhyate yacca puGgavaH  /  taddharmaphalamu pye
tatkIrtanamathAdhunA  /  / 205 /  /  hAstinaM nagaraM ramyaM sAketA ketubhUSitA
/  zrAvastI varavistIrNA kauzAmbI mAsitAmbarA  // 206 /  /  podanaM zailanagaraM
tayA siMhapuraM puram  /  kauzAmbI hAstinaM ceti krameNa parikIrtitA  /  / 207 /
/  sarvadaviNasaMpannA bhayasaMparkavarjitA  /  nagaryo vAsudevAnAmimAH pUrvatra
janmani  // 208 /  /  vizvanandI mahAtejAstataH parvatakAmidhaH  /
dhanamitrastato jJeyastRtIyazcakradhAriNAm  // 209 /  /  tataH sAgaradattAkhyaH
kSubdhasAgaranisvanaH  /  vikaTaH priyamitrazca tathA mAnasaceSTitaH  // 210 //
punarvasuzca vijJAto gaGgadevazva kIrtitaH  /  uktAnyamUni nAmAni kRSNAnAM
pUrvajanmani  // 211 //  naivikIyAtanaM yuddhavijayApramadAhRtiH  /
udyAnAraNyaramaNaM vanakrIDAbhikAGkSaNam  // 212 //  atyanta viSayAsaGgo
viprayogastUnapAt  /  daurbhAgyaM pretya hetubhya etebhyo harayo'bhavan  // 213
//  virUpA durbhagAH santaH sanidAnatapodhanAH  /  tatvavijJAnanirmukAH
saMbhavanti balAnujAH  // 214 //  sanidAnaM tapastasmAdvarjanIyaM prayatnataH  /
taddhi pazcAnmahAghoraduHkhadAnasuzikSitam  // 215 //  bIcameM calate haiM vaha
puNyarUpI rAjAkI manohara ceSTA hai  // 200 //  jo manuSya svargake bhavanake
samAna sundara rathapara savAra ho gamana karate haiM vaha unake puNyarUpI
himAlayase bharA huA svAdiSTa jharanA hai  // 201 //  jo puruSa malina vastra
pahanakara phaTe hue pairoMse paidala hI bhramaNa karate haiM vaha pAparUpI
viSavRkSakA phala hai  /  / 202 //  jo manuSya suvarNamayA pAtroMmeM amRtake
samAna madhura bhojana karate haiM use zreSTha.muniyoMne dharmarUpI rasAyanakA
prabhAva batalAyA hai  // 203 /  /  jo uttama bhavya jIva indrapada,
cakravartIkA pada tathA sAmAnya rAjAkA pada prApta karate haiM vaha ahiMsArUpI
latAkA phala hai  /  / 204 //  tathA uttama manuSya jo balabhadra aura
nArAyaNakI lakSmI prApta karate haiM vaha bhI dharmakA hI phala hai| he zreNika
! aba maiM unhIM balabhadra aura nArAyaNoMkA kathana karUMgA  /  / 205 /  /
prathama hI bharata kSetrake nau nArAyaNakI pUrvabhava sambandhI nagariyoMke
nAma suno-1 manohara hastinApura, 2 patAkAoMse suzobhita ayodhyA, 3 atyanta
vistRta zrAvastI, 4 nirmala AkAzase suzobhita kauzAmbI, 5 podanapura, 6
zailanagara, 7 siMhapura, 8 kauzAmbI aura, 9 hastinApura ye kramase nau
nagariyA~ kahI gayI haiN| ye sabhI nagariyA~ sarvaprakArake dhana-dhAnyase
paripUrNa thIM, bhayake samparkase rahita thIM, tathA vAsudeva arthAt
nArAyaNoMke pUrvajanma sambandhI nivAsase suzobhita thIM  // 206-208|| aba ina
vAsudevoMke pUrvabhavake nAma suno-1 mahApratApI vizvanandI, 2 parvata, 3
dhanamitra, 4 kSobhako prApta hue sAgarake samAna zabda karanevAlA sAgaradatta,
5 vikaTa, 6 priyamitra, 7 mAnasaceSTita, 8 punarvasu aura, 9 gaMgadeva ye
nArAyaNoMke pUrva janmake nAma kahe  // 209-211 /  /  ye sabhI pUrvabhavameM
atyanta virUpa tathA durbhAgyase yukta the| mUladhanakA apaharaNa 1, yuddha meM
hAra 2, strIkA apaharaNa 3, udyAna tathA vanameM krIr3A karanA 4, vana krIr3AkI
AkAGkSA 5, viSayoMmeM atyanta Asakti 6, iSTajanaviyoga 7, agnibAdhA 8 aura
daurbhAgya 9 kramazaH ina nimittoMko pAkara ye muni ho gaye the| nidAna arthAt
AgAmI bhogoMkI lAlasA rakhakara tapazcaraNa karate the tathA tattvajJAnase
rahita the  /  isI avasthAmeM marakara ye nArAyaNa hue the| ye sabhI nArAyaNa
balabhadrake choTe bhAI hote haiM  /  / 212-214|| he zreNika ! nidAna1.
zailendrAcchrato'sau m.| 2. yadamRtaM prAyaM ma.  /  3. rAjitA ma.  /  4.
nArAyaNAnAm  /  5. yuddha vijayA ma.  /  6. bharaNaM m.| 7. vanakrIDAbhikAkSaNaH
m.|

Page #490 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Padmapurana: Translation with Jain Terms  **Verse 216:** Sambhuta, the
embodiment of austerity, is known as Subhadra, Vasudarsana, Shreyans, Subhuti,
Vasubhuti.  **Verse 217:**  Ghosha, Sena, Parambhodi, and  Drumasen are the
great Munis, the gurus of the Krishnas in their previous birth.  **Verse 218:**
The Kalpas (epochs) are named Maha-Shukra, Pranata, Lantava, Sahasrar, Brahma,
and Mahendra.  **Verse 219:**  The Kalpas are also known as Soudharma, the abode
of those who strive for truth, and Sanatkumara, another Maha-Shukra.  **Verse
220:**  These beings, having attained the fruits of their good deeds, descended
from these heavens and, due to the residue of their merit, were born as the
Vasudeva kings.  **Verse 221:**  Their birthplaces are Podan, Dwapuri,
Hastinapur, Chakrpur, Kushagra, Mithilapuri, Ayodhya, and Mathura.  **Verse
222:**  These cities were filled with wealth and constantly bustling with
festivals.  **Verse 223:**  The fathers of the Krishnas are Prajapati,
Brahmabhuti, Raudra-nada, Soma,  Prakhyata, Shiva-kara, Sama-murdhagni-nada,
Dasharatha, and Vasudeva.  **Verse 224:**  The mothers of the Krishnas are
Mrigavati, Madhavi, Prithvi, Sita, Ambika, Lakshmi, Kesini, Kaikeyi, and Devaki.
**Verse 225:**  These mothers were blessed with great fortune and possessed
beautiful forms.  **Verse 226:**  The queens of the Krishnas are  Suprabha,
Rupini, Prabhava, Manohara, Sunetra, Vimala-sundari, Anandavati, Prabhavati, and
Rukmini.  **Verse 227:**  These queens are known as the Mahadevi (great
goddesses) of the Krishnas.  **Verse 228:**  One should abandon the practice of
austerity with great effort, as it is capable of causing immense suffering in
the future.  **Note:** The names of the nine Narayanas are missing in the
manuscript and printed copies, but they are essential. Pandit Daulatramji has
also translated them. Therefore, the text within the brackets [ ] has been added
to the translation for the sake of consistency.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANeM saMbhUtastapaso' mUrtiH subhadro vasudarzanaH  /  zreyAn
subhUtisaMjJazca vasubhUtizca kIrtitaH  //  216  //  ghoSa sena
parAmbhodhinAmAnau ca mahAmunI  /  drumasenazca kRSNAnAM guravaH pUrvajanmani
//  217  //  mahAzukrAbhidhaH kalpaH prANato lAntavastathA  /  sahasrAro'paro
brahmanAmA mAhendrasaMjJitaH  // 218 //  saudharmazca samAkhyAtaH kalpaH
sacceSTitAlayaH  /  sanatkumAranAmA ca mahAzukrAmiSo'paraH  //  219  //
etebhyaH pracyutAH santaH prAptapuNyaphalodayAH  /  puNyAvazeSato jAtA vAsudevA
narAdhipAH  //  220  //  podanaM dvApurI hastinagaraM tatpunaH smRtam  /  tathA
cakrapuraM ramyaM kuzAgraM mithilApurI  //  221 //  vinItA mathurA ceti
mAdhavotpattibhUmayaH  /  samastadhana saMpUrNAH sadotsavasamAkulAH  // 222 //
AdyaH prajApatirjJeyo brahmabhUtirato'paraH  /  raudranAdastathA somaH
prakhyAtazca zivAkaraH  // 223 //  samamUrddhAgninAdazca khyAto dazaraMthastathA
/  vasudevazca kRSNAnAM pitaraH parikIrtitAH  //  224  //  3 AdyA mRgAvatI jJeyA
mAdhavI pRthivI tathA  /  sItAmbikA ca lakSmIzca kezinI kaikayI zubhA  // 225 //
devakI caramA jJeyA mahAsaubhAgyasaMyutA  /  udArarUpasaMpannAH kRSNAnAM mAtaraH
smRtAH  // 226 //  suprabhA prathamA devI rUpiNI prabhavA parA  /  manoharA
sunetrA ca tathA vimalasundarI  //  227 //  tathAnandavatI jJeyA kIrtitA ca
prabhAvatI  /  rukmiNI ceti kRSNAnAM mahAdevyaH prakIrtitAH  //  228 //  440
sahita tapa prayatnapUrvaka chor3anA cAhie kyoMki vaha pIche calakara
mahAbhayaMkara duHkha denemeM nipuNa hotA hai || 215 || aba nArAyaNoMke
pUrvabhavake guruoMke nAma suno- tapakI mUrtisvarUpa sambhUta 1, subhadra 2,
vasudarzana 3, zreyAnsa 4, subhUti 5, vasubhUti 6, ghoSasena 7, parAmbhodhi 8,
aura drumasena 9 ye nau inake pUrvabhavake guru the arthAt inake pAsa inhoMne
dIkSA dhAraNa kI thI ||216-217 || aba jisa-jisa svargase Akara nArAyaNa hue,
unake nAma suno- mahAzukra 1, prANata 2, lAntava 3, sahasrAra 4, brahma 5,
mAhendra 6, saudharma 7, sanatkumAra 8, aura mahAzukra 9  /  puNyake
phalasvarUpa nAnA abhyudayoM ko prApta karanevAle ye deva ina svargose cyuta
hokara avaziSTa puNyake prabhAvase nArAyaNa hue haiM  /  / 218-220  /  /  aba
ina nArAyaNoMkI janma- nagariyoMke nAma suno- podanapura 1, dvApurI 2,
hastinApura 3, hastinApura 4, cakrapura 5, kuzAgrapura 6, mithilApurI 7, ayodhyA
8 aura mathurA 9 ye nagariyA~ kramase nau nArAyaNoMkI janma nagariyA~ thiiN| ye
sabhI samasta dhanase paripUrNaM thIM tathA sadA utsavoM se Akula rahatIM thIM
/  /  221 - 222  /  /  aba ina nArAyaNoMke pitA ke nAma suno - prajApati 1,
brahmabhUti 2, nAda 3, soma 4, prakhyAta 5, zivAkara 6, samamUrdhAgninAda 7,
dazaratha 8 aura vasudeva 9 ye nau kramase nArAyaNoMke pitA kahe gaye haiM  /  /
223 - 224 || aba inakI mAtAoMke nAma suno-mRgAvatI 1, mAdhavI 2, pRthvI 3, sItA
4, ambikA 5, lakSmI 6, kezinI 7, kekayI 8 aura devakI 9 ye krama se no
nArAyaNoMkI mAtAyeM thIM  /  ye sabhI mahAsaubhAgya se sampanna tathA utkRSTa
rUpase yukta thIM  //  225226||* [aba ina nArAyaNoMke nAma suno - tripRSTha 1,
dvipRSTha 2. svayambhU 3, puruSottama 4, puruSasiMha 5, puNDarIka 6, datta 7,
lakSmaNa 8 aura kRSNa 9 ye nau nArAyaNa haiM ] aba inakI paTTarAniyoMkA nAma
suno - suprabhA 1, rUpiNI 2, prabhavA 3, manoharA 4, sunetrA 5, vimalasundarI 6,
AnandavatI 7, prabhAvatI 8 aura rukmiNI 9 ye nau nArAyaNoMkI kramazaH nau
paTTarAniyA~ kahIM gayI hai  /  /  227-228||  hastalikhita tathA mudrita
pratiyoM meM nArAyaNoMke nAma batalAnevAle zloka upalabdha nahIM haiM  /
parantu unakA honA Avazyaka hai| paM. daulatarAmajIne bhI unakA anuvAda kiyA
hai| ataH prakaraNa saMgati ke lie [ ] koSThakAntargata pATha anuvAdameM diyA
hai  /  1. tApaso mUrti na  /  2. zreyAnsabhRtisaMjJazca ma  /  3.
samastamUrddhAgninAdazca ma  /  samastaddhaya gninAdazca ba.  /

Page #491 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Chapter Twenty**  The city of **Puá¹á¸arokini**, with
magnificent, pale-colored palaces, is like the earth, vast and wide.
**Pá¹thivÄ«purÄ«**, the second earth-city. ||229||  **ÄnandapurÄ«**, the city of
joy, and **NandapurÄ«**, the city of happiness, are also remembered.
**VyatiÌtashoÌka**, the city beyond sorrow, and **Vijayapur**, the city of
victory. ||230||  **SusiÌmaÌ**, the city with good boundaries, **Kshema**, the
city of safety, and **Hastinapur**, the city of elephants, are also mentioned.
These were the cities of **Balabhadra** in his previous birth. ||231||
**Bala**, the strong one, **MaÌrutavega**, the speed of the wind,
**Nandimitra**, the great friend, **MahaÌbala**, the very strong,
**Purushará¹£abha**, the best of men, **SudarÅana**, the sixth, **Vasundhara**,
the earth, **ÅrÄ«candra**, the moon, and **SakhisanÌjna**, the friend, are the
names of **Balabhadra** in his previous birth. ||232-233||  **AmritaÌra**, the
best of the monks, **MahaÌsuvratasuÌvratÄ«**, the great vow-keeper, **Vá¹á¹£abha**,
the bull, **PrajaÌpaÌla**, the protector of the people, **Damavara**, the
subduer, **Sudharma**, the righteous, **Ará¹ava**, the ocean, and **Vidruma**,
the ruby, are the teachers of **Balabhadra** in his previous birth. ||234-235||
**Anuttara**, the highest, was the abode of three **Balabhadra**.
**SahasraÌra**, the thousand-petaled lotus, was the abode of three others.
**Brahma**, the creator, was the abode of two, and **MahaÌÅukra**, the great
Venus, with its supreme beauty, was the abode of one. From these abodes, the
**Balabhadra**, with their good deeds, were born. ||236-237||
**BhadraÌmbhoja**, the lotus of good fortune, **Subhadra**, the auspicious one,
**Suvesha**, the well-dressed, **SudarÅana**, the beautiful, **Suprabha**, the
radiant, **Vijaya**, the victorious, **Vaijayanti**, the victorious one,
**MahaÌbhaÌga**, the fortunate, **MahaÌshiÌla**, the great virtuous,
**AparajiÌta**, the unconquered, and **RohiniÌ**, are the mothers of the
**Balabhadra**. ||238-239||  **Åreya**, the best, and the five **Jina**s,
starting with **Tripá¹á¹£á¹­ha**, followed by the **Balabhadra**, are five in number,
each one superior to the previous one. ||240||  **Laká¹£maá¹a**, the eighth
**Balabhadra**, is mentioned between **MunisuÌvratanatha** and **Naminatha**.
**Ká¹á¹£á¹a**, the ninth **Balabhadra**, with his miraculous deeds, worshipped
**NeminaÌtha**. ||241||  **Acala**, **Vijaya**, **Bhadra**, **Suprabha**,
**SudarÅana**, and **Nandimitra** are the names of the **Balabhadra**. ||242||
**[Note:** The names of the **Balabhadra** are not found in the available
manuscripts, but Pandit Daulatramji has translated them and they are useful.
Therefore, they are included in brackets.]  **[Note:** The names of the
**Balabhadra** are not found in the available manuscripts, but Pandit
Daulatramji has translated them and they are useful. Therefore, they are
included in brackets.]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 vizatitamaM parva prakANDapANDurAgArA nagarI puNDarokiNI  /
pRthivIvasuvistIrNA dvitIyA pRthivIpurI  // 229 //  anyAnandapurI zeyA
tathAnandapurI smRtA  /  purI vyatItazokAkhyA puraM vijayasaMjJitam  // 230 //
susImA ca tathA kSemA hAstinaM ca prakIrtitam  /  etAni baladevAnAM purANi
gatajanmani  // 231 //  balo mArutavegazca nandimitro mahAbalaH  /
puruSarSabhasaMjJazca tathA SaSThaH sudarzanaH  // 232 //  vasundharazca
vijJeyaH zrIcandraH sakhisaMjJakaH  /  jJeyAnyamUni nAmAni rAmANAM pUrvajanmani
// 233 //  amRtAro muniH zreSThaH mhaasuvrtsuvrtii| vRSabho'tha prajApAlastathA
damavarAbhidhaH  // 23 //  sudharmo'rNavasaMjJazca tathA vidmasaMjJitaH  /  amI
pUrvabhave jJeyA guravaH sIradhAriNAm  // 235 //  nivAso'nuttarA jJeyAstrayANAM
haladhAriNAm  /  sahasrArastrayANAM ca dvayorbrahmanivAsitA  // 236 //
mahAzukrAbhidhAnazca kalpaH paramazomanaH  /  ebhyazcyutvA samutpannA rAmAH
sAdhusuceSTitAH  // 237 //  bhadrAmbhojA subhadrA ca suveSA ca sudarzanA  /
suprabhA vijayA cAnyA vaijayantI prakIrtitA  // 238 //  mahAbhAgA ca vijJeyA
mahAzIlA'parAjitA  /  rohiNI ceti vijJeyA jananyaH sIradhAriNAm  // 239 //
zreya AdIn jinAnpaJca tripRSThAdyAbalAnujAH  /  krameNa paJca vidyante
tatparAvarataH parau  // 240 //  namisuvratayormadhye lakSmaNaH parikIrtitaH  /
vandako neminAthasya kRSNo'madadbhutakriyaH  // 24 //  alakaM vijayaM jJeyaM
nandanaM pRthivIpuram  /  tathA haripuraM sUryasiMhazabdapare pure  // 242 //
athAnantara aba nau balabhadroMkA varNana karate haiN| so sarvaprathama inakI
pUrvajanma-sambandhI nagariyoMke nAma suno-uttamottama dhavala mahaloMse sahita
puNDarIkiNI 1 pRthvIke samAna atyanta vistRta pRthivIpurI 2 AnandapurI 3
nandapurI 4 vItazokA 5 vijayapura 6 susImA 7 kSemA 8 aura hastinApura 9 ye nau
balabhadroMke pUrva janmasambandhI nagaroMke nAma haiM  // 229-231 /  /  aba
balabhadroMke pUrvajanmake nAma suno-bala 1 mArutavega 2 nandimitra 3 mahAbala 4
puruSarSabha 5 sudarzana 6 vasundhara 7 zrIcandra 8 aura sakhisaMjJa 9 ye nau
balabhadroMke pUrvanAma jAnanA cAhie  // 232233 /  /  aba inake pUrvabhava
sambandhI guruoMke nAma suno-amRtAra 1 mahAsuvrata 2 suvrata 3 vRSabha 4
prajApAla 5 damavara 6 sudharma 7 arNava 8 aura vidruma 9 ye nau balabhadroMke
pUrvabhavake guru haiM arthAt inake pAsa inhoMne dIkSA dhAraNa kI thI  /  /
234-235|| aba ye jisa svargase Aye usakA varNana karate haiM-tIna balabhadrakA
anuttara vimAna, tInakA sahasrAra svarga, dokA brahma svarga aura ekakA atyanta
sazobhita mahAzakra svarga pUrvabhavakA nivAsa thaa| ye saba yahA~se cyata
hokara uttama ceSTAoMke dhAraka balabhadra hue the  /  / 236-237 /  /  aba inakI
mAtAoMke nAma suno-bhadrAmbhojA 1 subhadrA 2 suveSA 3 sudarzanA 4 suprabhA 5
vijayA 6 vaijayantI 7 udAra abhiprAyako dhAraNa karanevAlI tathA mahAzIlavatI
aparAjitA (kauzilyA) 8 aura rohiNI 9 ye nau balabhadroMkI kramazaH mAtAoMke nAma
haiM  // 238-239 /  /  inameM-se tripRSTha Adi pAMca nArAyaNa aura pA~ca
balabhadra zreyAnsanAthako Adi lekara dharmanAtha svAmIke samaya paryanta hue|
chaThe aura sAtaveM nArAyaNa tathA balabhadra aranAtha svAmIke bAda hue|
lakSmaNa nAmake AThaveM nArAyaNa aura rAma nAmaka AThaveM balabhadra
munisuvratanAtha aura naminAthake bIcameM hue tathA adbhuta kriyAoMko karanevAle
zrI kRSNa nAmaka nauveM nArAyaNa tathA bala nAmaka nauveM balabhadra bhagavAna
neminAthakI vandanA karanevAle hae  // 240241 //  * [ aba balabhadroMke nAma
suno-acala 1 vijaya 2 bhadra 3 suprabha 4 sudarzana 5 nandimitra *nArAyaNake
nAmakI taraha balabhadroMke nAma ginAnevAle zloka bhI upalabdha pratiyoMmeM
nahIM mile haiM para paM. daulatarAmajIne inakA anuvAda kiyA hai tathA upayogI
bhI hai| ataH [ ] koSThakoMke antargata anuvAda kiyA hai| 1. pANDurogArA m.| 2.
pRthivIvat suvistiirnnaa-ativisttaa| 3. vivAso m.| 4. zreyonAthAdArabhya
dharmanAthaparyantaM paJca balabhadrA jAtAH  /  5. vandante ma.  /  56

Page #492 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **442** In the Padma Purana, the city of Lankapura, along with
other cities, were known to be the abodes of the Pratichà¤à¥à¤°à¤¿à¤£s. These cities
were illuminated by the rays of jewels. ||243||  **444** The names of the nine
Pratichà¤à¥à¤°à¤¿à¤£s of the Vasudevas are as follows: Ashwagriva, Taraka, Meraka,
Madhukaitabha, Nishumbha, Bali, Prahlada, Dashanana, and Jarasandha. ||244-245||
**446** The names of the Gurus of the Balabhadra are: Suvarna Kumbha, Satkirti,
Sudharma, Mriganka, Shruti Kirti, Sumit, Bhavanashruta, Suvrata, and
Susiddhartha. All of them were enveloped in the glory born from the burden of
their austerities. ||246-247||  **448** Eight of the nine Balabhadra, having
attained the glory of Balabhadra, became indifferent to the world and burned the
forest of karma. They attained Nirvana, where they were free from the torment of
various diseases, which were like animals roaming in the forest. This forest was
terrifying, with the tiger of death and the huge, tall trees of birth being cut
down. The last Balabhadra, due to the remaining karma-bondage, attained the
Brahma heaven. ||248||  **449** Gautama Ganadhara tells King Shrenik, "O King! I
have told you the story of the Tirthankaras, the Chakravartis who conquered the
Bharat Kshetra, the Narayanas, and the Balabhadra. This story is full of wonder,
starting from their previous births. Some of them, after performing great
austerities, attain liberation from this world. Some have a few remaining sinful
karmas and wander in the world for a short time before attaining liberation.
Some, due to the strong power of their karmas, wander in the dense cycle of
birth and death for a long time." ||249||  **Note:** The numbers in the text
refer to the verse numbers in the original text.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 442 padmapurANe laGkArAjagRhaM cAnyakrameNa praticakriNAm  /  sthAnAnyamUni
vedyoni dIptAni maNirazmibhiH  // 243 //  azvagrIva iti khyAtastArako
merakastathA  /  madhukaiTamasaMjJazca nizummazca tathA baliH  // 244 //
prahlAdo dazavaktrazca jarAsandhazca kIrtitaH  /  krameNa vAsudevAnAM vijJeyA
praticakriNaH  // 245 //  suvarNakumbhaH satkIti: sudharmo'tha mahAmuniH  /
mRgAGkaH zrutikItizca sumitro bhavanazrutaH  // 246 //  suvratazca susiddhArtho
rAmANAM guravaH smRtAH  /  tapaHsaMbhArasaMjAtakIrti veSTitaviSTapAH  // 247 //
sragdharAcchandaH dagdhvA karmorukakSaM jhumitabahuvidhavyAdhisaMbhrAntasattvaM
mRtyuvyAghrAti bhImaM mavavipulasamuttuGgavRkSorukhaNDam  /  yAtA nirvANamaSTau
haladharavibhavaM prApya saMvignamAvAH saMprApa brahmalokaM caramahaladharaH
karmabandhAvazeSAt  // 248 //  Adau kRtvA jinendrAn bharatajayakRtA kezavAnAM
balAnA metatte pUrvajanmaprabhRti nigaditaM vRttamatyantacitram  /  kecid
gacchanti mokSaM kRtapurutapasaH stokapaGkAzca kecit kecid bhrAmyanti bhUyo
bahumavagahanAM saMsRtiM nirvirAmAH  // 249 //  6 nandiSeNa 7 rAmacandra ( padma
) aura bala ] nArAyaNoMke pratidvandvI nau pratinArAyaNa hote haiN| unake
nagaroMke nAma isa prakAra jAnanA caahie| alakapura 1 vijayapura 2 nandanapura 3
pRthvIpura 4 haripura 5 sUryapura 6 siMhapura 7 laMkA 8 aura rAjagRha 9 /  ye
sabhI nagara maNiyoMkI kiraNoMse dedIpyamAna the  // 242-243|| aba
pratinArAyaNoMke nAma sano-azvagrIva 1 tAraka 2 meraka 3 madhukaiTabha 4
nizumbha 5 bali 6 prahlAda 7 dazAnana 8 aura jarAsandha 9 ye nau
pratinArAyaNoMke nAma jAnanA cAhie  /  / 244-245 //  suvarNakumbha 1 satkIrti 2
sudharma 3 mRgAMka 4 zrutikIrti 5 sumitra 6 bhavanazruta 7 suvrata 8 aura
susiddhArtha 9 balabhadroMke guruoMke nAma haiN| ina sabhIne tapake bhArase
utpanna kortike dvArA samasta saMsArako vyApta kara rakhA thA  /  / 246-247||
nau balabhadroMmeM-se ATha balabhadra to balabhadrakA vaibhava prApta kara tathA
saMsArase udAsIna ho usa karmarUpI mahAvanako bhasma kara nirvANako padhAre
jisameM ki kSobhako prApta hue nAnA prakArake rogarUpI jantu bhramaNa kara rahe
the, jo mRtyurUpI vyAghrase atyanta bhayaMkara thA tathA jisameM janmarUpI
bar3e-bar3e U~ce vRkSoke khaNDa laga rahe the| antima balabhadra karma-bandhana
zeSa rahaneke kAraNa brahma svargako prApta huA thA  // 248 //  gautama
gaNadhara rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! maiMne tIrthaMkaroMko Adi
lekara bharata kSetrako jItanevAle cakravatiyoM, nArAyaNoM tathA balabhadroMkA
atyanta Azcaryase bharA huA pUrva-janma AdikA vRttAnta tujhase khaa| inameM se
kitane hI to vizAla tapazcaraNa kara usI bhavase mokSa jAte haiM, kinhIMke kucha
pApa karma avaziSTa rahate haiM to ve kucha samaya taka saMsArameM bhramaNa kara
mokSa jAte haiM aura kucha karmokI sattA adhika prabala honese dIrgha kAla taka
aneka janma-maraNoMse saghana 1. vedAni m.| 2. sadharmo'tha ma., kh.| 3.
susiddhArthA m.| 4. vyAghrAdi kha., b.| 5. kRtAn ma.  /  6. kecidbhrAmyanti m.|
7. paratapasaH kha., yujatapasaH m.| 8. gacchanti ma.  /  .

Page #493 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
443 Knowing this twenty-first **Parva**, which is strange, the beings of the
world, engulfed in the great ocean of the **Kalikaluá¹£a** (the pollution of the
Kali Yuga), are burning in the great suffering of the **NÄ«cagatÄ«** (lower
realms) like fire. Knowing this, some **Bhavyas** (future Jinas) do not even
desire this world. Some want to make the acquaintance of **Puá¹ya** (merit), and
some, like the sun, end their **Moha** (delusion) and attain pure
**KevalajÃ±Äna** (omniscience). ||25|| Thus ends the twenty-first **Parva**
called **TÄ«rthankara BhavanukÄ«rtana** (the narration of the births of the
TÄ«rthankaras) in the **Padmacarita** (the story of the lotus) narrated by
**Raviá¹£eá¹a ÄcÄrya**, known as **Ärya**. ||20|| 1. **PrÄá¹ajÄta** m.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 443 vizatitamaM parva etajjJAtvA vicitraM kalikaluSa mahAsAgarAvartamagna
saMsAraprANijAtaM' virasagatimahAduHkhavapritaptam  /  kaSTaM necchanti
kecitsukRtaparicayaM kartumanyastu kazcit kRtvA mohAvasAnaM raviriva vimalaM
kevalajJAnameti  // 25 //  ityAce raviSeNAcAryaprokta padmacarite
tIrthaMkarabhavAnukIrtanaM nAma viMzatitamaM parva  // 20 //  isa saMsAra-
aTavImeM nirantara ghUmate rahate haiM  /  / 249 /  /  ye saMsArake vividha
prANI kalikAlarUpI atyanta malina mahAsAgarakI bhramarameM magna haiM tathA
narakAdi nIca gatiyoMke mahAduHkharUpI agnimeM santapta ho rahe haiN| aisA
jAnakara kitane hI nikaTa bhavya to isa saMsArakI icchA hI nahIM karate haiN|
kucha loga puNyakA paricaya karanA cAhate haiM aura kucha loga sUryake samAna
mohakA avasAna kara nirmala kevalajJAnako prApta hote haiM  // 250 //  isa
prakAra ArSa nAmase prasiddha raviSeNAcArya kathita padmacaritameM
tIrthakarAdike bhavoMkA varNana karanevAlA bIsavA~ parva samApta huA  // 20 //
1.prANajAtaM m.|

Page #494 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twenty-First Chapter  I tell you the story of the connection of the
eighth Balabhadra with Sri Rama. Listen to the lineage of some great men. ||1||
After the tenth Tirthankara, Sri Shitalnath Bhagwan attained liberation, a king
named Sumukh ruled in Kaushambi. At the same time, a wealthy merchant named
Veerak lived in the same city. ||2||  The king, Sumukh, abducted Veerak's wife,
Vanamala, and enjoyed her company as he desired. Finally, he gave donations to
the ascetics and went to Mount Rukmagiri. ||3||  There, in the southern part of
Mount Rukmagiri, there was a city called Haripur. In this city, a couple was
born, a Vidhyadhar and a Vidhyadhari. They enjoyed the pleasures of the material
world. ||4||  Veerak, whose body was burning with the fire of separation from
his beloved, attained the status of a god, surrounded by many goddesses, through
his penance. ||5||  With his knowledge of the past, the god knew that his enemy,
King Sumukh, was born in Harikshetra. Driven by his evil mind, he brought Sumukh
from Harikshetra to Bharatkshetra and caused his downfall. ||6||  Since he was
brought from Harikshetra with his wife, he became known as Hari throughout the
world. ||7||  He had a son named Mahagir, who had a son named Himagiri. Himagiri
had a son named Vasugiri, who had a son named Indragiri. Indragiri had a son
named Ratnamala, who had a son named Sambhut, who had a son named Bhootdev. In
this way, hundreds of kings, all descendants of Hari, were born. ||8-9||  Later,
in the same lineage, a famous and excellent king named Sumit, was born in the
great city of Kushagra. ||10||  This king was equal to Indra in his enjoyment,
he conquered the moon with his brilliance, he conquered the sun with his
radiance, and he defeated his enemies with his power. ||11||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekaviMzatitamaM parva zRNvato'STamarAmasya saMbandhArthaM vadAmi te  /
vaMzAnukIrtanaM kiMcinmahApuruSasaMbhavam  // 1 //  jinendra dazame'tote rAjAsIt
sumukhazrutiH  /  kauzAmbyAmaparo'traiva vANijo vIrakazrutiH  // 2 //  hRtvA
tadayitAM rAjA zritvA kAmaM yathepsitam  /  datvA dAnaM virAgANAM mRtvA
rukmagiri yayau  // 3 //  tatrApi dakSiNazreNyAM pure haripurasaMjJake  /
utpannau dampatI, krIDan bhogabhUmimazizriyat  // 4 //
dayitAvirahAGgAradagdhadehastu vIrakaH  /  tapasA devatA prApa
devInivahasaMkulAm  // 5 //  viditvAvadhinA devo vairiNaM harisaMbhavam  /
bharate'tiSThapadyAtaM durgatiM pApadhIratiH  // 6 //  yato'sau haritaH
kSetrAdAnIto bhAryayA samam  /  tato haririti khyAtiM gataH sarvatra viSTape  //
7 //  nAmnA mahAgiristasya suto himagiristataH  /  tato vasugirirjAto
babhUvendragiristataH  // 8 //  ratnamAlo'tha saMbhUto bhUtadevo mahIdharaH  /
ityAdyAH zatazo'tItA rAjAno harivaMzajAH  // 9 //  vaMze tatra mahAsatvaH
sumitra iti vizrutaH  /  babhUva paramo rAjA kuzAgrAkhye mahApure  // 10 //
tridazendrasamo bhogaiH kAntyA jitnishaakrH| jitaprabhAkaro dIptyA
pratApAnatazAtravaH  // 11 //  athAnantara gautamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate
haiM ki he rAjan ! aba AThaveM balabhadra zrIrAmakA sambandha batalAneke lie
kucha mahApuruSoMse utpanna vaMzoMkA kathana karatA hai so suna  // 1 //
dazaveM tIrthaMkara zrI zItalanAtha bhagavAnke mokSa cale jAneke bAda kauzAmbI
nagarImeM eka sumukha nAmakA rAjA huaa| usI samaya usa nagarImeM eka vIraka
nAmakA zreSThI rahatA thaa| usakI strIkA nAma vanamAlA thaa| rAjA sumukhane
vanamAlAkA haraNakara usake sAtha icchAnusAra kAmopabhoga kiyA aura antameM vaha
muniyoMke lie dAna dekara vijayA parvatapara gyaa| vahA~ vijayAdha parvatakI
dakSiNa zreNI meM eka haripura nAmakA nagara thaa| usameM ve donoM dampatI
utpanna hue arthAt vidyAdhara-vidyAdharI hue| vahAM krIr3A karatA huA rAjA
sumukhakA jIva vidyAdhara bhogabhUmi gyaa| usake sAtha usakI strI vidyAdharI bhI
thii| idhara strIke viraharUpI aMgArase jisakA zarIra jala rahA thA aisA vIraka
zreSThI tapake prabhAvase aneka deviyoMke samUhase yukta devapadako prApta huA
// 2-5 //  usane avadhi jJAnase jaba yaha jAnA ki hamArA vairI rAjA sumukha
harikSetrameM utpanna huA hai to pApa buddhi meM prema karanevAlA vaha deva use
vahA~se bharatakSetrameM rakha gayA tathA usakI durdazA kI  // 6 //  cUMki vaha
apanI bhAryAke sAtha harikSetrase harakara lAyA gayA thA isalie samasta
saMsArameM vaha hari isa nAmase prasiddhiko prApta huA  // 7 //  usake mahAgiri
nAmakA putra huA, usake himagiri, himagirike vasugiri, vasugirike indragiri,
indragirike ratnamAlA, ratnamAlAke sambhUta aura sambhUtake bhUtadeva Adi
saikar3oM rAjA kramazaH utpanna hue| ye saba harivaMzaja kahalAye  /  / 8-9 //
Age calakara usI harivaMzameM kuzAgna nAmaka mahAnagarameM sumitra nAmaka
prasiddha utkRSTa rAjA huA  // 10 //  yaha rAjA bhogoMse indrake samAna thA,
kAntise candramAko jItanevAlA thA, dIptise sUryako 1. nIte m.| 2. vaNijo ma  /
3. vIrakaH zrutiH kh.| 4. bhogabhUmimazizriyat k.| 5. ka. pustake eSa zloko
nAsti, ja. pustake'pi nAsti kintu kenaciTippaNaka; pustakAntarAduddhRtya yojitaH
/  ma. ba. pustakayoH tRtIyazlokasya 'mRtvA rukmagiriM yayau' iti sthAne 'pure
haripurasaMjJake' iti pATho vidyate  /  tadanantaraM caturthazlokasyetthaM kramo
vidyate-utpannau dampatI krIDAM kRtvA rukmagiri yyau| tatrApi dakSiNazreNyAM
bhogabhUmimazizriyat  // 4 //  atra tu mUle kha. pustakIyaH pAThaH sthApitaH  /
6. saMkUlam ma.  /  7. pApadhIriti m.|

Page #495 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twenty-First Chapter  Padmavati, the wife of Padma-netra, was a woman of
great beauty. Her eyes were like lotuses, she was adorned with auspicious marks,
and all her desires were fulfilled. ||12||  One night, while sleeping on a
comfortable bed in her beautiful palace, she saw sixteen auspicious dreams in
the last watch of the night. ||13||  She dreamt of an elephant, two bulls, a
lion, the coronation of Lakshmi, two garlands, the moon, the sun, two fish, a
pot, a lotus-filled lake, the ocean, a throne adorned with jewels, an aerial
chariot, a bright palace, a heap of jewels, and fire. ||14-15||  Astonished and
bewildered, the wise queen Padmavati woke up and, after performing her morning
rituals, went to her husband with great humility. ||16||  With folded hands, she
asked her husband, the knower of justice, about the meaning of her dreams, while
sitting comfortably on a beautiful seat. ||17||  As her husband was explaining
the meaning of her dreams, a rain of jewels began to fall from the sky. ||18||
By the command of Indra, a happy Yaksha showered three and a half crore jewels
on her house every day. ||19||  For fifteen months, the continuous rain of
wealth transformed the entire city into a city of jewels and gold. ||20||  All
the goddesses, like Shri and Hri, who resided in the lotus ponds of Padma,
Mahapadma, etc., along with their families, served the mother of the Jina with
great respect. ||21||  Then, the Lord was born. As soon as he was born, Indra,
along with the Lokapalas, performed his abhisheka with the water of the ocean of
milk on Mount Meru with great splendor. ||22||  After the abhisheka, Indra
worshipped, praised, and prostrated before the Jina, and then lovingly placed
him in his mother's lap. ||23||  Since the time the Lord was in the womb, his
mother had become particularly devoted to good vows, hence he became known as
Muni-Suvrata. ||24||  Muni-Suvrata, whose face was like the full moon, conquered
the entire world with his radiant body and defeated all his enemies with his
prowess. ||25||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekaviMzatitamaM parva padmAvatIti jAyAsya padmanetrA mahAdyutiH  /
zubhalakSaNasaMpUrNA pUrNasarvamanorathA  // 12 //  suptAsau bhavane ramye
rAtrau talpe sukhAvahe  /  adrAkSIt pazcime yAme svapnAn SoDaza pUjitAn  //  13
//  dviradaM zAskara siMhamabhiSekaM zriyastathA  /  dAmanI zItaguM mAnuM zaSau
kumbhaM saro'bjavat  // 14 //  sAgaraM siMhasaMyuktamAsanaM ratnacitritam  /
vimAnaM bhavanaM zubhraM ratnarAzi hutAzanam  // 15 //  tato vismitacittA sA
vibuddhA buddhizAlinI  /  kRtvA yathocitaM yAtA vinItA bharturantikam  //  16
//  kRtAnjali papraccha svasvapnArtha nyAyavedinI  /  madrAsane sukhAsInA
sphuradvadanapaGkajA  // 17 //  dayito'kathayadyAvattasyai svapnaphalaM zubham
/  apasad gaganAttAvadvRSTI ratnaprasUtinI  // 18 //  tisraH koTyordhakoTI ca
vasuno'sya dine dine  /  bhavane mudito yakSo vavarSaM surapAjJayA  // 19 //
mAsAn paJcadazA khaNDaM patantyA vasudhArayA  /  tayA ratnasuvarNAdimayaM
tannagaraM kRtam  // 20 //  tasyAH kamalavAsinyo jinamAtuH pratikriyAm  /
samastAmAdRtA devyazcakruH saparivArikAH  // 21 //  jAtamAtramatho santaM
jinendra kSIravAriNA  /  lokapAlaiH samaM zakro merAvasnapayacchriyA  //  22 //
saMpUjya bhaktitaH stutvA praNamya ca surAdhipaH  /  mAturake punaH prItyA
jinanAthamatiSThipat  //  23 //  AsId garbhasthite yasmin suvratA jananI yataH
/  vizeSeNa tataH kIrtiM gato'sau suvratAkhyayA  // 24 //  aJjanAdriprakAzo'pi
sa jino dehatejasA  /  jigAya tigmaguM pUrNa nizAkaranibhAnanaH || 25 ||
parAjita kara rahA thA aura pratApase samasta zatruoMko namra karanevAlA thA ||
11|| usakI padmAvatI nAmakI strI thI  /  padmAvatI bahuta hI sundarI thI  /
usake netra kamalake samAna the, vaha vizAla kAntikI dhAraka thI, zubha
lakSaNoMse sampUrNaM thI tathA usake sarvaM manoratha pUrNa hue the || 12 || eka
dina vaha rAtri ke samaya sundara mahalameM sukhakArI zayyApara so rahI thI ki
usane pichale pahara meM nimnalikhita solaha uttama svapna dekhe || 13 || gaja 1
vRSabha 2 siMha 3 lakSmIkA abhiSeka 4 do mAlAe~ 5 candramA 6 sUryaM 7 do mIna 8
kalaza 9 kamalakalita sarovara 10 samudra 11 ratnoMse citravicitra siMhAsana 12
vimAna 13 ujjvala bhavana 14 ratnarAzi 15 aura agni 16  /  /  14-15 //  445
tadanantara jisakA citta AzcayaMse cakita ho rahA thA aisI buddhimatI rAnI
padmAvatI jAgakara tathA prAtaHkAla sambandhI yathAyogya kArya kara bar3I
namratAse patike samIpa gayI || 16 | vahA~ jAkara jisakA mukhakamala phUla rahA
thA aisI nyAya kI jAnanevAlI rAnI bhadrAsanapara sukhase baiThI  /  tadanantara
usane hAtha jor3akara patise apane svapnoMkA phala pUchA ||17|| idhara patine
jabataka usase svapnoMkA phala kahA tabataka udhara AkAzase ratnoMkI vRSTi
par3ane lagI || 18 || indrakI AjJAse prasanna yakSa pratidina isake gharameM
sAr3he tIna karor3a ratnoMkI varSA karatA thA || 19|| pandraha mAsa taka
lagAtAra par3atI huI dhanavRSTise vaha samasta nagara ratna tathA suvarNAdimaya
ho gayA ||20|| padma, mahApadma Adi sarovaroMke kamaloMmeM rahanevAlI zrI-hrI
Adi deviyA~ apane parivAra ke sAtha milakara jinamAtAkI saba prakArakI sevA
bar3e AdarabhAvase karatI thIM  //  21  //  athAnantara bhagavAn kA janma huA  /
so janma hote hI indrane lokapAloMke sAtha bar3e vaibhavase sumeru parvata para
bhagavAnkA kSIrasAgarake jalase abhiSeka kiyA ||22|| abhiSekake bAda indrane
bhaktipUrvaka jinendradeva kI pUjA kI, stuti kI, praNAma kiyA aura tadanantara
premapUrvaka mAtAkI godameM lAkara virAjamAna kara diyA ||23|| jaba bhagavAn
garbhameM sthita the tabhIse unakI mAtA vizeSakara suvratA arthAt uttama
vratoMko dhAraNa karanevAlI ho gayI thIM isalie ve munisuvrata nAmase
prasiddhiko prApta hue ||24|| jinakA mukha pUrNa candramAke samAna thA aise
suvratanAtha bhagavAn yadyapi 1. bhuvane ma.  /  2. sUryam  /

Page #496 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
446 In the Padma Purana, it is said that the great Indra, adorned with the
finest pleasures, had rejected the immense happiness of the Indra-world from
afar. ||26|| Ha-ha, hoo-hoo, the celestial musicians like Tumburu, Narada, and
Vishvavasu, along with the Kinnara women and many Apsaras, sang and danced with
their veenas, flutes, and other instruments. Many goddesses bathed him, applying
fragrant pastes and other beauty treatments. ||27-28|| The Lord, with his
beautiful body, enjoyed the company of women in their youth, adorned with
charming smiles, shyness, pride, jealousy, grace, and other captivating
qualities, as he desired. ||29|| Seeing the clouds of the autumn season
dissolving, he was awakened to the desire for liberation. At that time, the
celestial beings praised him. ||30|| He then relinquished all desires and gave
his kingdom, where all the vassals were submissive and lived happily, to his
son, Suvrata. ||31|| Then, he emerged from the lotus-garden, his body fragrant
with divine unguents, attracting a multitude of eager bees with its sweet scent.
The garden was filled with green gem-like leaves, white lotus petals like rows
of teeth, the sounds of birds singing and ornaments jingling, waves of water,
and swan-like breasts. He emerged from this garden of beautiful women like a
swan from a lotus pond. ||32-35|| Then, the Lord Munisuvratanatha, the jewel of
humanity, mounted the Aparajita palanquin, carried by gods and kings, and went
to the vast garden called Vipula. ||36|| After descending from the palanquin,
the Lord Munisuvratanatha, the ornament of the Hari-dynasty, took Jain
initiation along with thousands of kings. ||37|| When the Lord took initiation,
he observed a two-day fast. After the fast, in the city of Rajagriha,
Vrishabhadatt, with devotion, gave him food for the breaking of the fast. ||38||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 446 padmapurANe dadhatA paramaM tena mogamindreNa kalitam  /  ahamindrasukhaM
dUramadharIkRtamUrjitam  // 26 //  hAhAhUhUzrutI tasya tumburU nAradastathA  /
vizvAvasuzca gAyanti kinno'psaraso varAH  // 27 //  vINAveNvAdivAyena taskRtena
sucAruNA  /  snAnAdividhimApnoti devIjanitavartanam  // 28 //
smitalajitadambhAprasAdAdisuvibhramAH  /  yauvaneramayadrAmAH so'bhirAmo
yathepsitam  // 29 //  zaradambhodavilayaM sa dRSTvA pratibuddhavAn  /  stuto
laukAntikairdevaiH pravivrajiSayAnvitaH  // 30 //  dattvA suvratasaMjJAya rAjyaM
putrAya nispRhH| praNatAzeSasAmantamaNDalaM sukhapAlanam  // 31 //  nirgataH
sauramavyAptadazadikcakravAlataH  /  divyAnulepanodArasukAntamakarandataH  // 32
//  sauramAkRSTasaMbhrAntabhramarIpRthuvRndataH  /
harinmaNivimAcakrapAlAzacayasaMkulAt  // 33 //
dantapaGktisitacchAyAvisajAlasamAkulAt  /  nAnAvibhUSaNadhvAnavihagArAvapUritAt
// 34 //  valItaraGgasaMpRktAt stanacakrAhvazomitAt  /  rAjahaMsaH sitaH kIrtyA
divyastrIpanakhaNDataH  // 35 //  devamAnavarAjoDhAM zivikAmaparAjitAm  /
Aruhya vipulodyAnaM yayau cUDAmaNirnRNAm  // 36 //  avatIrya tato rAjJAM
sahasrarbahubhiH samam  /  dadhau jainezvarI dIkSA harivaMzavibhUSaNaH  // 37 //
SaSThopavAsayuktAya tasmai rAjagRhe dadau  /  bhaktyA vRSabhadattAkhyaH
paramAnnena pAraNam  // 30 //  aMjanAgirike samAna zyAmavarNa the tathApi
unhoMne apane tejase sUryako jIta liyA thA  // 25 //  indrake dvArA kalpita (
racita ) uttama bhogoMko dhAraNa karate hue unhoMne ahamindrakA bhArI sukha
dUrase hI tiraskRta kara diyA thA  // 26 //  hA-hA, hU-hU, tumburU, nArada aura
vizvAvasu Adi gandharvadeva sadA unake samIpa gAte rahate the tathA kinnara
deviyAM aura aneka apsarAe~ vINA, bAMsurI Adi bAjoMke sAtha nRtya karatI rahatI
thiiN| aneka deviyAM ubaTana Adi lagAkara unheM snAna karAtI thIM  // 27-28 /  /
sundara zarIrako dhAraNa karanevAle bhagavAnne yauvana avasthAmeM manda
musakAna, lajjA, dambha, IrSyA, prasAda Adi sundara vibhramoMse yukta striyoMko
icchAnusAra ramaNa karAyA thaa|||29|| athAnantara eka bAra zaradaRtuke meghako
vilIna hotA dekha ve pratibodhako prApta ho gaye jisase dIkSA lenekI icchA unake
manameM jAga utthii| usI samaya laukAntika devoMne Akara unakI stuti kI  // 30
//  tadanantara jisameM samasta sAmantoMke samUha namrIbhUta the tathA sukhase
jisakA pAlana hotA thA aisA rAjya unhoMne apane suvrata nAmaka putrake lie
dekara saba prakArakI icchA chor3a dI  // 31 //  tatpazcAt jisane apanI
sugandhise dazoM dizAoMko vyApta kara rakhA thA, jisameM zarIrapara lagA huA
divya vilepana hI sundara makaranda thA, jisane apanI sugandhise Atura
bhramariyoMke bhArI samUhako apanI ora khIMca rakhA thA, jo hare maNiyoMkI
kAntirUpI pattoMke samUhase vyApta thA, jo dAMtoMkI paMktikI sapheda kAntirUpI
mRNAlake samUhase yukta thA, jo nAnA prakArake AbhUSaNoMkI dhvanirUpI pakSiyoMkI
kalakUjanase paripUrNa thA, balirUpI taraMgoMse yukta thA aura jo stanarUpI
cakravAka pakSiyoMse suzobhita thA aisI uttama striyoMrUpI kamala-vanase ve
kIrtidhavala rAjahaMsa ( zreSTha rAjA bhagavAn munisuvratanAtha) isa prakAra
bAhara nikale jisa prakAra ki kisI kamala-vanase rAjahaMsa (haMsa vizeSa )
nikalatA hai  // 32-35 //  tadanantara manuSyoMke cUr3AmaNi bhagavAn
munisuvratanAtha, devoM tathA rAjAoMke dvArA uThAyI huI aparAjitA nAmakI
pAlakImeM savAra hokara vipula nAmaka udyAnameM gaye  // 36 //  tadanantara
pAlakIse utarakara harivaMzake AbhUSaNasvarUpa bhagavAn munisuvratanAthane kaI
hajAra rAjAoMke sAtha jainezvarI dIkSA dhAraNa kara lI  // 37 //  bhagavAnne
dIkSA lete samaya do dinakA upavAsa kiyA thaa| upavAsa samApta honepara rAjagRha
nagarameM 1. vAdena ma., j.| 2. nartanam ba. ja.  /  tarjanam kha., vartanaH ma.
/  3. svana ma.  /

Page #497 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The twenty-first chapter describes how the Lord, for the sake of the practice of
the teachings and the enjoyment of the world, took food. Vrishabhadutta attained
the fivefold worship. ||39||  Then, while the Lord was seated in white
meditation under the Champaca tree, the final karma of the killer was destroyed,
and he attained Kevala Jnana. ||40||  Then, the gods, along with Indra, came
together, praised him, bowed down, and listened to the excellent Dharma from the
Muni Suvrata Nath, who was adorned with the excellent Ganadharas. ||41||  The
Lord explained the Dharma in many ways, with and without the possession of a
house. Having heard this pure Dharma, they all went to their respective places
as appropriate. ||42||  The Muni Suvrata Nath, who was praised by the gods and
demons, also established the Dharma Tirtha, and, filled with joy, he wandered
the earth with the great souls, the protectors of the Gan, and other virtuous
ones. ||43-44||  Then, he ascended to the peak of Sammed Shikhar, destroyed the
four types of karma, and became the jewel of the world, that is, he attained
Siddhalaya. ||45||  Those who read or hear this great story of Muni Suvrata
Nath, their sins are destroyed. ||46||  They attain enlightenment, purify the
three jewels, and attain the supreme state from which there is no return. ||47||
Then, Suvrata, the son of Muni Suvrata Nath, ruled his kingdom for a long time,
and then, after handing over the kingdom to his son Daksha, he renounced the
world and attained liberation. ||48||  Daksha had a son named Ilavardhana,
Ilavardhana had a son named Srivardhana, Srivardhana had a son named Srivrksha,
Srivrksha had a son named Sanjayanta, Sanjayanta had a son named Kunima, Kunima
had a son named Maharatha, and Maharatha had a son named Pulama. Thus, thousands
of kings were born in the Hari dynasty. Some of them attained liberation, and
some went to heaven. ||49-51||  In this way, after many kings had passed, a king
named Vasavaketu was born in this dynasty in Mithila. ||52||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekaviMzatitamaM parva zAsanAcAravRttyartha bhuktizca vibhunA kRtA  /  prApto
vRSamadattazca paJcAtizayapUjanam  // 39 //  adhazcampakavRkSasya
zukladhyAnamupeyuSaH  /  utpannaM ghAtikarmAnte kevalaM parameSThinaH  // 40 //
tato devAH samAgatya sendrAH stusvA praNamya ca  /
saMjAtagaNinastasmAcchuzruvurdharmamuttamam  // 41 //  sAgAraM ca nirAgAraM
bahubhedaM yathAvidhi  /  zrutvA te vimalaM dharma natvA jagmuryathAyatham  //
42 //  munisuvratanAtho'pi dharmatIrthapravartanam  /  kRtvA surAsurairnamraH
stUyamAnaH pramodimiH  // 43 //  gaNanAthairmahAsatvairgaNapAlanakAribhiH  /
anyaizca sAdhumiyukto vihRtya vasudhAtalam  // 4 //  sammedagirimUrdhAnaM
samAruhya caturvidham  /  vidhUya karma saMprApa lokacUDAmaNisthitam  // 45 //
munisuvratamAhAtmyamidaM ye'dhIyate janAH  /  zRNvanti vA sumAgna teSAM nazyati
duSkRtiH  // 46 //  bhUyazca bodhimAgatya tataH kRtvA sunirmalam  /  gacchanti
paramaM sthAnaM yato nAgamanaM punaH  // 47 //  athAsau suvrataH kRtvA ciraM
rAjyaM sunizcalam  /  dakSaM tatra vinikSipya pravrajyAvApa nivRtim  // 48 //
dakSAt samamavat sUnurilAvarddhanasaMjJitaH  /  tataH zrIvarddhano jajJe
zrIvRkSAkhyastato'bhavat  // 49 //  saJjayanto babhUvAsmAdudabhUtkuNimastataH  /
mahArathaH pulomA cetyevamAdyA narezvarAH  // 50 //  sahasrazaH samutpannA
harINAmanvaye zubhe  /  saMprApurnivRti kecit kecinnAkanivAsitAm  // 51 //  evaM
kramAt prayAteSu pArthiveSu ca bhUriSu  /  nRpo vAsavaketvAkhyaH
kule'sminmaithilo 'bhavat  // 52 //  vRSabhadattane unheM paramAnna arthAt
khIrase bhaktipUrvaka pAraNA karAyI  // 38 //  jinazAsanameM AcArako vRtti kisa
taraha hai yaha batalAneke lie hI bhagavAnne AhAra grahaNa kiyA thaa|
AhAradAnake prabhAvase vRSabhadatta paMcAtizayako prApta huA  // 39 //
tadanantara campaka vRkSake nIce zukla-dhyAnase virAjamAna bhagavAnko ghAtiyA
kokA kSaya honeke uparAnta kevalajJAna utpanna haA  // 40 //  tadanantara indroM
sahita devoMne Akara stati kI. praNAma kiyA tathA uttama gaNadharoMse yukta una
munisuvratanAtha bhagavAnase uttama dharmakA upadeza sunA  // 41 /  /
bhagavAnne sAgAra aura anagArake bhedase aneka prakArake dharmakA nirUpaNa kiyA
so usa nirmala dharmako vidhipUrvaka sunakara ve saba yathAyogya apane-apane
sthAnapara gaye  // 42 //  harSase bhare namrIbhUta surAsura jinakI stuti karate
the aise bhagavAn munisuvratanAthane bhI dharmatIrthako pravRtti kara
mahAdhairyake dhAraka tathA gaNakI rakSA karanevAle gaNadharoM evaM anyAnya
sAdhuoMke sAtha pRthivItalapara vihAra kiyA  /  / 43-44 //  tadanantara
sammedAcalake zikharapara ArUr3ha hokara tathA cAra adhAtiyA karmoMkA kSaya kara
ve lokake cUr3AmaNi ho gaye arthAt siddhAlayameM jAkara virAjamAna ho gaye  //
45 //  jo manuSya uttama bhAvase munisuvrata bhagavAnke isa mAhAtmyako par3hate
athavA sunate haiM unake samasta pApa naSTa ho jAte haiM  // 46 /  /  ve punaH
Akara ratnatrayako nirmala kara usa parama sthAnako prApta hote haiM jahA~se ki
phira AnA nahIM hotA  // 47 //  tadanantara munisuvratanAthake putra suvratane
bhI cirakAla taka nizcala rAjya kara antameM apane putra dakSake lie rAjya
sauMpa diyA aura svayaM dIkSA lekara nirvANa prApta kiyA  /  / 48|| rAjA dakSake
ilAvardhana, ilAvadhanake zrIvardhana, zrIvardhanake zrIvRkSa, zrIvRkSake
saMjayanta, saMjayantake kuNima, kuNimake mahAratha aura mahArathake pulomA
ityAdi hajAroM rAjA harivaMzameM utpanna hue| inameMse kitane hI rAjA nirvANako
prApta hue aura kitane hI svarga gaye  // 49-51 /  /  isa prakAra kramase aneka
rAjAoMke ho cukanepara isI vaMzameM mithilAkA rAjA vAsavaketu huA  // 52 // . 2.
-rAdhyaM m.| 3. etannAmAnaM putrama  /  4. pravrajya prApa m.| 5. mithilAyA 1.
asamAcAra- ma., b.| adhipo maithilH|

Page #498 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The queen was named Vipula, meaning "abundant." She had large eyes and was a
possessor of great fortune, yet she was also afflicted with poverty in the
middle, meaning her waist was very thin.  ||53||  Their son was named Janaka,
meaning "father," and he was skilled in politics. Like a true father, he always
worked for the welfare of his people. ||54||  O King Shrenika, I have thus
described the birth of King Janaka to you. Now listen to the story of King
Dasharatha, who belonged to the Yadu dynasty. ||55||  In the glorious lineage of
the Ikshvaku, after the great Lord Rishabhadeva attained nirvana, and after the
emperors Bharat, Arka-kirti, and Soma, the ornament of the dynasty, had passed
away, countless years later, many kings arose in that lineage. Some of them
attained nirvana after performing extremely difficult austerities, some went to
heaven and indulged in pleasures, and some, lacking in merit, became dry,
meaning they went to hell and other lower realms, where they wept and suffered
the consequences of their actions. ||56-58||  O Shrenika, in this world,
afflictions and joys are like a wheel, constantly turning. Sometimes afflictions
become like festivals, and sometimes festivals become like afflictions.
Sometimes, in this being, the defects of Maya, etc., gradually increase. ||59||
Sometimes these beings die and suffer, and sometimes they die in childhood due
to the depletion of their pre-ordained lifespan or some other reason. ||60||
Sometimes these beings take on various forms, sometimes they remain as they are,
sometimes they kill each other, sometimes they grieve, sometimes they cry,
sometimes they eat, sometimes they cause harm, sometimes they argue, sometimes
they go, sometimes they walk, sometimes they become powerful, meaning they
become masters, sometimes they carry burdens, sometimes they sing, sometimes
they worship, sometimes they eat, sometimes they become poor, sometimes they
speak. ||61-62||  Sometimes they win, sometimes they give, sometimes they
release, sometimes they rule, sometimes they adorn themselves with many
luxuries, sometimes they are content, sometimes they rule, sometimes they desire
peace, meaning forgiveness, sometimes they destroy peace. ||63||  Sometimes they
are ashamed, sometimes they behave in a vile manner, sometimes they torment
others, sometimes they are distressed, sometimes they are deceitful, sometimes
they beg, sometimes they run forward, sometimes...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 448 papurANe vipuleti mahAdevI tasyAsIt vipulekSaNA  /  paramazrIrapi prAptA yA
madhyena daridratAm  // 53 //  tasya janakanAmAbhUttanayo nayakovidaH  /  hitaM
yaH satataM cakre prajAnAM janako yathA  // 54 //  evaM janakasaMbhatiH kathitA
te narAdhipa  /  zRNu saMprati yadavaMze nRpo dazaratho'bhavat  // 55 //
ikSvAkUNAM kule ramye nivRte nAmije jine  /  bharate bhAskare some vyatIte
vaMzabhUSaNe  // 56 //  saMkhyAtItena kAlena kule tatra narAdhipAH  /
atikrAmanti kurvantastapaH paramaduzvaram  // 57 //  krIDanti bhoganirmagnAH
zuSyantyakRtapuNyakAH  /  labhante karmaNaH svasya vipAkamazradhAriNaH  // 58 //
cakravatparivartante vyasanAni mahotsavaiH  /  zanairmAyAdayo doSAH prayAnti
parivarddhanam  // 59 //  klizyante dravyanirmuktA mriyante bAlatAsu ca  /
pUrvopAttAyuSi kSINe hetunA copasaMhRte  // 6 //  nAnA bhavanti tiSThanti
nighnate zocayanti ca  /  rudantyadanti bAdhante vivadanti paThanti ca  // 61 //
dhyAyanti yAnti valAnti prabhavanti vahanti ca  /  gAyantyupAsate'inanti
daridrati nadanti ca  // 12 //  jayanti rAnti muJcanti rAjante vilasanti ca  /
tuSyanti zAsati zAnti spRhayanti haranti ca  // 3 //  pante drAnti sajjanti
dUyante kUTayanti ca  /  mArgayante'bhidhAvante kuhayante sRjanti ca  // 6 //
usakI vipulA nAmakI paTTarAnI thii| vaha vipulA, vipula arthAt dIrgha netroMko
dhAraNa karanevAlI thI aura utkRSTa lakSmIkI dhAraka hokara bhI madhyabhAgase
daridratAko prApta thI arthAt usakI kamara atyanta kRza thI  // 53 //  una
donoMke nItinipuNa janaka nAmakA putra huaa| vaha janaka, janaka arthAt pitAke
samAna hI nirantara prajAkA hita karatA thA  // 54|| gautamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase
kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! isa taraha maiMne tere lie rAjA janakakI utpatti khii|
aba jisa vaMzameM rAjA dazaratha hue usakA kathana karatA hU~ so suna  // 55 //
athAnantara ikSvAkuoMke ramaNIya kulameM jaba bhagavAn RSabhadeva nirvANako
prApta ho gaye aura unake bAda cakravartI bharata, arkakIrti tathA vaMzake
alaMkArabhUta soma Adi rAjA vyatIta ho cuke taba asaMkhyAta kAlake bhItara usa
vaMzameM aneka rAjA hue| unameM kitane hI rAjA atyanta kaThina tapazcaraNa kara
nirvANako prApta hue, kitane hI svargameM jAkara bhogoMmeM nimagna ho krIr3A
karane lage, aura kitane hI puNyakA saMcaya nahIM karanese zuSka ho gaye arthAt
narakAdi gatiyoMmeM jAkara rote hue apane karmoMkA phala bhogane lage  // 56-58
//  he zreNika ! isa saMsArameM jo vyasanakaSTa haiM ve cakrakI nAIM badalate
rahate haiM arthAt kabhI vyasana mahotsavarUpa ho jAte haiM aura kabhI mahotsava
vyasanarUpa ho jAte haiM, kabhI isa jIvameM dhIre-dhIre mAyA Adi doSa vRddhiko
prApta ho jAte haiM  // 52 //  kabhI ye jIva nidhana hokara kleza uThAte haiM
aura kabhI pUrvabaddha Ayuke kSINa ho jAne athavA kisI kAraNavaza kama ho jAnese
bAlya avasthAmeM hI mara jAte haiM  // 60 //  kabhI ye jIva nAnA rUpatAko
dhAraNa karate haiM, kabhI jyoM-ke-tyoM sthira raha jAte haiM, kabhI eka
dUsareko mArate haiM, kabhI zoka karate haiM, kabhI rote haiM, kabhI khAte haiM,
kabhI bAdhA pahuMcAte haiM, kabhI vivAda karate haiM, kabhI gamana karate haiM,
kabhI calate haiM, kabhI prabhAvazIla hote haiM, arthAt svAmI banate haiM, kabhI
bhAra Dhote haiM, kabhI gAte haiM, kabhI upAsanA karate haiM, kabhI bhojana
karate haiM, kabhI daridratAko prApta karate haiM, kabhI zabda karate haiM  //
61-62 /  /  kabhI jItate haiM, kabhI dete haiM, kabhI kucha chor3ate haiM, kabhI
virAjamAna hote haiM, kabhI aneka vilAsa dhAraNa karate haiM, kabhI santoSa
dhAraNa karate haiM, kabhI zAsana karate haiM, kabhI zAnti arthAt kSamAkI
abhilASA karate haiM, kabhI zAntikA haraNa karate haiM  // 3 //  kabhI lajjita
hote haiM, kabhI kutsita cAla calate haiM, kabhI kisIko satAte haiM, kabhI
santapta hote haiM, kabhI kapaTa dhAraNa karate haiM, kabhI yAcanA karate haiM,
kabhI sammukha daur3ate haiM, kabhI 1. panti kh.|

Page #499 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Twenty-First Chapter  442. They play, they go, they give, they discipline,
they dwell. They shine, they measure, they grieve, they prosper, they deviate.
65. They are pleased, they worship, they deceive, they console, they understand.
They are infatuated, they protect, they dance, they love, they are humble. 66.
They inspire, they gather grain, they plow, they cook, they bow. They play, they
shine, they listen, they perform oblations, they walk, they wake. 67. They
sleep, they fear, they act, they destroy, they break, they hurt, they complete,
they bathe, they bind, they stop, they shout. 68. They sleep, they wander, they
decay, they drink, they create, they choose, they rub, they spread, they please.
69. They contemplate, they abhor, they desire, they swim, they treat, they
approve, they stop, they swallow. 70. O King! Thus, many humans in the Ikshvaku
dynasty were engrossed in a web of actions and were engaged in auspicious and
inauspicious deeds. 71. In this way, time, known as Avasarpini, which is like a
moving picture depicting the various actions of all humans, gradually comes to
an end. 72. After that, in the interval of the present Tirthankara, where the
arrival of the gods continues, there was a great king named Vijay in the vast
city of Ayodhya. He had conquered all his enemies. He was endowed with the
brilliance of the sun and was skilled in the welfare of his subjects. 73-74. His
queen was Hemchula, a woman of great brilliance, and she gave birth to a son
named Surendramanyu, who was endowed with great virtues. 75. Surendramanyu had a
wife named Kirtisama, and they had two sons who were as radiant as the moon and
the sun. Both sons were adorned with virtues. 1. Shidanti M. 2. Bhanti M. 3.
Stutiantyarchanti M. 4. Rudanti cha M. 5. Siviyantyavanti M. 6. Shatai: M. 7.
Shaurya -kh.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekaviMzatitamaM parva 442 krIDanti syanti yacchanti zIlayanti vasanti ca  /
lucyanti mAnti sIdanti Rdhyanti vicalanti ca  //  'tuSyantyarcanti vaJcanti
sAntvayanti vidanti ca  /  muhyantyarvanti nRtyanti snihyanti vinayanti c||66||
nudantyucchanti karSanti bhRjanti vinamanti ca  /  dIvyanti dAnti zRNvanti
juhRtyaGganti jAgrati  // 67 /  /  svapanti bibhyatIGganti zyanti dyanti tudanti
ca  /  prAnti sunvanti sinvanti rundhanti viruvanti ca  /  68 /  sIvyantyaTanti
jIryanti pibanti racayanti ca  /  vRNate parimRdunanti vistRNanti pRNanti ca  //
69 //  mImAMsante jugupsante kAmayante taranti ca  /  cikitsyantyanumanyante
vArayanti gRNanti ca  // 7 //  evamAdikriyAjAlasaMtatavyAptamAnasAH  /
zubhAzubhasamAsaktA vyatikrAmanti mAnavAH  // 71 /  /  iti
citrapaTAkAraceSTitAkhilamAnave  /  kAle'vasarpiNInAmni prayAti vilayaM zanaiH
// 72 //  jAte viMzatisaMkhyAne vartamAnajinAntare  /  devAgamanasaMyukte
vinItAyAmarau puri  // 73 //  vijayo nAma rAjendro vijitAkhilazAtravaH  /
sauryapratApasaMyuktaH prajApAlanapaNDitaH  // 74 /  /  saMbhUto hemalinyAM
mahAdevyAM sutejasi  /  surendramanyunAmAbhUtsUnustasya mahAguNaH  // 75 //
tasya kIrtisamAkhyAyAM jAyAyAM tanayadvayam  /  candrasUryasamacchAyaM tAtaM
guNasamarcitam  // 76 //  mAyAcAra dikhAte haiM, kabhI kisIke dravyAdikA haraNa
karate haiM  // 64 //  kabhI krIr3A karate haiM, kabhI kisI vastuko naSTa karate
haiM, kabhI kisIko kucha dete haiM, kabhI kahIM vAsa karate haiM, kabhI kisIko
loMcate haiM, kabhI kisIko nApate haiM, kabhI duHkhI hote haiM, kabhI krodha
karate haiM, kabhI vicalita hote haiM,  // 65 //  kabhI santuSTa hote haiM,
kabhI kisIkI pUjA karate haiM, kabhI kisIko chalate haiM, kabhI kisIko sAntvanA
dete haiM, kabhI kucha samajhate haiM, kabhI mohita hote haiM, kabhI rakSA
karate haiM, kabhI nRtya karate haiM, kabhI sneha karate haiM, kabhI vinaya
karate haiM,  // 66 //  kabhI kisIko preraNA dete haiM, kabhI dAne-dAne bInakara
peTa bharate haiM, kabhI kheta jotate haiM, kabhI bhAr3a dUMjate haiM, kabhI
namaskAra karate haiM, kabhI krIr3A karate haiM, kabhI lunate haiM, kabhI sunate
haiM, kabhI homa karate haiM, kabhI calate haiM, kabhI jAgate haiM  // 67 //
kabhI sote haiM, kabhI Darate haiM, kabhI nAnA ceSTA karate haiM, kabhI naSTa
karate haiM, kabhI kisIko khaNDita karate haiM, kabhI kisIko pIr3A pahuMcAte
haiM, kabhI pUrNa karate haiM, kabhI snAna karate haiM, kabhI bAMdhate haiM,
kabhI rokate haiM, kabhI cillAte haiM,  // 68|| kabhI sote haiM, kabhI ghUmate
haiM, kabhI jINaM hote haiM, kabhI pIte haiM, kabhI racate haiM, kabhI varaNa
karate haiM, kabhI masalate haiM, kabhI phailAte haiM, kabhI tapaMNa karate haiM
// 69|| kabhI mImAMsA karate haiM, kabhI ghRNA karate haiM, kabhI icchA karate
haiM, kabhI tarate haiM, kabhI cikitsA karate haiM, kabhI anumodanA karate haiM,
kabhI rokate haiM aura kabhI nigalate haiM  /  / 70 //  he rAjan ! ityAdi
kriyAoMke jAlase jinake mana vyApta ho rahe the tathA zubha-azubha kAryoMmeM
lIna the aise aneka mAnava usa ikSvAkuvaMzameM kramase hue the  /  / 71 /  /
isa prakAra jisameM samasta mAnavoMkI ceSTAe~ citrapaTake samAna nAnA prakArakI
haiM aisA yaha avasarpiNI nAmakA kAla dhIre-dhIre samApta hotA gayA  // 72 //
athAnantara jisameM devoMkA Agamana jArI rahatA thA aise bosaveM vartamAna
tIrthakarakA antarAla zurU honepara ayodhyAnAmaka vizAla nagarImeM vijaya nAmakA
bar3A rAjA huaa| usane samasta zatruoMko jIta liyA thaa| vaha sUryake samAna
pratApase saMyukta thA tathA prajAkA pAlana karanemeM nipuNa thA  /  / 73-74 /
/  usakI hemacUlA nAmakI mahAtejasvinI paTTarAnI thI so usake surendramanya
nAmakA mahAguNavAn putra utpanna huA  // 75 //  surendramanyukI kIrtisamA strI
huI so usake candramA aura sUryake samAna kAntiko dhAraNa karanevAle do putra
hue| ye donoM hI putra guNoMse suzobhita 1. zIDanti m.| 2. bhAnti m.| 3.
stutyantyarcanti m.| 4. rudanti ca m.| 5. sIvyantyavanti ma  /  6. zataiH m.| 7.
zaurya -kha.  /

Page #500 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
450 In the Padma Purana, the elder son was Vajraà¤¬à¤¾à¤¹à¥ and the younger son was
Purandar. Both of them bore meaningful names and enjoyed happiness in the world.
||77|| In those days, the king named Ibhavahana ruled in the beautiful city of
Hastinapur. His wife's name was Chudamani. They had a very beautiful daughter
named Manodaya. She was obtained by the most praiseworthy Vajraà¤¬à¤¾à¤¹à¥ Kumar among
men. ||78-79|| Once, the daughter's brother, Udayasundar, went to Vajraà¤¬à¤¾à¤¹à¥'s
house to take the girl. Vajraà¤¬à¤¾à¤¹à¥, adorned with a beautiful white umbrella, was
also eager to go with him. ||80|| That girl was famous throughout the earth for
her beauty. Vajraà¤¬à¤¾à¤¹à¥, holding her in his mind, set out for his father-in-law's
city with great pomp. ||81|| Then, while walking, his gaze fell upon the
beautiful mountain named Vasant, which was filled with spring flowers. ||82|| As
he approached the mountain, he was filled with joy at the sight of its supreme
beauty. ||83|| The fragrant wind, mixed with flower dust, embraced him, as if a
friend long lost had embraced him. ||84|| The mountain, with its treetops
swaying in the wind, seemed to be cheering for Vajraà¤¬à¤¾à¤¹à¥ with the sound of the
male cuckoos. ||85|| The sound of the intoxicated, melodious, bee-like buzzing,
like the sound of a veena, captivated his ears and mind. ||86|| 'This is a mango
tree, this is a kener, this is a lodhra with flowers, this is a priyal, and this
is a palash, shining like a burning fire.' Thus, his steady gaze, moving in
sequence, fell upon the sage, whose human form was doubtful due to the distance.
||87-88|| Vajraà¤¬à¤¾à¤¹à¥ was perplexed about the sage, who was sitting in a state of
kayothsarga, wondering if he was a stump, a sage, or a mountain peak. ||89||
Then, when he reached the very nearby path, he was certain that he was a great
yogi-sage. ||90|| That sage was situated on a rough terrain of high and low
rocks. His face, touched by the rays of the sun, was pale and his lotus-like
face was drooping. ||91||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 450 padmapurANe vajrabAhustayorAdyo dvitIyazca puraMdaraH  /
anvarthanAmayuktau tau remAte bhuvane sukham  // 77 //  ibhavAhananAmAsIttasmin
kAle narAdhipaH  /  ramye nAgapure tasya nAmnA cUDAmaNiH priyA  // 78 //
tayorduhitaraM cAvI khyAtAM nAmnA manodayAm  /  vajrabAhukumAro'sau lebhe
ilAdhyatamo nRNAm  // 79 //  'tAM kanyAM sodaro netumAgAdudayasundaraH  /
sAdhaM tenocchitaH zrImatsitAtapanivAraNaH  // 40 //  kanyAM tAM rUpataH khyAtAM
sakale vasudhAtale  /  mAnasena vahan bhatyA pratasthe zvAzuraM puram  // 41 //
athAsya vrajato dRSTirvasantakusumAkule  /  girau vasantasaMjJA nipapAta
manohare  // 82 //  yathA yathA samIpatvaM yasya yAti girersau| tathA tathA
parAM lakSmI pazyan harSamupAgamat  // 83 //  puSpadhUlIvimizreNa vAyunA sa
sugandhinA  /  samAliGgayanta mitreNa saMprAptena cirAdiva  // 84 //
paMskokilakalAlApairjayazabdamivAkarot  /  vAtakampitavRkSAgro
vajrabAhordharAdhara  // 85 //  vINAjhaGkAraramyANAM bhRGgANAM madazAlinAm  /
nAdena zravaNau tasya mAnasena samaM hRtau  // 86 //  cUto'yaM karNikAro'yaM
lodhro'yaM kusumAnvitaH  /  priyAlo'yaM palAzo'yaM jvalatpAvakabhAsuraH  // 87
//  vajantIti krameNAsya dRSTinizcalapakSmikA  /  saMdigdhamAnuSAkAre papAta
munipuGgave  // 48 //  sthANuH syAcchramaNo'yaM nu zailakUTamidaM bhavet  /  iti
rAjJo vitarko'bhUt kAyotsargasthite munau  // 89 //  'nedIyAnsaM tato mArga
prayAtasyAsya nizcayaH  /  udapAdi mahAyogidehavindanatasparaH  // 10 //
uccAvacazilAjAlaviSame'vasthitaM sthiram  /
divAkarakarAzliSTAmlAnavaktrasaroruham  // 11 //  the| unameM se bar3e putrakA
nAma vajrabAhu aura choTe putrakA nAma purandara thaa| donoM hI sArthaka nAmako
dhAraNa karanevAle the aura saMsArameM sukhase krIr3A karate the||76-77|| usI
samaya atyanta manohara hastinApura nagarameM ibhavAhana nAmakA rAjA rahatA
thaa| usakI strIkA nAma cUr3AmaNi thaa| una donoMke manodayA nAmakI atyanta
sundarI putrI thI so use manuSyoMmeM atyanta prazaMsanIya vajrabAhu kumArane
prApta kiyA ||78-79 /  /  kadAcit kanyAkA bhAI udayasundara usa kanyAko leneke
lie vajrabAhuke ghara gayA so jisapara atyanta suzobhita safeda chatra laga rahA
thA aisA vajrabAhu svayaM bhI usake sAtha calane ke lie udyata huA  // 80 //
vaha kanyA apane saundaryase samasta pRthvImeM prasiddha thI, use manameM
dhAraNa karatA huA vajrabAhu bar3e vaibhavake sAtha zvasurake nagarakI ora calA
// 8 //  athAnantara calate-calate usako dRSTi vasanta Rtuke phUloMse vyApta
vasanta nAmaka manohara parvatapara par3I  // 82 //  vaha jaise-jaise usa
parvatake samIpa AtA jAtA vaise-vaise hI usakI parama zobhAko dekhatA huA
harSako prApta ho rahA thA  /  / 83 /  /  phUloMkI dhUlise milI sugandhita vAya
usakA AliMgana kara rahI thI so aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno cirakAlake bAda
prApta huA mitra hI AliMgana kara rahA ho  /  / 84 //  jahAM vRkSoMke agrabhAga
vAyuse kampita ho rahe the aisA vaha parvata puMskokilAoMke zabdoMke bahAne mAno
vajrabAhukA jaya-jayakAra hI kara rahA thA  // 85 /  /  vINAkI jhaMkArake samAna
manohara madazAlI bhramaroMke zabdase usake zravaNa tathA mana sAtha-hI-sAtha
hare gaye  /  / 86 //  'yaha Ama hai, yaha kanera hai, yaha phUloMse sahita
lodhra hai, yaha priyAla hai aura yaha jalatI huI agnike samAna suzobhita palAza
hai' isa prakAra kramase calatI huI usakI nizcala dRSTi dUrIke kAraNa jisameM
manuSyake AkArakA saMzaya ho rahA thA aise munirAjapara par3I  // 87-88 /  /
kAyotsargase sthita munirAjake viSayameM vajrabAhuko vitarka utpanna huA ki kyA
yaha ThUTha hai ? yA sAdhu haiM, athavA parvatakA zikhara hai ?  // 89||
tadanantara jaba atyanta samIpavartI mArgameM pahuMcA taba use nizcaya huA ki ye
mahAyogI-munirAja haiM  // 90 //  ve munirAja UMcI-nIcI 1. taM kanyA kha., ba.
/  tatkanyA- m.| 2. zrImAn sitAtapanivAraNaH m.| 3. saMjJAke m.| 4. parvataH  /
5. mandazAlinAma m.| 6. tato nedIyasaM mAgaM ma., ba., ka., kha., j.|

Page #501 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twenty-First Chapter  Standing firm on the uneven ground, his face pale
from the sun's rays, his two excellent arms hanging down like a large serpent,
his chest broad and wide like the shore of Mount Meru, his two shining thighs
steady like the pillars that bind the elephants, though thin from austerity, he
appeared very stout due to his radiance. He had fixed his extremely gentle and
unwavering eyes on the tip of his nose. Seeing the Muni meditating with such
single-pointed focus, King Vajraà¤¬à¤¾à¤¹à¥ began to think:  "Oh, how blessed is this
extremely peaceful, excellent human being who, renouncing all attachments, is
performing austerities with the desire for liberation! He is graced by
liberation, his mind is absorbed in his own welfare, his soul is free from
harming others, he is adorned by the divine Lakshmi. He is equal in his attitude
towards friend and foe, a heap of jewels and a blade of grass. He is free from
pride and envy, his desire for the embrace of the divine consort Siddhi is
growing. He has subdued his senses and mind, he is steady like Mount Meru, he is
free from attachment, and his mind is fixed on virtuous actions."  "He has
received the full fruit of his human birth. He has not been cheated by the
cruel, malicious thieves of the senses."  "And me? I am constantly bound by the
chains of karma, just as the sandalwood tree is bound by the great serpents of
the Ashivisha clan. Shame on me, this inert, sinful being whose mind is filled
with delusion. I am sleeping on the top of the great, round rock of the mountain
of enjoyment."  "If I could only attain the state of this yogi, then I would
have achieved the fruit of my human birth."  Thinking thus, the eyes of King
Vajraà¤¬à¤¾à¤¹à¥, the master of the unfettered, became as steady as if fixed on a
pillar.  Seeing him with such unwavering gaze, Udayasundara, with a pleasant
smile, said jokingly:  "You have been observing this Muni for a long time, so
are you taking this initiation? You seem to be attached to it."  Then,
concealing his feelings, Vajraà¤¬à¤¾à¤¹à¥ said:  "What is your opinion, Uday? Tell me."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekaviMzatitamaM parva pralambitamahAbhogibhogamAsurasadbhujam  /
zailendrataTasaMkAza pIvarodAravakSasam  //  92  //  dignAgabandhanastambha
sthirabhAsvadvarorukam  /  tapasApi kRzaM kAntyA dRzyamAnaM supIvaram  // 93 //
nAsikAgraniviSTAtisaumyanizcalacakSuSam  /  muniM dhyAyantamaikAgrayaM dRSTvA
'rAjetyacintayat  //  94 //  aho dhanyo'yamatyantaM prazAnto mAnavottamaH  /
yadvihAyAkhilaM saMgaM tapasyati mumukSayA  //  95 //  vimuktyAnugRhIto'yaM
kalyANAbhiniviSTadhIH  /  parapIDAnivRttAtmA munirlakSmIpariSkRtaH  // 96 //
samaH suhRdi zatrau ca ratnarAzau tRNe tathA  /  mAnamatsaranirmuktaH
siddhyAliGganalAlasaH  // 97 //  vazIkRtahRSIkAmA niSprakampo girIndravat  /
zreyo dhyAyati nIrAgaH kuzalasthitamAnasaH  // 98 //  phalaM puSkalametena
labdhaM mAnuSajanmanaH  /  ayaM na vaJcitaH krUraiH kaSAyAkhyairmalimlucaiH  //
99 //  ahaM nu veSTitaH pApaH karmapAzairanantaram  /  AzIviSairmahAnAgairyathA
candanapAdapaH  //  100  //  pramattacetasaM pApaM dhigmAM nizcetanopamam  /
yo'haM nidrAmimogAdvimahAbhRguzirasthitaH  //  101  //  yadi nAma
majeyemAmavasthAmasya yoginaH  /  bhaveyaM labdhalabdhavyastato mAnuSajanmani
//  102 //  iti cintayatastastra rAjJo nirgranthapuGgave  /  dRSTiH
stambhanibaddheva babhUvAtyantanizcalA  // 103 //  evaM nizcalapakSmANaM
nirIkSyodaya sundaraH  /  kurvannarma jagAdevaM vajrabAhuM kRtasmitaH  //  104
//  ciraM nirIkSito devastvayaiSa munipuGgavaH  /  vRNISe kimimAM dIkSAM
rAgavAnatra dRzyase  //  105  //  vajrabAhurathovocat kRtabhAvanigUhanaH  /
vartate kaH punarbhAvastavodaya nivedaya  //  106  //  zilAoMse viSama
dharAtalameM sthira virAjamAna the, sUryakI kiraNoMse AliMgita hone ke kAraNa
unakA mukhakamala mlAna ho rahA thA, kisI bar3e sarpake samAna suzobhita unakI
donoM uttama bhujAeM nocekI ora laTaka rahI thIM, unakA vakSaHsthala sumeruke
taTake samAna sthUla tathA caur3A thA, unakI dedIpyamAna donoM utkRSTa jA~gheM
diggajoMke bA~dhaneke khambhoMke samAna sthira thIM, yadyapi ve tapake kAraNa
kRza the tathApi kAntise atyanta sthUla jAna par3ate the, unhoMne apane atyanta
saumya nizcala netra nAsikAke agrabhAga para sthApita kara rakhe the, isa
prakAra ekAgra rUpase dhyAna karate hue munirAjako dekhakara rAjA vajrabAhu isa
prakAra vicAra karane lagA ki  /  / 91 - 94  //  aho ! ina atyanta prazAnta
uttama mAnavako dhanya hai jo samasta parigrahakA tyAga kara mokSakI icchAse
tapasyA kara rahe haiM ||15|| ina munirAjapara mukti-lakSmIne anugraha kiyA hai,
inakI buddhi AtmakalyANameM lIna hai, inakI AtmA parapIr3Ase nivRtta ho cukI
hai, ye alaukika lakSmIse alaMkRta haiM, zatru aura mitra, tathA ratnoMkI rAzi
aura tRNameM samAna buddhi rakhate haiM, mAna evaM matsarase rahita haiM,
siddhirUpI vadhUkA AliMgana karane meM inakI lAlasA bar3ha rahI hai, inhoMne
indriyoM aura manako vazameM kara liyA hai, ye sumeruke samAna sthira haiM,
vItarAga haiM tathA kuzala kAryameM mana sthira kara dhyAna kara rahe haiM ||
96-98 || manuSya meM janmakA pUrNa phala inhoMne prApta kiyA hai, indriyarUpI
duSTa cora inheM nahIM Thaga sake haiM ||19|| aura maiM ? maiM to karmarUpI
pAzoMse usa taraha nirantara veSTita hU~ jisa taraha ki AzIviSa jAtike
bar3e-bar3e sarpoMse candanakA vRkSa veSTita hotA hai || 100|| jisakA citta
pramAdase bharA huA hai aise jar3atulya mujha pApIke lie dhikkAra hai  /  maiM
bhogarUpI parvatakI bar3I gola caTTAna ke agrabhAga para baiThakara so rahA hU~
//  101  //  | yadi maiM ina munirAjakI isa avasthAko dhAraNa kara sakU~ to
manuSya janmakA phala mujhe prApta ho jAve || 102 || isa prakAra vicAra karate
hue rAjA vajrabAhukI dRSTi una nirgrantha munirAjapara khambhe meM ba~dhI huIke
samAna atyanta nizcala ho gayI  //  103  //  isa taraha vajrabAhako nizcala
dRSTi dekha udayasundarane susakarAkara ha~sI karate hue kahA ki Apa ina
munirAjako bar3I derase dekha rahe haiM so kyA isa dIkSAko grahaNa kara rahe ho
? isameM Apa anurakta dikhAI par3ate haiM  // 104-105 //  tadanantara apane
bhAvako chipAkara vajrabAhune kahA ki he udaya ! tumhArA kyA 451

Page #502 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
452 Not knowing his inner detachment, Udayasundara, with a fondness for jest,
said, his lips adorned with the gleam of his teeth:  âIf you accept this
initiation, then I too will be your friend. Oh, Kumar! You will be adorned with
the glory of a Shraman.â  âSo be it,â said Vajrabahu, adorned with the ornaments
of marriage, and he descended from the elephant and ascended the mountain.  Then
the women, with their large eyes, wept loudly. Large drops of tears, like
strings of broken pearls, fell from their eyes.  With tears in his eyes,
Udayasundara said, âBe pleased, Deva! What are you doing? I was only jesting.â
Vajrabahu, soothing him with sweet words, said, âOh, one with a heart of good
intentions! I was falling into a well, and you saved me.  There is no other
friend like you in the three worlds. Oh, beautiful one! It is inevitable that
those who are born must die, and those who die must be reborn.  This machine of
birth and death, more fickle than lightning, waves, and the tongue of a venomous
serpent, keeps turning constantly.  Why donât you see the life of this world,
consumed by sorrow? Enjoyments are like dreams, life is like a bubble, affection
is like the glow of twilight, and youth is like a flower. Oh, Bhadra! Your jest
has become like nectar to me.  What is drunk in jest? Does it not cure disease?
Since you have turned me towards my welfare, you are my friend today.  I was
engrossed in the ways of the world, but today you have made me detached from it.
Now, I take initiation. Do as you please.â  Saying this, he went to the Muni
Raja named Gunasagara, and bowing at his feet, with folded hands, he said, âOh,
Master! My mind has been purified by your grace, so today I wish to leave this
terrible prison of the world.â  1. Yajnatvattamaho-m., j. - Manyatvatta-b. 2.
Kumarah m. 3. VaivÄha-m. 4. Pitam aushadham m. 5. Visham m. 6. Sa tvameá¹£odyame
bandhu -m. 7. CaranÄnÅ«ce m. 8. SamsarakarÄgá¹hÄt. BhavatÄrakÄt m.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 452 padmapurANe antarviraktamajJAtvA tamAhodayasundaraH  /  parihAsAnurAgeNa
dantAMzucchuritAdharaH  // 10 //  dIkSAmimAM vRNISe cettato'hamapi te sakhA  /
aho virAjase'tyartha kumAra zramaNazriyA  // 108 //  astvevamiti bhASitvA yukto
vIvAhabhUSaNaiH  /  avArohadasau nAgAdArohaddharaNIdharam  // 109 //  tato
varAGganAstAraM rurudururulocanAH  /
chinnamuktakalApAbhasthUlanetrAstravindavaH  // 110 //  vyajJApayat
savASpAkSastamathodayasundaraH  /  prasIda deva narmedaM kRtaM kimanutiSThasi
// 111 //  uvAca vajrabAhustaM madhuraM parisAntvayan  /  kalyANAzayakUpe'haM
patannuttAritastvayA  // 112 //  bhavatA sadRzaM mitraM nAsti me bhuvanatraye  /
jAtasya sundarAvazyaM mRtyuH pretasya saMbhavaH  // 113 //
mRtyujanmaghaTIyantrametadubhrAmyatyanAratam  /  vidyuttaraGga
duSTAhirasanebhyo'picaJcalam  // 114 //  jagato daHkhamagnasya kiM na pazyasi
jIvitam  /  svapnabhogopamA mogA jIvitaM budabudopamam  // 115 //
sandhyArAgopamaH snehastAruNyaM kusumopamam  /  parihAso'pi te bhadra mama
jAto'mRtopamaH  /  / 116 //  parihAsena kiM pItaM nauSadhaM harate rujam  /  sa
tvameko'dya me bandhuryaH suzreyaHpravRttaye  // 11 //  saMsArAcArasaktasya
pratipanno'si hetutAm  /  eSo'haM pravrajAmyadya kuru tvaM svamanISitam  // 118
//  guNasAgaranAmAnaM tamupetya tapodhanam  /  praNamya caraNAvUce vinIto
racitAJjaliH  // 519 /  /  svAmin bhavatprasAdena pvitriikRtmaansH| adya
niSkramitaM bhImAdicchAmi bhavacArakAt  /  / 120 //  bhAva hai so to kaho  //
106 /  /  use antarase virakta na jAnakara udayasundarane parihAsake anurAgavaza
dA~toMkI kiraNoMse oThoMko vyApta karate hue kahA ki  // 107|| yadi Apa isa
dIkSAko svIkRta karate haiM to maiM bhI ApakA sakhA arthAt sAthI houuNgaa| aho
kumAra! Apa isa muni da dIkSAse atyadhika suzobhita hooge  // 108 /  /  'aisA
ho' isa prakAra kahakara vivAhaka AbhUSaNoMse yukta vajrabAhu hAthIse utarA aura
parvatapara car3ha gayA  // 109 //  taba vizAla netroMko dhAraNa karanevAlI
striyAM jora-jorase rone lgiiN| unake netroMse TUTe hue motiyoMke hArake samAna
A~suoMkI bar3I-bar3I ba~deM girane lagIM  // 110 //  udayasundarane bhI
A~khoMmeM A~sU bharakara kahA ki he deva ! prasanna hoo, yaha kyA kara rahe ho ?
maiMne to ha~sI kI thI  /  / 111 //  tadanantara madhura zabdoMmeM sAntvanA dete
hue vajrabAhane udayasundarase kahA ki he uttama abhiprAyake dhAraka ! maiM kue~
meM gira rahA thA so tumane nikAlA hai  // 112 /  /  tInoM lokoMmeM tumhAre
samAna merA dUsarA mitra nahIM hai| he sundara ! saMsArameM jo utpanna hotA hai
usakA maraNa avazya hotA hai aura jo maratA hai usakA janma avazyaMbhAvI hai  //
113 /  /  yaha janma-maraNarUpI ghaTIyantra bijalI, lahara tathA duSTa sarpakI
jihvAse bhI adhika caMcala hai tathA nirantara ghUmatA rahatA hai  /  / 114 /  /
duHkhameM phaMse hue saMsArake jIvanakI ora tuma kyoM nahIM dekha rahe ho? ye
bhoga svapnoMke bhogoMke samAna haiM, jIvana budbudake tulya hai, sneha
sandhyAkI lAlimAke samAna hai aura yauvana phUlake samAna hai| he bhadra ! terI
haMsI bhI mere lie amRtake samAna ho gayI  // 115-116 /  /  kyA haMsI meM po
gayI auSadhi rogako nahIM haratI? cUMki tumane merI kalyANakI ora pravRtti
karAyI hai isalie Aja tumhI eka mere bandhu ho||117|| maiM saMsArake AcArameM
lIna thA so Aja tuma usase viraktike kAraNa ho gye| lo, aba maiM dIkSA letA
huuN| tuma apane abhiprAyake anusAra kArya karo  // 118 //  itanA kahakara vaha
guNasAgara nAmaka munirAjake pAsa gayA aura unake caraNoMmeM praNAma kara bar3I
vinayase hAtha jor3atA huA bolA ki he svAmin ! Apake prasAdase merA mana pavitra
ho gayA hai so Aja maiM isa bhayaMkara saMsArarUpI kArAgRhase nikalanA cAhatA
hU~  // 119-120 //  1. yajJatvAttamAho-ma., j.| -mnytvaatt-b.| 2. kumAraH m.| 3.
vaivaah-m.| 4. pItamauSadhaM ma.  /  5. viSam ma,  /  6. sa tvameSodyame bandhu
-ma.  /  7. caraNAnUce ma.  /  8. saMsArakArAgRhAt  /  bhavatArakAt ma.  /

Page #503 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twenty-First Chapter  Then, the Muni (sage) approved of his disciple's
actions. Filled with great fervor, Vajraà¤¬à¤¾à¤¹à¥ renounced his clothes and
ornaments.  He sat down on a lotus posture, his mind filled with fervor. With
hands like red petals, he plucked out his hair. At that moment, he felt his body
become light, as if freed from illness. He renounced the marriage-related
initiation and embraced the initiation leading to liberation.   Those who had
renounced attachment, aversion, and pride, whose speed was towards fervor, and
who were like beautiful, illusory beings, such as Udayasundar and the other
twenty-six princes, filled with utmost enthusiasm, bowed to the Muni and took
initiation.   Knowing this, Manodaya, filled with brotherly love and great
fervor, also took initiation.  She, whose large breasts were covered with white
cloth, whose belly was thin, and whose body was covered in dust, became a great
ascetic.  When Vijayasyandan, Vajraà¤¬à¤¾à¤¹à¥'s father, heard this news, he was filled
with sorrow and spoke in the middle of the assembly, "Oh, what a wonder! My
grandson, still in his youth, has renounced worldly pleasures and embraced the
Digambara initiation.  Even I, an old man, am still bound by these pleasures
that are difficult to renounce. How could this young prince abandon them?  Or
perhaps, he has been blessed with the fortune of liberation, and has renounced
these pleasures like straw, attaining a state of peace.  I, who am unfortunate,
what should I do now, burdened by old age?  For a long time, I have been
deceived by these sinful pleasures, which seemed beautiful at first.  My hair,
which was once the color of indigo gems, has now turned white like a pile of
straw.  My eyes, which were once captivating with their white, black, and red
hues, are now veiled by the dust of old age."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekaviMzatitamaM parva tataH samAptayogena guruNetyanumoditaH  /
mahAsaMvegasaMpannastyaktavastravibhUSaNaH  //  121  //  paryaGkAsanamAsthAya
rabhasAnvitamAnasaH  /  kezApanayanaM kRtvA pallavAruNapANinA  //  122  //
jAnAnaH pralaghu dehamullAghamiva tatkSaNam  /  dIkSAM saMcakSya vaivAhIM
mokSadIkSAmazizriyat  //  123 //  tyaktarAgamadadveSA jAtasaMvegaraMhasaH  /
sundarapramukhA vIrAH kumArA mAravibhramAH  //  124 //  paramotsAha saMpannAH
praNamya munipuGgavam  /  SaDviMzatiramA tena rAjaputrA pravavrajuH  //  125  //
tamudantaM parijJAya sodarasnehakAtarA  /  vahantI purusaMvegamadIkSiSTa
manodayA  //  126  //  sitAMzukaparicchanna vizAlastanamaNDalA  /  alpodarI
makacchannA jAtA sAtitapasvinI  // 127 //  vijayasyandano vArtAM viditvA
vAjrabAhavIm  /  zokArdito jagAdaivaM sabhAmadhyavyavasthitaH  //  128 //
citraM pazyata me naptA vayasi prathame sthitaH  /  viSayebhyo viraktAramA
dIkSAM daigambaromitaH  //  129  //  mAdRzo'pi sudurmocairvarSIyAn pravaNIkRtaH
/  bhogairyaiste kathaM tena kumAreNa vivarjitAH  //  130  //
athavAnugRhIto'sau bhAgyavAnmukti saMpadA  /  bhogAn yastRNavatyaktvA zItIbhAve
vyavasthitaH  // 131 //  mandabhAgyo'dhunA ceSTAM kAM vrajAmi jarArditaH  /
suciraM vaJcitaH pApairviSayairmukhasundaraiH  // 132 //
indranIlAMzusaMghAtasaMkAzo yo'bhavat katham  /  kezabhAraH sa me jAtaH
kAzarAzisamadyutiH  // 133 //  sitAsitAruNacchAye netre ye janahAriNI  /  jAte
saMprati te survelIcchannasvavartmanI  //  134 //  tadanantara dhyAna samApta
honepara munirAjane usake isa kAryakI anumodanA kI  /  so mahAsaMvegase bharA
vajrabAhu vastrAbhUSaNa tyAga kara unake samakSa zIghra hI padmAsanase baiTha
gayA  /  usane pallavake samAna lAla-lAla hAthoMse keza ukhAr3akara pheMka diye
/  use usa samaya aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno usakA zarIra rogarahita honese
halakA ho gayA ho| isa taraha usane vivAha sambandhI dIkSAkA parityAga kara
mokSa prApta karAnevAlI dIkSA dhAraNa kara lI  // 121 - 123  //  tadanantara
jinhoMne rAga, dveSa aura madakA parityAga kara diyA thA, saMvegakI ora jinakA
vega bar3ha rahA thA, tathA jo kAmake samAna sundara vibhramako dhAraNa
karanevAle the, aise udayasundara Adi chabbIsa rAjakumAroMne bhI paramotsAhase
sampanna ho munirAjako praNAma kara dIkSA dhAraNa kara lI  // 124-125 /  /  yaha
samAcAra jAnakara bhAIke snehase bhIru manodayAne bhI bahuta bhArI saMvegase
yukta ho dIkSA le lI ||126 || sapheda vastrase jisakA vizAla stanamaNDala
AcchAdita thA, jisakA udara atyanta kRza thA aura jisake zarIrapara maila laga
rahA thA aisI manodayA bar3I tapasvinI ho gayI ||127|| vajrabAhuke bAbA
vijayasyandanako jaba usake isa samAcArakA patA calA taba zokase pIr3ita hotA
huA vaha sabhA ke bIca meM isa prakAra bolA ki aho ! AzcaryakI bAta dekho,
prathama avasthAmeM sthita merA nAtI viSayoMse virakta ho daigambarI dIkSAko
prApta huA hai  /  /  128 - 129  //  mere samAna vRddha puruSa bhI duHkhase
chor3ane yogya jina viSayoMke adhIna ho rahA hai ve viSaya usa kumArane kaise
chor3a diye ||130  //  athavA usa bhAgyazAlIpara muktirUpI lakSmIne bar3A
anugraha kiyA hai jisase vaha bhogoMko tRNake samAna chor3akara nirAkula bhAvako
prApta huA hai  //  131  //  prArambha meM sundara dikhanevAle pApI viSayoMne
jise cirakAlase ThagA hai tathA jo vRddhAvasthA se pIr3ita hai aisA maiM abhAgA
isa samaya kauna-sI ceSTAko dhAraNa karU~ ? || 132 || mere jo keza indranIla
maNikI kiraNoMke samAna zyAma varNaM the ve hI Aja kAsake phUloMkI rAzike samAna
safeda ho gaye haiM ||133|| safeda kAlI aura lAla kAntiko dhAraNa karanevAle
mere jo netra manuSyoMke manako haraNa 1. pANinAM ma  /  2. saMvIkSya ka.  /  3.
vajrabAhupitAmahaH  /  vijayasyandino ma, ja  /  4. muktasampadA ma  /  5.
zAntIbhAve ba.  /  6. valIcchannasuvartmanI bha., ka. 1 453

Page #504 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
454 The body which was once radiant with splendor and endowed with great
strength, now resembles a picture struck by lightning, faded and weak.  ||135||
Wealth, righteousness, and desire, these three are appropriate for a young man.
For an aged man, they are difficult to attain. ||136|| Alas, I am a senseless,
wicked, careless, and foolish man, caught in the whirlpool of false affection
for my relatives. ||137|| Having said this, and without consulting his
relatives, the king, with a detached heart, bestowed the kingdom upon his
grandson, Purandara, and, with his son, Surendramanu, took initiation from the
great soul, Nirvanaghoá¹£a, the liberated one. ||138-139|| Thereafter, Purandara's
wife, Prithivimati, gave birth to a son named Kirtidhara, who was like an ocean
of all renowned virtues. ||140|| By his charming conduct, Kirtidhara, ever
respectful, gradually attained youth, delighting all his relatives. ||141||
Then, King Purandara, having chosen a daughter of the king of Kosala, arranged
for his son's marriage. After this, the king, renouncing worldly attachments,
left his home. ||142|| Adorned with the ornaments of virtues, King Purandara,
taking initiation from the sage Ká¹£emaá¹kara, began to perform severe austerities
to eradicate the effects of his past actions. ||143|| Meanwhile, Kirtidhara, the
conqueror of his enemies, ruled the kingdom inherited from his ancestors,
enjoying the pleasures of life like the best of gods. ||144|| Once, Kirtidhara,
the king who was a friend to his subjects and who terrified his enemies, was
seated on a comfortable throne in his beautiful palace, resplendent like the
celestial being Nalakubara, when his gaze fell upon the sun, obscured by the
blue radiance of a solar eclipse. Seeing this, he thought, "Alas! This calamity
cannot be averted by any means." ||145-146|| Sun 1. PavanirvÄá¹a M. ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 454 padmapurANe prabhAsamujjyalaH kAyo yo'yamAsInmahAbalaH  /  jAtaH
saMpratyasau varSAhatacitrasamacchaviH  // 135 //  artho dharmazca kAmazca
trayaste taruNocitAH  /  jarAparItakAyasya duSkarAH prANadhAriNaH  // 136 //
dhiGamAmacetanaM pApaM durAcAraM pramAdinam  /
alIkabAndhavasnehasAgarAvartavartinam  // 137 //  ityuktvA bAndhavAn
sarvAnApRcchaya vigataspRhaH  /  datvA puraMdare rAjyaM rAjA jarjaravigrahaH  //
138 //  pArve nirvANaghoSasya nirgranthasya mahAtmanaH  /  surendramanyunA
sAdhaM pravavAja mahAmanAH  // 139 //  puraMdarasya tanayamasUta pRthiviimtii|
bhAryA kIrtidharAbhikhyaM vikhyAtaguNasAgaram  /  / 140 //  krameNa sa
pariprApto yauvanaM vinayAdhikaH  /  edhayan sarvabandhUnAM prasAdaM cAruceSTayA
// 14 //  kausalasthanarendrasya vRtA tasmai zarIrajA  /  sutamudvAhya tAM
gehAnnizcakrAma puraMdaraH  // 142 //  kSemaMkaramuneH pAveM pravrajya
guNabhUSaNaH  /  tapaH katu samArebhe karmanijarakAraNam  // 143 /  /
kulakramAgataM rAjyaM pAlayan jitazAtravaH  /  reme devottamairbhogaiH sukhaM
kIrtidharo nRpaH  /  / 144 //  vaMzasthavRttam athAnyadA kIrtidharaH kSitIzvaraH
prajAsubandhuH kRtamIrarAtiSu  /  sukhAsanastho bhavane manorame virAjamAno
nalakUbaro yathA  // 145 //  nirIkSya rAkSayanIlatejasA tirohitaM
bhAskarabhAsamaNDalam  /  acintayat kaSTamaho na zakyate vidhivinetaM
prakaTIkRtodayaH  /  / 146 //  karanevAle the, aba unakA mArga bhRkuTI rUpI
latAoMse AcchAdita ho gayA hai arthAt aba ve latAose AcchAdita gartake samAna
jAna par3ate haiM  // 134 //  merA jo yaha zarIra kAntise ujjvala tathA
mahAbalase yukta thA vaha aba varSAse tAr3ita citrake samAna niSprabha ho gayA
// 135 /  /  artha, dharma aura kAma ye tIna puruSArtha taruNa manuSyake yogya
haiN| vRddha manuSyake lie inakA karanA kaThina hai  /  / 136|| cetanAzUnya,
durAcArI, pramAdI tathA bhAI-bandhuoMke mithyA sneharUpI sAgarako bhaMvarameM
par3e hue mujha pApIko dhikkAra ho  // 137 /  /  isa prakAra kahakara tathA
samasta bandhujanoMse pUchakara udArahRdaya vRddha rAjA vijayasyandanane
niHspRha ho choTe pote purandarake lie rAjya sauMpa diyA aura svayaM
nirvANaghoSa nAmaka nirgrantha mahAtmAke samIpa apane putra surendramanyuke
sAtha dIkSA le lI  // 138-139|| tadanantara purandarako bhAryA pRthivImatIne
kIrtidhara nAmaka putrako utpanna kiyaa| vaha putra samasta prasiddha guNoMkA
mAno sAgara hI thA  /  / 140 //  apanI sundara ceSTAse samasta bandhuoMkI
prasannatAko bar3hAtA huA vinayI kIrtidhara krama-kramase yauvanako prApta huA
// 141 //  taba rAjA parandarane usake lie kauzala dezake rAjAkI putrI svIkRta
kii| isa taraha patrakA vivAhakara rAjA purandara virakta ho gharase nikala
par3A  // 142 /  /  guNarUpI AbhUSaNoMko dhAraNa karanevAle rAjA purandarane
kSemaMkara munirAjake samIpa dIkSA lekara karmokI nirjarAkA kAraNa kaThina tapa
karanA prArambha kiyA  // 143 /  /  idhara zatruoMko jItanevAlA rAjA kIrtidhara
kula-kramAgata rAjyakA pAlana karatA huA devoMke samAna uttama bhogoMke sAtha
sukhapUrvaka krIr3A karane lagA  // 144 //  athAnantara kisI dina zatruoMko
bhayabhIta karanevAlA prajA-vatsala rAjA kIrtidhara, apane sundara bhavanake
Upara nalakUbara vidyAdharake samAna sukhase baiThA huA suzobhita ho rahA thA ki
usakI dRSTi rAha vimAnako nIla kAntise AcchAdita sUryamaNDala (sUryagrahaNa )
para pdd'ii| use dekhakara vaha vicAra karane lagA ki aho ! udayameM AyA kama
dUra nahIM kiyA jA sakatA  /  / 145-146 /  /  sUrya 1. pAvanirvANa m.|

Page #505 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-One  **Verse 147** Even though the moon, devoid of brilliance,
destroys the terrible darkness and causes the lotus forest to bloom, the sun is
unable to dispel Rahu.  **Verse 148** Just as this sun is being destroyed, so
too will this youthful sun, afflicted by the eclipse of old age, be destroyed.
Bound by the strong ropes of fate, this poor creature will inevitably enter the
jaws of death.  **Verse 149** Considering this world to be impermanent, King
Kirtidhara addressed his ministers assembled in the court, saying, "Oh
ministers! Protect this earth, bounded by the ocean. I am departing on the path
of liberation."  **Verse 150** Upon hearing this, the assembly, filled with wise
men and relatives, became filled with sorrow and said, "Oh King! You are the
only husband of this entire earth."  **Verse 151** This earth, under your
control, and with all enemies defeated, will not be adorned without you.
Possessing great strength in your youth, rule like Indra.  **Verse 152** The
king replied, "Seeing this forest of afflictions, filled with the trees of
birth, enveloped in the fire of old age, separation, and aversion, and extremely
long, I am filled with great fear."  **Verse 153** When the ministers understood
the king's firm resolve, they extinguished a large pile of burning embers and
placed a beautiful, radiant, and excellent vaidurya gem in the middle. Its
brilliance illuminated the extinguished embers.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ekaviMzatitamaM parva 455 upajAtivRttam utsArya yo bhISaNamandhakAraM karoti
niSkAntikamindubimbam  /  asau raviH pAvanaprabodhaH svarmAnamasArayitaM na
zaktaH  // 147 //  tAruNyasUryo'pyayamevameva praNazyati prAptajaroparAgaH  /
janturvarAko varapAzabaddho mRtyoravazyaM mukhamabhyupaiti  // 14 //
upendravajAvRttam anityametajjagadeSa matvA samAsametAnagadIdamAtyAn  /
sasAgarAM rakSata bho dharitrImahaM prayAmyeSa vimuktimArgam  /  / 149 //
upajAtivRttam ityuktamAtre budhabandhupUrNA sabhA viSAdaM pragatA tamUce  /
rAjaMstvamasyAH patiradvitIyo virAjase sarvavasuMdharAyAH  // 150 //  syaktA
vazasthA dharaNI' svayeyaM na rAjate nirjitshtrupkssaa| nave
vayasyunatavIryarAjyaM kuruSva tAvat suranAthatulyam  // 151 //  vaMzasthavRttam
jagAda rAjA bhavavRkSasaMkaTAM jarAviyogArativahnidIpitAm  /  nirIkSya dIpoM
vyasanATavImimAM bhayaM mamAtyantamuru prajAyate  // 152 /  /  indravamrAvRttam
tanizcitaM mantrijano'vagatya vidhyAtamaGgAracayaM mahAntam  /  AnAyya
madhye'sya marIciramyaM vaidUryamasthApayadatyudAram  /  / 153 //  www
wwwwwwwwwwwwwwwww bhISaNa andhakArako naSTa kara candramaNDalako kAntihIna kara
detA hai tathA kamaloMke vanako vikasita karatA hai vaha sUrya rAhuko dUra
karane meM samartha nahIM hai  /  / 147|| jisa prakAra yaha sUrya naSTa ho rahA
hai usI prakAra yaha yauvanarUpI sUrya bhI jarArUpI grahaNako prApta kara naSTa
ho jaavegaa| majabUta pAzase ba~dhA huA yaha becArA prANI avazya hI mRtyuke
mukha meM jAtA hai  /  / 148|| isa prakAra samasta saMsArako anitya mAnakara
rAjA kIrtidharane sabhAmeM baiThe hue mantriyoMse kahA ki aho mantrI jano! isa
sAgarAnta pathivIkI Apa loga rakSA kro| maiM to muktike mArgameM prayANa karatA
hU~  // 149 //  rAjAke aisA kahanepara vidvAnoM tathA bandhujanoMse paripUrNa
sabhA viSAdako prApta ho usase isa prakAra bolI ki he rAjana! isa samasta
pathivIke tamhI eka advitIya pati ho  // 150 //  yaha pRthivI Apake AdhIna hai
tathA Apane samasta zatruoMko jItA hai, isalie Apake chor3anepara suzobhita
nahIM hogii| unnata parAkramake dhAraka ! abhI ApakI nayo avasthA hai isalie
indrake samAna rAjya karo  // 151 //  isake uttarameM rAjAne kahA ki jo
janmarUpI vRkSoMse saMkula hai, vyApta hai, bur3hApA, viyoga tathA aratirUpI
agnise prajvalita hai, tathA atyanta dIrgha hai aisI isa vyasanarUpI aTavIko
dekhakara mujhe bhArI bhaya utpanna ho rahA hai  /  / 152 //  jaba mantrIjanoMko
rAjAke dRr3ha nizcayakA bodha ho gayA taba unhoMne bahutase bujhe hue aMgAroMkA
samUha bujhAkara usameM kiraNoMse suzobhita uttama vaiDUryamaNi rakhA so usake
prabhAvase vaha bujhe hue aMgAroMkA samUha prakAzamAna ho gayA  // 153 //
tadanantara 1. dharaNI ca yeyaM ma.  /

Page #506 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
456 Padma Purana Upeendra Vajra Vrittam Again, the king spoke in Upeendra Vajra
Vrittam, as follows: "O King, just as a pile of coals does not shine without a
gem, so too, this world does not shine without you. ||154|| O Lord, without you,
this entire population, bereft of their protector, will become helpless and
perish. With the destruction of the people, Dharma will be destroyed, and with
the destruction of Dharma, what will not be destroyed? Tell me. ||155||
Therefore, just as your father, giving you to the people for their protection,
performed austerities and became adept at giving liberation, so too, you should
protect the Dharma of your lineage. ||156|| Thus, being advised by his wise
ministers, Kirtidhara made a vow. Hearing of the birth of his son, he would
surely take the exalted path of the munis. ||157|| Then, that king Kirtidhara,
whose power was like Indra's, whose soul was always alert, ruled the vast earth,
free from all fear, for a long time, with a well-established order. ||158||
Then, for a long time, Queen Sahadevi, enjoying happiness with King Kirtidhara,
gave birth to a son, complete in all virtues, capable of bearing the earth.
||159|| Upajati Vrittam There was no celebration of the birth, for fear that the
news might reach the king's ears. And so, for many days, the time of confinement
was like a prison. ||160||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 456 padmapurANe upendravajrAvRttam punastaduvRttya jagAda rAjan yathAmunA
ratnavareNa hInaH  /  na zobhate'GgArakalApa eSa tvayA vinedaM bhuvanaM tathaiva
/  / 154 /  /  upajAtivRttama nAtha tvayemA vikalA vinAthA prajA
vinazyantyakhilA varAkyaH  /  prajAsu naSTAsu tathaiva dharmo dharma vinaSTe
vada kiM na naSTam  // 155 /  /  tasmAdyathA te janakaH prajAbhyo datvA
bhavantaM paripAlanAya  /  tapo'karonivRtidAnadakSa tathA bhavAn rakSatu
gotradharmam  /  / 156 //  athaivamuktaH kuzalairamAtyairavagrahaM
kIrtidharazcakAra  /  zrutvA prajAtaM tanayaM prapatsye dhruvaM munInAM
padamatyudAram  // 157 //  tataH sa zakropamamogavIryaH sphItAM vyavasthAmahatIM
dharitrIm  /  sukhaM zazAsAkhilamItimuktAM sa mUrikAlaM susamAhitAtmA  // 15 //
upendravajrAvRttam ciraM tataH kIrtidhareNa sAkaM sukhaM majantI shdevdevii|
krameNa saMpUrNaguNaM prasUtA sutaM dharitrIdharaNe samartham  // 159 /  /
upajAtivRttam samutsavastatra kRto na jAte mAgAddharitrIpatikarNajAham  /
vAtati kAMzcidivasAnnigaDhaH kAlaH kathaMciyasavasya jAtaH  // 16 //  vaha ratna
uThAkara bole ki he rAjan ! jisa prakAra isa uttama ratnase rahita aMgAroMkA
samUha zobhita nahIM hotA hai usI prakAra Apake binA yaha saMsAra zobhita nahIM
hogA  // 154|| he nAtha ! tumhAre binA yaha becArI samasta prajA anAtha tathA
vikala hokara naSTa ho jaayegii| prajAke naSTa honepara dharma naSTa ho jAyegA
aura dharmake naSTa honepara kyA nahIM naSTa hogA so tumhIM kaho  // 155 //
isalie jisa prakAra Apake pitAne prajAkI rakSAke lie Apako dekara mokSa pradAna
karanemeM dakSa tapazcaraNa kiyA thA usI prakAra Apa bhI apane isa kuladharmakI
rakSA kIjie  // 156 //  athAnantara kuzala mantriyoMke isa prakAra kahane para
rAjA kIrtidharane niyama kiyA ki jisa samaya maiM putrako utpanna huA sunU~gA
usa samaya muniyoMkA utkRSTa pada avazya dhAraNa kara la~gA ||157 //
tadanantara jisake bhoga aura parAkrama indrake samAna the tathA jisakI AtmA
sadA sAvadhAna rahatI thI aise rAjA kIrtidharane saba prakArake bhayase rahita
tathA vyavasthAse yukta dIrgha pRthvIkA cirakAla taka pAlana kiyA  // 158||
tadanantara rAjA kIrtidharake sAtha cirakAla taka sukhakA upabhoga karatI huI
rAnI sahadevIne savaMguNoMse paripUrNa evaM pRthvIke dhAraNa karane meM samartha
putrako utpanna kiyA  // 159|| putra-janmakA samAcAra rAjAke kAnoM taka na
pahu~ca jAve isa bhayase putra janmakA utsava nahIM kiyA gayA tathA isI kAraNa
kitane hI dina taka prasavakA 1. dAnadattaM m.| 2. pratijJAM m.| 3. prapazye
ma., ja., kh.| 4. padamapyudAraM m.| padamapyudAraH ja.  /  padamapyudArAH b.|

Page #507 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-One: The Lineage and Story of Kirti Dhar  **457**  How could
the child, shining like the sun, be kept hidden for long?  A poor man, driven by
greed, informed the king, revealing the secret.  [161]  The king, overjoyed,
bestowed upon him a crown and other ornaments, along with the beautiful city of
Ghosha, a branch city, adorned with a hundred prosperous villages.  [162]  He
summoned the child, born of a single parent, and placed him on his throne,
surrounded by great splendor, earning the respect of all.  [163]  The city of
Kosala became exceptionally beautiful due to the child's birth.  Therefore, the
child, known for his noble deeds, was named Sukosala.  [164]  Leaving the
confines of his palace, Kirti Dhar, the king, went to the forest of penance and,
radiating the brilliance of his spiritual practice, shone like the sun, free
from the constraints of material wealth.  [165]  Thus ends the twenty-first
chapter of the Padma Charita, narrated by Acharya Ravishena, titled "The
Greatness of Muni Suvrata, Vajra Bahu, and Kirti Dhar."  [21]  **Time is kept
secret and protected.** [160]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 457 ekaviMzatitamaM parva vaMzasthavRttam tataH samudyadivasaprabhUpamazciraM
sa zakyaH kathameva gopitum  /  nivedito durvidhinAtiduHkhinA nRpAya kenApi
nareNa nizcitaH  // 161 //  upajAtivRttam tasmai narendro mukuTAdi hRSTo
vibhUSaNaM srvmdaanmhaatmaa| ghoSAkhyazAkhAnagaraM ca ramyaM
mahAdhanagrAmazatena yuktam  // 162 /  /  putraM samAnAyya ca pakSajAtaM sthitaM
mahAtejasi maaturke| atiSThipattuGgavibhUtiyuktaM nije pade pUjitasarvalokaH  /
/ 163 //  jAte yatastatra babhUva ramyA purI vibhUtyA kila koshlaakhyaa|
sukozalAkhyAM sa jagAma tasmAd bAlaH samaste bhuvane suceSTaH  /  / 16 /  /
vaMzasthavRttam tato viniSkramya nivAsacArakAdazizriyat kIrtidharastapovanam  /
tapomavenaiSa rarAja tejasA dhanAgamonmuktatanuryathA rviH||165|| ityAce
raviSeNAcAryaprokte padmacarite suvrata-vajrabAhu-kIrtimAhAtmyavarNanaM
nAmaikaviMzatitamaM parva  // 21 //  samaya gupta rakkhA gayA  // 160 //
tadanantara ugate hue sUryake samAna vaha bAlaka cirakAla taka chipAkara kaise
rakkhA jA sakatA thA ? phalasvarUpa kisI daridra manuSyane puraskAra pAneke
lobhase rAjAko usakI khabara de dI  // 161 //  rAjAne harSita hokara usake lie
mukuTa Adi diye tathA vipula dhanase yukta sau gA~voMke sAtha ghoSa nAmakA
manohara zAkhAnagara diyA  // 162 //  aura mAtAkI mahA tejapUrNa godameM sthita
usa eka pakSake bAlakako bulavAkara use bar3e vaibhavake sAtha apane padapara
baiThAyA tathA saba logoMkA sanmAna kiyA  // 163 /  /  cUMki usake utpanna
honepara vaha kosalA nagarI vaibhavase atyanta manohara ho gayI thI isalie
uttama ceSTAoMko dhAraNa karanevAlA vaha bAlaka 'sukosala' isa nAmako prApta huA
// 164 //  tadanantara rAjA kIrtidhara bhavanarUpI kArAgArase nikalakara
tapovanameM pahu~cA aura tapa sambandhI tejase varSAkAlase rahita sUryake samAna
atyanta suzobhita hone lagA  // 165 /  /  isa prakAra ArSa nAmase prasiddha,
raviSeNAcArya ke dvArA kathita padmacaritameM bhagavAn munisuvratanAtha
vajrabAhu tathA rAjA kIrtidharake mAhAtmyako kathana karanevAlA ikkIsavA~ parva
samApta huA  // 21 //

Page #508 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Twenty-Second Chapter  Then the great ascetic, the Lord who was as forgiving
as the earth, whose body was covered with a garment of dirt, who had renounced
pride, who was magnanimous, whose entire body was dried up by austerities, who
was a hero, who considered his matted hair as an ornament, whose long arms hung
down, whose eyes looked at the path of four cubits, who walked slowly like a
drunken elephant, who was free from all impurities, who was full of
concentration, who was humble, who was free from greed, who followed the
teachings of the scriptures, whose mind was pure with compassion, who was free
from the mire of affection, who was adorned with the glory of a monk, and who
had been fasting for a long time, such a glorious monk, while wandering, reached
his former home, which he had obtained in due course, and entered it for alms.
Seeing him, Sahadevi, his wife, stood at the window, her eyes fixed on him. She
was filled with extreme anger. Her face was flushed with anger. With her lips
clenched, she said to the gatekeepers with evil intentions, "This monk is going
to destroy the house, so let him be driven out quickly."  The innocent, beloved
by all, and gentle by nature, the young prince, as long as he did not see him,
quickly said, "Drive him away." Not only that, if I see any other naked man
inside the palace, remember, I will surely punish you, gatekeepers. Since this
heartless man left Shishuputra, I have not been happy with these people.  These
people hate the royal fortune, which is served by great heroes, and they cause
great distress to men who are devoted to great endeavors.  Thus, with her face
distorted by harsh words, and holding a staff in her hand, the yogi was quickly
driven away.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAviMzatitama parva atha ghoratapodhArI 'dharAtulyakSamaH prabhuH  /
malakaJcukasaMvIto vItamAno mahAmanAH  // 1 //  tapaHzoSitasarvADo dhIro
laJcavibhUSaNaH  /  pralambitamahAbAharyagAdhvanyastalocanaH  // 2 //
svabhAvAnmattanAgendramantharAyaNavibhramaH  /  nirvikAraH samAdhAnI vinIto
lobhavarjitaH  // 3 //  anusUtrasamAcAro dayAvimalamAnasaH  /
snehapaGkavinirmuktaH zramaNazrIsamanvitaH  // 4 //  gRhapaGktikramaprAptaM
bhrAmyannAtmancaraM gRham  /  munirviveza bhikSArtha cirakAlopavAsavAn  // 5 //
nirIkSya sahadevI taM gavAkSanihitekSaNA  /  paramaM krodhamAyAtA
visphurallohitAnanA  // 6 //  pratIhAragaNAnUce kuJcitoSThI duraashyaa| zramaNo
gRhabho'yamAzu nirvAsyatAmiti  // 7 //  mugdhaH sarvajanaprItaH
svabhAvamRdumAnasaH  /  yAvannirIkSate nainaM kumAraH sukumArakaH  // 8 //
anyAnapi yadIkSe tu bhavane nagnamAnavAn  /  nigrahaM vaH kariSyAmi pratIhArA na
saMzayaH  // 9 //  parityajya dayAmukko gato'sau zizuputrakam  /  yataH prabhRti
nAmISu tadArabhya tirmama  // 10 //  rAjyazriyaM dviSantyete mahAzUraniSevitAm
/  nayantyatyantanirvedaM mahodyogaparAnnarAn  // 11 //  krUrairityuditaiH
kSipraM durvAkya janitAnanaiH  /  dUraM nirdhArito" yogI vetragrAhitapANibhiH
// 32 //  _ athAnantara jo ghora tapasvI the, pRthvIke samAna kSamAke dhAraka
the, prabhu the, jinakA zarIra mailarUpI kaMcukase vyApta thA, jinhoMne mAnako
naSTa kara diyA thA, jo udAra hRdaya the, jinakA samasta zarIra tapase sUkha
gayA thA, jo atyanta dhIra the, keza loMca karaneko jo AbhUSaNake samAna
samajhate the, jinakI lambI bhujAe~ nIcekI ora laTaka rahI thIM, jo yugapramANa
arthAt cAra hAtha pramANa mArgameM dRSTi DAlate hue calate the, jo svabhAvase hI
matta hAthIke samAna mandagatise calate the, vikAra-zUnya the, samAdhAna arthAt
cittakI ekAgratAse sahita the, vinIta the, lobharahita the, AgamAnukUla AcArakA
pAlana karate the, jinakA mana dayAse nirmala thA, jo sneharUpI paMkase rahita
the, munipadarUpI lakSmIse sahita the aura jinhoMne cirakAlakA upavAsa dhAraNa
kara rakhA thA, aise kIrtidhara munirAja bhramaNa karate hue gRhapaMktikeM
kramase prApta apane pUrva gharameM bhikSAke lie praveza karane lage  // 1-5 /
/  usa samaya unakI gRhasthAvasthAkI strI sahadevI jharokhemeM dRSTi lagAye
khar3I thI so unheM Ate dekha paramakrodhako prApta huii| krodhase usakA muMha
lAla ho  /   /  oMTha cAbatI huI usa duSTAne dvArapAloMse kahA ki yaha muni
gharako phor3anevAlA hai isalie yahA~se zIghra hI nikAla diyA jAya ||6-7|mugdh,
sarvajana priya aura svabhAvase hI komala cittakA dhAraka, sukumAra kumAra
jabataka ise nahIM dekhatA hai tabataka zIghra hI dUra kara do| yahI nahIM yadi
maiM aura bhI nagna manuSyoMko mahalake andara dekhUgI to he dvArapAlo! yAda
rakho maiM avazya hI tumheM daNDita kruuNgii| yaha nirdaya jabase zizuputrako
chor3akara gayA hai tabhIse ina logoMmeM merA santoSa nahIM rahA  /  / 8-10 //
ye loga mahAzUra vIroMse sevita rAjyalakSmIse dveSa karate haiM tathA mahAn
udyoga karane meM tatpara rahanevAle manuSyoMko atyanta nirveda prApta karA dete
haiM  // 11 //  sahadevIke isa prakAra kahanepara jinake mukhase durvacana
nikala rahe the tathA jo hAthameM vetra dhAraNa kara rahe the 1. dharAtulya: ma.
/  2. saMvItavItamAno ma., j.| 3. nAgendraM ma., b.| 4. anusnAta b.| 5.
nnAtmavaraM m.| 6. kIrtidharapatnI  /  7. nirIkSyate m.| 8. rAjazriyaM ba., k.|
9. durvAkyAdvAlitAnanaH ma.  /  durvAkyaM janitAnanaH v.| 10. nirghAsito m.| 11.
vezagrAhita- m.|

Page #509 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twenty-Second Chapter  Even all other Lingins were expelled from the city at
that time. The king was afraid that the prince would hear the word Dharma. || 13
||  Hearing and seeing the Muni-punga who was being robbed by words, the devoted
Kirti-dhar's foster mother, Su-koshal, was filled with grief and sorrow. || 14
|| Recognizing her master Kirti-dhar after a long time, she cried out loud,
tearing her throat. || 15 ||  Hearing her cry, Su-koshal came to her and
comforted her, saying, "Mother, who has wronged you?" || 16 ||  "Mother only
carried this body in her womb, but this body has reached this state only because
of your milk." || 17 ||  "You are more honorable to me than my mother. Tell me,
who, desiring to enter the mouth of Yama, has insulted you?" || 18 ||  "If even
my mother has defeated you today, I am ready to be disrespectful to her, what to
speak of others?" || 19 ||  Then, the foster mother, Vasanti-lata, with great
difficulty, reduced the flow of her tears and told Su-koshal, "Your father, who
had you crowned king in your childhood and then, fearing the cage of worldly
sorrows, entered the forest of penance, has come to your house today for alms.
Your mother, by her authority, had him expelled by the gatekeepers." || 20-22 ||
"Seeing him being humiliated, I was filled with great sorrow, and I could not
stop it. Therefore, my dear son, I am crying." || 23 ||  "Who can defeat the one
whom you always see with honor? This is the reason for my crying, which I have
told you." || 24 ||  "Remembering the favor that Lord Kirti-dhar did for us at
that time, my body starts burning freely." || 25 ||  "This body of mine is stuck
here to be a recipient of suffering due to the rise of sin. It seems to be made
of iron, for even in the separation of the Lord, it remains steady." || 26 ||
The Nirgrantha Munis were expelled by the wicked gatekeepers from afar. || 12 ||
Not only them, but all other Munis residing in the city were also expelled from
the city, fearing that the prince residing in the palace would hear the word
Dharma. || 13 ||  The Muni-punga, who was robbed by words, was heard and seen by
Su-koshal, the devoted foster mother of Kirti-dhar, whose grief was renewed. She
recognized her master Kirti-dhar after a long time and cried out loud, tearing
her throat. || 14-15 ||  Hearing her cry, Su-koshal came to her and comforted
her, saying, "Mother, who has wronged you?" || 16 ||  "Mother only carried this
body in her womb, but this body has reached this state only because of your
milk." || 17 ||  "You are more honorable to me than my mother. Tell me, who,
desiring to enter the mouth of Yama, has insulted you?" || 18 ||  "If even my
mother has defeated you today, I am ready to be disrespectful to her, what to
speak of others?" || 19 ||  Then, the foster mother, Vasanti-lata, with great
difficulty, reduced the flow of her tears and told Su-koshal, "Your father, who
had you crowned king in your childhood and then, fearing the cage of worldly
sorrows, entered the forest of penance, has come to your house today for alms.
Your mother, by her authority, had him expelled by the gatekeepers." || 20-22 ||
"Seeing him being humiliated, I was filled with great sorrow, and I could not
stop it. Therefore, my dear son, I am crying." || 23 ||  "Who can defeat the one
whom you always see with honor? This is the reason for my crying, which I have
told you." || 24 ||  "Remembering the favor that Lord Kirti-dhar did for us at
that time, my body starts burning freely." || 25 ||  "This body of mine is stuck
here to be a recipient of suffering due to the rise of sin. It seems to be made
of iron, for even in the separation of the Lord, it remains steady." || 26 ||
The Nirgrantha Munis were expelled by the wicked gatekeepers from afar. || 12 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAviMzatitamaM parva anye'pi liGginaH sarve purAnnirvAsitAstadA  /  kumAro
dharmazabda mA zrauSIditi nRpAspade  //  13 //  iti saMtakSyamANaM taM vAgvAsyA'
munipuGgavam  /  zrutvA dRSTvA ca saMjAtapratyagraudArazokikA || 14 || svAminaM
pratyabhijJAya bhaktA kIrtidharaM cirAt  /  dhAtrI saukozalI
dIrghamarodImuktakaNThikA ||15|| zrutvA tAM rudatImA samAgatya sukozalaH  /
jagAda sAntvayanmAtaH kena te'pakRtaM vada  //  16 //  garbhadhAraNamAtreNa
jananyA samanuSTitam | tvatpayomayametattu zarIraM jAtamIdRzam  // 17 //  sA me
tvaM jananIto'pi paraM gauravamAzritA  /  vadApamAnitA kena mRtyuvaktraM
vivikSuNA ||18|| adya me tvaM jananyApi paribhUtA bhavedyadi  /  karomyavinayaM
tasyA jantoranyasya kiM punaH  //  19  //  tatastasmai samAkhyAtaM vasantalatayA
tayA  /  kRcchreNa viralIkRtya netrAmbuplava saMtatim ||20|| abhiSicya zizuM
rAjye bhavantaM yastapovanam  /  praviSTaste pitA bhIto mavavyasanapaJjarAt  //
21  //  mikSArthamAgataH so'dya praviSTo bhavato gRham  /  jananyAste niyogena
pratihArairnirAkRtaH ||22|| dRSTvA nirdhAryamANaM taM jAtazokoruvelayA  /
ruditaM mayakA vatsa zokaM dhartumazaktayA ||23|| bhavadgauravadRSTAyAH kurute
kaH parAbhavam  /  mama kAraNametattu kathitaM ruditasya te ||24|| prasAdastena
nAthena tadAsmAkamakAri yaH  /  smaryamANaH zarIraM sa dahatyeSa niraGkuzaH
||25|| dhRtametadapuNyaimeM zarIraM duHkhabhAjanam  /  viyoge tasya nAthasya
dhriyate yadayomayam  //  26  //  aise duSTa dvArapAloMne una munirAjako dUrase
hI zIghra nikAla diyA || 12 || inheM hI nahIM, 'rAjabhavana meM vidyamAna
rAjakumAra dharmakA zabda na suna le' isa bhayase nagara meM jo aura bhI muni
vidyamAna the una sabako nagarase bAhara nikAla diyA ||13|| 459 isa prakAra
vacanarUpI vasUlIke dvArA chIle hue munirAjako sunakara tathA dekhakara jisakA
bhArI zoka phirase navIna ho gayA thA, tathA jo bhakti se yukta thI aisI
sukosala dhAya cirakAla bAda apane svAmI kIrtidharako pahacAnakara galA
phAr3a-phAr3akara rone lagI ||14-15  /  /  use rotI sunakara sukozala zIghra hI
usake pAsa AyA aura sAntvanA detA huA bolA ki he mAtA ! kaha terA apakAra kisane
kiyA hai ? || 16 || mAtAne to isa zarIrako garbhamAtra meM hI dhAraNa kiyA hai
para Aja yaha zarIra tere dugdha-pAnase hI isa avasthAko prApta huA hai ||17||
tU mere lie mAtAse bhI adhika gauravako dhAraNa karatI hai  /  batA, yamarAja ke
mukhameM praveza karanekI icchA karanevAle kisa manuSyane terA apamAna kiyA hai
? || 18 || yadi Aja mAtAne bhI terA parAbhava kiyA hogA to maiM usakI avinaya
karaneko taiyAra hU~ phira dUsare prANokI to bAta hI kyA hai ? ||19||
tadanantara vasantalatA nAmaka dhAyane bar3e duHkhase A~suoMko dhArAko kamakara
sukozala se kahA ki 'tumhArA jo pitA zizu avasthA meM hI tumhArA rAjyAbhiSeka
kara saMsArarUpI duHkhadAyI paMjarase bhayabhIta ho tapovanameM calA gayA thA
Aja vaha bhikSAke lie Apake gharameM praviSTa huA so tumhArI mAtAne apane
adhikArase use dvArapAloMke dvArA apamAnita kara bAhara nikalavA diyA || 20-22
|| use apamAnita hote dekha mujhe bahuta zoka huA aura usa zokako maiM roka
nahIM skii| isalie he vatsa ! maiM ro rahI hU~ ||23|| jise Apa sadA gauravase
dekhate haiM usakA parAbhava kauna kara sakatA hai ? mere ronekA kAraNa yahI hai
jo maiMne Apase kahA hai ||24|| usa samaya svAmI kIrtidharane hamArA jo upakAra
kiyA thA vaha smaraNa meM Ate hI zarIrako svatantratAse jalAne lagatA hai ||25||
pApake udayase duHkhakA pAtra bananeke lie hI merA yaha zarIra rukA huA hai  /
jAna par3atA hai yaha lohe se banA hai isalie to svAmIkA viyoga honepara bhI
sthira hai ||26|| nirgrantha muniko 1. vacanakuThArikayA  /  2. lohamayam  /

Page #510 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
460 Seeing the Muni in the city, the king was afraid that his son would become
dispassionate. Therefore, he prohibited the entry of the Muni into the city.
||27|| This is the Dharma that has been passed down in your lineage, that you
should give the kingdom to your son and serve the Tapovan. ||28|| Don't you know
the decision of the ministers? You will never be able to leave this house.
||29|| For this reason, the ministers, who are wise in policy, have made
arrangements for you and others in this very house. ||30|| Hearing the entire
account from the messenger, Sukoshal quickly descended from the top of the
palace. ||31|| Leaving behind the royal insignia like the umbrella and the fly
whisk, he walked on foot, his feet adorned with a soft, lotus-like radiance. He
was graced by Lakshmi and inquired along the way, "Have you seen a great Muni
anywhere here?" Filled with utmost eagerness, Prince Sukoshal reached his
father. ||32-33|| His attendants, including the umbrella-holders, were all
agitated and ran after him in a flurry. ||34|| Reaching the place, he
circumambulated his father, Kirtidhar Muni, who was seated on a magnificent,
excellent stone platform, three times. His eyes were filled with tears, and his
emotions were sublime. ||35|| He joined his hands, touched his forehead with
them, and prostrated himself with his knees and forehead touching the ground,
paying his respects to his father with great affection. ||36|| He folded his
hands and sat before the Muni with humility. As if he was ashamed of the Muni
being rejected from his home. ||37|| He said to the Muni, "Just as a group of
clouds with loud thunder wakes up people sleeping in a house engulfed in flames,
so too, in this house of the world, burning with the fire of birth and death, I
was asleep, embraced by the sleep of delusion. O Lord! You have awakened me."
||38-39|| "Be pleased and grant me the same initiation that you have taken
yourself. O Lord! Please liberate me from the troubles of worldly desires."
||40|| While Sukoshal was speaking with his head bowed, the entire assembly of
his vassals arrived. ||41||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 460 papurANe nimranthaM bhavato dRSTvA mAbhUnnirvedadhIriti  /  tapasvinA
pravezo'sminnagare'pi nivAritaH  // 27 //  gotre paramparAyAto dharmo'yaM
bhavatAM kila  /  rAjye attanayaM nyasya tapovananiSevaNam  // 28 //  kiM
nAsmAdapi jAnAsi mantriNAM saMpradhAraNam  /  na kadAcidato gehAllabhase
yadvinirgamam  // 29 //  etasmAt kAraNAt sarva bAhyAlIbhramaNAdikam  /  amAtyaiH
kRtamatraiva bhavane nayazAlibhiH  // 30 //  tato nizamya vRttAntaM sakalaM
tanniveditam  /  avatIrya svarAyuktaH prAsAdApAt sukoshlH||31||
pariziSTAtapatrAdipRthivIpatilAnchanaH  /  padmakomalakAntibhyAM caraNAbhyAM
shriyaanvitH||32|| ito varamunidRSTo bhavadbhiriti nAdavAn  /  paramotkaNThayA
yuktaH saMprApa' piturantikam  // 33 //  asyAnupadavIbhUtA mahAsaMbhramasaMgatAH
/  chatradhArAdayaH sarve vyAkulIbhUtacetasaH  // 34 //  niviSTaM prAsukodAre
pravare'muM zilAtale  /  vASpAkulavizAlAkSastriH parItya sumAvanaH  // 35 /  /
karayugmAntikaM kRtvA mUrddhAnaM snehanirbharaH  /  nanAma
pAdayorjAnumastakaspRSTabhUtalaH  // 36 //  //  kRtAJjalirathovAca vinayena
purasthitaH  /  vrIDAmiva pariprApto munergehAdapAkRteH  // 37 //
agnijvAlAkulAgAre suptaH kazcinnaro yathA  /  bodhyate paTunAdena samUhena
payomucAm  // 38 //  tadvatsaMsAragehe'haM mRtyujanmAgnidIpite  /
mohanidrApariSvakto bodhito bhavatA pramo  // 39 //  prasAdaM kuru me dIkSAM
prayaccha svayamAzritAm  /  mA muSmAd bhavavyasanasaMkaTAt  // 40 //  bravIti
yAvadetAvanatavaktraH sukozalaH  /  tAvatsAmantaloko'sya samastaH samupAgataH
// 41 //  dekhakara tumhArI buddhi vairAgyamaya na ho jAve isa bhayase nagarameM
muniyoMkA praveza roka diyA gayA hai  /  / 27 /  /  parantu tumhAre kulameM
paramparAse yaha dharma calA AyA hai ki putrako rAjya dekara tapovanakI sevA
karanA  // 28 //  tuma kabhI gharase bAhara nahIM nikala sakate ho itanese hI
kyA mantriyoMke isa nizcayako nahIM jAna pAye ho  // 29 //  isI kAraNa nItike
jAnanevAle mantriyoMne tumha Adiko vyavasthA isI bhavanameM kara rakhI hai  //
30 //  tadanantara vasantalatA dhAyake dvArA nirUpita samasta vRttAnta sunakara
sukozala zIghratAse mahalake agrabhAgase nIce utarA  // 31 //  aura chatra
camara Adi rAja-cihnoMko chor3akara kamalake samAna komala kAntiko dhAraNa
karanevAle pairoMse paidala hI cala pdd'aa| vaha lakSmIse suzobhita thA tathA
mArgameM logoMse pUchatA jAtA thA ki yahAM kahIM Apa logoMne uttama munirAjako
dekhA hai ? isa taraha parama utkaNThAse yukta sukozala rAjakumAra pitAke samIpa
pahu~cA  // 32-33 /  /  isake jo chatra dhAraNa karanevAle Adi sevaka the ve
saba vyAkula citta hote hue har3abar3Akara usake pIche daur3ate Aye  // 34 //
jAte ho usane prAsuka vizAla tathA uttama zilAtala para virAjamAna apane pitA
kIrtidhara munirAjakI tIna pradakSiNAe~ diiN| usa samaya usake netra A~suoMse
vyApta the, aura usakI bhAvanAe~ atyanta uttama thIM  // 35 //  usane donoM
hAtha jor3akara mastakase lagAye tathA ghuTanoM aura mastakase pRthivIkA sparza
kara bar3e snehake sAtha unake caraNoMmeM namaskAra kiyA  // 36 /  /  vaha hAtha
jor3akara vinayase munirAjake Age baiTha gyaa| apane gharase munirAjakA
tiraskAra honeke kAraNa mAno vaha lajjAko prApta ho rahA thA  // 37 //  usane
munirAjase kahA ki jisa prakAra agnikI jvAlAoMse vyApta gharameM sote hue
manuSyoMko tIvra garjanAse yukta meghoMkA samUha jagA detA hai usI prakAra
janma-maraNarUpI agnise prajvalita isa saMsArarUpI gharameM maiM moharUpI
nidrAse AliMgita hokara so rahA thA so he prabho ! Apane mujhe jagAyA hai  /  /
38-39 /  /  Apa prasanna hoie tathA Apane svayaM jisa dIkSAko dhAraNa kiyA hai
vaha mere lie bhI diijiye| he bhagavan ! mujhe bhI isa saMsArake vyasanarUpI
saMkaTase bAhara nikAlie  // 40 //  nIcekI ora mukha kiye sukozala jabataka
munirAjase 1. saMprApayiturantikam m.| 2. mAmapyuttarayAmuSmAd- ma.  /  .

Page #511 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Second Chapter  The queen, Vichitramala, carrying the weight of
her pregnancy, filled with sorrow, arrived with the inner palace. ||42|| Knowing
that Sukoshal was about to take the initiation, a soft humming sound, like the
buzzing of a bee, arose from the inner palace. ||43|| Sukoshal said, "If this
child in Vichitramala's womb is a son, I have given him the kingdom." Saying
this, he became indifferent, severed the bonds of hope, burned the cage of
affection, broke the chains of his wife, and abandoned the kingdom like a blade
of grass. ||44-45|| He renounced all ornaments, discarded both internal and
external possessions, sat on a simple seat, and cut his hair. ||46|| He took the
great vows, with firm determination, and with a peaceful mind, he wandered with
his father. ||47|| As he walked, the red rays of his feet seemed to offer lotus
flowers to the earth. People looked at him with wonder. ||48|| Sahadevi, filled
with false beliefs and devoted to sin, died and was reborn in a lower animal
form. ||49|| Father and son wandered together, following the course of the sun.
When the sun set, they would rest. Then, the rainy season arrived, darkening the
sky. ||50|| The sky, covered with dark clouds, seemed to be plastered with cow
dung. Here and there, flying vultures made it seem as if the sky was being
adorned with clusters of white lotuses. ||51|| The large buds of the Kadamba
trees, buzzing with bees, seemed to be singing the praises of the king of the
rainy season. ||52|| The world seemed to be filled with clusters of blue
collyrium, like towering mountains. The moon and the sun had gone, as if they
were frightened by the roar of the clouds. ||53|| Uninterrupted streams of water
poured from the sky, making it seem as if the sky itself was melting and
flowing. The earth, covered with green grass, seemed to be wearing a garment of
contentment. ||54||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAviMzatitamaM parva kRcchra eNa dadhatI garbhamantaHpurasamanvitA  /  prAptA
vicitremAlAkhyA devI cAsya viSAdinI  // 42 //  dIkSAbhimukhaM jJAtvA
bhRGgajhAGkArakomalaH  /  antaHpurAt samuttasthau samaM ruditaniHsvanaH  // 43
//  syAccedvicitramAlAyA garbho'yaM tanayastataH  /  rAjyamasmai mayA dattamiti
saMbhASya niHspRhaH ||34|| AzApAzaM samucchidya nirdahya snehapaaram  /
kalatranigaDaM bhittvA tyaktvA rAjyaM tRNaM yathA  // 45 //  alaMkArAn
samutsRjya granthamantarbahiH sthitam  /  paryaGkAsanamAsthAya luJcitvA
kezasaMcayam  // 46 //  mahAvratAnyupAdAya gurorguruvinizcayaH  /  pitrA sAkaM
prazAntAtmA vijahAra sukozalaH  //  47  //  kurvannitra baliM padmaH
pAdAruNamarIcibhiH  /  saMbhrAmyan dharaNIM yogyAM vismitairIkSito janaiH  // 48
//  ArtadhyAyena sampUrNA sahadevI mRtA satI  /  tiryagyonau samutpannA
durdRSTiH pApatatparA  // 49 //  tayorviharatoryuktaM yatrAstamitazAyinoH  /
kRSNIkurvan dizAM cakramupatasthau ghanAgamaH  //  50  //  namaH payomucAM
vrAtairanuliptamivAsitaiH  /  valAkAbhiH kvaciccakre kumudaudhairivArcanam  //
51  //  kadambasthUlamukulaH kvaNaGgakadambakaH  /  payodakAlarAjasya
yazogAnamivAkarot  // 52 //  nIlAJjanacayaioryAptaM jagattuGganagairiva  /
candrasUryau gatau kvApi tarjitAviva garjitaiH  // 53 //
acchinnajaladhArAbhirdravatIva' namastalam  /  toSAdivottamAn mahyA
zabpakaJcukamAvRtam  // 54 //  yaha kaha rahA thA taba taka usake samasta
sAmanta vahA~ A pahu~ce ||41  //  sukozalakI strI vicitramAlA bhI garbhake
bhArako dhAraNa karatI, viSAdabharI, antaHpura ke sAtha vahA~ A pahu~cI  //  42
//  sukozalako dIkSAke sammukha jAnakara antaHpurase eka sAtha bhramarakI
jhaMkArake samAna komala ronekI AvAja uTha par3I ||43 //  461 tadanantara
sukozalane kahA ki 'yadi vicitramAlA ke garbhameM putra hai to usake lie maiMne
rAjya diyA' isa prakAra kahakara usane niHspRha ho, AzArUpI pAzako chedakara,
sneharUpI paMjarako jalAkara, strIrUpI ber3Iko tor3akara, rAjyako tRNake samAna
chor3akara, alaMkAroMkA tyAga kara antaraMga - bahiraMga donoM prakArake
parigrahakA utsarga kara, paryaMkAsana se baiThakara, kezoMkA loMcakara pitAse
mahAvrata dhAraNa kara liye  /  aura dRr3ha nizcaya ho zAnta citta se pitA ke
sAtha vihAra karane lagA ||44-47|| vaha vihAra yogya pRthivIpara bhramaNa karatA
thA taba pairoMkI lAla-lAla kiraNoMse aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno kamaloMkA
upahAra hI pRthivIpara car3hA rahA ho  /  loga use Azcaryabhare netroMse dekhate
the || 48  //  mithyAdRSTi tathA pApa karanemeM tatpara rahanevAlI sahadevI
ArtadhyAnase marakara tithaMca yoni meM utpanna huI ||49|| isa prakAra pitA-
putra AgamAnukUla vihAra karate the  /  vihAra karate-karate jahA~ sUrya asta ho
jAtA thA ve vahIM so jAte the  /  tadanantara dizAoM ko malina karatA huA varSA
kAla A pahu~cA  // 50 //  kAle-kAle meghoMke samUhase AkAza aisA jAna par3ane
lagA mAno gobara se lIpA gayA ho aura kahIM-kahIM ur3atI huI valAkAoMse aisA
jAna par3atA thA mAno usapara kumudoM ke samUhase arcA hI kI gayI ho  //  51  //
jinapara bhramara guMjAra kara rahe the aisI kadambakI bar3I-bar3I boDiyA~ aisI
jAna par3atI thIM mAno varSAkAlarUpI rAjAkA yazogAna hI kara rahe hoM  //  52
//  jagat aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno U~ce-U~ce parvatoMke samAna nIlAMjanake
samUhase hI vyApta ho gayA ho aura candramA tathA sUryaM kahIM cale gaye the
mAno mevoMkI garjanAse tarjita hokara hI cale gaye the ||53|| AkAzatalase
akhaNDa jaladhArA barasa rahI thI so usase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno AkAzatala
pighala-pighalakara baha rahA ho aura pRthivI meM harI-harI ghAsa uga rahI thI
usase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno usane santoSase ghAsarUpI kaMcuka ( colI ) hI
pahana rakhI ho ||54 || 1. vasantamAlAkhyA ma0  /  2. druvatIva ma.  /  3.
mahyAM zavyakaJcuka - ma.

Page #512 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
462 Padmapurana 3 Just as the mind of an extremely wicked person makes all high
and low equal, so the flood of water flowing with great speed made all the high
and low land equal. ||55|| The masses of water on the earth were roaring, and
the masses of clouds in the sky were roaring, as if they were searching for the
fleeing summer, the enemy. ||56|| The mountains adorned with waterfalls were
covered with very dense clusters of creepers. They looked as if the clouds had
fallen down under the weight of a lot of water. ||57|| In the natural land of
the forest, moving here and there, Indragopa (Veerbahuti) insects were visible.
They looked as if the pieces of the sun, ground by the clouds, had fallen on the
earth. ||58|| The lightning was moving quickly in all directions, as if the eye
of the sky was looking to see which country was filled with water and which was
not. ||59|| The sky was adorned with a rainbow, holding many kinds of
brilliance, as if it were adorned with a very high and beautiful archway. ||60||
The polluted rivers, which were bringing down both banks, in which terrible
whirlpools were rising, and which were flowing with great speed, looked like
adulterous women. ||61|| The women who were frightened by the roar of the
clouds, and whose eyes were as fickle as those of a deer, were quickly embracing
the pillars. ||62|| The emigrants, whose consciousness was being shaken by the
extremely terrible roar, were bewildered, with their eyes fixed in the direction
where the woman was. ||63|| The Digambar Muni Rajas, who were always eager to
practice compassion (mercy), having reached the Prasoo place, had taken the vow
of the Chaturmas Vrat. ||64|| The Shravakas, who were observing various kinds of
vows, such as Aakhari, etc., according to their strength, and who were always
eager to serve the saints, had taken the Digvrat. ||65|| Thus, when the rainy
season arrived, filled with clouds, the two father and son, the Nirgrantha
saints Kirtidhar Muni Raj and Sukoshal Swami, observing the appropriate conduct,
came to the cremation ground, which was filled with the darkness of trees, 1.
Praskhalasyava M., Kha. | 2. Richhanna M. | 3. Gopaga: M., J. 1 4. Yasyamashayam
dishi pramada tasyamashayam ahitekshana: pradatta lochanah. | 5. Chaturnam
masanam samaharaschaturmasi tasyavratam. | 6. Digviramashritam M.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 462 padmapurANe 3 jamitaM jalapUreNa samaM sarvaM natonnatam |
ativegapravRttena prakhalasyeva cetasA  // 55 //  bhUmau garjanti toyaudhA
vihAyasi ghanAghanAH  /  anviSyanta ivArAti nidAghasamayaM drutam  //  56  //
kandalairniviDaizchennA dharA nirjharazobhinaH  /  atyantajalabhAreNa patitA
jaladA iva  //  57  //  sthalIdezeSu dRzyante sphurantaH zakragopakAH  /
ghanacUrNitasUryasya khaNDA iva mahIM gatAH ||58 || cacAra vaidyutaM tejo dikSu
sarvAsu satvaram  /  pUritApUritaM dezaM pazyaccakSurivAmbaram  // 59 //
maNDitaM zukracApena gaganaM citratejasA  /  atyantonnatiyuktena toraNeneva
cAruNA  //  60 //  kUladvayanipAtinyo mImAvartA mahAjavAH  /  vahanti kaluSA
nadyaH svacchandapramadA iva  /  / 61|| ghanAghanaravatrastA hariNIcakitekSaNA
/  AliliGgutaM stambhAnnAryaH proSitabhartRkAH  //  62  //  garjitenAtiraudreNa
jarjarIkRtacetanAH  /  proSitA vihvalIbhUtAH 'pramadAzAhitekSaNAH  //  63  //
anukampAparAH zAntA nirgranthamunipuGgavAH  /  prAsukasthAnamAsAdya cAturmAsItra
taM zritAH  //  64  //  gRhItAM zrAvakaiH zaktyA nAnAniyamakAribhiH  /
digvirAmavrataM sAdhusevAtatparamAnasaiH  // 65 //  evaM mahati saMprApte samaye
jaladAkule  /  nirgranthau tau pitAputrau yathoktAcArakAriNau  //  66  //
vRkSAndhakAragambhIraM bahuvyAlasamAkulam  /  giripAdamahAdurgaM raudrANAmapi
bhItidam ||67 || jisa prakAra atizaya duSTa manuSyakA citta U~ca-nIca sabako
samAna kara detA hai usI prakAra vegase bahanevAle jalake pUrane U~cI-nIcI
samasta bhUmiko samAna kara diyA thA ||55  //  pRthivIpara jalake samUha garaja
rahe the aura AkAza meM meghoMke samUha garjanA kara rahe the usase aisA jAna
par3atA thA mAno ve bhAge hue grISmakAlarUpI zatruko khoja hI rahe the  //  56
//  jharanoMse suzobhita parvata atyanta saghana kandaloMse AcchAdita ho gaye
the  /  usase ve aise jAna par3ate the mAno jalake bahuta bhArI bhArase megha hI
nIce gira par3e hoM  //  57 //  vanakI svAbhAvika bhUmimeM jahA~-tahA~ calate-
phirate indragopa ( vIrabahUTI) nAmaka kIr3e dikhAI dete the  /  jo aise jAna
par3ate the mAno meghoMke dvArA cUrNIbhUta sUryake Tukar3e hI pRthivIpara A
par3e hoM || 58 || bijalIkA teja jaldI-jaldI samasta dizAoMmeM ghUma rahA thA
usase aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno AkAzakA netra 'kauna deza jalase bharA gayA
aura kauna deza nahIM bharA gayA' isa bAta ko dekha rahA thA  // 59 //  aneka
prakArake tejako dhAraNa karanevAle indradhanuSase AkAza aisA suzobhita ho gayA
mAno atyanta U~ce sundara toraNase hI suzobhita ho gayA ho ||60|| jo donoM taToM
ko girA rahI thIM, jinameM bhayaMkara Avarta uTha rahe the, aura jo bar3e vega
se baha rahI thIM aisI kaluSita nadiyA~ vyabhicAriNI striyoMke samAna jAna
par3atI thIM  // 69 //  jo meghoM kI garjanAse bhayabhIta ho rahIM thIM, tathA
jinake netra hariNIke samAna caMcala the aisI proSitabhartRkA striyA~ zIghra hI
khambhoMkA AliMgana kara rahI thIM || 62 || atyanta bhayaMkara garjanAse jinakI
cetanA jarjara ho rahI thI aise pravAsI-paradezI manuSya jisa dizA meM strI thI
usI dizAmeM netra lagAye hue vihvala ho rahe the ||63 || sadA anukampA ( dayA )
ke pAlana karanemeM tatpara rahanevAle digambara munirAja prAsu sthAna pAkara
cAturmAsa vratakA niyama liye hue the || 64 || jo zakti ke anusAra nAnA prakAra
vrata niyama Akhar3I Adi dhAraNa karate the tathA sadA sAdhuoMkI sevAmeM tatpara
rahate the aise zrAvakoMne digvrata dhAraNa kara rakhA thA || 65 || isa prakAra
meghoMse yukta varSAkAlake upasthita honepara AgamAnukUla AcArako dhAraNa
karanevAle donoM pitA-putra nirgrantha sAdhu kIrtidhara munirAja aura
sukozalasvAmI icchAnusAra vihAra karate hue usa zmazAnabhUmimeM Aye jo vRkSoMke
andhakAra se 1. praskhalasyeva ma., kha.  /  2. richannA ma.  /  3. gopagA: ma.,
ja. 1 4. yasyAmAzAyAM dizi pramadA tasyAmAzAyAmAhitekSaNAH pradattalocanAH  /
5. caturNAM mAsAnAM samAhArazcAturmAsI tasyA vratam  /  6. digvirAmazritaM ma  /

Page #513 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twenty-Second Chapter  The cremation ground was vast, filled with snakes and
other ferocious creatures. It was difficult to traverse, with its many small
hills, and terrifying even to the most fearsome beings. The air was thick with
the sounds of crows, vultures, bears, and jackals. Half-burnt corpses lay
scattered about, making the place even more dreadful. The ground was white in
places, covered with piles of skulls. The wind carried a strong, putrid smell of
decaying fat. The place was filled with laughter, and throngs of terrifying
demons and Vetalas. The trees were entangled with clumps of grass and vines.  In
this vast cremation ground, two ascetics, father and son, with pure minds and
the wealth of tapas, wandered together, arriving there by chance on the full
moon of Ashadha.   Free from all desires, the two ascetics took up a four-month
fast, settling down at the foot of a tree where the leaves had fallen and the
water was clear. They spent their time in various postures, sometimes in
Paryankaasana, sometimes in Kayotsarga, and sometimes in Viraasana and other
postures. In this way, they passed the rainy season.  Then came the autumn
season, when all human endeavors were in full swing. It was like the dawn,
illuminating the entire world with its brilliance. In the sky, white clouds
appeared, resembling clusters of blooming Kash flowers, swaying gently.   Just
as the glorious beings, the Jinas, shine brightly after the passing of the
Dushama-kala of the ascending time, so too did the sun shine brightly in the
sky, free from the presence of clouds.   The moon shone brightly amidst the
stars, like a young swan amidst a cluster of lotuses.   The entire world was
bathed in the white light of the moon, like a sea of milk flowing from the mouth
of a river.   The rivers were filled with joy, their sandy banks marked by
waves. The sounds of cranes, sarasa birds, and chakwas filled the air, as if
they were engaged in conversation.   The lotus ponds were adorned with clusters
of lotuses, buzzing with bees, as if they were adorned with false jewels.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAviMzatitamaM parva kaGkagRddharkSagomAyurava pUritagahvaram  /
ardhadagdhazavasthAnaM bhISaNaM viSamAvani ||68|| ziraHkapAlasaMghAtaiH
kvacitpANDuritakSiti'  /  vasAtivisragandhogravegavAhisamIraNam  // 69 //
sATTahAsabhramadbhImarakSovetAlasaMkulam  /
tRNagucchalatAjAlapariNaddhorupAdapam  //  70  //  raat dharAvASADhyAM
zucimAnasau  /  yadRcchayA pariprAptau viharantau tapodhanau  // 71 //  *
cAturmAsopavAsaM tau gRhItvA tatra niHspRhau  /  vRkSamUle sthitau
patrasaMgaprAsukitAmbhasi  //  72  //  paryAsanayogena kAyotsargeNa jAtucit  /
vIrAsanAdiyogena ninye tAbhyAM ghanAgamaH  // 73 //  tataH zaradRtuH prApa
sodyogAkhilamAnavaH  /  pratyUSa iva niHzeSajagadAlokapaNDitaH  // 74 //
sitacchAyA ghanAH kApi dRzyante gaganAGgaNe  /  'vikAsikAzasaMghAtasaMkAzA
mandakampitAH  //  75  //  ghanAgamavinirmukte bhAti khe padmabAndhavaH  /  gate
suduHSamAkAle bhavyabandhurjino yathA  // 76 //  tArAnikaramadhyastho rAjate
rajanIpatiH  /  kumudAkaramadhyastho rAjahaMsayuvA yathA  //  77  //  jyotsnayA
plAvito lokaH kSIrAkUpArakalpayA  /  rajanISu nizAnAtha praNAlamukhamuktayA  //
78 //  nadyaH prasannatAM prAptAstaraGgAGkitasaikatAH  /
krauJcasArasacakrAhnanAdasaMbhASaNodyatAH  // 79 //  gambhIra thA, aneka
prakArake sarpa Adi hiMsaka jantuoMse vyApta thA, pahAr3akI choTI-choTI
zAkhAoMse durgaM thA, bhayaMkara jIvoMko bhI bhaya utpanna karanevAlA thA, kAka,
gIdha, rIcha tathA zRgAla Adike zabdoM se jisake gataM bhara rahe the, jahA~
adhajale murade par3e hue the, jo bhayaMkara thA, jahA~kI bhUmi U~cI-nIcI thI,
jo zirakI haDDiyoMke samUha se kahIM-kahIM sapheda ho rahA thA, jahA~ carbIkI
atyanta sar3I bAsase tIkSNa vAyu bar3e vega se baha rahI thI, jo aTTahAsase
yukta ghUmate hue bhayaMkara rAkSasa aura vetAloMse yukta thA tathA jahA~
tRNoMke samUha aura latAoMke jAlase bar3e-bar3e vRkSa pariNaddha - vyApta the  /
aise vizAla zmazAna meM eka sAtha vihAra karate hue, taparUpI dhanake dhAraka
tathA ujjvala manase yukta dhIravIra pitA-putra - donoM munirAja ApADha sudI
pUrNimAko anAyAsa hI A pahu~ce ||66-71 || saba prakArakI spRhAse rahita donoM
munirAja, jahA~ pattoMke par3anese pAnI prAka ho gayA thA aise usa zmazAna meM
eka vRkSake nIce cAra mAsakA upavAsa lekara virAjamAna ho gaye  //  72  //  ve
donoM munirAja kabhI paryaMkAsanase virAjamAna rahate the, kabhI kAyotsargaM
dhAraNa karate the, aura kabhI vIrAsana Adi vividha AsanoMse avasthita rahate
the  /  isa taraha unhoMne varSA - kAla vyatIta kiyA  //  73  //  463
tadanantara jisameM samasta mAnava udyoga-dhandhoMse laga gaye the tathA jo
prAtaHkAlake samAna samasta saMsArako prakAzita karane meM nipuNa thI aisI zarad
Rtu AyI ||74 | | usa samaya AkAzAMgaNameM kahIM-kahIM aise sapheda megha dikhAI
dete the jo phUle hue kAzake phUloMke samAna the tathA mandamanda hila rahe the
||75 || jisa prakAra utsarpiNI kAlake duHSamA-kAla bItanepara bhavya jIvoMke
bandhu zrIjinendradeva suzobhita hote haiM, usI prakAra meghoMke Agamanase
rahita AkAza meM sUryaM suzobhita hone lagA || 76 || jisa prakAra kumudoMke bIca
meM taruNa rAjahaMsa suzobhita hotA hai usI prakAra tArAoM ke samUha ke bIca meM
candramA suzobhita hone lagA || 77|| rAtrike samaya candramArUpI praNAlIke
mukhase nikalI huI kSIrasAgara ke samAna sapheda cAMdanIse samasta saMsAra
vyApta ho gayA || 78 || jinake retIle kinAre taraMgoMse cihnita the, tathA jo
krauMca sArasa cakavA Adi pakSiyoMke zabda ke bahAne mAno paraspara meM
vArtAlApa kara rahI thIM aisI nadiyA~ prasannatAko prApta ho gayI thIM  //  79
//  | jinapara bhramara cala rahe the aise kamaloMke samUha tAlAboMmeM isa
prakAra suzobhita ho rahe the mAno mithyAtva1. viSamAvanim ma.  /  2. kSatiH ma
/  3. dhoro + ASADhyAM ASADhamAsapUrNimAyAm, ghorAvarSADhya (?) ma.  /  4.
caturmAso- ja.  /  5 yatra saGgama  /  vikAsakAza ma  /

Page #514 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
464 In the Padma Purana, the bees buzz around the lotuses in the lakes, just
like the group of the liberated souls, free from the accumulation of the false
beliefs. ||8|| The wealthy people, accompanied by their beloved ones, enjoy
themselves in the beautiful palaces, adorned with flowers, during the night.
||8|| The gatherings of the couples, who were separated, take place, where their
friends and relatives are honored and where great festivals are celebrated.
||8|| The ascetics wander in the places of the great glory of the Jinas, where
the auspicious events like the conception, birth, etc. of the Jinas took place,
after the full moon of the Kartik month. ||8|| Then, the two monks, whose vow of
the four-month fast was completed, started to go to the city for the breaking of
the fast, with the speed suitable for the time. ||84|| Seeing them, the tigress,
who was Sahadevi in her previous life, became filled with anger. Her hair,
stained with blood, was scattered and trembling. Her face was terrifying with
her fangs. Her yellow eyes were sparkling. Her round tail was touching her head.
She was digging the earth with her claws. She was roaring loudly. She looked
like a female demon, with her red tongue flickering. She was carrying a radiant
body, and she looked like the midday sun. After playing for a long time, she
jumped high, aiming at Sukoshala Swami. ||85-88|| Seeing her jumping, the two
monks, who were adorned with beautiful radiance, stood firm with their bodies,
fearless, with the vow of "If we survive this calamity, we will eat and drink,
otherwise not." ||89|| The merciless tigress fell upon Sukoshala Muni, tearing
his head and other parts of his body with her claws, and fell to the ground.
||90|| She tore his whole body, so that he looked like a mountain, from which
streams of water mixed with ochre and other metals were flowing. ||91|| Then,
she stood in front of him, performing various tricks, and started eating him
from his feet. ||92|| 1. Sahadevi in her previous life, Sahadevi-chari. 2.
Fearless with the vow, M. 3. From the head, M. 4. Tearing him from his feet. 5.
This verse is not in the K. book. 6. Of him, K.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 464 padmapurANe unmajanti calabhRGgAH saraHsu kamalAkarAH  /  bhavyasaMghA
ivonmuktamithyAtvamalasaMcayAH  // 8 //  taleSu tuGgahANAM puSpaprakaracAruSu  /
ramante bhogasaMpalA narA naktaM priyAnvitAH  // 8 //
sanmAnitasuhRddhandhujanasaMghA mahotsavAH  /  dampatInAM viyuktAnAM saMjAyante
samAgamAH  // 8 //  kArtikyAmupajAtAyAM viharanti tapodhanAH  /
jinAtizayadezeSu mahimodyatajantuSu  // 8 //  atha tI pAraNAhetoH samAptaniyamau
munii| nivezaM gantumArabdhau gatyA samayadRSTayA  // 84 //  'sahadevIcarI
vyAghrI dRSTvA tau krodhapUritA  /  zoNitAruNasaMkIrNadhutakesarasaMcayA  // 85
//  daMSTrAkarAlavadanA sphuratpiGganirIkSaNA  /  mastakolavalatpucchA
nakhakSatavasuMdharA  // 86 //  kRtagambhIrahuMkArA mArIvopAttavigrahA  /
lasallohitajihvAmA visphuradehadhAriNI  // 47 //  madhyAhnaravisaMkAzA kRtvA
krIDaoN vilambitAm  /  utpapAta mahAvegAlakSyIkRtya sukozalam  // 18 //
utpatantIM tu tAM dRSTvA tau munI cAruvibhramau  /  sAlamba bhayanirmuktau
kAyotsargeNa tasthatuH  // 89 //  sukozalamunerUddhvaM mUrdhnaH prabhRti nirdayA
/  dArayantI nakhaidehaM patitA sA mahItale  // 10 //  "tayAsau dArito dehe
vimuJcannastrasaMhatIH  /  babhava vigaladdhAtavArinirjharazailavat  // 11 //
'tatastasya puraH sthitvA kRtvA nAnAviceSTitam  /  pApA khAditumArabdhA
munimArabhya pAdataH  // 12 //  rUpI mailake samUhako chor3ate hue bhavya
jIvoMke samUha hI hoM  /  / 80 //  bhogI manuSya, phUloMke samUhase sundara
UMce-U~ce mahaloMke talloMse rAtrike samaya apanI vallabhAoMke sAtha ramaNa
karane lage  // 81 /  /  jinameM mitra tathA bandhujanoMke samUha sammAnita kiye
gaye the tathA jinameM mahAn utsavakI vRddhi ho rahI thI aise viyukta strI-
puruSoMke samAgama hone lage  // 82 //  kArtika mAsakI pUrNimA vyatIta honepara
tapasvIjana una sthAnoMmeM vihAra karane lage jinameM bhagavAnke garbha janma
Adi kalyANaka hue the tathA jahAM loga aneka prakArako prabhAvanA karanemeM
udyata the  // 83 //  athAnantara jinakA cAturmAsopavAsakA niyama pUrNa ho gayA
thA aise ve donoM munirAja AgamAnukUla gatise gamana karate hue pAraNAke nimitta
nagarameM jAneke lie udyata hue  /  / 84 //  usI samaya eka vyAghrI jo
pUrvabhavameM sukozalamunikI mAtA sahadedI thI unheM dekhakara krodhase bhara
gayI, usakI khUnase lAla-lAla dikhanevAlI bikharI jaTAeM kA~pa rahI thIM, usakA
mukha dAr3hoMse bhayaMkara thA, pIle-pIle netra camaka rahe the, usakI gola
pUMcha mastakake Upara Akara laga rahI thI, nakhoMke dvArA vaha pRthivIko khoda
rahI thI, gambhIra huMkAra kara rahI thI, aisI jAna par3atI thI mAno zarIrako
dhAraNa karanevAlI mArI hI ho, usakI lAla-lAla jihvAkA agrabhAga lapalapA rahA
thA, vaha dedIpyamAna zarIrako dhAraNa kara rahI thI aura madhyAhnake sUrya ke
samAna jAna par3atI thii| bahuta dera taka krIr3A karaneke bAda usane
sukozalasvAmIko lakSya kara UMcI chalAMga bharI  // 85-88|| sundara zobhAko
dhAraNa karanevAle donoM munirAja, use chalAMga bharatI dekha 'yadi isa
upasargase bace to AhAra pAnI grahaNa kareMge anyathA nahIM' isa prakArakI
sAlamba pratijJA lekara nirbhaya ho kAyotsargase khar3e ho gaye  // 89 //  vaha
dayAhIna vyAghrI sukozala munike Upara par3I aura nakhoMke dvArA unake mastaka
Adi aMgoMko vidAratI huI pRthivIpara AyI  // 90 //  usane unake samasta zarIrako
cIra DAlA jisase khUnakI dhArAoMko chor3ate hue ve usa pahAr3ake samAna jAna
par3ate the jisase gerU Adi dhAtuoMse mizrita pAnIke nirjhara jhara rahe hoM  //
11 //  tadanantara vaha pApina unake sAmane khar3I hokara tathA nAnA prakArakI
ceSTAe~ kara unheM pairakI orase khAne lagI  // 92 //  1. bhUtapUrvA sahadevI,
sahadevIcarI  /  2. sAlambabhayanirmuktI ma.  /  3. mUrdhaprabhRti m.| 4.
ghnantI taM padaghAtataH  /  5. eSa zlokaH kha. pustake nAsti  /  6. yatestasya
kh.|

Page #515 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Second Chapter  **465** Behold, O Shrenik, the workings of
delusion in the world, where a mother devours the body of her beloved son.
||13|| What greater sorrow can there be than that, blinded by past lives,
relatives become enemies and perpetrators of evil. ||14||   Then, for this
Sukoshal, steadfast like Mount Meru, and immersed in white meditation,  Kevala
Jnana arose before the shedding of his body. ||15||  Indra, along with the gods
and demons, came and, filled with joy, worshipped his body with divine flowers
and other treasures. ||16||   The tigress, enlightened by the wise words of
Kirti Dhar, embraced renunciation and attained heaven. ||97||  Then, Kevala
Jnana arose for Kirti Dhar as well.  The journey of these two, father and son,
became a glorious event for the gods. ||98||  The gods and demons, proclaiming
the supreme glory of Kevala Jnana, bowed down to the feet of the two Kevalins
and went to their respective places. ||99||  Gautama Swami says, "He who studies
the greatness of Sukoshal Swami, will be free from calamities and live happily
for a long time." ||100||  Then, at the completion of her pregnancy,
Vichitramala, the wife of Sukoshal, gave birth to a son with a beautiful and
auspicious body. ||101||  Because the mother became as beautiful as gold while
the child was in her womb, he was named Hiranyagarbha. ||102||  Hiranyagarbha, a
king of great virtue, brought back the time of Lord Rishabhadeva. He married
Amritavati, the virtuous daughter of King Hari. ||103||  King Hiranyagarbha was
blessed with friends and relatives, a master of all scriptures, possessed
inexhaustible wealth, was glorious, and as beautiful as Mount Sumeru.  He was
also magnanimous.  While enjoying the finest pleasures, he noticed a white hair
amidst his black hair, like a bee. ||104-105||  Seeing that white hair in the
mirror, he was filled with sorrow, as if he had been summoned by the messenger
of death. ||106||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAviMzatitama parva 465 pazya zreNika saMsAre saMmohasya viceSTitam  /
yatrAbhISTasya putrasya mAtA gAtrANi khAdati  // 13 //  kimato'nyatparaM kaSTaM
yajanmAntaramohitAH  /  bAndhavA eva gacchanti vairitAM pApakAriNaH  // 14 //
tato merusthirasyAsya shukldhyaanaavgaahinH| utpannaM kevalajJAnaM
dehamukteranantaram  // 15 //  Agatya'ca sahendreNa pramodena surAsurAH  /
cakrurdehArcanaM tasya divyapuSpAdisaMpadA  // 16 //  vyAghrI kIrtidhareNApi
suvAkyairbodhitA satI  /  saMnyAsena zubha kAlaM kRtvA svargamupAgatA  // 97 //
tataH kIrtidharasyApi kevalajJAnamudgatam  /  yAtrA saikaiva devAnAM jAtA
mahimakAriNAm  // 98 //  mahimAnaM paraM kRtvA kevalasya suraasuraaH| pAdau
kevalinornasvA yayuH sthAnaM yathAyatham  // 19 //  sukozalasya mAhAtmyamadhIte
yaH pumAniti  /  upasargavinirmaktaH sakhaM jIvatyasau ciram  // 10 //  devI
vicitramAlAtha saMpUrNe samaye sukham  /  prasUtA tanayaM
cArulakSaNAGkitavigraham  // 101 //  hiraNyarucirA mAtA tasmin
garbhasthite'bhavat  /  yato hiraNyagarbhAkhyAmato'sau sundaro'gamat  // 102 //
nAbheyasamayastena guNaH punarivAhRtaH  /  hareH sa tanayAM lebhe nAmnAmRtavatIM
zumAm  // 103 //  suhRdbAndhavasaMpannaH sarvazAstrArthapAragaH  /
akSINadraviNaH zrImAn hemaparvatasaMnimaH  // 10 //  parAnanubhavan
mogAnanyadAsau mahAmanAH  /  madhye bhRGgAbhakezAnAM palitAGkaramaikSata  // 105
//  darpaNasya sthitaM madhye dRSTvA taM palitAGkuram  /
mRtyordUtasamAhUtamAtmAnaM zokamAptavAn  // 106 //  gautamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase
kahate haiM ki he zreNika ! mohakI ceSTA to dekho jahAM mAtA hI priya putrake
zarIrako khAtI hai  // 93 /  /  isase bar3hakara aura kyA kaSTakI bAta hogI ki
dUsare janmase mohita ho bAndhavajana hI anarthakArI zatrutAko prApta ho jAte
haiM  // 14 //  tadanantara meruke samAna sthira aura zukla dhyAnako dhAraNa
karanevAle sukozala muniko zarIra chUTaneke pahale hI kevalajJAna utpanna ho
gayA  // 95 //  sura aura asuroMne indrake sAtha Akara bar3e harSase divya
puSpAdi sampadAke dvArA unake zarIrako pUjA kI  // 96 //  sukozalake pitA
kIrtidhara munirAjane bhI usa vyAghrIko madhura zabdoMse sambodhA jisase
saMnyAsa grahaNa kara vaha svarga gayI  // 97 //  tadanantara usI samaya
kIrtidhara munirAjako bhI kevalajJAna utpanna huA so mahimA ko karanevAle
devoMkI vahI eka yAtrA pitA aura putra donoMkA kevalajJAna mahotsava karanevAlI
hii||98|| sara aura asara kevalajJAnako parama mahimA phailAkara tathA donoM
kevaliyoMke caraNoMko namaskAra kara yathAyogya apane-apane sthAnapara gaye  //
99 //  gautamasvAmI kahate haiM ki jo puruSa sukozalasvAmIke mAhAtmyako par3hatA
hai vaha upasargase rahita ho cirakAla taka sukhase jIvita rahatA hai  // 10 //
athAnantara sukozalakI strI vicitramAlAne garbhakA samaya pUrNa honepara sundara
lakSaNoMse cihnita zarIrako dhAraNa karanevAlA putra utpanna kiyA  // 101 //
cUMki usa bAlakake garbhameM sthita rahanepara mAtA suvarNake samAna sundara ho
gayI thI isalie vaha bAlaka hiraNyagarbha nAmako prApta huA  // 102 //  Age
calakara hiraNyagarbha aisA rAjA huA ki usane apane guNoMke dvArA bhagavAn
RSabhadevakA samaya hI mAno punaH vApasa lAyA thaa| usane rAjA harikI amRtavatI
nAmakI zubha putrIke sAtha vivAha kiyA  // 103 /  /  rAjA hiraNyagarbha samasta
mitra tathA bAndhavajanoMse sahita thA, sarva zAstroMkA pAragAmI thA, akhaNDa
dhanakA svAmI thA, zrImAn thA, sumeru parvatake samAna sundara thA, aura udAra
hRdaya thaa| vaha utkRSTa bhogoMko bhogatA huA samaya bitAtA thA ki eka dina
usane apane bhramarake samAna kAle kezoMke bIca eka safeda bAla dekhA  /  /
104-105|| darpaNake madhyameM sthita usa sapheda bAlako dekhakara vaha aisA
zokako prApta huA mAno apane Apako bulAneke 1. camarendreNa kha., ca mahendreNa
j.| 2. bhavet ma.  /

Page #516 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In the Padma Purana,  (107) He thought, "Alas, it is a great hardship that my
limbs are being forcibly taken away by this old age, which destroys strength and
radiance." (108) My body, which is like a sandalwood tree, will now be burnt by
the fire of old age and become like a coal." (109) The disease, which is like a
hole, has been waiting for a long time, and now it will enter my body like a
demon." (110) "Death, who is eager to devour, has been standing like a tiger for
a long time, and now he will devour my body." (111) "Those young men who have
reached this land of action and have boarded the boat of vows, will cross the
ocean of existence." (112) Thinking thus, he placed his son, Amritavati, on the
throne and went to the pure yogis to take initiation. (113) Since no
inauspiciousness was declared when he was in the womb, he was known as
"Nighusha," and he had conquered the whole world with his virtues. (114) Then,
leaving his queen, Singhika, in the city, King Nighusha went to the north to
subdue his hostile enemies. (115) The kings of the south, knowing that Nighusha
was far away, came to seize his city of Ayodhya. They were accompanied by a
large army. (116) But the very valiant Queen Singhika defeated them all in
battle. She appointed a trustworthy king to protect the city and, with the
defeated vassals, went south to conquer the remaining kings. She had worked hard
in both weapons and scriptures. (117) She conquered the hostile vassals with her
own prowess and returned to the city, filling the directions with the sound of
victory. (118) When King Nighusha returned after subduing the north, he was very
angry, having heard of his wife's valor.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe acintayacca hA kaSTaM balAdaGgAni me'nayA  /  zaktikAntivinAzinyA
vyApyante jarasAdhunA  //  107  //  candanadrumasaMkAza e kAyo'yamadhunA mama  /
jarAjvalananirdagdho'GgArakalpo bhaviSyati  //  108  //  tarkayantI rujA chidraM
yA sthitA samayaM ciram  /  pizAcIvAdhunA sA me zarIraM vAdhayiSyati  //  109
//  ciraM baddhakramo yossthAd vyAghravadgrahaNotsukaH  /  mRtyuH sa me'dhunA
dehaM prasabhaM bhakSayiSyati  // 110 //  karmabhUmimimAM prApya dhanyAste
yuvapuGgavAH  /  vratapotaM samAruhya terherye bhavasAgaram  //  111  //  iti
saMcintya vinyasya rAjye'mRtavatIsutam  /  naghuSAkhyaM pravavrAja pAveM
vimalayoginaH  //  112 //  na ghoSitaM yatastasmin garbhasthe'pyazumaM bhuvi  /
naghuSo'sau tataH khyAto guNanAmitaviSTapaH  // 113 //  sa jAyAM siMhikAbhiyAM
sthApayitvA pure yayau  /  uttarAM kakubhaM jetuM sAmantAn pratyavasthitAn  //
114 //  dUrIbhUtaM nRpaM jJAtvA dAkSiNAtyA narAdhipAH  /  purIM
gRhItumAjagmurvinItAM' bhUrisAdhanAH  // 115 //  raNe vijitya tAn sarvAn
siMhikAtipratApinI  /  sthApayitvA dRDhaM sthAne rakSamAptataraM nRpam  //  116
//  sAmantairnirjitaiH sArddhaM jetuM zeSAnnarAdhipAn  /  jagAma dakSiNAmAzAM
zastrazAstrakRtazramA  //  117  //  pratApenaiva nirjitya sAmantAn
pratyavasthitAn  /  AjagAma purIM rAjJI jayanisvanapUritA  //  118  //
naghuSo'pyuttarAmAzAM vazIkRtya samAgataH  /  kopaM paramamApannaH
zrutadAraparAkramaH  //  119  //  466 lie yamakA dUta hI A pahu~cA ho ||106  //
| vaha vicAra karane lagA ki hAya bar3e kaSTakI bAta hai ki isa samaya zakti
aura kAntiko naSTa karanevAlI isa vRddhAvasthAke dvArA mere aMga balapUrvaka
hare jA rahe haiM || 107 || merA yaha zarIra candanake vRkSake samAna sundara
hai so aba vRddhAvasthArUpI agni se jalakara aMgArake samAna ho jAvegA  //  108
//  jo vRddhAvasthA rogarUpI chidrakI pratIkSA karatI huI cirakAla se sthita thI
aba vaha pizAcIkI nAI praveza kara mere zarIrako bAdhA pahu~cAvegI  // 109  //
grahaNa karanemeM utsuka jo mRtyu vyAghrakI taraha cirakAlase baddhakrama hokara
sthita thA aba vaha haThAt mere zarIrakA bhakSaNa karegA  //  110  //  ve
zreSTha taruNa dhanya jo isa karmabhUmiko pAkara tathA vratarUpI nAvapara savAra
ho saMsArarUpI sAgarase pAra ho cuke haiM  //  111  //  aisA vicArakara usane
amRtavatI ke putra naghuSako rAjya - siMhAsanapara baiThAkara vimala yogI ke
samIpa dIkSA dhAraNa kara lI  //  112  //  | cU~ki usa putrake garbha meM sthita
rahate samaya pRthivIpara azubhakI ghoSaNA nahIM huI thI arthAt jabase vaha
garbhameM AyA thA tabhIse azubha zabda nahIM sunAI par3A thA isalie vaha
'naghuSa' isa nAmase prasiddha huA thA  /  usane apane guNoMse samasta saMsArako
bhUta kara diyA thA ||113|| athAnantara kisI samaya rAjA naghuSa apanI siMhikA
nAmaka rAnIko nagarameM rakhakara pratikUla zatruoM ko vaza karaneke lie uttara
dizAkI ora gayA  //  114  //  idhara dakSiNa dizAke rAjA naghuSako dUravartI
jAnakara usakI ayodhyA nagarIko hathiyAneke lie A pahu~ce  /  ve rAjA bahuta
bhArI senA sahita the || 115 || parantu atyanta pratApinI siMhikA rAnIne una
sabako yuddha meM jIta liyaa| itanA hI nahIM vaha eka vizvAsapAtra rAjAko
nagarakI rakSAke lie niyukta kara yuddha meM jIte hue sAmantoMke sAtha zeSa
rAjAoMko jItaneke lie dakSiNa dizA kI ora cala pdd'ii| zastra aura zAstra
donoMmeM hI usane acchA parizrama kiyA thA ||116 - 117 /  vaha pratikUla
sAmantoMko apane pratApase hI jItakara vijayanAdase dizAoMko pUrNa karatI huI
nagarImeM vApasa A gayI ||118 || udhara jaba rAjA naghuSa uttara dizAko vaza
kara vApasa AyA taba strIke parAkrama 1. me tathA ma  /  2.
saMkAzakAyo'yamadhunA ma., ka., kha.  /  nAmita viSTape ma  /  guNAnAmiti
viSTape va  /  6. naraM ma ayodhyAm  /  9. zramAH ma. 1  /  3. yugapuGgavAH ma
/  4. taruyeM ma  /  5. guNabhRzaM kha.  /  7. purI ma.  /  8. vinItA ma.  /

Page #517 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twenty-Second Chapter  **467**  The king, convinced that the noble lady could
not have been so audacious, became estranged from the Lioness. **120**  Despite
her virtuous conduct, she was removed from the position of Mahadevi by the king.
Thus, she was reduced to great poverty and endured hardship for some time.
**121**  Later, the king was afflicted by a severe burning fever, which could
not be cured by any medicine prescribed by the physicians. **122**  Upon
learning of this, the Lioness was overwhelmed with grief.  She then devised a
plan to prove her innocence. **123**  She summoned all her relatives, vassals,
and subjects, and holding water given to her by the priest in her cupped hands,
she declared, "If I have not harbored any other man in my heart, then let this
water, sprinkled upon the king, cure him of his fever." **124-125**  As soon as
a single drop of the water from the Lioness's hand touched the king, he became
as cold as if he had been plunged into ice.  The chill caused his teeth to
chatter like a vina. **126**  At that moment, the sky was filled with the sound
of "Sadhu! Sadhu!" and the air was showered with flowers released by unseen
beings. **127**  Recognizing the Lioness's virtue, King Nahusha reinstated her
as Mahadevi and paid her great homage. **128**  Free from enemies, he enjoyed
pleasures with her for a long time, following all the customs of his ancestors.
Despite his enjoyment of worldly pleasures, he remained detached in his heart.
**129**  Finally, he bestowed the kingdom upon his son, born to the Lioness, and
followed the path of his father, embracing the Jain path. **130**  King Nahusha,
having subdued all his enemies, was known as Sudasa.  Therefore, his son was
known throughout the world as Saudasa (the son of Sudasa). **131**  In his
lineage, for eight days, even after the completion of four months, no one
consumed meat, even those who were accustomed to eating meat. **132**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAviMzatitama parva 467 avikhaNDitazIlAyA 'nedRgdhASTayaM kulastriyAH  /
bhavatIti vinizcitya siMhikAyAM vyarajyata  // 120 /  /  mahAdevIpadAt sAtha
cyAvitA sAdhuceSTitA  /  mahAdaridratA prAptA kAlaM kaMcidavasthitA  // 121 //
anyadAtha mahAdAhajvaro'bhUt pRthivIpateH  /
sarvavaidyaprayuktAnAmauSadhAnAmagocaraH  /  / 122 //  siMhikA taM tathAbhUtaM
jJAtvA zokasamAkulA  /  svaM ca zodhayituM sAdhvI kriyAmetAM samAzritA  // 123
//  samAhUyAkhilAn bandhUn sAmantAn prkRtiistthaa| karakoze samAdAya vAri dattaM
purodhasA  /  / 124 //  jagAda yadi me bhartA nAnyazcetasyapi sthitaH  /  tataH
sikto'mbunAnena rAjAstu vigatajvaraH  /  / 125 /  /  tato'sau siktamAtre'smin
taskarodakazIkare  /  dantavINAkRtasvAno himamagna ivAbhavat  /  / 126 /  /
sAdhu sAdhviti zabdena gaganaM paripUritam  /  adRSTajananirmuktairvRSTaM
sumanasAM cayaiH  // 127 //  iti tAM zIlasaMpanna vijJAya narapuGgavaH  /
mahAdevIpade bhUyaH kRtapUjAmatiSThipat  // 128 //  anubhUya ciraM bhogAn tayA
sArdhamakaNTakaH  /  niHzeSapUrvajAcAraM kRtvA manasi niHspRhaH  // 129 //
saMbhUtaM siMhikAdevyAM sutaM rAjye ninAya sH| jagAma padavIM dhIro janakena
niSevitAm  // 130 //  naghuSasya suto yasmAt sudaasiikRtvidvissH| saudAsa iti
tenAsau bhuvane parikIrtitaH  // 13 //  tasya gotre dinAnyaSTau
caturmAsIsamAptiSu  /  bhuktaM na kenacinmAMsamapi mAMsaidhitAtmanA  /  / 132 //
kI bAta sunakara vaha parama krodhako prApta huA  // 119|| akhaNDazIlako dhAraNa
karanevAlI kulAMganAkI aisI dhRSTatA nahIM ho sakatI aisA nizcaya kara vaha
siMhikAse virakta ho gayA  // 120|| vaha uttama ceSTAoMse sahita thI phira bhI
rAjAne use mahAdevIke padase cyuta kara diyaa| isa taraha mahAdaridratAko prApta
ho vaha kucha samaya taka bar3e kaSTase rahI  /  / 121 //  _ athAnantara kisI
samaya rAjAko aisA mahAn dAhajvara huA ki jo samasta vaidyoMke dvArA prayukta
oSadhiyoMse bhI acchA nahIM ho sakA  /  / 122 /  /  jaba siMhikAko isa bAtakA
patA calA taba vaha zokase bahuta hI Akula huii| usI samaya usane apane Apako
nirdoSa siddha karaneke lie yaha kAma kiyA  // 123 /  /  ki usane samasta
bandhujanoM, sAmantoM aura prajAko bulAkara apane karapuTameM purohitake dvArA
diyA huA jala dhAraNa kiyA aura kahA ki yadi maiMne apane cittameM kisI dUsare
bhartAko sthAna nahIM diyA ho to isa jalase sIMcA huA bhartA dAhajvarase rahita
ho jAve  // 124-125 /  /  tadanantara siMhikA rAnIke hAthameM sthita jalakA eka
chIMTA hI rAjApara sIMcA gayA thA ki vaha itanA zItala ho gayA mAno barpha meM
hI DabA diyA gayA ho| zItake kAraNa usakI dantAvalI vINAke samAna zabda karane
lagI  // 126 /  /  usI samaya 'sAdhu'-'sAdhu' zabdase AkAza bhara gayA au
adRSTajanoMke dvArA chor3e hue phUloMke samUha barasane lage  // 127 /  /  isa
prakAra rAjA naghuSane siMhikA rAnIko zIlasampanna jAnakara phirase use mahAdevI
padapara adhiSThita kiyA tathA usakI bahuta bhArI pujA ko  // 128 //
zatrurahita hokara usane cirakAla taka usake sAtha bhogoMkA anubhava kiyA aura
apane pUrvapuruSoMke dvArA AcArita samasta kArya kiye| usakI yaha vizeSatA thI
ki bhogarata rahanepara bhI vaha manameM sadA bhogoMse niHspRha rahatA thA  //
129|| antameM vaha dhIravora siMhikAdevIse utpanna putrako rAjya dekara apane
pitAke dvArA sevita mArgakA anusaraNa karane lagA arthAt pitAke samAna usane
jinadIkSA dhAraNa kara lI  // 130 //  rAjA naghuSa samasta zatruoMko vaza kara
leneke kAraNa sudAsa kahalAtA thaa| isalie usakA putra saMsArameM saudAsa (
sudAsasyApatyaM pumAn saudAsaH) nAmase prasiddha huA  // 131 /  /  pratyeka cAra
1. nedRgdhI ekulastriyAH m.| 2. moSadhInAmagocaraH m.| 3. kare kozaM kha., b.|
4. kRtasthAno ma. ! 5. dRSTaM ka., kha., j.| 6. bhUpaH ma.  /  7. niHzoSa m.| 8.
myaSTa mH| 9. caturvAsI m.| 10. mAMsadhRtAtmanA b.|

Page #518 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
468 In the Padma Purana, it is said that due to the arousal of some inauspicious
karma, the king Saudas developed a desire to eat meat on those very days.
||133|| Then, calling the cook aside, he said, "O Bhadra! I have a desire to eat
meat today." ||134|| The cook replied, "O King! You know that on these days,
throughout the entire earth, there is a grand celebration of the Jina's worship
and the killing of living beings is prohibited." ||135|| Hearing this, the king
said to the cook, "If I don't eat meat today, I will die. Having decided this,
do whatever is right. What is the use of talking?" ||136|| Knowing the king's
condition, the cook went outside the city. There, he saw a dead child abandoned
in the ditch on that very day. ||137|| Wrapping it in cloth, he brought it,
cooked it with delicious things, and gave it to the king to eat, thinking, "This
is suitable for him." ||138|| The king, whose mind was extremely delighted by
the taste of human flesh, ate it and, getting up, said to the cook in
astonishment, "O Bhadra! Where did you get this meat, whose taste is so
extremely sweet, which I have never tasted before?" ||139-140|| In response, the
cook, seeking his protection, told him everything as it was. Then the king said,
"Let this be done always." ||141|| Thereafter, the cook started giving laddoos
to the small children. Enticed by them, the children started coming to him every
day. ||142|| When the children went to take the laddoos, the one who lagged
behind was killed, cooked, and given to the king continuously. ||143|| When the
children of the city started decreasing every day, the people realized this and
expelled the king and the cook from the city. ||144|| Saudas had a son named
Simharatha born to his wife Kanakamba. The city dwellers installed him on the
throne, and all the kings bowed to him. ||145|| King Saudas became so attached
to human flesh that he even ate his cook. ||146|| When the month was over and
the eight days of the Ashtahnika came, no one in his lineage ate meat, even if
their body was nourished by it. ||132||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 468 padmapurANe karmaNastvazubhasyAsya kasyApi samudIraNAt  /  babhUva khAdituM
mAMsaM teSveva divaseSu dhIH  // 133 //  tato'nena samAhvAya sUdaH
svaramabhASyata  /  mAMsamattuM samutpannA mama madrAdya dhIriti  // 134 //
tenokta deva jAnAsi dineSveteSvamAraNam  /  jinapUjAsamRddheSu samastAyAmapi
kSitau  // 135 /  /  nRpeNoce punaH sUdo mriye'dya yadi nAmi tat  /  iti
nizcitya yadyuktaM tadAcara kimuktimiH  // 136 //  tadavasthaM nRpaM jJAtvA
purAt sUdo bahirgataH  /  dadarza mRtakaM bAlaM taddine parikhojjhitam  // 137
//  taM vastrAvRtamAnIya saMskRtya svAduvastubhiH  /  narendrAya dadAvattuM'
manyase'muSya gocaram (?)  // 138 //  mahAmAMsarasAsvAdanitAntaprItamAnasaH  /
bhuktvotthito mithaH sUda sa jagAda savismayaH  /  / 139 //  vada bhadra kutaH
prAptaM mAMsametattvayedRzam  /  anAsvAditapUrvo'yaM raso yasyAtipezalaH  // 140
//  so'bhayaM mArgayitvAsmai yathAvad vinyavedayat  /  tato rAjA jagAdedaM
sarvadA kriyatAmiti  // 141 //  sUdo'tha dAtumArabdhaH zizuvargAya modakAn  /
zizavastatprasaGgena pratyahaM taM samAyayuH  // 142 //  gRhItvA modakAn yAtAM
zizUnAM pazcimaM tataH  /  mArayitvA dadau sUdo rAjJe saMskRtya saMtatam  // 143
//  pratyahaM kSIyamANeSu paurabAleSu nizcitaH  /  sUdena sahito rAjA dezAt
paurairnirAkRtaH  // 14 //  kanakAmAsamutpannastasya siMharathaH sutaH  /
rAjye'vasthApitaH pauraiH praNataH sarvapArthivaiH  // 145 //
mahAmAMsarasAsaktaH saudAso jagdhasUdakaH  /  babhrAma dharaNI duHkhI
bhakSayannujjhitAn zavAn  // 146 //  mAsa samApta honepara jaba aSTAhnikAke ATha
dina Ate the taba usake gotrameM koI bhI mAMsa nahIM khAtA thA bhale hI usakA
zarIra mAMsase hI kyoM na vRddhiMgata huA ho  // 132 /  /  kintu isa rAjA
saudAsako kisI azubha karmake udayase inhIM dinoMmeM mAMsa khAnekI icchA utpanna
huI  /  / 133 /  /  taba usane rasoiyAko bulAkara ekAntameM kahA ki he bhadra !
Aja mere mAMsa khAnekI icchA utpanna huI hai  /  / 134 /  /  rasoiyAne uttara
diyA ki deva ! Apa yaha jAnate haiM ki ina dinoMmeM samasta pRthvImeM bar3I
samRddhike sAtha jinapUjA hotI hai tathA jIvoMke mAranekI manAhI hai  // 135 //
yaha suna rAjAne rasoiyAse kahA ki yadi Aja maiM mAMsa nahIM khAtA hU~ to mara
jaauuNgaa| aisA nizcaya kara jo ucita ho so kro| bAta karanese kyA lAbha hai ?
||136 /  /  rAjAkI aisI dazA jAnakara rasoiyA nagarake bAhara gyaa| vahA~ usane
usI dina parikhAmeM chor3A huA eka mRtaka bAlaka dekhA  /  / 137|| use vastrase
lapeTakara vaha le AyA aura svAdiSTa vastuoMse pakAkara khAneke lie rAjAko diyA
// 138|| mahAmAMsa ( naramAMsa ) ke rasAsvAdase jisakA mana atyanta prasanna ho
rahA thA aisA rAjA use khAkara jaba uThA taba usane Azcaryacakita ho rasoiyAse
kahA ki bhadra ! jisake isa atyanta madhura rasakA maiMne pahale kabhI svAda
nahIM liyA aisA yaha mAMsa tumane kahA~se prApta kiyA hai ?  // 139-140 /  /
isake uttarameM rasoiyAne abhayadAnakI yAcanA kara saba bAta jyoMkI-tyoM batalA
dii| taba rAjAne kahA ki sadA aisA hI kiyA jAye  // 141 /  /  athAnantara
rasoiyAne choTe-choTe bAlakoMke lie laDDU denA zurU kiyA, usake lobhase bAlaka
pratidina usake pAsa Ane lage  // 142 //  laDDU lekara jaba bAlaka jAne lagate
taba unameM jo pIche raha jAtA thA use mArakara tathA pakAkara vaha nirantara
rAjAko dene lagA  // 143 //  jaba pratidina nagarake bAlaka kama hone lage taba
logoMne isakA nizcaya kiyA aura rasoiyAke sAthasAtha rAjAko nagarase nikAla diyA
/  / 144 /  /  saudAsakI kanakAbhA strIse eka siMharatha nAmakA putra huA thaa|
nagaravAsiyoMne use hI rAjyapadapara ArUr3ha kiyA tathA saba rAjAoMne use
praNAma kiyA  // 145 /  /  rAjA saudAsa naramAMsameM itanA Asakta ho gayA ki
usane apane rasoiyAko hI khA 1. tenokto ma., kha., ja., ka.  /  2.
vstraavRtt-m.| 3. manyase mukhyagocaram ma., kha., j.| 4. sarvathA ma.  /  5.
gacchatAm  /  yAtAn m.| 6. 'rAjJa satataM so'tha sUdakaH' ma.  /

Page #519 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Twenty-second Chapter 469 Just as a lion's food is meat, so too was his
[Saudasa's] food. Thus, he became known in the world as 'Sinhsaudasa' [the lion-
like Saudasa]. 147 After reaching the Dakshinapatha [southern region], he
obtained shelter under a Digambara ascetic and, upon hearing the doctrine,
became a great observer of the Anuvrata [minor vows]. 148 Then, when the queen
of the great city died without a son, he was installed on the throne by the
royal elephant. 149 He then sent an envoy to his son, urging him to pay
obeisance, but the son, fearless, wrote back saying, "I will not bow down to one
who has engaged in despicable conduct." 150 Thereupon, Saudasa marched against
his entire domain, and the people fled in terror of being devoured. 151 After
defeating his son in battle and reinstating him on the throne, the now virtuous
Saudasa, filled with great remorse, entered the forest for penance. 152
Thereafter, from Brahmaratha were born Chaturvaktra, Dharmaratha, Shatarath,
Mandhata, Virasena, Pratimamyu, Kamalabandhava (also known as Kamalabandhus for
his radiance), Ravimamyu (also known as Vasantatilaka), Kuberadatta,
Kunthubhakti (the renowned one), Sharabhardvaja, Dviradrath, Mrigeshadvamana,
Hiranyakashipu, Pujjasthala, Kakutstha, and the supremely valorous Raghu.
153-158 These kings born in the Ikshvaku lineage attained moksha after taking up
the Digambara vow. 159 Thereafter, the great king Anaranya was born, the one who
made the land devoid of forests by settling people there. 160

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAviMzatitamaM parva 469 siMhasyeva yato mAMsamAhAro'syAmavattataH  /
siMhasaudAsazabdena bhuvane khyAtimAgataH  // 147 //  dakSiNApathamAsAdya
prApyAnambarasaMzrayam  /  zrutvA dharma babhUvAsAvaNuvratadharo mahAn  // 14 //
tato mahApure rAjJi mRte putravivarjite  /  skandhamAropitaH prApa rAjyaM
rAjadvipena saH  // 149 //  byasarjayacca putrasya nataye dUtamUrjitaH  /
so'likhattava gahyasya na namAmIti nirbhayaH  // 150 //  tasyopari tato yAti
saudAse viSayo'khilaH  /  prapalAyitumArebhe bhakSaNatrAsakampitaH  // 15 //
'sa jitvA tanayaM yuddha rAjye nyasya punaH kRtI  /  mahAsaMvegasaMpannaH
praviveza tapovanam  // 152 //  tato brahmaratho jAtazcaturvaktrastato'bhavat  /
tasmAddhamaratho jajJe jAtaH zatarathastataH  // 153 //  udapAdi
pRthustasmAdajastasmAt payorathaH  /  babhUvendraratho'muSmAdinanAtharathastataH
// 154 //  mAndhAtA vIrasenazva pratimanyustataH kramAt  /  nAmnA
kamalabandhuzca dIptyA kamalabAndhavaH  // 155 //  pratApena ravestulyaH
samastasthitikovidaH  /  ravimanyuzca vijJeyo vasantatilakastathA  // 156 //
kuberadattanAmA ca kunthubhaktizca kIrtimAn  /  zaramadviradau proktau
rathazabdottarazrutI  // 157 //  mRgezadamanAmikhyo hiraNyakazipustathA  /
puJjasthalaH kakutthazca raghuH paramavikramaH  // 158 //  itIkSvAkukulodbhUtAH
kIrtitA bhuvanAdhipAH  /  bhUrizo'na gatA mokSaM kRtvA daigambaraM vratam  //
159 //  AsIttato vinItAyAmanaraNyo mahAnRpaH  /  anaraNyaH kRto yena dezo
vAsayatA janam  // 16 //  liyaa| antameM vaha chor3e hue murdoko khAtA huA
duHkhI ho pRthvIpara bhramaNa karane lagA ||146 /  /  jisa prakAra siMhakA AhAra
mAMsa hai usI prakAra isakA bhI AhAra mAMsa ho gayA thaa| isalie yaha saMsArameM
siMhasaudAsake nAmase prasiddhiko prApta huA  // 147 /  /  athAnantara vaha
dakSiNa dezameM jAkara eka digambara munike pAsa pahuMcA aura unase dharma
zravaNa kara bar3A bhArI aNavratoMkA dhArI ho gayA  // 148 //  tadanantara usI
samaya mahApara nagarakA rAjA mara gayA thaa| usake koI santAna nahIM thii| so
logoMne nizcaya kiyA ki paTTabandha hAthI chor3A jaave| vaha jise kandhepara
baiThAkara lAve use hI rAjA banA diyA jaaye| nizcayAnusAra paTTabandha hAthI
chor3A gayA aura vaha siMhasaudAsako kandhepara baiThAkara nagarameM le gyaa|
phalasvarUpa use rAjya prApta ho gayA  // 149 /  /  kucha samaya bAda jaba
saudAsa baliSTha ho gayA taba usane namaskAra karaneke lie putrake pAsa dUta
bhejaa| isake uttarameM putrane nirbhaya hokara likha diyA ki cUMki tuma nindita
AcaraNa karanevAle ho ataH tumheM namaskAra nahIM karUMgA ||150 //  tadanantara
saudAsa putrake Upara car3hAI karaneke lie calA so 'kahIM yaha khA na le' isa
bhayase samasta dezavAsI logoMne bhAganA zurU kara diyA  // 151 /  /  antameM
saudAsane yuddha meM putrako jItakara use hI rAjA banA diyA aura svayaM
kRtakRtya ho vaha mahAvairAgyase yukta hotA huA tapovanameM calA gayA  // 152 //
tadanantara siMharathake brahmaratha, brahmarathake caturmukha, caturmukhake
hemaratha, hemarathake zataratha, zatarathake mAndhAtA, mAndhAtAke vIrasena,
vIrasenake pratimanyu, pratimanyuke dIptise sUryakI tulanA karanevAlA
kamalabandhu, kamalabandhuke pratApase sUryake samAna tathA samasta maryAdAko
jAnanevAlA ravimanyu, ravimanyuke vasantatilaka, vasantatilakake kuberadatta,
kuberadattake kIrtimAn kunthubhakti, kunthubhaktike zarabharatha, zarabharathake
dviradaratha, dviradarathake siMhadamana, siMhadamanake hiraNyakazipu,
hiraNyakazipuke puMjasthala, puMjasthalake kakuttha aura kakutthake atizaya
parAkramI raghu putra huA  // 153-158 //  isa prakAra ikSvAku vaMzameM utpanna
hue rAjAoMkA varNana kiyaa| inameM se aneka rAjA digambara vrata dhAraNa kara
mokSako prApta hue  // 159 //  tadanantara rAjA raghuke ayodhyAmeM anaraNya
nAmakA aisA putra huA ki jisane logoMko basAkara dezako anaraNya arthAt vanoMse
rahita kara 1. srajitvA m.| 2. puJjasthalakakutthazca m.| 3. vanarahitaH  /

Page #520 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
470 Padma Purana The great queen Prithivimati, endowed with great virtues,
resided in the midst of a circle of radiance, bringing happiness to all senses.
||161|| She had two sons, both of excellent qualities. The elder was known as
Anantarath, and the younger as Dasharath. ||162|| Anantarath had an excellent
friendship with Anaranya, the king of Mahishmati, who was known as
Sahasrarashmi. ||163|| These two noble men, bound by mutual affection, lived in
their respective abodes, like Sudharma and Aishaneindra. ||164|| After being
defeated by Ravana in battle, Sahasrarashmi attained enlightenment and, with
great fervor, embraced Jaineshwari initiation. ||165|| Having learned all the
details from the messenger sent by Anantarath, Dasharath, who was only a month
old, relinquished the royal fortune and, with great detachment, went to the
great Nirgrantha, Abhayasena, along with his elder brother Anantarath.
||166-167|| Anaranya, the sage, departed for liberation, while Anantarath, free
from all attachments, wandered the earth as befits a sage. ||168|| Anantarath,
who was not shaken by the twenty-two Pariá¹£ahas, became known as Anantavirya on
earth. ||169|| Dasharath then acquired a body adorned with youthful vigor, as
tall as a mountain peak, and decorated with various flowers. ||170|| He then
married Aparajita, the daughter of King Sukoshala, the lord of Darmasthala, who
was born of the great queen Amritaprabhava, and who was known for her beautiful
movements. Aparajita was so virtuous that even desire could not conquer her.
||171-172|| There was a magnificent city called Kamalasankula. Its king was
Subandhutilaka, and his wife was Mitra. They had a virtuous daughter named
Kaikeyi, whose eyes were like blue lotuses, and whose head was adorned with a
garland of them. ||173-174||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 470 padmapurANe pRthivImatyamikhyAsya mahAdevI mahAguNA  /
kAntimaNDalamadhyasthA sarvendriyasukhAvahA  // 161 //  dvau sutAvudapatsyAtAM
tasyAmuttamalakSaNo  /  jyeSTho'nantaratho jJeyaH khyAto dazaratho'nujaH  // 162
//  sahasrarazmisaMjJasya rAjJo mAhiSmatIpateH  /  ajayamanaraNyena
sAkamAsIdanuttamam  // 163 //  anyo'nyagatisaMvaddhapremANau tau narottamau  /
saudharmazAnadevendrAvivAsthAto svadhAmani  // 16 //  rAvaNena jito yuddhe
sahasrAMzurvibuddhavAn  /  dIkSAM jainezvarImApa bibhratsaMvegamumnatam  // 165
//  dUtAttatpreSitAj jJAtvA tadvRttAntamazeSataH  /  mAsajAte zriyaM nyasya nApI
dazarathe bhRzam  // 166 //  sakAze'bhayasenasya nigranthasya mahAtmanaH  /
rAjAnantarathenAmA pravavAjAtiniHspRhaH  // 167 //
anaraNyogamanmokSamanantasyandano mahIm  /  sarvasaGgavinirmukto vijahAra
yathocitam  // 168 //  atyantadussahayogI dvAviMzatiparISahai  /  na
kSomitastato'nantavIryAkhyA sa kSitau gataH  // 169 //  vapurdazaratho lebhe
navayauvanabhUSitam  /  zailakUTamivottuGgaM nAnAkumumabhUSitam  // 17 //
athAmRtaprabhAvAyAmutpannAM varayoSiti  /  darmasthalapurezasya
cAruvibhramadhAriNaH  // 171 //  rAjJaH sukozalAkhyasya tanayAmaparAjitAm  /
upayeme sa rasyApi strIguNairaparAjitAm  //  172 //  puramasti mahAramyaM nAmnA
kamalasaMkulam  /  subandhutilakastasya rAjA mitrAsya bhAminI  // 173 //  duhitA
kaikayI nAma tayoH kanyA guNAnvitA  /  muNDamAlA kRtA yasyA netrendIvaramAlayA
// 174 //  diyA  // 160 //  rAjA anaraNyakI pRthivImatI nAmakI mahAdevI thI jo
mahAguNoMse yukta thI, kAntike samUhake madhyameM sthita thI aura samasta
indriyoMke sukha dhAraNa karanevAlI thI  // 161 /  /  usake uttama lakSaNoMke
dhAraka do putra hue| unameM jyeSTha putrakA nAma anantaratha aura choTe putrakA
nAma dazaratha thA  // 162 /  /  mAhiSmatIke rAjA sahasrarazmikI anaraNyake
sAtha uttama mitratA thii||163|| parasparake Ane-jAnese jinakA prema vRddhiko
prApta huA thA aise donoM rAjA apane-apane ghara saudharma aura aizAnendrake
samAna rahate the  // 164 /  /  athAnantara rAvaNase parAjita hokara rAjA
sahasrarazmi pratibodhako prApta ho gayA jisase uttama saMvegako dhAraNa karate
hue usane jainezvarI dIkSA dhAraNa kara lI  /  / 165 /  /  dIkSA dhAraNa
karaneke pahale usane rAjA anaraNyake pAsa dUta bhejA thA so usase saba samAcAra
jAnakara rAjA anaraNya, jise utpanna hue eka mAha hI huA thA aise dazarathake
lie rAjyalakSmI sauMpakara abhayasena nAmaka nirgrantha mahAtmAke samIpa jyeSTha
putra anantarathake sAtha atyanta niHspRha ho dIkSita ho gayA  /  / 166-167||
anaraNya muni to mokSa cale gaye aura anantaratha muni sarva prakArake
parigrahase rahita ho yathAyogya pRthivIpara vihAra karane lage  // 168 //
anantaratha muni atyanta duHsaha bAIsa parISahoMse kSobhako prApta nahIM hue the
isalie pRthivIpara 'anantavIrya' isa nAmako prApta hue  // 169 /  /  athAnantara
rAjA dazarathane navayauvanase suzobhita tathA nAnA prakArake phUloMse subhUSita
pahAr3ake zikharake samAna U~cA zarIra prApta kiyA  // 170 //  tadanantara usane
darbhasthala nagarake svAmI tathA sundara vibhramoMko dhAraNa karanevAle rAjA
sukozalakI amRtaprabhAvA nAmakI uttama strIse utpanna aparAjitA nAmakI putrIke
sAtha vivAha kiyaa| aparAjitA itanI uttama strI thI ki striyoMke yogya guNoMke
dvArA rati bhI use parAjita nahIM kara sakI thI  // 171-172 /  /  tadanantara
kamalasaMkUla nAmakA eka mahAsundara nagara thaa| usameM subandhatilaka nAmakA
rAjA rAjya thaa| usakI mitrA nAmakI strI thii| una donoMke kaikayI nAmakI
guNavatI putrI thii| vaha itanI sundarI thI ki usake netrarUpI nIla kamaloMkI
mAlAse mastaka mAlArUpa ho gayA 1. saMgataM, maitrItyarthaH  /  2. mAso jAtasya
yasya sa tasmin  /  3. nRpasambandhinAm  /  4. -mutpannA ma.  /

Page #521 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twenty-Second Chapter  **471**  Since she was born from a mother named Mitra,
who was of excellent conduct and beautiful, she became known in the world as
Sumitra. **175**  The great king also married another princess named Suprabha,
who was radiant with beauty and brought prosperity. **176**  King Dasharatha
obtained both Right-Faith and a kingdom full of glory. He considered Right-Faith
as a jewel and the kingdom as mere grass. **177**  The reason for this is that
if one does not renounce the kingdom, it leads to downfall, while Right-Faith
leads to an unquestionable ascent. **178**  King Dasharatha repaired the
beautiful temples of the Jinas, which had fallen into disrepair, that were built
by the kings Bharata and others. **179**  He also built new temples of the
Jinas, which were praised by Indra himself, and were adorned with a multitude of
jewels, radiating brilliance. **180**  Gautama Swami tells King Shrenik, "O
King! Those who accumulate virtue in other births, attain the most beautiful
prosperity of the gods, and are reborn in this world as fortunate beings like
King Dasharatha, radiating brilliance like the sun, and attaining prosperity."
**181**  Thus ends the twenty-second chapter of the Padmacharita, narrated by
the Acharya, known as Ravisha, and containing the story of the birth of King
Dasharatha, along with the greatness of Sukoshala Swami.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dvAviMzatitama parva 471 mitrAyA janitA yasmAt suceSTA rUpazAlinI  /  sumitreti
tataH khyAti bhuvane samupAgatA  // 175 //  mahArAjasutAmanyAM prApAsau
suprabhAzrutim  /  lAvaNyasaMpadA bAlA janayantIM zriyasmapAm  // 176 //  sa
samyagdarzanaM lebhe rAjyaM ca paramodayam  /  Aye ratnamatistasya carame
tRNazemuSI  // 177 //  adhogatiryato rAjyAdatyaktAdupajAyate  /
samyagdarzanayogAttu gatirUva'masaMzayA  // 17 //  ye bharatAyairnRpatimiruddhAH
kAritapUrvA jinvrvaasaaH| bhagamupetAn kvacidapi ramyAn
so'nayadetAnaminavabhAvAn  // 179 //  indranutAnAM svayamapi ramyAn
tIrthakarANAM paramanivAsAn  /  ratnasamUhaH sphuradurumAsaH
saMtatapUjAmaghaTayadeSaH  // 180 //  anyabhaveSu prathitasudharmAH prApya
surANAM zriyamatiramyAm  /  IdRzajIvA punariha loke yAnti samRddhiM
ravirucibhAsaH  // 18 //  ityArSe raviSeNAcAryaprokta padmacarite
sukozalamAhAtmyayukta-dazarathotpattyabhidhAnaM nAma dvAviMzatitama parva  // 22
//  thA  // 173-174 /  /  cUMki yaha mitrA nAmaka mAtAse utpanna huI thI, uttama
ceSTAoMse yukta thI, tathA rUpavatI thI isalie lokameM sumitrA isa nAmase bhI
prasiddhiko prApta huI thii| rAjA dazarathane usake sAtha bhI vivAha kiyA thA
// 175 /  /  inake sivAya lAvaNyarUpI sampadAke dvArA lakSmIko bhI lajjA utpanna
karanevAlI suprabhA nAmakI eka anya rAjaputroke sAtha bhI unhoMne vivAha kiyA
thA  // 176 /  /  rAjA dazarathane samyagdarzana tathA parama vaibhavase yukta
rAjya ina donoM vastuoMko prApta thaa| so prathama jo samyagdarzana hai use vaha
ratna samajhatA thA aura antima jo rAjya thA use tRNa mAnatA thA  // 177 /  isa
prakAra mAnanekA kAraNa yaha hai ki yadi rAjyakA tyAga nahIM kiyA jAye to usase
adhogati hotI hai aura samyagdarzanake suyogase niHsandeha UdhvaMgati hotI hai
// 178 //  bharatAdi rAjAoMne jo pahale jinendra bhagavAnke uttama mandira
banavAye the ve yadi kahIM bhagnAvasthAko prApta hue the to una ramaNIya
mandiroMko rAjA dazarathane marammata karAkara punaH navInatA prApta karAyI thI
// 179 /  /  yahI nahIM, usane svayaM bhI aise jinamandira banavAye the jinakI
ki indra svayaM stuti karatA thA tathA ratnoMke samUhase jinakI vizAla kAnti
sphurAyamAna ho rahI thI  // 180 /  /  gautamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM
ki he rAjan ! anya bhavoMmeM jo dharmakA saMcaya karate haiM ve devoMkI atyanta
ramaNIya lakSmI prApta kara saMsArameM punaH rAjA dazarathake samAna bhAgyazAlo
jIva hote haiM aura sUryake samAna kAntiko dhAraNa karate hue samRddhiko prApta
hote haiM  /  / 181 /  /  isa prakAra ArSanAmase prasiddha raviSeNAcArya dvArA
kathita, padmacaritameM sukozala svAmIke mAhAtmyase yukta rAjA dazarathakI
utpatti kA kathana karanevAlA bAIsavA~ parva samApta huA  // 22 //  1.
lAvaNyasaMpadaM ma.  /  2. -rU; m.| 3. samRddhiraviracitA sA (?) ma.  /

Page #522 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Third Chapter  Once upon a time, King Dasharatha, adorned with
great brilliance and resembling Indra in splendor, was seated in his assembly,
engrossed in the tales of the Jina Kings. Suddenly, Narada, a wise man and a
beacon of virtue, arrived, his body radiating light.    The King rose to greet
him, offering him a comfortable seat. Narada blessed the King, and the wise King
inquired about his well-being. Narada replied with news of his welfare, and the
King, in turn, asked about his journey.   "From where do you come, O Lord? Where
have you been traveling? What have you seen and heard? Is there any land you
have not visited?" asked the King.  Narada, his heart filled with joy at the
mention of the Jina, and his body tingling with excitement, replied, "O King, I
have been to Videha, a land cherished by the virtuous, adorned with the Meru,
Gaja, and Vijaya mountains, the very foundations of the Jina temples."  "There,
in the city of Pundarika, radiant with the brilliance of countless jewels, I
witnessed the initiation ceremony of Simandhara Swami. The sky was filled with
celestial chariots, adorned with banners and umbrellas, and the arrival of the
gods, a sight to behold. Just as the gods of this land celebrated the coronation
of Muni Suvrata on Mount Meru, so too did they celebrate his coronation there. I
heard the stories of Muni Suvrata, the Jina, just as they are told here, and I
saw them unfold before my very eyes. I saw countless temples, towering and vast,
adorned with precious jewels, where worship is offered without cease."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 trayoviMzatitamaM parva anyadAtha sukhAsInaM sabhAyAM purutejasam  /
jinarAjakathAsaktaM surendrasamavibhramam  // 1 //  sahasA janitAloko gagane
dehatejasA  /  samAyapAvabaddhAraH' ziSTo dazarathaM sudhIH  // 2 //
kRtvAbhyutthAnamAsInamAsane taM sukhAvahe  /  dattAzIrvacanaM rAjA papraccha
kuzalaM kRtI  // 3 //  nivedya kuzalaM tena kSemaM pRSTo mahIpatiH  /  sakalaM
kSemamityuktvA punarevamabhASata  // 4 //  Agamyate kutaH sthAnAdbhagavan
vihRtaM kva ca  /  kimu dRSTaM zrutaM kiMvA na te dezo'styagocaraH  // 5 //
tato manaHsthajainendravarNanodbhUtasaMmadaH  /  unnataM pulakaM
bibhradityabhASata nAradaH  // 6 //  videha nRpa yAto'hamAsaM cArajenehitam  /
jinendrabhavanAdhArabhUrizailavibhUSitam  // 7 //  tatra niSkramaNaM dRSTaM mayA
sImandharAhataH  /  nagayAM puNDarIkiNyAM nAnAratrorutejasi  // 8 //
vimAnairvividhacchAyaiH ketucchatravibhUSitaiH  /  yAnaizca vividhairdRSTaM
devAgamanamAkulam  // 9 //  munisuvratanAthasya yatheha surapaiH kRtam  /
tathAbhiSecanaM merau mayA tasya muneH zrutam  // 10 //  suvratasya jinendrasya
vAcyamAnaM zrutaM yathA  /  tathA me caritaM tasya tatra gocaritaM dRzA  // 11
//  nAnAratnaprabhADhyAni tuGgAni vipulAni ca  /  dRSTAni tatra caityAni
kRtapUjAnyanAratam  // 12 //  athAnantara kisI samaya vizAla tejake dhAraka
tathA indrake samAna zobhAse sampanna rAjA dazaratha jinarAjakI kathA karate hue
sabhAmeM sukhase baiThe the ki sahasA zarIrake tejase prakAza utpanna karate hue
ziSTa puruSa tathA uttama buddhike dhAraka nAradajI vahAM A pahu~ce  // 1-2 //
rAjAne uThakara unakA sammAna kiyA tathA sukhadAyaka Asanapara baitthaayaa|
nAradane rAjAko AzIrvAda diyaa| tadanantara baddhimAna rAjAne kuzala-samAcAra
prachA  // 3|| jaba nArada kazala-samAcAra kaha cake taba rAjAne kSema arthAt
kalyANarUpa ho? yaha puuchaa| isake uttarameM 'rAjan ! saba kalyANa rUpa hai'
yaha uttara diyA  // 4 //  itanI vArtA ho cukaneke bAda rAjA dazarathane phira
pUchA ki he bhagavan ! Apa kisa sthAnase A rahe haiM ? aura kahA~ ApakA vihAra
ho rahA hai ? Apane kyA dekhA kyA sunA so kahie ? aisA koI deza nahIM jahA~ Apa
na gaye hoM  // 5 //  tadanantara manameM sthita jinendradeva sambandhI
varNanase jinheM Ananda utpanna ho rahA thA tathA isI kAraNa jo unnata romAMca
dhAraNa kara rahe the aise nAradajI kahane lage ki he rAjan ! uttama jana jisakI
sadA icchA karate haiM tathA jo jinamandiroMke AdhArabhUta meru, gajadanta,
vijayAddha Adi parvatoMse suzobhita hai aise videha kSetrameM gayA thA  // 6-7
//  vahA~ nAnA ratnoMke vizAla tejase yukta puNDarIkiNI nagarImeM maiMne
sImandhara svAmIkA dIkSA kalyANaka dekhA  // 8 //  patAkAoM aura chatroMse
suzobhita raMga-biraMge vimAnoM, tathA vividha prakArake vAhanoMse vyApta
devoMkA Agamana dekhA  /  / 9 /  /  maiMne vahA~ sunA thA ki jisa prakAra apane
isa bharata kSetrameM inhoMne munisuvratanAtha bhagavAnkA sumeru parvatapara
abhiSeka kiyA thA vaisA hI vahA~ una bhagavAnakA inhoMne sumeru parvatapara
abhiSeka kiyA thA  /  / 10|| munisuvrata bhagavAnkA jaisA bA~cA gayA caritra
yahA~ sunA hai vaisA hI vahA~ unakA caritra apanI A~khoMse dekhA hai  // 11 //
jo nAnA prakArake ratnoMkI prabhAse vyApta haiM, U~ce haiM, vizAla haiM tathA
jinameM nirantara pUjA hotI rahatI hai aise 1. naardH| 2. cArujinehitaM ma.,
cArujanohitaM kha., cArujane hitaM ja., ba., kaH  /

Page #523 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Twenty-Third Chapter  O King! I have seen the Jain temples there. In the
Nandana forest, I have seen very beautiful Chaitya-alaya. Those temples have
many kinds of gem-studded bells and their seats are made of gold. ||13|| They
are adorned with golden pillars, radiating various kinds of rays, resembling the
sun-chariot, adorned with garlands and toranas, enriched with gem-studded
garlands, with vast Vedikas in their grounds, with walls made of excellent
Vaidurya gems, decorated with pictures of elephants, lions, etc., and whose
interiors are filled with divine women playing music. I have bowed to all the
Jina images in such Devaranya Chaitya-alayas. ||14-16||  I have circumambulated
Mount Meru, which is endowed with the brilliance of artificial images, and have
gone to the very high sky, piercing the cloud-sheet. ||17|| And I have bowed to
the many great, radiant Jina Chaitya-alayas on the peaks of the Kulachala
mountains. ||18|| O King! In all those Chaitya-alayas, I bow to all the great,
radiant, non-artificial images of the Jinas. ||19||  When Narada said this, King
Dasharatha, with folded hands and bowed head, uttered the words, "Salutations to
the Lord of Lords." ||20||  Then, prompted by Narada's signal, King Dasharatha,
with respect, had all the people removed from there by the gatekeeper. ||21||
Then, when they were alone, Narada said to King Dasharatha, the ruler of Kosala,
"O King! Listen attentively, I am telling you a good thing." ||22||  I went to
the peak of Trikuta mountain with great eagerness to pay my respects. There, I
bowed to the very beautiful Shantinath Bhagwan's Jinalaya. ||23||  Then, by the
influence of your merit, I heard a decision of Vibhishana and other ministers of
Lanka's king, Ravana. ||24||  There, a man named Sagarbuddhi, who had the
knowledge of auspicious omens, told Ravana that the son of King Dasharatha would
be the cause of your death. ||25||  Similarly, the daughter of King Janaka will
also be a cause in this. ||26||  Hearing this, Vibhishana, with a heavy heart,
decided... ||26||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 trayoviMzatitamaM parva vicitramaNibhaktIni hemapIThAni pArthiva  /
dRSTAnyatyantaramyANi vanacaityAni nandane  //  13  //
cAmIkaramahAstambhayukteSu sphuritAMzuSu  /  bhAskarAlayatulyeSu
hAritoraNacAruSu  //  14  //  ratadAmasamRddheSu mahAvaidikabhUmiSu  /
dvipasiMhAdirUpAThya vaiDUryodAra bhittiSu  //  15 //  kRtasaMgIta divya
strIjana pUritakukSiSu  /  amarAraNya caityeSu jinAcaH praNatA mayA  //  16  //
caityaprabhAvikA sADhyaM kRtvA meruM pradakSiNam  /  payodapaTalaM bhittvA
samullaGghayonnataM namaH  //  17 //  vAsyAntaragirIndrANAM zikhareSu
mahAprabhAH  /  caityAlayA jinendrANAM praNatA bahavo mayA  //  18  //  sarveSu
teSu caityeSu jinAnAM pratiyAtanAH  /  akRtrimA mahAbhAso mayA pArthiva vandyate
// 19 //  ityukte devadevebhyo nama ityudgatadhvaniH  /  praNataM karayugmaM ca
cakre dazarathaH ziraH  //  20  //  saMjJayA nAradenAtha codite jagatIpatiH  /
janasyotsAraNaM cakre pratIhAreNa sAdaram  // 21 //  upAMzu nAradenAtha jagade
kozalAdhipaH  /  zRNu svAvahito rAjan sadbhAvaM kathayAmi te  //  22 //  gata
trikUTazikharaM vandArahamutsukaH  /  vanditaM zAntimavanaM mayA tatra manoramam
// 23 //  bhavatpuNyAnubhAvena mayA tatra pradhAraNam  /  zrutaM vibhISaNAdInAM
laGkAnAthasya mantriNAm  // 24 //  naimittena samAdiSTaM tena sAgarabuddhinA  /
bhavitA dazavaktrasya mRtyurdAzarathiH kila  // 25 //  duhitA janakasyApi
hetutvamupayAsyati  /  iti zrutvA viSaNNAtmA nizcicArye vibhISaNaH  //  26  //
3 473 vahA~ke jina mandira dekhe haiM || 12 || he rAjan ! vahA~ nandanavanameM
jo atyanta manohara caityAlaya haiM ve bhI dekhe haiM  /  una mandiroMmeM aneka
prakArake maNiyoMke belabUTe nikAle gaye haiM tathA unakI kursiyA~
suvarNanirmita haiM ||13|| so suvarNamaya khambhoMse yukta haiM, jinameM nAnA
prakArakI kiraNeM dedIpyamAna ho rahI haiM, jo sUrya-vimAnake samAna jAna
par3ate haiM, jo hAra tathA toraNoMse manohara haiM, jo ratnamayI mAlAoM se
samRddha haiM, jinakI bhUmiyoMmeM bar3I vistRta vedikAe~ banI huI haiM, jinakI
vaidUryamaNi nirmita uttama dIvAleM hAthI, siMha Adike citroMse alaMkRta haiM
aura jinake bhItarI bhAga saMgIta karanevAlI divya striyoMse bhare hue haiM,
aise devAraNyake caityAlayoM meM jo jinapratimAe~ haiM una sabake lie maiMne
namaskAra kiyA  // 14- 16  //  AkRtrima pratimAoMkI prabhAke vikAsase yukta jo
meru parvata hai usakI pradakSiNA dekara tathA megha-paTalako bhedana kara
bahuta U~ce AkAza meM gayA || 17 //  tathA kulAcaloMke zikharoMpara jo
mahAdedIpyamAna aneka jinacaityAlaya haiM unakI vandanA kI hai || 18 || he rAjan
! una samasta caityAlayoMmeM jinendra bhagavAnkI mahAdedIpyamAna akRtrima
pratimAe~ haiM maiM una sabako vandanA karatA hU~ ||19|| nAradake isa prakAra
kahanepara 'devAdhidevoMko namaskAra ho' zabdoM kA uccAraNa karate hue rAjA
dazarathane donoM hAtha jor3e tathA zira namrIbhUta kiyA  // 20 //  athAnantara
saMketa dvArA nAradakI preraNA pAkara rAjA dazarathane pratihArIke dvArA Adarake
sAtha saba logoMko vahA~se alaga kara diyA || 21|| tadanantara jaba ekAnta ho
gayA taba nAradane kosalAdhipati rAjA dazarathase kahA ki he rAjan ! ekAgracitta
hokara suno meM tumhAre lie eka uttama bAta kahatA hU~ ||22|| maiM bar3I
utsukatAke sAtha vandanA karaneke lie trikUTAcala ke zikharapara gayA thA so
maiMne vahA~ atyanta manohara zAntinAtha bhagavAnke jinAlayakI vandanA kI  // 23
//  tadanantara Apake puNya ke prabhAvase maiMne laMkApati rAvaNake vibhISaNAdi
mantriyoMkA eka nizcaya sunA hai ||24|| vahA~ sAgarabuddhi nAmaka nimittajJAnone
rAvaNako batAyA hai ki rAjA dazarathakA putra tumhArI mRtyukA kAraNa hogA ||25||
isI prakAra rAjA janakakI putrI bhI isameM kAraNapane ko 1. pratimAH  /  2.
akRtrima mahAbhAso ma, kha., ba., ka. 1 3. zRNuSvAvahitaH kha., ba., ma., ja.  /
4. nizvitvApa ma.  /  60

Page #524 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
474 In the Padma Purana, it is said that as long as the progeny of Dasharatha
and Janaka exist, Vibhishana will not kill them. He said this with great
determination. ||27|| He wandered the earth for a long time, but could not find
them. Then, his spies, who could assume any form at will, informed him about
their location, appearance, and other characteristics. ||28|| Being a sage, he
asked me, "O sage, do you know of any kings named Dasharatha and Janaka on
earth?" ||29|| In response, I said, "I will find out and tell you. O best of
men, I see his intentions as extremely cruel." ||30|| Therefore, O king, until
this Vibhishana does something to you, hide yourself somewhere secretly. ||31||
I have equal affection for those who are righteous and worship their gurus, and
especially for those like you. ||32|| Do what you think is right. May you be
well. I am now going to inform King Janaka of this matter. ||33|| Having said
this, Narada Muni, who had been greeted by King Dasharatha, flew up into the sky
and went towards Mithila with great speed. ||34|| He went there and informed
King Janaka of all this. It is right, because those who are worthy of respect
are dearer to him than life itself. ||35|| After Narada Muni left, King
Dasharatha, whose mind was filled with fear of death, summoned his minister,
Samudrahrdaya. ||36|| The best of speakers and devoted to his master, the
minister heard the great fear from the king's mouth. ||37|| He said, "O lord,
all creatures perform actions for the sake of life. Tell me, what is the use of
the kingdom of the three worlds for a lifeless creature?" ||38|| Therefore,
until I destroy the enemies, you should wander the earth in disguise, so that no
one recognizes you. ||39|| Upon hearing this, King Dasharatha entrusted his
treasury, country, city, and people to Samudrahrdaya and left the city. ||40||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 474 padmapurANe jAyate yAvadevAsya prajA dazarathasya na  /  janakasya ca
tAvattau mArayAmIti sAdaraH  // 27 //  paryaTacca ciraM kSoNIM taccareNa
niveditau  /  bhavantau kAmarUpeNa sthAnarUpAdilakSaNaiH  // 28 //
munivinammatastena pRSTo'hamapi mo yate  /  kvaciddazarathaM vesi janakaM ca
kSitAviti  // 29 //  anviSya kathayAmIti mayA copAttamuttaram  /  AkRtaM dAruNaM
tasya pazyAmi narapuGgava  // 30 //  tatte yAvadayaM kiMcinna karoti vimISaNaH
/  nigRhya tAvadAtmAnaM kvacittiSTha mahIpate  // 31 //  samyagdarzanayukteSu
gurupUjanakAriSu  /  sAmAnyenaiva me prItistvadvidheSu vizeSataH  // 32 //  sa
tvaM yuktaM kuru svasti bhUyAtte'haM gato'dhunA  /  imAM vedayituM vAtAM kSipraM
janakabhUbhRtaH  // 33 //  kRtAnatin peNaivamuktvotpatya nabhastalam  /
abaddhArayativegAnmithilAmimukhaM yayau  // 34 //  janakAyApi tenedamazeSaM
viniveditam  /  bhavyajIvA hi tasyAsan prANebhyo'pyativallabhAH  // 35 //
abadvArayatau yAte maraNAzaGkimAnasaH  /  samudrahRdayAmAtyamAkArayadilApatiH
// 36 //  zrutvA rAjamakhAnmantrI samabhyaNa mahAbhayam  /  jagAda gadatAM
zreSThaH svAmibhaktiparAyaNaH  // 37 //  jIvitAyAkhilaM kRtyaM kriyate nAtha
jantubhiH  /  trailokyezatvalAmo'pi vada tenojjhitasya kaH  // 38 //
tasmAdyAvadarAtInAM vyasanaM racayAmyaham  /  tAvadajJAtarUpastvaM vikRto
viharAvanim  // 39 /  /  ityukte tatra nikSipya kozaM dezaM puraM janam  /
nirakrAmat purAd rAjA sahyasya suparIkSitaH  // 40 //  prApta hogii| yaha
sunakara jisakI AtmA viSAdase bhara rahI thI aise vibhISaNane nizcaya kiyA ki
jabataka rAjA dazaratha aura janakake santAna hotI hai usake pahale hI maiM
inheM mAre DAlatA hU~  // 26-27|| yaha nizcaya kara vaha tuma logoMkI khojake
lie cirakAla taka pRthvImeM ghUmatA rahA para patA nahIM calA skaa| tadanantara
icchAnukUla rUpa dhAraNa karanevAle usake guptacarane sthAna, rUpa Adi
lakSaNoMse tuma donoMkA use paricaya karAyA hai  // 28 //  muni honeke kAraNa
merA vizvAsa kara usane mujhase pUchA ki he mune ! pRthvIpara koI dazaratha
tathA janaka nAmake rAjA haiM so unheM tuma jAnate ho  // 29|| isa praznake
badale maiMne uttara diyA ki khojakara batalAtA huuN| he narapuMgava ! maiM
usake abhiprAyako atyanta kaThora dekhatA hU~  // 30 //  isalie he rAjan ! yaha
vibhISaNa jabataka tumhAre viSayameM kucha nahIM kara letA hai tabataka tuma
apane Apako chipAkara kahIM guptarUpase rahane lago  // 31 //  samyagdarzanase
yukta tathA guruoMkI pUjA karanevAle puruSoMpara merI samAna prIti rahatI hai
aura tumhAre jaise puruSoMpara vizeSarUpase vidyamAna hai  // 32 //  tuma jaisA
ucita samajho so kro| tumhArA bhalA ho  /  aba maiM yaha vArtA kahane ke lie
zIghra hI rAjA janakake pAsa jAtA hU~  // 33 //  tadanantara jise rAjA
dazarathane namaskAra kiyA thA aise nArada muni isa prakAra kahakara tathA
AkAzameM ur3akara bar3e vegase mithilAkI ora cale gaye  // 34 //  vahA~ jAkara
rAjA janakake lie bhI unhoMne yaha saba samAcAra batalAyA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki
bhavya jIva unheM prANoMse bhI adhika pyAre the  // 35 /  /  nArada munike cale
jAnepara jisake manameM maraNako AzaMkA utpanna ho gayI thI aise rAjA
dazarathane samudrahRdaya nAmaka mantrIko bulavAyA  // 36 //  vaktAoMmeM zreSTha
tathA svAmibhaktimeM tatpara mantrIne rAjAke mukhase mahAbhayako nikaTasthala
suna kahA  // 37 //  ki he nAtha! prANI jitanA kucha kArya karate haiM vaha
jIvanake lie hI karate haiN| Apa hI kahie, jIvanase rahita prANIke lie yadi tIna
lokakA rAjya bhI mila jAye to kisa kAmakA hai  /  / 38 /  /  isalie jabataka
maiM zatruoMke nAzakA prayatna karatA hU~ tabataka tuma kisIkI pahacAnameM rUpa
na A sake isa prakAra veSa badalakara pRthvImeM vihAra karo  // 39 //  mantrIke
aisA kahanepara rAjA dazaratha usI samudrahRdaya mantrIke lie khajAnA, deza,
nagara tathA prajAko sauMpakara nagarase bAhara nikala gayA 1. santatiH  /  2.
kaMciddaza -m.| 3. muktvAtyanta- ma.  /  4. nAradarSiH  /  5. jagade ma.  /  6.
vikRtI m.| 7. niSkrAmad m.| .

Page #525 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
475 The twenty-third chapter The minister, having examined the king well, had a
dummy made of Dasaratha. The dummy was so similar to the original that only by
its lack of consciousness could it be distinguished. [41] The dummy was filled
with a mixture of lac and other substances to simulate blood, and it was made as
soft as the body of a real being. [42] The dummy was seated on a fine throne in
the seventh storey of the palace, surrounded by all the usual paraphernalia.
[43] The minister and the artist who made the dummy both thought it was a real
king, and everyone else thought so too. Sometimes, even they were deceived. [44]
The same thing was done to Janaka. The minds of the wise are often superficial,
one surpassing the other. [45] Just as the moon and the sun hide themselves
during the rainy season, so too did these two kings, who knew the state of the
world, hide themselves during times of trouble. [46] Gautama Swami said to King
Shrenika, "O king of Magadha! Those kings who once lived in great palaces, who
were rich in material possessions, and who were served by the most beautiful
women, are now, like ordinary men, helpless and wandering the earth on foot.
Alas, the state of this world!" [47-48] Having decided this, what did that man,
who gave protection to all beings, not give to those who stood at the head of
the virtuous? [49] Vibhishana, having learned of their whereabouts from his
spies, sent many assassins to kill them. [50] These assassins, armed with
weapons, were cruel by nature, their bodies were invisible to the eye, and their
eyes were very restless. They roamed the city day and night. [51] These
assassins, being weak, were unable to enter the palace. When they were delayed
in their task, Vibhishana came himself. [52] He followed the sound of music and,
having entered the palace, found Dasaratha in the inner apartments. [53] This is
correct because the minister had thoroughly examined the king. [40] When the
king left, the minister had a dummy made of King Dasaratha's body. The dummy was
so similar to the original body that only by its lack of consciousness could it
be distinguished. [41] A mixture of lac and other substances was used to create
blood inside the dummy, and it was made as soft as the body of a real being.
[42] The dummy of the king was seated on a fine throne in the seventh storey of
the palace, surrounded by all the usual paraphernalia, just as before. [43] The
minister and the artist who made the dummy both thought it was a real king, and
everyone else thought so too. Sometimes, even they were deceived. [44] The same
thing was done to King Janaka. The minds of the wise are often superficial, one
surpassing the other. [45] Just as the moon and the sun hide themselves during
the rainy season, so too did these two kings, who knew the state of the world,
hide themselves during times of trouble. [46] Gautama Swami said to King
Shrenika, "O king of Magadha! Those kings who once lived in great palaces, who
were rich in material possessions, and who were served by the most beautiful
women, are now, like ordinary men, helpless and wandering the earth on foot.
Alas, the state of this world!" [47-48] Having decided this, what did that man,
who gave protection to all beings, not give to those who stood at the head of
the virtuous? [49] Vibhishana, having learned of their whereabouts from his
spies, sent many assassins to kill them. [50] These assassins, armed with
weapons, were cruel by nature, their bodies were invisible to the eye, and their
eyes were very restless. They roamed the city day and night. [51] These
assassins, being weak, were unable to enter the palace. When they were delayed
in their task, Vibhishana came himself. [52] He followed the sound of music and,
having entered the palace, found Dasaratha in the inner apartments. [53]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 475 trayoviMzatitamaM parva gate rAjanyamAtyena 'lepyaM dAzarathaM vapuH  /
kAritaM mukhyavapuSo minnaM cetanayaikayA  // 41 //  lAkSAdirasayogena rudhiraM
tatra nirmitam  /  mArdavaM ca kRtaM tAdRgyAdRksatyAsudhAriNaH  // 42 //
varAsananiviSTaM taM vezmanaH saptame tale  /  yuktaM puraiva sarveNa
parivargeNa bimbakam  // 43 //  sa mantrI lepyakArazca kRtrimaM jaijJatu pam  /
bhrAntirhi jAyate tatra pazyatorubhayorapi  // 44 //  ayameva ca vRttAnto
janakasyApi kalpitaH  /  uparyupari hi prAyazcalanti viduSAM dhiyaH  /  / 45 //
madyAM tau kSitipo naSTau bhuvanasthitikovidau  /  ApakAle yathendvauM samaye
jaladAyinAm  // 16 //  yau purA varanArImirmahAprAsAdavartinau  /
udArabhogasaMpannau sevito magadhAdhipa  // 47 //  itarAviva tau kaucidasahAyau
narottamau  /  caraNAbhyAM mahIM kaSTaM bhramantau 'dhigbhavasthitim  // 48 //
iti nizcitya jantubhyo yo dadAtyabhayaM naraH  /  kiM na tena bhaveddattaM
sAdhUnAM dhuri tiSThatA  // 49 //  iSTau tau tatra tatreti caravargeNa veditau
/  anujena dazAsyasya preSitA vadhakA bhRzam  // 50 //  te zastrapANayaH krUrA
dRSTyagocaravigrahAH  /  divA naktaM ca nagarI bhramanti calacakSuSaH  // 51 //
prAsAdaM hInasattvAste praveSTaM na sahA yadA  /  cirAyante tadAyAsIt svayameva
vibhISaNaH  // 52 //  anviSya gItazabdena pravizya gatavibhramaH  /
dadarzAntaHpurAntasthaM vyaktaM dazarathaM vibhIH  // 53 //  so ThIka hI hai
kyoMki vaha mantrI rAjAkA acchI taraha parIkSA kiyA huA thA  // 40 //  rAjAke
cale jAnepara mantrIne rAjA dazarathake zarIrakA eka putalA bnvaayaa| vaha
putalA mUla zarIrase itanA milatA-julatA thA ki kevala eka cetanAko apekSA ho
bhinna jAna par3atA thA  // 41 /  /  usake bhItara lAkha AdikA rasa bharAkara
rudhirakI racanA kI gayI thI tathA sacamucake prANIke zarIrameM jaisI komalatA
hotI hai vaisI hI komalatA usa putale meM racI gayI thI  // 42 //  rAjAkA vaha
putalA pahaleke samAna hI samasta parikarake sAtha mahalake sAtaveM khaNDameM
uttama Asanapara virAjamAna kiyA gayA thA  // 43 /  /  vaha mantrI tathA
putalAko banAnevAlA citrakAra ye donoM hI rAjAko kRtrima rAjA samajhate the aura
bAkI saba loga use sacamucakA ho rAjA samajhate the| yahI nahIM una donoMko bhI
dekhate hue jaba kabhI bhrAnti utpanna ho jAtI thI  // 44 //  udhara yahI hAla
rAjA janakakA bhI kiyA gayA so ThIka hI hai kyoMki vidvAnoMkI buddhiyAM prAyaH
Upara-Upara hI calatI haiM arthAt eka-se-eka bar3hakara hotI haiM  // 45 //
jisa prakAra varSARtuke samaya candramA aura sUrya chipe-chipe rahate haiM usI
prakAra saMsArakI sthitike jAnakAra donoM rAjA bhI Apattike samaya pRthivIpara
chipe-chipe rahane lage  // 46 //  gautamasvAmI rAjA zreNikase kahate haiM ki he
magadhAdhipate ! jo rAjA pahale baDe-baDe mahaloMmeM rahate the, udAra bhogase
sampanna the| uttamottama striyAM jinakI sevA karatI thIM ve hI rAjA anya
manuSyoMke samAna asahAya ho pRthivIpara pairoMse paidala bhaTakate phirate the,
so isa saMsArakI dazAko dhikkAra ho  // 47-48 //  aisA nizcaya kara jo
prANiyoMke lie abhayadAna detA hai, satpuruSoMke agrabhAgameM sthita rahanevAle
usa puruSane kyA nahIM diyA ? arthAt saba kucha diyA  /  / 49 /  /  guptacaroMke
samUhane jahAM-jahA~ unakA sadbhAva jAnA vahA~-vahA~ vibhISaNane unheM svayaM
dekhA tathA bahuta-se vadhaka bheje  // 50 //  jinake hAthoMmeM zastra vidyamAna
the, jo svabhAvase krUra the, jinake zarIra netroMse dikhAI nahIM dete the tathA
jinake netra atyanta caMcala the, aise vadhaka rAta-dina nagarImeM ghUmane lage
// 51 //  hIna zaktike dhAraka ve vadhaka rAjamahalameM praveza karaneke lie
samartha nahIM ho sake isalie jaba unheM apane kAryameM vilamba huA taba
vibhISaNa svayaM hI AyA  // 52 //  saMgItake zabdase usane dazarathakA patA lagA
liyA, jisase 1. lekhyaM m.| 2. tAvadyAvatpatyAsudhAriNaH m.| 3. srajatu m.| 4.
dhiktavasthitim m.| 5. dRSTvA gocanavigrahA m.|

Page #526 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **476**  The celestial being named Vidyudvilasita,
instigated by Vibhishana, severed the head of Dasharatha and presented it to his
master with great joy. ||54|| Having heard the cries from the inner palace,
Vibhishana cast the severed head into the ocean. He acted with the same cruelty
towards Janaka. ||55||  Then, considering himself successful and filled with
brotherly affection, Vibhishana, full of joy, went to Lanka. ||56|| Dasharatha's
entourage, after much lamentation, learned of the puppet's true nature and were
filled with wonder. ||57|| Vibhishana, upon reaching the city, performed
auspicious acts like charity and worship to pacify the inauspicious deeds.
||58||  His mind, once calmed, was filled with remorse due to the strange nature
of karma. He thought: ||59||  **Upajati-vrutta**  Driven by false fear, I have
needlessly killed those helpless earth-dwellers. Even a serpent, born from the
poison of the Ashvi, cannot harm Garuda. ||60|| Where is the earth-dweller with
his insignificant valor, and where is Ravana, with his valor equal to Indra's?
Where is the elephant, slow and intoxicated with pride, and where is the lion,
swift as the wind? ||61||  **Indravajra-vrutta**  Whatever happiness or sorrow a
man is destined to experience, he will inevitably receive it, guided by his
karma. ||62|| If someone truly understands the cause and effect, why wouldn't
they strive for their own liberation? By doing so, they will attain supreme
happiness in this world and liberation from the cycle of birth and death. ||63||
**Note:** The translation preserves the Jain terms like "Upajati-vrutta" and
"Indravajra-vrutta" as requested.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 476 papapurANe vidyudvilasito nAma coditastena khecaraH  /  nikRtya tasya
mUrdhAnaM svaamine'drshynmudaa||54|| zrutAntaHpurajAkrando
nikSipyaitacchiro'mbudhau  /  janake'pi tathA cakre nirdayaM sa viceSTitam  //
55 //  tataH kRtinamAtmAnaM kRtvA sodaravatsalaH  /  yayau vibhISaNo laGkA
pramodaparipUritaH  // 56 //  vipralApaM paraM kRtvA viditvA pustakarma ca  /
tiM dAzarathaH prApa parivargaH savismayaH  // 57 //  vibhISaNo'pi saMprApya
purImazubhazAntaye  /  dAnapUjAdikaM cakre karma saJjanitotsavam  // 58 //
babhUva ca matistasya kadAcicchAntacetasaH  /  karmaNAmiti vaicitryAt
pazcAttApamupeyuSaH  // 59 //  upajAtivRttam asatyabhItyA kSitigocarau tau
nirarthaka pretagati praNItau  /  AzIviSAGgaprabhavo'pi sarpastAkSyasya zaknoti
kimu prahartum  // 60 //  'sulezazauryaH kSitigocaraH kva va rAvaNaH
zakrasamAnazauryaH  /  vebhaH sazako madamandagAmI va kesarI vAyusamAnavegaH  //
61 //  indravajrAvRttam yadyatra yAvacca yatazca yena duHkhaM sukhaM vA puruSeNa
labhyam  /  tattatra tAvacca tatazca tena saMprApyate karmavazAnugena 62 //
samyagnimittaM yadi vetti kazcicchu yo na kasmAt kurute nijasya  /  yeneha loke
labhate'tisaukhyaM mokSe ca dehasyajanAt purastAt  // 63 //  niHsandeha tathA
nirbhaya ho rAjamahalameM praveza kiyaa| vahAM jAkara usane antaHpurake bIca meM
sthita rAjA dazarathako spaSTa rUpase dekhA  // 53 //  usI samaya usake dvArA
prerita vidyudvilasita nAmaka vidyAdharane dazarathakA zira kATakara bar3e
harSase apane svAmI-vibhISaNako dikhAyA  /  / 54|| tadanantara jisane
antaHpurake rudanakA zabda sunA thA aise parake madanakA zabda sanA thA aise
vibhISaNane usa kaTe hae zirako samudrama girA diyA aura rAjA janakake viSayameM
bhI aisI hI nirdaya ceSTA kI  // 55 //  tadanantara bhAIke snehase bharA
vibhISaNa apane Apako kRtakRtya mAnakara harSita hotA huA laMkA calA gayA  // 56
//  dazarathakA jo parijana thA usane pahale bahuta hI vilApa kiyA para antameM
jaba use yaha vidita huA ki vaha putalA thA taba Azcarya karatA huA dhairyako
prApta huA  // 57|| vibhISaNane bhI nagarImeM jAkara azubha karmako zAntike lie
bar3e utsavake sAtha dAna-pUjA Adi zubha karma kiye  // 58|| tadanantara kisI
samaya jaba usakA citta zAnta huA taba karmokI isa vicitratAse pazcAttApa karatA
huA isa prakAra vicAra karane lagA ki  // 59|| mithyA bhayase maiMne una becAre
bhUmigocariyoMko vyartha hI mArA kyoMki sarpa AzIviSake zarIrase utpanna
honepara bhI kyA garur3ake Upara prahAra karaneke lie samartha ho sakatA hai ?
arthAt nahIM  // 60 /  /  atyanta tuccha parAkramako dhAraNa karanevAlA
bhUmigocarI kahA~ aura indrake samAna parAkramako dhAraNa karanevAlA rAvaNa
kahA~ ? zaMkAse sahita tathA madase dhIre-dhIre gamana karanevAlA hAthI kahAM
aura vAyuke samAna vegazAlI siMha kahA~ ?  // 61 /  /  jisa puruSako jahAM
jisase jisa prakAra jitanA aura jo sukha athavA duHkha milanA hai karmoMke
vazIbhUta hue usa puruSako usase usa prakAra utanA aura vaha sukha athavA duHkha
avazya hI prApta hotA hai  // 62 //  yadi koI acchI taraha nimittako jAnatA hai
to vaha apanI AtmAkA kalyANa kyoM nahIM karatA ? jisase ki isa lokameM tathA Age
calakara zarIrakA tyAga 1. sulezazauryoM m.| 2. kSitigocarI m.|

Page #527 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Three: The Story of Vibhishana's Misconduct  **477**  This
wisdom, which has been rendered foolish by the accidental separation of the two
kings' lives, is a result of my ignorance. It is true that the intellect of a
human being, due to poor education, is prone to act in ways that are not
beneficial. ||6||  This city of Lanka, situated in the middle of the ocean,
which pierces the netherworld, is capable of frightening even the gods. How then
can it be accessible to those who dwell on the earth? ||65||  "This act that I
have committed is entirely unworthy of me. I will never again engage in such
reckless behavior." With this thought, Vibhishana, radiant like the sun,
returned to his palace and indulged in his pleasures. ||66||  Thus ends the
twenty-third chapter of the Padmacharita, narrated by the sage Ravishena, which
describes the misconduct of Vibhishana.  **1. GÅ«á¸hatva - Kh. || 2. Kh. B.
Pustakayoá¸¥ PÄá¹­haá¸¥.**  **Note:** The text uses the Jain term "naimittika"
(à¤¨à¤¿à¤®à¤¿à¤¤à¥à¤¤à¤à¥à¤à¤¾à¤¨à¥) to describe someone who is influenced by external factors and
lacks true wisdom.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 477 trayoviMzatitamaM parva upajAtivRttam rAjJostayoH prANaviyojanena
naimittamUDhatvamitaM vivekam  /  duHzikSitArtharmanujairakAyeM pravartate
janturasArabuddhiH  // 6 //  asyAmbunAthasya purI sthiteyaM
praminnapAtAlatalasya madhye  /  kathaM sarANAmapi bhItidakSA gamyasvamAyAt
kSitigocarANAm  // 65 //  upendravajrAvRttam kRtaM mayAtyantamidaM na yogyaM
karomi naivaM punarapradhAryam  /  iti pradhAryottamadIptiyukto raviryathA sve
nilaye sa reme  // 66 //  ityAce raviSeNAcAryaprokta padmacarite
vibhISaNavyasanavarNanaM nAma trayoviMzatitamaM parva  // 23 //  iti zrIjanaka-
dazaratha-kAlanivartanam  /  ho jAnese mokSameM bhI uttama sukhako prApta hotA
// 63 /  /  maiMne jo una do rAjAoMkA prANaghAta kiyA hai usase jAna par3atA hai
ki merA viveka nimittajJAnIke dvArA atyanta mUr3hatAko prApta ho gayA thaa| so
ThIka hI hai kyoMki hona buddhi manuSya duHzikSita manuSyoMkI preraNAse akArya
meM pravRtti karane hI lagate haiM  // 64 //  yaha laMkAnagarI pAtAlatalako
bhedana karanevAle isa samudrake madhya meM sthita hai tathA devoMko bhI bhaya
utpanna karane meM samartha hai phira bhUmigocariyoMke gamya kaise ho sakatI hai
?  // 65 //  'maiMne jo yaha kArya kiyA hai vaha sarvathA mere yogya nahIM hai
aba Age kabhI bhI aisA avicArapUrNa kArya nahIM karUMgA' aisA vicArakara sUryake
samAna uttama kAntise yukta vibhISaNa apane mahalameM krIr3A karane lagA  // 66
/  /  isa prakAra ArSa nAmase prasiddha raviSeNAcArya dvArA kathita
padmacaritameM vibhISaNake vyasanakA varNana karanevAlA teIsavA~ parva samApta
huaa| 1. gUDhatva-kha.  /  2. kha. ba. pustakayoH pAThaH  /

Page #528 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Twenty-Fourth Chapter  "O Shrenik, I will tell you the wondrous story of
King Dasharatha's journey for the sake of protecting his life, listen to it with
wonder.  There is a city called Kautukamangal, adorned with a rampart like a
mountain, in the north.  There reigned a king named Shubhamati, who bore the
epithet 'SÄrthaka'.  His wife was Prithushri, adorned with the ornaments of
feminine virtues.  They had two children, a daughter named Kekaya and a son
named Drona-megha, both of whom filled the space between heaven and earth with
their pure qualities.  Kekaya, with her beautiful limbs and excellent features,
shone brightly, having mastered all the arts.  She knew the three types of
dance: AngahÄrÄshraya, AbhinayÄshraya, and VyÄyÄmika, along with their many sub-
types.  She was also well-versed in music, which is expressed through the
throat, head, and chest, and is composed of the seven notes: Shadja, Rishabha,
Gandhara, Madhyama, Panchama, Dhaivata, and Nishada.  It was accompanied by
three tempos: Drut, Madhy, and Vilambit, and had two types of talas: Asra and
Chaturasra.  It was composed of four types of varna: Sthayi, Sanchari, Arohi,
and Avarohi, and was set in four types of pada.  She was proficient in the three
languages: Sanskrit, Prakrit, and Shauraseni, which are characterized by their
use of nouns, verbs, prefixes, and particles.  There are eight types of jati:
Dhaivati, Ärshbhi, Shadja-Shadja, Udicya, Nishadini, Gandhari, Shadjakaikshi,
and Shadjamadyama.  Or, Gandharaudicya, Madhyamapanchami, Gandharapanchami,
Raktagandhari, Madhyama, etc."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturviMzatitamaM parva 'yadatha bhrAmyato vRttamanaraNyatanUbhuvaH  /  tatte
zreNika vakSyAmi zRNu vismayakAraNam  // 1 //  ito'styuttarakASThAyAM nAmnA
kautukamaGgalam  /  nagaraM cAsya zailAbhaprAkAraparizomitam  // 2 //  rAjA
zumamati ma tatrAsIt sArthakazrutiH  /  pRthuzrIrvanitA tasya yoSidguNavibhUSaNA
// 3 //  kekayA droNameghazca putrAvabhavatAM tayoH  /  guNairatyantavimalaiH
sthitau yo vyApya rodasI  // 4 //  tatra sundarasarvAGgA cArulakSaNadhAriNI  /
nitarAM kekayA reje kalAnAM pAramAgatA  // 5 //  aGgahArAzrayaM nRttaM
tathAminayasaMzrayam  /  vyAyAmikaM ca sAjJAsIttatprabhedaiH samanvitam  // 6 //
amivyaktaM tribhiH sthAnaiH kaNThena zirasorasA  /  svareSu samavetaM ca
saptasthAneSu tadyathA  // 7 //  SaDjarSamA tRtIyazca gAndhAro madhyamastathA  /
paJcamo dhaivatazcApi niSAdazcetyamI svarAH  // 8 //  sthitaM
layaistrisaMkhyAnaidrutamadhyavilambitaiH  /  asraM ca caturasraM ca
tAlayonidvayaM dadhat  // 9 //  sthAyisaMcAribhiryuktaM tathArohyavarohibhiH  /
varNairebhizcaturbhedezcatuHsaMkhyapadasthitam  // 10 //  nAmAkhyAtopasargeSu
nipAteSu ca saMskRtA  /  prAkRtI zaurasenI ca bhASA yatra trayI smRtA  // 11 //
dhaivatyathArSabhISaDjaSaDjodIcyA niSAdinI  /  gAndhArI cAparA SaDjakaikazI
SaDjamadhyamA  // 12 //  gAndhArodIcyasaMjJAbhyAM tathA madhyamapaJcamI  /
gAndhArapaJcamI raktagAndhArI madhyamA tathA  // 13 //  athAnantara gautamasvAmI
kahate haiM ki he zreNika! prANa-rakSAke lie bhramaNa karate samaya rAjA
dazarathakA jo AzcaryakArI vRttAnta huA vaha maiM tere lie kahatA hU~ so suna  /
yahA~se uttara dizAmeM parvatake samAna UMce koTase suzobhita kautukamaMgala
nAmakA nagara hai  // 1-2 //  vahA~ sArthaka nAmako dhAraNa karanevAlA zubhamati
nAmakA rAjA rAjya karatA thaa| usakI pRthuzrI nAmakI strI thI jo ki striyoMke
yogya guNarUpI AbhUSaNase vibhUSita thI  // 3 //  una donoMke kekayA nAmakI
putrI aura droNameghakA nAmakA putra ye do santAneM huiiN| ye donoM hI apane
atyanta nirmala guNoMke dvArA AkAza tathA pRthivIke antarAlako vyApta kara
sthita the  // 4 //  unameM jisake savaM aMga sundara the, jo uttama lakSaNoMko
dhAraNa karanevAlI tathA samasta kalAoMkI pAragAminI thI, aisI kekayA nAmakI
putrI atyanta suzobhita ho rahI thI  // 5 //  aMgahArAzraya, abhinayAzraya aura
vyAyAmikake bhedase nRtyake tIna bheda haiM tathA inake anya aneka avAntara
bheda haiM so vaha ina sabako jAnatI thI  // 6 //  vaha usa saMgItako acchI
taraha jAnatI thI jo kaNTha, zira aura urasthala ina tIna sthAnoMse abhivyakta
hotA thA, tathA nIce likhe sAta svaroMmeM samaveta rahatA thA  // 7 //  SaDja,
RSabha, gAndhAra, madhyama, paMcama, dhaivata aura niSAda ye sAta svara kahalAte
haiM  /  / 8 /  /  jo druta, madhya aura vilambita ina tIna layoMse sahita thA,
tathA asra aura caturasra ina tAlakI do yoniyoMko dhAraNa karatA thA  // 9 //
sthAyI, saMcArI, ArohI aura avarohI ina cAra prakArake varNose sahita hone ke
kAraNa jo cAra prakArake padoMse sthita thaa||10|| prAtipadika, tiGanta,
upasarga aura nipAtoMmeM saMskArako prApta saMskRta, prAkRta aura zaurasenI yaha
tIna prakArakI bhASA jisameM sthita thI  // 11 //  dhaivatI, ArSabhI, SaDja-
SaDjA, udIcyA, niSAdinI, gAndhArI, SaDjakaikazI aura SaDjamadhyamA ye ATha
jAtiyAM haiM athavA gAndhArodIcyA, madhyamapaMcamI, gAndhArapaMcamI,
raktagAndhArI, madhyamA, 1. yadartha j.| 2. yatrA m.| 3. paramAgatA ma., kha.  /
4. zirasorusA ma., j.| 5. tathArohAvarohibhiH m.| 6. padAsthitam m.|

Page #529 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Four  **479** The ten jÄtis are: ÄndhrÄ«, MadhyamodÄ«cyÄ,
KarmÄravÄ«, NandÄ«nÄ«, and KaiÅikÄ«. The music that was composed with these eight or
ten jÄtis, along with the thirteen ornaments mentioned here and those to be
mentioned later, was excellent. ||14-15||  The four ornaments of the sthÄyÄ« pada
are: PrasannÄdi, PrasannÄnta, MadhyaprasÄda, and PrasannÄdyavasÄna. ||16||  The
six ornaments of the saá¹cÄrÄ« pada are: Nirvá¹tta, Prasthita, Bindu, Preá¹kholita,
TÄro-mandra, and Prasanna. ||17||  The ÄrohÄ« pada has only one ornament,
PrasannÄdi, while the avarohÄ« pada has two ornaments, PrasannÄnta and Kuá¸¥ara.
Thus, there are thirteen ornaments in total. She knew this excellent music well,
along with all its characteristics. ||18-19||  The four types of instruments
are: *tata* produced from the *tantri* (veena), *avanaddha* produced from the
*má¹daá¹ga*, *Åuá¹£ira* produced from the *vaá¹Åa* (flute), and *ghana* produced from
the *tÄla*. All these instruments have various variations. Just as she knew all
this, so too was there hardly anyone else who could match her knowledge.
||20-21||  The combination of song, dance, and instruments is called *nÄá¹­ya*.
The nine rasas are: Åá¹á¹gÄra, HÄsya, Karuá¹Ä, VÄ«ra, Adbhuta, BhayÄnaka, Raudra,
BÄ«bhatsa, and ÅÄnta. She, the young girl KekayÄ, knew them all with their
various sub-categories and in their highest form. ||22-23||  The script that is
commonly used in one's own country is called *anuvá¹tta*. The script that people
imagine according to their own symbols is called *viká¹ta*. The script that is
used for writing about the *pratyanga* and other categories is called
*sÄmayika*. The script that is created by using flowers and other objects in
place of letters is called *naimittika*. This script has many variations
depending on the region, such as PrÄcya, Madhyama, Yaudheya, SamÄdra, etc.
KekayÄ knew all of them well. ||24-26||  There is an art called *uktikauÅala*
which has many variations depending on the *sthÄna* (location) and other
factors. The jÄtis are: *sthÄna*, *svara*, *saá¹skÄra*, *vinyÄsa*, *kÄku*,
*samudÄya*, *virÄma*, *sÄmÄnyÄbhihita*, *samÄnÄrthatva*, and *bhÄá¹£Ä*. ||27-28||
The *sthÄna* (location) is of three types: *uraá¸¥* (chest), *kaá¹á¹­ha* (throat),
and *Åiraá¸¥* (head). The *svara* (tone) is the same as before, starting with
*á¹£aá¸ja* and having seven variations. ||29||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 catuvizatitamaM parva 479 AndhrI ca madhyamodIcyA smRtA karmAravIti ca  /
proktAtha nandanI cAnyA kaizikI ceti jAtayaH  // 14 //
imAbhirjAtimiryuktamaSTAmirdazabhistathA  /  alaMkArairamImizca
trayodazamiranvitam  // 15 //  prasamAdiH prasannAntastathA madhyaprasAdavAn  /
prasannAdyavasAnazca caturdhA sthAyibhUSaNam  // 16 //  nirvRttaH prasthito
bindustathA preGkholitaH smRtaH  /  tAro mandraH prasannazca SoDhA
saMcAribhUSaNam  // 17 //  ArohiNaH prasannAdirekameva vibhUSaNam  /
prasannAntastathA tulyaH kuharazcAvarohiNaH  // 18 //  gaditau
dvAvalaGkArAvityalaGkArayojanam  /  avAgAt sAdhugItaM ca lakSaNaremiranvitam  //
19 //  tataM tantrIsamutthAnamavanaddhaM mRdaGgajam  /  zuSiraM vaMzasaMbhUtaM
dhanaM tAlasamutthitam  // 20 //  caturvidhamidaM vAdyaM nAnAbhedaiH samanvitam
/  jAnAti sma nitAntaM sA yathaivaM viralo'paraH  // 21 //  kalAnAM tisRNAmAsAM
nATyamekIkiyocyate  /  zRGgArahAsyakaruNevIrAdbhutabhayAnakAH  // 22 /  /
raubImarasazAntAzca rasAstatra navoditAH  /  vetti sma tadasau bAlA
saMprabhedamanuttamam  // 23 //  anuvRttaM lipijJAnaM yatsvadeze pravartate  /
dvitIyaM vikRtaM jJeyaM kalpitaM yatsvasaMjJayA  // 24 //  pretyaGgAdiSu varNeSu
tattvaM sAmayikaM smRtam  /  naimittikaM ca puSpAdidravyavinyAsato'param  // 25
//  prAcyamadhyamayaudheyasamAdrAdimiranvitam  /  lipijJAnamasau bAlA kila
jJAtavatI param  // 26 //  astyuktikauzala nAma bhisaMsthAnAdimiH kalA  /
sthAnaM svaro'tha saMskAro vinyAsaH kAkunA saha  // 27 //  samudAyo virAmazca
sAmAnyAmihitastathA  /  samAnArthatvabhASA ca jAtayazca prakIrtitAH  // 28 //
uraH kaNThaH zirazceti sthAnaM tatra tridhA smRtam  /  ukta eva svaraH pUrva
SaDjAdiH saptabhedakaH  // 29 //  AndhrI, madhyamodIcyA, karmAravI, nandinI aura
kaizikI ye daza jAtiyAM haiN| so jo saMgIta ina ATha athavA daza jAtiyoMse yukta
thA tathA inhIM aura Age kahe jAnevAle teraha alaMkAroMse sahita thA  // 12-15
//  prasannAdi, prasannAnta, madhyaprasAda aura prasannAdyavasAna ye cAra sthAyI
padake alaMkAra haiM  /  / 16 /  /  nivRtta, prasthita, bindu, kholita, tAra-
mandra aura prasanna ye chaha saMcArI padake alaMkAra haiM ||17|| ArohI padakA
prasannAdi nAmakA eka hI alaMkAra hai aura avarohI padake prasannAnta tathA
kuhara ye do alaMkAra haiN| isa prakAra teraha alaMkAra haiM so ina saba
lakSaNoMse sahita uttama saMgItako vaha acchI taraha jAnatI thI  // 18-19||
tantrI arthAt vINAse utpanna honevAlA tata, mRdaMgase utpanna honevAlA
avanaddha, bA~surIse utpanna honevAlA zuSira aura tAlase utpanna honevAlA ghana
ye cAra prakArake vAdya haiM, ye sabhI vAdya nAnA bhedoMse sahita haiN| vaha
kekayA ina sabako isa taraha jAnatI thI ki usakI samAnatA karanevAlA dUsarA
vyakti viralA hI thA  // 20-21 //  gIta, nRtya aura vAditra ina tInoMkA eka
sAtha honA nATya kahalAtA hai| zRMgAra, hAsya, karuNA, vIra, adbhuta, bhayAnaka,
raudra, bIbhatsa aura zAnta ye nau rasa kahe gaye haiN| vaha bAlA kekayA unheM
aneka avAntara bhedoMke sAtha utkRSTatAse jAnatI thI  /  / 22-23 //  jo lipi
apane deza meM Amataurase calatI hai use anuvRtta kahate haiN| loga apane-apane
saMketAnusAra jisakI kalpanA kara lete haiM use vikRta kahate haiN| pratyaMga
Adi vargoM meM jisakA prayoga hotA hai use sAmayika kahate haiM aura varNo ke
badale puSpAdi padArtha rakhakara jo lipikA jJAna kiyA jAtA hai use naimittika
kahate haiN| isa lipike prAcya, madhyama, yaudheya, samAdra Adi dezoMkI apekSA
aneka avAntara bheda hote haiM so kekayA una sabako acchI taraha jAnatI thI  //
24-26 //  jisake sthAna Adike apekSA aneka bheda haiM aisI uktikozala nAmakI
kalA hai| sthAna, svara, saMskAra, vinyAsa, kAku, samudAya, virAma,
sAmAnyAbhihita, samAnArthatva, aura bhASA ye jAtiyA~ kahI gayI haiM  // 27-28 /
/  inameM se 1. ranvitA  /  2. kAruNya ba., m.| 3. saptabheda- ma.  /  4.
anuvRttilipi ba.  /  5. atyaGgAdiSu ma.  /  6. asyukti m.| 7. bhinna
sthAnAdibhiH m.|

Page #530 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Papouraana  **Verse 30:** Two types of *sanskar* are described based on
their characteristics and purpose. *Vinyasa* refers to the arrangement of words,
sentences, and larger units of discourse.  **Verse 31:** *Kakus* are of two
types: relative and absolute. *Samadaya* (collection) is of three types: prose,
poetry, and mixed (champu).  **Verse 32:** Conciseness and pauses are general
features. The use of synonyms is also mentioned.  **Verse 33:** Using one word
to convey multiple meanings is called *tulyarthata* (synonymy). Language is of
three types: *arya*, *lakshana*, and *mleccha*, based on their rules.  **Verse
34:** *Lekha* refers to the practice of writing poetry. These are all considered
*jati* (categories). *Vyaktavaak*, *lokavaak*, and *margavyavahar* are
considered *matrika* (sources).  **Verse 35:** Even these categories have many
subcategories known to the wise. The skill of eloquence, encompassing all these
aspects, is called *uktikoushal*.  **Verse 36:** *Shushkachitra* (dry painting)
is of two types: *naanasushk* (various dry) and *varjit* (forbidden). *Aichitra*
(moist painting) is of many types, created using substances like sandalwood.
**Verse 37:** It is created on earth, water, and cloth using artificial and
natural colors. It is combined with various colors. Kekaya, with auspicious
signs, knew all about this art of painting.  **Verse 38:** *Pusthakarma* (toy-
making) is of three types: *kshaya* (destruction), *upachay* (addition), and
*sankrama* (transfer).  **Verse 39:** *Kshayajan* *pusthakarma* is created by
carving wood, etc. *Upachayajan* *pusthakarma* is created by adding clay, etc.
*Sankramajan* *pusthakarma* is created by molding using molds, etc.  **Verse
40:** *Pusthakarma* is further categorized based on the presence or absence of
mechanisms, holes, etc. Some toys are mechanized, while others are not. Some
have holes, while others don't. Kekaya knew this art of toy-making as well as it
was rare for others.  **Verse 41:** *Patracched* (paper cutting) is of three
types: *bushkim*, *chhinna*, and *achhinna*. *Bushkim* is created using needles,
teeth, etc. *Chhinna* is created by cutting with scissors. *Achhinna* is created
by combining different elements.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 papapurANe saMskAro dvividhaH prokto lakSaNoddezatastathA  /  vinyAsastu
sakhaNDAH syuH padavAkyAstaduttarAH  // 30 //  sApekSA nirapekSA ca
kAkumeMdadvayAnvitA  /  gadyaH padyazca mizrazca samudAyastridhoditaH  // 31 //
saMkSiptatA virAmastu sAmAnyAbhihitaH punaH  /  zabdAnAmekavAcyAnAM prayogaH
parikIrtitaH  // 32 //  tulyArthataikazabdena bahvarthapratipAdanam  /
bhASAryalakSaNamlecchaniyamAstrividhA smRtA  // 33 //  padyavyavahRtilekha
evamAdhAstu jAtayaH  /  vyaktavAglokavAgmArgavyavahArazca mAtaraH  // 3 //
eteSAmapi bhedAnAM ye bhedA budhagocarAH  /  sarvairemiH samAyuktaM
sAtyavaiduktikauzalam  // 35 //  zuSkacitraM dvidhA proktaM nAnAzuSkaM ca
varjitam  /  AIcitraM punarnAnA candanAdidravodbhavam  // 36 //
kRtrimAkRtrimairaGgairbhUjalAmbaragocaram  /  varNakazleSasaMyuktaM sA
vivedAkhilaM zumA  // 37 //  pustakarma vidhA proktaM kSayopacayasaMkramaiH  /
takSaNAdikramodbhutaM kASTAdau kSayajaM smRtam  // 38 //  upacityA
mRdAdInAmupaceyaM tu kathyate  /  saMkrAntaM tu yadAhasya pratibimba vibhAvyate
// 39 //  yantraniryantrasacchidranizchidrAdibhiranvitam  /  sA jajJe tadyathA
madrA lokebhyo durlabhastathA  // 40 //  vuSkima chinnamachinnaM patracchedyaM
vidhoditam  /  sUcIdantAdibhistatra nirmitaM vuSkima smRtam  // 41 //
urasthala, kaNTha aura mU ke bhedase sthAna tIna prakArakA mAnA gayA hai|
svarake SaDja Adi sAta bheda pahale kaha hI Aye haiM  // 29 //  lakSaNa aura
uddeza athavA lakSaNA aura abhidhAkI apekSA saMskAra do prakArakA kahA gayA hai|
padavAkya, mahAvAkya Adike vibhAgasahita jo kathana hai vaha vinyAsa kahalAtA
hai  // 30 //  sApekSA aura nirapekSAkI apekSA kAku do bhedoMse sahita hai|
gadya, padya aura mizra arthAt campUkI apekSA samudAya tIna prakArakA kahA gayA
hai  // 31 //  kisI viSayakA saMkSepase ullekha karanA virAma kahalAtA hai|
ekArthaka arthAt paryAyavAcI zabdoMkA prayoga karanA sAmAnyAbhihita kahA gayA
hai  /  / 32 /  /  eka zabdake dvArA bahuta arthakA pratipAdana karanA
samAnArthatA hai| Arya, lakSaNa aura mlecchake niyamase bhASA tIna prakArakI
kahI gayI hai  // 33 //  inake sivAya jisakA padyarUpa vyavahAra hotA hai use
lekha kahate haiN| ye saba jAtiyAM kahalAtI haiN| vyaktavAk, lokavAk aura
mArgavyavahAra ye mAtRkAe~ kahalAtI haiN| ina saba bhedoMke bhI aneka bheda haiM
jinheM vidvajjana jAnate haiN| ina sabase sahita jo bhASaNa-cAturya hai use
uktikauzala kahate haiN| kekayA isa ukti-kauzalako acchI taraha jAnatI thI  //
34-35 //  nAnAzuSka aura varjitake bhedase zuSkacitra do prakArakA kahA gayA hai
tathA candanAdike dravase utpanna honevAlA Ardracitra aneka prakArakA hai  // 36
//  kRtrima aura akRtrima raMgoMke dvArA pRthvI, jala tathA vastra Adike Upara
isako racanA hotI hai| yaha aneka raMgoMke sambandhase saMyukta hotA hai| zubha
lakSaNoMvAlI kekayA isa samasta citrakalAko jAnatI thI  // 37 /  /  kSaya,
upacaya aura saMkramake bhedase pustakarma tIna prakArakA kahA gayA hai| lakar3I
Adiko chIla-chAlakara jo khilaunA Adi banAye jAte haiM use kSayajanya pustakarma
kahate haiN| Uparase miTTI Adi lagAkara jo khilaunA Adi banAye jAte haiM use
upacayajanya pustakarma kahate haiM tathA jo pratibimba arthAt sAMce Adi
gar3hAkara banAye jAte haiM use saMkramajanya pustakama kahate haiM  /  / 38-39
/  /  yaha pustakarma, yantra, niryantra, sacchidra tathA nizchidra Adike
bhedoMse sahita hai, arthAt koI khilaunA yantracAlita hote haiM, aura koI binA
yantrake hote haiM, koI chidrasahita hote haiM, koI chidrrhit| vaha kekayA
pustakarmako aisA jAnatI thI jaisA dUsaroMke lie durlabha thA  // 40 //
patracchedake tIna bheda haiM-buSkima, chinna aura acchinna  /  suI athavA danta
Adike dvArA jo banAyA jAtA hai use buSkima kahate haiN| jo kaiMcIse kATakara
banAyA jAtA hai tathA jo anya avayavoMke sambandhase yukta hotA hai use 1.
bhASApalakSaNa- ma  /  2. buddhayagocarAH m.| 3. varNaka: zleSma- ma.  /  4.
kSayasaMsmRtam ma.  /

Page #531 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter Twenty-Four  **481**  That which is cut with scissors etc. and is
connected with other parts is called **chhinna**. That which is cut and is
devoid of connection with other parts is called **achhinna**. ||42||  This
**patracchedyakriya** (art of cutting leaves) is performed on leaves, cloth,
gold etc. and is of two types: **sthira** (stable) and **chanchal** (mobile).
The beautiful Kekaya had mastered this art. ||43||  The art of garland making is
of four types: **ardra** (moist), **shushka** (dry), **tadundmukta** (released
from that) and **mishra** (mixed). The garland made from fresh flowers etc. is
called **ardra**. The one made from dry leaves etc. is called **shushka**. The
one made from rice husk or jaw etc. is called **tadundmukta**. And the one made
from a mixture of all three is called **mishra**. ||44-45||  This garland making
art is associated with various aspects like **ranprabodhan** (awakening of war),
**vyuhsangyog** (combination of formations) etc. The wise Kekaya was well-versed
in all these aspects. ||46||  **Yoni dravya** (source material), **adhiá¹£á¹­hÄna**
(base), **rasa** (taste), **virya** (potency), **kalpana** (imagination),
**parikarma** (process), **guna-dosha** (qualities and defects) knowledge and
**kaushala** (skill) are the components of **gandhayà¥à¤à¤¨à¤¾** (art of fragrance
creation). **Tagara** (sandalwood) etc. are the **yoni dravya** from which
fragrant substances are created. The base of incense sticks etc. is called
**adhiá¹£á¹­hÄna**. **Kashaya** (astringent), **madhura** (sweet), **tikta**
(bitter), **katu** (pungent) and **amla** (sour) are the five types of **rasa**
which need to be carefully determined in fragrant substances. ||47-49||  The
**virya** of substances is of two types: **shita** (cold) and **ushna** (hot).
**Kalpana** is the combination of suitable and unsuitable substances. ||50||
**Parikarma** includes processes like **sneha** (oiling), **shodhan**
(purification) and **kshalan** (washing). **Guna-dosha** knowledge is the
understanding of qualities and defects. **Kaushala** is the knowledge of the
uniqueness of external and internal substances. ||51||  This art of
**gandhayà¥à¤à¤¨à¤¾** is associated with two aspects: **svatantr** (independent) and
**anugata** (dependent). Kekaya was well-versed in all these aspects. ||52||
There are five types of food items: **bhaká¹£ya** (eatable), **bhojya** (edible),
**peya** (drinkable), **lehya** (lickable) and **chushya** (suctable). Among
these, **bhaká¹£ya** is eaten for taste and is of two types: **ká¹trima**
(artificial) and **aká¹trima** (natural). ||53||  **Bhojya** is eaten to satisfy
hunger and is of two types: **mukhya** (main) and **sadhaka** (supplementary).
**Odan** (rice), **roti** (bread) etc. are **mukhya bhojya**. **Lappsi** (sweet
porridge), **dal** (lentils), **shak** (vegetables) etc. are **sadhaka bhojya**.
||54||  **Peeya** is of three types: **shityoga** (sherbet), **jala** (water)
and **madya** (wine). **Lehya** is of three types: **raga** (sweet), **khaá¹á¸a**
(sugar candy) and **valehya** (lickable). **Chushya** is of two types:
**ká¹trima** (artificial) and **aká¹trima** (natural). ||55||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturviMzatitamaM parva 481 kartarIcchedanodbhUtaM chinnaM saMbandhasaMyutam  /
vicchinnaM tu tadubhUtaM saMbandhaparivarjitam  // 42 //
patravastrasuvarNAdisaMbhavaM sthiracaJcalam  /  nirNinye sA paraM cArvI
saMvRtAsaMvRtAdijam  // 43 //  AI zuSkaM tadunmuktaM mizraM ceti caturvidham  /
mAlyaM tatrAIpuSpAdisaMbhavaM prathamaM matam  // 44 //  zuSkapatrAdisaMbhUtaM
zuSkamuktaM tadujjhitam  /  sikthakAdisamudbhUtaM saMkINaM tu trisaMkarAt  // 45
//  raNaprabodhanavyUhasaMyogAdimiranvitam  /  tadvidhAtumalaM prAjJA sAjJAsIt
pUraNAdijam  // 46 //  yonidravyamadhiSTAnaM raso vIyaM ca kalpanA  /  parikarma
guNA doSA yuktireSA tu kauzalam  // 47 //  yonirviziSTamalAdidravyaM tu
tagarAdikam  /  yadvarNavartikAdyetadadhiSThAnaM prakIrtitam  // 48 //  kaSAyo
madhurastiktaH kaTukAmlazca kIrtitaH  /  rasaH paJcavidho yasya nirhAreNa
vinizcayaH  // 49 //  dravyANAM zItamuSNaM ca vIrya tatra dvidhA smRtam  /
kalpanAtra vivAdAnuvAdasaMvAdayojanam  // 50 //  parikarma punaH
snehazodhanakSAlanAdikam  /  jJAnaM ca guNadoSANAM pATavAdItarAtmanAm  // 51 //
svatantrAnugatAkhyena tAM bhedena samanvitAm  /  gandhayuktimasau
sarvAmajAnAdyuktavibhramA  // 52 //  bhakSyaM bhojyaM ca peyaM ca lehyaM cUSyaM
ca paJcadhA  /  AsAdyaM tatra bhakSyaM tu kRtrimAkRtrimaM smRtam  // 53 //
bhojyaM dvidhA yavAgvAdivizeSAzcaudanAdayaH  /  zItayogo jalaM madyamiti peyaM
vidhoditam  // 54 //  rAgakhANDavalehyAkhyaM ledyaM trividhamucyate  /
kRtrimAkRtrimaM cUSyaM dvividhaM parikIrtitam  // 55 //  chinna kahate haiM  /
jo kaiMcI Adise kATakara banAyA jAtA hai tathA anya avayavoMke sambandhase
rahita hotA hai use acchinna kahate haiM  // 41-42 //  yaha patracchedyakriyA
patra, vastra tathA suvarNAdike Upara kI jAtI hai tathA sthira aura caMcala
donoM prakArako hotI hai  /  sundarI kekayAne isa kalAkA acchI taraha nirNaya
kiyA thaa||43|| Ardra, zuSka, tadunmukta aura mizrake bhedase mAlAnirmANako kalA
cAra prakArakI hai| inameMse gIle arthAt tAje puSpAdise jo mAlA banAyI jAtI hai
use Ardra kahate haiM, sUkhe patra Adise jo banAyI jAtI hai zuSka kahate haiN|
cAvaloMke sItha athavA javA Adise jo banAyI jAtI hai use tadujjhita kahate haiM
aura jo ukta tInoM cIjoMke melase banAyI jAtI hai use mizra kahate haiM  //
44-45 //  yaha mAlyakarma raNaprabodhana, vyUhasaMyoga Adi bhedoMse sahita hotA
hai vaha buddhimatI kekayA isa samasta kAryako karanA acchI taraha jAnatI thI
// 46 /  /  yonidravya, adhiSThAna, rasa, vIrya, kalpanA, parikarma, guNa-doSa
vijJAna tathA kauzala ye gandhayojanA arthAt sugandhita padArtha nirmANarUpa
kalAke aMga haiN| jinase sugandhita padArthoMkA nirmANa hotA hai aise tagara Adi
yonidravya haiM, jo dhUpabattI AdikA Azraya hai use adhiSThAna kahate haiM,
kaSAyalA, madhura, ciraparA, kar3aA aura khaTTA yaha pAMca prakArakA rasa kahA
gayA hai jisakA sugandhita dravyameM khAsakara nizcaya karanA par3atA hai  //
47-49 //  padArthoMkI jo zItatA athavA uSNatA hai vaha do prakArakA vorya hai|
anukUla-pratikUla padArthoM kA milAnA kalpanA hai  /  / 50 //  tela Adi
padArthoMkA zodhanA tathA dhonA Adi parikama kahalAtA hai, guNa athavA doSakA
jAnanA so guNa-doSa vijJAna hai aura parakIya tathA svakIya vastuko viziSTatA
jAnanA kauzala hai  // 51 //  yaha gandhayojanAkI kalA svatantra aura anugatake
bhedase sahita hai| kekayA isa sabako acchI taraha jAnatI thI  // 52 //
bhakSya, bhojya, peya, lehya aura cUSyake bhedase bhojana sambandhI padArthoke
pAMca bheda haiN| inameMse jo svAda ke lie khAyA jAtA hai use bhakSya kahate
haiN| yaha kRtrima tathA akRtrimake bhedase do prakArakA hai  // 53 //  jo
kSudhA-nivRttike lie khAyA jAtA hai use bhojya kahate haiM, isake bhI mukhya
aura sAbhakakI apekSA do bheda haiM ? odana. roTI Adi makhya bhojya haiM aura
lapsI. dAla, zAka Adi sAdhaka bhojya haiM  // 54 //  zItayoga ( zarbata), jala
aura madyake bhedase peya tIna prakArakA kahA 1. 2. bhogyaM m.|

Page #532 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  482 In the Padma Purana, the knowledge of taste is
described as being associated with digestion, cutting, heating, and cooling,
etc. Kekaya possessed this beautiful knowledge. ||56|| She knew well the
characteristics of gems like diamond, pearl, sapphire, gold, silver, weapons,
clothes, conch shells, etc. ||57|| She was skilled in weaving, dyeing clothes in
various colors, and other such arts with great beauty and excellence. ||58|| She
was very knowledgeable in making various tools from iron, teeth, lac, alkali,
stone, thread, etc. ||59|| There are four types of measurement based on the
differences in the object, place, weight, and time. Among these, the measurement
of the object is called "meya" and is differentiated based on the differences in
length, width, etc. ||60|| The measurement of place is called "desh" and is
measured in "vitasti" (span), etc. The measurement of weight is called "tula"
and is measured in "pal" (weight), etc. The measurement of time is called "kal"
and is measured in "samaya" (time), etc. ||61|| This measurement is generated
from ascent, circumference, diagonal, and action. She knew all of this well.
||62|| She was also knowledgeable in the arts of agriculture, treasure hunting,
identifying precious stones, business practices, and the science of life, all in
a special way. ||63|| She was well-versed in the treatment of humans, elephants,
cows, horses, etc., with knowledge of their causes and other aspects. ||64||
There are three types of fainting: caused by illusion, pain, or magic, and by
spells and medicines. She knew all of this well. ||65|| She was well-versed in
the various doctrines created by hypocrites, including their character and
various aspects. ||66|| There are four types of play: based on action, tools,
speech, and artistic skill. Action is the play that originates from the body.
||67|| Playing with balls, etc., is considered a tool. Speech play is the use of
various beautiful words. ||68|| Gambling, etc., is considered artistic skill.
She was an expert in all these types of play. ||69||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 482 padmapurANe pAcanacchedanoSNatvazItatvakaraNAdimiH  /
yuktamAsvAdyavijJAnamAsIttasyA manoharam  // 56 //  vajramauktikavaiDUryasuvarNa
rajatAyudham  /  vastrasaMkhAdi cAvedIt sA ratnaM lakSaNAdibhiH  // 5 //
tantusaMtAnayogaM ca vastrasya bahuvarNakam  /  rAgAdhAnaM ca sA cAru
vivedAtizayAnvitam  // 5 //  lohadantajatukSArazilosUtrAdisaMbhavam  /
tathopakaraNaM katuM jJAtamatyantamuddhayA  // 59 //
meyadezatulAkAlabhedAnmAnaM caturvidham  /  tatra prasthAdimirminnaM meyamAnaM
prakIrtitam  // 60 //  dezamAnaM vitastyAdi tulAmAnaM palAdikam  /  samayAdi tu
yanmAnaM tatkAlasya prakIrtitam  // 61 //
taccArohaparINAhatiryaggauravabhedataH  /  kriyAtazca samutpannaM
sAdhyagAnmAnamuttamam  // 62 //  bhUtikarma nidhijJAnaM rUpajJAnaM vaNigvidhiH
/  anyathA jIvavijJAnamAsIttasyA vizeSavat  // 63 //
mAnuSadvipagovAjiprabhRtInAM cikitsitam  /  sA nidAnAdibhirmedayuktaM jJAtavatI
param  // 64 //  mAyAkRtaM tridhA pIDAzakrajAlaM vimohanam  /
mantrauSadhAdibhirjAtaM tacca sarva viveda sA  // 65 //  samayaM ca samIkSyAdi
pAkhaNDaparikalpitam  /  cAritreNa padArthazca viveda vividhairyutam  // 66 //
ceSTopakaraNaM vANI kalAvyatyasanaM tthaa| krIDA caturvidhA proktA tatra ceSTA
zarIrajA  // 67 //  "kandukAdi tu vijJeyaM tatropakaraNaM bahu  /  vAkkrIDanaM
punarnAnA subhASitasamudbhavam  // 68 //  nAnAdurodaranyAsaH kalAvyatyasanaM
smRtam  /  krIDAyAM bahubhedAyAmasyAM sAtyantakovidA  // 69 //  gayA hai  /  /
55 /  /  ina sabakA jJAna honA AsvAdyavijJAna hai| yaha AsvAdyavijJAna pAcana,
chedana, uSNatvakaraNa tathA zItatvakaraNa Adise sahita hai, kekayAko isa sabakA
sundara jJAna thA  // 56 //  vaha vajra arthAt hIrA, motI, vaiDUyaM ( nIlama ),
suvarNa, rajatAyudha tathA vastra-zaMkhAdi ratnoMko unake lakSaNa Adise acchI
taraha jAnatI thI  // 57|| vastrapara dhAgese kar3hAIkA kAma karanA tathA
vastrako aneka raMgoMmeM raMganA ina kAryoMko vaha bar3I sundaratA aura
utkRSTatAke sAtha jAnatI thI  /  / 58 //  vaha lohA, danta, lAkha, kSAra,
patthara tathA sUta Adise bananevAle nAnA upakaraNoMko banAnA bahuta acchI
taraha jAnatI thI  // 59 //  meya, deza, tulA aura kAlake bhedase mAna cAra
prakArakA hai| isameMse prastha Adike bhedase jisake aneka bheda haiM use meya
kahate haiM  /  / 60 //  vitasti hAtha dezamAna kahalAtA hai, pala, chaTAka,
sera Adi tulAmAna kahalAtA hai aura samaya, ghar3I, ghaNTA Adi kAlamAna kahA
gayA hai  // 61 //  yaha mAna Aroha, parINAha, tiryaggaurava aura kriyAse
utpanna hotA hai| isa sabako vaha acchI taraha jAnatI thI  // 62 //  bhatikarma
arthAta belabaTA khIMcanekA jJAna, nidhijJAna arthAt gar3e hue dhanakA jJAna,
rUpajJAna, vaNigvidhi arthAt vyApAra kalA tathA jIvavijJAna arthAt jantuvijJAna
ina sabako vaha vizeSa rUpase jAnatI thii||63|| vaha manuSya, hAthI, gau tathA
ghor3A AdikI cikitsAko nidAna Adike sAtha acchI taraha jAnatI thii||64||
vimohana arthAt mUrchAke tIna bheda haiM-mAyAkRta, pIDA athavA indrajAla kRta
aura mantra tathA oSadhi Adi dvArA kRta  /  so isa sabako vaha acchI taraha
jAnatI tho  // 65 //  pAkhaNDIjanoMke dvArA kalpita sAMkhya Adi matoMko vaha
unameM varNita cAritra tathA nAnA prakArake padArthoM ke sAtha acchI taraha
jAnatI thii||66|| ceSTA, upakaraNa, vANI aura kalA vyAsaMgake bhedase krIr3A
cAra prakArakI kahI gayI hai| usameM zarIrase utpanna honevAlI krIDAko ceSTA
kahA hai  // 67 //  geMda Adi khelanA upakaraNa hai, nAnA prakArake subhASita
Adi kahanA vANI-krIr3A hai aura juA Adi khelanA kalAvyAsaMga nAmaka 1. vastraM
saMkhAdivAvedIt ba.  /  2. zilAstatrAdi ma, j.| 3. kAra  /  4. nidhirjJAnaM ma.,
j.| 5. vidhima ma., ba., ja., kh.| 6. karaNA m.| 7. kandukAditi ma., ba., j.|

Page #533 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The twenty-fourth chapter 483 The world is said to be of two kinds, based on the
distinction between the dependent and the support. The living beings and the
non-living beings are the dependents, and the earth, etc., are their supports.
|| 70 || In this world, there is the origin, existence, and destruction of
various forms of life. To know this is called LokajÃ±Äna (knowledge of the
world), which is very difficult to attain. || 71 || This world exists naturally
in various forms, such as mountains, earth, islands, and countries. Kekaya had
the best knowledge of this. || 72 || 1 The art of massage is of two types: one
is Karma-saá¹Åraya (dependent on karma) and the other is ÅayyopacÄrika (related
to the bed). There are four types of Karma-saá¹Åraya, as they provide comfort to
the skin, flesh, bones, and mind. Some massages provide comfort only to the
skin, some to the skin and flesh, some to the skin, flesh, and bones, and some
to all four: skin, flesh, bones, and mind. Besides these, there are other types:
contact, holding, eating, moving, striking, breaking, piercing, pressing, and
splitting. Furthermore, there are three types based on softness, medium, and
firmness. || 73-75 || The massage that provides comfort only to the skin is
called soft or delicate. The one that provides comfort to the skin and flesh is
called medium, and the one that provides comfort to the skin, flesh, and bones
is called firm. When music is added to it, it becomes known as mind-comforting
massage. || 76 || This art of massage also has the following drawbacks:
reversing the growth of hair on the body, pressing too hard on areas without
flesh, hair pulling, amazing, corruptly obtained, going astray, overeating,
being ordered to do something, excessive, and being the opposite of sleep. The
delicate massage that is free from these drawbacks, applied in the right place,
and done with knowledge of the intention, is very beautiful. || 77-79 || The
massage that is done with various instruments, such as cushions, is called
ÅayyopacÄrika, which provides comfort to the mind. || 80 || This art of massage,
which is related to the limbs and their parts, was known to that girl in a way
that no other woman knew. || 81 || Bathing, braiding the hair, and perfuming
them are the arts of body-culture and dressing. So 1. CÄsa-kha., VÄsa ja. 2.
Doá¹£ÄstasyÄ ma.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturviMzatitamaM parva 483 AzritAzrayato bhinno loko dvividha ucyate  /
AzritA jIvanirjIvA pRthivyAdistadAzrayAH  //  70  //  tatra nAnAbhavotpattiH
sthitirnazvaratA tathA  /  jJAyate yadidaM proktaM lokazatvaM sudurgamam  // 71
//  paurvAparyo dharo bhUrya dvIpadezAdibhedataH  /  svabhAvAvasthite loke
babhUvAsyAstaduttamam  // 72 //  saMvAhakakA dvedhA tatraikA karmasaMzrayA  /
zayyaupacArikA cAnyA prathamA tu caturvidhA  // 73 //
svaGmAMsAsthimanaHsaukhyAdete zvAsAmupakramAH  /  saMspRSTaM ca gRhItaM ca
bhuktitaM calitaM tathA  // 74 //  AhataM bhaGgitaM viddhaM pIDitaM
bhinnapATitam  /  mRdumadhya prakRSTatvAttatpunarbhidyate tridhA ||75 ||
tvaksukhaM sukumAraM tu madhyamaM mAMsasaukhyakRt  /  utkRSTamasthisaukhyAya
mRdugIti manaH sukham  // 76 //  doSAstasyAH pratIpaM yalomnAmudvartanaM tathA
/  nirmAsapIDitaM vADhaM kezAkarSaNamadbhutam  //  77  //
bhraSTaprAptamamArgeNa prayAtamatibhugnakam  /  AdezAhatamatyarthamava
suptapratIpakam  //  78  //  ebhirdoSairvinirmuktaM sukumAramatIva ca  /
yogyadezaprayuktaM ca jJAtAkUtaM ca zobhanam  // 79 //  karaNairvividhairyA tu
janyate cittasaukhyadA  /  saMvAhanAvagamyA sA zayyopacaraNAtmikA  // 80 //
saMvAhanakalAmetAmaGgapratyaGgagocarAm  /  avedasau yathA kanyA nAnyA nArI tathA
ghanam  //  81  //  zarIraveSasaMskArakauzalaM ca kalA parA  /
snAnamUrdhajavAsAdi niracaiSIdimAM ca sA  // 82 //  kIr3A hai isa prakAra vaha
aneka bhedavAlI krIr3AmeM atyanta nipuNa thI || 68-69 || Azrita aura Azrayake
bhedase loka do prakArakA kahA gayA hai| inameMse jIva aura ajIva to Azrita haiM
tathA pRthvI Adi unake Azraya haiM ||70 || isI lokameM jIvakI nAnA paryAyoMmeM
utpatti huI hai, usImeM yaha sthira rahA hai tathA usImeM isakA nAza hotA hai
yaha saba jAnanA lokajJatA hai  /  yaha lokajJatA prApta honA atyanta kaThina
hai  //  71  //  pUrvApara parvata, pRthvI, dvIpa, deza Adi bhedoM meM yaha loka
svabhAvase hI avasthita hai  /  kekayAko isakA uttama jJAna thA  //  72  //  1
saMvAhana kalA do prakArakI hai - unameMse eka karmasaMzrayA hai aura dUsarI
zayyopacArikA  /  tvacA, mAMsa, asthi aura mana ina cArako sukha pahu~cAneke
kAraNa karmasaMzrayA ke cAra bheda haiM arthAt kisI saMvAhanase kevala tvacAko
sukha milatA hai, kisIse tvacA aura mAMsako sukha milatA hai, kisIse tvacA,
mAMsa aura haDDIko sukha milatA hai aura kisIse tvacA, mAMsa, haDDI evaM mana
ina cAroM ko sukha prApta hotA hai| isake sivAya isake saMpRSTa, gRhIta,
bhuktita, calita, Ahata, bhaMgita, viddha, pIDita aura bhinnapIDita ye bheda bhI
haiN| ye hI nahIM mRdu, madhya aura prakRSTake bhedase tIna bheda aura bhI hote
haiM  /  / 73-75 || jisa saMvAhanase kevala tvacAko sukha hotA hai vaha mRdu
athavA sukumAra kahalAtA hai  /  jo tvacA aura mAMsako sukha pahu~cAtA hai vaha
madhyama kahA jAtA hai aura jo tvacA, mAMsa tathA haDDIko sukha detA hai vaha
prakRSTa kahalAtA hai| isake sAtha jaba saMgIta aura hotA hai taba vaha
manaHsukhasaMvAhana kahalAne lagatA hai || 76 || isa saMvAhana kalA nimnalikhita
doSa bhI haiM zarIrake romoMko ulaTA udvartana karanA, jisa sthAnameM mAMsa
nahIM hai vahA~ adhika dabAnA, kezAkarSaNa, adbhuta, bhraSTaprApta,
amArgaprayAta, atibhugnaka, adezAhata, atyarthaM aura avasuptapratIpaka, jo ina
doSoMse rahita hai, yogyadeza meM prayukta hai tathA abhiprAyako jAnakara kiyA
gayA hai aisA sukumArasaMvAhana atyanta zobhAspada hotA hai  // 77-79  //  jo
saMvAhana kriyA aneka kAraNa arthAt AsanoMse kI jAtI hai vaha cittako sukha
denevAlI zayyopacArikA nAmakI kriyA jAnanI cAhie ||80|| aMga-pratyaMgase
sambandha rakhanevAlI isa saMvAhanakalAko jisa prakAra vaha kanyA jAnatI thI usa
prakAra anya strI nahIM jAnatI thI  //  81  //  snAna karanA, zirake bAla
gUMthanA tathA unheM sugandhita Adi karanA yaha zarIra saMskAra veSakauzala
nAmakI kalA hai so 1. cAsA-kha., vAsA ja  /  2. doSAstasyA ma  /

Page #534 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
This maiden was also well aware of this. ||82|| Thus, adorned with beautiful
character and the excellent ornament of humility, she possessed all the arts
that captivated the minds of people. ||83|| Her fame, born of the qualities of
art, shone uniquely in the three worlds, attracting the minds of all. ||84||
King, what more need be said? Briefly, hear this: even in a hundred years, it
would be impossible to describe her form. ||85|| Her father thought, "Who could
be a suitable groom for her? It would be good if she chooses her own husband."
||86|| With this decision, he gathered all the kings of the earth, including
Harivahana, for her swayamvara. These kings were adorned with various kinds of
gestures and expressions even before the swayamvara. ||87|| King Dasharatha,
accompanied by King Janaka, arrived there. Although King Dasharatha was in
simple attire, he overshadowed all the other kings present with his brilliance.
||88|| The usher was introducing the generous kings seated on well-decorated
platforms, and the virtuous maiden, skilled in reading human character, was
going around, observing each king. Finally, she placed her garland of blue
lotuses, symbolizing her gaze, around Dasharatha's neck. ||89-90|| Just as a
swan is approached by a goose amidst a flock of geese, so this maiden, with her
graceful movements, approached King Dasharatha amidst the assembly of kings.
||91|| She had already accepted Dasharatha with the garland of emotions, and the
garland of wealth she placed on him was a repetition, as per social custom.
||92|| In that pavilion, many kings, with happy hearts, exclaimed, "Oh! This
excellent maiden has chosen a worthy and unparalleled husband." ||93|| And some
kings, out of extreme arrogance, became enraged and created a great commotion.
||94|| They said, "Leaving us, who are born in renowned lineages and possess
great wealth, this wicked maiden has chosen one whose lineage and character are
unknown. ||95||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 484 padmapurANe evamAdyAH kalAzcAruzIlA lokamanoharAH  /  adIdharatsamastAH sA
vinayottamabhUSaNA  // 83 //  kalAguNAbhirUpaM ca samudbhatA triviSTape  /
advitIyA babhau tasyAH kIrtirAkRSTamAnasA  // 8 //  bahunAtra kimuktena zRNu
rAjan samAsataH  /  tasyA varSazatenApi duHzakyaM rUpavarNanam  // 85 /  /
pitrA pradhAritaM tasyA yogyaH ko'syA bhaved varaH  /  svayaM rucitameveyaM
gRhNAtviti visaMzayam  /  / 86 /  /  tadartha pArthivAH sarve vasumatyAmupAhRtAH
/  harivAhananAmAdyAH purovibhramabhUSitAH  // 8 //  gato dazaratho'pyasya
janakena saha bhraman  /  sthitaH sa tAdRzo'pyetAn lakSmyA pracchAdya bhUpatIn
// 8 //  maJceSu suprapaJceSu niviSTAn vasudhAdhipAn  /
pratyekamaikSatodArAnpratIhAyAM niveditAn  // 89 //  bhrAmyantI sA tataH sAdhvI
naralakSaNapaNDitA  /  kaNThe dAzarathe nyAsa dRSTinIlotpalasrajam  // 10 //
bhUpAlanivahasthaM taM sA yayau cAruvibhramA  /  rAjahaMsaM yathA haMsI
vakavRndavyavasthitam  // 11 //  bhAvamAlAgRhIte'smin nyastA yA dravyamAlikA  /
paunaruktyaM prapede'sau lokAcArakRtAspadA  // 12 //  kecittatra jagustAraM
prasannamanaso nRpAH  /  aho yogyo vRtaH ko'pi puruSo'yaM sukanyayA  // 13 //
keSAMcittvativailakSyAt svadezagamanaM prati  /  virarAmAtireNa mano
vaivarNyamIyuSAm  /  / 94 //  kecidatyantapRSTatvAt paramaM kopamAgatAH  /
yuddha prati manazcakruH kRtakolAhalA bhRzam  // 15 //  'jaguzca khyAtasaluzAn
mahAbhogasamanvitAn  /  tyaktvA no gRhNatImetamajJAtakulazIlinam  // 16 //  vaha
kanyA ise bhI acchI taraha jAnatI thIM  // 82 //  isa taraha sundara zIlakI
dhAraka tathA vinayarUpI uttama AbhUSaNase suzobhita vaha kanyA inheM Adi lekara
logoMke manako haraNa karanevAlI samasta kalAoMko dhAraNa kara rahI thI  /  / 83
//  kalAguNake anurUpa utpanna tathA logoMke manako AkRSTa karanevAlI usakI
kIrti tInoM lokoMmeM advitIya arthAt anupama suzobhita ho rahI thI  /  / 84 //
he rAjan ! adhika kahanese kyA ? saMkSepameM itanA hI suno ki usake rUpakA
varNana sau varSoM meM bhI honA saMbhava hai  /  / 85 //  pitAne vicAra kiyA ki
isake yogya vara kauna ho sakatA hai ? acchA ho ki yaha svayaM hI apanI
icchAnusAra varako grahaNa kare  // 86|| aisA nizcaya kara usane svayaMvarake
lie pRthivIparake harivAhana Adi samasta rAjA ekatrita kiye  /  ve rAjA
svayaMvarake pUrva hI nAnA prakArake vibhramoM arthAt hAvabhAvoMse suzobhita ho
rahe the  /  / 87 //  rAjA janakake sAtha ghUmate hue rAjA dazaratha vahA~ jA
phuNce| rAjA dazaratha yadyapi sAdhAraNa veSabhUSAmeM the to bhI ve apanI
zobhAse upasthita anya rAjAoMko AcchAdita kara vahA~ virAjamAna the  // 88||
susajjita maMcoMke Upara baiThe hue udAra rAjAoMkA paricaya pratIhArI de rahI
thI aura manuSyoMke lakSaNa jAnanemeM paNDita vaha sAdhvI kanyA ghUmatI huI
pratyeka rAjAko dekhatI jAtI thii| antameM usane apanI dRSTirUpI nIlakamalakI
mAlA dazarathake kaNThameM DAlo  /  / 89-90|| jisa prakAra bagaloke bIcameM
sthita rAjahaMsake pAsa haMsI paheMca jAtI hai usI prakAra sundara hAva-bhAvako
dhAraNa karanevAlI vaha kanyA rAjasamUhake bIca meM sthita rAjA dazarathake pAsa
jA pahu~cI  /  / 21 /  /  usane dazarathako bhAvamAlAse to pahale hI grahaNa
kara liyA thA phira lokAcArake anusAra jo dravyamAlA DAlI thI vaha punaruktatAko
prApta huI thI  // 92 //  usa maNDapameM prasannacittake dhAraka kitane hI rAjA
jora-jorase kaha rahe the ki aho ! isa uttama kanyAne yogya tathA anupama puruSa
varA hai  /  / 93 /  /  aura kitane hI rAjA atyanta dhRSTatAke kAraNa kupita ho
atyadhika kolAhala karane lage  // 94 //  ve kahane lage ki are! prasiddha
vaMzameM utpanna tathA mahAbhogoMse sampanna hama logoMko chor3akara isa duSTa
kanyAne jisake kula aura zIlakA patA nahIM 1. bhUSaNAH ma.  /  2. yadarthaM ma.
/  3. lakSyA ma.  /  4. -maikSitodArAn m.| 5. jagmuzca kha.  /  6. tyaktavato
ma.  /  .

Page #535 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter Twenty-Four  485. "Seize this foreign woman, whose intentions are evil.
Grab her by the hair and drag her away forcefully, you wicked girl!" ||17||
Having said this, the kings, led by Dasharatha, all armed and ready, marched
towards him, their hearts filled with rage. ||98||  Then, overwhelmed with fear,
Shubhamati, the girl's father, spoke to Dasharatha, "O noble one! While I hold
back these enraged kings, you take the girl and hide her somewhere. The
knowledge of time is the supreme principle in all strategies." ||99-100||
Hearing this, Dasharatha, the wise and valiant king, smiled and said, "Be at
ease, my friend. See how they flee in fear!" ||101||  With these words, he
mounted his chariot, drawn by powerful horses, and became as terrifying as the
midday sun in autumn. ||102||  Kekaya quickly dismounted from the chariot and,
taking the reins and whip, stood in the battlefield, her courage unwavering.
||103||  She said, "My lord, command me. Whom shall I attack? Death is eager to
embrace whom today?" ||104||  Dasharatha replied, "What good is killing these
petty kings? I will strike down the head of this army, the leader of these men.
O wise and beloved one, drive the chariot towards the one with the white
umbrella, shining like the moon." ||105-106||  Following his command, she drove
the chariot forward, its white umbrella raised high, its great banner waving in
the wind. ||107||  The flames of the chariot, like the blazing light of the
banner, consumed thousands of warriors like moths drawn to a flame. ||108||  The
kings, struck by the arrows released from Dasharatha's chariot, fled in all
directions, trampling over each other in their panic. ||109||  Then, Hem Prabha,
seeing the kings defeated and ashamed, rallied them and urged them to attack
Dasharatha's chariot once more. ||110||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 caturvizatitama parva 485 amuM kamapi vaidezaM durabhiprAyakAriNIm  /  gRhIta
mUrdhajAkRSTAM prasabhaM duSTakanyakAm  // 17 //  ityuktvA te susanaddhAH
samudyatamahAyudhAH  /  nRpA dazarathAntena calitAH kruddhacetasaH  // 98 //
tataH samAkulIbhUto varaM zubhamatirjagau  /  madra yAvannRpAnetAn sukSubdhAn
vArayAmyaham  // 19 //  rathamAropya tAvattvaM kanyAmantarhito mava  /
kAlajJAnaM hi sarveSAM nayAnAM mUrdhani sthitam  // 10 //  evamukto jagAdAsau
smitaM kRtvAtidhIradhIH  /  vizrabdho bhava mAma tvaM pazyaitAnkAMdizIkRtAn  //
10 //  ityuktvA rathamAruhya saMyuktaM prauddhvaajibhiH| bhRzaM saMvavRte bhImaH
zaranmadhyAhnamAnubhAH  // 102 //  uttArya kekayA cAzu rathaivAhaM raNAGgaNe  /
tasthau pauruSamAlambya totrapragrahadhAriNI  /  / 103 //  uvAca ca prayacchAjJA
nAtha kasyopari datam  /  codayAmi rathaM tasya mRtyuradyAtivatsalaH  // 104 //
jagAdAsau kimatrAnyairvarAkainihatairna raiH  /  mU'namasya sainyasya puruSa
pAtayAmyaham  // 105 //  yasyaitatpANDuraM chatraM vibhAti zazivibhramam  /
etasyAbhimukhaM kAnte rathaM codaya paNDite  // 106 /  /  evamukte tayAtyantaM
dhIrayA vAhito rathaH  /  samucchritasitacchatrastaraGgitamahAdhvajaH  // 107 //
ketucchAyAmahAjvAle tatra dampatidevate  /  rathAgnau yodhazalabhAH dRSTvA
naSTAH sahasrazaH  // 10 //  dazasyandananirmuktairnArAcairarditA nRpAH  /
kSaNAtparAGmukhIbhUtAH parasparavilavinaH  // 109 //  tato hemaprabheNete coditA
lajitA jitAH  /  nivRtya punarArabdhA hantuM dAzarathaM ratham  // 110 //  aise
paradezI kisI manuSyako varA hai so isakA abhiprAya duSTa hai| isake keza
pakar3akara khIMco aura ise jabaradastI pakar3a lo  /  / 95-97 /  /  aisA
kahakara ve rAjA bar3e-bar3e zastra uThAte hue yuddhake lie taiyAra ho gaye
tathA kruddhacitta hokara rAjA dazarathakI ora cala par3e  // 98 //  tadanantara
kanyAke pitA zubhamatine ghabar3Akara dazarathase kahA ki he bhadra ! jabataka
maiM ina kSubhita rAjAoMko rokatA hU~ tabataka tuma kanyAko rathapara car3hAkara
kahIM antahita ho jAochipa jAo kyoMki samayakA jJAna honA saba nayoMke zirapara
sthita hai arthAt saba nItiyoMmeM zreSTha nIti hai  /  / 99-100 /  isa prakAra
kahanepara atyanta dhIra-vIra buddhike dhAraka rAjA dazarathane musakarAkara
kahA ki he mAma! nizcinta raho aura abhI ina sabako bhayase bhAgatA huA dekho
// 101 //  itanA kahakara ve praur3ha ghor3oMse jute rathapara savAra ho
zaradaRtuke madhyAhna kAla sambandhI sUryake samAna atyanta bhayaMkara ho gaye
/  / 102 /  /  kekayAne rathake cAlaka sArathiko to utAra diyA aura svayaM
zIghra hI sAhasake sAtha cAbuka tathA ghor3oMkI rAsa sa~bhAlakara yuddhake
maidAnameM jA khar3I huI  // 103 //  aura bolI ki he nAtha ! AjJA dIjie, kisake
Upara ratha calAU~ ? Aja mRtyu kisake sAtha adhika sneha kara rahI hai ?  // 104
//  dazarathane kahA ki yahA~ anya kSudra rAjAoMke mAranese kyA lAbha hai ? ataH
isa senAke mastakasvarUpa pradhAna puruSako hI girAtA huuN| he catura vllbhe|
jisake Upara yaha candramAke samAna sapheda chatra suzobhita ho rahA hai isIke
sanmukha ratha le calo  // 105-106 //  aisA kahate hI usa dhIra vIrAne jisapara
sapheda chatra laga rahA thA tathA bar3I bhArI dhvajA phaharA rahI thI aisA
ratha Age bar3hA diyA  // 107 //  jisameM patAkAkI kAntirUpI bar3I-bar3I jvAlAe~
uTha rahI thIM tathA dampatI hI jisameM devatA the aise ratharUpI agnimeM
hajAroM yodhArUpI pataMge naSTa hote hue dikhane lage  // 108|| dazarathake
dvArA chor3e bANoMse pIr3ita rAjA eka dUsareko lAMghate hue kSaNa-bharameM
parAGmukha ho gaye  // 109 /  /  tadanantara parAjita honese lajjita hue
rAjAoMko hemaprabhane lalakArA, jisase ve lauTakara 1. gRhItamUrddhajA-ma.  /
2. dazarathaM tena ma., ja., ka., b.| 3. kSudracetasaH m.| 4. bhAnubham m.| 5.
ratha vAhAn ka.  /  6. pazya m.| 7. pAtayAmyatha b.| 8. bhRzam kh.| 9.
-rArabdhaM ma.  /

Page #536 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
486 Padma Purana Many kings surrounded by horses, chariots, elephants and foot
soldiers, roaring like lions and moving with a large group, aimed their tomars,
arrows, nooses, chakras and gold weapons at the single king Dasharatha with
great eagerness. ||111-112|| It was amazing that King Dasharatha, even though he
was in a single chariot, was Dasharatha, and at that time he was becoming a
hundred-charioted or countless-charioted by his prowess. ||113|| The king
Dasharatha, who held a circular bow, pierced the weapons of the enemies with
arrows whose drawing and holding were not known. ||114|| He made the Hemprabha,
whose flag and umbrella had been cut and fallen down and whose vehicle was
exhausted and very anxious, chariotless in a moment with arrows shining like
gold. ||115|| Then Hemprabha, whose mind was filled with fear, mounted another
chariot and fled quickly, tarnishing his glory. ||116|| King Dasharatha pierced
the enemies and weapons and protected himself and his wife. The work that one
Dasharatha did at that time was worthy of an infinite chariot. ||117|| Seeing
the lion-like Dasharatha, who was shaking his arrow-like hair, the deer-like
warriors fled in all eight directions. ||118|| At that time, this loud sound was
rising in both his and the enemy's army: "Oh! What amazing power this man has!
And what a miracle this girl has done!" ||119|| People could recognize King
Dasharatha, who was holding high his prowess, only by the victory cry proclaimed
by the devotees or by his unparalleled power. ||120|| Then King Dasharatha took
the hand of the girl in the city called Kautukamangal, where others had
performed auspicious ceremonies and rituals. ||121|| After that, King Dasharatha
went to Ayodhya and King Janaka went to Mithilapuri, whose wedding celebration
was held with great wealth and splendor. ||122|| There, the relatives filled
with joy performed the rebirth festival and the re-coronation of King Dasharatha
with great splendor. ||123|| The virtuous King Dasharatha, who was free from all
kinds of fear and whose orders were considered sacred by all, was playing in
Ayodhya like Indra in heaven. ||124||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 486 padmapurANe vAjibhiH syandana gaiH pAdAtaizca nRpA vRtAH  /
kRtazUramahAnAdA ghanasaMghAtavartinaH  // 111 //  tomarANi zarAnyAzAMzcakrANi
kanakAni c| tamekaM nRpamuddizya cikSipuzca samudyatAH  // 112 //
citramekaratho bhUtvA tadA dazaratho nRpaH  /  jAtaH zatarathaH zaktyA
niHsaMkhyAnaratho'thavA  /  / 113 //  viciccheda sa nArAcaiH samaM zastrANi
vidviSAm  /  adRSTAkarSasaMdhAnaizcakrIkRtazarAsanaH  // 11 //
chinnadhvajAtapatraH san vihvalIkRtavAhanaH  /  zaraihemaprabhastena kSaNena
virathIkRtaH  // 115 //  sa rathAntaramAruhya bhayAvatatamAnasaH  /  dUtaM
palAyanaM cakre kRSNIkurvannijaM yazaH  // 116 //  rarakSa svaM ca jAyAM ca
zatrUnastrANi caacchint| eko dazarathaH karma cakre'nantarathocitam  // 117 //
dRSTvA dazarathaM siMhaM vidhUtazarakesaram  /  dudruvuryodhasAraGgAH parigRhya
digaSTakam  // 118 //  aho zakti rasyAsya hI citraM kanyayA kRtam  /  iti nAdaH
samuttasthau mahAn svaparasenayoH  // 119 /  /  vandighoSitazabdena zaktyA
vaannytulyyaa| janairdazaratho jajJe pratApaM bibhradatam  // 12 //  tataH
pANigrahastena kRtaH kautukamaGgale  /  kanyAyAH paralokena kRtakautukamaGgale
// 121 //  mahatA bhUtibhAreNa vRttopayamanotsavaH  /  yayau dazaratho'yodhyA
mithilA janako yathA  /  / 122 //  punarjanmotsavaM tasya tasyAM
cakre'tisaMmadaH  /  puna pAbhiSekaM ca parivargo maharddhi miH  // 12 //
azeSabhayanirmukko reme tatra sa puNyavAn  /  AkhaNDala iva svarga
pratimAnitazAsanaH  // 124 /  /  pUnaH dazarathake rathako naSTa karanekA
prayatna karane lage  // 110 //  jo ghoDoM. rathoM. hAthiyoM tathA paidala
sainikoMse ghire the, siMhanAda kara rahe the tathA bahuta bar3e samUhake sAtha
vartamAna the aise aneka rAjA akele rAjA dazarathako lakSya kara tomara, bANa,
pAza, cakra aura kanaka Adi zastra bar3I tatparatAse calA rahe the  // 111-112 /
/  bar3e AzcaryakI bAta thI ki rAjA dazaratha ekaratha hokara bhI dazaratha the
to aura usa samaya to apane parAkramase zataratha athavA asaMkhyaratha ho rahe
the  /  / 113 //  cakrAkAra dhanuSake dhAraka rAjA dazarathane jinake khIMcane
aura rakhanekA patA nahIM calatA thA aise bANoMse eka sAtha zatruoMke zastra
cheda DAle  // 114 //  jisakI dhvajA aura chatra kaTakara nIce gira gaye the
tathA jisakA vAhana thakakara atyanta vyAkula ho gayA thA aise rAjA hemaprabhako
dazarathane kSaNabharameM ratharahita kara diyA  // 115 /  /  tadanantara jisakA
mana bhayase vyApta thA aisA hemaprabha dUsare rathapara savAra ho apane yazako
malina karatA huA zIghra hI bhAga gayA  // 116 //  rAjA dazarathane zatruoM
tathA zastroMko cheda DAlA aura apanI tathA strIkI rakSA kii| usa samaya eka
dazarathane jo kAma kiyA thA vaha anantarathake yogya thA  // 117 //  jo
bANarUpI jaTAoMko hilA rahA thA aise dazaratharUpI siMhako dekhakara yoddhArUpI
hariNa ATho dizAe~ pakar3akara bhAga gaye  // 118 //  usa samaya apanI tathA
zatrukI senAmeM yahI joradAra zabda uTha rahA thA ki aho! isa manuSyakI kaisI
adbhuta zakti hai ? aura isa kanyAne kaisA kamAla kiyA ?  // 119|| unnata
pratApako dhAraNa karanevAle rAjA dazarathako loga pahacAna sake the to
vandIjanoMke dvArA ghoSita jayanAda athavA unakI anupama zaktise hI pahacAna
sake the  // 120 //   /  tadanantara anya logoMne jahA~ kautuka evaM maMgalAcAra
kiye the aise kautukamaMgala nAmA nagarameM rAjA dazarathane kanyAkA pANigrahaNa
kiyA  // 121 //  tatpazcAt bar3e bhArI vaibhavase jinakA vivAhotsava sampanna
huA thA aise rAjA dazaratha ayodhyA gaye aura rAjA janaka mithilApurI gaye  //
122 //  vahA~ harSase bhare parijanoMne bar3e vaibhavase sAtha rAjA dazarathakA
punarjanmotsava aura punarrAjyAbhiSeka kiyA  // 123 /  /  jo saba prakArake
bhayase rahita the tathA jinakI AjJAko saba zirodhArya karate the aise puNyavAn
rAjA dazaratha svargameM indrako taraha ayodhyAmeM krIr3A karate the 1.
nRpAdRtAH ma.  /  2. hi ma.  /  hA kha.  /  3. kRtaH ma., ba., ja.  /  4.
maGgalam m.| 5. tayA ma.  /

Page #537 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
487 In the twenty-fourth chapter, the king Dasaratha addressed Kekaya, who was
seated in the presence of his other wives and kings, saying, "O fair-faced one,
O beloved, tell me what you desire, I will fulfill it. I am very happy today."
If you had not driven the chariot with great skill at that time, how could I
have conquered the angry group of enemies who had risen together?   If the
charioteer Arun had not been there, how could the sun, pervading the entire
world, have destroyed the darkness?   Kekaya, whose face was bowed down under
the weight of shame born from receiving the boon, said repeatedly, "O lord, let
my request be a trust with you. When I ask, you will give it without saying
anything."  As soon as Kekaya said this, King Dasaratha, whose face was like the
full moon, and who was a rival to the moon god, said, "O beloved, O broad-hipped
one, O gentle-complexioned one, O possessor of three-colored, very beautiful,
clear and large eyes, let it be so."  The king Dasaratha said to the others,
"Oh! This Kekaya, born in a great family, skilled in the arts, and endowed with
all enjoyments, is truly wise in her policy, that she has made her request a
trust."  Thinking that this virtuous lady will slowly consider and ask for some
desired good thing, all her loved ones at that time attained the highest joy.
Gautama Swami says to Srenic, "O king! I have, according to my intelligence,
made this king for you.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 487 caturvizatitama parva tatra pratyakSamanyAsAM patnInAM bhUbhRtAM tathA  /
abhyadhAyi narendreNa kekayAsannavartinI  // 125 //  pUrNenduvadane brUhi yatte
vastu manISitam  /  iha saMpAdayAmyadya prasanno'smi tava priye  // 126 //
codayennAtivijJAnAdyadi' nAma tathA ratham  /  kathaM kruddhArisaMghAtaM
vijayeyaM sahosthitam  // 127 //  avasthitaM jagadvyApya nudedakaH kathaM tamaH
/  savyeSTA cedbhavedasya na mUrtiraruNAsmikA  // 128 //
guNagrahaNasaMjAtaMbrIDAmAranatAnanA  /  muhuH pracoditovAca kathaMciditi kekayA
// 129 //  nAtha nyAso'yamAstAM me svayi vAJchitayAcanam  /  prArthayiSye yadA
tasmin kAle dAsyasi nirvacAra bhujaGgaprayAtam iti proktamAtre jagau bhUminAthaH
samagendunAthapratisparcivaktraH  /  bhavatyeva yuddhe pRthuzroNisaumye
trivarNAtikAntaprasannorunetre  // 131 //  aho buddhirasyA mahAgobajAyA nayADyA
nitAntaM kalApAragAyAH  /  samastopabhogairalaM saMgatAyAH kRtaM nyAsabhUtaM
mataprArthanaM yat  // 132 //  samasto'pi tasyAstadAbhISTavargaH prayAtaH
pramodaM prakRSTaM nitAntam  /  vicintya pradhAnaM zubhA kaMcidartha
zanairmArgayiSyatyaho kekayeti  // 133 //  matergocaratvaM mayA
tAvadetatpraNItaM suvRttaM dharitrIpate te  /  samutpattimasmAnmahAmAnavAnAM
zRNu dyotakAnAmudArAnvayasya  // 134 //   // 124 /  /  vahA~ rAjA dazarathane
anya sapatniyoM tathA rAjAoMke samakSa pAsa baiThI huI kekayAse kahA ki he
pUrNacandramukhi ! priye ! jo vastu tumheM iSTa ho vaha kaho, maiM use pUrNa
kara duuN| Aja maiM bahata prasanna hU~  // 125-126 /  /  yadi tuma usa samaya
bar3I caturAIse usa prakAra ratha nahIM calAtIM to maiM eka sAtha uThe hue
kupita zatruoMke samUhako kisa prakAra jItatA?  // 127 //  yadi aruNa sArathi
nahIM hotA to samasta jagatmeM vyApta hokara sthita andhakArako sUrya kisa
prakAra naSTa kara sakatA? tadanantara guNagrahaNase utpanna lajjAke bhArase
jisakA mukha nIcA ho rahA thA aisI kekayAne bArabAra prerita honepara bhI kisI
prakAra yaha uttara diyA ki he nAtha ! merI icchita vastukI yAcanA Apake pAsa
dharoharake rUpameM rhe| jaba maiM mAgUMgI taba Apa binA kucha kahe de deMge  //
128-130 //  kekayAke itanA kahate hI pUrNacandramAke samAna mukhako dhAraNa
karanevAle rAjA dazarathane kahA ki he priye ! he sthUlanitambe ! he saumyavarNe
! tIna raMgake atyanta sundara, svaccha evaM vizAla netroMko dhAraNa karanevAlI
! aisA hI ho  // 131 //  rAjA dazarathane anya logoMse kahA ki aho ! mahAkUlameM
utpanna, kalAoMkI pAragAminI tathA mahAbhogoMse sahita isa kekayAkI buddhi
atyadhika nItise sampanna hai ki jo isane apane varakI yAcanA dharohararUpa kara
dI  // 132 //  yaha puNyazAlinI dhIredhIre vicArakara kisI abhilaSita uttama
arthako mAMga legI aisA vicArakara usake sabhI iSTa parijana usa samaya
atyadhika parama Anandako prApta hue the  /  / 133 /  /  gautamasvAmI zreNikase
kahate haiM ki he rAjan ! maiMne buddhike anusAra tere lie yaha rAjA
1..nAdivijJAnA -m.| 2. vijaye'haM m.| 3. vyApyaM m.| 4. saMveSTA m.| sacceSTA
kha. 'savyeSTA saarthiH'| 5. saMghAta ma.  /  6. uccakulasamutpannAyAH iti ba.
pustake TippaNam 7. manaHprArthanaM ma., b.|

Page #538 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
488 Padma Purana I will briefly tell you the story of the three worlds. Why
elaborate? Those with bad conduct experience extreme suffering, while those with
good conduct, shining like the sun, experience happiness. ||135|| Thus ends the
twenty-fourth chapter of the Padma Charita, narrated by the Acharya known as
Ravishena, titled "The Gift of Kekaya." ||24||  The story of Dasharatha's good
conduct has been told. Now listen to the account of the birth of the great
humans who illuminated their noble lineage. ||134|| There is no need for
elaboration to understand the story of the three worlds. Therefore, I will
briefly tell you this: those with bad conduct experience extreme suffering,
while those with good conduct, shining like the sun, experience happiness.
||135|| Thus ends the twenty-fourth chapter of the Padma Charita, narrated by
the Acharya known as Ravishena, titled "The Gift of Kekaya." ||24||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 488 padmapurANe samAsena sarva vadAmyeSa te'haM trilokasya vRttaM kimatra
prapaJcaiH  /  durAcArayuktAH paraM yAnti duHkhaM sukhaM sAdhuvRttA
raviprakhyabhAsaH  // 135 /  /  ityA raviSeNAcAryaprokta padmacarite
kekayAvarapradAnaM nAma caturviMzatitamaM parva  // 24 //  dazarathakA
suvRttAnta kahA hai| aba isase apane udAra vaMzako prakAzita karanevAle
mahAmAnavoMkI utpattikA varNana suna  // 134 //  tIna lokakA vRttAnta jAnaneke
lie vistArako AvazyakatA nhiiN| ataH maiM saMkSepase hI tere lie yaha kahatA hU~
ki durAcArI manuSya atyanta duHkha prApta karate haiM aura sUryake samAna
dIptiko dhAraNa karanevAle sadAcArI manuSya sukha prApta karate haiM  /  / 135 /
/  isa prakAra ArSa nAmase prasiddha raviSeNAcArya kathita padmacaritameM
kekayAke varadAnakA varNana karanevAlA caubIsavA~ parva samApta haA  // 24 //  .

Page #539 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The twenty-fifth chapter:  The queen Aparajita, sleeping peacefully in her
palace, on a bed adorned with a lake of shining jewels, saw wondrous dreams in
the last watch of the night, dreams that foretold the birth of a great man. She
saw these dreams as vividly as if she were awake.   In the first dream, she saw
a white elephant, in the second a lion, in the third the sun, and in the fourth
the moon. Upon seeing these, she awoke to the auspicious sounds of trumpets.
Her mind filled with wonder, Aparajita performed her morning rituals. As the
world was illuminated by the sun's rays, she went to her husband, her heart
filled with anxiety to know the meaning of her dreams. She was accompanied by
her friends, and she adorned the royal throne.   With a slight bow, Aparajita
joined her hands and recounted her dreams to her husband, who listened
attentively.   Then, King Dasharatha, the seer of all knowledge, standing amidst
the assembly of wise men, revealed the meaning of the dreams. He said, "My dear,
the reason for your wonder is that you will give birth to a son who will destroy
all enemies, both internal and external."  Upon hearing this, Aparajita was
filled with joy. She touched her belly and her lotus-like face was adorned with
a gentle smile.   With a pure heart, Aparajita, along with her delighted
husband, performed grand worship at the Jain temples.   From that day forward,
her beauty increased, and though her heart was filled with great strength, she
also experienced a profound peace.   Later, the beautiful queen Sumitra also had
dreams. She was astonished and her body trembled with excitement, her dreams
filled with auspicious meaning.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pazcaviMzatitama parva athAparAjitA devI sukhaM suptA varAlaye  /  zayanIye
mahAkAnte 'ratnodyotasaraHsthite  // 1 //  rajanyAH pazcime yAme
mahApuruSavedinaH  /  nitAntaM paramAn svapnAnakSatAzayitA yathA  // 2 //
zubhraM stamberamaM siMhaM padminIbAndhavaM vidhum  /  dRSTvA vibodhamAyAtA
tUryamaGgalanisvanaiH  // 3 //  tataH pratyaGgakAryANi kRtvA vismitamAnasA  /
divAkarakarAlokamaNDite bhuvane sati  // 4 //  sA vinItAntikaM
bharturgatvAtyantasamAkulA  /  sakhIbhirAvRtA bhadrapIThabhUSaNakAriNI  // 5 //
kRtAJjalirjagI svapnAn kiMcidvinatavigrahA  /  svAmine sAvadhAnAya
yathAdRSTAnmanoharAn  // 6 //  tato nikhilavijJAnapAradRzvA narAdhipaH  /
budhamaNDalamadhyasthaH svapnAnAmabhyadhAt phalam  /  / 7 /  /
paramAzcaryahetuste kAnte putro bhaviSyati  /  antarbahizca zatraNAM yaH
kariSyati zAtanam  // 8 //  evamukte paraM toSaM hastaspRSTodarI yyau|
smitakesarasaMruddhamukhapadmAparAjitA  // 9 //  cakAra ca samaM ma; paraM
pramadamIyuSA  /  jinendravezmasasphItAM pUjAM pUjitabhAvanA  // 10 //  tataH
prabhRtikAntyAsI sutarAM smAvagAdyate  /  babhUva cetasazcAsyAH zAntiH kApi
mahaujasaH  // 11 //  sumitrAnantaraM tasyA iikssaaNckre'tisundrii| vismitA
pulakopetA svapnAn sAdhumanorathA  // 12 //  athAnantara uttama mahala meM
ratnoMke prakAzarUpI sarovarake madhyameM sthita atyanta sundara zayyApara
sukhase sotI huI aparAjitA rAnIne rAtrike pichale paharameM mahApuruSake janmako
sUcita karanevAle atyanta AzcaryakAraka svapna dekhe| ve svapna usane itanI
spaSTatAse dekhe the jaise mAno jAga hI rahI thii||1-2|| pahale svapnameM usane
sapheda hAthI, dUsaremeM siMha, tIsaremeM sUrya aura cauthemeM candramA dekhA
thaa| ina sabako dekhakara vaha turahIke mAMgalika zabdase jAga uThI  /  / 3 /
/  tadanantara jisakA mana Azcaryase bhara rahA thA aisI aparAjitA prAtaHkAla
sambandhI zArIrika kriyAe~ kara, jaba sUryake prakozase samasta saMsAra
suzobhita ho gayA taMba bar3I vinayase patike pAsa gyii| svapnoMkA phala
jAnaneke lie usakA hRdaya atyanta AkUla ho rahA thA tathA aneka sakhiyA~ usake
sAtha gayI thiiN| jAkara vaha uttama siMhAsanako alaMkRta karane lagI  // 4-5 //
jisakA zarIra saMkocavaza kucha nIcekI ora jhuka rahA thA aisI aparAjitAne hAtha
jor3akara svAmIke lie saba manohara svapna jisa kramase dekhe the usI kramase
sunA diye aura svAmIne bhI bar3I sAvadhAnIse sune  /  / 6 /  /  tadanantara
samasta jJAnoMke pAradarzI evaM vidvatsamUhake bIca meM sthita rAjA dazarathane
svapnoMkA phala kahA  // 7 //  unhoMne kahA ki he kAnte ! tumhAre parama
AzcaryakA kAraNa aisA putra utpanna hogA jo antaraMga aura bahiraMga donoM
prakArake zatraoMkA nAza karegA  // 8 //  patike aisA kahanepara aparAjitA
parama santoSako prApta huii| usane hAthase udarakA sparza kiyA tathA usakA
mukharUpI kamala manda musakAnarUpI kezarase vyApta ho gayA  /  / 2 /  /
prazasta bhAvanAse yukta aparAjitAne parama prasannatAko prApta patike sAtha
jina-mandiroMmeM bhagavAnko mahApUjA kI  // 10 //  usa samayase dina-prati-dina
usakI kAnti bar3hane lagI tathA usakA citta yadyapi mahApratApase yukta thA to
bhI usameM adbhuta zAnti utpanna ho gayI thI  // 11 //  tadanantara atizaya
sundarI sumitrA rAnIne svapna dekhe| svapna dekhate samaya vaha Azcaryase cakita
ho gayI thI, usake samasta zarIrameM romAMca nikala Aye the aura usakA abhiprAya
atyanta 1. ratnodyotazirasthite ma., ba.  /  2. hastaspRSTodarA ka.  /  3.
mukhakesara-ma.  /

Page #540 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
490 Padma Purana She saw that Lakshmi and Kirti were respectfully anointing the
lion king with kalashas, which had lotuses placed on their mouths and were
filled with beautiful water. ||13|| Then she saw that she herself was standing
on the peak of a high mountain, looking at the vast earth adorned with the
ocean-like girdle. ||14|| After that, she saw a beautiful, rotating wheel,
shining with radiant rays, resembling the sun, studded with various gems. ||15||
Seeing these dreams, she woke up to the sound of auspicious musical instruments.
Then, with great humility, she went and told her husband the news of her dream
in very sweet words. ||16|| In response, King Dasharatha said, "O beloved, you
will have a son who will be the head of the age, who will destroy the group of
enemies, who will be of great brilliance, and who will be the bearer of
wonderful deeds." ||17|| With her mind filled with joy at her husband's words,
Queen Sumitra went to her place. At that time, she was seeing the entire world
as if it were located below. ||18|| Then, when the time was complete, just as
the eastern direction gives birth to the full moon, Queen Aparajita gave birth
to a radiant son. ||19|| When King Dasharatha sat down to give wealth to those
who announced this fortune-increasing event, he was left with only umbrellas,
whisks, and clothes, as he had given away everything else in charity. ||20|| All
the brothers and relatives celebrated this great birth with great pomp. It was
such a birth celebration that the whole world went mad with joy. ||21|| They
named this son, who had the complexion of the midday sun, whose chest was
embraced by Lakshmi, and whose eyes were like lotuses, Padma. ||22|| Then, just
as the land of gems, i.e., the mine, gives birth to a precious gem endowed with
qualities like shade, etc., Sumitra gave birth to a son who was the bearer of
supreme radiance. ||23|| As if researching the birth celebration of Padma, the
relatives also celebrated his birth with great pomp. ||24|| Thousands of
calamities arose in the cities of the enemies, indicating misfortune, and
thousands of auspicious signs appeared in the cities of the relatives,
indicating wealth. ||25||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 490 padmapurANe sicyamAne mRgAdhIzaM lakSkSyA kIrtyA ca sAdaram  /
kalazaizcAvamAnAsyakamalaizcAruvAribhiH  // 13 //  AtmAnaM cAtituGgasya bhUbhRto
mUrdhani sthitam  /  pazyantaM medinIM sphItAM nimnagApatimekhalAm  // 14 //
sphuraskiraNajAlaM ca divasAdhipavibhramam  /  nAnAratnocitaM cakraM saumyaM
kRtavivartanam  // 15|| vIkSya maGgalanAdena tathaiva kRtabodhanA  /
vinItAkathayat patye nitAntaM madhurasvanA  // 16 //  sUryugapradhAnaste
zatracakrakSayAvahaH  /  bhaviSyati mahAtejAzcinaceSTo varAnane  // 17 //
ityuktA sA satI patyA saMmadAkrAntamAnasA  /  yayau nijAspadaM lokaM
pazyantIvAdharasthitam  // 18 //  athAnehasi saMpUrNe pUrNendumive pUrvadik  /
asUta tanayaM kAntyA vizAlamaparAjitA  // 19 //  diSTyAvardhanakAribhyaH
prayacchan vasu pArthivaH  /  babhUva cAmaracchatraparidhAnaparicchadaH  // 20
//  janmotsavo mahAnasya cakre niHzeSabAndhavaiH  /
mahAvibhavasaMpanerunmattIbhUtaviSTapaH  // 21 //  taruNAdityavarNasya
pdmaalinggitvksssH| padmanetrasya padmAkhyA pitRbhyAM tasya nirmitA  // 22 //
sumitrApi tataH putramasUta paramadyutim  /  chAyAdiguNayogena sadralaM
ratnabhUriva  // 23 //  padmajanmotsavasyAnusaMdhAnamiva kurvatA  /  janito
bandhuvargeNa tasya janmotsavaH paraH  // 24 //  utpAtA jajJire'rAtinagareSu
sahasrazaH  /  ApadA sUcakA bandhunagareSu ca saMpadAm  // 25 //  manonwww
nirmala ho gayA thA  // 12 /  /  usane dekhA ki lakSmI aura kIrti AdarapUrvaka,
jinake mukhapara kamala rakhe hue the tathA jinameM sundara jala bharA huA thA
aise kalazoMse siMhakA abhiSeka kara rahI haiM  // 13 /  /  phira dekhA ki maiM
svayaM kisI U~ce parvatake zikharapara car3hakara samudrarUpI mekhalAse
suzobhita vistRta pRthivIko dekha rahI hU~  /  / 14 /  /  isake bAda usane
dedIpyamAna kiraNoMse yukta, sUryake samAna suzobhita, nAnA ratnoMse khacita
tathA ghUmatA huA sundara cakra dekhA  // 15 //  ina vapnoMko dekhakara vaha
maMgalamaya vAditroMke zabdase jAga utthii| tadanantara usane baDI vinayase
jAkara atyanta madhura zabdoM dvArA patike lie svapna-darzanakA samAcAra sunAyA
// 16 //  isake uttarameM rAjA dazarathane batAyA ki he uttama mukhako dhAraNa
karanevAlI priye ! tumhAre aisA putra hogA ki jo yugakA pradhAna hogA, zatruoMke
samUhakA kSaya karanevAlA hogA, mahAtejasvI tathA adbhuta ceSTAoMkA dhAraka hogA
// 17|| patike isa prakAra kahanepara jisakA citta Anandase vyApta ho rahA thA
aisI sumitrA rAnI apane sthAna para calI gyii| usa samaya vaha samasta lokako
aisA dekha rahI thI mAno nIce hI sthita ho  // 18 //  athAnantara samaya pUrNa
honepara, jisa prakAra pUrva dizA pUrNa candramAko utpanna karatI hai usI
prakAra aparAjitA rAnIne kAntimAn putra utpanna kiyA ||19|| isa bhAgya-vRddhiko
sUcanA karanevAle logoMko jaba rAjA dazaratha dhana dene baiThe to unake pAsa
chatra, camara tathA vastra hI zeSa raha gaye bAkI saba vastue~ unhoMne dAnameM
de dI  // 20 //  mahA vibhavase sampanna samasta bhAIbAndhavoMne isakA bar3A
bhArI janmotsava kiyaa| aisA janmotsava ki jisameM sArA saMsAra unmattasA ho
gayA thA  // 21 /  /  - madhyAhnake sUryake samAna jisakA varNa thA, jisakA
vakSaHsthala lakSmIke dvArA AliMgita thA tathA jisake netra kamaloMke samAna the
aise usa putrakA mAtA-pitAne padma nAma rakhA  // 22 //  tadanantara jisa
prakAra ratnoMkI bhUmi arthAt khAna chAyA Adi guNoMse sampanna uttama ratnako
utpanna karatI hai usI prakAra sumitrAne zreSTha kAntike dhAraka putrako utpanna
kiyA  /  / 23 /  /  padmake janmotsavakA mAno anusandhAna hI karate hue bandhu-
vargane usakA bhI bahuta bhArI janmotsava kiyA thA  // 24 //  zatruoMke
nagaroMmeM ApattiyoMkI sUcanA denevAle hajAroM utpAta hone lage aura bandhuoMke
nagaroMmeM sampattiyoMkI sUcanA denevAle hajAroM zubha cihna prakaTa 1.
pradhAnaM m.| 2. pUrNenduriva m.| .

Page #541 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## The Twenty-Fifth Canto  **26.**  A son, whose brilliance resembled the heart
of a full-blown blue lotus, who floated in a sea of radiance, and who was
adorned with many auspicious marks, was born to Lakshmana and his wife. His
parents named him Lakshmana.  **27-28.**  The two boys were exceedingly
beautiful. Their lips were red like coral, their hands and feet were the color
of red lotuses, and their movements were captivating. Their touch was as soft as
butter, and they possessed a natural fragrance.  Playing their childish games,
they stole the hearts of all who saw them.  **29.**  Anointed with sandalwood
paste and adorned with saffron tilak on their foreheads, they resembled
mountains of silver, infused with the essence of gold.  **30.**  Bound by the
love that had grown over countless lifetimes, they were each other's inheritors.
They were cherished by all their relatives within the palace.  **31.**  When
they spoke, it was as if they were vomiting nectar. When they looked at someone,
it was as if they were anointing the world with a blissful ointment.  **32.**
When they were called, they seemed to tear through poverty itself. They
satisfied the hearts of all, according to their own desires.  **33.**  Their
very presence seemed to bring blessings and prosperity.  Protected by their
guardians, the two princes roamed the city, enjoying their carefree games.
**34.**  Just as Vijaya and Triprishtha, the names of Balabhadra and Narayana,
had been given before, so too were these two princes endowed with similar
qualities.  **35.**  Later, Kekaya gave birth to a son, whose form was divine
and who was destined for great fortune. He was named Bharata in the world.
**36.**  Subsequently, Supribha gave birth to a beautiful son, whose fame as
Shatrughna still echoes throughout the world.  **37.**  Aparajita named her son
Bala, after the lotus, and Sumitra, with great desire, named her son Hari.
**38.**  Kekaya, seeing that the name Bharata was associated with the universal
emperor, declared her son to be half-emperor.  **39.**  Supribha, hearing the
name Chakravarti (emperor), declared that her son was worthy of the name
Shatrughna.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcaviMzatitamaM parva prauDhendIvaragarbhAbhaH kAntivArikRtaplavaH  /
'sulakSmA lakSmaNAkhyAyAM pitRbhyAmeva yojitaH  //  26  //  bAlau manojJarUpau
tau vidrumAbharadacchadau  /  raktotpalasamacchAyapANipAdau suvibhramau  // 27
//  navanItasukhasparzI jAtisaurabhadhAriNau  /  kurvANau zaizavIM krIDAM cetaH
kasya na jahatuH ||28|| candanadravadigdhAGgau kuGkumasthAsakAJcitau  /
suvarNarasasaMpRktarajetAcalakopamau  // 29 //
anekajanmasaMvRddhasnehAnyonyavazAnugI  /  antaHpuragatau sarvabandhubhiH
kRtapAlanau  // 30 //  vicchrdamiva kurvANAvasmRtena kRtasvanau  /  mukhapaGkena
limpantAviva lokaM vilokanAt  // 31 //  chindantAviva dAridryamAhUtAgamakAriNau
/  tarpayantAviva svAntaM sarveSAmanukUlataH  // 32 //  prasAdasaMmadau
sAkSAdiva dehamupAgatau  /  remAte tau sukhaM puryAM kumArau kRtarakSaNau  // 33
//  vijayazca tripRSThazca yathApUrvaM babhUvatuH  /  tattulyaceSTitAvevaM
kumArau tAvazeSataH  //  34 //  tanayaM kekayAsUta divyarUpasamanvitam  /  yo
jagAma mahAmAgyo bhuvane maratazrutim ||35|| suSuve suprabhA putraM sundaraM
yasya viSTape  /  khyAtiH zatrughnazabdena sakale'dyApi vartate  //  36  //
balanAmAparaM mAtrA padmasyeti vinirmitam  /  sumitrayA harirnAma tanayasya
mahecchayA  // 37 //  kRto'rdhacakrinAmAyaM mAtreti maratAbhidhAm  /  dRSTvA
cakriNi saMpUrNa kekayA prApayat sutam  // 38 //  cakravartidhvaniM noto
mAtrAyamiti suprabhA  /  tanayasyArhato nAma zatrughnamiti nirmame ||39|| hone
lage ||25|| prauDha nIla kamalake bhItarI bhAgake samAna jisakI AbhA thI, jo
kAntirUpI jalameM taira rahA thA aura aneka acche-acche lakSaNoMse sahita thA
aise usa putrakA mAtA-pitAne lakSmaNa nAma rakhA ||26|| una donoM bAlakoM kA
rUpa atyanta manohara thA, unake oMTha mUMgAke samAna lAla the, hAtha aura paira
lAla kamalake samAna kAntivAle the, unake vibhrama arthAt hAvabhAva dekhate hI
banate the, unakA sparza makkhanake samAna komala thA, tathA janmase hI ve
uttama sugandhiko dhAraNa karanevAle the  /  bAla-krIr3A karate hue ve kisakA
mana haraNa nahIM karate the ||2728|| candanake lepase zarIrako lipta karaneke
bAda jaba ve lalATapara kuMkumakA tilaka lagAte the taba suvarNaM rasase
saMyukta rajatAcalakI upamA dhAraNa karate the ||29|| aneka janmoMke saMskArase
bar3he hue snehase ve donoM hI bAlaka paraspara eka dUsareke vaMzAnugAmI the,
tathA antaHpurameM samasta bandhu unakA lAlana-pAlana karate the ||30|| jaba ve
zabda karate the taba aise jAna par3ate the mAno amRtakA vamana hI kara rahe hoM
aura jaba kisIkI ora dekhate the taba aisA jAna par3ate the mAno usa lokako
sukhadAyaka paMkase lipta hI kara rahe hoM ||31|| jaba kisIke bulAnepara ve
usake pAsa pahu~cate the taba aise jAna par3ate the mAno daridratAkA cheda hI
kara rahe hoN| ve apano anukUlatAse sabake hRdayako mAno tRpta hI kara rahe the
|| 32 || unheM dekhanese aisA jAna par3atA thA mAno prasAda aura sampad nAmaka
guNa hI deha rakhakara Aye hoN| jinakI rakSaka loga rakSA kara rahe the aise
donoM bAlaka nagarI meM sukhapUrvaka jahA~-tahA~ kror3A karate the ||33|| jisa
prakAra pahale vijaya aura tripRSTha nAmaka balabhadra tathA nArAyaNa hue the
usI prakAra ye donoM bAlaka bhI unhIMke samAna samasta ceSTAoMke dhAraka hue the
||34|| tadanantara kekayA rAnIne sundara rUpase sahita putra utpanna kiyA jo
mahAbhAgyavAn thA tathA saMsAra meM 'bharata' isa nAmako prApta huA thA ||35||
tatpazcAt suprabhA rAnIne sundara putra utpanna kiyA jisakI samasta saMsArameM
Aja bhI 'zatrughna' nAmase prasiddhi hai || 36 | aparAjitAne padmakA dUsarA nAma
bala rakhA thA tathA sumitrAne apane putrakA dUsarA nAma bar3I icchAse hari
ghoSita kiyA thA ||37|| kekayAne dekhA ki 'bharata' yaha nAma sampUrNa
cakravartI bharatameM AyA hai isalie usane apane putrakA ardha cakravartI nAma
prakaTa kiyA ||38|| suprabhAne vicAra kiyA ki jaba 1. sulakSmyA ma.  /  2.
rajatAJjanakopamI ma  /  3 sukhapaGkena kha., ja.  /  491

Page #542 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
492 In the Padma Purana, the four Kumaras were as deep as the ocean, as
harmonious as the right paths, and as generous as the directions. ||40|| Seeing
the Kumaras fit for learning, their father, Dasaratha, anxiously considered a
suitable teacher. ||41|| There was a beautiful city called Kampilya, where a
Brahmin named Shikhi lived. He had a daughter named Ishu. ||42|| They had a son
named Air, who, due to excessive pampering, became very unruly. His actions were
the cause of thousands of reproaches. ||43|| Earning wealth, acquiring
knowledge, and accumulating virtue, although within the control of man, are
often achieved in foreign lands. ||44|| Thinking thus, his parents, filled with
sorrow, expelled him from home. He went to the city of Rajagriha, wearing only
two garments, in a state of misery. ||45|| There was a learned man named
Vaivasvata, who was highly skilled in archery and had a thousand disciples who
were diligent in their studies. ||46|| Air approached him and learned archery
according to the proper method. In a short time, he became more skilled than all
his thousand disciples. ||47|| The king of Rajagriha heard that Vaivasvata had
made a foreign boy more skilled than his own sons. He was filled with anger upon
learning this. ||48|| Hearing the king's anger, Vaivasvata, the teacher of
archery, instructed Air, "You should appear foolish before the king." ||49||
Then the king, saying, "I will test the education of all your disciples,"
summoned Vaivasvata and his disciples. ||50|| Then the king had all the
disciples shoot arrows in turn, and they all hit the target as they should.
||51|| Then he had Air shoot arrows, and he shot them in such a way that the
king considered him foolish. ||52|| When the king realized that everyone had
been deceived, he sent Air away. The teacher of archery returned to his own
abode, surrounded by his disciples. ||53||  When Kekaya named his son
Chakravarti, I thought, "Why shouldn't I name my son something even greater?"
With this thought, he named his son Shatrughna after the Lord. ||39||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 492 padmapurANe samudrA iva catvAraH kumArAste nayA iva  /  digvibhAgA ivodArA
babhUvurjagataH priyAH  // 40 //  tataH kumArakAn dRSTvA vidyAsaMgrahaNocitAn  /
dadhyau yogyamupAdhyAyaM pitaiSAM manasAkulaH  // 41 //  athAsti nagaraM nAmnA
kAmpilyamiti sundaram  /  bhArgavo'tra zikhI khyAtastasyeSuriti bhAminI  // 42
//  airarUDhistayoH putro durvinIto'tilAlitaH  /  upAlambhasahasrANAM
kAraNIbhUtaceSTitaH  // 43 //  draviNopArjanaM vidyAgrahaNaM dharmasaMgrahaH  /
svAdhInamapi tatprAyo videza siddhimaznute  // 44 //  pitRbhyAM bhavanAdeSa
nirviNNAbhyAM niraakRtH| yayau rAjagRhaM duHkhI vasAnaH karpaTadvayam  // 45 //
tatra vaivasvato nAma dhanurvedAtipaNDitaH  /  yuktA sahasramAtreNa
ziSyANAmamiyoginAm  // 46 //  yathAvattasya pArzve'sau dhanurvidyAmupAgamat  /
jAtaH ziSyasahasrAcca dUreNAdhikakauzalaH  // 47 //  zrutaM kuzAgrarAjena
matsutebhyo'pi kauzalam  /  vaideze kvApi vinyastamiti jJAsvA ruSaM gataH  // 48
//  zrutvA ca svAminaM kruddhamastrAcAryeNa zikSitaH  /  evamero yathA rAjJaH
puraH kuNTho bhaviSyati  // 49 //  sa samAhniyitaH ziSyaiH sUto'sau vibhunA
nRNAm  /  zikSA pazyAmi sarveSAM kSAtrANamiti coditaH  // 50 //
tato'ntevAsinastena krameNa zaramocanam  /  kAritA lakSyapAtaM ca sarve
cakraryathAyatham  // 51 //  tathairo'pi sa nirya kaH zarAna cikSepa tAdazAn  /
duHzikSita iti jJAto vibhunA tena yaadshaiH||52|| viditvA vitathA sarvAM rAjJA
saMpreSito gataH  /  astrAcAryaH svakaM dhAma ziSyamaNDalamadhyagaH  // 53 //
kekayAne apane patrakA nAma cakravartIke nAmapara rakhA hai taba maiM apane
putrakA nAma isase bhI bar3hakara kyoM nahIM rakhU yaha vicArakara usane ahaMnta
bhagavAnke nAmapara apane putrakA nAma zatrughna rakhA  // 39|| jagatke jIvoMko
priya laganevAle ve cAroM kumAra samudrake samAna gambhIra the, samyag nayoMke
samAna paraspara anukUla the tathA digvibhAgoMke samAna udAra the  // 40 //
tadanantara ina kumAroMko vidyA grahaNake yogya dekhakara inake pitA rAjA
dazarathane bar3I vyagratAse yogya adhyApakakA vicAra kiyA  // 41 //
athAnantara eka kAmpilya nAmakA sundara nagara thA usameM zikhI nAmakA brAhmaNa
rahatA thaa| usakI iSu nAmako kho thI  // 42 //  una donoMke eka aira nAmakA
putra thA jo atyadhika lAr3a-pyArake kAraNa mahAavinayI ho gayA thaa| usakI
ceSTAe~ hajAroM ulAhanoMkA kAraNa ho rahI thiiN||43|| dhanakA upArjana karanA,
vidyA grahaNa karanA aura dharmasaMcaya karanA ye tInoM kArya yadyapi manuSyake
apane adhIna haiM phira bhI prAyaHkara videzameM hI inakI siddhi hotI hai  // 44
//  aisA vicArakara mAtA-pitAne duHkhI hokara use gharase nikAla diyA jisase
kevala do kapar3oMko dhAraNa karatA huA vaha duHkho avasthA meM rAjagRha nagara
pahu~cA  /  / 45 /  /  vahA~ eka vaivasvata nAmakA vidvAn thA jo dhanurvidyA meM
atyanta nipuNa thA aura vidyAdhyayanameM zrama karanevAle eka hajAra ziSyoMse
sahita thA  // 46 //  aira usIke pAsa vidhipUrvaka dhanurvidyA sIkhane lagA aura
kucha hI samayameM usake hajAra ziSyoMse bhI adhika nipuNa ho gayA  // 47 //
rAjagRhake rAjAne jaba yaha sunA ki vaivasvatane kisI videzI bAlakako hamAre
putroMse bhI adhika kuzala banAyA hai taba vaha yaha jAnakara krodhako prApta
huA  // 48 //  rAjAko kupita sunakara astravidyAke guru vaivasvatane airako aisI
zikSA dI ki tU rAjAke sAmane mUrkha bana jAnA  // 49 //  tadanantara rAjAne,
maiM tumhAre saba ziSyoMkI zikSA delU~gA, yaha kahakara ziSyoMke sAtha
vaivasvata guruko bulAyA  // 50 //  tadanantara rAjAne saba ziSyoMse kramase
bANa chur3avAye aura sabane yathAyogya nizAne bIMdha diye  // 51 //  isake bAda
airase bhI bANa chur3avAye to usane isa rItise bANa chor3e ki rAjAne use mUrkha
samajhA  // 52 //  jaba rAjAne yaha samajha liyA ki logoMne isake viSayameM 1.
vilAlitaH ma.  /  2. siddhamaznute ma.  /  3. ziSyataH ma.  /  4. lakSapAtaM ca
ma.  /  5. yena tAdRzaH k.|

Page #543 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Twenty-Fifth Chapter  Having accepted the daughter of Vaivasvata as his
wife, with the consent of his Guru, he fled at night and reached the city of
Dasharatha. [54] He displayed his skills in the forest and was presented to the
king. The king, pleased with him, entrusted his sons to him. [55] Just as the
image of the moon expands in clear ponds, so too did the skills of Aira expand
in his disciples. [56] Similarly, with the attainment of other Gurus, other
knowledge also became illuminated in them, just as hidden gems become
illuminated when the lid is removed. [57] Seeing the excellence of their
knowledge in all the scriptures, the king, whose heart was filled with joy due
to the conduct, humility, and generous actions of his sons, was greatly pleased.
He honored the Gurus with great wealth, exceeding their desires, being renowned
for his generosity and possessing knowledge of the qualities and wisdom of the
Gurus. [58]  Gautama Swami says, "O King! A little knowledge attained by some
men becomes excellent, some remain the same, and some, due to the disparity of
their actions, do not even retain what they have attained. This is because the
group of rays of the sun, upon reaching the shore of the crystal mountain,
expands greatly, remains the same in some places, and is completely destroyed in
places of darkness." [59]  Thus ends the Twenty-Fifth Chapter of the
Padmacharita, narrated by the sage Ravishena, which describes the birth of Rama
and his four brothers. [25]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paJcaviMzatitamaM parva . vaivasvatasutAmairaH svIkRtya gurusaMmatAm  /  rAtrau
palAyanaM kRtvA prApa dAzarathIM purIm  // 54 //  DhaukitazcAnaraNye svaM
kauzalaM ca nyavedayat  /  rAjJA samarpitA tasmai tuSTena tanusaMbhavAH  // 55
//  teSvastrakauzalaM tasya saMkrAntaM sphItatAM gatam  /  saraHsu suprasanneSu
candrabimbamivAgatam  // 56 //  anyAni ca guruprAptyA vijJAnAni prakAzatAm  /
yAtAni teSu ratnAni pidhAnApagamAdiva  // 57 //  sragdharAcchandaH dRSTvA
vijJAnameSAmatizayasahitaM sarvazAstreSu rAjA saMprAptastoSamagryaM
sutanayavinayodAraceSTAhRtAtmA  /  cakre pUjAsametaM guruSu
guNagaNajJAnapANDityayukto yAtaM vyutkramya vAJchAvibhavamatitarAM
dAnavikhyAtakIrtiH  //  58  //  jJAnaM saMprApya kiMcid vrajati paramatAM
tulyamanyatra yAtaM tAvatvenApi naiti kvacidapi puruSe karmavaiSamyayogAt  /
atyantaM sphItimeti sphaTikagiritaTe tulyamanyatra deze yAtyekAntena nAzaM
timiravati kheraMzuvRndaM khagaughaiH  // 59 //  ityArSe raviSeNAcArya prokte
padmacarite caturbhrAtRsaMbhavAbhidhAnaM nAma paJcaviMzatitamaM parva  // 25 //
O kahA thA vaha saba jhUTha hai taba usane astrAcAryako sammAnake sAtha vidA
kiyA aura vaha ziSyamaNDala ke sAtha apane ghara calA gayA ||53 || aira gurukI
sammatise usakI putrIko vivAha kara rAtrimeM vahA~se bhAga AyA aura rAjA
dazarathakI rAjadhAnI ayodhyApurImeM AyA ||54 || vahA~ usane rAjA dazarathake
pAsa jAkara unheM apanA kauzala dikhAyA aura rAjAne santuSTa hokara use apane
saba putra sauMpa diye || 55 || so jisa prakAra nirmala sarovaroMmeM
pratibimbita candramAkA bimba vistArako prApta hotA hai usI prakAra una ziSyoM
meM airakA astrakauzala pratibimbita hokara vistArako prApta ho gayA || 56 ||
isake sivAya anya anya viSayoMke guru prApta honese unake anya - anya jJAna bhI
usa taraha prakAzatAko prApta ho gaye jisa taraha ki Dhakkanake dUra ho jAnese
chipe ratna prakAzatAko prApta ho jAte haiM ||57|| putroMke naya, vinaya aura
udAra ceSTAoMse jinakA hRdaya harA gayA thA aise rAjA dazaratha una putroMkA
sarvazAstraviSayaka atizaya pUrNajJAna dekhakara atyanta santoSako prApta hue|
ve guNasamUhaviSayaka jJAna aura pANDitya se yukta the tathA dAnameM unakI kIrti
atyanta prasiddha thI, isalie unhoMne samasta guruoMkA sammAna kara unheM
icchAse bhI adhika vaibhava pradAna kiyA thA ||18|| gautamasvAmI kahate haiM ki
he rAjan ! kisI puruSako prAptakara thor3A jJAna bhI utkRSTatAko prApta ho jAtA
hai, kisIko pAkara utanAkA utanA hI raha jAtA hai aura karmoMko viSamatAse kisI
ko pAkara utanA bhI nahIM rahatA  /  so ThIka hI hai kyoMki sUryakI kiraNoMkA
samUha sphaTikagirike taTako pAkara atyanta vistArako prApta ho jAtA hai, kisI
sthAna meM tulyatAko prApta hotA hai arthAt utanAkA utanA hI raha jAtA hai aura
andhakArayukta sthAnameM bilakula hI naSTa ho jAtA hai  // 59 //  isa prakAra
ArSanAma se prasiddha raviSeNAcArya kathita padmacarita meM rAma Adi cAra
bhAiyoMkI utpattikA kathana karanevAlA pacIsavA~ parva samApta huA  // 25 //  *
1. saMbhrAntaM ma  /  2. prakAzitAm ma.  /  493

Page #544 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #545 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sloka Index  **[A]**  * Akampanasutaheto. 128 * Akasmatkathitam Mayam
Akasmad. 230 * Akaryena Tatah Svena Akarane Devaalam 212 *
Akrushtasarvasasyadhya Akruro Varisheno'tha 22 * Akshaya Nidhayastasya Agamat
Pramadoydaan- 88 * Agraheed Grihadharma Cha 394 * Agnijvala Kulagare
Agraskanthena Choudara 201 * Ankapraptena Sa Tena 47 * Ankasthavamapaanyanka 379
* Ankasya Purusheindrasya 348 * Anganoptayavabrihi Angananaam Tatastasya  *
Anganavishaya Srishti Angaharaashrayam Nruttam 478 * Angeshu Cha Chaturvashya
198 * Achiresshava Kalena Achintayacca Kintvet- 353 * Achintayacca Drishtevam
246 * Achintayacca Drishtavataam 104 * Achintayacca Noonan Sa 193 * Achintayacca
Bhadreayam 193 * Achintayacca Yadyesha 271 * Achintayacca Lokena 243 *
Achintayacca Virena 28 * Achintayacca Ha Kashttam 272 * Achintayacca Ha Kashttam
348 * Achintayacca Ha Kashttam  * Achintayattaatah Shakro 284 * Achintayattada
Naam 173 * Achiakaracca Sangraam- 182 * Achchhinnajaladharaabhi- 461 * Ajaah
Pashva Uddishta 241 * Ajaata Evaasmi Na Yaavadenaam 421 * Ajaaste Jayate Yeshaam
241 * Ajitam Vijitasesha Ajitasya Avataranam  * Ajairyashtavya Mityasya 241 *
Agnaatparamarthastaih 261 * Agnaatasatyaya Kashttam 405 * Anjanaadriprakaasho'pi
* Ajitamatyuurukalavidhaana 305 * Atavaamiha Saukhyam Kim 278 * Adhaukishi
Tamuddesha 409 * Anima Laghima Kshobhya 162 * Anuvratani Pancha Syu Anuvratani
Samprapta  * Anuvratani Sevante  * Atah Karmabhirevedam  * Atah Paramparayaat  *
Atah Pashyata Vaakrosh  * Atah Sanskaranopaaya  * Atah Tatpratikaaraya  * Atah
Taddarshanoupaaya- 342 * Atah Tishttha Tvamatrava 100 * Atikrantmahaaraksho  *
Atikrantastito Drishtava 107 * Atikranta Vasum Drashtrum 248 * Atimatram Tato
Bhooori 283 * Ativrushtiravrushtisch  * Ativirya Suviryashch  *
Atishayashubhacinta  * Atishaakhaamrigadweepa 101 * Ato Naathasya Me Shishya 242
* Ato'pi Samatikramya  * Ato Yathaatra Sutraarth- 323 * Ato Vidhatstva Tam
Yatnam 343 * Ato Vipadai Jaataaya 222 * Attichatyantduurganndham 32 * Atyanta
Suashamah Kaalah 429 * Atyantdineematasyam 376 * Atyantdussahayogi 470 *
Atyantphalasampatti  * Atyantmadhbhutam Kaaschidd 39 * Atyantmadhikaam Kurvan
205 * Atyantmantarangouyam 203 * Atyantmupacharajnaa  * Atyantvishayasaango  *
Atyantashuddhacittaaste  * Atyalpen Prayasena 328 * Atyashishtastato. Drishtava
164 * Atyugrashaasanaattasmad 437 * Atarantre Chalaanveshi 208 *
Atarantre'tyayam Praaptah 338 * Atarantre Nabhogaanaam 122 * Atarantre Punah
Praapto  * Atarantre Pure Raja 139 * Atarantre Priyatyanttam 345 * Atarantre
Mahamaano 141 * Atarantre Munish Praapto  * Atarantre Vinishkranto 225 *
Atarantre Virodho'bhoo- 353 * Atarantre'vishadroha- 382 * Atarantre Sadehaanaam
* Ath Kaschittparaadhino 50 * Ath Kaalaanyato Haani 36 * Ath Kinnarageetaakhye
Pure Rati 80  **Note:** This is a partial translation. The original text
contains many Sanskrit words and phrases that are difficult to translate
directly into English. I have attempted to preserve the Jain terms as much as
possible, but some terms may have been slightly modified for clarity.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH [a] akampanasutAheto. 128 akasmAtkathite mAyaM
akasma.datha pUreNa 230 akAryeNa tataH svena akAraNena devAlaM 212
akRSTasarvasasyADhyaM akrUro vAriSeNo'tha 22 akSayA nidhayastasya agamat
pramadodyAna- 88 agrahId gRhadharma ca 394 agnijvAlAkulAgAre agraskandhena
codArA 201 aGkaprAptena sA tena 47 aGkasthavAmapANyaGka 379 aGkasya
puruSendrasya 348 aGgaNoptayavabrIhi aGganAnAM tatastasya aGganAviSayA
sRSTiaGgahArAzrayaM nRttaM 478 aGgeSu ca caturvasya 198 acireSava kAlena
acintayacca kintveta- 353 acintayacca dRSTvevaM 246 acintayacca dRSTavatAM 104
acintayacca nUnaM sA 193 acintayacca bhadreyaM 193 acintayacca yadyeSA 271
acintayacca lokena 243 acintayacca vIreNa 28 acintayacca hA kaSTaM 272
acintayacca hA kaSTaM 348 acintayacca hA kaSTaM acintayattataH zakro 284
acintayattadA nAma 173 acIkaracca saMgrAma- 182 acchinnajaladhArAbhi- 461  /  /
ajAH pazava uddiSTA 241 ajAta evAsmi na yAvadenAM421 ajAste jAyate yeSAM 241
ajitaM vijitAzeSaajitasyAvataraNaM ajairyaSTavyamityasya 241
ajJAtaparamArthastaiH 261 ajJAtasatyayA kaSTaM 405 aJjanAdriprakAzo'pi
ajitamatyurukAlavidhAnA 305 aTavyAmiha saukhyaM kiM 278 aDhaukiSi tamuddeza 409
aNimA laghimA kSobhyA 162 aNuvratAni paJca syuaNuvratAni saMprAptA aNuvratAni
sevante ataH karmabhirevedaM ataH paramparAyAtaataH pazyata vAkrozaataH
saMskaraNopAyaatastatpratikArAya atastaddarzanopAya- 342 atastiSTha tvamatrava
100 atikrAntamahArakSo atikrAntastito dRSTvA 107 atikrAntA vasuM draSTuM 248
atimAtraM tato bhUri 283 ativRSTiravRSTizca ativIryaH suvIryazca
atizayazubhacintA atizAkhAmRgadvIpaH 101 ato nAthasya me ziSyaH 242 ato'pi
samatikramya ato yathAtra sUtrArtha- 323 ato vidhatsva taM yatnaM 343 ato vipadi
jAtAyA 222 atti cAtyantadurgandhaM 32 atyantaH suSamaH kAlaH 429
atyantadInamatasyAM 376 atyantadussahayogI 470
atyantaphalasaMpattiatyantamadbhutaM kAzcid 39 atyantamadhikAM kurvan 205
atyantamantaraGgo'yaM 203 atyantamupacArajJAH atyantaviSayAsaGgo
atyantazuddhacittAste atyalpena prayAsena 328 atyAziSastato. dRSTvA 164
atyugrazAsanAttasmAd 437 atrAntare chalAnveSI 208 atrAntare'tyayaM prAptaH 338
atrAntare nabhogAnAM 122 atrAntare puna: prApto atrAntare pure rAjA 139
atrAntare priyAtyantaM 345 atrAntare mahAmAno 141 atrAntare muniH prApto
atrAntare viniSkrAnto 225 atrAntare virodho'bhU- 353 atrAntare'vizadroha- 382
atrAntare sadehAnAM atha kazcitparAdhIno 50 atha kAlAnyato hAni 36 atha
kinnaragItAkhye pure rati 80 300 30

Page #546 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
496 Atha Kinargitasye Pure Sri 93 Atha Kusumapatantas Atha Kumbhapure Raj Atha
Ketumati Putra Atha Kenapi Vegena Atha Kailasa Sanká¹£obho Atha KridanasaktÄyÄ
Atha Ká¹£ubdheá¹£u Vireá¹£u Atha GhoratapodhÄri Atha CÄraá¹asÄdhÅ«n Atha CetobhÅ«vo Vege
Atha CaikÄntayukto'ni 238 113 282 458 Atha Ghnan Sa CirÄt Khinnaá¸¥ 258 Atha
Candrodare KÄla 210 239 341 251 10 256 92 205 80 26 Atha JambÅ«mati Dva Atha Tam
Gamane Saktam Atha Tatraiva Nagare Atha Tadbhavanam TasyÄ Atha TasyÄbhavatputraá¸¥
Atha Tirthakaro'dÄra Atha Tena SthitenÄrÄt Atha Te Sabhaye Dá¹á¹£á¹­Ä Aba To
PÄraá¹Ähetoá¸¥ Atha DantaprabhÄjÄla Atha DharmarathÄkhyena Atha DhÅ«tebhakalÄla Atha
NÄkÄdhipasyo Atha NÄ«lÄÃ±janÄkhyÄyÄá¹ Atha Naiva Ká¹tÄrtho'sÄ Atha PÄá¹igá¹hÄ«tyasyÄ
Atha PratikriyÄm Cakre Atha Pravartanam Ká¹tvÄ Atha Pravattitam TasyÄ Atha
PraÅÄntayÄ VÄcÄ Atha PrÄsÄdasikhare Atha PriyavimuktÄm TÄm Atha VÄledhumvÄ NÄmnÄ
..Aya Bhaá¹gam Gataá¸¥ Siá¹haá¸¥ 30 178  405 365 381 388 464 32 331 386 306 50 255 108
185 58 186 380 57 186 208 389 PadmapurÄá¹e Atha BhÄskarakará¹a Atha
BhÄsvÄnmahÄÅÄlÄá¹ Atha BhÅ«taravÄá¹­amyÄá¹ Atha BhÅ«taravÄbhirÅ«pam Atha Mandodari
Garbha Atha MÄlinamityÅ«ce Aya MÄli Samuttasyo Atha Meá¹£apurare RÄjÄ Atha
MeruguhakÄre Atha YajnadhvÄnÄ« ÅrutvÄ Atha Yo'sau Surendreá¹a Atha Ratnapuram NÄma
Atha RatnadhavÄá¸¥ Putra Atha RambhÄguá¹ÄkÄrÄ Atha RÄjapuram PrÄpto Athaá¹ká¹£a
SÅ«ryarajasa Atha Vaktá¹e TriyÄmÄyÄá¸¥ Atha vÄ Karmaá¹Äm Etam Atha vÄ Ki Prapace'na
Atha vÄ Ko'tra Vo Doá¹£aá¸¥ Atha vÄ DhanapÄlasvam Atha vÄ Na Nanu Ká¹£udre Atha vÄ
Nirmitam Ceto Atha vÄnugrahÄ«to'sat Atha vÄ Bhadra Te Ko'ya Atha VÄyukumÄrasya
Atha vÄ Yuktamevedam Atha vÄ Vacana JÃ±Äna Atha vÄ Vidyate Naiva Atha vÄ
ÅrutamevÄsi Atha vÄ SarvakÄryeá¹£u Atha vÄ Sarvasandeha Atha VijÃ±Äya Jayinam Atha
VidyÄbalÄdÄÅu Atha VidyuddvasyÄbhÅ« Atha Vidyuto NÄmnÄ Atha Vegavati NÄmnÄ Atha
Ve'ndra Jite YÅ«ne 416 205 407 404 179 141 144 134 154 238 274 97 163 275 245 89
300 325 375 184 332 130 **3 362 348 266 337 353 107 342 360 197 398 70 68 193
336  Atha Vaibhavaá¹aá¸¥ KÅ«á¹­o Atha VaiÅravaá¹o YÄsÄá¹ Atha ÅabdaÅca BuddhiÅca Atha
SÅ«ryarajÄá¸¥ Putraá¹ Atha SvayamvarÄÅÄnÄá¹ AthÄgantukasiá¹hasya AthÄjit Jino JÄta
AthÄÃ±jana GiricchayÄá¸¥ Reta Samaye PrÄpta AyÄdiÅyamateá¸¥ Putro AthÄnÄdarataá¸¥
PÅ«rvam AthÄhasi Saá¹pÅ«rá¹a AthÄnyadÄ Kirtidharaá¸¥ AthÄnyadÄnava Ucat AthÄnyadÄ
MadhÄ« KodÄ AthÄnyasya DinasyÄdau AthÄparÄjita Devi AthÄpi JananÄrabhÅ«tyÄ
AthÄyudvijamÄnasyÄ AthÄmangalabhÄ«tÄbhyÄá¹ AthÄmá¹taprabhÄvÄyÄ AthÄlamalamaiten
AthÄvocad DaÅagrÄ«vaá¸¥ AthÄsÄvan YadÄpá¹cchat AthÄsÄ«daká¹£iá¹asreá¹£á¹­ AthÄsau
Kathayannevam AvÄsi Darpaá¹a ChÄye AthÄsau BhagavÄn DhyÄnÄ« AthÄsau YauvanaprÄptÄm
AthÄsau LokamuttÄrya AyÄsi Vipule KÄnte AthÄsau Suvratas Ká¹tvÄ AthÄsati
Daká¹£iá¹asreá¹yÄá¹ AthÄrÄ«ta Nagaram NÄmnÄ AthÄsya Carite Padma AthÄsya Pá¹á¹­hamÄrÅ«á¸haá¸¥
AthÄsya MÄnasam Cinta ApÄsya VrajatÄ« Dá¹á¹£á¹­i 179 179 250 207 122 386 71 191 89 94
363 490 454 393 380 242 489 369 299 136 470 363 412 187 168 .200 108 57 122 66
151 447 178 492 28 199 332 450

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 496 atha kinaragItAsye pure zrI 93 atha kusumapaTAntaH atha kumbhapure rAja
atha ketumatI putra atha kenApi vegena atha kailAsa saMkSobho atha
krIDanasaktAyA atha kSubdheSu vIreSu atha ghoratapodhArI atha cAraNasAdhUna atha
cetobhuvo vegeatha caikAntayuktoni 238 113 282 458 atha ghnan sa cirAt khinnaH
258 atha candrodare kAla 210 239 341 251 10 256 92 205 80 26 atha jambUmati dva
atha taM gamane saktaM atha tatraiva nagare atha tadbhavanaM tasya atha
tasyAbhavatputraH atha tIrthakarodAra atha tena sthitenArAt atha te sabhaye
dRSTA aba to pAraNAhetoH atha dantaprabhAjAlaatha dharmarathAkhyena atha
dhUtebhakIlAla atha nAkAdhipasyo atha nIlAJjanAkhyAyAM atha naiva kRtArtho'sA
atha pANigRhItyasya atha pratikriyAM cakre atha pravartanaM kRtvA atha
pravattitaM tasya atha prazAntayA vAcA atha prAsAdazikhare atha priyavimuktAM
tAM atha vAledhuMvA nAmnA ..aya bhaGgaM gataH siMhaH 30 178 405 365 381 388 464
32 331 386 306 50 255 108 185 58 186 380 57 186 208 389 padmapurANe atha
bhAskarakarNa atha bhAsvanmahAzAlAM atha bhUtaravATamyAM atha bhUtaravAbhirUpaM
atha mandodarIgarbha atha mAlinamityUce aya mAlI samuttasyo atha meSapure rAjA
atha meruguhAkAre atha yajJadhvani zrutvA atha yo'sau surendreNa atha ratnapuraM
nAma atha ratnadhavAH putra atha rambhAguNAkArA atha rAjapuraM prApto atharkSa
sUryarajasA atha vaktre triyAmAyA: athavA karmaNAmeta athavA ki prapacena athavA
ko'tra vo doSaH athavA dhanapAlasvaM athavA na nanu kSudre athavA nirmitaM ceto
athavAnugRhItosat athavA bhadra te ko'ya atha vAyukumArasya athavA yuktamevedaM
athavA vacanajJAna athavA vidyate naiva athavA zrutamevAsI athavA sarvakAryeSu
athavA sarvasandeha atha vijJAya jayinaM atha vidyAbalAdAzu atha vidyuddvasyAbhU
atha vidyuto nAmnA atha vegavatI nAmnA athavendra jite yUne 416 205 407 404 179
141 144 134 154 238 274 97 163 275 245 89 300 325 375 184 332 130 **3 362 348
266 337 353 107 342 360 197 398 70 68 193 336 atha vaibhavaNaH kUTo atha
vaizravaNo yAsAM atha zabdazca buddhizca atha sUryarajAH putraM atha
svayaMvarAzAnAM athAgantukasiMhasya athAjita jino jAta athAJjana giricchAya:
reta samaye prApta ayAdizyamateH putro athAnAdarataH pUrvaM athAhasi saMpUrNa
athAnyadA kIrtidharaH athAnyadAnavocat athAnyadA madhI koDA athAnyasya
dinasyAdau athAparAjitA devI athApi jananArabhUtya athAyudvijamAnasya
athAmaGgalabhItAbhyAM athAmRtaprabhAvAyA athAlamalametena athAvocaddazagrIvaH
athAsAvanyadApRcchat athAsIdakSiNazreS athAsau kathayannevaM avAsI darpaNachAye
athAso bhagavAn dhyAnI athAso yauvanaprAptAM athAsau lokamuttArya ayAsI vipule
kAnte athAsau suvrataH kRtvA athAsti dakSiNazreNyAM athArita nagaraM nAmnA
athAsya carite padma athAsya pRThamArUDhaH athAsya mAnasaM cintA apAsya vrajatI
dRSTi 179 179 250 207 122 386 71 191 89 94 363 490 454 393 380 242 489 369 299
136 470 363 412 187 168 .200 108 57 122 66 151 447 178 492 28 199 332 450

Page #547 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Verse Index  497 1 327 170 280 81 52 279 299 150 211 110 311 139  ##  Verses
* **Athaasyatiprasannaasy** * **Athaekshwaakukulotthesh** * **Athaekshamchakre
vaiyam** * **Athaindunakhaayatasy** * **Athaindrajitaye gantum** *
**Athaindrajiduvaachedam** * **Athopashamachandrasya** * **Athovaacha
vihasyaivam** * **Atho hanuruhdveepa** * **Athaikastambhamurdhsthe** *
**Athaiteediyasantaapa** * **Arthatann tavaabheesht** * **Arthatasy samam
devya** * **Arthatasyashravo bhootva** * **Athaivam kathitam tena** * **Athaivam
bhaashamanaya** * **Athaivam shrenika shrutva** * **Athaivamuktah
kushalairmaatya** * **Athaivamukto varunah sa veera** *
**Adrishtaparagambheeram** * **Adoshaapi doshaaktaam** * **Adyaprabhrti me
bhrata** * **Adyaprabhrti me sarve** * **Adya me tvam jananyaapi** * **Adya
raatraau maya yaame** * **Adyaapi naiv nilanjj** * **Adrevalahakaakhyasya** *
**Adharam kashchidaakrushya** * **Adharagrahanee tasyaah** *
**Adhaschampakavrikshasya** * **Adhisthitastalee prishthah** * **Adhisahya
mahaarogaan** * **Adhuna gamanam tebhyah** * **Adhuna dinavaktre te** *
**Adhunaasmin prasanne te** * **Adhogatiryato raajya** * **Adhyatisthachcha
mudito** * **Adhyaaseeshcheti ha kashtam** * **Anagaaramaharsiinaam** * **Ananga
san vyathaamata** * **Anangapushyeti samastaloke** * **Anantam dadhatam jnaana**
* **Anantgunaagehasya** * **Anantaram cha swapnaanaam** *
**Anantaveeryakaivallyam** * **Anantaayaasch garbhaayaah** * **Anantaa
lokanabhano** * **Ananyagatachittaah** * **Ananyajena roopena** *
**Ananyasadrishah kshetre** * **Anaranyasahasraanshu** * **Anaranyogamanmoksha**
* **Anaakhyeyamidam vatsa** * **Anaathannaath nah krutva** * **Anaadarena
nikshipya** * **Anaadarena vikshipya** * **Anaathaa durbhagaa matru** *
**Anaaghmaatastatah shankho** * **Anichchhato gata drishtih** * **Anityatvam
shariraade** * **Anityametajjagadesha matva** * **Anilo'rimuhkhaspars** *
**Anukampaparaah shaantaa** * **Anukramaachcha tasyaabhoot** * **Anukramaatsaath
nireekshmanaa** * **Anukramena sheshaanaam** * **Anujnaatastatah tena** *
**Anujnaato'trahatkantaam** * **Anudaarabaleebhang** * **Anupaalya sameechinam**
* **Anubhooaya chiram bhogaan** * **Anuyaanasamaaroodha** * **Anuyaanti
mahaaranya** * **Anuraagam gunairevam** * **Anuraadhaa mahadaahukham** *
**Anuvruttam lipijnaanam** * **Anusutrasamaachaaro** * **Anekajanmasamvuddha** *
**Anekaroagasanpoorna** * **Anekashah krtodyoga** * **Aneketra tato'te** *
**Anekopaya sambhoota** * **Anena nagnaroopena** * **Anenaapi bhave svassmi** *
**Anenaiva samam bhee** * **Antahpallavakantaabhyaam** * **Antahpuram cha
kurvaanam** * **Antahpuram pravishtaa cha** * **Antahpurammahaapadma** *
**Antaranga hi sankalpah** * **Antaraasya kritaangashtham** *
**Antare'sminnavadvaara** * **Antaniroopya vaanchanti** *
**Antarghatrishatenait** * **Antarvatnee satimetaa** * **Antaviraktamajnaatva**
* **Antavedi pashoonaam cha** * **Anto'pi tahi na sya** * **Annam yathepsitam
taasaam** * **Annam yathepsitam tebhyah** * **Annam yadamritapraya** *
**Annamaatra kriyaa pumsam** * **Annamekasya hetooryat** * **Anyah kastasy
kathyet** * **Anyadaa kandukenaaso** * **Anyadaa krishisaktaanaam** *
**Anyadaatha taditkeshah** * **Anyadaatha mahadaaha** * **Anyadaatha
vibuddhaatmaa** * **Anyadaatha sukhaaseenam** * **Anyadaaranyaka shaastram** *
**Anyadaa ramyamudyana** * **Anyadaashanivego'tha** * **Anyadaa sa
gato'pashyad**  ##  Numbers  250 297 439 335 447 272 239

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH 497 1 327 170 280 81 52 279 299 150 211 110 311 139
athAsyAtiprasannAsya athekSvAkukulottheSu athekSAMcakrire vAyaM 408
athendunakhayAtasya athendrajitaye gantuM 226 athendrajiduvAcedaM 235
athopazamacandrasya athovAca vihasyaivaM atho hanUruhadvIpaM 411
athaikastambhamUrdhasthe athaitadIyasaMtApa- 395 arthatanna tavAbhISTaM 336
arthatasya samaM devyA arthatasyAzravo bhUtvA 271 athaivaM kathitaM tena
athaivaM bhASamANAyA athaivaM zreNikaH zrutvA 424 athaivamuktaH kuzalairamAtyai-
456 athaivamukto varuNaH sa vIraM 417 adRSTapAragambhIraM adoSAmapi doSAktAM
adyaprabhRti me bhrAtA 235 adyaprabhRti me sarve adya me tvaM jananyApi adya
rAtrau mayA yAme 151 adyApi naiva nilaMjja- 225  /  adrevalAhakAkhyasya 169
adharaM kazcidAkRSya 123 adharagrahaNe tasyAH 365 adhazcampakavRkSasya
adhiSThitasthalIpRSThaH adhisahya mahArogAn 436 adhunA gamanaM tebhyaH 368
adhunA dinavaktre te 392 adhunAsmin prasanne te 362 adhogatiryato rAjyA- 471
adhyatiSThacca mudito 148 adhyAsIccheti hA kaSTaM 359 anagAramaharSINAM 300
anaGgaH san vyathAmatA 342 anaGgapuSyeti samastaloke 418 anantaM dadhataM jJAna-
2 anantaguNagehasya anantaraM ca svapnAnAM 41 anantavIryakaivalyaM anantAyAzca
garbhAyAH 319 anantA lokanabhano 33 ananyagatacittAha 358 ananyajena rUpeNa
ananyasadRzaH kSetre anaraNyasahasrAMzu anaraNyogamanmokSa 470 anAkhyeyamidaM
vatsA 135 anAthAnnAtha naH kRtvA 121 anAdareNa nikSipya 404 anAdareNa vikSipya
220 anAthA durbhagA mAtR anAghmAtastataH zaGkho 43 anicchato gatA dRSTiH 350
anityatvaM zarIrAde- 323 anityametajjagadeSa matvA 455 anilo'rimukhasparzI
anukampAparAH zAntA 462 anukramAcca tasyAbhUt 207 anukramAtsAtha nirIkSamANA 420
anukrameNa zeSANAM 425 anujJAtastatastena 271 anujJAto'trahatkAntAM 401
anudArabalIbhaGgaanupAlya samIcInaM 382 anubhUya ciraM bhogAn 467
anuyAnasamArUDha 295 anuyAntI mahAraNya- 377 anurAgaM guNairevaM 265 anurAdhA
mahAduHkhaM anuvRttaM lipijJAnaM 479 anusUtrasamAcAro 458 anekajanmasaMvRddha-
491 anekarogasaMpUrNaanekazaH kRtodyogaaneke'tra tato'tIte anekopAyasaMbhUta-
307 anena nagnarUpeNa anenApi bhave svasmianenaiva samaM bhI
antaHpallavakAntAbhyAM 389 antaHpuraM ca kurvANaM 159 antaHpuraM praviSTA ca 277
antaHpuramahApadma- 187 antaraGgaM hi saMkalpaH antarAsya kRtAGgaSThaM 396
antare'sminnavadvAra- 292 antanirUpya vAJchantI 351 antarghAtRzatenaita- 414
antarvatnI satImetAantaviraktamajJAtvA 452 antarvedi pazUnAM ca anto'pi tahi na
syA- 256 annaM yathepsitaM tAsAM 328 annaM yathepsitaM tebhyaH 157 annaM
yadamRtaprAyaM annamAtraM kriyAH puMsAM 161 annamekasya hetoryat anyaH kastasya
kathyeta 117 anyadA kandukenAso anyadA kRSisaktAnAM 265 anyadAtha taDitkezaH 113
anyadAtha mahAdAha- 467 anyadAtha vibuddhAtmA anyadAtha sukhAsInaM 472
anyadAraNyaka zAstraM anyadA ramyamudyAnaM anyadAzanivego'tha anyadA sa
gato'pazyad 68 250 297 439 335 447 272 239

Page #548 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Jain terms preserved in the English translation:  498 AnyadÄ saukhyasaá¹bhÄra
AnyadÄ HÄstinipuraá¹ AnyadÄÅaá¸¥ samaá¹ tÄbhyÄá¹ 366 57 76 Anyabhaveá¹£u
prathitasuddharmÄá¸¥: 471 AnyaÅÄsana saá¹baddha 322 AnyÄnandapurÄ« jÃ±ÄyÄ AnyÄnapi
bahÅ«nÄ va AnyÄnapi mahÄbhÄgÄn AnyÄnapi yadÄ«ká¹£Ä tu AnyÄnÄ« ca gurupprÄptyÄ Anye ca
bahavaá¸¥ ÅÅ«rÄá¸¥ Anye ca svajanÄá¸¥ sarvÄ AnyÄdyuá¸¥ pratipannaÅca
AnyÄdyurbhÄnubhirbhÄno AnyÄnÄÅÄ«viá¹£Äá¹Äva Anyairiva mahÄbhÅ«taiá¸¥ AnyaiÅca vividhaiá¸¥
ÅastraAnyaiÅca vividhairyÄnAnyaistÄ nÄÅitÄá¸¥ santo AnyÅ'nyaá¹ kuÅalaá¹ pá¹á¹£á¹­vÄ
AnyÅnyakarasambandhÄ AnyÅ'nyagati saá¹vá¹ddhaAnyÅ'nyaprÄmasambandhaá¹
AnyÅnyasaá¹gamÄd bhÅ«taAnyÅ'nyasya tato ghÄtaá¹ 290 168 AnyÄnÄndraá¸¥ samuddiá¹£á¹­aá¸¥
Anye'pi liá¹ginaá¸¥ sarvÄ 459 AnyebhyaÅca bhaviá¹£yadbhayo 221 Anye'vadannimaá¹ dÄÅaá¹
262 148 287 106 24 AnvayÄ bhavatÄmÄsÄ«d Anviá¹£ya kathayÄmÄ«ti Anviá¹£ya gÄ«taÅabdÄna
AhnÅ'pi yÅjanaÅata Ahna muhÅ«rtamÄtraá¹ yaá¸¥ Apakará¹ya tato dhÄtrÄ«á¹ ApakÄrÄ
samÄsaktÄá¸¥ ApakvaÅÄli saá¹kÄÅaá¸¥ ApatrapÄá¹ vimucyÄÅu 441 126  2 458 493 176 163
122 413 412 162 470 40 182 74 109 474 475 322 323 127 430 428 360 PadmapurÄá¹Ä
ApayÄtaÅca ÅÄlÅ'sau AparatrÄyikÄsaá¹ghÅ AparÄ«ká¹£aá¹aÅÄ«lÄnÄá¹ AparÄ«ká¹£ya kathaá¹ ÅvaÅru
AparÄá¹Äti tatrÅktaá¹ AparÄ'pi khagÄá¸¥ sarvÄ AparÄÅvarayatnÅttha AparÅ'bhramayat
padmaá¹ ApaÅyatÄá¹ tataá¸¥ Åuddha ApaÅyannÄ kulÅ'bhÅ«vaá¹ ApÄpÄstÄ'dhigacchanti Api
bÄlÄpramÄtrÄá¹a Api bÄlÄ'tra jÄnÄsi ApÅ«rvaparvÄtÄkÄraiá¸¥ ApÅ«rvapuruá¹£Ä lÅka
ApÅ«rvÄkhyaÅca dharmÅ na ApÅ«rvÄ dhruva dharmÅ ApÅ«rvÄyÄá¸¥ parÄbhÅ«tÄ Apá¹cchata sa
bhavaá¹ pÅ«rva Apá¹á¹£á¹­Å'pi janaá¸¥ sÄdhu Api Äkaá¹ prativÄkyaá¹ mÄ ApragalbhatayÄ prÄptÄ
Apratiá¹£á¹­haá¸¥ suraÅrÄá¹£á¹­haá¸¥ AprÄmÄyamá¹dutvanÄ« AprÄptaá¸¥ pÄ«á¸anaá¹ svÄsya AprÄpya
mÄnuá¹£aá¹ janma Apsaraá¸¥ ÅatanÄtrÄlÄ« ApsarÅmaá¹á¸alÄntasthÅ AbadvÄrayatau yÄtÄ
AdhikÄÃ±cÄ«guá¹Äá¹ nÄ«la Abrahmaá¹yaká¹tÄrÄvÄ Abrahmaá¹yamahÅ rÄjan Abhavacca tatÅ
yuddha Abhavattanayastasya AbhÄviá¹£yattavÄvÄsÅ AbhÄá¹£ayÄdimÄá¹ bÄlÄá¹ Abhidyata
Åarairvaká¹£Å AbhidhÄá¸¥ kÅá¹­iÅastÄá¹£Äá¹ 278 21 405 537 53 122 256 123 378 130 326 318
402 10 149 254 250 128 300 383 406 276 425 18 218 317 376 324 474 260 259 260
144 336 384 126 288 95  AbhidhÄnaá¹ ká¹taá¹ cÄsya AbhidhÄyÄti ká¹tvÄ ca AbhidhÄyÄti
taiá¸¥ sarvÄ AbhidhÄyÄti sÄ tasyÄ AbhidhÄyÄti saá¹krudhya Abhinanditaniá¸¥ÅÄá¹£a
AbhinandyÄti saá¹vignaá¸¥ AbhinnaÄÄtasastatra AbhiprÄyaá¹ tatastasya AbhiprÄtÄá¹£u
dÄÅÄá¹£u AbhiprÄtya vadhaá¹ ÅatrÅ AbhimÄnÄttathÄpyÄnaá¹ AbhyÄyÄntaá¹ ca taá¹ dá¹á¹£á¹­vÄ
AbhyutthÄya mahÄndrÅ'pi AmandÄyanta kiraá¹Ä AmarÄá¹Äá¹ vilÄdhÄ«ÅÅ AmarÄá¹Äá¹ sahasrÄá¹a
AmarÄndraá¸¥ svayaá¹ yÅddhu 134 356 AbhimÄnÄna tuá¹gÄnÄá¹ AbhimÄnÅdayaá¹ muktvÄ
Abhilaá¹kÄá¹ daÅÄsyÅ'pi 333 AbhilÄá¹£Å yatastasmin 140 Abhivyaktaá¹ tribhiá¸¥ sthÄnaá¸¥
478 AmarÅdadhÄ«bhÄnubhyaá¸¥ AmÄtÄ ca tatastasmin 114 376 158 1 237 157 Abhiá¹£icya
ÅiÅuá¹ rÄjyÄ 459 Abhiá¹£Äkaá¹ jinÄndrasya 44 280 AbhÅ«d yaá¸¥ puá¹á¸arÄ«kÄ«yÄá¹ 433 Abhyaá¹aá¹
rÄvaá¹aá¹ ÅrutvÄ AbhyarthitÄ suhá¹dbhiá¸¥ sÄ AbhyavÄÃ±chÄtpadanyÄsaá¹ 134 153 183
AmitÄá¹kÅ'bhavad rÄjÄ AmÄ« bhÅ«gÅcarÄá¸¥ svalpÄ AmÄ«á¹£Äá¹ janakaÄdÄ«nÄá¹ AmÄ«á¹£Äá¹ prathamÅ
mÄlÄ« AmÄ« samutthitÄ dÄvÄ Amuá¹ kamapi vai

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 498 anyadA saukhyasaMbhAra anyadA hAstinapuraM anyadezaH samaM tAbhyAM 366 57
76 anyabhaveSu prathitasudharmA : 471 anyazAsana saMbaddha 322 anyAnandapurI
jJeyA anyAnapi bahUne va anyAnapi mahAbhAgAn anyAnapi yadIkSe tu anyAni ca
guruprAptyA anye ca bahavaH zUrAH anye ca svajanAH sarve anyedyuH pratipannazca
anyedyurbhAnubhirbhAno anyenAzIviSeNeva anyairiva mahAbhUtaiH anyaizca vividhaiH
zastraanyaizca vividhairyAnaanyaiste nAzitAH santo anyo'nyaM kuzalaM pRSTvA
anyonyakarasaMbandha anyo'nyagati saMvRddhaanyo'nyapremasaMbandhaM
anyonyasaMgamAd bhUtaanyo'nyasya tato ghAtaM 290 168 anyenendraH samuddiSTaH
anye'pi liGginaH sarve 459 anyebhyazca bhaviSyadbhayo 221 anye'vadannimaM dezaM
262 148 287 106 24 anvaye bhavatAmAsId anviSya kathayAmIti anviSya gItazabdena
ahno'pi yojanazata ahna muhUrtamAtraM yaH apakarNya tato dhAtrIM apakAre
samAsaktAH apakvazAli saMkAzaH apatrapAM vimucyAzu 441 126 2 458 493 176 163 122
413 412 162 470 40 182 74 109 474 475 322 323 127 430 428 360 padmapurANe
apayAtazca zAlo'sau aparatrAyikAsaMgho aparIkSaNazIlAnAM aparIkSya kathaM zvazru
apareNeti tatroktaM aparespi khagAH sarve aparezvarayatnottha aparo'bhramayat
padmaM apazyatAM tataH zuddha apazyannA kulo'bhUvaM apApAste'dhigacchanti api
bAlApramAtreNa api bAle'tra jAnAsi apUrvaparvatAkAraiH apUrvapuruSA loka
apUrvAkhyazca dharmo na apUrvA dhruva dharmo apUrvAyAH parAbhUte apRcchat sa
bhavaM pUrva apRSTo'pi jana: sAdhu apyekaM prativAkyaM me apragalbhatayA prAptA
apratiSThaH surazreSThaH aprameyamRdutvAni aprAptaH pIDanaM svasya aprApya
mAnuSaM janma apsaraH zatanetrAlI apsaromaNDalAntastho abadvArayatau yAte
adhikAJcIguNAM nIla abrahmaNyakRtArAvA abrahmaNyamaho rAjan abhavacca tato
yuddha abhavattanayastasya abhaviSyattavAvAso abhASayadimAM bAlAM abhidyata
zarairvakSo abhidhAH koTizasteSAM 278 21 405 537 53 122 256 123 378 130 326 318
402 10 149 254 250 128 300 383 406 276 425 18 218 317 376 324 474 260 259 260
144 336 384 126 288 95 abhidhAnaM kRtaM cAsya abhidhAyeti kRtvA ca abhidhAyeti
taiH sarve abhidhAyeti sA tasyA abhidhAyeti saMkrudhya abhinanditaniHzeSa
abhinandyeti saMvignaH abhinnacetasastatra abhiprAyaM tatastasya abhipreteSu
dezeSu abhipretya vadhaM zatro abhimAnAttathApyenaM abhyAyAntaM ca taM dRSTvA
abhyutthAya mahendro'pi amandAyanta kiraNA amarANAM vilAdhIzo amarANAM sahasreNa
amarendraH svayaM yoddhu 134 356 abhimAnena tuGgAnAM abhimAnodayaM muktvA
abhilaGkAM dazAsyo'pi 333 abhilASo yatastasmin 140 abhivyaktaM tribhiH sthAnaH
478 amarodadhibhAnubhyaH amAte ca tatastasmin 114 376 158 1 237 157 abhiSicya
zizuM rAjye 459 abhiSekaM jinendrasya 44 280 abhUd yaH puNDarIkiyAM 433 abhyaNaM
rAvaNaM zrutvA abhyarthitA suhRdbhiH sA abhyavAJchatpadanyAsaM 134 153 183
amitAGko'bhavad rAjA amI bhUgocarAH svalpA amISAM janakAdInAM amISAM prathamo
mAlI amI samutthitA devA amuM kamapi vai deza amuJcacchayanIyaM ca 100 174 142
100 110 170 339 26 29 227 286 84 92 438 232 424 134 284 485 42

Page #549 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
499 302 38 212 356 92 No 195 260 101 286 17 Verses from the beginning:
Amunchatam tatas kruddho 285 Arateyah prayunktetau 213 Amushmadapasarpashu 357
Arinjaya-pure vahni-amogh-vijaya nama 222 Arishtanemi-manuyuna-amritaro munih
shreshtha Arundhativ naathasya amritena nishiktena Arkakirti-bhujadhara amba
ko'yam ito yati 155 Arjunadi-mahottunga- 174 Amba te vachanad-ady 242 Artho
dharmascha kaamascha 454 Ambe ihaatra kim bhranti 374  _ Ardhakrittam
shiro'nyena 290 Ambhojadadhim-adhya-adi 315 Ardhachandra-akritiyastaa 45 Ayam
ko'pi rane bhati Ardhayaama-aveshashayaam ayam cha te maha-bhagyah 385
Ardharatre tatas tasmi- 390. Ayam jalagatah shailo 79 Ardhaswargo-tkata-schaapi
ayam tu vyakta eva-asti 112 Ardhaswargo-tkata-avarti ayam ni-raparadhah sam- 303
Abhankasya satopyesha 399 Ayam patang-bimbecha 142 Arhat-pada-paridhyan- 93 Ayam
bhati sahasra-anshu Arhat-siddha-munibhyo yo 321 Ayam aditya-vanshaste
Alankaaran samutsrijya 461 Ayam mrto'si mam prapya 288 Alankaarais samam tyaktva
52 Ayam ratna-pura-adhisho 124 Alankratastato deho ayam shakro mama bhrata 298
Alam vatsa prayatnena 294 Ayam shakro mahan-ete 291 Alakam vijayam jneyam 441
Ayam sa kalamegha-akhyah 407 Alak-bhramara eva 38 Ayam sa nayam purusho'paro'yam
421 Alakshata saratnena ayam sa prakhala-is khyati 178 Alankara-pura-avase 133
Ayam sa ravano yena 264 Alankara-pureshasya 134 Ayameva cha vrttanto 475
Alankara-udayam tyaktva 180 Ayamesha sa hasti-ti Alanghano nabho bhanuh 101 Ayi
krura-ashu nitvama 371 Alasah kasyachid-bahu- 288 Ayi naath tava-angan-i 352
Alabu-bijan-samsthana-ayi bhadre katham yasmi- 342 Alik-svahat-vaami-ayi maricha
maricha Alpa-karma-kalank-tvata-t ayi mitra shamam gachchha 346 Alpa-kalam idam
jantoh 3 Ayodhya-nagare shriman Alpaireva cha teho-bhih araghatta-ghati-yant-ra-
213 Avagamy jainendrasya aranyanyam samudre va 248 Avagamy param swam cha 208
Ara-mallyantara chakri 437 Avatirnascha sva-desha 306 Arati mucchhitam kashchit
290 . Avatirnascha tatra-asa-arati-bhang-chinh-tv-a- 186 Avatirya tato rajnan
Avatirya divo munah 81 Avatirya nabho-bhagat 170 Avatirya vimanan-tat avadhaye-
psitam kasma-avadharya tvaya sardham avadharyeti bhavena 332 Avadharyedam-
atyant-am 302 Avabhajya hrish-ikanam 160 Avarasmin videhe'tha avalokanya-
ridhvamsi 162 Avocat sa tatas-tasya 409 Avashyameva-met-ena avasthana-m
chakaraso 18 Avasthitam jagad-vya-py 487 Avadi-t sarathi-schaiva avapa meru-
shikhara-m  44 Ava-pta-prapaniyasya ava-pya durlabham tad-yah 315 Ava-pya yo
matam jainam 326 Ava-pyaapi dhanam klesha- 20 Ava-pyasy phalam na-ke- 324
Avikhandita-shila-ya- 467 A-vijnata-ran-svado a-vidita-tattva-sthitiyo- 350
A-vidhaya nara-h karya 135 A-vidhaye-psitam kasma-a-vibhinna mukha-chhaya 85
Avocata tatas savam 383 Avochad bhagavan sangho 87 Ashaktastatra rajan- 259
Ashakta-h sva-bhuvam tyaktum 299 Ashaknuvamstato kartum 222 Ashakya-h
shatrubhir-dhattam 291 Ashirira-h svabhava-stha 313 Ashuddha-h kartribhih
proktam 250 Ashubha-ayo-mayatyant-a- 313 Asesha-bhaya-nir-mukto 486 Ashoka-
pallava-sparshah 349 407 0 375 216

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 499 302 38 212 356 92 na 195 260 101 286 17 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH amuJcatAM
tataH kruddho 285 arAteyaH prayuGktetau 213 amuSmAdapasarpAzu 357 ariJjayapure
vahniamoghavijayA nAma 222 ariSTanemimanyUnAamRtAro muniH zreSThaH arundhatIva
nAthasya amRtena niSiktena arkakIrtibhujAdhArA amba ko'yamito yAti 155
arjunAdimahottuGga- 174 amba te vacanAdadya 242 artho dharmazca kAmazca 454 ambe
ihAtra kiM bhrAnti 374 _ ardhakRttaM ziro'nyena 290 ambhojadadhimadhvAdi 315
ardhacandrAkRtiya'stA 45 ayaM ko'pi raNe bhAti ardhayAmAvezaSAyAM ayaM ca te
mahAbhAgyaH 385 ardharAtre tatastasmi- 390. ayaM jalagataH zailo 79
ardhasvargotkaTazcApi ayaM tu vyakta evAsti 112 ardhasvargotkaTAvartI ayaM
niraparAdhaH saM- 303 abhaMkasya sato'pyeSA 399 ayaM pataGgabimbe ca 142
arhatpadaparidhyAna- 93 ayaM bhAti sahasrAMzu arhatsiddhamunibhyo yo 321
ayamAdityavaMzaste alaGkArAn samutsRjya 461 ayaM mRto'si mAM prApya 288
alaGkAraiH samaM tyaktvA 52 ayaM ratnapurAdhIzo 124 alaMkRtastato deho ayaM
zakro mama bhrAtA 298 alaM vatsa prayatnena 294 ayaM zakro mahAnete 291 alakaM
vijayaM jJeyaM 441 ayaM sa kAlameghAkhyaH 407 alakabhramarA eva 38 ayaM sa nAyaM
puruSo'paro'yaM 421 alakSata saratnena ayaM sa prakhalaiH khyAti 178
alaGkArapurAvAse 133 ayaM sa rAvaNo yena 264 alaGkArapurezasya 134 ayameva ca
vRttAnto 475 alaGkArodayaM tyaktvA 180 ayameSa sa hastIti alaGghano nabho bhAnuH
101 ayi krUrAzu nItvamA 371 alasaH kasyacidbAhu- 288 ayi nAtha tavAGgAni 352
alAbUbIjanasaMsthAnaayi bhadre kathaM yasmi- 342 alIkasvAhatavAmiayi mArIca
mArIca alpakarmakalaGkatvAt ayi mitra zamaM gaccha 346 alpakAlamidaM jantoH 3
ayodhyAnagare zrImAn alpaireva ca tehobhiH araghaTTaghaTIyantra- 213 avagamya
jinendrAsyA araNyAnyAM samudre vA 248 avagamya paraM svaM ca 208 aramallyantare
cakrI 437 avatIrNazca svAddezA 306 arAti mUcchitaM kazcit 290  /  avatIrNazca
tatrAsAarAtibhaGgacihnatvA- 186 avatIrya tato rAjJAM avatIrya divo mUnaH 81
avatIrya nabhobhAgAt 170 avatIrya vimAnAntAt avadhAyepsitaM kasmAavadhArya tvayA
sArdhaM avadhAryeti bhAvena 332 avadhAryedamatyantaM 302 avabhajya hRSIkANAM 160
avarasmin videhe'tha avalokanyaridhvaMsI 162 avocat sa tatastasyAH 409
avazyamevametena avasthAnaM cakArAso 18 avasthitaM jagadvyApya 487 avAdIta
sArathizcaiva avApa meruzikharaM 44 avAptaprApaNIyasya avApya durlabhaM tadyaH
315 avApya yo mataM jainaM 326 avApyApi dhanaM klezA- 20 avApyAsya phalaM nAke-
324 avikhaNDitazIlAyA- 467 avijJAtaraNasvAdo aviditatattvasthitayo- 350 avidhAya
narAH kArya 135 avidhAyepsitaM kasmAavibhinna mukhacchAyA 85 avocata tataH savaM
383 avocad bhagavAn saGghoM 87 azaktastatra rAjAna- 259 azaktAH svabhuvaM
tyaktuM 299 azaknuvaMstataH kartuM 222 azakyaH zatrubhirdhattaM 291 azarIrAH
svabhAvasthA 313 azuddhaH kartRbhiH proktaM 250 azubhAyomayAtyanta- 313
azeSabhayanirmukto 486 azokapallavasparzaH 349 407 0 375 216

Page #550 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
500 Padmapurana 82 141 72 172 Below the Ashoka tree 22 Unbelievers in the Jinas
273 This is unbelievable 30 She sheds tears 371 Known as Ashvagriva 422
Ashvattha and Singhasen 427 Ashvadharma was born 70 With a herd of horses,
neighing gold 205 A donkey is in the horse 253 Ashvini Vasus are eight, Ashvini
Vasus are the world 147 With horses, chariots, and elephants 289 With horses,
elephants, and those who are there 259 Eight karmas are freed 83 Eight days are
you, the eighth is the lord of the night, the eighth is also famous 424 Eighteen
Jinas are mentioned, riding on an eight-footed mountain 81 On the eight-footed
mountain, by Maheendra 437 This is impossible, O Bhadra, you are unable to see
189 In falsehood, completely 250 With fear of falsehood, the earth-dweller 476
Unbearable brilliance, in number 327 Incurable, the weapons of the nature 292 He
also, from there, of her 126 With swords, etc., weapons 99 Swords, arrows,
maces, and javelins 232 With swords, spears, and nooses 282 With the name Asura,
of enjoyments 147 By the lord of the Asuras 270 He gave birth to a son, dear 210
He, of her, with the best wives 399 He, the lord of the gods, is the receiver
306 He fled, frightened 142 He, in attainment, increase, ten-headed 296 He, with
few years 346 The great hero has set, near the setting sun 359 Near the setting
sun 26 There is one called Govardhana 434 I have a daughter, suitable 340 There
was enmity between my father and me 73 For my purpose, O lord 176 Our original
religion 252 Our affliction-cutting, to us, O lord of the Daityas 171 In this
entire three worlds 177 In this interval, the story 177 In this house, a Jain
177 In this Bharat-kshetra 34 This, his life-giving, this 269 Of this, the navel
mark 71 In the name of this, gone, ear 124 In both his arms, Lakshmi 126 On his
broad chest 114 Of this Sanatkumara 434 If you have pleasure in her lap 124 Of
this, the title 460 Of this, Ambunatha's city 477 There is a name, skill in
speaking 479 With various weapons, full 195 So be it, having spoken 452 I am,
indeed, surrounded by sin 451 I, again, not attaining 403 I also, by this, son
403 I am Indra, supreme happiness 403 I carried the mind, of my father 135 Non-
violence, pure religion, non-violence, harmony of kings, non-violence, truth,
non-stealing 318 Oh, of the beautiful lady, yours 357 Oh, the song, oh, the song
391 Oh, qualities, oh, beauty 219 Oh, people, they are ridiculed 403 Oh, thirst,
etc., dry 403 Oh, this is completely childish 417 Oh, brilliance, this, having
conquered 417 Oh, blessed, this, completely 451 Oh, patience, oh, belly 263 Oh,
certainty-possessed 219 Oh, you are supremely blessed 345 Oh, supreme ignorance
345 Oh, supreme greatness 116 Oh, this is supremely wonderful 345 Oh, valor,
with beauty 165 Oh, again, in the picture, yours 420 Oh, intelligence, of this,
great lineage 487 Oh, it pierces the vital parts 168 Oh, this is great,
wonderful 342 Oh, this is great patience, yours 417 Oh, this is great delusion
311 Oh, this is great, hero 232 Oh, Ravana's bow 233 Oh, the mockery of the
world 291 Oh, the power, of this man 486 Oh, the beautiful beginning 216 Oh, the
love is bound 264 Oh, the meeting is good 264 Oh, the intelligence is small 158
I bow, with the word, "I bow" 321 Of the lord of the Arhat's image, the nectar-
taste of the Arhat's doctrine [A] 363 412 772 A: In the city of the messenger
181 Imaginary, and attained 175 Of this form, I know 277 Like the sky, vast 79
Agitated, with a sigh 202 Crying, thus, making 389 Attacking, with teeth, fangs
376   .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 500 padmapurANe 82 141 72 172 azokapAdapasyAdho 22 azraddadhajjinendrANAM 273
azraddheyamidaM sarva 30 azrudhArAM vimuJcantI 371 azvagrIva iti khyAta- 422
azvatthaH siMhasenazca 427 azvadharmAbhavattasmA 70 azvavRndaiH kvaNaddhema- 205
azvAyAM rAsabhenAsti 253 azvinI vasavazcASTI azniI vasavo vizva 147 azvai ratha
TainagiH 289 azvairmataGgajaistatsthai- 259 aSTakarma vimuktAnAM 83
aSTabhidivasaH sa tvaM aSTamI zarvarInAtha aSTamo yazca vikhyAto 424
aSTAdazajinoddiSTaaSTApadanagArUDho 81 aSTApade mahendreNa aSTau duhitarastasya
437 asambhAvyamidaM bhadra asamarthastato draSTuM 189 asatyarthe nitAntaM ca 250
asatyabhItyA kSitigoca- 476 asahya tejasaH saMkhye 327 asAdhyaM prakRtAstrANAM
292 asAvapi tatastasyA 126 asikuntAdibhiH zastra- 99 asibANagadAprAsa- 232
asibhistomaraiH pAzai- 282 asurAkhyena bhogAnAM 147 asurANAmadhIzena 270 asUta
ca sutaM kAntaM 210 asau tasya varastrIbhi- 399 asau devAdhipagrAho 306 asau
palAyito bhIto- 142 aso prAptau vRddhi dazamukha- 296 asau saMvatsarairalpai 346
astaM yAte mahAvIra astAcalasamAsanna- 359 astAcalasamIpasthaH 26 asti
govardhanAbhikhyo 434 asti me duhitA yogyA 340 asmatpitrorabhUd vairaM 73
asmatprayojanAnnAtha 176 asmadAdimate dharmA 252 asmadvyasanavicchedaasmabhyaM
tava daityeza 171 asmistribhuvane kRtsne asmin yadantare vRttaM asmin vA bhavane
jaine 177 asmiMzca bharatakSetra 34 asya ca prANabhUto'yaM 269 asya
nAbheyacihnasya 71 asya nAmni gate karNa- 124 asya bAhudvaye lakSmI- 126 asya
vakSasi vistIrNe 114 asya sAnatkumArasya 434 asyAGke yadi te prItiH 124
asyAnupadavIbhUtA 460 asyAmbunAthasya purI- 477 astyuktikauzalaM nAma 479
astrairnAnAvidhaiH pUrNa 195 astvevamiti bhASitvA 452 ahaM tu veSTitaH pApa- 451
ahaM punarasaMprApya 403 ahamapyanayA putra ahamindraH paraM saukhyaM
aharanmAnasaM pitro- 135 ahiMsA nirmalaM dharmaahiMsA nRpasadbhAvo ahiMsA
satyamasteyaM _ 318 aho kulAGganAyAste 357 aho gItamaho gItaM 391  /  aho guNA
aho rUpa 219 aho janA viDambyante aho tRSNAditA zuSka- 403 aho'tyantamidaM bAla-
417 aho dyutiriyaM jitvA aho dhanyo'yamatyantaM 451 aho dhairyamahodaraM 263 aho
nizcayasaMpannaM 219 aho paramadhanyA tvaM 345 aho paramamajJAnaM 345 aho
paramamAhAtmyaM 116 aho paramidaM citraM aho parAkramaH kAntyA 165 aho
punazcitragatena te- 420 aho buddhirasyA mahAgotra- 487 aho bhinatti marmANi 168
aho mahadidaM citraM 342 aho mahaddharyamidaM tvadIyaM 417 aho mahAnayaM mohaH
311 aho mahAnayaM vIre- 232 aho rAvaNadhAnuSko 233 aho lokAvahAsasya 291 aho
zaktirnarasyAsya 486 aho zobhanamArabdhaM 216 aho saMvaddhitaM prema aho
samAgamaH sAdhuH 264 aho hrasIyasI buddhi- 158 ahaMte nama ityeta- 321
arhadvimbasanAthasya arhanmatAmRtAsvAda [A] 363 412 772 A: kudUtapuro'smAkaM 181
AkalpakaM ca saMprAptA- 175 AkArasyAsya jAnAmi 277 AkAzamiva vistIrNa 79
AkulAsitasAbha- 202 Akrandamiti kurvANA 389 Akramya dazanairdantAn 376 .

Page #551 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Verse Index (Shloka Anukrama)  501 440 'Naapatashaya 382 481 111
Aakhandalatvamasyady 291 Aagachchata cha putrena Aagachchata maya drishtam 361
Aagachchata maya drishta 361 Aagata gocharam ka te Aagatya cha sahendrena 465
Aagatya cha surai: sarvesh 51 Aagamen tavaanen 251 Aagamyate kutah sthana- 472
Aagopalaanganam loke 328 Aachaar iti pucchaavo 379 Aachaganam vighatena 81
Aachaarye dhriyamanaye 115 Aachita vividhai ratnai 101 Aachchidyant
sharaabaanai- 392 Aajnaam daatum abhiprayah 153 Aajna cha mama shakre va 298
Aajneyam karaniya te 367 Aatakeetyangana tasya
Aataapanashilalpiithaatoodyavarasampurna 115 Aatmakaarvaviruddho'yam 280
Aatmajaya tato raajyam 94 Aatmanah shaktiyogena 323 Aatminindaaparo dheerah 435
Aatmaanam chaatitungsya 490 Aatmano vahaanaanaam cha 358 Aatmiya tena men patni
273 Ati dhyanena sampurna Aatvijinam tato'vaadi Aadaaya taam shilan te
Aadaavaratanayah sapta 431 Aadityanagaraabhikyam Aadityabhavanakaara
Aadityarathasankasha 294 Aadityavatprabhavantaaadityabhimukhastasy 215
Aaditye'stamanu praapt- 324  Aadityo vartate meshe 397 Aadi kritvaa jinendran
442 Aadya prajaapatijneyo Aadyanta ripu muktaaya 220 Aadya sambhashanat saapi
366 Aadya mrigaavati jneya 440 Aadya tadvishaya chinta 341 Aardra shushkam
tadunmukta Aadhipatyam samastaanaam Aanachchalokanagare 248 Aananda: paramaam
vruddhi Aanandam bhavyalokasya 214 Aanandavachanaadeva 102 Aananditashcha
tadvaakya- 165 Anaayya varuno'vaachi- 417 Aaniyaasau tato palli 270 Aaniyaasau
tato dravyam 74 Andhri cha madhyamodeechya 479 Aapgaanaathataam yaati 174
Aapatan ti tato drishtava 231 Aapadbhyah paati yastasma- 309
Aapanmadhyotsavaavasthah 392 Aapaandurashariraam cha 246 Aapaatmaatraanav
Aapaatmaatra ramyesh  83 Aapuriyan parityaakt- 263 Aaprichchhantam tato kritvaa
51 Aaprichchaya bandhavan sarvaa- 357 Aaptavargaat parijnaaya Abhogino
samuttungo 344 Aamgarbhesh duhkhaani 272 Aamashtani karairindo Aamodam paramam
bibhrat Aamodam raavano jajne  267 Aamodi kusumodbhaasi Aayaatmaatrakenaive  200
Aayantam prushthato drishtava 98 Aayuhpramaanabodhartham 428  Aayuh
shodashavarshaani 431 Aayurdirghamudaaravibhrama- 410 Aayudhagrahanadanye 311
Aayuviraamamaasaadya Aayushmannasya shauryasya 298 Aayushmannidam astyeva 234
Aaranashcha samaakhyaata- 425 Aarasaatalamulaam taam 85 Aaraadeva nivrityaakhya-
239 Aarudhah paramekaante 295 Aarudhast rushaakhaayaam 193 Aarudha navataarunyam
168 Aarebhe cha samuddhattum 217 Aaropya sumukhe raajyam 95 Aarohi nah
prasannaadi 479 Aryaputraartumatyasmi Aarya mlecchaashcha tatraapi 308 Aalayam
kalpayamyatra Aalaapamiti kurvanty- 264 Aalingatiiva sarvaashah 19
Aalinganavimuktaaya 364 Aalinganti mridusparsha 47 Aalingaya mitravatkashchi-
289 Aaline cha yatha jaat- 282 Aalokanamatho chakra 98 Aavartavighatambhoda
Aavarteshvi va nikshipta 283 Aavayonan majjaapi 152 Aavalpaam pravarajjaata
Aavaanchhataam ranam kattum Aavaasataam mahardeenaam 214 Aavritam tena tatsthaan
Aashakarikarakaara- 216 Aashapaasam samuccchidy Aashastambaramaalat  47
Aashivisha samaashesha  258 Ashushushk animaadhaya 244 Aashramashcha samutpannah
216  402  27  21  334  327

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH 501 440 'NApAtazayA 382 481 111 AkhaNDalatvamasyAdya
291 AgacchatA ca putreNa AgacchatA mayA dRSTaM 361 AgacchatA mayA dRSTA 361
AgatA gocaraM kA te Agatya ca sahendreNa 465 Agatya ca suraiH sarveH 51 Agamena
tavAnena 251 Agamyate kutaH sthAnA- 472 AgopAlAGganaM loke 328 AcAra iti
pucchAvo 379 AcAgaNAM vighAtena 81 AcArye dhriyamANe ya- 115 AcitA vividhai
ratnai 101 Acchidyanta zarAbANai- 392 AjJAM dAtumabhiprAyaH 153 AjJA ca mama
zakre vA 298 AjJeyaM karaNIyA te 367 AtakItyaGganA tasya
AtApanazilApIThaAtodyavarasaMpUrNA 115 AtmakAryaviruddho'yaM 280 AtmajAya tato
rAjyaM 94 AtmanaH zaktiyogena 323 AtmanindAparo dhIraH 435 AtmAnaM cAtituGgasya
490 Atmano vAhanAnAM ca 358 AtmIyA tena meM patnI 273 atidhyAnena saMpUrNA
AtvijInaM tato'vAdIAdAya tAM zilAM te AdAvaratnayaH sapta 431
AdityanagarAbhikhyaM AdityabhavanAkAraAdityarathasaMkAza 294
AdityavatprabhAvantaAdityAbhimukhastasya 215 Aditye'stamanuprApta- 324 Adityo
vartate meSe 397 AdI kRtvA jinendrAn 442 AdyaH prajApatijJeyo AdyantaripumuktAya
220 AdyasaMbhASaNAtsApi 366 AdyA mRgAvatI jJeyA 440 Adya tadviSayA cintA 341
Ardra zuSkaM tadunmukta AdhipatyaM samastAnAM AnacchAlokanagare 248 AnandaH
paramAM vRddhi AnandaM bhavyalokasya 214 AnandavacanAdeva 102 Ananditazca
tadvAkya- 165 AnAyya varuNo'vAci- 417 AnIyAsau tataH pallI 270 AnIyAsau tato
dravyaM 74 AndhrI ca madhyamodIcyA 479 ApagAnAthatAM yAti 174 ApatantI tato
dRSTvA 231 ApadbhyaH pAti yastasmA- 309 ApanmadhyotsavAvasthAH 392
ApANDurazarIrAM ca 246 ApAtamAtraNava ApAtamAtraramyeSu 83 ApUrayanparityakta-
263 ApRcchantaM tataH kRtvA 51 ApRcchaya bAndhavAn sarvA- 357
AptavargAtparijJAya Abhogino samuttuGgo 344 AmagarbheSu duHkhAni 272 AmaSTAni
karairindoAmodaM paramaM bibhrat AmodaM rAvaNo jajJe 267 Amodi kusumodbhAsi
AyAtamAtrakeNaiva 200 AyAntaM pRSThato dRSTvA 98 AyuHpramANabodhArthaM 428 AyuH
SoDazavarSANi 431 AyurdIrghamudAravibhrama- 410 AyudhagrahaNAdanye 311
AyuvirAmamAsAdya AyuSmannasya zauryasya 298 AyuSmannidamastyeva 234 AraNazca
samAkhyAta- 425 ArasAtalamUlAM tAM 85 ArAdeva nivRtyAkhya- 239 ArUDhaH
paramekAnte 295 ArUDhasta ruzAkhAyAM 193 ArUDhA navatAruNyaM 168 Arebhe ca
samuddhattuM 217 Aropya sumukhe rAjyaM 95 ArohiNaH prasannAdi 479
Aryaputrartumatyasmi AryA mlecchAzca tatrApi 308 AlayaM kalpayAmyatra AlApamiti
kurvantya- 264 AliGgatIva sarvAzAH 19 AliGganavimuktAyA 364 AliGgantI mRdusparza
47 AliGgaya mitravatkazci- 289 AlIne ca yathA jAta- 282 Alokanamatho cakra 98
AvartavighaTAmbhodA AvarteSviva nikSiptA 283 Avayonana majjApi 152 AvalpAM
pravarAjjAtA AvAJchatAM raNaM kattuM AvAsatAM maharDInAM 214 AvRtaM tena
tatsthAnaAzAkarikarAkAra- 216 AzApAzaM samucchidya AzAstambaramAlAta 47
AzIviSasamAzeSa 258 AzuzukSaNimAdhAya 244 Azramazca samutpannaH 216 402 27 21
334 327

Page #552 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
502 Papuraá¹e [] 1 3 Jyi- 191 346 359 48 ÄÅritÄÅrayato bhinno 483 ÄÅliá¹£á¹­Ä
dayitasya aso 364 ÄÅvÄsayann ijaá¹ sainyaá¹ 286 Äsan stoyadavÄhÄdya ÄsatÄá¹
cetanÄstÄva- 265 ÄsatÄá¹ tÄvade te vÄ ÄsatÄá¹ mÄnuá¹£ÄstÄva- 222 Äsanam Åayanam
pÄnam  47 ÄsanÄbhimukhe tatra ÄsannastahanÅ«matkaá¸¥ 41 Äsan sunayanÄnande Äsi t ki
tasya mahÄtmyaá¹ 188 Äsi t tato vinÄ«tÄyÄ 469 Äsi t tatra pure rÄjÄ 14 Äsi t tatro
bhayoh Åreá¹yoh 122 Äsid garbhasthite yasmin 445 Äsid aá¹£á¹­ottaraá¹ tasya 94 Äsid
iká¹£urastÄsÄ Äsinasya tato joá¹£aá¹ 300 ÄsinÄá¹ cÄsane ramye 271 ÄsinÄ cÄÃ±jali ká¹tvÄ
151 ÄsecanakavÄ«ká¹£yÄá¹ tÄ- 344 ÄjÃ±ÄpayadanudhyÄta- 19 ÄstÄá¹ tataá¸¥ phalenaiva 136
ÄstÄ tÄvatpriyÄ satya- 408 ÄstÄá¹ tÄvadi daá¹ rÄjan 334 ÄstÄá¹ tÄvadi daá¹ svalpaá¹
222 ÄsthÄnamaá¹á¸ape 'yÄso 31 ÄsyatÄmiha vÄ chandÄ 298 Äsyadadhne 'vatÄ«rá¹asya 244
ÄsphÄlanair mahÄÅabda- 192 Ähataá¹ bhaá¹gitaá¹ viddhaá¹ 483 ÄhataÅ ca samaá¹ sarvÄ
175 Ähatya bhiá¹á¸imÄlena 285 ÄhÄro 'sya Åuciá¸¥ svÄdu 178 ÄhalyÄramaá¹aá¸¥ sa tvaá¹ 303
ÄhÅ«tÄviha kenato 127 ÄhÅ«ya cÄbhiyÄtasyÄ 129 ÄhÅ«ya suhá¹daá¸¥ sarvÄ iti bruvata
evÄsya 281 iti vÄcÄsya jÄto 'sau 367 iti vÄcintayÄt kÅghÄ- 119 iká¹£vÄka vo yathÄ
chaite iti vicin tya na yuktama upÄ- 206 iká¹£vÄku prabhá¹tÄ«nÄá¹ ca iti vijÃ±ÄpyamÄno
'pi 121 iká¹£vÄkuá¸¥ prathamast eá¹£Äá¹ iti vijÃ±Äpito dÅ«tyÄ 100 iká¹£vÄkuá¹Äá¹ kule ramye
448 iti vijÃ±Äya karttavya- 275 iá¹gitajÃ±ÄnakusalÄá¸¥  _ iti viditayathÄvad 423
icchÄnurÅ«pamÄsÄdya 382 iti Åuddha viruddhaÅ ca 416 itaá¸¥ sindhugambhÄ«ro 'ya iti
ÅrÄ«kaá¹á¹­hamÄhedam itarasyÄpi no yuktaá¹ iti ÅrutvÄ tato vaprÄ 188 itarÄvi va to
koci d 475 iti ÅrutvÄ 'tha khe Åabdaá¹ 232 itare 'pi yathÄ sama 79 iti ÅrutvÄ
vilÄpaá¹ sÄ 405 itaÅ cetas ca vidyÄyÄ 210 iti ÅrutvÄ surÄdhiÅaá¸¥ 303 iti ca
dhyÄtame tena iti saÃ±cintayantÄ« sÄ 348 iti cÄcintayÄt kaá¹£á¹­aá¹ iti saÃ±cin tya
jagrÄha 186 iti cÄcintayall apsye 190 iti saÃ±cin tya mÅ«rdhÄnam 272 iti
ÄhurdaÅagrÄ«va- 171 iti saÃ±cin tya vinyasya iti citrapatÄkÄra- 449 iti
saÃ±janitÄÅaá¹ka 387 iti cintayatastasyÄ iti santa ká¹£yamÄá¹aá¹ taá¹ 459 iti
cintayatastasyÄ 451 iti sandisya garveá¹a 275 iti cintÄpramode na 42 iti
sambhÄá¹£amÄno 'sau 142 iti covÄca taá¹ há¹dya- 165 iti sambhÄá¹£yamÄno 'pi iti jÃ±ÄtvÄ
parÄ«tya triá¸¥ 399 iti sÄÅru vadantÄ« tÄ- 362 iti tasya prabuddhasya 51 iti stuti
prabhajyÄsau 21 iti tÄá¹ ÅÄ«lasampa nnaá¹ 467 iti stutvÄ muni bhÅ«yaá¸¥ 220 iti to
gadgadÄlÄpo 77 iti stutvÄ vidhÄnena iti devayateá¸¥ ÅrutvÄ 262 iti spaá¹£á¹­e
samudbhÅ«te 27 iti dhyÄtvÄ samÄÅvÄ sya 284 iti svapaká¹£adoá¸¥sthitya- 21 iti dhyÄtvÄ
sthitaá¹ pÄrve 342 itÄ«ká¹£vÄ kukulÅdbhÅ«tÄá¸¥ 469 iti niÅcitya jantubhyo 475 ito 'sty
uttarakÄá¹£á¹­hÄyÄá¹ 478 iti niÅcitya manasÄ 107 ito varamunir dá¹á¹£á¹­o 460 iti niÅcitya
saá¹grÄma- 355 itthaá¹ nijabhavÄn ÅrutvÄ 385 iti niá¹£kramaá¹e tena 51 itthaá¹ vasanta
mÄlÄ ca 388 iti prabuddhÅdyatamÄnasa- 333 ity abhidhyÄyatstasyÄ 225 iti
prasÄdyamÄno 'pi 121 ity avagamyajÄá¸¥ suviÅuddha 305 iti priyavacÅvÄri 298 ity
avagamy duá¸¥khakuÅalÄ- 400 iti proktamÄtre jagau bhÅ«mi- 487 ity ÄdidevadevÄna 359

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 502 papurANe [] 1 3 jyi- 191 346 359 48 AzritAzrayato bhinno 483 AzliSTA
dayitasyAso 364 AzvAsayannijaM sainyaM 286 AsaMstoyadavAhAdyA AsatAM
cetanAstAva- 265 AsatAM tAvadete vA AsatAM mAnuSAstAva- 222 AsanaM zayanaM pAnaM
47 AsanAbhimukhe tatra AsannasthahanUmatkaH 41 Asan sunayanAnande AsIta ki tasya
mAhAtmyaM 188 AsIttato vinItAyA 469 AsIttatra pure rAjA 14 AsIttatrobhayoH
zreNyoH 122 AsId garbhasthite yasmin 445 AsIdaSTottaraM tasya 94
AsIdikSurasastAsAAsInasya tato joSaM 300 AsInAM cAsane ramye 271 AsInA cAJjali
kRtvA 151 AsecanakavIkSyAM tA- 344 AjJApayadanudhyAta- 19 AstAM tataH phalenaiva
136 AstA tAvatpriyA satya- 408 AstAM tAvadidaM rAjan 334 AstAM tAvadidaM svalpaM
222 AsthAnamaNDape'yAso 31 AsyatAmiha vA chandA 298 Asyadadhne'vatIrNasya 244
AsphAlanairmahAzabda- 192 AhataM bhaGgitaM viddhaM 483 Ahatazca samaM sarvA 175
Ahatya bhiNDimAlena 285 AhAro'sya zuciH svAdu 178 AhalyAramaNaH sa tvaM 303
AhUtAviha kenato 127 AhUya cAbhiyAtasya 129 AhUya suhRdaH sarvA iti bruvata
evAsya 281 iti vAcAsya jAto'sau 367 iti vAcintayat koghA- 119 ikSvAkavo yathA
caite iti vicintya na yuktamupA- 206 ikSvAkuprabhRtInAM ca iti vijJApyamAno'pi
121 ikSvAku: prathamasteSAM iti vijJApito dUtyA 100 ikSvAkUNAM kule ramye 448
iti vijJAya karttavya- 275 iGgitajJAnakuzalAH _ iti viditayathAvad 423
icchAnurUpamAsAdya 382 iti zuddhA viruddhAzca 416 itaH sindhugaMbhIro'ya iti
zrIkaNThamAhedaM itarasyApi no yuktaM iti zrutvA tato vaprA 188 itarAviva to
kocid 475 iti zrutvA'tha khe zabdaM 232 itare'pi yathA sama 79 iti zrutvA
vilApaM sA 405 itazcetazca vidyAyA 210 iti zrutvA surAdhIzaH 303 iti ca
dhyAtametena iti saJcintayantI sA 348 iti cAcintayatkaSTaM iti saJcintya jagrAha
186 iti cAcintayallapsye 190 iti saMcintya mUrdhAnaM 272 iti cAhurdazagrIva- 171
iti saMcintya vinyasya iti citrapaTAkAra- 449 iti saMjanitAzaGka 387 iti
cintayatastasya iti saMtakSyamANaM taM 459 iti cintayatastasya 451 iti saMdizya
garveNa 275 iti cintApramodena 42 iti saMbhASamANo'sau 142 iti covAca taM hRdya-
165 iti saMbhASyamANo'pi iti jJAtvA parItya triH 399 iti sAzru vadantI tA- 362
iti tasya prabuddhasya 51 iti stuti prabhajyAsau 21 iti tAM zIlasaMpannaM 467
iti stutvA muni bhUyaH 220 iti to gadgadAlApo 77 iti stutvA vidhAnena iti
devayateH zrutvA 262 iti spaSTe samudbhUte 27 iti dhyAtvA samAzvAsya 284 iti
svapakSadoHsthitya- 21 iti dhyAtvA sthitaM pArve 342 itIkSvAkukulodbhUtAH 469
iti nizcitya jantubhyo 475 ito'styuttarakASThAyAM 478 iti nizcitya manasA 107
ito varamunirdRSTo 460 iti nizcitya saMgrAma- 355 itthaM nijabhavAn zrutvA 385
iti niSkramaNe tena 51 itthaM vasantamAlA ca 388 iti prabuddhodyatamAnasA- 333
ityabhidhyAyatastasya 225 iti prasAdyamAno'pi 121 ityavagamya janAH suvizuddha
305 iti priyavacovAri 298 ityavagamya duHkhakuzalA- 400 iti proktamAtre jagau
bhUmi- 487 ityAdidevadevena 359

Page #553 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Sloka Anukrama (Order of Verses)  **379** * **102**  Many heroes like this
were mentioned, such as **68**, **166**, **Indra**, **Indra**, **Prabho**,
**Megha**, etc. * **371**  He said, "Cruel-named **270**," and drew his sword
from its sheath **181**. * **227**  He said, "Indrajit, the cloud-chariot
driver," and the minister spoke **294**. * **188**  He said, "Indrajit, the
cloud-chariot driver," and the battle-enthusiast **280** said, "Indratva
(Indra's position) belongs to the assembly of gods." * **227**  He said, "The
great-souled one," and they were filled with fear **404**. * **485**  He said,
"The one who knows good deeds," and they were well-armed **186**. * **392**  He
said, "The Indra-blue-light-net," and the wise one's friend **455** said, "The
Indra-blue-light-net." * **157**  He said, "Holding the Indra-blue-light-net,"
and **453** said, "He was afflicted by that sorrow." * **213**  He said, "He
left the house," and **471** said, "The Indra-worshipped ones are themselves
beautiful." * **236**  He said, "He placed it on his son," and **299** said, "He
went far away." * **270**  He said, "Indrabhuti, the purpose here," and the
goddess said **168**. * **133**  He said, "The one who is allowed to speak," and
**140** said, "The Indra-temple-like." * **385**  He said, "They were then," and
**349** said, "With love for her husband." * **143**  He said, "Indra then
spoke," and **119** said, "They were asked by them." * **278**  He said, "She
was then abandoned," and **139** said, "She was then by him." * **385**  He
said, "She spoke again," and **378** said, "Indra's command, pleased by them,
with agreement." * **454**  He said, "He bound his relatives," and **219** said,
"Even the power of Indras." * **42**  He said, "She was filled with great joy,"
and **417** said, "They were released by him." * **44**  He said, "Indrani, the
chief of the goddesses," and **384** said, "She was frightened." * **485**  He
said, "She mounted the chariot," and **141** said, "From Indra's shelter, the
kings of birds." * **490**  He said, "She, the virtuous one, with her husband,"
and **304** said, "He was worshipped by him." * **223**  He said, "He is capable
of conquering the senses," and **49** said, "He, with them." * **368**  He said,
"He gave her a ring," and **159** said, "They stood there when." * **395**  He
said, "Whatever happened, the truth," and **139** said, "Indra also mounted the
elephant." * **245**  He said, "He left some in the wilderness," and **299**
said, "Indra also did not have joy in the city." * **474**  He said, "He placed
it there," and **336** said, "When the cessation came." * **292**  He said, "His
becoming fuel," and **473** said, "He, seeing." * **297**  He said, "The one who
rides the elephant," and **450** said, "Narada spoke." * **272**  He said, "The
friend, the sword," and **368** said, "This, for the purpose of removing
carelessness." * **270**  He said, "He was determined by wisdom," and **375**
said, "He was with his friend." * **329**  He said, "Those who are wise, this
rule," and **396** said, "He was named Pasvang." * **364**  He said, "He
established it," and **383** said, "Seeing this enchantress." * **304**  He
said, "He called Sugriva," and **213** said, "His previous births." * **479**
He said, "He was united with these castes," and **344** said, "He was about to
go." * **63**  He said, "These desires, O Lord," and **331** said, "This is a
great wonder there." * **83**  He said, "Even with this time," and **110** said,
"The ministers comforted him." * **177**  He said, "They spoke to him again,"
and **406** said, "They held this for a long time." * **297**  He said, "The
guardians of the world," and **401** said, "This is your birth that was told." *
**135**  He said, "Knowing him to be averse," and **211** said, "This time,
father." * **73**  He said, "The Lord spoke this," and **370**  said, "He came
to the Pandu-like shade." * **115**  He said, "They were filled with wonder,"
and **64** said, "Now I will feed these." * **347**  He said, "The beloved ones,
sons, daughters," and **104** said, "By these, hundreds of his." * **266**  He
said, "The Indra-blue-lotus-dark," and **309** said, "Some beloved, glorious
ones." * **428**  He said, "The assembly-bearer, the gentle one," and **172**
said, "The Indra-blue-lotus." * **168**  He said, "The body, as it is," and
**319** said, "The Indra-blue-lotus-row shade." * **269**  He said, "The
ministers, together," and **292** said, "Here, in the Jambudvipa island." *
**349**  He said, "Indra, heaven, and other gods," and **317** said, "Here, in
the human world." * **380**  He said, "The king of the Rakshasas," and **147**
said, "The king of the Rakshasas."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zlokAnAmakArAdhanukramaH 379 102 ityAdyA bahavaH zUrA 68 ityukto'sau jagAdaiva
166 indra indra prabho megho ityAzIbhiH samAnandha ityuktvA krUranAmAnaM 371
indrajitakumbhakarNAbdaityuktaH puruNA yukta- 270 ityuktvA kozataH khaDgaM 181
indrajinmeghavAhazca 227 ityuktaH sacivaH prAha ityuktvA ca babandhAsau 188
indrajinmeghavAhAya ityuktaH samarotsAhA- 294 ityuktvA janakoddezaM 280
indratvaM devasaGghAnAM ityuktaH sa mahAsattvaH ityuktA te vyaraMsiSTAM
indradhvaMsanamAdhAya 227 ityuktaH sukRtajJo'so 404 ityuktvA te susaMnaddhAH 485
indranIlaprabhAjAla- 186 ityuktaM vitathaH pUrva ityuktvA devadevasya 392
indanIlaprabhAjAlaiityuktamAtre budhabandhu- 455 ityuktvA dhArayanmAna- 157
indranIlozusaMghAta 453 ityuktastena duHkhena ityuktvA nigato gehAda 213
indranutAnAM svayamapi ramyA-471 ityuktA tanaye nyasya 236 ityuktvA nu gato
dUraM 299 indrabhUtimihoddezaM 270 ityuktA prAha taM devI 168
ityuktvAnumatAlApaH 133  /  /  indramandirasaMkAzaM 140 ityuktAbhyAM
tatastAbhyAM 385 ityuktvA patyarAgeNa 349 indrastato'vadat 143 ityuktAbhyAM
paripRSTa- 119 ityuktvA parisRSTA sA 278 indrasya puruSairasya 21 ityuktA sA
tatastena 139 ityuktvA punarUce sA 385 indrAjJA parituSTAbhiityuktA sAnurodhena
378 ityuktvA bAndhavAn sarvA- 454 indrANAmapi sAmarthya- 219 ityuktA sA paraM
harSa- 42 ityuktvA mocitAstena 417 indrANIpramukhA devyaH 44 ityuktA sA
paritrastA 384 ityuktvA rathamAruhya 485 indrAzrayAt khagai rAjJAM 141 ityuktA
sA satI patyA 490 ityuktvA vanditastena 304 indriyANAM jaye zakto 223 ityuktA
tena tAH sAkaM 49 ityuktvA valayaM datvA 368 indreNa saha saMgrAme ityuktAste
yadA tasthuH 159  /  ityuktvA vastu yadvRttaM 395 indro'pi gajamArUDha. ityukte
kalpitAbhoga- 139  /  /  ityuktvA vijane kAMzcid 245 indro'pi na pure prIti 299
ityukte tatra nikSipya 474 ityuktvA virati yAte 336 indhanatvaM gataM tasya 292
ityukte devadevebhyo 473 ityuktvA vIkSamANo'sau 297 ibhavAhananAmAsI- 450
ityukte nArado'voca- 250 ityuktvA suhRdaH khaDgaM 272 imaM pramAdanodArtha 368
ityukte nizcito buddhayA 270 ityuktvAsI samaM sakhyA 375 imaM ye niyamaM prAjJAH
329 ityukte pAzvaMgaM nAmnA 396 ityuktvA sthApitaM tena 364 imAM ca mohinIM
dRSTvA  /  383 ityukte pUrvajanmAni 304 ityuktvAhUya sugrIva. 213
imAbhirjAtibhiryukta- 479 ityukte prasthitI gantuM 344 ityupAMzukRtAlApa ime
manorathA nAtha 3tyupata bhagavAnAha 63 idaM tatra paraM citraM 331 iyatA cApi
kAlena 83 ityukte mantribhiH sAntvaM 110 idaM tAH punarUcustaM 177 iyantaM
dhAritAH kAlaM 406 ityukte lokapAlAnAM 297 idaM te kathitaM janma 401 iyantaM
samayaM tAta 135 ityukte vimukhaM jJAtvA 211 idaM provAca bhagavAn 73 iyAya
pANDutAM chAyA 370 ityukte vismayopetau 115 idAnI bhojayAmyetAn 64 iSTAn bandhUn
sutAn dArAn 347 ityuktaiH zatazastasya 104 indIvaracayazyAmaH 266 iSTA
yazasvinaH kecit 309 ityukto gaNabhRtsaumyaH 428 indIvarAravindAnAM 172 iSTo
yathAtmano dehaH ityukto mantribhiH sAdhaM 168 indIvarAvalI chAyAM iha jambUmati
dvIpe ityukto rAkSasezAbhyAM indraH svargaH surAzcAnye 147 ihaiva mAnuSe loke
317 269 292 349 319 380

Page #554 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
504 Padma Purana 12 Ù ÙÙØ³ 187 Idakparakramaadhaarah 207 Ikshmano mahim mukta 322
Ikshanchakre parÄn svapnÄn 151 Ikshitah purvam apyesha 197 Idrishi cha tayoá¸¥
priti- 272 Idrishe patitaaranya 393 Idashe yachite'tyantam 277
Iryavakyaiá¹£aá¹ÄdÄnÄ«rá¹£yÄmanmathadagdhasya IshavatyÄá¹ narendrasya Ishvaratvam tataá¸¥
prÄptÄ 162 Ishvaratvam daridrÄá¹Ä- 148 247 Tan tasata 344 [U] 435 170 222 224 192
UttamÄá¹ge cha vindhyasya 228 Udanvadambhaso binduuttamottamtaá¹ teshaá¹ 383
Udayachalamerddhastham 40 UttÄnaá¸¥ kampayan bhumi 154 UdarasthakishorÄá¹Äá¹ Uttarya
kekaya cha ashu 485 Udaattam naditam kaischid 163 Uttisthat griham yamaá¸¥ 158
UdÄram bhanuvattejo Uttisthat nijÄn desÄn 53 UdÄragopurÄá¹­á¹­Äl- 54 UttisthatÄshu
gacchaamo 64 UdÄrascha tiraskÄraá¸¥ 320 UttisthatÅ mukhaá¹ bhaktu- 280
UdÄro.vibhavo yaste 277 Uttistha bho vaso svarga 257 Udaahrito maya yaste 245
Uttistha mitra gacchaavaá¸¥ 367 Udiaya cha tigmÄá¹shuá¸¥ 347 Uttistha sharaá¹am gaccha
177 Udichi prasthitaá¸¥ kaá¹£á¹­hÄá¹ 238 Uttistha svapuram yamo 348 Udguá¹á¹aÅcha
ayametena UttisthÄne sakhe tistha UdghÄá¹­akaghaá¹­Ä«sÄ«ktaiutthÄya cha ná¹siá¹ho'sau 58
Uddhateá¹£u satÄ tena utthÄya rÄká¹£asÄs tais te Uddhatuá¹ dharini ÅaktÄ utthito
yudhyamÄne'smi- 200 UdabhÅ«to vavadraá¹á¹£á¹­ro'tauá¹­patadbhiá¸¥ patadbhiÅcha 43
UdyatpralayatibrÄá¹shu 387 UtpatantÄá¹ tu tÄá¹ dá¹á¹£á¹­Ä 464 UdyadarkakarÄlÄ«á¸ha
utpattaveva rogasya 280 Udyamya ká¹£ipramÄtmiyayaiá¸¥ 200 Utpatti bhagavannasyÄ
UdyÄnÄnÄá¹ mahÄdhvamsaá¸¥ 143 Utpatti lokapÄlÄnÄá¹ 146 Udvahantim stanau tuá¹go 260
Utpattisamaye yasya UdvrÌ¥ttakuhukÄcÄraiuá¹­patya tvaritÄ vyomni 388 Unnatam
charanena asya 126 UtpannÄ mandavatyÄá¹ge 150 Unnatam naná¹tuá¸¥ kecid. 163
Utpatsyante trayaá¸¥ putrÄ 152 Unnamayya tato vaká¹£aá¸¥ utpÄtÄá¸¥ Åatrugeheá¹£u 140
Unnayanti rajo dÅ«ram utpÄtÄ jajÃ±ire'rÄti- 490 Unmajjanti chalabhá¹á¹gÄá¸¥ 464
UtsangalalitÄá¹ bÄlye 375 Unmattatvam upetaanÄ- 191 Utsarpiá¹Ä« cha tÄvantya 429
UnmÄ«lya sa tato neutsarpiá¹Ä«sahasrÄá¹i 317 Udaattamiti cha avochad 184
Utsarpiá¹yavasarpiá¹yo- 80 Upakaá¹á¹­haá¹ cha kaá¹á¹­hasya 272 Utsarpiá¹yavasarpiá¹yoá¸¥
saha- 326 Upakaá¹á¹­haá¹ muneÅchaitya- 220 UtsavÄdipravá¹ttÄ«nÄá¹ 431 UpakÄrasamÄká¹á¹£á¹­a-
273 UtsÄrya yo bhÄ«á¹£aá¹amandha- 455 UpakÄre pravá¹tto'yauá¹­sá¹á¹£á¹­acÄmaracchatra- 17
UpacÄreá¹a veÅyÄyÄ 74 Utkshipya parvatÄn kecit 114 UpacitiyÄ má¹dÄdÄ«nÄá¹ UdapÄdi
pá¹thustasmÄd 469. UpadravÄrthameteá¹£Äá¹ UdapÄdya nujÄ teá¹£Äá¹ 335. UpaneetÄÅcha
tatraiva 246 238 261 PistÄsmÄn 74 228 269 Uktaá¸¥ sa tairaho rÅ«paá¹ uktaá¹ cha
kanyayÄ nÅ«na- uktaá¹ cha nÄgapatinÄ uktaá¹ cha munichandreá¹a uktameva tatas tena
uktamanyairedam tatra ukto vará¹£asahasrÄá¹Äá¹ ugraá¹ ká¹tvÄ tapas tasmin
ugranakrakulaakrÄntÄá¹ ucite cha asane tasmiucchakesarakoá¹­Ä«nÄá¹
uccaavacashilÄjÄlucchalatkarabhÄro'sya ucchrite nÄtapatraá¹a
ucairucchairguá¹asthÄnucchyamÄneti sÄ tena ujjagÄma cha ÅÄ«tÄá¹shu utkrÌ¥ttaÅravaá¹aá¹
vigraá¹ uttamavratasansaktÄ uttaranti prayÄsena uttariyaá¹ cha vinyastauá¹­tareá¹a
tatha á¹£aá¹£á¹­i- uttamÄá¹gaá¹ tato dhÅ«tvÄ 27 450 125 187 214 27 327 330 377 480 54 337

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 504 padmapurANe 12 w lms 187 IdakparAkramAdhAraH 207 IkSamANo mahIM mukta 322
IkSAJcakre parAn svapnAn 151 IkSitaH pUrvamapyeSa 197 IdRzI ca tayoH prIti- 272
IdRze patitAraNya 393 Idaze yAcite'tyantaM 277
IryAvAkyaiSaNAdAnaIrSyAmanmathadagdhasya IzAvatyAM narendrasya IzvaratvaM tataH
prAptA 162 IzvaratvaM daridrANA- 148 247 TAna tasAtA 344 [u] 435 170 222 224 192
uttamAGge ca vindhyasya 228 udanvadambhaso binduuttamottamatAM teSAM 383
udayAcalamarddhasthaM 40 uttAnaH kampayan bhUmi 154 udarasthakizorANAM uttArya
kekayA cAzu 485 udAttaM naditaM kaizcid 163 uttiSThata gRhaM yAmaH 158 udAraM
bhAnuvattejo uttiSThata nijAna dezAn 53 udAragopurATTAla- 54 uttiSThatAzu
gacchAmo 64 udArazca tiraskAraH 320 uttiSThato mukhaM bhaktu- 280 udAro.vibhavo
yaste 277 uttiSTha bho vaso svarga 257 udAhRto mayA yaste 245 uttiSTha mitra
gacchAvaH 367 udiyAya ca tigmAMzuH 347 uttiSTha zaraNaM gaccha 177 udIcI
prasthitaH kASThAM 238 uttiSTha svapuraM yAmo 348 udgurNazcAyametena uttiSThAne
sakhe tiSTha udghATakaghaTIsiktaiutthAya ca nRsiMho'sau 58 uddhateSu satA tena
utthAya rAkSasAstaiste uddhatuM dhariNI zaktA utthito yudhyamAne'smi- 200
udbhUto vavadraMSTro'tautpatadbhiH patadbhizca 43 udyatpralayatIbrAMzu 387
utpatantAM tu tAM dRSTA 464 udyadarkakarAlIDhautpattAveva rogasya 280 udyamya
kSipramAtmIyaiH 200 utpatti bhagavannasya udyAnAnAM mahAdhvaMso 143 utpatti
lokapAlAnAM 146 udvahantIM stanau tuGgo 260 utpattisamaye yasya
udvRttakuhukAcAraiutpatya tvaritA vyomni 388 unnataM caraNenAsya 126 utpannA
mandavatyaGge 150 unnataM nanRtuH kecid. 163 utpatsyante trayaH putrA 152
unnamayya tato vakSaH utpAtAH zatrugeheSu 140 unnayantI rajo dUraM utpAtA
jajJire'rAti- 490 unmajjanti calabhRGgAH 464 utsaGgalAlitAM bAlye 375
unmattatvamupetAnA- 191 utsarpiNI ca tAvantya 429 unmIlya sa tato
neutsapiNIsahasrANi 317 udAttamiti cAvocad 184 utsapiNyavasapiNyo- 80 upakaNThaM
ca kaNThasya 272 utsapiNyavasapiNyoH saha- 326 upakaNThaM munezcaitya- 220
utsavAdipravRttInAM 431 upakArasamAkRSTa- 273 utsArya yo bhISaNamandha- 455
upakAre pravRtto'yautsRSTacAmaracchatra- 17 upacAreNa vezyAyA 74 utkSipya
parvatAn kecit 114 upacityA mRdAdInAM udapAdi pRthustasmAd 469 /
upadravArthameteSAM udapAdyanujA teSAM 335  /  /  upanItAzca tatraiva 246 238
261 pistAsman 74 228 269 uktaH sa tairaho rUpaM uktaM ca kanyayA nUna- uktaM ca
nAgapatinA uktaM ca municandreNa uktameva tatastena uktamanyairidaM tatra ukto
varSasahasrANAM ugraM kRtvA tapastasmin ugranakrakulAkrAntAM ucite cAsane
tasmiuccakesarakoTInAM uccAvacazilAjAlaucchalatkarabhAro'sya ucchritenAtapatraNa
ucairuccairguNasthAnaucyamAneti sA tena ujjagAma ca zItAMzu utkRttazravaNaM
vigraM uttamavratasaMsaktA uttarantI prayAsena uttarIyaM ca vinyastauttareNa
tathA SaSTi- uttamAGgaM tato dhUtvA 27 450 125 187 214 27 327 330 377 480 54 337
,

Page #555 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Verse Index and Glossary  **Verse Index:**  * 505 * 280 * 214, 276, 279 *
221, 433, 424 * 82, 253 * 177, 485, 126, 452, 405, 291, 249, 241, 236, 249, 340,
180, 137, 224, 330, 270, 314, 323, 408, 412, 379, 437, 314, 49, 340, 274, 327,
329, 329, 241, 241, 329, 325, 408, 473, 282, 479, 88, 141, 185, 42, 238, 133,
262, 349, 158, 394, 401, 361, 140, 185, 425, 317, 38 * 251, 141, 308, 330, 222,
261, 82, 170, 177, 245, 164, 422, 163, 263, 375, 331, 174, 443, 395, 346, 353,
368, 397 * 55, 258, 261, 260, 61  **Glossary:**  * **à¤à¤·à¤­ (Rishabha):** The first
Tirthankara (spiritual teacher) in Jainism. * **à¤¨à¤®à¥ (Namo):**  A salutation,
meaning "obeisance" or "respect." * **à¤à¤à¤¿à¤¤à¤¨à¤¾à¤¥ (Ajitanatha):** The first
Tirthankara in the present time cycle. * **à¤µà¤à¥à¤°à¤¬à¤¾à¤¹à¥ (Vajraà¤¬à¤¾à¤¹à¥):** A powerful
warrior. * **à¤¸à¤¾à¤°à¤¥à¤¿ (Sarathi):** A charioteer. * **à¤¦à¤¶à¤¾à¤¸à¥à¤¯ (Dashasya):** A ten-
headed demon. * **à¤®à¤°à¥à¤¤à¥à¤µà¤à¥à¤ (Marutvancha):** A powerful wind deity. *
**à¤®à¤¹à¥à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥à¤°à¥à¤½à¤¥ (Mahendra):** A king of the gods. * **à¤à¤ªà¤®à¤¾à¤¨ (Upaman):** A
comparison or analogy. * **à¤à¤ªà¤¯à¤®à¥à¤¯ (Upayamya):** To approach or go towards. *
**à¤à¤ªà¤°à¤®à¥à¤­à¤¾ (Uparambha):** An undertaking or beginning. * **à¤à¤ªà¤°à¥à¤¯à¥à¤ªà¤°à¤¿
(Uparyupari):** Above, on top of. * **à¤à¤ªà¤µà¤¾à¤¸à¤ (Upavasam):** A fast. * **à¤à¤ªà¤µà¤¿à¤·à¥à¤
(Upvishta):** Sitting. * **à¤à¤ªà¤¶à¤²à¥à¤¯ (Upshalya):** A wound or injury. * **à¤à¤ªà¤¶à¤¾à¤¨à¥à¤¤
(Upshanta):** Calm, peaceful. * **à¤à¤ªà¤¸à¤°à¥à¤ (Upsarga):** A calamity or affliction.
* **à¤à¤ªà¤¾à¤§à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤¯ (Upadhyaya):** A teacher or guru. * **à¤à¤ªà¤¾à¤¯ (Upaya):** A means or
method. * **à¤à¤ªà¤¾à¤à¤¶à¥ (Upanshu):** A ray of light. * **à¤à¤°à¤ (Urah):** The chest. *
**à¤à¤°à¥à¤¦à¤£à¥à¤¡ (Uru-danda):** The thigh. * **à¤à¤°à¥à¤µà¤°à¤¾ (Urvara):** Fertile, productive.
* **à¤à¤²à¥à¤à¤¾ (Ulka):** A meteor. * **à¤à¤à¥à¤ (Uchu):** They said. * **à¤à¤°à¥à¤§à¥à¤µà¤
(Urdhvam):** Upwards. * **à¤à¤·à¥à¤®à¤¾ (Ushma):** Heat. * **à¤à¤à¤ (Ekam):** One. *
**à¤¸à¤¹à¤¸à¥à¤°à¤¾à¤£à¤¾à¤ (Sahasranam):** Of thousands. * **à¤¸à¤à¤à¥à¤à¥à¤¯ (Sankochya):**
Contracting. * **à¤¸à¥à¤®à¤¿à¤¤à¥à¤° (Sumitra):** A name. * **à¤à¤à¤¨à¤¾à¤¸à¤¤à¥à¤µ (Ekanasatva):**
Having one nose. * **à¤à¤à¤à¥à¤¡à¥ (Ekachudo):** Having one tuft of hair. *
**à¤¦à¥à¤µà¤¿à¤à¥à¤¡à¤¶à¥à¤ (Dvichudo):** Having two tufts of hair. * **à¤à¤à¤¤à¥à¤° (Ekatra):**
Together. * **à¤­à¤¾à¤µà¤¨à¤¸à¥à¤¤à¥à¤°à¥ (Bhavana-stri):** A woman who meditates. * **à¤à¤à¤¤à¥à¤µ
(Ekatva):** Oneness. * **à¤¸à¤à¤¸à¤¾à¤°à¥ (Samsara):** The cycle of birth and death. *
**à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤¸à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤¸à¥à¤¯ (Purasya):** In front of this. * **à¤¬à¤²à¤¿à¤µà¤¤à¥ (Bali-vat):** Strong. *
**à¤à¤à¤­à¤à¥à¤¤à¥à¤¨ (Ekabhaktena):** By one devotee. * **à¤à¤¾à¤²à¤ (Kalam):** Time. * **à¤¦à¤¶à¤¯à¤¾
(Dashaya):** By ten. * **à¤à¤¸à¥à¤¯ (Kasy):** Of whom? * **à¤à¤à¤µà¤¿à¤à¤¶à¤¤à¤¿ (Ekavimshati):**
Twenty-one. * **à¤µà¤¾à¤°à¤¾à¤¨à¥ (Varan):** Times. * **à¤à¤¤à¥à¤¤ (Atita):** Past. * **à¤à¤à¤¾à¤à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¯à¤¾
(Ekakinya):** Alone. * **à¤ªà¥à¤¥à¥à¤à¤ (Prithuka):** Strong. * **à¤¸à¤¿à¤à¤¹à¤ (Simha):** A
lion. * **à¤à¤¸à¥à¤«à¤¾à¤²à¤¯à¤¨à¥ (Asphalayan):** Shaking. * **à¤à¥à¤·à¥à¤£à¥ (Kshoni):** The earth. *
**à¤à¤à¤®à¥à¤à¥à¤ (Ekamukhai):** With one face. * **à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤¾à¤¨à¥à¤¤ (Pranta):** Edge, boundary.
* **à¤µà¤¿à¤°à¥à¤ªà¤¾ (Virupa):** Deformed. * **à¤à¤à¥à¤­à¥à¤¯ (Ekibhuya):** Becoming one. *
**à¤µà¥à¤°à¤à¤¨à¥à¤¤à¥à¤½à¤®à¥ (Vrajanta ami):** These who are going. * **à¤à¥à¤¹à¥ (Grihe):** In the
house. * **à¤µà¤¾à¤¸à¥ (Vaso):** Residence. * **à¤à¤à¥à¤¦à¤°à¥à¤·à¤¿à¤¤à¤¾à¤ (Ekodaroshttam):** Born
from the same womb. * **à¤­à¥à¤°à¤¾à¤¤ (Bhrat):** Brother. * **à¤¨à¤¾à¤¸à¥à¤¤à¤¿ (Nasti):** There is
not. * **à¤¯à¥à¤·à¤¾à¤ (Yesham):** Of those. * **à¤­à¤¾à¤°à¤¤à¥à¤¨à¤¾à¤¥ (Bharatinatha):** A name. *
**à¤­à¤µà¤¤à¥à¤¯à¤¨à¥à¤à¤¶à¥à¤ (Bhavati aneka):** There are many. * **à¤à¤¤à¤ (Etam):** This. *
**à¤¬à¤¨à¥à¤§à¥à¤à¤¨à¤ (Bandhujanam):** Relatives. * **à¤°à¤à¥à¤· (Raksha):** Protect. *
**à¤µà¤¿à¤à¤¿à¤¤à¥à¤°à¤ (Vichitra):** Strange. * **à¤à¤²à¤¿ (Kali):** The age of darkness. *
**à¤à¤¤à¤¤à¥à¤à¥à¤²à¤à¥à¤°à¤®à¤¾à¤¯à¤¾à¤¤à¥ (Etatkulkramayaato):** Coming from this lineage. * **à¤à¤¤à¤µà¥
(Ritavo):** Seasons. * **à¤à¥à¤¤à¤à¤¸à¥à¤¥ (Chetastha):** In the mind. * **à¤à¤¤à¥à¤µà¤¿à¤à¥
(Ritvik):** A priest. * **à¤ªà¤°à¤¾à¤à¤¯à¥à¤¦à¥à¤­à¤¤ (Parajayodhbhata):** Arising from defeat. *
**à¤¸à¤à¤à¤¾à¤¤à¤ (Sanjatam):** Born. * **à¤µà¤¿à¤­à¥à¤¦à¤¿à¤µà¥à¤¯à¤ (Vibhodivyam):** Divine glory. *
**à¤¶à¤¤à¤ (Shata):** Hundred. * **à¤ªà¥à¤¤à¥à¤°à¤¾ (Putra):** Sons. * **à¤¸à¤®à¥à¤¤à¥à¤ªà¤¤à¥à¤¤à¤¿
(Samutpatti):** Origin, birth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH 505 280 214 276 279 RSabhasyAbhavat putro RSabhAya
namo nitya- RSabheNa yazovatyA RSabho'jitanAthazca RSabho nAma vikhyAto RSabho
vRSabhaH puMsA RSizRGgAdikAnAM ca 221 433 424 82 253 uvAca ca na mAM nUnaM 177
uvAca ca prayacchAjJAM 485 uvAca ca vidhAtavyaM uvAca ca sute pazya 126 uvAca
bhagavAne uvAca vajrabAhustaM 452 uvAca sA gataH kvAsau 405 uvAca sArathi vIraH
291 uvAcAsAvayaM vetti 249 uvAca svastimatyevaM 241 uvAceti dazAsyazca 236
uvAceti marutvaJca 249 uvAceti mahendro'tha 340 uvAcedaM tathA dUto 180 uvAha
vidhinA mAlI 137 224 330 270 314 323 408 upamAnavinirmuktaM upAmuktarUpasya
upayamya purI yAto uparambhA tato'vAdIuparambhA dazAsyena uparin staratnAMzu 412
upayaMtha samAruhya uparyupari te gatvA uparyupari yAtaizca uparyupari
saMvRddhaM 379 upalabhya samAnItA 437 upavAsaM caturdazyAupavAso'vamaudarya- 314
upaviSTastato nAbhi- 49 upaviSTau ca vizrabdhI 340 upazalyaM sa vijJAya 274
upazAntAzayA yAstu 327 upazAnti gate kecit 329 upazAnterazuddhasya 329
upasargajayantasya upasargasya vidhvaMsA upAdhyAyi niyacchAjJA 241 upAdhyAyIti
codAra- 241 upAyaM kecidajJAtvA 329 upAyamatra kaM kurmoM upAyametamujjhitvA 325
upAyebhyo hi sarvebhyo 408 upAyo gamanasyAyaM upAMzu nAradenAtha 473 upAhara
gajaM zIghra 282 uraH kaNThaH zirazceti 479 urasA prerayan kAJcit 88
urudaNDadvayaM dadhe urvarAyAM varIyobhiH urvazI menakA maJju 141
ulkAkAraistatastena 185 ullikhyamAnakaMsottha- 42 uvAca ca gaNAdhIzaH 238 133
UcuH kecidvaraM bhadrA 262 Ucaturvatsa saMtyajya Ucuranye'yamadyApi 349
UcustAsAmidaM kAzcit 158 Uce tAM vinayaM bibhrat 394 Uce prahasitaM caiva 401
Uce prahasitAvazyaUce prahasito'thaivaM 361 UrustambhavayaM tasya 140 UrdhvaM
tato dazAsyasya 185 Urdhvagrevayako jJeyo 425 Udhio madhyalokeSu 317 USmAbhAvena
yA candra- 38 [e] ekaM cAbdaM sahasrANAM ekaM yo veda tena syA- 251 ekaM
saMkocya caraNa- 141 ekaH sumitranAmAsIekanAsatvamAnetuM ekacUDo dvicUDazca
ekatra bhAvanastrINAekatvamatha saMsAro ekadA tu purasyAsya ekadotthAya balivat
ekadvitricatuHpaJca- 308 ekabhaktena te kAlaM 330 ekayA dazayA kasya 222
ekaviMzativArAn ye 261 ekastvatsadRzo'tIta- 82 ekAkinyA kathaM cAsmin 170 ekAkI
pRthukaH siMhaH 177 ekAnAsphAlayan kSoNI 245 ekAnekamukhaiH prAnta- 164 ekApi
yasyeha bhavedvirUpA 422 ekIbhUya vrajanto'mI 163 eke'vocan gRhe vAso 263
ekodaroSitAM bhrAta- 375 eko'pi nAsti yeSAM tu 331 eko'pi bhAratInAtha eko
bhavatyanekazca 174 etaM bandhujanaM rakSa etajjJAtvA vicitraM kali- 443
etatkulakramAyAto 395 346 353 368 397 [R] Rtavo'nye'pi cetaHstha- 55 Rtvik
parAjayodbhata- 258 RSabhasya tu saMjAtaM 261 RSabhasya vibhodivyaM 260
RSabhasya zataM putrA- 61 RSabhasya samutpatti

Page #556 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
506 Padmapurana 177 30 227 462 This is the best that has been done, this is all
resolved, 9 this is the good city of whom, 246 they do not desire this meaning,
185 having heard this story, 108 this is the beautiful joy, this is the inner
sixteen, 314 this is the story of the great, 273 for this reason, all, 460 from
this very end, 240 in the meantime, the messenger, 258 these contagious defects,
248 agitated by these two, 199 I will tell you this much, 198 these are the
crests of them, 306 these and others by misrepresentation, 87 these and others
are many, by this inference, 151 these are said to be like fathers, 37 these are
fallen, 440 these change, these are the six-part lords, 137 these are the first
wives, 480 these are the differences, 480 these are the lords of the gods and
demons, 428 these are freed from thirst, 64 with these, he departed, 226 having
obtained this great being, 412 freed from these two, 483 knowing it to be like
castor oil, I do this well, 367 thus, then, speaking to him, 258 thus, there,
great effort, 44 thus, there also, variety, 309 thus, in their conversation, 394
thus, her son also, 85 thus, this story, 224 thus, this story, listen, 405 Thus,
this fetus, 382 thus, all, having obtained, thus, in those who have passed,
Thus, in the hermitage of the virtuous, thus, like giving, Thus, searching, we
do not grieve, 132 thus, alas for the world, Thus, he gives this to her, 168
thus, various in that, 104. Thus, be dear, you, thus, having heard it said, 135
thus, it is said, 145 thus, being harassed, she, 374 thus, the network of
actions, 449 thus, the firm rock, 451. Thus, and so on, many, 255 thus, by the
merit of past lives, men, 166 thus, and so on, conversations, 288 thus, being
asked, the girl, 170 thus, and so on, conversations, beings, 282 thus, being
asked, Ganesha, 63 thus, and so on, beautiful arts, 484 thus, being asked, the
Jina, words Thus, and so on, gone, pleased, 171 thus, every day, whose, 322
thus, and so on, great knowledge, 162 thus, being told by Ganesha, 35 thus, and
so on, the lord of birds, 226 thus, by the merit of future lives, austerity, 96
thus, having said, having done, 435 thus, in a great battle, 290 thus, being
told by the people, he, thus, in a great lineage, 94 Thus, being told, he
called, 147 thus, in a great arrival, Thus, being told, then, he said, 343 thus,
whatever they do, 24 thus, having heard, according to karma, thus, of this kind,
by the gain of dharma, Thus, a family, in one, thus, he said, being asked, 323
thus, your austerity is done, 156 thus, of the monkey banners, Thus, the fire of
anger, his, thus, knowing the truth, she, Thus, in succession, in those who go,
447 thus, this kind of book, Thus, having gone, even reconciliation, 281 thus,
this kind of auspicious omen, Thus, having said, his daughter, polite, 418 thus,
this kind of ornament, poor, 260 thus, the qualities, of the whole, 319 thus,
this kind of, you, to do, 219 thus, and, he is enjoying, 174 thus, this kind of,
you, it is proper, 180 thus, thinking, his daughter, 347 thus, this kind of,
how, gods, 312 thus, thinking, his, thus, in this way, even having arrived,
Thus, the birth of Janaka, 448 thus, in this kind of, beings, 119 thus, knowing,
again, enmity, thus, by these means, you, 159 Thus, being told, he said, 392
thus, this celestial physician, for you, Thus, being told, Anjana said, 392
thus, having heard, great anger, 176 thus, being told, placing her in her lap,
thus, in brief, it is said, 112 thus, being told, then, they went, thus, being
urged, even, 121 thus, being told, he said, 99 thus, being addressed, by words,
248 thus, being told, by her, completely, 485 thus, all the birds, 422 Thus,
being told by Indra, 438 181 248 318 388 120 276 143

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 506 padmapurANe 177 30 227 462 etattaH kRtamuttamaM etatsarva samAdhAya 9
etatsunagaraM kasya 246 etadarthaM na vAJchanti 185 etadAkhyAnakaM zrutvA 108
etadAnandayazcAru etadAbhyantaraM SoDhA 314 etanmadhorupAkhyAna- 273 etasmAt
kAraNAt sarva 460 etasmAdeva codantAd 240 etasminnantare dUto 258 etAn
saMsargajAn doSA- 248 etAbhyAM coditaH kSubdho 199 etAvattu bravImyeto 198
etAzca kakubhasteSAM 306 ete cAnyApadezena 87 ete cAnye ca bahavaH etena
cAnumAnena 151 ete pitRsamAH proktAH 37 etebhyaH pracyutAH santaH 440 ete
viparivartante ete SaTkhaNDabhUnAthAH eteSAM prathamA jAyA 137 eteSAmapi
bhedAnAM 480 ete surAsurAdhIzaH 428 ete hi tRSNayA muktA 64 etaizca prasthitaH
sAkaM 226 enaM prApya mahAsattvaM 412 ebhirdovinirmuktaM 483 eraNDasadRzaM
jJAtvA evaM karomi sAdhUktaM 367 evaM tato gadantaM tama- 258 evaM tatra
mahAtodya 44 evaM tatrApi vaicitryaM 309 evaM tayoH samAlApe 394 evaM
tasyApyabhUt putra- 85 evaM tAvadidaM vRttaM 224 evaM tAvadidaM vRttaM zRNu 405
evaM tAvadayaM garbhaH 382 evaM sarvamapi prApya evaM teSvapyatIteSu evaM sAdhau
tapogAre evaM dAnasya sadRzo evamanviSya no zo- 132 evaM dhigastu saMsAraM
evamayaM dadatyasyA 168 evaM nAnAvidhAstasmin 104  /  evamastu priyA yUyaM evaM
nigaditaM zrutvA 135 evamastviti cokte'sA- 145 evaM nirdhATyamAnA sA 374
evamAdikriyAjAla- 449 evaM nizcalapakSmANaM 451  /  /  evamAdi ca bahveva 255
evaM pUrvabhavAjitena puruSAH 166 evamAdisamAlApAH 288 evaM pRSTA satI bAlA 170
evamAdisamAlApAH satva- 282 evaM pRSTo gaNezo'sA- 63 evamAdyAH kalAzcAru 484
evaM pRSTo jino vAkya evamAdyA gatAstoSaM 171 evaM pratidinaM yasya 322 evamAdyA
mahAvidyAH 162 evaM prokte gaNezena 35 evamAdyaH khagAdhIza- 226 evaM
bhavAntarakRtena tapo- 96 evamityudite kRtvA 435 evaM mahati saMgrAme 290
evamuktaH prajAbhiH sa evaM mahati saMtAne 94 evamuktaH sa cAhUya 147 evaM
mahati saMprApte evamuktastato'voca- 343 evaM yadyatprakurvanti 24 evaM
karmavazaM zrutvA evaMrUpA dharmalAbhena evaM kuTumba ekasmin evaM vadannasau
pRSTo 323 evaM kRtastavo'thAsau 156 evaM vAnaraketUnAM evaM kopAnalastasya evaM
viditatattvA sA evaM kramAt prayAteSu 447 evaMvidhaM kila granthaM evaM gate'pi
saMdhAnaM 281 evaMvidhazubhotpAtai evaM gaditvA tanujAM vinItA 418
evaMvidhamalaM dInaM 260 evaM guNAH samastasya 319 evaMvidhasya te kattuM 219
evaM ca ramamANo'sau 174 evaMvidhasya te yuktaM 180 evaM cintayatastasya kanyA
347 evaMvidhAH kathaM devA 312 evaM cintayatastasya evaM vidhe'pi saMprApte evaM
janakasaMbhUtiH 448 evaMvidheSu jIvAnAM 119 evaM jJAtvA punarvairaM
evaMvidhairupAyaiste 159 evamuktA jagAdAso evaM vaidyAdharo'yaM te
evamuktAJjanAvocat 392 evaM zrutvA mahAkrodha- 176 evamuktA vidhAyAGke evaM
saMkSepataH proktaH 112 evamuktAstato jagmuevaM saMcodyamAno'pi 121 evamukte
jagAdAsau 99 evaM saMbodhito vAkyaiH 248 evamukte tayAtyantaM 485 evaM
samastakhagaparabhi- 422 evamuktena zakrasya 438 181 248 318 388 120 276 143

Page #557 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Verse Index by First Word  **507** * evamukte param tosham * evamukto
ganeshah sa * evamukto jagado'sau devi * evamukto jagadasau * evamukto'tha
gandharvo * evamuktva jinedranam * evamuktva dadavasmai * evamuktva vatayaitam *
evamucustataà¤¶à¥à¤à¤¾à¤¨à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤ * evamekatra puruse * evamekatapatrayam * evametadyatha
vakshi * evametasya jatasy * evam prakaramatyant * esha kalyani te natha * esha
bhavam na vetta sya * eva te somavansho'pi * esha rakshasavanshasya * esham
tavad iyam vartta * esha te kathita sakam * esha namami te pada * esha api
grihava pyante * esha bhartu rakshun ya * eshaiva hi para kastha * ehi dani
puram yamo  **128** * kankagrdhhah gomaayu  **350** * kanchid ulkabhigate na
**483** * kanchilla angala pasena  **68** * kantakena krta tranah  **312** *
kati va ratna chakra anga * kati va samatikranta * katham kuryat tava stotram *
katham chatyant guru bhih * katham cheto vishuddhih syat * katham jinedra
dharmena * katham sphutati vo vakshah * kathanchichcha hate'pyasmin *
kathanchitsancharam cha sa * kathamasmad vidhas tasya * katha kalpita dharmakhya
* kathayam iti jatayaam * katha vidyut prabhasya smi * kathitam cha ganeshena
**451** * kadambasthula mukula  **87** * kadali garbha nihsara  **368** * kada
chid ath tatra asi * kada chid iha jayate  **342** * kada nu tam aham kantam
**125** * kada nu bhrataraveto * kada nu vadanam tasya  **436** * kanaka
prabhaya sardham * kakabhah iti khyato  **137** * kanakabhapureshasya  **468** *
kanakabhasamutpanna * kanaken tato bhitva  **394** * kanakodaryapi sreya  **47**
* kanayasaiva kalena  **173** * kanayan jit satrost u * kandarpadarpasa ksobham
* kandarasu ratam mero  **142** * kandalai ni vidaish channa  **462** *
kandukadi tu vijneyam  **482** * kanyam tam rupatah khyatam  **450** * kanya
drishti hara prapu  **267** * kanyanam yauvanarambhe  **209** * kanya nama
prabho deya  **176** * kanyanivahama dhyastha  **175** * kanya asokalata nama
**337** * kanye yam diyatam tasmai  **144** * kapiyatu dhanai apt  **105** *
kapotapalyupan teshu * kapolaveva satatam  **38** * kamalayu dha mukhyasca
**316** * kambukantha radchchhaya  **263** * kambugrivam hariskandha  **172** *
kamburekha nata grivam  **198** * karam karena kachichcha  **460** * karata
chyuta danambu * karanai vividhair ya tu * karayugmant ikam krutva  **341** *
karasangaru nibhutta  **47** * karangasthe tato nyasta  **290** * kara
ghatadalat kumbha  **338** * kari kandu yanam reje  **407** * karini bhir
athavrutya * karena veshtitum yava  **333** * karomi pratarutthaya  **393** *
karomi mandha bhagya kim  **351** * karaih sheet karasyapi  **48** * karau tasya
arun chhayo  **19** * karnatalasama sakta  **335** * karnantasangate kanti
**105** * karnan vidushakasakta  **173** * karn yorb alikaloka  **139** * kartum
shakto'smi te kante  **256** * kartari chchedanodbhut * ka prabhavascha vedasya
**492** * karma kastha kutharaya  **146** * karma kim purva mahosvi  **285** *
karmanastva shubhasyasya  **468** * karmanam viniyogena  **276** * kashyapa
**262** * kashyapa  **481** * kaksavidyut krtodyota  **252** * kaksavidyut
krtodyota  **46** * kaksavidyut krtodyota  **143** * airavarudhis tayo putra *
airavatam samaruh ya  **29** * airavatasamarudha * airavato gajo yasya  **107**
* aishvaryam tanaye kshipta  **236** * aishvaryapanjarant astha  **215** *
aushadhatrasadur astha

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH 507 20 evamukte paraM toSaM 489 evamukto gaNezaH sa 32
evamukto jagAdo'sau devi 368 evamukto jagAdAsau 485 evamukto'tha gandharvo 388
evamuktvA jinendrANAM 153 evamuktvA dadAvasmai evamuktvAvatAyaitAM 371
evamUcustatazcAnyAH 158 evamekatra puruSe 244 evamekAtapatrAyAM evametadyathA
vakSi 298 evametasya jAtasya 397 evaMprakAramatyantaeSa kalyANi te nAtha 407 eSa
bhAvaM na vettAsyA eva te somavaMzo'pi eSa rAkSasavaMzasya eSAM tAvadiyaM vArtA
eSA te kathitA sAkaM eSA namAmi te pAdAeSApi gRhavApyante 42 eSA bhartu rakSuNyA
74 eSaiva hi parA kASThA 319 ehIdAnI puraM yAmo 397 128 350 483 68 312
kaGkagRddhaHgomAyu 463 kaJcidulkAbhighAtena 415 kaJcillAGgalapAzena 414
kaNTakena kRtatrANaH 161 kati vA ratnacakrAGkakati vA samatikrAntA kathaM
kuryAttava stotraM 21 kathaM cAtyantagurubhiH kathaM cetovizuddhiH syAt kathaM
jinendradharmeNa 28 kathaM sphuTati vo vakSaH 8 kathaJcicca hate'pyasmin 209
kathaJcitsaMcaraMzcAsA- 249 kathamasmadvidhastasya 15 kathAkalpitadharmAkhya-
116 kathAyAmiti jAtAyAM kathA vidyutprabhasyAsmi- 345 kathitaM ca gaNezena
kadambasthUlamukula: 451 kadalIgarbhaniHsAra 87 kadAcidatha tatrAsI kadAcidiha
jAyate 368 kadA nu tAmahaM kAntAM 342 kadA nu bhrAtarAveto kadA nu vadanaM
tasyAH 125 kanakaprabhayA sArdhaM kAkAbha iti khyAto 436 kanakAbhapurezasya 137
kanakAbhAsamutpanna- 468 kanakena tato bhittvA kanakodaryapi zreyaH 394
kanIyasaiva kAlena 47 kanIyAn jitazatrostu kandarpadarpasakSobhaM 173 kandarAsu
rataM mero- 142 kandalainiviDaizchannA 462 kandukAdi tu vijJeyaM 482 kanyAM tAM
rUpataH khyAtAM 450 kanyA dRSTiharAH prApuH- 267 kanyAnAM yauvanArambhe kanyA
nAma prabho deyA 209 kanyAnivahamadhyasthaH 176 kanyA'zokalatA nAma 175 kanyeyaM
dIyatAM tasmai- 337 kapiyAtudhanaiApta- 144 kapotapAlyupAnteSu 105 kapolAveva
satataM _ 38 kamalAyudhamukhyAzca kambukaNThA radacchAyA 316 kambugrIvaM
hariskandhaM 263 kamburekhA nata grIvAM 172 karaM kareNa kazcicca
karaTacyutadAnAmbukaraNaivividhairyA tu karayugmAntikaM kRtvA 460
karasaGgAruNIbhUta- 341 karAGgaSThe tato nyasta- 47 karAghAtadalatkumbha- 290
karikaNDUyanaM reje 338 kariNIbhirathAvRtya 407 kareNa veSTituM yAva 198 karomi
prAtarutthAya 333 karomi mandabhAgyA kiM 393 karaiH zItakarasyApi 351 karau
tasyAruNacchAyo 48 karNatAlasamAsakta- 19 karNAntasaGgate kAnti- 335 karNAn
vidUSakAsakta- 105 karNayorbAlikAlokA 173 kartuM zakto'smi te kAnte 139
kartarIcchedanodbhUtakaprabhAvazca vedasya karmakASThakuThArAya karma kiM
pUrvamAhosvi- 256 karmaNastvazubhasyAsya 468 karmaNAM viniyogena 276 262 492 146
285 airarUDhistayoH putro airAvataM samAruhya 143 airAvatasamArUDhaairAvato gajo
yasya 29 aizvaryaM tanaye kSiptvA 107 aizvaryapaJjarAntastho 236 [au]
auSadhatrAsadUrastha- 215 [ka] kakSAvidyut kRtodyota- 155  /  481 252 46

Page #558 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
508 Padmapurana 303 355 466 88 360 22 He is influenced by karma 240, the kashaya
is sweet and bitter 481. || Having made time, he became cruel 243, knowing that
karma is difficult, by which this being Over time, he is reborn 179, by eight
types of karma 307, in ten years of someone 161, having attained this land of
karma, time and place Whose daughter are you, child? 150, having done the dharma
of time, freed from the eight karmas 223, playing in Kashi 390, in time, the
method of giving in a vessel, tightly embraced by a spouse 229, by a coincidence
118, until the time has passed, the wealth of the earth of the spouse Kakanda,
the root of convenience 426, when the time is full, and complete 139, the word
kalasha, a great jewel 345, a certain one, born from a lotus 55, in time, by
chance, there 379, the art combined with art 207, a certain one, angry, silent
Who is not attached to another man 372, beautiful with the qualities of art 448
A certain one, with sandalwood paste 230, a certain one, with a net of pearls
175, the moon in the capture of art A certain one, with all limbs visible 229,
the weight of wood, as it is 244, three months of art 479, in the city called
Kanchana 146, what is this, quickly 197, skilled in art, eyes 227, with gold,
the ground of the pyre What, do you worship stability with a compass 288, the
house of the wish-fulfilling tree, with bowed feet What should I do now, father,
with millions of wishes, satisfaction, a certain one, inside the door What, the
dust of the sun released 209, the supreme of the wish-fulfilling feet, a certain
one, the ear of the sun What, having done something terrible 213, resembling a
wish-fulfilling palace 439 If I do not see my beloved 405, what, with a
messenger, with a blessing 212, in a wish-fulfilling dwelling With eyes fixed on
my beloved 367, what, do you not see, oh mother 206, born from a wish-fulfilling
tree With my beloved, with my beloved 179, what, do you not remember, what was
before 302, three colors were imagined Without my beloved, of this 343, what, do
you not know from this 460, by the nature of auspiciousness 14, radiant, with
Indra What, is the womb troubled, auspiciousness be to you, king 260, radiance,
born from the lower lip What, me, blessed with laughter, auspicious friendship,
having gone Beloved, driven out, the lord of stars 152, what, service to the
king, enemy 347, auspicious, well-being, all, of one overcome by lust and anger
Auspicious, do not be like this, oh lady 362, the enjoyment of lust, by
comparison 194, what, or, from sorrow, in the womb 404, a certain one, made a
path 289, the arrows of one who has the form of lust 293 What, or, by some
wicked one 404, a certain one, seeing one who has fallen from his weapon 289,
the wealth of lust, dharma, and duty 431 What, even if you do not have that
anger 406, a certain one, having attained bondage 289, having stopped the action
289 Kampilya, having done armor 426, what, would it be the karma of an obstacle
353 In the city of Kampilya 437 What, or, the Milky Way, enchanted 403, a
certain one, taking a stake 289, in the city of Kampilya, the king 188, the
kinshuka, very dense 339, a certain one, with hair on the forehead Body pain, it
is said 314 Resembling the kinshuka flower 428, a certain one, having taken a
well 122, with body, mind, and speech 303, some are benefactors 255, a certain
one, shaking the left hand The activity of body, speech, and mind 383, but, like
a mother, we are not able 298, a certain one, having become excited, with speed,
abandoning the body What is more painful than this 465, a certain one, with the
right hand 127, causing, old stupas 238, what, much has been said here, do 211,
a certain one, looked, with curiosity 127, caused, by Bharata, this What, much
has been said here 9, a certain one, his own, with the city's water 289. Caused,
by Harishena 188, why, thus, are you shining 403, a certain one, throwing, with
anger 290, in the month of Kartik, having been born 464, what, like the fruit of
the pak 362 186 380 247 289 123 127 159 218   .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 508 padmapurANe 303 355 466 88 360 22 karmaNAnugRhIto'sau 240 kaSAyo
madhurastiktaH 481  /  /  kAlaM kRtvAbhavat krUro 243 karmaNAmiti vijJAya kaSTaM
yaireva jIvo'yaM kAlakramAt punargarbha 179 karmaNASTaprakAreNa 307
kasyaciddazabhirvarSeH 161 kAladezavidhAnajJakarmabhUmimimAM prApya kasyAsi
duhitA bAle 150 kAladharma tataH kRtvA karmASTakavinirmakto 223 kAsike vAdayantI
ca 390 kAle dAnavidhi pAtre kalatraniviDAzliSTa- 229 kAkatAlIyayogena 118 kAlena
yAvatA yAtakalatrasya pRthorlakSmI kAkandI suvidhimUlaM 426 kAle pUrNe ca
saMpUrNa- 139 kalazabdA mahAratna- 345 kAcitkamalagarbhAbhA 55 kAle yadRcchayA
tatra 379 kalAkalApasaMyukta 207 kAcid kopavatI maunaM kA vA narAntarAzleSa- 372
kalAguNAbhirUpaM ca 448 kAciccandanalepena 230 kAcicchokarajAlena 175 kalAnAM
grahaNe candro kAcidRzyasamastAGgA 229 kASThabhAraM yathAsarvaM 244 kalAnAM
tisRNAmAsA 479 kAJcanAkhye pure cAya- 146 kiM kimetaditi kSipraM 197
kalAvizAradA netra- 227 kAJcanena citAbhUmI ki kampase bhaja sthairya 288
kalpadrumagRhAkArakAJcitpAdapraNAmena kiM karomyadhunA tAta kalpAnAM
koTibhistRpti kAcidabhyantaradvAra kiM ca sUryarajomukte 209 kalpapAdaparamyasya
kAcidbhAskarakarNasya kiM tahi dAruNaM kRtvA 213 kalpaprAsAdasaGkAzaM 439 kAntAM
yadi na pazyAmi 405 kiM dUtena varAkeNa 212 kalpavAsina ekasmin kAntAyAM
nidadhanetre 367 kiM na pazyasi hA mAtaH 206 kalpavRkSasamutpannaM kAntayA
kAntayA sAkaM 179 kiM na smarasi yatpUrva 302 kalpitAzca trayo varNAH kAntayA
rahitasyAsya 343 ki nAsmAdapi jAnAsi 460 kalyANaprakRtitvena 14 kAntimAneSa
zakreNa kiM nu garbhaparikliSTA kalyANamastu te rAjan 260 kAntirevAdharodbhUtA
ki mAM prahasitapuNyAM kalyANamitratAM yAtaH kAnyutsAritatArezA 152 kiM
rAjasevanaM zatru- 347 kalyANi kuzalaM sarva kAmakrodhAbhibhUtasya ki vayasya
viSaNNo'si 403 kalyANi mAbhaNI revaM 362 kAmabhogopamAnena 194 kiM vA
duHkhAccyute garbhe 404 kazciccakAra panthAna- 289 kAmarUpabhRto bANA 293 ki vA
duSTena kenApi 404 kazciccyutAyudhaM dRSTvA 289 kAmArthadharmasaMbhAra- 431 ki
vAdyApi na taM kopaM 406 kazcitkabandhatAM prAptaH kAmpilyaM kRtavarmA ca 426
kiM vAntarAyakarma syA- 353 kazcitkaraNa saMrudhya 289 kAmpilyanagare cyutvA 437
kiM vA mandAkinI mugdhA 403 kazcitkIlAlamAdAya 289 kAmpilyanagare rAjA 188
kiMzukaM ghanamatyantaM 339 kazcitkuntalabhAlasthAM kAyakleza iti proktaM 314
kiMzukotkarasaMkAzo 428 kazcitkUparamAdhAya 122 kAyena manasA vAcA 303
kiMcopakAriNaH kecit 255 kazcidAsphAlayadvAma kAyavAkcetasAM vRttiH 383 kintu
mAteva no zakyA 298 kazcidutlutya vegena kAyotsarga parityajya kimato'nyatparaM
kaSTaM 465 kazciddakSiNahastena 127 kArayan jIrNacaityAnAM 238 kimatra
bahunoktena kuru 211 kazcidRSTiM vicikSepa 127 kAritaM bharatenedaM kimatra
bahanoktena 9 kazcinnija: purItadbhiH 289 /  kAritA hariSeNena 188 kimarthamevaM
bhAsse tvaM kazcidvikSipya kopena 290 kAttikyAmupajAtAyAM 464
kimpAkaphalatulyebhyo 403 362 186 380 247 289 123 127 159 218 .

Page #559 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
509 295 411 152 401 128 à¤à¤¿à¤®à¥à¤à¤®à¤¾à¤¶à¥à¤°à¤¯à¤¾à¤®à¥à¤¯à¥à¤¤à¤ 332 à¤à¤¿à¤®à¥à¤¤à¤¦à¤¿à¤¤à¤¿ à¤¤à¥ à¤¤à¥à¤¨ à¤à¤¿à¤®à¥à¤¤à¤¦à¤¿à¤¤à¤¿ à¤¨à¤¾à¤¥
à¤¤à¥à¤µà¤ à¤à¤¿à¤®à¥à¤¤à¤¦à¤¿à¤¤à¤¿ à¤ªà¥à¤·à¥à¤à¤¶à¥à¤ 200 à¤à¤¿à¤®à¥à¤¢à¥à¤µà¤®à¥à¤¤à¤¾à¤¨à¥à¤¢à¤¾ 173 à¤à¤¿à¤¯à¤¤à¥à¤¯à¤ªà¤¿ à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤¯à¤¾à¤¤à¥à¤½à¤¥ 370
à¤à¤¿à¤°à¤£à¥à¤à¤¿à¤¨à¤à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥à¤°à¤¸à¥à¤¯ à¤à¤¿à¤°à¤¤à¤¾à¤ à¤ªà¥à¤·à¥à¤ªà¤¨à¤¿à¤à¤°à¤ 104 à¤à¤¿à¤°à¥à¤à¤ à¤¬à¤¿à¤­à¥à¤°à¤¤à¤ à¤¨à¤¾à¤¨à¤¾ 183 à¤à¤¿à¤°à¥à¤à¥ à¤à¤µà¤à¥ à¤à¤¾à¤ªà¤¿
232 à¤à¤¿à¤·à¥à¤à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤§à¤¨à¤à¤°à¥ à¤°à¤®à¥à¤¯à¥ 207 à¤à¤¿à¤·à¥à¤à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤§à¥à¤¨à¤¾à¤ªà¤¿ à¤¨à¤¿à¤à¥à¤·à¤¿- 130
à¤à¤¿à¤·à¥à¤à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤§à¥à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥à¤°à¤¸à¥à¤¤à¤®à¤­à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤à¤¾- 411 à¤à¤¿à¤·à¥à¤à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤§à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤µà¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤¸à¤ 5 à¤à¤¿à¤·à¥à¤à¥à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤®à¥à¤¦à¤¨à¤à¤°à¥ 208
à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤¤à¤¯à¤¨à¥à¤¤à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤ à¤à¥à¤£à¤¾à¤¨à¥à¤µà¤ 345 à¤à¥à¤à¤à¤¾à¤¨à¤¾à¤®à¤¿à¤µà¥à¤¦à¤¾à¤°à¥ 292 à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤¤à¤¿à¤¤à¤ à¤¸à¥à¤·à¤®à¤¸à¥à¤¤à¤¿à¤¸à¥à¤°à¥ 429
à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤¤à¤¿à¤¶à¥à¤à¥à¤²à¤¸à¥à¤¤à¤¤à¥à¤½à¤ªà¤¶à¥à¤¯à¤¦à¥ 99 à¤à¥à¤²à¤¾à¤²à¤ªà¤à¤²à¤à¥à¤à¤¨à¥à¤¨à¤à¥à¤à¥à¤°à¤¨à¥à¤¥à¤ à¤µà¥à¤¦à¤¸à¤à¤à¥à¤à¤ à¤ à¤à¥à¤à¤à¤¾à¤¨à¤¾à¤ à¤µà¤¿à¤§à¥à¤¤à¤¾à¤¨à¤¿
à¤à¥à¤à¥à¤®à¥à¤¬à¥ à¤à¥à¤·à¤¿à¤¤à¤¿à¤ªà¤¾à¤²à¤¾à¤¯ 343 à¤à¥à¤ à¤¾à¤°à¥à¤°à¤¸à¤¿à¤­à¤¿à¤¶à¥à¤à¤à¥à¤°à¤ 308 à¤à¥à¤¡à¥à¤®à¤²à¥à¤¦à¥à¤¦à¥à¤ªà¤¿à¤¤à¥à¤½à¤¶à¥à¤à¤ 339
à¤à¥à¤¤à¥à¤¹à¤²à¤¾à¤¦à¤¿à¤¤à¤¿ à¤§à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤¤à¥à¤µà¤¾ 246 à¤à¥à¤¨à¥à¤¥à¥à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤­à¥à¤¤à¤¿à¤¸à¤¤à¥à¤¤à¥à¤µà¤¾à¤¨à¤¾à¤ à¤à¥à¤¨à¥à¤¥à¥à¤µà¤°à¥ à¤ªà¤°à¤¤à¤¸à¥à¤¤à¤¸à¥à¤¯ 436
à¤à¥à¤¦à¥à¤·à¥à¤à¥à¤¯à¤¾ à¤à¤µà¤¿à¤¤à¥ à¤²à¤¿à¤à¥à¤à¥ 247 à¤à¥à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¤¶à¥à¤­à¥à¤°à¤¸à¤®à¤¾à¤µà¤°à¥à¤¤à¤à¥à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¤¶à¥à¤­à¥à¤°à¤ à¤¸à¤®à¥à¤¤à¥à¤¤à¥à¤à¥à¤à¥ à¤à¥à¤ªà¤¿à¤¤à¥à¤¨à¥à¤¤à¤¿
à¤¸à¤¾ à¤¤à¥à¤¨ 374 à¤à¥à¤ªà¤¿à¤¤à¥ à¤®à¤¯à¤¿ à¤¶à¤à¥à¤°à¥ à¤µà¤¾ 180 à¤à¥à¤¬à¥à¤° à¤à¤µ à¤¸à¤¦à¥à¤­à¥à¤¤à¤¿à¤ 416 à¤à¥à¤¬à¥à¤°à¤¦à¤¤à¥à¤¤à¤¨à¤¾à¤®à¤¾ à¤
à¤à¥à¤­à¤¾à¤µà¤à¤¹à¤¨à¤¾à¤¤à¥à¤¯à¤¨à¥à¤¤à¤ 347 à¤à¥à¤®à¤¾à¤°à¥ à¤µà¥à¤°à¤¤à¤à¤¸à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤¨à¥à¤¤à¥ 324 à¤à¥à¤®à¤¾à¤°à¥à¤à¤¸à¤à¥à¤à¤®à¥à¤¤à¥à¤¸à¥à¤à¥à¤¯ 248
à¤¶à¥à¤²à¥à¤à¤¾à¤¨à¤¾à¤®à¤à¤¾à¤°à¤¾à¤¦à¥à¤¯à¤¨à¥à¤à¥à¤°à¤®à¤ à¤à¥à¤®à¥à¤¦à¥à¤°à¥à¤¤à¥à¤ªà¤²à¤ à¤ªà¤¦à¥à¤®à¤ 174 à¤à¥à¤®à¥à¤­à¤à¤°à¥à¤£ à¤à¤¤à¤¿ à¤à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤¤à¤¿ 178
à¤à¥à¤®à¥à¤­à¤à¤¾à¤°à¥à¤½à¤­à¤µà¤¦à¥à¤°à¤¾à¤à¤¾ 87 à¤à¥à¤®à¥à¤­à¤à¤¾à¤°à¥à¤½à¤­à¤µà¤¨à¥à¤®à¥à¤¤à¥à¤µà¤¾ 87 à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤¤à¥ à¤¯à¥ à¤à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¥à¤°à¤¾à¤£à¤¾à¤ 321 à¤à¥à¤°à¥
à¤¨à¤¾à¤¥ à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤¸à¤¾à¤¦à¤ à¤®à¥ 388 à¤à¥à¤°à¥ à¤ªà¥à¤à¥à¤¯ à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤¸à¤¾à¤¦à¤ à¤®à¥ à¤à¥à¤°à¥ à¤¸à¤à¥à¤à¥ à¤à¤°à¤ à¤¦à¤¾à¤¤à¥- 211 à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤µà¤¤à¥ à¤®à¤¾à¤¨à¤¸à¥
à¤°à¥à¤ªà¤ à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤µà¤¤à¥à¤½à¤¨à¥à¤à¤¶à¥ à¤µà¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤ 241 à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤µà¤¨à¥à¤¤à¤ à¤¬à¤§à¤¿à¤°à¤ à¤²à¥à¤à¤ à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤µà¤¨à¥à¤¤à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤°à¤¾à¤§à¤¨à¤ à¤¯à¤¤à¥à¤¨à¤¾à¤¤à¥
156 à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤µà¤¨à¥à¤®à¤¨à¥à¤¹à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¤²à¥à¤²à¤¾ à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤µà¤¨à¥à¤¨à¤¿à¤µ à¤¬à¤²à¤¿ à¤ªà¤®à¥à¤ 461 à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤µà¤¾à¤£à¤ à¤à¥à¤µà¤£à¤¨à¤ à¤µà¤¾à¤¤à¤¾ 181
à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤µà¤¾à¤£à¤¾ à¤¯à¤¶à¤¸à¥ à¤°à¤à¥à¤·à¤¾ 288 à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤¨à¥à¤®à¤¹à¥à¤¯à¤ à¤¹à¤¿à¤¤à¤ à¤¤à¤¾à¤¤à¥ 348 à¤à¥à¤²à¤à¤§à¤°à¥à¤½à¤ªà¤¿ à¤¤à¤¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤µ
à¤à¥à¤²à¤à¥à¤°à¤®à¤¸à¤®à¤¾à¤¯à¤¾à¤¤à¤¾à¤ 299 à¤à¥à¤²à¤à¥à¤°à¤®à¤¾à¤à¤¤à¤ à¤°à¤¾à¤à¥à¤¯à¤ 454 à¤à¥à¤²à¤à¥à¤°à¤®à¥à¤£ à¤¸à¤¾à¤¸à¥à¤®à¤¾à¤à¤à¥à¤²à¤ªà¥à¤¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤£
à¤à¤¾à¤¸à¤¨à¥à¤¨à¤à¥à¤²à¤®à¥à¤¤à¤à¥à¤à¤à¥à¤¨à¥à¤¤à¤¾à¤¨à¤¾à¤ 41 à¤à¥à¤²à¤µà¥à¤¦à¥à¤§à¤¾à¤¸à¥à¤¤à¤¦à¤¸à¥à¤®à¤¾à¤à¤ à¤à¥à¤²à¤¾à¤¨à¤¾à¤®à¤¿à¤¤à¤¿ à¤¸à¤°à¥à¤µà¥à¤·à¤¾à¤ 434
à¤à¥à¤²à¤¾à¤²à¤à¤à¥à¤°à¤¸à¤à¤¸à¥à¤¥à¤¾à¤¨à¥ à¤à¥à¤²à¥à¤à¤¿à¤¤à¤ à¤¤à¤¥à¤¾à¤ªà¥à¤¦à¤ 156 à¤à¥à¤µà¤¾à¤à¥à¤¯à¤®à¥à¤à¤°à¤¾à¤ à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤°à¤¾ 430
à¤à¥à¤¶à¤¾à¤¸à¥à¤¤à¥à¤°à¤®à¥à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¹à¥à¤à¤à¤¾à¤°à¥à¤ 431 à¤à¥à¤¹à¥à¤¤à¥à¤à¤¾à¤²à¤¸à¤à¤ªà¥à¤°à¥à¤£- 116 à¤à¥à¤à¤¿à¤¤à¤ à¤ªà¤à¥à¤·à¤¿à¤¸à¤à¤à¤¾à¤¨à¤¾à¤ 19
à¤à¥à¤ªà¤¾à¤¦à¥à¤¦à¥à¤§à¥à¤¤à¤®à¥à¤à¤¸à¥à¤®à¤¾- 310 à¤à¥à¤²à¤¦à¥à¤µà¤¯à¤¨à¤¿à¤ªà¤¾à¤¤à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¯à¥ à¤à¥à¤à¥à¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤£ à¤¦à¤§à¤¤à¥ à¤à¤°à¥à¤­à¤à¥à¤¤à¤ à¤à¥à¤à¤à¤£à¤¸à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤ªà¤¿
357 à¤à¥à¤¤à¤ à¤®à¤¯à¤¾à¤¤à¥à¤¯à¤¨à¥à¤¤à¤®à¤¿à¤¦à¤ à¤¨ à¤¯à¥à¤à¥à¤¯à¤ 477 à¤à¥à¤¤à¤à¥à¤²à¤¾à¤¹à¤²à¤¾à¤ à¤ªà¥à¤°à¥à¤µ 386 à¤à¥à¤¤à¤à¤®à¥à¤­à¥à¤°à¤¹à¥à¤à¤à¤¾à¤°à¤¾- 464
à¤à¥à¤¤à¤à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¤¨à¤à¤°à¥à¤à¥à¤½à¤¨à¥à¤¯à¤ 123 à¤à¥à¤¤à¤ªà¥à¤à¤¸à¥à¤¤à¤¤à¤ à¤à¥à¤¶à¥à¤à¤¿à¤¤à¥ à¤à¥à¤¤à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤¤à¥à¤¯à¤à¥à¤à¤à¤°à¥à¤®à¤¾à¤£à¤ 234
à¤à¥à¤¤à¤®à¤à¥à¤à¤²à¤à¤¾à¤°à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤¯ 151 à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¯à¥à¤¦à¥à¤§à¤¶à¥à¤à¤¿à¤°à¤ à¤à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤¨à¥ à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¶à¥à¤°à¤®à¤ à¤¸ à¤¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤¦à¥à¤·à¥à¤à¥ 435
à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¶à¤¤à¥à¤°à¥à¤¸à¤®à¥à¤¹à¤¾à¤¨à¥à¤¤à¤ 187 à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¸à¤à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¦à¤¿à¤µà¥à¤¯à¤¸à¥à¤¤à¥à¤°à¥ 473 à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¸à¥à¤¤à¤¦à¤°à¥à¤¥à¤®à¤¾à¤à¥à¤ª- 411
à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¾à¤à¥à¤à¤²à¤¿à¤°à¥à¤à¤à¥ à¤¸à¥à¤µà¤ªà¥à¤¨à¤¾à¤¨à¥ 489 à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¾à¤à¥à¤à¤²à¤¿: à¤ªà¤ªà¥à¤°à¤à¥à¤ à¤¸à¥à¤µ- 445 à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¾à¤à¥à¤à¤²à¤¿à¤°à¤¥à¥à¤µà¤¾à¤ 460
à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¾à¤à¥à¤à¤¹à¤¾à¤¸à¤®à¤¨à¥à¤¯à¥à¤¨ à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¾à¤¨à¤¤à¤¿à¤°à¥à¤¨à¥à¤ªà¥à¤£à¥à¤µ 474 à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¾à¤¨à¥à¤à¤®à¤¨à¤¾ à¤¸à¤à¥à¤¯à¤¾ 372 à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¾à¤¨à¥à¤¤à¤µà¤¨à¥à¤¦à¤¨à¤¾à¤à¤¾à¤°à¥-
182 à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¾à¤¨à¥à¤¤à¤¸à¥à¤¯ à¤¤à¤¤à¥ à¤¯à¥à¤¦à¥à¤§- 199 à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¾à¤°à¥à¤¥à¤ à¤¸à¤¾à¤à¤ªà¥à¤°à¤¤à¤ à¤à¤¾à¤¤à¥ 236 à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¾à¤°à¥à¤¥ à¤®à¤¨à¥à¤¯à¤®à¤¾à¤¨à¤¾ à¤¸à¥à¤µà¤
394 à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¾à¤°à¥à¤¥à¤¾ à¤à¤ªà¤¿ à¤¯à¥ à¤¸à¤¨à¥à¤¤à¥ 383 à¤à¥à¤¤à¤¾à¤°à¥à¤¥à¥ à¤¯à¤¦à¥à¤¯à¤¸à¥ à¤¸à¥à¤·à¥à¤à¥ 255 à¤à¥à¤¤à¥ à¤®à¥ à¤®à¤¨à¥à¤¦à¤­à¤¾à¤à¥à¤¯à¤¾à¤¯à¤¾à¤
406 à¤à¥à¤¤à¥à¤ªà¤²à¤®à¥à¤­à¤ à¤¸à¥à¤µà¤ªà¥à¤¨à¥à¤½à¤ªà¤¿ 203 à¤à¥à¤¤à¥à¤½à¤°à¥à¤§à¤à¤à¥à¤°à¤¿à¤¨à¤¾à¤®à¤¾à¤¯à¤ 491 à¤à¥à¤¤à¥à¤¤à¥à¤½à¤ªà¤¿ à¤à¤¸à¥à¤¯à¤à¤¿à¤¨à¥à¤®à¤°à¥à¤§à¤¾
290 à¤à¥à¤¤à¥à¤¯à¤ à¤à¤¾à¤²à¤¾à¤¤à¤¿à¤ªà¤¾à¤¤à¥à¤¨ à¤à¥à¤¤à¥à¤¯à¤ à¤à¤¿ à¤¬à¤¾à¤¨à¥à¤§à¤µà¥à¤°à¥à¤¯à¥à¤¨

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 509 295 411 152 401 128 kimekamAzrayAmyetaM 332 kimetaditi to tena kimetaditi
nAtha tvaM kimetaditi pRSTazca 200 kimUDhevamutAnUDhA 173 kiyatyapi prayAte'tha
370 kiraNaijinacandrasya kiratAM puSpanikaraM 104 kirITaM bibhrataM nAnA 183
kirITI kavacI cApi 232 kiSkindhanagare ramye 207 kiSkindhenApi nikSi- 130
kiSkindhendrastamabhyAgA- 411 kiSkindhapuravinyAsaM 5 kiSkupramodanagare 208
kIrtayantyAM guNAnevaM 345 kIcakAnAmivodAro 292 kIrtitaH suSamastisro 429
kIrtizuklastato'pazyad 99 kIlAlapaTalacchannakugranthaM vedasaMjJaM ca kuTajAnAM
vidhutAni kuTumbI kSitipAlAya 343 kuThArairasibhizcakraH 308
kuDmaloddIpito'zokaH 339 kutUhalAditi dhyAtvA 246 kunthuprabhRtisattvAnAM
kunthvarau paratastasya 436 kudRSTyA gavito liGgI 247
kundazubhrasamAvartakundazubhraH samuttuGge kupiteneti sA tena 374 kupite mayi
zakre vA 180 kubera iva sadbhUtiH 416 kuberadattanAmA ca kubhAvagahanAtyantaM
347 kumArI vratakasyAnte 324 kumArgasaGgamutsRjya 248 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH
kumudairutpalaH padmaH 174 kumbhakarNa iti khyAti 178 kumbhakAro'bhavadrAjA 87
kumbhakAro'bhavanmRtvA 87 kurute yo jinendrANAM 321 kuru nAtha prasAdaM me 388
kuru pUjya prasAdaM me kuru sajjo karaM dAtu- 211 kurvato mAnase rUpaM
kurvato'nekazo vyAkhyAM 241 kurvantaM badhiraM lokaM kurvantyArAdhanaM yatnAt
156 kurvanmanoharAM lIlA kurvanniva bali pamaiH 461 kurvANaM kvaNanaM vAtA 181
kurvANA yazaso rakSA 288 kuryAnmahyaM hitaM tAto 348 kulaMdharo'pi tatraiva
kulakramasamAyAtAM 299 kulakramAgataM rAjyaM 454 kulakrameNa sAsmAkakulaputreNa
cAsannakulametacchakuntAnAM 41 kulavRddhAstadasmAkaM kulAnAmiti sarveSAM 434
kulAlacakrasaMsthAno kulocitaM tathApIdaM 156 kuvAkyamukharAH krUrA 430
kuzAstramuktahuMkAraiH 431 kuhetujAlasaMpUrNa- 116 kUjitaH pakSisaMghAnAM 19
kUpAduddhRtamekasmA- 310 kuladvayanipAtinyo kRcchreNa dadhatI garbhakRtaM
chekagaNasyApi 357 kRtaM mayAtyantamidaM na yogyaM 477 kRtakolAhalAH pUrva 386
kRtagambhIrahuMkArA- 464 kRtacandanacarce'nyaH 123 kRtapUjastataH kaizcit
kRtapratyaGgakarmANaM 234 kRtamaGgalakAryAya 151 kRtayuddhazciraM khinno
kRtazramaH sa tairdRSTo 435 kRtazatrusamUhAntaH 187 kRtasaMgItadivyastrI 473
kRtastadarthamATopa- 411 kRtAJjalirjagI svapnAn 489 kRtAJjali: papraccha sva-
445 kRtAJjalirathovAca 460 kRtATTahAsamanyena kRtAnatirnRpeNaiva 474
kRtAnugamanA sakhyA 372 kRtAntavandanAkArai- 182 kRtAntasya tato yoddha- 199
kRtArthaH sAMprataM jAto 236 kRtArtha manyamAnA svaM 394 kRtArthA api ye santo
383 kRtArtho yadyaso sRSTI 255 kRte me mandabhAgyAyAH 406 kRtopalambhaM
svapne'pi 203 kRto'rdhacakrinAmAyaM 491 kRtto'pi kasyacinmardhA 290 kRtyaM
kAlAtipAtena kRtyaM ki bAndhavairyena kRtrimAkRtrimairaGgai- 480 kRtvA
gurujanApRcchAM 361 kRtvA catugato nityaM 309 kRtvA ciramasau rAjyaM 196
kRtvAJjali namasyAM ca 222 kRtvA dharma tataH kecit 91 kRtvA narakapAlAnAM 201
kRtvA pANigRhItAM ca 150 kRtvA pANigRhItAM tAM 224 kRtvApi hi ciraM saGgaM 83
kRtvA puSpAntakaM dhvastaM 159 291 135 190 30 169 462

Page #560 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
510 Padma Purana 85 265 433 Having done so much evil, 138 Having killed living
beings, 184 Having risen, sitting, 171 Having done proper conduct, 171 Having
become a good disciple, 434 Having smiled, then the goddess, 152 Having smiled,
then she said, 367 Mixed with worms, 431 The strength of the people also
perishes in the dark fortnight, 431 Kekaya, Drona, and clouds, 478 Some, having
reached the throat, 484 Some, by special action, 484 Some, the roar of the lion,
103 Some, the color of the conch shell, 103 Some, there, sang a star, 484 Some,
by the bonds of karma, 68 Some, with thin karma, 25 Some, with virtuous karma,
25 Some, having endured great penance, 25 Some, having attained great beings, 24
Some, having attained right faith, 484 Some, from extreme arrogance, 484 Some,
in deep samsara, 484 Some, not having attained destruction, 484 Some, like
snakes, raised up, 484 Some, fallen to the ground, 484 Some, continuous, 25
Ketuki dust, white, 485 The shadow of the flag, a great flame, 485 With a
shining armlet, 263 Who, then, do they worship, these colors? 150 Some, from
excessive difference, 484 Frightened by the roar of the lion, 387 The king of
the Kekayas, 7 The messenger of the son of Kaikasi, 7 The son of Kaikasi, 7 The
story of the Kekayas, 7 The shaking of Kailasa, 418 Even reaching Lanka, 418
With anger, he, 418 In the peaks of Kailasa, 402 With anger filled heart, 135
With anger, 114 The mountain of Kailasa, 418 Anger, pride, and illusion, 314
Some, their efforts, 458 They are distressed, freed from wealth, 458 The sound
of cuckoos, 338 Those ascetics, by whom, 192 With billions of parrot beaks, 11
Time has passed for us, from distress, 265 Billions of billions, they show, 429
Eight kotis, ten are mentioned, 61 Sometimes, Gandharvas sing, 78 Another, with
great strength, 73 Sometimes, playing in the surrounding area, 216 I have an
enemy without reason, 394 Sometimes, with a form of hair standing on end, 216
This one, a great hero, 215 Sometimes, the sound of swallowing, 287 The son of
Kauleya, and the jackal, 74 Sometimes, with lightning flashes, 216 This one,
with bad luck, blows, 380 Sometimes, with confidence, asleep, 216 This one,
whose name is Vaishravana, 181 With the sound, then, of those sitting, 182
Kaushambi, with great enjoyment, 425 Where is dharma, where is anger? 217
Kaushiki, greater there, 147 Sometimes, by the pure one, 216 The king of Kosala,
454 For the sake of momentary happiness, 308 In order, thus, of the Jinas, 308
In an instant, attained, entered, 157 In order, he attained, 454 From an
instant, from an instant, 174 Gradually, he attained youth, 140 In an instant,
and attainment, 344 Being done, with devotion, 110 There is no wound on my body,
342 Knowing this being done, 348 The foot, wounded by an arrow, 377 By action,
the god, his, 270 Those who are engaged in the treatment of wounds, 377 Those
who are engaged in giving in actions, 377 Thousands of Kshatriyas, 415 Seeing
him playing, 415 Kshatriyas, they are engaged in the treatment of wounds, 448
They play, immersed in enjoyment, 448 Falling, giving, shining, 292 They sing,
they fly, they give, 449 By forgiveness, by forgiveness, they are equal, 319
Playing with women in the water, 230 Forgiveness, gentleness, association, 314
When will I play, good one? 225 Support by the forgiving, 298 Having bought, by
the decree of fate, 75 Having said, "I am patient," then, 364 The sight of that
angry one, 176 As if thrown in a good field, 310 I would be cruel, as if
abandoned, 310 As if thrown in a barren land, 405 They quickly go to great joy,
322 Cruel ones, having given that, 311 The karma done in the past, diminished,
301 Even in my hand, nearness, 361 In the diminished, splendor trees, 458 Cruel
ones, thus said, quickly, 458 Born from milk watering, 212 Having said, "He is
unconscious from anger," 212 The clouds, who drink the ocean of milk, 266 72 253
373 353 202

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 510 padmapurANe 85 265 433 kRtvApyevaM subahuduritaM 138 kRtvA prANibadhaM
jantu- 184 kRtvAbhyutthAnamAsInakRtvA yathocitAcAra- 171 kRtvA suprabhaziSyatvaM
434 kRtvA smitaM tato devI 152 kRtvA smitamathApacchya 367
kRmiprakArasaMmizrakRSIbalajanAzcaiva kRSNapakSe kSayaM yAti 431 kekayA
droNameghazca 478 kecitkaNThe samAsAdya kecitkarmavizeSeNa kecitkesariNo nAdaM
kecicchaGkhadalacchAyAH 103 kecittatra jagustAraM 484 kecittu karmapAzena 68
kecittu tanukarmANo kecittu puNyakarmANaH 25 kecittu sutapaH kRtvA 25
kecitprApya mahAsattvA 24 kecitsamyagmati bhejukecidatyantadhRSTatvAt 484
kecidgambhIrasaMsArakecidvinAzamaprApte kecinnAgA ivodvRttAH kecinipatitA bhUmau
kecinnirantarAyaNa 25 ketakIdhUlidhavalA ketucchAyA mahAjvAle 485
keyUrakaradIptAMsaM 263 ke vA bhajanti te varNA 150 keSAJcittvativailakSyAt 484
kesaridhvanivitrastA 387 kaikayyAvarato rAjyakaikasIsUnunA dUtaH
kaikasInandanenAtha kaikaseyyAzca vRttAntaM 7 kailAsakampo'pi sametya laGkA418 .
krodhavastatastasya kailAsakUTakalpeSu krodhasaMpUrNacittena 135 6.
sakUTasaMkAzA- 402 krodhasaMbhArarodrAGgA 114 kailAsamandarAyA krodho mAnastathA
mAyA 314 kaizcittacceSTitaM teSAM klizyante dravyanirmuktA 458 kokilAnAM
svanazcakre 338 klIbAste tApasA yena 192 koTibhiH zukacaJcunAM 11 klezAt kAlo
gato'smAkaM 265 koTikoTyo darzateSAM 429 klezAdiyuktatA cAsya 256 koTyazcASTau
dazoddiSTA 61 kvacita kroDanti gandharvAH 78 ko'paro'sti madudvIryo 73
kvacitparisarakrIDat 216 ko'pyakAraNavairI me 394 kvacitpulakitAkAraM 216
ko'pyayaM sumahAn vIraH 215 kvacidgrasaditi dhvAno 287 kauleyako zRgAlau ca 74
kvacidvidyullatAzliSTa 216 ko vAti mandabhAgyo'yaM 380 kvacidvizrabdhasaMsupta
216 ko'sau vaizravaNo nAma 181 kvaNanena tato'sInAM 182 kauzAmbI ca mahAbhogA
425 kva dharmaH kva ca saMkrodho 217 kauzikI jyAyasI tatra 147 kvacitpAvaneneva
216 kausalasthanarendrasya 454 kSaNamAtrasukhasyArthe 308 krameNeti jinendrANA
kSaNAt prAptaM praviSTazca 157 krameNa sa pariprApto 454 kSaNAdArAt kSaNAdre 174
kramAta sa yauvanaM prApta- 140 kSaNena ca pariprAptI 344 kriyamANaM tu
tadbhaktyA 110 /  /  kSataM na cAsti me dehe 342 kriyamANamimaM jJAtvA 348  /
kSatajenAcito pAdo 377 kriyayaiva ca devo'sya 270 kSatatrANe niyuktA ye kriyAsu
dAnayuktAsu kSatriyANAM sahasrANi krIDantamiti taM dRSTvA 415  /  /  kSatriyAstu
kSatatrANA krIDanti bhoganimagnAH 448 kSaraddAnI sphuraddhema 292 kroDanti
syanti yacchanti 449 kSamayA kSamayA tulyAH 319 krIDantIbhirjale strIbhi- 230
kSamAto mRdutAsaGgA 314 krIDiSyAmi kadA sAdha 225 kSamAvatA samarthana 298
krItvA daivaniyogAttA- 75 kSAntamityudito'thA sA 364 kruddhasya tasya no dRSTiM
176 kSiptaM yathaiva satkSetre 310 krUrayeyaM yathA tyaktA kSiptaM yathoSare
bIjakarasaMdhAnadhAriNyA 405 kSipraM yAnti mahAnandaM 322 krarAste dApayitvA tad
311 kSINaM purAkRtaM karma 301 kare'pi mayi sAmIpyA- 361 kSINeSu dyutivRkSeSu
krUrairityuditaiH kSipraM 458 kSIrasekAdivodbhUtakrodhamUcchita ityuktvA 212
kSIrodapAyino meghA 266 72 253 373 353 202 .

Page #561 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Translated to English, preserving Jain terms:  The restless one, afflicted by
hunger and thirst, holds 28 kshetras (realms) in which the auspicious Kshemankar
Muni's feet are placed, 454. 103, 352. Throwing up the dust, the donkey (khara)
142, of the wicked Kharadushana Bhadra, 355, the date palm, emblic myrobalan,
and lotus are destroyed as if they have gone to the most wretched kshetras
(realms) of the Khechakas (celestial beings), 127. Thousands of Khecharas
(celestial beings), 209, O blessed Khechari (celestial being), 77, angered by
many Khecharas (celestial beings), 73. The famous one, named Vahni-shikha, 69,
the famous Vrishabhasena, 452, 269. [Ga] The index of the verses by initial
letter: The departed Dasharatha, 484, went out in search, 271. By movement,
body, and yoga, 23. The other one is deeply bound, 123. Increased by movement,
coming, and staying, 112. One sang a powerful song, 128. By movement, he
conquers this mind, 156. All by the Gandharva rite, 175. Going and paying
obeisance, 219. By the Gandhara and Udichya designations, 478. Going to the
provinces, 264. Sing together with their wives, 44. Going, speak boldly, 139.
The mountains are extremely lofty, 35. Going, circumambulating, 116. Where the
mountains are inaccessible, 157. Going to the abode of the gods, 32. Then the
Muni of Gujja, 182. Going to Vaisravana, 182. Arising from the contemplation of
qualities, 487. Going to the Shilakavata, 372. Engaged in the contemplation of
qualities, 124. With maces, spears, and javelins, 287. In the combination of
qualities and defects, the qualities, 4. With maces, spears, and arrows, 129. In
the combination of qualities and defects, the defects, 4. The two ornaments
spoke, 479. Overwhelmed by the form of qualities, 194. Desiring to go, as a
lame, 59. The gods began to go. The one named Gunasagara, addressed the
Gandharva maiden, 390. These are the qualities of this one in the Gandharva city
of song, 93. Endowed with excellent qualities and ornaments, 331. To the
Gandharva city of song, 335. Your qualities are renowned, 420. The Gandharva
also did for both, 392. He who is in the enumeration of the virtuous, 148. By
the Gandharva rites, the luster, 164. When the qualities are being contemplated,
he will go to the lord of Iladhya, 335. He is attracted by these qualities, 171.
Then Garuda took the weapon, 293. By your noble qualities, O lord, 121. Garuda
embraced, 294. His quality is the whole world, 49. By the roar of the clouds,
267. His quality is the whole world, 345. By the extremely fierce roar, 462. The
teachers by the ultimate truth, 298. Increased by the wind of pride, 397. The
teacher, the foot of SÄ«mandhara, is to be known, 425. Even the Gavita, by the
sciences, 156. Seeing the teacher, the guru of the demons, 397. The fragrance of
the cheek, 198. When the teachers are honored, 165. This one with the flow of
blood, 358. Through the aperture of the cave, 421. The woman emerged from the
aperture of the cave, 146. Performing this household duty, 321. Some facing the
apertures, 205. This house is empty by her, 402.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kSuttRSNA vyAkulazcAsau 28 kSetrANi dadhate yasmin kSemaGkaramuneH pAveM 454
103 352 kharaM kharaH khamutkSipya 142 kharadUSaNabhadrasya 355
khajUrAmalakInIpakhidyamAnA mradiSTheSu khile gataM yathA kSetra khecarANAM
vilakSANAM 127 khecarANAM sahasrANi 209 khecarAka dhanyo'si 77 khecarairbahubhiH
kruddhaH 73 khyAto vahnizikho nAmnA 69 khyAto vRSabhaseno'sya guNavatasamRddhena
452 269 [ga] zlokAnAmakArAdhanukramaH 511 gato dazaratho'pyasya 484 gaveSaNe
viniSkrAntaH 271 gatyA kAyaistathA yogai- 23 gADhamapyaparo baddha- 123
gatyAgamanasaMvRddha- 112 gAnaM balitamekena 128 gatyA jayedayaM citta- 156
gAndharvavidhinA sarvA 175 gatvA ca praNatiM kRtvA 219 gAndhArodIcyasaMjJAbhyAM
478 gatvA janapadAzcaiva 264 gAyanti saha patnIbhi- 44 gatvA pragalbhanAM brahi
139 girayo'tyantamuttuGgAH 35 gatvA pradakSiNIkRtya 116 girayo durgamA yatra 157
gatvA vA devanilayaM 32 gujAkhyasya tato mUni 182 gatvA vaizravaNAyeya- 182
guNagrahaNasaMjAta- 487 gatvA zilAkavATAkhyo 372 guNacintApravRttAsu 124
gadAbhiH zaktibhiH kuntai- 287 guNadoSasamAhAre guNAn 4 gadAbhiH zaktibhirbANaH
129 guNadoSasamAhAre doSAn 4 gaditI dvAvalaMkArA- 479 guNarUpamadagrastA 194
gantukAmo yathA pagu- 59 gantumArebhire devA guNasAgaranAmAnaM
gandharvakAntayAvAci 390 guNA etAvataivAsya gandharvagItanagare 93
guNAlaGkArasaMpannaH 331 gandharvanagaraM gIta guNAvanamite cApe 15
gandharvAdikalAbhijJA 335 guNAstavAsya prathitA 420 gandharvo'pyanayozcakre 392
guNinAM gaNanAyAM yaH 148 gandharudvartanaiH kAnti- 164 guNeSu bhAvyamANeSu
gamiSyati pati ilAdhyaM 335 guNaireSa samAkRSTaH 171 garuDAstraM tato dadhyo 293
/  guNairnAtha tavodAraiH 121 garutmatA kRtAzleSo 294  /  /  guNastava jagatsava
49 gajitena payodAnAM 267 guNastasya jagatsava 345 gajitenAtiraudreNa 462
guravaH paramArthena 298 gardApavanasaMvRddha guruH pAdo'nayA dRSTayA 397
garbhadhAraNamAtreNa guruH zanaizcaraM pAda- 397 garbhasthAnarbhakAn vRddhA- 307
guruH sImandharo jJeyo 425 gavitA api vidyAbhiH 156 gururdaityaguruM dRSTvA 397
galadgaNDasthalAmoda- 198 guruSu prAptapUjeSu 165 galadrudhiradhAro'sau
guhAmukhasukhAsInagavAkSajAlamArgeNa 358 guhAyAmatra kasyAMcigavAkSajAlena
nirIkSamANA 421 guhAvadanamuktena gavAkSanyastasanArI 146 gRhadharmamimaM kRtvA
321 gavAkSamukhaniryAta- 28 gRhapatitakramaprApta 458 gavAkSAbhimukhAH kAzcit
205 gRhametattayA zUnyaM 402 pakra 413 78 290 231 231 288 354 128 141 313
paGgeva vAhanIzasya gacchatAM dakSiNAzAyAM gajanAsAsamAkRSTa- gajavAjinarANAM ca
gajavAjisamArUDhAH gajazUtkRtanissarpagajA gajaiH samaM saktA gajA gajaistataH
sArddha garghanAdhanAkAraiH gaNanAthairmahAsattvaigatabhramo'nilazcaNDo
gatamUrcchastu saMkruddhaH gatayaH karmaNAM kasya gatastrikUTazikharaM gatA
rAkSasasainyasya gatAzcAnumatAstena gatitrayagataprANi gate tasminmanazcaure
gate rAjanyamAtyena 386 376 473 233 234 178 22 376 396 475

Page #562 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
512 Padmapurana Ghanaughadiv nirghata: 197 Ghora: patanti nirghata: 142
Ghoshasenaparam Bhodi- 440 82 300 [c] 92 489 239 147 460 224 Grihana jeevanam
natha grihitam nayakam jnatva 415 Grihitaprabhrita gatva 225
Grihitabhusanatyant- 205 Grihitamandalane grihithridayatasya grihitam ripuna
lakshmi 166 Grihitam sravakaih shaktya 462 Grihitamalashasthrabi- 40
Grihite'smin parishyand- 294 Grihitva kikasam kachhi- 289 Grihitva
kumbhamindro'pi 297 Grihitva cha kripayukt- 249 Grihitva modakan yataam 468
Grihitvevakhilatraina 149 Grihyatam kanyaka cheyam 262 Gotranasha kari cheshta
gotre paramparayato godandapathatulyeshu 430 Gopalaken sammantra go purani cha
tungani grasitveva vimunchantan 155 Grasta iva dishastena 140 Grahanam
parishishtaanam 397 Grahanam haridrusva cha 434 Graheshvabhimukhastheshu 169
Grame tatraiva vipro'bhut 69 Grahayitva cha tan kishku-105 [gh]
Ghaghaghaghayate'nyatra 287 Ghatate naakriterasyah 394 Ghana: shakha bhritaam
jajne 338 Dhanam kairavjam jalm ghanadukhavabaddhesh  ghanadhvanitavitrasta
ghanagamavinirmakt 463 Ghanaghanaravatrasta 462 Chatuhsamudra paryantan 207
Chatuhsamudra paryante chaturgatikasamsara chaturgatigataanek
chaturjnanopgadhatma chaturjnanopgadhatma chaturna praninamesha chaturna
lokapalanachaturdasha sahasrani 226 Chaturdasha swatite shu 72
Chatubhiradhikashiti purv- 432 Chatubhiradhikashitirabda 432 Chatubhih sahita
jneya: 429 Chaturangula manasca chaturvidham idam vachan 479 Chaturvidhasya
sanghasya 434 Chaturvidho janapado 242 Chandanena samalamya 45 Chandanadrava
digdhango 491 Chandanadrumasankashah 466 Chandram samastaya drishya 397
Chandrakantmani chhaya chandrakantsharirascha chandrakantivinirmaan
chandraadityapratispadhi chandraadityasame tasya chandrapadasraye ramye 120
Chandraabhas chandrasankashah chandraabhas cha parastasman chandrarshi vaya
karai: 227 Chandraloke tato lok- 271 Chandrasaladibhiryuktann 315
Champakksharakakara- 27 Champayam ath rudhayaam champeva vasupujyasya 427
Charanam shirasi nyasya charadbhihamsasanghate- 12 Chamanjalakasanshanna Chakara
cha samam bhi chakara viditartha cha 350 Chakara vipralapa cha 396 Chakra
sudarshanam amogha- 422 Chakrachapadhanaprasa- 414 Chakrachihnamasau bhu ktv 438
Chakradhvajo manigrivo 70 Chakravatparivartante 448 Chakravatidhwani nito
chakravatishriyam tavat chakravarti tato'prachcha chakravakiva duhkharta 239
Chakraankatanayo'pasyat chakraankapaksasampreetya 224 Chakraankitam shriyam bhu
ktv 82 Chakraarudham ivajasram . 352 Chakraahvav patipriita chakru'nye ravam
karne chakre cha mitra bhariyaayam 271 Chakrena lokapalanam 286 Chakrotpattim
cha saumitreh 81 Chakshuspakshmuputasang- 184 Chakshurmanasayo schouri
chakshushah putasancocho 23 Chakshusham vaguratulya 328 Chakshusho gocharibhuta
359 Chakshusmati tato'tite chakshusmanparastasmat 36 Chachara vaidyu tam tejo
462 Chanchalatvam samudbhut chanchupattamrunalanam 108 Chatuhpanchashadakhyatam
430 Chatuhsharanam ashritya 332 75 106 159 427 37 266 300   .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 512 padmapurANe ghanaughAdiva nirghAta: 197 ghorAH patanti nirghAtAH 142
ghoSasenaparAmbhodhi- 440 82 300 [ca] 92 489 239 147 460 224 gRhANa jIvanaM
nAtha gRhItaM nAyakaM jJAtvA 415 gRhItaprAbhRtA gatvA 225 gRhItabhUSaNAtyanta-
205 gRhItamaNDalAneNa gRhItahRdayA tasya gRhItAM ripuNA lakSmI 166 gRhItAM
zrAvakaiH zaktyA 462 gRhItAmalazastrAbhi- 40 gRhIte'smin pariSyanda- 294 gRhItvA
kIkasaM kazci- 289 gRhItvA kumbhamindro'pi 297 gRhItvA ca kRpAyukta- 249 gRhItvA
modakAn yAtAM 468 gRhItvevAkhilastraiNaM 149 gRhyatAM kanyakA ceyaM 262
gotranAzakarI ceSTA gotre paramparAyAto godaNDapathatulyeSu 430 gopAlakena
saMmantrya gopurANi ca tuGgAni grasitveva vimuJcantaM 155 grastA iva dizastena
140 grahANAM pariziSTAnAM 397 grahANAM haridRzvazca 434 graheSvabhimukhastheSu
169 grAme tatraiva vipro'bhUt 69 grAhayitvA ca tAn kiSku-105 [gha]
ghagghagghagghAyate'nyatra 287 ghaTate nAkRterasyAH 394 ghanaH zAkhAbhRtAM jajJe
338 dhanaM kairavajaM jAlaM ghanaduHkhAvabaddheSu ghanadhvanitavitrastA
ghanAgamavinirmakte 463 ghanAghanaravatrastA 462 catuHsamudraparyantaM 207
catuHsamudraparyante caturgatikasaMsAracaturgatigatAnekacaturjJAnopagUDhAtmA
caturjJAnopagUDhAtmA caturNA prANinAmeSA caturNA lokapAlAnAcaturdazasahasrANi
226 caturdazasvatIteSu 72 catubhiradhikAzItiH pUrva- 432 catubhiradhikAzItirabdA
432 catubhiH sahitA jJeyAH 429 caturaGgulamAnazca caturvidhamidaM vAcaM 479
caturvidhasya saMghasya 434 caturvidho janapado 242 candanena samAlamya 45
candanadravadigdhAGgo 491 candanadrumasaMkAzaH 466 candraM samastayA dRSTyA 397
candrakAntamaNicchAyA candrakAntazarIrAzcA
candrakAntivinirmANacandrAdityapratispaddhi candrAdityasame tasya
candrapAdAzraye ramye 120 candrAbhazcandrasaMkAzaH candrAbhazca parastasmAn
candrarazmi vayAkAraiH 227 candrAloke tato loka- 271 candrazAlAdibhiryuktAn 315
campakakSArakAkAra- 27 campAyAmatha ruddhAyAM campeva vAsupUjyasya 427 caraNaM
zirasi nyasya caradbhihaMsasaMghAtai- 12 camaMjAlakasaJchannA cakAra ca samaM
bhI cakAra viditArtha ca 350 cakAra vipralApaM ca 396 cakraM sudarzanamamogha-
422 cakracApadhanaprAsa- 414 cakracihnAmasau bhuktvA 438 cakradhvajo maNigrIvo
70 cakravatparivartante 448 cakravatidhvani nIto cakravatizriyaM tAvat
cakravartI tato'pracchacakravAkIva duHkhArtA 239 cakrAGkatanayo'pazyat
cakrAGkapakSasaMprItyA 224 cakrAGkitAM zriyaM bhuktvA 82 cakrArUDhamivAjasraM .
352 cakrAhvava patiprItA cakruranye ravaM karNe cakre ca mitrabhAryAyAM 271
cakreNa lokapAlAnAM 286 cakrotpattiM ca saumitreH 81 cakSuHpakSmapuTAsaGga- 184
cakSurmAnasayozcaurI cakSuSaH puTasaMkoco 23 cakSuSAM vAgurAtulyA 328 cakSuSo
gocarIbhUtA 359 cakSuSmati tato'tIte cakSuSmAnaparastasmAt 36 cacAra vaidyutaM
tejo 462 caJcalatvaM samudbhUtacaJcUpAttamRNAlAnAM 108 catuHpaJcAzadAkhyAtaM 430
catuHzaraNamAzritya 332 75 106 159 427 37 266 300 .

Page #563 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Verse Index:  513 246 154 409 412 254 338 253 450 187 282 40 473 482 95 186
169 473 98 13 487 25 381 223 152 288 393 435 172 437 438 381 185 162 453 381 486
436 125 382 396 376 173 151 191 404 287 116 40 121 270 491 160 486 421 302 410
452 326 404 272 378 373 104 277 203 357 156 234 194 201 240 240 335 467 455 221
124 184 485 372 421 484 339 67 158 160 74 474 324 205 212

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH 513 246 154 calanmInamahAnakra cUrNitazca tataH zaila-
409 cAturmAsopavAsaM to cUNito'nena zailo'sau 412 cAturvaNyaM yathAnyacca 254
cUtasya maJjarIjAlaM 338 cAtuvidhyaM ca yajjAtyA 253 cUto'yaM kaNikAro'yaM 450
cApatrizUlanistriza- 187 ceTa yaccha samAyogaM 282 cAmaragrAhiNI kAcit 40
ceSTitaM vajrakarNasya cAmIkaramahAstambha- 473 ceSTopakaraNaM vANI 482 cAmuNDo
mAraNo bhISmo 95 caityakAnanabAhyAlI- 186 cAraH kazcidvAceti 169
caityaprabhAvikAsADhyaM 473 cAraNena samAdiSTaM caityAnAM vandanAM kattuM 98
cAraNairutsavAvAsaH 13 codayannAtivijJAnA 487 cAritramapi saMprAptAH 25  /
cyutastasmAdiha dvIpe 381 cAritrAd guptito dharmA- 223 cyutA ca ratnanagare
cArukarmaphalaM bhuktvA 152 cyute zastrAntarAghAtA 288 cArulakSaNapUrNo'yaM 393
cyuto nAgapure jAtaH 435 cArulakSaNasaMpUrNa cyuto nAgapure padma 437
cArulakSaNasaMpUrNA 172 . cyuto brahmarathasyAbhUt 438 cikrIDa damayanto'pi 381
cyuto mahAvidehe'tha 301 ciccheda sAyakAn tasya 185 cyutvA gabhaMgRhe bhUyo
cittodbhavakarI zAnti: 162 cyutvA tatra manuSyatve citraM pazyata me naptA 453
cyutvAtraiva tato vAsye 381 citramekaratho bhUtvA 486 cyutvA nAgapure vizva- 436
citrAmbarasya putro'yaM 125 cyutvA puNyAvazeSeNa 382 citraratna vinirmANa- 396
cyutvA mahendrarAjasya cintayatyanyathA lokaH 376 cyutvA sumitrarAjasya
cintayantamimaM caiva 173 cintayantI guNAn patyu- 151 cintayanniti cAnyacca 191
chatraH zazAGkasaGkAzacintayanniti paryaTya 404 chalachalAyate'nyatra 287 cintAM
kAmapi saMprAptA 116 chAdayantI svanAdena cintAyA api na klezaM 40 chitvA
snehamayAn pAzAn 121 cintitaprAptaniHzeSa- 270 /  chindantAviva dAridraya- 491
ciraM ca kRtasaMgrAmo 200 chinna pitroH zirasteSAM 160 ciraM tataH kIrtidhareNa
sAkaM456' chinnadhvajAtapatraH san 486 ciraM nirIkSito deva 451 chetsyante sa
tatodyukta- 421 ciraM baddhakramo yo'sthAd 466 [ja] ciravRttatayA buddhI 302
cirAtsaMprAptapatnIkaH 410 jagato duHkhamagnasya 452 jagatyasmin mahAvaMzA
jagaddhitA mahAmAtyA 326 jagAda gajanAthaM taM 404 jagAda ca gaNAdhIzaH jagAda
ca tvarAyuktaM 272 jagAda ca na zaknomi 378 jagAda ca sakhIsnehAt 373 jagAda ca
samAsannAn 104 jagAda ca smitaM kRtvA 277 jagAda ca smitaM zrutvA 203 jagAda
cAJjali kRtvA 357 jagAda ceti ki mAta- 156 jagAda ceti bhagavan 234 jagAda ceti
rAjAsti 194 jagAda codyatAn kleza- 201 jagAda nArado mAtaH 240 jagAda nArado'haM
dbhiH 240 jagAda pazyatAvasthA jagAda mantriNazcaiva 335 jagAda mAtulaM caiva
jagAda yadi me bhartA 467 jagAda rAjA bhavavRkSasaMkaTA 455 jagAda rAvaNaM sAdho
221 jagAda vacanaM kanyA 124 jagAda sa tato jyeSTha 184 jagAdAsau kimatrAnyai.
485 jagAdAsau tatastasmai 372 jagAdeti tato bAlijagAma ca nijaM vezma jagAma
badhvA sahito 421 jaguzca khyAtasavaMzAn 484 jagmuraSTApade tatra 339 jajJe ca
subalastasmAt 67 jaTAyuniyamaprApti jaTAmukuTabhAraH kva 158 jaThareNa mayA
yUyaM 160 janakasya tato mRtyu 74 janakAyApi tenedaM 474 324 205 212

Page #564 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Padma Purana 94 261 436 Whose birth was announced by water pouring 462 by all
creatures 393 by creatures, leading the life of creatures 90 by creatures, who
are deluded, their 383 three births have passed 36 from birth onwards, cruel
birth, thus I am fulfilled 142 before and after birth 16 from birth onwards,
evil-minded 238 birth, he obtained from the mountain 399 birth after birth, then
he said 119 birth after birth, with the love of his son 78 birth and incarnation
of all 82 Jahnu, the Apsaras were afraid 217 birth festival of the great one 490
Jambudvipa king said 162 Jambudvipa king, Yaksha 157 Jambudvipa's Bharata 75
Jambubharata, in the name of Jambudvipa, in the abode of the Jambudvipa tree,
victory, the Kalpadruma is in the navel 37 they are born, they die, they release
448 victory, Nand, live long 204 victory, the sound created by the arrows 79
victory, the place to the south of the mountain 336 victory, the enthusiasm of
Jayajit 262 water-bright, then angry 354 water-bubble, the essence 304 water-
bubble-like body 84 water-machines, beautiful 229 water-wave-mountain, his 412
water-land-born 328 in water, by the use of the machine, born, eternally flowing
261 just born, then the saint 445 just born, and who is the god 260 just born,
the coronation, who 436 Born, the abode, Padma, called  By the Jinas, even this
was not done, born, that cave, by him 393 by the Jinas, Dharma was declared 334
born, in the dim morning, then 366 Jina-born, the meaning of the meaning, born,
from where, there, it was beautiful 457 the being, does by Dharma, born, twenty
in number 449 the being, the pair of beings 104 born, Megha Ratha, called 146
lives, the lord of life, they 279 knowing, then by the king 242 life-donation,
and what is said 311 knowing, the light body 453 life-attraction, the shape of
the Kusa 387 I know, and so, not this 276 life, indeed, of all 343 I will know,
as my deed 342 life, all the work 474 with the knees, the earth was conquered
333 life-support, having made 361 Jamadagni, the respected Kshatriya I will live
now, master 357 sick, then by words 203 Jain, the best word, is born, as long as
this 474 trembling, shaking, Jamma 341 wife, wife, there was 380 known, what,
not so born 260 wife, in the golden teeth 381 knowing, as it were, the story 269
the desire to conquer, the Yaksha-killer 267 knowing, him, you are pleased 63
conquered, conquered, even not the weapon 1 knowing, then, without light, so
much 209 the conqueror of enemies, having joined, the conquerors of enemies  71
knowing, the ten-headed one, obtained 413 having conquered, the lord of the
Vidyadharas 225 knowing, the obtained boon, this  Jina Chandra Katha Rashmi 321
8 knowing, the friend's wife, so 273 Jina-declared truths 23 knowing, the spring
garland, her 389 Jina-feet, near  knowing, the wind-son, and 403 Jina-worship-
worthy  knowledge, having obtained, some, goes 493 Jina-image, Jina-form 321
knowledge-Jina, with three 42 Jina-mother, then, having done 44 eldest, the
thousands of diseases 271 Jina-worship, equal to  light, the light-net 35 Jina-
abode, they, by him 75 light-wheel, to lift 315 Jina-teaching, having attained
330 lights, in the abode, born 43 Jinas, the birth-stars 426 light, the world,
flooded 463 Jinas, the interval, said 431 light, the thoughts, the kalpas 37
Jina, obtained, worship 265 burning, very near, the Jina, the two, having
released  219 burning, the matted hair, the fire, the Jina, only, he saw 28
burning, fierce-mouthed, this 142 Jina's word, whoever 324 [D] Jina, the tenth,
in the past  Dakini, preta, ghost, etc. 325 Jina, the lord, the hero 19 [Dh]
Jina-feet, pure-ash 28 shaken, and, in the forest, himself 493 73 392 222 229

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe 94 261 436 jananAbhiSave yasya janitaM jalapUreNa 462 jantunA
sarvavastubhyo 393 jantUnAM jIvitaM nItvA 90 jantUnAM mohinAM teSAM 383
janmatrayamatItaM yo 36 janmanaH prabhRti krUrA janmanetthaM kRtArtho'smi 142
janmano'rvAkpurastAcca 16 janmaprabhRti duzceto 238 janma lebhe yataH zaile 399
janmAntaraM tato'vocata 119 janmAntarasutaprItyA 78 janmAvatAraH sarveSAM 82
jahna rapsaraso bhItA 217 janmotsavo mahAnasya 490 jambUdvIpapatiH prAha 162
jambUdvIpapatiryakSa 157 jambUdvIpasya bharate 75 jambUbharatasaMjJAyAM
jambUvRkSasya bhavane jaya kalpadrumo nAbhe- 37 jayanti rAnti muJcanti 448 jaya
nanda ciraM jIva 204 jayazabdakRtArAvaiH 79 jayAdridakSiNaM sthAnaM 336
jayAjitasamutsAhA 262 jalakAntastataH kruddhaH 354 jalabudbudanissAraH 304
jalabubudavatkAyaH 84 jalayantrANi citrANi 229 jalavIcigirI tasya 412
jalasthalasamudbhUta- 328 jale yantraprayogeNa jAtaM zazvatpravRttApi 261
jAtamAtramatho santaM 445 jAtamAtrazca yo devai 260 jAtamAtro'bhiSekaM yaH 436
jAtA sadanapadmAkhyA jinairapi kRtaM naitat jAtena sA guhA tena 393
jinairabhihitaM dharma 334 jAte mandaprabhAte'tha 366 jinoditArthasaMsaktA jAte
yatastatra babhUva ramyA 457 jIvaH karoti dharmeNa jAte viMzatisaMkhyAne 449
jIvaM jIvakayugmAnAM 104 jAto megharathAbhikhyA 146 jIvati prANanAthe te 279
jAnatApi tato rAjJA 242 jIvadAnaM ca yatproktaM  /  311 jAnAnAH pralaghu deha-
453 jIvAkarSAM kuzAkArAM 387 jAnAmi ca tathA naitat 276 jIvitaM nanu sarvasyA
343 jAnAsyeva mamAkUta- 342 jIvitAyAkhilaM kRtyaM 474 jAnubhyAM bhuvamAkramya
333 jIvitAlambanaM kRtvA 361 jAmadagnyAdRtakSAtra jIviSyAmyadhunA svAmin 357
jAmAturatha vAkyena 203 jainamevottamaM vAkyaM jAyate yAvadevAsya 474 jambhaNaM
kampanaM jammA 341 jAyA jAyAsya tatrAbhU- 380 jJAtaM kiM na tathotpannAH 260
jAyAyAM kanakodA~ 381 jJAtvA cetIva vRttAnta- 269 jigISoryakSamardasya 267
jJAtvA taM bhavatastuSTo 63 jitajeyo'pi no zastra- 1 jJAtvA'tha niSprabhistAva-
209 jitazatroH samAyojya- jitazatrAH 71 jJAtvA dazAnanaM prApta 413 jitvA
vidyAdharAdhIzAn 225 jJAtvA labdhavaraM caitaM - jinacandrakathArazmi- 321 8
jJAtvA vayasya patnIti 273 jinadezitatattvAnAM 23 jJAtvA vasantamAlA tAM+ 389
jinapAdasamIpe to jJAtvA vAyukumAraM ca 403 jinapUjanayogyAni jJAnaM saMprApya
kiMcid vrajati 493 jinabimbaM jinAkAraM 321 jJAnajinastribhiryuktaH 42
jinamAtustataH kRtvA 44 jyeSTho vyAdhisahasrANAM 271 jinavandanayA tulyaM jyoti
maprabhAjAla- 35 jinavezmani tau tena 75 jyotizcakraM samuddhartu- 315
jinazAsanamAsAdya 330 jyotiSAM nilaye jAta- 43 jinAnAM janmanakSatra 426
jyotsnayA plAvito lokaH 463 jinAnAmantaraM proktaM 431 jyotiSA bhAvanAH kalpA 37
jinendraH prApitaH pUjA 265 jvalannAtisamIpasthajinendra varaNau muktvA 219
jvAlAjaTAlamanalaM jinendrameva cApazyat 28 jvAlAraudramukhI ceyaM 142
jinendravacanaM yastu 324 [Da] jinendra dazame'tIte DAkinIpretabhUtAdi- 325
jinendro bhagavAn vIraH 19 [Dha] jinezapAdapUtAzA 28 DhokitazcAnaraNye svaM 493
73 392 222 229

Page #565 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
[ T ] Knowing him to be inclined towards initiation, Seeing him, and even more
so, Hearing of him, the one with the jewel earrings, They brought him, clothed
in a garment, and he became theirs at that time. His very limbs, his climbing up
and down, 461 240 163 468 101 177 482 65 269 The spreading of the feet on the
shore, 359 Where is the Dikesh, for what reason? 113 The story of the lightning-
haired one, 5 Knowing the lightning-haired one, 112 176 331 Then, by whom, at
that time, some turns, then, the Cupid, some, then, the girl's father, knowing,
43 349 Then, hearing the murmur, 131 Then, the going to Kapistha, 120 198 Then,
the going to Kama, then, coming to Kampilya, 196 Then, saying, "What is this?",
348 Then, the king of Kishku, 120 Then, even of Kirtithara, Hearing this,
Bharata became angry, Sowing, the mind-absorbed branch, Then, having made a
shade with a Kustha tree, Then, the burden of the hair, Then, seeing the young
boys, Then, united with the prince, Then, making himself worthy, Then, attached
to compassion, Then, having done what glory, Then, Ketumati, the daughter of
Kuda, Then, of Ketumati, then, Then, with the trembling of Kailasa, Then, of the
belly of Kailasa, then, in order, their sons, then, to play, they began, 465 192
58 492 47 476 50 24 370 338 221 275 224 192 The order of the verses, according
to the first letter, Then, for a moment, she stood, knowing, Then, for a moment,
having stood, She went out, 396 Then, for a moment, having stood, he, 394 Then,
with the waters of the milk ocean, 44 Then, the auspicious one was born, 36
Then, the celestial sun, him, 125 Then, by the celestial world, 80 Then, the
shade of various trees, 104 Then, on the banners, Indrajeet, the chief, 420
Then, even by the husband of the Yakshas, 162 Then, with the greatest anger, 354
Then, the strong one, with delight, 285 Then, the sound of the strong one, 212
Then, united with the greatest, 294 Then, having obtained the greatest, 347
Then, saying, "The greatest", 361 Then, some put on, 52 Then, seeing the insult,
382 Then, with harsh words, 211 180 194 178 486 432 71 356 277 379 72 135 489
124 399 Then, the harsh-word wind, Then, he performed the taking of the hand,
then, Then, he performed the taking of the hand, of him, Then, the taking of the
hand was done by him, Then, from the side of the Jina, before, Then, he asked
his father, 363 Then, the father spoke to him, Then, covering with his hands,
Then, many things done before, Then, angry at the killing of his father, Then,
bowing down, they were asked, Then, the duties of the limbs, Then, he answered
him, Then, the city people came out, Then, the lotus bud blossomed, 364 Then,
with the morning music, auspicious, Then, with the morning music, the conch,
Then, from that time, with beauty, he, 151 489 Then, from that time, with anger,
Then, from that time, those who were born, then, with joyful gods, Then, with
the wind of destruction, Then, having done praise, Then, the one named with
happy fame, Then, he laughed and said, Then, "I am famous", Then, laughing,
confidently, Then, he climbed up the palace, Then, when it was said, "Food,
etc.", Then, the one who lived in the country of Priyans, Then, the fruits,
etc., of them, Then, with the bow of Indra, Then, the followers of Indra, Then,
the sound of the conch became, Then, with the sound of the instruments, Then,
all that was sound, Then, they went for refuge, Then, the autumn season arrived,
Then, in the darkness made by weapons, Then, the autumn cloud, Then, he attained
the feet of Shiva, 362 197 401 346 366 52 195 297 198 51 396 48 463 287 19 62 87
284 Then, hearing, he should protect, 373 Then, she released her breaths, 189
Then, even the six, not until, 52 Then, they, having accomplished their task,
366 85 218 143 196 191 199 377 196 334 Then, by the snake of sorrow, he, Then,
by Srimalina, of them, Then, the kings, coming together, Then, the one named
Samvartaka, Then, she, being bound, Then, carrying, he arrived, Then, united
with compassion, Then, with flowers, pearls, Then, friendship, well-arranged,
515 Then, he, frightened by the ascetics, Then, in the form of good men, 302 110
58 130 234 372 360

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 [ ta ] taM dIkSAbhimukhaM jJAtvA taM dRSTvA sutarAM cakre taM ratnazravasaM
zrutvA vastrAvRtamAnIya ta eva sAMprataM jAtA ta evAvayavAstasya
taccArohaparINAha 461 240 163 468 101 177 482 65 269 taTapAdapasArA 359 DikezaH
kuto heto 113 taDitkezasya carita 5 taDitkezasya vijJAya 112 176 331 tataH
kibhistAsAtataH katicidAvRttI tataH kandarpaNaH kecit tataH kanyA-pitA jJAtvA 43
349 tataH kalakalaM zrutvA 131 tataH kApiSThagamanaM 120 198 tataH kAmagamArA
tataH kAmpilyamAgatya 196 tataH kimidamityuktvA 348 tataH kiSkupurasvAmI 120
tataH kIrtitharasyApi tacchrutvA bharataH kruddhaH seca cintAparaM zAkhA tataH
kuthAkRtacchAye tataH kuntalabhAraNa tataH kumArakAn dRSTvA tataH kumArayukto
tataH kRtinamAtmAnaM tataH kRpAsamAsakta tataH ke vibhUti kRtvA tataH ketumatI
kuDA tataH ketumatasyothe tataH kailAsa kampena tataH kailAsakukSisyA tataH
kramAttayoH putrau tataH krIDitumArebha 465 192 58 492 47 476 50 24 370 338 221
275 224 192 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH tataH kSaNaM sthitA veda tataH kSaNamiva
sthitvA niSkrAntA 396 tataH kSaNamiva sthitvA sa 394 tataH kSIrArNavAmbhobhiH 44
tataH kSemaMkaro jAta: 36 tataH khecarabhAnustaM 125 tataH khecaralokena 80
tataH nAnAtarucchAyA 104 tataH paTeSvindrajitapradhAnA 420 tataH patyApi
yakSANAM 162 tataH paramakopena 354 tataH parabale toSa 285 tataH
parabaladhvAnaM 212 tataH paramayA yukto 294 tataH paramamApatro 347 tataH
paramamityuktvA 361 tataH paridadhuH kecit 52 tataH paribhavaM dRSTvA 382 tataH
paruSavAkyena 211 180 194 178 486 432 71 356 277 379 72 135 489 124 399 tataH
paruSavAgvAta tataH pANigrahazcakre tayotataH pANigrahazcakre tasya tataH
pANigrahastena kRta: tataH pArzvajinAt pUrva tataH pitaramApRcchapa 363 tataH
pitA jagAdainaM tataH pidhAya pANibhyAM tataH pUrvakRtAneka tataH pitRvadhAt
kruddhaH tataH praNamya taiH pRSTau tataH pratyaGgakAryANi tataH pratyAcacakSe
taM tataH pratyudgataH paura tataH prabuddharAjIva 364 tataH prabhAtatUryeNa
maGgalai- 228 tataH prabhAta tUryeNa zaGkhatataH prabhRti kAntyAsau 151 489
tataH prabhRti kopena tataH prabhRti ye jAtA tataH pramuditairdevaiH tataH
pralayavAtena tataH prazaMsanaM kRtvA tataH prasannakIrtyAkhyaM tataH
prahasito'vocad tataH prathito'smIti tataH prahasya vizrabdhaM tataH
prAsAdamArukSa tataH prAddhAdirityukte tataH priyAMsadezastha tataH phalAdikaM
teSAM tataH zakradhanuH sAkaM tataH zakrasya sAmantAH tataH zaGkhasvanobhUta
tataH zabdena tUryANAM tataH zabdamayaM sarva tataH zaraNamIyustA tataH
zaradRtuH prApa tataH zastrakRtadhvAnte tataH zAradajImUta tataH zivapadaM prApa
362 197 401 346 366 52 195 297 198 51 396 48 463 287 19 62 87 284 tataH zrutvA
pAhetu 373 tataH zvAsAn vimuJcantI 189 tataH SaDapi no yAvat 52 tataH
saMprAptakRtye tau 366 85 218 143 196 191 199 377 196 334 tataH zokorageNAsau
tataH zrImAlinA teSAM tataH saMbhUya rAjAno tataH saMvartakAbhikhya tataH
saMbAdhyamAnA sA tataH saMvAhayan prApto tataH sakaruNAyukto tataH sakusumA
muktA tataH sakhyaM savinyasta 515 tataH sa tApasairbhIta tataH satpuruSAbhirUpA
302 110 58 130 234 372 360

Page #566 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
56. Then, by the light of the evening, Then, along with the ministers, Then,
reaching the appointed time, Then, becoming agitated, then they arrived and
knew. Then, the vow was completed. Then, by the combination of the time, Then,
the Bhairava deities were summoned. Then, at the appropriate time, Then, they
set out to go.  457. Then, the sun-like lord went, seeing properly.  64. Then,
abandoning the distorted form,  114. Then, while wandering in that place, 104.
Then, the powerful Shakra enjoyed. 456. Then, the thousand-rayed one approached.
233. Then, the thousand-rayed one shone.  396. 396. 155. Then, in thousands, the
fragments. Then, the year spoke. Then, she told him. Then, the city of Saketa.
Then, the one named Sagardatta. Then, the inner palace. Then, after worshiping
the ascetic, Then, seated on a comfortable seat, Then, hearing about the death
of the son, Then, completely pure and perfect, Then, the divine, human-like god,
Then, the entire divine army, Then, return to the sun, Then, he of immeasurable
speed, Then, with a smiling face, he spoke, Then, hearing like a dream, Then,
seeing like a dream, Then, by himself, as I said,  347. 355. 350. 485. 347. 149.
453. 44.  344. 61. 43. 439. 202. 381. 170. 199. 129. 307. 434. 294. 349. 380.
408. 129. 362. 389. 127. 169.  In the Padma Purana: Then, he himself took. Then,
the arising. Then, the arrival occurred. Then, Indra was born. Then, he began to
destroy. Then, rising up, he placed. Then, on the horse. Then, that which was
the enemy. Then, by the four types of gods. Then, the moon-nailed one was born.
Then, the supreme divine energy. Then, his extraordinary qualities. Then, going
and bringing her. Then, on that day, the ten-necked one. Then, crying for a long
time. Then, fallen, shining loudly. Then, falling from humanity, Then, born
here. Then, on the day of the battle. Then, seeing him angry, Then, with deep
anger, Then, seeing him in that way, Then, the head was honored. Then, he went
out. Then, with great skill, Then, adorned, he was, Then, from youth he saw,
Then, humble, he was, Then, trembling, Then, with a shower of arrows, Then,
suddenly seeing him, Then, the god, well-established, Then, that charioteer.
Then, to break that pride.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 56 tataH saMdhyAprakAzena tataH sa mantribhiH sArka tataH samayamAsAdya tataH
samAkulIbhUto tataH samAgatau jJAtau tataH samAptaniyamaH tataH samAsayogena
tataH samAhatA bhairyaH tataH samucite kAle tataH samudyatA gantuM 457 tataH
samudivasaprabhUpa tataH samyagdRzo yAtA 64 tataH sa vikRtAM tyaktvA 114 tataH
sa viharaMstasmin 104 tataH zakroSamabhogavIryaH 456 tataH sahasrakiraNaH samA-
233 tataH sahasrakiraNo vibhrA- 232 396 396 155 tataH sahasrazaH khaNDa tataH
sAMvatsaro'vocat tataH sA kathayattasya tataH sAketanagara tataH
sAgaradattAkhyaH tataH sAntaHpuraH putratataH sAdhuM sa vanditvA tataH
sukhAsanAsIne tataH sukhAsanAsIne tataH sutavadhaM zrutvA tataH sanipurNa zuddha
tataH sumAnuSo deva tataH surabalaM sarva tataH sUre nivartasva tataH so'mita
gatyAkhyo tataH smitamukho'vocat tataH svadAranetrAmbu tataH svapnasamaM zrutvA
tataH svapnopamaM dRSTvA tataH svAmipavAdatataH svayaM mayenoktaM 347 355 350
485 347 149 453 44 344 61 43 439 202 381 170 199 129 307 434 294 349 380 408 129
362 389 127 169 padmapurANe tataH svayaM samAdAya tatanyasamutthAnatata
AgamanobhUta tata Arabhya saMprApa tala indramato jAto taja ucchettumArabdho
tata utpatya vinyasya tatazca paro'zvena tatazca taM yadvipaM tatazcatuvidhairde
tatazcandranakhA jAtA tatazvaramayAmAdI tatazcAtizayAstasya tatazcAnaya tAM
gatvA tatadivase dazagrIva tatazciraM ruditvainA talacyutAH sphurantyucaiH
tatazcyuto yazovatyAM tatazcyutvA manuSyatvaM tatazcyutveha saMbhUto
tatazcatrasya divase tatastaM kupitaM dRSTrA tatastaM kopagambhIra tatastaM
viparItyAso tatastaM tadvidhaM dRSTvA sadastaM matamUrdhAnaM tatastaM nirgataM
tavastaM parayA yutyA tatastaM bhUSitaM santaM tatastaM yauvanAdISat tatastaM
vinayopetaM tatastaM vepathupra tatastaM zarajAlena tatastaM sahasA dRSTvA
tatastaM susthitaM devo tatastaM syandanAdo rAstatkaNIjA tatastadgauravaM
bhaGktu 355 479 209 335 108 183 294 72 103 307 154 226 72 278 354 376 327 438
326 272 102 193 109 32 196 408 202 178 46 124 115 114 414 362 119 201 398 349
tatastata iti prokte tatastattasya kauTilya tatastasAdRzenApi tatastatrastha
evAsI tatastatrApyasI kAntA tatastatpravizantI sA tatasta vAhate saimyaM
tatastayoH satAM madhye tatastayopadiSTA sA tatastasminnapi prIti tatastasmai
samAkhyAtaM tatastasya puraH sthitvA tatastasya viSAdo'bhUt tatastasya samAkAraM
tatastasya sitadhyAnAd tatastasya suto jAtaH tatastasyopakaNThe te tatastA
zaraNaM jammU tatastAM paramAM mUrti tatastAM lakSaNairebhiH tavastAnAyato
dRSTvA tatastAbhyAM vasuH pRSTo 200 278 304 188 tatastaduHkhato mukta
tatastadvacanaM zrutvA tatastadvacanAttena tatastadvacanAdetAM
tatastamaGkamAropya 44 tatastamakumAropya pramoda- 393 tatastamambarai
divyaitatastamavatIrNo'sau tatastamavadhi jJAnA tatastayoH parechannaM
tatastAmanyathAbhUtAM tatastAmA kuloM jJAtvA tatastAmiGgitAbhijJo tatastA
yugapad dRSTvA tatastAvudyato kRtya tatastuSTAva devendro 402 372 145 371 306
278 371 103 59 202 242 176 125 459 464 93 129 58 111 116 191 116 370 176 242 190
377 98 175 122 20

Page #567 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Verse Number Index:  517 105 371 292 331 358 115 292 135 245 200 389 284 176
284 31 283 104 **Ø§ÙÙ Ø§Ù ÙÛ** 110 Then by him, the army, then by him, many, then
by him, the ten-headed, then by him, the infinite-strength-moon, then by him,
"die", then by him, the god, then by him, heard before, then by him, seeing the
troubled, then by him, the dharma-gone-out, then by them, by SukeÅa, then by
him, on the head, then by him, the world-generous, then of them, the great born,
then by them, from the union, then by them, sent, cruel, then by them, followed,
the unrighteous, then by them, raised, the army, then by them, the great roar,
then by them, that promise, then by him, with the group, then by him, the sons,
the kingdom, then by him, the unsaid-known, then the inner chamber, pleasant,
then the being in the womb, then the teachers, with obeisance, then from the
house, of the Jinas, then by the lineage, then having taken all, then spoke, the
eye-possessing, then spoke, the god's, then spoke, the Bhagavan, then spoke,
MarÄ«ci, then from the crowd, hearing, then for the benefit of beings, the
gathering, then to chant, they began, then the birth-festival, of him, then near
the Jina, him, then in the born, jewels, then the great cry, 185 then his own
strength, the foolish, 292 then seeing the ointment, then the hip-fruit, then
the very dense battle, 355 then seeing the sleep-depletion, 193 then the very
cruel, 357 then the helpless-body, 114 then the very great-being, then going
out, by him, 226 then like the burnt, then hearing the news, 460 then by the
ten-headed, said, then the night-bride, shone, 413 then by the ten-headed,
ordered, 235 then the certainty-known, 240 then the ten-faced, quickly, 231 then
by compassion, the thumb, 219 then the ten-faced, spoke, 210 then they inferred,
of him, then the seeing, one another, then following, with speed, then the long-
hot-breath, 372 then by this, called, 468 then the sorrow-filled-body, 394 then
the interval, even, then the sorrow, not knowing, 372. then the dwelling-in, by
him, 239 then the bad-speed, him, 354. then another chariot, mounting, 185 then
seeing, the approaching, 295. then another, also, obtained, then seeing, his
effort, 346. then the ear-cutting, doing, 282 then by the god-sons, 164 then the
insulted, by whom, then the god-sky-vehicles, then also, the arya-being, 92 then
the gods, coming together, then spoke, them, the Raká¹£as, 245 then the gods-
demons, devotees, 333 then Bali, he, 216 then before the dharma-jina, 432 then
Brahma-ratha, born, 469 then the "Fie-Fie" sound, almost, 243 then the breaking,
obtaining, 283 then the meditation-elephant-mounted, 121 then the Bharata-king,
also, then the sinless-body, him, then there was, the great battle, 136 then not
born, I, then you, by me, of her, 194 then the infinite-strength, said, 318 then
by the future-disease, 386 then by this, again obtained, 69 then the sun-lord's,
then of these two, the moment-born, 173 then the overcoming, able, 286 then the
lord, the strength, seeing, 200 then the face-to-face, coming, him, 233 then not
gave, the father, of her, then the various-flowers, 104 then the face-to-face,
coming, seeing, 183 then the various-birds, 228 section then the name, the
great-enthusiasm, then frightened, very much, the messenger, 212 then all this,
of her, 372 then the servants, lifting, 185 then all-knowledge, 489 then by the
brother, together, enmity, 62 then said, the serpent, 222 then turning, by him,
196 then his own strength, passed, 183 then the Magadha-king, also, 132 380 171
153 163 172 205 277 323 395 402 157 153 196 21

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH 517 105 371 292 331 358 115 292 135 245 200 389 284
176 284 31 283 104 lm l mh 110 tataste tena gaNa tataste tena bahavaH tatastena
dazAsyasya tataste'nantavIryendutatastena mriyasvaiti tatastena sureNAso
tatastena zrutaM pUrva tatastenAkulaM dRSTvA tataste nirgataM dharmatatastebhyaH
sukezena tataste mastake kRtvA tataste visvarodAraM tatasteSAM mahAn jAto
tataste saGgamAtprApya tatastaiH prahitAH krUrAH
tatastairanuyAto'sAtatastairutthitaH sainyaM tatastaimahatI
rantutatastaistatpratijJAya tatasto parivargeNa tatasto putrayo rAjyaM
tato'kathitavijJAtatato garbhagRhaM ramyaM tato garbhasthite sattve tato gurUn
praNAmena tato gehAjjinendrANAM tato gotrakramAyAtatato gRhItasarvasvaH tato
jagAda cakSuSmAn tato jagAda devasya tato jagAda bhagavAn tato jagAda mArIcI
tato janaughataH zrutvA tato jantuhitA saGgatato japitumArabdhAH tato
janmotsavastasya tato jinasamIpe taM tato jAteSu ratneSu tato jAto mahAkrandaH
185 tato nijabalaM mUr3ha 292 tato'JjanAM samAlokya tato nitambaphalaka
tato'tigahane yuddha 355 tato nidrAkSaye dRSTrA 193 tato'tyantamaSi krUraM 357
tato nirIhadeho'sau 114 tato'tyantamahAbhUtyA tato nirgatya tenAsA- 226 tato
dagdhopamAnena tato nizamya vRttAntaM 460 tato dazamukhenoktaM tato nizAvadhU
reje 413 tato dazamukhAdiSTo 235 tato nizcayavijJAta- 240 tato dazAnanaH kSipraM
231 tato'nukampayAGgaSThaM 219 tato dazAnano'vAdIt 210 tato'numenire tasya tato
darzanamanyo'nyaM tato'nusRtya vegena tato dIrghoSNanizvAsa- 372 tato'nena
samAhvAya 468 tato duHkhabharoTela- 394 tato'ntarAla evAtitato duHkhamavijJAya .
372 /  tato'ntevAsinastena 239 tato durivegaM taM 354  /  /  tato'nyaM
rathamAruhya 185 tato dRSTA samAsannaM 295  /  /  tato'nyadapi saMprApta tato
dRSTo'sya saMrambha 346  /  tato'pakarNanaM kRtvA 282 tato devakumArAbhaiH 164
tato'pamAnitaM yairyaiH tato devanabhoyAnA tato'pyAryatvasaMbhUti- 92 tato devAH
samAgatya tato babhANa tAn rakSaH 245 tato devAsurA bhaktAH 333 tato
bAlirasAveSa 216 tato dharmajinAtpUrva 432 tato brahmaratho jAta- 469 tato dhig-
dhig dhvaniHprAyo 243 tato bhaGgaM pariprAptA 283 tato dhyAnagajArUDha- 121 tato
bharatarAjo'pi tato'naghazarIraM taM tato'bhavanmahAyuddhaM 136 tato na jAta
evAsmi tato bhavAn mayA tasyA 194 tato'nantabalovAca 318 tato bhAvyupasargeNa
386 tato'nayA punarlabdhA 69 tato bhAskaranAthasya tato'nayoH kSaNodbhUta- 173
tato'bhibhavane saktaM 286 tato nAtha balaM dRSTrA 200 tato'bhimukhamAyAtaM
tamA- 233 tato nAdAtpitApyasyAH tato'bhimukhamAyAtaM dRSTvA 183 tato
nAnAprasUnAnAM 104 tato'bhimukhamAyAntaM dRSTvA tato nAnAzakuntoSaiH 228 khaNDa
287 tato nAmnA mahotsAhaH tato bhIto bhRzaM dUto 212 tato nikhilametasyAH 372
tato bhRtyaH samuddhRtya 185 tato nikhilavijJAna- 489 tato bhrAtrA samaM vaira-
62 tato nigaditaM nAga- 222 tato bhrAmayatA tena 196 tato nijaM balaM tItaM 183
tato magadharAjo'pi 132 380 171 153 163 172 205 277 323 395 402 157 153 196 21

Page #568 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
518 Padma Purana 28 235 82 92 Then with a auspicious song, then with an
inauspicious fear, 195 then in pleasant seats, 122 then with intoxicated
elephants, 143 then with the ocean of wisdom, then with intoxicated
Kalabhaindra, then with the attainment of Madana, 278 then he spoke this honey-
like word,  269 then with the mind-born Indra, 472 then with the distressed
Mandodari, 219 then with the Jina-image, then with me gone to liberation, then
with the immortal Prabhu born, 108 then after performing great penance, then
with a great assembly, then in a great battle, then with the great battle begun,
279 then with the king of the great city, 469 then with the great strength born,
67 then with the great burden afflicted, 218 then he performed a great festival
with the navel, 43 then he performed a great festival with the company, 139 then
with the great rising enthusiasm, 203 then with the human form, 243 then with
the garland of excellence on the neck, 127 then with the son of the garland-
wearer, then knowing the Muni-mountain,  224 then with the Muni-face like the
sun, 120 then with the Meru-mountain stable, then with the intoxication of
delusion, 243 then with the desired gift, then with the Yama-torment, 293 then
until he was to kill, 114 then until Dasagriva, then those who were conquered by
him, 200 then with the Rakshasa-army, 204 then with the battle-like attainment,
then with the net of gem-light,  283 then with the gem-box in the hair, 52 then
with the gem-creation, then with the chariot-horse-elephant, 348 then with the
Rakshasa-army, 282 then with the king together with them, then seeing the
marked, 414 then to know the writing,  356 then with the Vajradhara, then with
the light of the limit,  272 then with the light of the limit, the delight, 221
then with the destruction of the deaf, 181 then with the beautiful women, 452
then with the thousands of years, 36 then with the increase only, he, then with
the subdued, 235 then with the spring garland, him, 394 then with the spring
garland, that song, 391 then with the spring garland, then with the broken down,
then with the fire-burning, 347 then with the wind, he spoke this, 360 then to
know the news, 234 then with the victorious strength, 111 then with the victory
of the lion, 127 then knowing with Janaka, her, 420 then with the power of
knowledge, then with the method of Dharma, 350 then with the destruction of the
Naga-city, 390 then with the humble, he, 297 then with the exit from the
dwelling, 457 then with the Vindhya-mountain, his, 288 then with Vibhishana
born, 154 then with the ascent of the aircraft, then with the abandonment of the
aircraft, 198 then with the prepared bed, then with the fear of separation, then
with the eyes, then until the marriage, 271 then with the army resting, 415 then
with the poison-arrow-thrower, 217 then with the astonished mind, she, 445 then
with the astonishment attained,  114 then with the Vaishravana, again,  184 then
with the delighted army, he spoke, 340 then with the eight-limbed sign-knower,
152 then with the conversation of this, 351 then he said, with what, then he,
thus spoken, then he, with the Dharma of time, 120 then he, with the men spoken,
236 then he, with the arrow of desire, 224 then he, gradually increasing, 210
then he, like the moon-beam, 126 then he, with the touch of the goat, 389 then
he, his death, then he, with that intention, 124 then he, like the bow, born,
then he, killed, for the sake of, 120 then he, fallen, child, 130 then he,
returned again, 110 then he, brought back again, 179 then he, to go from behind,
132 then he, simultaneously, son, 414 then he, lamenting greatly, 131 then he,
with the trembling attained, 115 then he, with all the knowledge, 217 then he,
with the weapon-mass, 177 then he, in the just-moistened, 467 then with him,
enduring, then with him, suddenly, the wisdom, 302 then with the Hanuraha-named,
409 then I also, with the word, 340 then with the laughter, he spoke this, then
with the elephant-leader, spoken, then with the sound of Ha, 409 then with the
king of Hemapura, 137 8 am 177 393 192    .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 518 padmapurANe 28 235 82 92 tato maGgalagItena tato'maGgalabhItena 195 tato
maJceSu ramyeSu 122 tato mattadvipAlAna- 143 tato matisamudraNa tato
madakalabhendratato madanasaMprAptA 278 tato madhoridaM prAha 269 tato
manaHsthajanendra- 472 tato mandodarI dInA 219 tato mayA jinendrArcA tato mayi
gate mokSatato'maraprabho jAta- 108 tato mahattapastaptvA tato mahati saMjAte
tato mahati saMgrAme tato mahati saMgrAme pravRtte 279 tato mahApure rAjJa- 469
tato mahAbalo jAta 67 tato mahAbharAkrAnta- 218 tato mahotsavaM cakre nAbhinA 43
tato mahotsavaM cakre saha 139 tato mahodayotsAhaH 203 tato mAnuSaveSastho 243
tato mAlAguNaH kaNThe 127 tato mAlyavataH putraH tato munigiraM jJAtvA 224 tato
munimukhAdityA 120 tato merusthirasyAsya tato mohamadAviSTaH 243 tato
yathepsitaM dAnaM tato yamavimardaina 293 tato yAvadasau hantuM 114 tato
yAvaddazagrIvaH tato ye nijitAstena 200 tato rakSogaNAstasya 204 tato raNAdiva
prAptatato ratnaprabhAjAla 283 tato ratnapuTe kezAn 52 tato ratnavinirmANaH tato
rathAzvamAtaGga- 348 tato rAkSasasainyasya 282 tato rAjA samaM tAbhyAM tato
lakSIkRtaM dRSTvA 414 tato lekhArthamAvedya 356 tato vajradhareNAso
tato'vadhikRtAlokaH 272 tato'vadhikRtAlokastoSa- 221 tato vadhirayannAzAH 181
tato varAGganAstAraM 452 tato varSasahasrANAM 36 tato vaddhimAtraM sa tato
vazIkRtasyAsya 235 tato vasantamAlA taM 394 tato vasantamAlA tadgeya- 391 tato
vasantamAloce tato'vasAdanAd bhagnaM tato vahanvirAgaNa 347 tato vAyuruvAcedaM
360 tato vArtAmiva jJAtuM 234 tato vikramasaMpanna- 111 tato vijayasiMhasya 127
tatoviditvA janakena tasyA-420 tato vidyAprabhAveNa tato vidhAnayogena 350 tato
vidhvasya nAgAri 390 tato vinayanamraH san 297 tato viniSkramya nivAsa- 457 tato
vindhyAntike tasya 288 tato vibhISaNo jAtaH 154 tato vimAnamAruhya tato
vimAnamujjhitvA 198 tato viracite talpe tato virahato bhItA tato vilocanaiH
sAtato vivAhaparyantaM 271 tato vizramayan sainyaM 415 tato viSakaNakSepi 217
tato vismitacittA sA 445 tato vismayamApanna 114 tato vaizravaNo bhUya 184
tato'vocadalaM prItaH 340 tato'STAGganimittajJaH 152 tato saMbhASaNAdasyA 351
tato'sAvabravIt kena tato'sAvevamuktaH san tato'sau kAladharmeNa 120 tato'sau
kathite pumbhiH 236 tato'sau kAmazalyena 224 tato'sau kramato vRddhi 210
tato'sau candralekheva 126 tato'sau takarasparzA- 389 tato'sau tasya maraNaM
tato'sau tadabhiprAya- 124 tato'sau namivajjAtaH tato'so nihataH styarthaM 120
tato'sau patito bAla- 130 tato'sau punarAgacchat 110 tato'sau punarAnItA 179
tato'sau pRSThato gantu- 132 tato'sau yugapatputraH 414 tato'sau vilapan bhUri-
131 tato'sau vepathu prApto 115 tato'sau sarvavidyAbhi- 217 tato'sI
zastrasaMghAtaM 177 tato'sau siktamAtre'smin 467 tato'sya sahamAnasya tato'sya
sahasA buddhi- 302 tato hanUruhAbhikhye 409 tato'hamapi vAkyena 340 tato
hasannuvAcedaM tato hastipakenoktatato hAkArazabdena 409 tato hemapurezasya 137
8 m 177 393 192 .

Page #569 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Sloka Number Index  519 126 348 175 88 12 270 Then by Hem Prabha these 485
There in heaven thousands 324.  So with precious jewels illuminated 424 I do
that again by which 236 There his wife, going to her husband 98 So by Rajas,
Kisku 203 That which is made, born from service 112 There then with ministers
together 269 So situated, he was 364 That there, the root cause, karma's sound
350 There, attached, having obtained increase 420 So monkey-marked 112 That,
all, Baladir 141 There he saw, that vast 105 So true-word-dharma 117 That, his
end-body 62 There also, in the southern row So, all people's joy 425 That, by
those arrows, after 283 There also, not the mind of that So, let it be, welcome
to him 363 That, to you, as long as this, something 474 There also, liberated
enjoyment 281 So, stealing, a woman's company 91 That wife, Chelna by name 16
There also, being remembered, that So, thus, caused by him, there, by lust,
having enjoyed 330 There, this moon, cold So, thus, of Airavata's year, there,
in Kumbhapura, his 178 There, seated, knowing him So, thus, he also, was
appointed 492 There, of those playing, engaged There, Asura-pura-like 413 So,
thus, of these, awake, this 199 There, to play, he began, where is, everywhere,
beautiful That, today, beginning, thinking 298 There, and, alone, one 359 There,
his world, was born 19 That, for that, earthly kings, all 484 There, birth-
festival, his 399 There, indeed, by celestial beings, these That, state, king,
knowing 468 There, there, indeed, in the land 377 There, indeed, at the time,
his 150 That, his, for the sake of, intellect, there, three-world-common, there,
indeed, another, was, in the village That, ordered, Prahasta, then 197 There,
god, like, generous 381 There, generous, happiness, obtained 381 That, he saw,
the world, whole 404 There, to hold, body 378 That, region, made, by gods Then,
Mlechcha-force, terrible, there, various, was, birth 483 That, be pleased,
compassion, noble 181 Then, Varuna-Chandra's 415 There, exit, seen 472 Truly,
if, lord, mine 348 Then, this, then, seen 115 There, son-killing-anger, his,
vassals, and, pleased, That, is, Kishkindha-pura 419 There, Purnaghana, by name
72 So, somehow, having obtained That, means, do, you, there, directly, other, of
her 487 So, do, as, more 384 That, this, Sikata-fist 312 There, in the question,
in the age, that So, thus, done, then, in the ear 277 That, thus, enemy, sorrow
131 There, in the middle, is, that island 78 So, fierce, also, doing 322 That,
indeed, shrinking, seeing, there, minister, spoke 336 So, and, that, animal,
life That, indeed, means, that 415 There, two months, taking 409.  So, their,
delight, obtained 365 That, indeed, this, lake, delightful 359 There, root-
fruit, etc. 189.  So, joyful, to be known 440 That, these, opposite, there,
gone, indeed, in the Rewa 235 So, Nala, in Kishku-pura, body 419 That, village-
dwelling, by one, there, night, happiness, taking 412 So, still, they, gone,
disturbance 158 That, sorrow, etc., dullness 386 There, in the greedy, in the
wicked, so, still, by the other, joined That, sorrow, etc., having obtained 372
There, in a hundred years, past 428 So, still, manliness, bearing That, country-
altar, by, charioteers, there, Vidyadharas, all 302 So, still, let it be, known
269 That, country, vast-shouldered 58 There, Vaivasvata, by name 492 So, still,
if, dissatisfaction 396 Then, tell, young woman, to whom 168 There, of worldly-
beings So, still, valiant-handed 265 That, hair-like, with, spears 182 There,
beautiful-limbed 478 So, still, with faith, that, mine 107 That, like, worldly-
house, I 460.  There, crystal-walled So, thus, renounced, having become 247
That, for-killing, gone, Indra 145 159 262 361 255 87 279 23 t

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zlokAnAmakArAkhanukramaH 519 126 348 175 88 12 270 tato hemaprabheNaite 485
tatra svarge sahasrANi 324  /  /  tathA ratnavarairdIptA 424 tatkaromi punaryena
236 tatra svasuH patiM gatvA 98 tathAHrajase kiSku 203 tatkRtAt sevanAjjAtAH 112
tatrAtha mantribhiH sAdhaM 269 tathAvasthita evAsI 364 tattatra mUlaheto
karmaravau 350 tatrAnuraktAmadhigamya vADha- 420 tathA vAnaracihnana 112
tattatsarvaM balADIraH 141 tatrApazyat sa vistIrNa 105 tathA satyavacodharma 117
tattasyAntazarIratvA 62 tatrApi dakSiNazreNyAma tathA sarvajanAnandaH 425
tattena vizikhaiH pazcA- 283 tatrApi na manastasyA tathAstu svAgataM tasya 363
tatte yAvadiyaM kiMcinna 474 tatrApi muktasadbhogaH 281 tathA steyaM striyAH
saGgaM 91 tatpatnI celanA nAmnI 16 tatrApi smaryamANaM tat tatheti kArite tena
tatra kAmena bhuktvAso 330 tatrAyaM candramA zIta tathairAvatavarSasya tatra
kumbhapure tasya 178 tatrAsInaM viditvenaM tathairo'pi sa niyuktaH 492 tatra
krIDAprasaktAnAM tatrAsurapurAkAre 413 tathaiSAM jAgratAmeSa 199 tatra
krIDitumArebhe yatrAsti sarvataH kAntaM tadadyArabhya saMcintya 298 tatra
caikAkinImekA- 359 tatrAsya jagatI jAtA 19 tadarthaM pArthivAH sarve 484 tatra
janmotsavastasya 399 tatraiva khecarairebhi tadavasthaM nRpaM jJAtvA 468 tatra
tatraiva bhUdeze 377 tatraiva samaye tasya 150 tadasya yuktaye buddhi tatra
trilokasAmAnye tatraivAnyo'bhavad grAme tadAdiSTaH prahasto'tha 197 tatra deva
ivodAra- 381 tatrodAraM sukhaM prApa 381 tadapazyajjagatkRtsnaM 404 tatra
dhArayituM deha- 378 tatpradeze kRtA devai tadA mlecchabalaM bhIma tatra
nAnAbhavotpattiH 483 tatprasIda dayAmArya 181 tadA varuNacandrasya 415 tatra
niSkramaNaM dRSTaM 472 tatvato yadi nAtho me 348 tadAzcayaM tato dRSTA 115 tatra
putrabadhakrodhatatsAmantAzca tuSTena tadAsti kiSkindhapure 419 tatra pUrNaghanA
nAma 72 tathA kathaJcidAsAdya tadupAyaM kuru tvaM tatatra pratyakSamanyAsAM 487
tathA kuru yathA bhUyo 384 tadetatsikatAmuSTi- 312 tatra prazne yuge yattA tathA
kRte tataH karNe 277 tadevaM vairiNaM zokaM 131 tatra madhye'sti sa dvIpo 78
tathogramapi kurvANA 322 tadeva sakucadvIkSya tatra mantrI jagAdakaH 336 tathA
ca yatpazurmAyu tadeva sAdhanaM tAva 415 tatra mAsadvayaM nItvA 409 /  /  tathA
tayo ratiH prAptA 365 tadevedaM saro ramyaM 359 tatra mUlaphalAdIni 189  /
tathAnandavatI jJeyA 440 tadeSAM viparItAnAtatra yAte hi revAyAM 235 tathA nala:
kiSkupure zarIra-419 tadgrAmavAsinaikena tatra rAtri sukhaM nItvA 412 tathApi te
gatA kSobhaM 158 taduHkhAdiva mandatvaM 386 tatra lubdheSu pApeSu tathApi parayA
yukta taduHkhAdiva saMprAptA 372 tatra varSazate'tIte 428 tathApi pauruSaM
bibhrad taddezavedibhizcAraiH tatra vidyAdharA sarve 302 tathApi bhavatu jJAtA
269 taddeze vipulaskandho 58 tatra vaivasvato nAma 492 tathApi yadyasaMtoSaH 396
tabrUhi taruNI kasmai 168 tatra saMsArijIvAnAM tathApi zUrahastAyA- 265
tadromasaMnibhaiH kuntai- 182 tatra sundarasarvAGgA 478 tathApi zraddhayA tanme
107 tadvatsaMsAragehe'ha 460  /  tatra sphaTikabhittyaGgA tathA pravrajito
bhUtvA 247 tadvadhArtha gataM zakra- 145 159 262 361 255 87 279 23 ta

Page #570 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
520 In the search for that, those who were left after being killed by him, His
son, the son of Sagara, killed - the son of Kekaya, The body of the one who was
being understood, 335 245 87 491 240 341 335 492 482 String, lineage, and mixed,
121 That is certain, the ministers understood, 455 294 61 The whole body was
thin, the middle of the body was broad-hipped, The one who lived at the end of
the body, by him, The connection of the thread of lineage, and Bad house In the
middle of that, Bharata, the wheel-bearing one, In the middle of that, it shines
like Mount Meru, Those who have set out on that path, and the penance I do, the
penance of the world, the inconceivable penance of the cowardly, The penance of
the crooked one who is the end of the world, The penance, by the suffering, of
you, The penance, the one whose whole body is dried up, those who have burnt
away their sins by penance, The forest of penance, by the best of the sages -
seeing him, then, the Shal tree, Hearing him, then, the end, hearing him, then,
all, Knowing him, then, the end, I told him, in the jewel-topped one, The
darkness, then, was separated by the pure, By her, too, for my son, by her, the
one who was humble, With her, great wealth, He was made generous in body, By
that wealth, The battle of those two princes, the news of the well-being of
those two, With the love of those two, thus, That was said, he heard that, then,
the direction of those two, his,  78 313 302 382 8 69 458 323 13 279 259 242 453
388 27 97 434 208 464 182 265 99 396 189 195 In the Padma Purana, Of those two,
unknown, thus, of those two, mutually connected, Of those two, also, obtained
before, of those two, also, before, the head, Of those two, the elephant-skull-
shaped umbrella, From the covering cloth of the waves, of the one whose color is
like the young sun, Thinking, from the one whose color is like the young sun,
the disease, the hole, The one who has been satisfied, the group of travelers,
On the bases, of the tall mansions, You were given, by the love of others, The
wealth of those two, made into music, 390 The daughter of those two, and 450 Of
those two, a great one arose, in the marriage, 418 the gathering of the prowess
of those two, 337 The marriage of those two, by great wealth, 421 Yo-har, 461 Of
those two, the name was Shrikantha, of those two, there was, there, Bhima, Of
those two, the daughter, the nine lotus-colored ones, The one who is like the
breaking of the waves, the one whose eyebrows are like the waves, the one who is
adorned with the beauty of the waves, the new, beautiful one, By his grace,
then, They stood together, free from knots, Therefore, I do actions, And from
that, I obtained birth, Therefore, we go to her, Therefore, son, return, 366 47
153 160 62 Therefore, giving up all this, Therefore, this good god, Therefore,
the Veda is without a doer, Therefore, we stay here, 97 388 419 27 228 230 368
490 34 466 12 464 121 393 21 107 134 299 132 360 374 Therefore, I ask him, now,
therefore, of doubtful character, therefore, with all effort, in a man, 3
therefore, with all effort, the standard, 319 84 391 250 53  Therefore, another,
also, who, to him, 374 217 361 284 50 132 346 92 312 92 90 456 474 368
Therefore, I will abandon him, therefore, going without knowing, therefore, his
own battle, therefore, giving up this, therefore, get up, go, therefore, get up,
go, therefore, hearing him get up, therefore, giving with the intention,
therefore, skilled by what was obtained, therefore, foolish, like this,
therefore, as your father, therefore, until the arrogant ones, therefore, until
this womb, therefore, born from the fire, 70 Therefore, by someone who hates,
256 Therefore, by a man, or a woman, 328 Therefore, he is returning, 98
Therefore, informing, go, you, 368 in that, thus, in the prosperous one,
existing, 421 in that, then, he goes to Rajagriha, 421 in that time, in those
who are lost, 48 116 In that, he speaks, in that country, 42 In that, while in
the womb, because in that, the jewels of rules, 323 311 In that, indeed, of the
one who is shining, to him, truth is not pleasing, 57 To him, the king of men,
delighted by the crown, etc., 457 To him, five prostrations, 114 To him, the
flower-answer, the girl, 97 To him, in summary, he said, 434 To him, she spoke
with words, 150 449 467 195 448 373 In the fame of that one, in the lineage of
that one, eight days, of that one, also, the footsteps went, The name of the
father of that one was, The word of that one, the ear, of that god, in this
world, 49

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 520 tadvarAnveSaNe tasya tadvyApAditazeSA ye tanayaH sAgarerjahro - tanayaM
kekayAsUta tanutAM bodhyamAnAyAH 335 245 87 491 240 341 335 492 482 tantrI
vaMzAdisaMmizra 121 tannizcitaM mantrijano'vagatya 455 294 61
tanubhUtasamastAGgaH tanumadhyA pRthuzroNI tano'ntevAsinastena tantusantAnayogaM
ca dugRha tanmadhye bharatazcakrI tanmadhye meruvadbhAti tanmArgaprasthitAnAJca
tapaH karomi saMsAratapaH kApuruSAcintyaM tapaH kRtAntavakrasya tapaH klezena
bhavatAM tapaH zoSitasarvAGgo taponirdagdhapApA ye tapovanaM munizreSThai--
tamadRSTvA tataH zAlaM tamudantaM tataH zrutvA tamudantaM tato'zeSaM tamudantaM
parijJAya tamUce maNicUlAyaM tamo'tha vimalaibhinnaM tayApi mama putrAya tayA
vinayavatyAsI tayA saha mahaizvaryaM tAsaudArito dehe tandhanavibhUtyAsya tayoH
kumArayoryuddhaM tayoH kuzalavRttAnta- tayoH snehabhareNaivaM tayoktaM sa tataH
zrutvA tayoryayA dizA tasya 78 313 302 382 8 69 458 323 13 279 259 242 453 388
27 97 434 208 464 182 265 99 396 189 195 padmapurANe tayorajJAtayorevaM
tayoranyonya saMbaddha tayorapi puropAttaM tayorapi puro mUrddhA
tayorgajaghaTATopa taraGgapracchadapaTAd taruNAdityavarNasya
taruNAdityasaMkAzAtarkayantI rujA chidraM tarpitAdhvagasaMghAteH taleSu tuGga
harmyANAM tavApitaH paraprItyA tayordhanaM kRtaM vAdyaM 390 tayorduhitaraM cAva
450 tayormahAn saMvavRte vivAhe 418 tayovikramasaMbhAro 337 tayovivAhaH parayA
vibhUtyA 421 yohara 461 tayoH zrIkaNThanAmAbhUt tayostatrAbhavadbhImaH
tayostanUjA navapadmarAgA taraGgabhaGgarAkArataraGgabhrUvilAsADhyA taraGgiNI
nave ramye tadAsya cAnubhAvena tasthurekatra nirgranthA tasmAt karomi karmANi
tasmAcca saMbhavaM prApa tasmAttAmeva gacchAmo tasmAtputra nivarttasva 366 47
153 160 62 tasmAtsarvamidaM hitvA tasmAtsAdhumimaM devaM tasmAdakartRko vedaH
tasmAdatraiva tiSThAmo 97 388 419 27 228 230 368 490 34 466 12 464 121 393 21
107 134 299 132 360 374 tasmAtpRcchAmyamuM tAvat
tasmAtsaMdigdhazIleyatasmAtsarvaprayatnena puruSe 3 tasmAtsarvaprayatnena
pratimAn 319 84 391 250 53 tasmAdanyo'pi yastasmai 374 217 361 284 50 132 346 92
312 92 90 456 474 368 tasmAdapana yAmyenaM tasmAdavidito gatvA tasmAdasya svayaM
yuddha tasmAdidaM parityajya tasmAduttiSTha gacchAma tasmAduttiSTha gacchAva
tasmAdutthitamAkarNya tasmAduddizya yaddAnaM tasmAdupAttakuzalo tasmAdevaMvidhaM
mUDhA tasmAdyathA te janakaH tasmAdyAvadarAtInAM tasmAdyAvadayaM garbha
tasmAdvahniTI jAto 70 tasmAdviSTena kenApi 256 tasmAnnareNa nAryA vA 328
tasmAnnivartamAno'sau 98 tasmAnnivedya gaccha tvaM 368 tasmiMstathA zrImati
vartamAne421 tasmiMstadA rAjagRhaM prayAti 421 tasmin kAle naSTeSu 48 116 tasmin
gadati taddeze 42 tasmin garbhasthite yasmAtasminniyamaratnAni 323 311 tasmin hi
dIpamAnasya tasmai na rucitA satyaH 57 tasmai narendro mukuTAdihRSTo 457 tasmai
paJcanamaskAraH 114 tasmai puSpottaraH kanyAM 97 tasmai samAsato'vocat 434
tasmai sAkathayad vAcA 150 449 467 195 448 373 tasya kIttisamAkhyAyAM tasya
gotre dinAnyaSTau tasya cAnupadaM jagmu tasya janakanAmAbhU tasya tadvacanaM
zrotretasya devasya loke'smin 49

Page #571 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Verse Number Index  521 * **179**  *tasyacchandanamalaaya* * **243**
*tasyapakse tatas petuh* * **71**  *tasyapadmottaraabhikyah* * **71**
*tasyapitraa jitaah sarve* * **413**  *tasyaputrashatam taav* * **387**
*tasyapratininadena* * **58**  *tasyapradakshinam kurvan* * **139**
*tasyabhaaryaa babhuveshta* * **33**  *tasyamadye mahaameru* * **100**
*tasyayogyaa gunaih kanyaa* * **69**  *tasyayuddhaaya samprapto* * **69**
*tasyaloshthubhiranyaisch* * **149**  *tasyasaa yoginah paaven* * **445**
*tasyah kamalavaasinyo* * **365**  *tasyah sechanakatvam tu* * **173**  *tasyam
madhuryayuktaayaam* * **147**  *tasyam vaishravano jaatah* * **94**
*tasyadityagatirjaato* * **285**  *tasyadityayashah putro babhuva* * **67**
*tasyadityayashah putro bharat* * **39**  *tasyanaabhisametaaya* * **39**
*tasyanugamanam chakra* * **39**  *tasyanupam maishvaryam* * **409**
*tasyamasuuta saa putram* * **353**  *tasyametadavasthaayaam* * **358**
*tasyarupasamudre'sau* * **358**  *tasyavata ratah sena* * **404**
*tasyavartaasu mugdhena* * **361**  *tasyavinaaparaadhena* * **402**
*tasyasannbhuvam prapya* * **61**  *tasyasid ganapalaana* * **395**
*tasyastatsakalam duhkham* * **365**  *tasyaste kamyamaanaaya* * **361**
*tasyaste nayane dirgha* * **284**  *tasyasyako rane sthatum* * **414**
*tasyeshubhirvapubhinnam* * **241**  *tasyai chaakthayann mulaam* * **334**
*tasyaiva cha muneh paarve* * **291**  *tasyaiva shakrasanjnasy* * **214**
*tasyocchinnigateh shabde* * **469**  *tasyopare tato yaati* * **177**
*tasyopare tato yodha* * **271**  *tam kanyaam sodaro netut* * **271**  *tam
kanyaam samaasaady* * **202**  *taaditastrikshnabhanena* * **159**  *taadyamanaa
cha chandaalai* * **109**  *taat naasmin janah ko'pi* * **356**  *taat me
lakshanam shakt* * **235**  *taatasya charani natvaa* * **100**  *taat svalpaapi
nastyatra* * **299**  *taani shastraani te naaga* * **29**
*tapatyajanachittasya* * **177**  *tamaasena tato'strena* * **246**  *taapasena
sata tena* * **243**  *taapasaan durvidhaan buddhya* * **10**
*taapasphutitakooshikai* * **158**  *taabhirityu ditam teshaam* * **343**
*tamadrishvaatichakshusyaam* * **39**  *taambuldayini kachit* * **357**
*taambularaganimmukt* * **463**  *taaranikaramadhyastho* * **455**
*taarunyasuryo'pyayamevameva* * **265**  *taavachch vrajatastasya* * **265**
*taavachch bhaanu raidastham* * **415**  *taavatputrashatam tasya* * **233**
*taavatsaagaravriddhya* * **233**  *taavadan yakathaachchede* * **233**
*taavadutpattyavegena* * **280**  *taavadeva janah sarvah* * **280**
*taavadvimrishya kaaryaani* * **280**  *taavantyeva chotpannaah* * **280**
*taavanty eva sahasraani* * **209**  *taavandmandodari bava* * **416**  *taa
vishadavatiirdrishtaa* * **179**  *taasu ratnaani vastraani* * **180**
*tiraschaam maanushaanaam cha* * **75**  *tiryagjaatisametasya* * **75**
*tiryagjaatisvabhaavena* * **75**  *tiryagnara kaduhkhaani* * **75**
*tiryagnara kanthah san* * **75**  *tiryagbhirmaanushairdevaih* * **33**
*tiryaglokasya madhye'smin* * **308**  *tilakena bhrumormadhyam* * **308**
*tilamatro'pi deso'sau* * **357**  *tishtataapi tvayaa naath* * **114**  *tisht
tisht duraachaar* * **367**  *tishtatyudikshmanasch* * **194**  *tisht tvamiha
jaamataah* * **187**  *tishtanti nischalaah svaamin* * **64**  *tishtanti munayo
yatra* * **365**  *tisht munch grihaaneti* * **445**  *tisra koá¹­yo'rdhakoá¹­i cha*
* **215**  *tikshnah shikharasamghaatah* * **404**  *tire'syaah saritah shasyam*
* **381**  *tirthe vimalanathasya* * **227**
*tungaarjunavanakiirnatungavanhinapichchougha* * **227**
*tungastarangsanghaataih* * **236**  *tubhyam vedayitaasmiiti* * **480**
*turangairyadalam svangat* * **480**  *turangachanchalaacharut* * **480**
*turiyam va srijel lokam* * **480**  *tulyarthataikashabdene* * **278**
*tushtÄbhyupagamÄt kinch* * **47**  *tushtÄ samvikshya tanayam* * **72**
*tushtena tena saa tasmai* * **449**  *susyantyarchanti vanchanti* * **170**
*tuni mano bhuvah stambho* * **170**  *turyadidambaram tyaktvaa* * **291**
*trnatulyeshu naamishu* * **322**  *trnaanaam shalayah shreshthah* * **322**
*trnupamam paradravyaam* * **27**  *trtiye mandaddirghoshnat* * **27**  *trpta
rasen padmaanaam*  **438** **212** **344** **317** **341**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH 521 tasya candanamAlAyA- 179 tasya pakSe tataH petuH
243 tasya padmottarAbhikhyaH tasya pitrA jitAH sarve 71 tasya putrazataM tAva-
413 tasya pratininAdena 387 tasya pradakSiNAM kurvan 58 tasya bhAryA babhUveSTA
139 tasya madhye mahAmeru 33 tasya yogyA guNaiH kanyA 100 tasya yuddhAya
saMprApto tasya loSThubhiranyaizca 69 tasya sA yoginaH pAveM 149 tasyAH
kamalavAsinyo 445 tasyAH secanakatvaM tu 365 tasyAM mAdhuryayuktAyAM 173 tasyAM
vaizravaNo jAtaH 147 tasyAdityagatirjAto 94 tasyAdityayazAH putro babhUva285
tasyAdityayazAH putro bharata- 67 tasyA nAbhisametAyA- 39 tasyAnugamanaM cakra
tasyAnupamamaizvarya tasyAmasUta sA putra 409 tasyAmetadavasthAyAM 353 tasyA
rUpasamudre'sau tasyAvata rataH senA 358 tasyA vArtAsu mugdhena 404 tasyA
vinAparAdhena 361 tasyAsannabhuvaM prApya 402 tasyAsId gaNapAlAnA- 61
tasyAstatsakalaM duHkhaM 395 tasyAste kAmyamAnAyA- 365 tasyAste nayane dIrgha
361 tasyAsya ko raNe sthAtuM 284 tasyeSubhirvapubhinnaM 414 tasyai
cAkathayanmUlaM 241 tasyaiva ca muneH pArve 334 tasyaiva zakrasaMjJasya 291
tasyocchinnagateH zabde 214 tasyopari tato yAti 469 tasyopari tato yodhA 177 tAM
kanyAM sodaro netUtAM ca kanyAM samAsAdya 271 tADitastIkSNabANena 202 tADyamAnA
ca caNDAlai- 159 tAta nAsmin janaH ko'pi 109 tAta me lakSaNaM zakta- 356 tAtasya
caraNI natvA 235 tAta svalpApi nAstyatra 100 tAni zastrANi te nAgA- 299
tApatyajanacittasya 29 tAmasena tato'streNa 177 tApasena satA tena 246 tApasAn
durvidhAn buddhyA 243  /  tApasphuTitakozIkai- 10 tAbhirityuditaM teSAM 158
tAmadRSvAticakSuSyAM 343 tAmbUladAyinI kAcit 39 tAmbUlarAganirmukta- 357
tArAnikaramadhyastho 463 tAruNyasUryo'pyayamevameva 455 tAvacca vrajatastasya
265 tAvacca bhAnuraidastaM tAvatputrazataM tasya 415 tAvatsAgaravRddhayAdi
tAvadanyakathAcchede tAvadutpattya vegena 233 tAvadeva janaH sarvaH tAvadvimRzya
kAryANi 280 tAvanta eva cotpannAH tAvantyeva sahasrANi tAvanmandodarI bavA 209
tA viSAdavatIrdRSTA 416 tAsu ratnAni vastrANi 179 tirazcAM mAnuSANAM ca 180
tiryagjAtisametasya tiryagjAtisvabhAvena tiryagnarakaduHkhAni
tiryagnArakapAnthaH san 75 tiryagbhirmAnuSairdevaiH tiryaglokasya madhye'smin 33
tilakena bhruvormadhyaM tilamAtro'pi dezo'sau 308 tiSThatApi tvayA nAtha 357
tiSTha tiSTha durAcAra 114 tiSThatyudIkSamANazca 367 tiSTha tvamiha jAmAtaH 194
tiSThanti nizcalAH svAmin 187 tiSThanti munayo yatra 64 tiSTha muJca gRhANeti
365 tisra koTyo'rdhakoTI ca 445 tIkSNaH zikharasaMghAtaH 215 tIre'syAH saritaH
zasyaM 404 tIrthe vimalanAthasya 381 tuGgArjunavanAkIrNatuGgavaMhiNapicchaugha-
227 tuGgastaraGgasaMghAtaiH tubhyaM vedayitAsmIti 236 turaGgairyadalaM
svaGgaturaGgazcaJcalaccAruturIyaM vA sRjellokaM tulyArthataikazabdena 480
tuSTAbhyupagamAt kiMci. 278 tuSTA saMvIkSya tanayaM 47 tuSTena tena sA tasmai 72
suSyantyarcanti vaJcanti 449 tUNI manobhuvaH stambho tUryAdiDambaraM tyaktvA 170
tRNatulyeSu nAmISu 291 tRNAnAM zAlayaH zreSThAH tRNopamaM paradravyaM 322 tRtIye
mandadIrghoSNatRptA rasena padmAnAM 27 438 212 lsh 344 317 341

Page #572 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
522 Papouraane _34  _ 78 43 486 81 Trilokeshwara-taachihna- 22 Trivarna-netra-
shobhinyo Trivishtapaá¹ yathÄ Shakro 143 Trishchatasribhir-yukta Trinshad-
yojanamÄnÄdhah Trailokyaá¹ shobhamÄyÄtatrailokyaá¹ api sambhÅ«ya TrailokyasyÄ
paritya jya TrailokyÄdath niá¸¥sheá¹£aá¹ 219 Twaksukhaá¹ sukumÄraá¹ tu 483
TwangmÄá¹sÄsthÄ«nÄá¸¥saukhyÄ 483 Twatsangamaá¹ samÄsÄdya 392 Twatsmá¹ti pratibaddhaá¹
me 364 Tvadgatiprekshaá¹enaite TvadvaktrakantisambhÅ«tatvayÄ nÄth jagatsupta 20
TwayyavijnÄtagarbhÄyÄtvÄdá¹ÅÄ mÄdrÌ¥ÅÄ ye cha 222 375 414 Te kathaá¹ vada ÅÄmyante
2 Te kadÄcidatho yÄtÄá¸¥ 84 Te kudharma samÄsthÄya TejomayÄ«va santÄpa- 352 Te taá¹
prÄpya punardharma Te taá¹ bhÄvena sansevyate Sato vadatÄmeva 379 Tena
ká¹£aá¹asamudbhÅ«ta- 292 Tena chabhihitaá¸¥ pÅ«rva- 236 Tena tanikhilaá¹ dhvantaá¹ 293
Tena te ká¹£aá¹amÄtreá¹a 284 Tena tvayÄ sÄrdhamahaá¹ vidhÄya 418 Tena doá¹£Änubandhena
70 Tena dharmaprbhÄvena Tena paryata tÄ dá¹á¹£á¹­vÄ 134 Tena yukto janaá¸¥ ÅaktyÄ 323
Tena vÄkyena sikto'sÄ- 173 Tena vÄruá¹ayÄá¸¥ sarve Tena sÄdhaá¹ mayÄ vidyÄ 273
TenÄnudhÄvamÄnÄna TenÄpahatachittÄnÄá¹ TenÄbhijnÄnadÄnÄna TenÄmÄ« kÄrÄ«tÄ bhÄnti
196 Tenaikena vinÄ sainya- 129 Tenaiva taccha sanjÄtaá¹ 58 Tenoktaá¹ deva jÄnÄsi
468 TenoktÄste ká¹tasnÄnaá¹ 435 Te punaá¸¥ parapeedÄyÄá¹ 25 Te'pyasá¹­au tadviyogena
437 Tebhyo jagÄda yajÃ±asya Tebhyo bhÄvena yaddattaá¹ 310 Te virÅ«pasamÄstÄá¹gÄ- 431
Te shakranagarÄbhikyÄ 204 Te Åastrapaá¹ayaá¸¥ krÅ«rÄ- 475 Teá¹£Äá¹ kenachidityukta 53
Teá¹£Äá¹ nÄmÄni sarveá¹£Äá¹ Teá¹£Äá¹ madhye tato jyeá¹£á¹­ho Teá¹£Äá¹ madhye na dagdhau dvai 85
Teá¹£Äá¹ mahotsavastatra 409 Teá¹£Äá¹ vaktrÄá¹i ye prÄptÄ 275 Teá¹£Äá¹ Åiá¹£yÄá¸¥ praÅiá¹£yÄÅcha
TenÄmanupadaá¹ lagnÄ 136 Teá¹£vastrakoshalaá¹ tasya 493 Te samÄdhi samÄsÄdya 25
TomarÄá¹i ÅarÄnyÄÅÄá¹ TyaktarÄgamadadveá¹£Ä 453 TyaktÄyÄ me tvayÄ nÄth 358 TyaktÄ
vaÅasthÄ dharaá¹Ä« tvayeyam 455 TyaktvÄ dharmadhiyÄ bandhÅ«n 246 TyaktvÄ nau
dharaá¹Ä«vÄso 194 TyaktvÄ parigrahaá¹ sarva 93 TyakvÄ lingÄ« punaá¸¥ pÄpo 247
Tyajato'sya dharitriyaá¹ 87 TyÄgasya nÄthino yasya 15 TyÄjyetadtparaá¹ loke 325
TrapraprapÄyate'nyatra 287 Vapante drÄnti sajjanti 448 Ayaá¹ surabhikoá¹­Ä«nÄá¹
prayo'gnyo vapuá¹£yeva 257 TrastasÄranga kÄntÄká¹£Ä« TrastasÄranga jÄyÄ ká¹£Ä« 377
TrastÄvyÄlokanÄÅÄá¸¥ 217 TrÄsÄkulitachitteá¹£u 183 Triá¸¥parÄ«tya cha bhÄvena 379
TrikÅ«á¹­aÅikhÄrÄdhastÄn TrikÅ«á¹­aÅikharaá¹Äso 136 TrikÅ«á¹­Äbhimukho gacchan 412
TrikÅ«á¹­ÄnÄva tenÄso 102 TridaÅÄndrasamo bhogaá¸¥ Tripuro malayo hema- 226
Tripuspoà¤¤à¥à¤¤à¤°à¤¸à¤à¤à¥à¤à¥à¤½à¤¤à¥ 425 TribhÅ«vanakushalamatiÅaya- 391 Trilokaká¹tapujÄya 220
TrilokamandanaabhikyÄá¹ 199 TrilokasrÄ«pariprapta 117 Triloka vibhutÄachihna [da]
275 171 Daá¹á¹£á¹­rayoá¸¥ preá¹khaá¹aá¹ kurvan 142 Daá¹á¹£á¹­rÄkarÄlavadanÄ- 464
Daá¹á¹£á¹­rÄkarÄlave tÄla karÄlasta- 114 Daá¹á¹£á¹­rÄ vasantasimhasya Daká¹£aá¸¥ prasanna
kÄ«riyaá¹ 283 Daká¹£Ät sambhavatsuá¹uá¸¥ 447 Daká¹£iá¹asyÄá¹ ná¹paÅreá¹yÄá¹ 334 Daká¹£iá¹asyÄmaá¹
Åreá¹yÄdaká¹£iá¹Äá¹ cha gá¹hÄá¹Äti 242 Daká¹£iá¹ÄpathamÄsÄdya Daká¹£iá¹ÄÅÄmaÅeá¹£Äá¹ sa 187
Daká¹£iá¹ÄÅÄmu khodgÄ«rá¹aá¸¥ 338 Daká¹£iá¹ÄnÄghriá¹Ä pÅ«rva 357 Daká¹£iá¹Ä vijayÄrddhasya 54
Daká¹£iá¹odantvato dvÄ«pe 146 DagdhvÄ karmorukaká¹£a ká¹£ubhita- 442 Daá¹á¸aÅcha má¹tyuriva
jÄtaÅarÄ«ra- 422 244

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 522 papapurANe _34 _ 78 43 486 81 trilokezvaratAcihna- 22 trivarNanetrazobhinyo
triviSTapaM yathA zakro 143 trizaccatasRbhiryuktA triMzadyojanamAnAdhaH
trailokyaM zobhamAyAtatrailokyamapi saMbhUya trailokyasya parityajya
trailokyAdatha niHzeSaM 219 tvaksukhaM sukumAraM tu 483
tvaGamAMsAsthiAnaHsaukhyA 483 tvatsaGgamaM samAsAdya 392 tvatsmRti pratibaddhaM
me 364 tvadgatiprekSaNenaite tvadvaktrakAntisaMbhUtatvayA nAtha jagatsupta 20
tvayyavijJAtagarbhAyAtvAdRzA mAdRzA ye ca 222 375 414 te kathaM vada zAmyante 2
te kadAcidatho yAtAH 84 te kudharma samAsthAya tejomayIva saMtApA- 352 te taM
prApya punardharma te taM bhAvena saMsevyate sato vadatAmeva 379 tena
kSaNasamudbhUta- 292 tena cAbhihitaH pUrva- 236 tena tanikhilaM dhvAntaM 293
tena te kSaNamAtreNa 284 tena tvayA sArdhamahaM vidhAya 418 tena doSAnubandhena
70 tena dharmaprabhAveNa tena paryaTatA dRSTvA 134 tena yukto janaH zaktyA 323
tena vAkyena sikto'sA- 173 tena vAruNayaH sarve tena sAdhaM mayA vidyA 273
tenAnudhAvamAnena tenApahatacittAnAM tenAbhijJAnadAnena tenAmI kAritA bhAnti 196
tenaikena vinA sainya- 129 tenaiva tacca saMjAtaM 58 tenoktaM deva jAnAsi 468
tenoktAste kRtasnAnaM 435 te punaH parapIDAyAM 25 te'pyaSTau tadviyogena 437
tebhyo jagAda yajJasya tebhyo bhAvena yaddattaM 310 te virUpasamastAGgA- 431 te
zakranagarAbhikhye 204 te zastrapANayaH krUrA- 475 teSAM kenacidityuktA 53 teSAM
nAmAni sarveSAM teSAM madhye tato jyeSTho teSAM madhye na dagdhau dvau 85 teSAM
mahotsavastatra 409 teSAM vaktrANi ye prAptA 275 teSAM ziSyAH praziSyAzca
tenAmanupadaM lagnA 136 teSvastrakozalaM tasya 493 te samAdhi samAsAdya 25
tomarANi zarAnyAzAM tyaktarAgamadadveSA 453 tyaktAyA me tvayA nAtha 358 tyaktA
vazasthA dharaNI tvayeyaM455 tyaktvA dharmadhiyA bandhUn 246 tyaktvA nau
dharaNIvAso 194 tyaktvA parigrahaM sarva 93 tyakvA liGgI punaH pApo 247
tyajato'sya dharitrIyaM 87 tyAgasya nAthino yasya 15 tyAjyametatparaM loke 325
trapatrapAyate'nyatra 287 vapante drAnti sajjanti 448 ayaM surabhikoTInAM
prayo'gnayo vapuSyeva 257 trastasAraGgakAntAkSI trastasAraGgajAyAkSI 377
trastAvyalokanAzAH 217 trAsAkulitacitteSu 183 triHparItya ca bhAvena 379
trikUTazikharAdhastAn trikUTazikhareNAso 136 trikUTAbhimukho gacchan 412
trikUTeneva tenAso 102 tridazendrasamo bhogaH tripuro malayo hema- 226
tripuSpottarasaMjJo'to 425 tribhuvanakuzalamatizaya- 391 trilokakRtapUjAya 220
trilokamaNDanAbhikhyAM 199 trilokazrIpariprApta 117 trilokavibhutAcihna [da] 275
171 daMSTrayoH preGkhaNaM kurvan 142 daMSTrAkarAlavadanA- 464
daMSTrAkarAlavetAla karAlastai- 114 daMSTrA vasantasiMhasya dakSaH prasanna
kIriyAM 283 dakSAt samabhavatsUnuH 447 dakSiNasyAM nRpazreNyAM 334
dakSiNasyAmayaM zreNyAdakSiNAM ca gRhANeti 242 dakSiNApathamAsAdya
dakSiNAzAmazeSAM sa 187 dakSiNAzAmukhodgIrNaH 338 dakSiNenAghriNA pUrva 357
dakSiNe vijayArddhasya 54 dakSiNodanvato dvIpe 146 dagdhvA karmorukakSa
kSubhita- 442 daNDazca mRtyuriva jAtazarIra-422 244

Page #573 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
What is the gift desired? The gift given by the king of the demons. The battle
of giving lasted for a long time, and after giving the order, he again did.
Giving the news of the counter-force. Giving the seven virtues. Giving to
Suvrata, he showed the Narmada with foam-covered waves. He gives liberation. He
gave the knowledge of the Ashali. They saw, struck with wonder. They saw him,
the king of the people. With teeth-bitten lower lip, bound. Row of teeth, white-
shadowed. Those very teeth, which are peaceful-toothed, having seen the clearly-
seen king of the teeth, the great circle, the elephant smells him, as long as he
holds the supreme by him. Holding the self as void. Wearing a garland on his
chest. He said, "Again, O Bhadra!" He said, "O fire of desires!" By suppression,
the beating of the wicked. The Jinas, being told of compassion. The burning coal
of separation from the beloved. The beloved told, as long as. 142 154 354 231
111 381 446 228 222 278 164 57  142 446 3 294 140 198 446 341 296 273 225 23 326
444 445 270 20 Born of a poor family, always in a poor belly. By pure vision.
309 302 By the fuel of vision, having become beyond the reach of vision. 325 By
vision, by touch, by anger. 229 Shown by these two, on the back. Shown, even
then, in that. 370 In the middle of the mirror. 144 465 153 Even though there is
a mirror, a blade of grass is distinct. 403 The order of the first letters of
the verses. Like a leaf, with pride. Even in the leaf, fear of movement.
Dashagriva in vain. Praise. Dashagriva is the essence. To Dashagriva, Sugriva.
With Dashagriva, those. Dashagriva, then, his son. In those ten divisions, thus.
On the tenth day, from that day, the tenth, the tenth part. By the one released
from the ten mouths. 35 199 432 233 By the mouth of Dashagriva. 267 By the ten-
mouthed one, by him, I. 170 Dashagriva, even those arrows. 292 By the ten
streams released. 485 One hundred more, by him. The birth of Dashaanan. Whatever
mouth of Dashaanan. The story of the ten-mouthed one, to him. It is the duty of
the ten-mouthed one. By the ten-mouthed one, then, he was driven. The ten-
mouthed one, with many wives. 84 6 267 203 212 210 336 185 346 275 As in a
burning house. 247 Pomegranate, betel nut, and kol. 103 The giver, the enjoyer,
the one who stands, the doer. 317 Even though the gift is condemned, it goes.
311 152 309 179 190 328 6 The ten-mouthed one, even though he conquered the
enemy. With bitten lower lip, he pulled. Like a generous one being burned. By
the gift, the cloud of desires. By the gift, they resort. The child, the joy of
his own people. 20 377 160 160 214 176 179 Like a forest fire, by him. The class
of servants, vast wealth. By the Digambara, the statement. The pillar of
Dignaga's bondage. At the end of the day, the end of the Tatpurusha. In the
three days that have passed. 451 371 340  These three days are not mine. Then,
on that day, the disc. The touch of the sun's hand. The horses of the sun's
chariot. Made joyful with divine garlands. Covered with a divine garment. The
direction in which the sun went. In the direction of Kishkupura, then. All
directions were darkened. By destiny, you have resorted to enlightenment. To
those who are the cause of increase by destiny. He attained the Jain initiation.
By taking initiation, by him. The initiation of Indrajeet and others. If you
choose this initiation. The initiation of the son of the wind. Having performed
austerities for a long time. Long, hot breath. To the poor, blind, and people.
The king, the owner of the dinar. What else with the poor here? For sorrow goes
to destruction. By the speech that has come out of sorrow. The sorrow-stricken
grove, without relatives. The self-proof of sorrow. Overwhelmed by the burden of
sorrow. By sorrow, the state of death. The difficult entry of the unrighteous.
By bad nature, the mother-in-law. By the wicked, how by him. Broken, with a foul
body. By nature, in foulness. Rare, in the existence of beings. Bad clothes,
unfortunate, rough. Difficult, even for Ravana. Those who do not give up evil
deeds. Those who are attached to evil deeds, the supreme. The wicked, of the
evil deed, now. 523 342 199 173 11 51 22 129 201 266 385 490 304 81 8 452 8 304
351 310 320 136 394 351 324 374 327 245 78 395 130 327 332 91 301 405 331 96 259

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 dattaM kimicchakaM dAnaM dattaM rAkSasanAthena dattayuddhazciraM tAvat datvA
cAjJAM punazcakre datvA pratibalAkhyAya datvA saptaguNopetA datvA
suvratasaMjJAya dadarza narmadAM phenapaTalaiH dadAti parinirvANa dadAvAzAlikAM
vidyAM dadRzuvismayApannAH dadRzustaM prajAdevaM dantadaSTAdharo baddha
dantapaGkti sitacchAyA dantAsta eva ye zAntadantino dRSTavispaSTadantirAjo
mahAvRttaM dantI jighrati taM yAvadadhatA paramaM tena dadhAnaH zUnyamAtmAnaM
dadhAno vakSasA hAraM dadhyau ceti punarbhadraH dadhyau ceti sakAmAgni
damanaistADanaMrdo ha dayAnukto jinendrANAM dayitAvirahAGgAra
dayito'kathayadyAvat 142 154 354 231 111 381 446 228 222 278 164 57 142 446 3
294 140 198 446 341 296 273 225 23 326 444 445 270 20 ni daridrakulasaMbhUtaH
daridramudare nityaM darzanena vizuddhena 309 302 darzanendhana
saMvRddhadarzanAgocarIbhUte 325 darzanAt sparzanAt kopAt 229 darzitAH
pRSThametAbhyAM darzite'pi tadA tasmin 370 darpaNasya sthitaM madhye 144 465 153
darpaNe vidyamAne'pi darbhasUcI vinirbhinna 403 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH
dalantamiva darpeNa dalespi calite trAsaM dazagrIva vRthA stotra dazagrIvastu
bhAvasya dazagrIvAya sugrIvo dazagrIveNa sArdhaM tAH dazagrIvo'tha putrAsyaM
dazabhedeSu teSvevaM dazame'hni dinAdasmAdazamo dazamo bhAga:
dazavaktravimuktena 35 199 432 233 dazavaktrasya vaktreNa 267 dazavaktreNa
tenAhaM 170 dazavaktro'pi tAn bANa- 292 dazasyandananirmuktai 485 dazAdhikaM
zataM tena dazAnanasya prajani dazAnanasya yadvaktraM dazAsyacaritaM tasmai
dazAsyasyaiva karttavyaM dazAsyena tato dRtaH dazAsyo'nekapatnIko 84 6 267 203
212 210 336 185 346 275 dahyamAne yathAgAre 247 dADimI pUgakaGkola 103 dAtA
bhoktA sthiteH kartA 317 dAnaM ninditamapyeti 311 152 309 179 190 328 6
dazAsyo'pi jitaM zatruM daSTAdharaH samAkarSan dahyamAnamivodAraM dAnena
kAmajaladA dAnenApi prapadyante dArako svajanAnandaM 20 377 160 160 214 176 179
dAvAgnisadRzAstena dAsavargo vizAlA zrI digambareNa kathanaM
dignAgabandhanastambhadinAnte tatpurasyAntaM dineSu triSu yAteSu 451 371 340
divasAnAM trayaM naitanmama divasena tato bimbaM divAkarakarasparza
divAkararathAzvAnAM divyasragbhiH kRtAmodAM divyAMzukaparicchanna dizA
yayAndhrako yAtaH dizi kiSkupurasyAtha dizosndhakAritAH sarvA diSTayA bodhi
prapannAsi diSTayAvardhanakAribhyaH dIkSAM jainezvarIM prApa dIkSAmAsthAya
tenaiva dIkSAmindrajidAdInAM dIkSAmimAM vRNISe cet dIkSA pavanaputrasya
dIrghakAlaM tapastaptvA dIrghoSNataranizvAsa dInAndhA dijanebhyastu
dInArasvAminA rAjA dInaiH kimaparairatra duHkhaM hi nAzamAyAti duHkhaniHsRtayA
vAcA duHkhinyupavanA'bandhu duHkhapratyAyanasvAnta duHkhabhArasamAkrAntA
duHkhena maraNAvasthAM duHpravezamarAtInAM du:svabhAvatayA zvazrvA durAtmanA
kathaM tena durgandhavigrahA bhagna durgandhAyAM svabhAvena durlabhaM sati
jantuve duzcelA durbhagA rUkSA duSkaro rAvaNasyApi duSkarma ye na muJcanti
duSkarma saktamatayaH paramAM duSkRtasyAdhunA pApAH 523 342 199 173 11 51 22 129
201 266 385 490 304 81 8 452 8 304 351 310 320 136 394 351 324 374 327 245 78
395 130 327 332 91 301 405 331 96 259

Page #574 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
524 In the Padma Purana 486 154 482 253 Leaving that wicked woman 108 Seeing
that hostile 284 great serpent of the senses Seeing his form again 435 the
daughter named Kaikeyi 470 Seeing with respect and doing 273 the daughter of
Janaka 473 Seeing Dasharatha like a lion, 470 Seeing him being determined 459
The messenger said thus 100 Seeing the enemy force arrive 231 The young
messenger went to Shrinagara 420 Seeing the fragrance on the body 366 The
messenger stood in the northern part 101 Seeing the child, the father 154 Flying
far away Seeing him overwhelmed 303 Seeing him from afar 178 The gardener with a
sharp arrow 137 Seeing from afar Seeing those joyful ones before 109 Leaving him
from afar 22 Seeing the extraordinary knowledge 493 Descending from afar Seeing
the wonder of this garland 154 Knowing that the king has gone far 466 Seeing on
the bank of the river 239 Pulling out the DurvÄ sprout 338 Seeing that Prithuka
to his mother 396 DÅ«panÄkhya was the commander of the army 226 Seeing Hanuman's
army 412 With firm steps 137 Seeing the brilliance of Kapila 283 Caste
distinction is seen Seeing the northern direction pervaded 99 With eyes devoid
of stars DevakÄ« is to be known as the last 440 Seeing these only The jewel-
bearing deity 353 Defeated in the battle of sight They attain divinity 309 He
then said with gravity The miseries of the fallen deities Seen even by them
Riding the king of gods and men Seen by him, the minister This is the divine
prowess 278 The eyes wander here and there People are like gods among them
Honoring some with the gaze 295 Free from going to the gods Seeing and honoring
the armored one 286 The devotion to the gods 391 Seeing him, then frightened 202
The lord of the gods has set 439 Seeing him, great affection 198 The gods are
pleased with him 306 Seeing the wind-born one standing 420 Where is that lord of
the gods 29 Seeing those animals bound 249 In the fear of gods and demons 279
Seeing the son captured by enemies 287 O virtuous lady, whose 391 Seeing, a mark
arose in her 249 O goddess, all offenses 158 Seeing that handsome form 269 The
goddess fell down again 108 Seeing the parasol of this one 291 The goddess with
a wonderful garland 465 Seeing him in the nearby village 87 Saying "By the god"
115 By the demon king god The gods also nourished 249 The threshold, the part of
the foot 106 Embodied, he attained the state of the body Even in the body, they
do 318 Crowded with villages and towns Traveled to another country 241 The
regions are equal in enjoyment He wanders in every region 135 Known for his
demonic nature 168 Similarity to the Dodunduka. In the magnificent swings 113
What fault is there in the crows 417 Her faults are the opposite 483 At the end
of the ocean of misfortune 375 Like the sky freed from the sun 352 Satisfaction
in acquiring wealth 117 Wealth acquisition is knowledge 492 Wealth that is equal
to the self 310 This wealth is deeply 428 The coldness and heat of wealth 481
You bear the life span 163 The flower fallen from the tree 185 Only two were
borne by that face 48 Only two by the brave ones 417 The twelfth day, the
dakshina, go 254 Placed at the entrance 295 Blocking the door 373 Seated at the
door 357 Completely with the door posts 319 The elephant, the lion-like 445 The
dharma is said to be twofold 318 Measured by two hands The fearsome islands and
mountains 201 This entire island 163 This island is of the jewels of dharma 431

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 524 padmapurANe 486 154 482 253 duSTAM tataH striyaM tyaktvA 108 dRSvA
tamabhyamitrINa- 284 duSTendriyamahAnAga dRSTvA tasya punArUpaM 435 duhitA
kaikayI nAma 470 dRSTvAdareNa kRtvA ca 273 duhitA janakasyApi 473 dRSTA
dazarathaM siMha dUtAttatpreSitAja jJAtvA 470 dRSTvA nirdhAryamANaM taM 459 dUto
yAvad bravItyevaM 100 dRSTvA parabalaM prApta 231 dUto yuvA zrInagaraM sametya
420 dRSTvA parimalaM dehe 366 dUto'varottare bhAge 101 /  /  dRSTrA pitA ca taM
bAlaM 154 dUramuDDIyamAnena dRSvAbhibhUyamAnaM taM 303 dUrAdeva ca taM dRSTvA
178 daSTrA mAlI zitabaNiH 137 darAdeva tato dRSTvA dRSTA yAn mudita: pUrva 109
dUrAdeva hi saMtyajya 22 daSTA vijJAnameSAmatizaya- 493 dUrAdevAvatIrNazca
dRSTAzcaryaM sa hAro'sya 154 dUrIbhUtaM nRpaM jJAtvA 466 dRSTA sarittaTodyAne
239 dUrvApravAlamuddhRtya 338 dRSTA'sau pRthuko mAtu 396 dUpaNAkhyazca senAyAH
226 dRSTvA hanUmataH sainyaM 412 dRDhabaddhapadAyatya- 137 dRSdaiva
kapilakSmAsya 283 dRzyate jAtibhedastu dRSTvottarAM dizaM vyAptAM 99
dRSTaniHzeSatArAkSaH devakI caramA jJeyA 440 dRSTamAtreSu caiteSu 151
devatAdhiSThitaH ratna- 353 dRSTiyuddhe tato bhagna devatvaM ca prapadyante 309
dRSTo'tha gauraveNoce devadurgatiduHkhAni dRSTo'pi tAvadeteSAM
devamAnavarAjoDhAM dRSTo'sau sacivastasya devaprakrama evAya- 278 dRSTI to tatra
tatreti devA iva janAsteSu dRSTyA saMmAnayan kA~zci- 295 devAgamananirmukte
dRSTvA ca chinnavarmANaM 286 devAdevabhaktiprahaH 391 dRSTvA ca taM tato bhItA
202 devAdhipatitAcakra- 439 dRSTA ca taM parAM prIti 198 devAnAmeSa tuSTAnAM 306
dRSTvA ca taM vAyusutaM paTasthaM 420 devAnAmadhipaH kvAsau 29 dRSTvA ca tAn
pazUn baddhAn 249 devAsurabhayotpAde 279 dRSTA ca mAtaraM cihna: 249 devi
pazyATavIM ramyA 133 dRSTvA ca zatrubhiH putraM 287 devi zIlavatI kasya 391
dRSTvA cAsya samutpannA 89 devi sarvAparAdhAnAM dRSTvA janasamUhaM taM 407 devI
nivedanAd dRSTvA 158 dRSTvA taM sundarAkAraM 269 devI bhUyazcyuto jAtaH 108
dRSTvAtapatrametasya 291 devI vicitramAlAtha 465 dRSTA tamantikagrAmo 87
devenetyabhidhAyAso 115 devena rAkSasendraNa devaiH saMvadhitatvAcca 249 dehalI
piNDikAbhAga- 106 dehavattvaM jagAmAsI dehe'pi yena kurvanti 318
dezagrAmasamAkIrNadezamAnaM vitastyAdi dezAntaraM prayAtena 241 dezA bhogabhuvA
tulyA deze deze carAstena 135 daityatvena prasiddhasya 168 dodundukasUraupamyaM
/  dolAsu ca mahArhAsu 113 doSaH ko'tra varAkINAM 417 doSAstasyA pratIpaM ya-
483 daurbhAgyasAgarasyAnte 375 dyaurivAdityanirmuktA 352 draviNAptiSu saMtoSo
117 draviNopArjanaM vidyA- 492 dravyaM yadAtmatulyeSu 310 dravyapalyamidaM
gADha- 428 dravyANAM zItamuSNaM ca 481 drAdhiSThaM jIvakAlaM tvaM 163 drumasya
puSpamuktasya 185 dvayaM babhAra tadvaktra- 48 dvayameva raNe vIraiH 417 dvAdazI
dakSiNA yAtu 254 dvAradezasuvinyasta 295 dvArapAlanirodhana 373
dvArastambhaniSaNNAGgAM 357 dvAropari samAyuktadvirbhavaizca niHzeSaM 319
dviradaM zAtkaraM siMha- 445 dvividho gadito dharmo 318 dvihastasaMmitAmA
dvIpaigirinirbhIma- 201 dvIpasyAsya samastasya 163 dvIpo'yaM dharmaratnAnA 431 .

Page #575 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 224 ## 470 rm ## 27 ## 389 The order of the verses, starting with the first,
is twofold. ## 311 Woe to those wicked ones, two of whom are in Kuru-dvipa. ##
360 Two great trees are to be known. ## 299 Woe to those who are beyond the
reach of knowledge, two sons will be born. ## 259 Those who are shaking their
wings with speed. ## 459 This demerit is washed away. ## 262 He who possesses
the fame of a king. ## 478 Divine and Rishi-like fear. ## 326 He who is wealthy,
generous, and has washed away the stains of betel nut. ## 282 Run with the bow
in your hand. ## 218 Having meditated, the big toe. ## 220 The sin burnt by
meditation. ## 379 Touched by the earth, then knowledge. ## 448 They meditate,
they go, they wander. ## 78 Another in the other earth. ## 371 Meditating, she
is overwhelmed with much. ## 161 Abandoning her father's house. ## 247 The
object is to be meditated upon with a concentrated mind. ## 314 They practice
Dharma for the sake of liberation. ## 238 You are praised, O Goddess, as
Goddess. ## 161 The mind is attached to Dharma meditation. ## 238 Destroying the
hatred of the Jinas. ## 161 By the mere utterance of the word Dharma. ## 144 The
army is being destroyed, then. ## 195 Liberated by hearing Dharma. ## 144 The
army is being destroyed, then, seen. ## 314 This is the Dharma-sign. ## 210
Flags, umbrellas, etc., are beautiful. ## 328 See the greatness of Dharma. ##
110 On flags, on the horns of houses. ## 117 For Dharma has compassion as its
root. ## 182 Any sound was mixed. ## 48 Even by a Dharma-soul, of the world. ##
145 The enemy is destroyed, and the thread is good. ## 148 Dharma, Artha, Kama,
and Karya. ## 197 The attainment of the drop of Dharma-water. ## 315 They do it
with this Dharma. ## 276 I do not praise myself. ## 314 United with this Dharma.
## 326 Eating day and night. ## 328 Dharma is the root of the origin of
happiness. ## 45 Large pearls in the constellations. ## 427 Dharma is the city
of jewels, the sun. ## 427 No one recites the ten virtues. ## 55 No one is a
part of the country. ## 270 In the island of Dhataki-lakshmi. ## 364 No one is
born, O Lord. ## 294 Running, born of victory. ## 418 No one's name is greater.
## 233 With the bow, in the chariot. ## 285 The nail can be cut. ## 111 The bow
is the union of the bow. ## 118 A man going to the city. ## 263 Near the city.
## 370 Woe to you, wicked moon. ## 219 Woe to this body, this mind. ## 454 Woe
to me, this unconscious sin. ## 246 Cities and crowds of people. ## 424 The city
is very beautiful. ## 210 In the city, then in Lanka. ## 190 Neither in the
village nor in the city. ## 193 The daughters of the king of the city. ## 467
The son of Naghusha. ## 466 Naghusha also desired the northern region. ## 466
Because it was not proclaimed there. ## 253 Nor by one of another caste. ## 235
Nor is this said to me. ## 100 Nor is there any reason. ## 254 There is no
caste-benefit. ## 334 Not so the king of the mountains. ## 210 His glory is not
in the wheel. ## 372 Sleep does not come to his eyes. ## 380 Having bowed down
to the spring garland, having looked at the spring garland. ## 190 On the banks
of rivers, in forests. ## 349 By whom are you told? ## 352 Was anyone born to
you? ## 376 To the enlightened one herself. ## 218 She danced and played on the
Ganges. ## 218 Like Nandan, with the wind. ## 210 Nandan, etc., are beautiful.
## 218 Nanda said, "Live." ## 218 In the Jinas, the lords of Nandis. ## 438 The
wind of the clouds, the food, cakes, etc. ## 281 The cloud-travelling, these
cloud-travelling groups. ## 281 The commonality of cloud-travelling. ## 337 The
cloud-travelling moon is here. ## 155 The cloud went somewhere with the cloud.
## 124 This one, named Nabha-tilaka. ## 164 The sun having gone in the middle of
the sky. ## 208 The interior is as pure as the sky. ## 221 Salutations to
Kunthu-Jinendra. ## 221 Salutations to the one united with Right Faith. ## 188
Having said, "Salutations to the Siddhas." ## 221 Salutations to Sumati, the
lotus. ## 120 Bowed down, prostrated, O God. ## 55 ## 264

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 224 470 rm 27 389 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH dvaidhIbhAvamupetena dhigastu tAn
khalAneSa 311 dvau ca tatra kurudvIpe dhigasmatsadRzAnmUrkhA- 360 dvau
mahApAdapo jJeyo dhigvidyAgocaraizvayaM 299 dvo sutAvudapatsyAtAM dhunvAnAM
pakSatI vegAt 259 dhUto'nyena jaTAbhAra[dha] dhUtametadapuNyama 459 dhatte yo
nRpatikhyAti 262 dhaivatyathArSabhISaDja- 478 dhanado vA bhavatyeSa
dhautatAmbUlarAgANAdhanavanto guNodArAH 326 dhautasphaTikatulyAmbhaH dhanurAhara
dhAvasva 282 dhyAtveti caraNAGguSTha- 218 . dhammilamallikAbandha
dhyAnanirdagdhapApAya 220 dharaNena tataH spRSTaH dhyAyantaM vastu yAthAtmyaM
379  /  dharaNena tato vidyA dhyAyanti yAnti valganti 448 dharaNyantarati cAnyad
78 ghyAyantImAkulaM bhUri 371 gharaNyAM svapitustyAgaM 161 dhyeyamekAgracittena
247 dharma caranti mokSArtha ghriyase devi devIti dharmadhyAnaprasaktAtmA
dhvaMsayana jinavidveSa 238 dharmazabdanamAtreNa 161 dhvaMsyamAnaM tataH sainyaM
144 dharmazravaNato mukto dhvaMsyamAnaM tataH sainyaM dRSTA 195
dharmasaMjJamidaM sarva 314 dhvajachatrAdiramyeSu 210 dharmasya pazya mAhAtmya
328 dhvajeSu gRhazRGgeSu 110 dharmasya hi dayAmUlaM 117 dhvaniH ko'pi
vimizro'bhUt 182 dharmAtmanApi lokasya .48 dhvastazatruzca sutrAmA 145
dharmArthakAmakAryANAM 148 dhvastasaMdhyena ca vyAptaM 197
dharmAmbubindusaMprApti [na] dharmeNa maraNaM prAptA 315 dharmeNAnena kurvanti
314 na karomi stuti svasya 276 dharmeNAnena saMyuktA naktaM divA ca bhuJjAno 326
dharmo mUlaM sukhotpatte- 328  /  nakSatrasthUlamuktAbhiH 45 dharmo ratnapurI
bhAnu- 427 427 na kazcidakadazAjapa na kazcidekadezo'pi 55 5 dhAtakIlakSmaNi
dvIpe 270 na kazcijjanito nAtha 364 dhAvamAno jayodbhUta- 294 na kasyacinnAma
mahIya- 418 dhAnuSkeNa rathasthena 233 nakhena prApyate chedaM 285 dhAnuSko
dhanuSo yogAt 111 nagaraM vrajataH puMso 118 dhAnyAnAM parvatAkArA nagarasya
samIpena 263 dhika tvAM pApAM zazAGkAMzu 370 nagarANi janaughAzca 246 dhik
zarIramidaM ceto 219 nagarI paramodArA 424 ghiG mAmacetanaM pApaM 454
nagaryAmatha laGkAyAM 210 na grAme nagare nopa- 190 nagarAdhipasya kanyAnAM 193
naghuSasya suto yasmAt 467 naghuSo'pyuttarAmAzAM 466 na ghoSitaM yatastasmin 466
na ca jAtyantarasthena 253 na cAnenoditaM mahyaM 235 na cAsti kAraNaM kiMcit 100
na jAtihitA kAcid 254 na tathA girirAjasya 334 na tasya gauravaM cakre 210 na
tasyA nayane nidrA 372 natvA vasantamAlA taM natvA vasantamAloce- 380 nadI
kUleSvaraNyeSu 190 nanu kena kimukto'si 349 nanu te janitaH kazcin 352 nanu
svayaM vibuddhAyA 376 nanRtugaMgane krIDA 218 nandanasyeva vAtena nandanAdiSu
ramyANi nandAjJApaya jIveti nandIzvare jinendrANAM nabhaHpayomucAM vAtana
pAtheyamapUpAdi- 438 nabhaHsaMcAriNI kAyanabhazcaragaNairebhiH  /
nabhazcaratvasAmAnyaM 281 nabhazcarazazAGko'tra 337 nabha nabhasA prasthitaM
kvApi 155 nabhastilakanAmno'yaM 124 nabhomadhye gate bhAnI 164
nabhovadamalasvAntaH 208 namaH kunthujinendrAya 221 namaH samyaktvayuktAya 221
namaH siddhebhya ityuktvA 188 namaH sumataye padma- 221 namataM praNataM deva-
120 55 264

Page #576 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
526 Padmapurana 125 ir Namatiiva sadaayana Naakopbhuuktapaakasy 410
Naanaalabdhisamutpatteh 382 Namaskritya ca sambhraanta- 202. Namas kritya
vahaamyetan Naagabhogasamaakara- 263 Naanaavaaditra shabdena 296
Namaskrityopavishtaste Naagabhogopamaa bhoga- 83 Naanaasanvyavaharaabhi- 207
Namaste vijagadgiita Naagavatyah sutaa tasmin 190 Naabhicca tatsutan drishtaa 47
Namaste devadevaaya 220 Naagavruksho'nuraadhakhya 426. Naabheya samayastena 465
Namaste viitaraagaaya 20 Naagiyama iva tatkaanta Naabheya sya sunandaabhuut
Namisu vrata yorm adhye 441 Naagendrakritarakshana 154 Naabheyo vaa punar yasmin
Nabhijanato dosho 97 Naajnaasiit kila tall oka 243 Naama shruutvaa pranamati
janah 268 Namero pall avaapaasta- 274 Naatishita na caatyushna 35
Naamaaksharakarair asya Navidyadharendrasya 68 Naatyant munnati yaataa 103
Naamaakhyatopa sargeshu 478 Namo'stu pushpadantaaya 221 Naatha te gamanam yuktam
356 Naamnaatha mishrakeshiiti 345 Nayamaanam prapan nena 280 Naatha tvayema
vikalaa vina- 456 Naamna naagavati tasya 190 Naratvam durlabham praapya 321
Naatha nyaaso'maastaam me 487 Naamna prahasitam mitram 342 Naranaatha ku tumbee
vaa 321 Naatha yaataa samas taaste 48 Naamna mahaa giris tasya 444
Naravrindaraakaasaktanaatha gaganayaatraanaam 201 Naamna shaakhabali putra 200
Narantara mukhakleda- 278 Naathena tu vina yaataan 53 Naayaatah sa dinaante'pi
239 Naraaschandra mukhaah shooraah Naanaakaaraani yantraani 231 Naaradah
kupito'vochattatah 241 Narendra tava naasty eva 101 Naanaacheshtitasampoornaa
Naaradastama tha shruutvaa 240 Narendrasya dharaadevyaam 76 Naanaajanapadaan
dweepaa Naaradaalikhitaam sitaam 7 Narorvantaranik shipta Naanaajanapadairevam
265 Naarado'thaantare tasmin 246 Navam patala mabjaanaam 338 Naanaadurodaran
yaasa 482 Naarado'pi tatah kaanchin 258 Navati panchabhih
saardhanaanaadrumalataakirne Naarthi hridayavegaayaamajaayan ta 335 Navati sch
sahasraani Naanaadeshasamaayaata Naashane shayaniyena Navati stasya sanjaataa
Naanaadeshasamutpanna- 238 Naasaavabhimato'smaakam Navaneetasukhaspartee 491
Naanaadeshodbhavam shruutvaa Naasikaagranivishtaati- 451 Navapallavasachchhaayam
344 Naanaadhaatu kritachchhaaya 392 Naaso shishyo na chaacharyo 115
Navayauvanasampoornaa 168 Naanaadhaatusamaakirna 215 Naasti kachchin naro loke
86 Na vina piithabandhana Naanaapushpasamaako naam Naahaminindro jagannindy- 353
Na vyavastha na sambandha Naana bhavanti tishthanti Nishaeshadrishyavibhraanta-
109 Na shaknoomi gajam dhatum Naanaratanakaraasanga Nishaeshado shanirmukto Na
shiilam na ca samyaktva 322 Naanaratanakaro dyota Nisarpanamaram taavad- 275 Na
shaileshu na vrukshesh u 404 Naanaratanakritachchhaayam 227 Nishareyasasya
bhutaanaam 220 Nasht adharma jagatyasmin Naanaratanakrito dyota Nikaaram
arunagraame Na samyakkarunaa teshu Naanaratanakrito dyota- 227 Nigadanty
evamaadiini 206 Na saa tridashanaathasya 303 Naanaratanachitaanaam cha Nighnanti
taani randhreshu 135 Na so'sti purusho bhumau 183 Naanaratanaprabhaajaal- 78
Nijagaad tatah shakrah 144 Naakaardhasanjnakasyaayam Naanaratanaprabhaatyani 472
Nijagotrkramaayaatam 199 x 432 350 359 33 228 448 57 325 104 126

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 526 padmapurANe 125 ir namatIva sadAyAna nAkopabhuktapAkasya 410
nAnAlabdhisamutpatteH 382 namaskRtya ca saMbhrAnta- 202 /  /  nAgaH
kasyacidapyatra 185 nAnAvarNAni vastrANi 57 namaskRtya vahAmyetAn
nAgabhogasamAkAra- 263 nAnAvAditrazabdena 296 namaskRtyopaviSTaste nAgabhogopamA
bhogA- 83 nAnAsaMvyavahArAbhi- 207 namaste vijagadgIta nAgavatyAH sutA tasmin
190 nAbhizca tatsutaM dRSTrA 47 namaste devadevAya 220 nAgavRkSo'nurAdhakSa 426
/  nAbheyasamayastena 465 namaste vItarAgAya 20 nAgIyamiva tatkAntaM nAbheyasya
sunandAbhUt namisuvratayormadhye 441 nAgendrakRtarakSaNa 154 nAbheyo vA
punaryasmin nabhijanato doSo 97 nAjJAsIt kila tallokaH 243 nAma zrutvA praNamati
janaH 268 namerupallavApAsta- 274 nAtizItaM na cAtyuSNaM 35 nAmAkSarakarairasya
navidyAdharendrasya 68 nAtyantamunnati yAtA 103 nAmAkhyAtopasargeSu 478 namo'stu
puSpadantAya 221 nAtha te gamanaM yuktaM 356 nAmnAtha mizrakezIti 345 nayamAnaM
prapannena 280 nAtha tvayemA vikalA vinA-456 nAmnA nAgavatI tasyA 190 naratvaM
durlabhaM prApya 321 nAtha nyAso'mAstAM me 487 nAmnA prahasitaM mitraM 342
naranAthaH kuTumbI vA 321 nAtha yAtAH samastAste 48 nAmnA mahAgiristasya 444
naravRndArakAsaktanAthA gaganayAtrANAM 201 nAmnA zAkhAbalI putraH 200
narAntaramukhakleda- 278 nAthena tu vinA yAtAn 53 nAyAtaH sa dinAnte'pi 239
narAzcandramukhAH zUrAH nAnAkArANi yantrANi 231 nAradaH kupito'vocattataH 241
narendra tava nAstyeva 101 nAnAceSTitasaMpUrNA nAradastamatha zrutvA 240
narendrasya dharAdevyAM 76 nAnAjanapadAn dvIpA nAradAlikhitAM sItAM 7
narorvantaranikSipta nAnAjanapadairevaM 265 nArado'thAntare tasmin 246 navaM
paTalamabjAnAM 338 nAnAdurodaranyAsaH 482 nArado'pi tataH kAMzcin 258 navatiH
paJcabhiH sArdhanAnAdrumalatAkIrNe nArthI hRdayavegAyAmajAyanta 335 navatizca
sahasrANi nAnAdezasamAyAta nAzane zayanIyena navatistasya saJjAtA
nAnAdezasamutpanna- 238 nAsAvabhimato'smAkaM navanItasukhasparTI 491
nAnAdezodbhavaM zrutvA nAsikAgraniviSTAti- 451 navapallavasacchAyaM 344
nAnAdhAtukRtacchAyA 392 nAso ziSyo na cAcAryo 115 navayauvanasaMpUrNA 168
nAnAdhAtusamAkIrNa 215 nAsti kazcinnaro loke 86 na vinA pIThabandhana
nAnApuSpasamAkoNAM nAhamindro jagannindya- 353 na vyavasthA na saMbandhA nAnA
bhavanti tiSThanti niHzeSadRzyavibhrAnta- 109 na zaknomi gajaM dhatuM
nAnAratnakarAsaGga niHzeSadoSanirmukto na zIlaM na ca samyaktvaM 322
nAnAratnakarodyota niHsarpaNamaraM tAvada- 275 na zaileSu na vRkSeSu 404
nAnAratnakRtacchAyaM 227 niHzreyasasya bhUtAnAM 220 naSTadharma jagatyasmin
nAnAratnakRtodyotA nikAramaruNagrAme na samyakkaruNA teSu nAnAratnakRtodyota-
227 nigadantyevamAdIni 206 na sA tridazanAthasya 303 nAnAratnacitAnAM ca
nighnanti tAni randhraSu 135 na so'sti puruSo bhUmau 183 nAnAratnaprabhAjAla- 78
nijagAda tataH zakraH 144 nAkArddhasaMjJakasyAyaM nAnAratnaprabhATyAni 472
nijagotrakramAyAtaM 199 x 432 350 359 33 228 448 57 325 104 126

Page #577 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 308 ## 27 ## Verses and their order ## 527  Self-nature attainment - 346 ||
Exiting from there, then from that - 402  The king marched forward 31  Hip-
carrying effort - 113  Unbound, your sight is seen 460  Decision also gained
beforehand - 161  Completely, far away, he was taken 345.  Unbound, seen in
front 65 ||  He threw flowers 264  Completely, in a soft field 36.  Let me
explain this to you 127  Playless, those who have gone forth, mostly 430
Completely, even though a renunciant 222.  Having defeated them, you, the enemy
92 ||  With a sigh, measured, he was - 306  Completely, those who do  ##
Defeat, knowing the slain 137  Sitting down, with good eyes, he 72  Completely,
with delicate limbs 158  The reason for killing and defeat ##  Unshaken, even
though on the head 122  Completely pure, he made ##  The law, his maternal
uncle, then 395 ||  He exited, stunning the colors 276  Completely brilliant,
others ##  Of waterfalls, very large 103 ||  They exited, well-armed - 282  In
those with eternal darkness ##  Of the friendless, the helpless 21  She exited
from the cave dwelling 398  In eternal light, then in the city 214  Of the
friendless, the helpless 21  She exited from the cave dwelling 398  In eternal
light, then in the city 214  In eternal light, those, in those 330 ##  Made,
self-nature itself 38  Pulling out, with a thread, the string 220  Death, in the
courageous ##  Appointed, always, by men - 230  The firmness of the body 153
The repository of actions, this 152  Shameless, this one, with clothes removed
119  Nature-science, right understanding - 23  Blaming, severely, herself  _351
The reason for exile, of this one 409  Nature, this, thus, by which 384
Blaming, her own reproach 377  Exile, of those, by dharma ## 118 ##  With groups
of three-headed ones 259  Blame, of the virtuous class 273  Let him be exiled,
from the city, from us - 373  Exiting from the circle, from the friend 381
Falling at the feet, then 285  He was exiled, standing, with the virtuous 210
He was slain, your brother 132  With suppressed, deep, breathing 378  He has
ceased, he has departed, the point 479  He was taken, with the thousand-rayed
one 264  Subtle, sinking, arising - 113  He has ceased, also, by the law 135  He
was taken, to his own abode, binding 233  With the branch of the submerged
lineage, the topmost part - 198  I will turn you away, from this country 215
She was taken, to the house of her father 179  The mere cause, others, this 186
The dwelling, of past good deeds 10 ##  He was taken, by a new boat 266  The
mere cause, in this 302  The dwelling, the highest, is to be known 441  With the
brilliance of blue lotuses  He endures, even a blink - 339  Dense, the mass of
hair . 48 ##  With the color of blue lotuses, with a blink, the earth of
sacrifice ##  259  Entered, in the belly of the arrow ##  The shade of blue,
mountain-like 407  Deep, the sound of the low-flying ones 318  Having heard, the
beloved, has ceased 350  The attainment of blue collyrium 461  You are able to
control, then 180  Having ceased, with anger, blazing ##  Having ceased,
quickly, completely - 258  With blue lotus eyes, the lotus - 149  By rule,
given, here, also ##  Having ceased, from the effort of Ravana - 275  With the
loosening of the loincloth, busy, by rule, the creators 319 ||  It was reported,
then, by him 197  They push, they raise, they pull  Indifferent, excessive, what
248 ##  This was reported, virtuous one - 395  They sounded, the aerial beings,
sorrow 274  Without throwing, then, becoming 361 ##  He was reported, with
lightning hair 120  Surely, someone, is mine, in this 109  They were observed,
in the mother, yours 136  Having reported, well-being, by him 472  Surely, in
the past, the action done 300  Observing, the waning of the power of Rahu 454
Having reported, he is freed, from sorrow - 343  Surely, good birth 298
Observing, with the goddess, him 458  Having placed, in the place, desired by
the beloved 367  Surely, you are near death 192  Without, Vaishravana, who
fights 182  This, night, is clear 42  Surely, Vaishravana, has arrived 197  He
exited, the sun, not reached - 446  At night, eating, is unrighteousness, those
who - 325 ||  Surely, this one's, beloved, he is not 347  He exited, with his
own, hidden, thorn 223  He marched forth, from the womb 43  Surely, near death,
you are 354 ## 335 ## 343

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 308 27 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH 527 nijaprakRtisaMprApti- 346  /  /
nirgatyAsau tatastasmA- 402 nizcakrAma puro rAjA 31 nitambavahanAyAsa- 113
nirgranthaM bhavato dRSTA 460 nizcayo'pi puropAtta- 161 nitAntaM ca hRto dUraM
345  /  nirgranthamagrato dRSTvA 65  /  /  nizcikSipuzca puSpANi 264 nitAntaM
mRduni kSetre 36  /  nirdhATayetAmimAvasmAd 127 nizlIlA nirvatAH prAyaH 430
nitAntaM yadyapi tyAgI 222  /  nirghATya tAn tvayA zatrun 92  /  /
nizvAsenAmitenAsI- 306 nitAntaM ye tu kurvanti nirghAtaM nihataM jJAtvA 137
niSadya ca sunetraM sa 72 nitAntaM sukumArAGgA 158 nirghAtavadhahetuM ca
niSkampamapi mUrddhasthaM 122 nitAntavimalaizcakre nitimAtulAthAsau 395  /  /
niSkrAntastambhitAn varNAn 276 nitAntojjvalamapyanye nirjharANAmatisthUlaH 103
/  /  niSkrAntAzca susaMnaddhA- 282 nityAndhakArayukteSu nirbandhUnAmanAthAnAM
21 niSkrAntA sA guhAvAsAt 398 nityAloke'tha nagare 214 nirbuddhe ! kodravAnuptvA
301 niSkrAnto vibhunA sAdhaM 301 nityAlokeSu te teSu 330 nirmitAtmasvarUpeva 38
niSkRSya ca snasA tantrI 220 nidhanaM sAhasagate niyuktaiH sarvadA pumbhi- 230
niSTharatvaM zarIrasya 153 nidhAnaM karmaNAmeSa 152 nirlajjo vastramukto'yaM 119
nisargazAstrasamyaktva- 23 nindantI bhRzamAtmAnaM _351 nirvAsakAraNaM cAsyA 409
nisargo'yaM tathA yena 384 nindantI svamupAlambhaM 377 nirvAsasAM tu dharmeNa
118 nistriMzanaravRndaizca 259 nindanaM sAdhUvargasya 273 nirvAsyatAM purAdasmA-
373 nissRtya maNDalAnmitrAd 381 nipatya pAdayostAva- 285 nirvAsyAsau sthitaH
sAdhaM 210 nihatazca tava bhrAtA 132 nibhRtocchvAsanizvAsaM 378 nivRttaH
prasthito binduM 479 nItaH sahasrazmizca 264 nimajjadudbhavatsUkSma- 113
nivRttaM ca vidhAnena 135 nItaH svanilayaM baddhvA 233 nimagnavaMzamagrAGga- 198
nivartayAmyato dezAt 215 nItA ca janakAgAraM 179 nimittamAtratAnyeSA 186 nivAsaH
pUrvapuNyAnAM 10 nIto navena nIpena 266 nimittamAtrametasmin 302 nivAso'nuttarA
jJeyA 441 nIlanIrajanirbhAsA nimeSamapi sehAte- 339 niviDa: kezasaMghAtaH . 48
nIlanIrajavarNAnAnimiSeNa makhakSoNI 259 niviSTaM prAsukodAre
nIlAjjanagiricchAyaH 407 nimnagAnAthagambhIrA 318 nivRttaM dayitaM zrutvA 350
nIlAJjanacaryApti 461 niyantumatha zaknoSi 180 nivRtya krodhadIptena nIleneva ca
vastreNa niyamAt kuruSe yasmA nivRtya tvarayAtyanta- 258 nIlotpalekSaNAM padma-
149 niyamAddAnatazcAtra nivRtya rAvaNAyAsa- 275 nIvIvimocanavyagraniyamAnAM
vidhAtAraH 319  /  /  niveditaM tatastena 197 nudantyucchanti karSanti
nirapekSamatiH kA 248 niveditamidaM sAdho- 395 nunaduH khecarAH khedaM 274
nirakSepastato bhUtvA 361 niveditastaDitkezaH 120 nUnaM kazcinmamAste'smin 109
nirIkSitA pitamyAM te 136 nivedya kuzalaM tena 472 nUnaM purAkRtaM karma 300
nirIkSya rAhakSayalInatejasA454 nivedya mucyate duHkhA- 343 nUnaM
bhadrasamutpattiH 298 nirIkSya saha devI taM 458 nivezya tatpriyoddiSTe 367
nUnaM mRtyusamIpo'si 192 niraivaizravaNo yoddhaM 182 nizAnta ityayaM spaSTo 42
nUnaM vaizravaNaH prAptaH 197 nirgataH sauramavyApta- 446 nizi bhuktiradharmo
yai- 325  /  /  nUnamasyAH priyo'sau nA 347 nirgatasvAntazalyazca 223 nizcakrAma
to garbhAt 43 nUnamAsannamRtyustvaM 354 335 343

Page #578 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
528 The king again, two rivers, the path In this country, the forest is
beautiful Nothing is said about this It is not commanded by any reason If he
does not do this, see Naval torture, like the fig tree, is small Justice, the
conduct, is satisfied Those who fight with justice, less than a crore [ P ] By
the wind, the king's wings are tightly bound Pulse Is taken Five hundred sons of
the lame Five-colored great jewel Let them do it with five colors Lame You are a
learned man, you are a noble man, wearing a silk garment The sound of falling,
jagged stones Falling, in a difficult path, because even falling, not falling
from the back, that is humanity, the fallen sand, fallen from the earth Husband,
the pain of union Fighting with leaves, clothes, gold, etc. Lotus-like action,
relationship Born from a lotus, the festival, without a lotus garland, then
becoming  468 450 127 53 Fifty, the loss of the bow 432 Fifty crore more, 429
five great vows, high 117 wearing a silk garment 40 473 180 439 329 56 232 429
293 258 18 312 63 41 297 45 180 217 313 289 317 230 345 396 481 287 4 490 190 In
the Padma Purana Pure red ruby Red ruby creation Red ruby, red, closed
Padmalakshmana, Shatrughna, Padma, another great Padma I will tell the story of
the lotus Born in the lotus womb Covered with lotuses, water plants Lotus, etc.,
the great sages Padmavati, the tip of the grass Padmavati, the wife In the
beautiful lotus ponds Covered with lotus ponds Lotus transaction, writing The
king of Magadha asked He asked with loving words Attacked by the enemy's wheel
Words that cause pain to others The highest good from this Smaller than an atom
Self-interest in the ultimate truth By understanding the ultimate truth They are
the cause of great wonder They are full of great enthusiasm Mutual contemplation
of qualities Mutual speed attack Mutual chariot attack Mutual killing there
Mutual conversation He who considers another's wife as his mother They both
obtained great joy Then the army from afar Experiencing the pleasures of others
By the mere defeat They were defeated, yet others, again, the work, love,
acceptance, embrace, in acceptance, of the wives 302 Surrounded by women 151
Abandoning compassion, freed 458 Abandoning the kingdom, the king 112 Abandoning
fear, the brave 149 Abandoning the great kingdom 438 Abandoning happiness, from
that 300 Protect yourself, oh lord! 389 Then he cried Defeated, shining, the
group of her To be avoided, like a snake With the whole family Appendix, letter
of penance, etc. Embracing Hanuman For the sake of mocking blows What is drunk
with mockery? Enough of the group of companions Seen by others, afraid Always a
benefactor of others Stay on the couch, the couch, the posture, the body By the
couch posture Because of the couch posture He traveled many countries He
traveled the earth for a long time You two are traveling here The arrogant
chariot, falling He attains, abandoning The mountain, that Kishkindha The music
of the bees These are on the tips of the Palasha trees Less than one third of
the Palya The tenth of the Palya Embracing the wind By the wind-conquering hero
In the story of the wind-conquering In which the wind trembles, etc. Even the
wind, climbing 107 22 98 320 145 460 412 39 452 301 233 207 453 463 385 191 474
119 217 100 134 31 392 429 432 408 407 405 102 403

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 528 nRpeoce punaH do nedIyAnsaMtato mArga neha deze vanaM ramyaM naitena
kathitaM kicit namittena samAdiSTaM naivaM cetkurute pazya naivika yAtanaM
yuddhanyagrodhasya yathA svalpaM nyAya vartana saMtuSTAH nyAyena yoddhumArabdhAH
nyUnaH koTisahasreNa [ pa ] pakSavAtena tasyAbhUpakSIva nibiDaM baddhaH spandana
nIyate paGgunA paJcaputrazatAnyasya paJcavarNamahAratna paJcavarNaizca kurvantu
paGgu paTTAMzuko parinyastapaNDito'si kulIno'si patadvikaTapASANaravA patantaM
durgatau yasmAt patanto'pi na pRSThasya patitaM tanmanuSyatvaM patitAn sikatA
pRSThe patitA vasudhArAtvaM patya saGgamaduHkhena patravastrasuvarNAdipadAtibhiH
samaM yuddhaM padmaceSTitasaMbandha padmajanmotsavasyAnupadmamAlI tato bhUtvA
468 450 127 53 paJcAzaccApahAnyAtaH 432 paJcAzadadhikoTInAM 429
paJcodAravratottuGge 117 paTTAMzukaparicchanne 40 473 180 439 329 56 232 429 293
258 18 312 63 41 297 45 180 217 313 289 317 230 345 396 481 287 4 490 190
padmapurANe padmarAgamaNiH zuddhaH padmarAgavinirmANa padmarAgAruNaM ruddhaH
padmalakSmaNazatrughnapadmazcAnyo mahApadma padmasya caritaM vakSye padmagarbhe
samudbhUtaH padmAdijalajacchannAH padmAdIn munisattamAn padmAvatI kuzAgraM ca
padmAvatIti jAyAsya padmendIvara ramyeSu padmendIvara saMchannaM
padmavyavahRtirlekha papraccha mAgadhezo'ya papraccha priyayA vAcA
paracakrasamAkrAnta parapIDAkaraM vAkyaM paramAM bhUtimetasmAt paramANoH paraM
svalpaM paramArthahitasvAntaH paramArthAvabodhena paramAzcaryahetuste
paramotsAha saMpannAH paraspara guNadhyAna parasparajavAghAta paraspararadAghAta
parasparavadhAstatra parasparasamullApaM parastrI mAtRvad yasya parAM
prItimavApAsau parAcInaM tataH sainyaM parAnanubhavan bhogAn parAbhibhavamAtreNa
parAvRttAstathApyanye parikarma punaH snehaparigrahapariSvaGgAd parigrahe tu
dArANAM 45 186 205 7 425 2 96 35 9 427 445 113 41 480 246 150 78 91 385 60 213
178 489 453 366 290 293 308 103 148 265 354 465 234 383 481 25 374 pariNIya sa
tAM bhogAn 302 paritaH sthitayAmastrI 151 parityajya dayAmukto 458 parityajya
nRpo rAjyaM 112 parityajya bhayaM dhIro 149 parityajya mahArAjyaM 438 parityajya
sukhe tasmA 300 paritrAyasva hA nAtha ! 389 paridevamatho cakre paribhUta ra
vidyota parivargastatastasyAH parivarjyA bhujaGgIva parivAreNa sarveNa
pariziSTAtapatrAdi pariSvajya hanUmantaM parihAsaprahArAya parihAsena kiM pItaM
parISagaNasyAlaM parairAlokito bhIta paropakAriNaM nityaM paryaGkAsanamA sthAya
paryaGkAsana yogena kAyo paryaGkAsanayogena yasmA paryaTaMzca bahUn dezAn
paryaTacca ciraM kSoNIM paryaTanto yuvAmatra paryasyaduddhatArAva paryApnoti
parityak parvato'pi sa kiSkindhaH palabhramarasaMgIta palAzAgrasthitAnete
palyabhAgatrayanyUnaM palyopamasya dazamo pavanaM ca pariSvajya
pavanaJjayavIreNa pavanaJjayavRttAnte pavanAkampanAdyasmin pavano'pi samAruhya
107 22 98 320 145 460 412 39 452 301 233 207 453 463 385 191 474 119 217 100 134
31 392 429 432 408 407 405 102 403

Page #579 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Sloka Number Index  529 373 221 311 148 2 243 165  ##  Verse  Thus, these
letters are pure And the feet on the pedestal, 164. Given with paternal
affection at the door, From the animal earth and so on, To the feet and hands,
364. Like a father, for the sake of spreading The life-forms and animals, 250.
Bowing down to the feet, High up, 143. Established by the father, For that, 484.
In the midst of animals, Slaughter is to be known, 255. As long as the feet are
pulled, 182. Knowing the parents thus, 75. Then, I said, 239. With the big toe,
someone, 123. And the parents, in humility, the feet, 146. See this picture of
men, 304. With the big toe, Meru, 16. He holds the evening glow, 27. See the
play of actions, 380. Joined by the foot-soldier, 117. Tied by fear of the
demon, 154. See, I am born with joy, 221. Someone seated on the footstool, 289.
See, this is clearly visible, 275. In the method of drinking and eating,
Someone, 257. Seeing, filled with wonder, 204. Giving up drinking, eating, and
so on, 48. Sin, the mountain, in the world, 158. Seeing, the king's ministers,
291. By the commission of sinful deeds, 103. Seeing, seeing the blue gem-like
shade, 329. Seeing, Meru, 191. Seeing, hidden bodies, 88. The boundary of the
sinful star, 378. Seeing, seeing this cave, 402. Seeing, seeing the front of
this, 272. Seeing, seeing, dear! Let us go, 388. Those who are in the darkness
of sin, 313. The virtuous, great beings, liberation, 219. See the row of the
virtuous, 161. By some sin, death, 239. I am virtuous, worthy of worship, 298.
See the row in the world, 465. The lineage of the Parijata, 38. Seeing, his
chest is broad, 125. From that, hearing the tradition, 192. Seeing the
generosity of virtue, 415. Seeing, bewildered by wealth, 184. By that very
tradition, 396. They were graced by virtue, 265. He saw the rule of cooking, 71.
The son, of the one with full wealth, then, 23. By the cooked and uncooked, the
beans, 417. The son, equal to, and the bird-kind, 457. The cutting of the
digestion, heat, 482. Someone brought with a rope, 289. With love for the son,
he smelled, 408. The Padala, worthy of worship, 426. Someone, in the side, 123.
The son's fortune, when will you, 156. With one hand, 390. The other hand of the
one beside, 123. To the son, all the wealth, 372. From the carrying of the
hands, the number, 454. In the side, the sound of Nirvana, 159. The sons,
protect me from the barbarians, 44. The name of the pale cloth, 216. Doing like
the pale one, 293. Having made into a ball, the heavy ones, 286. With the pale
one, above, 355. This, in the city of Patala, 412. Again and again, he did, 364.
The name of the lotus of Patala, 413. My grandfather, my lord, 87. Then, the
nurse said again, 136. From Patala, he came out, 189. Much beloved, said again,
217. From Patala, he arose, with hands, 145. You have attained rebirth, 132. In
Patala, there, 349. Your words to my father, 43. The festival of the previous
birth, 439. The one who killed the father, 117. The king, even a speck of dust,
211. The father, your similar joy, 230. The two feet of the Jinas, 492. Again,
she was asked by this, 106 112 125 242 395 486

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zlokAnAmakArAdhanukramaH 529 373 221 311 148 2 243 165 pavitrANyakSarANyevaM
pAdapITheSu caraNau 164 /  pitRsnehAnvitaM dvAre pazubhUmyAdikaM dattaM pAdayoH
karayo bhyAM 364 piteva prANivargasya pazUnAM ca vitAnArtha 250  /  pAdayozca
praNamyoce 143 pitrA pradhAritaM tasyA 484 pazomadhye vadho vedyAH 255
pAdayostAvadAkRSya 182 pitrorevaM parijJAya 75 pazcAdemIti tenokta- 239
pAdAGguSThena kazcicca 123 pitrozca vinayAta pAdau 146 pazyata citramidaM
puruSANAM 304 pAdAGguSThena yo meru 16  /  pidadhe sAMdhyamudyotaM 27 pazyatAM
karmaNAM lIlA 380 pAdAtena samAyuktAH 117  /  /  pinaddhaM rakSasA bhItyA 154
pazya toSeNa me jAtaM 221 pAdAsanasthitaM kazci pinAkAnanalagnena 289 pazya
dRzyata evAyaM 275 pAnAzanavidhau kAcita piSTenApi pazuM kRtvA 257 pazyanto
vismayApUrNAH 204 pAnAhArAdikaM tyaktvA pInastanakRtAnyonyapazyantyo'pi tadA
sasyaM 48 pApaH parvatako loke pInastanataTAspAla- 158 pazyannindrasya sAmantA-
291 pApakarmaniyogena puNDarIkekSaNaM pazyan pazyannIlamaNicchAyaM 103
pApakarmavazAtmAnaH 329 puNDarIkekSaNaM meru 191 pazyan pracchanna gAtrANi 88
pApanakSatramaryAdA puNyaM kecidupAdAya pazya pazya guhAmetAM 378
pApazatrunighAtAya puNyakarmodayAjjJAtvA pazya pazya purasyAsya 402 pApAdasmAnna
mucye'ha- 272 puNyavanto mahAsatvA puruSA-374 pazya pazya priya ! prastAM 388
pApAndhakAramadhyasthAH 313 puNyavanto mahAsatvA mukti-219 pazya zreNika
puNyAnAM 161 pApena kenacinmRtyu 239 puNyavAnasmi yatpUjyo 298 pazya zreNika
saMsAre 465  /  /  pArijAtakasantAna puNyavRttitayA jainyA 38 pazya vakSo'sya
vistIrNa 125 pAramparya tataH zrutvA 192 puNyasya pazyataudArya 415
pazyaizvaryavimUDhena 184 pAramparyeNa tenaiva 396 puNyenAnugRhItAste 265
pAkazAsanamaikSiSTa pAlayitvA zriyaM kecit 71 putraH pUrNadhanasyAtha
pAkyApAkyatayAmASa- 23 pAlikAmugdhalokasya 417 putraH samAnAyya ca pakSajAtaM
457 pAcanacchedanoSNatva- 482 pAzena kazcidAnIya 289 putraprItyA tamAghrAya 408
pADalA vasupUjyazca 426  /  pArzvage puruSe kazci- 123 putralakSmI kadA tu tvaM
156 pANidhairekatAnena 390 pArzvasthasyAparo hastaM 123 putrAya sakalaM dravyaM
pANisaMvAhanAt saMkhyA 372 pArve nirvANaghoSasya 454 putrA rakSata mAM mlecchai-
159 pANDukambalasaMjJAyAM 44 pAzvo vIrajinendrazca 82 putrANAM zatametasya
pANDukasyeva kurvANaM 216 piNDayitvA sthavIyAnsau 293 putro bhImaprabhasyAtha
pANDureNoparisthena 286 piNDIkRtasamastAGgA 91 putro vijayasiMho'sya
pAtAlanagare'yaM tu 355 pitaraM mAtaraM mAtu- 412 punaH punazcakArAso 364
pAtAlapuNDarIkAkhyaM 413 pitAmahasya me nAtha 87 punarAha tato dhAtrI
pAtAlAdatha nirgatya 136 pitAyaM jananI caiSA 189 punaruktaM priyaM bhUri
pAtAlAdutthitaH karai- 217 pitA vicitrabhAnumeM punarjanmeva te prAptA 145
pAtAlAvasthite tatra 132 piturmama ca te vAkyaM 349 puvarjanmotsavaM tasya
pAtAlodaragambhIra- 43 pituryo vadhakaM yuddha punarvasuzca vijJAto 439 pArthivo
loSTalezo'pi 117 pituste sadRzIM prIti- 211 punazca yantranirmukta- 230
pAdadvayaM jinendrANAM pitRbhyAM bhavanAdeSa- 492 punazcAnena sA pRSTA 106 112
125 242 395 486

Page #580 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Padma Purana " Not 353 38 108 339 470 372 297 Again, the king said, 456 Male
Kokila's sweet sound - 450 Another desire from them, again Nagamalati Kund - 40
The method of the book is said 480. Scattered flower rain city, there by great
desire 105 Worship with various flowers 107 Nature stable mind, then the city
circumambulated, worshipped by all the world's Following nature, combined 215
City crown jewel in the house 206 Worshipped by the king's world 249 Washed,
ten-faced, also 186 Purandara city form, worthy of worship, not retreating Good
qualities, section, country, Purandara's son, he gave birth 454 Full, by the
ultimate form Fallen, in Bharata, born 77 Thousands of Purandhri, full moon like
mirror Prajag, this country is 51 City, great, beautiful Being filled, always
served - 204 By Prajapati, etc. 251 Honoring, then, wind 409 Full moon faced,
tell 487 In the bowed, merciful - 262 City's, let there be beauty Full moon,
gentle faced 157 Bowing to the Jina, with strength 63 City's, whose, what name
147 Before, Brahma Ratha, let him go 188 Bowing to the rest, and 402 Before, by
the Muni, said 190 He went, then, combined, cities, in them, beautiful 101
Previous birth, names 425 By power, like the sun, all the cities, you 417
Previous birth, conduct By power, he conquered, city, now, doing  Previous
dharma, influence Unable to do, he 210 Man, excitement, full 382 Before,
qualities, loved 275 Opposed, command 210 City, birth, Indra's Before, also,
gone out 182 Returning, he, that, confused 134 City, thus, Kinnara song, named
419 Before, obtained, god, born Promise, also, he made, this 354 City, Podana,
named, then Before, practice, Sakra's 301 Promise, also, he made, god 241 City,
Meghapur, placed Before, earned, merit's 111 Promise, also, city's, city,
Hanuruh, in which Asked, also, with effort 348 Promised, thus, merit 194 City,
Hemapura, named, separately, oneness, doctrine Opposition, seat, shaking, city,
in the evening, excitement 135 Separately, separately, they take refuge 272
Opposition's, seen 229 Flower top, with, riding 227 Earth, very, to be called
470 Take refuge, when, initiation 322 Flower tooth, eight, end Wide, dead,
forest, brave 463 Reflection, own, seeing 359 Flower dust, mixed 450 Wide,
trembling, some 195 Reflections, like, own, flower, wealth, this, seeing Earth,
what, Magadha, king 227 Awakened, moon, also 145 Flower, pollen, from, light 101
From behind, then, that, this Shining, again, high 409 Flower, wealth, like,
obtaining Back, shoulder, head, thigh 244 Shining, roaring, him 406 Flower,
offering, saying, then 133 Back's, seeing, by whom Shining, combined, they 407
Flowers, five, colors Podana, two, city, elephant 440 Image, also, Jina's 394
Flower, end, gathering Podana, mountain, city Image, also, entering 394 Flower,
end, from, going out 169 Podana, named, city, his Image, heavy, teeth 288
Flower, joy, wealth, with 133 Manliness, more, so much Image, god, gods 382
Flower, after, saying, this, full moon, as, moon Images, also, by gods, his 261
Flower, decorated, purpose 18 Before, after, holding, many 483 Image, placed,
his, then 53 Men, family, born 346 Very, pale, house 441 Echo, like, his 375 71
146 340 220 153 82 209 270 132 281 .... . 329

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe " na 353 38 108 339 470 372 297 punastadudvatya jagAda rAjan 456
puMskokilakalAlApai- 450 prakAmamanyadapyebhyo punnAgamAlatIkunda- 40 pustakarma
vidhA proktaM 480  /  prakIrNA sumanovRSTipuraM tatra mahecchena 105 pUjA ca
vividhaiH puSpaiH 107 prakRtisthiracitto'tha puraM pradakSiNIkRtya pUjitA
sarvalokasya prakRtyanugatairyuktaM 215 puracUDAmaNI gehe 206 pUjito rAjalokasya
249 prakSAlya dazavaktro'pi 186 purandarapurAkAre pUjyaM nAbheyanivRtyA
praguNAkANDadezeSu purandarasya tanayamasUta 454 pUrNaH paramarUpeNa pracyutya
bharate jAto 77 purandhrINAM sahasrANi pUrNacandranibhAdarza prajAga iti
dezo'sau 51 puramasti mahAramyaM pUryamANaH sadA sevyai- 204
prajApatyAdibhizcAya- 251 puraskRtya tato vAyu 409 pUrNenduvadane brUhi 487
praNateSu dayAzIla- 262 purasya kriyatAM zobhA pUrNendusaumyavadanA 157 praNamya
ca jinaM maktyA 63 purasya yasya yannAma 147 pUrvaM brahmaratho yAtu 188
praNamya zeSasaMrgha ca purassareNa tenAso 402 pUrva hi muninA proktaM 190
pratasthe ca tato yuktaH purANi teSu ramyANi 101 pUrvajanmani nAmAni 425
pratApena ravestulyaH purAvadakhilaM sa tvaM 417 pUrvajanmAnucaritaM pratApenava
nirjitya purIyaM sAMprataM kRtyA pUrvadharmAnubhAvena pratikartumazakto'sau 210
purusaMvegasampanno 382 pUrvameva guNa raktA 275 pratikUlitavAnAjJA 210 pure
jananamindrasya pUrvameva ca niSkrAnto 182 pratigacchan sa tAmUr3havA 134 pure
tathA kinnaragItasaMjJake 419 pUrvAptadevajanitAd pratijJAM ca cakAremA 354 pure
podanasaMjJe'tha pUrvAbhyAsena zakrasya 301 pratijJAM cAkarodeva 241 pure
meghapure nyastaH pUrvopArjitapuNyAnAM 111 pratijJA ca purastasyA pure hanUruhe
yasmA pRcchyamAnA ca yatnena 348 pratijJAyeti puNyena 194 pure hemapurAbhikhye
pRthaktvaikatvavAdAya pratipakSAsanAkampa puryAmazanivegena 135 pRthak-pRthak
prapadyante 272 pratipakSasya dRSTAnyA 229 puSpakAgraM sabhArUDho 227
pRthivImatyabhikhyAsya 470 pratipadya kadA dIkSA 322 puSpadanto'STakarmAntaH
pRthupretavanaM dhIrA 463 pratibimba nijaM dRSTvA 359 puSpadhUlI vimizreNa 450
pRthuvepathavaH keci- 195 pratibimbairivAtmIyaiH puSpabhUtiriyaM dRSTvA pRthvyA
ki magadhAdhIza- 227 pratibuddhaH zazAGko'pi 145 puSpaparAgamaNerbhAbhiH 101
pRSThatazca tataH seyaM pratibhAnuH punazcoce 409 puSpalakSmImiva prApya
pRSThaskandhazirojaGghA 244 pratibhAnurudantaM taM 406 puSpAJjali prakIryAtha
133 pRSThasya darzanaM yena pratibhAnusametAste 407 puSpANAM paJcavarNAnAM
podanaM dvApurI hasti 440 pratimAM ca jinendrasya 394 puSpAntakasamAvezaM
podanaM zailanagaraM pratimAM ca pravezyanAM 394 puSpAntakAd viniSkramya 169
paudanAkhye pure tasya pratimAguravo dantA 288 puSpAmodasamRddhena 133
pauruSeNAdhikastAva pratimA devadevAnAM 382 puSpottaravadatyetad paurNamAsyAM
yathA candraH pratimAzca suraistasya 261 puSpopazobhitoddeze 18 paurvAparyodharo
bhUrya- 483 pratimAsthasya tasyAtha 53 puMsAM kulaprasUtAnAM 346
prakANDapANDurAgArA 441 pratizabdasamaM tasyA 375 71 146 340 220 153 82 209 270
132 281 .... . 329

Page #581 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Verse Index:  531 181 348 451 133 285 166 163 454 460 399 67 328 491 121 459
458 320 424 232 105 300 265 352 438 288 352 413 293 202 468 28 218 148  386 320
131 142  226 152 179 182 429 205 365 288 406 333 435 414 355 83 401 339 228 297
339 175 297  106 122 296  479 378  426 20 378 214 390  417 21 209 63 433 121 247
213 77 65 153  38  32 43  174 274 174 19 479 157 395 349 321 325

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH 531 181 348 451 133 pratizrImAli cAyAsI- 285
prabhAvAttasya bAlasya 166 prasanne mayi te vatsa 163 pratizrutiriti jJeya
prabhAsamujjvalaH kAyo 454 prasAdaM kuru me dokSA 460 pratisUryastato'voca- 399
prabhuvibhuravidhvaMso 67 prasAdaM bhagavanto me pratIkAgrAhavaccAsya prabhUtaM
gomahiSyAdi 328 prasAdasammado sAkSA- 491 pravIndurapi putrAya 121
pramattacetasaM pApaM prasAdastena nAthena 459 pratihAragaNAnUce 458 pramANaM
kAryamicchAyAH 320 prasAdAttava vijJAtaH 424 pratIhAreNa cAkhyAta- 232 pramANaM
yojanAnyasya 105 prasAdhanamatiH prAptapratyakSajJAnasaMpanna- 300 pramodaM
paramaM bibhrajjano 265 prasIda tava bhaktA'smi 352 pratyakSamakSamuktaM ca 438
prayacchatpratipakSasya 288 prasIda bhagavannetatpratyaGgAdiSu varNeSu 479
prayacchantItyupAlambhaM 352 prasIda muzca nirdoSApratyari vrajato'muSya- 413
prayayAvasvatantratvaM 293 prasIda vraja vA kopaM 202 pratyahaM kSIyamANeSu 468
prayANasUcinA tena prasUnaprakarAvAptaM 28 pratyahaM bhaktisaMyuktaH 218
pralambitamahAbhogi prasekamamRteneva 148 pratyAgacchaMstato'pazya
pralayajvalanajvAlA- 386 prasevakamito gRhA- 320 pratyAgamaH kRte zoke 131
pravattitastvayA panthA prastAvagatametatte pratyuvAca tato mAlI 142
pravAjitanAtho'pi prasthitazca sa taM dezaM 226 pratyuvAca sa tAmevaM 152
praviveza tato dUtaH 179 prasphuraccAmarairazvai- 182 pratyekametayo dAH 429
praviveza nijAmIzo 205 prasvedabindunikara- 365 prathamaM cAvasarpiNyA
pravizanti raNaM kecit prahAraM muJca bho zUra 288 prathamAdapi sA duHkhAt 406
pravizya vasatiM svAM ca 333  /  /  prahlAdarAjaputrasya prathame darzane yAsya
435 praviSTaH parasainyaM sa 414  /  /  prahlAdamapi tatrAyA 355 prathamo
bharato'tIta- 83 praviSTazca puraM paurai- 401 prahlAdena samaM tena prathitA
vimalAbhAsya praviSTA rakSasAM sainyaM 232 prahlAdo dazavaktrazca 442 pradaya
radanaM kAcit 175 praviSTAzca pratIhAra- 297 prahlAdo'pi tadAyAsIt 339 pradIpa
iva cAnItaH 228 praviSTAste tato laGkA 137 prAkArastatra vinyasto 106 pradeze'pi
sthitAM kazci- 122 praviSTo nagaroM laGkAM prAcyamadhyamayaudheya- 479 pradeze
saMcarantoha 378 praviSTo mudito laGkA 296 prANato'nantarAtIto 426 pradoSamiva
rAjantaM 20 praveSTuM sahasA bhIte 378 prANadhAraNamAtrAtha 214 pradhAnaM
bAhubalino pravINAbhaH pravAlAbhAM 390 prANAtipAtataH sthUlA pradhAnaM
divasAdhIzaH pravINa mA kRthAH zoka 417 prANAtipAtavirataM
pradhAnAzAmukhaistuGga- 21 pravRtte dAruNe yuddhe 209 prANighAtAdikaM kRtvA 63
prabuddhaH putrazokena 433 pravrajAmIti cAnena 121 prANino granthasaGgena 247
prabuddhena satA ceyaM 213 pravrajya ca pituH pAveM 77 prANino mArayiSyanti 65
prabhayA tasya jAtasya 153 prazastAH satataM tasya prANezasaMkathA eva 38
prabhavaM kramataH kIti prazAntena zarIreNa 32 prAtiSThanta mahotsAhA 43
prabhAmaNDalamevAsI praSTavyA guravo nityaM 30 prAtihAryANi yasyASTo prabhAvaM
vedituM vAJchan 174 prasannasalilA tatra 274 prApaddevIsahasrasya 174 prabhAvAt
kasya me kampaM 19 /  /  prasannAdiH prasannAnta- 479 . prAptamaGgalasaMskAro
157 395 349 321 325

Page #582 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
532 Then I think it is obtained Obtained by the learned And that dark country is
obtained And the god is obtained with it And the beautiful Anjana is obtained
They are certainly obtained in dissolution And the attainment of JitapadmÄ is
obtained And what is obtained by that, the living being born in the family, if
he obtains this 257 300 173 326 24 249 Obtaining a small character, obtaining
time spent there, obtaining those banana pillars - 213 131 203 83 Obtaining the
sweet music of the gods, obtaining her command even in a dream, obtaining this
hole of RÄvaá¹a, atonement without fault Atonement and good conduct Generally,
the power of the great ones They started, ÅivÄrÄva He obtains birth and death He
obtains religious fervor A mace-like wheel Those who are of low character have a
palace Then the work of the palace etc. There are palaces in the trees, in the
palace he is a Jain elsewhere Like a fire in passion PriyadattÄ is new to him,
his body is enjoyed by the beloved, his mind is not attracted to the unpleasant
Obtained by the beloved's contempt By separation from the beloved He is despised
by the beloved The joy of the king of KÅ«á¹­apura Born in a joyful one, why is my
joy greater? Looking at the treasury 190 73 31 20 362 362 7  415 254 314 304 386
144 475 313 35 92 343 365 365 404 352 23 362 137 148 76 271 In the Padma PurÄá¹a
Driven by anger, driven by devotion to the master Driven by devotion to the
master These are said in the descending age With mature indigo embryos Plaksha,
the strong chariot king [F] The fruit is plentiful with this The fruit is the
description of the form In the pleasant fruits, flowers and minds The tips are
humble with the weight of the fruit Drinking the sweet juice of the fruit The
dream of the foam, Indra's bow [B] Many, tying their brows fiercely, are sinners
with their paraphernalia He tied it tightly He was taken prisoner in the prison
The relative of the lotus pieces There was joy between them And his mind was so
There was a king in the city 216 258 133 29 40 150 476 433 436 278 183 72 264
491 86 238 265 226 131 131 232 441  There was a lotus There was RÄvaá¹a with him
There was a great birth He was of auspicious form He said to DaÅagrÄ«va Another
name for the child, the mother For all the strong ones And he heard of the
strong one The cloud, the thunderbolt of Indra Of all the strong ones 131 183
287 83 491 426 The stronger enemy is hidden, the thunderbolt is stronger than
this The strength of the king of the demons Strength is the speed of the wind
451 254 113 392 11 86 Going out to play 337 What more can be said A large army,
difficult to see Thousands of his Relatives, BhÄnukaá¹á¹a, even a child, carrying
a child, playing with a child, a fierce child, playing with a child 484 212 209
186 Playing 155 140 130 223 6 129 491 297 139 Your child, with a smile, this
childish act, he hears The child's departure is a disturbance The child is
blind, wicked The children are beautiful in form The arms of virtue are exalted
Why do you carry your limbs? Carrying the form of the thirty-three gods Like the
Buddha, not released Because of his greatness, the Lord Brahma As the day's lord
departs Almost like Brahma, the creator From the world of Brahma, he came to
Alki He speaks the word of the god He speaks as long as this Brahma is the name
of that yoga Saying this, he arrived [B] Devotees, be the Jinas The god has done
this with devotion, food, drink, and drink Lord, by your grace Lord, I have not
yet Lord, I have not yet Lord, in the descending age Lord, the story of Padma
Lord, they want to know 204 15 253 26 252 258 100 460 397 402 385 45 481 304 318
332 80 32 307

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 532 prAptameva tato manye prApta vidyAbhRzyena prAptazca tamasau dezaM
prAptazca sahito deva prAptazcAJjanasundaryA prAptAni vilayaM nUnaM prApti ca
jitapadmAyAH prAptena vApi kiM tena prApto jIvaH kule jAto prApnuyAdyadi
mAmaitAM 257 300 173 326 24 249 prApya kSullakacAritraM prApya tatra sthita
kAlaM prApya tAn kadalIstambha- 213 131 203 83 prApya vA surasaMgItaprApya
svapne'pi tasyAjJAM prApyAsya rAvaNachidraMprAyazcittaM ca nirdoSa prAyazcittaM
vinItizca prAyeNa mahatAM zaktiprAvartanta zivArAvo prApnoti janma mRtyuM ca
prApnoti dharmasaMvegaM prAsamudgaracakrAsi prAsAdaM hInasattvAste prAsAdAdi
tataH kAryaM prAsAdAstatra vRkSeSu prAsAde so'nyadA jaine prAhNAderiva rAgeNa
priyadattA navAstasya priyabhuktAtanustasyApriyAgatamanaskasya priyAtparibhavaM
prAptA priyANAM viprayogena priyeNa paribhUteti prIti kUTapurezasya prItimatyAM
samutpannaH prItirmamAdhikA kasmAt prakSya ca prabhavAgAraM 190 73 31 20 362 362
7 415 254 314 304 386 144 475 313 35 92 343 365 365 404 352 23 362 137 148 76
271 padmapurANe prekSApUrvapravRttena preritaH kopavAtena preritaH svAmino
bhaktyA proktA ete'vasarpiNyAM prauDhendIvara garbhAbhiH plakSo dRDharatho rAjA
[ pha] phalaM puSkala metena phalaM rUpaparicchedaH phalapuSpamanojJeSu
phalabhAravinamrAgrA phalasvAdapayaHpAna phenormIndradhanuHsvapna [ ba] bahavA
ca bhRkuTIM bhImAM baddhvA parikaraM pApA: baddhveva dhRtavAn gADhaM bandIgRha
gRhItosat bandhuM kumudakhaNDAnAM babhUva ca tayoH prIti babhUva ca matistasya
babhUva nagare rAjA 216 258 133 29 40 150 476 433 436 278 183 72 264 491 86 238
265 226 131 131 232 441 babhUva puNDarIkiyAM babhUva rAvaNaH sAkaM babhUva
sumahajjanyaM babhUvAsI zubhAkAro babhUveti dazagrIve bAlanAmAparaM mAtrA
balavadbhyo hi sarvebhyo balavAMzca zrutastena balAkA vidyudindrAstra balAnAM hi
samastAnAM 131 183 287 83 491 426 balIyasa ripo gupti balIyAn vajravego'ya bale
ca rAkSasezasya balo mArutavegazca 451 254 113 392 11 86 bahiH krIDA viniSkrAntA
191 bahirantazca sa saGga 337 bahunA kimuktena bahusainyaM durAloka bahUnyasya
sahasrANi bAndhavo bhAnukarNo'pi bAlako'Gke bhajan vAlakrIDApi bhImAbhUbAlakrIDA
babhUvAsya 484 212 209 186 krIDAM 285 155 140 130 223 6 129 491 297 139 bAla te
smitasaMyuktaM bAliceSTitamidaM zRNoti bAleH pravrajanaM kSobha bAlo'mandhrakaH
pApo bAlau manojJarUpI to bAhvoH puNyasya codAttaM bibhratyaGgAni te kasmA
bibhrANAstridazAkAraM buddhasyeva na nirmukta bRhattvAdbhagavAn brahma brajato
dinanAthasya brahmaprajApatiprAyaH brahmalokAlki lAgatya bravIti devapadaM
bravIti yAvadetAva brahmo nAma tadA yogo bruvannevaM sa saMprAptaH [bha] bhaktA
bhava jinendrANAM bhaktyA kRtamidaM devaH bhakSyaM bhojyaM ca peyaM ca
bhagavaMstvatprasAdena bhagavanna mamAdyApi bhagavanna mayA nArI
bhagavannavasarpiNyAM bhagavan padmacaritaM bhagavan jJAtumicchanti 204 15 253
26 252 258 100 460 397 402 385 45 481 304 318 332 80 32 307

Page #583 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Verse Index:  533 266 287 259 152 Seeing the broken progress 214 || Seeing
the greatness of yours, broken head and disease-ridden 218 Your two kinds of
great kings 430 Broken, indeed, should be followed 132 The lords of the houses,
the lords of the gods 327 Broken space, the sky 198 In the houses, those who are
hit, I do not make a break, not staying 213 When actions become, the break of
the garland of trees 197 They become those who have prosperity 379 The army,
close to the break 232 They become united with anxiety 328 The army, being
worshipped  They become, indeed, in the world, being worshipped, then, by the
vows  Of those like you, the jewels of men 219 By the noise of the soldiers 282
You also went there, the war of the soldiers  Of you, thus, eight 321 And by the
soldiers, they were surrounded  By the dense other-world 247 Blessed, the
renounced one, was born  The other-world, the earth, the abundance 106 Blessed,
in the Sal forest, those which are  We will be again, blessed lotus, Subhadra
and  He will be the first of them 152 Blessed, seated on the seat  He will be,
some great one 169 Blessed, listen, making your mind 383 When will he become
praiseworthy 353 All limbs, trembling with fear  Of the younger brother, who
will be 153 With the remaining fear, and the desired  Of him, then, the battle
413 The terrifying, then, obtaining 377 In the four-fold existence, wandering
383 The earth, the place of the elephants 427 In her, the golden-bodied 382
Bharata, then, made the kingdom 62 Worthy, the obeisance of this 325 Bharata,
he, the three parts 166 Worthy, for the sake of seeing the truth 46 By Bharata,
his son  The worthy and the unworthy, in this 23 Bharata, in the Podana place 92
Worthy, this, the ancestors, gone 337 By the Bharatas, in the Aravata field
Covered with ashes, like fire, ashes 156 The husband, became, in youth 260 The
ashes, he takes, the people 315 Brought near the husband 179 The ashes, the
state of being, attained  The remaining of your command  The bank of the Ganga,
very far 267 Of you, being beaten 259 In this part, he who crossed 147 You, a
friend like  The sun, setting in the three 20 You, with the caravan  Then, the
sun-eared one, was born 154 Your sight, by this 298 The sun-eared one, also,
this, released 160 You, who is considered, anyone 250 Like the disc of the sun
145 Your family lineage, come  The wife, of the humble  434 Your merit, by the
grace 473 || The place of the expression of feeling  It becomes, of the meaning,
the established 280 In this, the garland of feelings, taken 484 Your sorrow, the
fire, burnt 405 Thinking, thus, with a thousand rays 237  Half of the language,
Magadhi, his 80 The hearing of the sun, the best  The hearing of the sun,
obtained 178 Like the chariot of the sun  The fear of the sun, arising 162 Those
who are illuminated by the sun  Begging, in another's house, obtained  The
giving of alms, to the virtuous  For the sake of alms, he came, today
Different, the stream of flowers  Fearful, inside the face, tearful 372 With
fear, speechless, become  Bhima, very, very, fierce-eyed 101 Bhima, the
tortoise, the elephant, the fish 358 Having enjoyed, having enjoyed, the
pleasure born of the world 137 The earth-dwellers, the humans, to 235 The forest
of beings, entered  The action of the elements, the knowledge of the treasure
482 By the beings, and by the beating  The being, the king, in the crowd, him
484 The earth-born, the fruit-bearing  48 The earth, the cloud, connected  The
gift of land, also, thrown  On the earth, roar, the water-dwellers 462 On the
earth, thrown, all limbs 352 Again, taking birth, in Kashi 75 Again, near the
sky 388 Again, with the water-shine  Again, coming to enlightenment  Again, this
place, high 376 Again, also, carrying the mind 184 Fear, he said, then, the
earth  The ornament, the bees, indeed  The fire of the sun, the head of the bee
The fault of the servant, what 181 By the servants, brought to you 186 I am your
servant, O Lord of Lanka! 262 He went, the circle, as it is  311 34 The adorned,
the letter  87 452 124 155

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH 533 266 287 259 152 bhagnapravRttimAlokya 214  /  /
bhavadgauravadRSTAyAH bhagnamaulizirogADha- 218 bhavadvidhamahArAja 430 bhagnAH
kilAnusartavya- 132 bhavanezAH surezAzca 327 bhagnAvakAzamAkAzaM 198
bhavaneSvahatAM teSu bhaGgaM karomi nAsthAyA- 213 bhavanti karmANi yadA
bhaGgamAlAnavRkSANAM 197 bhavanti kSematAbhAjo 379 bhaGgAsannaM tataH sainyaM
232 bhavantyutkaNThayA yuktA 328 bhajyamAnaM tataH sainya bhavantyevAthavA loke
bhajyamAnastato yapai bhavAdRzAM nRratnAnAM 219 bhaTAnAmaTTahAsena 282 bhavAnapi
gatastatra bhaTAnAmabhavadyuddha bhavAnAmevamaSTAnA- 321 bhaTaizca paryacodyanta
bhavAntaranibaDhena bhadra pravrajito jAtaH 247 bhavAntarabhavabhUri bhadra
zAlavane yAni 106 bhavitA punarasmAkaM bhadrAmbhojA subhadrA ca 441 bhavitA
prathamasteSAM 152 bhadrAsananiviSTAya bhavitAso mahAn ko'pi 169 bhadre zRNu
manaH kRtvA 383 bhaviSyati kadA zlAghyaH 353 bhayavepitasarvAGgA
bhaviSyato'nujAvasya 153 bhayazeSeNa cAbhIlAM bhaviSyato'tha saMgrAmA- 413
bhayAnakAM tataH prApya 377 bhave caturgatau bhrAmyan 383 bharaNI hAstinasthAna-
427 bhave'syAH kanakodaryA 382 bharatastvakarod rAjyaM 62 bhavyaH praNAmametasya
325 bharatasya sa khaNDAMstrIn 166 bhavyAnAM tattvadRSTayarthaM 46 bharatenAsya
putraNa bhavyAbhavyadvayenAtra 23 bharate podanasthAne 92 bhavyo'yaM pUrvajA
yAtA 337 bharatairAvatakSetre bhasmacchannAgnivadbhasmI 156 bhartA babhUva
kaumAraH 260 bhasmatAM nayate loka- 315 bharturantikamAnItA 179
bhasmasAdbhAvamApanno bhavacchAsanazeSAti bhAgIrathyAstaTamatitarAM 267 bhavatAM
tADyamAnAnAM 259 bhAge'tra yo vyatikrAnta- 147 bhavatA sadRzaM mitraM
bhAnAvastaMgate tIne bhavatA sArthavAhena 20 bhAnukarNastato jAtaH 154 bhavato
darzanenedaM 298 bhAnukarNo'pyayaM muktaH 160 bhavato yo mataH ko'pi 250
bhAnubimbasamAnena 145 bhavatkulakramAyAtAM bhAryA vinayavatyasya 434
bhavatpuNyAnubhAvena 473  /  /  bhAvapravedanasthAnaM bhavatyarthasya
saMsiddhayaM 280 bhAvamAlAgRhIte'smin 484 bhavaduHkhAgnisaMtaptAM 405
bhAvayanniti sahasradIdhiti 237 bhASArddhamAgadhI tasya 80 bhAskarazravaNa:
zreSTho bhAskarazravaNo lebhe 178 bhAskarasyandanasyeva bhAskarIbhayasaMbhUti-
162 bhAsvatAbhAsitAnAn bhikSAM paragRhe labdhAM bhikSAdAnana sAdhUnAM
bhikSArthamAgataH so'dya bhinnaM dhArAkadambena bhItAntarvadanaM sAzru 372
bhItyA niruttarIbhUtAM bhImAtibhImadAkSiNyA- 101 bhImaH kUrmejhaMpainakra- 358
bhuktvA bhuktvA viSayajanitaM 137 bhUcarAnmAnuSAotuM 235 bhUtATavIM praviSTasya
bhUtikarma nidhijJAnaM 482 bhUtaizca tADanAd bhUto bhUpAlanivahasthaM taM 484
bhUmijaM phalasaMpannaM 48 bhUmijImUtasaMsaktAH bhUmidAnamapi kSipta bhUmau
garjanti toyodhAH 462 bhUmau nikSiptasarvAGgA 352 bhUyaH saMsRtya kAzyAM to 75
bhUyaH samIpamAkAza- 388 bhUyazca jalakAntena bhUyazca bodhimAgatya bhUyazcoce
pradezo'yaM 376 bhUyo'pi mAnasaM bibhrat 184 bhayo'vadattato dhAtrI bhUSaNaM
bhramarA eva bhRguraGgizirAvahniH bhRtyasyAparAdhaH kaH 181 bhRtyairupAhRtaM
tujhaM 186 bhRtyo'haM tava laGkeza! 262 bheje vRttIyathAsthAnaM 311 34
sajAvamApatro 87 452 124 155

Page #584 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
534 In the Padma Purana 118 155 78 316 367 188 The sound of the conch shell also
His mandala revolves eternally, equal to the land of enjoyment. 407 My
understanding of the object. 54 Without enjoyment, the limbs do not. 158
According to the virtuous Suvratanathas, the food is divided into two, like
gruel. 48.1 By the collision of the intoxicated elephants 284 Oh, good people,
for what reason 158 Wandering where the wind has crushed the intoxicated
elephant 102 Mounted on the intoxicated elephant- 184 Wander among the beasts
118 By whom the earth-bearing mountain is wandered like an intoxicated elephant.
419 Even the elephants of that 28 Embraced by the swarm of bees- 108 Intoxicated
by the taste of honey 102 Subtle and dark like the bees The great one is not
intoxicated- 147 The bee, tired of wandering, 338 The dust from my feet, O sage
211 This chariot of mine will wander The lord of the city of Mathura, having
lost the path, 483 Seeing his brother killed in Mathura 145 With his cheeks wet
with passion 407 Along with his brothers there Of the one whose eyes are
intoxicated by Madana, 341 Wandering through the whole world, 228 That
intoxicated woman, wandering in the swarm of intoxicated bees, 484 Even a mere
touch of these intoxicated by liquor 160 The physician intoxicated with passion
347 As if making eyebrow movements 174 Even this sight of mine 222 Just by the
movement of the eyebrows 212 Just by the movement of the eyebrows 126 On the
sword blade smeared with honey From honey, intoxication, meat [and] From honey,
meat, and liquor- 321 Attached to the nectar of the flowers Those whose speech
drips with honey, the intoxicated by the nectar- 215 In the middle of them, the
ten-necked one 325 Looking at the middle part 262 Auspicious is what was done
before 110 Auspicious is what was served by the elders 110 In the middle of the
women with braids 231 And for fear of destroying the auspicious 368 In the
middle of this ocean 101 Auspicious things were used 123 Like the midday sun 112
Holding the pillar in the middle of the day 128 Seated on the couches, the
people 484 The minds of the city women- 193 Placed in the jewel-studded 106
Having attained the human state 383 Like the jewel trees sprouting 103 Having
attained the human state 325 Adorned with Indra's bow 462 Having attained the
human state - 23 The adornment of the shaved garland Human enjoyment and heaven
387 Only those who are human Seeing even that beautiful one 173 The arrow of
Manobhava 271 This is the desire of hundreds of desires 340 His mind is the
ketaki flower 407 Ascending the beautiful one by nature 49 With beautiful
celestial gardens 169 And the ministers, indeed, constantly 340 Endowed with the
council of ministers 453 Now the unfortunate one's efforts 274 Like the Mandara
with the gentle wind 295 The arrival of the gentle Mandodari 358 I think even
Indra 197 I think this one is like us 428 Like the peacock's neck 392 This news
is known to me 174 Even I have the worry of a daughter 389 The destruction of
the Maruts 263 Having joined the palms, the Maruts 12 Free from dirt and sweat
17 And my fame is tarnished 279 Mallika and Suvratanatha 424 With the tip of the
tail on the head 387 With the great sound of the musical instrument 486 The
great impetus of righteousness 320 187 175 340 303 77

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 534 padmapurANe 118 155 78 316 367 188 bherIzaGkaninAdo'pi maNDalena
bhramatyasya 407 bhogabhUmisamaM zazvad 54 matergocaratvaM mayA tAva- 487
bhogavinA na gAtrANA- 158 mate suvratanAthasya bhojyaM dvidhA yavAgvAdi 48.1
mattadvipendrasaMghaTTa 284 bho bhoH supuruSAH kasmA- 158 mattavAraNasaMkSuNNe
bhramatA yatra vAtena 102 mattastambaramArUDhe- 184 bhramanti yena tiryakSu 118
mattebhasadRzaM cetabhramannaso yena mahIdhare. 419  /  /  mattairapi gajastasya
28 bhramarAlIpariSvakta- 108 mattarmadhvAsavAsvAdA 102 bhramarAsitasUkSmAti
matto'sti na mahAna kazci-147 bhramarI bhramaNazrAntAM 338 matpAdajaM rajo mUni
211 bhramiSyati ratho'yaM meM mathurAnagarInAthaH bhraSTaprAptabhamArgeNa 483
mathurAyAM sadezAyAbhrAtaraM nihataM dRSTA 145 madaklinnakapolo'sau 407
bhrAtRbhyAM sahitastatra madanoragadRSTasya 341 bhrAntveva bhuvanaM sarva- 228
madAndhamadhupazreNIbhrAmyantI sA tataH sAdhvI 484 madirAmattavanitA
bhrakSepamAtrato'pyete 160 madirArAgiNaM vaidyaM 347 bhrUkSepAniva kurvANAM 174
madarzanaM tathApyetat 222 bhrUlatotkSemAtraNa 212 madhudhAtkRtazcaNDA 307
bhrUsamutkSepamAtreNa 126 madhudigdhAsidhArAyAM madhuno madyato mAMsAd [ma]
madhumAMsasurAdInA- 321 makarandarasAsakto madhu sravanti ye vAcA
makarandasurAmatta- 215 madhyaM tAsAM dazagrIvo makSikAkITakezAdi- 325
madhyabhAgaM samAlokya 262 maGgalaM yasya yatpUrva 110 madhyamarSabhagAndhAra-
390 maGgalaM sevitA pUrveH 110 madhyelalAmanArINAM 231 maGgaladhvaMsabhItyA ca
368 madhye sAgarametasmin 101 maGgalAni prayuktAni 123 madhyAhnaravisaMkAzaM
maJcasthAH puruSA maJcA 112 madhyAhnaravisaMkAzAmaJcasthastambhamAdAya 128
manasApi hi sAdhUnAM maJceSu suprapaJceSu 484 manAMsi poranArINA- 193
maNikuTTimavinyasta- 106 manuSyajAtimApannA 383 maNivRkSA ivodbhidya- 103
manuSyatvaM samAsAdya 325 maNDitaM zakracApena 462 manuSyabhAvamAsAdya - 23
maNDanaM muNDamAlAyA manuSyabhogaH svargazca maNDalasyAntare kRtvA 387 manuSyA
eva ye keci manojJAbhapi tAM dRSTrA 173 manobhavazareru 271 manorathazatAneSa
manoratho'yamAyAtA 340 mano'sya ketakI sUcI manoharAM samAruhya 407 manoharAM
nisargeNa manoharANi divyAni 49 manohAribhirudyAnaiH mantriNazca kilAjasraM
mantriNo bhrAtarazcAsya 169 mantrimaNDalayuktasya 340 mandabhAgyo'dhunA ceSTA
453 mandamArutasaMpRkta mandaraM prasthitAyAsmai 274 mandareNa yathA
jambUmandAnilavidhUtAnta- 295 mandodaryAH pariprApti mandrakolAhalAdeSA 358
manye purandarasyApi 197 manye'smadvattaye'nena mama vajramayaM nUnaM mayasya
mantriNo'nye ca  /  mayUrakaNThasaMkAzo 428 mayUrasArikAkIra- 392 mayeyaM viditA
vArtA mayo'pi tanayAcintA 174 maraNaM rAjaputrIyaM 389 marutvamakhavidhvaMso 263
marutvo'thAJjaliM baddhvA 262 marududdhRtacamara- 12 malasvedavinirmuktaM 17
malImasA ca me kItiH 279 malliH suvratanAthazca 424 mastakanyastapucchAgro 387
mahatA tUryanAdena 155 mahatA bhUtibhAreNa 486 mahato dharma saMvegA 320 187 175
340 303 77

Page #585 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Order of the Names of the Heroes etc.  175 Pal 321 187 293 Born of a great
lineage, born of a great lineage, residing in the land of great caves - 157,
with a great roar, by the moon - 76, the great cloud-like evening - 283, the
great cloud-like assembly, in the great star, as in one, endowed with great
wonders, great drums sounded - 59, from the position of the great goddess,
together - 467, with great pride in the great goddess - 382, the great demon, I
too, by him, the great sound, at its end - 123, the great roar of the clash -
295, with great blue-like ones, the great glory, of the playful people - 422,
the great glory, the yoga - 378, with the great glory, the words - 394, the
great noise, blocked - 377, a great clamor arose - 64, even the great, attained,
the great lotus, famous, the great lotus, having performed penance, endowed with
great possessions - 308, overwhelmed by the burden of great sins - 243, the
great character of the great man, the other, dear - 425, the great strength,
this one, of him - 287, with the great arm, the blind - 217, the great fortunate
ones, should be known - 441, endowed with great pride - 199, on the back of the
great buffalo, attached to the great flesh-juice - 468, the great flesh-juice,
tasting - 468, the great cloud-chariot, by name, the great protector, the moon,
even, the great protector, having deposited, in the great beginnings, engaged -
471, the great king's daughter, another - 471, the great precious jewel, the
great Lakshmi, known as - 188, endowed with great beauty, the great Videha
country - 34, endowed with great humility, the great vessel of glory - 264, the
great vows, five, the great vows, having taken - 461, the great Friday, by name,
the kalpa - 440, the great Friday, by name, having attained the great assembly -
223, endowed with great means - 225, endowed with great means - 211, endowed
with great means - 228, the great fragrance, breathing, the glory, seeing his
face - 155, the glory, then, having made - 52, the glory, the highest, having
made - 465, by glory, the whole sky, the queens, by thousands, that - 12, the
queen, his, by name VaprÄ - 188, by the women of the earth, going - 263, like
the earth, that lord, famous in the earth-sphere - 329, like the earth, born -
136, Mahendradatta, was his name - 437, Mahendra's daughter, in her - 386,
Mahendra's, then, the learning - 339, Mahendra's, raised, the pitcher - 419,
with great wealth - 220, the great festival, from where, his - 199, the great
festival, Dasagriva, the great enthusiasm, then, the army, by the great ocean-
prince, the great ocean-roar, by name, to me, in danger - 219, to me, then, the
kings, lost - 475  Mother, from where, this, before - 189, mother, father, dear,
mother, father, brothers - 307, in the grandfather's house, growth - 179, by the
mother's grief, afflicted - 190, in the mother's lap, then, having made - 46, in
the mother's lap, situated, then, he - 155, in the mother's womb, whose - 16,
having heard the mother's compassionate words - 156, in the mother's sacrifice,
the killing, of the mother - 244, the mother's sister's son, I am, to you - 184,
even the mother, did not do, anything - 375, like me, even, very difficult to
release - 453, Madhavya's son, by name - 272, honor, carrying, of a man - 185,
in the mind, the mental burden, honor, dishonor, equal - 310, proud, there,
MarÄ«ci, but, the human-two-winged-horse - 482, having come to the human birth -
119, by pride, the height, of this, MandhÄtÄ, VÄ«rasena, and - 469, may not be,
from the two, my, arising - 482, illusion-made, three-fold suffering - 482,
MarÄ«ci, then, said - 214, MarÄ«ci, the sky-knowledge, and - 187, MarÄ«ci, the
thunderbolt-middle, and - 171, MÄruti, RÄvaá¹a, seeing - 412, MÄruti, the wind,
speed - 414, the paths, club-shaped - 325, on the path, stand, the sword - 184,
the path, this, by which, one goes - 116, MÄrtaá¹á¸akuá¹á¸ala, by name - 124, by
gentleness, endowed, some - 308, MÄlinÄ«, the story, having obtained - 165,
MÄlinÄ«, in the forehead-region, then, MÄlyavattana, seeing - 437, the garland-
anointing, etc. - 144, the garland-wearing, son, seeing - 425, the garland-
wearing, son, seeing - 144, the garland-wearing, son, seeing - 286

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ilokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH 175 pAla 321 187 293 mahAkulasamutpanno
mahAkulasamudbhUtA mahAgahvaradezastha- 157 mahAghoSeNa candriNyA- 76
mahAjaTharasaMdhyAbhra- 283 mahAjaladasaMghAta mahAtarau yathaikasmin
mahAtizayasaMpanna mahAdundubhayo neduH 59 mahAdevIpadAt sAtha 467
mahAdevyabhimAnena 382 mahAdaityo mayo'pyenamahAnAdasya tasyAnte- 123
mahAninadasaMghaTTaH 295 mahAnIlanibhairebhimahAnubhAvaH pramadAjanasya 422
mahAnubhAvatA yogA- 378 mahAnubhAvavAcaiva 394 mahAnokahasaMruddha- 377 mahAn
kalakalo jAtaH 64 mahAntamapi saMprAptaH mahApadmaH prasiddhazca mahApadmastapaH
kRtvA mahAparigrahopetA 308 mahApApabharakrAnto 243
mahApuruSacAritramahAbalo'paraH kAnta- 425 mahAbalo'yametasya 287
mahAbAhuvanenAndhaM 217 mahAbhAgA ca vijJeyA 441 mahAbhimAnasaMpanno 199
mahAmahiSapRSThasthamahAmAMsarasAsaktaH 468 mahAmAMsarasAsvAda- 468
mahAmegharatho nAma mahArakSaH zazAGko'pi mahArakSasi nikSipya mahArambheSu
saMsaktAH mahArAjasutAmanyAM 471 mahArghamaNivAcAlamahAlakSmIriti khyAtA 188
mahAlAvaNyayuktAzca mahAvidehavarSasya 34. mahAvinayasaMpannAH
mahAvibhavapAtrasya 264 mahAvratAni paJca syumahAvratAnyupAdAya 461
mahAzukrAbhidhaH kalpaH 440 mahAzukrAbhidhAnazca mahAsaMvaramAsAdya 223
mahAsAdhanayuktasya 225 mahAsAdhanasaMpanna- 211 mahAsAdhanasaMpannA 228
mahAsaurabhanizvAsamahimAnaM ca dRSTrAsya 155 mahimAnaM tataH kRtvA 52 mahimAnaM
paraM kRtvA 465 mahimnA sarvamAkAzaM mahiSINAM sahasrairyat 12 mahiSI tasya
vaprAhvA 188 mahIgocaranArIbhi- 263 mahIdhramiva taM nAthaM mahImaNDalavikhyAto
329 mahImayamivotpannaM 136 mahendradattanAmAsIt 437 mahendraduhitA tasyAM 386
mahendrasya tato'bhyAzaM 339 mahendrakumbhonnatapIvara- 419 mahaizvaryasametAya
220 mahotsavaH kutastasya 199 mahotsavo dazagrIvo mahotsAhamatho sainyaM
mahodadhikumAreNa mahodadhiravo nAma mahyaM vipadyamAnAya 219 mahyAM to kSitipo
naSTau 475 mAtaH kasmAdidaM pUrva 189 mAtaraM pitaraM kAntaM mAtaraM pitaraM
bhrAtRn 307 mAtAmahagRhe vRddhi 179 mAtuH zokena saMtapto 190 mAturaGke tataH
kRtvA 46 mAturaGke sthito'thAsau 155 mAturapyudare yasya 16 mAturdInavacaH
zrutvA 156 mAtRmedhe vadho mAtuH 244 mAtRSvasuH suto'haM te 184 mAtrApi na kRtaM
kiMcit 375 mAdRzo'pi sudurmocai- 453 mAdhavyAstanayo nAmnA 272 mAnamudvahataH
puMso 185 mAnase mAnasaMbhAro mAnApamAnayostulya- 310 mAnI tatra marIcistu
mAnuSadvipagovAji- 482 mAnuSyabhavamAyAto 119 mAnena tuGgatAmasya mAndhAtA
vIrasenazca 469 mAbhUdAbhyAM mamodvataH mAyAkRtaM tridhApIDA 482 mArIcastata
AcakSau 214 mArIco'mbaravidyacca- 187 mArIcI vajramadhyazca 171 mAruti rAvaNo
vIkSya 412 mArutirmArutaM vegA- 414 mArgA godaNDakAkArA: 325 mArge tiSTha
kRpANasya 184 mArgo'yamiti yo gacchet 116 mArtaNDakuNDalo nAmnA 124
mArdavenAnvitAH keci- 308 mAlina: saMkathAprApta 165 mAlino bhAladeze'tha
mAlyavattanayaM dRSTvA mAlyAnulepanAdIni 125 437 144 425 144 286

Page #586 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
55 248 18 Tamattavishaya- 536 Padmapurana mentions meat, alcohol, and night-time
enjoyment 326. The power of Munikshobhana 113. Eating meat for them 244. Muni,
the wealth, the brave 425. Ten years, even for a Muni 223. Muni's trust,
therefore 474. Four months, there  Muni's power of virility 218. Fifteen months,
a part  Muni's time, waiting 330. In the tenth month, the brave  Muni's time,
giving 329. The king of Mahishmati, blessed 236. Muni Suvrata Nath's pilgrimage
112. The king of Mahishmati city, then  Muni Suvrata Nath's, as here 472. With a
moderate family 122. Muni Suvrata Nath's, placing 391. The father of the friend,
because 471. Muni Suvrata Nath, also 447. The friend, Sudarshan, the arrow 427.
Muni Suvrata's greatness 447. The friend's equipment, whose 148. The mind, whose
delusion is hidden 208. The friend, those two, of Saurika, then 76. The Muni,
having reached Rantaka, together with Vibhishana, this 278. The Muni's, also,
his 389. False vision, combined 25. Many times, with great speed, he mounts
False vision, the origin, dying 272. The one who is very tired 378. False
vision, also, thirsty 65. A moment, the food  False vision, also, having
attained  Three hundred moments, having done 324. Mixed, the sexual desire of
those 175. Two moments, whoever  Fish, the Daitya Guru, high 397. A moment, the
work 324. They contemplate, they are disgusted 449. The foolish, the great
sorrow, the net 131. The crown, placed, the moon-rays 263. The foolish, having
taken up the bow 218. Released, the son of the wind  The root, indeed, the
cause, karma 153. Released, the lotus, in the lotus  The root, the net, firmly
bound 128. Released, the net, scattered 162. The foolish group, the bad manners
347. Released, the net, in those 194. In a swoon, having fallen, in that 285.
Released, the net, by the released 186. Born of the womb, indeed, the blades of
grass 257. Released, the garland, adorned with gold  The tamer of the deer,
known as  The moon of the face, this, seen  By the deer, the killing of the
lion, this  The origin from the mouth, also 253. Dead, the moon, the strength,
the protector  Delighted, pleasing to all people 458. Like a dead one, he
thought of her 150. Delighted, with faces like the full moon 57. The machine of
death, birth, and time 452. Releasing, a long roar 282. The cycle of death,
birth, and old age 322. Releasing, that speech 393. The death, the Daitya, the
end, indeed 387. Releasing, "Hey," the net, those two 286. The death, the
difficult to obtain, of this 86. Releasing, the arrow, from the sea 274. Dying,
a kalpa, he, the Indra  The lentil, like a terrible one 387. The sound of the
mridanga, some  Life, having enjoyed 288. The earth, he defeats 191.  324 Soft-
hearted, by nature 342. Soft heat, in the fire, also  Soft, the roots, very 20.
Soft, the grass, covering  174. From sweetness, from being forced 311. The
cloud, the lightning, the wind  283. He thought, and my all-glory 203. The
country of Meya, the time of the scales 482. The shape of a Meskutta, the
mountain, the head, like 59. The east of Meru, Videha  The minister, all the
subjects, released, from hell, having heard 202. They were released, then, by
them 177. The intoxicating, the creeper, the intoxicated  430. The delusion, the
darkness, covering 322. The delusion, the darkness, covering 80. The vow of
silence, having taken  The auspicious moment, then, he spoke 396. Dying, the
soldier, some 288. The Mlechchha, the different religion, being practiced 160.
_[y] Whoever, abandoning the earth, the wife 260. Whoever, again, the time of
attainment, may be 248. Whoever, applies the mind, to the good 237. Whoever,
remembers, even, with feeling  Whatever country, he, the all-knowing  Yaksha,
Kinnara, Gandharva 44. Yaksha song, in the city, the Yakshas 147. Yaksha,
Rakshasa, the battle  Yaksha king, the hand, attached 22. Yakshi, the lotus, the
hope, the eye  Begging, having known, that 53. For the purpose of sacrifice,
indeed, of the created 256. The sacrificer, may be, the self 257. By the
creation of the sacrifice, not 257. For the purpose of sacrifice, the animals,
created 244.  405

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 55 248 18 tamattaviSayA- 536 padmapurANe mAMsaM madyaM nizAbhukti 326  /
munikSobhanasAmarthya- 113 mAMsasya bhakSaNaM teSAM 244  /  /  munirdhanaravo
dhIra- 425 mAsamAtraM dazAsyopi 223 munivisrambhatastena 474 mAsAMzca
caturastatra munivIryaprabhAveNa 218 mAsAn paJcadazA khaNDaM munivelA
pratIkSyatvA- 330 mAse ca dazame dhIrA munivelAvato datvA 329
mAhiSmatIpatirdhanyaH 236 munisuvratanAthasya tIrthe 112 mAhiSmatIpurezo'tha
munisuvratanAthasya yatheha 472 mitena parivAreNa 122 manisuvratanAthasya
vinyasya 391 mitrAyA janitA yasmAt 471 munisuvratanAtho'pi 447 mitrA
sudarzanazcUto 427 manisuvratamAhAtmya- 447 mitropakaraNaM yasya 148 maneH
pihitamohasya 208 mitrI tau saurikasyAthai 76 mune rantikamAsAdya mitho
vibhISaNAyedaM 278 munerapi tathA tasya 389 mithyAdarzanasaMyuktA 25 muhuH
pracaNDamArohe mithyA dRk prabhavo mRtvA 272 maharvizramyamAnAlyA 378
mithyAdRzo'pi tRSNArtA 65 muhUrta parivAnnaM mithyAdRzo'pi saMprAptA
muhUrtatrizataM kRtvA 324 mizre kAmarase tAsAM 175 muhUrttadvitayaM yastu mInau
daityagurustuGga- 397 muhartayojanaM kArya- 324 mImAMsante jugupsante 449 mUDhAH
zokamahApale 131 mukuTanyastamuktAMzu- 263 mUDhAH saMnadbhumArabdhAH 218 muktaM
vAyukumAraNa mUlaM hi kAraNaM karma, 153 muktapadmAlayAM padmAM
mUlajAladRDhAbaddha- 128 muktAjAlaparikSipta- 162 mUrkhagoSThIkumaryAda 347
muktA jAlaparIteSu 194 mUrcchayA patite tasmin 285 muktAjAlapramuktena 186
mardhajA eva darbhANi 257 muktAdAmacito hema mRgezadamanAbhikhyo
mukhacandramimaM dRSTA mRgaiH siMhavadhaH so'yaM mukhAdisaMbhavazcApi 253 mRtaH
zazI balovardo mugdhaH sarvajanaprItaH 458 mRtAmiva sa tAM mene 150 mugdhAH
pUrNenduvadanA 57 mRtyujanmaghaTIyantra- 452 muJcatsu dIrghahuGkAraM 282
mRtyujanmajarAvarta- 322 muJcantImiti tAM vAcaM 393 mRtyudaityakRtAnto nu 387
muJcantau heti jAlaM tau 286 mRtyordurlavitasyAsya 86  /  muJcannArAtsamudrasya
274 mRtvA kalpaM sa mAhendra mudga reNeva ghoreNa 387 mRdaGganisvanaM
kAcimudhaiva jIvanaM bhuktaM 288 mRdaM parAbhavatyeSa 191 324 mRducittAH
svabhAvena 342 mRdutApo nidAdhe'pi mRdumUnimatyanta- 20 mRduzaSpapaTacchanna 174
mRSTatvAd balakAritvA- 311 meghamAlItaDiviGgo 283 mene ca mama sarvazrI- 203
meyadezatulAkAla- 482 meskUTasamAkAramerumastakasaMkAzaM 59 meroH pUrvavidehasya
maMtrIsamastaviSayAmocitAn nArakAt zrutvA 202 mocitAste tatastAbhi: 177
mohakAdambarI mattA 430 mohAndhakArasaMchanne 322 mohAndhadhvAntasaMchannaM 80
maunavrataM samAsthAya mauhUrtena tato'vAci- 396 mriyamANo bhaTaH kazci- 288
mlecchaividharmyamANAyAM 160 _[ya] yaH parityajya bhUbhAryA 260 yaH punaH
prAptakAla: syA- 248 ya: prayojayati mAnasaM zubhe 237 yaH smaratyapi bhAvena
yaM yaM dezaM sa sarvajJaH yakSakinnaragandharvAH 44 yakSagIte pure yakSAH 147
yakSarAkSasasaMgrAma yakSarAjakarAsakta- 22 yakSI padmapalAzAkSI yAcamAno
viditvA tA. 53 yajanArthaM ca sRSTAnAM 256 yajamAno bhavedAtmA 257
yajJakalpanayA naiva 257 yajJArthaM pazavaH sRSTAH 244 405

Page #587 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
By sacrifice is satisfaction obtained, From whence, beginning, there abides,
From whence, hear, from there even, From whence, of good families born, From
whence, this, by the opponent, From whence, as formerly in error, From whence,
that, green, fields, Whatever, doing, of that, By effort, even, here, be thou,
By effort, great, seeking, Whatever, against the enemy's force, thrown,
Whatever, that, of the thousand Indras, Where, umbrella-shaped, Where, born, of
the father, all, Where, to you, is pleasing, gift, Where, elephant-riding,
Where, where, foot-placement, Where, you, this, are striving, Where, indeed, the
father, angry, Where, medicinal-herb-radiance-net, like fire, from eating, cold,
As, and, is born, sorrow, As, and, by snakes, drunk, As, and, the hole,
reaching, As, and, in the eyes, placed, As, father, waiting, you, As, to save,
able, As, you, many, gone, As, mirror-transmitted, As, speaks, skill, As, to me,
prostrated, all, As, as, nearness, As, this, here, attached, As, of that, by the
side, that, As, poison-grain, obtained, As, power, then, by devotion, As, white,
and, black, and, As, all, water-bodies, 68  257 334 33 100 210 119 444 248 274
143 269 317 102 17 168 13 57 375 374 102 383 320 36 247 36 297 323 86 42 365 355
450 89 492 312 313 36 434 Verses, beginning-letter-sequence, As, place, then, in
them, 59 As, own, and, situated, all, 299 247 As, indeed, concealed, various,
As, indeed, life, dear, As, deserved, treatment, you, As, desired, wealth,
given, As, this, pulsates, eye, As, desired, necklace, placed, As, this, day,
kingdom, As, indeed, they, arisen, As, proper, conversation-made, As, excellent,
Indras, and, As, thus, wandering, conduct, As, purpose, is taken, father, As,
ordered, you, said, When, then, arisen, When, then, obtains, gambling, When,
was, defeated, in gambling, If, and, there, be, even, If, that, not, bring,
quickly, If, so, this, destroyed, If, name, then, of that, If, name, then,
meditation, If, name, by that, virtuous, If, name, I, worship, If, name, be,
essence, If, name, this, not, ask, If, motionless, by sight, If, creature-
killing, heaven, If, creature-killing, Brahma, If, or, that, like, be, If, all-
kind, even, If, be, then, known, If, being, prevented, even, That, this, by
mountain, said, When, indeed, by that, she, seen, When, thus, even, not,
meditation-wisdom-preceded, 259 408 140 194 151 184 111 350 23 478 193 148 81
244 74 170 194 89 359 161 303 451 236 99 62 256 257 253 250 349 411 242 208 160
255  537 Wherever, as long as, from where, by which, 476 Wherever, own-people-
house, she, 374 Whatever, is striven, with, 130 117 60 Although, be, somewhere,
And, austerity, by power, Although, these, to the surrendered, Although, thus,
speaks, clearly, Whatever, or, in the three worlds, not, that, Machine-
emanating-machine-hole, Machines, and, applied, Whose, name, is seen, in the
world, Which, not, by means, achievable, Which, great, Hari-Dwar, Whose, place-
fallen, and, meaning, Whose, servants, poor, Yama's, wrath, arising, By Yama,
oneself, self, Yama, Vaishravana, Soma, Fame, ornament, of that, And, who,
Kamadeva, amorous-glance, And, who, Rama, within, whose, Who, you, scolds,
untied, From, whom, beginning, in me, womb, From, whom, killing, son, In, which,
wandering-obtained, Whose, gold-made, Whose, even, in forests, Whose, this,
pale, umbrella, Whose, above, not, go, In, which, which, beings, take refuge,
Goes, if, here, your, mind, Yatudhana, even, obtaining, Whatever, even, speaks,
indeed, Which, which, and, pleasures, As long as, that, of those, war, As long
as, tumult, of those, As long as, anyone, not, knows, As long as, of those,
conversation, 383 212 332 480 139 384 111 317 6 201 211 200 44 149 249 428 303
139 65 17 325 109 485 157 90 125 144 2 385 129 129 367 343

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 yajJena kriyate tRpti yataH prabhRti tatrAsthA yataH zRNu tatastAvat yataH
satkulajAtAnAM yato'yaM pratipakSeNa yato yathA purA bhrAntau yato'sau haritaH
kSetrA yatkicitkurvatastasya yatnAttAvadihAssva tva yatnena mahatAnviSya
yatpratyaribalaM kSipta yattatsurasahasrANAM yatracchatrasamAkArAH yatra jAte
pituH sarve yatra te rucitaM dAnaM yatra mAtaGgagAminyaH yatra yatra padanyAsa
yatra yUyamidaM ceSTAH yatraiva janakaH kruddho yatroSadhiprabhAjAlaiyathAgneH
sevanAcchIta yathA ca jAyate duHkhaM yathA ca pannagaiH pItaM yathA ca vivaraM
prApya yathA cekSuSu nikSiptaM yathA tAta pratIkSyastvaM yathA tArayituM zaktA
yathA te bahavo yAtAH yathA darpaNasaMkrAnta yathA bravIti vaidagdhyaM yathA me
praNatAH sarve yathA yathA samIpatvaM yathA'yamatra saMsaktayathAvattasya
pArzve'so yathA viSakaNaH prApta: yathAzakti tato bhaktyA yathA zuklaM ca kRSNaM
ca yathA sarvAmbudhAnAnAM 68 257 334 33 100 210 119 444 248 274 143 269 317 102
17 168 13 57 375 374 102 383 320 36 247 36 297 323 86 42 365 355 450 89 492 312
313 36 434 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH yathAsthAnaM tatasteSu 59 yathAsvaM ca
sthitAH sarve 299 247 yathA hi chaditaM nAnaM yathA hi jIvitaM kAntaM
yathArhamupacAraM te yathecchaM draviNaM dattaM yathedaM spandate cakSu
yatheSTagallake nyasta yathaidivasaM rAjyaM yathaiva tAH samutpannA yathocitaM
kRtAlApAH yathotkRSTasurANAM ca yadatha bhrAmyato vRtta yadarthaM nIyate tAta
yadAjJApayasItyuktA yadA tadA samutpanno yadAna prApnuyAt kU yadAsI nirjito
dyUte yadi ca syurbhavanto'pi yadi taM nAnaye zIghraM yadi tAvadayaM dhvasto
yadi nAma tadA tasyAH yadi nAma tadA dhyAna yadi nAma tayA sAdhvyA yadi nAma
bhajeyemAM yadi nAma bhavet sAraH yadi nAmaiSa no sAmnA yadi niHspandayA dRSTyA
yadi prANivadhaH svarga yadi prANidhAd brahma yadi vA tadvadeva syAd yadi
sarvaprakAro'pi yadi syAdatha vijJAtA yadi nivAryamANo'pi yadetatparvatenoktaM
yadaiva tena sA dRSTA yadaivamapi na dhyAnabuddhipUrvakA 259 408 140 194 151 184
111 350 23 478 193 148 81 244 74 170 194 89 359 161 303 451 236 99 62 256 257
253 250 349 411 242 208 160 255 537 yadyatra yAvacca yatazca yena 476
yadyatsvajanagehaM sA 374 yadyadviceSTitaM sArddha 130 117 60 yadyapi syAt
kvacit vaM tapaH zaktyA yadyapyeSAM prapanneSu yadyevaM bhASate vyaktaM yadvA
lokatraye nAsau yantraniryantrasacchidra - yantrANi ca prayuktAni yannAma
dRzyate loke yannopakaraNaiH sAdhya yanmaharidvA yamasthAnacyutaM cArtha yamasya
kiMkarA dInAH yamArAti samudvAsya yamena svayamAtmAnaM yamo vaizravaNaH somo
yazo vibhUSaNaM tasya yazca kandarpa kautkucya yazca rAmo'ntare yasya
yastvAkrozati nirgranthaM yasmAdArabhya meM garbhe yasmAnmA hananaM putra yasmin
viharaNaprApte yasya kAJcananirmANA yasyAdyApi vanAnteSu yasyaitatpANDuraM
chatra yasyopari na gacchanti yAMyAM jIvA prapadyante yAti cediha te cetaH
yAtudhAnA api prApya yAdRzo'pi vadatyeva yAni yAni ca saukhyAni yAvacca
tattayoryuddhaM yAvacca tumulaM teSAM yAvatkazcinna jAnAti yAvattayoH samAlApo
383 212 332 480 139 384 111 317 6 201 211 200 44 149 249 428 303 139 65 17 325
109 485 157 90 125 144 2 385 129 129 367 343

Page #588 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
538 Papuraá¹e 53 50 7 . 74 4 nny 475 yÄvattena samaá¹ yuddhaá¹ 189 yÄvantaá¸¥
samatikrÄntÄ yÄvatparigrahasaktiyÄvatprasÄdayatyekÄá¹ 229 yÄvadevaá¹ manastasyÄ
yÄvadevaá¹ samÄlÄpo yÄvadevaá¹ sutaá¹ ÅÄsti 132 yÄsÄá¹ varcaÅ ca mÅ«traá¹ ca 54 yÄhi
yÄhi puromargÄ- 31 yuktaá¸¥ paramadhairyena 204 yuktaá¸¥ priyÄá¹Äá¹ daÅabhiá¸¥ 422
yuktaá¹ prahasitedaá¹ te yuktamatanna dhÄ«rÄá¹Äá¹ 131 yuktavistÄramuttungaá¹ 172
yuktaá¹ mÄtaá¹gamÄlÄbhi- 377 yuktiÅ ca kartá¹mÄn vedaá¸¥ 252 yugaá¹ tena ká¹taá¹
yasmayugÄntghana bhÄ«mÄnÄá¹ yugmamutpadyate tatra yuddhaá¹ sulocanasyogra- 72
yuddhÄya prasthito dá¹á¹£á¹­Ä 385 yuddhe vaiÅravaá¹o yena 203 yuddhe sahÄyatÄá¹
kartuyuvÄ saumyo vinÄ«tÄtmÄ 345 yuá¹£mÄkaá¹ pÅ«rvajairyasmÄyÅ«kÄpanayanaá¹ paÅyan 105
ye kÄmavaÅatÄá¹ yÄtÄá¸¥ ye ká¹tÄ mandabhÄgyena ye ca te prathamaá¹ bhagnÄ 66 ye ca
matsadá¹ÅÄá¸¥ sarve 82 ye tu ÅrutÄd druti prÄptÄ 50 yena kenacidu dÄttakarmaá¹Ä 237
yena yena prakÄreá¹a 308 yenÄyamanayÄ sÄka yenÄvasarpiá¹Ä«kÄle 431 ye'pi
jÄtasvarÅ«pÄá¹Äá¹ ye'pi tÄ«rthakara nÄma ye'pi Åoá¹£ayituá¹ ÅaktÄ ye punaá¸¥ kutsitÄ
dÄnaá¹ 36 raká¹£onÄthapariprapti ye bharatÄdharnapatibhiruddhaá¸¥ 471 rajaá¸¥sveda rujÄ
muktaá¹ 316 yojanapratimaá¹ vyÅma- 428 rajanipativatkÄnto 234 yojanÄni daÅÄruhya
rajanÈ³Ä paÅcime yÄme 489 yojanÄnÄá¹ Åataá¹ tuá¹gaá¸¥ 275 rajobhiá¸¥ Åastraniká¹£epa- 289
yojanÄnÄá¹ sahasrÄá¹i 33 à¥¤à¥¤ raá¹aprabodhanavyÅ«ha- 481 yodhÄstatra nirÄkramÄn 413 à¥¤à¥¤
raá¹e nijitya tÄá¹ sarvÄn 466 yo na tvat sadá¹Åaá¹ pÄpe 370 ratavyatikara chinnÄ-
368 yo na vetti sa kiá¹ vakti 252 ratÄ mahattvayukteá¹£u 318 yonidravyam
adhiá¹£á¹­hÄnaá¹ 481 rativibhrama dhÄriá¹yá¸¥ 416 yonivisiá¹£á¹­amÅ«lÄdi- 481 rantum ced yÄt
kiá¹£kiá¹dhaá¹ 135 yo yastasyÄ mayÄlikhya 194 ratnakÄÃ±canavistÄ«rá¹a- 102 yoá¹£itaá¸¥
sukumÄrÄá¹gÄá¸¥ 55 ratnacitro'bhavat tasyÄ 68 yoá¹£itpuá¹yavati so'yaá¹ 264
ratnacÅ«á¹aratiÅlaká¹£á¹aiá¸¥ 108 yo'sau tatra mahÄrakso ratnatritayasampuá¹á¹Ä 326
yo'sau niyamadatto'bhÅ«t ratnadÄmasamá¹ddheá¹£u 473 yo'sau bhÄvananÄmÄsi
ratnadÄmÄkulaá¹ tuá¹gaá¹ 204 yo karÄ« varanÄrÄ«á¹Äá¹ 213 ratnadvÄ«paá¹ praviá¹£á¹­asya . 331
yo purÄ varanÄrÄ«bhi ratnamÄlo'sya sambhÅ«to 444 yauvanaÅriyamÄlokya 208
ratnapÄtreá¹a datvÄrgha yauvanauá¹£masamudbhÅ«tÄ 39 ratnabuddhir abhÅ«d yasya
ratnabhumipariká¹£ipta 88 _ [ra] ratnaÅravaá¸¥sutena'so 165 raktakardamabÄ«bhatsa- 24
ratnaÅravaá¸¥sutena'stÄn 233 raktadantchachhadachchÄyÄ 172 ratnÄá¹Åukadhvajanayas-
146 raktÄá¹ ca tasyÄ tÄá¹ jÃ±ÄtvÄ 190 ratnÄvalÄ«prabhÄjÄla- 316 raktÄruá¹itadehaá¹ ca
rathÄnÅ«puranÄthendra- 176 rakto dviá¹£á¹­o'thavÄ mÅ«á¸ho 307 rathamÄropyÄ tÄvat tvam
raktoá¹£á¹­ho haricandraÅ ca 70 rathamÄÅu samÄruhya 414 raká¹£atÄ balamÄtmÄ«yaá¹ 283
rathaarÅ«á¸hastatastasya 202 raká¹£anti raká¹£asÄá¹ dvÄ«paá¹ rathino rathibhiá¸¥ sÄdhaá¹ 232
raká¹£asastanayo jÄto 94 rathair aÅvaigajair uá¹£á¹­raá¸¥ raká¹£asÄmanvaye yo'bhÅ«d 225
rathairÄdityasaá¹kÄÅai 201 raká¹£ÄtmÄnaá¹ vrajÄmuá¹£mÄd 288 rathair mattagajendraÅ ca
raká¹£itaá¹ yasya yaká¹£Äá¹Äá¹ 63 rathotsahaá¸¥ samÄruhya raká¹£itÄ bÄhrÅ«á¸aá¹á¸ena 16
radagrahÄrÅ«á¹Ä«bhutaá¹ 365 raká¹£itÄ mithilÄ kumbho 427 radanasi
kharadaá¹£á¹­aspaá¹£á¹­araká¹£itÄste yatastenÄ 65 à¥¤à¥¤ randhra vaiÅravaá¹ah prÄpya 185 58 " 1
353 202

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 538 papapurANe 53 50 7 . 74 4 nny 475 yAvattena samaM yuddhaM 189 yAvantaH
samatikrAntA yAvatparigrahAsaktiyAvatprasAdayatyekAM 229 yAvadevaM manastasya
yAvadevaM samAlApo yAvadevaM sutaM zAsti 132 yAsAM varcazca mUtraM ca 54 yAhi
yAhi puromArgA- 31 yuktaH paramadhairyeNa 204 yuktaH priyANAM dazabhiH 422
yuktaM prahasitedaM te yuktamatanna dhIrANAM 131 yuktavistAramuttuGgaM 172
yuktAM mAtaGgamAlAbhi- 377 yuktizca kartRmAn vedaH 252 yugaM tena kRtaM
yasmAyugAntaghanabhImAnAM yugmamutpadyate tatra yuddhaM sulocanasyogra- 72
yuddhAya prasthito dRSTA 385 yuddhe vaizravaNo yena 203 yuddhe sahAyatAM
kartuyuvA saumyo vinItAtmA 345 yuSmAkaM pUrvajairyasmAyUkApanayanaM pazyan 105
ye kAmavazatAM yAtAH ye kRtA mandabhAgyena ye ca te prathamaM bhagnA 66 ye ca
matsadRzAH sarve 82 ye tu zrutAd druti prAptA 50 yena kenacidudAttakarmaNA 237
yena yena prakAreNa 308 yenAyamanayA sAka yenAvasarpiNIkAle 431 ye'pi
jAtasvarUpANAM ye'pi tIrthakarA nAma ye'pi zoSayituM zaktA ye punaH kutsite
dAnaM 36 rakSonAthapariprApti ye bharatAdharnapatibhiruddhAH 471 rajaHsvedarujA
muktaM 316 yojanapratimaM vyoma- 428 rajanipativatkAnto 234 yojanAni dazAruhya
rajanyA pazcime yAme 489 yojanAnAM zataM tuGgaH 275 rajobhiH zastranikSepa- 289
yojanAnAM sahasrANi 33  /  /  raNaprabodhanavyUha- 481 yodhAstatra nirAkrAman
413  /  /  raNe nijitya tAn sarvAn 466 yo na tvatsadRzaM pApe 370
ratavyatikaracchinna- 368 yo na vetti sa kiM vakti 252 ratA mahattvayukteSu 318
yonidravyamadhiSThAnaM 481 rativibhramadhAriNyaH 416 yoniviziSTamUlAdi- 481
rantuM cedyAta kiSkindhaM 135 yo yastasyA mayAlikhya 194 ratnakAJcanavistIrNa-
102 yoSitaH sukumArAGgAH 55 ratnacitro'bhavattasyA 68 yoSitpuNyavatI so'yaM 264
ratnacUNaratizlakSNaiH 108 yo'sau tatra mahArakSo ratnatritayasaMpUrNA 326
yo'sau niyamadatto'bhUt ratnadAmasamRddheSu 473 yo'sau bhAvananAmAsI
ratnadAmAkulaM tuGgaM 204 yo karI varanArINAM 213 ratnadvIpaM praviSTasya . 331
yo purA varanArIbhi ratnamAlo'sya saMbhUto 444 yauvanazriyamAlokya 208
ratnapAtreNa datvArgha yauvanoSmasamudbhUtA 39 ratnabuddhirabhUd yasya
ratnabhUmiparikSipta 88 _ [ra] ratnazravaHsutenA'so 165 raktakardamabIbhatsa- 24
ratnazravaHsutenAstAn 233 raktadantacchadacchAyA 172 ratnAMzukadhvajanyasta- 146
raktAM ca tasya tAM jJAtvA 190 ratnAvalIprabhAjAla- 316 raktAruNitadehaM ca
rathanUpuranAthendra- 176 rakto dviSTo'thavA mUDho 307 rathamAropya tAvattvaM
raktoSTho haricandrazca 70 rathamAzu samAruhya 414 rakSatA balamAtmIyaM 283
rathArUDhastatastasya 202 rakSanti rakSasAM dvIpaM rathino rathibhiH sAdhaM 232
rakSasastanayo jAto 94 rathairazvairgajairuSTraH rakSasAmanvaye yo'bhUd 225
rathairAdityasaMkAzai 201 rakSAtmAnaM vrajAmuSmAd 288 rathairmattagajendrazca
rakSitaM yasya yakSANAM 63 rathotsAhaH samAruhya rakSitA bAhRdaNDena 16
radagrahAruNIbhUtaM 365 rakSitA mithilA kumbho 427
radanazikharadaSTaspaSTarakSitAste yatastena 65  /  /  randhra vaizravaNaH
prApya 185 58 " 1 353 202

Page #589 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The one who is bitten by the serpent of love, Whose love is devoid of love,
Whose love is like a pillar, Whose love is like a pillar, Whose love is mixed
with the beautiful, Whose love is in the beautiful places, Protected himself and
his wife, And his roar with all his might, Following the path of the sun, Oh,
great sage, The sun has also touched them, The rope is connected to the
lightning, The touch of the tongue, the smell, The cutting of the tongue, son,
Taking the taste of the alms, The one who is surrounded by the touch of taste,
In the city of the taste, he embraced his beloved, who was like the taste, with
many secrets, The son of the king of the demons, You are blessed by the lord of
the demons, The demon is a sign, The chain of passion, which is called passion,
is filled with passion, hatred, etc., and can be inferred from passion and
hatred. 338 359 77  316 172 98 189 486 218 406 407 281 267 314 241 58 307 411
204 367 294 221 32 481 310 312 85 353 156 88 254 478 317 85 King Sagar, see, Let
her be the king's daughter, The king's path of valor, the king, becoming a monk,
kills the king Soma, The king named Shubhamati, the best king of men, was named
Bharata, Rajiva, Paundarika, etc., See the king, the king named Sukoshala, the
life of those two kings - 477 470 354 259 The order of the verses starting with
Ra He declares the kingdom, Leaving the kingdom to his sons, These two hate the
glory of the kingdom, Even at night, she did not get it, The enemy of Rama,
Keshava, the wealth of Rama and Keshava, The desire of the Ramas, The name Rama
is in vain, Ravana, having obtained in the battle, Ravana, having obtained his
own people, Ravana's brother, Ravana's entry, Ravana's strength, Ravana's anger,
Ravana, knowing, Ravana, defeated in battle, Ravana, carrying a long, Ravana,
bowing, Ravana, bathing happily, Ravana, his sister, with love, Ravana, with
many wives, Ravana, my great brother, Ravana, not a demon, Seeing his empty,
Enemies, more fierce, Compassion for those who are crying, The lions of the
Rurus, Then, angry with those words, Rough, broken hand, etc., seeing the form
of the Jina, that form, seeing him, The beautiful daughter, for him, By their
form, By form, a picture is made, Free from the thorns of the ReÅu, He rejoiced,
delighted with them, They rejoiced, having reached him, Many 397 67 458 351 7
439 112 341 280 336 28 8 354 292 275 470 411 307 230 226 340 300 32 401 206 396
315 127 327 44 189 281 158 262 55 109 267 229  On the peaks of the mountains,
thousands of Raishas, Burning with anger, filled with sorrow, terrible,
disgusting, and peaceful, [ L ] The sign of which, in the world, The best of
signs and ornaments, We go to Lanka, In the city of Lanka, he is vast, In Lanka,
he was then the lord, Lanka, the royal palace, and another, taken by the king of
Lanka, Overtaken by horses, airplanes, ashamed by his own form, In the middle of
the creeper house, Your son will be obtained, If I do not get her, Rama, For the
sake of obtaining the color of merit, Having obtained wealth, having done his
duty, Having obtained the knowledge of the demons, Having obtained perfect
knowledge, Having obtained the vision of the right, Having obtained humanity,
karma, Even if born in a good family, blind, They get whatever they want, The
element is remembered in the attainment, Shining, hanging, flowing, Shining,
hanging, earrings, made of glass, lac, etc., with the juice, The gain of
Manorama, Thrown into the mouth, smeared with saliva, Smeared with beauty,
Everything is looted here, See the story written by the writer, To get the
meaning of the writing, 539 210 397 281 479 111 45 141 422 112 442 130 182 .53
32 166 404 148 77 79 301 25 383 24 327 313 31 396 475 8 258 324 149 416 346 274
411

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ramaNadvijadaSTAnAM ramaNena viyuktAyAH rambhasya bhavato yasmA rambhAstambha
samasparza rambhAstambhasamAnAbhyAM ramyapravaNamizreNa ramyeSvapi pradezeSu
rarakSa svaM ca jAyAM ca ravaM ca sarvayatnena raveH panthAnamAzritya veNa
mahatA teSAM raverapi kRtasparzaH razanA vidyutA yuktA rasana sparzana ghrANa
rasanAcchedanaM putra rasabhikSoH samAdAya rasasparzapariprAhi rasAtalapure
tasya rasAtalamivAnekarahasyAliGgaya dayitAM rAkSasAdhipaputro'pi
rAkSasezvaradhanyo'si rAkSasohi saGke rAgakhANDavale hyAkhyaM
rAgadveSAdibhiryuktaM rAgadveSAnumeya 338 359 77 316 172 98 189 486 218 406 407
281 267 314 241 58 307 411 204 367 294 221 32 481 310 312 85 353 156 88 254 478
317 85 rAjan sagara pazya tvaM rAjaputrI bhavatveSA rAjamArgoM pratApasya rAjA
ca zramaNo bhUtvA rAjAnaM hantyaso somaM rAjA zubhamatirnAma rAjA zreSTho
manuSyANAM rAjAsIdbharato nAmnA rAjIva pauNDarIkAdyA: rAjJaH pazyata evAsya
rAjJaH sukozalAkhyasya rAjJostayoH prANaviyoja - 477 470 354 259 zlokAnAmakA
rAdyanukramaH rAjyaM nivedayatyasya rAjyaM suteSu nikSipya rAjyazriyaM
dviSantyete rAtrAvapi na sA lebhe rAmakezavatacchatrurAmakezavayorlakSmI
rAmANAmabhirAmANAM rAmAbhidhyAnato moghaM rAvaNaH saMyuge labdhvA rAvaNaM
svajanaM prApya rAvaNasya kila bhrAtA rAvaNasya pravezaM ca rAvaNasya bale nAmA
rAvaNasyeva kopena rAvaNena ca vijJAya rAvaNena jito yuddhe rAvaNo'tha vahan
dIrghaM rAvaNo'pi namaskRtya rAvaNo'pi sukhaM snAtvA rAvaNo'pi svasuH prItyA
rAvaNo bahupatnIka rAvaNo me mahAbandhu rAvaNo rAkSaso naiva riktakaM tasya taM
dRSTvA ripava ugratarA viSayA rudatsu teSu kAruNyA rurubhizvamaraiH siMha ruSTo
tato vacobhistau rUkSasphuTita hastAdirUpaM pazyan jinasyAsau rUpametasya taM
dRSTvA rUpiNI ca sutAM tasmai rUpeNa tAstatasteSAM rUpeNa hi kRtaM citraM
reNukaNTakanirmuktA reme ca mudito'mIbhiH remirestAstamAsAdya bahutAM 397 67 458
351 7 439 112 341 280 336 28 8 354 292 275 470 411 307 230 226 340 300 32 401
206 396 315 127 327 44 189 281 158 262 55 109 267 229 varSadharAgreSu raizatAnAM
sahasreNa roSajvalana saMtAparaudrabIbhatsazAntAzca [ la ] lakSaNaM yasya
yalloke lakSaNAbharaNazreSThau laGkAM vA pratigacchAmaH laGkAnagaryAM sa vizAla
laGkAyAM sa tadA svAmI laGkA rAjagRhaM cAnyalaGkendreNa tato nItaH
laGghitAzvavimAnebhalajjitA svena rUpeNa latAbhavanamadhyasthA lapsyate bhavataH
putrA lapsye yadi na tAM rAmA labdhavarNopakArAya labdhArthaH kRtakRtyo'pi
labdhvA ca rAkSasoM vidyAM labdhvA paramasamyaktvalabdhvApi darzanaM samyak
labdhvA manuSyatAM karma labdhe'pi sukule kANa labhante tA yathAbhISTaM
bhirdhAtuH smRtaH prAptau lalatprAlambatarala lalallambUSakaM
kAcalAkSAdirasayogena lAbhaM manoramAyAzca lAlAklinne mukhe kSiptaM
lAvaNyapaGkalitAnAM lAvaNyena vilimpantIM luNThitaM cAtra sakalaM nAmyato'nayoH
pazya lekhAropitavRttAntaM lekhArthamabhigamyaito 539 210 397 281 479 111 45 141
422 112 442 130 182 .53 32 166 404 148 77 79 301 25 383 24 327 313 31 396 475 8
258 324 149 416 346 274 411

Page #590 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
540 Padmapurana 402 He obtained the color of the obtained one, having crossed
all the 249 lokas, 49 in the three lokas, it is not there, 303 the fruit of the
two lokas, then the lokapalas said, 297 the lokapalas also went out, 143 the
lokapalas are also like this, 298 the loka-anta-parvata-akara, the shadow of the
eye is like this, 371 the shadow of the dense eye, 316 in the eye, making buds,
387 producing after the eye, 433 driven by greed, the sinful one, equal to the
lord of the earth, dharma, 117 iron teeth, salt, 482 red-bodied, in the middle
of the bull, 397 [v] the shadow of the lineage, the lineage, there is a great
being, 444 the lineage, the demon, the sky, the fragrance of the bakula, the
sigh,  149 eloquence is completely inappropriate,  251 opposition to eloquence,
252 the moon of the face, the eyes of that one, 150 in the mountains of the
chest, 34 this word, he then said, 171 the word, in the suffering of others, the
thunderbolt, the weapon, three,  140 the thunderbolt throat, then Sai, 107 the
protection of the speed of the thunderbolt, known as the thunderbolt navel, 425
the thunderbolt navel should be known, 425 the thunderbolt arm then said, 451
the thunderbolt arm, the first of those two, 450 the thunderbolt middle, below
the face, the thunderbolt pearl platform, 482 the speed of the thunderbolt, the
hand, then, 283 Vajrasena, great radiance, Vajra-abho, Vajra-bahu, 68 the son of
the thunderbolt weapon, 125 like a thunderbolt, then, his, Vajrodari,
attraction, 162 deception, the rays of the sun, the throwing, 229 having
deceived his own people, then, 402 the one named the greedy hand, 69 the one who
gave the rules of the merchant, 69 the merchants, the two brothers, there, 107
calf. As long as the bow science, 233 calf (forest) the protector of the forest,
11 calf, who are you, where do you live, 170 calf, listen, from where you have
come, 380 tell, by whom the lower jaw, from that, 281 the one who is said, or
the listener, says this, then the doctor, the face, the hand and foot, 104 from
the face, then blood, 286 they say, they have gone, 407 they say, all the
lingins, 310 they say, a compassionate voice, she says this, 363 tell, good sir,
from where you have come, 468 tell, having become fearless, bound with a
garment, Indra, 294 from the killing of Vijayasimha, the killing, etc., gives
birth, 319 the one to be killed, the girl is given, 281 the forest, go there,
the forest god, this delusion, 189 the forest, see, in the middle of this, come
to worship, 92 come to worship, another time, with the sound of the praise, 486
having worshipped him, with a lamp, 408 having worshipped, they praised, good,
the body of Dasaratha obtained, 470 Vapra, and another time, in Jainism, 188 we
are some great pure ones, 65 we have come to the lord, the boon, the lightning
radiance, the name, the boon, choose, I am pleased, 221 the boon, I am in this
battle, 300 the boon, master, your desire, 277 the boon, the Vidya-dhari hand,
187 the boon, the suitable bed, the body, 4.8 the boon, the gathering of women,
the one whose life has gone to me, 278 the boon, the one who has been struck,
177 the boon, the seat, the one who has sat, 475 the boon, the one who has sat
on the seat, 234 the boar, the wolf, the cat, 326 the boon, the one who has worn
clothes, like Varuna, there is no wealth, Varuna, there was a battle,  415
Varuna, made to be reassured, 354 the three colors, Bhagavan, the date is
present today, 396 at the end of Vardhamana-jina, Vardhamana-jinendra, 430
Vardhamana-jinendra said, at that time of years, 266 the sound of the rings,
from the contact of the waves of the ocean, 446 from the obstruction of the ant-
hill, I will stop there, 235 the one who controls, the desires, the one who has
controlled, the mind of the desires, 451 in the controlled ones, there was, 225
the one who has been controlled, and the respect, living in the houses of the
guru, 192 see the spring garland, 406 the spring garland, the difference, the
spring garland, the name, 373 the spring garland, and it is said, 406 417 276
365 374 238 80 172 345

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 540 padmapurANe 402 lebhe ca labdhavarNaH san 249 lokaM sarvamatikramya 49
lokatraye'pi tannAsti 303 lokadvayaphalaM tena lokapAlAnathovAca 297 lokapAlAzca
nirjagmu- 143 lokapAlAstathaivAsya 298 lokAntaparvatAkAraM locanacchAyayevAsyA-
371 locanAntaghanacchAyA 316 locane mukulIkurvan 387 locAnantaramutpAdya 433
lobhena coditaH pApo lo'Tulezasamo dharmo 117 lohadantajatukSAra- 482 lohitAGgo
vRSamadhye 397 [va] vaMzAnusaraNacchAyA vaMze tatra mahAsattva: 444 vaMzo rakSo
nabhogAnAM vakulAmodaniHzvAsA 149 vaktRtvaM sarvathA'yuktaM 251 vaktRtvasya
virodhA vA 252 vaktracandre'kSiNI tasyA 150 vakSAragiriyukteSu 34 vacaH so'yaM
tataH prAha 171 vacanaM parapIDAyAM vajraM praharaNaM trINi 140
vajrakaNThastata: sAI 107 vajrajavaparitrANaM vajranAbhiriti khyAta. 425
vajranAbhizca vijJeyaH 425 vajrabAhuratho'vocata 451 vajrabAhustayorAdyo 450
vajramadhyAmadho vaktrAM vajramauktikaveDyaM- 482 vajravegaH prahasto'tha 283
vajraseno mahAtejA vajrAbho vajrabAhuzca 68 vajrAyudhasya putro'yaM 125
vajraNeva tatastasya vajrodarI samAkRSTi- 162 vaJcanAdaMzukAkSepA- 229 vaJcitvA
svajanaM so'tha 402 vaNi gdhitakaro nAmnA 69 vaNigniyamadattasya 69 vaNijau
bhrAtarAvAstAM 107 vatsa. tAvaddhanurveda- 233 vatsa (vana) pAlIkarAdhRSTa- 11
vatse kAsi kuto vAsi 170 vatse zRNu yataH prAptA 380 vada kenAdharastasmA- 281
vaditA yo'thavA zrotA vadatyevaM tato vyAdhe vadanaM pANipAdaM ca 104 vadanena
tato raktaM 286 vadanta iti te yAtA407 vadanti liGginaH sarve 310 vadantIH
karuNaM svaraM vadantyAmevametasyA 363 vada bhadra kutaH prApta 468 vada
vizrabdhikA bhUtvA vaddhAMzukena devendra 294 vadhAt vijayasiMhasya vadhAdi
kurute janma 319 vadhyasya dIyate kanye 281 vanaM tadeva gacchAva vanadeva iti
bhrAntiM 189 vanasya pazya madhye'sya vandanAya samAyAtaM 92 vandanAyAnyadAyAto
vandighoSitazabdena 486 vanditvA taM pradIpena 408 vanditvA tuSTuvuH sAdhu
vapurdazaratho lebhe 470 vaprayA cAnyadA jaine 188 vayaM ke'pi mahApUtA 65 vayaM
prabhuM samAyAtA varaM vidyutprabheNAmA varaM vRNISva tuSTo'smi 221 varaM samara
evAsmin 300 varaM svAmini kAmaM te 277 varavidyAdharIpANi 187 varazayyocitaH
kAya- 4.8 varastrIjanasaMcAtaiH varAkI madgataprANA 278 varAnihatarebhiH 177
varAsananiviSTaM te 475 varAsanopaviSTe ca 234 varAhavRkamArjAra- 326
varivasyAmavastrANAvaruNasyeva na dravyaM varuNasyAbhavayuddhaM 415 varuNena
kRtAzvAsA- 354 varNatrayasya bhagavan vartate tithiradyeyaM 396
varddhamAnajinasyAnte varddhamAnajinendrasya 430 varddhamAnajinendroktaH
varSANAM samaye tasmi- 266 valayAnAM raNatkAraH valItaraGgasaMpRktAt 446
valmIkavivarodhAtaivazIkaromyatastAvad 235 vazIkartAhRSIkANAM vazIkRta huSIkAtmA
451 vazIkRteSu tasyAsIt 225 vazIkRtazca sanmAnaM vasatAM gurugeheSu 192
vasantamAlike pazya 406 basantamAlike bhedo vasantamAlayAkhyAtaM . 373
vasantamAlayA coktA 406 417 276 365 374 238 80 172 345

Page #591 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Åloka Anukrama (Index of Verses)  541 441 239 208 KÄÅya 120 349 48
VasÄntamÄlÄyÄ tasya 386 vÄsa re prathame vÄso 358 vasÄntamÄlÄyÄ datte 394 vÄsa
sya bharatasya ante 334 vasÄntamÄlÄyÄ sÄkaá¹ 40 vÄsudeva bhavisyanti 83
vasundharaÅca vijÃ±eyaá¸¥ VÄsupÅ«jyaá¹ satÄmÄ«Åaá¹ vasur nÄma bhavat tasya VÄsupÅ«jya
jinÄntÄnÄá¹ 424 vaso vitathasÄmÄ - 243 vÄsupÅ«jyo mahÄvÄ«ro 428 vastrÄnu lepanÄdÄ«ni
VÄsyÄntaragirindrÄá¹Äá¹ 473 vasvaÅvi pramukhÄ devÄá¸¥ 280 vÄá¹£pÄkulitane trÄbhyÄá¹ 357
valivan muÃ±cati jvÄlÄ 174 vikacendÄ«varayantra 102 vÄkyam tato 'numanyedaá¹ 366
viká¹tya nijarÅ«paá¹ sa vÄá¹manasakÄyavá¹ttÄ«nÄ - 314.à¥¤ VikretÄ badarÄdÄ«nÄá¹ 320
vÄcayitvÄ ca taá¹ ká¹tvÄ 274 vigatÄ lepanÄ kÄcit 229 vÄjibhiá¸¥ syandana gaá¸¥ 486
vigamo 'narthadaá¹á¸ebhyo vÄjibhir vÄyuraho bhi - 99.à¥¤ Vigrahe 'pi nirÄsango 121
vÄjimÄtaá¹gapÄdÄt - 227 vicicchedha sa nÄrÄcaiá¸¥ 486 vÄÃ±chatam naramÄtreá¹a Vicitto
'si kimityeva 271 vÄá¹ijyaká¹á¹£igoraká¹£Ä Vicintaty evame tasmin 193
vÄá¹ijyavyavahÄreá¹a Vicintayanti pitaro 419 vÄá¹ijyasadá¹Åo dharma - 312 vicitra
karma saá¹pÅ«rá¹Ä dÄá¹yava madhurÄ vÄ«á¹Ä 39 vicitramaá¹ibhakti ni 473 vÄtÄtapa
pariÅrÄntÄ 375.à¥¤ Vicitramaá¹i sambhÅ«ta vÄta Ätmikaá¹ ca tatkará¹a - 136 vicitra
vanitÄ vÄÃ±chÄ 277 vÄtayanagatÄÅce ká¹£Ä Vicitra vÄhanÄrÅ«á¸hÄ 201 vÄtoddhá¹tÄ jaá¹­Ä
tasya 52.à¥¤ Vicchhada m iva kurvÄá¹Ä vÄto 'pi nÄharat kiÃ±cit 15 vijayaÅca
triprá¹£á¹­haÅca vÄnareá¹a satÄ prÄptaá¹ 115 vijayasya ndano vÄrtÄ 453 vÄyunÄ
vÄyunÄvÄÅu VijayÄmÄ«ri sthÄnÄá¹ 172 vÄyuputrasahÄyatvaá¹ Vijayar dhajalo kena 299
vÄyumapyabhinandanti 351 vijayar dhagire ge vÄyurapyuttamÄmá¹ddhi VijayÄddhagirÄ«
tena vÄyoá¸¥ sutasyaiva kathaá¹ 418 vijayar dhanagastheá¹£u 141 vÄyitvetyaso tÄtaá¹
285 vijayar dhanage ye ca vÄ rÄá¹asÄ« viÅÄkhÄ ca 427 vijayÄ? tataÅcyutvÄ vÄrtÄyÄ
ÅrÅ«yate ko 'pi Vijayo nÄma rÄjendro vÄttikairasuracchidraá¹ Vijayo mithilÄ vaprÄ
427 vÄliÅ¡ÄnÄmanÄthÄnÄá¹ VijitÄ bahavo 'nena 281 bÄleyai mahip ahaá¹sa VijÃ±Äto 'sau
tatastena 74 vÄsagehÄcca niá¸¥krÄntÄ 42 vijÃ±ÄpayÄmi nÄtha tvÄá¹ 380 VijÃ±ÄpayÄmi
nÄthÄhaá¹ 235 vijÃ±Äya ká¹£aá¹ikÄá¹ laká¹£mÄ« 435 vijÃ±Äya manasaá¸¥ ká¹£obha - 223 vijÃ±eyau
bÄlisugrÄ«vo 208 vitathavya há¹tÄsaktÄá¸¥ 308 vitÄnaá¹ dambharacitaá¹ 243
vitÄ«rá¹asvajÄnandaá¸¥ vitÄ«rya bÄlaye rÄjyaá¹ 208 vitá¹ptihará¹£apÅ«rá¹Äbhi - 293 vittÄni
nÄnurÄgasya viditvÄ nagaraá¹ ruddhÄá¹ 129 viditvÄvadhinÄ devo 444 viditvÄ vitathÄ
sarvÄ 492 viditvopaÅama prÄptÄn 133 videhaá¹ ná¹pa yÄto 'ha - 472 vidyate
sarvamÄvÄ sya vidyamÄne prabho bhá¹tye 145 vidyÄ cÄá¹£á¹­Äká¹£arÄ nÄ«tÄ 157 vidyÄdhara
kumÄryo yÄ 214 vidyÄdhara purÄkÄrÄ vidyÄdhara samÄjo 'yaá¹ vidyÄdharaá¹Äá¹
saá¹ghÄtaiá¸¥ vidyÄdhara Ädhipa ti pÅ«jita - 422 vidyÄnu yoga kuÅalÄá¸¥ 95 vidyÄbalena
yaá¸¥ kuryÄd 126 vidyÄbalena yatkiÃ±cit 291 vidyÄbhá¹ccakravarttitva vidyÄbhá¹tÄá¹
tá¹tÄ«yastu vidyÄbhá¹tÄá¹ patis tasmin 91 vidyÄmandara - saá¹jÃ±asya 122 vidyÄyÄá¹
viditÄá¹ pÅ«rva vidyÄ lÄbhaá¹ mahendrasya vidyÄliá¹ganajÄmÄ«Ä 172 vidyÄvatÄá¹ prabho
bhadral 355 vidyÄvinayasampanne 254 vidyÄsamÅ«hasampanna 207 vidyÄ hi sÄdyate
putraá¸¥ vidyutÄ«va tato dá¹á¹£á¹­i 127 401 147 358 140 231 77 141 357

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH 541 441 239 208 kAsya 120 349 48 vasantamAlayA tasyA
386 vAsare prathame vAso 358 vasantamAlayA datte 394 vAsasya bharatasyAnte 334
vasantamAlayA sAkaM 40 vAsudevA bhaviSyanti 83 vasundharazca vijJeyaH vAsupUjyaM
satAmIzaM vasurnAmAbhavattasya vAsupUjyajinAntAnAM 424 vaso vitathasAmA - 243
vAsupUjyo mahAvIro 428 vastrAnulepanAdIni vAsyAntaragirIndrANAM 473
vasvazvipramukhA devAH 280 vASpAkulitanetrAbhyAM 357 valivanmuJcati jvAlA 174
vikacendIvarayaMtra 102 vAkyaM tato'numanyedaM 366 vikRtya nijarUpaM sa
vAGmanaHkAyavRttInA- 314  /  /  vikretA badarAdInAM 320 vAcayitvA ca taM kRtvA
274 vigatA lepanA kAcit 229 vAjibhiH syandana gaH 486 vigamo'narthadaNDebhyo
vAjibhirvAyurahobhi- 99  /  /  vigrahe'pi nirAsaGgo 121 vAjimAtaGgapAdAta- 227
viciccheda sa nArAcaiH 486 vAJchataM naramAtreNa vicitto'si kimityeva 271
vANijyakRSigorakSA vicintatyevametasmin 193 vANijyavyavahAreNa vicintayantI
pitaro 419 vANijyasadRzo dharma- 312 vicitrakarmasaMpUrNA dANyava madhurA vINA
39 vicitramaNibhaktIni 473 vAtAtapaparizrAntA 375  /  /
vicitramaNisaMbhUtavAtAtmakaM ca tatkarNa- 136 vicitravanitA vAJchA 277
vAtAyanagatAzcekSA vicitravAhanArUDhA 201 vAtoddhRtA jaTA tasya 52  /  /
vicchadamiva kurvANA vAto'pi nAharat kiMcit 15 vijayazca tripRSThazca vAnareNa
satA prAptaM 115 vijayasyandano vArtA 453 vAyunA vAyunevAzu vijayAmiristhAnAM
172 vAyuputrasahAyatvaM vijayArdhajalokena 299 vAyumapyabhinandantI 351
vijayArddhagire ge vAyurapyuttamAmRddhi vijayAddhagirI tena vAyoH sutasyaiva
kathaM 418 vijayArddhanagastheSu 141 vAyitvetyaso tAtaM 285 vijayArddhanage ye
ca vArANasI vizAkhA ca 427 vijayA? tatazcyutvA vArtayA zrUyate ko'pi vijayo nAma
rAjendro vAttikairasuracchidraM vijayo mithilA vaprA 427 vAlizAnAmanAthAnAM
vijitA bahavo'nena 281 bAleyaimahipahaMsa vijJAto'sau tatastena 74 vAsagehAcca
ni:krAntA 42 vijJApayAmi nAtha tvAM 380 vijJApayAmi nAthAhaM 235 vijJAya
kSaNikAM lakSmI 435 vijJAya manasaH kSobha- 223 vijJeyau bAlisugrIvo 208
vitathavyAhRtAsaktAH 308 vitAnaM dambharacitaM 243 vitIrNasvajanAnando vitIrya
bAlaye rAjyaM 208 vitRptiharSapUrNAbhi- 293 vittAni nAnurAgasya viditvA nagaraM
ruddhaM 129 viditvAvadhinA devo 444 viditvA vitathA sarvA 492 viditvopazama
prAptAna 133 videhaM nRpa yAto'ha- 472 vidyate sarvamevAsya vidyamAne prabho
bhRtye 145 vidyA cASTAkSarA nItA 157 vidyAdharakumAryo yA 214 vidyAdharapurAkArA
vidyAdharasamAjo'yaM vidyAdharANAM saMghAtaiH vidyAdharAdhipatipUjita- 422
vidyAnuyogakuzalAH 95 vidyAbalena yaH kuryAd 126 vidyAbalena yatkicit 291
vidyAbhRccakravartitvavidyAbhRtAM tRtIyastu vidyAbhRtAM patistasmin 91
vidyAmandara-saMjJasya 122 vidyAyAM viditAM pUrva vidyAlAbhaM mahendrasya
vidyAliGganajAmIA 172 vidyAvatAM prabhobhadra! 355 vidyAvinayasaMpanne 254
vidyAsamUhasaMpanna 207 vidyA hi sAdhyate putraH vidyutIva tato dRSTi 127 401
147 358 140 231 77 141 357

Page #592 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
542 Padma Purana 10 18 184 277 401 28 Vidhyutprakasha naamasya 112 Vipralapaá¹
tataá¸¥ ÅrutvÄ 394 Vidhyutprabhaguá¹astotram 394 Vipralapaá¹ paraá¹ ká¹tvÄ 476
Vidhyatprabo bhavedasyÄá¸¥ 345 VibhudhendrÄdibhogÄnÄm 118 VidhyutvÄn cÄruyÄnaÅca
144. VibhaktaparvatÄn paÅyan 306 Vidhyuddandeá¹a saá¹yuktaá¹ 171 VibhÄ«á¹£aá¹ena vegena
279 Vidhyuktotpala chÄyÄ 328 VibhÄ«á¹£aá¹o'pi saá¹prÄpya 476 VidhyudvÄhananÄmnÄsau
129 VibhÄ«á¹£aá¹o'pyayaá¹ vyartha VidhyudvilasitÄkÄrÄá¹ Vibhur nalinagulmaÅca 425
VidhyudvilasitenÄso 192 VibhÅ«ti mama paÅya tvaá¹ Vidhyadvilasito nÄma 476
VibhÅ«tyÄ parayÄ yukto VidhyunmÄlÄ ká¹tÄbhikyai Vimala antar dharmÄÅca 82
Vidhyunmukhaá¸¥ suvaktraÅca 68 Vimala amalakÄntÄdyÄ VidrÄvayan mayÅ«khaiÅca 151
Vimalaaya nabhastredhÄ 221 VidhattÄá¹ paÃ±catÄyogyÄá¹ VimÄnaá¹ sÅ«ryasaá¹kÄÅaá¹ 412
Vidhat sva dhá¹timoÅe 392 VimÄna prabhá¹tÄ«n jÄ«vÄ 315 VidhavÄ bhartá¹saá¹yukta
VimÄnÄbhyantara nyastÄ 416 VidhÄya ca namaskÄra 221 VimÄnavividha chÄyaiá¸¥ ketu
472 VidhÄya praá¹ati tatra VimÄnavividha chÄyaiá¸¥ sandhyÄ 141 VidhÄya bhÅ«bhujaá¸¥
ká¹tyaá¹ VimuÃ±canviá¹£ama chchedÄ 386 VidhÄya mahatÄ«á¹ pÅ«jÄá¹ 230 VimuÃ±ceá¹£u dharitrÄ«
vÄ 211 VidhÄya sÄdhulokasya Vimu ktaá¹ sarpajÄlena 293 VidhÄya siddhabimbÄnÄm 85
Vimu ktÄÅeá¹£akarmÄá¹aá¸¥ 313 VidhÄyÄntaka saá¹mÄnaá¹ 203 Vimu ktyÄnugá¹hÄ«to'yaá¹ 451
VidhinÄ ca tato vá¹ttaá¹ Viyukta iva jÄ«vena 402 VidhmÄpakÄya duá¸¥khÄgne 46 Viyuk
tÄnena bÄleyam 337 Vinayena paripva kÄ 330 Viracayya ghanavyÅ«havinÄ«tÄ nagarÄ«
nÄbhi 426 Virati sarvataá¸¥ kattu 240 VinÄ«tÄ mathurÄ ceti 440 Viralata ÄdrÅÄn loke
207 VinÄ«tÄyÄá¹ mahÄnÄsÄ« 239 VirÄdhitasya Ägamanaá¹ VindhyakÅ«á¹­a samÄkÄrai VirÅ«pÄ
dhaninaá¸¥ ke ci 309 Vindhyasya srotasÄ nÄgÄ 322 VirÅ«pÄ durbhgÄá¸¥ santaá¸¥ 439
Vinyastaá¹ bhÄvato dÄnaá¹ 310. Virocane'stasamsa rga 326 ViparÄ«taá¹ yadetasmÄd 118
Virodhavadidaá¹ karma 277 VipÄá¹­itau svabhÄvena 113 Vilaká¹£astu priye má¹á¹£yavipulaá¹
Åikhare ca ekaá¹ Vilaká¹£ÄÅcÄbhavan yaká¹£Ä 183 VipulÄbhraá¹lihodÄra 334 VilalÄpa
mahÄvatsa vipuleti mahÄdevÄ« VilÄpamapi kurvÄá¹aá¹ Vipralapaá¹ tataÅcakre 130
VilÄpamiti kurvantyÄ 239 VilÄ«natripusÄ« sÄdi 119 VilupyamÄnaá¸¥ pathikaivilomÄni
nayello mÄ 105 Vivará¹asÅ«tra sambaddha vivartaá¸¥ paÃ±came'á¹gasya 341 Vivi
ktadhiá¹£aá¹enÄ sÄ 281 VividharatnasamÄgama sampadaá¸¥ 206 VividhÄni vimuÃ±canta 176
VivekarahitÄmetÄá¹ 348 Vivekino'pi tasyaedaá¹ 341 Vivedeti ca dhikkaá¹£á¹­aá¹ ViveÅa ca
ká¹tÄryÄdi 401 ViveÅa bhavanaá¹ cÄsya 402 Viá¹Åatyardhamukhaá¸¥ ká¹ddhaá¸¥ 414 ViÅaddhiá¸¥
sainyamÄgatya ViÅaÅramuá¸¥ ká¹£aá¹aá¹ tasmi 246 ViÅÄla pulinÄÅcÄsya 190 ViÅiá¹£á¹­acintayÄ
yÄtaá¹ 3 ViÅiá¹£á¹­ÄkÄrasambaddha 256 ViÅaddhavinayÄ cÄrvi 374 ViÅeá¹£atastvayÄ kÄntaá¸¥
362 ViÅrabbdhÄ guravo'pá¹cchÄá¹ 165 ViÅrÄntaá¹ mÅ«rcchhayÄ ÅÅ«raiá¸¥ 290 ViÅrÄntÄbhyÄá¹
cirÄd dá¹á¹£á¹­i 378 ViÅvanandÄ« mahÄtejÄ 439 Viá¹£ayavaÅamupÄtai naá¹£á¹­a 423 Viá¹£ayÄ hi
samabhyastÄ 331 Viá¹£aye nagare grÄme 264 Viá¹£ayeá¹£u tathÄ saukhyaá¹
Viá¹£ayesvaprasaktÄtmÄ 337 Viá¹£Ädamatulam cÄgÄ 183 Viá¹£Äde ca gate mÄndya 236
Viá¹£á¹uÅrÄ«á¸¥ Åravaá¹o viá¹£á¹uá¸¥ 426 VisajitÄÅca te tena 205 Visarpaá¹amime sÅ«tra 261
Visá¹á¹£á¹­asarvasangÄnÄm 318 Visphu rachchafarÄ«nÄlai 11 Vismayaá¹ prÄptavÄn dá¹á¹£á¹­vÄ 21
303 232 89 448 .

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 542 padmapurANe 10 18 184 277 401 28 vidyutprakAzA nAmAsya 112 vipralApaM tataH
zrutvA 394 vidyutprabhaguNastotraM 394 vipralApaM paraM kRtvA 476 vidyatprabho
bhavedasyAH 345 vibudhendrAdibhogAnAM 118 vidyutvAn cAruyAnazca 144  /  /
vibhaktaparvatAn pazyan 306 vidyuddaNDena saMyuktaM 171 vibhISaNena vegena 279
vidyuktotpalacchAyA 328 vibhISaNo'pi saMprApya 476 vidyudvAhananAmnAsau 129
vibhISaNo'pyayaM vyartha vidyudvilasitAkArAM vibhurnalinagulmazca 425
vidyudvilasitenAso 192 vibhUti mama pazya tvaM vidyadvilasito nAma 476 vibhUtyA
parayA yukto vidyunmAlAkRtAbhikhyai vimalAntardharmAzca 82 vidyunmukhaH
suvaktrazca 68 vimalAmalakAntAdyA vidrAvayan mayUkhaizca 151 vimalAya
nabhastredhA 221 vidhattAM paJcatAyogyAM vimAnaM sUryasaMkAzaM 412 vidhatsva
dhRtimoze 392 vimAnaprabhRtIn jIvA 315 vidhavA bhartRsaMyuktA
vimAnAbhyantaranyastA- 416 vidhAya ca namaskAra 221 vimAnavividhacchAyaiH ketu-
472 vidhAya praNati tatra vimAnavividhacchAyaiH saMdhyA 141 vidhAya bhUbhujaH
kRtyaM vimuJcanviSamacchedA- 386 vidhAya mahatIM pUjAM 230 vimuJceSu dharitrI vA
211 vidhAya sAdhulokasya vimuktaM sarpajAlena 293 vidhAya siddhabimbAnAM 85
vimuktAzeSakarmANaH 313 vidhAyAntakasaMmAnaM 203 vimuktyAnugRhIto'yaM 451
vidhinA ca tato vRttaM viyukta iva jIvena 402 vidhmApakAya duHkhAgne- 46
viyuktAnena bAleyaM 337 vinayena paripvakA 330 viracayya ghanavyUhavinItA nagarI
nAbhi- 426 virati sarvataH kattu 240 vinItA mathurA ceti 440 viralastAdRzAM loke
207 vinItAyAM mahAnAsI- 239 virAdhitasyAgamanaM vindhyakUTasamAkArai virUpA
dhaninaH keci- 309 vindhyasya srotasA nAgA 322 virUpA durbhagAH santaH 439
vinyastaM bhAvato dAnaM 310 /  /  virocane'stasaMsarga 326 viparItaM yadetasmAd
118 virodhavadidaM karma 277 vipATitau svabhAvena 113 vilakSastu priye
mRSyavipulaM zikhare caikaM vilakSAzcAbhavan yakSA 183 vipulAbhraMlihodAra- 334
vilalApa mahAvatsa vipuleti mahAdevI vilApamapi kurvANaM vipralApaM tatazcakre
130 vilApamiti kurvantyA 239 vilInatripusIsAdi . 119 vilupyamAnaH
pathikaivilomAni nayellomA- 105 vivarNasUtrasaMbaddhavivartaH paJcame'Ggasya 341
viviktadhiSaNenAsA- 281 vividharatnasamAgamasaMpadaH 206 vividhAni vimuJcanta
176 vivekarahitAmetAM 348 vivekino'pi tasyedaM 341 vivedeti ca dhikkaSTaM viveza
ca kRtAryAdi 401 viveza bhavanaM cAsya 402 viMzatyarddhamukhaH kruddho 414
vizaddhiH sainyamAgatya vizazramuH kSaNaM tasmi- 246 vizAlapulinAzcAsya 190
viziSTacintayA yAtaM 3 viziSTAkArasaMbaddha- 256 vizaddhavinayA cArvI 374
vizeSatastvayA kAntaH 362 vizrabdhA guravo'pRcchaM 165 vizrAntaM mUrcchayA
zUraiH 290 vizrAntAbhyAM cirAd dRSTi- 378 vizvanandImahAtejA- 439
viSayavazamupetairnaSTa- 423 viSayA hi samabhyastA 331 viSaye nagare grAme 264
viSayeSu tathA saukhyaM viSayesvaprasaktAtmA 337 viSAdamatulaM cAgA- 183 viSAde
ca gate mAndya- 236 viSNuzrIH zravaNo viSNuH 426 visajitAzca te tena 205
visarpaNamime sUtra- 261 visRSTasarvasaMgAnAM 318 visphuracchapharInAlai- 11
vismayaM prAptavAn dRSTvA 21 303 232 89 448 .

Page #593 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Ilokanamakaradhanukramaá¸¥  230 192 314 231 246 They forget not the past 180,
bound by ropes, the earth 303, doubts, etc., defects of vision 435, forgetting
me, this god 159. || Bound by this, then pleased 79, able to go in the sky 377,
forgetting good deeds done 211, Vaidyuta-dandhika-sakta  Able to fight, whose
126, wandering, all living beings 214, Vaidarya, the branch below 22, with
supreme power 140, laughing, he then anger Vaidhurya, forest in the middle 403,
able to harm all, abandoning the kingdom like grass 436, enemies are many
Shakra, etc., bull-like gods 77, abandoning the tilaka-kesha 72, Vaivasvata-
suta-Aira 493, Shakra also, in anger, the Aravata 293, seeing white teeth 105,
manifest form, like color, speech 3, hundred, his sons, seeing auspicious sound
Announcing, with tearful eyes 452, hundred, others, by the son, Vina-jhankara-
ramya 450, past sorrow, consciousness 425, hundred-armed, chariot, hearing 234
Vina, bamboo, conch 123, adultery, not knowing 279 Hundred-two, Kha-khadya-
yoshat 429, Vina, bamboo, mixed 205, order, only, his Hundred, five, bows 431,
Vina, bamboo, etc., musical instruments, he discharged, the son's Enemies,
creating trembling, free from attachment, all-knowing 311, tiger-seen, deer-like
this 373, enemies, arrival, hearing, free from attachment, that purpose, tiger,
lion, etc., before Enemy, thus, he conquered 146, hero-producing, hero Tiger, by
the fame-bearer 465, Shani, all-seeing 397, hero's, equal position, hunter, of
those two, there was one Sound, by that, knowing 294, what is cut, what is not
cut 480, diseases, very severe 315, these pacifiers, how, snakes, tree-root-
located, below Hunter, also, for a long time, wandering 120, bed-making, method,
some, trees, darkness, deep Filled, direction, circle 339, autumn, ocean, form
133, surrounded, by Kshaya-samantas 117, sky, drop, thus, known 147, refuge,
obtaining, that, lord 120, round, fat, great, pot, sky, like, dirt, connection
Refuge, obtaining, that, lord, sages 81, story, that, I, seeing 200, wound,
breaking, then, his Autumn, ocean, form 216, story, in, this, you, wound,
breaking, method Autumn, all, moon, like 295, in, knowledge, by, celestial
beings, gods Autumn, water, like, form 18, bowing, monkeys, of 127, by, those,
some Autumn, ocean, like, wave, increase, going, knowledge Going, thus, in
order, his 450 Autumn, moon, white, Veda, knowledge, scripture-ness 254, going,
by, offering, with 150, autumn, flower, like, form 387, year, digs, ant-hill
191, let them go, now, living beings 51, arrows, hearing, attracted 292, bull-
killer, not, whose You go, where, by, samantas 121, body, obtained, by, dharma,
bull, drum, shoulder You go, now, elephant-hood 404. || Body, welfare, asking,
etc. 164, bull, she, then, joined, vow, obtained, by, Rama Body, then, not, his,
rain, without, how, clouds Vow, this, householder's 117, body, dress, refinement
483, speed, from, practiced, his 198, vow, this, by me, obtained Body, like,
with, joined 150, speed, great, going 120, vows, other, five, these 311, arrows,
by, that, with, joined 195, speed, by, that, then, going 114 Moon, white, high
140 [Sh] Prostitute's, going, plane, or 141 Moon, like, form, by, bound,
entered, by, those 178, doubt, desire, with, joined 322, moon, gentle, face,
like 263 462 198 318 201 234 12 316 256 408

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 ilokAnAmakArAdhanukramaH 230 192 314 231 246 vismaranti ca no pUrva 180 veSTito
rajjubhiH kSoNI 303 zaGkAdidRSTidoSANA- 435 vismRtya mAmime devaM 159  /  /
veSTito'sau tatastuSTaH 79 zaktApi gagane gantuM 377 vismRtya sukRtaM kRtyaM 211
vaiDUyaMdaNDikAsakta zaktA yasya na saMgrAme 126 viharan sarvajIvAnAM 214
vaiDarya viTapasyAdho 22 zaktyA paramayA yuktaM 140 vihasya sa tataH kopA
vaidhuryAraNyamadhyasthA 403 zaknoti bAdhituM sarvA vihAya tRNavadrAjyaM 436
vairiNo bahavaH santi zakrAdyA devavRSabhAH 77 vihAyastilakezaMsa 72
vaivasvatasutAmairaH 493 zakro'pyarAvataM roSA- 293 vIkSamANaH sitAn dantAn 105
vyaktAkArAdivarNA vAga 3 zatenaM tasya putrANAM vIkSya maGgalanAdena vyajJApayat
savASpAkSa- 452 zatamanyozca putreNa vINAjhaGkAraramyANAM 450
vyatItazokasaMjJazca 425 zatabAhuratha zrutvA 234 vINAbhirveNubhiH zaGkha- 123
vyabhicAramavijJAya 279 zatavAddhikhakhadyoSaTa 429 vINAveNuvimizreNa 205
vyavasthAmAtrakaM tasya zatAni paJca cApAnAM 431 vINAveNvAdi-vAdyana
vyasarjayacca putrasya zatrUNAM janayan kampaM vItarAgAn samastajJA- 311
vyAghradRSTamRgIveyaM 373 zatrUNAmAgamaM zrutvA
vItasaMgAstamuddezavyAghrasiMhAdayaH pUrva zatrunevaM sa nirjitya 146
vIraprasavinI vIrA vyAghro kIrtidhareNApi 465 zanaizcaraM samagrAkSa- 397
vIrasya samavasthAnaM vyAdhastayorabhUdeko zabdena tena vijJAya 294 vuSkima
chinnamacchinnaM 480 vyAdhInAmatitIvrANAM 315 zamino'mI kathaM vyAlA
vRkSamUlasthasAdhozca vyAdho'pi suciraM bhrAntvA 120 zayanIyavidhau kAcit
vRkSAndhakAragaMbhIraM vyAptadikcakravAlena 339 zarajjaladharAkAro 133 vRtaM
kaSAyasAmantai- 117 vyomabinduriti khyAtaH 147 zaraNaM prApya taM nAtha 120
vRttapInamahAkumbhaM vyomavanmalasaMbandha zaraNaM prApya taM nAtha munayo 81
vRttAntaM tamahaM dRSTrA 200 vraNabhaGgaM tatastasya zaratpayodharAkAra- 216
vRttAntagatametatte vraNabhaGgavidhAnena zaratsakalacandrAbhaM vRttau
vidyAdharairdevai- 295 vrajatA raviNApyUz2a 139 zaratsaraHsamAkAraM 18 vandAni
vAnarINAM vA 127 vadbhireva taiH kaici zaradambhodavilayaM vaddhi vrajati
vijJAnaM vrajantIti krameNAsya 450 zarannizAkarazvetavedAgamasya zAstratva- 254
vrajantI bajyayA yukta 150 zarapuSpasamAkAra- 387 vaSaH khanati valmIka 191
vrajantu sAMprataM jIvA 51 zarAnAkarNamAkRSTAn 292 vRSaghAtIni no yasya vrajasi
kveti sAmantai- 121 zarIraM labhyate dharmAt vRSabhaM dundubhiskandhaM vrajedAnI
gajendratvaM 404  /  /  zarIrakSemapRcchAdi- 164 vRSabhI to samAsajya
vrataprAptena rAmeNa zarIramatha naivAsya vRSTivinA kuto meghaiH vratametad
gRhasthAnAM 117 zarIraveSasaMskAra- 483 vegAdabhyAyatasyAsya 198
vratametanmayopAttaM zarI reNeva saMyuktAM 150 vegena mahatAgatya 120
vratAnyaNani paJcaiSAM 311 zaraistena samaM yuktai- 195 vegena sa tato gatvA 114
zazAGkadhavalastuGgo 140 [za] vezyAyAnaM vimAnaM vA 141
zazAGkasadRzAkAraiveSTitazca praviSTastaiH 178 zaGkayAkAGkSayA yuktA 322
zazAGkasaumyavaktrAbhi- 263 462 198 318 201 234 12 316 256 408

Page #594 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Padmapurana 78 219 LankÄ, 132 ÅaÅi-pÅ«rva-antara, 76 ÅaÅi-pÅ«rva, tat-chyutvÄ, 75
ÅaÅi-pÅ«rva, rajo-valyÄ, 75 ÅaÅi-bhiá¸¥, puá¹á¸arÄ«kiá¹yÄá¹, 433 ÅaÅi-vaá¹Åe,
samutpannÄá¸¥, ÅaÅyÄvali-samÄhvÄnÄ«, 75 Åastra-paÃ±jara-madhyastho, 415 Åastra-
ÄyamÄnaiá¸¥ niá¸¥Åeá¹£a-, 258. Åastri-bhiá¸¥ vÄ«ra-nilayo, 13 ÅÄka-kandala-vÄá¹­ena, 11
ÅÄkhÄ-bhiá¸¥, supra-kÄÅÄ-bhiá¸¥, 103 ÅÄntiá¸¥, kunthura-raÅceti, 427 ÅÄntiá¸¥, mÄli-
vadhenaiva, 180 ÅÄli-ÅÅ«ka-sama-chchÄyÄn, 105 ÅÄsana-ÄcÄra-vá¹ttyartha, 447
ÅÄstreá¹a co-ditatvÄcca, 254 Åikharaá¹ tasya Åailendra, ÅikhÄ«keÅari-daá¹á¸ona-
ÅithilÄyitum-ÄrabdhÄ, Åiraá¸¥-kapÄla-saá¹ghÄtaá¸¥, ÅirasÄ mukuá¹­a-nyasta-Åiraá¸¥-su
vidviá¹£Äm eva, 181 Åiro namaya cÄpaá¹ vÄ, 211 ÅilÄ-tala-viÅÄlÄ ca, ÅilÄ-taleá¹£u
viÅrabdhaá¹, 104 ÅilÄ-vistÄ«rá¹a-há¹dayaá¹, ÅilpÄnÄá¹ Åataá¹ uddiá¹£á¹­aá¹, Åoka-rÄdita-
devatvÄ-d, 274 Åotalaá¹ ÅÄ«taladhyÄna, ÅÄ«talÄ má¹davo dhÄrÄá¸¥, 266 ÅÄ«tÄá¹Åuka-kiraá¹a-
Åveta-, 40 ÅÄ«toá¹£á¹a-vÄta-yukteá¹£u, Åukra-Åoá¹ita-mÄá¹sÄsthi-, 291 Åukra-Åoá¹ita-
saá¹bhÅ«ta-, 257 ÅuklÄyÄá¹ mÄrga-ÅÄ«rá¹£asya, Åuddha-dhyÄna-samÄviá¹£á¹­a, Åuddha-
abhijana-tÄá¹ mukhyÄ, Åubha-laká¹£aá¹a-saá¹chhanna, Åubho vÄyu-gatiá¸¥ nÄma, 334
Åramaá¹a-tva-dharaá¸¥ ká¹tvÄ, 272 Åubhraá¹ stamberaá¹ aá¹ sihaá¹, 489 ÅrÄmaá¹yaá¹ kevala-
utpatti-ÅuÅubhe, bhrÄtá¹-madhye sÄ, 155. ÅrÄmaá¹ya-vatam-ÄsthÄya, ÅuÅrÄva cÄgato
vÄrtÄ, 209. ÅritÄ ye 'pi su-durgaá¹i, 226 ÅurukakÄá¹£á¹­haá¹ dadhac-chaÃ±cÄ, 142 Åriyam
indraá¸¥ sute nyasya, 304 Åuá¹£ka-citraá¹ dvidhÄ proktaá¹, 480 ÅriyÄá¹ ca saá¹pÄdinÄ«
kará¹a-, 419 Åuá¹£ka-patra-Ädi-saá¹bhÅ«taá¹, 481 ÅrÄ«kaá¹á¹­haá¹ abhidhÄyaivaá¹, 101 Åuá¹£ka-
sÄgara-virti, ÅrÄ«kaá¹á¹­ho 'pi kule jÄtaá¸¥, 99 Åaro 'pi na samartho 'haá¹, 332
ÅrÄ«kÄntÄ supra-bhÄtula-yÄá¸¥, 328 ÅÅ«ro ki kurutÄma-tra, 209 ÅrÄ«matÄ« nÄma tasyÄsÄ«t,
97 ÅÅ«la-ratnaá¹ sa tat-prÄpya, 273 ÅrÄ«mato hariá¹£eá¹asya, ÅÅ«laiá¸¥ pÄÅaiá¸¥
bhuá¹£uá¹á¸Ä«bhiá¸¥, 287 ÅrÄ«mÄn vidyÄdhara-ÄdhiÅo, 353 Åá¹á¹utÄto 'sti nagara-, 337
ÅrÄ«mÄlÄá¹ cÄbravÄ«devaá¹, 133 Åá¹á¹u duá¸¥khaá¹ yathÄ-pÅ«rva, 353 ÅrÄ«mÄlÄyÄá¹ tataá¸¥ teá¹£Äá¹,
122 Åá¹á¹ Åreá¹ika vaká¹£yÄmi, 424 ÅrÄ«mÄlÄ« cÄpi saá¹prÄptaá¹, 285 Åá¹á¹u saá¹prati te
svÄsthyaá¹, 77 ÅrÄ«Åailatula-yairatha khecareÅaá¸¥, 422 Åá¹á¹u su-ndara kasyÄnya-, 360
ÅrÄ«Åailasya samud-bhavena, 410 Åá¹á¹omi vedmi paÅyÄmi, ÅrÄ«ÅailÄbhimukhaá¹ dá¹á¹£á¹­vÄ,
415 Åá¹á¹vato 'á¹£á¹­ama-rÄmasya, 444 ÅrÄ«vat svargÄt paribhraá¹£á¹­Ä, 373 ÅrÄ«vat-
saprabhá¹ti-stulya, Åá¹á¹veá¹£Ä viá¹£á¹­apa-vyÄpi, ÅrÄ«vat-sa-maá¹á¸ita-uraá¹£ko, 156 Åeá¹£aá¹
sÄdhvasamete ca, 390 Åeá¹£Ä api yathÄ-sthÄnaá¹, 206 ÅrÄ«vardhanas tapaá¸¥ ká¹tvÄ, Åeá¹£Äm
iva daÅÄsyÄjÃ±Äá¹, 231 ÅrÄ«á¹£eá¹a sutayorÄsÄ«t, Åailakuá¹­a-gatÄÅakaá¹, 379 Årutaá¹
kuÅÄgra-rÄjena, 492 Åokaá¸¥ pratyuta dehasya, 131 ÅrutÄntaá¸¥pura-jÄkrÄá¹á¸o, 476
ÅokÄtapa-parimlÄna-, 403 Årutena sakalaá¹ paÅyan, 214 ÅokÄdiva rabiá¹ba, 386
ÅrutvÄ kanyÄpi tÄ vÄrtÄ, 338 ÅokÄn-dhanayana kiá¹ nu, ÅrutvÄ kalakala-dhvÄnaá¹,
200 Åodhayatyatra devÄnÄá¹, 254 ÅrutvÄ gavÄká¹£a-jÄlena, 385 ÅobhamÄnÄá¹ nisargeá¹a,
205 ÅrutvÄ ca tat-ká¹£aá¹aá¹ yuddha, 128 ÅobhayÄsyÄá¹ hiha-stÄnÄá¹, 182 ÅrutvÄ ca
svÄminam ká¹ddhaá¹, 392 Åoá¹£ayed vÄá¹bhasÄ nÄthaá¹, 126 ÅrutvÄ taá¹ dÄ«na-bhÄrÄvaá¹, 218
Åaurya-raksita-loko 'pi, ÅrutvÄ tad-vacanaá¹ samrÄá¸, 64 ÅraddadhÄnÄstato bhÅ«tvÄ,
244 ÅrutvÄ tamÄsan-nataraá¹ pra-vá¹á¹£á¹­aá¸¥, 421 ÅraddadhÄno mataá¹ jainaá¹, 324 ÅrutvÄ
tÄá¹ rudatÄ«m ÄÅu, 459 Åramaá¹a-thÄvakÄá¹Äá¹ ca, ÅrutvÄ tÄvad-iyam jÄta, 342 Åravaá¹aá¹
vÄma-tarjanyÄ, ÅrutvÄ dharma jinaá¹ stutvÄ, 395 ÅrutvÄ, 70 ÅrutvÄ, 215 ÅrutvÄ,
438 ÅrutvÄ, 14 ÅrutvÄ, 100 ÅrutvÄ, 367

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 padmapurANe 78 219 zazAsAtrAntare laGkAM 132 zazipUrvastatazcyutvA 76 zazipUrvo
rajovalyA 75 zazibhiH puNDarIkiNyAM 433 zazivaMze samutpannAH zazyAvalisamAhvAnI
75 zastrapaJjaramadhyastho 415 zastrAyamANainiHzeSa- 258  /  /
zastribhirvIranilayo 13 zAkakandalavATena 11 zAkhAbhiH suprakAzAbhi- 103 zAntiH
kunthurarazceti 427 zAntirmAlivadhenaiva 180 zAlizUkasamacchAyAn 105
zAsanAcAravRttyartha 447 zAstreNa coditatvAcca 254 zikharaM tasya zailendra
zikhikezaridaNDonazithilAyitumArabdhA ziraHkapAlasaMghAtaH zirasA
mukuTanyastazirassu vidviSAmeva 181 ziro namaya cApaM vA 211 zilAtalavizAlA ca
zilAtaleSu vizrabdhaM 104 zilAvistIrNahRdayaM zilpAnAM zatamuddiSTaM
zokarAditadevatvAd 274 zotalaM zItaladhyAna zItalA mRdavo dhArAH 266
zItAMzukiraNazveta- 40 zItoSNavAtayukteSu zukrazoNitamAMsAsthi- 291
zukrazoNitasaMbhUta- 257 zuklAyAM mArgazIrSasya zuddhadhyAnasamAviSTa
zuddhAbhijanatAmukhyA zubhalakSaNasaMchanna zubho vAyugatirnAma 334
zramaNatvadharaH kRtvA 272 zubhraM stamberamaM sihaM 489 zrAmaNyaM
kevalotpattizuzubhe bhrAtRmadhye sA 155  /  zrAmaNyavatamAsthAya zuzrAva cAgato
vArtA 209  /  /  zritA ye'pi sudurgANi 226 zurukakASThaM dadhaccaJccA 142
zriyamindraH sute nyasya 304 zuSkacitraM dvidhA proktaM 480 zriyAM ca saMpAdini
karNa- 419 zuSkapatrAdisaMbhUtaM 481 zrIkaNThamabhidhAyaivaM 101
zuSkasAgaravirtI zrIkaNTho'pi kule jAtaH 99 zaro'pi na samartho'haM 332 zrIkAntA
suprabhAtulyAH 328 zUro ki kurutAmatra 209 zrImatI nAma tasyAsIt 97 zUlaratnaM
sa tatprApya 273 zrImato hariSeNasya zUlaiH pAzairbhuzuNDIbhiH 287 zrImAna
vidyAdharAdhIzo 353 zRNutAto'sti nagara- 337 zrImAlAM cAbravIdevaM 133 zRNu
duHkhaM yathApUrva 353 zrImAlAyAM tatasteSAM 122 zRNa zreNika vakSyAmi 424
zrImAlI cApi saMprAptaM 285 zRNu saMprati te svAsthyaM 77 zrIzailatulyairatha
khecarezaH 422 zRNu sundara kasyAnya- 360 zrIzailasya samudbhavena 410 zRNomi
vedmi pazyAmi zrIzailAbhimukhaM dRSTvA 415 zRNvato'STamarAmasya 444 zrIvat
svargAt paribhraSTA 373 zRNvAyuSman mahIpAla 32 zrIvatsaprabhRtistulya zRNveSA
viSTapavyApi zrIvatsamaNDitorasko 156 zeSaM sAdhvasamete ca 390
zrIvatsalakSaNAtyanta- 152 zeSA api yathAsthAnaM 206 zrIvarddhanastapaH kRtvA
zeSAmiva dazAsyAjJAM 231 zrISeNa sutayorAsId zailakUTagatAzakaM 379 zrutaM
kuzAgrarAjena 492 zokaH pratyuta dehasya 131 zrutAntaHpurajAkrando 476
zokAtapaparimlAna- 403 zrutena sakalaM pazyan 214 zokAdiva rabimba 386 zrutvA
kanyApi tA vArtA 338 zokAndhanayanA kiM nu zrutvA kalakaladhvAnaM 200
zodhayatyatra devAnAM 254 zrutvA gavAkSajAlena 385 zobhamAnAM nisargeNa 205
zrutvA ca tatkSaNaM yuddha 128 zobhayAsyAMhihastAnAM 182 zrutvA ca svAminaM
kruddhaM 392 zoSayed vAmbhasA nAthaM 126 zrutvA taM dInabhArAvaM 218
zauryarakSitaloko'pi zrutvA tadvacanaM samrAD 64 zraddadhAnAstato bhUtvA 244
zrutvA tamAsannataraM pravRSTaH 421 zraddadhAno mataM jainaM 324 zrutvA tAM
rudatImAzu 459 zramaNathAvakANAM ca zrutvA tAvadiyaM jAtA 342 zravaNaM
vAmatarjanyA zrutvA dharma jinaM stutvA 395 70 215 438 14 100 367

Page #595 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Verse Number Index  415 474 480 449 Having heard the Dharma, he was filled
with joy, 228. Having heard the powerful one, he attained, 201 Having heard the
beautiful stories, 262. Having heard this from the people, 340 Born only from
thought, 317. Having heard that a hundred sons were bound, Born from thought,
sorrow arose, 309. Having heard of the previous birth, 88 There is no sign on
the day for whom, 271. Having heard the words of Maricha, 215 Playing with the
body, 251. Having heard from the king's mouth, the minister, Brevity is the
pause, 251. Having seen the things,  I will do it briefly, 161. Having heard
this humble word, 177 After the number, in time, 448. Having heard the
contracted eyebrows, 231 The object that is within the range of number, 428.
Having heard that, I hold it in my heart, 343 Combined with the sound of music,
12. Heard in the worldly scriptures, 28 From his going to war, 152. Hear this
series, The series, hear this, 26. The series, even the great king, Having
conquered the two series, he, 110. Moving with difficulty, 351 The two series,
then of them, 137. Sanjaya, by Narada, 473 Thus, in these beautiful series, 56.
The best, the Jinas, the five, 441 Not having attained suffering, 13. The best
of the gods, the god of gods, 112 With contentment, and by Indra, 300. The best
lips, those two, 3 Leaving all the celestial beings, 302. The best, from the
assembly, 107 Leaving those pleasures, 62. Praiseworthy, that world of
relatives, even, 264. Doubtful death, someone, 416. The mother-in-law, Ketumati,
cruel, 373 The cycle of doubt and inequality, 347. The sorrows caused by the
mother-in-law, 375 The evening colors, the beautiful lines, 225 The evening
color, the delight of the mind, 101 The evening-attached cloud-masses, 33. With
six verses, music is made, The evening, born of gold, 175. The six, the bull,
the third, 478 The evening gathering, the rising, 178. The six pleasure-worlds
are said, 34 The wealth and the other, the carriage, twenty-two thousand, 140
This contact, this misfortune, 248. Sixty, and five, should be known, 432 The
promised pledge, 170. By the sixth part, accomplished, Worshiping with devotion,
praising, 72. For him, with the sixth fast, Now, indeed, that play, 446. For
him, with the sixth fast, the king, Considering that, then, half, 234. In the
sixteenth year, even, 336 Sending first, the evening, 392. [S] He attained the
respect of the gods, 435. From the order of stories, whose, He attained the
protected wealth, 24. He attained the supreme place, 25 You have attained the
forest, terrible, 388. Narada attained worship, 243 You have attained birth in a
good family, 256. Having attained perfect knowledge, 17 The enemy of the earth,
he will be born, 399. He will be born, six months, 42 I respect the gods, 126.
Then, he spoke, Born in the golden necklace, 146. Born, the womb of Sri Prabha,
Born in the lioness goddess, 467. Born from austerity, the form, 440 Born in the
golden mountain, 467. Together, they were then broken, Together, all of us, 217.
Confused, steady-eared, Confused, brown-eyed, 387. The face, the door, the day,
the arrangement, 105 Combined with the time-duty, 435. In a hundred years, even,
337 Ten and eight years, 273. The king, angry, spoke, The art of carrying, two
ways, 320. The art of carrying, this, The division of guests, 320. The division
of this, should be done, Wandering in the world, 23. The knowledge of the nature
of the world, In the terrible ocean of the world, 323. The destroyer of the
world, Attached to the conduct of the world, 452. Wandering in the world, the
being, 331 The ritual, two kinds, is said, 480. I will suppress the pain, anger,
144 Collecting the image-work, 303. He, seeing these first, 109 How will he ask
about his family, 370 0 0 Ww. 246 194 58

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zlokAnAmakArAdhanukramaH 415 474 480 449 zrutvA dharma samAviSTo
saMkathAbhivicitrAbhi- 228  /  zrutvA parabalaM prApta 201 saMkathAbhizca
ramyAbhi- 262  /  zrutvA parijanAdetAM 340 saMkalpamAtrasaMbhUta- 317 zrutvA
putrazataM baddhaM saMkalpAdazu bhAd duHkhaM 309 zrutvA pUrvabhavAneva 88
saMketo na tithau yasya zrutvA prANasamasyAsya 271 saMkocinA bhuje kazci- 128
zrutvA mArIcavacana- 215 saMkrIDanairvapuSmadabhizrutvA rAjamukhAnmantrI
saMkSiptatA virAmastu zrutvA vastunyadRSTe ca 251 saMkSepeNa kariSyAmi 161
zrutvA vAkyamidaM dInaM 177 saMkhyAtItena kAlena 448 zrutvA saMkucitabhrUzca 231
saMkhyAgocaraM yo'rthoM 428 zratvaMya tAmahaM hRdyAM 343 saMgItasvanasaMyukta 12
zrUyante laukike granthe 28 saMgrAmagamanAttasya 152 zreNika zrUyatAmeSA
saMgrAme zastrasaMpAta- 281 zreNiko'pi mahArAjo 26  /  saMgrAme saMzayo
mAbhazreNidvayaM vijityAsau 110 saMcArayantI kRcchreNa 351 zreNIdvayaM
tatasteSAM 137 saMjayA nAradenAtha 473 zreNyorevaM ramyayostannitA. 56
santatotkalikAyogA- 352 zreya AdIn jinAnpaJca 441 santApamapariprAptaH 13
zreyaso devadevasya 112 santoSeNa ca zakreNa 300 zreSTAvoSThau ca tAveva 3
santyajya khecarAn sarvAn 302 zreSThinaH saMgamAdeva 107 santyajya sa tato
bhogAn 62 zlAghyaH sa bandhuloko'pi 264  /  /  sandigdhamaraNaM kAcid 416
zvazrUH ketumatI krUrA 373 sandehaviSamAvartA 347 zvazravAdikRtaduHkhAnAM 375
sandhyAkArAH suvelAzca 225 sandhyAkAro manohlAdaH 101 sandhyAnuraktameghaugha-
33 SaTpadaiH kRtasaMgItA sandhyAyAM kanakAjjAtA 175 SaDjarSabhau tRtIyazca 478
sandhyAsaMvezanotthAna- 178 SaDbhogakSitayaH proktA 34
sampadAparayovAhaSaDviMzatisahasrANi 140 saMparko'yamanartho'sau 248 SaSTizca
paJcasu jJeyaH 432 saMpAditapratijJA ca SaSThabhaktena saMsAdhya 170 saMpUjya
bhaktitaH stutvA SaSThopAvAsayuktAya tasmai 72 saMpratyeva hi sA krIDA
SaSThopavAsayuktAya tasmai rA-446 saMpradhArya tataH sArdha- 234
SoDazAbdasamAne'pi 336 saMpreSya prathamaM saMdhyAM 392 [sa] saMprAptaH
surasaMmAnaM saMkathAnukramAd yasya 435 saMprApta rakSitaM dravyaM 24 saMprAptAH
paramaM sthAnaM 25 saMprAptAsi vanaM bhImaM 388 saMprApto nAradaH pUjA 243
saMprApto'si kule janma 256 saMprApya kevalajJAnaM 17 saMbhavatIha bhUdhararipuH
pavi- 399 saMbhaviSyati SaNmAsA- 42 saMbhAvayAmi devAnAM 126 saMbhASaNaM
tatazcakre saMbhUtaH kanakAvalyAM 146 saMbhUtaH zrIprabhAgarbha saMbhUta
siMhikAdevyAM 467 saMbhUtastapaso mUrtiH 440 saMbhUto hemacUlinyAM saMbhUya te
tato bhagnA saMbhUya mama sarve'pi saMbhrAntanizcalotkarNa- 217
saMbhrAntababhrunetrANA- 387 saMmukhadvAradinyAsA- 105 saMyuktaH kAlagharmeNa
435 saMvatsarazatenApi 337 saMvatsarAn dazASTau ca 273 saMvataH
kupito'vocasaMvAhanakalA dvedhA saMvAhanakalAmetAsaMvibhAgo'tithInAM ca
saMvibhAgo'sya kartavyo 320 saMsAre paryaTanneSa- 23 saMsAraprakRtijJAnAM
saMsArasAgare bhIme 323 saMsArasya nihantAraM saMsArAcArasaktasya 452 saMsAre
bhramato janto- 331 saMskAro dvividhaH prokto 480 saMstAmya vedanA krodhA- 144
saMhRtya pratimAyoga- 303 sa etAn prathamaM dRSTrA . 109 sa kathaM
svajanapRcchAM 370 0 0 Ww. 246 194 58

Page #596 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
546 Papuraana 197 319 346 Of all this country, 109 of all the pure Tara kings,
221 in the presence of Abhayasena, 470 having once made the earth, 437 having
once seen clearly, 351 having once said this, if at all, 193 friend, any of mine
has been born, 416 friend, from childhood, 276 friend! My destruction of virtue,
416 friend, Vasantamala and, 362 friend, known as Vicitramala, 276 friend, the
people of the friends are arranged, 352 friend, Vasantamala, you, 370 friend,
equal to those who are satisfied, 38 friend, whose generosity, 342 friend, what
is there to say more, 343 friend, here, not even nearby, 347 friend! The
destruction of the enemy, 360 friend, friend, enough of this, friendship,
abandoned, 124 friend, together, 371 friendship, please, taken, 385 he, going,
with a crane, 106 the ocean, and the wives, 84 he, born there, 434 association,
with the country, by whom, 265 association, anxious, he, 341 the assembly,
condemnation, having done, 88 he, and, that, attached, 183 he, and, the story,
having done, 273 true, effort, description, color, 3 watery, water, deep, 116
he, wife, known as Singhika, 466 he, having conquered, son, in battle, 469 he,
decorating, became, 447 hundred, aircraft, having ascended, 186 from, the
staircase, in, 113 he, there, the Jina, not having seen, 9 he, there, in the
vast, pure, 9. evening, darkness, Suvela, and, 93 he, those, having seen, great,
joy, 108 evening, cloud, mountain, beautiful, 408 heat, victory, mountain,
evening, color, covered, he, that joy, great, obtained. Evening, color, like,
love, 452 good, story, hearing, from, 4 evening, light, destruction, 363 good,
story, hearing, which, 3 evening, back, from, going, 413 good, karma, child,
and, that, 249. evening, pride, decoration, with, 143 good, praise, nectar,
taste, 3 evening, placing, near, this, 274 truth, first, principle,  evening,
honored, friend, relative, 464 truth, stake, austerity, fire, 257. evening,
honored, by, that, honored, 418 truth, they, say, kings, 242 with, leaves,
mouth, full, 357 truth, arrows, five, mind, being, 421 with, son, vehicle,
having mounted, truth, others, also, exist, 125 with, sons, and, sons, 84 truth,
righteousness, together, that, 403 seventh, and, floor, obtained, 170 truth, by,
heard, you, that, 242 seventh, shoulder, having ascended, 344 truth, indeed, in,
me, Indra, 285 seven, times, done, offering, 437 you, that, to say, not, 360
seven, eight, birth, by, some, 322 you, that, do, mercy, in, this, 373 seven,
by, falls, horse, you, that, any, great, being, 49 seventh, that, story,
attachment, 341 you, that, play, frog, 180 with, blow, forest, with, tears, 199
you, that, free, having become, 285. being, existence, liberation, you, that,
become, happy, mind, 109 he, prosperity, great, desiring, 149 you, that,
festival, born, 166 he, wandering, many, countries, you, that, proper, do, well-
being, 474 equal, Kubera, beloved, 329 you, that, Indra, dejected, what, 301
equal, friend, enemy, and, 451 you, that, expelled, all,  equal, by, that, then,
gone,  173 you, that, such, having become, 49 equal, mountain, in, lord, 240
member, then, Jina, of,  equal, friend, world, by, 165 with, sight, knowledge,
foot,  in, front, guru, world, of, immediately, melted, sweat, 218 all,
strength, together, with, Sanatkumara, Chakra, king,  he, minister, plasterer,
and, 475 Sanatkumara, king, became,  equal, half, fire, sound, and, 440
Sanatkumara, fame, 83 time, and, considering, beginning, 482 with, cause,
austerity, from, that, 339 time, those, who, not, householder, with, full, king,
army, 182 time, by, this, united, with, anklet, sound,  all, creature, trouble,
24 saints, they, say, who, you, 114. all, Jina, image, of, 207 there, are, salt,
water,  78 all, earth, spreading, 211 423 436 329 297 139

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 546 papapurANe 197 319 346 sakalasyAsya dezasya 109 sakalAmalatAreza- 221
sakAze'bhayasenasya 470 sakRtvA dharaNIM sarvA 437 sakRdaspaSTadRSTatvA- 351
sakRdeSA kathaMciccet 193 sakhi kApi mamotpannA 416 sakhi bAlyata Arabhya 276
sakhi ! zIlavinAzo me 416 sakhIM vasantamAlAM ca 362 sakhI vicitramAlAkhyA 276
sakhIjanAMsavinyasta- 352 sakhI vasantamAlA te 370 sakhISu nirvRtestulyA 38
sakhe kasya vadAnyasya 342 sakhe ki bahunoktena 343 sakhe'tra na samIpe'pi 347
sakhe ! pratinaroccheda- 360 sakhe sakhe'lametena sakhyaM sanyastavizraMsi 124
sakhyA samaM samAropya 371 sakhyeva kRpayA nItaH 385 sa gacchan krauJcayuktena
106 sagarasya ca patnInAM 84 sa gRhI tatra jAtaH san 434 saGgaM dezena yenAso
265 saGgamotkaNThitaH so'ya- 341 saGghasya nindanaM kRtvA 88 sacApaM
tamivAsakta- 183 sa cApi caritaM kRtvA 273 sacceSTAvarNanA varNA- 3
sajalAmbhodagambhIra- 116 sa jAyAM siMhikAbhikhyA 466 sa jitvA tanayaM yuddhe
469 sajjayanto babhUvAsmA- 447 sataM vimAnamAruhya 186 sataH sopAnamArgeSu 113
sa tatra jinamacitvA sa tatra vipule zuddha 9. sandhyAkAraH suvelazca 93 sa tAn
dRSTvA paraM toSaM 108 sandhyAbhraparvate ramye 408 satApaM vijayA dri
sandhyArAgeNa cacchannaM sa toSaM paramaM prAptaH  /  sandhyArAgopamaH sneha-
452 satkathAzravaNAd yacca 4 sandhyAlokaparidhvaMsa- 363 satkathAzravaNo yo ca 3
sandhyAsya pRSThato yAntI 413 satkarmA bAlakazcAsau 249 /  /  sannAhamaNDanopetA
143 satkIrtanasudhAsvAda- 3 sannivezya samIpe'syA 274 sattakA prathamaM tattvaM
sanmAnitasuhRdbandhu- 464 satyaM yUpastapo vahni- 257  /  /  sanmAnitastena ca
mAni- 418 satyaM vadanti rAjAnaH 242 sapallavamukhe pUrNa- 357 satyaM zarAH
paJca manobhavasya 421 saputrAM yAnamAropya satyamanye'pi vidyante 125
saputrANAM ca putrANAM 84 satyArjavasametAsau 403 saptamaM ca talaM prAptaH 170
satyena zrAvitaH sa tvaM 242 saptamaM skandhamAruhya 344 satyeva mayi devendra
285 saptavArAn kRtAkSatrA 437 sa tvaM kathayituM naita- 360 saptASTajanmabhiH
keci- 322 sa tvaM kuru dayAmasyAM 373 saptinA pAtyate vAjI sa tvaM ko'pi
mahAsattvo 49 saptame tatkathAsaktyA 341 sa tvaM krIDasi maNDUko 180
saprahAravaNaH sAzru- 199 sa tvaM nirAkulo bhUtvA 285  /  /  sabhavaH saMbhavo
mukte sa tvaM bhava prasannAtmA 109 sa bhUtiM paramAM vAJchan 149 sa tvaM
mahotsavo jAta: 166 sa bhraman bahudezeSu sa tvaM yuktaM kuru svasti 474 samaH
kuberakAntasya 329 sa tvamindra viSaNNaH kiM 301 samaH suhRdi zatrI ca 451 sa
tvamutsAritAzeSa samaM tayA tato yAtaH 173 sa tvamevaMvidho bhUtvA 49 samaM
parvatake nAtha 240 sadasyatha jinendrasya samaM bAndhavalokena 165
sadRSTibodhacaraNa samakSaM gurulokasya sadyaH pragalitasveda- 218
samagrabalasaMyuktAn sanatkumAracakreze sa mantrI lepyakArazca 475
sanatkumArarAjo'bhUd samamardhAgninAdazca 440 sanatkumAravikhyAti- 83 samayaM ca
samIkSyAdi 482 sanidAnaM tapastasmAd 339 samayaM ye'nagArANAM
sanirbharAjanakSoNI 182 samayenAmunA yuktA sanUpuraraNatkAra
samastajantusaMbAdhaM 24 santo vadata ke yUyaM 114  /  /  samastajinabimbAnAM
207 santyatra lavaNAmbhodhA 78 samastadharaNIvyApi 211 423 436 329 297 139

Page #597 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
With all restrictions, All-pervading the universe, With all the gods assembled,
275 All of them, at that time, desired - 48 Hearing that speech, I will attain
the meeting, Applying the mind to dharma, The same fame by which, Those who
desire the same, Do not attain their end until, 346 406 116 276 280 161
Comforting her then, 112 Comforting her then, he was taken, 279 In short, I tell
you all this, 488 Calling together all the relatives, 467 Even in the
assemblies, that number, 318 189 26 271 169 Angiras, the disciple of Samia, 318
187 Near the source, 339 259 Near the city, the trembling caused by the wind,
363 The breath of the wind, The beloved one arose with difficulty, 456 A
festival was held there, The assembly and the cessation, The conquest of the
sea, The vast army of the sea, Connected to the waves of the sea, Four like the
oceans, Cooled by the association of the ocean, Gathering together, I will
pacify her, Dead, having attained victory, Equally loved by both parents, Now,
your smile is not, The full milk has become, Seeing the full youth, The full
moon of the face, the connection, Two kinds of sexual, The summit of Mount
Sammed, 479 427 263 180 492 415 349 433 408 41 139 334 344 242 447 Index of
verses by the first letter At the end of Mount Sammed, With right knowledge, the
soul, Right faith, may they come, Some by their own power, Right faith, may they
come, Some, some, with vows, 331 Those with right faith, 474 You are endowed
with right faith, 134 By the greed for right faith, 321 120 309 238 Right faith,
knowledge, Right faith, pure, Those who are pure in right faith, Those endowed
with right faith, Endowed with right faith, Right faith, enlightenment, The lack
of right faith, the birth of wrong vision, Right vision is enough, If one knows
the right cause, He mounts another chariot, In that lake-less one, Of the mind
called lake, In one lake, water, Some with passionate restraint, Lotuses with
petals, The gate of the lake, water, The touch of the lotus petal, The lotus
covered with dust, Some with a snake's embrace, All, Man, this is, The
attainment of all welfare, Free from all bonds, Omniscient, all-seeing, where is
he? Hearing this, the omniscient, Always, simultaneously, Endowed with all
wealth, Filled with all relatives, All blind, 197 213 26 60 223 17 117 64 303
476 486 187 340 310 309 54 4 316 54 159 244 428 410 251 317 87 439 406 134  All
ornaments, liberation, the refuge of all beings, Possessing all wealth, Filled
with flowers of all seasons, Charming in all seasons, Flowers and fruits of all
seasons, With flowers and fruits of all seasons, Surpassing all worlds, The eye
of all minds, The master of all arts and sciences, Along with all the keepers of
knowledge, Skilled in all the meanings of the scriptures, Skilled in all the
meanings of the scriptures, Having vowed all to be void, The story of all
existence, Delight in the forefront of all, Placed on all fingers, By man, all
giving, The abandonment of all beginnings, In the abandonment of all beginnings,
All beginnings are established, The word for the fulfillment of all purposes,
The prosperity of all food, All were invited by him, All the citizens came
together, Fearlessness for all, For all beings, In all those shrines, With all
effort, The trembling of the limbs, Covering the face with the left hand, He was
called by the disciples, He attained right faith, She remembered the words
spoken before, Endowed with the nature of plants, The tigress, the companion of
the goddess, The destruction of speech, The light born suddenly, 547 8 7 203 295
215 18 35 327 399 336 129 239 32 220 300 15 45 161 60 117 247 425 162 406 205
311 376 473 98 164 123 492 471 241 102 564 128 472

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samastapratibandhena samastabhuvanavyApi samastAtasametA 275 samasto'pi
tasyAstadAbhISTa- 48 samAkarNya tato vAkyaM samAgamamavApsyAmi samAdhAya mano
dharmaH samAnaM khyAti yenAtaH samAnamIhamAnAnAM samAptimeti no yAva 346 406 116
276 280 161 samAzvAsya tataH kAnta 112 samAzvAsya tato nIto 279 samAsena sarvaM
vadAmyeSa te'haM488 samAhUyAkhilAn bandhUn 467 samitiSvapi tatsaMkhyA 318 189 26
271 169 samiyAmAGgiraH ziSya samIkRtatatottuGga 318 187 samIpaM prabhavasyApi
339 259 samIpe ca purasyAsya samIraNakRtAkampaH samIraraMhasazvAsya samutthitAM
priyAM kRcchrA- 363 samutsavastatra kRto na jAte 456 samudAyo virAmazca
samudravijayazcitrA samudravipulaM sainyaM samudravIci saMsaktaH samudrA iva
catvAraH samudrAsaGgazItena samuhya zAtayAmyenAM mRto vijayaM gatvA
samatApitRbhyAM samprati tvatsmite naiva sampUrNa dohadA jAtA sampUrNa yauvanaM
dRSTvA sampUrNa vaktracandrAMzusambandho dvividho yaunaH sammedagirimUrdhAnaM
479 427 263 180 492 415 349 433 408 41 139 334 344 242 447
ilokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH sammeda bhUdharasyAnte samyagjJAnAbhiyuktAtmA
samyagdarzana mAyAtAH keci tkecit svazaktitaH samyagdarzanamAyAtAH ke
cikecidaNuvratA 331 samyagdarzanayukteSu 474 samyagdarzanayukto'sI 134
samyagdarzanalobhena 321 120 309 238 samyagdarzana saMjJAna samyagdarzana
saMzuddha samyagdarzanasaMzuddhAn samyagdarzanasaMpannAH samyagdarzanasaMpanno
samyagdarzana saMbodha samyagdarzanahInatvAsamyagdRSTijanaM sarva
samyagdRSTiralaM sAhi samyagnimittaM yadi vetti sa rathAntaramAruhya sarasI
rahite'muSmin saraso mAnasAkhyasya sarasyAM jalamekasyAM sarAgasaMyamAH kecit
sarAMsi padmayuktAni saro jalAgamadvAra saroruhadalasparza sararuha rajazchannA
sarpeNa veSTanaM kazci sarva puruSa evedaM sarva kalyANasaM prApti
sarvagranthavinirmuktA sarvajJaH sarvadRk kvAso sarvajJovatamidaM zrutvA sarvadA
yugapatsa sarvadraviNasaMpannA sarvabandhujanAkIrNaH sarvAndhavak 197 213 26 60
223 17 117 64 303 476 486 187 340 310 309 54 4 316 54 159 244 428 410 251 317 87
439 406 134 sarvabhUSaNa kaivalyasarvabhUtazaraNyasya sarvamaizvaryamattasya
sarvartukusumavyApta sarvartujamanohAri sarvartuphalapuSpANi
sarvartuphalapuSpaizca sarvalokaparAbhUtA sarvalokamanonetra sarva vidyAkalApAro
sarvavidyAdharaiH sArddha sarvazAstrArthakuzalaH sarvazAstrArthakuzalo sarvaM
zUnya pratijJAya sarvasaMsAravRttAnta sarvasyAgresare prIti sarvAGgulISu
vinyastaM sarvAdAnmanuSyeNa sarvArambhaparityAgaM sarvArambhaparityAge
sarvArambhaH sthitaH kurvasarvArthasiddhizabdo sarvAhAratisaMvRddhi sarve
cAhvAyitA tena sarve paurAH samAgatya sarveSAmabhayaM tasmA sarveSAmeva jantUnAM
sarveSu teSu caityeSu sarvodyogena saMnahya savepathuka reSAM savyena
vaktramAcchAdya sa samAhvayitaH ziSyaiH sa samyagdarzanaM lebhe sasmAra sA purA
proktAM sasyaiH svabhAvasaMpanna - sahadevIcarI vyAghrI sahadhvaM dhvaMsanaM
vAcaH sahasA janitAloko 547 8 7 203 295 215 18 35 327 399 336 129 239 32 220 300
15 45 161 60 117 247 425 162 406 205 311 376 473 98 164 123 492 471 241 102 564
128 472

Page #598 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
548 Suddenly a loud roar Suddenly a flower-like pillar Suddenly he was going
Suddenly he reached the sky He reached the thousand-rayed one The karma of the
thousand-rayed one I with thousand eyes Thousand-petaled eyes Thousand times
more born Released by the thousand-rayed one The thousand-rayed one is also
called This is the thousand-rayed one The story of the thousand-rayed one, the
one known as the thousand-rayed one Born in thousands The servant of the
thousand-headed one, the thousand-rayed one said And four thousand Eighty
thousand The thousand-rayed one, the son, in the kingdom Then the thousand-rayed
one said One sword of help He is the cause of all faults, with his instruments
Doing it on the upper surface, near the city of Saketa Saketa, the lord of his
own To fight with him Directly with the body Why is there direct pleasure The
ocean, the lion-joined ocean, even the ocean, the ocean of the ascetics 306 214
300 199 231 279 73 263 226 233 235 229 233 470 447 76 236 52 430 132 143 209 74
235 358 63 426 124 90 255 445 229 60 This death of the ocean dwellers 85 447 The
ocean and the non-ocean, the ocean, the people in heaven 118 She is a disease, a
chip, a chip 301 With folded hands, she bowed and said 370 In the Padma Purana
In the midst of calamities, not too much Joined by those who remove calamities,
the terrible one, laughing, with his fame, white All the seven yajnas, the earth
By the power of the karma You, the lion-faced one, speak You, by virtue,
increase this With respect, the elders of the family You have understood the
true Lord The true one, the demons Good, good, with this sound The haters of the
good are wicked The association of the good with the good From the association
of the good in the world Free from bad conduct After comforting her After
comforting her with words She, too, is pure-minded, a tortoise Relative and non-
relative Now I want to hear Like the lotus-born, the one who is like the moon,
followed by his vassals, then he With his vassals, the doorkeepers Equipped with
this power Some of the common gods By the effort of Samayika I am your mother-
born, even though By the crowds of the joyful The smell of the musk deer The
destroyer of the face of the musk deer, attracted by the urging of the
charioteer The teaching of the essence of dharma The cat of the Sarameya The
essence of dharma in the three worlds The essence and non-essence, seen by
oneself, the purpose made clear 202 41 463 97 245 385 389 384 356 51 171 467 308
13 304 91 396 378 248 480 424 277 273 466 31 219 315 320 459 11 12 387 290 77
325 317 101 11  With the great chariot, he The year: Kundapura, the city of Pava
She, the virtuous one, the wife of her husband, the greatness of her courage The
king of the deer, being watered The prosperity being watered by the serpents The
shadow made by the white flag The white shadow, the clouds, somewhere Covered
with white cloth, white-black-red-colored Red-colored, high, perfect, complete,
beautiful meaning The one with perfect knowledge, powerful Born from perfect
knowledge, the destroyer of enemies The one with perfect knowledge, the
protector, Ayodhya Perfect, from grammar, the world The lion-flag, the moon-
faced one Known as the lion-moon 410 135 162 426 313 70 381 118 469 59 34 467
308 The lion, the tiger, the elephant 204 The garland of boundary gems 173 They
are sewn, they are worn out, they are old 449 The son, known as hair 120 Kosala,
the sage, stopped 464 The greatness of the well-being 465 For the sake of
remembering good deeds 148 317 132 315 391 59 247 The lion, the tiger, the wolf,
the dog The lion, as if from meat Sitting on the throne Four thrones The
lioness, thus, that one The lion, the tiger, the dog, the serpent Comfortable,
the state of the machine dwelling Comfortable, the union of the senses 87 427
489 16 490 40 188 463 453 453 20 1 The destruction of comfortable sleep The
comfortable birth of that one Everything was done for comfort Comfortable
sitting and walking

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 548 sahasA ninadaM tuGga sahasA puSpakaM stambha sahasA vrajatastasya sahasA
viyataH prAptaH sahasrakiraNaM prAptA sahasrakiraNe karma sahasranayanenAhaM
sahasrapatranayanaM sahasramadhikaM jAtaM sahasrarazminA muktA sahasrarazmirUce
ca sahasrarazmirevaiSa sahasrarazmivRttAntA sahasrarazmisaMjJasya sahasrazaH
samutpannA sahasraziraso bhRtyo sahasrAMzuruvAceti sahasrANi ca catvAri
sahasrANi vyazItistu sahasrAraM sutaM rAjye sahasrArastato'vocat
sahAyakhaGgamekaM ca sahetu sarva doSasyasahopakaraNaizcAsau sahoparitale kurvan
sAketanagarAsanne sAketA nijayAnAtho sAkametena rantuM ce sAkSAdiva zarIreNa
sAkSAdeva rati kasmA sAgaraM sihasaMyuktasAgarasyApi saMroddhusAgarANAM yatInAM
ca 306 214 300 199 231 279 73 263 226 233 235 229 233 470 447 76 236 52 430 132
143 209 74 235 358 63 426 124 90 255 445 229 60 sAgarINAmimaM mRtyuM 85 447
sAgAraM ca nirAgAraM sAgAreNa janaH svarge 118 sA cillA cipiTA vyAdhi 301
sAJjaliH sA praNamyoce 370 padmapurANe sATopavyasane nAti sATopaharibhiryuktaM
sATTahAsabhramadbhImasA tena kIrtizubhrAya sAtairyajJamahI sarvA sAtvaM
karmAnubhAvena sA tvaM kesariNo vaktra tvaM puNyairimAM vRddhi sAdaraM
kulavRddhAbhi sAdhunAthAvabuddhaM te sAdhunA daityAna sAdhu sAdhviti zabdena
sAdhUnAM dveSakAH pApA sAdhUnAM saMgamaH sadbhi sAdhoH saMgamanAlloke sAdhvAcAra
vinirmuktA sAntvayitvA tatastasyA sAntvayitvA tato vAkyaiH sApi zuddhamatiH
kUrmI sApekSA nirapekSA ca sAmprataM zrotumicchAmi
sAmbhojImUtasaMkAzasAmantAnugato'thAso sAmantanirjitaiH sArddhaM sAmantaizca
pratIhAra sAmarthyenAmunA yukta sAmAnikAH surAH keci - sAmAyika prayatnena sA me
tvaM jananIto'pi sAmodajanasaMghAtaiH sAraGgamRgasadgandha sAraGgAmukhavidhvaMsi
sArathipreraNAkRSTa sAradharmopadezAkhyaM sArameyAkhu mArjAra sArastribhuvane
dharmaH sArAsAraM svayA dRSTaM sArIkRtasamuddezaH 202 41 463 97 245 385 389 384
356 51 171 467 308 13 304 91 396 378 248 480 424 277 273 466 31 219 315 320 459
11 12 387 290 77 325 317 101 11 sArddhaM bhImarathenAsau sAla : kuNDapuraM pAvA
sA vinItAntikaM bhartusAhasAni mahimno na sicyamAnaM mRgAdhIzaM sicyamAnAM
zriyaM nAgaiH sitaketukRtacchAyAH sitacchAyA ghanAH kvApi sitAMzuka
paricchannasitAsitAruNacchAye sindUrAruNitottuGgasiddhaM saMpUrNa bhavyarthaM
siddhavidyaH prabhAvADhyo siddhavidyAsamudbhUtasiddhArthA zatrudamanI siddhArthA
saMvaro'yodhyA siddho vyAkaraNAlloka siMhaketuH zazAGkAsya siMhacandra iti
khyAtaH 410 135 162 426 313 70 381 118 469 59 34 467 308 siMhazArdUlamAtaGga 204
sImantamaNibhAjAla - 173 sIvyantyanti jIryanti 449 kezasaMjJake putra 120
kozalamune ruddhavaM 464 sukozalasya mAhAtmya 465 sukRtasmaraNArthaM ca 148 317
132 315 391 59 247 siMhavyAghravRkazyena siMhasyeva yato mAMsa sihAsana
sthitasyAsya siMhAsanAni catvAri siMhikA taM tathAbhUtaM siMhavyAghraH zvabhiH
sarpaH sukhaM yantridazAvAse sukhaM viSayayogena 87 427 489 16 490 40 188 463
453 453 20 1 sukhanidrAkSaye yadva sukhaprasUti tasya sukhArthaM ceSTitaM sarvaM
sukhAsanavihAraH san

Page #599 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Verse Number Index  549 208 490 270 279 267 194 128 153 1 395 Sugandhimaruto
yasya 18 Sugreevo'pi harigreevam Sugreevanantara kanya sucharuvasano'tyanta- 322
Sukha pratibalasyapi 111 Sutagaatra samaasanga- 47 Sutaraam sa tato loke
Sutaakasha dhvajasyaapi Suta cha suryakamala 134 Suta dasasamutpanna 93 Suta
mandodari naama 168 Sutaavijnaapanat tyakta- 100 Sutareti gata khyati 224
Suteshu prabhutaam nyasya Suto'yam merukantasya Sutraamaprahitaiyasyasya
Sutraamaapi samam deva 259 Sundarottista kim seshaisudridham Sukrite lagno
Sudharmo'rnavasanjna sch Sudharasasamaasangasudhirvasantamalaayam Suputrena
tatha raksha Suptametena jeevena Suptaajagaranischvasa- 157 Suptaasau bhavane
ramye Supratisthah puri kaashi Supratistho'bhavad raja 240 Suprabha prathama
devi 440 Subuddhinarayatnotthasamstha 255 Subuddhinarayatnotthaah Subhadrah
sagaro bhadro Subhoomi iti chaakhyata- 436 Subhoorilakshasankhyasu 307 Sumangala
priyayangu sch 426 Sumaryaadevadeyam ka 394 Sumahaanagaram charu 424 Sumali
nyagadarchvam 188 Sumali malyavan Suryaraja rikshasumali malyavan suryaraja 165
Sumitrarajacharitam 273 Sumitrasyabhavad raajyam 270 Sumitranantaraam tasya 489
Sumitrapita tatah putra Sumitro'thanyadaaranya Sumerushikharakaaram
Suyashodatanamaaso Suraktam panicharanam Suranathaapitaskandhaam 51
Suravidyadharaih sarve. 337 Surasundarato jaata 175 Sura yadi hutenaagnau 258
Suraristraijato bheemo Surupee pratipadyasva 125 Surendram vikshya pitra te 108
Surendramukutaashlistasurendrena tato'saji 292 Suleshashauryah kshitigocharah
476 Sulochanaasutaabhartri 335 Suvarnakakshaya yuktam 19 Suvarna kumbhah
satkiitih 442 Suvarna khura shringaanam 54
Suvarnaparvate'mushimissuvarnavastrasasyadisuvidhanaa taporupa 162 Suvidhih
sheetalah shreyann 424 Suvyakto'mritavegaakhye Suvrataam suvrataanaam cha
Suvrata sch susiddhartho 442 Suvratasya jinendrasya 472 Susheelas teraso saakam
Sususuve suprabhaputra 491 Susannaddhaan jitva trinam iva 296 Susarvajnascha kim
kuryu- 253 Suseema cha tatha kshema 441 Suseema vatsanagari cha 426 Suseema
simasampanna 425 Suswaadarasasampannasuhridbandhavasampannah 465 Sukshmaasu
madviyuktaasu. Sutra kanthah prithivyaam ye 245 Sutrakanthah pura tena Sudo'tha
datumaarabdhah 468 Sunuryugapradhanaste Suryo gajapuram kunthu- 427
Suryodayapuram chaisha Srishtam virarase neva 203 Srishtah kaale cha tasya eva
81 Senayorubhayorjaat Senaajitaariraajasch 426 Senamukhaavasadena 282 Seyam
nidaghasuryamshu- 373 Seyam punyavaseshena 394 Seyamadya prasoota nu
Seyamalaambanarmukta Sainyavritasch sannahya 212 Sainyen dashavaktrasya 294
Sodaro mama kantaaya So'nyada kamalacchhanna- 88 So'nyada svaravijnaatah 395
So'pi kaalanubhavena 48 So'pi datvaashi sham taabhyaam 385 So'pi
samsaraakiryaakhye 95 So'bhayam margayitvaasmai 468 So'yam manushyamaatrena 29
So'yamaasannadeshastho 276 So'yamindro dasasyasya 281 So'yam syenaayate kaakah
181 So'yam svakarmavashatah kulasam- 423 So'vochadamb tena eva- 405 So'vochad
gachch gachch tvam 403 So'ham sadhu prasadena 115 Saukumaryadivoodara 149 395
366 _98 165 308 426 Di. 328

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zlokAnAmakArAnukramaH 549 208 490 270 279 267 194 128 153 1 395 sugandhimaruto
yasya 18 sugrIvo'pi harigrIvaM sugrIvAnantarA kanyA sucAruvasano'tyanta- 322
sukhaH pratibalasyApi 111 sutagAtrasamAsaGga- 47 sutarAM sa tato loke
sutAkAzadhvajasyApi sutA ca sUryakamalA 134 sutA dazasamutpannA 93 sutA
mandodarI nAma 168 sutAvijJApanAt tyakta- 100 sutAreti gatA khyAti 224 suteSu
prabhutAM nyasya suto'yaM merukAntasya sutrAmaprahitaiyasya sutrAmApi samaM deva
259 sundarottiSTha kiM zeSaisudRDhaM sukRte lagno sudharmo'rNavasaMjJazca
sudhArasasamAsaGgasudhIrvasantamAlAyAM suputreNa tathA rakSaH suptametena jIvena
suptAjagaranizvAsa- 157 suptAsau bhavane ramye supratiSThaH purI kAzI
supratiSTho'bhavad rAjA 240 suprabhA prathamA devI 440
subuddhinarayatnotthasaMsthA 255 subuddhinarayatnotthAH subhadraH sAgaro bhadro
subhUma iti cAkhyAta- 436 subhUrilakSasaMkhyAsu 307 sumaGgalA priyayaGguzca 426
sumaryAdevadeyaM kA 394 sumahAnagaraM cAru 424 sumAlI nyagadarcavaM 188 sumAlI
mAlyavAn sUryarajA RkSasumAlI mAlyavAn sUryarajA 165 sumitrarAjacaritaM 273
sumitrasyAbhavad rAjyaM 270 sumitrAnantaraM tasyA 489 sumitrApi tataH
putrasumitro'thAnyadAraNya sumeruzikharAkAraM suyazodattanAmAso suraktaM
pANicaraNaM suranAthApitaskandhAM 51 suravidyAdharaiH sarve. 337 surasundarato
jAtA 175 surA yadi hutenAgnau 258 surAristrijaTo bhImo surUpe pratipadyasva 125
surendraM vIkSya pitrA te 108 surendramukuTAzliSTasurendreNa tato'saji 292
sulezazauryaH kSitigocaraH 476 sulocanAsutAbhartR 335 suvarNakakSayA yuktaM 19
suvarNakumbhaH satkItiH 442 suvarNakhurazRGgANAM 54
suvarNaparvate'muSmisuvarNavastrasasyAdisuvidhAnA taporUpA 162 suvidhiH zItalaH
zreyAn 424 suvyakto'mRtavegAkhye suvrataM suvratAnAM ca suvratazca susiddhArthoM
442 suvratasya jinendrasya 472 suzIlasteraso sAkaM suSuve suprabhAputra 491
susannaddhAn jitvA tRNamiva 296 susarvajJAzca kiM kuryu- 253 susImA ca tathA
kSemA 441 susImA vatsanagarI ca 426 susImA sImasaMpannA 425
susvAdarasasaMpannasuhRdbAndhavasaMpannaH 465 sUkSmAsu madviyuktAsu  /  sUtra
kaNThAH pRthivyAM ye 245 sUtrakaNThAH purA tena sUdo'tha dAtumArabdhaH 468
sUnuryugapradhAnaste sUryo gajapuraM kunthu- 427 sUryodayapuraM caiSA sRSTaM
vIraraseneva 203 sRSTAH kAle ca tasyaiva 81 senayorubhayorjAtasenAjitArirAjazva
426 senAmukhAvasAdena 282 seyaM nidAghasUryAMzu- 373 seyaM puNyAvazeSeNa 394
seyamadya prasUtA nu seyamAlambanarmuktA sainyAvRtazca saMnahya 212 sainyena
dazavaktrasya 294 sodaro mama kAntAyA so'nyadA kamalacchanna- 88 so'nyadA
svaravijJAtaH 395 so'pi kAlAnubhAvena 48 so'pi datvAziSaM tAbhyAM 385 so'pi
saMsArakIryAkhye 95 so'bhayaM mArgayitvAsmai 468 so'yaM mAnuSamAtreNa 29
so'yamAsannadezastho 276 so'yamindro dazAsyasya 281 so'yaM zyenAyate kAkaH 181
so'yaM svakarmavazataH kulasaM-423 so'vocadamba tenaiva- 405 so'vocad gaccha
gaccha tvaM 403 so'haM sAdhuprasAdena 115 saukumAryAdivodArA 149 395 366 _98 165
308 426 di. 328

Page #600 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
550 244 440 Soudharma is described in the Sutramani Vidhana. In the Kalpas
beginning with Soudharma, the Manas - 326 In the Kalpas beginning with
Soudharma, they go 330 With great fortune, etc. 334 433 355 204 446 344 370 416
335 282 363 338 103 And having spoken various praises 171 22 Having praised,
they bow down to you, some praise at that time 39 Having praised in the three
periods of time, whoever 330 Even a little here is not surprising - 305 Having
seen a woman, some of them 66 Women also fall from heaven 314 By women, he is
then surrounded, that  307 Having obtained that jewel of women, from the land,
from the water, Dharma - 307 They are seen in the land countries, this Shraman
is firm, indeed 119 73 462 450 Give me a place, O Lord 390 If you were to be
born in a place 393 394 230 93 99 68 313 478 Somangalo became Soumalinandano
Raksha: Soumali also wearing Saurabha attracted, confused From the weight of the
breasts, etc., generous, breasts rise to the top Breasts are painful These are
the two pots of the breasts, this pillar is here, what is the reason The trunk
has become stiff and spread out Praise, breasts are humble Praise, breasts are
not humble Having established the cave door, having established the dense joy,
having established the kingdom, having established it, he is confident,
established by him, he is led, he is in the kingdom of knowledge, he is in the
three numbers of destruction  Padma Purana He is situated near the sky - 98 The
origin of the lineage of stability 4 With both armies stationed there 340 261 66
309 478 332 154 411 435 20 198 319 338 257 172 293 352 102 Desiring, they
followed those who were  Crystal-like, arranged in between, clearly different,
bitten by another - 123 With the feet clearly pressed, 439 The water clearly
pressed on the earth, the radiant network of rays, the radiant sparks, the
fierce fire, the radiant taste, thousands, laughter, anger, mixed, that 217
Remembering that very thing Smiling, shy, not wanting, smiling, then he spoke He
stayed for a thousand years, this is your right to stability By the power of
stability Combined with the stable and the mobile, the killing of large animals,
etc., in the large, pure gems Having bathed and eaten in the morning The one who
bathes in a single garment, glorious Soft in the nail areas Like a soft, dark
blue sapphire Blocked by love Love became very great, from touch, from taste,
from form Touching the forehead plate Touched by Garuda 490 118 18 280 130 446
195 Remembering, along with the gods 106 274 Remembering the story of Bali, put
the chariot behind 282 You may have the opinion that there are no doers 252 The
womb of the variegated garland 461 Hanging down the garment 113 48 438 This is
for those who roam freely, the sign of independence  Independent, followed by
the name, the name with the same name 481 93 391 434 257 252 They sleep, they
tremble, they go 449 Even in a dream, he saw her 193 As if there was a meeting
in a dream 84 37 4 Fifty of their own sounds In the dwelling place of the Jinas
Pleased with the approval of their own side, this is their own side, it is not
to be known The nature of time Thinking about the nature The nature of the
intoxicated elephant king, by nature, you are cruel By nature, I am pure My
Indra, the mountain, my own Known as self-luminous You will be a slave to the
self-luminous Self-created, the world, heaven, the fate of falling The heavenly
Ganges, then again, falling Fallen from the heavenly world, born in the human
world, in heaven Even a little, even a little, by the wise Her sister was And
give her sister, give her sister, do not give her to me They went to the front
of their own army Prosperity, in the place, in front Prosperity, then she asked
From us, even so, of the creatures His own Directed My wife, my good woman, you
The sisters of the king of the gods, welcome, etc., he said, recognizing his
master, with love for his master, they are ruled by their master He spoke to his
mistress 458 159 332 147 162 235 255 236 118 146 313 323 97 211 213 183 355 239
383 383 395 284 171 459 261 232 391

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 550 244 440 sotrAmaNividhAnenasaudharmazca samAkhyAta: saudharmAdiSu kalpeSu
mAnasA - 326 sodharmAdiSu kalpeSu yAnti 330 saubhAgyAdibhiratyantaM 334 433 355
204 446 344 370 416 335 282 363 338 103 stavazca vividhAnuktvA 171 22 stuti
kRtvA praNemuste stuvanti kAzcittatkAle 39 stutvA kAlatraye yastu 330
stokamapIha na cAdbhuta- 305 striyaM dRSTrA kucittAste 66 striyo'pi
svargatazcyutvA 314 strIbhistataH parItaM taM strIratnaM tadasau labdhvA
sthalajAn jalajAn dharma- 307 sthalI dezeSu dRzyante sthANuH syAcchramaNo'yaM nu
119 73 462 450 sthAnakaM yaccha me nAtha 390 sthAno'janiSyathAzcettvaM 393 394
230 93 99 68 313 478 somaGgalo babhUvAso saumAlinandano rakSa: saumAlirapi
bibhrANaH saurabhAkRSTasaMbhrAnta stanabhArAdivodArAn stanAyatyunnati prAptI
stanAvanapradehAstA stanayoH kumbhayoreSa stambhito'sIha ki sAdi
stambhavatprasRtAkANDA stavakastanamrAbhi stavakastanaranyAbhi sthApayitvA
guhAdvAri sthApayitvA ghanAmodasthApayitvA tato rAjye sthApayitveti vizrabdhaM
sthApitastena nItvAsau sthitaM jJAnasya sAmrAjye sthitaM layaistrisaMkhyAnai
padmapurANe sthitazcaiSo'ntikavyomni- 98 sthitivaMzasamutpattiH 4 sthite
tatrobhayoH sene 340 261 66 309 478 332 154 411 435 20 198 319 338 257 172 293
352 102 spRhayannanuyAtAbhyaH sphaTikAntaravinyastaiH sphuTadanyo'nyasaMdaSTa-
123 sphuTitAbhyAM padAGghribhyAM 439 sphuTitAvanipItAmbuH sphuratkiraNajAlaM ca
sphuratsphuliGga raudrAgnisphuritA rasahasreNa smayaroSavimizraM ta 217
smaryamANaM tadeveda smitalajjatadabherSyA smitvA tato jagAdAsI sthito
varSasahasraM ca sthityadhikAro'yaM te sthityA tyA prabhAveNa
sthAyisaMcAribhiryuktaM sthUlaprANivadhAdimyo sthUlasvaccheSu ratneSu snAtvA
bhuktvA ca pUrvAhNe snAnaikazATakaH zrImAn snigdhaM nakha pradezeSu
snigdhendranIlasaMkAzaM snehapaararuddhAnAM sneho babhUva cAtyantasparzato
rasato rUpAd spRzallalATapaTTena spRSTAgaruDavAna 490 118 18 280 130 446 195
smRtvA ca vibudhaiH sArddha 106 274 smRtvA nu bAlivRttAntaM syandanaM parato
dhehi 282 syAtte matirna kartAraH 252 syAdvicitramAlAyA garbho 461 srastAmbara
samAlambi 113 48 438 svacchandacAriNAmetad svatantraliGgasaMjJasya
svatantrAnugatAkhyena svanAmasahanAmAni 481 93 391 434 257 252 svapanti
bibhyatIGganti 449 svapne'pi ca sa tAmeva 193 svapne samAgamo yadvat 84 37 4
svanAnye konapaJcAzat svaniveze jinendrANAM svapakSAnumatiprIte
svapakSo'yamavidyeyaM svabhAvamiti kAlasya svabhAvamiti saMcintya
svabhAvAnmattanAgendra svabhAvenaiva te krUrAH svabhAvenaiva me zuddha
svamindraM parvataM svagaM svayaMprabhamiti khyAtaM svayaMprabhA ca te dAsye
svayaMbhUva ca lokasya svarga dhik cyutiyogena svargaGgAstu punazcyutvA
svargalokAccyuto jAto svarge manuSyaloke ca svalpaM svalpamapi prAjJaiH svasA
tasyAbhavaccAva svasAraM ca prayacchemAM svasAraM yaccha mA vAsmai
svasenAmukhatAM jagmu svasti sthAne puraspArA svastimatyatha papraccha
svasmAttathApi jantUnAM svasya muddizya svastrIyA mama sAdhvi tvaM svasrIyAzca
surendrasya svAgatAdikamityAha svAminaM pratyabhijJAya svAminazcAnurAgeNa
svAminAdhiSThitAH santa svAminIM ca jagAdaivaM 458 159 332 147 162 235 255 236
118 146 313 323 97 211 213 183 355 239 383 383 395 284 171 459 261 232 391

Page #601 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Verse Index  **S**  * **Swamini** Shaasasadevi 371 * **Swamin**
Bhavatprasadena 452 * **Swamini** Alam Ruditva Te 376 * **Swami** Tvam Asmakam
Udara Kirte 418 * **Svedi** Paniraso Tasyah 363 * **Swedod** Bindu Sambaddha 109
* **Sveshu** Putreshu Nikshipya 328  **H**  * **Hansavali** Nadi Tire 302 *
**Hansi** Vibhrama Gaminyo  * **Hata** Srimalika Prapya 286 * **Hata**
Kudrushtyo Yasmin  * **Hanuman** Tatra Samprapya 410 * **Hanuman** Ko Ganadhisha
334 * **Hanmane** Vam Uktash San 411 * **Hanti** Tapam Sahasransho 315 *
**Hanyamanam** Tato Drista 260 * **Hanyamana** Narah Krur 114 * **Hanyate**
Vajina Vaji  * **Harigrivo** Api Nikshipya  * **Haridaso** Gatash Kveti  *
**Harinmani** Saroshasri Harishena  * **Harishena** Samutpannah 188 *
**Harishena** Charitam 196 * **Harmya** Prushthagato Drishtva 192 * **Hastina**
Nagaram Ramyam 439 * **Hasitva** Kecid Ityuchu 349 * **Hinsakarma** Param
Shastram 243 * **Hastatritaya** Matra Stha 388 * **Hinsato** Alikatah Steya 314
* **Hastanam** Saptakam Tung 198 * **Hinsadharma** Pravinasy 235 *
**Hastavalam** Badanen 378 * **Hinsayajna** Mim Ghoraha  * **Kasta** Vanchita
Papo 89 * **Hinsaya** Anritat Steyan 240 * **Ha** Ki Ketumati Krure 389 *
**Hinsitva** Jantu Sanghatam 223 * **Ha** Devi Te Gatash Kalo 389 * **Hidimbo**
Haihido Dimbo 216 * **Ha** Nath Pranasarvasva 406 * **Hitankar** Api Pratam 376
* **Ha** Putra Kimidam Vrittam 396 * **Himavantam** Tato Gatva 225 * **Ha**
Bhartrudarike Purva 188 * **Himani** Lavinirmukto  * **Ha** Bhratarmayi Satyev
130 * **Hiranya** Ruchira Mata 465 * **Ha** Mata Sadhava Kyam Te 375 * **Huta**
Asanashikhasyasit 224 * **Haramusti** Tato Balam 154 * **Hata** Asanashikha Peya
332 * **Harina** Katakadhara 330 * **Hrutva** Taddayitam Raja 444 * **Haro**
Pashobhita Grivam  * **Hridayavyatha** Vidya Bhruchrena 355 * **Ha** Vatsa
Vinaya Dhara 405 * **Hridaye** Shukla Male Ath 185 * **Havabhava** Sametascha 44
* **Hridayasthena** Nathena  * **Ha** Hata Mandabhagyasmi 375 * **Hetuna** Kena
Bharta Sya 380 * **Hahakara** Tato Kritva  * **Hetuna** Tena Chakresha  *
**Hahaha** Hu Shruti Tasy  * **Hemaka** Kshabhrita Kambu 266 * **Hahaha** Hu
Saman Sa  * **Hemasphatika** Vaidyurya  * **Hasa** Ev Cha Sadgandha 39 *
**Heyangavina** Kankshasya  * **Napaka** Kankshasya 29 * **Hasad** Bhushan
Nikshepat 229 * **Hrasvayu** Vittamuktasya 326  **N**  * **Napaka** Kankshasya
29

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 zlokAnAmakArAdyanukramaH svAminIzAsasAdevi 371 svAmin bhavatprasAdena 452
svAminyalaM ruditvA te 376 svAmI tvamasmAkamudArakIrte418 svedIpANiraso tasyAH
363 svedodabindusaMbaddha- 109 sveSu putreSu nikSipya 328 haMsAvalInadItIre 302
haMsIvibhramagAminyo hatazrImAlikaH prApya 286 hatA kudRSTayo yasmin
hanumAMstatra saMprApya 410 hanUmAn ko gaNAdhIza- 334 hanamAnevamuktaH san 411
hanti tApaM sahasrAMzo 315 hanyamAnaM tato dRSTA 260 hanyamAnAM naraH krUrai-
114  /  hanyate vAjinA vAjI harigrIvo'pi nikSipya haridAso gataH kveti
harinmaNisarojazrIhariSeNaH samutpannaH 188 hariSeNasya caritaM 196
harmyapRSThagato dRSTvA 192 hAstinaM nagaraM ramyaM 439 hasitvA kecidityUcu- 349
hiMsAkarmaparaM zAstraM 243 hastatritayamAtrasthA- 388 hiMsAto'lIkataH steyA 314
hastAnAM saptakaM tuGga 198 hiMsAdharmapravINasya 235 hastAvalambadAnena 378
hiMsAyajJamimaM ghorahA kaSTaM vaJcitaH pApo 89 hiMsAyA anRtAt steyAn 240 hA ki
ketumati krUre 389 hiMsitvA jantusaMghAtaM 223 hA devi te gataH kAlo 389 hiDimbo
haihiDo Dimbo 216 hA nAtha prANasarvasva- 406 hitaGkaramapi prAptaM 376 hA putra
kimidaM vRttaM 396 himavantaM tato gatvA 225 hA bhartRdArike pUrva 188  /
himAnilavinirmukto hA bhrAtarmayi satyevaM 130 hiraNyarucirA mAtA 465 hA mAtaH
sAdhavAkyaM te 375 hutAzanazikhasyAsIt 224 hAramuSTi tato bAlaM 154
hatAzanazikhA peyA 332 hAriNaH kaTakAdhAra- 330  /  hRtvA taddayitAM rAjA 444
hAropazobhitagrIvaM hRdayavyathavidyAbhRccakreNa 355 hA vatsa ! vinayAdhAra! 405
hRdaye zuklamAle'tha 185 hAvabhAvasametAzca 44 hRdayasthena nAthena hA hatA
mandabhAgyAsmi 375 hetunA kena bhartAsyA 380 hAhAkAraM tataH kRtvA hetunA tena
cakrezaH hAhAhUhUzrutI tasya hemakakSAbhRtaH kambu 266 hAhAhUhUsamAnaM sa
hemasphaTikavaiDUryahAsA eva ca sadgandhAH 39 haiyaGgavInakAGkSasya
napAkAGkSasya 29 hAsAdbhUSaNanikSepAt 229 hrasvAyuvittamuktasya 326 181 74 45
315

Page #602 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #603 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Adiapurana (Sanskrit, Hindi) by Acharya Jinasena, edited and translated by Dr.
Pannalal Jain, Sahityacharya Uttarapurana (Sanskrit, Hindi) by Acharya
Gunabhadra, edited and translated by Dr. Pannalal Jain Padmapurana (Sanskrit,
Hindi) by Acharya Ravishena, 3 volumes, edited and translated by Dr. Pannalal
Jain Harivamsapurana (Sanskrit, Hindi) by Acharya Jinasena, edited and
translated by Dr. Pannalal Jain Samaraicchakaha (Prakrit prose, Sanskrit shadow,
Hindi translation) by Haribhadra Suri, translated by Dr. Rameshchandra Jain
Kathakosha (Sanskrit) by Panditacharya Viravardhamanacharita (Sanskrit, Hindi)
by Mahakavis Sakalkirti Dharmasharmaabhyudaya (Sanskrit, Hindi) by Mahakavis
Harichandra Purudevachampoo (Sanskrit, Hindi) by Mahakavis Arhadadas
Veerajinindachariu (Apabhramsha, Hindi) by Kavis Pushpadanta Vaddhaamanachariu
(Apabhramsha, Hindi) by Vibhudha Shridhar Mahapurana (Apabhramsha, Hindi) by
Kavis Pushpadanta, in 5 volumes Nayakumarachariu (Apabhramsha, Hindi) by Kavis
Pushpadanta Jasaharachariu (Apabhramsha, Hindi) by Kavis Pushpadanta
Sirivalachariu (Apabhramsha, Hindi) by Narasena Deva Paumachariu (Apabhramsha,
Hindi) by Svayambhu, in 5 volumes Ritthanechichariu (Yadavakanda) (Apabhramsha,
Hindi) by Svayambhu Vardhamanapuranam (Kannada) by Acharya, modern Kannada
translation by T.S. Shamrao, Pannagaiya Ramachandracharitapuranam (Kannada) by
Kavis Nagachandra, modern Kannada translation by Dr. R.C. Hirematha

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 bhAratIya jJAnapITha se prakAzita purANa, carita evaM anya kAvya-grantha
AdipurANa (saMskRta, hindI) : AcArya jinasena, bhAga 1, sampA.-anu. : DaoN.
pannAlAla jaina, sAhityAcArya uttarapurANa (saMskRta, hindI) : AcArya guNabhadra
sampA.-anu. : DaoN. pannAlAla jaina, sAhityAcArya padmapurANa (saMskRta, hindI)
: AcArya raviSeNa, 3 bhAgoM sampA.-anu. : DaoN. pannAlAla jaina, sAhityAcArya
harivaMzapurANa (saMskRta, hindI) : AcArya jinasena sampA.-anu. : DaoN.
pannAlAla jaina, sAhityAcArya samarAiccakahA (prAkRta gadya, saMskRta chAyA,
hindI anuvAda mUla : haribhadra sUri, anuvAda : DaoN. ramezacandra jaina
kathAkoSa (saMskRta) : paNDitAcArya  /  sampA.-anu. : DaoN. A. ne. upAdhye
vIravardhamAnacarita (saMskRta, hindI) : mahAkavi sakalakIti sampA.-anu. : paM.
hIrAlAla zAstrI dharmazarmAbhyudaya (saMskRta, hindI) : mahAkavi haricandra
sampA.-anu. : DaoN. pannAlAla jaina, sAhityAcArya purudeva campU (saMskRta,
hindI) : mahAkavi arhaddAsa sampA.-anu. : DaoN. pannAlAla jaina, sAhityAcArya
vIrajiNiMdacariu (apabhraMza, hindI) : kavi puSpadanta sampA.-anu. : DaoN.
hIrAlAla jaina vaDDhamANacariu (apabhraMza, hindI) : vibudha zrIdhara
sampA.-anu. : DaoN. rAjArAma jaina mahApurANa (apabhraMza, hindI) : kavi
puSpadanta, 5 bhAgoM meM sampA.-pI.ela vaidya, anu.-DaoN. devendrakumAra jaina
NAyakumAracariu (apabhraMza, hindI) : kavi puSpadanta sampA.-anu. : DaoN.
hIrAlAla jaina jasaharacariu (apabhraMza, hindI) : kavi puSpadanta sampA.-anu. :
DaoN. hIrAlAla jaina sirivAlacariu (apabhraMza, hindI) : narasena deva
sampA.-anu. : DaoN. devendrakumAra jaina paumacariu (apabhraMza, hindI):
svayambhU, pA~ca bhAgoM meM sampA.-anu. : DaoN. devendrakumAra jaina
riTThaNemicariu (yAdavakANDa) : svayambhU (apabhraMza, hindI) sampA.-anu. :
devendrakumAra jaina vardhamAnapurANam (kannar3a) : AcaNNa Adhunika kannar3a
anuvAda : TI. esa. zAmarAva, paM. nAgarAjaiyA rAmacandracaritapurANam (kannar3a)
: kavi nAgacandra Adhunika kannar3a anuvAda : DaoN. Ara. sI. hIremaTha For
Private & Personal use only Inelibrary.org

Page #604 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Balampranalama Parine PratiÅacapratihÄra Mumbedanagirama Yovarisp:
Karmayathocita Hovainimindrodhi SarvanakaranÅ«bit LÄkhamÄnatÄnÄ YathÄtÄprÄ«tiya
JÄ«yavinmukti BavattÄntyÄthÄ KarikhÄnidhi VÄkevÄgadÄtÄbÄ RÄnayormata. Mamevaramhi
DaijinÄmÄrthako Ru 2evjeta BhÄratÄ«ya JÃ±ÄnapÄ«á¹­ha SthÄpanÄ: San 1944 Uddesya JÃ±Äna
Ki Vilupta, Anupalabdha Aura AprÃ¤kÄÅita SÄmagrÄ« KÄ AnusandhÄna Aura PrakÄÅana
Tatha LokahitakÄrÄ« Maulik SÄhitya KÄ Nirman SansthÄpaka Swa. SÄhu ÅÄntipraÅÄda
Jaina Swa. ÅrÄ«matÄ« RamÄ Jaina Adhyaká¹£a ÅrÄ«matÄ« Indu Jaina KÄryalaya: 18,
InstitÅ«Åanala EriyÄ, LodÄ« RÅá¸a, NayÄ« DillÄ«-110 003

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
bAlaMpranalamA pArine pratizacapratIhAra muMbedAnagirAma yovarispa:
karmayathocita hovAInamiMdrodhi sarvanakAranUbita lAkhamAnatAnA yathAtApritIya
jIyavinmuktI bavattAMtyAyathA karikhyAnidhi vAkevAgadAtabA raanyormt|
mamevarAmahI daijinAmArthako ru 2evajetA bhAratIya jJAnapITha sthApanA : san
1944 uddezya jJAna kI vilupta, anupalabdha aura aprakAzita sAmagrI kA
anusandhAna aura prakAzana tathA lokahitakArI maulika sAhitya kA nirmANa
saMsthApaka sva. sAhU zAntiprasAda jaina sva. zrImatI ramA jaina adhyakSa
zrImatI indu jaina kAryAlaya : 18, insTITyUzanala eriyA, lodI roDa, nayI
dillI-110 003

