Catalog link: https://jainqq.org/explore/001945/1

Page #1 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Piṇḍaniryukti Khand-4 Vācanā Pramukh Gaṇādhipati Tulasi Anuvādak Muni Dulharāj
Pradhān Sampādak Ācārya Mahāprajña Sampādikā Samani Kusumaprajña

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti khaNDa-4 vAcanA pramukha gaNAdhipati tulasI anuvAdaka muni
dulaharAja pradhAna sampAdaka AcArya mahAprajJa sampAdikA samaNI kusumaprajJA

Page #2 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The first commentary of the Agamas is the Nirukti literature. This literature,
written in a concise style and in verse, is a valuable treasure of ancient
Indian literature. In it, Acharya Bhadrabahu has presented a concise explanation
of the special words used in the Agama texts. This commentary is extremely
important from the perspective of the science of semantic development today.
Within the Nirukti literature, there is an important text related to the Pind-
Nirukti Charanakarananuyoga. Written in a systematic and subject-oriented style,
this text encompasses many topics related to the Sadhu's Bhikshacharya. Due to
its nature as an Achar-related text, it is considered a primary source in some
traditions. The present text elaborates on the faults of Udgaman, Utpadana,
Eshana, and Paribhogaeshana in detail. This text is also extremely rich from the
perspective of the contemporary civilization and culture. It is believed that
this fourth flower in the chain of Nirukti literature will also be established
and popular in the scholarly world.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AgamoM kA prathama vyAkhyA - sAhitya niryukti hai| saMkSipta zailI meM
padyabaddha likhA gayA yaha sAhitya bhAratIya prAcIna vAGmaya kI amUlya
dharohara hai| isameM AcArya bhadrabAhu ne Agama-graMtha meM Ae vizeSa zabdoM kI
nikSepa paraka vyAkhyA prastuta kI hai| yaha vyAkhyA Aja artha-vikAsa vijJAna kI
dRSTi se atyanta mahattvapUrNa hai| niryukti-sAhitya ke antargata piNDa-niryukti
caraNakaraNAnuyoga se sambandhita eka mahatvapUrNa graMtha hai| kramabaddha aura
viSayapratibaddha zailI meM likhA gayA yaha graMtha sAdhu ko bhikSAcArya se
sambandhita aneka viSayoM ko apane bhItara sameTe hue hai  /  AcAra - viSayaka
graMtha hone ke kAraNa kucha paramparAoM meM yaha mUla sUtra ke rUpa meM
parigaNita hai| prastuta graMtha meM udgama, utpAdanA, eSaNA aura paribhogaiSaNA
ke doSoM kA vistAra se sAMgopAMga varNana huA hai| tatkAlIna sabhyatA aura
saMskRti kI dRSTi se bhI yaha graMtha atyanta samRddha hai  /  niryukti-sAhitya
kI zRMkhalA meM yaha cauthA puSpa bhI vidvad jagat meM pratiSThita evaM
lokapriya hogA, aisA vizvAsa hai  /  www.lainelibrary.org

Page #3 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Acharya Bhadrabahu Krit Pindaniyukti [Original Text, Variant Readings,
Footnotes, Translation, Introduction and Numerous Appendices] (Volume-4) Reading
Chief Acharya Tulsi Chief Editor Acharya Mahaprajna Translator Muni Dulharaj
Editor Samani Kusumprajna Jain Vishvabharati, Ladnun-341306

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 AcArya bhadrabAhu kRta piNDaniyukti [ mUlapATha, pAThAntara, pAdaTippaNa,
anuvAda, bhUmikA tathA aneka pariziSToM se samalaMkRta] (khaNDa-4)
vAcanApramukha AcArya tulasI pradhAna saMpAdaka AcArya mahAprajJa anuvAdaka muni
dulaharAja saMpAdikA samaNI kusumaprajJA jaina vizvabhAratI, lADanUM-341306

Page #4 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Publisher: Jain Vishva Bharati, Ladnun 341306 (Rajasthan) © Jain Vishva Bharati,
Ladnun IS B N-81-7195-135-X Courtesy :- Lakshmichand Sethia Charitable Trust
23/24, Radha Bazaar Street, Kolkata-700001 First Edition : 2008 Pages :- 520
Price :- 350 Rupees Printer : Kala Bharati Naveen Shahdara, Delhi-32  For
Private & Personal use only

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzaka: jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM 341306 (rAjasthAna) (c) jaina vizva
bhAratI, lADanUM IS B N-81-7195-135-X saujanya :- lakSmIcaMda seThiyA ceriTebala
TrasTa 23/24, rAdhA bAjAra sTrITa, kolakAtA-700001 prathama saMskaraNa : 2008
pRSTha :- 520 mUlya :- 350 rupaye mudraka : kalA bhAratI navIna zAhadarA,
dillI-32 For Private & Personal use only

Page #5 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
PIŅDANIRYUKTI S Original text, variant readings, critical notes, 2 Z
translation, preface and various appendices Synod Chief ĀCĀRYA TULSI Chief
Editor ĀCĀRYA MAHĀPRAJÑA Translator MUNI DULAHARAJ Editor SAMAŅi KUSUMPRAÑA JAIN
VISHVA BHARATI Ladnun - 341 306 (Raj.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 PINDANIRYUKTI S Original text, varaint readings, critical notes, 2 Z
translation, preface and various appendices Synod Chief ACARYA TULSI Chief
Editor ACARYA MAHAPRAJNA Translator MUNI DULAHARAJ Editor SAMANi KUSUMPRANA JAIN
VISHVA BHARATI Ladnun - 341 306 (Raj.)

Page #6 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Publisher: Jain Vishva Bharati Ladnun - 341 306 (Raj.) © Jain Vishva Bharati,
Ladnun ISBN-81-7195-135-X Courtesy: Lakshmichanda Sethiya Charitable Trust
23/24, Radha Bazar Street, Kolkata - 700 001 First Edition: 2008 Pages: 520
Price: Rs. 350/- Printed By: Kala Bharati Naveen Shahdara, Delhi - 110 032

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 Publisher : Jain Vishva Bharati Ladnun - 341 306 (Raj.) (c) Jain Vishva
Bharati, Ladnun ISBN-81-7195-135-X Courtsey: Lakshmichanda Sethiya Charitable
Trust 23/24, Radha Bazar Street, Kolkatta - 700 001 First Edition : 2008 Pages :
520 Price: Rs. 350/ Printed By: Kala Bharati Naveen Shahdara, Delhi - 110 032

Page #7 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Dedication**  **Puttho vi pannapuriso sudakkho, anapahanno jani jassa
niccam.** **Saccapppaoge pavarasayassa, bhikkhussa tassa ppannihanapuvvam.**
Whose wise man is strong and skillful, and who is the knower of the Agamas,
always. Whose mind is the best in the true yoga, to that monk with pure
devotion.  **Vilodayam agamaduddhameva, laddham suladham navaniyam accham.**
**Sajjhaya-sajjhanarayassa niccam, jayassa tassa ppannihanapuvvam.** Who has
churned the ocean of Agamas, and obtained the best, abundant, fresh butter.
Whose mind is always immersed in the study and contemplation of the scriptures,
to that Jayacharya with pure devotion.  **Pavahiya jena suyassa dhara, gane
samathe mama manase vi.** **Jo heubhuo ssa pavayanassa, kalussa tassa
ppannihanapuvvam.** Whose stream of scriptures flows, in the entire assembly, in
my mind too. Who is the cause of the scriptures, to that Kalugani with pure
devotion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 samarpaNa puTTho vi paNNApuriso sudakkho, ANApahANo jaNi jassa niccaM  /
saccappaoge pavarAsayassa, bhikkhussa tassa ppaNihANapuvvaM  //  jisakA
prajJApuruSa puSTa paTu, hokara bhI AgamapradhAna thaa| satyayoga meM pravara
citta thA, usI bhikSu ko vimala bhAva se|| viloDiyaM Agamaduddhameva, laddhaM
suladdhaM nnvnniiymcchN| sajjhAya-sajjhANarayassa niccaM, jayassa tassa
ppnnihaannpuvvN|| jisane Agama dohana kara-kara, pAyA pravara pracura nvniit|
zruta saddhyAna lIna cira cintana, jayAcArya ko vimala bhAva se|| pavAhiyA jeNa
suyassa dhArA, gaNe samatthe mama mANase vi| jo heubhUo ssa pavAyaNassa, kAlussa
tassa ppaNihANapuvvaM  //  jisane zruta kI dhAra bahAI, sakala saMgha meM, mere
mana meN| hetubhUta zruta-sampAdana meM, kAlugaNI ko vimala bhAva se||

Page #8 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Antastosha**  Antastosha is indescribable, like the joy of a gardener who sees
his nurtured and watered grove flourish with leaves, blossoms, and fruit; like
the joy of an artist who sees the formless become form through his brush; and
like the joy of a visionary who sees his imagination come to life through his
efforts. For a long time, my mind was filled with the vision of a scholarly
edition of the Jain Agamas, and I dedicated many laborious moments of my life to
this endeavor. My resolve bore fruit, and it came to pass. With me as the
center, my Dharma family became involved in this work, and therefore, I want to
share this Antastosha with all those who have participated in this endeavor.
**Samvibhaga is our Dharma.** To all those who have selflessly dedicated their
Samvibhaga to this momentous endeavor, I offer my blessings and wish that their
future becomes the future of this great work.  **Ganadhipati Tulsi Acharya
Mahaprajna**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 aMtastoSa aMtastoSa anirvacanIya hotA hai usa mAlI kA, jo apane hAthoM se upta
aura siMcita drumanikuMja ko pallavita-puSpita aura phalita huA dekhatA hai, usa
kalAkAra kA, jo apanI tUlikA se nirAkAra ko sAkAra huA dekhatA hai aura usa
kalpanAkAra kA, jo apanI kalpanA ko apane prayatnoM se prANavAn banA dekhatA
hai| cirakAla se merA mana isa kalpanA se bharA thA ki jaina AgamoM kA
zodhapUrNa sampAdana ho aura mere jIvana ke bahuzramI kSaNa usameM lgeN|
saMkalpa phalavAn banA aura vaisA hI huaa| mujhe kendra mAna merA dharmaparivAra
isa kArya meM saMlagna ho gayA ata: mere isa aMtastoSa meM maiM una sabako
samabhAgI banAnA cAhatA hUM, jo isa pravRtti meM saMvibhAgI rahe haiN|
_saMvibhAga hamArA dharma hai| jina-jina ne isa gurutara pravRtti meM unmukta
bhAva se apanA saMvibhAga samarpita kiyA hai, una sabako maiM AzIrvAda detA hUM
aura kAmanA karatA hUM ki unakA bhaviSya isa mahAn kArya kA bhaviSya bne|
gaNAdhipati tulasI AcArya mahAprajJa

Page #9 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Message  **Pindaniyukti Muni** - is an important text on conduct. It can be
called a supplementary text to the fifth study of Dashavaikalik. There are many
topics to be known about the Muni's diet method and diet purification, the
नियुक्तिकार has planned them properly.  Muni Dulharajji has been working with
dedication in the field of Agam and Agam's commentary literature. The
translation of the presented text done by him will be very useful for the
reader. Some lines of the efforts of Samani Kusumprajna have been marked in its
editing work. This text is readable and contemplative for Sadhus and Sadhvis. It
is also a very valuable text for curious readers of Muni's diet routine and
conduct routine.  Kositthal (Raj.) 7 January 2008  Acharya Mahaprajna

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 saMdeza piMDaniyukti muni- - AcAra kA mahattvapUrNa graMtha hai| ise
dazavaikAlika ke pAMcaveM adhyayana kA pUraka graMtha kahA jA sakatA hai| muni
kI AhAra - vidhi aura AhAra-zuddhi ke viSaya meM aneka viSaya jJAtavya haiM,
niyuktikAra ne unakA samyak niyojana kiyA hai| muni dulaharAjajI Agama aura
Agama ke vyAkhyA - sAhitya ke kSetra meM samarpita bhAva se kArya karate rahe
haiN| unake dvArA kiyA gayA prastuta graMtha kA anuvAda pAThaka ke lie bahuta
upayogI hogaa| isake sampAdana- kArya meM samaNI kusumaprajJA ke zrama kI kucha
rekhAoM kA aMkana huA hai| sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke lie yaha graMtha paThanIya aura
mananIya hai| muni kI AhAra caryA aura vihAra caryA ke jijJAsu pAThakoM ke lie
bhI yaha bahuta mUlyavAn graMtha hai  /  kozIthala (rAja.) 7 janavarI 2008
AcArya mahAprajJa

Page #10 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #11 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Light of Knowledge**  The Jain Agamas hold a significant place in ancient
Indian literature. Numerous new facts related to history, philosophy, society,
culture, Ayurveda, geography, and astrology are scattered throughout this
literature. To reveal the profound mysteries of the Agamas, the first commentary
literature was written, named Nirukti. This literature, which explains the word
or subject in a concise style using the method of deposition, contains many new
facts within itself.  1 Acharya Tulsi's awakened wisdom dreamt of a well-
organized compilation of the Agamas. Inspired by him, many enlightened saints,
including his disciple Muni Nathmalji (present Acharya Mahapragya), joined this
great endeavor, and gradually, around 100,000 pages of Agamic literature were
edited and published, including the original text of the Agamas, commentaries,
translations, and lexicons. Jain Vishva Bharati had the privilege of publishing
this magnificent work, for which it is deeply grateful to the revered ones.  In
today's convenience-oriented age, the arduous task of editing ancient texts from
manuscripts holds special significance. Jain Vishva Bharati has already
published two volumes of Nirukti literature. The second volume related to the
necessary Nirukti is being published, and before that, the fourth volume, named
Pindanirukti, is reaching the hands of scholars. The present Pindanirukti text
deals with the faults related to the diet and begging practices of the Sadhus.
This text also highlights many important cultural and social aspects
incidentally. A significant aspect of the editing of this text is the attempt to
separate the Nirukti and commentary, which are written in the same language and
style. To make this text accessible to the public, the translation work was done
by Agam Manishi Muni Shri Dulharajji. Earlier, Muni Shri had translated many
voluminous texts. Even today, he is constantly engaged in the worship of Shruti
like a steady yogi. Even in a state of physical ill health, his steady yoga
keeps him focused on Agamic work.  Samani Kusumprajnaji has been involved in the
editing of Agamic commentary literature for the past 28 years. Such work is
impossible without subtle intellect, firm determination, intense concentration,
and vibrant life energy. Samani Kusumprajnaji has not only provided textual
variations from about 6 manuscripts but has also written many important
footnotes. The 21 appendices included in the text highlight its importance.
Jain Vishva Bharati is extremely happy to publish this important text.
Congratulating Muni Shri and Samani Ji for this momentous work, I wish that
their journey of Shruti continues uninterrupted for the propagation of the Jain
religion in the future, and Jain Vishva Bharati continues to deliver the ancient
wisdom to the masses. The institution family hopes that this publication, like
previous publications, will prove to be extremely useful in the eyes of
scholars.  Surendra Chordia President

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prakAzakIya prAcIna bhAratIya vADmaya meM jaina AgamoM kA mahattvapUrNa sthAna
hai  /  itihAsa, darzana, samAja, saMskRti, Ayurveda, bhUgola aura jyotiSa se
sambandhita aneka nae tathya isa sAhitya meM vikIrNa rUpa se bikhare par3e haiN|
Agama-sAhitya ke gUr3ha rahasyoM ko prakaTa karane ke lie prathama vyAkhyA -
sAhitya likhA gayA, jisakA nAma niryukti rakhA gyaa| saMkSipta zailI meM nikSepa
paddhati se zabda kI yA viSaya kI vyAkhyA karane vAlA yaha sAhitya aneka nae
tathyoM ko apane bhItara sameTe hue hai  /  1 AcArya tulasI kI jAgRta prajJA ne
AgamoM ke suvyavasthita sampAdana kA sapanA saMjoyA  /  unakI preraNA se
aMtevAsI ziSya muni nathamalajI (vartamAna AcArya mahAprajJa) sameta aneka
prabuddha saMta isa mahAyajJa ke sAtha jur3e aura dhIre-dhIre lagabhaga 1 lAkha
pRSTha ke Asa-pAsa Agama - sAhitya sampAdita hokara prakAza A gayA, jisameM
AgamoM kA mUlapATha, bhASya, anuvAda aura koza- sAhitya bhI sammilita hai  /
jaina vizva bhAratI ko isa mahanIya kArya ke prakAzana kA punIta avasara milA,
isake lie yaha pUjyavaroM ke prati hRdaya kRtajJa hai| Aja ke suvidhAvAdI yuga
meM hastapratiyoM se prAcIna graMthoM ke sampAdana kA durUha kArya apanA vizeSa
mahattva rakhatA hai| jaina vizva bhAratI dvArA niyukti - sAhitya ke do khaNDa
pahale prakAza meM A cuke haiN| Avazyaka niryukti se sambandhita dUsarA khaNDa
prakAzyamAna hai, usase pUrva piNDaniryukti nAmaka cauthA khaNDa vidvAnoM ke
hAtha meM pahuMca rahA hai| prastuta piNDaniryukti graMtha sAdhu kI AhAracaryA
evaM bhikSAcaryA ke doSoM se sambandhita hai| isa graMtha meM prasaMgavaza aneka
mahattvapUrNa sAMskRtika evaM sAmAjika pahalU bhI ujAgara hue haiN| isa graMtha
ke sampAdana kA mahattvapUrNa pahalU yaha hai ki eka hI bhASA-zailI meM likhe
gae do graMtha niryukti aura bhASya ko pRthak karane kA prayatna kiyA gayA hai|
isa graMtha ko janabhogya banAne ke lie anuvAda kArya Agama manISI muni zrI
dulaharAjajI ne kiyA hai| isase pUrva bhI muni zrI aneka bRhatkAya graMthoM kA
anuvAda kara cuke haiN| vartamAna meM bhI ve sthirayogI kI bhAMti zruta kI
upAsanA meM aharniza saMlagna haiM  /  zArIrika asvAsthya kI sthiti meM bhI
unakA sthirayoga unheM AgamakArya meM dattacitta banAe rakhatA hai  /  samaNI
kusumaprajJAjI pichale 28 sAloM se Agama-vyAkhyA sAhitya ke sampAdana kArya meM
saMlagna haiN| aise kArya sUkSma manISA, dRr3ha adhyavasAya, saghana ekAgratA
aura sphurita prANaUrjA ke binA asaMbhava hai| samaNI kusumaprajJAjI ne
lagabhaga 6 hastapratiyoM se pAThAntara hI nahIM die apitu anake mahattvapUrNa
pAdaTippaNa bhI likhe haiM  /  graMtha meM samAviSTa 21 pariziSTa isakI mahattA
ko ujAgara karane vAle haiN| jaina vizva bhAratI isa mahattvapUrNa graMtha ko
prakAzita karate hue atyanta harSa kA anubhava kara rahI hai| isa gurutara kArya
hetu maiM munizrI evaM samaNIjI ko badhAI dete hue yaha maMgala kAmanA karatA
hUM ki bhaviSya meM bhI jinazAsana kI prabhAvanA hetu unakI zrutayAtrA anavarata
calatI rahe aura jaina vizva bhAratI jana-jana taka ArSavANI ko pahuMcAtI rhe|
saMsthA parivAra ko AzA hai ki pUrva prakAzanoM kI taraha yaha prakAzana bhI
vidvAnoM kI dRSTi se atyanta upayogI siddha hogA  /  surendra corar3iyA adhyakSa

Page #12 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #13 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Bibliography 1-158 3-10 11-97 98-106 109-203 205 207 215 228 266 273 281 283
Piṇḍaniyukti: A Review Piṇḍaniyukti Subject Index Piṇḍaniyukti Original Text
Piṇḍaniyukti Commentary Piṇḍaniyukti Translation Appendix • Equation of Verses •
Hierarchy • Stories • Ayurveda and Health • Comparative References • Synonymous
• Nirukta • Used Native Words • Sūkta-Subhāṣita • Simile and Illustration •
Deposited Words • Proverbs and Justice • Definitions • Difference in Meaning of
Two Words • Verses Quoted from Malayagiri Vṛtti • Special Name Hierarchy •
Special Name Hierarchy Under Commentary • Subject Index • Word Meaning •
Reference Bibliography • Used Bibliography 285 293 294 295 296 297 302 304 306
312 315 316 346 347

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 graMthAnukrama 1-158 3-10 11-97 98-106 109-203 205 207 215 228 266 273 281 283
piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa piNDaniyukti viSaya-sUcI piNDaniyukti mUlapATha
piNDaniyukti bhASya piNDaniyukti anuvAda pariziSTa * gAthAoM kA samIkaraNa *
padAnukrama *kathAeM * Ayurveda evaM Arogya * tulanAtmaka saMdarbha * ekArthaka
* nirukta * prayukta dezI zabda * sUkta-subhASita * upamA aura dRSTAnta *
nikSipta zabda * lokoktiyAM evaM nyAya * paribhASAeM * do zabdoM kA arthabheda *
malayagiri vRtti kI uddhRta gAthAeM * vizeSanAmAnukrama * TIkA ke antargata
vizeSanAmAnukrama * viSayAnukrama * zabdArtha * saMketa graMtha sUcI * prayukta
graMtha sUcI 285 293 294 295 296 297 302 304 306 312 315 316 346 347

Page #14 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #15 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍanīyukti: An Observation  **On**  **The Nature of the Appointment** **The
Purpose of the Appointment** **The Number of Appointments** **The Order of the
Appointment Structure** **Ācārya Govinda and His Appointment** **The Agency and
Time of Composition of the Pinḍanīyukti** **The Independent Existence of the
Pinḍanīyukti** **The Separation of the Appointment and the Commentary: A
Discussion** **The Subject Matter and Uniqueness of the Pinḍanīyukti** *
Language and Style * The Use of Stories **The Exegetical Literature of the
Pinḍanīyukti** * The Original Commentary and the Old Commentary * The
Pinḍanīyukti Bhāṣya * The Malayagīrīya Ṭīkā * The Pinḍanīyukti Avacūrī * The
Ṭīkā by Vīrācārya * The Dīpikā by Māṇikyasekhara **The Influence of Earlier
Texts on the Pinḍanīyukti** **The Influence of the Pinḍanīyukti on Later Texts**
**The Consciousness and Unconsciousness of Stationary Bodies: A Discussion** *
Pṛthvīkāya * Apkāya * Tejas kāya * Vāyukāya * Vanaspatikāya **Bhikṣācāryā**
**Bhikṣāvṛtti and the Difference in Begging** **How Many Times Should a Muni
Beg?** **5 Eṣaṇā and Its Faults** **6 Udgaman Doṣa** * AViśodhī and Viśodhī
Categories **10 Ādhākarma** * The Doors of Ādhākarma * The Names of Ādhākarma *
The Single Meaning of Ādhākarma * Adhaḥkarma * Ātmaghna * Ātmakarma * Food
Created for Whom is Ādhākarma? **55 What is Ādhākarma?** * One's Own Side and
the Other Side * The Roles of Accepting Ādhākarma * The Faults of Accepting
Ādhākarma * Purification of Ādhākarma from the Three Kalpas **60 The Avoidance
of Ādhākarma** * The Rule of Accepting Ādhākarma in the Time of Tīrthaṅkaras *
Exceptions to Accepting Ādhākarma **Auddeśika** * Oga Auddeśikā * The Method of
Knowing Oga Auddeśika * Vibhāga Auddeśikā * Uddhiṣṭa * Kṛta **Karma Pūtikarma
Doṣa** * Upakaraṇapūti * Āhārapūti * Bhaktapānapūti * Sūkṣmapūti **69**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa bh ls@ niyukti kA svarUpa niyukti kA prayojana
niyuktiyoM kI saMkhyA niyukti-racanA kA krama AcArya goviMda evaM unakI niyukti
piNDaniyukti kA kartRtva evaM racanAkAla piNDaniyukti kA svataMtra astitva
niyukti aura bhASya kA pRthakkaraNa : eka vimarza piNDaniyukti kI viSayavastu
evaM vaiziSTya * bhASA-zailI * kathAoM kA prayoga piNDaniyukti kA vyAkhyA-
sAhitya * mUlaTIkA evaM vRddhvyaakhyaa| * piNDaniyukti bhaassy| * malayagirIyA
ttiikaa| * piNDaniyukti avcuuri| * vIrAcArya kRta ttiikaa| * mANikyazekhara kRta
diipikaa| piNDaniyukti para pUrvavartI graMthoM kA prabhAva piNDaniyukti kA
paravartI anya graMthoM para prabhAva sthAvarakAyoM kI sacittatA-acittatA : eka
vimarza * pRthviikaay| * apkaay| * tejskaay| * vAyukAyA * vnsptikaay|
bhikSAcaryA bhikSAvRtti evaM bhIkha meM aMtara muni ke lie bhikSA kitanI bAra 5
eSaNA evaM usake doSa 6 udgama doSa * avizodhi evaM vizodhi kotti| 10 AdhAkarma
* AdhAkarma ke dvaar| * AdhAkarma ke naam| * AdhAkarma ke ekaarthk| * adh:krm| *
aatmghn| * aatmkrm| * kisake lie nirmita AhAra aadhaakrm| 55 * AdhAkarma kyA
hai? * svapakSa aura prpkss| * AdhAkarma grahaNa kI bhuumikaaeN| * AdhAkarma
grahaNa ke doss| * kalpatraya se AdhAkarma kI shuddhi| 60 * AdhAkarma kA
prihaar| * tIrthaMkaroM ke kAla meM AdhAkarma grahaNa kA niym| * AdhAkarma
grahaNa ke apvaad| auddezika * ogha auddezikA * ogha auddezika jAnane kI vidhi|
* vibhAga auddezikA * uddiSTa * kRta * karma pUtikarma doSa * upkrnnpuuti| *
aahaarpuuti| * bhktpaanpuuti| * suukssmpuuti| mmmmmmmmm 69

Page #16 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 2 **Mixed Caste** * **Misra-jat** * **Yavadarthi-Misra** * **Pakhand-Misra**
* **Sadhu-Misra**  **Establishment Defects** * **Prabhutika Dosha**     *
**Badar Avashvashkan Prabhutika**     * **Sookshma Avashvashkan Prabhutika**
* **Badar Utshvashkan Prabhutika**     * **Sookshma Utshvashkan Prabhutika**
* **Badar Prabhutika**     * **Sookshma Prabhutika**  **Manifestation Defects**
* **Prakata-karan** * **Prakash-karan**  **Purchased Defects** * **Atma-dravya-
krit** * **Atma-bhava-krit** * **Para-dravya-krit** * **Para-bhava-krit**
**Pride (Humility) Defects** * **Laukik Pramit** * **Lokothar Pramit**
**Changed Defects** * **Abhyahrit Dosha**     * **Nishith Swagram Abhyahrit**
* **No-Nishith Swagram Abhyahrit**     * **Nishith Paragram Abhyahrit**     *
**Aachirn Swagram Abhyahrit**  **Different Defects** * **Malapahrit Dosha** *
**Aachhedya Dosha**     * **Prabhuvishayak**     * **Swamivishayak** * **Pindan-
niyukti** * **Stenavishayak**  **70 Unreleased Defects** * **Sadharan
Anisrisht** * **Cholluk Anisrisht** * **Swami Vishayak** * **Hasti Vishayak**
**72 Adhyavpurk Dosha** **72 Agam-Sahitya mein prapt Udgam Dosha** **73
Production Related Defects** **73 Dhatri Dosha** **73 Dooti Dosha** **73 Nimit
Dosha** **74 Aajivana Dosha** * **Jati Aajivana** * **Kul Aajivana** * **Karma
aur Shilp Aajivana** * **Gan Aajivana**  **76 Vanipk Dosha** **76 Chikitsa
Dosha**  **77 Krodh Pind** **77 Man Pind** **77 Maya Pind** **77 Lobh Pind**
**78 Sanstav Dosha** * **Sanstav** * **Paschadvachan Sanstav** *
**Purvasambandhi Sanstav** * **Paschatsambandhi Sanstav**  **81 Vidya Pind
Dosha** **81 Mantra Pind Dosha** **82 Churn Pind Dosha**  **101 84 Yog Pind
Dosha** **101 84 Moolakarma Dosha** **101 84 Grahan-Eshna ke Dosha**  **103**
**100** **100**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 2 d t 9 8 mizrajAta yaavdrthikmishr| * paakhnnddimishr| * saadhumishr| sthApanA
doSa prAbhRtikA doSa * bAdara avaSvaSkaNa praabhuutikaa| * sUkSma avaSvaSkaNa
praabhRtikaa| * bAdara utSvaSkaNa praabhRtikaa| * sUkSma utSvaSkaNa
praabhRtikaa| * bAdara praabhRtikaa| * sUkSma praabhRtikaa| prAduSkaraNa doSa
prkttkrnn| * prkaashkrnn| . krItakRta doSa * aatmdrvykriit| * aatmbhaavkriit| *
prdrvykriit| * prbhaavkriit| prAmitya (apamitya) doSa * laukika praamity| *
lokottara praamity| parivartita doSa abhyAhRta doSa . * nizItha svagrAma
abhyaahRt| * nonizItha svagrAma abhyaahRt| *nizItha paragrAma abhyaahRt| *
AcIrNa svagrAma abhyaahRt| ubhinna doSa mAlApahRta doSa Acchedya doSa *
prabhuviSayaka * svAmiviSayaka piMDaniyukti * stenaviSayaka 70 anisRSTa doSa *
sAdhAraNa anisRsstt| * collaka anisRsstt| * svAmI vissyk| * hastI vissyk| 72
adhyavapUraka-doSa 72 Agama-sAhitya meM prApta udgama-doSa 73 utpAdanA se
sambandhita doSa 73 dhAtrI-doSa 73 dUtI-doSa 73 nimitta-doSa 74 AjIvanA-doSa *
jaati-aajiivnaa| kul-aajiivnaa| * karma aura shilp-aajiivnaa| * gnn-aajiivnaa|
76 vanIpaka-doSa 76 cikitsA-doSa krodhapiNDa 77 mAnapiNDa 77 mAyApiNDa 77
lobhapiNDa 78 saMstava doSa sNstv| * pazcAdvacana sNstv| * pUrvasambandhI sNstv|
* pazcAtsambandhI sNstv| 81 vidyApiNDa doSa 81 maMtrapiNDa doSa 82 cUrNapiNDa
doSa 101 84 yogapiNDa doSa 101 84 mUlakarma doSa 101 84 grahaNaiSaNA ke doSa 103
100 100

Page #17 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  **142**  **Suspected Faults, Observed Faults**
* **Saccitta Pṛthvīkāya Mrakṣita:** Earth-body with consciousness, destroyed. *
**Apkāya Mrakṣita:** Water-body destroyed. * **Vanaspatikāya Mrakṣita:** Plant-
body destroyed. * **Acitta Mrakṣita:** Non-conscious destroyed. * **Nikkṣipta
Doṣa, Pihita Doṣa, Saṃhata Doṣa, Dāyaka Doṣa, Unmiśradoṣa, Apariṇata Doṣa:**
Deposited fault, hidden fault, combined fault, giving fault, mixed fault,
unrefined fault.     * **Dravya Viṣayak Apariṇata:** Unrefined in terms of
substance.     * **Bhāva Viṣayak Apariṇata:** Unrefined in terms of feeling. *
**Lipta Doṣa, Chardita Doṣa, Paribhoga Iṣaṇā:** Attached fault, vomited fault,
desire for consumption.     * **Āhāra-Maṇḍalī Paribhoga Kī Vidhi, Paribhoga
Iṣaṇā Yā Māṇḍalika Doṣa:** Method of consumption of the food-group, desire for
consumption or fault of the group. * **Saṃyojanā Doṣa:** Fault of combination. *
**Pramāṇātireka Doṣa:** Fault of excess measure.  **★ Prakāma Āhāra:** Desired
food. **\* Nikāma Āhāra:** Undesired food. **★ Praṇīta Āhāra:** Prescribed food.
**\* Atibahuk Āhāra:** Excessive food. **\* Atibahuśaḥ Āhāra:** Very excessive
food.  * **Sa-aṅgāra Doṣa:** Fault of charcoal. * **Sa-dhūma Doṣa:** Fault of
smoke. * **Kāraṇa Doṣa:** Fault of cause.  * **Āhāra Na Karne Ke Hetu Paribhoga
Iṣaṇā Ke Anya Doṣa, Bhikkṣācaryā Ke Niyamon Meṃ Parivartan, Bhikkṣā Ke Samay
Śārīrika Aur Mānasik Sthiti, Bhikkṣācaryā Ke Doṣa Sambandhī Prāyaścitta:** Other
faults of desire for consumption due to not eating food, change in the rules of
begging, physical and mental state during begging, atonement related to faults
of begging.  **104** **Bhikkṣācaryā Ke Anya Doṣa:** Other faults of begging.
**137** **104** **Śayyātarapiṇḍa:** Bed-side food.  **137** **105**
**Rājapiṇḍa:** King's food.  **139** **105** **Nityāgrapiṇḍa:** Daily first
food.  **139** **105** **Puraḥkarma Aur Paścātkarma:** Pre-action and post-
action.  **140** **106** **Kimicchaka:** One who desires something.  **140**
**106** **Durbhikkṣabhakta:** One who eats during famine.  **141** **109**
**Bālikābhakt:** One who eats with a girl.  **141** **111** **Kāntāra bhakt:**
One who eats in a desert.  **141** **112** **Prāghūrṇakabhakta:** One who eats
before the proper time.  **141** **114** **Agrapiṇḍa:** First food.  **141**
**115** **Glānabhakt:** One who eats while sick.  **142** **115**
**Nivedanāpiṇḍa:** Offered food.  **142** **115** **Mṛtakabhoja:** One who eats
the food of the dead.  **142** **115** **Nikācita Āhāra:** Rejected food.
**142** **116** **Racita Āhāra:** Prepared food.  **142** **117**
**Saṃkhaḍibhoja:** One who eats with a group.  **143** **119** **Rātri-bhojan
Viramāṇa:** Abstinence from night-time food.  **143** **119** **Gṛhantara
Niṣadyā:** Sitting in another's house.  **145** **121** **Sanniidhi Aur
Saṃcaya:** Proximity and accumulation.  **145** **122** **Sāṃskṛtika Sāmagri:**
Cultural material.  **146** **123** **Devī-devatā:** Goddesses and Gods.
**146** **124** **Sannyasta Paramparā Evaṃ Sāṃprādāyikata:** Abandoned tradition
and communalism.  **147** **124** **Vidya Aur Mantra Kā Prayog:** Use of
knowledge and mantras.  **147** **124** **Artha-vyavasthā:** Economy.  **148**
**124** **Cikitsā:** Medicine.  **149** **124** **Dhānya Evaṃ Khādya:** Grain
and food.  **124** **Vāihāika Sambandha:** Marital relationship.  **150**
**124** **Sāmājika Paramparāeṃ Evaṃ Mānyatāeṃ:** Social traditions and beliefs.
**151** **125** **Yātāyāt:** Transportation.  **152** **126** **Aparādha Evaṃ
Daṇḍa:** Crime and punishment.  **153** **Paṭha-saṃpādana Kī Prakriyā,
Hastaprati Paricaya:** Process of text editing, introduction to manuscript.
**156** **127** **Piṇḍaniyukti Ke Saṃpādana Kā Itihāsa:** History of the editing
of Piṇḍaniyukti.  **157** **128** **Kṛtagnata-jñāpan:** Expression of gratitude.
**158**  **149**  **125**  **153**  **153**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 142 or zaMkita doSa prakSita doSa * sacitta
pRthvIkAya mrkssit| * apkAya mrkssit| * vanaspatikAya mrkssit| * acitta mrkssit|
nikSipta doSa pihita doSa saMhata doSa dAyaka doSa unmizradoSa apariNata doSa *
dravya viSayaka apariNata  /  * bhAva viSayaka apariNata  /  lipta doSa chardita
doSa paribhogaiSaNA : AhAra-maMDalI paribhoga kI vidhi paribhogaiSaNA yA
mAMDalika doSa * saMyojanA doss| *pramANAtireka doss|  prakAma aahaar| *nikAma
aahaar|  praNIta aahaar| * atibahuka aahaar| * atibahuzaH aahaar| * sa-aMgAra
doSa * sa-dhUma doss| * kAraNa doss| * AhAra na karane ke hetu paribhogaiSaNA ke
anya doSa bhikSAcaryA ke niyamoM meM parivartana bhikSA ke samaya zArIrika aura
mAnasika sthiti bhikSAcaryA ke doSa sambandhI prAyazcitta 104 bhikSAcaryA ke
anya doSa 137 104 * shyyaatrpinndd| 137 105 * raajpinndd| 139 105 *
nityaagrpinndd| 139 105 * puraHkarma aura pshcaatkrm| 140 106 * kimicchk| 140
106 * durbhikssbhkt| 141 109 * baalikaabhkt| 141 111 * kaantaarbhkt| 141 112 *
praaghuurnnkbhkt| 141 114 * agrpinndd| 141 115 * glaanbhkt| 115 * nivednaapiNdd|
142 115 * mRtkbhoj| 142 115 *nikAcita aahaar| 142 116 * racita aahaar| 142 117 *
sNkhddibhoj| 143 119 * rAtri-bhojana virmnn| 143 119 * gRhaantrnissdyaa| 145 121
* sannidhi aura sNcy| 145 122 sAMskRtika sAmagrI 146 123 * devii-devtaa| 146 124
* saMnyasta paramparA evaM saamprdaayiktaa| 147 124 * vidyA aura maMtra kA
pryog| 147 124 arth-vyvsthaa| 148 124 * cikitsaa| 149 124 * dhAnya evaM khaady|
124 * vaivAhika smbndh| 150 124 * sAmAjika paramparAeM evaM maanytaaeN| 151 125
* yaataayaat| 152 * aparAdha evaM daMDa  /  126 pATha-sampAdana kI prakriyA
hastaprati paricaya 156 127 piNDaniyukti ke sampAdana kA itihAsa 157 128
kRtajJatA-jJApana 158 149 125 153 153

Page #18 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #19 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pinḍaniyukti:** A commentary known as the first exegetical literature of the
Jain Āgamas. According to the Digambara tradition, the Āgama texts were lost
over time, hence the Niyukti literature is only accepted in the Śvetāmbara
tradition. The Śvetāmbara Mūrtipūjak tradition considers the Niyukti literature
along with 45 Āgamas as authoritative, but the Sthānakavāsī and Terāpanthī
traditions accept 11 Angas, 12 Upangas, 4 Mūlas, 4 Chhedas, and 1 Āvashyak -
these 32 Āgamas as authoritative. The remaining Niyukti literature is not
accepted as Āgama-authoritative.  **Nature of Niyukti:** The first commentary on
the Āgamas is Niyukti, hence it is not an independent scripture but is subject
to its own sūtra. Just as Yāska explained the Vedic technical terms through
Nirukta, similarly the Niyuktikāra explained the technical terms used in the
Jain Āgamas through the Nikshepa method. In the Nikshepa method, the meaning of
a word used in various fields is revealed, and it is revealed what its meaning
is in the presented context. The Niyukti literature is written in Mahārāṣṭrī
Prakrit language, it mainly uses Āryā chanda but sometimes Doha and Indravajra
etc. chandas are also used.  Āchārya Bhadrabahu, while explaining the word
Niyukti, says - 'Nijjuttā te atthā, jaṁ baddhā teṇ hoī nijjuttī' i.e. that by
which the meaning assigned in the sūtra is decided, that is Niyukti. Certainly,
the purpose of Niyukti is to decide the correct meaning and to reveal the
interconnected meaning in the sūtra itself. According to Āchārya Haribhadra,
explaining the word by action, agent, difference, and synonym or revealing the
meaning is Nirukti-Niyukti. According to the German scholar Schantier, Niyuktis
are primarily: 1. Mavṛ 1; Niruktayō na svatantra śāstrarūpāḥ, kintu
tattatsūtraparatantraḥ. 2. Āvani 82. 3. (a) Vibhā 1086; Jaṁ nicchayaijuttā,
sutte atthā imīe vakkhāyā. Teṇeyam nijjuttī, nijjattathābhihānāō. (b) Sūṭī p.1:
Yojanam yuktiḥ arthaghaṭanā niścayena adhikyeṇa vā yuktirniyuktiḥ
samyagarthaprakatanam. Niruktanām vā sūtreṣveva parasparasambaddhānām arthānām
āvirbhāvanam yuktaśabdalopānniyuktiḥ. (c) Āvamṭī p. 100; Sūtrārthayoḥ parasparam
niryojanam sambandhanam niyuktiḥ. (d) Oniṭī p. 4; Ni:ādikye yojanam yuktiḥ
sūtrārthayoḥ yogo nitya vyavasthita evāste vācyavācakatayeti arthah. Adhikā
yojanā niyuktirūcyate, niyatā niścitā vā yojanēti. (e) Āvacū 1 p. 92
Suttanijjuttaththanijjūhaṇam nijjuttī. 4. Āvahāṭī Bhā. 1 p. 242.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa jaina AgamoM kA prathama vyAkhyA-sAhitya
niyukti-sAhitya ke rUpa meM prasiddha hai| digambara-paramparA ke anusAra Agama
graMthoM kA kAlAntara meM lopa ho gayA ata: niyukti-sAhitya kevala zvetAmbara
paramparA meM hI mAnya hai| zvetAmbara mUrtipUjaka paramparA 45 AgamoM ke sAtha
niyukti-sAhitya ko bhI pramANabhUta mAnatI hai lekina sthAnakavAsI evaM
terApaMthI paramparA 11 aMga, 12 upAMga, 4 mUla, 4 cheda tathA 1 Avazyaka-ina 32
AgamoM ko pramANabhUta svIkAra karatI hai| zeSa niyukti-sAhitya Agama-prAmANya
ke rUpa meM aMgIkRta nahIM hai| niyukti kA svarUpa AgamoM para prathama vyAkhyA
sAhitya niyukti hai ataH ye svataMtra zAstra na hokara apane-apane sUtra kI
vyAkhyA ke adhIna haiN| jaise yAska ne vaidika pAribhASika zabdoM ko nirukta ke
mAdhyama se vyAkhyAyita kiyA, vaise hI niyuktikAra ne jaina AgamoM meM prayukta
pAribhASika zabdoM ko nikSepa-paddhati se vyAkhyAyita kiyA hai| nikSepa paddhati
meM kisI eka zabda ke vividha kSetroM meM prayukta arthoM ko prakaTa karake
prastuta saMdarbha meM usakA kyA artha hai, yaha prakaTa kiyA jAtA hai| niyukti-
sAhitya mahArASTrI prAkRta bhASA meM nibaddha hai, isameM prAyaH AryA chaMda kA
upayoga huA hai lekina kahIM-kahIM dohA aura iMdravajrA Adi chaMdoM kA prayoga
bhI huA hai| AcArya bhadrabAhu niyukti zabda kA nirukta karate hue kahate
haiM-'nijjuttA te atthA, jaM baddhA teNa hoi nijjuttI2 arthAt jisake dvArA sUtra
meM niyukta artha kA nirNaya hotA hai, vaha niyukti hai| nizcaya rUpa se samyag
artha kA nirNaya karanA tathA sUtra meM hI paraspara saMbaddha artha ko prakaTa
karanA niyukti kA uddezya hai|' AcArya haribhadra ke anusAra kriyA, kAraka,
bheda aura paryAyavAcI zabdoM dvArA zabda kI vyAkhyA karanA yA artha prakaTa
karanA nirukti-niyukti hai| jarmana vidvAn zAnTiyara ke anusAra niyuktiyAM
pradhAna rUpa se 1. mavR 1; niryuktayo na svataMtra zAstrarUpAH, kintu
tattatsUtraparatantrAH  /  2. Avani 82  /  3. (ka) vibhA 1086 ; jaM
nicchayAijuttA, sutte atthA imIe vkkhaayaa| teNeyaM nijjuttI,
nijjtttthaabhihaannaao|| (kha) sUTI pa.1: yojanaM yuktiH arthaghaTanA
nizcayenAdhikyena vA yuktirniyuktiH smygrthprkttnm| niryuktAnAM vA sUtreSveva
parasparasambaddhAnAmarthAnAmAvirbhAvanaM yuktazabdalopAnniyuktiH  //  (ga)
AvamaTI pa. 100; sUtrArthayoH parasparaM niryojanaM sambandhanaM niyuktiH| (gha)
oniTI pa. 4 ; ni:Adhikye yojanaM yukti: sUtrArthayoryogo nityavyavasthita evAste
vAcyavAcakatayetyarthaH adhikA yojanA niyuktirucyate, niyatA nizcitA vA yojneti|
(Ga) AvacU 1 pR. 92 suttanijjuttaatthanijjUhaNaM nijjuttii| 4. AvahATI bhA. 1
pR. 242 /

Page #20 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pindianuyukti**  It acts as an index to the related text and briefly mentions
all the detailed events. In the context of explanation, Anugam is of two types -
Sutra-Anugam and Niyukti-Anugam. There are three types of Niyukti-Anugam: 1.
Nikshepaniyukti-Anugam. 2. Upodhaatanniyukti-Anugam. 3. Sutrasparshikaniyukti-
Anugam.  Nikshepaniyukti-Anugam helps in understanding which meaning of the word
is relevant in the given context. In Upodhaatanniyukti-Anugam, the word or topic
is discussed in twenty-six ways. Thereafter, the Niyuktikar presents the
explanation of the words in the Sutra through Sutrasparshikaniyukti-Anugam. The
Niyuktikar does not explain every word of the original text, but only presents
the explanation of specific words.  Three types of explanations have been
mentioned in the Bhashya literature, in which Niyukti is the second. In the
first explanation, the student is only taught the meaning of the Sutra, in the
second explanation, the Sutra is explained along with Niyukti, and in the third
explanation, a complete and comprehensive explanation is given. Here, the second
meaning of 'Nijjuttimiaso' is also possible that in the second explanation, the
student is taught the meaning of the Sutra, which is called Arthagam. The
purpose of Niyukti  A question naturally arises that when Arthagam is associated
with each Sutra, then why was there a need to write Niyukti separately? In
answer to this question, the Niyuktikar himself says, 'Tah Vi Ya Ichchaveti
Vibhasitum Suttaparivadi' Even when the meaning is clear in the Sutra, Niyukti
is being created to explain the Sutra method to the students in various ways.
While explaining this verse of Aavashyakniyukti, it has been said in
Visheshvaavashyak Bhashya that the meaning is bound in the Shrutaparipati 1.
Uttaradhyayana Sutra, Preface, Page 50, 51. 2. Vibha 972; Nijjutti Tivi Gappa,
Nasovaggaay-Suttvakkhanam. 3. Vibha 973, 974. 4. Vibha 566; Suttattho Khalu
Padhamo, Bio Nijjattimiaso Bhanio. Taiyo Ya Niravaseso, Es Vihi Hoi Anuoge. The
present verse of Visheshvaavashyak Bhashya is also found in Bhagavati 25/97, but
it seems to have been interpolated in Bhagavati later. 5. Avani 82

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti sambandhita graMtha ke iMDeksa kA kArya karatI haiM tathA sabhI
vistRta ghaTanAvaliyoM kA saMkSepa meM ullekha karatI haiN|' vyAkhyA ke
saMdarbha meM anugama do prakAra kA hotA hai-sUtra-anugama aura niyukti-anugm|
niyuktianugama ke tIna prakAra haiM 1. nikssepniyukti-anugm| 2.
upodghaatniyukti-anugm| 3. suutrsprshikniyukti-anugm| zabda ke kaI arthoM meM
prastuta prasaMga meM kauna-sA artha prAsaMgika hai, isakA jJAna
nikSepaniyuktianugama se hotA hai| upodghAtaniyukti-anugama meM chabbIsa prakAra
se zabda yA viSaya kI mImAMsA kI jAtI hai| tatpazcAt sUtrasparzikaniyukti-
anugama ke dvArA niyuktikAra sUtragata zabdoM kI vyAkhyA prastuta karate haiN|
niyuktikAra mUlagraMtha ke pratyeka zabda kI vyAkhyA na karake kevala vizeSa
zabdoM kI hI vyAkhyA prastuta karate haiN| bhASya-sAhitya meM vyAkhyA ke tIna
prakAra batAe gae haiM, unameM niyukti kA dUsarA sthAna hai| prathama vyAkhyA
meM ziSya ko kevala sUtra kA artha karAyA jAtA hai, dUsarI vyAkhyA meM niyukti
ke sAtha sUtra kI vyAkhyA kI jAtI hai tathA tIsarI vyAkhyA meM niravazeSa-
sarvAMgINa vyAkhyA kI jAtI hai| yahAM 'nijjuttimIsao' kA dUsarA artha yaha bhI
saMbhava hai ki dUsarI vyAkhyA meM ziSya ko sUtragata artha kA adhyayana karAyA
jAtA hai, jise arthAgama kahA jAtA hai| niyukti kA prayojana sahaja hI eka
prazna upasthita hotA hai ki jaba pratyeka sUtra ke sAtha arthAgama sambaddha
hai, taba phira alaga se niyukti likhane kI AvazyakatA kyoM par3I? isa prazna ke
uttara meM niyuktikAra svayaM kahate haiM'taha vi ya icchAvetI vibhAsituM
suttaparivADI sUtra meM artha niryukta hone para bhI sUtrapaddhati kI vividha
prakAra se vyAkhyA karake ziSyoM ko samajhAne ke lie niyukti kI racanA kI jA
rahI hai| Avazyakaniyukti kI isI gAthA kI vyAkhyA karate hue vizeSAvazyaka
bhASya meM kahA gayA hai ki zrutaparipATI meM hI artha nibaddha 1.
Uttaradhyayana sutra, Preface, Page 50, 51 /  2. vibhA 972 ; nijjuttI tivigappA,
nAsovagghAya-suttavakkhANaM  /  3. vibhA 973, 974 /  4. vibhA 566; suttattho
khalu paDhamo, bIo nijjattimIsao bhnnio| taio ya niravaseso, esa vihI hoi
annuoge| vizeSAvazyaka bhASya kI prastuta gAthA bhagavatI 25/97 meM bhI prApta
hai parantu bhagavatI meM yaha kAlAntara meM prakSipta huI hai, aisA pratIta
hotA hai| 5. Avani 82

Page #21 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pinḍaniyukti:** This is an observation, therefore, the appointing Ācārya, who
does not desire to express meaning, is driven towards the revelation of meaning
by the tradition itself in order to bestow grace upon the listeners. By way of
example, the commentator says that just as a painter explains the story depicted
on his canvas and presents its interpretation with the help of a stick or
finger, in the same way, the appointing Ācārya expresses the meaning of the
sūtras through the medium of appointment in order to make each meaning easily
understood. Jinabhadragaṇi Kṣamāśramaṇa has given the second meaning of the word
'icchāve' as follows: a dull-witted disciple, due to not understanding the
correct meaning of the sūtra, inspires the guru to explain the sūtra. Ācārya
Haribhadra has also given the same explanation.  In conclusion, it can be said
that appointments through the method of niṣkṣepa are an important commentary
literature for explaining the special words of Jain Āgamas and determining their
meaning.  **Number of Appointments:**  Nothing definite can be said about the
number of appointments because in the Nandi Sūtra, where an introduction to each
Āgama is found, there is a mention of countless appointments on each of the
eleven angas. Here, the word 'asankhyeya' can be understood in two contexts:
either many appointments were written on each anga or the number of verses of
the appointments written on a single anga was not fixed. The question arises:
what were these appointments? One possibility for its solution is that the
sūtrakar himself would have written appointments along with the sūtra. These
appointments can only be called arthāgama. Haribhadra has also called the mutual
arrangement of sūtra and meaning as appointment. From this point of view, the
meaning of 'sankejjāo nijjuttīo' seems more appropriate that the arthāgama
written by the sūtrakar himself on the sūtrāgama were called appointments at
that time. The second option is also possible that Nandikara may have mentioned
'sankejjāo nijjuttīo' in the introduction of Ācārāṅga and Sūtrakṛtāṅga, but
later, due to the uniformity of the text, the text 'sankejjāo nijjuttīo' got
attached to all the anga Āgamas.  1. Vibhā 1088; So suyaparivāḍicciya, icchāve'i
tamaṇicchāmaṇam pi. Nijjutte vi tadatthe, vottuṁ tadanuṭṭaghaṭṭhāe. 2. Vibhā
1089; Falayalihiyam pi maṅkho, paḍhai pabhāsai taha kara'ihiṁ. Dāe'i ya
paivaththu, suhabōhatthaṁ taha ihaṁ pi. 3. Vibhā 1091; Icchha vibhāsi'uṁ me,
suyaparivāḍiṁ na suṭṭha bujḍḍhāmi. Nātima'i vā sīsō, gurumiṭṭhāve'i vottuṁ je.
4. Āvahāṭī 1 p. 45. 5. Nandi 81-91.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa hai ataH arthAbhivyakti kI icchA nahIM rakhane
vAle niyuktikartA AcArya ko zrotAoM para anugraha karane ke lie vaha
zrutaparipATI hI artha-prAkaTya kI ora prerita karatI hai| udAharaNa dvArA
bhASyakAra kahate haiM ki jaise maMkhacitrakAra apane phalaka para citrita
citrakathA ko samajhAtA hai tathA zalAkA athavA aMguli ke sAdhana se usakI
vyAkhyA prastuta karatA hai, usI prakAra pratyeka artha kA saralatA se bodha
karAne ke lie sUtrabaddha arthoM ko niyuktikAra niyukti ke mAdhyama se
abhivyakta karate haiN| jinabhadragaNi kSamAzramaNa ne 'icchAvei' zabda kA
dUsarA artha yaha kiyA hai ki maMdabuddhi ziSya hI sUtra kA samyak artha nahIM
samajhane ke kAraNa guru ko prerita karake sUtravyAkhyA karane kI icchA utpanna
karavAtA hai| AcArya haribhadra ne bhI yahI vyAkhyA kI hai| _ niSkarSataH kahA
jA sakatA hai ki nikSepa paddhati ke mAdhyama se niyuktiyAM jaina AgamoM ke
vizeSa zabdoM kI vyAkhyA prastuta karane evaM artha-nirdhAraNa karane kA
mahattvapUrNa vyAkhyA-sAhitya hai| niyuktiyoM kI saMkhyA niyuktiyoM kI saMkhyA
ke viSaya meM nizcita rUpa se kucha nahIM kahA jA sakatA kyoMki naMdI sUtra meM
jahAM pratyeka Agama kA paricaya prApta hai, vahAM gyAraha aMgoM ke paricaya-
prasaMga meM pratyeka aMga para asaMkhyeya niyuktiyAM hone kA ullekha hai| yahAM
'asaMkhyeya' zabda ko do saMdarbho meM samajhA jA sakatA haipratyeka aMga para
aneka niyuktiyAM likhI gayIM athavA eka hI aMga para likhI gaI niyuktiyoM kI
gAthAsaMkhyA nizcita nahIM thii| prazna upasthita hotA hai ki ye niyuktiyAM kyA
thIM? isake samAdhAna meM eka saMbhAvanA yaha kI jA sakatI hai ki svayaM
sUtrakAra ne hI sUtra ke sAtha niyuktiyAM likhI hoNgii| ina niyuktiyoM ko mAtra
arthAgama kahA jA sakatA hai| haribhadra ne bhI sUtra aura artha ke paraspara
niyojana ko niyukti kahA hai| isa dRSTi se 'saMkhejjAo nijjuttIo' kA yaha artha
adhika saMgata lagatA hai ki sUtrAgama para svayaM sUtrakAra ne jo arthAgama
likhA, ve hI usa samaya niyuktiyAM kahalAtI thiiN| dUsarA vikalpa yaha bhI
saMbhava hai ki AcArAMga aura sUtrakRtAMga ke paricaya meM naMdIkAra ne
'saMkhejjAo nijjuttIo' kA ullekha kiyA hogA lekina bAda meM pATha kI ekarUpatA
hone se sabhI aMga AgamoM ke sAtha 'saMkhejjAo nijjuttIo' pATha jur3a 1. vibhA
1088 ; to suyaparivADicciya, icchAvei tamaNicchamANaM pi| nijjutte vi tadatthe,
vottuM tadaNuggahaTThAe  /  2. vibhA 1089; phalayalihiyaM pi maMkho, paDhai
pabhAsai tahA kraaiihiN| dAei ya paivatthu, suhabohatthaM taha ihaM pi|| 3.
vibhA 1091 ; icchaha vibhAsiuM me, suyaparivADiM na suTTha bujjhAmi  /  nAtimaI
vA sIso, gurumicchAvei vottuM je|| 4. AvahATI 1 pR. 45 /  5. naMdI 81-91 /

Page #22 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Pindanuyukti is gone. The currently available literature on the subject does
not seem to have any connection with the Nandy Sutra's mention of the Nuyukti.
Acharya Bhadrabahu has promised to write 10 Nuyuktis in the Avashyak Nuyukti.
The order in which these Nuyuktis are written is as follows: 1. Avashyak 2.
Dasha Vaikalik 3. Uttara Adhyayan 4. Acharang 5. Sutra Kritang 6. Dasha Shruta
Skandh 7. Brihat Kalp 8. Vyavahar 9. Surya Prajnapti 10. Rishi Bhashit.
Haribhadra has also mentioned the Nuyukti of Devendrastava etc. in the
explanation of the word 'Ishibhasianam cha'. Currently, only eight of these ten
Nuyuktis are available. It seems likely that Bhadrabahu promised to write ten
Nuyuktis in the Avashyak Nuyukti but was unable to create the last two. Another
possibility is that, like other Agam literature, some Nuyuktis have also been
lost over time. In this context, Dr. Sagarmalji Jain's opinion is worth reading:
"It seems that after seeing some mentions in the Surya Prajnapti that are
contrary to Jain moral principles and the mention of controversial figures like
Narada, Mankhali Gaushalak etc. in the Rishi Bhashit, Acharya Bhadrabahu may
have postponed the idea of writing Nuyukti on them even after promising to do
so. Or it is also possible that Nuyuktis were written on these two texts but due
to the mention of controversial topics, they were kept out of reading and study,
and as a result, they became extinct over time due to neglect." In addition,
there is also independent existence of Pindanuyukti, Oghanuyukti,
Panchkalpanuyukti and Nishthanuyukti etc. According to Dr. Ghatge, these are
supplementary Nuyuktis of Dasha Vaikalik Nuyukti, Avashyak Nuyukti, Brihat Kalp
Nuyukti and Acharang Nuyukti respectively, but the point to be considered is
whether these Nuyukti texts are supplementary or independent works. Pindanuyukti
is an independent work, its detailed discussion will be done in the introduction
later. Oghanuyukti cannot be called a supplement to Avashyak Nuyukti because the
entire chapter of Asvadhyayan Nuyukti in Avashyak Nuyukti is in Oghanuyukti. If
it were a supplementary text to Avashyak Nuyukti, there would not have been so
many verses repeated. Detailed thinking about this will be done in the fifth
volume of Nuyukti literature. 1. Avani 80, 81; Avassagass Dasakaliyass Tah
Uttarajjhamayaare. Suygade Nijjuttim, Vocchami Taha Dasanam Cha || Kappass Ya
Nijjuttim, Vavaharassev Paramaniunass. Suriyapannattiae, Voccham Ishibhasianam
Cha || 2. Avahati 1 p. 41; Rishi Bhashitanaam Cha Devendrastavaadinaam
Nuyuktim.....। 3. Sagar Jain Vidya Bharati, Part 1 p. 205.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti gyaa| abhI vartamAna meM jo niyukti-sAhitya upalabdha hai, usake
sAtha naMdI sUtra meM ullikhita niyukti kA koI saMbaMdha pratIta nahIM hotaa|
Avazyakaniyukti meM AcArya bhadrabAhu ne 10 niyuktiyAM likhane kI pratijJA kI
hai| ina niyuktiyoM ke likhane kA krama isa prakAra hai-1. Avazyaka 2.
dazavaikAlika 3. uttarAdhyayana 4. AcArAMga 5. sUtrakRtAMga 6. dazAzrutaskaMdha
7. bRhatkalpa 8. vyavahAra 9. sUryaprajJapti 10. Rssibhaassit| haribhadra ne
'isibhAsiyANaM ca' zabda kI vyAkhyA meM devendrastava Adi kI niyukti kA bhI
ullekha kiyA hai| vartamAna meM ina dasa niyuktiyoM meM kevala ATha niyuktiyAM
hI prApta haiN| aisA saMbhava lagatA hai ki bhadrabAhu ne Avazyakaniyukti meM
dasa niyuktiyAM likhane kI pratijJA kI lekina ve aMtima do niyuktiyoM kI racanA
nahIM kara ske| dUsarA vikalpa yaha bhI saMbhAvita hai ki anya Agama-sAhitya kI
bhAMti kucha niyuktiyAM bhI kAla ke aMtarAla meM lupta ho gyiiN| isa saMdarbha
meM DaoN. sAgaramalajI jaina kA maMtavya paThanIya hai-'lagatA hai
sUryaprajJapti meM jaina AcAramaryAdA ke pratikUla kucha ullekha tathA
RSibhASita meM nArada, maMkhali gauzAlaka Adi jaina paramparA ke lie vivAdAspada
vyaktiyoM kA ullekha dekhakara AcArya bhadrabAhu ne pratijJA karane para bhI ina
para niyukti likhane kA vicAra sthagita kara diyA ho athavA yaha bhI saMbhava
hai ki ina donoM graMthoM para niyuktiyAM likhI gayIM hoM para vivAdita viSayoM
kA ullekha hone se inako paThana-pAThana se bAhara rakhA gayA ho phalataH upekSA
ke kAraNa kAlakrama se ye vilupta ho gayI hoN|' isake atirikta piMDaniyukti,
oghaniyukti, paMcakalpaniyukti aura nizIthaniyukti Adi kA bhI svataMtra astitva
milatA hai| DaoN. ghATage ke anusAra ye kramaza: dazavaikAlikaniyukti,
Avazyakaniyukti, bRhatkalpaniyukti aura AcArAMganiyukti kI pUraka niyuktiyAM
haiM lekina vicAraNIya viSaya yaha hai ki ye niyukti graMtha pUraka haiM athavA
svataMtra kRtiyaaN| piNDaniyukti eka svataMtra racanA hai, isakA vistRta
vivecana Age bhUmikA meM kiyA jaaegaa| oghaniyukti ko Avazyaka niyukti kA pUraka
nahIM kahA jA sakatA kyoMki Avazyakaniyuktigata asvAdhyAyaniyukti kA pUrA
prakaraNa oghaniyukti meM hai| yadi yaha Avazyakaniyukti kA pUraka graMtha hotA
to itanI gAthAoM kI punarukti nahIM hotii| isake bAre meM vistRta ciMtana
niyukti-sAhitya ke pAMcaveM khaNDa meM kiyA jaaegaa| 1. Avani 80, 81 ;
Avassagassa dasakAliyassa taha uttrjjhmaayaare| sUyagaDe nijjuttiM, vocchAmi
tahA dasANaM ca  //  kappassa ya nijjuttiM, vavahArasseva prmnniunnss|
sUriyapaNNattIe, vocchaM isibhAsiyANaM ca  //  2. AvahATI 1 pR. 41;
RSibhASitAnAM ca devendrastavAdInAM niyuktiN.....| 3. sAgara jaina vidyA
bhAratI, bhAga 1 pR. 205 /

Page #23 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation**  Some scholars consider Niśītha niyukti as a
supplement to Ācārāṅga niyukti, but Niśītha niyukti was composed independently
after Ācārāṅga niyukti because Ācārya Bhadrabahu wrote a very concise niyukti of
the four chūlās of Ācārāṅga, but Niśītha niyukti is written in a very detailed
style. The niyuktikāra himself expresses his intention in the niyukti of the
fourth chūlā of Ācārāṅga that after the fourth chūlā of Ācārāṅga, I will now
speak about the fifth Niśītha chūlā. This statement of his automatically proves
the separate existence of the text. Otherwise, he would have composed it along
with the Ācārāṅga niyukti without mentioning it.  Looking at the difference in
the style of composition of Niśītha niyukti, it can be said that Bhadrabahu II
may have expanded it and established its independent importance. While Ācārya
Bhadrabahu vows to write ten niyuktis, Niśītha is not mentioned. This is the
starting point of contemplation. More research is needed in this area. Detailed
speculation about this will be done in the sixth volume of niyukti literature.
Pancakalpana niyukti cannot be considered a supplement to Bṛhatkalpa either. It
seems more likely that Ācārya Bhadrabahu has included both Pancakalpa and
Bṛhatkalpa niyuktis in the mention of the word 'k appa' in 'k appao tah dasāṇam
cha'.  Currently, the niyuktis written on Sūryaprajñapti and Ṛṣibhāṣita and
Ārādhanā niyukti are unavailable. Manuscript copies of Saṃsakta niyukti are
available, but it has not been published yet. There is a lot of difference in
the verses and text in its copies. It mentions 84 āgamas, hence scholars
consider it a later and inconsistent composition. A copy of Maheśa niyukti is
also found in the Gadhaiya manuscript repository of Sardarshahar, but it is a
matter of research as to when and by whom it was written on which text?  In
addition to these niyuktis, mention of Govinda niyukti written by Govinda Ācārya
is also found in many places. This will be discussed in detail in the
introduction.  It cannot be said clearly about the definite number of other
niyuktis besides the niyuktis mentioned by Ācārya Bhadrabahu. Niyukti-gāthās
written on independent subjects have also been separated from the original
niyukti and given the name of independent niyukti, such as - Āvśyaka niyukti is
a vast 1. Āni 366; Āyārssa Bhagavato, Chauthachūlāi Es Nijjutti.
Panchamachūlniśīham, Tassa Ya Uvari Bhṇīhāmi. 2. Nibhā 5573, Bṛbhā 5473, T. P.
1452, Pankbhā 420.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa nizItha niyukti ko kucha vidvAn AcArAMga
niyukti kI pUraka mAnate haiM lekina nizItha niyukti kI racanA svataMtra rUpa se
AcArAMga niyukti ke bAda huI kyoMki AcArAMga kI cAra cUlAoM kI AcArya bhadrabAhu
ne atyanta saMkSipta niyukti likhI hai lekina nizItha niyukti atyanta vistRta
zailI meM likhI gaI hai| svayaM niyuktikAra AcArAMga kI vimukti (cauthI) cUlA kI
niyukti meM saMkalpa vyakta karate haiM ki AcArAMga kI cauthI cUlA ke bAda aba
maiM paMcama nizItha cUlA ke bAre meM khuuNgaa| unake isa kathana se graMtha kA
pRthak astitva svataH siddha hai| anyathA ve aisA ullekha na karake AcArAMga
niyukti ke sAtha hI isakI racanA kara dete| nizItha niyukti kI racanA zailI kI
bhinnatA dekhakara yaha saMbhAvanA vyakta kI jA sakatI hai ki bhadrabAhu dvitIya
ne ise vistAra dekara isakA svataMtra mahattva sthApita kara diyA ho| AcArya
bhadrabAhu jahAM daza niyuktiyAM likhane kI pratijJA karate haiM, vahAM nizItha
kA nAmollekha nahIM hai| yaha cintana kA prArambhika bindu hai| abhI isa kSetra
meM aura adhika khoja kI AvazyakatA hai| isake bAre meM vistRta UhApoha niyukti
sAhitya ke chaThe khaNDa meM kiyA jaaegaa| paMcakalpaniyukti ko bhI bRhatkalpa
kI pUraka nahIM mAnA jA sktaa| aisA adhika saMbhava lagatA hai ki AcArya
bhadrabAhu ne 'kappo taha dasANaM ca' isa 'kappa' zabda ke ullekha se paMcakalpa
aura bRhatkalpaina donoM niyuktiyoM kA samAveza kara diyA hai| vartamAna meM
sUryaprajJapti tathA RSibhASita para likhI gayI niyuktiyAM aura ArAdhanAniyukti
anupalabdha hai| saMsaktaniyukti kI hastalikhita pratiyAM milatI haiM kintu abhI
taka vaha prakAzita nahIM ho pAyI hai| isakI pratiyoM meM gAthAoM tathA pATha kA
bahuta aMtara milatA hai| isameM 84 AgamoM ke sambandha meM ullekha hai ata:
vidvAn loga ise paravartI evaM asaMgata racanA mAnate haiN| saradArazahara ke
gadhaiyA hastalikhita bhaMDAra meM mahezaniyukti kI prati bhI milatI hai kintu
yaha khoja kA viSaya hai ki yaha kisa graMtha para kaba aura kisake dvArA likhI
gaI? ina niyuktiyoM ke atirikta goviMda AcAryakRta goviMdaniyukti kA ullekha bhI
aneka sthaloM para milatA hai| isake bAre meM vistAra se bhUmikA meM Age carcA
kI jaaegii| _ AcArya bhadrabAhu dvArA ullikhita niyuktiyoM ke atirikta anya
niyuktiyoM kI nizcita saMkhyA ke bAre meM spaSTa rUpa se kucha nahIM kahA jA
sktaa| svataMtra viSaya para likhI gaIM niyukti-gAthAoM ko bhI mUla niyukti se
alaga kara use svataMtra niyukti kA nAma diyA gayA hai, jaise-Avazyakaniyukti
eka vizAla 1. Ani 366 ; AyArassa bhagavato, cautthacUlAi esa nijjuttii|
paMcamacUlanisIhaM, tassa ya uvari bhnniihaami|| 2. nibhA 5573, bRbhA 5473, TI.
pR. 1452, paMkabhA 420 /

Page #24 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  10. Pinḍaniyukti (Arrangement of Texts)  This is a composition. Its six
studies have independent existence with different names. Below are some names
and their inclusion in which niyukti is mentioned.  **Āvashyakaniyukti
(Essential Arrangement)** 1. Sāmaiyanijjutti 2. Logassujjoyanijjutti 3.
Ṇamokkāranijjutti 4. Pariṭṭhāvaṇiyanijjutti 5. Paccakkhāṇanijjutti 6.
Asajjhaianijjutti 7. Samosaraṇanijjutti 8. Kappaniyjutti  **Brihatkalpa and
Daśāśrutaskandhaniyukti (Arrangement of the Ten Chapters of the Śruta)** 9.
Pajjosavaṇākappaniyjutti  In addition to these, the niyuktis written on the
Jaina Āgamas have different names based on their different studies. For example,
in Ācārāṅganiyukti, the names like Satthaparinnānijjutti, Mahāparinnānijjutti,
and Dhūyanijjutti are mentioned.  Currently available niyuktis are found
independently, such as Ācārāṅga and Sūtrakrtaṅga niyuktis. Some niyuktis have
short commentaries on their partial parts, such as Daśavaikālika and
Uttarādhyayana niyuktis. Some niyuktis have Brihad-bhāṣya (extensive
commentary), but both have independent existence, such as Āvashyakaniyukti,
Oghanīyukti, etc. Some niyuktis have become a single text with the commentary,
which is very difficult to separate today, such as Niśītha, Vyavahāra,
Brihatkalpa, etc.  **Order of Niyukti Composition**  In Āvashyakaniyukti, Ācārya
Bhadravāhu has vowed to write ten niyuktis. Pandit Dalasukh Bhai Malvaṇiya
believes that the niyuktis were composed in the same order in which Bhadravāhu
vowed to write them in Āvashyakaniyukti. Some reasons can be presented in
support of this statement:  1. In Ācārāṅganiyukti, verse 177 mentions "Logo
Bhaṇio". This indicates that Āvashyakaniyukti was written before
Ācārāṅganiyukti. 2. Oghanīyukti and its commentary are published separately, but
the verses of the niyukti and the commentary have merged. This will be discussed
in the fifth chapter of the niyukti. 3. Gaṇadharavāda, pages 13-14.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 10 piMDaniyukti racanA hai| usake chaha adhyayanoM kI niyuktiyoM kA bhI alaga-
alaga nAma se svataMtra astitva milatA hai| nIce kucha nAma tathA unakA samAveza
kisa niryukti meM ho sakatA hai, isakA ullekha kiyA jA rahA hai Avazyakaniryukti
Avazyakaniryukti 1. sAmAiyanijjuttI 2. logassujjoyanijjattI 3. NamokkAranijjuttI
Avazyaka niyukti 4. pariTThAvaNiyAnijjuttI Avazyaka niryukti 5.
paccakkhANanijjuttI Avazyaka niyukti 6. asajjhAiyanijjuttI Avazyakaniryukti 7.
samosaraNanijjuttI Avazyaka niyukti 8. kappanijjuttI bRhatkalpa tathA
dazAzrutaskaMdhaniyukti dazAzrutaskaMdhaniyukti 9. pajjosavaNAkappanijjuttI
isake atirikta jina AgamoM para niyuktiyAM likhI gaI haiM, unake alaga-alaga
adhyayanoM ke AdhAra para hI niryukti ke alaga-alaga nAma milate haiM, jaise-
AcArAMganiryukti meM satthapariNNAnijjuttI, mahApariNAnijjattI aura
dhuyanijjuttI Adi nAmoM kA ullekha milatA hai  /  vartamAna meM upalabdha
niyuktiyoM meM kucha niryuktiyAM svataMtra rUpa se milatI haiM, jaise- AcArAMga
aura sUtrakRtAMga kI niyuktiyAM  /  kucha niryuktiyoM ke AMzika aMza para laghu
bhASya milate haiM, jaise- dazavaikAlika aura uttarAdhyayana kI niyuktiyAM  /
kucha niryuktiyoM para bRhadbhASya haiM para donoM kA svataMtra astitva milatA
hai, jaise - Avazyakaniryukti, oghaniryukti' aadi| kucha niryuktiyAM aisI haiM,
jo bhASya ke sAtha milakara eka graMtha rUpa ho gayI haiM, jinako Aja pRthak
karanA atyaMta kaThina kArya hai, jaise- nizItha, vyavahAra, bRhatkalpa Adi kI
niyuktiyAM  /  niryukti-racanA kA krama Avazyaka niyukti meM AcArya bhadrabAhu
ne daza niryuktiyAM likhane kI pratijJA kI hai  /  paMDita dalasukhabhAI
mAlavaNiyA kA abhimata hai ki bhadrabAhu ne Avazyakaniryukti meM jisa krama se
graMthoM kI niyuktiyAM likhane kI pratijJA kI, usI krama se niyuktiyoM kI racanA
huI hai| isa kathana kI puSTi meM kucha hetu prastuta kie jA sakate haiM 1.
AcArAMganiryukti gA. 177 meM 'logo bhaNio' kA ullekha hai| isase Avazyaka
niryukti 1. oghaniyukti aura usakA bhASya pRthak rUpa se prakAzita hote hue bhI
niyukti aura bhASya kI gAthAeM Apasa meM mila gaI haiM  /  niyukti ke pAMcaveM
khaNDa meM isa viSaya meM carcA kI jaaegii| 2. gaNadharavAda pR. 13, 14  /

Page #25 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  **(Gā. 682, 6831)** This points towards the
explanation of the *Logassa* text in the *Caturviṁśatistava*.  2. The mention of
*“Āyare angammi ya puvvuṭṭiō”* is found in the *Ācārāṅganiyukti* (Gā. 5). The
*Daśavaikālika*’s *Kṣullakācāra* study appointment (Gā. 154-61) and the *Ācāra*
and *Uttarādhyayana*’s *Caturangīya* study appointment (Gā. 144-58) provide a
detailed description of the word *anga*. This makes it clear that the
*Daśavaikālika* and *Uttarādhyayana* appointments were composed before the
*Ācārāṅga*.  3. The mention of *“Viṇao puvubuddivo”* (Gā. 29) in the
*Uttarādhyayana* appointment points towards the *Daśavaikālika*’s
*Vinayasamādhi* appointment (Gā. 286-303). This quote makes it clear that the
*Uttarādhyayana* appointment was composed after the *Daśavaikālika*.  4. The
quote *“Kāma puvvuṭṭhiā”* (Gā. 200) in the *Uttarādhyayana* appointment points
towards the explanation of the word *“Kāma”* described in the
*Daśavaikālikaniyukti* (Gā. 137-41). This makes it clear that the
*Daśavaikālikaniyukti* was composed before the *Uttarādhyayana*.  5. The mention
of *“Āyār-sutan bhaṇiyam”* in the *Sūtrakṛtāṅganiyukti* (Gā. 183) makes it clear
that the *Daśavaikālika* and *Uttarādhyayana* appointments were composed before
it, because the description of *Ācāra* is found in *Daśani* (Gā. 154-61) and the
description of *Śruta* is found in *Uni* (Gā. 29).  6. Some verses explaining
*Karaṇa* described in the *Uttarādhyayana* appointment are found in the
*Sūtrakṛtāṅganiyukti*.  7. The mention of *“Gantho puvvuḍdiddyo”* (Gā. 127) in
the *Sūtrakṛtāṅganiyukti* points towards the explanation of the word *“Grantha”*
described in the *Uttarādhyayana* appointment (Gā. 234-37). This quote makes it
clear that the *Uttarādhyayana* appointment was composed before the
*Sūtrakṛtāṅganiyukti*.  8. The mention of *“Jah vakkaṁ tah bhāsā”* described in
the *Ācārāṅganiyukti* (Gā. 336) points towards the *Daśavaikālika*’s
*Vakkasuddhi* study appointment (Gā. 245-58).  9. The mention of *“Dhammo
puvubuddiṭṭo”* in the *Sūtrakṛtāṅganiyukti* (Gā. 99) points towards the
explanation of the word *“Dharma”* described in the *Daśavaikālikaniyukti* (Gā.
36-40). This makes it clear that the *Sūtrakṛtāṅganiyukti* was composed later.
10. The mention of *“Jo cev hoti mokkho, sā u vimutti pagayam”* in the
*Ācārāṅganiyukti* (Gā. 365) points towards the explanation of *Mokṣa* described
in the *Uttarādhyayana* appointment (Gā. 491-94).  The above mentions make it
clear that the order of composition of the appointments is the same as the order
in which they pledged to write the appointments.   1. This number is from the
*Āvaśyakaniyukti* volume 2, published by Jain Vishva Bharati.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa (gA. 682, 6831) meM caturviMzatistava ke
logassa' pATha kI vyAkhyA kI ora saMketa hai| 2. 'AyAre aMgammi ya puvbuTTio'
ullekha AcArAMganiyukti (gA. 5) meM hai| dazavaikAlika ke kSullikAcAra adhyayana
kI niyukti (gA. 154-61) meM AcAra tathA uttarAdhyayana ke caturaMgIya adhyayana
kI niyukti (gA. 144-58) meM aMga zabda kA vizada varNana milatA hai| isase
spaSTa hai ki AcArAMga se pUrva dazavaikAlika aura uttarAdhyayananiyukti kI
racanA ho cukI thii| 3. uttarAdhyayananiyukti meM 'viNao pubuddivo' (gA. 29) kA
ullekha dazavaikAlika kI vinayasamAdhi kI niyukti (gA. 286-303) kI ora saMketa
karatA hai| isa uddharaNa se spaSTa hai ki dazavaikAlika ke bAda
uttarAdhyayananiyukti kI racanA huii| _4. uttarAdhyayananiyukti kA 'kAmA
puvbuTThiA' (gA. 200) uddharaNa dazavaikAlikaniyukti (gA. 137-41) meM varNita
'kAma' zabda kI vyAkhyA kI ora saMketa karatA hai| isase spaSTa hai ki
uttarAdhyayana se pUrva dazavaikAlikaniyukti kI racanA huii| 5.
sUtrakRtAMganiyukti (gA. 183) meM AyAra-sutaM bhaNiyaM' ullekha se spaSTa hai ki
dazavaikAlika aura uttarAdhyayananiyukti kI racanA usase pUrva ho gayI thI
kyoMki AcAra kA varNana dazani (gA. 154-61) meM tathA zruta kA varNana uni (gA.
29) meM hai| 6. uttarAdhyayananiyukti meM varNita karaNa kI vyAkhyA vAlI kucha
gAthAeM sUtrakRtAMganiyukti meM milatI haiN| 7. sUtrakRtAMganiyukti meM 'gaMtho
puvvuddidyo' (gA. 127) kA ullekha uttarAdhyayananiyukti (gA. 23437) meM varNita
graMtha zabda kI vyAkhyA kI ora saMketa karatA hai| isa uddharaNa se spaSTa hai
ki sUtrakRtAMganiyukti se pUrva uttarAdhyayananiyukti kI racanA huii| 8.
AcArAMganiyukti (gA. 336) meM varNita 'jaha vakkaM taha bhAsA' kA ullekha
dazavaikAlika kI 'vakkasuddhi' adhyayana kI niyukti (gA. 245-58) kI ora saMketa
karatA hai| 9. sUtrakRtAMganiyukti (gA. 99) meM dhammo puvuddiTTo' kA ullekha
dazavaikAlikaniyukti (gA. 3640) meM varNita dharma zabda kI vyAkhyA kI ora
saMketa karatA hai| isase spaSTa hai ki sUtrakRtAMganiyukti kI racanA bAda meM
huii| 10. 'jo ceva hoti mokkho, sA u vimutti pagayaM' AcArAMganiyukti (gA. 365)
kA yaha ullekha uttarAdhyayananiyukti (gA. 491-94) meM varNita mokSa kI vyAkhyA
kI ora saMketa karatA hai| uparyukta ullekhoM se spaSTa hai ki niyuktiyoM kI
racanA kA krama vahI hai, jisa krama se unhoMne niyuktiyAM likhane kI pratijJA
kI hai| 1. yaha saMkhyA jaina vizva bhAratI dvArA prakAzyamAna Avazyakaniyukti
khaNDa-2 kI hai|

Page #26 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 12. The Appointment of Acharya Govinda and His Appointment  In addition to
the appointments written by Acharya Bhadrabahu, the mention of Govindanuyukti,
written by Acharya Govinda, is found in many places. In the *Aavashyak Niyukti*,
it is mentioned as a *darshanaprabhavak* (influential in philosophy) text. In
the *Nishith Churni*, Acharya Govinda is introduced as follows:  Govinda was a
Buddhist monk. He was defeated eighteen times in debates by a Jain Acharya.
Grieving over his defeat, he contemplated that he could not win until he
understood their principles. Therefore, with the desire to defeat them, he
requested initiation from the same Acharya to gain knowledge. While studying
*Samayik* etc., Govinda the monk attained *samyaktv* (right faith). The Guru
gave him *mahavrata-diksha* (initiation into the highest vows). After being
initiated, Govinda the monk simply explained the purpose of his initiation to
his Guru. His purpose of being initiated was not *samyak* (right faith),
therefore he was called *gyan-sten* (one who steals knowledge).  In the
*Brihatkalpa Bhashya*, he is not mentioned as *gyan-sten*. He was initiated to
write *Govindanuyukti* containing *hetu-shastra* (logic) and to obtain knowledge
and mantras, according to the *Bhashyakar* (commentator) and *tikakar*
(commentator) Malayagiri. The same mention is found in the *Nishith Bhashya* and
*Panchkalpa Bhashya*. In the *Vyavahar Bhashya*, he is mentioned as a
*mithyatvi* (false believer). There are examples of four types of *mithyatvis*,
among them Govinda Acharya was a *mithyatvi* due to his previous *agrah*
(attachment). In the *Thanam Sutra*, Govinda Acharya is mentioned as being
initiated due to his special desire, among the ten reasons for *pravrajya*
(renunciation).  According to the *Sthaviravali* of the *Nandi Sutra*, he
belonged to the fourth generation of Arya Skandil. In the *Nandi Sutra*, he is
presented as a *vipula anuyogadharak* (one who holds vast knowledge of the
*anuyog* - scriptures), *kshanthi-daya* (compassionate) and *utkrusht prarupkak*
(excellent speaker):  "Govindaanang pi namo, anuyogge viul dharinindaanang.
Niccham kshanthi dayaang, paruvana dullhabhindaang."  In *Govindanuyukti*, he
attempted to prove the existence of *jivattva* (soul) in *ekendriya jivas* (one-
sensed beings). This *niyukti*...  1. *Nibha* 3656, *Chu.* p. 260. 2. Acharya
Haribhadra used *Gopendravachak* instead of Govinda (*Dashahati* p. 53). 3.
*Nichu* 3 p. 37; *Bhavateno Siddhatavaharanatthataae Kenati Pauutto Aagato,
Appana Va Govindavachakavat*. 4. *Bubha* 5473, *T.* p. 1452; *Vidya-mantra
nimittarthang Hetushastraanang Cha Govindanuyukti Prabhriti Naam Arthaya*. 5.
(a) *Nibha* 5573, *Nichu* p. 96; *Hetusattha Govinda-Nijjuttaadiyattha
Uvasampjatti*. (b) *Pankbha* 420; *Govindajjo Naane, Dansanasutta Tthha
Hetusattha Va*. 6. *Vyabha* 2714, *Puvvaggahiten Hoti Govindo*. 7. *Stha* 10/15.
8. *Nichu* 3 p. 260; *Paccha Tena Egindiyajivasahanang Govindanijjattee Kaya*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 12 piMDaniyukti AcArya goviMda evaM unakI niyukti AcArya bhadrabAhu dvArA
likhita niyuktiyoM ke atirikta goviMda AcArya kRta goviMdaniyukti kA ullekha
aneka sthAnoM para milatA hai| Avazyakaniyukti meM darzanaprabhAvaka graMtha ke
rUpa meM goviMdaniyukti kA ullekha huA hai| nizItha cUrNi meM goviMda AcArya kA
paricaya isa prakAra milatA hai - goviMda' nAmaka eka bauddha bhikSu thaa| eka
jaina AcArya dvArA vAda-vivAda meM vaha aThAraha bAra parAjita huaa| parAjaya se
du:khI hokara usane ciMtana kiyA ki jaba taka maiM inake siddhAMta ko nahIM
jAnUMgA, taba taka inheM nahIM jIta sakatA isalie harAne kI icchA se jJAna-
prApti ke lie usI AcArya ko dIkSA ke lie nivedana kiyaa| sAmAyika Adi kA
adhyayana karate hue goviMda bhikSu ko samyaktva kA bodha ho gyaa| guru ne use
mahAvrata-dIkSA dii| dIkSita hone para goviMda bhikSu ne saralatApUrvaka apane
dIkSita hone kA prayojana guru ko batA diyaa| unake dIkSita hone kA uddezya
samyak nahIM thA ataH unheM jJAna-stena kahA gayA hai| bRhatkalpabhASya meM
unakA ullekha jJAna-stena ke rUpa meM nahIM hai| ve hetuzAstra yukta
goviMdaniyukti likhane tathA vidyA aura maMtra kI prApti ke lie dIkSita hue,
aisA bhASyakAra tathA TIkAkAra malayagiri kA maMtavya hai| nizIthabhASya evaM
paMcakalpabhASya meM bhI aisA hI ullekha milatA hai  /  vyavahArabhASya meM
mithyAtvI ke rUpa meM unakA ullekha milatA hai| vahAM cAra prakAra ke
mithyAtviyoM ke udAharaNa haiM, unameM goviMda AcArya pUrva gRhIta Agraha ke
kAraNa mithyAtvI the| ThANaM sUtra meM pravrajyA ke dasa kAraNoM meM apanI icchA
vizeSa se dIkSita hone meM goviMda AcArya kA ullekha hai| _ naMdI sUtra kI
sthavirAvalI ke anusAra ye Arya skandila kI cauthI pIr3hI meM hue| naMdI sUtra
meM inheM vipula anuyogadhAraka, kSAMti-dayA se yukta tathA utkRSTa prarUpaka ke
rUpa meM prastuta kiyA gayA hai goviMdANaM pi namo, aNuoge viuldhaarnniNdaannN|
niccaM khaMtidayANaM, parUvaNA dullbhiNdaannN|| goviMdaniyukti meM unhoMne
ekendriya jIvoM meM jIvatva-siddhi kA prayatna kiyA hai| yaha niyukti 1. nibhA
3656, cU. pR. 260 /  2. AcArya haribhadra ne goviMda ke sthAna para
gopendravAcaka kA prayoga kiyA hai (dazahATI p.53)| 3. nicU 3 pR. 37 ; bhAvateNo
siddhatAvaharaNaTThatAe keNati pautto Agato, appaNA vA goviNdvaackvt| 4. bubhA
5473, TI. pa. 1452; vidyA-maMtranimittArthaM hetuzAstrANAM ca
goviNdniyuktiprbhRtiinaamrthaay| 5. (ka) nibhA 5573, nicU pR. 96;
hetusatthagoviMda-nijjuttAdiyaTThA uvsNpjjti| (kha) paMkabhA 420; goviMdajjo
NANe, daMsaNasuttaTThahetusaTThA vaa| 6. vyabhA 2714, puvvaggahiteNa hoti
goviNdo| 7. sthA 10/15 /  8. nicU 3 pR. 260; pacchA teNa egiMdiyajIvasAhaNaM
goviMdanijjattI kyaa|

Page #27 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  There is no mention of Pinḍaniyukti in the
fourth study of Daśavaikālika, based on the sixth chapter of Chhajjivaṇiyā, or
in the first study of Ācārāṅga, Śastra-parijñā. The Daśavaikālika mentions only
"Govindavāyago vi ya, jah parapphakhaṁ niyatteï mātra".  This Pinḍaniyukti
appears to be written based on the first study of Ācārāṅga, Śastra-parijñā. Some
reasons for this are:  * In the context of the existence of Apkāya, Ācārāṅga
Chūrṇi mentions, "Jan cha ninjuttiē āukkāyajīvalakkhaṇaṁ, jancha ajjagovindēhi
bhaṇiyaṁ gāhā" (2). This quote clearly indicates that they wrote the
Pinḍaniyukti based on the first study of Ācārāṅga. * In the Ācārāṅga Sutra,
Bhagavān Mahāvīra mentions many sutras about the existence of these
sthāvarakāyas, while Daśavaikālika only discusses their non-violence.
Ācārāṅganiyukti also contains some gāthās about the existence of sthāvarakāyas.
It is possible that Ācārya Bhadravāhu took some gāthās from Govindaniyukti, as
Govindaācārya was before Bhadravāhu II. Both the Daśavaikālika chūrṇis also
mention this gāthā with the name of Govindaācārya:  > Kāye vi hu ajjhappam,
sarīra-vāyasamannīyaṁ cheva. > Kāya-maṇasampauttaṁ, ajjhappam kinchidāhaṁsu.
Although no independent text called Govindaniyukti is found today, based on the
available facts, it can be said that Govindaācārya wrote Govindaniyukti, which
is now unavailable.  ## Authorship and Time of Composition of Pinḍaniyukti
There is no consensus yet on who the original author of the Niyukti literature
was, despite many speculations. Was it Bhadravāhu I or II? In ancient times, the
absence of mention of the author and time of composition in the copies makes it
difficult to determine the author of a particular text today. This is also the
case with an important text like Pinḍaniyukti. Ācārya Malayagiri, in his
commentary on Pinḍaniyukti, and Dronācārya, in his commentary on Oghanīyukti,
mention Chaturdaśapūrvi Bhadravāhu as the author.  In the Niśītha Chūrṇi, for
Pinī 199 under Dhātrīpiṇḍa, it is mentioned, "Esa Bhaddabāhukayā ṇijjuttigāhā"
(NiChū 3, p. 407). Similarly, for Pinī 205, Niśītha Chūrṇi (NiChū 3, p. 411)
mentions, "Imā Bhaddabāhukayā gāhā". This mention clearly indicates that Ācārya
Bhadravāhu wrote Pinḍaniyukti, but it is not clear whether it was
Chaturdaśapūrvi Bhadravāhu I who wrote it.  1. Daśani 78. 2. Āchū p. 27. 3.
Daśajichū 101, Daśaachū p. 53. 4, 5. Mavṛ p. 1, Onīṭī p. 3.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 6 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa dazavaikAlika ke caturtha adhyayana
chajjIvaNiyA ke AdhAra para likhI gayI athavA AcArAMga ke prathama adhyayana
zastra-parijJA para, isakA koI ullekha nahIM miltaa| dazavaikAlikaniyukti meM
'goviMdavAyago vi ya, jaha parapakkhaM niyattei mAtra itanA ullekha hai| yaha
niyukti AcArAMga ke prathama adhyayana zastra-parijJA ke AdhAra para likhI gayI
pratIta hotI hai| isake kucha hetu isa prakAra haiM * apkAya kI jIvatva-siddhi
ke prasaMga meM AcArAMga cUrNi meM ullekha hai-'jaM ca ninjuttIe
AukkAyajIvalakkhaNaM, jaMca ajjagoviMdehi bhaNiyaM gAhA'2isa uddharaNa se spaSTa
hai ki AcArAMga ke prathama adhyayana ke AdhAra para unhoMne niyukti likhI
hogii| * AcArAMga sUtra meM bhagavAn mahAvIra ne ina sthAvarakAyoM kI astitva-
siddhi ke aneka sUtroM kA ullekha kiyA hai, jabaki dazavaikAlika meM kevala
inakI ahiMsA kA viveka hai| AcArAMganiyukti meM bhI sthAvarakAya-siddhi kI kucha
gAthAeM haiN| saMbhava hai AcArya bhadrabAhu ne goviMdaniyukti se kucha gAthAeM
lI hoM kyoMki goviMdAcArya bhadrabAhu dvitIya se pUrva ke haiN| dazavaikAlika kI
donoM cUrNiyoM se bhI goviMda AcArya ke nAmollekha pUrvaka yaha gAthA milatI hai
kAye vi hu ajjhappaM, sarIra-vAyAsamanniyaM cev| kAya-maNasaMpauttaM, ajjhappaM
kiNcidaahNsu|| Aja svataMtra rUpa se goviMdaniyukti nAmaka koI graMtha nahIM
milatA phira bhI prApta tathyoM ke AdhAra para yaha kahA jA sakatA hai ki
goviMda AcArya ne goviMda niyukti likhI thI, jo Aja anupalabdha hai|
piNDaniyukti kA kartRtva evaM racanAkAla niyukti-sAhitya ke kartRtva ke bAre meM
aneka UhApoha hone ke bAda abhI taka isa bAta meM mataikya nahIM hai ki mUla
niyuktikAra kauna the? bhadrabAhu prathama athavA dvitIya? prAcInakAla meM
pratiyoM meM racanAkAra evaM racanAkAla kA ullekha na hone se Aja yaha nirNaya
karanA kaThina hotA hai ki amuka graMtha ke racanAkAra kauna haiM ? piNDaniyukti
jaise mahattvapUrNa graMtha kI bhI yahI sthiti hai| AcArya malayagiri ne
piNDaniyukti tathA droNAcArya ne oghaniyukti kI TIkA' meM graMthakartA ke rUpa
meM caturdazapUrvI bhadrabAhu kA ullekha kiyA hai| dhAtrIpiMDa ke antargata pini
199 ke lie nizItha cUrNi meM 'esA bhaddabAhukayA NijjuttigAhA' (nicU 3 pR. 407)
kA ullekha hai| isI prakAra pini 205 ke lie bhI nizItha cUrNi (nicU 3 pR. 411)
meM 'imA bhaddabAhukayA gAhA' kA ullekha hai| isa ullekha se yaha to spaSTa hai
ki AcArya bhadrabAhu ne hI piMDaniyukti kI racanA kI lekina yaha spaSTa nahIM
hai ki caturdaza pUrvadhara prathama bhadrabAhu ne isakI racanA kI 1. dazani 78
/  3. dazajicU 101, dazaacU pR. 53  /  2. AcU pR. 27 /  4, 5. mavR pa. 1, oniTI
pa. 3 /

Page #28 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 14: Piṇḍaniyukti  **Or, the Second Bhadrabahu?** A detailed
discussion regarding the antiquity and authorship of the Niyukti literature will
be presented in the next forthcoming section of the Niyukti literature.
According to Dr. Sagarmal Jain, the fourteenth पूर्वी Ācārya Bhadrabahu lived
long ago, and the Second Bhadrabahu lived much later. Therefore, there must have
been another Ācārya named Bhadrabahu in between. According to him, Āryabhadra of
the Gautama gotra, who lived in the second century CE, can be considered the
author of the Niyuktis. There is also an inscription from the fifth century CE
that mentions Bhadraanvaya. Since he is the only Ācārya whose authorship would
make the time of the Niyukti composition fit, he can be considered the author.
However, this argument cannot be fully accepted because there is no similarity
between the names Āryabhadra and Bhadrabahu. Nevertheless, his opinion compels
us to think in this direction.  The earliest mention of Piṇḍaniyukti is found in
the Daśavaikalika Cūrṇi by Jinadas. This mention suggests that the Piṇḍaniyukti
was composed before the Cūrṇikāra Jinadas Gaṇi, because the Cūrṇi literature is
considered to be from the sixth and seventh centuries CE. According to Dr.
Sagarmal Jain, there is no specific information in the Niyukti literature after
the second century CE. Therefore, the Second Bhadrabahu cannot be its author.
The entire section related to the faults of origin, production, and burning has
been transferred from the Piṇḍaniyukti to the Mūlācāra. Some Digambara scholars
also accept this. Based on this argument, it can be assumed that the
Piṇḍaniyukti must have been composed before the Mūlācāra. Some verses related to
the faults of production have been transferred from the Piṇḍaniyukti to the
Niśītha Bhāṣya. Based on this, its time of composition is also proven to be
earlier.  In the ten Niyuktis promised in the Āvश्यक Niyukti, the names
Piṇḍaniyukti and Oghanīyukti are not mentioned. This suggests that after or
before composing the ten Niyuktis, Ācārya Bhadrabahu composed two independent
texts to expound the dietary and general conduct of a muni, which he named
Piṇḍaniyukti and Oghanīyukti.  The question may arise as to why he did not
mention them in the ten Niyuktis? The solution to this is that there, Ācārya
Bhadrabahu is making a vow to compose Niyukti literature based on the vast
knowledge of the scriptures expounded by the Tīrthankaras and Ācāryas, not to
compose any independent text. Therefore, he mentioned the Niyuktis written on
the Ācārāṅga and other sūtras.  1. Sagar Jain Vidya Bharati, p. 222-24.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14 piMDaniyukti athavA dvitIya bhadrabAhu ne? niyukti-sAhitya kI prAcInatA evaM
kartRtva ke saMdarbha meM vistRta carcA niyuktisAhitya ke agale prakAzyamAna
khaMDa meM kI jaaegii| DaoN. sAgaramala jaina ke anusAra caturdazapUrvI AcArya
bhadrabAhu bahuta pahale ho gae tathA dvitIya bhadrabAhu kA samaya bahuta bAda
kA hai ata: bIca meM bhadrabAhu nAmaka koI aura AcArya hone caahie| unake
anusAra gautamagotrIya Aryabhadra, jo IsA kI dUsarI zatAbdI meM hue haiM, unheM
niyuktiyoM kA kartA mAnA jA sakatA hai| bhadrAnvaya ullekha yukta pAMcavIM
zatAbdI kA abhilekha bhI milatA hai kyoMki ye hI aise AcArya haiM, jinako
niyuktikAra mAnane se niyukti-racanA kA kAla sahI baiThatA hai lekina unake isa
tarka ko bhI pUrNarUpeNa samyak nahIM mAnA jA sakatA kyoMki Aryabhadra aura
bhadrabAhu-ina donoM nAmoM meM hI sAmya nahIM hai phira bhI unakA yaha abhimata
isa dizA meM kucha socane ko bAdhya karatA hai| piNDaniyukti kA sabase prAcIna
ullekha jinadAsakRta dazavaikAlika cUrNi meM milatA hai| isa ullekha se yaha
anumAna lagAyA jA sakatA hai ki cUrNikAra jinadAsagaNI se pahale piNDaniyukti kI
racanA ho cukI thI kyoMki cUrNi-sAhitya kA samaya chaThI, sAtavIM zatAbdI mAnA
jAtA hai| DaoN. sAgaramala jaina ke anusAra niyukti sAhitya meM IsA kI dUsarI
zatAbdI ke bAda kI vizeSa koI sUcanA nahIM milatI ataH bhadrabAhu dvitIya inake
kartA nahIM ho skte| udgama, utpAdana aura eSaNA ke doSoM se sambandhita sArA
prakaraNa mUlAcAra meM piNDaniyukti se saMkrAnta huA hai| isa bAta ko kucha
digambara vidvAn bhI svIkAra karate haiN| isa tarka ke AdhAra para bhI yaha
saMbhAvanA kI jA sakatI hai ki mUlAcAra kI racanA se pUrva isakI racanA ho jAnI
caahie| utpAdana ke doSoM vAlI kucha gAthAeM nizItha bhASya meM piNDaniyukti se
saMkrAnta huI haiM, isa AdhAra para bhI isakA racanAkAla prAktana siddha hotA
hai| Avazyaka niyukti meM pratijJAta dasa niyuktiyoM meM piMDaniyukti aura
oghaniyukti kA nAmollekha nahIM hai, isa bAta se aisA saMbhava lagatA hai ki
dasa niyuktiyoM kI racanA karane ke pazcAt yA pahale AcArya bhadrabAhu ne muni
kI AhAracaryA aura sAmAnyacaryA kA pratipAdana karane ke lie do svataMtra
graMthoM kI racanA kI, jinakA nAma unhoMne piNDaniyukti aura oghaniyukti rkhaa|
prazna upasthita ho sakatA hai ki phira unhoMne dasa niyuktiyoM meM inakA
ullekha kyoM nahIM kiyA? isakA samAdhAna yaha diyA jA sakatA hai ki vahAM AcArya
bhadrabAhu tIrthaMkara aura AcAryoM ko vaMdanA karake unake dvArA pratipAdita
artha-bahula zrutajJAna kI niyukti-racanA kI pratijJA kara rahe haiM, na ki kisI
svataMtra graMtha kI racanA karane kii| isIlie unhoMne AcArAMga Adi sUtroM para
likhI niyuktiyoM kA nAmollekha kiyA 1. sAgara jaina vidyA bhAratI pa. 222-24 /

Page #29 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Piṇḍaniyukti: A Commentary**  It is possible to suggest that the two
appointments, which were composed as independent texts, were not included under
the vow. However, both these texts are fully qualified to be independent texts
in terms of subject matter and size.   Furthermore, the detailed description of
the rules of the Muni's begging practice available in it also suggests that its
time is contemporary with all other appointments. It can be said that the verses
that reveal the exception in both Piṇḍa and Oga appointments are later mixed by
the commentators or other Acharyas.  Nandinī Sūtrakara has given a list of many
texts under Kālika and Utkalika Sūtras, but there is no mention of Piṇḍaniyukti
and Oghanīyukti anywhere. It is surprising that he did not include these two
important texts in the list of texts, even though they had been composed by that
time. There are two possible solutions to this question: Firstly, these texts
were not so famous until the time of Devardhigaṇī Kṣamāśramaṇa. They did not
mention it because it was under the commentary literature like other
appointments. Secondly, it is possible that some later Acharyas included these
two texts under the original literature because they were the proponents of the
original conduct of the Sadhu.  **The Independent Existence of Piṇḍaniyukti**
Piṇḍaniyukti has an important place in the Āgama and its commentary literature.
It is an original and independent text written on the Muni's begging practice
and diet. The importance of this text can be gauged from the fact that the
German scholar Layman was the first to publish this text in the German language.
Professor H.R. Kapadia has mentioned that Bhavaprabhasūri was the first to
mention four original Sūtras in Jain Dharmavarastotra: 1. Uttarādhyayana 2.
Āvश्यक 3. Piṇḍaniyukti and Oghanīyukti 4. Daśavaikālika. Scholars like Professor
Winternitz have considered Piṇḍaniyukti as an original Sūtra along with
Uttarādhyayana, Āvश्यक and Daśavaikālika. Due to the description related to
Sadhvācāra, it is sometimes counted under the Chhedasūtras.  Some scholars
consider Piṇḍaniyukti as the fifth study of the Daśavaikālika appointment,
Piṇḍaiṣaṇā niyukti.  1. All traditions do not accept these as original texts.
(Editor) 2. Jain Dharmavarastotra 30 T. p. 94; Ath Uttarādhyayana-Āvश्यक-
Piṇḍaniyukti and Oghanīyukti-Daśavaikālika iti Chatvāri Mūlasūtrāṇi. 3. History
of the Canonical literature of the Jainas p. 43.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa hai| svataMtra graMtha ke rUpa meM jina do
niyuktiyoM kI racanA kI,unakA pratijJA ke antargata samAveza nahIM kiyA, yaha
saMbhAvanA vyakta kI jA sakatI hai| vaise bhI ye donoM graMtha viSayavastu evaM
AkAra kI dRSTi se pUrNarUpeNa svataMtra graMtha kI yogyatA rakhate haiN| isake
atirikta isameM muni kI bhikSAcaryA ke jina niyamoM kA sUkSma rUpa se varNana
upalabdha hai, usase bhI isakA kAla bAkI sabhI niyuktiyoM ke samakAlIna rakhA jA
sakatA hai| piNDa aura ogha-ina donoM niyuktiyoM meM apavAda ko prakaTa karane
vAlI jo gAthAeM haiM, ve bhASya kI yA anya AcAryoM dvArA bAda meM mizrita kI gaI
haiM, aisA kahA jA sakatA hai| naMdI sUtrakAra ne kAlika aura utkAlika sUtroM ke
antargata aneka graMthoM kI sUcI dI hai, usameM kahIM bhI piNDaniyukti aura
oghaniyukti kA ullekha nahIM milatA hai| Azcarya isa bAta kA hai ki ina donoM
mahattvapUrNa graMthoM ko unhoMne graMthoM kI sUcI meM samAveza kyoM nahIM kiyA?
jabaki inakI racanA usa samaya taka ho cukI thii| isa prazna ke samAdhAna meM do
vikalpa saMbhava haiM* prathama to yaha ki devardhigaNI kSamAzramaNa ke samaya
taka ye graMtha itane prasiddha nahIM hue the| anya niyuktiyoM kI bhAMti
vyAkhyA-sAhitya ke antargata hone se unhoMne inakA ullekha nahIM kiyaa| * sAdhu
ke maulika AcAra kA pratipAdaka hone ke kAraNa bAda ke kucha AcAryoM ne ina
donoM graMthoM ko mUla'sAhitya ke antargata samAviSTa kara diyA, yaha saMbhAvanA
kI jA sakatI hai| piNDaniyukti kA svataMtra astitva _ Agama evaM usake vyAkhyA-
sAhitya meM piNDaniyukti kA mahattvapUrNa sthAna hai| muni kI bhikSAcaryA aura
AhAravidhi para likhA gayA yaha maulika aura svataMtra graMtha hai| isa graMtha
kA mahattva isa bAta se AMkA jA sakatA hai ki sarvaprathama jarmana vidvAn
lAyamana ne jarmana bhASA meM isa graMtha ko prakAzita kiyA thaa| pro. eca. Ara
kApar3iyA ne ullekha kiyA hai ki sabase pahale bhAvaprabhasUri ne
jainadharmavarastotra meM cAra mUla sUtroM kA ullekha kiyA hai 1. uttarAdhyayana
2. Avazyaka 3. piNDaniyukti aura oghaniyukti 4. dshvaikaalik| pro. viMTaranitsa
Adi vidvAnoM ne uttarAdhyayana, Avazyaka aura dazavaikAlika ke sAtha
piNDaniyukti ko mUlasUtra ke antargata mAnA hai| sAdhvAcAra se sambandhita
varNana hone se kahIM-kahIM isakI gaNanA chedasUtroM ke antargata bhI hotI hai|
kucha vidvAn piNDaniyukti ko dazavakAlika niyukti ke pAMcaveM adhyayana
piNDaiSaNA niyukti kI 1. sabhI paramparAeM inako mUla graMtha ke antargata
svIkAra nahIM karatI haiN| (saMpA) 2. jainadharmavarastotra 30 TI. pR. 94 ; atha
uttarAdhyayana-Avazyaka-piNDaniyukti tathA oghaniyukti-dazavaikAlika iti catvAri
muulsuutraanni| 3. History of the Canonical literature of the Jainas p. 43 /

Page #30 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 16: Pinḍaniryukti  **Supporters** believe that due to its large
size, Pinḍaniryukti was later given the status of an independent text.
Malayagiri himself mentions in the beginning of the text that the Dasavaikalika
was compiled by Bhadrabahu Swami, the fourteenth predecessor. Due to the
vastness of the fifth study, called Piṇḍaiṣaṇā, it was established independently
and named Piṇḍaniryukti. This statement by Acharya Malayagiri clearly suggests
that by his time, Piṇḍaniryukti was considered a supplementary text to the
Dasavaikalika.  Acharya Malayagiri further argues that it is not an independent
text because there is no mangalacharan (invocation) at the beginning of
Piṇḍaniryukti. This is because the Dasavaikalika already has a mangalacharan at
its beginning.  In this context, it can be argued that the tradition of
mangalacharan began later. In ancient times, authors would begin their texts
with a sangrahani gatha (summary verse). The mangalacharan gatha in the
Dasavaikalika was also added later. This is evident from the fact that both the
chūrṇikāras (commentators) neither mentioned nor explained the mangalacharan
gatha. The mangalacharan gatha is only found in the Haribhadriya tika
(commentary). It is highly likely that the first mangalacharan gatha of the
Dasavaikalika was added later by Bhadrabahu II or the commentator, which became
famous as the niryukti gatha by the time of Acharya Haribhadra.  Similarly, the
chūrṇikāra has not indicated or explained the mangalacharan gatha of the
Ācārāṅga niryukti. There is a mention of "Esa bitiya gaha" for the third gatha.
This clearly indicates that the mangalacharan gatha of the Ācārāṅga niryukti did
not exist during the time of the chūrṇikāra. Additionally, the beginning of the
Cheda (sections) and Mūlasūtras (original texts) also do not start with a
mangalacharan. The tradition of mangalacharan is around the second or third
century Vikram era.  Apart from Malayagiri's commentary, there is no mention of
this anywhere else. Therefore, it is clear that Piṇḍaniryukti cannot be
considered a part of the Dasavaikalika niryukti based on this single mention.
Despite being a supplementary text to the Dasavaikalika sūtra, Piṇḍaniryukti is
an independent text, which can be supported by some arguments:  The entire text
of Piṇḍaniryukti is expanded based on the first sangrahani gatha. Therefore,
attention...  1. Mavṛ p. 1; The Dasavaikalika and its niryukti were compiled by
Bhadrabahu Swami, the fourteenth predecessor. Due to the vastness of the fifth
study, called Piṇḍaiṣaṇā, it was established independently as another text, and
named Piṇḍaniryukti. 2. Mavṛ p. 1; There is no invocation at the beginning, as
it is part of the Dasavaikalika niryukti, and the invocation of the latter would
suffice to ward off obstacles. The rest of the niryukti is established as the
Dasavaikalika niryukti. 3. The Niryukti Panchak text, published by Jain Vishva
Bharati, discusses this in detail.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 16 piMDaniryukti pUraka mAnate haiN| unakA mAnanA hai ki bRhatkAya graMtha hone
ke kAraNa bAda meM ise svataMtra graMtha kA sthAna de diyA gyaa| svayaM
malayagiri ne graMtha ke prArambha meM isa bAta kA ullekha kiyA hai ki
dazavaikAlika kI niyukti caturdazapUrvI bhadrabAhu svAmI ne kii| usameM
piNDaiSaNA nAmaka pAMcaveM adhyayana kI niyukti bahuta bar3I hone ke kAraNa use
svataMtra rUpa se sthApita kara diyA, jisakA nAma piNDaniryukti rakha diyA gayA
/ ' AcArya malayagiri ke isa ullekha se yaha spaSTa pratIta hotA hai ki unake
samaya taka piNDaniryukti dazavaikAlika niryukti ke pUraka graMtha ke rUpa meM
samajhI jAne lagI thI  /  AcArya malayagiri dUsarA tarka prastuta karate hue
kahate haiM ki yaha svataMtra graMtha nahIM hai isIlie piNDaniryukti ke
prArambha meM maMgalAcaraNa nahIM kiyA gayA hai| kyoMki dazavaikAlika niyukti ke
prArambha meM maMgalAcaraNa kara diyA gayA hai| isa saMdarbha meM yaha tarka
prastuta kiyA jA sakatA hai ki maMgalAcaraNa kI paramparA bAda meM prArambha huI
hai| prAcInakAla meM graMthakAra saMgrahaNI gAthA ke dvArA apane graMtha kA
prArambha karate the  /  dazavaikAlika niyukti meM bhI maMgalAcaraNa kI gAthA
bAda meM prakSipta huI hai| isakA pramANa hai ki donoM cUrNikAroM ne
maMgalAcaraNa vAlI gAthA kA na ullekha kiyA hai aura na hI vyAkhyA  /
maMgalAcaraNa vAlI gAthA kevala hAribhadrIya TIkA meM milatI hai| bahuta
saMbhava lagatA hai ki dazavaikAlika niyukti kI prathama maMgalAcaraNa kI gAthA
bhadrabAhu dvitIya athavA bhASyakAra dvArA bAda meM jor3I gaI ho  /  jo AcArya
haribhadra ke samaya taka niryukti gAthA ke rUpa meM prasiddha ho gaI thii| isI
prakAra AcArAMga niyukti kI maMgalAcaraNa kI gAthA kA bhI cUrNikAra ne koI
saMketa athavA vyAkhyA nahIM kI hai| vahAM tIsarI gAthA ke lie 'esA bitiyA gAhA'
kA ullekha hai| isa ullekha se spaSTa hai ki cUrNikAra ke samaya taka AcArAMga
niyukti ke maMgalAcaraNa kI gAthA nahIM thii| isake atirikta cheda evaM
mUlasUtroM kA prAraMbha bhI maMgalAcaraNa se nahIM huA hai| maMgalAcaraNa kI
paramparA lagabhaga vikrama kI dUsarItIsarI zatAbdI ke AsapAsa kI hai|
malayagiri kI TIkA ke atirikta aisA ullekha anyatra kahIM nahIM milatA ataH
spaSTa hai ki kevala isa eka ullekha mAtra se piNDaniryukti ko dazavaikAlika
niyukti kA aMga nahIM mAnA jA sakatA  /  dazavaikAlika sUtra kA pUraka graMtha
hote hue bhI piNDaniryukti eka svataMtra graMtha hai, isakI puSTi meM kucha
tarka prastuta kie jA sakate haiM piNDaniryukti meM prathama saMgrahagAthA ke
AdhAra para pUre graMtha kA vistAra kiyA gayA hai ataH dhyAna 1. mavR pa. 1;
dazavaikAlikasya ca niryuktizcaturdazapUrvavidA bhadrabAhusvAminA kRtA, tatra
piNDaiSaNAbhidhapaJcamAdhyayananiyuktiratiprabhUtagraMthatvAt pRthak
zAstrAntaramiva vyavasthApitA, tasyAzca piNDaniryuktiriti nAma kRtaM,
piNDaiSaNAniryuktiH  /  2. mavR pa. 1 ; cAdAvatra namaskAro'pi na kRto,
dazavaikAlikaniryuktyantargatatvena tannamaskAreNaivAtra vighnopazamasambhavAt,
zeSA tu niryuktirdazavaikAlikaniryuktiriti sthApitA  /  3. jaina vizva bhAratI
dvArA prakAzita niyukti paMcaka graMtha meM vistAra se isa saMdarbha meM carcA
kI gaI hai|

Page #31 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation**  17  It is clear from reading that this is an
independent composition, not a supplement to the fifth study of Daśavaikālika.
Looking at the final verse of the Piṇḍaniryukti text, it also appears that it
was composed as an independent text and concluded in the same way.  If this text
were a supplement, then the mention of "Vattavā Piṇḍanijjutti" would not be
found in the Daśavaikālika niryukti. This mention indicates that in order to
understand the reasonable meaning in relation to the Piṇḍa, Piṇḍaniryukti should
be said here. Otherwise, no author would mention the word "Vattavā", just as
after writing the niryukti of the four chūlās in the Ācārāṅga niryukti, the
niryuktikāra has clearly mentioned that "Pancama Chūlanisīham, Tassa Ya Uvariṁ
Bhaṇīhāmi" (Āni 366), meaning I will speak of the niryukti of the fifth chūla
later. Similarly, when Piṇḍaniryukti was separated from Daśavaikālikaniryukti,
the author would certainly have mentioned something in this context, but such a
mention is neither found in Piṇḍaniryukti nor in Daśavaikālika niryukti.
Therefore, it must be an independent text. Ancient scribes and authors would
often mention many verses in the margins as "Jaha Āvassaē", "Jaha Ovavaiē", etc.
Since Piṇḍaniryukti presents a comprehensive material on the dietary and begging
practices of the sadhu, there was no better text to understand Piṇḍaiṣaṇā,
therefore, it was mentioned in the niryukti of the fifth study of Daśavaikālika
niryukti that the entire Piṇḍaniryukti should be said here. Initially, it was
mentioned as a supporting text from the point of view of subject matter
similarity, but later it was accepted as a supplementary text to Daśavaikālika
niryukti.  Niryuktikāras usually explain only the special technical terms that
appear in the text. The eight authorities mentioned at the beginning of
Piṇḍaniryukti have no connection with the subject matter of the fifth Piṇḍaiṣaṇā
study of Daśavaikālika. On this basis too, it can be said that it must be an
independent text.  One important argument for its being an independent text is
that the verses of a supplementary text cannot be so many from the original
text. The niryuktikāra has written only 371 verses on the entire Daśavaikālika,
and only the mention of "Vattavā Piṇḍanijjutti" is found in Daśavaikālika
niryukti (218/4), (Hāti 239). There is no indication or explanation of this
verse in both the chūrṇīs of Daśavaikālika, therefore, this verse should not
originally belong to Daśavaikālika niryukti. The bhāṣyakāra has mentioned
"Vattavā Piṇḍanijjutti" to properly understand the dietary practices of the
sadhu (see Niryuktipañcaka p. 49).  2. The Daśavaikālikaniryukti edited by Jain
Vishva Bharati has 349/2 verses, and the Daśavaikālika Hāribhadriya ṭīkā has 371
verses. In the editing, an attempt has been made to separate the niryukti and
the bhāṣya, in which many niryukti verses have been proved to be of the bhāṣya
and some bhāṣya verses have been proved to be of the niryukti.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa 17 se par3hane para spaSTa pratIta hotA hai ki
yaha eka svataMtra racanA hai, na ki dazavaikAlika ke pAMcaveM adhyayana kI
niryukti kI pUraka  /  piNDaniryukti graMtha kI aMtima gAthA para dRSTipAta
kareM, taba bhI yaha pratIta hotA hai ki svataMtra graMtha ke rUpa meM isakI
racanA huI hai aura usI dRSTi se isakA samApana kiyA gayA hai| * yadi yaha
graMtha pUraka hotA to dazavaikAlika niryukti meM 'vattavvA piMDanijjuttI "
ullekha nahIM milatA  /  yaha ullekha isa bAta kI ora saMketa kara rahA hai ki
piNDa ke sambandha meM yuktiyukta artha ko samajhane ke lie yahAM piNDaniryukti
kahanI caahie| anyathA koI bhI graMthakAra 'vattavvA' zabda kA ullekha nahIM
karegA, jaise AcArAMga niyukti meM cAra cUlAoM kI niyukti likhane ke bAda
niyuktikAra ne spaSTa ullekha kiyA hai ki paMcama cUlanisIhaM, tassa ya uvariM
bhaNIhAmi (Ani 366 ) arthAt maiM paMcama cUlA nizItha kI niyukti bAda meM
kahUMgA, vaise hI jaba piNDaniryukti ko dazavaikAlikaniryukti se alaga kiyA
gayA, usake saMdarbha meM bhI graMthakAra kucha ullekha avazya karate lekina
aisA na piNDaniryukti meM ullekha milatA hai aura na hI dazavaikAlika niyukti
meM ataH yaha svataMtra graMtha honA caahie| prAcIna lipikAra evaM graMthakAra
aneka gAthAoM ko hAsie meM 'jahA Avassae' 'jahA ovavAie' Adi ullekha kara dete
the, cUMki piNDaniryukti sAdhu kI AhAracaryA aura bhikSAcaryA para sarvAMgINa
sAmagrI prastuta karatI hai, piNDaiSaNA ko samajhane ke lie isase acchA koI
graMtha nahIM thA ataH dazavaikAlika niyukti ke pAMcaveM adhyayana kI niryukti
meM yaha ullekha kara diyA gayA ki yahAM sampUrNa piMDaniryukti kahanI caahie|
prArambha meM viSaya sAmya kI dRSTi se sahAyaka graMtha ke rUpa meM isakA
ullekha kiyA gayA lekina bAda meM ise dazavaikAlika niyukti pUraka graMtha ke
rUpa meM svIkRta kara liyA gyaa| niryuktikAra prAya: graMtha meM Ae vizeSa
pAribhASika zabdoM kI hI vyAkhyA karate haiM  /  piNDaniryukti ke prArambha meM
jina ATha adhikAroM kA saMketa hai, usase dazavaikAlika ke pAMcaveM piNDaiSaNA
adhyayana kI viSaya-vastu ke sAtha koI sambandha nahIM baiThatA hai| isa AdhAra
para bhI kahA jA sakatA hai ki yaha svataMtra graMtha honA caahie| * isake
svataMtra graMtha hone kA eka mahattvapUrNa tarka yaha hai ki mUlagraMtha se
pUraka graMtha kI gAthAeM itanI adhika nahIM ho sktiiN| sampUrNa dazavaikAlika
para niyuktikAra ne mAtra 371 gAthAeM likhIM aura akele 1. 'vattavvA
piMDanijjuttI' ullekha dazavaikAlika niyukti (218/4), (hATI 239) meM milatA hai
/  dazavaikAlika kI donoM cUrNiyoM meM isa gAthA kA koI saMketa evaM vyAkhyA
nahIM hai ataH mUlataH yaha gAthA dazavaikAlika niyukti kI nahIM honI caahie|
bhASyakAra ne sAdhu kI AhAracaryA ko samyak rUpa se samajhAne ke lie 'vattavvA
piMDanijjuttI' kA ullekha kiyA hai (dekheM niryuktipaMcaka pR. 49 )  /  2. jaina
vizva bhAratI dvArA sampAdita dazavaikAlikaniryukti meM 349/2 gAthAeM haiM tathA
dazavaikAlika hAribhadrIya TIkA meM 371 gAthAeM haiN| saMpAdana meM niyukti aura
bhASya ko alaga-alaga karane kA prayatna kiyA gayA hai, jisameM aneka
niyuktigata gAthAeM bhASya kI tathA kucha bhASya gAthAeM niyukti ke rUpa meM
sahetu siddha kI gaI haiN| *

Page #32 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The **Piṇḍaniyukti** has 671 (-324) verses written on the fifth study. How the
supplementary text can have more verses than the original text is an
investigable point. • In this context, a question arises that the verses of
**Piṇḍaiṣaṇā** study found in **Daśavaikālika** should also be included in
**Piṇḍaniyukti**, but those verses are not found in it. If it is assumed that
the **niyuktikāra** (author of the commentary) created some verses separately
for **Daśavaikālika** and created a separate composition of **Piṇḍaniyukti**,
then what is the obstacle in considering it as an independent text? • In the
commentary of **Bṛhatkalpabhāṣya**, in the context of **Piṇḍakalpik**, there is
a mention of '**atra Piṇḍaniyuktiḥ sarvā vaktavya**' along with the
**Piṇḍaiṣaṇā** study. It is also mentioned that **Piṇḍaniyukti** is a separate
text, hence it has its own independent place. • **Niyuktikāra** often present a
concise explanation of the important words that appear in the original text. In
**Piṇḍaniyukti**, apart from **Piṇḍa** and **Eṣaṇā**, there is no explanation of
any word from **Daśavaikālika**. Secondly, **Piṇḍaniyukti** is as subject-
oriented and systematic composition as it is, such systematicness and subject-
orientation is not found in the composition style of **niyukti** literature. •
**Oghanīyukti** and **Piṇḍaniyukti** are considered by some Jain sects as part
of the 45 **Āgamas**. They are also counted among the original texts. No other
**niyukti** has been included in the **Āgamas**. This also makes it clear that
**Bhadrabahu** must have created these two independently before other
**niyuktis**, or seeing the popularity of **niyukti** literature, he created
these two texts independently. From the point of view of subject matter,
**Ācārya Mahāprajña** has considered it as a supplement to the **Daśavaikālika**
sūtra. **Separation of **niyukti** and **bhāṣya**: A discussion In the texts in
which commentaries were written on **niyuktis**, except for the **Āvśyaka
niyukti**, both the texts often became one text, such as **Bṛhatkalpa**,
**Vyavahāra** and **Niśītha** etc. **Ācārya Malayagiri** has mentioned this in
the preface of **Bṛhatkalpa bhāṣya**. The same sequence is found in
**Piṇḍaniyukti** and **Oghanīyukti**. In its manuscripts, the verses of
**niyukti** and **bhāṣya** are written together, from this it can be inferred
that by the time of writing of this text, both **niyukti** and **bhāṣya** had
become one text. 1. **Bṛbhā 532, T p. 154; sā ca granthāntaratvāt svathāne
sammiśraṇa ho gayā hai. Jain Viśva Bhārati se prakāśit eva sthitā
pratipattavya.** Attempt to separate in **Āvśyaka niyukti** section 1 2.
Although independent copies of **Āvśyaka niyukti** are found. But in it too, the
verses of **anyakartaki** and **bhāṣya** 3. **Bṛbhāpī. p. 2; sūtrasparshika
niyukti bhāṣyaṁ cai ko grantho jātaḥ.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti pAMcaveM adhyayana para 671 (-324) gAthAeM likhiiN| mUlagraMtha se
pUraka graMtha kI gAthAeM itanI adhika kaise ho sakatI haiM, yaha anveSaNIya
bindu hai| * isa saMdarbha meM eka prazna yaha upasthita hotA hai ki
dazavaikAlika ke piNDaiSaNA adhyayana para jo niyukti-gAthAeM milatI haiM, unakA
samAveza piNDaniyukti meM bhI honA cAhie lekina ve gAthAeM usameM nahIM milatI
haiN| yadi yaha mAnA jAe ki dazavaikAlika niyukti ke lie niyuktikAra ne kucha
gAthAeM alaga banA dI aura piMDaniyukti kI alaga racanA kI to phira ise
svataMtra graMtha mAnane meM hI kyA bAdhA hai? * bRhatkalpabhASya kI TIkA meM
piNDakalpika ke prasaMga meM piMDaiSaNA adhyayana ke sAtha 'atra piNDaniyuktiH
sarvA vaktavyA' kA ullekha hai| sAtha hI yaha bhI ullekha hai ki piNDaniyukti
granthAntara hai ata: usakA apanA svataMtra sthAna hai| * niyuktikAra prAyaH
mUla graMtha meM Ae mahattvapUrNa zabdoM kI nikSepaparaka vyAkhyA prastuta
karate haiM piNDaniyukti meM piNDa aura eSaNA ke atirikta dazavaikAlika ke kisI
zabda kI vyAkhyA nahIM hai| dUsarI bAta piNDaniyukti jitanI viSayabaddha aura
kramabaddha racanA haiM, utanI kramabaddhatA aura viSayapratibaddhatA niyukti-
sAhitya kI racanA-zailI meM nahIM milatI hai| * oghaniyukti aura piNDaniyukti ko
kucha jaina sampradAya 45 AgamoM ke antargata mAnate haiN| inakI gaNanA
mUlasUtroM meM bhI hotI hai| anya kisI niyukti ko AgamoM ke antargata nahIM
rakhA gayA hai| isa bAta se bhI yaha spaSTa hotA hai ki bhadrabAhu ne anya
niyuktiyoM se pUrva ina donoM kI svataMtra racanA kI hogI athavA niyukti-sAhitya
kI lokapriyatA dekhakara unhoMne ina donoM graMthoM kI svataMtra racanA kara
dii| viSayavastu kI dRSTi se AcArya mahAprajJa ne ise dazavaikAlika sUtra kA
pUraka mAnA hai| niyukti aura bhASya kA pRthakkaraNa : eka vimarza jina graMthoM
meM niyuktiyoM para bhASya likhe gae, unameM Avazyaka niyukti ko chor3akara
prAyaH donoM graMtha milakara eka graMtha rUpa ho gae, jaise-bRhatkalpa,
vyavahAra aura nizItha aadi| AcArya malayagiri ne bRhatkalpa bhASya kI pIThikA
meM yahI ullekha kiyA hai| piNDaniyukti aura oghaniyukti meM bhI aisA hI krama
milatA hai| isakI hastapratiyoM meM niyukti aura bhASya kI gAthAeM eka sAtha
likhI huI haiM, isase yaha anumAna lagAyA jA sakatA hai ki isa graMtha ke
lekhana-kAla taka niyukti aura bhASya donoM milakara eka graMtha rUpa ho gae
the| 1. bRbhA 532, TI pR. 154 ; sA ca granthAntaratvAt svasthAne sammizraNa ho
gayA hai| jaina vizva bhAratI se prakAzita eva sthitA prtipttvyaa| Avazyaka
niyukti khaNDa 1 meM pRthakkaraNa kA prayAsa 2. yadyapi Avazyaka niyukti kI
svataMtra pratiyAM milatI haiM  /  lekina usameM bhI anyakartakI evaM bhASya kI
gAthAoM kA 3. bRbhApI. pR. 2 ; sUtrasparzikaniyuktirbhASyaM caiko graMtho jAtaH
/

Page #33 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  Commentator Malayagiri has mentioned the
commentator or the author of the commentary at 18 places. Based on this mention,
it can be assumed that the Pinḍaniyukti existed independently for some time even
after the commentary was written. However, based on Malayagiri's mention, it
cannot be assumed that there are only as many commentary verses as the number of
verses mentioned by Acharya Malayagiri as the commentator. This is because it is
not necessary for the commentator to mention the commentator at all places.  The
number of commentary verses should be more than the number of published
commentaries because in the published commentaries, wherever the commentator has
mentioned the commentary verse, the verse numbers have been added in front of
those verses. However, after a thorough study of the Pinḍaniyukti, it is
concluded that it should have 324 verses of the Pinḍaniyukti. Most of the
remaining verses are verses from the commentary or verses from other texts that
have been added according to the context of the subject.  Although it is
extremely difficult to distinguish between two texts written in the same
language style, an attempt has been made to separate the verses from the
Pinḍaniyukti verses, which is an initial but laborious task. As mentioned at the
beginning of the commentary verses, it cannot be claimed that this separation
has been done perfectly. However, this first attempt will surely be a guiding
light for future researchers. In this context, some lines from a conversation
sent by internationally renowned scholar Dalsukh Bhai Malvaniya to Acharya Tulsi
on 25.1.85 are worth quoting: "Samani Kusumprajna has done the work of
separating the Pinḍaniyukti from the commentary with great effort. This is her
first attempt, yet she has made every effort to reach the truth. By going before
the scholars, they will be able to critically evaluate it, which will facilitate
decision-making and revision in its second edition. It is not possible to
separate the Pinḍaniyukti without hard work. I am very impressed by the effort
and intelligence she has used in this work. Therefore, I commend and approve
this initial effort."  The points on which the attempt has been made to
determine the number of verses of the Pinḍaniyukti have been given critical
footnotes at almost all places in the text editing. Footnotes have also been
given below regarding the verses about which there was a doubtful situation. For
the convenience of researchers, some of the major criteria for separation are
being presented here. Commentator Malayagiri has been a guide in knowing the
projected part, paving the way. He has made a beautiful attempt to connect the
subject at the beginning of the verses. Through the commentary, it becomes known
how many verses have been explained in which part of which verse. For this,
Malayagiri's commentary...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa TIkAkAra malayagiri ne 18 sthaloM para
bhASyakRd yA bhASyakAra kA ullekha kiyA hai| isa ullekha ke AdhAra para yaha
anumAna to lagAyA jA sakatA hai ki bhASya likhe jAne ke bAda bhI kucha samaya
taka niyukti kA svataMtra astitva thA lekina malayagiri ke ullekha ke AdhAra
para yaha nahIM mAnA jA sakatA ki mAtra utanI hI bhASya-gAthAeM haiM, jitanI
gAthAoM ke bAre meM AcArya malayagiri ne bhASyagAthA kA ullekha kiyA hai kyoMki
vyAkhyAkAra saba sthAnoM para bhASyakAra kA ullekha kare, yaha Avazyaka nahIM
hai| _ bhASya gAthAoM kI saMkhyA prakAzita TIkA kI saMkhyA se adhika honI cAhie
kyoMki prakAzita TIkA meM jahAM-jahAM TIkAkAra ne bhASyagAthA kA ullekha kiyA
hai, una gAthAoM ke Age bhASya ke kramAMka lagA die gae haiM lekina piNDaniyukti
kA gaharAI se sAMgopAMga adhyayana karane ke bAda yaha niSkarSa nikalatA hai ki
isameM niyukti kI gAthAeM 324 honI caahie| bAkI kI adhikAMza gAthAeM bhASya kI
athavA prasaMgavaza viSaya ke anurUpa anya graMthoM kI gAthAeM jor3a dI gaI
haiN| yadyapi eka hI bhASA-zailI meM likhe gae do graMthoM ko alaga-alaga karanA
atyanta kaThina kArya hotA hai, phira bhI gAthAoM ke paurvAparya evaM unake
prakSipta aMza ko niyuktigAthAoM se pRthaka karane kA prArambhika kintu
zramasAdhya kArya karane kA prayatna avazya kiyA gayA hai| jaisA ki bhASya
gAthAoM ke prArambha meM ullekha kiyA gayA hai ki pRthakkaraNa ke saMdarbha meM
yaha dAvA nahIM kiyA jA sakatA ki yaha pUrNataH ThIka hI huA hai phira bhI yaha
prathama prayAsa bhaviSya meM zodha karane vAloM ke lie mArgadIpa avazya bnegaa|
isa saMdarbha meM antarrASTrIya khyAti prApta paMDita dalasukha bhAI mAlavaNiyA
kI 25.1.85 ko AcArya tulasI ko bheje gae eka saMvAda kI kucha paMktiyAM
uddharaNIya haiM-"samaNI kusumaprajJA ne bhASya se niyukti ke pRthakkaraNa kA
kArya bar3e parizrama se kiyA hai| yaha unakA prathama prayAsa hai, phira bhI
yathArtha taka pahuMcane kA pUrA prayatna kiyA hai| vidvAnoM ke samakSa jAne se
isakI acchI samAlocanA kara sakeMge, jisase isakI dUsarI AvRtti meM nirNaya
karane evaM saMzodhana meM suvidhA hogii| kaThina prayatna ke binA yaha saMbhava
nahIM hai ki niyuktiyoM kA pRthakkaraNa ho ske| isa kArya meM unhoMne jo zrama
aura prajJA kA prayoga kiyA hai, usase maiM bahuta prabhAvita huA hUM ataeva
maiM isa prAthamika prayatna kI prazaMsA evaM anumodanA karatA huuN|" jina
binduoM ke AdhAra para niyukti kI gAthA-saMkhyA ke nirdhAraNa kA prayatna kiyA
gayA hai, unake bAre meM pATha-saMpAdana meM lagabhaga sabhI sthaloM para
samAlocanAtmaka pAdaTippaNa de die gae haiN| jina gAthAoM ke saMdarbha meM
saMdehAtmaka sthiti thI, unake bAre meM bhI nIce pAdaTippaNa de die gae haiN|
zodhakartAoM kI suvidhA ke lie yahAM pRthakkaraNa kI kucha pramukha kasauTiyoM
ko prastuta kiyA jA rahA hai* prakSipta aMza ko jAnane meM TIkAkAra malayagiri
mArgadarzaka banakara patha-prazasta karate rahe haiN| unhoMne gAthAoM ke
prArambha meM viSaya ko jor3ane kA suMdara prayAsa kiyA hai| TIkA ke mAdhyama se
yaha jJAta ho jAtA hai ki kisa gAthA ke kisa aMza kI kitanI gAthAoM meM vyAkhyA
kI gaI hai| isake lie malayagiri kI TIkA

Page #34 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
It was necessary to recite the Pindanuyukti one hundred times and to remember
where the explanation of the original Dvaragatha ends, just as the explanation
of the original Dvaragatha (60) related to Adhakarma extends to 124 verses. Even
after many verses, the commentator has given a hint of the explanation of the
previous Dvaragatha, therefore it can be said without any doubt that without the
commentator, determining the number of verses of the Nuyukti and separating the
Bhashyagatha was an extremely difficult task. In addition, the in-depth study,
editing and style of composition of other independent Nuyuktis have also been
instrumental in determining the number of verses of the Nuyukti. • Many verses
of Pindanuyukti have been transferred to Nisith Bhashya etc. There, the
commentator has mentioned the commentator for some verses of Pindanuyukti. From
the point of view of the order of the subject, they also appear to be Bhashya,
therefore, in some places, other explanatory texts have also become the basis of
separation. • Writing the main word as a synonym is a linguistic characteristic
of the Nuyuktikara. Verses with synonyms related to the subject have been placed
in the order of the Nuyuktigaatha, such as verse 51 in Eshana and 61 in
Adhakarma. • The language style of the Nuyuktis found independently makes it
clear that writing concise verses is the characteristic of the Nuyuktikara. The
Nuyuktikara determines the meaning of the word that comes in the original sutra
through deposition. Pindanuyukti is an independent text, but even in this, the
deposition of the words and main topics that came in the first collection verse
has been presented. Although the commentator also writes concise verses, most of
the concise verses appear to be of Nuyukti. After mentioning the original
deposition by the author, the explanation of the substance, field, time etc. can
be done by both the Nuyuktikara and the commentator, it is clearly written in
the Visheshvaavashyak Bhashya that the subject of the Nuyukti is to deposit the
name etc., the rest is not to be considered. Therefore, the verses explaining
the production of substance and emotion (194/1-3) and the various depositions of
the Sadharmic word. (73/1-22) should be of Bhashya. Wherever the same word has
been deposited twice, one of them should clearly be of Bhashya, for example, in
the third verse of Pindanuyukti, the Nuyuktikara has mentioned four and six
depositions of the word Pind and promised to make its prototype, in 3/1 again
there is a hint of six depositions. The Nuyuktikara does not do such repetition,
therefore this verse should be of Bhashya because the commentator has clarified
it with the example of Kulak. 1. Vibha 963, T p. 226.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti kA zatAdhika bAra pArAyaNa karanA par3A tathA mUla dvAragAthA kI
vyAkhyA kahAM taka calatI hai, use smRti meM rakhanA par3A, jaise AdhAkarma se
sambandhita mUladvAra gAthA (60) kI vyAkhyA 124 gAthAoM meM calatI hai| aneka
gAthAoM ke bAda bhI pUrvavartI dvAra gAthA kI vyAkhyA kA saMketa TIkAkAra ne de
diyA hai ataH yaha niHsaMkoca kahA jA sakatA hai ki TIkAkAra ke binA niyukti kI
gAthA-saMkhyA kA nirdhAraNa evaM bhASyagAthA kA pRthakkaraNa atyanta durUha
kArya thaa| isake atirikta anya svataMtra niyuktiyoM kA gahana adhyayana,
sampAdana tathA unakI racanA-zailI bhI niyukti kI gAthA-saMkhyA ke nirdhAraNa
meM hetubhUta bane haiN| * piNDaniyukti kI aneka gAthAeM nizItha bhASya Adi meM
saMkrAnta huI haiN| vahAM piNDaniyukti kI kucha gAthAoM ke lie cUrNikAra ne
bhASyakAra kA ullekha kiyA hai| viSaya kI kramabaddhatA kI dRSTi se bhI ve
bhASya kI pratIta hotI haiM ataH kahIM-kahIM pRthakkaraNa kA AdhAra anya vyAkhyA
graMtha bhI bane haiN| * mukhya zabda ke ekArthaka likhanA niyuktikAra kA
bhASAgata vaiziSTya hai| viSaya se sambaddha ekArthaka vAlI gAthAoM ko
niyuktigAthA ke krama meM rakhA hai, jaise gA. 51 meM eSaNA tathA 61 meM
AdhAkarma ke ekaarthk| * svataMtra rUpa se milane vAlI niyuktiyoM kI bhASA zailI
se spaSTa hai ki nikSepaparaka gAthAeM likhanA niyuktikAra kA apanA vaiziSTya
hai| mUla sUtra meM Ae zabda kA niyuktikAra nikSepa ke dvArA artha-nirdhAraNa
karate haiN| piNDaniyukti cUMki svataMtra graMtha hai lekina isameM bhI prathama
saMgraha gAthA meM Ae zabdoM evaM mukhya viSayoM ke nikSepa prastuta kie gae
haiN| yadyapi bhASyakAra bhI nikSepaparaka gAthAeM likhate haiM lekina adhikAMza
nikSepaparaka gAthAeM niyukti kI pratIta hotI haiN| graMthakartA dvArA mUla
nikSepa kA ullekha karane ke bAda dravya, kSetra, kAla Adi kI vyAkhyA
niyuktikAra evaM bhASyakAra donoM kI ho sakatI hai, vizeSAvazyaka bhASya meM
spaSTa likhA hai ki niyukti kA viSaya nAma Adi kA nikSepa karanA hai, zeSa artha
kA vicAra karanA nhiiN| ata: dravya aura bhAva utpAdanA (194/1-3) tathA
sAdharmika zabda ke vividha nikSepoM kI vyAkhyA karane vAlI gaathaaeN| (73/1-22)
bhASya kI honI caahie| jahAM kahIM eka hI zabda kA do bAra nikSepa huA hai,
vahAM spaSTa rUpa meM eka bhASya kI honI cAhie, jaise piNDaniyukti kI tIsarI
gAthA meM niyuktikAra ne piNDa zabda ke cAra aura chaha nikSepoM kA ullekha
karake usakI prarUpaNA karane kI pratijJA kI hai, 3/1 meM punaH chaha nikSepoM
kA saMketa hai| niyuktikAra aisI punarukti nahIM karate ata: yaha gAthA bhASya
kI honI cAhie kyoMki bhASyakAra ne kulaka ke dRSTAnta se ise spaSTa kiyA hai| 1.
vibhA 963, TI pR. 226  /

Page #35 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation  * It cannot be definitively said whether the
Dwāragāthā and Sangrahagatha are *nirukti* or not. This is because commentators
also write Sangrahagatha or Dwāragāthā to clarify the subject matter. Pandit
Dalasukh Bhai Malvaniya has considered Dwāragāthā as *niruktigāthā*.  The
linguistic characteristic of the *niyuktikār* is that they mention a story or an
example in brief to clarify any subject. Wherever a story is hinted at in brief
and later the same story is elaborated, the verse hinting at the story in brief
is considered *niruktigat* and the verses elaborating it are considered
*bhāṣyagat*. A main reason for considering such verses as *niyuktigat* is that
at many places, after the verse hinting at the brief story, the commentator
mentions "Atha enam eva gāthām bhāṣyakār: vivṛṇoti". In *Piṇḍaniryukti* itself,
in verse 199, there is a hint of the story of Ācārya Sangama and his disciple
Datta. Later, for two verses, the commentator has mentioned "Gāthādvayena
bhāṣyakṛd vivṛṇoti". This makes it clear that the *bhāṣyakār* elaborates on the
*nirukti* verse that hints at the brief story. Such instances are also found in
many places in *Āvश्यक* *niyukti* etc. Similarly, in the 76th verse, the
*niyuktikār* has hinted at the story in brief. 76/1-5 - these five verses
elaborate on the same story again. In addition, verses 90/1-4, 144/1-4, 148/1,
2, 166/1, 2, 179/1, 2 etc. are also noteworthy. The *niyuktikār* has hinted at
the four stories of anger, pride, deceit, and greed in the 216th verse.
Therefore, 218/1, 219/1-15, 220/1, 2, all these verses should be *bhāṣya*.  * In
some places, the *niyuktikār* has not mentioned the story in brief, yet the
verses related to the story seem to be *bhāṣya*. The six verses (136/1-6) at the
beginning of the *Prāduṣkaraṇa* *dvār* clearly appear to be of the *bhāṣyakār*
because the *niruktikār* usually hints at any story in brief. Another reason for
this is that the *niyuktikār* usually mentions the story related to the faults
of *bhikṣācaryā* after describing their distinctions.  * When the commentator
designates the verses elaborating on one story as *nirukti* while referring to
multiple stories hinted at in the same verse, then the verses elaborating on the
other story should also be *bhāṣya*. For example, if the commentator has
mentioned "Bhāṣya gāthā" for the verses explaining the story related to *cūrṇa*
and *antaradhāna*, then the 7 verses (231/2-4, 6, 7, 10, 11) related to the
story of *pādapralepana*, *yoga*, and *mūlakarma* should also be of the
*bhāṣyakār*.  3. *PiBhā* 35-37, *Mavṛp*. 142; *Bhāṣyakṛd gāthātrayeṇa
vyākhyānayati*. 1. *Nipībhū* *Pṛ*. 41, 42. 2. *PiBhā* 31, 32. 21

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa * dvAragAthA aura saMgrahagAthA ke bAre meM
spaSTa rUpa se nahIM kahA jA sakatA ki ye niryukti kI haiM athavA kI? kyoMki
bhASyakAra bhI viSaya ko spaSTa karane ke lie saMgraha gAthA yA dvAragAthA
likhate haiN| paMDita dalasukhabhAI mAlavaNiyA ne dvAragAthA ko niryuktigAthA
mAnA hai  /  niyuktikAra kA yaha bhASAgata vaiziSTya hai ki ve kisI bhI viSaya
ko spaSTa karane ke lie saMkSepa meM kathA yA dRSTAnta kA ullekha karate haiN|
jahAM bhI saMkSepa meM kathA kA saMketa AyA hai aura bAda meM usI kathA kA
vistAra huA hai to vahAM saMkSepa meM kathA kA saMketa dene vAlI gAthA ko
niryuktigata mAnA hai tathA vistAra karane vAlI gAthAoM ko bhASyagata  /  aisI
gAthAoM ko niyuktigata mAnane kA eka mukhya kAraNa yaha hai ki aneka sthaloM
para saMkSipta kathA kA saMketa karane vAlI gAthA ke bAda TIkAkAra 'atha enAmeva
gAthAM bhASyakAra: vivRNoti' kA ullekha karate haiM, svayaM piNDaniryukti meM
bhI gAthA 199 meM AcArya saMgama evaM datta ziSya kI kathA kA saMketa hai, bAda
meM do gAthAoM ke lie TIkAkAra ne 'gAthAdvayena bhASyakRd vivRNoti' kA ullekha
kiyA haiN| isase spaSTa hai ki saMkSipta kathA kA saMketa karane vAlI niryukti
gAthA kA bhASyakAra vistAra karate haiN| aise prasaMga Avazyaka niyukti Adi
niyuktiyoM meM bhI aneka sthaloM para milate haiN| isI prakAra 76 vIM gAthA meM
niyuktikAra ne saMkSepa meM kathA kA saMketa kara diyA hai, 76/1-5 - ina pAMca
gAthAoM meM puna: isI kathA kA vistAra huA hai| isake atirikta 90/1-4, 144/1-4,
148/1, 2, 166/1, 2, 179/1, 2 Adi gAthAeM bhI draSTavya haiN| krodha, mAna, mAyA
aura lobha Adi kI cAroM kathAoM kA saMketa niyuktikAra ne 216 vIM gAthA meM kara
diyA hai ataH 218/1, 219/1-15, 220/1, 2 ye sabhI gAthAeM bhASya kI honI cAhie  /
* kahIM-kahIM niyuktikAra ne kathA kA saMkSepa meM ullekha nahIM kiyA hai phira
bhI kathA se sambandhita gAthAeM bhASya kI saMbhava lagatI haiM  /  prAduSkaraNa
dvAra ke prArambha meM kathA kA saMketa karane vAlI chahoM gAthAeM (136/1-6)
spaSTatayA bhASyakAra kI pratIta hotI haiM kyoMki niryuktikAra prAyaH saMkSepa
meM kisI bhI kathA kA saMketa karate haiN| isakA dUsarA hetu yaha hai ki
niyuktikAra prAyaH bhikSAcaryA ke doSoM ke bhedoM kA varNana karane ke bAda
usase sambandhita kathA kA saMketa karate haiN| * eka hI gAthA meM saMketita
aneka kathAoM ke bAre meM jaba TIkAkAra eka kathA kA vistAra vAlI gAthAoM ko
niryukti ke rUpa meM nirdiSTa karate haiM to dUsarI kathA ke vistAra vAlI
gAthAeM bhI bhASya kI honI cAhie, udAharaNArtha cUrNa aura antardhAna se
sambandhita kathA kI vyAkhyA karane vAlI gAthAoM ke lie TIkAkAra ne bhASya
gAthA' kA ullekha kiyA hai to phira pAdapralepana, yoga aura mUlakarma kI kathA
se sambandhita 7 gAthAeM ( 231 / 2- 4, 6, 7, 10, 11) bhI bhASyakAra kI honI
caahie| 3. pibhA 35-37, mavRpa. 142; bhASyakRd gAthAtrayeNa vyAkhyAnayati  /  1.
nipIbhU pR. 41, 42  /  2. pibhA 31, 32  /  21

Page #36 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pinḍaniyukti** • Where the compiler has briefly explained a gate, if there are
verses that explain the same gate in detail, they should clearly be commentary
verses, such as 41/1, 2, 44/1-4, 52/14, 64/1-3, 83/1-5, 89/1-9, 116/1-4 etc. •
Conversational or repetitive verses cannot be the work of the same author. The
commentator of that text must make the verse or foot of the original verse a
part of his verse in his commentary. Wherever a verse has been repeated or the
same topic has been expanded again after a brief statement, those verses have
not been added to the original number of the appointment, they should be
commentary verses. For example, verses 82/1-3, in these, the fourth verse of the
82nd verse and the first verse of 82/3 are almost the same in terms of words and
in terms of subject, the 82nd verse is directly connected to the 83rd verse. In
the same order, verses 313/1-6, 314/1-3, 318/1, 2, 320/1, 2 etc. should also be
of the commentary. • The uniformity of language style has also been helpful in
separating the commentary from the appointment. The compiler has explained
almost all the faults related to begging by describing its nature or by
distinguishing it, but in the case of the fault of attachment, there is a
dialogue between the guru and the disciple in the initial 10 verses, these ten
verses seem to be explanatory 295/1-10. • The order and precedence of the
subject has also been helpful in separating the projected parts. At many places,
from the point of view of the order of the subject, it was clear that this much
part has been projected later by the commentator or other acharya in an
unauthorized manner, it has no connection with the original subject or verse.
Even without adding those verses to the original number, there is no difference
in the order of the current subject matter. For example, in the last verse of
the 166th verse, the compiler mentions that these are the faults of Malāpahṛta.
In between 166/1, 2 - these two verses have an expansion of the story. In 167,
the faults of Malāpahṛta are mentioned, therefore, from the point of view of the
subject, the 166th verse is connected to the 167th verse. The two verses in
between clearly appear to be of the commentary. Similarly, from the point of
view of the subject, the 68th verse is connected to the 69th verse. In the 11
verses in between, the commentator has explained the karma of the self by the
analogy of Kūṭapāśa. The 70th verse is related to the 71st verse from the point
of view of the subject. In between 70/1-6 - these six verses should be the
projected or commentary explanation of the fourfold of pronunciation and meaning
and its comparison with Ādhākarma. • Wherever the same verse has been repeated,
the verse has been added to the number of the original appointment verse, where
the order seemed appropriate from the point of view of the subject. In another
place, that same verse has been kept in order but not added to the number of the
original appointment verse.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti * jahAM niyuktikAra ne kisI dvAra kI saMkSepa meM vyAkhyA kara dI
hai, vahAM usI dvAra kI yadi vistRta vyAkhyA karane vAlI gAthAeM AI haiM to ve
spaSTatayA bhASya-gAthAeM honI cAhie, jaise-41/1, 2, 44/1-4, 52/14, 64/1-3,
83/1-5, 89/1-9, 116/1-4 aadi| * saMvAdI athavA punarukta gAthAeM eka hI
graMthakAra kI racanA nahIM ho sktiiN| usa graMtha ke vyAkhyAkAra avazya apanI
vyAkhyA meM mUla gAthA ke caraNa yA pAda ko apanI gAthA kA aMga banA lete haiN|
jahAM kahIM caraNa punarukta huA hai athavA saMkSipta kathana ke bAda usI viSaya
kA punaH vistAra huA hai to una gAthAoM ko niyukti ke mUla kramAMka meM nahIM
jor3A hai, ve bhASya-gAthAeM honI caahie| udAharaNArtha 82/1-3 gAthAeM, inameM
82 vI gAthA kA caturtha caraNa tathA 82/3 kA prathama caraNa zabdoM kI dRSTi se
lagabhaga samAna hai tathA viSaya kI dRSTi se 82 vI gAthA sIdhI 83 vIM gAthA se
jur3atI hai| isI krama meM 313/1-6, 314/1-3, 318/1, 2, 320/1, 2 Adi gAthAeM bhI
bhASya kI honI caahie| * niyukti se bhASya ko pRthak karane meM bhASA-zailI kI
ekarUpatA bhI sahAyaka banI hai| bhikSAcaryA se sambandhita prAya: sabhI doSoM
kI vyAkhyA niyuktikAra ne usake svarUpa varNana yA bheda-prabheda ke dvArA kI
hai lekina lipta doSa meM prArambha meM 10 gAthAoM meM guru aura ziSya kA
saMvAda hai, ye dasoM gAthAeM 295/1-10 vyAkhyAtmaka lagatI haiN| * viSaya kI
kramabaddhatA aura paurvAparya bhI prakSipta aMzoM ko alaga karane meM sahAyaka
banA hai| aneka sthaloM para viSaya kI kramabaddhatA kI dRSTi se spaSTa pratIta
ho rahA thA ki itanA aMza anadhikRta rUpa se bhASyakAra yA anya AcArya dvArA
bAda meM prakSipta huA hai, isakA mUla viSaya yA gAthA ke sAtha koI sambandha
nahIM hai| una gAthAoM ko mUla kramAMka meM na jor3ane para bhI cAlU viSaya-
vastu ke krama meM koI aMtara nahIM aataa| jaise 166 vI gAthA ke aMtima caraNa
meM niyuktikAra ullekha karate haiM ki mAlApahRta ke ye doSa haiN| bIca meM
166/1, 2-ina do gAthAoM meM kathAnaka kA vistAra hai| 167 meM mAlApahRta ke
doSoM kA ullekha hai ataH viSaya kI dRSTi se 166 vIM gAthA 167 vIM gAthA se
jur3atI hai| bIca kI donoM gAthAeM spaSTatayA bhASya kI pratIta hotI haiN| isI
prakAra viSaya kI dRSTi se 68 vI gAthA 69 vI gAthA se jur3atI hai| bIca kI 11
gAthAoM meM bhASyakAra ne kUTapAza kI upamA dvArA Atmakarma ko samajhAyA hai| 70
vIM gAthA viSaya kI dRSTi se 71 vIM gAthA se sambaddha hai| bIca meM 70/1-6-ina
chaha gAthAoM meM vyaJjana aura artha kI caturbhaMgI tathA AdhAkarma ke sAtha
usakI tulanA prakSipta athavA bhASya kI vyAkhyA honI caahie| * jahAM kahIM
samAna gAthA punarukta huI hai, vahAM gAthA kA viSaya kI dRSTi se jo krama ucita
lagA, vahAM usa gAthA ko mUla niyuktigAthA ke kramAMka meM jor3A hai| dUsare
sthAna para usa samAna gAthA ko krama meM to rakhA hai para mUla niyukti gAthA
ke kramAMka meM nahIM jor3A hai|

Page #37 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  **23.** In some places, the separation of the
niyukti and bhāṣya has been done based on the interpretation of other dvāras.
For example, the niyuktikāra has given a very brief explanation of the dvāras
related to the pṛthvīkāya piṇḍa and agnikāya piṇḍa. Therefore, the following
gāthās related to the apkāya should be considered bhāṣya: 17/1-3, 21/1,2,
22/1-6, and 27/1, 2. Similarly, the 198/1-15 gāthās of the dhātrīpiṇḍa and the
207/1-4 gāthās of the ājīva piṇḍa should also be considered bhāṣya because the
explanation of the dūtī and nimitta dvāras, etc., is very brief.  **•** In some
places, even if the gāthā is not explained in the ṭīkā, if it is found in the
manuscripts of the piṇḍaniyukti, then the gāthā related to the subject has been
added to the niyukti's serial number. The gāthās that seemed irrelevant or
interpolated have not been added to the original serial number even if they are
placed in the sequence of gāthās, such as 173/1. If the gāthā is found in even
one or two manuscripts, then it has been placed in the sequence of gāthās. If it
appears to be explanatory, then it has not been added to the original serial
number, such as the 231/5 gāthā, which is found only in the A and B manuscripts.
Similarly, if the gāthā is not found in the manuscripts but is present in the
ṭīkā or avacūrī, then it has been added to the original serial number if it
appears to be niyukti; otherwise, it has been placed in the sequence without
being added to the serial number, such as the 192/6, 7, 253/3 gāthās.  **•** In
some places, it is clear that so many gāthās should be considered bhāṣya or
interpolated in between. For example, in the context of grahaṇaiṣaṇā, the
niyuktikāra mentions in gāthā 236: "bhāvammai ya dasapada hoti." Three
additional gāthās seem to be extra, which elaborate on the story related to the
vānarayūtha. The gāthā related to the dasapada is the 237th. From the point of
view of the subject, the 236th gāthā is also connected to the 237th.  **•** One
way to identify the bhāṣya-gāthā is that where the bhāṣyakāra is explaining all
the dvāras, the gāthā explaining only one dvāra has not been added to the
niyukti's sequence.  **•** The gāthās that we have not considered niyuktigat
have been placed in the sequence of niyukti but have not been added to the
original serial number of the niyukti, such as 3/1, 44/1-4, etc.  In some
places, it was very difficult to decide about the gāthās. There, we have decided
on the gāthās based on our own thinking. These points of separation have also
helped in separating other niyuktis from the bhāṣya.  **The Subject Matter and
Uniqueness of Piṇḍaniyukti**  Piṇḍaniyukti is an important text related to the
caraṇakaraṇānuyoga. This text encompasses many topics related to the sadhu's
bhikṣācāryā. While the Nandī Sūtra mentions the kālika and utkālika sūtras, it
does not mention both piṇḍaniyukti and oghanīyukti. It seems that...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 23 * kahIM-kahIM anya dvAroM kI vyAkhyA ke
AdhAra para bhI niyukti aura bhASya kA pRthakkaraNa huA hai, jaisepRthvIkAya
piMDa, agnikAya piMDa se sambandhita dvAroM kI niyuktikAra ne atyanta saMkSipta
vyAkhyA kI hai ata: apkAya se sambandhita 17/1-3, 21/1,2, 22/1-6 tathA 27/1,
2-ye sabhI gAthAeM vyAkhyAtmaka hone ke kAraNa bhASya kI honI caahie| isI
prakAra dhAtrIpiNDa kI 198/1-15 gAthAeM tathA AjIva piNDa kI 207/1-4-gAthAeM bhI
bhASya kI honI cAhie kyoMki Age dUtI aura nimitta Adi dvAra kI vyAkhyA bahuta
saMkSipta meM kI gaI hai| * kahIM-kahIM TIkA meM gAthA vyAkhyAta na hone para
bhI yadi piNDaniyukti kI hastapratiyoM meM gAthA milI hai to viSaya se sambaddha
gAthA ko niyukti ke kramAMka meM jor3A hai| jo gAthA viSaya se asambaddha yA
prakSipta lagI, use gAthAoM ke krama meM rakhane para bhI mUla kramAMka ke sAtha
nahIM jor3A hai, jaise 173/1  /  yadi eka do pratiyoM meM bhI gAthA milI hai to
una gAthAoM ko bhI gAthAoM ke krama meM rakhA hai| yadi vyAkhyAtmaka pratIta huI
to usako mUla kramAMka meM nahIM jor3A hai, jaise-231/5 gAthA kevala a aura bI
prati meM milatI hai| isI prakAra hastapratiyoM meM na milane para bhI yadi TIkA
yA avacUri meM vaha gAthA hai to niyukti kI pratIta hone para mUla kramAMka meM
jor3A hai anyathA krama meM rakhakara bhI kramAMka ke sAtha nahIM jor3A,
jaise-192/6, 7, 253/3 gaathaaeN| * kahIM-kahIM to spaSTatayA pratIta hotA hai ki
itanI gAthAeM bIca meM bhASya kI athavA prakSipta honI caahie| jaise
grahaNaiSaNA ke prasaMga meM gA. 236 meM niyuktikAra ullekha karate haiM-
bhAvammi ya dasapadA hoti  /  bIca meM vAnarayUtha se sambandhita kathA kA
vistAra karane vAlI tIna gAthAeM atirikta pratIta hotI haiN| dasapada se
sambandhita gAthA 237 vIM hai| viSaya kI dRSTi se bhI 236 vIM gAthA 237 se
jur3atI hai| * bhASya-gAthA ko pahacAnane kA eka tarIkA yaha bhI hai ki jahAM
bhASyakAra sabhI dvAroM kI vyAkhyA kara rahe haiM, vahAM kevala eka dvAra kI
vyAkhyA vAlI gAthA ko niyukti ke krama meM nahIM jor3A hai| * jina gAthAoM ko
hamane niyuktigata nahIM mAnA, unako niyukti ke krama meM rakhakara bhI niyukti
ke mUla kramAMka ke sAtha nahIM jor3A hai, jaise 3/1, 44/1-4 aadi| kahIM-kahIM
gAthAoM ke bAre meM nirNaya karanA atyanta duSkara kArya thA, vahAM hamane apane
cintana ke AdhAra para bhI gAthAoM kA nirNaya kiyA hai| pRthakkaraNa ke ye bindu
anya niyuktiyoM ko bhASya se pRthak karane meM bhI sahayogI bane haiN|
piNDaniyukti kI viSayavastu evaM vaiziSTya piNDaniyukti caraNakaraNAnuyoga se
sambandhita eka mahattvapUrNa graMtha hai| yaha graMtha sAdhu kI bhikSAcaryA se
sambandhita aneka viSayoM ko apane bhItara sameTe hue hai| naMdIsUtra meM jahAM
kAlika aura utkAlika sUtroM kA ullekha hai, vahAM piNDaniyukti aura oghaniyukti-
donoM kA ullekha nahIM hai| aisA lagatA hai ki

Page #38 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍa Niyukti  Being a text on conduct, it later became established as a
मूलसूत्र (fundamental text). Due to its description of पिण्ड (body), it is
sometimes counted among the छेदसूत्र (texts dealing with specific topics).  The
author of the text, in the beginning, has divided the faults related to begging
into eight categories through संग्रह गाथा (collected verses). Even though many
other topics are discussed later, the author has described these eight
categories in order. The name of the text is पिण्डनिर्युक्ति, therefore, the
author has explained the word पिण्ड in detail at the beginning. In the
explanation of the nine types of पिण्ड, a beautiful description is given of how
a पिण्ड, from one-sense to five-sense, is useful for humans. This entire
description is very useful from the perspective of Ayurveda and medicine. In
ancient times, before washing their clothes, monks would practice विश्रमणा-विधि
(a method of rest) for seven days or three days. Although this practice is no
longer followed, it still signifies the importance of subtle non-violence in the
conduct of monks at that time.  There are many types of भावपिण्ड (mental body)
that present various options for spirituality. After the detailed explanation of
the word पिण्ड, the author has given a concise explanation of the words एषणा
(desire) and उद्गम (origin). Then, the author has discussed the sixteen faults
of उद्गम, including आधाकर्म (half-action), in detail. Among the sixteen faults
of उद्गम, आधाकर्म is considered more serious, therefore, it has been discussed
comprehensively through various categories. After that, the author has indicated
which fault belongs to which category, विशोधिकोटि (purifying category) or
अविशोधिकोटि (non-purifying category).  After उद्गम, the author discusses the
concise explanation of उत्पादना (production) and its sixteen faults, including
धात्री (wet nurse). Along with the explanation of the faults, the author has
also presented a picture of the culture and civilization of that time, such as
what effect a particular धात्री has on a child and what types of धाय (wet
nurses) existed at that time and what their roles were. After the explanation of
the sixteen faults of उत्पादना, the author discusses the ten faults of एषणा,
including शंकित (doubtful).  Finally, the author gives a detailed description of
the five faults of ग्रासैषणा (desire for food), including संयोजना (combination).
Even after consuming pure food free from the faults of उद्गम and उत्पादना, a
monk can still create karmic bondage during the time of consumption. The
description of the प्रमाण-दोष (fault of quantity) in ग्रासैषणा is important from
the perspective of Ayurveda, and the description of the quantity of food
according to the season is also scientifically explained. The criteria of
हिताहार (beneficial food) and मिताहार (moderate food) are noteworthy from the
perspective of health science.  The author has often used stories to explain the
faults related to begging.  1. बृहद् इतिहास भाग - २ पृ. १५९ (The Great History,
Part 2, Page 159)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDa niyukti AcAraviSayaka graMtha hone ke kAraNa bAda meM yaha mUlasUtra ke
rUpa meM pratiSThita ho gayA  /  piNDa sambandhI varNana hone se kahIM-kahIM
isakI gaNanA chedasUtroM meM bhI hotI hai  / " 24 graMtha ke prArambha meM
niyuktikAra ne saMgraha gAthA ke mAdhyama se bhikSA sambandhI doSoM ko ATha
bhedoM meM vibhakta kara diyA hai| avAntara aneka viSayoM kA varNana hone para
bhI niyuktikAra ne kramazaH ina ATha dvAroM kA varNana kiyA hai| graMtha kA nAma
piNDaniryukti hai isalie prArambha meM graMthakAra ne piNDa zabda kI vistAra se
vyAkhyA kI hai  /  piNDa ke nau bhedoM kI vyAkhyA meM ekendriya se paMcendriya
piNDa manuSya ke lie kisa rUpa meM upayogI hai, isakA suMdara varNana kiyA hai|
yaha sArA varNana Ayurveda aura cikitsA kI dRSTi se atyanta upayogI hai|
prAcInakAla meM vastra dhone se pUrva sAdhu sAta dina yA tIna dina taka
vizramaNA-vidhi karate the, yadyapi yaha vidhi Aja kRtakRtya ho gaI hai, phira
bhI usa samaya ke sUkSma ahiMsaka sAdhvAcAra kA mahattvapUrNa saMketa detI hai|
bhAvapiNDa ke aneka prakAra adhyAtma ke vividha vikalpoM ko prastuta karane vAle
haiN| piNDa zabda kI sAMgopAMga vyAkhyA ke pazcAt niyuktikAra ne eSaNA aura
udgama zabda kI nikSepaparaka vyAkhyA kI hai| phira vistAra se udgama ke
AdhAkarma Adi 16 doSoM kA vivecana prastuta kiyA hai| udgama ke 16 doSoM meM
AdhAkarma adhika sAvadya hai ataH isakA aneka dvAroM ke mAdhyama se sarvAMgINa
vivecana prastuta kiyA gayA hai| tatpazcAt udgama doSa ke vizodhikoTi aura
avizodhikoTi- ina do bhedoM meM kisa doSa kA kisameM samAveza hotA hai, isakA
saMketa diyA gayA hai| udgama ke bAda utpAdanA ke nikSepa tathA usake dhAtrI Adi
16 doSoM kI carcA hai  /  niyuktikAra ne doSoM kI vyAkhyA ke sAtha-sAtha usa
samaya kI saMskRti aura sabhyatA kA citraNa bhI prastuta kiyA hai, jaisekisa
dhAtrI kA bAlaka para kyA asara hotA hai tathA usa samaya kitane prakAra kI
dhAya hotI thIM, unakA kyA kArya hotA thA Adi  /  utpAdana ke 16 doSoM kI
vyAkhyA ke bAda eSaNA ke zaMkita Adi dasa doSoM kA vivecana hai  /  aMta meM
grAsaiSaNA ke saMyojanA Adi pAMca doSoM kA vistRta varNana hai  /  udgama aura
utpAdanA ke doSoM se rahita zuddha AhAra grahaNa karane para bhI sAdhu paribhoga
ke samaya karma-baMdhana kara sakatA hai| grAsaiSaNA ke antargata pramANa-doSa
kA varNana Ayurveda kI dRSTi se to mahattvapUrNa hai hI, sAtha hI Rtu ke anusAra
AhAra kI mAtrA kA varNana bhI vaijJAnika dRSTi se nirUpita hai| hitAhAra aura
mitAhAra kI kasauTiyAM svAsthyavijJAna kI dRSTi se ullekhanIya haiN| niyuktikAra
ne bhikSA sambandhI doSoM ko spaSTa karane meM prAyaH kathAnakoM kA saMketa kiyA
hai, 1. jaina sAhitya kA bRhad itihAsa bhAga - 2 pR. 159  /

Page #39 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation  25  This is explained by the commentators and
annotators. Except for a few narratives mentioned in Pinḍaniryukti, the
narratives are mostly new, which are rarely found in other explanatory
literature. The narrative uniqueness of Pinḍaniryukti will be discussed further.
The author has also discussed philosophical and theoretical issues in context.
The explanation of the word "Pinḍa" includes the explanation of Kṣetrapinḍa and
Kālapinḍa from a philosophical perspective. There is a combination and division
of Pinḍa related to name, establishment, substance, etc., therefore, these are
Pinḍa in a transcendental sense, but there is no such combination and division
in Kṣetra and Kālapinḍa, therefore, Kṣetrapinḍa and Kālapinḍa are accepted
formally. This is a tri-regional Samvagāḍha Triprādeśika Pudgala Skandha in
three regions, or food prepared in a particular kitchen, this type of Vyapadesa
is Kṣetrapinḍa. Similarly, this is a Trisāmayika Pudgala Skandha or
Chatursāmayika, such a statement is Kālapinḍa.  In this context, the author
himself has raised a question that mutual investigation and numerical abundance
are possible in concrete substances, but investigation-union of Kṣetra and Kāla
is not possible, Kṣetra is artificial, its regions are located separately,
therefore, the union of Ākāśa-regions is not possible. In Kāla also, the past
time has been destroyed, the future has not been born, only one time is present
in the present, therefore, mutual investigation and numerical abundance are
impossible in Kāla. Answering this, the author says that all the regions of
Ākāśa remain connected in a continuous manner, just like the four Skandhas
produced by the clouds. There is also numerical abundance in the regions of
Kṣetra, therefore, the word Pinḍa can be used for Kṣetra. Kāla is present-
momentary. Its past and future times do not meet, but numerical abundance is
possible in Kāla conceived by the intellect, therefore, Pinḍa of Kāla is also
possible. Due to being resultant and consequent, intellectual investigation is
possible with the present time. According to the commentator, there is a
detailed description of this in the Dharma Sangrahaṇī Tīkā, therefore, it is not
explained here.  The author has also described linguistics through deposition
here and there. In the context of the word Pinḍa, four types of names are
mentioned in Nāma Nikṣepa. Despite being given in a note, it is being described
in detail here due to its importance.  1. **Gauṇanāma:** To name someone
according to their qualities, actions, and substances, for example, to name a
powerful person Mahāvīra, the name of a cow is not based on Gotva, but on the
basis of the action of movement. 2. **Dravyanāma:** It is based on etymology,
for example, Śṛngī, Danṭī, Daṇḍī, etc.  2. Pinī 41, 42, Mavṛ P. 22-24. 1. Mavṛ
P. 23.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa 25 jisakI vyAkhyA bhASyakAra evaM TIkAkAra
dvArA kI gaI hai| piNDaniryukti meM ullikhita kucha kathAnakoM ko chor3akara
prAyaH kathAnaka navIna haiM, jo anya vyAkhyA - sAhitya meM kama milate haiM  /
piNDaniryukti ke kathAvaiziSTya ke bAre meM Age carcA kI jaaegii| niyuktikAra ne
prasaMgavaza dArzanika aura tAttvika carcA bhI kI hai| piNDa zabda kI vyAkhyA
meM kSetrapiNDa aura kAlapiNDa kI vyAkhyA dArzanika dRSTi se kI gaI hai| nAma,
sthApanA, dravya Adi se sambandhita piNDa kA saMyoga aura vibhAga hotA hai ataH
ye pAramArthika rUpa se piNDa haiM lekina kSetra aura kApiNDa meM isa rUpa se
saMyoga aura vibhAga nahIM hotA isalie kSetrapiNDa aura kAlapiNDa ko aupacArika
rUpa se svIkAra kiyA gayA hai| yaha tIna pradezoM meM samavagAr3ha triprAdezika
pudgala skandha hai athavA amuka rasoI meM banAyA gayA khAdya hai, isa prakAra
kA vyapadeza kSetrapiNDa hai| isI prakAra yaha trisAmayika pudgala skandha hai
yA catu sAmayika, aisA kathana kAlapiNDa hai  /  isa saMdarbha meM graMthakAra
ne svayaM eka prazna upasthita kiyA hai ki mUrtta dravyoM meM paraspara anuvedha
aura saMkhyA- - bAhulya saMbhava hai lekina kSetra aura kAla kA anuvedha -
milana saMbhava nahIM hai, kSetra akRtrima hai, usake pradeza vivikta rUpa se
avasthita haiM ataH AkAza-pradezoM kA milana saMbhava nahIM hai| kAla meM bhI
atIta kA samaya naSTa ho gayA, bhaviSya kA utpanna nahIM huA, vartamAna meM
kevala eka samaya vidyamAna hai ataH kAla meM paraspara anuvedha aura saMkhyA -
bAhulya asaMbhava hai| isakA uttara dete hue graMthakAra kahate haiM ki AkAza ke
sAre pradeza nairantarya rUpa se vaise hI sambaddha rahate haiM, jaise bAdara
niSpAdita cAra skandha  /  kSetra pradezoM meM bhI saMkhyA kA bAhulya rahatA hai
isalie kSetra ke lie piNDa zabda kA prayoga kiyA jA sakatA hai| kAla vartamAna
kSaNavartI hotA hai| usake pUrvApara samaya Apasa meM nahIM milate' lekina
buddhi se kalpita kAla meM saMkhyA- bAhulya saMbhava hai ataH kAla kA bhI piNDa
saMbhava hai| pariNAmI aura anvayI hone ke kAraNa vartamAna samaya ke sAtha
buddhikalpita anuvedha saMbhava hai| TIkAkAra ke anusAra dharma saMgrahaNI TIkA
meM isakA vistAra se varNana hai ataH yahAM vyAkhyA nahIM kI gaI hai| nikSepa
mAdhyama se bhASA vijJAna kA varNana bhI niryuktikAra ne yatra-tatra kara diyA
hai  /  piNDa zabda prasaMga meM nAma nikSepa meM nAma ke cAra prakAra batAe gae
haiN| TippaNa meM dene ke bAvajUda mahattvapUrNa hone ke kAraNa yahAM vistAra se
usakA varNana kiyA jA rahA hai gauNanAma - guNa, kriyA aura dravya ke anurUpa
kisI kA nAma rakhanA, jaise- zaktisampanna kA mahAvIra nAma rakhanA, gAya kA
nAma gotva ke AdhAra para nahIM, apitu gamana kriyA ke AdhAra para hai  /
dravya nAma vyutpatti ke AdhAra para hotA hai, jaise- zrRMgI, daMtI, daNDI Adi
/  2. pini 41, 42, mavR pa. 22-24  /  1. mavR pa. 23  /

Page #40 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pindaniyukti** is a name famous in theory but meaningless in terms of time. In
practice, a group of liquids is not called a **pind**, but the term **pind** has
been used for water in the scriptures. Therefore, even in the absence of the
synthesis of hard matter, the name **pind** for water is famous in time but not
meaningful. The name **Prabhriti** for **odana** is also a name of time.
**Tadu-bhayaj** - names that are both meaningful and famous in time, such as the
name **Rajoharan** for **Dharmadhwaj**. It is called **Rajoharan** because it
removes both external and internal **raj**. Therefore, its name is **Rajoharan**
by treating the action in the cause.  **Anubhayaj** - meaningless and unknown in
theory. The commentator has mentioned the name **Ubayatirikta** for this, such
as giving someone the name **Singh** in the absence of **shaurya** etc.  The
commentator has raised a question that there is no special difference between
**Samayakrit** and **Ubayatirikta** because both names are deficient in meaning.
Therefore, instead of mentioning two, only one could be mentioned. In response,
the commentator says that common people use the names that are symbolic in the
world, but common people do not use the names that are famous in theory, such as
the use of the word **Samuddesha** for food. Therefore, both have been mentioned
separately. Similarly, both **Goun** and **Samayakrit** are meaningful names,
but common people use the **Goun** name and not the **Samayakrit** name, but
only the **Samayakrit** name is used by the people of the time.  Many
psychological facts have also been presented in **Pindaniyukti** in context,
such as:  * A child who is not rejected in childhood becomes intelligent and
disease-free in the future. This means that if any frustration is instilled in
the subconscious mind in childhood, it greatly affects the person in adulthood.
* The **niyuktikar** has carved the effect of the **dhai's** body on the child's
body and mind based on the thinness and thickness of the **dhai's** body in a
very psychological way. This entire context is very important from the
perspective of modern child psychology. * If people laugh at each other when
they hear someone's statement, then it should be understood that there is less
truth in what is being said. The author has explained this psychological method
to know whether **bhiksha** is **auddeshik** or not. If the **grihaswamini**
says that this food is made for us

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti samayaja-artharahita lekina siddhAnta meM prasiddha naam|
vyavahAra meM tarala padArthoM ke samUha ko piNDa nahIM kahA jAtA lekina zAstra
meM pAnI ke lie piMDa zabda kA prayoga huA hai ataH kaThina dravya ke saMzleSa
ke abhAva meM bhI pAnI kA piNDa nAma samaya prasiddha hai lekina anvartha yukta
nahIM hai, odana ke lie prAbhRtikA nAma bhI samayaja nAma hai| tadubhayaja-
guNaniSpanna aura samayaprasiddha nAma, jaise-dharmadhvaja kA nAma hai
rajoharaNa  /  bAhya aura Abhyantara raja ko haraNa karane ke kAraNa ise
rajoharaNa kahA jAtA hai isalie kAraNa meM kArya kA upacAra karake isakA nAma
rajoharaNa rakhA gayA hai| anubhayaja-anvartharahita aura siddhAnta meM
aprasiddha naam| bhASyakAra ne isake lie ubhayAtirikta nAma kA ullekha kiyA hai,
jaise-zaurya Adi ke abhAva meM kisI kA nAma siMha rakha denaa| TIkAkAra ne eka
prazna upasthita kiyA hai ki samayakRta aura ubhayAtirikta-ina donoM meM vizeSa
aMtara nahIM hai kyoMki donoM nAma anvartha se vikala haiM ataH do kA ullekha na
karake eka kA hI nirdeza kiyA jA sakatA thaa| isakA uttara dete hue TIkAkAra
kahate haiM ki jo laukika sAMketika nAma haiM, unakA vyavahAra sAmAnya vyakti
karate haiM lekina jo siddhAnta prasiddha nAma haiM, unakA vyavahAra sAmAnya
vyakti nahIM karate, jaise bhojana ke lie 'samuddeza' zabda kA prayoga isIlie
donoM kA pRthak-pRthak ullekha kiyA gayA hai| isI prakAra gauNa aura samayakRta
donoM hI anvartha yukta nAma haiM lekina gauNa nAma kA prayoga sAmAnya vyakti
karate haiM tathA samayakRta kA sAmAnya vyakti nahIM apitu sAmayika hI karate
haiN| piNDaniyukti meM prasaMgavaza aneka manovaijJAnika tathya bhI prastuta hue
haiM, jaise* jo bAlaka bacapana meM tiraskRta nahIM hotA, vaha Age jAkara
buddhimAn aura rogarahita hotA hai| isakA tAtparya yaha hai ki bacapana meM yadi
avacetana mana meM koI kuMThA baiTha jAtI hai to bar3e hone ke bAda vaha vyakti
ko bahuta prabhAvita karatI hai| * niyuktikAra ne dhAI ke zarIra kI kRzatA aura
sthUlatA ke AdhAra para bAlaka ke zarIra aura mana para par3ane vAle prabhAva ko
bahuta manovaijJAnika vidhi se ukerA hai| yaha pUrA prasaMga Adhunika bAla
manovijJAna kI dRSTi se atyanta mahattvapUrNa hai| * yadi kisI vyakti ke kathana
para dUsare loga eka dUsare ko dekhakara haMsate haiM to samajha lenA cAhie ki
jo bAta kahI jA rahI hai, usameM satyAMza kama hai| bhikSA auddezika hai yA
nahIM, isako jAnane kA graMthakAra ne yahI manovaijJAnika tarIkA batAyA hai|
yadi gRhasvAminI kahatI hai ki yaha AhAra hamAre lie banAyA 1. AcUlA 1/7 /  2.
pini 198/2, mavR pa. 122 ; avimAnita:-anapamAnito bAlo matimAnarogI dIrghAyazca
bhavati, vimAnita: punrvipriitH|

Page #41 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation**  27 If, upon hearing that a monk has gone,
other members of the family laugh amongst themselves, the monk should understand
that the alms are not genuine.  In short, it can be said that the entire text
presents a comprehensive discussion of the monk's begging practice. Previously,
scattered references to faults related to alms are found in the Bhagavati,
Acharachula, and other Agamas, but in terms of such a systematic and organized
description, Pinḍaniryukti can be called the most ancient text. 1  **Language
Style**  Niryukti is a verse-based commentary written in the Prakrit language,
reflecting the influence of both Ardhamagadhi and Maharashtri languages. The
subject matter of Niryukti is presented using the method of "nikshepa"
(deposition). The Niryuktikara has presented a detailed explanation using the
method of deposition of selected and technical terms, such as pinḍa, udgama,
utpadana, eshana, etc. Through this, he has presented a comprehensive knowledge
of the subject. Pinḍa  In the context of nikshepa, the Niryuktikara clearly
states that here the context is of the "achitta dravyapinda" (non-mental
material object) and the "prashasta bhavpinda" (excellent mental object), but to
make the disciple's mind understand, a detailed discussion of pinḍas like name,
etc., has been done. 2  Writing synonyms for important words is a linguistic
characteristic of the Niryuktikara. The use of synonyms has also been presented
in the text, such as pinḍa, adhakarma, etc., see Pari. San. 6. In some places,
the author has also explained the tradition of the difference in meaning of
synonymous words through examples, which is very important from the point of
view of linguistics. In gatha 52/1, eshana, gaveshana, margana, and udgopana -
although synonymous, the difference in meaning of all four words should be
known, see the translation of 52/1.  Like other niryuktis, Pinḍaniryukti also
uses many native words, see Pari. San. 8. The linguistic importance of the
present text is the use of poignant and impactful sayings. Although primarily
focused on conduct, this text uses some important sayings, see Pari. San. 9.
The use of similes, worldly examples, illustrations, and logic creates
diversity, penetration, and elegance in the language. The Niryuktikara has
explained complex theoretical topics through new similes and examples, see Pari.
San. 10 and 12.  1. Pini 89/8, Mavri P. 73, 74. 2. Pini 47; Davve Acchitteṇam,
Bhave Ya Pasatthaehiṁ Pagatam. Uccaritattthasarisā, Sīsamativikōvaṇattḥāe ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti: : eka paryavekSaNa 27 gayA hai, use sunakara parivAra ke anya
sadasya Apasa meM haMsate haiM to sAdhu ko samajhanA cAhie ki bhikSA audezika
hai| saMkSepa meM kahA jA sakatA hai ki sampUrNa graMtha muni kI bhikSAcaryA kA
sAMgopAMga vivecana prastuta karane vAlA hai| isase pUrva vikIrNa rUpa se
bhagavatI, AcAracUlA Adi AgamoM meM bhikSA sambandhI doSoM kA ullekha milatA hai
lekina itanA kramabaddha aura vyavasthita varNana kI dRSTi se piNDaniryukti ko
sabase prAcIna graMtha kahA jA sakatA hai 1 bhASA zailI niryukti prAkRta bhASA
meM racita padyamayI vyAkhyA hai, isameM ardhamAgadhI aura mahArASTrI donoM
bhASAoM kA prabhAva parilakSita hotA hai| niryukti meM nikSepa paddhati se
viSaya kA pratipAdana huA hai| niyuktikAra ne cayanita evaM pAribhASika zabdoM
kI nikSepa paddhati se vistRta vyAkhyA prastuta kI hai, jaise piNDa, udgama,
utpAdanA, eSaNA Adi  /  isake mAdhyama se unhoMne usa viSaya kA sarvAMgINa jJAna
prastuta kara diyA hai| piMDa nikSepa ke prasaMga meM niyuktikAra spaSTa rUpa se
kahate haiM ki yahAM acitta dravyapiMDa aura prazasta bhAvapiMDa kA prasaMga hai
lekina ziSya kI mati ko vyutpanna karane ke lie nAma Adi piNDoM kA vistRta
vivecana kiyA gayA hai  /  2 mahattvapUrNa zabdoM ke ekArthaka likhanA
niryuktikAra kA bhASAgata vaiziSTya hai  /  prasaMgavaza ekArthakoM kA prayoga
bhI prastuta graMtha meM huA hai, jaise- piNDa, AdhAkarma Adi, dekheM pari. saM.
6  /  kahIM-kahIM graMthakAra ekArthaka zabdoM kI artha-bheda paramparA ko bhI
udAharaNa ke mAdhyama se spaSTa kiyA hai, jo bhASAvijJAna kI dRSTi se atyanta
mahattvapUrNa hai  /  gAthA 52/1 meM Ae eSaNA, gaveSaNA, mArgaNA aura udgopanA -
ekArthaka hote hue bhI cAroM zabdoM kA artha-bheda jJAtavya hai, dekheM 52 / 1
kA anuvAda | anya niyuktiyoM kI bhAMti piNDaniryukti meM bhI aneka dezI zabdoM
kA prayoga huA hai, dekheM pari. saM. 8  /  prastuta graMtha kA bhASAgata
mahattvapUrNa vaiziSTya hai- mArmika evaM prabhAvaka sUktiyoM kA prayoga  /
AcArapradhAna hote hue bhI isa graMtha meM kucha mahattvapUrNa sUktiyoM kA
prayoga huA hai, dekheM pari. saM. 9  /  upamA, laukika dRSTAnta, udAharaNa evaM
nyAya ke prayoga se bhASA meM vicitratA, vedhakatA evaM sarasatA utpanna ho jAtI
hai| niyuktikAra ne jaTila saiddhAntika viSayoM ko nayI upamAoM evaM dRSTAntoM
ke mAdhyama se samajhAyA hai, dekheM pari. saM. 10 aura 12  /  1. pini 89/8,
mavR pa. 73, 74  /  2. pini 47 ; davve accitteNaM, bhAve ya pasatthaehiM pagataM
/  uccAritatthasarisA, sIsamativikovaNaTThAe  //

Page #42 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 28:  The Style of the Author  The author, in some places, has used
multiple actions together to reveal the characteristics of the action or the
doer. For example:  > "They praise and they give, they cut and they grind, they
cage and they tear, they kill and they beat."  In the above single verse, the
author has used eight verbs, each expressing different actions.  While the use
of nominal verbs is less common in Prakrit, the author has used them as needed.
For example, "Vatuंti" means "to make round," and here it refers to shaping a
round sweet. Similarly, the use of nominal verbs like "Mamaye" etc. is also
noteworthy.  The author has also presented discussions related to grammar in
many places. For example:  > "Vani Jayan tti Vaniyo."  In many places, the
concise meaning of words or the distinction between two words has also been
clarified. For example, in verse 79, the distinction between "Nishthit" and
"Krit" is explained.  The author has adopted both the styles of "Vyas" and
"Samas." In many places, a detailed explanation of a single topic or word is
given, while in other places, the topic is presented very concisely. The
following example illustrates the concise style:  > "Kattoccau tti Sali Vani
Janati Puccha Tam Gantum." (Pini 88/1)  This single sentence mentions three
things.  It is a stylistic characteristic of the author that, to comprehensively
discuss the desired topic, they first provide a brief overview of all the topics
in a verse, which is called "Dwaragatha," and then explain each "Dwar" one by
one. In verse 60, there are nine "Dwars" related to "Adhakarma," and then each
"Dwar" is elaborated upon in 124 verses.  The author has presented the cause-
and-effect chain in many places. For example, "Darshan" and "Jnana" give rise to
"Charitra," and the purity of these two leads to the purity of "Charitra," which
in turn leads to the purity of "Karma," and the purity of "Udgam" leads to the
purity of "Charitra."  From the perspective of meter, the author has sometimes
shortened words and made the quantity of syllables short. For example, "Jivan" -
"Jiyan," "Veyana" - "Viyana," etc.  3. Pini 57/5. 1. Pini 267. 2. Pini 208.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 28 piMDaniyukti kahIM-kahIM niyuktikAra ne kArya yA kartA ke vaiziSTya ko
prakaTa karane hetu aneka kriyAoM kA eka sAtha prayoga kara diyA hai; jaise
bhajjaMti va daleMtI, kaMDaMtI ceva taha ya piisNtii| piMjaMtI ruMcaMtI,
kattaMti pamaddamANI y|| uparyukta eka hI gAthA meM niyuktikAra ne bhinna-bhinna
kriyAoM ko prakaTa karane vAlI ATha dhAtuoM kA prayoga kara diyA hai| prAkRta
meM nAma dhAtu kA prayoga kama hotA hai lekina niyuktikAra ne prasaMgavaza nAma
dhAtu kA bhI prayoga kiyA hai; jaise-vaTuMti, vaTTa kA artha hotA hai gola ata:
yahAM vaTuMti kA artha hai golAkAra modaka kI AkRti denaa| isI prakAra mamAyae
Adi nAma dhAtuoM kA prayoga bhI draSTavya hai| niyuktikAra ne aneka sthaloM para
prasaMgavaza vyAkaraNa sambandhI vimarza bhI prastuta kiyA hai; jaisevaNi jAyaNa
tti vnnio| aneka sthaloM para zabdoM kA saMkSipta artha yA do zabdoM meM
bhedarekhA bhI spaSTa huI hai; jaise-gA. 79 meM niSThita aura kRta kI
bhedrekhaa| niyuktikAra ne vyAsa aura samAsa-donoM zailiyoM ko apanAyA hai|
aneka sthaloM para eka hI viSaya yA zabda kI vistRta vyAkhyA kI hai to kahIM-
kahIM atyanta saMkSepa meM viSaya kA pratipAdana huA hai| saMkSipta zailI kA
nimna udAharaNa draSTavya hai-kattoccau tti sAlI vaNi jANati puccha taM gNtuN|
(pini 88/1) isa eka vAkya meM tIna bAtoM kA ullekha ho gayA hai| niyuktikAra kA
yaha zailIgata vaiziSTya hai ki Ipsita viSaya kA sarvAMgINa vivecana karane ke
lie pahale gAthA meM una saba viSayoM kI saMkSipta jAnakArI dete haiM, jise
dvAragAthA kahate haiM, usake bAda eka-eka dvAra kI vyAkhyA karate haiN| gA. 60
meM AdhAkarma se.sambandhita 9 dvAroM kA ullekha hai phira 124 gAthAoM meM
pratyeka dvAra kA vistAra hai| niyuktikAra ne aneka sthaloM para kArya-kAraNa
paramparA ko prastuta kiyA hai, jaise-darzana aura jJAna se cAritra kA udgama
hotA hai, ina donoM kI zuddhi se cAritra zuddha hotA hai, cAritra se karma-
zuddhi hotI hai tathA udgama-zuddhi se cAritra-zuddhi hotI hai| chaMda kI dRSTi
se niyuktikAra ne kahIM kahIM zabdoM kA saMkSepIkaraNa aura mAtrA kA hasvIkaraNa
bhI kiyA hai-jIvaM - jiyaM, veyaNA - viyaNA aadi| 3. pini 57/5 /  1. pini 267 /
2. pini 208 /

Page #43 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  The author of the Pinḍaniyukti has often
explained the reasons behind the topics discussed. For example, he has given
reasons why clothes should be washed before the rainy season, and also discussed
the harms caused by washing them during the rainy season. (See the translation
of Pinḍi Gā. 20 and 21). He has mentioned the reasons for eating, and also
explained the reasons for not eating.  After studying the Pinḍaniyukti
literature, it can be clearly said that the author's main goal was to present
the subject matter, not to create any poetry. Therefore, he paid less attention
to the meters and focused more on presenting the facts.  The use of stories is a
stylistic feature of the author. He often used narratives to explain the subject
matter. Some of these stories are related to kings, queens, ministers, or
merchants, while others show the influence of the Panchatantra. It seems that,
except for some historical and fictional stories related to animals and birds,
the author has presented the narratives or illustrations based on events that
occurred in his time.  In the Pinḍaniyukti, apart from historical stories, the
names of places or individuals are rarely mentioned in the stories. However, the
commentator has often mentioned the names of villages, cities, or districts, and
the names of the related individuals in the stories. It seems likely that the
commentator has mentioned the names of the locations and individuals in a
fictional way to give the event the form of a story, such as the names of the
four sons and four daughters-in-law of Sagaradatta Shreshthi in the Govatsa
illustration. However, further discussion is needed on this topic.  Except for
some historical stories like Chanakya, Arya Samiti, or Padalipta, most of the
narratives are not found in the Āgama-vyākhyā-sāhitya. Some of these narratives
are found in the Nishīth Bhāṣya and Jītakalpa Bhāṣya. This is because these
chapters have been transferred from the Pinḍaniyukti.  The understanding of
animals and birds in the stories mentioned in the Pinḍaniyukti is presented in a
highly developed form. The deer leader tells the deer that this is not the
season for the Śrīparṇī fruits to ripen. Even if they ripen, there are not so
many fruits in the summer season. Therefore, this is a trick by some cunning
person. The monkey leader also explains to the monkeys that this Draha is not
harmless because there are footprints of carnivores going into the Draha, but
there are no footprints coming out. In the context of the Grāsaiṣaṇā fault, the
fish itself tells a courageous story from its own mouth. Here, the author has
used the concept of shadowism beautifully.  1. Pinḍi 53/1-54, Mavṛ P. 30, 31. 2.
Pinḍi 236/1-3, Mavṛ P. 146.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa niyuktikAra ne prAyaH viSayoM ko hetu purassara
spaSTa kiyA hai| varSAkAla se pUrva kapar3e kyoM dhone cAhie, isake hetu die
haiM to varSAkAla meM dhone se hone vAlI hAniyoM kA bhI kAraNa sahita vivecana
kiyA hai| (dekheM pini gA. 20 aura 21 kA anuvAda ) AhAra karane ke kAraNoM kA
ullekha kiyA hai to na karane ke hetuoM kA bhI spaSTIkaraNa kiyA hai| niyukti-
sAhitya kA adhyayana karane ke bAda yaha spaSTa rUpa se kahA jA sakatA hai ki
niyuktikAra kA mUla lakSya viSaya-pratipAdana thA, kisI kAvya kI racanA karanA
nahIM ataH unhoMne chaMdoM para jyAdA dhyAna na dekara tathya-pratipAdana para
adhika bala diyA hai| kathAoM kA prayoga niyuktikAra kA eka zailIgata vaiziSTya
hai ki viSaya ko spaSTa karane ke lie unhoMne prAyaH kathAnakoM kA prayoga kiyA
hai| inameM kucha kathAeM rAjA-rAnI, maMtrI yA zreSThI Adi se sambandhita haiM
to kucha kathAoM para paMcataMtra kA prabhAva parilakSita hotA hai| aisA pratIta
hotA hai ki kucha aitihAsika aura pazu-pakSI se sambandhita kAlpanika kathAnakoM
ko chor3akara prAya: kathAnaka yA dRSTAnta niyuktikAra ne apane samaya meM
ghaTita ghaTanAoM ke AdhAra para prastuta kie haiN| piMDaniyukti meM aitihAsika
kathAoM ke atirikta prAyaH kathAoM meM sthAna yA vyakti ke nAma kA ullekha nahIM
hai lekina TIkAkAra ne prAyaH kathAoM meM gAMva, nagara yA janapada ke nAma
tathA sambandhita vyaktiyoM ke nAmoM kA ullekha kiyA hai| aisA saMbhava lagatA
hai ki ghaTanA ko kathA kA rUpa dene ke lie TIkAkAra ne kAlpanika rUpa se
ghaTanAsthala tathA vyakti ke nAmoM kA ullekha kara diyA hai, jaise govatsa
dRSTAnta meM sAgaradatta zreSThI ke cAra putra evaM cAra putravadhuoM ke naam|
phira bhI isa viSaya meM aura adhika vimarza kI AvazyakatA hai| cANakya, Arya
samita yA pAdalipta Adi kucha aitihAsika kathAoM ko chor3akara prAyaH kathAnaka
Agama-vyAkhyA-sAhitya meM anupalabdha haiN| isake kucha kathAnaka nizItha bhASya
aura jItakalpa bhASya meM milate haiM, isakA kAraNa hai ki piMDaniyukti se hI
yaha prakaraNa vahAM saMkrAnta huA hai| piMDaniyukti meM nirdiSTa kathA meM
pazu-pakSiyoM kI samajha atyanta vikasita rUpa meM prakaTa kI gaI hai| mRga
yUthapati mRgoM se kahatA hai ki yaha mausama zrIparNI phaloM ke vikasita hone
kA nahIM hai| yadi vikasita hoM to bhI grISma Rtu meM itanI mAtrA meM phala
nahIM hote ataH kisI dhUrta ke dvArA yaha upakrama kiyA gayA hai| vAnara
yUthapati bhI vAnaroM ko samajhAtA hai ki yaha draha nirupadrava nahIM hai
kyoMki yahAM draha meM jAte hue zvApadoM ke padacihna hai lekina nikalate hue
unake padacihna nahIM haiN| grAsaiSaNA doSa ke saMdarbha meM matsya svayaM apane
mukha se sAhasa bharI kathA kahatA hai| yahAM graMthakAra ne chAyAvAda kA
suMdara prayoga kiyA hai| 1. pini 53/1-54, mavR pa. 30, 31  /  2. pini 236/1-3,
mavR pa. 146  /

Page #44 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  30 The text of the *Piṇḍaniyukti* also presents theoretical
topics beautifully through stories. In the *Nūpurapaṇḍitā* narrative, the four
types of transgression (atikram, etc.) are beautifully explained through the
medium of an elephant. The *Piṇḍaniyukti* commentary literature is written in a
very concise and symbolic style, making it extremely difficult to understand
without commentary literature. For example, in the context of *Ādhākarma*, the
author of the *Piṇḍaniyukti* has mentioned "Dansaṇagandhaparikahā, Bhāvinti
Sulūhavittin Pi2". Even though it is simple, it is difficult to understand the
latter part of the verse without a commentary or explanation.  **Original
Commentary and Old Commentary**  Ācārya Malayagiri has mentioned the old
commentary or the old tradition in many places. This mention could mean that
there was a previous Ācārya's text that presented an explanation of the
*Piṇḍaniyukti* before him. The term "Old Commentary" has also been mentioned by
Yaśodevasūri, the commentator of the *Piṇḍaviśuddhiprakaraṇa*. This original
commentary is not available today, but it is a subject of historical research to
find out which Ācārya Ācārya Malayagiri has referred to as the original
commentator and when he wrote this commentary.  The commentator has mentioned
the old tradition, old commentary, previous Ācārya commentary, and original
commentary in the following places:  * "Pravacanādipadasaṭake Punarevaṃ
Pūrvācāryavyākhyā Pravacanalin̄ga..." (Mavṛ p. 55) * "Uktan Ca Mūlatīkāyāṃ
Caraṇātmavighāte...Heto'nirarthakatvādīti." (Mavṛ p. 42, 43) * "Tadayuktaṃ,
Mūlatīkāyāṃ Asyārthasyāsammaṭatvāṭ, Mūlatīkāyāṃ Hi
Liṅgābhigraha...Vidhirevamuktaṃ, Liṅge No Abhigghe..." (Mavṛ p. 62) * "Atra
Vṛddhasamprāyaḥ, Iha Yadyekam Vāraṃ...Niṣṭhitakṛta Ucyate." (Mavṛ p. 65, 66) *
"Atra Cāyaṃ Vṛddhasamprāyaḥ-Saṅkalpitāsu Dattiṣu...Kalpyamavaseyam." (Mavṛ p.
78) * "Yata Uktan Mūlatīkāyāṃ-'Atra Cāyaṃ Vidhiḥ-Sandissantaṃ Jo
Suṇai...Doṣābhāvādīti.'" (Mavṛ p. 81)  Vīrācārya has mentioned in the initial
praise verses of his concise commentary that Ācārya Haribhadra wrote a
commentary called "Śiṣyahiṭā" on the *Piṇḍaniyukti*, but he wrote this
commentary only up to the *sthāpanā doṣa* and then passed away. Ācārya
Malayagiri's commentary mentions the old commentary, old tradition, or previous
Ācārya commentary before the *sthāpanā doṣa*. The discussion of the subsequent
faults...  1. Piṇi 82/2, Mavṛ p. 68. 2. Piṇi 69/2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 30 piMDaniyukti kathA ke mAdhyama se saiddhAntika viSayoM kI bhI suMdara
prastuti huI hai| nUpurapaMDitA kathAnaka meM hAthI ke mAdhyama se atikrama Adi
cAroM bhedoM ko suMdara DhaMga se spaSTa kiyA gayA hai| piNDaniyukti kA vyAkhyA-
sAhitya niyukti-sAhitya atyanta saMkSipta evaM sAMketika zailI meM likhA gayA
hai ataH binA vyAkhyAsAhitya ke isako samajhanA atyanta kaThina hai|
udAharaNasvarUpa AdhAkarma ke prasaMga meM niyuktikAra ne
'daMsaNagaMdhaparikahA, bhAviMti sulUhavittiM pi2 kA ullekha kiyA hai| sarala
hote hue bhI gAthA ke isa uttarArddha ko TIkA yA vyAkhyA-sAhitya ke binA
samajhanA kaThina hai| mUlaTIkA evaM vRddhavyAkhyA AcArya malayagiri ne aneka
sthaloM para vRddha vyAkhyA yA vRddha sampradAya kA ullekha kiyA hai| isa
ullekha kA tAtparya yahI ho sakatA hai ki unake samakSa piMDaniyukti kI vyAkhyA
prastuta karane vAlA pUrvavartI AcArya kA koI graMtha thaa| atra vRddhavyAkhyA'
kA ullekha piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa ke TIkAkAra yazodevasUri ne bhI kiyA hai|
vartamAna meM yaha mUla TIkA upalabdha nahIM hai, phira bhI aitihAsika dRSTi se
khoja kA viSaya hai ki mUla TIkA ke rUpa meM AcArya malayagiri ne kisa AcArya kA
saMketa kiyA hai tathA unhoMne kisa samaya isa vyAkhyA ko likhaa| TIkAkAra ne
nimna sthaloM para vRddhasampradAya, vRddhavyAkhyA, pUrvAcArya vyAkhyA tathA
mUlaTIkA kA ullekha kiyA hai * pravacanAdipadasaptake punarevaM
pUrvAcAryavyAkhyA pravacanaliGga.......  /  (mavR pa. 55) * uktaM ca mUlaTIkAyAM
crnnaatmvighaate......hetornirrthktvaaditi| (mavR pa. 42, 43) * tadayuktaM,
mUlaTIkAyAmasyArthasyAsammatatvAt, mUlaTIkAyAM hi
liMgAbhigraha....vidhirevamuktam, liMge no abhiggahe....  /  (mavR pa. 62) *
atra vRddhasampradAyaH, iha yadyekaM vAraM....niSThitakRta ucyte| (mavR pa. 65,
66) * atra cAyaM vRddhasampradAyaH-saGkalpitAsu dttissu........klpymvseym| (mavR
pa. 78) * yata uktaMmUlaTIkAyAm-'atra cAyaM vidhiH-saMdissaMtaM jo
sunni....dossaabhaavaaditi|' (mavRpa.81) vIrAcArya ne apanI saMkSipta TIkA ke
prArambhika prazasti zlokoM meM isa bAta kA ullekha kiyA hai ki AcArya
haribhadra ne piNDaniyukti para 'ziSyahitA' nAmaka vivRtti likhI thI lekina
unhoMne sthApanA doSa taka hI vaha vivRti (TIkA) likhI, usake bAda ve divaMgata
ho ge| AcArya malayagiri kI TIkA meM sthApanA doSa se pUrva hI vRddha-vyAkhyA,
vRddhasampradAya yA pUrvAcAryavyAkhyA kA ullekha hai| Age ke doSoM kI 1. pini
82/2, mavR pa. 68 /  2. pini 69/2 /

Page #45 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  **Commentary:**  Mālayagiri does not mention
this in his commentary, so it is possible that the "vṛddha-vyākhyā," "mūlatīkā,"
or "vṛddha-sampradāya" mentioned by Mālayagiri refers to the *Śiṣya-hitā*
commentary by Haribhadra. However, further research is needed on this topic.
**Pinḍaniyukti Bhāṣya:**  The first brief commentary on *Pinḍaniyukti* is the
*Bhāṣya*. The published commentary contains only 37 *bhāṣya* verses, but
originally there must have been more. This is indicated in the notes in the
edition.  Since a *bhāṣya* was written on *niyukti*, it is certain that there
were two ācāryas who authored these works. Ācārya Mālayagiri mentions "āha
bhāṣyakāraḥ" etc. in many places and also explains the *bhāṣya* verses, so it is
also certain that the *bhāṣyakāra* lived before Ācārya Mālayagiri.  It is not
possible to say for certain who the *bhāṣyakāra* of *Pinḍaniyukti* was.
Currently, two names are known as *bhāṣyakāra* - Saṅhadāsagaṇi and
Jinabhadragaṇi Kṣamāśramaṇa.  In the *Nīśītha Bhāṣya*, after the verse of
*Pinḍaniyukti*, the *cūrṇikāra* mentions "etīa imā do vakkhāṇagāhāo" for the
verses explaining it. This mention is found in other places as well. This
suggests that the *Nīśītha Bhāṣyakāra* may have composed the *bhāṣya* verses,
but further research and discussion are needed in this regard.  Looking at the
*Laghubhāṣya*, it is also possible that some ācārya in between composed this
*bhāṣya*.  **Mālayagīrīya Tīkā:**  Currently, the most comprehensive commentary
on *Pinḍaniyukti* is by Ācārya Mālayagiri. Although there is no specific
information about his life in history, he was a contemporary of Hemacandra, so
his existence is confirmed around the 12th century. Ācārya Mālayagiri wrote
extensive commentaries on about 25 texts.  The commentator's wide knowledge can
be seen from the fact that he also mentions other texts, such as "etaccañyatra
dharma-saṅgrahaṇīṭikādau vibhāvitamiti neha bhūyo vibhāvyate, granthagaurava-
bhayāt." He also mentions other beliefs by mentioning "anye" or "kecidāhuḥ" in
many places, such as:  1. *Mavṛ* p. 23.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa vyAkhyA meM malayagiri ne isa prakAra kA
ullekha nahIM kiyA hai ataH yaha saMbhAvanA kI jA sakatI hai ki malayagiri ne jo
vRddha-vyAkhyA, mUlaTIkA yA vRddha-sampradAya kA ullekha kiyA, vaha haribhadra
kRta ziSyahitA TIkA ke lie hI kiyA hogaa| phira bhI isa viSaya meM aura adhika
zodha kI AvazyakatA hai| piNDaniyukti bhASya piNDaniyukti para prathama
saMkSipta vyAkhyA bhASya hai| prakAzita TIkA meM bhASya kI saMkhyA mAtra 37 hai
lekina mUlataH bhASya gAthAeM adhika honI caahie| saMpAdana meM isakA nirdeza
TippaNa meM yatra-tatra kara diyA gayA hai| niyukti para bhASya likhA gayA ata:
yaha to nizcita hai ki ina donoM ke kartA do AcArya rahe hoNge| AcArya
malayagiri ne aneka sthaloM para 'Aha bhASyakAra: ' Adi kA ullekha kiyA hai
tathA bhASya-gAthAoM kI vyAkhyA bhI kI hai ataH bhASyakAra AcArya malayagiri se
pUrva hue, yaha bhI nizcita hai| piNDaniyukti ke bhASyakAra kauna the, isa bAre
meM nizcayapUrvaka kucha bhI nahIM kahA jA sktaa| vartamAna meM bhASyakAra ke
rUpa meM do nAma prasiddha haiM-saMghadAsagaNI evaM jinabhadragaNi kssmaashrmnn|
nizItha bhASya meM piNDaniyukti kI gAthA ke bAda usakI vyAkhyA vAlI gAthAoM ke
lie cUrNikAra ne 'etIe imA do vakkhANagAhAo' kA ullekha kiyA hai| aisA ullekha
aura bhI sthAnoM para milatA hai| isase eka saMbhAvanA yaha kI jA sakatI hai ki
nizItha bhASyakAra ne hI isakI bhASyagAthAoM kI racanA kI ho, phira bhI isa
saMdarbha meM abhI aura bhI adhika khoja evaM vimarza karane kI AvazyakatA hai|
laghubhASya ko dekhakara eka saMbhAvanA yaha bhI kI jA sakatI hai ki bIca ke
kisI AcArya ne yaha bhASya racA ho| malayagirIyA TIkA vartamAna meM piNDaniyukti
para sabase samRddha TIkA AcArya malayagiri kI hai| yadyapi unake jIvana ke bAre
meM itihAsa meM vizeSa jAnakArI nahIM miltii| ye AcArya hemacandra ke samakAlIna
the ataH inakA astitva bArahavIM zatAbdI ke AsapAsa siddha hotA hai| AcArya
malayagiri ne lagabhaga 25 graMthoM para vistRta TIkAeM likhI haiN| TIkAkAra ke
bAhuzrutya ko isa bAta se jAnA jA sakatA hai ki unhoMne anya graMthoM kA ullekha
bhI kiyA hai, jaise-etaccAnyatra dharmasaMgrahaNiTIkAdau vibhAvitamiti neha
bhUyo vibhAvyate, grnthgaurvbhyaat| aneka sthaloM para 'anye' yA 'kecidAhuH' kA
ullekha karake anya mAnyatAoM kA ullekha bhI kiyA hai, jaise 1. mavR pa. 23 /

Page #46 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **32** Others apply the term *tadguna-vikatthana* to
*pindaniyukti* in this way: "Someone who eats *adhakarman*..." (Mavri p. 50).
Some say: "Those who have attained the *ekadashi* image are *sadhukalpa*, and
even their..." (Mavri p. 62).  The commentator, by mentioning Panini's sutras in
passing, has also explained grammar and the derivation of words. For example,
the word *malin* is neuter, but due to Prakrit, it is used as masculine. The
commentator says: "Even though *malinani* is neuter, the sutra indicates
masculinity due to the characteristics of Prakrit, and it is said: 'Panini, in
his own description of Prakrit, says: 'The gender can be violated.'"  Similarly,
while explaining the word *niyoga*, the commentator says: "One who is not
preceded by anything is used in the sense of 'benefit'... 'He is used, he is
employed by this' - *niyoga* is the instrument."  The commentator has also
discussed *tattvajñana* in passing, for example, he has discussed *shatsthana-
patita*, *samyama-shreni*, and *kandaka* in detail in these two chapters, 39 and
40.  In some places, he has also described the sublime spiritual essence in the
form of self-reflection. In such places, his language, even though literary, is
very important. When *laddhukapriya-kumara* attained *kaivalya*, the commentator
presented his self-reflection in a literary style.  The story hinted at by the
*niyuktikara* has been elaborated by Acharya Malayagiri. It is very difficult to
understand those stories without the help of the commentary. Through the
stories, the commentator has also preserved many cultural facts.  It can be said
that the commentary plays a very important role in understanding the heart of
*pindaniyukti*. In many places, it is not impossible, but certainly difficult,
to grasp the heart of the verses without the help of the commentary.
*Pindaniyukti Avchuri*  There is also an *avchuri* on *pindaniyukti* by
Kshamaratnasuri. The *avchurikara* has explained *pindaniyukti* in brief. In
some places, where Acharya Malayagiri has not explained the context, Acharya
Kshamaratnasuri has explained it in the *avchuri*. In some places, the
*avchurikara* has quoted the Malayagiri commentary, mentioning "the old
tradition in the *vrutta*," for example, see Av p. 102. *Viracharya's
Commentary*  There is also a short commentary on *pindaniyukti* by Viracharya.
At the beginning of the commentary, he has mentioned...  1. Mavri p. 12. 2.
Mavri p. 34.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 32 piMDaniyukti anye tu tadguNavikatthanAmevaM yojayanti-AdhAkarmabhojinaM
ko'pi.......  /  (mavR pa. 50) kecidAhuH-ekAdazI pratimAM pratipannAH sAdhukalpa
iti tasyApyAya.......  /  (mavR pa. 62) TIkAkAra ne prasaMgavaza pANinI ke
sUtroM kA ullekha karake vyAkaraNa-bodha tathA zabdoM kI siddhi bhI kI hai,
jaise malina zabda napuMsaka hote hue bhI prAkRta ke kAraNa pulliMga ke rUpa meM
prayukta hai| TIkAkAra kahate haiM-malinAnItyatra napuMsakatve prApte'pi sUtre
puMstvanirdezaH prAkRtalakSaNavazAt, tathA cAha-pANiniH svaprAkRtalakSaNe-liGga
vybhicaarypiiti| isI prakAra niryoga zabda kA nirukta karate hue TIkAkAra kahate
haiM-nispUrvo yujirupakAre vartate.... niyujyate-upakriyate'neneti niryog-
upkrnnm| prasaMgavaza TIkAkAra ne tattvajJAna kA bhI vivecana kiyA hai, jaise
SaTsthAnapatita, saMyamazreNi evaM kaNDaka Adi kA vistRta vivecana 39 evaM
40-ina do patroM meM kiyA hai| kahIM-kahIM unhoMne Atma-cintana ke rUpa meM
utkRSTa AdhyAtmika rasa kA varNana bhI kiyA hai| aise sthaloM meM unakI bhASA
sAhityika hone para bhI atyanta mahattvapUrNa hai| laDDukapriyakumAra ko
kaivalya kI utpatti hone para TIkAkAra ne usake Atmacintana ko sAhityika zailI
meM prastuta kiyA hai| niyuktikAra dvArA saMketita kathA kA vistAra AcArya
malayagiri ne kiyA hai| binA TIkA kI sahAyatA ke una kathAoM ko samajhanA
atyanta kaThina hai| kathAoM ke mAdhyama se TIkAkAra ne aneka sAMskRtika tathyoM
ko bhI surakSita kara diyA hai| kahA jA sakatA hai ki piNDaniyukti ke hArda ko
samajhane meM TIkA kA atyanta mahattvapUrNa sthAna hai| aneka sthaloM para binA
TIkA kI sahAyatA ke gAthAoM ke hRdaya ko pakar3anA asaMbhava nahIM to kaThina
avazya hai| piNDaniyukti avacUri piMDaniyukti para kSamAratnasUrikRta avacUri
bhI milatI hai| avacUrikAra ne saMkSepa meM piNDaniyukti kI vyAkhyA kI hai|
kahIM-kahIM jisa prasaMga kI vyAkhyA AcArya malayagiri ne nahIM kI, usakI
vyAkhyA AcArya kSamAratnasUri ne avacUri meM kI hai| kahIM-kahIM avacUrikAra ne
malayagiri TIkA ko uddhRta karate hue 'vRttau vRddhasampradAyo' kA ullekha kiyA
hai, udAharaNArtha dekheM ava pa. 102  /  vIrAcArya kRta TIkA piNDaniyukti para
vIrAcArya kRta eka laghu TIkA bhI milatI hai| TIkA ke prArambha meM unhoMne
ullekha 1. mavR pa. 12 /  2. mavR pa. 34 /

Page #47 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pinḍaniyukti:** It has been observed that Haribhadra Suri started writing a
commentary called Śiṣyahitā on Pinḍaniyukti, but he passed away after writing
the commentary up to the section on establishment defects.  This commentary is
concise but presents an explanation of the original words. It is published in
the ninth appendix along with the Avacūrī, published by Devacandra Lalbhai Jain
Pustakoddhār.  **Maṇikyasekhara's Dīpikā** A concise commentary on Pinḍaniyukti
is also found in Ācārya Maṇikyasekhara's Dīpikā. It contains an explanation of
the first approximately 100 verses. The explanation of hundreds of verses in the
middle is missing. Again, the Dīpikā author has started the explanation from the
Dāyaka doṣa. This Dīpikā is published in the tenth appendix along with the
Pinḍaniyukti Avacūrī.  **Influence of Earlier Texts on Pinḍaniyukti** Just as
the Tīrthankaras were devoted to spirituality, they were also devoted to
conduct. This is why, on the one hand, we have a gem of a text like Ācārāṅga,
which presents the most excellent exposition of spirituality, and on the other
hand, the second Śrutaśkaṇḍha, Ācāra-cūlā, which presents a detailed exposition
of good conduct. Hints of the conduct of a sādhus and their defects are found
scattered in the Āṅga literature such as Ācāra-cūlā, Sūtrakṛtāṅga,  Śthānāṅga,
Bhagavati, and Praśnavyākaraṇa. In narrative Āṅga literature like Vipākaśruta,
there is no special discussion regarding the conduct of begging. Within the
Chedasūtras, in Niśītha, there are provisions for many rules, sub-rules, and
penances related to begging. In the Mūlasūtras, the first and fifth studies of
Daśavaikalika are related to begging. In Uttarādhyayana, there are instructions
regarding the defects of begging in the style of a sermon, as the occasion
arises. It can be said that almost all the defects of begging are mentioned in
the Āgamas in a scattered form. (See Introduction, p. 89) The author of the
Niyukti, like a garland maker, has strung them together in a coherent way,
giving them the form of a garland. Therefore, it can be said without a doubt
that even though it is influenced by Āgama literature, the systematic and
organized description of the 42 or 46 defects of begging is the original
contribution of the author of the Niyukti.  **Influence of Pinḍaniyukti on Other
Later Texts** It has been a characteristic of ancient literature that authors
would incorporate any part of any text into their own text without any mention
of the source. At that time, this was not considered literary theft. 1. Muni
Hansasāgara has translated the verses of Pinḍaniyukti and the commentary of
Malayagiri into Gujarati. This book is published by Hansasāgara Śāsana-
kaṇṭakoddhār Jñānamantra, Bhavnagar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa kiyA hai ki haribhadra sUri ne piNDaniyukti
para ziSyahitA nAmaka vRtti likhanI prArambha kI lekina sthApanA doSa taka kI
TIkA likhakara ve divaMgata ho ge| yaha TIkA saMkSipta hai lekina mUla zabdoM kI
vyAkhyA prastuta karane vAlI hai| yaha devacandra lAlabhAI jaina pustakoddhAra
dvArA prakAzita avacUri ke sAtha pIche navama pariziSTa meM prakAzita hai|'
mANikyazekhara kRta dIpikA piNDaniyukti para eka saMkSipta vyAkhyA AcArya
mANakyazekhara kRta dIpikA bhI milatI hai| isameM prArambha kI lagabhaga 100
gAthAoM kI vyAkhyA hai| bIca kI saikar3oM gAthAoM kI vyAkhyA nahIM hai| punaH
dIpikAkAra ne dAyaka doSa se vyAkhyA prArambha kI hai| yaha dIpikA piNDaniyukti
avacUri ke sAtha dazama pariziSTa meM prakAzita hai| piNDaniyukti para
pUrvavartI graMthoM kA prabhAva tIrthaMkara jitane adhyAtmaniSTha the, utane hI
AcAraniSTha bhI, yahI kAraNa hai ki eka ora adhyAtma kA utkRSTatama nirUpaNa
karane vAlA AcArAMga jaisA graMtharatna upalabdha hotA hai to dUsarI ora usI kA
dvitIya zrutaskandha AcAracUlA sAdhvAcAra kA vizada nirUpaNa karane vAlA hai|
sAdhu kI bhikSAcaryA evaM usake doSoM kA saMketa prakIrNaka rUpa se AcAracUlA,
sUtrakRtAMga, sthAnAMga, bhagavatI evaM praznavyAkaraNa Adi aMga-sAhitya meM
milatA hai| vipAkazruta jaise kathAtmaka aMga-sAhitya meM bhikSAcaryA ke
sambandha meM vizeSa carcA nahIM miltii| chedasUtroM ke antargata nizItha meM
bhikSAcaryA se sambandhita aneka niyama-upaniyama tathA prAyazcittoM kA vidhAna
hai| mUlasUtroM meM dazavaikAlika kA prathama tathA pAMcavAM adhyayana
bhikSAcaryA se hI sambandhita hai| uttarAdhyayana meM prasaMgavaza upadeza zailI
meM bhikSAcaryA ke doSoM ke sambandha meM nirdeza milatA hai| kahA jA sakatA hai
ki AgamoM meM vikIrNa rUpa se bhikSAcaryA ke prAyaH sabhI doSoM kA ullekha hai|
(dekheM bhUmikA pR. 89) niyuktikAra ne mAlAkAra kI bhAMti unheM susambaddha rUpa
se pirokara mAlA kA rUpa pradAna kiyA hai ata: nirvivAda rUpa se yaha kahA jA
sakatA hai ki Agama-sAhitya se prabhAvita hone para bhI bhikSAcaryA ke 42 yA 46
doSoM kA kramabaddha aura vyavasthita varNana niyuktikAra kA maulika avadAna
hai| piNDaniyukti kA paravartI anya graMthoM para prabhAva prAcIna sAhitya kI
eka vizeSatA rahI hai ki lekhaka kisI bhI graMtha ke kisI bhI aMza ko binA kisI
nAmollekha ke apane graMtha kA aMga banA lete the| usa samaya yaha sAhityika
corI nahIM mAnI jAtI thii| 1.piNDaniyukti kI gAthAoM evaM malayagiri kI TIkA kA
gujarAtI anuvAda muni haMsasAgara jI ne kiyA hai| yaha pustaka haMsasAgara
zAsana-kaMTakoddhAra jJAnamaMdira bhAvanagara se prakAzita hai|

Page #48 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  34 ##  Pindaniyukti  It is difficult to determine today which text
influenced which, and which text contains the earliest mention of a particular
topic, given the presence of similar sections in numerous texts. Many stories
related to Pindaniyukti have been incorporated into other texts as chapters or
as explanations of topics. Here are some points regarding the influence of
Pindaniyukti on later literature.  The detailed explanation of the word "Pind"
in Pindaniyukti is relevant, but the forty verses related to "Pind" in
Oghanuyukti seem to be quoted from Pindaniyukti, as there is no context for the
explanation of "Pind" there.  The faults of Udgama and Utpadana have been
transmitted from the Svetambara tradition to the Digambara tradition. Pandit
Sukhlalji considers Mulachar to be a compiled work, so it is very likely that
the chapter on Bhikṣācaryā in Mulachar was influenced by Pindaniyukti. Although
there are differences in the names and order of the faults in many places, and
the verses are not the same, it can be said that this chapter is influenced by
Pindaniyukti in terms of subject matter and names. While Pindaniyukti mentions
Aṣṭavidha Pindaniyukti, Mulachar hints at Aṣṭavidha Pindasuddhi. Considering the
chapter, it does not seem possible that the author of Pindaniyukti was
influenced by Mulachar.  Based on the current Digambara and Svetambara methods
of Bhikṣā, it can also be said that the faults of Bhikṣācaryā related to Udgama,
Utpadana, and Eṣaṇā were determined by the Svetambara Ācāryas. The Digambara
Ācāryas wrote more on Prathamānuyoga and Karmavāda, so detailed descriptions of
practical Ācāra-Mīmāṁsā are found less frequently in texts other than Mulachar
and Bhagavati Ārādhanā.  The Niśīthabhāṣya describes 152 faults related to
Utpadana in approximately 972 verses. Almost all the verses are identical to
those in Pindaniyukti. Some verses have been added by the Bhāṣyakāra. For
example, for verse Pin 205 (Nibha 4406), the Niśīth Chūrṇikāra mentions "Imā
Bhaddabāhukayā Gāhā", and for the two verses following it, he mentions "Etiyā
Imā Do Vakkhaṇagāhāo". This indicates that the Niśīth Bhāṣyakāra has made these
verses a part of his commentary. The Chūrṇikāra has mentioned Pindaniyukti in
many places, some references are presented here:  * Jahā Govo Pindanijjuttiye
(Niču Bhā. 4 p. 67). 1. Oni 331-71. 2. Niśīth does not mention Mulakarma. 3.
Nibha 4375-4472. 4. Niču Bhā. 3 p. 411. 5. Pibha 33, 34, Nibha 4407, 4408, Chū.
p. 411.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34 piMDaniyukti aneka graMthoM meM samAna aMza ko dekhakara Aja yaha nirNaya
karanA kaThina ho jAtA hai ki kauna kisase prabhAvita huA hai tathA tadviSayaka
sabase prAcIna ullekha kisa graMtha kA hai| piNDaniyukti kI aneka gAthAeM
prakaraNa rUpa meM yA viSaya-vyAkhyA ke rUpa meM anya graMthoM meM saMkrAnta huI
haiN| yahAM piNDaniyukti kA paravartI sAhitya para kyA prabhAva par3A, isa
saMdarbha meM kucha bindu prastuta kie jA rahe haiM* piNDaniyukti meM piNDa
zabda kI vistRta vyAkhyA prAsaMgika hai lekina oghaniyukti meM piNDa se
sambandhita cAlIsa gAthAeM' piNDaniyukti se uddhRta kI gaI haiM, aisA pratIta
hotA hai kyoMki vahAM piNDa kI vyAkhyA kA prasaMga nahIM hai| * udgama aura
utpAdanA ke doSa zvetAmbara paramparA se digambara paramparA meM saMkrAnta hue
haiN| paMDita sukhalAlajI mUlAcAra ko saMkalita racanA mAnate haiM ata: bahuta
saMbhava hai ki mUlAcAra meM bhikSAcaryA vAlA prakaraNa piNDaniyukti se
prabhAvita huA hai| yadyapi vahAM aneka sthAnoM para doSoM ke nAma evaM krama
meM aMtara hai, gAthAeM bhI samAna nahIM haiM lekina viSaya aura nAmoM kI dRSTi
se yaha prakaraNa piNDaniyukti se prabhAvita hai, yaha kahA jA sakatA hai|
piNDaniyukti meM jahAM aSTavidha piNDaniyukti kA ullekha hai, vahAM mUlAcAra meM
aSTavidha piNDazuddhi kA saMketa hai| prakaraNa ko dekhate hue aisA saMbhava
nahIM lagatA ki piNDaniyuktikAra mUlAcAra se prabhAvita hue hoN| vartamAna meM
digambara aura zvetAmbara kI bhikSA-vidhi ke AdhAra para bhI yaha kahA jA sakatA
hai ki udgama, utpAdanA aura eSaNA sambandhI bhikSAcaryA ke doSa zvetAmbara
AcAryoM dvArA nirdhArita kie gae haiN| digambara AcAryoM ne prathamAnuyoga aura
karmavAda para adhika likhA ata: vyAvahArika AcAra-mImAMsA kA vizeSa varNana
mUlAcAra aura bhagavatI ArAdhanA ke atirikta anya graMthoM meM kama milatA hai|
nizIthabhASya meM utpAdanA se sambandhita 152 doSoM kA lagabhaga 972 gAthAoM meM
varNana huA hai| lagabhaga gAthAeM piNDaniyukti se akSarazaH milatI haiN| kucha
gAthAeM bIca meM bhASyakAra dvArA bhI banAI gaI haiN| udAharaNArtha pini 205
(nibhA 4406) gAthA ke lie nizItha cUrNikAra ne 'imA bhaddabAhukayA gAhA" tathA
isake bAda kI do gAthAoM ke lie 'etIe imA do vakkhANagAhAo' kA ullekha kiyA hai|
isa saMketa se spaSTa hai ki nizItha bhASyakAra ne ina gAthAoM ko apanI vyAkhyA
kA aMga banAyA hai| cUrNikAra ne aneka sthaloM para piNDaniyukti kA ullekha kiyA
hai, yahAM kucha saMdarbha prastuta kie jA rahe haiM * jahA govo piMDanijjuttIe
(nicU bhA. 4 pR. 67)  /  1. oni 331-71 /  2. nizItha meM mUlakarma kA ullekha
nahIM hai| 3. nibhA 4375-4472 /  4, nicU bhA. 3 pR. 411  /  5. pibhA 33, 34,
nibhA 4407, 4408, cU. pR. 411  /

Page #49 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Piṇḍaniyukti: An Observation**  * According to the *Seṣa Piṇḍanijjutti*, it
should be explained (Ni. Bhā. 4, p. 191). * It should be explained in detail as
in the *Piṇḍanijjutti Gāhā Sutta* (Ni. Bhā. 4, p. 193).  The *Jītakalpa Bhāṣya*
describes the faults of *bhikṣācārya* in 5861 verses. The commentator has also
created new verses for atonement or to establish a connection in some places. In
some places, he has also abridged the expansion, for example, the explanation of
*sādharmika* is expanded in 22 verses in *Piṇḍaniyukti*, but Jinabhadragaṇi
Kṣamāśramaṇa has described it briefly. Looking at the verses of the *Jītakalpa
Bhāṣya*, it can be assumed that the commentator has made this entire passage a
part of his work with some changes.  *Piṇḍaviśuddhi Prakaraṇa* is a short
treatise written on the *bhikṣācārya* of a *sādhu* and its faults. Its author,
Jinavallabha Sūri, a disciple of Abhaydeva Sūri, the commentator of the *Navāṅgī
Ṭīkā*, composed this treatise based on *Piṇḍaniyukti*. At the end of the
treatise, in the 103rd verse in the *śārdulavikrīḍita* meter, he himself
mentions:  > *Iccheyam Jiṇavallaheṇa Gaṇiṇā, jaṁ Piṇḍanijjuttiō. Kiñcī
Piṇḍavihāṇajāṇanakae, bhavvāṇa savvāṇa vi. Vuttaṁ Suttanīuttamuḍḍhamaīṇā,
bhattiī sattiī taṁ. Savvaṁ bhavvam maccharā suyaharā, bohintu sohintu ya.*  The
author has given a concise but meaningful presentation about *bhikṣācārya*, but
has also used his original brilliance in some places, such as the doors of
*ādhākarma* and their explanation. This treatise has the special feature that
the author has presented a brief definition of every fault. The importance of
the treatise can be known from the fact that six commentaries and one *avacūrī*
have been written on it.  The commentator Yaśodeva Sūri has expanded almost all
the stories mentioned in *Piṇḍaniyukti*. He has mostly presented the stories in
the Prakrit language. Some stories are also in Prakrit verse. It seems likely
that these stories, written in detail in Prakrit verse, were quoted by the
commentator from some other treatise.  Extra-canonical literature, which
discusses *bhikṣācārya* and its faults, is mostly post-*Piṇḍaniyukti*
literature. Looking at them, it can be easily assumed that almost all the later
treatises related to *bhikṣācārya* are influenced by *Piṇḍaniyukti*. Among
these, the *Aṣṭaka Prakaraṇa* (fifth, sixth, seventh *aṣṭaka*) by Ācārya
Haribhadra, the *Pañcāśaka Prakaraṇa* (thirteenth *pañcāśaka*), the *Pañca
Vastu* (verses 739-68), the *Viṁśati Viṁśikā* (thirteenth and fourteenth
*viṁśikā*), the *Pravacana Sāroddhāra* and its commentary by Ācārya Nemicandra,
the *Mūlācāra* and the *Anāgāra Dharmāmṛta* etc. are prominent.  1. *Jībhā*
1088-1674.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa * sesaM piNDanijjuttiaNusAreNa bhANiyavvaM
(nicU bhA. 4 pR. 191) /  * piNDanijjuttigAhAsutte jahA tahA savittharaM
bhANiyavvaM (nicU bhA. 4 pR. 193) /  jItakalpabhASya meM bhikSAcaryA ke doSoM kA
varNana 5861 gAthAoM meM hai| bhASyakAra ne prAyazcitta sambandhI athavA kahIM-
kahIM sambandha biThAne ke lie naI gAthAoM kA bhI nirmANa kiyA hai| kahIM-kahIM
vistAra kA saMkSepa bhI kiyA hai, jaise sAdharmika kI vyAkhyA piMDaniyukti meM
22 gAthAoM meM vistAra se hai lekina jinabhadragaNi kSamAzramaNa ne saMkSepa meM
isakA varNana kiyA hai| jItakalpabhASya kI gAthAoM ko dekhakara yaha saMbhAvanA
kI jA sakatI hai ki bhASyakAra ne kucha parivartana ke sAtha isa pUre prasaMga
ko apane graMtha kA aMga banA liyA hai| piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa sAdhu kI
bhikSAcaryA evaM usake doSoM para likhA gayA eka laghu graMtha hai| isake
racayitA navAMgI TIkAkAra abhayadevasUri ke ziSya jinavallabhasUri ne
piNDaniyukti ke AdhAra para isa graMtha kI racanA kI hai| graMtha ke aMta meM
zArdUlavikrIr3ita chaMda meM 103 vI gAthA meM ve svayaM ullekha karate haiM
icceyaM jiNavallaheNa gaNiNA, jaM piNddnijjuttio| kiMcI piMDavihANajANaNakae,
bhavvANa savvANa vi|| vuttaM suttaniuttamuddhamaiNA, bhattIi sattIi tN| savvaM
bhavvamamaccharA suyaharA, bohiMtu sohiMtu y|| graMthakartA ne bhikSAcaryA ke
bAre meM saMkSipta kintu sArayukta prastuti dI hai lekina kahIM-kahIM apanI
maulika pratibhA kA upayoga bhI kiyA hai, jaise AdhAkarma ke dvAra evaM unakI
vyaakhyaa| isa graMtha kI yaha vizeSatA hai ki graMthakartA ne saMkSepa meM hara
doSa kI paribhASA prastuta kara dI hai| graMtha kA mahattva isa bAta se jAnA jA
sakatA hai ki isa para chaha TIkAeM tathA eka avacUri likhI gaI hai| TIkAkAra
yazodeva sUri ne piNDaniyukti meM ullikhita prAyaH sabhI kathAoM kA vistAra kiyA
hai| unhoMne prAyaH kathAoM ko prAkRta bhASA meM prastuta kiyA hai| kucha
kathAeM prAkRta padya meM bhI haiN| saMbhava lagatA hai ki vistAra se likhI
prAkRta padyabaddha ye kathAeM TIkAkAra ne kisI anya graMtha se uddhRta kI haiN|
Agametara sAhitya, jisameM bhikSAcaryA evaM usake doSoM kA vivecana hai, vaha
prAyaH sAhitya piNDaniyukti ke bAda kA hai| unako dekhane se yaha sahaja anumAna
lagAyA jA sakatA hai ki bhikSAcaryA se sambandhita prAyaH sabhI paravartI
graMtha piNDaniyukti se prabhAvita haiN| inameM AcArya haribhadrakRta
aSTakaprakaraNa (pAMcavAM, chaThA, sAtavAM aSTaka), paMcAzaka prakaraNa
(terahavAM paMcAzaka), paMcavastu (gA. 739-68), viMzati viMzikA (terahavIM evaM
caudahavIM viMzikA) AcArya nemicandra kRta pravacanasAroddhAra evaM usakI TIkA,
mUlAcAra evaM anagAradharmAmRta Adi graMtha ratna pramukha haiN| 1. jIbhA
1088-1674 /

Page #50 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Pinḍaniyukti**  **The Consciousness of Stationary Bodies: A Discourse**
In the Vedic tradition, Earth, Water, Fire, etc. are revered as deities. In the
Nāstika and some other schools of thought, they are accepted as the five
elements.  Mahavira, through his direct knowledge, declared them to be living
beings, stating, "Earth, Fire, etc. are themselves living beings. Many Trasa and
stationary beings reside in them. Stationary beings are conscious without the
need for weapons. One who harms stationary beings also harms many subtle Bādar,
as well as sufficient and insufficient beings residing in them."   Witnessing
the scientific exposition of the six categories of living beings
(ṣaḍjīvanikāya), Ācārya Siddhasena exclaimed, "O Lord! Your omniscience is
evident in your exposition of the six categories of living beings. The
presentation of the ṣaḍjīvanikāya is a unique contribution of Mahavira to the
entire Indian philosophy." In the Ācārāṅga Niyukti, the Niyuktikāra has
presented many logical and practical arguments for the consciousness of
stationary bodies. A detailed description of this is provided in the
introduction to the Niyuktipañcaka.  In Pinḍaniyukti, the author, in the context
of explaining the word "Pinḍa," presents a novel perspective on the conscious,
unconscious, and mixed states of Earth and other stationary bodies. The
consciousness of stationary bodies is dense, and they are always influenced by a
state of partial sleep (styānārddhi nidrā). Therefore, it is extremely difficult
to determine their conscious, unconscious, or mixed state based on external
signs. Only a specific knowledgeable person can describe this. The departure of
the soul from a conscious object occurs according to a fixed time or due to the
use of opposing weapons. The Niyuktikāra has meticulously presented the
conscious, unconscious, and other states of stationary bodies from both the
perspective of certainty and practice. Here, some specific references presented
by him are being presented:  **Earth Body**  The Earth bodies of hell like
Ratnaśarkara, etc., and the central parts of great mountains like Meru,
Himalayas, etc., are undoubtedly conscious. Unhindered forests, where there is
no movement of humans and animals, and no dung, etc., are practically conscious.
Trees like Banyan and Asvattha are called Kṣīradruma. Due to their sweetness,
there is a lack of weapons there. Under these trees, some Earth becomes
unconscious due to cold, etc., which are weapons, while some remain conscious.
The Earth outside a village or city is also mixed.  1. Daśa 4/4
Annatthasatthaparinaenaṁ. 2. Āyārō 1/27, Āni 102, 103. 3. Dvātriṁśad Dvātriṁśikā
1/13. 4. See Niyuktipañcaka Introduction, pp. 88-93. 5. Pini 10. 6. Mavṛ p. 8.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti sthAvarakAyoM kI sacittatA-acittatA : eka vimarza _ vaidika-
paramparA meM pRthvI, jala, agni Adi ko devavAda ke rUpa meM pratiSThita kiyA
gyaa| nAstika evaM kucha anya darzanoM meM inheM paMcabhUtoM ke rUpa meM svIkRta
kiyA gyaa| mahAvIra ne apane pratyakSa jJAna se inheM sajIva rUpa meM
pratipAdita karate hue kahA-'pRthvI, agni Adi svayaM jIva haiN| inake Azrita
aneka trasa aura sthAvara jIva rahate haiN| zastrapariNati ke binA sthAvarajIva
sacitta hote haiN| sthAvara jIvoM kI hiMsA karane vAlA, unake Azrita rahane vAle
aneka sUkSma-bAdara tathA paryApta aura aparyApta jIvoM kI hiMsA karatA hai|'2
SaDjIvanikAya ke vaijJAnika pratipAdana ko dekhakara AcArya siddhasena ne
bhAvavibhora hokara kahA'bhagavan ! ApakI sarvajJatA kI siddhi meM eka pramANa
hI paryApta hai ki Apane SaDjIvanikAya kA pratipAdana kiyaa| samUce bhAratIya
darzana meM SaDjIvanikAya kA nirUpaNa mahAvIra kI maulika prasthApanA hai|
AcArAMga niyukti meM niyuktikAra ne sthAvarakAyoM kI jIvatva-siddhi meM aneka
tArkika evaM vyAvahArika hetu prastuta kie haiN| usakA vistRta varNana
'niyuktipaMcaka' kI bhUmikA meM kiyA jA cukA hai|' piNDaniyukti meM graMthakAra
ne piNDa zabda kI vyAkhyA ke saMdarbha meM pRthvI Adi sthAvarakAyoM ke sacitta-
acitta aura mizra rahane kI sthiti ko bahuta navInatA ke sAtha prastuta kiyA
hai| sthAvarakAyoM kI cetanA saghana rahatI hai, ve sadaiva styAnarddhi nidrA se
prabhAvita rahate haiM ataH bAhya kisI bhI lakSaNa se unake sacitta-acitta yA
mizra hone ke bAre meM jAnanA atyanta kaThina hai| koI viziSTa jJAnI hI isakA
varNana prastuta kara sakatA hai| sacitta vastu meM jIva kI cyuti nizcita kAla
ke anusAra athavA virodhI zastra ke prayoga se bhI hotI hai| niyuktikAra ne
nizcaya aura vyavahAra-donoM dRSTiyoM se sthAvarakAya kI sacittaacitta Adi
sthiti ko sUkSmatA se pratipAdita kiyA hai| yahAM unake dvArA nirUpita kucha
vizeSa saMdarbho ko prastuta kiyA jA rahA haipRthvIkAya ratnazarkarA Adi naraka
pRthviyAM tathA mahAparvata meru, himAlaya Adi ke bahumadhyabhAga nizcaya rUpa
se sacitta hote haiN| nirAbAdha araNya, jahAM manuSya evaM pazu-pakSI kA
AvAgamana nahIM hotA, gobara Adi nahIM hotA, vaha pRthvIkAya vyAvahArika rUpa se
sacitta hotI hai| vaTa, azvattha Adi ke vRkSa kSIradruma kahalAte haiN| mAdhurya
ke kAraNa vahAM zastra kA abhAva hotA hai| ina vRkSoM ke nIce zIta Adi zastra ke
kAraNa kucha pRthvI acitta ho jAtI hai tathA kucha sacitta rahatI hai| grAma yA
nagara ke bAhara jo pRthvI hai, vaha bhI mizra hotI 1. daza 4/4
anntthstthprinnennN| 2. AyAro 1/27, Ani 102, 103 /  3. dvAtriMzad dvAtriMzikA
1/13  /  4. dekheM niyuktipaMcaka bhUmikA pR. 88-93  /  5. pini 10 /  6. mavR
pa. 8 /

Page #51 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation  Because land that has been uprooted by the
wheels of carts and wagons, or broken by a plow, is initially sentient
(saccitt), but then becomes somewhat insentient (acitt) due to cold winds and
other factors, it becomes mixed. When rainwater falls on sentient earth,
initially some of the earth particles become insentient, while some remain
sentient. After a short time, both become insentient due to being weapons
(śastra) to each other.  If there is heavy rainfall, the earth particles remain
in a mixed state until the rain stops. When the rain stops, sometimes the earth
remains sentient. Dung and other fuels are weapons to sentient earth particles.
As long as the earth is not fully transformed, it remains sentient. If there is
more fuel (dung, etc.) and less earth, the earth remains in a mixed state for
one prahara. With moderate fuel, it remains sentient for two praharas, and with
little fuel, it remains sentient for three praharas. The commentator of
Oghaniryukti explains this using the example of clay mixed with water brought by
a potter.  If salt, etc., is transported from its place of origin to a distance
of one hundred yojanas, it becomes insentient. Some Acharyas consider one
hundred gavyutis instead of one hundred yojanas. Explaining the reason for its
becoming insentient, the commentator says that it does not get its appropriate
nourishment. It becomes insentient when transferred from one vessel to another,
or when placed from one cart to another. It also becomes insentient due to wind,
fire, and smoke.  The commentator gives another reason for salt, etc., becoming
insentient, saying that it becomes insentient when people sit on bags of salt
loaded on the back of a cart, or due to the heat of the body of oxen, etc. It
also gradually becomes insentient when the nourishment it receives from the
earth is cut off.  Similarly, harital, manahsila, etc., which are earth
particles, also become insentient when transported beyond one hundred yojanas.
The reasons for their becoming insentient should be understood in the same way
as for salt.  Cold weapons, hot weapons (intense heat of the sun, etc.), alkali,
special dung, fire, salt, salt produced in arid regions, etc., along with dust,
acidity, oil, etc., are all weapons to earth particles. These make the earth
particles insentient. The commentator of Pinḍaniryukti, Viracharya, has also
discussed in detail the becoming insentient of earth particles in relation to
substance (dravya), region (kṣetra), time (kāla), and emotion (bhāva).  1. Pinḍi
11, Mavṛ P. 8. 2. Oniti P. 129. 3. Prasāti P. 297; Some read gavyutishatam in
place of yojanashatam. 4. Bṛbhā 973, T P. 306, Prasāga 1001; Due to the presence
of fast-moving vehicles in the present time, the possibility of becoming
insentient after being transported for one hundred yojanas is less. 5. Bṛbhā
975, T P. 307. 6. Bṛbhā 974, T P. 306. 7. Pinḍi 12. 8. Vīvṛ P. 144.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa hai kyoMki gAr3I Adi ke pahie se ukhar3I huI
tathA hala se vidArita bhUmi pahale sacitta hotI hai phira zIta vAta Adi se
kucha acitta ho jAtI hai ataH mizra hotI hai| varSA kA jala sacitta pRthvI para
giratA hai to prArambha meM kucha pRthvIkAya acitta ho jAtI hai, kucha sacitta
rahatI hai  /  antarmuhUrtta ke bAda donoM eka dUsare ke zastra hone ke kAraNa
acitta ho jAte haiN| adhika varSA hone para jaba taka varSA nahIM rukatI, taba
taka pRthvIkAya mizra rUpa meM rahatI hai  /  varSA rukane para kabhI-kabhI
sacitta bhI rahatI hai  /  gobara Adi IMdhana sacitta pRthvIkAya kA zastra hai|
jaba taka pRthvI pUrNa rUpa se pariNata nahIM hotI, taba taka sacitta rahatI
hai| yadi IMdhana (gobara Adi) adhika hai aura pRthvIkAya kama hai eka prahara
taka pRthvI mizra rUpa meM rahatI hai| madhyama IMdhana hone para do prahara
taka tathA svalpa IMdhana hone para tIna prahara taka pRthvI sacitta - sajIva
rahatI hai|' oghaniryukti ke TIkAkAra ne isakI vyAkhyA kumbhakAra dvArA AnIta
pAnI sahita miTTI se kI hai| lavaNa Adi apane utpatti - sthAna se yadi sau
yojana dUra taka le jAyA jAtA hai to vaha acitta ho jAtA hai| kucha AcArya sau
yojana ke sthAna para sau gavyUta mAnate haiN| isake acitta hone kA kAraNa
batAte hue bhASyakAra kahate haiM ki use svayogya AhAra nahIM miltaa| eka
bartana se dUsare bartana meM DAlate hue tathA eka zakaTa se dUsare zakaTa meM
rakhA jAtA huA vaha acitta ho jAtA hai| vAyu, agni aura dhUma bhI vaha acitta ho
jAtA hai| * lavaNa Adi ke acitta hone kA eka anya kAraNa batAte hue bhASyakAra
kahate haiM ki zakaTa kI pITha para lade namaka ke thailoM para manuSya ke
baiThane se tathA baila Adi ke zarIra kI uSmA se vaha lavaNa acitta ho jAtA hai
tathA bhUmi se milane vAle AhAra kA viccheda hone para bhI kramazaH vaha acitta
ho jAtA hai  /  " haritAla, manaHzilA Adi pRthvIkAya bhI sau yojana se Age le
jAne para acitta ho jAte haiN| isameM bhI acitta hone ke kAraNoM ko lavaNa kI
bhAMti hI samajhanA caahie| zIta zastra, uSNa zastra (sUrya Adi kA tIvra Atapa )
kSAra, gobara vizeSa, agni, lavaNa, uSaUSara kSetra meM utpanna lavaNa Adi se
yukta raja, amlatA, taila Adi - ye saba pRthvIkAya ke zastra haiM  /  inase
pRthvIkAya acitta hotI hai| piNDaniryukti ke TIkAkAra vIrAcArya ne bhI dravya,
kSetra, kAla aura bhAva se pRthvIkA ke acitta hone ke saMdarbha meM vistRta
carcA kI hai| 1. pini 11, mavR pa. 8  /  2. oniTI pa. 129  /  3. prasATI pa. 297
; kecittu yojanazatasthAne gavyUtazataM paThaMti  /  4. bRbhA 973, TI pR. 306,
prasAgA 1001 ; vartamAna meM drutagAmI vAhana hone ke kAraNa sau yojana le jAne
para 37 acitta hone kI saMbhAvanA kama rahatI hai| 5. bRbhA 975, TI pR. 307  /
6. bRbhA 974, TI pR. 306  /  7. pini 12  /  8. vIvRpa. 144  /

Page #52 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  38. Apkay (Water)  Many philosophers have acknowledged the existence of
living beings in water, but Mahavira, making a new proposition, stated that
water itself is a living being. The solid, dense, foundational earth of hell
(ghanodadhi) and the circular, water-filled ghanavalaya surrounding the hellish
earth, the oceans containing hail, salt, etc., and the water in the middle of
the Padmadrah, etc., are definitely sentient (saccitt). The water in wells,
tanks, and ponds, etc., is sentient according to practical usage
(vyavaharanaya). Sometimes, the entire water of a pond may be non-sentient
(acitt), but in the absence of omniscience (sarvjna), it is practically
impossible to know whether it is sentient or non-sentient. Therefore, while
traveling from Rajagriha to Vitabhaya Nagar in the Sindhusauvira country to
ordain King Udayan, even though the pond was considered non-sentient, Lord
Mahavira did not allow him to drink its water. Pure water (antarakshajal), dew,
haratanuk (water droplets that emerge from the earth), mahika (mist), and snow
are all sentient apkay.  Water does not become non-sentient simply by being
heated; therefore, the term "tattafasuy" is used in the Dashavaikalik Sutra.
Otherwise, the term "tatt" alone would have sufficed. It is not necessary for it
to be "prasauk" (suitable for drinking) even when heated. Water placed on fire
remains mixed (misra) until it boils three times. In the first boil, it becomes
non-sentient to a small extent. In the second boil, it becomes non-sentient to a
greater extent, and in the third boil, it becomes completely non-sentient.
Rainwater, if it falls in a place where humans and animals move, remains mixed
for some time. If rainwater falls outside villages and towns, it remains mixed
until it becomes non-sentient due to contact with the earth (prithvikaay). If
there is heavy rainfall, the water that falls first becomes mixed due to contact
with the earth, but the water that falls later remains sentient.  The author
mentions three beliefs regarding rice water. The water that drips from the
vessel used to wash rice into other vessels remains mixed until it is destroyed.
Another belief is that the rice water is considered mixed until the bubbles that
form on the surface of the water when it is poured from the washing vessel into
another vessel subside. The third belief is that the rice water remains mixed
until the rice is cooked.  1. Pinni 16. 2. Bribha 999, T. p. 315. 3. In the
commentary on Mulachar, the water that originates in a large lake or ocean is
called haratanu (Mulaati p. 176). 4. Utt 36/85, Mula 210. 5. (a) Pinni 17.
Pindaniryukti (b) Dasajichu p. 114; Ahva tattamvi jahe tinni varani na uvvattam
bhavai, tahe tam anivvudam, sacitt tivrtt bhavai. 6. Mavr. p. 10. 7. Pinni 17/1,
Dasajichu p. 185.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 38 apkAya pAnI meM jIva hote haiM, ise aneka dArzanikoM ne svIkAra kiyA lekina
mahAvIra ne eka nayI prasthApanA karate hue kahA ki pAnI svayaM jIva hai|
narakapRthvI kA AdhArabhUta Thosa ghanodadhi tathA naraka pRthvI ke pArzvavartI
vRttAkAra jala vAlA ghanavalaya, ole, lavaNa Adi samudra tathA padmadraha Adi ke
madhyabhAga kA pAnI naizcayika rUpa se sacitta hotA hai| kUpa, vApI aura tAlAba
Adi kA jala vyavahAranaya se sacitta hotA hai| kabhI-kabhI pUrA tAlAba kA pAnI
acitta ho sakatA hai lekina sarvajJa ke abhAva meM vyAvahArika rUpa se yaha
jAnanA saMbhava nahIM hotA ki yaha sacitta hai athavA acitta  /  isIlie udAyana
rAjA ko pravrajita karane ke lie rAjagRha se siMdhusauvIra deza ke vItabhaya
nagara meM jAte hue yAtrA ke madhya tAlAba ko acitta jAnakara bhI bhagavAn
mahAvIra ne usake jala ko pIne kI anujJA nahIM dii| zuddhodaka (aMtarikSajala),
osa, haratanuka, (pRthvI ko bhedakara nikalane vAle jalabindu) mahikA (dhUMara)
aura hima - ye sacitta apkAya haiN| kevala garma hone mAtra se jala acitta nahIM
hotA isIlie dazavaikAlika sUtra meM 'tattaphAsuya' vizeSaNa kA prayoga huA hai|
anyathA kevala ' tatta' vizeSaNa se hI kAma cala sakatA thA  /  tapta hone para
bhI prAsuka ho, yaha Avazyaka nahIM hai| agni para car3he hue pAnI meM jaba taka
tIna ubAla na Ae, taba taka vaha jala mizra hotA hai  / " prathama ubAle meM
vaha jala kucha mAtrA meM acitta hotA hai  /  dvitIya meM adhika mAtrA meM tathA
tIsare ubAla meM pUrNa acitta ho jAtA hai| varSA kA jala yadi manuSya aura
tiryaJca ke AvAgamana vAle sthAna meM giratA hai to vaha kucha samaya taka mizra
rahatA hai| grAma aura nagara ke bAhara yadi varSA kA jala giratA hai to vaha
bhI pRthvIkAya ke samparka se jaba taka acitta nahIM hotA, taba taka mizra
rahatA hai| yadi adhika mAtrA meM varSA hotI hai to prArambha meM pRthvIkA ke
samparka se mizra ho jAtA hai lekina bAda meM girane vAlA jala sacitta hI rahatA
hai| graMthakAra ne cAvala ke pAnI ke lie tIna mAnyatAoM kA ullekha kiyA hai|
cAvala dhone vAle bartana se anya bartanoM meM DAlate hue AsapAsa jo bindu laga
jAte haiM, ve jaba taka vinaSTa nahIM hote, taba taka vaha cAvala kA pAnI mizra
hotA hai| dUsarA abhimata hai ki taNDula - prakSAlana ke bartana se dUsare
bartana meM DAlate samaya pAnI ke Upara jo bubude utpanna hote haiM, ve jaba
taka zamita nahIM hote, taba taka taNDulodaka mizra kahalAtA hai| tIsarA
abhimata yaha hai ki cAvala dhone ke pazcAt jaba taka ve pakva nahIM hote, taba
taka taNDulodaka mizra hotA hai| 1. pini 16  /  2. bRbhA 999, TI pR. 315  /  3.
mUlAcAra kI TIkA meM mahAsarovara yA samudra meM utpanna jala ko haratanu kahA
hai (mUlATI pR. 176)  /  4. utta 36/85, mUlA 210  /  5. (ka) pini 17  /
piMDaniryukti (kha) dazajicU pR. 114; ahavA tattamavi jAhe tinni vArANi na
uvvattaM bhavai, tAhe taM anivvuDaM, sacittaM tivRttaM bhavai  /  6. mavR. pa.
10 /  7. pini 17/1, dazajicU pR. 185  /

Page #53 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  39 **Pindaniyukti: An Observation**  These three views cannot be
definitively one form and truth because the points on a rough vessel dry
quickly, while the points on a smooth vessel take time to dry. Water bubbles
also quickly subside with a strong wind, but can remain for some time in a
gentle breeze. There is also no uniformity in the third order. Rice that has
been soaked in water for a long time, is old, has sufficient fuel material
below, and has the addition of sweet water, cooks quickly. In the opposite
situation, rice takes longer to cook. Explaining this, the author says that
until the tandulodak (rice water) becomes completely pure, it should be
considered mixed. According to the commentator, if another conscious water is
added to the unrefined chaulodak (rice water), both waters become refined for a
long time.  According to the commentator Malayagiri, if conscious water is added
to a vessel containing curd and oil, and a thick layer (layer) of curd or oil
forms on top, then that water becomes unconscious in one pourushi (unit of
time), unconscious in two pourushi with a medium layer, and unconscious in three
pourushi with a thin layer.  Rainwater falling on a clay mortar on the roof of a
house becomes unconscious due to contact with the smoke and heat on the roof.
After the rain stops, that water can be taken as it becomes unconscious. When it
rains, the water is mixed, so it should be taken after the rain stops. According
to the churnikar (author of a commentary), in the summer season, hot water
becomes conscious again after one day and night, and in the winter and rainy
seasons, hot water made in the morning becomes conscious by evening. According
to the Pravachnasaroaddhar (a commentary), in the hot season, after five prahar
(units of time), in the cold season after four prahar, and in the rainy season
after three prahar, the prasauk (water used for drinking) also becomes conscious
again. According to the commentator, prasauk water also becomes conscious after
three prahar. Adding ash does not make it conscious again, but it cleanses even
dirty water.  According to the commentator, water does not remain conscious for
a long time when mixed with a substance that has intense color, smell, taste,
and touch. If the bad color, smell, etc. are intense, then that water becomes
unconscious quickly. If the color, smell, etc. are good, then it becomes refined
for a long time. The time taken for water to become unconscious from conscious
also varies based on touch. Due to its bitter taste, sandalwood is the weapon of
tandulodak, but because the touch of sandalwood is cool, tandulodak becomes
unconscious or refined for a long time. Similarly, in water that has come into
contact with curd, etc., the sour taste is the weapon of water, but because its
touch is cool, it becomes unconscious for a long time.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 39 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa ye tInoM mata bhI aikAntika rUpa se eka rUpa
tathA satya nahIM ho sakate kyoMki rUkSa bartana meM lage hue bindu jaldI
sUkhate haiM tathA snigdha pAtra meM lage binduoM ko sUkhane meM samaya lagatA
hai| jala ke bubude bhI teja pavana se jaldI zAnta ho jAte haiM, maMda havA meM
kucha samaya taka avasthita bhI raha sakate haiN| tIsare Adeza meM bhI ekarUpatA
nahIM hai| jo cAvala bahuta dera se pAnI meM bhIge hue haiM, purAne haiM, nIce
IMdhana sAmagrI paryApta mAtrA meM hai tathA madhura jala kA yoga hai to ve
jaldI paka jAte haiN| isake viparIta sthiti meM cAvala ko pakane meM adhika
samaya lagatA hai| isakA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue graMthakAra kahate haiM ki jaba
taka taNDulodaka ati svaccha na ho jAe, taba taka use mizra mAnanA caahie|
bhASyakAra ke anusAra apariNata cAulodaka meM yadi dUsarA sacitta jala DAla diyA
jAe to ve donoM udaka cirakAla se pariNata hote haiN| TIkAkAra malayagiri ke
anusAra dahI aura taila ke ghaTa meM yadi sacitta jala DAla diyA jAe aura usake
Upara dahI yA taila kI moTI tarI (parata) A jAe to vaha jala eka pauruSI meM
acitta hotA hai,madhyama tarI se do pauruSI meM tathA patalI tarI Ane se tIna
pauruSI meM acitta hotA hai|' ghara kI chata para miTTI ke kolhU para girA varSA
kA jala chata para lage dhUma aura Atapa ke samparka ke kAraNa acitta ho jAtA
hai| varSA rukane ke antarmuhUrta bAda vaha pAnI acitta ho jAne se grahaNa kiyA
jA sakatA hai| varSA girane para vaha jala mizra hotA hai ata: varSA rukane ke
bAda grahaNa karanA caahie| cUrNikAra ke anusAra grISmaRtu meM eka dina-rAta ke
bAda garma pAnI phira sacitta ho jAtA hai tathA hemanta aura varSARtu meM savere
kiyA huA garma jala zAma taka sacitta ho jAtA hai| pravacanasAroddhAra ke
anusAra uSNakAla meM pAMca prahara ke pazcAt, zItakAla meM cAra prahara tathA
varSAkAla meM tIna prahara ke pazcAt prAsuka jala bhI punaH sacitta bana jAtA
hai| TIkAkAra ke anusAra prAsuka jala bhI tIna prahara ke bAda sacitta ho jAtA
hai| rAkha DAlane para vaha punaH sacitta nahIM hotA, usase malina jala bhI
svaccha ho jAtA hai| bhASyakAra ke anusAra jisa dravya meM varNa, gaMdha, rasa
aura sparza utkaTa hote haiM, usa dravya se mizrita hone para udaka adhika
samaya taka sacitta nahIM rhtaa| yadi azubha varNa, gaMdha Adi utkaTa haiM to
vaha udaka kSipra gati se acitta hotA hai| yadi varNa, gaMdha Adi zubha haiM to
cirakAla meM pariNata hotA hai| sparza ke AdhAra para bhI sacitta se acitta hone
ke kAla meM aMtara AtA hai| kaTukarasa hone ke kAraNa caMdana taMDulodaka kA
zastra hai phira bhI caMdana kA sparza zItala hone se taMDulodaka cirakAla se
acitta yA pariNata hotA hai| isI prakAra dahI Adi se saMspRSTa jala meM
amlarasatA jala kA zastra hai lekina usakA sparza zItala hone ke 1. pini 17/2,
mavR pa. 10, 11 /  2. bRbhA 5917 /  3. mavR p.11| 4. dazaaca pra. 61:.....gimhe
ahoratteNaM saccittIbhavati, hemaMta-vAsAsa puvvaNhe kataM avrnnhe| 5. prasAgA
882 /  6. pini 22/4, mavR pa. 15, oni 355, vR.pa. 132 /  7. bRbhA 5914, TI pR.
1559 /

Page #54 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniryukti  Because water is inherently non-sentient for a long time. The
smell of ghee and raw meat - both are weapons of water, but their taste is sweet
and touch is cold, therefore, their mixture makes water non-sentient for a long
time. The acidity produced by the kukkus in chaulodak also becomes a weapon of
water. If sentient water is added to the juice of a fruit, it becomes non-
sentient for a long time.  ## Tejaskaay  In the context of Tejaskaay, the
Niyuktikar says that the middle part of the electricity that bakes bricks, the
meteor, etc., is definitely sentient Tejaskaay. The word 'etc.' according to the
commentator, also includes the fire used by the potter to bake the pot, the fire
lit in the stove to cook the sugarcane juice. Angara, Murmur, Agni, Archi,
Jwala, Ulka, Vidyut, etc., are practical sentient Tejaskaay. The fire produced
from unbreakable Vajra, Vidyut, and Suryakant Mani, etc., is accepted as
sentient. Karishagni mixed Tejaskaay.  ## Vayukaay  The wind that blows when
there is a dense cloud, thin wind, excessive snowfall, and darkness caused by
clouds, that wind is definitely sentient. The wind blowing in the east, etc.,
direction is practically sentient. The author has mentioned five types of non-
sentient wind:  * **Aakrant:** The wind that comes out from mud, etc., that is
trampled by feet. * **Dhamat:** The wind that comes out from the mouth and the
wind filled in the bellows. * **Ghan:** The wind that comes out from the sesame
crushing machine. In the commentary of Thanam and Oghniryukti, there is a
reference to Sammurcchhi Vayu in place of Ghan, which means the wind produced
from the palate, etc. * **Dehanugat:** The wind that comes out from the anus and
the form of inhalation-exhalation. * **Peelit:** The wind that comes out from
squeezing wet clothes.  According to the commentator Abhaydevsuri, these five
types of wind are non-sentient at the time of their origin, but they can also
become sentient in the end.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniryukti kAraNa jala cirakAla se acitta hotA hai| ghRtakiTTa aura kacce
mAMsa kI gaMdha-ye donoM jala ke zastra haiM lekina inakA rasa madhura aura
sparza zIta hai ataH inake mizraNa se jala cirakAla se acitta hotA hai  /
cAulodaka meM kukkusa ke dvArA utpanna amlatA bhI udaka kA zastra banatI hai|
phala ke rasa meM yadi sacitta jala DAla diyA jAe to vaha cirakAla se acitta
hotA hai| tejaskAya 40 tejaskAya ke saMdarbha meM nirUpaNa karate hue
niyuktikAra kahate haiM ki IMTa pakAne vAlI vidyut, ulkA Adi kA madhya bhAga
nizcaya rUpa se sacitta tejaskAya hai|' Adi zabda se TIkAkAra ke anusAra
kumbhakAra kI ghar3A pakAne vAlI agni, IkSu rasa pakAne hetu jalAI gaI cUlhe kI
agni kA bhI grahaNa ho jAtA hai|" aMgArA, murmura, agni, arci, jvAlA, ulkA,
vidyut Adi vyAvahArika sacitta tejaskAya haiN| aparAjita vajra, vidyut evaM
sUryakAnta maNi Adi se utpanna agni ko sacitta rUpa meM svIkAra kiyA hai  /
karISAgni mizra tejaskAya hai  /  vAyukAya savalaya ghanavAta, tanuvAta,
atyadhika himapAta tathA meghajanya aMdhakAra hone para jo vAyu calatI hai, vaha
vAyu naizcayika sacitta hotI hai| pUrva Adi dizA meM calane vAlI vAyu
vyAvahArika sacitta hotI hai| ' graMthakAra ne pAMca prakAra kI acitta vAyu kA
ullekha kiyA hai - * AkrAnta - pairoM se AkrAnta kardama Adi se nikalane vAlI
vAyu  /  * dhmAta - dhauMkanI tathA mukha kI vAyu se bharI dRti se nikalane vAlI
vAyu  /  * ghANa ga- tilapIr3ana yaMtra se nikalane vAlI vAyu  /  ThANaM tathA
oghaniryukti kI TIkA meM ghANa ke sthAna para sammUrcchi vAyu kA nirdeza hai,
jisakA artha hai tAlavRMta Adi se utpanna vAyu  / ' * * * dehAnugata - gudA
pradeza tathA ucchvAsa - niHzvAsa rUpa se nikalane vAlI vAyu  /  pIlita - Ardra
kapar3oM ko nicor3ane se nikalane vAlI vAyu  /  TIkAkAra abhayadevasUri ke
anusAra utpatti kAla meM ye paMcavidha vAyu acitta hotI haiM lekina
pariNAmAntara meM sacitta bhI ho sakatI hai| " * 1. bRbhA 5915, TI pR. 1559  /
2. bRbhA 5916, TI pR. 1560  /  3. bRbhATI pR. 1560  /  4. pini 24  /  5. mavR.
pa. 16  /  6. mUlA 211 TI pR. 177; zuddhAgni :
vajrAgnirvidyutsUryakAntAdyudbhavaH  /  7. pini 24  /  8. pini 27  /  9. sthA
5/183, oniTI pa. 133  /  10. sthATI pR. 224; ete ca pUrvamacetanAstataH sacetanA
api bhavaMti  /

Page #55 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation  The commentator has considered the air that
comes out of the palate as *achitt* (non-conscious) based on the word *ādi*
(beginning). However, the *Daśavaikalika Sūtra* prohibits the *sādhu* (saint)
from blowing air from the palate, etc. This clearly indicates that the
prohibition is due to the air being *saccitt* (conscious). The *niryuktikāra*
(author of the *niryukti*) has also elaborated on the determination of *miśra
vāyukāya* (mixed air body) and its *saccitt* and *achitt* nature within the
*vāyukāya* (air body).  If *achitt* air is filled into a *dṛti* (leather bag)
made of skin and its mouth is tightly tied with a rope, and then it is released
into the water of a river, the air inside the *dṛti* remains *achitt* for up to
one hundred *hastas* (cubits). It becomes *miśra* (mixed) in the second hundred
*hastas* and *saccitt* as soon as it enters the third hundred *hastas*. After
that, it remains *saccitt*. This is a description of the duration for which the
air remains *miśra* or *saccitt* from the perspective of the area.  From the
perspective of time, the *bhāṣyakāra* (commentator) explains that the air inside
the *dṛti* remains *achitt* for one *prahara* (watch) during *ekānta snigdha
kāla* (very moist time). It becomes *miśra* at the beginning of the second
*prahara* and *saccitt* at the beginning of the third *prahara*. During
*madhyama snigdha kāla* (moderately moist time), it remains *achitt* for two
*praharas*, becomes *miśra* in the third *prahara* and *saccitt* in the fourth
*prahara*. During *jighanya snigdha kāla* (least moist time), the air inside the
*dṛti* remains *achitt* for three *praharas*, becomes *miśra* in the fourth
*prahara* and *saccitt* in the fifth *prahara*. The same should be understood
for *rūkṣa kāla* (dry time). There, instead of *praharas*, the number of days
should be increased. During *jighanya rūkṣa kāla* (least dry time), the air
inside the *vasti* (body) remains *achitt* for one day, becomes *miśra* on the
second day and *saccitt* on the third day. During *madhyama rūkṣa kāla*
(moderately dry time), it remains *achitt* for two days, becomes *miśra* on the
third day and *saccitt* on the fourth day. During *utkṛṣṭa rūkṣa kāla* (most dry
time), it remains *achitt* for three days, becomes *miśra* on the fourth day and
*saccitt* on the fifth day.  ## Vanaspatikāya (Plant Body)  All *anantakāya*
(infinite body) plants are *saccitt* according to the *niścaya naya* (certainty
view). Every plant is *saccitt* according to the *vyavahāra naya* (practical
view). *Mlāna* (wilted) and *ardha śuṣka* (semi-dry) plants are *miśra*. Rice
flour is *miśra*. According to the commentator, freshly ground wheat porridge is
*miśra*. A *śami* (Acacia suma) pod that has been roasted once also remains
*saccitt* and *miśra*. Leaves, flowers, tender fruits, rice, green stems, etc.,
become *achitt* when they dry. *Utpala* (blue lotus) and *padma* (red lotus)
become *achitt* before one *prahara* when kept in the sun. *Uṣṇayonika* (heat-
born) plants become *mlāna* due to rain. *Magadantika* (a type of flower) and
*jūhi* (jasmine) flowers, being *uṣṇayonika*, remain *saccitt* for a long time
even when kept in the sun. *Magadantika* flowers become *achitt* before one
*prahara* when put in water. *Utpala* and *padma*, being *udakayonika* (water-
born), can remain *saccitt* for a long time in water.  *Bṛhatkalpabhāṣya*  1.
*Daśa* 8/9. 2. *Pini* 27/2, *Mavṛ* p. 18. 3. *Pibhā*, 12-14, *Mavṛ* p. 18,
*Onīṭī* 133, 134. 4. *Pini* 30, *Mavṛ* p. 19. 5. *Daśa* 5/2/20. 6. *Bṛbhā* 978.
7. *Daśajicū* p. 262; *Uṇhajōṇiō vā vaṇapphaī kuhejja*. 8. *Bṛbhā* 978, 979.  41

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa TIkAkAra ne Adi zabda se tAlavRnta se hone
vAlI vAyu ko acitta mAnA hai lekina dazavaikAlika sUtra meM sAdhu ko tAlavRnta
Adi se havA karane kA niSedha hai| isase spaSTa hai ki sacitta hone ke kAraNa hI
niSedha kiyA hogA  /  niryuktikAra ne vAyukAya ke antargata mizra vAyukAya evaM
usake sacitta- acitta hone kA nirdhAraNa bhI vistAra se kiyA hai| carmamaya dRti
meM yadi acitta vAyu bharakara usake mukha ko DorI se dRr3hatA se bAMdha kara
yadi nadI ke jala meM chor3a diyA jAe to sau hAtha taka dRtistha vAyu acitta
rahatI hai  /  dvitIya hastazata meM mizra tathA tRtIya hastazata meM praveza
karate hI sacitta ho jAtI hai| usake bAda vaha sacitta hI rahatI hai  /  yaha
kSetra kI dRSTi se jitane samaya taka mizra athavA sacitta rahatI hai, usakA
varNana hai  / " kAla kI dRSTi se bhASyakAra isakI vyAkhyA karate hue kahate
haiM ki ekAnta snigdha kAla meM dRtistha vAyu eka prahara taka acitta rahatI
hai| dUsarI prahara ke prAraMbha meM mizra tathA tIsarI prahara ke prAraMbha meM
hI sacitta ho jAtI hai| madhyama snigdha kAla meM do prahara taka acitta, tIsarI
prahara meM mizra tathA cauthI prahara meM sacitta ho jAtI hai| jaghanya snigdha
kAla meM dRtistha vAyu tIna prahara taka acitta, cauthI prahara meM mizra tathA
pAMcavIM prahara meM sacitta ho jAtI hai| rUkSa kAla meM bhI aisA hI jAnanA
caahie| vahAM prahara ke sthAna para dinoM kI vRddhi karanI cAhie  /  jaghanya
rUkSa kAla meM vastigata vAyu eka dina taka acitta, dUsare dina mizra tathA
tIsare dina sacitta hotI hai| madhyama rUkSa kAla meM do dina taka acitta,
tIsare dina mizra tathA cauthe dina sacitta hotI hai  /  utkRSTa rUkSa kAla meM
tIna dina taka acitta, cauthe dina mizra tathA pAMcaveM dina sacitta hotI hai|
vanaspatikAya sArI anaMtakAya vanaspati nizcaya naya se sacitta hotI hai|
pratyeka vanaspati vyavahAra naya se sacitta hotI hai  /  mlAna evaM arddha
zuSka vanaspati mizra hotI hai| cAvala kA ATA mizra hotA hai| TIkAkAra ke
anusAra tatkAla dalA gehUM kA daliyA mizra hotA hai| eka bAra bhunI huI zamI -
phalI bhI sacitta mizra rahatI hai  /  patra, puSpa, komala phala, vrIhi,
hariyAlI ke vRMta Adi vanaspati sUkhane para vaha acitta ho jAtI hai  /  utpala
aura padma Atapa meM rakhane para eka prahara se pahale acitta ho jAte haiN|
uSNayonika vanaspati varSA se mlAna ho jAtI hai| magadaMtikA evaM jUhI ke phUla
uSNayonika hone ke kAraNa Atapa meM rakhane para bhI cirakAla taka sacitta
rahate haiN| magadaMtikA ke puSpa pAnI meM DAlane para eka prahara se pUrva
acitta ho jAte haiN| utpala aura padma udakayonika hone ke kAraNa udaka meM
cirakAla taka sacitta raha sakate haiM  / " bRhatkalpabhASya 1. daza 8/9  /  2.
pini 27/2, mavR pa. 18  /  3. pibhA, 12 - 14, mavR pa. 18, oniTI 133, 134  /  4.
pini 30, mavR pa. 19  /  41 5. daza 5 / 2 / 20  /  6. bRbhA 978  /  7. dazajicU
pR. 262 ; uNhajoNio vA vaNapphai kuhejjA  /  8. bRbhA 978, 979  /

Page #56 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
42 According to Pindaniyukti, plants like Pippali, Khajur, Daak and Harde become
Achitt (inanimate) when transported beyond a hundred Yojanas. The commentator
has also given other reasons for their becoming Achitt.  If grains like Yav,
Yavyav, Godhum, Shalyodan and Brihi are stored in a granary and sealed with a
lid after plastering it from above, then due to the vacuum, these grains can
remain Sachitt (animate) for a short period of time (Antarmuhurt) in the worst
case and for three years in the best case. If pulses like Til, Moong, Masoor,
Matar, Urad, Chawla, Kulath, Arhar, Black Chana, Vall-Nishpav etc. are stored in
a granary and properly sealed and marked so that air cannot enter the granary,
then these grains can remain Sachitt for a short period of time (Antarmuhurt) in
the worst case and for five years in the best case. If seeds of oilseeds like
Atasi, Latt-Kusumbh, Kangu, Kodusag-Kordushak, San, Varatt-Barath,
Siddharsarsons, Kodrav, Ralak and Mooli are stored in a granary and properly
sealed, then these seeds can remain Sachitt for a short period of time
(Antarmuhurt) in the worst case and for seven years in the best case. After
that, they become Abeej (seedless). Generally, all grains can become Achitt
after a short period of time (Antarmuhurt) in the worst case. The best case
scenario is different for each.  Thus, the Niyuktikar has presented a beautiful
discussion of the state of Sachitt, Achitt and Mishr (mixed) of sthavar
(stationary) objects. Some material about this is also found scattered in Jain
Agamas. Bhikchacharya  Food is a basic necessity of life. Life cannot be
sustained for long without it. Munis take food to keep their journey of
restraint going smoothly. Eating for taste is forbidden for Munis. In the story
of the Seth and the thief in the Jnata Dharmakatha, it is beautifully expressed
that Munis do not take food for the sake of beauty, growth, strength and
satisfaction of the senses, but for the development of knowledge, vision and
character. Even if one who eats for all this is a Prasaukhabhoji (one who eats
for the sake of taste), he is still an Aprashast Pratisevi (one who does not eat
properly). In Mulachar, there is a directive for Munis that they should consume
food that is cold-hot, rough-dry, oily-non-oily, salty or unsalted without
tasting it.  Bhikchacharya is an integral part of the Sadhu's conduct. Whatever
a Muni receives, he receives it through Bhikcha. 1. Bribha 974. 7. Jnata 1/2/76;
No Vannaheum Va No Ruvaheum Va No Balheum 2. Bribha 973, T. p. 306. Va No
Visayheum Va..........Nannath Nana Dansan Charittanam 3. Bhag 6/129, Prasa 995,
996. Vahanatthae. 4. Bhag 6/130, Stha 5/209, Prasa 997, 998. 8. Nibha 469; Bal-
Vann-Ruvahetu, 5. Prasa 999, 1000. Phasuyabhoi Vi Hoi Apasattho. 6. Prasa 1000;
Hoi Jahannen Punno Antarmuhurt Samagganam. 9. Mula 816.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 42 piMDaniyukti ke anusAra pippalI, khajUra, dAkha tathA harar3e Adi vanaspati
sau yojana dUra le jAne para acitta ho jAtI hai| bhASyakAra ne inake acitta hone
ke aura bhI kAraNa batAe haiN| khAdyAnna meM yava, yavayava, godhUma, zAlyodana
aura brIhi-ina dhAnoM ko koThI meM DAlakara yadi use Upara se lIpa kara Dhakkana
baMda kara diyA jAe to nirvAta hone ke kAraNa vaha dhAnya jaghanya antarmuhUrta
tathA utkRSTa tIna varSa taka sacitta raha sakatA hai| tila, mUMga, masUra,
maTara, ur3ada, cavalA, kulattha, arahara, kAle cane, valla-niSpAva Adi dAloM ko
koThe meM rakhakara bhalIbhAMti mudrita aura lAMchita kiyA jAe, jisase koThe meM
havA kA praveza na ho to ye dhAnya jaghanya antarmuhUrta tathA utkRSTa pAMca
varSa taka sacitta raha sakate haiN| tilahana meM atasI, laTTa-kusuMbha, kaMgu,
koDUsaga - koradUSaka, sana, varaTTa-baraTha, siddhArthasarasoM, kodrava, rAlaka
aura mUlI ke bIja-inako yadi koThe meM DAlakara bhalIbhAMti mudrita kara diyA
jAe to ye bIja jaghanya antarmuhUrta tathA utkRSTa sAta varSa taka sacitta raha
sakate haiN| isake bAda ye abIja ho jAte haiN| sAmAnyataH sabhI dhAnya jaghanya
rUpa se antamuhUrta ke pazcAt acitta ho sakate haiN| utkRSTa kI sthiti sabakI
alaga-alaga hai| isa prakAra niyuktikAra ne sthAvarakAya ke sacitta, acitta aura
mizra hone kI sthiti kA suMdara vivecana prastuta kiyA hai| jaina AgamoM meM bhI
prakIrNaka rUpa se isake bAre meM kucha sAmagrI milatI hai| bhikSAcaryA AhAra
jIvana kI mUlabhUta AvazyakatA hai| isake binA lambe samaya taka jIvana ko nahIM
calAyA jA sktaa| muni saMyama-yAtrA ko nirabAdha gati se calAne ke lie AhAra
grahaNa karate haiN| svAda ke lie khAnA muni ke lie niSiddha hai|
jJAtAdharmakathA meM seTha aura cora ke kathAnaka ke mAdhyama se bahuta suMdara
zailI meM isa tathya ko prakaTa kiyA gayA hai ki muni varNa-saundarya, rUpa-
vRddhi, bala-prApti aura iMdriya viSaya kI tRpti hetu nahIM apitu jJAna, darzana
aura cAritra ke vikAsa hetu AhAra grahaNa kre| ina sabake lie AhAra karane vAlA
prAsukabhojI hone para bhI aprazasta pratisevI hotA hai| mUlAcAra meM muni ke
lie nirdeza hai ki vaha ThaMDA-garma, rUkhA-sUkhA, snigdha-asnigdha,
lavaNasahita yA lavaNarahita AhAra ko binA svAda lie prayoga kre| bhikSAcaryA
sAdhu kI caryA kA abhinna aMga hai| muni ko jo kucha prApta hotA hai, vaha saba
bhikSA se 1. bRbhA 974 /  7. jJAtA 1/2/76 ; No vaNNaheuM vA no rUvaheuM vA no
balaheuM 2. bRbhA 973, TI pR. 306  /  vA no visayaheuM vA..........NaNNattha
NANadaMsaNacarittANaM 3. bhaga 6/129, prasA 995, 996 /  vahaNaTThAe  /  4. bhaga
6/130, sthA 5/209, prasA 997, 998  /  8. nibhA 469 ; bala-vaNNa-rUvahetuM, 5.
prasA 999, 1000 /  phAsuyabhoI vi hoi apsttho| 6. prasA 1000; hoi jahanneNa puNo
aMtamuhattaM smggaannN| 9. mUlA 816  /

Page #57 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation**  It is stated in the Āgama that among all the
yogas of a Muni, bhikṣācaryā is the primary yoga. In Vyavahāra Bhāṣya, it is
mentioned that a Muni who experiences laziness or carelessness in bhikṣācaryā is
a mandasṁvigna (slow renunciate), and one who is diligent and enterprising in
bhikṣācaryā is a tīvrasṁvigna (intense renunciate).  The bhikṣā of Jain ascetics
is different from that of ordinary mendicants. They accept bhikṣā that is
flawless and free from any harm. If a Muni accepts or approves of food that is
obtained through running away, fleeing, causing suffering, or initiating an
action, then his fasting, svādhyāya, and other yogas are destroyed like nectar
in a broken vessel.  The bhikṣācaryā of a Muni, based on complete non-violence,
is bound by numerous rules and sub-rules. The method of bhikṣā, which is pure in
nine ways and free from 42 faults, is not found in either the Buddhist tradition
or the Vedic tradition. The Buddha considered purposeful, purchased, and
requested food as acceptable. The first study of the famous Jain text
Daśavaikālika begins with the non-violent bhikṣāvrutti of a Muni. The ascetic
resolves in the language of the Uttama Puruṣa, "May we obtain such a livelihood
(bhikṣāvrutti) that does not cause suffering to anyone." This is a vow
voluntarily accepted by the Muni, not imposed by anyone.  The bhikṣācaryā of an
ascetic is also called vr̥tti-saṁkṣepa. It is not about obtaining desired
substances, but about being content with whatever is received. Expressing
reverence for the method of flawless bhikṣā presented by the omniscient ones,
Ācārya Śayyambhava says in the Daśavaikālika Sūtra, "Oh, how the Jinas have made
this provision for the livelihood of the wealthy!"  In the Aṣṭakaprakarṇa,
Haribhadra has written three chapters related to bhikṣā. In the Bhikṣāṣṭaka
Prakarṇa, he mentions three types of bhikṣācaryās: 1. Sarvasampatkari, 2.
Pauraṣaghnī, 3. Vr̥ttibhikṣā. Accepting pure bhikṣā while avoiding faults is
Sarvasampatkari bhikṣā. Obtaining bhikṣā through conduct contrary to saṁyaktva
without working in the garb of a śramaṇa is Pauraṣaghnī bhikṣā. And the
bhikṣāvrutti that is relied upon by the poor, lowly, disabled, and destitute as
a means of livelihood is Vr̥ttibhikṣā. A Nirgrantha ascetic does not engage in
either Pauraṣaghnī bhikṣā or Vr̥ttibhikṣā. He fulfills his needs through
Sarvasampatkari bhikṣā.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 43 prApta hotA hai| Agama meM muni ke saba
yogoM meM bhikSAcaryA ko pradhAna yoga kahA gayA hai| vyavahAra bhASya meM
ullekha milatA hai ki jo muni bhikSAcaryA meM Alasya yA pramAda kA anubhava
karatA hai, vaha maMdasaMvigna (maMda vairAgI) hai tathA jo bhikSAcaryA meM
upayukta aura udyamI hai, vaha tIvrasaMvigna-tIvra vairAgI hotA hai|' jaina
sAdhuoM kI bhikSA sAmAnya bhikSuoM se alaga hotI hai| ve niravadya aura
nirupahata bhikSA grahaNa karate haiN| yadi muni apadrAvaNa, vidrAvaNa,
paritApana aura Arambha rUpa kriyA se niSpanna AhAra ko grahaNa karatA hai
athavA anumodana karatA hai to usake upavAsa, svAdhyAya Adi yoga khaMDita
bartana meM bhare amRta ke samAna naSTa ho jAte haiN| pUrNa ahiMsA para AdhArita
muni kI bhikSAcaryA aneka niyama aura upaniyamoM se pratibaddha hai| navakoTI
parizuddha aura 42 doSoM se rahita bhikSA-vidhi kA vidhAna na bauddha paramparA
meM milatA hai aura na hI vaidika paramparA meN| bhagavAn buddha ne auddezika,
krIta aura abhihata AhAra ko kalpya mAnA hai| jaina paramparA kA prasiddha
graMtha dazavaikAlika kA prathama adhyayana muni kI ahiMsaka bhikSAvRtti se
prArambha hotA hai| sAdhu uttamapuruSa ke bhASA meM saMkalpa karate haiM ki hama
aisI AjIvikA (bhikSAvRtti) prApta kareM, jisase kisI ko pIr3A na phuNce| yaha
muni kA svecchA se svIkRta vrata hai, kisI ke dvArA thopA gayA nahIM hai| sAdhu
kI bhikSAcaryA ko vRttisaMkSepa bhI kahA gayA hai| isameM icchAnusAra padArtha
kI upalabdhi nahIM, apitu jo kucha mila jAe, usameM saMtoSa karane ko
vRttisaMkSepa kahA gayA hai| niravadya bhikSA kA jo vidhAna sarvajJoM ne
prastuta kiyA hai, usake prati ahobhAva prakaTa karate hue AcArya zayyaMbhava
dazavaikAlika sUtra meM kahate haiM-'aho jiNehiM asAvajjA, vittI sAhUNa
kppiyaa|' . aSTakaprakaraNa meM haribhadra ne bhikSA se sabandhita tIna
prakaraNa likhe haiN| bhikSASTaka prakaraNa meM unhoMne tIna prakAra kI
bhikSAcaryAoM kA ullekha kiyA hai-1. sarvasampatkarI 2. pauruSaghnI 3.
vRttibhikssaa| mAdhukarI bhikSA se doSoM ko TAlate hue zuddha bhikSA grahaNa
karanA sarvasampatkarI bhikSA hai| zramaNa veza meM zrama na karake sAdhutva ke
pratikUla AcaraNa dvArA bhikSA prApta karanA pauruSaghnI bhikSA hai tathA dIna,
hIna, apaMga evaM nirdhana ke dvArA AjIvikA ke rUpa meM jisa bhikSAvRtti kA
sahArA liyA jAtA hai, vaha vRttibhikSA hai| nirgrantha sAdhu na to pauruSaghnI
bhikSA karatA hai aura na hI vRttibhikssaa| vaha sarvasampatkarI bhikSA ke dvArA
apanI 1. utta 2/28 ; savvaM se jAiyaM hoi, natthi kiMci ajaaiyN| 6. daza 1/4
vayaM ca vittiM labbhAmo, na ya koi uvhmmii| 2. mUlA 939 ; jogesu mUlajogaM,
bhikkhAcariyaM ca 7. sama 6/3 /  vaNiyaM sutte| 8. aSTakaprakaraNa 5/1; 3.
vyabhA 2484, 2485 /  /  sarvasampatakarI caikA, pauruSaghnI tthaa'praa| 4.bRbhA
4780; aNavajjaM niruvahayaM, bhaMjaMti ya sAhaNo bhikkhaM  /  vRttibhikSA ca
tattvajJairiti bhikSA tridhoditaa|| 5. cA. sA. 68/2 /

Page #58 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  44. Pinḍaniyukti  This fulfills the need, which is also called Madhukari
Bhiksha or Gochari. Just as a bumblebee takes a little nectar from flowers,
which does not cause pain to the flowers and also satisfies it, in the same way,
a sadhu should take a little food from the food prepared for the householder, so
that the householders do not suffer and the sadhu's life journey continues
properly.  The Uttaradhyayanasutra and the Rishibhashit' text also mention the
Kapoti Vritti for the sadhu's Bhiksha. Just as a pigeon is apprehensive every
moment while pecking at a grain of rice, in the same way, a muni engaged in
Bhikshacharya is apprehensive about the faults of Eshana. A special
characteristic of the muni's Bhiksha is - Agnatunchha. The Bhikshu takes Bhiksha
from unknown families in a communal way, that is, without prior instructions.
The muni takes Navakoti Vishuddha Ahar. Navakoti means that the sadhu does not
kill himself, nor does he get anyone killed, nor does he approve of the killer.
He does not cook himself, nor does he get anyone to cook, nor does he approve of
cooking. The muni does not buy himself, nor does he get anyone to buy, nor does
he approve of buying. According to the Digambar tradition, he does not do,
cause, or approve of anything through mind, speech, and body. Multiplying three
by three gives Navakoti Parishuddha Bhiksha.  Acharyas have discussed in detail
who is eligible to receive Bhiksha, i.e., Pindakalpik, and what are their
qualifications. The reason for this is that a muni who does not know the
Bhikshavidhi or its rules cannot perform Samyak Eshana. According to Vyavahar
Bhashya, in ancient times, a muni became Pindakalpik after reading the Amagandhi
Sutra of Acharanga both in terms of meaning and text, but nowadays, he becomes
Pindakalpik after reading the Pindeshana study of Dashavaikalik. The Brihatkalpa
Bhashya clearly states that if someone has not read the Acharachula Gat
Pindeshana and the fifth Pindeshana study of Dashavaikalik, then the Acharya has
to perform a penance of four Guru Maas (fasting) for sending him to Gochari. If
he is sent without explaining the meaning, or even if the meaning is explained
but the other person has not understood or has no faith, or if he is sent even
if he has faith but has not been tested, then he gets a penance of four small
months (Ayambil) each.  1. Das 1/2. 2. Isi. 12/2. 3. U. 19/33, Shanti P. 456,
457. 4. Das. 9/3/4; Annayuncha Charai Visuddha, Javanatthaya Samuyana Cha
Niccham. 5. Sta 9/30, Dasani 219. 6. Mula 813, T. p. 61. 7. Vyabha 1532. 8.
Bribha 531, T p. 154.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 44 piMDaniyukti AvazyakatA kI pUrti karatA hai, jise mAdhukarI bhikSA yA gocarI
bhI kahA jAtA hai| jaise bhramara phUloM se thor3A-thor3A rasa grahaNa karatA
hai, jisase phUloM ko pIr3A nahIM hotI hai aura usakI tRpti bhI ho jAtI hai,
vaise hI sAdhu bhI gRhastha ke lie banAe gae AhAra meM se thor3A-thor3A AhAra
grahaNa kare, jisase gRhasthoM ko kaSTa na ho aura sAdhu kI jIvana-yAtrA bhI
samyak rUpa se calatI rhe| uttarAdhyayana sUtra evaM RSibhASita' graMtha meM
sAdhu kI bhikSA ke lie kApotI vRtti kA ullekha bhI milatA hai| jisa prakAra
kapota dhAnya kaNa ko cugate vakta hara kSaNa sazaMka rahatA hai, usI prakAra
bhikSAcaryA meM pravRtta muni eSaNA ke doSoM ke prati sazaMka rahatA hai| muni
kI bhikSA kA eka vizeSaNa hai-ajnyaatunych| bhikSu sAmudAnika rUpa se
ajJAtakuloM se arthAt pahale nirdeza die binA bhikSA karatA hai| muni navakoTi
vizuddha AhAra grahaNa karatA hai, navakoTi kA tAtparya hai ki sAdhu AhAra hetu
na svayaM vadha karatA hai, na vadha karavAtA hai aura na hI vadha karane vAle
kA anumodana karatA hai| vaha na svayaM pakAtA hai, na pakavAtA hai aura na hI
pakAne kA anumodana karatA hai| muni na svayaM kraya karatA hai, na kraya
karavAtA hai aura na hI krIta kA anumodana karatA hai| digambara paramparA ke
anusAra mana, vacana aura kAyA ke dvArA kRta, kArita aura anumodana nahIM krtaa|
tIna ko tIna kA guNana karane para navakoTi parizuddha bhikSA hotI piNDakalpika
arthAt bhikSA karane ke yogya kauna hotA hai, usakI arhatAeM kyA hotI haiM,
isakA AcAryoM ne vistAra se vivecana kiyA hai| isakA kAraNa yaha hai jisa muni
ko bhikSAvidhi yA usake niyamoM kA jJAna nahIM hotA, vaha samyak eSaNA nahIM
kara sktaa| vyavahArabhASya ke anusAra prAcIna kAla meM AcArAMga ke AmagaMdhI
sUtra ko arthataH tathA sUtrataH par3ha lene para muni piNDakalpika hotA thA
lekina vartamAna meM dazavaikAlika ke piNDaiSaNA adhyayana ko par3ha lene para
piNDakalpI ho jAtA hai| bRhatkalpabhASya meM spaSTa ullekha hai ki jisane
AcAracUlA gata piNDaiSaNA tathA dazavaikAlika kA pAMcavAM piNDaiSaNA adhyayana
nahIM par3hA, usako gocarI bhejane para AcArya ko cAra gurumAsa (upavAsa) kA
prAyazcitta hotA hai| artha batAe binA bhejane para, artha batAne para bhI
sAmane vAle ko adhigata nahIM huA hai athavA zraddhA nahIM huI hai, usako
bhejane para, zraddhA hone para bhI jisakI parIkSA nahIM huI, usako bhejane para
cAra-cAra laghumAsa (Ayambila) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| 1. daza 1/2 /  2.
isi. 12/2 /  3. u. 19/33, zAMTI pa. 456, 457 /  4. daza.9/3/4 ; annAyauMchaM
caraI visuddha, javaNaTThayA samuyANaM ca niccaM  /  5. sthA 9/30, dazani 219  /
6. mUlA 813, TI. pR. 61  /  7. vyabhA 1532 /  8. bRbhA 531, TI pR. 154  /

Page #59 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation**  **Difference between Bhikshavṛtti and
Bhiksha**  There is a world of difference between the bhikshavṛtti of a sādhū
and the bhiksha of a destitute person. Firstly, there are no rules or
commitments in the bhiksha of a beggar; he begs from one house to another in a
pleading tone. On the other hand, a sādhū, with humility (Daśa 5/2/26) and self-
respect, accepts bhiksha offered by others for the attainment of the perfection
of the vows. A beggar collects wealth or material for future worries, whereas a
sādhū does not even store food for the evening, even if it is collected in the
morning. In other words, he cannot consume the bhiksha received in the first
watch in the last watch. A sādhū accepts with respect, humility, and
persistence, while a beggar desires more even after receiving what is due. A
sādhū remains equanimous, without feeling sorrow or disrespect if he does not
receive bhiksha, whereas a beggar sometimes becomes agitated and starts talking
nonsense if he does not receive bhiksha. A sādhū collects bhiksha by going to
many houses and working hard, while a beggar can fulfill his needs from one
house. Mahāvīra has kept the self-respect of a sādhū so alive that if a beggar
or another bhikshavṛtti is already present in a house, the muni will not enter
that house.  **How many times is bhiksha allowed for a muni?**  According to the
Āgamas, the third watch of the day is considered the time for bhiksha for a
nitya-bhakti muni. In the Daśāśrutaskandha, one of the 20 asamādhi-sthānas is to
eat from sunrise to sunset. The mention of "egbhattam ca bhoyanam" (Daśa 6/22)
points towards the dietary restraint of a sādhū. A fasting muni is allowed to go
for bhiksha only once, but if food and water are not available in sufficient
quantity, he can go twice.  Two gocharakālas are allowed for those practicing
bela tapasya, and three gocharakālas are allowed for those practicing tela
tapasya. For those practicing tapasya beyond tela, three gocharakālas are
allowed. A person practicing bela tapasya can go for bhiksha twice because the
intestines shrink during bela tapasya, and eating more frequently helps regain
the strength to practice bela tapasya again, and the food also does not get
cold.  1. Nibha 4141. 2. Daśa 5/2/6. 3. Daśa 5/2/12,13. 4. U 26/12; Taiyaae
Bhikkhaeriyam. 5. Daśaru 1/3. 6. Bṛbha 1698, Tī p. 499, Daśaru 8/60. 7. Bṛbha
1697, 1698, Tī p. 499. 8. Bṛbha 1699, Tī p. 499, 500.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa bhikSAvRtti evaM bhIkha meM aMtara sAdhu kI
bhikSAcarI aura dIna-hIna vyakti kI bhIkha meM jamIna-AsamAna kA aMtara hai|
prathama to bhikSuka kI bhIkha meM koI niyama-pratibaddhatA nahIM hotI, vaha
dIna svaroM meM eka ke bAda dUsare ghara se mAMga karatA rahatA hai, jabaki
sAdhu adInabhAva se (daza 5/2/26) AtmasammAna ke sAtha saMyamayogoM kI siddhi
hetu dUsaroM ke lie kRta evaM niSpanna bhikSA grahaNa karatA hai| bhikSuka
bhaviSya kI cintA ke lie bhI dhana athavA padArtha kA saMgraha karatA hai,
jabaki sAdhu prAtaHkAla lAI khAdya vastu kA zAma ke lie bhI saMgraha nahIM
karatA arthAt prathama prahara meM lAI huI bhikSA kA vaha aMtima prahara meM
upabhoga nahIM kara sktaa|' sAdhu mAna, manuhAra aura haThapUrvaka thor3A-thor3A
grahaNa karatA hai, jabaki bhikSuka deya vastu sArI lene para bhI aura adhika
lene kI AkAMkSA rakhatA hai| sAdhu alAbho tti na soejjA-arthAt bhikSA na milane
para duHkha kI anubhUti na karake samabhAva meM sthita rahatA hai, kisI kI
avahelanA nahIM karatA, jabaki bhikSuka bhIkha na milane para kabhI-kabhI
uttejita hokara anargala pralApa bhI karane lagatA hai| sAdhu aneka gharoM meM
ghUmakara zramapUrvaka bhikSA grahaNa karatA hai, jabaki bhikhArI eka ghara se
bhI apanI udarapUrti kara letA hai| mahAvIra ne to sAdhu ke svAbhimAna ko itanA
jIvanta rakhA hai ki yadi bhikhArI yA anya bhikSAcara ghara meM pahale se Ae hue
hoM to muni usa ghara meM praveza na kre| muni ke lie bhikSA kitanI bAra AgamoM
ke anusAra nityabhaktika muni ke lie dina kA tIsarA prahara bhikSA kA kAla mAnA
gayA hai| dazAzrutaskandha meM 20 asamAdhi-sthAnoM meM eka asamAdhi-sthAna yaha
hai ki sUryodaya se sUryAsta taka khAte rhnaa| egabhattaM ca bhoyaNaM (daza
6/22) ullekha sAdhu ke AhAra-saMyama kI ora saMketa karatA hai| upavAsa-kartA
muni ko bhI eka bAra hI bhikSArtha jAnA anujJAta hai lekina yadi AhAra-pAnI
paryApta mAtrA meM nahIM milA ho to do bAra jAyA jA sakatA hai| bele kI tapasyA
vAle ke lie do gocarakAla tathA tele kI tapasyA vAle ke lie tIna gocarakAla
anujJAta haiN| tele se adhika tapasyA karane vAle ke lie tIna gocarakAla
anujJAta haiN|' bele kI tapasyA vAlA do bAra bhikSArtha isalie jA sakatA hai
kyoMki bele Adi ke tapa meM AMta sikur3a jAtI hai ata: adhika bAra khAne se
puna: belA Adi tapa karane kA bala prApta ho jAtA hai tathA AhAra bhI ThaMDA
nahIM hotaa| 1. nibhA 4141 /  2. daza 5/2/6 /  3. daza 5/2/12,13 /  4. u 26/12 ;
taiyAe bhikkhAyariyaM  /  5.dazru 1/3 /  6. bRbhA 1698, TI pR. 499, dazru 8/60 /
7. bRbhA 1697, 1698, TI pR. 499  /  8. bRbhA 1699, TI pR. 499, 500 /

Page #60 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  If food is brought once and kept for the evening, it can also
be a reason for reluctance to eat cold food, therefore, it is permissible for a
Bele tapasvi to go for alms twice. If the fasting person goes for alms for the
third time, he gets Laghumas (Purimardh), for the fourth time, Guru-mas
(Ekasana), for the fifth time, Charlagghu (Ayambil), for the sixth time,
Charguru (Upvas), for the seventh time, Chalagghu, for the eighth time,
Chhaguru, for the ninth time, Chhed, for the tenth time, Mul, for the eleventh
time, Anvasthapy, and for the twelfth time, Paranchik Prayashchitta. Similarly,
for a Bele, going for alms for the twelfth time is a provision for Paranchik
Prayashchitta. For an Ashtamabhaktik-Tele, going for alms from the fourth time
to the thirteenth time results in Paranchik Prayashchitta.  **46**  According to
the Digambar tradition, the middle time between three ghadi after sunrise and
three ghadi before sunset is the time for food for a Muni. Eating in three
Muhurtas during the middle time is excellent, two Muhurtas is moderate, and one
Muhurta is inferior. Eating in one Muhurta is excellent conduct, two Muhurtas is
moderate conduct, and eating in three Muhurtas is inferior conduct.  **Eshana
and its faults**  The walking, talking, eating, keeping of equipment, and
excretion of a Sadhu are all different from a householder, therefore, his
correct actions are called Samiti. Among the five Samitis, the Samiti related to
Bhikchacharya is called Eshana. Jain Acharyas have given great importance to
pure Bhikcha Vritti. Vrat, Sheel, etc. qualities are based on the purity of
Bhikchacharya or Eshana. In the Bhashya literature, it is mentioned that where
there are faults of Eshana like Karma, etc., the Sadhu should not go for alms.
Unawareness in Eshana is the twentieth Asamadhi Sthan. Explaining this, the
commentator Abhaydevsuri says that one who is not suitable in Eshana is inclined
towards violence. When other Munis warn him, he becomes involved in conflict,
remaining in Asamadhi himself and becoming the cause of Asamadhi for others.
According to Acharya Battke, those who wander after purifying their Bhikcha,
Vachan, and Hriday, are called well-established Sadhus in the Jinashasana.
Acharya Kundkund has even said that a Muni who practices pure Bhikcha Eshana is
an Anahari even while eating. The Uttaradhyayanasutra clearly states that one
who is Auddeshik, Krit 1. Bribha 1700, 1701, T p. 500. 2. Mula 492, T p. 378,
379. 3. Mula 1005. 4. Bribha 5441; Jahiyan Esanadosa, Purakammai Na Tattha
Gantvam. 5. Dasru 1/3.  6. Samati p. 26; Aneshanam Na Pariharati, Preritashcha
Sau Sadhubhih Kalhayate..., Chatmaparayorasamadhikaranaadasamadhi Sthanam. 7.
Mula 1006. 8. Prav 3/27.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti yadi eka bAra lAkara use zAma ke lie rakha diyA jAtA hai to ThaMDA
bhojana AhAra karane kI anicchA kA hetu bhI bana sakatA hai ataH bele kA tapa
karane vAle ko do bAra bhikSA jAnA anujJAta hai| yadi upavAsakartA tIsarI bAra
bhikSArtha jAtA hai to use laghumAsa (purimArdha), cauthI bAra jAne para
gurumAsa (ekAsana), pAMcavIM bAra jAne para cAralaghu (Ayambila), chaThI bAra
jAne para cAraguru (upavAsa), sAtavIM bAra jAne para chahalaghu, AThavIM bAra
bhikSArtha jAne para chahaguru, nauvIM bAra jAne para cheda, dasavIM bAra jAne
para mUla, gyArahavIM bAra jAne para anavasthApya tathA bArahavIM bAra
bhikSArtha jAne para pArAJcika prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| isI prakAra bele
vAle ke lie bArahavIM bAra bhikSArtha jAne para pArAJcika prAyazcitta kA vidhAna
hai| aSTamabhaktika- tele vAle ke lie cauthI bAra se prArambha karake terahavIM
bAra bhikSArtha jAne para pArAJcika prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai  /  46
digambara paramparA ke anusAra sUryodaya kI tIna ghar3I ke bAda tathA sUryAsta
kI tIna ghar3I pahale kA madhyakAla muni ke lie AhAra kA kAla hotA hai| madhya
kAla meM tIna muhUrta AhAra karanA utkRSTa, do muhUrta karanA madhyama tathA eka
muhUrta AhAra karanA jaghanya hai| eka muhUrtta AhAra karanA utkRSTa AcaraNa, do
muhUrtta karanA madhyama AcaraNa tathA tIna muhUrtta taka AhAra karanA jaghanya
AcaraNa hai  /  ' eSaNA evaM usake doSa sAdhu kA calanA, bolanA, khAnA,
upakaraNa Adi rakhanA tathA utsarga- ye sabhI kriyAeM gRhastha se bhinna hotI
haiM ataH usakI ina samyak kriyAoM ko samiti kahA gayA hai| pAMca samitiyoM meM
bhikSAcaryA se sambandhita samiti kA nAma eSaNA hai| jaina AcAryoM ne zuddha
bhikSA vRtti ko bahuta mahattva diyA  /  vrata, zIla Adi guNa bhikSAcaryA yA
eSaNA kI vizuddhi para hI sthita rahate haiN| bhASya sAhitya meM ullekha milatA
hai ki jahAMpura: karma Adi eSaNA ke doSa lageM, vahAM sAdhu ko bhikSArtha nahIM
jAnA caahie| eSaNA meM ajAgarUkatA bIsavAM asamAdhisthAna hai| isakA
spaSTIkaraNa karate hue TIkAkAra abhayadevasUri kahate haiM ki jo eSaNA meM
upayukta nahIM hotA, vaha hiMsA meM pravRtta hotA hai| jaba dUsare muni use
sAvadhAna karate haiM, taba vaha kalaha meM pravRtta hokara svayaM asamAdhistha
rahatA hai tathA dUsaroM kI asamAdhi meM nimittabhUta banatA hai  / ' AcArya
baTTakera ke anusAra jo bhikSA, vacana aura hRdaya - ina tInoM kA zodhana karake
vicaraNa karate haiM, ve jinazAsana meM susthita sAdhu kahalAte haiN| AcArya
kuMdakuMda ne to yahAM taka kaha diyA ki jo muni zuddha bhikSA kI eSaNA karatA
hai, vaha AhAra karatA huA bhI anAhArI hai|' uttarAdhyayana meM spaSTa ullekha
hai ki jo auddezika, krIta 1. bRbhA 1700, 1701, TI pR. 500 /  2. mUlA 492, TI
pR. 378, 379  /  3. mUlA 1005  /  4. bRbhA 5441; jahiyaM esaNadosA, purakammAI
na tattha gaMtavvaM  /  5. dazru 1/3  /  6. samaTI pR. 26; aneSaNAM na
pariharati, preritazcAsau sAdhubhiH kalahAyate...,
cAtmaparayorasamAdhikaraNAdasamAdhisthAnam  /  7. mUlA 1006  /  8. prava 3/27  /

Page #61 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation  One who does not abandon the non-eshanīya
(non-permissible) food, even though he knows it is non-permissible, becomes like
fire, consuming everything and accumulating sinful karma. He dies and attains a
lower rebirth. According to Chūrṇikār Jinadās, if a monk does not get enough
eshanīya food, he should reduce his intake and eat only one mouthful, but he
should not consume non-eshanīya food.  In the Pañcāśak Prakaraṇa, three synonyms
for eshanā are found: gaveshanā, anveshanā, and grahana. The meaning of eshanā
is to be careful in the search, acquisition, and consumption of food. It has
three divisions: gaveshanā, grahaneshanā, and paribhogeshanā.  Gaveshanā
includes 16-16 faults related to origin and production, grahaneshanā includes 10
faults like doubt, and paribhogeshanā includes five faults like combination.
Counting all these faults, there are 47 faults in bhikṣācārya, but the texts
usually mention only 46 faults of bhikṣā. Explaining this, the commentators say
that the 16 faults of origin include the inclusion of adhyavapūraka in
miśrajāta, thus reducing the faults of origin to 15. This makes the faults of
bhikṣācārya 46. If the five faults of paribhogeshanā are not included, there are
only 41 faults of bhikṣā. According to Ācārya Kundakunda, a monk who eats food
with 46 faults with an impure mind falls into the state of a lower being and
suffers great pain. Chūrṇikār Jinadās has included only the 10 faults of
grahaneshanā, like doubt, in the word eshanā. The Uttarādhyayana instructs on
the purity of all three types of eshanā. According to the Daśavaikalika Niyukti,
the description of all three types of eshanā is quoted from the Karmapravāda.
The greatness of Pinḍaniryukti can be understood from the fact that a whole
independent text has been written on the method of bhikṣā alone. In the first
verse of Pinḍaniryukti, eshanā and paribhogeshanā are included in the eight-fold
Pinḍaniryukti. The same thing is included in the eight-fold Pinḍavishuddhi in
the Mūlācāra: 1. Udgaman 2. Utpādan 3. Eshanā 4. Sanyojana 5. Pramāṇa 6. Ingāla
7. Dhūma 8. Kārana.  10 Udgaman Faults  The faults or mistakes that arise from
the giver while cooking or giving food are called Udgaman ṣoḍaśa utpādanadoṣā,
daśa eshanādoṣāḥ sanyojanaādīnāṁ ca pañcakamiti.  1. U20/47. 2. Nichū Bhā. 1 p.
145; Jati na labhati paḍipuṇṇamāhārō To eguṇe bhuñjau, evam egahāṇīe jāv
egalambanaṁ bhuñjar, māy asi bhuñj. 3. Pañcā 13/25; Eṣaṇa gavesaṇaṇṇeshanā ya
gahaṇaṁ ca hoti egaṭṭhā. 4. U 24/11. 5. Pini 315, Mavṛ P. 176; Tadevaṁ
bhojanavidhau sarvasaṅkhyayā ṣaṭcaṭvāriṁśaddoṣā boddhavyaḥ, tadyathā - pañcadaśa
udgamanadoṣāḥ, adhyavapūrakasya miśrajāte'ntarbhavavivakṣaṇāt,  47 6. Bhāpā 101;
7. Chāyāladoṣa dusiyamasaṇaṁ gasiuṁ asuddhabhāveṇa. Patto si mahāvasaṇaṁ,
tiriyagaīe aṇappavaso. Daśajichūpṛ. 67; Eshanāgahaṇeṇa dasaeshanādoṣaparisuddhaṁ
geṇhati. U 24/11, 12. 8. 9. Daśani 15; Kammappavāyapuvvā piṇḍassā tu eshanā
tividhā. 10. Mūlā 421.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa aura nityA Adi aneSaNIya ko nahIM chor3atA,
vaha agni kI bhAMti sarvabhakSI hokara pApakarma kA arjana karatA hai aura
marakara durgati ko prApta karatA hai| cUrNikAra jinadAsa ke anusAra yadi
eSaNIya AhAra paryApta mAtrA meM na mile to muni kama karate-karate kevala eka
hI kavala khAkara raha jAe para aneSaNIya AhAra kA bhoga nahIM kre| paMcAzaka
prakaraNa meM eSaNA ke tIna ekArthaka milate haiM - gaveSaNA, anveSaNA aura
grahaNa  /  eSaNA kA artha hai - AhAra kI anveSaNA, prApti aura paribhoga meM
yatanA rkhnaa| isake tIna bheda haiM- gaveSaNA, grahaNaiSaNA, paribhogaiSaNA  /
gaveSaNA meM udgama aura utpAdana se sambandhita 16 - 16 doSa, grahaNaiSaNA meM
zaMkita Adi 10 doSa tathA paribhogaiSaNA meM saMyojanA Adi pAMca doSoM kA
samAhAra hotA hai| ina saba doSoM kI gaNanA karane para bhikSAcaryA ke 47 doSa
hote haiM lekina graMthoM meM prAyaH bhikSA ke 46 doSoM kA hI ullekha milatA
hai| isakA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue TIkAkAra kahate haiM ki udgama ke 16 doSoM
meM adhyavapUraka kA mizrajAta meM samAveza se udgama ke 15 doSa gRhIta hote
haiN| isase bhikSAcaryA ke 46 doSa hote haiN|' paribhogaiSaNA ke 5 doSoM kA
samAveza na kiyA jAe to bhikSA ke bayAlIsa doSa hI hote haiN| AcArya kuMdakuMda
ke anusAra 46 doSoM se yukta AhAra ko azuddha bhAva se khAne vAlA muni
tiryaJcagati meM avaza hokara mahAn duHkhoM kA bhoga karatA hai| cUrNikAra
jinadAsa ne eSaNA zabda se kevala grahaNaiSaNA ke zaMkita Adi 10 doSoM kA
samAveza kiyA hai| uttarAdhyayana meM tInoM prakAra kI eSaNAoM kI vizuddhi kA
nirdeza diyA hai|' dazavaikAlika niyukti ke anusAra tInoM prakAra kI eSaNAoM kA
varNana karmapravAda pUrva se uddhRta hai  /  piNDaniryukti jaise bRhad graMtha
se isa bAta ke mAhAtmya ko jAnA jA sakatA hai ki kevala bhikSA-vidhi para pUrA
eka svataMtra graMtha likha diyA gyaa| piNDaniryukti kI prathama gAthA meM eSaNA
evaM paribhogaiSaNA ko aSTavidha piNDaniryukti meM samAviSTa kara diyA gayA hai,
usI bAta ko mUlAcAra meM aSTavidha piNDavizuddhi meM samAviSTa kiyA hai - 1.
udgama 2. utpAdana 3. eSaNA 4. saMyojanA 5. pramANa 6. iMgAla 7. dhUma 8. kAraNa
/  10 udgama doSa AhAra pakAte samaya yA dete samaya dAtA ke dvArA jo doSa yA
skhalanAeM utpanna hotI haiM, ve udgama SoDaza utpAdanadoSA, daza eSaNAdoSAH
saMyojanAdInAM ca paJcakamiti  /  1. u20/47  /  2. nicU bhA. 1 pR. 145 ; jati na
labbhati paDipuNNamAhAro to egUNe bhuMjau, evaM egahANIe jAva egalaMbaNaM
bhuMjara, mAya asi bhuMja  /  3. paMcA 13/25 ; esaNa gavesaNa'NNesaNA ya gahaNaM
ca hoti egaTThA  /  4. u 24 /11  /  5. pini 315, mavR pa. 176; tadevaM
bhojanavidhau sarvasaGkhyayA SaTcatvAriMzaddoSA boddhavyAH, tadyathA - paJcadaza
udgamadoSAH, adhyavapUrakasya mizrajAte'ntarbhAvavivakSaNAt, 47 6. bhApA 101; 7.
chAyAladosa dUsiyamasaNaM gasiuM asuddhabhAveNa  /  patto si mahAvasaNaM,
tiriyagaIe aNappavaso  //  dazajicUpR. 67 ; eSaNAgahaNeNa
dasaesaNAdosaparisuddhaM geNhati  /  u 24 / 11, 12  /  8. 9. dazani 15 ;
kammappavAyapuvvA piMDassa tu esaNA tividhA  /  10. mUlA 421  /

Page #62 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  8. These are called **Pindaniyukti** faults. The author has
mentioned three synonyms for the word **udgama** - **udgama**, **udgopana** and
**margana**. In the **Panchashak Prakaran** and **Panchavastu**, Acharya
Haribhadra has considered **udgama**, **prasooti** and **prabhava** as synonyms
for **udgama**. The **niyuktikara** has mentioned the origin of many things like
**jyotish**, **trna**, **rna** etc. in the **dravya udgama**. In this context,
the story of **Laddhukpriyakumar** is described. The sixteen faults of
**udgama** can be divided into two categories - **avishodhikati** and
**vishodhikati**. The category that causes many faults in the **gachchha** is
**avishodhikati**. This category is of nine types - **self-harm**, **causing
harm to others**, and **approving harm**, **digestion**, **digestion**, and
**approving digestion** - these six categories are under **avishodhikati**, and
the last three - **self-purchase**, **causing purchase**, and **approving
purchase** - these three are under **vishodhikati**. Multiplying these nine by
**raga-dvesha** gives 18, multiplying by **mithyatva**, **ajnan** and
**aviraati** gives 27, and multiplying 27 by **raga-dvesha** gives 54 types. In
another way, multiplying the original 9 types by **dashavidha shramanadharma**
gives 90 types. Multiplying 90 by **gyan**, **darshan**, and **charitra** gives
270 types.  **Avishodhikati** can also be called **udgamakoti**. When the food
contaminated by the fault is removed in that quantity, the remaining food
becomes acceptable for the **muni**, that is called **vishodhikati**, and the
food that is not acceptable for the **sadhu** even after removing the
contaminated part, is called **avishodhikati**. **Adhakarma**, **auddeshik**,
**pootikarma**, **mishrajat**, **badar prabhritika** and the last two types of
**adhyavtar** - these come under **avishodhikati**. Even in this, some types of
**auddeshik**, **mishrajat** and **adhyavtar** are included in **avishodhikati**
and some in **vishodhikati**. For example, all three types of **vibhaga
auddeshik** come under **avishodhikati**. The last two types of **adhyavpurka**
- **swagruhapashandimishra** and **swagruhasadhุมishra** - these two are in
**avishodhikati**, and **swagruhayavadarthikamishra** is included in
**vishodhikati**.  1. **Pini 56**. 7. **Pini 192/6**. 2. **Pancha 13/4, Panv
740**. 8. **Mavri P. 116; yaddoshasprishtabhakte tavammaatre'panite sati sesham
3. Pini 57/1**. kalpate sa dosho vishodhikati, seshastvavishodhikati. 4. For the
expansion of the story, see **Pari. 3, Katha San. 3**. 9. **Pini 190**. 5.
**Jibha 1287; kodijjamte jamha, bahuvo dosa u sahiyae 10. Some acharyas include
the last three types of karma auddeshik in the gachchha**. kodi tti ten
bhannati. 6. **Jibha 1288-92, Pini 192/7, Mavri P. 119, 120**. (**Pimprati P.
49**).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 8 piMDaniyukti doSa kahalAte haiN| graMthakAra ne udgama zabda ke tIna paryAyoM
kA ullekha kiyA hai-udgama, udgopanA aura maargnnaa| paMcAzaka prakaraNa evaM
paMcavastu meM AcArya haribhadra ne udgama, prasUti aura prabhava-ina tIna
zabdoM ko udgama kA ekArthaka mAnA hai| avizodhi evaM vizodhi koTi niyuktikAra
ne dravya udgama meM jyotiS, tRNa, RNa Adi aneka vastuoM ke udgama ke bAre meM
ullekha kiyA hai| isa saMdarbha meM laDDukapriyakumAra ke kathAnaka kA varNana
kiyA hai| udgama ke solaha doSoM ko do koTiyoM meM vibhakta kiyA jA sakatA hai-
avizodhikoTi aura vizodhikoTi  /  jisake dvArA gaccha meM aneka doSa utpanna
hote haiM, vaha koTi hai| koTi nau prakAra kI hotI hai-svayaM hanana karanA,
dUsare se hanana karavAnA tathA hanana kA anumodana, pacana, pAcana tathA pAcana
kA anumodana-ye chaha koTiyAM avizodhi koTi ke antargata tathA aMtima tIna-
svayaM kraya karanA, kraya karavAnA tathA kraya kA anumodana karanA-ye tIna
vizodhi koTi ke antargata haiN| ina nau ko rAga-dveSa se guNA karane para 18,
mithyAtva, ajJAna aura avirati se guNA karane para 27 tathA 27 ko rAga-dveSa se
guNA karane para 54 bheda hote haiN| prakArAntara se mUla 9 bhedoM kA dazavidha
zramaNadharma se guNA karane para 90 bheda hote haiN| 90 kA jJAna, darzana,
cAritra se guNA karane para 270 bheda hote haiN| avizodhikoTi ko udgamakoTi bhI
kahA jA sakatA hai| doSa se spRSTa AhAra ko utanI mAtrA meM nikAla dene para
zeSa AhAra muni ke lie kalpanIya ho jAtA hai, vaha vizodhikoTi kahalAtA hai
tathA jo AhAra jisa doSa se dUSita hai, usa AhAra ko alaga karane para bhI jo
AhAra sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya nahIM hotA, vaha avizodhikoTi kahalAtA hai|
AdhAkarma, auddezika, pUtikarma, mizrajAta, bAdara prAbhRtikA aura adhyavatara
ke aMtima do bheda-ye avizodhikoTi ke antargata Ate haiN| isameM bhI audezika,
mizrajAta aura adhyavatara ke kucha bheda avizodhikoTi meM tathA kucha bheda
vizodhikoTi ke antargata samAviSTa hote haiN| jaise auddezika ke antargata
vibhAga auddezika ke tInoM bheda avizodhikoTi ke antargata Ate haiN|
adhyavapUraka ke aMtima do bheda svagRhapASaMDimizra tathA svagRhasAdhumizra-ye
do avizodhikoTi meM tathA svagRhayAvadarthikamizra vizodhikoTi ke antargata
samAviSTa hote haiN| 1. pini 56 /  7. pini 192/6 /  2. paMcA 13/4, paMva 740 /
8. mavR pa. 116; yaddoSaspRSTabhakte tAvanmAtre'panIte sati zeSaM 3. pini 57/1 /
kalpate sa doSo vizodhikoTiH, shessstvvishodhikottiH| 4. kathA ke vistAra hetu
dekheM pari.3, kathA saM. 3 /  9. pini 190 /  5. jIbhA 1287 ; koDijjaMte jamhA,
bahavo dosA u sahiyae 10. kucha AcArya vibhAga ke antargata karma auddezika ke
gcchN| koDi tti teNa bhnnnnti| aMtima tIna bhedoM ko avizodhi koTi meM rakhate
haiM 6.jIbhA 1288-92, pini 192/7, mavR pa. 119, 120 /  (piMpraTI pa. 49) /

Page #63 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation  **Lepkṛd** or **Alekpṛd** substances,
containing elements of **Aviseodhikōṭi**, if mixed with pure food, require the
vessel to be cleansed three times (**Kalpatraya**) even after discarding the
food. Otherwise, **Pūti Dosa** occurs.  The author raises a question: Some
individuals, due to weakness, accept that someone prepared **Ādhākarmik** rice.
In this case, the rice is **Ādhākarmik**, but the remaining **Avashrāvaṇa**,
**Kāñji**, etc., are not **Ādhākarmik** because they were not prepared for the
**Sādhu**. Therefore, food in contact with them does not become **Pūti**.  The
commentator and the commentator explain that **Bhadrabahu Svāmī** believes that
if the rice is **Ādhākarmik**, then the **Kāñjik** and **Avashrāvaṇa** will also
be **Ādhākarmik**.  The remaining **Ogh**, **Auddeshik**, **Mishrajāt**'s
primary division (**Yāvadārthikamiśra**), **Upakaraṇapūti**, **Sthāpanā**,
**Sūkṣma Prābhṛtika**, **Prāduṣkaraṇa**, **Kṛta**, **Prāmitya**,
**Parivartita**, **Abhyāhrta**, **Udbhinna**, **Mālāpahṛta**, **Ācchhedya**,
**Anisṛṣṭa**, **Adhyavapūraka**'s primary division (**Swagṛhayāvadārthik**) -
all these faults fall under **Aviseodhikōṭi**.  In the context of
**Aviseodhikōṭi**, the author explains **Viveka** in detail. Using
**Chaturbhangi**, the author states:  * If **Vishodhikōṭi** dry **Vall** etc.
fall into pure dry **Chan** etc., they can be easily separated without water-
washing. * If **Vishodhikōṭik** moist **Tīman** etc. fall into pure dry **Chan**
etc., then **Kāñjik** etc. can be added to remove the impure **Tīman**. * In the
third **Bhang**, if **Vishodhikōṭik** dry **Chan** etc. are added to pure moist
**Tīman**, then the **Chan** etc. can be removed by hand. * In the fourth
**Bhang**, if a mixture of **Vishodhikōṭi** moist **Tīman** is added to impure
moist **Tīman**, then if it is a rare substance that cannot be recovered, then
the portion should be removed with **Aṣṭha Bhāva**, and the rest should be
discarded. If it can be done without it, then the whole should be discarded
because it is not possible to separate moist from moist.  The sixteen faults of
**Udgma Dosa** are as follows:  1. **Ādhākarma** 2. **Auddeshik** 3.
**Pūtikarma** 4. **Mishrajāt** 5. **Sthāpanā** 6. **Prābhṛtika**
**References:**  1. **Jībhā 1300-1302, Mavṛ P. 117** 2. **Mavṛ P. 117** 3.
**Pini 192/2-5, Mavṛ P. 118, 119, Jībhā 1308-11** 4. **Mavṛ P. 118; In this
case, if it is necessary, then everything mixed with **Vishodhikōṭidosa** should
be discarded. If it is not necessary, then only that much.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa avizodhikoTi ke avayava se yukta lepakRd yA
alepakRd padArtha yadi vizuddha AhAra ke sAtha mila jAtA hai to usa AhAra ko
tyakta karane ke pazcAt bhI pAtra ko kalpatraya - tIna bAra sApha karanA
Avazyaka hai anyathA pUti doSa hotA hai| graMthakAra ne eka prazna upasthita
kiyA hai ki kucha vyakti daurbalya ke kAraNa isa bAta ko svIkAra karate haiM ki
kisI ne AdhAkarmika odana taiyAra kiyA, vahAM odana AdhAkarmika hai lekina zeSa
avazrAvaNa, kAMjI Adi AdhAkarmika nahIM hai kyoMki vaha sAdhu ke lie nahIM
banAyA gayA ataH usase saMspRSTa AhAra pUrti nahIM hotA  /  bhASyakAra evaM
TIkAkAra ne spaSTa ullekha kiyA hai ki bhadrabAhu svAmI mAnate haiM ki odana
yadi AdhAkarmika hai to kAMjika aura avazrAvaNa bhI AdhAkarmika hI hogA  / "
zeSa ogha auddezika, mizrajAta kA Adya bheda ( yAvadarthikamizra),
upakaraNapUti, sthApanA, sUkSma prAbhRtikA, prAduSkaraNa, krIta, prAmitya,
parivartita, abhyAhRta, udbhinna, mAlApahRta, Acchedya, anisRSTa, adhyavapUraka
kA Adya bheda (svagRhayAvadarthika ) - ye saba doSa avizodhikoTi ke antargata
Ate haiN| avizodhikoTi AhAra ke spRSTa hone para kalpatraya se zodhana karane kI
AvazyakatA nahIM rahatI  /  avizodhi koTi ke saMdarbha meM graMthakAra ne viveka
kI vistAra se vyAkhyA kI hai  /  caturbhaMgI ke mAdhyama se spaSTa karate hue
graMthakAra kahate haiM ki zuddha zuSka cane Adi meM yadi vizodhikoTi zuSka
valla Adi gira jAeM to binA jala-prakSepa ke sugamatA se unako alaga kiyA jA
sakatA  /  yadi zuddha zuSka cane Adi meM vizodhikoTika Ardra tImana Adi gira
jAe to usameM kAMjika Adi DAlakara azuddha tImana ko bAhara nikAlA jA sakatA
hai| tIsare bhaMga meM yadi zuddha Ardra tImana meM vizodhikoTika zuSka cane Adi
kA prakSepa ho jAe to hAtha DAlakara cane Adi ko nikAlA jA sakatA hai tathA
caturtha bhaMga meM yadi azuddha Ardra tIna meM vizodhikoTi Ardra tImana kA
mizraNa ho jAe usa sthiti meM yadi durlabha dravya hai, jisakI punaH prApti
saMbhava nahIM hai to azaTha bhAva se utanA aMza nikAla liyA jAe, zeSa kA
parityAga kara diyA jaae| yadi usake binA kAma calatA ho to sampUrNa kA
parityAga kara diyA jAe kyoMki Ardra se Ardra ko pRthak karanA saMbhava nahIM
hotaa| udgama doSa ke solaha doSa isa prakAra haiM 1. AdhAkarma 4. mizrajAta 2.
auddezika 3. pUtikarma 1. jIbhA 1300 - 1302, mavR pa. 117  /  2. mavR pa. 117  /
5. sthApanA 6. prAbhRtikA 49 3. pini 192 / 2-5, mavR pa. 118, 119, jIbhA 1308-11
/  4. mavR pa. 118; iha nirvAhe sati vizodhikoTidoSasammizraM sakalamapi
parityaktavyam, anirvAhe tu tAvanmAtram  /

Page #64 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 50 **Pindaniyukti** 7. Praduskarana 12. Udbhinna 8. Krita 13. Malaprahrita 9.
Apamitya Athava Pramitya 14. Acchhedya 10. Parivartita 15. Anisrusht 11.
Abhihrita 16. Adhyavapurka 1. Adhakarma  The first fault of Udgam is Adhakarma.
The food etc. produced by killing beings, taking the Sadhu as the basis, is
Adhakarma. Navangi Tika-kar Abhaydev Suri, while explaining Adhakarma, has said
that to make the sentient object insentient, to build houses etc., and to weave
clothes etc., keeping the Sadhu in mind, is Adhakarma. According to the
Bhashyakar, it is not only Adhakarma that is produced by killing beings. Even if
an insentient object is produced for the Sadhu, it is Adhakarma. In Dasha-
shruta-skandha, Adhakarma is considered the fourth Shabala Dosha in the twenty-
one Shabala Doshas of food enjoyment. According to Brihatkalpa-bhashya,
Adhakarma Dosha is of two types: 1. The one that harms the Mulaguna, 2. The one
that harms the Uttaragunas.  German scholar Layman has done a Sanskrit shadow of
'Ahakamma' as per his wish. According to him, producing food according to the
wish of the Sadhu is Adhakarma. Based on this concept, Acharya Mahaprajna, in
Bhagavati Bhashya, while explaining the word Adhakarma, says that the Muni who
eats food as per his wish is devoid of compassion towards the six-bodied beings
like Prithvikaaya etc. This implies that the meaning of eating food as per one's
wish is that the householder wants to make something for the Muni according to
his wish, the Muni gives his consent for it, or the Muni inspires the
householder to make food according to his wish.  Among all the faults of Udgam,
Adhakarma Dosha is the most cautious. The Niyuktikar says that just as food
becomes inedible after vomiting, similarly, Adhakarma food becomes inedible and
uneatable for the Muni. Giving a worldly example, the author says that just as
sheep, camel milk, garlic, onion, liquor, and beef etc. are considered inedible
and unacceptable in the Vedic scriptures, similarly:  1. Pini 62. 2. Bhati Bhag
1 P. 102; Adhyaya - Sadhu-pranidhanena yatsachetan- machetanam kriyate achetanam
va pachyate chiyate va grihaadikam vyuyate va vastraadikam tadaadhakarma. 3.
Bribha 1763. 4. Dashru 2/3. 5. Bribha 1084; Kamme Aadesadurga, Muluttare. 6.
Doctrine of Jainap. 2721 7. Bhag Bha. 1 P. 185. 8. Pini 85.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 50 piMDaniyukti 7. prAduSkaraNa 12. udbhinna 8. krIta 13. mAlApahRta 9.
apamitya athavA prAmitya 14. Acchedya 10. parivartita 15. anisRSTa 11. abhihRta
16. adhyavapUraka 1. AdhAkarma udgama kA prathama doSa AdhAkarma hai| sAdhu ko
AdhAra mAnakara prANiyoM kA vadha karake jo AhAra Adi niSpanna kiyA jAtA hai,
vaha AdhAkarma hai| navAMgI TIkAkAra abhayadeva sUri ne AdhAkarma ko spaSTa
karate hue kahA hai ki sAdhu ko dhyAna meM rakhakara sacitta vastu ko acitta
karanA, gRha Adi banAnA tathA vastra Adi bunanA AdhAkarma hai| bhASyakAra ke
anusAra jIvaghAta se niSpanna hI AdhAkarma nahIM hotaa| acitta vastu bhI yadi
sAdhu ke lie niSpanna kI jAe to vaha AdhAkarma hai| dazAzrutaskandha meM ikkIsa
zabala doSoM meM AdhAkarma AhAra ke bhoga ko cauthA zabala doSa mAnA hai|
bRhatkalpabhASya ke anusAra AdhAkarma doSa do prakAra kA hotA hai-1. mUlaguNa kA
upaghAta karane vAlA 2. uttaraguNoM kA upaghAta karane vaalaa| jarmana vidvAn
lAyamana ne 'AhAkamma' kI saMskRta chAyA yathAkAmya kI hai| isake anusAra sAdhu
kI icchA ke anusAra AhAra niSpanna karanA AdhAkarma hai| isI kalpanA ke AdhAra
para bhagavatI bhASya meM AcArya mahAprajJa AdhAkarma zabda kI vyAkhyA karate
hue kahate haiM ki yathAkAmya AhAra karane vAlA muni pRthvIkAya Adi
SaDjIvanikAyoM ke prati niranukampa hotA hai| isase yaha phalita hotA hai ki
yathAkAmya AhAra kA artha hai-gRhastha apanI icchA ke anusAra muni ke lie koI
vastu banAnA cAhatA hai, muni usake lie svIkRti de detA hai athavA muni apanI
icchAnukUla bhojana ke lie gRhastha ko prerita karatA hai|' . udgama ke sabhI
doSoM meM AdhAkarma doSa adhika sAvadha hai| niyuktikAra kahate haiM ki jaise
vamana ho jAne ke bAda vaha bhojana abhojya bana jAtA hai, vaise hI AdhAkarma,
bhojana muni ke lie aneSaNIya aura abhojya hotA hai| prakArAntara se laukika
udAharaNa dete hue graMthakAra kahate haiM ki jaise veda Adi dhArmika graMthoM
meM bher3I, UMTanI kA dUdha, lahasuna, pyAja, madirA aura gomAMsa Adi akhAdya
aura asammata haiM, vaise hI 1. pini 62 /  2. bhaTI bhAga 1 pa.102; AdhayA-
sAdhupraNidhAnena yatsacetana- macetanaM kriyate acetanaM vA pacyate cIyate vA
gRhAdikaM vyUyate vA vastrAdikaM tdaadhaakrm| 3. bRbhA 1763 /  4. dazru 2/3 /
5. bRbhA 1084; kamme Adesadurga, muuluttre| 6. Doctrine of Jainap.2721 7. bhaga
bhA. 1 pR. 185 /  8. pini 85 /

Page #65 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindianiyukti: An Observation  In the 51 Jain scriptures, food that is
*Ahadkarma* is considered inedible and unacceptable. According to Acharya
Kundakunda, a monk who indulges in *Ahadkarma* food abandons the path to
liberation.  The severity of the *Ahadkarma* fault is evident in the fact that a
monk cannot eat in a house where *Ahadkarma* food is known for three days. That
house is considered polluted for three days. The Bhagavati Sutra clearly states
that a *Nirgrantha* who consumes *Ahadkarma* binds himself to the remaining
seven *karma* types, excluding *Ayukarma*, with strong bonds, long-lasting
effects, intense experiences, and extensive scope. Acharya Vattkekar says that a
monk who consumes *Ahadkarma* food, which arises from the destruction of the
six-bodied beings, is not a true monk but rather a *Shravak* (lay follower) due
to his ignorance and greed for the tongue. The commentator of the Mulachar goes
so far as to say that such a person is not even a *Shravak* because he is devoid
of Dharma. A virtuous person with a mind that approves of digestion and
assimilation, who is not afraid of the violence caused by such food, is a self-
murderer even while eating. Such a monk, corrupted by worldly desires, has no
future in this life or the next. His wearing the robes of a monk is meaningless
without restraint.  The gravity of the *Ahadkarma* fault can be understood from
the fact that even if a monk mentally desires *Ahadkarma*, he binds himself to
karmas even while consuming *Prasauk* (acceptable) food. The Sutra-Kritanga
clearly states in this context that if a monk knows that the food is
contaminated with *Ahadkarma* and other faults, he should not eat it himself,
nor should he feed it to others, nor should he approve of those who eat it.  The
author of *Pindianiyukti* explains the term *Ahadkarma* through nine doors: 1.
The name of *Ahadkarma*, 2. Its meaning, 3. For whom is *Ahadkarma* intended, 4.
The nature of *Ahadkarma*, 5. The opposing side, 6. The supporting side, 7. Four
roles: transgression, violation, etc., 8. The consumption of *Ahadkarma*, 9.
Faults like disobedience and violation.  The *Pindavishuddhiprakaran* also
mentions nine doors, but with some differences. In *Pindianiyukti*, the doors
are indicated in the form of questions, while in *Pindavishuddhiprakaran*, they
are in the form of pronouns. There, the doors are: 1. *Yatjo* (nature), 2.
*Yasy* (whose), 3. *Yatha* (in what form the *Ahadkarma* fault is incurred), 4.
*Yadrish* (vomiting).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 51 jinazAsana meM AdhAkarma bhojana akhAdya
aura asammata hai| AcArya kuMdakuMda ke anusAra AdhAkarma AhAra meM rata muni
mokSamArga ko tyakta kara detA hai| _ AdhAkarma doSa kI bhayAvahatA isa bAta se
spaSTa hai ki AdhAkarma bhojana jJAta hone para muni tIna dina taka usa ghara
meM bhojana grahaNa nahIM kara sktaa| vaha ghara tIna dina taka pUtidoSa yukta
hotA hai| bhagavatI sUtra meM spaSTa ullekha milatA hai ki AdhAkarma grahaNa
karatA huA nirgrantha Ayukarma ko chor3akara zeSa sAta karma-prakRtiyoM ko
gAr3ha baMdhana vAlI, dIrghakAlika sthiti vAlI, tIvra anubhAva vAlI tathA
bahupradeza parimANa vAlI karatA hai| AcArya vaTTakera kahate haiM ki jo SaTkAya
jIvoM ke ghAta se niSpanna AdhAkarma bhojana grahaNa karatA hai, vaha ajJAnI
aura jihvendriya kA lobhI muni zramaNa na hokara zrAvaka ke samAna ho jAtA hai|
mUlAcAra ke TIkAkAra to yahAM taka kahate haiM ki vaha dharma se rahita hone ke
kAraNa zrAvaka bhI nahIM rhtaa| jo pacana-pAcana meM anumodana yukta citta vAlA
sAdhu inase hone vAlI hiMsA se nahIM DaratA, vaha AhAra karate hue bhI svaghAtI
hai, uttamArtha se bhraSTa usa muni kA na ihaloka hai aura na hI paraloka  /
saMyama se hIna usakA muniveza dhAraNa karanA vyartha hotA hai| AdhAkarma doSa
ke bhArIpana ko isa bAta se jAnA jA sakatA hai ki yadi mAnasika rUpa se bhI
sAdhu AdhAkarma kI icchA kara letA hai to vaha prAsuka dravya letA huA bhI
karmoM kA baMdha kara letA hai| isa saMdarbha meM sUtrakRtAMga meM spaSTa
ullekha hai ki yadi sAdhu ko jJAta ho jAe ki yaha AdhAkarma Adi doSa se yukta
AhAra hai to vaha na use svayaM khAe, na dUsaroM ko khilAeM aura na hI khAne
vAle kA anumodana kre| AdhAkarma ke dvAra niyuktikAra ne nau dvAroM ke mAdhyama
se AdhAkarma zabda kI vyAkhyA kI hai-1. AdhAkarma ke nAma 2. usake ekArthaka 3.
kisake lie banAyA AdhAkarma? 4. AdhAkarma kA svarUpa 5. parapakSa 6. svapakSa 7.
atikrama, vyatikrama Adi cAra bhUmikAeM 8. AdhAkarma kA grahaNa 9. AjJA-bhaMga
Adi doss| piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa meM bhI nau dvAroM kA ullekha hai lekina unameM
kucha bhinnatA hai| piNDaniyukti meM praznavAcaka rUpa meM dvAroM kA saMketa
hai, jabaki piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa meM sarvanAma ke rUpa meN| vahAM 1. yatjo
(svarUpa) 2. yasya-(jisakA) 3. yathA-jisa rUpa meM AdhAkarma doSa lagatA hai| 4.
yAdRza-vAnta 1. pini 86/2 /  syAt ubhydhrmrhittvaat| 2. mopA 79; AdhAkammammi
rayA, te cattA mokkhmggmmi| 6. mUlA 930, 931  /  3. pini 118 ; tinni u divasANi
pUiyaM hoti| 7. pini 90 /  4. bhaga 1/436 /  8. sU 2/1/65........te cetiyaM siyA
taM No sayaM bhaMjai, No 5. mUlA 929 TI pR. 128 ; athavA na zramaNo nApi
zrAvakaH aNNeNaM bhuMjAvei, aNNaM pi bhuMjaMtaM Na smnnujaanni...|

Page #66 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pind 52 ## Clarification of Aadhākarma by Analogy 5. Doshas 6. Aadhākarma 7.
Yathāpr̥cchā - Vidhi - Parihār 8. Chhalnā 9. Shuddhi | ## Names of Aadhākarma A
question arises in these nine doors: why did the author separately instruct on
the names and the one-meaning (ekārthak) doors? Because the names of Aadhākarma
are the same as the one-meaning. In resolving this question, it can be said that
the author has mentioned eight words in the names of Aadhākarma, and only four
words are indicated in the one-meaning: Aadhākarma, Adhah Karma, etc.
Pratisevna, etc., cannot be one-meaning of Aadhākarma, but Aadhākarma is used
through them. Therefore, by treating the cause as non-different, Pratisevna,
Pratiśravaṇa, Samvās, and Anumodana have also been included under the name of
Aadhākarma. ## Aadhākarma Food Brought by Another Sadhu A Sadhu who eats
Aadhākarma food brought by another Sadhu and serves it to other Sadhus is
afflicted with the Pratisevna dosha. A Sadhu who says, "I did not bring
Aadhākarma food, I am only enjoying food brought by others, therefore I am pure
because a person who pulls embers from another's hand does not get burned
himself," is explained by the Niyuktikār as a fool who does not understand the
meaning of the scriptures. Even if he did not bring it himself, the Sadhu is
still contaminated by the Pratisevna dosha. ## Explanation of Pratisevna, etc.
The Niyuktikār explains the four terms, Pratisevna, etc., by saying that a Muni
invited four Sadhus for Aadhākarma food. The first Muni accepted the invitation.
The second said, "I will not enjoy Aadhākarma food, you all do." The third Sadhu
remained silent after hearing him but performed Samvās with them, and the fourth
explicitly refused and left their company. The first Muni was contaminated by
the Pratisevna dosha, he was also contaminated by these three yogas: mind,
speech, and body. The second Muni incurred the verbal dosha of Pratiśravaṇa, and
also the mental dosha of Anumodana in the form of an indication. The third Muni,
who remained silent, incurred the mental dosha of Anumodana due to Samvās. The
fourth Muni remained free from all these doshas. ## Doshas of Aadhākarma Food
Four doshas are incurred by the one who consumes Aadhākarma food, three doshas
by the one who performs Pratiśravaṇa, two doshas by the one who stays with the
Aadhākarma eater, and one dosha by the one who performs Anumodana. Among these,
1. Pinni 68 / 2, 3. 2. According to the Tikākār, even if a Sadhu serves
Aadhākarma food brought by another to other Sadhu-like Munis, he is still
afflicted with the Pratisevna dosha (Mavṛ P. 47). 3. Pinni 68 / 10, 11 Mavṛ P.
48.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDa 52 Adi kI upamA dvArA AdhAkarma kI spaSTatA 5. doSa 6. AdhAkarma AhAra
dene vAle zrAvaka ko doSa 7. yathApRcchA - vidhi - parihAra 8. chalanA 9. zuddhi
| AdhAkarma ke nAma ina nau dvAroM meM eka prazna upasthita hotA hai ki
graMthakAra ne nAma aura ekArthaka - ina do dvAroM kA alaga-alaga nirdeza kyoM
kiyA ? kyoMki jo AdhAkarma ke nAma haiM, ve hI ekArthaka haiM  /  isa prazna ke
samAdhAna meM yaha kahA jA sakatA hai ki graMthakAra ne AdhAkarma ke nAma meM
ATha zabdoM kA ullekha kiyA hai tathA ekArthaka meM AdhAkarma, adhaH karma Adi
cAra zabdoM kA hI saMketa hai| pratisevanA Adi AdhAkarma ke ekArthaka nahIM ho
sakate lekina inake dvArA AdhAkarma kA prayoga hotA hai ataH kAraNa meM abheda
kA upacAra karake pratisevanA, pratizravaNa, saMvAsa aura anumodanA ko bhI
AdhAkarma nAma ke aMtargata samAviSTa kara diyA gayA hai| anya sAdhu dvArA AnIta
AdhAkarma AhAra ko svayaM khAne vAlA tathA anya sAdhuoM ko parosane vAlA sAdhu
pratisevanA doSa se yukta hotA hai| jo sAdhu yaha kahatA hai ki maiM AdhAkarma
AhAra nahIM lAyA, maiM to dUsaroM dvArA AnIta AhAra kA bhoga kara rahA hUM ataH
maiM zuddha hUM kyoMki dUsare ke hAtha se aMgAre khIMcane vAlA vyakti svayaM
dagdha nahIM hotaa| isa bAta kA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue niyuktikAra kahate haiM
ki aisI upamA dene vAlA sAdhu zAstra ke artha ko nahIM jAnatA, vaha mUr3ha hai|
svayaM na lAne para bhI vaha sAdhu pratisevanA doSa se dUSita hotA hai  /
pratisevanA Adi cAroM padoM kA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue niyuktikAra kahate haiM
ki kisI muni ne cAra sAdhuoM ko AdhAkarma bhojana ke lie nimaMtrita kiyaa|
prathama muni ne nimaMtraNa svIkAra kiyaa| dUsare ne kahA ki maiM AdhAkarma
AhAra kA bhoga nahIM karUMgA, tuma loga kro| tIsarA sAdhu usako sunakara mauna
rahA lekina saMvAsa unhIM ke sAtha kiyA aura cauthe ne spaSTa rUpa se pratiSedha
karake unake sAtha rahanA chor3a diyaa| prathama muni pratisevanA doSa se dUSita
huA, vaha mana, vacana aura kAyA - ina tInoM yogoM se bhI dUSita huaa| dUsare
muni ko pratizravaNa kA vAcika doSa lagA, upalakSaNa se anumodana rUpa mAnasika
doSa bhI lgaa| tIsarA muni, jo mauna rahA, usako saMvAsa ke kAraNa mAnasika
anumodana kA doSa lgaa| cauthA muni ina saba doSoM se mukta rhaa| AdhAkarma
AhAra kA sevana karane vAle ke pratisevanA Adi cAroM doSa, pratizravaNa karane
vAle ke tIna doSa, AdhAkarma bhojI ke sAtha rahane vAle ke do tathA anumodana
karane vAle ke eka doSa lagatA hai| inameM 1. pini 68 / 2, 3  /  2. TIkAkAra ke
anusAra anya dvArA AnIta AdhAkarma AhAra ko bhI yadi sAdhu sAdharmika muniyoM ko
parosatA hai to bhI vaha pratisevanA doSa se yukta hotA hai (mavR pa. 47) /  3.
pini 68 / 10,11 mavR pa. 48  /

Page #67 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti: An Observation  53  From the perspective of offense,
*pratisevna* is the most serious, the rest are progressively less serious:
*pratiśravana*, *sanvās*, and *anumoḍana*.  To further clarify *pratiśravana*,
the *niyuktikār* states that if an *ādhākarma* criticizes the food while the
*ācārya* uses the term "sulābhda" - you have received good - then they are also
guilty of the *pratiśravana* offense. *Sanvās* means to live with the
*ādhākarma* eater. To clarify why *sanvās* is prohibited, the *niyuktikār*
states that the sight, smell, and discussion of the *ādhākarma* food can attract
even the well-behaved and austere monks, therefore living with the *ādhākarma*
eater can also lead to offense. *Anumoḍana* means to praise. Even if a monk does
not consume the *ādhākarma* food, but says that these monks are blessed who
receive food that is seasonal, smooth, delicious, and sufficient with respect,
this *anumoḍana* also makes him guilty of the *ādhākarma* offense. Although the
one who praises does not consume it, his viewpoint is false due to supporting
the mistake, therefore he is considered contemptible. The *Sūtrakṛtāṅga Sūtra*
clearly states in the *samādhi* study that a *sādhu* should not desire
*ādhākarma* food in any situation, nor should he praise or support those who
desire *ādhākarma*. The *niyuktikār* has indicated four examples to clarify
these four: *pratisevna* - a thief, *pratiśravana* - a prince, *sanvās* - a
merchant living in a village, and *anumoḍana* - a wicked king.  **One-Word
Synonyms for *Ādhākarma***  The author has mentioned three one-word synonyms for
*ādhākarma*: 1. *Adhaḥkarma*, 2. *Ātmaghna*, and *Ātmakarma*. The *Sūyagado*
also uses the word *Āhakad-Ādhākṛta* for this.  *Adhaḥkarma* - By consuming
*ādhākarma* food, the *samyama sthāna*, *samyama śreṇī*, *leśyā*, and the state
of auspicious actions, the present auspicious *adhyavasāya* becomes inferior to
the most inferior. Therefore, by treating the cause with the effect, *ādhākarma*
is named *Adhaḥkarma*. To explain this, the author gives the example of a monk
with *Upaśānta moha* *cāritra*. According to him, even a monk with *Upaśānta
moha* *cāritra* in the eleventh *guṇasthāna*, let alone a *sādhu* with the sixth
*pramatta* *samyata* *guṇasthāna*, if he consumes *ādhākarma* food, he will:  1.
*Pini* 68. 2. *Pini* 68/4, *Mavṛ* p. 46. 3. *Piṁpra* 15, *Sanvāsō sahavāsō
kammiyabhōihiṁ*. 4. *Pini* 69/2. 5. *Piṁpra* 15; *Tappasaṁsāō anumoḍana tti*. 6.
*Pini* 69/4. 7. *Sū* 1/10/11. 8. *Pini* 68/6, for the expansion of the stories,
see *Pari* 3, story no. 4-7. 9. *Sū* 1/10/8.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 53 aparAdha kI dRSTi se pratisevanA sabase guru
hai, zeSa kramaza: laghu, laghutara aura laghutama haiN| pratizravaNa ko aura
adhika spaSTa karate hue niyuktikAra kahate haiM ki yadi AdhAkarma AhAra kI
AlocanA karate samaya AcArya 'sulabdha'-tumane acchA prApta kiyA hai, isa zabda
kA prayoga karate haiM to ve bhI pratizravaNa doSa ke bhAgI hote haiN| saMvAsa
kA artha hai-AdhAkarmabhojI ke sAtha rhnaa| saMvAsa kA niSedha kyoM kiyA gayA,
ise spaSTa karate hue niyuktikAra kahate haiM ki AdhAkarma bhojana kA avalokana,
usakI gaMdha tathA paricarcA suvihita evaM rUkSabhogI muni ko bhI AkRSTa kara
detI hai ataH AdhAkarmabhojI ke sAtha saMvAsa bhI doSa kA kAraNa bana sakatA
hai| anumodana kA artha hai prazaMsA krnaa| AdhAkarma kA upabhoga na karane para
bhI yadi muni aisA kahatA hai ki ye muni dhanya haiM, jo Rtu ke anukUla,
snigdha, svAdiSTa aura paryApta AhAra sammAna ke sAtha prApta karate haiM, yaha
anumodanA bhI use AdhAkarma doSa kA bhAgI banA detI hai| anumodana karane vAlA
yadyapi usakA bhoga nahIM karatA phira bhI galatI kA samarthana karane ke kAraNa
usakA dRSTikoNa mithyA hotA hai ataH usako heya mAnA hai| sUtrakRtAMga sUtra ke
samAdhi adhyayana meM spaSTa ullekha hai ki sAdhu kisI bhI sthiti meM AdhAkarma
AhAra kI kAmanA na kare aura na hI AdhAkarma kI icchA rakhane vAloM kI prazaMsA
yA samarthana kre| niyuktikAra ne ina cAroM ko spaSTa karane ke lie cAra
dRSTAntoM kA saMketa kiyA hai-pratisevanA meM cora, pratizravaNa meM rAjaputra,
saMvAsa meM pallI meM rahane vAle vaNik tathA anumodanA meM rAjaduSTa kaa|
AdhAkarma ke ekArthaka _graMthakAra ne AdhAkarma ke tIna ekArthakoM kA ullekha
kiyA hai- 1. adha:karma 2. Atmaghna aura aatmkrm| sUyagaDo meM isake lie
AhAkaDa-AdhAkRta zabda kA prayoga bhI huA hai| adhaHkarma-AdhAkarma AhAra kA
grahaNa karane se saMyamasthAna, saMyamazreNI, lezyA tathA zubha karmoM kI
sthiti meM vartamAna zubha adhyavasAya hIna se hInatara hote haiM ataH kAraNa
meM kArya kA upacAra karake AdhAkarma kA eka nAma adha:karma rakhA gayA hai| isa
bAta ko samajhAne ke lie graMthakAra ne upazAntamoha cAritra vAle muni kA
udAharaNa diyA hai| unake anusAra chaThe pramatta saMyata guNasthAna vAle sAdhu
kI bAta to dUra, gyArahaveM upazAnta moha cAritra vAlA sAdhu bhI yadi AdhAkarma
AhAra grahaNa karatA hai to vaha apanI 1. pini 68 /  2. pini 68/4, mavR pa. 46
/  3. piMpra 15, saMvAso sahavAso kmmiybhoihiN| 4. pini 69/2 /  5. piMpra 15 ;
tappasaMsAo aNumoyaNa tti| 6. pini 69/4 /  7. sU 1/10/11 /  8. pini 68/6,
kathAoM ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari 3, kathA saM 4-7 /  9. sU1/10/81

Page #68 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  54  **Pindaniyukti** (Pindaniyukti) leads to the downfall of the soul.  The
**Moolachar** (Moolachar) illustrates this point through an example:  A monk who
stands in **Viraasana** (Viraasana), practices **Kayotsarga** (Kayotsarga),
maintains silence, meditates, fasts, and observes **bela** (bela), but is still
involved in **Aadhkarma** (Aadhkarma) food consumption, renders all his efforts
futile.  An **Aadhkarma** (Aadhkarma) eater not only binds his lifespan to a
downward path but also directs other karmas towards the same. He accumulates
karmas every moment, intensifying the binding and extraction of karmas
associated with intense emotions. These heavy karmas drag him down.  An
**Aadhkarma** (Aadhkarma) eater, by consuming food, harms the life force and
beings, and also destroys his own knowledge, perception, and conduct. Therefore,
**Aadhkarma** (Aadhkarma) is also called **Aatmaghna** (Aatmaghna) - the
destroyer of the self. According to the text, the destruction of conduct leads
to the destruction of knowledge and perception. However, from a practical
perspective, the destruction of conduct leads to the loss of knowledge and
perception.  An **Aadhkarma** (Aadhkarma) eater, consumed by negative emotions,
connects himself to the actions of others, particularly the **Parakarma**
(Parakarma) - the actions of householders, such as cooking and eating. Due to
the complex consequences, he binds himself to karmas. Therefore, **Aadhkarma**
(Aadhkarma) is also called **Aatmakarma** (Aatmakarma) - the action of the self.
A question arises regarding **Aatmakarma** (Aatmakarma): How can the actions of
others be transferred? If this were possible, then a monk who has attained the
**Kshapaka** (Kshapaka) stage could, out of compassion, absorb the karmas of
others and destroy them. However, this is never possible.  In response to this
question, Acharya Yashobhadrasurī presented the example of a deer and a trap.
Explaining this, the commentator Malayagiri states that a skilled and vigilant
deer avoids traps. Even if it gets caught in a trap, it escapes before the trap
is closed. However, a careless and unskilled deer gets trapped. Therefore,
simply being in the presence of others does not lead to karmic bondage.
Similarly, simply preparing **Aadhkarma** (Aadhkarma) food by a householder does
not bind the monk to **papakarma** (papakarma) - negative karma. A monk who, due
to carelessness, consumes **Aadhkarma** (Aadhkarma) food with negative
intentions, makes promises, associates with **Aadhkarma** (Aadhkarma) eaters,
and approves of their actions, binds himself to the actions of others,
particularly the **Parakarma** (Parakarma) - the actions of householders, such
as cooking and eating.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 54 piMDaniyukti AtmA kA adha:patana kara letA hai| prakArAntara se mUlAcAra meM
isI bAta ko dRSTAnta dvArA prakaTa kiyA gayA hai ki khar3e hokara vIrAsana meM
kAyotsarga, mauna, dhyAna karane vAlA tathA upavAsa, belA Adi karane vAlA sAdhu
bhI yadi AdhAkarma bhojana-grahaNa meM pravRtta hai to usake sabhI yoga
nirarthaka haiN| AdhAkarmagrAhI adhogati kA to AyuSya bAMdhatA hI hai, anyAnya
karmoM ko bhI adhogati ke abhimukha kara detA hai| vaha tIvra-tIvratama bhAvoM
se baMdhe hue karmoM kA nidhatti aura nikAcanA rUpa meM ghanakaraNa karatA huA
pratipala karmoM kA upacaya karatA hai, ve bhArI karma use adhogati meM le jAte
haiN|' Atmana AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa karane vAlA prANa aura bhUtoM ke hanana ke
sAtha-sAtha apanI AtmA ke jJAna, darzana aura cAritra kA ghAta bhI kara detA hai
isalie AdhAkarma kA eka nAma Atmaghna hai| graMthakAra ke anusAra nizcayanaya se
cAritra kA ghAta hone se jJAna aura darzana kA ghAta hotA hai lekina
vyavahAranaya kI apekSA se cAritra kA ghAta hone para jJAna aura darzana ke
ghAta kI bhajanA hai| Atmakarma AdhAkarma grahaNa karane vAlA muni azubha bhAva
meM pariNata hokara parakarma arthAt gRhastha ke pacanapAcana Adi karma se
svayaM ko jor3a letA hai| saMkliSTa pariNAmoM ke kAraNa vaha karmoM kA baMdha
karatA hai ataH AdhAkarma kA eka nAma Atmakarma bhI hai| Atmakarma ke saMdarbha
meM eka prazna upasthita hotA hai ki parakriyA anyatra kaise saMkrAnta ho sakatI
hai? yadi aisA saMbhava ho taba to kSapakazreNI meM ArUr3ha muni karuNAvaza
sabake karmoM ko apane bhItara saMkrAnta karake unakA kSaya kara sakatA hai
lekina aisA kabhI saMbhava nahIM hotaa| isa prazna ke uttara meM AcArya
yazobhadrasUri ne mRga aura kUTa kA dRSTAnta prastuta kiyA hai, jisakI vyAkhyA
karate hue TIkAkAra malayagiri kahate haiM ki jaise dakSa aura apramatta mRga
jAla se bacakara calatA hai| yadi kisI kAraNavaza vaha jAla meM phaMsa bhI jAtA
hai to jAla baMda hone se pUrva vahAM se bacakara nikala jAtA hai lekina
pramatta aura akuzala mRga vahAM phaMsa jAtA hai ataH paraprayukti mAtra se koI
baMdhanagrasta nahIM hotaa| isI prakAra kevala gRhastha dvArA AdhAkarma AhAra
banAne mAtra se sAdhu-pApakarma kA baMdhana nahIM krtaa| jo muni pramatta hokara
azubha adhyavasAyoM se AdhAkarma AhAra ko grahaNa karatA hai, usake bAre meM
pratizravaNa karatA hai, AdhAkarmabhojI ke sAtha saMvAsa karatA hai tathA usakI
anumodanA karatA hai, vaha parakarma-gRhastha ke pacana-pAcana Adi karma ko
Atmakarma 1. pini 64/1, mavR pa. 41 /  2. mUlA 924 /  3. pini 64/2,3 /  4. mavR
pa. 36, jIbhA 1117 /  5. pini 66/1, mavR pa. 42, 43, jIbhA 1118  /  6. pini 67,
mavR pa. 43 /  7. mavR pa. 44 /

Page #69 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation  **55**  A muni who is free from negligence in
thought, speech, and action does not acquire bondage, even though he may be
creating it. This is explained in the Mulacara through the example of fish: just
as fish become intoxicated when a narcotic substance is put into a lake, but
frogs do not, similarly, a muni who takes food prepared by a householder with
pure intention does not become entangled in demerit.  How can parakṛta karma be
the cause of bondage? This is explained in the Jītakalpabhāṣya through an
example: just as poison used by another is deadly for another, similarly,
parakṛta action also becomes the cause of bondage for a jīva due to a particular
intention.  **What is the ādhākarma for whom the food is prepared?**  The third
gate related to ādhākarma is "kass" - that is, for whom the food is prepared is
called ādhākarma. Explaining this, the Niyuktikāra says that, as a rule, food
prepared for a sādharmika is called ādhākarma.  In this context, twelve deposits
of sādharmika are made in Pinḍaniryukti, along with their detailed explanation
in 22 gāthās. Here, some special facts related to ādhākarma related to
sādharmika are being mentioned.  If a person's father's name is Devadatta, and
after his death, his son resolves that, whether he is a householder or a sādhū,
he will give food to all persons named Devadatta, then in this situation, that
food is not considered appropriate for a sādhū named Devadatta because the name
is sādharmika. If the householder resolves that he will feed all householders
named Devadatta, then in this resolution, that food is considered appropriate
for a muni named Devadatta. If his resolution is that he will feed all sādhūs
named Devadatta, then in this mixed resolution, that food is not appropriate for
a sādhū named Devadatta, but it is appropriate for all sādhūs with different
names, such as Chaitra, etc. If the householder's resolution is that he will
feed all sādhūs named Devadatta who are of other darshanas, then in this
resolution, it is appropriate for the sādhū to take that food. If the
householder has resolved for all śramaṇas, then this resolution is mixed, and
even a nirgrantha sādhū is included in it, so that food is not appropriate for
the sādhū. If the resolution is that he will feed all śramaṇas except nirgrantha
sādhūs, then that food is appropriate for the sādhū. According to the tīkākara,
if the tīrthankara and...  •  1. Jībhā 1128. 2. Jībhā 1124, Pinḍi 67/2-4 Mavṛ P.
44, 45. 3. Mūla 486.  4. Jībhā 1122. 5. Pinḍi 72; Niyamā sāhammīyassā tṁ hoti.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa 55 banA letA hai lekina jo muni mana, vacana
aura kAyA ke yogoM se apramatta hotA hai, vaha baMdhana ko prApta nahIM hotaa|
yahI bAta mUlAcAra meM matsya ke dRSTAnta se samajhAI gaI hai, jaise- machaliyoM
ke lie sarovara meM mAdaka padArtha DAlane para machaliyAM hI unmatta hotI haiM,
meMr3haka nhiiN| vaise hI gRhastha dvArA banAe gae bhojana ko vizuddha bhAva se
lene vAlA muni doSa se lipta nahIM hotA  /  parakRta karma baMdhana kA kAraNa
kaise ho sakatA hai, ise jItakalpabhASya meM dRSTAnta dvArA samajhAyA gayA hai,
jaise paraprayukta viSa dUsare ke lie mAraka hotA hai, vaise hI parakRta kriyA
bhI jIva ke bhAva vizeSa se baMdhana kA kAraNa bana jAtI hai|" kisake lie
nirmita AhAra AdhAkarma AdhAkarma se sambandhita tIsarA dvAra hai- 'kassa'
arthAt kisake lie nirmita AhAra AdhAkarma kahalAtA hai| isakA spaSTIkaraNa
karate hue niyuktikAra kahate haiM ki niyamataH sAdharmika ke lie nirmita AhAra
hI AdhAkarmika kahalAtA hai|" isa saMdarbha meM piNDaniryukti meM sAdharmika ke
12 nikSepa kie gae haiM, sAtha hI 22 gAthAoM meM unakI vistAra se vyAkhyA bhI
hai| yahAM sAdharmika se sambandhita AdhAkarma ke kucha vizeSa tathyoM kA
ullekha kiyA jA rahA hai kisI vyakti ke pitA kA nAma devadatta hai| usakI mRtyu
ke bAda putra yaha saMkalpa kare ki gRhastha ho yA sAdhu, maiM devadatta nAmaka
sabhI vyaktiyoM ko AhAra duuNgaa| aisI sthiti meM nAma sAdharmika hone se
devadatta nAmaka sAdhu ke lie vaha AhAra kalpya nahIM hotA  /  yadi gRhastha
yaha saMkalpa kare ki devadatta nAmaka sabhI gRhasthoM ko AhAra karavAUMgA to
isa saMkalpa meM devadatta nAmaka muni ke lie vaha AhAra kalpya hotA hai| yadi
usakA saMkalpa yaha hotA hai ki devadatta nAmaka sabhI sAdhuoM ko AhAra dUMgA to
isa mizra saMkalpa meM devadatta nAmaka sAdhu ke lie vaha AhAra akalpya hai
lekina visadRza nAma vAle caitra Adi sabhI sAdhuoM ke lie vaha AhAra kalpanIya
hai  /  yadi gRhastha kA yaha saMkalpa hotA hai ki jitane anya darzanI devadatta
nAmaka sAdhu haiM, unako AhAra dUMgA to isa saMkalpa meM sAdhu ko vaha AhAra
lenA kalpya hai| yadi gRhastha ne sabhI zramaNoM ke lie saMkalpa kiyA hai to
yaha saMkalpa mizra hone se nirgrantha sAdhu bhI usameM sammilita hone se vaha
AhAra sAdhu ke lie kalpya nahIM hai| yadi saMkalpa aisA hotA hai ki nirgrantha
sAdhuoM ke atirikta sabhI zramaNoM ko AhAra dUMgA to sAdhu ke lie vaha AhAra
kalpya hai| TIkAkAra ke anusAra yadi tIrthaMkara aura * 1. jIbhA 1128  /  2.
jIbhA 1124, pini 67 / 2-4 mavR pa. 44, 45  /  3. mUlA 486  /  4. jIbhA 1122  /
5. pini 72; niyamA sAhammiyassa taM hoti  /

Page #70 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **Every Buddha** is a **kalpya** (permissible) for the
**sadhu** (monk) because **Tirthankaras** and **Every Buddha** are **atiit**
(transcended) from the **sangha** (community), they have risen above all
**kalpas** (time cycles), therefore they are not **sadharmic** (of the same
dharma) with the **sadhus**.  **56**  * If a **grihastha** (householder) makes a
**lepyamayi** (clay) image of their deceased father or while he is alive and
prepares **naivedya** (offering) for him, it is also of two types: 1.
**Nishraakrut** 2. **Anishraakrut**. If the **grihastha** resolves that I will
offer **naivedya** to the image of my father who is **rajoharanadhari** (one who
has renounced worldly possessions), then it is called **Nishraakrut naivedya**.
If it is prepared without any resolution, then it is called **Anishraakrut**.
**Nishraakrut naivedya** is **akalpya** (impermissible) because it is
**adhakarmi** (related to the five senses), and **Anishraakrut** is **kalpya**
(permissible) but prohibited because it is **lokavirodh** (against the world).
Similarly, the food prepared for the deceased **sadhu**'s body is called
**mrutatnubhakt**. It is also of two types: **Nishraakrut** and
**Anishraakrut**. The first is **akalpya** and the second is **kalpya** but
prohibited.  * From the perspective of **kshetra** (region), if someone resolves
that I will give **bhiksha** (food) to all the **sadhus** born in **Saurashtra**
country, then that food is **akalpya** for the **sadhu** born in **Saurashtra**
country, and **kalpya** for the rest. Similarly, **niyuktikar** (author of the
text) and **tikaakar** (commentator) have described in detail about
**sadharmic** in terms of **kal** (time), **pravachan** (discourse), **ling**
(gender), **darshan** (philosophy), **gyan** (knowledge), **charitra**
(conduct), **abhigraha** (attachment), and **bhavana** (feelings).  **What is
Adhakaram?**  **Adhakaram** is the fourth **dwar** (gate) related to the
subject. **Niyuktikar** explains that **adhakaram** is the constituent elements
of **utpatti** (birth): **ashan** (food), **pan** (drink), **khadim** (smell),
and **svadim** (taste) - these four. **Pindaniyuktikar** has described in detail
only the **adhakaram** related to **aahar** (food), but in **Prashnavyakaran
Sutra** it is mentioned that **vasati** (residence), **upaashray** (shelter),
etc., if they are for the **sadhu**, then it is **adhakarmi**, its use is the
cause of **asanyam** (non-restraint).  **Swapash and Parapash**  In the fifth
**dwar**, **niyuktikar** has described **adhakaram** based on **krit** (done)
and **nishthit** (confirmed) with **sadhu** and **grihastha**.  1. **Pini 73/4,
5, Mavri P. 53, 54**. 2. **Mavri P. 54**. 3. **Mavri P. 55**. Some **acharyas**
(teachers) believe that **ekadash pratimadhari shravak** (layman who has taken
eleven vows) are like **sadhus** from the perspective of **ling**, therefore
**krit aahar** (food prepared by someone else) is not **kalpya** for them, but
**tikaakar Malayagiri** has refuted this opinion and quoting the original
**tikaakar** said that **ekadash pratimadhari shravak** who are **ling yukta**
(have gender) are **sadharmic** from the perspective of **ling**, not from
**abhigraha**, therefore **krit aahar** is **kalpya** for them. 4. See **Pini
73/8-22, Mavri P. 55-62**. 5. **Pra 8/9**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti pratyekabuddha ke nAma se saMkalpa kiyA gayA hai to vaha AhAra
sAdhu ke lie kalpya hai kyoMki tIrthaMkara aura pratyekabuddha saMgha se atIta
hote haiM, ve saba kalpoM se Upara uTha gae haiM ataH ve sAdhuoM ke sAdharmika
nahIM hote  /  56 * yadi koI gRhastha dIkSita pitA ke divaMgata hone para yA
jIvita avasthA meM unakI lepyamayI pratimA banavAkara unake lie naivedya taiyAra
karavAtA hai to vaha bhI do prakAra kA hotA hai- 1. nizrAkRta 2. anizrAkRta  /
yadi gRhastha yaha saMkalpa karatA hai ki rajoharaNadhArI mere pitA kI pratikRti
ko maiM naivedya dUMgA to vaha nizrAkRta naivedya kahalAtA hai  /  yadi binA
saMkalpa ke sAmAnya rUpa se taiyAra karatA hai to vaha anizrAkRta kahalAtA hai
/  nizrAkRta naivedya AdhAkarmI hone se akalpya hotA hai tathA anizrAkRta kalpya
hone para bhI lokaviruddha hone se niSiddha hai| isI prakAra tatkAla divaMgata
sAdhu ke zarIra ke sAmane rakhane ke lie jo AhAra taiyAra kiyA jAtA hai, vaha
mRtatanubhakta kahalAtA hai| vaha bhI nizrAkRta aura anizrAkRta do prakAra kA
hotA hai| unameM prathama akalpya tathA dUsarA kalpya hote hue bhI pratiSiddha
hai  /  * kSetra kI dRSTi se koI yaha saMkalpa kare ki maiM saurASTra deza meM
utpanna sabhI sAdhuoM ko bhikSA dUMgA to saurASTra deza meM utpanna sAdhu ke lie
vaha AhAra akalpya hai, zeSa ke lie kalpya  /  isI prakAra kAla, pravacana,
liMga, darzana, jJAna, cAritra, abhigraha aura bhAvanA Adi sAdharmika ke bAre
meM bhI niyuktikAra aura TIkAkAra ne vistAra se varNana kiyA hai| AdhAkarma kyA
hai ? AdhAkarma viSayaka cauthA dvAra haiAdhAkarma kyA hotA hai ? isakI vyAkhyA
karate hue niyuktikAra kahate haiM ki AdhAkarma utpatti ke ghaTaka tattva azana,
pAna, khAdima aura svAdima- ye cAra hote haiN| piNDaniyuktikAra ne kevala AhAra
se sambandhita AdhAkarma kA hI vistAra se varNana kiyA hai lekina
praznavyAkaraNa sUtra meM ullekha milatA hai ki vasati - upAzraya Adi kA
sammArjana, zodhana, chAdana, putAI, lipAI Adi bhI yadi sAdhu ke lie hotI hai to
vaha AdhAkarmika hai, usakA prayoga asaMyama kA kAraNa hai|" svapakSa aura
parapakSa pAMcaveM dvAra meM niyuktikAra ne sAdhu aura gRhastha ke sAtha kRta
aura niSThita ke AdhAra para AdhAkarma 1. pini 73 / 4, 5, mavR pa. 53, 54  /  2.
mavR pa. 54 3. mavR pa. 55 ; liMga kI dRSTi se kucha AcArya mAnate haiM ki
ekAdaza pratimAdhArI zrAvaka sAdhu jaise hI hote haiM ataH unake lie kRta AhAra
sAdhu ke lie kalpya nahIM hotA lekina TIkAkAra malayagiri ne isa mata kA
khaMDana kiyA hai tathA mUla TIkAkAra kA uddharaNa dete hue kahA hai ki liMga
yukta ekAdaza pratimAdhArI zrAvaka liMga se sAdharmika haiM, abhigraha se nahIM
ataH unake lie kRta AhAra sAdhu ke lie kalpya hotA hai  /  4. dekheM pini
73/8-22, mavR pa. 55-62  /  5. pra 8/9  /

Page #71 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  57.  Pinḍaniyukti: A Discussion of Observation  This discussion reveals the
profound depth of the ancient Acharyas' analysis of this topic. Based on "kṛta"
and "niṣṭhita," the four-fold classification is as follows:  * **Kṛta** for the
ascetic, **niṣṭhita** for the ascetic. * **Kṛta** for the ascetic, **niṣṭhita**
for the householder. * **Kṛta** for the householder, **niṣṭhita** for the
ascetic. * **Kṛta** for the householder, **niṣṭhita** for the householder.  The
second and fourth categories in this four-fold classification are pure, and the
ascetic can consume food from them. The first and third categories are impure,
and it is inconceivable for the ascetic to consume food from them.  The nature
of "kṛta" and "niṣṭhita" manifests in various forms. Generally, what is cooked
or prepared is "niṣṭhita," and all actions prior to that are "kṛta." Another
interpretation of "kṛta" and "niṣṭhita" is that from sowing to the second
boiling is "kṛta," and the third boiling is "niṣṭhita."  The Jītakalpabhāṣya
elaborates on these four categories. If someone sows grain for the ascetic,
boils it three times, and cooks it for them, the Tirthankaras consider it a
double "ādhākarma." The first "ādhākarma" is "kṛta" in form, and the second
"ādhākarma" is "niṣṭhita" in the form of cooked rice. In this context, the
commentator mentions the Vṛddhasampradāya, stating that if the rice is boiled
once or twice for the ascetic, and the householder boils it a third time for
themselves and appropriates it for their own use, then that rice is still
permissible for the ascetic. The commentator also presents several other options
in this context.  Regarding the "khādim," the author mentions a specific belief.
Some Acharyas believe that even the shade of a tree grown for the ascetic should
be avoided. In this context, the Niyuktikāra states that if the householder
appropriates the fruits of a tree grown for the ascetic while picking them, then
those fruits are still permissible for the ascetic, so why should the shade be
avoided?  1. Jībhā 1157. 2. Mavṛ P. 66; There, from sowing to the second boiling
is "kṛta," and the third boiling is "niṣṭhita." 3. Jībhā 1158. 4. Pini 80, Mavṛ
P. 65. 5. Mavṛ P. 65, 66.  **Notes:**  * "Kṛta" refers to actions performed with
the intention of benefiting an ascetic. * "Niṣṭhita" refers to the final product
or result of those actions. * "Ādhākarma" refers to actions that create karmic
consequences. * "Khādim" refers to a type of tree that is considered auspicious
for ascetics. * "Vṛddhasampradāya" refers to an ancient tradition or school of
thought. * "Niyuktikāra" refers to the author of the Niyukti, a commentary on
the Jītakalpabhāṣya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 57 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa kA vivecana kiyA hai| isa vivecana ko
par3hakara jAnA jA sakatA hai ki prAcIna AcAryoM ne kitanI gaharAI se isa
sambandha meM vivecana prastuta kiyA hai| kRta aura niSThita ke AdhAra para
caturbhaMgI isa prakAra hai * sAdhu ke lie kRta, sAdhu ke lie nisstthit| * sAdhu
ke lie kRta, gRhastha ke lie niSThita  /  * gRhastha ke lie kRta, sAdhu ke lie
nisstthit| * gRhastha ke lie kRta, gRhastha ke lie nisstthit| caturbhagI meM
dUsarA aura cauthA bhaMga zuddha hai, inameM sAdhu AhAra le sakatA hai| prathama
aura tRtIya bhaMga azuddha hai, inameM sAdhu ko AhAra grahaNa karanA akalpya
hai| kRta aura niSThita kA svarUpa aneka rUpoM meM milatA hai| sAmAnyataH jo
prAsuka kiyA jAtA hai athavA rAMdhA jAtA hai, vaha niSThita tathA isase pUrva kI
sArI kriyA kRta hai| kRta aura niSThita kI dUsarI vyAkhyA yaha milatI hai ki
vapana se lekara do bAra kaMDana karanA kRta tathA tIsarI bAra kaMDita karanA
niSThita hai| jItakalpabhASya meM ina cAroM bhaMgoM kI vistAra se carcA kI gaI
hai| yadi koI vyakti sAdhu ke lie dhAnya botA hai, tIna bAra kaMDita karatA hai
aura unhIM ke lie rAMdhatA hai to use tIrthaMkaroM ne dugunA AdhAkarma mAnA hai|
prathama AdhAkarma to kRtarUpa tathA dUsarA AdhAkarma pAka kriyA rUpa niSThita
tNddul| isa prasaMga meM TIkAkAra ne vRddhasampradAya kA ullekha kiyA hai ki
yadi taMDula ko eka yA do bAra sAdhu ke lie kaMDita kiyA, tIsarI bAra gRhastha
ne apane lie kaMDita karake pakAyA aura use AtmArthIkRta kara liyA to ve taMDula
sAdhu ke lie kalpya haiN| isa saMdarbha meM TIkAkAra ne anya bhI aneka vikalpa
prastatu kie haiN| khAdima ke prasaMga meM graMthakAra ne mAnyatA vizeSa kA
ullekha kiyA hai| kucha AcAryoM kI mAnyatA hai ki sAdhu ke lie boe gae
AdhAkarmika vRkSa kI chAyA kA bhI varjana karanA caahie| isa saMdarbha meM
niyuktikAra kA kathana hai ki sAdhu ke lie boe gae vRkSa ke phala tor3ate samaya
yadi gRhastha ne unheM AtmArthIkRta kara liyA to ve phala bhI jaba sAdhu ke lie
kalpya haiM to phira chAyA kA varjana karanA ucita 1. jIbhA 1157 /  Ama, kakar3I
Adi niSpanna karake Tukar3oM meM kATanA 2. mavR pa. 66 ; tatra vapanAdArabhya
yAvadvAradvayaM kaNDanaM tAvat tathA jaba taka ve prAsuka nahIM hue, taba taka
kRta aura kRtatvaM, tRtIyavAraM tu kaNDanaM nisstthittvm| prAsuka hone ke bAda
niSThita kahalAte haiN| isI prakAra pAna ke saMdarbha meM yadi sAdhu ke nimitta
kUpa Adi svAdima ko bhI samajhanA cAhie (mava p.66)| kA khanana karake usameM se
jala nikAlA, jaba taka vaha 3. jIbhA 1158 /  sarvathA prAsuka nahIM huA, taba
taka kRta tathA prAsuka hone 4. pini 80, mavR p.65| ke bAda niSThita kahalAtA
hai| isI prakAra khAdima meM 5. mavR pa. 65, 66  /

Page #72 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **58**  There is no **pindiya-niyukti** (application of the
principle of **pindiya**). The reason for this is that even though a tree is
**adhakarmic** (subject to the rules of **adhakarmic** conduct), its shade is
not **adhakarmic** because the shade is caused by the sun, not just the tree.
Just as a gardener cultivates a tree, the shade is not cultivated by him. The
argument of the **niyuktikara** (one who applies the principle) is that if the
shade of a tree is considered **adhakarmic** and its use is prohibited, then it
would be permissible to sit under the tree when the sky is overcast and the
tree's shade disappears. Another point is that the shade of a tree touches many
houses and food, which would make those houses and food contaminated with
**puti-dosha** (impurity). The shade is naturally caused by the sun, therefore
it is not **adhakarmic**. If there are sentient particles scattered under the
tree, then that place is **puti** (impure) and it is forbidden for a **sadhu**
(Jain monk) to sit there.  **Roles in the Acceptance of Adhakarmic Conduct**
There are four roles in the acceptance of **adhakarmic** food that lead to the
accumulation of **dosha** (negative karma). A monk who accepts **adhakarmic**
food and consumes it incurs all four **doshas**: **atikram** (transgression),
**vyatikram** (deviation), **aticar** (excess), and **anacar** (immorality).
Accepting the invitation for **adhakarmic** food and seeking permission from the
**guru** (spiritual teacher) is **atikram**. Lifting one's feet to reach the
householder's house to bring the food is **vyatikram**. Accepting the
**adhakarmic** food into the bowl is **aticar**, and swallowing it is
**anacar**.  The first three roles do not break the **vrat** (vow), but the
**anacar** role destroys the **vrat**. The ability to return to the original
state is weakened. For example, in the **nupuraharica** (anklet-wearing woman)
analogy, even though the elephant on the mountain peak with a broken tusk lifted
three of its legs into the air, it still returned to the earth. But when all
four legs were lifted, its destruction was certain. According to the **vyavahar-
bhashya** (commentary on practical matters), the **pratyashchit** (atonement)
for **atikram**, **vyatikram**, and **aticar** is **guru-mas** (one month of
**ekasan** - sitting in one place), and for **anacar** it is **char-guru** (four
months of fasting).  **The Doshas of Accepting Adhakarmic Food**  The **heyata**
(undesirability) of **adhakarmic** food is described in many texts. Acharya
Malayagiri says that just as a thousandth person is also killed by the effect of
a thousand-fold poison, similarly, even a single bite of **adhakarmic** food can
lead to death. In that situation, it would not be considered **anacar**. Some
**acharyas** (teachers) consider placing **adhakarmic** food in the mouth to be
**anacar**, but in this case, it is still possible to return to the original
state. In this context, the **Jitatkalpa-bhashyakara** (commentator on the
**Jitatkalpa** text) has argued that the act of placing food in the mouth allows
the **sadhu** to return to the original state. He can spit out the food into the
**shleeshmapaatra** (spittle pot).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 58 piMDaniyukti nahIM hai| isakA hetu yaha hai ki vRkSa AdhAkarmika hone para
bhI usakI chAyA AdhAkarmika nahIM hotI kyoMki chAyA sUryahetukI hotI hai, kevala
vRkSahetukI nahIM hotii| jaise mAlI vRkSa ko bar3hAtA hai, vaise chAyA usake
dvArA bar3hAyI nahIM jaatii| niyuktikAra kA tarka yaha hai ki yadi vRkSa kI
chAyA ko AdhAkarmikI mAnakara usakA varjana kiyA jAe to meghAcchanna AkAza se
vRkSa kI chAyA lupta ho jAne para usake nIce baiThanA kalpanIya ho jaaegaa|
dUsarI bAta vRkSa kI chAyA aneka gharoM tathA AhAra kA sparza karatI hai, isase
ve ghara aura AhAra bhI pUti doSa se yukta ho jaaeNge| chAyA sUrya ke dvArA
svataH hotI hai ataH vaha AdhAkarmikI nahIM hotii| yadi vRkSa ke nIce sacitta
kaNa bikhare hoM to vaha sthAna pUti hotA hai, vahAM sAdhu kA baiThanA niSiddha
hai| AdhAkarma grahaNa kI bhUmikAeM AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa karane para doSa
lagane kI cAra bhUmikAeM haiN| jo muni AdhAkarma grahaNa karake usakA paribhoga
karatA hai, usake atikrama, vyatikrama, aticAra aura anAcAra Adi cAroM doSa
lagate haiN| AdhAkarma ke nimaMtraNa ko svIkAra karake bhikSArtha guru kI
anumati lenA atikrama, usako lAne hetu paira uThAkara gRhastha ke ghara taka
pahuMcanA vyatikrama, AdhAkarma AhAra ko pAtra meM grahaNa karanA aticAra tathA
usako nigalanA anAcAra' doSa hai| prathama tIna bhUmikAoM taka vrata kA khaMDana
nahIM hotA lekina anAcAra bhUmikA meM vrata kA vinAza ho jAtA hai| vahAM se
punaH svasthAna meM lauTane kI bhUmikA kSINa ho jAtI hai| jaise-nUpurahArikA
dRSTAnta meM chinna TaMka vAle parvata zikhara para sthita hAthI ke tIna paira
Upara AkAza meM uThAne para bhI vaha punaH pRthvI para sthita ho gayA lekina
cAroM paira Upara hone para usakA vinAza nizcita thaa| vyavahArabhASya ke
anusAra atikrama, vyatikrama tathA aticAra taka doSa lagane para tInoM meM
pratyeka kA prAyazcitta gurumAsa (ekAsana) tathA anAcAra meM cAraguru (upavAsa)
kI prApti hotI hai| AdhAkarma grahaNa ke doSa AdhAkarma kI heyatA kA varNana
aneka graMthoM meM milatA hai| AcArya malayagiri kahate haiM ki jaise
sahasrAnupAtI viSa ke prabhAva se hajAravAM vyakti bhI mRtyu ko prApta ho jAtA
hai, vaise hI AdhAkarma AhAra ke 1. pini 80/1-5, mavR pa. 66,67, jIbhA 1168-72 /
sakatA hai, usa sthiti meM vaha anAcAra nahIM mAnA jAegA 2. pini 82/3, vyabhA 43
; kucha AcArya AdhAkarma AhAra ata: nigalane para anAcAra doSa honA cAhie kyoMki
vahAM muMha meM rakhane ko anAcAra doSa mAnate haiM lekina isa se punaH lauTanA
saMbhava nahIM hotaa| (jIbhA 1178-1180) saMdarbha meM jItakalpa bhASyakAra ne
eka tarka diyA hai ki 3. mava p.68| AhAra ko muMha meM rakhane kI kriyA se sAdhu
punaH pratinivRtta 4. vyabhA 44 /  ho sakatA hai| vaha usa kavala ko zleSmapAtra
meM thUka

Page #73 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pinḍaniyukti:** Even a single particle of observation, when it comes into
contact with a thousandth person, can destroy the life of a monk's austerity.
The author of Niyukti has discussed the faults that arise from consuming
Ādhākarma food at the final gate. There are four main types: 1. Violation of
Jineshvara's command, 2. Anvasthā fault, 3. Attainment of Mithyātvā, 4.
Virādhanā.  The Lord has said, "My Dharma lies in following the Dharma-command."
A monk who consumes Ādhākarma food violates the Lord's command. What command
does a monk who transgresses the command follow to complete other rituals of
Sadhutva? This is expressed in another way in Mūlāchāra, saying that all the
actions of a monk who consumes Ādhākarma food, such as living in the forest,
living in a solitary house, and living at the root of a tree, are meaningless.
The second fault of consuming Ādhākarma is Anvasthā, i.e., the continuation of
the fault. The Piṇḍavishuddhiprakaraṇa text raises a question: When a monk does
not consume Ādhākarma food, does not cause it to be consumed, and does not
approve of it, then what is the fault for a Trikaraṇa-shuddha monk in consuming
Ādhākarma food prepared by a householder?  In response, the author says that if
a monk knowingly consumes Ādhākarma food, it means that he encourages the
occasion of preparing Ādhākarma food. When one monk sees someone consuming
Ādhākarma food, he also starts consuming Ādhākarma food due to that influence.
Seeing him, other monks also become inclined to consume Ādhākarma food. In this
way, the tradition of many monks increases, leading to the severance of
austerity and penance, resulting in the severance of the Tirtha. One who
destroys the Tirtha becomes a participant in great Āshātanā.  The third fault of
consuming Ādhākarma is the attainment of Mithyātvā. A Sadhu who does not follow
the Āgama-prescribed method, without concealing his strength according to the
country, time, and concentration, becomes a Mahāmithyādrishti due to creating
doubt in others. Other Sadhus think that this person consumes Ādhākarma food
even though he knows the truth, then the things said in the sermon must be
false, thus creating doubt.  1. Bṛbhāṭī p. 1142; as poison consumed by a
thousand people, 4. Mūlā 925. Even a thousandth person is killed, so even by
consuming Ādhākarma, 5. Piṃpra 26; it destroys the life of austerity of a
thousandth Sadhu. What is not done by the Muni, is not caused, is not approved
of. 2. Pini 83. What is done by the householder, what is the fault for the
Trikaraṇa-shuddha? | 3. Pini 83/1, Jībhā 1183. 6. Pini 83/2, Mavṛ p. 69, Jībhā
1184.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa kaNa mAtra se saMspRSTa sahasrAntarita arthAt
hajAraveM vyakti ke pAsa jAne para bhI vaha AhAra sAdhu ke saMyamajIvana kA nAza
karane vAlA hotA hai| niyuktikAra ne aMtima dvAra meM AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa
karane se lagane vAle doSoM kA vivecana kiyA hai| usameM mukhya cAra prakAra
haiM-jinezvara kI AjJA kA bhaMga 2. anavasthA doSa 3. mithyAtva kI prApti 4.
viraadhnaa| bhagavAn ne kahA hai ki ANAe mAmagaM dhamma-AjJA pAlana meM merA
dharma hai| AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa karane vAlA muni bhagavAn kI AjJA kA lopa
karatA hai| AjJA kA atikramaNa karane vAlA muni kisakI AjJA se sAdhutva ke anya
anuSThAnoM ko pUrNa karatA hai ? isI bAta ko prakArAntara se mUlAcAra meM isa
bhASA meM vyakta kiyA gayA hai ki AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa karane vAle muni kI
vanavAsa, zUnyagRha-nivAsa tathA vRkSamUla meM nivAsa Adi sabhI kriyAeM
nirarthaka haiN|' AdhAkarma grahaNa kA dUsarA doSa hai-anavasthA arthAt doSa kI
paramparA clnaa| piMDavizuddhiprakaraNa graMtha meM eka prazna uThAyA gayA hai
ki jaba muni AdhAkarma AhAra na niSpanna karate haiM, na karavAte haiM aura na
hI usakA anumodana karate haiM to phira trikaraNa zuddha muni ke lie gRhastha
dvArA kRta AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa karane meM kyA doSa hai? isakA uttara dete
hue graMthakAra kahate haiM ki yadi jAnate hue muni AdhAkarma AhAra ko grahaNa
karatA hai to isakA tAtparya hai ki vaha AdhAkarma bhojana banAne ke prasaMga ko
bar3hAvA detA hai| jaba eka muni kisI ko AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa karate dekhatA
hai to usake Alambana se dUsarA muni bhI AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa karane lagatA
hai| use dekhakara anya muni bhI AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa meM pravRtta ho jAte
haiN| isa prakAra sAtA bahula muniyoM kI paramparA bar3hane se saMyama aura tapa
kA viccheda hone se tIrtha kA viccheda ho jAtA hai| tIrtha kA lopa karane vAlA
mahAn AzAtanA kA bhAgI hotA hai| AdhAkarma grahaNa kA tIsarA doSa hai-mithyaatv-
praapti| deza, kAla aura saMhanana ke anurUpa apanI zakti kA gopana nahIM karate
hue Agamokta vidhi kA pAlana nahIM karane vAlA sAdhu svayaM dUsaroM meM zaMkA
utpanna paidA karane ke kAraNa mahAmithyAdRSTi hotA hai| anya sAdhu socate haiM
ki yaha tattva ko jAnate hue bhI AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa karatA hai, taba
pravacana meM kathita bAta mithyA honI cAhie, isa prakAra zaMkA utpanna 1.
bRbhATI pR. 1142 ; yathA sahasrAnupAti viSaM bhakSyamANaM 4. mUlA 925  /
sahasrAntaritamapi puruSaM mArayati, evamAdhAkarmA'pyupabhujya- 5. piMpra 26;
mAnaM sahasrAntaritamapi sAdhu saMyamajIvitAd vypropytiiti| naNu muNiNA jaM na
kayaM, na kAriyaM nANumoiyaM taM se| 2.pini83| gihiNA kaDamAiyao,
tigaraNasuddhassa ko doso? | 3. pini 83/1, jIbhA 1183 /  6. pini 83/2, mavR pa.
69, jIbhA 1184 /

Page #74 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
60 When a *pinḍanīyukti* occurs, it perpetuates the tradition of *mithyātva*.
Additionally, the *rasalampata* muni, by indulging in his own and others'
attachments, becomes ruthless and does not hesitate to consume living beings.
The fourth fault of accepting *ādhākarma* is *virādhaṇā*. Consuming excessive
amounts of oily food makes the muni ill. Illness leads to the loss of *sūtra*
and *artha* for him and his attendants. Treatment of the illness involves
violence to the six bodies. If the attendants do not provide proper service, he
experiences distress himself and, by becoming angry with the attendants, creates
distress in their minds as well. In this way, he attains *ātmavirādhaṇā* and
*sanyamavirādhaṇā*. The fifth century of the *Bhagavati* mentions that a muni
who mentally considers *ādhākarma* to be flawless, enjoys it himself considering
it flawless, feeds others considering *ādhākarma* food to be flawless, and
presents *ādhākarma* as flawless among the people, if he attains *kāladharma*
without retracting from that place, becomes a *virādhaka*. Illustrating the
fault of *ādhākarma*, the *niyuktikāra* says that just as a beautiful gift,
adorned with a coconut shell, becomes inedible if even a particle of dirt or
other impurity touches it, similarly, pure food becomes inedible if it comes
into contact with even a particle of *ādhākarma* food. Purification of
*ādhākarma* by the three *kalpas* Even after emptying the vessel containing
*ādhākarma* food, it remains contaminated until the three *kalpas* are
performed. The *niyuktikāra* has explained the three *kalpas* in two ways.
Cooking *ādhākarma* food in a vessel, removing it to another vessel and cleaning
it thoroughly with a finger, is the first *lepa*. Similarly, the food remains
contaminated until it is cleaned three times. If food is cooked in that vessel
for the fourth time, it becomes pure. Alternatively, if the vessel is thoroughly
washed three times and wiped with a cloth before cooking food, the food becomes
pure. Similarly, if *ādhākarma* food enters the vessel of a *sādhu*, it must be
purified by the three *kalpas* before consuming other food, otherwise, even pure
food becomes contaminated. 1. *Pini* 83/3, *Mavṛ* p. 69, *Jībhā* 1185. 2. *Pini*
83/4. 3. *Pini* 83/5, *Jībhā* 1188. 4. (a) *Bhag* 5/139-145. (b) *Piṁpra* 19;
*Tass Ārāhaṇā Natthi*. 5. *Pini* 87. 6. *Mavṛ* p. 871.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 60 piMDaniyukti hone para vaha mithyAtva kI paramparA ko Age bar3hAtA hai|
isake atirikta vaha rasalampaTa muni svayaM kI tathA dUsaroM kI Asakti ko
bar3hAvA detA huA nirdayI banakara sajIva padArthoM ko khAne meM bhI saMkoca kA
anubhava nahIM krtaa| AdhAkarma grahaNa karane kA cauthA doSa hai-viraadhnaa|
atyadhika mAtrA meM snigdha AhAra karane se muni rugNa ho jAtA hai| roga hone se
usakI tathA praticArakoM kI sUtra aura artha kI hAni hotI hai| rogacikitsA meM
SaTkAya kI hiMsA hotI hai| praticArakoM dvArA samyak sevA na hone para vaha
svayaM kleza kA anubhava karatA hai tathA paricArakoM para krodhita hone ke
kAraNa unake mana meM bhI saMkleza utpanna karatA hai| isa prakAra vaha
AtmavirAdhanA aura saMyamavirAdhanA ko prApta karatA hai| bhagavatI ke pAMcaveM
zataka meM ullekha milatA hai ki AdhAkarma ko mAnasika rUpa se anavadya mAnane
vAlA, use anavadya mAnakara svayaM usakA bhoga karane vAlA, AdhAkarma AhAra ko
anavadya mAnakara use dUsaroM ko khilAne vAlA tathA janatA ke bIca AdhAkarma ko
anavadya prarUpita karane vAlA muni yadi usa sthAna kA pratikramaNa kie binA
kAladharma ko prApta ho jAtA hai to vaha virAdhaka ho jAtA hai| AdhAkarma doSa
ko dRSTAnta ke mAdhyama se spaSTa karate hue niyuktikAra kahate haiM ki jaise
suMdara upahAra, jisa para nAriyala phala kA zikhara kiyA huA ho, yadi usa
suMdara upahAra se mala Adi azuci padArtha kA eka kaNa bhI spRSTa ho jAe to vaha
abhojya ho jAtA hai, vaise hI nirdoSa AhAra bhI AdhAkarma AhAra ke kaNa mAtra se
saMspRSTa hone para abhojya ho jAtA hai| kalpatraya se AdhAkarma kI zuddhi
AdhAkarma AhAra se yukta pAtra ko khAlI karake bhI jaba taka kalpatraya nahIM
kiyA jAtA, taba taka vaha AhAra pUtidoSa yukta hotA hai| niyuktikAra ne
kalpatraya kI do prakAra se vyAkhyA kI hai| bartana meM AdhAkarma bhojana
pakAyA, usako kisI dUsare bartana meM nikAlakara aMguli se pUrA sApha kara diyA,
yaha prathama lepa hai| isI prakAra tIna bAra sApha karane taka vaha AhAra
pUtidoSa yukta hotA hai| usa bartana meM cauthI bAra AhAra pakAyA jAe to vaha
nirdoSa hotA hai athavA usa bartana ko tIna bAra acchI taraha prakSAlita karake
use kapar3e se poMchane ke bAda yadi AhAra pakAyA jAe to vaha AhAra zuddha hotA
hai| isI prakAra sAdhu ke pAtra meM yadi AdhAkarma AhAra A jAe to use kalpatraya
se prakSAlita karake hI dUsarA AhAra grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai anyathA zuddha
AhAra bhI pUti doSa yukta ho jAtA hai| 1. pini 83/3, mavR pa. 69, jIbhA 1185  /
2. pini 83/4 /  3. pini 83/5, jIbhA 1188 /  4. (ka) bhaga 5/139-145  /  (kha)
piMpra 19; tassa ArAhaNA ntthi| 5.pini 87 /  6. mavR pa. 871

Page #75 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation**  The sixth gate related to Ādhākarma in the
Piṇḍaviśuddhiprakaraṇa, "Taddāne Doṣa," is different from the gates of
Piṇḍaniyukti. This gate is related to householders. Ādhākarma, which is the
giving of food, disrupts the character of the ascetics, therefore householders
should not use it in the path of Utsarga.  The author quotes an instance from
the fifth śataka of Bhagavati that a person incurs the bondage of short lifespan
due to three reasons: 1. Violence, 2. Lying, and 3. Giving unsuitable and
inedible food to a true Śramaṇa. In the eighth śataka of Bhagavati, a fourfold
classification of giving, recipient, what is to be given, and benefit is found.
A restrained ascetic takes pure food.  * **Ekānta Nirjarā:** A restrained
ascetic takes unsuitable food. * **Bahut Nirjarā, Alp Pāpa:** An unrestrained
person takes suitable and edible food. * **Ekānta Pāpa, Nirjarā Nahīṁ:** An
unrestrained person takes unsuitable and inedible food.  In this, the first
classification - giving suitable and pure food - is pure. In the second
classification, there is a desire for purity. The remaining two classifications
are the cause of Ekānta Pāpa. The second option of this fourfold classification,
giving unsuitable and inedible food to a restrained ascetic, is debatable. There
is no mention of this kind in the Āgama literature in the context of Ādhākarma.
While explaining this statement, the commentator Abhaydeva Sūri has said that
here, due to being beneficial to character, Nirjarā and due to the killing of a
living being, a lesser bondage is accepted. Jayācārya, quoting the opinion of
Ācārya Bhiksu in the Joḍ of Bhagavati, has said that if the giver, knowing it to
be pure in practice, gives inedible food unknowingly, then he has a lot of
Nirjarā, but there is no bondage of sinful karma. Here, the word "Alp" is a
negation indicator, yet both Abhaydeva Sūri and Ācārya Bhiksu have considered
this instance to be only knowable by a Kevali. Ācārya Mahāprajña has explained
this sūtra in detail in the Bhagavati Bhāṣya.  This instance has been explained
in the Piṇḍaviśuddhiprakaraṇa in relation to the path of Utsarga and exception.
If, in a situation of sustenance without expectation, a householder gives
Ādhākarma food and an ascetic takes it, then this situation is harmful and
meaningless for both. In the exception, it is acceptable in a situation of
famine or illness. In this instance, the detailed commentary written by Ācārya
Mahāprajña, the ninth commentary of Sūtrakṛtāṅga Part 2, page 304, is worth
reading and pondering.  1. Piṇḍpra 20. 2. Bhag 5/126, Piṇḍpraṭī p. 23. 3. Bhag
8/245-247. 4. See Bhag Bhā. 3 p. 94, 95. 5. Piṇḍpra 21.  Santharanami asuddham,
doṇha vi geṇhat dentayāṇ'ahiyam. Āuraditumteṇam, tam ceva hiyam asantharaṇe.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa meM AdhAkarma se
sambandhita chaThA dvAra 'taddAne doSa' piNDaniyukti ke dvAroM se bhinna hai|
yaha dvAra gRhasthoM se sambandhita hai| AdhAkarma AhAra dene vAlA sAdhuoM ke
cAritra kA vighAta karatA hai ataH gRhastha ko utsarga mArga meM isakA prayoga
nahIM karanA caahie|' graMthakAra ne bhagavatI ke pAMcaveM zataka kA eka
prasaMga uddhRta kiyA hai ki tIna kAraNoM se vyakti alpa AyuSya kA baMdha karatA
hai-1. hiMsA se 2. jhUTha bolakara 3. tathArUpa zramaNa ko aprAsuka aura
aneSaNIya AhAra dekr| bhagavatI ke AThaveM zataka meM dAna, pAtra, deya aura
lAbha kI apekSA caturbhaMgI milatI haisaMyamI sAdhu zuddha aahaar| ekAnta
nirjraa| saMyamI sAdhu aprAsuka aahaar| bahuta nirjarA, alpa paap| asaMyata
prAsuka eSaNIya aahaar| ekAnta pApa, nirjarA nhiiN| asaMyata aprAsuka aneSaNIya
aahaar| ekAnta pApa, nirjarA nhiiN| isameM prathama bhaMga-supAtra aura zuddha
AhAra denA zuddha hai| dUsare bhaMga meM zuddhi kI bhajanA hai| zeSa do bhaMga
ekAnta pApa ke hetu haiN| isa caturbhaMgI kA dUsarA vikalpa saMyamI sAdhu ko
aneSaNIya aprAsuka AhAra denA vimarzaNIya hai| AdhAkarma ke prasaMga meM Agama-
sAhitya meM isa prakAra kA ullekha aura kahIM nahIM miltaa| isa AlApaka kI
vyAkhyA karate hue TIkAkAra abhayadevasUri ne kahA hai ki yahAM cAritra kA
upakAraka hone ke kAraNa nirjarA tathA jIva-vadha ke kAraNa alpatara baMdha ko
svIkAra kiyA gayA hai| jayAcArya ne bhagavatI kI jor3a meM AcArya bhikSu ke mata
ko uddhRta karate hue kahA hai ki dAtA yadi vyavahAra meM zuddha jAnakara
ajAnakArI meM aneSaNIya AhAra detA hai to usake bahuta nirjarA hotI hai,
pApakarma kA baMdha nahIM hotaa| yahAM alpa zabda niSedha vAcaka hai phira bhI
isa prasaMga ko abhayadevasUri aura AcArya bhikSu donoM ne kevaligamya kiyA hai|
AcArya mahAprajJa ne bhagavatI bhASya meM isa sUtra kI vistRta vyAkhyA kI hai| _
isa prasaMga ko piNDazuddhi prakaraNa meM utsarga aura apavAda mArga kI apekSA
se vyAkhyAyita kiyA gayA hai| yadi binA apekSA nirvAha kI sthiti meM gRhastha
AdhAkarma AhAra detA hai aura sAdhu letA hai to yaha sthiti donoM ke lie
ahitakara aura anarthakAraka hai| apavAda meM durbhikSa yA glAnatva kI sthiti
meM grAhya hai| isa prasaMga meM AcArya mahAprajJa dvArA likhita vistRta TippaNa
sUtrakRtAMga bhAga 2 pR. 304 kA navAM TippaNa paThanIya evaM mananIya hai| 1.
piMpra 20 /  2. bhaga 5/126, piMpraTI pa. 23  /  3. bhaga 8/245-247 /  4. dra
bhaga bhA. 3 pR. 94, 95 /  5. piMpra 21 saMtharaNami asuddhaM, doNha vi geNhata
deMtayANa'hiyaM  /  AuradiTuMteNaM, taM ceva hiyaM asNthrnne||

Page #76 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  62. Avoiding *Aadhākarma*  The facts described in the seventh gate, named
*Yathāpṛcchā*, in the *Piṇḍaviśuddhiprakaraṇa* are explained under the heading
of *Piṇḍaniryukti* in the context of *vidhi* and *avidhi* avoidance. This topic
is discussed separately in *Piṇḍaniryukti* after the explanation of the nine
gates.  Knowing the faults caused by *ādhākarma*, a *sādhu* avoids it in two
ways: 1. *Vidhi-parihāra* 2. *Avidhi-parihāra*. A *sādhu* who avoids *ādhākarma*
through *avidhi* cannot properly follow the path of *sādhu* and cannot gain the
benefits of knowledge, etc. In *avidhi-parihāra*, the author mentions the story
of a *bhikṣu*. When the *bhikṣu* asked, the householder replied that this
*śālyodana* came from *Gobaragrāma* in Magadha. To find out more, he started
going to *Gobaragrāma*. Since he feared that the path might be constructed by
*ādhākarmis*, he left the main path and started going through a difficult path
full of thorns, snakes, etc. He also avoided the shade of trees, considering it
to be *ādhākarmic*. He fainted on the way and started accumulating *saṃkleśa*.
In *vidhi-parihāra*, a *sādhu* pays attention to four things: *dravya*, *kula*,
*deśa*, and *bhāva*. Explaining these, the author says that if an unlikely
*dravya* is available in a particular *deśa*, if abundant food is available in a
small family, and if the donation is given with excessive respect, then there
might be a possibility of *ādhākarma*. If an item is commonly used by people in
a particular place and is available in abundance, then there is no need for
inquiry. For example, *maṇḍaka* (a type of bread) is abundant in the *Mālavā*
region, so there is no fear of *ādhākarma* regarding that *dravya*. However,
even there, if the family is small and the *dravya* is abundant, then there
might be a suspicion of *ādhākarma*. If a donor is giving the donation
disrespectfully, then also there is usually no fear of *ādhākarma*, because a
donor who provides *ādhākarma* food usually also shows respect.  The author
presents a psychological method to examine whether *ādhākarma* food has been
prepared in a particular house or not. If, upon inquiry, the housewife says
deceitfully that this food is prepared for the family members, not for you, and
if other family members look at each other with suspicion or laugh shyly, then
the *sādhu* should consider that food to be *ādhākarmic* and avoid it. If, upon
inquiry, the donor  1. *Piṇi* 89/1-3, *Mavṛ* p. 72, 73. *Piṇḍaniryukta*  2.
*Piṇi* 89/4-7, *Mavṛ* p. 73.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 62 AdhAkarma kA parihAra piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa meM yathApRcchA nAmaka sAtaveM
dvAra meM varNita tathya piNDaniryukti meM vidhi aura avidhi parihAra ke
antargata vyAkhyAyita haiM  /  piNDaniryukti meM yaha prasaMga nau dvAroM kI
vyAkhyA ke bAda alaga se varNita hai| dhAkarma se hone vAle doSoM ko jAnakara
sAdhu do prakAra se usakA parihAra karatA hai - 1. vidhi - parihAra 2. avidhi -
parihAra  /  jo sAdhu avidhi se AdhAkarma kA parihAra karatA hai, vaha na
sAdhutva kA samyak pAlana kara sakatA hai aura na hI jJAna Adi kA lAbha prApta
kara sakatA hai| avidhi - parihAra meM graMthakAra ne eka bhikSu kI kathA kA
ullekha kiyA hai| bhikSu ke dvArA pUchane para gRhasvAmI ne batAyA ki yaha
zAlyodana magadha ke gobaragrAma se AyA hai| vaha usakI jAnakArI hetu
gobaragrAma jAne lgaa| mArga kA nirmANa to kahIM AdhAkarmI nahIM hai, isa AzaMkA
se vaha mUla mArga ko chor3akara kAMTe, sAMpa Adi se yukta unmArga se jAne lagA
tathA vRkSa kI chAyA ko bhI AdhAkarmika samajhakara vRkSa kI chAyA kA bhI
parihAra karane lgaa| vaha rAste meM hI mUrcchita hokara saMkleza ko prApta
karane lgaa| vidhi-pariharaNa meM sAdhu cAra bAtoM para dhyAna detA hai- dravya,
kula, deza aura bhAva  /  inakI vyAkhyA karate hue graMthakAra kahate haiM ki
vivakSita deza meM asaMbhAvya dravya kI upalabdhi, choTe parivAra meM pracura
khAdya kI prApti tathA atyadhika AdarapUrvaka dAna ho to vahAM AdhAkarma kI
saMbhAvanA ho sakatI hai| jo vastu jahAM sAmAnya rUpa se logoM ke dvArA pracura
rUpa meM kAma meM lI jAtI hai, vaha yadi pracura mAtrA meM upalabdha ho to
pRcchA kI AvazyakatA nahIM rahatI, jaise mAlavA deza meM maNDaka (eka prakAra kI
roTI) pracura mAtrA meM hotA hai, vahAM usa dravya ke viSaya meM AdhAkarma kI
AzaMkA nahIM hotI lekina vahAM bhI yadi parivAra choTA ho aura dravya pracura
mAtrA meM ho to AdhAkarma kI zaMkA ho sakatI hai| yadi koI dAtA anAdarapUrvaka
dAna de rahA hai, vahAM bhI prAyaH AdhAkarma kI AzaMkA nahIM rahatI kyoMki jo
dAtA AdhAkarma AhAra niSpanna karatA hai, vaha prAyaH Adara bhI pradarzita
karatA hai| amuka ghara meM AdhAkarma bhojana niSpanna huA hai athavA nahIM,
isakI parIkSA karane kI vidhi ko graMthakAra ne manovaijJAnika DhaMga se
prastuta kiyA hai| muni ke dvArA pUchane para yadi gRhasvAminI mAyApUrvaka
kahatI hai ki yaha khAdya-padArtha ghara ke sadasyoM ke lie banAyA gayA hai,
Apake lie nhiiN| yaha sunakara yadi ghara ke anya sadasya eka dUsare ko Ter3hI
najaroM se dekhate haiM athavA salajja eka dUsare ko dekhakara maMda hAsya
karate haiM, taba sAdhu ko usa deya vastu ko AdhAkarmika samajhakara parihAra
kara denA caahie| yadi pUchane para dAnadAtrI 1. pini 89 / 1-3, mavR pa. 72, 73
/  piMDaniryukta 2. pini 89/4-7, mavR pa. 73  /

Page #77 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  **63** angrily says, "What do you care?" In
such a situation, there is no fear of ādhākarma. The muni can eat without any
doubt. Even if it is not known whether the food is pure or not, the niyuktikāra
has given the solution that if the muni is seeking pure food appropriately, then
even while consuming ādhākarma food, he is pure, i.e., he does not bind karma.
If he is inappropriately consuming ādhākarma food from a mental perspective,
then even while consuming prāsuka and eṣaṇīya food, he binds inauspicious karma.
In this context, the niyuktikāra has hinted at two stories. In one, a muni
consumes pure food but mentally consumes it with the intellect of an ādhākarmic
saṃgha-bhakta, due to which he binds karma. In the other, a māsa-kṣapaka muni,
while engaged in the search for pure food, consumes ādhākarmic kheer and attains
kaivalya. Explaining the reason, the author says that the first muni violated
the command of the Bhagavān, therefore, even the enjoyment of pure food became a
cause of binding of sin. The second, however, obeyed his command, therefore,
even while consuming impure food, he crossed the ocean of samsara. In this
context, the author has also given the example of the sunrise and moonrise
gardens.  **The rule of consuming ādhākarma in the time of the Tīrthankaras**
Due to being ṛjuprajña sādhus and sādhvīs, except for the first and last
Tīrthankaras, the remaining twenty-two Tīrthankaras and the Tīrthankaras of the
Mahāvideha region have given so much leeway in ādhākarma piṇḍa that the food is
not kalpya for the sādhus for whom it is made, but the rest of the sādhus can
consume it. The bhāṣyakāra has presented a detailed discussion of this context.
If the saṃgha of Bhagavān Ṛṣabha and Ajita are together, then if someone makes
ādhākarma food for the entire saṃgha, then it is not kalpya for the sādhus of
both the pañcayāmika and cātur-yāmika saṃghas. If ādhākarma food is made for the
sādhus of Ṛṣabha, then it is acceptable for the cātur-yāmika sādhus of Ajita. If
ādhākarma food is made for the cātur-yāmika sādhus, then that food is not kalpya
for both.  If ādhākarma is made individually for a pañcayāmika sādhus of Ṛṣabha,
then...  1. Piṇi 89/8, Mavṛ P. 73, 74. 2. Piṇi 90, Mavṛ P. 74. 3. Piṇi 90/1-4,
for the expansion of both stories, see Pari 3, Katha Saṃ. 13, 14. 4. Piṇi 91,
for the expansion of the story, see Pari 3, Katha Saṃ. 15. 5. Bṛbhā 3541, Tī P.
986. 6. Bṛbhā 5345, 5346, Tī P. 1419.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 63 gusse meM Akara yaha kahatI hai ki Apako
isakI kyA cintA hai ? aisI sthiti meM AdhAkarma kI AzaMkA nahIM rahatI, muni
niHzaMka rUpa se vaha AhAra grahaNa kara sakatA hai| ina saba kAraNoM se bhI
AhAra zuddha hai yA nahIM, yaha jJAta na ho to niyuktikAra ne samAdhAna diyA hai
ki yadi muni upayukta hokara zuddha AhAra kI gaveSaNA kara rahA hai to vaha
AdhAkarma bhojana grahaNa karatA huA bhI zuddha hai arthAt karmoM kA baMdhana
nahIM karatA yadi vaha anupayukta hokara vaicArika dRSTi se AdhAkarma AhAra
grahaNa meM pariNata hai to vaha prAsuka aura eSaNIya AhAra grahaNa karatA huA
bhI azubha karmoM kA baMdha karatA hai| isa prasaMga meM niyuktikAra ne do
kathAoM kA saMketa kiyA hai, jisameM eka muni zuddha AhAra grahaNa karatA huA
bhI mAnasika rUpa se AdhAkarmika saMghabhakta kI buddhi se AhAra grahaNa karatA
hai, jisase vaha karmoM kA baMdha kara letA hai| dUsarA mAsakSapaka muni zuddha
AhAra kI gaveSaNA meM saMlagna AdhAkarmI khIra ko grahaNa karatA huA bhI
kaivalya ko prApta kara letA hai| isakA hetu batAte hue graMthakAra kahate haiM
ki prathama muni ne bhagavAn kI AjJA kI virAdhanA kI isalie zuddha AhAra kA
bhoga bhI pApa baMdha kA kAraNa bana gayA tathA dUsare ne unakI AjJA kI ArAdhanA
kI isalie azuddha AhAra karate hue bhI saMsAra-samudra se pAra pA liyaa| isa
saMdarbha meM graMthakAra ne sUryodaya aura candrodaya udyAna kA dRSTAnta bhI
diyA hai| tIrthaMkaroM ke kAla meM AdhAkarma grahaNa kA niyama RjuprAjJa sAdhu-
sAdhviyAM hone ke kAraNa prathama aura aMtima tIrthaMkaroM ko chor3akara zeSa
bAvIsa tIrthaMkaroM tathA mahAvideha kSetra ke tIrthaMkaroM ne AdhAkarma piNDa
meM itanI chUTa dI hai ki jisa sAdhu ke lie AdhAkarma banAyA gayA hai, usake lie
vaha AhAra kalpya nahIM hotA lekina zeSa sAdhu use grahaNa kara sakate haiN| isa
prasaMga kI bhASyakAra ne vistRta carcA prastuta kI hai| yadi bhagavAn RSabha
aura ajita kA saMgha eka sAtha milA huA hai, usa samaya yadi pUre saMgha ko
lakSya karake koI AdhAkarma bhojana banAtA hai to paMcayAmika aura cAturyAmika-
donoM saMgha ke sAdhuoM ke lie vaha AhAra kalpya nahIM hotaa| yadi RSabha ke
sAdhuoM ko uddiSTa karake AdhAkarma AhAra niSpanna kiyA jAtA hai to ajita ke
cAturyAmika sAdhuoM ke lie vaha AhAra grAhya hotA hai| yadi cAturyAmika sAdhuoM
ke lie AdhAkarma AhAra niSpanna hotA hai to vaha AhAra donoM ke lie akalpya hotA
hai| yadi vyaktigata rUpa se RSabha ke paMcayAmika sAdhu ko uddiSTa karake
AdhAkarma niSpanna kiyA 1. pini 89/8, mavR pa. 73, 74 /  2. pini 90, mavR pa. 74
/  3. pini 90/1-4, donoM kathAoM ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari 3, kathA saM. 13,
14  /  4. pini 91, kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari 3, kathA saM. 15 /  5.
bRbhA 3541, TI pR. 986 /  6. bRbhA 5345, 5346, TI pR. 1419  /  |

Page #78 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **64**  If a *pindanuyukti* is made for a *sadhu* who is a
follower of Ajita, it is considered acceptable. If an *adhakarma* is performed
with the intention of a *chaturyaamika sadhu*, it is unacceptable for both the
*sadhus* of Rishabha and Ajita. This means that an *adhakarma* made with the
intention of the *sangha* of the first and last *tirthankara* is not acceptable
to anyone. If an *adhakarma* meal is made for a particular *sadhu*, it is not
acceptable for any *sadhu* in the *sangha* of the first and last *tirthankara*.
If an *adhakarma* is made for a *sadhu* of a middle *tirthankara*, it is
unacceptable for him, but the other *sadhus* can accept it. However, the first
and last *tirthankara's* *sadhus* cannot accept that food.  The commentator
explains the reason for this by saying that the *sadhus* of the first
*tirthankara* are *rijujada* (straight and rigid). Therefore, they criticize the
*akritya* (wrong action) but cannot avoid other similar faults. The rigidity of
the householders at that time is that they make food that is forbidden for one
person for the sake of others.  The *sadhus* of the 22 middle *tirthankaras* are
*rijuprajna* (straight and wise). Because they are straight, they criticize the
*akritya* done in solitude with righteousness. Their wisdom lies in the fact
that they themselves also prevent faults related to *tajjaatiya bhikṣā* (food
received from the same caste). At that time, the householders also do not commit
*aarambha-samarambha* (beginning and ending) faults for the *sadhus* and avoid
other *tajjaatiya* faults. The disciples of the last *tirthankara* are
*vakrajada* (crooked and rigid). Because they are crooked, they do not readily
accept *akritya*. And because they are rigid, they continue to consume
*adhakarma* and other offenses. Even when the householder performs *adhakarma*
with deceit, he says that the food was prepared because of guests or a festival.
**Exceptions to the Acceptance of *Adhakarma***  If the *adhakarma* food becomes
*avagrahantaarit* (under the control of Indra), then that food can be considered
acceptable. In this context, it is not irrelevant to mention the incident that
happened during the time of Lord Rishabha. Once, Lord Rishabha was in
*samavasarana* (assembly) with his *sangha* on the Ashtapada mountain. Hearing
of Lord Rishabha's arrival, Emperor Bharat also arrived with all his riches to
see the Lord.   **Footnotes:**  1. Bribha 5348, T. p. 1420; This is also a 'mere
establishment' if the *sadhus* have to stay together, then they are initiated
for the purpose of mere identification and knowledge. Because of the long time
difference, it is impossible for the *sadhus* of the east and west to be
together in the *panchayaama* or *chaturyaama*. 2. Bribha 5348-50, T. p. 1420;
The commentator has clearly stated that this is a mere representation to explain
this point. 3. Bribha 5356, T. p. 1422; 4. Bribha 5357, T. p. 1422, 1423; It is
impossible for the *sadhus* of the east and west to be together in an assembly.
5. Bribha 5358, T. p. 1423; Their mutual exchange or acceptance does not happen.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 64 piMDaniyukti jAtA hai to ajita ke anuyAyI sAdhu ke lie vaha kalpya hotA hai|
yadi cAturyAmika sAdhu ko lakSya karake koI AdhAkarma niSpanna karatA hai to
RSabha aura ajita donoM ke sAdhuoM ke lie vaha akalpanIya hotA hai| kahane kA
tAtparya yaha hai ki pUrva aura aMtima tIrthaMkara ke saMgha ko uddiSTa karake
banAyA huA AdhAkarma kisI ke lie grAhya nahIM hotaa| yadi vyaktigata kisI sAdhu
ke lie AdhAkarma bhojana niSpanna hai to prathama aura aMtima tIrthaMkara ke
sAdhuoM meM vaha kisI bhI sAdhu ke lie kalpya nahIM hotaa| yadi madhyama
tIrthaMkara ke kisI sAdhu ke lie AdhAkarma niSpanna hotA hai to usake lie
akalpya hotA hai, zeSa sAdhu use grahaNa kara sakate haiM lekina usa AhAra ko
prathama aura aMtima tIrthaMkara ke sAdhu grahaNa nahIM kara skte| isakA kAraNa
batAte hue bhASyakAra kahate haiM ki prathama tIrthaMkara ke sAdhu Rjujar3a hone
ke kAraNa akRtya karake usakI AlocanA to karate haiM lekina usake samAna anya
doSoM kA parihAra nahIM kara paate| usa samaya ke gRhasthoM kI jar3atA yaha hai
ki ve eka ke lie varjita doSa yukta AhAra dUsaroM ke nimitta kara dete haiN|
madhyama 22 tIrthaMkaroM ke sAdhu RjuprAjJa hote haiN| Rju hone ke kAraNa ve
ekAnta meM hue akRtya kI AlocanA RjutA se karate haiM tathA unakA prAjJatva isa
bAta meM hai ki ve tajjAtIya bhikSA sambandhI doSoM kA nivAraNa bhI svayaM kara
dete haiN| usa samaya ke gRhastha bhI sAdhuoM ke lie AraMbha-samAraMbha rUpa
doSa nahIM karate haiM tathA tajjAtIya anya doSoM kA varjana karate haiN| aMtima
tIrthaMkara ke ziSya vakrajar3a hote haiN| vakra hone ke kAraNa ve sahajatayA
akRtya ko svIkAra nahIM karate tathA jar3a hone ke kAraNa puna: AdhAkarma Adi
aparAdhapada kA sevana karate rahate haiN| gRhastha mAyApUrvaka AdhAkarma
niSpanna karane para bhI yaha kahatA hai ki mehamAna Ane ke kAraNa yA utsava ke
kAraNa yaha khAdya taiyAra kiyA gayA hai| AdhAkarma grahaNa ke apavAda yadi
AdhAkarma AhAra avagrahAntarita ho jAe arthAt iMdra ke avagraha ke antargata A
jAe to vaha AhAra kalpya ho sakatA hai| isa prasaMga meM bhagavAn RSabha ke
samaya meM ghaTita ghaTanA prasaMga kA ullekha karanA aprAsaMgika nahIM hogaa|
eka bAra bhagavAn RSabha aSTApada parvata para sasaMgha samavasRta hue| bhagavAn
ke Agamana ko sunakara cakravartI bharata bhI sampUrNa Rddhi ke sAtha bhagavAn
ke darzana karane phuNce| bhagavAn ko 1. bRbhA 5348, TI pR. 1420 ; etacca
'sthApanAmAtraM' yadi sAdhuoM kA Apasa meM ekatra rahanA hotA hai to ve
prarUpaNAmAtraM saMjJAvijJAnArthaM kriyate, bahakAlAntaritatvena paMcayAma se
cAturyAma athavA cAturyAma se paMcayAma meM pUrva-pazcimasAdhUnAmekatrAsambhavAt
tatra parasparaM grahaNaM pravrajita hote haiN| 'nAsti' na ghaTate-bhASyakAra ne
spaSTa ullekha kiyA hai 2. bRbhA 5348-50, TI. pR. 1420  /  ki yaha bAta
samajhAne ke lie prarUpita kI gaI hai| pUrva 3. bRbhA 5356, TI pR. 1422  /  aura
pazcima sAdhuoM kA ekatra samavAya asaMbhava hai| 4. bRbhA 5357, TI pR. 1422,
1423 /  unakA paraspara AdAna-pradAna yA grahaNa ghaTita nahIM hotaa| 5. bRbhA
5358, TI pR. 1423  /

Page #79 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  65 ##  Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation  They took with them 500 carts filled
with food for the sake of giving alms. They requested alms from the Lord. The
Lord said, "Bharat! Ādhākarma, Abhyāhata, and Rājapinḍa are painful for the
āhāra vrata, therefore this āhāra is inconceivable for the sādhus."  Bharat was
extremely saddened upon hearing the Lord's words. He began to consider himself
unfortunate. At that time, Devendra was also present there. Knowing his sorrow,
he asked the Lord about avagraha. The Lord explained the five types of avagraha.
Devendra paid homage to the Lord and distributed the sādhuprāyogya āhāra brought
in his avagraha. Seeing the benefit, Bharat Chakravarti also became happy. Then
Bharat distributed sādhuprāyogya āhāra, etc., throughout India.  The
Bṛhatkalpabhāṣya mentions exceptions to the consumption of ādhākarma āhāra. In
times of famine, or if an ācārya, upādhyāya, or any bhikṣu is ill, there is a
possibility of consuming ādhākarma āhāra. Even if pure āhāra is not found after
searching for it three times before entering a dense forest on the way,
ādhākarma āhāra can be consumed on the fourth occasion.  One point to consider
regarding ādhākarma is that kṛta, auddeshika, and āhṛta are mentioned in many
places in the āgamas, but it is surprising that the word ādhākarma is not found
anywhere in important texts like the Daśavaikalika, which presents the entire
ācāra-saṃhitā of the sādhus. Although there is a prohibition of samaṇṭṭa, i.e.,
food prepared for the śramaṇa. Why Ācārya Śayyambhava did not use the word
ādhākarma is a subject of investigation.  2. Auddeshika  Āhāra prepared
collectively for the sake of śramaṇa, māhaṇa, atithi, kṛpaṇa, etc., bhikṣācaras
is called auddeshika. According to Mūlācāra, āhāra prepared for the sake of
devatā, pāṣaṇḍī, anyadarshi, or kṛpaṇa, etc., is called auddeshika. It is
debatable why Vaṭṭaker did not mention śramaṇa in this. The Daśavaikalika sūtra
explains this fault through word differentiation. According to it, if a sādhus
knows that this āhāra is prepared for donation, for merit, for beggars, or for
śramaṇas (five types of śramaṇas), then the sādhus should refrain from that
āhāra. There is a mention there that the sādhus who are nityāgra (daily 1. Bṛbhā
4779-86, T p. 1284, 1285. 2. Bṛbhā 5359, T p. 1423. 3. Daś 5/1/53. 4. (a)
Daśajicū p. 111; uddissa kajjai tam uddesiyam, sādhus nimittaṃ ārambh tti vṛttaṃ
bhavati.  (b) Paṃv 744; uddesiya sāhumādī omacchae bhikṣaviaraṇaṃ jaṃ ca. 5.
Mūlā 425. 6. Daś 5/1/47-54.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 65 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa bhikSA dene hetu ve apane sAtha 500 zakaToM
meM bhaktapAna bharakara le ge| unhoMne bhagavAn ko bhikSA ke lie nivedana kiyA
/  bhagavAn ne kahA- 'bharata ! AdhAkarma, abhyAhata aura rAjapiMDa AhAra vrata
ko pIr3A dene vAlA hotA hai ataH yaha AhAra sAdhuoM ke lie akalpya hai  / '
bhagavAn ke vacanoM ko sunakara bharata ko atyanta duHkha huA  /  ve svayaM ko
maMdabhAgya samajhane lge| usa samaya devendra bhI vahAM upasthita the  /  unake
duHkha ko jAnakara unhoMne bhagavAn se avagraha ke bAre meM pUchA  /  bhagavAn
ne paMcavidha avagraha kI bAta batAI  /  devendra ne bhagavAn ko vaMdanA karake
apane avagraha meM AnIta sAdhu prAyogya AhAra kA vitaraNa kiyA  /  lAbha
dekhakara bharata cakravartI bhI prasanna ho gae  /  phira bharata ne sampUrNa
bhArata meM sAdhu ke prAyogya AhAra Adi kA vitaraNa kiyA  /  bRhatkalpabhASya
meM AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa ke apavAda batAe gae haiN| durbhikSa kI sthiti meM
athavA AcArya, upAdhyAya yA koI bhikSu glAna ho to AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa kI
bhajanA hotI hai| mArga meM gahana aTavI meM praveza karane se pUrva tIna bAra
zuddha AhAra kI gaveSaNA karane para bhI yadi zuddha AhAra prApta na ho to
cauthe parivarta meM AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai| AdhAkarma ke
sambandha meM eka vicAraNIya bindu yaha hai ki krIta, auddezika aura AhRta kA
ullekha AgamoM meM aneka sthAnoM para milatA hai lekina Azcarya isa bAta kA hai
ki sAdhu kI sampUrNa AcAra-saMhitA ko prastuta karane vAle dazavaikAlika jaise
mahattvapUrNa graMtha meM AdhAkarma zabda kA ullekha kahIM bhI prApta nahIM hotA
hai  /  yadyapi vahAM samaNaTTA arthAt zramaNa ke lie banAe gae AhAra kA niSedha
hai  /  AcArya zayyaMbhava ne AdhAkarma zabda kA prayoga kyoM nahIM kiyA, yaha
khoja kA viSaya hai  /  2. auddezika zramaNa, mAhaNa, atithi, kRpaNa Adi
bhikSAcaroM ke nimitta se samuccaya rUpa meM banAyA gayA AhAra auddezika
kahalAtA hai| mUlAcAra ke anusAra devatA, pASaMDI - anyadarzanI yA kRpaNa Adi ke
nimitta banAyA gayA AhAra auddezika kahalAtA hai  /  vaTTakera ne isameM zramaNa
kA ullekha kyoM nahIM kiyA, yaha vimarzanIya hai| dazavaikAlika sUtra meM
zabdabheda se isa doSa kI vyAkhyA kI gaI hai| usake anusAra sAdhu ko yaha jJAta
ho jAe ki yaha AhAra dAna hetu, puNya hetu, yAcakoM ke lie yA zramaNoM
(paMcavidha zramaNa) ke lie banAyA gayA hai to sAdhu usa AhAra kA niSedha kre|
vahAM ullekha hai ki jo sAdhu nityAgra ( pratidina 1. bRbhA 4779-86, TI pR.
1284, 1285  /  2. bRbhA 5359, TI pR. 1423  /  3. daza 5/1/53  /  4. (ka)
dazajicU pR. 111 ; uddissa kajjai taM uddesiyaM, sAdhu nimittaM AraMbha tti
vRttaM bhavati  /  (kha) paMva 744; uddesiya sAhumAdI omaccae bhikkhaviyaraNaM
jaM ca  /  5. mUlA 425  /  6. daza 5/1/47-54 /

Page #80 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  66  Those who accept **piṇḍanīyukti** (invited food), **krīta** (purchased),
**auddeshika** (purposeful) and **āhr̥ta** (obtained) food, approve of the
killing of living beings. In the **Praśnavyākaraṇa Sūtra**, **auddeshika** food
is described as being full of violence and sin. The author has divided
**auddeshika** into two categories: **oḍha** and **vibhāga**.   **Oḍha
auddeshika** is when a householder cooks food thinking, "If I don't give
anything now, I won't get anything in the next life," and then offers it to
other **darśanī** ascetics without any division.   **How to know oḍha
auddeshika:**  Generally, an ascetic can understand from the householder's words
and actions that it is **oḍha auddeshika**. According to the **niyuktikāra**,
here are some points to identify **oḍha auddeshika**:  * The wife tells her
husband that the five **bhikṣācara** (begging monks) have already received their
alms for the day. * The housewife draws lines to count the alms or counts them
while giving them. * The housewife tells her husband or the alms-giver to give
alms from the designated portion, not from here. * When an ascetic enters for
alms, she says, "Separate this much alms." * The housewife's movements, opening
and closing of utensils, and her words reveal the **muni**'s desire and non-
desire for **auddeshika** alms.  In this context, the **niyuktikāra** gives the
example of a **govatṣa** (cowherd).  **Vibhāga auddeshika**  Food cooked after
dividing it for **śramaṇa** (ascetics), **brāhmaṇa** (priests), etc., is called
**vibhāga auddeshika**. According to **piṇḍanīyukti**, after a wedding or other
celebration, setting aside a portion of the remaining cooked food for charity is
**vibhāga auddeshika**. There are three types of **vibhāga auddeshika**:
**uddiṣṭa**, **kr̥ta**, and **karma**.  **Uddiṣṭa** - Setting aside a portion of
the food prepared for the householder for the **bhikṣācara** is called **uddiṣṭa
auddeshika**.  **Kr̥ta** - Mixing curd and rice from the leftover **śālyodana**
(rice cooked with ghee) and offering it in the form of **karamba** (a type of
sweet) for alms is called **kr̥ta auddeshika**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 66 piMDaniyukti nimaMtrita AhAra), krIta, auddezika aura AhRta AhAra grahaNa
karate haiM, ve prANi-vadha kA anumodana karate haiN| praznavyAkaraNa sUtra meM
auddezika AhAra ko hiMsA aura pApa bahula batAyA hai| graMthakAra ne auddezika
ke ogha aura vibhAga do bheda kie haiN| ogha auddezika yahAM kucha nahIM dUMgA
to agale janma meM bhI kucha nahIM milegA, yaha socakara gRhastha dvArA pakAe
jAne vAle AhAra meM anya darzanI sAdhuoM ke lie vibhAga rahita prakSepa ogha
auddezika kahalAtA hai| ogha auddezika jAnane kI vidhi sAmAnyataH sAdhu gRhastha
ke zabda evaM usakI ceSTA se jAna letA hai ki yaha ogha auddezika hai|
niyuktikAra ke anusAra ogha auddezika jAnane ke kucha bindu isa prakAra haiM *
patnI apane pati se yaha kahe ki pratidina dI jAne vAlI pAMcoM bhikSAcaroM ko
bhikSAeM dI jA cukI haiN| * yadi gRhasvAminI bhikSA kI gaNanA hetu rekhAeM
khIMce athavA bhikSA detI huI usakI gaNanA kre| * gRhasvAminI apane pati yA
bhikSA-dAtA ko kahe ki uddiSTa dattI se bhikSA do, yahAM se nhiiN| * sAdhu ke
bhikSArtha praveza karane para vaha kahe ki itanI bhikSA pRthak kara do| *
gRhasvAminI ke gamana, bartanoM ko kholanA, rakhanA tathA usake zabdoM meM
dattAvadhAna muni auddezika bhikSA kI eSaNA aura aneSaNA ko samyak prakAra se
jAna letA hai| isa prasaMga meM niyuktikAra ne govatsa kA udAharaNa diyA hai|
vibhAga auddezika zramaNa, brAhmaNa Adi kA vibhAga karake jo bhojana pakAyA jAtA
hai, vaha vibhAga auddezika hai| piNDaniyukti ke anusAra vivAha Adi utsava
samApta hone ke pazcAt usameM zeSa bace hue pakvAnna meM kucha hissA dAna hetu
alaga rakhanA vibhAga auddezika hai| isake tIna prakAra haiM-uddiSTa, kRta aura
krm| uddiSTa-gRhastha ke nimitta niSpanna AhAra meM bhikSAcaroM ke lie alaga
rakhanA uddiSTa auddezika kahalAtA kRta-bace hue zAlyodana kI bhikSA dene ke lie
dahI aura bhAta milAkara karamba rUpa meM niSpanna karanA kRta auddezika hai|'
1. daza 6/48 2. pini 94 /  3. pini 94/1, 95 /  4. pini 95/1-96/3, kathA ke
vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 16 /  5. pini 96/4, mavR pa. 79  /  6.
mavR pa. 77; svArthameva niSpannamazanAdikaM bhikSAcarANAM dAnAya yat
pRthakkalpitaM tduddissttm| 7. mavR pa.77; yat punaruddharitaM sat
zAlyodanAdikaM bhikSA dAnAya karambAdirUpatayA kRtaM ttkRtmityucyte|

Page #81 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pinḍaniyukti:** A karma-vivah (ceremony) where the leftover modaka (sweetmeat)
is ground into powder and given to the bhikṣācara (mendicants) is called karma.
The difference between ādhākarma and karma auddeshika is that ādhākarma is made
for the sadhu (saint) from the beginning, while karma auddeshika is when a
householder adds something to or refines their own food.  There are four sub-
categories of each of these three: 1. Uddesa 2. Samuddesa 3. Ādesa 4. Samādesa.
Uddesa - food made for all bhikṣācara, anyadarśanī (those who see others) and
śramaṇa (ascetics). Samuddesa - food made for all pākhaṇḍī (hypocritical)
anyadarśanī sadhus. Ādesa - food made for śramaṇa. Samādesa - food made for
nirgrantha (those who have renounced everything).  When uddishta, kṛta and karma
are multiplied by the above four categories, there are 12 categories. The
niyuktikāra (author) has also made sub-categories of these 12 categories.
Uddishta auddeshika etc. are of two types, each chhinna (regular) and achhinna
(irregular). Chhinna means regular and achhinna means irregular. Then there are
four categories of each, based on dravya (substance), kṣetra (field), kāla
(time) and bhāva (feeling). Thus, there are eight categories of each.
Multiplying 12 categories by 8 gives 96 categories of auddeshika dosha.
According to the Sūtrakṛtāṅga, there is a possibility of jīvavada (killing of
living beings) by accepting auddeshika bhikṣā (alms), therefore it is considered
aneshanīya (not to be accepted). 3. Pūtikarma Dosha  Pūti means foul-smelling or
impure. There are two categories of this: dravya pūti and bhāva pūti. The
combination of a fragrant or pure substance with an impure substance is dravya
pūti. Here, the author has alluded to the story of the Chagaṇadharmic. The
mixture of even a small amount of the elements of the divisions of ādhākarma
etc. udgama dosha in pure food is bhāva pūti. Bhāva pūti also makes the muni's
niratichara (non-transgressive) character impure. Just as one 1. Mavṛ p.77; Yat
punarvivahaprakaraṇādāvuddhṛitam modaka- 5. Sū1/9/14. cūṇyādi tadbhūyo'pi
bhikṣācaraṇāṁ dānāya guḍapākadaṇā- 6. Pini 107, 108. dinā modakādikṛtam
tatkarmityabhidhīyate. 7. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha
Saṅ. 17. 2. Mavṛ p.82; Yat prathamateva sādhvarthē niṣpāditaṁ tadādhākarma, 8. M
p 83; Here, ādhākarma, auddeshika etc. in udgama dosha are taken as the category
of avishodhi (unpurified). 9. (a) Pini 109. 3. Pini 98, Mūla 426. (b) Paṁv 745;
4. For the expansion of these categories, see Pini 99/1-101/2,
Kammavayavasameyaṁ, Sambhāvijjai Jayam Tu Taṁ Pūī. Mavṛ p.80,81 Desikam.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa karma-vivAha meM bace hue modaka ke cUrNa ko
bhikSAcaroM ko dene hetu gur3apAka Adi se punaH modaka karane ko karma kahA jAtA
hai| AdhAkarma aura karma auddezika meM itanA hI aMtara hai ki AdhAkarma meM
prArambha se hI sAdhu ke nimitta banAyA jAtA hai, jabaki karma auddezika meM
gRhastha apane banAe hue AhAra meM kucha vRddhi karatA hai athavA saMskArita
karatA hai| ina tInoM ke bhI cAra-cAra avAntara bheda hote haiM-1. uddeza 2.
samudeza 3. Adeza 4. smaadesh| uddeza-sabhI bhikSAcara, anyadarzanI evaM
zramaNoM ke uddezya se banAyA gayA aahaar| samuddeza-sabhI pAkhaMDI-anyadarzanI
sAdhuoM ke lie banAyA gayA aahaar| Adeza-zramaNoM ke nimitta banAyA gayA aahaar|
samAdeza-nirgranthoM ke uddezya se banAyA gayA aahaar| uddiSTa, kRta aura karma
ko uparyukta cAra bhedoM se guNA karane para 12 bheda ho jAte haiN| niyuktikAra
ne ina 12 bhedoM ke avAntara bheda bhI kie haiN| uddiSTa auddezika Adi pratyeka
chinna aura acchinna bheda se do prakAra kA hotA hai| chinna kA artha hai-
niyamita aura acchinna kA artha hai-aniyamita  /  phira usake bhI dravya,
kSetra, kAla aura bhAva se cAra bheda hote haiN| isa prakAra pratyeka ke ATha
bheda ho jAte haiN| 12 bhedoM kA 8 se guNA karane para audezika doSa ke 96 bheda
hote haiN| sUtrakRtAMga ke anusAra audezika bhikSA grahaNa karane se jIvavadha-
hiMsA kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai ata: isako aneSaNIya mAnA hai| 3. pUtikarma doSa
pUti kA artha hai-durgandhayukta yA apvitr| isake do bheda haiM-dravyapUti aura
bhAvapUti  /  sugaMdhita yA zuddha padArtha kA azuci padArtha se yukta honA
dravya pUti hai| yahAM graMthakAra ne chagaNadhArmika kI kathA kA saMketa kiyA
hai| zuddha AhAra meM AdhAkarma Adi udgama doSa ke vibhAgoM ke avayava mAtra kA
mizraNa bhI bhAvapUti hai| bhAvapUti muni ke niraticAra cAritra ko bhI azuddha
banA detI hai| jaise azuddha padArtha kA eka 1. mavR pa.77; yat
punarvivAhaprakaraNAdAvuddharitaM modaka- 5. suu1/9/14| cUNyAdi tadbhUyo'pi
bhikSAcarANAM dAnAya gur3apAkadAnA- 6.pini 107, 108 //  dinA modakAdikRtaM
ttkrmetybhidhiiyte| 7. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 17 /  2.
mavR pa.82 ; yat prathamata eva sAdhvarthe niSpAditaM tadAdhAkarma, 8. ma pa 83;
yahAM udgama doSa meM AdhAkarma, auddezika yat prathamataH sad bhUyo'pi
pAkakaraNena saMskriyate tatkauM - Adi avizodhi koTi kA grahaNa kiyA gayA hai|
9. (ka) pini 109 /  3. pini 98, mUlA 426  /  (kha) paMva 745; 4. ina bhedoM ke
vistAra hetu dekheM pini 99/1-101/2, kammAvayavasameyaM, saMbhAvijjai jayaM tu
taM puuii| mavR pa.80,81 deshikm|

Page #82 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 68 ## Pindaniyukti  If even a particle comes into contact, that substance
becomes unacceptable. Similarly, even a small portion of *Ahadkarma* renders the
entire food impure. Acharya Haribhadra considered mixed food contaminated with
the element of potential *Ahadkarma* as *Pootikarma* dosha.  *Pooti* does not
occur merely by contact with *Ahadkarma*, but food contaminated with *Pooti* is
also considered to have *Pooti* dosha.  In *Moolaachar*, five types of *Pooti*
are specified: 1. *Chulli* (fireplace), 2. *Ukka* (mortar), 3. *Darvi*
(doorway), 4. *Bhajan* (vessel), 5. *Gandha* (smell). In *Anngardharmaamrit*,
two types of *Pooti* dosha are found: *Aaprasookamishra* and *Kalpit*.
*Aaprasookamishra Pootikarma* is the name given to *Prasook* substance mixed
with *Aaprasook* substance. The second *Pooti* dosha, called *Kalpit*, is when
the food is not used until it is given to the *Sadhu*. There is a significant
difference between *Aaprasook* and *Ahadkarma*. *Aaprasook* means *Achit*
(unacceptable), while *Ahadkarma* means food made *Achit* for the sake of the
*Sadhu*. The various types of *Pooti* dosha can be presented in the following
chart:  **Pooti** **Dravya** (Substance) **Sookshma** (Subtle)
**Upakaranavishayak** (Related to utensils) **Bhaktapanavishayak** (Related to
food and drink) **Indhan** (Fuel) **Dhoom** (Smoke) **Vaashp** (Vapor)
**Agnikan** (Fire particle) **Nishith** (Night)  According to *Bhaashya*, the
types of *Badarpooti* are as follows:  **Badarpooti** **Aahar** (Food)
**Upadhi** (Cause) **Vasati** (Residence) **Upakaranpooti** (Utensil
contamination) **Aaharpooti** (Food contamination) **Vastra** (Clothing)
**Paatra** (Vessel) **Moolgun** (Primary quality) **Uttargun** (Secondary
quality)  *Nishith Bhaashya* has classified seven types each of *Moolgun* and
*Uttargun*. In house construction, the use of two *Veli* (creepers), two
*Dharana* (supports), and one *Prishthavansh* (back support) are related to
*Moolgun*.  The seven things related to *Uttargun* are: bamboo, *Kadan-Okampan*
(construction materials), roof construction, plastering, door installation, and
earthwork. If six of these are *Prasook* and one is *Ahadkarma*, then *Pooti*
dosha occurs.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 68 piMDaniyukti kaNa bhI spRSTa ho jAe to vaha padArtha agAhya ho jAtA hai,
vaise hI AdhAkarma kA aMzamAtra bhI pUre bhojana ko azuddha banA detA hai|
AcArya haribhadra ne saMbhAvyamAna AdhAkarma ke avayava se mizra AhAra ko
pUtikarma doSa mAnA hai| kevala AdhAkarma se spRSTa hone para hI pUti nahIM
hotI, pUti se spRSTa AhAra bhI pUtidoSa yukta hotA hai| mUlAcAra meM pUti ke
pAMca bheda nirdiSTa haiM-1. cullI 2. ukkhA (Ukhala) 3. darvI 4. bhAjana 5.
gNdh| anagAradharmAmRta meM pUti doSa ke do bheda prApta hote haiM-aprAsukamizra
tathA klpit| aprAsuka dravya se milA huA prAsuka dravya aprAsukamizra pUtikarma
kahalAtA hai tathA jaba taka sAdhu ko yaha bhojana na diyA jAe , taba taka koI
upayoga na kare, yaha kalpita nAmaka dUsarA pUtidoSa hai| aprAsuka aura
AdhAkarma meM bahuta antara hai| aprAsuka kA artha hai acitta tathA AdhAkarma kA
artha hai sAdhu ke nimitta acitta kiyA huA aahaar| pUtidoSa ke bheda-prabhedoM
ko nimna cArTa se prastuta kiyA jA sakatA hai pUti dravya sUkSma
upakaraNaviSayaka bhaktapAnaviSayaka iMdhana dhUma vASpa agnikaNa nizItha bhASya
ke anusAra bAdarapUti ke bheda-prabheda isa prakAra haiM bAdarapUti AhAra upadhi
vasati upakaraNapUti AhArapUti vastra pAtra mUlaguNa uttaraguNa 1. dazahATI pa.
174 ; pUtikarma-saMbhAvyamAnAdhAkarmAvayava sNmishrlkssnnm| 2. nicUbhA 2, pR.
65; na kevalaM AhAkammeNa puDhe pUtitaM, pUtieNa vi puDhe pUimityarthaH  /  3.
anadha 5/9, TI pR. 381  /  4. nibhA 806, 807 /  5. nibhA 811 cU pR. 65, nizItha
bhASya meM mUlaguNa aura uttaraguNa ke sAta-sAta bheda kie gae haiN| gRha-
nirmANa meM do mUla velI, do dhAraNA aura eka pRSThavaMza-ina sAta vastuoM kA
prayoga mUlaguNa se sambandhita hotA hai tathA bAMsa, kaDaNa-okaMpaNa, chata
DAlanA, lipAI karanA, dvAra lagAnA aura bhUmikarma karanA-ye sAta cIjeM
uttaraguNa se sambandhita haiN| inameM yadi chaha prAsuka hai aura eka
AdhAkarmika hai to bhI pUtidoSa hotA hai|

Page #83 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  **Equipment Pollution (Upakaraṇapūti)**
Equipment is referred to as that which is helpful, such as a stove for cooking
food and a spoon for serving food. A stove mixed with Ādhākarmic dust and a
plate and spoon touched by Ādhākarmic food are examples of equipment pollution.
**Food Pollution (Āhārapūti)**  If an Ādhākarmic spoon is removed from a plate,
the food on the plate is considered pure. However, if even pure food is served
with an Ādhākarmic spoon, it becomes Āhārapūti. Similarly, even if a cook is
not Ādhākarmic, if they stir Ādhākarmic food and then serve pure food, that pure
food is also considered Āhārapūti.  **Drink Pollution (Bhaktapānapūti)**
Mixing Ādhākarmic vegetables, salt, asafoetida, mustard seeds, and cumin seeds
in pure buttermilk, or adding spices to it, is Bhaktapānapūti. If a vessel in
which Ādhākarmic food was previously cooked is not cleaned thoroughly three
times (Kalpātra), and food is cooked or placed in it, it is considered
Bhaktapānapūti. Another interpretation of Kalpātra is that after cooking food
in the vessel three times and removing it, the food cooked for the fourth time
is pure. The smoke that arises from putting gram flour, asafoetida, and cumin
seeds on smokeless embers pollutes the plate and buttermilk, etc., which is
included in equipment pollution.  **Subtle Pollution (Sūkṣmapūti)**  Subtle
pollution arises from fuel, fire particles, smoke, and vapor. The elements of
smoke, smell, etc., are present everywhere, so it is not possible to avoid them.
In the context of subtle pollution, the author raises a question: How is it
possible to avoid subtle pollution when sometimes even after washing a vessel
three times, its smell does not go away? In response, the author of the Niyukti
says that just as a substance is not considered contaminated or discarded when
it is touched by the smell of impurity coming from a distance, similarly, the
character is not corrupted by the touch of the particles of smell associated
with Ādhākarma. Ācārya Malayagiri clarifies this by saying that smell is subtle
pollution. It is only to be understood, it cannot be avoided because the atoms
of smell are present throughout the universe.  **Footnotes:**  1. Piṇi 113,
113/2. 2. Piṇi 113/3. 3. Piṇi 113/4. 4. Nibha 809, Cū p. 65. 5. Piṇi 114, Mavṛ
p. 85. 6. Piṇi 117/2. 7. Mavṛ p. 86, 87.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa upakaraNapUti pakate hue anna ke lie cUlhA
tathA parose jAte hue AhAra ke lie cammaca Adi upakArI hone ke kAraNa upakaraNa
kahe jAte haiN| AdhAkarmika kardama se mizrita cUlhA tathA AdhAkarma AhAra se
spRSTa sthAlI aura cammaca upakaraNa pUti haiN|' AhArapUti yadi AdhAkarmika
cammaca ko sthAlI se bAhara nikAla diyA jAe to sthAlI kA AhAra kalpya hotA hai
lekina AdhAkarmika cammaca se yadi zuddha AhAra bhI diyA jAe to vaha AhArapUti
hai| isI prakAra yadi darvI AdhAkarmikI na hone para bhI usase yadi AdhAkarma
AhAra ko hilAkara phira zuddha AhAra diyA jAe to vaha zuddha AhAra bhI AhArapUti
kahalAtA hai| bhaktapAnapUti zuddha chAcha Adi meM AdhAkarmika zAka, lavaNa,
hIMga, rAI tathA jIrA Adi kA mizraNa karanA athavA baghAra denA bhaktapAnapUti
hai| jisa bhAjana meM pahale AdhAkarma AhAra pakAyA gayA, yadi use kalpatraya-
tIna bAra acchI taraha se sApha kie binA AhAra pakAyA athavA DAlA jAe to vaha
bhaktapAnapUti kahalAtA hai| kalpatraya kA eka artha yaha bhI saMbhava hai ki
tIna bAra usa pAtra meM AhAra pakAkara nikAlane para cauthI bAra pakAyA gayA
AhAra zuddha hotA hai| dhUma rahita aMgAroM para besana, hIMga tathA jIrA Adi
DAlane para jo dhUma nikalatA hai, usa dhUma se vyApta sthAlI tathA takra Adi
bhI pUti doSa se yukta haiM, yaha upakaraNapUti ke antargata AtA hai| sUkSmapUti
IMdhana, agnikaNa, dhUma aura vASpa-ina cAroM se sUkSmapUti hotI hai| dhUma,
gaMdha Adi ke avayava saba jagaha vyApta rahate haiM ata: unakA parihAra
saMbhava nahIM hai| sUkSmapUti ke saMdarbha meM graMthakAra ne eka prazna
upasthita kiyA hai ki kabhI-kabhI kalpatraya se pAtra ko dhone para bhI usakI
gaMdha nahIM jAtI ataH sUkSma pUti se bacAva kaise saMbhava hai? isakA samAdhAna
karate hue niyuktikAra kahate haiM ki jaise dUra se AtI azuci gaMdha se spRSTa
hone para bhI usa dravya ko dUSita yA tyAjya nahIM mAnA jAtA, vaise hI AdhAkarma
se sambandhita gaMdha ke pudgaloM ke sparza se cAritra vikRta nahIM hotaa|
AcArya malayagiri ise spaSTa karate hue kahate haiM ki gaMdha sUkSmapUti hai|
yaha kevala prajJApanIya hai, isakA parihAra saMbhava nahIM ho sakatA kyoMki
gaMdha ke paramANu samagra loka meM vyApta haiN| 1. pini 113, 113/2 /  2. pini
113/3 /  3. pini 113/4 /  4. nibhA 809, cU pR. 65 /  5. pini 114, mavR pa. 85 /
6. pini 117/2 /  7. mavR pa. 86, 87 /

Page #84 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniryukti  On the day a householder completes the half-day meal
(Aadakarma), the food is tainted by the Aadakarma dosha. This taint remains in
the house for the next three days. During these three days, a Muni cannot accept
alms from that house. If the vessel is tainted by the Pooti dosha, the food
placed or cooked in it after three Kalpas can be accepted.  ## Pootikarma  The
Sutra Kritanga describes the harm of consuming food tainted by Pootikarma. Even
if a monk accepts such food after traveling a thousand houses, he acts like a
householder despite being a renunciate. Just as fish washed ashore by the tide,
trapped in the sand, experience immense suffering when their flesh is pecked by
carnivorous birds like Dhak and Kank, similarly, monks who indulge in the
present pleasure of consuming Pootikarma-tainted food, experience endless
suffering like those fish.  According to Nishaith Churnikar, if a monk accepts
food, clothing, or shelter tainted by Pooti dosha, it leads to the violation of
restraint (Samyama-viraadhana). The impure acceptance can deceive the deity and
cause indigestion or other illnesses as a form of self-violation.  ## Mishrajat
Food cooked for a householder, a hypocrite, a deceitful alms-seeker, or a monk,
is tainted by Mishrajat dosha. It is of three types:  * **Yavadarthic
Mishrajat:** Food cooked for a householder and all alms-seekers. * **Pakhandi
Mishrajat:** Food cooked for a householder and a deceitful monk. * **Sadhu
Mishrajat:** Food cooked for a family and a Nirgranth.  The Niruktikars clearly
state that just as a person dies from consuming a thousand-pronged poison,
similarly, even if a thousand people have touched the three types of Mishrajat
food, it is not acceptable for a monk. It destroys the monk's character.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniryukti jisa dina gRhastha AdhAkarma bhojana niSpanna karatA hai, usa
dina vaha AhAra AdhAkarma doSa se duSTa hotA hai| zeSa tIna dina taka usa ghara
meM pUti rahatI hai| tIna dina taka muni vahAM se bhikSA grahaNa nahIM kara
sktaa| yadi pAtra pUtidoSa se yukta hai to kalpatraya ke bAda usameM DAlA gayA
yA pakAyA gayA AhAra grAhya ho sakatA hai| 70 pUtikarma AhAra grahaNa kI hAniyoM
kA citraNa karate hue sUtrakRtAMga meM kahA gayA hai ki pUrtikarma AhAra ko yadi
bhikSu hajAra gharoM ke aMtarita ho jAne para bhI letA hai to vaha pravrajita
hokara bhI gRhastha jaisA AcaraNa karatA hai| jisa prakAra samudra ke jvAra ke
sAtha kinAre para Ane vAle matsya yadi bAlU meM phaMsa jAte haiM to mAMsArthI
DhaMka aura kaMka Adi pakSiyoM dvArA unakA mAMsa noce jAne para ve atyanta
duHkha kA anubhava karate haiM, usI prakAra vartamAna sukha kI eSaNA meM rata
pUtikarma yukta AhAra lene vAle sAdhu una matsyoM kI bhAMti anaMta duHkhoM ko
prApta karate haiN| nizItha cUrNikAra ke anusAra yadi sAdhu pUti doSa yukta
AhAra, upadhi yA vasati grahaNa karatA hai to saMyama - virAdhanA hotI hai|
azuddha grahaNa se devatA pramatta sAdhu ko chala sakate haiM tathA Atma-
virAdhanA ke rUpa meM ajIrNa yA kisI anya prakAra kA roga bhI utpanna kara
sakate haiN| 4. mizrajAta AhAra gRhastha ke sAtha pAkhaMDI, anyadarzanI
bhikSAcara evaM sAdhu ke nimitta se pakAyA jAtA hai, vaha mizrajAta doSa yukta
hotA hai| vaha tIna prakAra kA hotA hai-- * yAvadarthikamizra - jo AhAra
gRhastha tathA sabhI bhikSAcaroM ke nimitta banAyA jAtA hai, vaha
yAvadarthikamizra kahalAtA hai| * * pAkhaNDimizra - jo AhAra gRhastha ke sAtha
anyadarzanI sAdhu ke nimitta pakAyA jAtA hai, vaha pAkhaNDimizra kahalAtA hai| *
sAdhumizra - parivAra evaM nirgrantha ke nimitta banAyA gayA AhAra sAdhumizra
kahalAtA hai| niryuktikAra spaSTa ullekha karate haiM ki jaise sahasravedhaka
viSa khAne se kisI kI mRtyu ho jAe to pArampara maraNa meM hajAraveM vyakti kA
mAMsa khAne para bhI vyakti kI usa viSa se mRtyu ho jAtI hai, vaise hI tInoM
prakAra kA mizrajAta AhAra sahasrAntarita - hajAraveM vyakti ke pAsa jAne para
bhI sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya nahIM hotA, vaha sAdhu ke cAritra kA vinAza kara detA
hai  / "' 1. pini 118, mavR pa. 87  /  2. sU 1/1/60-63 /  3. nicUbhA. 2, pR. 66
/  4. mUlA 429  /  5. pini 121  /  6. pini 122  /  7. pini 122  /  8. pini 123,
124  /

Page #85 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindianuyukti: An Observation  **71**  Explaining the process of
purification, the author states that after consuming mixed food, one should
completely remove it from the vessel with a finger or clean the vessel with dry
cow dung, then wash the vessel three times. After that, the vessel should be
dried in the sun and then pure food should be consumed in it. Some Acharyas
believe that after washing the vessel for the fourth time, food can be consumed
without drying the vessel, and there is no fault in it.  **5.  Establishment
Fault**  Separating food for a Sadhu and keeping it aside is an establishment
fault. According to Mulachar, taking food from a cooking vessel and placing it
in another vessel, either in one's own house or in another house, is an
establishment fault. According to the commentator, a Muni who consumes food from
an establishment fault is considered to be in a state of Parvasta. A Muni who
consumes food with an establishment fault, considering it to be faultless, and
does not criticize or repent for it, does not become an Aradhak after attaining
Kaladharma.  Establishment occurs in two ways: 1. Swasthana Establishment, 2.
Parastthana Establishment. Placing an object on the stove is a Swasthana
establishment fault, and placing it on a sneeze, etc., is a Parastthana
establishment fault. Both of these have two sub-categories:  * Swasthana Anantar
Establishment and Swasthana Parampar Establishment. * Parastthana Anantar
Establishment and Parastthana Parampar Establishment.  Substances like ghee and
jaggery, which are not susceptible to any change, and whose form is not altered
by the doer, are called Anantar Established substances. Milk, sugarcane juice,
etc., which can be transformed into curd, butter, ghee, and jaggery, etc., are
called Parampar Established substances. Keeping these for a long time makes them
foul-smelling and putrid.  The author of the Niyukti has explained the
establishment fault based on time with an example. A Sadhu requested milk from a
housewife. At that time, she said, "I will give you alms after some time." The
Sadhu received milk from another place. When the housewife requested the Sadhu
to take the milk, the Muni said, "I have already received milk, I will take it
when I need it again." Fearing the Sadhu's debt, the woman did not use the milk.
She thought, "Tomorrow I will make curd from this milk and give it to the Muni."
Thinking this, she established it for the Muni. The next day, the Muni did not
take the curd. The woman made butter and 1. Pini 125, Mavri P. 89. 4. Vyabha
856. 2. Mavri P. 35; Stapanam Sadhubhyo Deyamiti Buddhya Deyavastunah... 5. Bhag
5/139-45. Vyavasthapanam Stapana. 6. Pini 126-28, Mavri P. 89, 90. 3. Mula 430.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 71 isakI zuddhi kI prakriyA batAte hue
graMthakAra kahate haiM ki mizrajAta AhAra lene para usakA aMguli se pUrA
apanayana karake athavA sUkhe gobara se pAtra ko sApha karake phira tIna bAra
pAtra kA prakSAlana kiyA jAe, tatpazcAt dhUpa meM pAtra ko sukhAkara usameM
zuddha AhAra grahaNa kiyA jaae| kucha AcAryoM kI mAnyatA hai ki cauthI bAra
prakSAlana karane para binA pAtra ko sukhAe bhI bhojana grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA
hai, usameM koI doSa nahIM rhtaa| 5. sthApanA doSa _ sAdhu ko dene ke lie AhAra
nikAlakara alaga rakha denA sthApanA doSa hai| mUlAcAra ke anusAra pAka-bhAjana
se anya bartana meM nikAlakara apane ghara meM yA dUsare ghara meM rakhanA
sthApanA doSa hai| bhASyakAra ke anusAra sthApanAkula se AhAra lene vAlA muni
pArzvastha hotA hai| sthApanA doSa yukta AhAra ko anavadya mAnakara usakA
paribhoga karane vAlA muni yadi usa sthAna kI AlocanA yA pratikramaNa nahIM
karatA to vaha kAladharma ko prApta hokara ArAdhaka nahIM hotaa| sthApanA do
prakAra se hotI hai-svasthAna sthApanA 2. parasthAna sthaapnaa| cUlhe para vastu
Adi rakhanA svasthAna sthApanA doSa hai tathA chIMke Adi para rakhanA parasthAna
sthApanA hai| ina donoM ke do-do bheda hote haiM * svasthAna anaMtara sthApanA
tathA svasthAna parampara sthaapnaa| * parasthAna anaMtara sthApanA tathA
parasthAna parampara sthaapnaa| ghI tathA gur3a Adi padArtha, jinameM koI vikAra
saMbhava nahIM hotA, kartA ke dvArA usakA svarUpa parivartana nahIM hotA, ve
dravya anaMtara sthApita kahalAte haiN| dUdha, ikSurasa Adi jinakA dahI,
makkhana, ghI tathA gur3a Adi vikAra saMbhava hai, ve parampara sthApita
kahalAte haiN| lambe samaya taka inako rakhane se ye durgandha yukta tathA
kuthita ho jAte haiN| niyuktikAra ne kAla ke AdhAra para sthApanA doSa ko eka
udAharaNa dvArA spaSTa kiyA hai| kisI sAdhu ne eka gRhiNI se dUdha kI yAcanA kI,
usa samaya usane kahA-'maiM kucha samaya bAda bhikSA duuNgii|' sAdhu ko kisI
dUsare sthAna se dUdha mila gyaa| gRhiNI ne jaba sAdhu se dUdha lene kA Agraha
kiyA to muni bolA'mujhe abhI dUdha prApta ho gayA phira kabhI prayojana hone
para luuNgaa|' sAdhu ke RNa se bhayabhIta usa mahilA ne dUdha kA upayoga nahIM
kiyaa| usane socA kala isI dUdha ko maiM dahI jamAkara duuNgii| yaha socakara
usane use muni ke lie sthApita kara diyaa| dUsare dina bhI muni ne dahI nahIM
liyaa| mahilA ne usa dahI se makkhana tathA 1. pini 125, mavR pa. 89 /  /  4.
vyabhA 856 /  2. mavR pa. 35 ; sthApanaM sAdhubhyo deyamiti buddhayA
deyavastunaH... 5. bhaga 5/139-45 /  vyavasthApanaM sthaapnaa| 6. pini 126-28,
mavR pa. 89, 90 /  3. mUlA 430 /

Page #86 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 72  The curd was made into a lump (पिंडनियुक्ति) and the butter was converted
into ghee. If the housewife does not use that ghee for the family, then that
established ghee may be afflicted with the establishment fault (स्थापना दोष) up
to the "देशोनपूर्वकोटि". In the Jītakalpabhāṣya, this is considered a permanent
fault (चिरस्थापित दोष).  Explaining the establishment fault in another way, the
नियुक्तिकार says that someone comes with alms in hand to give to a monk from
three houses situated in the same row. At that time, one monk accepts the alms
properly (सम्यक् उपयोगपूर्वक), and the other monk stands between the two houses
and uses the alms for things like अनेषणीयता. In this way, after three houses,
that food becomes afflicted with the establishment fault (स्थापना दोष). In the
Jītakalpabhāṣya, this is included under the category of "त्वरिक स्थापना दोष". In
the पिण्डविशुद्धिप्रकरण, this is explained under the category of "अभ्याहत दोष".
**6. प्राभृतिका दोष**  To give a desired object as a gift to one's beloved or
revered person with respect is called प्राभृत. Giving such food as a gift to a
monk is called प्राभृतिका दोष. In the Bṛhatkalpabhāṣya, प्राभृतिका and प्रहेणक
are considered synonymous. This is of two types: 1. सूक्ष्म प्राभृतिका 2. बादर
प्राभृतिका. These also have two sub-types each: 1. अवष्वष्कण (उत्सर्पण) and 2.
उत्ष्वष्कण (अवसर्पण).  **बादर अवष्वष्कण प्राभृतिका:** Getting married before the
determined time when the monk's arrival is known, so that alms can be given to
the monk, is the बादर अवष्वष्कण or बादर अवसर्पण प्राभृतिका दोष.  **सूक्ष्म
अवष्वष्कण प्राभृतिका:** The mother told the child, "I am busy spinning cotton
etc. right now, so I will give you food later." In the meantime, the monk
arrived, so feeding the child first along with the monk is the सूक्ष्म अवष्वष्कण
or सूक्ष्म अवसर्पण प्राभृतिका.  1. The monk's excellent character-time is eight
years less than the पूर्वकोटि. 3. जीभा 1223. As much as it is. The commentator
clarifies that 4. पिनि 130, मवृ प. 91. If a child becomes a monk at the age of
eight, his 5. जीभा 1221, 1222. Lifespan is according to the पूर्वकोटि. If he 6.
पिंप्र 47. Requested ghee from a housewife whose age is पूर्वकोटि. At that time
7. मवृ प. 35; कस्मैचिदिष्टाय पूज्याय वा बहुमानपुरस्सर For some reason, she could
not give it, later she established that ghee. 8. बृभा 3656; पाहुडिय पहेणगं च
एगटुं. And kept that ghee until the monk passed away, then that established ghee
9. पिंप्र 40; परओ करणमुस्सक्कणं. May be देशोनपूर्वकोटि. After passing away, that
10. पिंप्र 40; ओसक्कणमारओ करणं. Ghee becomes free from the establishment fault
(स्थापना दोष) (म प. 91). 11. पिनि 134. 2. पिनि 128/2, 3. 12. पिभा 26, 27.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 72 piMDaniyukti takra banA diyA aura makkhana ko ghI rUpa meM parivartita kara
diyaa| yadi gRhiNI usa ghI ko kuTumba ke lie hogA, aisA karake nahIM apanAtI hai
to vaha sthApita ghI dezonapUrvakoTi' taka sthApanA doSa se yukta raha sakatA
hai| jItakalpabhASya meM ise cirasthApita doSa mAnA hai| sthApanA doSa ko
prakArAntara se vyAkhyAyita karate hue niyuktikAra kahate haiM ki eka hI paMkti
meM sthita tIna gharoM se koI sAdhu ko dene ke lie hAtha meM bhikSA lekara AtA
hai, usa samaya eka sAdhu bhikSA ko samyak upayogapUrvaka grahaNa karatA hai
tathA dUsarA sAdhu do gharoM ke bIca meM khar3e hokara bhikSA kI aneSaNIyatA Adi
kA upayoga karatA hai| isa prakAra tIna ghara ke bAda vaha AhAra sthApanA doSa
yukta hotA hai| jItakalpabhASya meM ise itvarika sthApanA doSa ke antargata
rakhA hai| piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa meM isako abhyAhata doSa ke antargata
vyAkhyAyita kiyA hai| 6. prAbhRtikA doSa apane iSTa athavA pUjya ko
bahumAnapUrvaka upahArasvarUpa abhISTa vastu denA prAbhRta hai| sAdhu ko aise
AhAra kA dAna denA prAbhRtikA doSa hai| bRhatkalpa bhASya meM prAbhRtikA aura
praheNaka ko ekArthaka mAnA hai| yaha do prakAra kA hai-sUkSma prAbhRtikA 2.
bAdara praabhRtikaa| inake bhI do-do bheda haiM-avaSvaSkaNa (utsarpaNa) tathA
utSvaSkaNa (avsrpnn)| bAdara avaSvaSkaNa prAbhRtikA-sAdhu kA Agamana jJAta hone
para nirdhArita samaya se pUrva vivAha karanA, jisase sAdhu ko bhikSA dI jA
sake, yaha bAdara avaSvaSkaNa yA bAdara avasarpaNa prAbhRtikA doSa hai|12||
sUkSma avaSvaSkaNa prAbhRtikA-mAM ne bAlaka ko kahA ki abhI maiM ruI Adi kAtane
meM vyasta hUM ata: bAda meM bhojana duuNgii| isI bIca sAdhu kA Agamana hone se
unake sAtha bAlaka ko bhI pahale bhojana denA sUkSma avaSvaSkaNa yA sUkSma
avasarpaNa prAbhRtikA hai|12 1. sAdhu kA utkRSTa cAritra-kAla ATha varSa kama
pUrva-koTi 3. jIbhA 1223  /  jitanA hotA hai| TIkAkAra spaSTa karate hue kahate
haiM ki 4. pini 130, mavR pa. 91  /  yadi koI bAlaka ATha varSa kI Ayu meM sAdhu
banA, usakA 5. jIbhA 1221, 1222  /  AyuSya yadi pUrvakoTi pramANa hai| usane
yadi pUrvakoTi 6. piMpra 47  /  Ayu vAlI gRhiNI se ghI kI yAcanA kii| usa samaya
7. mavR pa. 35 ; kasmaicidiSTAya pUjyAya vA bahumAnapurassarIkisI kAraNa se vaha
nahIM de sakI, bAda meM usane vaha ghI kAreNa yadabhISTaM vastu dIyate
ttpraabhRtmucyte| muni ke lie sthApita kara diyA tathA usa ghI ko taba taka 8.
bRbhA 3656 ; pAhuDiya paheNagaM ca egttuN| rakhA, jaba taka muni divaMgata na
hoM to usa sthApita ghI kA 9. piMpra 40 ; parao krnnmusskknnN| kAla
dezonapUrvakoTi ho sakatA hai| divaMgata hone para vaha 10. piMpra40;
osakkaNamArao krnnN| ghI sthApanA doSa se mukta ho jAtA hai (ma pa. 91) /  11.
pini 134 /  2. pini 128/2, 3 /  12. pibhA 26, 27 /  |

Page #87 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation  **73**  **Bādar Utshvashkaṇ Prābhṛtika:**
Delaying the date of a son's or daughter's wedding, etc., for the purpose of
feeding the Sadhus, is called Bādar Utshvashkaṇ Prābhṛtika.  **Sūkṣma
Utshvashkaṇ Prābhṛtika:**  If a mother, busy with work, tells her child to wait
a little while when it is time for food, saying that the Muni will come home
soon and she will feed him then, this is the fault of Sūkṣma Utshvashkaṇ or
Sūkṣma Utsarpana Prābhṛtika.  Āchārya Batṭar, considering the increase and
decrease of time, has described giving food after the day, fortnight, month,
year, etc., as Bādar Prābhṛtika, and giving food intended for the morning in the
afternoon or midday as the fault of Sūkṣma Prābhṛtika. The commentator of
Mūlāchāra has mentioned the fault of Prābhṛtika as a Prāvartita fault.
According to the Niruktakāra, a Muni who accepts food with the fault of
Prābhṛtika and does not perform Pratikramṇa of that place, wanders in the world
in vain, like a bald Muni or a pigeon with lost wings.  In Anagāradharmāmṛta,
the term Prābhṛtak is used instead of Prābhṛtika. According to Digambara Āchārya
Vasunandi, accepting alms with the fault of Prāvartita leads to afflictions,
many obstacles, and the faults of Ārambh-hiṃsā, etc.  In Pinḍaniryukti, the
fault of Prābhṛtika is related to food, but in Bṛhatkalpabhāṣya, Prābhṛtika is
also related to the place of residence.  **Bādar Prābhṛtika**  There are five
types of Bādar Prābhṛtika: 1. Vidhvamsana 2. Chādana 3. Lepana 4. Bhūmikarma 5.
Pratītyakaraṇa.  These five types are of two kinds: 1. Avashvashkaṇ 2.
Abhishvashkaṇ.  In Avashvashkaṇ, Vidhvamsana, etc., are done before the time
fixed for the Sadhu. In Abhishvashkaṇ, they are done after the fixed time. All
these types are also divided into two parts: 1. Deshatah 2. Sarvatah.
Performing Bādar Prābhṛtika related to residence results in four Laghu (Ayambil)
Prāyaśchitta. Performing it Deshatah results in Māsalghu (Purimārḍha)
Prāyaśchitta, and performing it Sarvatah results in Bhinnamās Prāyaśchitta.
**Sūkṣma Prābhṛtika**  Sūkṣma Prābhṛtika related to residence is also of five
types:  1. Pini 135. 2. Pini 132, 133. 3. Mūla 433. 4. Mūlāṭī p. 340. 5. Pini
136. 6. Mūlāṭī p. 340.  7. For the details of all these, see Bṛbhā 1675-1680, Ṭī
p. 493, 494. 8. In Pinḍaniryukti, the word Utshvashkaṇ is used instead of
Abhishvashkaṇ. 9. Bṛbhā 1675, Ṭī p. 493. 10. Bṛbhā 1680, Ṭī p. 494. 11. Bṛbhā
1681.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa 73 bAdara utSvaSkaNa prAbhRtikA - sAdhuoM ko
AhAra dene ke nimitta se putra Adi ke vivAha kI tithi bAda meM karanA bAdara
utSvaSkaNa prAbhRtikA hai  / " sUkSma utSvaSkaNa prAbhRtikA - AhAra kA samaya
hone para bhI kArya meM vyasta mAM yadi bAlaka ko yaha kahe ki thor3I dera ruko,
abhI muni apane ghara AeMge, usa samaya tumheM bhI bhojana de dUMgI, yaha sUkSma
utSvaSkaNa yA sUkSma utsarpaNa prAbhRtikA doSa hai| AcArya baTTara ne kAla kI
vRddhi hAni ke anusAra divasa, pakSa, mahInA, varSa Adi kA parAvartana karake
AhAra denA bAdara prAbhRtikA tathA pUrvAhna meM die jAne vAle AhAra ko aparAhna
yA madhyAhna meM dene ko sUkSma prAbhRtikA doSa mAnA hai| mUlAcAra ke TIkAkAra
ne prAbhRtikA doSa ko prAvartita doSa ke rUpa meM ullikhita kiyA hai  /  "
niryuktikAra ke anusAra jo muni prAbhRtikA doSa yukta AhAra ko grahaNa karake,
usa sthAna kA pratikramaNa nahIM karatA, vaha muNDa muni vilupta paMkha vAle
kapota kI bhAMti vyartha hI saMsAra meM paribhramaNa karatA rahatA hai  / "
anagAradharmAmRta meM prAbhRtikA ke sthAna para prAbhRtaka doSa kA ullekha hai|
digambara AcArya vasunaMdI ke anusAra prAvartita doSa yukta bhikSA grahaNa
karane se kleza, bahuvighna tathA AraMbha - hiMsA Adi doSa hote haiN|
piNDaniryukti meM prAbhRtikA doSa AhAra se sambandhita hai lekina
bRhatkalpabhASya meM prAbhRtikA vasati- -sthAna se sambandhita bhI hai  /
bAdara prAbhRtikA bAdara prAbhRtikA ke pAMca bheda isa prakAra haiM - 1.
vidhvaMsana 2. chAdana 3. lepana 4. bhUmIkarma 5. pratItyakaraNa  / " ye pAMcoM
bheda do prakAra ke haiM-avaSvaSkaNa 2. abhiSvaSkaNa  / ' avaSvaSkaNa meM
vidhvaMsana Adi sAdhu ke nimitta nirdhArita samaya se pUrva kie jAte haiM  /
abhiSvaSkaNa meM nirdhArita samaya ke bAda kie jAte haiN| ye saba bheda bhI
dezataH aura sarvataH - ina do bhAgoM meM vibhakta haiN| vasati sambandhI bAdara
prAbhRtikA karane para cAra laghu (Ayambila) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai  /
dezataH karane para mAsalaghu (purimArdha) tathA sarvataH karane para bhinnamAsa
prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai  / " sUkSma prAbhRtikA vasati sambandhI sUkSma
prAbhRtikA bhI pAMca prakAra kI hotI hai" 1. pini 135  /  2. pini 132, 133 /  3.
mUlA 433  /  4. mUlATI pR. 340  /  5. pini 136  /  6. mUlATI pR. 340  /  7. ina
sabake vistAra hetu dekheM, bRbhA 1675 - 1680, TI pR. 493, 494  /  8.
piNDaniryukti meM abhiSvaSkaNa ke sthAna para utSvaSkaNa zabda kA prayoga milatA
hai| 9. bRbhA 1675, TI. pR. 493  /  10. bRbhA 1680, TI. pR. 494  /  11. bRbhA
1681

Page #88 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 14: Pindaniyukti  **1. Sammarjan:** Sweeping. **2. Avarshan:**
Cooling a place with water. **3. Uplepan:** Applying cow dung. **4. Sukshma-
pushpa-rachana:** Creating a subtle flower arrangement. **5. Deepak:** Lighting
a lamp.  These also have two divisions: **Avashvashkan** and **Abhisvashkan**.
For example, if a householder thinks, "I will sweep before the time for the
study group arrives," and sweeps, this is a subtle **Sammarjan**
**Avashvashkan** **Prabhriti** fault. If he thinks, "The study group is sitting
now, I will sweep when they get up," then this is a subtle **Sammarjan**
**Abhisvashkan** **Prabhriti**. The author has further divided this into many
sub-categories.  **7. Pradushkaran Fault:**  Giving food by illuminating a dark
place or bringing it out of darkness into light is a **Pradushkaran** fault. The
Dashavaikalik Sutra mentions that a monk should not accept alms from a place
with a low doorway or a dark room where the object or creature is not visible
due to darkness. There are two divisions of **Pradushkaran** fault:  **1.
Prakatcharan:** Removing the object to be given from darkness and placing it in
a light place. **2. Prakashkaran:** Making a hole in the wall, widening the
doorway, creating another doorway, removing the roof of the house, or
illuminating the object to be given with a gem, lamp, or fire to illuminate a
dark place.  Explaining the **Prakatcharan** fault, the **Niyuktikar** says that
there are three types of hearths:  **1. Sancharimā:** A portable hearth. **2.
Sadhu ke liye pahle se hi bahar banai hui chulhi:** A hearth already built
outside for the monk. **3. Sadhu ke liye sadya bahar prakash mein banaya gaya
chulha:** A hearth built outside in the light for the monk.  Eating food cooked
on all three types of hearths results in two faults: **Upakaranaputi** and
**Pradushkaran**.  **1. For expansion, see Bribha 1681-86, T. p. 495, 496.**
**2. Panv 747; Niyavaranhare, Gavakkhakaranaai Paukaranam Tu.** **3. Das
5/1/20.** **4. Pini 138/1.** **5. Pini 138/4,5.** **6. A hearth that can be
taken outside for a purpose even though it is inside the house (Mavri P. 94).**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14 piMDaniyukti 1. sammArjana-jhADU lgaanaa| 2. AvarSaNa-pAnI se sthAna ko
ThaMDA krnaa| 3. upalepana-gobara se liipnaa| 4. sUkSma-puSpa-racanA krnaa| 5.
dIpaka-dIpaka jlaanaa| inake bhI avaSvaSkaNa aura abhiSvaSNakaNa-ye do bheda
haiN| udAharaNa ke rUpa meM jaise gRhastha socatA hai ki jaba taka svAdhyAya-
maMDalI kA kAla nahIM AtA hai, taba taka maiM pramArjana kara detA hUM , aisA
socakara yadi pramArjana karatA hai to yaha sUkSma sammArjana avaSvaSkaNa
prAbhRtikA doSa hai| yadi yaha socatA hai ki abhI svAdhyAya-maMDalI baiThI hai,
jaba yaha uThegI, tabhI pramArjana karUMgA to yaha sUkSma sammArjana
abhiSvaSkaNa prAbhRtikA hai| graMthakAra ne phira isake bhI aneka bheda-prabheda
kie haiN| 7. prAduSkaraNa doSa aMdhakAra yukta sthAna ko prakAzita karake athavA
aMdhakAra se bAhara prakAza meM lAkara Ahara denA prAduSkaraNa doSa hai|
dazavaikAlika sUtra meM ullekha milatA hai ki aMdhakAra ke kAraNa vastu athavA
prANI dikhAI na de, vaise nimna dvAra vAle athavA aMdhakAra yukta koTharI se
muni bhikSA grahaNa na kre| prAduSkaraNa doSa ke do bheda haiM-1. prakaTakaraNa
2. prkaashkrnn| prakaTakaraNa-deya vastu ko aMdhakAra se haTAkara prakAzayukta
sthAna meM rkhnaa| prakAzakaraNa-aMdhakAra yukta sthAna ko prakAzita karane ke
lie dIvAra meM chidra karanA, dvAra bar3hAnA, dUsarA dvAra banAnA, ghara ke
Upara ke chappara ko haTAnA athavA maNi, dIpaka yA agni se deya vastu ko Alokita
krnaa| prakaTakaraNa doSa ko spaSTa karate hue niyuktikAra kahate haiM ki cUlhe
ke tIna prakAra hote haiM1. saMcArimA 2. sAdhu ke lie pahale se hI bAhara banAI
huI culhii| 3. sAdhu ke lie sadyaH bAhara prakAza meM banAyA gayA cuulhaa| ina
tInoM prakAra ke cUlhoM para pakAyA huA bhojana lene se do doSa hote haiM-
upakaraNapUti aura praadusskrnn| 1. vistAra hetu dekheM bRbhA 1681-86, TI. pR.
495, 496 /  5. vaha cUlhA, jo ghara ke aMdara hone para bhI prayojanavaza bAhara
2. paMva 747; nIyavAraMdhAre, gavakkhakaraNAi pAukaraNaM tu| le jAyA jA sake
(mavR pa. 94) /  3. daza 5/1/20 /  6. pini 138/1 /  4. pini 138/4,5 /

Page #89 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti: An Observation  The term "transition" has been used in place of
"manifestation" in the Mulachara. The meaning is the same as that of
"manifestation". In "illumination", the commentator has given the meaning as
polishing vessels with ashes etc. and spreading the vessels out.  The author,
while explaining the exceptions to both these faults, says that if a householder
brings out food in the light and says that there are many flies inside the house
and it is also very hot, there is light outside and no flies, therefore we have
brought food out for ourselves or cooked it outside. In this way, by making it
self-intended, that food becomes blameless and is therefore acceptable to the
monk. However, if the light of a lamp or a torch is used for self-intended
purposes, i.e., for the householder's own use, then that food is not acceptable
to the monk. If, for some reason, food contaminated with the fault of
contamination is consumed, the monk can consume pure food in that vessel without
washing it. According to Acharya Vasunandi, food contaminated with the fault of
contamination is prohibited due to the lack of purity of the path of eating.
**8. Kritakrit Fault**  For a monk, buying and giving alms is a Kritadosa.
Acharya Haribhadra, while clarifying this, has said that whatever is bought for
a monk is Krit, and what is made from the purchased item is called Kritakrit.
Wherever the mention of "purpose" is found in the Agamas like Acharachula,
Sutrakritanga, Stananga, Bhagavati, Dasha Vaikalik etc., there is also a mention
of Kritakrit and Abhihit etc. faults.  According to the Brihatkalpa Bhashya, the
Kritakrit fault is of two types - specified and unspecified. Where the
householder buys with the instruction that such and such clothes, vessels etc.
will be for me and such and such for the monk, there is specified Krit.
Conversely, what is bought spontaneously is called unspecified Krit. In
unspecified Krit, the remaining clothes etc. are acceptable to the monk after
being used by the householder, but specified Krit is unacceptable to the monk.
In specified Krit, if the householder tells the monk that you accept the clothes
bought for me, I will use the clothes bought for you, then the monk can take the
specified clothes for that householder. In Pindaniyukti, four types of Kritakrit
fault have been explained.  1. Mulaati p. 341; Prakashanam bhajanadinaam
bhasmaadinod- 4. Dashahati p. 116; Krayanam-kritam....sadhvadinimittamiti kadina
va nirmarjanam bhajanaderva vistaranam. Gamyate, tena kritam-nirvartitam
kritakritam. 2. Mulaati p. 341; Iryapathadoshadarshanad iti. 5. Achuula 1/29,
Su1/9/14, Sta 9/62, Bhaga 9/177, 3. (a) Dasachhu p. 60; Kotakadam jan kiniun
dijati. Dasha 3/2. (b) Ma p. 35 Kritam yat sadhvartham mulyaena parigrihitam. 6.
Babha 4201, 4202, Ti p. 1141.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa mUlAcAra meM prakaTakaraNa ke sthAna para
saMkramaNa zabda kA prayoga huA hai| jisakA tAtparya vahI hai, jo prakaTakaraNa
kA hai| prakAzakaraNa meM TIkAkAra ne eka artha rAkha Adi se bartanoM ko
camakAnA tathA bartanoM ko phailAkara rakhanA kiyA hai| donoM doSoM ke apavAda
batAte hue graMthakAra kahate haiM ki yadi gRhastha bAhara prakAza meM lAkara
yaha kahatA hai ki ghara ke aMdara bahuta makkhiyAM haiM tathA garmI bhI adhika
hai, bAhara prakAza bhI hai aura makkhiyAM bhI nahIM haiM ataH hama apane lie
bhojana bAhara lAe haiM athavA bAhara pakAyA hai| isa prakAra AtmArthIkRta
karane para vaha bhojana nirdoSa hone se sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya hai| jyoti yA
dIpaka kA prakAza karane para AtmArthIkRta arthAt gRhastha ke apane lie karane
para bhI vaha AhAra sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya nahIM hotaa| yadi kisI kAraNa se
prAduSkaraNa doSa yukta AhAra grahaNa kara liyA jAe to sAdhu usa pAtra ko dhoe
binA bhI usameM zuddha AhAra grahaNa kara sakatA hai| AcArya vasunaMdI ke
anusAra IryApatha kI zuddhi na hone ke kAraNa prAduSkaraNa doSa yukta AhAra
varjita hai| 8. krItakRta doSa sAdhu ke lie kharIdakara bhikSA denA krItadoSa
hai| AcArya haribhadra ne ise spaSTa karate hue kahA hai ki jo sAdhu ke lie
kharIdA jAe, vaha krIta hai tathA kharIdI huI vastu se banA huA krItakRta
kahalAtA hai| AcAracUlA, sUtrakRtAMga, sthAnAMga, bhagavatI, dazavaikAlika Adi
AgamoM meM jahAM bhI auddezika kA ullekha hai, vahAM krItakRta aura abhihata Adi
doSoM kA bhI sAtha meM ullekha milatA hai| bRhatkalpa bhASya ke anusAra
krItakRta doSa do prakAra kA hotA hai-nirdiSTa aura anirdisstt| jahAM gRhastha
isa nirdeza pUrvaka kharIdatA hai ki amuka vastra, pAtra Adi mere lie hoMge
tathA amuka sAdhu ke lie, vahAM nirdiSTakrIta hotA hai| isake viparIta sahaja
rUpa se kharIdA huA anirdiSTakrIta kahalAtA hai| anirdiSTakrIta meM gRhastha ke
dvArA prayukta hone ke bAda zeSa vastra Adi sAdhu ke lie kalpya hote haiM lekina
nirdiSTakrIta sAdhu ke lie agrAhya hotA hai| nirdiSTakrIta meM gRhastha yadi
sAdhu ko yaha kahe ki Apa mere nimitta kharIde vastra grahaNa kareM, maiM Apake
nimitta krIta vastroM kA upayoga karUMgA, aisA kahane para sAdhu usa gRhastha ke
lie nirdiSTa vastra ko le sakatA hai| piNDaniyukti meM krItakRta doSa ke cAra
bhedoM kI vyAkhyA kI gaI hai 1. mUlATI pR. 341 ; prakAzanaM bhAjanAdInAM
bhasmAdinoda- 4. dazahATI pa. 116 ; krayaNaM-krItaM....sAdhvAdinimittamiti
kAdinA vA nirmArjanaM bhAjanAdervA vistrnnm| gamyate, tena kRtaM-nirvartitaM
kriitkRtN| 2. mUlATI pR. 341 ; iiryaapthdossdrshnaaditi| 5. AcUlA 1/29,
sU1/9/14, sthA 9/62, bhaga 9/177, 3. (ka) dasaacU pR.60; kotakaDaM jaM kiNiUNa
dijjati  /  daza 3/2 /  (kha) ma pa. 35 krItaM yat sAdhvarthaM mUlyena
prigRhiitm| 6.babhA 4201, 4202, TI pa. 1141  /

Page #90 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **Pindaniyukti**  **Atmadravyakrit**  Receiving food by giving
the householder offerings from pilgrimages, fragrant substances, transformative
pills, sandalwood, and pieces of cloth, etc., for good fortune is called
Atmadravyakrit. Here, the cause is treated in the action, and Atmadravyakrit is
accepted.  The author, while pointing out the faults of Atmadravyakrit, says
that if someone becomes ill due to giving offerings, etc., then that person may
criticize the sermon or the monk, saying that I became ill due to their
influence. If he becomes healthy due to the offerings, etc., then he flatters
the monk in front of everyone, saying that I became healthy due to their
influence. If, upon hearing his praise, other people request offerings, etc.,
and they are not given to all, then there is a possibility of conflict and
dispute.  **Atmabhavakrit**  Receiving alms based on religious stories, debates,
austerities, astrology, heat treatment, Shruasthan (position of Acharya), caste,
family, group, karma, and skills, etc., is called Atmabhavakrit. The author has
tried to express human weakness in a very psychological way in Atmabhavakrit. If
a monk tells religious stories to obtain food, then the listeners willingly
provide him with whatever he needs. The author, while explaining another option,
says that if a monk looks like a famous story teller, and people ask him if he
is the famous religious story teller, then he says, for the sake of greed for
food, etc., that all monks are religious story tellers, or if he remains silent
at that time, then the devotees think that he is the famous religious story
teller, and he is not revealing himself due to seriousness. Thus, obtaining
wealth by impressing with one's skills is also Atmabhavakrit.  If the monk does
all these things for the reduction of suffering or karma, then there is great
Nirjara. If he uses religious stories, etc., for the sake of a common need like
receiving alms, then the fruit of Nirjara is reduced.  **Paradravyakrit**
Receiving food bought by the householder for the monk is called Paradravyakrit.
**Parabhavakrit**  Displaying or telling religious stories through a puppet,
etc., to attract the monk, is called Parabhavakrit.  **Footnotes:**  1. Pinni
141. 2. Pinni 143. 3. Pinni 143/1-3. 4. Mavru P. 97.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti AtmadravyakrIta saubhAgya ke lie tIrthoM kA prasAda, gaMdhadravya,
rUpaparAvartinI guTikA, caMdana tathA vastra khaMDa Adi gRhastha ko dekara AhAra
prApta karanA AtmadravyakrIta hai| yahAM kArya meM kAraNa kA upacAra karake
AtmadravyakrIta ko grahaNa kiyA gayA hai| AtmadravyakrIta ke doSa batAte hue
graMthakAra kahate haiM ki yadi nirmAlya-devadravya Adi dene para saMyogavaza
koI bImAra ho jAe to vaha vyakti pravacana athavA sAdhu kI niMdA kara sakatA hai
ki inake yoga se mujhe roga huA hai| yadi nirmAlya Adi se svastha ho jAe to vaha
sabake samakSa sAdhu kI cATukAritA karatA hai ki inake yoga se maiM svastha ho
gyaa| usakI prazaMsA sunakara anya vyaktiyoM dvArA nirmAlya gaMdha Adi kI yAcanA
karane para yadi una sabako na dI jAe to adhikaraNa-kalaha kI saMbhAvanA rahatI
hai| AtmabhAvakrIta dharmakathA, vAda-vivAda, tapasyA, jyotiSvidyA, AtApanA,
zrutasthAna (AcAryapada), jAti, kula, gaNa, karma aura zilpa Adi ke AdhAra para
bhikSA prApta karanA AtmabhAvakrIta hai| niyuktikAra ne AtmabhAvakrIta meM
bahuta manovaijJAnika DhaMga se mAnavIya durbalatA ko prakaTa karane kA prayatna
kiyA hai| yadi sAdhu AhAra-prApti ke lie dharma-kathA karatA hai to use jisa
vastu kI AvazyakatA hotI hai, zrotA use saharSa pradAna kara dete haiN| isakA
dUsarA vikalpa batAte hue graMthakAra kahate haiM ki koI sAdhu prasiddha kathA
kathaka ke AkAra jaisA hai, usase yadi loga pUchate haiM ki kyA vaha prasiddha
dharmakathA karane vAle Apa hI haiM? taba vaha AhAra Adi ke lobha meM kahatA hai
ki sabhI sAdhu dharmakathA karane vAle hI hote haiM athavA usa samaya yadi vaha
mauna rahatA hai to zrAvaka socate haiM ki vaha prasiddha dharmakathA kathaka
yahI hai, gaMbhIratA ke kAraNa yaha svayaM ko prakAzita nahIM kara rahA hai| isa
prakAra apane kauzala se prabhAvita karake dravya prApta karanA bhI
AtmabhAvakrIta hai| _ yadi sAdhu ina saba cIjoM ko duHkhakSaya yA karmakSaya ke
lie karatA hai to mahAn nirjarA hotI hai| yadi bhikSA-prApti jaisI sAmAnya
AvazyakatA ke lie dharmakathA Adi kA prayoga karatA hai to nirjarA kA phala kama
ho jAtA hai| paradravyakrIta gRhastha ke dvArA sAdhu ke nimitta kharIdA huA
AhAra grahaNa karanA paradravyakrIta hai| parabhAvakrIta sAdhu ko dene ke lie
maMkha Adi ke dvArA pradarzana karanA athavA dharmakathA karanA, jisase AkRSTa
1. pini 141 /  2. pini 143 /  3. pini 143/1-3 /  4. mavR pa. 97 /

Page #91 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation  **Giving food etc. to a person who is parava-
krita (influenced by the object of desire) is considered a fault. There are
three faults in accepting parava-krita - krita, abhihr̥ta and sthāpita. The
author has also mentioned the story of a monk named Devasharma to explain this
fault.**  **According to Bhagavati, a muni who considers krita-krita food as
flawless, consumes it considering it flawless, and presents it as flawless in
the assembly, is a viradhaka if he does not criticize that place.**  **9.
Prāmitya (Apamitya) Fault**  **The ninth fault of udgama is prāmitya. Giving
food etc. to a sadhu by borrowing from someone is the prāmitya fault. The
commentator Malayagiri has given the Sanskrit shade of 'pāmiccha' as apamitya.**
**Chanakya has called the acceptance of grains etc. with the promise of
returning them as apamitya. Therefore, the Sanskrit shade of apamitya given by
the commentator Malayagiri is also consistent here. In Digambara literature,
there is a mention of ṛṇadosha for the prāmitya fault.**  **This is of two types
- with increase (with interest) and without increase. The meaning is that when
the giver brings rice etc. saying that I will give you more back from this, then
it is a fault with increase. When he brings it with the instruction that I will
give you this much food later, it is a fault without increase.**  **According to
the author, the prāmitya fault is of two types - laukika and lokoत्तर. Laukika
prāmitya**  **If a family member like a sister borrows from someone and gives it
to the sadhu, then it is the laukika prāmitya fault. To reveal this fault, the
author has mentioned the story of Bhagini Sammati, who borrowed oil for her
brother sadhu and gave it as a donation. Due to the unlimited debt, she had to
accept slavery. Later, the initiated brother explained to the Seth and Bhagini
Sammati also took initiation.**  **Lokoत्तर prāmitya**  **Giving each other
loans among sadhus is lokoत्तर prāmitya. Lokoत्तर prāmitya is of two types.
Firstly, a muni may accept clothes for some time. Secondly, give it on loan in
such a way that the same clothes will be returned after so many days. In the
first type, if the clothes become dirty, torn, etc.,**  **1. Pinḍi 142, Nibha
4477.**  **2. Pinḍi 142/1, 2, For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha
No. 18.**  **3. Bhag 5/139 145.**  **4. (a) Piṁpra 44; Samaṇatṭha Ucchindiya,
Jaṁ Deyaṁ Dei Tamiha Pāmicchaṁ. (b) Dashahatti P 174; Prāmityaṁ
Sādhvārthamucchidy Dānalakṣaṇam.**  **5. Mavṛ P. 35.**  **6. Kau 2/31/15/1, P.
158; Tadeva Pratidānārthamapamityakam.**  **7. Mūlāṭi P. 342.**  **8. Mūlāṭi P.
342; Tatpunardviviḍhaṁ Savṛddhikamāvṛddhikam Cāpi. Bhiksau Caryāyāṁ Praviṣṭe
Dātānyadīyaṁ Gṛhaṁ Gatvā Bhaktiyā Bhaktadīkaṁ Yācate Vṛddhiṁ Samiṣya Vṛddhyā
Vinā Vā Sāduhetoḥ.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa hokara loga use AhAra Adi deM, vaha AhAra
grahaNa karanA parabhAvakrIta hai| parabhAvakrIta ko grahaNa karane meM tIna
doSa hote haiM - krIta, abhihRta aura sthApita  /  niyuktikAra ne isa doSa ko
spaSTa karane ke lie devazarmA nAmaka maMkha kI kathA kA saMketa bhI diyA hai  /
2 bhagavatI ke anusAra krItakRta AhAra ko anavadya mAnane vAlA, anavadya
mAnakara usakA paribhoga karane vAlA tathA use pariSad meM anavadya prarUpita
karane vAlA muni yadi usa sthAna kI AlocanA nahIM karatA to vaha virAdhaka hotA
hai  /  9. prAmitya ( apamitya) doSa udgama kA navAM doSa hai - prAmitya  /
sAdhu ko dene ke lie kisI se udhAra lekara AhAra Adi denA prAmitya doSa hai|
TIkAkAra malayagiri ne 'pAmicca' kI saMskRta chAyA apamitya kI hai|" dhAnya Adi
padArtha punaH lauTAne kI pratijJApUrvaka grahaNa karane ko cANakya ne
apamityaka kahA hai ataH yahAM TIkAkAra malayagiri dvArA kI gaI apamitya
saMskRta chAyA bhI saMgata baiThatI hai  /  digambara sAhitya meM prAmitya doSa
ke lie RNadoSa kA ullekha hai  / " yaha do prakAra kA hotA hai - vRddhi sahita
(byAja sahita) vRddhi rahita  /  kahane tAtparya yaha hai ki jaba dAtA yaha
kahakara odana Adi lAtA hai ki maiM punaH isase adhika tumako vApasa de dUMgA to
vaha vRddhisahita doSa hai| jaba vaha yaha nirdeza karake lAtA hai ki itanA hI
bhojana maiM tumako bAda meM de dUMgA, yaha vRddhirahita doSa hai  / '
niyuktikAra ke anusAra prAmitya doSa do prakAra kA hotA hai-laukika tathA
lokottara  /  laukika prAmitya bahina Adi pArivArika vyakti sAdhu ke lie kisI se
udhAra lekara de to vaha laukika prAmitya doSa hai  /  isa doSa ko prakaTa
karane hetu graMthakAra ne bhaginI sammati kI kathA kA ullekha kiyA hai, jisane
apane bhrAtA sAdhu ke lie taila udhAra lekara dAna diyaa| RNa aparimita hone ke
kAraNa use dAsatva svIkAra karanA pdd'aa| kAlAntara meM dIkSita bhAI ne seTha ko
samajhAyA tathA bahina sammati ne bhI dIkSA grahaNa kara lI  /  lokottara
prAmitya paraspara sAdhuoM meM eka dUsare ko udhAra denA lokottara prAmitya hai
/  lokottara prAmitya do prakAra kA hai| prathama to koI muni kucha samaya ke
upayoga hetu vastra grahaNa kre| dUsarA yaha ki itane dinoM bAda aisA hI vastra
vApasa de diyA jAegA, isa rUpa meM udhAra de  /  prathama bheda meM yadi vastra
mailA ho jAe, phaTa jAe, 1. pini 142, nibhA 4477  /  2. pini 142 / 1, 2, kathA
ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 18  /  77 3. bhaga 5/139145  /  4.
(ka) piMpra 44 ; samaNaTThA ucchiMdiya, jaM deyaM dei tamiha pAmicvaM  /  (kha)
dazahATI pa 174 ; prAmItyaM sAdhvarthamucchidya dAnalakSaNam  /  5. mavR pa. 35
/  6. kau 2/31/15/1, pR. 158 ; tadeva pratidAnArthamApamityakam  /  7. mUlATI
pR. 342  /  8. mUlATI pR. 342 ; tatpunardvividhaM savRddhikamavRddhikaM cApi  /
bhikSau caryAyAM praviSTe dAtAnyadIyaM gRhaM gatvA bhaktyA bhaktAdikaM yAcate
vRddhiM samiSya vRddhyA vinA vA sAdhuhetoH  /

Page #92 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 78 If the allotted cloth becomes worn out, is stolen, or is lost, there is a
possibility of conflict. Similarly, if a monk who is difficult to please is
given a better or a special cloth in exchange for a loan, he may cause conflict.
The author says that if a monk needs cloth and another monk wants to give cloth,
etc., then give the cloth without any apprehension. If a cunning or lazy monk
needs to be given cloth, then he should not be given the cloth directly. The
cloth should be given through the Guru, so that there is no conflict later. 10.
Parivartita Dosha Giving food, etc., to a monk by exchanging it with a neighbor
or someone else is Parivartita Dosha. Parivartita Dosha is also of two types -
Laukika and Lokottara. Both have two sub-categories each - 1. Taddravya
Vishayaka 2. Anyadravya Vishayaka. Giving fragrant ghee in exchange for cooked
ghee to a monk is Laukika Taddravya Paravarta, and giving Kodrava grain in
exchange for Shalyodana, etc., is Laukika Anyadravya Paravarta Dosha. The
Niyuktikara has mentioned the story of Lakshmi, a woman, who gave Shalyodana in
exchange for Kodrava grain when her brother, Kshemankar, a monk, came to visit.
This led to conflict between the two families. A monk exchanging cloth, etc.,
with another monk is Lokottara Paravarta. Giving cloth and taking cloth in
return by a monk is Lokottara Taddravya Parivartita Dosha, and giving cloth and
taking a book in return is Lokottara Anyadravya Paravarta. While explaining the
faults of Lokottara Paravarta, the Niyuktikara says that the monk who receives
the cloth, etc., may say that this cloth is inferior, my cloth was bigger, and
this cloth is worn out, rough to touch, made of thick thread, torn, stained,
unable to protect from cold, and faded, my cloth was not like this. Similarly, a
monk may be misled by the words of a cunning monk. Therefore, if a monk has a
certified cloth and another monk does not, then the exchange should be done in
front of the Guru, so that there is no possibility of conflict later. 11.
Abhyahrita Dosha Bringing food, etc., from another place for a monk is
Abhyahrita Dosha. This is called Ahut and  1. Pini 144/4-146. 2. (a) Pimpra 45;
Pallattiya Jam Davvam, Tadannavvehim Dei Sahunam. Tam Pariyattimettham. (b)
Mavru P. 35; Parivartitam Yat Sadhanimittam Kritparavartaam. 3. Pini 147, Mavru
P. 100. 4. Pini 148-148/2, For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha
San. 20. 5. (a) Dasachoo. P. 60; Abhihadam Jam Abhimuhamaniitam Uvassae Aneuun
Dinnam. (b) Mavru P. 35% Abhihritam-Yat Sadhudanaya Swagramaat Paragramaadva
Samaneetam. 6. Su 1/9/14.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 78 piMDaniyukti jIrNa-zIrNa ho jAe, corI ho jAe athavA kho jAe to kalaha kI
saMbhAvanA rahatI hai| dUsarI prakAra se udhAra lene para usase acchA yA viziSTa
vastra dene para bhI koI duSkararuci muni kalaha kara sakatA hai| graMthakAra
kahate haiM ki yadi kisI sAdhu ko vastra kI AvazyakatA ho aura koI dUsarA sAdhu
vastra Adi denA cAhe to binA kisI AzaMsA ke vastra de| yadi koI kuTila yA AlasI
sAdhu ko vastra dene kI apekSA par3e to usako vaha svayaM vastra na de| guru ke
mAdhyama se vastra diyA jAe, jisase bAda meM kalaha na ho| 10. parivartita doSa
sAdhu ko dene ke lie par3osI yA kisI anya se parivartana karake AhAra Adi denA
parivartita doSa hai| parivartita doSa bhI do prakAra kA hai-laukika aura
lokottr| donoM ke do-do bheda hote haiM-1. taddravyaviSayaka 2. anydrvyvissyk|
kuthita ghI ke badale sugaMdha yukta ghI lekara sAdhu ko denA tadravyaviSayaka
laukika parAvarta hai tathA kodrava dhAnya dekara zAlyodana Adi lenA laukika
anyadravya parAvarta doSa hai| niyuktikAra ne laukika parAvarta doSa meM lakSmI
nAmaka mahilA kI kathA kA ullekha kiyA hai, jisane apane bhrAtA kSemaMkara sAdhu
ke Ane para kodrava dhAnya ko badalakara zAlyodana diyA, isase donoM parivAroM
meM kalaha ho gyaa| _ eka sAdhu dUsare sAdhu ke sAtha vastra Adi kA parivartana
karatA hai, vaha lokottara parAvarta hai| sAdhu dvArA vastra dekara vastra lenA
tadravyaviSayaka lokottara parivartita doSa hai tathA vastra dekara pustaka lenA
anyadravyaviSayaka lokottara parAvarta hai| lokottara parAvarta ke doSa batAte
hue niyuktikAra kahate haiM ki vastra Adi parivartana karane meM grahaNakartA
sAdhu kaha sakatA hai ki yaha nyUna vastra hai, merA vastra bar3A thA tathA yaha
vastra jIrNaprAyaH, karkaza sparza vAlA, moTe dhAge se niSpanna, chinna, malina
tathA zIta se rakSA karane meM asamartha aura badaraMga hai, merA vastra aisA
nahIM thaa| isI prakAra kisI kuTila sAdhu ke kahane para bhI sAdhu vipariNata ho
sakatA hai ata: yadi kisI sAdhu ke pAsa pramANopeta vastra hai aura dUsare ke
pAsa nahIM hai to guru ke sAmane parivartana kiyA jAe, jisase bAda meM kalaha kI
saMbhAvanA na rhe| 11. abhyAhRta doSa sAdhu ke lie anya sthAna se AhAra Adi
lAkara denA abhyAhRta doSa hai| ise AhUta aura 1. pini 144/4-146 /  /  2. (ka)
piMpra 45 ; pallaTTiya jaM davvaM, tadannadavvehiM dei sAhUNaM  /  taM
pariyaTTiyametthaM  /  (kha) mavR pa. 35 ; parivartitaM yat sAdhanimittaM
kRtpraavrtm| 3. pini 147, mavR pa. 100 /  4. pini 148-148/2, kathA ke vistAra
hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 20 /  5. (ka) dazaacU. pR. 60; abhihaDaM jaM
abhimuhamANItaM uvassae ANeUNa dinnnnN| (kha) mavR pa. 35% abhihRtaM-yat
sAdhudAnAya svagrAmAt paragrAmAdvA smaaniitm| 6. sU 1/9/14 /

Page #93 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti: An Observation  **Abhyahita Dosha** (also known as Abhyahita
Dosha) is of two types: **Aachirna** and **Anaachirna**. The **Chhedasutras**
mention that if a **Gaathapati** brings food for a **Sadhu** from beyond three
houses, the monk who accepts it is liable for **Prayaschitta** (penance). The
**Dashavaikalik Sutra** accepts the approval of killing in **Abhyahita Aahar**.
The **Agamas** prohibit the acceptance of **Abhyahita Dosha**-affected alms in
many places.  **Anaachirna Abhyahita** has two sub-categories: **Nishith
Anaachirna Abhyahrita** and **Nonishith Anaachirna Abhyahrita**. **Nishith**
means where the giver does not reveal their intention, and **Nonishith** means
where the giver clearly states the purpose of their arrival. The commentary on
**Pravachnasaroddhar** classifies the types of **Abhyahrita** as follows:  |
**Aachirna** | **Anaachirna** | **Desha** | **Deshadesha** | **Deshadesha** |
**Nishith** | **Nishith** | **Nonishith** | **Nonishith** |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|---| | **Utkrishta** | **Utkrishta** |
**Swagrām** | **Swagrām** | **Swagrām** | **Swagrām** | **Swagrām** |
**Swagrām** | **Swagrām** | | **Madhyama** | **Madhyama** | **Paragrām** |
**Paragrām** | **Paragrām** | **Paragrām** | **Paragrām** | **Paragrām** |
**Paragrām** | | **Jghanya** | **Jghanya** | **Gṛhantar** | **Gṛhantar** |
**Gṛhantar** | **Gṛhantar** | **Gṛhantar** | **Gṛhantar** | **Gṛhantar** | |  |
| **Nogṛhantar** | **Nogṛhantar** | **Nogṛhantar** | **Nogṛhantar** |
**Nogṛhantar** | **Nogṛhantar** | **Nogṛhantar** | |  |  | **Swadesha** |
**Swadesha** | **Swadesha** | **Swadesha** | **Swadesha** | **Swadesha** |
**Swadesha** | |  |  | **Paradesha** | **Paradesha** | **Paradesha** |
**Paradesha** | **Paradesha** | **Paradesha** | **Paradesha** | |  |  |
**Vāṭaka** | **Vāṭaka** | **Vāṭaka** | **Vāṭaka** | **Vāṭaka** | **Vāṭaka** |
**Vāṭaka** | |  |  | **Sāhi** | **Sāhi** | **Sāhi** | **Sāhi** | **Sāhi** |
**Sāhi** | **Sāhi** | |  |  | **Niveshan** | **Niveshan** | **Niveshan** |
**Niveshan** | **Niveshan** | **Niveshan** | **Niveshan** | |  |  | **Gṛha** |
**Gṛha** | **Gṛha** | **Gṛha** | **Gṛha** | **Gṛha** | **Gṛha** | |  |  |
**(Gali)** | **(Gali)** | **(Gali)** | **(Gali)** | **(Gali)** | **(Gali)** |
**(Gali)** | |  |  | **Jalapath** | **Jalapath** | **Jalapath** | **Jalapath** |
**Jalapath** | **Jalapath** | **Jalapath** | |  |  | **Sthalapath** |
**Sthalapath** | **Sthalapath** | **Sthalapath** | **Sthalapath** |
**Sthalapath** | **Sthalapath** | |  |  | **Nāṁv** | **Nāṁv** | **Nāṁv** |
**Nāṁv** | **Nāṁv** | **Nāṁv** | **Nāṁv** | |  |  | **Taranakāstha** |
**Taranakāstha** | **Taranakāstha** | **Taranakāstha** | **Taranakāstha** |
**Taranakāstha** | **Taranakāstha** | |  |  | **Tumba** | **Tumba** | **Tumba**
| **Tumba** | **Tumba** | **Tumba** | **Tumba** | |  |  | **Jāṁghā** |
**Jāṁghā** | **Jāṁghā** | **Jāṁghā** | **Jāṁghā** | **Jāṁghā** | **Jāṁghā** | |
|  | **Jāṁghā** | **Jāṁghā** | **Jāṁghā** | **Jāṁghā** | **Jāṁghā** | **Jāṁghā**
| **Jāṁghā** | |  |  | **Vāhana** | **Vāhana** | **Vāhana** | **Vāhana** |
**Vāhana** | **Vāhana** | **Vāhana** | |  |  | **Nāv** | **Nāv** | **Nāv** |
**Nāv** | **Nāv** | **Nāv** | **Nāv** | |  |  | **Uḍup** | **Uḍup** | **Uḍup** |
**Uḍup** | **Uḍup** | **Uḍup** | **Uḍup** | |  |  | **Jāghā** | **Jāghā** |
**Jāghā** | **Jāghā** | **Jāghā** | **Jāghā** | **Jāghā** | |  |  | **Vāhana** |
**Vāhana** | **Vāhana** | **Vāhana** | **Vāhana** | **Vāhana** | **Vāhana** |
**References:**  1. Ni 3/15. 2. Dasha 6/48. 3. Stha 9/62, Dasha 3. 4. Jībhā
1250, Chhaṇṇa Nisīham Bhaṇṇati, Pagadaṁ Puṇa Hoti ṇoṇisīham Ti. 5. Prasa 140,
141. 6. Jībhā 1253; Jītakalpabhāṣya further divides **Jalapath** and
**Sthalapath** into two parts: **Doshayukta Marg** (path with fault) and
**Nirapad Marg** (safe path).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 79 abhihata doSa bhI kahA jAtA hai| abhihata
doSa do prakAra kA hotA hai-AcIrNa aura anAcIrNa  /  chedasUtroM meM ullekha
milatA hai ki yadi koI gAthApati sAdhu ke lie tIna ghara ke Age se AhAra lAkara
de to use grahaNa karane vAlA bhikSu prAyazcitta kA bhAgI hotA hai|
dazavaikAlika sUtra meM abhihata AhAra meM vadha kI anumodanA ko svIkAra kiyA
hai| AgamoM meM aneka sthaloM para abhihata doSa yukta bhikSA kA niSedha kiyA
gayA hai| anAcIrNa abhyAhata ke do bheda haiM-nizItha anAcIrNa abhyAhRta tathA
nonizItha anAcIrNa abhyaahRt| nizItha kA artha hai-jahAM dAyaka apane Azaya ko
prakaTa na kare tathA nonizItha kA tAtparya hai, jahAM dAtA apane Ane kA
prayojana spaSTa kara de| pravacanasAroddhAra' kI TIkA meM abhyAhRta ke bheda-
prabheda isa prakAra AcIrNa anAcIrNa deza dezadeza dezadeza nizItha nizItha
nonizItha nonizItha utkRSTa madhyama jaghanya utkRSTa madhyama jaghanya svagrAma
paragrAma svagrAma paragrAma gRhAntara nogRhAntara svadeza paradeza vATaka sAhI
nivezana gRha (galI) jalapatha sthalapatha jalapatha sthalapatha nAMva
taraNakASTha tumbA jaMghA jaMghA vAhana nAva uDupa jaghA vAhana 1. ni 3/15 /  2.
daza 6/48 /  3. sthA 9/62, dsh3| 4. jIbhA 1250, chaNNa NisIhaM bhaNNati, pagaDaM
puNa hoti NoNisIhaM ti| 5. prasA 140,141 /   /  6. jIbhA 1253 ; jItakalpabhASya
meM jalapatha aura sthalapatha ko punaH do bhAgoM meM vibhakta kiyA hai-
doSayukta mArga tathA nirApada maarg|

Page #94 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 80. Pindiya-niyukti  **Nishith Swagram Abhyahrit**  The village where the
sadhus reside is called Swagram, and the rest are called Paragram. The
Niyuktikar explains Nishith Swagram Abhyahrit by saying that a Shravika goes to
the Upashray with food to donate. So that the Muni does not have any
apprehension, she tells the Muni in front of him, "Bhagavan! I received this
sweet while going to such and such house, or I got this material in such and
such Jimanwar. I have come to pay my respects to the Sadhus naturally," and then
she pays her respects to the Muni, gives the alms, and returns.  Or, she hides
her original thoughts in front of the Muni and says, "I brought this sweet from
home to give to my family members, but they didn't take it," or she deceitfully
says in a loud voice in the house of the Shayataris, "Take this Prahenak." The
Shayataris deceitfully refuse. When there is an artificial quarrel between the
two, the Muni gives her the Prahenak as alms. This is Nishith Swagram Abhyahrit.
**No-Nishith Swagram Abhyahrit**  The Granthakar has mentioned many reasons for
No-Nishith Swagram Abhyahrit:  * The Muni went for alms, but the alms-giver was
not at home or was sleeping. * It was not the time for alms. * Food prepared for
specific individuals was not given first. * After the alms-seeking Sadhu left,
festival sweets arrived from another house.  Due to all these reasons, the
Shravika later goes to the Sadhu's Upashray with alms from her home. This is No-
Nishith Swagram Abhyahrit.  **Nishith Paragram Abhyahrit**  The Niyuktikar has
explained Nishith Paragram Abhyahrit in detail through a story. After the
marriage of Seth Dhanavah, many Modaks were left over. He thought that if he
gave alms to the Sadhus, it would be beneficial. The Sadhus could not come from
the nearby village yet because there was a river in between. Therefore, it would
be good if he went to the nearby village to give alms to the Sadhus. There, the
Shravak, thinking that the Sadhus would not accept these Modaks due to the fear
of Adhakarma, thought that he should first give alms to the Brahmanas. He sat in
the middle of the Uccar-Sthandila land of the Sadhus and Sadhvis. Then, upon
request, the Muni accepted the Modaks.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 80 piMDaniyukti nizItha svagrAma abhyAhRta jisa gAMva meM sAdhu nivAsa karate
haiM, vaha svagrAma tathA zeSa paragrAma kahalAte haiN| nizItha svagrAma
abhyAhRta ko spaSTa karate hue niyuktikAra kahate haiM ki koI zrAvikA dAna dene
ke lie upAzraya meM AhAra lekara jAtI hai| muni ko AzaMkA na ho isalie vaha muni
ke samakSa kahatI hai ki bhagavan ! amuka ghara meM jAte hue mujhe yaha miThAI
prApta huI hai athavA mujhe amuka jImanavAra meM yaha sAmagrI milI hai| maiM
sahaja rUpa se sAdhuoM ko vaMdanA karane AI hUM, aisA kahakara vaha muni ko
vaMdanA karake bhikSA pradAna karake lauTa jAtI athavA vaha muni ke samakSa mUla
manogata bhAvoM ko chipAte hue kahatI hai ki yaha miThAI maiM parijanoM ko dene
ke lie ghara se lAI thI lekina unhoMne lI nahIM athavA vaha kapaTapUrvaka
zayyAtarI ke ghara meM ucca svara meM kahatI hai ki yaha praheNaka lo| zayyAtarI
mAyApUrvaka niSedha karatI hai| donoM meM kRtrima kalaha ho jAne para muni ko
vaha praheNaka bhikSA meM detI hai, yaha nizItha svagrAma abhyAhata hai|
nonizItha svagrAma abhyAhRta graMthakAra ne nonizItha svagrAma abhyAhRta ke
aneka kAraNoM kA ullekha kiyA hai - * muni bhikSA hetu gae, usa samaya
bhikSAdAtrI ghara meM nahIM thI athavA so rahI thii| * usa samaya bhikSA kA kAla
nahIM thaa| * viziSTa vyaktiyoM ke lie bane khAdya padArtha ko pahale nahIM diyA
gyaa| * bhikSArtha sAdhu ke cale jAne para kisI dUsare ghara se tyauhAra kI
miThAI aaii| ina saba kAraNoM se vaha zrAvikA bAda meM apane ghara se bhikSA
lekara sAdhu ke upAzraya meM jAtI hai, yaha nonizItha svagrAma abhyAhRta hai|
nizItha paragrAma abhyAhRta  /  nizItha paragrAma abhyAhRta ko niyuktikAra ne
eka kathA ke mAdhyama se vistAra se spaSTa kiyA hai| seTha dhanAvaha ke yahAM
vivAha ke pazcAt adhika modaka baca gae to usane socA ki yadi sAdhuoM ko bhI
bhikSA dI jAe to lAbha milegaa| sAdhu abhI samIpavartI gAMva se nahIM A sakate
kyoMki bIca meM nadI hai ataH acchA ho maiM hI sAdhuoM ko dAna dene ke lie pAsa
ke gAMva meM calA jaauuN| vahAM bhI zrAvaka yaha socakara ki sAdhu ina modakoM
ko AdhAkarma kI AzaMkA se grahaNa nahIM kareMge ataH pahale brAhmaNoM ko dAna
denA caahie| vaha sAdhu-sAdhviyoM ke uccAra-sthaNDila bhUmi ke bIca meM baiThA
phira nivedana karane para muni ne una 3. pini 156/1 /  1. pini 157/5 /  2. pini
157/6 /

Page #95 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  This is an observation on the acceptance of
modakas as prasūka. It is stated in the Nishītha paragram that modakas are
prasūka. The Nishītha paragram should be understood in the same way as the
Nishītha svagram. The niyuktikāra and the tīkākara have not explained it
separately.   There are two types of ācīrṇa svagram abhyāhr̥ta based on the
area: deśa and deśadeśa. An area within a hundred hands is called deśa, and an
area beyond a hundred hands is called deśadeśa. In this, food brought from
within a hundred hands is ācīrṇa for the sādhus, and food brought from beyond
that distance is anācīrṇa.   There are three types of ācīrṇa abhyāhr̥ta:
jaghanya, madhyama, and utkr̥ṣṭa. Transferring an object from one hand to
another is jaghanya ācīrṇa, abhyāhr̥ta from within a hundred hands is utkr̥ṣṭa
ācīrṇa, and abhyāhr̥ta from the area between these two is madhyama ācīrṇa.  The
niyuktikāra has mentioned the faults of abhyāhr̥ta from jalapath and sthalapaṭh.
According to him, both these paths lead to samyama-virādha and ātma-virādha. The
faults of the jalapath are: immersion in deep water, being caught by aquatic
animals, and sinking of the feet due to mud, etc. The faults of the sthalapaṭh
are: thorns, snakes, thieves, dogs, etc.  In the tīkā of Mūlācāra, the Sanskrit
shadow of 'abhihaḍ' is 'abhighaṭ', and it is divided into two parts: deśa
abhighaṭ and sarva abhighaṭ. Deśa abhighaṭ is of two types: ācīrṇa and anācīrṇa.
According to the Digambara tradition, alms brought from three houses or seven
houses are ācīrṇa, and alms brought from beyond that distance are anācīrṇa.
There are four types of sarva abhighaṭ: 1. svagram 2. paragram 3. svadesa 4.
paradesa. Taking from the east side of the neighborhood to the west side of the
neighborhood is svagram abhighaṭ. Bringing from another village is paragram
abhighaṭ. Similarly, svadesa and paradesa should be understood. All types of
sarvābhighaṭ are anācīrṇa.  In svagram abhyāhr̥ta, food brought from within
three houses is called svagram gṛhantar. Nogṛhantar is of many types: vāṭaka,
gali, etc. In this, the one who brings it cannot use it, therefore it is
anācīrṇa.   12. Udbhinna Doṣa  Opening a covered or sealed container with lac,
etc., and giving medicines, ghee, sugar, etc., to the sādhus is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa modakoM ko prAsuka samajhakara grahaNa kara
liyA yaha nizItha paragrAma abhyAhRta hai| nonizItha paragrAma abhyAhRta ko
nonizItha svagrAma abhyAhRta kI bhAMti samajhanA caahie| niyuktikAra aura
TIkAkAra ne usakI alaga se vyAkhyA nahIM kI hai| AcIrNa svagrAma abhyAhRta
kSetra kI apekSA AcIrNa svagrAma abhyAhRta ke do bheda haiM-deza tathA deshdesh|
sau hAtha pramita kSetra deza tathA sau hAtha ke madhya yA usase dUra kSetra
dezadeza kahalAtA hai| isameM sau hAtha pramita kSetra se lAyA huA AhAra sAdhu
ke lie AcIrNa tathA isase adhika dUrI se lAyA huA anAcIrNa hotA hai| AcIrNa
abhyAhRta ke tIna bheda haiM-jaghanya, madhyama aura utkRsstt| eka hAtha se
dUsare hAtha meM vastu parivartana karanA jaghanya AcIrNa, sau hAtha se
abhyAhata utkRSTa AcIrNa tathA isake madhyavartI kSetra se abhyAhRta madhyama
AcIrNa kahalAtA hai| niyuktikAra ne jalapatha aura sthalapatha se abhyAhRta ke
doSoM kA ullekha kiyA hai| unake anusAra ina donoM mArgoM se lAne meM saMyama-
virAdhanA aura Atma-virAdhanA hotI hai| jalamArga ke doSa isa prakAra haiMgahare
pAnI meM nimajjana, jalacara jaMtuoM ke dvArA pakar3A jAnA tathA kIcar3a Adi ke
kAraNa paira kA dhaMsanA aadi| sthalamArga meM kAMTe, sarpa, cora, zvApada Adi
doSoM kA bhaya rahatA hai| _ mUlAcAra kI TIkA meM 'abhihaDa' kI saMskRta chAyA
abhighaTa kI hai tathA isako deza abhighaTa aura sarva abhighaTa-ina do bhAgoM
meM vibhakta kiyA hai| deza abhighaTa AcIrNa aura anAcIrNa do prakAra kA hotA
hai| digambara paramparA ke anusAra tIna ghara yA sAta ghara se lAI huI bhikSA
AcIrNa hai, isase adhika dUrI se lAI gaI anAcIrNa hai| sarva abhighaTa ke cAra
bheda haiM-1. svagrAma 2. paragrAma 3. svadeza 4. prdesh| pUrva dizA ke muhalle
se pazcima dizA ke muhalle meM le jAnA svagrAma abhighaTa hai| dUsare gAMva se
lAnA paragrAma abhighaTa hai| isI prakAra svadeza aura paradeza samajhanA
caahie| sarvAbhighaTa ke sabhI bheda anAcIrNa haiN| svagrAma abhyAhRta meM tIna
ghara ke antara se upayogapUrvaka lAyA huA AhAra svagrAma gRhAntara kahalAtA
hai| nogRhAntara vATaka, galI Adi aneka prakAra kA hotA hai| isameM lAne vAle kA
upayoga saMbhava nahIM hotA isalie yaha anAcIrNa hai| 12. udbhinna doSa Dhake
hue yA lAkha Adi se mudrita pAtra ko kholakara auSadha, ghI, zakkara Adi vastueM
sAdhu ko 1. pini 157/1-4, kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 21 /
2. pini 154  /  3. mUlA 438-440, TI. pR. 343  /

Page #96 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  82. Giving food by opening a sealed container is a type of Udbhinna Dosha.
Udbhinna Dosha is of two types: Pihithoudbhinna and Kapatoadbhinna. Giving ghee
or oil to a Sadhu by opening a seal, whether it is a conscious or unconscious
act, is Pihithoudbhinna Dosha. Giving alms by opening a closed door is
Kapatoadbhinna Dosha.  If a container of oil is opened for a Sadhu, giving it to
a son or engaging in buying and selling with it is a sinful act. If the
householder forgets to close the container, ants, mice, or other creatures may
fall into it and be killed. Opening and closing seals or coverings causes
violence to the elements of earth, water, fire, and air.  Kapatoadbhinna Dosha
can lead to the following:  1.  Dirt, water, and plants near the door can be
trampled upon. 2.  If water spills, it can harm the fire element of the nearby
stove. 3.  The movement of the door can harm small creatures like lizards,
centipedes, and ants. 4.  Opening the door can injure a child sitting behind it.
If a door without a latch is opened daily and does not scrape against the
ground, a Sadhu can receive alms through it. Similarly, if the mouth of a pot or
container is opened daily or covered with cloth, not sealed with wax or other
materials, it is acceptable to give alms through it.  ## 13. Malaprahrit Dosha
This is the thirteenth type of Udgma Dosha. Bringing food to a Sadhu from a
higher floor or a basement, or giving it to them after sneezing, is Malaprahrit
Dosha. In Digambar literature, the terms Malarohan and Aroha are used instead of
Malaprahrit. A Muni who accepts Malaprahrit food is subject to atonement.
Malaprahrit Dosha is mainly of two types: Jghanya Malaprahrit and Utkrishta
Malaprahrit. Giving alms while standing on the balls of one's feet or on a
platform, stool, or other raised surface is Jghanya Malaprahrit.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 82 piMDaniyukti denA udbhinna doSa hai| udbhinna doSa do prakAra kA hotA hai-
pihitodbhinna tathA kapATodbhinna  /  sAdhu ke nimitta sIla Adi kholakara sAdhu
ko ghI yA taila denA pihitodbhinna doSa hai| yaha pidhAna sacitta aura acitta
donoM prakAra kA ho sakatA hai| baMda kapATa ko kholakara bhikSA denA
kapATodbhinna doSa hai| _sAdhu ke nimitta yadi tailapAtra kholA hai to use putra
Adi ko dene athavA kraya-vikraya meM pApamaya pravRtti hotI hai| yadi gRhastha
punaH pAtra ko baMda karanA bhUla jAe to usameM cIMTI, mUSaka Adi jIva girane se
unakI hiMsA ho sakatI hai kyoMki sIla yA lepa ko kholane aura baMda karane se
pRthvI, jala, agni tathA vAyu Adi kAyoM kI hiMsA hotI hai| kapATodbhinna se
nimna doSa saMbhava haiM1. kapATa ke pAsa miTTI, pAnI tathA vanaspati Adi rahane
se unakI virAdhanA saMbhava hai| 2. yadi jala phaila jAtA hai to usake
samIpavartI cUlhe ke agnikAya kI virAdhanA saMbhava hai| agni ke sAtha vAyukAya
ke jIvoM kI virAdhanA bhI jur3I huI hai| 3. kapATa kI Avartana pIThikA ke Upara-
nIce hone se chipakalI, kuMthu, cIMTI Adi trasa jIvoM kI virAdhanA saMbhava hai|
4. kapATa kholane se usake pIche baiThe bAlaka ko coTa laga sakatI hai| kuMcikA
rahita kapATa yadi pratidina khulatA hai tathA daravAjA dharatI se nahIM ghisatA
to use kholane para sAdhu bhikSA prApta kara sakatA hai| isI prakAra maTake yA
pAtra kA muMha yadi pratidina kholA jAtA hai athavA usakA mukha yadi kapar3e se
baMda kiyA jAtA hai, lAkha Adi se mudrita nahIM kiyA jAtA to usako kholakara
denA bhI AcIrNa hai| 13. mAlApahRta doSa yaha udgama kA terahavAM doSa hai|
sAdhu ke nimitta chIMke Adi se, UparI maMjila se athavA bhUmigata kamare se
AhAra lAkara denA mAlApahRta doSa hai| digambara sAhitya meM mAlApahRta ke
sthAna para mAlArohaNa tathA Aroha' zabda kA prayoga huA hai| mAlApahRta AhAra
grahaNa karane vAlA muni prAyazcitta kA bhAgI hotA hai| mAlApahRta doSa
mukhyataH do prakAra kA hotA hai-jaghanya mAlApahata aura utkRSTa mAlApahRta  /
paira ke agra bhAga ke bala para khar3e hokara athavA maMcaka, AsaMdI Adi ke
Upara khar3e hokara bhikSA denA jaghanya mAlApahRta 1. (ka) piMpra48;
jauchagaNAivilittaM, ubhidiya dei jaM 4. (ka) mava pa. 35 : mAlAta
maMcAderapahRtaM sAdhvarthamAnItaM tmunbhinnN| yadbhaktAdi tnmaalaaphtN| (kha)
mUlA 441 (kha) paMva 750 ; mAlohaDaM tu bhaNiyaM, jaM mAlAIhiM dei pihidaM
laMchidayaM vA,osahaghidasakkarAdi jaM davvaM  /  ghettuunnN| ubbhiNNiUNa deyaM,
ubbhiNNaM hodi NAdavvaM  //  5. mUlA 442  /  2. pini 163/3-5, jIbhA 1263  /  6.
anadha 5/6 /  3. pini 163/7, jIbhA 1267 /  7. ni 17/125  /

Page #97 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 83. Pinḍaniyukti: A Supervisory Flaw  Pinḍaniyukti is a supervisory flaw.
Offering alms by climbing up to a platform, such as a Niḥśreṇī, and then
descending from the upper part of the prāsāda is considered an excellent example
of Mālapāhata. The Niyuktikāra has given the example of a Bhiksu in the case of
a heinous Mālapāhata and a Kapālika in the case of an excellent Mālapāhata.
There are also three types of Mālapāhata flaws, according to different
interpretations: 1. Ūrdhva, 2. Adhaḥ, 3. Tiर्यक्. Offering alms by descending
from above, such as by sneezing, is Ūrdhva Mālapāhata. Offering alms by bringing
it from below, such as from a basement, is Adhaḥ Mālapāhata. Offering alms from
a very high place, such as a large pot, is Tiर्यक् Mālapāhata. According to the
Bhāṣyakāra, offering food kept in an Ardha-māle is Tiर्यक् Mālapāhata.  The
Piṇḍaviśuddhiprakaraṇa mentions four types of Mālapāhata flaws. In addition to
the three mentioned above, the fourth is Ubhaya Mālapāhata. Explaining Ubhaya,
its commentator Yaśodevasūri says that offering food to a sādhū by raising one's
heel and extending one's arm while standing on a large pot, a camel's back, or a
high platform is Ubhaya Mālapāhata. In this case, the body is moving in both
upward and downward directions, hence the name Ubhaya Mālapāhata.  If the
householder is already standing on a platform, a step, or a staircase before the
sādhū arrives, then he can offer the pātra-dāna by extending his hand, as this
is not considered Anuccotkṣipta.  Yaśodevasūri has raised an argument regarding
the Mālapāhata flaw: If offering alms by descending from above is a Mālapāhata
flaw, then how is offering alms by bringing it from below a Mālapāhata flaw? In
response, he says that food brought from the basement is also considered
Mālapāhata due to the nature of the action. This has become a convention in the
Āgama, therefore using the term Mālapāhata for bringing food from below is not
incorrect.  While explaining the Mālapāhata flaw, the Niyuktikāra says that
offering alms by climbing up to a Niḥśreṇī, a platform, etc., can cause the
donor to lose balance and fall, resulting in injuries to his hands and feet. If
there are sharp objects like Brihidalanaka instruments lying around, it could
even lead to death. If the donor is a pregnant woman, there is a possibility of
harming two living beings. Falling down could also result in the killing of
earth-dwelling beings and other living beings under her body. Due to animosity
towards the muni, there could be obstacles in obtaining wealth, the
effectiveness of the sermon could be diminished, and people might develop the
misconception that these munis are unaware of future calamities.  1. Piṇi 165,
Mavṛ P. 108. 2. For a detailed explanation, see Pari. 3, Kathā Saṅ. 22, 23. 3.
Piṇi 169, Jībhā 1270, Niśītha Bhāṣya (5949) mentions Ubhayat: instead of
Tiर्यक्. 4. Jībhā 1270. 5. Piṇpraṭī P. 45. 6. Piṇi 170. 7. Piṇpraṭī P. 45, 46.
8. Piṇi 167, 168, Daśa 5/1/67-69.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 83 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa doSa hai| niHzreNI Adi para car3hakara
prAsAda ke UparI hisse se utArakara bhikSA denA utkRSTa mAlApahRta doSa hai|
niyuktikAra ne jaghanya mAlApahRta meM bhikSu kA tathA utkRSTa mAlApahata meM
kApAlika kA dRSTAnta diyA prakArAntara se mAlApahata doSa ke tIna bheda bhI
milate haiM-Urdhva 2. adha: 3. tiryak  /  Upara chIMke Adi se utArakara denA
Urdhva mAlApahRta hai| nIce bhUmigRha se lAkara denA adha: mAlApahata tathA
bahuta UMce kuMbha Adi se bhikSA denA tiryak mAlApahata hai| bhASyakAra ke
anusAra ardhamAle meM rakhA huA AhAra denA tiryaka mAlApahRta hai|
piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa meM mAlApahata doSa ke cAra bheda kie haiN| uparyukta
tIna ke atirikta cauthA ubhaya mAlApahRta kA ullekha huA hai| ubhaya kI vyAkhyA
karate hue usake TIkAkAra yazodevasUri kahate haiM ki kumbhI, uSTrikA tathA
bar3e koThe meM se er3I ko UMcA karake tathA bAhu ko nIce phailAkara sAdhu ko
AhAra denA ubhaya mAlApahRta doSa hai| isameM zarIra kA vyApAra Upara aura nIce
donoM dizAoM meM huA hai ataH isakA nAma ubhaya mAlApahata hai| yadi dardara,
silA, sopAna Adi para sAdhu ke Agamana se pUrva hI gRhasvAmI car3hA huA ho to
hAtha lambA karake vaha sAdhu ko pAtra-dAna de sakatA hai kyoMki yaha
anuccotkSipta hai| yazodevasUri ne mAlApahRta doSa ke prasaMga meM eka tarka
upasthita kiyA hai ki Upara se utArakara denA to mAlApahRta doSa hai lekina nIce
bhUmigRha se lAkara denA mAlApahRta kaise huA? isakA uttara dete hue ve kahate
haiM ki pravRtti nimitta se bhUgRha se lAe hue AhAra ko bhI mAlApahRta kahA gayA
hai| Agama meM yaha rUr3ha ho gayA hai ataH nIce se lAne ke lie mAlApahRta zabda
kA prayoga galata nahIM hai|' mAlApahRta ke doSa batAte hue niyuktikAra kahate
haiM ki niHzreNI, phalaka Adi se car3hakara bhaktapAna dene se dAtA ke paira kA
saMtulana bigar3ane se vaha nIce gira sakatA hai, jisase usake hAtha-paira meM
coTa laga sakatI hai| yadi vahAM brIhidalanaka yaMtra Adi par3e hoM to usakI
mRtyu ho sakatI hai| yadi garbhiNI strI ho to do trasa jIvoM kI hiMsA kI
saMbhAvanA bhI rahatI hai tathA nIce girane se usake zarIra ke nIce Ae
pRthvIjIva tathA usake Azrita anya jIvoM kI hiMsA ho sakatI hai| muni ke prati
pradveSa bhAva hone se dravyaprApti kA vyavadhAna ho sakatA hai, pravacana kI
aprabhAvanA hotI hai tathA logoM meM yaha bhrAMti phailatI hai ki ye muni
bhaviSya meM hone vAle anarthoM ko nahIM jaante| 1. pini 165, mavR pa. 108 /  2.
kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 22, 23  /  3. pini 169, jIbhA
1270, nizItha bhASya (5949) meM tiryak ke sthAna para ubhayata: bheda kA ullekha
milatA hai| 4. jIbhA 1270 /  5. piMpraTI pa. 45 /  6.pini 170 /  7. piMpraTI pa.
45, 46 /  8. pini 167, 168, daza 5/1/67-69 /

Page #98 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 84 ## 14. Acchhedya Dosha  Taking something from its owner against their will
and giving it to a sadhu is Acchhedya Dosha. The Mulachar explains it slightly
differently. According to it, giving food to a sadhu out of fear of the king,
thieves, etc., after witnessing the muni's begging efforts is Acchhedya Dosha.
Its commentator clarifies that it is Acchhedya Dosha when the king and thieves
instill fear in the householder's mind, saying that if they don't give food to
the muni, the king will take away their wealth or banish them from the kingdom,
and thus force them to donate. Acchhedya Dosha is of three types:  *
**Prabhuvishayak:** When a householder forcibly takes something from their son,
daughter, servant, cowherd, etc., and gives it to a sadhu, it is Prabhuvishayak
Acchhedya Dosha. * **Swamivishaya:** When a village head forcibly takes
something from a householder, etc., and gives it to a sadhu, it is Swamivishaya
Acchhedya Dosha. * **Stenavishaya:** When a thief takes something from a
merchant and gives it to a sadhu, it is Stenavishaya Acchhedya Dosha.  All three
types of Acchhedya food are unacceptable for a sadhu.  Taking Acchhedya food can
lead to displeasure and conflict, as illustrated in the story of the cowherd
mentioned by the Niruktikar, where the cowherd developed animosity towards the
muni. The muni becomes the cause of the binding of antaray karma for the person
from whom the food, etc., is taken, and the muni also incurs the Adattadan
Dosha. Due to animosity, the bhaktapan for one or many sadhus may be severed.
Additionally, expulsion from the upashraya and other hardships may also be
experienced.  The author mentions an exception, stating that if the poor person
or the owner allows the bhaktapan to be given, then the muni can take that
Acchhedya food.  **Pind**  The context of Stenavishaya Acchhedya often arises in
the presence of munis traveling with merchants. Generally, a sadhu should not
accept Stenacchhedya, but if the thieves forcibly give it, and the merchant says
that this is a fortunate opportunity for them to donate to the muni, then the
muni:  1. (a) Mavr P. 35; Acchhidyate - Whatever is taken unwillingly from a
servant, son, etc., for the purpose of giving it to a sadhu, is Acchhedya. (b)
Pimpr 50; Acchidiya annesim, balavi jam denthi Samiphahu tena tam acchhejjam.
2. Mula 443, T P. 346.  3. Pini 174.  4. Pini 177.  5. Pini 173/2, 3.  6. Pini
176, 177.  7. Pini 177.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 84 14. Acchedya doSa kisI vastu ko usake svAmI kI binA icchA ke balAt chInakara
sAdhu ko denA Acchedya doSa hai|' mUlAcAra meM isakI vyAkhyA kucha bhinna milatI
hai| usake anusAra muni ke bhikSA zrama ko dekhakara rAjA aura cora Adi ke bhaya
se sAdhu ko AhAra denA Acchedya doSa hai| isake TIkAkAra ne ise spaSTa karate
hue kahA hai ki rAjA aura cora dvArA kauTumbika ke mana yaha bhaya utpanna kiyA
jAe ki yadi muni ko AhAra nahIM doge to rAjA dravya kA apaharaNa kara leMge yA
rAjya se bAhara nikAla deMge, isa prakAra bhaya utpanna karake dAna dilavAnA
Acchedya doSa hai  /  Acchedya doSa tIna prakAra kA hotA hai * prabhuviSayaka -
gRhasvAmI apane putra, putrI, naukara, gvAlA Adi kI vastu ko balAt chInakara
sAdhu ko detA hai, vaha prabhuviSayaka Acchedya doSa hai  /  * svAmiviSayaka ---
grAmanAyaka kisI kauTumbika Adi kI vastu balAt chInakara sAdhu ko detA hai, vaha
svAmiviSayaka Acchedya doSa hai  /  3 * stenaviSayaka - cora kisI sArtha ke
vyakti kI vastu ko chInakara yadi sAdhu ko detA hai to vaha stenaviSayaka
Acchedya doSa hai| ye tInoM prakAra ke Acchedya AhAra sAdhu ke lie akalpya haiN|
Acchedya AhAra grahaNa karane se aprIti aura kalaha kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai,
jaisA ki niryuktikAra dvArA nirdiSTa gopAlaka kI kathA meM gopAlaka ko muni ke
prati pradveSa paidA ho gyaa| jisase chInakara Aha Adi diyA jAtA hai, usake
aMtarAya karma baMdhane meM bhI muni nimittabhUta banate haiM tathA muni ko
adattAdAna doSa bhI lagatA hai  /  pradveSa ke kAraNa eka yA aneka sAdhuoM ke
lie bhaktapAna kA viccheda hotA hai| isake atirikta upAzraya se niSkAzana tathA
anya aneka kaSTa bhI prApta ho sakate haiN| isakA apavAda batAte hue graMthakAra
kahate haiM ki yadi ve daridra puruSa yA svAmI bhaktapAna dene kI anumati deM to
muni vaha Acchedya AhAra le sakatA hai| piMDa stena viSayaka Acchedya kA
prasaMga prAyaH sArtha ke sAtha jAne vAle muniyoM ke samakSa upasthita hotA hai
/  sAmAnyataH sAdhu ko stenAcchedya nahIM grahaNa karanA cAhie lekina coroM ke
dvArA balAt dene para sArthaka yadi yaha kahate haiM ki hamAre lie muni ko dAna
dene kA yaha saubhAgya kA avasara upasthita huA hai to muni 1. (ka) mavR pa. 35
; Acchidyate - anicchato'pi bhRtakaputrAdeH sakAzAt sAdhudAnAya parigRhyate yat
tdaacchedym| (kha) piMpra 50; acchidiya annesiM, balAvi jaM deMti sAmipahuteNA
taM acchejjaM  /  2. mUlA 443, TI pR. 346  /  3. pini 174 | 4. pini 177  /  5.
pini 173 / 2, 3  /  6. pini 176, 177  /  7. pini 177  /

Page #99 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti: A Consideration  A monk may accept food under the following
circumstances: if, after thieves have left, the monk returns the food to the
owner, saying, "We accepted this food out of fear of the thieves. Now, please
accept this back." If the owner happily agrees, the monk may then accept the
food.   This is an example of **Anisrusht Dosha** (a transgression).
**Anisrusht Dosha** is when something is given by a master (owner) and is
considered **Nisrushta** (released). If there are multiple owners, or if food is
accepted without the permission of the owner, it is considered **Anisrusht
Dosha**. Food obtained through **Anisrusht Dosha** is prohibited by the
Tirthankaras.   The **Dashavaikalik Sutra** clearly states that if two owners
are entitled to enjoy a particular food, and one of them invites the monk, the
monk should not accept the offered food.   The **Churnikar** explains this by
saying that even if one owner gives permission, the monk should try to
understand the intentions of the other owner through their expressions,
gestures, and facial expressions. If the other owner seems agreeable, the monk
may accept the food even without their explicit permission.   Generally, there
are two types of **Anisrusht Dosha**:  1. **Sadharan Anisrusht** (General
Anisrusht) 2. **Cholluk Anisrusht** (Food-related Anisrusht)  The
**Jitkalpabhashya** and **Pindavishuddhiprakaran** further divide **Anisrusht
Dosha** into three types:  1. **Sadharan Anisrusht** (General Anisrusht) 2.
**Cholluk Anisrusht** (Food-related Anisrusht) 3. **Jadd-Hasti Anisrusht**
(Jadd-Hasti Anisrusht)  **Pindaniyukti** includes **Jadd-Hasti Anisrusht** under
**Cholluk Anisrusht**.  **Sadharan Anisrusht**  **Sadharan Anisrusht** includes
things like sweets, milk, oil presses, weddings, shops, and houses. There may be
multiple owners of the items found in these places, so a monk should not accept
them without the permission of the owner. The author explains **Sadharan
Anisrusht** related to sweets through the story of Mani Bhadra and 32 other
young men.  If a householder monk accepts **Sadharan Anisrusht**, the
householder may punish him by making him a householder again and expelling him
from the country.   **References:**  1. Mavr P. 113 2. Bribha 3657, T. P. 1016;
Dinnam tu Janasu Nisatum 3. Sthati P. 311; Anisrushtan Sadharan Bahunamekaadina
Ananujnatam Diyamanam 4. Pini 178 5. Das 5/1/37 6. Dasachoo P. 110, Dasajichoo
P. 179; Nettadihi Vigarehi Abhanantass Vi Najjai Jaha Eyass Dijjamanam Chiyattam
Na Va Iti, Achiyattam To No Padigehnejja 7. Jibha 1275, Pimpr 51 8. Pini 181/1
9. Jibha 1276 10. Pini 179-179/2, For details of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha
San. 25 11. Pini 180

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa usa AhAra ko grahaNa kara sakatA hai, phira
coroM ke cale jAne para muni vaha AhAra sArthika ko punaH dete hue kahe ki usa
samaya coroM ke bhaya se hamane yaha AhAra grahaNa kara liyA, aba tuma yaha
dravya vApisa grahaNa kara lo, aisA kahane para sArthika yadi prasannatApUrvaka
anujJA de to muni vaha AhAra grahaNa kara sakatA hai| 15. anisRSTa doSa svAmI ke
dvArA datta nisRSTa kahalAtA hai| aneka svAmI hone para yA jo vastu jisakI hai,
usakI anumati ke binA AhAra Adi grahaNa karanA anisRSTa doSa hai| anisRSTa doSa
yukta AhAra tIrthaMkaroM dvArA pratiSiddha hai|' dazavaikAlika sUtra meM spaSTa
ullekha milatA hai ki jisa AhAra kA do svAmI bhoga karane vAle hoM, usameM se
yadi eka nimaMtrita kare to muni vaha diyA jAne vAlA AhAra grahaNa na kre| isakI
vyAkhyA karate hue cUrNikAra kahate haiM ki eka dAtA kI anujJA hone para bhI
dUsare svAmI ke AkAra, iMgita, ceSTA tathA mukha aura nayana ke saMketoM se
jAnane kA prayatna kare, yadi use iSTa ho to spaSTa anumati ke binA bhI eka
svAmI dvArA datta AhAra liyA jA sakatA hai| sAdhAraNataH anisRSTa ke do bheda
haiM-1. sAdhAraNa anisRSTa 2. collaka anisRSTa (bhojnvissyk)| jItakalpabhASya
evaM piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa meM isake tIna bheda kie haiM-1. sAdhAraNa anisRSTa
2. collaka anisRSTa 3. jaDDa-hastI anisRsstt| piNDaniyukti meM collaka anisRSTa
ke antargata jaDDu-hastI anisRSTa kA samAveza kara diyA gayA hai| sAdhAraNa
anisRSTa sAdhAraNa anisRSTa meM modaka, kSIra, kolhU, vivAha, dukAna tathA gRha
Adi kA samAveza hotA hai| modaka, kSIra tathA kolhU Adi sthAnoM para hone vAle
padArtha ke aneka svAmI ho sakate haiM ataH sAdhu svAmI kI anujJA ke binA unheM
na le| graMthakAra ne modaka viSayaka sAdhAraNa anisRSTa ko mANibhadra Adi 32
yuvakoM kI kathA ke mAdhyama se spaSTa kiyA hai| _ sAdhAraNa anisRSTa lene para
gRhastha sAdhu ko 'pacchAkaDa'-punaH gRhastha banAkara deza se niSkAzana bhI
kara sakatA hai| 1. mavR pa. 113 /  2. bRbhA 3657, TI. pR. 1016 ; diNNaM tu
jANasu nisttuN| 3. sthATI pR. 311; anisRSTaM sAdhAraNaM bahanAmekAdinA
ananujJAtaM diiymaanm| 4. pini 178 /  5. daza 5/1/37 /  6. dazaacU pR. 110,
dazajicU pR. 179 ; NettAdIhiM vigArehiM abhaNaMtassa vi najjai jahA eyassa
dijjamANaM ciyattaM na vA iti, aciyattaM to No pddigennhejjaa| 7. jIbhA 1275,
piNpr51| 8. pini 181/1 /  9. jIbhA 1276 /  10. pini 179-179/2, kathA ke vistAra
hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 25 /  11. pini 180 //

Page #100 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 86. Anisr̥ṣṭa (Unpermitted) Food  Anisr̥ṣṭa related to food is of two types:
1. Swami-viṣayak (related to the owner), 2. Hasti-viṣayak (related to the
elephant).  **Swami-viṣayak:** Swami-viṣayak Chollka is of two types: Chhinna
and Acchinna. When a householder prepares food for the laborers working in his
field and sends it separately, it is called Chhinna. When he sends food for all
the laborers together in the same vessel, it is called Acchinna. If the
householder sends the collective food meant for the laborers also for donation
to a monk, it is called Nisr̥ṣṭa-Anuññāta. Without the householder's permission,
it is called Anisr̥ṣṭa. In Chhinna Chollka, the permission of the original owner
is not required. If each laborer wishes to give his individual food, it is
acceptable for the monk. In Acchinna, if all the owners give permission, then it
is acceptable for the monk to accept the food.  **Hasti-viṣayak:** Even if the
food of the elephant is permitted by the Mahāvat (elephant keeper), it is not
acceptable. If the Mahāvat's own food is unseen by the elephant, then it is
acceptable for the monk. Taking unpermitted Rajapiṇḍa (food offered to the king)
and Gajapiṇḍa (food offered to the elephant) leads to Antarāya (obstruction) and
Adattādāna (unaccepted donation) etc. faults. Taking Rajapiṇḍa without the
king's permission can lead to the king dismissing the Mahāvat etc. from their
jobs, causing the monk to incur the fault of Antarāya due to the disruption of
their livelihood.  Explaining the reason for not taking Gajabhukta (food offered
to the elephant), the commentator says that seeing the Mahāvat giving donations
daily, the elephant may become angry and think that this monk takes my food
every day. Seeing the monk in the shelter, he may break the shelter and in
anger, even kill the monk. Therefore, food given by the Mahāvat in the presence
of the elephant should not be accepted.  It is a matter of investigation why
only the elephant is mentioned and not the cow, buffalo, horse, dog etc. in the
Tiryañc (animals). The following possible reasons can be considered:  - The food
given to the elephant may contain more human-edible substances. - Around the
time of the composition of Piṇḍaniryukti, there may have been an incident where
an elephant injured a monk who continuously accepted alms. - Compared to other
creatures, the elephant's understanding is more mature.  The commentator of
Mūlācāra has interpreted the Sanskrit shadow of 'Aṇisatt' as Anīśārtha. In
Angārādharmāmṛta, this...  1. Piṇi 181/1. 2. Jībhā 1277; Parichhiṇṇam ciya
dijati, eso chhinno muṇetavvo. 3. Mavṛ p. 114; Yada tu sarveṣām api hālikānām
yogya Piṇḍa niyukti  Mekasyāmeva sthālyām kṛtvā preṣayati tadā so'cchhinnaḥ. 4.
Piṇi 185, Jībhā 1281. 5. Mavṛ p. 115, Jībhā 1282.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 86 collaka anisRSTa bhojana se sambandhita anisRSTa do prakAra kA hai - 1.
svAmI viSayaka, 2. hastI viSayaka  /  svAmI viSayaka - svAmI viSayaka collaka do
prakAra kA hotA hai - chinna aura acchinna  /  koI kauTumbika apane kheta meM
kAma karane vAle hAlikoM ke lie bhojana banavAkara alaga-alaga bhejatA hai vaha
chinna kahalAtA hai  /  jaba vaha sabhI hAlikoM ke lie eka sAtha eka hI bartana
meM bhojana bhejatA hai to vaha acchinna kahalAtA hai  /  yadi kauTumbika
hAlikoM ke lie bheje sAmUhika bhojana ko sAdhu ke dAna hetu bhI bhejatA hai to
vaha nisRSTa- anujJAta kahalAtA hai, kauTumbika kI anumati ke binA vaha anisRSTa
kahalAtA hai  /  chinna cullaka meM mUla svAmI kI anujJA apekSita nahIM hai|
pratyeka hAlika yadi apanA vyaktigata AhAra denA cAhe to vaha sAdhu ke lie
kalpya hai| acchinna meM yadi sabhI svAmI anujJA deM to vaha AhAra sAdhu ko
grahaNa karanA kalpanIya hai| hastI viSayaka - hAthI kA bhojana mahAvata ke
dvArA anujJAta hone para bhI akalpya hai| yadi svayaM mahAvata kA bhojana gaja
ke dvArA adRSTa hai to vaha sAdhu ke lie grahaNa yogya hai  /  ananujJAta
rAjapiNDa aura gajapiNDa ko lene se aMtarAya aura adattAdAna Adi doSa lagate
haiN| rAjA kI anujJA ke binA rAjapiNDa lene se rAjA mahAvata Adi ko naukarI se
mukta kara sakatA hai, usakI AjIvikA viccheda se sAdhu ko aMtarAya kA doSa
lagatA hai| gajabhakta ko na lene kA kAraNa spaSTa karate hue vyAkhyAkAra kahate
haiM ki mahAvata ko pratidina dAna dete dekhakara hAthI ruSTa hokara yaha soca
sakatA hai ki yaha sAdhu pratidina mere AhAra ko grahaNa karatA hai  /  vaha
upAzraya meM usa sAdhu ko dekhakara upAzraya ko tor3a sakatA hai tathA roSa meM
Akara sAdhu kA prANaghAta bhI kara sakatA hai ataH gaja ke samakSa mahAvata ke
dvArA diyA jAne vAlA AhAra grahaNa nahIM karanA cAhie  / " yaha khoja kA viSaya
hai kiM tiryaJca meM gAya, bhaiMsa, ghor3A, kuttA Adi kA ullekha na karake
kevala hAthI kA hI ullekha kyoM huA ? isake saMbhAvita nimna kAraNa ho sakate
haiM - * hAthI ko jo AhAra diyA jAtA hai, usameM manuSya dvArA bhogya padArtha
adhika die jAte hoMge  /  piNDaniryukti kI racanA ke AsapAsa koI aisI ghaTanA
ghaTa gaI hogI, jaba nirantara bhikSA grahaNa karane vAle kisI sAdhu ko hAthI ne
coTa pahuMcAI ho  /  * anya prANiyoM kI tulanA meM hAthI kI samajha adhika
paripakva hotI hai  /  mUlAcAra ke TIkAkAra ne 'aNisaTTha' kI saMskRta chAyA
anIzArtha kI hai  /  anagAradharmAmRta meM yaha * 1. pini 181 / 1  /  2. jIbhA
1277 ; parichiNNaM ciya dijjati, eso chiNNo muNetavvo  /  3. mavR pa. 114; yadA
tu sarveSAmapi hAlikAnAM yogya piMDa niyukti mekasyAmeva sthAlyAM kRtvA
preSayati tadA so'cchinnaH  /  4. pini 185, jIbhA 1281  /  5. mavR pa. 115,
jIbhA 1282  /

Page #101 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindianuyukti: An Observation  87  The term "Nishiddha Dosha" refers to a
prohibited fault. The Digambar texts like Charitrasar, Mulachar, etc., explain
this fault with some differences. There are two types of Anissatta - Ishwar and
Anishwar. Both of these have four sub-types: 1. Saraksha 2. Vyakt 3. Avyakt 4.
Sanghat. 16. Adhyavpurka Dosha  For a householder, cooking food with an
increased quantity for a Sadhu, when remembered later, is considered Adhyavpurka
Dosha. It is also called Adhyavtar. In the Digambar tradition, instead of
Adhyavpurka, a fault called Adhyadhi is found, which is also called Sadhik. Its
alternative meaning is found in Mulachar as follows: "Ahva Pagam Tu Jav Roho Wa"
- meaning, to stop a Muni until the food is completely prepared is also Adhyadhi
Dosha.  The difference between Mishrajat and Adhyavpurka is that in Mishrajat,
the quantity of rice, water, fruits, vegetables, etc., is increased from the
beginning for the Sadhu, while in Adhyavtar or Adhyavpurka, the quantity is
increased in the middle.  Adhyavpurka Dosha is of three types: 1.
Swagrihayaavadarthik Mishra 2. Swagrihasadhumishra 3. Swagrihapashandimishra.
The explanation of all three is clear from their names. Among these,
Swagrihayaavadarthik Mishra falls under Vishudhikote. This means that if
Yaavadarthik Mishra Adhyavpurka food is mixed with pure food, then removing that
quantity or giving it to the Bhikshacharya purifies the food. The remaining food
can be considered fit for the Muni. But if Swagrihapashandimishra and
Swagrihasadhumishra Adhyavpurka cooked food falls into pure food, then it
becomes contaminated with Puti Dosha. Even after separating that quantity or
giving it to the Pashandis, the remaining food is not considered fit for the
Sadhu.  In the two verses of Mulachar where the 16 faults of Udgam are
mentioned, the first name is Adhakarma. But adding Adhakarma makes 17 faults of
Udgam, therefore, in the Digambar tradition, Adhakarma is not included with the
16 faults. The commentators of Mulachar explain this by saying that Adhakarma
(Adhakarma) is a Mahadosha. It is associated with Pancha Suna (violence place)
and the killing of six living beings.  1. Andh 5/15, T p. 386. 2. (a) Chasa
69/2. (b) For a detailed explanation of all these types, see Mulaati p. 347,
348. 3. (a) Mula 427, T p. 336. (b) Andh 5/8 Syaddosho'dhyadhirodo, Yat Swapake
Yatidattaye. Prakshepastandu laadinaam Rodho Va'apchanaadyateh || 4. Mula 427, T
p. 336. 5. Pini 187, Mavri p. 116. 6. Pini 188, Mavri p. 116.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 87 niSiddha doSa ke nAma se ullikhita hai|
cAritrasAra, mUlAcAra Adi digambara graMthoM meM isa doSa kI vyAkhyA kucha
aMtara ke sAtha milatI hai| aNisaTTha ke do bheda haiM-Izvara aura anIzvara  /
ina donoM ke bhI cAra-cAra bheda haiM-1. sArakSa 2. vyakta 3. avyakta 4.
sNghaat| 16. adhyavapUraka doSa gRhastha ke lie pakAe jAne vAle bhojana meM yAda
Ane para sAdhu ke lie adhika DAlakara bhojana pakAnA adhyavapUraka doSa hai, ise
adhyavatara bhI kahA jAtA hai| digambara paramparA meM adhyavapUraka ke sthAna
para adhyadhi nAmaka doSa milatA hai, isakA dUsarA nAma sAdhika bhI hai| isakA
vaikalpika artha mUlAcAra meM isa prakAra milatA hai-'ahavA pAgaM tu jAva roho
vA' arthAt jaba taka AhAra pUrA taiyAra na ho, taba taka muni ko rokanA bhI
adhyadhi doSa hai|" mizrajAta aura adhyavapUraka meM yahI aMtara hai ki
mizrajAta meM sAdhu ke nimitta cAvala, jala, phala, zAka Adi kA parimANa
prArambha se hI adhika kara diyA jAtA hai, jabaki adhyavatara yA adhyavapUraka
meM inakA parimANa madhya meM bar3hAyA jAtA hai| adhyavapUraka doSa tIna prakAra
kA hotA hai-1. svagRhayAvadarthika mizra 2. svagRhasAdhumizra 3.
svgRhpaassNddimishr| ina tInoM kI vyAkhyA apane-apane nAma se spaSTa hai| inameM
svagRhayAvadarthikamizra vizodhikoTi ke antargata AtA hai| isakA tAtparya yaha
hai ki zuddha AhAra meM yadi yAvadarthika mizra adhyavapUraka AhAra mila jAe to
usako utanI mAtrA meM nikAla dene se yA bhikSAcaroM ko dene se AhAra kI vizuddhi
ho jAtI hai, zeSa AhAra muni ke lie kalpya ho sakatA hai lekina
svagRhapASaMDimizra aura svagRhasAdhumizra adhyavapUraka pakAyA huA AhAra yadi
zuddha AhAra meM gira jAe to vaha pUti doSa yukta ho jAtA hai| utanA AhAra
pRthak karane yA pASaMDiyoM ko dene para bhI zeSa AhAra sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya
nahIM hotaa| mUlAcAra meM jina do gAthAoM meM udgama ke 16 doSoM kA ullekha hai,
vahAM prathama nAma AdhAkarma kA hai lekina AdhAkarma ko jor3ane se udgama ke 17
doSa ho jAte haiM ataH digambara paramparA meM AdhAkarma ko 16 doSoM ke sAtha
nahIM jor3A gayA hai| mUlAcAra ke TIkAkAra isakA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue kahate
haiM ki adha:karma (AdhAkarma) mahAdoSa vAlA hai| paMca sUnA (hiMsA sthAna)
tathA chaha jIvanikAyoM ke vadha se yukta 1. anadha 5/15, TI pR. 386  /  2. (ka)
cAsA 69/2 /  (kha) ina saba bhedoM kI vistRta vyAkhyA hetu dra mUlATI pR. 347,
348  /  3. (ka) mUlA 427, TI pR. 336  /  (kha) anadha 5/8 syAddoSo'dhyadhirodho,
yat svapAke ytidttye| prakSepastaNDulAdInAM rodho vaa''pcnaadyteH|| 4. mUlA 427,
TI pR. 336 /  5. pini 187, mavR pa. 116 /  6. pini 188, mavR pa. 116  /

Page #102 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 88  **Pindaniyukti** is considered inferior due to its nature, hence it is
kept separately. In **Anugardharmamrut**, **Adhakarma** is not included with the
**Udgam Doshas**.  There are differences in the names and order of
**Bhikshacharya Doshas** in the **Digambar tradition**. Here is a chart of
**Bhikshacharya Doshas** based on **Shwetambar** and **Digambar** texts:  |
**Pindaniyukti (Ga. 58,59)** | **Mulachar (Ga. 422,423)** | **Anugardharmamrut
(An. 5/5,6)** | **Panchashak/Panchavastu (Panchashak 13/5,6, Panv 741, 742)** |
|---|---|---|---| | 1. Adhakarma | 1. Auddeshik | 1. Uddishta | 1. Adhakarma | |
2. Auddeshik | 2. Adhyadhi | 2. Sadhik | 2. Auddeshik | | 3. Putikarma | 3. Puti
| 3. Puti | 3. Putikarma | | 4. Mishrajat | 4. Mishra | 4. Mishra | 4. Mishrajat
| | 5. Sthapana | 5. Sthapit | 5. Prabhritak | 5. Sthapana | | 6. Prabhritka |
6. Bali | 6. Bali | 6. Prabhritka | | 7. Praduskarana | 7. Pravartita | 7.
Nyasta | 7. Praduskarana | | 8. Krit | 8. Pradukskar | 8. Praduskrut | 8. Krit |
| 9. Pramitya | 9. Krit | 9. Krit | 9. Pramitya | | 10. Parivartita | 10.
Pramrushya | 10. Pramitya | 10. Parivartita | | 11. Abhihit | 11. Parivartaka |
11. Parivartita | 11. Abhihit | | 12. Udbhinna | 12. Abhighat | 12. Nishiddha |
12. Udbhinna | | 13. Malapharit | 13. Udbhinna | 13. Abhihit | 13. Malapharit |
| 14. Acchhedya | 14. Malaroh | 14. Udbhinna | 14. Acchhedya | | 15. Anisrusht |
15. Acchhedya | 15. Acchhedya | 15. Anisrusht | | 16. Adhyavpurka | 16.
Anisrusht | 16. Aroha | 16. Adhyavpurka |  Based on this chart, some conclusions
can be drawn:  * In **Mulachar** and **Anugardharmamrut**, **Adhyadhi** or
**Sadhik** dosha is present instead of **Adhyavpurka**. * In **Mulachar**,
**Sthapit** dosha is present instead of **Sthapana** dosha, and in
**Anugardharmamrut**, **Nyasta** dosha is present instead of **Sthapana** dosha.
**References:**  1. **Mulaati p. 331**:  "Grihasthashritam panchasunasametam
tavat - Uddishtam sadhikam puti, mishram prabhritakam balis.  Nyastam praduskrut
kritam, pramitya parivartitam.  Nishiddhabhihitodbhinnacchedyaarohastathodgmaah.
Dosha hinsanadaranyasparshadainyadayoagatah." 2. **An. 5/5,6**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 88 piMDaniyukti hone ke kAraNa nikRSTa hai ata: isako alaga se rakhA gayA hai|
anagAradharmAmRta meM bhI AdhAkRta ko udgama doSoM ke sAtha nahIM jor3A gayA
hai| digambara paramparA meM bhikSAcaryA ke doSoM ke nAma evaM krama meM aMtara
milatA hai| yahAM zvetAmbara tathA digambara graMthoM ke AdhAra para bhikSAcaryA
ke doSoM kA cArTa prastuta kiyA jA rahA hai piNDaniyukti (gA. 58,59) mUlAcAra
(gA. 422,423) anagAradharmAmRta (anadha 5/5,6) 1. AdhAkarma 2. auddezika 3.
pUtikarma 4. mizrajAta 5. sthApanA 6. prAbhRtikA 7. prAduSkaraNa 8. krIta 9.
prAmitya 10. parivartita 11. abhihata 12. udbhinna 13. mAlApahRta 14. Acchedya
15. anisRSTa 16. adhyavapUraka 1. auddezika 2. adhyadhi 3. pUti 4. mizra 5.
sthApita 6. bali 7. prAvartita 8. prAduSkAra 9. krIta 10. prAmRSya 11.
parivartaka 12. abhighaTa 13. udbhinna 14. mAlAroha 15. acchedya 16. anisRSTa 1.
uddiSTa 2. sAdhika 3. pUti 4. mizra 5. prAbhRtaka 6. bali 7. nyasta 8.
prAduSkRta 9. krIta 10. prAmitya 11. parivartita 12. niSiddha 13. abhihRta 14.
udbhinna 15. Acchedya 16. aaroh| paMcAzaka/paMcavastu (paMcAzaka 13/5,6, paMva
741, 742) 1. AdhAkarma 2. auddezika 3. pUtikarma 4. mizrajAta 5. sthApanA 6.
prAbhRtikA 7. prAduSkara 8. krIta 9. prAmitya 10. parivartita 11. abhihRta 12.
udbhinna 13. mAlApahata 14. Acchedya 15. anisRSTa 16. adhyavapUraka isa cArTa ke
AdhAra para kucha niSkarSa isa rUpa meM prastuta kie jA sakate haiM* mUlAcAra
aura anagAradharmAmRta meM adhyavapUraka ke sthAna para adhyadhi yA sAdhika doSa
hai| * sthApanA doSa ke sthAna para mUlAcAra meM sthApita doSa tathA
anagAradharmAmRta meM nyasta doSa hai| 1. mUlATI pR. 331 ; gRhasthAzritaM
paMcasUnAsametaM tAvat- 3. uddiSTaM sAdhikaM pUti, mizraM prAbhRtakaM bliH|
sAmAnyabhUtamaSTavidhapiNDazuddhiM bAhyaM mahAdoSarUpamadhaH- nyastaM
prAduSkRtaM krItaM, prAmityaM privrtitm|| karma kthyte|
niSiddhAbhihatodbhinnAcchedyArohAstathodgamAH  /  2. anadha 5/5,6 /  doSA
hiMsAnAdarAnyasparzadainyAdiyogataH  //  anadha-5/5,6

Page #103 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  • In place of the *abhihat* fault mentioned in
*Mūlācāra*, the fault is *abhigat*.  • In place of the *mālāpahat* fault,
*Mūlācāra* mentions *mālāroh* and *Anāgāradharmāmṛta* mentions *āroh* fault.  •
In place of the *prābhṛtika* fault, *Mūlācāra* mentions *prāvartita* and
*Anāgāradharmāmṛta* mentions *prābhṛtak* fault.  • In place of the *prāmitya*
fault in *Mūlācāra*, *prāmṛṣya* is mentioned, and in place of *āccheḍya*,
*accheḍya* fault is mentioned.  • In place of the *anisṛṣṭa* fault,
*Anāgāradharmāmṛta* mentions the *niṣiddha* fault.  • The *bali* fault mentioned
in *Mūlācāra* and *Anāgāradharmāmṛta* is an additional fault. It cannot be
compared to any other fault. Giving the remaining portion of the offering made
for Yakṣas, Nāgas, Kuladevatās, Pitṛs, etc., to the Muni is the *bali* fault.
The *udgama* faults found in Āgama literature are rare to find elsewhere. The
Tīrthaṅkaras and Jain Ācāryas have described the non-violent nature of the
mendicant's begging in such detail. The 42 faults of *bhikṣācaryā* are not found
together in Āgama literature. There, the names of almost all the faults, except
for *mūlakarma*, are found scattered. Some additional faults are also mentioned
there. Here, a collection of *udgama* faults found scattered in Āgama literature
is presented.  • *Ācāra-cūlā*: *ādhākarma*, *auddesika*, *miśrajāt*,
*krītakṛta*, *prāmitya*, *āccheḍya*, *anisṛṣṭa* and *abhihat* faults.  •
*Sūtrakṛtāṅga*: *auddesika*, *ādhākarma*, *krīta*, *prāmitya*, *āccheḍya*,
*anisṛṣṭa*, *abhihat* and *pūti* faults.  • *Stānāṅga*: *ādhākarmic*,
*auddesika*, *miśrajāt*, *adhyavatar*, *pūtik*, *krīta*, *prāmitya*, *āccheḍya*,
*anisṛṣṭa* and *abhihat* faults.  • *Bhagavati*: *ādhākarma*, *auddesika*,
*miśrajāt*, *adhyavatar*, *pūtik*, *krīta*, *prāmitya*, *āccheḍya*, *anisṛṣṭa*
and *abhihat* faults.  • *Praśnavyākaraṇa*: *uddiṣṭa*, *sthāpita*,
*prāduṣkaraṇa*, *prāmitya*, *miśrak* (*miśrajāt*), *krītakṛta*, *prābhṛta*
(*prābhṛtika*), *āccheḍya* and *anisṛṣṭa* faults.  *Jñātādharmkathā* and
*Antakṛddasā* etc. texts also mention *ādhākarmic*, *auddesika* and *krītakṛta*
etc. faults.  Here, the point to be discussed is that *Daśavaikalika* is the
representative text of *sādhvācāra*, in which the *udgama* faults are mentioned.
1. *Mūlā* 431, *Anādh* 5/12. 2. *Ācūlā* 1/29; *saṅkhaḍiṁ saṅkhaḍiṁ-paḍiāe
abhisandhāre māṇe eti vā ajjhoyaraye ti vā patiye kīte pāmicche acchejje
āhākammiyam vā, uddeśiyam vā, mīsajāyam vā, kīyagaḍam vā, aṇisate abhihaḍe ti
vā. pāmiccham vā, acchejjam vā, aṇisiṭuṁ vā, abhihaḍam vā. 3. *Sū* 1/9/14. 4.
*Sū* 2/1/65. 5. *Stā* 9/62 *ādhākammiye ti vā uddeśie ti vā mīsajjā*. 6. *Bha*
9/177. *āhaṭṭa dijjamāṇaṁ bhuṁjejjā*. 7. *Pra* 10/7. 8. *Jñā* 1/1/112, *Ant*
3/72.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa * mUlAcAra meM abhihata doSa ke sthAna para
abhighaTa doSa hai| * mAlApahata doSa ke sthAna para mUlAcAra meM mAlAroha tathA
anagAradharmAmRta meM Aroha doSa kA ullekha hai| * prAbhRtikA doSa ke sthAna
para mUlAcAra meM prAvartita tathA anagAradharmAmRta meM prAbhRtaka doSa hai| *
mUlAcAra meM prAmitya doSa ke sthAna para prAmRSya tathA Acchedya ke sthAna para
acchedya doSa kA ullekha hai| * anisRSTa doSa ke sthAna para anagAradharmAmRta
meM niSiddha doSa kA ullekha milatA hai| * mUlAcAra aura anagAradharmAmRta meM
ullikhita bali doSa atirikta hai| isakI kisI ke sAtha tulanA nahIM kI jA sktii|
yakSa, nAga, kuladevatA, pitaroM Adi ke lie banAe gae upahAra meM se bacA huA
aMza muni ko denA bali doSa hai| Agama sAhitya meM prApta udgama doSa
tIrthaMkaroM evaM jaina AcAryoM ne jisa sUkSmatA se sAdhu kI ahiMsA pradhAna
bhikSAvRtti kA ullekha kiyA hai, vaisA anyatra milanA durlabha hai| Agama-
sAhitya meM bhikSAcaryA ke 42 doSa eka sAtha nahIM milate haiN| vahAM vikIrNa
rUpa se mUlakarma ko chor3akara prAyaH sabhI doSoM ke nAma milate haiN| kucha
atirikta doSoM kA ullekha bhI vahAM milatA hai| yahAM Agama-sAhitya meM prakIrNa
rUpa se milane vAle udgama doSoM kA saMkalana prastuta kiyA jA rahA hai*
AcAracUlA-AdhAkarma, auddezika, mizrajAta, krItakRta, prAmitya, Acchedya,
anisRSTa aura abhihata doss| * sUtrakRtAMga-auddezika, AdhAkarma', krIta,
prAmitya, Acchedya, anisRSTa, abhihata aura puuti| * sthAnAMga-AdhAkarmika,
auddezika, mizrajAta, adhyavatara, pUtika, krIta, prAmitya, Acchedya, anisRSTa
aura abhihata * bhagavatI-AdhAkarma, auddezika, mizrajAta, adhyavatara, pUtika,
krIta, prAmitya, Acchedya, anisRSTa aura abhihata * praznavyAkaraNa-uddiSTa,
sthApita, prAduSkaraNa, prAmitya, mizraka (mizrajAta), krItakRta, prAbhRta
(prAbhRtikA) Acchedya aura anisRsstt| jJAtAdharmakathA tathA aMtakRddazA Adi
graMthoM meM bhI AdhAkarmika, auddezika aura krItakRta Adi doSoM kA ullekha
milatA hai| yahAM vimarzanIya bindu yaha hai ki dazavaikAlika sAdhvAcAra kA
pratinidhi graMtha hai, usameM udgama ke 1. mUlA 431, anadha 5/12 /  5.sthA 9/62
AdhAkammie ti vA uddesie ti vA mIsajjA2. AcUlA 1/29 ; saMkhaDiM saMkhaDiM-
paDiyAe abhisaMdhAremANe eti vA ajjhoyarae ti vA patie kIte pAmicce acchejje
AhAkammiyaM vA, uddesiyaM vA, mIsajAyaM vA, kIyagaDaM vA, aNisaTe abhihaDe ti
vaa| pAmiccaM vA, acchejjaM vA, aNisiTuM vA, abhihaDaM vA 6. bhaga 9/177 /
AhaTTa dijjamANaM bhuNjejjaa| 7. pra 10/7 /  3. suu1/9/14| 8. jJA 1/1/112, aMta
3/72 /  4. sU 2/1/65 /

Page #104 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The text describes the defects of "piṇḍaniyukti" -  "auddeshika", "krītakṛta",
"abhihata", "pūtikarma", "adhyavatra", "prāmitya" and "miśrajāta" - but does not
mention the defect of "ādhākarma". There are a few possible reasons for this
omission:  *  Ācārya Śayyambhava may have included "ādhākarma" within the
"auddeshika" defect. *  The "ādhākarma" defect may not have been widely used
until after Ācārya Śayyambhava's time. *  The "karmapravāda" text, which is the
source for the study of "piṇḍaiṣaṇā", does not mention "ādhākarma", so it may
not have been included.  The text also mentions that some of the 52 "anācāra"
(unlawful acts) described in the "Daśāśrutaskandha" and "Daśavaikālika" are
related to the defects of "bhikṣācaryā" (begging for alms):  1. "auddeshika" -
the second defect of "udgama" (origin). 2. "krītakṛta" - the third defect of
"udgama". 3. "abhihata" - the eleventh defect of "udgama". 4. "ājīvavṛttita" -
the fourth defect of "utpādana" (production). 5. "taptānivr̥tabhojitva" - the
ninth defect of "eṣaṇā" (desire).  In conclusion, the systematic and sequential
description of the sixteen defects of "udgama" in one place is a unique
contribution of the "piṇḍaniyuktikāra". Although the defects of "prābhṛtika",
"parivartana", etc. are not mentioned frequently in the "āgama" literature, the
seeds of these defects can be found in the "āgama" literature. The "niyuktikāra"
has systematically explained these defects.  The text then discusses the defects
related to "utpādana" (production). "Utpādana" means to produce. In the
"pañcavastū" (five substances), "utpādana", "sampādana" (acquisition), and
"nirvartana" (completion) are considered synonymous. The "niyuktikāra" has
provided a detailed explanation of the term "utpādana" based on name,
establishment, and substance. There are two types of "bhāva-utpādana"
(production of emotions): "praśasta" (praiseworthy) and "apraśasta"
(unpraiseworthy). The production of knowledge, perception, and character, etc.
is "praśasta bhāva-utpādana". The production of food, etc. due to anger, etc. or
through "dhātrīkaraṇa" (nursing) and other unethical business practices is
"apraśasta bhāva-utpādana". The sixteen defects of "utpādana" are related to the
"sādhu" (holy person).  1. "dhātrīdoṣa" (defect of nursing) The defect of
"dhātrīdoṣa" is to obtain food by feeding a child, like the five types of "dhāy"
(nurse). A "dhātrī" is one who carries a child, nourishes the child, or whom the
child drinks from.  The text then lists several references from different Jain
scriptures related to the "dhātrīdoṣa" and other defects.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti auddezika, krItakRta, abhihata, pUtikarma, adhyavatara, prAmitya
aura mizrajAta'-ina doSoM kA varNana milatA hai lekina AdhAkarma doSa kA ullekha
nahIM hai| AdhAkarma kA ullekha na hone ke kucha saMbhAvita bindu ye ho sakate
haiM* AcArya zayyaMbhava ne audezika doSa meM AdhAkarma kA samAveza kara diyA
ho| * AcArya zayyaMbhava taka AdhAkarma doSa kA adhika prayoga nahIM hotA thaa|
* karmapravAda pUrva, jisase piNDaiSaNA adhyayana nirdRr3ha huA hai, vahAM isakA
ullekha nahIM hone se unhoMne isakA samAveza nahIM kiyaa| dazAzrutaskandha tathA
dazavaikAlika meM varNita 52 anAcAroM meM kucha anAcAra bhikSAcaryA ke doSoM se
bhI sambandhita haiM 1. auddezika-dUsarA udgama doss| 4. AjIvavRttitA-utpAdanA
kA cauthA AjIva doss| 2. krItakRta-tIsarA udgama doss| 5. taptAnivRtabhojitva-
eSaNA kA navAM apariNata doss| 3. abhihata-gyArahavAM udgama doss| - niSkarSata:
kahA jA sakatA hai ki udgama ke solaha doSoM kA eka sthAna para kramika aura
vyavasthita varNana piNDaniyuktikAra kA maulika avadAna hai| prAbhRtikA',
parivartana Adi doSoM kA AgamasAhitya meM adhika ullekha nahIM hai, phira bhI
ina sabhI doSoM ke bIja Agama-sAhitya meM milate haiN| niyuktikAra ne inako
vyavasthita rUpa dekara vyAkhyAyita kiyA hai| utpAdanA se sambandhita doSa
utpAdanA kA artha hai-utpanna krnaa| paMcavastu meM utpAdana, saMpAdana aura
nirvartana ko ekArthaka mAnA hai| niyuktikAra ne nAma, sthApanA aura dravya ke
AdhAra para utpAdanA zabda kI vistRta vyAkhyA kI hai| bhAva-utpAdanA ke do
prakAra haiM-prazasta aura aprazasta  /  jJAna, darzana aura cAritra Adi kI
utpatti prazasta bhAva-utpAdanA hai| krodha Adi se yA dhAtrIkaraNa Adi sAvadha
vyApAra se AhAra Adi kI utpAdanA karanA aprazasta bhAva-utpAdanA hai| utpAdanA
ke solaha doSa sAdhu se sambandhita hote haiN| 1. dhAtrIdoSa paMcavidha dhAya kI
bhAMti bAlaka ko khilAkara AhAra prApta karanA dhAtrI doSa hai| jo bAlaka ko
dhAraNa karatI hai, bAlaka kA poSaNa karatI hai athavA bAlaka jisako pIte haiM,
vaha dhAtrI kahalAtI hai| 1. daza 5/1/55 /  6. jIbhA 1317 /  2. dazani 15 ;
kammappavAyapuvvA, piMDassa tu esaNA tividhaa| 7. pini 194/3 /  3. vasati
sambandhI prAbhRtikA doSa kA vistRta varNana 8. (ka) pini 193 ; uppAdaNAya dose,
sAhUu samuTThite jaann| bRhatkalpabhASya meM milatA hai| (kha) jIbhA 1472;
uppAyaNa hoi smnnutthaannaa| 4. paMva 753 ; uppAyaNa saMpAyaNa nivvattaNamo ya
huMti egtttthaa| 9. mUlA 447 ; paMcavidhadhAdikammeNuppAdo dhAdidoso du| 5.
vistAra hetu dekheM pini 194/1, 2, mavR pa. 119, 120 /  10. pini 198  /

Page #105 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  In ancient times, there were five types of
Dhātrīs (nurses) based on their responsibilities:  1. **Kṣīradhātrī:**
Breastfeeding the child. 2. **Majjanadhātrī:** Bathing the child. 3.
**Maṇḍanadhātrī:** Adorning the child. 4. **Krīḍanadhātrī:** Playing with the
child. 5. **Aṅkadhātrī:** Holding the child in their lap.  There are some
variations in the names of these Dhātrīs in Digambara literature. In Mūlācāra,
the names are **Mārjan, Maṇḍan, Krīḍan, Kṣīra, and Amba**, while in
Anagāradharmāmṛta, the names are **Mārjan, Krīḍan, Staṇyapan, Svāpan, and
Maṇḍan**.  The Dhātrī-doṣa (fault of a nurse) can be committed in two ways: by
personally acting as a Dhātrī or by causing others to act as one.  To clarify
the concept of Dhātrī-doṣa, the Niyuktikāra (one who appoints) explains that if
a monk, while begging for alms, sees a child crying and tells the householder
that the child is dependent on milk and is crying because of its absence, and
then asks for alms to feed the child with milk, or asks for alms after feeding
the child with milk, or says that he will return to beg for alms, or says that
they should feed the child or he will, then the householder, if she is kind-
hearted, may commit violence due to affection for the monk. If she is not
righteous, she may develop hatred. If the child falls ill due to some reason or
karma, the preaching will be neglected. People may criticize the monk,
considering him to be flattering, and the householder may also doubt the monk's
character.  If the monk tries to replace one Dhātrī with another, it also falls
under Dhātrī-doṣa. For example, if a monk, while begging for alms, sees a woman
distressed and asks her the reason for her sorrow, and she says that her
position as a Dhātrī has been taken away and another woman has been appointed in
her place, causing her livelihood to be disrupted, then the monk, while
consoling her, learns about the age, size, and thinness of the newly appointed
Dhātrī and tells the wealthy person that their ancestors lacked knowledge about
Dhātrīs or that their wealth has only recently increased, which is why such an
inexperienced Dhātrī has been appointed. If the wealthy householder, after
hearing all this from the monk, dismisses the newly appointed Dhātrī and
appoints the old one again, then his statement is considered to be Dhātrī-doṣa.
This can make the newly appointed Dhātrī resentful. Out of revenge, she may:  1.
**[Text missing]** 2. **[Text missing]** 3. **[Text missing]** 4. **[Text
missing]** 5. **[Text missing]**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa prAcIna kAla meM vaibhava ke anusAra pAMca
prakAra kI dhAya hotI thIM 1. kSIradhAtrI-stanapAna karAne vaalii| 2.
majjanadhAtrI-snAna karAne vaalii| 3. maMDanadhAtrI-bAlaka kA maMDana-vibhUSA
karane vaalii| 4. krIr3anadhAtrI-bAlaka ko krIr3A karAne vaalii| 5. aMkadhAtrI-
bAlaka ko goda meM rakhane vaalii| digambara sAhitya meM inake nAmoM meM kucha
parivartana hai| mUlAcAra meM mArjana, maNDana, krIr3ana, kSIra aura amba tathA
anagAradharmAmRta meM mArjana, krIr3ana, stanyapAna, svApana aura maNDana-ina
pAMca nAmoM kA ullekha milatA hai| dhAtrI doSa do prakAra se lagatA hai-svayaM
dhAtrItva karanA tathA dUsaroM se krvaanaa| dhAtrItvakaraNa ko spaSTa karate hue
niyuktikAra kahate haiM ki bhikSArtha gayA muni bAlaka ko rudana karate
dekhakara yadi gRhastha ko yaha kahatA hai ki yaha bAlaka abhI dUdha para Azrita
hai ata: dUdha na milane ke kAraNa ro rahA hai| mujhe bhikSA dekara ise dUdha
pilAo athavA ise dUdha pilAkara mujhe bhikSA do athavA maiM punaH bhikSArtha A
jAUMgA athavA yaha kahe ki tuma ise dUdha pilAo anyathA maiM ise dUdha
pilaauuNgaa| sAdhu ke dvArA isa prakAra kahane se gRhasvAminI yadi bhadra
svabhAva vAlI hotI hai to vaha snehavaza sAdhu ke lie AdhAkarma janya hiMsA kara
sakatI hai, yadi vaha dharmAbhimukhI nahIM hai to usake mana meM pradveSa ho
sakatA hai| kisI kAraNavaza yA karmodaya se bAlaka bImAra ho jAe to pravacana kI
avahelanA hotI hai| muni ko cATukArI mAnakara loga unakI niMdA karate haiM tathA
gRhasvAmI ke mana meM bhI sAdhu ke zIla ke prati AzaMkA ho sakatI hai| dhAtrItva
kArAvaNa meM yadi sAdhu eka dhAtrI ke sthAna para dUsarI dhAtrI rakhane kA
prayatna karatA hai to vaha bhI dhAtrI doSa ke antargata AtA hai, jaise-
bhikSArtha gayA sAdhu yadi kisI strI ko khedakhinna dekhakara usake duHkha kA
kAraNa puuche| usa samaya vaha strI yaha kahe ki Aja merA dhAtrItva chIna liyA
gayA hai| mere sthAna para amuka strI ko dhAtrI ke rUpa meM niyukta kiyA gayA
hai ataH AjIvikA vicchinna hone se maiM duHkhI huuN| muni usa strI ko sAMtvanA
dekara navaniyukta dhAtrI kI Ayu, stanoM kI sthUlatA yA kRzatA ko jAnakara usa
dhanADhya vyakti ko yaha kahatA hai ki tumhAre pUrvajoM ko dhAtrIviSayaka jJAna
nahIM thA athavA isa kula meM vaibhava abhI hI bar3hA hai, tabhI aisI-vaisI
anubhava rahita dhAtrI niyukta kI huI hai| muni se sArI bAta sunakara vaha
dhanADhya gRhastha navaniyukta dhAtrI ko mukta karake punaH purAnI dhAtrI ko
rakhatA hai to usakA yaha kathana dhAtrI doSa se yukta hotA hai| aisA karane se
vaha abhinavadhAtrI dveSayukta ho sakatI hai| pratizodhavaza vaha sAdhu 1. jJA
1/1/82, rAja 804, pini 197 /  2. anadha 5/20 ; mArjana-krIDana-stanyapAna-
svApana mnnddnm| 3. jIbhA 1323; taM duvihaM dhAtittaM, karaNe kArAvaNe ya
boddhavvaM  /  4. pini 198/1-3 /  5. pini 1984-6 /

Page #106 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 92 ## Pindaniyukti It can also lead to false accusations. The old Dhaatri may
think that this Muni, like the new Dhaatri, may also create obstacles in her
life, so she may use poison, etc., to kill the Sadhu. Similarly, the author has
described in detail the psychological description of the remaining four
Dhaatris, including the Majjan Dhaatri. This entire description not only depicts
the cultural situation of that time, but also the entire context is very
important from the point of view of Ayurveda. To clarify the Dhaatri Pind, the
author has described the story of Sangam Acharya and the Datta Shishya.  ## 2.
Dooti Dosha Obtaining alms by conveying a person's message to another place
through diplomatic work is Dooti Dosha. According to Moolaachar, going to one's
own village or another village by water, land or air and obtaining food by
conveying the message of the concerned person is Dooti Dosha. The commentator
has explained this by considering it as a masculine gender, considering it as a
"Dut Dosha". Diplomatic work is of two types - related to one's own village and
related to another village. Conveying a message in the same village where the
Sadhu lives is Dootity related to one's own village, and conveying a message by
going to another nearby village is Dootity related to another village. There are
two sub-categories of both - concealed and revealed. In the transcendental,
there is only concealed Dootity. In the worldly, both concealed and revealed
diplomatic work takes place. While going for alms, if the Muni takes the message
of his mother, father, etc., to his own village or another village, saying that
your mother has said this or your father has said this, it is revealed Dootity
related to one's own village and another village. So that the other Muni next to
him does not know, the Muni says in a symbolic language that your daughter is
not clever, she is ignorant by tradition, that's why she told me to give this
message to my mother. At that time, the mother also answers skillfully that I
will explain to my daughter. She will not give such a message in the future,
this is concealed Dootity related to one's own village and another village in
the transcendental. Conveying a message in this way in one's own village or
another village, so that neither the people know nor the Muni next to him, this
is concealed Dootity related to one's own village and another village in the
worldly. For example, saying that the desired work has been completed according
to your wish or I will do as they wish. The employer has hinted at a poignant
story in the context of revealed Dootity related to another village, which
presents a beautiful picture of the harm caused by the diplomatic work done by
the Muni.  1. Pini 198/9. 2. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Story
No. 26. 3. Moola 448; Jal-thal-ayasagad, sayaparagame sadesa-parade.
Sambandhivayananayan, doodi doso havdi eso. 4. Moolaati p. 351. 5. Pini 200,
201, Mavri p. 126. 6. Jiba 1328-1331. 7. Jiba 1333, 1334. 8. Pini 201/3. 9. Pini
202, 203, Mavri p. 127, for the expansion of the story See Pari. 3, Story No.
27.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 92 piMDaniyukti para galata abhiyoga bhI lagA sakatI hai| purAnI dhAtrI yaha
soca sakatI hai ki abhinava dhAtrI kI bhAMti yaha muni kabhI mere jIvana meM bhI
vighna upasthita kara sakatA hai ataH vaha sAdhu ko mArane ke lie viSa Adi kA
prayoga bhI kara sakatI hai| isI prakAra graMthakAra ne majjanadhAtrI Adi zeSa
cAra dhAtriyoM ke bAre meM vistAra se manovaijJAnika varNana kiyA hai| yaha sArA
varNana usa samaya kI sAMskRtika sthiti kA to citraNa karatA hI hai, sAtha hI
Ayurveda kI dRSTi se bhI pUrA prasaMga atyanta mahattvapUrNa hai| dhAtrIpiMDa ko
spaSTa karane ke lie graMthakAra ne saMgama AcArya aura datta ziSya ke kathAnaka
ko nirUpita kiyA hai| 2. dUtI doSa dautya karma dvArA eka vyakti ke saMdeza ko
dUsare sthAna taka saMpreSita karake bhikSA prApta karanA dUtI doSa hai|
mUlAcAra ke anusAra jala, sthala yA AkAza mArga se svagrAma yA paragrAma meM
jAkara sambandhita vyakti ke saMdeza ko kahakara AhAra prApta karanA dUtIdoSa
hai| TIkAkAra ne pulliMga ke AdhAra para dUta doSa mAnakara isakI vyAkhyA kI
hai| dautya karma do prakAra kA hotA hai-svagrAma viSayaka aura paragrAma
vissyk| jisa gAMva meM sAdhu rahatA hai, usI gAMva meM saMdeza pahuMcAnA
svagrAma viSayaka dUtItva hai tathA nikaTa ke dUsare gAMva meM jAkara saMdeza
denA paragrAma viSayaka dUtItva hai| ina donoM ke bhI do-do bheda haiM-
pracchanna aura prakaTa  /  lokottara meM pracchanna dUtItva hI hotA hai|
laukika meM pracchanna aura prakaTa donoM prakAra kA dautyakarma calatA hai|
bhikSArtha jAte hue muni svagrAma yA paragrAma meM yadi jananI, pitA Adi kA
saMdeza le jAtA hai ki tumhArI mAtA ne yA tumhAre pitA ne aisA kahA hai, yaha
svagrAma aura paragrAma viSayaka prakaTa dUtItva hai| sAtha vAle dUsare muni ko
jJAta na ho isalie muni sAMketika bhASA meM yaha kahatA hai ki tumhArI putrI
catura nahIM hai, paramparA se ajAna hai, tabhI usane mujhe aisA kahA hai ki
merI mAM ko yaha saMdeza de denaa| usa samaya mAM bhI kuzalatApUrvaka uttara
detI hai ki maiM apanI putrI ko samajhA duuNgii| Age se vaha aisA saMdeza nahIM
degI, yaha svagrAma-paragrAma viSayaka lokottara pracchanna dUtItva hai|
svagrAma meM yA paragrAma meM isa prakAra saMdeza pahuMcAnA, jisase na logoM ko
jJAta ho aura na sAtha vAle muni ko, yaha svagrAma viSayaka lokalokottara
viSayaka pracchanna dUtItva hai| udAharaNa svarUpa yaha kahanA ki vivakSita
kArya tumhArI icchA ke anusAra sampanna ho gayA hai athavA jaisA ve cAheMge
vaisA hI kruuNgii| niyuktikAra ne prakaTa paragrAmadUtI ke prasaMga meM eka
mArmika kathA kA saMketa kiyA hai, jo muni dvArA kie gae dautyakarma se hone
vAlI hAni kA suMdara citra prastuta karatI hai| 1. pini 198/9 /  2. kathA ke
vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 26  /  3. mUlA 448; jala-thala-
AyAsagadaM, sayaparagAme sdes-prdese| saMbaMdhivayaNaNayaNaM, dUdIdoso havadi
eso|| 4. mUlATI pR. 351 /  5. pini 200, 201, mavR pa. 126  /  6. jIbhA 1328-1331
/  7. jIbhA 1333, 1334 /  8. pini 201/3 /  9. pini 202, 203, mavR pa. 127, kathA
ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 27 /

Page #107 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation 3. Nimitta Dosha  Claiming to have knowledge of
the past, present, and future, and using this to obtain alms by stating six
types of causes (nimitta), benefits (laabha), disadvantages (alaabha), happiness
(sukha), sorrow (duhkha), and life and death (jeevan-maran) is a Nimitta Dosha.
According to the Angaar Dharmaamrit, obtaining food by pleasing the donor by
stating eight types of causes (nimitta) is a Nimitta Dosha. The commentator
considers a sadhu who uses knowledge (vidya), mantras (mantra), and causes
(nimitta) as charan-kushila. The Manusmriti also prohibits taking alms by
stating causes (nimitta). According to Nisiitha, a muni who claims to know the
present and future causes is liable for atonement. Jinabhadragani Kshamasraman
also considers stating causes related to the present and future more blameworthy
than stating causes related to the past. Therefore, there is a difference in the
atonement for both. The author of Pinḍaniyukti has indicated a story to clarify
the harms caused by Nimitta Dosha. The Nisiitha Bhashya discusses the faults
arising from stating causes (nimitta) in detail. Taking alms with Nimitta Dosha
carries the fear of self-violence (svapar ki himsa).  ## 4. Aajivana Dosha
Taking alms by introducing oneself based on one's caste (jati), lineage (kul),
group (gan), etc. is Aajivana Dosha. The Nisiitha Sutra states that a muni who
enjoys Aajivapinda is liable for atonement. The Dashakalika Sutra considers
Aajivavrittita as misconduct. The commentator considers a sadhu who takes alms
by Aajivana as kushila.  Aajivana Dosha occurs in five ways: caste (jati),
lineage (kul), group (gan), karma, and craft (shilp). The Mulaachar considers
caste (jati), lineage (kul), craft (shilp), penance (tap), and wealth
(aishwarya) as Aajivana.  The five types of Aajivana Dosha occur in two ways:
explicitly stating them (spasht shabdon se kathana) and implicitly stating them
through indirect words (prakarantar se asphut vachan se kathana). The author has
expressed this using the terms "sucha" and "asucha". The author has presented a
psychological and subtle analysis of the five types.  ## Jati-Aajivana  Caste
(jati) is related to the maternal side. Obtaining food and other things from a
householder based on caste (jati) is...  **Footnotes:**  1. Mula 449; Mulaachar
mentions eight types of causes (nimitta) in Nimitta Dosha: expressions
(vyanjan), limbs (ang), sounds (swar), etc. 2. Anath 5/21 3. Vyabha 879 4. Manu
6/50 5. Ni 10/7,8 6. Jiabha 1348, 1349 7. Pini 205, Jiabha 1342-47, for the
expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha San. 28 8. Nibha 2689-92, Chu Pr. 18,
19 9. Pini 204, Mavr P. 128 10. Ni 13/64 11. Dasha 3/6 12. Vyabha 880 13. Mula
450 14. (a) Jiabha 1352; Jati Mahanmaadi, Matisamuttha V Hoti Bodhavva. (b)
Pimpr 64; Maibhava Vippai V Jai.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 3. nimitta doSa trikAlaviSayaka SaDvidha'
nimitta-lAbha-alAbha, sukha-duHkha aura jIvana-maraNa batAkara bhikSA prApta
karanA nimitta doSa hai| anagAradharmAmRta ke anusAra aSTAMganimitta batAkara
dAtA ko prasanna karake AhAra grahaNa karanA nimitta doSa hai| bhASyakAra ne
vidyA, maMtra aura nimitta kA prayoga karane vAle sAdhu ko caraNakuzIla mAnA
hai| manusmRti meM bhI nimitta kathana ke dvArA bhikSA lene kA pratiSedha hai|
nizItha ke anusAra vartamAna aura bhaviSya ke nimitta kA kathana karane vAlA
muni prAyazcitta kA bhAgI hotA hai| jinabhadragaNi kSamAzramaNa ne bhI atIta
sambandhI nimitta kathana kI apekSA vartamAna aura bhaviSya sambandhI nimitta
kathana ko adhika doSapUrNa mAnA hai ataH ina donoM ke prAyazcitta meM bhI
aMtara hai| niyuktikAra ne nimitta doSa se hone vAlI hAniyoM ko spaSTa karane ke
lie eka kathA kA saMketa kiyA hai| nizItha bhASya meM nimitta kathana se hone
vAle doSoM kI vistAra se carcA hai| nimitta doSa se yukta bhikSA grahaNa karane
meM svapara kI hiMsA kA bhaya rahatA hai| 4. AjIvanA doSa apanI jAti, kula, gaNa
Adi kA paricaya dekara bhikSA lenA AjIvanA doSa hai| nizItha sUtra meM
AjIvapiMDa kA bhoga karane vAle muni ko prAyazcitta kA bhAgI batAyA gayA hai|
dazavakAlika sUtra meM AjIvavRttitA ko anAcAra mAnA hai| bhASyakAra ne AjIvanA
se bhikSA prApta karane vAle sAdhu ko kuzIla mAnA hai|12 AjIvanA doSa pAMca
prakAra se lagatA hai-jAti, kula, gaNa, karma aura shilp| mUlAcAra meM jAti,
kula, zilpa, tapa aura aizvarya-ina pAMca ko AjIva mAnA hai|3 AjIvanA ke pAMcoM
doSa do prakAra se lagate haiM-spaSTa zabdoM se kathana tathA prakArAntara se
asphuTa vacana se kthn| ise graMthakAra ne sUcA aura asUcA zabda se prakaTa kiyA
hai| graMthakAra ne pAMcoM bhedoM kA manovaijJAnika aura sUkSma vivecana
prastuta kiyA hai| jAti-AjIvanA jAti mAtRpakSa se sambandhita hotI hai| jAti ke
AdhAra para gRhastha se AhAra Adi prApta karanA 1. mUlA 449 ; mUlAcAra meM
nimitta doSa meM vyaJjana, aMga, svara Adi aSTavidha nimittoM kA ullekha hai| 2.
anadha 5/21  /  3. vyabhA 879 /  4. manu 6/50 /  5.ni 10/7,8 /  6. jIbhA 1348,
1349  /  7. pini 205, jIbhA 1342-47, kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA
saM. 28  /  8. nibhA 2689-92, cU pR. 18, 19  /  9. pini 204, mavR pa. 128 10.ni
13/64 /  11. daza 3/6 /  12. vybhaa880|| 13. mUlA 450 14. (ka) jIbhA 1352; jAtI
mAhaNamAdI, mAtisamutthA va hoti bodhvvaa| (kha) piMpra64; mAibhavA vippAi va
jaaii|

Page #108 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 94  **Caste-based livelihood** is a type of livelihood. Seeing a Brahmin's
son performing rituals like Homa correctly, a Muni knows that he is a Brahmin
who has been in a Gurukul. Or, the Muni asks the father if his son performed the
Homa rituals correctly or incorrectly. Hearing this, the father knows that the
Muni must be from a Brahmin lineage, otherwise how would he know about these
rituals? This is livelihood based on caste through inference. When the Muni
himself clearly states his caste, this is livelihood based on caste through
direct statement. Similarly, one should know about lineage, clan, profession,
and craft.  If a householder is virtuous, he can provide a Sadhu with food that
is **half-karma** in the context of livelihood based on caste. If he is wicked,
he can insult the Sadhu and throw him out of the house.  **Lineage-based
livelihood**  Lineage is related to the paternal side. Earning a living by
mentioning one's own or another's lineage is lineage-based livelihood.
Explaining lineage-based livelihood, the commentator says that a Muni entering a
fierce lineage sees the householder's son engaged in the work of a guard and
asks the father if his son is skilled in the deployment of foot soldiers.
Hearing this, he knows that the Muni is born into a fierce lineage. When the
Muni clearly reveals his lineage, saying "I am from a fierce or prosperous
lineage," this is revealing the lineage through direct statement.  **Profession
and Craft-based livelihood**  Agriculture and machine operation are considered
professions, while sewing and weaving are considered crafts. Another definition
is that what is learned by oneself without a teacher is a profession, and what
is taught by a teacher is a craft.  Seeing many things related to profession and
craft, knowing whether they are correct or incorrect through one's own skill, or
stating it clearly, is livelihood based on profession and craft.  **Clan-based
livelihood**  Clan means a group of wrestlers. Earning a living by mentioning
one's clan skills is clan-based livelihood.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 94 piMDaniyukti jAti-AjIvanA hai| brAhmaNa-putra ko sahI rUpa se homa Adi
kriyAeM karate dekhakara muni yaha jAna letA hai ki yaha gurukula meM rahA huA
brAhmaNa hai athavA muni usake pitA se kahatA hai ki tumhAre putra ne homa Adi
kriyAeM samyak kI haiM yA asamyak, yaha sunakara pitA jAna letA hai ki avazya hI
yaha muni brAhmaNa kula se sambandhita hai anyathA inako ina kriyAoM kA jJAna
kaise hotA? yaha sUcA dvArA jAti se upajIvanA hai| muni svayaM spaSTa rUpa se
apanI jAti batAe, yaha asUcA dvArA jAti upajIvanA hai| isI prakAra kula, gaNa,
karma aura zilpa Adi ke bAre meM jAnanA caahie| jAti Adi se AhAra prApta karane
ke upakrama meM yadi gRhastha bhadra ho to vaha sAdhu ke lie AdhAkarma AhAra
niSpanna kara sakatA hai, yadi prAnta ho to vaha sAdhu ko apamAnita karake ghara
se bAhara nikAla sakatA hai| kula-AjIvanA kula pitRpakSa se sambandhita hotA
hai| apanA yA dUsare kA kula batAkara AjIvikA calAnA kula AjIvanA hai| kula-
AjIvanA ko spaSTa karate hue TIkAkAra kahate haiM ki ugrakula meM praviSTa muni
gRhastha ke putra ko ArakSaka karma meM niyukta dekhakara pitA se kahatA hai ki
lagatA hai tumhArA putra padAti senA ke niyojana meM kuzala hai| yaha sunakara
vaha jAna letA hai ki yaha sAdhu ugra kula meM utpanna hai| jaba muni spaSTa
rUpa se apane kula ko prakaTa karatA hai ki maiM ugra yA bhoga kula kA hUM to
yaha asUcA ke dvArA kula ko prakaTa karanA hai| karma aura zilpa-AjIvanA kRSi
tathA yaMtra-utpIlana Adi ko karma tathA silAI-bunAI Adi ko zilpa kahA jAtA hai|
inakI dUsarI paribhASA yaha bhI kI jAtI hai ki jo binA AcArya ke svayaM apane
kauzala se sIkhA jAtA hai, vaha karma tathA AcArya dvArA upadiSTa kauzala zilpa
kahalAtA hai| karma aura zilpa viSayaka ekatrita aneka vastuoM ko dekhakara yaha
samyak hai athavA asamyak, aisA apane kauzala se jatAnA athavA spaSTa kahanA
karma aura zilpa viSayaka upajIvanA hai|0 gaNa-AjIvanA gaNa kA artha hai-mll-
smuuh| gaNa-kauzala ko batAkara AjIvikA prApta karanA gaNa-AjIvanA 1. pini
207/1, 2, jIbhA 1353-55 /  6.pini 207; kamma kisimaadii| 2.pini 207/3, 4, mavR
pa. 129  /  7. jIbhA 1358 ; jaMtuppIlaNamAdi tu kmm| 3. jIbhA 1356 /  8. pini
207, mavR pa. 129,jIbhA 1358 ; tuNNAdiyaM sippN| 4. (ka) jIbhA 1357 ; uggAIyaM
tu kulaM, pituvNsaadi| 9. jIbhA 1359 ; jaM kIratI sayaM tU, taM kamme, ahavA
(kha) piMpra 64 ; uggAipiubhavaM ca kulN| jaM sikkhijjai, Ayarituvadesato tayaM
sippaM  /  5. mavR pa. 129  /  10. pini 207/4, jIbhA 1360 /

Page #109 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Piṇḍaniyukti:** This is an observation. In the **Sthānāṅga Sūtra**, it is
called **Liṅga Ājīvanā**. **Liṅga Ājīvanā** refers to a knowledge-less ascetic
receiving alms solely based on their ascetic lineage.  The **Vyavahāra Bhāṣya**
mentions **Tap** and **Śruta Ājīvanā** in addition to these five. Receiving alms
by mentioning one's own austerities is **Tap Ājīvanā**, and receiving alms by
revealing one's knowledge is **Śruta Ājīvanā**.  **Ājīvanā** is a fault that
arises from consuming food that is tainted. It leads to the concealment of
strength and the manifestation of the monk's humility.  **5. Vanīpaka Fault**
The word **Vanīpaka** is derived from the root **Vanu-yācanā**. It is the fault
of begging for food by presenting oneself as a devotee of ascetics, Brahmins,
the poor, guests, dogs, etc., or by praising them. According to **Abhaydeva
Sūri**, **Vanī** is the wealth obtained by showing one's poverty to others or by
speaking in a way that pleases them. One who drinks it, i.e., enjoys or protects
it, is called **Vanīpaka**.  The **Niyuktikāra** explains through an analogy:
Just as a cowherd searches for another cow for a calf whose mother has died,
similarly, due to greed for food, etc., begging with humility by presenting
oneself as a devotee of ascetics, the poor, guests, and dogs, is the
**Vanīpaka** fault. In **Digambara** texts, it is called **Vanīpakocti**.  The
author has presented a beautiful discussion of the language used by ascetics in
front of devotees.  In front of **Śākya-Bauddha** devotees, the ascetic says
that **Bauddha** monks eat without attachment, like a painted wall. They are
supremely compassionate and generous. If the charity given to the highly
attached Brahmins is not wasted, then how can the charity given to **Śākya** and
other ascetics be in vain?  In front of **Brahmin** devotees, the ascetic
praises the Brahmins, engaging in **Vanīpaka**. He says that Brahmins roam the
earth in the form of gods, therefore, charity given to benevolent Brahmins is
very fruitful. What to say about the benefits of giving to Brahmins engaged in
the six duties?  In front of **poor** devotees, the monk says that this world is
full of worship and adoration. One who gives charity to the poor, the suffering,
the friendless, the sick, or the lame without any expectation, steals the banner
of charity.  **References:**  1. **Sthā 5/71**. 2. **Vyabhā 880**. 3. **Mūlāṭī
p. 353; Vīryagūhanadīnattvādidōṣadarshanāt**. 4. **Sthāṭī 5/200, T. p. 228;
Pareṣāmātmduḥsthatvadarshanenā** Nukūlabhāṣaṇato yallabyate dravyam sā vanī
tāmpibeti-āsvādayati pāti ti veti vanīpaḥ sa eva vanīpako-yācakaḥ. 5. **Pini
208/1, Jībhā 1365**. 6. **Anadh 5/22**. 7. **Pini 209/1, Jībhā 1368**. 8. **Pini
210/1, Jībhā 1371**. 9. **Pini 210/2, Jībhā 1373**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa hai| sthAnAMga sUtra meM isake sthAna para
liMga AjIvanA kA nAma hai| liMga- AjIvanA kA tAtparya hai jJAnazUnya sAdhu kA
kevala sAdhu liMga ke AdhAra para bhikSA prApta krnaa| vyavahAra bhASya meM ina
pAMca ke atirikta tapa aura zruta AjIvanA kA bhI ullekha milatA hai| svayaM ke
tapa ko batAkara bhikSA prApta karanA tapa-AjIvanA tathA apane jJAna ko prakaTa
karake bhikSA prApta karanA zrutaAjIvanA hai| AjIvanA doSa yukta AhAra lene se
zakti kA gopana tathA muni kI dInatA prakaTa hotI hai| 5. vanIpaka doSa vanIpaka
zabda vanu-yAcane dhAtu se niSpanna hai| svayaM ko zramaNa, brAhmaNa, kRpaNa,
atithi aura zvAna Adi kA bhakta batAkara yA unakI prazaMsA karake AhAra kI
yAcanA karanA vanIpaka doSa hai| abhayadevasUri ke anusAra dUsaroM ko apanI
daridratA dikhAkara athavA unake anukUla bolane se jo dravya milatA hai, use
vanI kahate haiN| jo usako pItA hai arthAt usakA AsvAdana karatA hai athavA
rakSA karatA hai, vaha vanIpaka kahalAtA hai| niyuktikAra upamA ke dvArA spaSTa
karate hue kahate haiM ki jisa bachar3e kI mAM mara jAtI hai, usake lie gvAlA
anya gAya kI khoja karatA hai, vaise hI AhAra Adi ke lobha se mAhaNa, kRpaNa,
atithi aura zvAna ke bhaktoM ke sammukha svayaM ko unakA bhakta batAkara dInatA
se yAcanA karanA vanIpaka doSa hai  /  digambara graMthoM meM isakA nAma
vanIpakokti milatA hai| bhaktoM ke sAmane sAdhu kaisI bhASA kA prayoga karatA
hai, isakA graMthakAra ne suMdara vivecana prastuta kiyA hai zAkya-bauddha-
bhaktoM ke sammukha sAdhu kahatA hai ki bauddha bhikSu citrabhitti kI bhAMti
anAsakta rUpa se bhojana karate haiN| ye parama kAruNika aura dAnaruci haiN|
kAma meM atyanta Asakta brAhmaNoM ko diyA gayA dAna bhI naSTa nahIM hotA to
phira zAkya Adi zramaNoM ko diyA gayA vyartha kaise ho sakatA hai ? brAhmaNa-
bhaktoM ke samakSa brAhmaNoM kI prazaMsA rUpa vanIpakatva karate hue sAdhu
kahatA hai ki brAhmaNa pRthvI para deva rUpa meM vicaraNa karate haiM ataH
lokopakArI brAhmaNoM ko diyA gayA dAna bahuta phaladAyI hotA hai, phira SaTkarma
meM rata brAhmaNa ko dene se hone vAle lAbha kA to kahanA hI kyA? kRpaNa-bhaktoM
ke sammukha muni kahatA hai ki yaha loka pUjitapUjaka hai| jo kRpaNa, du:khI,
abaMdhu, rogI yA lUle-laMgar3e ko AzaMsA se rahita hokara dAna detA hai, vaha
dAnapatAkA kA haraNa karatA hai| 1.sthA 5/71 /  2. vyabhA 880 /  3. mUlATI pR.
353 ; vIryagUhanadInatvAdidoSadarzanAt  /  4. sthATI 5/200, TI. pR. 228;
pareSAmAtmaduHsthatvadarzanenA nukUlabhASaNato yallabhyate dravyaM sA vanI
tAMpibati-AsvAdayati pAtIti veti vanIpaH sa eva vniipko-yaackH| 5. pini 208/1,
jIbhA 1365 /  6. anadha 5/22 /  7. pini 209/1, jIbhA 1368 /  8. pini 210/1,
jIbhA 1371  /  9. pini 210/2, jIbhA 1373  /

Page #110 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The Muni says in front of the guests that people often give donations to
benefactors, acquaintances, and dependents, but the donation given to those who
entertain guests is superior.  The Muni says to the dog-devotees while
performing Vanipaktav that you alone know how to give donations in this world.
These dogs are special deities of Mount Kailash, they are wandering on earth in
the form of Yakshas. Their worship is beneficial and their disregard is harmful.
Food like grass etc. becomes easily available for cows, bulls etc., but food is
not easily available for these dogs, therefore, giving donations to them is
superior. By accepting from dogs etc., acceptance from crows etc. also takes
place.  The author, while pointing out the flaws, says that the statement that
the donation given to a worthy or unworthy person is not in vain is flawed
because it equates the worthy and the unworthy. Praising unworthy donations is
highly flawed. This leads to the establishment of falsehood, there is a
possibility of the fault of half-heartedness, the possibility of the saint being
included in their order due to greed for food, and the belief spreads among
people that these saints are flattering, they flatter for the sake of getting
food. If the donor is hateful and not a devotee of Shakyas etc., he may say
contemptuously, "Don't come here again." Accepting Vanipakpind reveals poverty.
**6. Medical Flaw**  Taking alms by giving medical advice or preaching like a
physician is a medical flaw. In Mulachar, taking alms by preaching eight types
of medical treatment is called a medical flaw. In Angar Dharmamrut, it is
mentioned as Vaidyak Dosha. In the Parishha study of Uttaradhyayanas, it is
mentioned that the saint should not give importance to medical treatment. His
Shramanya can remain safe only if he does not get medical treatment and does not
treat others. A monk who consumes medical pind is liable for atonement.  **11.
If a householder tells the saint about his illness, the saint can treat him in
three ways:**  1. Pini 210/3. 2. Jiabha 1376: Tummego Janasi Dau. 3. Pini 210/4,
5, Jiabha 1377-80. 4. Pini 212. 5. Pini 213, Jiabha 1381. 6. Pini 210, Jiabha
1369. 7. Mulaati p. 354; Dinatvadidoshadarshanat. 8. The names of the eight
medical treatments are as follows: 1. Kaumar Chikitsa 2. Tanu Chikitsa 3.
Rasayan Chikitsa 4. Visha Chikitsa 5. Bhoot Chikitsa 6. Ksharatantra Chikitsa 7.
Shalaakik Chikitsa (opening eyes etc. with a probe) 8. Shalya Chikitsa (Mula Tu
452, Stha 8/26). 9. Anath 5/25. 10. U 2/33. 11. Ni 13/66.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti atithi-bhaktoM ke sammukha muni kahatA hai ki prAyaH loga
upakAriyoM, paricitoM evaM AzritoM ko dAna dete haiM lekina jo atithiyoM kA
satkAra karate haiM, unheM dAna dete haiM, unakA dAna zreSTha hotA hai| zvAna-
bhaktoM ke sammukha vanIpakatva karate hue muni isa prakAra kahatA hai ki isa
saMsAra meM tuma akele dAna denA jAnate ho| ye zvAna kailAza parvata ke deva
vizeSa haiM, pRthvI para ye yakSa rUpa meM vicaraNa kara rahe haiN| inakI pUjA
hitakara tathA tiraskAra ahitakara hotA hai| gAya, baila Adi ko tRNa Adi AhAra
sulabha ho jAtA hai lekina ina kuttoM ko AhAra-prApti sulabha nahIM hotI ata:
inako dAna denA zreSTha hai| zvAna Adi ke grahaNa se kAka Adi kA bhI grahaNa ho
jAtA hai|' isake doSa batAte hue graMthakAra kahate haiM ki pAtra yA apAtra ko
diyA huA dAna vyartha nahIM hotA, aisA kathana doSa yukta hai kyoMki isase
supAtra aura kupAtra ko eka samAna nirUpita kara diyA gayA hai| apAtra dAna kI
prazaMsA karanA atyadhika doSayukta hai| isase mithyAtva kA sthirIkaraNa hotA
hai, AdhAkarmI doSa kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai, AhAra-lolupatA se sAdhu kI unake
gaccha meM samAviSTa hone kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai tathA logoM meM yaha
avarNavAda phailatA hai ki ye sAdhu cATukArI haiM, AhAra-prApti ke lie
cATukAritA karate haiN| yadi dAna-dAtA dveSI hai aura zAkya Adi kA bhakta nahIM
hai to vaha tiraskArapUrvaka yaha kaha sakatA hai ki yahAM dubArA mata aanaa|
vanIpakapiNDa grahaNa karane se dainya prakaTa hotA hai|' 6. cikitsA doSa vaidya
kI bhAMti cikitsA batAkara yA upadeza dekara bhikSA lenA cikitsA doSa hai|
mUlAcAra meM ATha prakAra kI cikitsA kA upadeza dekara bhikSA prApta karane ko
cikitsA doSa kahA gayA hai| anagAradharmAmRta meM isake lie vaidyaka doSa kA
ullekha milatA hai| uttarAdhyayana ke parISaha adhyayana meM ullekha milatA hai
ki sAdhu cikitsA ko bahumAna na de| usakA zrAmaNya tabhI surakSita raha sakatA
hai, jaba vaha na cikitsA karavAe aura na dUsaroM kI cikitsA kre| cikitsApiNDa
kA upabhoga karane vAlA bhikSu prAyazcitta kA bhAgI hotA hai  / 11 gRhastha yadi
sAdhu ko apane roga ke bAre meM batAtA hai to sAdhu usakI tIna prakAra se
cikitsA kara sakatA hai 1. pini 210/3 /  2. jIbhA 1376 : tumamego jANasI daauN|
3. pini 210/4, 5, jIbhA 1377-80 /  4. pini 212 /  5. pini 213, jIbhA 1381  /  6.
pini 210, jIbhA 1369  /  7. mUlATI pR. 354 ; diintvaadidossdrshnaat| 8. ATha
cikitsA ke nAma isa prakAra haiM-1. kaumAra cikitsA 2. tanu cikitsA 3. rasAyana
cikitsA 4. viSa cikitsA 5. bhUta cikitsA 6. kSArataMtra cikitsA 7. zAlAkika
cikitsA (zalAkA dvArA AMkha Adi kholanA) 8. zalya cikitsA (mUlA tu 452,sthA
8/26) /  9. anadha 5/25 /  10. u 2/33 /  11. ni 13/66 /

Page #111 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti: An Observation  **•** When a householder asks for medical
advice, the monk should say, "I am not a physician." This statement will make
the householder understand that the illness is serious and they should consult a
physician.   **•** In another type of medical advice, when the householder asks
about the diagnosis, the monk might say, "I too suffered from this illness in
the past, and I recovered by consuming such and such medicine." Or, they might
say, "We monks treat illnesses that arise suddenly through tapasya (austerities)
like fasting and oil massage."   **•** In the third type of medical advice, the
monk acts as a physician themselves, cleansing the stomach and calming the bile,
then diagnosing the illness.  According to the Jitakalp Bhashya, the first two
types of medical advice are subtle (sukshma) and the third type is a form of
coarse (badar) medical advice.  There are two potential drawbacks to receiving
alms through treating an un-restrained householder:  **•** The use of medicinal
herbs like roots and tubers in treatment can lead to the killing of living
beings (jiva-himsa).  **•** It can increase the householder's unrestrained
behavior (asanyama) because they become strong like a heated iron ball and
become the cause of violence against many living beings. The author uses the
example of a weak tiger to illustrate this important point. To understand the
depth of this principle, one should read the "Chaupai" on charity and compassion
by Acharya Bhikṣu and the book "Bhikṣu Vichar Darshan" by Acharya Mahaprajna.
**•** If the illness worsens despite the monk's treatment, the householder might
blame the monk and even have them punished by the king, which would lead to
criticism of the teachings.  **•** **Krodha Pind:** The food that a monk
receives through the influence of their knowledge and austerities, the favor of
the royal family, and their physical strength is called Krodha Pind. When a monk
is angry because they are not given alms, the householder thinks, "The monk's
anger is not good for my future. If I don't give alms to the monk, the king will
be angry with me because they are favored by the king." This is how they receive
alms through fear of the monk's anger. To explain Krodha Pind, the author
mentions the story of a thief in Hastakalp Nagar.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa * gRhastha ke pUchane para sAdhu kahatA hai ki
maiM vaidya nahIM huuN| isa vAkya kI arthApatti se gRhastha jAna letA hai ki
roga gaMbhIra hai, use vaidya ke pAsa jAnA caahie| * cikitsA ke dUsare prakAra
meM gRhastha ke dvArA roga kA nidAna pUchane para muni kahatA hai ki maiM bhI
atIta meM isa roga se grasta thA, taba amuka auSadhi ke sevana se maiMne
svAsthya-lAbha prApta kiyA thaa| athavA vaha yaha kahatA hai ki hama sAdhu loga
sahasA utpanna roga kI cikitsA tele Adi kI tapasyA se karate haiN|2  /  * tIsarI
prakAra kI cikitsA meM sAdhu svayaM vaidya banakara roga kI cikitsA hetu peTa kA
zodhana tathA pitta kA upazamana karavAtA hai phira roga kA nidAna karatA hai|
jItakalpabhASya ke anusAra ina tIna prakAra kI cikitsAoM meM prathama do sUkSma
cikitsA hai tathA tIsarA bheda bAdara cikitsA rUpa hai| asaMyamI gRhastha kI
cikitsA dvArA bhikSA-prApti meM nimna doSoM kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai* cikitsA
meM kaMda, mUla Adi auSadhiyoM ke prayoga se jIvahiMsA kA prasaMga rahatA hai| *
asaMyama kI vRddhi hotI hai kyoMki gRhastha tapta lohe ke gole ke samAna hotA
hai| vaha sabala banakara aneka jIvoM kI hiMsA meM nimittabhUta banatA hai|
graMthakAra ne isa mahattvapUrNa pahalU ko samajhAne ke lie durbala vyAghra ke
dRSTAnta kA saMketa kiyA hai| isa siddhAnta kI gaharAI ko samajhAne ke lie
AcArya bhikSu kI dAna-dayA kI caupaI tathA AcArya mahAprajJa kI bhikSu vicAra
darzana pustaka paThanIya hai| * yadi sAdhu ke dvArA cikitsA kI jAne para bhI
kisI kAraNavaza roga bar3ha jAe to gRhastha sAdhu kA nigraha kara sakatA hai
arthAt rAjA Adi se daMDita bhI karavA sakatA hai, jisase pravacana kI niMdA hotI
hai|' 7. krodhapiNDa jo AhAra muni apanI vidyA aura tapa ke prabhAva se,
rAjakula kI priyatA tathA apane zArIrika bala ke prabhAva se prApta karatA hai,
vaha krodha piNDa hai| mAMgane para bhikSA prApta na hone se sAdhu ke kupita
hone para gRhastha yaha socatA hai ki sAdhu kA kupita honA mere bhaviSya ke lie
acchA nahIM hogA, yadi muni ko bhikSA nahIM dUMgA to rAjA mujha para kupita ho
jAeMge kyoMki ye rAjA ke kRpApAtra haiM, isa rUpa meM bhikSA prApta karanA
krodhapiNDa hai| krodhapiNDa ko spaSTa karane ke lie graMthakAra ne hastakalpa
nagara ke eka kSapaka kI kathA kA ullekha kiyA hai| 1. pini 214/1 /  2. pini
214/2 /  3. pini 214/3 /  4. jIbhA 1389 /  5. pini 215, mavR pa. 133, jIbhA 1392
/  6. vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 29 /  7. pini 215 /  8. pini 217,
piMpra 67 /  9. pini 218 /  10. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM.
30 /

Page #112 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti 8. Manapind  To beg for alms with pride when encouraged by
others or upon hearing words of praise and gain, or to beg for alms when
humiliated by another, is the Manapind fault. To clarify the Manapind fault, the
author has described in detail the story of the Kshapaka who brought Sevayi.
The Manapind fault, when committed while accepting alms, can sometimes lead to
hatred and distance between husband and wife. If a Muni accepts alms from a
husband against the wishes of his wife, using it as a reason for humiliation, it
can lead to suicide by one of them. Accepting Manapind also leads to neglect of
preaching.  ## 9. Mayapind  To accept alms deceitfully is the Mayapind fault.
The author has not clarified the nature of Mayapind, but has only hinted at the
story of Ashadhabhuti.  ## 10. Lobhapind  To search for a particular item with
greed, by any means, or to accept an excessive amount of heavy or superior food
is the Lobhapind fault. The author has hinted at the story of the Sadhu who
received saffron sweets in Lobhapind.  These four Pindas are the cause of
Karmabandha, and also the reason for the lightness of preaching.  ## 11. Sanstav
Dosha  To praise the giver before or after accepting alms, or to establish a
relationship, is the Sanstav Dosha. This is of two types: 1. Vachan Sanstav 2.
Sambandhi Sanstav. Both of these have two sub-categories, before and after. The
Nisith Bhashya describes many more sub-categories of Sanstav in detail. The
explanation of these four sub-categories is as follows:  * **Purvavachan
Sanstav:** To praise the good or bad qualities of the giver before accepting
alms, saying that your fame is spread in all ten directions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 8. mAnapiNDa dUsaroM ke dvArA utsAhita kie jAne para athavA labdhi
aura prazaMsAtmaka zabdoM ko sunakara garva se bhikSA kI eSaNA karanA athavA
dUsare ke dvArA apamAnita hone para piNDa kI eSaNA karanA mAnapiNDa doSa hai|'
mAnapiNDa doSa ko spaSTa karane ke lie graMthakAra ne sevaI lAne vAle kSapaka kI
kathA kA vistAra se varNana kiyA hai| _ mAnapiNDa doSa yukta bhikSA grahaNa
karane se kabhI-kabhI pati-patnI ke bIca dveSa evaM dUrI ho sakatI hai kyoMki
patnI kI icchA nahIM hone para ise mAnahAni kA hetu banAkara muni yadi pati se
vaha bhikSA grahaNa kara letA hai to isa apamAna se kabhI donoM meM se eka
AtmaghAta bhI kara sakatA hai| mAnapiNDa grahaNa karane se pravacana kI
avahelanA bhI hotI hai| 9. mAyApiNDa mAyApUrvaka bhikSA grahaNa karanA mAyApiNDa
doSa hai| niyuktikAra ne mAyApiNDa kA svarUpa spaSTa na karake kevala
ASAr3habhUti ke kathAnaka kA hI saMketa diyA hai| 10. lobhapiNDa AsaktipUrvaka
kisI vastu vizeSa kI yena kena prakAreNa gaveSaNA karanA athavA gariSTha yA
uttama padArtha ko ati mAtrA meM grahaNa karanA lobhapiNDa doSa hai| graMthakAra
ne lobhapiNDa meM kezariyA modaka prApta karane vAle sAdhu kI kathA kA saMketa
diyA hai| krodha, mAna Adi cAroM piNDa karmabaMdha ke kAraNa to haiM hI,
pravacana-lAghava ke hetu bhI haiN| 11. saMstava doSa bhikSA grahaNa karane se
pahale yA grahaNa karane ke bAda dAtA kI prazaMsA karanA yA sambandha sthApita
karanA saMstava doSa hai| yaha do prakAra kA hotA hai-1. vacana saMstava 2.
sambandhI sNstv| ina donoM ke bhI pUrva aura pazcAt do-do bheda hote haiN|
nizItha bhASya meM saMstava ke aura bhI aneka bhedoM kA vistAra se varNana kiyA
gayA hai| ina cAroM bhedoM kI vyAkhyA isa prakAra hai* pUrvavacana saMstava
bhikSA lene se pUrva dAtA ke sad asad guNoM kA utkIrtana karanA ki tumhArI kIrti
dasoM dizAoM meM 1.pini 219 /  2. vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 37 /
3. pini 219/8, doNhegatarapadose, AtavivattI ya uddddaaho| 4. piMpra69 ; mAyAe
viviharUvaM, rUvaM AhArakAraNe kunni| 5. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3,
kathA saM. 38 6. pini 220  /  7. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA
saM. 39  /  8. piMpra 71 ; thuNaNe saMbaMdhe, saMthavo duhA so ya puvva pacchA
vA  /  dAyAraM dANAo, puvvaM pacchA va jaM thuNaI  //  9. nibhA 1025-49, cU. pR.
108-113 /

Page #113 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Piṇḍaniyukti: A Supervision Constraint is Resonating**  For many days, we have
heard about your generosity, but today we have witnessed this quality of yours
firsthand. Your spirit of giving is unparalleled, and so on. Thus, praising the
donor before receiving alms is called **pūrvavacana-sanstava**.  In the
Digambara tradition, the terms **pūrvasanstuti** and **paścātsanstuti** are
used. According to them, telling the donor that you are a generous patron like
Yaśodhara, and reminding them that you are a great giver, how can you forget to
give now, is a **pūrvasanstuti** fault.  **Paścādvacana-sanstava** is praising
the donor after receiving alms, saying that my eyes have been purified by
meeting you. Earlier, I had doubts about your qualities, but seeing you, I have
realized that your qualities are truly renowned.  **Pūrvāsambandhi-sanstava** is
establishing a relationship with a donor as a father, mother, or sister while
receiving alms. The monk entering for alms, seeing his age and the age of the
housewife, establishes a relationship accordingly, saying that my mother,
sister, daughter, or granddaughter was like this. Establishing a relationship
before marriage is **pūrvāsambandhi-sanstava**.  **Paścātsambandhi-sanstava** is
establishing a relationship with the donor as a father-in-law, mother-in-law, or
wife according to age while receiving alms. Seeing a donor, the monk says that
my mother-in-law or wife was like you.  In the **Jītakalpabhāṣya**, establishing
a relationship or praising a woman is more blameworthy than a man in all four
categories. The faults arising from **pūrvāsambandhi-sanstava** and
**paścātsambandhi-sanstava** can be presented in the following points:  * If the
housewife is of a proud nature, she may think that this monk is a magician and a
flatterer. He is insulting us by calling us mother, wife, etc. She may become
angry and throw the monk out of the house. * If the housewife's husband hears
this, he may kill the monk immediately.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa nirbandha gUMja rahI hai| itane dina tumhAre
dAna ke bAre meM sunate the lekina Aja pratyakSa tumhArI isa vizeSatA ko dekhA
hai| tumhArI dAna kI bhAvanA apUrva hai aadi-aadi| isa prakAra bhikSA lene se
pahale saMstava karake bhikSA lenA pUrvavacana saMstava hai| digambara paramparA
meM pUrvasaMstuti aura pazcAtsaMstuti zabda kA prayoga milatA hai| unake anusAra
dAtA ko yaha kahanA ki tuma yazodhara ke samAna dAnapati ho tathA bhUlane para
yaha yAda dilAnA ki tuma to bar3e dAnI the, aba dAna denA kaise bhUla gae, yaha
pUrvasaMstuti doSa hai| * pazcAdvacana saMstava bhikSA lene ke bAda dAtA kI
prazaMsA karate hue yaha kahanA ki tumase milakara Aja mere cakSu pavitra ho ge|
pahale mujhe tumhAre guNoM ke bAre meM zaMkA thI lekina tumako dekhakara
anubhava huA ki tumhAre guNa yathArtha rUpa se prasiddha haiM, yaha pazcAtvacana
saMstava hai|' * pUrvasambandhI saMstava bhikSA lete samaya kisI dAnadAtA yA
dAnadAtrI ke sAtha pitA, mAtA yA bahina kA sambandha sthApita karanA,
pUrvasambandhI saMstava hai| bhikSArtha praviSTa muni apanI vaya tathA gRhiNI kI
vaya dekhakara tadanurUpa sambandha sthApita karate hue kahatA hai ki merI mAtA,
bahina, beTI yA pautrI aisI hI thI, isa prakAra vivAha se pUrva hone vAle
sambandha sthApita karanA pUrvasambandhI saMstava hai| * pazcAtsambandhI
saMstava bhikSA lete samaya dAtA yA dAtrI ke sAtha vaya ke anusAra zvasura, sAsa
yA patnI ke rUpa meM sambandha sthApita karanA pazcAtsambandhI saMstava hai|6
pazcAtsaMstava ke rUpa meM kisI dAnadAtrI ko dekhakara muni kahatA hai ki merI
sAsa yA patnI tumhAre jaisI thii|  /  jItakalpabhASya meM ina cAroM bhedoM meM
puruSa kI apekSA strI se sambandha sthApita karanA yA saMstava karanA adhika
doSaprada hai| pUrva aura pazcAt sambandhI saMstava se hone vAle doSoM ko nimna
binduoM meM prastuta kiyA jA sakatA hai * yadi gRhiNI prAnta svabhAva kI hai to
vaha yaha soca sakatI hai ki yaha muni mAyAvI aura cApalUsa hai| yaha mAtA,
bhAryA Adi kahakara hamArA tiraskAra kara rahA hai| vaha kruddha hokara muni ko
ghara se bAhara bhI nikAla sakatI hai| * yadi gRhiNI kA pati muni kI yaha bAta
suna letA hai to vaha muni kA sadyaH ghAta kara sakatA 1.pini 225, 225/1 /  2.
mUlA 455 /  3. pini 226, 226/1, mUlA 456 /  4. piMpra 72 ; jaNaNi-jaNagAi puvvaM
/  5. pini 222/1 /  6. piMpra 72 ; pacchA sAsu-sasurAi jaM ca jii| 7. pini 223 /
8. jIbhA 1422-1425  /

Page #114 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 100. Pindaniyukti  It is said that a muni's vow of celibacy can be broken by
mental disturbance caused by a woman's behavior as a wife.  • If the woman is of
good character, a loving relationship can be established between them, and she
may even give her widowed daughter-in-law in charity.  ## 12. Vidyapind Dosha
Vidyā is that which has a presiding deity and is perfected through chanting,
homa, etc. Obtaining alms by demonstrating Vidyā is Vidyapind Dosha. According
to Mulachar, it is a Vidyā Dosha to obtain food by enticing someone with the
promise of Vidyā or by extolling its virtues. The author of the Niyukti has
alluded to the story of a mendicant and a devotee in relation to Vidyā. The use
of Vidyā can lead to a person being affected by it or someone else associated
with them using counter-Vidyā to harm the muni. The use of Vidyā can also lead
to people accusing the muni of being a sinner, a magician, and a manipulator.
Complaints to the king can lead to persecution and punishment by the king's men.
## 13. Mantra Pind Dosha  Mantra is that which has a presiding deity and is
perfected simply by chanting without the need for homa, etc. Obtaining alms by
performing miracles through the use of Mantra is Mantra Pind Dosha. The author
of the Niyukti has referred to the story of King Murunda and Acharya Padalipta
in relation to Mantra. The use of Mantra Pind carries the same faults as those
mentioned for Vidyapind. According to the author, Mantra can be used correctly
in exceptional circumstances for the benefit of the community.  Mulachar also
explains this in a different way by considering Vidyā and Mantra together.
According to it, calling upon the external deities who give food and perfecting
them with Vidyā and Mantra is Vidyā Mantra Dosha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 100 piMDaniyukti hai athavA strI ke dvArA bhAryAvat AcaraNa karane para citta-
vikSobha se muni kA brahmacarya vrata bhI bhaMga ho sakatA hai| * yadi vaha
gRhiNI bhadra svabhAva kI hai to una donoM ke madhya sneha-sambandha sthApita ho
sakatA hai, vaha apanI vidhavA putravadhU kA dAna bhI kara sakatI hai| 12.
vidyApiNDa doSa jisakI adhiSThAtrI devI ho tathA jo japa, homa Adi ke dvArA
siddha kI jAe, vaha vidyA hai| vidyA kA pradarzana karake bhikSA prApta karanA
vidyApiNDa doSa hai| mUlAcAra ke anusAra vidyA-pradAna karane kA pralobhana
dekara yA vidyA ke mAhAtmya se AhAra prApta karanA vidyA-doSa hai| niyuktikAra
ne vidyA ke lie bhikSu-upAsaka kI kathA kA saMketa kiyA hai| vidyA kA prayoga
karane se vidyA se abhimaMtrita vyakti yA usase sambandhita anya koI vyakti
pratividyA se muni kA aniSTa kara sakatA hai| vidyA-prayoga se logoM meM yaha
apavAda phailatA hai ki ye muni pApajIvI, mAyAvI evaM kArmaNakArI haiN| rAjA ko
zikAyata karane se rAjapuruSoM dvArA nigraha tathA daMDa bhI prApta ho sakatA
hai| 13. maMtrapiNDa doSa jisakA adhiSThAtA devatA ho tathA jo binA homa Adi
kriyA ke par3hane mAtra se siddha ho jAe, vaha maMtra kahalAtA hai|
maMtraprayoga se camatkAra karake AhAra prApta karanA maMtrapiNDa doSa hai|
maMtraprayoga meM niyuktikAra ne muruNDa rAjA evaM pAdalipta AcArya kI kathA kA
nirdeza kiyA hai| maMtrapiNDa kA prayoga karane meM ve hI doSa haiM, jo
vidyApiNDa meM ullikhita haiN| graMthakAra ke anusAra saMgha kI prabhAvanA ke
lie ApavAdika sthiti meM maMtra kA samyak prayoga kiyA jA sakatA hai|' mUlAcAra
meM vidyA aura maMtra ko eka sAtha mAnakara prakArAntara se bhI isakI vyAkhyA kI
hai| usake anusAra AhAra dene vAle vyantara devatAoM ko vidyA aura maMtra se
bulAkara unheM siddha karanA vidyAmaMtra doSa 1. pini 223, 224 /  2. (ka) mavR
pa. 141 ; sasAdhanA strIrUpadevatAdhiSThitA vaa'kssrpddhtirvidyaa| (kha)
piMpra73, TI. pa.66 ; sAdhanena japahomAdhupacAreNa yuktA samanvitA
akSarapaddhatiH sAdhanayuktA vidyaa| 3. mUlA 457; vijjA sAdhitasiddhA, tisse
aasaapdaannkrnnehiN| tasse mAhappeNa ya. vijjAdoso da uppaado|| 4. kathA ke
vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 40 /  5.pini 228 //  6.(ka) jIbhA 1438;
maMto puNa paDhiyasiddhotu  /  (kha) mavRpa. 141 ; asAdhanA
puruSarUpadevatAdhiSThitAvA mNtrH| 7. mUlA 4581 8. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM
pari. 3, kathA saM. 41 /  9. pini 229  /  10. mUlA 459; AhAradAyagANaM, vijjA-
maMtehiM devadANaM tu| AhUya sAdhidavvA, vijjAmaMto have doso||

Page #115 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  **101.14. Cūrṇapiṇḍa Doṣa**  Obtaining alms by
becoming invisible through the use of collyrium (anjan) etc., or by subduing
someone with powder (cūrṇa) and then obtaining alms, is called cūrṇapiṇḍa doṣa.
The same faults that exist in the use of knowledge (vidyā) and mantra-piṇḍa are
also present in the consumption of cūrṇapiṇḍa. By using cūrṇapiṇḍa, one can
obtain hatred and even cause the death of a muni. In the Digambara tradition,
the explanation of cūrṇa doṣa is different. There, it is not the use of
collyrium etc. that makes one invisible, but rather the use of powder to cleanse
the eyes and powder to adorn and illuminate the body, and then obtaining food
through this is considered cūrṇa doṣa. The antardhāna piṇḍa mentioned in Niśītha
can be included under cūrṇapiṇḍa. The author has alluded to the story of Cāṇakya
and the two Kṣullakas in the context of cūrṇapiṇḍa doṣa. When the use of
cūrṇapiṇḍa is detected, it leads to disrespect for the sādhutva and the saṅgha.
**15. Yogapiṇḍa Doṣa**  Obtaining alms by using foot-ointment (pādalepa) or
fragrant substances, by walking on water, or by flying in the sky, is called
yogapiṇḍa doṣa. The example of Ārya Samita and the Kulapati falls under
yogapiṇḍa. Ārya Samita did not use yoga to influence people or to obtain alms,
but rather to influence the saṅgha.  There is no significant difference between
cūrṇa and yoga in terms of the substance used. Dry or moist powder (kṣoda)
produced from ordinary substances is called cūrṇa, and dry or paste-like (lepa)
powder produced from fragrant substances is called yoga.  **16. Mūlakarma Doṣa**
To damage someone's virginity through the use of practices, or to insert
something into someone's vagina, i.e., to make them fit for enjoyment by
removing their virginity, is called mūlakarma. In the Piṇḍaviśuddhiprakaraṇa,
bathing for good fortune, tying a rakṣābandhan, conception, abortion, marriage,
and the use of incense etc. are considered to be under mūlakarma. According to
mūlācāra, to subdue those who are not under control, and to bring together those
who are separated, is mūlakarma. Obtaining food through this is mūlakarma doṣa.
In the Anagāradharmāmṛta, there is also mention of vaśa doṣa in its place.
Mūlakarma denotes a broader context. Subduing someone is just one application of
mūlakarma.  **1. Piṁpr 73.**  **5. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3,
Kathā Saṅ. 43.**  **2. Piṁprati P. 40; Cūrṇaḥ auṣadha dravyasaṅkara kṣodaḥ -
aneka 6. Pini 231/1, Mavṛ P. 143.**  **A mixture of medicines is called cūrṇa.**
**7. (a) Pini 231/5.**  **(b) Paṁv 760; Gabbhaparisaḍaṇai v, Piṇḍatthaṁ kuṇai
evaṁ vasīkaraṇādisu, cunṇeṣu vasīkareṭṭu jo tu paraṁ. Mūlakammaṁ tu. Upyāetī
piṇḍaṁ, so hotī cunṇapiṇḍo tu.**  **8. Piṁpr 75: Maṅgalamūlīṇhavṇai,
Gabbhavīvāhakaraṇaghāyāī.**  **4. Mūla 460**  **_ Bhavavanamaūlaṁ karma, ti
mūlakarmaṁ mahāpāvaṁ. Nettassaṁjaṇacunṇaṁ, bhūṣaṇacunṇaṁ ca gattsobhayaraṁ._**
**9. Mūla 461. Cunṇaṁ teṇuppādā, cunṇayadoṣo havdi eso.**  **10. Anadh 5/19.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 101 14. cUrNapiNDa doSa aMjana Adi ke prayoga
se adRzya hokara bhikSA prApta karanA athavA cUrNake dvArA vazIkRta karake
bhikSA prApta karanA cUrNapiNDa doSa hai| vidyA aura maMtrapiNDa ke prayoga meM
jo doSa haiM, ve hI cUrNapiNDa grahaNa karane meM haiN| cUrNapiNDa prayoga se
pradveSa ko prApta karake koI vyakti muni kA prANa-ghAta bhI kara sakatA hai|
digambara paramparA meM cUrNadoSa kI vyAkhyA bhinna prakAra se milatI hai| vahAM
adRzya hone vAle aJjana Adi kA prayoga nahIM, balki AMkhoM ko nirmala karane
vAle cUrNa tathA zarIra ko vibhUSita aura dIpta karane vAle cUrNa kI vidhi
batAkara AhAra prApta karanA cUrNa doSa hai| nizItha meM ullikhita antardhAna
piNDa ko cUrNapiNDa ke antargata rakhA jA sakatA hai| graMthakAra ne cUrNapiNDa
doSa meM cANakya aura kSullakadvaya kI kathA kA saMketa kiyA hai| cUrNapiNDa ke
prayoga kI avagati hone para sAdhutva evaM saMgha kI avamAnanA hotI hai| 15.
yogapiNDa doSa pAdalepa athavA sugaMdhita padArtha kA prayoga karake, pAnI para
calakara athavA AkAza-gamana karake bhikSA prApta karanA yogapiNDa doSa hai|
yogapiNDa ke antargata Arya samita evaM kulapati kA dRSTAnta hai| Arya samita ne
logoM ko prabhAvita karane yA bhikSA ke lie yoga kA prayoga nahIM kiyA, balki
saMgha kI prabhAvanA ke lie yoga kA prayoga kiyaa| cUrNa aura yoga-ina donoM meM
dravya kI apekSA se vizeSa bheda nahIM hai| sAmAnya dravya se niSpanna zuSka yA
Ardra kSoda cUrNa kahalAtA hai tathA sugaMdhita dravya se niSpanna zuSka yA lepa
rUpa piSTI yoga kahalAtA hai| 16. mUlakarma doSa prayoga dvArA kisI ke kaumArya
ko kSata karanA athavA kisI kI yoni kA nivezana karanA arthAt use akSata karake
bhoga bhogane ke yogya banA denA mUlakarma hai| piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa meM
saubhAgya ke lie snAna, rakSAbaMdhana, garbhAdhAna, garbhaparizATana, vivAha
karAnA tathA dhUpa Adi ke prayoga ko mUlakarma ke antargata mAnA hai| mUlAcAra
ke anusAra jo vaza meM nahIM haiM, unako vaza meM karanA tathA viyuktoM kA
saMyoga karAnA mUlakarma hai, usake dvArA AhAra kI prApti mUlakarma doSa hai|
anagAradharmAmRta meM isake sthAna para vaza doSa kA bhI ullekha hai| mUlakarma
vyApaka saMdarbha ko prakaTa karatA hai| vazIkaraNa mUlakarma kA hI eka prayoga
hai| 1. piNpr73| 5. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 43 /  2.
piMpraTI pa. 40 ; cUrNaH auSadha dravyasaMkarakSodaH-aneka 6. pini 231/1, mavR
pa. 143 /  auSadhiyoM ke mizraNa ko cUrNa kahate haiN| 7. (ka) pini 231/5 /  3.
jIbhA 1456 (kha) paMva 760; gabbhaparisADaNAi va, piMDatthaM kuNai evaM
vasikaraNAdisu, cuNNesu vasIkarettu jo tu prN| mUlakammaM tu| upyAetI piMDaM, so
hotI cuNNapiMDo tu|| 8. piMpra 75 : maMgalamUlINhavaNAi,
gbbhviivaahkrnnghaayaaii| 4. mUlA 460 _ bhavavaNamUlaM kamma, ti mUlakammaM
mhaapaavN| nettassaMjaNacuNNaM, bhUsaNacuNNaM ca gattasobhayaraM  /  9. mUlA 461
/  cuNNaM teNuppAdo, cuNNayadoso havadi eso|| 10. anadha 5/19 /

Page #116 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍa Niyukti  According to the commentator Yashodeva Suri of the
Piṇḍaviśuddhiprakaraṇa, the use of Mūlakarma is the most serious and harmful of
the 47 faults of Bhiksha.  The fault of Mūlakarma related to Bhiksha is not
mentioned anywhere in the Āgama literature. The term Mūlakarma is mentioned in
the Praśna Vyākaraṇa (2/12), but there is no context of Bhiksha. In this
context, it can be assumed that Mūlakarma was not used for obtaining Bhiksha by
Mahavira and for some years after him, but later, in the course of time, some
Sadhu might have used it. This is why the Piṇḍaniyuktikāra has linked it with
the fault of Utpādana. The Niśītha also mentions 15 faults of Utpādana, but it
does not mention Mūlakarma.  The Tattvārtha Bhāṣya mentions two types of
Mūlakarma - Garbhādāna and Garbha-Pariśāṭana. In this, the Niyuktikāra mentions
the narratives of a girl of different Yoni and two queens.  The use of Karma
leads to the fault of violence. Making a woman Akshat Yoni increases her sexual
desire, and causing an abortion can lead to intense anger in the person
involved, which disrespects the preaching. Making a woman Kshatayoni leads to
Bhogantaray for the Sadhu for life. The Jītakalpa Bhāṣya also mentions the
faults of accusation, etc., arising from Mūlakarma.  There is a difference in
the order and names of the Utpādana faults in the Śvetāmbara and Digambara
traditions. Here, a chart is presented with the names of the faults obtained in
the Śvetāmbara Āgama and the Digambara tradition along with Piṇḍaniyukti.
**Piṇḍaniyukti** 1. Dhātrī 2. Dūtī 3. Nimitta 4. Ājīvana 5. Vanīpaka 6. Cikitsā
7. Krodha 8. Māna 9. Māyā 10. Lobha 11. Sanstava 12. Vidya 13. Mantra 14. Cūrṇa
15. Yoga 16. Mūlakarma  **Niśītha 13/61-75** 1. Dhātrī 2. Dūtī 3. Nimitta 4.
Ājīvikā 5. Vanīpaka 6. Cikitsā 7. Krodha 8. Māna 9. Māyā 10. Lobha 11. Vidya 12.
Mantra 13. Yoga 14. Cūrṇa 15. Antaradhānapiṇḍa  **Piṃpra 75; Mūlakammaṁ
Mahāpāvaṁ, Tī P. 69.** **Jībhā 1468; Duvihaṁ Tu Mūlakammaṁ, Gabbhādānaṁ Taheva
Pariśāḍe.**  **Mūlācāra 445** 1. Dhātrī 2. Dūt 3. Nimitta 4. Ājīva 5. Vanīpaka
6. Cikitsā 7. Krodhī 8. Mānī 9. Māyī 10. Lobhī 11. Pūrvastuiti 12. Paścāttusti
13. Vidya 14. Mantra 15. Cūrṇayoga 16. Mūlakarma  **Anāgāradharmāmṛta 5/19** 1.
Dhātrī 2. Dūt 3. Nimitta 4. Vanīpakokti 5. Ājīva 6. Krodha 7. Māna 8. Māyā 9.
Lobha 10. Prāknuti 11. Anunuti 12. Vaidyak 13. Vidya 14. Mantra 15. Cūrṇa 16.
Vaśa/Mūlak  **3. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Kathā Saṁ.
44-46.** **4. Jībhā 1469.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDa niyukti piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa ke TIkAkAra yazodevasUri ke anusAra bhikSA
ke 47 doSoM meM mUlakarma kA prayoga sabase adhika guru aura sAvadya hai| 102
bhikSA se sambandhita mUlakarma doSa kA ullekha Agama- sAhitya meM kahIM nahIM
milatA hai| prazna vyAkaraNa (2/12) meM mUlakarma kA ullekha hai para vahAM
bhikSA kA prasaMga nahIM hai| isa saMdarbha meM yaha saMbhAvanA kI jA sakatI hai
ki mahAvIra tathA usake bAda bhI kucha varSoM taka mUlakarma kA prayoga bhikSA-
prApti ke lie nahIM kiyA jAtA thA lekina bAda meM samaya ke antarAla meM kisI
sAdhu ne yaha prayoga kiyA hogA isIlie piNDaniryuktikAra ne ise utpAdanA doSa ke
sAtha jor3a diyaa| nizItha meM bhI utpAdanA ke 15 doSoM kA ullekha hai, usameM
mUlakarma kA saMketa nahIM hai| takalpabhASya meM mUlakarma ke do bheda kie
haiM- garbhAdhAna tathA garbha- parizATana  /  isameM niyuktikAra bhinnayonikA
kanyA tathA do rAniyoM ke kathAnakoM kA ullekha kiyA hai| karma kA prayoga
karane se hiMsA kA doSa lagatA hai| akSata yonitva karane se kAmapravRtti
bar3hatI hai tathA garbhapAta karane se sambandhita vyakti ko bhayaMkara roSa ho
sakatA hai, isase pravacana kI avamAnanA hotI hai  /  kSatayoni karane se sAdhu
ko jIvana bhara bhogAntarAya lagatA hai| jItakalpabhASya meM bhI mUlakarma se
hone vAle doSAropaNa Adi doSoM kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai| zvetAmbara aura
digambara paramparA meM utpAdana doSoM krama evaM nAmoM meM aMtara milatA hai|
yahAM piNDaniryukti ke sAtha zvetAmbara Agama tathA digambara paramparA meM
prApta doSoM ke nAmoM kA cArTa prastuta kiyA jA rahA hai piNDaniryukti 1. dhAtrI
2. dUtI 3. nimitta 4. AjIvanA 5. vanIpaka 6. cikitsA 7. krodha 8. mAna 9. mAyA
10. lobha 11. saMstava 12. vidyA 13. maMtra 14. cUrNa 15. yoga 16. mUlakarma
nizItha 13/61-75 1. dhAtrI 2. dUtI 3. nimitta 4. AjIvikA 5. vanIpaka 6. cikitsA
7. krodha 8. mAna 9. mAyA 10. lobha 11. vidyA 12. maMtra 13. yoga 14. cUrNa 15.
antardhAnapiMDa 1. piMpra 75 ; mUlakammaM mahApAvaM, TI pa. 69  /  2. jIbhA
1468; duvihaM tu mUlakammaM, gabbhAdANe taheva parisADe  /  mUlAcAra 445 1.
dhAtrI 2. dUta 3. nimitta 4. AjIva 5. vanIpaka 6. cikitsA 7. krodhI 8. mAnI 9.
mAyI 10. lobhI 11. pUrvastui 12. pazcAtstuti 13. vidyA 14. maMtra 15. cUrNayoga
16. mUlakarma anagAradharmAmRta 5 / 19 1. dhAtrI 2. dUta 3. nimitta 4.
vanIpakokti 5. AjIva 6. krodha 7. mAna 8. mAyA 9. lobha 10. prAknuti 11. anunuti
12. vaidyaka 13. vidyA 14. maMtra 15. cUrNa 16. vaza/mUlaka 3. kathA ke vistAra
hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 44-46  /  4. jIbhA 1469  /

Page #117 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation  The term "dūtdoṣa" is mentioned in Mūlācāra
instead of "dūtidoṣa".  In Mūlācāra, instead of terms like "krodhapiṇḍa", the
specific characteristics of the individual are mentioned, such as "krodhī",
"mānī", "māyī", and "lobhī".  In Niśītha, the "sanstavadoṣa" is not mentioned
along with the 15 other faults, but in another context, the one who performs
"puraḥ" and "paścāt" sanstava is considered liable for atonement. In
Piṇḍaniryukti, "pūrvastuṭi" and "paścātstuṭi" are included under the
"sanstavadoṣa", while in Mūlācāra and Anagāradharmāmṛta, "sanstavadoṣa" is
considered as two separate faults. Anagāradharmāmṛta mentions "prāknuti" and
"paścātṇuti", while Mūlācāra mentions "pūrvastuṭi" and "paścātstuṭi". Although
there is a difference in words, the meaning is the same.  In Anagāradharmāmṛta,
"vaidyaka doṣa" is mentioned instead of "cikitsā doṣa".  In the Digambara
tradition, "cūrṇa" and "yoga" are considered together, while in Piṇḍaniryukti,
they are considered as separate faults.  In the thirteenth context of Niśītha,
15 faults related to "utpādana" are mentioned in one place, but there, the
"chedasūtrakara" has not mentioned them as faults of "utpādana". The
"antaradhāna doṣa" is considered as an independent fault, not under
"cūrṇapiṇḍa", and the "mūlakarma doṣa" is not mentioned. Ācārya Bhadravāhu has
declared the muni who consumes these faults liable for atonement.  ## Faults of
Grahaṇaiṣaṇā  Consuming food without any faults like "udgama", "utpādana",
"śaṅkā", etc., is called "grahaṇaiṣaṇā". In Pañcavastū, the word "aiṣaṇā" is
used in the context of "grahaṇaiṣaṇā". There, "aiṣaṇā", "gaveṣaṇā", "anveṣaṇā",
and "grahaṇa" are considered synonymous.  The faults of "udgama" are related to
the householder, and the faults of "utpādana" are related to the sādhū. But the
ten faults of "aiṣaṇā" are related to both the sādhū and the householder. Among
these, "śaṅkita" and "bhāvataḥ apariṇata" are two faults related to the sādhū,
and the remaining eight faults are generally caused by the householder. For
these faults of "aiṣaṇā", the commentators of Mūlācāra and Anagāradharmāmṛta
have also mentioned "aśana doṣa". Accepting alms with these faults of
"grahaṇaiṣaṇā" leads to "pāpabandha", "hiṃsā", and disgust in the world. The ten
faults of "grahaṇaiṣaṇā" are as follows:  1. Śaṅkita 2. Prakṣita 3. Nikṣipta 4.
Pihita 5. Saṃhata 6. Dāyaka 7. Unmiśra 8. Apariṇata 9. Lipta 10. Chardita  1. Ni
2/37 2. Ni 13/61-75 3. Pini 233 4. Pañv 761; Eṣaṇa gaveṣaṇā aṇṇeṣaṇā ya grahaṇaṃ
ca honti egaṭṭhā. 5. Pini 234, 235 6. (a) Mūlāṭī p. 367; ete aśanadoṣāḥ daśa
pariharaṇīyāḥ. (b) Anadh 5/28 7. Pini 237, Jībhā 1476.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa mUlAcAra meM dUtIdoSa ke sthAna para dUtadoSa
kA ullekha bhI milatA hai| mUlAcAra meM krodhapiNDa Adi ke sthAna para vyakti kA
vizeSaNa karake krodhI, mAnI, mAyI aura lobhI kA ullekha hai| * * nizItha meM 15
doSoM ke sAtha saMstava doSa kA ullekha nahIM hai lekina dUsare uddezaka meM
puraH evaM pazcAt saMstava karane vAle ko prAyazcitta kA bhAgI batAyA hai|'
piNDaniryukti meM saMstava doSa ke antargata hI pUrvastuti tathA pazcAt stuti kA
samAveza hotA hai, jabaki mUlAcAra aura anagAradharmAmRta meM saMstava doSa ko
do alaga-alaga doSa mAnA hai| anagAradharmAmRta meM prAknuti aura pazcAtnuti
tathA mUlAcAra meM pUrvastuti aura pazcAtstuti kA ullekha hai  /  zabdabheda
hone para bhI yahAM arthasAmya hai| * * anagAradharmAmRta meM cikitsA doSa ke
sthAna para vaidyaka doSa kA ullekha bhI milatA hai| digambara paramparA meM
cUrNa aura yoga ko eka sAtha mAnA hai, jabaki piNDaniryukti meM ye donoM alaga-
alaga doSa haiN| nizItha ke terahaveM uddezaka meM utpAdanA se sambandhita 15
doSoM kA ullekha eka sthAna para milatA hai lekina vahAM cheda sUtrakAra ne
inake lie utpAdanA ke doSoM kA ullekha nahIM kiyA hai  /  antardhAna doSa ko
cUrNapiNDa ke antargata na rakhakara svataMtra doSa mAnA hai tathA mUlakarma
doSa kA ullekha nahIM hai| AcArya bhadrabAhu ne ina doSoM kA sevana karane vAle
muni ko prAyazcitta kA bhAgI batAyA hai| grahaNaiSaNA ke doSa udgama aura
utpAdana ke atirikta zaMkA Adi doSoM se rahita AhAra grahaNa karanA grahaNaiSaNA
hai  /  paMcavastu meM eSaNA zabda ko grahaNaiSaNA ke saMdarbha meM prayukta
kiyA hai| vahAM eSaNA, gaveSaNA, anveSaNA aura grahaNa ko ekArthaka mAnA hai|
103 inameM udgama ke doSa gRhastha se, utpAdana ke doSa sAdhu se sambandhita
hote haiM lekina eSaNA ke daza doSa sAdhu aura gRhastha donoM se sambandhita
hote haiN| inameM zaMkita tathA bhAvataH apariNata- ye do doSa sAdhu se tathA
zeSa ATha doSa niyamataH gRhastha se utpanna hote haiN| eSaNA ke ina doSoM ke
lie mUlAcAra aura anagAradharmAmRta ke TIkAkAra ne azana doSa kA ullekha bhI
kiyA hai| grahaNaiSaNA ke doSoM se yukta bhikSA lene se pApabaMdha, hiMsA tathA
loka meM jugupsA hotI hai  /  grahaNaiSaNA ke dasa doSa isa prakAra haiM- 1.
zaMkita, 2. prakSita, 3. nikSipta, 4. pihita, 5. saMhata, 6. dAyaka, 7. unmizra,
8. apariNata, 9. lipta, 10. chardita  /  1. ni 2/37  /  2. ni 13/61-75  /  3.
pini 233  /  4. paMva 761 ; esaNa gavesaNa'NNesaNA ya gahaNaM ca hoMti egaTThA
/  5. pini 234, 235  /  6. (ka) mUlATI pR. 367 ; ete azanadoSAH daza
pariharaNIyAH  /  (kha) anadha 5 / 28 7. pini 237, jIbhA 1476  /

Page #118 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 104  **1. Sankit Dosha**  Taking alms when there is a possibility of doshas
like Aadhkarma etc. is Sankit Dosha. Dashavaikalik explicitly mentions that a
Muni should avoid food that is doubtful from the perspective of Kalpa and
Akalpa. The author has given the following Chaturbhangi for Sankit:  * Sankit
Grahan, Sankit Bhog * Sankit Grahan, Nishankit Bhog * Nishankit Grahan, Sankit
Bhog * Nishankit Grahan, Nishankit Bhog  The fourth bhang in this Chaturbhangi
is pure. Niruktikar has explained all four bhangs in detail. Seeing the abundant
alms offered at a householder's house, the Muni is unable to ask questions due
to shyness. He takes the alms with doubt and consumes it in the same state, this
is the explanation of the first bhang.  In the second bhang, the Muni is
doubtful while taking the alms but while consuming it, another Muni clarifies
that due to some incident, abundant food was prepared for a guest at that house
or a Prahenak has come from another house. Hearing this, he consumes the alms
without any doubt, this is the second option of Chaturbhangi.  In the third
option, the Muni sees the same food items with other Munis while criticizing in
front of the Guru, and doubt arises in his mind. Therefore, even though he has
taken the alms without any doubt, he consumes it in a doubtful state. In the
fourth bhang, there is no doubt in both situations, therefore it is pure and
Eshaniya.  **2. Prakshit Dosha**  Taking alms with a hand or spoon etc. that is
contaminated with Satchit etc. substances is Prakshit Dosha. It is considered
the fourteenth Asamadhisthan in Samavayang and the fifteenth in Dasha Shruta
Skandh. The commentator Malayagiri has also used the word Prakshipt instead of
Prakshit. It is of two types:  1. Satchit Prakshit  1. Mula 463, Pimpranti P.
71; Aadhkarmadi Doshavattataya Aarekitasyabhaktadegrahanam swikar:
Sankitgrahanam. Pind 2. Dasha 5/1/44 3. Pini 238, Jiba 1477, 1478.  4. Pini
240/1-3. 5. Mula 464. 6. Sam 20/1, Dasru 1/3. 7. Mavru P. 147; Prakshiptan
Satchitprithivyaadinaavagunditam.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 104 1. zaMkita doSa AdhAkarma Adi doSa kI saMbhAvanA hone para bhI bhikSA
grahaNa karanA zaMkita doSa hai  /  dazavaikAlika meM spaSTa ullekha hai kalpa
aura akalpa kI dRSTi se zaMkAyukta AhAra kA muni niSedha kare graMthakAra ne
zaMkita ke viSaya meM nimna caturbhaMgI kA nirdeza diyA hai. zaMkita grahaNa,
zaMkita bhoga  /  zaMkita grahaNa, niHzaMkita bhoga  /  * * niHzaMkita grahaNa,
zaMkita bhoga  /  * niHzaMkita grahaNa, niHzaMkita bhoga  /  * isa caturbhaMgI
meM cauthA bhaMga vizuddha hai| niryuktikAra ne ina cAroM bhaMgoM kA vistAra se
spaSTIkaraNa kiyA hai| gRhastha ke ghara dI jAne vAlI pracura bhikSA sAmagrI ko
dekhakara muni lajjAvaza pUchatAcha karane meM samartha nahIM hotaa| vaha zaMkA
ke sAtha bhikSA grahaNa karatA hai aura usI avasthA meM usakA upabhoga karatA
hai, yaha prathama bhaMga kI vyAkhyA hai| dUsare bhaMga meM muni bhikSA grahaNa
karate samaya zaMkAgrasta rahatA hai lekina upabhoga karate samaya dUsarA muni
spaSTIkaraNa kara detA hai ki usa ghara meM prakaraNavaza kisI atithi ke lie
pracura khAnA banA hai athavA kisI anya ke ghara se praheNaka AyA hai, yaha
sunakara vaha niHzaMkita hokara usa bhikSA kA upabhoga karatA hai, yaha
caturbhaMgI kA dUsarA vikalpa hai| tIsare vikalpa meM guru ke samakSa AlocanA
karate hue anya muniyoM ke pAsa bhI vaisI hI khAdya sAmagrI dekhakara muni ke
mana meM zaMkA ho jAtI hai ataH niHzaMkita rUpa se grahaNa kI gaI bhikSA ko bhI
vaha zaMkita avasthA meM upabhoga karatA hai| cauthe bhaMga meM donoM sthitiyoM
meM zaMkA nahIM hotI ataH vaha vizuddha hone se eSaNIya hai| 2. prakSita doSa
sacitta Adi padArthoM se lipta hAtha yA cammaca Adi se bhikSA grahaNa karanA
mrakSita doSa hai  / " samavAyAMga meM caudahavAM tathA dazAzrutaskandha meM ise
pandrahavAM asamAdhisthAna mAnA hai| TIkAkAra malayagiri prakSita ke sthAna para
prakSipta zabda kA prayoga bhI kiyA hai| yaha do prakAra kA hotA hai - 1.
sacitta prakSita 1. mUlA 463, piMpraMTI pa. 71; AdhAkarmAdidoSavattayA
Arekitasya bhaktAdergrahaNaM svIkAra: zaMkitagrahaNam  /  piMDa 2. daza 5 /1/44
3. pini 238, jIbhA 1477, 1478  /  4. pini 240 / 1-3  /  5. mUlA 464  /  6. sama
20/1, dazru 1 / 3 | 7. mavR pa. 147 ; prakSiptaM sacittapRthivyAdinA'vaguNDitam
/

Page #119 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 105. Pindaniyukti: An Observation 2. AChitta Prakshit.  There are three types
of Sachitta Prakshit: 1. PrithviKay Prakshit, 2. ApKay Prakshit, 3. VanaspatiKay
Prakshit.  **Sachitta PrithviKay Prakshit:** Accepting alms with a hand or
vessel that is touched by dry or moist Sachitta PrithviKay.  **ApKay Prakshit:**
Accepting alms with a hand or vessel that is touched by dry or moist Sachitta
Rasa (juices). There are four types of Sachitta ApKay Prakshit: 1. Purahkarma -
Washing hands with Sachitta water before giving alms to a Sadhu. 2. Paschatkarma
- Washing hands with Sachitta water after giving alms. 3. Sasnigdha - Accepting
alms with hands slightly wet with Sachitta water. 4. Udaka - Accepting alms with
a hand that is touched by Sachitta water that is dripping.  **VanaspatiKay
Prakshit:** Accepting alms with a hand that is touched by the juices of a
VanaspatiKay or any other ordinary plant's smooth parts.  The remaining three
Kayas - Tejas, Vayu, and Tras - do not have Sachitta-AChitta forms of Prakshit,
therefore they are not considered here.  There are eight Bhangs formed by the
combination of Sansrusht hand, Sansrusht vessel, Savasesha dravya (substance
with residue) and their opposites - Asansrusht hand, Asansrusht vessel, and
Niravasesha dravya (substance without residue).  * Sansrusht hand, Sansrusht
vessel, and Savasesha dravya. * Sansrusht hand, Sansrusht vessel, and
Niravasesha dravya. * Sansrusht hand, Asansrusht vessel, and Savasesha dravya. *
Sansrusht hand, Asansrusht vessel, and Niravasesha dravya. * Asansrusht hand,
Sansrusht vessel, and Savasesha dravya. * Asansrusht hand, Sansrusht vessel, and
Niravasesha dravya. * Asansrusht hand, Asansrusht vessel, and Savasesha dravya.
* Asansrusht hand, Asansrusht vessel, and Niravasesha dravya.  In the second,
fourth, sixth, and eighth options, there is a possibility of Paschatkarma,
therefore accepting alms in those Bhangs is prohibited. In the odd-numbered
Bhangs, accepting alms is permissible because due to the presence of Savasesha,
even if the hand and vessel are Sansrusht, there is no possibility of
Paschatkarma.  1. Pini 243, Jiba 1491. 4. For clarification of Purahkarma and
Paschatkarma, see Dasha 2, Jiba 1494, Pini 243/2. 5/1/32-36 and their
commentary. 3. Dasha Jichuu p. 178; Purekammanam naam jan sadhunam dattanam
hattham 5. Pini 299. Bhayana dhovai, tam purekamm bhannai.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 105 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 2. acitta prkssit| sacitta prakSita ke tIna
bheda haiM-1. pRthvIkAyaprakSita 2. apkAyamrakSita 3. vnsptikaaymrkssit| sacitta
pRthvIkAya prakSita-zuSka yA Ardra sacitta pRthvIkAya se lipta hAtha yA pAtra se
bhikSA lenaa| apkAya prakSita-zuSka yA Ardra sacitta rasoM se yukta hAtha yA
pAtra se bhikSA grahaNa karanA apkAya mrakSita hai| sacitta apkAya prakSita ke
cAra bheda haiM - 1. puraHkarma-sAdhu ko bhikSA dene ke lie dAna dene se pUrva
sacitta jala se hAtha dhonaa| 2. pazcAtkarma-bhikSA dene ke pazcAt sacitta jala
se hAtha dhonaa|' 3. sasnigdha-sacitta jala se ISat AI hAthoM se bhikSA grahaNa
krnaa| 4. udakA-jisase pAnI Tapaka rahA ho, aise sacitta jala se yukta hAtha se
bhikSA grahaNa krnaa| vanaspatikAya mrakSita-vanaspatikAya ke rasa athavA
pratyeka aura sAdhAraNa vanaspati ke zlakSNa khaMDoM se lipta hAtha se bhikSA
grahaNa krnaa| zeSa tIna kAya-tejas, vAyu aura trasa ke sacitta-acitta rUpa
mrakSita nahIM hotA ataH usakA yahAM grahaNa nahIM kiyA gayA hai| saMsRSTa
hAtha, saMsRSTa pAtra tathA sAvazeSa dravya tathA inake pratipakSI-asaMsRSTa
hAtha, asaMsRSTa pAtra tathA niravazeSa dravya-inake paraspara saMyoga se ATha
bhaMga banate haiM * saMsRSTa hAtha, saMsRSTa pAtra tathA sAvazeSa drvy| *
saMsRSTa hAtha, saMsRSTa pAtra tathA niravazeSa drvy| * saMsRSTa hAtha,
asaMsRSTa pAtra tathA sAvazeSa drvy| * saMsRSTa hAtha, asaMsRSTa pAtra tathA
niravazeSa drvy| * asaMsRSTa hAtha, saMsRSTa pAtra tathA sAvazeSa drvy| *
asaMsRSTa hAtha, saMsRSTa pAtra tathA niravazeSa drvy| * asaMsRSTa hAtha,
asaMsRSTa pAtra tathA sAvazeSa drvy| * asaMsRSTa hAtha, asaMsRSTa pAtra tathA
niravazeSa dravya  /  inameM dUsare, cauthe, chaThe aura AThaveM vikalpa meM
pazcAtkarma kI saMbhAvanA hone ke kAraNa una bhaMgoM meM bhikSA lene kA niSedha
hai tathA viSama saMkhyA vAle bhaMgoM meM bhikSA grahaNa kI jA sakatI hai kyoMki
sAvazeSa hone ke kAraNa hAtha aura pAtra saMsRSTa hone para bhI pazcAtkarma kI
saMbhAvanA nahIM rhtii| 1. pini 243, jIbhA 1491  /  4. puraHkarma aura
pazcAtkarma ke spaSTIkaraNa hetu dekheM daza 2. jIbhA 1494, pini 243/2 /
5/1/32-36 evaM unakA ttippnn| 3. dazajicU pR. 178 ; purekammaM nAma jaM sAdhUNaM
daTTaNaM hatthaM 5. pini 299  /  bhAyaNaM dhovai, taM purekamma bhnnnni|

Page #120 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 106. Pindaniyukti  **Achett Mrakshit**  Achett Mrakshit also has four
divisions related to the hand and the vessel. The four divisions involve the act
of taking food. In these, alms are acceptable from a hand and vessel that are in
contact with Agarhita Mrakshit, but there is a prohibition against Garhita
Mrakshit. If a hand or vessel is smeared with Agarhita Gorasdrav, Madhu, Ghrita,
Taila, Gud, etc., and is in contact with living beings, then alms are
permissible in that situation because there is a possibility of violence against
Makshika, Pipilika, etc. Generally, Sthavirakalpi Munis can accept alms with a
hand smeared with Ghrita, Gud, etc., after following the proper procedure, but
Jinakalpi Munis cannot accept alms with such hands. In the world, it is
forbidden to take food from a hand or vessel smeared with Garhita Mans, Vasa,
Shonit, and Madhira, etc., and in both worlds, Garhita Mutra and Mal are also
unacceptable for a Sadhu.  **3. Nikshipta Dosha**  Accepting alms that are
placed on Sachitta Prithvi, etc., is Nikshipta Dosha. In Dashavaikalika, it is
clearly mentioned that Ashan, Pan, Khadim, and Swadim, etc., food items are
unacceptable for a Sadhu if they are placed on water, Uttinga, or Panak, etc.,
or if they are placed on fire. Nikshipta Dosha is of two types: Sachitta and
Achett.  Sachitta Nikshipta has two divisions: Anantara and Parampara. There are
six ways in which the six Jeevanikayas of Prithvi, Ap, etc., can be deposited
with each other:  1. Prithvikaaya on Prithvikaaya. 2. Prithvikaaya on Apkaaya.
3. Prithvikaaya on Tejaskaaya. 4. Prithvikaaya on Vayukaaya. 5. Prithvikaaya on
Vanaspatikaaya. 6. Prithvikaaya on Traskaaya.  Similarly, there are six
divisions for Apkaaya, etc. In these, one option is Svasthan and the remaining
five are Parasthan. The seven types of Nikshep of Agnikaaya are as follows:  1.
Vidhyat - The fire that is not visible initially but becomes visible later after
adding fuel is called Vidhyat.  **References:**  1. Pini 245, 245/1. 2. Pini
249. 3. Pini 245/2. 4. Das 5/1/59, 61, 62. 5. Mula 465. 6. The author has
explained the various divisions of Nikshipta on fire in detail, see Pini
252-252/2, Mavri P. 152, 153.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 106 piMDaniyukti acitta mrakSita acitta mrakSita meM bhI hasta aura pAtra se
sambandhita caturbhagI hotI hai| caturbhaMgI meM AhAra grahaNa kI bhajanA hai|
inameM agarhita prakSita se yukta hAtha aura pAtra se bhikSA grAhya hai lekina
garhita mrakSita kA pratiSedha hai| agarhita gorasadrava madhu , ghRta, taila,
gur3a Adi se kharaMTita hAtha yA pAtra yadi jIvoM se saMsakta haiM to usa sthiti
meM bhikSA varNya hai kyoMki isase makSikA, pipIlikA Adi kI hiMsA kI saMbhAvanA
rahatI hai| sAmAnyataH sthavirakalpI muni vidhipUrvaka ghRta, gur3a Adi se
kharaMTita hAtha se bhikSA grahaNa kara sakate haiM lekina jinakalpika vaise
hAthoM se bhikSA grahaNa nahIM kara skte| loka meM garhita mAMsa, vasA, zoNita
aura madirA Adi se kharaMTita hAtha yA pAtra se AhAra lenA varjita hai tathA
ubhayaloka meM garhita mUtra aura mala se mekSita bhI sAdhu ke lie agrAhya hai|
3. nikSipta doSa sacitta pRthvI Adi para rakhI huI bhikSA grahaNa karanA
nikSipta doSa hai| dazavaikAlika meM spaSTa ullekha hai ki azana, pAna, khAdima
aura svAdima Adi khAdya yadi pAnI, uttiMga yA panaka Adi para rakhe hue hoM,
agni para nikSipta hoM to vaha bhaktapAna sAdhu ke lie akalpya hai| nikSipta
doSa do prakAra kA hotA haisacitta aura acitt| sacitta nikSipta ke do bheda
haiM-anantara aura prmpr| pRthvI, ap Adi SaDjIvanikAyoM kA Apasa meM chaha
prakAra se nikSepa saMbhava hai 1. pRthvIkAya kA pRthvIkAya pr| 2. pRthvIkAya kA
apkAya pr| 3. pRthvIkAya kA tejaskAya pr| 4. pRthvIkAya kA vAyukAya pr| 5.
pRthvIkAya kA vanaspatikAya pr| 6. pRthvIkAya kA trasakAya pr| isI prakAra
apkAya Adi ke bhI 6-6 bheda hote haiN| inameM eka-eka vikalpa svasthAna tathA
zeSa pAMca parasthAna hote haiN| agnikAya kA saptavidha nikSepa isa prakAra
hai1. vidhyAta-jo agni pahale dikhAI nahIM detI lekina bAda meM IMdhana DAlane
para spaSTa dikhAI detI hai, vaha vidhyAta kahalAtI hai| 1. pini 245, 245/1 /
5. pini 249 /  2.pini 245/2 /  6. graMthakAra ne agni para nikSipta ke aneka
bhaMgoM kI vistAra 3. mUlA 465 /  se vyAkhyA kI hai, dekheM pini 252-252/2, mavR
pa. 4. daza 5/1/59,61, 62 /  152, 153 /

Page #121 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation  **2. Murmur:** The half-cooked fire particles
of āpingala color are called murmur.  **3. Angāra:** Fire without flames is
called angāra.  **4. Aprāpta-jvalā:** A vessel placed on the stove, which does
not touch the fire, is called aprāpta-jvalā.  **5. Prāpta-jvalā:** Fire that
touches the pitharak is called prāpta-jvalā.  **6. Sama-jvalā:** Fire that
touches the upper part of the vessel is called sama-jvalā.  **7. Vyutkrānta-
jvalā:** Fire that rises above the vessel placed on the stove is called
vyutkrānta-jvalā.  Just as a sa-citta deposit is made on a sa-citta, similarly,
on mixed earth, there is a deposit of sa-citta earth, on sa-citta earth, there
is a deposit of mixed earth, and on mixed earth, there is a deposit of mixed
earth. Similarly, there are four divisions of deposit on a-citta with sa-citta
and mixed. In these three four-fold divisions, the fourth division of the four-
fold division related to a-citta is the object of bhakta-pāna.  Where there is a
deposit on sa-citta, a-citta, or mixed substance, there are two types of mārgṇā:
anantara and parampara. The anantara and parampara deposit of the ṣaḍ-jīvanikāya
is as follows: where a thing is placed directly on sa-citta earth without any
interval, it is the anantara deposit of the sa-citta-pṛthvīkāya. Similarly, the
deposit on the pitharak etc. placed on the earth is parampara-nikshipta. Butter
etc. placed in sa-citta water is anantara-nikshipta, and the butter placed in a
boat in river water is parampara-nikshipta. *Grain husk blown by the wind is
anantara-nikshipta, and the thing deposited on a vessel filled with air is
parampara-nikshipta. From the perspective of the vanaspathikāya, the thing
deposited on greenery is anantara-nikshipta, and the malpūā etc. deposited in
the pitharak etc. placed on greenery is parampara-nikshipta. From the
perspective of the trasakāya, the malpūā etc. placed on the back of a bull etc.
is anantara-nikshipta, and the malpūā placed on the back of a bull in vessels
like kutupa etc. is parampara-nikshipta. According to the commentator, the total
number of divisions of nikshipta is 432.  By reading the entire context of
nikshipta, it can be understood how meticulously the Jain ācāryas have thought
about the bhikṣācāryā of a sadhu. There is no mention of such a subtle ahiṃsā-
based bhikṣācāryā for the monastic class of any other religion.  1. Pini
252/1,2. 2. Pini 250. 3. Pini 251/2. 107  4. Pini 251/3. 5. Pini 254, 255. 6.
Mavṛ P. 151.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa 2. murmura - ApiMgala raMga ke ardhavidhyAta
agnikaNa murmura kahalAte haiM  /  3. aMgArA - jvAlArahita agni aMgArA kahalAtI
hai| 4. aprAptajvAlA-' -cUlhe para sthita bhAjana, jisako agni kA sparza nahIM
hotA, vaha aprAptajvAlA kahalAtI hai| 5. prAptajvAlA - piTharaka kA sparza
karane vAlI agni prAptajvAlA kahalAtI hai  /  6. samajvAlA - jo bartana ke UparI
bhAga taka sparza karatI hai, vaha samajvAlA kahalAtI hai  /  7. vyutkrAntajvAlA
- jo agni cUlhe para car3he bartana ke Upara taka pahuMca jAtI hai, vaha
vyutkrAntajvAlA kahalAtI hai  /  sacitta para sacitta nikSepa kI taraha mizra
pRthvI para sacitta pRthvI, sacitta pRthvI para mizra pRthvI tathA mizra pRthvI
para mizra pRthvI kA nikSepa hotA hai| isI prakAra sacitta aura mizra ke sAtha
acitta para nikSepa kI caturbhaMgI bhI hotI hai| ina tIna caturbhaMgiyoM meM
acitta se sambandhita catubhaMgI ke cauthe bhaMga meM bhaktapAna grAhya hotA
hai| jahAM sacitta, acitta athavA mizra dravya para nikSepa hotA hai, vahAM
anaMtara aura parampara do prakAra kI mArgaNAeM hotI haiM  /  SaDjIvanikAya kA
anaMtara aura parampara nikSepa isa prakAra hotA hai- jahAM sacitta pRthvI para
binA kisI antarAla ke sAkSAt vastu rakhI jAtI hai, vaha sacitta pRthvIkAya kA
anantara nikSepa hai| isI prakAra pRthvI para rakhe piTharaka Adi para nikSepa
hotA hai, vaha parampara nikSipta hai| makkhana Adi sacitta jala meM rakhA hai,
vaha anaMtara nikSipta tathA nadI - jala meM sthita nAva meM rakhA navanIta
parampara nikSipta kahalAtA hai|* vAyu dvArA ur3AyA gayA dhAnya kA chilakA
anaMtara nikSipta tathA vAyu se bharI vasti para nikSipta vastu parampara
nikSipta hotI hai  /  vanaspatikAya kI dRSTi se hariyAlI para nikSipta vastu
anaMtara nikSipta tathA hariyAlI para rakhe hue piTharaka Adi meM nikSipta
mAlapUA Adi parampara nikSipta hotA hai| trasakAya kI dRSTi se baila Adi ke
pITha para rakhe hue mAlapUe Adi anaMtara nikSipta tathA kutupa Adi bhAjanoM meM
bharakara baila kI pITha para rakhe mAlapUe parampara nikSipta hote haiN|
TIkAkAra ke anusAra nikSipta ke kula bhedoM kI saMkhyA 432 hotI hai| nikSipta ke
pUre prasaMga ko par3hakara jAnA jA sakatA hai ki jaina AcAryoM ne sAdhu kI
bhikSAcaryA ke viSaya meM kitanI sUkSmatA se cintana kiyA hai| anya kisI bhI
dharma ke saMnyAsI varga ke lie itanI sUkSma ahiMsA pradhAna bhikSAcaryA kA
ullekha nahIM milatA hai| 1. pini 252/1,2  /  2. pini 250  /  3. pini 251 / 2  /
107 4. pini 251 / 3  /  5. pini 254, 255  /  6. mavR pa. 151  /

Page #122 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 108 ## Pindaniyukti  Roasting or placing wheat etc. over fire in the seven
types of fire is considered Anantar Nikshipt, and placing an object in a vessel
over fire is called Parampar Nikshipt. In Parampar Nikshipt, the author has
presented four options:  * **Paashravaalipta:** The vessel with a wide mouth
placed over the fire should be covered with mud on all sides. If for any reason
a drop of juice or water falls, the mud should absorb it, preventing harm to the
Agnikai. * **Anatyushna:** The sugarcane juice should not be excessively hot.
Consuming excessively hot juice can lead to both self-harm and harm to others. *
**Aparishaati:** Aparishaati means that the juice should not fall while being
offered. The falling of juice can potentially harm the Agnikai. * **Aghattunt:**
This means that the water or juice offered from the vessel should not be poured
from the top edge (karna) of the vessel onto the hot surface. If it is poured
from the top edge, there is a possibility of the drop falling into the fire and
the top part of the vessel breaking, making it unsuitable.  The author has
conceived 16 bhangas using a mathematical formula based on these four terms:
Paashravaalipta, Anatyushna, Aparishaati, and Aghattunt. The first bhang is
pure, and the remaining 15 are impure. The creation of these sixteen bhangas is
as follows:  1. In the first row, sixteen bhangas are created by alternating
short and long syllables. 2. In the second row, sixteen bhangas are created by
having two short syllables followed by two long syllables. 3. In the third row,
there are four short syllables followed by four long syllables, then again four
short syllables and four long syllables. 4. In the fourth row, there are eight
short syllables followed by eight long syllables.  These are established as
follows:  ISISISISI SISISIS || ss ||ss ||ss ||ss || ||s sss || || ssss  || || ||
|| || ssss ssss  By picking up one bhang at a time from left to right, moving
upwards from the bottom in all four rows, the sixteen bhangas are created as
follows:  1. Pinni 253/21

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 108 piMDaniyukti saptavidha agni meM geMhU Adi ko agni ke Upara sekanA yA
DAlanA anaMtara nikSipta hai tathA agni ke Upara pAtra meM vastu rakhane ko
parampara nikSipta kahate haiN| parampara nikSipta meM graMthakAra ne cAra
vikalpa prastuta kie haiM* pAzrvAvalipta-agni para car3hA vizAla mukha vAlA
pAtra cAroM ora se miTTI se avalipta honA caahie| yadi kisI kAraNa se rasa yA
pAnI kI bUMda gira jAe to use miTTI sokha le, agnikAya kI virAdhanA na ho| *
anatyuSNa-ikSurasa ati uSNa nahIM honA caahie| atyadhika uSNa rasa lene se Atma-
virAdhanA aura para-virAdhanA donoM saMbhava haiN| * aparizATi-aparizATi arthAt
dete samaya rasa nIce nahIM giranA caahie| rasa girane se agnikAya kI virAdhanA
saMbhava rahatI hai| * aghaTuMta-arthAt kaTAha se dIyamAna, udaka yA rasa kar3AI
ke uparitana bhAga (karNa) se ghaTTita nahIM honA caahie| ghaTTita hone para
agni meM bUMda girane tathA pAtra kA UparI bhAga khaMDita hone kI saMbhAvanA
rahatI hai ataH vaha kalpanIya nahIM hotaa| graMthakAra ne pArvAvalipta,
anatyuSNa, aparizATi aura aghaTTita karNa-ina cAra padoM se gaNita ke phArmUle
dvArA 16 bhaMgoM kI kalpanA kI hai| inameM prathama bhaMga zuddha tathA zeSa 15
bhaMga azuddha haiM  /  solaha bhaMgoM kI racanA isa prakAra hogI 1. prathama
paMkti meM ekAntarita laghu guru karate hue solaha bhNg| 2. dvitIya paMkti meM
do laghu do guru karate hue solaha bhNg| 3. tRtIya paMkti meM pahale cAra laghu
phira cAra guru, punaH cAra laghu aura cAra guru| 4. caturtha paMkti meM pahale
ATha laghu phira ATha guru| inakI sthApanA isa prakAra hogI ISISISISI SISISIS  /
/  ss /   / ss ||ss  /  /  ss  /   /   /   / s sss  /  /   /  /  ssss  /  /   /
/   /   /   /  /  ssss ssss cAroM paMktiyoM meM nIce se Upara calate hue bAyIM
ora se eka eka bhaMga ko uThAne se solaha bhaMgoM kI racanA isa prakAra hogI
1.pini 253/21

Page #123 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti: An Observation 109  (1.) ||| (2.) ||s (3.) ||| (4.) ||ss (5.) |
s || (6.) |s I s (7.) | ss| (8.) | sss (9.) ||| (10.) || (11.) s| 5 | (12.) SIss
(13.) ss || (14.) s SIS (15.) ss s| (16.) ssss  In these, the portions with
straight lines are pure and the portions with s-shaped lines are impure. Of
these sixteen bhangas, the first bhang is permitted. The remaining 15 bhangas
are unacceptable. Based on four factors, the chart of bhangas can be presented
as follows:  | **Parvavalipt** | **Anatyushna** | **Aparishaati** |
**Aghattitkarna** | **Bhang** | |---|---|---|---|---| | Parvavalipt | Anatyushna
| Aparishaati | Aghattitkarna | ||| | Parvavalipt | Anatyushna | Aparishaati |
Ghattitkarna | ||| | Parvavalipt | Anatyushna | Parishati | Aghattitkarna | Iss
| | Parvavalipt | Anatyushna | Parishati | Ghattitkarna | ISII | | Parvavalipt |
Atyushna | Aparishaati | Aghattitkarna | Is Is | | Parvavalipt | Atyushna |
Aparishaati | Ghattitkarna | Iss| | Parvavalipt | Atyushna | Parishati |
Aghattitkarna | ISSS | | Parvavalipt | Atyushna | Parishati | Ghattitkarna |
s||| | Anvalipt | Anatyushna | Aparishaati | Aghattitkarna | SIIs | | Anvalipt |
Anatyushna | Aparishaati | Ghattitkarna | SISI | | Anvalipt | Anatyushna |
Parishati | Aghattitkarna | SISS | | Anvalipt | Anatyushna | Parishati |
Ghattitkarna | ss|| | Anvalipt | Atyushna | Aparishaati | Aghattitkarna | SSIS |
| Anvalipt | Atyushna | Aparishaati | Ghattitkarna | sss| | Anvalipt | Atyushna
| Parishati | Aghattitkarna | ssss | | Anvalipt | Atyushna | Parishati |
Ghattitkarna |  |  In modern mathematics, this can be presented as the formula:
4 = 16.  **4. Pihit Dosha**  Consuming food that is covered with sentient fruit
or earth, etc., or that is hidden by an insentient guru substance is called
Pihit Dosha. The fifth study of Dashavaikalik mentions that a woman who gives a
sadhu an open vessel that is hidden by a water pot, millstone, grinding stone,
stone child (lodha), mud plaster, or lac, etc., should be prohibited from giving
alms. There are three types of this: 1. Sachitt 2. Achitt 3. Mishr. These three
have three Chaturbhangis:  1. Mula 466: > Sachitteṇ va pihidam, adhavā
achittgurugapihidam ca. Tam chhanḍiya jam deyam, pihidam tam hodi bodhavvo||  2.
Dasha 5/1/45, 46.  3. Pini 256, Mavṛ P. 154.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 109 (1.)  /  /  /  /  (2.)  /  /  / s (3.)  /
/   /  (4.)  /  / ss (5.)  /  s  /  /  (6.)  / s I s (7.)  /  ss /  (8.)  /  sss
(9.)  /  /  /  (10.)  /  /  (11.) s /  5  /  (12.) SIss (13.) ss || (14.) s SIS
(15.) ss s /  (16.) ssss inameM sIdhI rekhA vAle aMza zuddha tathA s AkAra vAle
aMza azuddha haiN| ina solaha bhaMgoM meM prathama bhaMga anujJAta hai| zeSa
15bhaMga akalpya haiN| cAra padoM ke AdhAra para bhaMgoM kA cArTa isa prakAra
prastuta kiyA jA sakatA hai pArvAvalipta anatyuSNa aparizATI aghaTTitakarNa ILIS
pArvAvalipta anatyuSNa aparizATI ghaTTitakarNa  /  /   /  /  pArvAvalipta
anatyuSNa parizATI aghaTTitakarNa | Iss pArvAvalipta anatyuSNa parizATI
ghaTTitakarNa ISII pAzrvAvalipta atyuSNa aparizATI aghaTTitakarNa Is Is
pArvAvalipta atyuSNa aparizATI ghaTTitakarNa Iss /  pArvAvalipta atyuSNa
parizATI aghaTTitakarNa ISSS pArvAvalipta atyuSNa parizATI ghaTTitakarNa s /  /
/  anavalipta anatyuSNa aparizATI aghaTTitakarNa SIIs anavalipta anatyuSNa
aparizATI ghaTTitakarNa SISI anavalipta anatyuSNa parizATI aghaTTitakarNa SISS
anavalipta anatyuSNa parizATI ghaTTitakarNa ss|| anavalipta atyuSNa aparizATI
aghaTTitakarNa SSIS 37796 atyuSNa aparizATI ghaTTitakarNa sss /  anavalipta
atyuSNa parizATI aghaTTitakarNa ssss anavalipta atyuSNa parizATI ghaTTitakarNa
Adhunika gaNita meM isakA sUtra isa prakAra prastuta kiyA jA sakatA hai-4=16  /
4. pihita doSa sacitta phala yA pRthvI Adi se r3hake hue athavA acitta guru
padArtha se pihita khAdya padArtha ko grahaNa karanA pihita doSa hai|
dazavaikAlika ke pAMcaveM adhyayana meM ullekha milatA hai ki jalakuMbha, cakkI,
pITha, zilAputra (lor3hA),miTTI kA lepa tathA lAkha Adi se pihita pAtra ko sAdhu
ke lie kholakara detI huI strI ko muni bhikSA kA pratiSedha kre| isake tIna
bheda haiM-1. sacitta 2. acitta 3. mishr| ina tInoM kI tIna caturbhaMgiyAM hotI
haiM 1. mUlA 466; saccitteNa va pihidaM, adhavA acittagurugapihidaM c| taM
chaMDiya jaM deyaM, pihidaM taM hodi bodhvvo|| 2. daza 5/1/45, 46 /  3. pini
256, mavR pa. 154 /

Page #124 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 110 ## Pindaniyukti  **Fourfold classification of *saccitta* and *misra*:**
1. *Saccitta* given as *saccitta* from *saccitta*. 2. *Saccitta* given as
*saccitta* from *misra*. 3. *Misra* given as *misra* from *saccitta*. 4. *Misra*
given as *misra* from *misra*.  All four options are inconceivable
(inadmissible).  **Fourfold classification of *saccitta* and *acitta*:**  1.
*Saccitta* given as *saccitta* from *saccitta*. 2. *Saccitta* given as
*saccitta* from *acitta*. 3. *Acitta* given as *acitta* from *saccitta*. 4.
*Acitta* given as *acitta* from *acitta*.  The first three options are
inconceivable, and the fourth option is *bhajana*.  **Fourfold classification of
*acitta* and *misra*:**  1. *Misra* given as *misra* from *misra*. 2. *Misra*
given as *misra* from *acitta*. 3. *Acitta* given as *acitta* from *misra*. 4.
*Acitta* given as *acitta* from *acitta*.  The first three options are
inconceivable, and the fourth option is *bhajana*.  **Fourfold classification of
the fourth option:**  1. Heavy object given as heavy from heavy object. 2. Heavy
object given as heavy from light object. 3. Light object given as light from
heavy object. 4. Light object given as light from light object.  In this
fourfold classification, the first and third options are inadmissible, and the
second and fourth options are admissible.  The commentator explains that when
lifting a heavy object, if the object falls from the hand, there is a
possibility of injury to the feet or limbs. If the object to be given is heavy,
it is not necessary to lift it and give it.  1. *Pini* 259/1, *Mavri* p. 155.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 110 piMDaniyukti sacitta aura mizrakI caturbhaMgI 1. sacitta se pihita sacitta
deya vstu| 2. mizra se pihita sacitta deya vstu| 3. sacitta se pihita mizra deya
vstu| 4. mizra se pihita mizra deya vstu| ye cAroM vikalpa akalpanIya (agrAhya)
haiN| sacitta aura acitta kI caturbhagI 1. sacitta se pihita sacitta deya vastu
/  2. acitta se pihita sacitta deya vstu| 3. sacitta se pihita acitta deya vstu|
4. acitta se pihita acitta deya vstu| inameM prathama tIna vikalpa akalpanIya
tathA caturtha vikalpa meM bhajanA hai| acitta aura mizra kI caturbhaMgI 1.
mizra se pihita mizra deya vstu| 2. acitta se pihita mizra deya vstu| 3. mizra
se pihita acitta deya vstu| 4. acitta se pihita acitta deya vastu  /  inameM
prathama tIna vikalpa akalpanIya haiM, caturtha vikalpa meM bhajanA hai|
caturtha vikalpa kI catubhaMgI bhI isa prakAra banatI hai1. bhArI vastu se
pihita bhArI deya vstu| 2. halkI vastu se pihita bhArI deya vstu| 3. bhArI vastu
se pihita halkI deya vstu| 4. halkI vastu se pihita halkI deya vstu| isa
caturbhaMgI meM prathama aura tRtIya vikalpa meM vastu agrAhya tathA dvitIya
aura caturtha bhaMga meM vastu grAhya hai| isakI vyAkhyA karate hue TIkAkAra
kahate haiM ki bhArI padArtha ko uThAne meM vastu hAtha se chUTane para paira
Adi ke coTa yA aMga-bhaMga saMbhava hai| deya vastu yadi bhArI hai to use
uThAkara denA Avazyaka nahIM hai, 1.pini 259/1, mavR pa. 155 /

Page #125 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti: An Observation  **111**  Alms can also be given from a bowl,
etc., therefore alms are considered in the second alternative. In the fourth
alternative, both items are light, therefore the item is acceptable in this
alternative.  There are two divisions of each of the *saccitta pihita* etc. -
*anantara* and *parampara*. *Saccitta* food etc. hidden by the lid of the earth
is *anantara pihita*, and food placed on a *pithara* placed on the *saccitta*
earth is *parampara pihita*. An item fumigated by embers is *anantara pihita*,
and a *pithara* fumigated by embers or *sarava* etc. is *parampara pihita*. In
the case of *angara-dhoopita* etc., the air that is *atirohita* is *anantara
pihita*, and an item hidden by air-filled *drti* etc. is *parampara pihita*.
Food hidden by *atirohita* fruit etc. is *anantara pihita*, and an item hidden
by a *chabari* etc. filled with fruits is *parampara pihita*. In the context of
*trasakaya*, food hidden by a tortoise etc. is *anantara pihita*, and an item
hidden by a *pitharak* etc. impregnated by a tortoise, insect etc. is *parampara
pihita*.  **5. Sanhrita Dosha**  If there is any *adeya ashan* etc. in the
vessel from which alms are being given, it is a *sanhata dosha* to give alms
after throwing it on the ground or elsewhere. In the *Jitakalp-bhashya*,
*sanharan*, *utkirana* and *virechana* are considered synonymous. The fifth
study of *Dashavaikalika* mentions that if a woman gives food and water by
transferring it from one vessel to another, placing it on a *saccitta* object,
shaking *saccitta* water, bathing in it, and walking on water that has fallen in
the courtyard, then the muni should prohibit her. In *Moolachar*, the word
*sanvyavaharan* is used in place of *sanhata*. According to it, it is a
*sanvyavaharan dosha* to give food by pulling the cloth or vessel intended for
the muni without looking at it. In *Anangardharmamrta*, it is mentioned as a
general *dosha* in its place. It seems possible that the Prakrit transformation
of *sanhrta* is *sanharan* or *saharan*. On the same basis, it is written as a
general *dosha* in *Anangardharmamrta*.  Just as there are three *chaturbhangis*
of *saccitta*, *acitta* and *misra* in the *nikshipta* and *pihita* *doshas*, so
also there are *chaturbhangis* of this. Only the third *bhang* of the second and
third *chaturbhangis* differs in the method of *margana*. The author has
conceived of four *bhangs* on the basis of *shushk* and *ardra* *sanharan* and
*sanhiyamana*.  1. *Shushk* on *shushk*. 3. *Ardra* on *shushk*. 2. *Shushk* on
*ardra*. 4. *Ardra* on *ardra*.  1. *Pini* 258, 259. 2. (a) *Panv* 764
*Mattagagayam-ajoggam, padhavais-chhodhade-sahiryam*. (b) *Pini* 262. 3. *Jibha*
1557: *Saharanam ukkiranam, vireyanam cheva egade*. 4. *Dasha* 5/1/30, 31. 5.
*Moola* 467; *Sanvavaharanam kiccha, padadumi-dichel-bhayanadinam*. *Asamikkhaya
jam deyam, sanvavaharano havdi doso*. 6. *Anath* 5/33. 7. *Pini* 261.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 111 kaTorI Adi se bhI bhikSA dI jA sakatI hai
ataH dUsare vikalpa meM bhikSA kalpya hai| caturtha vikalpa meM donoM hI vastueM
halkI haiM ata: isa vikalpa meM vastu grAhya hai| sacitta pihita Adi ke bhI do-
do bheda hote haiM-anaMtara aura parampara  /  sacitta pRthvI ke r3hakkana se
pihita khAdya Adi anantara pihita tathA sacitta pRthvI para rakhe piThara para
rakhA padArtha parampara pihita, aMgAra se dhUpita vastu anaMtara pihita tathA
aMgAra se bhRta zarAva Adi se pihita piThara parampara pihita hai| aMgAra-
dhUpita Adi meM atirohita vAyu anaMtara pihita tathA vAyu se bharI dRti Adi se
pihita vastu parampara pihita hai| atirohita phala Adi se pihita khAdya anaMtara
pihita tathA phaloM se bharI chAbar3I Adi se pihita padArtha parampara pihita
hai| trasakAya ke saMdarbha meM kacchapa Adi se pihita AhAra anaMtara pihita hai
tathA kacchapa, kITikA Adi se garbhita piTharaka Adi se pihita vastu parampara
pihita hai|' 5. saMhRta doSa jisa pAtra se bhikSA dI jA rahI ho, usameM yadi koI
adeya azana Adi ho to use bhUmi para yA anyatra DAlakara bhikSA denA saMhata
doSa hai| jItakalpabhASya meM saMharaNa, utkiraNa aura virecana ko ekArthaka
mAnA hai| dazavaikAlika ke pAMcaveM adhyayana meM ullekha milatA hai ki eka
bartana se dUsare bartana meM nikAlakara, use sacitta vastu para rakhakara,
sacitta jala ko hilAkara, usameM avagAhana kara, AMgana meM gire jala para
calakara yadi koI strI AhAra-pAnI de to muni usakA pratiSedha kre| mUlAcAra meM
saMhata ke sthAna para saMvyavaharaNa zabda kA prayoga huA hai| usake anusAra
muni ko dene hetu vastra yA bhAjana ko binA dekhe khIMcakara AhAra denA
saMvyavaharaNa doSa hai| anagAradharmAmRta meM isake sthAna para sAdhAraNa doSa
kA ullekha milatA hai| aisA saMbhava lagatA hai ki saMhRta kA prAkRta
rUpAntaraNa saMharaNa yA sAharaNa hotA hai| usI AdhAra para anagAradharmAmRta
meM yaha sAdhAraNa doSa ke rUpa meM likhA gayA hai| jisa prakAra nikSipta aura
pihita doSa meM sacitta, acitta aura mizra kI tIna caturbhagiyAM hotI haiM,
vaise hI isakI bhI caturbhaMgiyAM haiN| kevala dvitIya aura tRtIya caturbhaMgI
ke tIsare bhaMga kI mArgaNA-vidhi meM aMtara hai| graMthakAra ne zuSka aura
Ardra saMharaNa tathA saMhiyamANa ke AdhAra para cAra bhaMgoM kI kalpanA kI hai
1. zuSka para shussk| 3. Ardra para shussk| 2. zuSka para aardr| 4. Ardra para
aardr| 1. pini 258, 259 /  2. (ka) paMva764 mattagagayaMajoggaM,
paDhavAisachoDhadei saahriyN| (kha) pini 262 /  3. jIbhA 1557 : sAharaNaM
ukkiraNaM, vireyaNaM ceva egdeN| 4. daza 5/1/30, 31  /  5. mUlA 467;
saMvavaharaNaM kiccA, pdaadumidicel-bhaaynnaadiinnN| asamikkhaya jaM deyaM,
saMvavaharaNo havadi doso|| 6. anadha 5/33 /  7. pini 261 /

Page #126 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 112  **Pindaniyukti**  In this, the possibility of killing living beings is
less when dry substances are compacted together. Therefore, if dry substances
are compacted together, that substance may be acceptable to the Sadhu.  Due to
the compacted fault, there is a possibility of harming the six-bodied being.
Therefore, food with compacted fault is unacceptable to the Sadhu. Again, the
author has explained this through the four-fold division based on little and
much.  * Little dry on little dry. * Little dry on much dry. * Much dry on
little dry. * Much dry on much dry.  Where much dry is compacted on little dry
and much dry is compacted on much dry, it is acceptable for the Sadhu to take
food.  It is not acceptable to take food in these three divisions: dry on moist,
moist on dry, or moist on moist.  If the acceptable substance is light in
weight, and a light weight substance is placed on it, then it is acceptable to
keep it elsewhere and take food, etc.  If the donor has difficulty in lifting or
placing down a heavy or large vessel, and there is also a possibility of public
criticism that this greedy Sadhu does not even consider the convenience or
inconvenience of others. If the donor or his family members become unhappy if
there is a limb fracture or the body burns while donating, then it leads to the
cessation of other donations, and there is a possibility of killing the six-
bodied being due to the substance coming out of the heavy vessel.  **_Each door,
such as collection, etc., has 432 divisions based on the divisions. For example,
the collection of sentient earth on sentient earth-bodied, the collection of
sentient earth-bodied on sentient ap-bodied, etc. There are 36 divisions in
relation to one's own body and another's body. From these, there are 12
divisions due to the three four-fold divisions of sentient, non-sentient, and
mixed. Multiplying 12 by 36 gives 432 divisions._**  **6. Giver's Fault**  It is
a giver's fault to accept alms from those who are ineligible to give alms. In
Pindaniyukti, forty people are considered ineligible to give alms. Some of these
faults are related to individuals, and some are related to cautious actions, and
due to treatment, they are associated with the giver. The names of the
prohibited givers are as follows:  1. Child, 2. Very old, 3. Intoxicated, 4.
Possessed by a Yaksha, 5. Trembling body, 6. Feverish, 7. Blind, 8. Leprous, 9.
Wearing sandals, 10. Wearing handcuffs, 11. Bound with chains, 12. Hands and
feet cut off, 13. Impotent, 14. Pregnant woman, 15. Breastfeeding, 16. Eating,
17. Churning curd, 18. Picking chickpeas, 19. Grinding wheat, etc., 20. Grinding
rice, etc. in a mortar, 21. Stone...  **_1. Mavr P. 165._**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 112 piMDaniyukti inameM zuSka vastu ko saMhata karane se jIva-hiMsA kI
saMbhAvanA kama rahatI hai ataH zuSka para zuSka ko saMhRta kiyA jAe to vaha
vastu sAdhu ke lie grAhya ho sakatI hai| saMhRta doSa se SaTkAya jIva kI
virAdhanA kA prasaMga saMbhava hai isalie saMhRta doSa yukta AhAra sAdhu ke lie
akalpya hai| puna: isako bhI graMthakAra ne stoka aura bahu ke AdhAra para
caturbhaMgI ke mAdhyama se samajhAyA hai * thor3e zuSka para thor3A shussk| *
thor3e zuSka para bahu shussk| * bahu zuSka para thor3A shussk| * bahu zuSka
para bahu shussk| jahAM thor3e zuSka para bahu zuSka tathA bahu zuSka para bahu
zuSka saMhata hotA hai, vahAM sAdhu ko AhAra lenA kalpya hotA hai| zuSka para
Ardra, Ardra para zuSka yA Ardra para Ardra-ina tIna bhaMgoM meM AhAra grahaNa
karanA kalpya nahIM hotA hai| yadi grAhya vastu kama bhAra vAlI hai, usa para
laghu bhAra vAlI vastu rakhI hai to use anyatra rakhakara AhAra Adi lenA kalpya
hai| bhArI yA bar3e pAtra ko uThAne yA nIce rakhane meM dAtA ko kaSTa hotA hai
tathA loka-niMdA bhI saMbhava hai ki yaha lolupa sAdhu dUsaroM kI suvidhA-
asuvidhA kA bhI dhyAna nahIM rkhtaa| yadi dAna dete samaya aMgabhaMga yA zarIra
jala jAe to dAtA yA usake parijanoM ke mana meM aprIti utpanna ho jAtI hai,
jisase anya dravyoM kA vyavaccheda ho jAtA hai tathA bhArI pAtra se vastu bAhara
nikalane se SaTkAya-vadha kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai| _ saMharaNa Adi pratyeka
dvAra meM bhaMgoM ke AdhAra para 432 bhaMga isa prakAra banate haiM-sacitta
pRthvI kA sacitta pRthvIkAya para saMharaNa, sacitta pRthvIkAya kA sacitta
apkAya para saMharaNa Adi svakAya-parakAya kI apekSA 36 bhaMga hote haiN| inake
sacitta, acitta aura mizra pada se pratyeka kI tIna caturbhaMgI hone se 12 bheda
hote haiN| 12 kA 36 se guNA karane para 432 bheda hote haiN|' 6. dAyaka doSa jo
bhikSA dene ke ayogya hoM, unake hAtha se bhikSA grahaNa karanA dAyaka doSa hai|
piNDaniyukti meM cAlIsa vyaktiyoM ko bhikSA ke ayogya mAnA hai| inameM kucha
doSa vyaktiyoM se sambandhita haiM tathA kucha sAvadha kriyAoM se sambaddha hone
ke kAraNa upacAra se dAyaka ke sAtha sambaddha ho gae haiN| niSiddha dAyakoM ke
nAma isa prakAra haiM-1. bAla, 2. ativRddha, 3 matta, 4. yakSAviSTa, 5.
kampamAna zarIra, 6. jvaragrasta, 7. andhA, 8. kor3hI, 9. khar3AU pahane hue,
10. hathakar3I pahane hue, 11. ber3iyoM se baddha, 12. hAtha-paira kaTe hue, 13.
napuMsaka, 14. garbhavatI strI, 15. stanapAna karAtI huI, 16. bhojana karatI
huI, 17. dadhi-manthana karatI huI, 18. cane pUMjatI huI, 19. gehUM Adi pIsatI
huI, 20. Ukhala meM cAvala Adi kUTatI huI, 21. zilA 1. mavR pa. 165 /

Page #127 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindianiyukti: An Observation  **113.** Grinding sesame seeds etc., **22.**
Spinning cotton, **23.** Picking cotton, **24.** Spinning yarn, **25.** Using a
spinning wheel, **26.** Holding water, plants etc. with conscious hands, **27.**
Holding salt etc. with conscious hands, keeping the six kayas below, **28.**
Crushing the six kayas with feet, **29.** Touching the six kayas with the body,
**30.** Violating the six life-kayas, **31.** Having hands smeared with curd
etc., **32.** Having a vessel smeared with curd etc., **33.** Giving from a
large vessel, **34.** Giving another's belongings, **35.** Giving stolen goods,
**36.** Removing the front kaval, **37.** A woman who is likely to fall etc.,
**38.** Giving food established for another sadhu, **39.** Giving knowingly
impure food, **40.** Giving unknowingly impure food.  _The fifth Pindaiṣaṇa
study of Dasavaikalika mentions the prohibited dayakas in a scattered manner._
**Oghanīyukti** mentions 20 faults related to dayakas: **1.** Avyakt (child),
**2.** Aprābhū (one who does not own the house), **3.** Sthavira (elder), **4.**
Napumsaka (impotent), **5.** Matta (intoxicated), **6.** Kṣipta citta (one whose
mind is disturbed by theft of wealth etc.), **7.** Dīptacitta (one whose mind is
disturbed by repeated defeat by an enemy), **8.** Yakṣaviṣṭa (possessed by a
yakṣa), **9.** One with a cut hand, **10.** One with a severed leg, **11.**
Blind, **12.** Chained, **13.** Leprous, **14.** Pregnant woman, **15.** Woman
with a child, **16.** One who grinds grain, **17.** One who grinds it, **18.**
One who roasts grain, **19.** One who spins yarn, **20.** One who spins cotton.
**Mūlācāra** considers the following individuals ineligible for alms: **1.**
Dhāy (wet nurse), **2.** One intoxicated by alcohol, **3.** Sick, **4.** One who
has gone to the cremation ground and returned, **5.** Napumsaka (impotent),
**6.** Piśāca (one affected by water disease), **7.** Naked, **8.** One who has
defecated, **9.** One who has fallen due to fainting, **10.** One who has
vomited and come immediately, **11.** One with blood, **12.** Prostitute,
**13.** Āryikā-śramaṇī (except for Raktāpattikā Āryikā etc.), **14.** One who
has anointed the body, **15.** Ati bālā (small girl, here a small boy will also
be included in the treatment), **16.** Ati vrddhā (very old), **17.** One who is
eating, **18.** Pregnant woman (five months pregnant), **19.** Blind woman,
**20.** A woman sitting behind or with the support of Antaritā-bhīta etc.,
**21.** One sitting below, **22.** One sitting in a high place, **23.** One who
blows fire from the mouth, **24.** One who lights fire by putting wood, **25.**
One who moves wood etc. in the Sāraṇa-chulha, **26.** One who covers the fire
with ashes etc., **27.** One who extinguishes fire with water etc.  **1.** Pinī
265-70. **5.** Mūlāṭī p. 364; Mṛtakasūtakena yo juṣṭaḥ so'pi mṛtaka **2.** Daśa
5/1/29, 40, 42, 43. Ity ucyate-mṛtaka sūtaka se yukt hone ke kāran vah bhi
**3.** Oni 467, 468. mṛtaka kahlātā hai. **4.** Mūla 468-71. **6.** Mūlāṭī p.
364; Garbhīṇī gurubhārā pañcamāsikā.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 113 para tila Adi pIsatI huI, 22. ruI dhunatI
huI, 23. kapAsa loThatI huI (bInatI huI), 24. sUta kAtatI huI, 25. carakhA
calAtI huI, 26. sacitta jala, vanaspati Adi se yukta hAtha vAlI, 27. sacitta
lavaNa Adi SaTkAya ko nIce rakhatI huI, 28. chaha kAya ko pairoM se kucalatI
huI, 29. chaha kAya kA zarIra se sparza karatI huI, 30. chaha jIvanikAya kI
hiMsA karatI huI, 31. dahI Adi se lipta hAtha vAlI, 32. dahI Adi se lipta pAtra
vAlI, 33. bar3e pAtra se nikAla kara detI huI, 34. dUsaroM kI vastu detI huI,
35. corI kI vastu detI huI, 36. agra kavala nikAlatI huI, 37. girane Adi kI
sambhAvanA ho aisI strI, 38. anya sAdhu ke lie sthApita AhAra detI huI, 39.
jAna-bUjhakara azuddha detI huI 40. anajAna meM azuddha detI _ dazavaikAlika ke
pAMcaveM piNDaiSaNA adhyayana meM pratiSiddha dAyakoM kA vikIrNa rUpa se ullekha
milatA hai| oghaniyukti meM dAyaka se sambandhita 20 doSoM kA ullekha milatA
hai-1. avyakta (bAla), 2. aprabhu (jisakA ghara para svAmitva na ho), 3.
sthavira, 4. napuMsaka, 5. matta, 6. kSipta citta (dhana Adi kI corI hone para
jisakA citta kSipta ho jAe), 7. dIptacitta (zatru ke dvArA aneka bAra parAjita
hone para citta-vipluti honA), 8. yakSAviSTa, 9. kaTe hAtha vAlA, 10. chinna
paira vAlA, 11. aMdhA, 12. zrRMkhalAbaddha, 13. kor3hI, 14. garbhavatI strI, 15.
bAlavatsA strI, 16. anAja kA kaMDana karatI huI, 17. use pIsatI huI, 18. anAja
bhUnatI huI, 19. sUta kAtatI huI, 20. ruI pIjatI huii| mUlAcAra meM nimna
vyaktiyoM ko bhikSA dene ke ayogya mAnA hai -1. dhAya 2. madirA se unmatta 3.
rogI 4. mRtaka ko zmazAna meM pahuMcAkara Ane vAlA5 5. napuMsaka 6. pizAca
(vAtaroga se prabhAvita) 7. nagna 8. mala visarjita karake AyA huA 9. mUrchA ke
kAraNa patita 10. vamana karake tatkAla AyA huA 11. rudhira yukta 12. vezyA dAsI
13. AryikA-zramaNI (raktapaTikA AryikA Adi na ho) 14. zarIra kA abhyaMgana kI
huI 15. ati bAlA (choTI bAlikA, yahAM upacAra se choTA bAlaka bhI gRhIta ho
jaaegaa|) 16. ativRddhA 17. khAnA khAtI huI 18. garbhiNI (pAMca mAsa kI
garbhiNI)6 19. aMdhI strI 20. aMtaritA-bhIta Adi ke pIche yA usake sahAre se
baiThI strI 21. nIce baiThI huI 22. UMce sthAna para baiThI huI 23. muMha se
agni phUMkane vAlI 24. kATha DAlakara agni jalAne vAlI 25. sAraNa-cUlhe meM
lakar3I Adi ko Age-pIche sarakAtI huI 26. bhasma Adi se Aga ko Dhakane vAlI 27.
pAnI Adi se agni 1. pini 265-70 /  5. mUlATI pR. 364 ; mRtakasUtakena yo juSTaH
so'pi mRtaka 2. daza 5/1/29, 40, 42,43 /  ityucyate-mRtaka sUtaka se yukta hone
ke kAraNa vaha bhI 3. oni 467, 468 /  mRtaka kahalAtA hai| 4. mUlA 468-71 /  6.
mUlATI pR. 364 ; garbhiNI gurubhArA pNcmaasikaa|

Page #128 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **114**  **28.** Those who extinguish a fire. **29.**
Those who move a fire around or extinguish it. **30.** Those who plaster with
cow dung, etc. **31.** Those who bathe or perform ablutions. **32.** Those who
give alms while feeding a child with milk.  The commentary on Pravachana-sara-
uddhar mentions 29 ineligible donors, with a different order: **1.** Stavira,
**2.** Aprubhu, **3.** Napumsaka, **4.** Kampaman, **5.** Jwaragrastha, **6.**
Andha, **7.** Bala, **8.** Matta, **9.** Unmatta, **10.** Lulla, **11.**
Langada, **12.** Kodhi, **13.** Bandhanabaddha, **14.** Paduka-pahana-huwa,
**15.** Dhan-ka-kandan-karti-huwi, **16.** Pisati-huwi, **17.** Anaj-bhanjati-
huwi, **18.** Charkha-kati-huwi, **19.** Kapas-lothi-huwi, **20.** Kapas-alag-
karti-huwi, **21.** Rui-pijati-huwi, **22.** Anaj-adi-dalati-huwi, **23.** Dahi-
ka-manthan-karti-huwi, **24.** Bhojan-karti-huwi, **25.** Garbhini, **26.**
Balavatsa, **27.** Chha-kay-jiva-se-yukt-hath-wali, **28.** Chha-kay-jiva-ka-
ghat-karti-huwi, **29.** Sambhavita-bhayavali.  Pindavishuddhiprakarana mentions
38 faults, but it does not mention the Abhoga and Anabhoga dayakas described in
Pindaniyukti.  An-gar-dharma-amrita prohibits donors who are menstruating,
pregnant, Aryikas of other sects, those carrying a corpse to the cremation
ground, those in mourning for a deceased person, and eunuchs.  The 40 faults of
the donor mentioned in Pindaniyukti are related to the first 25 individuals. In
exceptional circumstances, one can accept alms from them. For example, accepting
alms from a child under 8 years old is unacceptable, but if the child gives alms
in the presence of their mother or guardian, a small amount can be accepted from
their hand.  **7. Unmisra Dosha**  Accepting alms with a mixed mind is Unmisra
Dosha. An-gar-dharma-amrita refers to this as Vimishra or Misra Dosha. According
to Pindavishuddhiprakarana, giving alms by mixing eligible and ineligible items
is Unmisra Dosha. Dashavaikalika mentions that if food, drink, Khadim, and
Swadim, etc., are mixed with flowers, seeds, and greenery, it is unacceptable
for a Bhakt-pan Sadhu. Mulachara also explains Unmisra Dosha in the same way.
Unmisra Dosha is mainly of three types: **1.** Sachitta, **2.** Achitta, **3.**
Misra. These three...  **1.** Prasati P. 151-53. **4.** An-dha 5/28, 5/36.
**2.** An-dha 5/34. **5.** Pimpr 89; Joggam-joggam-cha-duve, Vimisi-undei-janta-
mammisam. **3.** Similarly, for other donor faults and exceptions, see **6.**
Mula 472; see Pini 273-288/7 verses translation and Mav Pudhavi-au-ya-taha,
Harida-biya-tasa-ya-sajjiva. P. 159-164. Panchehi-tehi-missam, Aharam-hodi-
ummisam.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 114 piMDaniyukti bujhAne vAlI 28. agni ko idhara-udhara calAne vAlI yA bujhAne
vAlI 29. gobara Adi se lIpatI huI 30. majjana-snAna Adi karatI huI 31. dUdha
pIte bAlaka ko chor3akara bhikSA detI huii| pravacanasAroddhAra kI TIkA meM 29
ayogya dAtAoM ke nAma milate haiM, vahAM inake krama meM bhI aMtara hai-1.
sthavira, 2. aprabhu, 3. napuMsaka, 4. kaMpamAna, 5. jvaragrasta, 6. aMdha, 7.
bAla, 8. matta, 9. unmatta, 10. lUlA, 11. laMgar3A, 12. kor3hI, 13.
baMdhanabaddha, 14. pAdukA pahanA huA, 15. dhAnya kA kaMDana karatI huI, 16.
pIsatI huI, 17. anAja bhaMjatI huI, 18. carakhA kAtatI huI, 19. kapAsa loThatI
huI, 20. kapAsa alaga karatI huI, 21. ruI pIjatI huI, 22. anAja Adi dalatI huI,
23. dahI kA manthana karatI huI, 24. bhojana karatI huI, 25. garbhiNI, 26.
bAlavatsA, 27. cha: kAya jIvoM se yukta hAtha vAlI, 28. cha: kAya jIvoM kA ghAta
karatI huI, 29. saMbhAvita bhyvaalii| piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa meM 38 doSoM kA
ullekha hai, vahAM piMDaniyukti meM varNita Abhoga aura anAbhoga dAyakoM kA
ullekha nahIM milatA hai| anagAradharmAmRta meM rajasvalA, garbhiNI, anya
sampradAya kI AryikA, zava ko zmazAna le jAne vAle, mRtaka ke sUtaka vAle tathA
napuMsaka Adi dAyaka varjita haiN| piNDaniyukti meM varNita dAyaka ke 40 doSoM
meM prathama 25 vyaktiyoM se grahaNa kI bhajanA hai| vizeSa apavAda kI sthiti
meM inase grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai, jaise 8 varSa se kama Ayu vAle bAlaka se
bhikSA grahaNa karanA akalpya hai lekina yadi mAM yA parijana ke samakSa bAlaka
bhikSA de to alpa mAtrA meM usake hAtha se bhikSA grahaNa kI jA sakatI hai| 7.
unmizra doSa sacitta mizrita bhikSA grahaNa karanA unmizra doSa hai|
anagAradharmAmRta meM isake lie vimizra athavA mizra doSa kA ullekha hai|
piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa ke anusAra bhikSA dene yogya tathA bhikSA ke ayogya
vastuoM ko milAkara bhikSA denA unmizra doSa hai  /  dazavaikAlika meM ullekha
milatA hai ki yadi azana, pAna, khAdima aura svAdima Adi puSpa, bIja aura
hariyAlI se unmizra hoM to vaha bhaktapAna sAdhu ke lie akalpanIya hotA hai|
mUlAcAra meM bhI unmizra doSa kI yahI vyAkhyA milatI hai| unmizra doSa mukhyataH
tIna prakAra kA hotA hai-1. sacitta 2. acitta 3. mishr| inakI tIna 1. prasATI
pa. 151-53 /  4. anadha 5/28, 5/36 /  2. anadha 5/34 /  5.
piMpra89;joggamajoggaM ca duve, vimIsiuMdei jNtmmmiisN| 3. isI prakAra anya dAtA
ke doSoM aura apavAdoM ke lie 6. mUlA 472 ; dekheM pini 273-288/7 gAthAoM kA
anuvAda evaM mava puDhavI AU ya tahA, haridA bIyA tasA ya sjjiivaa| pa. 159-164
/  paMcehiM tehiM missaM, AhAraM hodi ummissN||

Page #129 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindianuyukti: An Observation  **115. In the last two Chaturbhangis out of
the 115 Chaturbhangis, the first three alternatives are prohibited and the
fourth alternative is to be worshipped. In the first Chaturbhangi, all four
alternatives are prohibited for begging.**  **Like the Sanhrita Dvara, here
also, one should understand the saamyogik bhang of Prithvikaaya etc. and the
four alternatives of shushk and aadr should be known like the Sanharan dosha.**
**While explaining the difference between Unmisra and Sanhrita dosha, the author
says that giving alms by mixing both kalpya and akalpya types of objects is
Unmisra dosha, and collecting the non-deserving object from the bhajanastha and
putting the kalpya object in it and giving alms is Sanhrita dosha.**  **8.
Aparinat Dosha**  **To take an object which is not completely a-chitta or which
the giver does not want to give is Aparinat dosha. In the Dashavaikalik Sutra,
the word 'anivvud' is used for Aparinat.**  **According to the Digambar
tradition, tilodak, tandulodak, ushnajal, chane ka dhovan, tushodak, if they are
not completely a-chitta or other objects which are aparinat, taking them is
Aparinat dosha. This is of two types - dravya aparinat and bhav aparinat.**
**From the perspective of the giver and the receiver, there are two types of
each:**  **Dravya Vishayak Aparinat - This is of six types due to its relation
with the Shatkayas. For example, conscious earth is aparinat as long as it is
alive, and after becoming lifeless, it is called parinat. Similarly, one should
know about Apkay etc.**  **Bhav Vishayak Aparinat - When an object is related to
two or more people, one person wants to give it to the sadhu and the other
person or others do not want to give it, then it is bhavatah aparinat from the
giver's perspective. Similarly, if two munis go for alms and one muni considers
the object to be eshaniya and the other does not consider it to be eshaniya,
then it is bhavatah aparinat from the receiver's perspective, hence it is
akalpya.**  **_The commentator Malayagiri has explained the difference between
anisrusht and datribhav from aparinat. According to him, in anisrusht, the giver
is generally indirect, but in datribhav from aparinat, the giver is present.
Both of them disagree to give alms._**  **9. Lipta Dosha**  **Taking lepkrud
substances increases the desire for taste, hence taking lepkrud substances like
milk, curd etc. is Lipta dosha.**  **1. Pini 291/1. 2. Pini 291, Mavri P. 165.
3. Pimpr 90. 4. Das 3/71. 5. Mula 473. 6. Pini 293. 7. Pini 294, 295, Jiba
1590-92. 8. Mavri P. 166.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 115 caturbhagiyoM meM aMtima do caturbhagiyoM
meM Adya tIna vikalpa pratiSiddha tathA cauthe vikalpa kI bhajanA hai| prathama
catubhaMgI ke cAroM vikalpoM meM bhikSA pratiSiddha hai| saMhRta dvAra kI bhAMti
isameM bhI pRthvIkAya Adi ke sAMyogika bhaMga samajhane cAhie tathA zuSka aura
Ardra ke cAra vikalpa saMharaNa doSa kI bhAMti hI jAnane caahie| unmizra aura
saMhRta doSa meM antara batAte hue graMthakAra kahate haiM ki kalpya aura
akalpya-donoM prakAra kI deya vastu ko mizrita karake bhikSA denA unmizra doSa
hai tathA bhAjanastha adeya vastu kA anyatra saMharaNa karake usameM kalpya
vastu DAlakara bhikSA denA saMhata doSa hai| 8. apariNata doSa jo vastu pUrNataH
acitta na huI ho athavA jisako dene kA dAtA kA mana na ho, use lenA apariNata
doSa hai| dazavaikAlika sUtra meM apariNata ke lie anivvuDa' zabda kA prayoga
huA hai| digambara paramparA ke anusAra tilodaka, taNDulodaka, uSNajala, cane kA
dhovana, tuSodaka yadi pUrNa acitta na hue hoM athavA aura bhI vastueM jo
apariNata hoM, unheM lenA apariNata doSa hai| yaha do prakAra kA hotA hai-dravya
apariNata tathA bhAva aprinnt| dAtA aura grahaNakartA kI dRSTi se ina donoM ke
do-do bheda hote haiMdravya viSayaka apariNata-yaha SaTkAya se sambandhita hone
ke kAraNa chaha prakAra kA hotA hai| udAharaNa svarUpa sacetana pRthvI jaba taka
sajIva hai, taba taka apariNata hai aura jIva rahita hone ke bAda vaha pariNata
kahalAtI hai| isI prakAra apkAya Adi ko jAnanA caahie| bhAva viSayaka apariNata-
jo vastu do yA adhika vyaktiyoM se sambandhita hai, usameM eka vyakti kI sAdhu
ko dene kI icchA ho aura dUsare kI yA anya kI icchA na ho to vaha dAtA sambandhI
bhAvataH apariNata hai| isI prakAra bhikSArtha gae do muniyoM meM eka muni ne
deya vastu ko eSaNIya mAnA aura dUsare ne eSaNIya nahIM mAnA, vaha grAhaka
sambandhI bhAvataH apariNata hai ata: akalpya hai|' _TIkAkAra malayagiri ne
anisRSTa aura dAtRbhAva se apariNata kA aMtara spaSTa kiyA hai| unake anusAra
anisRSTa meM sAmAnyataH dAtA parokSa hotA hai lekina dAtRbhAva se apariNata meM
dAtA samakSa hotA hai| bhikSA dene kI asahamati donoM kI hotI hai| 9. lipta doSa
lepakRd padArtha lene se rasalolupatA bar3hatI hai ata: dUdha, dahI Adi lepakRd
dravya lenA lipta doSa 1. pini 291/1 /  2. pini 291, mavR pa. 165 /  3. piMpra
90 /  4. daza 3/71 5.mUlA 473 /  6.pini 293 /  7. pini 294, 295, jIbhA 1590-92
/  8. mavR pa. 166 /

Page #130 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  116. This is called **Piṇḍaniyukti**. The definition of
**lipta dosa** in the Digambara tradition is slightly different. There, giving
food with a hand or vessel that has come into contact with geru, harital,
khaḍiya, manahsila, wet dough, or uncooked rice is considered **lipta dosa**.
According to this definition, there is no difference between **prakshit dosa**
and **lipta dosa**.  The definition of **lipta dosa** described in
**Piṇḍaniyukti** is also thought-provoking because it discusses the faults that
arise from the giver or householder at the time of begging, not the discussion
of what kind of food a muni should or should not take. A detailed description of
this is found in the **Dashavaikalika Sutra**. It seems likely that **lipta
dosa** is mentioned because there is a high probability of **pashchatkarma**
after consuming contaminated substances. The **niyuktikara** has presented a
list of three types of substances: **alepakrid**, **alpalepakrid**, and
**bahulepakrid**, and has clarified the subject through a question-and-answer
session between the guru and the disciple. The author has presented eight
options arising from the mutual combination of six things: **sansrusht hath**,
**sansrusht patra**, **savasesh dravya**, and their opposites: **asansrusht
hath**, **asansrusht patra**, and **niravasesh dravya**.  10. **Chardit dosa**
Giving alms by dropping the object is **chardit dosa**. The **Dashavaikalika
Sutra** prohibits accepting such alms. In Digambara literature, this fault is
called **parityaajana dosa** or **tyakt dosa**. In **Piṇḍaniyukti**, **chardana
dosa** is related only to the householder giver, but in Digambara literature,
this fault is explained in two forms. There, it is related to both the
householder and the muni. Taking alms that the householder drops while giving,
or dropping food while eating, or dropping one thing and eating another desired
thing is **tyakt dosa** or **parityaajana dosa**. In **Anngardharmaamrit**, it
is explained as **chhotit dosa**.  There are three types of **chardana dosa**:
**sachitt**, **achitt**, and **mishra**. All the options of these four
**bhangis** are prohibited. A sadhu who consumes food with **chardit dosa**
incurs faults like **ajna**, **anavastha**, **mithyatva**, and **viradhana**.
The **niyuktikara**, explaining the reason for not accepting alms with **chardit
dosa**, says that if the **achitt dravya** is hot, it can burn the giver when it
falls to the ground, and it can cause **viradhana** to earth-bodied beings, etc.
If cold **dravya** is **chardit**, then also **viradhana** of earth-bodied
beings, etc., is possible. In this context, the **niyuktikara** has presented
the example of **madhubindu**.  1. **Mula 474, Anndh 5/35**. 2. **Pini 296-98**.
3. For these **bhangis**, see **Mrakshit Dosa Bhoomika p. 104**. 4. **Dash
5/1/28**. 5. **Chasa 72/1**. 6. **Mula 475**. 7. **Anndh 5/31**. 8. For the
expansion of the story, see **Pari. 3, Katha San. 49**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 116 piMDaniyukti kahalAtA hai| digambara paramparA meM lipta doSa kI paribhASA
kucha bhinna milatI hai| vahAM geru, haratAla, khar3iyA, manaHzilA, gIlA ATA
tathA apakva odana Adi se lipta hAtha yA pAtra se AhAra denA lipta doSa hai| isa
paribhASA ke anusAra phira prakSita doSa aura lipta doSa meM koI aMtara nahIM
rhtaa| piNDaniyukti meM varNita lipta doSa kI paribhASA bhI cintanIya hai kyoMki
yahAM bhikSA ke samaya dAtA yA gRhastha se lagane vAle doSoM kI carcA hai na ki
isa bAta kA vimarza karanA ki muni ko kaisA AhAra lenA cAhie aura kaisA nhiiN|
isakA vistRta varNana dazavaikAlika sUtra meM milatA hai| aisA saMbhava lagatA
hai ki lepayukta padArtha lene se pazcAtkarma kI prAya: saMbhAvanA rahatI hai
isalie lipta doSa kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai| niyuktikAra ne alepakRd ,
alpalepakRd aura bahulepakRd-ina tInoM prakAra ke dravyoM kI sUcI prastuta kI
hai tathA guru aura ziSya ke praznottara ke mAdhyama se viSaya ko spaSTa kiyA
hai| graMthakAra ne saMsRSTa hAtha, saMsRSTa pAtra aura sAvazeSa dravya tathA
pratipakSI asaMsRSTa hAtha, asaMsRSTa pAtra evaM niravazeSa dravya-ina chaha ke
paraspara saMyoga se hone vAle ATha vikalpoM ko prastuta kiyA hai| 10. chardita
doSa deya vastu ko girAte hue bhikSA denA chardita doSa hai| dazavaikAlika sUtra
meM isa prakAra kI bhikSA grahaNa karane kA niSedha hai| digambara sAhitya meM
isa doSa kA parityajana yA tyakta doSa nAma milatA hai| piNDaniyukti meM
chardana doSa kA sambandha kevala gRhastha dAtA se hai lekina digambara sAhitya
meM isa doSa kI do rUpoM meM vyAkhyA kI gaI hai| vahAM gRhastha aura muni donoM
ke sAtha isa doSa kA sambandha hai| gRhastha ke dvArA girAte hue dI jAne vAlI
bhikSA lenA tathA bhojana ke samaya girAte hue bhojana karanA athavA eka vastu
ko girAkara anya iSTa vastu khAnA tyakta yA parityajana doSa hai|
anagAradharmAmRta meM ise choTita doSa nAma se vyAkhyAyita kiyA hai| chardana
doSa ke tIna prakAra haiM-sacitta, acitta aura mishr| ina tInoM caturbhaMgiyoM
ke sAre vikalpa pratiSiddha haiN| chardita doSa yukta AhAra grahaNa karane vAle
sAdhu ko AjJA, anavasthA, mithyAtva aura virAdhanA Adi doSa lagate haiN|
niyuktikAra chardita doSa yukta bhikSA na lene kA kAraNa batAte hue kahate haiM
ki acitta dravya yadi uSNa hai to usake bhUmi para girane se dAtA jala sakatA
hai tathA pRthvIkAya Adi jIvoM kI virAdhanA ho sakatI hai| yadi zIta dravya kA
chardana hotA hai to bhI pRthvI Adi jIvoM kI virAdhanA saMbhava hai| isa
prasaMga meM niyuktikAra ne madhubindu kA dRSTAnta prastuta kiyA hai| 1. mUlA
474, anadha 5/35 /  2. pini 296-98 /  3. ina bhaMgoM ke lie dekheM mrakSita doSa
bhUmikA pR. 104 /  /  4. daza 5/1/28 /  5. cAsA 72/1 /  6. mUlA 475 /  7. anadha
5/31 /  8. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 49 /

Page #131 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindianiyukti: An Observation  **117**  **Available**  There are some
differences in the order and names of the ten defects of *eshana* in the
Svetambara and Digambara traditions. Here, the order and differences in the
words of the defects found in some texts are being presented in a chart.  |
**Pindianiyukti** | **Moolachar** | **Anudharmamrit** | **Dasha Vaikalik** |
**Panv** | |---|---|---|---|---| | **1. Sankit** | **1. Sankit** | **1. Sankit**
| **1. Sankit** | **1. Sankit** | | **2. Mrkshit** | **2. Mrkshit** | **2.
Pihit** | **2. Mekshit** | **2. Mrkshit** | | **3. Nikshipt** | **3. Nikshipt**
| **3. Mrkshit** | **3. Nikshipt** | **3. Nikshipt** | | **4. Pihit** | **4.
Pihit** | **4. Nikshipt** | **4. Pihit** | **4. Pihit** | | **5. Sanhrit** |
**5. Sanvyavharan** | **5. Chhotit** | **5. Sanhrit** | **5. Sanhrit** | | **6.
Dayak** | **6. Dayak** | **6. Aparinat** | **6. Dayak** | **6. Dayak** | | **7.
Unmishra** | **7. Unmishra** | **7. Sadharan** | **7. Unmishra** | **7.
Unmishra** | | **8. Aparinat** | **8. Aparinat** | **8. Dayak** | **8.
Aparinat** | **8. Aparinat** | | **9. Lipt** | **9. Lipt** | **9. Lipt** | **9.
Lipt** | **9. Lipt** | | **10. Chardit** | **10. Chhotit** | **10. Vimishra** |
**10. Chardit** | **10. Chardit** |  * In *Moolachar*, the term *Sanvyavharan*
is used instead of *Sanhrit* defect, and in *Anudharmamrit*, the term *Sadharan*
defect is mentioned. * In the Digambara tradition, the term *Chhotit* defect is
mentioned instead of *Chardit* defect. * In *Anudharmamrit*, the terms
*Vimishra* and *Mishra* defects are mentioned instead of *Unmishra* defect.
**Paribhog Eshana: Ahar-Mandali**  The Agamas mention seven mandalis
(communities) of the Muni's communal life, one of which is the Ahar-Mandali. The
Sadhu consumes the received food in two ways: 1. In the Mandali, 2. Alone. In
*Oghanuyukti*, it is mentioned that the Sadhus who eat in the Mandali gather
together and eat after waiting for each other. There are some *Samuddishak* in
each Mandali, who do not go for alms themselves but eat in the Mandali, such as
the very ill, children, the elderly, the Acharya, etc. - these are unable to
bring alms. The reason is that the *Shaiksh* does not know the alms-giving
method, the guest and the Guru are not sent for alms due to respect, the
*Asahuvarg* i.e. the prince, etc. Muni cannot go for alms due to his delicate
nature, and the *Alabhidhari* Muni, who do not get food easily due to *Antaray*
karma, also eat in the Mandali. No one *Upgrah* (attends) on all of them, the
work is done with the cooperation of all. This can be included in the defect
mentioned in the following verses:  1. **Moola 462** 2. **Anudharmamrit 5/281**
3. **Dasha Vaikalik Sutra** mentions the defects of *eshana* in a scattered
form. The defect is not mentioned by the name *Lipt*, but it is related to
*Purahkarma* and *Paschatkarma*. 4. **Panv 343** 5. **Oni 522** 6. **Oni 553**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 117 labhiAta  /  eSaNA ke daza doSoM ke krama
evaM nAmoM meM zvetAmbara tathA digambara paramparA meM kucha aMtara hai| yahAM
kucha graMthoM meM prApta doSoM kA krama evaM zabdabheda ke aMtara ko cArTa ke
dvArA prastuta kiyA jA rahA haipiNDaniyukti  /  mUlAcAra | anadha dazavaikAlika
1. zaMkita 1. zaMkita 1. zaMkita 1. zaMkita 5/1/44 2. mrakSita 2. mrakSita 2.
pihita 2. mekSita 5/1/32-36 3. nikSipta 3. nikSipta 3. mrakSita 3. nikSipta
5/1/59-62 4. pihita 4. pihita 4. nikSipta 4. pihita 5/1/47 5. saMhRta 5.
saMvyavaharaNa 5. choTita 5. saMhRta 5/1/30, 31 6. dAyaka 6. dAyaka 6. apariNata
6. dAyaka 5/1/29, 39-42, 63 7. unmizra 7. unmizra | 7. sAdhAraNa 7. unmizra
5/1/5, 5/1/57 8. apariNata 8. apariNata |8. dAyaka 8. apariNata 5/1/37, 5/1/70
9. lipta 9. lipta 9. lipta 9. lipta 5/1/32 10. chardita  /  10. choTita 10.
vimizra | 10. chardita 5/1/28 * mUlAcAra meM saMhRta doSa ke sthAna para
saMvyavaharaNa tathA anagAradharmAmRta meM sAdhAraNa doSa kA ullekha hai| *
chardita doSa ke sthAna para digambara paramparA meM choTita doSa kA ullekha
milatA hai| * unmizra doSa ke sthAna para anagAradharmAmRta meM vimizra tathA
mizra doSa kA ullekha milatA hai| paribhogaiSaNA : AhAra-maMDalI AgamoM meM muni
ke sAmudAyika jIvana kI sAta maMDaliyoM kA ullekha milatA hai, jinameM eka
AhAra-maMDalI hai| prApta AhAra kA sAdhu do prakAra se paribhoga karate haiM-1.
maMDalI meM 2. ekaakii| oghaniyukti meM ullekha milatA hai ki maMDalI meM
bhojana karane vAle sAdhu sabhI eka dUsare kI pratIkSA karake ekatrita hokara
AhAra karate haiN| pratyeka maMDalI meM kucha samuddizaka hote haiM, jo svayaM
bhikSA ke lie nahIM jAte lekina maMDalI meM AhAra karate haiM, jaise ati glAna,
bAla, vRddha, AcArya Adi-ye bhikSA lAne meM asamartha hote haiN| isakA kAraNa
hai ki zaikSa bhikSA-vidhi ko nahIM jAnatA, atithi aura guru ko sammAna ke
kAraNa bhikSA meM nahIM bhejA jAtA, asahuvarga arthAt rAjaputra Adi muni
sukumAratA ke kAraNa bhikSA nahIM jA sakate tathA alabdhidhArI muni, jinheM
aMtarAya karma ke kAraNa sahajatayA AhAra nahIM milatA, ve bhI maMDalI meM AhAra
karate haiN| ina saba para koI eka sAdhu upagraha nahIM karatA, sabake sahayoga
se kArya hotA hai| yaha 1, 2. mUlA 462, anadha 5/281 gAthAoM meM usa doSa ko
samAhita kiyA jA sakatA hai| 3. dazavaikAlika sUtra meM eSaNA ke prAyaH doSa
vikIrNa 4. paMva 343  /  rUpa se milate haiN| lipta nAma se doSa kA ullekha
nahIM 5. oni 522 /  hai lekina puraHkarma aura pazcAt karma se sambandhita 6.
oni 553 /

Page #132 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 118 ## Pinḍa Niyukti  The subject of research is why the Pinḍaniryuktikār did
not use the word "Mandali"? Digambara tradition sadhus go alone for alms. They
are pāṇipātra, and in the house where the muni's abhigraha are complete, they
receive alms free from 14 malas and 32 antarāyas. They stand and take alms only
once a day. For Śvetāmbara sadhus, the instruction is to bring alms in a wooden
vessel and eat at their own place. After bringing the alms, the muni should rest
for a moment so that the fatigue and disturbance of the metals are calmed.
During the time of rest, in kāyoatsarga, he should contemplate that if the
ācārya or muni blesses the food brought by me, I will be blessed, I will be
fortunate, and I will believe that they have saved me from the ocean of
existence. After contemplation, he should request the ācārya to give the food
brought by me to a guest, ascetic, sick, elderly, or student. Whether they
accept that invitation or not, the result is that the mind of the one who gives
the invitation is purified and there is abundant nirjarā, and the benefit of
knowledge etc. is obtained. In Āgama literature, great emphasis is placed on the
division of the food received. One who does not divide cannot be eligible for
liberation. If the muni hides the food from other things due to greed while
taking food, then due to this taste and lust, he binds himself with dense
karmas. Due to the lack of self-satisfaction, liberation also becomes rare for
him.  Ācārya Tilaka has explained this in two different meanings by considering
bhikṣācārya as two words. The first word 'bhikṣā' is accepted in the context of
bringing pure eṣaṇīya alms by going around, and the second word 'cārya' is
accepted in the sense of eating. Anyway, the root 'car' is also used in the
sense of eating, so the faults that occur during the time of paribhoga-iṣaṇā
also come under bhikṣācārya. These are also called grāsa-iṣaṇā or māṇḍalika
faults. Even after taking pure food from the source and production, if there is
no discretion or non-attachment during consumption, then that pure food also
becomes tainted with faults. In the Daśavaikalika Sutra, it is said that the
muni should eat whatever food is available, whether it is bitter, pungent,
astringent, sour-sweet, or salty, like honey and ghee. He should eat for the
proper carrying of the burden of restraint, like applying ointment on a wound
and massage on a chariot wheel, not for taste or attachment. In the Āgamas, it
is mentioned that the muni should not move the food from the left molar to the
right molar for the sake of taste. Just as a snake enters a hole straight, so
too, with a non-attached attitude, he should swallow the food down his throat.
1. According to Daśa 5/1/93, Oghanīyukti Bhāṣya (274), after bringing the alms,
the muni should chant the Namaskāra Mahāmantra for 8 breaths. 2. Daśa 5/1/94 3.
Panv 346, Oni 523-525 4. Mavṛ p. 75 5. Daśa 9/2/22 6. Daśa 5/2/31, 32 7. Daśa
5/1/97 8. Oni 546 9. Ā 8/101; Se bhikṣū vā bhikṣuṇī vā asanaṁ vā pāṇaṁ vā
khāimaṁ vā sāimaṁ vā āhāremāṇe ṇo vāmaō haṇuyāō dāhiṇaṁ haṇuyaṁ sancārejja
āsaemāṇe dāhiṇāō vā haṇuyāō vāmaṁ haṇuyaṁ ṇo sancārejja. 10. Daśa-acū p. 8; Jahā
sappo sar tti bilaṁ pavisati tahā....

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 118 piMDa niyukti anusaMdhAna kA viSaya hai ki piNDaniryuktikAra ne maMDalI
zabda kA prayoga kyoM nahIM kiyA ? digambara paramparA sAdhu ekAkI bhikSArtha
jAtA hai| vaha pANipAtra hotA hai, jisa ghara meM muni ke abhigraha pUrNa hote
haiM, 14 mala aura battIsa antarAya se rahita bhikSA milatI hai, vahIM
khar3e-khar3e dina meM eka bAra hI bhikSA grahaNa karatA hai| zvetAmbara sAdhu
ke lie kASTha pAtra meM bhikSA lAkara apane sthAna para AhAra karane kA nirdeza
hai| bhikSA lAne ke bAda muni kSaNabhara vizrAma kare, jisase zramajanya
viSamatA aura dhAtukSobha zAnta ho jAe  / ' vizrAma ke samaya kAyotsarga meM
vaha yaha cintana kare ki mere dvArA AnIta AhAra para AcArya yA muni anugraha
kare to maiM nihAla ho jAUM, dhanya ho jAUM aura maiM yaha mAnUM ki unhoMne
mujhe bhava-sAgara se tAra diyA hai  / " cintana ke pazcAt vaha AcArya ko
nivedana kare ki mere dvArA AnIta AhAra atithi, tapasvI, glAna, vRddha yA zaikSa
ko dene kI kRpA kreN| ve usa nimaMtraNa ko svIkAra kareM athavA na kareM, para
pariNAmavizuddhi se nimaMtraNa dene vAle kI citta zuddhi aura vipula nirjarA
hotI hai tathA tadgata jJAnAdi kA lAbha hotA hai| Agama - sAhitya meM prApta
AhAra ke saMvibhAga para bahuta jora diyA gayA hai| asaMvibhAgI mokSa kA
adhikArI nahIM ho sakatA  / " yadi muni AhAra lete samaya lobha ke kAraNa usa
vastu ko kisI anya vastu se chipAtA hai to isa svAdavRtti aura rasalolupatA ke
kAraNa vaha saghana karmoM kA baMdhana karatA hai| Atma-tuSTi ke abhAva meM
usake lie nirvANa bhI durlabha ho jAtA hai| AcArya tilaka ne bhikSAcaryA ko do
zabdoM se niSpanna mAnakara do bhinna arthoM meM isako vyAkhyAyita kiyA hai|
prathama 'bhikSA' zabda ghUmakara zuddha eSaNIya bhikSA lAne ke saMdarbha meM
tathA dvitIya 'caryA' zabda bhakSaNa ke artha meM svIkRta kiyA hai, vaise bhI
'cara' dhAtu bhakSaNa artha meM bhI prayukta hotI hai ataH paribhogaiSaNA ke
samaya lagane vAle doSa bhI bhikSAcaryA ke antargata Ate haiN| ye grAsaiSaNA yA
mAMDalika doSa bhI kahalAte haiM  /  udgama aura utpAdana se zuddha AhAra lekara
bhI yadi paribhoga ke samaya viveka yA anAsakti nahIM rahatI to vaha zuddha
AhAra bhI doSa sahita ho jAtA hai  /  dazavaikAlika sUtra meM kahA gayA hai ki
muni tikta, kaTu, kasailA, khaTTA-mIThA yA namakIna, jo bhI AhAra upalabdha ho,
use madhughRta kI bhAMti khAe  /  vaha vraNa para lepa tathA zakaTa-cakra para
abhyaMga kI bhAMti saMyama - bhAra kA samyak vahana karane ke lie AhAra kare, na
ki AsvAda yA Asakti ke lie  /  AgamoM meM ullekha milatA hai ki muni svAda ke
lie AhAra ko bAMyI dAr3hA se dAhinI dAr3hA meM na le jaae| jaise sAMpa bila meM
sIdhA praveza karatA hai, vaise hI anAsakta bhAva se AhAra ko gale se nIce utAra
de|" 1. daza 5/1/93, oghaniyukti bhASya (274) ke anusAra bhikSA lAkara muni 8
ucchvAsa taka namaskAra mahAmaMtra kA japa kre| 2. daza 5 / 1 / 94 / 3. paMva
346, oni 523-525  /  4. mavR pa. 75  /  5. daza 9/2/22  /  6. daza 5/2/31, 32  /
7. daza 5/1/97  /  8. oni 546  /  9. A 8 / 101 ; se bhikkhU vA bhikkhuNI vA
asaNaM vA pANaM vA khAimaM vA sAimaM vA AhAremANe No vAmAo haNuyAo dAhiNaM
haNuyaM saMcArejjA AsAemANe dAhiNAo vA haNuyAo vAmaM haNuyaM No saMcArejjA  /
10. dazaacU pR. 8 ; jahA sappo sara tti bilaM pavisati tahA....  /

Page #133 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation  **Method of Consumption**  The
**Oghaniryukti** and its commentary present a psychological, practical, and
poignant discussion regarding the acceptance of food from a vessel and its
placement in the mouth for consumption. The text vividly describes the mindset
of the eater through the analogy of animals. The **Oghaniryukti** uses the
example of a crow and a jackal to illustrate improper consumption. Just as a
crow eats grains hidden in dung, scattering the rest and looking around while
eating, similarly, consuming food with relish, dropping food, or looking around
in another's vessel while eating is considered improper. The jackal eats
different parts of its food, not in order, similarly, if rice is mixed with
fragrant ghee, drinking the ghee and leaving the rice is improper consumption.
Consuming superior and inferior substances together is considered proper. Eating
one's food in pieces, like a lion, is considered proper consumption. A monk who
eats improperly is given **Kalyanak** atonement by the **Acharya** to prevent
the repetition of such an act.  The method of placing food in the mouth, as
described in the **Bhagawti Sutra**, is also found in the **Oghaniryukti**
commentary. When placing food in the mouth, if there is excessive chili, the
monk should not make a "snorting" sound. While chewing, the monk should not make
a "smacking" sound. The monk should not eat too quickly or too slowly. While
eating, the monk should not drop food. The **Dashavaikalik Sutra** mentions
"**Jayam Aparisaḍayam**", which points to this very aspect. After eating, the
monk should wipe any food residue from the vessel with their finger and eat it.
Whether the substance is fragrant or foul, the monk should not leave even a
small portion uneaten. The **Oghaniryukti** also emphasizes the use of
appropriate qualities of mind, speech, and body. This means that while eating,
the monk should not have distorted thoughts, should not express reactions to the
food through speech, and should not express through their body that they would
not eat such distorted food. This way, the eater achieves purity in consumption.
**Consumption Craving or Māṇḍalik Dosha**  The **Pinḍaniryukti** refers to the
poignant story of a fisherman and a fish in the context of **dravya
grāsaishana** (craving for food). In this story, the fish tells the fisherman
its story from its own mouth. The fish says that it escaped the mouth of a
**balaka** (a type of bird) three times. It also escaped the fisherman's net
twenty-one times with skill. Even when caught in the net, it escaped the
fisherman's grasp while being threaded through the net.  **Footnotes:**  1.
**Oabha** 296-98. 2. **Oabha** 288. 3. **Oabha** 300. 4. **Bhagawti** 7/25. 5.
**Dashavaikalik** 5/1/96. 6. **Dashavaikalik** 5/2/1. 7. **Oabha** 289, **Tika**
p. 187.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa paribhoga kI vidhi oghaniyukti evaM usake
bhASya meM paribhoga ke lie pAtra se kavala grahaNa karane evaM mukha meM
kavalaprakSepa ke saMdarbha meM manovaijJAnika, vyAvahArika aura mArmika
vivecana prastuta kiyA gayA hai| pAtra se kavala grahaNa karane meM pazu-pakSI
kI upamA se AhAra karane vAle kI manovRtti kA sajIva varNana kiyA gayA hai|
avidhi bhukta meM niyuktikAra ne kAka aura zrRMgAla kA udAharaNa diyA hai, jaise
kAka gobara meM chipe anAja dAnoM ko khA letA hai, zeSa ko cAroM ora bikhera
detA hai tathA khAte samaya bhI idhara-udhara dekhatA rahatA hai, vaise hI
manojJa AhAra karanA, girAte hue AhAra karanA yA idhara-udhara dUsare ke pAtra
meM jhAMkate hue AhAra karanA avadhi bhukta hai  /  zRgAla apane bhojya ke
bhinna-bhinna bhAgoM ko khAtA hai, kramazaH nahIM khAtA, vaise hI odana Adi yadi
surabhita tImana se milA huA ho to odana ko chor3akara tImana ko pInA
avidhibhukta hai  /  utkRSTa - anutkRSTa dravyoM ko samIkRta karake khAnA vidhi
sammata hai| siMha ke samAna apane bhojya ko khaNDa-khaNDa karake pratara rUpa
meM kramazaH khAnA vidhibhukta hai  /  jo sAdhu avidhipUrvaka bhojana karatA
hai, usako AcArya kalyANaka prAyazcitta dete haiM, jisase Age vaha prasaMga
punarukta na ho| mukha meM kavala - prakSepa kI vidhi kA bhagavatI sUtra meM jo
varNana hai, vaha oghaniyukti bhASya meM bhI milatA hai| mukha meM kavala DAlate
samaya adhika mirca Adi ho to muni sUM-sUM kA zabda na kare, bhojana cabAte
samaya capa-capa kI AvAja na kare, bhojana na adhika zIghratA se kare aura na
adhika vilamba se  /  bhikSu khAte samaya bhojana ko nIce girAte hue na khAe  /
dazavaikAlika sUtra kA 'jayaM aparisADayaM " kA ullekha isI ora saMketa karatA
hai| AhAra ke pazcAt muni pAtra meM lage lepa yA khAdya-padArtha ko aMguli se
poMchakara khaae| padArtha cAhe sugaMdha yukta ho yA durgandha yukta, vaha aMza
mAtra bhI jUThA na chodd'e|' oghaniyukti meM ina saba bAtoM ke sAtha mana,
vacana aura kAyA se upayukta vizeSaNa kA prayoga bhI huA hai arthAt AhAra ke
samaya muni mana se vikRta cintana na kare, vacana se AhAra ke prati pratikriyA
vyakta na kare tathA kAyA se yaha prakaTa na kare ki aise vikRta AhAra ko kauna
khAegA ?" isa prakAra AhAra karane vAle ke paribhoga-vizuddhi hotI hai|
paribhogaiSaNA yA mAMDalika doSa piNDaniryukti meM dravya grAsaiSaNA ke
saMdarbha meM macchImAra tathA eka matsya kI mArmika kathA kA nirdeza hai,
jisameM matsya svayaM apane mukha se macchImAra ko apanI kathA kahatA hai ki
maiM tIna bAra balAkA mukha meM jAkara bhI chUTa gyaa| macchImAra ke jAla meM 21
bAra phaMsane para bhI usase kuzalatApUrvaka bAhara nikala gyaa| eka bAra jAla
meM pakar3e jAne para bhI maiM dhAge meM pirone ke samaya usake caMgula se mukta
ho gayA  /  1. obhA 296-98  /  2. obhA 288  /  3. obhA 300  /  4. bhaga 7 / 25
/  5. daza 5/1/96 | 6. daza 5 / 2 / 1  /  7. obhA 289, TI pa. 187  /  119

Page #134 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 120 ## Pindaniyukti  It is your shamelessness that you want to catch me, who
am full of power. This example is found in the Jitakalp Bhashya and the
Malayagiri commentary on Pindaniyukti. Here, the sage is like a fish, the flesh
is the local devotee's drink, and the fisherman is the local attachment and
aversion. Just as the fish was not caught even by many means, so too should the
sage practice self-discipline and think that when I was not deceived by the 42
faults of begging, then my soul should not be deceived by attachment and
aversion during the time of eating and drinking. To inspire oneself with this
feeling is **Bhavagrasaeshanā**. This resolve keeps the sage detached and
neutral even in the presence of favorable and unfavorable food.  In the present
context, it would not be irrelevant to present the fourfold truth of the world
and the non-world as specified in **Oghanuyukti**. The monk who resolves that I
will eat coarse and fine food, if he eats the same food at the time of eating,
then he is **Sasar Upavishta** and **Sasar Uthitha**, that is, he enters the
food assembly with auspicious results and eats the same food with auspicious
results, this is the first **Bhang**. In the second **Bhang**, the monk enters
the food assembly with auspicious resolve but due to degenerate results, he is
unable to remain detached from eating, therefore he is **Sasar Upavishta** and
**Asar Uthitha**. In the third **Bhang**, he enters with attached results at the
time of eating but eats coarse and fine food in small quantities while eating,
he is **Asar Upavishta** and **Sasar Uthitha**, and the fourth type of sage is
**Asar Upavishta** and **Asar Uthitha**, he is attached in both ways and has
weak willpower. Here, the **Niyuktikar** has also given the example of a sea
merchant who took his ship loaded with goods and returned loaded with gold,
silver, etc., that is, he went to the world and returned to the world,
similarly, one should understand the other **Bhangs** of the fourfold truth.  In
**Pindaniyukti**, where the five faults of **Grasaeshanā** are mentioned, the
word **Atibahuk** is used in place of **Pramanatireka** and the word **Anarth**
(without purpose) is used in place of the fault of **Karan**. In
**Anugardharmamrut**, only three faults are mentioned in addition to the fault
of **Karan**, there is also a difference in the order of the faults.  In the
**Bhagavati Sutra**, the faults of **Angar** etc. are not mentioned as
**Grasaeshanā** or **Mandalik** faults.  1. **Jibha 1606, Mavru P. 171.** The
sage who shows aversion towards food is **Asar** because his perspective is
devoid of knowledge, faith, and conduct. 2. **Oni 544, 545, Pini 302/5, Jibha
1607, 1608.** The sage who takes ordinary food without attachment and aversion
with a mind free from the faults of **Udgam**, **Utpādana**, and **Eshanā** is
**Sasar** because his perspective is filled with knowledge, faith, and conduct.
3. **Oni 567-70.** 4. **Oni 571, 572, T P. 187, 188.** 5. **Pini 303/1;
Sanjoyanamibahuya, Ingal Sadhumgam Anattae.** 6. **Anudh 5/37.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 120 piMDaniyukti mujha zaktisampanna ko tuma pakar3anA cAhate ho, yaha tumhArI
nirlajjatA hai| isa dRSTAnta kA upanaya jItakalpa bhASya tathA piNDaniyukti kI
malayagiri TIkA meM milatA hai| yahAM matsya ke samAna sAdhu, mAMsa sthAnIya
bhaktapAna tathA mAtsyika sthAnIya rAga aura dveSa haiN| jisa prakAra aneka
upAyoM ke dvArA bhI vaha matsya pakar3A nahIM gayA, vaise hI AtmAnuzAsana kA
abhyAsa karate hue sAdhu ko cintana karanA cAhie ki jaba bhikSAcaryA ke 42 doSoM
se maiM chalA nahIM gayA, phira AhAra-paribhoga ke samaya rAga-dveSa ke mAdhyama
se merI AtmA nahIM chalI jAnI caahie| isa bhAvanA se svayaM ko bhAvita karanA
bhAva grAsaiSaNA hai| yaha saMkalpa sAdhu ko anukUla-pratikUla khAdya kI
upasthiti meM bhI anAsakta aura taTastha rakhatA hai| prastuta prasaMga meM
oghaniyukti meM nirdiSTa sasAra aura asAra caturbhaMgI ko prastuta karanA
aprAsaMgika nahIM hogaa| jo muni yaha saMkalpa karatA hai ki maiM anta-prAnta
aura rUkhA-sUkhA AhAra karUMgA, yadi vaha bhojana ke samaya bhI vaisA hI AhAra
karatA hai to vaha sasAra upaviSTa aura sasAra utthita hai arthAt vaha
zubhapariNAmoM se bhojana-maMDalI meM praviSTa hotA hai tathA zubha pariNAmoM se
vaisA hI AhAra karatA hai, yaha prathama bhaMga hai| dUsare bhaMga meM muni
zubha saMkalpa se bhojana-maMDalI meM upaviSTa hotA hai lekina pratipatita
pariNAmoM ke kAraNa khAne meM anAsakta nahIM raha pAtA ata: vaha sasAra upaviSTa
tathA asAra utthita hotA hai| tIsare bhaMga meM bhojana ke samaya Asakta
pariNAmoM se upaviSTa hotA hai lekina bhojana karate samaya anta-prAnta bhojana
svalpa mAtrA meM grahaNa karatA hai, vaha asAra upaviSTa tathA sasAra utthita
hai tathA cauthe prakAra kA sAdhu asAra upaviSTa aura asAra utthita hotA hai,
vaha donoM dRSTiyoM se Asakta aura kamajora manobala vAlA hotA hai| yahAM
niyuktikAra ne samudra vaNik ke udAharaNa kA bhI nirdeza diyA hai, jo jahAja ko
mAla se bharakara le gayA aura suvarNa, hiraNya Adi bharakara lauTA arthAt vaha
sasAra gayA aura sasAra lauTA, isI prakAra caturbhaMgI ke anya bhaMgoM ko
samajhanA caahie| piNDaniyukti meM jahAM grAsaiSaNA ke pAMca doSoM kA ullekha
huA hai, vahAM pramANAtireka ke sthAna para atibahuka tathA kAraNa doSa ke
sthAna para anartha (binA prayojana) zabda kA prayoga huA hai| anagAradharmAmRta
meM kAraNa doSa ke atirikta tIna doSoM kA hI ullekha huA hai, vahAM doSoM ke
krama meM bhI aMtara hai| bhagavatI sUtra meM grAsaiSaNA yA mAMDalika doSa ke
rUpa meM aMgAra Adi doSoM kA ullekha nahIM miltaa| 1. jIbhA 1606, mavR pa. 171 /
/  AhAra ke prati dveSa prakaTa karatA hai, vaha sAdhu asAra hotA 2. oni 544,
545, pini 302/5, jIbhA 1607, 1608 /  hai kyoMki usakA dRSTikoNa jJAna, darzana
aura cAritra se 3. oni 567-70 ; udgama, utpAdanA aura eSaNA ke rahita hotA hai|
doSa se rahita sAdhAraNa AhAra ko jo rAga dveSa rahita 4. oni 571, 572, TI pa.
187, 188 /  aMta:karaNa se grahaNa karatA hai, vaha sAdhu sasAra hotA hai 5.
pini 303/1 ;saMjoyaNamaibahuyaM, iMgAla sadhUmagaM anntttthaae| kyoMki usakA
dRSTikoNa jJAna, darzana aura cAritra se 6. anadha 5/37 /  yukta hai tathA jo
udgama Adi doSoM se rahita sAdhAraNa

Page #135 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindianiyukti: An Observation  **121** There is a general description of
Angar, Dhum and Samyoga in the context of food in the seventh century. After
that, there is a description of the Pramanatikrant dosha along with
Kshetratikrant, Kalatikrant and Margattikrant related to food and water. There
is no mention of the Karan dosha. From this context, it can be inferred that
these had not developed as Grasaishana or Mandalik doshas until the composition
of the Bhagavati Sutra.   **Samyoga** Combining other food items with edible and
palatable food items to enhance taste and juice is the Samyoga dosha. Samyoga is
of two types - external and internal.  Combining suitable substances in a
household item is external Samyoga, and the combination done while eating in an
Upashraya is internal Samyoga. This is done in three ways - in the vessel, in
the Kavala, and in the mouth. In Panchvastu, only two types of internal Samyoga
are mentioned - in the vessel and in the mouth.  Since Pindianiyukti describes
food and Bhikchacharya, it only describes Samyoga related to food and drink, but
Pravachansaroaddhar also mentions external and internal Samyoga related to
equipment. The commentator, while explaining external Samyoga related to
equipment, says that if a Sadhu gets a beautiful Cholapatt from somewhere, he
wears a new Pachevadi for adornment outside the residence, that is external
Samyoga related to equipment. If he does so inside the residence, it is internal
equipment Samyoga.  Mixing ghee or chili-spices etc. with the item kept in the
vessel is vessel-related Samyoga. Mixing sugar or other substances in the Kavala
held in the hand to enhance its taste is Kavala-related Samyoga, and putting
another substance in the mouth after taking the Kavala in the mouth to enhance
its taste is mouth-related Samyoga. A Muni who does Samyoga due to attachment
and taste, combines karma with his soul due to the cause of raga-dvesha. The
combination of karma leads to infinite suffering.  **Exceptions to Samyoga
Dosha** The Niyuktikar states that if there is leftover food after eating
enough, then Samyoga is allowed to consume the leftover food. For example, it is
not possible to eat leftover ghee without bread and sugar after being satisfied
with food, its Paristapan...  **1. Bhag 7/22** **2. Bhag 7/22, Pini 306** **3.
Pini 305, Jibha 1613** **4. Panv 359** **5. Pini 305, Mavru P. 172, Bribhati P.
239** **6. Pini 307, Jibha 1616, 1617**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 121 vahAM sAtaveM zataka meM AhAra ke prasaMga
meM sAmAnya rUpa se aMgAra, dhUma aura saMyojanA kA varNana hai| usake bAda
AhAra aura pAnI se sambandhita kSetrAtikrAnta, kAlAtikrAnta aura mArgAtikrAnta
ke sAtha pramANAtikrAnta doSa kA varNana hai| vahAM kAraNa doSa kA ullekha nahIM
huA hai| isa prasaMga se yaha anumAna lagAyA jA sakatA hai ki bhagavatI sUtra kI
racanA taka grAsaiSaNA yA mAMDalika doSoM ke rUpa meM inakA vikAsa nahIM huA
thaa| saMyojanA svAda aura rasa-utkarSa bar3hAne hetu eSaNIya aura prAsuka
khAdya-padArtha meM anya khAdya-vastu kA saMyoga karanA saMyojanA doSa hai|
saMyojanA do prakAra kI hotI hai-bAhya aura aantrik| gRhastha ke ghara kisI
vastu meM anukUla dravyoM kA saMyoga karanA bAhya saMyojanA tathA upAzraya meM
bhojana karate samaya jo saMyojanA kI jAtI hai, vaha AMtarika saMyojanA hai|
yaha tIna prakAra se kI jAtI hai-pAtra meM, kavala meM tathA muMha meM  /
paMcavastu meM Abhyantara saMyojanA ke do hI bheda kie haiM-pAtra meM tathA
mukha meN| piNDaniyukti meM cUMki AhAra evaM bhikSAcaryA kA varNana hai ataH
unhoMne bhaktapAna viSayaka saMyojanA kA hI varNana kiyA hai lekina
pravacanasAroddhAra meM upakaraNa viSayaka bAhya aura AMtarika saMyojanA kA bhI
ullekha hai| TIkAkAra ne upakaraNaviSayaka bAhya saMyojanA ko spaSTa karate hue
kahA hai ki kisI sAdhu ko kahIM se suMdara colapaTTa mila gyaa| vaha vibhUSA ke
lie nayI pachevar3I mAMgakara vasati ke bAhara pahanatA hai, vaha upakaraNa
viSayaka bAhya saMyojanA hai| yadi vasati ke aMdara aisA karatA hai to AMtarika
upakaraNa saMyojanA hai| pAtra meM rakhI vastu meM ghI yA mirca-masAlA Adi anya
dravya kA mizraNa karanA pAtraviSayaka saMyojanA hai| hAtha meM sthita kavala kI
svAdavRddhi hetu usameM zarkarA yA anya dravya kA mizraNa kavala viSayaka
saMyojanA hai tathA muMha meM kavala lene ke pazcAt usakI svAdavRddhi hetu kisI
anya dravya ko mukha meM DAlanA mukha viSayaka saMyojanA hai| Asakti aura
svAdavaza saMyojanA karane vAlA muni rAga-dveSa ke nimitta se apanI AtmA ke
sAtha karmoM kA saMyoga karatA hai| karmoM kA saMyoga anaMta du:kha kA kAraNa
banatA hai| _ saMyojanA doSa ke apavAda batAte hue niyuktikAra kahate haiM ki
yadi paryApta khAne ke bAda bhI khAdya sAmagrI baca jAe to avazeSa sAmagrI kA
upabhoga karane ke lie saMyojanA anujJAta hai| udAharaNa svarUpa bhojana kI
tRpti ke bAda bace hue ghI ko binA roTI aura zarkarA ke khAnA saMbhava nahIM
hai, usakA pariSThApana 1. bhaga 7/22 //  2. bhaga 7/22, pini 306 /  3. pini
305, jIbhA 1613  /  4. paMva 359 /  5. pini 305, mavR pa. 172, bRbhATI pR. 239
/  6. pini 307, jIbhA 1616, 1617 /

Page #136 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  122.  The practice of *pindiya* (offering food to deities) is
not appropriate because it can lead to the harm of many creatures like ants.
Therefore, it is prescribed to mix leftover food with sugar, etc. Similarly, for
those who find food unpalatable, for princes and other virtuous individuals, and
for those who are not yet fully initiated into the Jain way of life, mixing food
is prescribed. This is an example of the fallacy of *pramanatirek* (excessive
proof).  For a monk, Mahavira used a specific term - *mayanna* - meaning one who
knows the right measure of food. Food that does not harm *dhriti* (mental
health), *bala* (physical strength), and *sanjama* (self-control) in the present
and future is considered *pramanayukta* (measured) food.  Eating more than this
is harmful for a monk. Eating excessively more than three times due to
attachment or dissatisfaction is the fault of *pramanatirek*. According to the
Bhagavati Sutra, eating more than 32 *kavala* (mouthfuls) is considered
*pramanatikrant* (excessive) food.  The *niyuktikara* (commentator) and
*bhashyakara* (interpreter) have considered *hita* (beneficial), *mita*
(moderate), and *alpa* (minimal) food as *pramanayukta* food. The *bhashyakara*
has presented a fourfold classification of beneficial food, connecting it to
this world and the next:  * Beneficial in this world, not in the next. *
Beneficial in the next world, not in this. * Beneficial in this world and the
next. * Not beneficial in this world or the next.  Eating *aneshaniya* (non-
essential) foods like *kheer* (rice pudding), *dahi* (yogurt), and *gud*
(jaggery) with attachment and aversion is beneficial in this world but not in
the next. Eating pure food with *eshana* (effort) but without *manojna*
(pleasantness) is beneficial for the next world but not for this. Eating food
that is both *pathya* (wholesome) and pure with *eshana* is beneficial for both
worlds. Eating *apathya* (unwholesome) and *aneshaniya* food with attachment and
aversion is harmful for both this world and the next.  The *niyuktikara* has
scientifically explained *mita* (moderate) food. Generally, a person should
imagine their stomach divided into six parts, three parts for food, two parts
for water, and the sixth part empty for air circulation.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 122 piMDaniyukti bhI ucita nahIM hai kyoMki pariSThApana se aneka cIMTI Adi
jIvoM kA vyAghAta saMbhava hai ataH bace hue dravya meM khAMDa Adi kI saMyojanA
vihita hai| isI prakAra glAna ke lie, jisako bhojana arucikara lagatA hai,
rAjaputra Adi sukhocita sAdhu ke lie tathA apariNata zaikSa Adi ke lie saMyojanA
vihita hai|' pramANAtireka doSa muni ke lie mahAvIra ne eka vizeSaNa kA prayoga
kiyA hai-mAyaNNe-arthAt AhAra kI mAtrA ko jAnane vaalaa| jisa AhAra se vartamAna
aura bhaviSyakAla meM dhRti-mAnasika svAsthya, balazArIrika bala aura
saMyamayogoM kI hAni na ho, vaha pramANayukta AhAra hai| isase adhika AhAra
sAdhu ke lie duHkhakAraka hotA hai| Asakti vaza yA atRptivaza tIna bAra se
adhika bAra ati mAtrA meM AhAra karanA pramANAtireka doSa hai| bhagavatI sUtra
ke anusAra 32 kavala se adhika AhAra karanA pramANAtikrAnta AhAra hai|
niyuktikAra aura bhASyakAra ne hita, mita aura alpa AhAra ko pramANa yukta AhAra
mAnA hai| hitakara AhAra ko ihaloka aura paraloka se jor3akara bhASyakAra ne eka
catubhaMgI prastuta kI hai * isa loka meM hitakara, paraloka meM nhiiN| *
paraloka meM hitakara, isa loka meM nhiiN| * isa loka meM hitakara, paraloka meM
bhI hitkr| * na isa loka meM hitakara, na paraloka meN| aneSaNIya khIra, dahI,
gur3a Adi aviruddha padArthoM ko rAga dveSa yukta bhAva se khAnA isa loka meM
hitakara hai, paraloka meM nhiiN| eSaNA se zuddha lekina amanojJa AhAra
samatApUrvaka khAnA paraloka ke lie hitakara hai, isa loka ke lie nhiiN| pathya
aura eSaNA se zuddha AhAra donoM lokoM ke lie hitakara hai tathA apathya aura
aneSaNIya AhAra rAga-dveSa yukta hokara khAnA ihaloka aura paraloka-donoM ke lie
ahitakara hai| niyuktikAra ne mitAhAra kA vaijJAnika DhaMga se nirUpaNa kiyA
hai| sAmAnyataH vyakti kalpanA se udara ke chaha bhAga karake tIna bhAga AhAra
ke lie, do bhAga pAnI tathA chaThA bhAga vAyu-saMcaraNa ke lie khAlI 1.pini 309
/  3. jIbhA 1628, 1629 ; 2. (ka) bRbhA 5852 ahavA atippamANo, AturabhUto tu
bhuMjae jNtu| paDupanna'NAgate vA, saMjamajogANa jeNa prihaannii| taM hoti
atipamANaM.... Na vi jAyati taM jANasu, sAhussa pmaannmaahaare|| 4. bhaga 7/24 /
(kha) piMpra 95 ; 5. pini 313, jIbhA 1632  /  dhii-bala-saMjamajogA, jeNa Na
hAyaMti saMpai pae vaa| 6. jIbhA 1633-37  /  taM AhArapamANaM, jaissa sesaM
kilesphlN||

Page #137 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  **123.** According to the texts of Mūlācāra and
Āyurveda, the abdomen is divided into four parts, two parts for food, one part
for water, and the fourth part is kept empty for air circulation.   **1.** The
practitioner of Pinḍaniyukti has also given instructions on the amount of food
according to the season. In winter, one part is allotted for water and four
parts for food. In moderate winter, two parts for water and three parts for
food, in summer, two parts for water and three parts for food, and in extreme
summer, three parts for water and two parts for food. The sixth part is always
reserved for air circulation.   **2.** One part of water and two parts of food
are constant, they do not increase or decrease. In extreme summer, two parts of
water increase, and in extreme winter, two parts of food increase. This means
that in extreme summer, two parts of food decrease, and in extreme winter, two
parts of water decrease.   **3.** The third and fourth parts out of the six
parts are unstable. The fifth part related to water, the sixth part related to
air, and the first and second parts related to food - these four parts are
present.   **4.** By this method, keeping the stomach empty for air and water is
considered moderate eating. Eating less than this is considered minimal eating.
**5.** The excess of food (Pramaṇātireka) occurs in five ways. Prakāma āhāra is
the first type of excess food. The Uttarādhyayana Sutra mentions that just as a
fire in a forest with abundant fuel and strong wind does not extinguish quickly,
similarly, the digestive fire of a person who eats excessively (Prakāmabhōji)
never calms down.   **6.** For men, 32 kavala is the prescribed amount of food,
and for women, 28 kavala. For eunuchs, 24 kavala is the prescribed amount.
Eating more than this is considered Prakāma āhāra.   **7.** The Vyavahāra Bhāṣya
considers 32 kavala as Prakāma āhāra. There, the amount of kavala is explained
practically and intelligibly. According to it, one should know the amount of the
abdomen (kukkuḍi-udara-pramaṇam) as the 32nd part of one's own food intake.
**8.** Another alternative meaning is found in the commentary of Śāntyācārya.
The meaning of "aṇḍaka" is the mouth. The amount of food that can be put into
the mouth without distorting it naturally is the prescribed kavala.   **9.** The
Harivamśa Purāṇa, while describing the kavala-pramaṇam, states that one thousand
grains of rice are equal to one kavala.   **10.** The size of an āṁvala (Indian
gooseberry) is also mentioned for kavala-pramaṇam. However, everyone's body
structure and digestive power are not the same.   **Footnotes:**  1. Piṇi 313/2.
2. Piṇi 313/3, 4. 3. Piṇi 313/5, 6, for details see Mavṛ P. 175. 4. Jībhā
1638-42. 5. U 32/11. 6. Jībhā 1622, 1623. 7. Vyabhā 3688. 8. Vyabhā 3682;
Nīyāhārassaya, battisaimo u jo bhave bhāgo. Tam kukkuḍippamāṇam, nātavvaṁ
buddhimāntehiṁ. 9. Uśāṁvṛ P 604. 10. Hapu 11/125.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 123 rkhe| mUlAcAra evaM Ayurveda ke graMthoM ke
anusAra udara ko cAra bhAgoM meM vibhakta karake do bhAga AhAra se, eka bhAga
pAnI tathA cauthA bhAga vAyu-saMcaraNa ke lie khAlI rakhA jAe, aisA ullekha
milatA hai| . Rtu ke anusAra bhI niyuktikAra ne AhAra ke pramANa kA nirdeza diyA
hai| zItakAla meM pAnI ke lie eka bhAga tathA AhAra ke lie cAra bhAga kalpita
haiN| madhyama zItakAla meM do bhAga pAnI tathA tIna bhAga AhAra, uSNa kAla meM
do bhAga pAnI tathA tIna bhAga AhAra tathA ati uSNa kAla meM tIna bhAga pAnI
tathA do bhAga AhAra-yaha pramANa hai| chaThA bhAga sarvatra vAyu-saMcaraNa ke
lie vihita hai| inameM pAnI kA eka bhAga tathA bhojana ke do bhAga sthira haiM,
unameM hAni-vRddhi nahIM hotii| ati uSNakAla meM pAnI ke do bhAga tathA ati
zItakAla meM AhAra ke do bhAga bar3ha jAte haiN| kahane kA tAtparya yaha hai ki
ati uSNa kAla meM bhojana ke do bhAga kama ho jAte haiM tathA ati zItakAla meM
pAnI ke do bhAga kama ho jAte haiN| chaha bhAgoM meM tIsarA aura cauthA bhAga
asthira hai| pAnI viSayaka pAMcavAM, vAyu viSayaka chaThA tathA AhAra viSayaka
pahalA aura dUsarA bhAga-ye cAroM bhAga avasthita haiN| isa vidhi se vAyu aura
pAnI ke lie peTa khAlI rakhanA mitAhAra hai| isase bhI kama khAnA alpa AhAra
hai| pramANAtireka doSa pAMca prakAra se ghaTita hotA haiprakAma AhAra-
pramANAtireka AhAra kA prathama bheda hai-prakAma aahaar| uttarAdhyayana sUtra
meM ullekha milatA hai ki jaise pracaNDa pavana ke sAtha pracura IMdhana vAle
vana meM Aga lagane para dAvAgni jaldI se zAnta nahIM hotI, vaise hI
prakAmabhojI kI iMdriyAgni bhI kabhI zAnta nahIM hotii| puruSoM ke lie battIsa
tathA striyoM ke lie aTThAIsa kavala AhAra pramANopeta hai| napuMsaka ke lie 24
kavala pramANa hai| usase adhika AhAra grahaNa karanA prakAma AhAra hai|
vyavahArabhASya meM battIsa kavala AhAra ko prakAma AhAra mAnA hai| vahAM kavala
kA pramANa vyAvahArika aura buddhigamya rUpa se vyAkhyAta hai| usake anusAra
pratyeka vyakti ke apane AhAra kI mAtrA kA jo battIsavAM bhAga hai, vaha
kukkuTi-udara-pramANa jAnanA caahie| isakA dUsarA vaikalpika artha zAntyAcArya
kI TIkA meM prApta hotA hai| aMDaka kA artha hotA hai-mukha, sahaja rUpa se
muMha avikRta kie binA jitanA AhAra usameM DAlA jA sake, vaha pramANopeta kavala
hai| harivaMza purANa meM kavala-pramANa batAte hue kahA gayA hai ki eka hajAra
cAvala eka kavala pramANa jitanA hotA hai| kavala-pramANa ke lie AMvale ke AkAra
kA bhI ullekha milatA hai| vaise sabakI zarIra-racanA aura pAcana-zakti samAna
nahIM 1. pini 313/2 /  2. pini 313/3, 4 /  3. pini 313/5, 6, vistAra hetu dekheM
mavR pa. 175  /  4. jIbhA 1638-42 /  5. u 32/11 /  6. jIbhA 1622,1623  /  7.
vyabhA 3688 /  8. vyabhA 3682; niyayAhArassa sayA, battIsaimo u jo bhave bhaago|
taM kukkuDippamANaM, nAtavvaM buddhimNtehiN|| 9. uzAMvR p604| 10. hpu11/125|

Page #138 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 124  **Pindaniyukti** occurs. The amount of food also varies based on
physical and mental labor. **Nikam Aahar** - consuming more food than the daily
requirement is **Nikam Aahar**. According to Manusmriti, excessive food hinders
health and longevity, obstructs attaining heaven and merit, and increases
animosity in this world. **Pranit Aahar** - heavy or excessively oily food is
called **Pranit Aahar**, such as Ghevar, Sneha Prakshit Mandak, etc. Excessive
**Pranit Rasa**-rich food excites and destroys a person just like birds destroy
a sweet fruit-bearing tree. **Atibahuk Aahar** - consuming much more food than
one's hunger is **Atibahuk**. **Atibahush Aahar** - eating multiple times a day
or more than three times is **Atibahush**. **S-Angar Dosha**  Consuming food
praising water with **Raga**, **Aasakti**, **Grdhi**, and **Moorcheha** is
**Angar Dosha**. Just as coal becomes **Angara** after burning without smoke
from fire, similarly, the **Raga** fueled fire burns the character regularly
like **Angara**, this is **Angar Dosha**. The author says that even **Prasook
Aahar** consumed due to **Aasakti** burns the character.  **S-Dhoom Dosha**
Criticizing bland or unpleasant food and consuming it due to hatred, anger, or
distress is **Dhoom Dosha**. Just as a painting contaminated with smoke does not
look beautiful, similarly, a character tainted with **Dhoom Dosha** does not
look beautiful. The burning fire of hatred keeps burning with the smoke of
displeasure, making the character dull until it becomes like **Angara**.
**Karan Dosha**  Eating for taste is forbidden for a Muni. According to
**Moolachar**, a Muni should eat not for strength, longevity, or increase in
energy, but for the practice of knowledge, restraint, and meditation. Consuming
food without the six reasons like hunger, etc., is **Karan Dosha**, and when the
six reasons for abandoning food are present,   1. Manu 2/57. 2. Bribha 6009;
Nehaagadham Kusanam, Tu Evam Ai Paniyam Tu. 3. U 32/10. 4. Bhag 7/22, Pini 314,
Moola 477. 5. Jiba 1646. 6. Pini 314/1, 2. 7. Pini 314, Moola 477, Bhag 7/22. 8.
Jiba 1650; Jah Vavi Chitta Kamma, Dhoomena Orattam Na Sobhai U. Tah Dhoom
Dosarattam, Charanam Pi Na Sobhae Mailan. 9. Pini 314/3. 10. Moola 481.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 124 piMDaniyukti hotii| zArIrika aura mAnasika zrama ke AdhAra para bhI AhAra
kI mAtrA meM aMtara AtA hai| nikAma AhAra-pratidina pramANa se adhika AhAra
karanA nikAma AhAra hai| manusmRti ke anusAra bahuta adhika bhojana svAsthya
tathA dIrghAyu meM bAdhaka, svargaprApti evaM puNya meM avarodhaka tathA isa
loka meM pradveSa ko bar3hAne vAlA hotA hai| praNIta AhAra-gariSTha athavA
atisnigdha AhAra praNIta kahalAtA hai, jaise-ghevara, sneha prakSita maMDaka
aadi| adhika praNIta rasa yukta AhAra vyakti ko vaise hI uddIpta aura vinaSTa
kara detA hai, jaise svAdu phala vAle vRkSa ko pkssii| atibahuka AhAra-apanI
bhUkha se bahuta adhika bhojana karanA atibahuka hai| atibahuzaH AhAra-dina meM
aneka bAra yA tIna bAra se adhika bhojana karanA atibahuzaH hai| sa-aMgAra doSa
rAga, Asakti, gRddhi tathA mUrchA se prAsuka eSaNIya AhAra-pAnI kI prazaMsA
karate hue AhAra karanA aMgAra doSa hai| jaise agni se jalane para dhUmarahita
hone para koyalA aMgArA bana jAtA hai, vaise hI rAga rUpI iMdhana se jalane para
jo cAritra ko niyamata: aMgAre ke samAna dagdha kara detA hai, vaha aMgAra doSa
hai| graMthakAra kahate haiM ki prAsuka AhAra bhI yadi Asaktivaza khAyA jAtA hai
to vaha cAritra ko dagdha kara detA sa-dhUma doSa nIrasa yA apriya AhAra kI
niMdA karate hue use dveSa, krodha yA kleza janita pariNAmoM se khAnA dhUma doSa
hai| jaise dhUma se kaluSita citrakarma suzobhita nahIM hotA, vaise hI dhUma
doSa se yukta malina cAritra bhI suzobhita nahIM hotaa| jalatI huI dveSAgni
aprIti ke dhUma se cAritra ko dhUmila banAtI huI taba taka jalatI rahatI hai,
jaba taka use aMgAre ke samAna nahIM banA detii| kAraNa doSa svAda ke lie AhAra
karanA muni ke lie niSiddha hai| mUlAcAra ke anusAra muni ko bala, Ayu, teja-
vRddhi Adi ke lie nahIM apitu jJAna, saMyama aura dhyAna kI sAdhanA ke lie khAnA
caahie| kSudhA Adi chaha kAraNoM ke binA AhAra karanA kAraNa doSa hai tathA
AhAra-tyAga ke chaha kAraNa upasthita hone para 1. manu 2/57 /  2. bRbhA 6009;
nehAgADhaM kusaNaM, tu evamAI paNIyaM tu| 3. u 32/10 /  4. bhaga 7/22, pini 314,
mUlA 477  /  5. jIbhA 1646 /  6. pini 314/1, 2 /  7. pini 314, mUlA 477, bhaga
7/22  /  8. jIbhA 1650; jaha vAvi cittakamma, dhUmeNorattayaM Na sobhai u| taha
dhUmadosarattaM, caraNaM pi Na sobhae milN|| 9. pini 314/3 /  10. mUlA 481 /

Page #139 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindianiyukti: An Observation  **125. Not abandoning food is also a cause-
defect.** The *Anugardharmamrita* does not mention cause-defect. In
*Pindianiyukti*, six purposes of food are specified for the Muni:  1. **Vedana-
Kshudha:** There is no greater pain than hunger, therefore, food should be taken
to alleviate it. 2. **Vaiyavrutya:** A hungry person cannot serve, therefore,
food should be taken for the proper service of the sick, elderly, ascetics, etc.
3. **Iryapatha-Shuddhi:** A hungry person cannot be aware of the Iryapatha,
therefore, food should be taken to properly perform the Iryapatha and the six
essentials. 4. **Samyama-Preksha:** Food should be taken for the proper
observance of Samyama, contemplation, etc. 5. **Pranapratyay:** Without food,
physical strength weakens, therefore, food should be taken to sustain life. 6.
**Dharmachintan:** In a state of no food, the Sadhu is not able to use
knowledge-reflection, contemplation, etc., therefore, food should be taken.
**Reasons for not eating:**  Similar to the six reasons for eating, the Agamas
mention six reasons for not eating. The *Pindianiyukti* mentions the same
reasons that are also indicated in the *Uttaraadhyayayana*, *Sthananga*, etc.:
1. **Atanka:** In case of sudden illness like fever, etc., to prevent it. 2.
**Upsarga-Titiksha:** In case of an attack by a king, etc. 3. **Brahmacharya-
Suraksha:** To protect the nine secrets of Brahmacharya. 4. **Pranidaya:** To
show compassion towards living beings in rain, dew, etc. 5. **Tap:** For
fasting, etc., up to the Paunmasik Tap. 6. **Sharira-Vyutsarga:** To shed the
body, for Sanlekhana or fatal fasting.  **Other defects of Paribhogaishana:**
The *Bhagavati Sutra* prohibits the consumption of food that is
*Kshetratrikrant*, *Kalatrikrant*, and *Margatrikrant* in the context of the
Muni's diet. There, consuming food before sunrise and then consuming it after
sunrise is a *Kshetratrikrant* defect. Consuming food taken in the first watch
in the last watch is a *Kalatrikrant* defect.  **Note:** The *Brihatkalpa*,
*Nishitha*, etc., and their commentaries use only the terms *Kalatrikrant* and
*Kshetratrikrant*, the term *Margatrikrant* is not used there. The
interpretation of the term *Kshetratrikrant* in the *Bhagavati* is debatable
because it relates to time, not place. In this context, the commentator
Abhaydeva Suri and Acharya Mahaprajna have discussed it in detail in the
*Bhagavati Bhashya Bha. 2 p. 336*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 125 bhI AhAra kA parityAga na karanA bhI kAraNa
doSa hai| anagAradharmAmRta meM kAraNa doSa kA ullekha nahIM hai| piNDaniyukti
meM muni ke lie AhAra ke chaha prayojana nirdiSTa haiM1. vedanA-kSudhA se bar3I
koI vedanA nahIM hotI ataH ise zAnta karane ke lie AhAra karanA caahie| 2.
vaiyAvRttya-bhUkhA vyakti sevA nahIM kara sakatA ataH glAna, vRddha, tapasvI Adi
kI samyak sevA hetu _ AhAra karanA caahie| 3. IryApatha-zuddhi-bubhukSita vyakti
IryApatha ke prati jAgarUka nahIM raha sakatA ataH IryApatha tathA SaDAvazyaka
Adi anuSThAnoM ko samyak rUpa se karane ke lie bhojana grahaNa karanA caahie| 4.
saMyama-prekSA Adi saMyama kI vidhivat anupAlanA ke lie AhAra grahaNa karanA
caahie| 5. prANapratyaya-binA AhAra ke zArIrika bala kSINa na ho ataH prANa-
dhAraNa hetu AhAra karanA caahie| 6. dharmacintana-anAhAra kI sthiti meM sAdhu
jJAna-parAvartana tathA anuprekSA Adi kA prayoga karane meM sakSama nahIM rahatA
ata: AhAra karanA caahie| AhAra na karane ke hetu AhAra karane ke chaha kAraNoM
kI bhAMti AgamoM meM AhAra na karane ke bhI chaha kAraNoM kA ullekha milatA hai|
piNDaniyukti meM jina kAraNoM kA ullekha hai, unhIM kA saMketa uttarAdhyayana,
sthAnAMga Adi graMthoM meM huA hai1. AtaMka-jvara Adi Akasmika bImArI ke utpanna
hone para usake nivAraNa hetu| 2. upasarga-titikSA-rAjA Adi kA upasarga utpanna
hone pr| 3. brahmacarya-surakSA-brahmacarya kI nava guptiyoM kI rakSA hetu| 4.
prANi-dayA-varSA tathA osa Adi meM prANiyoM ke prati dayA karane ke lie| 5. tapa
hetu-upavAsa se lekara pANmAsika tapa ke lie| 6. zarIra-vyutsarga-zarIra kA
vyutsarga karane ke lie saMlekhanA yA mAraNAMtika anazana karane hetu|'
paribhogaiSaNA ke anya doSa bhagavatI sUtra meM muni kI AhAracaryA ke saMdarbha
meM kSetrAtikrAnta, kAlAtikrAnta aura mArgAtikrAnta AhAra kA paribhoga karane kA
niSedha kiyA gayA hai| vahAM sUryodaya se pahale AhAra grahaNa karake sUryodaya
ke bAda paribhoga karanA kSetrAtikrAnta doSa hai| prathama prahara meM gRhIta
AhAra ko aMtima prahara meM paribhoga karanA 1. pini 318, sthA 6/41, u 26/32,
prasA 737, oni 580 /  2. u 26/34, sthA 6/42, pini 320, prasA 738  /  3.
bRhatkalpa, nizItha Adi graMthoM tathA unake bhASyoM meM kAlAtikrAnta aura
kSetrAtikrAnta-ina do zabdoM kA hI prayoga huA hai, vahAM mArgAtikrAnta zabda kA
prayoga nahIM hai| bhagavatI ke kSetrAtikrAnta zabda kI vyAkhyA vimarzanIya hai
kyoMki vahAM kSetra kA nahIM, apitu kAla kA sambandha hai| isa saMdarbha meM
TIkAkAra abhayadeva sUri evaM AcArya mahAprajJa ne bhagavatI bhASya bhA. 2 pR.
336 meM vistAra se carcA kI hai|

Page #140 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  126.   **Kalaatikrant** is a fault committed when the time for
consuming the food offered (**pindaniyukti**) has passed. A sadhu can consume
the food until the third prahar (time period). After that, the food becomes
unfit for consumption due to **kalaatikrant** and needs to be **parishthapit**
(disposed of).    **Margatikrant** is a fault committed when the food is
consumed more than half a yojana (two kos) away from the place where it was
offered.    Consuming **kshetrattikrant** food results in a **chaar guru** (four
guru) penance. This also leads to other faults like **aagyaabhang**
(disobedience), **sanyamviraadhana** (violation of restraint), etc. The faults
arising from consuming **kshetrattikrant** food are discussed in detail in the
**bhaashya** literature.  **Changes in the Rules of Bhikshaacharya**  From
Mahavira to the present day, it is a subject of historical research to
understand the changes in the rules of **bhikshaacharya** (begging for food).
How many rules have been **kritkrit** (abolished) and how many new rules have
been established?    Reading about **pindaniyukti** clearly shows that the
sadhu's **aachaar-sanhita** (code of conduct) has changed significantly over
time, depending on **dravya** (substance), **kshetra** (place), **kaal** (time),
and **bhaav** (emotion).    The seven-day **vishramana** (rest) period for a
sadhu before washing clothes is unimaginable today, and such circumstances no
longer exist. For example, consider the rule regarding how many times a muni
should go out for **bhiksha** (begging) in a day. The tradition until
**Uttaraadhyaayana** states that a muni should go out for **bhiksha** in the
third prahar of the day, as the muni was only allowed to eat once a day. The
**Dashavaikalik Sutra**, which is a representative text on muni conduct, does
not mention this. While it mentions "**egabhattam cha bhoyanam**" (eating once a
day), it is possible that Muni Manak, the son of Shayambhav, who was very young
at the time, may have established a different time for **bhiksha** for
educational purposes as an exception. This could also be the reason why there is
no mention of this in the **Dashavaikalik Sutra**.    Generally, a sadhu cannot
eat at a householder's home. However, the statement mentioned in **Dashavaikalik
5/1/82, 83** suggests that a sadhu can eat in a place that is covered from
above, enclosed on all sides, and suitable for eating, if they wish to do so
while begging. It is a subject of historical research to understand why Acharya
Shayambhav established this rule.  According to the **vyakhya** literature, a
muni should not go out for **bhiksha** alone but with two other munis. The
following **upsarg** (adverse circumstances) can arise for a muni who goes out
alone: **stree janit upsarg** (adverse circumstances caused by women), **pasu
janit upsarg** (adverse circumstances caused by animals).  1. **Prasaa 813** 2.
**Bhag 7/24** 3. **Bubha 5287**; **paramddhajoyanaao, ujjanaparena
chauguruhoti**. 4. **Nibha 4168** 5. **Bribha 5288**, **Nibha 4169**, **4170**
**Chu** p. 356.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 126 piMDaniyukti kAlAtikrAnta doSa hai| sAdhu usa AhAra ko tIsarI prahara taka
paribhoga kara sakatA hai| bAda meM kAlAtikrAnta hone se vaha AhAra paribhoga ke
lie akalpya ho jAtA hai, use pariSThApita karanA par3atA hai| eSaNIya AhAra ko
AdhA yojana (do koza) se adhika dUra le jAkara paribhoga karanA mArgAtikrAnta
doSa hai| kSetrAtikrAnta AhAra kA paribhoga karane para cAra guru (upavAsa)
prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| isase AjJAbhaMga, saMyamavirAdhanA Adi doSa bhI
utpanna hote haiN| kSetrAtikrAnta AhAra kA paribhoga karane se hone vAle doSoM
kA bhASya-sAhitya meM vistAra se vivecana kiyA gayA hai| bhikSAcaryA ke niyamoM
meM parivartana _ mahAvIra se lekara Aja taka bhikSAcaryA sambandhI niyamoM meM
aitihAsika dRSTi se kyA-kyA parivartana hue, kitane niyama kRtkRtya hue tathA
kitane nae niyama bane, yaha aitihAsika dRSTi se zodha kA viSaya hai|
piNDaniyukti ko par3hane se spaSTa jJAta hotA hai ki dravya, kSetra, kAla aura
bhAva ke anusAra sAdhu kI AcAra-saMhitA meM samaya ke antarAla meM bahuta
parivartana AyA hai| vastra dhone se pUrva sAdhu ke lie jo sAta dina kI
vizramaNA-vidhi kA ullekha hai, usakI Aja na to kalpanA kI jA sakatI hai aura na
hI vaisI paristhitiyAM haiN| udAharaNasvarUpa muni dina meM kitanI bAra
bhikSArtha jAe, isI niyama ko dekheM to uttarAdhyayana taka kI paramparA kahatI
hai ki muni dina ke tIsare prahara meM bhikSArtha jAe kyoMki muni ke lie dina
meM eka samaya hI AhAra karane kA vidhAna thaa| dazavaikAlika sUtra, jo muni-
AcAra kA pratinidhi graMtha hai, usameM isa bAre meM koI ullekha nahIM miltaa|
'egabhattaM ca bhoyaNaM' kA ullekha vahAM milatA hai phira bhI yaha saMbhAvanA
kI jA sakatI hai ki zayyaMbhava kA putra muni manaka jo umra meM bahuta choTA
thA, usa samaya unhoMne ApavAdika rUpa meM zaikSa ke lie anya samaya bhI bhikSA
kA vidhAna kiyA hogA tathA bhikSAcaryA ke samaya meM bhI parivartana huA hogA
tabhI unhoMne isa bAre meM koI ullekha nahIM kiyaa| _ sAmAnyataH sAdhu gRhastha
ke ghara bhojana nahIM kara sakatA lekina dazavaikAlika 5/1/82, 83 meM ullikhita
kathya isa ora saMketa karatA hai ki bhikSA karate samaya yadi sAdhu kI icchA ho
jAe to vaha Upara se chAe hue, cAroM ora se saMvRta aura prAsuka sthAna meM
baiThakara AhAra kara sakatA hai| AcArya zayyaMbhava ko yaha niyama kyoM banAnA
par3A, yaha bhI aitihAsika dRSTi se khoja kA viSaya hai| vyAkhyA-sAhitya ke
anusAra muni ko bhikSArtha akele nahIM apitu do muniyoM ke sAtha jAnA caahie|
akele muni ke samakSa nimna upasarga A sakate haiM-strI janita upasarga, pazu
janita upasarga, 1. prsaa813| 2. bhaga 7/24 /  3. bubhA5287; paramaddhajoyaNAo,
ujjANapareNa cuguruuhoti| 4. nibhA 4168 /  5. bRbhA 5288, nibhA 4169, 4170 cU
pR. 356  /

Page #141 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation** 127  **Counterproductive Practices:**  Such as
the use of prefixes, the non-purification of alms, and the undermining of great
vows.  **Oghanīyukti** explains the psychological reasons for a monk going for
alms alone: * One who is proud of their gains. * One who starts preaching in a
householder's home (and therefore no one wants to go with them). * One who is
deceitful, lazy, and fond of pleasure. * One who desires to consume non-
prescribed food. * During a famine, when alms are scarce.  However, currently,
nuns go for alms in pairs, and monks go alone. The question of when, how, and
why this change in the rules of alms-seeking occurred, and what its background
was, is a subject for independent research.  **Physical and Mental State During
Alms-Seeking**  It is not enough to simply avoid the 42 faults while going for
alms and receiving alms. The fifth study of the Dashavaikalika mentions many
other small details. Acharya Haribhadra clearly states that only a monk who
follows the rules of *īryāsamiti*, the avoidance of greenery, etc., can seek
pure food. The Dashavaikalika Sutra presents a psychological portrait of how a
monk should be physically and mentally during alms-seeking.  The mind of a monk
going for alms should be free from anxiety and distractions. A monk who is
mentally hurried cannot purify *īryāsamiti* nor be aware of *eṣaṇāsamiti*.
Therefore, the monk should seek food with a clear mind, free from anxiety.  The
monk should not only be free from fainting while eating but also while seeking
alms. If the mind is faint and attached during alms-seeking, then pure food
cannot be sought. The author of the *niyukti* gives the example of a calf. Even
if a merchant's daughter offers food to the calf adorned and decorated, the calf
remains focused only on eating its food. It does not pay attention to the
woman's form, color, or adornment. Similarly, the monk should seek food while
remaining free from attachment to sensory objects.  Another interpretation is
that just as a cow grazes without distinguishing between good and bad grass, so
too should the monk accept alms from all families without distinction.  1. Oṇi
412; *Ekaṇiyassā dosā, itthī sāṇe taheva paḍiṇīe. Bhikṣavisohi mahavvay tamhā
sabitijjaye gamaṇam.*  2. Oṇi 413, Tī P. 150. 3. Pañcā 13/31. 4. Daśa 5/1/2:
*Care mandamaṇuvviggo avvaviḵatteṇa ceyasā.*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 127 pratyanIka kRta upasarga, bhikSA kI
avizodhi tathA mahAvratoM kA upaghAta aadi| oghaniyukti meM ekAkI bhikSArtha
jAne ke manovaijJAnika kAraNa batAe gae haiM* jise apanI labdhi kA garva hai| *
jo gRhastha ke ghara dharmakathA zurU kara detA hai| (ata: usake sAtha koI jAnA
nahIM caahtaa|) * jo mAyAvI, AlasI aura rasalolupa hotA hai| * jo aneSaNIya
AhAra grahaNa karane kI icchA karatA hai| * durbhikSa meM jaba bhikSA kI
durlabhatA hotI hai| lekina vartamAna meM sAdhviyAM do tathA sAdhu ekAkI
bhikSArtha jAte haiN| bhikSAcaryA ke niyamoM meM kaba, kaise, kyoM parivartana
huA, usakI pRSThabhUmi kyA rahI, yaha svataMtra rUpa se zodha kA viSaya hai|
bhikSA ke samaya zArIrika aura mAnasika sthiti bhikSArtha jAte samaya tathA
bhikSA grahaNa karate samaya kevala 42 doSoM ko TAlanA hI paryApta nahIM hotA,
isake sAtha aura bhI aneka choTI-choTI bAtoM kA ullekha dazavaikAlika ke
pAMcaveM adhyayana meM vistAra se milatA hai| AcArya haribhadra ne spaSTa likhA
hai ki IryAsamiti, hariyAlI kA varjana Adi niyamoM kA upayoga rakhane vAlA muni
hI zuddha piNDa kI gaveSaNA kara sakatA hai| bhikSA ke samaya sAdhu kI zArIrika
aura mAnasika sthiti kaisI honI cAhie, isakA dazavaikAlika sUtra meM
manovaijJAnika citraNa prastuta hai| bhikSArtha jAne vAle muni kA citta
anudvigna tathA vikSepa rahita honA caahie| mAnasika tvarA karane vAlA bhikSu na
IryAsamiti kA zodhana kara sakatA hai aura na hI eSaNA samiti ke prati jAgarUka
raha sakatA hai ataH bhikSu mAnasika dRSTi se asaMbhrAnta arthAt anAkulabhAva se
AhAra kI gaveSaNA kre| AhAra karate samaya hI nahIM balki bhikSA karate samaya
bhI muni amUrchita rahe  /  yadi bhikSA ke samaya cittavRtti mUrcchita aura
Asakta hogI to zuddha AhAra kI gaveSaNA nahIM ho skegii| niyuktikAra ne isa
saMdarbha meM govatsa kA udAharaNa diyA hai| seTha kI putravadhU alaMkRta aura
vibhUSita hokara govatsa ko AhAra detI hai to bhI bachar3A kevala apane cAre ko
khAne meM lIna rahatA hai| vaha strI ke rUpa, raMga yA zRMgAra kI ora dhyAna
nahIM detA, vaise hI sAdhu bhI iMdriyaviSaya meM amUrcchita rahatA huA AhAra kI
gaveSaNA kre| isakI dUsarI vyAkhyA yaha bhI kI jA sakatI hai ki jaise gAya
acchI- burI ghAsa kA bheda kie binA caratI rahatI hai, vaise hI muni bhI uttama
aura sAmAnya kuloM kA bheda na karate hue sAmudAnika bhikSA grahaNa kre| 1. oni
412; ekANiyassa dosA, itthI sANe taheva pddinniie| bhikkhavisohi mahavvaya tamhA
sabitijjae gmnnN|| 2. oni 413, TI pa. 150 /  3. paMcA 13/31 /  4. daza 5/1/2 :
care maMdamaNuvviggo avvavikhatteNa ceysaa|

Page #142 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 128  **Pinḍaniyukti:** While walking, a Muni's gaze should be fixed on the
ground, according to the measure of their body. "Yug" means the ground according
to the measure of the body. Explaining "Yug-pramāṇa," Ācārya Mahāprajña says
that if the gaze is cast too far, then subtle-bodied beings will not be visible.
If the gaze is kept too close, then it will not be possible to avoid beings that
suddenly come underfoot. Therefore, the instruction is given to walk while
looking at the area according to the measure of the body.  If the Muni does not
perform Pratikramaṇa for the fault committed during the time of begging, then
they will receive the Masalghu (Purimārḍha) Prāyaścitta.  **Muni Life:** Every
substance is requested in Muni life. Even a piece of grass is not unrequested.
Therefore, the Muni should accept alms with a submissive mind. They should not
feel sorrow if they receive alms or not. In this context, the Dasavaikalika
Sutra, while cleansing the mind of the Sadhu, says that there may be many
pleasing and delicious food items in the house of a householder. Even if the
food is visible, if the householder does not give it to the Muni, the Muni
should not show anger or displeasure. At that time, the Muni should think that
it is their wish to give or not give. Even if the giver gives little, they
should not criticize them. To protect their self-respect and self-esteem, they
should keep in mind that if other begging monks have already entered the house
of a householder, they should not enter that house for alms.  **Prāyaścitta for
Faults in Bhikṣācāryā:**  Bhagavān Mahāvīra gave great importance to
Prāyaścitta, which is why independent texts in the form of Chhed Sutras were
created. For mistakes or offenses, Mahāvīra did not prescribe punishment but
Prāyaścitta, because in this, the individual themselves accepts the mistake and
takes Prāyaścitta from the Guru. Punishment and law do not involve remorse or a
change of heart.  The Chhed Sutras mention the Prāyaścitta for faults committed
by the Sadhu during Bhikṣācāryā in a scattered manner. In the situation of
Asantharaṇa, the Niśītha Bhāṣyakāra has presented an alternative: the 42 faults
of Bhikṣācāryā should be written on the heart-plate with the ink of Śruta-jñāna,
and the one with the least Prāyaścitta should be taken. The least Prāyaścitta is
Paṇaga (Nirvigaya), and the most is four Guru (fasting).  **Detailed and Ordered
Description of Prāyaścitta for Faults Committed in Bhikṣācāryā in the Jītakalpa
Bhāṣya:**  1. Daś 5/1/3: The fifth Piṇḍaiṣaṇa study of the Dasavaikalika
instructs on many points to be kept in mind while walking and begging. 2. U
2/28: Everything is obtained, nothing is unobtainable. 3. Daś 5/2/26-28. 4. Daś
5/2/12, 13. 5. Nibha 445: Forty-two faults, written on the heart-plate with the
ink of Śruta-jñāna. Paṇaga and other Guru at the end, fear of the previous birth
in the two faults.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 128 piMDaniyukti zArIrika dRSTi se calate samaya muni kI dRSTi yuga-pramANa
bhUmi para TikI rhe| yuga kA artha haizarIra-pramANa bhuumi| yuga-pramANa kI
vyAkhyA karate hue AcArya mahAprajJa kahate haiM ki yadi calate samaya dRSTi ko
bahuta dUra DAlA jAe to sUkSma zarIra vAle jIva dikhAI nahIM dete| yadi dRSTi ko
atyanta nikaTa rakhA jAe to sahasA paira ke nIce Ane vAle jIvoM ko TAlA nahIM jA
sakatA isalie zarIra pramANa kSetra dekhakara calane kA nirdeza kiyA gayA hai|
bhikSA ke samaya gamana sambandhI doSa kA pratikramaNa na karane para mAsalaghu
(purimArdha) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| _ muni jIvana meM hara padArtha
yAcita hotA hai| tRNa kA Tukar3A bhI ayAcita nahIM hotAataH muni mAnasika rUpa
se adIna hokara bhikSA grahaNa kre| bhikSA milane yA na milane para viSAda kA
anubhava na kre| isa saMdarbha meM sAdhu kI mastiSkIya dhulAI karate hue
dazavaikAlika sUtra meM kahA gayA hai ki gRhastha ke ghara aneka manojJa aura
sarasa khAdya-padArtha ho sakate haiN| padArtha sAmane dikhAI dene para bhI yadi
gRhastha vaha padArtha muni ko na de to muni krodha yA kheda pradarzita na kre|
usa samaya muni yaha cintana kare ki yaha isakI icchA hai dAna de yA na de| yadi
dAtA thor3A de to bhI usakI niMdA na kre| apane svAbhimAna aura AtmasammAna ko
surakSita rakhane hetu isa bAta kA dhyAna rakhe ki yadi anya bhikSAcara gRhastha
ke ghara meM pahale se praveza kie hue hoM to bhikSArtha usa ghara meM praveza
na kre|' bhikSAcaryA ke doSa sambandhI prAyazcitta - bhagavAn mahAvIra ne
prAyazcitta ko bahuta mahattva diyA isIlie cheda sUtroM ke rUpa meM svataMtra
graMthoM kI racanA ho gii| bhUla yA aparAdha hone para mahAvIra ne daMDa kA
nahIM apitu prAyazcitta kA vidhAna kiyA kyoMki isameM vyakti svayaM bhUla
svIkAra karake guru se prAyazcitta letA hai| daMDa aura kAnUna meM na
aparAdhabodha hotA hai aura na hI hRdy-privrtn| chedasUtroM meM sAdhu ke dvArA
bhikSAcaryA meM lagane vAle doSoM ke prAyazcittoM kA vikIrNa rUpa meM ullekha
milatA hai| asaMtharaNa kI sthiti meM nizItha bhASyakAra ne eka vikalpa prastuta
kiyA hai ki bhikSAcaryA ke 42 doSoM ko hRdayapaTa para zrutajJAna rUpI kara se
likhakara jisa doSa meM alpatara prAyazcitta ho, usakA sevana karanA caahie|
sabase kama prAyazcitta hai-paNaga (nirvigaya) tathA sabase adhika prAyazcitta
hai cAra guru (upavAsa) jItakalpabhASya meM bhikSAcaryA meM lagane vAle doSoM ke
prAyazcitta kA vistAra se kramabaddha varNana 1. daza 5/1/3: dazavaikAlika ke
pAMcaveM piNDaiSaNA adhyayana meM calate samaya evaM bhikSA karate samaya dhyAna
rakhane yogya aneka binduoM kA nirdeza kiyA gayA hai  /  2. u 2/28 ; savvaM se
jAiyaM hoi, natthi kiMci ajAiyaM  /  3. daza 5/2/26-28 /  4. daza 5/2/12, 13 /
5.nibhA 445;bAyAlIsaMdose, hiyayapaDe sutakareNa virettaa| paNagAdI guru aMte,
puvvappatare bhayasu dose||

Page #143 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation  **129**  There is a mention of the atonement-
method in a symbolic form in the *Bṛhatkalpabhāṣya* as well, albeit very
briefly. The *Niśīthabhāṣya* also describes atonements in some places. The
commentary on the *Piṇḍaviśuddhiprakaraṇa* mentions the atonements for faults
related to begging in a classified form, collectively. There, the *mūlakarma* is
considered the most serious.  Jain Ācāryas have mentioned four *guru*, four
*laghu*, *gurumās*, *laghumās*, and *paṇa* etc. atonements symbolically, which
the *muni* who performs the atonement carries out in the form of *tapa*. Here,
the atonement-method related to all faults related to begging is being
described.  **Ādhākarma:** An atonement of four *guru* is incurred upon taking
*ādhākarma* food. Its *tapa* form of atonement is fasting.  **Auddeśika:** The
different types of *auddeśika* and its atonement are being presented through a
chart.  **Auddeśika**  | **Uddesa (Māsaguru)** | **Ādeśa** | **Samādeśa** |
**Uddesa** | **Samuddeśa** | **Ogh** | |---|---|---|---|---|---| | (Māsaguru) |
(Māsalaghu) | (Māsalaghu) | (Māsalaghu) | (Māsalaghu) | (Māsalaghu) | |
(Pūrimārḍha) | (Māsaguru) | (Māsaguru) | (Four Laghumās) | (Four Gurumās) |  | |
**Vibhāga** | **Uddisṭa Kṛta** | **Samādeśa** | **Samuddeśa** | **Ādeśa** |
**Samādeśa** | |  |  | (Māsaguru) | (Four Gurumās) | (Four Gurumās) | (Four
Gurumās) |  **1. Bṛbhā 533-540. 2. Piṃpraṭī P. 88, 89. 3. Jībhā 19195.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa 129 milatA hai| bRhatkalpabhASya meM bhI
atyaMta saMkSepa meM sAMketika rUpa meM prAyazcitta - vidhi kA ullekha hai  /
nizItha bhASya meM bhI kahIM-kahIM prAyazcittoM kA varNana hai  /
piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa kI TIkA meM sAmUhika rUpa se vargIkRta rUpa se
bhikSAcaryA sambandhI doSoM ke prAyazcittoM kA ullekha hai, vahAM mUlakarma ko
sabase adhika sAvadya mAnA hai| jaina AcAryoM ne sAMketika rUpa se cAra guru,
cAralaghu, gurumAsa, laghumAsa tathA paNaga Adi prAyazcittoM kA ullekha kiyA
hai, jinakA prAyazcitta - kartA muni tapa rUpa meM nirvAha karatA hai| yahAM
bhikSA sambandhI sabhI doSoM se sambandhita prAyazcitta-vidhi kA varNana kiyA jA
rahA hai AdhAkarma - AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa karane para cAra guru kA
prAyazcitta AtA hai| isakA tapa rUpa prAyazcitta upavAsa hotA hai| auddezika--
auddezika ke bheda-prabheda aura usake prAyazcitta ko cArTa ke mAdhyama se
prastuta kiyA jA rahA hai auddezika uddeza (mAsaguru) Adeza samAdeza uddeza
samuddeza (mAsalaghu) (mAsalaghu) (mAsalaghu) (mAsalaghu) ogha ' 1. bRbhA 533 -
540  /  2. piMpraTI pa. 88, 89  /  (mAsalaghu) (purimArdha) samuddeza (mAsaguru)
Adeza (mAsaguru) uddeza ( cAra laghumAsa ) vibhAga uddiSTa kRta samAdeza
(mAsaguru) samuddeza (cAra gurumAsa) 3. jIbhA 19195  /  Adeza samAdeza (cAra
gurumAsa ) ( cAra gurumAsa)

Page #144 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **130**  The commentator, while presenting these penances as
forms of austerity, states that the latter half of a small month (Purīmārdha),
one day of a large month (Ekāśana), four small months (Āyambila), and four large
months (Upavās) are penances. In the two categories of Pūtikarma, the penance
for Upakaraṇa-Pūti is Māsalagha (Purīmārdha), and the penance for Bhaktapāna-
Pūti is Māsaguru (Ekāśana). In the three categories of Miśrajāta-Doṣa, the
penance for the first, Yāvadārthika Miśra, is four small months (Āyambila), and
the penance for Pākhaṇḍimiśra and Sādhumiśra is four large months (Upavās).
There are two types of Sthāpanā-Doṣa: Itvarīka Sthāpita and Cira Sthāpita. The
penance for Itvarīka Sthāpita is Paṇaga (five days and nights, Nirvigaya), and
the penance for Cira Sthāpita is Māsalagha (Purīmārdha). The penance for Sūkṣma
Prābhṛtika-Doṣa is Laghapaṇaga (Nirvigaya), and the penance for Bādra
Prābhṛtika-Doṣa is four large months (Upavās). In the category of Prāduṣkaraṇa-
Doṣa, the penance for Prakāṭakaraṇa, i.e., bringing something out of a dark
place into the light, is Māsalagha (Purīmārdha), and the penance for
illuminating it with a lamp, etc., is four small months (Āyambila). There are
four types of Krītakṛta-Doṣa: 1. Ātmadravya-Krīta, 2. Ātmabhava-Krīta, 3.
Paradravya-Krīta, 4. Parabhava-Krīta. The penance for Ātmadravya-Krīta,
Paradravya-Krīta, and Ātmabhava-Krīta is four small months (Āyambila), and the
penance for Parabhava-Krīta is Māsalagha (Purīmārdha). The penance for Laukika
Prāmitya-Doṣa is four small months (Āyambila), and the penance for Lokottara
Prāmitya-Doṣa is Māsalagha (Purīmārdha). The penance for Laukika Parivartita-
Doṣa is four small months (Āyambila), and the penance for Lokottara Doṣa is
Māsalagha (Purīmārdha). The penance for Svagrāma Anācīrṇa Abhyāhata-Doṣa is
Māsalagha (Purīmārdha). Paragrāma Abhyāhata is of two types: Jalapatha and
Sthalapatha. In this, there is the possibility of Ātma-Virādhanā and Samyama-
Virādhanā in the path with many obstacles, therefore, the penance for Abhyāhata
in a path with many obstacles is four large months (Upavās).  1. Jībhā
1200-1202. 2. The form of austerity for each penance is given in parentheses
after the penance. 3. Jībhā 1206, 1207. 4. Jībhā 1217, 1218. 5. Jībhā 1219,
1220. 6. Jībhā 1225. 7. Jībhā 1239, 1240. 8. Jībhā 1242-44. 9. Jībhā 1251.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 130 piMDaniyukti ina prAyazcittoM kI tapa ke rUpa meM prastuti dete hue
bhASyakAra kahate haiM ki ladhumAsa kA purimArdha, gurumAsa kA ekAzana, cAra
laghumAsa kA Ayambila tathA cAra gurumAsa kA upavAsa prAyazcitta hotA hai|
pUtikarma-pUtikarma ke do bhedoM meM upakaraNapUti kA prAyazcitta mAsalaghu'
(purimArdha) tathA bhaktapAnapUti kA prAyazcitta mAsaguru (ekAzana) hai|
mizrajAta doSa-mizrajAta doSa ke tIna bhedoM meM prathama yAvadarthika mizra
AhAra lene para cAra laghumAsa (Ayambila) tathA pAkhaMDimizra tathA
sAdhumizraAhAra grahaNa para cAra guru (upavAsa) prAyazcitta AtA hai| sthApanA
doSa-sthApanA doSa do prakAra kA hotA hai-itvarika sthApita tathA cira sthApita
/  itvarika sthApita sambandhI doSa lagane para paNaga-pAMca dina-rAta
(nirvigaya) tathA cira sthApita doSa lagane para mAsalaghu (purimArdha)
prAyazcitta AtA hai| prAbhRtikA doSa-sUkSma prAbhRtikA doSa lagane para
laghupaNaga (nirvigaya) tathA bAdara prAbhRtikA sambandhI doSa lagane para cAra
gurumAsa (upavAsa) prAyazcitta AtA hai| prAduSkaraNa doSaprAduSkaraNa doSa ke
antargata prakaTakaraNa arthAt aMdhakArapUrNa sthAna se bAhara prakAza meM lAne
para mAsalaghu (purimArdha) aura dIpa Adi ke dvArA prakAza karane para cAra
laghu (Ayambila) prAyazcitta AtA hai| krItakRta doSa-yaha doSa cAra prakAra kA
hotA hai-1. AtmadravyakrIta 2. AtmabhAvakrIta 3. paradravyakrIta 4.
prbhaavkriit| inameM AtmadravyakrIta, paradravyakrIta tathA AtmabhAvakrIta doSa
meM cAralavu (Ayambila) tathA parabhAvakrIta meM mAsalaghu (purimArdha)
prAyazcitta AtA hai| prAmitya doSa-laukika prAmitya sambandhI doSa meM cAralaghu
(Ayambila) tathA lokottara prAmitya sambandhI doSa meM mAsalaghu (purimArdha) kA
prAyazcitta AtA hai| parivartita doSa-laukika parivartita doSa lagane para
cAralaghu (Ayambila) tathA lokottara doSa lagane para mAsalaghu (purimArdha)
prAyazcitta AtA hai| abhyAhRta doSa-svagrAma anAcIrNa abhyAhata doSa lagane para
mAsalaghu (purimArdha) prAyazcitta AtA hai| paragrAma abhyAhRta jalapatha aura
sthalapatha do prakAra kA hotA hai| isameM sapratyavAya arthAt doSa bahula mArga
meM Atma-virAdhanA aura saMyama-virAdhanA saMbhava hai ataH apAyabahula mArga se
abhyAhata meM cAraguru (upavAsa) 1. jIbhA 1200-1202 /  5. jIbhA 1219, 1220  /
2. jisa prAyazcitta kA jo tapa rUpa nirvAha hai, usako usI 6.jIbhA 1225  /
prAyazcitta ke Age koSThaka meM diyA jA rahA hai| 7. jIbhA 1239, 1240 /  3.
jIbhA 1206, 1207 /  8. jIbhA 1242-44 /  4. jIbhA 1217, 1218 /  9. jIbhA 1251 /

Page #145 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation  This is an observation regarding the
**Pinḍaniryukti** (a Jain term referring to the rules regarding the consumption
of food).  **Four Laghu (Ayambil) Prāyaścitta** (penance) is prescribed for the
following offenses:  **Udbhinn** (offense related to the removal of something
covered):  * If **Prāsuka** (a substance that is easily absorbed) like ghee or
oil spills while opening a **Gobar** (cow dung) or **Kapḍe** (cloth)
**Mukhabanda** (covering), then **Māsalghu** (Purimārḍha) Prāyaścitta is
prescribed. * If **Aprāsuka** (a substance that is not easily absorbed) like
earth or a sentient object is attached to the covered object and is removed,
then **Ṣaṭkāya-Virāḍhanā** (violation of the six categories of living beings) is
possible. Therefore, **Cāralghu** (Ayambil) Prāyaścitta is prescribed for this
offense. * Similarly, **Cāralghu** (Ayambil) Prāyaścitta is prescribed for
offenses related to **Kapāṭodbhinn** (opening a door or a container). *
According to **Niśīthabhāṣya**, **Cāraguru** (Upavās) is prescribed for removing
**Anantakaaya** (infinite-bodied) plants, **Māsalghu** (Purimārḍha) for removing
**Parittamiśra** (mixed with a limited number of living beings) plants, and
**Māsaguru** (Ekāsan) for removing **Anantamiśra** (mixed with an infinite
number of living beings) plants.  **Mālāpahṛta** (offense related to wearing a
garland):  * **Cāralghu** (Ayambil) Prāyaścitta is prescribed for **Utkṛṣṭa**
(superior) **Mālāpahṛta** (wearing a garland) offense. * **Māsalghu**
(Purimārḍha) Prāyaścitta is prescribed for **Jaghanya** (inferior)
**Mālāpahṛta** offense.  **Āccheḍya** (offense related to cutting):  *
**Cāralghu** (Ayambil) Prāyaścitta is prescribed for all three types of
**Āccheḍya** offenses: **Prabhu** (related to a master), **Svāmī** (related to
an owner), and **Stena** (related to a thief).  **Anisṛṣṭa** (offense related to
something not permitted):  * **Anisṛṣṭa** (Ananuññāta) offense is of three
types: 1. **Sādharan** (ordinary), 2. **Cōllaka** (related to a thief), and 3.
**Jaḍḍu** (related to an elephant). * **Cāralghu** (Ayambil) Prāyaścitta is
prescribed for all three types of **Anisṛṣṭa** offenses.  **Adhyavapūraka**
(offense related to something added):  * **Laghumās** (Purimārḍha) Prāyaścitta
is prescribed for **Yāvadārthika** (meaningful) **Adhyavapūraka** offense. *
**Gurumās** (Ekāsan) Prāyaścitta is prescribed for **Pāṣaṇḍimiśra** (mixed with
heresy) and **Sādhumiśra** (mixed with virtue) **Adhyavapūraka** offenses.
After discussing the Prāyaścitta for the 16 offenses related to **Udgaman**
(consumption), the Prāyaścitta for the 16 offenses related to **Utpādana**
(production) is being discussed.  **Dhātrīpiṇḍa** (offense related to a mother):
* **Cāralghu** (Ayambil) Prāyaścitta is prescribed for all five types of
offenses related to **Dhātrī** (mother): **Aṅkadhātrī** (mother who carries the
child in her womb), etc.  **Dūtīpiṇḍa** (offense related to a messenger):  *
**Cāralghu** (Ayambil) Prāyaścitta is prescribed for consuming food after
performing **Dāutyakarma** (messenger's duty).  **Nimittapiṇḍa** (offense
related to a cause):  * **Cāralghu** (Ayambil) Prāyaścitta is prescribed for
mentioning **Atita** (past) **Nimitta** (cause). * **Cāraguru** (Upavās)
Prāyaścitta is prescribed for mentioning **Varttamāna** (present) and
**Bhaviṣya** (future) **Nimitta** (cause).  **References:**  1. Jībhā 1254,
1255. 2. Jībhā 1257. 3. Jībhā 1264, 1265. 4. Jībhā 1268. 5. Niśūbhā. 4 p. 192;
Aṇanteṣu Cauguruṁ, Parittamiśeṣu Māsalahuṁ, Anantamiśeṣu Māsaguruṁ. 6. Jībhā
1272, 1273. 7. Jībhā 1274. 8. Jībhā 1275. 9. Jībhā 1285. 10. Jībhā 1324. 11.
Jībhā 1340. 12. Jībhā 1348, 1349.  **Page:** 131

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa tathA doSa rahita mArga se Ahata meM cAra
laghu (Ayambila) prAyazcitta AtA hai  / " udbhinna doSa - pihita udbhinna
sambandhI doSa meM yadi prAsuka gobara yA kapar3e ke mukhabaMdha ko kholate
samaya ghI yA taila phaila jAtA hai to mAsalaghu (purimArdha) prAyazcitta AtA
hai| yadi aprAsuka pRthvIkAya yA sacitta vastu se lipta pihita ko kholakara diyA
jAe to usameM SaTkAya- virAdhanA saMbhava rahatI hai ata: isa doSa meM cAralaghu
(Ayambila) prAyazcitta AtA hai| isI prakAra kapATodbhinna sambandhI doSa meM bhI
cAralaghu (Ayambila) prAyazcitta prApta hotA hai| nizIthabhASya ke anusAra
anaMtakAya vanaspati ko udbhinna karane para cAra guru (upavAsa), paritta mizra
vanaspati ko udbhinna karane para mAsalaghu (purimArdha) tathA anaMtamizra ko
unna karane para mAsaguru ( ekAsana) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai  /
mAlApahRta doSa - utkRSTa mAlA pahRta doSa lagane para cAra laghu (Ayambila)
tathA jaghanya mAlApahRta doSa meM mAsalaghu (purimArdha) prAyazcitta AtA hai  /
Acchedya doSa- Acchedya doSa meM prabhu, svAmI tathA stenaviSayaka - ina tInoM
prakAra ke doSa lagane para cAralaghu (Ayambila) prAyazcitta AtA hai| " anisRSTa
doSa - anisRSTa (ananujJAta) doSa bhI tIna prakAra kA hotA hai - 1. sAdhAraNa 2.
collaka 3. jaDDu (haathii)| ina tInoM prakAra ke anisRSTa doSa meM cAra laghu
(Ayambila) prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  adhyavapUraka doSa- yAvadarthika
adhyavapUraka doSa lagane para laghumAsa (purimArdha) tathA pASaMDimizra
adhyavatara aura sAdhumizra adhyavatara meM gurumAsa ( ekAsana) prAyazcitta AtA
hai  /  udgama ke 16 doSoM ke prAyazcitta kathana ke pazcAt utpAdanA ke solaha
doSoM se sambandhita prAyazcittoM kA kathana kiyA jA rahA hai dhAtrIpiNDa -
aMkadhAtrI Adi pAMcoM prakAra kI dhAtrI - sambandhI doSa lagane para cAralaghu
(Ayambila) prAyazcitta AtA hai  /  " dUtIpiNDa - dautyakarma karake AhAra lene
para cAralaghu (Ayambila) prAyazcitta AtA hai  / " nimittapiNDa - nimitta doSa
meM atIta sambandhI nimitta kahane para cAralaghu (Ayambila) tathA vartamAna
aura bhaviSya viSayaka nimitta kathana karane para cAraguru (upavAsa)
prAyazcitta AtA hai| 12 1. jIbhA 1254, 1255  /  2. jIbhA 1257  /  3. jIbhA 1264,
1265  /  4. jIbhA 1268  /  5. nicUbhA. 4 pR. 192; aNaMtesu cauguruM,
parittamIsesu mAsalahuM, anaMtamIsesu mAsaguruM  /  6. jIbhA 1272, 1273  /  7.
jIbhA 1274  //  8. jIbhA 1275  /  9. jIbhA 1285  /  10. jIbhA 1324  /  11. jIbhA
1340  /  12. jIbhA 1348, 1349  /  131

Page #146 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 132:  Penances for Different Types of Pindas  **Ajiva-Pinda:**  The
consumption of food using five types of Ajiva (livelihood) -  **jati** (caste),
**kul** (family), **gana** (group), **karma** (action), and **shilpa** (craft) -
incurs a penance of four **laghu** (Ayambil) for each type.  **Vanipak-Pinda:**
There are five types of **vanipak** (beggars) - **shraman** (ascetic), **mahan**
(great), **kripana** (miserly), **atithi** (guest), and **shvan** (dog).
Receiving food by praising them incurs a penance of four **laghu** (Ayambil) for
each type.  **Chikitsa-Pinda:**  There are two types of **chikitsa-pinda**
(medical treatment) - **sukshma** (subtle) and **badar** (gross).  Consuming
**sukshma-chikitsa-pinda** incurs a penance of **masalghu** (purimarth), while
consuming **badar-chikitsa-pinda** incurs a penance of four **laghu** (Ayambil).
**Krodha-Pinda:**  Receiving **krodha-pinda** (anger) incurs a penance of four
**laghu** (Ayambil).  **Mana-Pinda:**  Receiving **mana-pinda** (pride) incurs a
penance of four **laghu** (Ayambil), similar to **krodha-pinda**.  **Maya-
Pinda:**  Receiving **maya-pinda** (deception) incurs a penance of **masaguru**
(ekasan).  **Lobha-Pinda:**  Receiving **lobha-pinda** (greed) incurs a penance
of four **guru** (upavas).  **Sanstava-Pinda:**  There are four types of
**sanstava-pinda** (sexual misconduct): 1. **Purvasambandhi Sanstava** (pre-
marital) 2. **Paschatsambandhi Sanstava** (post-marital) 3. **Purvavachan
Sanstava** (pre-marital verbal) 4. **Paschatvachan Sanstava** (post-marital
verbal)  For **purva** and **paschatsambandhi sanstava**, if the misconduct is
with a woman, the penance is four **guru** (upavas), and if it is with a man,
the penance is four **laghu** (Ayambil).  For **purva** and **paschatsanstava**
related to **vachan** (verbal), if the misconduct is with a woman, the penance
is **masaguru** (ekasan), and if it is with a man, the penance is **masalghu**
(purimarth).  **Vidya and Mantra Pinda:**  Receiving **vidya-pinda** (knowledge)
and **mantra-pinda** (mantra) incurs a penance of four **laghu** (Ayambil).
**Churna and Yoga Pinda:**  Using **churna-pinda** (powder) and **yoga-pinda**
(medicine) incurs a penance of four **laghu** (Ayambil) for the Sadhu.  **Mula-
Pinda:**  There are two types of **mula-pinda** (root): **garbhadan**
(conception) and **garbha-parishotan** (abortion).  A Muni who consumes food
using these two types of **mula-karma** (root actions) incurs a **mula** (root)
penance.  **References:** 1. Jiva 1351 2. Jiva 1364 3. Jiva 1385 4. Jiva 1420;
For greed, four guru, and for repeated consumption, a single grain of food. 5.
Jiva 1422, 1423 6. Jiva 1424, 1425 7. Jiva 1437 8. Jiva 1449 9. Jiva 1468; For
both types of root actions, the penance is mula.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 132 piMDaniyukti AjIvapiNDa-jAti, kula, gaNa, karma aura zilpa-ina pAMca
prakAra ke AjIva kA prayoga karake AhAra grahaNa karane para cAra-cAra laghu
(Ayambila) prAyazcitta AtA hai| vanIpakapiNDa-pAMca prakAra ke vanIpaka
(zramaNa, mAhaNa, kRpaNa, atithi aura zvAna)-bhaktoM ke samakSa unakI prazaMsA
karake bhojana prApta karane para pratyeka doSa meM cAralaghu (Ayambila)
prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| cikitsApiNDa-cikitsApiNDa doSa do prakAra kA
hotA hai-sUkSma aura bAdara  /  sUkSma-cikitsA piNDa grahaNa karane para
mAsalaghu (purimArdha) tathA bAdara cikitsApiNDa grahaNa karane para cAra laghu
(Ayambila) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| krodhapiNDa-krodhapiNDa prApta karane
para cAralaghu (Ayambila) prAyazcitta AtA hai| mAnapiNDa-mAnapiNDa meM bhI
krodhapiNDa kI bhAMti cAralaghu (Ayambila) prAyazcitta AtA hai| mAyApiNDa-
mAyApiNDa grahaNa karane para mAsaguru (ekAsana) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai|
lobhapiNDa-lobhapiNDa grahaNa karane para cAraguru (upavAsa) prAyazcitta prApta
hotA hai| saMstavapiNDa-yaha cAra prakAra kA hotA hai-1. pUrvasambandhI saMstava
2. pazcAtsambandhI saMstava 3. pUrvavacana saMstava tathA 4. pazcAtvacana sNstv|
inameM pUrva aura pazcAtsambandhI saMstava meM yadi strI ke sAtha saMstava hotA
hai to cAraguru (upavAsa) tathA puruSa ke sAtha saMstava hone para cAralaghu
(Ayambila) prAyazcitta AtA hai| vacana sambandhI pUrvasaMstava aura
pazcAtsaMstava bhI do prakAra kA hotA hai| strI sambandhI vacana saMstava hone
para mAsaguru (ekAsana) tathA puruSa sambandhI vacana saMstava hone para
mAsalaghu (purimArdha) prAyazcitta prApta hotA hai| vidyA aura maMtra piNDa-
vidyApiNDa aura maMtrapiNDa prApta karane para cAralaghu (Ayambila) prAyazcitta
kI prApti hotI hai| cUrNa aura yogapiNDa-cUrNapiNDa aura yogapiNDa kA prayoga
karane para sAdhu ko cAralaghu (Ayambila) prAyazcitta prApta hotA hai|
mUlapiNDa-mUlapiNDa do prakAra kA hotA hai-garbhAdhAna aura garbha-parizATana-
donoM prakAra ke mUlakarma kA prayoga karake AhAra prApta karane vAle muni ko
mUla prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| 1. jIbhA 1351 /  6. jIbhA 1424, 1425  /  2.
jIbhA 1364 /  7. jIbhA 1437 /  3. jIbhA 1385 /  8. jIbhA 1449 /  4. jIbhA 1420 ;
lobhe caugurugA tU, AvattI dANa hoy'bhttttuN| 9. jIbhA 1468 ; duvihe vi
mUlakamme, pacchittaM hoti mUlaM tu| 5. jIbhA 1422, 1423 /

Page #147 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  **133** The **Shankita Doṣa-Jītakalpabhāṣya**
does not indicate the **prāyaścitta** (penance) for **Shankita Doṣa** (doubtful
fault). In **Prakṣita Doṣa** (observed fault) and **Mrakṣita Doṣa** (touched
fault), taking alms with a hand touched by **Pṛthvīkāya** (earth element)
results in **Paṇaga** (Nirvigaya), taking alms with a hand mixed with
**Kardama** (mud) results in **Laghumāsa** (Pūrimārḍha), and taking alms with a
hand touched by dry **Pṛthvīkāya** results in **Cāralagha** (Āyambila)
**prāyaścitta**.  Taking alms with a **Sasnigdha** (oily) and **Sarajaska**
(moist) hand and vessel results in **Paṇaga** (Nirvigaya), and taking alms with
a **Ārdra** (wet) hand and vessel results in **Māsalagha** (Pūrimārḍha)
**prāyaścitta**.  In **Mrakṣita Doṣa**, if **Puraḥkarma** (prior action) and
**Paścātkarma** (posterior action) faults occur, **Cāralagha** (Āyambila)
**prāyaścitta** is incurred. Some **Ācāryas** also mention **Māsalagha**
(Pūrimārḍha) **prāyaścitta** in this case.  In **Mekṣita Doṣa** (touched fault),
taking alms with a hand touched by **Paritta Vanaspatikāya** (limited plant
element) results in **Māsalagha** (Pūrimārḍha), taking alms with a hand touched
by **Anantakaaya Vanaspatikāya** (infinite plant element) results in
**Māsaguru** (Ekāsana) **prāyaścitta**. Taking alms with a hand touched by a
mixture of all plants results in **Māsalagha** (Pūrimārḍha) **prāyaścitta**.
Taking alms with a hand or vessel touched by **Garhita Mala** (excrement) etc.,
and taking alms with a hand or vessel touched by **Gorasa** (juice) and **Jīva**
(living beings) results in **Cāralagha** (Āyambila) **prāyaścitta**.  In
**Nikkṣipta Doṣa** (deposited fault), taking alms with **Anantara Nikkṣipta
Doṣa** (immediately deposited fault) from **Saccitta Pṛthvīkāya** (conscious
earth element) to **Trasakāya** (three elements) excluding **Anantakaaya
Vanaspatikāya** (infinite plant element) results in **Cāralagha** (Āyambila),
and taking alms with **Parampara Nikkṣipta Doṣa** (consecutively deposited
fault) results in **Māsalagha** (Pūrimārḍha) **prāyaścitta**. In **Miśra
Pṛthvīkāya** (mixed earth element), taking alms with **Anantara Nikkṣipta Doṣa**
results in **Māsalagha** (Pūrimārḍha), and taking alms with **Parampara
Nikkṣipta Doṣa** results in **Paṇaga** (Nirvigaya) **prāyaścitta**. Taking alms
with **Anantara Nikkṣipta Doṣa** on **Anantakaaya Vanaspati** (infinite plant
element) results in **Cāraguru** (Upvāsa), and taking alms with **Parampara
Nikkṣipta Doṣa** on **Anantakaaya** results in **Māsaguru** (Ekāsana)
**prāyaścitta**.  The **Bṛhatkalpabhāṣya** and its commentary provide a detailed
description of the **prāyaścitta** for **Nikkṣipta Doṣa**. Taking food with
**Anantara** and **Parampara Nikkṣipta Doṣa** on each **Miśra Vanaspati** (mixed
plant) results in **Māsalagha** (Pūrimārḍha), taking food with **Anantara** and
**Parampara Nikkṣipta Doṣa** on the seed of each plant results in **Paṇaga**
(Nirvigaya), and taking food with **Anantara** and **Parampara Nikkṣipta Doṣa**
on **Ananta Vanaspati** (infinite plant) results in **Māsalagha** (Pūrimārḍha).
**Footnotes:**  1. Jībhā 1493. 2. Jībhā 1495. 3. Jībhā 1496. 4. Bṛbhā 537, Tī
Pṛ. 156; Others have **Māsalagha** as **prāyaścitta**. 5. Jībhā 1497. 6. Jībhā
1498. 7. Bṛbhā 537, Tī Pṛ. 156: **Māsalagha** is **prāyaścitta** for all **Miśra
Paritta**. 8. Jībhā 1505, 1509. 9. Jībhā 1544, 1545, Nicū Bhā. 4 Pṛ. 193.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 133 zaMkita doSa-jItakalpabhASya meM zaMkita
doSa ke prAyazcitta kA saMketa nahIM kiyA gayA hai| prakSita doSa-mrakSita doSa
meM pRthvIkAya se prakSita rUkSa hAtha aura pAtra se bhikSA lene para paNaga
(nirvigaya), kardama mizrita hAtha se bhikSA lene para laghumAsa (purimArdha)
tathA zuSka pRthvIkAya se mekSita hAtha se bhikSA lene para cAra laghu
(Ayambila) prAyazcitta prApta hotA hai| sasnigdha aura sarajaska hAtha aura
pAtra se bhikSA grahaNa karane para paNaga (nirvigaya) tathA Ardra hAtha aura
pAtra se bhikSA grahaNa karane para mAsalaghu (purimArdha) prAyazcitta prApta
hotA hai| _ mrakSita doSa meM puraHkarma aura pazcAtkarma doSa lagane para
cAralaghu (Ayambila) kA prAyazcitta AtA hai| kucha AcArya isameM mAsalaghu
(purimArdha) prAyazcitta kA ullekha bhI karate haiN|' mekSita doSa meM paritta
vanaspatikAya mrakSita hAtha se bhikSA lene para mAsalaghu (purimArdha)5,
anaMtakAya vanaspatikAya se mrakSita hAtha se bhikSA grahaNa karane para
mAsaguru (ekAsana) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| mizra pratyeka vanaspati se
mekSita hAtha se bhikSA grahaNa karane para mAsalaghu (purimArdha) prAyazcitta
kI prApti hotI hai| garhita mala Adi se prakSita hAtha yA pAtra se bhikSA lene
para tathA gorasa aura jIvoM se saMsakta hAtha yA pAtra se bhikSA lene para
cAralaghuka (Ayambila) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI nikSipta doSa-anaMta
vanaspatikAya ko chor3akara sacitta pRthvIkAya se lekara trasakAya taka anaMtara
nikSipta doSa yukta bhikSA lene para cAralaghu (Ayambila) tathA parampara
nikSipta doSa yukta bhikSA lene para mAsalaghu (purimArdha) prAyazcitta kI
prApti hotI hai| mizra pRthvIkAya meM anaMtara nikSipta doSa yukta bhikSA lene
para mAsalaghu (purimArdha) tathA mizra pRthvIkAya meM parampara nikSipta doSa
yukta bhikSA lene para paNaga (nirvigaya) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai|
anaMtakAya vanaspati para anaMtara nikSipta bhikSA grahaNa karane para cAra guru
(upavAsa) tathA anaMtakAya para parampara nikSipta bhikSA grahaNa karane para
mAsaguru (ekAsana) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| bRhatkalpabhASya evaM usakI
TIkA meM nikSipta doSa ke prAyazcitta ke saMdarbha meM vistRta varNana milatA
hai| pratyeka mizra vanaspati para anantara aura parampara nikSipta AhAra lene
para mAsalaghu (purimArdha), pratyeka vanaspati ke bIja para anantara evaM
parampara nikSipta AhAra lene para paNaga (nirvigaya) tathA anaMta vanaspati 1.
jIbhA 1493 /  2. jIbhA 1495 /  3. jIbhA 1496 /  4. bRbhA 537, TI pR. 156 ; anye
maasldhu-prtipnnvntH| 5. jIbhA 1497 /  6. jIbhA 1498 /  7. bRbhA 537, TI pR. 156
: mizre parItte sarvatra mAsalaghaH  /  8. jIbhA 1505, 1509 /  9. jIbhA 1544,
1545, nicU bhA. 4 pR. 193  /

Page #148 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 134:  Pindaniyukti  **On taking food deposited on a seed, four Guru
(fasting) is obtained. On taking food deposited on an infinite mixed plant,
Anantar and Paramar, the penance of Masaguru (Ekasana) is obtained. According to
other Acharyas, due to a difference in tradition, on taking food deposited on
each mixed plant, Anantar and Paramar, Panag (Nirvigaya) is obtained, and on
taking food deposited on an infinite mixed plant, Anantar and Paramar, Guru-mas
(Ekasana) is obtained. On taking food deposited Anantar on each plant with
awareness, four Laghu (Ayambil) is obtained, on taking food deposited Paramar,
Maslaghu (Purimarth) is obtained, and on taking food deposited Anantar on each
mixed plant, Maslaghu (Purimarth) is obtained, on taking food deposited Paramar,
Panag (Nirvigaya) is obtained, on taking food deposited Anantar on an infinite-
bodied plant, Masaguru (Ekasana) is obtained, and on taking food deposited
Paramar, Panag (Nirvigaya) is obtained. On taking food deposited Anantar on a
three-bodied plant, four Laghu (Ayambil) is obtained, and on taking food
deposited Paramar, Maslaghu (Purimarth) is obtained. On taking food deposited
Anantar and Paramar on an infinite-bodied plant with a hidden fault, Guru Panag
(Nirvigaya) is obtained, and on taking food deposited Anantar and Paramar on
each plant with a hidden fault, Laghu Panag (Nirvigaya) is obtained. The penance
for a hidden fault should be understood like the penance for a deposited fault,
starting from the earth-bodied plant. If there is self-contradiction, then the
penance of four Guru-mas (fasting) is obtained. According to Brihatkalpabhashya,
even if there is no awareness, on taking food deposited from a heavy substance,
the penance of four Guru (fasting) is obtained. The penance for a collected
fault is like the penance for a deposited fault. On collecting a substance with
awareness, four Laghu (Ayambil) is obtained. Although it is inconceivable to
take food from the hands of prohibited givers, the order of the penance method
for taking food from them without reason is as follows: On taking food from the
hands of a child, an old person, a drunkard, a madman, a trembling person, a
feverish person, Maslaghu (Purimarth) is obtained, and on taking food from the
hands of a blind person, a leper, a person wearing shoes and handcuffs, a person
disabled in hands and feet, a eunuch, a pregnant woman, and a person with a
child, the penance of four Guru (fasting) is obtained. On taking food from the
hands of a woman who has eaten, bathed, and washed, four Laghu (Ayambil) is
obtained. On taking food from the hands of a woman who is collecting chickpeas,
etc., grinding, pounding, cooking, grinding, kneading, spinning cotton, and
killing living beings, the penance of four Laghu (Ayambil) is obtained.  **

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 134 piMDaniyukti ke bIja para nikSipta lene para cAra guru (upavAsa),
anaMtamizra vanaspati para anaMtara aura parampara nikSipta AhAra lene para
mAsaguru (ekAsana) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| paramparA-bheda se anya
AcAryoM ke anusAra pratyeka mizra vanaspati para anaMtara aura parampara
nikSipta lene para paNaga (nirvigaya) anaMtamizra vanaspati para anantara aura
parampara nikSipta lene para gurumAsa (ekAsana) kI prApti hotI hai| sacitta
pratyeka vanaspati para anaMtara nikSipta AhAra lene se cAra laghu (Ayambila),
parampara nikSipta AhAra lene para mAsalaghu (purimArdha) tathA mizra pratyeka
vanaspati ke anantara nikSipta lene para mAsalaghu (purimArdha), parampara
nikSipta lene para paNaga (nirvigaya), mizra anaMtakAya vanaspati ke anaMtara
nikSipta lene para mAsaguru (ekAsana) tathA parampara nikSipta lene para paNaga
(nirvigaya) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI haiN| trasakAya para anaMtara nikSipta
lene para cAra laghu (Ayambila) tathA parampara nikSipta lene para mAsalaghu
(purimArdha) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| pihita doSa-anaMtakAya vanaspati
para anaMtara aura parampara pihita bhikSA grahaNa karane para guru paNaga
(nirvigaya) tathA pratyeka vanaspatikAya para anaMtara aura parampara pihita
bhikSA grahaNa karane para laghu paNaga (nirvigaya) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI
hai| pihita doSa ke antargata pRthvIkAya Adi se pihita ke prAyazcitta nikSipta
dvAra kI bhAMti samajhanA caahie| yadi AtmavirAdhanA ho jAe to cAra gurumAsa
(upavAsa) kA prAyazcitta AtA hai| bRhatkalpabhASya ke anusAra acitta hone para
bhI bhArI padArtha se pihita AhAra lene para cAraguru (upavAsa) prAyazcitta kI
prApti hotI hai| saMhRtadoSa-saMhata doSa kA prAyazcitta bhI nikSipta doSa kI
bhAMti hai| sacitta dravya saMhRta karane para cAralaghu (Ayambila) prAyazcitta
kI prApti hotI hai| dAyaka doSa-yadyapi niSiddha dAyakoM ke hAtha se bhikSA
grahaNa karanA akalpanIya hai lekina binA kAraNa inase grahaNa karane para
prAyazcitta-vidhi kA krama isa prakAra hai-bAla, vRddha, matta, unmatta, vepita
(kampamAna zarIra vAlA), jvarita-inake hAtha se bhikSA grahaNa karane para
mAsalaghu (purimArdha) tathA aMdha, kor3hI, pAdukA aura hathakar3I pahane hue,
hAtha paira se vikala, napuMsaka, garbhavatI aura bAlavatsA-inake hAtha se
grahaNa karane para cAraguru (upavAsa) kA prAyazcitta AtA hai| khAtI huI,
ghusuleMtI-bilaunA karatI huI strI ke hAtha se bhikSA lene para cAralaghu
(Ayambila) canA Adi pUMjatI huI, dalatI huI, kaMDana karatI huI, pIsatI huI,
pIjatI huI, ruMcatI-ruI kAtatI, jIvoM 1. bRbhA 538, TI pR. 156, 157 /  2. jIbhA
1546 /  3. jIbhA 1556 /  4. jIbhA 1568; sAharaNeyaM bhaNiyaM, AvattI dANajaha tu
nikkhitte| 5. bRbhA 539, TI pR. 157 /  6. jIbhA 1577, 1578 /

Page #149 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  **135**  Taking alms from a woman who is
menstruating, or whose hands are stained with the six substances of the body,
attracts different penances. However, generally, the penance for these is
**Cāralghu (Āyambil)**. There are some differences in the penances for the
**Dāyaka Doṣa** mentioned in the commentary of the **Bṛhatkalpa**. There, taking
alms from a leper or a eunuch attracts **Cāraguru (Upavās)**, while taking food
from the hands of a woman who is menstruating, cutting, or grinding, attracts
**Māsalghu (Pūrimārḍha)**. Taking alms from the hands of other prohibited givers
attracts **Cāralghu (Āyambil)**.  **Umiśra Doṣa** - The **Jītakalpabhāṣya** does
not mention the penance for **Umiśra Doṣa**. According to the
**Bṛhatkalpabhāṣya**, taking **Umiśra** food with conscious intention from an
infinite source attracts **Cāraguru (Upavās)**, taking mixed infinite **Umiśra**
attracts **Māsaguru (Ekāsana)**, taking **Umiśra** with conscious intention from
each body plant attracts **Cāralghu (Āyambil)**, and taking mixed **Umiśra**
from each plant attracts **Māsalghu (Pūrimārḍha)**. Taking **Umiśra** food from
the seeds of each plant and infinite body plants attracts **Paṇanga
(Nirvigaya)** penance.  **Apariṇata Doṣa** - Taking **Apariṇata** with intention
attracts **Māsalghu (Pūrimārḍha)** penance. The **Bṛhatkalpabhāṣya** also
describes the penance for **Apariṇata** in terms of substance. Taking earth,
etc., as **Apariṇata** (with conscious intention) attracts **Cāralghu
(Āyambil)**, and taking infinite body **Apariṇata** attracts **Cāraguru
(Upavās)** penance.  **Lipta Doṣa** - Taking alms from a vessel or hand that is
stained attracts **Cāralghu (Āyambil)**, and taking alms from a vessel that is
partially stained attracts **Lghumās (Pūrimārḍha)** penance.  According to the
commentator, the first three stages of **Chardita Doṣa** attract **Cāralghu
(Āyambil)**, and the final stage, if it is **Aneṣaṇīya**, attracts **Cāraguru
(Upavās)**.  **Chardita Doṣa** - Taking alms that are affected by **Chardita
Doṣa** attracts **Cāralghu (Āyambil)** penance. The commentator of the
**Bṛhatkalpabhāṣya** has further clarified this by stating that taking alms that
are affected by the first three stages of the fourth stage of **Chardita Doṣa**
attracts **Cāralghu (Āyambil)** penance. The final stage is **Anācīrṇa**.  **1.
Jībhā 1579-1581.** **7. Jībhā 1599.** **2. Bṛbhā 539, T P. 157.** **8. Bṛbhāṭī
P. 157.** **3. Bṛbhāṭī P. 157.** **9. Jībhā 1601.** **4. Bṛbhā 539, T P. 157.**
**10. Bṛbhāṭī P. 157; Charditē-Ādyeṣu Triṣu Bhaṅgeṣu Pratiyaka 5. Jībhā 1593.**
**Caturlaghukam, Caramabhaṅge'nācīrṇam.** **6. Bṛbhā 539, T P. 157.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 135 kA pramardana karatI huI tathA SaTkAya se
lipta hasta vAlI strI-ina sabase bhikSA lene para bhinna-bhinna prAyazcitta hotA
hai lekina sAmAnyatayA inakA prAyazcitta cAralaghu (Ayambila) AtA hai|
bRhatkalpa kI TIkA meM ullikhita dAyaka doSa ke prAyazcittoM meM kucha aMtara
hai| vahAM kuSTha rogI aura napuMsaka se lene para cAraguru (upavAsa) tathA
piMjana, kartana aura pramardana karatI huI strI ke hAtha se AhAra lene para
mAsalaghu (purimArdha) tathA zeSa niSiddha dAyakoM ke hAtha se lene para
cAralaghu (Ayambila) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| unmizra doSa-
jItakalpabhASya meM unmizra doSa ke prAyazcitta kA varNana nahIM hai|
bRhatkalpabhASya ke anusAra sacitta ananta se unmizra AhAra lene para cAraguru
(upavAsa), mizra anaMta unmizra lene para mAsaguru (ekAsana), sacitta
pratyekakAya vanaspati se unmizra lene para cAra laghu (Ayambila) tathA mizra
pratyeka vanaspati se unmizra lene para mAsalaghu (purimArdha) prAyazcitta kI
prApti hotI hai| pratyeka vanaspati tathA anaMtakAya vanaspati ke bIja se
unmizra AhAra lene para paNaMga (nirvigaya) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai|
apariNata doSa-bhAvataH apariNata ko grahaNa karane para mAsalaghu (purimArdha)
prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| bRhatkalpabhASya meM dravyataH apariNata
prAyazcitta-vidhi kA varNana bhI milatA hai| pRthvI Adi ko apariNata (sacitta)
lene para cAralaghu (Ayambila) tathA anaMtakAya apariNata lene para cAraguru
(upavAsa) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| lipta doSa-lipta doSa meM saMsakta
hAtha aura pAtra se bhikSA grahaNa karane para cAralaghu (Ayambila) tathA
sAvazeSa pAtra se bhikSA grahaNa karane para laghumAsa (purimArdha) prAyazcitta
kI prApti hotI hai| bhASyakAra ke anusAra chardita doSa ke Adya tIna bhaMgoM meM
cAra laghu (Ayambila) tathA carama bhaMga meM aneSaNIya hone para cAra guru
(upavAsa) kI prApti hotI hai| chardita doSa-chardita doSa yukta bhikSA lene para
cAralaghu (Ayambila) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai|' bRhatkalpabhASya ke
TIkAkAra ne ise aura adhika spaSTa karate hue kahA hai ki chardita doSa kI
caturtha catubhaMgI ke prathama tIna bhaMgoM se yukta bhikSA lene para cAralaghu
(Ayambila) prAyazcitta AtA hai| carama bhaMga anAcIrNa hotA hai|" 1. jIbhA
1579-1581 /  7. jIbhA 1599  /  2. bRbhA 539, TI pR. 157 /  8. bRbhATI pR. 157 /
3. bRbhATI pR. 157 /  9. jIbhA 1601 /  4. bRbhA 539, TI pR. 157 /  10. bRbhATI
pR. 157; chardite-AdyeSu triSu bhaGgeSa pratyeka 5. jIbhA 1593 /  caturlaghukam
, crmbhngge'naaciirnnm| 6. bRbhA 539, TI pR. 157 /  .

Page #150 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **136**  **Piṇḍaniyukti Samyojana:**  If a monk,
influenced by the vices of anger and hatred, engages in internal and external
combinations to enhance taste, he incurs the **Cāraguru (fasting)** penance.
According to another view, he incurs the **Cāralahu (Āyambil)** penance.
According to the *Bṛhatkalpabhāṣya*, internal combination leads to **Cāralahu
(Āyambil)** penance, while external combination leads to **Cāraguru (fasting)**
penance.  **Proof:** If a monk consumes more food than the prescribed amount for
men and women, or more than what is required for a life of restraint, he incurs
the **Cāralahu (Āyambil)** penance.  **Angāra Doṣa:** If a monk consumes
palatable food with attachment, he incurs the **Cāraguru (fasting)** penance.
**Dhūmadoṣa:** If a monk consumes unpalatable food with hatred, he incurs the
**Cāralahu (Āyambil)** penance.  **Kāraṇa Doṣa:** If a monk consumes food
without a valid reason, he incurs the **Cāralahu (Āyambil)** penance. According
to another view, he incurs the **Laghumās (Pūrimārḍha)** penance. If a monk does
not eat when the reason is present, he incurs the **Cāralahu (Āyambil)**
penance.  **Explanation:** Literature also mentions the penance of chanting with
inhalation and exhalation. According to the *Oghanīyukti Bhāṣya*, if a monk does
not properly examine the alms after receiving them, or does not show the full
offering to the guru, or if there is a subtle fault in the alms, he should chant
the Namaskāra mantra with 8 inhalations and exhalations for purification.  This
section mainly discusses the penances for the major faults related to begging.
The *Jītakalpasūtra* and its commentary describe the penances for various types
of faults in begging.  **References:**  1. *Jībhā* 1620% 2. *Bṛbhā* 540, *Tī* p.
158. 3. *Jībhā* 1630. 4. *Jībhā* 1643. 5. *Jībhā* 1643. 6. *Jībhā* 1644 7.
*Jībhā* 1645, 8. *Obhā* 274. 9. For details, see *Jīsu* 36-44, *Jībhā*
1675-1719.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 136 piMDaniyukti saMyojanA doSa-rAga-dveSa se prabhAvita hokara rasa bar3hAne
hetu aMta: aura bAhya saMyojanA karane para cAraguru (upavAsa) prAyazcitta kI
prApti hotI hai| dUsarI mAnyatA ke anusAra cAralaghu (Ayambila) prAyazcitta kI
prApti hotI hai| bRhatkalpabhASya ke anusAra aMta: saMyojanA karane para
cAralaghu (Ayambila) tathA bahi: saMyojanA karane para cAraguru (upavAsa)
prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| pramANa doSa-strI aura puruSa ke lie jitane
kavala nirdhArita haiM, usa pramANa se adhika AhAra karane para athavA saMyama
jIvana-yAtrA ke lie jitanA apekSita hai, usase adhika bhojana karane para
cAralaghu (Ayambila) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| aMgAra doSa-manojJa AhAra
ko Asakti pUrvaka khAne para cAraguru (upavAsa) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai|
dhUmadoSa-amanojJa AhAra kA dveSapUrvaka upabhoga karane para cAralaghu
(Ayambila) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| kAraNa doSa-niSkAraNa AhAra karane
para cAralaghu (Ayambila) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| dUsarI mAnyatA ke
anusAra niSkAraNa AhAra karane para laghumAsa (purimArdha) prAyazcitta kI prApti
hotI hai| kAraNa upasthita hone para yadi sAdhu AhAra nahIM karatA hai to
cAralaghu (Ayambila) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| vyAkhyA-sAhitya meM
zvAsocchvAsa ke sAtha japa ke prAyazcitta kA ullekha bhI milatA hai| oghaniyukti
bhASya ke anusAra bhikSA lAne ke bAda yadi samyak AlocanA nahIM kI ho athavA
guru ko pUrA bhaktapAna na dikhAyA ho, bhikSA meM sUkSma eSaNA kA doSa lagA ho
to usakI vizuddhi hetu 8 zvAsocchvAsa ke sAtha namaskAra maMtra kA japa karane
kA vidhAna hai| yahAM sAmAnyataH bhikSAcaryA se sambandhita mukhya doSoM ke
prAyazcittoM kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai| jItakalpasUtra evaM usake bhASya meM
bhikSAcaryA ke doSoM ke bheda-prabhedoM ke prAyazcittoM kA prakArAntara se bhI
varNana kiyA gayA hai| 1. jIbhA 1620% aMto bahi caugurugA, bitiyAeseNa bAhi
culhugaa| cauguruge'bhattaTuM, caulahuge hoti aayaamN|| 2. bRbhA 540, TI pR. 158
/  3. jIbhA 1630 /  4. jIbhA 1643 /  5. jIbhA 1643 /  6. jIbhA 1644 NikkAraNa
bhaMjate. ettha vi lahagA udaannmaayaam| bitiyAdese lahuo, AvattI dANa
purimhuuN| 7. jIbhA 1645, Na vi bhuMjai kAraNato, ettha vi lahugA tu
daannmaayaam| 8. obhA 274 /  9. vistAra hetu dekheM jIsU 36-44, jIbhA 1675-1719
/

Page #151 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  **137 Other Defects of Bhikṣācaryā**  The
number of defects of Bhikṣācaryā described in Pinḍaniyukti cannot be considered
final. However, looking at the systematic description of Pinḍaniyukti, it can be
said that by the time of the Pinḍaniyukti-kāra, the systematic development of
Bhikṣācaryā and its related defects had taken place. Although it is mentioned in
Bhagavati that a pure-minded ascetic should take food free from the defects of
origin, production, and craving, and scattered references to many defects are
also found, it is not mentioned there which and how many defects are related to
origin, how many to production, and how many to craving. Therefore, it can be
said without doubt that the credit for systematically organizing the scattered
defects of Bhikṣācaryā in the Āgamas goes to the Pinḍaniyukti-kāra.  In addition
to these defects, if we search for general and specific rules in this context,
many other defects related to Bhikṣācaryā are found scattered in the Āgamas and
their explanatory literature. For example, the inclusion of Nityāgra food is not
included in the defects of craving, but it is mentioned in many places. The
Daśavaikālika Sūtra also mentions many rules and prohibitions regarding the time
spent in wandering for Bhikṣā. Here, we are mentioning the defects related to
Bhikṣācaryā found in the Āgamas in addition to Pinḍaniyukti, so that research
students can get comprehensive information about the legal and prohibited
aspects of Bhikṣācaryā in one place.  **Śayyātarapiṇḍa**  The one who crosses
the ocean of existence by giving a bed to the ascetic is called Śayyātar.
Śayyātarapiṇḍa is also called Sāgārikapiṇḍa. Śayyātarapiṇḍa is considered
unrighteous for the ascetic and prohibited by the Tīrthankaras. Even the 22
Tīrthankaras in between did not allow Śayyātarapiṇḍa. It is counted under the
category of Śabala dosa. Seeing the abundance of defects, the Cūrṇikāra
considered taking Bhikṣā from the seven houses near the Śayyātar as unrighteous.
The food from the house where the ascetic stayed for one night is called
Śayyātarapiṇḍa. If the well-off ascetic stays awake all night and goes elsewhere
to perform the necessary tasks like morning Pratikramṇa, then the householder...
1. Bhag 7/25; Uggamuppāyaṇeṣaṇāsuparisaḍḍha. 2. Daś 3/2. 3. Nicū Bhā. 2 p. 131;
Sejjādāṇeṇa Bhavasamudraṁ tarati tti Sijjātaro. 4. Daś 3/5. 5. Nibhā 1159, Bṛbhā
3540; Tittthankarapadīkuṭṭho. 6. Prasā 807. 7. Sam 21/1, Daśru 2/3. 8. Daśacū p.
61 Jāṇi vi tadāṣaṇṇāṇi Sejjātaratullāṇi Tāṇi satta vajjettavvāṇi.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 137 bhikSAcaryA ke anya doSa bhikSAcaryA ke
jina doSoM kA varNana piNDaniyukti meM upalabdha hai, usa saMkhyA ko aMtima
nahIM mAnA jA sakatA phira bhI piNDaniyukti ke vyavasthita varNana ko dekhakara
yaha kahA jA sakatA hai ki niyuktikAra ke samaya taka bhikSAcaryA evaM usase
sambandhita doSoM kA vyavasthita vikAsa ho gayA thaa| yadyapi udgama, utpAdanA
aura eSaNA doSa se parizuddha AhAra sAdhu ko grahaNa karanA cAhie, yaha ullekha
bhagavatI meM milatA hai' tathA vikIrNa rUpa se aneka doSoM kA saMketa bhI
milatA hai lekina vahAM yaha ullekha nahIM milatA ki inameM kauna se aura kitane
doSa udgama se, kitane utpAdanA se tathA kitane eSaNA se sambandhita haiM ataH
yaha nirvivAda kahA jA sakatA hai ki AgamoM meM vikIrNa bhikSAcaryA ke doSoM ko
vyavasthita rUpa dene kA zreya piMDaniyuktikAra ko jAtA hai| ina doSoM ke
atirikta bhI yadi isa saMdarbha meM sAmAnya aura vizeSa niyamoM kI khoja kI jAe
to bhikSAcaryA se sambandhita anya aneka doSa Agama evaM usake vyAkhyA-sAhitya
meM vikIrNa rUpa se milate haiN| udAharaNa ke lie nityAgra bhojana kA samAveza
eSaNA ke doSoM meM sammilita nahIM hai lekina isakA ullekha aneka sthAnoM para
milatA hai| dazavaikAlika sUtra meM bhI bhikSA hetu parivrajana ke samaya lagane
vAle aneka niyama evaM varjanAoM kA ullekha hai| yahAM hama piNDaniyukti ke
atirikta AgamoM meM milane vAle bhikSAcaryA se sambandhita doSoM kA ullekha kara
rahe haiM, jisase zodha vidyArthiyoM ko eka hI sthAna para bhikSAcaryA ke vidhi-
niSedhoM kI samagra jAnakArI mila ske| zayyAtarapiNDa sAdhu ko zayyA dekara jo
bhavasamudra kA pAra pA letA hai, vaha zayyAtara kahalAtA hai| zayyAtarapiMDa ko
sAgArikapiNDa bhI kahA jAtA hai| zayyAtarapiNDa sAdhu ke lie anAcIrNa tathA
tIrthaMkaroM dvArA niSiddha hai| bIca ke 22 tIrthaMkaroM ne bhI zayyAtarapiNDa
kI anujJA nahIM dii| isakI gaNanA zabala doSa ke antargata kI gaI hai|
doSabahulatA dekhakara hI cUrNikAra ne zayyAtara ke samIpa ke sAta gharoM se
bhikSA grahaNa ko anAcAra mAnA hai| sAdhu jisake ghara eka rAta ruke, vahAM kA
AhAra zayyAtarapiNDa kahalAtA hai| yadi suvihita sAdhu sampUrNa rAtri jAgakara
savere ke pratikramaNa Adi Avazyaka kArya anyatra jAkara karatA hai to vaha
gRhasvAmI 1. bhaga 7/25; uggmuppaaynnesnnaasuprisddh| 2. daza 3/2 /  3. nicU
bhA. 2 pR. 131 ; sejjAdANeNa bhavasamudraM tarati tti sijjaatro| 4. daza 3/5 /
5. nibhA 1159, bRbhA 3540; titthNkrpddikuttttho| 6. prasA 807 /  7. sama 21/1,
dazru 2/3  /  8. dazaacU pR.61 jANi vi tadAsaNNANi sejjAtaratullANi tANi satta
vjjetvvaanni|

Page #152 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  138 ##  Pinḍaniryukti  One is not considered a *śayyatara* while staying in
a place, but becomes a *śayyatara* upon sleeping and performing necessary
(pratikramṇa) actions. If both the night stay and the morning pratikramṇa are
performed at another place, then the owners of both places are considered
*śayyatara*. The *Nīśītha Bhāṣya* and its *Cūrṇi* provide detailed discussions
on when one becomes a *śayyatara*.  Grass, *ḍagala*, alkali, *malla*, bed,
bedding, platform, and plaster are not considered *śayyatara-piṇḍa*, hence they
can be taken. Even clothes and utensils, including *śaikṣa*, are not *śayyatara-
piṇḍa*, meaning they can be taken if the son of a *śayyatara* is initiated.
Twelve items are considered *śayyatara-piṇḍa*: food, drink, *khādima*,
*svādima*, footwear, clothes, utensils, blanket, needle, razor, ear cleaner, and
nail cutter.  The main reason for prohibiting *śayyatara-piṇḍa* is that by
repeatedly visiting the house where the monk resides, the householder may
prepare alms with *ādhākarma* and *auddeśika* faults due to excessive
familiarity. Taking daily prescribed food increases attachment to food, and
sometimes, frequent visits may also alienate the *śayyatara* from the Dharma or
the monks, making it difficult for other monks to find accommodation. The
*Bhāṣyakāra* has described in detail the faults arising from accepting
*śayyatara-piṇḍa*.  The *Piṇḍaviśuddhiprakaraṇa* mentions two stories in this
context. One *śayyatara* gave a blanket to a monk. His son and brother also gave
him blankets and other clothes. Due to the burden of abundant equipment, the
monk did not travel elsewhere. By divine providence, there was a famine in that
area. The householder thought that both the monk and he would perish in the
famine, so he should send the monk to a prosperous region by some means. One
day, when the monk was going out for *utsarga*, he took out all the equipment,
hid it, and set fire to the house. When the monk returned, he gave him some
equipment. The monk started to leave for another country, then the *śayyatara*
said, "Come back here when there is prosperity." The monk came back there when
there was prosperity. The *śayyatara* again offered him his equipment. Thus,
accepting *śayyatara-piṇḍa* leads to the diminishment and disrespect of
preaching.  Five hundred monks stayed at the house of a householder. The monks
used to take their first alms from the *śayyatara* every day. In due course, he
became poor. When those monks left, other monks came there. They also requested
accommodation. The householder said, "I only have accommodation, but I have
nothing to give for the first alms."   1. *Bṛhabhāṣya* 3529, *Prasādya* 803. 2.
*Bṛhabhāṣya* 3530, *Prasādya* 802. 3. *Nīśītha Bhāṣya* 1155, *Cūrṇi* p. 134,
*Bṛhabhāṣya* 3536, *Ṭīkā* p. 984, 985. 4. *Nīśītha Bhāṣya* 1154, *Bṛhabhāṣya*
3535. 5. *Bṛhabhāṣya* 3540, *Nīśītha Bhāṣya* 1159. 6. *Bṛhabhāṣya* 3541-49,
6378. 7. *Piṇḍapraṇṭī* p. 90.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 138 piMDaniryukti zayyAtara nahIM hotA, sone evaM Avazyaka (pratikramaNa)
karane para zayyAtara hotA hai| yadi rAtri - pravAsa aura savere kA pratikramaNa
donoM anya sthAna para kie jAeM to donoM sthAnoM ke svAmI zayyAtara mAne jAte
haiN| zayyAtara kaba hotA hai, isa saMdarbha meM nizItha bhASya evaM usakI cUrNi
meM vistRta carcA milatI hai| tRNa, Dagalaga, kSAra, mallaga, zayyA, saMstAraka,
pIr3ha tathA lepa - ye vastueM zayyArapiNDa nahIM hotIM ataH lI jA sakatI haiN|
vastra evaM pAtra sahita zaikSa bhI zayyAtarapiNDa nahIM hotA arthAt zayyAtara
ke putra kI dIkSA ho to ye vastueM lI jA sakatI haiN| azana, pAna, khAdima,
svAdima, pAdaproJchana, vastra, pAtra, kambala, sUI, kSura, karNazodhanI,
nakharadanI - ye bAraha vastueM zayyAtarapiNDa kahalAtI haiN| zayyAtarapiNDa kA
niSedha karane kA mukhya kAraNa yahI rahA ki jisa ghara meM sAdhu raheM, vahAM
bArabAra jAne se atiparicaya ke kAraNa gRhastha AdhAkarma aura auddezika doSa
yukta bhikSA taiyAra kara sakatA hai| pratidina praNIta AhAra lene se AhAra kI
Asakti bar3hatI haiM tathA kabhI-kabhI bAra-bAra jAne se zayyAtara dharma se yA
sAdhuoM se vimukha bhI ho sakatA hai, jisase anya sAdhuoM ke lie vasati milanA
kaThina ho jAtA hai| bhASyakAra ne zayyAtarapiNDa grahaNa se hone vAle doSoM kA
vistAra se varNana kiyA hai| piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa meM isa saMdarbha meM do
kathAoM kA ullekha milatA hai| eka zayyAtara ne sAdhu ko kambala diyA  /  usake
putra aura bhAI ne bhI use kambala Adi vastra de die| pracura upakaraNa ke bhAra
ke kAraNa vaha sAdhu anyatra vihAra nahIM karatA thA  /  devayoga se usa kSetra
meM durbhikSa ho gyaa| gRhasvAmI ne socA ki durbhikSa meM yaha sAdhu aura hama
donoM samApta ho jAeMge ataH kisI prayoga se sAdhu ko subhikSa pradeza meM
bhejanA caahie| eka dina sAdhu ke utsarga hetu bAhara jAne para usane sAre
upakaraNoM ko bAhara nikAlakara unheM chipA diyA aura makAna ke Aga lagA dii|
sAdhu ke Ane para kucha upakaraNa usako de die| vaha sAdhu dUsare deza meM
prasthita hone lagA, taba zayyAtara ne kahA - ' -'subhikSa hone para punaH yahAM
A jaanaa|' vaha sAdhu subhikSa hone para vahAM A gyaa| zayyAtara ne usake
upakaraNa punaH samarpita kara die| isa prakAra zayyAtarapiNDa grahaNa karane se
pravacana kI laghutA evaM avamAnanA hotI hai| eka gRhapati ke ghara meM pAMca
sau sAdhuoM ne pravAsa kiyaa| sAdhu pratidina zayyAtara ke yahAM prathama bhikSA
grahaNa karate the  /  kAlAntara meM vaha nirdhana ho gyaa| una sAdhuoM ke jAne
para anya sAdhu vahAM Ae  /  unhoMne bhI vasati kI yAcanA kii| gRhapati ne kahA-
'mere pAsa kevala vasati hai, prathama bhikSA dene ke lie 1. bRbhA 3529, prasA
803  /  2. bRbhA 3530, prasA 802  /  3. nibhA 1155, cU. pR. 134, bRbhA 3536, TI.
pR. 984, 985  /  4. nibhA 1154, bRbhA 3535  /  5. bRbhA 3540, nibhA 1159  /  6.
bRbhA 3541-49, 6378  /  7. piMpraMTI pa. 90  /

Page #153 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindanuyukti: An Observation  **139. "There is nothing."** The Sadhus said,
"Shayyatar Bhiksha is not permissible for us." The householder said, "It would
be inauspicious for the Sadhus to leave our house with empty bowls, therefore I
will not provide lodging." The Sadhus explained and obtained lodging. Thus,
obtaining lodging by accepting Shayyatar Pind can be rare.  The Panchashak
Prakaran also presents the opinions of other Acharyas regarding the "faults of
Shayyatar Pind" and the benefits of not accepting Shayyatar Pind.
**Exceptions:** Shayyatar Pind is permitted for eight reasons: 1. Anagadh or
Agadh Glanktav 2. Invitation from Shayyatar 3. Insistence from Shayyatar 4. Rare
substance 5. Ashiv 6. Unodari 7. Predvesh 8. Rajdviष्ट.  **Rajpind:** The ninth
Uddeshak of Nishita is connected to many prohibitions related to Rajpind. The 22
Tirthankaras in between and the Tirthankaras of Mahavideha also prohibited
Sadhus from accepting Rajpind food. Ashan, Pan, Khadim, Swadim, Vastra, Patra,
Kambal, and Padapronchan - these eight types of items are called Rajpind if
taken from the King's place. Acharya Haribhadra has described the faults of
accepting Rajpind food. Detailed discussion on this topic is found in Brihatkalp
Bhashya.  The Nishita Sutra mentions Chaturmasik Prayashchitta for the Muni who
accepts and consumes Rajpind food. Accepting the delicious and heavy food
prepared for the King can increase the desire for taste, therefore Rajpind is
prohibited. Like Shayyatar Pind, Rajpind can also be accepted in special
exceptions.  **Nityaagrapind:** Nityaagrapind means accepting invited Bhiksha
daily from one house. The Dashavaikalik Sutra considers it a fault of Anachar
and the Nishita Sutra considers the one who consumes Nityaagrapind as a
participant in Prayashchitta. In Nishita, "Nitiy Aggapind" and "Nitiy Pind"
words are used instead of Niyag.  1. Pimprati P. 90, 91 2. Pancha 17/18 3.
Pancha 17/19 4. For detailed explanation of all these reasons, see Bubha
3550-3602, 6379. 5. Pancha 17/20 6. Nibha 2500, Bribha 6384, mention of
Rajoharan instead of Padapronchan. 7. Pancha 17/22 8. Pancha 17/21 9. Ni 9/1,2
10. For details, see Bribha 6396, 6397. 11. Dashati P 203; Niyagam ti
Nityamamantritham Pindam. 12. Das 3/2 13. Ni 2/32 14. Ni 2/31, 32.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 139 kucha bhI nahIM hai|' sAdhuoM ne kahA-
zayyAtara bhikSA hamAre lie kalpya nahIM hai|' gRhapati ne kahA-'hamAre ghara se
khAlI pAtra lekara sAdhu bAhara jAeM, yaha amaMgala hogA ataH maiM vasati nahIM
duuNgaa|' sAdhuoM ne use samajhAkara vasati prApta kii| isa prakAra zayyAtara
piNDa grahaNa se vasati kI prApti durlabha ho sakatI hai| paMcAzaka prakaraNa
meM bhI zayyAtarapiNDa ke doSa' tathA zayyAtarapiNDa grahaNa na karane se hone
vAle lAbhoM ke sambandha meM anya AcAryoM ke abhimata prastuta haiN|' apavAda
svarUpa zayyAtarapiNDa ATha kAraNoM se anujJAta hai-1. anAgAr3ha yA AgAr3ha
glAnatva 2. zayyAtara kA nimaMtraNa 3. zayyAtara kA Agraha 4. durlabha dravya 5.
aziva 6. UNodarI 7. pradveSa 8. raajdvisstt| rAjapiNDa nizItha kA navAM uddezaka
rAjapiNDa se sambandhita aneka varjanAoM se jur3A huA hai| bIca ke 22
tIrthaMkaroM evaM mahAvideha ke tIrthaMkaroM ne bhI sAdhu ke lie rAjapiNDa AhAra
grahaNa karane kA niSedha kiyA hai| azana, pAna, khAdima, svAdima, vastra,
pAtra, kambala aura pAdapoMchana-ye ATha prakAra kI vastueM yadi rAjA ke yahAM
se lI jAeM to ye rAjapiNDa kahalAtI haiN| AcArya haribhadra ne rAjapiNDa AhAra
grahaNa karane se hone vAle doSoM kA varNana kiyA hai| bRhatkalpabhASya meM isa
saMdarbha meM vistRta vivecana milatA hai| nizItha sUtra meM rAjapiNDa AhAra ko
grahaNa karane evaM usakA bhoga karane vAle muni ke lie cAturmAsika prAyazcitta
kI bAta kahI gaI hai| rAjA ke nimitta banA sarasa aura gariSTha bhojana grahaNa
karane se rasa-lolupatA bar3ha sakatI hai isalie rAjapiNDa kA niSedha kiyA gayA
hai| zayyAtara piMDa kI bhAMti rAjapiMDa bhI vizeSa apavAdoM meM grahaNa kiyA jA
sakatA hai| nityAgrapiNDa nityAgra kA artha hai-eka ghara se pratidina
nimaMtrita bhikSA grahaNa karanAra dazavaikAlika sUtra meM ise anAcAra doSa mAnA
hai tathA nizItha sUtra meM nityapiNDa kA bhoga karane vAle ko prAyazcitta kA
bhAgI batAyA hai|3 nizItha meM niyAga ke sthAna para 'Nitiya aggapiMDa' tathA
nitiya piMDa zabda kA prayoga huA hai| 1. piMpraTI pa. 90, 91 //  7. paMcA 17/22
//  2. paMcA 17/18 /  8. paMcA 17/21 //  3. paMcA 17/19 /  9.ni 9/1,2 /  4. ina
saba kAraNoM kI vistRta vyAkhyA hetu dekheM bubhA 3550- 10. vistAra hetu dekheM
bRbhA 6396,6397 /  3602,6379 /  11. dazahATI pa 203; niyAgaM ti nityamAmantritaM
pinnddm| 5. paMcA 17/20 /  12. daza 3/2 /  6. nibhA 2500, bRbhA 6384,
pAdaproJchana ke sthAna para 13. ni 2/32 /  rajoharaNa kA ullekha bhI milatA
hai| 14. ni 2/31, 32 /  |

Page #154 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 140 ## Piṇḍaniyukti  The commentator and the Chūrṇikāra have explained this
in detail. According to the Chūrṇikāra, Agastya Singh, accepting alms daily
without invitation and with a natural attitude is not a Nityāgra. Āchārya Bhikṣu
has described this in detail in the Āchāra's Chaupai. (Bhikṣu Granth Ratnākar:
Āchāra's Chaupai) Āchārya Mahāprajña has discussed this word in detail in the
commentary on the Daśavaikālika Sūtra. In the Niśītha Chūrṇi, the disciple has
raised a question: If a householder prepares food for himself daily, then if he
invites someone respectfully, is there any fault? In response, the commentator
says that there is a need to give an invitation, therefore, there may be faults
like sthāpanā, ādhākarma, prābhṛtika, adhyavapūraka, krīta and prāmitya, etc.
Therefore, one should not accept natural food without an invitation. The one who
accepts Nityāgrapiṇḍa receives the Prāyaścitta of Laghumāsa (Pūrimārddha).  ##
Puraḥkarma and Paścātkarma  Washing hands or vessels, etc., before giving alms
is Puraḥkarma. This fault is usually associated with householders. If a Sadhu
knows that the giver will clean his hands, etc., with water after giving alms
with unclean hands or vessels, then that food is unacceptable for the Sadhu. The
one who accepts food from hands, vessels, Dī and Bhājana with Puraḥkarma is a
recipient of Prāyaścitta.  If naturally moist hands dry, then alms can be
accepted from that giver, but alms cannot be accepted even after the hands dry
after Puraḥkarma. In Puraḥkarma, starting the use of water is a serious offense,
using water is a moderate offense, and accepting alms with oily hands is a minor
offense. Accepting alms with a serious offense results in four Laghumāsa
(Āyambila), with a moderate offense results in Laghumāsa (Pūrimārddha), and with
a minor offense results in Paṇaga (Nirvigaya) Prāyaścitta. The Br̥hatkalpabhāṣya
(1831-63) explains Puraḥkarma in detail.  ## Kimicchaka  Food given after asking
what someone wants is Kimicchaka. The Daśavaikālika Sūtra considers it under
Anāchāra. Some Āchāryas have also considered it as a special characteristic of
Rājapinḍa there. The commentary written by Āchārya Mahāprajña in this context is
worth reading.  1. Dra Nibhā 999-1021 Chū Pṛ. 103-107. 2. Daśachūp. 60; ṇ tujan
ahasamāvattie a dine dine bhikṣāgahaṇam. 3. See Daśa Pṛ. 45-47. 4. Nibhā
1003-1006, Pṛ. 103, 104. 5. Vyabhā 857. 6. Br̥bhā 1820, Nibhā 4063; Haththam vā
mattam vā, puṭviṁ sītodaeṇa jaṁ dhove. Samaṇatṭhāe dāyā, purakammaṁ taṁ vijāṇāhi
|| 7. Br̥bhā 1829, Tī Pṛ. 537. 8. Daśahāṭī P. 117 kimicchatītyevaṁ yo dīyate sa
kimicchakaḥ. 9. Daśa Pṛ. 52, 53.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 140 piMDaniyukti bhASyakAra evaM cUrNikAra ne isakI vistRta vyAkhyA kI hai|
cUrNikAra agastyasiMha ke anusAra binA nimaMtraNa sahaja bhAva se pratidina
bhikSA grahaNa karanA nityAgra nahIM hai| AcArya bhikSu ne AcAra kI caupAI meM
vistAra se isake bAre meM varNana kiyA hai| (bhikSu graMtha ratnAkara : AcAra kI
caupAI) AcArya mahAprajJa ne dazavaikAlika sUtra ke TippaNa meM vistAra se isa
zabda kA vivecana kiyA hai| nizItha cUrNi meM ziSya ne eka prazna upasthita kiyA
hai ki gRhastha pratidina apane lie bhojana banAtA hI hai phira yadi vaha
AdarapUrvaka nimaMtraNa de to kyA doSa hai ? isakA uttara dete hue bhASyakAra
kahate haiM ki nimaMtraNa meM avazya dene kI bAta hotI hai ata: vahAM sthApanA,
AdhAkarma, prAbhRtikA, adhyavapUraka, krIta aura prAmitya Adi doSa bhI laga
sakate haiM ataH svAbhAvika bhojana bhI nimaMtraNapUrvaka nahIM lenA caahie|
nityAgrapiNDa grahaNa karane vAle ko laghumAsa (purimArdha) prAyazcitta prApta
hotA hai| puraHkarma aura pazcAtkarma dAna dene se pUrva hAtha yA pAtra Adi
dhonA puraHkarma hai| isa doSa kA sambandha prAya: gRhastha se hai| sAdhu ko
jJAta ho jAe ki lipta hAtha yA pAtra se bhikSA dene ke bAda dAtA sacitta jala se
hAtha Adi sApha karegA to vaha AhAra sAdhu ke lie akalpya hotA hai| puraHkarma
yukta hAtha, pAtra, dI aura bhAjana se AhAra grahaNa karane vAlA prAyazcitta kA
bhAgI hotA hai| sahaja rUpa se udaka se Ardra hAtha yadi sUkha jAte haiM to usa
dAtA se bhikSA lI jA sakatI hai lekina pura:karma ke pazcAt gIle hAtha sUkhane
para bhI bhikSA grahaNa nahIM kI jA sktii| puraHkarma meM udakasamAraMbha karanA
utkRSTa aparAdha, udakAI madhyama aparAdha tathA sasnigdha hAtha se bhikSA lenA
jaghanya aparAdha-pada hai| utkRSTa aparAdha yukta bhikSA grahaNa karane para
cAra laghumAsa (Ayambila), madhyama meM laghumAsa (purimArdha) tathA jaghanya
meM paNaga (nirvigaya) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| bRhatkalpabhASya
(1831-63) meM puraHkarma kI vistAra se vyAkhyA kI gaI hai| kimicchaka kauna kyA
cAhatA hai, yaha pUchakara diyA jAne vAlA AhAra kimicchaka hai| dazavaikAlika
sUtra meM ise anAcAra ke antargata mAnA hai| kucha AcAryoM ne vahAM ise
rAjapiNDa kA vizeSaNa bhI mAnA hai| isa saMdarbha meM AcArya mahAprajJa dvArA
likhita TippaNI paThanIya hai|' 1. dra nibhA 999-1021 cU pR. 103-107 /
2.dazaacUpa.60;Na tujaM ahAsamAvattIe diNe diNe bhikkhaaghnnN| 3. dekheM daza
pR. 45-47 /  4. nibhA 1003-1006, pR. 103, 104 /  5. vyabhA 857 /  6. bRbhA 1820,
nibhA 4063; hatthaM vA mattaM vA, puTviM sItodaeNa jaM dhove| samaNaTThAe dAyA,
purakammaM taM vijANAhi  //  7. bRbhA 1829, TI pR. 537 /  8. dazahATI pa. 117
kimicchatItyevaM yo dIyate sa kimicchkH| 9. daza pR. 52, 53 /

Page #155 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti: An Observation  **141**  **Durbhiksha Bhakta** When a severe
famine occurs, the food prepared by a king or a wealthy person for the monks is
called Durbhiksha Bhakta. This type of food is unacceptable for a Muni. One who
consumes Durbhiksha Bhakta is considered a Viradhak.  **Bardalika Bhakta** If a
king or a householder makes special arrangements for food-donation for the Muni
during the rainy season or when dark clouds are present, it is called Bardalika
Bhakta. A Muni who consumes Bardalika Bhakta is subject to atonement. According
to Nishita Churni, if a king prepares food for the monks for seven consecutive
days during the rainy season, it is called Bardalika Bhakta. Like Kantara
Bhakta, consuming Bardalika Bhakta is considered Viradhak.  **Kantara Bhakta**
In ancient times, means of transportation were not developed. People generally
traveled long distances with a caravan. Monks also traveled on foot with the
caravan due to fear of thieves and other dangers. The food prepared for the
monks out of compassion in the forest is called Kantara Bhakta. Nishita mentions
that one who consumes Aranya Bhakta or Kantara Bhakta is subject to atonement.
The commentator Abhaydeva Suri considers Kantara Bhakta, Durbhiksha Bhakta,
Glana Bhakta, Balika Bhakta, Praghoornak Bhakta, etc. as part of Adhakarma.
**Praghoornak Bhakta** Food prepared for a guest is called Praghoornak Bhakta.
**Agra Pind** Agra Pind Bhikhya, which is prepared in a householder's house, is
forbidden for a monk. Nishita mentions that a monk who consumes Agra Pind is
subject to atonement. Often, Agra Pind is given to cows, dogs, or beggars in
homes. If a monk consumes it, he incurs the fault of Antaray. Consuming Agra
Pind makes the monk hasty, and therefore he does not pay attention to
Iryasamiti.  **1. Nichu 2 p. 455; Kantaraate Adviniggayanam Bhukkhattanam 5.
Bhag 5/139-46.** **2. Bhag 5/139-46.** **3. Ni 9/6.** **4. Nichu 2 p. 455;
Sattahabaddale Padate Bhattam Kareti Raya.** **5. Bhag 5/139-46.** **6. Bhag Bha
2 p. 521; Kantarabhattam Ti Kantaram-Aranyam Tatra.** **7. Ni 9/6, Nibha 5415.**
**8. Sthati . 311; Kantarabhaktaday Adhakarmadi Bheda Ev.** **9. Apuvvanam Va
Avidhiinam Bhattam Kareti Raya.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 141 durbhikSabhakta bhayaMkara duSkAla hone
para rAjA athavA dhanADhya vyakti sAdhuoM ke lie jo bhaktapAna taiyAra karate
the, vaha durbhikSabhakta kahalAtA thaa| isa rUpa meM diyA jAne vAlA AhAra muni
ke lie agrAhya hotA hai| durbhikSa bhakta ko grahaNa karane vAlA virAdhaka hotA
hai| bArdalikAbhakta varSA hone para yA ghanaghora bAdala chAe rahane para rAjA
athavA gRhastha yadi muni ke lie vizeSa rUpa se AhAra-dAna kI vyavasthA karatA
hai, vaha bArdalikAbhakta kahalAtA hai| bArdalikAbhakta grahaNa karane vAlA muni
prAyazcitta kA bhAgI hotA hai| nizItha cUrNi ke anusAra sAta dina taka lagAtAra
varSA hone para rAjA sAdhuoM ke nimitta jo bhojana banavAtA hai, vaha
bArdalikAbhakta kahalAtA hai| kAntArabhakta kI bhAMti bAlikAbhakta ko grahaNa
karane vAlA virAdhaka hotA hai  /  kAntArabhakta prAcInakAla meM yAtAyAta ke
sAdhana vikasita nahIM the| sAmAnyataH loga sArtha ke sAtha eka sthAna se dUsare
sthAna kI dUrI taya karate the| cora Adi ke bhaya se muni bhI sArtha ke sAtha
padayAtrA karate the| aTavI meM sAdhu para dayA karake unake lie jo bhojana
banAyA jAtA thA, use kAntArabhakta kahA jAtA thaa| nizItha meM araNyabhakta yA
kAntArabhakta lene vAle ko prAyazcitta kA bhAgI batAyA hai| TIkAkAra
abhayadevasUri ne kAMtArabhakta, durbhikSabhakta, glAnabhakta, bAlikAbhakta,
prAghUrNakabhakta Adi ko AdhAkarma ke antargata mAnA hai| prAghUrNakabhakta
atithi ke nimitta banA huA bhojana prAghUrNakabhakta kahalAtA hai| agrapiNDa
gRhastha ke ghara meM niSpanna agrapiNDa bhikSA sAdhu ke lie niSiddha hai|
nizItha meM agrapiNDa grahaNa karane vAle sAdhu ko prAyazcitta kA bhAgI batAyA
hai| prAya: gharoM meM agrapiNDa gAya, kuttA yA bhikhArI ko diyA jAtA hai, yadi
sAdhu use grahaNa karatA hai to usako aMtarAya kA doSa lagatA hai| agrapiNDa
lene se sAdhu ko tvarA rahatI hai ata: IryAsamiti kA dhyAna bhI nahIM rhtaa| 1.
nicU 2 pR. 455 ; kaMtArAte aDaviNiggayANaM bhukkhattANaM 5. bhaga 5/139-46 /   /
jaM dubbhikkhe rAyA deti, taM dubbhikkhabhattaM  /  6. bhagabhA 2 pR. 521 ;
kaMtArabhattaM ti kAntAram-araNyaM tatra 2. bhaga 5/139-46 /  bhikSukANAM
nirvAhArthaM yadavihitaM bhaktaM ttkaantaarbhktm| 3. ni 9/6 /  7. ni 9/6, nibhA
5415  /  4. nicU 2 pR. 455 ; sattAhabaddale paDate bhattaM kareti rAyA 8. sthATI
. 311; kAMtArabhaktAdaya AdhAkarmAdi bhedA ev| apuvvANaM vA avidhINa bhattaM
kareti raayaa|

Page #156 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 142:  Types of Food Offerings  **Gilanabhakta**  The Bhagavati Sutra
considers Gilanabhakta as cautious as the Ahadkarma Ahar.  Tika-kar Abhaydevsuri
explains that Gilanabhakta refers to the food given to a sick person for their
recovery.  Another meaning of Gilanabhakta is the food given in a hospital.
**Nivedanapinda**  The food offered to deities like Purnabhadra or Manibhadra,
either with or without a reason, is called Nivedanapinda.  According to Nisith,
a Sadhu who partakes in Nivedanapinda incurs a Prāyaścitta (penance).
Nivedanapinda is of two types: 1. Sadhu Nishrakrit, 2. Anishrakrit.  A Sadhu who
consumes Nivedanapinda offered for a Sadhu incurs a Charaguru (fasting)
Prāyaścitta, while one who consumes Anishrakrit incurs a Masalghu (half-month)
Prāyaścitta.  **Arhat Paksha Deva Pind**  The Pind offered to Jain deities
(Arhat Paksha Deva) is also of two types.  Consuming Nishrakrit Pind leads to
faults like Agyabhang (disobedience).  **Mritak Bhoj**  This is also called
Karaduyabhakta or Pindnikar.  The meal offered on the twelfth day after death is
called Mritak Bhoj.  It is forbidden for a Sadhu to accept alms during Mritak
Bhoj.  **Nikachit Ahar**  The food offered daily during Chaturmas, due to
Bhutikarma (karma related to the body) etc., is called Nikachit Ahar.  According
to the Bhashyakar, one who consumes Nikachit Ahar is considered a Deshatah
Parswasth (one who is near the place of death).  Consuming Nikachit Ahar incurs
a Laghumas (half-month) Prāyaścitta.  **Rachit Ahar**  The Vyavahar Bhashya
mentions various faults related to alms in the context of a Muni with
Asanklishta Achar (unblemished conduct).  One such fault is Rachit Ahar.  A Muni
with Suvihit (good conduct) cannot consume Rachit Ahar.  Acharya Malayagiri, in
his commentary on Vyavahar Bhashya, explains Rachit as "keeping food in a
vessel."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 142 piMDaniyukti glAnabhakta _ bhagavatIsUtra meM glAnabhakta ko AdhAkarma
AhAra kI bhAMti sAvadha mAnA hai| glAnabhakta kA artha karate hue TIkAkAra
abhayadevasUri kahate haiM ki rogI ke Arogya hetu diyA jAne vAlA AhAra
glAnabhakta kahalAtA hai| glAnabhakta kA dUsarA artha hai-ArogyazAlA meM diyA
jAne vAlA bhojn| nivedanApiMDa kAraNavaza yA akAraNavaza pUrNabhadra yA
mANibhadra Adi devatAoM ke lie jo AhAra arpita kiyA jAtA hai, vaha nivedanApiMDa
kahalAtA hai| nizItha ke anusAra nivedanA piMDa kA bhoga karane vAlA sAdhu
prAyazcitta kA bhAgI hotA hai| nivedanApiMDa do prakAra kA hotA hai-1. sAdhu
nizrAkRta 2. anishraakRt| sAdhu ke lie kRta nivedanApiMDa grahaNa karane vAle
sAdhu ko cAraguru (upavAsa) tathA anizrAkRta ko grahaNa karane vAle ko mAsalaghu
(purimArdha) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| arhat pakSa ke devatA arthAt jaina
devatAoM ko jo piMDa nivedita kiyA jAtA hai, vaha bhI pUrvavat do prakAra kA
hotA hai| usameM nizrAkRta ko grahaNa karane para AjJAbhaMga Adi doSa hote haiN|
mRtaka bhoja ise karaDuyabhakta yA piMDanikara bhI kahA jAtA hai| marane ke
pazcAt bArahaveM dina kiyA jAne vAlA bhoja mRtaka bhoja kahalAtA hai| sAdhu ke
lie mRtaka bhoja meM bhikSA grahaNa karanA niSiddha hai| nikAcita AhAra
bhUtikarma Adi ke kAraNa cAturmAsa paryanta pratidina nibaddhIkRta rUpa se jo
dAna diyA jAtA hai, vaha nikAcita AhAra kahalAtA hai| bhASyakAra ke anusAra
nikAcita AhAra lene vAlA dezataH pArzvastha hotA hai| nikAcita AhAra grahaNa
kartA ko eka laghumAsa (purimArdha) prAyazcitta kI prApti hotI hai| racita AhAra
asaMkliSTa AcAra vAle muni ke prasaMga meM vyavahArabhASya meM bhikSA se
sambandhita aneka doSoM kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai, usameM eka doSa hai-racita
AhAra  /  suvihita muni racita AhAra kA prayoga nahIM kara sktaa| vyavahAra
bhASya kI TIkA meM AcArya malayagiri ne racita kA artha kiyA hai-'pAtra meM
AhAra rakhakara 1. bhagabhA 2 pR. 521; gilANabhattaM ti glAnasya nIrogatArthaM
2. nicU 2 pR. 455 : AroggasAlAe jaM gilANassa dijjati, taM gilaannbhttN| 3. nicU
bhA. 3 pR. 224| 4. ni 11/82 /  5. nicU bhA. 3 pR. 224  /  6. nibhA 3489 cU. pR.
224 /  7.pini 218/1 /  8. nicU 2 pR. 444 ; pitipiMDapadANaM vA piNddnnigro| 9.
vyabhA 857 /

Page #157 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti: An Observation  **143. "To decorate around it with various
dishes."** According to Abhaydeva Suri, making modaks again from modak powder is
a created fault, which can be placed under the karma bhed of auddeshik dosha.
**Sankaḍi Bhoj**  _Where there is abundant killing of beings, it is called
Sankaḍi. Or where various types of food materials are processed, it is called
Sanskriti-Sankaḍi. In Majjhima Nikaya, Sankaḍi is called Sankhati. Mahavira
prohibited the sadhu from going to Sankaḍi Bhoj because there may be an occasion
for debate or conflict with the Tirthika sadhu. In Nisitha Bhashya, it is
mentioned that the muni should not go in the direction where Sankaḍi-Bhoj is
taking place. A sadhu who takes food in Sankaḍi Bhoj receives the atonement of
four anudghāt. There are two types of daily and nightly Sankaḍi - Pur: Sankaḍi
and Paschat Sankaḍi. The one done after sunrise is called Pur: Sankaḍi and the
one done after sunset is called Paschat Sankaḍi._  _If a sadhu takes Sankaḍi-
Bhoj due to attachment, arrogance or without any reason, then it is a fault. If
he goes to a Sankaḍi house in the order of household tradition, then there is no
fault. If he goes to Sankaḍi for a strong support or purpose, then also there is
no fault. The commentator has discussed this in detail in this context._
**Ratri-Bhojan Viramna**  This rule is related to the time of taking Pind and
its consumption. In the nineteenth study of Uttaradhyayana, the parents of
Mrgaputra, while describing the horror of Sadhutva, have described Ratri-Bhojan
Viramna as a very difficult task. Ratri-Bhojan is unaccepted for the sadhu. Jain
Acharyas have considered it under the category of Shabal dosha. One rule in the
18 rules of Shraman (Vrat Shatka, Kay Shatka...) is the avoidance of Ratri-
Bhojan. To establish the importance of Ratri-Bhojan Viramna, Mahavira did not
mention it along with the 46 faults of Bhiksha, but established it as the sixth
Vrat along with the five Mahavrata.  **1. Bhagabha 2 p. 521; Raiyam ti
Modakchurnadi Punarmodaka- Ditaya Rachitmaudeshik Bhedarupam. 2. Bribha 3140;
Sankaḍijjati Jahin, Auni Jiyaan Sankaḍi Sa Khalu. 3. Majjhima Nikaya 2/16. 4.
Bribha 3160. 5. Bribha 3141. 6. For the description of various atonements and
their faults when a sadhu goes to all these Sankaḍis, see Bribha 3142-3206 T p.
881-897. 7. Bribha 3177, T p. 890; Ath Kamen Grihaparipatyā Sankaḍigriham
Pratapstatatra Grahanam Bhojanam Va Kurvanasya Na Dosha Bhavanti. 8. U 19/30. 9.
Dasha 3/2. 10. Sam 21/1, Dashru 2/3 11. Bribha 2839, Dasha 4/17, Rai Bhoyana
Veraman Chatthai.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 143 usake cAroM ora bahuvidha vyaJjana
sjaanaa|' abhayadevasUri ke anusAra modakacUrNa se punaH modaka banAnA racita
doSa hai, ise auddezika doSa ke karma bheda ke antargata rakhA jA sakatA hai|'
saMkhaDi bhoja _jahAM jIvoM kA pracura mAtrA meM ghAta hotA hai, vaha saMkhaDi
kahalAtA hai| athavA jahAM vividha prakAra kI bhojana sAmagrI saMskArita kI jAtI
hai, vaha saMskRti-saMkhaDi kahalAtI hai| majjhima nikAya meM saMkhaDi ko
saMkhati kahA gayA hai| mahAvIra ne sAdhu ke lie saMkhaDi bhoja meM jAne kA
niSedha kiyA hai kyoMki vahAM paratIrthika sAdhu ke sAtha vAda-vivAda yA kalaha
kA prasaMga ho sakatA hai| nizItha bhASya meM ullekha milatA hai ki jisa dizA
meM saMkhaDi-bhoja ho, muni usa dizA meM na jaae| saMkhaDibhoja meM AhAra lene
vAle sAdhu ko cAra anudghAta kA prAyazcitta prApta hotA hai  /  daivasika aura
rAtrikI saMkhaDi ke do-do bheda haiM-pura: saMkhaDi aura pazcAt sNkhddi|
sUryodaya ke pazcAt kI jAne vAlI puraHsaMkhaDI tathA sUryAsta ke pazcAt kI jAne
vAlI pazcAt saMkhaDi kahalAtI hai| _ saMkhaDi-bhoja ko yadi sAdhu Asakti, darpa
yA binA kisI kAraNa ke grahaNa karatA hai to doSa hai| yadi gRha-paripATI ke
krama se saMkhaDi vAle ghara meM jAtA hai to koI doSa nahIM hai| yadi kisI puSTa
Alambana yA prayojana se saMkhaDi meM jAtA hai to bhI doSa nahIM hai| bhASyakAra
ne isa saMdarbha meM vistRta vivecana kiyA hai| rAtri-bhojana viramaNa yaha
niyama piMDagrahaNa evaM usake upabhoga ke kAla se sambandhita hai|
uttarAdhyayana ke unnIsaveM adhyayana meM mRgAputra ke mAtA-pitA ne sAdhutva kI
vibhISikA batAte hue rAtri-bhojana viramaNa ko atyanta duSkara kArya batAyA hai|
sAdhu ke lie rAtri-bhojana anAcIrNa hai| jaina AcAryoM ne ise zabala doSa ke
antargata mAnA hai| zramaNa ke 18 niyamoM (vrataSaTka, kAyaSaTka....) meM eka
niyama rAtri-bhojana kA parihAra hai| rAtri-bhojana viramaNa kI mahattA ko
sthApita karane ke lie mahAvIra ne bhikSA ke 46 doSoM ke sAtha isakA ullekha na
karake pAMca mahAvrata ke sAtha isako chaThe vrata ke rUpa meM pratiSThita kiyA
hai| bRhatkalpa kI 1. bhagabhA 2 pR. 521 ; raiyaM ti modakacUrNAdi punarmodakA-
ditayA rcitmaudeshikbhedruupm|| 2.bRbhA 3140; saMkhaDijjati jahiM, AUNi jiyANa
saMkhaDI sa khlu| 3. majjhimanikAya 2/16 /  4. bRbhA 3160 /  5. bRbhA 3141 /  6.
ina saba saMkhaDiyoM meM sAdhu ke jAne para vividha prAyazcittoM evaM usake
doSoM ke varNana hetu dekheM bRbhA 3142-3206 TI pR.881-897| 7. bRbhA 3177, TI
pR.890; atha kameNa gRhaparipATyA saGkhaDigRhaM prAptastatastatra grahaNaM
bhojanaM vA kurvANasya na doSA bhvnti| 8. u 19/30 /  9. daza 3/2 /  10. sama
21/1, dazru 2/3 11. bRbhA 2839, daza 4/17, raaiibhoynnvermnnchtttthaaii|

Page #158 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 144 ## Pindaniyukti  The commentary clearly states that Mahavrata
practitioners suffer pain when the sixth night-meal vow is broken.  In Nishītha
Chūrṇi, a question is raised: if the atonement for both Ādhākarma and night-meal
is four gurus (fasts), which option is less blameworthy? In response, the
Chūrṇikāra states that Ādhākarma is detrimental to the secondary qualities, but
the night-meal is detrimental to the primary qualities, hence it should be
avoided. The Chūrṇikāra has presented many other options in this context.  The
Nishītha Sutra presents four options for the night-meal:  * Brought during the
day, consumed during the day. * Brought during the day, consumed during the
night. * Brought during the night, consumed during the day. * Brought during the
night, consumed during the night.  Explaining the first transgression, the
Bhāṣyakāra states that if a fasting Muni learns that there is a Sankaḍi feast at
the homes of his relatives, he goes there without a bowl. The relatives ask,
"Why didn't you bring a bowl?" He replies, "I am fasting today." They then set
aside a portion of the Sankaḍi for the Muni, saying, "We will give it to you
tomorrow for your parana." The Muni who consumes this on the next day for his
parana incurs the first transgression of the night-meal. The Bhāṣyakāra and the
Tikākāra have described the other three transgressions and the harms caused by
the night-meal in detail.  According to the Bhāṣyakāra, if a Muni accepts alms
out of doubt that the sun has not risen, even if the sun rises, he is liable for
the atonement of four gurus (fasts). However, if he accepts alms with a
confident mind, believing that the sun has not risen, even if it has not risen,
he is not liable for the atonement. The Daśavaikalika Sutra mentions the
violence-related faults arising from the night-meal. According to the
Bṛhatkalpabhāṣya, going out for alms at night creates doubt about the
omniscience of the Lord, increases falsehood, and leads to self-contradiction
and restraint-contradiction. In the darkness of night, the Muni may stumble and
fall, get thorns in his feet, fall into a pit, be bitten by a snake, or be
attacked by a dog.  1. Bṛbhāṭī p. 801. 2. NiChū Bhā. 1 p. 150; Kamma Seyam Na
Bhoyanam Rāto Mūlaguṇo-upghātitvāt. 3. (a) Ni 11/75-78. 4. See Bṛbhā 2850-64, Tī
p. 806-812. 5. Bṛbhā 5808, 5809, for details see Bṛbhā 5786-5828. 6. Daśa
6/23-25. (b) NiBhā 412 Chū p. 140.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 144 piMDaniyukti TIkA meM spaSTa ullekha hai ki chaThe rAtribhojana vrata ke
bhagna hone para mahAvratoM ko pIr3A hotI hai| . nizItha cUrNi meM eka prazna
uThAyA gayA hai ki AdhAkarma aura rAtribhojana-donoM kA prAyazcitta cAra guru
(upavAsa) hai phira donoM meM se kauna-sA vikalpa kama doSa vAlA hai, isakA
uttara dete hue cUrNikAra kahate haiM ki AdhAkarma uttaraguNoM kA upaghAta
karane vAlA hai lekina rAtri-bhojana mUlaguNoM kA upaghAtI hai ataH usakA
parihAra karanA caahie| cUrNikAra ne isa prasaMga meM aura bhI aneka vikalpoM ko
prastuta kiyA hai| nizItha sUtra meM rAtri-bhojana ke cAra vikalpa prastuta kie
gae haiM* dina meM lAyA huA, dina meM bhog| * dina meM lAyA huA, rAtri meM bhog|
* rAtri meM lAyA huA, dina meM bhog| * rAtri meM lAyA huA, rAtri meM bhog|
prathama bhaMga ko spaSTa karate hue bhASyakAra kahate haiM ki koI upavAsa kartA
muni ko jJAta huA ki jJAti logoM ke yahAM saMkhaDi bhoja hai| vaha binA pAtra
lie vahAM pahuMcA to jJAti logoM ne kahA-'Apa pAtra kyoM nahIM lAe?' usane
kahA-'Aja mere upavAsa hai|' taba unhoMne muni ke lie saMkhaDi kA kucha bhAga
sthApita kara diyA ki kala pAraNe meM hama muni ko deNge| dUsare dina pAraNe meM
usako grahaNa karane vAle muni para rAtribhojana kA prathama bhaMga ghaTita hotA
hai| bAkI ke tIna bhaMgoM kA tathA rAtribhojana se hone vAlI hAniyoM kA
bhASyakAra evaM TIkAkAra ne vistAra se varNana kiyA hai| bhASyakAra ke anusAra
yadi muni sUrya udita nahIM huA hai, isa zaMkA se bhikSA grahaNa karatA hai to
sUryodaya hone para bhI vaha cAraguru (upavAsa) prAyazcitta kA bhAgI hotA hai|
sUryodaya na hone para bhI yadi sUryodaya ke vizvAsa se niHzaMkita mana meM
bhikSA grahaNa karatA hai to vaha prAyazcitta kA bhAgI nahIM hotaa|
dazavaikAlika sUtra meM rAtri-bhojana se hone vAle hiMsA janita doSoM kA ullekha
hai| bRhatkalpabhASya ke anusAra rAtri meM bhikSArtha jAne se bhagavAn kI
sarvajJatA ke prati AzaMkA utpanna hotI hai, mithyAtva kI vRddhi hotI hai tathA
Atma-virAdhanA aura saMyama- virAdhanA hotI hai| rAtri ke aMdhakAra meM na
dIkhane se muni skhalita hokara gira sakatA hai, paira meM kAMTe laga sakate
haiM, gar3he meM gira sakatA hai, sarpa kATa sakatA hai, kutte 1. bRbhATI
pR.801| 4. dekheM bRbhA 2850-64, TI pR. 806-812  /  2. nicU bhA. 1 pR. 150;
kamma seyaM na bhoyaNaM rAto mUlaguNopa- 5. bRbhA 5808, 5809, vistAra hetu
dekheM bRbhA 5786ghaatitvaat| 5828 /  3. (ka) ni 11/75-78  /  6. daza 6/23-25 /
(kha) nibhA 412 cU pR. 140 /  |

Page #159 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation** 145  They can cause trouble, a bull can charge,
and the guards can harass them thinking they are thieves. The Nīśītha Bhāṣya and
its Cūrṇi also describe in detail the faults that arise from eating at night.
Under the category of violation of restraint, violation of the six categories is
possible during night travel because in the darkness, it is possible to harm
greenery and seeds, etc., as they are not visible. The Bhāṣyakāra has described
in detail the violation of restraint that arises from eating at night. One who
eats at night receives the atonement of four Anudghāta months or four Guru
months (fasts). **Gṛhantaraniṣadyā** At the time of begging, the Muni cannot sit
in the house of a householder. The Āgamas consider a Muni who sits in the house
of a householder to be a participant in sin and atonement. The Daśavaikalika
Sūtra considers sitting in the house of a householder without reason to be
immoral. If the Muni sits in the house of a householder at the time of begging,
there is a possibility of breaking celibacy due to excessive contact. Seeing the
ascetic sitting in the house waiting for alms, the householder's wife may
quickly kill beings in the forbidden time, which hinders other beggars and
causes anger in the householder due to hindrance in work. **Sanniidhi and
Sancaya** It is immoral for an ascetic to accumulate or collect. An ascetic
cannot accumulate or collect the alms received. The Sūtras clearly state that an
ascetic should not accumulate even a small amount or a speck.1 The one who
accumulates food items acts like a householder.2 Mahāvīra did not allow even the
accumulation of medicine.13 Although this rule is not directly related to
begging, the collection or accumulation of food and water along with utensils
also takes place, hence it has been mentioned. 1. Bṛbhā 2841, 2842. 8. Daś 6/56.
2. See Nībhā 413-423, Cū. p. 140-43. 9. Daś 6/571 3. See Bṛbhā 2843-48, Tī p.
803-805. 10. Daś 3/3. 4. Nībhā 412, Cū p. 140; Rāibhatte Cauvvaihe, Cauro Māsā
11. (a) U 6/15; Sannihinca Na Kuvvejjā, Levamāyāe Sanjae. Bhavantanuṇghāyā. (b)
Daś 8/24; Sannihim Ca Na Kuvvejjā, Aṇumāyam Pisanjae. 5. Daś 5/2/8. 12. Daś
6/18. 6. U 17/19; Gihinisejjam Ca Vāhei, Pāvasamani Tti Vuccai. 13. Pra 10/9. 7.
Nī 12/13.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 145 upadrava kara sakate haiM, baila sIMga mAra
sakatA hai tathA ArakSakagaNa use cora samajhakara utpIr3ita kara sakate haiN|
nizItha bhASya evaM usakI cUrNi meM bhI rAtribhojana se hone vAle doSoM kA
vistAra se varNana huA hai| saMyama-virAdhanA ke antargata rAtrigamana meM
SaTkAya kI virAdhanA saMbhava hai kyoMki aMdhakAra meM dikhAI na dene se
hariyAlI evaM bIja Adi kI hiMsA bhI saMbhava hai| bhASyakAra ne rAtribhojana se
hone vAlI saMyama-virAdhanA kA vistAra se varNana kiyA hai|' rAtri-bhojana
karane vAle ko cAra anudghAta mAsa athavA cAra gurumAsa (upavAsa) prAyazcitta kI
prApti hotI hai| gRhAntaraniSadyA bhikSA ke samaya muni gRhastha ke ghara nahIM
baiTha sktaa| AgamoM meM gRhastha ke ghara baiThane vAle muni ko pApazramaNa
tathA prAyazcitta kA bhAgI mAnA hai| dazavaikAlika sUtra meM binA kAraNa
gRhastha ke ghara baiThane ko anAcAra mAnA gayA hai| bhikSA ke samaya muni yadi
gRhastha ke ghara baiThatA hai to atisamparka hone ke kAraNa brahmacarya
khaMDita hone kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai| ghara meM baiThe sAdhu bhikSA kI
pratIkSA kara rahe haiM, yaha dekhakara gRhasvAminI zIghratA se avadhakAla meM
prANiyoM kA vadha kara sakatI hai, isase anya bhikSAcaroM ko bAdhA pahuMcatI hai
tathA kAma meM bAdhA par3ane se gRhastha ko gussA bhI A sakatA hai| sannidhi
aura saMcaya sannidhi yA saMgraha karanA sAdhu ke lie anAcAra hai| sAdhu prApta
bhikSA kI na sannidhi kara sakatA hai aura na hI sNcy| sUtroM meM spaSTa ullekha
hai ki sAdhu aNumAtra yA lepamAtra bhI saMcaya na kre|1 prApta khAdya-padArthoM
kA saMcaya karane vAlA gRhastha kI bhAMti AcaraNa karatA hai  / 2 mahAvIra ne
auSadha kA saMcaya karane kI bhI anumati nahIM dii|13 yadyapi yaha niyama sIdhA
bhikSAcaryA ke sAtha nahIM jur3atA lekina upakaraNoM ke sAtha AhAra-pAnI kA
saMgraha yA saMcaya bhI ho jAtA hai ata: isakA ullekha kiyA gayA hai| 1. bRbhA
2841, 2842 /  8. dsh6/56|| 2. dekheM nibhA 413-423, cU. pR. 140-43 /  9. daza
6/571 3. dekheM bRbhA 2843-48, TI pR. 803-805 /  10. daza 3/3 /  4. nibhA 412,
cU pR. 140; rAIbhatte cauvvihe, cauro mAsA 11. (ka) u 6/15;sannihiMca na
kuvvejjA, levamAyAe sNje| bhvNtnnugghaayaa| (kha) daza 8/24; sannihiM ca na
kuvvejjA, aNumAyaM pisNje| 5. daza 5/2/8 /  12. daza 6/18 //  6. u 17/19;
gihinisejjaM ca vAhei, pAvasamaNi tti vuccii| 13. pra10/9  /  7. ni 12/13 /

Page #160 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 146 ## Pindianiyukti ## Cultural Content  Any literature, in some way or
another, reflects the cultural, religious, and social conditions of its time,
because the writer breathes in society. While being primarily focused on
conduct, the literature of Pindianiyukti also depicts the contemporary cultural,
social, and familial circumstances as the occasion demands. Although presenting
a complete cultural description is not the aim here, some topics are being
touched upon. The cultural environment in Pindianiyukti can also be the subject
of independent research.  ## Deities  India is a land of faith, hence the
existence of numerous deities and the practice of their worship is prevalent
here. In ancient times, eight-day festivals were also celebrated based on
deities, such as Indramaha, Rudramaha, Varunamaha, etc.  When entering a battle,
the commander and soldiers would pay homage to Chamundadevi. For the peace of
calamities like शीतलक and अशिव, people would worship Manibhadra Yaksha and
celebrate together in the Yakshayatan on the eighth and fourteenth days of the
lunar fortnight. Manibhadra Deva is also mentioned in the Mahabharata. According
to Dr. Jagdishchandra Jain, the oldest statue of Yakshas found is that of
Manibhadra Yaksha.  It was a common belief that dogs are special deities of
Mount Kailash (Meru) who roam the earth in the form of dogs. They benefit those
who worship them and harm those who disrespect them. Deities would reside in the
worship of a restrained ascetic. They would also punish an impure disciple. For
example, the deity residing in the worship of Sangamacharya caused a torrential
downpour with fierce winds to awaken the errant disciple Datta.  Some Acharyas
were so powerful that the Vyantara Devas would flee at the sound of their tongs.
When Sangamacharya struck his tongs, a child who had been affected by Vyantara
for six months stopped crying, and the Vyantara Devi fled from there.  1. Mavri
P. 130 || 2. Maha 2/10/10. 3. Jain Agam-Sahitya mein Bharatiya Samaj, p. 438. 4.
(a) Pini 210/5. (b) Nibha 4427, Chu p. 416: Kailasparvato Meru:, tattha jaani
devabhavanani tannivasino je deva ete imam macchalokam aagacchati, jakkharuveena
shvanarupenaityartha. 5. Mavri P. 126. 6. Mavri P. 125.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 146 piMDaniyukti sAMskRtika sAmagrI koI bhI sAhitya usa samaya kI sAMskRtika,
dhArmika evaM sAmAjika sthitiyoM ko kisI na kisI rUpa meM prakaTa kara hI detA
hai kyoMki sAhityakAra samAja meM zvAsa letA hai| AcAra pradhAna hote hue bhI
niyukti-sAhitya meM prasaMgavaza tatkAlIna sAMskRtika, sAmAjika evaM pArivArika
paristhitiyoM kA citraNa huA hai| yadyapi pUrNa rUpa se sAMskRtika varNana
prastuta karanA yahAM abhISTa nahIM hai phira bhI kucha viSayoM para yahAM
caMcupAta kiyA jA rahA hai| piNDaniyukti meM sAMskRtika pariveza-isa viSaya para
svataMtra zodha bhI kiyA jA sakatA hai| devI-devatA bhArata dharmapradhAna bhUmi
hai ata: yahAM aneka devI-devatAoM kA astitva evaM unakI pUjA-vidhAna kA
pracalana hai| prAcInakAla meM devatAoM ke AdhAra para aSTadivasIya utsava bhI
manAe jAte the, jaiseindramaha, rudramaha, varuNamaha Adi  /  yuddha ke lie
praveza karane ke samaya senApati aura sainika cAmuNDA devI ko praNAma karate
the| zItalaka aziva Adi upadrava kI zAMti ke lie mANibhadra yakSa kI ArAdhanA
evaM aSTamI-caturdazI ko saba milakara yakSAyatana meM udyApana kiyA karate the|
mANibhadra deva kA ullekha mahAbhArata meM bhI AtA hai| DaoN. jagadIzacandra
jaina ke anusAra yakSoM meM sabase prAcIna mUrti mANibhadra yakSa kI milatI
hai|' kuttoM ke viSaya meM yaha mAnyatA pracalita thI ki ye kailAzaparvata
(meru) ke deva vizeSa haiM, jo pRthvI para zvAna rUpa meM vicaraNa karate haiN|
ye pUjA karane vAle kA hita tathA tiraskAra karane vAle kA ahita karate haiN|
saMyamI sAdhu kI upAsanA meM devatA rahate the| ve avinIta ziSya ko daMDita bhI
kara dete the, jaise saMgama AcArya kI upAsanA meM rahane vAle deva ne datta
ziSya ko pratibodha dene ke lie bhayaMkara vAyu ke sAtha varSA kI vikurvaNA kii|
kucha AcArya itane zakti sampanna hote the ki cimaTI bajAte hI vyantara deva
palAyana kara jAte the| saMgama AcArya ke cimaTI bajAte hI chaha mahIne se
vyantara prabhAvita bAlaka ne ronA baMda kara diyA aura vyantara devI vahAM se
palAyana kara gii| 1. mavR pa. 130 //  2. mahA 2/10/10 /  3. jaina Agama-sAhitya
meM bhAratIya samAja, pR. 438  /  4. (ka) pini 210/5 /  (kha) nibhA 4427, cU pR.
416 : kailAsaparvato meruH , tattha jANi devabhavaNANi taNNivAsiNo je devA ete
imaM maccalogaM Agacchati, jakkharUveNa shvaanruupennetyrthH| 5. mavR pa. 126 /
6. mavR pa. 125 /

Page #161 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  **147**  **Renounced Traditions and
Sectarianism**  The author mentions several renounced traditions prevalent at
the time. In the context of begging, five types of Śramaṇa and five types of
Vanīpaka are mentioned. The five types of Śramaṇa are: 1. Nirgrantha, 2. Śākya -
Buddhist monks wearing red robes, 3. Tapas, 4. Gairuk - wandering ascetics
wearing saffron robes, 5. Ājīvika - ascetics of the Gosālaka tradition.  Those
who earned their livelihood through begging were called Vanīpaka. Five types of
Vanīpaka are described: Śramaṇa, Brāhmaṇa, Kṛpaṇa, Atithi, and Śvāna. The author
describes the characteristics of all these types under the category of Vanīpaka
faults. Ascetics of one sect would criticize the ascetics of another sect out of
envy. Due to sectarian bias, excellent literary works were burnt. For example,
the play *Raṣṭrapāla* written by Āṣāḍhabhūti was burnt because its performance
led to the renunciation of 500 Kshatriyas.  **Use of Knowledge and Mantras**  In
the society of the time, there was a tradition of mastering specific knowledge
and mantras and using them. Mahāvīra prohibited the use of knowledge, mantras,
and other means for ascetics, but due to hypocrisy, some ascetics used them to
obtain food. Ācārya Pādalipta used mantras to cure the headache of King Muruṇḍa
to gain the favor of the Sangha. By using knowledge, ascetics could obtain
clothes, ghee, jaggery, etc., in sufficient quantities from even a miserly
person. Later, when the knowledge was withdrawn, the person would realize that
his clothes, etc., had been stolen. Upon lamenting, his family members would
explain that he had donated those items himself.  Some Tapas, through yogic
powers, could cross rivers by walking on water. By using special knowledge,
Ācārya Samita requested the Krishna River to be crossed. The two banks of the
river then merged, and its width became as narrow as the length of his feet.
After crossing, the river returned to its original width.  Sometimes, ascetics
would change their appearance through supernatural powers and beg from the same
house repeatedly. Āṣāḍhabhūti Muni, to obtain sweets from a jester, assumed the
form of a deaf, hunchbacked person, and begged three times.  1. Mavṛ P. 108. 2.
Pini 227. 3. Pini 227/1,2. 4. Pini 231/1, 2, Mavṛ P. 144. 5. Pini 231/4, Mavṛ P.
144.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 147 saMnyasta paramparA evaM sAmpradAyikatA
niyuktikAra ne tatkAlIna aneka saMnyasta paramparAoM kA ullekha kiyA hai|
bhikSAcaryA ke prasaMga meM pAMca prakAra ke zramaNa evaM pAMca vanIpakoM kA
ullekha hai| zramaNoM ke pAMca prakAra haiM-1. nirgrantha 2. zAkya
-raktapaTadhArI bauddha saMnyAsI 3. tApasa 4. gairuka-gerue vastra dhAraNa
karane vAle parivrAjaka 5. AjIvakagozAlaka paramparA ke saadhu| yAcanA ke dvArA
AjIvikA calAne vAle vanIpaka kahalAte the, unake pAMca bheda varNita
haiMzramaNa, brAhmaNa, kRpaNa, atithi aura shvaan| vanIpaka doSa ke antargata
niyuktikAra ne ina sabakI vizeSatAoM kA ullekha kiyA hai| eka sampadAya ke
saMnyAsI mAtsarya ke kAraNa dUsare sampradAya ke sAdhu kI niMdA karate the|
sAmpradAyika abhiniveza ke kAraNa kisI utkRSTa sAhityika racanA ko jalA diyA
jAtA thA, jaiseASAr3habhUti dvArA racita rASTrapAla nAmaka nATaka ko isalie jalA
diyA gayA ki usakA maMcana hone se 500 kSatriya pravrajita ho gae the| vidyA
aura maMtra kA prayoga niyuktikAlIna samAja meM viziSTa vidyA evaM maMtra ko
siddha karake usake prayoga kI paramparA calatI thii| mahAvIra ne sAdhu ke lie
vidyA, maMtra, nimitta Adi kA prayoga niSiddha kiyA thA lekina chadmasthatA vaza
kahIM-kahIM sAdhu AhAra-prApti ke lie inakA prayoga kara lete the| AcArya
pAdalipta ne saMgha-prabhAvanA ke lie maMtraprayoga se muruMDa rAjA kI zIrSa-
vedanA ko dUra kiyaa| vidyA kA prayoga karake sAdhu kaMjUsa vyakti se bhI
vastra, ghI, gur3a Adi padArtha paryApta mAtrA meM le lete the, phira vidyA
pratisaMhRta hone para usa vyakti ko jJAta hotA thA ki mere vastra Adi kisane
curAe? vilApa karane para usake pArivArika loga use samajhAte ki tumane svayaM
una vastuoM kA dAna kiyA hai| kucha tApasa yogasiddhi karake pAda-lepa ke dvArA
paidala calakara nadI pAra kara lete the| vidyA vizeSa ke prayoga se AcArya
samita ne kRSNA nadI ko pAra karane kA nivedana kiyA to nadI ke donoM kinAre
Apasa meM mila ge| usakI caur3AI unake pairoM se lAMghane jitanI ho gii| pAra
karane para nadI punaH caur3I ho gii| kabhI-kabhI sAdhu vaikriya labdhi se rUpa-
parivartana karake eka hI ghara se bAra-bAra bhikSA grahaNa kara lete the|
ASAr3habhUti muni ne naTa ke yahAM se modaka-prApti ke lie kAne, kubja Adi kA
rUpa banAkara tIna 1. mavR pa. 108 /  2.pini 227 /  3. pini 227/1,2 /  4. pini
231/1, 2, mavR pa. 144 /  5.pini 231/4, mavR pa. 144 /

Page #162 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 148: Pinḍaniyukti  **The text describes various aspects of life in
ancient India, drawing upon the Jain text Pinḍaniyukti and other sources like
the Manusmṛti and Kauṭilya's Arthaśāstra.**  **Magic and Occult Practices:**  *
The text mentions the use of **Mūlakarma** (root-karma) by ascetics to perform
**Garbha-Pariśāṭana** (abortion), **Garbhādhāna** (impregnation), and
**Vaśīkaraṇa** (subjugation). * **Añjana** (collyrium) was used to achieve
invisibility. * The text mentions two minor kings who ate with Chandragupta
Maurya while remaining invisible. * **Pinḍaniyukti** itself describes various
occult practices, including the creation of animals like horses through
**Sammūrchchima** (a type of magic) without sexual union.  **Astrology and
Omens:**  * **Jyotiṣa** (astrology) was highly developed, allowing for the
prediction of the color of a foal in the womb. * **Nimaitta** (omens) were used
to interpret dreams and other signs. * **Śakuna** (omens) were used to determine
auspicious and inauspicious events. The sound of a conch shell was considered
auspicious and a great omen.  **Economic Life:**  * **Pinḍaniyukti** provides
insights into the economic system of the time. * People earned their livelihood
through **karma** (work) and **śilpa** (crafts). * **Agriculture** and **animal
husbandry** were prominent occupations. * Wealthy merchants employed
**karmakara** (workers) to tend to their cows and buffaloes. These workers
received wages and were allowed to take all the milk on the eighth day. *
**Fishing** was another occupation. Fishermen used hooks with bait and tied the
fish with thread to prevent them from escaping. * **Halika** (ploughmen) were
employed for agricultural work. They were paid in food or received food
collectively or individually. * **Interest** was a common practice, known as
**vṛddhi**. The text mentions a 5% interest rate on 100 rupees. * **Debt** could
lead to **slavery**.  **References:**  * **Pinḍaniyukti** (Pinḍaniyukti Bhaṣya)
* **Manusmṛti** (Manusmriti) * **Kauṭilya's Arthaśāstra** (Kauṭilya's
Arthaśāstra)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 148 piMDaniyukti bAra modaka prApta kie| chadmasthatA vaza sAdhu ke dvArA bhI
mUlakarma ke prayoga dvArA garbha-parizATana, garbhAdhAna tathA vazIkaraNa Adi
ke prayoga kie jAte the| aJjana Adi prayoga se adRzya hone kI vidyA pracalita
thii| do kSullaka rAjA candragupta maurya ke sAtha adRzya hokara bhojana karate
the| piNDaniyukti bhASya meM vividha gupta vidyAoM se yukta yoni prAbhRta kA
ullekha milatA hai| isa graMtha ke dvArA saMyoga binA bhI sammUrcchima ghor3e
Adi kI utpatti saMbhava thii| jyotiSa vidyA prakarSa para thI, isake dvArA
naimittika batA dete the ki ghor3I ke peTa meM pAMca varNa vAlA (paMcapuMDra)
ghor3I kA baccA hai| nimitta ke mAdhyama se guhya pradeza ke tila tathA svapna
Adi ke bAre meM bhI batAyA jAtA thaa| zubha-azubha zakuna viSayaka jJAna bhI
TIkAkAra ko thaa| prasthAna ke samaya zaMkha kI dhvani ko maMgala phala dene
vAlI tathA mahAzakuna vAlI batAI gaI hai| artha-vyavasthA piMDaniyukti ko
par3hane se usa samaya kI artha-vyavasthA kA bhI yatkiMcit jJAna hotA hai|
karma, zilpa Adi ke dvArA AjIvikA calatI thii| kRSi evaM pazupAlana ke vyavasAya
kA bhI sphuTa rUpa se varNana milatA hai| dhanADhya seTha apane ghara ke lie
gAya-bhaiMsa kI rakhavAlI meM karmakara niyukta karate the, jo vaitanika hone
para bhI AThaveM dina sArA dUdha apane ghara lekara jAte the| _matsya
pakar3akara usakA vyavasAya kiyA jAtA thaa| macchImAra kAMTe meM mAMsa lagAkara
machalI ko pakar3ate the| idhara-udhara na ho jAe isalie vaha unheM dhAge meM
pirotA thaa| kauTumbika khetI ke kArya hetu hAlikoM ko niyukta karatA thaa|
kevala bhojana ke AdhAra para bhI hAlika khetI meM majadUrI karate the| hAlikoM
ke lie bhojana sAmUhika rUpa se tathA vyaktigata rUpa se alagaalaga bhI bhejA
jAtA thaa| byAja kA dhaMdhA prakarSa para thA, ise vRddhi kahA jAtA thaa|
piNDaniyukti meM 100 ru. para 5 ru. byAja kA ullekha milatA hai| TIkAkAra
malayagiri ne prativarSa kA ullekha kiyA hai, jabaki yaha byAja mAsika honA
cAhie kyoMki kauTilIya arthazAstra meM 100 paNa para 5 paNa mAsika byAja kA
ullekha hai| RNa na cukAne para vyakti ko dAsa banA diyA jAtA thaa| manusmRti
meM bhI ullekha hai ki vyakti apane RNa ko 1. pini 219/10, mavR pa. 137 /  2.
pibhA 35-37, mavR pa. 143 /  3. mavR pa. 128 /  4. mavRpa.
20;zaGkhazabdamAkarNyamAnaM prazastaMmahAzakunamAmananti shaakunikaaH| 5. mavR
pa. 111 /  6. mavR pa. 170, 171 /  7. pini 182, mavR pa. 114  /  8. mavR pa. 33
; RNasya paMcakazatAdivarddhanarUpeNa karANAM prtivrsse.....| 9. kauTi.
3/68/11/1 /

Page #163 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation  **Debt:** A person forcefully took everything
from another. Bahin Sammati took two palas of oil from her ascetic brother at
double the interest. On the third day, the oil became one karsa. Due to the
unlimited debt, she had to accept servitude.  **Medicine:** Indian Ayurvedic
science is extremely rich. It mentions three types of treatments: physical,
mental, and emotional. The author of the Pinḍaniryukti has described many
important facts about Ayurveda and medicine in passing. Through a medical
method, a person cured a tiger's blindness.  Milk is considered healthy at the
end of a meal. Staying up late at night causes indigestion. To avoid indigestion
during illness, clothes should be washed frequently. When bitten by a snake,
both mantras and medicine were used. Many facts related to Ayurveda and health
are compiled in Appendix 4.  **Grains and Food:** Certain regions were famous
for their grains. For example, Gobar Gram in Magadha was famous for its abundant
production of Shali. Dr. Kamalchandra Jain has speculated that the village might
have been named Gobar due to the easy availability of cow dung. Cow dung manure
would have been readily available there, which would have been used as
fertilizer.  Kodrava and Rālaka were considered light grains, so poor people
often consumed them, while wealthy people used Shali grain. The author of the
Pinḍaniryukti has mentioned many grains, pulses, spices, food items, cooking
utensils, and cooking methods in passing. For this, see Appendix 16, Special
Name Order, page 306.  To protect grains, they were stored in granaries,
plastered with cow dung and sealed with lac, etc., so that they would not
deteriorate for a long time. The Brihatkalpa Bhashya also provides a scientific
method for storing grains.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa balapUrvaka kisI bhI rIti se pUrA le letA
thaa| bahina sammati ne apane sAdhu bhAI ke lie do pala taila dugune byAja se
liyaa| tIsare dina vaha taila eka karSa ho gyaa| RNa asImita hone se use dAsatva
svIkAra karanA pdd'aa| R cikitsA bhAratIya Ayurveda vijJAna atyanta samRddha hai
/  usameM zArIrika, mAnasika aura bhAvanAtmaka - tInoM prakAra kI cikitsAoM kA
ullekha milatA hai| niryuktikAra ne prasaMgavaza Ayurveda evaM cikitsA ke aneka
mahattvapUrNa tathyoM kA nirUpaNa kiyA hai| cikitsA paddhati ke dvArA eka vyakti
ne vyAghra ke aMdhepana ko miTA diyaa| bhojana ke aMta meM dUdha
svAsthyavardhaka mAnA jAtA hai| rAtri meM adhika jagane se ajIrNa roga hotA hai
/ ' bImArI meM ajIrNa na ho isalie vastra bAra-bAra dhone caahie| sAMpa kATane
para maMtra aura auSadhi donoM kA prayoga hotA thaa| Ayurveda aura Arogya se
sambandhita aneka tathya pariziSTa saMkhyA 4 meM saMkalita haiN| dhAnya evaM
khAdya dezavizeSa ke dhAnya prasiddha hote the| jaise magadha ke gobara grAma
meM zAli pracura rUpa meM utpanna hone ke kAraNa vaha prasiddha thaa| DaoN.
kamalacandra jaina ne eka kalpanA kI hai ki saMbhavata: gobara kI sulabhatA ke
kAraNa usa gAMva kA nAma gobara par3a gayA hogaa| vahAM gobara kI khAda sulabha
hotI hogI, jisakA upayoga urvaraka ke lie hotA rahA hogaa| kodrava aura rAlaka
kI halke stara ke dhAnyoM meM ginatI hotI thI ataH nirdhana loga prAyaH inhIM
dhAnyoM kA upabhoga karate the, dhanADhya loga zAli dhAnya kA prayoga karate
the| niryuktikAra ne prasaMgavaza aneka dhAnya, dAla, masAle, khAdya-padArtha,
pAkabhAjana evaM pAka-kriyA ke sAdhanoM kA ullekha kiyA hai| isake lie dekheM
pariziSTa 16 vizeSanAmAnukrama pR. 306  /  dhAnya Adi kI surakSA ke lie unheM
koThe meM bharakara gobara se lIpakara lAkha Adi se mudrita kara diyA jAtA thA,
jisase ve lambe samaya taka vikRta nahIM hote the  / " bRhatkalpa bhASya meM bhI
dhAnya ke bhaNDArana kI vaijJAnika vidhi upalabdha hotI hai  /  12 1. manu 8/50
/  2. pini 144 / 2  /  3. mavR pa. 133  /  4. mavR pa. 111 1 5. mavR pa. 33  /
6. pini 21, mavR pa. 12  /  149 7. mavR pa. 108  /  8. mavR pa. 72, 73  /  9.
prAcIna jaina sAhitya meM Arthika jIvana, pR. 44, 45  /  10. mavR pa. 100  /
11. pini 162, mavR pa. 105  /  12. bRbhA 3310-12 /

Page #164 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
150 Pindaniyukti Vaivaahika Sambandha Marriages used to take place at a young
age. If a daughter or son grew up, their parents were encouraged that your son
has become young, why don't you get him married? Lest he elopes with a
promiscuous woman without getting married. Similarly, it was said for the
daughter that if the marriage is not solemnized in time, the daughter may
disgrace your clan. The daughter's marriage should take place before the onset
of puberty.  Just as in the present times, in the then society also, the
marriage of a daughter was performed by taking a daughter, like the marriage of
Devadatta's sister with Dhanadatta and the marriage of Dhanadatta's sister with
Devadatta. Although in ancient times, widow remarriage was not accepted, the
woman used to observe the vow of chastity throughout her life, but as an
exception, the widow of the brother-in-law used to marry the brother-in-law
after the death of the brother-in-law.  If there was domestic strife with the
first wife, the person used to think of remarrying. Out of the fear of co-wife,
the wife would make that maiden different-gendered through the practice of
Moolkarma, so that the husband could not remarry. Chandramukha, the wife of the
merchant Dhanadatta, made the daughter of the seth different-gendered by feeding
her medicines etc. When the fact of being different-gendered came to light, the
husband did not marry her. Due to the jealousy of the co-wife, the co-wife used
to get the fetus of the second queen aborted during pregnancy, so that her son
could not become the crown prince.  In the third month of pregnancy, the
pregnant woman experiences the most intense desire, which is called Dohaad.
Dohaad and its fulfillment have an important place during the gestational
period. If the Dohaad is not fulfilled, it affects both the pregnant woman and
the fetus. According to Choornikara Agastyasinh, without the fulfillment of
Dohaad, abortion or even death can occur. The Dohaad was fulfilled in one way or
the other. King Jitashatru ordered the royal servants to bring golden-backed
deer for the fulfillment of the Dohaad of Queen Sudarshana, as the queen had
developed a craving to consume the meat of golden-backed deer.  After the birth
of the child, the affluent people got the child nurtured and cared for by five
types of wet nurses. The one who fed the milk was called Ankadhatri. The one who
bathed the child was called Majjanadhātri, the one who adorned and decorated the
child was called Mandanadhātri, the one who played with the child was called
Kridāpanadhātri, and the one who held the child in her lap was called
Ādānadhātri.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 150 piMDaniyukti vaivAhika sambandha vivAha alpAyu meM hote the| yadi koI kanyA
yA putra bar3A ho jAtA to usake mAtA-pitA ko prerita kiyA jAtA ki tumhArA putra
yuvA ho gayA, isakA vivAha kyoM nahIM karate ho? zAdI kie binA kahIM yaha
svairiNI strI ke sAtha bhAga na jaae| isI prakAra putrI ke lie kahA jAtA ki
samaya para vivAha na hone se putrI tumhAre kula ko kalaMkita na kara de|
RtudharmA hone se pUrva kanyA kI zAdI ho jAnI caahie| _ Ajakala kI bhAMti
tatkAlIna samAja meM bhI putrI lekara putrI kA vivAha kiyA jAtA thA, jaise
devadatta kI bahina kI zAdI dhanadatta se tathA dhanadatta kI bahina kA vivAha
devadatta se huaa| yadyapi prAcInakAla meM vidhavA vivAha mAnya nahIM thA, strI
AjIvana pAtivratya dharma kA pAlana karatI thI lekina apavAda svarUpa devara kI
patnI kI mauta hone para bhAI kI vidhavA patnI devara se vivAha kara letI thii|
prathama patnI se gRha-kalaha hone para vyakti dUsarI zAdI karane kI bAta socatA
thaa| sauta ke bhaya se patnI usa kanyA ko mUlakarma ke prayoga se bhinnayonikA
banA detI thI, jisase pati dUsarI zAdI na kara ske| dhanadatta sArthavAha kI
patnI candramukhA ne seTha kI putrI ko auSadha Adi khilAkara bhinnayonikA banA
diyaa| bhinnayonikA kI bAta jJAta hone para pati ne usake sAtha vivAha nahIM
kiyaa| sautiyA DAha ke kAraNa sauta dUsarI rAnI ke putra ko garbhAvasthA meM hI
usakA parizATana karavA detI thI, jisase usakA putra yuvarAja na bana paae|
garbha ke tIsare mahIne meM garbhavatI strI ke tIvratama icchA utpanna hotI hai,
jise dohada kahA jAtA hai| garbhakAla meM dohada evaM usakI saMpUrti kA
mahattvapUrNa sthAna hotA hai| dohada kI pUrti na hone para garbhavatI evaM
garbhastha zizu-donoM para prabhAva par3atA hai| cUrNikAra agastyasiMha ke
anusAra dohada-pUrti ke binA garbhapAta athavA maraNa bhI ho sakatA hai| dohada
kI pUrti yena kena prakAreNa kI jAtI thii| jitazatru rAjA ne sudarzanA rAnI kI
dohadapUrti hetu rAjapuruSoM ko svarNapRSTha vAle mRga lAne kA Adeza diyA kyoMki
rAnI ke mana meM sunaharI pITha vAle mRgoM kA mAMsa bhakSaNa karane kA dohada
utpanna ho gayA thaa| saMtAna utpanna hone ke bAda dhanADhya loga pAMca prakAra
kI dhAya mAtAoM dvArA bAlaka kA pAlana poSaNa karavAte the| dUdha pilAne vAlI
aMkadhAtrI kahalAtI thii| snAna karAne vAlI majjanadhAtrI, bAlaka ko vibhUSita
aura alaMkRta karane vAlI maNDanadhAtrI, krIr3A karAne vAlI krIDApana dhAtrI
tathA bacce ko goda meM 1. pini 231/8, 9 /  2. mavR pa. 100 /  3. mavR pa. 64 /
4. mavR pa. 144, 145  /  5. pini 231/10,11 /  6. dazaacU pR. 111;
DohalassAvigame maraNaM gabbhapataNaM vA hojjaa| 7. pini 53/1-54, mavR pa. 30 /
8. pini 197, AcUlA 15/14  /

Page #165 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pindaniyukti: A Observation  The one who held the accounts was called the
Ankadhatri. The divine legends of the Buddhist tradition mention four types of
wet nurses.  Even in a male-dominated society, some men were so subservient to
women that they obeyed their every command like slaves. Pindaniyukti mentions
six types of inferior men who were dominated by women. The Svetangali, who
cleaned the stove and lit it at his wife's behest, the Bakodayaka, who fetched
water from the lake every morning, the Kinkara, who worked according to his
wife's instructions, the Snayaka, who bathed as per his wife's orders, the
Grdhriveidi, who like a vulture, went to his wife with the food vessel, and the
Hadjna, who cleaned the child's excreta and urine, were all such men.  Even
then, domestic violence existed. Men tortured their wives if work was done
against their liking, which the women bore silently. When the Salyodana was
changed, both the husbands tortured their wives, who trembled like the branch of
a tree. When Marjara ate meat, his wife Rukmini was tortured by her husband
Ugrateja out of fear, and when she cooked the vomited meat of a dog, her husband
punished her. Somewhere, the wives also got angry at their husbands. When the
master took away the milk from the ascetic, the cowherd Vatsaraja, on reaching
home with less milk, was scolded by his wife.  There was also conflict between
husband and wife over giving alms. The wife wanted to give to Brahmins, while
the husband wanted to give to the ascetics.  The author has also mentioned
various worldly and Vedic traditions in the context. This does not mean that the
author believed in that tradition, but to make the text important and to express
his erudition, he has mentioned many worldly beliefs and superstitions prevalent
in other religions. Some of these traditions are related to religion and some to
society. Expressing the Vedic belief, the author said that the girl child bleeds
as many times as her mother goes to hell before her marriage.  Procreation of a
son was considered rare. Even in Uttaradhyayana, the priest Bhrigu considered
the birth of a son from a worldly point of view.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 151 rakhane vAlI aMkadhAtrI kahalAtI thii|
bauddha paramparA ke divyAvadAna grantha meM cAra prakAra kI dhAiyoM kA varNana
milatA hai| puruSa pradhAna samAja hone para bhI kucha puruSa mahilAoM ke itane
adhIna hote the ki dAsa kI bhAMti unake hara Adeza kA pAlana karate the|
piNDaniyukti meM chaH prakAra ke strIpradhAna adhama puruSoM kA ullekha milatA
hai| patnI ke kahane para pratidina cUlhA sApha karake use jalAne vAlA
zvetAGgali, pratidina prAtaH sarovara se pAnI lAne vAlA bakoDDAyaka, hara dina
patnI se pUchakara kArya karane vAlA kiMkara, patnI ke Adeza ke anusAra snAna
karane vAlA snAyaka, AhAra ke samaya gRdhra kI bhAMti sthAlI lekara patnI ke
pAsa jAne vAlA gRdhraivariDI tathA bAlaka ke mala-mUtra Adi kI saphAI karane
vAlA hadajJa kahalAtA thaa| Aja kI bhAMti usa samaya bhI gharelU hiMsA hotI
thii| ruci ke viparIta kArya hone para puruSa patniyoM ko pratAr3ita karate the,
jise striyAM zAMti se sahana karatI thiiN| zAlyodana parivartana karane para
donoM patiyoM ne apanI patniyoM ko pratAr3ita kiyaa| unakI patniyAM vRkSa kI
zAkhA kI bhAMti kAMpane lgiiN| mArjAra dvArA mAMsa khAne para apane pati
ugrateja ke bhaya se kutte dvArA vAnta mAMsa pakAne para patnI rukmiNI ko usake
pati ne pratAr3ita kiyaa| kahIM-kahIM patniyAM bhI pati para gussA karatI thiiN|
svAmI dvArA chInakara sAdhu ko dUdha dene para jaba vatsarAja nAmaka gvAlA kucha
nyUna dUdha lekara apane ghara pahuMcA to usakI patnI ne bahuta gussA kiyaa|
bhikSA dene ke lie bhI pati-patnI meM kalaha ho jAtA thaa| patnI brAhmaNoM ko
dene kI icchA rakhatI tathA pati zramaNoM ko| sAmAjika paramparAeM evaM
mAnyatAeM niyuktikAra ne prasaMgavaza aneka laukika evaM vaidika paramparAoM kA
ullekha bhI kiyA hai| isakA tAtparya yaha nahIM hai ki niyuktikAra ko usa
paramparA ke prati vizvAsa thA lekina graMtha ko mahattvapUrNa banAne evaM apane
bAhuzrutya ko prakaTa karane ke lie unhoMne anya dharmoM meM pracalita aneka
laukika mAnyatAoM evaM aMdhavazvAsoM kA ullekha kiyA hai| inameM kucha
paramparAeM dharma se sambandhita haiM tathA kucha samAja se sambandhita  /
niyuktikAra ne vaidika mAnyatA ko prakaTa karate hue kahA hai ki RtumatI kanyA
ke rakta ke jitane bindu girate haiM, utanI hI bAra usakI mAM naraka meM jAtI
hai| isake pIche vaidika mAnyatA yaha hai ki RtumatI hone ke pUrva kanyA kA
vivAha ho jAnA cAhie anyathA usakA asara mAM para par3atA hai| putra-prApti ko
durlabha mAnA jAtA thaa| uttarAdhyayana meM bhI bhRgu purohita laukika dRSTi se
putrotpatti 1. mavR pa. 135, 136 /  2. mavR pa. 101 /  3. mavR pa. 136 /  4.
pini 231/8 /  5.pini 198/2 /

Page #166 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  The Importance of Pindaniryukti  This text discusses the importance of
Pindaniryukti (a Jain ritual). It explains that if a couple was unable to have
children, a ritual called Niyoga was performed. This involved a man called a
Lomsha Purusha, who would father a child with the woman. The Manusmriti (a Hindu
legal text) also mentions Niyoga, but specifies that only a son should be born
through this practice. The text also mentions that a man could pay someone to
have their horse breed with another horse.  After a person's death, a statue of
them was made and offerings were given. On the anniversary of a parent's death,
a feast was held in their memory, either for people with the same name or for
everyone.  The text also mentions the tradition of giving charity. People
believed that if they didn't give charity, they wouldn't have a good afterlife.
Wealthy people would give five types of alms to ascetics and Brahmins,
especially after a famine. Women would keep track of the alms they gave by
drawing lines on their walls.  The text states that eating beef was considered a
great sin. A feast was held for the deceased, which included sweets like Ghevar.
This feast was also called Karaduyabhakta. Special foods like laddoos were made
for the Udyapan (a Jain ceremony). On special festivals, sevai (a type of
noodle) was eaten with ghee and jaggery.  ## Transportation  The text also
mentions transportation methods. The author describes the ancient transportation
routes and methods, including water and land routes. Water routes were traversed
by boats, while land routes were covered by carts, donkey carts, bullock carts,
and on foot. People who were unable to walk were carried in a Kapotee (a type of
palanquin). The text also mentions obstacles faced on water routes, such as deep
water.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniryukti 152 kA mahattva pratipAdita karatA hai| kisI bhI upAya se putra
paidA na hone para devatA ke dvArA aupayAcitaka rUpa lomaza puruSa dvArA niyoga
prayoga se putra yA putrI ko utpanna kiyA jAtA thA  /  manusmRti ke anusAra bhI
niyoga-vidhi se eka putra kI hI utpatti karanI cAhie, dUsare kI nhiiN| vahAM
lomaza puruSa ke sthAna para ghI cupar3e vyakti kA ullekha hai  /  apanI ghor3I
se ghor3e ko utpanna karane ke lie rupae dekara bhI dUsare ke ghor3e se saMyoga
karavAte the  /  vyakti ke marane para usakI pratimA banavAkara naivedya taiyAra
karavAkara use baMTavAyA jAtA thA tathA pitA yA mAtA ke mRtyu ke dina unakI
smRti meM usa nAma ke logoM ke lie yA sabhI ke lie apanI-apanI kSamatA ke
anusAra bhoja kA Ayojana hotA thaa| samAja meM dAna dene kI paramparA thii| Ama
logoM meM yaha dhAraNA pracalita thI ki yadi yahAM dAna nahIM deMge to paraloka
nahIM sudharegA ataH durbhikSa ke pazcAt dhanADhya loga zramaNa, brAhmaNa Adi ke
lie paMcavidha bhikSA dete the| mahilAeM smRti ke lie ghara kI dIvAra para
lakIreM khIMcakara rakhatI thIM ki kitanI prakAra kI bhikSAeM dI jA cukI haiN|"
gomAMsa kA prayoga bahuta bar3e pApa kA hetu mAnA jAtA thaa| mRtaka bhoja kA
Ayojana hotA thA, jisameM ghevara Adi miSThAnna banate the  /  mRtakabhoja ko
karaDuyabhakta bhI kahA jAtA thaa|' udyApana meM laDDU Adi viziSTa khAdya-
padArtha banAe jAte the| viziSTa parva para sevaI ko ghI aura gur3a ke sAtha
khAyA jAtA thA  / ' yAtAyAta niyuktikAra evaM TIkAkAra ne prasaMgavaza yAtAyAta
ke patha evaM usake sAdhanoM kA bhI varNana kiyA hai  /  sUtrakRtAMga ke mArga
adhyayana kI niryukti meM nikSepa ke mAdhyama se niryuktikAra ne prAcIna
yAtAyAta - patha kA vistRta vivecana kiyA hai| yAtAyAta ke mukhyataH do patha
pracalita the- jala evaM sthala  /  jalamArga ko jaMghA, dRti, bAhu aura naukA
ke dvArA tathA sthala mArga ko zakaTa, gadhAgAr3I, bailagAr3I tathA paidala pAra
kiyA jAtA thA  /  akSama vyakti ko kApotI - kAMvar3a ke dvArA bhI le jAyA jAtA
thaa| jalamArga meM nimna bAdhAeM upasthita hotI thIM . gahare pAnI meM
nimajjana  /  1. mavR pa. 120, kenacinnijabhAryAyAH kathamapi putrAsambhave
devatAyA aupayAcitakena RtukAle svasaMprayogeNa ca sutaH putrikA votpAdyate  /
2. manu 9/60  /  3. pini 194 / 1, mavR pa. 120  /  4. mavR pa. 54  /  5. pini
95/2, mavR pa. 78  /  6. mavR pa. 47  /  7. pini 218/1, mavR pa. 134  /  8. mavR
pa. 134  /  9. sUni 108, TI pR. 131  /  10. pini 153  /

Page #167 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  **153.**  * Being caught by crocodiles,
tortoises, etc. * Getting stuck in mud, etc.  _Due to dusty, unpaved roads,
there was fear of thorns, snakes, thieves, and wild animals even on land routes.
If a monk got separated from the caravan, a bull's horn was blown to find him.
The community of monks also traveled from one place to another with the caravan.
Sometimes, thieves would be with the caravan, who would forcibly take food from
the caravan members and give it to the monks._  **Offenses and Punishments**
The nature of offenses and punishments has changed in every era. The punishment
system, which began with the policies of "Hākar," "Mākar," and "Dhikkār,"
reached the point of capital punishment. In the society of the time of the
Pinḍaniyukti, capital punishment was given for violating the king's orders.
Those who went to the "Sūryodaya Udyān" (Sunrise Garden) were punished with
death for violating the order, while those who went to the "Chandrodaya Udyān"
(Moonlight Garden) and saw the inner palace were not punished because they did
not violate the king's order.  The one who supports, cooperates, praises, and
approves of the sinner is more guilty than the sinner himself. The king would
punish those who praised the criminal with capital punishment because it
encouraged and supported the crime. The king would also punish those who lived
with thieves, etc. The king of Śrīnilaya Nagar, Guṇacandra, gave a humiliating
death penalty to the person who had relations with the queens of the inner
palace and, through spies, found out who was praising him in the city. The king
also severely punished those who praised him.  ... Here, a picture of the
contemporary cultural situation related to some topics has been presented
briefly. More important material on this subject is scattered in this text and
its commentary literature, which is a subject of independent research by
scholars.  **Process of Text Editing**  The task of text editing in research
work is very complex, tedious, and laborious, but important. The meaning of text
determination is not just to find one text among the different texts of ancient
manuscripts.  1. Pinḍaniyukti 154. 4. Pinḍaniyukti 91/1-4, Mahavṛtta p. 76. 2.
Mahavṛtta p. 20, 21, Śṛṅgasyā Mahīṣyādisatkasyā, tad dhi mārge 5. Mahavṛtta p.
48, 49. Gacchātparibhraṣṭānām sādhūnām mīlanāya vādyate. 6. Pinḍaniyukti 69/3,
Mahavṛtta p. 49. 3. Pinḍaniyukti 177/1, 2, Mahavṛtta p. 112, 113.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 153. * magaramaccha, kacchapa Adi ke dvArA
pakar3A jaanaa| * kIcar3a meM paira dhaMsanA aadi| _dhUliyukta kacce mArga hone
se sthalamArga meM bhI kAMTe, sarpa, cora tathA jaMgalI pazuoM kA bhaya rahatA
thaa| sArtha meM yadi koI sAdhu bichur3a jAtA to mahiSa Adi kA sIMga bajAkara
usakA milApa kiyA jAtA thaa| sAdhu samudAya bhI sArtha ke sAtha eka sthAna se
dUsare sthAna kI dUrI taya karate the| kabhI-kabhI sArtha ke sAtha cora bhI hote
the, jo sArthika se balAt AhAra chInakara sAdhu ko de dete the| aparAdha evaM
daMDa hara yuga meM aparAdha aura daMDa kA svarUpa badalatA rahatA hai| hAkAra,
mAkAra aura dhikkAra nIti se prArambha hone vAlI daMDa-vyavasthA prANadaMDa taka
pahuMca gii| niyuktikAlIna samAja meM rAjAjJA bhaMga hone para prANadaMDa taka
kA daMDa diyA jAtA thaa| sUryodaya udyAna meM jAne vAle AjJAbhaMga ke kAraNa
prANadaMDa ke bhAgI hue, jabaki caMdrodaya udyAna meM jAne vAle tRNahAraka
aMta:pura ko dekhakara bhI daMDa mukta ho gae kyoMki unhoMne rAjA kI AjJA kA
bhaMga nahIM kiyA thaa| pApa karane vAle se bhI usakA samarthana, sahayoga,
prazaMsA aura anumodana karane vAlA adhika doSI hotA hai| aparAdhI kI prazaMsA
karane vAle ko bhI rAjA prANadaMDa taka kI sajA de dete the kyoMki isase
aparAdha ko sahayoga aura protsAhana milatA hai| cora Adi ke sAtha rahane vAloM
ko bhI rAjA daMDita karatA thaa| zrInilaya nagara ke rAjA guNacandra ne
aMta:karaNa kI rAniyoM ke sAtha sambandha sthApita karane vAle vyakti ko caurAhe
para tiraskAra pUrNa prANadaMDa diyA tathA guptacaroM ke mAdhyama se yaha jJAta
kiyA ki nagara meM kauna usakI prazaMsA kara rahA hai| rAjA ne prazaMsA karane
vAle ko bhI kar3A daMDa diyaa| .. yahAM saMkSipta meM kucha viSayoM se
sambandhita tatkAlIna sAMskRtika sthiti kA citraNa prastuta kiyA hai| isa viSaya
meM aura bhI mahattvapUrNa sAmagrI isa graMtha evaM isake vyAkhyA-sAhitya meM
vikIrNa rUpa se bikharI par3I hai, jo svataMtra rUpa se vidvAnoM dvArA zodha kA
viSaya hai| pATha-saMpAdana kI prakriyA zodha kAryoM meM pATha-saMpAdana kA
kArya atyanta jaTila, nIrasa aura zramasAdhya hote hue bhI mahattvapUrNa hai|
pATha-nirdhAraNa kA artha mAtra itanA hI nahIM ki prAcIna pratiyoM ke vibhinna
pAThoM meM eka pATha 1.pini 154 /  4. pini 91/1-4, mavR pa.76  /  2. mavR pa.
20, 21, zRGgasya mahiSyAdisatkasya, taddhi mArge 5. mavR pa. 48, 49 /  /
gacchAtparibhraSTAnAM sAdhUnAM mIlanAya vaadyte| 6. pini 69/3, mavR pa. 49  /
3. pini 177/1, 2, mavR pa. 112, 113  /

Page #168 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 154 ## Pinḍaniryukti  The text variations of other texts should be given
considering the main text as the primary source. Textual determination involves
careful consideration from multiple perspectives.  Modern scholars have shed
significant light on the subject of textual research. Western scholars divide
this work into four parts: 1. Material Collection 2. Text Selection 3. Text
Correction 4. Higher Criticism. All four aspects have been considered in the
editing of this text. Three bases have been before us for textual correction: 1.
Manuscript copies of Pinḍaniryukti. 2. Commentary literature of Pinḍaniryukti
(Malayagiriya Tika, Avacuri etc.). 3. Numerous verses of Pinḍaniryukti found in
texts like Jitakalphabhashya and Nisithabhashya.  Palm leaf copies of
Pinḍaniryukti are rare, hence only copies written on paper in the 15th and 16th
centuries have been used in text editing. In textual correction and selection,
we have given prominence to the text of the copies, but no single copy has been
made the basis of text selection, nor has the decision been made based on
majority. The text that seemed appropriate based on the justification of
semantic interpretation, the explanation of the commentary, and the context, has
been included in the original text. In some places, the text of the commentary
seemed appropriate based on the explanation, so it has also been included in the
original, and the text of the copies has been given in the text variations.  In
verse determination, we have taken utmost care that any verse that seemed
incompatible with the language style of the Pinḍaniryukti or irrelevant to the
subject matter has not been included with the original number. Discussion and
commentary have been presented regarding many verses, explaining why they are
not part of the Pinḍaniryukti but were later interpolated or added to the
commentary's Pinḍaniryukti. Some points regarding text editing are presented
here: • In some places, a word, line, or verse is missing in a copy, which has
been indicated by the symbol 'x' in the footnote. Where the text variation is on
more than one word or in a line, it has been indicated by the symbol ' ' . •
Textual variations of elements like 'ch', 'u', 'v' etc. have been determined
mainly based on the explanation of the commentary. • Where the original
consonant-based text has been found, it has been accepted in the original from
the perspective of antiquity, but in the absence of the text, the text with the
'y' sound has also been accepted. Therefore, in the same text, 'soy' text will
be found in some places and 'sot' in others. The text with the 't' sound has not
been given priority, for example - 'kato' (kago).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 154 piMDaniryukti ko mukhya mAnakara anya pAThoM ke pAThAntara de die jaaeN|
pATha-nirdhAraNa meM sUkSmatA se aneka dRSTiyoM se vicAra kiyA jAtA hai  /
Adhunika vidvAnoM ne pAThAnusaMdhAna ke viSaya meM paryApta prakAza DAlA hai|
pAzcAttya vidvAn isa kArya ko cAra bhAgoM meM vibhakta karate haiM - 1. sAmagrI
saMkalana 2. pATha - cayana 3. pATha- sudhAra 4. uccatara AlocanA  /  prastuta
graMtha ke saMpAdana meM cAroM bAtoM kA dhyAna rakhA gayA hai| pATha-saMzodhana
ke lie tIna AdhAra hamAre sAmane rahe 1. piNDaniryukti kI hastalikhita pratiyAM
/  2. piNDaniryukti kA vyAkhyA - sAhitya (malayagirIyA TIkA, avacUri Adi)  /  3.
piNDaniryukti kI aneka gAthAeM, jo jItakalpabhASya tathA nizItha bhASya Adi
graMthoM meM milatI haiM  /  piNDaniryukti kI tAr3apatrIya pratiyAM kama milatI
haiM ataH pATha - sampAdana meM pandrahavIM, solahavIM zatAbdI meM kAgaja para
likhI pratiyoM kA hI upayoga kiyA gayA hai| pATha-saMzodhana evaM pATha- cayana
meM hamane pratiyoM ke pATha ko pramukhatA dI hai kintu kisI eka prati ko hI
pATha cayana kA AdhAra nahIM banAyA hai aura na hI bahumata ke AdhAra para pATha
kA nirNaya kiyA hai| artha-mImAMsA kA aucitya, TIkA kI vyAkhyA evaM paurvAparya
ke AdhAra para jo pATha saMgata lagA, use mUla pATha ke antargata rakhA hai|
kahIMkahIM vyAkhyA ke AdhAra para TIkA kA pATha ucita lagA to use bhI mUla meM
rakhA hai tathA pratiyoM kA pATha pAThAntara meM diyA hai| gAthA - nirdhAraNa
meM hamane isa bAta kA pUrA dhyAna rakhA hai ki jo bhI gAthA niryukti kI bhASA-
zailI se pratikUla yA viSaya se asaMbaddha lagI, use hamane mUla kramAMka ke
sAtha nahIM jor3A hai| aneka gAthAoM ke bAre meM TippaNI sahita vicAra-vimarza
prastuta kiyA hai ki kisa kAraNa se vaha gAthA niyukti kI na hokara bAda meM
prakSipta huI hai athavA bhASya kI gAthA niryukti meM jur3a gii| yahAM pATha-
sampAdana ke kucha binduoM ko prastuta kiyA jA rahA hai * kahIM-kahIM kisI prati
meM koI zabda, caraNa yA gAthA nahIM hai, usakA nirdeza pAdaTippaNa meM x cihna
dvArA kiyA hai| jahAM pAThAntara eka se adhika zabdoM para yA eka caraNa meM hai
use ' ' cihna se darzAyA gayA hai| * ca, u, va Adi avayavoM ke pATha-bheda
prAyaH TIkA kI vyAkhyA ke AdhAra para nirdhArita kie haiN| * 'prAcInatA kI dRSTi
se jahAM kahIM mUla vyaJjanayukta pATha milA, use mUla meM svIkRta kiyA hai
lekina pATha na milane para yakAra zruti vAle pATha ko bhI svIkRta kiyA hai
isIlie eka hI graMtha meM kahIM soya pATha milegA to kahIM sota  /  takArazruti
vAle pATha ko prAthamikatA nahIM dI hai, jaise - kAto (kAgo)  /

Page #169 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniryukti: An Observation  **Based on the manuscripts, the term 'dāram'
is mentioned after the verses, but in many places, they cannot be considered as
dvāragāthās from the perspective of the subject matter.**  **Where there have
been textual variations due to the scribe's error, those variations have not
been mentioned in most cases, but where there was a possibility of another
meaning from that word, those variations have been mentioned.**  **Western
scholars Lumen (for Daśavaikālika) and Elfsdorf (for Uttarādhyayana) have done
textual emendation and textual discussion in many places from the perspective of
meter. They have used meter technique as a tool. Jacobi has determined the
antiquity and modernity of the verses based on the meter. According to him, the
literature composed in Āryā meter is later and the verses used in Vedic meters
are ancient. In Pinḍaniryukti also, full attention has been paid to the meter
perspective in text editing. In many places, textual errors have been caught
based on the meter. In text editing, we have not given separate instructions for
the sub-types of Āryā, but if the verses are composed in a meter other than
Āryā, then it has been mentioned in the commentary.**  **In Pinḍaniryukti, in
some places, both Anuṣṭup and Āryā meters have been used in the same verse, for
example, three stanzas of Āryā and one of Anuṣṭup, or three Anuṣṭup and one
Āryā. Wherever there is a mixture of meters, it has also been mentioned in the
footnotes.**  **In many places, from the perspective of meter, there has been
use of case endings without case endings, non-characteristic makāra, and
singular in place of plural or plural in place of singular, where the
commentator has presented an instruction or discussion, it has been mentioned in
the footnote, for example:**  **"Here, due to the metrical significance of the
two ikāras, the initial word is reversed, and due to the non-characteristic
nature of makāra, this instruction is to be seen."**  **"In the sūtra, the
absence of case endings is due to being Ārṣa."**  **"Here, everywhere, the
seventh case is used in the sense of the third case due to the characteristics
of Prakrit."**  **"In 'Sehamāiṇa', makāra is non-characteristic."**  **"The word
'nema' is a local word, established in the sense of action."**  **"The verb
'sīdati' has multiple meanings, therefore it means 'phalati'."**  **"The
feminine gender indication is in the Prakrit style."**  **For the convenience of
researchers, the serial numbers of the edited Pinḍaniryukti have been given at
the beginning and the serial numbers of the commentary at the end of the verse.
This will make it easier to see the commentary of any verse. Although we were
supposed to give the commentary verses published in the commentary along with
it, there was not much importance in giving the commentary verses published in
the commentary separately, but the commentary was not edited and the verses had
already been set, so the commentary verses have been given at the end of the
Pinḍaniryukti verses.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti : eka paryavekSaNa hastapratiyoM ke AdhAra para gAthAoM ke Age
'dAraM' kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai lekina aneka sthaloM para viSaya kI dRSTi se
unako dvAragAthA nahIM mAnA jA sktaa| lipikAra kI bhUla se jahAM pAThabheda huA
hai, una pAThAntaroM kA prAyaH ullekha nahIM kiyA hai lekina jahAM usa zabda se
anya artha nikalane kI saMbhAvanA thI, una pAThAntaroM kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai|
* * * pazcimI vidvAn lyUmena ne dazavaikAlika evaM elphasaDorpha ne
uttarAdhyayana kA chaMda kI dRSTi se aneka sthaloM para pATha - saMzodhana evaM
pATha-vimarza kiyA hai| unhoMne chaMda takanIka ko upakaraNa ke rUpa meM kAma
meM liyA hai| jekobI ne chaMda ke AdhAra para gAthA kI prAcInatA evaM arvAcInatA
kA nirdhAraNa kiyA hai| unake anusAra AryA chaMda meM nibaddha sAhitya bAda kA
tathA veda chaMdoM meM prayukta gAthAeM prAcIna haiM  /  piNDaniryukti meM bhI
pATha - saMpAdana meM chaMda dRSTi kA pUrA dhyAna rakhA gayA hai| aneka sthaloM
para chaMda ke AdhAra para hI pATha kI azuddhiyAM pakar3I gaI haiN| pATha-
saMpAdana meM hamane AryA kI upajAtiyoM kA pRthak nirdeza nahIM kiyA hai lekina
AryA ke atirikta dUsare chaMda meM gAthAeM nibaddha haiM to unakA TippaNa meM
ullekha kara diyA hai| piNDaniryukti meM kahIM-kahIM eka hI gAthA meM anuSTup
evaM AryA- donoM chaMdoM kA prayoga huA hai, jaise- tIna caraNa AryA ke tathA
eka anuSTup kA athavA tIna anuSTup aura eka AryA kaa| jahAM bhI chaMdoM kA
mizraNa huA hai, pAdaTippaNa meM usakA bhI ullekha kara diyA gayA hai| aneka
sthAnoM para chaMda kI dRSTi se vibhakti rahita prayoga, alAkSaNika makAra tathA
bahuvacana ke sthAna para ekavacana athavA ekavacana ke sthAna para bahuvacana
kA prayoga huA hai, vahAM TIkAkAra ne isakA nirdeza yA vimarza prastuta kiyA hai
to usakA pAdaTippaNa meM ullekha kiyA gayA hai, jaise atraikAradvayasya
chaMdo'rthatvAdAdizabdasya vyatyayAnmakArasya cAlakSaNikatvAdevaM nirdezo
draSTavyaH  /  * 155 sUtre vibhaktilopa ArSatvAt  /  iha sarvatra saptamI
tRtIyArthe prAkRtalakSaNavazAt  /  sehamAINa ityatra makAro'lAkSaNikaH  /
nemazabdo dezyaH kAryAbhidhAne rUDhaH  /  sIdati dhAtUnAmanekArthatvAt phalati
/  prAkRtazailyA strIliMganirdezaH  /  zodhakartAoM kI suvidhA ke lie saMpAdita
niyukti ke kramAMka prArambha meM tathA TIkA ke kramAMka gAthA ke anta meM de
die gae haiN| isase kisI bhI gAthA kI TIkA dekhane meM suvidhA rhegii| yadyapi
hamako TIkA meM prakAzita bhASyagAthAoM ko bhI sAtha 'denA thaa| TIkA meM
prakAzita bhASya gAthAoM ko alaga dene kA itanA mahattva nahIM thA lekina TIkA
kA sampAdana nahIM huA aura gAthAoM kI seTiMga ho cukI thI ataH bhASya gAthAoM
ko niryuktigAthAoM ke anta meM diyA hai|

Page #170 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  156 ##  Piṇḍa Nirukta  In some cases, the page number of the commentary
given behind the Bhagavati Bhāṣya has been given as a reference to the Bhagavati
Ṭīkā. • • The word-list does not include Sanskrit-based words that are used in
Prakrit without any change, such as: Kovida, Khara, Gala, Turanga, Nicaya,
Samvāya, Madhu, etc.  The task of editing the text from manuscripts is extremely
difficult. A competent Acharya like Abhaydeva Suri, the author of the Navāngī
Ṭīkā, has described the various differences and difficulties encountered in this
context. Yet, he performed the great task of worshipping the Śruta. Inspired by
the venerable ones, taking him as an ideal, this work was started and a little
bit of worship of the Śruta was done.  ## Manuscript Introduction  The following
manuscripts and sources were used in the editing of Piṇḍa Nirukta:  **(a)** This
manuscript was obtained from the Delā Upāśraya, Ahmedabad. Its serial number is
11458. It is 30 cm long and 11 cm wide. It has 14 pages and the last page is
blank. The manuscript is clear and neat. At the end, it says: "Piṇḍa Nijjuttī
Sammattā, Shubham Bhavatu Saṃ. 1422 Varṣe Phālgun Sudi 12 Budhavāra Dine
Likhitā".  **(k)** This manuscript was obtained from the Śrī Hemchandracharya
Jain Jñānamandir, Pāṭan, Gujarat. Its serial number is 3677 and it has 24 pages.
Its pages are very old and worn out, but the letters of the manuscript are clear
and neat. This manuscript should be from the fourteenth-fifteenth century. At
the end, it says: "Piṇḍa Nijjuttī Sammattā Granthāgra Gāthā 716 || Ch || Śrī ||
Śrī || Śrī ||".  **(b)** This manuscript was obtained from the Jasubhai Library,
Ahmedabad. Its serial number is 623. It is 25 cm long and 11 cm wide. It has 26
pages. It is written in bold letters. At the end, it says: "Piṇḍa Nijjuttī
Sammattā Saṃ. 1552, Varṣe Bhādravā Badi 10 Rāvo Śrī Aṇahillapura Pattane Śrī
Koranga Gran. 800 Śrī ||".  **(B)** This manuscript was obtained from the
Rajasthan Prācya Vidya Prasthāna, Bikaner. Its accession number is 13194. It is
28 cm long and 13 cm wide. This manuscript is broken from the edge, so many
words are missing. There is a large red dot in the middle and on the edge of the
manuscript. It has 22 pages. The last page is blank. At the end of the
manuscript, it says: "Iti Piṇḍa Nijjuttī Sammattā Shubham Bhavatu, Granthāgra
1000 Paripūrṇā Śrī Pūrṇimā Pakṣe Śrī Vimalena Lipī Kṛtavān Śrīrastu Saṃvat 1657
Varṣe Viśākha Sudi Pañcamī Dine ||".  **(lā)** This manuscript was obtained from
the Lalbhai Dalpat Vidya Mandir, Ahmedabad. Its serial number is 1954. It is...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 156 piMDa niryukta kahIM-kahIM bhagavatI TIkA ke saMdarbha hetu bhagavatI
bhASya ke pIche dI gaI TIkA kI hI pRSTha saMkhyA de dI gaI * hai| * zabda - sUcI
meM saMskRtaniSTha zabda, jo prAkRta meM binA parivartanaM ke prayukta hote
haiM, unakA samAveza nahIM kiyA hai, jaise- kovida, khara, gala, turaMga,
nicaya, samavAya, madhu Adi  /  hastapratiyoM se pATha-saMpAdana kA kArya
atyanta durUha hai  /  navAMgI TIkAkAra abhayadevasUri jaise sakSama AcArya ne
isa saMdarbha meM Ane vAlI vibhinnatAoM aura kaThinAiyoM kA varNana kiyA hai
phira bhI unhoMne zruta kI upAsanA kA mahAn kArya kiyaa| unhIM ko Adarza
mAnakara pUjyavaroM dvArA prerita hokara yaha kArya prArambha kiyA aura
yatkiMcita zruta kI upAsanA kI  /  hastaprati - paricaya piNDaniryukti ke
sampAdana meM nimna pratiyoM evaM srotoM kA upayoga kiyA gayA hai (a) yaha prati
delA kA upAzraya ahamadAbAda se prApta hai| isakI kramAMka saMkhyA 11458 hai  /
yaha 30 semI. lambI tathA 11 semI. caur3I hai| isakI patra saMkhyA 14 tathA
aMtima pRSTha khAlI hai| prati spaSTa evaM sApha-sutharI hai| isake aMta meM "
piNDanijjuttI sammattA, zubhaM bhavatu saM. 1422 varSe phAlguna sudi 12
budhavAra dine likhitA " aisA likhA hai| (ka) yaha prati zrI hemacandrAcArya
jaina jJAnamaMdira pATaNa gujarAta se prApta hai| isakI kramAMka saMkhyA 3677
tathA patra saMkhyA 24 hai| isake patra atyanta jIrNa-zIrNa haiM lekina prati ke
akSara spaSTa evaM sApha-suthare haiN| yaha prati caudahavIM-pandrahavIM zatAbdI
kI honI caahie| isake aMta meM " piMDanijjuttI sammattA graMthAgra gAthA 716  //
cha  //  zrI  //  zrI  //  zrI  //  " kA ullekha hai  /  (ba) yaha prati
jasubhAI lAIbrerI ahamadAbAda se prApta hai| isakI kramAMka saM. 623 hai  /
yaha 25 semI. lambI evaM 11 semI. caur3I hai| isakI patra saM. 26 hai  /  yaha
moTe akSaroM meM likhI gaI hai| isake aMta meM " piNDanijjuttI sammattA saM.
1552, varSe bhAdravA badi 10 rAvo zrI aNahillapurapattane zrI koraMga graM. 800
zrI  //  " aisA ullekha hai  /  (bI) yaha prati rAjasthAna prAcya vidyA
pratiSThAna bIkAnera se prApta hai| isakI parigrahaNAMka saM. 13194 hai  /  yaha
28 semI. lambI 13 semI. caur3I hai| yaha prati kinAre se khaMDita hai ataH aneka
zabda lupta ho gae haiN| prati ke bIca tathA kinAre para bar3A lAla bindu hai  /
isakI patra saMkhyA 22 hai  /  aMtima pRSTha khAlI hai| prati ke aMta meM " iti
piNDanijjuttI sammattA zubhaM bhavatu, graMthAgra 1000 paripUrNA zrI
pUrNimApakSe zrI vimalena lipI kRtavAn zrIrastu saMvat 1657 varSe vizAkhasudi
paMcamI dine  // " aisA ullekha hai| (lA) yaha prati lAlabhAI dalapata vidyA
maMdira ahamadAbAda se prApta hai| isakI kramAMka saMkhyA 1954 hai  /  yaha

Page #171 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti: An Observation  **157**  **25.5 cm** long and **13.3 cm** wide.
It is clean and legible. It has **15** leaves. At the end of each leaf,
"Mahalliyāpiṇḍanijjutti Sammattā Śrīrastu Shubhaṃ Bhavatu" is written, and the
last page is blank. (s) This manuscript was obtained from the Śrī
Hemchandrachāryā Jain Jñānamändira, Pāṭaṇa, Gujarāt. Its serial number is
**3554** and leaf number is **22**. Despite being old, its letters are clear and
legible. This manuscript should be from the latter half of the **14th century**.
At the end, it mentions "Piṇḍanijjutti Sammattā || Ch ||". (mu) The variations
in the text from the printed text in the commentary of Malayagiri are indicated
by the symbol 'mu'. (ṭīpā) The variations in the text mentioned by the
commentator in his commentary are indicated by ṭīpā.  **History of the Editing
of Piṇḍaniyukti**  After the completion of the text editing of the Niyukti
Pañcaka and the Āvashyaka Niyukti, it was necessary to edit the second part of
the Āvashyaka Niyukti. However, in the intervening four years, I was busy
traveling outside Lāḍanū and writing the history of the Samanasreṇī, so the work
of editing the Āgama was almost abandoned. When the revered ones appointed me to
this task again, I could not focus on it for many days. I took up the task of
editing the Āvashyaka Niyukti many times, but due to its complexity, it was
abandoned each time. Therefore, I started the work of Piṇḍaniyukti before the
Āvashyaka Niyukti. Although the work of editing this text from manuscripts was
completed in **1988**, when it was published, the text was compared with
manuscripts obtained from Pāṭaṇa and Ahmedabad, which involved a lot of effort.
After the Gaṅgāśahar Maryādā-Mahotsava, I started this work with the firm
resolve to complete it by the next Āsīnda Maryādā-Mahotsava. From Diwali to the
Maryādā-Mahotsava, I worked till midnight, even in the biting cold, but due to
the extensive introduction, the work could not be completed within the
stipulated time. Today, I am experiencing immense satisfaction at its
completion. In this context, I firmly believe that such important tasks are
possible only with the grace of the Guru, the blessings of the elders, and the
strength of the Sangha. The individual is merely an instrument.  Although there
were many obstacles and complexities in this work, they were overcome by the
grace of the Guru. All the Āgama texts published till date have received the
full cooperation and guidance of the Āgama scholar Muni Śrī Dulharājī. Although
I did not have his direct presence this time, he had prepared the ground, which
made this work easier. The translation of Piṇḍaniyukti was completed by his
swift pen. I cannot diminish my debt to him by expressing my gratitude, because
he not only provided guidance, but also taught me how to translate and how to
focus on the task with unwavering commitment. Most of the annotations and the
detailed introduction written on this text are the result of his efforts.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniyukti : eka paryavekSaNa 157 25.5 semI. lambI tathA 13.3 semI. caur3I
hai| yaha sApha-sutharI evaM par3hane meM spaSTa hai| isake 15 patra haiN| prati
ke aMta meM "mahalliyApiMDanijjuttI sammattA zrIrastu zubhaM bhavatu" likhA huA
hai tathA aMtima pRSTha khAlI hai| (sa) yaha prati zrI hemacandrAcArya jaina
jJAnamaMdira pATaNa gujarAta se prApta hai| isakI kramAMka saMkhyA 3554 tathA
patra saMkhyA 22 hai| jIrNa hote hue bhI isake akSara spaSTa evaM sApha-suthare
haiN| yaha prati caudahavIM zatAbdI ke uttarArdha kI honI caahie| isake aMta meM
"piNDanijjuttI smmttaa|| ch||" kA ullekha hai| (mu) malayagiri kI TIkA meM
mudrita pATha ke pAThAntara 'mu' ke saMketa se nirdiSTa haiN| (TIpA) TIkAkAra ne
apanI TIkA meM jina pAThAntaroM kA ullekha kiyA hai, use TIpA se nirdiSTa kiyA
hai| piNDaniyukti ke sampAdana kA itihAsa niyukti paMcaka aura Avazyaka niyukti
kA pATha-sampAdana parisampanna hone ke pazcAt Avazyaka niyukti ke dvitIya
khaMDa kA sampAdana karanA Avazyaka thA lekina bIca meM cAra sAla lADanUM se
bAhara yAtrA karane evaM eka sAla samaNazreNI kA itihAsa likhane kI vyastatA meM
Agama-sampAdana kA kArya lagabhaga chUTa sA gyaa| punaH jaba pUjyavaroM ne mujhe
isa kArya meM niyukta kiyA to kaI dinoM taka isa kArya meM mana ekAgra nahIM ho
skaa| aneka bAra Avazyaka niyukti ke sampAdana kA kArya hAtha meM liyA lekina
jaTilatA ke kAraNa vaha hara bAra chUTatA gayA isalie Avazyaka niyukti se pUrva
piNDaniyukti kA kArya prArambha kiyaa| yadyapi isa graMtha kA hastapratiyoM se
sampAdana kA kArya san 1988 meM hI pUrA kara diyA thA lekina prakAzana ke samaya
pATaNa evaM ahamadAbAda se prApta pratiyoM se isake pATha kA milAna kiyA to
utanA hI zrama ho gyaa| gaMgAzahara maryAdA-mahotsava ke bAda isa dRr3ha
saMkalpa ke sAtha kArya prArambha kiyA thA ki agrima AsIMda maryAdAmahotsava
taka yaha kArya sampanna karanA hai| dIpAvalI se lekara maryAdA-mahotsava taka
kar3akar3AtI sardI meM rAtri meM bAraha-sAr3he bAraha baje taka kArya kiyA,
lekina bhUmikA bar3I hone ke kAraNa nirdhArita kAla-sImA taka yaha kArya
paripUrNa nahIM ho skaa| Aja isakI parisampannatA para atyanta AtmatoSa kA
anubhava ho rahA hai| isa saMdarbha meM merA dRr3hatama vizvAsa hai ki aise
gurutara kArya guru kI kRpA, bujurgoM kA AzIrvAda evaM saMgha kI zakti se hI
saMbhava hote haiM, vyakti to kevala nimitta mAtra hotA hai| yadyapi isa kArya
meM aneka avarodha aura jaTilatAeM AIM lekina guru-kRpA se samAhita hotI giiN|
Aja taka jo bhI Agama graMtha prakAzita hue, unameM Agama manISI muni zrI
dulaharAjajI kA pUrNa sahayoga aura mArgadarzana prApta hotA rahA, isa bAra
bhale hI unakI pratyakSa sannidhi nahIM milI lekina unhoMne pRSThabhUmi taiyAra
kara dI thI, phalataH yaha kArya sugama ho skaa| piNDaniyukti ke anuvAda kA
unakI drutagAminI lekhanI se sampanna huA hai| maiM unake prati kRtajJatA
jJApita karake unake RNa ko kama nahIM karanA cAhatI kyoMki unhoMne kevala
mArgadarzana hI nahIM diyA, anuvAda karanA aura lakSya pratibaddha hokara kArya
meM ekAgra rahanA bhI sikhAyA hai| isa graMtha para likhe gae adhikAMza TippaNa
evaM vistRta bhUmikA usI kI phalazruti hai|

Page #172 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 158 **Pindaniyukti** **Acknowledgement**  I am eternally grateful to
Ganadhipati Gurudev Shri Tulsi for inspiring me to value time. Revered Acharya
Pravara and Yuvacharya have not only appointed me to this Agam work, freeing me
from travel and other duties, but also empowered me with strength, keeping me
constantly energized. I can only offer these humble verses at their feet:
*Yadatra Sausthavam Kinchit, Tad Gurvoreva Me Na Hi.* *Yadatra Asausthavam
Kinchit, Tanmamaeva Tayo Na Hi.*  The affectionate gaze of Mahashramanee Sadhvi
Pramukha Kanak Prabhaji keeps me free from despair and constantly active. The
meticulous organization of the esteemed Chief Organizer Vishruta Vibhaji and
Organizer Samani Madhura Prajnaji has made this work easy to complete. Despite
her physical weakness, Sadhvi Siddha Prajnaji's spirit is incredibly strong. She
has generously helped me whenever I faced difficulties in separating the
appointment and commentary. The support of the Jain Vishva Bharati officials and
administrators has also been invaluable. Kusum Surana's hard work is evident in
the composing and setting. Finally, I express my gratitude to the Samani Vrinda
and offer my heartfelt devotion at the feet of Shrutadevata, with the firm
resolve to soon dedicate the next chapter of the appointment to the Sangha and
Sanghapati.  Dr. Samani Kusum Prajna 14.4.2008 Jain Vishva Bharati, Ladnun

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 158 piMDaniyukti kRtajJatA-jJApana gaNAdhipati gurudeva zrI tulasI hara kSaNa
isalie smRti meM rahate haiM kyoMki unhoMne samaya ke mUlya ko AMkane kI preraNA
dii| pUjya AcAryapravara evaM yuvAcAryavara ne yAtrA Adi kAryoM se mukta
rakhakara mujhe AgamakArya meM niyukta hI nahIM kiyA varan zakti-saMpreSita
karake anavarata UrjAvAn bhI banAe rkhaa| unake caraNoM meM to maiM kevala nimna
padya hI arpita kara sakatI hUM yadatra sauSThavaM kiJcit , tad gurvoreva me na
hi| yadatrAsauSThavaM kiJcit , tanmamaiva tayo na hi  //  mahAzramaNI
sAdhvIpramukhA kanakaprabhAjI kI sneha bharI dRSTi mujhe nirAzA se mukta
rakhakara satata sakriya banAe rakhatI hai| AdaraNIya mukhya niyojikA
vizrutavibhAjI evaM niyojikA samaNI madhuraprajJAjI kI samyag vyavasthA se yaha
kArya sugamatA se sampanna ho skaa| zArIrika dRSTi se kamajora hote hue bhI
sAdhvI siddhaprajJAjI kA manobala atyanta majabUta hai| niyukti aura bhASya ke
pRthakkaraNa meM jahAM bhI kaThinAI kA anubhava huA, unhoMne mukta hasta se
sahayoga kiyA hai| jaina vizva bhAratI ke adhikArIgaNa aura vyavasthApakoM kA
sahayoga bhI mUlyAha rahA hai| kampojiMga evaM seTiMga meM kusuma surAnA kA
zrama mukhara hai| anta meM maiM samaNIvRMda ke prati AbhAra jJApita karatI huI
zrutadevatA ke caraNoM meM bhAvabhInI zraddhA arpita karatI hUM, isa dRr3ha
saMkalpa ke sAtha ki saMgha aura saMghapati ke zrIcaraNoM meM zIghra hI niyukti
kA agalA khaMDa samarpita kara skuu| DaoN. samaNI kusumaprajJA 14.4.2008 jaina
vizva bhAratI, lADanUM

Page #173 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Piṇḍaniryukti Mūlapāṭha

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piNDaniryukti mUlapATha

Page #174 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #175 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Table of Contents  **12-14** **15** **17 17/1-3 18, 19** Eight types of
Pindanuyukti. Synonyms for the word 'Pind'. The vow of deposition of the word
'Pind'. The meaning of the six depositions of the word 'Pind'. Six depositions
of the word 'Pind'. Four types of Name Pind. Description of the establishment
Pind. Classification of Dravya Pind. Three types of Prithvikaaya and two types
of Sachitt Prithvi. Explanation of Misra Prithvikaaya. Achitt Prithvikaaya and
their purpose. Classification of Apkaaya Pind. Sachitt Apkaaya in terms of
certainty and practice. The nature of Misra Apkaaya. Three orders related to
Misra Apkaaya and their review. Achitt Apkaaya and its purpose.  **20** **21
21/1 21/2** **22** **22/1-3 22/4 22/5 22/6** **27/1**  Faults of washing clothes
during the rainy season. Faults of not washing clothes before the rainy season.
How much Upadhi needs to be washed before the rainy season? Instructions for
washing the Acharya's clothes when they are soiled. Names of Upadhis that are
not eligible for Vishramana. Instructions for Vishramana before washing clothes
and their method. Method of taking water for washing clothes. Order of washing
clothes. Method of washing clothes. Classification of Tejaskaaya Pind. Types of
Sachitt Tejaskaaya. Achitt Tejaskaaya Pind. Classification of Vayukaaya Pind.
Types of Sachitt and Achitt Vayu. Five types of Achitt Vayu.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSaya sUcI 12-14 15 17 17/1-3 18, 19 piNDaniyukti ke ATha prkaar| 'piMDa'
zabda ke pryaay| piMDa zabda ke nikSepa kI prtijnyaa| 'piMDa' zabda ke chaha
nikSepoM kI saarthktaa| piMDa zabda ke chaha nikssep| nAma piMDa ke cAra prkaar|
sthApanA piMDa kA vivrnn| dravyapiMDa ke bhed-prbhed| pRthvIkAya ke tIna bheda
tathA sacitta pRthvI ke do bhed| mizra pRthvIkAya kI vyaakhyaa| acitta
pRthvIkAya tathA unake pryojn| apkAyapiMDa ke bhed-prbhed| nizcaya aura
vyavahAra rUpa se sacitta apkaay| mizra apkAya kA svruup| mizra apkAya se
saMbaMdhita tIna Adeza tathA unakI smiikssaa| acitta apkAya aura usakA pryojn|
Rtubaddha kAla meM vastra dhone ke doss| varSAkAla se pUrva vastra na dhone ke
doss| varSAkAla se pUrva kitanI upadhi kA prakSAlana Avazyaka? AcArya ke vastra
malina hone para dhone kA nirdesh| vizramaNA nahIM karane yogya upadhiyoM ke
naam| vastra dhone se pUrva vizramaNA kA nirdeza tathA unakI vidhi| vastra-
prakSAlana hetu jala-grahaNa kI vidhi| vastroM ke dhone kA krm| vastra-
prakSAlana kI vidhi| tejaskAya piMDa ke bheda-prabheda  /  sacitta tejaskAya ke
prkaar| acitta tejskaaypiNdd| vAyukAya piMDa ke bhed-prbhed| sacitta evaM acitta
vAyu ke prakAra  /  acitta vAyu ke pAMca prkaar| 20 21 21/1 21/2 22 22/1-3 22/4
22/5 22/6 27/1

Page #176 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindanyukti  **27/2** **28** **29, 30, 31, 32** **39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44,
44/1-4** **45/1** **46**  The time taken for the air situated in the river to
become conscious again. The purpose of the unconscious air body. The different
types of plant bodies. The unconscious plant body and its purpose. The bodies of
the two-sensed, three-sensed, etc. The purpose of the disabled-sensed. The use
of the horse-fly in the four-sensed, the uselessness of the hellish in the five-
sensed. The use of the five-sensed animal. The use of the three types of
conscious humans. The use related to deities. The different combinations of
mixed bodies. The description of the field body and the time body. The types of
feeling bodies. The types of auspicious and inauspicious feeling bodies. The
characteristics of auspicious and inauspicious feeling bodies. The bodies of
knowledge, perception, conduct, etc. The definition and etymology of the feeling
body. The authority of the unconscious body in this chapter. Knowledge,
perception, etc. are caused by food. Knowledge, perception, conduct, etc. for
the attainment of liberation. The promise to explain the nature of craving. The
synonyms of craving. The types of craving: deposit, substance, and feeling. The
meaning of the words craving, investigation, path, and nourishment. The types of
feeling craving. The accepted order of the three types of craving. The deposit,
name, etc. of investigation. The example of the deer and the elephant in
substance craving. The synonyms of origin and its deposit. The types of feeling
origin. The description of substance origin. The story of the Ladduka-priya-
kumar in substance origin. The purity of origin is the purity of conduct.  **47,
48, 49, 49/1, 49/2** **50** **52, 52/1, 2, 52/3, 52/4, 53, 53/1-55** **56**
**57, 57/1, 57/2-4, 57/5**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 27/2 28 29, 30 31, 32 39, 40 41, 42 43, 44 44/1-4 45/1 46 nadI meM
dRti sthita vAyu ke puna: sacitta hone kA kaalmaan| acitta vAyukAya kA pryojn|
vanaspatikAyapiMDa ke bhed-prbhed| acitta vanaspatikAya tathA usakA prayojana  /
dvIndriya, trIndriya Adi ke piNdd| vikalendriya kA pryojn| caturindriya meM
azvamakSikA kA upayoga, paMcendriya meM nairayika anupyogii| paMcendriya
tiryaMca kA upyog| sacitta Adi tInoM prakAra ke manuSyoM kA upyog| devatA
viSayaka upyog| mizrapiMDa ke vividha saMyoga kRta bhed| kSetrapiMDa tathA
kAlapiMDa kA vivrnn| bhAvapiMDa ke bhed| prazasta evaM aprazasta bhAvapiMDa ke
bhed| prazasta-aprazasta bhAvapiMDa ke lkssnn| jJAna, darzana, cAritra Adi ke
piNdd| bhAvapiMDa kI paribhASA evaM usakA nirukt| prastuta prakaraNa meM acitta
piMDa kA adhikaar| jJAna, darzana Adi kA kAraNa aahaar| mokSa kI siddhi ke hetu
jJAna, darzana, cAritra aadi| eSaNA ke svarUpa-kathana kI pratijJA  /  eSaNA ke
ekaarthk| eSaNA ke nikSepa tathA dravya aura bhAva eSaNA ke prkaar| eSaNA,
gaveSaNA, mArgaNA aura udgopanA Adi zabdoM kI arth-miimaaNsaa| bhAvaiSaNA ke
prkaar| eSaNA ke tInoM prakAroM kA mAnya krm| gaveSaNA ke nAma Adi nikssep|
dravya eSaNA meM kuraMga evaM gaja kA dRSTAnta  /  udgama ke ekArthaka tathA
usake nikssep| bhAva udgama ke prkaar| dravya udgama kA vivrnn| dravya udgama
meM laDDukapriyakumAra kA kthaank| udgama kI zuddhi sai cAritra kI shuddhi|
47,48 49,49/1 49/2 50 52 52/1,2 52/3 52/4 53 53/1-55 56 57 57/1 57/2-4 57/5

Page #177 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Table of Contents  58, 59, 60 61/1 Kha Ka 64 64/1-3 65 66, 66/1, 67, 67/1,
67/2, 67/3, 4, 67/5 68 Sixteen Defects of *Udgama*. The *Muladvara* Gatha
related to *Adhakarma*. Names of *Adhakarma*. Description of *Dravya-Adha*.
Definition of *Adhakarma*. Description of *Dravya Adhakarma*. Description of
*Bhaava Adhakarma*. Downfall and Karma-Bondage of the *Adhakarmagrahi*. Nature
of *Dravyaatmagna*. Nature of *Bhaavaatmagna*. Loss of Knowledge and Vision due
to Violation of *Charitra*. Nature of *Dravya Atmakarma* and *Bhaava Atmakarma*.
Nature of *Atmakarma*. How *Parakarma* becomes *Atmakarma*? Only the *Pramatta*
and *Adaksha* are Bound. Defects of *Adhakarma* Acceptance. Order of *Guru* and
*Laghu* in *Pratisevna*, *Pratiśravaṇa* etc. Promise to Describe the Nature of
*Pratisevna* etc. Nature of *Pratisevna*. Nature of *Pratiśravaṇa*. Explanation
of *Samvasa* and *Anumodana*. Examples of all four Stages of *Pratisevna* etc.
Example of *Stena* related to *Pratisevna*. Example of *Rajasuta* related to
*Pratiśravaṇa*. Mention of all four Stages of *Pratisevna* etc. in the
*Rajasuta* Example. Example of *Palli* related to *Samvasa*. Example of
*Rajadusta* in *Anumodana*. Description of the Nature of *Anumodana* in a
Different Way. Meaning Difference of Synonymous Words for *Adhakarma*. Fourfold
*Artha* and *Vyanjana* and their Examples. Adjustment of the Above Fourfold with
the Synonyms of *Adhakarma*. Meaning Similarity and Cause-Effect Tradition of
Synonyms of *Adhakarma*. For Whom is *Adhakarma* Performed? 68/1, 68/2, 3, 68/4,
68/5, 68/6, 68/7, 8, 68/9-11, 69, 69/1, 2, 69/3, 69/4, 70, 70/1-3, 70/4-6, 71

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSaya sUcI 58,59 60 61/1 khh kh 64 64/1-3 65 66 66/1 67 67/1 67/2 67/3, 4 67/5
68 udgama ke solaha doss| AdhAkarma se saMbaMdhita mUladvAra gaathaa| AdhAkarma
ke naam| dravya-AdhA kA vivrnn| AdhAkarma kI pribhaassaa| dravya adha:karma kA
vivrnn| bhAva adha:karma kA vivrnn| AdhAkarmagrAhI kI adhogati evaM karma-
baMdhana  /  dravyaAtmaghna kA svruup| bhAvaAtmaghna kA svruup| cAritra ke
vighAta se jJAna aura darzana kI bhI hAni  /  dravya Atmakarma aura bhAva
Atmakarma kA svruup| Atmakarma kA svruup| parakarma Atmakarma kaise? pramatta
aura adakSa hI baMdhana grst| AdhAkarma grahaNa ke doss| pratisevanA,
pratizravaNa Adi meM guru aura laghu kA krm| pratisevanA Adi ke svarUpa-kathana
kI prtijnyaa| pratisevanA kA svruup| pratizravaNa kA svruup| saMvAsa evaM
anumodanA kI vyaakhyaa| pratisevana Adi cAroM padoM ke udaahrnn| pratisevana se
saMbaMdhita stena kA dRssttaant| pratizravaNa viSayaka rAjasuta kA dRssttaant|
rAjasuta dRSTAnta meM pratizravaNa Adi cAroM padoM kA kthn| saMvAsa se
saMbaMdhita pallI kA dRssttaant| anumodana meM rAjaduSTa kA dRssttaant|
prakArAntara se anumodanA kA svruup-kthn| AdhAkarma ke paryAyavAcI zabdoM kA
arth-bhed| artha aura vyaMjana kI caturbhaMgI tathA unake udaahrnn| uparyukta
caturbhaMgI kA AdhAkarma ke ekArthakoM ke sAtha samAyojana  /  AdhAkarma ke
ekArthakoM kA artha-sAmya evaM kArya-kAraNa prmpraa| kisake lie kiyA huA
AdhAkarma? 68/1 68/2,3 68/4 68/5 68/6 68/7,8 68/9-11 69 69/1,2 69/3 69/4 70
70/1-3 70/4-6 71

Page #178 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  6 73 73/1-22 18 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 74 75 76 76/1-5. 77 78 79 80 80/1-5 81, 81/1
82-82/3 83 83/1 83/2 83/3, 4 83/5 84-84/1 85-86/1 86/2 87 88 89 89/1-3 89/4-7
89/8 89/9 90, 90 / 1 90/2-4 91-91/4 92 93  Twelve deposits of the Sadharmic. The
nature of the divisions of the Sadharmic - statement. Statement of the door in
the context of Adhakarma. Chaturbhangi based on the action and certainty of
food, etc. An example related to Adhakarma regarding food. Expansion of the
above example. An example of Adhakarma related to Panak. Adhakarma related to
Khadim and Swadim. Definition of certainty and action. Double Adhakarma in
certainty and action related to rice, etc. A different opinion regarding the
shadow of the Adhakarma tree. Chaturbhangi arising from certainty and action.
Discussion of transgression, violation, etc. related to Adhakarma. Four faults
in accepting Adhakarma: disobedience, etc. Discussion of the fault of
disobedience. Explanation of the fault of non-existence. Discussion of the fault
of falsehood. Explanation of the fault of contradiction. The inconceivable
method of Adhakarma. A story related to the inedibility of Adhakarma. Inedible
and undrinkable substances. The inconceivability of what is touched by
Adhakarma. The rule of performing the three kalpas for a vessel touched by an
Adhakarma element. Instruction to avoid Adhakarma like vomiting and expelling. A
story related to the avoidance of the method. Method-avoidance in relation to
substance, family, etc. and its significance. The method of knowing Adhakarma
food. Pinda appointment. A disciple's inquiry and the guru's solution regarding
Adhakarma. Karma-bondage based on the result even while eating pure food and its
example. A muni attaining liberation even after eating impure food containing
Adhakarma. A story clarifying disobedience. Criticism of the Adhakarma eater.
Promise of the statement of the Audeshic door.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 6 73 73/1-22 18 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 74 75 76 76/1-5. 77 78 79 80 80/1-5 81, 81/1
82-82/3 83 83/1 83/2 83/3, 4 83/5 84-84/1 85-86/1 86/2 87 88 89 89/1-3 89/4-7
89/8 89/9 90, 90 / 1 90/2-4 91-91/4 92 93 sAdharmika ke bAraha nikSepa  /
sAdharmika ke bhedoM kA svarUpa - kathana  /  AdhAkarma ke saMdarbha meM kiM
dvAra kA kathana  /  azana Adi kI kRta aura niSThita ke AdhAra para caturbhaMgI
/  azana se saMbaMdhita AdhAkarma viSayaka dRSTAnta  /  uparyukta dRSTAnta kA
vistAra  /  pAnaka se saMbaMdhita AdhAkarma kA dRSTAnta  /  khAdima aura svAdima
se saMbaMdhita AdhAkarma  /  niSThita aura kRta kI paribhASA  /  cAvala Adi se
saMbaMdhita niSThita aura kRta meM dugunA AdhAkarma  /  AdhAkarmika vRkSa kI
chAyA se saMbaMdhita matAntara  /  niSThita aura kRta se utpanna caturbhaMgI  /
AdhAkarma se saMbaMdhita atikrama, vyatikrama Adi kA vivecana  /  AdhAkarma
grahaNa meM AjJAbhaMga Adi cAra doSa  /  AjJAbhaMga doSa kA vivecana  /
anavasthA doSa kI vyAkhyA  /  mithyAtva doSa kA vivecana  /  virAdhanA doSa kA
spaSTIkaraNa  /  AdhAkarma kI akalpya vidhi  /  AdhAkarma kI abhojyatA se
saMbaMdhita kathA  /  abhojya aura apeya padArtha  /  AdhAkarma se spRSTa kI
akalpyatA  /  AdhAkarma avayava se spRSTa bhAjana kA kalpatraya karane kA
vidhAna  /  vamana aura uccAra ke samAna AdhAkarma ke parihAra kA nirdeza  /
avidhi-pariharaNa se saMbaMdhita kathAnaka  /  dravya, kula Adi kI apekSA se
vidhi- pariharaNa tathA usakI sArthakatA  /  AdhAkarma bhojana ke jJAna kI
pravidhi | piMDa niyukti AdhAkarma se saMbaMdhita ziSya kI jijJAsA evaM guru kA
samAdhAna  /  zuddha bhojana karate hue bhI pariNAma ke AdhAra para karma-
baMdhana evaM usakA dRSTAnta  /  AdhAkarma yukta azuddha bhojana karane para bhI
muni ko kaivalya - prApti  /  AjJAbhaMga ko spaSTa karane vAlA kathAnaka  /
AdhAkarmabhojI kI nindA | audezika dvAra ke kathana kI pratijJA  /

Page #179 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Table of Contents 94 94 / 1,95 95/1, 2 96 96/1-3 96/4 97-99 99/1 99/2 100 101
101 / 1, 2 102, 103 104 105, 105/1 106 107 108 - 108/2 109 110 111 112-14 115 -
117/4 118 119 119/1 120 121 122-24 125 126-29 130-36  Twelve types of
**Aushik**. Nature of **Ogh Auddeshik** - Statement. Doubts and solutions
related to **Ogh Auddeshik**. Instructions for a **Sadhu** to receive alms
without being unclothed. The example of **Govats** and **Upanaya**. Possibility
of **Vibhag Auddeshik**. Types of **Vibhag Auddeshik**. **Dravyaadi Achchhinna
Auddeshik**. **Dravyaadi Chhinna Auddeshik**. **Kalpyakalpya** rules regarding
**Uddishta**. **Kalpyakalpya** rules regarding **Samprdaan Vibhag**. Nature of
**Uddishta Auddeshik**. Possible reasons for **Krit Auddeshik** and its nature -
statement. Possible reasons for **Karma Auddeshik** and its nature - statement.
**Kalpyakalpya** rules related to **Auddeshik**. Criticism of those who consume
**Auddeshik** food. Types of **Pootikarma**. Nature of **Dravyaputi** and
related story. Nature of **Bhaavaputi**. Inclusion of **Adhaakarma**,
**Auddeshik**, etc. six faults in the **Udgam Koti**. Types of **Baadaraputi**.
Explanation of **Baadaraputi** related to **Bhaktapaan**, etc. Explanation of
**Sookshma Puti**. **Kalpyakalpya** rules regarding **Puti**. Definition of
**Puti**. Means of knowing **Puti**. Three types of **Mishrajat**. Nature of
**Yavadarthic Mishrajat**. Explanation and example of **Pakhandamishra**, etc.
in **Mishrajat**. **Kalpyakalpya** rules for **Mishrajat**. 7 Types of
**Sthapanadosh** and its explanation. Mention of types of **Praabhratika**,
example of **Darika**, faults of not avoiding **Praabhratika**.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSaya sUcI 94 94 / 1,95 95/1, 2 96 96/1-3 96/4 97-99 99/1 99/2 100 101 101 /
1, 2 102, 103 104 105, 105/1 106 107 108 - 108/2 109 110 111 112-14 115 - 117/4
118 119 119/1 120 121 122-24 125 126-29 130-36 auzika ke bAraha bheda-prabheda
/  ogha audezika kA svarUpa - kathana  /  ogha auddezika se saMbaMdhita zaMkA
aura samAdhAna  /  sAdhu ko amUcchita rahakara bhikSA karane kA nirdeza  /
govatsa kA dRSTAnta evaM upanaya  /  vibhAga auddezika kI saMbhAvyatA  /
vibhAga auddezika ke bheda-prabheda  /  dravyAdi acchinna auddezika  /  dravyAdi
chinna auddezikA | uddiSTa kI apekSA kalpyAkalpya vidhi | sampradAna vibhAga kI
apekSA kalpyAkalpya vidhi | uddiSTa auddezika kA svarUpa  /  kRta auddezika kA
saMbhava hetu tathA usakA svarUpa-kathana  /  karma auddezika kA saMbhava hetu
tathA usakA svarUpa- kathana  /  auddezika saMbaMdhita kalpyAkalpya vidhi  /
auddezika AhAra lene vAle kI niMdA  /  pUtikarma ke bheda - prabheda  /
dravyapUti kA svarUpa evaM usase saMbaMdhita kathA  /  bhAvapUrti kA svarUpa  /
AdhAkarma, auddezika Adi chaha doSoM kA udgama koTi meM samAveza  /  bAdarapUrti
ke bheda | bhaktapAna Adi se saMbaMdhita bAdarapUti kI vyAkhyA  /  sUkSma pUrti
kI vyAkhyA  /  pUrti viSayaka kalpyAkalpya vidhi  /  pUrti kI paribhASA  /
pUrti ke parijJAna kA upAya  /  mizrajAta ke tIna bheda  /  yAvadarthika
mizrajAta kA svarUpa  /  mizrajAta meM pAkhaNDimizra Adi kI vyAkhyA evaM
dRSTAnta  /  mizrajAta kI kalpyAkalpya vidhi | 7 sthApanAdoSa ke bheda evaM
usakI vyAkhyA  /  prAbhRtikA ke bhedoM kA ullekha, dArikA kA dRSTAnta,
prAbhRtikA kA parihAra na karane ke doSa  /

Page #180 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **136/1-6:** Mention of the plot in the Praduskarana Dosha.
**137-138/6:** Types of Praduskarana and its explanation. **139-143/3:**
Explanation and plot of the different types of Kritakrita. **144-144/4:** Types
of Pramitya and the example of a brother and sister. **145:** Doshas related to
clothes etc. in Pramitya. **146:** Exceptions related to Pramitya. **147-50:**
Explanation of the Parivartita Dvara and worldly examples. **151-157/6:**
Different types of Abhyahrita and their examples. **158, 159:** Types of
Aachirna Abhyahrita and their nature. **160:** Kalpya-akalpya vidhi related to
Abhyahrita. **161:** Jghanya, Madhyama etc. types of Aachirna Abhyahrita.
**162-64:** Explanation of the Udhhinna Dvara and its doshas. **165-71:**
Explanation of the types of Malapahata Dvara and the example of a monk.
**172-177/2:** Explanation of the types of Aachhedya and the example of a
cowherd. **178-85:** Explanation of the Anisirshta Dvara and the example of a
sweetmeat. **186-188/1:** Types of Adhyavapurka and Kalpya-akalpya vidhi.
**189:** Two types of sixteen Udgama Doshas. **190:** Explanation of the
Avishodhi Koti. **191:** Doshas of food touched by the Avishodhi Koti.
**192-192/5:** Explanation of the Vishodhi Koti and Chaturbhagi. **192/6:** Two
types of Kotikarana. **192/7:** Nine and seventy types from another perspective.
**193:** Udgama Dosha arising from a householder and the Doshas of production
related to a Sadhu. **194:** Deposits and different types of production.
**194/1:** Production of Sachitta Dravya. **194/2:** Production of Misradravya.
**194/3:** Two types of Bhava production. **195, 196:** Sixteen Doshas of
production. **197:** Five types of Dhatri. **198:** Nirukta of the word Dhatri.
**198/1-15:** Dhatritvakarana and its doshas. **199:** The story of Sangama
Stavira and Datta Shishya in the Dhatri Dosha. **200, 201:** Different types of
Dooti.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 136/1-6 prAduSkaraNa doSa meM kathAnaka kA ullekh| 137-138/6
prAduSkaraNa ke bheda evaM usakI vyaakhyaa| 139-143/3 krItakRta ke bheda-
prabhedoM kI vyAkhyA evaM kthaank| 144-144/4 prAmitya ke bheda evaM bhAI-bahina
kA dRssttaant| 145 prAmitya viSayaka vastrAdi se saMbaMdhita doss| 146 prAmitya
viSayaka apvaad| 147-50 parivartita dvAra kI vyAkhyA evaM laukika udaahrnn|
151-157/6 abhyAhRta ke bheda-prabheda evaM usake dRssttaant| 158, 159 AcIrNa
abhyAhRta ke bheda evaM unakA svruup-kthn| 160 abhyAhRta viSayaka kalpyAkalpya
vidhi| 161 AcIrNa abhyAhRta ke jaghanya, madhyama Adi bhed| 162-64 udbhinna
dvAra kI vyAkhyA evaM usake doss| 165-71 - mAlApahata dvAra ke bhedoM kI vyAkhyA
evaM bhikSu kA udaahrnn| 172-177/2 Acchedya ke bhedoM kI vyAkhyA evaM gopa kA
dRssttaant| 178-85 anisRSTa dvAra kI vyAkhyA tathA modaka kA dRSTAnta  /
186-188/1 adhyavapUraka ke prakAra evaM kalpyAkalpya vidhi| 189 solaha udgama
doSa ke do bhed| 190 avizodhi koTi kI vyaakhyaa| avizodhi koTi se spRSTa anna ke
doss| 192-192/5 vizodhikoTi kI vyAkhyA evaM cturbhgii| 192/6 koTikaraNa ke do
prkaar| 192/7 prakArAntara se nau evaM sattara bhed| 193 udgama doSa gRhastha se
samutthita tathA utpAdanA ke doSa sAdhu se sNbNdhit| 194 utpAdanA ke nikSepa
evaM bhed-prbhed| 194/1 sacitta dravya utpaadnaa| 194/2 mizradravya utpaadnaa|
194/3 bhAva utpAdanA ke do bhed| 195, 196 utpAdanA ke solaha doss| dhAtrI ke
pAMca prkaar| dhAtrI zabda kA nirukt| 198/1-15 dhAtrItvakaraNa evaM usake doss|
199 dhAtrI doSa meM saMgama sthavira evaM datta ziSya kI kthaa| 200, 201 dUtI ke
bheda-prabheda  /  197 198

Page #181 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Table of Contents  201/1-3 202, 203 204 205 206 - 207/4 208 214, 215 216 Five
types of **Vanipak** and their explanation. 208/1-213 Types of **Vanipak** and
their faults. Types of treatment and their faults. 220 220/1, 2 221 222 - 224
225 - 226 / 1 227. 227 / 1 - 228 228/1, 229 230-32 217-218 / 1 Nature and
example of **Krodha Pind**. Nature of **Mana Pind**. 219 219/1-15 Example of
**Mana Pind** and **Maya Pind**. Nature of **Lobha Pind**. 233 234 235 236
236/1-3 237 238 238/1, 2 239 239/1 Process of **Dooti** (messenger) role. Story
of a father and daughter related to **Dooti**. Types of **Nimitta** (cause). 240
240/1-4 Example of **Nimitta Dwaar** (door of cause). Five types of **Aajivana**
(livelihood) and their nature.  Examples related to **Krodha Pind** etc. and
names of cities related to them. Example of **Lobha Pind**. Types of **Sanstav**
(praise). Explanation of **Sambandhi Sanstav** (related praise) and its faults.
Explanation of **Vachan Sanstav** (verbal praise). Indication of examples
related to **Vidya Dwaar** (knowledge door) and **Mantra Dwaar** (mantra door).
Examples and faults related to **Vidya Dwaar**. Story of King Murund and
Padalipta in **Mantra Dwaar** and its faults. Examples related to **Churna**
(powder), **Yog** (combination) and **Moolakarma** (root action) and their
faults. Relationship of **Grahaneshna** (desire to acquire) with **Gaveshana**
(research). Faults of **Utpaddana** (production) arising from **Sadhu** (saint)
and faults of **Grahaneshna** arising from both **Sadhu** and **Grihastha**
(householder). Faults of **Shankit** (doubtful) and **Bhaav** (emotion) not
transformed arising from **Sadhu** and other faults arising from **Grihastha**.
Deposits of **Grahaneshna**. Example of a troop of monkeys in **Dravya
Grahaneshna** (desire to acquire material). Ten faults of **Bhaav Grahaneshna**
(desire to acquire emotion). Fourfold nature of **Shankit** (doubtful) fault.
Mention of twenty-five faults of **Udgam** (origin) and **Utpaddana**
(production). Proof of **Shrutagyan** (scriptural knowledge) for **Chhadmastha**
(hypocrite). Consumption of impure food by **Shrutagyani** (knower of
scriptures), its consumption by **Kevali** (omniscient) otherwise **Shruta**
(scripture) is not authentic. Lack of **Charitra** (conduct) and **Moksha**
(liberation) due to non-authenticity of **Shruta**. Explanation of fourfold
nature of **Shankit** (doubtful). 9

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 viSaya sUcI 201/1-3 202, 203 204 205 206 - 207/4 208 214, 215 216 vanIpaka ke
pAMca prakAra evaM nirukta  /  208/1-213 vanIpakatva karane ke prakAra evaM doSa
/  cikitsA ke prakAra evaM usake doSa  /  220 220/1, 2 221 222 - 224 225 - 226 /
1 227. 227 / 1 - 228 228/1, 229 230-32 217-218 / 1 krodhapiMDa kA svarUpa evaM
dRSTAnta  /  mAnapiMDa kA svarUpa  /  219 219/1-15 mAnapiMDa evaM mAyApiMDa kA
dRSTAnta  /  lobhapiMDa kA svarUpa  /  233 234 235 236 236/1-3 237 238 238/1, 2
239 239/1 dUtItva karaNa kI prakriyA | dUtIviSayaka pitA-putrI kI kathA  /
nimitta ke prakAra  /  240 240/1-4 nimitta dvAra kA dRSTAnta  /  AjIvanA ke
pAMca prakAra evaM unakA svarUpa  /  krodhapiMDa Adi se saMbaMdhita dRSTAnta
evaM unase saMbaMdhita nagaroM ke nAma  /  lobhapiNDa kA dRSTAnta  /  saMstava
ke bheda - prabheda  /  saMbaMdhI saMstava kI vyAkhyA evaM usake doSa  /  vacana
saMstava kI vyAkhyA  /  vidyA evaM maMtra dvAra ke dRSTAntoM kA saMketa  /
vidyA dvAra se saMbaMdhita dRSTAnta evaM doSa  /  maMtra dvAra meM muruNDa rAjA
evaM pAdalipta kA kathAnaka tathA usake doSa  /  cUrNa, yoga evaM mUlakarma se
saMbaMdhita dRSTAnta evaM unake doSa  /  gaveSaNA ke sAtha grahaNaiSaNA kA
saMbaMdha  /  utpAdanA ke doSa sAdhu se samutthita tathA grahaNaiSaNA ke doSa
sAdhu aura gRhastha donoM se samutthita  /  zaMkita aura bhAva se apariNata doSa
sAdhu se tathA anya doSa gRhastha se samutthita grahaNaiSaNA ke nikSepa  /
dravya grahaNaiSaNA meM vAnarayUtha kA dRSTAnta  /  bhAva grahaNaiSaNA ke dasa
doSa  /  zaMkita doSa kI caturbhaMgI  /  udgama - utpAdanA ke paccIsa doSoM kA
ullekha  /  chadmastha ke lie zrutajJAna pramANa  /  zrutajJAnI dvArA azuddha
AhAra kA grahaNa, kevalI dvArA usakA upabhoga anyathA zruta kI aprAmANikatA  /
zruta ke aprAmANya se cAritra aura mokSa kA abhAva  /  zaMkita caturbhaMgI kI
vyAkhyA  /  9

Page #182 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Pinḍaniyukti**  **241** Purity and impurity based on the outcome.
**242-245/2** Different types of Mr̥kṣita and their description. **246-55**
Different types of Nikṣipta and their explanation. **256-259/1** Fourfold
classification of Pihita and explanation of its types. **260-264/1** Explanation
of Sanhata dosa, its fourfold classification and its faults. **265-70** Forty
types of Varjanyadaya. **271** Instruction regarding Bhajana and Vikalpa in
Dayakas. **272-88** Faults of accepting alms from the hands of Varjanyadaya like
a child, an elder, a madman, etc. **288/1-8** Exceptions to accepting alms from
these Dayakas. **289, 290** Fourfold classification of Unmiśra and its
explanation. **291** Difference between Sanhata and Unmiśra. **291/1** Bhajana
in the fourth fold of the fourfold classification of Unmiśra. **292-95**
Different types of Apariṇata dvāra and their explanation. **295/1-10** Inquiry
and solution regarding Lipta dvāra. **296-98** Instruction regarding Alepa,
Alpalepa and Bahulepa substances. **299** Eight folds related to the hand and
vessel that have come into contact with something. **300** Fourfold
classification of Chardita. **301** Faults of accepting Chardita and the example
of Madhubindu. **302-302/5** Deposit of Nikṣepa in Grāsaiṣaṇā and the example of
a fish in Dravya Grāsaiṣaṇā. **303, 303/1** Different types of Bhāva Grāsaiṣaṇā.
**304-07** Different types of San Yojana dosa and their explanation. **308,
309** Exceptions to Dravya San Yojana. **310** Measure of food. **311** Measure
of food for travel and Avam āhāra. **312-312/3** Faults of food measure and
their explanation. **313** Fruit of Hita āhāra. **313/1** Description of Ahita
āhāra. **313/2** Description of Mita āhāra. **313/3-6** Measure of food
according to the season like cold, etc. **314-16** Explanation of Angāra and
Dhūma dosa. **317-318/2** Six reasons for eating food. **319-21** Six reasons
for not eating food. **322** Forty-two faults of Trividha Eṣaṇā. **323** Fruit
of Āhāra vidhi. **Exception: Even the consumption of food by a well-conducted
Muni is a cause of Nirjarā.** **324**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 241 pariNAma ke AdhAra para zuddhi aura ashuddhi| 242-245/2
mrakSita ke bheda-prabheda tathA unakA vivrnn| 246-55 nikSipta ke bheda-prabheda
evaM unakI vyaakhyaa| 256-259/1 pihita kI caturbhaMgI evaM usake bhedoM kI
vyaakhyaa| 260-264/1 saMhata doSa kI vyAkhyA, usakI catubhaMgI evaM doSa  /
265-70 varjanIya dAyaka ke cAlIsa prkaar| 271 dAyakoM meM bhajanA evaM vikalpa
kA nirdesh| 272-88 bAlaka, sthavira, unmatta Adi varjanIya dAyaka ke hAtha se
bhikSA lene ke doss| 288/1-8 ina dAyakoM se bhikSA lene kA apavAda  /  289, 290
unmizra kI caturbhaMgI evaM vyaakhyaa| 291 saMhata aura unmizra meM bhed| 291/1
unmizra kI caturbhaMgI ke caturtha bhaMga meM bhjnaa| 292-95 apariNata dvAra ke
bheda-prabheda evaM unakI vyaakhyaa| 295/1-10 lipta dvAra ke saMbaMdha meM
jijJAsA evaM smaadhaan| 296-98 alepa, alpalepa tathA bahulepa padArthoM kA
nirdesh| 299 saMsRSTa hAtha aura pAtra se saMbaMdhita ATha bhNg| 300 chardita kI
cturbhNgii| 301 chardita grahaNa ke doSa tathA madhubindu kA dRssttaant|
302-302/5 grAsaiSaNA ke nikSepa tathA dravya grAsaiSaNA meM matsya kA dRSTAnta
/  303, 303/1 bhAva grAsaiSaNA ke bhed-prbhed| 304-07 saMyojanA doSa ke bheda
evaM unakI vyaakhyaa| 308, 309 dravya saMyojanA ke apvaad| 310 AhAra kA prmaann|
311 yAtrAmAtrAhAra kA pramANa tathA avama aahaar| 312-312/3 AhAra-pramANa ke
doSa evaM unakI vyaakhyaa| 313 hitAhAra kI phlshruti| 313/1 ahita-AhAra kA
vivrnn| 313/2 mita-AhAra kA vivrnn| 313/3-6 zIta Adi kAla kI apekSA AhAra kA
prmaann| 314-16 aMgAra aura dhUma doSa kI vyaakhyaa| 317-318/2 AhAra karane ke
chaha kaarnn| 319-21 AhAra na karane ke chaha kaarnn| 322 trividha eSaNA ke 42
doSa  /  323 AhAra-vidhi kI phlshruti| suvihita muni kA apavAda-sevana bhI
nirjarA kA hetu| 324

Page #183 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Pindaniyukti  **1.**  As per the method of **samyojana** (joining) of
**pindas** (bodies), there are six types of **nikshep** (deposition) due to
**ingal-dhum** (fire-smoke) as the cause, in the **atthavihar** (eight types of
conduct).  **2.**  In the **pind-nikaya-samuhe** (group of bodies),
**sampindana** (joining together) and **pindana** (body-making) are the same.
**Samusarana** (movement), **nichaya** (determination), **uvacaya** (increase),
**chaya** (shadow), **jumma** (burden), and **rasi** (heap) are also the same.
**3.**  The **nikshev** (deposition) of the **pinda** (body) is of four or six
types. The **kayavva** (form) of the **nikshev** is called **nikkhev**
(deposition).  **4.**  In the **kula** (family), there are four types of
**samhava** (birth) and six types of **chakkag** (six-fold). There is a rule for
**samhava** (birth), so the **chakkag** (six-fold) is **nikkhev** (deposited).
**5.**  The **namathavana-pinda** (name-giving body) is **nikshev** (deposited)
in **davva** (wealth), **khetta** (field), **kala** (time), and **bhava**
(state). This is the **nikshev** (deposition) of the **pinda** (body) in six
ways.  **6.**  If it is done by **gonnam** (common) or **samayakatam** (proper
time) or both, then it is called **namathavana-pinda** (name-giving body).
**7.**  In the **akkha** (whole) **varaḍa** (world) or **kata** (part)
**puttha** (book) or **chitta-kamme** (mental activity) or **sabhava** (natural)
or **asabhava** (unnatural), the **namathavana-pinda** (name-giving body) is
**viyanahi** (explained).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti piMDe uggama-uppAyaNesaNA joyaNA' pamANe y| iMgAla-dhUma- kAraNa,
aTThavihAre piMDanijjuttI  // 1 //  dAraM  /  /  piMDa-nikAya-samUhe, saMpiMDaNa
piMDaNA ya smvaae| samusaraNa -nicaya-uvacaya, cae ya jumme ya rAsI y||2||
piMDassa u nikkhevo, caukkago chakkago ya kaayvvo| 'nikkhevaM kAUNaM', parUvaNA
tassa kAyavvA  //  3  //  kulae u caubhAgassa, saMbhavo chakkagecauNDaM ca  /
niyameNa saMbhavo atthi, chakkagaM nikkhive2 tamhA  //  4  //  nAma
ThavaNApiMDo, davve khette ya kAla bhAve y| eso khalu piMDassa u, nikkhevo
chavviho hoti  //  5  //  goNNaM samayakataM vA, jaM vAvi5 havejja'6 tadubhaeNa
kataM  /  /  taM beMti nAmapiMDaM, ThavaNApiMDaM ao vocchaM  //  6  //  akkhe
varADae vA, kaTe putthe7 va18 cittakamme vaa| sabbhAvamasabbhAve19,
ThavaNApiMDaM viyANAhi  // 7 //  5. 1. yahAM 'joyaNA' zabda saMyojanA kA vAcaka
hai| kA ullekha karake usakI prarUNNA karane kI bAta 2. "viha (s)| kahI hai|
chaha prakAra ke nikSepa kI bAta kahakara 3. paMkabhA 768, tu. mUlA 421  /
niyuktikAra punaH usakI punarukti nahIM karate ata: 4. vi (a, bii)| bhASyakAra
ne dRSTAnta ke dvArA chaha prakAra ke nikSepa 5. samosaraNa (sa, oni 407) /  kI
siddhi kI hai| isI saMbhAvanA ke AdhAra para 6. kAUNa ya nikkhevaM (ba, ka, lA,
s)| isa gAthA ko nigA ke kramAMka meM nahIM rakhA hai| 7. oni 331  /  14. oni
332 //  8. kulake-catuHsetikApramANe (mvR)| 15. 'avi' zabda se graMthakAra ne
ubhayAtirikta yA anubhayaja 9. chakkao (a, bii)| nAma ko sUcita kiyA hai (mavR
p.4)| 10. va (a, ba, lA, bii)| 16. have ya (ba), havijja (ka), oni 333  /  11.
chakkaga (b)| 17. potthe (b)| 12. nikkheve (a, lA, bii)| 18. ya (k)| 13. yaha
gAthA bhASya kI saMbhava hai kyoMki gAthA 3 meM 19. bhAvi (b)| niyuktikAra ne
piMDa zabda ke cAra tathA chaha nikSepoM 20. oni 334, Avani 987/2  /

Page #184 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **The Composition of the Body**  There are three kinds of body-matter:
**saccitta** (conscious), **misao** (mixed), and **acitta** (unconscious). Each
of these has nine subdivisions.   **Earth, water, fire, and air** are the four
elements. They are classified as **single-sensed**, **two-sensed**, **three-
sensed**, and **four-sensed** or **five-sensed**.  Earth-matter is of three
kinds: **saccitta**, **misao**, and **acitta**. **Saccitta** is further divided
into **nichchya** (definite) and **vavahari** (conventional).  **Nichchya
saccitta** is the earth-matter that forms the great mountains and other large
masses. **Acitta misao** is the rest, and **vavahari saccitta** is the
conventional earth-matter.  **Milk, curd, butter, and ghee** are **misao**
(mixed) substances. They are produced from **kiththolle** (wood) and **indhane**
(fuel). They are also classified as **single-fuel**, **two-fuel**, **three-
fuel**, and **multi-fuel**.  **Salt, sourness, bitterness, and astringency** are
**acitta** (unconscious) substances. They are produced from **fire**, **loonus**
(salt), and **ambile** (sourness).  **Avaraddhiga** (obstruction), **vis**
(poison), and **bandhe** (binding) are also **acitta** substances. They are
produced from **salt** and **surabhiuvalae** (fragrant substances).  **Location,
position, and destruction** are **acitta** substances. They are produced from
**uccara** (pronunciation) and other **ussago** (efforts).  **Ghattag**
(hardness), **daglagalevo** (smoothness), and other qualities are also
**acitta** substances. They are produced from **payoayana** (nourishment).
**Water-matter** is of three kinds: **saccitta**, **misao**, and **acitta**.
**Saccitta** is further divided into **nichchya** (definite) and **vavahari**
(conventional).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti tividho u' davvapiMDo, 'saccitto mIsao acitto y2| ekkekkassa ya
etto, nava nava bhedA muNeyavvA  //  8  //  puDhavI AukkAo, teU vAU vaNassatI
cev|| beiMdiya teiMdiya, cauro paMciMdiyA ceva  //  9  //  puDhavIkAo tividho,
saccitto mIsao ya accitto| saccitto puNa duvidho, nicchayavavahArio ceva  // 10
//  nicchayao saccitto', puDhavi-mahApavvatANa bhumjjhe|| accittamIsavajjo',
seso vvhaarsccitto||11|| khIradumahe? paMthe, 'kiTTholle10 iMdhaNe ya mIso u'11
/  porisi ega-duga-tigaM, 'bahuiMdhaNa-majjha-thove y'12|| 12  //  sI-uNha-
khAra-khatte13, aggI loNUsa" aMbile nehe| vukkaMtajoNieNaM, payoyaNaM teNimaM
hoti15  //  13  //  avaraddhiga-visa-baMdhe, lavaNeNa va surabhiuvalaeNaM vaa|
accittassa16 u gahaNaM, payoyaNaM 'teNimaM va'nnaM '17  //  14  //  14. ThANa-
nisIya-tuyaTTaNa, uccArAdINa ceva ussAgo  /  ghaTTaga9-Dagalagalevo, emAdi
payoyaNaM bahuhA  //  15  //  AukkAo tividho, saccitto mIsao ya accitto|
saccitto20 puNa29 duvidho, nicchaya-vavahArio22 ceva  // 16 //  1. ya (lA, ka,
ba), oni 335  /  11. abhiNava kaTTholla iMdhaNe mIsaM (nibhaa)| 2.
saccittAccittamIsao ceva (ba, lA, sa), "mIsao 12. thoviMdhaNa majjha bahae ya
(nibhA 151), oni 339  /  ya accitto (a, ka, bii)| 13. iha sarvatra saptamI
tRtIyArthe prAkRtalakSaNavazAt (mvR)| 3. u patteyaM (a, bI, ka, mu), sa prati
meM 7 aura 14. loNUsaM (ba, laa)| 8-ye donoM gAthAeM nahIM haiN| 15. dra. pini
18, oni 340  /  4. 'kkAe (a, ka, bI, oni 336, jIbhA 956) /  16. accittassa tti
vibhaktipariNAmeNeha tRtIyAntaM 5. oni meM isa gAthA kA uttarArdha isa prakAra
hai- sambandhyate (m)| "biya-tiya-cauro paMciMdiyA ya levo ya dasamo u||" 17.
hoi jaM ca'nnaM (oni 341) /  6. vi ya (k)| 18. ussayo (b)| 7. oni 337 /  19.
ghuTTaga (mu, oni 342), ghuTTako-lepitapAtramasRNatA 8. sacitto (b)| kAraka:
pASANaH (mvR)| 9. acitto mIsa (ba, lA), oni 338  /  20. ya accitto (s)| 10.
katthulla (bI), kaTThole (s)| 21. vi ya (a, ka, ba, lA, bii)| 22. 'hArao (mu)
srvtr|

Page #185 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **16.** The vast oceans, like the earth, are the foundation of
the universe, hard and vast, not repeating themselves, nor are they the oceans
of anything. **17.** With a firm and certain mind, one should be free from the
rules of conduct. **18.** When water is used for drinking, or for punishment, or
for measuring, or for washing rice, it is considered pure. **17/1.** The water
used for washing vessels, for bathing, for blowing bubbles, or for cooking rice,
is considered pure. **17/2.** These are the rules, and there is no possibility
of any other time-based rule. The water used for washing vessels, for bathing,
for blowing bubbles, or for cooking rice, is considered pure. **17/3.** "Until
it is very pure," "until the rice is cooked," "this is it," these are the rules.
The measure is not certain, but it is not necessary for it to be very pure.
**18.** Water used for cooling, for heating, for salting, for eating, for fire,
for salt, for pickles, is considered pure. **22.** Water used for washing, for
drinking, for hands, for washing clothes, for washing utensils, for washing
food, is considered pure. **23.** Water used for bathing, for washing, for
cleaning, for removing dirt, for purifying, for destroying evil, is considered
pure. **21.** Water used for washing, for cooling, for applying medicine, for
washing clothes, for washing the body, for washing the house, is considered
pure.   **Notes:**  * **1.** The vast oceans are the foundation of the universe,
hard and vast, not repeating themselves, nor are they the oceans of anything. *
**2.** "Yameyam ti (s), "Yamete y (Ooni 344)." * **3.** "Pasavi (b, s), Pasagal
(k)." * **4.** V (a, b). * **5.** Ja anne (a, b, la, b, s). * **6.** Asambh (a,
b). * **7.** Javann (b, la). * **8.** Mis ta (b). * **9.** Etth es (b, la). *
**10.** 17/1-3-these three verses are in the published commentary in the order
of Niga, but these three should be the verses of the commentary. These verses
explain verse 17. Due to the concise style, the compiler  * **11.** Vakkant (la,
b). * **12.** Dr. Pini 12, Ooni 346. * **13.** Hatthai (k), Dhoyan (b, a),
Dhoyana (Ooni 347). * **14.** Dhavane (a, la, s), Dhoyan (k). * **15.** Paun (a,
b, la), Palavan (Ooni 348). * **16.** 'N Jire Gelanne (la). * **17.** Ohavan (a,
mu). * **18.** Y Dhovane (b). * **19.** Ooni 349.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 16. ghaNaudahI ghaNavalayA, karaga samuddaddahANa bhumjjhe| aha
nicchayasaccitto, vavahAranayassa agaDAdI  //  17  //  17. usiNodagamaNuvatte,
daMDe vAse ya paDiyamittammi  /  mottUNAdesatigaM, cAulaudagaM'bahupasannaM  //
18  //  17/1. bhaMDagapAsavalaggA, utteDA bubbuyA ya na smeNti| jA tAva mIsagaM
taMDulA ya raddhaMti jAva'nne  //  19  //  17/2. ete u aNAdesA, tinni vi
kAlaniyamassa'saMbhavao  /  lukkhetarabhaMDaga pavaNa-saMbhavAsaMbhavAdIhiM  //
20  //  17/3. 'jAva na bahuppasannaM, 'tA mIsaM'8 'esa ettha'9 aadeso| hoti
pamANamacittaM, bahuppasannaM tu nAtavvaM  // 21 //  18. sI-uNha-khAra-khatte,
aggI loNUsa-aMbile nehe| vukkaMtajoNieNaM, payoyaNaM teNimaM hoti12  //  22  //
pariseya-piyaNa-hatthAdidhovaNe13 cIradhovaNaM14 cev| AyamaNa-bhANadhuvaNaM,
emAdi payoyaNaM bahuhA  //  23  //  uubaddhadhuvaNa bAusa, baMbhaviNAso
aThANaThavaNaM c| saMpAima-vAuvaho, pAvaNa5 bhUtovaghAto y||24|| 21. aibhAra
cuDaNa paNae, sItala 'pAuraNa'jIra-gelaNNe'16  /  obhAvaNa17 kAyavadho, vAsAsu
adhovaNe8 dosA  //  25  /  /  1. ghanodadhayaH narakapRthvInAmAdhArabhUtAH
kaThinatoyAH na punarukti karate haiM aura na hI kisI bAta kA samudrAH (mavR),
oni 343 /  /  vistaar| pRthvIkAya Adi se saMbaMdhita gAthAoM ke 2. 'yameyaM ti
(sa), "yamete ya (oni 344) /  AdhAra para bhI yaha niSkarSa nikalatA hai ki ye
3. "pAsavi (bI, sa), pAsagala (k)| gAthAeM bhASya kI honI caahie| 4. va (a,
bii)| 11. vakkaMta (lA, bii)| 5. jA anne (a, ba, lA, bI, s)| 12. dra. pini 12,
oni 346  /  6. asaMbha (a, bii)| 13. hatthAI (ka), dhoyaNe (bI, a), 7. jAvanna
(ba, laa)| _dhoyaNA (oni 347) /  8. mIsa tA (bii)| 14. dhAvaNe (a, lA, sa),
dhoyaNaM (k)| 9. ettha esa (ba, laa)| 15. pAuNa (a, ba, lA), palavaNa (oni 348)
/  10. 17/1-3-ye tInoM gAthAeM prakAzita TIkA meM nigA 16. 'Na jIre gelaNNe
(laa)| ke krama meM haiM lekina ye tInoM bhASya kI gAthAeM 17. ohAvaNa (a, mu)|
honI caahie| ina gAthAoM meM gA. 17 kI hI 18. ya dhovaNe (bii)| vyAkhyA hai|
saMkSipta zailI hone ke kAraNa niyuktikAra 19. oni 349  /  |

Page #186 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 14  **21/1. Appatte** **21/2.** "Airiya - Gilaṇāṇ ya5, Maila Maila Puṇo Vi
Dhoventi. Mā Hu Gurūṇ Avaṇṇo, Logammi Ajīraṇam Itare" || 27 || Payassa Paḍoyāro,
Dunisejjā Tipaṭṭa Potti Rayahaṛaṇam. Ete 'ṇ U10 Vissāme1, Jataṇā Saṅkāmaṇā
Dhūvaṇā12 || 28 || **22/1.** Jo Puṇ Vīsāmijjati, Taṁ Evaṁ Vītarāga Āṇāe. Patte
Dhovaṇakāle, Uvahiṁ14 Vissāma Sāhū15 || 29 || Cciya' Vāse, Savvaṁ Uvadhiṁ
Dhūvanti Jataṇāe. 'Asaiye Va'2 Davassa U Jahanno Payanijjōgo || 26 ||  **22.**
**4** **22/2.** Abbhintaraparibhōgaṁ, Uvariṁ Pāuṇati Nāti Dūre Ya. Tinni Ya
Tinni Ya Egaṁ, Nisim Tu Kāuṁ Paričchējjā || 30 ||  **22/3.** Keī Ekke
Kkanisiṁ17, Saṁvāseuṁ Pāuṇiya18 Jai Na Laggaṁti Chapppaya19 Tiha Paričchaṁti.
Tāheṁ20 Dhovejja19 || 31 ||  **1. Cciya (Bī), Oni 350.** **2. Asaiye U (S,
Mu).** **3. Ya (Mu, B, Lā).** **4. Prasā 864, 21/1, 2 -** These two gāthās are
in the Nigā number in the published commentary, but due to being explanatory,
these two gāthās appear to be from the Bhāṣya. Even in the context of Pṛthvīkāya
etc., the author has not explained in such detail. **5. ṇāṇam (Lā, B, S K), ṇāṇ
u (Bī).** **6. Malinānityatra Napuṁsakatvē Prāpte'pi Sūtre Puṁstvanirdeśaḥ
Prākṛtalakṣaṇavaśāt (Mavṛ).** **7. Dhāvanti (Mu, B), Dhovvamti (S), Dhovamti
(Oni 351).** **8. Prasā 865.** **9. Donisejjā (Lā).** **10. U Na (Mu, Lā, B,
S).** **11. Vīsāme (A, Bī, Mu), Sarvatra.** **12. Dhūvaṇam (Mu, S),** This gāthā
is not in B prati, Oni 352. **13. Ganīie (S).** **14. Uvahiṁ (K).** **15. Sāhū
(K).** **16. Paḍi (Bī, A), Oni 353.** **17. Nisim (Lā), Nisī (S).** **18. Pāuṇi
(Lā, B).** **19. Chapppaya (Mu).** **20. Tāhi (Bī, S, Mu).** **21. Dhāventi (K,
S, Mu), Oni 354.**  **22/1-6 -** These six gāthās mention the method of
Viśrāmaṇā and the method of taking water for washing clothes. They mention the
opinions of other Ācāryas. These gāthās should not be considered as Niyukti but
as Bhāṣya, because even in other Ācārāṅga etc. Niyuktis, there is no mention of
differences of opinion specifically. By the time of the Bhāṣyakāra, differences
of opinion had begun, so these gāthās should be from the Bhāṣya. Also, the
previous gāthā "Dhovatthaṁ Tinni"....... (Pibhā 11) is from the Bhāṣya. Even if
these gāthās are not considered as Niyukti, there is no difference from the
point of view of the current subject matter.  **Piṇḍaniryukti**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 14 21/1. appatte 21 /2. 'Ayariya - gilANANa ya5, mailA mailA puNo vi dhoveMti
/  mA hu gurUNa avaNNo, logammi ajIraNaM itare'  //  27  //  pAyassa paDoyAro,
dunisejja tipaTTa potti rayaharaNaM  /  ete 'Na u10 vissAme 1, jataNA saMkAmaNA
dhuvaNA 12  //  28  //  22 / 1. jo puNa vIsAmijjati, taM evaM vItarAga ANAe  /
patte dhovaNakAle, uvahiM 14 vissAma sAhU15  //  29  //  cciya' vAse, savvaM
uvadhiM dhuvaMti jataNAe  /  'asaIe va '2 davassa u jahannao pAyanijjogo  //  26
//  " 22. 4 22 / 2. abbhiMtaraparibhogaM, uvariM pAuNati nAtidUre y| tinni ya
tinni ya egaM, nisiM tu kAuM paricchejjA  //  30  //  22/3 keI ekke kkanisiM 17,
saMvAseuM pAuNiya 18 jai na laggaMti chappayA 19 14 tihA paricchaMti | tAheM 20
dhovejjA 19  //  31  //  1. ciya (bI), oni 350  /  2. asaie u ( sa, mu)  /  3.
ya (mu, ba, lA)  /  4. prasA 864, 21/1, 2- ye donoM gAthAeM prakAzita TIkA meM
nigA ke kramAMka meM haiM lekina vyAkhyAtmaka hone ke kAraNa ye donoM gAthAeM
bhASya kI pratIta hotI haiN| pRthvIkAya Adi ke saMdarbha meM bhI graMthakAra ne
itane vistAra se vyAkhyA nahIM kI hai| 5. NANaM (lA, ba, sa ka ), NANa u (bI) 1
6. malinAnItyatra napuMsakatve prApte'pi sUtre puMstvanirdeza:
prAkRtalakSaNavazAt (mavR)  /  7. dhAvaMti (mu, ba), dhovvaMti (sa), dhovaMti
(oni 351)  /  8. prasA 865 / 9. donisejjA (lA)  /  10. u na (mu, lA, ba, sa )  /
11. vIsAme ( a, bI, mu), sarvatra  /  12. dhuvaNaM (mu, sa), yaha gAthA ba prati
meM nahIM hai, 18. pAuNii (lA, ba )  /  oni 352 13. ganIie (sa)  /  15. uvahI (
ka )  /  22/1-6 - ye chahoM gAthAeM vizrAmaNA-vidhi evaM vastraprakSAlana hetu
jala-grahaNa Adi kI vidhi kA ullekha karane vAlI haiN| inameM anya AcAryoM ke
mata kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai| ye gAthAeM niyukti kI na hokara bhASya kI honI
cAhie kyoMki anya AcArAMga Adi niyuktiyoM meM bhI vizeSa rUpa se matAntara kA
ullekha nahIM milatA hai| bhASyakAra ke samaya taka matAntara prArambha ho gae
the ataH ye gAthAeM bhASya kI honI caahie| vaise bhI isase pUrva kI gAthA
'dhovatthaM tinni'....... (pibhA 11) gAthA bhASya kI hai| ina gAthAoM ko niyukti
kI na bhI mAnA jAe to cAlU viSaya-vastu kI dRSTi se koI aMtara nahIM AtA  /  16.
paDi (bI, a), oni 353  /  17. nisi (lA), nisI ( sa )  /  19. chappaiyA (mu)  /
20. tAhi (bI, sa, mu)  /  21. dhAveMti (ka, sa, mu), oni 354 piMDaniryui

Page #187 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti **4.** 22/4. The taking of Nivodaga, in some accounts, is
prohibited for the sick. The taking of Gihibhayanas, is a fine, a misdeed, a
sin. || 32 || 22/5. The washing of the Guru, the sick, the relatives, etc., is
done first. Then, one's own, then the elders, and the others are washed
afterwards. || 33 || 22/6. In the case of shedding and beating, one should not
wash, nor should one wash the washing water. The enjoyment of non-enjoyment, the
shade, the wind, etc., are auspicious. || 34 || **Door** || 23. There are three
types of Teukkaos, the conscious, the unconscious, and the mixed. The conscious
is again of two types, the definite and the conventional. || 35 || The definite
is the bricks, the pots, etc., the many, the middle, the lightning, etc. The
conventional is the iron, etc., the murmur, etc., and the mixed. || 36 || 25.
The rice, the vegetables, the food, the water, the mustard, the dung, the straw,
the needle, the pepper, etc., are the objects of the senses. || 37 || **Door**
|| The Vaukkaos are of three types, the conscious, the unconscious, and the
mixed. The conscious is again of two types, the definite and the conventional.
|| 38 || 27. The definite is the fine, the coarse, the thin, the thick, the
cold, the hot, the light, the heavy, etc. The conventional is the drinking,
etc., the touching, etc., and the unconscious. || 39 || 27/1. The unconscious is
of five types, as stated by the experts in the field of Karma. || 40 || 1. Ooni
355. - 2. "Maiṇ (Ooni 356), Sehmaaiṇ, etc., the Ma is a figurative term (Mavṛ).
3. Dhoyaṇam (A, B). 4. Puvviṁ (La, B). 5. "Haagade (La, B). 6. Acchol (B),
Aaccheṭanam-rajakaivāsphalanam (Mavṛ). 7. In the Sutra, the seventh case is used
in the sense of the third case (Mavṛ). 8. Dhoe (Mu), Dhaave (Ooni 357). 9. Bhog
Aapari (Mu). 10. In the Sutra, the case ending is omitted due to being ancient
(Mavṛ). 11. "Haario (La, B). 12. Bahu' (B). 13. Nicchaiyo (K, B). 14. U Misso U
(Mu), Ooni 358. 15. "Paṇaga-Aayaam Musi (S, K, Ooni 359). 16. 'Lagaai Y (K). 17.
"Haario (K, S). 18. "Duddiṇe Y (Mu, Ooni). 19. Gai° (La), Paayaṇai (S),
Paayamaai (Ooni 360). 20. Akkantan (B). 21. Paṇe (La, B). 22. Piviiliaisu (La,
B), 'Isu Y (K). 23. Acchitta Vaukkaao (Mu, La, B, K). 24. This verse is not
present in Ooni in the order of the verses.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 4. 22/4 nivvodagassa gahaNaM, keI bhANesu asuipddisedho|
gihibhAyaNesu gahaNaM, Thiya vAse mIsagaM chAro  //  32  //  22/5. guru-
paccakkhANi-gilANa-sehamAdINa dhovaNaM puvvaM  /  to appaNo puvvamahAkaDe ya
itare duve pacchA  //  33  //  22/6. acchoDa-piTTaNAsu' ya, na dhuve dhove
payAvaNaM na kre| paribhogamaparibhoge', chAyA''tava0 peha kallANaM  //  34
||daarN  //  23. tividho teukkAo, saccitto mIsao ya accitto| saccitto puNa
duvidho, nicchayavavahAraora ceva  //  35 //  iTTagapAgAdINaM, bahumajjhe12
vijjumAdi nicchayaora3  /  iMgAlAdI itaro, mummuramAdI 'ya mIso tu14|| 36 //
25. 'odaNa-vaMjaNa-pANaga-musiNodagaM'15 ca kummaasaa| Dagalaga-sarakkhasUI,
'pippalamAdI u'16 uvogo|| 37||daarN  //  vAukkAo tividho, saccitto mIsao ya
accitto| saccitto puNa duvidho, nicchayavavahArao7 cev|| 38  //  27. savalaya
ghaNa-taNuvAyA, aihima-aiduddiNesu8 nicchyo| vavahAra pAiNAdI, akkaMtAdI ya
accitto||39  /  /  27/1. akkaMta0 dhaMta ghANe29, dehANugate ya pIliyAdIsu22  /
'accitto paMcaviho'23, bhaNito kammaTThamahaNehiM  //  40  //  1. oni 355 /  -
2. "mAINa (oni 356), sehamAINa ityatra makAro'lAkSaNikaH (mvR)| 3. dhoyaNaM (a,
bii)| 4. puvviM (lA, b)| 5. "hAgaDe (lA, b)| 6. acchola (bI), AccheTanaM-
rajakairivAsphAlanam (mvR)| 7. sUtre ca saptamI tRtIyArthe (mvR)| 8. dhoe (mu),
dhAve (oni 357) /  9. bhoga apari (mu)| 10. sUtre ca vibhaktilopaH ArSatvAt
(mvR)| 11. "hArio (lA, b)| 12. bahU' (bii)| 13. nicchaio (ka, bii)| 14. u misso
u (mu), oni 358  /  15. "pANaga-AyAma musi (sa, ka, oni 359) /  16. 'lagAI ya
(k)| 17. "hArio (ka, s)| 18. "duddiNe ya (mu, oni)| 19. gAideg (lA), pAyaNAI
(sa), pAyamAI (oni 360) /  20. akkaMtaM (b)| 21. pANe (lA, b)| 22. pivIliyAisu
(lA, ba), 'Isu ya (k)| 23. accitta vAukAo (mu, lA, ba, k)| 24. gAthAoM ke krama
meM oni meM yaha gAthA nahIM hai|

Page #188 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **27/2.** The wind in the hand is a non-conscious state, the
seed is a non-conscious state. **27/3.** In the third, it is conscious, the wind
is again in the pores. || 41 || **28.** From the wind in the pores, the Muni
gets nourishment. **28/2.** In the wind, it is also conscious, one should avoid
the non-conscious state. || 42 || **29.** "The three types of Vanasika" are
conscious, non-conscious, and the conscious state is of two types, the state of
certainty and the state of conduct. || 43 || **30.** All Vanasika are conscious
in the state of certainty. The rest are in the state of conduct, the state of
wind, dust, etc. || 44 || **31.** "Flowers, leaves", 19, "ripe fruits", 12, and
green things. **31/2.** In the wind, 13, in the mixture, 14, it is not the
living being that is born. || 45 || **32.** The support, the foot, the stick,
the hair, the "cotton", 16, the fruit, etc. **32/2.** Medicines, herbs, etc.,
this is the nourishment in many ways. || 46 || **33.** The seed, the second, the
fourth, the five senses, and the three types of fire, 8, where they meet.
**33/2.** In the six places, in the six places, that body is the cause of the
action. || 47 ||  **Notes:** 1. Acitto (A, B, Oni 361), Acchittu (Mu). Added
with the number. 2. Bitiyae (B, La), Biyao (K, S). 3. Y (A, K, B). 4. Vatthi
(K). 5. 27/1, 2 - These two verses are related to the 28th verse in the
published commentary. 6. V (Mu), Ani 362. 7. Sacchitta (S). 8. Tiviho
Vanasaikaao (B), Vanassai (A). 9. Hario (K, B, La). 10. Pamailu (A),
Pavvairuṭṭai (La), "Yarotṭai (S, Mu, Oni 363), Loṭṭaḥ Gharṭṭādichūrṇaḥ (Mavṛ).
11. Paṭṭāṇam Puphaṇam (A, B, Bṛbhā 980). 12. Saraḍ (K), Śalāduphalānām-
Komalaphalaṇām (M). 13. Vaṇṭammi (K). 14. Milāyammi (B), Milāimmi (A). 15. This
verse is not in the S manuscript. 16. Kappās (B), Kappāi (Oni). 17. Tarusu (La,
B, Oni 364). 18. "Io (La, B), Tapp (K), "Bhijna (Oni 365).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 27/2. hatthasayamega gaMtA, daio accitta' bIyae' miiso| tatiyammi
u saccitto, vatthI' puNa porisidiNesu  //  41  //  28. daieNa vatthiNA vA,
payoyaNaM hojja vAuNA munninno| gelaNNammi vi hojjA, sacittamIse' prihrejjaa||
42  //  'vaNasaikAo tividho', saccitto mIsao ya accitto| saccitto puNa duvidho,
nicchayavavahArao cev|| 43  //  savvo vaNaMtakAo, saccitto hoti nicchynyss|
vavahArassa ya seso, mIso pavvAyaluTTAdI0  //  44  //  'pupphANaM pattANaM '19,
saraDuphalANaM12 taheva hritaannN| viMTammi13 milANammI, nAtavvaM
jIvavippajaDhaM5  //  45  /  /  saMthAra-pAya-daMDaga, khomiya 'kappA ya'16
piiddh-phlgaadii| osadha-bhesajjANi ya, emAdi payoyaNaM bahuhA  /  /  46 ||daarN
//  . 33. biya-tiya-cauro paMciMdiyA ya tippabhii8 jattha u smeti| saTThANe
saTThANe, so piMDo teNa kajjamiNaM  //  47  /  /  1. acitto (a, ba, oni 361),
accittu (mu)| kramAMka ke sAtha jor3a diyA ho| hastapratiyoM meM 2. bitiyae (bI,
lA), bIyao (ka, s)| bhI niyukti aura bhASya kI gAthAoM ke lie koI 3. ya (a, ka,
bii)| saMketa nahIM milatA hai| inheM nigA ke kramAMka meM 4. vatthi (k)| nahIM
rakhane se bhI viSaya-vastu kI dRSTi se 27 5. 27/1, 2-ye donoM gAthAeM prakAzita
TIkA meM niyukti vIM gAthA ke bAda 28 vI gAthA saMbaddha lagatI hai| ke kramAMka
meM haiM lekina ye bhASya kI gAthAeM honI 6. va (mu), Ani 362 /  caahie| ina
gAthAoM ke bhASyagata hone kA eka 7. saccitta (s)| kAraNa yaha hai ki 27 vI
gAthA meM jaba niyuktikAra 8. tiviho vaNasaikAo (bI), vaNassai (a)| 'akkaMtAdI
ya accitto' kA ullekha kara cuke haiM 9. hArio (ka, ba, laa)| to phira agalI
gAthA meM akkaMta, dhaMta Adi acitta 10. pamAilu (a), pavvAiruTTAI (lA),
"yaroTTAI (sa, vAyu kI punarukti nahIM krte| isI prakAra 28 vIM mu, oni 363),
loTTaH gharaTTAdicUrNaH (mvR)| gAthA meM ullekha hai ki muni ko dRti aura vasti
11. pattANaM pupphANaM (a, bI, bRbhA 980) /  . meM sthita vAyu se prayojana hotA
hai| 27/2 meM dRti 12. saraDa (ka), zalAduphalAnAM-komalaphalAnAM (m)| sthita
vAyu nadI Adi ke jala meM kAla ke AdhAra 13. vaMTammi (k)| para kaba sacitta
hotI hai, isakA ullekha yahAM 14. milAyammI (bI), milAimmI (a)| aprAsaMgika aura
vyAkhyAtmaka lagatA hai| saMbhava hai 15. yaha gAthA sa prati meM nahIM hai|
bhASyakAra ne isa dvAragAthA 27/2 kA varNana karake 16. kappAsa (bI), kappAI
(oni)| Age cAra gAthAoM meM isakI vyAkhyA kI hai 17. tarusu (lA, ba, oni 364) /
lekina prakAzita TIkA meM saMpAdaka ne ise niryakti 18. "io (lA, ba), tappa
(ka), "bhijJa (oni 365) /

Page #189 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  34. 'Beindiya Paribhoga', 'Akkaana Sasippa Sankhamaadiinam'.
Teindiyaan Uddehigaadi Jam Va Wade Vejjo. || 48 || Chaurindiyaan Macchhiya
Parihaaro Asamakkhiya Cheva. Panchindiya Pindammi U, Avvavahari U Neraiya. || 49
|| Chammatthi-Dant-Nah-Rom-Sing-Amilai Chagan-Gomutte. Kheer-Dadhimaadiyaan Ya,
Panchindiya Tiriya Paribhoga. || 50 || Sacchitte Pavvaavan, 'Panthuvadese Ya'10
Bhikkhadaanaadi. Seesatthiga Acchitte, Meesatthi Sarakkha Pahpuccha. || 51 ||
Khamgagadikala Kajjaiaesu Pucchezjja1 Devatan Kinchhi. Panthe Subhasubhe Va,
Pucchezjah'2 Divvauvago12. || 52 || _ Ah Meesao Ya Pindao, Etesim Chiya Navanha
Pindanam. Dugasamjogaadio, Netavvo4 Jaav Charamo5 Tti. || 53 || 40. Sovir-
Gorasaasava, Vesan6 Bhesajja-Neh-Saag-Phale. - Poggal17-Lon-Gulodan, Nega Pindaa
U Sanjoga. || 54 || 41. Tinni U8 Padesa Samaya, Thaanatthiui'9 Davie Tayaadesa.
Chau-Panchama Pindanam, Jaththa Jaya Tapparuvanaya. || 55 || 41/1. Muttadaviesu
Jujjati, Jai Anno'nnaanuvehao Pindao. Mutthi-Vimutte Su Vi So, 'Nanu Jujjati'20
Sankhabaahulla. || 56 ||  1. Yadva'atra Karmasadhanaha Paribhoga Shabdo
Vivakshaniyaha (Mavru). 10. Panthuvadeesai (A, K). 2. Akkaanaha Sippa
Sankhamaaiinam (La), Akkaaneha Sippi 11. Pucchijja (A). Sankha' (B), Akkaana
Sasankhasippama' (S), Akkaana 12. Pucchijjiha (A, La, S). Sasippa' (K). 13.
Divvamu (K, S), Oni 370. 3. 'Hiyaai (La, B). 14. Nayavvo (Mu). 4. Binti (A). 15.
Charimu (K). 5. Vijja (La), Oni 366. 16. Vesanam-Jirkalavanad (Mavru). 6.
Makkhiyapa" (Oni 367). 17. Puggal (A, K, B), Poggalam-Maansam (Mav). 7. Avilalai
(Mu), "Lai (K). 18. Ya (S). 8. "Muttai (A), Oni 368. 19. "Dwiuiu (K). 9.
Sacchitto (S), Oni 369, Sachitte Iti Shashthi- 20. Jujjai Nanu (Mu), "Jujjai
(S). Saptamyorath Pratyabhedat Sachittasya (M).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 34. beiMdiyaparibhogo', 'akkhANa ssippisNkhmaadiinnN'| teiMdiyANa
uddehigAdi jaM vA vade vejjo  //  48  //  cauriMdiyANa macchiyaparihAro
AsamakkhiyA cev| paMciMdiyapiMDammi u, avvavahArI u neraiyA  //  49  //
camma'TThi-daMta-naha-roma-siMga-amilAI chagaNa-gomutte  /  khIra-dadhimAdiyANa
ya, paMciMdiyatiriyaparibhogo  //  50  //  saccitte pavvAvaNa, 'paMthuvadese
ya'10 bhikkhdaannaadii| sIsa'TThiga accitte, mIsa'TTi sarakkha pahapucchA  // 51
//  khamagAdikAlakajjAiesu pucchejja1 devataM kiNci| paMthe subhAsubhe vA,
pucchejjaha'2 divvauvaogo12  //  52  //  _ aha mIsao ya piMDo, etesiM ciya
navaNha piNddaannN| dugasaMjogAdIo, netavvo4 jAva caramo5 tti  //  53  //  40.
sovIra-gorasAsava, vesaNa6 bhesjj-neh-saag-phle| - poggala17-loNa-gulodaNa, NegA
piMDA u saMjoge  // 54 //  41. tinni u8 padesasamayA, ThANaTThiiu'9 davie
tyaadesaa| cau-paMcamapiMDANaM, jattha jayA tppruuvnnyaa|| 55  //  41/1.
muttadaviesu jujjati, jai anno'nnANuvehao piNddo| mutti-vimuttesu vi so, 'naNu
jujjati '20 sNkhbaahullaa||56|| 1. yadvA'tra karmasAdhanaH paribhogazabdo
vivakSaNIyaH (mvR)| 10. paMthuvadesAI (a, k)| 2. akkhANaha sippaM saMkhamAINaM
(lA), akkhANeha sippi 11. pucchijja (a)| saMkha' (ba), akkhANa sasaMkhasippimA'
(sa), akkhANaM 12. pucchijjiha (a, lA, s)| sasippi' (k)| 13. divvamu (ka, sa),
oni 370  /  3. 'hiyAI (lA, b)| 14. nAyavvo (mu)| 4. biMti (a)| 15. carimu (k)|
5. vijjA (lA), oni 366  /  16. vesanaM-jIrakalavaNAdi (mvR)| 6. makkhiyapa" (oni
367) /  17. puggala (a, ka, bI), poggalaM-mAMsaM (mv)| 7. avilAi (mu), "lAI (k)|
18. ya (s)| 8. "muttAI (a), oni 368 /  19. "dviIu (k)| 9. saccitto (sa), oni
369, sacitte iti SaSThI- 20. jujjai naNu (mu), "jujjaI (s)| saptamyoratha
pratyabhedAt sacittasya (m)|

Page #190 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  41/2. When the first two parts are the shoulder, what is the
essence of the third part? Undivided and connected, how can it be said to be the
basis? || 57 || Or, the four rules, the Pind is connected by the division of
yoga. As there are two kinds of Pind, it is said to be a merchant. || 58 ||
There are two kinds of Bhava Pind, the desirable and the undesirable. These two
are said to be the attainment of the fruit. || 59 || 44. There are three kinds
of desirable, knowledge, vision, and conduct. The two, the seven, and the four,
by which one attains the other. || 44/1. There are ten kinds of desirable and
undesirable. Self-control, knowledge, and conduct, knowledge, vision, and three
kinds of conduct. || 60 || 44/2. Knowledge, vision, and self-control, five and
six, you should know. Pindasana, Panasana, 'Ugghapadimaa' also resides in the
Pind. || 61 || 44/3. The nine Brahma-Gutti, the nine kinds of Maya, and the
Samana Dharma. This is the desirable Pind, said to be attained by the practice
of meditation. || 62 || 1. Pind (b, la). Not explained in the order of Niga.
Only a, k 2. Tisu vi (mu). And this verse is found in the B version. In the K
version 3. "Gaho (la). This verse is found after 44/3. This verse 4. Bhagimasan
(b, la, s), Avibhagena Sambaddah (mavru). Should be the Niyukti. From the point
of view of the subject matter 5. Kahanna (a, b), Kahan tu (mu). It seems to be
connected to the 44th verse. The desirable 6. 41/1, 2 both these verses are in
the published commentary and the undesirable Bhava Pind is discussed in detail
in 44/1-4 are in the order of Niga but because of being explanatory these verses
should be of the Bhashya. The point which is mentioned in verse 41, the same
point is mentioned in these two verses, the reason is presented in a sequential
manner. 12. 'Vihai (s). 7. Jujjai (k, s). 13. Tah ya (b). 8. Kirai (k, s). 14.
Nana Dansana (b, la, mu), Nana Dansanam (k, b). 9. Hu (b, la). 15. Padimai (s),
Avgrahapratima Vasativishayakanayam 10. Oni 408 has the latter part of this
verse in the next Visheshah (mavru). verse. 16. Pindam tu (la, b). 11. Tu. Oni
409, this verse is in the published commentary 17. Bambhavvayagu (b, la),
Bambhavaya (a, b). 18. U (s).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 41/2. jaha tipadeso khaMdho', tIsure padesesu jo samogADho  /
avibhAgiNasaMbaddho , kahaNNu nevaM tadAdhAro?  //  57  /  /  ahavA cauNha
niyamA, jogavibhAgeNa jujjate" piNddo| dosu jahiyaM tu piMDo, vaNijjati kIrate.
vAvi  //  58  //  duvidho ya bhAvapiMDo, pasatthao ceva appasattho y| etesiM
doNhaM pi ya', patteya parUvaNaM vocchaM10  //  59  /  /  44. tividho hoti
pasattho, nANe taha daMsaNe caritte y| duga sattaTTha caukkaga, jeNaM vA
bajjhatI itro1|| 44/1. egavihAi12 dasavidho, pasatthao ceva13 appasattho y|
saMjama-vijjA-caraNe, nANAditigaM ca tiviho u  // 60  //  44/2. 'nANa-iMsaNa'14
tava saMjamo ya vaya paMca chacca jaannejjaa| piMDesaNa-pANesaNa, 'uggahapaDimA
ya'15 piNddmmi6||61  //  44/3. pavayaNamAyA nava baMbhaguttio7 taha ya
samaNadhammo y8| esa pasattho piMDo, bhaNito kammaTThamahaNehiM  //  62  //  1.
piMDo (ba, laa)| nigA ke krama meM vyAkhyAta nahIM hai| kevala a, ka 2. tisu vi
(mu)| aura bI prati meM yaha gAthA milatI hai| ka prati meM 3. "gAho (laa)|
'yaha gAthA 44/3 ke bAda milatI hai| yaha gAthA 4. bhAgimasaM (ba, lA, sa),
avibhAgena saMbaddhaH (mvR)| niyukti kI honI caahie| viSaya-vastu kI dRSTi 5.
kahaNNa (a, bI), kahaM tu (mu)| se yaha 44 vI gAthA se saMbaddha lagatI hai|
prazasta 6. 41/1, 2 ye donoM gAthAeM prakAzita TIkA meM aura aprazasta
bhAvapiMDa kI 44/1-4 meM vistAra se nigA ke krama meM haiM lekina vyAkhyAtmaka
hone ke carcA hai lekina isa gAthA meM saMkSipta saMketa de kAraNa ye gAthAeM
bhASya kI honI caahie| jo diyA hai ataH isa gAthA ko nigA ke krama meM bAta gA.
41 meM kahI gaI hai, usI bAta ko ina rakhA gayA hai| do gAthAoM meM hetu
purassara prastuta kiyA gayA hai| 12. 'vihAI (s)| 7. jujjaI (ka, s)| 13. taha ya
(b)| 8. kIrai (ka, s)| 14. NANaM daMsaNa (ba, lA, mu), nANaM daMsaNaM (ka, bii)|
9. hu (ba, laa)| 15. paDimAi (sa), avagrahapratimA vasativiSayakaniyama10. oni
408 meM isa gAthA kA uttarArddha agalI vizeSAH (mvR)| gAthA meM hai| 16. piMDaM
tu (lA, b)| 11. tu. oni 409, yaha gAthA prakAzita TIkA meM 17. baMbhavvayagu
(ba, lA), baMbhavaya (a, bii)| 18. u (s)|

Page #191 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **44/4.**  He who is not well-disposed, is unrestrained, does
not desist from food, and desires what is wrong,  is filled with anger, has the
poison of passion, and is a body of evil deeds. ||63||  **45.** He who is
destroyed by karma, becomes completely ill-disposed.  He who is liberated by it,
becomes well-disposed, and is known as a non-deceiver. ||64||  **46.** He who is
a true Jain, by virtue of his right faith, knowledge, and conduct,  becomes a
**Pind** (body) worthy of being worshipped. ||65||  **47.** He who, by his
nature, is able to control his **Pind** (body) which is sticky and difficult to
control,  becomes a **Bhavpind** (body of nature), for he is the **Pind** (body)
of the **Pind** (body). ||66||  **47.** He who is not attached to wealth, and
whose nature is well-disposed,  is like a person who has uttered the right
words, and is worthy of being praised. ||67||  **48.** He who practices **Pind**
(body) purification by means of food, medicine, and rest,  is pure in all eight
aspects of his **Pind** (body). ||68||  **49.** Liberation is the goal, and
right knowledge is the cause of it.  Food is the cause of right knowledge.
||69||  **49/1.** Just as the thread is the cause of the cloth,  so is food the
cause of liberation. ||70||  **49/2.** Just as the cause of the chariot is the
wheel, which is always in motion,  so are right knowledge and the other virtues
always in motion, leading to liberation. ||71||  **Notes:**  1. The verses
44/1-4 are explained in the commentary in the order of the **Niga** (a system of
Jain scriptures). 2. The commentator has not mentioned any **Niga** for these
verses, but they should be part of the commentary. The 44th verse is expanded in
these verses. 3. Even without the **Niga** order, the 44th verse seems to be
connected to the 45th verse in terms of content. 4. The verses 49/1-2 are
explained in the commentary in the order of the **Niga**. 5. The commentary is
brief and does not provide detailed explanations. It is possible that these
verses are part of the commentary.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 44/4. apasattho u asaMjama, aNNANaM aviratI ya micchttN|| kohA
Asava kAyA, kamme guttI adhammo y||63  //  45 bajjhati ya jeNa kammaM, so savvo
hoti appasattho u| muccati ya jeNa so puNa, pasatthao navari vinnnneo|| 64  //
dasaNa-nANa-carittANa, pajjavA je u jattiyA vaavi|| so so hoti tadakkho,
pajjavapeyAlaNA piNddo||65|| kammANa jeNa bhAveNa, appage ciNati cikkaNaM
piNddN| so hoti bhAvapiMDo, 'piMDayae piMDaNaM jamhA'2  // 66 //  47. davve
accitteNaM', 'bhAve ya pasatthaeNihaM5 pagataM  /  uccAritatthasarisA,
sIsamativikovaNaTThAe  //  67  //  'AhAra-uvadhi-sejjA', pasathapiMDassuvaggahaM
kuNati  /  AhAre ahigAro, aTThahi ThANehi~ so suddho|| 68  //  nivvANaM khalu
kajjaM, nANAditigaM tu kAraNaM tss| nivvANakAraNANaM, tu kAraNaM hoti
aahaaro||69  //  49/1. jaha kAraNaM tu taMtU, paDassa tesiM ca hoMti pmhaaii||
nANAditigassevaM, AhAro mokkhanemassa  //  70  //  49/2. jaha kAraNamaNuvahataM,
kajjaM sAheti avikalaM19 niymaa| mokkhakkhamANi12 evaM, nANAdINi u avigalANi13
//  71  //  1. yA (a, ba, lA), 44/1-4-ye cAra gAthAeM 7,8. kArayaM (s)|
prakAzita TIkA meM nigA ke krama meM vyAkhyAta haiN| 9. pamhAI (k)| TIkAkAra ne
ina gAthAoM ke lie kisI prakAra kA 10. nemissa (a, ka, bI) nemazabdo dezyaH
kAryAbhidhAne ullekha nahIM kiyA hai lekina ye gAthAeM bhASya kI rUDhaH (mvR)|
honI caahie| 44 vIM gAthA kA vistAra hI ina 11. avagalaM (ba), avilagaM (s)|
gAthAoM meM kiyA gayA hai| inako nigA ke krama meM 12. "khamAiM (lA, a, ba, s)|
na rakhane para bhI 44 vIM gAthA viSayavastu kI dRSTi 13. lAyaM (mu, a, ka, lA),
49/1,2-ye donoM gAthAeM se 45 vI gAthA se saMbaddha pratIta hotI hai| prakAzita
TIkA meM nigA ke krama meM haiM lekina 2. piMDayaI (a, ka, bI), piMDaie piMDao
jamhA (s)| ye 49 vI gAthA kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiN| saMkSipta 3. teNa u (a, bii)|
zailI hone ke kAraNa niyuktikAra na punarukti 4. bhAvammi (mu)| karate haiM aura
na hI vistRta vyaakhyaa| saMbhAvanA kI 5. pasatthaeNa iha (a, bii)| jA sakatI
hai ki ye donoM gAthAeM bhASya kI honI 6. AhArovahisejjAe (a, bii)| caahie|

Page #192 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti 50. The meaning of the word "Pindita" is this: "This is the Pind
that I have explained." I will explain the meaning of "Food-Spoiled-Cloth-
Substance" in detail. || 72 ||   **Door:** The meaning of "Esana" is to be
understood as "Investigation, Path, and Understanding."  These are the names
that are combined together for "Esana." || 73 ||   52. The name "Thavana" should
be understood in terms of "Daviya" and "Bhavammi" in relation to "Esana."
"Daviya" and "Bhavammi" should be understood in three ways each. || 74 ||
52/1. "Jamm" is one, "Sutas" is another, "Tamesa" is another, and "Natum" is
another.  "Sattum" is one, and "Se Maccu" is another. || 75 ||   52/2.
Similarly, in the rest of the "Chauppada-A-Chitta-Misesu,"  wherever "Esana" is
connected, there "Joejja" should be understood. || 76 ||   52/3. "Bhavesana" is
of three types, "Gavesa-Gahana-Esana" should be understood.  "Ghase-Esana" is
the first, and it is understood by those who have attained "Vit-Raga." || 77 ||
52/4. "Agavittassa" does not have "Gahana," and "Ag-Ahiyas" does not have
"Paribhoga."  This is the meaning of "Esana-Tiga," and it should not be
understood in a sequential manner. || 78 ||   53. The name "Thavana" should be
understood in terms of "Daviya" and "Bhavammi" in relation to "Gavesana."  In
"Daviya," "Kuranga-Gaya," "Uggam-Uppa-Dana" should be understood in terms of
"Bhavammi." || 79 ||   1. "Pindayatto (k, la, b)." 2. "Viyad (s)." 3. "Patto
(la, b), Itto (a, b)." 4. "Paden (s)." 5. "Chauppayae A-Chitta (b, la), "Ppaya
Apayachitta (k)." 6. "Sesa (b, la)." 7. "Jo (a, b, la)." 8. "Jujjai (a, b)." 9.
"U (k)." 10. "Gase (mu)." 11. "I (la, b), Yam (a, b, s)." 12. "S" in the verse
is not the first half of the verse. 13. "Puvi U (la, b, s, mu)." 14. "Bhavammi
(a, b)." 15. This verse is not present in "La" and "B" versions.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 50. saMkhevapiMDitattho', evaM piMDo mae smkkhaato| phuDa-vigaDa-
pAgaDatthaM, vocchAmI esaNaM etto  //  72  //  dAraM  //  esaNa gavesaNA maggaNA
ya uggovaNA ya bodhvvaa| ete u esaNAe, nAmA egaTThiyA hoMti  /  /  73  //  52.
nAmaM ThavaNA davie, bhAvammi ya esaNA munneyvvaa|| davve bhAve ekkekkayA u
tivihA muNeyavvA  //  74  //  52/1. jammaM esati ego, sutassa anno tamesae
nttuN| sattuM esati anno, esati anno ya se maccu  /  75  //  52/2. emeva
sesagesu vi, 'cuppdaapd-acittmiisesu"| jA jattha jujjate esaNA tu taM tattha
joejjA  //  76  //  52/3. bhAvesaNA u tividhA, gavesa-gahaNesaNA ya0 bodhvvaa|
ghAsesaNA'1 u12 kamaso, paNNattA vItarAgehiM  //  77  //  52/4. agaviTThassa u
gahaNaM, na hoti na ya agahiyassa pribhogo3|| esaNa tigassa esA, nAtavvA
ANupuvvIe  //  78  //  53. nAmaM ThavaNA davie, 'bhAve ya'15 gavesaNA
munneyvvaa| davvammi kuraMga-gayA, uggama-uppAdaNA bhAve 6  //  79  //  1.
"piMDayattho (ka, lA, b)| gAthA viSaya-vastu kI dRSTi se 53 vI gAthA ke 2.
viyaDa (s)| sAtha sambaddha pratIta hotI hai| 3. patto (lA, ba), itto (a, bii)|
6. sesae (ba, laa)| 4. padeNa (s)| 7 cauppayAe acitta (ba, lA), "ppayA
apayacitta (k)| 5. 52/1-4-ye cAra gAthAeM prakAzita TIkA meM nigA 8. jo (a, ba,
laa)| ke krama meM hote hue bhI bhASya kI honI cAhie 9. jujjaI (a, bii)| kyoMki
ye gA. 52 kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiN| 52/1 meM 10. u (k)| eSaNA, gaveSaNA Adi zabdoM
kA udAharaNa dvArA 11. gAse (mu)|| artha spaSTa kiyA gayA hai| gAthA 52 meM
graMthakAra 12. i (lA, ba), yaM (a, bI, s)| isa bAta kA nirdeza kara cuke haiM
ki dravyaiSaNA aura 13. sa prati meM gAthA kA pUrvArddha nahIM hai| bhAvaiSaNA
ke tIna-tIna bheda jAnane caahie| 52/3 14. 'puvvI u (lA, ba, sa, mu)| meM punaH
isI bAta kI punarukti huI hai| 52/4 bhI 15. bhAvammi (a, bii)| 52/3 se jur3I huI
prAsaMgika gAthA hai| ina cAra 16. yaha gAthA lA aura ba prati meM nahIM hai|
gAthAoM ko nigA ke krama meM na rakhane para 52 vIM

Page #193 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti 54. 53/1 Just as a female deer enters the forest, attracted by
the scent of fragrant grass, So do the weak and feeble, attracted by the words
of the wicked. || 80 || 53/2 Just as a deer is attracted to a beautiful tree, So
are people attracted to both good and bad things. || 81 || Just as a deer is
distressed when the tree withers, So are people distressed when their desires
are not fulfilled. || 82 || 54/1 Just as an elephant is captured in the summer,
And the lakes are filled with water, So are the people of the world attracted to
the teachings of the wise. || 83 || Just as the elephant is distressed when the
water dries up, So are people distressed when they lose their wealth. || 84 ||
The path of liberation is one and the same for all, It is called the path of
non-violence, and it leads to liberation. || 85 || 57. Just as there are
different types of food, So are there different types of liberation. There are
three types of liberation: liberation of the senses, liberation of knowledge,
and liberation of conduct. Liberation of conduct is the highest form of
liberation. || 86 || 1. Dev (a, b, la, bi). 8. Biimeyam (bi), Vitiyameyam (s),
Viditametad (mavr), from the perspective of the meter, the reading of Vi is Vi.
2. Kanagapatta (s). 3. Dohl (k). 9. Sivai (a, b), Sidai (oni 452), Sidati
(mavr). Due to the polysemy of the verb, it bears fruit. 4. Aana ya (mu, s, oni
450). 5. Moyaythavana (a, b). 6. Hidhesu (a, k, b). 10. Vayo (b, la). 7. Oni
451, 53/1, 2 - both these verses are clearly from the commentary, because the
style of composition of the other appointments is only a hint of the story by
the appointee. In the 53rd verse, the appointee has hinted at the story related
to the deer and the elephant in the mention of 'davvammi kurang-gaya', therefore
they do not mention the story again in detail. For verses 54 and 55, the
commentary has the indication of 'niyuktikaro gatham pathati'. It is possible
that these two verses became famous as Nigas by the time of the commentator.
Respecting the mention of the commentator, these two verses have been kept in
the number of Nigas. 11. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha San.
1. 12. 'Dae sa nal' (a, k, b). 13. Airodha (a, la), Airodha (s), Abhirodha (oni
453). 14. This verse should be from the commentary, see note 53/1, 2. 15.
Viyametam (a). 16. Dahti jharane (la), Jharanti sara (k, oni 454). 17. For the
expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha San. 2. 18. “Yain (a, k, la). 19.
Eyae (s). 20. Ahva vi (jibha 1090). 21. Ahigaro (jibha).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 54. 53/1 jitasattu devi' cittasabha- pavisaNaM
knngpitttthpaasnnyaa| dohala' dubbala pucchA, kahaNaM ANAdi purisANaM  //  80
//  53/2 sIvaNNisarisamodagakaraNaM sIvaNNirukkhaheDhesu  /  AgamaNa kuraMgANaM,
pasattha-apasattha uvamA u  //  81 //  viyameta kuraMgANaM, jadA sIvaNNi sIdatI
/  purA vi vAyA vAyaMti, na uNa puMjakapuMjagA  // 82  //  54/1. hatthiggahaNaM
gimhe, arahaTTehiM bharaNaM ca sarasINaM  /  'accudageNa nalavaNA'12, ArUDhA3
gajakulAgamaNaM  //  83  //  viyametaM5 gajakulANaM, jadA rohaMti nlvnnaa|
annayAvi 'jharaMti dahA'16, na ya evaM bahuodagA  // 84  //  uggama uggovaNa
maggaNA ya egaTThiyANi18 etAiM19  /  nAma ThavaNA davie, bhAvammi ya uggamo hoti
//  85  //  57. davvammi0 laDDagAdI, bhAve tivihuggamo munneyvvo| daMsaNa-nANa-
caritte, carittuggameNittha ahigAro21  //  86  //  1. deva (a, ba, lA, bii)| 8.
biimeyaM (bI), vitiyameyaM (sa), viditametad 2. kaNagapaTTa' (s)| (mavR), chaMda
kI dRSTi se viiya kA vii pATha 3. Dohala (k)| huA hai| 4. ANA ya (mu, sa, oni
450) /  9. sIvaI (a, bI), sIdaI (oni 452), sIdati5. moyayaThavaNA (a, bii)|
dhAtUnAmanekArthatvAt phalati (mvR)| 6. hiDhesu (a, ka, bii)| 10. vAyo (ba,
laa)| 7. oni 451, 53/1, 2-ye donoM gAthAeM spaSTa rUpa 11. kathA ke vistAra hetu
dekheM pari. 3,kathA saM. 1 /  se bhASya kI pratIta hotI haiM kyoMki anya
niyuktiyoM 12. 'dae sA nala' (a, ka, b)| kI racanA zailI meM niyuktikAra kathA
kA saMketa mAtra 13. airUDhA (a, lA), aIrUDhA (sa), karate haiN| 53 vI gAthA meM
niyuktikAra ne 'davvammi abhirUDhA (oni 453)  /  kuraMga-gayA' ullekha meM mRga
evaM hAthI se saMbaMdhita 14. yaha gAthA bhASya kI honI cAhie, dekheM TippaNa
53/1, 2 /  kathA kA saMketa kara diyA hai ataH ve punaH vistAra 15. vIyametaM
(a)| se kathA kA ullekha nahIM krte| gA. 54 evaM 55 16. dahati jharaNe (lA),
jharaMti sarA (ka, oni 454) /  ke lie TIkA meM 'niyuktikAro gAthAM paThati' kA
17. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3,kathA saM. 2 /  saMketa hai| saMbhava
hai TIkAkAra ke samaya taka ye 18. "yAiM (a, ka, laa)| donoM gAthAeM nigA ke
rUpa meM prasiddha ho gaI thiiN| 19. eyAI (s)| TIkAkAra ke ullekha kA sammAna
karate hue ina 20. ahavA vi (jIbhA 1090) /  donoM gAthAoM ko nigA ke kramAMka
meM rakhA hai| 21. ahIgAro (jiibhaa)|

Page #194 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  57/1.  Jotis-tanosahina, megha-rinakaraana uggamoore davve. So
puna jatto ya jaya, jaha ya davvuggamoo vaccho. || 87 || 57/2. Vasaghare
anujatta, atthaani jogga kiddakale ya. Ghadaga-saravesu kata, u modaga
laddagapiyassa. || 88 || 57/3. Jogga ajinne marutanisagga tisamutthato.
Asuisamuttho. Ahaaruggamchinta, asui tti duha malappbhavo. || 89 || 57/4.
Tassevam veragguggameṇa sammatta-naana-charanaana. Jugavam kammavagamo,
kevalanaanuuggamoo jato. || 90 || 57/5. Dansana-naanappbhavam, charanam suddehi
tehi tassuddi. Charanena kammasuddi, uggaamasuddi charanasuddi. || 91 || 58.
Aahakammuddesiya, puutikamme ya misajate ya. Thavana pahudiyae, paoyara kita
pamicche. || 92 ||  1. Meha (la, ba, mu, ka). 2. Muggamoo (mu). 3. Jutto (a, ba,
la). 4. Vuccho (sa), tu. Jiabha 1089. 5. Vasahara (mu). 6. “Jutta, (a, bi),
“Jatto (sa). 7. Kidd (la, ba). 8. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3,
Katha San. 3. 9. Ajinne (mu). 10. Tisamubbhavo (a, ba). 11. Veragg' (bi),
Gugaman (ba, la). 12. Kammuvagamo (a), Kamuvagamo (bi), Kamuggamoo va (ka, sa).
13. Suddehi tehi (a, bi), Sudde tu tammi (Jiabha 1092). 14. Karanena (a, bi),
Dharanena (la), Haranena (ba). 15. "Sidda (ba, la). 16. 57/1-5- These five
verses are mentioned in the published commentary in the order of Niga, but these
five verses should be from the commentary. In verse 57, the author speaks of the
origin of substance and the origin of emotion. 17. Puuyakamme (a, bi). 18.
Prabhutika-purvam napumsakatve'pi kapratyayee samanete sati striitvam (mavru).
19. Nibha 3250, Bribha 4275, Prasa 564, Jiabha 1095, Pimpra 3, Tu. Mula 422,
Pancha 13/5, 58, 59- these two verses are not in the S prati.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 57/1. jotisa-taNosahINaM, megha'-riNakarANa uggamore dvve| so puNa
jatto ya jayA, jahA ya davvuggamo vacco  //  87  //  57/2 vAsaghare' aNujattA,
atthANI jogga kiDDakAle y| ghaDaga-sarAvesu katA, u modagA laDDagapiyassa  //
88  //  57/3. joggA'jiNNe' mArutanisagga tisamutthato. 'suismuttho|
AhAruggamaciMtA, asui tti duhA malappabhavo  //  89 //  57/4. tassevaM
veragguggameNa9 smmtt-naann-crnnaannN| jugavaM kammAvagamo12, kevalanANuggamo
jaato||90  //  57/5. daMsaNa-nANappabhavaM, caraNaM 'suddhesu tesu'13 tssuddhii|
caraNeNa4 kammasuddhI, uggamasuddhI5 caraNasuddhI16  //  91 //  58.
AhAkammuddesiya, pUtIkamme7 ya mIsajAte y| ThavaNA pAhuDiyAe, pAoyara kIta
pAmicce  //  92  //  1. meha (lA, ba, mu, k)| kahakara prastuta prasaMga meM
cAritra udgama ke adhikAra 2. muggamo (mu)| kA nirdeza karate haiM phira 57/1
meM graMthakAra punaH 3. jutto (a, ba, laa)| dravya udgama kI bAta nahIM khte|
57 vIM gAthA 4. vuccho (sa), tu. jIbhA 1089 /  meM niyuktikAra ne 'davvammi
laDDugAdI' nirdeza se 5. vAsaharA (mu)| 'laDDukapriyakumAra' kI kathA kA saMketa
kiyA hai| 6. "juttA, (a, bI), "jatto (s)| 57/2-4 ina tIna gAthAoM meM isI kathA
kA 7. kidda (lA, b)| vistAra hai ataH ye gAthAeM bhI bhASya kI honI 8. kathA ke
vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 3 /  caahie| 57/5 gAthA bhI prAsaMgika
rUpa se bhASyakAra 9. ajiNNa (mu)| dvArA nirmita pratIta hotI hai kyoMki gAthA
57 ke 10. tisamubbhavo (a, b)| aMtima caraNa 'carittuggameNittha ahigAro'
ullekha 11. veragga' (bI), gugamaNa (ba, laa)| ke bAda udgama ke 16 doSoM kA
ullekha karane 12. kammuvagamo (a), kamuvagamo (bI), vAlI gAthAoM kA viSaya kI
dRSTi se sIdhA sambandha kamuggamo vA (ka, s)| baiThatA hai| 13. suddhehiM tahiM
(a, bI), suddhe tu tammi (jIbhA 1092) /  17. pUiyakamme (a, bii)| 14. karaNeNa
(a, bI), dharaNeNa (lA), haraNeNa (b)| 18. prAbhRtikA-pUrvaM napuMsakatve'pi
kapratyaye samAnIte 15. "siddhA (ba, laa)| sati strItvaM (mvR)| 16. 57/1-5-ye
pAMcoM gAthAeM prakAzita TIkA meM 19. nibhA 3250, bRbhA 4275, prasA 564, jIbhA
nigA ke krama meM ullikhita haiM lekina ye pAMcoM 1095, piMpra 3, tu. mUlA 422,
paMcA 13/5, gAthAeM bhASya kI honI caahie| gAthA 57 meM 58, 59-ye do gAthAeM sa
prati meM nahIM haiN| niyuktikAra dravya udgama aura bhAva udgama kI bAta

Page #195 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  59. Pariyattiye 'Abhihade, Ubbhinne Malohhade Tira Ya. Acchijje
Anissiddhe, 'Ajzhoyaraye Ya Solasame'2||93|| Ahakammiyanāma, Egattha Kassa Vāvi
Kim Vāvi. Parappakhe Ya Sapakhe, Chauro Gahaṇe Ya Āṇādi ||94|| Āha Ahe Ya Kamme,
'Āyāhamme Ya5 Attakamme Ya. Padisēvaṇa Padisūṇṇā, Sanvās'aṇumodana' Cheva ||95||
Dhanujukāyabharaṇam, Kuḍumbarajjadhuramāiyāṇam Cha. 'Khandhādi Hiyām Chaiya'19,
Davvāhā Antae Dhanuṇo ||96|| Orālasarīrāṇam, Uddavaṇa1 Tivāyana12 Cha Jassattha.
Maṇamāhitta Kuvvati3, Āhakamman Tayaṃ Benti || 97 || Jam Davvam Udagaādisu,
Chūḍamahe Vayati Jam Cha Bhāreṇam. Sītiēṇ Rajjuēṇ Va, Otaranaṃ Davvahekamman ||
98 || Sanjamathāṇāṇam Kaṇḍagāṇ5 Lesa-Thītiviseṣāṇam. Bhāvam Ahe Kareti6, Tamhā
'Tam Bhāvahekamman'17 || 99 || 64/1. Bhāvāvayaramāhittu18 Mappage19
Kinchiṇūṇacharaṇaggo20. Āhakammaggahi, Aho Aho Neti Appāṇam || 100 || 64/2.
Bandhati Ahebhāvauṃ, Pakareti Aho Muhāiṃ Kammāi. Ghaṇakaraṇam Tivvēṇ U, Bhāvēṇ
'Chao Uvachao'21 Ya22 || 101 ||  1. Haḍubbhinnē (Bī). 13. Kīrai (Mu), Kuvvāi
(Sa). 2. Vi (A, Bī). 14. Jībhā 1100. 3. Dhōte Ratte Ya Ghaṭe Ya (Nibhā 3251),
Bṛbhā 4276, 15. Kaṇḍakam Nāma Samaya Paribhāṣayā'ṅgalamātra Kṣetrāsaṃkhyeya
Jībhā 1096, Prasā 565, Tu. Pimpra 4, Tu. Mūla Bhāga Gatapradeśarāśi Pramaṇā
Saṃkhyā'bhidhīyate (Mavṛ). 423, Pañcā 13/6. 16. Karenti (B, Lā). 4. Jībhā 10981
17. Tam Bhāvaē Kamman (A, Bī), Tu Bhavē 5. "Hammiy (B).  _ Ahekamman (Jībhā
1106). 6. Padisūvaṇā (Lā). 18. Bhāvovayaramādittu (A, Bī), Ragāheu (B, Lā), 7.
Sa'ṇamo (Bī, K). Bhāva Avayaramāheu (K). 8. Tu. Bṛbhā 5342, 6375. 19. Appāṇo (A,
Bī). 9. Kuḍumbarajjadhar' (A, K, Bī). 20. Charaṇe Ya (B). 10. Khandhāti
Hitayammī Ya (Lā, B, Sa, K). 21. Stokatarā Vṛddhiśchayaḥ, Prabhūtatarā
Vṛddhirūpacayaḥ (Mavṛ). 11. Uddavaṇaśabdāt Parato Vibhaktilopa Ārṣatvat (Mavṛ).
22. Tu (Jībhā 1113), Tu. Bhaga. 1/436, 437. 12. Nivā' (Bī).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 59. pariyaTTie 'abhihaDe, ubbhiNNe mAlohaDe tira y| acchijje
aNisiddhe, 'ajjhoyarae ya solsme'2||93  //  AhAkammiyanAmA, egaTThA kassa vAvi
kiM vaavi| parapakkhe ya sapakkhe, cauro gahaNe ya ANAdI  // 94  //  AhA ahe ya
kamme, 'AyAhamme ya5 attakamme y| paDisevaNa paDisuNaNA, saMvAsa'NumodaNA' ceva
// 95  //  dhaNujuyakAyabharANaM, kuDuMbarajjadhuramAiyANaM c| 'khaMdhAdI
hiyayaM ciya'19, davvAhA aMtae dhnnunno||96  //  orAlasarIrANaM, uddavaNa1
tivAyaNaM12 ca jassaTThA  /  maNamAhittA kuvvati3, AhAkammaM tayaM beMti  //  97
//  jaM davvaM udagAdisu, chUDhamahe vayati jaM ca bhAreNaM  /  sItIe~ rajjueNa
va, otaraNaM davvahekammaM  //  98  //  saMjamaThANANaM kaMDagANa5 lesaa-
tthitiivisesaannN| bhAvaM ahe karetI6, tamhA 'taM bhAvahekammaM '17  //  99  //
64/1. bhAvAvayAramAhittu18 mappage19 kiMciNUNacaraNaggo20  /  AhAkammaggAhI, aho
aho neti appANaM  //  100  //  64/2. baMdhati ahebhavAuM, pakareti ahomuhAi~
kmmaaii| ghaNakaraNaM tivveNa u, bhAveNa 'cao uvacao'21 ya22  //  101 //  1.
haDubbhiNNe (bii)| 13. kIrai (mu), kuvvaI (s)| 2. vi (a, bii)| 14. jIbhA 1100 /
3. dhote ratte ya ghaTe ya (nibhA 3251), bRbhA 4276, 15. kaNDakaM nAma
samayaparibhASayA'GgalamAtrakSetrAsaMkhyeya jIbhA 1096, prasA 565, tu. piMpra 4,
tu. mUlA bhAgagatapradezarAzipramANA saMkhyA'bhidhIyate (mvR)| 423, paMcA 13/6 /
16. kareMti (ba, laa)| 4. jIbhA 10981 17. taM bhAvae kammaM (a, bI), tu bhave 5.
"hammiya (b)| _ ahekammaM (jIbhA 1106) /  6. paDisuvaNA (laa)| 18.
bhAvovayAramAdittu (a, bI), ragAheu (ba, lA), 7. sa'Namo (bI, k)| bhAva
avayAramAheu (k)| 8. tu. bRbhA 5342, 6375  /  19. appaNo (a, bii)| 9.
kuDaMbarajjadhara' (a, ka, bii)| 20. caraNe ya (b)| 10. khaMdhAtI hitayammi ya
(lA, ba, sa, k)| 21. stokatarA vRddhizcayaH, prabhUtatarA vRddhirupacayaH (mvR)|
11. uddavaNazabdAt parato vibhaktilopa ArSatvAt (mvR)| 22. tu (jIbhA 1113), tu.
bhaga. 1/436, 437 /  12. nivA' (bii)|

Page #196 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **64/3.**  The 'Mudae, Appagam'¹  leads to the bad births² for
those who are not aware of it. It is not possible to escape from it, 'Adharagati
Neti Kammai'⁵.  || 102 ||  **65.**  One who commits the sixfold transgression,
whether intentionally or unintentionally, 'Ayahhamm'³  is the result, whether it
is done for gain or not. || 103 ||  The body is for earning, the three things
like knowledge are for the soul. One who is attached to harming others, destroys
his own self. || 104 ||  **66/1.**  The destruction of the self is the
destruction of the path of liberation, even for those who have knowledge and
vision. In the conduct of life, the destruction of the self is the destruction
of the rest. || 105 ||  **Dara** ||  The wealth that one acquires through one's
own actions is one's own. The wealth that one acquires through the actions of
others is the result of bad karma. || 106 ||  **67/1.**  The result of the
actions of others is 'Phasugamvi Sankiliṭṭhaparināmo'¹². One who is born
suffers, know that it is the result of one's own actions. || 107 ||  **67/2.**
One who performs the actions of others as one's own, is like one who eats the
food of others. 'That is the result of the actions of others, how can it not'¹⁴
lead to harm? || 108 ||  **67/3.**  One who is deceived by the false
appearance¹⁵, is bound by the actions of others¹⁷. The Guru¹⁸ says, 'One who is
careless, suffers due to the false appearance, being unaware'. || 109 ||
**Footnotes:**  1. Enappagam (A, B) 2. Duggaii (B) 3. Chaie (La) 4. "Gai (B, La)
5. Ahakammam Bhaṇṇae Tamhā (Jībhā 1114), 64/1 6. Parijñānavatā'pi Yajjīvānāṁ
Prāṇavyaparopanaṁ Sā Nidā (Mava) 7. Pūrvōktaparijñānavikalena Satā
Yatparaprāṇanirvahaṇaṁ Sā Anidā (Mava) 8. Āyākamm (A, B) 9. Benti Tu
Davvāyahhamm Tī (Jībhā 1115) 10. Tu. Jībhā 1117 11. Jībhā 1118, this verse is an
explanation of verse 66, see the commentary on verse 64/3. These three verses
are an explanation of verse 64. The author of the Niyukti has explained the
meaning of Ādhākarma in one or two verses. After explaining 'Ahekamm', the verse
65 is placed in the Niyukti, which explains 'Āyāhamm'. 12. Phasuyamasaniki (S)
13. Āiy' (A, B, La), Ātiy' (Jībhā 1120) 14. Choeti Parakkiriyā Kahaṇṇu (Jībhā
1121) 15. Kuḍguv' (La, B), Kūḍav' (B), “Mai (A), Kūḍ Uvamāe U (K) 16. Keī (B)
17. U (A) 18. Guru Vi (A), Guruṁ (K), Tu. Jībhā 1124

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 64/3. tesiM gurUNa 'mudaeNa, appagaM'1 duggatIeN2 pvddtN| na caeti
vidhAreuM, 'adharagati Neti kammAI'5  //  102  //  65. aTThAe~ aNaTThAe,
chakkAyapamaddaNaM tu jo kuNati  /  anidAepa ya nidAe', 'AyAhammaM tayaM beMti
//  103  //  davvAyA khalu kAyA, bhAvAyA tinni naannmaadiinni|
parapANapADaNarato, caraNAyaM appaNo haNati  //  104  //  66/1. nicchayanayassa
caraNAyavighAte nANa-dasaNavaho vi| vavahArassa u caraNe, hatammi bhayaNA u
sesANaM  // 105  //  dAraM  //  davvammi attakammaM, jaM jo u mamAyae tayaM
davvaM  /  bhAve asubhapariNato, parakammaM attaNo kuNati  //  106  //  67/1.
AhAkammapariNato, 'phAsugamavi saMkiliTThapariNAmo'12  /  AyayamANo3 bajjhati,
taM jANasu attakammaM ti|| 107  //  67/2. parakamma attakammIkareti, taM jo u
gihiuM bhuNje| 'tattha bhave parakiriyA, kahaM nu'14 annattha saMkamati  //  108
//  67/3. kUDuvamAe15 keI16, parappautte vi7 beMti baMdho ti| bhaNati 'ya gurU
'18 pamatto, bajjhati kUDe adakkho ya  //  109  //  1. eNappagaM (a, bii)| 8.
AyAkammaM (a, bii)| 2. duggaiI (bii)| 9. beMti tu davvAyahammaM tI (jIbhA 1115)
/  3. caie (laa)| 10. tu. jIbhA 1117 /  4. "gaI (bii,laa)| 11. jIbhA 1118, yaha
gAthA 66 vI gAthA kI vyAkhyA 5. ahakammaM bhaNNae tamhA (jIbhA 1114), 64/1 rUpa
hai, dekheM TippaNa gAthA 64/3 /  3-ye tInoM gAthAeM 64 vIM gAthA kI vyAkhyA
rUpa 12. phAsuyamasaMki (s)| haiN| niyuktikAra ne AdhAkarma ke ekArthakoM kI eka
13. Aiya' (a, bI, lA), Atiya' (jIbhA 1120) /  yA do gAthAoM meM hI vyAkhyA kI
hai| 'ahekamma' 14. coeti parakkiriyA kahaNNu (jIbhA 1121) /  kI vyAkhyA ke bAda
gA. 65 meM 'AyAhamma' kI 15. kuDaguva' (lA, ba), kUDava' (bI), "mAi (a), vyAkhyA
vAlI gAthA niyukti kI hai|| kUDa uvamAe u (k)| 6, parijJAnavatA'pi yajjIvAnAM
prANavyaparopaNaM sA nidA (mv)| 16. keI (b)| 7. pUrvoktaparijJAnavikalena satA
yatparaprANanirvahaNaM sA 17. u (a)| anidA (mvR)| 18. guru vi (a), guruM (ka),
tu. jIbhA 1124  /

Page #197 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniryukti 67/4. 68. 67/5.  Kamam sayam na kuvvati, jananto pun tahaavi
taggahi | Vadddeti tappasangam, aginhmano u padisesavadihi tam pun 68/2. Emaeva
bhavakude, bajjhati jo Tamha u 68/1. Padisesavanmaadinam, 'Ahamsambhavam
asubhabhavaparinama | Asubha bhavo, vajjevo payattenam || 110 || Imehi.
Attikareti ra kammam, tattha guru adipayam, lahu lahu lahuga kamanitare || 112
|| " Annenaha kammam, parahatthe nangare,  68/3. Evam khu aham
samayatthamjaanto, mudho Saruvam 5, Uvanitam to jah suddo, doso
darananumoayanavasananam | Sodaharanam pavakkhami || 113 || 3. Karei (la, b, bi,
s), Karei (k) | 4. Padisesavaihim (b) | Asai 1. Y (la, b) | 5. 2. Jibha 1126,
67/1-5 - Ye panchon gathaen prakashit 6. Tika mein niyukti kramank ke antarga
hai lekin ye bhashya ki honi chahie. Inmen 67vi gatha ki vyakhya hai. Bhashyakar
ne vishay ko spasht karne ke liye kut-pash ki upma ka ullekh karke atmakarm ko
spasht kiya hai. Yadyapi gatha 67/3 ke uttarardh mein tikakar 'Chaitdev
niryuktikrud' ka ullekh karte hain lekin sambhav yah lagta hai ki yah nirdesh
67vi gatha ke praarambh mein hona chahie. In gathao ko niga ke kramank mein
nahin rakha gaya hai. 7. 8. 9. 10. Choio na dentass padisesavanam 12. 13. Jjhati
chittarakhkatha | 68/4. Uvogaammi y labham, kammaggaahiss aaloi suladham,
bhanati bhanantass padisunana || 116 || 68/5. Sanvaso u pasiddo anumodan
kammabhoigapansar | Ete samudaharana, e u kame natava || 117 || 68/6.
'Padisesavanaai tena 14, padisunanaae y15 rayaputto tu | Sanvasammi y palli,
anumodan rayadutto y16 || 118 || Wareti || 111 || Bhanati. Kudaumvaae. U' || 114
|| 14. 'Nai ete (bi) | Kunati || 115 || Jah' (mu, s), 'Vassaruvam (k) | Asai
(bi). Choium (s) | Hu (bi, s, mu) | Khalu (bi) | Dosam (b, la, s) |  11.
Padimunana (la, bi), Padigunana (b), Pratiśravaṇam prākr̥tatvāt strītvnirdeśaḥ
(mavṛ). Bhoyagam (a, mu). ' Sūtre ca udāharaṇasabdasya pullingata
prākr̥talakṣaṇavaśāt (mavṛ). 15. U (la, b, k, mu) | 16. U (Jibha 1929) | 25

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniryukti 67/4. 68. 67/5. kAmaM sayaM na kuvvati, jANaMto puNa tahAvi
taggAhI  /  vaDDeti tappasaMgaM, agiNhamANo u paDisevAdIhi taM puNa 68/2. emeva
bhAvakUDe, bajjhati jo tamhA u 68 / 1. paDisevaNamAdINaM, 'ahasaMbhavaM
asubhabhAvapariNAmo  /  asubha bhAvo, vajjevvo payatteNaM  //  110  //  imehiM
/  attIkareti ra kammaM, tattha gurU AdipayaM, lahu lahu lahugA kameNitare  //
112  //  " anneNAhAkammaM, parahatthe NaMgAre, 68/3. evaM khu ahaM
samayatthamajANaMto, mUDho sarUvaM 5, uvaNItaM to jaha suddho, doso
dArANa'NumoyaNAvasANANaM  /  sodAharaNaM pavakkhAmi  //  113 //  3. kareI (lA,
ba, bI, sa), kArei (ka)  /  4. paDisevAIhiM (ba)  /  asai 1. ya (lA, ba) | 5. 2.
jIbhA 1126, 67 / 1-5 - ye pAMcoM gAthAeM prakAzita 6. TIkA meM niyukti kramAMka
ke antargata haiM lekina ye bhASya kI honI caahie| inameM 67 vIM gAthA kI
vyAkhyA hai| bhASyakAra ne viSaya ko spaSTa karane ke lie kUTa - pAza kI upamA
kA ullekha karake Atmakarma ko spaSTa kiyA hai| yadyapi gAthA 67/3 ke
uttarArddha meM TIkAkAra 'caitadeva niryuktikRd' kA ullekha karate haiM lekina
saMbhava yaha lagatA hai ki yaha nirdeza 67 vIM gAthA ke prAraMbha meM honA
caahie| ina gAthAoM ko nigA ke kramAMka meM nahIM rakhA gayA hai| 7. 8. 9. 10.
coio na deMtassa paDi sevaNaM 12. 13. jjhati cittarakkhaTThA  /  68/4. uvaogammi
ya lAbhaM, kammaggAhissa Aloi suladdhaM, bhaNati bhaNaMtassa paDisuNaNA  //  116
//  68/5. saMvAso u pasiddho aNumodaNa kammabhoigapasaMsAra  /  ete
samudAharaNA, e u kame nAtavvA  //  117  //  68/6. 'paDisevaNAi teNA 14,
paDisuNaNAe ya15 rAyaputto tu  /  saMvAsammi ya pallI, aNumodana rAyaduTTho ya16
//  118  //  vAreti  //  111  //  bhaNati  /  kUDauvamAe  /  u'  //  114  //
14. 'NAi ete (bI)  /  kuNati  //  115  //  jaha' (mu, sa), 'vassarUvaM ( ka )  /
asaI (bii)| coiuM ( sa )  /  hu (bI, sa, mu)  /  khalu (bI)  /  dosaM (ba, lA,
sa )  /  11. paDimuNaNA (lA, bI), paDiguNaNA (ba), pratizravaNaM prAkRtatvAt
strItvanirdeza: (mavR)  /  bhoyagaM ( a, mu)  /  ' sUtre ca udAharaNazabdasya
pulliMgatA prAkRtalakSaNavazAt (mvR)| 15. u (lA, ba, ka, mu)  /  16. u ( jIbhA
1929)  /  25

Page #198 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  26 ##  Pindaniyukti  68.7.  "Goṇihaṛaṇ" is the ground, taking the goṇi, one
sees the food. Nivvisaya parivesaṇ, standing there, they are put in the well. ||
119 || 68/8.  Whatever they serve, the pleasant ones they hold. They are also
destroyed completely, what is the use of the body? || 120 || 68/9.  The strength
of the king's son, the help of the wife, and the desire. Even that is to be
abandoned, it is not there in the state of the two. || 121 || 68/10.  He eats,
he does not eat, he eats, the third one eats happily first. Even that is to be
abandoned, it is not there for the one who serves. || 122 || 68/11.  The karma
of the one who brings, the fault of the second is also destroyed. The third one
is also a human, the fourth one is liberated from these three. || 123 || 69.
Serving, listening, living together, and rejoicing in the company, these four
are all. The path of the father, the king's son, should be considered by the
wise. || 124 || 69/1.  In the village, there is no thief, we are merchants, not
thieves. We do not flee, we do not take anything, we are not conquered by
anyone. || 125 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 26 piMDaniyukti 68.7. goNIharaNa' sabhUmI, neUNaM goNio pahe bhkkhe| nivvisayA
parivesaNa', ThitA vi te kUviyA ghatthe  //  119  //  68/8. je vi ya
paDisevaMtI', bhAyaNANi dhareMti y| te vi bajjhaMti tivveNaM, kammuNA kimu
bhoiNo ?  //  120  //  68/9. sAmatthaNa rAyasute, pitivahaNa sahAya taha ya
tunnhikkaa| tiNhaM pi hu paDisuNaNA, raNNo siTThammi sA natthi2  //  121 //
68/10. bhuMja'3 na bhuMje bhuMjasu, tatio tusiNIeN4 bhuMjae5 pddhmo| tiNhaM pi
hu paDisuNaNA, paDisehatassa sA natthi  // 122  //  68/11. ANeta6 bhuMjagA
kammuNA u bitiyassa vAio doso| tatiyassa ya mANasio, tIhi vimukko cauttho u18
//  123  //  69. paDisevaNa paDisuNaNA, saMvAsa'NumodaNA ya9 cauro vi|
pitimAraga20 rAyasute, vibhAsitavvA21 jaijaNe vi22  //  124 //  69/1.
pallIvadhammi naTThA, corA vaNiyA vayaM na cora tti| na palAyA pAvakaratti23 kAu
raNNA uvAladdhA24  //  125  //  1. goNAha (s)| 17. visuddho (mu)| 2. NeuNiya
(a)| 18. 68/1-11-ye gyAraha gAthAeM bhASya kI honI cAhie 3. goNiyao (s)| kyoMki
gA. 68 meM niyuktikAra ne pratiSevaNA, nivvisiyA (a, bii)| pratizravaNa Adi
cAroM padoM kI saMkSipta vyAkhyA 5. pariesaNa (lA, s)| kara dI hai tathA isa
gAthA kA sambandha sIdhA 69 6. ghitthe (a, bI, ka), ghetthe (lA), ghatthe itti
vI gAthA se jur3atA hai| 68/1 meM bhASyakAra ina gRhItAH (mava), kathA ke
vistAra hetu dekheM pari. cAroM padoM kI sodAharaNa vyAkhyA prastuta karane kA
3,kathA saM. 4 /  saMkalpa karate haiN| bhASyakAra kI vyAkhyA meM 69 vIM 7.
parivesaMtI (ka, laa)| gAthA atirikta pratIta hotI hai| 68/1-11 tathA 8.
bhoyaNANi (bii)| 69/1-4-ye gAthAeM bhASya kI haiM tathA bIca meM 9. gAthA meM
anuSTup chaMda hai| 69 vIM gAthA niyukti kI hai| ina gAthAoM ko 10. sAmatthaNaM
dezyA cintA (ava), sAmatthaNaM svabhaTaiH nigA ke kramAMka meM nahIM jor3A hai|
saha paryAlocanaM (mvR)| 19. u (mu)| 11. rAyasue tti tRtIyArthe saptamI (m)| 20.
piyamA (ka, mu), piimA (a, bii)| 12. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3,kathA
saM. 5 /  21. vihAsi (a, bii)| 13. bhuMjaha (lA, b)| 22. ya (lA, ba, s)| 14.
"NAo (a, bii)| 23. pAvaraya tti (a, bii)| 15. bhuMjaI (s)| 24. kathA ke vistAra
hetu dekheM pari. 3.kathA saM. 6 /  16. ANiMtu (a, bI), ANaMta (mu)|

Page #199 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti 27  69/2.  Ahakadabhoihim, sahavaso tah ya tavvivajjam2 pi.
Dassanagandhaparikha, bhaventi suluhavittim pi. || 126 || 69/3.
Raya'varoha'varahe, vibhusito ghaito nagaramajjhe. Dhannadhannoti kaha, vahavaho
kappadhiya khola. || 127 || 69/4. Saun pajjatan aadareṇ, kale riukkhaman
niddhāṁ. Taggunavikaththanaae, abhujjamāṇe vi anumannā. || 128 || 70. Aaha ahe
ya kamme, ayahamme ya attakamme ya. Jah vanjan naṇattāṁ, attheṇ vi puccchate
evaṁ. || 129 || 70/1. Egatthah egavanjan, egaṭuṁ naṇavanjanā ceva. Naṇ?
Egavanjan, naṇatthā vanjanā nāṇā'10. || 130 || 70/2. 'Diṭuṁ khīraṁ khīraṁ'11,
ega8 egavanjanam loe. 'Egaṭuṁ bahunām'12, duddh payo pīlu13 khīraṁ ca. || 131 ||
70/3. Go-mahisī-ajākhīraṁ, naṇatuṁ egavanjanam neyaṁ 5. 'Ghaḍ-paḍ-kaḍ-sagad-
raha'16, hoti pihattham pihaṁ nāmaṁ. || 132 || 70/4. Aahakammādīṇam, hoti
duruttāadi7 padhamabhango u. Aahahekammṁ ti ya'18, bitio sakkinda iv bhango. ||
133 || 70/5. Aahakammatariya9, asanādī u20 cauro tatiyabhango. Aahakamm
paducchā, niyamā suṇṇo carimabhangō. || 134 ||  1. vi (a, b). 10. naṇavanjanaya
(jibhā 1131), tu. vyabhā 155, 2. vajjiṁ (k). This gatha is not in the
manuscript. 3. satthuvitti (a, b), vittaṁ (s). 11. jah khīraṁ khīraṁ ciya (jibhā
1132). 4. rāyāvorohaarāhe (la), rāyāvorohavarahe (a), 12. egaṭṭha naṇavanjan
(jibhā). rāyārohavarahe (k, mu). 13. pālu (a, b, la), pāl (s). 5. khola:-herikāḥ
(mavṛ), for the expansion of the story see 14. tu. vyabhā 156.  pari. 3, katha
saṁ. 7. 15. loe (a, b), nāmaṁ (k). 6. "vikath (a, b, la, b), “vikaththanaae (s).
16. “sagadarahaī (a, b). 7. ya bhuj (s). 17. durantāadi (la, b), “ttaīṁ (a). 8.
69/1-4-these four gathas are not in the niyukti, see 18. aaha ahe ya kamme (a).
. tippan 68/11. 19. "mantiriya (s). 9. egaṭṭha (a, b, mu). 20. ya (k).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 27 69/2. AhAkaDabhoIhiM, sahavAso taha yA tavvivajjaM2 pi|
daMsaNagaMdhaparikahA, bhAveMti sulUhavittiM pi|| 126  //  69/3.
rAya'varoha'varAhe, vibhUsito ghAito ngrmjjhe| dhannAdhannotti kahA, vahAvaho
kappaDiya kholA  //  127  //  69/4. sAuM pajjataM AdareNa, kAle riukkhamaM
niddhaM  /  tagguNavikatthaNAe, abhuMjamANe vi aNumannA  //  128 //  70. AhA ahe
ya kamme, AyAhamme ya attakamme y| jaha vaMjaNa nANattaM, attheNa vi pucchate
evaM  //  129  //  70/1. egaTThaH egavaMjaNa, egaTuM nANavaMjaNA cev| nANa?
egavaMjaNa, nANaTThA vaMjaNA nANA'10  //  130  //  70/2. 'diTuM khIraM khIraM
'11, ega8 egavaMjaNaM loe| 'egaTuM bahunAma'12, duddha payo pIlu13 khIraM ca  //
131 //  70/3. go-mahisi-ajAkhIraM, nANaTuM egavaMjaNaM NeyaM 5 /  'ghaDa-paDa-
kaDa-sagaDa-rahA'16, hoti pihatthaM pihaM nAmaM  //  132  //  70/4.
AhAkammAdINaM, hoti duruttAdi7 paDhamabhaMgo u| AhAhekammaM ti ya'18, bitio
sakkiMda iva bhNgo||133  //  70/5. AhAkammatariyA9, asaNAdI u20 cauro ttiybhNgo|
AhAkamma paDuccA, niyamA suNNo carimabhaMgo  // 134  //  1. vi (a, bii)| 10.
NANavaMjaNayA (jIbhA 1131), tu. vyabhA 155, 2. vajjiM (k)| yaha gAthA lA prati
meM nahIM hai| 3. satthuvitti (a, bI), vittaM (s)| 11. jaha khIraM khIraM ciya
(jIbhA 1132) /  4. rAyAvaroharAhe (lA), rAyAvarohavarAhe (a), 12. egaTTha
NANavaMjaNa (jiibhaa)| rAyArohavarAhe (ka, mu)| 13. pAlu (a, ba, lA), pAla (s)|
5. kholA:-herikAH (mavR), kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM 14. tu. vyabhA 156 /  /
pari. 3,kathA saM. 7 /  15. loe (a, bI), NAma (k)| 6. "vikaMtha (a, ba, lA, bI),
"vikaMthaNAe (s)| 16. "sagaDarahAI (a, bii)| 7. ya bhuMja (s)| 17. duraMtAdi
(lA, ba), "ttAiM (a)| 8. 69/1-4-ye cAra gAthAeM niyukti kI nahIM haiM, dekheM
18. AhA ahe ya kamme (a)  /  . TippaNa 68/11 /  19. "maMtiriyA (s)| 9. egaTThA
(a, ba, mu)| 20. ya (k)|

Page #200 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  70/6.  Indattham jah sadda, purandaraadi u naativattamte.
'Ahakamma ayahhamma', taha aah naativattamte' 3 || 135 || Aahakammena ahe
kareti, jam hanati panabhutaai. Jam tam aaiyamano, parakammam attano kunati ||
136 || Daram ||  _ Kassa tti puchchhitammi, niyama sahammissassa tam hoti.
Sahammissassa tamha', 'kayavva paruvaana vihina" ||137 || Namam thavana davie,
khette kale ya pavayane linge. Dansana-nana-charitte, abhigghe 'bhavanaao ya ||
138 || 73/1. Namammi sarisanaamo, thavanaae0 kattakammamaadiyaa. Davvammi jo u
bhavyo, sahammhi sariragam chevara || 139 || 73/2. Khette samaanadesi, kalammhi
'ya ekkakalasambhuto'12. Pavayanasanghgegataro, linge rayaharan muhapotti13 ||
140 || 73/3. 'Dansana-nana-charitte14, tiga pan pan 'tivih hoti u charittam'5.
_ 'Davvaadio abhiggah'16, ah 'bhavana mo aniccadi 10 || 141|| 73/4. Javant8
devadatta, gihiiv aghiiv tesi dahami.  _ No kappati 'gihiin u' 19, daham ti
visesite 20 kappe ||142 ||  1. Naiva' (la, b), naaivauttamte (k). 9. Nahim cha
(jibha 1139), vyabha 986, yah gatha 2. Attakamma (b, la, s). b is not present in
me. 3. Ah aah-attakamma, taha ahe na (jibha 1936). 10. °nanam (k). 70/1-6- These
gathas are the explanation of the 70th gatha, but in the published tika, these
six gathas are in the number of niga. The 70th gatha is directly related to the
71st gatha, so they are not kept in the order of niga. 11. Jam cha (a, b),
vyabha 987. 12. Samaanakalasam (mu). 13. Patti (a, b), "putti (k), vyabha 988.
14. Naane charane (a, b, mu). 15. Tiviho tti va charitte (b, la, s). 16.
Davvaadi tu abhi (vyabha 989), "ghe (b, la). 17. Bhavenaaniccadi (la, b). 18.
Jananti (a, b), javanti (k, s). 19. Gihiinam (k, mu). 20 "Siyam (k). 4. Aayay
(k, mu). 5. Jibha 1137. 6. “Yammhi (a, b). 7. Jamha (b, la, s). 8. Paruvaanam
tassa vucchhami (a, b).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 70/6. iMdatthaM jaha saddA, puraMdarAdI u NAtivattaMte  /
'ahakamma AyahammA', taha Aha NAtivattaMte' 3  //  135  //  AhAkammeNa ahe
kareti, jaM haNati paannbhuutaaii| jaM taM AiyamANo, parakammaM attaNo kuNati
//  136 ||daarN  //  _ kassa tti pucchitammI, niyamA sAhammiyassa taM hoti  /
sAhammiyassa tamhA', 'kAyavva parUvaNA vihiNA"  // 137  //  nAmaM ThavaNA davie,
khette kAle ya pavayaNe liNge| daMsaNa-nANa-caritte, abhiggahe 'bhAvaNAo y|| 138
//  73/1. nAmammi sarisanAmo, ThavaNAe0 ktttthkmmmaadiiyaa| davvammi jo u
bhavio, sAhammi sarIragaM cevara  //  139  //  73/2. khette samANadesI, kAlammi
'ya ekkkaalsNbhuuto'12|| pavayaNasaMghegataro, liMge rayaharaNa muhapottI13  //
140  //  73/3. 'daMsaNa-nANa-caritte14, tiga paNa paNa 'tividha hoti u
carittaM'5  /  _ 'davvAdio abhiggaha'16, aha 'bhAvaNa mo aNiccAdI 10  //  141 //
73/4. jAvaMta8 devadattA, gihIva agihIva tesi daahaami| _ no kappatI 'gihINa u'
19, dAhaM ti visesite 20 kappe  // 142  //  1. Naiva' (lA, ba), NAivuttaMte (k)|
9. NAhiM ca (jIbhA 1139), vyabhA 986, yaha gAthA 2. attakammA (ba, lA, s)| ba
prati meM nahIM hai| 3. aha Aha-attakammA, tahA ahe NA (jIbhA 1936). 10.
degNANaM (k)| 70/1-6-ye gAthAeM 70 vIM gAthA kI vyAkhyA rUpa 11. jaM ca (a, bI),
vyabhA 987 /  haiM lekina prakAzita TIkA meM ye chahoM gAthAeM nigA 12.
samANakAlasaM (mu)| ke kramAMka meM haiN| 70 vIM gAthA kA saMbaMdha 71 vI 13.
pattI (a, bI), "puttI (ka), vyabhA 988 /  gAthA se sAkSAt jur3atA hai ataH inako
nigA ke 14. nANe caraNe (a, ba, mu)| krama meM nahIM rakhA gayA hai| 15. tiviho
tti va caritte (ba, lA, s)| 4. Ayaya (ka, mu)| 16. davvAdI tu abhi (vyabhA 989),
"gahe (ba, laa)| 5. jIbhA 1137 /   /  17. bhAveNANiccAdI (lA, b)| 6. "yammi (a,
bii)| 18. jANaMti (a, bI), jAvaMti (ka, s)| 7. jamhA (ba, lA, s)| 19. gihINaM
(ka, mu)| 8. parUvaNaM tassa vucchAmi (a, bii)| 20 "siyaM (k)|

Page #201 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  73/5.  Pasandisu'  are different from the true Samanas, just as
the  miserable are different from the generous. Samanas, who have forgotten
their true nature, are not worthy of being called Samanas. ||143||  73/6.  The
miserly and the greedy are different from the true Samanas, just as the
materialistic are different from the spiritual. Those who are attached to
material possessions and pleasures, do not truly understand the nature of the
soul. ||144||  73/7.  Pasandisu' Samanas and those who are still attached to
worldly life are different from the true Samanas. Just as they are different in
name, so too are they different in their actions, their understanding, and their
goals. ||145||  73/8.  The ten characteristics of the true Samanas are not found
in the Pasandisu'. The Pasandisu' may claim to have these characteristics, but
they do not truly possess them. ||146||  73/9.  The true Samanas are not those
who are attached to the world and its pleasures. They are those who have
attained the true knowledge and understanding of the path to liberation. ||147||
73/10.  The true Samanas are not those who are attached to the world and its
pleasures. They are those who have attained the true knowledge and understanding
of the path to liberation. ||148||  73/11.  The true Samanas are not those who
are attached to the world and its pleasures. They are those who have attained
the true knowledge and understanding of the path to liberation. ||149||  73/12.
The true Samanas are not those who are attached to the world and its pleasures.
They are those who have attained the true knowledge and understanding of the
path to liberation. ||150||  73/13.  The true Samanas are not those who are
attached to the world and its pleasures. They are those who have attained the
true knowledge and understanding of the path to liberation. ||151||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 73/5. pAsaMDIsu' vi evaM, mIsAmIsesure hoti ure vibhAsA  /
samaNehi saMjayANa tu, visarisanAmANa vi na kappe  // 143  //  73/6. nIsamaNIsA
va kaDaM, ThavaNA sAhammiyammi u vibhaasaa| davve matataNubhattaM, na taM tu
kucchA vivajjeMti  //  144  //  dAraM  //  73/7. pAsaMDIsamaNANaM,
gihiniggaMthANa ceva u vibhaasaa| jaha nAmammi taheva u, khette kAle ya nAtavvaM
// 145  //  73/8. dasa sasihAgA sAvagara, pavayaNasAdhammiyA na liNgenn||
liMgeNa u sAhammI2, no pavayaNa niNhagA savve  //  146  //  73/9.
visarisadasaNajuttA, pavayaNasAdhammiyA na dNsnno| titthagarA'3 patteyA, no
pavayaNa dNssaahmmii||147  //  73/10. 'nANa-carittA'14 evaM5, nAtavvA hoMti
pavayaNeNaM tu| pavayaNato sAdhammI, nAbhiggaha sAvagA jaiNo  //  148  //
73/11. sAhamma'bhiggaheNaM16, no pavayaNa niNha tittha ptteyaa| evaM pavayaNa
bhAvaNa, 'etto sesANa'97 vocchAmi  //  149  //  73/12. liMgAdIhi8 vi evaM,
ekkekkeNaM tu uvarimA nejjA9  /  je'NaNNe20 uvarillA, te mottuM sesae evaM  //
150  //  73/13. liMgeNa u sAdhammI, na daMsaNe vIsudaMsi1 jai ninnhaa|
patteyabuddha titthaMkarA ya bitiyammi bhNgmmi|| 151  //  1. DINa (a, bii)|
liMgeNa usAhammI, No pavayaNao ya niNhagA svve| 2. missAmissammi (ba, lA, ka,
sa), pavayaNasAhammiya puNa, liMge dasa hoMti ssihaagaa|| missAmissANa (a, bii)|
11. sAviga (s)| 3. x (bI), hu (mu, lA, s)| 12. sAhammiya (ba), sAhammiyo (a,
bii)| 4. samaNesu (mu)| 13. titthaMkarA (a, b)| 5. kappai (ttiipaa)| 14. carittI
(lA, b)| 6. "NIsaM (k)| 15. ceva (a, bii)| 7. dugaMchA (a, bii)| 16. sAhammi '
(k)| 8. vivajjejjA (mu)| 17. ettovasANa (s)| 9. pAsaMDiyasa' (lA, b)| 18.
saptamyarthe tRtIyA (mvR)| 10.a, ka aura bI prati meM 73/7 gAthA ke bAda nimna
19. neyA (a, mu)| gAthA atirikta milatI hai| yaha gAthA 73/9 kI 20. jeNeNaM (b)|
saMvAdI hai kevala zAbdika aMtara hai| mUlataH yaha 21. "daMse (bI), "daMsa (a)|
gAthA vyabhA (991) kI hai

Page #202 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 50 **Pindaniyukti**  73/14.  Not by the sign; not by the sign, but by the
sign. If the ocean is broken in two, the path of the Tirthankara is the same. ||
152 ||  73/15.  Thus, the sign is the perception, the knowledge is the first
breaking. If the ocean is broken by the twenty, thus the second breaking is the
same. || 153 ||  73/16.  The knowledge is the first, the Savaga Jain is the
second breaking. The Jain forgets the knowledge, the knowledge is the sign, or
the sign is the knowledge. || 154 ||  73/17.  The ocean is the twenty signs, the
first, the second, and the perception. By knowledge, it is not so, I say this by
the sign. || 155 ||  73/18.  The Jain is the twenty signs, the first, the
second, the ocean, and the Jain. Thus, in the perceptions, I say both, this is
the meaning. || 156 ||  73/19.  The Jain is the Savaga, the sign, the first, the
second, and the breaking. The perfect knowledge of the Tirthankara does not
apply, but it is done. || 157 ||  73/20.  Thus, by the sign, the knowledge,
etc., are the breaking. In the upper ones, the lower word is to be understood.
|| 73/21 ||  73/21.  The path of the Buddha, the sign, the fast, the Kevali is
also attached. In the feelings of the earth, etc., the breaking is to be
understood. || 158 ||  73/22.  Where there is the breaking of the three, there
is no application of the rest. The Tirthankara Kevali, the application is not of
the eleven others. || 159 ||  1.  Ghe (a), Ggaha (s). 2.  Savaga (mu). 3.
Jayano (s) everywhere. 4.  Visubhi (a, b). 5.  Manatta (b). 6.  Bia (a, b, k,
s). 7.  Jah (tipa, b, s). 8.  Lingachhadejja (jibha 1142), this verse is only
found in the K darshan. 9.  Ninhav (mu), Ninhay (k). 10. Vyabha 994, tu. Jibha
1144. 11. Titthakar (b), Titthagarnihnhovasagaadi kappe na (jibha 1145). 12.
73/1-22 - These twenty-two verses are of the 73rd verse, therefore, from the
point of view of the subject, there is no obstacle in not considering them as a
part of the niyukti.  The commentator does not explain the verses of the
deposit-related verses in such detail, so it seems that the commentator must
have explained them in detail. Even during the time of the commentator
Malayagiri, these verses were known as niyukti verses. In verse 73/9, Malayagiri
has mentioned 'svayameva shrotaro 'bhotsyante iti buddhya
niyuktikrunnodahritavan' and in verse 73/14, he has mentioned 'lingachhadejja
(jibha 1142), this verse is only found in the K darshan. daharati'. This makes
it clear that these verses were known as niyukti. Because of being explanatory,
they are not included in the number of the niyukti. The explanation of the
'kassa' door in the original door verse is in verse 73 and the explanation of
the 'kim' door is in verse 75, therefore, from the point of view of the subject,
there is no obstacle in not considering them as a part of the niyukti.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 50 piMDaniyukti 73/14. liMgeNa u nAbhiggaha; aNabhiggahavIsu'bhiggahI cev| jai
sAga bitiyabhaMge, patteyabuhA ya titthagarA  //  152  //  73/15. evaM liMge
bhAvaNa, daMsaNa nANe ya paDhamabhaMgo u| _jai sAga vIsunANI, evaM ciya
bitiyabhaMgo vi|| 153  //  73/16. daMsaNa caraNe paDhamo, sAvaga jaiNo ya
bIyabhaMgo u|| jaiNo visarisadaMsI, daMse ya abhiggahe vocchaM  //  154  //
73/17. sAga jai vIsa'bhiggaha, paDhamo bIo ya bhAvaNA cev| nANeNa vi NejjevaM,
etto caraNeNa vocchAmi  // 155  //  73/18. jaiNo vIsA'bhiggaha, paDhamo biya
niNha -sAga-jaiNo vi| evaM tu bhAvaNAsu vi, vocchaM doNhaM ti mANatto'  //  156
//  73/19. jaiNo sAvaga niNhaga, paDhame bitie ya hoMti bhaMge y| kevalanANe
titthaMkarassa no kappati kataM tu||157  //  73/20. emeva ya liMgeNaM,
daMsaNamAdI u hoMti bhaMgA u| bhaiesu uvarimesuM, hiTThillapadaM tu vajjejjA  //
73/21. patteyabuddha-niNhaga', uvAsae kevalI vi aasjj| khaiyAdie ya bhAve,
paDucca bhaMge tu joejjA  //  158  //  73/22. jattha u tatio bhaMgo, tattha na
kappaM tu sesae bhynnaa|| 'titthaMkarakevaliNo, jahakappaM no ya'11 sesANaM12
// 159  //  1. gahe (a), ggahA (s)| niyuktikAra nikSepa paraka gAthA kI itanI
vistRta 2. sAvaga (mu)| vyAkhyA nahIM karate ataH saMbhava lagatA hai ki itanI
3. jayaNo (sa) srvtr| vistRta vyAkhyA bhASyakAra ne kI hogI phira bhI 4. vIsubhi
(a, b)| TIkAkAra malayagiri ke samaya taka ye gAthAeM niyukti 5. mANattA (b)|
gAthA ke rUpa meM prasiddha ho gaI thiiN| gA. 73/9 meM 6. bIe (a, bI, ka, s)|
malayagiri ne 'svayameva zrotAro 'bhotsyante iti buddhyA 7. jaha (TIpA, ba, s)|
niyuktikRnnodAhRtavAn' tathA gA. 73/14 meM 'liMgachaDejjA (jIbhA 1142), yaha
gAthA kevala ka prati darzana caturbhaMgikAdyadvayasadRzAnIti kRtvA
niyuktikRnnomeM milatI hai| dAharati' kA ullekha kiyA hai| isase spaSTa hai ki
9. niNhava (mu), niNhaya (k)| ye gAthAeM niyukti ke rUpa meM prasiddha ho cukI
thiiN| 10.vyabhA 994, tu. jIbhA 1144 /  vyAkhyAtmaka hone ke kAraNa inako nigA
ke kramAMka 11. titthakara (bI), titthagaraniNhaovAsagAdi kappe Na meM nahIM
rakhA hai| mUladvAra gA. ke 'kassa' dvAra kI (jIbhA 1145) /  vyAkhyA gA. 73 meM
tathA kiM dvAra kI vyAkhyA 75 meM 12.73/1-22-ye bAvIsa gAthAeM 73 vIM gAthA kI
hai ataH viSaya kI dRSTi se bhI inako niyukti kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiN| niyukti kI
racanA-zailI ke anusAra na mAnane para koI bAdhA upasthita nahIM hotI hai| 8.

Page #203 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti 74. 75. 76. When asked, "What is that action?", the meaning of
the word "sanbhavapadarisaṇatt" is that the food of that person, like rice and
so on, is considered good, and fruits and so on are considered bad.  "In that,
there are four, pure and impure." || 161 || In the village of Koddavara, a group
of monks lived happily.  Sanjay, who had fallen into the field, asked, "What
should I do?" || 162 || • 76/1. The field of the group is flourishing, but there
is no benefit for the teachers.  "What is the price of rice?"  They asked in the
house of the merchant. || 163 || 76/2. They said, "Twelve or thirteen, or other
grains, but there is no grain there.  They hear that the price of gold is high,
and they gather the children and so on." || 164 || 76/3. These are the houses.
As they are established, rice is given to the house, or he himself gives it, or
he gives it, or he gives it. || 165 || 76/4.  The rice was cooked in a pot, and
rice was made.  In the middle, the death of the husband, and the death of the
brother, was considered a blessing. || 166 || 76/5.  He also gives rice and
water, and rice is used for the purpose of cooking.  "What is this?"  They said,
"It is forbidden food, or they say it is forbidden food." || 167 || The meaning
of the metaphor.  He says: || 160 || 1. This (b), this (s). 2. He says (a). 3.
Avarde (k, mu). 4.  Fruits also (a, jībhā). 5.  In this, pure and impure (jībhā
1147), pure and impure, that is 15.  Bālāi (a, b), due to the tradition, pure
and impure (mavr). 6.  Sāvampu° (lā, b). 7.  Kahaṇam (s), jībhā 1148. 8.  Junjai
(b), jujjuī (s). 9.  Rūpaṇ (b), ruppana (a, b, jībhā 1949), rupaṇ that is
ropaṇam (mavr). 10.  Paribhāyaṇ that is gṛhe paribhājanam (mavr). 11.  76/1-5 -
These five verses clearly appear to be from the commentator, because in verse
76, the author of the work has briefly indicated the whole story.  Further, in
76/1-5, the commentator has explained this same story in detail, therefore these
verses have not been added in the number of the verses. 12.  Bolittā (b). 13.
Vi (lā, b, s), v (mu, k). 14.  Muṇenti (a, b, lā, b), suṇanti (mu, k).  Sankahā
(lā, b, k, mu). 16.  Bemi (k). 17.  76/2-5 verses are in Anuṣṭup meter. 18.  Se
(s, mu). 19.  For the expansion of the story, see Pari 3, story no. 8's note.
20.  From the point of view of meter, "Chaulodaṁ" should be the reading. 21.
Sāli (lā, b). 22.  Ti kae (a, b), takkaḍaṁ (k). 23.  Vajjanti ṇṇaṁ (s),
vajjanta' (mu). 24.  Yā (lā, b), for the expansion of the story, see Pari 3,
story no. 8.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 74. 75. 76. kiM taM AhAkammaM, ti pucchite saMbhavapadarisaNatthaM
ca tassa asaNAiNaM sAlImAdI agaDe, phalAdi suMThIya sAimaM hoti  /  tassa
'kaDaniTThitammI, suddhamasuddhe 5 ya cattAri  //  161  //  koddavarAlaga gAme,
vasahI ramaNijja bhikkha - sajjhAe  /  khetta paDileha saMjaya, 'sAvaga
pucchujjae' 16 kahaNA  //  162  //  * 76/1. jujjati gaNassa khettaM, navari
gurUNaM tu natthi pAuggaM  /  sAli tti kate ruMpaNa', paribhAyaNa niyagagehesu"
//  163 //  76 / 2. voliMtA 12 te u13 anne vA, aDaMtA tattha goyaraM  /
surNeti94 esaNA juttA, bAlAdijaNasaMkahaM5  //  164  //  76 / 3. ete ghare  /
te jesimo raddho, sAlikUro ghare diNNo vA se sayaM demi16 dehi vA beMti vA imaM
17  //  165  //  76/4. thakke thakkAvaDiyaM, abhattae sAlibhattayaM jAtaM  /
majjha ya patissa maraNaM, diyarassa ya me" matA bhajjA 19  //  166 //  76/5.
cAulodagaM20 pi se dehi, sAlI AyAmakaMjiyaM  /  kimedaM 'ti kataM 122 nAuM
vajjiMta'nnaM 23 vayaMti vA24  //  167  //  tassarUvakahaNatthaM  /  bhaNati  //
160  //  1. imaM (ba), iyaM ( sa )  /  2. bhaNae ( a )  /  3. avaDe (ka, mu)  /
4. phale ya ( a, jIbhA )  /  5. mmiM suddhAsuddhe (jIbhA 1147), suddhamasuddhe
tti 15. bAlAI ( a, bI), ArSatvAt zuddhAvazuddhau (mavR)  /  6. sAvamapudeg (lA,
ba )  /  7. kahaNaM (sa), jIbhA 1148  /  8. juMjai (ba), jujjuI ( sa )  /  9.
rUpaNa (ba), ruppaNa (a, bI, jIbhA 1949), ruMpaNa tti ropaNaM (mavR)  /  10.
paribhAyaNa tti gRhe paribhAjanaM (mvR)| 11. 76/1-5 - ye pAMcoM gAthAeM
spaSTatayA bhASyakAra kI pratIta hotI haiM kyoMki gAthA 76 meM niyuktikAra ne
saMkSepa meM pUrI kathA kA saMketa kara diyA hai| Age 76 / 1-5 meM bhASyakAra ne
isI kathA kI vistAra se vyAkhyA kI hai ataH ye gAthAeM nigA ke kramAMka meM
nahIM jor3I gaI haiN| 12. bolittA (bI)  /  13. vi (lA, ba, sa ), va (mu, ka)  /
14. muNeMti ( a, ba, lA, 31 bI), suNaMti (mu, k)| saMkahA (lA, ba, ka, mu)  /
16. bemi ( ka )  /  17. 76/2-5 gAthAoM meM anuSTup chaMda hai| 18. se (sa, mu)
/  19. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari 3, kathA saM. 8 kA TippaNa  /  20.
chaMda kI dRSTi se 'cAulodaM' pATha honA cAhie  /  21. sAli (lA, ba )  /  22. ti
kae ( a, bI), takkaDaM ( ka )  /  23. vajjaMti NNaM (sa), vajjaMta' (mu)  /  24.
yA (lA, ba), kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3 kathA saM. 8  /

Page #204 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  77. 'Lonagadodaye evam', khanittu mahurodagam.
Dhakkiten'achchate tav, jav 'sahu tti'2 agata. ||168|| Kakkadiy-ambaga' va;
dadim' dakkhayi bijapuradi. _ 'Khaim'adhikaranakaranam, tu saim'am
tikadumadiyam. ||169|| Asanadiin chaunh vi, aam'am jan sahugahanpauggam. Tan
nitthitam viyanasu, uvakkadam tu kadam hoti. ||170|| 80. Kandit tigunukanda, u
nitthita nega dugun ukanda. Nitthitkado ya kuro, ahakamman dugunamahu. ||171||
80/1. Chayan pi vivajjeti, kei phalhetugadi vuttas. Tan tu na jujjati jamha,
phalam pi11 kappam bitiyabhang'e12. ||172|| 80/2. Parapacchaiya chaya, na vi sa
'rukkheva vadditi'13 katha. Natthachchaye u dume, kappati evam4 bhanantass.
||173|| 80/3. Vaddati hayati5 chaya, tachchikkan pu'iyam pi v6 nan kapp'e. Na ya
ahay'a suvihite, nivvattayati7 ravichchayan8. ||174|| 80/4.
Aghaghanacharigagan'e, chaya nattha diya puno hoti. Kappati niratave nam, at'ave
tan vivajjeum19. ||175||  1. Ah tav savayo tu (Jibha 1952). 2. Sahutth (A, B).
3. In the gatha, there is Anushtup chanda, for the expansion of the story, see
Pari. 3, Katha San. 9. 4. Ambagam (K). 5. Dalim (La, B, S). 6. Dakkha ya (Mu),
Dakkha va (Jibha). 7. Ti (A, B, La, Mu). 8. "Inam (A, B), Jibha (1154) has the
latter half of the gatha as follows: Emai khaim'am tu, saim'am tah tigadu
aadiyam. 9. Phalaga'iheu (A, B). 10. Uttas (S). 11. Ti (A, B). 12. Jibha 1168,
80/1-5- these five gathas are explanatory. Incidentally, the author has given a
detailed explanation in the context of Khadim, whether the shadow is ahakarmika
or not. These gathas should be part of the Bhashya. They are not included in the
original numbering of the Niga. 13. Rukkhamm'i vattia (La, B), Rukkhamm'i vaddia
(S), Rukkh'ovva (Jibha 1169). 14. Eyam (A, B). 15. Hay'i (S). 16. Vi (B). 17.
Nivvattei (A, B). 18. Ravi'ch'aya (A, La, Jibha 1170), Ravi'ch'ayan (K, S). 19.
Vivajjati (La, B), Vivajjiti (B), Vivajjiti (A), Vivajjenti (S), Vivajjantu
(Jibha 1171).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 77. 'loNAgaDodae evaM', khaNittu mhurodgN| DhakkiteNa'cchate tAva,
jAva 'sAhu tti'2 AgatA  // 168  //  kakkaDiya-aMbagA' vA; dADima' dakkhAi
biijpuuraadii| _ 'khAima'dhikaraNakaraNaM, tu sAimaM tikaDumAdIyaM  //  169  //
asaNAdINa cauNha vi, AmaM jaM sAhugahaNapAuggaM  /  taM niTThitaM viyANasu,
uvakkhaDaM tU kaDaM hoti  //  170  //  80. kaMDita tiguNukkaMDA, u niTThitA Nega
duguNa ukkNddaa|| niTTitakaDo ya kUro, AhAkammaM duguNamAhu  //  171  //  80/1.
chAyaM pi vivajjetI, keI phalahetugAdi vuttss| taM tu na jujjati jamhA, phalaM
pi11 kappaM bitiyabhaMge12  //  172  //  80/2. parapaccaiyA chAyA, na vi sA
'rukkheva vaDDitA'13 kttaa| naTThacchAe u dume, kappati evaM4 bhaNaMtassa  //
173  //  80/3. vaDDati hAyati5 chAyA, tacchikkaM pUiyaM pi va6 Na kppe| na ya
AhAya suvihite, nivvattayatI7 ravicchAyaM8  //  174  //  80/4.
aghaNaghaNacArigagaNe, chAyA naTThA diyA puNo hoti  /  kappati nirAtave nAma,
Atave taM vivajjeuM19  //  175  //  1. aha tAva sAvayo tU (jIbhA 1952) /  2.
sAhuttha (a, bii)| 3. gAthA meM anuSTup chaMda hai, kathA ke vistAra heta dekheM
pari. 3,kathA saM. 9 /  4. aMbagaM (k)| 5. dAlima (lA, ba, s)| 6. dakkhA ya
(mu), dakkhA va (jiibhaa)| 7. ti (a, bI, lA, mu)|| 8. "INaM (a, bI), jIbhA
(1154) meM gAthA kA uttarArddha isa prakAra hai emAi khAimaM tU, sAima taha
tigaDu AdIyaM  /  9. phalagAiheu (a, bii)| 10. uttassa (s)| 11. ti (a, bii)| 12.
jIbhA 1168, 80/1-5-ye pAMcoM gAthAeM vyAkhyAtmaka haiN| prasaMgavaza graMthakAra
ne khAdima ke prasaMga meM chAyA AdhAkarmikI hotI hai yA nahIM, isa saMdarbha
meM vistRta vyAkhyA kI hai| ye gAthAeM bhASya kI honI caahie| inako nigA ke mUla
kramAMka meM nahIM jor3A hai| 13. rukkhammi vaTTiyA (lA, ba), rukkhammi vaDDiyA
(sa), rukkhovva (jIbhA 1169) /  14. eyaM (a, bii)| 15. hAyaI (s)| 16. vi (b)|
17. nivvatteI (a, bii)| 18. ravIchAyA (a, lA, jIbhA 1170), ravIchAyaM (ka, s)|
19. vivajjati (lA, ba), vivajjiti (bI), vivajjiti (a), vivajjeMti (sa),
vivajjaMtu (jIbhA 1171) /

Page #205 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti 33 80/5. This is not a fault, it is possible to be without the
characteristics of karma. Even if it is very disgusting, there is no fault in
accepting it. || 176 || 81. The other side is the householder, the monks and
nuns are the same side. The rope is broken, the other rope is tied, everything
is tied. || 177 || 81/1. In that "rope-tied", in the rope of food, it is tied.
There is fourfold destruction here, the last stage is the end of the cycle. ||
178 || Fourfold transgression, transgression, excessive, and non-excessive.
Fourfold non-perception, invitation in the act of eating. || 179 || 82/1. Rice,
ghee, jaggery, and juice, in new fruits that have grown. New grains, invitation
in the act of eating. || 180 || 82/2. In the acceptance of the act of eating,
there are fourfold transgressions, etc. The elephant with a broken tusk, with
four, three, two, and one movements. || 181 || 82/3. Invitation in the act of
eating, transgression occurs when listening. Transgression from the difference
in words, etc., the third and the other are swallowed when accepted. || 182 ||
Door || 83. The twelve faults, etc., which we have spoken of in acceptance, are
these. Breaking the command, non-compliance, and wrong belief. || 183 || 83/1.
The command of all beings, the one who accepts it transgresses, the one who is
deceived. The command is transgressed, who will do the rest for whom? || 184 ||
1. 'Vai (k), it is possible (Jibha 1172). 2. The following are the reasons why
these verses are part of the commentary. Here, the reason is first (Mavri), less
(La, Ba). • Verse 82/3 is found in many texts, therefore 3. U (A, B, Mu). The
author has only indicated transgression in the fourth line. 4. Tu. Jibha 1156. •
The fourth line of Verse 82 and the first line of 82/3 are almost the same in
terms of words, 5. 'Yammi (Mu). This verse should be part of the commentary. The
compilers do not repeat so much. 6. Tu. Jibha 1157, Ba, K, La, and Sa. This is
not a verse. It should be part of the commentary. The compilers do not repeat so
much. 7. Tu. Jibha 1174. Verse 82 directly connects to Verse 83 in terms of
subject matter. The author has left something unsaid in the fourth line of 82.
Therefore, 8. Aahakamme Nimantei (Jibha 1177), Aahayakayam Nimantei (Sa, K), Tu.
Nibha 2662, Tu. Bribha 5341. Verse 83 mentions the faults of accepting the
invitation to eat. 9. "Chalanaanam (La, Ba), see Pari. 3, Katha Sa. 10 for the
expansion of the story. 10. 'Karma Nimantan (Mu, K). 12. Anaayanoo (Sa). 11.
Vibha 43, 82/1-3 - these three verses are explanations of Verse 82, therefore
they should be part of the commentary. 13. Jibha 1183.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 33 80/5. tamhA na esa doso, saMbhavate kmmlkkhnnvihuunno| taM pi
ya hu atighiNillA, vajjemANA adosillA  //  176  //  81. parapakkho u gihatthA,
samaNA samaNI ya' hoti u spkkho| phAsukaDaM raddhaM vA, niTTitamitaraM kaDaM
savvaM  //  177  //  81/1. tassa 'kaDanidruitammi ya", annassa kaDammi nidvite
tss| caubhaMgo ettha bhave, carimaduge hoti kappaM tu  //  178  //  cauro
atikkama-vatikkame ya atiyAra taha annaayaare| niddarisaNaM cauNha vi, AhAkamme
nimaMtaNayA  //  179  /  /  82/1. sAlI-ghata-gula-gorasa, navesu vallIphalesu
jaatesuN| dANe abhiNavasaDDhe, 'AhAyakate nimaMtaNayA  //  180  //  82/2.
AhAkammaggahaNe, aikkamAdIsu vaTTate causu  /  neurahAriga hatthI, cau-tiga-
duga-egacalaNeNaM  //  181  //  82/3. AhAkammAmaMtaNa", paDisuNamANe aikkamo
hoti| padabhedAdi vaikkama, gahite tatietaro gilie  //  182  //  dAraM  //  83.
ANAdiNo12 ya dosA, gahaNe jaM bhaNiyamaha ime te u| ANAbhaMga'NavatthA,
micchattavirAdhaNA ceva  //  183  //  83/1. ANaM savvajiNANaM, geNhaMto taM
aikkamati luddho| ANaM ca atikkaMto, kassAdesA kuNati sesaM13?  //  184  //  1.
'vaI (ka), tu saMbhave (jIbhA 1172) /  ina gAthAoM ke bhASyagata hone ke nimna
kAraNa haiM2. atra heto prathamA (mavR), hUNA (lA, b)| * gA. 82/3 aneka graMthoM
meM milatI hai ataH 3. u (a, bI, mu)| graMthakAra ne caturtha caraNa meM
atikrama kA saMketa 4. tu. jIbhA 1156 /  mAtra kara diyA hai| 5. 'yammI (mu)| *
gA. 82 kA caturtha pada aura 82/3 kA prathama 6. tu. jIbhA 1157, ba, ka, lA aura
sa prati meM yaha pada zabdoM kI dRSTi se lagabhaga samAna hai, _ gAthA nahIM
hai| yaha gAthA bhASya kI honI caahie| niyuktikAra itanI punarukti nahIM karate
haiN| 7. tu. jIbhA 1174 /  82 vI gAthA viSaya kI dRSTi se sIdhI 83 vIM 8.
AhAkamme nimaMtei (jIbhA 1177), AhAyakayaM gAthA se jur3atI hai| 82 ke caturtha
pada meM nimaMtei (sa, ka), tu. nibhA 2662, tu. bRbhA 5341  /  graMthakAra ne
adhUrI bAta kahI hai .ata: 83 vIM 9. "calaNANaM (lA, ba), kathA ke vistAra hetu
dekheM gAthA meM AdhAkarma kA nimaMtraNa svIkAra karane pari. 3,kathA saM. 10 /
/  ke doSoM kA ullekha hai| 10. 'kamma nimaMtaNa (mu, k)| 12. ANAyaNo (s)| 11.
vyabhA 43, 82/1-3-ye tInoM gAthAeM 82 vIM gAthA 13.jIbhA 1183 /  kI vyAkhyA rUpa
haiM ata: bhASya kI honI caahie|

Page #206 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 34 **Pindaniyukti**  83/2. What else is there, other than the **tappas**
(penance) that one performs, which is the cause of **punya** (merit)? The
**saataabahulaparampara** (tradition of many births) is cut off by **sanjama**
(self-control) and **tavana** (penance). || 185 ||  83/3. Who else is there,
other than one who has **michchhaddiṭṭhi** (wrong belief), who does not perform
**jahavaaya** (self-reflection)? One who praises **michchhattam** (wrong belief)
and considers it to be the **sankam** (benefit) of others. || 186 ||  83/4. One
who praises **tappasangam** (association with penance) and considers it to be
the **appano** (own) of others and oneself. Even if one is **sajiya** (united)
and **bhinnadaado** (different in strength), one does not become **muya** (free)
from **niddhando** (bondage) afterwards. || 187 ||  83/5. One who is **khaddhe**
(half-hearted) in **niddh** (meditation) and **ruya** (suffering), **suttee**
(sleep) and **tigicchane** (desire) of the body. One who causes **haani** (harm)
to the **paḍieragaṇa** (sense organs) and performs **kilesam** (affliction)
while being **kilissant** (afflicted). || 188 ||  84. Just as **karma** (action)
is **akappam** (unpredictable), **tachchikkam** (its result) is
**bhayanatthitam** (established by fear). One says that **pariharaṇam**
(avoidance) of it is the **gahiyamdosam** (secret fault). || 189 ||  84/1.
**Abhojje** (non-food) **gamaṇaadi** (going etc.), **puccha** (question)
**davvakula** (wealthy family) **desa** (country) **bhaave** (in the sense of)
etc. Thus, **chalaṇā** (deceitful) are born, and **donnia** (two) are there to
be seen. || 190 ||  85. Just as **vant** (food) is **abhoj** (non-food),
**bhattam** (food) which is **susakkayam** (well-prepared) is **asi** (is).
Similarly, **asangamavamane** (in the absence of self-control), **anesanijjam**
(non-beneficial) is **abhojjam** (non-food). || 191 ||  86. **Majjarakhaiyam**
(meat of a cat), **mansasitthi** (meat of a cow) **kunim** (dog) **sunagavant**
(pig). **Vannaadi** (color etc.) **anṇauppaaiyam** (produced from other things)
- what is that, is it **bhojjam** (food)? || 192 ||  86/1. Some say that
**pahiye** (in the case of) **utthaane** (rising) **mansapesivosiranam** (meat
of a cow, pig, and goat). **Sambharit** (prepared) **parivesan** (food) - one
says that it is **suto** (good) to **ghettum** (take). || 193 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 34 piMDaniyukti 83/2. egeNa' katamakajja, kareti' tappaccayA puNo anno|
sAtAbahulaparaMpara, vocchedo saMjama-tavANaM  //  185  //  83/3. jo jahavAyaM
na kuNati, micchaddiTThI tao hu ko anno? vaDDeti ya micchattaM, parassa saMkaM
jaNemANo  //  186  //  83/4. vaDDeti tappasaMgaM, gehI ya parassa appaNo cev|
sajiyaM pi bhinnadADho, na muyati niddhaMdhaso pacchA'  //  187  //  83/5.
khaddhe niddhe ya ruyA, sutte hANI tigicchaNe kaayaa| 'paDiyaragANa ya hANI'6,
kuNati kilesaM kilissaMto  //  188  //  84. jaha kammaM tu akappaM, tacchikkaM
vAvi bhAyaNaThitaM vaa| pariharaNaM tasseva ya, gahiyamadosaM ca taha bhaNati
//  189  //  84/1. abbhojje gamaNAdI, pucchA davvakula-'desa-bhAve'10 y| eva
jayaMte chalaNA, diTuMtA tatthime donniA  //  190  //  85. jaha vaMtaM tu abhoja
2, bhattaM 'jaM pi ya'13 susakkayaM AsI5  /  evamasaMjamavamaNe, aNesaNijjaM
abhojjaM tu|| 191  //  86. majjArakhaiyamaMsA, maMsAsitthi6 kuNimaM suNagavaMtaM
/  vaNNAdiaNNauppAiyaM7 pi kiM taM bhave bhojjaM?8  //  192  //  86/1. keI
bhaNaMti9 pahie, uTThANe20 maMsapesivosiraNaM  /  saMbhArita parivesaNa, vAreti
suto kare ghettuM2  //  193  //  1. ekeNa (bii)| saMbhAvanA lagatI hai ki 84/1
tathA 86/1, 22. kare (b)| ye tInoM gAthAeM bhASya kI honI caahie| inako 3. jIbhA
1984, bRbhA 928, nibhA 4787 /  nigA ke krama meM nahIM jor3A hai| 4. jIbhA 1185,
paMcA 11/46 /  12. ahojaM (lA, ba, s)| 5. ettha (bI), jIbhA 1187 /  13. jai vi
ya (mu)| paDiyaragANa ya kAyA (lA, ba), 14. sasakkayaM (s)| 'gANa vi hANI (k)|
15. Asi (mu, laa)| 7. ca kissaMto (ka, jIbhA 1188), 83/1-5-ye 16. "sitthI (a,
bii)| pAMcoM gAthAeM 83 vIM gAthA kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiM 17. vaNNAtivaNNau (lA,
s)| ata: bhASya kI honI caahie| 18. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA
saM. 11 //  yaha gAthA ba prati meM nahIM hai| 19. vayaMti (a, bii)| 9.
ahabhojja (lA), abbhujje (ka, bii)| 20. atthANA (a, ba, lA), utthANA (s)| 10.
khettabhAve (a, bI, s)| 21. parivaTTaNa (a, ba, lA, bii)| 11. jIbhA 1190, 84/1
yaha gAthA 84 vIM gAthA kI 22. ghatthaM (bI), kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari.
3, vyAkhyA rUpa hai| vyAkhyArUpa hone se adhika kathA saM. 11 kA ttippnn| |

Page #207 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  86/2. Sour 'karabi kheer'², garlic, palandu, sura and beef.
Even in the Vedic times, this was considered inedible and unwholesome. || 194 ||
87. Even things like color, etc., are considered harmful if they are mixed with
harmful things like fruits and flowers. Even in the case of 'chikkao abhojjao',
it is considered harmful. || 195 || Similarly, even in the case of abandoned
things, if they are used in food, they become inedible. It is considered
inedible if it is contaminated with something impure. || 196 || A wise person,
fearing the consequences of improper speech, avoids it. He avoids both proper
and improper ways of avoiding things. || 197 || 89/1. A foolish person, seeing
rice-gruel, says, "It is good." He asks, "Where did you get this rice?" || 198
|| 89/2. Having gone to the market, he asks the merchant, "Where did you get
this rice?" He replies, "From Gobbar village, it is available there." || 199 ||
89/3. He is doubtful about the food, and seeing the thorns, he wants to throw it
away. He also avoids the shade, fearing the heat and the sun. || 200 || 89/4.
This avoidance of improper things is not for the ignorant. These rules of
avoidance are applicable in terms of wealth, family, country and behavior. ||
201 ||   1. Avilā (mu). 15. Avikavido (a, b, la, bi). 2 Karahakkhiram (a, b),
Karahi (k). 16. Dei (a, b), Diti (k). 3. Lhasun (mu), Lasan (a, k, b). 17. Vani
Jane (s). 4. Falandu (la), Palandu (a, b, s). 18. 89/1-8-These eight verses are
the explanation of verse 89. 89/1-3-These three verses should be in the second
half of verse 89, see note 84/1. These verses are about the story related to
improper avoidance, and "Lalakal (la, b, s), Palalam Tilakshoda Uchyate,
89/4-8-These five verses explain the proper avoidance. Shekharah-Shikha Yasya Sa
(Mavri). The explanation is given. Verse 89/9 is also an explanation. 7.
Vippusena (la), Vipusena (b). 19. Mutun (a, b). 8. 'Kkahutt'abhikkhao (a, b),
'Kka hujj- 20. Puchchh (s). Bhujjao (k). 21. Gubbar (b). 9. Ahakammamiy (a). 22.
Kamma San (a, b). 10. Akaye (a, b). 23. Muttu (a, b). 11. Suddham Pi (a, b),
Suddhe Vi (k, mu). 24. Vajjayanto (mu). 12. x (la). 25. For the expansion of the
story, see Pari. 3, Kantha San. 12. 13. U (a, b). 26. "Parihari (a, b). 14.
Odhanam (b). 27. Nanahinam (s).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 86/2. amilA' 'karabhI khIraM'2, lasuNa palaMDU surA ya gomNsN|
vedasamae vi amayaM, kiMci abhojjaM apijjaM ca  //  194  /  /  87. vaNNAdijuyA
vi balI, sapalalaphalaseharA asuintthaa| asuissa vippuseNa' vi, jaha 'chikkAo
abhojjAo"  //  195  //  emeva ujjhitammi vi, AhAkammammi akayae. kppe| hoti
abhojjaM bhANe, jattha va suddhammira taM paDitaM  //  196  //
vaMtuccArasaricchaM, kammaM soumavi 'kovido bhIto'12 | pariharati sAvi ya duhA,
vihi-avihIe ya3 prihrnnaa|| 197  //  89/1. sAlI-odaNa14 hatthaM, daTTha bhaNatI
akovido5 deMti16  /  kattoccau tti sAlI, 'vaNi jANati'17 puccha taM gaMtu  //
198  //  89/2. gaMtUNa'9 AvaNaM so, vANiyagaM pucchate 20 kato sAlI? paccaMte
magahAe, gobbaragAmera tahiM vayati  // 199  /  /  89/3. kammAsaMkAe~ 22 pahaM,
mottuM23 kaMTAhisAvayA adisiN| chAyaM pi vivajjeMto", Dajjhati uNheNa mucchAdI25
//  200  //  89/4. iya avihIpariharaNA26, nANAdINaM27 na hoti aabhaagii| davva-
kula-desa-bhAve, vidhipariharaNA imA tattha  // 201 //  1. avilA (mu)| 15.
avikovio (a, ba, lA, bii)| 2 karahakkhIraM (a, bI), karahI (k)| 16. deI (a, bI),
diti (k)| 3. lhasuNa (mu), lasaNa (a, ka, bii)| 17. vaNi jANe (s)| 4. phalaMDu
(lA), palaMDu (a, bI, s)| 18. 89/1-8-ye AThoM gAthAeM gA. 89 ke uttarArddha 5.
vA (ka), 86/1, 2-ye tInoM gAthAeM bhASya kI kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiN| 89/1-3-ina
tIna gAthAoM honI cAhie, dekheM TippaNa 84/1 /  meM avidhi-pariharaNa se
saMbaMdhita kathAnaka hai tathA "lalakala (lA, ba, sa), palalaM tilakSoda
ucyate, 89/4-8-ina pAMca gAthAoM meM vidhi-pariharaNa zekharaH-zikhA yasya sa
(mvR)| kI vyAkhyA hai| gAthA 89/9 bhI vyAkhyA rUpa hai| 7. vippusseNa (lA),
vipuseNa (b)| 19. mUtUNa (a, bii)| 8. 'kkAhutta'bhikkhAo (a, bI), 'kkA hujja-
20. puccha (s)| bhujjAo (k)| 21. gubbara (bii)| 9. AhAkammamiya (a)| 22. kamma
saM (a, bii)| 10. akae (a, bii)| 23. muttu (a, b)| 11. suddhaM pi (a, bI),
suddhe vi (ka, mu)| 24. vajjayaMto (mu)| 12. x (laa)| 25. kathA ke vistAra hetu
dekheM pari. 3,kaMthA saM. 12 /  13. u (a, bii)| 26. "parihArI (a, bii)| 14.
odaNaM (bii)| 27. nANahINaM (s)|

Page #208 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Pindaniyukti  89/5.  Odan-samitima'- sattunaga-kummasadi ya' honti 'davve
tu". Bahujanam-appajanam va, kulan tu deso surattadi. || 202 || 89/6. Ayara-
nayarabhave, sayam va annena vavvi davanaya. Etesim tu padanam, caupayatipaya'
varsha bhayana u. || 203 || 89/7. Anuciya-desam davvam", kulan-appam ayaro ya to
puccha. Bahue vi natthi puccha, sadesa-davvie abhave vi. || 204 || 89/8.
Tujjhattaeo kayaminam-anno'nnam-avekkhae11 ya2 savilakham. Vajjenti3
gadharutta", ka bhe tatti5 tti va ginhe. || 205 || 89/9. Gudhayara16 'na
karentu'17, adaram puccchita vi na kahenti.  _Thovam19 ti va no puttha, 'tam
ca'20 asuddham kaham tattha? || 206 || Aha-kamm-parinato, phasugabhoi21 vi
bandhago hoti. Sudham gavesamano, aha-kamme vi so sudho. || 207 || 90/1.
Sanghudditum soum, eti22 dutam koi bhaie patto. Dinnam ti dehi'3 'majjhatiga
u'24 saum25 tato laggo26. || 208 || 90/2. Masig-parana-gattha, gamana asanna-
gama-ge27 khamage. Saddi payasa-karanam, kaya'i28 ajjejjhi29 khamago. || 209 ||
1. Samiti (a, b), samitima:-mandadika: (mavru). 17. Kareti ya (b). 2. U (a, b,
mu). 18. Kahanti (a, la). 3. Hoi (b). 19. Thevam (la, b). 4. Davvam tu (la, b),
davva'i (k, mu). 20. Na va (s). 5. Caupayatipaya (a, b). 21. Gadavve (mula 487).
6. Ya (k). 22. Ey (a, k, b). 7. Savvam (a, b, la, b). 23. Dehi (la, k, mu). 8.
Bahue (b). 24. Jhantgau (a, b). 9. Ya (la, k, b). 25. Dhaum (la). 10. Tubbha'
(a, b). 26. 90/1-4-ye charo gatha'en 90 vi gatha ki vyakhya 11. "Minam anno'nnam
vikkhae (la, b, s), kayam rup hain. Gatha ko spasht karne vale do kathankon
minamanno'nnam-apikkhae (a). Ka sanketa in char gatha'on men hain, katha ke 12.
Vi (a, b), va (k). vistar hetu dekhen pari. 3. Katha san. 13. 13. Tajjanti (b).
27. "Magam (la, b). 14. Rute (la, a), 'ruttho (s). 28. Kaya'i (b). 15. Titti
(k). 29. Ajjejjahan (a, b), ajjejjhihan (s). 16. Mudha (a, b). 30. Katha ke
vistar hetu dekhen pari. 3, katha san. 14.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 89/5. odaNa-samitima'- sattuga-kummAsAdI ya' hoMti 'davve tu"|
bahujaNamappajaNaM vA, kulaM tu deso suraTThAdI  //  202  //  89/6.
Ayara'NAyarabhAve, sayaM va anneNa vAvi daavnnyaa| etesiM tu padANaM,
caupayatipayA' varSa bhayaNA u||203  //  89/7. aNuciyadesaM davvaM", kulamappaM
Ayaro ya to pucchaa| bahue vi natthi pucchA, sadesadavie abhAve vi||204  //
89/8. tujjhaTThAe0 kayamiNamanno'nnamavekkhae11 ya2 svilkkhN| vajjeMti3
gADharuTThA", kA bhe tatti5 tti vA giNhe  //  205  //  89/9. gUDhAyArA16 'na
kareMti'17, AdaraM pucchitA vi na kheNti| _thovaM19 ti va no puTThA, 'taM ca'20
asuddhaM kahaM tattha?  // 206  //  AhAkammapariNato, phAsugabhoI21 vi baMdhago
hoti  /  suddhaM gavesamANo, AhAkamme vi so suddho  //  207  //  90/1.
saMghuddiTuM souM, eti22 dutaM koi bhAie ptto| diNNaM ti deha'3 'majjhatigA u'24
sAuM25 tato laggo26  //  208  //  90/2. mAsigapAraNagaTThA, gamaNaM
AsannagAmage27 khmge| saDDI pAyasakaraNaM, kayAi28 ajjejjihI29 khamago0  //  209
//  1. samiti (a, bI), samitimAH-mANDAdikAH (mvR)| 17. kareti ya (b)| 2. u (a,
bI, mu)| 18. kahaMti (a, laa)| 3. hoi (b)| 19. thevaM (lA, b)| 4. davvaM tu (lA,
ba), davvAiM (ka, mu)| 20. na va (s)| 5. cauppayatippayA (a, bii)| 21. gadavve
(mUlA 487) /  6. ya (k)| 22. eya (a, ka, bii)| 7. savvaM (a, ba, lA, bii)| 23.
dehi (lA, ka, mu)| 8. bahUe (bii)| 24. jhaMtagAu (a, bii)| 9. ya (lA, ka, b)|
25. dhAuM (laa)| 10. tubbha' (a, bii)| 26. 90/1-4-ye cAroM gAthAeM 90 vI gAthA
kI vyAkhyA 11. "miNaM annonnaM vikkhae (lA, ba, sa), kayaM rUpa haiN| gAthA ko
spaSTa karane vAle do kathAnakoM miNamaNNoNNamapikkhae (a)| kA saMketa ina cAra
gAthAoM meM haiM, kathA ke 12. vi (a, ba), va (k)| vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3.
kathA saM. 13  /  13. tajjaMti (bii)| 27. "magaM (lA, b)| 14. ruTe (lA, a),
'ruTTho (s)| 28. kayAI (bii)| 15. titti (k)| 29. ajjejjahaM (a, bI), ajjejjihaM
(s)| 16. mUDhA (a, bii)| 30. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3,kathA saM. 14
/

Page #209 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti 37 90/3. Khallag-mallag 'lechcharigani dimbhag'5 'nibbachchit ti
runtanaya'2 | Handi 'samana ti'3 payas, ghataguljuy javanatthae || 210 || 90/4.
Egantmavakkamana', jai sadhu 'ejj hojj'6 tinno mi. Tanukotthammi amuchcha',
bhuttammmi ya kevalam nanam. || 211 || 91. Chandodayam cha surodayam cha ranno u
donni ujjana. Tesi vivaritagamane, ana kovo tato dando || 212 || 91/1. Surodayam
gacchamahambhabate, chandodayam jam tu tanaihara. Duha ravi'pacchurasam ti'10
kau, raya ya11 chandodayameva gacche || 213 || 91/2. Pattaladumasalagata,
dachchamu12 'nivangan ti'53 ducchitta. Ujjana palaehi, gahita ya hata ya baddha
ya || 214 || 91/3. Sahasa pavittha dittha, itarehi nivangan ti to baddha.
Nintassa ya avarane, dassanamubhao vah-visaggo5 || 215 || 91/4. Jah te
dassanakankhi, apuritichcha vinasita ranna. Didhe vitare mukka, emeva iham
samotaroo16 || 216 || 92. Ahakammam bhunjati, na padikkama te ya tassa thanassa.
Emeva adati bodo, lukkavilukko8 jah kavodo19 || 217 || Ahakammiyadaram20
bhanitamidanim pura samudditum. Udde siyantu21 voccham, samasato tam duha hoti
|| 218 || 1. Riga ya dimb (a, b). 14. “Navavadehim (la), "Navavadoham (b). 2.
‘Chhanam cha rum' (mu), 'chhie ti bhandanaya (la). 15. Katha ke vistar hetu
deken pari. 3,katha san. 15. 3. Samanam ti (b). 16. Jibha 1192, 91/1-4-ye charo
gathaen spasht 4. Payagul° (la, b). rup se bhashya ki pratiti hoti hain. Ga. 91
men 5. Egatt (b). niyuktikar ne sanksep men puri katha ka sanket kar 6. Ijj ya
homi (b, k, s). diya hai. Ga. 91/1-4-in charo gathao men isi 7. Na muchcha (a).
katha ka vistar hai. Inko niga ke kramank men 8. Tayabhihara (la), tayatihara
(b). nahin joda hai. 9. Sasi (la). 17. Podo (la). 10. Rasin ti (la),
pratyurasam-urasah sammukham (mavri). 18. Luggavilutto (a, b). 11.vi (la, b, mu,
s). 19. Kamodo (la, s), kammodo (b), kkamodo (k), 12.Dachchamo (a). Jibha 1193.
13. Ganitti (a). 20. Kammdaram (mu). 21. Ti (k, mu).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 37 90/3. khallaga-mallaga 'lecchArigANi DiMbhaga'5 'nibbhacchita
tti ruMTaNayA'2 | haMdi 'samaNa tti'3 pAyasa, ghatagulajuya jAvaNaTThAe  //  210
//  90/4. egaMtamavakkamaNaM', jai sAdhU 'ejja hojja'6 tinno mi| taNukoTThammi
amucchA', bhuttammi ya kevalaM nANaM  /  /  211  //  91. caMdodayaM ca sUrodayaM
ca raNNo u doNNi ujjaannaa| tesi vivarItagamaNe, ANA kovo tato dNddo|| 212  /  /
91/1. sUrodayaM gacchamahaM pabhAte, caMdodayaM jaM tu tnnaaihaaraa| duhA
ravI'paccurasaM ti'10 kAuM, rAyA ya11 caMdodayameva gacche  //  213  //  91/2.
pattaladumasAlagatA, dacchAmu12 'nivaMgaNa tti'53 duccittaa|| ujjANapAlaehiM,
gahitA ya hatA ya baddhA y|| 214  //  91/3. sahasA paviTTha diTThA, itarehi
nivaMgaNa tti to bddhaa|| niMtassa ya avaraNhe, daMsaNamubhao vaha-visaggo5  //
215  //  91/4. jaha te daMsaNakaMkhI, apUriticchA viNAsitA rnnnnaa| diDhe vitare
mukkA , emeva ihaM samotAro16  //  216  //  92. AhAkammaM bhuMjati, na
paDikkamate ya tassa tthaannss| emeva aDati boDo, lukkavilukko8 jaha kavoDo19
//  217  //  AhAkammiyadAraM20 bhaNitamidANiM purA samuddiTuM  /  uddesiyaM tu21
vocchaM, samAsato taM duhA hoti  //  218  //  1. rigA ya DiMbha (a, bii)| 14.
"NavAvaDehiM (lA), "NavAvaDohaM (b)| 2. 'cchaNaM ca rUM' (mu), 'cchie tti
bhaMDaNayA (laa)| 15. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3,kathA saM. 15  /  3.
samaNaM ti (bii)| 16. jIbhA 1192, 91/1-4-ye cAroM gAthAeM spaSTa 4. payaguladeg
(lA, b)| rUpa se bhASya kI pratIta hotI haiN| gA. 91 meM 5. egatta (bii)|
niyuktikAra ne saMkSepa meM pUrI kathA kA saMketa kara 6. ijja ya homi (ba, ka,
s)| diyA hai| gA. 91/1-4-ina cAra gAthAoM meM isI 7. na mucchA (a)| kathA kA
vistAra hai| inako nigA ke kramAMka meM 8. tayAbhihArA (lA), tayAtihArA (b)|
nahIM jor3A hai| 9. sasI (laa)| 17. poDo (laa)| 10. rasiM tti (lA), pratyurasam-
urasaH sammukhaM (mvR)| 18. luggavilutto (a, bii)| 11.vi (lA, ba, mu, s)| 19.
kamoDo (lA, sa), kammoDo (ba), kkamoDo (ka), 12.dacchAmo (a)| jIbhA 1193 /  13.
gaNitti (a)| 20. kammadAraM (mu)| 21. ti (ka, mu)|

Page #210 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 38 94. 95. Ohe division, Ohe is firm, twelve directions are the work, one by
one twenty-four. 94/1. Jiva-mu' says, Ohe, constantly begging, even if we give
something, it is not given. There is no ungiven, he enjoys the un-given, he does
not bear fruit. || 220 || That is not special, in the limited food, he is
satisfied with rice. The heretic, the householder, who says this, his begging is
not right. || 221 || He says. Fourth 14 Chettae. || 222 || 95/1. Choum-matho-
uddesam, how does he explain, "Guru, thus 15, 96. Uva-utto Gihattha-sadda-adi
95/2. Given, then five, he makes a line, he gives, and he calculates. 16 "Give"
from here, or from here, even if it is not given, this is begging. || 223 ||
Sadda-adi-su sahu, do not ask, this is right, like a cowherd, 96/1. Festival
decoration, do not give water, the merchant's arrival, the covering, the
decoration, 96/2. Five types of objects, the moment, 22 many together, he does
not calculate, like a cowherd, 23 asked, he is caught, 1. U (s). 2. Uddesa (a,
b, la, k, bi). 3. Ikkik-ke (bi), ekke-kki (s, mu). 4. Chakk-ao (k, mu). 5. Jiya-
mo (la, b), jive-mu (k). 6. Kai-vai demo (mu). 7. Bhuj-jai (mu). 8. Ya vise-sae
(a, b). 9. Niyam-mi (a, k, b). 10. Tandu-le (mu). 11. Ehin-ti (la, b), ehi (k).
12. Rakkhat-ta (a, b).  13. 'Ttho-ud-desam (a, b, la). 14. Choi-ae (a, k, b,
mu). O 18. 19. Pinda-niyukti Vibhage. Bhedo. || 219 ||  Go-yar-gato u. Gavatti-
vva. || 224 || Not a charioteer. Kharan-tanaya. || 225 || 15. Hoj-ja-guru (s).
16. Ganen-ti (b), ganan-ti (mu), ganen-ta (s). 17. Dehi (k). Hi (k). Gavatte-va
(la), gavatte-v (a, b). Gihan-tan-tu. Gavatti-mmi 4. || 226 || 20. Vi ya (a, b),
x (s). 21. 96/1 - 4 - These four stanzas are explanatory, therefore they should
be in the commentary. The commentator has indicated the example of the calf by
saying "Go-ni-vaccho gavatti-vva" in stanza 96. 96/1 - 3 expand on this example.
96/4 is directly related to 99/1, 2, therefore they should also be in the
commentary. 22. Kkhanin (a, b). 23. Go-n (la). 24. For the expansion of the
story, see Pari. 3, Katha San. 16.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 38 94. 95. oheNa vibhAgeNa ya, ohe ThappaM tu bArasa uddi kaDe kamme, ekkekkara
cauvviho' 94 / 1. jIvAmu' kaha vi ome, niyataM bhikkhA vi tA 'kaivi demo 6  /
haMdi hu natthi adinnaM, bhuMjati akataM na ya phaletI  //  220  //  sA u
avisesitaM ciya, mitammi bhattammi cAule chubhati  /  pAsaMDINa gihINa va, jo
ehiti tassa bhikkhaTThA  //  221  //  bhaNati  /  coito 14 ceTTAe  //  222  //
95/1. chaumatthoghuddesaM, kahaM vivANAti 'guru evaM 15, 96. uvautto
gihatthasaddAdi 95 / 2. diNNAu tAu paMca vi, rehAu kareti deti va gaNitI6  /
deha" ito mA ya ito, avaNeha ya ettiyA bhikkhA  //  223  //  saddAdisu sAhU,
mucchaM na karejja esa jutto hojjA, goNIvaccho 96 / 1. Usava maMDaNalaggA, na
pANiyaM vacchae vaNiyAgama avaraNhe, vacchagaraDaNaM 96 / 2.
paMcavihavisayasokkhakkhaNI 22 vahU samahiyaM na gaNeti goNivaccho 23, mucchita
gaDhio 1. u ( sa )  /  2. uddesa ( a, ba, lA, ka, bI)  /  3. ikkikke (bI),
ekkekki (sa, mu)  /  4. cakkao (ka, mu)  /  5. jIyAmo (lA, ba), jIvemu ( ka )  /
6. kaivaI demo (mu)  /  7. bhujjai (mu)| 8. ya visesae ( a, bI)  /  9. niyammi (
a, ka, bI)  /  10. taMDule (mu)  /  11. ehiMti (lA, ba), ehi ( ka )  /  12.
rakkhaTTA ( a, bI)  /  13. 'tthodduddesaM ( a, ba, lA)  /  14. coie ( a, ka, bI,
mu)  /  O 18. 19. piMDa niyukti vibhAge  /  bhedo  //  219  //  goyaragato u  /
gavattivva  //  224 //  na vA cArI  /  kharaMTaNayA  //  225  //  15. hojjaguru
(sa)  /  16. gaNeMti (ba), gaNaMti (mu), gaNeMtA ( sa )  /  17. dehi (ka)  /  hi
(ka)  /  gavatte vA (lA), gavatte va ( a, bI)  /  gihaM taM tu  /  gavattammi 4
//  226  //  20. vi ya ( a, bI), x (sa)  /  21. 96/1 - 4 - ye cAra gAthAeM
vyAkhyAparaka haiM ataH bhASya kI honI cAhie  /  niyuktikAra ne gAthA 96 meM
'goNIvaccho gavattivva' kahakara bachar3e ke dRSTAnta kA saMketa kara diyA hai
/  96 / 1 - 3 meM isI dRSTAnta kA vistAra hai  /  96 / 4 kA sambandha sIdhA 99 /
1, 2 se jur3atA hai ataH ve bhI bhASya kI honI caahie| 22. kkhaNiM ( a, bI)  /
23. goNa (lA)  /  24. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 16  /

Page #211 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pindaniyukti  98. 96/3. In the case of going and coming, the monk knows through
the faculty of speech and other senses. He knows the desired and the undesired,
and thus the monk knows his own mind. || 227 ||  96/4. The remaining part of the
large plate, such as the leftover curry, etc. The householder, after seeing it,
says: "Give this to the one who seeks merit." || 228 ||  97. Uddeshika,
samuddesika, aadeshika, and samaadesham. Thus, the fourfold division is made in
the case of each karma. || 229 ||  Javaantigamuddesham, the uddeshana of the
heretics. The aadeshana of the monks, the samaadesham of the Nirgranthas. || 230
||  Chinnacchinna is of two types - in terms of substance, space, time, and
state. What is not to be known is that which does not fit in any of these. ||
231 ||  Surely, the leftover of the meal in the plate, either on the same day or
the next day. Everything, both inside and outside, should be uninterrupted every
day. || 232 ||  99/2. Do not leave this body, whether it has gone outside or
remained inside. Until the time of release, focus on the time of release. || 233
||  100. Even if it is said that the substance, etc. is cut off, if the ascetic
says, "Do not give." Then it is permissible even if it is cut off, they avoid
the uncut portion. || 234 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 98. 96/3. gamaNAgamaNukkheve, bhAsita sotaadiiNdiyaautto|
esaNamaNesaNaM vA, taha' jANatire tammaNo samaNo  //  227 ||daarN  //  96/4.
mahatIya saMkhaDIe', uvvaritaM kuurvNjnnaadiiyN|| pauraM dadruNa gihI, bhaNati
imaM dehipa puNNaTThA  //  228  //  97. uddesiyaM samuddesiyaM ca AdesiyaM
smaadesN| evaM kaDe ya kamme, ekkekka cauvviho bhedo  //  229  /  /
jAvaMtigamuddesaM, pAsaMDINaM bhave samuddesaM  /  samaNANaM AdesaM,
niggaMthANaM smaadesN1|| 230  //  chinnamachinnaM duvidhaM, davve khette ya kAla
'bhAve ya'12  /  nipphAiyanipphannaM13, nAtavvaM jaM jahiM kamati  //  231 //
bhuttuvvaritaM15 khalu saMkhaDie16 tadivasamannadivasaM17 vaa| aMto bahiM ca
savvaM, savvadiNaM deha8 acchinnaM 19  //  232  //  99/2. deha imaM mA sesaM,
aMto bAhiragataM va egtrN| jAva amugi tti velA, amugaM20 velaM ca Arabbha  //
233  //  100. davvAdI chinnaM pi21 hu, jai bhaNate 22 Arao vi mA deh| to 23
kappati chinnaM pi hu, acchinnakaDaM pariharaMti  //  234  //  1. iha (laa)| 2.
jANa vi (lA, b)| 3. samaNe (b)| 4. saMkhaDie (a, bii)| 5. bhaNaha (a, bii)| 6. x
(a, bI), deha (ka)  /  7. siyaM va (lA, b)| 8. caukkao (ka, mu)| nibhA (2019)
meM yaha gAthA isa prakAra milatI haiuddesagA samuddesagA ya Adesa taha
smaadesaa| emeva kaDe cauro, kammammi vi hoMti cttaari|| 10. *NANa tu (nibhA
2020) /  11. jIbhA 1199, mUlA 426, piMpra 30 /  12. bhAveNaM (lA, b)| 13.
niSphaiyaniSphaNNA (laa)| 14. kamao (a, bii)| 15. bhattu (a, bI, mu)| 16.
saMkhaDIe (lA, ba, mu), gAthA meM chaMda kI dRSTi se ikAra hrasva huA hai| 17.
divase (ka, mu)| 18. dehi (mu), srvtr| 19. yaha gAthA 96/4 se jaDatI hai| bIca
meM tIna gAthAeM niyukti kI haiN| 99/1, 2-ina donoM gAthAoM meM dravyAdi
acchinna tathA dravyAdi chinna kI vyAkhyA hai| 20. amuM (a, bii)| 21. vi (a,
bii)| 22. bhaNaI (a, ka, mu, bI), bhaNai (b)| 23. no (mu, bii)|

Page #212 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  101. There are two interpretations of "amugaṇam": "amugaṇam ti"
and "amugaṇam 'matti'".  Where there is a distinction in the Jati, one should
avoid that designation. || 235 || 101/1. One who hears the doubt, is worthy of
being the rest.  The collection of the statement, or, one does "asute" in this
way. || 236 || 101/2. Do not say "this is the body", avoid that in the future.
What is given is given, do not say "the body takes it". || 237 || 102. For the
sake of the taste of food, one should not say "I am happy with the bad food".
One should avoid the curd and other things, this is a cruel and harsh act. ||
238 || 103. Do not say anything bad, and give happiness with a calculated mind.
With a broken and torn cloth, one should not be equal to the destitute. || 239
|| 104. Similarly, in karma, there is no knowledge in the heat of passion.  With
the immersion of the mind, the purification of the moya and the chuṇṇī. || 240
|| 105. "Amugaṇam" is again established, it is fit for burning, it is fit for
the arato.  Inside and outside the field, "in time it is good" or "it is good
for others". || 241 || 105/1. As the burning is done, so it is fit for the
arato, and so it is not done.  What is the share of the "mani"? Even if it is
established, how much should one give? || 242 || 1. Vi (sa).  17. "Kattilayam
(sa), parikattilayam - ekatra piṇḍīkṛtam (mavr). 2. Diṭṭhau (b, la).  18. Tu (a,
b). 3. Mitti (k, mu), ma iti (sampa).  19. Phāḍieṇ (b). 4. Vibhāso (b).  20.
Vaṭṭeti (b). 5. Visatṭho (b).  21. x (sa). 6. Pariharaṇti (mu).  22. Puṇokaraṇam
(b), 104-105/1-ye tīn gāthāeṁ 7. Kappati (sa).  la prati meṁ nahīṁ haiṁ. 8.
Sāhaṇam - kathanaṁ (mavr).  23. Taṁ (b). 9. Kareṁti (la, mu, sa).  24. Dāhāma
(b). 10. Amuge (b, a, la).  25. Tu āro (a, k, b). 11. 101/1, 2-ye do gāthāeṁ
atirikt vyākhyātmik 26. Bāhi ya (b), bāhi vi (sa).  haiṁ. Inko mūl nigā ke
kramāṁk meṁ nahīṁ joḍā hai. 27. Kāli suivvaṁ (sa, mu, k). 12. Dehi (sa), dehi
(mu).  28. Paḍivvaṁ (a, b). 13. Dei (a, b), dehi (mu).  29. Kaḍaṁ (sa). 14.
Kuccchihiti mā (la, k, b).  30. 'Maṇiddhatṭhiyam (b), 'Maṇitti thiyaṁ (m). 15.
Āyattam (k).  31. "Tiya (b). 16. Kāhaṁti (mu).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 101. amugANaM ti va' dijjau', amugANaM 'ma tti'3 ettha u
vibhaasaa| jattha jatINa visiTTho', niddeso taM pariharejjA  //  235  //  101/1.
saMdissaMtaM jo suNati, kappate tassa sesae tthvnnaa| saMkaliyasAhaNaM. vA,
kareti' asute10 imA merA  //  236  //  101/2. mA eyaM deha'2 ima, puDhe
siTThammi taM prihrNti|| jaM dinnaM taM dinnaM, mA saMpati deha'3 gehaMti  //
237  //  102. rasabhAyaNahetuM vA, 'mA kucchihitI'14 suhaM va daahaami| dahimAdI
AyattI5, kareti kUraM kaDaM etaM  //  238  //  103. mA kAhiMti6 avaNNaM,
parikaliyaM ca dijjati suhaM tu|| vigaDeNa phANiteNa19 va, niddheNa samaM tu
vaTuMti  //  239  //  104 emeva ya kammammi vira, uNhavaNe navari tattha
naanntN| tAvitavilINaeNaM, moyagacuNNI puNakkaraNaM22  //  240  //  105. amugaM
ti23 puNo raddhaM, dAhamakappaM24 tamArato25 kappaM  /  khette aMto bAhiM26,
'kAle suivvaM '27 parevvaM28 vaa|| 241  //  105/1. jaM jaha va kataM29 dAhaM,
taM kappati Arato tahA akataM  /  kayapAga'Ni?mattaTThiyaM0 pi jAvaMtiyaM mottuM
//  242  //  1. vi (s)| 17. "kaTTilayaM (sa), parikaTTalitaM-ekatra piNDIkRtaM
(mvR)| 2. diTThAu (ba, laa)| 18. tu (a, bii)| 3. mitti (ka, mu), mA iti (sNpaa)|
19. phADieNa (b)| 4. vibhAso (b)| 20. vaTTeti (b)| 5. visaTTho (b)| 21. x (s)|
6. pariharaMti (mu)| 22. puNokaraNaM (ba), 104-105/1-ye tIna gAthAeM 7. kappai
(s)| lA prati meM nahIM haiN| 8. sAhaNaM-kathanaM (mvR)| 23. taM (b)| 9. kareMti
(lA, mu, s)| 24. dAhAma (bii)| 10. amuge (bI, a, laa)| 25. tu Arao (a, ka, bii)|
11. 101/1, 2-ye do gAthAeM atirikta vyAkhyAtmaka 26. bAhi ya (ba), bAhi vi (s)|
haiN| inako mUla nigA ke kramAMka meM nahIM jor3A hai| 27. kAli suivvaM (sa, mu,
k)| 12. dehI (sa), dehi (mu)| 28. paDivvaM (a, bii)| 13. dei (a, bI), dehi (mu)|
29. kaDaM (s)| 14. kucchihitImA (lA, ka, b)| 30. 'maNiddhattaThiyaM (ba),
'maNitti ThiyaM (m)| 15. AyattaM (k)| 31. "tiya (bii)| 16. kAhaMti (mu)|

Page #213 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  106. "Chakkayaniranukampa", Jinapvayana-bahira, bahi-phoda.
Evam vayanti bhoda, lukkavilukka jah kavoda. || 107. Puuti-kammam duvidham,
davve bhaave ya hoti natavvam. Davvammi 'chaganadhammiya, bhavammi ya badaram
suhum. || 243 || 108. Gandhadi-gunavisiṭuṁ, jaṁ davvam asuigandha davva-jutṁ.
Puuti' tti parihara-jjati, taṁ jaṇasu 'davva-puuti tti'. || 244 || 108/1.
Gotthin-iutto dhammi, sabhae' asanna-gotthi bhattaae. Samiya-suravall'- misam,
ajinna sanna mahisiphoho. || 245 || 108/2. Sanjat-alitta-bhatte, 'gotthigagandho
tti' vall-avaliya u. Ukkhaniya anna-chaganeṇa limpanaṁ 'davva-puuti tti'. || 246
|| 109. Uggam-koḍi-avayava-mittena vi missitam 'susuddham pi'. Suddham pi kunati
charanaṁ, puutiṁ taṁ bhavatō puuti. || 247 || Aaha-kammuddesiya, misam taha
badara ya pahudiya. Puuti ajjhoyar-ao, uggam-koḍi bhavae esa. || 248 || 111.
Badara suhum bhaave, u pu-iyam suhum-uvari vocchaami. Uvakarana- bhatta-paṇe,
duvidham puṇa badaram puurti. || 249 ||  ## Aahaka  1. Kaya jivamoda (la, b, s),
"Jivamera (k). 10. Valli (la, b). 2. Jinavar-amayaba' (la, b, s). 11. Sinna (a,
b). 3. Ajja phoda (la, s), ya bahi (k). 12. 108/1, 2 - These two gathas are an
expansion of the story about dravya-puuti. The author has already mentioned
"davvammi chaganadhammiya" in gatha 107, so these two gathas should be placed in
the niyukti section because they are an expansion of the story. 4. Kamoda (la,
b, s, k), this gatha is found in all manuscripts. The commentary mentions
"Chakkayeti gatha" but does not explain it. 13. "Gandhu tti (a, b). This gatha
should be in the niyukti section because it follows the ahadkarma. 14. Oganiyo
(b, s), Oganiun (a). 15. "Pu-i tu (la), "Pu-i tu (s). 6. "Gunasamiddham (a, b,
mu). 7. Pu-y (a). 8. "Pu-i tu (a). 9. Sahae (mu). 5.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 106. chakkAyaniraNukaMpA', jiNapavayaNabAhirA2 bhipphoddaa| evaM
vayaMti boDA, lukkavilukkA jaha kavoDA  //  107. pUtIkammaM duvidhaM, davve
bhAve ya hoti nAtavvaM  /  davvammi 'chagaNadhammiya, bhAvammi ya bAdaraM
suhumaM5  /  /  243  //  108. gaMdhAdiguNavisiTuM', jaM davvaM asuigaMdha
davvajutaM  /  /  pUti' tti pariharijjati, taM jANasu 'davvapUti tti'  /  /  244
//  108/1. goTThiniutto dhammI, sabhAe' AsannagoTThi bhttaae| samiya-
suravalla''- mIsaM, ajiNNa saNNA 11 mahisipoho12  //  245  //  108/2.
saMjAtalittabhatte, 'goTThigagaMdho tti'13 vallavaliyA u| ukkhaNiya4
annachagaNeNa liMpaNaM 'davvapUti tti'15  //  246  //  109.
uggamakoDIavayavamitteNa vi missitaM16 'susuddhaM pi'17| suddhaM pi kuNati
caraNaM, pUtiM taM8 bhAvato pUtI9  //  247  //  AhAkammuddesiya, mIsaM taha
bAdarA ya paahuddiyaa| pUtI ajjhoyarao29, uggamakoDI bhave esA  //  248  //
111. bAdara suhumaM bhAve, u pUiyaM suhumamuvari21 vocchaami| uvakaraNa-
bhattapANe, duvidhaM puNa bAdaraM pUrti  //  249  //  110. AhAka 1 TAkA 1. kAya
jIvamoDA (lA, ba, sa), "jIvamerA (k)| 10. valli (lA, b)| 2. jiNavaramayabA' (lA,
ba, s)| 11. siNNA (a, bii)| 3. ajja phoDA (lA, sa), ya bahi (k)| 12. 108/1, 2-ye
donoM gAthAeM dravyapUti viSayaka kathA 4. kamoDA (lA, ba, sa, ka), yaha gAthA
sabhI hasta- kA vistAra karane vAlI haiN| graMthakAra gA. 107 meM pratiyoM meM
milatI hai| TIkA meM "chakkAyeti gAthA 'davvammi chagaNadhammiya' ullekha se isa
dRSTAnta dRzyate paraM sA vRttau na vyAkhyAtA sugamA ca saMbaMdhazca kA kathana
kara cuke haiM ataH ye donoM gAthAeM na kopi" itanA ullekha hai ataH prakAzita
TIkA bhASya kI honI caahie| meM gAthA nigA ke krama meM nahIM rakhI hai lekina
13. "gaMdhu tti (a, bii)| yaha gAthA niyukti kI honI cAhie kyoMki AdhAkarma 14.
ogaNio (bI, sa), ogaNiuM (a)| Adi dvAroM ke bAda aMta meM isa prakAra kI gAthA
15. "pUi tu (lA), "pUI tu (sa), kathA ke vistAra aneka sthaloM para milatI hai|
hetu dekheM pari. 3,kathA saM. 17 //  dhammI bhAve duvihaM imaM hoti (jIbhA
1203), 16. x (sa), mIsiyaM (mu)| nibhA 804 /  17. asuddhaM pi (a), sasuddhaM tu
(lA, b)| 6. "guNasamiddhaM (a, bI, mu)| 18. tu (s)| 7. pUya (a)| 19. pUiM (a),
pUyaM (s)| 8. "pUI tu (a)| 20. ajjhovarae (a), yarae (k)| 9. sahAe (mu)| 21.
suhuma uvari (lA, ba, s)| 5.

Page #214 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 42 112. 113. 113/1. Chullukkha Padikutung Dae Chullukkhaliya' Doe',
Davvichude Lone Hingu, Kam Sijjhatassuvkaran, ' Dijjantassu Vareti " Tan
Uvakaranam Chulli, Ukkha Davvi Ya 113/2. Kammiyakaddamimissa, Chulli Ukkha Ya Do
Dande 17 Uvakaranaputimeyam, 113/3. Davvichude Kamma Ghadiya Kammadi,
Adimbhangensu Tisu1 Vi Tatthatham, Annatthagatam 13 114. Sankameum Kammam,
Siddham Jan Thali, ' Angar 5 Dhum 1. Chullukkh' (A, B). 2. Dove (La). 3. Puym
(B, S). Tti Jan Vuttam, 115. Indhanadhumegandhe Avayavamadihi 5 Sundarametam
Puti, Chodag 4. Lunam (La, B, S). 5. Sankamanen (A, B). Sudham Tu, ' Ghatte
113/4 Attatthiya Adane, Dayam Lonam Cha Kamma Tan Bhattapanaputi, Phodan Annam
21 Va Jan 12. Asudham (La, B, S). 13. 'Tthakayam (A, B, La). 14. Atra Hetau
Prathama (Mavri). 15. Va (A, B).  6. Phodanam (La, B, K, S), Phod Sandhume
(Nibha 808). 7. Vi (S). 8. Siddassu Kareti Vavi (Jibha 1208). 9. Dowai (La, B, S
K), 10. Chulli Ukha (A, B, S). 11. Tesu (A, B). Ya Misagan ' Phodanen Tu. Jibha
1208. Kammadavviya Vesan 24 'Kinchit Thatth '23 Mu Bhanite SuhumPuti Jan
Faddagajuta 14 U 15 || Va Egatare || 253 || Pindaniryukti Putim. Dhuumen || 250
|| 16 Davvam. Doiyadi || 251 || Jan Dae. Aharapui Yam' 19 || 254 ||  Akappam.
Annanatam || 252 || Hinguo Va. Chubhati 22 || 255 || Chudham Va. Dhumo || 256 ||
Tu. Bhanati || 257 || Guru 16. Doe Iti Deshe Samudaya Shabdopcharat Doe Ityukte
Doyasyagra Bhago Grihyate (Mavri). 17. Gande (A, B, La, B, S). 18. Ghattiya (K).
19. Ghatta Har Iyam (K, Mu), Gatha Men Anushtup Chhand Hai. 20. Hingu (K, Mu).
21. Mannam (A, K, B). 22. Jibha 1213, 113/14 - Ye Charon Gathaen 112 Vi Gatha Ki
Vyakhya Rup Hain Atah Bhashya Ki Honi Chahiye. 23. Thatth Kinchit (A, K, B). 24.
Kammiya Vesan Angar Thali (A, B). 25. Atraikardvayasy
Chhando'rthtvadadishabdasyavyatyayanm Karsya Chalakshanikatvadavam Nirdhesho
Drashtavya (Mavri), Indhanagrahanam Chopalakshanam Adishabdene Cha
Vashpaparigraha (Mavri).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 42 112. 113. 113/1. cullukkhA paDikuTuM DAe cullukkhaliyA' Doe', davvIchUDhe
loNe hiMgU, kAma sijjhatassuvakAraM, ' dijjaMtassa va kareti " taM uvakaraNaM
cullI, ukkhA davvI ya 113/2. kammiyakaddamamissA, cullI ukkhA ya Do daMDe 17
uvakaraNapUtimeyaM, 113/3. davvIchUDhe kammaM ghaDiya kammAdI, AdimabhaMgeMsu
tIsu1 vi tatthatthaM, annatthagataM 13 114. saMkAmeuM kammaM, siddhaM jaM thAlI,
' aMgAra 5 dhUma 1. cullakkha' ( a, bI)  /  2. Dove (lA)  /  3. pUyaM (bI, sa )
/  tti jaM vuttaM, 115. iMdhaNadhUmegaMdhe avayavamAdIhi 5 suMdarametaM pUtI,
codaga 4. lUNaM (lA, ba, sa )  /  5. saMkamaNe (a, bI)  /  suddhaM tu, ' ghaTTe
113/4 attaTThiya AdANe, DAyaM loNaM ca kamma taM bhattapANapUtI, phoDaNa annaM
21 va jaM 12. asuddhaM (lA, ba, sa )  /  13. 'tthakayaM ( a, ba, lA)  /  14.
atra hetau prathamA ( mavR )  /  15. vA ( a, bI)  /  6. phoDaNaM (lA, ba, ka,
sa), phoDa saMdhUme ( nibhA 808 )  /  7. vi (sa)  /  8. siddhassa kareti vAvi
(jIbhA 1208 )  /  9. DovAI (lA, ba, sa ka ), 10. cullI ukhA ( a, bI, sa)  /  11.
tesu ( a, bI)  /  ya mIsagaM ' phoDaNe tu. jIbhA 1208  /  kammadavvIya vesaNa 24
'kiMci tattha '23 mu bhaNite suhumapUtI jaM phaDDagajutA 14 u 15  //  va egatare
//  253  //  piMDaniryukti pUtiM  /  dhUme  //  250  //  16 davvaM  /  DoyAdI
//  251  //  jaM dae  /  AhArapUI yaM' 19  //  254  //  akappaM  /  aNNAtaM  //
252  //  hiMgU0 vA  /  chubhati 22  //  255  //  chUDhaM vA  /  dhUmo  //  256
//  tu  /  bhaNati  //  257  //  gurU 16. Doe iti deze samudAyazabdopacArAt Doya
ityukte DoyasyAgrabhAgo gRhyate (mvR)| 17. gaMDe ( a, ba, lA, bI, sa)  /  18.
ghaTTia ( ka )  /  19. ghaTTa hAra iyaM (ka, mu), gAthA meM anuSTup chaMda hai|
20. hiMguM (ka, mu)  /  21. mannaM ( a, ka, bI)  /  22. jIbhA 1213, 113/14 - ye
cAroM gAthAeM 112 vIM gAthA kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiM ataH bhASya kI honI caahie| 23.
tattha kiMci ( a, ka, bI)  /  24. kammiya vesaNa aMgAra thAli ( a, bI)  /  25.
atraikAradvayasya chaMdo'rthatvAdAdizabdasya vyatyayAnma kArasya
cAlAkSaNikatvAdevaM nirdezo draSTavyaH (mavR), iMdhanagrahaNaM copalakSaNaM
Adizabdena ca vASpaparigrahaH (mavR)  /

Page #215 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **116.**  "Just as fuel, smoke, and smell are not the body,
etc., so also food smell is not the body."  **116/1.** "Fuel is the primary
element, smoke is the secondary, and all people breathe it, so it is said to be
all."  **116/2.** "But..."  **116/3.** "O seeker! Fuel, etc., are all subtle
impurities, and this is the way they are perceived. There is no removal of
them."  **116/4.** "A thing that is not perceived is not perceived, and what is
perceived is not perceived. It is not perceived, and it is not perceived."
**117.** "Washing does not make the body free from impurities, because it is a
karmic action. Just as there are no qualities in water, so also there is no
purity."  **117/1.** "Washing does not make the body free from impurities,
because it is a karmic action. Just as there are no qualities in water, so also
there is no purity."  **117/2.** "In the world, even bad smells, when
transformed, do not pollute. Just as the dead do not pollute, so also those who
have gone far away do not pollute."  **117/3.** "The rest of the substances, by
means of them, are perceived as subtle impurities. They are perceived as subtle
impurities, and they are perceived as subtle impurities."  **Notes:**  *
**Pindaniyukti:** This refers to the Jain concept of the body and its
impurities. * **Fuel, smoke, and smell:** These are used as metaphors to
illustrate that the body is not the same as its temporary attributes. * **Food
smell:** This is another example of a temporary attribute that is not the body
itself. * **Subtle impurities:** These are the karmic residues that cling to the
soul and cause suffering. * **Washing:** This is used as an example of a karmic
action that does not remove the root cause of suffering. * **Dead:** This is
used as an example of something that no longer has the capacity to pollute. *
**Gone far away:** This is used as an example of something that is no longer in
close proximity and therefore cannot pollute. * **Subtle impurities:** These are
the karmic residues that cling to the soul and cause suffering.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 116. iMdhaNadhUmegaMdhe avayavamAdI' na jesiM tu esa ' annagaMdho
116/1. iMdhaNa - agaNIavayava, dhUmo bappho ya savvaM phusaMti logaM, bhaNNati
savvaM tao 116/ 2. naNu 116/3. codaga! iMdhaNamAdIhi, cauhiM vi suhumapUiyaM
paNNavaNAmettamidaM", pariharaNA natthi 117. 116/4. sajjhamasajjhaM kajjaM,
sajjhaM sAhijjate na u12 pUiyaM pUtI, sohI u Na vijjate " 1. gaMdhedhU (ka)  /
2. eyaM (ba), evaM (sa)  /  3. tu. nibhA 805  /  4 va (ka)  /  5. gaMdhuvva ( a,
bI)  /  6. pUIM (lA, b)| 7. dhUmAIhiM (ka, mu)  /  suhumapUiyassA, yogessaMbhava
evaM  /  dhUmAdita tamhA 'pUi tti siddhamiNaM  //  260  //  asajjhaM  /  jo u
asajjhaM 3 sAhati, kilissati na taM ca sAhetI 14  //  262  //  papphoDaNa kAya
akayae kappe  /  AhAkammiyabhAyaNa, gahitaM tu supUta dhovaNamAdIhi pariharaNA
//  263  //  117/1. dhoyaM 17 pi nirAvayavaM na hoti Ahacca kammagahaNammi | na
ya addavvA u guNA, bhaNNati suddhI" kato evaM ?  //  264  //  117 / 2. 'loe vi
19 asuigaMdhA, vipariNatA dUrao na dUsaMti  /  'na ya mAreti 121 pariNatA,
dUragatAo visAvayavA  //  265  //  117/3. sesehi u davvehiM, levehi 'tihi u' 23
8. pUyaM tu (sa)  /  9. miyaM ( a, bI, sa)  /  10. viMdhaNa (ba), tiMdhaNa 11.
mittamayaM ( a, bI), 12. hu (lA, ba, sa ), va 13. Na majjhaM (lA, ba)  /  (lA)
/  miNaM (sa, ka )  /  (ka)  /  jAvaiyaM phusati 22 pUtI, hoti  /  tesiM  //
258  //  ya"  /  pUrtI  //  259  //  tattiyaM pUtI  /  kappati kappe kate tiguNe
//  266  //  15. pUiM (lA, ba)  /  16. dhoyaNa ( ka)  /  hoti  /  etassa  //
261  //  14. 116/ 1 - 4 - ye cAroM gAthAeM gA. 116 kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiN| inameM
sUkSmapUrti viSayaka carcA hai| ye gAthAeM bhASya kI honI cAhie  /  17. dhovaM
(lA, ba, sa )  /  18. siddhI (lA, ba, sa )  /  19. loiya ( ba )  /  20. dUsei (
a )  /  21 mA kareMti (lA, ba, sa )  /  43 22. phusaI ( sa )  /  23. tehiM (lA,
ba), tiNNi ( a, bI), tahiM ( ka )  /  24. tiguNA (lA, ba), tu. nibhA 809  /

Page #216 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  - 117/4. Fuel, etc., are four kinds of substances. Their
quantity is the measure, starting from that measure. || 267 || - 118. The act is
done on the first day, or it is purified for three days. It is not proper in
those three purifications, it is proper in the third purification. || 268 || -
119. The act of the Samana's fire, whatever the Samanas do with fire. Food,
medicine, and shelter, all that is purified. || 269 || - 119/1. On the day of
the sound, there was a conch shell or a community meal. Having asked the
knowledgeable, the discussions of the householders. || 270 || - 120. The food
prepared by the Jain, the food prepared by the heretic, and the food prepared by
the good. It is not proper in the thousandfold, it is proper in the threefold
purification. || 271 || - 121. As many times as it is perfected, the Jain does
not desire the body. It is said that it is destroyed in many ways, so cook other
food. || 272 || - 122. The Jain cooks, the heretic also enjoys it in the second
purification. The Niggantha cooks in the third, even the Jain cooks. || 273 || -
123. The poisoner dies, the one who eats it also dies. This is the death of the
lineage, it dies in thousands. || 274 || - 124. Thus, the food prepared by the
Jain, destroys the good and pure. Therefore, it is not proper, even if it is in
the thousandfold of people. || 275 ||  1. "Mai (Mu). In the commentary, from 804
to 815, there is a discussion of the Patikarma. 2. Taiyappa' (La), "Mana U (Mu).
3. Arao (Sa), 117/1-4- these four verses are the explanation of the 117th verse.
10. Pansand (Ka). The discussion about smoke is in the 116/1-4 verses. 11.
Javantittha (A, B). The subject of the four verses is the expansion of the
Patikarma. These verses should be in the commentary. 12. Neyam Tam (Mu), Ne Eti
Tam (La, Ba), Yanti Ta (Ka). 13. Jainam (A, B, Mu). 4. Ya (La, Ba, Sa). 14.
Apahuvante (La, Ka, Ba). 5. 'Sai (Ka). 16. Mannam (A, B). 6. Puisu (A, B). 17.
Bhanai (Ka, Mu). 7. Kade Hoti (A, B). 18. Randhati (Sa, Ka). 8. Thoy' (A, B).
19. Pisasi (A, B). 9. Ya Ga (La, Ba), Vagarinam (Sa, Ka), Nisith 20. Iya Param
(Ka).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - piMDaniyukti - 117/4. iMdhaNamAdI' mottuM, cauro sesANi hoti dvvaanni| tesiM
puNa parimANaM, tayappamANAi2 ArabbhaH  //  267  //  118. paDhamadivasammi
kammaM, tinni u divasANi' pUiyaM hoti  /  pUtIsu tisu na kappati, kappati taio
jayA kppo|| 268  //  119. samaNakaDAhAkammaM, samaNANaM 'jaM kaDeNa'5 mIsaM t||
AhAra- uvadhi-vasahI, savvaM taM pUiyaM hoti  //  269  //  119/1. saDDassa
thovadivasesu, saMkhaDI Asi saMghabhattaM vaa| pucchittu niuNapucchaM, saMlAvAo
agArINaM  /  /  270  //  dAraM  //  120. mIsajjAtaM jAvaMtigaM ca pAsaMDideg-
sAhumIsaM c| sahasaMtaraM na kappati, kappati kappe kate tiguNe  //  271 //
121. jAvaMtavAra siddhaM, 'na eti tA'12 deha kAmitaM jaiNo3  /  bahusu ya
apahuppaMte", bhaNAti5 annaM16 pi raMdheha  //  272  //  dAraM  //  122.
attaTThA raMdhato, pAsaMDINaM pi bitiyao chubhti| niggaMthaTThA tatio, attaTThAe
vi raMdhate  //  273  //  123. visaghAtiya pisiyAsI9, marati tamanno vi khAiuM
mrti| 'iya pAraMparamaraNe'20, aNumarati sahassaso jAva  //  274  //  124. evaM
mIsajjAtaM, caraNappaM haNati sAhu suvisuddhaM  /  tamhA taM no kappati,
purisasahassaMtaragataM pi|| 275  //  1. "mAiM (mu)| bhASya meM 804 se 815 taka
patikarma kA vivecana 2. taiyappa' (lA), "mANA u (mu)| 3. ArAo (sa), 117/1-4-ye
cAroM gAthAeM 117 10. pAMsaMDa (k)| vI gAthA kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiN| 116/1-4 meM
dhUma 11. jAvaMtiTThA (a, bii)| viSayaka carcA hai| ina cAra gAthAoM meM gaMdha
viSayaka 12. neyaM taM (mu), na eti taM (lA, ba), pati kA vistAra hai| ye
gAthAeM bhASya kI honIna yaMti tA (k)| caahie| 13. jaiNaM (a, bI, mu)| 4. ya
(lA, ba, s)| 14. apahuvvaMte (lA, ka, b)| 5. 'sAI (k)| 15. bhaNai (a, bii)| 6.
pUisu (a, bii)| 16. mannaM (a, bii)| 7. kaDe hoti (a, bii)| 17. bhaNai (ka, mu)|
8. thoya' (a, bii)| 18. raMdhati (sa, k)| 9. ya gA (lA, ba), vagArINaM (sa, ka),
nizItha 19. pisaAsI (a, bii)| 20. Iya paraM. (k)|

Page #217 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti 64  125. If it is separated, or if it is cooked, then it is a
kappa. _ 'Sukka-vitta' is counted, food is the fourth, and the uncooked is 25.
|| 276 || Daram || 126. Satthana-paratthana, two kinds are established, it is
not to be done. Milk etc. in succession, what is held in the hand, the house,
and beyond. || 277 || 127. Chabbaga-varagamadi, there are many kinds of
paratthana. In satthana, there are six kinds, and in pidhara, there are six
kinds, and these are also far away. || 278 || 128. Each one is two kinds, and it
is not to be done in the successive order. The unchanging substance, it is also
successive. || 279 || 128/1. Ucchukkhiraadi, changing, unchanging, 'gul-ghataa'
etc. || 11. Pariyavajjanadosa, or odana-dahimadi. || 280 || 128/2. Ubbhattha,
what is fallen, food is obtained, milk is taken. Rina-bhiita, or agari, 'dahi'
is placed in the fire. || 281 || 128/3. Navanita-matthure, 'takka', 'tti' etc.,
'attathiya' etc. are counted. From desuna to ghee, even kusana, for as long as
it is. || 282 || 129. Rasa-kakkaba-pindagula, macchhandiya-khandasakkara etc.
There is a succession of establishment, it is suitable for food where. || 283 ||
Daram ||  1. Nicchho (s, mu). Vyakhya is to be presented. 128/1, 2-These two
gathaas have an explanation of the example related to the establishment of
parampra. 3. Uvvadhate (a, b). 14. Ayavitta (k). 5. Sanleha sukkayappe tinni u
se sukko davammi (la, b), sanlehu sakayakappe tinni u se sukko davansi (s). 15.
Parinnaayam (mu, la, s). 16. Luddham (la, b, s). 17. Pacchham (s). 6. Hatthasaya
(k). 18. Dahi dehaham (b), dahi se daham (la). 7. Gavai (la, b). 19. Thavana
(mu, la, b, s), thavae (a, k, b). 8. Y (mu, k). 20. Manthu (mu). 9. “Parampram
(a, k, b). 21. Takka tti (la, b), takkammi (b). 10. “Karakayam (a, b). 22.
"Tthayaai (k). 11. Ghaygulaaiyam (mu), gulpaya (s). 23. “Guda (a, b). 12. Vajjan
sesa (a, b). 13. 128/1-3-These three gathaas are the 128th gatha. 24.
Macchhandiya (a, b). 25. Tattha (s).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 64 125. vicchoDite' karIseNa, vAvi uvvaTTite tao kppaa| _
'sukkAvittA giNhati, anna cautthe asukke vi5  //  276  //  dAraM  //  126.
saTThANa-paraTThANe, duvihaM ThavitaM tu hoti nAtavvaM  /  khIrAdiparaMparae,
hatthagata gharaMtaraM jAva  //  277  //  127.. chabbaga-vAragamAdI', hoti
paraTThANa mo aNegavidhaM  /   /  saTThANe piDhare chabbage ya emeva dUre vi  //
278  //  128. ekkekkaM taM duvidhaM, aNaMtaraparaMpare' ya nAtavvaM  /
avikArikataM0 davvaM, taM ceva aNaMtaraM hoti  //  279  //  128/1
ucchukkhIrAdIyaM, vikAri avikAri 'gula-ghatAdIyaM '11  /  pariyAvajjaNadosA2,
odaNa-dahimAdiyaM vAvi  //  280  //  128/2. ubbhaTTha'4 paDiNNAtaM5, annaM
laddha6 payoyaNe ghetthii| riNabhItA va agArI, 'dahi tti dAhaM '18 sue ThavitA
//  281  //  128/3. navaNIta-matthure0 'takkaM, ti'21 jAva 'attaTThiyA va'22
ginnhNti| desUNA jAva ghataM, kusaNaM pi ya jattiyaM kAlaM  //  282  //  129.
rasa-kakkaba-piMDagulA3, macchaMDiya24-khaMDasakkarANaM c| hoti
paraMparaThavaNA, annattha va jujjate jattha25  //  283  /  /  dAraM  //  1.
niccho (sa, mu)| vyAkhyA prastuta karane vAlI haiN| 128/1, 2-ina 2. kari (a, ba,
lA, bii)| donoM gAthAoM meM parampara sthApanA se sambandhita 3. uvvaddhate (a,
bii)| udAharaNa kI vyAkhyA hai| 4. AyAvittA (k)| 14. obbhaTTha (s)| 5. saMleha
sukkayappe tiNNi u se sukkho davammi (lA, 15. pariNNAyaM (mu, lA, s)| ba),
saMlehu sakayakappe tiNNi u se sukko 16. luddhaM (lA, ba, s)| davaMsi (s)| 17.
pacchaM (s)| 6. hatthasaya (k)| 18. dahi dehAhaM (ba), dahi se dAhaM (laa)| 7.
gavAI (lA, b)| 19. ThavaNA (mu, lA, ba, sa), Thavae (a, ka, bii)| 8. ya (mu, k)|
20. maMthu (mu)| 9. "paraMparaM (a, ka, bii)| 21. takka tti (lA, ba), takkammi
(bii)| 10. "kArakayaM (a, bii)| 22. "TThayAI (k)| 11. ghayagulAIyaM (mu),
gulapayA (s)| 23. "guDA (a, bii)| 12. vajjaNa sesA (a, bii)| 24. macchaMDiya (a,
bii)| 13. 128/1-3-ye tInoM gAthAeM 128 vI gAthA kI 25. tattha (s)|

Page #218 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  46  130. 131.  Pahuḍiā vi ya duvidhā, bādar suhumā ya hoti nā tavvā.
'Osakkhaṇa ussakkhaṇa'4, kappatṭī samosaraṇe. || 285 || 132. Mā tāv jhankha
puttay!, parivāḍiē ihehīhī" sāhū. Ettaṭṭh 'uṭṭhiyā dāhaṁ souṁ vivajjeti. || 286
|| 133. 134. 135. Bhikkhaggāhi egaṭṭh, kuṇati bitio u dosu uvagam. Teṇa paraṁ
ukkhitta, pahuḍiā hoti 135/1. Mangalahetuṁ 'Anguliē vā ghettuṁ 11, kaḍḍhati12
kappatṭho gharaṁ teṇa. 'Kiṁ ti 14 kahite na gacchati15, pahuḍiā ese 16 suhumā 17
u. || 287 || Puttassa vivāha diṇaṁ, 'Osaraṇa aicchite 18 muṇiya 19 saḍḍī.
Osakkhantosaraṇe, sankhaḍ - pāhe gadatṭhā 21. || 288 || Appattammī va22 ṭhavitam
23, osaraṇe 'hohīti tti 24 ussakkhaṇaṁ 25. Taṁ pāgaḍamitaram vā, kareti 26 ujjū
aṇujjū 1. ya (a, k, b). 2. uvacarau (b). 3. ṭhaviyā (s, k). 4. Osakkhaṇa mussa
(mu), ukkasaṇa ahisakkhaṇa (a, la, s), ussakkhaṇa osakkhaṇa (k). 5. Samaya
paribhāṣayā kabbaṭṭī laghvī dārikā bhaṇyate (mavṛ). 6. Tu. Jībhā 1224,
Prābhṛtika dvār kī vyākhyā meṁ bṛbhā meṁ gā. 1674 se 1699 tak kī gāthāēṁ haṁ. 7.
Ehihī so (a, k, b), ehiti so (la, b), ihehī so (mu).  8. Eyassa (la, b, mu, s,
k). 9. Puṭṭhi (a, b). 10. Vivajjamti (a, b), Jībhā 1231. va osakkitam duha
puṇṇadvayā ussakkitam28 pi29 kiṁ ti ya, 'puṭṭhe siṭṭe' 30 vivajjeti 11. Ahvā
anguliyāē (la, b, k, mu), Anguliē cāleum (Jībhā 1232). ṭhavaṇār 12. Kaḍḍau (b).
13. Jatto (k, Jībhā, mu), juttoo (la, b, s). 14. Kanți (b), kiṁ te (a, b). u. ||
284 || Piṇḍaniryukti vā 7. || 289 || Pagatam. || 290 || 15. Vaccai (a, b, k),
vacchati (Jībhā 1232). 16. Ese (la). 17. Suhumāṁ (a, b). 18. 19. 20. Ussakke
osaraṇaṁ (k). raṇe icchīē (a, k, b). Muṇīya (b). 27. Jībhā 1235. 28. Os (k). 21.
Tu. Jībhā 1234. 22. Vi (la, b), ya (k, mu). 23. ṇa ṭhiyaṁ (la, b). 24. Hohīti
tti (la, b, mu), hohai ti (a, b), hoihiī (s).  25. Ukkasai (a, b), ukkasaṇaṁ
(la, k). 26. Karejj (la, b, s). 29. Va (a, b), ti (k). 30. Siṭṭe puṭṭhe (a, b).
31. 'Jjeī (a, b), Tu. Jībhā 1236.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 46 130. 131. pAhuDiyA vi ya duvidhA, bAdara suhumA ya hoti nAtavvA  /  '
osakkaNa ussakkaNa'4, kappaTTI samosaraNe  //  285  //  132. mA tAva jhaMkha
puttaya!, parivADIe ihehihIM" sAhU | etaTTha 'uTThiyA dAhaM souM vivajjeti  //
286  //  te", 133. 134. 135. bhikkhaggAhI egattha, kuNati bitio u dosu uvaogaM
/  teNa paraM ukkhittA, pAhuDiyA hoti 135/1. maMgalahetuM 'aMgulie vA ghettuM
11, kaDDhati12 kappaTThao gharaM teNa  /  'kiM ti 14 kahite na gacchati15,
pAhuDiyA esa 16 suhumA 17 u  //  287  //  puttassa vivAhadiNaM, 'osaraNa
aicchite 18 muNiya 19 saDDI  /  osakkaMtosaraNe, saMkhaDa - pAhe gadaTThA 21  //
288  //  appattammi va22 ThavitaM 23, osaraNe 'hohiti tti 24 ussakaNaM 25  /
taM pAgaDamitaraM vA, kareti 26 ujjU aNujjU 1. ya ( a, ka, bI)  /  2. uvacarau (
ba )  /  3. ThaviyA (sa, ka)  /  4. ossakkaNa mussa (mu), ukkasaNa ahisakkaNa (
a, lA, sa), ussakkaNa osakkaNa ( ka )  /  5. samayaparibhASayA kabbaTThI laghvI
dArikA bhaNyate (mavR)  /  6. tu. jIbhA 1224, prAbhRtikA dvAra kI vyAkhyA meM
bRbhA meM gA. 1674 se 1699 taka kI gAthAeM haiN| 7. ehiI so ( a, ka, bI), ehiti
so (lA, ba), ihehi so (mu)  /  8. eyassa (lA, ba, mu, sa, ka)  /  9. puTThi (a,
ba )  /  10. vivajjaMti ( a, bI), jIbhA 1231  /  va osakkitaM duhA puNNadvayA
ussakkitaM28 pi29 kiM ti ya, 'puTThe siTTe '30 vivajjeti 11. ahavA aMguliyAe
(lA, ba, ka, mu), aMgulie cAleuM (jIbhA 1232 )  /  ThavaNAra 12. kaDDau (bI)  /
13. jatto (ka, jIbhA, mu), jutto (lA, ba, sa )  /  14. kaMti (ba), kiM te ( a,
bI)  /  u  //  284  //  piMDaniryukti vA7  //  289  //  pagataM  /   //  290  //
15. vaccai ( a, bI, ka), vaccati ( jIbhA 1232 )  /  16. ese (lA)  /  17 suhumaM
( a, bI)  /  18. 19. 20. ussakke osaraNaM ( ka )  /  raNe icchie ( a, ka, ba)  /
muNIya (bI)  /  27. jIbhA 1235  /  28. osa ( ka )  /  21. tu. jIbhA 1234  /  22.
vi (lA, ba), ya (ka, mu)  /  23. Na ThiyaM (lA, ba)  /  24. hohiitti (lA, ba,
mu), hohaiti (a, bI), hoihii ( sa )  /  25. ukkasai ( a, ba ), ukkasaNaM (lA,
ka)  /  26. karejja (lA, ba, sa )  /  29. va ( a, bI), ti ( ka )  /  30. siTTe
puTThe ( a, ba )  /  31. 'jjei ( a, bI), tu. jIbhA 1236  /

Page #219 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pindaniyukti  136/1. He eats the alms-food, but does not perform the
Pratikramana of that place.  Just as the owl flies about in the darkness, so
also he moves about stealthily.  136/2. His body is emaciated, his skin is
wrinkled, his eyes are sunken, and his limbs are unsteady. He has a distorted
vision, and his mind is disturbed.  136/3. Thinking that 'he is not purified in
the outer door of the house', he stays outside the house, like one who is
rejected.  136/4. Indolent in his conduct, he asks questions of those who have
come to another place. He talks about this world and the next world, wishing to
deceive this world.  136/5. The alms-seeker does not accept alms at the outer
door of the house, thinking 'I am an ascetic living on alms'. When you ask me,
'How do you live?', I say 'I live on the alms-bowl'.  136/6. The explanation of
the virtues of the ascetic pleases him in the same way. These are the crows that
wander about, but we are the Chiravayara, the true ascetics.  137. The
Prayogakarana is of two kinds - the Pragadakarana and the Prakasakarana. The
Pragada is the purification of the place by sweeping, and the Prakasa is the
illumination.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 136. pAhuDibhattaM bhuMjati, na paDikkamate ya tassa tthaannss|
emeva aDati boDo', lukkavilukko jaha kvoddo|| 291  //  dAraM  //  136/1.
loyaviraluttimaMgaM, tavokisaM jllkhuriysriirN| jugamettaMtaradiTuiM,
aturiya'cavalaM sagihameMtaM  //  292  //  136/2. daTThaNa tamaNagAraM, saDDI
saMvegamAgatA' kaai| viulannapANa ghettUNa, niggatA niggato so vi|| 293  //
136/3. nIyaduvArammideg ghare, na sujjhate esaNa1 tti kaauunnN| nIhammie agArI,
acchati viliyA va12 gahiteNaM  //  294  //  136/4. caraNakaraNAlasammI2, annammi
ya Agate gahita pucchaa| ihalogaM paralogaM, kaheti caiMuM imaM logaM  //  295
//  136/5. nIyaduvArammi ghare, bhikkhaM necchaMti esnnaasmitaa| jaM pucchasi
majjha kahaM, kappati liMgovajIvI'haM5  //  296  //  136/6.
sAdhuguNesaNakahaNaM, AuTTA tassa tippati16 taheva  /  kukkuDi8 caraMti ete,
vayaM tu ciNNavvayAra bitio22  //  297  //  137. pAokaraNaM duvidhaM,
pAgaDakaraNaM pagAsakaraNaM c| pAgaDa saMkAmaNa 'kuDDadArapAte ya'23 chinneNaM
//  298  //  1. poDo (lA, ba), bolo (a, bii)| 10. niya' (a, bii)| 2. kamoDo (lA,
ka, ba), kameDo (jIbhA 1237) /  11. esaNu (a, bii)| 3. "viralattu (lA),
'luttamaMgaM (mu. ka), atrottamAGga- 12. vi (s)| zabdenottamAGgasthAH kezA
ucyante (m)| 13. "karaNaparihINe (lA, ba, sa), "lasammi ya (mu)| 4, "diTThI (a)|
14. NacchaMti (b)| 5. "hamaMtaM (lA, ba), "hamiMtaM (mu, bI, ka), 136/1- 15.
"jIvihaM (a, bI, lA, s)| 6-ye gAthAeM prAduSkaraNa se saMbaMdhita kathAnaka ko
16. kappai (ka), tappai (a, ba), tepate kSarati dadAti prakaTa karane vAlI haiN|
gAthA 137 meM niryaktikAra smeti bhAvArthaH (mv)| prAduSkaraNa kI vyAkhyA
prastuta karate haiN| dvAra ke 17. taha vi (lA, ba, s)| prAraMbha meM ye gAthAeM
spaSTatayA bhASyakAra kI honI 18. kukkuDa (ka, s)| caahie| 19. caritaM (b)| 6.
ya aNa. (mu, ka, lA, ba, s)| 20. ti (a, bii)| 7. 'mAiyA (a, bii)| 21. ciNNe vayA
(a, bii)| 8. kai vi (lA, b)| 22. bIo (a, ka, mu)| 9. u (ba, sa), ya (a, k)| 23.
'dAramAle ya (a, bii)| 24. chinne va (m), chinne ya (k)|

Page #220 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **138.** The light of the lamp, does not burn the well-prepared
food. _The uncooked food_, burns, burning without being cooked. || 299 || 138/1.
The mobile stove, and the external stove, were made in the past. Then, they burn
sometimes, _the fuel and the fire_. || 300 || 138/2. You do not want it in the
darkness, the external stove is good for the accomplished. Thus, _remove the
darkness_, then _in the light_, it is the same. || 301 || 138/3. The fish-smell
inside, the external wind is near the burning. Thus, _the taking of the uncooked
food_, is a difference in the making of the food. || 302 || 138/4. The cook cuts
the vegetables, the carpenter makes the door, or makes the food. He removes the
covering, or _places the lamp_, burning. || 303 || 138/5. The light of the lamp,
is the same as saying, _the uncooked food_, or _the cooked food_. _The taking of
the uncooked food_, _the light of the lamp is prohibited_. || 304 || Door ||
138/6. In the making of the food, in which there is haste, or the enjoyment of
the food. Taking it, without examining it, he eats the food, not cooked
properly. || 305 ||  **139.** The _kitagada_ is also of two types, in wealth and
in feeling, it is of two types, each one. _Ayakia_ and _parakia_, the wealth of
others is of three types, beginning with the mind. || 306 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 138. rayaNapadIve jotI, na kappati pagAsaNA suvihitaannN| _
attaTThi aparibhuttaM', kappati kappara akAUNaM  //  299  //  138/1. saMcArimA
ya cullI, bahiM va cullI purA katA tesiN| tahi raMdhaMti kadAI, uvahI 'pUtI ya5
pAo yaH  //  300  //  138/2. necchaha tamisammi' tao, bAhiracullIya sAhu
siddhnne| iti- souM pariharae', puDhe 'siTThammi vi'10 taheva  //  301  //
138/3. macchiya-ghammA aMto", bAhi pavAtaM12 pagAsamAsannaM 3  /  iti4
attaTThiyagahaNaM, pAgaDakaraNe vibhAsesA5  //  302  //  138/4. kuDDassa kuNati
chiDa6, dAraM vaDDeti7 kuNati annaM vaa| avaNeti chAdaNaM18 vA, Thavetira
'rayaNaM va'20 dippaMtaM  //  303  //  138/5. jotI padIva kuNatIra, taheva
kahaNaM22 tu puTTha'puDhe vaa| 'attaTThiyA ya'23 gahaNaM, 'joti padIve u
vajjittA'24  //  304 ||daarN  //  138/6. pAgaDapagAsakaraNe, katammi sahasA va
ahava'NAbhogA5  /  gahitaM vigiMciUNaM, gehati annaM akatakappe26  //  305  //
139. kItagaDaM pi ya duvidhaM, davve bhAve ya duvidhamekke kkaM  /  AyakiyaM28
parakIyaM29, paradavvaM tividha cittAdI0  //  306  //  1. ribhattaM (bI),
"ribhattuM (a), bhuttuM (s)| 15. 'seyaM (mu), vibhAsA u (a, bii)| 2. kappe (a,
bii)| 16. chidaM (ba, s)| 3. cullA (k)| 17. vaDDai (b)| 4. raMdhei (a, bI),
raMdhaMtu (sa), raMdheta (lA, b)| 18. chAvaNaM (lA, b)| 5. pUyAI (ba), pUyaM ya
(s)| 19. ThAvei (a, bI), ThAvai (mu)| 6. 138/1-6-ye chaH gAthAeM gA. 137 aura
138 20. rayaNaM vi (sa), ya rayaNaM (k)| kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiM ataH bhASya kI
honI caahie| 21. kuNai va (a, lA, ka, mu)| 7. ttimi' (ka), tamaseMti (a, bI),
22. karaNaM (lA, b)| Nimisacchi (laa)| 23. TThie u (ka, mu)| 8. iya (a, mu), Iya
(k)| 24. dosu vi ya jahA pura kaesu (ba), 'vajjei (laa)| 9. "haraI (s)| 25. havA
aNAbhogA (bii)| paddhammi u (bI). "mmi va (a). "mmi u (sa. k)| 26. yaha gAthA a
aura ba prati meM nahIM hai| 11. yaMto (a, bI), iMto (s)| 27. mekekaM (s)| 12.
palAyaM (s)| 28. 'kIyaM (lA, ba), "kiyaM ca (a, mu)| 13. "saNNe (lA, ba, sa),
'sasAmannaM (k)| 29. "kiyaM (sa), va parakiyaM (k)| 14. iya (a, bI, mu)| 30.
nibhA 4475, tu. jIbhA 1241  /

Page #221 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **140.** The word 'pi' is of two types, in substance and in
feeling, like powdered substance etc. in substance. In feeling, it is the
influence of others, or it is one's own nature. || 307 ||  **141.** Fragrant
balls, colored clothes, these are the substances that are considered 'pi'.  The
act of going, the act of flying, the act of making a sound, the act of taking,
these are the feelings. || 308 ||  **142.** Wind, etc., and the mind, etc., are
influenced by others, and are restrained by the restraint of the self.  The act
of producing, the act of inviting, the act of keeping in a cage, the act of
hitting, these are the feelings. || 309 ||  **142/1.** The mind, like the ocean,
is full of desires, and it asks many questions. Where will you go?  Who will
make you happy? || 310 ||  **142/2.** The restraint is given, the invitation is
taken, the act of doing is done.  In the past and the future, it is agitated in
the same house. || 311 ||  **143.** The 'Dhammakah' is the story, the 'Nimitta
Atava' is the place of the story.  The caste, the family, the group, the karma,
the profession, these are the feelings in the story. || 312 ||  **143/1.** The
'Dhammakah' is told, the 'Dhammakah' is raised, or it is taken.  They say,
'Sahavo Chiya', you tell me, what do you think? || 313 ||  **143/2.** What will
you say, the sun, the moon, or the house?  What will you say, the necklace, the
family, or the head? || 314 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 140. AyakiyaM 'pi ya" duvidhaM, davve bhAve ya davvacuNNAdI  /
bhAvammi parassaTThA, ahavAvI appaNA ceva  //  307  //  141.
nimmallagaMdhaguliyA, vaNNaga 'pottAi Ayakita dvve"| gelaNNe uDDAho, pauNe
caDukAri' ahigaraNaM  //  308  //  142. vaiyAdi maMkhamAdI, parabhAvakato' tu
saMjataTThAe  /  uppAdaNA nimaMtaNa, kItagaDe abhihaDe Thavite  //  309  /  /
142/1. sAgAri maMkha chaMdaNa, paDiseho puccha bahu gate vAse  /  katari disiM
gamissaha ? amui12 tahiM13 saMthavaM kuNati  //  310 //  142/2. dijjate
paDisedho, kajje ghetthaM nimaMtaNA" jinnN5|| puvvagataAgatesuM, saMchubhatI
egagehammi'6  //  311  //  143. 'dhammakaha vAya'17 khamage, 'nimitta AtAvaNe'18
sutaTThANe19  /  jAtI-kula-gaNa-kamme, sippammi ya bhAvakItaM tu|| 312  //
143/1. dhammakahAakkhitte0, dhammakahA uTThiyANa vA ginnhe| _ kahayaMti 'sAhavo
ciya'22, tumaM va kahiM acchate 22 tusiNI  //  313  //  143/2. kiM vA kahejja
chArA, dagasoyariyA23 va ahv'gaartthaa'24|| kiM chagalagagalavalayA5,
muMDakuDuMbIva26 kiM kahae27  //  314  /  /  1. puNa (mu)| caahie| inako nigA ke
krama meM na rakhane para bhI 2. "vaNNAI (bI, lA), davvicu (k)| viSayavastu kI
dRSTi se 142 vI gA. 143 ke 3. pottA ya (lA), potAni laghubAlakayogyAni vastra-
sAtha sIdhI jur3atI hai| gA. 142 meM parabhAvakrIta khaNDAni (mvR)| tathA gAthA
143 meM AtmabhAvakrIta kI vyAkhyA hai, 4. pottAdiyA ya katadavve (nibhA 4476) /
kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 18 /  5. caDugAdi (nibhA, s)|
17. 'kahi vAi (lA, ba, sa, ka, nibhA 4480) /  6. maMkhagAI (s)| 18. nimittAtAvae
(lA, ba), etto AtAvae (nibhA), 7. kayaM (mu, ka, b)| AyAvie (k)| 8. "gaDaM (mu)|
19. sue ThANe (ka, nibhaa)| 9. nibhA 4477 /  20. "kahAto hijjati (nibhA 4481) /
10. varise (nibhA 4478) /  21. sAhavacciya (k)| 11. gammi (s)| 22. pucchie (ka,
mu)| 12. amuiM (sa, mu, nibhaa)| 23. "sUyariyA (lA, ba), 'sovariyA (a),
'sUyarayA (s)| 13. taha (nibhA, ka, b)| 24. kiM va gAra (a, nibhA 4482) /  14.
"taNaM (a, bI, ka, mu), "taNa (nibhaa)| 25. chagalakasya-pazorgalaM-grIvAM
valayanti moTayanti ye 15. jaINaM (a, bI, lA, ba, nibhaa)| te
chagalakagalavalakAH (mvR)| 16. nibhA 4479,142/1,2-ye donoM gAthAeM 142 vI 26.
puMDaku (lA), 'kuDuMbI (sa), muNDAH saMto ye gAthA kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiN| ye
bhASya kI honI kuTumbinaH zauddhodanIyAH (mvR)| 27. kahite (nibhaa)|

Page #222 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  143/3.  This is the explanation of the term 'vadi' (meaning
'one who argues') in the context of 'nimitta ayavayamma' (meaning 'the cause of
the body'). The term 'vadi' is used for those who are learned in the scriptures,
like the Ganis (Jain monks) and others, and those who are skilled in the
scriptures, like the Ayariyas (Jain monks) and others. || 315 ||  144.  There
are two types of 'pamiccha' (meaning 'offering'), namely 'loiya' (meaning
'worldly') and 'loguttara' (meaning 'transcendental'). 'Loiya' includes
offerings like 'sajjhili' (meaning 'food') and others, while 'loguttara'
includes offerings like 'vattha' (meaning 'clothes') and others. || 316 ||
144/1.  The method of approaching a 'sut' (meaning 'Jain monk') is to ask him
questions, and to say 'jiva ti sasa te' (meaning 'you are a living being'). One
should enter the 'paga' (meaning 'house') and prevent him from leaving, and
offer him 'tell' (meaning 'oil') and 'jati' (meaning 'perfume'). || 317 ||
144/2.  One should not offer 'apariimitatill' (meaning 'infinite wealth') or
'dasatta' (meaning 'slavery') to a 'sut'. If one offers 'dasatta', one should
not be ashamed to say 'achira moemi appahe' (meaning 'I will soon become poor').
|| 318 ||  144/3.  When a 'bhikkhudag' (meaning 'Jain monk') is about to start
his 'samarambha' (meaning 'work'), one should say 'kahimbhe' (meaning 'tell me')
and ask him to stay. One should offer him 'sammvaaya' (meaning 'food') and say
'kaivaya u' (meaning 'how much do you want'). || 319 ||  144/4.  These are the
faults, especially in the context of 'vatthapaasa' (meaning 'clothes and food').
These faults are present in 'loiyapamiccha' (meaning 'worldly offerings') and
'loguttariya' (meaning 'transcendental offerings'). || 320 ||  145.  One should
not offer 'mailiyar' (meaning 'dirty'), 'faliyar' (meaning 'rotten'), or
'khosit' (meaning 'worn out') things to a 'sut'. One should not offer him food
that is not good for his health, or that is not beautiful, or that is difficult
to digest, or that causes quarrels. || 321 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 143/3. emeva 'vAdi' khamage, nimitta AyAvayammi'2 ya vibhaasaa|
sutaThANaM gaNimAdI, ahava' vAyaNAyariyamAdI  //  315  //  dAraM  //  144.
pAmiccaM pi ya duvidhaM, loiya-loguttaraM smaasennN| loiya sajjhiligAdI',
loguttara vatthamAdIsu  //  316  //  144/1. sutaabhigamaNAtavidhI, 'bahi pucchA"
ega 'jIvati sasA te  /  pavisaNa pAganivAraNa, ucchiMdaNa tella jatidANaM  //
317  //  144/2. aparimitatillavuDDI, dAsattaM so ya Agato pucchaa| dAsatta
kahaNa mA ruya, acirA moemi appAhe  //  318  /  /  144/3. bhikkhudaga'3
samAraMbhe, kahaNAuTTo 'kahiM bhe'14 vasahi tti| sammavayA5 AharaNaM, visajja
kahaNA 'kaivayA u'16  //  319  //  144/4. ete ceva ya7 dosA, savisesatarA u
vtthpaaesuN| loiyapAmiccesuM, loguttariyA'9 ime anne  //  320  //  145.
mailiyara phAliya-khosiya2, hitanaTe vAvi anna mggNte| avi suMdare vi diNNe23,
dukkararoI25 kalahamAdI  //  321  //  1. vAya (a, bii)| 14. kahite (bI), kahiMti
(mu)| 2. "ttamAyAvagammi (a), hoti niyamA khamae 15. saMveyA (mu)| AtAvatammi
(nibhA 4483) /  16. ya kati vA tu (nibhA 4489) /  3. aha (a, bI), ahavA
(nibhaa)| 17. u (lA, ba, s)| 4. 143/1-3-ye tInoM gAthAeM 143 vI gAthA kI 18.
vatthamAIsu (a, bii)| vyAkhyA rUpa haiM ataH ye bhASya kI honI caahie| 19.
"ttarie (a, bii)| inako mUla niyukti gAthA ke kramAMka meM nahIM 20. 145 vI
gAthA 144/4 ke aMtima caraNa 'loguttariyA jor3A hai| ime anne' ke sAtha jur3atI
hai ataH bhASya kI 5. sajjhilamAI (sa), sajjhilagA-bhaginI (mv)| pratIta hotI
hai lekina yahAM aisA pratIta hotA hai 6. tu. nibhA 4486 /  ki 144/1-4-ye cAroM
gAthAeM bhASya kI honI 7. paDipu (lA, b)| caahie| bhASyakAra ne 144/4 meM
niyukti gAthA 8. jIvau sasAe (bii)| 145 ke sAtha saMbaMdha jor3ane kA prayatna
kiyA hai| 9. acchiM (lA, ba, s)| 21. meliya (s)| 10. nibhA 4487, kathA ke
vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, 22. phosita (nibhA 4491), kholAsiya (lA, ba), kathA
saM. 19 /  /  khelosiya (sa), khosite-jIrNaprAye (m)| 11. nehavaDDI (a, bI, sa),
"nehavuDDI (nibhA 4488) /  23. daNNe (lA, b)| 12. ettAhe (mu, ba), appA bhe (a,
bii)| 24. duSkararuciH (mvR)| 13. bhikkha (mu, a, ka, bI), bhikkhAdaga (s)| |

Page #223 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Pindanuyukti  **146.**  A grain of high quality, a rare, crooked, lazy palm
fruit. Even that, "for the Guru's sake," he gives it, let there be no quarrel.
**147.**  There are two types of Pariyatta, the lower and the higher, in
summary. Each one is also of two types, in terms of its substance, food
substance.  **148.**  The lower and the higher are connected, joined by two
types of food. The Puggalia is connected, the Pariyatta is a collection of
knowledge.  **148/1.**  Compassion for a sister's household, a poor Pariyatta,
even for a cruel person.  A question for a cruel person, a mosquito does not fly
in a storm.  **148/2.**  The other one is also in a storm, a night of rain and
wind, he gives knowledge. Therefore, it should not be taken, by those who are in
the state of Uvasama.  **149.**  A diminished, weak one, or a heavy, broken,
rotten, iron-like one.  A bad food, or a transformed food, or a food that is
eaten.  **150.**  For one person, it is appropriate, but not for two or more in
matters like this.  To stay at the Guru's feet, he "breaks the food quarrel."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 146. uccattAe' dANaM, dullabha khaggUDa-alasa pAmiccaM  /  taM pi
ya 'gurussa pAse", Thaveti5 so deti mA kalaho  /  322  //  dAraM  //  147.
pariyaTTiyaM pi" duvidhaM, loiya loguttaraM samAseNaM  /   /  ekkekkaM pi ya
duvidhaM, taddavve annadavve y|| 323  //  148. avaropparasajjhilagA', saMjuttA
do vi0 annmnnennN| _ poggaliya'2 saMjataTThA, pariyaTTaNa saMkhaDe bohI13  //
324  //  148/1. aNukaMpa bhagiNigehe, daridda pariyaTTaNA ya kuurss| pucchA
koddavakUre", macchara nAikkha paMtAve5  //  325  /  /  148/2. itaro vi ya
paMtAve, nisi osavitANa'6 tesi dikkhA y| tamhA 'na u'17 ghettavvaM, kaivA8 je
uvasamehiMti9  //  326  //  149. UNahiyadeg dubbalaM vA, khara gurura chinna-'
mailaM asItasahaM '22  /  duvvannaM vA nAuM, vipariName23 annabhaNito vA  //
327  //  150. egassa mANajuttaM, na tu bitie evamAdi kjjesu| gurupAmUle
ThavaNaM, so 'dalayati annahA'25 kalaho  //  328 ||daarN  //  1. ucchahattAe
(laa)| 17. u na (lA, ba, ka, mu, sa), No (nibhA 4496) /  2. dulaha (s)| 18.
kaiva tti-katipayAH (mvR)| 3. khaggUDa:-kuTilaH (mvR)| 19. osame (mu), osavehiM
pi (lA, ba, sa), 4. "ssagAse (a, bii)| osamehiti (nibhA) parivartita doSa ke
prasaMga meM 5. Thavai (lA, ba), ThaveMti (nibhA 4492) /  gAthA 148 meM
saMkSipta meM niyuktikAra ne pUrI 6. deI (bI), deha (sa), dei (mu)| kathA kA
saMketa kara diyA hai| 148/1,2-ina 7. pi ya (a, bii)| donoM gAthAoM meM isI
kathA kA vistAra hai ataH 8. nibhA 4493 /  ye donoM gAthAeM bhASya kI honI
caahie| ina donoM 9. 'liyA (ka, nibhA 4494) /  gAthAoM ko mUla niyukti gAthA ke
kramAMka meM nahIM 10. x (lA, b)| rakhA hai| 11. ekkamekkeNaM (nibhaa)| 20.
UNAhi (lA, ba, bI, s)| 12. puggaliyaM (a, bii)| 21. guruH
sthUlasUtraniSpannatayA bhArayuktaM (mvR)| 13. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM
pari. 3,kathA saM. 20 /  22. mailiyaM sIyasahaM (a, bI), 14. kuddava (a, bii)|
mailaM asIiM suhaM (s)| 15. nibhA 4495 /  23. vippa (a, bI, nibhaa)| 16.
osadhitANa (lA), osavidhANa (sa), 24. nibhA 4497 /  osamiANa (k)| 25. dalai (a,
ba), deI iyarahA (nibhA 4498) /

Page #224 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **151.**  Aininnamanainna, niseeha-abhihada and noniseeha.
Niseeha-abhihada is fixed, "I will explain noniseeha."  **152.**  Saggaama-
paraggaame, sadeesa-paradeesameva bodhavva. Duvidham tu paraggaame, jala-thala-
naavodu-janghaa-ae.  **153.**  Janghaa baahu tarri v, jale thale khandha
arakkhura-nibadhaa. "Sanjama-aayaviraadhana", tahiyam pun sanjame kaaya.
**154.**  Aththaah gaah-pankaa, magarohaara jale avaaya u. Kantaahi-tena-
saavaya, thalammi ete "bhave dosa".  **155.**  Saggaame vi ya duvidham,
gharantara nogharanta cheva. Tigharantaara parena, gharantara tam tu naatavva.
**156.**  Nogharanta-anegavidham, vaadaga-saahi nivesana gihesu. Kaaye khandhe
mimmaya, kamse v tam tu aanejjaa.  **156/1.**  Sunna v asati kaalo, pagata v
pahe nagam v pasutta. Iti eti kaai ghettu, diveti ya kaaranam tam tu.  **157.**
"Eseva kamo" niyama, niseeha-abhihade vi hoti naatavyo. Avidita-daayagabhavam,
"niseeha-abhihada tam tu" naatavva.  **Notes:**  1. Niseeha (a, b, la, k, s). 9.
Jalamma (a, b). 2. Noniseeham tu vocchaami (la, b). Vocchaami ya no 10. Avaaya u
(la, b, s). (a, b). 11. Neyavva (k). 3. Naayavva (a, b), bodhavvo (s). 12. Nivi
(s). 4. Tarri ya (a, b). 13. Ghare ya (s). 5. Arakkhura (b), 'badha (k), here
the meter 14. Mimmaya (b), mimmiy (k). requires arakkhura instead of arakkhura.
(Arakkhura- 15. Kamme (la, b), kammena (s). nibaddha tti atra 16. Asui (a, b,
la). trtiyaarthe prathama tato'yam arthah arakani- 17. Na suutta (b). badhaa
gantri taya kharani-badhaa raashabhabali- 18. Iya (mu). vardaadayah (mavri). 19.
Kaay (b, s). 6. "Maayavi (la, b). 20. Emeva gamo (la, k). 7. 'Aththaah' ity-aady
atra praakrutatvat kvchidvibhakti- 21. Ya (k). lopah kvchidvibhaktiparinaamascha
tato'yam arthah 22. Niseehiam tam tu (mu). astaaghe (mavri). 8. Ohaare tti
kachchapah (mavri).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 151. AiNNamaNAiNNaM, nisIha'bhihaDaM ca nonisIhaM c|
nisIhAbhihaDaM ThappaM, 'vocchAmI nonisIhaM tu'2|| 329  //  152. saggAma-
paraggAme, sadesa-paradesameva bodhavvaM  /  duvidhaM tu paraggAme, jala-thala-
nAvoDu-jaMghAe  //  330 //  153. jaMghA bAhu tarIi va, jale thale khaMdha
arkhurnibddhaa|| 'saMjama-AyavirAdhaNa'6, tahiyaM puNa saMjame' kAyA  //  331 //
154. atthAha' gAha-paMkA, magarohArA jale avAyA u| kaMTAhi-teNa-sAvaya, thalammi
ete 'bhave dosA'10  //  332  //  155. saggAme vi ya duvidhaM, gharaMtaraM
nogharaMtaraM cev| tigharaMtarA pareNaM, gharaMtaraM taM tu nAtavvaM  //  333
//  156. nogharaMtara'NegavidhaM, vADaga-sAhI nivesaNa2 gihesu13  /  kAe khaMdhe
mimmaya", kaMseNa5 va taM tu aannejjaa|| 334  //  156/1. sunnaM va asati6 kAlo,
pagataM va paheNagaM va paasuttaa| iti8 eti kAi9 ghettuM, dIveti ya kAraNaM taM
tu  //  335  /  /  157. 'eseva kamo'20 niyamA, nisIha'bhihaDe vi21 hoti naatvyo|
aviditadAyagabhAvaM, 'nisIhabhihaDaM tu'22 nAtavvaM  //  336  //  1. nisIhA (a,
ba, lA, ka, s)| 9. jalammi (a, bii)| 2. nonisIhaM tu vocchAmi (lA, ba). vocchAmi
ya no 10. avAyA u (lA, ba, s)| (a, bii)| 11. NeyavvaM (k)| 3. nAyavvaM (a, bI),
bodhavvo (s)| 12. nivi (s)| 4. tarI ya (a, bii)| 13. ghare ya (s)| 5. arakkhura
(bI), 'baddha (ka), yahAM chaMda kI daSTi 14. mimayaM (bI), mimmiya (k)| se
Arakhara ke sthAna para arakhara pATha hai| (Arakhara- 15. kamme (lA, ba),
kammeNa (s)| nibaddha tti atra tRtIyArthe prathamA tato'yamarthaH 16. asui (a,
ba, laa)| ArakanibaddhA gantrI tayA kharanibaddhA rAsabhabalI- 17. Na suttA
(bii)| vardAdayaH (mvR)| 18. iya (mu)| 6. "mAyavi (lA, b)| 19. kAya (bI, s)| 7.
'atthAha' ityAdi atra prAkRtatvAta kvacidvibhaktilopaH 20. emeva gamo (lA, k)|
kvacidvibhaktipariNAmazca tato'yamarthaH astAghe (mv)| 21. ya (k)| 8. ohAre tti
kacchapaH (mvR)| 22. nisIhiaM taM tu (mu)|

Page #225 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **157/1.**  They give [food] to those who have come from a very
distant land, [to] the Sankaḍī, or [to] those who are not [Sankaḍī]. **157/2.**
They give [food] to those who have come from a temple, [to] those who have come
from a place where there is a fire, [to] those who have come from a place where
there is a [religious] assembly. **157/3.**  They do not eat [food] that has
been touched by a [Jain] monk, or [food] that has been touched by a [Jain] nun.
**157/4.**  They throw away [food] that has been touched by a [Jain] monk, or
[food] that has been touched by a [Jain] nun. **157/5.**  They give [food] to
those who have come from a place where there is a [Jain] temple, or [food] to
those who have come from a place where there is a [Jain] temple. **157/6.**
They give [food] to those who have come from a place where there is a [Jain]
temple, or [food] to those who have come from a place where there is a [Jain]
temple.  **158.**  This is what is called "Aṇaiṇṇa" [unlawful], and there are
two types of "Aṇaiṇṇa" [unlawful]. **159.**  There are two types of "Aṇaiṇṇa"
[unlawful], one is called "Deśa" [country] and the other is called "Deśadeśa"
[country of countries]. **1.**  There are three types of "Aṇaiṇṇa" [unlawful] in
the "Deśa" [country].

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 157/1. atidUrajalaMtariyA, kammAsaMkAi' 'vA na'2 ghecchaMti  /
ANeti saMkhaDIo', saDDo saDDI va pacchaNNaM  //  337  //  157/2. niggama deula
dANaM, diyAdi sannAi- niggate daannN| siTuMsi sesagamaNaM, dita'nne
vArayaMta'nne  //  338  //  157/3. bhuMjaNa ajIra purimaDDagAi0 acchaMti5
bhuttasesaM vaa| AgamaNanisIhiyAi2, na bhuMjate 13 sAvagAsaMkA"  //  339  //
157/4. ukkhittaM nikkhippati5, AsagataM mallagammi paasgte| khAmittu'6 gatA
saDDhA, te vi ya suddhA asaDhabhAvA  //  340  /  /  157/5. 'laddhaM paheNagaM
me'8, amugatthagatAe saMkhaDIe vaa| vaMdaNagaTThapaviTThA, deti tagaM paTThiya
niyattA  //  341  /  /  157/6. nIyaM paheNagaM me, niyagANaM nicchitaM va taM
tehiM  /  sAgari9 saejjhiyaM20 vA, paDikuTThA saMkhaDe ruTThA21  //  342  /  /
158. etaM tu aNAiNNaM, duvidhaM pi ya AhaDaM samakkhAtaM  /  AiNNaM pi ya
duvidhaM, dese taha desadese y|| 343  /  /  159 hatthasayaM khalu deso, AreNaM
hoti desadeso ya22  /  'AiNNe tinni gihA'23, te ciya uvaogapuvvAgA  //  344  /
/  1. saMkANa (b)| 11. yacchaMti (bii)| 2. mA Na (mu), na vAvi (a, b)| 12.
Agamani (lA, ba, mu), "yAI (s)| 3. gacchaMti (lA, ba, s)| 13. bhuMjaMta (lA,
ba), bhuMjaI (mu)| 4. ANaMti (mu)| 14. "gAsaMsA (lA, ba, s)| 5. saMkhaDio (a,
bii)| 15. nikkhavaI (a, bii)| 6. Na (a, bii)| 16. sAmittu (s)| 7. 157/1-6-ye
chahoM gAthAeM bhASya kI honI caahie| 17. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari.
3.kathA saM. 21  /  157/1-4-ina cAra gAthAoM meM paragrAma abhyAhRta 18. laddhe
paheNagammi (lA, b)| ko spaSTa karane vAlI kathA kA vistAra hai| saMkSipta 19.
sAgAri (mu, laa)| zailI hone ke kAraNa niyuktikAra kisI bhI gAthA 20.
sayajjhiyaM (mu), saejjhae (lA, ba), kI itanI vistRta vyAkhyA nahIM karate haiN|
157/5, saijjhiyA (ka), saijjhiyaM-bhaginIM (av)| 6-ina do gAthAoM meM svagrAma
abhyAhata kI vyAkhyA 21. a aura bI prati meM gA. 157/6 aura 158 meM hai|
vyAkhyAtmaka hone ke kAraNa ina gAthAoM ko kramavyatyaya hai| yahAM TIkA kA
krama svIkRta kiyA mUla niyukti gAthA ke kramAMka meM nahIM jor3A hai| gayA hai|
8. sinnAi (s)| 22. u (a, k)| 9. siTTammi (lA, ba, mu, ka s)| 23. AiNNe tiNha
gihA (ba), Ainnammi tigihA (mu)| 10. maDDigAi (k)| 24. "ga kAUNaM (a, ba, lA,
bI, sa), puvvAgaM (k)|

Page #226 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 54  160. Parivesanapantiye', 161. Duravese hatthasaya ainnam', gahanam  163.
Apphasu pudhavimadi, Ubbinne chakkaya, dane te cev kavadammi 11 1. Parikesan (a,
b, la). 2. Durappa (b). 3. Avinne (la, b), dainne (a). 4. Pariku (a, b), ga. 160
ke bad a aur b prati mein nimn gatha milti hai. Is gatha ki tikakar ne bhi
vyakhya nahin ki hai. Yah gatha atirikt si lagti hai. Vah gatha is prakar hai
hoti pun desdeso, anto gih sa nadi sae jath. Ukkhevadi jath u, soyadi deti
uvagam || 5. Tu (mu). 6. Ayannam (a, b). 7. 'Padiyatt' (a, b). y ukkos -
majjhim- jahannag ch tividham tu hoti ainnam. Karpariyattjahannam", 'sayamukkose
taram 8. Sayamukkosam majjhimam sesam (mu), sayamukkas majjhimam sesam (k),
mukkose y majjhimaga (la, b). 9. Nibha 5955. 10. Tam (k). 11. 'Dammi (s). 12.
163 / 1-7- ye parato 162. Pihitubbinnakavade, phasug apphasuge y bodhavve | Sat
gathaen prakashit tika mein hain. Hastapratiyon mein niyukti niga ke kramank
mein u ghangasalgihe. phasug kayavikkaye y adhigaranam. Savisesa vi, 163/1.
Sacchittpudhavilittan, Silan vavi daumolittan. Lelu sacchittpudhavilievo, chiran
pi udagan achirattiam || 349 || 163/2. Evam tu13 puvvalitte, kaya 'ullimpamane
te hojja 14. Timmeu ullimpati15, jatumudd16 vavi taveum || 350 || padikutam* ||
345 || 163/3. Jah cev puvvalitte 17, kaya daum puno vi tah uvalipte " 18 kaya,
muingadi 19 navari majjh || 346 || daram || chaganadi daddar' || 347 ||
jantamadisu || 348 ||  Pindaniyukti 15. Tu limpai (la). aur bhashya ki gathaen
ek sath likhi hui karna kathin karya hai bina kisi ullekh ke atah mulatah yah
nirdharit ki kitni niyukti ki gathaen hain aur kitni bhashya ki phir bhi
vyakhyatmak hone ke karan ye saton gathaen bhashya ki pratit hoti hain. Ga. 163
ki vyakhya hi in saton gathaon mein hui hai. Niyuktikar kisi bhi vishay ki itni
punarukti nahin karte atah in gathaon ko bhashyagat mankar niyukti ke mul
kramank mein nahin joda hai. 13. Ch (la, b). 14. Olimpamane (la, b, s), cev.
Chatthe || 351 || ullimpane vi te cev (k, mu). 18. Oli (a, b). 19 Muiaangai
(mu). hain 16. Jaimu (s). 17. Littan (la), litti (b), puvvilittan (s).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 54 160. parivesaNapaMtIe', 161. dUravese hatthasayA AinnaM', gahaNaM 163.
apphAsu puDhavimAdI, ubbhinne chakkAyA, dANe te ceva kavADammi 11 1. pariesaNa (
a, ba, lA)  /  2. dUrappa (bI)  /  3. AviNe (lA, ba), dAinne ( a )  /  4. pariku
( a, bI), gA. 160 ke bAda a aura bI prati meM nimna gAthA milatI hai| isa gAthA
kI TIkAkAra ne bhI vyAkhyA nahIM kI hai| yaha gAthA atirikta sI lagatI hai| vaha
gAthA isa prakAra haihoti puNa desadeso, aMto giha sA nadI sae jattha  /
ukkhevAdI jattha u, soyAdI deti uvaogaM  //  5. tu (mu)  /  6. AyaNNaM ( a, bI)
/  7. 'paDiyatta' (a, bI)  /  ya ukkosa - majjhima- jahannagaM ca tividhaM tu
hoti AinnaM  /  karapariyattajahannaM", 'sayamukkose taraM 8. sayamukkosaM
majjhimaM sesaM (mu), sayamukkasa majjhimaM sesaM (ka), mukkose ya majjhimagA
(lA, ba)  /  9. nibhA 5955  /  10. taM (ka)  /  11. 'DammI (sa)  /  12. 163 /
1-7- ye parato 162. pihitubbhiNNakavADe, phAsuga apphAsuge ya bodhavve | sAta
gAthAeM prakAzita TIkA meM haiN| hastapratiyoM meM niyukti nigA ke kramAMka meM
u ghaMghasAlagihe  /  phAsuga kayavikkae ya adhigaraNaM  /  savisesA vi, 163/1.
saccittapuDhavilittaM, silaM vAvi dAumolittaM  /  lelu saccittapuDhavilevo,
ciraM pi udagaM acirattiM  //  349  //  163/2. evaM tu13 puvvalitte, kAyA
'ulliMpamANa te hojjA 14  /  timmeuM uvaliMpati15, jatumudda16 vAvi tAveuM  //
350  //  paDikuTuM*  //  345  //  163/3. jaha ceva puvvalitte 17, kAyA dAuM puNo
vi taha uvalipte " 18 kAyA, mUiMgAdI 19 navari majjha  //  346  //  dAraM  //
chagaNAdidaddara'  //  347  //  jaMtamAdIsu  //  348  //  piMDaniryukti 15. tu
liMpai (lA)  /  aura bhASya kI gAthAeM eka sAtha likhI huI karanA kaThina kArya
hai binA kisI ullekha ke ataH mUlataH yaha nirdhArita ki kitanI niyukti kI
gAthAeM haiM aura kitanI bhASya kI phira bhI vyAkhyAtmaka hone ke kAraNa ye
sAtoM gAthAeM bhASya kI pratIta hotI haiN| gA. 163 kI vyAkhyA hI ina sAta
gAthAoM meM huI hai| niyuktikAra kisI bhI viSaya kI itanI punarukti nahIM karate
ataH ina gAthAoM ko bhASyagata mAnakara niyukti ke mUla kramAMka meM nahIM jor3A
hai| 13. ca (lA, ba)  /  14. oliMpamANe (lA, ba, sa ), ceva  /  chaTThe  //  351
//  ulliMpaNe vi te ceva (ka, mu)  /  18. oli ( a, bI)  /  19 muiaMgAI (mu)  /
haiM 16. jaimu (sa)  /  17. littaM (lA), litti (bI), puvvilittaM ( sa )  /

Page #227 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  163/4. He himself gives that to the guest at home, sesame
seeds, salt, ghee, or jaggery. The revealed "he does that for sure" with
attachment, he stains the merit with that. || 352 ||  163/5. "Giving" or "buying
and selling with attachment", it becomes "the acquisition of non-merit". Those
who go like that, their lives are like a mouse in a trap. || 353 ||  163/6. Just
as in a pot, etc., previously sown, bodies arise. Similarly, when they are
thrown out, bodies should be considered as being in the state of decay. || 354
||  163/7. The movement of the house-lizard, the clinging to the wall. Even in
that, inside, there are faults like pride, etc. || 355 ||  164. He takes it in
the state of non-contraction, he carries it on the shoulders. He is bound by
non-merit, he enjoys the taste of the world. || 356 ||  ## Door  165. "The
garland is also of two types, it should be understood as being of the type of
taking and giving. Taking is with the front part, giving is with the back part."
|| 357 ||  166. The monk is in the state of taking, the householder is seen in
the state of giving. The fault of seeing the garland, "such and such is the
fault". || 358 ||  166/1. Seeing the garland in front, the monk has gone out of
the house. The arrival of the householder, the question "is it not given?". ||
359 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 163/4. parassa taM deti sa eva gehe, tellaM2 va loNaM va ghataM
gulaM vaa| ugghADite 'taM tu kareti 'vassaM" savikkayaM teNa kiNAti vannaM  //
352  //  163/5. dANa' 'kayavikkae vA", hoI' 'adhigaraNa ajatabhAvassa'10  /
nivataMti je u11 tahiyaM, jIvA mUiMgamUsAdI12  //  353  //  163/6. jaheva
kuMbhAdisu puvvalitte, ubbhijjamANe 13 vi" havaMti5 kaayaa| ulliMpamANe16 vi
tahA taheva", kAyA kavADammi vibhAsitavvA  //  354  //  163/7.
gharakoilasaMcArA, AvattaNapeDhiyAi19 hettvriN| nite vi eya aMto, DiMbhAdI
pellaNe dosA  //  355  //  164. gheppati akuMciyAgammi21, kavADe paidiNaM22
privhNte| ajatUmuddiya23 gaMThI, paribhujjati daddaro jo y|| 356 ||daarN  //
165. 'mAlohaDaM pi duvidhaM 24, jahaNNamukkosagaM ca bodhavvaM  /  aggapadehi25
jahaNNaM, tavvivarItaM tu ukkosaM26  //  357  //  166. bhikkhU jahaNNagammI,
geruya ukkosagammi dittuNto| ahiDasaNa28 mAlapaDaNe, 'ya evamAdI bhave'29 dosA
//  358  //  166/1. mAlAbhimuhi20 daTTaNa, agAriM niggato tao sAdhU  /
taccaNNiyaAgamaNaM, pucchA ya 'adiNNadANa tti'32  //  359  /  /  1. evaM (laa)|
18. saMcAlA (a, bii)| 2. tillaM (a, bI, k)| 19. veDhiyAi (a, bI), peDhayAe (sa),
3. uppADiyaM (ba, s)| pIDhagAi (mu)| 4. tammi kare avassaM (mu, k)| 20. jIbhA
1267 /  5. kiNAya (s)| 21. akuciyA (ba), akUiyAge tti pAThaH tatra 6. annaM (mu,
ka), dhannaM (ba), jIbhA 1262 /  akRjikAke kUjikArahite akreGkArArAve (mv)| 7.
dANe (mu)| 22. 'diNe (lA, ba, mu)| 8. "vikkayA ceva (a ba, lA, bI, sa), 23.
ajjatumuddaya (sa), ajau (ba), ajaU (mu)| vikkayAdI (jIbhA 1263) /  24. savvaM
pi ya taM duvihaM (jiibhaa)| 9. huMti (a, lA, sa), hoti (b)| 25. aggatalehi (ka,
mu)| 10. "garaNamajaya (mu, ka, bii)| 26. pukkosaM (sa), tu. nibhA 5949, jIbhA
1271  /  11. Na (lA, ba), ya (mu, k)| 27. nAyavvo (nibhA 5950) /  12. mUyaMga
(bI), muiyaMga (mu), 'pUsAI (laa)| 28. ahida (a, nibhA), ahivasaNa (s)| 13.
osiyamANe (ba, laa)| 29. evamAdI tahiM (sa, nibhaa)| 14. ya (lA, ba, mu, s)| 30.
"bhimuhI (s)| 15. hoMti (sa, k)| 31. agArI (s)| 16. olippa' (a, bI, sa, jIbhA
1264), oliMpa (m)| 32. dANaM ti (mu), kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 17.
taheya (a, bii)| 3,kathA saM. 22 /  -

Page #228 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  166/2. In a house, a thief, with fragrance, steals and runs
away. Eating food, sleeping, and talking are all considered as Sambhohi. || 360
|| 167. A seat, a step, a platform, a painful injury, falling, and both kinds of
killing. Cutting, stealing from a neighbor, and boasting are all considered as
Sambhohi. || 361 || 168. Similarly, a war, a weapon, a female bird falling, A
pregnant woman's belly being broken, and death in front of someone are all
considered as Sambhohi. || 362 || 169. Uddhameha, ten kinds of Tiryanch, and
also a Malohard, are of three types. Uddhameha is considered as Otarana, and it
is said that "Kumbhaadisoo Ubhayan" are also considered as Sambhohi. || 363 ||
170. Daddara, "Sil Sovane", a previous rider, and a person who is thrown up. A
Malohard is not considered as Sambhohi, but the rest are considered as Malohard.
|| 364 || 171. "Tiryaayatamuzzuge, with a rope, what is taken by a person who is
hanging. This is considered as Anuccukkhitta, and the rest are considered as
Uccukkhitta. || 365 || 172. Acchhejj, "Pi Ya", is of three types, a king, a
master, and also by them. Acchhejj, Padikutu, is not suitable for a Samana to
take. || 366 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 166/2. mAlammi kuDe' modaga, sugaMdha ahipavisaNaM' kare ddkkaa|
annadiNasAhuAgama, niddaya kahaNe ya saMbohI  //  360  //  167. AsaMdi-pIDha-
maMcaga, jaMtoDUkhala' paData ubhayavadho  /  voccheda padosAdI,
uDDAhamanANivAdo y||361  //  168. emeva ya ukkose, vAraNa-nisseNi
guvvinniipddnnN|| gabbhitthikucchiphoDaNa, purato' maraNaM. 'kahaNa bohI  //
362  //  169. uDvamahe 10 tiriyaM pi ya9, ahavA mAlohaDaM bhave tividhaM  /  _
'uDDamahe otaraNaM'12, bhaNitaM 'kuMbhAdisU ubhayaM'13  //  363  //  170.
daddara14 'sila sovANe'15, puvvArUDhe aNuccamukkhitte16  /  mAlohaDaM na hotI,
sesaM mAlohaDaM jANa  //  364  //  171. 'tiriyAyatamujjugeNa, geNhate 18 jaM
kareNa phaasNto| eyamaNuccukkhittaM9, uccukkhittaM bhave sesaM  //  365  //
dAraM  //  172. acchejjaM 'pi ya'20 tividhaM, pabhU ya sAmI ya teNae cev|
acchijjaM paDikuTuM, samaNANa21 Na kappate ghettuM22  //  366  //  1. kuTe (a,
bii)| 9. ca saMbohI (lA, sa), kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM 2. "pave (laa)| pari.
3,kathA saM. 23 /  3. kahaNA (lA, ba, mu)| 10. uddhe ahe (a, lA), uDDa ahe (s)|
4. 166/1,2-ye donoM gAthAeM prakAzita TIkA meM 11. va (a, bii)| nigA ke kramAMka
meM haiM lekina ye bhASya kI honI 12. uDDe ya mahoyaraNaM (lA, ba, mu, s)|
caahie| ina gAthAoM ke bhASyagata hone kA eka 13. kuMbhAiesu ubhayaM pi (a,
bii)| bahuta bar3A tarka yaha hai ki gAthA 166 ke uttarArddha meM 14. daddare
(laa)| niyuktikAra 'evamAdI bhave dosA' kA ullekha karate 15. sila somANe (a,
s)| haiN| 166/1, 2 ina donoM gAthAoM meM geruka bhikSu 16. amucca (a, bii)| kI
kathA hai| 166 vIM gAthA kA sIdhA sambandha 17. hoi (lA, ba, sa, ka, mu)| 167 vI
gAthA ke sAtha jur3atA hai ataH bIca kI ye 18. 'taujjugaeNa giNhaI (ka, mu)|
donoM gAthAeM bhASya kI honI caahie| inako nigA 19. yadRSTerupari bAhuM prasArya
deyavastugrahaNAya pAtraM dhriyate ke mUla kramAMka meM nahIM jor3A hai|
tattathA dhriyamANamuccotkSiptam (mvR)| 5. jaMtoDu (bI), jaMtodukkhala (nibhA
5951), 20. puNa (a, bI, jiibhaa)| "DUhala (k)| 21. sAhUNa (a, bI), sAdhUNa
(nibhA 4500) /  6. paDeti (a, bI), par3ate (laa)| 22. tu. jIbhA 1274, nizItha
cUrNi meM isa gAthA ke 7. phuraMta (lA, ba, s)| lie 'imA NijjuttI' kA ullekha
milatA hai| 8. paDaNaM (a, bii)|

Page #229 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pandaniyukti  **173.**  **173/1.**  If a householder has a cow, it is known
by the name of the cow,  **173/2.**  "To kill a cow is a sin, to give it to a
Jain is a virtue," says the scripture.  A householder who kills a cow, commits a
sin, and suffers in the next life.  **173/3.**  By the act of killing, he takes
on the karma of the cow, and suffers the consequences.  He does not attain
liberation.  **173/4.**  A Jain does not kill a cow, nor does he eat its milk.
He follows the path of non-violence.  Why then does a householder commit such a
sin?  He is not compassionate.  He is not a true Jain.  He does not understand
the true nature of food.  He is attached to the world.  He is not free from the
cycle of birth and death.  **174.**  **175.**  A cow is like a mother.  A calf
is like a child.  A householder who kills a cow, kills a mother.  He kills a
child.  He commits a great sin.  He is not a true Jain.  **Notes:**  1.
*kharasu* (B), *kharae ya* (S), *aksharako dvayaksharaka abhidhano dasa iti
artha* (Mavri). 2.  *suhaye* (S), *kharaputte dhuya sunha vihava ya* (Nibha
4501). 3.  *sankadiae* (A, B). 4.  *kaippaose* (B). 5.  173/1 is present in all
manuscripts.  It is not explained in the Malayagiri tika.  It is mentioned in
the Avchuri tika as "choctum" in the explanation of 173/1.  It is also not
present in the Nisith bhashya.  It is possible that it was added later by
scribes or acharyas.  Due to its explanatory and additional nature, it has not
been included in the original order of the verses. 6.  *pao* (La, B, Mu, K, S),
*govo* (Nibha). 7.  *chhettam* (K, B), *ucchettu* (Nibha). 8.  *bhatidivase
dinno ya sadhuno* (Nibha 4502). 9.  *payabhanunam ti vibhakti lopaat
payobhajanamunam* (Mavri). 10.  *datthe* (A, B).  11.  *bhogi* (B, S), *bhoi iti
bhogya bhariya iti artha* (Mavri). 12.  *rue* (A, B), *bhave* (La). 13.
*padicharan* 14.  *tan nibandha* (B). 15.  *hand* (La, Nibha). 16.  *sa* (La, B,
K, Mu). 17.  *bitiya* (La), *biyam* (Mu), Nibha 4503, Katha.  For the expansion
of this story, see Pari. 3, Katha San. 24. 18.  *na anirvrushttam - anuparjitam*
(Mavri). 19.  *bhujjae* (La, B, Mu, Nibha 4504). 20.  *kahi* (K, Mu). 21.  *va*
(Nibha), 173/2-4 - these three verses should be part of the bhashya.  In the
173rd verse, the author has hinted at the story.  The expansion of the same
story is in 173/2, 3, and 173/4 is also explanatory. 22.  *karunananam kripa
sthanaanam daridra kautumbikaadi naanm* (Mavri). 23.  *acchettu* (A, B). 24.
*vucchham* (S), Nibha 4505, in the explanation of this verse, the Avchuri tika
mentions "hoi pabu ghar....." (173/1 verse) as "choctum".  See note 173/1. 25.
*ahaaruvahi* (K). 26.  *sankadiy sankadiyam va* (A), *diy va* (La, K, S). 27.
*va tahim* (Nibha 4506).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 paMDaniyukti 173. 174. 173 / 1. hoti pabhU gharabhANe, sAmI teNa ya pasiddha
gocciya, 173/2. govapayaM acchettuM', 'diNNaM tu jatissa bhatidiNe" bhANU daTTu,
khiMsati bhoI11 ruve 12 173/3. paDiyaraNapadoseNaM 13, bhAvaM nAuM jatissa
tannibbaMdhA4 gahitaM, haMdi 15 hu16 mukko 173/4. nAnivviTTha" labbhati, dAsI vi
na bhuMjate 9 rite dohe gatarapadosaM, kAhiti aMtarAyaM sAmI cArabhaDA vA,
saMjata daTThUNa kaluNANaM 22 acchejjaM23, sAhUNa na kappate AhArovahimAdI 25,
jati aTThAe 'saMkhaDi asaMkhaDIe 26, tesi taM 27 175. govAlae ya bhayae'kkharae'
putte ya dhUya aciyatta saMkhaDAdI', ' kei padosaM 4 jahA 4 1. kharaesu (bI),
kharAe ya (sa), akSarakodvayakSarakAbhidhAno dAsa ityarthaH (mavR)  /  2. suhAya
(sa), kharaputte dhUya suNha vihavA ya ( nibhA 4501 )  /  3. saMkhaDIe ( a, bI)
/  4. kaippaose (bI)  /  5. 173 / 1 gAthA sabhI hastapratiyoM meM hai  /
malayagiri TIkA meM isakI vyAkhyA nahIM hai| avacUri meM 173/1 kI vyAkhyA meM
'coktam' kahakara yaha gAthA dI hai| nizItha bhASya meM bhI cAlU prasaMga meM
yaha gAthA nahIM hai| saMbhava hai yaha lipikarttAoM yA AcAryoM dvArA bAda meM
jor3a dI gaI ho  /  vyAkhyAtmaka evaM atirikta hone ke kAraNa isako mUla gAthA
ke krama meM nahIM jor3A hai| 6. pao (lA, ba, mu, ka, sa), govaya ( nibhA)  /
7. chettaM (ka, bI), ucchettu (nibhA)  /  8. bhatidivase diNNo ya sAdhuNo (
nibhA 4502 )  /  9. payabhANUNaM ti vibhaktilopAt payobhAjanamUnaM (mavR)  /
10. daTThe ( a, bI)  /  11. bhogI (ba, sa), bhoI iti bhogyA bhAryA ityarthaH
(mavR)  /  12. rue ( a, bI), bhave (lA)  /  puNa gAmasAmio bhaNito  /
eyacchiNNaM na geNhejjA"  //  suhaae| govo  //  367  //  22. 23. 24. u koi
giNhaMte ime AlAvo  /  si mA bitiyaM  //  369  //  pahuNA  /  ceDA  //  368  //
bhattA  /  ca  //  370  //  dAraM  //  aTThAe  /  ghettuM 24  //  371  //
acchiMde  /  dosA  //  372  //  (sa)  /  13. paDicaraNa 14. taM nibaMdhA (bI)  /
15. haMda (lA, nibhA)  /  16. sa (lA, bI, ka, mu)  /  17. bitiyA (lA), bIyaM
(mu), nibhA 4503, kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 24 18. na
anirvRSTam - anupArjitam (mavR)  /  19. bhujjae (lA, ba, mu, nibhA 4504 )  /
20. kAhI (ka, mu)  /  21. vA (nibhA), 173 / 2 - 4 - ye tInoM gAthAeM bhASya kI
honI cAhie  /  173 vIM gAthA meM graMthakAra kathA kA saMketa kara cuke haiN|
usI kathA kA vistAra 173/2,3 meM hai tathA 173 / 4 bhI vyAkhyAtmaka hai|
karuNAnAM kRpAsthAnAnAM daridrakauTumbikAdInAM (mavR)  /  acchettu ( a, bI)  /
vucchaM (sa), nibhA 4505, isa gAthA kI vyAkhyA meM avacUri meM 'hoi pabhU
ghara.....' (173 / 1 gAthA ) coktam kahakara dI huI hai| dekheM TippaNa 173 / 1
/  AhArauvahi (ka)  /  57 25. 26. saMkhaDiya saMkhaDIyaM va (a), 'DIya va (lA,
ka, sa)  /  27. va tahiM (nibhA 4506 )  /

Page #230 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **176.** In the case of a non-obtainable object, there is a
cutting off of the multiplicity of the object. The faults of non-tranquility,
etc., are what one obtains in the absence of that. || 373 ||  **177.**
Therefore, one should be restrained, for the sake of one's own welfare and for
the welfare of others. "Cutting off" and "fault" are not appropriate for the
non-obtainable. || 374 ||  **177/1.** Therefore, the restrained ones, who are
free from attachment, are those who are not attached to the world. If they give,
one should not take, so that there is no cutting off of non-tranquility. || 375
||  **177/2.** Having heard the words of the wise, one should take only after
they have been given by the wise. "They give, and those who are wise take," the
wise ones eat. || 376 ||  **178.** It is appropriate for the well-behaved to eat
what is not given, not taken, and not obtained. "They eat laddu, jante, and
sankhadi, and milk and rice, etc." || 377 ||  **179.** Thirty-two is the number
of the Samanas, and they are said to have gone to bathe. With the blessings of
the others, it is good, and one should not be envious of anyone. || 378 ||
**179/1.** "If there are thirty-two, and if they are given, there will be no
fear of the enemy." If you know this, give it to me, for it is beneficial and
abundant. || 379 ||  **Notes:**  1. *viyalalambhe ya jam* (A, B), *viyalalambhe
va jo* (S, La), *viyalalambhe ya jam* (Nibha 4507) 2. *voccheya paosam va* (La,
B, K, Mu) 3. *nappae kappae anunnatan* (A, B), *nnaae* (S), Nibha 4513 4.
*ayatti* (La), *aiyayi* (A, B), *achiayatti* (Nibha 4514) 5. *jatinan* (S,
Nibha) 6. *na* (K) 7. *ghatasattugadi tunto* - In some manuscripts, this phrase
is replaced with *tenagabhaena ghettu*. The commentator also mentions
*ghyasattugadi tunto* in his commentary. 8. *tan satthigana denati* (Nibha 4515)
9. *tu* (S) 10. *kappai* (S) 11. *ladduga jante sankhadi, khire va avanadi su*
(Nibha 4516) 12. *kahim* (Mu, K, T) 13. *gai* (A, B) 14. *iy* (Mu) 15. *na* (K)
16. Nibha 4517, see Pari. 3, Katha San. 25 for further explanation. 17. *abahu*
(La) 18. *dinnehi* (La, B, K, Mu, S), *dinnaae* (Nibha 4518) 19. *tamega* (S)
20. *to deh* (A, B) 21. Verse 179 briefly mentions a story related to
*anisrusht*. Verses 179/1 and 179/2 expand on this story, making them part of
the commentary.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 176. aciyattamaMtarAyaM, teNAhaDa egnnegvocchedo| nicchubhaNAdI
dosA, 'tassa alaMbhe ya jaM5 pAve  //  373  //  dAraM  //  177. teNA va
saMjataTThA, kaluNANaM appaNo va atttthaae| 'vocchedaM va padosaM'2, 'na kappate
kappa'NuNNAtaM'3  //  374  //  177/1. saMjatabhaddA teNA, AyaMtI' vA asaMthare
jatiNaM  /  jai deMti na ghettavvaM, nicchubha-voccheda mA hojjA  //  375  //
177/2. ghatasattugadiTuMto', samaNuNNAtA va ghettu NaM pcchaa|| 'deMti tayaM
tesiM ciya'", samaNuNNAtA va bhuMjaMti  //  376  //  dAraM  //  178. aNisiTuM
paDikuTuM, aNuNAtaM kappate10 suvihitANaM  /  _ 'laDDaga collaga jaMte, sNkhddi-
khiiraavnnaadiisu1|| 377  //  dAraM  /  /  179. battIsA sAmanne, te 'vi ya12
NhAtuM gata'3 tti iti4 vutte| parasaMtieNa puNNaM, na tarasi kAuM ti5 paccAha'6
//  378  /  /  179/1. 'avi ya hu'17 battIsAe, 'diNNe ya'18 tavegamoyago9 na
bhve| appavayaM bahuAyaM, jadi jANasi dehi to'20 majhaM  //  379  /  /  1.
viyAla alaMbhe ya jaM (a, bI), viyAla laMbhe va jo 10. kappai (s)| (sa, lA),
viyAla'laMbhe ya jaM (nibhA 4507) /  11. gAthA kA uttarArddha (nibhA 4516) meM
isa prakAra hai2. voccheya paosaM vA (lA, ba, ka, mu)| laDDaga jaMte saMkhaDi,
khIre vA aavnnaadiisuN| 3. Nappae kappae aNuNNAtaM (a, bI), 'NNAe (sa), 12.
kahiM (mu, ka, ttii)| nibhA 4513 /  13. gai (a, bii)| 4 AyattI (lA), aiyaI (a,
bI), aciyattI (nibhA 4514) /  14. iya (mu)| 5. jatINaM (sa, nibhaa)| 15. Na (k)|
6. 177/1,2-ye donoM gAthAeM 177 vIM gAthA kI vyAkhyA 16. nibhA 4517, kathA ke
vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, prastuta karane vAlI haiM ata: bhASya kI honI
caahie| kathA saM. 25  /  prakAzita TIkA meM ye niyukti gAthA ke krama meM haiM
17. abahu (laa)| lekina inako mala niryakti gAthA ke krama meM nahIM 18. diNNehi
(lA, ba, ka, mu, sa), rakhA hai| diNNAe (nibhA 4518) /  7. hastapratiyoM meM
'ghatasattugadiTuMto' ke sthAna para 19. tamega' (s)| 'teNagabhaeNa ghettuM'
pATha milatA hai| avacUrikAra ne bhI 20. to deha (a, bii)| apanI vyAkhyA meM
'kvacid dvitIyagAthAyAM ghayasattuga- 21. gAthA 179 meM anisRSTa se saMbaMdhita
kathA kA diTuMto' kA ullekha kiyA hai| saMkSepa meM ullekha hai| 179/1, 2 meM
isI kathA 8. taM satthigANa deMtI (nibhA 4515) /  kA vistAra hai ataH 179/1, 2
ye donoM gAthAeM 9. tu (s)| spaSTa rUpa se bhASya kI honI caahie| koI bhI
graMthakAra itanI punarukti nahIM krtaa|

Page #231 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindanuyukti  179/2. The beneficiary, the *Shinto*, asks, "What is gained, if
we do not give?"  The other says, "I do not give, but I am a thief with a
companion." || 380 || 180. Taking and giving are transactions, the
*Pachchakaḍḍuḍḍāha* says, "Thus it is, in the *Nivvisae*." The fault is in
*Apbhummi*, "The *Pbhummi* is given, then it is taken." || 381 || 181.
Similarly, in the case of animals, in *Saṅkhaḍi*, milk, and *Āvaṇādīsuṃ*. It is
common to be *Paḍikutu*, it is appropriate to take, if it is *Aṇuṇṇāta*. || 382
|| 181/1. "The *Chulla*," the *Dāramahuṇā* says, "It should be given much," thus
it is done afterwards. The *Vaṇṇe* is the *Guru*, but the *Sāmi* is the
elephant, who is *Viṇṇeō*. || 383 || 182. "The *Chhinna* and the *Achhinna* are
two, the *Achhinna* is *Nisitṭha* and *Anisitṭha*." In the *Chhinna*, the
*Chulla* is appropriate to take, in the *Nisitṭha*. || 384 || The *Chhinna* is
*Ditṭha* and *Aditṭha*, which is *Nisitṭha*, "The *Achhinna* or the *Chhinna*."
That is appropriate, but the other, "The *Aditṭha* or the *Aṇuṇṇāta*." || 385 ||
184. The *Anisitṭha* and the *Aṇuṇṇāta*, it is appropriate to take, similarly,
the *Aditṭu*. In the case of the *Jaḍḍa*, or the *Anisitṭu*, it is not
appropriate, it is appropriate to take the *Aditṭu*. || 386 ||  1. *Mitto* (B),
*Naṇto* (S), *Neto* (Mu). "The *Vaṇṇe* is the *Guru*, but" by saying this, the
*Nuyuktikāra* has indicated towards the *Nuyukti*. 2. *Bhāṇe Pecchāmo* (Nibha
4519). This *Gāthā* is not included in the original *Nuyukti* *Gāthā*s. 3.
*Choratti* (Mu). 4. *Mev Niddissao* (La), *Puccha Ni'* (Mu). 14.
*Chhinnamachhinnaṃ Duvihaṃ, Hoi Achhinnaṃ Nisatṭhamanisatuṃ* (A, B), "The
*Nisatṭhamanisatuṃ* (K, S). 15. *Cholagammi* (S). 16. *Nisatṭho Vi* (S). 17.
*Nisatṭho* (S, Nibha). 18. *Chhinna Chhinno Va* (La, B), *Bhave Achhinno Ya* (K,
Mu), *Pi Hoi Achhinno* (Nibha 4510). 19. *Aditṭha Sitṭho Bahuviṇāso* (A, B),
*Aṇu* (K). 20. *Aṇasatuṃ* (S). 21. *Ya Anisatuṃ* (Mu), *Va Nisatuṃ* (S). 22.
Nibha (4511). In this *Nibha*, the following *Gāthā* is found in place of this
*Gāthā*: *Aṇisatuṃ Paṇ Kappati, Adidaṃ Jehi Taṃ Ta Āṇītaṃ. Dili Pi Pahū Kappati,
Jai Aṇujāṇanti Tāi Tu*. No *Granthakāra* himself explains this. Another thing is
that in 181/1, the *Bhāṣyakāra* has explained the *Chollakaḍḍavāra* later, why
is it not in order? This *Gāthā* explains this. Any *Granthakāra* does not
explain this himself. Another thing is that in 181/1, the *Bhāṣyakāra* has
explained the *Chollakaḍḍavāra* later, why is it not in order? This *Gāthā*
explains this. Any *Granthakāra* does not explain this himself. Another thing is
that in 181/1, the *Bhāṣyakāra* has explained the *Chollakaḍḍavāra* later, why
is it not in order? This *Gāthā* explains this. Any *Granthakāra* does not
explain this himself.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 179/2. lAbhita ziMto' puTTho, kiM laddhaM natthi 'pecchimo dAe'2
/  itaro vi Aha nAhaM, demi tti sahoDha corattaM  //  380  //  180. geNhaNa
kaDDaNa vavahAra, pacchakaDuDDAha 'taha ya nivvise'| apabhummi bhave' dosA,
'pabhummi diNNe tato gahaNaM  //  381  //  181. emeva ya jaMtammi vi, saMkhaDi
khIre ya aavnnaadiisuN| sAmannaM paDikuTuM, kappati ghettuM aNuNNAtaM  //  382
//  181/1. 'culla tti'10 dAramahuNA, bahuvattavvaM ti taM kataM pcchaa| vaNNeti
gurU so puNa, sAmiya12 hatthINa viNNeo3  //  383  //  182. 'chiNNamachiNNo
duviho, hoti achiNNo nisiTThamaNisiTTho'14  /  chiNNammi cullagammI'5, kappati
ghettuM nisiTThammi5  /  /  384  //  chiNNo diTThamadiTTho, jo ya nisiTTho7
'achiNNa chiNNo vA'18  /  so kappati itaro puNa, 'adidiTTho v'nnunnnnaato'19||
385  //  184. aNisiTThamaNuNNAtaM20, kappati ghettuM taheva addittuN| jaDDassa
vA'nisiTuM9, na kappatI kappati adiTuM22  //  386  //  1. mitto (bI), NaMto
(sa), neto (mu)| 'vaNNei guru so puNa' kahakara niyuktikAra kI ora 2. bhANe
pecchAmo (nibhA 4519) /  saMketa kiyA hai| isa gAthA ko mUla niyukti gAthA 3.
coratti (mu)| ke kramAMka meM nahIM rakhA hai| 4. meva niddisao (lA), puccha ni'
(mu)| 14. chiNNamachiNNaM duvihaM, hoi achinnaM nisaTThamanisaTuM 5. huMti (a,
bii)| (a, bI), "nisaTThamaNasaTTo (ka, s)| 6. pahummi tti tRtIyArthe saptamI
(mvR)| 15. colagammi (s)| 7. pabhuM va diNNaM ao (lA, s)| 16. nisaTTho vi (s)|
8. nibhA 4520 /  17. nisaTTho (sa, nibhaa)| 9. nibhA 4521 /  18. chiNNa chiNNo
vA (lA, ba), bhave achinno ya 10. coleti (lA), cola tti (s)| (ka, mu), pi hoi
acchiNNo (nibhA 4510) /  11. ghetthA (s)| 19. adiTTha siTTho bahuviNAso (a, bI),
aNu (k)| 12. sAmI (lA, ba, ka, s)| 20. aNasaTuM (s)| 13. bhiNNAo (sa), 181/1
yaha gAthA spaSTa rUpa se 21. ya anisaTuM (mu), vA nisaTuM (s)| bhASya kI
pratIta hotI hai| krama ke anusAra 22. nibhA (4511) meM isa gAthA ke sthAna para
nimna 'collakadvAra' kI vyAkhyA bAda meM kyoM kI gaI, gAthA milatI haiisakA
spaSTIkaraNa isa gAthA meM kiyA gayA hai| aNisaTraM paNa kappati, adidaM jehi
taM ta aanniitN| koI bhI graMthakAra svayaM isa bAta kA spaSTIkaraNa dilR pi
pahU kappati, jai aNujANaMti tAI tu|| nahIM krtaa| dUsarI bAta 181/1 meM
bhASyakAra ne

Page #232 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **60**  **185.** Nivapindo gayabhattam, dumbassa
santiye vi hu, ajjhoyarao tividho, mulammhi ya puvvakate, **187.** Tandula-jala-
adane, parimane nanattam, **186.** **189.** Eso eka 14 **188.** Javantiye
visodhi, sagharam 5 pasandi mise chhipane vi sohi dinnammi, kappati 'na kappati'
188/1. Chhinnammi tao okaddhiyammi kappati pihikate' abhavanay dinnam, evaiyam
11 kappate **191.** **192.** 1. Nibha 4512. 2. Otarai (la), overai (b). 3. Phala
(s). 4. Yam (b). 5. Sanjay (a, b). solasabhedo, visohicode, sesam. sesam 12. ||
391 || Ugamo. Chavara || 392 || **190.** Ahakammuddesiya, charimati gam purti
misajate ya. 'Badarapahudiya vi ya 17, ajjhoyaraye ya charimdugam 18 || 393 ||
Ugamocode avayava, levaleve ya kanjiya- ayamgar - chaulod 21 - sansadva kappe
99. Sesa visodhicode, bhattam pan 23 analakkhiya misadave 25, 6. Pasanda (a, k,
b). 7. Kappai (la, b, a, b). 8. x (s). 9. Ukkadd (la, b, mu). 10. Kayam (a, b).
gahandi antaraiyam adinnam. Abhikka vasahhiya fedanaya || 387 || Daram ||
Sagharamisapasande | Javantiya Oyarati Tih Puppha-phale 3 sag - vesane ajjhoyar
misajate 11. Ca tattiyam (la, b, mu). 12. 188/1 ki gatha kevala a aur b prati me
hai. Avchurikar ne 'esha gatha kvaapi na drishyate' aisa ullekh karte hue iski
vyakhya ki hai. Malayagiri ki tika me yah bina kisi nirdesh ke vyakhyat hai.
Duha 3 avisohi 15 " u 'akayaye 'puuti atthaye || 388 || Lone. ya || 389 ||
puuti. sesam || 390 || 10 ya 122 || 394 || viginch jahasatti 24.
Savvavivego'vayavasuddho 26 || 395 ||  Pinda niyukti 13. Vi duha (a, b, la, b).
14. Ekko (la), ego (mu). 15. U avi (la). 16. Gatha ka pratham evam tritiya
charan arya tatha dvitiya aur chaturtha charan anushtup chhand me hai. 17. Yaaye
(k) 1 18. Jibha 1295, tu. Dasani 220/1. 19. Akappakappe ya (a, b, s). 20. Ayame
(la, b, jibha). 21. 'Lodaye (a, b). 22. Puio (mu), puiyam (la, s), jibha 1297.
23. Dan (la, b), danam (s) 1 24. 25. 26. Sattim (mu). Davve (a, k, b). 'Go ya
avayave (la, b, s).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 60 185. nivapiMDo gayabhattaM, DuMbassa saMtie vi hu, ajjhoyarao tividho,
mUlammi ya puvvakate, 187. taMDula- jala-AdANe, parimANe nANattaM, 186. 189. eso
ekA 14 188. jAvaMtie visodhI, sagharaM 5 pAsaMDi mIsae chipaNe visohi dinnammi,
kappati 'na kappatI" 188 / 1. chinnammi tao okaDDiyammi kappati pihIkate'
AbhAvaNAya dinnaM, evaiyaM 11 kappate 191. 192. 1. nibhA 4512  /  2. otarai
(lA), ovaraI (bI)  /  3. phala (sa)  /  4. yaM (bI)  /  5. saMjaya ( a, ba )  /
solasabhedo, visohikoDI, sesaM  /  sesaM12  /  /  391  /  /  ugamo  /  cAvarA
//  392  //  190. AhAkammuddesiya, carimatigaM pUrti mIsajAte y| '
bAdarapAhuDiyA vi ya 17, ajjhoyarae ya carimadugaM 18  //  393  //  ugamakoDI
avayava, levAleve ya kaMjiya- AyAmagara - cAuloda 21 - saMsadva kappe 99  /
sesA visodhikoDI, bhattaM pANa23 aNalakkhiya mIsadave25, 6. pAsaMDa ( a, ka, ba)
/  7. kappaI (lA, ba, a, bI)  /  8. x ( sa )  /  9. ukkaDDa (lA, ba, mu)  /  10.
kayaM ( a, bI)  /  gahaNAdI aMtarAiyamadinnaM  /  abhikkha vasahIya pheDaNayA
//  387  //  dAraM  //  sagharamIsapAsaMDe | jAvaMtiya oyaratI tiha puppha-phale
3 sAga - vesaNe ajjhoyara mIsajAte 11. ca tattiyaM (lA, ba, mu)  /  12. 188 / 1
kI gAthA kevala a aura bI prati meM hai  /  avacUrikAra ne 'eSA gAthA kvApi na
dRzyate' aisA ullekha karate hue isakI vyAkhyA kI hai| malayagiri kI TIkA meM
yaha binA kisI nirdeza ke vyAkhyAta hai| duhA 3 avisohI 15 " u 'akayae 'pUtI
aTThAe  //  388  //  loNe  /  ya  //  389  //  pUtI  /  sesaM  //  390  //  10
ya 122  //  394  //  vigiMca jahasattI 24  /  savvavivego'vayavasuddho26  //
395  //  piMDa niyukti 13. vi duhA ( a, ba, lA, bI)  /  14. ekko (lA), ego (mu)
/  15. u avi (lA)  /  16. gAthA kA prathama evaM tRtIya caraNa AryA tathA
dvitIya aura caturtha caraNa anuSTup chaMda meM hai| 17. yAe (ka) 1 18. jIbhA
1295, tu. dazani 220 / 1  /  19. akappakappe ya ( a, bI, sa)  /  20. AyAme (lA,
ba, jIbhA )  /  21. 'lodae ( a, bI)  /  22. pUIo (mu), pUIyaM (lA, sa), jIbhA
1297  /  23. dANa (lA, ba), dANaM (sa) 1 24. 25. 26. sattiM (mu)  /  davve ( a,
ka, bI)  /  'go ya avayave (lA, ba, sa )  /

Page #233 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  192/1. The essence of the matter is this: whatever substance is
in the field, It is seen by the wise as being neither permanent nor impermanent.
|| 396 ||  192/2. Like a dry leaf, it is neither permanent nor impermanent,
there are four states. It is like a wind that blows, there are two states, "two
or not two". || 397 ||  192/3. "Dryness is dryness" is understood, the first
happiness is to be detached. To leave the substance in the seed, the tongue
tastes the substance, the hand gives. || 398 ||  192/4. To leave the hand in the
third, the food and so on, which crosses, rises. In the last, in the rare
substance, the third is understood. || 399 ||  192/5. All understand in the
state of harmony, the four states are in the state of disharmony. The wise
understand those in whom there is no disharmony, the illusionary ones are
attached to them. || 400 ||  192/6. There are two types of classification, the
ascending classification and the purifying classification. The ascending
classification is six, the purifying classification is of many kinds. || 401 ||
192/7. Nine, sixteen, twenty-seven, and forty-four. Nine hundred and two,
"seventy-five" are the classifications. || 402 ||  193. Sixteen ascending
faults, the householder's are born from the mind. The faults for creation, "the
householder's are born from the knowledge". || 403 ||  1. This (A). 2. Then (S).
3. Sukkholl (A, B). 4. In the sutra, the masculine gender is indicated due to
the Vedic nature (M). 5. Nivao (La, K, S), Nivaaya (A, B). 6. Donn'atulla U
(Mu). 7. Sukkhe Sukkham (A, B). 8. Viginchay (B). 9. Galanti (A, B), Galeti (S),
Jiba 1309. 10. Davvam (A, K, B). 11. Kare (A). 12. Ullichai (La, B). 13. Dullbha
Davvam (Mu, B). 14. Viginchei (A, B). 15. Tesu (La, B, S). 16. Jesu Bajjhai (K,
Mu), The verse is in Anushtup meter. 17. Bhave Sesa (Dasani 220), Tu. Jiba 1293.
18. Tu Sattara (Jiba 1289). 19. Dasani 221, 192/1-7- these seven verses should
not be included in the Niyukti due to their relation to Parak and Chaturbhagi.
192/6,7- these two verses are not found in any manuscript. These verses are
explained in the Avchuri and published commentary in the number of the Niiga.
These verses seem to be extra. They are not included in the original number of
the Niiga. 20. Samuchchie (La, B), Samutthie (S). 21. Sahuy (A, B), Sahun (K).
22. Aysamutthe Ao Voccham (La, B, S), Jiba 1313.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 192/1. davvAiora vivego, davve jaM davva jaM jahiM khette|| kAle
akAlahINaM, asaDho jaM passatI bhAve  //  396  //  192/2. sukkolla sarisapAe,
asarisapAe ya ettha cubhNgo| tulle tullanivAte', tattha duve 'donni vA'tullA'6
//  397  //  192/3. 'sukke sukkaM' paDitaM, vigiMciuM hoti taM suhaM pddhmo|
bIyammi davaM choDhuM, gAlaMti davaM0 karaM dAuM  //  398 //  192/4. tatiyammi
karaM1 choDhuM, ulliMcati12 odaNAdi jaM tarati  /  dullabhadavammi3 carime,
tattiyamettaM vigicaMti  //  399  //  192/5. saMthare savvamujhaMti, caubhaMgo
asaMthare  /  asaDho sujjhate jesu5, mAyAvI 'tesu laggatI '16  //  400  //
192/6. koDIkaraNaM duvidhaM, uggamakoDI visodhikoDI y| uggamakoDI chakkaM,
visodhi koDI aNegavihA7  /  /  401 //  192/7. nava ceva'TThArasagaM, sattAvIsA
taheva caupaNNA  /  nautI do ceva sayA, 'u sattarI'18 hoMti koDINaM19  //  402
//  193. solasa uggamadose, gihiNo u samuTThite20 viyaannaahi|| uppAdaNAya dose,
'sAhU ura samuTThite jANa'22  //  403  //  1. Io (a)| 2. tahiM (s)| 3. sukkholla
(a, bii)| 4. sUtre ca puMstvanirdeza ArSatvAt (m)| 5. nivAo (lA, ka, sa), nivAyA
(a, bii)| 6. donna'tullA u (mu)| 7. sukkhe sukkhaM (a, bii)| 8. vigiMcaya (bii)|
9. galaMti (a, bI), gAleti (sa), jIbhA 1309 /  10. davvaM (a, ka, bii)| 11. kare
(a)| 12. ullicai (lA, b)| 13. dullabhadavvaM (mu, b)| 14. vigiMceI (a, bii)| 15.
tesu (lA, ba, s)| 16. jesu bajjhaI (ka, mu), gAthA meM anuSTup chaMda hai| 17.
bhave sesA (dazani 220), tu. jIbhA 1293  /  18. tu sattarA (jIbhA 1289) /  19.
dazani 221, 192/1-7-ye sAta gAthAeM vyAkhyA paraka evaM caturbhagiyoM se
saMbaMdhita hone ke kAraNa niyukti kI nahIM honI caahie| 192/6,7-ye donoM
gAthAeM kisI bhI hastaprati meM nahIM milatI haiN| avacUri tathA prakAzita TIkA
meM ye gAthAeM nigA ke kramAMka meM vyAkhyAta haiN| ye gAthAeM atiriktasI lagatI
haiN| inako mUla nigA ke kramAMka meM nahIM rakhA hai| 20. samucchie (lA, ba),
samutthie (s)| 21. sAhUya (a, bI), sAhUNa (k)| 22. Ayasamutthe ao vocchaM (lA,
ba, sa),jIbhA 1313  /

Page #234 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 62 194. The name is given to the substance, 194/1.  From envy, etc., son,
desire, etc., The arising of the feeling is to be known. There are three kinds
of substance, and sixteen kinds of feeling. || 404 || 194/2.  From the dust,
etc., the hair, etc., of all the aggregates, 194/3.  The feeling is pleasant,
the other, 198. 195.  The nurse, the messenger, the cause, the livelihood,
anger, deceit, 196.  The previous, the later, the agreement, the means of
attainment, the fault, 197.  The milk, the marrow, Each one of the twelve, and
also the one that is held, as the power of the fifteen, The two Anger, etc.,
with the nurse, etc., and knowledge, etc., The arising of As the element, etc.,
with the two, etc., 1998/1.  The milk food cries, the marrow later, the marrow
burns, 2.  The means of attainment (s). 3.  The dust, etc. (la, ba), the dust,
etc. (s). 4.  The greatest enemy, etc. (a, b). 5.  The aggregates, etc. (la,
ba), the aggregates, etc. (s). 6.  The direction, etc. (a, b).  1.  Envy (la,
ba), envy, etc. (Jibha 1315), envy, etc. (Mavri). 9.  The shadow (a, b). 10.
Jibha 1319, Prasa 566, Tu. Mula 445, Hair, horse, seed, etc. Or 7.  The two, the
means of attainment, the substance (Jibha 1316). 8.  Jibha 1317, 194/1-3- These
three verses are the explanation of the 194th verse. They mention the production
of both the conscious and unconscious from the substance, and the production of
feeling. From the point of view of the subject matter, the 194th verse is also
connected with the 195th. The adornment is also of two kinds, the doing, the
causing, they hold or not, thus fourteen, by that before, the milk, etc., the
desire for the done, eighteen, enough, Tu Or 6 Or Or We say, "the three
desires." There are ten of these in greed. || 408 || Knowledge, thought, the
sixteenth Or the dust, the connection, etc. The root action. || 409 || The
playing, the giving, etc. Even thirteen. || 410 || Conscious. || 405 ||
Unconscious. The arising. || 406 || Unpleasant. Pleasant. || 407 || The nurse,
etc. The five nurses. || 411 || The body, nineteen, to be eaten. I eat this. ||
412 || The explanation of the aggregate Pin 58, Panca 13/18. 11.  Jibha 1320,
Prasa 567, Tu. Mula 446, Pin 59, Panca 13/19. 12.  Ikkikka (b), Ekeka (s). 13.
Tu. Jibha 1322. 14.  Tammi (k). 15.  Vibhava (s, k, Nibha 4376), Vihavam (mu).
16.  Jibha 1321. 17.  Royai (a, mu). 18.  Kita'asadi (Nibha 4377), Krutasaya -
Vihitabhikshalabhananorathay (Mavri). 19.  Dehi (s, k, Nibha). 20.  V (la, ba,
mu, Nibha). 21.  Dahi (mu k).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 62 194. nAmaM ThavaNA davie, 194/1. AsUyamAdiehiM', suta- Asa- dumAdINaM, bhAve
uppAdaNA muNeyavvA  /  davvammi hoti tividhA, bhAvammi ya solasapadA u  //  404
//  194/2. kaNaga-rayayAdiyANaM, mIsA u sabhaMDANaM ", 194/3. bhAve pasattha
itarA, 198. 195. dhAI dUtI nimitteM, AjIva kodhe mANe mAyA, 196. puvviM pacchA
saMthava, uppAyaNAya dosA, 197. khIre ya majjaNe ekkekkA 12 vi ya dhArayati
dhIyate vA, jahavibhavaM 15 Asi dupA kohAdijutA dhAyAdiNaM ca nANAdi uppAdaNayA
jahe dhAtuvihiyA 'dupayAdi kayA 1998 / 1. khIrAhAro rovati 17, majjha pacchA vi0
majjha dAhisi", 2. uppAyaNA (sa)  /  3. rayatAviyANaM (lA, ba), rayatAtihANaM (
sa )  /  4. jahiTThaghAUvihiya ( a, bI)  /  5. sabhaMDayANaM (lA, ba),
sabhaMDiyANaM ( sa )  /  6. dikayAi ( a, bI)  /  1. AsUla (lA, ba),
AyAsuyamAdIhiM (jIbhA 1315 ), AsUrya aupayAcitakam (mvR)| 9. cchAe ( a, bI)  /
10. jIbhA 1319, prasA 566, tu. mUlA 445, vAlaciya- turaMga - bIyamAdIhiM  /  u
7. dupayA tuppAyaNA davve (jIbhA 1316 )  /  8. jIbhA 1317, 194 / 1-3- ye tInoM
gAthAeM 194 vIM gAthA kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiN| inameM dravya se sacitta aura acitta
utpAdanA tathA bhAva utpAdanA kA ullekha hai  /  viSaya kI dRSTi se bhI 194 vIM
gAthA 195 ke sAtha saMbaddha hai I maMDaNe ya duvidhA, karaNe kArAvaNe dhayaMti
vA tamiti 14 teNa purA, khIrAdI katAsAya 18 alaM va tu u 6 u u vaNImage
'tigicchA ya"  /  lobhe ya bhavaMti dasa ete  //  408  //  vijjA maMte solasame
ya cuNNa- joge ya  /  mUlakamme ya11  //  409  //  kIlAvaNaMkadhAI ya  /  ceva
13  //  410  //  saccittA  //  405  //  accittA  /  uppattI 7  //  406  //
apasatthA  /  pasatthA'  //  407  //  dhAI u  /  paMcadhAIo16  //  411  //  deha
19 NaM pejje  /  bhujjo va ehAmi  //  412  //  piMDaniryukti piM 58, paMcA 13/18
/  11. jIbhA 1320, prasA 567, tu. mUlA 446, piM 59, paMcA 13/19  /  12. ikkikkA
(bI), ekekA ( sa )  /  13. tu. jIbhA 1322  /  14. tammi ( ka )  /  15. vibhavA
(sa, ka, nibhA 4376), vihavaM (mu)  /  16. jIbhA 1321  /  17. royai ( a, mu)  /
18. kitA''sAdi (nibhA 4377), kRtAzAya - vihitabhikSAlAbhamanorathAya (mavR)  /
19. dehi (sa, ka, nibhA)  /  20. va (lA, ba, mu, nibhA)  /  21. dAhI (mu ka )  /

Page #235 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  198/2. I am a healthy, unblemished child. It is rare to find a
son like me, I give you everything. || 413 ||  198/3. A bad omen, a sick
person's desire for recovery. A deceitful and wicked person, "I am a good
person" he says. || 414 ||  198/4. This is a bad choice, a beggar's request for
alms. A painful explanation, and the good thing is to give alms today. || 415 ||
198/5. "I asked him about his age, his teeth, his body, and his gait." He went
there, he was capable, he said that he had seen the child. || 416 ||  198/6. I
do not consider this family to be good, it is not well-behaved. I wish to be
reborn in a good family, "I will be reborn as a child." || 417 ||  198/7. The
nun is weak, her face is pale, she is a guest. She is thin, "she is weak," "she
is a guest, she is pale." || 418 ||  198/8. Whatever is good in appearance, "he
is praised for it." He is praised greatly, "he is praised for his good
qualities." || 419 ||  1. *Pijjahi* (mu), *Pajjehi* (Nibha 4378). 2. *Cadukari*
(mu). 3. *Ya* (a, k, b, mu, Nibha). 4. *Niyavanno* (a, b), *Niya Anno* (Nibha
4379). 5. *Nam* (mavri). 6. *Sanka* (s). 7. *Adhiti* (b). 8. *Hiya* (la, b). 9.
*Me* (a, b, mu, s, Nibha 4380), *Mi* (k). 10. *Ajjo* (b, la, Nibha), *Nishith
Churni* in this context, the *Dhatri* and the *Muni* are made to speak verses.
First, the *Dhatri* says, "Whoever has not experienced suffering, whoever is not
capable of overcoming suffering, whoever is not suffering, whoever is not
suffering, I will not tell him about suffering." The *Muni* replies, "I have
experienced suffering, I am capable of overcoming suffering, I am suffering, I
am suffering, so I will tell him about suffering." 11. *Tanuyattanehi Pucchiy*
(la, b), *Vya-Ganda Tanuy* *Thullagattanehi To Pu* (a, b). 12. *Gato* (s, Nibha
4381). 13. *Va Iman* (la, b, s), *Iman* (k, Nibha 4382). 14. *Calai Balena Suem*
(a, b), *Sa Prati Me Gatha* *Ka Uttarardha Nahin Hai*. 15. *Chivido* (b, k, s).
16. *Pillliya* (a, k, b). 17. *Tunui* (la, b). 18. *Mandakkhira* (s, Nibha
4383). 19. *Kappar* (la, b), *Koppari* (s), *Kupparathaniaye* (mu). 20. *Hati
Tu* (la, b, s), *Hate Sa* *Teneva* (Nibha 4384). 21. *Tthamiyar* (k, mu). 22.
*Vanna* (a, b, la), *Duvanna Ya* (s), *Tu Duvanna* (k).  *Nicu Bha. 3 Pri. 405*

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 198/2. maimaM arogi dIhAuo ya hoti avimANito baalo| dullabhagaM
khu sutamuhaM, pijjehi' ahaM va NaM demi  /  /  413  //  198/3. ahigaraNa
bhadda-paMtA, kammudaya gilANae ya uddddaaho| caDugArI va avaNNo, 'niyago aNNaM
ca'" va NaM5 saMke  //  414  //  198/4. ayamavaro u vikappo, bhikkhAyari saDDi
addhitI' pucchaa| dukkhasahAya vibhAsA, hitaM ca dhAtittaNaM ajja  //  415  //
198/5. 'vaya-gaMDathullataNugattaNehi taM . pucchiuM'11 ayaannNto| tattha gata12
tassamakkhaM, bhaNAti taM pAsiuM bAlaM  //  416  //  198/6. ahuNuTThiyaM ca
aNavekkhitaM 'ca iNamaM'13 kulaM tu mannAmi  /  punnehi jahicchAe, 'taraI bAleNa
sUemo'14  //  417  //  19847. therI dubbalakhIrA, cimiDho5 pelliyamuho16
atithnniie| taNuI17 'u maMdakhIrA'18, 'kopparathaNiyaM ti19 sUimuho  //  418  //
19848. jA jeNa hoti vaNNeNa, ukkaDA 'garahate ya taM teNaM'20  /  garahati
samANa tivvaM, pasatthabhedaM21 'ca duvvaNNaM'22  //  419  //  1. pijjAhi (mu),
pajjehi (nibhA 4378) /  11. 'taNuyattaNeNa pucchiyaM (lA, ba), vaya-gaMDa taNuya
2. caDukArI (mu)| thUlagattaNehi to pu (a, bii)| 3. ya (a, ka, bI, mu, nibhaa)|
12. gato (sa, nibhA 4381) /  4. nIyAvaNNo (a, ba), nIyA aNNo (nibhA 4379) /  13.
va imaM (lA, ba, sa), imagaM (ka, nibhA 4382) /  5. Nam iti vAkyAlaMkAre (mvR)|
14. calai bAleNa sUema (a, bI), sa prati meM gAthA 6. saMkA (s)| kA uttarArdha
nahIM hai| 7. adhitI (b)| 15. civiDo (ba, ka, s)| 8. hiyA (lA, b)| 16. pilliya'
(a, ka, bii)| 9. me (a, bI, mu, sa, nibhA 4380), mi (k)| 17. tuNuI (lA, b)| 10.
ajjo (bI, lA, nibhA), nizItha cUrNi meM isa prasaMga 18. maMdakkhIrA (sa. nibhA
4383) /  meM dhAtrI aura muni ke mukha se padya kahalavAe gae 19. kappara (lA.
ba), koppari' (sa). haiN| sarvaprathama dhAtrI kahatI hai kupparathaNiyAe (mu)|
jo ya Na dukkhaM patto, jo ya na dukkhassa nigghsmttho| 20. 'hatI tu (lA, ba,
sa), 'hate sa jo ya na duhie duhio, na hu tassa kahijjau dukkhN| teNeva (nibhA
4384) /  muni isakA uttara dete hue kahatA hai- 21. "tthamiyaraM (ka, mu)|
ahayaM dukkhaM patto, ahayaM dukkhassa nigghsmttho| 22. "vaNNA (a, ba, lA),
duvaNNe ya (sa), ahayaM duhie duhio, to majjha kahijjau dukkhaM  //  tu duvvaNNe
(k)| nicU bhA. 3 pR. 405

Page #236 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 64. Pindaniyukti  198/9. The one who is **ovvattita** (shining), **chhobhga**
(beautiful) and **ubbhāmago** (radiant) is the one who is **tu**. He is the one
who is **hojja** (strong) in the middle, **viggho** (obstacle) and **visādi**
(sad) in other ways. || 420 ||  198/10. The one who is **emeva** (like this) is
also **sesigāsu** (having a body), **sutamaisu** (having a good mind) and
**karaṇa-kāravaṇa** (doing actions) with **sagihe** (patience). He is the one
who is **iddhisu** (having powers) and **dhāisu** (having wealth), and he is
also **ovvattiāṇo** (shining) and **gamo** (going). || 421 ||  198/11. The one
who is **lolati** (shaking) like **mahiy dhūliy** (earth dust), **guṇḍito**
(covered) by **pahaṇa** (stones) and **ahva** (having) **ṇam majje** (in the
middle). He is **jalabhīru** (afraid of water), **abalanayano** (having weak
eyes), **atiuppalaṇeṇa** (with excessive heat) and **rattachcho** (red). || 422
||  198/12. The one who is **abbhangiya** (broken), **sanbāhiya** (connected),
**ovvattita** (shining), **majjita** (immersed) and **ta** (that) **bāla**
(child). He is **uvaṇeti** (going), **ṇhavaṇadhāti** (having a body),
**maṇḍaṇadhāti** (having ornaments) and **suideha** (having a good body). || 423
||  198/13. The one who is **usukādiehi** (with arrows) **maṇḍehi** (with
ornaments) **tāva ṇam** (that much) **ahva ṇam** (having) **vibhūsemi**
(decorated). He is **hathicchaga** (having a hand) and **vā** (or) **pāe**
(feet), **kya galiccha** (wearing ornaments) and **se pāde** (on those feet). ||
424 ||  198/14. The one who is **ḍaḍḍarasara** (having a strong body),
**chunnamuho** (having a beautiful face), **mauyagirasu** (having a big
mountain) and **y** (and) **mammanullavo** (having a big heart). He is
**ullāvaṇamādihi** (with joy) **kareti** (doing) **kāreti** (making) **vā** (or)
**kiḍ** (playing). || 425 ||  198/15. The one who is **thullāe** (having a big
body), **vigadpādo** (having broken feet), **bhaggakḍi** (having broken bones),
**sukkḍi** (having dry bones) and **y** (and) **dukkha** (suffering). He is
**nimmansakakkhaḍakarehi** (with a body that is not strong), **bhīruo** (afraid)
and **hoti** (being) **gheppanto** (holding). || 426 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 64 piMDaniyukti 198/9.uvvaTTitA' padosaM, chobhaga' ubbhAmago' ya se jaM tu|
hojjA majjha vi viggho, visAdi itarI vi emeva  //  420  //  198/10. emeva'
sesigAsu vi, sutamAisu karaNa-kAravaNa' sgihe| 'iDDhIsu ya'8 'dhAIsu ya'",
taheva uvvaTTiyANadeg gamo 1  //  421  //  198/11. lolati mahIya dhUlIya,
guMDito pahANa12 ahava NaM mjje| jalabhIru abalanayaNo, atiuppalaNeNa13
rattaccho'8  //  422  //  dAraM  //  198/12. abbhaMgiya saMbAhiya5, uvvaTTita
majjitaM ca taM16 baalN| uvaNeti NhavaNadhAtI, maMDaNadhAtIya suidehaM  //  423
/  /  198/13. usukAdiehi8 maMDehi 'tAva NaM19 ahava NaM vibhuusemi| hatthiccagA
va pAe, 'kayA galiccA'21 va 'se pAde '22  //  424  /  /  198/14. DhaDDarasara
chunnamuho22, 'mauyagirAsU ya mammaNullAvo '24  /  ullAvaNamAdIhiM25, kareti
kAreti vA kiD  //  425  //  dAraM  //  198/15. thullAe~6 vigaDapAdo, bhaggakaDI
'sukkaDI ya'27 dukkhaM c| nimmaMsakakkhaDakarehi8, bhIruo29 hoti gheppaMto30  //
426  //  1. ovaTTiyA (nibhaa)| anye tilakamityAhuH, AdizabdAt kSurikAkArAdyA2.
chohaga (lA), chobbhaga (k)| bharaNaparigrahaH (m)| 3. ubbhAmio (k)| 19.
bhareNaM (ba), tAva deNaM (s)| 4. nibhA 4385 /  20. hatthevvagA (nibhA 4389),
hathiccagA hastayogyA5. emeva ya (a, bii)| nyAbharaNANi (m)| 6. atra SaSThya
rthe saptamI (mvR)| 21. kayameleccA (nibhA), kayA galiMcA (a, bI), 7. kAraNe
(lA, nibhA), kAraNaM (ka, mu)| galiccA galasatkAni AbharaNANi (mvR)| 8. iDDIsuM
(mu)| 22. pAe vA (mu)|| 9. dhAIsu yatti bhAvapradhAno'yaM nirdezaH paJcamyarthe
ca 23. puNNamuho (a, ba, nibhA 4390) /  saptamI (mvR)| 24. "girAe u
mammaNapalAvo (a, bI), "girAsummaya 10. uTThiyANa (laa)| palAvo (lA, ba), muiya
girAsu iya ma' (s)| 11. nibhA 4386 /  25. tullA (a, bI), NagAIhiM (mu)| 12.
pahANe (a, ba, lA, sa), hANi (mu)| 26. thullIe (mu)| 13. "laNe ya (mu, nibhA
4387) /  27. sukkaDAe (mu)| 14. attaccho (a, bii)| 28. nImaMsa (nibhA 4391) /
15. "hio (mu)| 29. bhIro u (a, bii)| 16. to (lA, ba, ka, mu)| 30. gheppaMtu (a,
bI), 198/1-15-ye 15 gAthAeM 17. majjadhAI (mu), NhANadhAtI (ka, nibhA 4388) /
vyAkhyAtmaka hone ke kAraNa bhASya kI honI caahie| 18. usuNAdi (a, bI), iSukaH
iSukAkAramAbharaNam isameM pAMca prakAra kI dhAtriyoM kA vistRta vivecana

Page #237 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **199.** The one who is to be given, the one who is given,
becomes the head. He takes the body of the Dharma, as if it were a finger-ring.
|| 427 ||  **200.** In the case of heaven and hell, there are two kinds of
messengers. One or the other speaks, speaking with the words of the past. || 428
||  **201.** There are two kinds of each, the covering of the head and the
covering of the body. The answer of the world is there, and the second is on
both sides. || 429 ||  **201/1.** The mendicants, etc., say, "It is not a small
thing," of patience, etc. She is the mother of that, he is the father, "He says
this." || 430 ||  **201/2.** The second is the one who is called, "It is not a
small thing," the second cause, he says. The daughter who is not ignorant, she
says, "Say this," of patience. || 431 ||  **201/3.** Both are covered,
"Patience! You will speak to patience." That is born, and so you will do that.
|| 432 ||  **202.** The two villages are different, the birth of patience is
there. The killing of the enemy, the destruction of patience, is a battle fought
by the relatives. || 433 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 199. kollaire' vatthavvo, datto AhiMDao2 bhave siiso|| uvaharati
dhAtipiMDaM, aMgulijalaNe ya sAdivvaM  //  427  /  /  200. saggAma-paraggAme,
'duvidhA dUtI'5 u hoti naatvvaa| 'sA vA'6 so vA bhaNatI, bhaNatI
pacchaNNavayaNehi  //  428  //  201. 'ekkekkA vi ya duvidhA', pAgaDa channA ya
channa duvidhA u|| loguttara tatthegA, bitiyA puNa ubhayapakkhe vi|| 429  //
201/1. bhikkhAdI vaccaMte, 'appAhaNi Neti'11 khaMtiyAdINaM12  /  sA te amugaM
mAtA, so va3 piyA 'te imaM bhaNati'14  //  430 //  201/2. dUittaM khu garahitaM,
appAhiu'5 bitiyapaccayA'6 bhnnti| avikovitA sutA te, jA Aha 'imaM bhaNasu'17
khaMti8  //  431  //  201/3. ubhae19 vi ya pacchannA, khaMta! kahijjAhideg
khaMtiyAi tum| taM taha saMjAtaM ti ya, taheva 'taM aha'21 karejjAsi22  //  432
//  202. gAmANa doNha veraM23, sejjAtaridhUya tattha khNtss| vadhapariNata
khaMta'bbhatthaNaM24 ca NAte kate25 juddhaM26  //  433  //  1. kulla (a, bI),
"layare (s)| gAthAeM gA. 201 kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiN| prakAzita 2. "Dio (a, bI),
"Dito (nibhaa)| TIkA meM ye nigA ke krama meM haiM lekina ye bhASya 3. ava (ka,
mu)| kI honI caahie| inako mUla nigA ke krama meM 4. kathA ke vistAra hetu
dekheM bhASyagAthA 31,32 tathA nahIM jor3A hai| pari. 3 kathA saM. 26, uni 107,
nibhA 4392, 15. appAheu (lA, ba), appAhio (nibhaa)| nizIthacUrNi meM isa gAthA
ke lie 'esA bhaddabAhukayA 16. bIya (a, bI), ccayaM (sa, nibhaa)| nijjuttigAhA'
kA ullekha milatA hai| 17. mamaM bhaNati (nibhA 4400) /  5. dUI duvihA (s)| 18.
khaMtI (k)| 6. sAnnA (s)| 19. ubhao (a, bii)| 7. paMtaM vayaNeNaM (a, bI), va
taM channa' (mu), taM 20. kaijjAhi (a, bI), kahiyAsu (lA, b)| channa (nibhA
4397), 'vayaNeNaM (ka, sa, nibhaa)| 21. aha taM (lA, ba, ka, mu)| 8. ekekA sA
duvihA (ka, sa), 22. 'jjAhi (ka, sa), nibhA meM yaha gAthA nahIM hai| duvihA ya
hoi dUtI (nibhA 4398) /  23. vero (s)| 9. ya (nibhaa)| 24. khaMtajjhatthaNaM
(mu)| 10.bIyA (a, ba, mu)| 25. vao (a, bI), kae (nibhA 4401) /  11. appAhiNi NeI
(a, ba), appAhaNa' (s)| 26. jujhaM (bI), jaTuM (sa), gAthA 202, 203 meM
12.khaMtigAdIhiM (nibhA 4399) /  AI kathA jIbhA meM pAMca gAthAoM (1335-39) 13.
u (ka), ca (nibhaa)| meM AI hai, kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, 14.
pAgaDaM bhaNati (jIbhA 1327), 201/1-3-ye tInoM kathA saM. 27 /

Page #238 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  66 ##  Pindaniyukti  203. "Who said that killing one's son-in-law is a sin?"
This is the question. "I will bear it with patience," is the answer. || 434 ||
204. There are six types of faults in the three periods of time, depending on
the cause. The present is the cause, the past and future are not the cause. ||
435 ||  205. Due to the cause of fear, the earth is always in the earth. As
mentioned before, the coming one is angry and strong. || 436 ||  206. There are
five types of karma: caste, family, group, profession, and livelihood. Envy and
jealousy are also karma, and "I am the only one" is also karma. || 437 ||  207.
Caste and family are the divisions, group is like the Mallis, profession is like
the farmers. The karma of the artisans, the karma of the non-artisans, and the
karma of the others. || 438 ||  207/1. The karma of the non-artisans, like the
karma of the priests, is like the son of the king. He lives in the house of the
teacher, he has the qualities of a teacher, and he is a sage. || 439 ||  1.
Jamaipuu (s). 9. Kahitta (la, b), Kahente (nibha 4406). 2. Tu (nibha 4402). 10.
"Gato (s). 3. Kahyam (a, b). 11. Vadavae (mu), Nishita Churni mentions "Ima
Bhaddabahukaya Gaha" for this gatha, where the story is indicated in one gatha.
Here, the story is described in two more gathas. For them, "Etie Ga. 202 and 203
- these two gathas" are mentioned. The story is described in the tongue. The
story is also indicated briefly by the Niyuktikar in the Dhaatri and Nimitta
doors. The Bhashyakar has given a detailed explanation of the story, but here,
the Niyuktikar has given the story in two gathas in the "Dootidvaar". 12. Kahei
(b, k), Kahejj (nibha 4411). 13. Kahei Appaanamaekkekke (jibha 1350). 5. Nemite
(nibha 4405). 14. Tunna ya (la, b), Tullai (a, b), a, b. In the a, b, and k,
there is a "l" in place of "n" in many places. 6. Vajjmane (a, b), "Manam (k).
7. Jibha 1341. After this gatha, the following gatha is found in the a and b.
This gatha seems to be interpolated because the previous gatha already mentions
"Nimitte Chavihe Bhave Dosa". This gatha is not explained in the Malayagiri tika
and Avchuri. 15. "Sippina" (s), "Jjagam (mu, nibha). "Jjanam (la, b, a, k). 16.
"Jj (mu, a, k, b), nibha 4412. 17. "Homay" (mu), "Bhomai" (a, b). 18. "Sottiss
(la, b), "Sutthi" (k). 19. "Puttu tti (a, k), "Putt ti (b). 20. "Usio (a, s).
21. Nibha 4413, Jibha 1353, 207/1-4 - these four gathas are the explanation of
207, so they should be part of the Bhashya. 8. Agampia (la, b, a, k).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 66 piMDaniyukti 203. jAmAtiputtapatimAraNaM' care keNa kahitaM ti jnnvaado|
jAmAtiputtapatimAraeNa khaMteNa 'me siTuM"  //  434  //  dAraM  //  204. niyamA
tikAlavisae, vi nimitte' chavvidhe bhave dosaa|| sajjaM tu vaTTamANe, Aubhae
tatthimaM NAtaM  //  435  //  AkaMpiyA nimitteNa, bhoiNI bhoie cirgtmmi|
puvvabhaNite kahate', AgatoM0 ruTTho va valavAe  //  436  /  /  206. jAtI-kula-
gaNa kamme, sippe AjIvaNA u pNcvidhaa| sUyAe~ asUyAe~ va, 'appANa kahe hi12 ekke
kko '13  //  437  //  207. jAtI-kule vibhAsA, gaNo u mallAdi kamma kisimaadii|
tuNNAdi4 sippa'NAvajjage15 ca kammetarA''vajje 16  //  438  //  207/1.
homAda'vitahakaraNe15, najjati jaha sottiyassa8 'putto tti'19  /  vasio0 vesa
gurukule, AyariyaguNe va sUeti21  //  439  //  1. jAmAIpu (s)| 9. kahittA (lA,
ba), kaheMte (nibhA 4406) /  2. tu (nibhA 4402) /  10. "gato (s)| 3. kahayaM (a,
bii)| 11. vaDavAe (mu), nizItha cUrNi meM isa gAthA ke lie 4. siTuM ti (lA, ba,
sa), niyuktikAra prAyaH kathA 'imA bhaddabAhukayA gAhA' kA ullekha hai,vahAM
isakI kA saMketa eka hI gAthA meM kara dete haiN| yahAM vyAkhyA meM do gAthAeM
aura haiM, unake lie 'etIe gA. 202 aura 203-ina do gAthAoM meM kathA kA imA do
vakkhANagAhAto' kA ullekha hai| jIbhA meM varNana hai| dhAtrI aura nimitta dvAra
meM bhI niyuktikAra isa gAthA meM AI kathA 6 gAthAoM meM ullikhita ne saMkSepa
meM kathA kA saMketa kiyA hai aura usakI hai| (dra. jIbhA 1342-47), kathA ke
vistAra hetu vistRta vyAkhyA bhASyakAra ne kI hai lekina yahAM dekheM
bhASyagAthA 33,34 tathA pari. 3,kathA saM. 28  /  'dUtIdvAra' meM niyuktikAra ne
hI do gAthAoM meM vistAra 12. kahei (bI, ka), kahejja (nibhA 4411) /  se kathA
kA saMketa kara diyA hai| 13. kahei appANamekkekke (jIbhA 1350) /  5. nemite
(nibhA 4405) /  14. tuNNA ya (lA, ba), tullAi (a, bI), a, bI 6. vajjamANe (a,
bI), 'mANaM (k)| prati meM aneka sthaloM para Na ke sthAna para la pATha hai| 7.
jIbhA 1341. isa gAthA ke bAda a aura bI prati 15. sippiNA" (sa), "jjagaM (mu,
nibhA). meM nimna gAthA milatI hai| yaha gAthA prakSipta sI 'jjaNaM (lA, ba, a,
k)| lagatI hai kyoMki isase parva gAthA meM 'nimitte 16. "jja (mu, a, ka, ba),
nibhA 4412  /  chavihe bhave dosA' kA ullekha kiyA jA cakA hai| 17. homAya'
(mu), bhomAI' (a, bii)| malayagiri TIkA evaM avacUri meM bhI yaha gAthA 18.
sottissa (lA, ba), sutti' (k)| vyAkhyAta nahIM hai 19. puttu tti (a, ka), putta
ti (bii)| lAbhAlAbhaM suhaM dukkhaM, jIvitaM maraNaM thaa| 20. usio (a, s)|
chavihe vi nimitte u, dosA hoMti ime suNa  //  21. nibhA 4413, jIbhA 1353,
207/1-4-ye cAroM 8. AgaMpiyA (lA, ba, a, k)| gAthAeM 207 kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiM
ataH ye bhASya kI honI caahie|

Page #239 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniryukti 207/2. Sammam-samme samidha - Mantahuti 207/3. Uggaadi-kule-su
208. Kiriya, anena unnahiga ca vivarita. - Thana - Jagara - Kale Vi Deul-darisan
bhasa, 207/4. Kattari 209. 210. 'E-meva gane Uvanaya 1. Sammam-samme (b). 2.
Mantahuti (s). 3. Janna (s), java (nibha 4414). 4. Vasai (la, b), jiba 1354.
208/1. Mayama-tivacchagam14 16 Pi va, vaneti aharam-adilo-bhenam. 'Samane-su
mahanes-u ya 15, kivina-atihi - sanabhattes-u 6 || 444 || Niggantha- sakka-
tavasa, geruya- ajiva panchaha samana. Tesim parivesana-aen 17, lo-bhenam
vanijja" ko appam?99 || 445 || 209/1. Bhumjan-ti citta-kammat-titta 20 va
karuniya avi kama-gad-dabhe-su vi21, na nassa-e 22 kim micchatt-thiri-karanam,
uggamado-sa cadugar-a dinna-dana, pacchathi 25 va 'Ya tes-u ma puno  Ya Payo-
yanava-ekkha' vathu bahu-vittha E-meva. Kamme-su ya sippe-su ya, sammam-samme-su
su-itara || 442 || Daram || Samane" mahana kivane, atihi sane ya hoti panchama-
ge. Vani jayana tti vanio, paya-ppananam ' vanimu tti 13 || 443 || 8. Yanattha
(jiba 1360), sutre ca atra vibhakti-lopa Arshatvat (mavr). 9. Taha ceva (jiba).
10. Nibha 4416. 11. Samana (la, b). 12. Kimane (k). 13. Vaneso tti (la, b),
vanei tti (mu), tu jiba Ghos-adi || 440 || 16 Mandala-ppaves-adi 6. Danda-madiya
|| 441 || Dana-ruino va. Puna jati-su || 446 || Gacche '24. 5. Uggai (a, s, bi).
6. E-meva-ne mand' (la, b), e-meva-ganam-am (a, 17. Pari-esa (la, b, jiba). bi),
gana mandana-ppa (k). 7. Ma-ini (la, b, s), ma-inanam (k), Ma-isu (a), madi va
(nibha 4415). Entu 26 || 447 || 1364, gathao-n ke kram me nibha me yah gatha
nahi hai. 14. Maima (a, bi). 15. Appanam samana-mahana (jiba 1365). 16. Nibha
4419.  18. Van-ei (jiba 1366), van-ejja (nibha). 67 19. Appanam (la, b), nibha
4420. 20. 'Kamm-am thiya (a, bi mu). 21. Ya (a, bi) 1 22. Nassa-i (a, bi, mu),
vi nasai (jiba 1368), nas-ae (nibha 4421). 23. Ja-isu (a), ga. 209, 209/1 tatha
210 gathao-n sa prati me nahi hai. 24. Va te puna karejja (jiba 1369). 25.
Puvvatthak (la, b), titham-am (a, bi). 26. Intu (la, mu, k, b), nibha 4422.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniryukti 207/2. sammamasammA samidhA - maMtAhuti 207/3. uggAdikulesu 208.
kiriyA, aNeNa UNAhigA ca vivarItA  /  -ThANa - jAgara - kAle vi deuladarisaNa
bhAsA, 207/4. kattari 209. 210. 'emeva gaNe uvaNaya 1. sammaM sammA (b)| 2.
maMtAhutI ( sa )  /  3. jaNNa (sa), jAva ( nibhA 4414 )  /  4. vAsAI (lA, ba),
jIbhA 1354 | 208/1. mayamAtivacchagaM14 16 pi va, vaNeti AhAramAdilobheNaM  /
'samaNesu mAhaNesu ya 15, kiviNA'tihi - sANabhattesu 6  //  444  //  niggaMtha-
sakka- tAvasa, geruya- AjIva paMcahA samaNA  /  tesiM parivesaNAe~ 17, lobheNa
vaNijja" ko appaM ?99  //  445  //  209 / 1. bhuMjaMti cittakammaTTitA 20 va
kAruNiya avi kAmagaddabhesu vi21, na nassae 22 kiM micchattathirIkaraNaM,
uggamadosA caDugAra' diNNadANA, paccatthi 25 vA 'ya tesu mA puNo ya
payoyaNAvekkha' vatthu bahuvittha emeva  /  kammesu ya sippesu ya,
sammamasammesu sUitarA  //  442  //  dAraM  //  samaNe" mAhaNa kivaNe, atihI
sANe ya hoti paMcamage  /  vaNi jAyaNa tti vaNio, pAya'ppANaM ' vaNImu tti 13
//  443  //  8. yaNaTThA (jIbhA 1360), sUtre cAtra vibhaktilopa ArSatvAt (mavR)
/  9. taha ceva (jIbhA )  /  10. nibhA 4416  /  11. samaNA (lA, ba )  /  12.
kimaNe ( ka )  /  13. vaNeso tti (lA, ba), vaNei tti (mu), tu jIbhA ghosAdI  //
440  //  16 maMDalappavesAdI 6  /  daMDamAdIyA  //  441  //  dANaruiNo vA  /
puNa jatIsu  //  446  //  gacche '24  /  5. uggAI ( a, sa, bI)  /  6. evameva Ne
maMDa' (lA, ba), evamevagaNamaM (a, 17. pariesa (lA, ba, jIbhA )  /  bI), gaNa
maMDaNappa ( ka )  /  7. mAINi (lA, ba, sa), mAINaM (ka), mAIsu (a), mAdI vA (
nibhA 4415 )  /  eMtu 26  //  447  //  1364, gAthAoM ke krama meM nibhA meM yaha
gAthA nahIM hai| 14. maimA ( a, bI)  /  15. appANa samaNa-mAhaNa (jIbhA 1365)  /
16. nibhA 4419  /  18. vaNei ( jIbhA 1366 ), vaNejja ( nibhA)  /  67 19. appANaM
(lA, ba), nibhA 4420  /  20. 'kammaM ThiyA ( a, bI mu)  /  21. ya ( a, bI) 1 22.
nassaI ( a, bI, mu), vi NAsai (jIbhA 1368 ), NAsae (nibhA 4421 )  /  23. jaisu
(a), gA. 209, 209 / 1 tathA 210 gAthAeM sa prati meM nahIM haiM  /  24. va te
puNa karejjA ( jIbhA 1369 )  /  25. puvvatthaka (lA, ba), tithamaM ( a, bI)  /
26. iMtu (lA, mu, ka, ba), nibhA 4422  /

Page #240 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  210/1. Giving to the worthy, to the earth-deities, is a gift of
great fruit. What to speak of the Brahma-bandhus, what to speak of those who are
devoted to the sixfold conduct? || 448 ||  210/2. What to speak of the weak, the
wretched, the unattached, the fearful, the trembling? In the world of the
worthy, the tooth of the giver takes away the gift. || 449 ||  210/3. The world
gives with its hand, to the familiar, to the worthy. But he who gives with a
half-hearted mind, his gift is truly not worthy. || 450 ||  210/4. What to speak
of the easily available, the food of the cows and the like, the grass and the
like? The easily available food of the hungry, the thirsty, is not easily
available. || 451 ||  210/5. These are the beings of Kailasa, who have come to
this earth in disguise. They wander about in the form of yakshas, worthy and
unworthy, beneficial and harmful. || 452 ||  211. This is the meaning, seen in
the world, in the matter of giving and receiving. These are the faults of the
worthy, the virtuous, the wise, as mentioned one by one. || 453 ||  212. Just as
crows and the like, are known by their grasping nature. So also, he who is seen
to be greedy in the world, is known to be a beggar, whether he asks or not. ||
454 ||  213. A gift is not fruitless, it is seen to be beneficial in the case of
those who have received it. These faults, as mentioned, are seen in the case of
those who have received it, what to speak of those who have not received it? ||
455 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 210/1. logANuggahakArisu, bhUmIdevesu bahuphalaM daannN| avi nAma
baMbhabaMdhusu, kiM puNa chakkammaniratesu  //  448  //  210/2. kivaNesure
dummaNesu ya, abaMdhavA''taMkajuMgiyaMgesu'  /  pUyAhajje loge, dANapaDAgaM
harati deMto  //  449  /  /  210/3. pAeNa deti logo, uvagArI- 'paricitesu
jusie'vaa| jo puNa addhAkhinnaM, atihiM pUeti taM dANaM  //  450  //  210/4. avi
nAma hojjA sulabhora, goNAdINaM taNAdi12 aahaaro| chicchi kkArahatANaM13, na yA4
sulabho hoti sANANaM5  //  451 //  210/5. kelAsabhavaNA'6 ete, AgatA gujjhagA
mhiN|| caraMti jakkharUveNaM, pUyA'pUya hitA'hitA  //  452  //  211. eteNa
majjha bhAvo, diTTho8 loge pnnaamhjjmmi| ekkekke puvvuttA, bhaddagapaMtAiNo20
dosA  //  453  /  /  212. emeva kAgamAdI, sANaggahaNeNa sUitA hoti| jo vAra
jammi pasatto, vaNeti tahiM 22 puTTha'puTTho vA23  //  454  //  213. dANaM na
hoti aphalaM, pattamapattesu saNNijujjaMtaM5  /  'iya vi bhaNite 26 vi dosA,
pasaMsato27 kiM puNa apatte?28  //  455  //  1. 'devasu (lA, ba) bhUmi (nibhaa)|
15. suNagANaM (nibhA, ka, mu), suNahANaM (a, bI), 2. nibhA 4423, jIbhA 1371,
vyAkhyAtmaka hone ke suNayANaM (jIbhA 1377) /  kAraNa 210/1-5 taka kI pAMca
gAthAeM bhASya kI 16. kayalAsa' (a), kailAsa' (bI, ka), honI caahie| _ 'bhavaNe
(sa, nibhA 4427) /  3. kiviNesu (a, ka, ba), kimaNesu (lA, s)| 17. pUyApUyA (a,
bI, sa, mu), jIbhA 1378, isa 4. dubbalesu (a, bI, nibhA, jIbhA 1373) /  gAthA
meM anuSTup chaMda hai| 5. 'yaMge tu (a, bI), 'juMgiyattesu (nibhA 4424) /  18.
viddho (lA, ba, jIbhA, nibhA 4428) /  pUyA havijja (a, bI), pUyAhejje (nibhaa)|
19. "mahijja (k)| 7. deMti (lA, ba), deMtI (s)| 20. paMtAiyA (jIbhA 1382) /  _
*gArisu (ka, mu)| 21. va (lA, b)| 9. parijue va vusie (lA, ba), "ciesujjhusie
(mu), 22. taM (a, bI), nibhA 4429 /  /  parijitesu vusie (nibhA 4425), 'cie va
23. u (nibhaa)| jhasie (jIbhA 1375) /  24. "patte ya (a, bI, jIbhA 1383), 10.
hoti (sa, nibhA 4426) /  _ patte va (lA, ka, b)| 11. sulaho (s)| 25. "ga~jaMtaM
(ka), "ujjaMtaM (jiibhaa)| 12. taNAI (bI), taNAI (s)| 26. Iya vibhaNie (lA, ka,
b)| 13. acchikkA (lA, ba), chicchikkA' (mu)| 27. pasaMsimo (jiibhaa)| 14. hu
(ka, mu)| 28. apattaM (nibhA 4430) /

Page #241 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pindaniyukti  214. He says, "I am not a physician, nor do I speak of my own
actions."  Or even by knowledge, the threefold treatment should be understood.
[456] End.  214/1. The sick person, who has gone for alms, asks, "Am I a
physician?"  Atthavatthiya. The done, the not-understood, "This is the
understanding." [457]  214/2. Such a pain, may it be cured by the medicine
without delay. As soon as it arises, we avoid it with the eighth and others.
[458]  214/3. Purification, pacification, and avoidance of the cause, wherever
There is disturbance of the elements, it performs the action. [459]  215. For
the uncontrolled and the unfit, the binding, the killing of the body, the iron
ball. The carrying away of the weak, the excessive rise, the seizure and the
fall. [460]  216. 'Handcraft-mountain-flower' Rajagaha and likewise Campa.
Kaddha, filled with ghee, the desired, obtained likewise the lion's mane. [461]
217. The power of knowledge and austerity, the beloved in the royal family. The
innate strength, 'He gives the mass of anger.' [462]  218. Arising from others,
if he is deprived, he gets angry. In the fruit of anger, 'if it is firm', what
is obtained, the mass of anger. [463]

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 214. bhaNati ya nAhaM vejjo, ahavAvi kaheti' appaNo kiriyN| adhavA
vi vijjayAe, tividha tigicchA muNeyavvA  //  456  //  dAraM  //  214/1.
'bhikkhAdi gate'3 rogI, kiM vejjo haM ti pucchito bhnnti|| atthAvattIya . katA,
abuhANaM 'bohaNA evaM"  //  457  //  214/2. erisagaM vA dukkhaM, bhesajjeNa
amugeNa pauNaM me|| sahasuppanna va ruyaM, vAremo aTThamAdIhiM0  //  458  //
214/3. saMsodhaNa-saMsamaNaM, nidANaparivajjaNaM ca jaM jatthA  /  AgaMtu
dhAtukhobhe, va12 Amae kuNati kiriyaM3 tu  //  459  //  215. assaMjamajogANaM,
pasaMdhaNaM15 kAyaghAta aygolo| dubbalavagghAharaNaM, accudae giNhaNuDDAho  //
460  //  216. 'hatthakappa-giriphulliya'17 rAyagihaM khalu taheva caMpA y| kaDa8
ghatapuNNe iTTaga, laDDaga taha sIhakesarae19  //  461  //  217. vijjA-
tavappabhAvaM, rAyakule vAvi vallabhattaM se| nAuM orassabalaM, 'dei bhayA9
kohapiMDo22 so'23  //  462  /  /  218. annesi dijjamANe, jAyaMto vA aladdhio
kujjhe24  /  kohaphalammi25 'vi diDhe '26, jaM labbhati27 kohapiMDo28 u|| 463
//  1. karei (lA, b)| 15. dhaNA (a, bI), dhaNe (sa), 2. vijjae (a, bI), vejjiyAe
(ba, nibhA 4433) /  pasaMjaNaM (jIbhA 1392) /  3. bhikkhAtito (nibhaa)| 16.
nibhA 4437, kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3. 4. veyA (lA, b)|  /  kathA
saM. 29 /  5. bohaNaM eyaM (a, bI), nibhA 4434 /  17. hatthagirikappaphulliya
(a, bii)| 6. me (lA, ba, sa), ciya (ka, mu)| 18. kaya (a, bii)| 7. ya aNueNa (a,
bii)| 19. nibhA meM gAthAoM ke krama meM yaha gAthA nahIM hai| 8. sahassu (lA,
ba), sahasuppattiyaM (nibhA 4435) /  tu jIbhA 1394 /  /  9. sayaM (nibhaa)| 20.
so (a, b)| 10. "mAIyaM (lA, ba), jIbhA 1388 /  21. jaM (ba, lA, s)| 11. tattha
(lA, ba, ka, mu, s)| 22. kova (nibhA 4440) /  12. ya (mu), u (k)| 23. jo labbhai
kovapiMDo u (sa, lA, mu), 13. kiriyA (a, bii)| diti bhayA koha (k)| 14. nibhA
4436, jIbhA 1390, 214/1-3-ye tInoM 24. kuppe (ka, mu)| gAthAeM gA. 214 kI
vyAkhyA rUpa haiM ataH spaSTa 25. kova (a, ka, bI, nibhA 4441) /  rUpa se bhASya
kI honI caahie| niyuktikAra isa 26. adiDhe (ka, lA, b)| prakAra kI punarukti
nahIM karate haiN| 27. lahai (ka) 28. kova (a, bii)|

Page #242 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti 218/1. The food obtained by begging, they say, is indeed to be
consumed. Therabhogan Tathie, Aikkhan Khamana Danam || 464 || Daram || 219.
Exalted by others, or praised for his attainment, he is elated. Insulted by
others, he is one who is attached to the body. || 465 || 219/1. In the midst of
the assembly, what joy can one who is attached to the body find? He is called a
"body-attached" one, a small one, he says, "I am attached." || 466 || 219/2.
Even if he is aware, he does not give up his attachment to the body. He desires
to be praised, he says, "I am attached." || 467 || 219/3. The enlightened one,
the perfected one, says to the householder, "If you get it, give it to me, do
not make me suffer." || 468 || 219/4. Asking whose house, the assembly asks,
"Which one is that?" What will it do to us, he says, "It does not burn you." ||
469 || 219/5. "It burns," he said, if you are not a man of six months. Another
one says, "It is for you," I will explain it to the assembly. || 470 || 1.
Karaduyasattu (a, b). 18. Agari (mu). 2. Daiththa (a, b). 19. Je Labhasi (a, b),
'Lahasi (mu, k). Bhanati (Nibha 4442). 20. Ta To (Nibha 4448). Aikkhan (a, b).
21. Mi (la, k, b). Khavana (a, b). 22. Muttam (la, k, b). 6. Dr. Tippan 220/1,
See the expansion of the story in Katha Sam. 3, Katha San. 30. 23. Puchchhiyanam
(s). Pari. 24. Kataro Amugo (Nibha 4449), Amuhi Kataro (s). 7. 'Sai (a, b). 25.
U Puchcha (a, b), Puchchitta (mu, la, b), Samutta' (mu, k, b). Puchchitta (s).
9. So (mu, k, Nibha 4445), Tu. Pimpra 68. 26. Amh (Nibha), Amhe (a, k, b, s).
10. N (a, b, s). 27. Kimino (a, b). 11. Pagev (a, mu). 28. N Dahit (s, k,
Nibha). 12. Ne Aane (la, b, s), Aaneme (k, mu), 29. Tujjh (s, mu), Tumhe (k),
Tujjhan (Nibha). Nibha 4446, 219/1-15-Gathaen should be from the Bhashya. Dr.
Tippan 220/1. 30. Dahami (a, k, b), Dahitti (mu). 31. Bhanie (la, b, s, mu). 13.
Tai (a, b), Taihin (k, mu). 32. Chanhhiman (a, k, b.), Chanhhemesi (m). 14. Me
(s). 33. Tehin (a, b, la, b, s). 15. To (b). 34. Panamemi (a, b), Panayami (mu),
Jayami (Nibha 4450). 16. Aanehan Ti (a, b), Aanehin Ti (la, b, s). 17. Nibha
44471

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 218/1. karaDuyabhattamaladdhaM, annahi dAhitthara eva vccNto|
therAbhogaNa tatie, AikkhaNa khAmaNA dANaM  //  464  //  dAraM  //  219.
ucchAhito pareNa va, laddhipasaMsAhi" vA smuttuio| avamANito pareNa va, jo esati
mANapiMDo u  //  465  //  219/1. iTTagachaNammi paripiMDitANa ullAva ko Nu' hu
peti|| ANejja iTTagAo, khuDDo paccAha 'haM ANe'12  //  466  //  219/2. jai vi ya
tA pajjattA, agulaghatAhiM na tAhi13 Ne14 kjj|| jArisiyAo icchaha, tA5 'ANemi
tti'16 nikkhaMto0  //  467  //  219/3. obhAsiya paDisiddho, bhaNati agArI18
avassimA majhaM  /  'jai labbhasi'19 'to taM'20 me, nAsAe kuNasu moyaM22 ti||
468  //  219/4. kassa ghara pucchiUNaM22, parisAe 'amuga katara'24 pucchNto25|
kiM teNa'mhe26 jAyasu, so kiviNo27 'dAhiti na'28 tubbhaM29  //  469  //  219/5.
'dAhaM ti'30 teNa bhaNitaM", jai na bhavasi chaNhimesi2 purisaannN| aNNataro to
'te haM'33, parisAmajjhammi paNaemi  //  470  /  /  1. karaduyasattu (a, bii)|
18. agAri (mu)| 2. dAittha (a, bii)| 19. je labbhasi (a, bI), 'lahasi (mu, k)|
bhaNati (nibhA 4442) /  20. tA to (nibhA 4448) /  AyakkhaNa (a, bii)| 21. mi
(lA, ka, b)| khAvaNA (a, bii)| 22. muttaM (lA, ka, b)| 6. dra. TippaNa 220/1,
kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM 23. pucchiyANaM (s)| pari. 3, kathA saM. 30 /  /
24. kataro amugo (nibhA 4449), amui kataro (s)| 7. 'sAi (a, bii)| 25. u pucchA
(a, bI), pucchittu (mu, lA, ba), samutta' (mu, ka, b)| pucchittA (s)| 9. so (mu,
ka, nibhA 4445), tu. piMpra 68 /  26. amha (nibhA), amhe (a, ka, bI, s)| 10. Na
(a, bI, s)| 27. kimiNo (a, bii)| 11. pageva (a, mu)|| 28. Na dAhitI (sa, ka,
nibhaa)| 12. Ne ANe (lA, ba, sa), ANemi (ka, mu), 29. tujjha (sa, mu), tumhe
(ka), tujjhaM (nibhaa)| nibhA 4446, 219/1-15-gAthAeM bhASya kI honI 30. dAhAmi
(a, ka, bI), dAhitti (mu)| caahie| dra. TippaNa 220/1 /  31. bhaNie (lA, ba, sa,
mu)| 13. tAi (a, bI), tAhiM (ka, mu)| 32. chaNhimANa (a, ka, bI.), chaNhamesi
(m)| 14. me (s)| 33. tehiM (a, ba, lA, bI, s)| 15. to (b)| 34. paNamemi (a, bI),
paNayAmi (mu), 16. ANehaM ti (a, bI), ANehiM ti (lA, ba, s)| jAyAmi ( nibhA
4450) /  17. nibhA 44471

Page #243 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinḍaniyukti 71 219/6. Selanguli' baguḍḍāve, kinkare tattha hāyaye'.
Giddhāvarinkhi 'haḍḍaṇṇaye ya'5 'purisā'dhamā chā tu'5. || 471 || 219/7. Jāyasu
na eriso haṁ, iṭṭaga' mama dehi puvvamaigantuṁ. Mālā uttāri gulaṁ11, bhōemi 'die
tti āruḍhā'12. || 472 || 219/8. Siti-avaṇṇa'3 paḍilābhaṇa, dissitari bola
mangulī5 nāsaṁ. Doṇṇhegatarapaḍōse, ātavivattī'6 ya uḍḍāho. || 473 || 219/9.
Rāyagihe dhammaruī18, 'asāḍabhūti tti'19 khuḍḍuō tassa. Rāyanḍagehapavisana,
sambhōiya mōdage lambhō. || 474 || 219/10. Āyariya-uvajjhāye, sanghāḍaga-kāṇa-
khujja taddōsī. Naḍapāsanapajjattaṁ, nikāyaṇa diṇe diṇe dāṇaṁ21. || 475 ||
219/11. Dhūyadugam22 sandeśō, dāṇasiṇehakaraṇaṁ rahe gahaṇaṁ23. Lingam muyati
gurusitṭha, vīvāhe24 'uttamā pagai'25. || 476 || 1. Selanguli (la, ba, sa),
Seyanguli (ka, mu). 20. Lābhō (a, b), 219/9 Gāthā meṁ māyāpiṇḍa se 2. Vagguḍḍāve
(nibha 4451). sambandhit kathā kā prārambh hotā hai. Yah shōdh kā tittha
pāhayaye ceva (nibha, la, ba), viṣaya hai ki jab niyuktikāra ne krōdhapiṇḍa ke
lie ṇhāyaye tahā (mu), “hāvaye (ka). dō tatha māna aur lōbha piṇḍa kō spasṭa
karane ke gaddhā' (a, b, nibha), varinkhiyā (la, ba). lie ek-ek gāthā kā ullekh
kiyā hai fir 5. Haḍḍaṇṇaye u (a, b). māyā kō spasṭa karane ke lie unhōne gāthā
kyōṁ 6. “sā mahatthā u (a, b), in chhōṁ kathā ke nahīṁ likhī? Is sandarbha meṁ
nimna vikalpa prastut vistāra hetu dekhen pari. 3, kathā saṁ. 31-36. kiye jā
sakte hain 7. Jāisu (a, la). • lekhan meṁ lipikārōṁ dvārā vah gāthā chhūṭ gaī
hō. . Iṭṭāga (la, ba), Iṭṭaga (mu, nibha, ka). • athavā niyuktikāra kō māyāpiṇḍa
spasṭa karane 9. Ehi (a, b). kī apekshā nahīṁ lagī. 10. "mitigantuṁ (sa). nibha
meṁ keval krōdha aur māna ke svarūpa evaṁ 11. Gulaṁ tu (la). unase sambandhit
kathāōṁ vāli gāthāeṁ hain. Māyā aur 12. Die tai durūḍhā (nibha 4452), 'iti rūḍhā
(sa). lōbha se sambandhit na gāthā hai aur na hī cūrṇi meṁ 13. 'ṇay (la, ba,
sa). vyākhyā hai. Jītakalpa bhāṣya meṁ krōdhapiṇḍ ādi se 14. Diss' (a, b).
sambandhit kathāōṁ kā vistāra hai lekin inakā svarūpa 15. Angulī (nibha). prakaṭ
karane vāli gāthāeṁ nahīṁ hain. 16. "viyattī (la, ba). 21. tu. jībhā 1399. 17.
Ubhae ya (nibha 4453), kathā ke vistāra hetu 22. 'due (mu). dekhen pari. 3,
kathā saṁ. 37. 23. karaṇaṁ (a, b). 18. Dhammaruī (jībhā 1398). 24. vīvāhe (mu).
19. Bhūī ya (ka, mu), 'bhūti tu (jībhā). 25. Uttamāppagihi (la, ba, sa).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 71 219/6. seDaMguli' baguDDAve, kiMkare tattha haaye'|
giddhAvariMkhi 'haddaNNae ya"5 'purisA'dhamA chA tu5|| 471  //  219/7. jAyasu na
eriso haM, iTTaga' mama dehi puvvamaigaMtuM  /  mAlA uttAri gulaM11, bhoemi 'die
tti ArUDhA'12  //  472  //  219/8. siti-avaNaNa'3 paDilAbhaNa, dissitarI bola
maMgulI5 naasN| doNhegatarapadose, AtavivattI'6 ya uDDAho  //  473  /  219/9.
rAyagihe dhammaruI18, 'asADabhUti tti'19 khuDDuo tss| rAyanaDagehapavisaNa,
saMbhoiya modage laMbho0  //  474  //  219/10. Ayariya-uvajjhAe, saMghADaga-
kANa-khujja tddosii| naDapAsaNapajjattaM, nikAyaNa diNe diNe dANaM21  //  475  /
/  219/11. dhUyadugaM22 saMdeso, dANasiNehakaraNaM rahe gahaNaM23  /  liMgaM
muyati gurusiTTha, vIvAhe 24 'uttamA pagaI '25  //  476  //  1. selaMguli (lA,
ba, sa), seyaMguli (ka, mu)| 20. lAbho (a, bI), 219/9 gAthA meM mAyApiMDa se 2.
vagguDAve (nibhA 4451) /  sambandhita kathA kA prAraMbha hotA hai| yaha zodha kA
tittha pahAyae ceva (nibhA, lA, ba), viSaya hai ki jaba niyuktikAra ne
krodhapiMDa ke lie NhAyae tahA (mu), "hAvae (k)| do tathA mAna aura lobha piNDa
ko spaSTa karane ke gaddhA' (a, bI, nibhA), variMkhiyA (lA, b)| lie eka-eka
gAthA kA ullekha kiyA hai phira 5. haddaNae u (a, bii)| mAyA ko spaSTa karane ke
lie unhoMne gAthA kyoM 6. "sA mahatthA u (a, bI), ina chahoM kathA ke nahIM
likhI? isa saMdarbha meM nimna vikalpa prastuta vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3,
kathA saM. 31-36  /  kie jA sakate haiM7. jAisu (a, laa)| * lekhana meM
lipikAroM dvArA vaha gAthA chUTa gaI ho| . iTTAgA (lA, ba), iTTagA (mu, nibhA,
k)| * athavA niyuktikAra ko mAyApiMDa spaSTa karane 9. ehi (a, bii)| kI apekSA
nahIM lgii| 10. "mitigaMtuM (s)| nibhA meM kevala krodha aura mAna ke svarUpa
evaM 11. gulaM tu (laa)| unase saMbaMdhita kathAoM vAlI gAthAeM haiN| mAyA aura
12. die tai durUDhA (nibhA 4452), 'iti rUDhA (s)| lobha se saMbaMdhita na gAthA
hai aura na hI cUrNi meM 13. 'Naya (lA, ba, s)| vyAkhyA hai| jItakalpa bhASya
meM krodhapiMDa Adi se 14. dissa' (a, bii)| saMbaMdhita kathAoM kA vistAra hai
lekina inakA svarUpa 15. aMgulI (nibhaa)| prakaTa karane vAlI gAthAeM nahIM
haiN| 16. "viyattI (lA, b)| 21. tu. jIbhA 1399 /  17. ubhae ya (nibhA 4453),
kathA ke vistAra hetu 22. 'due (mu)| dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 37 /  23.
karaNaM (a, bii)| 18. dhammaruyI (jIbhA 1398) /  24. vivAhe (mu)| 19. bhUI ya
(ka, mu), 'bhUtI tu (jiibhaa)| 25. uttamappagihI (lA, ba, s)|

Page #244 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
72 Pindaniyukti 219/12. In the house, the mind is not steady. ‘Ta u’ in
separation, the mind is distracted, in the upper house, two are passed. || 477
|| 219/13. By the tiger, the mind is controlled, the mind is detached, the mind
is enlightened. By the indication, ask, ‘The livelihood is the protector.’ ||
478 || 219/14. ‘The desire is the burden’, - in the house of the senses, the
omniscient one. The act of taking, the act of going, the obstacle is not
‘controlled’. || 479 || 219/15. Along with that, the five ‘human qualities’ are
burning in the mind. The gone, the forgiving, the guest, the elders are seen,
‘the second one’. || 480 || Door || 220. The obtained is not taken, the food
‘this one’ is obtained today. The good taste, the cow, takes the half, the
refined one. || 481 || 220/1. I will take the camphor in a moment, the sweet
food, the lion’s saffron. The prohibition, the gain of dharma, the lion’s
saffron. || 482 || 220/2. The good conduct, the saffron, the food, ask the
previous one. The use, ‘the good advice’, the ‘good’ inquiry, the knowledge. ||
483 || Door || 1. “House (a, b, k, mu). 2. “Hill (la, b), Nimmahalam (k). 3.
Nadugam (a, b). 4. Ta y (a, b, mu), Tav (Jibha 1405). 5. Ta virahammi y matta
(k). 6. Gehe (la, b, s). 7. Niyanta (s), Niyattee (k). 8. Parjivaanam riddhival
tti (a, b). 9. Ikhagha bharhavanso (k). 10. ‘Khavane (b), ‘Khavan (la), Khevan
(s). 11. Gahanam (mu, k). 12. Niyatta tti (k), tu. Jibha 1409. 13. “Sayatti (a,
b, mu), ‘Sai tti (k). 14. Dattha (a, b). 15. Biya tti (a, b), Biyam tu (mu),
Bitiya vva (s), Dr tippan 220/1, Katha ke Vistara hetu deken pari. 3, Katha san.
38. 16. Ginhhae (s). 17. Gatti (a). 18. Gecchaami (k, mu, Jibha 1413). 19. x (a,
b). 20. Khiddam (a, b). 21. Sanammi (la). 22. Vi (mu). 23. Kaun y (a, b). 24.
220/1,2-ye dono gathaen lobhapind se sambandhit Katha ka sanketa karne wali
hain. Niyuktikar gatha 216 mein is katha ka sanketa kar chuke hain atah katha ka
vistara karne wali ye dono gathaen bhashya ki honi chahiye. Isi prakar krodh,
man aur mayapind se sambandhit kathaon ki gathaen bhi ga. 216 mein sandishta hai
atah katha ka vistara karne wali ye gathaen bhashya ki honi chahiye. 218/1, 219/
1-15 gathaen niga ke mul kramank mein nahin jodi gai hain. 25. Chant choyan (b),
Chand joyan (a, Jibha). 26. Sahuu tti (b).   "Chane (mu, Jibha 1417). 28. Katha
ke vistara hetu deken pari. 3,katha san. 39.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 72 piMDaniyukti 219/12. rAyagihe' ya kadAI, nimmahilaM2 nADagaM nddaagcchii|
'tA u' virahammi mattA'5, uvarigihe do vi pAsuttA  //  477  //  219/13.
vAghAteNa niyatto', dissa vicelA virAga sNbodhii| iMgitanAte pucchA, 'pajIvaNaM
raTThapAlaM ti  //  478  /  /  219/14. 'ikkhAguvaMsa bharaho'9, - AdaMsaghare ya
kevlaaloo| hArAdikhivaNadeg gamaNaM19, uvasagga na so 'niyatto tti'12  //  479
//  219/15. teNa samaM pavvaitA, paMca 'narasatA u'3 nADage ddhnnN| gelaNNa-
khamaga- pAhuNa, therA diTThA ya 'bitiyaM tu'15  //  480  //  dAraM  //  220.
labbhaMtaM pi na giNhati16, annaM 'amugaM ti'17 ajja labbhAmo8  /  bhaddarasaM
ti va9 kAuM, giNhati khaddhaM20 sinniddhaadii|| 481  //  220/1. caMpA chaNammi29
ghecchAmi, modage te ya22 sIhakesarae  /  paDisedha dhammalAbha, kAUNaM23
sIhakesarae2  //  482  //  220/2. saDDaDvaratta kesarabhAyaNabharaNaM ca puccha
purimdddde| uvaoga 'saMta codaNa'25, 'sAhu tti'26 vigiMcaNA27 nANaM28  //  483
//  dAraM  //  1. "ghare (a, bI, ka, mu)| 2. "hilayaM (lA, ba), nimmahalaM (k)|
3. nADugaM (a, bii)| 4. tA ya (a, bI, mu), tAva (jIbhA 1405) /  5. tA virahammi
ya mattA (k)| 6. gehe (lA, ba, s)| 7. niyaMto (sa), niyattI (k)| 8. parajIvANaM
riddhivAla tti (a, bii)| 9. ikkhAga bharahavaMso (k)| 10. 'khavaNe (ba),
'khavaNa (lA), khevaNa (s)| 11. gahaNaM (mu, k)| 12. niyatta tti (ka), tu. jIbhA
1409 /  13. "sayatti (a, bI, mu), 'sai tti (k)| 14. daTThA (a, bii)| 15. bIya
tti (a, bI), bIyaM tu (mu), bitiya vva (sa), dra TippaNa 220/1, kathA ke vistAra
hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 38 /  16. giNhae (s)| 17. gatti (a)| 18.
ghecchAmi (ka, mu, jIbhA 1413) /  19. x (a, bii)| 20. khiddhaM (a, bii)| 21.
saNammi (laa)| 22. vi (mu)| 23. kAUNa ya (a, bii)| 24. 220/1,2-ye donoM gAthAeM
lobhapiMDa se sambandhita kathA kA saMketa karane vAlI haiN| niyuktikAra gAthA
216 meM isa kathA kA saMketa kara cuke haiM ataH kathA kA vistAra karane vAlI ye
donoM gAthAeM bhASya kI honI caahie| isI prakAra krodha, mAna aura mAyApiMDa se
saMbaMdhita kathAoM kI gAthAeM bhI gA. 216 meM saMdiSTa hai ataH kathA kA
vistAra karane vAlI ye gAthAeM bhASya kI honI caahie| 218/1, 219/ 1-15 gAthAeM
nigA ke mUla kramAMka meM nahIM jor3I gaI hai| 25. caMta coyaNa (ba), caMda
joyaNa (a, jiibhaa)| 26. sAhU tti (bii)| "caNe (mu, jIbhA 1417) /  28. kathA ke
vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3,kathA saM. 39 /

Page #245 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **221.** There are two types of *santhava*: *sambandhi-
vayanasanthava* and *vayanasanthava*. Each of these is of two types: *pulli* and
*pacchha*.  **222.** *Matapiti* is the *puvvasanthava*, and *sasuu-sasuraigaan*
is the *pacchha*. The relationship of *gihisanthava* is established by *putvi*
and *pacchha*.  **222/1.** *Ayavayam* and *paravayam* are related to the name,
according to its meaning. My *mata* is *erisia*, and *sasa*, *dhuta*, and
*natta* are also *erisia*.  **222/2.** *Adhiti* is the *ditthipahnhay*, and
asking "who is my mother?" is *merisi*. The relationship is like that of a
*thanakha*, and *sunha* is the *padaan*.  **223.** The fault of *pacchasanthava*
is that it is *sasuu-vihavaadi* and *dhuyadhaan*. *Bhajja* is also *merisi*, and
*sajjo*, *ghaato*, and *bhangao* are also *merisi*.  **224.** *Mayavi* and
*chadukaari* are those who deceive us. *Nicchubhanaadi* is the *panta*, and
*karejja* is the *bhadde* in which there is a *padibandho*.  **225.** *Pulli* is
established by *gunasanthava*, and *thunjjahi* is established by
*santasanthava*. *Dayaram* is *dinnamm* in this, and that is *pulli santhava*.
**225/1.** This is the one whose *guna* spreads in all directions. We hear about
this in *kaha*, and we have seen it today.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 221. duvidho u' 'saMthavo khalu'2, saMbaMdhI-vayaNasaMthavo cev|
ekkekko 'vi ya'3 duvidho, puLLi pacchA ya nAtavvo  //  484  //  222. mAtipiti
puvvasaMthava', sAsU-sasurAigANa' pacchA u| gihisaMthavasaMbaMdhaM, kareti
puTviM ca pacchA vA  //  485  /  /  222/1. AyavayaM ca paravayaM, nAuM
saMbaMdhate tadaNurUvaM  /  mama 'mAtA erisiyA'10, sasA va dhUtA va nattAdI2  //
486  //  222/2. addhiti'3 diTThIpaNhaya14, pucchA kahaNaM mamerisI jnnnnii|
thaNakhevo saMbaMdho, vihavA 'suNhA padANaM ca'15  //  487  //  223.
pacchAsaMthavadosA, 'sAsU-vihavAdi'16 dhUyadANaM c|| bhajjA mamerisicciya, sajjo
ghAto va bhaMgo vA  /  /  488  /  /  224. mAyAvI caDukArI18, amhaM obhAvaNaM
kuNati eso|| nicchubhaNAdI19 paMto, karejja bhaddesu paDibaMdho  //  489  //
225. guNasaMthaveNa puliM, saMtAsaMteNa jo thunnijjaahi|| 'dAyAramadinnammi u'
20, so 'puLi saMthavo hoti '21  //  490  //  225/1. so eso jassa guNA,
viyaraMti22 avAriyA dasadisAsu 23  /  iharA 'kahAsu suNimo '24 paccakkhaM ajja
diTTho si25  //  491  /  /  1. ya (lA, ba, sa, ka, jiibhaa)| 2. bhAvasaMthavo
(nibhA 1040) /  3. puNa (jIbhA 1421) /  4. mAya (mu), mAtapitA (nibhA 1041) /
5. 'thavo (sa, nibhaa)| 6. sAsuya (a)| 7. susarA (mu)| 8. puvvaM (mu)| 9. dhaI
(a, bI), 'dhatI (jIbhA 1427) /  10. erisiyA mAyA (nibhA 1042) /  11. suNhA
(nibhaa)| 12. 222/1, 2-ye donoM gAthAeM 222 vI gAthA kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiM ataH
bhASya kI honI caahie| 13. adhiti (lA, b)| 14. diTTi (sa), pAhuya (lA, b)| 15.
suNhA dANaM ca (a.), suNhAidANaM ca (mu. ka), suNhAya dANaM ca (nibhA 1043,
jIbhA 1428) /  16. vihavAI (a, bI), sAsuyavi (jIbhA 1430) /  17. "sittiya (lA,
ka, ba, nibhA 1044), mama erisiyA (jiibhaa)| 18. caDuyAro (nibhA 1045)  /  19.
nicchu (lA, b)| 20. dinnammI (nibhA 1046, mu), "mmiM (jiibhaa)| 21. vayaNe
saMthavo puTviM (jIbhA 1432) /  22. hiMDaMti (lA, ba, s)| 23. disAo (lA, b)| 24.
kahA suvvasi (a, bI, ka, laa)| 25. siM (sa), nibhA 1047, jIbhA 1433, 225/1 yaha
gAthA 225 kI vyAkhyA rUpa hai| isI prakAra 226/1 bhI 226 vI gAthA kI vyAkhyA
hai| vyAkhyAtmaka hone ke kAraNa isako mUla nigA ke kramAMka meM nahIM jor3A
gayA hai|

Page #246 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 74  229. 226. After the *guna-santhava* said, "I have given the *dayara*,"
226/1. "Purify our eyes," 3, where there was doubt before, "It is fulfilled,"
227. The *vijjamantaparuva*, the *vijjaye* in the *mant* is the *sisesavedana*,
there 227/1. The *paripinditamu* *ullavo*, the *atipanta* *bhikkhuvasa* - "The
*muttho* is If you wish, I will allow you," 12, I will give you *ghata* *gula*
and *vattha*," 227/2. You are the *vijjamanta*, what shall I give you? 14
*Ghata* *gula* "And the *padisaharanam* given, by whom is it beneficial, by whom
228. *Padivijjathambhan* etc., he or another or the *pavajeevi* *mai*, the
*kammankari* "As 228/1. As you teach," the *janukamma* is followed, so also the
*sises* "The *viyana*, the *panassati* 19 *padimanta* etc., he or another or the
*pavajeevi* *mai*, the *kammankari* 22 will be 4 *santa* *sante* by whom you are
imprisoned. He is the *pachhasanthava*." || 492 ||  1. *Dayara* *vidinnammi* u
(la, b, s), *dayaram* *dinnammi* u (a, k). 2. *Vayane* (jibha 1434), *nibha*
1048. 3. *Chakkhu* (la, b), " *Kay* *ne* *chakkhu* (jibha), x (k). 4. *Jahattio*
(b), *thaya* (k). 5. *Visarita* (s, nibha 1049), *viyaria* (mu, a, k). 6.
*Tujjham* (mu, jibha nibha), *tumham* (k). 7. *Me* (k, mu). 17. 8. *Sampay* *ni*
(mu), *idani* *nisankiyam* (jibha 1435). 18. 9. *Dra* *tippana* 225/1. 19. 10.
*Murande* (s), *marunde* (k). 20. 11. *Nibha* 4456. 12. *Janamaha* (la, b, s),
*jana* *aha* (nibha). 13. *Vatthadi* *davavemi* (nibha 4457), *daami* (k), for
the details of the story see *pari*. 3, *katha* *san*. 40. 14. *Demi* (nibha
4458), *desi* (s). 15. *Tu* *vatthai* (la, b, s). *Vicharia* *guna* *tubham*.
*Nissankiyam* " *Bhikkhuvasago* *Murude* 21. 22. 23. *Pindaniryukti* *Jatam* ||
493 || *Daram* || 9 *Hoti*. *Dittamto* 9 || 494 || *Dave*. 113  || 495 ||
*Vatthadi* 15. *Si* 16 || 496 || 16. *Mudho* *si* (b), *muttho* *mi* (nibha, k,
mu), 227/1, 2 - In both these verses, there is an elaboration of the story of
the *bhikkhu* *upasaka* under the category of *vidya*. Similarly, in 228/1,
there is a story of *acharya* *padalipta* and *murunda* king under the category
of *mantra*. The *niyuktikara* has already hinted at these two stories in verse
227, therefore, these three verses elaborating the story should be considered as
*bhashya*. *Karijjahi*. *Gahandi* 17 || 497 || *Bhamadei*. *Murundaraya* || 498
|| *Karezjahi*. *Biyan* 23 || 499 || *Daram* || *Bhave* *bitiye* (nibha 4459),
*jibha* 1443. *Sini* (a, s, mu, jibha 1445). *Viyanam* *panassati* (nibha 4460),
*ssai* (a, s, k). *Marunda* (k), *dra* *tippana* 227/2, for the details of the
story see *pari*. 3, *katha* *san*. 41. *Jjassi* (a, b). " *Nagari* (la, mu), "
*Kari* (b). *Bhave* *bitiye* (nibha 4461), *bio* (k), *ya* *gahandi* (jibha
1447), this verse is not present in *s* *prati*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 74 229. 226. guNasaMthaveNa pacchA, 'dAyAraM dinnammI ", 226/1. 'vimalIkaya'mha
cakkhU'3, jahatthato Asi purA Ne saMkA, 'saMpai 227. vijjAmaMtaparUvaNa, vijjAe
maMtammi sIsavedaNa, tattha 227/1. paripiMDitamullAvo, atipaMto bhikkhuvAsa -
'muTTho se jai icchaha aNujANaha 12, ghata gula-vatthANi dAvemi' 227 / 2. tuM
vijjA-maMtaNa, kiM demi ?14 ghataM gulaM 'ca dinne paDisAharaNaM, keNa hitaM
keNa 228. paDivijjathaMbhaNAdI, so vA anno va pAvAjIvI mAI, kammaNakArI "ya
228/1. jaha jaha padesiNiM" jANukammi pAlittao taha taha sIse 'viyaNA, paNassati
19 paDimaMtathaM bhaNAdI, so vA anno va se pAvAjIvI mAI, kammaNakArI 22 bhave 4
saMtAsaMteNa jo thuNijjAhi  /  so pacchAsaMthavo hoti'  //  492  //  1. dAyAra
vidinnammi u (lA, ba, sa ), dAyAraM dinnammi u ( a, ka )  /  2. vayaNe (jIbhA
1434), nibhA 1048  /  3. cakkhu (lA, ba), 'kaya Ne cakkhUM (jIbhA), x (ka)  /
4. jahatthio (bI), tthayA ( ka )  /  5. visaritA (sa, nibhA 1049), viyariyA (mu,
a, ka )  /  6. tujjhaM (mu, jIbhA nibhA), tumhaM ( ka)  /  7. me (ka, mu)  /
17. 8. saMpaya ni (mu), idANi NIsaMkiyaM (jIbhA 1435 )  /  18. 9. dra TippaNa
225/1  /  19. 10. muraMDeNa (sa), maruMDeNa ( ka )  /  20. 11. nibhA 4456 | 12.
jANamahaM (lA, ba, sa ), jANa ahaM ( nibhA)  /  13. vatthAdINi davAvemi (nibhA
4457), dAemi (ka), kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 40  /  14.
demI (nibhA 4458), desi (sa)  /  15. tu vatthAI (lA, ba, sa )  /  vicariyA guNA
tubbhaM  /  nissaMkiyaM " bhikkhuvAsago muruDe 21. 22. 23. piMDaniryukti jAtaM
//  493  //  dAraM  //  9 hoti  /  diTTaMto9  //  494  /  /  dAve  /  113  //
495  //  vatthAdI 15  /  si16  //  496  //  16. muddho si (ba), muTTho mi
(nibhA, ka, mu), 227/1, 2 - ina donoM gAthAoM meM vidyA ke antargata bhikSu
upAsaka kI kathA kA vistAra hai| isI prakAra 228 / 1 meM maMtra ke antargata
AcArya pAdalipta evaM muruMDa rAjA kA kathAnaka hai| ina donoM kathAoM kA
saMketa niyuktikAra gAthA 227 meM kara cuke haiM ataH kathA kA vistAra karane
vAlI ye tInoM gAthAeM bhASya kI honI caahie| karijjAhi  /  gahaNAdI 17  //  497
//  bhamADei  /  muruMDarAyassa  //  498  //  karejjAhi  /  bIyaM 23  //  499  /
/  dAraM  //  bhave bitie ( nibhA 4459), jIbhA 1443  /  siNI ( a, sa, mu, jIbhA
1445 )  /  viyaNaM paNAsati ( nibhA 4460), ssaI ( a, sa, ka)  /  maruMDa (ka),
dra TippaNa 227/2, kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 41  /  jjAsi
( a, bI)  /  'NagArI (lA, mu), 'karI ( ba )  /  bhave bitie ( nibhA 4461), bIo
(ka), ya gahaNAdI (jIbhA 1447), yaha gAthA sa prati meM nahIM hai|

Page #247 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti 75 230.  Chune antaddhane, chanakke padalevane samie. Mulavivahe
do dandini u adana parisade. || 500 || 231. Je vijja-mantdosa, te chchiya
vasikaranmaadicchunehim. Egamanepadosamp, kujja pattharao vavi. || 501 || 231/1.
Subhagdobhaggakara', 'joga aharime'5 ya itare ya. Aghasa-dhuvavasa'10,
padapalevaino itare. || 502 || 231/2. 'Nadikanh venndive'12, panchasaya tavasana
nivasanthi. Pavvadivasesu kulavati, palevuttarasakkaroo13. || 503 || 231/3.
Janasavagaana khinsan, samiyakkhan14 maithaanalevenam. Savagaphayattakaranam,
avinaya loe chalan dhoe'5. || 504 || 231/4. Padhilaabhit vaccanta, nibuddha6
nadikoolamilan7 samiyaae. Vimhay8 panchasaya tavasana pavvajja saha ya9. || 505
|| 231/5. Avi ya kumarakhayam, joni vivaritta ni vesanam vavi. Gampae payam va,
jo kuvvati mulakamman tu. 1. Katha ke vistar hetu dekhen bhasyagatha 35-37
chahie. 231/5 gatha kevala a aur b prati me tatha pari. 3, katha san. 42. Milati
hai lekin yah chaloo vishayavastu ki drishti 2. "Vanam (s). Se mulakarm ki
vyakhya prastut karti hai. Sambhav 3. Samio (a, s), jogen (b, mu), jogo (k). Hai
kuchh lipikaron dwara yah gatha chhut gai ho. 4. Padisade (la, b), gathao ke
kram me nibha me 12. Naikanhibinn (b, k), nai kanh binn (mu). Yah gatha nahin
hai. 13. Padalevuttar' (nibha 4470), paleve limp pae tu 5. Sutre cha trutiya
saptamyarthe. (jibha 1461). 6. Eganega (b), "paose (a, b). 14. Samayathan (la,
b), samiyathan (s). 7. Jibha 1457. 15. Dhove (k, s), nibha 4471. 8. 'Gadubhagg”
(mu, b), ‘gadohagg' (la, a), 16. Nibbud (mu, b). 'Gadubhag' (k). 17. “Lamiliy
(jibha 1466). 9. Je joga'a'harime (nibha 4469), °asima (k). 18. Vimhiy (k, mu,
jibha). 10. "Vasa dhuva (nibha), vaso (jibha 1459), ye 19. Nibha 4472, katha ke
vistar hetu dekhen pari. 3, paniyadi na sah ghar shay itva piyante te adhar
shaah (mavru). katha san. 43. 11. 231/1-4 tatha 6 se 11-ye das gathaen ga. 20.
Yah gatha kevala a aur b prati me milati hai. 230vin gatha ki vyakhya roop hain.
Jab 'chune yah gatha bhasya ki honi chahie kyonki isme antaddhane chanakke' is
pad ki vyakhya karne wali 'mulakarm' ka swaroop hai. 231/6, 7-in dono evam katha
se sambandhit gathao ke liye tikaakar gathao me mul karm se sambandhit katha ka
ullekh ne 'bhasyakrud' ullekh kiya hai to phir payalevan, jog, mul adi dvaro se
sambandhit gatha evam katha chahie. Dekhen tippan 231/1. ko vistar dene wali
gathaen bhi bhasya ki honi

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 75 230. cuNNe aMtaddhANe, cANakke pAdalevaNe samie  /  mUlavivAhe
do daMDiNI u AdANa parisADe  //  500  //  231. je vijja-maMtadosA, te cciya
vasikaraNamAdicuNNehiM  /  egamaNegapadosaMpa, kujjA patthArao vAvi  //  501 //
231/1. sUbhagadobhaggakarA', 'jogA AhArimA'5 ya itare y| Aghasa-dhUvavAsA'10,
pAdapalevAiNo itare  //  502  //  231/2. 'nadikaNha veNNadIve'12, paMcasayA
tAvasANa nivsNti| pavvadivasesu kulavati, pAlevuttArasakkAro13  //  503  //
231/3. jaNasAvagANa khiMsaNa, samiyakkhaNa14 maaitthaannlevennN|
sAvagapayattakaraNaM, aviNaya loe calaNa dhoe'5  /  /  504  //  231/4.
paDilAbhita vaccaMtA, nibuDDa6 nadikUlamilaNa7 smiyaae| vimhaya8 paMcasayA
tAvasANa pavvajja sAhA y9|| 505  //  231/5. avi ya kumArakhayaM, joNI vivariTThA
nivesaNaM vaavi| gammapae pAyaM vA, jo kuvvati mUlakammaM tu  //  1. kathA ke
vistAra hetu dekheM bhASyagAthA 35-37 caahie| 231/5 gAthA kevala a aura bI prati
meM tathA pari. 3, kathA saM. 42 /  milatI hai lekina yaha cAlU viSayavastu kI
dRSTi 2. "vaNaM (s)| se mUlakarma kI vyAkhyA prastuta karatI hai| saMbhava 3.
samio (a, sa), joge (bI, mu), jogo (k)| hai kucha lipikAroM dvArA yaha gAthA
chUTa gaI ho| 4. paDisADe (lA, ba), gAthAoM ke krama meM nibhA meM 12.
naikaNhibinna (bI, ka), nai kaNha binna (mu)| yaha gAthA nahIM hai| 13.
pAdalevuttAra' (nibhA 4470), pAleve liMpa pAe tu 5. sUtre ca tRtIyA saptamyarthe
/  (jIbhA 1461) /  6. egaNega (ba), "paose (a, bii)| 14. samayatthaNa (lA, ba),
samiyatthaNa (s)| 7. jIbhA 1457 /  15. dhove (ka, sa), nibhA 4471 /  8.
'gadubbhagga" (mu, bI), 'gadohagga' (lA, a), 16. nibbuDa (mu, bii)| 'gadUbhaga'
(k)| 17. "lamiliya (jIbhA 1466) /  9. je jogA''hArime (nibhA 4469), degAsimA
(k)| 18. vimhiya (ka, mu, jiibhaa)| 10. "vAsa dhUvA (nibhA), vAso (jIbhA 1459),
ye 19. nibhA 4472, kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, pAnIyAdinA saha
gharSayitvA pIyante te AdharSAH (mvR)| kathA saM. 43 /  11. 231/1-4 tathA 6 se
11-ye dasa gAthAeM gA. 20. yaha gAthA kevala a aura bI prati meM milatI hai|
230vIM gAthA kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiN| jaba 'cuNNe yaha gAthA bhASya kI honI cAhie
kyoMki isameM aMtaddhANe cANakke' isa pada kI vyAkhyA karane vAlI 'mUlakarma' kA
svarUpa hai| 231/6, 7-ina donoM evaM kathA se saMbaMdhita gAthAoM ke lie
TIkAkAra gAthAoM meM mUla karma se saMbaMdhita kathA kA ullekha ne 'bhASyakRd'
ullekha kiyA hai to phira pAyalevaNa, hai ataH ye donoM gAthAeM bhI bhASya kI
honI joga, mUla Adi dvAroM se saMbaMdhita gAthA evaM kathA caahie| dekheM
TippaNa 231/1 /  ko vistAra dene vAlI gAthAeM bhI bhASya kI honI

Page #248 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  76 ##  Pindaniyukti 231/6.  Adhiti asked, "Is your marriage imminent, with a
different clan's son?" This is a beloved medicine, Akhatare 'Jajjiv Adhikarana'.
|| 506 || 231/7.  Saddhi, adorned with anklets, Adhiti asked, "Is he my wealth?"
'Joga Jonugghandan', Padisheh, a neighbor's boast. || 507 || 231/8.  May your
clan not be entangled, we are daughters born of an unblemished lineage. Dharma
is 'Lohiyasya Ya', 'Jai Bindu... Tatthya Naraga'. || 508 || 231/9.  Why is a son
not considered, a son who is the lineage of the clan's 'Gottakitti'? Later, even
that task, Asangha, may not destroy us. || 509 || 231/10.  Why Adhiti? She
asked, "My Goddess, I am a wealthy pregnant woman." The womb's protection is
yours, I will do it, do not ask Adhiti. || 510 || 231/11.  If a son is born to
me, 'even then' he is considered inferior by other young men. He gives a
scolding, and the neighbor's slander is not there. || 511 || 232.  In the
unification of the body, 'Kamapavitti' is done in the same way. The same boast,
'Jajjiya Bhogantaraayam Cha'. || 512 || 233.  Thus, for the one who is
established, the one who has arisen, the one who has been purified. The one who
has been purified by taking and giving up, the Pindas' taking happens. || 513 ||
234.  The faults of arising, 'Saahu Samautthite Viyaanahi'. 'The faults of
taking, are said to be from within and outside'. || 514 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 76 piMDaniyukti 231/6. adhitI' pucchA AsannavivAho bhinnknnsaahnnyaa| AyamaNa
piyaNa osadha, akkhatare 'jajjIva adhikaraNaM'2  //  506  //  231/7.
jaMghAparijita saDDI, addhiti' ANijjate 'mama savattI'5  /  'jogo joNugghADaNa',
paDiseha' padosa-uDDAho  //  507  //  231/8. mA te phaMsejja kulaM, adijjamANA
sutA vayaM pttaa|| dhammo va 'lohiyassa ya', 'jai biMdU0 tattiyA naragA  /  /
508  //  231/9. kiM na Thavijjati putto, patto kul-'gott-kitti'11-sNtaanno|
pacchA vi ya taM kajjaM, asaMgaho mA ya naasejjaa|| 509  //  231/10. kiM
addhiti12 tti pucchA, savattiNI13 gabbhiNi tti me4 devii| gabbhAdhANaM5 tujjha6
vi, karemi7 mA addhitiM kuNasu  // 510  //  231/11. jai vi suto me hohiti'9,
'taha vi'20 kaNiTTho tti itara' juvraayaa| - deti parisADaNaM se, nAte ya padosa
patthAro22  //  511  //  232. saMkhaDikaraNe kAyA, 'kAmapavittiM ca'23 kuNati
egtth|| egatthuDDAhAdI, 'jajjiya bhogaMtarAyaM ca'24  //  512  //  233. evaM tu
gaviTThassA, uggm-uppaadnnaa-visuddhss|| gahaNa-visohivisuddhassa, hoti gahaNaM
tu piMDassa25  /  /  513  //  234. uppAdaNAe~ dosA, 'sAhUu samuTThite
viyANAhi'26  /  'gahaNesaNAi dosA, Ata-para-samuTThite vocchaM '27  //  514  //
1. adhiti (lA, ba), addhiI (k)| 14. se (a, bii)| 2. akkhu ya (ka, s)| 15.
'bhAdANaM (a, ba, lA, bI, s)| 3. jajjIya (ba), joNI ya ahi. (a). adhikaraNaM 16.
tu majjha (b)| -maithunapravRttiH (mava), kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM 17. karei
(a, bI, ba), karomi (mu)| pari. 3, kathA saM. 44 /  18. kuNamu (bii)| 4. adhiti
(laa)| 19. hohI (mu)| 5. savattatI (lA), savatti tti (s)| 20. so vi (a, bii)| 6.
jogappayaNugghA' (lA, ba, s)| 21. iyaro (lA, ba, mu)| 7. paDileha (a, k)| 22.
prastAra:-vinAzaH (mavR), kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM 8. kathA ke vistAra hetu
dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 45 /  pari. 3, kathA saM. 46  /  9. ssA (mu)| 23.
"pavattIi (lA, ba), "pavattI (s)| 10. biMdU jai (k)| 24. jajjiya bhogaMtarAyavva
(a), jattiya bho (s)| 11. kitti gutta (k)| 25. jIbhA 1471 /  12. adhii (laa)|
26. solasa sAhusamuTThiyA bhaNiyA (a, bii)| 13. savittiNI (mu)| 27. dasa esaNAya
dosA gihi sAhu samuTThie vocchaM (a), tu. jIbhA 1472 /

Page #249 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti 77  235. Two are born of greed, the confused and the unripe. The
remaining eight are the rules, known to be born of the householder. || 515 ||
Door ||  236. The name is to be placed in the object, the feeling is to be
considered in the feeling. In the object, the monkey troop, in the feeling, the
'ten-footed' are. || 516 ||  236/1. The parrot with its feathers spread, the
forest is seen, 'it eats food'. The parrot falls down, it goes along with the
monkey. || 517 ||  236/2. It itself eats the fruit, the parrot eats it along
with the monkey. It destroys their food, and then it goes to the forest. || 518
||  236/3. The foot that is going out is seen, the one that is going in is not
seen. It drinks water with a straw, there is no sign of the forest. || 519 ||
237. Confused, deceived, and rejected, hidden, served, and given away. Unripe,
licked, and spat out, these ten are the faults of eating. || 520 ||  238.
Confusion has four parts, the fault is in taking and eating. Whatever is
confused, twenty-five are purified in the end. || 521 ||  238/1. Sixteen are the
faults of origin, and ten are the faults of eating. These are nine in the
deceived, twenty-five are purified in the end. || 522 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 77 235. donni u sAhusamutthA, saMkita taha bhAvato'pariNataM' c|
sesA aTTha vi niyamA, gihiNore ya samuTThite jANa  //  515  //  dAraM  //  236.
nAmaM ThavaNA davie, bhAve gahaNesaNA munneyvvaa| davve vANarajUhaM, bhAvammi ya
'dasapadA hoMti'3  //  516  //  236/1. parisaDitapaMDupattaM, vaNasaMDaM daTTha
'annahiM pese| jUhavatI paDiyarate5, jUheNa samaM tahiM gacche 6  //  517  //
236/2. sayamevAloeuM, jUhavatI taM vaNaM samaMteNaM  /  viyarati tesi payAraM,
cariUNa ya to dahaM gacche  /  /  518 //  236/3. oyaraMtaM padaM daTuM,
nIharaMtaM na diistii| nAleNa pibaha pANIyaM, nesa11 nikkAraNo dho|| 519  //
237. saMkita makkhita nikkhitta, pihita sAhariya'2 daaygummiise| apariNata litta
chaDDiya, esaNadosA dasa havaMti3  //  520  //  238. saMkAe caubhaMgo, dosu vi
gahaNe ya bhuMjaNe14 lggo| jaM saMkitamAvanno, paNuvIsA5 carimae'6 suddho  //
521  //  238/1. uggamadosA solasa, AhAkammAi esaNA dosaa| nava makkhiyAe ete,
paNuvIsA carimae suddho17  //  522  /  /  1. degapari (laa)| 14. bhujiuM (s)| 2.
gihiyA (a, lA, b)| 15. paNavIsA (mu), 'vIsaM (lA, b)| 3. ThANamAINi (oni 458) /
16. caramae (a, bii)| 4. mannahiM vesA (a, bii)| 17. 238/1. gAthA bhASyakRda
honI caahie| isa gAthA ke 5. pariya' (a, bI), paDiarie (k)| bhASyagata hone ke
nimna tarka prastuta kie jA sakate haiM6. oni 459, 236/1-3-ye tInoM gAthAeM 236
vIM . 238 vI gAthA kA aMtima caraNa 'paNuvIsA carimae gAthA meM nirdiSTa
'vANarajUha' kathA kI ora saMketa suddho' hai aura 238/1 ke aMtima caraNa meM
bhI isI pada karatI haiN| kathA kA vistAra bhASyakAra dvArA huA kI punarukti huI
hai| koI bhI graMthakAra isa prakAra kI hai, aisA saMbhava lagatA hai, kathA ke
vistAra hetu punarukti nahIM krte| dekheM pari. 3,kathA saM. 47 /  *
niryaktikAra udgama ke 16 doSoM evaM eSaNA ke daza 7. taM (lA, ba), te (a, bI,
oni 460), sa prati doSoM kA pahale ullekha kara cuke haiM ata: 'zaMkita dvAra'
kI meM yaha gAthA nahIM hai| vyAkhyA ke prasaMga meM ve puna: isa bAta kA
ullekha nahIM krte| 8. uttaraMtaM (a, ba, lA, ka, oni 461) /  * bahuta saMbhava
lagatA hai ki 'paNuvIsA' zabda kI 9. piyaha (lA, ba, mu, sa, k)| vyAkhyA meM
yahAM prasaMgavaza bhASyakAra ne 25 doSoM kA 10. toyaM NaM (k)| saMketa kara
diyA ho vaise bhI 238 vI gAthA viSaya vastu 11. na eya (a, ba, lA, bI, sa), na
esa (k)| kI dRSTi se 239 ke sAtha sIdhI jur3atI hai| punarukta 12. sAharaNa
(jIbhA 1476) /  hone se 238/2 vI gAthA bhI prakSipta athavA bhASya kI 13. prasA
568, tu. mUlA 462, piMpra 77, paMcA 13/26 /  honI caahie| yaha gAthA prakAzita
malayagiri TIkA meM bhI vyAkhyAta nahIM hai|

Page #250 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti 238/2. The doubts of the ignorant are many, the doubts of the
wise are few. They are overcome. Doubts, whether they are doubts or free from
doubts, are to be investigated. || 239. The wise, with their pure knowledge,
investigate with right effort. They overcome the doubts, being pure by the
measure of their knowledge. || 523 || 239/1. Oh! If the wise, even if they take
something impure, Even a Kevali (omniscient) would be considered impure, if he
takes something impure. || 524 || 240. In the absence of purity, there is no
liberation, and therefore liberation is useless. And in the absence of
liberation, the purification of the senses is useless. || 525 || 240/1. But what
about the alms that are given, and not asked for? One who is doubtful, eats it
with doubt. || 526 || 240/2. With a doubtful mind, one eats food that is
contaminated. One who is free from doubt, eats food that is pure. || 527 ||
240/3. "I have received alms in this house." Even if the food is pure, it
becomes impure due to doubt. || 528 || 240/4. If doubt is a cause of impurity,
then even pure food becomes impure. That which is free from doubt, even if it is
not pure, is free from blame. || 529 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 238/2. uggamadosA solasa, nava esaNa dosa saMka mottUNaM  /
pnnuviisete| dosA, saMkita nissaMkite vucchaM  //  239. chaumattho sutanANI,
gavesatI ujjuo payatteNaM  /  _ Avanno paNuvIsaM, sutanANapamANato suddho  /  /
523  //  239/1. oho' sutovautto, sutanANI jai vi geNhati asuddhaM  /  taM kevalI
vi bha'jati, apamANa sutaM bhave iharA  //  524  //  240. suttassa appamANe',
caraNAbhAvo tao tu mokkhss| mokkhassa vi ya abhAve, dikkhapavittI niratthA u.
//  525  //  240/1. kinnu hu khaddhA bhikkhA, dijjati na ya taraha 'pucchiuM
hirimN11| iti saMkAe ghettuM, taM bhuMjati saMkito ceva2  //  526  /  /  240/2.
hiyaeNa saMkiteNaM, gahitA anneNa sohitA sA ya  /  pagataM paheNagaM vA, souM15
nissaMkito6 bhuMje  //  527  //  240/3. 'jArisie cciya'17 laddhA, khaddhA
bhikkhA mae8 amuggehe| annehi vi tArisiyA, vigaDaMta19 nisAmaNe20 tatie21  //
528  /  /  240/4. jadi saMkA dosakarI, evaM suddhaM pi hoti tu asuddha22  /
nissaMkamesitaM ti ya, aNesaNijja23 pi nidosaM24  /  /  529  //  1. sesaNa (k)|
ko spaSTa karane vAlI haiN| 240/4 gAthA meM ziSya 2. carimo (lA, ba, s)| kI
zaMkA upasthita hai| vyAkhyAtmaka hone se ye 3. suddho (lA, ba), jIbhA 1487,
yaha gAthA kevala sabhI gAthAeM bhASya kI pratIta hotI haiN| lA, ba, sa aura ka
prati meM milatI hai| 13. saMkiyAe (s)| 4. jIbhA 1484 /  14. jIbhA (1480) meM
isa gAthA kA pUrvArddha isa 5. sAhU (jIbhA 1485), oho ityatra prathamA
tRtIyArthe (mvR)| prakAra hai6. gAthA 239 kI vyAkhyA rUpa hone ke kAraNa yaha
bIeNa gahiya saMkiya, vigaDaMtanne ya navari saMghADe  /  gAthA bhASya kI honI
caahie| 15. soU (s)| 7. "mANaM (a), 'mANa (laa)| 16. "kiyaM (lA, ba, ka, s)| 8.
ya (ka, mu, jiibhaa)| 17. "siyaM ciya (lA, ka, ba), "saI ciya (s)| 9. "payattI
(a, bI, sa), "payaNNA (laa)| 18. ege (a)| 10. jIbhA (1486) meM isa gAthA kA
uttarArdha isa prakAra hai- 19. vikareMta (lA, ba), viyaDiMti (k)| mokkhAbhAvAo
ciya, payattadikkhA NiratthA y| 20. "mae (mu)|| 11. pucchiuM tahiyaM (jiibhaa)|
21. taiyA (a, bI), taio (ka, s)| 12.tu. jIbhA 1479, 240/1-4-ye cAroM gAthAeM 22.
avisuddhaM (mu, ka), avasuddhaM (lA, ba, s)| prakAzita TIkA meM nigA ke kramAMka
meM haiN| inameM 23. aNesaNIyaM (laa)| 240/1-3-ye tIna gAthAeM 238 vI gAthA ke
bhaMgoM 24. jIbhA 1488  /

Page #251 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  241. The impure result is considered to be one of the two
wings. This also makes the knowing one, the non-knowing one, pure. || 530 ||
Dāram ||  242. There are two types of perception, one with consciousness and one
without consciousness. There are three types of perception with consciousness,
and two types of perception without consciousness. || 531 ||  243. Earth and the
plant kingdom are the three types of perception with consciousness. The two
types of perception without consciousness are the one with a body and the one
without a body. || 532 ||  243/1. The perception of earth is through the white,
the yellow, the perception of the earth element, and the perception of the earth
element. All of this is perception, I will explain it further. || 533 ||  243/2.
The four types of perception are the perception of the past, the perception of
the future, the perception of the present, and the perception of the present.
The perception of the present is the perception of the present, the perception
of the present, and the perception of the present. || 534 ||  243/3. The
perception of the other bodies, the perception of the three, the perception of
the wind, and the perception of the wind. The perception of the consciousness is
not perception, nor is it the perception of the element. || 535 ||  244. In the
perception of consciousness, there are four stages of the body. The first stage
is the stage of the body, the second stage is the stage of the body, the third
stage is the stage of the body, and the fourth stage is the stage of the body.
|| 536 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 241. avisuddho pariNAmo, egatare avaDito' u2 pkkhmmi| esiM pi
kuNati NesiM, aNesimesiM2 'visuddho u"  //  530  //  dAraM  //  242. duvidhaM ca
makkhitaM khalu, saccittaM 'ceva hoti'5 accittaM  /  'tividhaM puNa saccittaM',
accittaM hoti duvidhaM tu  //  531  //  243. puDhavI Au vaNassati, tividhaM
saccitta makkhitaM hoti  /  accittaM 'pi ya duvidhaM, garahitamitare' ya0
'bhayaNA u'11  //  532  /  /  243/1. sukkeNa12 sarakkheNaM, makkhita ulleNa13
puddhvikaaennN| _ savvaM pi makkhitaM taM, etto14 Aummi vocchAmi  /  /  533  //
243/2. purapacchakamma-sasiNiddhadaulle15 caura6 aaubhedaao| ukkaTTharasAlittaM,
paritta'NataM18 mahiruhesu19  //  534  //  243/3. 'sesehi u'20 kAehiM, tIhi vi
teU-samIraNa-tasehiM 21  /  'saccittaM mIsaM vA'22, na makkhitaM23 asthi ullaM
vA'24  //  535  //  244. saccittamakkhitammI25, hatthe matte ya hoti caubhaMgo26
/  Aditige paDisedho, carime27 bhaMge aNuNNAto8  //  536  /  /  1. Avaritu (lA,
ba), Avario (s)| 2. ya (k)| 3. "mesI (s)| 4. visuddhayaro (bI), tu. jIbhA 1489
/  5. hoi ceva (a, bii)| 6. saccittaM puNa tivihaM (mu)| 7. jIbhA (1491) meM isa
gAthA kA uttarArdha isa prakAra hai_ saccittaM tattha tihA, puDhavI AU ya
vnnkaae| 8. puNa (mu)| 9. hiya iyare (a)| 10.u (a, s)| 11. NAe (bI), 'NAya (a)|
12. ukkoseNa u (a, bii)| 13. molleNa (a, bI, mu)| 14. tatto (lA, b)|
15.sasnigdham-ISallakSyamANajalakharaNTitaM hastAdi (mvR)| 16. cattAri (a, bI),
cauro (sa, ka, mu)| 17. ukkiTTha (mu)| 18. paritta'NataM ityatra
prAkRtatvAdvibhaktivacanavyatyaya iti SaSThIbahuvacanaM (mvR)| 19. atra ca
tRtIyArthe saptamI (mvR)| 20. sesehiM (mu, k)| 21. tasesu (a, ka, bii)| 22.
accittamIsagaM va (lA, ba, s)| 23. nikkhiyaM (a)| 24. isa gAthA kA uttarArddha
(jIbhA 1500) meM isa prakAra haisaccittamIsaeNa va, makkhitta na vajjae kiNci|
243/1-3-ye tInoM gAthAeM vyAkhyAtmaka haiM ataH bhASya kI honI caahie| inako
nigA ke mUla kramAMka meM nahIM rakhA hai| 25. mmiM (lA, ba), tammi u (ka,
jiibhaa)| 26.sUtre ca puMstvanirdezaH ArSatvAt (mv)| 27. carimo (s)| 28. jIbhA
meM isa gAthA kA pUrvArddha gA. 1501 meM tathA uttarArddha gA. 1502 meM hai|

Page #252 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **245.** "In the unmindful, there is fear in all four types of
breakage." "Taking without permission is prohibited, and prohibition is for the
sake of the impermissible." || 537 || 245/1. "It is wrong to mix with the
impermissible, even with the impermissible like milk, curd, honey, ghee, and
oil." "Do not cause harm by eating, drinking, or licking." || 538 || 245/2.
"Meat, fat, and fermented liquor, these are also impermissible in the world."
"Both are impermissible, even if they are cut into pieces by uttering the name."
|| 539 ||  **246.** "In the mindful, there are two types of detachment in the
body." "Each of these two types is further divided into two, one after the
other, and in succession." || 540 ||  **247.** "Earth, water, fire, wind,
plants, and space, these are the six types of matter." "Each of these is further
divided into two, and in succession, there are seven types in the enumeration."
|| 541 ||  **248.** "Mindful earth, and mindful detachment from earth." "Water,
fire, wind, space, and plants, these are the same." || 542 ||  **249.** "The
same is true for the remaining types of matter, there is detachment in the body
of the living being." "Each of these is further divided into five, and in
succession, there are five." || 543 ||  **250.** "The same is true for the
mindful, there is detachment in the mindful and the mindful objects." "In the
mindful and the mindful objects, both are unmindful." || 544 ||  **Notes:**  1.
"Yammim (la, b, k), "Yan pi (a), "Mmi u (s). 10. This verse is not present in la
and b. 2. Sansajj (b), "Mehim (mu, k, jibha). 11. "Kke u anantar (la). 3. Jibha
1508, this verse is not present in s. 12. "Kke dagbheo nantar paraganimm
sattaviho (a, b). 4. In this sutra, the omission of the case ending is due to
the ancient tradition (mavr). 13. "Nikkhevo (a, b, b, la, s). 5. Loesu va
garhiesu vajjam tu (la, b), "Rahiyo 14. Teu vau vanassai tasesu (la, b, s).
vivajjezza (a, b), the verse is not present in s. 15. Jibha (1518) has the
following second half of the verse: Sacchitte acchitto, acchitte va vi
sacchitto. 6. Duhao (la, b, k, s), Duhio (a). 16. Sesaesu (k). 7. "Hiesu (la,
b). 17. "Kayesu (s), "Kaesu (mu). 8. Chhinnam (s). 18. Ekeko (s). 9. Tu. Jibha
1504, 245/1, 2 both these verses 19. Misayasasu (a, b). 245th verse are
explanatory, therefore they should be 20. "Nan chey (la, b, s), "Sucheyana (a).
part of the commentary. Due to being 21. Acchitto (la, b). explanatory, they are
not included in the original numbering of the Niga.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 245. 'accittamakkhitammi u'1, causu vi bhaMgesu hoti bhayaNA u|
agarahiteNa u gahaNaM, paDisedho garahite hoti  //  537  /  /  245/1.
saMsajjimehira vajjaM, agarahitehiM pi gorasadavehiM  /  madhu-ghata-tella-
gulehiM, mA macchipivIliyAghAto  /  /  538  //  245/2. maMsa-vasa-soNiyAsava',
'loe vA garahitehi vjjejjaa"| ubhao vi garahitehiM', muttuccArehi chittaM pi||
539  //  246. saccittamIsaesuM, duvidhaM kAesu hoti nikkhittaM  /  ekkekkaM taM
duvidhaM, aNaMtara paraMparaM ceva  //  540  //  dAraM  //  247. puDhavI AukkAe,
teuu-vaauu-vnnssti-tsaannN| 'ekkekka duhANaMtara' 19, paraMpara' gaNimmi
sattavihA2  //  541  /  /  248. saccittapuDhavikAe, saccitto ceva
puDhavinikkhitto53  /  AU-'teu-vaNassati-samIraNa-tasesu14 emeva5  //  542  //
249. emeva sesigANa'6 vi, nikkhevo hoti jIvakAyANaM  /  ekkekko saTTANe,
paraThANe paMca paMceva  //  543  //  250. emeva mIsaesu9 vi, 'mIsANa
saceyaNesu'20 nikkhevo| mIsANaM mIsesu ya, doNhaM pi ya hoya'cittesu25  //  544
//  1. "yammiM (lA, ba, ka), "yaM pi (a), "mmi u (s)| 10. yaha gAthA lA aura ba
prati meM nahIM hai| 2. saMsijja (bI), "mehiM (mu, ka, jiibhaa)| 11. "kke u
aNaMtara (laa)| 3. jIbhA 1508, yaha gAthA sa prati meM nahIM hai| 12. 'kke
dagabheo NaMtara paragaNimmi sattaviho (a, bii)| 4. atra sUtre vibhaktilopa
ArSatvAt (mvR)| 13. 'nikkhevo (a, ba, bI, lA, s)| 5. loesu vA garahiesu vajjaM
tu (lA, ba), 'rahio 14. teu vAU vaNassai tasesu (lA, ba, s)| vivajjejjA (a, bI),
sa prati meM gAthA kA 15. jIbhA (1518) meM gAthA kA uttarArddha isa prakAra
haipUrvArddha nahIM hai| saccitte accitto, accitte vA vi sccitto| 6. duhao (lA,
ba, ka, sa), duhio (a)| 16. sesaesu (k)| 7. "hiesu (lA, b)| 17. "kAyesu (sa),
"kAesuM (mu)| 8. chinnaM (s)| 18. ekeko (s)| 9. tu. jIbhA 1504, 245/1, 2ye donoM
gAthAeM 19. mIsayAsu (a, bii)| 245 vIM gAthA kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiM ataH bhASya kI
20. 'NaM ceya (lA, ba, sa), "suceyaNANa (a)| honI caahie| vyAkhyAtmaka hone ke
kAraNa inako 21. acitto (lA, b)| nigA ke mUla kramAMka meM nahIM joDA hai|

Page #253 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **251.** Where there is a mind-object, there are four stages,
and in those four stages, there are four types of fire. That which is
immediately after the other, is called the 'remaining fire' by the commentators.
545 || 251/1. There is no mind-object, it is one by one, and it is without mind.
There, there are four stages, and there is no fire in those stages. 546 ||
251/2. But that which is without mind-object, is deposited in the mind-objects.
Then, the fire is called 'inward fire', and there is a continuous succession.
547 || 251/3. The fire of the ocean is immediately after, and the fire of the
earth is in succession. The fire of the new moon is immediately after, and the
fire of the full moon is in succession. 548 ||  **252.** The fire of the
'Mummur' is extinguished in the 'Apatta' and the 'Patta' stages. The fire of the
'Voli' is extinguished in the 'Jant' and the 'Jatana' stages. 549 ||  **252/1.**
The fire is not seen, but the fire is seen when the fuel is ignited. The fire of
the 'Apingala' is extinguished in the 'Mummur' and the 'Ingala' stages. 550 ||
**252/2.** The 'Apatta' is in the fourth stage, and the 'Patta' is in the fifth
stage. The 'Kanna' is in the sixth stage, and the 'Samati' is in the seventh
stage. 551 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 251. jattha u sacittamIse, caubhaMgo tattha causu vi agijhaM  /
taM tu aNaMtara itaraM', paritta'NataM ca vaNakAe  /  545  //  251/1. ahava Na'
'sacittamIso, u'3 'egao egao" ya' accitto  /  ettha' 'tu caukkabhaMgo'",
tatthAditie' kahA natthi  //  546  //  251/2. jaM puNa acittadavvaM, nikkhippati
cetaNesu miisesu| tahi12 maggaNA u iNamo, aNaMtara-paraMparA hoti  //  547  //
251/3. ogAhimAda'NaMtara 3, paraMparaM piDharagAdi14 puddhviie| navaNIyAdi
aNaMtara, paraMparaM nAvamAdIsu  //  548  /  /  252. vijjhAta mummuriMgAlameva
appatta5 patta6 smjaale| volINe8 sattadugaM', 'jaMtolitte ya jataNAe'20  //  549
||daarN  //  252/1. vijjhAu tti na dIsati, aggI dIsati ya iMdhaNe chuuddhe| .
ApiMgalamagaNikaNA21, mummura nijAla iMgAlA22  //  550  //  252/2. appattA u
cautthe, jAlA piDharaM23 tu paMcame pttaa| chaThe puNa kaNNasamA, jAlA
samaticchiyA carime25  //  551  //  1. miyaraM (k)| 14. "ramAi (a, ba, ka, lA,
bI), "mAI (s)| 2. Neti vAkyAlaMkAre (mvR)| 15. yaH punazculyA upari sthApitaM
piTharaM jvAlAbhirna 3. cittamIsA ya (lA, ba, s)| prApnoti so'prAptaH (m)| 4.
ikkao ikkao (a, ka, bI, s)| 16. jvAlAbhiH piTharaM bughne spazati sa prAptaH
(mv)| 5. u (mu)| 17. yaH punaH piTharasya bughnAdUrdhvamapi yAvat karNI 6.
saccitto (lA, ba, s)| jvAlAbhiH spRzati sa samajvAlaH (mvR)| 7. etthaM (sa, mu)|
18. vokkaMte (mu), yasya punarsthAlA piTharakarNAbhyA8. vi caubhaMgo (a, bI,
sa), caukkabheo (mu)| mUrdhvamapi gacchanti sa vyutkrAntaH (mvR)| 9. "due (a,
ba, sa, lA, bii)| 19. 'duve (lA, ba, s)|| 10.251/1-3-ye tInoM gAthAeM bhASya kI
honI caahie| 20. ete tu aNaMtara pare ya (jIbhA 1529) /  251 meM kalpyAkalpya
vidhi kA varNana karake 21. "la agaNi (lA, ba, mu, sa, k)| niyuktikAra ne
nikSipta dvAra ko sampanna kara diyaa| 22. iMgAle (ka, mu), jIbhA (1530) meM isa
gAthA bAda meM 251/1-3-ina tIna gAthAoM meM kalpyA - kA uttarArdha isa prakAra
haikalpya vidhi ke saMbaMdha meM jo matAntara prastuta kiyA  /  chArummIsA
piMgala, agaNikaNA mummuro hoti  /  gayA hai, ve gAthAeM bhASyakAra dvArA
nirmita honI 23. piDhare (a, ka, bii)| cAhie, aisA saMbhava lagatA hai| 24.
samatitthayA (laa)| 11. davvesu (a, ba, ka, lA, bI, s)| 25. carame (ka), 252/1,
2-ye donoM gAthAeM 252 12. taha (a, bii)| vI gAthA kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiM ataH
spaSTatayA bhASya 13. "himAyaNaM (mu), 'himAdiNaM (ka, b)| kI pratIta hotI haiN|

Page #254 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 82 253. A Pasaolitta Kadāha, without a boundary, is also vast. It is also not
quickly cooled, and it is not very hot. || 552 || 253/1. It is heated by the
fire, and it is not very hot, being transformed by the juice of sugar. And that
which is not struck by the ear, is not fire in the striking and falling. || 553
|| 253/2. A Pasaolitta Kadāha, with sixteen types of destruction, 253/3. In the
appearance of the milk and the sugar, 254. 255. 256. 257. 258. 1. Not quickly
cooled (k, s). 2. Tongue 1534. 3. V (k). 4. Not hot (la, b), not very hot (s).
5. Striking and falling (a, k, b). The measure of destruction One after another,
light and heavy, twice as much, two types of destruction by heat, vomiting,
being thrown out, after that, the tradition, the succession 6. 253/1-3 - These
three stanzas are meant to explain the 253rd stanza, therefore they should be
part of the commentary. Stanza 253/3 is not found in any of the manuscripts,
therefore it is either part of the commentary or added later by some Acharya.
Acharya Malayagiri has explained it. There is a brief explanation of it in the
Avacuri, but not the stanza. The editor has given the reason for including it in
the numbering in the footnote, saying - "This Haritadi tradition, the
succession, after the striking of the ground, in the heat, in the Pupay in the
conscious, in the 13 unconscious, in the covered, it is said that there is a
prohibition, 'in the last destruction, fear Just as there is in the thrown out,
so also there are connections in the covered, in the knowledge of the Angara-
Dhuviyaadi 15, Anantaro 16 Santaro there itself, Atir 17 wind, the tradition
Vatthina 7. 8. 9. 10. Not Tesima Twice as much Loss and the difference in the
speech. " Rayana. In the left. || 555 ||  Vatthi. || 556 || The statement of the
body In the speech. Others. || 557 || Door. || Four types of destruction. U 14.
|| 558 || Destruction U. The third destruction. || 559 || Saravaadi. In the
covered. || 560 || Stanza The commentary explained by Sri Malayagiri Pada And
Therefore, its numbering is justified (av). " Ghattan (la). 'Pāre (a, b), 'Param
(s). Vatthi, the ending of the third case, in the object (mavṛ). Hariyāy (a, b),
11. Tarayā (s), Taraye (k). 12. Kuu (b), Kuudagaisu (la, b), Kundagatiisu (s).
13. Sacchitte etc. in the seventh case, in the third meaning (mavṛ). 14. In the
taking, the fault of the Aṇāy U (s). 15. Angaru (s), Dhumiaai (la, b). 16. Tara
(la). 17. Athir (b). 18. Parupparam (a, b).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 82 253. pAsolittakaDAhe, parisADI natthi taM pi ya visAlaM  /  so vi ya
aciracchUDho', ucchuraso nAtiusiNo yaraM  //  552  //  253/1. usiNodagaM pira
gheppati, gula- rasapariNAmigaM aNaccusiNaM  /  jaM ca aghaTTiyakaNNaM,
ghaTTiyapaDaNammi mA aggI  //  553  //  253 / 2. pAsolittakaDAhe,
solasabhaMgavikappA, 253/3. payasamadugaabbhAse, 254. 255. 256. 257. 258. 1.
aciraM chUDho (ka, sa)  /  2. jIbhA 1534  /  cusi paDha * 3. va (ka)  /  4. tu
na usiNA (lA, ba), tu Naccu (sa)  /  5. sADi ghaTTaMto ( a, ka, bI)  /  mANaM
bhaMgANa egaMtariyaM lahuguru, duguNA duvidhavirAdhaNa usiNe, chaDDaNa
vAukkhittA'NaMtara, paraMparA pappaDiya 6. 253 / 1-3- ye tInoM gAthAeM 253 vIM
gAthA kI vyAkhyA prastuta karane vAlI haiM ataH bhASya kI honI caahie| gA. 253 /
3 sabhI hastaAdarzoM meM aprApta hai ataH bhASya kI athavA bAda meM kisI AcArya
dvArA jor3I gaI pratIta hotI hai| AcArya malayagiri ne isakI vyAkhyA kI hai|
avacUri meM isakI saMkSipta vyAkhyA hai, para gAthA nahIM hai| vahAM ise niyukti
kramAMka meM parigaNita karane kA kAraNa saMpAdaka ne pAdaTippaNa meM prastuta
karate hue kahA hai- " eSA haritAdI tariyA, paraMparaM piDharagAdisu
piTThaNaMtara, bharage kuubAisU pUpAi saccitte 13 accitte, mIsaga pihitammi hoti
Aditige paDisedho, 'carime bhaMgammi bhayaNA jaha ceva ya nikkhitte, saMjogA
ceva hoMti emeva ya pihitammi vi nANattamiNaM 'aMgAra- dhUviyAdI 15, aNaMtaro 16
saMtaro tattheva atira17 vAU, paraMparaM vatthiNA 7. 8. 9. 10. aparisA'ghaTTate"
| sesesu  //  554 //  na tesimA duguNA ya hANI ya bhANabhedo ya  /  " rayaNA  /
vAmesu  //  555  //  vatthI'  //  556  //  piMDaniryukti vaNammi  /  itarA  //
557  //  dAraM  //  caubhaMgo  /  u 14  //  558  //  bhaMgA u  /  tatiyabhaMge
//  559  //  sarAvAdI  /  pihite  //  560  //  gAthA zrImalayagiripAdairaMgIkRtA
vyAkhyAtA ca ato'syA kramAMkopasthiti: nyAyyaiva (ava)  / " ghaTTaNa (lA)  /
'pare ( a, bI), 'paraM ( sa )  /  vatthi ttivibhaktilopAd vastau (mavR)  /
hariyAya ( a, bI), 11. tarayA (sa), tarae (ka)  /  12. kUu (bI), kUDagAisU (lA,
ba), kuMDagAtisu (sa)  /  13. saccitte ityAdau saptamI tRtIyArthe (mavR) 14.
gahaNe ANAya dosA u ( sa )  /  15. aMgAru (sa), dhUmiyAI (lA, b)| 16. tarA
(laa)| 17. athira ( ba )  /  18. parupparaM ( a, bI)  /

Page #255 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **259.** "Airaṁ phalādipihitaṁ", vaṇammi kacchabhasancaraadi,
**259/1.** Guru guruna guru lahuṇa, lahugaṁ gurueṇa do vi lahuyaai. Accitteṇa vi
pihite, caubhaṅgo do **261.** **262.** **260.** Saccitte accitte, misaga
"sāharaṇe ya10 āditige paḍiseḍho, "carime bhaṅgammi **263.** **1.** Airaṁ tti
atirohitena (mavṛ). **2.** Phalāi pihie (a, b). **4.** Jah ceva ya13 nikkhitte,
saṁjoga ceva honti tah ceva sāharaṇe, ya nāṇattamiṇaṁ **3.** Mmi va (b). **4.**
Itarammi (k). **5.** Vattthapiuḍāi (la, b), pacchhipihuḍāadi (jibhā). **6.**
Atiratiran pacchiyāadihiṁ (jibhā 1553), "taraṇāntare **7.** Vāvi (la, b). **8.**
Saccittena (s). **9.** Mā gejḍho (la, b), 259/1 - Yah gāthā prakāśita ṭīkā meṁ
nigā ke kram meṁ hai lekin yah bhāṣya ki honi cāhie. Iske bhāṣyagat hone kā
sabse baḍā tark yah hai ki yah gā. 260 meṁ āe "carime bhaṅgammi bhayaṇā u" ki
vyākhyā rūp hai. **10.** Sāharaṇe hoi (a, b). **1.** Itaraṁ tu chabbapiḍharāadi.
**11.** Bhaṅgā (s). **12.** Gahaṇe āṇāiṇo dosā (a, b, la, b), gahaṇe āṇāyaṇo
dosā (s).  matteṇa jeṇa dāhiti15, tattha adejḍā16 va hojḍa17 asanaadi. Chhoḍu"
tadannahi tenaṁ, deti9 ah hoti sāharaṇā. || 565 || Bhomaiyesu taṁ puṇa,
sāharaṇam hoti21 chhasu vi kāsu. Jaṁ taṁ "duha accittaṁ"22, "sāharaṇam tattha
caubhaṅgo"23. || 566 || 263/1. Sukke sukkam paḍhamo, sukke ullan5 tu "biṭiya
caubhaṅgo" ullan sukkam tatiyo, ullan cauṭṭho u27. || 567 ||  **13.** U (mu).
**14.** Bhaṅgo (a, b, s). **15.** Dāhi (k). **16.** Ya dijḍaṁ (a, b, la, k, mu).
**17.** Hoi (s). **18.** Chhoḍuṁ (s, k). **19.** Deha (a, b, la, b), dei (k).
**20.** Raṇaṁ (mu), tu. jibhā (1558). **21.** Bhūmā (mu). **22.** Duha acittaṁ
(k, mu). **23.** Sāharaṇo hoi caukkko (la, b). **24.** Sukkha (a, b), sarvatra.
**25.** Tullan (la, b). **26.** Bi'iyao bhaṅgo (mu, k, jibhā 1562), bīya cau°
(a, b). **83.** **27.** Ya (k), tu (jibhā), 263/1-3 - Ye tīnoṁ gāthāeṁ 263 vīṁ
gāthā ki vyākhyārūp hone ke kāraṇa bhāṣya ki honi cāhie.  **Parampere chaṭṭhe'6.
|| 561 ||** **Aggejḍhaṁ. || 562 || Dāraṁ. ||** **Coubhaṅgo".** **U12. || 563
||**  **Bhaṅgāra4 ya.** **Tatiyabhaṅge. || 564 ||**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 259. airaM phalAdipihitaM', vaNammi kacchabhasaMcArAdI, 'anaMtara
259/1. guru guruNA guru lahuNA, lahugaM gurueNa do vi lahuyAI  /  accitteNa vi
pihite, caubhaMgo do 261. 262. 260. saccitte accitte, mIsaga 'sAhAraNe ya10
Aditige paDisedho, 'carime bhaMgammi bhayaNA 263. 1. aira tti atirohitena (mavR)
/  2. phalAi pihie ( a, bI)  /  4 jaha ceva ya13 nikkhitte, saMjogA ceva hoMti
taha ceva sAharaNe, ya nANattamiNaM matteNa jeNa dAhiti15, tattha adejjA 16 va
hojja 17 asaNAdI  /  chodu" tadannahi teNaM, detI 9 aha hoti sAharaNA  //  565
//  bhomAiesu taM puNa, sAharaNaM hoti 21 chasu vi kAsu  /  jaM taM 'duha
accittaM ' 22, 'sAharaNaM tattha caubhaMgo 23  //  566  //  263/1. sukke sukkaM
paDhamo, sukke ullaM 5 tu ' bitiya caubhaMgo' ulle sukkaM tatio, ullaM cauttho
u27  //  567  //  24 126 T ulle 3. mmi va (ba)  /  4. itarammi ( ka )  /  5.
vatthapiuDAi (lA, ba), pacchipihuDAdI (jIbhA )  /  6. atiratiraM pacchiyAdIhiM
(jIbhA 1553), 'tarANaMtare chaTuM (ba, lA)  /  7. vAvi (lA, ba)  /  8.
saccittena ( sa )  /  9. mA gejjho (lA, ba), 259 / 1 - yaha gAthA prakAzita TIkA
meM nigA ke krama meM hai lekina yaha bhASya kI honI caahie| isake bhASyagata
hone kA sabase bar3A tarka yaha hai ki yaha gA. 260 meM Ae 'carime bhaMgammi
bhayaNA u' kI vyAkhyA rUpa hai 10. sAharaNe hoi ( a, bI)  /  1 itaraM tu
chabbapiDharAdI | 11. bhaMgA (sa)  /  12. gahaNe ANAiNo dosA ( a, ba, lA, bI),
gahaNe ANAyaNo dosA (sa)  /  paraMpare chaTThe'6  //  561  //  aggejjhaM  //
562  //  dAraM  //  cubhNgo"| u 12  //  563  //  bhaMgAra4 ya  /  tatiyabhaMge
//  564  //  13. u (mu)  /  14. bhaMgo ( a, bI, sa)  /  15. dAhI ( ka )  /  16.
ya dijjaM ( a, ba, lA, ka, mu)  /  17. hoI (sa)  /  18. choDhuM (sa, ka)  /  19.
deha ( a, ba, lA, bI), dei (ka)  /  20. raNaM (mu), tu. jIbhA ( 1558 )  /  21.
bhUmA (mu)| 22. duhA acittaM (ka, mu)  /  23. sAharaNo hoi caukko (lA, ba)  /
24. sukkhe ( a, bI), sarvatra  /  25 tullaM (lA, b)| 26. biiyao bhaMgo (mu, ka,
jIbhA 1562), bIya caudeg ( a, bI)  /  83 27. ya (ka), tu (jIbhA ), 263/1-3- ye
tInoM gAthAeM 263 vIM gAthA kI vyAkhyArUpa hone ke kAraNa bhASya kI honI caahie|

Page #256 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **263/2.**  One by one, four types of food, and four types of
food like dry food, etc.  Little by little, little by little, many times, the
explanation of two types of food. || 568 ||  **263/3.**  Where little by little,
dry food is consumed, that is called 'Gejhan'. If that is to be consumed, the
food is reduced by the burden of the body. || 569 ||  **264.**  In the case of
vomiting, in the case of defecation, 'in the case of excessive eating, there is
indigestion and burning'. || 'Unnecessary cutting', 'six types of food are also
heavy'. || 570 ||  **264/1.**  Little by little, the food is consumed, dry food
is consumed, that is called 'Ainn'. Many times, the food is not consumed, that
is called 'Kadadoso'. || 571 ||  **265.**  In the case of a child, an old
person, a drunkard, a madman, a sick person, and a person who is always talking.
In the case of a blind person, a lame person, a person who is riding, and a
person who is walking. || 572 ||  **266.**  In the case of a person whose hands
are tied, a person who is separated from his hands and feet. Those who are like
children, eat and drink. || 573 ||  **267.**  They eat, they chew, they break,
they cut, they grind, they swallow, they vomit, they eat with greed. || 574 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 263/2. ekkekke' caubhaMgo, sukkAdIesu causu bhNgesu| . thove
thovaM thove, bahuyaMre 'vivarIta do anne  //  568  //  263/3. jattha tu thove
thovaM, sukke ullaM ca chubhati taM gejhN| jai taM tu samukkhittuM', thovAbhAraM
dalati annaM  //  569  //  264. ukkheve nikkheve, 'mahallabhANammi luddha vadha
DAho'11  //  'aciyattaM vocchedo' 12, 'chakkAyavaho ya gurumatte '13  //  570
//  264/1. thove thovaM chUDhaM", sukke ullaM ca5 taM tu Ainna :6 /  bahugaM tu
aNAinnaM, kaDadoso so tti kAUNaM  //  571  //  265. bAle vuDDe matte, ummatte
vevite 17 ya8 jarite y| aMdhillae pagalie, ArUDho pAuyAhiM ca  //  572  /  /
266. hatthaMdunigalabaddhe21, vivajjite 'ceva hattha-pAdehiM '22  /  terAsi22
guvviNI bAlavaccha, bhuMjaMti ghusuliMtI  //  573  /  /  267. bhajjatI25 va26
daleMtI27, kaMDaMtI28 'ceva taha ya 29 piisNtii| piMjaMtI uMcaMtI, kattaMti
'pamaddamANI ya'32  //  574  /  /  1. "kkaM (s)| 17. thevite (lA, sa), vevire
(mu)| 2. bahU ya (bI), bahuM ca (ka, mu)| 18. va (a, bI, s)| 3. 'rIya tu (a,
bI), rIyaM (lA) 1 19. paMgulie (lA, ba), "rie (mu)| 4. bahu thova bahu bahugaM
(jIbhA 1563) /  20. jIbhA 1569, oghaniyukti meM kucha aMtara ke sAtha 5. sukkhaM
(a, ba, lA, bI, s)| 'dAyaka dvAra' meM dAna dene ke ayogya dAtAoM 6. mejjhaM
(lA, ba, sa), gajjhaM (jiibhaa)| kA ullekha hai| dekheM oni 467, 468 /  7. jaha
(lA, b)| 21. hattha aMdu (ba, a), hatthaMDu (lA), hatthiMdu" (mu)| 8. samukkhe
uM (mu)| 22. "pAesu (lA, ba, sa), hattha pAyae ceva (k)| 9. thovAhAraM (a, ba,
lA, bI, ka, sa, jiibhaa)| 23. telAsi (lA, bii)| 10.mannaM (a, ba, lA, ka, bI),
jIbhA 1564 /  24. ghusAlaMtI (lA, ba), jIbhA 1570  /  11. llae luddhayA vahe
dAho (a, bI), bhANassa luddhayA 25. bhaMjaMtI (lA), bhuMjaMtI (a, bii)| vaho
dAho (lA, ba, s)| 26. ya (lA, ba, mu, sa, jiibhaa)| 12. chakkAyavaho ya tahA
(jiibhaa)| 27. dalaMtI (mu, sa, k)| 13.dosu vi bhaMgesu bahUyA ya (a, bI),
aciyattaM ceva cava 28. khaMDaMtI (a, bI), kaMDeMtI (jiibhaa)| kI vocchedo
(jIbhA 1566) /  29. taha ya ceva (k)| 14. choDhuM (laa)| 30. posaMtI (a, ba),
pIseMtI (jiibhaa)| 15.tu (mu, jIbhA 1567) /  31. ruMdhatI (a, bii)| 16. yahAM
AinnaM ke sthAna para NAinnaM pATha honA caahie| hie| 32. ya pamaddamANIyA (lA,
ba), jIbhA 1571  /

Page #257 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pindaniyukti  268. The mendicants who have the nature of the six-fold group,
being ascetics, 'should not accept (alms) from them'. They even enter (their
houses), and begin to associate (with them). || 575 ||  269. And with the
associated substance, 'being smeared, and having smeared hands',  they go out,
give common (alms), and also give thievish (alms). || 576 ||  270. And they
place the 'pāhuḍiya', and with the intention of the other,  they destroy with or
without intention, what is to be avoided. || 577 ||  271. The acceptance by some
of these donors is to be feared. The non-acceptance by some, and the acceptance
in the opposite of that, is (also to be feared). || 578 ||  272. The
kappāṭṭhika, the appāhaṇa, the given of another, the acceptance is proper. The
khantika, the maggaṇa, the given, the uḍḍāha, the padosa, the cārabhada. || 579
||  273. The elder, the galantarāla, the kampanāhasta, may give or fall down.
The apabhū, and the aciyatta, either one or both. || 580 ||  274. The avayāsa,
the bhāṇabheda, the vamana, the 'asuci', and the 'loggarhitā', the 'pantāvaṇā'
and the 'matte', the vamanavivarjitā, the unmatta. || 581 ||  275. The veviṇa,
the parisāḍaṇayā, the pāse, may disturb, or the bhāṇabheda. Even thus in old
age, the uḍḍāha of the jara-saṃkramaṇa. || 582 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 268. chakkAyavaggahatthA, samaNaTThA 'nikkhivittu te5 cev| te
cevogAhaMtI, saMghaTuMtArabhaMtI ya  //  575  //  269. saMsatteNa ya davveNa,
'littamattA ya littahatthA" y| uvvattaMtI sAhAraNaM va deMtI ya coriyagaM  //
576  //  270. pAhuDiyaM ca ThaveMtI, sapaccavAyA paraM 'ca uddiss|
AbhogamaNAbhogeNa, dalaMtI vajjaNijjA u||577  //  etesi dAyagANaM, gahaNaM
kesiMci hoti bhaiyavvaM  /  kesiMcI0 aggahaNaM, tavvivarIte" bhave gahaNaM  //
578  //  272. kappaTThiga12 appAhaNa2, diNNe annanna5 gahaNa pajjattaM  /
khaMtiga maggaNa dinne16, uDDAha padosa cArabhaDA  //  579  //  273. thero
galaMtalAlo, kaMpaNahattho paDejja vA deNto| apabhu8 tti ya aciyattaM, egataro
'ubhayao vaavi'19|| 580  //  274. avayAsa bhANabhedo, vamaNaM20 asui tti
'logagarihA ya'21  /  'paMtAvaNA va matte'22, vamaNavivajjA u ummatte  //  581
//  275. veviya23 parisADaNayA, pAse va24 chubhejja25 bhANabhedo vaa| emeva ya
jaritammi vi, jarasaMkamaNaM ca uDDAho26  //  582  /  /  1. "khivaM tu taM (a,
bii)| sambandhita 272-83 taka kI gAthAoM meM kucha 2. saMghaTTitA' (k)| gAthAeM
oghaniyukti meM bhI milatI haiN| kappaTThiga 3. tu. (jIbhA 1572) /  (gA. 272) ke
prArambha meM oghaniyukti ke TIkAkAra 4. littahatthA ya littamattA (ka, sa, mu,
jiibhaa)| idAnIM bhASyakAra:.....kA ullekha karate haiN| saMbhava 5. ovattetI
(lA, sa), oyattaMtI (a, ka, bI), lagatA hai ki piNDaniyukti kI gAthAoM ko
oghaoyattetI (jIbhA 1573) /  niyukti ke bhASyakAra ne apane graMtha kA aMga banA
6. ThavaMtI (a, bI, mu)| liyA ho, kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, 7.
samuddi (ba, s)| kathA saM. 48 /  8. bhoge (a), "ga aNA" (ka, jIbhA 1574) /  18.
avahu (b)| 9. dalayaMtI (s)| 19. vA ubhayao vA (lA, ba, ka, sa, mu)| 10. kesiMci
ya (ba, sa), kesiMti (bii)| 20. ghAyaM (a, b)| 11. tappaDivakkhe (jIbhA 1575) /
21. "garahANaM ya (lA), garahA ya (sa), 12. kabbaDhiga (mu), kabbaTThia (k)|
_loga uDDAho (a, bii)| 13. appAhiUNaM ti saMdizya (m)| 22. ee ceva u matte (mu),
vaNaM va (s)| 14. vi diNNe (s)| 23. vevaNa (a, b)| 15. aNaNNa (lA), aNNeNa (ba),
annonna (obhA 241) /  24. vA (s)| 16. dinnaM (a, ka, obhA), dinne ya (s)| 25.
chuhai (lA, b)| 17. niSiddha dAyakoM ke hAtha se bhikSA lene ke doSa se 26.
uDDAhe (b)|

Page #258 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **276.**  Uddah kayapadana, andhe bhedo ya paschhu bhana va.
Taddosi sankamanam, galant bhis bhinnadehere ya. || 583 ||  **277.**
Pauyadurudhapadanam, badha paritaav asuikhimsa ya. Karachhinnaasuikhimsa, te
chchiya- padammi padanam cha. || 584 ||  **278.** Ayaparo bhayadosa,
abhikkhagahanammi 'khubhana pande. Logadugucha sanka, erisaga nunamete vi. ||
585 ||  **279.** Guvvini gabbhe sanghatana u utentuvesamaniye. Balaadi
mansundaga, majjaraadi virahejjya. || 586 ||  **280.** Bhumjanti ayamane, udagam
chotti12 ya loggarhaha13 ya. Ghusalinti4 sansatte, karammi litte bhave rasaga.
|| 587 ||  **281.** Dagabie5 sanghatana, pisana 'kanda-dal bhajjaned15
dahana'17. 'Pinjant ruchanaadi18, dinne litte kare udagam. || 588 ||  **282.**
Lona-daga-agani-vatthi, phalaadi macchaadi sajiya hatthammi. Paenogahanaya,
sanghatana sesakaenam. || 589 ||  **283.** Khanamani aarabhae, majjati dhovati22
‘va sinchati’23 kinchi. 'Chheda-visaranam aadi'24, chindati25 chhathe
furufurunte26. || 590 ||  **Notes:**  1. "Paranam (la, b, s). 15. Biodag (Obha
247). 2. Bhinnaboha (la, b). 16. Bhanjane (a, b), bhajjanā (la, b). 3. Va (b).
17. Kandan dalan bhajjaned dahana (k), 4. Ti (k). gahanam (la, b, s), 'dahana
(b). 5. Vi ya (b). 18. Katteti pijjanai (la, b, s), kattamti pinjanai 6. Paye vi
(mu). (k), runchanam aadi shabdat kartan pramaradane cha 7. Khobana napumse
(mu), khubhana pande (b, s), khubhana kurvati (mavru). napumse (k, obha 243).
19. Loni (la, b, s), lonam (mu). 8. Nun eae (a, k, b). 20. Paenam ga (la),
'nogahinya (s). 9. Utuntave' (la, b), utuntanives (k). 21. "Kayanam (la, b, s).
10. Mansudar (la), mansudara (b), mansundaga tti arshavad 22. Dhoya (k, mu).
vyatyasena padayojana (mavru). 23. Sinchae (a, k, b), va sinchae (mu). 11.
Virahanaya (a, b), obha 246. 24. Chitte virallamai (la, b, s). 12. Potti (la,
s), putti (a, b). 25. Chanda (la), chinde (a, b). 13. Gariha (la, b, mu, s). 26.
“Furanto (la, b), purufurute (a, b), furufurunte 14. Ghusalinti (b), ghusalanti
(la), ghusalanti dadhyadi iti posphuryaman pideyodvellat ity arthah. (mavru).
mathnati (mavru).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 276. uDDAha kAyapaDaNaM, aMdhe bhedo ya pAsachu bhaNaM v| taddosI
saMkamaNaM, galaMta bhisa bhinnadehere y|| 583  //  277. pAuyadurUDhapaDaNaM,
baddha paritAva asuikhiMsA y| karachinnAsui khiMsA, te cciya- pAdammi paDaNaM ca
//  584  //  278. AyaparobhayadosA, abhikkhagahaNammi 'khubbhaNA paMDe  /
logaduguMchA saMkA, erisagA nUNamete vi|| 585  //  guvviNi gabbhe saMghaTTaNA u
uTheMtuvesamANIe  /  bAlAdI maMsuMDaga", majjArAdI virAhejjA  //  586  //  280.
bhuMjaMtI AyamaNe, udagaM choTTI12 ya logagarahA13 y| ghusuliMtI4 saMsatte,
karammi litte bhave rsgaa|| 587  //  281. dagabIe5 saMghaTTaNa, pIsaNa 'kaMDa-
dala bhajjaNe15 DahaNaM'17  /  'piMjaMta rucaNAdI 18, dinne litte kare udagaM
//  588  /  /  282. loNa-daga-agaNi-vatthI, phalAdi macchAdi sajiya htthmmi|
pAeNogAhaNayA, saMghaTTaNa sesakAeNaM  //  589  //  khaNamANI Arabhae, majjati
dhovati22 'va siMcatI'23 kiNci| 'cheda-visAraNamAdI'24, chiMdati25 chaThe
phuruphuraMte26  //  590  //  1. "paraNaM (lA, ba, s)| 15. bIodaga (obhA 247) /
2. bhinnabohA (lA, b)| 16. bhaMjaNe (a, bI), bhajjaNA (lA, b)| 3. vA (bii)| 17.
kaMDaNa dalaNa bhajjaNe DahaNaM (ka), 4. ti (k)| gahaNaM (lA, ba, sa), 'dahaNaM
(bii)| 5. vi ya (bii)| 18. katteti pijjaNAI (lA, ba, sa), kattaMti piMjaNAI 6.
pAye vi (mu)| (ka), ruJcanamAdizabdAt karttanapramardane ca 7. khobhaNa napuMse
(mu), khubbhaNaM paMDe (ba, sa), khubbhaNa kurvatI (mvR)| napuMse (ka, obhA 243)
/  19. loNi (lA, ba, sa), loNaM (mu)| 8. nUNa ee (a, ka, bii)| 20. pAeNaM gA
(lA), 'NogAhiNayA (s)| 9. uTuMtave' (lA, ba), uTuMtanivesa (k)| 21. "kAyANaM
(lA, ba, s)| 10.maMsudara (lA), maMsudarA (ba), maMsuMDaga tti ArSatvAd 22.
dhoyai (ka, mu)| _ vyatyAsena padayojanA (mvR)| 23. siMcae (a, ka, bI), va
siMcae (mu)| 11. virAhaNayA (a, bI), obhA 246 /  24. chitte virallamAI (lA, ba,
s)| 12. poTTI (lA, sa), puTTI (a, b)| 25. chaMdai (lA), chiMde (a, bii)| 13.
garihA (lA, ba, mu, s)| 26. "phuraMto (lA, ba), puruphurite (a, bI),
phuruphuruMte 14. ghusaliMti (bI), ghusalaMtI (lA), ghusulaMtI dadhyAdi iti
posphUryamANAn pIDayodvellata ityarthaH  /  (mvR)| mathnatI (mvR)| 283.

Page #259 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **284.** "What is the meaning of 'Chakkayavaggahattha'?" -
They say it is like ears, etc., which are pierced. **591.**  The flowers of the
Siddhattha tree, when given to the head, are considered to be a gift.
**284/1.**  Some say that there are ten types of food, but there is no mention
of taking food in the context of the five types of faults. **592.**  Therefore,
it is not considered a gift, but rather a taking of a gift.  **285.**  In the
context of the body, the body is considered to be the object of the gift.
**593.**  "Sंचारो ओवत्तण" -  Even if it is thrown away, it is still considered a
gift.  **286.**  There are many types of gifts, and there are also faults
associated with them. **594.**  These faults include theft, taking, fear, and
happiness.  **287.**  The faults of a gift that is given to a beggar are: "tiri-
udd-mahe" - these are the three types of hell. **595.**  A gift that is given to
a worthy person is considered to be a gift that brings happiness to the giver.
**288.**  Even if someone knows that a gift is given out of compassion, it is
still considered a fault. **596.**  This is because the gift is given out of a
desire to get something in return.  **288/1.**  If a gift is given to a child
who is not yet able to understand, it is considered to be a gift that is given
out of compassion. **597.**  But if the gift is given to someone who is able to
understand, it is considered to be a gift that is given out of a desire to get
something in return.  **288/2.**  If a gift is given to a monk who is old and
weak, it is considered to be a gift that is given out of compassion. **598.**
But if the gift is given to someone who is strong and healthy, it is considered
to be a gift that is given out of a desire to get something in return.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 284. 'chakkAyavaggahattha tti kei', kolAdikaNNalaiyAI  /
siddhatthagapupphANi ya, sirammi dinnAi~ vajjeMti  //  591  //  284/1. anne
bhaNaMti dasasu vi, esaNadosesu natthi taggahaNaM  /  teNa na vajja bhaNNati",
naNu gahaNaM dAyagaggahaNA  //  592  //  285. saMsajjimammi dese,
saMsajjimadavvalittakaramattA  /  'saMcAro ovattaNa'19, ukkhippaMte vi12 te ceva
// 593  //  286. sAhAraNa13 bahUNaM, tattha u dosA taheva'4 aNisiTTe5  /
coriyage gahaNAdI6, bhayae17 suhAdi8 vA dite  //  594 ||daarN  //  287. pAhuDi-
ThaviyagadosA, 'tiri-uDDa-mahe '20 tihA avAyAo21  /  dhammiyamAdI ThavitaM,
parassa parasaMtiyaM 'va tti'22  /  /  595  //  288. aNukaMpA paDiNIyaTThayAya23
te kuNati jANamANo vi| esaNadose bitio, 'u kuNati'24 asaDho ayANaMto25  //  596
//  288/1. bhikkhAmatte26 aviyAlaNA27 tu bAleNa dijjmaannmmi| saMdiDhe vA
gahaNaM, atibahuya28 viyAlaNe'NuNNA  //  597  //  288/2. thera pabhu
tharatharate29, dharite anneNa daDhasarIre vaa| avvattamattasaDDe, avibbhale0 vA
asAgarie  //  598  //  1. 'hatthi tti (a, bI), 'hatthA (ka, mu)| 15. aNisaTTe
(k)| 2. keI (ka, mu)| 16. "NAI (ka, mu)| 3. "kannu (a, ba, lA), 'kandu' (lA,
sa), 'kannalaiyAI 17. rueNa (lA, ba,), bhaie va (k)| ti karNe pinaddhAni (mvR)|
18. suNhA ya (lA, s)| 4. dinANi (a, bii)| 19. deti (lA, ba, s)| 5. vajjaMto (lA,
sa), vajjeI (a, bii)| 20. tiriguDDamahaM (b)| 6. vaNNaM (bii)| 21. avAyA u (sa),
apAyAstrividhaH tatra tiryagvAdibhyaH 7. bhaNai (bii)|
urddhamuttaraGgakASThAderadhaH sarpakaNTakAdeH (mvR)| 8. bhaNiyaM (a, bii)| 22.
biMti (a, bI, ka), vAvi (mu)| 9. dAyagu' (ba), "haNe (ka, s)| 23. paDaNI (ba),
NIyaTTAvi (a, bI), "NIyaTTe va (k)| 10.saMsijji' (lA), 'matte (a, bI), 24. kuNai
u (mu), kuNaI (k)| _jimalittadavvakaramatte (k)|| 25. bRbhA 5622 /  11. saMcarao
uvvattaNa (a, bI), saMcaro uvavattaNa (lA), 26. mitte (lA, ba, ka, mu)| oyattaNa
(ma), saMcArA oattaNa (k)| 27. avivAraNA (lA, ba), "laNaM (oni 469) /  12. ya
(a, bii)| 28. "hula (s)| 13. sAharaNaM (a, bii)| 29. tharaharaMte (a, ka, bI),
thura' (s)| 14. jaheva (a, bI, ka, mu)| 30. avabbhale (a), abaMbhale (bI),
aviMbhale (mu)|

Page #260 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **288/3.**  Suī-bhadda-gadittā-ādi, dadḍaggahe vevite jarammi
sive. 'Anna-dharitam tu'3 saḍḍho, dentam-adho-annenā vā dharito. || 599 ||
**288/4.** Mandala-pasutti-kuṭṭhī', 'asāgariē pāugāgae acale. Kama-baddhe
saviyāre, itaro biḍe asāgariē'. || 600 ||  **288/5.** Paṇḍaga' appḍisevī, velā
thaṇajīvi¹¹ itara'² 'savvam pi'¹³. Ukkhitta-maṇavāe¹⁴, na kiñci⁵ laggaṁ¹⁶
thavantiē. || 601 ||  **288/6.** Pīsanți nippitte, phāsu vā ghusalane⁸
asansattaṁ ⁹. Kattaṇa⁰ asankacunam, cunnam²¹ vā jā acokkhalinī. || 602 ||
**288/7.** Uvvaṭṭane²² sansatteṇa vāvi aṭṭhillāe²³ na ghaṭṭeti. Piñjaṇa²⁴ -
pammaddaṇesu ya, . pacchākammāṁ jahiṁ²⁵ natthi. || 603 ||  **288/8.** Seseṣu
ya²⁶ paḍivakkho, na sambhavati kāyagahaṇam-ādiṣu. Paḍivakkhassa 'abhāve, niyamā
u bhave'²⁷ - tadaggahaṇaṁ²⁸. || 604 ||  **Dāram** ||  **289.** Sacitte acitte,
mīsaga ummisagaṁsi²⁹ cau-bhango. Āditi-ge paḍiseḍho, carime bhangammi bhayana u.
|| 605 ||  **Footnotes:**  1. Suy (la), Suī (a, b, s). 18. Ghusu (a, k), Ghusa'
(la), Ghusalane shankacūrṇādy 2. 'Dittātī (b, s). sansktam daddhyādi mathnatyāḥ
(mavṛ). 3. Anne vi dhariē (a, b). 19. Asammattaṁ (b, k, la), "satti (s). Denti-
annenā (la), deī annenā (a, b). 20. Kattaṇi (mu). 5. Pasūī (b, b). 21. Cunne (b,
k, la). 6. Asāriē (b, k la), Asāgari (b), Asāgariē (s). 22. Uvvaṭṭaneī (la),
Oyyaṭṭane (b). 'Gāvāe (a, la), pāugāṭṭhāe (s). 23. Addhillāe (a, b), Aṭṭhillāe
asthikān kārpā'viṭṭhappasāga' (a, b). sikān (mavṛ). 9. Piṇḍaga (b, la). 24.
Bhañjaṇa (b). 10. Velatti sūcanāt sūtramiti nyāyādvēlāmāsaprāptā 25. Jahā (mu),
tahiṁ (b). bhavati navamāmāsagarbhā yadi bhavati (mavṛ). 26. U (a, b). 11. Jīvī
(b, s), Jīva (a, b). 27. Abhāvammi niyamā ya bhave (b, s). 12. Therayaṁ (s, k).
28. 288/1-8-in āṭha gāthāoṁ meṁ bāla ādi dāyakoṁ 13. Savve vi (b, la, s). kī
bhajanā ko spaṣṭa kiyā gayā hai. sambhāvanā kī 14. Ukkhitte aṇavāe (b, la, s),
"khitta aṇā (k). jā sakti hai ki ye gāthāeṁ bhāṣya kī honī cāhie. 15. Kiñc (la,
b). 29. Ummi-liyaṁ ca (b), "sayammi (a, b), 16. Lagge (k, s). gammi (k). 17.
Nippatte (b). 30. Cau-bhango (s).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 288/3. suI-bhaddagadittAdI, daDhaggahe vevite jarammi sive  /
'annadharitaM tu'3 saDDho, deMtaM'dho'nneNa vA dharito  /  /  599  //  288/4.
maMDalapasuttikuTThI', 'sAgarie pAugAgae acle| kamabaddhe saviyAre, itaro biDhe
asAgarie'  /  /  600  /  /  288/5. paMDaga' appaDisevI, velA thaNajIvi11 itara'2
'savvaM pi'13|| ukkhittamaNAvAe14, na kiMci5 laggaM16 tthvNtiie||601  //  288/6.
pIsaMtI nippiTTe, phAsu vA ghusulaNe8 asaMsattaM 9  /  kattaNa0 asaMkhacunaM,
cunnaM21 vA jA acokkhlinnii||602  //  288/7. uvvaTTaNe 22 saMsatteNa vAvi
aTThillae23 na ghaTTeti  /  piMjaNa24 - pamaddaNesu ya, . pacchAkammaM jahiM25
ntthi|| 603  /  /  288 / 8. sesesu ya26 paDivakkho, na saMbhavati
kaayghnnmaadiisu| paDivakkhassa 'abhAve, niyamA u bhave'27 - tadaggahaNaM28  //
604  //  dAraM  //  289. saccitte accitte, mIsaga ummIsagaMsi29 caubhaMgo  /
Aditige paDisedho, carime bhaMgammi bhayaNA u|| 605  //  1. suya (lA), suI (a,
bI, s)| 18. ghasu (a, ka), ghusa' (lA), ghusulaNe zaMkhacUrNAdya2. 'dittAtI (ba,
s)| saMsaktaM dadhyAdi mathnatyAH (mvR)| 3. anne vi dharie (a, bii)| 19.
asammattaM (ba, ka, lA), "sattI (s)| deMti'nneNa (lA), deI anneNa (a, bii)| 20.
kattaNi (mu)| 5. pasUI (ba, bii)| 21. cunne (ba, ka, laa)| 6. asArie (ba, ka
lA), asAgari (bI), asAgarie (s)| 22. uvaTTaNei (lA), oyaTTaNe (bii)| 'gAvAe (a,
lA), pAugaTThAe (s)| 23. addhillae (a, bI), aTThillae asthikAn
kArpA'viTThappasAga' (a, bii)| sikAn (mvR)| 9. piMDaga (ba, laa)| 24. bhaMjaNa
(b)| 10. vela tti sUcanAt sUtramiti nyAyAdvelAmAsaprAptA 25. jahA (mu), tahiM
(bii)| bhavati navamamAsagarbhA yadi bhavati (mvR)| 26. u (a, bii)| 11. jIvI
(ba, sa), jIva (a, bii)| 27. abhAvammi niyamA ya bhave (ba, s)| 12. therayaM
(sa, k)| 28. 288/1-8-ina ATha gAthAoM meM bAla Adi dAyakoM 13. savve vi (ba, lA,
s)| kI bhajanA ko spaSTa kiyA gayA hai| saMbhAvanA kI 14. ukkhitte aNavAe (ba,
lA, sa), "khitta aNA (k)| jA sakatI hai ki ye gAthAeM bhASya kI honI caahie| 15.
kiMca (lA, bii)| 29. ummIliyaM ca (ba), "sayammi (a, bI), 16. lagge (ka, s)|
gammi (k)| 17. nippaTe (bii)| 30. caubbhaMgo (s)|

Page #261 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pindanirykti Kayanan 290. Just as the combinations (of elements), so also is the
manifestation (of qualities). The difference is in the cause. That which is to
be given and that which is not to be given, such as food, water, etc., both
these substances are given (to the ascetic) by the householder.  291/1. That
which is pure is pure, the four types of impurities are in the act of giving.
Even in small or large quantities, the four (types of impurities) are the same,
so also the accepted and the unaccepted. 608 There are two kinds, in substance
and in state, and one is of both kinds. In the state, there is the attainment of
equanimity.  291. 292. 293. Even an unripe substance has six (qualities), in the
living being there are six (qualities) without exception, from the visible, the
curd and the milk, the unripe, the ripe, the unripe in the ripe.  294. In the
general, if it undergoes transformation, then I give it there, not the rest, the
unripe in the state. 295. Even by one, this is attained in the mind, that too is
not to be desired, the attainment of equanimity is the aim.  295/1. That which
is to be taken is the pure, in the pure, there should not be attachment to taste
and touch, thus it is said. 'Paccakamma'

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniryukti kAyANaM 290. jaha ceva ya saMjogA, taha ceva ya ummIse, heTuo ya
hoti viseso imo dAyavvamadAyavvaM, odaNaku saNAdINaM', ca do vi davvANi deMti
tadannahiM sAharaNa 291/1. taM piya sukke sukkaM, bhaMgA cattAri jaha u sAharaNe
/  appabahue vi cauro, taheva AiNNa'NAiNe  //  608  //  duvidhaM, davve bhAve ya
duvihamekkkaM  /  bhAvammi ya hoti sajjhilagA  //  609  //  291. 292. 293.
'apariNataM pi" ya davvammi hoti chakkaM, jIvattammi avigate 6, diTThato duddha-
dahI, apariNataM pariNataM gate apariNataM ' pariNataM 'taM 294. dugamAdI
sAmanne, jadi pariNamatI 10 ' u tattha 11 demi tti na sesANaM, apariNataM
bhAvato 295. egeNa vAvi esiM, maNammi 12 pariNAmitaM na taM pi hu hoti agejjhaM,
sajjhilagA sAmi 295/1. ghettavvamalevakaDaM, levakaDe mA hu na ya
rasagehipasaMgo, iya 14 vutte 'pacchakammaM 1. NAINi va (ka)  /  2. a aura bI
prati meM yaha gAthA nahIM hai| 3. a aura bI prati meM isa gAthA kA pUrvArddha
nahIM hai| 4. AinnAnAinnaM (a, bI)  /  5. appa (sa), 'tammi (ka )  /  6. ya
vigae ( a, bI)  /  7. dahiM (a)  /  8. iya aparideg (lA, ka, ba, mu, jIbhA 1588)
/  9. ceva (jIbhA )  /  10. mai (bI)  /  11. x ( a )  /  sAharaNe  /  tattha  //
606  //  mIseuM  /  choDhuM  //  607  //  18. hANe (bI)  /  19. samaM (lA, sa )
/  20. hAyaI (ka)  /  21. sthA (lA, sa )  /  22. tu (ka)  /  jIve  /  ca N  //
610  //  mA ceva bhuMjaU sayayaM  /  4 codaga! khamaMtassa 19  //  614  //
295/2. jai pacchakammadosA, bhavaMti 6 'tava-niyama- saMjamANaM 17, hANI" 295/3.
littaM ti bhANiUNaM, chammAsA hAyate 0 cautthaM 21 tira  /  AyaMbilassa gahaNaM,
asaMthare appalevaM tu  //  615  //  egassa  /  eyaM  //  611  //  ti 13  /
codago 15 bhaNati  //  613  //  itareNaM  /  sAhU vA  //  612  //  dAraM  //
12. maNaM pi (a)  /  13. kammAI (mu)  /  14. iti ( ka )  /  15. codaga (bI),
coio (sa)  /  16. havaMti ( a, ka, sa, mu)  /  17. tavasaMjamajogANaM ( a, ka,
bI)  /  89

Page #262 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **295/4.**  "Aayambilaparange", for six months continuously,
one should fast. If one does not fast for six months, then one should fast for
one day. || 616 ||  **295/5.**  Thus, one should fast for one day,
"Aayambilaparana". Day by day, one should count, "Aayambila" should not be left
out. || 617 ||  **295/6.**  If one does not follow this, then "esse" (this)
becomes a sin. One should always perform "Aayambila" by overcoming the sin. ||
618 ||  **295/7.**  Marhatthag, Kosalaga, Soviraga, Kurubhoino, these are the
types of men. If even they fast, then what is the name of the one who does not
fast? || 619 ||  **295/8.**  For the ascetics, cold is three, for the
householders, hot is three, and for the animals, it is three. The taking of
food, etc., should be done in the extreme conditions. || 620 ||  **295/9.**
Food, time, and bed, these three are hot for the householders and cold for the
ascetics. Therefore, they are destroyed by these two, hot and cold food. || 621
||  **295/10.**  These three, for the ascetics, are cold even in summer.
Therefore, they are destroyed by fire, and then there are two faults,
indigestion, etc. || 622 ||  **Notes:**  1.  "Aayambilaparana" refers to a
specific type of fast in Jainism. 2.  "Esse" is a Jain term for sin. 3.
"Marhatthag", "Kosalaga", "Soviraga", and "Kurubhoino" are types of men based on
their character and behavior. 4.  The three "cold" conditions for ascetics are:
cold weather, cold food, and cold water. 5.  The three "hot" conditions for
householders are: hot weather, hot food, and hot water. 6.  The three "hot"
conditions for animals are: hot weather, hot food, and hot water. 7.
"Indigestion" is a common problem for those who do not follow the proper dietary
guidelines in Jainism.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 295/4. AyaMbilapAraNage', chammAsa niraMtaraM khameUNaM  /  _ jai
na tarati chammAse, egadiNUNaM tato kuNa  //  616  //  295/5. evaM
ekkekkadiNaM', AyaMbilapAraNaM khaveUNaM  /  divase divase giNhau", AyaMbilameva
nillevaM  //  617  //  295/6. jai se na jogahANI , saMpati 'esse va9 hoti to
khmo| khamaNaMtareNa2 AyaMbilaM tu niyataM tavaM kuNau13  //  618  //  295/7.
marahaTThaga14 kosalagA, sovIraga kUrabhoiNo5 mnnuyaa| jai te vi javeMti16 tahA,
kiM nAma jatI na jAveMti  //  619  //  295/8. tiya8 sItaM samaNANaM, tiya uNha
gihINa teNa'NuNNAtaM  /  takkAdINaM gahaNaM, kaTTaramAdIsu bhaiyavvaM  //  620
//  295/9. AhAra-uvadhi sejjA,tiNNi vi uNhA gihINa sIte vi| teNa u jIrati20
tesiM, duhao usiNeNa aahaaro|| 621  //  295/10. eyAI ciya tinni vi, jatINa
sItAi~ hoMti gimhe vi| teNuvahammati aggI, tao yAra dosA ajIrAdI22  //  622  /
/  1. 'Naye (k)| 2. tu khaviUNaM (mu), tu khamiUNaM (sa, k)| 3. 'NUNe (a, bI,
sa), ikkadiNUNe (k)| 4. kuNai (lA, ba, ka, s)| 5. "diNe (a, bii)| 6. bhave. (a,
ba, lA, bI), kareUNaM (k)| 7. giNhai (ba, lA, s)| 8. "hANiM (a, bI), yogahAniH-
pratyapekSaNAdirUpa saMyamayogabhraMzo na bhavati (mvR)| 9. emeva (lA, ba),
eseva (mu)| 10. bho (ba, laa)| 11.kSapakaH SaNmAsAdyupavAsakartA (mvR)| 12.
NaMtare vi (k)| 13. kuNai (lA, ba, ka, mu, s)| 14. heTThAvaNi (a, ba, ka, mu),
TIkAkAra ne heTThAvaNi pATha kI vyAkhyA kI hai| 15. bhoyaNo (ba), bhoINo (mu)|
16.javaMti (ka, a)| 17. jAveti (a, lA, ba), jati (mu)| 18.taya (s)| 19. bhaIya'
(s)| 20.jIrau (k)| 21. u (b)| 22.295/1-10-ye dasoM gAthAeM prakAzita TIkA meM
nigA ke kramAMka meM haiM lekina ye bhASya kI honI caahie| piNDaniyukti meM
prAyaH nae dvAra kI vyAkhyA kA prAraMbha niyuktikAra ne kiyA hai,jaise zaMkita,
mekSita, nikSipta Adi dvaar| lekina alepa dvAra kA prAraMbha bhASya gAthAoM se
huA hai, aisA saMbhava lagatA hai| niyuktikAra ne zaMkita Adi dasoM dvAroM kI
itane vistAra se kahIM carcA nahIM kI hai| dUsarI bAta saMkSipta zailI hone ke
kAraNa niryaktikAra codaka aura AcArya ke mAdhyama se itane prazna aura uttara
bhI prastuta nahIM karate haiN| alepa dvAra kA prAraMbha codaka kI jijJAsA evaM
AcArya ke uttara se huA hai| ye gAthAeM vyAkhyAtmaka sI pratIta hotI haiN| inako
niyukti gAthA ke kramAMka meM nahIM jor3A gayA hai|

Page #263 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  **296.** Rice, barley, and sattu, along with beans, lentils,
and dried peas. **297.** Sprouts, vegetables, and kangu, along with soup, gruel,
and khadya. **298.** Kheer, yogurt, and jau, along with oil, ghee, and fermented
food. **299.** Food touched by another's hand, or food left over from a meal.
**300.** Food eaten with a disturbed mind, or food rejected after being taken
into the mouth. **301.** Spitting out hot food, or experiencing burning
sensation in the mouth. **302.** Food consumed with a desire for its name, or
food consumed with a desire for its taste. **302/1.** Food consumed for its
benefit, or food consumed for its sustenance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 296. odaNa-maMDaga'-sattuga', kummAsA rAyamAsare kala vllaa|
tUvari masUra muggA, mAsA ya alevaDA sukkA  //  623  //  297. ubbhijja' pejja
kaMgU, tkkollnn-suuv-kNji-kddhiyaadii| ete u appalevA, pacchAkammaM tahiM
bhaiyaM  //  624  //  298. khIra-dahi jAu'1 kaTTara, tella-ghataM-phANitaM
spiNddrsN| iccAdI bahulevaM, pacchAkammaM tahiM niymaa|| 625  /  /  299.
saMsaTThetarahattho, matto 'vi ya'12 davva saavsesitrN| etesu13 aTTha bhaMgA,
niyamA gahaNaM tu oesu  //  626  //  300. saccitte accitte, mIsaga taha
chaDDuNe5 ya cubhNgo| caubhaMge paDisedho, gahaNe ANAdiNo dosaa|| 627  //
usiNassa chaDDaNe16 deMtao ya7 Dajhejja kAyadAho'8 vaa| sItapaDaNammi kAyA,
paDite madhubiMdudAharaNaM  //  628  //  302. nAmaM ThavaNA davie, bhAve
ghAsesaNA munneyvvaa| davve macchAharaNaM, bhAvammi ya hoti pNcvihaa|| 629  //
302/1. caritaM va kappitaM vA, AharaNaM duvidhameva nAtavvaM  /  atthassa
sAhaNaTThA, iMdhaNamiva odaNaTThAe  //  630 //  1. maMDaNa (a, ba, mu)| 16.
chiDaNe (s)| 2. sattu (k)| 17. va (k)| 3. 'rAjamASA:'-sAmAnyatazcavalA:
zvetacavalikA vA (mvR)| 18. "DAho (a, jIbhA 1603) /  4. 'kalA'-vRttacanakA
sAmAnyena vA canakAH (mvR)| 19. 'duAha (a, bI, mu, jIbhA), kathA ke vistAra 5.
tuvarI (a, bI), tUyari (mu)| _ hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 49 /  6. x (b)|
20. neyavvaM (s)| 7. unbhajja (sa), ubbhijji (ka), 'udbhedyA'- 21. oni
541,302/1-5-ye pAMcoM gAthAeM 302 ke vastulaprabhRtizAkabharjikA (mvR)| tRtIya
caraNa 'davve macchAharaNaM' kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiN| 8. kUro (bii)| 302/1 gAthA
meM bhASyakAra ne prasaMgavaza AharaNa ke 9. ullaNaM-
yenaudanamArdIkRtyopayujyate (mvR)| do bhedoM kA ullekha kiyA hai| 302/2-4-ina
10. sUpo-rAddhamudgadAlyAdiH (mvR)| tIna gAthAoM meM macchaAharaNa ko saMvAda-
zailI meM 11.jAu-kSIrapeyA (mvR)| vistRta rUpa se prastuta kiyA hai tathA 302/5
vIM 12.cciya (k)| gAthA meM upasaMhAra kiyA hai| vyAkhyAtmaka hone ke 13. eesi
(lA, sa), eesu (mu)| kAraNa inako mUla niyuktigAthA ke kramAMka meM nahIM 14.
ojassu-viSameSu bhaMgesu prathamatRtIyapaMcamasaptameSu jor3A hai| jIbhA meM
kevala upanaya rUpa meM sAdhu (mavR), tu. bRbhA 1868 /  ke sAtha tulanA karate
hue do gAthAoM kA ullekha 15.chaMDaNe (a, bii)| hai (jIbhA 1606, 1607) /

Page #264 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 92 ## Pindaniyukti 302/2. "I am dying," says the fish, when it is caught.
What are you dying for? Listen, just as the Ahiris are. || 631 || 302/3. With a
hook in its mouth, it is pierced by a sharp hook. It is caught in a net of sharp
hooks, and it burns with the pain of being cut. || 632 || 302/4. My life is like
that, constantly being struck and beaten. You want to take me by the throat, oh,
how Ahiris are! || 633 || 302/5. In the tight grip of the snare, the living
being is not deceived. Just as you are not deceived, you enjoy the pleasures of
anger and hatred. || 634 || 303. In the matter of food, there is both good and
bad. There are five kinds of bad food, and the opposite of them is good food. ||
635 || 303/1. There is much attachment to food, and it is harmful to the body
and mind. There are five kinds of bad food, and the opposite of them is good
food. || 304 || 304. In the matter of wealth, there is attachment to wealth, and
there are two kinds of wealth, external and internal. A beggar walks around,
attached to external wealth. || 636 || 305. Milk, yogurt, ghee, and hard sweets,
jaggery, ghee, and sweet cakes, and salt. There are three kinds of internal
wealth, and there are many kinds of external wealth. || 637 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 92 piMDaniyukti 302/2. aha maMsammi pahINe, jhAyaMta' macchiyaM bhaNati mccho|
kiM jhAyasi taM evaM, suNa tAva jahA ahirio si  //  631  /  /  302/3.
tibalAgamuhummukko', tikkhutto vlyaamuhe| tisattakkhuttajAleNaM, sai chinnodae
dahe  //  632  /  /  302/4. eyArisaM mama sattaM, saDhaM ghaTTiyaghaTTaNaM  /
icchasi galeNa ghettuM, aho te ahirIyayA  //  633  //  302/5.
bAyAlIsesaNasaMkaDammi, 'gahaNammi jIva na hu8 chlito| eNhiM jaha na chalijjasi,
bhuMjato rAgadosehiM  //  634  //  303. ghAsesaNA tu bhAve, hoti pasatthA 'ya
appasatthA y'10| apasatthA paMcavidhA, tavvivarItA pasatthA u1  /  /  635  //
303/1. saMjoyaNamaibahuyaM2, iMgAla'3 sadhUmagaM anntttthaae| 'paMcavidhA
apasatthA'4, tavvivarItA pasatthA u5  //  304. davve bhAve saMjoyaNA u davve
'duhA u'16 bahi aNto| bhikkhaM ciya hiMDato, saMjoyaMtammi8 bAhiriyA  //  636
//  305. khIra-dahi-sUva-kaTTara0 laMbhe gudd-sppi-vddg-vaaluNke| aMto u tihA
pAe, laMbaNa vayaNe22 vibhAsA u|| 637  //  1. jjhayaMtaM (a)| 14. apasatthA
paMcavihA (jIbhA 1610), viha appa (s)| 2. oni 540, kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM
pari. 3, 15. yaha gAthA sabhI hastapratiyoM meM prApta hai kintu kathA saM. 50 /
malayagiri ne isa gAthA kA koI ullekha nahIM 3. tivilA (bI), 'gamuhA mukko (oni
542) /  kiyA hai| avacUrikAra ne "saMjo gAhA" itanA 4. kkhutto" (ka, mu)|
saMketa karake gAthA kA saMkSipta bhAvArtha diyA hai| 5. maM (ba), mahaM (ba,
laa)| yaha gAthA prakSipta sI lagatI hai kyoMki 303 vIM 6. galeNA (sa, b)| gAthA
kA uttarArddha isa gAthA se akSarazaH milatA hai| 7. ahIriyayA (ba, sa), oni 543
/  16. duvihA u hoi (ba, lA, s)| 8. geNhaMto jIva! Na si (jIbhA 1608) /  17.
yaMto (s)| 9. oni 545, ka prati meM isa gAthA kA kevala prathama 18. saMjoiyammi
(s)| pada hai| 19. tu. jIbhA 1611 /  10.taheva appa (s)| 20. kaTTarasya
tImanonmizraghRtavaTikArUpasya dezavizeSa11. ya (sa), tu (jIbhA 1609) /
prasiddhasya (m)| 12.saMjoiya(ba, lA, sa), 'bahuyA (a, bii)| 21. vAlaMke (bii)|
13. sayaMgAla (ba), saMgAla (jiibhaa)| 22. vayaNa (lA), vayaNA (k)|

Page #265 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  **Pinḍaniyukti**  **306.**  The **sanjoyanās** are faults, which bind the
food and drink. They cause harm to the **rasahetu** (taste-producing factor) and
the body. || 638 ||  **307.**  The **sanjoyanās** are in the sense of "binding"
those substances. "**Sanjoyayate karma**" (karma is bound), through karma, there
is birth and then suffering. || 639 ||  **308.**  The **patteya** (food) and
**puralambha** (drink) are consumed, and the remaining portion is discarded.
This is the **sanjoga** (association) that is seen, and karma is produced by it.
|| 640 ||  **309.**  When the **rasahetu** is destroyed, the **sanjoga** is
considered to be harmful. For one who has no desire for food, and whose taste is
not awakened. || 641 ||  **310.**  Thirty-two **kavalas** (mouthfuls) are said
to be the "**kucchipūrṇa**" (full stomach) for a man. For a woman, it is twenty-
eight **kavalas**. || 642 ||  **311.**  Less than this, half or even less than
half, is the food for a **sāhu** (noble) person. For a **dhīra** (wise) person,
it is the same as for a woman and a **yoma** (young man). || 643 ||  **312.**
**Pakāma** (cooked) and **nikāma** (uncooked), **paṇīta** (refined) food and
drink. Too much or too little, the fault of quantity should be avoided. || 644
||  **312/1.**  Beyond thirty-two, **pakāma** and **nikāma** are always the
same. But what is **galantaneha** (easily digestible), that is considered
**paṇīta** by the wise. || 645 ||  **312/2.**  Too much or too little, eating in
excess. It causes **hādejj** (indigestion), **vāmijja** (vomiting), or
**mārejja** (death), and it is **ajīranta** (indigestible). || 646 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 306. saMjoyaNAe~ doso, jo saMjoeti bhattapANaM tu| davvAdI
rasaheuMre, uvaghAto tassimo hoti  //  638  //  307. saMjoyaNA u bhAve,
'saMjoiMto u tANi davvAiM5  /  'saMjoyayae kamma'6, kammeNa bhavaM tao dukkhaM
//  639  //  308. patteya pauralaMbhe, bhuttuvvarite" ya sesgmnntttthaa| diTTho
saMjogo khalu, aha kammo tassimo hoti  //  640  //  309. rasahetuM paDisiddho',
saMjogo kappate 10 gilaanntttthaa| jassa va abhattachaMdo, suhocio'bhAvito jo
y|| 641  //  dAraM  //  310. battIsaM kira kavalA, AhAro 'kucchipUrao bhaNito'11
/  purisassa mahiliyAe'2, aTThAvIsaM bhave kavalA'3  //  642  //  311. etto
kiNAi14 hINaM, addhaM addhaddhagaM ca aahaarN| sAhussa beMti dhIrA, jAyAmAyaM ca
omaM c|| 643  //  312. pakAmaM ca nikAmaM ca, paNItaM5 bhttpaannmaahaare|
atibahuyaM atibahuso, pamANadoso muNeyavvo  //  644  //  312/1. battIsAi16
pareNaM, pagAma niccaM tameva u nikaam| jaM puNa galaMtanehaM, 'paNItamiti
taM'17 buhA beMti  //  645  //  312/2. atibahuyaM atibahuso, atippamANeNa
bhoyaNaM bhuttaM  /  hAdejja20 va vAmijja va mArejja va taM ajIraMta21  //  646
//  1. saMjoaNAi (mu, k)| 12. "liyA va (s)| 2. rasabheo (b)| 13. jIbhA 1622,
prasA 866 /  3. vAghAo (ka, mu)| 14. kiM vA (bI), kiNAvi (jIbhA 1624), kiNAi iti
4. tesimo (a, bii)| kiJcinmAtrayA (mava), kiNAi iti kiyanmAtrayA (av)| 5.
saMjoeUNa tANi (mu), "iMto vi tAi (a, bI), 15. x (lA, ba, sa), jo paNiyaM (jIbhA
1625)  /  . iMto u bhave davvAiM (sa), 'davvANi (k)| 16. "sAu (lA, ba, s)| 6.
saMjoyaMte u kammaM (lA, sa), saMjoyai kammeNaM 17. "mittaM ti (b)| (mu),
saMjoyati u kammaM (b)| 18. jIbhA 1626, 312/1-3-ye tInoM gAthAeM 312 vIM 7.
bhuttuddharie (ba, lA), bhattuvva (a)| gAthA kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiN| prakAzita
TIkA meM 8. tesimo (bii)| nigA ke kramAMka meM hone para bhI vyAkhyAtmaka hone
9. paDikuTTho (a, bI, jIbhA 1618) /  ke kAraNa inako mUla niyukti gAthA ke rUpa
meM 10. kappaI (s)| nahIM jor3A hai| 11. kucchio pUrao hoi (a, bI), kukkhipUraNo
hoi 19. bhuttuM (a), bhottuM (sa, mu)| (bhaA 211) /  20. hArejja (lA, sa),
hAvijja (ba, bii)| 21. jIbhA 1627, piMpra 96 /

Page #266 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 94 ## Pindaniyukti  312/3. Atibahu, atibahuso, re, tinni tinni va parenam.
Tam ciya atippamanam, bhunjati jam va atippanto. || 647 || 313. Hiyahara,
miyahara, appahara ya je nara. Na te vijja tigicchanti, appanam te tigicchanga.
|| 648 || 313/1. Dahi-tellasamaoga, ahito 'khir-dadhi-kanjiyanam'8 cha. Pattham
pun rogahara, na ya hetu hoti rogas. || 649 || 313/2. Addham asanas sa vanjanas,
kujja davas do bhage. Vatpaviyaranaṭṭha, chabbhagam unagam kujja. || 650 ||
313/3. Sito usino saharano ya kalo titha muneyavvo. Saharanammi kale, tatthahre
ima matta. || 651 || 313/4. Site davas ego, bhatte chattari ahava do pane. Usine
davas donni, tinni u sesa va bhattas. || 652 || 313/5. Ego davas bhag, avatthito
bhoyanas do bhage. Vadanti va 'hayanti va, do do bhage tu ekke kke. || 653 ||
313/6. Ettha u tatiyachatuttha, donni ya anavadvita bhave bhage. Panchama
chattho padhamo, bitio y avatthita bhage. || 654 || Daram. ||  1. "Ta aibai (la,
b), "maibahuya (a, k, b). Esu ti su pi, ahare hoti ma matta. 2. Tribh yo va
varebhyah paratastadbhojanam atibahusah (m). 14. Bhage (s). 3. Tinna (la, k, b),
tinha (s). 15. Dunni (a, k), donni u (mu). 4. Bhumkte yad va atripyan esha
aippama iti asya 16. v (mu), ya (s). Shabdhasya arthah (mavri). 17. Prasa 869 5.
Tu. Jiba 1628. 18. Haimti va (b), havanti (s). 6. Chigi (jiba 1632), sarvatra.
19. Ikkikka (la, b), jiba 1640, prasa 870. 7. Oni 578. 20. Tattha (la, b, s). 8.
Dahi khir sanjuya nam (s), dahi khir kanji' (k). 21. U (s), vi (jiba 1641). 9.
Addham asanas (la, b, s). 22. Bio (k). 10. Savan (s). 23. Vi (mu). 11. Vaup'
(mu, jiba 1638). 24. 313/1-6-ye chahon gathaye 313 vi gatha ki 12. Pankbha 741,
vyabha 3701, prasa 867, tu. Mula 491 vyakhya prastut karne wali hai. Vyakhyatmak
hone 13. Prasa 868, jiba (1639) gatha ka uttarardh is ke karan inko mul niga ke
kramank me nahi prakar hai joa hai.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 94 piMDaniyukti 312/3. bahuyAtItamatibahU', atibahusore tinni tinni va pareNaM
/  taM ciya atippamANaM', bhuMjati jaM vA atippaMto  //  647  /  /  313.
hiyAhArA miyAhArA, appAhArA ya je nraa| na te vijjA tigicchaMti, appANaM te
tigicchagA  //  648  //  313/1. dahi-tellasamAogA, ahito 'khIra-dadhi-
kaMjiyANaM'8 c| patthaM puNa rogaharaM, na ya hetU hoti rogss||649  //  313/2.
addhamasaNassA savvaMjaNassa0 kujjA davassa do bhaage| vAtapaviyAraNaTThA,
chabbhAgaM UNagaM kujjA 2  //  650  //  313/3. sIto usiNo sAhAraNo ya kAlo tidhA
munneyvvo|| sAhAraNammi kAle, tatthAhAre imA mattA 2  //  651  //  313/4. sIte
davassa ego, bhatte4 cattAri ahava do paanne| usiNe davassa donnI5, tinni u16
sesA va bhattassa  //  652  //  313/5. ego davassa bhAgo, avaTThito bhoyaNassa
do bhaagaa| vaDaMti va 'hAyaMti va8, do do bhAgA tu ekke kke 9 //  653  //
313/6. ettha20 u tatiyacatutthA, doNNi ya9 aNavadvitA bhave bhaagaa| paMcama
chaTTho paDhamo, bitio22 ya23 avaTThitA bhAgA24  //  654  //  dAraM  //  1. "ta
aibaI (lA, ba), "maibahuyaM (a, ka, bii)| eesuM tIsuM pI, AhAre hotimA mttaa| 2.
tribhyo vA vArebhyaH paratastadbhojanamatibahuzaH (m)| 14. bhAge (s)| 3. tinna
(lA, ka, ba), tiNha (s)| 15. dunnI (a, ka), donni u (mu)| 4. bhuMkte yad vA
atRpyan eSa aippamANa ityasya 16.va (mu), ya (s)| zabdasyArthaH (mvR)| 17.prasA
869 5. tu. jIbhA 1628 //  18. hAiMti vA (bI), hAvaMti (s)| 6. cigi (jIbhA 1632),
srvtr| 19. ikkikkA (lA, ba), jIbhA 1640, prasA 870  /  7. oni 578 /  20. tattha
(lA, ba, s)| 8. dahikhIrasaMjuyANaM (sa), dahikhIrakaMji' (k)| 21.u (sa), vi
(jIbhA 1641) /  9. addhaM asaNassa (lA, ba, s)| 22.bIo (k)| 10.savaMja (s)|
23.vi (mu)| 11. vAUpa' (mu, jIbhA 1638) /  24.313/1-6-ye chahoM gAthAeM 313 vIM
gAthA kI 12. paMkabhA 741, vyabhA 3701, prasA 867, tu. mUlA 491 vyAkhyA prastuta
karane vAlI haiN| vyAkhyAtmaka hone 13. prasA 868, jIbhA (1639) gAthA kA
uttarArdha isa ke kAraNa inako mUla nigA ke kramAMka meM nahIM prakAra hai jor3A
hai|

Page #267 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Verse 314** **Pindanirjukta** 314. That is, that is indeed 314/1. Like a
burning ember, Water-like 'Ember is what is said 2, 314/2. Inflamed by the fire
of passion, Like a burning coal', 314/3. Anger-fire Like a burning coal, which
is smoky 316. 315. 'Inflamed by passion', shadow-like anger, Ascetic, Eating
Food 12 for the sake of meditation,  **Verse 317** **Water-like, not a fire,
smoky-smoky** It burns Smoke 317. By six causes, the virtuous, By six causes
also, 318. Pain-sensation, Like a burning ember, which does not become Fuel
Food, it is unconscious, that which is food Fuel smoke That is indeed a mark of
the past Auspicious also By anger, it is to be known' **Vitingala 13** also Good
1. Tu. Mula 477. 2. Angaragam ti kucchai (A, B), Angar tti pavuccai (K). 3.
314/1 - 3 - These three verses are in the form of an explanation of the 314th
verse. Not keeping them in the order of the verses does not make any difference
in the order of the subject matter. Due to being explanatory, they have not been
kept in the original number of the verses. 4. Ragaggiepajjaliyo (Jibha 1648).
Food also Unconscious 14 5. Niddaddhingaranihm (A, S), Niddaddungal° (K). 6.
Ingarmett' (A, B), 'Mittasems (La, S, B). 7. Niddhi (Mu), Niddhuhati (Jibha
1652). 8. Sayangal (S). Desire That is, for the sake of life, the sixth 9. Baya
(S). 10. Tu Bodhavvam (A, B). 11. Tu. Jibha 1653; some manuscripts have
Bayalisam But That Saints. Condemns. || 655 || Also  Tu. Smoke. || 656 || Food.
Harsh. || 657 || Food-method Gone smoke Food It is to be considered. Foot. So.
|| 658 || || 659 || Door. || And. Of the fire. || 660 || Door. || Dharma. Food
15. || 661 || Self-control. Dharma-thought. 6. || 662 || 95 The text is found.
Sixteen origins related to food, sixteen productions and ten desires - thus
there are 42 faults, but the commentator has mentioned forty-six faults related
to food while explaining the text of Bayalisam. By including the supplementary
in the mixed, there are 15 faults of origin. Sixteen faults of production, ten
faults of desire and five faults of Grasaisana - thus there are 46 faults
related to food. 12. Aharesi (La, B), Remi (S). 13. Vigaiangalam (Mu. K),
Vigatigalam (Jibha 1654). 14. Nivvuhianto (La, B), Nijjuhato (A). 15. Jibha
1657, Mula 478. 16. Jibha 1658, Thanam 6/41, Utt 26/32, Prasa 737, Oni 580, Tu.
Mula 479.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniryukta 314. taM hoti taM puNa 314/1. aMgArattamapattaM, jalamANaM '
aMgAraM ti ya vuccati 2, 314/2. rAgaggisaMpalitto, niddaDDuiMgAlanibhaM', 314/3.
dosaggI saiMgAlaM, jaM hoti sadhUmaM 316. 315 rAgeNa saiMgAlaM', chAyAlIsaM
dosA, tavassI, bhuMjaMto AhAreM ti12 jhANajjhayaNanimittaM, vi jalato, appattiya
dhUmadhUmiyaM niddahati " dhUma 317. chahi kAraNehi sAdhU, chahi ceva kAraNehiM,
318. vedaNa- veyAvacce, aMgAramittasarisaM, jA na bhavati rei caraNiMdhaNaM
AhAreti mucchito jaM AhAreti iMdhaNaM dhUmaM taM ciya daGkaM gate phAsugaM pi
doseNa bodhavvA" vItaMgAlaM 13 ca suvo 1. tu. mUlA 477  /  2. aMgAragaM ti
kuccai (a, bI), aMgAra tti pavuccai ( ka )  /  3. 314/1 - 3 - ye tInoM gAthAeM
314 vIM gAthA kI vyAkhyA rUpa haiN| inako nigA ke krama meM na rakhane se bhI
cAlU viSaya vastu ke krama meM koI aMtara nahIM AtA  /  vyAkhyAtmaka hone ke
kAraNa inheM nigA ke mUla kramAMka meM nahIM rakhA hai| 4. rAgaggIpajjalio (
jIbhA 1648 )  /  AhAreMto vi nijjUhiMto 14 5. niddaddhiMgAranihaM ( a, sa),
niddaDuMgAladeg (ka)  /  6. iMgArametta' ( a, bI), 'mittasesaM (lA, sa, ba)  /
7. niddahI (mu), NiDDUhati (jIbhA 1652 )  /  8. sayaMgAla ( sa )  /  iriTThAe
taha pANavattiyAe, chaTTaM 9. bAyA (sa)  /  10. tu bodhavvaM ( a, bI)  /  11.
tu. jIbhA 1653; kucha hastapratiyoM meM bAyAlIsaM puNa ya sNto| niMdato  //  655
//  vi tu  /  dhUme  //  656  //  AhAraM  /  khippaM  //  657  //  bhoyaNavidhI
vigatadhUmaM Ayarati muNeyavvaM  /  caraNaM  /  tAva  //  658  //  || 659  //
dAraM  //  c| pavayaNassa  //  660 ||daarN  //  dhammaM  /  Ayarati 15  //  661
//  saMjamaTThAe  /  dhammaciMtAe6  //  662  //  95 pATha milatA hai| bhojana se
saMbaMdhita 16 udgama, 16 utpAdana tathA 10 eSaNA - isa prakAra 42 doSa ho jAte
haiM lekina TIkAkAra ne chAyAlIsaM pATha kI vyAkhyA karate hue bhojana se
saMbaMdhita chayAlIsa doSoM kA ullekha kiyA hai| adhyavapUraka kA mizrajAta meM
antarbhAva karane se udgama ke 15 doSa hote haiM  /  16 utpAdanA ke doSa, 10
eSaNA ke doSa tathA 5 grAsaisaNA ke doSa - isa prakAra bhojana se saMbaMdhita 46
doSa hote haiM 1 12. AhAresi (lA, ba), remi (sa)  /  13. vigaiMgAlaM (mu. ka ),
vigatiMgAlaM ( jIbhA 1654 )  /  14. nivvUhiMto (lA, ba), nijjUhato ( a )  /  15.
jIbhA 1657, mUlA 478  /  16. jIbhA 1658, ThANaM 6 / 41, utta 26 / 32, prasA 737,
oni 580, tu. mUlA 479  /

Page #268 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  318/1. There is no food like *sarisa*, the ascetic eats it for
tapas. It is like a shadow, it does not cross over any *kaun* (being) by eating
it. || 663 ||  318/2. "It does not suit *iriya*", "It does not cross over any
*kaun* (being) by *pehadiya* restraint." "It is like a *thamo* (darkness), it
does not cross over any *kaun* (being) by *guna* (virtue) *anuppeh*
(comparison)." || 664 ||  319. One should not eat *kujja* food, it is restrained
by six factors. After that, in the last time, it is not *apphakkama*
(unsuitable) for *kaun* (being). || 665 ||  320. In fear, in *uvasagga*
(congregation), "by *titikkha* (forbearance) in the *bhambacheragutti* (conduct
of a monk)." By *panidaya* (compassion) and *tava* (self-control), for the sake
of *sarir* (body) *vochchedana* (destruction). || 666 ||

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 318/1. natthi chuhAya sarisiyA', viyaNA bhuMjejja tppsmnntttthaa|
chAo veyAvaccaM, na tarati kAuM ao bhuMje  //  663  /  /  318/2. 'iriyaM na
visohetI', 'pehAdIyaM ca saMjamaM kAuM5  /  thAmo vA parihAyati',
'guNa'NuppehAsu ya asatto"  //  664  //  319. ahava na kujjAhAraM, chahiM
ThANehi sNje| pacchA pacchimakAlammi, kAuM appakkhamaM khamaM  //  665  /  /
320. AtaMke uvasagge, 'titikkhayA baMbhaceraguttIsu19  /  pANidayA2-tavaheuM,
sarIravocchedaNaTThAe13  //  666  //  1. sarisA (mu), sarasiyA (s)| 10. gAthA kA
prathama caraNa AryA meM tathA aMtima tIna 2. jIbhA 1659, obhA 290 /  caraNa
anuSTup chaMda meM hai| 3. iriyavva na soheI (lA, ba), iriyaM ca Na sohetI 11.
"gattIe (jIbhA 1664), titikkhaNe baMbhaceragattIe (jIbhA), iriyaM na vi sohei
(obhA 291) /  (ThANaM 6/42) /  4. pehAIyA (s)| 12. pANa' (a, b)| 5. khahito
bhamalIya peccha aMdhAraM (jiibhaa)| 13. ThANaM 6/42, utta. 26/34, prasA 738,
obhA 292, 6. "yau (s)| tu. mUlA 480, oghaniyukti meM yaha gAthA bhASya 7. pehAdI
saMjamaM Na tare (jIbhA 1660), 318/1, 2 ke krama meM hai lekina vahAM saMbhava
lagatA hai ki -ye donoM gAthAeM prakAzita TIkA meM nigA ke krama mudraNa kI
asAvadhAnI se yaha bhASya gAthA ke meM haiM lekina ina donoM gAthAoM ke lie
TIkAkAra sAtha jur3a gaI hai kyoMki vahAM AhAra karane ke chaha 'enAmeva gAthAM
gAthAdvayena vivRNvannAha' kA ullekha kAraNoM vAlI gAthA nigA ke kramAMka meM
hai| karate haiN| saMbhava lagatA hai ki lipikAra dvArA piMDaniyukti meM isa
gAthA kI vyAkhyA meM do gAthAeM prakAzita hote samaya 'bhASyakAraH' zabda chUTa
gayA (320/1, 2) haiM lekina jItakalpa bhASya meM isa ho| oghaniyukti meM ye
donoM gAthAeM bhASya gAthA ke gAthA kI vyAkhyA nimna 6 gAthAoM meM vistAra se
krama meM haiM tathA TIkAkAra ne bhI 'adhunaitAM gAthAM kI gaI haibhASyakRta
pratipadaM vyAkhyAnayati' kA saMketa kiyA AyaMko jaramAdI, tammuppaNNe Na bhujeM
bhaNitaM c| hai| ye gAthAeM spaSTa rUpa se bhASya kI pratIta hotI sahasuppaiyA
vAhI, vArejjA aTThamAdIhiM  //  haiN| inako mUla nigA ke krama meM nahIM jor3A
hai| rAyA saNNAyAdI, uvasaggo tammi vI Na bhNjejjaa| AhAra karane ke chaha
kAraNoM kI vyAkhyA meM jIbhA sahaNaTThA tu titikkhA, bAhijjaMte tu visaehiM  /
/  meM nimna do gAthAeM aura milatI haiN| mahattvapUrNa hone bhaNitaM ca
jiNiMdehi, avi AhAraM jatI ha vocchiNde| ke kAraNa unakA yahAM nirdeza kiyA jA
rahA hai loge vi bhaNiya visayA, viNivattaMte aNAhAre  /  Ayu-sarIra-ppANAdi,
chavvihe pANa Na taratI mottuM  /  taddhAraNa?teNaM, bhuMjejjA pANavattIyaM  /
/  to baMbharakkhaNaTThA, Na vi bhuMjejjA hi evamAhAraM  /  dhammajjhANaM Na
tarati, ciMteuM puvvrttkaalmmi| pANadaya vAsa mahiyA, pAusakAle va Na vi bhuje||
ahavA vI paMcavihaM, Na tarati sajjhAya kAuM je|| tavahetu cautthAdI, jAva tu
chammAsio tavo hoti  /  (jIbhA 1661, 1662) chaTuM NicchiNNabharo, chaDDhetumaNo
sarIraM tu|| 8. kujja AhAraM (ka, oni 581) /  asamatthoM saMjamassa u,
katakiccovakkharaM va to dehN| 9. pazcAta-
ziSyaniSpAdanAdisakalakarttavyAnaMtaram (mv)| chaDDammi tti na bhuMjai, savvaha
voccheya AhAraM  //  (jIbhA 1665-70)

Page #269 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Pindaniyukti  320/1. Atamko 321. 322.  323. 320/2. The reason for the vow (tava)
is "from the fourth (stage) up to the sixth stage of penance, for the purpose of
abandoning the body." 326.  "For the protection of brahmacharya (celibacy)," By
these the dharma  Jaramadi, Sixteen 'Ten 'This Which K Anahaaro (non-consumption
of food) in six places, "O monk, who is devoted to dhamma-meditation,"
Ugamadosa, sixteen Dosa10, This is the way As said by all the omniscient ones
12. Aaharavidhi, dhammavaasakajoga, which does not diminish, that should be done
4 ॥ 670 ॥ Bhave Viraahanaa of the complete scriptural injunction. Of one
purified internally 15 ॥ 671 ॥ Nijjaraphala, That 4 'Raaya - sannayagadi'
compassion towards living beings Of one who is victorious becomes  1. Raya° (s),
'yagaai (a), yagaa v (obha 293). 2. 'vayarakkhanatttha (la, b, s). 3. Paan' (la,
b, s, obha). 4. Hiyaai (k, obha). 5. Heun (s). 6. Obha 294, cf. Jibhaa 1669,
320/1, 2 - these gāthās are not placed in the order of Niga. See note 318/1, 2.
Uvasaggo. Vaasamahigaadi ॥ 667 ॥ 7. Ya (la, b, s). 8. Na aikame (la, b). 9.
Jhaanajogaro (la, b, oni 582), Jhaanajogagao tave (s), this gāthā is available
in all the manuscripts. In the printed book of Malayagiri Tika, this gāthā is in
the footnote. The editor has mentioned 'Esaa gāthā Hota'naahaaro ॥ 668 ॥ Who
Uppaayanāya 'Sanjoyanamaadi 13. 14. 15. Bhave. 19 Bhave ॥ Dosa tu. Pañceva19 ॥
669 ॥

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 320 / 1. AtaMko 321. 322. 323. 320 / 2 tavahetu " cautthAdI, jAva
u chammAsigo tavo hoti  /  sarIravocchedaNaTThayA, chaTTha 324. baMbhavata
pAlaNaTThA', etehiM dhammaM jaramAdI, solasa 'dasa 'eso jA k aNAhAro chahi
ThANehiM, nAikkame' bhikkhU, ' dhammajjhANarao uggamadosA, solasa dosA10,
esaNAya jaha bhaNito savvabhAvadaMsIhiM 12  /  AhAravidhI, dhammAvAsagajogA,
jeNa na hAyaMti taM kujjA4  //  670  //  bhave virAhaNA suttavihisamaggassa  /
ajjhatthavisohijuttassa 15  //  671  //  nijjaraphalA, sA 4 'rAyA - sannAyagAdi"
pANidayA jayamANassa hoti 1. rAyadeg (sa), 'yagAI (a), yagA va ( obhA 293)  /
2. 'vayarakkhaNaTThA (lA, ba, sa )  /  3. pANa' (lA, ba, sa, obhA)  /  4. hiyAI
(ka, obhA)  /  5. heUM (sa)  /  6. obhA 294, tu. jIbhA 1669, 320 / 1, 2 - ina
gAthAoM ko nigA ke krama meM nahIM rakhA haiN| dra. TippaNa 318/1, 2 /  uvasaggo
/  vAsamahigAdI  //  667  //  7. ya (lA, ba, sa )  /  8. Na aikkame (lA, ba, )
/  9. jhANajogarao (lA, ba, oni 582), jhANajogagao tave (sa), yaha gAthA sabhI
hastapratiyoM meM upalabdha hai  /  malayagiri TIkA kI mudrita pustaka meM yaha
gAthA pAdaTipNa meM hai| saMpAdaka ne 'eSA gAthA hota'NAhAro  //  668  //  jo
uppAyaNAya ' saMjoyaNamAdi 13. 14. 15. bhave  /  19 bhave  //  dosA tu  /
paMceva19  //  669  //  zrIvIrAcAryakRta zrIpiMDaniyuktivRttau sUtre ca dRzyate
zrImalayagirisUripraNIta vRttyAdarzeSu bahuSu na dRzyate' aisA ullekha hai  /
avacUri meM yaha gAthA hai kintu nigA ke kramAMka meM nahIM jor3I gaI hai| yaha
gAthA niryukti kI honI caahie| gA. 320 vIM ke sAtha viSaya kI dRSTi se isakA
sIdhA saMbaMdha jur3atA hai| 10. x ( a, bI)  /  11. 'mAyayaM ceva (sa), jIbhA
1671, paMcA 13/31 12. jIbhA (1673 ) meM isa gAthA kA pUrvArddha isa prakAra hai
97 etaddosavimukko, bhaNitAhAro jiNehiM sAhUNaM  /  dhammovAsaya' (lA, ba),
dhammAvassaga' (jIbhA )  /  vyabhA 3702  /  oni 759, piMpra 102  /

Page #270 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
The *Pinḍanīyukti Bhāṣya* and *Pinḍanīyukti* are two texts that have become one.
In the manuscripts, both texts are written together without any instructions. In
the published commentary, the editor has numbered the commentary verses before
some verses, but this separation does not seem correct. It seems likely that the
commentator has numbered the commentary verses before the verses for which he
has mentioned the *bhāṣyakāra* and the verses related to them. We have made a
primary attempt to separate the commentary and the *nīyukti* verses. During the
separation, it was experienced at many places that many verses which are
published in the order of *nīyukti* should be of the commentary. Although this
work took a lot of time and effort, the number of verses had to be changed many
times. The entire text had to be reflected more than a hundred times, yet it
cannot be said with certainty that this attempt at separation is completely
correct. There are many more possibilities to work in this field. It is certain
that this attempt at separation will prove to be a foundation stone for those
who will work in this field.  It would have been better to give the commentary
verses along with the *nīyukti* verses. This would have also included the
numbers of the commentary verses determined in the editing, but due to the non-
editing of the commentary, this undertaking was not done for the convenience of
the researchers. We have mentioned in detail in the introduction the points on
which we have based the separation. The instructions given by the commentator
regarding the *bhāṣyakāra* and the commentary verses given in the commentary are
being mentioned here.  * *Enam eva gāthām bhāṣyakṛt saprapañcaṁ
vyācikhyāsuḥ.....vyākhyānayannāha* (Bhāgā. 1-4, Mavṛ. p. 4) * *Cāha bhāṣyakṛt*
(Bhāgā. 5, Mavṛ. p. 5) * *Cāha bhāṣyakṛt* (Bhāgā. 6, Mavṛ. p. 6) *
*Bhāṣyakṛdupadarśayati* (Bhāgā. 7, Mavṛ. p. 6) * *Bhāṣyakṛt gāthātrayeṇa
vyākhyānayati* (Bhāgā. 8-10, Mavṛ. p. 13, 14) * *Enam eva gāthām bhāṣyakṛt
vyākhyānayati* (Bhāgā. 11, Mavṛ. p. 14) * *Bhāṣyakṛt gāthācatuṣṭayeṇa
vyākhyānayati* (Bhāgā. 12-15, Mavṛ. p. 18) * *Imām eva gāthām bhāṣyakṛt
gāthātrayeṇa vyākhyānayati* (Bhāgā. 25-27, Mavṛ. p. 38) * *Enam eva gāthām
bhāṣyakṛt gāthātrayeṇa vyākhyānayati* (Bhāgā. 28-30, Mavṛ. p. 38) * *Cāha
bhāṣyakṛt* (Bhāgā. 31, Mavṛ. p. 42) * *Cāha bhāṣyakṛt* (Bhāgā. 32, Mavṛ. p. 79)
* *Enam eva gāthām bhāṣyakṛdvayācikhyāsuḥ prathamto miśrajātasya sambhavāmāha*
(Bhāgā. 33, Mavṛ. p. 88) * *Tatra enam eva gāthām bhāṣyakṛdvayācikhyāsaḥ
prathamtaḥ svathānāmāha* (Bhāgā. 34, Mavṛ. p. 89) * *Bhāṣyakṛt gāthādvayenāha*
(Bhāgā. 35, 36, M. p. 92) * *Etad eva rūpakatrayeṇa bhāṣyakṛdvayākhyānayati*
(Bhāgā. 37-39, Mavṛ. p. 117) * *Etad eva gāthādvayena bhāṣyakṛtvivṛṇoti* (Bhāgā.
40, 41, Mavṛ. p. 126) * *Etad eva gāthādvayena bhāṣyakṛtvivṛṇoti* (Bhāgā. 42,
43, Mavṛ. p. 128) * *Bhāṣyakṛdagāthātrayeṇa vyākhyānayati* (Bhāgā. 44-46, M. p.
142)  1. In the printed commentary, the number 25 comes directly after 15.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti bhASya piMDaniyukti aura usakA bhASya-ye donoM graMtha milakara
eka rUpa ho gae haiN| hastapratiyoM meM bhI binA kisI nirdeza ke donoM graMtha
eka sAtha likhe hue haiN| prakAzita TIkA meM saMpAdaka ne kucha gAthAoM ke Age
bhASya gAthA ke kramAMka lagAe haiM lekina yaha pRthakkaraNa samyak pratIta
nahIM hotaa| aisA saMbhava lagatA hai ki TIkAkAra ne jahAM-jahAM jina gAthAoM ke
lie bhASyakAra' kA ullekha kiyA hai, una-una gAthAoM evaM unase sambandhita
gAthAoM ke Age bhASya ke kramAMka lagA die haiN| hamane bhASya aura niyukti
gAthAoM ko pRthak karane kA prAthamika prayAsa kiyA hai| pRthakkaraNa ke samaya
aneka sthaloM para aisA anubhava huA ki aneka gAthAeM jo niyukti ke krama meM
prakAzita haiM, ve bhASya kI honI caahie| yadyapi isa kArya meM samaya aura
zakti bahuta lagI, aneka bAra gAthAoM kI saMkhyA badalanI pdd'ii| zatAdhika bAra
pUre graMtha kA parAvartana karanA par3A phira bhI yaha dAve ke sAtha nahIM kahA
jA sakatA ki pRthakkaraNa kA yaha prayAsa pUrNatayA sahI hI hai| isa kSetra meM
kArya karane kI aura bhI bahuta saMbhAvanAeM haiN| itanA avazya hai ki jo vyakti
isa kSetra meM kArya kareMge, unake lie yaha pRthakkaraNa kA prayAsa nIMva kA
patthara sAbita ho skegaa| bhASya-gAthAoM ko niyukti-gAthA ke sAtha hI denA
ThIka rhtaa| isase saMpAdana meM nirNIta bhASyagAthAoM ke kramAMka bhI inake
sAtha jur3a jAte lekina TIkA kA saMpAdana na hone se zodha karane vAloM kI
suvidhA ke lie yaha upakrama nahIM kiyA gyaa| hamane jina binduoM ko
pRthakkaraNa kA AdhAra banAyA hai, usakA bhUmikA meM vistAra se ullekha kiyA
hai| TIkAkAra dvArA die gae bhASyakAra sambandhI nirdeza tathA TIkA meM dI gaI
bhASya-gAthA kA yahAM ullekha kiyA jA rahA hai* enAmeva gAthAM bhASyakRt
saprapaJcaM vyAcikhyAsuH.....vyAkhyAnayannAha (bhAgA. 1-4 mavR pa. 4) * cAha
bhASyakRt (bhAgA. 5 mavR pa. 5) * cAha bhASyakRt (bhAgA. 6 mavR pa. 6) *
bhASyakRdupadarzayati (bhAgA. 7 mavR pa. 6) * bhASyakRd gAthAtrayeNa
vyAkhyAnayati (bhAgA. 8-10, mavR pa. 13, 14) * enAmeva gAthAM bhASyakRd
vyAkhyAnayati (bhAgA. 11, mavR pa. 14) * bhASyakRd gAthAcatuSTayena
vyAkhyAnayati (bhAgA. 12-15, mavR pa. 18) * imAmeva gAthAM bhASyakRd
gAthAtrayeNa vyAkhyAnayati (bhAgA. 25-27, mavR pa. 38) * enAmeva gAthAM
bhASyakRd gAthAtrayeNa vyAkhyAnayati (bhAgA. 28-30, mavR pa. 38) cAha bhASyakRt
(bhAgA. 31, mavR pa. 42) * cAha bhASyakRt (bhAgA. 32, mavR pa. 79) * enAmeva
gAthAM bhASyakRdvayAcikhyAsuH prathamato mizrajAtasya sambhavamAha (bhAgA. 33,
mavR pa. 88) * tatrainAmeva gAthAM bhASyakadvayAcikhyAsaH prathamata:
svasthAnamAha (bhAgA. 34, mavR pa.89) * bhASyakRd gAthAdvayenAha (bhAgA. 35, 36,
ma pa.92) * etadeva rUpakatrayeNa bhASyakRdvayAkhyAnayati (bhAgA. 37-39, mavR
pa. 117) * etadeva gAthAdvayena bhASyakRdvivRNoti (bhAgA. 40, 41, mavR pa. 126)
* etadeva gAthAdvayena bhASyakRdvivRNoti (bhAgA. 42, 43, mavR pa. 128) *
bhASyakadagAthAtrayeNa vyAkhyAnayati (bhAgA. 44-46, ma pa. 142) 1. mudrita TIkA
meM 15 ke bAda sIdhA 25 kA kramAMka hai|

Page #271 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti Bhashya  **1.** A name derived from a quality is called a
*goṇṇa* (secondary) name. The same is considered a *yathaarth* (true) name by
those who know the meaning. Based on action, the *yathaarth* names are like
*kṣapaṇa* (consumption), *jvalaṇa* (burning), *tapaṇa* (heating), *pavaṇa*
(wind), *pradeepa* (lamp), etc.  **2.** Where the word *piṇḍa* (lump) is used
even though there is no combination of many substances, it is called a
*samayakṛta* (time-created) *piṇḍa* name. For example, the use of the word
*piṇḍa* for water in a sutra.  **3.** The *tadu-bhaya* (both) *piṇḍa* is the
attainment of *guḍa* (jaggery), *odana* (rice), etc., *piṇḍa* by a *sādhu* (holy
person) who has entered for the sake of food-gain.  **4.** Besides the *goṇṇa*
and *samayaja* (time-born) names, there is another *lokiya* (worldly) name
created by the intention of the self. This is called an *anubhayaja*
(experience-born) name, like *sīhag* (lion), *devadatta* (given by god), etc.
**5.** The name that is devoid of both *goṇṇa* and *samayaja*, i.e.,
*ubhayatirikta* (beyond both), is indicated by the word *avi* (not) by the
*niryuktikāra* (one who defines). An example of an *ubhayatirikta* name is to
name a human being *piṇḍa*.  **Notes:**  1. *khavaṇa* (B, A) 2. After this
verse, there is a verse in the *k* commentary. The commentator has not explained
this verse because it seems to be a repetition of the subject matter of verse 4.
3. *bahuyadvaṇāṁ* (S) 4. *piṇḍapaḍi* (Mu, B) 5. The use of the word *piṇḍa* for
water in the absence of a combination of hard substances is meaningless, but it
is famous in the *siddhānta* (doctrine), therefore it is also called a
*samayaja* name (Mavṛp. 5). 6. Due to the characteristics of *prākṛta* (Prakrit
language), the third case is used for the sixth case (Mavṛ). 7. Because it is
meaningful and famous in time, it is also called an *ubhayaja* name (Mavṛp. 5).
8. To name someone *sīhag* even though they are devoid of qualities like courage
and cruelty, or to name someone *devadatta* even though they were not given by
god, is an *anubhayaja* name. This is also called an *ubhayatirikta* name
(Mavṛp. 5). 9. There are six *bhāṣyagāthā* (commentary verses) (Pibhā 1-6) in
the explanation of *Pini* 5. 10. See *Pini* 5.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti bhASya 1. guNaniSphaNNaM goNNaM, taM ceva jahatthamatthavI beMti
/  taM puNakhamaNo jalaNo, tavaNo pavaNo padIvo ya  //  1  //  guNa niSpanna
nAma gauNa kahalAtA hai| usI ko arthavettA yathArtha nAma mAnate haiM  /  kriyA
ke AdhAra para yathArtha nAma isa prakAra haiM- kSapaNa, jvalana, tapana,
pavana, pradIpa ityAdi  /  2. piMDaNa bahudavvANaM, paDivakkheNAvi jattha
piMDakkhA  /  so samayakato piMDo, jaha suttaM piMDavaDiyAI  //  2  //  aneka
dravyoM kA samavAya na hone para bhI jahAM 'piMDa' zabda kA prayoga hotA hai,
vaha samayakRta nAmapiMDa hai; jaise- sUtra meM pAnI ke lie piMDa' zabda kA
prayoga  /  3. jassa puNa piMDavAyaTTayA paviTThassa hoti saMpattI  /
gulaodaNapiMDehiM', tadubhayapiMDamAhaMsu  //  3  //  taM AhAra-lAbha hetu
praviSTa sAdhu ko jo gur3a, odana Adi piMDa kI samprApti hotI hai, vaha
tadubhaya  piMDa kahalAtA hai| 4. ubhayAtirittamahavA, aNNaM pi hu atthi loiyaM
nAmaM  /  attAbhippAyakataM, jaha sIhagadevadattAdI  //  4 //  gauNa aura
samayaja nAma ke atirikta kisI anya AtmAbhiprAya kRta laukika nAma ko rakhanA
anubhayaja' nAma hai, jaise siMhaka, devadatta Adi  /  goNNasamayAtirittaM,
iNamannaM vAvi sUiyaM nAma  /  jaha piMDa tti kIrati, kassai nAmaM maNUsassa  //
5  //  gauNa tathA samayaja se rahita arthAt ubhayAtirikta nAma (niryuktikAra
ne) 'avi zabda se sUcita kiyA hai| ubhayAtirikta nAma kA udAharaNa hai-jaise
kisI manuSya kA nAma piMDa rakha denA  /  1. khavaNo (bI, a)  /  2. isa gAthA ke
bAda ka prati meM nimna gAthA milatI hai| TIkAkAra ne isa gAthA kI gAthA
punarukta sI lagatI hai viSaya kI punarukti hai aNNaM piya atthi nAmaM, na
kevalaM paribhAsiyaM taM tu  /  jaha devadatta sIhaga, govAliya iMdago vAI  //
vyAkhyA nahIM kI hai| yaha kyoMki gAthA 4 meM isI 3. bahuyadavvANaM (s)| 4.
piMDapaDi (mu, ba)  /  5. kaThina dravyoM ke paraspara saMzleSa ke abhAva meM
pAnI ke lie 'piMDa' zabda kA prayoga anvartha rahita hai lekina 99 siddhAMta meM
prasiddha hai ataH yaha samayaja nAma bhI kahalAtA hai (mavRpa. 5)  /
prAkRtalakSaNavazAt SaSThyarthe tRtIyA (mavR)  /  anvarthayukta aura
samayaprasiddha hone ke kAraNa yaha ubhayaja nAma bhI kahalAtA hai (mavR pa. 5)
/  8. zaurya-kraurya Adi guNoM se rahita hone para bhI kisI kA nAma 'siMhaka'
rakhanA athavA deva pradatta na hone para bhI 'devadatta' nAma rakhanA
anubhayaja nAma hai| isako ubhayAtirikta nAma bhI kahA jAtA hai (mavR pa. 5)  /
9 pinigA. 5 kI vyAkhyA meM chaha bhASyagAthAeM (pibhA 1-6) haiN| 10. dekheM pini
5  /  6. 7.

Page #272 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 100 ## Pindaniyukti  6. Even if the meanings are the same, common people do
not accept the name that is well-known in time. But they use the name that is
well-known to the people, even if it is not well-known in time. ||6||  7.
Placing one aksha, varataka, or anguliyaka as a pind is an asadhava
establishment. Placing three akshas, three varatakas, or three anguliyakas
together in one place as a pind is a sadhava establishment. In chitra karma,
establishing a pind from one point is an asadhava establishment. Establishing a
pind from many points is a sadhava establishment. Making a pind shape in wood
and lepya upala is a sadhava establishment. ||7||  8. Patra, patravarja,
patraniryoga, rajoharana, external and internal - these are two nisadyaas. Three
pattas - santhar, uttar, and chola patta. The meaning of potti is mukhapotti,
mukhavastrika. Rajoharana with one nisadya - all these upadhis are used
diligently every day, so there is no need to rest them. ||8||  9. Where there
are shatpadikas, they should be transferred elsewhere and these instruments
should be washed according to the rules. ||9||  10. These should not be used for
twenty days. They should be used diligently every day. If there is doubt, they
should be washed according to the rules. ||10||  11. For washing clothes, a
sadhu wears the pravarana for three days, then he keeps it close for three days.
He wears it for three days, then he keeps it far for one day. ||11||
**Footnotes:**  1. Levovale (s, a). 2. Pini ga. 6 has one bhashyagatha (pibha
7). 3. One aksha, varataka, or anguliyaka does not form a pind shape, so it is
an asadhava establishment. Although there is a collection of atoms in the aksha,
from that perspective it is a pind, but there is no pind shape in practice
(mavru p. 7). 4. Yaram (s, b). 5. U (k). 6. Muhaputti (k). 7. Putti (k). 8. Un
(mu). 9. Dhovanti (a.m), dhovijja (k), dhoveti (s). 10. Bhashya ga. 11 mentions
the method of resting. See the translation and commentary of pini 22/2 for
details. 11. Dinani (k). 12. Tahiyam (k). 13. Pini ga. 22 has four bhashyagathas
(pibha 8-11).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 100 piMDaniyukti 6. tulle vi abhippAe, samayapasiddhaM na giNhate logo| jaM
puNa logapasiddhaM, taM sAmaiyA uvcrNti||6|| tulya abhiprAya hone para bhI
samayaprasiddha nAma ko sAmAnya loga svIkRta nahIM karate lekina jo
lokaprasiddha nAma haiM, unakA prayoga sAmayika (samayaprasiddha) bhI karate
haiN| 7. ekko u asabbhAve, tiNhaM ThavaNA u hoti sbbhaave| cittesu asabbhAve,
'dAruya-leppovale' sitro||7|| eka akSa, varATaka yA aMgulIyaka ko piMDa rUpa meM
sthApita karanA asadbhAva viSayaka sthApanA hai|' tIna akSa, tIna varATaka yA
tIna aMgulIyaka ko eka sthAna para saMzliSTa karake piMDa rUpa meM rakhanA
sadbhAva sthApanA hai| citrakarma meM bhI eka bindu se piMDa sthApanA karanA
asadbhAva sthApanA hai| aneka binduoM se piMDa rUpa meM sthApita karanA sadbhAva
sthApanA hai| kASTha aura lepya upala meM piNDAkRti banAnA sadbhAva sthApanA
hai| pAyassa paDoyAroM', pattagavajjo yA paaynijjogo| donni nisijjAo puNa,
abjiMtara-bAhirA cev|| 8 //  saMthAruttaracolaga, paTTA tinni u havaMti
naatvvaa| muhapottiya tti pottI', eganisejjaM ca ryhrnnN|| 9 //  10. ete 'na u.
vIsAme, patidiNamuvaogato ya jtnnaae| saMkAmiUNa dhoveti', chappaiyA tattha
vihiNA u||10|| pAtra kA upakaraNa, pAtravarja, pAtraniryoga, rajoharaNa kI bAhya
aura Abhyantara-do niSadyAeM, tIna paTTa-saMstAraka paTTa, uttarapaTTa aura
colapaTTa, potti kA artha hai-mukhapotti, mukhavastrikA, eka niSadyA se yukta
rajoharaNa-ina saba upadhiyoM kA pratidina yatanApUrvaka upayoga hone se
vizramaNA karane kI AvazyakatA nahIM hai| jahAM SaTpadikAeM hoM, unako anyatra
saMkramita karake vidhipUrvaka ina upakaraNoM ko dhonA caahie| 11. dhovatthaM
tinni diNe 9, uvari pAuNati 'taha ya12 aasnnN| dhArei tinni diyahe, egadiNaM
uvari laMbataM3  // 11 //  vastra dhone ke lie sAdhu tIna dina taka prAvaraNa ko
Upara or3hatA hai phira tIna dina pAsa meM sthApita 1. levovale (sa, a)| 7.
puttI (k)| 2.pini gA.6 kI vyAkhyA meM eka bhASyagAthA (pibhA 7) hai| 8. una
(mu)| 3. eka akSa, varATaka yA aMgulIyaka meM piNDAkRti na banane 9. dhovaMti
(a.ma), dhovijja (ka), dhoveti (s)| se vaha asadbhAva sthApanA hai| yadyapi akSa
meM paramANuoM 10. bhASya gA.11 meM vizramaNA vidhi kA ullekha hai| vistAra kA
saMghAta hai, isa dRSTi se piNDa hai para vahAM vyavahAra meM hetu dekheM pini
22/2 kA anuvAda evaM ttippnn| piNDa kI AkRti nahIM banatI hai (mavR pa. 7) /
11. diNANi (k)| 4. 'yAraM (sa, bii)| 12. tahiyaM (k)| 5. u (k)| 13. pini gA. 22
kI vyAkhyA meM cAra bhASyagAthAeM (pibhA 6. muhaputtI (k)| 8-11) haiN|

Page #273 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti Bhashya ### 101  It makes and on one day it hangs it downwards,
extending it to the body from the edge of the Sanstaraka. 12. Niddeyaroyakalo,
egantasiniddham ajjhimajahanno. Lukkho vi hoti tividho, jahanno majjho ya
ukkosso. ||12|| Time is of two types - Snigdha and Rooksha. Snigdha time is also
of three types - Ekanta Snigdha (Ati Snigdha), Madhyama Snigdha and Jaghanya
Snigdha. Rooksha time is also of three types - Jaghanya, Madhyama and Utkrushta.
13. Egantasiniddhammi, porisimegam achetano hoti. Bitiyae sammiso, tatiyaai
sachetano vatthi. ||13|| In Ekanta Snigdha time, the Dristi-sth Pavan remains
Achitta till one Purushi, in the second Purushi it becomes mixed and in the
third Prahar it becomes Sachitta. 14. Majjhimanidde do porisiu acchittu misao
tatie. Chauthie sachetto, pavano daiyaai majjhagato. ||14|| In Madhyama Snigdha
time, the Dristi-sth Pavan remains Achitta till two Purushi, in the third
Purushi it becomes mixed and at the beginning of the fourth Purushi it becomes
Sachitta. 15. Porisitigam acchittu, niddejahann ammi, 'misaga-chauthi. Sachitta
panchamie, evam lukkhe vi dinavuddi. ||15|| In Jaghanya Snigdha time, the
Dristi-sth Achitta Pavan remains Achitta till three Purushi, in the fourth
Purushi it becomes mixed and at the beginning of the fifth Purushi it becomes
Sachitta. Similarly, in Rooksha time, instead of Purushi, one should understand
Dinavruddi. 16. Oralaggahanena, tirikkhamanuyahva suhumvajjha. Uddawanam pun
janasu, ativatavivjjitam pidam. ||25|| By the acceptance of the Audarik word,
the acceptance of Tiryanch, Manushya and the one-sensed being devoid of subtle
is done. 1. 4 (s). remains, on the second day it becomes mixed and on the third
day it becomes Sachitta. 2. The time of water and cold is Snigdha and the time
of heat is Rooksha (Mavri P. 18). It remains Achitta for two days, on the third
day it becomes mixed and on the fourth day it becomes Sachitta. 3. Dhammi (k).
In Utkrushta Rooksha time, the Vastigat Vayu remains Achitta for three days, on
the fourth day it becomes mixed and on the fifth day it becomes Sachitta (Mavri
P. 18). 4. Bhaiyae (b, s). 5. Hoi (k). 6. Gasachitto (k). 7. Misage Chauha (a,
s). 8. Panchamahi (k, s). 9. Pini 27/2 has four Bhashya-gathaas (Pibha 12-15) in
its explanation. 10. In Jaghanya Rooksha time, the Vastigat Vayu remains Achitta
for one day. 11. Jiba 1101, in the printed commentary, the number of Bhashya-
gathaas is 25 directly after 15. 12. Tiryanch includes beings from one-sensed to
five-sensed. There are two types of one-sensed beings - Sukshma and Badar. The
Apdravna of Sukshma one-sensed beings is not possible by humans, therefore it is
excluded here.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti bhASya 101 karatA hai tathA eka dina use saMstAraka ke kinAre
zarIra paryanta phailAkara adhomukha laTakA detA hai| 12. niddheyaro ya kAlo',
egNtsinniddhmjjhimjhnno| lukkho vi hoti tividho, jahaNNa majjho ya ukkoso||12||
kAla do prakAra kA hotA hai-snigdha aura rUkSa  /  snigdha kAla bhI tIna prakAra
kA hotA haiekAnta snigdha (ati snigdha), madhyamasnigdha aura jghnysnigdh| rUkSa
kAla bhI tIna prakAra kA hotA haijaghanya, madhyama aura utkRsstt| 13.
egaMtasiNiddhammI, porisimegaM acetaNo hoti| bitiyAe saMmIso, tatiyAi sacetaNo
vatthI'  //  13 //  ekAnta snigdhakAla meM dRtistha pavana eka pauruSI taka
acitta rahatA hai, dUsarI pauruSI meM mizra tathA tIsarI prahara meM sacitta ho
jAtA hai| 14. majjhimaniddhe do porisIu accittu mIsao ttie| cautthIe sacitto,
pavaNo daiyAi mjjhgto||14|| madhyama snigdha kAla meM dRtistha pavana do pauruSI
taka acitta rahatA hai, tIsarI pauruSI meM mizra tathA cauthI pauruSI ke
prAraMbha meM hI sacitta ho jAtA hai| 15. porisitigamaccitto, niddhajahannammi,
'miisg-cutthii| saccitta paMcamIe, evaM lukkhe vi diNavuDDI  // 15 //  jaghanya
snigdha kAla meM dRtistha acitta pavana tIna pauruSI taka acitta rahatA hai,
cauthI pauruSI meM mizra tathA pAMcavIM pauruSI ke prAraMbha meM sacitta ho jAtA
hai| isI prakAra rUkSa kAla meM pauruSI ke sthAna para dinavRddhi samajhanI
caahie| 16. orAlaggahaNeNaM, tirikkhamaNuyA'havA suhumvjjaa| uddavaNaM puNa
jANasu, ativAtavivajjitaM piiddN||25|| audArika zabda ke grahaNa se tiryaJca'2,
manuSya tathA sUkSma varjita ekendriya kA grahaNa hotA hai| 1. 4 (s)| rahatI
hai, dUsare dina mizra tathA tIsare dina sacitta ho 2. sajala aura zIta kAla
snigdha tathA uSNa kAla rUkSa jAtI hai| madhyama rUkSakAla meM do dina taka
acitta, kahalAtA hai (mavR pa. 18) /  tIsare dina mizra tathA cauthe dina
sacitta ho jAtI hai| 3. ddhammi (k)| utkRSTa rUkSa kAla meM vastigata vAyu tIna
dina taka 4. bhaiyAe (ba, s)| acitta, cauthe dina mizra tathA pAMcaveM dina
sacitta ho 5. hoi (k)| jAtI hai (mavR pa 18) /  6. gasaccitto (k)| 11. jIbhA
1101, mudrita TIkA meM bhASyagAthAoM ke kramAMka 7. mIsage cauhA (a, s)| meM 15
ke bAda sIdhA 25 kA kramAMka hai| 8. paMcamAhiM (ka, s)| 12. tiryaJca meM
ekendriya se paMcendriya taka ke prANI samAviSTa 9. pini 27/2 kI vyAkhyA meM
cAra bhASyagAthAeM (pibhA hote haiN| ekendriya ke do bheda hote haiM-sUkSma aura
bAdara  /  12-15) haiN| sUkSma ekendriya kA apadrAvaNa manuSya ke dvArA saMbhava
10. jaghanya rUkSa kAla meM vastigata vAyu eka dina taka acitta nahIM hai isalie
usakA yahAM varjana kiyA gayA hai|

Page #274 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 102 ## Pindaniyukti  "Apdravan" means to know the pain without causing any
harm or destruction. 17. Body, speech, and mind, or body, life, and senses.
"Samittāvāyāṇe" means to cause harm or destruction through these three, i.e.,
body, speech, and mind, or body, life, and senses. 26.  Body, mind, and speech,
or body, life, and senses - the ownership of these three, i.e., the sixth case
ending (षष्ठी तत्पुरुष), the fifth case ending (अपदान, पञ्चमी तत्पुरुष), and the
third case ending (करण, तृतीया तत्पुरुष) are called "Tripatan". 18.  Thinking in
the heart about one or many virtuous beings, the giver who kills the six bodies
is called "Adhakarma". 27.  The limits of conduct are infinite, and so are the
stages of restraint. There are countless "Kandaka" in them. 28.  There are
countless "Kandaka" in the six stages (infinite parts, infinite qualities, etc.,
six types of increase and decrease). The countless six stages are called the
"Samyama Shreni". 29.   1. For the meaning of "Apdravan", see the second part of
the translation of "Pini Ga. 62" - causing harm or destruction through body,
speech, and mind, or body, life, and senses.  2. "Samittāvāyāṇe" (अ, स). 3. "U"
(स, जीभा). 4. "Karane Y" (ला, ब, स), "Karanammi" (जीभा ११०२). 5. In the sixth
case ending compound, the destruction of body, speech, and mind. This should be
understood from the perspective of a fully developed, five-sensed human being
and the lower beings.  6. "Apadan" - the fifth case ending compound, from the
perspective of the three lower beings, the destruction of body, speech, and
mind.  7. "Karan" means the means. From the perspective of the means, the
destruction of body, speech, and mind is called "Tripatan".  8. "Tu" (जीभा
११०३), the 62nd verse of "Pindaniyukti" has three commentary verses (पिभा १६-१८)
in its explanation.  9. "Tath Ananta" (क, ब). 10. "X" (स), the 64th verse of
"Pindaniyukti" has three commentary verses (पिभा १९-२१) in its explanation.  11.
"Kandaka" means countless parts of a finger-sized area. "Kandaka" and "Samyama
Sthanaka" are explained in the "Shri Bhikshagma Vishayakosh" part 2, pages 341,
342.  12. "U Tani" (क). 13. "Mavr P. 41"; "Chasankaheylokaakashpradeshapramanani
Shat Sthanakanisamyamshrenirucyate" - countless "Sthanaka" as large as the space
of the universe are called "Samyama Shreni".

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 102 piMDaniyukti apadrAvaNa' kA artha atipAta-vinAza rahita pIr3A jAnanA
caahie| 17. kAya-vai-maNo tinni u, ahavA dehaau-iNdiyppaannaa| sAmittAvAyANe',
hoti tivAo ya krnnesuN||26|| kAya, mana aura vacana athavA deha, Ayu aura
iMdriya-ina tInoM kA svAmitva' arthAt SaSThI tatpuruSa, apAdAna' arthAt paJcamI
tatpuruSa tathA karaNa-tRtIyA tatpuruSa se tipAta-atipAta karanA tripAtana hai
18. hiyayammi samAheuM, egamaNegaM ca gAhagaM jo u| vahaNaM kareti dAtA, kAyANa
tamAhakammaM ti|| 27 //  eka yA aneka sAdhu ke lie hRdaya meM socakara dAtA jo
SaTkAya kA vadha karatA hai, vaha AdhAkarma kahalAtA hai| 19. tatthANaMtA' u
carittapajjavA hoMti sNjmaannN| _ 'saMkhAIyANi u tANi kaMDagaM hoti nAtavvaM'10
// 28 //  cAritra ke paryava anaMta hote haiM, utane hI saMyamasthAnaka hote
haiN| unameM saMkhyAtIta kaMDaka' hote haiN| 20. saMkhAIyANi u12 kaMDagANi
chaTThANagaM vinniddittuN| chaTThANA u asaMkhA, saMjamaseDhI muNeyavvA  // 29 //
saMkhyAtIta kaMDaka SaTsthAnaka (anaMta bhAga, anaMta guNa Adi chaha prakAra kI
vRddhi-hAni vAle)hote haiN| asaMkhyeya SaTsthAnaka saMyamazreNI13 kahalAte haiN|
1. apadrAvaNa hetu dekheM pini gA. 62 ke anuvAda kA dUsarA hogA-kAya, vacana
aura mana se tathA deha, Ayu aura ttippnn| iMdriya' se pAtana-cyAvana karanA
tripAtana hai (mavRpa. 37) /  2. sAmitte avayANe (a, s)| 7. karaNa arthAt
sAdhana kI dRSTi se kAya, vacana aura 3. u (sa, jiibhaa)| mana-ina tIna karaNoM
se atipAta karanA tripAtana hai| 4. karaNe ya (lA, ba, sa), karaNammi (jIbhA
1102) /  8. tu (jIbhA 1103), piMDaniyukti kI 62 vIM gAthA kI 5. SaSThI tatpuruSa
samAsa meM kAya, vacana aura mana kA pAtana vyAkhyA meM tIna bhASya gAthAeM
(pibhA 16-18) haiN| arthAt vinaash| yaha paripUrNa garbhaja paMcendriya manuSya
9. tattha aNaMtA (ka, b)| aura tiryaJcoM kI dRSTi se jAnanA caahie| ekendriyoM
ke 10. x (sa), piMDaniyukti kI 64 vIM gAthA kI vyAkhyA meM kevala kAya kA,
vikalendriya evaM sammUrcchima tiryaJca tIna bhASya gAthAeM (pibhA 19-21) haiN|
aura manuSyoM ke kAya aura vacana kA atipAta jAnanA 11. kaMDaka kA artha hai
aMgula mAtra kSetra kA asaMkhyeyabhAga caahie| deha, Ayu aura iMdriya kA atipAta
sabhI gata pradeza rAzi pramANa sNkhyaa| kaMDaka evaM saMyamasthAnaka tiryaJca
aura manuSyoM para ghaTita hotA hai| inameM kI vyAkhyA hetu dekheM zrI
bhikSaAgama viSayakoza bhAgabhI ekendriya kI dRSTi se audArika deha, Ayu kI 2
pR. 341, 342 /  apekSA se tiryaga Ayu tathA iMdriya kI apekSA se sparza 12. u
tANi (k)| iMdriya jAnanA caahie| dvIndriya meM sparzana aura rasana- 13. mavR
pa. 41; cAsaGkhayeyalokAkAzapradezapramANAni SaT ina do iMdriyoM kA samAveza
hotA hai (mavR pa. 37) /  sthAnakAni saMyamazreNirucyate-asaMkhyeya lokAkAza6.
apAdAna-paMcamI tatpuruSa kI apekSA se tripAta kA nirukta pradeza pramANa
SaTsthAnaka saMyamazreNI kahalAte haiN|

Page #275 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniya Bhashya ### 103 **21.** The one who consumes food with the karma-
prakritis of Krishna, etc., with the characteristics of excellent purity and
stability, is considered Adhah-Adhah (one with low purity and low stability).
**22.** Knowingly killing the six bodies with intention is Nida, and killing
them unknowingly is Anida. **23.** In this context, the division of food is
intended to be given as per the need. This division is explained in detail for
the benefit of the disciples. **24.** When a famine has passed, a devotee cooks
food for many mendicants who have arrived at the entrance or exit of a desert or
on a pilgrimage. This is called Misrajata. **25.** There are two types of
places: 1. Place of the object (Sthan Sthan) 2. Place of the vessel (Bhajan
Sthan). The stove (Chulli) and the vessel (Avchulli) are the Place of the
object, and the platform (Pithar) and the vessel (Sthali) are the Place of the
vessel. The fourfold classification of the Place of the object and the Place of
the vessel is as follows: * Placed on the stove, also on the platform. * Placed
on the stove, not on the platform (because it is placed in a vessel like a pot).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti bhASya 103 21. kiNhAdiyA u' lesA, ukkosavisuddhiThitivisesAo  /
etesi visuddhANaM, appaM taggAhago kunnti|| 30 //  kRSNa Adi lezyA tathA utkRSTa
vizuddhi aura sthiti vAlI karma-prakRtiyoM ko AdhAkarma bhojana grahaNa karane
vAlA adhaH-adhaH (alpa vizuddhi aura alpasthiti vAlA) karatA hai| 22.
jANaMtamajANato, 'taheva uddisiya'3 ohato vaavi| jANagamajANagaM vA, vaheti
anidA nidA esA  // 31 //  jAnate hue uddezyapUrvaka SaTkAya kA vadha karanA nidA
tathA ajAnakArI meM sAmAnya rUpa se vadha karanA anidA hai| 23. tattha
vibhAguddesiyamevaM saMbhavati puvvmuddittuN| sIsagaNahitaTThAe, taM ceva
vibhAgato bhaNati  //  32 //  pracura khAdya-sAmagrI bacane para vibhAga
auddezika meM yathAvat denA uddiSTa hai| ziSya gaNa ke hita ke lie vibhAga
auddezika ko vistAra se kahA jA rahA hai| 24. duggAse taM samaicchiyA va
addhANasIsae jttaa| saDDI bahubhikkhayare, mIsajjAtaM kare koI10  // 33 //
durbhikSa atikrAnta hone para koI zraddhAlu kAntAra ke praveza yA nirgama mArga
para athavA tIrtha-yAtrA meM aneka bhikSAcaroM ko prApta karake bhojana pakAtA
hai, vaha mizrajAta hai| 25. cullI avacullo vA, ThANasaThANaM11 tu bhAyaNaM
pihaDe12  /  saTThANaTThANammi ya, bhAyaNaThANe13 ya caubhaMgA  //  34 //
sthAna do prakAra kA hotA hai-1. sthAna svasthAna 2. bhAjana svasthAna  /  cullI
avacullI sthAna svasthAna hai tathA piThara-sthAlI Adi bhAjana svasthAna haiN|
sthAna svasthAna tathA bhAjana svasthAna kI caturbhaMgI isa prakAra hai * cullI
para sthApita, piThara para bhii| * cullI para sthApita, piThara para nhiiN|
(chabbaka Adi meM sthita hone ke kAraNa) 1. x (ka, b)| 8. duHkhena grAso yatra
tad durgAsaM (mavR pa. 88) /  2. visuddha (ba, k)| 9. 'cchiuM (mu)| 3. vaheti
Niddisiya (jIbhA 1116) /  10. pini 120 vIM gAthA kI vyAkhyA meM eka bhASyagAthA
4. jANaga ajANae (ka, bii)| (pibhA 24) hai| 5. pini 65 vIM gAthA kI vyAkhyA meM
eka bhASya gAthA (pibhA 11. saTThANaM (ka, b)| 22) hai| 12. piDhare (mu)| 6.
'meyaM (s)| 13. NaTThANe (k)| 7. saMbaMdha gAthA ke rUpa meM bhASyakAra ne yaha
gAthA 14. bhago (lA, ka), pini 126 kI vyAkhyA meM yaha (pibhA 23) likhI hai|
bhASyagAthA (pibhA 25) hai|

Page #276 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **104** • Not established on the stove, but established
on the back (established in the back away from the stove). • Not established on
the stove, nor on the back (established in a place like a cupboard away from the
stove). If the child cries for food, then give it to him! Don't cry.  **26.**
"If the householder hears you, then the beginning (of violence) will not happen
there." (35)  **27.** "I am spinning cotton right now. After that, I will give
you food, so don't cry." (36) Hearing this statement, the monk should not enter
for alms, because there is a possibility of violence (beginning) there. If the
mother says, "I am busy with something else, then I will give you food," even
then the monk should avoid it. Or, if the child says to his mother when the monk
arrives, "Why don't you get up? We will get food because of the monk's
influence," even hearing these words, the monk should avoid the offered food.
**28.** "Even if it is dry, it is washed with water, as people do." (37) Just as
a vessel or object is washed when touched by dry impurity, similarly, a vessel
touched by an uncoated, non-violent, non-injurious substance like a thread or a
grain, must be purified with the three purifications.  **29.** "What is said to
be taken, even if it is a non-coated substance." (38) Even if a non-coated, non-
violent, non-injurious substance like a thread or a grain is taken, food cannot
be considered fit for consumption in that vessel without the three
purifications. What to say about a substance like buttermilk, which is coated?
**30.** "The action that is done for the sake of the monk, is only for the sake
of the rice." (39) In the context of the non-violent, non-injurious rice, etc.,
prepared for the monk, some say...  **Footnotes:**  1. "That if (it is)..." 2.
"Tongue" (reference to a commentary) 3. "Influence also (of, to)" 4. "Pibha"
(reference to a commentary) 5. "That which is touched" 6. "Wash" 7. "Tongue"
(reference to a commentary) 8. "Substance not coated" 9. "Tongue" (reference to
a commentary) 10. "Hihi" 11. "Rice or" 12. "Do"  **Commentary:**  There are
three commentary verses (Pibha 28-30) in the explanation of verse 191 of the
Piniga.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 104 * cullI para sthApita nahIM, piThara para sthApita  /  (cUlhe se dUra
piThara meM sthApita ) * na cullI para sthApita, na hI piThara para  /  (cUlhe
se dUra chabbaka Adi meM sthApita ) kattAmi tAva pelUM, to te dehAmi putta ! mA
rova  /  26. 'jai taM suNeti sAhU, na gacchate tattha AraMbho  //  35  //  27.
annaTTha uTThiyA vA, tubbha vi demi tti kiM pi pariharati  /  kiha dANi na
uTThahisI ?, sAdhupabhAveNa labbhAmo  //  36  //  (bAlaka ke dvArA bhojana
mAMgane para rUI kI pUrNikA kAtatI huI strI kahatI hai - ) 'maiM abhI rUI kAta
rahI huuN| isake bAda maiM tumheM bhojana dUMgI ataH tuma mata roo' isa vAkya ko
sunakara sAdhu bhikSA ke lie aMdara na jAe kyoMki vahAM AraMbha - hiMsA kI
saMbhAvanA hai| yadi mAM yaha kahatI hai ki anya prayojana se ulUMgI to tumheM
bhI bhojana dUMgI to bhI sAdhu usakA parihAra karatA hai athavA sAdhu ke Ane
para yadi bAlaka apanI mAM ko kahatA hai ki tuma kyoM nahIM uThatI ho ? sAdhu ke
prabhAva se hameM bhI bhojana milegaa| bAlaka ke ina vacanoM ko sunakara bhI
sAdhu dIyamAna AhAra kA parihAra karatA hai  /  28. sukkeNa vi 'jaM chikkaM 5,
tu asuiNA dhovva jahA loge  /  iha sukkeNa vi chikkaM, dhovvati kammeNa bhANaM
tu ?  //  37  //  jisa prakAra zuSka azuci se spRSTa hone para bhI loka meM usa
bhAjana yA vastu ko dhoyA jAtA hai, vaise hI alepa AdhAkarmika valla, caNaka Adi
kA sparza hone para bhI pAtra kA kalpatraya se zodhana karanA anivArya hai| 29.
levAleva tti jaM vuttaM, jaM pi davvamalevaDaM '  /  taMpi ghettuM Na kappaMti,
takkAdi kimu levaDaM 29  //  38  //  alepakRd AdhAkarmika valla, caNaka Adi ke
grahaNa karane para bhI kalpatraya ke binA usa pAtra meM bhojana kalpanIya nahIM
hotA phira takra Adi lepayukta padArtha kA to kahanA hI kyA ? AhAya jaMkIrati
taM tu kammaM, vajjehihI " odaNamegameva  /  sovIra AyAmaga cAulodaM", kammaM ti
to taggahaNaM kareMti12  //  39  //  sAdhu ke nimitta se jo AdhAkarmika odana
Adi banAyA jAtA hai, usake saMdarbha meM 30. kucha 1. taM jai (mu)  /  2. tu.
jIbhA 1230  /  3. pabhAvA vi (sa, lA)  /  4. pibhA 26, 27 meM apasarpaNarUpa
sUkSmaprAbhRtikA kA varNana hai| ye gAthAeM vAstava meM niryukti kI honI cAhie
lekina TIkAkAra ne 'bhASyakRd gAthAdvayamAha' kA ullekha kiyA hai ata: ise
bhASyagAthA ke rUpa meM rakhA hai| 5. jacchikkaM ( a, sa)  /  piMDaniyukti 6.
dhovae (mu)  /  7. jIbhA 1298  /  8. davva alevaDaM (sa)  /  9. jIbhA 1299  /
10. 'hihi (sa)  /  AcAryoM 11. cAulo vA (mu), lodagaM (lA)  /  12. karaMti ( a,
ka ), pini gA. 191 kI vyAkhyA meM tIna bhASyagAthAeM (pibhA 28-30) haiM  /

Page #277 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindanuyukti Bhashya ### 105  It is believed that only Odana is Adhakarma,
while the rest like Sauvira, Avshravan and Tandulodak are not Adhakarma, hence
they consume them. 31. The Sangam Theras, due to weakness in their legs,
abandoned the Gachchha.  They started living in the nine-part field of
Kollikera.  After some days, the disciple Datta arrived.  He stayed outside the
Upashraya.  He was mentally disturbed by the unknown Ucchha Bhiksha.  The Seth's
son, Putana, was affected by Vyantari.  The Acharya said, "Don't cry," and
struck the Chapputika, which resulted in the receipt of Bhiksha.  The disciple
criticized him properly. 32. A distant village leader arrived alone.  Seeing his
relatives approaching, he asked the reason for their arrival.  They said, "The
Sadhu has said so."  To gain trust, they spoke of dreams, etc.  In anger, the
household leader asked, "What is in the mare's womb?"  The Naimittika Sadhu
said, "A Panchpuundra Kishor (mare's foal) is there."  When the mare's belly was
cut open, the same came out.  If this had not happened, you would have also been
killed.  There are many Naimittikas who speak of Avithath Nimitta. 13  1. The
commentator Malayagiri has clearly mentioned that Sauvira, Avshravan and
Tandulodak are considered Adhakarma by the Niyuktikara Bhadrabahu (Nibha 2695,
4407).  The same is confirmed by the Niyuktikara in the expansion of the story
in Gatha 191.  2. The expansion of the story mentioned in Nibha 4393, Pini Ga.
199 is found in two Bhashya Gathas (Pibha 31, 32).  3. The expansion of the
story is found in Pari. 3, Katha San. 26.  4. The expansion of the story is
found in Pari. 3, Katha San. 28.  5. The expansion of the story mentioned in
Pini Ga. 205 is found in two Bhashya Gathas (Pibha 33, 34).  6. Paccuni -
Sammukhagamana (Mavri).  7. Puccha ti ya Samana (K), Niyuktikara Bhadrabahu
(Nibha 2695, 4407).  8. Suminai (K, Mu).  9. Vadava (B, Mu).  10. Bhanati
Panchpuundasaso (Nibha 2696), Panch Puundaga Santu (Nibha 4408).  11. Tu (K).
12. Tuhan (Mu, Jibha 1347).  13. The expansion of the story mentioned in Pini
Ga. 205 is found in two Bhashya Gathas (Pibha 33, 34).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti bhASya 105 kI yaha mAnyatA hai ki odana hI AdhAkarma hotA hai,
zeSa sauvIra, avazrAvaNa aura taNDulodaka Adi AdhAkarmika nahIM hote ataH ve
unakA grahaNa karate haiN|' 31. ome saMgamatherA, gaccha visajjaMti
jNghblhiinnaa| navabhAgakhettavasadhI, dattassa ya Agamo tAhe  // 40 //  32.
'uvasayabAhiM ThANaM'3, annAuMcheNa saMkileso y| pUyaNaceDe mA ruda, paDilAbhaNa
vigaDaNA smmN||41|| durbhikSa meM saMgama sthavira ne jaMghAbala kI kSINatA ke
kAraNa gaccha kA visarjana kara diyaa| kollikera nagara ke navabhAga karake vahI
rahanA prAraMbha kara diyaa| kucha dinoM bAda ziSya datta kA Agamana huaa| vaha
upAzraya ke bAhara rukaa| ajJAta uJcha bhikSA se vaha mAnasika rUpa se saMkliSTa
ho gyaa| seTha kA bAlaka pUtanA vyantarI se prabhAvita thaa| AcArya ne 'mata
roo' aisA kahakara cappuTikA bajAI, jisase bhikSA kI prApti huii| ziSya ne
samyak AlocanA kii| 33. dArAbhogaNa egAgi, AgamoM5 pariyaNassa paccoNI  /
'pucchA samaNe kahaNaM", sAiyaMkAra suviNAdI  //  42  //  34. kovo
valavAgabbhaM, ca pucchito paMcapuMDamAiMsu  /  phAlaNadiDhe jai nevaM, to1
tuha2 avitahaM kai vaa|| 43 //  dUragata grAmanAyaka ekAkI AyA, parijanoM ko
sAmane Ate hue dekhakara usane Ane kA kAraNa puuchaa| unhoMne kahA-'sAdhu ne
kahA hai|' vizvAsa ke lie svapna Adi kI bAta khii| kopa se gRhanAyaka ne
pUchA-'ghor3I ke garbha meM kyA hai ?' naimittika sAdhu ne kahA-'paMcapuMDra
kizora (ghor3I kA baccA) hai|' ghor3I kA peTa phAr3ane para vahI niklaa| yadi
aisA nahIM hotA to tumhArA bhI vadha ho jaataa| aise kitane naimittika haiM, jo
avitatha nimitta kA kathana karate haiN|13 1. TIkAkAra malayagiri ne spaSTatA se
ullekha kiyA hai ki 7. puccha ti ya samaNaM (ka), niyuktikAra bhadrabAhu ne
sauvIra, avazrAvaNa aura pucchA ya khamaNakahaNaM (nibhA 2695, 4407) /
taNDulodaka ko AdhAkarma mAnA hai| gAthA 191 meM bhI 8. sumiNAI (ka, mu), kathA
ke vistAra hetu dekheM niyuktikAra ne isI bAta kI puSTi kI hai| pari. 3, kathA
saM. 28 /  2. nibhA 4393, pini gA. 199 meM AI kathA kA vistAra 9. vaDavA (bI,
mu)| do bhASyagAthAoM (pibhA 31, 32) meM huA hai| 10. bhaNati paMcapuMDAso
(nibhA 2696), 3. uvasaggabahiTThANaM (nibhA 4394) /  paMca puMDagA saMtu (nibhA
4408) /  4. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 26  /  11. tu (k)|
5. Agao (lA, mu)| 12. tuhaM (mu, jIbhA 1347) /  6. paccoNI-sanmukhAgamanaM
(mvR)| 13. pini gA. 205 meM AI kathA kA vistAra do bhASyagAthAoM (pibhA 33, 34)
meM huA hai|

Page #278 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 106: The Arrangement of the Body  **35.** The Acharya, weakened by
his emaciated body, resided in the city of Kusumpura. Due to famine, he gave the
*Yoini Prabhrit* text to a worthy disciple in seclusion. Two *Ksullaka* monks
heard it. Making the disciple an Acharya, he sent him to another country.
**36.** During the famine, even though there was a shortage of alms, the Acharya
divided his food with the two *Ksullaka* monks. Later, using *Anjan* (collyrium)
to become invisible, the two *Ksullaka* monks began to eat with King
Chandragupta.  **37.** Chandragupta felt weakness due to his *Omodariya*
(weakness of the stomach). Chanakya asked the reason. He spread fine powder of
brick everywhere, closed the door, and filled the place with smoke. Seeing the
two *Ksullaka* monks, Chandragupta felt disgust. Chanakya praised him.
Approaching them, the Acharya rebuked Chanakya.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 106 piMDaniyukti 35. jaMghAhINA' ome, kusumapure sissajogarahakaraNaM  /
khuDDa dugaMjaNasuNaNaM, gamaNaM 'desaMta osrnnN||44|| 36. bhikkhe parihAyaMte,
therANaM 'tesi omeM 5 deNtaannN| sahabhuja caMdagutte , omodariyAe~ dobballaM
//  45  //  37. cANakka puccha iTTAlacuNNa dAraM pihittu dhUme y| daTuM
kucchapasaMsA, therasamIve uvAlaMbho  // 46 //  jaMghAbala se hIna AcArya
kusumapura nagara meM rahane lge| durbhikSa hone para yogya ziSya ko ekAnta meM
(yoniprAbhRta) graMtha kI vAcanA dii| do kSullaka muniyoM ne vaha suna lii|
ziSya ko AcArya banAkara dezAntara meM preSita kara diyaa| durbhikSa meM bhikSA
kI kamI hone para bhI AcArya kSullakadvaya ko bAMTakara AhAra krte| bAda meM
aMjana-prayoga se adRzya hokara kSullakadvaya rAjA candragupta ke sAtha bhojana
karane lge| UNodarI se candragupta ko durbalatA kA anubhava hone lgaa| cANakya
ne kAraNa puuchaa| usane IMTa kA bArIka cUrNa saba jagaha phailA diyA aura dvAra
baMda karake cAroM ora dhuMA kara diyaa| kSullakadvaya ko dekhakara candragupta
ne jugupsA kii| cANakya ne prazaMsA kii| samIpa jAne para AcArya ne cANakya ko
upAlambha diyaa| 1. hINe (nibhA 4463) /  2. jogasIsaparikahaNaM (ka), jogga (s)|
3. "suNaNA (mu, sa, a)| 4. desaMtare saraNaM (mu, bii)| 5. ome tesiM (sa,
tu.jIbhA 1453) /  6. bhojjaM (sa, laa)| 7. caMdautte (k)| 8. iTTANa (s)| 9.
jIbhA 1455, pini gA. 230 meM saMketita cANakya aura do kSullaka kI kathA kA
vistAra tIna bhASyagAthAoM (pibhA 35-37) meM huA hai| 10. kathA ke vistAra hetu
dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 42 /

Page #279 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Piṇḍaniyukti Translation

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 - piNDaniyukti anuvAda

Page #280 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #281 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Pindanuyukti-Anuvaad**  1. There are eight types of
Pindanuyukti: Udgam (origin), Utpadan (production), Eshana (desire), Sanyojana
(combination), Praman (proof), Ingal-Dhoom (smoke) etc. defects and causes of
Aahar (food). 2. There are twelve synonyms for the word Pind: Pind, Nikaya,
Samuh, Sampindan, Pindan, Samavay, Samavasaran, Nichay, Upchay, Chay, Yugm and
Rashi. 3. The word Pind should be explained in four or six ways. After
explaining, the form of Pind should be described.  1. This is a collection of
verses about the meaning of the text, therefore, only eight meanings related to
Pind are mentioned here. The author has explained these meanings in detail. 2.
According to the commentator Viracharya, no word can be synonymous with another
word in the context of absolute difference, because all substances are
completely different from each other. Therefore, the word "Ghat" cannot be
synonymous with the word "Kut". Similarly, in the context of absolute non-
difference, all substances are in their own form, therefore, the word "Ghat" is
synonymous with the word "Ghat", but "Kut" etc. are not synonymous (Av Vr P.
138).  There are twelve words mentioned as synonyms for the word Pind. According
to the commentator, all these words are indicative of different groups, but they
are considered synonymous because they are generally indicative of the meaning
of a group. Pindadayah Shabdaah: Loke Pratiniyat Ev Sanghatavisheshe Rudhah,
Tathapi Samanyato Yad Vyutpattinimittan Sanghatatvatvamatra Lakshanan Tat
Sarvesham Api Avishistamiti Krutva Samanyato Sarve Pindadayah Shabdaah Ekartheka
Uktah Tato Na Kaschiddoshah (Mavru P. 2). The meaning of the words Pind etc. is
as follows:  * Pind - To make a Pind by combining many things. * Nikaya - A
group of monks. * Samuh - A community of humans. * Sampindan - The proper
combination of sesame seeds in a sesame cake. * Pindan - The combination of
substances. * Samavay - A group of merchants. * Samavasaran - A council of
Tirthankaras, a meeting place of many scholars. * Nichay - A group of animals
like pigs. * Upchay - Increase in the previous group. * Chay - The construction
of bricks, building a wall etc. * Yugm - The combination of two substances, the
combination of an axle pair etc. * Rashi - A heap of peanuts etc.  3. The
commentator Viracharya has raised a question: How can Pind be formed in a Yugm
where there is a combination of two objects? In response, he mentions a specific
belief and says that two Bharunda birds who live together for life live in one
body, therefore, from this perspective, it becomes a Pind. Mentioning another
belief, the commentator says that the combination of three or more substances is
primarily called Pind, but the combination of two Kapardikas with different
bodies in one place is also called Pind (Av Vr P. 138).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti-anuvAda 1. piMDaniyukti ke ATha prakAra haiM-udgama, utpAdana,
eSaNA, saMyojanA, pramANa, iMgAla-dhUma Adi doSa aura AhAra ke kaarnn| 2. piMDa
zabda ke bAraha paryAya haiM--piMDa, nikAya, samUha, saMpiNDana, piNDana,
samavAya, samavasaraNa, nicaya, upacaya, caya, yugma aura raashi| 3. piMDa zabda
ke cAra yA chaha prakAra se nikSepa karane caahie| nikSepa karane ke pazcAt
piMDa kI prarUpaNA karanI caahie| 1. yaha graMtha ke arthAdhikAra kI saMgraha
gAthA hai ata: isameM piNDa se saMbadhita ATha arthAdhikAroM kA ullekha mAtra
kiyA gayA hai  /  inhIM adhikAroM kI graMthakAra ne kramazaH vistRta vyAkhyA kI
hai| 2. TIkAkAra vIrAcArya ke anusAra ekAnta bheda kI apekSA koI bhI zabda kisI
zabda kA ekArthaka nahIM ho sakatA kyoMki saba padArtha eka dUsare se sarvathA
bhinna haiM ata: ghaTa zabda kuTa zabda kA ekArthaka nahIM ho sktaa| isI prakAra
ekAnta abheda pakSa meM bhI saba padArtha apane svarUpa meM sthita haiM ata:
ghaTa zabda kA ghaTa zabda abhinna ekArthaka hai, kuTa Adi ekArthaka nahIM haiM
(ava vR pa. 138) /  piNDa zabda ke ekArthaka meM bAraha zabdoM kA ullekha hai|
TIkAkAra ke anusAra ye sabhI zabda pratiniyata va bhinnabhinna samUhoM ke vAcaka
haiM lekina sAmAnya rUpa se samUha artha ke vAcaka hone se ina sabhI ko
ekArthaka mAnA hai| piMDAdayaH zabdA: loke pratiniyata eva saMghAtavizeSe
rUDhAH, tathApi sAmAnyato yad vyutpattinimittaM saMghAtatvamAtralakSaNaM tat
sarveSAmapyaviziSTamiti kRtvA sAmAnyata: sarve piNDAdayaH zabdA ekArthikA uktAH
tato na kazciddoSaH (mavR pa. 2) /  piNDa Adi zabdoM kI artha-paramparA isa
prakAra hai * piNDa-bahuta cIjoM ko milAkara eka piNDa bnaanaa| * nikAya-
bhikSuoM kA smuuh| * samUha-manuSyoM kA smudaay| * sapiNDana-tilapapar3I meM
tiloM kA paraspara samyak sNyog| * piNDana-vastu kA sNyog| * samavAya-vaNikoM kA
samUha  /  *samavasaraNa-tIrthaMkaroM kI pariSada, aneka vAdiyoM kA miln-sthl| *
nicaya-sUara Adi pazuoM kA saMghAta  /  * upacaya-pUrva samUha meM vRddhi honaa|
* caya-IMToM kI racanA, dIvAra Adi bnaanaa| * yugma-do padArthoM kA milanA, akSa
yugala kA saMghAta aadi| * rAzi-mUMgaphalI Adi kA ddher| 3. TIkAkAra vIrAcArya
ne eka prazna upasthita kiyA hai ki yugma meM do vastuoM kA saMghAta hotA hai
ata: usameM piMDatva kaise ghaTita ho sakatA hai? isake uttara meM mAnyatA
vizeSa kA ullekha karate hue ve kahate haiM ki jIvanabhara sAtha rahane vAle do
bhAruNDa pakSI eka zarIra meM rahate haiM ataH isa dRSTi se vaha piMDa ho gyaa|
dUsarI mAnyatA kA ullekha karate hue TIkAkAra kahate haiM ki mukhya rUpa se tIna
yA tIna se adhika padArthoM kA milana hI piNDa kahalAtA hai lekina gauNa rUpa se
bhinna zarIra vAlI do kapardikAoM kA eka sthAna meM milana bhI piMDa kahalAtA
hai (ava vR pa. 138) /

Page #282 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 110: The Constitution of a Pind  **3/1.** Just as one *setika* (a
unit of measurement) is present in a *kulak* (a larger unit) as its fourth part,
similarly four *nikshepas* (deposits) are present in six *nikshepas* by rule.
Therefore, six *nikshepas* should be performed.   **4.** There are six
*nikshepas* of the word *pind* (aggregate): *nama* (name), *sthapana*
(establishment), *dravya* (substance), *kshetra* (field), *kala* (time), and
*bhava* (emotion).  **5.** There are four types of *nama-pind* (name-aggregate):
*gauna* (secondary), *samayakrita* (time-established), *tadu-bhayaj* (both-
related), and *anubhayaj* (unrelated). Now I will speak about *sthapana-pind*
(establishment-aggregate).  **6.** *Sthapana-pind* is of two types:
*sadbhavasthapana-pind* (establishment with harmony) and *asadbhavasthapana-
pind* (establishment without harmony). Their examples are: *aksha* (axis),
*varataka* (a type of wooden stick), *kastha* (wood), *pust* (clay sculpture),
and *chitra-karma* (painting) etc.  **7.** *Dravya-pind* (substance-aggregate)
is of three types: *sachitta* (conscious), *misra* (mixed), and *achitta* (non-
conscious). Each type has nine sub-types.  **8.** These nine sub-types are:
*prithvikaaya* (earth-body), *ap-kaaya* (water-body), *tejas-kaaya* (fire-body),
*vayu-kaaya* (air-body), *vanaspati-kaaya* (plant-body), *dvi-indriya* (two-
sense), *tri-indriya* (three-sense), *chatur-indriya* (four-sense), and *panch-
indriya* (five-sense).  **1.** *Gauna-nama* (secondary name) is a name given
according to the quality, like the name *Mahavira* for a powerful person. This
can be based on both quality and action. The name *gau* (cow) is not based on
the quality of being a cow, but on its tendency to move, like *gachchatiti gau*
(she who moves is a cow). The commentator *Malayagiri* has divided *gauna-nama*
into three sub-types: *dravya-nimitta* (substance-based), *guna-nimitta*
(quality-based), and *kriya-nimitta* (action-based). *Dravya-nama* is based on
etymology, like *shrungi* (horned), *danti* (toothed) etc. (Mava. P. 3,4).
**2.** *Samayaj* (time-established) is a name that is meaningless but famous in
theory. In practice, a group of liquids is not called a *pind*, but the
scriptures (Ayarachula 1/7) use the word *pind* for water. Therefore, even in
the absence of the synthesis of hard substances, the name *pind* for water is
time-established but not meaningful. The name *praabhratika* for cooked rice is
also a *samayaj* name.  **3.** *Tadu-bhayaj* (both-related) is a name that is
both quality-based and time-established, like the name *Rajoharana* for
*Dharmadhwaja*. It is called *Rajoharana* because it removes both external and
internal dust. Therefore, the name *Rajoharana* is given by treating the action
in the cause.  **4.** *Anubhayaj* (unrelated) is a name that is meaningless and
not famous in theory. The commentator has mentioned *ubhayatirikta* (both-
exclusive) name for this. The *niyuktikara* (author of the text) has used the
word *avi* (not) instead of mentioning the name, like giving someone the name
*Singh* (lion) in the absence of courage etc. (Mava. P. 3,4).  The commentator
has explained these four names in detail. The commentator has raised a question
that there is no special difference between *samayakrita* and *ubhayatirikta*
because both names are devoid of meaning. Therefore, instead of mentioning two,
only one could have been mentioned. Answering this, the commentator says that
common people use the names that are symbolic in the world, but common people do
not use the names that are famous in theory, like the use of the word
*samuddesha* (purpose) for food. Therefore, both are mentioned separately.
Similarly, both *gauna* and *samayakrita* are meaningful names, but common
people use *gauna* names, while common people do not use *samayakrita* names,
but only those who are contemporary use them (Mava. P. 6).  **5.** Gathering
many things together and establishing them is *sadbhavasthapana-pind*
(establishment with harmony), and where only one *aksha* or only *varataka* etc.
is established as a *pind* in the form of imagination, it is *asadbhavasthapana-
pind* (establishment without harmony). Even one *aksha* is made of many atoms,
from this perspective, it is a *pind* (Mava. P. 7).  **6.** In *pind-niyukti*
(constitution of a *pind*), nine sub-types of *sachitta*, *achitta*, and *misra*
*dravya-pind* (conscious, non-conscious, and mixed substance-aggregates) are
mentioned, but in *ogha-niyukti* (constitution of a *ogha* (stream)), *lepa-
pind* (coating-aggregate) for *patra* (vessel) etc. is accepted as the tenth
*achitta* *dravya-pind* (non-conscious substance-aggregate) (Oni 336; Levo Ya
Dasamo U).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 110 piMDaniyukti 3/1. jaise cAra setikA pramANa eka kulaka meM usakA
caturthabhAga (eka setikA) niyamata: vidyamAna hai, vaise hI chaha nikSepoM meM
cAra nikSepa niyamataH vidyamAna haiM isalie chaha nikSepa karane caahie| 4.
piMDa zabda ke chaha nikSepa haiM-nAma, sthApanA, dravya, kSetra, kAla aura
bhaav| 5. nAmapiMDa ke cAra prakAra haiM-gauNa', samayakRta, tadubhayaja tathA
anubhyj| aba maiM sthApanA piMDa ke bAre meM khuuNgaa| 6. sthApanApiMDa do
prakAra kA hai-sadbhAvasthApanA piMDa tathA asadbhAvasthApanA piNdd| unake
udAharaNa haiM-akSa, varATaka, kASTha, pusta (miTTI kA zilpakArya) tathA
citrakarma aadi| 7. dravyapiMDa tIna prakAra kA hai-sacitta, mizra aura acitt|
pratyeka prakAra ke phira nau-nau bheda haiN| 8. ve nau bheda ye haiM-
pRthvIkAya, apkAya, tejaskAya, vAyukAya, vanaspatikAya, dvIndriya, trIndriya,
caturindriya, paMcendriya 1. gauNa nAma-guNa ke anurUpa nAma rakhanA, jaise
zakti sampanna vyakti kA mahAvIra naam| yaha guNa aura kriyA donoM ke AdhAra
para ho sakatA hai| gAya kA nAma gotva ke AdhAra para nahIM apitu usakI pravRtti
gamana-kriyA ke AdhAra para hai, jaisegacchatIti gau| TIkAkAra malayagiri ne
gauNa nAma ke tIna bheda kie haiM-dravyanimitta 2. guNanimitta 3. kriyAnimitta
/  dravya nAma vyutpatti nimitta hotA hai, jaise-zrRMgI, dantI Adi (mavR pa.
3,4) /  2. samayaja-artharahita lekina siddhAnta meM prasiddha nAma  /
vyavahAra meM tarala padArthoM ke samUha ko piMDa nahIM kahA jAtA lekina zAstra
(AyAracUlA 1/7) meM pAnI ke lie piMDa zabda kA prayoga huA hai ataH kaThina
dravya ke saMzleSa ke abhAva meM bhI pAnI kA piMDa nAma samaya prasiddha hai
lekina anvartha yukta nahIM hai, odana ke lie prAbhRtikA nAma bhI samayaja nAma
hai| 3. tadubhayaja-guNaniSpanna aura samayaprasiddha nAma, jaise-dharmadhvaja
kA nAma hai rajoharaNa  /  bAhya aura Abhyantara raja ko haraNa karane ke kAraNa
ise rajoharaNa kahA jAtA hai isalie kAraNa meM kArya kA upacAra karake isakA
nAma rajoharaNa rakhA gayA hai| 4. anubhayaja-anvartharahita aura siddhAnta meM
aprasiddha naam| bhASyakAra ne isake lie ubhayAtirikta nAma kA ullekha kiyA hai|
niyuktikAra ne nAma kA ullekha na karake 'avi' zabda se isakA grahaNa kiyA hai,
jaise-zaurya Adi ke abhAva meM kisI kA nAma siMha rakha denA (mavR pa. 3,4) /
bhASyakAra ne ina cAroM nAma kI vistRta vyAkhyA kI hai| TIkAkAra ne eka prazna
upasthita kiyA hai ki samayakRta aura ubhayAtirikta ina donoM meM vizeSa aMtara
nahIM hai kyoMki donoM nAma anvartha se vikala haiM ata: do kA ullekha na karake
eka kA hI nirdeza kiyA jA sakatA thaa| isakA uttara dete hue TIkAkAra kahate
haiM ki jo laukika sAMketika nAma haiM, unakA vyavahAra sAmAnya vyakti karate
haiM lekina jo siddhAnta prasiddha nAma haiM, unakA vyavahAra sAmAnya vyakti
nahIM karate, jaise bhojana ke lie 'samuddeza' zabda kA prayoga ata: donoM kA
pRthak ullekha kiyA gayA hai| isI prakAra gauNa aura samayakRta donoM hI
anvartha yukta nAma haiM lekina gauNa nAma kA prayoga sAmAnya vyakti karate haiM
tathA samayakRta kA sAmAnya vyakti nahIM apitu sAmayika hI karate haiM (mavR
p.6)| 5. aneka vastuoM ko eka sAtha ekatrita karake sthApita karanA
sadbhAvasthApanA piMDa hai tathA jahAM kevala eka akSa yA kevala varATaka Adi
meM kalpanA ke rUpa meM piMDa kI sthApanA kI jAtI hai, vaha asadbhAvasthApanA
piMDa hai| eka akSa bhI aneka paramANuoM se banA hai, isa dRSTi se vaha piMDa hI
hai (mavR pa. 7) /  6. piMDaniyukti meM sacitta, acitta aura mizra dravyapiMDa
Adi ke nau-nau bheda kie haiM lekina oghaniyukti meM pAtra Adi ke lie lepapiMDa
ko dasaveM acitta dravyapiMDa ke rUpa meM svIkRta kiyA hai (oni 336; levo ya
dasamo u)|

Page #283 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 111 9. There are three types of *Pṛthvīkāya* -
*Sacitta*, *Miśra* and *Acitta*. There are two divisions of *Sacitta Pṛthvīkāya*
- *Niścaya Sacitta* and *Vyavahāra Sacitta*. 10. The majority of the great
mountains are *Niścaya Sacitta Pṛthvī*, and except for *Acitta* and *Miśra
Pṛthvī*, all the earth (like forests etc.) is *Vyavahāra Sacitta Pṛthvī*. 11.
The earth beneath trees like *Kṣīradruma*, *Vaṭa*, *Aśvattha* etc., the earth of
paths outside *Pantha-grāma* and cities, the land broken by the plough, the
earth mixed with water, the earth mixed with fuel, dung etc. are all *Miśra
Pṛthvīkāya*. The earth mixed with a lot of fuel remains as *Miśra Pṛthvīkāya*
for one *prahara*, the earth mixed with medium fuel for two *praharas*, and the
earth mixed with little fuel for three *praharas* (after which it becomes
*Acitta*). 12. The *Pṛthvīkāya* becomes *Acitta* due to these things - cold,
heat, alkali, *kṣatra*, fire, salt, *ūṣa*, acid, oil etc. The *Pṛthvīkāya* of
*Vyutkrānta-yoni* i.e. *Prāsuka* is useful for the *Sādhu*. 13. *Aparāddhika*
i.e. blisters caused by the bite of spiders etc. and poison, snakebite etc.,
*Acitta Pṛthvīkāya* is used for applying poultice and bandages for their relief.
*Acitta* salt is taken in food etc. *Acitta* *Surabhi-upala* i.e. the stone
called *Gandharohaka* is used for its purpose.  1. Trees like *Vaṭa*, *Aśvattha*
etc. are called *Kṣīradruma*. Due to their sweetness, there is a lack of
weapons, so some *Pṛthvīkāya* beings remain *Sacitta*, and some become *Acitta*
due to contact with weapons like cold etc., therefore, *Miśra Pṛthvīkāya*
remains under these trees (M.V.P. 8). 2. When the water of the cloud falls on
*Sacitta Pṛthvīkāya*, the water-soaked earth remains *Miśra* for some time.
After a short while, it becomes *Acitta* because earth and water are both
weapons for each other. As long as it is not completely transformed, the earth
remains *Miśra* (M.V.P. 8). 3. Here, the word *Uṣṇa* refers to the heat of the
sun. The heat of fire is referred to by the word *Agni* (M.V.P. 8). 4. *Karīṣa*
is special (A.V.P. 4). 5. M.V.P. 8; *Ūṣarādi-kṣetra-udbhavo lavaṇi-sammiśro
rajo-viśeṣaḥ*. *Ūṣa* - *Ūṣara* is a special type of dust particle produced in
the *Ūṣara* field, mixed with salt. 6. The *Acittata* of *Pṛthvīkāya* happens in
four ways - 1. *Dravyataḥ* 2. *Kṣetrataḥ* 3. *Kālataḥ* 4. *Bhāvataḥ*. The earth
that becomes *Acitta* due to its own body or another body's weapon is
*Dravyataḥ*. The earth that becomes *Acitta* due to the contact of earth
produced in an alkaline field and earth produced in a sweet field is
*Kṣetrataḥ*. Here, the predominance of a particular field is intended. Taking
the *Pṛthvīkāya* beyond a hundred *yojanas*, it becomes *Acitta* due to
different food and contact with cold etc., this is also *Kṣetrataḥ* *Acittata*.
The earth that becomes *Acitta* due to the natural decay of its lifespan is
*Kālataḥ*. Only those who are extremely knowledgeable can know this, not the
*Chhadmastha*. This is why Bhagavan Mahāvīra did not allow drinking water from a
pond with *Acitta* water due to the decay of its lifespan, lest the *Sādhu* who
come later drink the water of a *Sacitta* pond. *Bhāvataḥ* *Acittata* means the
change in color, taste etc. (M.V.P. 8, 9). 7. M.P. 9; *Surabhy-upalena gandha-
pāṣāṇena gandharohaka-ākhyena prayojanam, tena hi pāma-prasat-vāta-ghāta-ādiḥ
kriyate*. *Surabhi-upala* i.e. the stone called *Gandharohaka* was used to cure
the wind etc. caused by itching.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 111 9. pRthvIkAya ke tIna prakAra haiM-sacitta, mizra aura acitta  /
sacitta pRthvIkAya ke do bheda haiM-nizcaya sacitta aura vyavahAra scitt| 10.
mahAparvatoM kA bahumadhyabhAga nizcayasacitta pRthvI hai tathA acitta aura
mizra pRthvI ko chor3akara (araNya Adi kI) sArI pRthvI vyavahAra sacitta pRthvI
hai| 11. kSIradruma-vaTa, azvattha Adi vRkSoM ke nIce kI pRthvI, paMtha-grAma
aura nagara ke bAhara ke mArga kI pRthvI, kRSTa-hala dvArA vidArita bhUmi,
Ardra-jalamizrita pRthvI', IMdhana-gobara Adi se mizrita pRthvIye saba mizra
pRthvIkAya haiN| adhika IMdhana ke madhyagata pRthvI eka prahara taka, madhyama
IMdhana se saMpRkta pRthvI do prahara taka tathA alpa IMdhana se saMpRkta pRthvI
tIna prahara taka mizra pRthvIkAya ke rUpa meM rahatI hai| (bAda meM vaha acitta
ho jAtI hai)| 12. ina cIjoM se pRthvIkAya acitta hotA hai-zIta, uSNa', kSAra,
kSatra, agni, lavaNa, USa', amla (khaTAI), sneha, taila Adi  /  vyutkrAntayoni
arthAt prAsuka pRthvIkAya se sAdhuoM kA prayojana hotA hai| 13. aparAddhika
arthAt makar3I Adi ke daMza se hone vAlA phapholA tathA viSa-sarpadaMza Adi,
inake upazamana hetu pralepa-baMdha karane meM acitta pRthvIkAya kA upayoga hotA
hai| acitta lavaNa bhojana Adi meM gRhIta hotA hai| acitta surabhiupala' arthAt
gaMdharohaka nAmaka pASANa kA saprayojana grahaNa hotA hai| 1. vaTa, azvattha
Adi ke vRkSa kSIradruma kahalAte haiN| inake mAdhurya ke kAraNa zastra kA abhAva
hone se kucha pRthvIkAya ke jIva sacitta rahate haiM tathA zIta Adi zastra ke
samparka se kucha acitta ho jAte haiM ataH ina vRkSoM ke nIce mizra pRthvIkAya
rahatI hai (mavR pa. 8) /  2. megha kA jala jaba sacitta pRthvIkAya para giratA
hai to kucha samaya taka jalArdra pRthvI mizra rahatI hai| antarmuhUrta bAda
acitta ho jAtI hai kyoMki pRthvI aura pAnI donoM Apasa meM zastra haiN| jaba
taka sarvathA pariNata nahIM hotI, taba taka pRthvI mizra rahatI hai (mavR p.8)|
3. yahAM uSNa' zabda se sUrya kA paritApa gRhIta hai| agni kA paritApa'agni'
zabda se gRhIta hai (mavR p.8)| 4. karISa vizeSa (ava pa. 4) /  5. mavR pa.8;
USarAdikSetrodbhavo lavaNimasammizro rajovizeSaH  /  USa-USara kSetra meM
utpanna lavaNa mizrita rajakaNa vishess| 6. pRthvIkAya kI acittatA cAra prakAra
se hotI hai-1. dravyataH 2. kSetrataH 3. kAlata: 4. aura bhAvataH |svkaay yA
parakAya zastra se jo pRthvI acitta hotI hai, vaha dravyataH hai| kSAra kSetra
meM utpanna aura madhurakSetra meM utpanna pRthvI kA Apasa meM samparka hone se
jo pRthvI acitta hotI hai, vaha kSetrataH hai| isameM kSetra vizeSa kI
pradhAnatA vivakSita hai| sau yojana ke Age pRthvIkAya ko le jAne para bhinna
AhAra tathA zIta Adi ke samparka se pRthvI acitta ho jAtI hai, yaha bhI
kSetrata: acitta honA hai| svabhAvataH Ayu kSaya hone para jo pRthvI acitta hotI
hai, vaha kAlataH hai| atizaya jJAnI hI isa bAta ko jAna sakate haiM, chadmastha
nhiiN| yahI kAraNa hai ki Ayu kSaya hone para acitta jala vAle tar3Aga kA pAnI
pIne kI bhagavAn mahAvIra ne anujJA nahIM dI ki kahIM Age Ane vAle sAdhu sacitta
tar3Aga ke jala kA sevana na kreN| bhAvataH acitta hone kA artha hai-varNa, rasa
Adi kA badalanA (mavR pa. 8,9) /  7. ma pa. 9; surabhyupalena gandhapASANena
gandharohakAkhyena prayojanaM, tena hi pAmAprasatavAtaghAtAdiH kriyte| surabhi
upala arthAt gaMdharohaka nAmaka pASANa ke dvArA khujalI se utpanna vAta Adi kA
nirAkaraNa kiyA jAtA thaa|

Page #284 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 112. Pindaniyukti  Some other uses of achitt prithvi-kay are as follows: 14.
Achitt prithvi is used for the discharge of sthana-kayotsarga, nishidan, shayan,
uchchar, etc. and for smoothing the ghuttak-lepit patra, the special stone used
for smoothing the ghuttak-lepit patra, the stone used for cleaning the
apanamarga after the discharge of duglak-uchchar prasravan, and the patra-lep,
etc. Thus, achitt prithvi-kay is used in many ways. 15. There are three types of
ap-kay: sachitt, mishra, and achitt. There are two types of sachitt ap-kay:
nischya sachitt ap-kay and vyavahar sachitt ap-kay. 16. Nischya-sachitt (ekant
sachitt) ap-kay is found in the middle of ghanodadhi, ghanavalaya, karak-ola,
the sea, and drah. The ap-kay of kूप, वापी, तड़ाग, etc. is vyavaharatah sachitt.
17. Anuvritt ushnajal and rainwater are mishra ap-kay. Except for the three
aadesh-matas or paramparas, rice water, which is not very clean, is also mishra
ap-kay. 17/1. The three aadesh-matas of tandul-udak are as follows: * The water
droplets that stick to the sides of the vessel when the tandul is washed and
transferred from one vessel to another are considered mishra tandul-udak until
they dry. * The bubbles that rise when the tandul is washed and transferred to
another vessel are considered mishra tandul-udak until they settle down. * The
tandul-udak is considered mishra until the rice is cooked. (These are the three
matas). 1. The sea with the solid ap-kay as its base is the earth of narak. (Mat
P. 9) For a scientific comparison of the words ghanodadhi, ghanavat, etc., see
Bhagavati Bhashya Part 1, p. 136. 2. The ap-kayamaya parikota (Mav P. 9)
surrounding the earths of narak. 3. Usnajal with three boils is considered
prasuk. In the first boil, it undergoes some transformation, in the second, it
undergoes most of the transformation, and in the third, it is completely
transformed into achitt form (Mav P. 10). 4. The rainwater that falls in
villages, towns, etc. is not completely achitt due to the contact of humans,
tiryanch, etc., and therefore it is mishra. If there is less rainfall outside
villages, towns, etc., the water remains mishra when it is transformed from
prithvi-kay. When there is heavy rainfall, the initial rainwater remains mishra
after being transformed from prithvi-kay, but the later rainwater is sachitt
(Mav P. 10). 5. For an explanation of the three aadesh, see the translation of
Ga. 17/1. 6. Apte's dictionary (p. 416) mentions four stages of rice: * Shasya
is the rice in the field. * Dhanu is the rice with husk. * Tandul is the rice
without husk. * Anna is the cooked rice.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 112 piMDaniyukti acitta pRthvIkAya ke kucha anya prayojana isa prakAra haiM14.
sthAna-kAyotsarga, niSIdana, zayana, uccAra Adi kA utsarga karane ke lie acitta
pRthvI kA upayoga hotA hai tathA ghuTTaka-lepita pAtra ko cikanA karane meM
prayukta pASANa vizeSa, Dagalaka-uccAra prasravaNa ke pazcAt apAnamArga ko
zuddha karane vAlA pASANa-khaMDa tathA pAtra-lepa Adi isa prakAra acitta
pRthvIkAya kA bahuvidha prayoga hotA hai| 15. apkAya ke tIna bheda haiM-sacitta,
mizra aura acitt| sacitta apkAya ke do prakAra haiM-nizcaya sacitta apkAya tathA
vyavahAra sacitta apkaay| 16. ghanodadhi, ghanavalaya', karaka-olA tathA samudra
aura draha ke bahumadhyabhAga meM nizcayasacitta (ekAnta sacitta) apkAya hotA
hai| kUpa, vApI, tar3Aga Adi kA apkAya vyavahArataH sacitta hotA hai| 17.
anuvRtta uSNajala tathA barasatI huI varSA kA pAnI mizra apkAya hotA hai| tIna
AdezoM-matoM yA paramparAoM ko chor3akara cAvala kA pAnI, jo atyanta svaccha
nahIM hai, vaha bhI mizra apkAya hai| 17/1. taNDula-udaka ke tIna Adeza-mata isa
prakAra haiM * taNDula ko dhokara eka bartana se dUsare bartana meM DAlane para
jo pAnI ke bindu bartana ke pArzva meM laga jAte haiM, ve jaba taka nahIM
sUkhate, taba taka vaha taNDulodaka mizra mAnA jAtA hai| * taNDula ko dhokara
dUsare bartana meM DAlane para jo bubude uThate haiM, ve jaba taka zAMta nahIM
hote, taba taka taNDulodaka mizra hotA hai| * taNDulodaka meM jaba taka cAvala
nahIM pakate, taba taka vaha taNDulodaka mizra hotA hai, (ye tIna mata haiN)| 1.
naraka pRthvI kA AdhArabhUta Thosa apkAya vAlA smudr| (mata pa. 9) ghanodadhi,
ghanavAta Adi zabdoM kI vaijJAnika dRSTi se tulanA hetu dekheM bhagavatI bhASya
bhAga 1 pR. 136  /  2. naraka pRthviyoM ke pArzvavartI apkAyamaya parakoTA (mava
pa. 9) /  3. tIna ubAla vAlA uSNajala prAsuka mAnA jAtA hai| pahale ubAla meM
vaha kucha pariNata hotA hai, dUsare meM adhikAMza pariNata _ ho jAtA hai tathA
tIsare meM vaha pUrNarUpa se acitta rUpa meM pariNata ho jAtA hai (mavR pa. 10)
/  4. grAma, nagara Adi meM barasane vAlA pAnI manuSya, tiryaJca Adi ke
AvAgamana se unake samparka ke kAraNa pUrNa acitta nahIM hotA ata: mizra hotA
hai| grAma, nagara Adi ke bAhara yadi kama varSA hotI hai to pRthvIkAya se
pariNata hone para vaha jala mizra rahatA hai| jaba bahuta teja varSA hotI hai
taba prAraMbha kI varSA kA jala pRthvIkAya ke samparka se pariNata hokara mizra
rahatA hai lekina bAda meM barasane vAlA jala sacitta hotA hai (mavR pa. 10) /
5. tIna AdezoM kI vyAkhyA hetu dekheM gA. 17/1 kA anvaad| 6. ApTe kI DikzanarI
(pa. 416) meM cAvala kI cAra avasthAeM batAI gaI haiM zasyaM kSetragataM
proktaM, satuSaM dhaanymucyte| nistuSaH taNDulaH proktaH, svinnmnnmudaahtm||
kSetragata cAvala zasya, tuSa sahita cAvala dhAnya, tuSa rahita cAvala taNDula
tathA pakAyA huA cAvala anna kahalAtA hai|

Page #285 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 113 17/2. These three injunctions are non-
injunctions because time regulation is not possible in them. The following are
the reasons for the absence of definite time - the vessel being rough or smooth,
contact with strong or weak wind, and the uncertainty of time in the cooking of
rice. 17/3. As long as the rice water is not extremely pure, it is mixed, this
is the very proof, not the rest. What is extremely pure (white) should be
considered as *achitt*. 18. These things make *apkay* *achitt* - cold, hot,
alkali, special *kshatra-karish*, fire, salt, special salt-mixed dust particles
produced in *ush-ushar* areas, sourness, *sneha-tail* etc. What becomes *apkay*
*vyutkrantayoni* i.e. *achitt*, is used by the virtuous. 19. *Achitt* *apkay* is
used in the acts of *parisheka*, drinking, washing hands etc., washing clothes,
*achman*, washing vessels etc. 20. During the menstrual period, washing clothes
makes the *charitra* weak, destroys *brahmacharya*, the monk is considered to be
in an inappropriate place, *sampaatim* and *vayukaya* beings are killed, and the
flowing water from washing clothes harms the beings. 21. If clothes are not
washed near the rainy season, the following defects arise: • The weight of the
clothes increases. • They become worn out. • *Leelan-phoolan* (moss) grows on
the clothes. • Wearing cold clothes causes indigestion, which leads to criticism
and slander of the sermon. 1. The disappearance of the point on the vessel, the
destruction of the bubble, and the time of the rice being finished is not the
same everywhere. The reason for this is that the points on a rough vessel dry
quickly, while the points on a smooth vessel take time to dry. Similarly,
bubbles disappear quickly in contact with strong wind, not so quickly in weak
wind, and due to the difference in water, there is no regularity in the time
taken for the rice to cook. Rice cooks quickly in sweet water and takes time to
cook in salty water. Similarly, it cooks quickly in a strong fire and takes more
time to cook in a weak fire (Mavri p. 10, 11). 2. The *tari* that comes on top
of the water kept in a pot of curd or oil, if it is thick, then the *satchitt*
water becomes *achitt* in one *paurushi*, if it is medium, then in two
*paurushi*, and if it is thin, then in three *paurushi* (Mavri p. 11). 3. Mavri
p. 11; *Parisheko-dushtvanaderutthitasya upari paniyena parishechanam* - pouring
water over a bad wound. 4. Using water for purification after *uchchar-
prasravan*. 5. Seeing clean clothes, people think that he must be a *kami*,
otherwise why does he adorn himself so much? (Mavri p. 11)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 113 17/2. ye tInoM Adeza anAdeza haiM kyoMki inameM kAla-niyamana
saMbhava nahIM hai| pratiniyata kAla na hone ke nimna kAraNa haiM-bartana kA
rUkSa yA snigdha honA, teja athavA maMda vAyu kA samparka honA tathA taNDula ke
pakane meM kAla kI aniyttaa| 17/3. jaba taka taNDulodaka ati svaccha nahIM hotA,
taba taka vaha mizra hai, yaha mata hI pramANa hai, zeSa nhiiN| jo ati svaccha
(sapheda) hai, use acitta jAnanA caahie| 18. ina vastuoM se apkAya acitta hotA
hai-zIta, uSNa, kSAra, kSatra-karISa vizeSa, agni, lavaNa, USa-USara kSetra meM
utpanna lavaNa mizrita rajakaNa vizeSa, khaTAI, sneha-taila' aadi| jo apkAya
vyutkrAntayoni arthAt acitta ho jAtA hai, usase sAdhuoM kA prayojana hotA hai|
19. pariSeka, pIne, hAtha Adi dhone, vastra dhone, Acamana karane, pAtra dhone
Adi kAryoM meM acitta apkAya kA prayoga hotA hai| 20. Rtubaddha kAla meM vastra-
prakSAlana se cAritra bakuza hotA hai, brahmacarya kA vinAza hotA hai, muni
asthAna meM sthita mAnA jAtA hai, saMpAtima tathA vAyukAya ke jIvoM kA vadha
hotA hai tathA vastra dhoe hue jala ke plAvana se jIvoM kA upaghAta hotA hai|
21. varSAkAla kI sannikaTatA meM vastra-prakSAlana na karane para nimna doSa
utpanna hote haiM * vastroM kA bhAra bar3ha jAtA hai| * ve jIrNa ho jAte haiN| *
vastroM meM lIlana-phUlana (kAI) A jAtI hai| * zItalIbhUta vastroM ko pahanane
se ajIrNa roga hotA hai, jisase pravacana kI apabhrAjanA-niMdA hotI hai| 1.
bhAMDa meM lage bindu kA apagama, budbuda kA nAza tathA cAvala ke niSpanna hone
kA sarvatra eka jaisA samaya nahIM hotaa| isakA kAraNa hai rUkSa bartana meM
lage bindu jaldI sUkhate haiM, jabaki snigdha bartana ke binduoM ko sUkhane meM
samaya lagatA hai| isI prakAra teja pavana ke samparka se bubude jaldI samApta
hote haiM, maMda pavana se utanI jaldI samApta nahIM hote tathA jala kI bhinnatA
ke kAraNa cAvala ke pakane meM bhI samaya kI niyamitatA nahIM rhtii| mIThe pAnI
meM cAvala jaldI pakate haiM tathA khAre jala meM cAvaloM ko pakane meM samaya
lagatA hai| isI prakAra pracura agni meM jaldI pakate haiM, maMda agni meM
adhika samaya se pakate haiM (mavR pa. 10, 11) /  2. dadhi yA taila ke ghar3e
meM rakhe hue pAnI ke Upara jo tarI AtI hai, vaha yadi sthUla hotI hai to
sacitta jala eka pauruSI meM acitta ho jAtA hai, madhyama hotI hai to do pauruSI
meM tathA patalI hotI hai to tIna pauruSI meM acitta hotA hai (mavR pa. 11) /
3. mavR pa. 11; pariSeko-duSTavaNAderutthitasyopari pAnIyena pariSecanaM-duSTa
vraNa hone para usake Upara pAnI kA sek| 4. uccAra-prasravaNa karane ke bAda
pAnI se zuddhi hetu jala kA pryog| 5. sApha kapar3oM ko dekhakara loga socate
haiM ki avazya hI yaha kAmI hai, anyathA yaha svayaM ko itanA maNDita kyoM
karatA? (mavR pa. 11)

Page #286 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 114 There is a contradiction between the life of a householder and the life
of a monk. * Spreading water harms the creatures dependent on the earth. * 21/1.
Even if it is not the rainy season, a monk should carefully wash all his
equipment. If water is not available, he should definitely wash the *paatra-
niryoga*. **Explanation** 21/2. The clothes of the Acharya and the *glana* are
washed repeatedly because if the Acharya's clothes are not washed, it leads to
*avarnavada* (casteism) among people, and if the *glana*'s clothes are not
washed, it leads to indigestion and other diseases. 22. There are six types of
*paatra-pratyavataara* (i.e., *paatra-niryoga*), two types of *rajo-haran* (dust
removal) - external and internal, three types of *patta* (cloth) - *sanstaarak-
patta*, *uttar-patta* and *chol-patta*, *potti* (mouth cloth), and *rajo-haran*
(dust removal) - these equipment are used daily, so they should not be kept
unused. They should be carefully transferred, i.e., the *shat-padika* should be
transferred to other clothes and then those clothes should be washed. 22/1. One
who keeps the *upaadhi* (body) unused due to the *shat-padika* etc., even when
the time for washing is available, should keep the *upaadhi* in this way
according to the instructions of the *veet-raag* (liberated soul) by the method
of *vishramna* (rest). 1. The meaning of *paatra-niryoga* is - the equipment
that helps the *paatra* (monk), such as *paatra-bandh* (container holder),
*paatra-sthapan* (container placement), *paatra-kesharika* (container brush),
*patala* (cloth), *rajastraan* (dust remover), *gocchaka* (bundle) - all these
are *paatra-niryoga*. *Pattam patta-bandho, paayattavanam cha paayakesariya.
Padalai rayattaan, cha gocchao paay-nijjogo.* (Mavri P. 13) 2. There are two
types of *rajo-haran* (dust removal) - 1. *Aabhyantar* (internal) *nishadya*
(cloth), which is made of cloth. 2. *Baahya* (external) *nishadya* (cloth),
which is made of blanket (Av P. 6). 3. The cloth that covers the mouth, which is
four fingers more than a *vitasti* (span) in length, is called *mukha-pottika*
or *mukha-vastrika* (mouth cloth) (Mavri P. 13). 4. This verse describes the
*vishramna* method in the context of washing clothes. A monk has three
*pravaran* (garments) - two cotton and one woolen. One *pravaran* made of
*kshoum* (cotton) is always worn close to the body. Above it is the second
*pravaran* and above that is the woolen *pravaran*. In the first *vishramna*
method, for three days, the cotton cloth worn close to the body should be worn
over the other two clothes in such a way that the *shat-padika* (lice) attached
to it, due to hunger or cold, move to the other two clothes or the body. This is
the first *vishramna* method. After wearing it for three days, it should be kept
on the *sanstaarak* (bed) for three nights, so that the *shat-padika* that did
not come out of the cloth in the first *vishramna* method, come out for food
etc. and attach themselves to the *sanstaarak*. This is the second *vishramna*
method. Then, for one night, the cloth should be spread downwards and worn over
the body, and *drishti-pratilekhana* (visual inspection) should be done. If the
*shat-padika* are not visible after *drishti-pratilekhana*, the cloth should be
worn again on the body for the protection of the small lice, so that they attach
themselves to the body for food etc. After doing this, *drishti-pratilekhana*
should be done again. In this way, *kalpa-shodhan* (purification) takes place in
seven days, and then the cloth is washed. This method is now obsolete because
due to hygiene, there is a lack of *shat-padika* etc. (Mavri P. 14) See the
translation of 22/2, 3.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 114 saMpAtimajIva evaM vAyukAya kI virAdhanA hotI hai  /  * pAnI phailAne se
pRthvI para Azrita jIvoM kA upaghAta hotA hai| * 21/1. varSAkAla ke aprApta hone
para bhI muni apane samasta upakaraNoM kA yatanApUrvaka prakSAlana kre| pAnI kI
prApti na hone para jaghanyataH pAtraniryoga' kA prakSAlana to avazya hI kara
lenA cAhie  /  piMDaniryukti 21/ 2. AcArya tathA glAna ke malina vastra bAra-
bAra dhoe jAte haiM kyoMki AcArya ke vastroM ko na dhone para logoM meM
avarNavAda hotA hai tathA glAna ke vastra na dhone para ajIrNa Adi roga hotA hai
/  22. pAtra ke pratyavatAra arthAt pAtraniryoga ke chaha prakAra, rajoharaNa kI
do niSadyAeM2 - bAhya aura Abhyantara, tIna paTTa - saMstArakapaTTa, uttarapaTTa
tathA colapaTTa, potti - mukhavastrikA, rajoharaNa - ina upakaraNoM kA pratidina
upayoga hotA hai ataH inheM aparibhogyarUpa meM sthApita na kare  /
yatanApUrvaka saMkramaNa kare arthAt SaTpadikA ko anya vastroM meM saMkramita
karake phira usa vastra kA prakSAlana kare  /  22/1. jo prakSAlanakAla prApta
hone para bhI SaTpadikA Adi ke kAraNa upadhi ko aparibhogya rUpa meM sthApita
karatA hai, vaha vItarAga kI AjJA ke anusAra upadhi ko isa prakAra vizramaNA
vidhi se sthApita kare  /  1. pAtraniryoga kA artha hai- pAtra ke upakArI
upakaraNa, jaise- pAtrabaMdha, pAtrasthApana, pAtrakezarikA, paTala, rajastrANa,
gocchaka - ye saba pAtraniryoga haiM pattaM pattAbaMdho, pAyaTTavaNaM ca
pAyakesariyA  /  paDalAI rayattANaM, ca gocchao pAyanijjogo  //  ( mavR pa. 13)
2. rajoharaNa kI do niSadyAeM hotI haiM - 1. Abhyantara niSadyA, jo vastramayI
hotI hai  /  2. bAhya niSadyA, jo kambalamayI hotI hai (ava pa. 6)  /  3. mukha
ko Dhakane ke lie cAra aMgula adhika vitasti pramANa vastra mukhapotikA yA
mukhavastrikA kahalAtA hai ( mavR pa. 13)  /  4. isa gAthA meM vastra-prakSAlana
ke saMdarbha meM vizramaNA vidhi batAI gaI hai| muni ke tIna prAvaraNa hote haiM
do sUtI tathA eka UnI  /  kSauma kA eka prAvaraNa sadA zarIra se lagA huA rahatA
hai| usake Upara dUsarA prAvaraNa tathA usake Upara kaMbala kA prAvaraNa rahatA
hai| prathama vizramaNA vidhi meM tIna dina taka zarIra se saMlagna sUtI kapar3e
ko zeSa do kapar3oM ke Upara isa prakAra or3hA jAe ki usa kapar3e meM lagI
SaTpadikAeM kSudhA se pIr3ita hokara yA zIta se bAdhita hokara zeSa do vastroM
meM athavA zarIra meM laga jAeM, yaha prathama vizramaNA-vidhi hai| tIna dinoM
taka dina meM or3hane ke bAda phira tIna rAtri taka saMstAraka ke taTa para hI
kapar3e ko sthApita kiyA jAe, jisase prathama vizramaNA-vidhi meM jo SaTpadikAeM
kapar3e se bAhara nahIM nikalatIM ve AhAra Adi ke lie bAhara nikalakara
saMstAraka para laga jAtI haiM, yaha dUsarI vizramaNA vidhi hai| phira eka rAtri
meM kapar3e ko adhomukha phailAkara zarIra paryanta phailAkara or3he aura dRSTi-
pratilekhanA kre| dRSTi-pratilekhanA karane para yadi SaTpadikAeM dikhAI na deM
to sUkSma jUMoM kI rakSA hetu punaH usa kapar3e ko zarIra para or3he, jisase
AhAra Adi ke lie ve zarIra para laga jaaeN| itanA karane para phira dRSTi-
pratilekhana kre| isa prakAra sAta dinoM se kalpazodhana hotA hai phira usa
vastra kA prakSAlana kiyA jAtA hai| vartamAna meM yaha vidhi kRtakRtya ho gaI
hai kyoMki svacchatA ke kAraNa SaTpadikA Adi kA abhAva hotA hai (mavR pa. 14)
dekheM 22 / 2, 3 kA anuvAda  /

Page #287 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **115**  **22/2.**  The inner garment worn next to the body
should be worn for three days, then for three days the garment should be kept
far away from the bed, at the edge of the bedspread. Then, for one night, sleep
with the garment spread out on the bed, covering the feet. After that, examine
the garment with subtle vision.   **22/3.** According to some Acharyas, (the
above three methods of resting the garment) should be followed for three nights
and then examined with subtle vision. If no six-legged creatures are seen, the
garment should be washed.  **22/4.** (If sufficient water is not available for
washing the garment) the Muni should take Nivrodak. Some Acharyas say that the
Nivrodak should be taken in their own vessel. Some say that this water is
impure, so the Muni should not take it in their own vessel, but in a vessel
belonging to the householders. Nivrodak should also be taken after the end of
the rainy season. During the rainy season, the water of Nivrodak is mixed. After
the rain stops, ash should be added to the Nivrodak so that it does not become
sentient again.  **22/5.** The Muni should first wash the clothes of the Guru,
then the clothes of the Pratyakhyani-Tapasvis, then the clothes of the Glana,
then the clothes of the Shaiksha, and then their own clothes. Among the clothes,
first wash the Yathakrut clothes, then the Alpaparikarmiti clothes, and finally
the Bahuparikarmiti clothes.  **22/6.** The Muni should not wash the clothes by
hitting them on a stone or beating them with wood. After washing, the clothes
should not be dried in the heat of fire. The clothes that are used should be
dried in the shade, and the clothes that are not used should be dried in the
sun.   **Footnotes:**  1. The seven-day Kalpashodhan method described in verse
22/2 is the same as the three-day method described in this verse. On the first
night, the garment to be purified should be worn outside, on the second night it
should be placed near the bedspread, and on the third night it should be spread
out on the bedspread, facing downwards, covering the body (Mavri P. 15). 2.
During the rainy season, the water dripping from the end of the tiles on the
roof of the house is called Nivrodak. Due to the contact of dust particles,
smoke, blackness, and the heat of the sun, this water becomes sentient (Mavri P.
15). 3. According to the commentator, adding ash makes even dirty water clean
(Mavri P. 15). 4. The commentator believes that the water of the Prasauk becomes
sentient after three Praharas, so it should be used after adding ash (Mavri P.
15). 5. Yathakrut clothes are those that are free from any kind of work and are
obtained in their original form (Mavri P. 15). 6. A garment that has been torn
once and sewn back together (Mavri P. 15). 7. According to the commentator, this
order of washing clothes is explained due to the pure and holy determination.
Alpaparikarmiti clothes are those that cause less hindrance in restraint, study,
etc. Yathakrut clothes do not have any work, so they do not hinder restraint,
study, etc. Bahuparikarmiti clothes are harmful to study, etc., so they should
be washed last (Mavri P. 16). 8. The prohibition of drying in the heat of fire
is because the water droplets falling during drying may cause harm to the fire
(Mavri S. 16). 9. Even after washing the clothes that are used, there may be
living beings like insects, etc., so they should not be dried in the sun (Mavri
P. 16).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 115 22/2. zarIra ke sAtha lage hue Abhyantara vastra ko tIna dinoM taka
Upara or3he phira tIna dinoM taka usa prAvaraNa ko sote samaya bahuta dUra na
rakhe arthAt saMstAraka ke kinAre para rakhe phira eka rAta zayana-sthAna para
adhomukha vastra ko phailAkara paira paryanta or3hakara soe , tatpazcAt sUkSma
dRSTi se vastra kA nirIkSaNa kre| 22/3. kucha AcAryoM kI mAnyatA ke anusAra
(uparyukta tInoM vizramaNA-vidhi ko) tIna rAta taka saMvAsa karake sUkSma dRSTi
se pratilekhana kre| yadi SaTpadikA dikhAI na de to vastra ko prakSAlita kre|
22/4. (yadi vastra-prakSAlana ke lie jala paryApta mAtrA meM prApta na ho to)
muni nIvrodaka grahaNa kre| kucha eka AcArya kahate haiM ki nIvrodaka ko apane
pAtra meM grahaNa kre| kucha eka kahate haiM ki vaha udaka azuci hotA hai ataH
muni apane pAtra meM na le, gRhasthoM ke bhAjana meM grahaNa kre| nIvrodaka bhI
varSA ruka jAne ke antarmuhUrta pazcAt grahaNa kare  /  barasatI varSA meM
nIvrodaka kA jala mizra hotA hai| varSA ke ruka jAne ke pazcAt lie gae nIvrodaka
meM rAkha DAlI jAe, jisase ki vaha punaH sacitta na ho|' 22/5. muni pahale guru
ke, phira pratyAkhyAnI-tapasviyoM ke, phira glAna ke, phira zaikSa ke tathA
tadanantara apane vastroM kA prakSAlana kre| vastroM meM bhI pahale yathAkRta'
phira alpaparikarmita aura aMta meM bahuparikarmita' vastroM kA prakSAlana kre|
22/6. muni vastroM ko zilA para paTaka-paTaka kara yA lakar3I Adi se pITa-
pITakara na dhoe| dhone ke pazcAt vastroM ko agni ke tApa meM na sukhaae|
paribhogya vastroM ko chAyA meM tathA aparibhogya vastroM ko 1. gAthA 22/2 meM
jo saptadivasIya kalpazodhana vidhi hai, vahI isa gAthA meM tIna divasIya
varNita hai| prathama rAtri meM zodhanIya vastra ko bAhara se or3hakara, dUsarI
rAtri meM saMstAraka ke nikaTa sthApita kare tathA tIsarI rAtri meM saMstAraka
para vastra ko adhomukha karake zarIra paryanta phailAkara or3he (mavR pa. 15) /
2. varSAkAla meM ghara kI chata para lage khaparaila ke aMta bhAga se Tapakane
vAlA pAnI nIvrodaka kahalAtA hai| rajakaNa, dhUma kA . kAlApana tathA dinakara
ke Atapa se tapta nIvra ke samparka se vaha jala acitta ho jAtA hai (mavR pa.
15) /  3. TIkAkAra ke anusAra rAkha DAlane se malina jala bhI svaccha ho jAtA
hai (mavR pa. 15) /  4. prAsuka jala tIna prahara ke bAda sacitta ho jAtA hai,
aisI TIkAkAra kI mAnyatA hai ata: rAkha DAlakara upayoga meM lenA cAhie (mavR
pa. 15) /  5. yathAkRta-parikarma se rahita tathArUpa labdha vastra (mavR pa.
15) /  6. eka bAra phAr3akara silAI kiyA huA vastra (mavR pa. 15) /  7. TIkAkAra
ke anusAra vizuddha evaM pavitra adhyavasAya ke kAraNa vastroM ke dhone kA yaha
krama batAyA gayA hai| alpa parikarma vAle vastra saMyama, svAdhyAya Adi meM
kama bAdhA DAlane vAle hote haiN| yathAkRta vastroM meM parikarma kA abhAva hone
se saMyama svAdhyAya Adi meM bilkula vyAghAta nahIM hotaa| bahu parikarma vAle
vastra svAdhyAya Adi ke vyAghAtaka hote haiM ata: unako sabase aMta meM dhonA
cAhie (mavR pa. 16) /  8. sukhAte samaya jala-bindu girane se agnikAya kI
virAdhanA na ho isalie agni-tApa meM sukhAne kA niSedha hai (mavR Sa. 16) /  9.
paribhogya vastroM ko dhone para bhI unameM jaM Adi jIvita raha sakatI haiM ata:
unheM dhUpa meM sukhAne kA niSedha hai (ma pa. 16) /

Page #288 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 116 ## Pindaniyukti  Dried in the sun. Keep an eye on the dried clothes (so
that thieves etc. do not steal them). For the lack of restraint in washing and
drying the clothes, the guru should give the disciple a 'Kalyanak' penance. 23.
There are three types of Tejaskaay - Sachitt, Mishr and Achitt. There are two
types of Sachitt Tejaskaay - Nishchaya Sachitt and Vyavahar Sachitt. 24. Brick
kiln, potter's furnace etc. the middle part, electricity and meteor etc. are
Nishchaya Sachitt Tejaskaay. Angara etc. are Vyavahar Sachitt Tejaskaay. Fire
from a piece of wood etc. is Mishr Sachitt Tejaskaay. 25. Odan, Vyajan, Panak-
Kanji water, Aayam-Avshravan, Ushnodak, Kulmash, Dagalak, needle with ash,
Pippalak-Kinchit Vakra Kshur Vishesh (scissors) etc. - these are examples of
Achitt Agni Kay. Odan etc. are used in food etc. 26. There are three types of
Vayukay - Sachitt, Achitt and Mishr. Sachitt Vayukay is of two types - Nishchaya
Sachitt and Vyavahar Sachitt. 27. Valayakara Ghanavat' and Tanuvat', Atihim and
Atiduridin - the wind caused by these is definitely Sachitt Vay. (In the absence
of Atihim and Atiduridin) the wind from the east etc. direction is Vyavaharatah
Sachitt. Aakrant etc. wind is Achitt. 27/1. Jinendradev, who churned the eight
karmas, has propounded five types of Achitt Vay: • Aakrant - Wind coming out
from the mud etc. trampled by feet. • Dhmant - Wind coming out from the bellows.
• Ghan - Wind coming out from the sesame crushing machine. • Dehanugat - Wind
released from the anal region. • Pilit - Wind released by squeezing wet clothes.
27/2. The Drti (whose mouth is tied with a rope) filled with Achitt Vay from the
mouth, while flowing in water, remains Achitt Vay for a hundred hands, in the
second Hastashat it becomes Mishr and in the third Hastashat it becomes Sachitt,
then it remains Sachitt. The Vay in the Vasti or Drti, being in the land 1. Odan
to Pippalak - all these were previously transformed into Agni Kay, based on this
they are considered Agni Kay. 2. Ghanavat - Dense wind (Mavri P. 17) occurring
in the form of a circle below the earth like hell etc. 3. Tanuvat - Liquid wind
(Mavri P. 17) occurring in the form of a circle below the earth like hell etc.
4. Darkness arising from the clouds. 5. In Thaan (5/183) there is mention of
Sammuchim Vay in place of Ghan, which occurs due to fanning etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 116 piMDaniyukti Atapa-dhUpa meM sukhaae| sukhAe gae vastroM ko nirantara
dekhatA rahe (jisase ki cora Adi unako curAkara na le jaaeN|) vastra ke
prakSAlana tathA sukhAne meM hue asaMyama ke lie guru ziSya ko 'kalyANaka'
nAmaka prAyazcitta de| 23. tejaskAya ke tIna prakAra haiM-sacitta, mizra aura
acitt| sacitta tejaskAya ke do prakAra haiMnizcayasacitta aura vyvhaarscitt| 24.
IMToM kA bhaTTA, kumbhakAra kA AvA Adi kA bahumadhyabhAga, vidyut tathA ulkA Adi
nizcayasacitta tejaskAya haiN| aMgArA Adi vyavahArasacitta tejaskAya hai| kaMDe
kI Aga Adi mizra sacitta tejaskAya hai| 25. odana, vyaJjana, pAnaka-kAMjI kA
pAnI, AyAma-avazrAvaNa, uSNodaka, kulmASa, Dagalaka, rAkha se yukta sUI,
pippalaka-kiJcit vakra kSura vizeSa (kaiMcI) Adi-ye acitta agnikAya ke udAharaNa
haiN| odana Adi kA bhojana Adi meM prayoga hotA hai| 26. vAyukAya ke tIna
prakAra haiM-sacitta, acitta aura mishr| sacitta vAyukAya do prakAra kA
hainizcayasacitta tathA vyvhaarscitt| 27. valayAkAra ghanavAta' tathA tanuvAta',
atihima aura atidurdina -inase hone vAlI vAyu nizcayataH sacitta vAyu hai|
(atihima aura atidurdina ke abhAva meM) jo pUrva Adi dizA kI vAyu hai, vaha
vyavahArataH sacitta hai| AkrAnta Adi vAyu acitta hotI hai| 27/1. ATha karmoM ko
mathane vAle jinezvaradeva ne pAMca prakAra kI acitta vAyu kA pratipAdana kiyA
hai * AkrAnta - pairoM se AkrAnta kardama Adi se nikalane vAlI vaayu| * dhmAta -
dhauMkanI se nikalane vAlI vaayu| * ghANa - tilapIr3ana-yaMtra se nikalane vAlI
vaayu| * dehAnugata - gudA pradeza se niHsRta vaayu| * pIlita - Ardra vastra ko
nicor3ane se niHsRta vAyu  /  27/2. muMha kI acitta vAyu se bharI huI dRti
(jisakA muMha DorI se bAMdha diyA gayA hai|) jala meM bahatI huI sau hAtha jAne
taka acitta vAyu vAlI rahatI hai, dUsare hastazata meM vaha vAyu mizra ho jAtI
hai aura tIsare hastazata meM vaha sacitta ho jAtI hai, phira vaha sacitta hI
rahatI hai| vasti athavA dRtistha vAyu sthala meM hone 1. odana yAvat pippalaka-
ye sAre pahale agnikAya ke rUpa meM pariNata the, isake AdhAra para inheM
agnikAya mAnA gayA hai| 2. ghanavAta-naraka Adi pRthvI ke nIce valayAkAra ke
rUpa meM hone vAlI ghanIbhUta vAyu (mavR pa. 17) /  3. tanuvAta-naraka Adi
pRthvI ke nIce valayAkAra ke rUpa meM hone vAlI tarala vAyu (mavR pa. 17) /  4.
megha se utpanna aNdhkaar|| 5. ThANaM (5/183) meM ghANa ke sthAna para
sammUchima vAyu kA ullekha hai, jo paMkhA Adi jhalane se hotI hai|

Page #289 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 117 Based on the time being dry or moist, the
air in the body (स्थलस्थ वायु) becomes sentient (सचित्त) according to the day.
28. (In crossing a river etc.) the Muni uses the air in the body (स्थलस्थ वायु)
which is situated in the chest (दृति) or the abdomen (वस्ति), or in a particular
disease, the air is projected into the region of the anus (अपान प्रदेश). (This
is the use of the air in the body) The Muni should avoid sentient (सचित्त) and
mixed (मिश्र) air. 29. There are three types of plant bodies (वनस्पतिकाय):
sentient (सचित्त), mixed (मिश्र), and non-sentient (अचित्त). There are two types
of sentient plants: definitively sentient (निश्चयसचित्त) and practically
sentient (व्यवहारसचित्त). 30. According to the definitive view (निश्चयनय), all
infinite-bodied plants (अनन्तकाय वनस्पति) are sentient. According to the
practical view (व्यवहारनय), all other plants are sentient. Wilted (म्लान) plants
and ground rice etc. are mixed plant bodies (मिश्र वनस्पतिकाय). 31. Flowers,
leaves, tender fruits, green (हरित) i.e. rice (ब्रीहि), and stalks, if they are
wilted (म्लान), are non-sentient (अचित्त) plant bodies. 32. There are many uses
of non-sentient plant bodies; for example, as coverings (संस्तारक), vessels
(पात्र), sticks (दंडक), cloth (क्षौम), beds (पीढ़), planks (फलक), medicine
(औषधि-हरीतकी etc.), and powders of various medicines (भेषज). 33-35. Two-sensed
(द्वीन्द्रिय), three-sensed (त्रीन्द्रिय), four-sensed (चतुरिन्द्रिय), and five-
sensed (पंचेन्द्रिय) beings are collected together in their respective species
in groups of three, and that is called a group (पिंड). Its use is this: the use
of two-sensed beings is in the form of conch shells (शंख), oysters (शुक्ति), and
cloth (कपर्दक) etc. The use of three-sensed beings is in the form of termite
mounds (दीमककृत वल्मीक) etc.   1. In a solitary and moist time, the air in the
body (स्थलस्थ वायु) situated in the chest (दृति) or the abdomen (वस्ति) remains
non-sentient (अचित्त) for one prahar. At the beginning of the second prahar, it
becomes mixed (मिश्र), and at the beginning of the third prahar, it becomes
sentient (सचित्त). In a moderately moist time, it remains non-sentient for two
prahars, becomes mixed in the third prahar, and becomes sentient in the fourth
prahar. In a slightly moist time, the air in the chest remains non-sentient for
three prahars, becomes mixed in the fourth prahar, and becomes sentient in the
fifth prahar. The same should be known for dry time. There, instead of prahars,
one should increase the number of days. In a slightly dry time, the air in the
abdomen remains non-sentient for one day, becomes mixed on the second day, and
becomes sentient on the third day. In a moderately dry time, it remains non-
sentient for two days, becomes mixed on the third day, and becomes sentient on
the fourth day. In a highly dry time, it remains non-sentient for three days,
becomes mixed on the fourth day, and becomes sentient on the fifth day (Pibha
12-14, Mavri p. 18). 2. Some parts of the powder may remain unground, so the
powder is considered mixed, or some particles of freshly ground flour may remain
unprocessed, so it is mixed. 3. There are two types of uses of two-sensed beings
etc. for the virtuous: 1. from sound (शब्द) 2. from the body (शरीर). Astrologers
consider the sound of the conch shell to be very auspicious, this is the use of
two-sensed beings from sound etc. The body is used in three ways: 1. from the
whole body 2. from a part of it 3. from another object produced by contact with
the body. Pearls are produced by contact with the water that falls in the Swati
constellation. The axle and the cloth are used in the establishment of the
Samavasarana. The conch shell and the oyster are used to cure eye diseases
(Mavri p. 20). 4. The mention of three etc. is by way of example. A group
(पिण्ड) is also formed by the union of two (Mavri p. 19). 5. According to the
commentator, the word 'परिभोग' here is used in the sense of means of action
(Mavri p. 20).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 117 vAle rUkSa athavA snigdha kAla ke AdhAra para pauruSI aura dina ke
anusAra sacitta hotI hai| 28. (nadI Adi ke uttaraNa meM) muni kA dRtisthita
athavA vastisthita vAyu se prayojana hotA hai athavA roga vizeSa meM apAna
pradeza meM vAyu kA prakSepa kiyA jAtA hai| (yaha sthalastha vAyu kA prayojana
hai) muni ko sacitta aura mizra vAyu kA parihAra karanA caahie| 29.
vanaspatikAya ke tIna prakAra haiM-sacitta, mizra aura acitt| sacitta vanaspati
ke do prakAra haiMnizcayasacitta aura vyvhaarscitt| 30. nizcayanaya ke anusAra
anantakAya vanaspati sacitta hotI hai| vyavahAranaya ke anusAra zeSa sArI
vanaspati sacitta hotI hai  /  mlAna (arddhazuSka) vanaspati tathA ghaTTI meM
pIsA gayA cAvala Adi kA cUrNa mizra vanaspatikAya hai| 31. puSpa, patra,
komalaphala, harita arthAt brIhi tathA vRnta yadi mlAna (zuSka prAyaH) ho gae
hoM to vaha jIvavipramukta vanaspati hai arthAt acitta hai| 32. acitta
vanaspatikAya ke aneka prayojana haiM; jaise-saMstAraka, pAtra, daMDaka, kSauma
(do prakAra ke kalpa-prAvaraNa), pIr3ha, phalaka, auSadhi-harItakI Adi, bheSaja-
aneka auSadhiyoM kA cUrNa aadi| 33-35. dvIndriya, trIndriya, caturindriya,
paMcendriya prANI tIna-tIna ke rUpa meM apanI-apanI jAti meM ekatra saMzliSTa
hote haiM, vaha piMDa kahalAtA hai| usakA yaha prayojana hai-dvIndriya kA
paribhoga' zaMkha, zukti aura kapardaka Adi ke rUpa meM hotA hai| trIndriya ke
rUpa meM dImakakRta valmIka kI miTTI kA upayoga (sarpadaMza 1. ekAnta snigdha
kAla meM sthalastha dRti yA vasti meM sthita vAyu eka prahara taka acitta rahatI
hai| dvitIya prahara ke prAraMbha meM mizra tathA tIsarI prahara ke prAraMbha
meM hI sacitta ho jAtI hai| madhyama snigdha kAla meM do prahara taka acitta,
tIsarI prahara meM mizra tathA cauthI prahara meM sacitta ho jAtI hai| jaghanya
snigdha kAla meM dRtistha vAyu tIna prahara taka acitta, cauthI prahara meM
mizra tathA pAMcavIM prahara meM sacitta ho jAtI hai| rUkSa kAla meM bhI aisA hI
jAnanA caahie| vahAM prahara ke sthAna para dinoM kI vRddhi karanI caahie|
jaghanya rUkSa kAla meM vastigata vAyu eka dina taka acitta, dUsare dina mizra
tathA tIsare dina sacitta hotI hai| madhyama rUkSakAla meM do dina taka acitta,
tIsare dina mizra tathA cauthe dina sacitta hotI hai| utkRSTa rUkSa kAla meM
tIna dina taka acitta, cauthe dina mizra tathA pAMcaveM dina sacitta hotI hai
(pibhA 12-14, mavR pa. 18) /  2. cUrNa meM kucha aMza binA dale raha sakate
haiM, isa apekSA se cUrNa ko mizra mAnA hai athavA tatkAla pIse hue ATe ke kucha
kaNa apariNata raha sakate haiM ataH vaha mizra hotA hai| 3. dvIndriya Adi kA
sAdhu ke lie do prakAra kA prayojana hotA hai-1. zabda se 2. zarIra se|
zakunazAstrI zaMkha kI dhvani ko bahuta zubha mAnate haiM, yaha dvIndriya kA
zabda Adi se prayojana hai| zarIra dvArA tIna prakAra se prayojana siddha hotA
hai1. sampUrNa zarIra se 2. usake eka deza se 3. zarIra ke samparka se utpanna
anya vastu se| svAti nakSatra meM barasane vAle jala ke samparka se motI paidA
hote haiM  /  akSa aura kapardaka samavasaraNa kI sthApanA meM prayukta hote
haiM  /  zaMkha aura zukti kA upayoga cakSupuSpa (netra roga vizeSa) ko dUra
karane meM hotA hai (mavR pa. 20) /  4. tIna Adi kA ullekha upalakSaNa se hai|
do ke milane se bhI piNDa hotA hai (mavR pa. 19) /  5. TIkAkAra ke anusAra yahAM
'paribhoga' zabda kA prayoga karma ke sAdhana rUpa meM vivakSita hai (mavR pa.
20) /

Page #290 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 118 **Pindaniyukti**  This is for the purpose of **pindaniyukti** and
**dahopaśaman** (cremation and pacifying the fire) or, as per the physician's
advice, for **lep** (ointment) etc. The consumption of **chaturindriya** (four-
sensed beings) like **makkhi** (flies) **mal** (excreta, i.e., honey) is for
**vaman-nirodh** (stopping vomiting) or the **ashvamaskhika** (horsefly) is used
to remove **akshar** (black water) from the eyes. **Panchendriya** (five-sensed
beings) are **nairyaik** (useless) in **pind** (body). 36. These are the uses of
**tiryanch panchendriya** (five-sensed beings in the animal kingdom) **pind**:
**charma** (skin), **asthi** (bone), **dant** (tooth), **nakh** (nail), **rom**
(hair), **sing** (horn), **bhed** (sheep) etc. **mingni** (wool), **gobar** (cow
dung), **gomutra** (cow urine), and **doodh-dadhi** (milk-curd) etc. 37. (There
are three types of humans: **sachitt**, **mishra**, and **achitt**.) The purpose
of **sachitt** (conscious) humans is to **pravrajit** (make them renounce the
world), guide them on the path when asked, give **bhiksha** (alms) to **munis**
(ascetics), provide **vasati** (shelter) etc. The purpose of **achitt**
(unconscious) humans is that their skull is ground and used to cure a specific
disease related to the **ling** (genitals). The purpose of **mishra** (mixed)
humans is that their bones are used to make ornaments, ashes are applied to
their bodies, and they are used to ask the way of **kapalik** (skull-wearers).
38. This is the use of **devata** (deities) for **tapasvi** (ascetics),
**kshapka** (those who practice severe austerities) etc. **munis** (ascetics) to
ask about their **kal-mrityu** (time of death) and about the **shubh-ashubh**
(auspicious-inauspicious) aspects of the path. 39. There is also a **mishra
pind** (mixed body) of these nine **pind** (bodies) (see verse 8). From **dwik**
(two) to **charam** (extreme) **sanyog** (combination), there is a **mishra
pind**. 40. These are other examples of **mishra pind**: **sauvir-kanji** (rice
gruel), **goras-chhach** (whey), **asav-madya** (wine), **vesan-jira** (gram
flour-cumin), **lavan** (salt) etc., **bheshaj-yavagu** (medicinal barley
water), **sneh-ghrit** (clarified butter) etc., **shak** (vegetables), **phal**
(fruits), **pudgal-pakaya hua mans** (cooked meat), **lavan**, **gudoudan**
(sweet rice) - in this way, there are many **mishra pind** due to **sanyog**
(combination). 1. The commentator has clearly mentioned the uses of **charma**
(skin) etc. **Charma** is used to make **koshak** (containers) to keep **ksura**
(razor) etc. The **asthi** (bone) and **nakh** (nail) of **giddha** (vulture)
are tied externally to treat **phoda** (boil) in the body. The **daada** (molar)
of **shukar** (pig) is used to cure **drishtipusp** (a specific eye disease).
The **nakh** (nails) of specific creatures are used for **dhoop** (incense) and
**gandh** (fragrance), and also for the treatment of specific diseases. **Rom**
(hair) is used to make **kambal** (blankets). The **sing** (horn) is used to
call together **marg bhrashta sadhu** (deviated ascetics) and **gomutra** (cow
urine) is used for **khujli** (itching) etc. (Mavri P. 20, 21). 2. The
commentator mentions another use of the skull, saying that if a king is angry
with an ascetic and tries to kill him, the ascetic should take the skull and
escape to another country disguised as a **kapalik** (skull-wearer) (Mavri P.
21). 3. The word "**adi**" (etc.) should also include **acharya** (teacher) etc.
in addition to **kshapka**. The commentator's opinion is that **devata**
(deities) are present in the presence of **kshapka** due to his special
**tapovishesh** (austerities), hence the word **kshapka** is used here directly.
4. There are 36 options for **dwik sanyog** (two combinations), 84 for **trik
sanyog** (three combinations), 126 for **chatushk sanyog** (four combinations),
126 for **panch sanyog** (five combinations), 84 for **shat sanyog** (six
combinations), 36 for **sapt sanyog** (seven combinations), 9 for **asht
sanyog** (eight combinations), and 1 for **nav sanyog** (nine combinations) - a
total of 502 options (Mavri P. 21). 5. The commentator has explained in detail
how many **kay** (bodies) are mixed in **sauvir** (rice gruel) etc. **Sauvir-
kanji** is a **pind** (body) of **apkay** (water body), **tejaskay** (fire
body), and **vanaspatikay** (plant body) because rice is washed and cooked with
water, **avshravan** (residue) is formed by fire, and **tandul** (rice) is used
as **vanaspatikay**. Some people also add **lavan** (salt) to it, so there is
also a mixture of **prithvikay** (earth body). **Goras-takr** (whey) etc. are a
mixture of **apkay** and **traskay** (wind body). **Asav-madya** (wine) is a
**pind** of **apkay**, **tejaskay**, and **vanaspatikay** etc. **Vesan** (gram
flour) is a **pind** of **vanaspatikay** and **prithvikay** etc. **Bheshaj
yavagu** (medicinal barley water) etc. are a **pind** of **apkay**,
**tejaskay**, and **vanaspatikay**. **Sneh-ghrit** (clarified butter) etc. are a
**pind** of **tejaskay** and **traskay**. **Shak** (vegetables) like **bhathua
bharjika** (spinach) etc. are **pind** forms of **vanaspati** (plant),
**prithvikay**, and **traskay** etc. (Mavri P. 22).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 118 piMDaniyukti aura dAhopazamana ke lie hotA hai athavA) vaidya ke
kathanAnusAra lepa Adi meM hotA hai| caturindriya kA paribhogamakkhiyoM kA mala
(arthAt zahada) vamana-nirodha ke lie hotA hai athavA azvamakSikA kA AMkhoM se
akSara (kAlA pAnI) kA samuddhAra karane ke lie kiyA jAtA hai| paMcendriya piMDa
meM nairayika anupayogI haiN| 36. tiryaJca paJcendriya piMDa ke ye upayoga haiM-
carma', asthi, dAMta, nakha, roma, sIMga, bher3a Adi kI mIMganI, gobara, gomUtra
tathA dUdha-dadhi aadi| 37. (manuSya ke bhI tIna bheda haiM-sacitta, mizra aura
acitt|) sacitta manuSya kA prayojana-pravrajita karanA, pUchane para mArga
batAnA, muniyoM ko bhikSA denA, vasati Adi denaa| acitta manuSya kA prayojana-
manuSya ke sira kI haDDI liMga saMbaMdhI vyAdhi vizeSa ko dUra karane ke lie
ghisa kara dI jAtI hai| mizra manuSya se prayojana-haDDiyoM ke AbhUSaNa pahane,
zarIra para rAkha lagAe kApAlika kA mArga pUchane meM upayoga hotA hai| 38.
tapasvI kSapaka Adi muni kisI devatA se apanI kAla-mRtyu ke viSaya meM pUche
tathA mArga viSayaka zubha-azubha kI bAta pUche, yaha devatA viSayaka upayoga
hai| 39. ina nau piNDoM (dekheM gAthA 8) kA mizra piMDa bhI hotA hai| dvika Adi
ke saMyoga se carama saMyoga taka mizra piMDa hotA hai| 40. mizra piMDa ke anya
udAharaNa ye haiM-sauvIra'-kAMjI, gorasa-chAcha, Asava-madya, vesana-jIrA,
lavaNa Adi, bheSaja-yavAgU, sneha-ghRta Adi, zAka, phala, pudgala-pakAyA huA
mAMsa, lavaNa, guDaudana-isa prakAra saMyoga se aneka mizra piMDa hote haiN| 1.
TIkAkAra ne carma Adi ke upayoga kA spaSTatayA ullekha kiyA hai| carma kA
upayoga kSurA Adi rakhane ke lie kozaka banAne meM hotA hai| gIdha kI asthi
tathA nakha zarIra meM hone vAle phor3e kI cikitsA hetu bAhya rUpa se bAMdhe
jAte haiN| zUkara kI dAr3hA dRSTipuSpa (netra roga vizeSa) ko dUra karane ke lie
prayukta hotI hai| jIva vizeSa ke nakhoM kA upayoga, dhUpa aura gaMdha ke lie
tathA kisI roga vizeSa kI cikitsA ke lie bhI prayukta hote haiN| roma kA prayoga
kambala banAne meM hotA hai| mArga bhraSTa sAdhuko Apasa meM milAne ke lie sIMga
bajAne kA prayoga tathA khujalI Adi meM gomUtra kA prayoga hotA hai (mavR pa.
20, 21) /  2. TIkAkAra sira kI haDDI kA eka anya prayojana batAte hue kahate
haiM ki kabhI kisI sAdhu para rAjA ruSTa hokara use mArane kA prayatna kare to
sAdhu sira kI haDDI lekara kApAlika veza meM palAyana karake dezAntara calA jAe
(mavR pa. 21) /  3. 'Adi' zabda se kSapaka ke atirikta AcArya Adi kA grahaNa bhI
karanA caahie| TIkAkAra kA maMtavya hai ki kSapaka ke tapovizeSa se AkRSTa
hokara devatA usakI sannidhi meM upasthita rahate haiM ata: yahAM sAkSAt kSapaka
zabda kA prayoga kiyA hai| 4. dvika saMyoga ke 36, trika saMyoga ke 84, catuSka
saMyoga ke 126, paMca saMyoga ke 126, SaTsaMyoga ke 84, saptasaMyoga ke 36,
aSTasaMyoga ke 9 tathA nava saMyoga kA 1-kula 502 vikalpa hote haiM (mavR pa.
21) /  5. TIkAkAra ne sauvIra Adi dravya kitane kAyoM kA mizraNa hai, isakA
vistAra se ullekha kiyA hai| sauvIra-kAMjI, yaha apkAya, tejaskAya aura
vanaspatikAya kA piNDa hai kyoMki pAnI se cAvala ko dhokara pakAyA jAtA hai,
agni dvArA avazrAvaNa banatA hai tathA vanaspatikAya ke rUpa meM taNDula kA
upayoga hotA hai| kucha vyakti usameM lavaNa bhI milAte haiM ata: pRthvIkAya kA
mizraNa bhI ho gyaa| gorasa-takra Adi meM apkAya aura trasakAya kA mizraNa hai|
Asava-madya apkAya, tejaskAya tathA vanaspatikAya Adi kA piNDa hai| vesana-
vanaspatikAya tathA pRthvIkAya Adi kA piNDa hai| bheSaja yavAgU Adi meM apkAya,
tejaskAya aura vanaspatikAya kA piNDa hai| sneha-ghRta Adi tejaskAya aura
trasakAya kA piNDa hai| zAka-bathuA bharjikA Adi vanaspati pRthvIkAya tathA
trasakAya Adi ke piNDa rUpa haiM (mavR p.22)|

Page #291 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **41.** Three sky regions, mutually connected, are called a
*kṣetra-piṇḍa*. Similarly, there are three time periods, mutually connected,
which are called *kāla-piṇḍa*. In terms of space-pervasion and time-based
location, the fourth and fifth *piṇḍa*, namely *kṣetra-piṇḍa* and *kāla-piṇḍa*,
should be designated. Alternatively, for the sake of convenience, *kṣetra* and
*kāla-piṇḍa* should be conceptualized based on "where" and "when" (e.g., this is
a *vasati-rūpa kṣetra-piṇḍa*, this is a *pौरुषी-rūpa kāla-piṇḍa*).   **41/1.**
If the *piṇḍa* of concrete substances is designated based on mutual connection
and numerical abundance, then the *piṇḍa* of abstract substances is also
designated based on mutual connection and numerical abundance.   **41/2.** Why
wouldn't the three-region *skandha*, which are evenly distributed in three
regions and connected by continuous relationship, be referred to by the term
*piṇḍa*? (Because the basis of the three *paramāṇu-skandha* is the collection of
three regions.)  **42.** Alternatively, due to the presence of combination and
division, the term *piṇḍa* is appropriate for all four: name, establishment,
substance, and emotion. However, (the *kṣetra* and *kāla* are formal *piṇḍa*)
the *kṣetra* and *kāla* in which the *piṇḍa* is mentioned are called *kṣetra-
piṇḍa* and *kāla-piṇḍa*.  **43.** There are two types of *bhāva-piṇḍa*:
*praśasta bhāva-piṇḍa* and *apraśasta bhāva-piṇḍa*. I will describe both
separately.  **44.** *Praśasta bhāva-piṇḍa* is of three types: knowledge,
perception, and character. Conversely, *apraśasta bhāva-piṇḍa*, which binds the
living being to karmas, is of two, four, and seven types.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 41. paraspara anugata tIna AkAza pradeza kSetra piNDa kahalAtA hai| isI
prakAra paraspara anugata tIna samayakAlapiMDa hai| dravya meM sthAna-avagAha
aura sthiti-kAlika avasthAna-inakI apekSA se cauthA aura pAMcavAM piMDa arthAt
kSetrapiMDa aura kAlapiMDa kA vyapadeza karanA caahie| prakArAntara se sopacAra
kSetra aura kAlapiMDa ke lie jahAM aura jaba ke AdhAra para prarUpaNA karanI
cAhie, (jaise--yaha vasatirUpa kSetrapiMDa hai, yaha pauruSI rUpa kAlapiMDa
hai)| 41/1. yadi mUrta dravyoM meM paraspara anuvedha tathA saMkhyAbAhulya se
piMDa kA vyapadeza hotA hai to vaise hI amUrta dravyoM meM bhI paraspara
anuvedha tathA saMkhyAbAhulya se piMDa kA vyapadeza hotA hai| 41/2. tripradezI
skandha jo tIna pradezoM meM samavagAr3ha haiM aura nairantarya saMbaMdha se
saMbaddha haiM, ve piMDa zabda se vyavahRta kyoM nahIM hoMge? (kyoMki tIna
paramANuskandha kA AdhAra tIna pradezoM kA samudAya hai|) 42. athavA saMyoga
aura vibhAga hone ke kAraNa nAma, sthApanA, dravya aura bhAva-ina cAroM ke lie
piNDa zabda kA prayoga upayukta hai lekina (kSetra aura kAla aupacArika piNDa
haiM) jisa kSetra aura kAla meM piNDa ullikhita hotA hai, vaha kSetrapiMDa aura
kAlapiMDa kahA jAtA hai|' 43. bhAvapiMDa ke do prakAra haiM-prazasta bhAvapiMDa
aura aprazasta bhaavpiNdd| donoM kI maiM pRthak-pRthak prarUpaNA kruuNgaa| 44.
prazasta bhAvapiMDa tIna prakAra kA hotA hai-jJAna, darzana aura caaritr| isake
viparIta aprazasta bhAvapiMDa, jisase jIva karmoM se baMdhatA hai, vaha do, cAra
aura sAta prakAra kA hotA hai| 1. TIkAkAra ne kSetrapiMDa aura kAlapiMDa ke bAre
meM pUrvapakSa aura uttarapakSa prastuta karake vistAra se carcA kI hai| ve
svayaM prazna upasthita karate hue kahate haiM ki mUrta dravyoM meM paraspara
anuvedha aura saMkhyA-bAhulya saMbhava hai lekina kSetra aura kAla meM paraspara
anuvedha-milana saMbhava nahIM hai| isake atirikta kSetra nitya akRtrima hotA
hai, usake pradeza vivikta rUpa se avasthita haiM ataH AkAza pradezoM kA
anuvedha kaise saMbhava hai ? kAla meM bhI saMkhyA-bAhulya saMbhava nahIM hai
kyoMki atIta kA samaya naSTa ho gayA, bhaviSya kA utpanna nahIM huA, vartamAna
meM kevala eka samaya vidyamAna hai ata: kAla meM paraspara anuvedha aura
saMkhyA-bAhulya honA asaMbhava hai ata: ina donoM kA piMDa saMbhava nahIM hai|
isakA uttara tIna gAthAoM (41/1, 2, 42) meM tathA TIkAkAra malayagiri ne vistAra
se diyA hai, dekheM 41/1 kA TippaNa (mavR pa. 22, 23) /  2. TIkAkAra malayagiri
vistAra se isa gAthA ko spaSTa karate hue kahate haiM ki AkAza ke sAre pradeza
nairantarya rUpa se vaise hI sambaddha rahate haiM, jaise bAdara niSpAdita cAra
skaMdha  /  kSetra-pradezoM meM bhI saMkhyA kA bAhulya rahatA hai ata: kSetra ke
lie piNDa zabda kA prayoga karanA viruddha nahIM hai| kAla meM bhI yadyapi
pUrvApara samaya Apasa meM nahIM milate lekina buddhi se kalpita kAla meM
saMkhyA-bAhulya saMbhava hai ataH kAla kA bhI piNDa saMbhava hai (mavR pa. 23) /
3. nAma, sthApanA, dravya aura bhAva Adi se saMbaMdhita piNDa kA saMyoga aura
vibhAga hotA hai ata: ye pAramArthika rUpa se piNDa rUpa meM varNita haiM lekina
kSetra aura kAla meM isa rUpa meM saMyoga aura vibhAga nahIM hotA ataH kSetra
piMDa aura kAla piMDa ko aupacArika rUpa se svIkAra kiyA gayA hai| yaha prathama
pauruSI kA piNDa hai athavA yaha amuka ghara kI rasoI meM banAyA gayA modaka
hai, isa dRSTi se inako kSetra piNDa aura kAla piNDa kahA jA sakatA hai (ma pa.
24) /  4. dekheM gA. 44/4 kA anuvAda  /

Page #292 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 120 ## Pindaniyukti ## 44/1-3.   The **भावपिंड** (emotional state) can be
**प्रशस्त** (auspicious) or **अप्रशस्त** (inauspicious) and can be of ten types.
The **तीर्थंकर**s have described the ten types of auspicious **भावपिंड**:  1.
**संयम** (self-restraint) 2. **विद्या** (knowledge) and **चरण** (action) 3.
**ज्ञानादि त्रिक** - **ज्ञान** (knowledge), **दर्शन** (insight), **चारित्र**
(conduct) 4. **ज्ञान**, **दर्शन**, **तप** (austerity), and **संयम** 5. Five
**महाव्रत** (great vows) - **प्राणातिपात विरमण** (non-violence) etc. 6.
**व्रतषट्क** (six vows) including **रात्रि भोजन** (night meal) 7. Seven
**पिंडैषणा** (types of food intake), seven **पानैषणा** (types of water intake),
and seven **अवग्रहप्रतिमा** (types of dwelling restrictions)  1. **संयम** is
**पिंडीभूत** (integrated) in its **पर्यव** (ultimate state) and remains
**अविभक्त** (undivided). There is a **तादात्म्य** (identity) relationship
between its parts, therefore, despite having **पर्याय** (synonyms), it is a
single **पिंड** (entity) and there is no **विरोध** (contradiction) (**मवृ प.
26**).  2. There are seven types of **पिंडैषणा**:  * **असंसृष्टा** - taking food
with **असंसृष्ट** (uncontaminated) hands and utensils. * **संसृष्टा** - taking
food with **संसृष्ट** (contaminated) hands and utensils. * **उपनिक्षिप्तपूर्वा**
(**उद्धृता**) - taking food that has been previously removed from a vessel. *
**अल्पलेपा** - taking dry food like **बेर** (jujube) powder, **चावल** (rice)
flour, etc. * **उपहृत भोजनजात** (**अवगृहीता**) - taking food that has been
served on a plate for eating. * **प्रगृहीत भोजनजात** (**प्रगृहीता**) - taking
food that is held in the hand. * **उज्झितधर्मा** - taking food that other
**द्विपद** (bipeds), **चतुष्पद** (quadrupeds), or **श्रमण-माहन** (ascetics)
would not take (**आचूला 1/140-47**).  3. Similar to **पिंडैषणा**, there are
seven types of **पानैषणा**. **पिंड** refers to the intake of food like **अशन**
(food), while **पान** refers to the intake of water like **पानी** (water).  In
**प्रवचनसारोद्धार** (**गा. 744, टी प. 216**), the author explains the meaning of
**अल्पलेपा** under **पानैषणा** as **काजी** (a type of drink), **अवश्रावण**
(water dripping from a vessel), **गरम जल** (hot water), **चावलों का धोवन** (rice
washing water), etc. are **अलेपकृत पानक** (unmixed drinks), while **इक्षुरस**
(sugarcane juice), **द्राक्षा पानक** (grape juice), and **अम्लिका पानक** (sour
fruit juice) are **लेपकृत** (mixed drinks).  4. **अवग्रह प्रतिमा** refers to
specific rules regarding dwelling or specific restrictions. There are seven
types:  * **मैं अमुक स्थान में रहूंगा, दूसरे में नहीं** (I will stay in this
place, not in another). * **मैं दूसरों के लिए स्थान की याचना करूंगा तथा दूसरे
द्वारा याचित स्थान में रहूंगा** (I will request a place for others and stay in
the place requested by others). This vow is for **गच्छगत साधु** (ascetics who
travel). * **मैं दूसरों के लिए स्थान की याचना करूंगा लेकिन दूसरों द्वारा याचित
स्थान में नहीं रहूंगा** (I will request a place for others but will not stay in
the place requested by others). This vow is for **यथालन्दिक साधु** (ascetics who
stay in one place). * **मैं दूसरों के लिए अवग्रह की याचना नहीं करूंगा किन्तु
दूसरों द्वारा अवगृहीत या याचित स्थान में रहूंगा** (I will not request a place
for others but will stay in the place occupied or requested by others). This vow
is for **गच्छगत साधु** who practice **जिनकल्प दशा** (a state of austerity). *
**मैं अपने लिए स्थान की याचना करूंगा, दूसरों के लिए नहीं** (I will request a
place for myself, not for others). This vow is for **जिनकल्पिक साधु** (ascetics
who practice certain austerities). * **जिसका मैं स्थान ग्रहण करूंगा, उसी के यहां
तृण, पलाल आदि से निर्मित संस्तारक आदि प्राप्त करूंगा अन्यथा उत्कटुक या निषद्या
आसन में बैठकर रात बिताऊंगा** (I will accept bedding made of grass, straw, etc.
from the person whose place I occupy, otherwise, I will spend the night sitting
on a **उत्कटुक** (a type of seat) or **निषद्या आसन** (a type of seat)). This vow
is for **जिनकल्पिक** or **अभिग्रहधारी साधु** (ascetics who accept certain
possessions). * **जिसका मैं स्थान ग्रहण करूंगा, उसके यहां सहज रूप से बिछा हुआ
सिलापट्ट या काष्ठपट्ट उपलब्ध होगा तो प्राप्त करूंगा अन्यथा उत्कटुक या निषद्या
आसन में बैठा-बैठा रात बिताऊंगा** (I will accept a **सिलापट्ट** (cotton mat) or
**काष्ठपट्ट** (wooden mat) that is readily available at the place I occupy,
otherwise, I will spend the night sitting on a **उत्कटुक** or **निषद्या आसन**).
This vow is also for **जिनकल्पिक** or **अभिग्रहधारी साधु** (**आचूला 7/48-55**).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 120 piMDaniyukti 44/1-3. prazasta aura aprazasta bhAvapiMDa eka se dasa prakAra
kA hai| tIrthaMkaroM ne prazasta bhAvapiMDa ke dasa prakAra ye batAe haiM 1.
sNym| 2. vidyA aura caraNa (jJAna aura kriyaa)| 3. jJAnAdi trika-jJAna, darzana,
caaritr| 4. jJAna, darzana, tapa aura sNym| 5. (prANAtipAta viramaNa Adi) pAMca
mhaavrt| 6. rAtri bhojana sahita vrtssttk| 7. sAta piMDaiSaNA', sAta pAnaiSaNA,
sAta avgrhprtimaa| 1. saMyama ke paryava avibhakta rUpa se piMDIbhUta hokara
avasthita rahate haiN| unakA Apasa meM tAdAtmya saMbaMdha rahatA hai ata:
saMyama ke paryAyoM kI apekSA ekavidha hote hue bhI vaha piMDa hai, isameM
virodha nahIM hai (mavR pa. 26) /  2. piNDaiSaNA ke sAta prakAra haiM *
asaMsRSTA-asaMsRSTa hAtha evaM pAtra se AhAra lenaa| * saMsRSTA-saMsRSTa hAtha
aura saMsRSTa pAtra se AhAra lenaa| * upanikSiptapUrvA (uddhRtA)-kisI pAtra meM
pahale se nikAlA huA AhAra lenaa| * alpalepA-bera kA cUrNa, cAvala kA ATA Adi
rUkhA AhAra lenaa| * upahRta bhojanajAta (avagRhItA)-khAne ke lie thAlI meM
parosA huA AhAra lenaa| * pragRhIta bhojanajAta (pragRhItA)-hAtha meM rakhA huA
bhojana lenaa| * ujjhitadharmA-jise anya dvipada, catuSpada yA zramaNa-mAhana na
lenA cAheM, use lenA (AcUlA 1/140-47) /  3. piNDaiSaNA kI bhAMti hI pAnaiSaNA ke
sAta prakAra haiN| piNDa meM azana Adi tathA pAna meM pAnI Adi kA grahaNa hotA
hai| pravacanasAroddhAra (gA. 744, TI pa. 216) meM pAnaiSaNA ke antargata
alpalepA kA artha karate hue graMthakAra kahate haiM ki kAjI, avazrAvaNa, garama
jala, cAvaloM kA dhovana Adi alepakRta pAnaka haiM tathA ikSurasa, drAkSA pAnaka
tathA amlikA pAnaka Adi lepakRta haiN| 4. vasati viSayaka niyama vizeSa yA
pratimA vizeSa ko avagraha pratimA kahate haiM, usake sAta prakAra haiM * maiM
amuka sthAna meM rahUMgA, dUsare meM nhiiN| * maiM dUsaroM ke lie sthAna kI
yAcanA karUMgA tathA dUsare dvArA yAcita sthAna meM rahUMgA, yaha pratijJA
gacchagata sAdhu kI hotI hai| * maiM dUsaroM ke lie sthAna kI yAcanA karUMgA
lekina dUsaroM dvArA yAcita sthAna meM nahIM rhuuNgaa| yaha yathAlandika sAdhu
ke hotI hai| * maiM dUsaroM ke lie avagraha kI yAcanA nahIM karUMgA kintu
dUsaroM dvArA avagRhIta yA yAcita sthAna meM rhuuNgaa| yaha pratijJA jinakalpa
dazA kA abhyAsa karane vAle gacchagata sAdhuoM ke hotI hai| * maiM apane lie
sthAna kI yAcanA karUMgA, dUsaroM ke lie nhiiN| yaha pratijJA jinakalpika
sAdhuoM kI hotI hai| * jisakA maiM sthAna grahaNa karUMgA, usI ke yahAM tRNa,
palAla Adi se nirmita saMstAraka Adi prApta karUMgA anyathA utkaTuka yA niSadyA
Asana meM baiThakara rAta bitaauuNgaa| yaha pratijJA jinakalpika yA
abhigrahadhArI sAdhuoM ke hotI hai| * jisakA maiM sthAna grahaNa karUMgA, usake
yahAM sahaja rUpa se bichA huA silApaTTa yA kASThapaTTa upalabdha hogA to prApta
karUMgA anyathA utkaTuka yA niSadyA Asana meM baiThA-baiThA rAta bitaauuNgaa|
yaha pratimA bhI jinakalpika yA abhigrahadhArI sAdhu kI apekSA se hai (AcUlA
7/48-55) /

Page #293 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 121 8. Eight types of Pravachana-Mata. 9. Nine
secrets of Brahmacharya. 10. Ten types of Shraman Dharma. 44/4. There are ten
types of Aprashasta Bhava-Pinda: 1. Asanyama. 2. Agnana and Aviriti. 3. Agnana,
Aviriti and Mithyatva. 4. Krodha, Mana, Maya and Lobha. 5. Five Asrava. 6.
Shatkayavadha. 7. Seven types of Karma Nibandhanabhoot Adhyavasaya. 8. Eight
types of Karma Nibandhanabhoot Parinam. 9. Nine secrets of Brahmacharya. 10.
Adharma - Ten types of Shraman Dharma's counter-parts. 45. The Bhava-Pinda which
binds Karma is Aprashasta Bhava-Pinda. The Bhava-Pinda which liberates from
Karma-bandhan is Prashasta Bhava-Pinda. 45/1. All the synonyms of Jnana,
Darshan, Charitra etc. become Pinda by Paryav Praman with their own Akhya (like
synonyms of Jnana, synonyms of Darshan etc.). 1. The nine secrets of
Brahmacharya are as follows: • Separate bed without women, animals, or eunuchs.
• Avoidance of women's stories. • Avoidance of love stories. • Drishti-Samyama
(not looking at the attractive form of women). • Abandonment of food with Pranit
Rasa. • Avoidance of excessive food. • Not remembering the past enjoyed
pleasures. • Not being attached to words, forms etc. • Not being attached to
wealth and happiness. (Thanam 9/3) 2. The specific results (Mavri P. 26) of the
seven Karmas, excluding Ayukarma, are caused by Kshaya-yukt or Kshaya-rahita. 3.
The specific results (Mavri P. 26) of the eight Karmas are caused by Kshaya-
yukt. 4. Acting contrary to the nine secrets of Brahmacharya is Agupti. See note
no. 1. 5. For detailed explanation, see Mavri P. 26, 27.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 121 8. ATha prvcn-maataa| 9. nau brahmacarya kI guptiyaaN| 10. dasa
prakAra kA shrmnndhrm| 44/4. aprazasta bhAvapiMDa ke dasa prakAra haiM 1. asNym|
2. ajJAna tathA avirti| 3. ajJAna, avirati aura mithyaatv| 4. krodha, mAna, mAyA
aura lobha  /  5. pAMca aashrv| 6. ssttkaayvdh| 7. sAta prakAra ke karma
nibaMdhanabhUta adhyvsaay| 8. ATha prakAra ke karma nibaMdhanabhUta prinnaam| 9.
brahmacarya kI nau aguptiyaaN| 10. adharma-dasa prakAra ke zramaNa dharma ke
prtipkss| 45. jisa bhAvapiMDa se karma kA baMdha hotA hai, vaha aprazasta
bhAvapiMDa hai| jisa bhAvapiMDa se karma-baMdhana se mukti milatI hai, vaha
prazasta bhAvapiMDa hai| 45/1. jJAna, darzana, cAritra Adi ke jitane paryAya
hote haiM, ve apanI-apanI AkhyA (jaise jJAna ke paryAya, darzana ke paryAya Adi)
se paryava pramANa se piMDa ho jAte haiN| 1. brahmacarya kI nau guptiyAM isa
prakAra haiM * strI, pazu, napuMsaka rahita vivikta shyyaa| * strI-kathA kA
vrjn| * kAma-kathA kA vrjn| *dRSTi-saMyama (strI ke manohArI rUpa ko na
dekhnaa)| praNIta rasa yukta AhAra kA prityaag| * atimAtrA meM AhAra kA vrjn| *
pUrva bhukta bhoga kI smRti na krnaa| * zabda, rUpa Adi meM Asakta na honaa| *
sAtA aura sukha meM pratibaddha na honaa| (ThANaM 9/3) 2. Ayukarma ko chor3akara
zeSa sAta karmoM ke kAraNabhUta kaSAyayukta yA kaSAyarahita pariNAma vizeSa
(mavR pa. 26) /  3. ATha karmoM ke kAraNabhUta kaSAyayukta pariNAma vizeSa (mavR
pa. 26) /  4. brahmacarya kI nau guptiyoM ke viparIta AcaraNa karanA agupti hai|
dekheM TippaNa naM. 1 5.vizeSa vivaraNa ke lie dekheM-mavR pa. 26, 27 /

Page #294 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 122: Pindaniyukti  **46.** The specific feeling with which the
bundle of subtle karmas is bound is called **bhavpind** because it connects
those specific karmas with the soul.   **47.** This **pindaniyukti** involves
the **achitt dravyapind** and the **prashastabhavpind**. The remaining terms
like **nama** (name) etc. are equivalent to the meaning already explained. They
are mentioned to clarify the student's understanding.  **48.** There are three
types of **achitt dravyapind**: **ahararup** (food-like), **upadhirrup**
(support-like), and **shayyarup** (bed-like). These three are the facilitators
and the foundation for the **prashastabhavpind**. In the present context, the
purpose of the **achitt dravyapind** is **shuddha ahararup** (pure food-like)
from eight sources: **udgam** (origin), etc.  **49.** **Nirvana** is the goal,
and its three causes are **jnana** (knowledge), **darshan** (perception), and
**charitra** (conduct). The cause of these causes of **nirvana** is **ahar**
(food).   **49/1.** Just as threads are the cause of cloth, and threads are
caused by **pakshm** (cotton), similarly, **moksha** (liberation) is the goal,
its causes are **jnana** (knowledge) etc., and their cause is **ahar** (food).
**49/2.** Just as an uninterrupted cause completes the entire work, similarly,
for the attainment of the **moksha** goal, **avikal jnana** (unwavering
knowledge) etc. are the means.  **50.** Thus, I have briefly explained the
meaning of the word **pind**. Now, I will explain the meaning of **eshana**
(desire) in detail, which is subtle and can be understood by those with sharp
intellect.  **51.** These are the synonyms of **eshana**: **eshana**,
**gaveshana**, **margana**, **udgopana**.  **52.** There are four aspects of the
word **eshana**: **nama** (name), **sthapana** (establishment), **dravya**
(substance), and **bhava** (feeling). There are three types each of **dravya**
and **bhava** related to **eshana**.  **52/1.** Examples of **eshana**,
**gaveshana**, etc. are as follows: * A person desires the birth of a son, this
is **eshana**. * A person searches for a lost son, this is **gaveshana**. * A
person searches for an enemy based on footprints, this is **margana**. * A
person publicizes the death of his enemy, this is **udgopana**.  **1.**
According to the commentator, all four terms **eshana** etc. are synonymous, yet
there is a definite difference in their meaning. * **Eshana**: Expression of
mere desire. * **Gaveshana**: Searching everywhere for an unavailable object. *
**Margana**: Investigating an object with skillful intelligence. * **Udgopana**:
Revealing the desired object to the public. (See translation of 52/1 for clarity
of these terms)  **2.** There are three types of **dravya eshana**: **sachitt
dravya vishayak** (related to conscious substance), **achitt dravya vishayak**
(related to non-conscious substance), and **mishra dravya vishayak** (related to
mixed substance). There are three types of **bhava eshana**: **gaveshana**
(search), **grahaneshana** (desire to acquire), and **graseshana** (desire to
consume).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 122 piMDaniyukti 46. jisa bhAva vizeSa se cikane karmoM kA piMDa baMdhatA hai,
vaha bhAvapiMDa hai kyoMki vaha bhAva vizeSa karmoM ko AtmA ke sAtha saMbaddha
karatA hai| 47. isa piMDaniyukti meM acitta dravyapiMDa evaM prazastabhAvapiMDa
kA prasaMga hai| zeSa nAma Adi piMDa pratipAdita artha ke tulya haiN| ziSya kI
mati ko vyutpanna karane ke lie inakA pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai| 48. acitta
dravyapiMDa ke tIna prakAra haiM-AhArarUpa, upadhirUpa tathA shyyaaruup| ye
tInoM prazastabhAvapiMDa ke upakAraka haiM, AdhArabhUta haiN| prastuta prakaraNa
meM udgama Adi ATha sthAnoM se zuddha AhArarUpa acitta dravyapiMDa kA prayojana
hai| 49. nirvANa kArya hai, unake tIna kAraNa haiM-jJAna, darzana aura caaritr|
nirvANa ke ina kAraNoM kA kAraNa hai-aahaar| 49/1. jaise tantu paTa ke kAraNa
haiM, tantuoM kA kAraNa hai-pakSma, vaise hI mokSa kArya hai, usake kAraNa
haiMjJAnAditrika aura inakA kAraNa hai-aahaar| 49/2. jaise anupahata kAraNa
sampUrNa kArya ko niSpanna karatA hai, vaise hI mokSa-kArya kI siddhi ke lie
avikala jJAna Adi kAraNa sAdhana hote haiN| 50. isa prakAra maiMne saMkSepa meM
piMDa zabda kA abhidheya mAtra pratipAdita kiyA hai| aba isase Age eSaNA kA
spaSTa tathA vikaTa-sUkSmamati dvArA gamya artha ko prakaTa kruuNgaa| 51. eSaNA
ke ye ekArthaka nAma haiM-eSaNA, gaveSaNA, mArgaNA, udgopnaa|' 52. eSaNA zabda
ke cAra nikSepa haiM-nAma, sthApanA, dravya aura bhaav| dravya aura bhAva eSaNA
ke tIna-tIna prakAra haiN| 52/1. eSaNA, gaveSaNA Adi ke udAharaNa isa prakAra
haiM * koI vyakti putra ke janma kI eSaNA-icchA karatA hai, yaha eSaNA hai| . *
koI vyakti khoe hue putra kI khoja karatA hai, yaha gaveSaNA hai| * koI vyakti
padacihnoM ke AdhAra para zatru kI khoja karatA hai, yaha mArgaNA hai| * koI
apane zatru kI mRtyu ko prakAzita karatA hai, yaha udgopanA hai| 1. TIkAkAra ke
anusAra eSaNA Adi cAroM pada ekArthaka haiM phira bhI ina cAroM meM niyata
artha-bheda hai| * eSaNA-icchA mAtra kI abhivykti| * gaveSaNA-anupalabdha
padArtha kI sarvataH khoj| * mArgaNA-nipuNa buddhi se usa padArtha kI
anvessnnaa| * udagopanA-vivakSita padArtha janatA ke bIca prakaTa krnaa| ina
zabdoM kI spaSTatA hetu dekheM 52/1 kA anuvAda) (mavR pa. 29) /  2. dravya eSaNA
ke tIna prakAra haiM-sacitta dravya viSayaka, acitta dravya viSayaka tathA mizra
dravya vissyk| bhAva eSaNA ke tIna prakAra haiM-gaveSaNA, grahaNaiSaNA tathA
graasaissnnaa|

Page #295 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 123 52/2. Similarly, in the case of four-
footed, footless, non-sentient and mixed substances, the words like *aeshanā*,
*gaveshanā*, *mārganā* etc. should be combined wherever appropriate. 53/3. The
liberated Lord has described three types of *bhavaeṣhanā* in order -
*gaveshanā*, *grahanaiṣhanā* and *grāsaiṣhanā*. 52/4. The ungathered lump is not
taken and the ungrasped is not consumed. This order of the three *aiṣhanās*
should be known. 53. There are four types of *gaveshanā* - name, establishment,
substance and feeling. Examples of substance-related *gaveshanā* are the search
for deer and elephants. Feeling-related *gaveshanā* is the search for food free
from defects like origin, production etc. 53/1,2. King Jitashatru, Goddess
Sudarshana, the sight of golden-backed deer in the Chitrasabha, the origin of
the *dohad*, weakness due to non-fulfillment, the king's inquiry, the order to
the servants to bring the deer. Making *modakas* resembling *Shriprani* fruits
and placing them under the *Shriprani* tree. The arrival of deer upon seeing the
fruits. This is an example of a proper and improper comparison. The deer who
obeyed the leader of the herd lived long, and those who did not obey due to
greed were bound in the snare and became victims of suffering. 54. The deer know
when the *Shriprani* tree bears fruit? (Even if it bears fruit now, there is no
heap of fruits.) If it is said that this happened due to the wind, then the wind
also blew in the old days, but there were never so many fruits. 54/1. In the
summer, the king wanted to catch elephants. The men filled the pond with water
from *arghattas*. Due to excessive water, *nalavana* grew in the pond. Attracted
by it, the herd of elephants arrived. 55. The elephants know when and where
*nalavana* grows? The pond is filled with water even at other times, but not so
full (the elephants who did not go to that pond when the leader of the herd was
alert were proper elephants. Those who went there and got caught in the snare
were called improper elephants. This is a description of *dravyaeṣhanā*.) 56.
*Udgaman*, *udgopana* and *mārganā* are synonymous words. There are four types
of *udgaman* - name, establishment, substance and feeling. 57. In substance-
related *udgaman*, the example of *laddaka* etc. is given. Feeling-related
*udgaman* should be known in three types - object-related, knowledge-related and
character-related. In the present context, the context of character-related
*udgaman* is relevant. 1. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3 Story No.
1. 2. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3 Story No. 2.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 123 52/2. isI prakAra catuSpada, apada, acitta aura mizra viSayaka
dravyoM meM jahAM jo upayukta ho, vahAM eSaNA, gaveSaNA, mArgaNA Adi zabdoM kA
saMyojana karanA caahie| 53/3. vItarAga bhagavAn ne bhAvaiSaNA ke kramaza: tIna
prakAra pratipAdita kie haiM-gaveSaNA, grahaNaiSaNA aura graasaissnnaa| 52/4.
agaveSita piMDa kA grahaNa nahIM hotA aura agRhIta kA paribhoga nahIM hotaa|
tIna eSaNAoM kA yaha krama jAnanA caahie| 53. gaveSaNA ke cAra prakAra haiM-
nAma, sthApanA, dravya tathA bhaav| dravya viSayaka gaveSaNA ke udAharaNa
haiMmRga aura hAthI kI gvessnnaa| bhAva gaveSaNA hai-udgama-utpAdana Adi doSoM
se rahita AhAra kI gvessnnaa| 53/1,2. jitazatru rAjA, sudarzanA devI, citrasabhA
meM svarNapRSTha vAle mRgoM kA darzana, dohada kI utpatti, pUrti na hone se
durbalatA, rAjA dvArA pRcchA, sevakoM ko mRga lAne kA aadesh| zrIparNI phala ke
sadRza modakoM ko banavAkara unheM zrIparNI vRkSa ke nIce rkhnaa| phala
dekhakara mRgoM kA aagmn| yaha prazasta aura aprazasta upamA kA udAharaNa hai|
jina kuraMgoM ne yUthAdhipati kA vacana mAnA, ve dIrghajIvI hue aura jinhoMne
lolupatAvaza isa vacana ko nahIM mAnA, ve pAza meM baMdhakara du:kha ke bhAgI
bne| 54. mRgoM ko yaha vidita hai ki zrIparNI vRkSa kaba phalatA hai? (yadi abhI
phalatA bhI hai to phaloM kA Dhera nahIM hotaa|) yadi kahA jAe ki vAyu ke kAraNa
aisA huA hai to purAne jamAne meM bhI vAyu calatI thI parantu itane r3hera sAre
phala kabhI nahIM hue| 54/1. grISmakAla meM rAjA ne hAthI pakar3anA caahaa|
puruSoM ne araghaTToM se tAlAba ko pAnI se bhraa| atyadhika pAnI se tAlAba meM
nalavana uga ge| usake AkarSaNa se gajayUtha kA Agamana ho gyaa| 55. hAthiyoM ko
yaha vidita hotA hai ki nalavana kaba aura kahAM ugate haiM? anya kAla meM bhI
tAlAba pAnI se bharate haiM parantu isa prakAra labAlaba nahIM hote (yUthapati
dvArA saceSTa kie jAne para jo hAthI usa tAlAba para nahIM gae, ve prazasta
hAthI hue| jo vahAM jAkara kUTapAza meM phaMsa gae, ve aprazasta hAthI khlaae|
yaha dravyaiSaNA kA varNana hai|) 56. udgama, udgopanA aura mArgaNA-ye ekArthaka
zabda haiN| udgama ke cAra prakAra haiM-nAma, sthApanA, dravya tathA bhaav| 57.
dravya udgama meM laDDaka Adi kA udAharaNa hai| bhAva udgama tIna prakAra kA
jAnanA cAhie-darzana viSayaka, jJAna viSayaka aura cAritra viSayaka  /  prastuta
prasaMga meM cAritra viSayaka udgama kA prasaMga hai| 1. kathA ke vistAra hetu
dekheM pari. 3 kathA saM. 1 /  2. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3 kathA
saM. 2 /

Page #296 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  124 ##  Origin of Substances  57/1.  Astrological bodies like the sun and
moon, grass, medicinal plants like rice, clouds, debt, and taxes are the sources
of substances. One should describe the origin of these substances, including
from where, when, and how they originate. 57/2-4.  The prince, having left his
residence, was engaged in play in the court hall. At mealtime, his mother sent
him sweets, filled in pots and bowls, as he was fond of them. The prince ate a
lot of sweets.  As he remained seated in the court hall, he suffered from
indigestion and foul-smelling flatulence. The prince then contemplated the
origin of his food: "Sweets are born of three things" - ghee, jaggery, and
flour. Their origin is from pure substances. This body is born of two types of
impurities - the mother's menstrual fluid and the father's semen. The prince
felt detachment. From this, he simultaneously attained right faith, knowledge,
and conduct, followed by the attainment of omniscience. 57/5.  Conduct
originates from perception and knowledge. Purity of both leads to pure conduct.
Conduct leads to purity of karma. In conclusion, purity of origin leads to
purity of conduct. 58, 59.  There are sixteen defects of origin:  1.
*Aadhākarma* 9.  *Apamitya* or *Prāmitya* 2.  *Auddeshika* 10.  *Parivartita* 3.
*Pūtikarma* 11.  *Abhihata* 4.  *Miśrajāta* 12.  *Udbhinn* 5.  *Sthāpanā* 13.
*Mālāpahṛta* 6.  *Prābhṛtika* 14.  *Ācchhedya* 7.  *Prāduṣkaraṇa* 15.
*Anisṛṣṭa* 8.  *Krīta* 16.  *Adhyavapūraka* 60.  One should consider the name of
*Aadhākarma*, its meaning, for whom it is done, and its nature. Food taken for
the benefit of the householders is not *Aadhākarma*. Food taken for the benefit
of the virtuous, etc., is *Aadhākarma*.  There are nine doors to *Aadhākarma*:
four transgressions - excess, irregularity, abuse, and misconduct; and two
defects in its acceptance - disobedience, etc.  1.  Astrological bodies and
clouds originate from the sky, grass and rice, etc., from the earth, debt from
business, and taxes from men appointed by the king.  Astrological bodies, like
the sun, originate in the morning, and the rest, like the moon, etc., at other
times, according to the time. Grass, etc., originate mainly in the month of
Shraavana, etc. Astrological bodies and clouds extend in the sky until late at
night, grass, rice, etc., emerge from the earth by breaking it, debt originates
from interest, etc., and taxes are collected annually (M.V.P. 33). 2.  See
*Parī* : 3 *Kathā Saṅ.* 3 for the expansion of the story. 3.  This is the main
gate verse. Its explanation continues until the 92nd (217th) verse.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 124 piMDaniyukti 57/1. jyotiSa-sUrya-candra Adi, tRNa, auSadhi-zAli Adi dhAna,
megha, RNa, kara-rAjadeya dravya-ye dravya viSayaka udgama haiN| ina dravyoM kA
jisase, jaba aura jaise udgama hotA hai, vaisA kahanA caahie| 57/2-4. vAsagRha
se nikalakara rAjakumAra AsthAna maMDapa meM krIr3Amagna ho gyaa| bhojana ke
samaya mAtA ne laDDa pasaMda karane vAle kumAra ko ghaTa aura zarAvoM meM
bharakara modaka bheje| kumAra ne yatheSTa modaka khaae| AsthAna maMDapa meM
baiThe raha jAne ke kAraNa usake ajIrNa roga ho gayA, durgandha yukta adhovAyu
nikalane lgii| kumAra ne taba AhAra ke udgama kA cintana kiyA-'modaka
trisamuttha'-ghRta, gur3a aura ATA se udbhUta haiN| inakA udgama zuci dravyoM se
hai| yaha zarIra do prakAra ke maloM-mAtA ke raja evaM pitA ke vIrya se udbhUta
hai| rAjakumAra ko vairAgya huaa| usase usako yugapad samyaktva, jJAna aura
cAritra kA udgama huA, tatpazcAt kevalajJAna kA udgama huaa| 57/5. darzana aura
jJAna se cAritra kA udgama hotA hai| ina donoM kI zuddhi se cAritra zuddha hotA
hai| cAritra se karmazuddhi hotI hai| niSkarSa kI bhASA meM udgama kI zuddhi
hone para hI cAritra kI zuddhi hotI hai| 58, 59. udgama ke solaha doSa haiM1.
AdhAkarma 9. apamitya athavA prAmitya 2. auddezika 10. parivartita 3. pUtikarma
11. abhihata 4. mizrajAta 12. udbhinna 5. sthApanA 13. mAlApahRta 6. prAbhRtikA
14. Acchedya 7. prAduSkaraNa 15. anisRSTa 8. krIta 16. adhyavapUraka 60.
AdhAkarma ke nAma, ekArthaka, vaha kisake lie kiyA jAtA hai, usakA svarUpa kyA
hai-yaha vicAra karanA caahie| parapakSa-gRhastha varga ke lie kiyA huA AhAra
AdhAkarma nahIM hotaa| svapakSa-sAdhu Adi ke lie kiyA huA AhAra AdhAkarma hotA
hai| AdhAkarma meM atikrama, vyatikrama, aticAra aura anAcAra Adi cAra, usake
grahaNa meM AjJAbhaMga Adi doSa-ye nau dvAra haiN| 1. jyotiS tathA meghoM kA
AkAza se, tRNa, zAli Adi kA pRthvI se, RNa kA vyApAra se, karoM kA nRpati
niyukta puruSoM se udgama hotA hai| samaya ke anusAra jyotizcakra ke bIca sUrya
kA prabhAta meM tathA zeSa candra Adi kA anyAnya samayoM meM, tRNoM kA prAyaH
zrAvaNa Adi mAsa meM tathA jyotiS cakra aura meghoM kA AkAza meM dera rAtri taka
vistRta hone se, tRNa, zAli Adi kA bhUmi ko phor3akara Upara Ane se, RNa kA
byAja Adi se evaM karoM kA prativarSa saMkalana karane se udagama hotA hai (mavR
pa. 33) /  2. kathAnaka ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari : 3 kathA saM. 3 /  3. yaha
mUladvAragAthA hai| isakI vyAkhyA Age 92 (217) vIM gAthA taka calatI hai|

Page #297 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 125 61. These are the names of *Aadhākarma*:
*Aadhākarma*, *Adhaḥkarma*, *Ātmaghna*, *Ātmakarma*, *Pratiṣevṇā*,
*Pratiśravaṇa*, *Samvāsa*, *Anumodnā*. 61/1. The bow is the base for
*Pratyāñca*, the bull's shoulder is the base for the *Yūpa*, the human shoulder
is the base for the *Kāpotī*, the vehicle is the base for the weight of grains
etc., and the heart is the base for the worries of family, kingdom etc. All
these substances are examples of *Aadhā*. 62. *Aadhākarma* is that which is
performed by causing harm and destruction to the beings with generous bodies,
with the intention in mind. 63. *Adhaḥkarma* is the downward movement of the
substance due to its weight when it is put into water etc., and the descent
through a strainer, rope etc. 64. *Adhaḥkarma* is the feeling that lowers the
good *Adhyavasaya* present in the special state of *Samyama sthāna*, *Kanda-
Samyama śreṇī*, *Leśyā* and good karmas, from the good to the lower. 64/1. The
*Muni* present in the state of *Kiñcit* *Nyūna* *Cāraṇāgra* *Upaśānta* *Moha*,
by descending his feelings - *Samyama sthāna* - in the soul in a lower and lower
form, takes the *Aadhākarma* substance, which also takes his soul down from the
lower to the lower.  1. *Aadhākarma* is used due to the faults of *Pratiṣevṇā*
etc., therefore, by treating the cause with non-difference, *Pratiṣevṇā*,
*Pratiśravaṇa*, *Samvāsa* and *Anumodnā* are accepted as names of *Aadhākarma*
(M.V.P. 36). 2. The commentator *Malaya Giri* has raised a question that the
generous body is of *Tiryāñca* and human. *Tiryāñca* includes beings from one-
sense to five-sense. One-sense includes subtle beings. Due to their subtlety,
their harm is not possible by humans, therefore, why are they included here?
Answering this, the commentator says that one should know that whoever is not
averse to something, even if he does not do that work, he is doing it in the
ultimate sense, just as a householder who is not averse to night food, even if
he does not eat night food, is still involved in the sin of night food,
similarly, a householder is not averse to the harm of subtle one-sense beings,
therefore, here, starting for the *Sādhu*, they harm the subtle one-sense beings
(M.V.P. 37). The commentator has rejected the subtle one-sense in his
explanation (Pibhā 16). 3. The commentator has defined *Uddavaṇa* -
*Apadraavaṇa* as pain without excessive harm. For *Sādhu*, when cooking
*Śālyodana* etc., all the pain before the harm to the life of the plant is
called *Apadraavaṇa* (Pibhā 16), for example, for *Sādhu*, *Śālyodana* is cooked
by grinding the *Śāli* twice, until then, the pain caused by grinding is called
*Apadraavaṇa*. In the third grinding, the harm to the *Śāli* beings is
inevitable (M.V.P. 37). 4. There are countless *Kanda* in the region of the size
of a finger, in the amount of a *Rāśi* of parts. *Malaya Giri* has quoted a
verse to clarify *Kanda* here - ' *Kaṇḍaṃ ti ittha bhaṇṇai, angulabhāgo
asankhejjō* ' (M.V.P. 39). 5. It seems that here, the author has given the
example of someone with less character, i.e., someone with *Upaśānta* *Moha*
character, to show the terrible nature of the fault caused by *Aadhākarma*. The
meaning here is that even a *Sādhu* with *Upaśānta* *Moha* character (eleventh
*Guṇasthāna*), let alone a *Pramatta* *Samyata* (sixth *Guṇasthāna*) *Sādhu*, if
he takes *Aadhākarma* food, he will fall down his soul (M.V.P. 41).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 125 61. AdhAkarma ke ye nAma haiM-AdhAkarma, adha:karma, Atmaghna,
Atmakarma, pratiSevaNA', pratizravaNa, saMvAsa, anumodnaa| 61/1. pratyaJcA kA
AdhAra dhanuSa, yUpa kA AdhAra baila kA kaMdhA, kApotI kA AdhAra manuSya kA
kaMdhA, anAja Adi ke bhAra kA AdhAra vAhana tathA kuTumba, rAjya Adi kI cintA kA
AdhAra hRdaya hotA hai, ye saba dravya AdhA ke udAharaNa haiN| 62. jisake lie
mana meM socakara audArika zarIra vAle prANiyoM kA apadrAvaNa tathA vinAza
karake dravya niSpAdita kiyA jAtA hai, use AdhAkarma kahate haiN| 63. jala Adi
meM DAlane para dravya kA apane bhAra ke kAraNa nIce jAnA hai tathA ni:saraNI
aura rajju Adi se nIce avataraNa karanA dravya adha:karma hai| 64.
saMyamasthAna, kaMDaka-saMyamazreNI, lezyA tathA zubha karmoM kI sthiti vizeSa
meM vartamAna zubha adhyavasAya ko jo hIna-nIce se nIce karatA hai, vaha bhAva
adha:karma hai| 64/1. kiMcit nyUnacaraNAgra-upazAMtamoha kI avasthA meM
vartamAna muni apane bhAvoM-saMyamasthAnoM kA AtmA meM hIna, hInatara rUpa meM
avataraNa karake AdhAkarma dravya ko grahaNa karatA hai, vaha bhI apanI AtmA ko
nIce se nIce le jAtA hai|' 1. pratiSevaNA Adi doSoM se AdhAkarma kA prayoga hotA
hai ataH kAraNa meM abheda kA upacAra karake pratiSevaNA, pratizravaNa saMvAsa
aura anumodanA ko AdhAkarma ke nAma ke rUpa meM svIkAra kiyA hai (mavR pa. 36) /
2. TIkAkAra malayagiri ne eka prazna upasthita kiyA hai ki audArika zarIra
tiryaJca aura manuSya ke hotA hai| tiryaJca meM ekendriya se paJcendriya taka ke
jIvoM kA grahaNa hotA hai| ekendriya meM sUkSma jIva bhI hote haiN| sUkSma hone
ke kAraNa unakA apadrAvaNa manuSyoM ke dvArA saMbhava nahIM hai ata: unakA yahAM
grahaNa kyoM kiyA gayA hai ? isakA uttara dete hue TIkAkAra kahate haiM ki jo
jisa vastu se avirata hai, vaha usa kArya ko nahIM karatA huA bhI paramArthataH
use karatA huA jAnanA cAhie, jaise rAtribhojana se avirata gRhastha rAtribhojana
nahIM karatA huA bhI rAtribhojana ke pApa se lipta hotA hai, vaise hI gRhastha
sUkSma ekendriya ke apadrAvaNa se avirata hai ata: yahAM sAdhu ke lie samArambha
karate hue ve sUkSma ekendriya ke apadrAvaNa ko karate haiM (mavR pa. 37) /
bhASyakAra ne apanI vyAkhyA meM sUkSma ekendriya kA varjana kiyA hai (pibhA 16)
/  /  3. bhASyakAra ne uddavaNa-apadrAvaNa kA artha atipAta rahita pIr3A kiyA
hai| sAdhuoM ke lie zAlyodana Adi pakAne meM vanaspatikAya kA jaba taka
prANAtipAta nahIM hotA, usase pUrva kI sArI pIr3A apadrAvaNa kahalAtI hai (pibhA
16) jaise sAdha ke lie zAlyodana pakAne meM zAli kA do bAra kaNDana kiyA jAtA
hai, taba taka kaNDana kRta pIr3A apadrAvaNa kahalAtI hai| tIsarI bAra kaNDana
karane meM zAli jIvoM kA avazya hI atipAta ho jAtA hai (mavR pa. 37) /  4.
aMgula mAtra kSetra ke asaMkhyeya bhAgagata pradeza rAzi pramANa kaMDaka hote
haiM  /  malayagiri ne yahAM kaMDaka ko spaSTa karane hetu eka pada uddhRta kiyA
hai-'kaNDaM ti ittha bhaNNai, aMgulabhAgo asaMkhejjo' (mavR pa. 39) /  5.
saMbhava lagatA hai ki yahAM graMthakAra ne AdhAkarma se hone vAle doSa kI
bhayAvahatA ko prakaTa karane ke lie kucha kama cAritra vAle arthAt upazAntamoha
cAritra vAle kA udAharaNa diyA hai| yahAM kahane kA tAtparya yaha hai ki
pramattasaMyata (chaThe guNasthAna) vAle sAdhu kI bAta to dUra, upazAMtamoha
cAritra (gyArahavAM guNasthAna) vAlA sAdhu bhI yadi AdhAkarma AhAra ko grahaNa
karatA hai to vaha apanI AtmA kA adha: patana kara letA hai (mavR pa. 41) /

Page #298 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 126 ## Pindaniyukti  64/2. A muni who takes *ādhākarma* binds his lifespan to
*adhogati* and also directs other karmas towards *adhogati*. He intensifies the
karmas bound by intense emotions, accumulating them as *nidhatti* and
*nikachana*, constantly choosing and accumulating karmas. 64/3. Due to the
arising of these heavy karmas, that *ādhākarma* taking muni cannot save his soul
from falling into *durgati*. These karmas take him to *adhogati*. 65. One who
takes the life of any of the six living beings, whether intentionally,
unintentionally, or unknowingly, is called a *dravya ātmāghna*. 66. The *dravya
ātmā* is the six *kāyas*. Knowledge, perception, and conduct - these three are
the *bhāva ātmā*. One who is engaged in destroying the lives of beings, destroys
his own *bhāva ātmā* in the form of conduct. 66/1. According to *niśchayanaya*,
the destruction of conduct leads to the destruction of knowledge and perception.
According to *vyavahāranaya*, the destruction of conduct leads to the
destruction of knowledge and perception. 67. The man who says, "This is mine,"
regarding any object, is *mamākāra* *dravya* related *ātmākarma*. And the one
who connects himself with the karmas of *parakarma*, *pachan*, *pachana*, etc.,
by turning into an inauspicious state, is *bhāva* related *ātmākarma*. 67/1. A
muni who takes *ādhākarma* and turns it into *dravya* is one with a complex
outcome. Even while taking *prāsuka dravya*, he is bound by karmas, therefore,
it should be known as *ātmākarma*. 67/2. One who takes *ādhākarma* and consumes
it, takes the karmas of *parakarma*, *pachan*, *pachana*, etc., of a householder
as *ātmākarma*. The question is, how does *parakriya* transfer elsewhere?
67/3,4. Some people say, based on a hypothetical example, that just as a hunter
sets up a trap,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 126 piMDaniyukti 64/2. AdhAkarmagrAhI muni adhogati kA AyuSya bAMdhatA hai
tathA anyAnya karmoM ko bhI adhogati ke abhimukha karatA hai| vaha tIvra-
tIvratara bhAvoM se baMdhe hue karmoM kA nidhatti, nikAcanA rUpa meM ghanakaraNa
karatA huA pratipala karmoM kA caya-upacaya karatA hai| 64/3. una bhArI karmoM
ke udaya se vaha AdhAkarmagrAhI muni durgati meM giratI huI apanI AtmA ko nahIM
bacA sktaa| ve karma use adhogati meM le jAte haiN| 65. jo prayojana se athavA
niSprayojana jAnate hue athavA anajAna meM SaDjIvanikAya kA prANavyaparopaNa
karatA hai, use dravya Atmaghna kahate haiN| 66. dravya AtmA SaTkAya haiM  /
jJAna, darzana aura cAritra-ye tIna bhAva AtmA haiM, jo prANiyoM ke prANoM kA
vinAza karane meM rata hai, vaha apanI caraNarUpa bhAva AtmA kA hanana karatA
hai| 66/1. nizcayanaya ke anusAra cAritra ke vighAta se jJAna aura darzana kA
ghAta hotA hai| vyavahAranaya ke anusAra caraNa-cAritra kA vighAta hone para
jJAna aura darzana ke vighAta kI bhajanA hai| 67. jo puruSa jisa dravya ko-yaha
merA hai-aisA kahatA hai, vaha mamakAra dravya viSayaka Atmakarma hai tathA jo
azubhabhAva meM pariNata hokara parakarma-pacana-pAcanAdi karma se apane Apako
jor3atA hai, vaha bhAva viSayaka Atmakarma hai| 67/1. AdhAkarma dravya grahaNa
meM pariNata muni saMkliSTa pariNAma vAlA hotA hai| vaha prAsuka dravya grahaNa
karatA huA bhI karmoM se baMdhatA hai ataH ise Atmakarma jAnanA caahie| 67/2. jo
AdhAkarma ko grahaNa kara usakA upabhoga karatA hai, vaha parakarma-gRhastha ke
pacana-pAcana Adi karma ko Atmakarma kara letA hai| prazna hai parakriyA anyatra
kaise saMkrAnta hotI hai ? 67/3,4. kucha vyakti kUTa dRSTAnta ke AdhAra para
kahate haiM ki jaise vyAdha kUTa-pAza kI sthApanA karatA 1. bhagavatI sUtra meM
ullekha milatA hai ki AdhAkarma kA bhoga karane vAlA sAdhu AyuSya karma ko
chor3akara zeSa sAta karma prakRtiyoM ke zithila baMdhana ko gAr3ha baMdhana
vAlI, alpasthiti vAlI karma-prakRtiyoM ko dIrghakAlika sthiti vAlI, maMda vipAka
vAlI prakRtiyoM ko tIvra vipAka vAlI tathA alpa pradeza-parimANa vAlI prakRtiyoM
ko bahupradeza parimANa vAlI karatA hai| AyuSya kA baMdhana kabhI karatA hai,
kabhI nahIM karatA (bha. 1/436) /  2. isa gAthA ke antargata prazna kA uttara
agalI gAthA meM diyA gayA hai| TIkAkAra isakI vyAkhyA karate hue kahate haiM ki
parakriyA kabhI bhI dUsare meM saMkrAnta nahIM ho sktii| yadi aisA saMbhava ho
to kSapaka zreNI meM ArUr3ha muni karuNAvaza sabake karmoM ko apane bhItara
saMkramaNa karake unakA kSaya kara sakatA hai lekina aisA saMbhava nahIM hai
(mavR pa. 44) /  3. TIkAkAra malayagiri aura avacUrikAra ke anusAra mRga aura
kUTa kA dRSTAnta yazobhadrasUri kA hai| unake anusAra dakSa aura apramatta mRga
jAla se bacakara calatA hai aura yadi kisI kAraNavaza vaha jAla meM phasa bhI
jAtA hai to jAla baMdha hone se pahale tatkAla vahAM se nikala jAtA hai lekina
pramatta aura akuzala mRga baMdha hI jAtA hai ata: kevala paraprayukti mAtra se
koI baMdhanagrasta nahIM hotaa| isI prakAra AdhAkarma AhAra banAne mAtra se
sAdhu ke pApa karma kA baMdhana nahIM hotaa| jo azubha adhyavasAya se usako
grahaNa karatA hai, vaha parakarma-gRhastha ke pacana-pAcana Adi karma ko
Atmakarma banAtA hai| yahAM upacAra se AdhAkarma ko Atmakarma kahA gayA hai
(mavR pa. 44, 45) /

Page #299 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 127 It is the deer who are bound, not the
hunter. Similarly, the householder cooks and eats, he is not bound, the customer
is bound. (Responding to this doubt) The Guru says - Just as a foolish and
unskilled deer is bound in a snare, in the same way, a monk who is bound by evil
thoughts is bound in the realm of emotions. Therefore, one should diligently
avoid evil thoughts. 67/5. It is agreed that a monk neither performs nor causes
the performance of an act of violence, but even knowing about it, if he accepts
it, he promotes the act of violence by accepting food. He who does not accept
it, prevents it. 68. The monk assimilates the act of violence through serving
others, etc. (In verse 61) Among the four terms - serving others, etc., the
first term - serving others is the most important, the most significant, the
rest are progressively less important. (For example, compared to serving others,
listening to others is less important, listening to others is less important
than living with others, and living with others is less important than approving
of others.) 68/1. I will explain the nature of the doors from serving others to
approving of others, with examples, as much as possible. 68/2. One who eats the
food brought by another monk, also becomes bound by the sin of serving others.
When such a monk is told this, he replies that there is no sin in it, because
one who pulls hot coals from another's hand does not get burned himself. 68/3.
The monk who eats the food of violence, thinking, "I am pure," is a fool, the
one who gives the food of violence is guilty. Not knowing the meaning of the
scriptures through this false analogy of hot coals, he serves others. 68/4. The
Guru who uses the word "benefit" for the mental concentration of the monk who
eats the food of violence at the time of showing alms, and when criticized for
saying that such and such a devotee has given this food of violence with
devotion, says "good - it was obtained," then such an Acharya is also a
participant in the sin of listening to others. 68/5. The well-known meaning of
living with others is - to live with those who enjoy the food of violence.
Praising the eater of the food of violence is approval. One should know these
examples in order. 68/6. The example of a thief should be known in serving
others, the example of a prince in listening to others, the example of a
merchant living in a village in living with others, and the example of a wicked
king in approving of others. 1. This verse mentions a special belief, but it is
against the Jain teachings because the householder who initiates the action is
bound by karma as a matter of course. If the monk is foolish, then he too is
bound by sin by accepting the food of violence, only by using another's action,
one is not bound by karma (Mavri P. 45).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 127 hai, usameM mRga hI baMdhanagrasta hote haiM, vyAdha nhiiN| isI
prakAra gRhastha pacana-pAcana karatA hai, usake baMdha nahIM hotA, jo grAhaka
hai usake baMdha hotA hai| (isa AzaMkA kA uttara dete hue) guru kahate haiM-
jaise pAza meM pramatta aura adakSa mRga hI baMdhanagrasta hotA hai, usI prakAra
bhAvakUTa meM vahI sAdhu baMdhatA hai, jo azubhabhAva meM pariNata hotA hai
isalie prayatnapUrvaka azubhabhAvoM kA varjana karanA caahie| 67/5. yaha sammata
bAta hai ki koI muni na svayaM AdhAkarma karatA hai aura na karavAtA hai parantu
AdhAkarma ko jAnatA huA bhI jo use grahaNa karatA hai, vaha AdhAkarma bhojana
grahaNa karane ke prasaMga ko bar3hAvA detA hai| jo usako grahaNa nahIM karatA
hai, vaha usakA nivAraNa karatA hai| 68. sAdhu pratiSevaNA Adi se parakarma ko
AtmasAt karatA hai| (gAthA 61 meM Ae) pratiSevaNA Adi cAra padoM meM Adipada-
pratiSevaNA saba se guru hai, pradhAna hai, zeSa kramaza: laghu, laghu, laghuka
haiM, (jaise-pratiSevaNA kI apekSA pratizravaNa laghu, pratizravaNa se saMvAsana
laghu tathA saMvAsana se bhI anumodana laghutara hai|) 68/1. yathAsaMbhava
pratiSevaNA se anumodana taka ke dvAroM ke svarUpa ko udAharaNa sahita khuuNgaa|
68/2. dUsare sAdhu ke dvArA AnIta AdhAkarma bhojana ko jo khAtA hai, vaha bhI
pratiSevaNA doSa se baMdhatA hai| aisA karane vAle muni ko kucha kahane para
vaha pratyuttara detA hai ki isameM koI doSa nahIM hai kyoMki dUsare ke hAtha se
aMgAre khIMcane vAlA svayaM dagdha nahIM hotaa| 68/3. AdhAkarmI bhojana karatA
huA jo muni socatA hai ki 'maiM to zuddha hUM', jo AdhAkarma detA hai, vaha doSI
hai, mUr3ha hai| isa aMgAre ke mithyA dRSTAnta dvArA zAstroM ke artha ko na
jAnatA huA vaha pratiSevaNA karatA 68/4. jo guru bhikSA dikhAne ke samaya
AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa karane vAle muni kI cittasamAdhi ke lie 'lAbha' isa
zabda kA prayoga karate haiM tathA amuka zrAvikA ne zraddhApUrvaka yaha
AdhAkarma AhAra diyA hai, aisI AlocanA karane para 'sulabdha'-acchA prApta huA,
aisA kahate haiM to ve AcArya bhI pratizravaNa doSa ke bhAgI hote haiN| 68/5.
saMvAsa kA prasiddha artha hai-AdhAkarma bhogane vAloM ke sAtha rhnaa| AdhAkarma
bhojI kI prazaMsA karanA anumodanA hai| inake kramazaH ye udAharaNa jAnane
caahie| 68/6. pratiSevaNA meM cora, pratizravaNa meM rAjaputra, saMvAsa ke
antargata pallI meM rahane vAle vaNik kA tathA anumodanA meM rAjaduSTa kA
udAharaNa jJAtavya hai| 1. isa gAthA meM mAnyatA vizeSa kA ullekha hai lekina
yaha jinavacana ke viruddha hai kyoMki samArambha kartA gRhastha ke niyamata:
karmabaMdha hotA hI hai| sAdhu yadi pramatta hai to usake bhI AdhAkarma grahaNa
se pApakarma kA baMdha hotA hai kevala paraprayoga mAtra se karmabaMdha nahIM
hotA (mavR pa. 45) /

Page #300 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 128 ## Pindaniyukti  68/7,8. Thieves were abducting cows and heading towards
their village. On the way, they killed some cows, cooked the meat, and ate it.
The meat consumers, the servers who served the meat, and other travelers sitting
there - all of them were caught by the king's men who were chasing the thieves.
The servers who served the meat and those who held the meat vessels were also
bound by the king's men. What to say about the meat eaters? (Similarly, the
monks who serve the *Ahadkarma* food and those who hold the vessel for it also
receive intense karma-bondage. What to say about the *Ahadkarma* eater?) 68/9.
The prince conspired with the ministers for the murder of his father. Some
ministers said they would help in the murder of the father, some remained
silent. The prince and both types of ministers are guilty of the *Pratiśravaṇa*
fault. Those who told the king are not guilty of this fault. 68/10,11. A sage
invited four monks to eat *Ahadkarma* food. One sage started eating it. The
second said, "I will not eat, you eat." The third monk remained silent. The
fourth prohibited it. Among these, the first three monks are guilty of the
*Pratiśravaṇa* fault, and the monk who prohibited it is free from that fault. In
this context, both the one who brings the *Ahadkarma* and the eater are guilty
of *Kāyika* action. The second is guilty of *Vāchika* fault, the third is
tainted by *Mānasika* fault, and the fourth is pure from all three faults. 69.
For the prince who killed his father, *Pratiśevaṇa*, *Pratiśravaṇa*, *Samvāsa*,
and *Anumodana* - all four faults occur. Similarly, all the faults should be
combined with the monk who consumes *Ahadkarma*. 69/1. When the king attacked
the gang of thieves, some thieves ran away, some merchants did not run away
thinking, "We are not thieves." Because of associating with the thieves, the
king punished them considering them criminals. 69/2. Similarly, those who
associate with the monks who consume *Ahadkarma* food are also guilty. The
sight, smell, and discussion of *Ahadkarma* food also affect the monks who are
*Rūkshavrutti* and avoid *Ahadkarma*. That monk also starts desiring to consume
that food.  1. For the expansion of the story, see *Pari.*-3, *Katha* No. 4. 2.
For the expansion of the story, see *Pari.*-3, *Katha* No. 5. 3. All four faults
apply to the one who commits *Pratiśevaṇa*. The one who commits *Pratiśravaṇa*
has three, the one who commits *Samvāsa* has two, and the one who commits
*Anumodana* has one fault (M.V.P. 48). 4. For the expansion of the story, see
*Pari.*-3, *Katha* No. 6. 5. *Darśana*, *Gandha*, *Parikatha* - these are three
words, their meaning is - seeing *Ahadkarma* food, the smell of that food, and
its discussion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 128 piMDaniyukti 68/7,8. cora gAyoM kA apaharaNa kara apane grAma kI ora jA
rahe the| mArga meM unhoMne kucheka gAyoM ko mArakara mAMsa pakAkara khA liyaa|
mAMsa ke upabhoktA, mAMsa ko parosane vAle pariveSaka tathA vahAM baiThe hue
anya pathika-ina sabako cora pakar3ane vAle rAjapuruSoM ne pakar3a liyaa| mAMsa
ko parosane vAle tathA mAMsa ke bhAjanoM ko dhAraNa karane vAle bhI rAjapuruSoM
dvArA baMdhana ko prApta hue phira mAMsa khAne vAloM kA to kahanA hI kyA? (isI
prakAra AdhAkarma AhAra ko parosane vAle aura usa pAtra ko dhAraNa karane vAle
muni bhI tIvra karma-baMdhana ko prApta karate haiM phira AdhAkarmabhojI kI to
bAta hI kyA hai ?) 68/9. rAjakumAra ne pitA ke vadha hetu sahAyaka bhaToM ke
sAtha maMtraNA kii| kucha subhaTa bole ki hama pitA ke vadha meM sahAyaka
baneMge, kucha subhaTa mauna rhe| rAjakumAra tathA donoM prakAra ke subhaTa
pratizravaNa doSa ke bhAgI haiN| jinhoMne rAjA ko kahA, ve isa doSa ke bhAgI
nahIM haiN| 68/10,11. eka sAdhu ne cAra muniyoM ko AdhAkarma AhAra karane ke lie
nimaMtrita kiyaa| eka sAdhu use khAne lgaa| dUsarA bolA-'maiM nahIM khAtA, tuma
khaao|' tIsarA muni mauna rhaa| cauthe ne usakA pratiSedha kiyaa| inameM
prathama tIna muni pratizravaNa doSa ke bhAgI haiM tathA pratiSedha karane vAlA
muni usa doSa se mukta hai| prastuta prasaMga meM AdhAkarma lAne vAlA tathA
bhoktA-donoM kAyika kriyA ke doSI haiN| dUsarA vAcika doSa kA bhAgI hai, tIsarA
mAnasika doSa se duSTa hai tathA cauthA tInoM doSoM se vizuddha hai| 69.
pitRmAraka rAjaputra ke pratiSevaNa', pratizravaNa, saMvAsa tathA anumodanA-ye
cAroM doSa ghaTita hote haiN| isI prakAra AdhAkarma kA upabhoga karane vAle
munijana ke sAtha sAre doSoM kI saMyojanA karanI caahie| 69/1. coroM kI pallI
para (rAjA dvArA) AkramaNa karane para kucha cora bhAga gae, kucha vaNikoM ne
hama cora nahIM haiM, aisA socakara palAyana nahIM kiyaa| coroM ke sAtha saMvAsa
karane ke kAraNa unheM aparAdhI mAnakara rAjA ne unako daMDita kiyaa| 69/2. isI
prakAra AdhAkarma bhojana kA upabhoga karane vAle muniyoM ke sAtha saMvAsa
karane vAle bhI doSI hote haiN| AdhAkarma bhojana kA avalokana, usakI gaMdha
aura usakI paricarcA rUkSavRtti vAle tathA AdhAkarma kA parihAra karane vAle
muni ko bhI prabhAvita kara detI hai arthAt vaha muni bhI usa bhojana ke
paribhoga kI vAJchA karane lagatA hai| 1. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari.-3,
kathA saM. 4 /  2. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari.-3, kathA saM. 5 /  3.
pratiSevaNa karane vAle ke cAroM doSa lagate haiN| pratizravaNa karane vAle ke
tIna, saMvAsa karane vAle ke do tathA anumodana karane _ vAle ke eka doSa lagatA
hai (mavR pa. 48) /  4. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari.-3, kathA sN.6| 5.
darzanagaMdhaparikathA-ye tIna zabda haiM, inakA artha hai-AdhAkarma bhojana kA
avalokana, usa bhojana kI gaMdha tathA usakI pricrcaa|

Page #301 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 129 69/3. The person who committed a crime in
the king's inner apartments was killed in the middle of the city, along with the
ornaments he was wearing when he entered the inner apartments. The king
appointed royal officials dressed in Karpataka garments. Those who praised were
killed, but those who did not praise were not killed. 69/4. These monks receive
timely, respectful, fragrant, delicious, and sufficient food according to the
season, therefore they are blessed. Thus, a monk who praises these qualities,
even if he does not consume the half-karma, is still tainted by the fault of
approval. 70. Just as there is a variety of dishes in half-karma, adha-karma,
atmaghna, and atma-karma, is there also a variety of meanings? When asked this,
the Acharya says 70/1. There are four categories of dishes and meanings: 1. One
meaning, one dish. 2. One meaning, many dishes. 3. Many meanings, one dish. 4.
Many meanings, many dishes. 70/2. In the world, words with one meaning and one
dish are prevalent, such as - ksheer-ksheer. Words with one meaning and many
dishes, such as - dugdha, payah, pilu, ksheer, etc., for the meaning of milk.
70/3. A word with one dish and many meanings, such as - the use of the word
ksheer for the milk of a cow, buffalo, and goat, etc. Many meanings and many
dishes, such as - ghat, pat, kat, shakat, rath, etc. names. 70/4,5. The use of
the word adha-karma, adha-karma by two, three, or more people for one thing,
this is the first category (one meaning and one dish); adha-karma, adha-karma,
atmaghna - these are one-meaning words with many dishes, this is the second
category, such as - shakra, indra, etc., one-meaning words with many dishes. 1.
For the expansion of the story, see Pari.-3, Katha San. 7. 2. According to the
commentator, the fault arising from approval is acceptable by treating the cause
in the action (Mavri P. 50). 3. In Vyavahar Bhashya, there is a mention of four
categories of dishes and meanings and their examples in the following two
verses. These verses have differences in word division and examples, but the
meaning is the same. Naanatam dissae atthe, abhinne vanjanammi vi. Vanjanassa ya
bhedammi, koi attho na bhijhati || Padhamo tti ind-indo, bitiyao hoi ind-sakko
tti. Tatiyo go-bhoop-pasu, rassi charamo ghad-pado tti || (Vyabha 155, 156)
70/1-3- These three verses are very important from the point of view of
linguistics. The words adha-karma, adha-karma, atmaghna, and atma-karma, etc.,
are included under the second category, one meaning and many dishes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 129 69/3. rAjA ke antaHpura meM aparAdha karane para jina AbhUSaNoM ko
pahanakara vyakti antaHpura meM gayA, una AbhUSaNoM sahita vaha nagara ke madhya
meM mArA gyaa| rAjA ne kArpaTika vezadhArI rAjapuruSoM ko niyukta kiyaa| dhanya
kahane vAloM kA vadha tathA adhanya kahane vAloM kA vadha nahIM huaa| 69/4. ye
muni Rtu ke anukUla, snigdha, svAdiSTa aura paryApta AhAra sammAnapurassara
samaya para prApta karate haiM, isalie ye dhanya haiN| isa prakAra una guNoM kI
prazaMsA karane vAlA muni AdhAkarma kA upabhoga na karane para bhI usakI
anumodanA ke doSa se yukta hotA hai| 70. AdhAkarma, adha:karma, Atmaghna tathA
Atmakarma-inameM jaise vyaJjanoM kA nAnAtva hai, vaise hI artha meM bhI nAnAtva
hai? aisA pUchane para AcArya kahate haiM70/1. vyaJjana aura artha kI
caturbhaMgI hotI hai 1. eka artha eka vyNjn| 2. eka artha nAnA vyNjn| 3. nAnA
artha eka vyNjn| 4. nAnA artha nAnA vyNjn| 70/2. loka meM eka artha aura eka
vyaMjana vAle zabda pracalita haiN-jaise-kssiir-kssiir| eka artha aura bahu
vyaMjana vAle zabda-jaise dUdha ke artha meM dugdha, payaH, pIlu, kSIra aadi|
70/3. eka vyaMjana aura nAnA artha vAlA zabda, jaise-gAya, bhaiMsa aura bakarI
Adi ke dUdha ke lie kSIra zabda kA prayoga  /  nAnA artha aura nAnA vyaMjana
jaise-ghaTa, paTa, kaTa, zakaTa, ratha Adi naam|' 70/4,5. eka vastu ke lie do,
tIna yA adhika bAra aneka vyaktiyoM ke dvArA AdhAkarma, AdhAkarma zabda kA
prayoga, yaha prathama bhaMga hai (eka artha aura eka vyaJjana); AdhAkarma,
adha:karma Atmaghna-ye nAnA vyaMjana vAle ekArthaka zabda haiM, yaha dUsarA
bhaMga hai, jaise-zakra, indra Adi ekArthaka zabda nAnA vyaMjana vAle 1. kathA
ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari.-3, kathA saM. 7 /  2. TIkAkAra ke anusAra anumodanA
janita doSa kArya meM kAraNa kA upacAra karane se mAnya hai (mavR pa. 50) /  3.
vyavahArabhASya meM vyaJjana aura artha kI caturbhaMgI evaM usake udAharaNa meM
nimna do gAthAoM kA ullekha milatA hai| ina gAthAoM meM zabdabheda tathA
udAharaNa meM bhinnatA hai lekina vAcyArtha eka hI hai nANataM dissae atthe,
abhinne vaMjaNammi vi| vaMjaNassa ya bhedammi, koi attho na bhijjati  //
paDhamo tti iMda-iMdo, bitIyao hoi iMda-sakko tti| tatio go-bhUpa-pasU, rassI
caramo ghaDa-paDo tti  //  (vyabhA 155, 156) 70/1-3-ye tInoM gAthAeM
bhASAvijJAna kI dRSTi se atyanta mahattvapUrNa haiN| AdhAkarma ke adha:karma,
Atmaghna tathA Atmakarma Adi zabda dvitIya bhaMga eka artha aura nAnA vyaJjana
ke aMtargata samAviSTa hote haiN|

Page #302 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 130 ## Pindaniyukti  There are four types of food: Asan, Pan, Khadim, and
Swadim. Using the term Adhakarma for all four types of food is the third type of
Bhang (Nana Artha Ek Vyanjan). In the context of Adhakarma, the fourth type of
Bhang (Nana Artha Nana Vyanjan) is nonexistent. 70/6. Just as words like
Purandar etc. do not transgress the meaning of Indra, similarly words like
Adhakaram, Atmaghna etc. do not transgress the meaning of Adhakarma. 71. The one
who consumes Adhakarma causes the downfall of his own soul (hence one name is
Adhakaram). He destroys the virtues like character of the soul along with the
killing of living beings and ghosts, hence one name is Atmaghna. The one who
takes Adhakarma takes upon himself the sinful karma of Parakarma-Pachak etc.,
hence one name is Atmakarma. 72. When a disciple asks which particular man's
karma is called Adhakarma, the answer is that the karma done for a Sadharmik is
called Adhakarma, hence the word Sadharmik should be properly defined. 73. There
are twelve types of Sadharmik: 1. Naam Sadharmik 7. Ling Sadharmik 2. Sthapana
Sadharmik 8. Darshan Sadharmik 3. Dravya Sadharmik 9. Gyan Sadharmik 4. Kshetra
Sadharmik 10. Charitra Sadharmik 5. Kaal Sadharmik 11. Abhigrah Sadharmik 6.
Pravachan Sadharmik 12. Bhavana Sadharmik 73/1-3. Naam Sadharmik - A person with
the same name. Sthapana Sadharmik - The establishment of a Sadharmik in a wooden
statue, axis etc. Dravya Sadharmik - Having a Pravardhman body, this will be the
Sadharmik of the Sadhu in the future (or the dead body of the Sadharmik).
Kshetra Sadharmik - Born in the same area. Kaal Sadharmik - Born in the same
time.  1. Although the fourth Bhang is nonexistent here, according to the
commentator, if someone uses Adhakarma for Asan, Adhakaram for Panak, Atmaghna
for Khadim, and Atmakarma for Swadim, then these names become Nana Artha and
Nana Vyanjan. From this perspective, the extreme Bhang can also be achieved
(Mavri P. 51). 2. The Nishita Bhashya mentions three types of Sadharmik: 1. Ling
Sadharmik 2. Pravachan Sadharmik 3. Ling-Pravachan Sadharmik. There, three
divisions of Sadharmik are also made alternatively: 1. Sadhu 2. Parswasth 3.
Shravak. The second alternative is: 1. Shraman 2. Parswasth Shraman 3. Shravak
(Nibha 336 Chu. P. 117).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 130 piMDaniyukti haiN| azana, pAna, khAdima, svAdima-ina cAroM prakAra ke AhAra
hetu AdhAkarma zabda kA prayoga karanA tIsarA bhaMga hai (nAnA artha eka
vynyjn)| AdhAkarma ke prasaMga meM cauthA bhaMga (nAnA artha nAnA vyaJjana)
zUnya hai|' 70/6. jaise purandara Adi zabda indra ke artha kA atikramaNa nahIM
karate, vaise hI adha:karma, Atmaghna Adi zabda bhI AdhAkarma ke artha kA
atikramaNa nahIM krte| 71. AdhAkarma kA upabhoga karane vAlA apanI AtmA kA adha:
patana karatA hai (ataH isakA eka nAma adha:karma hai) vaha prANa aura bhUtoM ke
hanana ke sAtha AtmA ke cAritra Adi guNoM kA nAza karatA hai isalie isakA eka
nAma Atmaghna hai| AdhAkarma lene vAlA parakarma-pAcaka Adi ke pApa karma ko
svayaM AtmasAt karatA hai ata: isakA eka nAma Atmakarma hai| 72. ziSya dvArA
prazna pUchane para ki kisa puruSa vizeSa ke lie kiyA huA karma AdhAkarma
kahalAtA hai? isakA uttara hai ki sAdharmika ke lie kiyA huA karma AdhAkarma
hotA hai isalie sAdharmika zabda kI vidhipUrvaka prarUpaNA karanI caahie| 73.
sAdharmika' ke bAraha prakAra haiM1. nAma sAdharmika 7. liMga sAdharmika 2.
sthApanA sAdharmika 8. darzana sAdharmika 3. dravya sAdharmika 9. jJAna
sAdharmika 4. kSetra sAdharmika 10. cAritra sAdharmika 5. kAla sAdharmika 11.
abhigraha sAdharmika 6. pravacana sAdharmika 12. bhAvanA sAdharmika 73/1-3. nAma
sAdharmika - samAna nAma vAlA vykti| sthApanA sAdharmika - kATha kI pratimA,
akSa Adi meM sAdharmika kI sthApanA  /  dravya sAdharmika - pravarddhamAna
zarIra hone para bhaviSya meM yaha sAdhu kA sAdharmika hogA (athavA sAdharmika
kA mRta zarIra) kSetra sAdharmika - samAna kSetra meM utpnn| kAla sAdharmika -
samAna kAla meM utpanna  /  1. yadyapi yahAM cauthA bhaMga zUnya hai lekina
TIkAkAra ke anusAra yadi koI vyakti azana ke lie AdhAkarma, pAnaka ke lie
adha:karma, khAdima ke lie Atmaghna tathA svAdima ke lie Atmakarma kA prayoga
kare to ye nAma nAnA artha aura nAnA vyaJjana vAle ho jAte haiN| isa dRSTi se
carama bhaMga bhI prApta ho sakatA hai (mavR p.51)| 2. nizItha bhASya meM tIna
prakAra ke sAdharmikoM kA ullekha hai-1. liMga sAdharmika 2. pravacana
sAdharmika 3. liMga-pravacana saadhrmik| vahAM vaikalpika rUpa se sAdharmika ke
tIna-tIna bheda aura kie haiM-1. sAdhu 2. pArzvastha 3. shraavk| dUsarA vikalpa
hai-1. zramaNa 2. pArzvastha zramaNa 3. zrAvaka (nibhA 336 cU. pR. 117) /

Page #303 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 131 **Pravachan Sadharmic** - A member of the
fourfold assembly (Tirth Chatushtaya). **Ling Sadharmic** - One who adopts the
same attire as a Muni, such as the removal of hair, mouth-covering, etc.
**Darshan Sadharmic** - One who shares the same philosophy. There are three
types of Darshan. **Gyan Sadharmic** - One who shares the same knowledge. There
are five types of Gyan. **Charitra Sadharmic** - One who shares the same
conduct. There are five or three types of Charitra Sadharmic. **Abhigraha
Sadharmic** - One who shares the same acceptance. There are four types of
Abhigraha Sadharmic. **Bhavana Sadharmic** - One who shares the same feelings.
There are twelve types of Bhavana Sadharmic based on twelve feelings like
impermanence, etc. 6 73/4, 5. (The method of determining Nam Sadharmic) -
Someone's father's name was Devadatta. Upon his death, his son vowed that he
would offer food, etc., to anyone named Devadatta, whether a householder or a
monk. In such a situation, the vow does not apply to Munis named Devadatta. If
the householder vows to offer food to all householders named Devadatta, then the
vow applies to monks named Devadatta. Similarly, in the case of monks belonging
to heterodox sects, one must understand the concept of mixed and unmixed.  1.
The commentator Malayagiri, quoting the commentary of the Purvacharya, states
that there are 21 distinctions arising from the combination of two out of the
seven categories of Pravachan, Ling, etc. There are six divisions of Pravachan,
Ling, Darshan, etc., up to Bhavana. There are five divisions of Ling with
Darshan, etc., four divisions of Darshan with Gyan, etc., three divisions of
Gyan with Charitra, etc., two divisions of Charitra with Abhigraha and Bhavana,
and one division of Abhigraha with Bhavana - thus, there are twenty-one
distinctions in total. Each of these twenty-one distinctions has four divisions
(Mavri P.55). 2. Three types of Darshan Sadharmic - 1. Kshayik Darshan Sadharmic
2. Kshayopa-shamic Darshan Sadharmic 3. Aupa-shamic Darshan Sadharmic. (One who
holds the Kshayik Darshan is a Sadharmic of the Kshayik Darshani). 3. Five types
of Gyan Sadharmic - 1. Mati Gyan Sadharmic 2. Shruta Gyan Sadharmic 3. Avadhi
Gyan Sadharmic 4. Manahparyav Gyan Sadharmic 5. Keval Gyan Sadharmic. 4. Five
types of Charitra Sadharmic - 1. Samayik Charitra Sadharmic 2.
Chhedopasthapaneya Charitra Sadharmic 3. Parihar Vishuddhi Charitra Sadharmic 4.
Sukshma Samparaya Charitra Sadharmic 5. Yathakyat Charitra Sadharmic. According
to other opinions, there are also three types of Charitra Sadharmic - 1. Kshayik
Charitra Sadharmic 2. Kshayopa-shamic Charitra Sadharmic 3. Aupa-shamic Charitra
Sadharmic. 5. Four types of Abhigraha Sadharmic - 1. Dravya Abhigraha Sadharmic
2. Kshetra Abhigraha Sadharmic 3. Kal Abhigraha Sadharmic 4. Bhav Abhigraha
Sadharmic. 6. Twelve types of Bhavana Sadharmic - 1. Anitya Bhavana Sadharmic 2.
Asharanatva Bhavana Sadharmic 3. Ekatva Bhavana Sadharmic 4. Anyatva Bhavana
Sadharmic 5. Ashuchitva Bhavana Sadharmic 6. Sansar Bhavana Sadharmic 7. Ashrava
Bhavana Sadharmic 8. Sanvar Bhavana Sadharmic 9. Nirjara Bhavana Sadharmic 10.
Lokavistar Bhavana Sadharmic 11. Dharma Bhavana Sadharmic 12. Bodhi Durlabhatva
Bhavana Sadharmic.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 131 pravacana' sAdharmika - tIrtha catuSTaya meM koI eka sdsy| liMga
sAdharmika - muni ke samAna rajoharaNa, mukhapatti Adi veza dhAraNa karane
vaalaa| darzana sAdharmika - samAna darzana vAlA, darzana ke tIna prakAra haiN|
jJAna sAdharmika - samAna jJAna vAlA, jJAna ke pAMca prakAra haiN| cAritra
sAdharmika - samAna cAritra vAlA, cAritra sAdharmika ke pAMca prakAra athavA
tIna prakAra haiN| abhigraha sAdharmika - samAna abhigraha karane vaalaa|
abhigraha sAdharmika ke cAra prakAra bhAvanA sAdharmika - samAna bhAvanA vaalaa|
anitya Adi bAraha bhAvanAoM ke AdhAra para bhAvanA sAdharmika ke bAraha prakAra
haiN|6 73/4, 5. (nAma sAdharmika kI kalpyAkalpya vidhi-) kisI ke pitA kA nAma
devadatta thaa| usakI mRtyu para putra ne yaha saMkalpa kiyA ki gRhastha ho yA
sAdhu, jinakA nAma devadatta hai, maiM unako AhAra Adi duuNgaa| aisI sthiti meM
devadatta nAma ke muniyoM ko vaha AhAra nahIM klptaa| yadi gRhastha yaha
saMkalpa kare ki devadatta nAmaka sabhI gRhastha vyaktiyoM ko AhAra dUMgA to
aise nirdhAraNa meM devadatta nAmaka sAdhuoM ko vaha AhAra kalpatA hai| isI
prakAra pASaMDI-matAMtara vAle sAdhuoM ke viSaya meM mizra-amizra kI bAta
samajhanI 1. TIkAkAra malayagiri ne pUrvAcArya kRta vyAkhyA kA ullekha karate
hue kahA hai ki pravacana, liMga Adi saptaka ke dvisaMyoga se 21 bheda hote
haiN| pravacana ke liMga, darzana yAvat bhAvanA taka chaha bhaMga hote haiN|
liMga ke darzana Adi ke sAtha pAMca, darzana ke jJAna Adi ke sAtha cAra, jJAna
ke cAritra Adi ke sAtha tIna, cAritra kA abhigraha aura bhAvanA ke sAtha do
tathA abhigraha kA bhAvanA ke sAtha eka-isa prakAra saba milakara ikkIsa bheda
hote haiN| ina ikkIsa bhedoM meM pratyeka kI eka-eka caturbhaMgI hotI hai (mavR
p.55)| 2. trividha darzana sAdharmika-1. kSAyikadarzana sAdharmika 2.
kSAyopazamika darzana sAdharmika 3. aupazamika darzana saadhrmik|
(kSAyikadarzana vAlA kSAyika darzanI kA sAdharmika hotA hai)| 3. paMcavidha
jJAna sAdharmika-1. matijJAna sAdharmika 2. zrutajJAna sAdharmika 3. avadhijJAna
sAdharmika 4. manaHparyava jJAna sAdharmika 5. kevalajJAna saadhrmik| 4.
paMcavidha cAritra sAdharmika-1. sAmAyika cAritra sAdharmika 2.
chedopasthApanIya cAritra sAdharmika 3. parihAravizuddhi cAritra sAdharmika 4.
sUkSma samparAya cAritra sAdharmika 5. yathAkhyAta cAritra saadhrmik| matAntara
se cAritra sAdharmika ke tIna prakAra bhI milate haiM-1. kSAyika cAritra
sAdharmika 2. kSAyopazamika cAritra sAdharmika 3. aupazamika cAritra saadhrmik|
5. caturvidha abhigraha sAdharmika-1. dravya abhigraha sAdharmika 2. kSetra
abhigraha sAdharmika 3. kAla abhigraha sAdharmika 4. bhAva abhigraha saadhrmik|
6. dvAdazavidha bhAvanA sAdharmika-1. anitya bhAvanA sAdharmika 2.
azaraNatvabhAvanA sAdharmika 3. ekatvabhAvanA sAdharmika 4. anyatvabhAvanA
sAdharmika 5. azucitvabhAvanA sAdharmika 6.saMsArabhAvanA sAdharmika 7.
AzravabhAvanA sAdharmika 8. saMvarabhAvanA sAdharmika 9. nirjarAbhAvanA
sAdharmika 10.lokavistArabhAvanA sAdharmika 11. dharmabhAvanA sAdharmika 12.
bodhidurlabhatvabhAvanA saadhrmik|

Page #304 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 132. Pindaniyukti  It is necessary to understand the rules regarding
Pindaniyukti (offering food). If a householder has made a vow to offer food to a
Shraman (Jain monk) or Sadhu (holy person), then that food is not considered
suitable for a Sadhu with a different name, even if they are of the same sect.
(73/6)  This distinction should be made in relation to the offering of food to a
Sadharmic (fellow Jain) based on whether the offering is Nishra (with a specific
intention) or Anishra (without a specific intention). In the case of a
Sadharmic, one should avoid offering food like Upaskat (food offered to a guest)
near the body of a deceased Sadhu, as it would lead to criticism in the world.
(73/7)  Just as we have discussed the distinction between Pashandi (non-Jain)
and Shraman in terms of Mishra (mixed) and Amishra (unmixed) intentions, we
should also understand the same distinction in relation to the place and time of
the offering.  1. **Pashandi:** The commentator explains the distinction between
Mishra and Amishra in relation to Pashandi as follows: If a householder vows to
offer food to all Pashandi named Devadatta, this is a Mishra vow. This vow does
not include a Sadhu named Devadatta, as the vow encompasses all Pashandi named
Devadatta, including Sadhus. However, if the vow is to offer food to all Sarjask
Pashandi (Buddhist) named Devadatta, then this vow includes a Sadhu named
Devadatta. Just as we have explained the distinction between Mishra and Amishra
in relation to the word Pashandi, we should also apply the same distinction to
the word Shraman.  There are five types of Shraman: Nirgranth, Shaky, Tapas,
Gairik, and Ajivika. If a householder makes a Mishra vow to offer food to all
Shraman named Devadatta, then this vow does not include a Sadhu named Devadatta.
However, if the householder vows to offer food to all Shraman except Nirgranth
Sadhus, then this vow includes a Sadhu named Devadatta. If someone vows to offer
food to all Sanayats (ascetics) named Devadatta, then this vow does not include
a Sadhu named Chaitra, as the vow is specifically for Sadhus named Devadatta.
The commentator further explains that if the vow is made in the name of a
Tirthankara or Pratyekabuddha, then the food is considered suitable for a Sadhu,
as Tirthankaras and Pratyekabuddhas are beyond the Sangha (community) and are
not considered Sadharmic to Sadhus. (Mav P. 53, 54)  2. **Pratikruti
(Replica):** If a householder, out of affection, makes a replica of their
deceased or living father and prepares an offering for them, it can be of two
types: Nishrakrut and Anishrakrut. If the householder vows to offer the offering
to the replica of their father who is a Rajoharan (one who has renounced worldly
possessions), then it is called Nishrakrut. If the offering is prepared without
any specific vow, then it is called Anishrakrut. Nishrakrut offerings are not
considered suitable for a Sadhu. Anishrakrut offerings are considered suitable,
but the Acharyas (teachers) have prohibited them because they are against social
norms.  Similarly, the food prepared for a deceased Sadhu's body is called
Mritatanubhakt. This is also of two types: Nishrakrut and Anishrakrut. If the
offering is prepared with the vow to offer it to a Sadhu, then it is called
Nishrakrut. If the offering is prepared without any specific vow, out of mere
filial piety, then it is called Anishrakrut. Nishrakrut offerings are not
considered suitable for a Sadhu. Anishrakrut offerings are considered suitable,
but they are criticized in the world, as people question the Sadhu's conduct for
not avoiding such offerings. Therefore, a Sadhu should avoid such offerings.
(Mav P. 54)  3. **Desha (Place):** If a householder vows to offer food to
Pashandi born in the Saurashtra region, then this vow does not include a Sadhu
born in the Saurashtra region, but it does include a Sadhu born in another
region. (For further details, see Mav P. 55, Ga. 73/4, 5 commentary)  4. **Kala
(Time):** If a householder vows to offer food to Pashandi born on a specific
day, then this vow does not include a Sadhu born on that day, but it does
include Sadhus born on other days. (Mav P.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 132 piMDaniyukti caahie| yadi zramaNa aura sAdhu ke lie saMkalpa kiyA hai to
visadRza arthAt bhinna nAma vAle sAdhu ko bhI vaha AhAra nahIM klptaa| 73/6.
sthApanA sAdharmika ke saMbaMdha meM nizrA yA anizrA se niSpAdita dravya ke lie
yaha vibhASA karanI caahie| dravya sAdharmika ke viSaya meM mRtatanubhakta-
tatkAla mRta sAdhu ke zava ke pAsa rakhane ke lie upaskata anna Adi kA mani
vivarjana kare kyoMki isase loka meM niMdA hotI hai| 73/7. jaise nAma sAdharmika
ke prasaMga meM pASaMDI (anya darzanI), zramaNa, gRhI-agRhI tathA nigraMthoM kA
vivaraNa diyA hai, vaise hI kSetra aura kAla ke viSaya meM jAnanA caahie| 1.
pASaMDI saMbaMdhI mizra aura amizra kI vyAkhyA TIkAkAra ne isa prakAra kI hai-
jitane bhI devadatta nAmaka pASaMDI (anyadarzanI) haiM, unako maiM bhojana
dUMgA, gRhastha dvArA kiyA gayA yaha saMkalpa mizra hai| isa saMkalpa meM
devadatta nAmaka sAdhu ko vaha AhAra nahIM kalpatA kyoMki pASaMDI devadatta se
sabhI sAdhuoM kA grahaNa ho jAtA hai| jitane sarajaska pASaMDI arthAt bauddha
darzanI devadatta nAmaka sAdhu haiM, unako AhAra dUMgA, isa saMkalpa meM sAdhu
ko vaha AhAra kalpanIya hai| jaise pASaMDI zabda kI mizra aura amizra se
saMbaMdhita vyAkhyA kI hai, vaise hI zramaNa se saMbaMdhita bhI mizra aura
amizra ke AdhAra para vyAkhyA karanI caahie| nirgrantha, zAkya, tApasa, gairuka
aura AjIvaka-ye pAMca prakAra ke zramaNa hote haiN| yadi gRhastha ne mizra
saMkalpa kiyA ki jitane devadatta nAmaka zramaNa haiM, unako bhojana dUMgA to
devadatta nAmaka sAdhu ko vaha AhAra nahIM klptaa| yadi gRhastha yaha saMkalpa
karatA hai ki nirgrantha sAdha ke atirikta sabhI zramaNoM ko bhikSA dUMgA to
vaha AhAra sAdha ke lie kalpanIya hai| yadi koI yaha saMkalpa kare ki maiM
devadatta nAmaka sabhI saMyatoM ko AhAra dUMgA to isase bhinna nAma vAle caitra
nAmaka sAdhu ko bhI vaha annapAna nahIM kalpatA kyoMki vaha sAdhu ke nimitta
kiyA gayA AhAra hai| TIkAkAra isakI vizada vyAkhyA karate hue kahate haiM ki
yadi tIrthaMkara yA pratyekabuddha ke nAma se saMkalpa kiyA gayA hai to sAdhu ko
vaha AhAra kalpatA hai kyoMki tIrthakara aura pratyekabuddha saMgha se atIta
hote haiM, ve sAdhuoM ke sAdharmika nahIM hote (mavR pa. 53, 54) /  2. yadi koI
gRhastha pravrajita pitA ke divaMgata hone para yA jIvita rahane para snehavaza
unakI pratikRti banavAkara unake lie naivedya taiyAra karavAtA hai to vaha do
prakAra kA hotA hai-nizrAkRta 2. anishraakRt| yadi gRhastha yaha saMkalpa karatA
hai ki rajoharaNadhArI mere pitA kI pratikRti ko maiM naivedya dUMgA to vaha
nizrAkRta naivedya kahalAtA hai| yadi binA saMkalpa ke sAmAnya rUpa se naivedya
taiyAra karatA hai to vaha anizrAkRta kahalAtA hai| nizrAkRta naivedya akalpya
hotA hai| anizrAkRta naivedya kalpya hai lekina loka-vyavahAra ke viruddha hone
se AcAryoM ne usakA niSedha kiyA hai| isI prakAra tatkAla divaMgata sAdhu ke
zarIra ke sAmane rakhane ke lie jo AhAra taiyAra kiyA jAtA hai, vaha
mRtatanubhakta kahalAtA hai| yaha bhI nizrAkRta aura anizrAkRta bheda se do
prakAra kA hotA hai| sAdhu ko dUMgA isa saMkalpa se taiyAra kiyA gayA bhakta
nizrAkRta tathA kevala pitRbhakti se binA kisI saMkalpa se banAyA gayA bhakta
ani zrAkRta kahalAtA hai| nizrAkRta bhakta sAdhu ke lie akalpya hai| anizrAkRta
kalpanIya hai lekina loka meM niMdA hotI hai ki ye sAdhu kaise haiM, jo
matabhakta kA bhI parihAra nahIM karate haiM ataH sAdhu ko usa bhakta kA varjana
karanA cAhie (mava p.54)| 3. yadi gRhastha saMkalpa kare ki saurASTra deza meM
utpanna pASaMDiyoM ko bhikSA dUMgA to saurASTra deza meM utpanna sAdhu ke lie
vaha AhAra kalpanIya nahIM hai lekina anya deza meM utpanna sAdhu ke lie
kalpanIya hai| (vistAra hetu dekheM mavR pa. 55, gA. 73/ 4,5 kA ttippnn)| 4.
kAla kI apekSA se yadi gRhastha saMkalpa kare ki vivakSita dina meM utpanna
pASaMDiyoM ko maiM dAna dUMgA to usa dina utpanna sAdhu ko vaha AhAra nahIM
kalpatA hai, zeSa dina meM utpanna sAdhuoM ke lie vaha AhAra kalpanIya hai (mavR
pa.

Page #305 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 133 73/8. Those Śrāvakas who are in the tenth
Śrāvaka pratima are with braided hair. They are of the same dharma due to their
teachings, not due to their gender and attire. Nihnvas are of the same dharma
due to their gender but not due to their teachings. 73/9. Those Śrāvakas and
Sadhus who are endowed with various Kṣayika etc. Samyaktva are of the same
dharma due to their teachings, not due to their vision. Tīrthankaras and
Pratyekabuddhas are of the same dharma due to their vision, not due to their
teachings. 73/10. Similarly, one should know the relationship of knowledge and
conduct with teachings. They are of the same dharma due to teachings but not due
to their possessions; for example, the possessions of Śrāvakas and Munis are
different. 73/11. Nihnvas, Tīrthankaras and Pratyekabuddhas - all three are of
the same dharma due to their possessions, not due to their teachings. Similarly,
one should know the fourfold truth of teachings and contemplation. Now I will
tell the remaining examples of the fourfold truth. 73/12. Similarly, with terms
like gender-based samādharma, vision-based samādharma etc., one should combine
each term like gender etc. with the fourfold truth of superior terms like
vision, knowledge etc. Those fourfold truths which are not similar to others in
terms of examples should be discarded, and the remaining options should be known
in the same way. 73/13. In this division of the fourfold truth, where one is of
the same dharma due to gender but not due to vision, Nihnvas and Pratima-dhari
Śrāvakas with different visions come. The food prepared for them is conceivable
for a Sadhu but not prepared for a Sadhu. In this second division, where one is
of the same dharma due to vision but not due to gender, Pratyekabuddhas,
Tīrthankaras and ordinary Śrāvakas come. The food prepared for them is
conceivable for a Muni.  1. The fourfold truth based on teachings and gender is
as follows: • Of the same dharma due to teachings, not due to gender. • Of the
same dharma due to gender, not due to teachings. • Of the same dharma due to
teachings, also of the same dharma due to gender. • Neither of the same dharma
due to teachings nor of the same dharma due to gender.  In Vyavahāra-bhāṣya, the
corresponding verse of this verse is found as follows: "All Nihnvas are of the
same dharma due to gender, not due to teachings. But those who are of the same
dharma due to teachings, are not of the same dharma due to gender with braided
hair." (Vyabhā 991)  The commentator, while explaining this verse, says that if
one Sadhu or Śrāvaka is endowed with Kṣayopashamika vision and the other is
endowed with Aupaśamika or Kṣayika Samyaktva, then they are of the same dharma
due to teachings, not due to vision (Mavṛ P. 56).  3. Just as the four divisions
of gender and vision have been mentioned with examples (verse 73/13), similarly,
there are options for gender and knowledge, and gender and conduct. Leaving
those aside, one should mention the options for gender and vision, and gender
and possessions.  4. The author has mentioned only two divisions. The
commentator has explained the examples of the remaining two divisions. In this
division, where one is of the same dharma due to gender and has the same vision,
Sadhus and Ekādaśa Pratima-dhari Śrāvakas come. In this, the food prepared for
the Śrāvaka is conceivable, but not conceivable for the Sadhu. In the fourth
division, where one is neither of the same dharma due to gender nor due to
vision, Pratyekabuddhas, Tīrthankaras and Śrāvakas without Pratima come. The
food prepared for them is conceivable for a Sadhu. The commentator has also
described in detail the fourfold truth of gender and knowledge, gender and
conduct etc. (For details, see Mavṛ P. 57, 58).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 133 73/8. jo zrAvaka dasavIM zrAvaka pratimA meM haiM, ve sazikhA-
kezasahita hote haiN| ve pravacana se sAdharmika hote haiM, liMga-vezabhUSA se
nhiiN| nihnava liMga se sAdharmika hote haiM parantu pravacana se nhiiN| 73/9.
jo vibhinna kSAyika Adi samyaktva se yukta zrAvaka aura sAdhu hote haiM, ve
pravacana se sAdharmika haiM, darzana se nhiiN| tIrthaMkara aura pratyekabuddha
darzana se sAdharmika haiM, pravacana se nhiiN| 73/10. isI prakAra jJAna aura
cAritra kA bhI pravacana ke sAtha saMbaMdha jAnanA cAhie, pravacana se
sAdharmika kintu abhigraha se nahIM; jaise- zrAvakoM aura muniyoM ke abhigraha
bhinna-bhinna hote haiN| 73/11. nihnava, tIrthaMkara aura pratyekabuddha-ye
tInoM abhigraha se sAdharmika hote haiM, pravacana se nhiiN| isI prakAra
pravacana aura bhAvanA kI caturbhaMgI jAnanI caahie| aba zeSa caturbhaMgI ke
udAharaNa khuuNgaa| 73/12. isI prakAra liMga sAdharmika, darzana sAdharmika Adi
padoM ke sAtha bhI liMga Adi pratyeka pada uparitana arthAt darzana, jJAna Adi
padoM kI caturbhaMgI ke sAtha saMyuti karanI caahie| jo caturbhagiyAM udAharaNa
kI apekSA se anya ke sadRza nahIM haiM, unako chor3akara zeSa vikalpoM ko isI
prakAra jAnanA caahie| 73/13. liMga se sAdharmika, darzana se nahIM, caturbhaMgI
ke isa bhaMga meM vibhinna darzana vAle nihnava aura pratimAdhArI zrAvaka Ate
haiN| inake lie banAyA gayA AhAra sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya hai lekina sAdhu ke lie
banAyA huA nhiiN| darzana se sAdharmika liMga se nahIM, isa dUsare bhaMga meM
pratyekabuddha, tIrthaMkara tathA sAmAnya zrAvaka Ate haiN| inake lie banAyA
gayA AhAra muni ke lie kalpanIya hai| 1. pravacana aura liMga ke AdhAra para
banane vAlI caturbhaMgI isa prakAra hai * pravacana se sAdharmika, liMga se
nhiiN| * liMga se sAdharmika, pravacana se nhiiN| * pravacana se sAdharmika,
liMga se bhI saadhrmik| * na pravacana se sAdharmika aura na hI liMga se
saadhrmik| vyavahArabhASya meM isa gAthA kI saMvAdI gAthA isa prakAra milatI hai
liMgeNa u sAhammI, nopavayaNato ya niNhagA svve| pavayaNasAdhammI puNa, na liMga
dasa hoMti sasihAgA  //  vyabhA 991 TIkAkAra isa gAthA kI vyAkhyA karate hue
kahate haiM ki eka sAdhu yA zrAvaka kSAyopazamika darzana se yukta hai aura
dUsarA aupazamika yA kSAyika samyaktva se yukta hai to ve paraspara pravacana se
sAdharmika haiM, darzana se nahIM (mavR pa. 56) /  3. jaise liMga aura darzana
ke jo cAra bhaMga udAharaNa sahita kahe gae haiM (gA. 73/13) udAharaNa kI apekSA
se vaise hI vikalpa liMga aura jJAna tathA liMga aura caraNa ke bhI hote haiN|
unheM chor3akara liMga aura darzana tathA liMga aura abhigraha ke vikalpoM ko
kahanA caahie| 4. niyuktikAra ne kevala do bhaMgoM kA ullekha kiyA hai| zeSa do
bhaMgoM ke udAharaNoM kI vyAkhyA TIkAkAra ne kI hai| liMga se sAdharmika tathA
darzana se samAna darzana vAle, isa bhaMga meM sAdhu aura ekAdaza pratimAdhAraka
zrAvaka Ate haiN| isameM zrAvaka ke lie kRta AhAra kalpanIya hai, sAdhu ke lie
kRta akalpya hai| caturtha bhaMga meM na liMga se sAdharmika na darzana se,
isameM pratyekabuddha, tIrthaMkara aura pratimA rahita zrAvaka Ate haiN| inake
lie kRta AhAra sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya hai| TIkAkAra ne liMga aura jJAna tathA
liMga aura cAritra Adi kI caturbhagiyoM kA bhI vistRta varNana kiyA hai (vistAra
hetu dekheM mavRpa. 57,58) /

Page #306 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  134. Pindaniyukti  **73/14.** In this first division, those who are similar
in **linga** but not in **abhigraha** are included. These include various
**abhigraha**-holding **sadhus**, **pratima-pratipanna** **shravakas**, and
**nihnvas**. For **nihnvas** and **shravakas**, **krita aahar** is **kalpanya**
for **sadhus**. In the second division, those who are similar in **abhigraha**
but not in **linga** are included. These include all **buddhas**,
**tirthankaras**, and **pratima-rahit** **shravakas**. For them, **krita aahar**
is **kalpya** for **sadhus**.  **73/15.** Just as there are four divisions based
on **linga** and **abhigraha**, there are also four divisions based on **linga**
and **bhavana**. In the first division of the four divisions based on
**darshan** and **gyan**, those who are similar in **darshan** but not in
**gyan** are included. These include **sadhus** and **shravakas** with different
**gyan** but similar **darshan**. For **shravakas**, **krita aahar** is
**kalpya**. Similarly, the second division should be understood as those who are
similar in **gyan** but not in **darshan**.  **73/16.** In the four divisions
based on **darshan** and **charitra**, the first division includes those who are
similar in **darshan** but not in **charitra**. These include **shravakas** with
similar **darshan** and **sadhus** with different **charitra**. (For
**shravakas**, **krita aahar** is **kalpanya** for **sadhus**, but it is not
**kalpanya** for **sadhus** themselves.) The second division includes those who
are similar in **charitra** but not in **darshan**. These include **sadhus**
with different **darshan** and similar **charitra**. (For them, **krita aahar**
is not **kalpya**.) Now I will speak about **darshan** and **abhigraha**.
**73/17.** **Shravakas** and **sadhus** with similar **darshan** and different
**abhigraha** are similar in **darshan** but not in **abhigraha**. This is the
first division. In the second division, those who are similar in **abhigraha**
but not in **darshan** are included. This also includes **sadhus** and
**shravakas**. These **sadhus** and **shravakas** have different **darshan** and
similar **abhigraha**. (The commentator has also explained the last two
divisions.) The four divisions based on **darshan** and **bhavana** should also
be understood in the same way. The four divisions based on **gyan** and
**charitra** etc. should be understood. Now I will speak about the four
divisions based on **charitra** and **gyan** etc.  **1.** Malayagiri, presenting
the views of some **acharyas**, said that eleven **pratima-pratipanna**
**shravakas** are like **sadhus**, and therefore, **krita aahar** for them is
not **kalpanya** for **sadhus**. The commentator refuted this view and, quoting
the original commentator, said that **krita aahar** is **kalpanya** for
**sadhus** for eleven **pratima-pratipanna** **shravakas** who have **linga**
(Mavri p. 62).  **2.** In the **gatha**, the **niyuktikara** has only explained
two divisions, but the commentator has explained all four divisions. The third
division includes those who are similar in **linga** and also similar in
**abhigraha**. This includes **sadhus**, eleven **pratima-pratipanna**
**shravakas**, and **nihnvas**. For **shravakas** and **nihnvas**, **krita
aahar** is **kalpanya** for **sadhus**. The fourth division includes those who
are neither similar in **linga** nor in **abhigraha**. This includes
**tirthankaras**, all **buddhas**, and eleven **pratima-rahit** **shravakas**
with different **abhigraha**. For them, **krita aahar** is **kalpya** (Mavri p.
58).  **3.** For further explanation of this fourfold division, see Mavri p. 58.
**4.** The commentator has also mentioned the third and fourth divisions (see
Mavri p. 59).  **5.** For further explanation of the remaining third and fourth
divisions, see Mavri p. 59.  **6.** For further explanation, see Mavri p. 59.
**7.** For further explanation, see Mavri p. 60.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 134 piMDaniyukti 73/14. liMga se sAdharmika lekina abhigraha se nahIM, isa
bhaMga meM vibhinna abhigrahadhArI sAdhu, pratimA pratipanna zrAvaka tathA
nihnava Adi Ate haiN| inameM nihnava aura zrAvaka ke lie kRta AhAra sAdhu ke lie
kalpanIya hai| abhigraha se sAdharmika, liMga se nahIM-isa dvitIya bhaMga meM
pratyekabuddha, tIrthaMkara aura pratimArahita zrAvaka Ate haiN| inake lie kRta
AhAra sAdhu ke lie kalpya hai|' 73/15. liMga aura abhigraha kI caturbhaMgI kI
bhAMti liMga aura bhAvanA se sAdharmika kI caturbhaMgI samajhanI caahie| darzana
aura jJAna viSayaka caturbhaMgI ke prathama bhaMga meM darzana se sAdharmika
jJAna se nahIM, isameM vibhinna jJAna vAle samAna darzana vAle sAdhu tathA
zrAvaka Ate haiN| isameM zrAvaka ke lie kRta AhAra kalpya hai| isI prakAra jJAna
se sAdharmika darzana se nahIM, isa dUsare bhaMga ko jAnanA caahie|' 73/16.
darzana aura cAritra kI caturbhaMgI meM prathama bhaMga hai-darzana se
sAdharmika cAritra se nahIM, isameM samAna darzana vAle zrAvaka tathA visadRza
cAritra vAle sAdhu Ate haiN| (isameM zrAvakoM ke lie kRta AhAra sAdhu ke lie
kalpanIya hai para sAdhu ke lie banAyA huA akalpanIya hai|) cAritra se
sAdharmika darzana se nahIM, isa dvitIya bhaMga meM visadRza darzanI aura samAna
cAritra vAle sAdhu Ate haiM (inake lie kRta AhAra akalpya hai|)| aba maiM
darzana aura abhigraha ke bAre meM khuuNgaa| 73/17. samAna darzana tathA
vibhinna abhigraha vAle zrAvaka aura sAdhu darzana se sAdharmika haiM lekina
abhigraha se nahIM, yaha prathama bhaMga hai| dUsare bhaMga meM abhigraha se
sAdharmika darzana se nahIM, isameM bhI sAdhu aura zrAvakoM kA samAveza hotA
hai| ve sAdhu aura zrAvaka visadRza darzana tathA samAna abhigraha vAle hote
haiN| (TIkAkAra ne aMtima do bhaMgoM kI bhI vyAkhyA kI hai|) darzana aura
bhAvanA kI caturbhaMgI ko bhI isI rUpa meM jAnanA caahie| jJAna ke sAtha cAritra
Adi padoM kI caturbhaMgI jAnanI caahie| aba cAritra ke sAtha jJAna Adi kI
caturbhaMgI khuuNgaa| 1. malayagiri ne kucha AcAryoM kA maMtavya prastuta karate
hue kahA hai ki ekAdaza pratimA pratipanna zrAvaka sAdhu jaise hI hote haiM ata:
unake lie kiyA huA AhAra sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya nahIM hotaa| isa mata kA
TIkAkAra ne nirasana kiyA hai tathA mUla TIkAkAra kA uddharaNa dete hue kahA hai
ki liMgayukta ekAdaza pratimAdhArI zrAvaka ke lie kRta AhAra sAdhu ke lie
kalpanIya hotA hai (mavR pa. 62) /  2. gAthA meM niyuktikAra ne kevala do
bhaMgoM kI hI vyAkhyA kI hai lekina TIkAkAra ne cAroM bhaMgoM kA spaSTIkaraNa
kiyA hai| liMga se sAdharmika tathA abhigraha se bhI sAdharmika-isa tRtIya
bhaMga meM sAdhu, ekAdaza pratimA pratipanna zrAvaka tathA nihnava Adi Ate haiN|
inameM bhI zrAvaka aura nihava ke lie kRta AhAra sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya hai|
cauthA bhaMga hai na liMga se sAdharmika aura na hI abhigraha se, isa caturtha
bhaMga meM visadRza abhigraha vAle tIrthaMkara, pratyekabuddha aura ekAdaza
pratimA rahita zrAvaka Ate haiM, inake lie kRta AhAra kalpya hai (mavR p.58)| 3.
isa caturbhagI ke vistAra hetu dekheM mavR pa.58 4. TIkAkAra ne tRtIya aura
caturtha bhaMga kA ullekha bhI kiyA hai (dekheM mavR pa. 59) /  5. bAkI ke
tIsare aura cauthe bhaMga ke vistAra hetu dekheM mavR pa. 59  /  6. vistAra hetu
dekheM mavR pa. 59  /  7. vistAra hetu dekheM mavR p.60|| |

Page #307 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 135 73/18. In the first division, monks with
similar conduct but different vows come. In the second division, monks with
similar vows but different conduct come, including Nihnvas, Shravakas, and
monks. (Here, the food prepared for Shravakas and Nihnvas is considered
acceptable.) Similarly, one should understand the four divisions of conduct and
emotions. Now I will speak of the four divisions related to vows and emotions.
73/19. In these two divisions, monks, Shravakas, and Nihnvas are included, where
vows are similar but emotions are different, and emotions are similar but vows
are different. Food prepared for the common knowledgeable person is not
considered acceptable for other monks. Food prepared for the Tirthankara and the
Pratyekabuddha is considered acceptable for other monks. 73/20. Similarly, there
are four divisions of Darshan (vision) etc. with Ling (gender). In the first
three divisions, it is acceptable, but the last division should be avoided.
73/21. One should plan the options (based on Darshan, Gyan, Charitra, Abhigha,
and Bhavana) according to the Kshayik (temporary) emotions etc. of each
Pratyekabuddha, Nihnva, Upasaka, Kevali, and other monks. 73/22. Where the third
division is similar in terms of preaching and Ling, food is not considered
acceptable for the monk. (In this option, all monks except the Pratyekabuddha
and Tirthankaras are included.) In the remaining three divisions, it is
acceptable sometimes, sometimes not. Food prepared for the Tirthankara and
Kevali is considered acceptable. Food and water prepared for other monks is not
considered acceptable. 74. When asked by the disciple about the nature of
Adhakarma, the Acharya explains the components of Adhakarma, such as food and
drink, to explain its nature. 75. Food includes rice etc., drink includes water
from wells etc., Khadim includes fruits etc., and Swadim includes ginger etc.
Based on the concepts of "Krit" (prepared) and "Nishthit" (established), there
are four divisions: pure and impure.  The commentator has also explained the
last two divisions (see Mavri p. 61). 2. Deities create Samavasaran etc. for the
Tirthankara, and monks go there to listen to the Dharma-Deshana. Similarly, the
food prepared for the Tirthankara is also considered acceptable for the monks.
The Tirthankara and Pratyekabuddha have risen above all Kalpas (time periods),
perhaps this is why this rule is established. (Mavri p. 61) According to Bribha,
the Tirthankara is not similar to anyone, therefore, the food prepared for them
is considered acceptable for the monks (Bribha 1782, T p. 526). 3, 4. While
explaining why the words Tirthankara and Kevali are used in the verse, the
commentator says that the Tirthankara's attainment of Kevalgyan becomes known to
everyone, but it is not necessary for everyone to know about the Kevali's
Kevalya, therefore, both Tirthankara and Kevali are considered separately. The
word "Tirthankara" also includes the Pratyekabuddha by implication. (Mavri p.
62) The words Nihnva and Upasaka are used in the Jitakalp Bhashya (Jibha 1145).
5, 6. For the four divisions of Krit and Nishthit, see the translation of verse
80, 80/1.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 135 73/18. cAritra se sAdharmika abhigraha se nahIM, isa prathama
bhaMga meM samAna cAritrI evaM vibhinna abhigraha vAle sAdhu Ate haiN| abhigraha
se sAdharmika cAritra se nahIMisa dvitIya bhaMga meM samAna abhigrahadhArI
nihnava, zrAvaka aura vibhinna cAritra vAle sAdhu Ate haiN| (yahAM zrAvaka aura
nihnava ke lie kRta AhAra kalpanIya hai|) isI prakAra cAritra aura bhAvanA kI
caturbhaMgI ko samajhanA caahie| aba maiM abhigraha aura bhAvanA se saMbaMdhita
caturbhaMgI ko khuuNgaa| 73/19. abhigraha se sAdharmika bhAvanA se nahIM tathA
bhAvanA se sAdharmika abhigraha se nahIM-ina do bhaMgoM meM sAdhu, zrAvaka aura
nihnavoM kA samAveza hotA hai| sAmAnya kevalajJAnI ke nimitta banA huA AhAra Adi
anya sAdhuoM ko nahIM klptaa| tIrthaMkara aura pratyekabuddha ke lie banA huA
AhAra Adi anya sAdhuoM ko kalpatA hai| 73/20. isI prakAra liMga ke sAtha darzana
Adi kI caturbhaMgI hotI hai| Upara ke tIna bhaMgoM meM bhajanA hai lekina aMtima
bhaMga kA varjana karanA caahie| 73/21. pratyekabuddha, nihnava, upAsaka, kevalI
aura zeSa sAdhu Adi ke sAtha kSAyika Adi bhAvoM ke anusAra (darzana, jJAna,
cAritra, abhigraha aura bhAvanA ke AdhAra para) vikalpoM kI yojanA karanI
caahie| 73/22. jahAM tIsarA bhaMga-pravacana se sAdharmika tathA liMga se
sAdharmika, vahAM sAdhu ko AhAra nahIM klptaa| (isa vikalpa meM pratyekabuddha
aura tIrthaMkaroM ko chor3akara zeSa muni A jAte haiN|) zeSa bhaMgatraya meM
bhajanA hai-kvacit kalpatA hai, kvacit nhiiN| tIrthaMkara aura kevalI ke nimitta
banAyA huA AhAra Adi kalpatA hai| zeSa sAdhuoM ke lie kiyA huA anna-pAnI Adi
nahIM klptaa| 74. ziSya ke dvArA pUchane para ki AdhAkarma kyA hai ? AcArya
usakA svarUpa batAne hetu AdhAkarma utpatti ke ghaTaka azana-pAna Adi kA kathana
karate haiN| 75. azana-zAli Adi, pAna-avaTa (kUpa Adi ) se nikalA pAnI, khAdima-
phala Adi aura svAdima-sUMTha Adi hai| inameM kRta aura niSThita ke AdhAra para
zuddha aura azuddha cAra bhaMga hote haiN| TIkAkAra ne aMtima do bhaMgoM kI
vyAkhyA bhI kI hai (dekheM mavR pa. 61) /  2. devatA tIrthaMkara ke lie
samavasaraNa Adi kI racanA karate haiM, usameM sAdhu dharma-dezanA sunane ke lie
jAte haiN| isI prakAra tIrthaMkara ke lie banA bhakta Adi bhI sAdhu ke lie
kalpanIya hai| tIrthaMkara aura pratyekabuddha sabhI kalpoM se Upara uTha gae
haiM, saMbhavata: isIlie yaha vidhAna kiyA gayA hai| (mavR pa.61) bRbhA ke
anusAra tIrthaMkara kisI ke sAdharmika nahIM hote ataH unake lie kRta AhAra muni
ke lie kalpya hai (bRbhA 1782, TI pR. 526) /  /  3, 4. gAthA meM tIrthaMkara
aura kevalI-ina do zabdoM kA prayoga kyoM kiyA gayA, isakA spaSTIkaraNa karate
hue TIkAkAra kahate haiM ki tIrthaMkara ko kevalajJAna utpanna hone para sabako
jJAta ho jAtA hai lekina kevalI kA kaivalya sabako jJAta ho, yaha Avazyaka nahIM
hai isalie tIrthaMkara aura kevalI donoM ko alaga-alaga grahaNa kiyA hai|
tIrthaMkara' zabda ke grahaNa se upalakSaNa se pratyekabuddha kA grahaNa bhI ho
jAtA hai| (mavR pa.62) jItakalpabhASya meM nihnava aura upAsaka zabda kA prayoga
huA hai (jIbhA 1145) /  5. 6. kRta aura niSThita kI caturbhagI ke lie dekheM
gA.80, 80/1 kA anuvaad|

Page #308 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti  76. In the village, there was an abundance of Kodrava and Ralak
grains, so those were the only things available for alms. The monks had a
pleasant dwelling suitable for their studies. The monks arrived for the purpose
of marking the territory. The lay devotees asked, "Is this area suitable for the
Acharya's Chaturmas?" The monks, with honesty, told them everything. 76/1. "The
area is suitable for the Gan, but not for the Guru's Chaturmas, because there is
no Shalyodana suitable for the Acharya here." Hearing this, the lay devotee
sowed Shali seeds and distributed the Shali to his relatives' homes. 76/2, 3. As
time passed, they or some other monks, while wandering, came to that village and
went for alms. They were filled with desire. They heard this discussion from the
mouths of the children. Some children were saying, "These are the monks for whom
Shalyodana is made in every house." Another said, "Mother gave me Shalyodana for
the monks." A donor said, "I gave Shalyodana for others, now I want to give my
own." A child said, "Give me Shalyodana for the monks." A poor man said, "There
was a lack of Odana here, so Shalyodana happened on the occasion." 76/4. (The
wife of the younger brother died in two brothers) The elder brother's wife said
to her brother-in-law, "My husband and your wife have died, so I want to become
your wife. This is an example of 'Thhakke Thhakkaavdiyan', meaning things
happening according to the occasion." 76/5. A child said, "Mother! Give the
monks Tandulodak." Another said, "Give the monks Shalikaanjik." Hearing this
from the mouths of the children, the monks asked, "What is this?" Knowing the
whole story, the monks, knowing it was Adhakarma Ahar, rejected those houses and
started wandering for alms in other houses.  77. In one village, all the wells
were of salty water. Once, a lay devotee dug a well of sweet water and covered
it with planks, etc., until the monks arrived.  78. Regarding Khadim substances
like cucumber, mango, pomegranate, grapes, and Bijoura, there can be a tendency
towards Papakaran. For Swadim substances like Trikatuk, etc., the lay devotee
also commits many sinful tendencies.  79. Making the four types of Asan, Pan,
etc., which are Sachitt, suitable for the monks to consume, i.e., making them
Prasauk, is called 'Nishthit'. Starting to serve these four is called 'Kat'.
Here, the author has given an example of a worldly event in the middle to
explain 'Thhakke Thhakkaavdiyan' - things happening according to the occasion.
This seems irrelevant in the context of the children's discussion. 2. See Pari.
3 Katha San. 8 for the expansion of the story. 3. This is an example of
Adhakarma related to Pan. See Pari. 3 Katha San. 9 for the expansion of the
story. 4. Trikatuk - ginger, peepal, black pepper, etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 76. gAMva meM kodrava aura rAlaka do prakAra ke dhAnyoM kI
pracuratA thI ataH bhikSA meM ve hI dravya milate the| sAdhuoM ke svAdhyAya ke
yogya ramaNIya vasati thii| kSetra-pratilekhanA hetu sAdhuoM kA aagmn| zrAvakoM
ne pUchA-'kyA yaha kSetra AcArya ke cAturmAsa yogya hai ?' sAdhuoM ne RjutA se
saba kucha kahA76/1. kSetra gaNa ke yogya hai lekina guru ke cAturmAsa yogya
nahIM hai kyoMki yahAM AcArya ke yogya zAlyodana nahIM hai| yaha sunakara
zrAvaka ne zAli bIjoM kA vapana kiyA aura svajanoM ke ghara zAli ko baMTavA
diyaa| 76/2, 3. samaya bItane para ve yA kucha anya muni vihAra karate hue usa
gAMva meM Ae aura bhikSArtha ge| ve eSaNA se yukta the| unhoMne bAlakoM ke mukha
se yaha carcA sunii| kucha bAlaka kaha rahe the-'ye ve sAdhu haiM, jinake lie
ghara-ghara meM zAlyodana banA hai|' dUsarA bolA-' mAM ne mujhe sAdhu-saMbaMdhI
zAlyodana diyaa|' eka dAnadAtrI bolI-'maiMne parakIya zAlyodana diyA, aba maiM
apanA bhI denA cAhatI huuN|' koI bAlaka bolA'mujhe sAdhu-saMbaMdhI zAlyodana
do|' eka daridra bolA-'yahAM odana kA abhAva thA ataH avasara para zAlyodana ho
gyaa|' 76/4. (do bhAiyoM meM choTe bhAI kI patnI kI mRtyu ho gaI) bar3e bhAI kI
patnI ne devara se kahA-'mere pati tathA tumhArI patnI kI mRtyu ho gaI hai ata:
maiM tumhArI patnI bananA cAhatI hUM, yaha 'thakke thakkAvaDiya' arthAt avasara
para avasara ke anurUpa ghaTita hone kA udAharaNa hai|" 76/5. eka bAlaka
bolA-'mAM! tuma sAdhuoM ko taNDulodaka do|' dUsarA bolA-'tuma sAdhuoM ko
zAlikAJjika do|' baccoM ke mukha se yaha bAta sunakara sAdhuoM ne pUchA-'yaha
kyA bAta hai?' sArI bAta jAnakara sAdhuoM ne AdhAkarma AhAra jAnakara una gharoM
kA varjana kara diyA aura anya gharoM meM bhikSArtha ghUmane lge| 77. eka gAMva
meM sAre kUeM khAre pAnI ke the| eka bAra eka zrAvaka ne mIThe pAnI kA kuAM
khudavAkara usako taba taka phalaka Adi se r3hakakara rakhA, jaba taka vahAM
sAdhu nahIM A ge| 78. kakar3I, Ama, anAra, aMgUra tathA bijaurA Adi khAdima
vastuoM ke viSaya meM pApakaraNa kI pravRtti ho sakatI hai| trikaTuka Adi
svAdima vastuoM ke lie bhI zrAvaka aneka pApakArI pravRttiyAM kara letA hai| 79.
cAroM prakAra ke azana, pAna Adi jo sacitta haiM, unako sAdhuoM ke grahaNa yogya
banAnA arthAt prAsuka karanA 'niSThita' kahalAtA hai| ina cAroM ko upaskata
karane kA prAraMbha karanA 'kata' kahalAtA hai| yahAM graMthakAra ne thakke
thakkAvaDiyaM-avasara para avasara ke anurUpa kArya honA ko spaSTa karane ke lie
bIca meM hI eka laukika ghaTanA kA udAharaNa de diyA hai| yahAM bAlakoM kI carcA
ke prasaMga meM yaha aprAsaMgika sA lagatA hai| 2. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM
pari. 3 kathA saM. 8 /  /  3. yaha pAnaka saMbaMdhI AdhAkarma kA udAharaNa hai|
kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3 kathA saM. 9 /  4. trikaTuka-sauMTha,
pIpala, kAlImirca aadi|

Page #309 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **137**  **80.** Rice that has been washed three times is
considered "**niṣṭhita**" (purified), and rice that has been washed once or
twice is considered "**kṛta**" (prepared). The **Tīrthaṅkaras** have considered
**niṣṭhita kṛta** rice as having two **ādhākarma** (impurities): one
**ādhākarma** due to the **kṛta** rice form and the other **ādhākarma** due to
the cooking process. 80/1. Some **Ācāryas** prohibit sitting under the shade of
a tree planted for the benefit of a **sādhu** (monk) for the purpose of enjoying
fruits, flowers, or any other reason. However, this is not appropriate. It is
conceivable to consume the fruit of that tree in a different **bhaṅga** (state),
i.e., as "**kṛta**" for the **sādhu** and "**niṣṭhita**" for the **gṛhastha**
(householder). 80/2. The shade of a tree is not **ādhākarmic** because the shade
is **parapratyayika** (dependent on something else), i.e., it is caused by the
sun, not solely by the tree. Just as a **mālākara** (gardener) cultivates a
tree, the shade is not cultivated by the tree. Those who prohibit sitting under
the shade of a tree, considering it **ādhākarmic**, would then consider it
permissible to sit under that tree when the shade disappears due to the sky
being covered by clouds. 80/3. The shade increases and decreases. The increasing
shade of a tree touches many houses. It is not conceivable that all those houses
and food would become impure due to **pūti doṣa** (impurity). (This is not
mentioned in the **Āgamas**). The sun does not cause the shade for the **munis**
(ascetics) who are **suvihit** (well-behaved), it occurs naturally. Therefore,
it is not **ādhākarmic**. 80/4. When scattered clouds move across the sky, the
shade disappears and reappears during the day. When the sun is covered by
clouds, it is permissible to sit under the tree, but it should be avoided during
the heat of the sun. (This fact is neither mentioned in the **Āgamas** nor
recorded by the **pūrvapurṣas** (predecessors), therefore it is false). 80/5.
Thus, this fault related to shade is not possible. It is free from
**ādhākarma**. Even so, those who are very compassionate and avoid it are not at
fault.  **81, 81/1.** **Gṛhasthas** are considered **paraphakṣa** (other party)
and **śramaṇas** and **śramaṇīs** (monks and nuns) are considered **svaphakṣa**
(own party). What is cooked and prepared is considered "**niṣṭhita**",
everything else is "**kṛta**". For a **sādhu**, "**kṛta**" and "**niṣṭhita**"
are permissible, and for a **gṛhastha**,   1. The commentator **Malayagiri**
mentions the **Vṛddha-sampradāya** (ancient tradition) in this context, stating
that if rice is washed once or twice for the **sādhu** and a third time by the
**gṛhastha** for themselves and cooked, then that rice is permissible for the
**sādhu**. Other traditions are also mentioned in this context. One should
understand **kṛta** and **niṣṭhita** in relation to **pān** (betel leaf),
**khādim** (vegetables), and **svādim** (tasty food). If a well is dug for a
**sādhu**, water is drawn from it, and it is prepared for drinking, then it is
called "**kat**" until it is prepared for drinking, and after it is prepared for
drinking, it is called "**niṣṭhita**". Similarly, in **khādim**, when cucumbers,
etc., are sown and harvested, and then cut into pieces, those pieces are called
"**kṛta**" until they are prepared for eating, and after they are prepared for
eating, they are called "**niṣṭhita**" (**M.P. 65, 66**).  2. According to the
commentator, some parts of the ground under a tree are contaminated with
**saccitta kaṇas** (sentient particles), therefore it is impure. It is not
permissible to sit in that place, but the shade of the tree is not
**ādhākarmic** (**M.V.P. 66**).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 137 80. jo taNDula tIna bAra prabalarUpa se kaMDita kie jAte haiM, ve
'niSThita' tathA eka yA do bAra kaMDita kie jAte haiM, ve 'kRta' kahalAte haiN|
niSThita kRta odana ko tIrthaMkaroM ne dugunA AdhAkarma mAnA hai-eka AdhAkarma
to kRta taMDula rUpa aura dUsarA AdhAkarma paakkriyaaruup| 80/1. kucha AcArya
phala-puSpa Adi ke prayojana se athavA anya kisI prayojana se sAdhu ke lie boe
gae vRkSa kI chAyA kA varjana karate haiM lekina yaha ucita nahIM hai| usa vRkSa
kA phala bhI dUsare bhaMga meM lenA kalpanIya hai arthAt sAdhu ke lie 'kRta'
tathA gRhastha ke lie niSThita' rUpa meN| 80/2. vRkSa kI chAyA AdhAkarmikI nahIM
hotI kyoMki chAyA parapratyayikA arthAt sUryahetukI hotI hai, vRkSamAtrahetukI
nahIM hotI, jaise-mAlAkAra vRkSa ko bar3hAtA hai, vaise hI chAyA usake dvArA
bar3hAI nahIM jaatii| jo use AdhAkarmikI mAnakara usake nIce baiThane kA niSedha
karate haiM phira unake anusAra meghAcchanna AkAza se vRkSa kI chAyA lupta ho
jAne para usa vRkSa ke nIce baiThanA kalpanIya ho jaaegaa| 80/3. chAyA bar3hatI
hai, ghaTatI hai| vRkSa kI bar3hatI huI chAyA aneka gharoM kA sparza karatI hai,
isase ve sAre ghara tathA AhAra pUti doSa se duSTa hone para kalpanIya nahIM
hoNge| (yaha bAta Agamokta nahIM hai) sUrya suvihita muniyoM ke lie chAyA kA
pravartana nahIM karatA, vaha svataH hotI hai isalie vaha AdhAkarmikI nahIM
hotii| 80/4. AkAza meM yatra-tatra virala meghoM ke ghUmane para unase chAyA
miTa jAtI hai tathA dina meM punaH chAyA ho jAtI hai| sUrya ke meghAcchanna ho
jAne para usa vRkSa ke adha:stana pradeza kA Asevana kalpatA hai parantu Atapa
meM usakA vivarjana karanA caahie| (yaha tathya na Agama sammata hai aura na
pUrvapuruSoM dvArA AcIrNa isalie yaha asat hai|) 80/5. isa prakAra chAyA
saMbaMdhI yaha doSa saMbhava nahIM hai, yaha AdhAkarma vihIna hai| itanA hone
para bhI jo ati dayAlu puruSa usakA vivarjana karate haiM to ve doSI nahIM haiN|
81, 81/1. gRhastha parapakSa hote haiM tathA zramaNa aura zramaNI svapakSa hote
haiM, jo prAsuka kiyA jAtA hai aura rAMdhA jAtA hai, vaha 'niSThita' anya sArA
'kRta' hai| sAdhu ke lie kRta' tathA 'niSThita' tathA gRhastha ke lie 1.
TIkAkAra malayagiri ne isa prasaMga meM vRddha-sampradAya kA ullekha karate hue
kahA hai ki yadi cAvaloM ko eka bAra yA do bAra sAdhuoM ke lie kaMDita kiyA aura
tIsarI bAra gRhastha ne apane lie kaMDita kiyA aura pakAyA to ve taNDula sAdhu
ke lie kalpanIya haiN| isa saMdarbha meM anya paramparAoM kA bhI ullekha hai|
pAna, khAdima aura svAdima Adi ke bAre meM bhI kRta aura niSThita ko samajhanA
caahie| sAdhu ke lie kUpa Adi kA khanana kiyA, usameM se jala nikAlA tathA use
prAsuka kiyaa| jaba taka vaha pAnI prAsaka nahIM hotA, taba taka vaha kata
kahalAtA hai tathA prAsuka hone ke bAda niSThita kahalAtA hai| isI prakAra
khAdima meM kakaDI Adi kA vapana karake use niSpanna kiyA phira use Tukar3oM meM
kATA, jaba taka ve Tukar3e prAsuka nahIM hue, taba taka kRta tathA prAsuka hone
ke bAda niSThita kahalAte haiM (ma pa.65, 66) /  2. TIkAkAra ke anusAra vRkSa ke
nIce kA kucha bhAga sacitta kaNoM se saMpRkta hotA hai ataH vaha pUti hotA hai|
usa sthAna para baiThanA kalpanIya nahIM hai lekina vRkSa kI chAyA AdhAkarmikI
nahIM hotI (mavR pa. 66) /

Page #310 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  138 ##  Pindaniryukti For a 'Krit' Sadhu, there are four 'Nishthit'
categories. The second and fourth categories are conceivable, such as: * Krit
for Sadhu, Nishthit for Sadhu. * Krit for Sadhu, Nishthit for Grihasth. * Krit
for Grihasth, Nishthit for Sadhu. * Krit for Grihasth, Nishthit for Grihasth.
## 82. There are four faults related to Adhakarma: Atikram, Vyatikrama, Atichar,
and Anachar. One should know the demonstration of these four. The first is
Atikram, meaning invitation for Adhakarma. ## 82/1. A new Shravak invites a Muni
to donate Shali, Ghrit, Gud, Goras, and new Valli fruits that are not suitable
for a Muni. ## 82/2. A Muni who accepts and consumes Adhakarma, consumes all
four faults, including Atikram. The example of Nupurharika is relevant here. In
the Nupurharika story, the king's elephant raises one, two, three, and then all
four legs. ## 82/3. One who accepts the invitation for Adhakarma commits the
fault of Atikram. Raising the leg to bring it is the fault of Vyatikrama.
Accepting the Adhakarma in a vessel is the fault of Atichar, and swallowing it
is the fault of Anachar.  ## 83. As previously stated (Ga. 60), there are faults
like Agyabhang, etc., in accepting Adhakarma. These faults are: Agyabhang,
Anvastha, Mithyatva, and Viradhana. ## 83/1. One who accepts Adhakarma due to
greed for food, etc., violates the commands of all Tirthankaras. One who
violates the command, by whose command does he follow the remaining rituals? ##
83/2. If one Muni performs an inappropriate act (consumes Adhakarma), other
Munis, based on their faith, start performing the same act. This way, due to the
tradition of many Munis, restraint and penance are broken, leading to the
breaking of the Tirth. (This is an example of the fault of Anvastha.)  1. For
detailed explanation of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha San. 10. 2. Just as an
elephant can raise one, two, or three legs on a mountain with broken peaks, but
falls to the ground when it raises all four legs, similarly, a Sadhu can purify
himself with specific good determination until the fault of Atichar, but with
Anachar, restraint is destroyed. The commentator says that although the elephant
did not raise all four legs in the story, it was stated to prove the point in
the parable (Mavri P. 68). 3. According to Jitkalpabhashya, some Acharyas
consider keeping Adhakarma food in the mouth as Anachar, but the Sadhu can
refrain from it. He can spit it out into a nearby vessel, but after swallowing,
it is not possible to refrain, therefore, swallowing Adhakarma food should be
considered Anachar (Jibha 1179, 1180).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 138 piMDaniryukti 'kRta' sAdhu ke lie 'niSThita' kI caturbhaMgI hotI hai,
isameM dUsarA aura cauthA bhaMga kalpanIya hotA hai, jaise-- sAdhu ke lie kRta,
sAdhu 'lie niSThita  /  * sAdhu ke lie kRta, gRhastha ke lie niSThita  /
gRhastha ke lie kRta, sAdhu ke lie niSThita  /  gRhastha ke lie kRta, gRhastha
ke lie niSThita  /  * * * 82. AdhAkarma viSayaka cAra doSa hote haiM-atikrama,
vyatikrama, aticAra aura anAcAra  /  ina cAroM kA nidarzana jAnanA caahie|
pahalA hai atikrama arthAt AdhAkarma ke lie nimaMtraNa  /  82 / 1. koI nayA
zrAvaka muni ke lie niSpAdita zAli, ghRta, gur3a, gorasa tathA muni ke lie
acitta kie gae nae vallI phaloM kA dAna dene ke lie muni ko nimaMtraNa detA hai|
82 / 2. jo muni AdhAkarma grahaNa karake usakA paribhoga karatA hai, vaha
atikrama Adi cAroM doSoM kA sevana karatA hai  /  isa viSaya meM nUpurahArikA kA
udAharaNa hai - nUpurahArikA kathAnaka meM rAjA ke hAthI dvArA eka, do, tIna
tathA cAroM pairoM ko Upara utthaanaa| 82/3. jo AdhAkarma ke nimaMtraNa ko
svIkAra karatA hai, vaha atikrama doSa kA sevana karatA hai  /  usako lAne ke
lie paira uThAnA vyatikrama doSa hai| AdhAkarma ko pAtra meM grahaNa karanA
aticAra doSa tathA usako nigalanA ra anAcAra doSa hai  /  83. jo pahale kahA thA
(gA. 60) ki AdhAkarma grahaNa karane meM AjJAbhaMga Adi ke doSa hote haiM, ve
doSa ye haiM - AjJAbhaMga, anavasthA, mithyAtva tathA virAdhanA  /  83 / 9. jo
azana Adi meM lubdha hokara AdhAkarma grahaNa karatA hai, vaha sabhI
tIrthaMkaroM kI AjJA kA atikramaNa karatA hai| jo AjJA kA atikramaNa karatA hai,
vaha zeSa anuSThAnoM kA anupAlana kisakI AjJA se karatA hai ? 83/2. eka muni
akArya karatA hai, (AdhAkarma kA paribhoga karatA hai) to dUsare muni bhI usake
vizvAsa ke AdhAra para vahI kArya karane laga jAte haiN| isa prakAra sAtAbahula
muniyoM kI paramparA se saMyama aura tapa kA viccheda hone se tIrtha kA viccheda
hone lagatA hai| (yaha anavasthA doSa kA udAharaNa hai  / ) 1. kathA ke vistAra
hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 10  /  2. jaise hAthI chinna TaMka vAle parvata
para eka, do yA tIna paira Upara karane meM samartha ho sakatA hai lekina cAroM
paira Upara karane para vaha nizcita rUpa se bhUmi para gira jAtA hai, vaise hI
aticAra doSa taka sAdhu viziSTa zubha adhyavasAya se svayaM ko zuddha karane meM
samartha ho sakatA hai kintu anAcAra hone para saMyama kA nAza ho jAtA hai|
TIkAkAra kahate haiM ki yadyapi kathAnaka dRSTAnta meM hAthI ke dvArA cAroM
paira Upara nahIM uThAe gae lekina dASTantika meM bAta ko siddha karane hetu
yaha pratipAdana kiyA gayA hai (mavR pa. 68 )  /  ke 3. jItakalpabhASya ke
anusAra kucha AcArya AdhAkarma AhAra ko muMha meM rakhane ko anAcAra mAnate haiM
lekina vahAM se sAdhu pratinivRtta ho sakatA hai| vaha pArzvasthita zleSmapAtra
meM thUka sakatA hai lekina nigalane ke bAda pratinivRtti saMbhava nahIM hai
ataH AdhAkarma AhAra ko nigalanA anAcAra mAnanA cAhie (jIbhA 1179, 1180 )  /

Page #311 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 139 83/3. Who is greater than a Muni who does
not perform rituals according to the Yathavad-Agamoct Vidhi, because he creates
doubt in others and promotes the tradition of Mithyatva? Could he be a
Mithyadristi? He is.  83/4. A Muni who consumes Adhakarma Ahar promotes its
consumption and increases his own and others' attachment. He, being a
Bhinnadanshtra - a Muni with an extreme craving for taste, becomes completely
heartless and does not even spare living beings.  83/5. A Muni who consumes a
lot of oily food becomes ill. An ill Muni loses his Sutra and Artha. There is a
violation of the Shatkay in the treatment of the disease. The Praticharakas also
lose their Sutra and Artha. Due to lack of care, the ill Muni himself
experiences Klesh. (In the absence of proper care) he becomes angry with the
Praticharakas, and in this situation, he also creates Klesh in the minds of the
Praticharakas.  84. How is Adhakarma Akalpya? How is other food touched by it
Akalpya? How is food placed in a vessel used for Adhakarma Akalpya? What is the
method of its avoidance? How is a devotee who has consumed Adhakarma free from
Dosha? The Guru explains about these topics.  84/1. (Adhakarma Ahar, other
substances touched by it, food placed in a vessel not washed with Kalpatraya) -
all this is Abhojya. In the case of A-Vidhi-Parihar, one should inquire about
the Dosha of going to the place, etc., and in the case of Vidhi-Parihar, one
should inquire about the Dravya, Kula, Desh, and Bhava. (There is no Chhalna in
a Muni who acts in this way.) If there is Chhalna, there are two examples in
this regard.  85. Just as vomited food from well-cooked food becomes Abhojya,
similarly, vomited Adhakarma food due to Asanyam becomes Aneshanya and Abhojya
for a Muni.  1 86. If a cat eats meat, can the meat, vomited by a dog and
seasoned with spices, be considered edible for those who desire meat (husband
and elder brother), even if it is made of a different color? (Never).  86/1.
Some Acharyas describe this story as follows: A traveler had diarrhea and
excreted pieces of muscle from his stool. A woman washed it, seasoned it with
spices, and served it (to her husband and elder brother). The son held their
hands and stopped them from eating it.  86/2. Just as the Vedas and other
religious texts consider the milk of sheep and camels, garlic, onions, liquor,
and beef to be Asammat - Akhadya, similarly, in the Jinashastra, Adhakarma food
is Abhojya and Apeya.  1. If a Sadhu consumes Adhakarma Ahar once. 2. For the
expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha No. 11. Then, due to the greed for
the delicious taste, he becomes inclined to consume it repeatedly (Mavru P. 69).
3. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha No. 11, footnote.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 139 83/3. jo muni yathAvAda - Agamokta vidhi ke anusAra anuSThAna nahIM
karatA, usase bar3A anya kauna kyoMki vaha dUsaroM meM AzaMkA paidA kara
mithyAtva kI paramparA ko Age bar3hAtA mithyAdRSTi ho sakatA hai ? hai  /  83/4.
AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa karatA huA muni usake grahaNa - prasaMga' ko bar3hAvA
detA hai tathA apanI aura dUsaroM kI Asakti ko bar3hAtA hai  /  vaha
bhinnadaMSTrA - atyanta rasalampaTa muni sarvathA nirdayI banakara sajIva
padArthoM ko bhI nahIM chor3atA  /  83 / 5. jo muni pracura mAtrA meM snigdha
AhAra karatA hai, vaha rugNa ho jAtA hai| rogagrasta muni ke sUtra aura artha kI
hAni hotI hai| roga - cikitsA meM SaTkAya kI virAdhanA hotI hai| praticArakoM ke
bhI sUtra aura artha kI hAni hotI hai| paricaryA ke abhAva meM rogI muni svayaM
kleza ko prApta hotA hai| (samyak paricaryA na hone para) vaha paricArakoM para
kupita hotA hai, isa sthiti meM vaha paricArakoM ke mana meM bhI kleza utpanna
karatA hai  /  84. AdhAkarma akalpya kaise ? usase spRSTa anya AhAra akalpya
kaise ? AdhAkarma bhAjana vAle pAtra meM DAlA huA bhojana akalpya kaise ? usake
parihAra kI vidhi kyA ? kaise liyA huA AdhAkarma bhakta doSamukta hotA hai ? Adi
ke viSaya meM guru batAte haiM  /  84/1. (AdhAkarma AhAra, usase spRSTa anya
padArtha, kalpatraya se aprakSAlita pAtra meM DAlA huA AhAra - ) yaha sArA
abhojya hai  /  avidhi - parihAra meM gamana Adi ke doSa tathA vidhi- parihAra
meM dravya, kula, deza aura bhAva kI pRcchA karanI caahie| (isa prakAra vartana
karane vAle muni meM chalanA nahIM hotI  /  ) yadi chalanA hotI hai isa viSaya
meM do dRSTAnta haiM  /  85. jaise susaMskRta bhojana kA vamana ho jAne para
vaha 'vAnta' bhojana abhojya bana jAtA hai, vaise hI asaMyamapUrvaka vAnta
AdhAkarma bhojana muni ke lie aneSaNIya aura abhojya ho jAtA hai| 1 86. mArjAra
ke dvArA mAMsa khAne para mAMsa ke icchuka (pati evaM jeTha) ke lie kutte ke
dvArA vAnta mAMsa ko masAle DAlakara anya varNa vAlA banAne para bhI kyA vaha
bhojana khAdya ho sakatA hai ? (kabhI nahIM )  /  86/1. isa kathAnaka ko kucha
AcArya isa prakAra kahate haiMpathika ke atisAra roga hone para usane mala se
mAMsapezI ke Tukar3e vyutsarjita kie| mahilA ne use dhokara masAle se saMskArita
karake ( pati evaM jeTha ko) parosA  /  putra hAtha pakar3akara unako khAne se
rokaa| 86/2. jisa prakAra veda Adi dhArmika graMthoM meM bher3I aura U~TanI kA
dUdha, lahasuna, pyAja, surA aura gomAMsa - ye sArI vastueM asammata - akhAdya
haiM, usI prakAra jinazAsana meM bhI AdhAkarma bhojana abhojya aura apeya hai|
1. eka bAra yadi sAdhu AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa kara letA hai| 2. kathA ke
vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 11  /  to manojJa rasa kI lolupatA se
vaha bAra-bAra grahaNa karane 3. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA
saM. 11 kA TippaNa  /  meM pravRtta hotA hai ( mavR pa. 69 )  /

Page #312 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 140 ## Pindaniyukti  87. An offering, consisting of grains like sesame seeds,
adorned with fruits like coconut, is considered inedible if it is touched even
by a speck of impurity. (Similarly, even pure food becomes inedible if it comes
into contact with the elements of an Adhakarma.) 88. If food contaminated with
Adhakarma is removed from a vessel, but the vessel itself is not purified by the
three Kalpas, then even pure food placed in that vessel becomes inedible.
Alternatively, if a speck of Adhakarma food falls into a vessel containing pure
food, then that food becomes inedible. 89. Adhakarma food is like vomit and
excrement. Even a learned person is terrified upon hearing about it and avoids
it. Avoidance can be of two types: with proper procedure and without proper
procedure. 89/1-3. Seeing Shaliodana in a woman's hand, an uninformed ascetic
asked her, "Where did this Shaliodana come from?" The woman replied, "The
merchant knows, so ask him." Going to the market, he asked the merchant about
the Shaliodana. The merchant said, "The rice came from Gobargram, a village on
the outskirts of Magadh." He started to go there. Fearing Adhakarma, he left the
main path and walked on a path full of thorns, snakes, and wild animals. Going
astray, he became disoriented. Fearing Adhakarma, he even avoided the shade of
trees. Overwhelmed by the heat, he fainted and suffered distress. (This is an
example of avoidance without proper procedure.) 89/4. One who avoids Adhakarma
in this way without proper procedure cannot attain the benefits of knowledge,
etc. There are four components of proper avoidance: substance, family, country,
and feeling. 89/5, 6. Rice, porridge, roasted barley flour, black gram, etc.,
are substances. A family can be small or large. Saurashtra, etc., are countries.
Respect or disrespect is the feeling. Giving it oneself is a feeling of respect,
while getting it from servants or others is a feeling of disrespect. The
arrangement of these elements can be of two types: four-legged or three-legged.
89/7. If the desired substance is unavailable in the desired country, the family
is small, the quantity obtained is large, and there is excessive respect, then
there is a possibility of Adhakarma. In such a situation, one should inquire. If
the desired substance is abundant in the desired country, even if there is no
respect, inquiry is not necessary. (For example, Mandak is found abundantly in
every household in Malavadesh. There is no fear of Adhakarma regarding that
substance there.)  1. For the explanation of the three Kalpas, see the
commentary on verse 117/3. 2. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, story
no. 12.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 140 piMDaniyukti 87. varNa Adi se yukta bali-upahAra, jo tilakSoda se banA huA
hai, usa para nAriyala Adi phala kA zikhara kiyA huA ho| yadi vaha suMdara bali
azuci ke kaNa mAtra se bhI spRSTa ho jAtA hai to vaha abhojya ho jAtA hai| (isI
prakAra nirdoSa AhAra bhI AdhAkarma ke avayava se saMspRSTa hone para abhojya ho
jAtA hai|) 88. jisa pAtra meM AdhAkarma AhAra liyA, usa bhAjana se AdhAkarma
AhAra nikAla diyA parantu usa pAtra ko akRtakalpa arthAt kalpatraya' se
prakSAlita nahIM kiyA, usa pAtra meM yadi punaH zuddha AhAra bhI DAla diyA jAe
to vaha abhojya hotA hai| athavA pAtra meM zuddha AhAra liyA aura yadi usameM
AdhAkarma AhAra kA kaNa mAtra bhI gira jAe to vaha AhAra abhojya hotA hai| 89.
AdhAkarma AhAra vAnta aura uccAra (mala) sadRza hai| use sunakara bhI paMDita
puruSa bhayabhIta ho jAtA hai, usakA parihAra karatA hai| parihAra do prakAra se
hotA hai-vidhipUrvaka tathA avidhipuurvk| 89/1-3. mahilA ke hAtha meM zAlyodana
dekhakara eka akovida sAdhu ne mahilA se pUchA-'ye zAlyodana kahAM se Ae haiM ?'
mahilA ne kahA--'yaha bAta vaNik jAnatA hai ataH usake pAsa jAkara puucho|'
bAjAra meM jAkara usane vaNik se zAlyodana ke bAre meM puuchaa| vaNik
bolA-'magadha ke pratyantavartI gobaragrAma se zAli AyA hai|' vaha vahAM jAne
lgaa| AdhAkarma kI AzaMkA se vaha mUla mArga ko chor3akara kAMTe, sAMpa aura
hiMsra pazuoM se yukta mArga para calane lgaa| utpatha para jAne se vaha
digbhramita ho gyaa| AdhAkarma kI AzaMkA se vaha vRkSa kI chAyA kA bhI parihAra
karane lgaa| garmI se tapta hokara vaha mUrcchita hokara kleza prApta karane
lgaa| (yaha avidhi-pariharaNa kA udAharaNa hai|) 89/4. jo isa prakAra avidhi se
AdhAkarma kA parihAra karatA hai, vaha jJAna Adi kA lAbha prApta nahIM kara
sktaa| vidhipUrvaka parihAra ke cAra ghaTaka haiM-dravya, kula, deza aura bhaav|
89/5, 6. odana, mAMDa, sattU, kulmASa Adi dravya haiN| thor3e vyaktiyoM athavA
bahuta vyaktiyoM kA kula hotA hai| saurASTra Adi deza haiN| Adara athavA
anAdara-yaha bhAva hotA hai| svayaM denA AdarabhAva hai, naukara Adi anya
vyaktiyoM se dilAnA anAdarabhAva hai| ina padoM kI yojanA catuSpadA athavA
tripadA-vikalpa se do prakAra kI hotI hai| 89/7. vivakSita deza meM asaMbhAvya
dravya kI upalabdhi, kula choTA ho aura prApti adhika ho tathA atyadhika
AdarabhAva ho to AdhAkarma kI saMbhAvanA hotI hai| aisI sthiti meM pRcchA karanI
caahie| vivakSita deza meM labdha pracura dravya ke viSaya meM, cAhe Adara na ho
to pRcchA Avazyaka nahIM hotii| (jaise mAlavadeza meM maMDaka ghara-ghara meM
pracura mAtrA meM prApta hotA hai| vahAM usa dravya ke viSaya meM AdhAkarma kI
AzaMkA nahIM rhtii|) 1. kalpatraya kI vyAkhyA hetu dekheM gA. 117/3 kA ttippnn|
2. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 12 /

Page #313 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 141 89/8. When the Muni asks, the simple-
natured donor says, "This food, etc., is made for you." A donor who is attached
to Maya says, "This is made for the house, not for you," but other members of
the house, hearing this, look at each other or laugh at each other in shame. In
such a situation, knowing it to be *Aadhākarma*, the Muni rejects it. When
asked, if the donor becomes angry and says, "Muni! What is your concern, what is
your worry?" In such a situation, the Muni should accept the substance without
fearing *Aadhākarma*. 89/9. Those *Shravak-Shravika* who have a subtle conduct,
neither show respect nor speak of goodwill when asked. Seeing the scarcity of
substance, etc., the Muni does not inquire. In such a situation, if the given
substance is impure, tainted by the fault of *Aadhākarma*, then how will the
*Sadhu* be purified? Thus, when inquiring, the Guru says 90. Even if a
*Prasūkhabhoji* Muni becomes involved in consuming *Aadhākarma* food, he becomes
bound by evil karma. If, while seeking pure food, he also consumes *Aadhākarma*,
he is pure because it has a pure outcome. 90/1. Hearing about the *Sangha-
Bhojya*, a Muni went to that village quickly. The Seth's wife had already given
away all the *Sanghabhakta*. When asked again, the Seth said, "Give the *Sadhu*
some from the food made for me." The wife gave the food. While eating, the Muni
thought, "This *Sanghabhakta* is delicious." (Even though it was pure food, the
Muni became bound by the karma arising from the consumption of *Aadhākarma*.)
90/2-4. For the *Parana* of the monthly fast, the ascetic Muni went to a nearby
village. The *Shravika* made *Kheer* for the Muni and thought, "Perhaps the
*Kshapak* will come here today." So that the Muni would not have any suspicion,
she put a little *Kheer* in the *Shravas* and, after cleaning it with the
*Kheer* from outside, explained it to the children. With anger and disrespect,
she gave the *Sadhu* *Kheer*, *Ghee*, and *Gud*, etc., as alms. Taking the alms,
the *Sadhu* went to a secluded place and began to contemplate, "If some *Sadhu*
comes and becomes a *Sanvibhagi*, I will be fulfilled." With a calm mind, he ate
that food, even though he was unconscious. Even though he consumed *Aadhākarma*
food, he attained *Kevalgyan*. 91. The king had two gardens - *Suryodaya* and
*Chandrodaya*. Those who went to those gardens without permission were punished.
91/1-3. (The king announced) "In the morning, I will go to the *Suryodaya*
garden with the *Antahpura*, so the *Trinaharak* and *Kasthaharak* should go to
the *Chandrodaya* garden." The king thought, "I will go to the *Suryodaya*
garden in the morning and come back in the evening.  1. According to the
commentator, *Prasūkhabhoji* means *Eshaniya Bhoji* here (Mavri P. 74). 2. For
the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha No. 13. 3. For the expansion of
the story, see Pari. 3, Katha No. 14. 4. For the expansion of the story, see
Pari. 3, Katha No. 15.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 141 89/8. muni ke pUchane para sarala svabhAvI dAnadAtrI kahatI
hai-"yaha azana Adi Apake lie banAyA gayA hai|" jo dAtrI mAyA yukta hotI hai,
vaha kahatI hai, yaha ghara ke lie banAyA gayA hai, Apake lie nahIM parantu
ghara ke anya sadasya yaha sunakara eka-dUsare ko dekhate haiM athavA lajjA se
eka-dUsare ko dekhakara haMsate haiM, aisI sthiti meM use AdhAkarma jAnakara
muni usakA varjana karate haiN| pUchane para jaba dAnadAtrI ruSTa hokara kahatI
hai-'mune ! Apako kyA cintA hai, kyA tapti hai?' aisI sthiti meM AdhAkarma kI
AzaMkA na karake muni usa dravya ko grahaNa kre| 89/9. jo zrAvaka-zrAvikAeM
gUDha AcAra vAle hote haiM, ve na Adara karate haiM aura na pUchane para
sadbhAva kA kathana karate haiN| dravya Adi kI alpatA ko dekhakara muni pRcchA
nahIM karate, aisI sthiti meM vaha deya vastu yadi azuddha hai, AdhAkarma doSa
se duSTa hai to vahAM sAdhu kI zuddhi kaise hogI? isa prakAra jijJAsA karane
para guru kahate haiM90. prAsukabhojI' muni bhI yadi AdhAkarma AhAra grahaNa
karane meM pariNata hotA hai to vaha azubha karmoM kA baMdhaka hotA hai| zuddha
bhojana kI gaveSaNA karatA huA yadi AdhAkarma bhI grahaNa kara letA hai, khA
letA hai to vaha zuddha hai kyoMki vaha zuddha pariNAma vAlA hai| 90/1. saMgha-
bhojya kI bAta sunakara koI muni zIghra hI usa gAMva meM gyaa| seTha kI patnI ne
pahale hI sArA saMghabhakta de diyA thaa| punaH mAMgane para seTha bolA-'mere
lie banAe bhojana meM se sAdhu ko do|' patnI ne bhojana diyaa| muni ne khAte hue
socA, yaha saMghabhakta svAdiSTa hai| (zuddha AhAra hote hue bhI vaha muni
AdhAkarma ke paribhoga se utpanna karmoM se baMdha gyaa|) 90/2-4. mAsika tapa ke
pAraNe hetu tapasvI muni samIpavartI gAMva meM gyaa| zrAvikA ne muni ke lie
khIra banAI aura socA ki zAyada Aja vaha kSapaka yahAM aaegaa| muni ko AzaMkA na
ho isalie zarAvoM meM thor3Ithor3I khIra DAlI, use bAhara khIra se kharaMTita
karake bAlakoM ko samajhA diyaa| roSa sahita anAdara ke sAtha sAdhu ko khIra,
ghRta aura gur3a Adi kI bhikSA dii| sAdhu bhikSA lekara ekAnta meM gayA aura
ciMtana karane lagA-"yadi koI sAdhu Akara saMvibhAgI bane to maiM kRtArtha ho
jaauuN|" zarIra se amUrcchita hokara samabhAva se usane vaha bhojana kiyaa|
AdhAkarmI AhAra karane para bhI use kevalajJAna ho gyaa|' 91. rAjA ke do udyAna
the-sUryodaya aura cndrody| una udyAnoM meM jAne para AjJA-bhaMga karane vAloM
ko daMDa diyA gyaa| 91/1-3. (rAjA ne ghoSaNA kI-) prAtaH aMta:pura ke sAtha maiM
sUryodaya udyAna meM jAUMgA ataH tRNahAraka aura kASThahAraka candrodaya udyAna
meM jaaeN| rAjA ne socA ki sUryodaya udyAna meM prAta: jAte aura sAyaM Ate 1.
TIkAkAra ke anusAra prAsukabhojI kA artha yahAM eSaNIyabhojI hai (mavR pa. 74) /
2. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 13 /  3. kathA ke vistAra
hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 14 /  4. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3,
kathA saM. 15 /

Page #314 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 142 ## Pindaniyukti  The sun will be facing both sides, so I will go to the
Chandrodya garden. Some wicked people, thinking they will see the king's wives
(Antahpur), will sit on the branches of the letter-filled trees and hide. The
gardeners will see them, so they will bind them and beat them with wood, etc.
The king and the Antahpur, entering the Chandrodya garden suddenly, will be seen
by the grass-eaters and wood-eaters. Their Rajapurusha will also subdue them. At
midday, while going towards the city, the king will be presented with the
subdued men on both sides. Those who disobeyed the order will be killed, and the
others will be released. 91/4. Those who wished to see the women of the Antahpur
did not have their wish fulfilled, yet they were punished by the king for
breaking the royal order. The other men who saw the Antahpur were released
without punishment because they did not break the royal order. In the same way,
one should make a Samvattara in the matter of Adhakarma. 92. The Bodmundit
person who enjoys Adhakarma and does not do the atonement for that un-doable
place wanders in the world in vain, like a Lunched-Vilunched (featherless)
pigeon. 93, 94. The statement of the Adhakarma door has been made. Now I will
tell you about the previously mentioned Auddeshik door. It is of two types in
brief - Ogh and Vibhag. Ogh is established, Vibhag has three types - Uddishta,
Krit and Karma. Each has four types. Thus, there are twelve types of Vibhag.
94/1. After the famine, some householders thought - We lived somehow during the
famine. Now we will give some alms every day, because surely the person who did
not give alms in the past life does not enjoy in this birth, and the fruit of
un-done good deeds does not happen in the afterlife (therefore, let us earn some
good deeds by giving alms). 95. A housewife put rice for other Darshani Sadhus
in the fixed rice to be cooked for herself. The divisionless projection Ogh
Auddeshik is called for the hypocrite (other Darshani) and the householder. 1.
If a person who has become a result of eating Adhakarma food takes pure food, he
binds bad karma due to breaking the order, and the Muni who is engaged in the
search for pure food, even if he eats Adhakarma, is a worshiper of the order, he
does not bind karma (Mav P. 76). 2. The food prepared for the householder, which
is kept aside for the Bhikshacharya, is called Uddishta (Mav P. 77). 3. Pimpr
31; Vanjanamisaiyikadam - Uddharit Shalyodana, which is prepared as Karamb (a
dish made by mixing curd and rice) etc. for alms, is called Krit (Mav P. 77). 4.
The powder of the remaining Modak in the marriage is called Karma to make Modak
again from Gudpak etc. for giving to many Bhikshacharya (Mav P. 77). According
to the Pindavishuddhiprakaran, it is considered Karma to be re-sanctified by
heating with fire. Agni Taviyaai Pun Kammam (Pimpr 31). 5. According to the
Vridh Sampradaya, the remaining food is considered to be for the Sadhu when alms
are given to the intended Bhikshacharya (Mav P. 78).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 142 piMDaniyukti samaya donoM tarapha sUrya sammukha rahegA ataH maiM
candrodaya udyAna meM jaauuNgaa| kucha duSTa caritra vAle loga patrabahula
vRkSoM kI zAkhA para baiThakara rAjA kI patniyoM (aMtaHpura) ko dekheMge, yaha
socakara ve chipakara baiTha ge| udyAnapAlakoM ne unheM dekha liyA ataH unako
bAMdhakara lakar3I Adi se piittaa| candrodaya udyAna meM sahasA praviSTa rAjA
eva aMta:pura ko tRNahAraka aura kASThahArakoM ne dekhaa| unakA bhI rAjapuruSoM
ne nigraha kara liyaa| madhyAhna meM nagarAbhimukha jAte hue rAjA ke sammukha
donoM ora se nigRhIta puruSoM ko prastuta kiyA gyaa| AjJAbhaMga karane vAloM kA
vadha tathA dUsaroM ko visarjita kara diyA gyaa| 91/4. jo manuSya antaHpura kI
striyoM ko dekhane ke icchuka the, unakI icchA pUrI nahIM huI, phira bhI ve
rAjAjJA kA bhaMga karane ke kAraNa rAjA se daMDita hue| anta:pura ko dekhane
vAle jo anya puruSa the, unako binA daMDita kie mukta kara diyA gayA kyoMki ve
rAjAjJA kA bhaMga karane vAle nahIM the| AdhAkarma ke viSaya meM isI prakAra
yahAM samavatAra karanA caahie|' 92. jo sAdhu AdhAkarma kA paribhoga karake usa
akaraNIya sthAna kA prAyazcitta nahIM karatA, vaha boDamuMDita vyakti saMsAra
meM vaise hI vyartha paribhramaNa karatA hai, jaise luMcita-viluMcita (paMkha
rahita) kpot| 93, 94. AdhAkarma dvAra kA kathana kara diyaa| aba pahale se
samuddiSTa auddezika dvAra ko khuuNgaa| vaha saMkSepa meM do prakAra kA hai-ogha
aura vibhaag| ogha sthApya hai, vibhAga ke tIna prakAra haiM-uddiSTa', kRta aura
karma  /  pratyeka ke cAra-cAra prakAra haiN| isa prakAra vibhAga ke bAraha
prakAra hote haiN| 94./1 durbhikSa ke anantara kucha gRhasthoM ne socA-durbhikSa
kAla meM hamane jyoM-tyoM jIvana-yApana kiyaa| aba hama pratidina kucha bhikSA
deMge kyoMki nizcita hI bhavAntara meM adatta dAna vAle vyakti kA isa janma meM
upabhoga nahIM hotA aura akRta zubha karma kA paraloka meM phala nahIM hotA
(ataH bhikSA dekara kucha zubha karma upArjita kreN|) 95. kisI gRhanAyikA ne
apane lie pakAe jAne vAle niyata cAvaloM meM anya darzanI sAdhuoM ke lie bhI
cAvala DAla die, pAkhaMDI (anya darzanI) evaM gRhastha ke lie pakAe jAne vAle
cAvaloM meM vibhAga rahita prakSepa ogha auddezika kahalAtA hai| 1. AdhAkarma
bhojana lene-bhogane ke pariNAmoM meM pariNata vyakti yadi zuddha AhAra bhI letA
hai to vaha AjJA kA bhaMga karane ke kAraNa azubha karmoM ko bAMdhatA hai aura
jo muni zuddha AhAra kI gaveSaNA meM yukta hai, vaha AdhAkarma khA lene para bhI
AjJA kA ArAdhaka hotA hai, vaha karmoM kA baMdha nahIM karatA (mava pa. 76) /
2. gRhastha ke lie niSpanna AhAra, jo bhikSAcaroM ko dene ke lie alaga rakha
diyA jAtA hai, vaha uddiSTa kahalAtA hai (mavR p.77)| 3. piMpra 31 ;
vaMjaNamIsAikaDaM-uddharita zAlyodana, jo bhikSAdAna hetu karamba (dahI-bhAta
milAkara taiyAra kiyA gayA padArtha) Adi ke rUpa meM taiyAra kiyA jAtA hai, vaha
kRta kahalAtA hai (mavR pa. 77) /  4. vivAha meM bace hue modaka ke cUre ko
aneka bhikSAcaroM ko dene hetu gur3apAka Adi se punaH modaka karane ko karma
kahA jAtA hai (mavR pa. 77), piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa ke anusAra agni se tApita
karake puna: saMskArita karane ko karma mAnA hai agnitaviyAi puNa kammaM (piMpra
31) /  5, vRddha sampradAya ke anusAra saMkalpita bhikSAcaroM ko bhikSA dene
para zeSa bacA huA bhojana sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya hai (mavR p.78)|

Page #315 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 143 95/1. The disciple asked, "How can one
recognize a disguised *Ogh Auddeshik*?" The Guru said, "It can be known by
paying attention to the words and actions of the householder." 95/2. (When the
Muni entered for alms, the husband asked for alms, but the wife said-) "The five
daily alms have already been given, or she draws lines on the wall to count the
alms and counts them while giving alms. Or a woman says to someone, "Give alms
from the designated donation, not from here." Or when the ascetic enters the
intended house for alms, she says, "Separate this much alms." 96. The Muni who
has gone for alms should not be unconscious in words, form, taste, etc. He
should only be attentive to *Eshana*, just as a calf is attentive to its cow,
food, and water. 96/1, 2. When there was a wedding celebration in the house, all
four daughters-in-law were busy with their adornment and cosmetics. No one gave
the calf food and water. In the afternoon, the Seth came home. Seeing him, the
calf started to cry. Knowing that it was hungry, the Seth scolded the daughters-
in-law. The daughters-in-law were like mines that provided five types of worldly
pleasures. The house was also decorated more than them, but the calf did not
become attached to anyone. It remained engrossed only in eating its cow, food,
and water. 96/3. When the mistress of the house goes to give alms to the Muni,
comes before the ascetic with alms-worthy things, opens and places the vessels,
etc., the Muni, with his senses of hearing, etc., pays attention to the
mistress's speech and, like a calf, remains absorbed in it, knowing *Eshana* and
*Aneshana* correctly. 96/4. Knowing that there is a lot of *Shalyodana*, dishes,
etc., left over in a big *Jimanwar* (Sankadi), the master of the house tells his
servants, "Give all this leftover food to the alms-takers for merit." 97. There
are four types of *Vibhag Auddeshik* - *Auddeshik*, *Samuddeshik*, *Aadesh*, and
*Samadesh*. Each has three divisions - *Uddist*, *Krit*, and *Karma*.
Multiplying three by four, *Vibhag Auddeshik* is of twelve types. 98, 99.
Whatever food and water is made with the intention of the alms-takers is
*Uddist*. Food made for giving to heretics (other than those who follow the
right path) is called *Samuddes* or *Samuddeshik*. Food made for giving to
*Shramanas* is called *Aadesh*, and food intended for giving to *Nirgranthas* is
called *Samadesh*. Each of these... 1. Hearing all these conversations or seeing
the lines drawn on the wall, even a disguised ascetic can know that this is *Ogh
Auddeshik* alms (Mavri P. 78). 2. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3,
Katha No. 16.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 143 95/1. ziSya ne pUchA-'isa prakAra ke ogha auddezika ko chadmastha
kaise jAna sakatA hai ?' guru ne kahA'gRhastha ke zabda evaM ceSTAoM meM
dattAvadhAna hokara jAnA jA sakatA hai|' 95/2. (muni ke bhikSArtha praveza
karane para pati ne bhikSA ke lie kahA to patnI bolI-)pratidina dI jAne vAlI
pAMcoM bhikSAcaroM ko bhikSAeM dI jA cukI hai athavA vaha bhikSA kI gaNanA hetu
bhitti para rekhAeM karatI hai aura bhikSA detI huI unakI gaNanA karatI hai|
athavA koI strI kisI ke sammukha kahatI hai-'uddiSTa dattI se bhikSA do, yahAM
se nhiiN|' athavA vivakSita ghara meM sAdhu ke bhikSArtha praveza karane para
vaha kahatI hai-'itanI bhikSA pRthak kara do| 96. bhikSA ke lie gayA huA muni
zabda, rUpa, rasa Adi meM mUrcchita na ho| vaha kevala eSaNA meM dattAvadhAna
ho, jaise bachar3A gobhakta-cArA-pAnI ke prati dattAvadhAna hotA hai| 96/1, 2.
ghara meM vivAha kA utsava hone para cAroM putravadhueM apane maNDana-prasAdhana
meM vyasta ho giiN| kisI ne bachar3e ko cArA-pAnI nahIM diyaa| aparAhna meM
seTha ghara aayaa| use dekhakara bachar3e ne cillAnA prArambha kara diyaa| use
bhUkhA jAnakara seTha ne bahuoM ko ddaaNttaa| bahueM pAMca prakAra ke viSaya-
sukha ko pradAna karane vAlI khAni-khadAna kI bhAMti thiiN| ghara bhI unase
adhika alaMkRta kiyA gayA thA lekina vaha bachar3A kisI meM gRddha aura
mUrcchita nahIM huaa| kevala gobhakta-cArA-pAnI khAne meM tallIna rhaa| 96/3.
muni ko bhikSA dene ke lie gRhanAyikA kA gamana, bhikSA yogya dravya lekara
sAdhu ke sammukha Agamana, bartanoM ko kholanA, rakhanA Adi kArya hone para muni
gRhanAyikA ke bhASaNa ke prati zrotra Adi iMdriyoM se dattAvadhAna hokara
bachar3e kI bhAMti tanmanA hokara eSaNA aura aneSaNA ko samyak prakAra se jAnatA
96/4. kisI bar3e jImanavAra (saMkhaDI) meM zAlyodana, vyaMjana Adi ko pracura
mAtrA meM bacA huA jAnakara gRhanAyaka apane sevakoM se kahatA hai-'yaha sArA
bacA huA dravya puNya ke lie bhikSAcaroM ko de do|' 97. vibhAga auddezika ke
cAra prakAra haiM-auddezika, samuddezika, Adeza aura smaadesh| pratyeka ke
'uddiSTa' 'kRta' aura 'karma'-ye tIna bheda hote haiN| tIna se cAra kA guNA
karane para vibhAga auddezika bAraha prakAra kA hotA hai| 98, 99. jitane
bhikSAcaroM ke saMkalpa se AhAra-pAnI banAyA jAtA hai, vaha uddiSTa hai,
pASaMDiyoM (anya darzanI) ko dene ke lie nirmita AhAra samuddeza athavA
samuddezika kahalAtA hai, zramaNoM ko dene ke lie banAyA gayA Adeza tathA
nirgranthoM ko dene ke lie parikalpita AhAra samAdeza kahalAtA hai| ina pratyeka
ke 1. ina saba AlApa-saMlApoM ko sunakara yA dIvAra para khiMcI rekhAoM ko
dekhakara chadmastha sAdhu bhI jAna sakatA hai ki yaha ogha auddezika bhikSA hai
(mavR p.78)|| 2. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 16 /

Page #316 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 144. Pindaniyukti  There are two types of Pindaniyukti: Chhinna (regular) and
Achhinna (irregular). Both of these have four sub-types: Dravya, Kshetra, Kala
and Bhava. (Multiplying Chhinna and Achhinna with these four sub-types results
in eight types.) Similarly, Nishpadit-Nishpanna should be understood as Krit and
Karma, depending on where it occurs. 99/1. If food, etc., is left over in a
Jemanwar, giving it away on the same day or another day, either outside or
inside the house, is Kshetra Achhinna. Giving away the entire amount is Dravya
Achhinna. Giving it away for the whole day or continuously is Kala Achhinna.
(Bhava Achhinna is giving it away regardless of whether it is palatable or not.)
99/2. Giving away only two items of food, but not the rest, is Dravya Chhinna.
Giving away one of the two, either from inside or outside the house, is Kshetra
Chhinna. Giving away something from a particular time to a particular time is
Kala Chhinna. (Bhava Chhinna is giving away as much as you want, but not more.)
100. If an item is Chhinna in terms of Dravya, Kshetra, etc., but the
householder says before the stipulated time that it should not be given to
anyone, then that item is Kalpaneya because the householder has made it his own.
Sadhus avoid Achhinnakrit items. 101. If there is a Sankalpa (intention) like
"this item should be given to this person, but not to that person," then
sometimes it is Kalpaneya and sometimes it is not. (If there is a specific
instruction for the Yatis, then it is definitely not Kalpaneya.) 101/1. (The
item is not yet Auddeshik (intended for a specific purpose), it is Uddishyaman
(being intended). The householder says, "This item should be given, but not the
rest.") A Muni who hears about such a Sandishyaman (doubtful) item, it is
Kalpaneya for him to take that item at that time. For those who do not hear, it
is not Kalpaneya due to the fault of not being established. That Muni, leaving
from there, tells the Munis who have not heard about the previous Purushaachirna
Maryada (tradition) or through Sankalika (a group of monks), one monk tells
another, and another tells the third, and in this way, all the Munis are
informed that "the alms of this house are Aneshanya (not to be taken). This is
the Maryada if you don't hear." 101/2. (While giving alms to a Sadhu, a woman
says) "Don't give this, but give the item in this vessel." Upon hearing this,
the Muni asks, "Why is this prohibited? Why is that item being given?" Then the
householder woman says, "This item is kept for donation, not this." Hearing
this, the Muni should avoid that item. If she says again, "What has been given
has been given, now don't give the rest," then upon such prohibition, the
Atmarthikrit Uddishta-Auddeshik (intended for oneself and for a specific
purpose) food is Kalpaneya for the Sadhu.  1. If the householder intends that
this item should be given to a Grihastha (householder), Agrihastha (non-
householder), Bhikṣācara (beggar) or any Sadhu, then it is not Kalpaneya. If
there is no instruction for the Sadhu in it, then it is Kalpaneya (Mavri P. 81).
2. The commentator has given two meanings of the word Sankalika: 1. To tell the
Sadhus who have not heard about the Maryada that has been established by the
previous Purushas (men). 2. To give information in a sequential manner, one monk
to another, and another to the third monk (Mavri P. 81).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 144 piMDaniyukti do-do bheda haiM-chinna (niyamita), achinna (aniyamita) ye
donoM cAra-cAra prakAra ke haiM-dravya, kSetra, kAla aura bhaav| (chinna,
achinna kA ina cAra bhedoM se guNA karane para ATha bheda ho jAte haiN|) isI
prakAra niSpAditaniSpanna bhI kRta aura karma meM jo jahAM ghaTita hotA hai, use
vaisA jAnanA caahie| 99/1. jImanavAra meM jo AhAra Adi bacA hai, use usI dina
athavA anya dina bAhara athavA bhItarI kSetra meM denA, kSetra acchinna hai|
sArA denA, dravya acchinna hai| pUre dina taka athavA anavarata denA-
kAlaacchinna hai| (bhAva-acchinna hai-rucikara ho yA na ho to bhI avazya denaa|)
99/2. yaha AhAra do, bAkI kA nahIM-yaha dravya-chinna hai| antarvyavasthita
athavA bahirvyavasthita-donoM meM se eka do-yaha kSetra-chinna hai| amuka samaya
se prArambha kara amuka kAla taka do-yaha kAla-chinna hai| (bhAva-chinna hai-
jitanA tumako denA ho utanA do, isase atirikta nhiiN|) 100. jo vastu dravya,
kSetra Adi se chinna hai parantu gRhasvAmI niyata avadhi se pUrva hI kaha detA
hai ki aba kisI ko na dI jAe, taba vaha vastu kalpanIya hai kyoMki gRhasvAmI ne
usako apanA banA liyA hai| jo acchinnakRta hai, usakA sAdhu parihAra karate
haiN| 101. ye dravya amuka ko dene haiM, amuka ko nahIM-isa prakAra ke saMkalpa'
meM kabhI lenA kalpatA hai aura kabhI nhiiN| (yadi yatiyoM kA vizeSa rUpa se
nirdeza hotA hai to vaha nizcita rUpa se nahIM klptaa|) 101/1. (abhI vastu
auddezika nahIM huI hai, vaha uddizyamAna hai, gRhasvAmI kahatA hai-yaha vastu
denI hai, zeSa nhiiN|) aisI sandizyamAna vastu ke bAre meM jo sunatA hai, usa
muni ko vaha dravya usI samaya lenA kalpatA hai| jo nahIM sunate unako sthApanA
doSa ke kAraNa nahIM klptaa| vaha muni vahAM se calakara, jina muniyoM ne nahIM
sunA hai, unako pUrva puruSAcIrNa maryAdA kA kathana karatA hai athavA
saMkalikA' se eka saMghATaka dUsare saMghATaka ko aura dUsarA tIsare ko-isa
prakAra sabhI muniyoM ko yaha jJAta karA detA hai ki 'isa ghara kI bhikSA
aneSaNIya hai| na sunane para maryAdA isa prakAra hai|' 101/2. (sAdhu ko bhikSA
dete samaya koI strI kahatI hai-) 'yaha mata do kintu isa bhAjana meM rakhe
dravya ko do|' aisA kahane para muni pUchatA hai-'isakA niSedha kyoM? vaha
dravya kyoM diyA jA rahA hai?' taba gRhasvAminI kahatI hai-'yahI dravya dAna ke
lie rakhA hai, yaha nhiiN|' yaha sunakara muni usa dravya kA parihAra kre| yadi
vaha punaH kahatI hai ki jo de diyA gayA, vaha de diyA gayA aba zeSa mata do-
aisA niSedha karane para jo AtmArthIkRta uddiSTa-auddezika bhojana hai, vaha
sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya hai| 1. yadi gRhasvAmI yaha saMkalpa karatA hai ki yaha
vastu gRhastha, agRhastha bhikSAcara athavA koI sAdhu ko denI hai to vaha
kalpanIya nahIM hotii| yadi usameM sAdhu kA nirdeza nahIM hotA hai to kalpanIya
hotI hai (mavR pa. 81) /  2. TIkAkAra ne saMkalikA zabda ke do artha kie haiM-1.
jina sAdhuoM ne nahIM sunA, unheM pUrva puruSoM dvArA AcIrNa maryAdA ko batAnA
2. eka siMghAr3e dvArA dUsare ko tathA dUsare dvArA tIsare siMghAr3e ko
kramabaddha sUcanA denA (mavR pa. 81) /

Page #317 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **102, 103.**  Making *karamb* by mixing *odana* with *dadhi*
etc. is considered *krita* (done) due to reasons such as: emptying a vessel
filled with *dadhi* etc., becoming foul-smelling without being mixed with
*dadhi* etc., or being able to give it comfortably in one go after mixing with
*dadhi* etc. Giving *dadhi* and *odana* separately will be considered
*avarnavada* (heresy) by the *pasandhijan* (heretics).  Since what is
*parikattalit* (collected and formed into a lump) can be given comfortably,
binding the powder of *modaka* with *vikat-madya* (strong liquor), *phanit*
(fermented), and *ghrita* (clarified butter) etc. into a lump is called *krita*.
**104.** Similarly, the nature of *karma auddeshik* (action with a specific
purpose) is that there is diversity in heating the substances; for example,
heating *gud* (jaggery) etc. and mixing it with *modaka* powder to make *modaka*
again.  **105.** If a householder tells a *muni* (ascetic) who has entered for
*bhiksha* (alms) that he will give a certain food item after cooking it again
(making *modaka* again from *modaka* powder with *gudpak* (jaggery paste)), that
food item is *akalpya* (unacceptable) for the *muni* because it is *karma
auddeshik*. If he gives it before the cooking process, it is *kalpanya*
(acceptable). Similarly, with respect to the *kshetra* (place), inside or
outside the house, and with respect to *kala* (time), tomorrow or the day after
tomorrow (if he says he will give it after cooking it again), it is *akalpya*
for the *sadhu* (saint). If he gives it before that, it is *kalpanya*.
**105/1.** Taking such a substance before it is *krita* is *kalpanya*. Accepting
it after it is done in that way is *akalpya*. If the substance is *atmarthi*
(for oneself), it is *kalpanya* if it is kept aside for *yavadarthic* (as much
as needed) *pak* (cooking) *dana* (donation). The rest is *anishta*
(undesirable) and *ananujnat* (unpermitted).  **106.** Those who are
*niranukampa* (lacking compassion) towards the *shatkay* (six categories of
existence), have an *bahya drishti* (external vision) devoid of *jin-pravachan*
(Jain teachings), and are *bahubhak* (eat a lot) are only *bod* (shaved head).
Their condition is like that of a pigeon with lost and plucked feathers.
**107.** There are two types of *putikarma* (foul action): *dravya-puiti*
(foulness of substance) and *bhava-puiti* (foulness of feeling). *Dravya-puiti*
is the example of a *chhaganopalakshit* (one who observes the six vows)
*dharmic* (righteous person). There are two types of *bhava-puiti*: *badar*
(gross) and *sukshma* (subtle).  **108.** When a substance that was previously
rich in qualities like *surabhigandha* (pleasant smell) etc. becomes
contaminated with a substance having a foul smell, it is called *puiti*. Knowing
this, one avoids it. This is *dravya-puiti*.  **108/1, 2.** People of the same
age appointed a *dharmic* to plaster the *yaksha-sabha* (assembly of yakshas). A
laborer became indigested from eating *mandaka* (a type of food), *valla* (a
type of food), and drinking *sura* (liquor). He defecated foul-smelling
excrement in the cow shed. A buffalo then defecated on top of it. The appointed
*dharmic* plastered the *yaksha-mandap* (yaksha pavilion) with the dung mixed
with filth. When the people of the assembly came for the *udyapanika*
(celebration), they experienced the smell. In the plastering...  1. In a
particular region, *vikat-madya* was used to bind the *modaka* powder again
(Mavri p. 81). 2. The commentator, while explaining the verse, says that even
*tuvari* (a type of food) etc. offered at night, if it becomes stale, is also
heated and processed. Therefore, there is diversity in heating substances in
*karma* (Mavri p. 82).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 102, 103. dadhi Adi se bhare pAtra ko rikta karane ke lie athavA dadhi
Adi se mizrita kie binA durgandhayukta ho jAtA hai athavA dadhi Adi se mizrita
hone para use sukhapUrvaka eka hI bAra meM diyA jA sakatA hai--ityAdi kAraNoM se
odana ko dadhi Adi se mizrita karake karamba banAnA - yaha kRta hai  /  dadhi
aura odana ko pRthak-pRthak dene para pASaMDijana avarNavAda boleNge| jo
parikaTTalita - ekatra piMDIbhUta hai, use sukhapUrvaka diyA jA sakatA hai ataH
vikaTa-madya vizeSa', phANita tathA ghRta Adi se modaka ke cUrNa ko piMDarUpa
meM bAMdhanA kRta kahalAtA hai| 104. isI prakAra karma auddezika kA svarUpa hai
kevala dravyoM ko uSNa karane meM nAnAtva hai; jaise gur3a Adi ko tapAkara
modaka cUrNa meM milAkara punaH modaka banAnA  /  145 105. bhikSArtha praviSTa
muni ko yadi gRhastha kahatA hai ki amuka padArtha ko maiM punaH pakAkara
(modaka cUrNa ko gur3apAka se punaH modaka banAkara ) dUMgA to vaha padArtha
karma auddezika hone ke kAraNa muni ke lie akalpya hai  /  yadi vaha pAka kriyA
se pUrva detA vaha kalpanIya hai| isI prakAra kSetra kI apekSA se ghara ke
aMdara yA bAhara tathA kAla kI apekSA kala yA parasoM (punaH pakAkara dUMgA to
vaha sAdhu ke lie akalpya hai  /  yadi usase pahale de to kalpanIya hai  /   /
105/1. 'maiM amuka dravya ko aisA karake dUMgA' vaisA dravya kRta se pUrva lenA
kalpatA hai  /  vaisA karake dene para usakA grahaNa akalpya hai| jo
yAvadarthika pAka dAna ke lie nizcita kara rakhA hai, vaha dravya yadi
AtmArthIkRta hai, vaha kalpanIya hai, zeSa aniSTa hai, ananujJAta hai| 106.
SaTkAya ke prati niranukaMpa, jina-pravacana se rahita bAhya dRSTi vAle tathA
bahubhakSaka vyakti kevala boDa - muMDita sira vAle hI hote haiN| unakI vahI
sthiti hotI hai, jaise lupta luMcita paMkha vAle kapota kI  /  107. pUtikarma ke
do prakAra haiM- dravyapUti aura bhAvapUti  /  dravyapUti hai chagaNopalakSita
dhArmika kA dRSTAnta  /  bhAvapUrti ke do prakAra haiM - bAdara aura sUkSma  /
108. jo dravya pahale surabhigaMdha Adi guNoM se samRddha thA, phira vaha
azucigaMdha vAle dravya se yukta ho jAne para yaha 'pUti' hai aisA jAnakara
usakA parihAra kiyA jAtA hai, yaha dravyapUrti hai  /  108/1,2. samAnavaya ke
logoM ne yakSasabhA ko lIpane ke lie dhArmika kI niyukti kI  /  maNDaka, valla
aura surApAna karane se kisI karmakara ko ajIrNa ho gyaa| usane vahIM go-bAr3e
meM durgandhayukta mala kA vyutsarjana kara diyaa| usake Upara bhaiMsa ne gobara
kara diyA  /  niyukta dhArmika ne gaMdagI mizrita gobara se yakSamaMDapa ko lIpa
diyaa| jaba goSThI ke loga udyApanikA hetu Ae to unheM gaMdha kI anubhUti huI  /
lipAI meM 1. deza vizeSa meM modaka ke cUrNa ko punaH bAMdhane hetu madya vizeSa
kA prayoga kiyA jAtA thA (mavR pa. 81) /  2. TIkAkAra gAthA kA spaSTIkaraNa
karate hue kahate haiM ki tuvarI Adi bhakta bhI rAtri kA paryuSita ho to use bhI
garma karake saMskArita kiyA jAtA hai ataH 'karma' meM dravyoM ko uSNa karane kI
vividhatA hai (mavR pa. 82)  /

Page #318 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 146. Pindaniyukti  The components of Valla, etc., and the foul smell of Sura,
etc., were experienced. (Upon knowing the true situation) the paste of cow dung
was removed and replaced with other cow dung. (Due to contact with impurity, the
food was also made different.) This is an example of Dravya-puti. 109. Even pure
food, due to the mixture of mere components of the divisions of Adhakarma, etc.,
and the origin defect, inherently makes the pure-non-deviant conduct of the Muni
impure. This is Bhava-puti. 110. Adhakarma, Auddeshika, Misrajata, Badar-
praabhratika, Puti and Adhyavapurka - all these are included under the Udgama
koti, i.e., the A-vishodhi koti. 111. There are two types of Bhava-puti - Badar
and Sukshma. I will speak about Sukshma later. There are two types of Badar
Bhava-puti -  Upakaran-vishayaka and Bhakta-pan-vishayaka. 112. The stove, the
vessel, the large ladle, the small ladle - all these, if mixed or touched by
Adhakarma, make even pure food impure. Mixing pure food with Adhakarma-affected
vegetables, salt, asafoetida, and keeping or cooking pure food in a plate, etc.,
touched by Sankraman-Adhakarma, processing food with Sphodan-Adhakarma-affected
mustard, etc., and adding asafoetida, etc., as a seasoning - all this is Bhakta-
pan-vishayaka Puti. 113. The stove, etc., for boiling food, and the ladle, etc.,
for cooked food, are beneficial, hence they are called Upakaran. The stove, the
vessel, the spoon, the large ladle - all these are Upakaran. 113/1. Based on
Adhakarma, there are four options for the stove and the vessel: 1. Stove
Adhakarmiki, vessel also. 2. Stove Adhakarmiki, vessel not. 3. Vessel
Adhakarmiki, stove not. 4. Neither vessel Adhakarmiki nor stove. The first three
options are inconceivable. Cooking on the stove, etc., and establishing it from
another place is prohibited. If the same food is taken from another place, it is
permitted. 113/2. The stove and the vessel mixed with Adhakarmika mud is
Upakaran-puti. If, in the same way, the handle, the front part of the large
ladle, or the stick - one of these two is Adhakarmika, then it is Upakaran-puti.
1. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha No. 17. 2. The Puti-dosha
is described in detail in the Nisithabhashya. There, three types of Badar-puti
are mentioned - 1. Ahar 2. Upadhi and Vasati. Two types of Ahar-puti are
mentioned by option - 1. Upakaran-puti and Ahar-puti. (Nibha 806, 807) Two types
of Upadhi-puti are mentioned - Vastra and Patra, and seven types each are
mentioned under Mulaguna and Uttaraguna of Vasati-puti (Nibha 811). In Mulachar
(428), five types of Puti are mentioned - 1. Chulli 2. Ukkhali (Ukhala) 3.
Darvich-chammach 4. Bhajan 5. Gandha.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 146 piMDaniyukti valla Adi ke avayava tathA surA Adi kI durgandha kA anubhava
huaa| (yathArtha sthiti jAnane para) gomaya ke lepa ko ukhAr3akara anya gobara
se leSa kiyA gyaa| (azuci ke samparka ke kAraNa khAdya-padArtha bhI dUsarA
banAyA gyaa|) yaha dravyapUti kA udAharaNa hai| 109. AdhAkarma Adi udgama doSa
ke vibhAgoM ke avayava mAtra ke mizraNa se svarUpataH zuddha AhAra bhI muni ke
zuddha-niraticAra cAritra ko azuddha kara detA hai, yaha bhAvapUti hai| 110.
AdhAkarma, auddezika, mizrajAta, bAdaraprAbhRtikA, pUti tathA adhyavapUraka-ye
saba udgama koTi arthAt avizodhi koTi ke antargata haiN| 111. bhAvapUti ke do
prakAra haiM-bAdara aura sUkSma  /  sUkSma ke viSaya meM Age khuuNgaa| bAdara
bhAvapUti ke do prakAra haiM-upakaraNa viSayaka tathA bhaktapAna vissyk| 112.
AdhAkarma yukta cUlhA, sthAlI, lakar3I kI bar3I kar3achI, choTI kar3achI-inase
mizrita yA spRSTa zuddha azana Adi bhI pUti ho jAtA hai| AdhAkarmika zAka,
lavaNa, hIMga se mizrita karanA tathA saMkrAmaNaAdhAkarma se saMspRSTa thAlI Adi
meM zuddha azana rakhanA yA pakAnA, sphoTana-AdhAkarmika rAI Adi se bhojana ko
saMskArita karanA tathA hIMga Adi kA baghAra denA-yaha sArA bhaktapAna viSayaka
pUti hai| 113. sIjhate hue anna ke lie cullI Adi tathA pakva dIyamAna bhaktapAna
ke lie kur3achI Adi upakArI hote haiM isalie ye upakaraNa kahalAte haiN| cullI,
sthAlI, cammaca, bar3I kur3achI-ye sAre upakaraNa haiN| 113/1. AdhAkarma ke
AdhAra para cullI aura ukkhA (sthAlI) ke cAra vikalpa haiM 1. cullI AdhAkarmikI,
sthAlI bhii| 2. cullI AdhAkarmikI, sthAlI nhiiN| 3. sthAlI AdhAkarmikI, cullI
nhiiN| 4. na sthAlI AdhAkarmikI aura na cullii| prathama tIna vikalpa akalpya
haiN| cullI Adi para pakAne tathA anya sthAna se lAkara vahAM sthApita karane
para vaha pratiSiddha hai| vahI AhAra yadi anyatra gayA huA liyA jAe to anujJAta
hai| 113/2. AdhAkarmika kardama se mizrita cullI aura sthAlI upakaraNapUti hai|
yadi isI prakAra Doya, bar3I kur3achI kA agrabhAga athavA daMDa-ina donoM meM se
eka AdhAkarmika hotA hai to vaha upakaraNapUti hotA hai| 1. kathA ke vistAra
hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 17 /  2. nizIthabhASya meM vistAra se pUtidoSa
kA varNana kiyA gayA hai| vahAM bAdarapUti ke tIna bheda kie gae haiM-1. AhAra
2. upadhi aura vsti| vikalpa se AhArapUti ke do bheda kie haiM-1. upakaraNapUti
aura aahaarpuuti| (nibhA 806,807) upadhi pUti ke vastra aura pAtra do bheda kie
gae haiM tathA vasatipUti ke mUlaguNa aura uttaraguNa ke antargata sAta-sAta
bheda kie haiM (nibhA 811), mUlAcAra (428) meM pUti ke pAMca prakAra nirdiSTa
haiM-1.cullI 2. ukkhali (Ukhala) 3. darvIcammaca 4. bhAjana 5. gNdh|

Page #319 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **113/3.** If the *ādhākarmic* food is removed from the vessel,
the food in the vessel is considered *kalpya* (permissible). But if *ādhākarmic*
food is given with pure food, it is considered *āhārapūti* (contaminated). The
*darvi* (a type of utensil) is not *ādhākarmic*, but if it first stirs the
*ādhākarmic* food and then makes a paste of pure food, then that pure food is
also considered *āhārapūti*.  **193/4, 114.** To drink *takra* (buttermilk) etc.
for oneself, mixing *ādhākarmic* vegetables, salt, asafoetida, mustard, and
cumin etc. in it or adding spices is *bhaktpānapūti* (contamination by
consumption). If the vessel in which *ādhākarmic* food was cooked is transferred
to another vessel and pure food is taken out, cooked, or added to it without
being cleaned with the three *kalpas* (purification methods), it is
*bhaktpānapūti*. The vessel, *takra* etc. are also contaminated with *pūti*
(contamination) due to the smoke that arises when *besan* (gram flour),
asafoetida, cumin etc. are put on smokeless embers.  **115.** Pure food that is
mixed with the elements of *ādhākarmic* fuel (embers), smoke, smell etc. is
*sūkṣmapūti* (subtle contamination). Regarding this *sūkṣmapūti*, the disciple
says - "It is good to avoid *sūkṣmapūti*, then why is it not prohibited in the
scriptures?" To this, the teacher says:  **147**  **116.** Food mixed with the
elements of *ādhākarmic* fuel, smoke, smell etc. is not contaminated. Those who
believe in this contamination cannot be completely purified.  **116/1.** (The
teacher says) The elements of fuel and fire are subtle. They spread invisibly
with smoke, and smoke, vapor, and the smell of food - these touch the entire
world. According to this view, the whole world would be contaminated.
**116/2.** The disciple says again - "If *sūkṣmapūti* is impossible, then how
will the two types of *bādarapūti* (contamination by contact) and *sūkṣma*
(subtle) be established? Therefore, it is proven that food mixed with fuel,
smoke etc. is *sūkṣmapūti*."  **116/3.** The teacher says - "Disciple!
*Sūkṣmapūti* occurs from these four - fuel, fire particles, smoke, and vapor. It
is only a description, it cannot be avoided."  **116/4.** There are two types of
actions: - achievable and unachievable. Achievable actions are achieved,
unachievable ones are not. A person who tries to achieve an unachievable action
suffers and cannot achieve the action either.  **1.** According to the
commentator, this is an example of *bādarapūti*.  **2.** The word "etc." should
be understood to include vapor etc. (Mava. p. 85).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 113/3. AdhAkarmika darvI ko yadi sthAlI se bAhara nikAla diyA jAe to
sthAlI kA AhAra kalpya hai lekina AdhAkarmika dava se zuddha AhAra bhI diyA jAe
to vaha AhArapUti hai  /  darvI AdhAkarmikI nahIM hai lekina pahale AdhAkarma
AhAra ko hilAkara phira zuddha AhAra kA ghaTTana karatI hai to vaha zuddha AhAra
bhI AhArapUrti kahalAtA hai  /  193/4, 114. apane lie takra Adi kA pAna karane
ke lie AdhAkarmika zAka, lavaNa, hIMga, rAI tathA jIrA Adi ko usa takra meM
mizrita karanA yA baghAra denA bhaktapAnapUrti hai  /  jisa sthAlI meM pahale
AdhAkarma AhAra pakAyA thA, use dUsare pAtra meM DAlakara kalpatraya se sApha
kie binA usameM zuddha AhAra nikAlA jAe, pakAyA jAe athavA prakSipta kiyA jAe to
vaha bhaktapAnapUti hotA hai| nirdhUma aMgAroM para besana, hIMga, jIraka Adi
DAlane para jo dhUma nikalatA hai, usa dhUma se vyApta sthAlI, takra Adi bhI
pUti doSa se yukta haiN| 115. jo zuddha azana AdhAkarmika IMdhana (aMgArA),
dhUma, gaMdha Adi ke avayavoM se sammizrita hai, vaha sUkSmapUrti hai| isa
sUkSmapUrti ke viSaya meM ziSya kahatA hai- sUkSmapUrti kA varjana karanA acchA
hai to phira AgamoM meM usakA niSedha kyoM nahIM hai, aisA kahane para guru
kahate haiM 147 116. AdhAkarma IMdhana ke avayava, dhUma, gaMdha Adi se mizrita
azana pUti nahIM hotaa| jo isa pUrti ko mAnate haiM, unake mata se sAdhu kI
sarvathA zuddhi nahIM ho sakatI  /  116 / 1. ( guru kahate haiM ) IMdhana aura
agni ke avayava sUkSma hote haiN| ve dhUma ke sAtha adRzya hokara phailate haiM
tathA dhUma, vASpa aura anna kI gaMdha - ye sampUrNa loka kA sparza karate haiN|
isa mata ke anusAra to sArA jagat hI pUti ho jaaegaa| 116/2. ziSya punaH kahatA
hai- yadi sUkSmapUti asaMbhava hai to phira pUrva uddiSTa bhAvapUti ke do
bhedabAdara aura sUkSma- inameM sUkSmapUrti kI siddhi kaise hogI ? isalie yaha
siddha hai ki IMdhana, dhUma Adi se sammizrita anna sUkSmapUti hai  /  116/3.
guru kahate haiM- 'ziSya ! IMdhana, agnikaNa, dhUma aura vASpa - ina cAroM se
sUkSmapUti hotI hai, vaha kevala prarUpaNA mAtra hai, isakA parihAra nahIM ho
sakatA  /  ' 116/4. kArya ke do prakAra haiM-: - sAdhya aura asAdhya  /  sAdhya
kArya ko sAdhA jAtA hai, asAdhya ko nahIM  /  jo vyakti asAdhya kArya ko sAdhane
kA prayatna karatA hai, vaha kleza pAtA hai aura kArya ko bhI nahIM sAdha sakatA
/  1. TIkAkAra ke anusAra yaha bAdarapUti kA udAharaNa hai| 2. 'Adi' zabda se
vASpa Adi kA grahaNa karanA cAhie (mavR pa. 85 )  /

Page #320 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniryukti  **117.** If food, etc., is taken from a vessel in which an
*ahadkarma* meal has been taken, and the vessel is shaken to remove all
particles of the *ahadkarma* food, but the vessel is not purified by the three
purifications, then if another meal, etc., is taken from it, it is
*sukshmaputi*. By washing the vessel with the three purifications, the
*sukshmaputi* can be avoided.  **148**  **117/1.** (The disciple asks) - Perhaps
even after abandoning the vessel in which the *ahadkarma* was taken and washing
it, it does not become completely free from the elements of the *ahadkarma*,
because the smell of the food remains. It is true that without substance, there
are no qualities like smell, etc., so how can the purification of *sukshmaputi*
be possible?  **117/2.** (The Acharya says) - In the world, it is also seen that
a substance is not considered contaminated by the touch of an impure smell
coming from a distance. Even the elements of poison, when they go far away and
undergo a change, cannot kill anyone. (Similarly, the *pudgalas* of the smell
related to *ahadkarma* do not corrupt the character, nor does the fault caused
by the touch of *ahadkarma* arise.)  **117/3.** The food, etc., that comes into
contact with the vessel, to the extent that it comes into contact with the
*ahadkarma* vegetables, salt, etc., except for the elements of fuel like smoke,
etc., is *puti*. It is *puti* for three applications. After the three
purifications, the food cooked in that vessel becomes *kalpta*, i.e., the food
cooked after three washes becomes *kalpta*.  **117/4.** Except for the four
elements of fuel, the remaining food, drink, etc., are capable of becoming
*puti*. Their quantity starts from the amount of skin. Even if a single skin is
touched by *ahadkarma*, the entire food becomes *puti*.  **118.** On the day
*ahadkarma* is performed in a house, the food on that day is *ahadkarma*. For
the next three days, it is *puti*. It is not *kalpta* for a monk to eat there
for those three days of *puti*. If the vessel of a *sadhu* is *puti*, then the
food, etc., taken after the third purification becomes *kalpta*.  **1.** The
commentator Malayagiri, while explaining this verse, says that the smell that
comes from the vessel is *sukshmaputi*. This is only for the purpose of
informing, it is not possible to avoid it because the *pudgalas* of smell are
present throughout the world. The atoms of smell are not capable of destroying
character (Mavri p. 86, 87).  **2.** While explaining that it is *puti* for
three applications, the commentator Malayagiri says that *ahadkarma* food was
cooked in one vessel. It was taken out into another vessel and cleaned with a
finger, this is one application. Similarly, after cleaning it three times and
cooking it, that food is called *puti*. The food cooked in the same vessel for
the fourth time is not *puti*. Or, if pure food is cooked in the same vessel
without the three purifications - three washes, then it is *puti* food. The food
cooked in that vessel after three washes is pure (Mavri p. 87).  **3.** Fuel
(ember), smoke, smell, and vapor.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniryukti 117. jisa pAtra meM AdhAkarma AhAra Adi grahaNa kiyA huA hai, usa
pAtra ko jhaTaka kara AdhAkarma AhAra ke sAre kaNa nikAla lie kintu usa pAtra kI
kalpatraya se zuddhi kie binA yadi dUsarA azana Adi usameM liyA jAtA hai to vaha
sUkSmapUti hai  /  usa pAtra ko kalpatraya se dhone para sUkSmapUti kA parihAra
ho sakatA hai| 148 117/1. (ziSya pUchatA hai - ) kadAcit jisa pAtra meM
AdhAkarma grahaNa kiyA hai, usakA parityAga karake use dhone para bhI vaha
sarvathA AdhAkarma ke avayavoM se rahita nahIM hotA kyoMki anna kI gaMdha to AtI
hI rahatI hai| yaha tathya hai ki binA dravya ke gaMdha Adi guNa nahIM hote ataH
sUkSmapUrti kI zuddhiparihAra kaise ho sakatA hai ? 117/2. (AcArya kahate haiM )
- loka meM bhI yaha dekhA jAtA hai ki dUra se AtI azuci gaMdha se vipariNata -
spRSTa hone para bhI kisI dravya ko dUSita nahIM mAnA jAtA  /  viSa ke avayava
bhI dUra jAkara paryAyAntara meM pariNata hone se kisI ko mAra nahIM skte| (isI
prakAra AdhAkarma saMbaMdhI gaMdha ke pudgaloM se cAritra vikRta nahIM hotA aura
na hI AdhAkarma saMsparza janita doSa lagatA hai  / ) 117/3. IMdhana ke dhUma
Adi avayavoM se vyatirikta zeSa AdhAkarmika zAka, lavaNa Adi se sthAlI meM
jitanA azana Adi spRSTa hotA hai, utanA hI pUti hotA hai| tIna lepoM taka pUrti
hotI hai| kalpatraya ke bAda usa pAtra meM pakAyA huA anna kalpatA hai arthAt
tIna bAra prakSAlita karane para pakAyA huA AhAra kalpatA hai| 117/4. IMdhana ke
cAra avayavoM ko chor3akara zeSa azana, pAna Adi pUti hone ke yogya hote haiM  /
unakA parimANa tvak pramANa se AraMbha hotA hai  /  tvak mAtra bhI yadi
AdhAkarma se spRSTa to sArA azana pUti ho jAtA hai| 118. jisa ghara meM jisa
dina AdhAkarma kiyA jAtA hai, usa dina vaha AhAra AdhAkarma hai| zeSa tIna dina
pUti hotI hai| pUrti ke tIna dinoM muni ko vahAM AhAra lenA nahIM kalpatA  /
yadi sAdhu kA pAtra pUtibhUta hai to tRtIya kalpa ke bAda liyA jAne vAlA azana
Adi kalpatA hai  /  1. TIkAkAra malayagiri isa gAthA kI vyAkhyA karate hue
kahate haiM ki pAtra meM jo gaMdha AtI hai, vaha sUkSma pUrti hai  /  yaha
kevala prajJApanA karane ke lie hai, isakA parihAra saMbhava nahIM hai kyoMki
gaMdha ke pudgala samagra loka meM vyApta haiN| gaMdha ke paramANu cAritra kA
nAza karane meM samartha nahIM haiM ( mavR pa. 86, 87)  /  2. tIna lepoM taka
pUti hotI hai, isakI vyAkhyA karate hue TIkAkAra malayagiri kahate haiM ki eka
bartana meM AdhAkarma bhojana pakAyA  /  usako kisI dUsare bartana meM
nikAlakara aMguli se sApha kara diyA, yaha eka lepa hai| isI prakAra tIna bAra
sApha karake pakAne taka vaha AhAra pUrti kahalAtA hai| usI bartana meM cauthI
bAra pakAyA gayA AhAra pUti nahIM hotaa| athavA usI bartana meM kalpatraya -
tIna bAra prakSAlana kie binA zuddha AhAra pakAyA to vaha pUrti AhAra hai| tIna
bAra dhone para usa pAtra meM pakAyA gayA AhAra zuddha hotA hai (mavR pa. 87 ) 1
3. IMdhana (aMgArA), dhUma, gaMdha aura vASpa  /

Page #321 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 149 119. For the ascetics, all the actions like
food, clothing, shelter, etc. are considered *adhakarma*. All the *adhakarma*
done for the ascetics that are mixed with food are considered *purti*. 119/1. If
a muni suspects the possibility of *putidoṣa*, he should ask the *śrāvaka* or
*śrāvikā*, "Was there any *jīmanvār* or *saṅghabhakt* in your house a few days
ago?" Or, he should know from the conversation of the housewives whether there
is *puti* or not. (If there was *saṅkhaḍi* or *saṅghabhakt*, *puti* remains in
that house for three days, therefore, the muni should not take food there, and
on the fourth day, he can take alms from there.) 120. There are three types of
*miśrajāt*: *yāvadārthik*, *pāṣaṇḍimiśra*, and *sādhumiśra*. Even after being
transferred a thousand times, *miśrajāt* food is not considered pure. (If
someone who made *miśrajāt* food gave it to another person, and that person gave
it to a third person, and so on, even if it is given to the thousandth person,
that food is not considered pure.) It is permissible to take pure food in a
vessel that has been used for *miśrajāt* after removing the *miśrajāt* from the
vessel and washing it three times. 121. This food is not cooked for all the
future alms-seekers, but for the intended alms-seekers, therefore, you should
give it to the ascetics according to their wishes. Or, if there are too many
alms-seekers, and the food that was cooked earlier will not be enough, then the
householder tells his wife, "Add more food to this and cook it." That food is
*yāvadārthik miśrajāt*. 122. While cooking food for his family, another
householder says, "Cook some extra for the *pāṣaṇḍis*." A third householder
says, "Cook some extra for the *nirgranthas* along with our food." (This is
*pāṣaṇḍimiśra* and *sādhumiśra* food respectively.) 123. A person dies from the
poison of *sahasraveḍhaka*. The person who eats the meat of that person also
dies, and then the person who eats the meat of that person dies. In this chain
of death, even the thousandth person who eats that meat dies. 124. Similarly,
all three types of *miśrajāt* food destroy the pure character and soul of an
ascetic, therefore, such *miśrajāt* food is not considered pure even after being
transferred a thousand times. 125. If a muni takes *miśrajāt* food, he should
remove it completely from the vessel, clean it with his fingers or with dry cow
dung, then wash it three times and dry it in the sun, and then take pure food in
it. (Otherwise, there is a possibility of *putidoṣa*.) Some *ācāryas* believe
that there is no fault in taking food in that vessel after washing it four times
without drying it. 1. This verse explains the *sahasantar* (thousand times
transferred *miśrajāt*) mentioned in verse 120.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 149 119. zramaNoM ke lie kRta AhAra, upadhi, vasati Adi sArA AdhAkarma
hai| jo zramaNoM ke lie kie AdhAkarma AhAra se mizra hai, vaha sArA pUrti hai  /
119 / 1. muni ko pUtidoSa kI saMbhAvanA ho to vaha zrAvaka yA zrAvikA se pUche-
'tumhAre ghara meM kyA kucha dina pUrva jImanavAra yA saMghabhakta huA thA ?'
athavA gRhiNiyoM ke paraspara saMlApa se jAna le ki vahAM pUti hai yA nahIM ? (
saMkhaDi yA saMghabhakta hone para tIna dina usa ghara meM pUti rahatI isalie
muni vahAM AhAra na le cauthe dina vahAM se bhikSA grahaNa kI jA sakatI hai|)
120. mizrajAta ke tIna prakAra haiM- yAvadarthika, pASaMDimizra tathA sAdhumizra
/  mizrajAta AhAra sahasrAntarita hone para bhI nahIM kalpatA  /  (jisane
mizrajAta AhAra banAyA, usane use dUsare ko, dUsare ne tIsare ko - isa prakAra
hajAraveM vyakti ko de dene para bhI vaha AhAra nahIM kalpatA  / ) jisa bhAjana
meM mizrajAta hai, usa pAtra se mizrajAta kA apanayana kara use tIna bAra
prakSAlita kara usameM zuddha AhAra lenA kalpatA hai  /  121. yaha anna Ane vAle
sabhI bhikSAjIviyoM ke lie nahIM pakAyA gayA hai apitu vivakSita bhikSAcaroM ke
lie hai ata: tuma sAdhuoM ko unakI icchA ke anusAra do| athavA atyadhika
bhikSAcaroM ke A jAne para, jo pahale pakAyA gayA hai, vaha pUrA nahIM hogA ataH
gRhanAyaka apanI patnI se kahatA hai - 'isameM aura adhika anna DAlakara pakAo',
vaha AhAra yAvadarthika mizrajAta hai  /  122. apane kuTumba ke lie bhojana
pakAte samaya koI dUsarA gRhasvAmI kahatA hai ki pASaMDiyoM ke lie bhI kucha
adhika pkaao| tIsarA gRhanAyaka kahatA hai ki apane bhojana ke sAtha-sAtha
nirgranthoM ke lie bhI kucha adhika pkaao| (yaha kramazaH pASaMDimizra aura
sAdhumizra AhAra hai  /  ) 123. sahasravedhaka viSa se vyakti kI mRtyu ho jAtI
hai| usa vyakti kA mAMsa khAne vAlA bhI mara jAtA hai phira usakA mAMsa khAne
vAlA mara jAtA hai| isa pAraMpara maraNa meM usa mAMsa ko khAne vAlA hajAravAM
vyakti bhI mara jAtA hai| 124. isI prakAra tInoM prakAra kA mizrajAta AhAra
sAdhu kI suvizuddha cAritra - AtmA kA vinAza kara DAlatA hai isalie vaisA
mizrajAta AhAra sahasrAntarita hone para bhI nahIM kalpatA  /  125. mizrajAta
AhAra lene para muni usa pAtra se usakA pUrA apanayana karake, aMguli Adi se
usakA mArjana kare athavA sUkhe gobara se pAtra ko sApha kare phira tIna kalpa
se usakA prakSAlana kara Atapa meM sukhAe, phira usameM zuddha anna grahaNa kare
/  (anyathA pUtidoSa kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai) kucha AcAryoM kA mata hai ki
cauthI bAra prakSAlana karake binA sukhAe hI usa pAtra meM bhojana lene meM koI
doSa nahIM hai| 1. isa gAthA meM gA. 120 meM Ae sahasaMtara (sahasrAntarita
mizrajAta) kI vyAkhyA hai|

Page #322 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 150:  Pindaniryukti (Designation of the Object)  **126.** There are
two types of established faults: **Swasthan sthapit** (established in the proper
place) and **Parasthan sthapit** (established in an improper place). Each of
these has two sub-types: **Anantar** (immediate) and **Parampar** (successive).
Substances like ghee are **Anantar sthapit**, they do not undergo any change.
Milk, on the other hand, is **Parampar sthapit**.  Alms brought for a Sadhu
after three houses are considered **sthapit**.  **127.**  **Chhabbag** (bamboo
basket), **Warak** (small pot), and many other things are **Parasthan**.
**Pithar** (a type of vessel), **Chhabbag**, etc. are **Swasthan**.  A
**Chulli** (stove) and **Avchulli** (a place where the stove is not) are
**Parasthan** because they are located in different regions.  **128.**  There
are two sub-types of **Swasthan sthapana** and **Parasthan sthapana**:
**Anantar** and **Parampar**.  An established substance that cannot be altered,
and is not changed by the giver, is **Anantar sthapit** for the Sadhu.
**128/1.**  Substances like sugarcane juice and milk are **vikari** (liable to
change) as they can be transformed into **khakka** (a type of sweet) and
**dadhi** (curd) respectively. Substances like ghee and jaggery are **avikari**
(not liable to change).  **Odan** (cooked rice) and **dadhi** also change into
**karamb** (a type of food) and are therefore **vikari**.  They become
**kuthit** (putrid) and **durgandhyukt** (foul-smelling) if kept for a long
time, hence they are **vikari**.  **128/2, 3.**  A Sadhu requested milk from a
housewife. She said, "I will give it to you later." The Sadhu received milk
elsewhere. When the housewife reminded him about the milk, the Muni said, "I
have already received milk, I will take it when I need it."  Fearing the debt,
the housewife did not consume the milk.  She thought, "Tomorrow I will give the
Muni curd made from this milk."  She kept it aside. The next day, the Muni did
not take the curd, so the housewife made **navneet** (fresh butter), **mastu**
(buttermilk), and **takra** (sour milk) from it. She made ghee from the
**navneet**. If the housewife uses all of this for her family, making it
**atmarthi** (for her own benefit), then:  1. The milk undergoes a change. Milk
becomes curd, curd becomes butter, and butter becomes ghee.  The milk that was
kept aside for the Sadhu and from which ghee was extracted is **Parampar
sthapit**.  For explanation, see the translation and commentary of verse 128/2,
3 (Mavri p. 89).  2. Alms held in hand are considered faultless for three
houses. After three houses, until another house is reached, it is not considered
**sthapana**.  When another house is reached, the alms held in hand brought for
the Sadhu fall under the category of **sthapana dosha** (fault of establishment)
because it is then impossible to use them (Mavri p. 89).  3. Except for cooking
vessels and **chulli-avchulli**, all other vessels are both **Swasthan** and
**Parasthan**.  The commentator has given a **chaturbhangi** (four-fold
classification) based on **Swasthan** and **Parasthan**:     1. **Swasthan** in
**Swasthan**.     2. **Swasthan** in **Parasthan**.     3. **Parasthan** in
**Swasthan**.     4. **Parasthan** in **Parasthan** (Mavri p. 90).  4. For
example, if milk is kept aside as milk itself, without being processed into
curd, etc., on the same day, then it is **Anantar sthapit**.  Similarly, if
sugarcane juice is kept aside and given on the same day, it is **Anantar
sthapit**.  If it is used to make jaggery, etc., then it becomes **Parampar
sthapit** (Mavri p. 90).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 150 piMDaniryukti 126. sthApita doSa ke do prakAra haiM- svasthAna sthApita
tathA parasthAna sthApita  /  pratyeka ke do-do prakAra haiM - anantara, prNpr|
ghRta Adi dravya anantara sthApita hote haiM, unameM koI vikAra nahIM hotA  / )
dUdha Adi paraMpara sthApita hotA hai  / ' tIna ghara ke bAda sAdhu ke nimitta
se lAI gaI bhikSA sthApita hotI hai  / " 127. chabbaga- bAMsa kI TokarI, vAraka-
laghu ghaTa Adi anekavidha parasthAna haiN| piThara, chabbaga Adi svasthAna
haiN| cullI - avacullI se dUra pradezAntara meM sthita hone se ye parasthAna
haiN| 128. svasthAna sthApanA tathA parasthAna sthApanA ke do-do bheda haiM-
anantara aura prNpr| jisa sthApita dravya kA vikAra saMbhava nahIM hai, kartA ke
dvArA usako vikRta nahIM kiyA jAtA, vaha sAdhu ke nimitta anantara sthApita hai
/  128/1. ikSurasa, dUdha Adi vikArI dravya haiM (inase kakkaba tathA dadhi Adi
vikAra saMbhava hai)| ghRta, gur3a Adi avikArI dravya haiN| odana aura dadhi Adi
bhI karamba rUpa meM parivartita hote haiM ataH vikArI haiM  /  lambe samaya
taka rakhane se ye kuthita - durgandhayukta ho jAte haiM ataH vikArI dravya haiM
/  128/2, 3. kisI sAdhu ne eka gRhiNI se dUdha kI yAcanA kii| usane kahA- 'kucha
samaya bAda duuNgii|' sAdhu ko anyatra dUdha mila gyaa| dUdha hetu gRhiNI ke
kahane para muni bolA- 'mujhe abhI dUdha prApta ho gayA prayojana hone para
grahaNa kruuNgaa|' aisA kahane para RNa se bhayabhIta gRhiNI ne usa dUdha kA
upabhoga nahIM kiyaa| 'kala maiM muni ko isa dUdha kA dahI jamAkara dUMgI', yaha
socakara usane use sthApita kara diyaa| dUsare dina bhI muni ne dahI nahIM liyA,
taba gRhiNI ne usakA navanIta, mastu aura takra banA diyaa| navanIta kA ghRta
banA diyaa| yadi gRhiNI ina sabako apane kuTumba ke lie hoMge, isa prakAra
AtmArthIkRta kara letI hai to 1. dUdha meM vikAra hotA hai| dUdha se dahI, dahI
se makkhana, makkhana se ghii| jo sAdhu ke nimitta dUdha sthApita kara usameM se
ghI nikAla kara detA hai, vaha dUdha paraMpara sthApita hotA hai| isakI vyAkhyA
hetu dekheM gAthA 128/ 2, 3 kA anuvAda evaM TippaNa ( mavR pa. 89 )  /  2. hAtha
meM rakhI huI bhikSA tIna ghara taka nirdoSa hotI hai, tIna ghara ke bAda jaba
taka gRhAntara nahIM hotA, taba taka vaha sthApanA nahIM hai| gRhAntara Ane para
sAdhu ke nimitta lAI gaI hastagata bhikSA sthApanA doSa ke aMtargata AtI hai
kyoMki phira vahAM upayoga asaMbhava hai (mavR pa. 89 )  /  3. pAka-bhAjana
tathA cullI - avacullI ko chor3akara zeSa saba bhAjana svasthAna aura parasthAna
donoM haiN| TIkAkAra ne yahAM svasthAna aura parasthAna ke AdhAra para
caturbhaMgI dI hai 1. svasthAna meM svasthAna  /  2. svasthAna meM parasthAna  /
3. parasthAna meM svasthAna  /  4. parasthAna meM parasthAna ( mavR pa. 90 )  /
4. jaise dUdha yadi dadhi Adi ke rUpa meM parikarmamANa na hokara usI dina dUdha
rUpa meM hI sthApita hotA hai to vaha anantara sthApita hai  /  isI prakAra
sthApita ikSu rasa bhI usI dina diyA jAtA hai to vaha anaMtara sthApita hai,
usakA gur3a Adi banAne para vaha parampara sthApita hotA hai ( mavR pa. 90 )  /

Page #323 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 151. Accepting it is *kalpata*. Established
ghee, until the *deshonpurvakoti* (eight years prior to the end of life), can be
tainted with *sthapana dosha*. Similarly, a substance transformed into *karamb*
form, as long as it remains in an indestructible form, is tainted with *sthapana
dosha*. 129. Establishing *kankab*, *pind*, *gud*, *matsyadika* (a type of
sugar), *khand*, and *sharkara* from sugarcane juice is *parampar sthapana*.
Similarly, *parampar sthapana* occurs when other substances are transformed.
(Whatever is established, half of which is not used for *adhakarma* and which
has been *atmarthikrit* (used for self-benefit), is *kalpata*.) 130. One
mendicant uses one house, another uses two houses, until the use of three
houses, there is no *sthapana dosha*. Beyond three houses, alms collected
separately for the monk is *praabhratika sthapana*. 131. There are two types of
*praabhratika* - *badar* and *sukshma*. Both have two sub-types - *avashvashkan*
and *utshvashkan*. Knowing the coming and going of the community of monks,
marrying a girl is *avashvashkan*, doing it earlier or later is *utshvashkan*
*badar praabhratika sthapana*. 132, 133. When a son asks for food, the mother
says, "Son! Don't ask again and again. The monks will come here soon, taking
alms from houses in turn, and I will be ready to give them alms, then I will
give you food." Hearing this, the monk rejects the alms of that house, or
hearing the mother's words, the child takes the monk's finger and brings him to
his house. The monk asks, "Why are you pulling my finger?" Upon asking, the
child tells the truth. Hearing the child's words, the monk does not go there for
alms because there is *utserpan* form of *sukshma praabhratika dosha*. 134.
After the community of monks has left, knowing the day of the son's marriage, a
lay devotee, knowing the day of the *jimanwar* (a festival), marries his son
before the appointed time, intending to give the *modak* (sweetmeat) and *drav-
tanduldhavan* (rice and water) to the monk, this is *avashvashkan* form of
*badar praabhratika*. 135. Due to the non-arrival of the community of monks on
the fixed day of marriage, postponing the marriage   1. The *sthapana dosha* has
the highest *kalaman* (time limit) of *deshonpurvakoti* because the *kalaman* of
*charitra* (conduct) is eight years less than *purvakoti*. Explaining this, the
commentator Malayagiri says that a boy became a monk at the age of eight. His
lifespan was *purvakoti* (the time limit of a human lifespan). He requested ghee
from a householder whose lifespan was also *purvakoti*. She said, "I will give
you ghee after some time." The monk received ghee elsewhere. The householder
said to the monk, "There is no need now, I will take it when needed." The
householder established that ghee for the monk and kept it until the monk passed
away. After the monk's death, that ghee became free from *sthapana dosha* (Mavri
P. 91).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 151 unako grahaNa karanA kalpatA hai| sthApita ghRta dezonapUrvakoTi
taka sthApanAdoSa yukta ho sakatA hai| isI prakAra karamba rUpa meM parivartita
dravya bhI jitane kAla taka avinAzI rUpa meM rahatA hai, taba taka sthApanA doSa
yukta hotA hai| 129. ikSurasa kA kakkaba, piMDa, gur3a, matsyaMDikA-eka prakAra
kI zarkarA, khAMDa tathA zarkarA banAkara sthApita kara diyA, yaha paraMpara
sthApanA hai| isI prakAra anya dravyoM meM bhI paryAyAntara karane para
parampara sthApanA hotI hai| (jitanA sthApita kiyA hai, usameM se jitanA
AdhAkarma na ho aura jo AtmArthIkRta kara liyA ho, vaha kalpatA hai|) 130. eka
bhikSAgrAhI eka ghara kA upayoga karatA hai| dUsarA do gharoM kA karatA hai,
tIna gharoM kA upayoga hone taka sthApanA doSa nahIM hotaa| tIna gharoM se pare
muni ke lie alaga se nikAlI huI bhikSA prAbhRtikA sthApanA hotI hai| 131.
prAbhRtikA ke do prakAra haiM-bAdara aura sUkSma  /  donoM ke do-do bheda haiM-
avaSvaSkaNa tathA utssvssknn| sAdhu-samudAya kA AnA-jAnA jAnakara lar3akI ke
vivAha ko avaSvaSkaNa, utSvaSkaNa arthAt pahale-pIche karanA bAdara prAbhRtikA
sthApanA hai| 132, 133. putra dvArA bhojana mAMgane para mAM kahatI hai-'putra!
bAra-bAra mata maaNg| abhI paripATI-bArIbArI se gharoM meM bhikSA lete hue sAdhu
yahAM AeMge to maiM unako bhikSA dene ke lie ulUMgI, tabhI tujhe bhojana
duuNgii|' yaha vacana sunakara muni usa ghara kI bhikSA kA vivarjana karatA hai
athavA mAM kA vacana sunakara vaha bAlaka sAdhu kI aMguli pakar3akara apane
ghara para lAtA hai| sAdhu pUchatA hai-'tuma merI aMguli kyoM khIMca rahe ho?'
yaha pUchane para bAlaka yathArtha kaha detA hai| bAlaka kI bAta sunakara muni
vahAM bhikSA ke lie nahIM jAtA kyoMki vahAM utsarpaNa rUpa sUkSma prAbhRtikA
doSa hotA hai| 134. sAdhu-samudAya ke vihAra hone ke bAda putra ke vivAha kA
dina jAnakara koI zrAvaka jImanavAra meM banane vAle modaka tathA drava-
taNDuladhAvana Adi sAdhu ko dene ke lie niyatakAla se pUrva putra-vivAha karatA
hai, yaha avaSvaSkaNa rUpa bAdara prAbhRtikA hai| 135. nizcita vivAha ke dina
sAdhu-samudAya kA Agamana na hone se vivAha ko niyatakAla se Age karanA 1.
sthApanA doSa kA utkRSTa kAlamAna dezonapUrvakoTi hai kyoMki cAritra kA kAlamAna
ATha varSa kama pUrvakoTi hotA hai| isa bAta kA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue TIkAkAra
malayagiri kahate haiM ki koI bAlaka ATha varSa kI Ayu meM sAdhu bnaa| usakA
AyuSya pUrvakoTi pramANa thaa| usane pUrvakoTi AyuSya vAlI kisI gRhiNI se ghRta
kI yAcanA kii| usane kahA-'maiM kucha samaya bAda ghata duuNgii|' mani ko
anyatra ghata kI prApti ho gii| gahiNI ke kahane para mani ne kahA-'abhI
prayojana nahIM hai, jaba AvazyakatA hogI, taba luuNgaa|' gRhiNI ne usa ghRta ko
sAdhu ke nimitta sthApita kara diyA aura usako taba taka rakhA, jaba taka ki
muni divaMgata nahIM ho ge| sAdhu ke divaMgata hone para vaha ghRta sthApanA
doSa se mukta ho gayA (mavR pa. 91) /

Page #324 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 152. Pindaniyukti  The form of *praabhratika* is *utsarpana* (offering) and
*avadhushkana* (withholding). A righteous person reveals this form of
*praabhratika*, while a deceitful person keeps it hidden. 135/1. There are two
reasons for *avadhushkana* on days like weddings - for the purpose of
auspiciousness and for the purpose of merit. Similarly, *utsarpana* also occurs
for two reasons. If a householder tells the truth when asked about the reason,
then a monk avoids the food offered at that wedding, etc. 136. A monk who
consumes *praabhratika* offered by a devotee and does not perform *pratikramana*
for that (fault) is like a pigeon with clipped wings, wandering aimlessly.
136/1-6. A *shravaka* woman saw a monk with a clipped head. His body was thin
from austerity and stained with dirt. He was walking quickly and steadily,
looking at the ground with a single glance. Seeing that monk coming to her house
for alms, the *shravaka* woman was moved. She brought a large amount of food and
drink. Thinking that the door of this house is low, so the *eshana* will not be
pure, the monk moved on.  Seeing the monk leave without taking alms, the
*shravika* woman became sad and ashamed and sat there with the food and drink.
Just then, another monk, who was lax in following the rules of conduct, came
there and accepted the alms. Then the *shravaka* woman asked, "Bhagavan! A monk
came here earlier. He refused to take alms, and you have accepted them. What is
the reason for this?" The monk explained the reason for refusing alms, stating
the worldly and otherworldly benefits: "Monks who are in harmony with the
*eshana* committee do not accept alms from houses with low doors because (due to
darkness) the purity of *eshana* cannot be achieved there." (Those monks were in
harmony with *eshana*, so they left without accepting alms.) You ask me how I
find that food acceptable. Listen: "I am only a *lingopajivi*, only a *sadhu* in
appearance, not a virtuous *sadhu*." The monk explained to the *shravika* woman
about the qualities of a monk and *eshana*. Impressed by the simplicity of the
*sadhu*, the *shravaka* woman offered the monk abundant food and drink with
devotion. After that monk left, another monk came. When the *shravaka* woman
asked him, he said, "Such monks are deceitful, they behave deceitfully. We too
had previously behaved deceitfully in our vows." 137, 138. There are two types
of *praadushkarana* - *prakatkarana* and *prakashkarana*. *Prakatkarana*
means...  1. Explaining the latter part, the commentator says: A monk should not
accept that food if he knows the truth revealed by a righteous person through
tradition. Even if the *sadhu* does not know after searching, there is no fault
in accepting it because the *sadhu's* results are pure (Mavri P. 93). 2. The
commentator, explaining the worldly and otherworldly, has said that obtaining
alms is a worldly benefit, but following dharma and rules is an otherworldly
benefit, which is of greater virtue (Mat P. 94).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 152 piMDaniyukti utsarpaNa rUpa bAdara prAbhRtikA hai| isa avaSvaSkaNa aura
utSvaSkaNa rUpa bAdara prAbhRtikA ko koI Rju vyakti prakaTa kara detA hai aura
kuTila vyakti pracchanna rUpa se rakhatA hai| 135/1. do kAraNoM se vivAha Adi ke
dinoM kA avaSvaSkaNa hotA hai-maMgala ke prayojana se tathA puNya ke prayojana
se| isI prakAra utSvaSkaNa bhI do kAraNoM se hotA hai| kAraNa pUchane para yadi
gRhastha yathArtha bAta batAe to muni usa vivAha Adi meM bane AhAra kA varjana
karatA hai| 136. jo muni prAbhRtikA bhakta kA upabhoga karake usa sthAna (doSa)
kA pratikramaNa nahIM karatA, vaha muMDa vaise hI vyartha paribhramaNa karatA
hai jaise luMcita-viluMcita paMkha vAlA kapota  /  136/1-6. eka zrAvikA ne
luMcita zira vAle sAdhu ko dekhaa| usakA zarIra tapa se kRza aura maila se
kaluSita thaa| vaha yugamAtra dRSTi se bhUmi ko dekhatA huA atvarita aura
acapala gati se cala rahA thaa| usa muni ko apane ghara meM bhikSA ke lie Ate
hue dekhakara vaha zrAvikA saMvegayukta ho gii| vaha vipulamAtrA meM anna-pAna
lekara aaii| isa ghara kA dvAra nIcA hai ataH eSaNA zuddha nahIM hogI, yaha
socakara muni vahAM se Age bar3ha gyaa| muni ke binA bhikSA lie cale jAne para
vaha zrAvikA udAsIna aura lajjita ho gaI aura anna-pAna lekara vahIM baiTha gii|
itane meM hI eka dUsarA muni, jo caraNa-karaNa ke pAlana meM zithila thA, vahAM
AyA aura usane vaha bhikSA grahaNa kara lii| taba usa zrAvikA ne pUchA-'bhagavan
! abhI eka muni Ae the| unhoMne bhikSA lene kA niSedha kara diyA aura Apane
bhikSA grahaNa kara lI, isakA kyA kAraNa hai ?' muni ne aihalaukika aura
pAralaukika lAbha batAkara bhikSA chor3ane kA kAraNa batAyA-'jo muni eSaNA
samiti se samita hote haiM, ve nIce dvAra vAle gharoM se bhikSA nahIM lete
kyoMki (aMdhakAra ke kAraNa) vahAM eSaNA kI vizuddhi nahIM ho sktii|' (ve muni
eSaNA samita the isalie bhikSA grahaNa kie binA hI cale ge|) tuma mujhe pUchatI
ho ki mujhe vaha AhAra kaise kalpatA hai to suno-'maiM kevala liMgopajIvI hUM,
kevala sAdhu vezadhArI hUM, guNayukta sAdhu nahIM huuN|' muni ne usa zrAvikA ko
muni ke guNoM tathA eSaNA ke bAre meM btaayaa| sAdhu kI saralatA se prabhAvita
hokara zrAvikA ne bhaktipUrvaka muni ko vipula anna-pAna diyaa| usa muni ke cale
jAne para eka dUsarA muni aayaa| zrAvikA ke pUchane para usane kahA-'aise muni
mAyAvI hote haiM, mAyApUrNa AcaraNa karate haiN| hamane bhI pahale vratoM kA
mAyApUrNa AcaraNa kiyA thaa|' 137, 138. prAduSkaraNa ke do prakAra haiM-
prakaTakaraNa aura prkaashkrnn| prakaTakaraNa kA artha hai 1. uttarArdha ko
spaSTa karate hue TIkAkAra kahate haiM- Rju vyakti ke dvArA prakaTa kI gaI
yathArtha bAta ko jana-paramparA se jAnakara muni usa AhAra ko grahaNa na
kre|khoj karane para bhI yadi sAdhu na jAna pAe to use grahaNa karane meM koI
doSa nahIM hai kyoMki sAdhu ke pariNAma zuddha haiM (mavR pa. 93) /  2. TIkAkAra
ne ihaloka aura paraloka ko spaSTa karate hue kahA hai ki bhikSA kI prApti
aihalaukika lAbha hai lekina dharma aura niyama kA pAlana pAralaukika lAbha hai,
jo adhika guNa vAlA hai (mat pa. 94) /

Page #325 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 153 It is not permissible to give alms to monks
by providing them with light in a place that was previously dark, by making a
hole in a wall or by breaking down a wall, by lighting a gem lamp or a fire. The
food that is taken for oneself is permissible. If a monk has inadvertently taken
impure food due to a fault of contamination, and has not consumed it, then it is
permissible to purify that food and take pure food in the same vessel without
washing it. 138/1. There are three types of hearths: 1. *Sंचारिम* 2. A hearth
that is built outside for the monk beforehand 3. A hearth that is built outside
for the monk at that time. In all three cases, there are two faults in taking
food cooked on these hearths: *उपकरणपूति* and contamination. 138/2. The
housewife says, "O monk! You do not take alms from a dark place, therefore I
have cooked food on an external hearth." Hearing this, the monk should avoid
that food. If there is doubt, and upon questioning, the housewife speaks the
truth, then the monk should avoid that food as before. 138/3. If a housewife
builds a hearth outside for the monks and then thinks, "There are many flies
inside the house, and it is also hot. There is air and light outside, and the
cooking place is also close to the dining place, so now I will eat my food here
every day." If she takes it for herself, then the food cooked there is
permissible for the monk. This is the explanation of what is permissible and
impermissible regarding contamination. 138/4,5. Making a hole in the wall for
light, making a small door bigger, making another door, removing the upper
covering or roof, installing a luminous gem, lighting a fire, lighting a lamp -
if the housewife says that this has been done for the monk, or even without
asking, she tells him that it has been done for him, then such food is
contaminated and therefore impermissible for the monk. If the housewife does all
these things for herself, then the food there is permissible for the monk, but
light and lamp - both these means are impermissible because they involve contact
with the *तेजस्काय*. 138/6. If a monk inadvertently or unknowingly takes food
after it has been illuminated or made bright, then after knowing, he can purify
that food and take another pure food in the same vessel without washing it. 139.
There are two types of *क्रीतकृत*: *द्रव्यक्रीत* and *भावक्रीत*. Both have two
types each: *आत्मक्रीत* and *परक्रीत*. *परद्रव्यक्रीत* is of three types:
*सचित्त*, *मिश्र* and *अचित्त*. 1. *मवृ प. ९४*; *संचारिमा* or
*गृहाभ्यन्तरवर्तिन्यपि बहिरानेतुं शक्यते* - a hearth inside the house that can
be taken outside for some reason.   For Private & Personal use only

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 153 andhakAra se prakAza vAle sthAna meM le jAnA, dIvAra meM cheda
karanA athavA dIvAra ko girA denA, ratnapradIpa athavA agni ko jalAnA-isa
prakAra prakAza karake suvihita sAdhuoM ko dAna denA nahIM klptaa| isameM jo
AhAra AtmArthIkRta hotA hai, vaha kalpatA hai| yadi kisI muni ne sahasA
prAduSkaraNadoSa se duSTa AhAra le liyA ho, usakA paribhoga nahIM kiyA ho to usa
AhAra ko pariSThApita karake pAtra ko dhoe binA bhI usameM zuddha AhAra lenA
kalpatA hai| 138/1. cullI ke tIna prakAra haiM-1. saMcArima' 2. sAdhu ke lie
pahale se bAhara banAI huI cullI 3. usa samaya sAdhu ke nimitta bAhara banAI gaI
cullii| ina tInoM meM se kisI bhI cullI para pakAyA huA AhAra lene meM do doSa
haiM-upakaraNapUti tathA praadusskrnn| 138/2. gRhiNI kahatI hai-'he sAdhu! tuma
aMdhakAramaya sthAna se bhikSA nahIM lete ataH maiMne bAhya cullI para anna
pakAyA hai|' yaha sunakara muni usa AhAra kA parihAra kre| zaMkA hone para
pUchane se yadi gRhiNI yathArtha kahe to muni pahale kI bhAMti hI usa AhAra kA
parihAra kre| 138/3. koI gRhanAyikA pahale sAdhuoM ke lie bAhyabhAga meM cullI
banAkara phira socatI hai-ghara ke bhItara makkhiyAM bahuta haiM, garmI bhI
rahatI hai| bAhara havA aura prakAza rahatA hai tathA pAkasthAna se
bhojanasthAna bhI nikaTa rahatA hai isalie aba maiM pratidina apanA bhojana
yahIM kruuNgii| isa prakAra usako AtmArthI kara lene para vahAM pakAyA huA AhAra
muni ke lie kalpatA hai| prAduSkaraNa ke viSaya meM yaha kalpya-akalpya kI
vyAkhyA hai| 138/4,5. prakAza ke lie dIvAra meM chidra karanA, choTe dvAra ko
bar3A banAnA, dUsarA dvAra banAnA, Upara ke AcchAdana yA chata ko haTAnA,
dedIpyamAna ratna kI sthApanA karanA, jyoti jalAnA, dIyA jalAnAgRhasvAminI ko
pUchane para vaha kahe yA binA pUche hI yaha bAta batAe ki muni ke lie kiyA gayA
hai to vaisA AhAra prAduSkaraNa doSa duSTa hotA hai isalie vaha muni ke lie
varNya hai| yadi gRhasvAminI ye sArI bAteM apane lie karatI hai to vahAM kA
AhAra muni ke lie kalpya hai parantu jyoti aura pradIpa-ye donoM sAdhana varNya
haiM kyoMki inameM tejaskAya kA sparza hotA hai| 138/6. prakaTakaraNa athavA
prakAzakaraNa kie jAne para yadi muni sahasA athavA anajAna meM AhAra grahaNa
kara letA hai to jAnakArI ke pazcAt usa AhAra kA pariSThApana karake binA
prakSAlana kie usI pAtra meM dUsarA zuddha AhAra grahaNa kara sakatA hai| 139.
krItakRta ke do prakAra haiM-dravyakrIta tathA bhaavkriit| donoM ke do-do
prakAra haiM-AtmakrIta aura prkriit| paradravyakrIta tIna prakAra kA hai-
sacitta, mizra aura acitt| 1. mavR pa. 94; saMcArimA yA gRhAbhyantaravartinyapi
bahirAnetuM zakyate-gRha ke aMdara vAlI cullI, jise kAraNavaza bAhara le jAyA jA
ske| For Private & Personal use only

Page #326 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 154 ## Pindaniyukti  140. Atmakrita is of two types - dravya and bhava.
Dravya is through things like churna, etc. Bhava is when a sadhu earns something
through the display of their knowledge for another sadhu, or when they earn
something through their own dharmakatha, etc., for their own sustenance. This is
called parabhavakrita and atmabhavakrita respectively.  141. Earning sustenance
through things like nirmalya, gandhadravya, gutika, varnka-chandanadi, pott-
laghu vastrakhand, etc., is called atmadravyakrita. These can lead to two doshas
- glanata, the ineffectiveness of preaching, flattery from people when one is
healthy, and adhikarana.  142. If a mankh goes to a small Gokul, etc., and shows
off his pat to attract people, and then brings ghee, milk, etc., for a muni and
invites them, this is parabhavakrita aahar. It has three doshas - krita,
abhyahit, and sthapit.  142/1. In a village, a mankh was a shayyatar. He invited
sadhus for aahar. The sadhus refused. After a long time during varshavas, he
asked the munis, "After chaturmas, in which direction will you go?" The munis
said, "In such and such direction." Then the mankh introduced them to many
houses in that direction.  142/2. Those people wanted to give the mankh milk,
ghee, etc. He refused them, saying, "Not now, I will take it when I need it."
The munis arrived. The mankh had already gone to those houses and collected
ghee, etc., and gathered it in one house. (When the munis arrived, he gave them
the donation.)  143. A muni who uses dharmakatha, debate, tapasya, the story of
nimitta, aathapana, etc., to impress people, and who presents themselves as a
shrutasthan-acharya, or who uses their jati, kul, gan, karma, shilp, etc., to
earn aahar, etc., is engaging in atmabhavakrita.  1. Mavri P. 96; Nirmalya - the
leftover food of a deva, which has the power to influence things like tirtha,
etc.  2. Mavri P. 96; Gutika - a pill that is kept in the mouth for the purpose
of changing its form, etc.  3. According to the tikaakar, all these things are
atmadravyakrita due to the treatment of the cause in the action (Mavri P. 96).
4. If someone becomes ill after being given nirmalya, etc., then the preaching
is ineffective. If someone becomes healthy after being given nirmalya, etc.,
then it leads to flattery. Everyone praises them. Hearing the praise, others
also come and ask for nirmalya, gandha, etc. If they don't get it, sometimes it
leads to conflict (Mavri P. 96).  5. M. P. 96; Mankh - a person who shows off
their pat, etc., to amaze people.  6. For the expansion of the story, see Pari.
3, Katha San. 18.  7. The munis accepted it with eshana, therefore it is pure
aahar. If they had known about the mankh's efforts and accepted the aahar, then
the munis would have been guilty of three doshas - krita, abhyahrit, and sthapit
(Mavri P. 96).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 154 piMDaniyukti 140. AtmakrIta do prakAra kA hai-dravya aura bhaav| dravya se-
cUrNa Adi se| bhAva se-sAdhu ke lie dUsare ke dvArA svayaM ke vijJAna-pradarzana
se upArjita dravya parabhAvakrIta hai athavA AhAra ke lie svayaM dharmakathA Adi
se upArjita dravya AtmabhAvakrIta hai| 141. nirmAlya', gaMdhadravya, guTikA',
varNaka-candanAdi, potta-laghu vastrakhaMDa Adi se AhAra Adi arjita karanA-ye
AtmadravyakrIta haiN| inake upayoga se ye doSa saMbhava haiM-glAnatA, pravacana
kI aprabhAvanA, svasthatA hone para logoM kI cATukAritA tathA adhikrnn| 142. koI
maMkha vajikA-choTe gokula Adi meM jAkara vahAM paTa dikhAkara logoM ko AkRSTa
karake saMyamI muni ke lie ghI, dUdha Adi lAkara muni ko nimaMtraNa detA hai,
yaha parabhAvakrIta AhAra hai, isameM tIna doSa haiM-krIta, abhyAhata aura
sthaapit| 142/1. eka gAMva meM eka maMkha zayyAtara thaa| usane sAdhuoM ko AhAra
ke lie nimaMtraNa diyaa| sAdhuoM ne pratiSedha kiyaa| varSAvAsa kA bahuta samaya
bIta jAne para usane muniyoM ko pUchA-'cAturmAsa ke pazcAt Apa kisa dizA meM
jAeMge?' muniyoM ne kahA-'amuka dizA meN|' taba maMkha ne usI dizA meM sthita
aneka gharoM se paricaya kiyaa| 142/2. una logoM ne maMkha ko dUdha, ghI Adi
denA caahaa| usane una logoM ko pratiSedha karate hue kahA-'abhI nahIM,
prayojana hone para luuNgaa|' muni vahAM aae| maMkha ne pahale hI Akara una
gharoM se ghRta Adi lekara eka ghara meM ekatrita kara liyaa| (muniyoM ke vahAM
Ane para unako usakA dAna diyaa|) 143. jo muni logoM ko prabhAvita karane ke lie
dharmakathA, vAda, tapasyA, nimitta kA AkhyAna, AtApanA Adi karatA hai tathA
apane Apako zrutasthAna-AcArya batAtA hai athavA jAti, kula, gaNa, karma, zilpa
Adi batAkara AhAra Adi saMpAdita karatA hai-yaha AtmabhAvakrIta hai| 1. mavR pa.
96; nirmAlyaM-tIrthAdigatasaprabhAvapratimAzeSA-deva kA ucchiSTa drvy| 2. mavR
pa. 96; mukhe prakSepakasya svarUpaparAvartAdikArikA guTikA-rUpa-parivartana ke
lie mukha meM rakhI jAne vAlI golI guTikA kahalAtI hai| 3. TIkAkAra ke anusAra
ye sabhI vastueM kArya meM kAraNa ke upacAra se AtmadravyazrIta haiM (mavR pa.
96) /  nirmAlya Adi dene ke bAda devayoga se koI rugNa ho jAtA hai to pravacana
kA ur3Aha hotA hai| nirmAlya Adi se yadi koI rugNa nIroga ho jAtA hai to usase
cATukAritA bar3hatI hai| sabhI usakI prazaMsA karate haiN| prazaMsA ko sunakara
anya loga Akara bhI - usase nirmAlya, gaMdha Adi kI yAcanA karate haiN| nahIM
milane para kabhI-kabhI kalaha kA prasaMga bhI A jAtA hai (mavR pa. 96) /  5. ma
pa. 96; maGgaH kaidArako yaH paTamupadarya lokamAvarjayati-paTa Adi dikhAkara
logoM ko Azcaryacakita karane vAlA vykti| 6. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari.
3, kathA saM. 18 /  7. muniyoM ne eSaNApUrvaka usako grahaNa kiyA ataH yaha
zuddha AhAra hai| yadi unako maMkha kI ceSTA jJAta ho jAtI aura ve usa AhAra ko
grahaNa karate to muni tIna doSoM ke bhAgI hote-krIta, abhyAhRta tathA sthApita
(mavR pa. 96) /

Page #327 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 155 143/1. Whatever is accepted from
individuals influenced by religious discourses or those who have heard religious
discourses is called *ātmabhāvākṛta*. A lay follower asks, "Are you the famous
religious speaker?" The monk says, "Often, the virtuous are religious speakers,"
or the monk remains silent. This is *ātmabhāvākṛta*. 143/2. (A lay follower
asks-) "Are you the one who is a famous religious speaker in the world?" (The
monk says-) "Are you talking about someone with a body covered in ashes? Or
about someone who practices *daksausaukarīka-sāṃkhya*? Or about a certain
householder or someone who slaughters goats? Or are you talking about a *muṇḍa
kauṭumbika*, that is, a Buddhist monk, when you say religious speaker?" 2 143/3.
Similarly, one should know about the *vādī*, *tapasvī*, *naimittika*, *ātāpaka*,
etc. When asked about *śruta-sthāna*, that is, being an *ācārya* or a
*vācanācārya*, etc., presenting oneself in that form for food, etc., is
*ātmabhāvākṛta*. 144. Briefly, there are two types of *prāmitya*: worldly and
transcendental. Worldly is the property acquired by a sister, etc.
Transcendental is clothing, etc. 144/1. Through the practice of *śruta-jñāna*, a
monk, knowing the rules of restraint, came outside a village and asked, "Is
anyone from such and such family alive?" In response, it was said, "Only a
daughter of that family is alive, she is your sister." The monk went to her
house. When food was being cooked for the monk, the monk prohibited that food.
One day, she borrowed two *pala* of oil from an oil merchant at double the
interest and gave it to the monk. (The monk took the oil without knowing the
full details.) 144/2. Since the debt of the oil was unlimited, he accepted
servitude. After some time, the same brother came to the same village and asked
about his sister. The sister told him about the monk's servitude. The monk said,
"Don't cry. I will soon free you from servitude." 144/3. The monk went to the
house of the same merchant for alms. The housewife washed her hands to give
alms. The monk said, "The water ceremony has begun, I do not feel it is
appropriate for me to accept such alms." When asked the reason, the monk
explained the matter of killing living beings. The householder asked, "Bhanta!
Where are you staying?" The monk said, "I haven't found a place yet." Then the
householder gave him a place in his own house. By listening to the monk's
discourse and the example of (Vasudeva) every day, he became detached. The
merchant, with the consent of his eldest son and virtuous sister, gave him
permission to renounce the world.  1. By the monk's silence, the lay follower
understands that he is the famous religious speaker, because due to his
seriousness, he does not reveal himself, and being influenced by him, the lay
follower gives him abundant food, etc. (Mavṛ P. 97). 2. Concluding the verse,
the commentator says that after hearing so many options from the monk, the lay
follower thinks that he himself is the famous religious speaker, that's why he
is taking the names of others (Mavṛ P. 98).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 155 143/1. dharmakathA se prabhAvita vyaktiyoM se athavA dharmakathA
sunakara jAne vAloM se jo kucha bhI grahaNa karanA AtmabhAvakrIta kahalAtA hai|
koI zrAvaka pUchatA hai-'kyA ve prasiddha dharmakathI Apa haiM ?' muni kahatA
hai-'prAyaH sAdhu dharmakathI hI hote haiM' athavA vaha muni mauna rahatA hai,
yaha AtmabhAvakrIta hai| 143/2. (koI zrAvaka pUchatA hai-) 'jo jaga-prasiddha
dharmakathI hai, vaha Apa hI haiM kyA?' (muni kahatA hai-) 'kyA rAkha se guMDita
zarIra vAle ke lie kaha rahe ho? athavA dakasaukarika-sAMkhya ke lie? athavA
amuka gRhastha yA bakaroM kA galA mor3ane vAle ke lie? athavA muMDa kauTumbika
arthAt bauddha bhikSuoM ke lie tuma dharmakathI kI bAta kaha rahe ho?'2 143/3.
isI prakAra vAdI, tapasvI, naimittika, AtApaka Adi ke viSaya meM jAnanA caahie|
zrutasthAna arthAt AcAryatva athavA vAcanAcAryatva Adi ke viSaya meM pUchane
para AhAra Adi ke lie svayaM ko usa rUpa meM prastuta karanA AtmabhAvakrIta hai|
144. prAmitya ke saMkSepa meM do prakAra haiM-laukika aura lokottr| laukika hai-
bhaginI Adi dvArA krIta drvy| lokottara hai-vastra aadi| 144/1. zrutajJAna ke
abhyAsa se saMyama-vidhiyoM ke jJAtA muni ne eka gAMva ke bAhara Akara
pUchA'amuka kuTumba kA koI vyakti jIvita hai ?' uttara meM kahA-'usa kuTumba kI
eka putrI mAtra jIvita hai, vaha tumhArI bahina hai|' muni usake ghara ge| muni
ke lie AhAra pakAne para muni ne usa AhAra kA niSedha kiyaa| eka dina usane
taila ke vyApArI se dugune byAja se do pala taila udhAra lAkara muni ko diyaa|
(muni ne pUrI jAnakArI ke abhAva meM taila le liyaa|) 144/2. taila kA RNa
aparimita hone se usane dAsatva svIkAra kara liyaa| kAlAntara meM vahI bhAI muni
usI gAMva meM AyA aura bahina ke bAre meM pUchA- 'bahina ne muni ko apane
dAsatva ke bAre meM btaayaa|' muni bole-'ro mt| maiM zIghra hI tujhe dAsatva se
mukta karA duuNgaa|' 144/3. muni usI seTha ke ghara bhikSA ke lie ge| gRhiNI ne
bhikSA dene ke lie hAtha dhoe| muni bole'pAnI kA samAraMbha huA hai, mujhe aisI
bhikSA lenA nahIM klptaa|' kAraNa pUchane para muni ne jIvahiMsA kI bAta btaaii|
gRhasvAmI ne pUchA-'bhaMte! Apa kahAM Thahare haiM ?' muni ne kahA-'abhI kahIM
sthAna nahIM milA hai|' taba gRhapati ne apane ghara meM hI sthAna de diyaa|
pratidina muni kA pravacana evaM (vAsudeva kA) udAharaNa sunane se use vairAgya
ho gyaa| zreSThI ne apane jyeSTha putra aura sAdhu bhaginI sammati ko pravrajyA
ke lie 1. mauna se zrAvaka yaha jAna lete haiM ki vaha prasiddha dharmakathI
sAdhu yahI hai kyoMki gaMbhIratA ke kAraNa yaha svayaM ko prakAzita nahIM kara
rahA hai, usase prabhAvita hokara zrAvaka use prabhUta AhAra Adi dete haiM (mavR
pa. 97) /  2. gAthA kA upasaMhAra karate hue TIkAkAra kahate haiM ki muni se
itane vikalpa sunane ke bAda zrAvaka socate haiM ki vaha prasiddha dharmakathI
yaha svayaM hI hai, tabhI dUsaroM kA nAma le rahA hai (mavR pa. 98) /

Page #328 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 156 **Piṇḍaniyukti**  Discarded. Such are the meanings of the songs of the
Muni, and the results of the renunciation are manifested in only a few
individuals. 144/4, 145. There are faults in worldly **prāmittya** related to
clothes, utensils, etc., such as slavery and chain-binding. The faults related
to **lokoत्तर prāmittya** are these: (A Muni was given clothes borrowed from
someone, and the Muni used them.) When those clothes become soiled, torn, worn
out, stolen by thieves, or fall on the road, there may be conflict. Even if a
more beautiful garment is offered again in place of a previously requested
garment, a donor may have a difficult interest, and then there is a possibility
of conflict and other faults. 146. A Muni is in dire need of clothes. If another
Muni wants to give him clothes, he should give them with a high spirit, without
any apprehension, not lend them. If a Muni is crooked or lazy, and you have to
give him clothes, don't give them to him yourself. Keep the clothes with the
Guru. The Guru himself should give him those clothes, so that there is no
conflict. 147. In brief, there are two types of **parivartita** faults: worldly
and **lokoत्तर**. Both of these are of two types: **tad-dravya-viṣaya** and
**anya-dravya-viṣaya**. 148. Two neighbors were related to each other. They made
a **paudgalika śalyodana** change for the sake of the Sadhu. When there was
conflict, everyone attained enlightenment from the Muni's teachings. 148/1. The
Muni, moved by compassion for his sister, who was overwhelmed by poverty, stayed
at her house. The sister made a change in the food from her neighbor's wife.
Seeing **kodrava** instead of **śalyodana**, the brother asked the reason. Out
of envy, the wife did not tell the reason. The husband tormented her. 148/2. On
the other hand, the other one also tormented his wife. At night, the Sadhu
pacified both of them. After attaining enlightenment, they were initiated, so
one should not take **parivartita** food, because there are many people who
pacify conflict. 1. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha No. 19.
2. **Tad-dravya-viṣaya** change, such as giving fragrant ghee for the Sadhu
after giving foul-smelling ghee. **Anya-dravya-viṣaya** change, such as giving
**kodrava** food and taking **śalyodana**, etc., this is a worldly
**parivartita** fault (Mavṛ P. 100). The meaning of the word '**sajjhilga**' in
the text has been given as brother by the commentator, but here it should mean
neighbor. According to the relationship, both are brother-in-law, so the meaning
of neighbor seems appropriate here. Both meanings are given in the Deshi
Shabdkosh (Mavṛ P. 100). 4. Daśajicū P. 236; Puvvadeśayaṇam Puggalī Odano
Bhaṇṇai - People from the eastern country called rice **pudgal**. 5. For the
expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha No. 20.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 156 piMDaniyukti visarjita kara diyaa| aise gItArtha muni katipaya hI hote haiM
aura kucheka vyaktiyoM meM hI pravrajyA ke pariNAma udita hote haiN| 144/4, 145.
vastra-pAtra Adi se saMbaMdhita laukika prAmitya meM dAsatva tathA zrRMkhalA-
baMdhana Adi doSa hote haiM  /  lokottara prAmitya viSayaka doSa ye haiM-(kisI
se vastra udhAra lekara muni ko diyA , muni ne usakA upabhoga kiyaa|) vaha
vastra malina ho jAne para, phaTa jAne para, jIrNa-zIrNa ho jAne para, coroM
dvArA apahRta ho jAne para athavA mArga meM gira jAne para kalaha ho sakatA hai|
pUrvayAcita vastra se bhI suMdara vastra punaH samarpita karane para bhI koI
dAtA duSkara ruci ho sakatA hai, taba kalaha Adi doSa kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai|
146. kisI muni ko vastra kI atyaMta AvazyakatA hai| dUsarA muni use vastra denA
cAhe to uccabhAvanA se binA kisI AzaMsA se vaha vastra de, udhAra na de| koI
muni kuTila athavA AlasI hai, usako yadi vastra denA par3e to svayaM usako na
de| vastra ko guru ke pAsa rakha de| guru svayaM use vaha vastra de, jisase ki
kalaha na ho| 147. parivartita doSa ke bhI saMkSepa meM do prakAra haiM-laukika
aura lokottr| ye donoM do-do prakAra ke haiMtadravyaviSayaka tathA
anydrvyvissyk| 148. do par3osI Apasa meM eka dUsare ke saMbaMdhI the| sAdhu ke
lie paudgalika zAlyodana kA parivartana kiyaa| kalaha hone para muni ke upadeza
se sabako bodhi prApta ho gii| 148/1. muni ne daridratA se abhibhUta apanI
bhaginI para anukampA karake usake ghara meM pravAsa kiyaa| bahina ne par3osI
bhAI kI patnI se AhAra kA parivartana kiyaa| zAlyodana ke sthAna para kodrava
dekhakara bhAI ne kAraNa puuchaa| matsara bhAva ke kAraNa patnI ne kAraNa nahIM
btaayaa| pati ne usako pratAr3ita kiyaa| 148/2. idhara dUsare ne bhI patnI ko
pratAr3ita kiyaa| rAtri meM sAdhu ne donoM ko upazAnta kiyaa| bodhi prApta hone
para unakI dIkSA ho gaI isalie parivartita AhAra nahIM lenA cAhie kyoMki kitane
aise loga haiM, jo kalaha kA upazamana karate haiN| 1. kathA ke vistAra hetu
dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 19  /  2. tadravyaviSayaka parivartana jaise
durgandhayukta ghI dekara sAdhu ke lie sugaMdha yukta ghI lenaa|
anyadravyaviSayaka parivartana, jaisekodrava kA bhojana dekara zAlyodana lenA
Adi, yaha laukika parivartita doSa hai (mavR pa. 100) /  thA meM Ae 'sajjhilaga'
zabda kA artha TIkAkAra ne bhAI kiyA hai lekina yahAM paDosI artha honA caahie|
saMbaMdha ke hisAba se bhI donoM sAlA-bahanoI lagate haiM ataH yahAM par3osI
artha hI saMgata lagatA hai| dezI zabda koza meM sajjhilaga ke donoM artha die
gae haiM (mavR pa. 100) /  4. dazajicU pR. 236 ; puvvadesayANaM puggali odaNo
bhaNNai-pUrva dezavAsI odana ko pudgala kahate the| 5. kathA ke vistAra hetu
dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 20  /

Page #329 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **157**  **149.** (The exchange of clothes and other belongings
between ascetics is an extraordinary exchange, and it has these faults-) Knowing
that the clothes are inferior, superior, worn out, rough to the touch, heavy due
to thick yarn, torn, stained, incapable of protecting from cold, or of a
deformed color, the ascetic may become disturbed or his mind may be corrupted by
the words of another ascetic.   **150.** One monk has clothes that are in
accordance with the rules, while another does not. In such a situation, the
clothes that are in accordance with the rules should be placed at the feet of
the Guru. The Guru should give those clothes to the requesting monk. If the Guru
keeps them, it may lead to conflict.  **151.** There are two types of
*abhyahrit* - *achirna* and *anachirna*. There are two types of *anachirna* -
*nishith abhyahrit* and *no-nishith abhyahrit*. *Nishith abhyahrit* is to be
established, and we will discuss it later. Now, I will discuss *no-nishith
abhyahrit*.  **152.** *No-nishith abhyahrit* is of two types -
*swagramavishayak* and *pargramavishayak*. *Pargramavishayak abhyahrit* is of
two types - *swadesh pargrama abhyahrit* and *pardesh pargrama abhyahrit*. Both
of these have two types each - *jalpath se abhyahrit* and *sthalpath se
abhyahrit*. *Jalpath se abhyahrit* is of two types - *nauka se* and *dongi se*.
*Sthalpath se abhyahrit* is of two types - *jangha* and *gadi adi se*.  **153.**
The means of *abhyahrit* by water route are *jangha*, *bahu*, or *nauka adi*,
and the means of *abhyahrit* by land route are *kandha*, *shakat*, or a cart
with a donkey, bull, or other hoofed animal. These involve restraint-violation
and self-violation. Restraint-violation involves violation of *kay-apkay* etc.
**154.** Self-violation by water route occurs in this way - one may be submerged
due to deep water, may be caught by aquatic creatures, or one's feet may get
stuck in mud, crocodiles, turtles, etc. The faults of the land route are thorns,
snakes, thieves, dogs, etc.  **155.** *Swagramavishayak abhyahrit* is also of
two types - *grihantar* and *nogrihantar*. *Grihantar* is called that which is
brought from within three houses.  **156.** *Nogrihantar* has many types -
*vatak vishayak*, *sahi-gali vishayak*, *niveshan*, and *grihavishayak*. In
these, if a householder brings food, etc., to the ascetic in the *upashray* from
a *kapoti*, shoulder, or earthen or bronze vessel, it is *anachirna*.  **1. **
The village where the ascetic resides is *swagrama*, and the rest is *pargrama*.
**2.** *Grihantar abhyahrit* is conceivable, and *nogrihantar abhyahrit* is
inconceivable.  **3.** *Mavri P. 103; Vatak: parichchhanna: pratinayat:
sannivesh: - A separate, constant dwelling is called *vatak*.  **4.** *Mavri P.
103; Niveshanam - ek nishkraman praveshani vyadhigrihani - Two or more houses
with a single entrance.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 157 149. (sAdhuoM kA paraspara vastra Adi kA parivartana karanA
lokottara parivartana hai, usake ye doSa haiM-) yaha vastra mere dvArA pradatta
vastra pramANa se nyUna hai, adhika hai, jIrNaprAyaH hai, karkaza sparza vAlA
hai, moTe sUta kA banA huA bhArayukta hai, chinna hai, malina hai, ThaMDa se
rakSA karane meM akSama hai, virUpa varNa vAlA hai-aisA jAnakara vaha sAdhu
vipariNata ho sakatA hai athavA anya sAdhu ke kahane para usakA mana dUSita ho
sakatA hai| 150. eka muni ke pAsa pramANopeta vastra hai, dUsare ke pAsa vaisA
nahIM hai| aisI sthiti utpanna hone para pramANopeta vastra guru ke pAdamUla meM
sthApita kara de| guru usa vastra ko yAcaka muni ko de| guru ke pAsa na rakhane
para kalaha ho sakatA hai| 151. abhyAhRta ke do prakAra haiM-AcIrNa tathA
anAcIrNa  /  anAcIrNa ke do prakAra haiM-nizItha abhyAhata tathA no-nizItha
abhyaaht| nizItha abhyAhata sthApya hai use Age kheNge| abhI no-nizItha
abhyAhata khuuNgaa| 152. no-nizItha abhyAhata do prakAra kA hai-svagrAmaviSayaka
tathA prgraamvissyk| paragrAma viSayaka abhyAhata do prakAra kA hai-svadeza
paragrAma abhyAhata tathA paradeza paragrAma abhyAhRta  /  ina donoM ke do-do
prakAra haiM-jalapatha se abhyAhRta tathA sthalapatha se abhyaahRt| jalapatha se
abhyAhata ke do prakAra haiM-naukA se tathA DoMgI se| sthalapatha se abhyAhRta
ke do prakAra haiM-jaMghA tathA gAr3I Adi se| 153. jalamArga se abhyAhRta ke ye
sAdhana haiM-jaMghA, bAhu athavA naukA Adi tathA sthalamArga se abhyAhRta ke ye
sAdhana haiM-kaMdhA, zakaTa athavA gadhA, baila Adi khuranibaddha pazu se yukta
gaadd'ii| inameM saMyama-virAdhanA tathA AtmavirAdhanA hotI hai| saMyama-
virAdhanA meM kAya-apkAya Adi kI virAdhanA hotI hai| 154. jalamArga se
AtmavirAdhanA isa prakAra hotI hai-gahare pAnI ke kAraNa nimajjana ho sakatA
hai, jalacara vizeSa kI pakar3a ho sakatI hai, kIcar3a, magaramaccha, kacchapa
Adi ke kAraNa paira phaMsa sakate haiN| sthalamArga ke doSa isa prakAra haiM-
kaMTaka, sarpa, cora, zvApada Adi kA doss| 155. svagrAma viSayaka abhyAhRta ke
bhI do prakAra haiM-gRhAntara tathA nogRhaantr| tIna gharoM ke antara se lAyA
huA gRhAntara kahalAtA hai| 156. nogRhAntara ke aneka prakAra haiM-vATaka
viSayaka, sAhI-galI viSayaka, nivezana tathA gRhaviSayaka, inameM koI gRhastha
kApotI se, kaMdhe se athavA mRnmaya yA kAMsya bhAjana se AhAra Adi lAkara muni
ko upAzraya meM de, yaha anAcIrNa hai| 1. jisa grAma meM sAdhu rahatA hai, vaha
svagrAma aura zeSa prgraam| 2. gRhAntara abhyAhRta kalpanIya tathA nogahAntara
abhyAhRta akalpya hotA hai| 3. mavR pa. 103 ; vATakaH paricchannaH pratiniyataH
sanniveza:-alaga pratiniyata sanniveza vATaka kahalAtA hai|  /  4. mavR pa. 103
; nivezanam-ekaniSkramaNapravezAni vyAdigRhANi-eka hI daravAje vAle do yA usase
adhika ghr|

Page #330 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 158 ## Pindaniyukti  156/1. If a female lay devotee brings food from her home
to the monk's residence, revealing the following reasons, it is called
Nonishithswagrāma Abhyāhr̥ta: * When the monk went for alms, no one was at home.
* Or, it was not the time for alms. * Or, food was prepared for specific
individuals, so alms were not given before their arrival. * Or, after the monk
who came for alms left, sweets for a festival arrived. * Or, when the monk came
for alms, the householder was asleep.  157. The same order that was stated for
Nonishith Abhyāhr̥ta related to Swagrāma-Paragrāma should be known for Nishītha
Abhyāhr̥ta. Where the giver's intention is unknown, it should be known as
Nishītha Abhyāhr̥ta.  157/1-4. Some monks were far away, and some were across
the river. (The lay devotee had a lot of sweets left over from a wedding.) The
lay devotee thought that the monks would not accept the sweets due to the
possibility of Ādhākarma, so some lay devotees secretly took the sweets (to the
village across the river). There, they stayed in a temple and started giving
small amounts to the twice-born (Dwij) and others. They gave to the monks who
had gone out for Ucchāra and other activities. At the request of those monks,
the remaining monks also went there for alms. (So that the monks would not be
suspicious, a lay devotee said deceitfully)- 'Do not give them everything, give
them only what is necessary.' Another said- 'Give everything to the monks, we
only need a little bit left.' The monks who had taken the Navakārsi with
Namaskāra had already eaten. Those who had taken Purimārddha (two Paurashis) due
to indigestion, etc., did not eat. After giving the alms, the lay devotees came
there to pay their respects. They performed all the rituals, including
Naishēdhīkī. (The monks realized that this food was brought for us.) At that
time, the monks who had taken Purimārddha and had not eaten, did not eat that
food. Those who had picked up the Kaval, put it back in the bowl. Those who had
put the Kaval in their mouths, spat it out into the nearby Mallak-Pātra as soon
as they realized. All the food in the vessels was purified. All the lay devotees
apologized to the monks and returned. Those who had eaten earlier or had eaten
half, are pure due to their deceitful nature.  157/5. (A householder goes to
another householder's house with a Prāheṇaka to avoid the possibility of
Abhyāhr̥ta. While returning, she goes to the monk's residence with the intention
of giving alms to the monks and says)- 'Bhagavan! I received this Prāheṇaka
while going to such and such house, or I received it on such and such day of the
week.'  1. 157/1-4 In these four verses, the author has explained Paragrāma
Abhyāhr̥ta Nishītha through a specific incident. For the expansion of the story,
see Pari. 3, Kathā Saṅ. 21.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 158 piMDaniyukti 156/1. nimna kAraNoM ko prakaTa karake koI zrAvikA apane ghara
se sAdhu ke upAzraya meM AhAra lAe to yaha nonizIthasvagrAma abhyAhRta kahalAtA
hai * jaba muni bhikSA ke lie gae, taba ghara meM koI nahIM thaa| * athavA usa
samaya bhikSA-kAla nahIM thaa| * athavA viziSTa vyaktiyoM ke lie bhojana banAyA
gayA thA isalie unake Ane se pUrva bhikSA nahIM dI gii| * athavA bhikSArtha Ae
sAdhu ke cale jAne para praheNaka-tyauMhAra kI miThAI aaii| * athavA jaba muni
bhikSArtha Ae, taba gRhasvAminI so rahI thii| 157. jo krama svagrAma-paragrAma
viSayaka nonizItha abhyAhRta ke lie kahA gayA hai, vahI krama nizItha abhyAhata
ke lie jAnanA caahie| jahAM dAyaka kA bhAva avidita hotA hai, use nizItha
abhyAhRta jAnanA caahie| 157/1-4. kucha muni adhika dUrI para the tathA kucha
nadI ke pAra the| (zrAvaka ke yahAM vivAha ke pracura modaka baca ge|) zrAvaka
ne socA ki yahAM muni AdhAkarma kI AzaMkA se modaka grahaNa nahIM kareMge ataH
kucha zrAvaka pracchanna rUpa se modaka lekara (nadI ke pAra vAle gAMva meM)
cale ge| vahAM ve devakula meM ruke aura dvija Adi ko thor3A-thor3A dAna dene
lge| unhoMne uccAra Adi ke lie nirgata sAdhuoM ko dAna diyaa| una sAdhuoM ke
kahane para zeSa sAdhu bhI vahAM bhikSArtha ge| (sAdhuoM ko AzaMkA na ho ata:
mAyApUrvaka koI zrAvaka bolA-) 'inako pUrA mata denA, AvazyakatA ho utanA hI
denaa|' dUsarA bolA-'sAdhuoM ko sArA de do, pIche thor3A hI caahie|'
namaskArasahitA (navakArasI) vAle sAdhu khA cuke the| ajIrNa Adi ke kAraNa
jinhoMne purimArdha (do pauruSI) kI thI, unhoMne bhojana nahIM kiyaa| dAna dene
ke pazcAt zrAvaka vahAM vaMdanA karane aae| unhoMne naiSedhikI Adi sArI kriyAeM
kiiN| (sAdhuoM ko jJAta ho gayA ki yaha hamAre lie lAyA gayA AhAra hai|) usa
samaya jina purimArdha vAle muniyoM ne AhAra nahIM kiyA thA, unhoMne vaha
bhojana nahIM kiyA, jinhoMne kavala uThA liyA, unhoMne kavala vApasa pAtra meM
rakha diyaa| jinhoMne mukha meM kavala DAla diyA, unhoMne jJAta hote hI
pArzvasthita mallaka-pAtra meM thUka diyaa| bhAjanagata sArA AhAra pariSThApita
kiyA gyaa| sAre zrAvaka sAdhuoM se kSamA mAMgakara lauTa ge| jinhoMne pahale
bhojana kara liyA athavA AdhA bhojana kiyA, ve azaThabhAva ke kAraNa zuddha
haiN|' 157/5. (koI gRhiNI abhyAhata kI AzaMkA-nivRtti ke lie praheNaka lekara
kisI anya gRhiNI ke ghara kI ora jAtI hai| vahAM se lauTate samaya muniyoM ko
dAna dene kI bhAvanA se upAzraya meM jAkara kahatI hai)-'bhagavan ! amuka ghara
meM jAte samaya mujhe yaha praheNaka prApta huA athavA yaha mujhe amuka
jImanavAra meM 1. 157/1-4 ina cAra gAthAoM meM ghaTanA vizeSa ke mAdhyama se
graMthakAra ne paragrAma abhyAhRta nizItha ko spaSTa kiyA hai, kathA ke vistAra
hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 21  /

Page #331 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 159 "I have come to the Upashraya to pay homage
to the Munis. Please take this food. She gives the food to the Munis and
returns." 157/6. Or, that housewife says, "O Bhagavan! I brought this food from
home to give to my family, but they did not take it." (Or, some housewife,
having pre-planned everything, brings food according to plan and, so that it can
be heard by the Munis, says in a loud voice to the woman who is sleeping or
staying near the Upashraya - ) "Take this food." Then, she becomes angry,
pretending to refuse. When there is an artificial quarrel between the two, she
goes to the Upashraya in anger, pays homage, and gives the food to the Munis
after telling them the whole story. 158. Both types of Abhyahrit (Nishith,
Nonishith or Swagram, Paragram) mentioned are Anachirna. There are two types of
Achirna Abhyahrit - Desh and Deshadesh. 159. A region measuring one hundred
hands is called Desh, and the middle region of one hundred hands is called
Deshadesh. In this Achirna Abhyahrit, if there is a difference of three houses
that are useful, then food is permissible, otherwise not. 160. Taking food
brought from a distance of one hundred hands from the Pariveshanapankti (the row
of those who eat in the Jimanwar, etc., with a Muni on one side and the offering
on the other), a long entrance, or a Ghangeshala house is Achirna. Taking food
brought from a greater distance is prohibited. 161. There are three types of
Achirna Abhyahrit - Utkrishta, Madhyama, and Jghanya. Giving food taken from one
hand to another is Jghanya Abhyahrit. Abhyahrit from one hundred hands is
Utkrishta, and Abhyahrit from the middle place of one hundred hands is Madhyama.
All three are Achirna Abhyahrit. 162. Udbhinna is of two types - Pihitoddbhinna
and Kapato-dbhinna. In Pihitoddbhinna, there are two types of Pidhan - Prasook
and Aprasook. Aprasook is the covering of conscious earth, etc., and Prasook is
the covering of Chhagan (splinters) and Dardarak - a piece of cloth used to tie
the mouth of a vessel, etc. 163. In Pihitoddbhinna, there is a violation of the
Shatkay. Opening an oil vessel for a Sadhu and giving it to a son, etc., and
buying and selling leads to Adikaran-paapmaya activity. The same faults are
present in opening a door. There is a special violation in breaking open a
machine, etc. 1. 157/5,6 - These two verses are examples of Swagram Abhyahrit
Nishith. 2. Mavru P. 105; Upayogastatra Datum Shakya Ityarthah - The meaning of
Upayogapurvak is - a house suitable for giving. 3. If a housewife takes rice,
etc., in a bowl to serve her children, and a Sadhu comes to beg in the meantime,
then changing hands is also Jghanya Abhyahrit (Mavru P. 105). 4. Kutup - a
leather vessel for filling oil, etc., food given to a Sadhu after opening its
mouth is Pihitoddbhinna (Mavru P. 105).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 159 milA hai| muniyoM ko vaMdanA karane ke lie maiM upAzraya meM AI
huuN| Apa yaha bhojya sAmagrI leN| muniyoM ko vaha bhojana sAmagrI dekara lauTa
jAtI hai|' 157/6. athavA vaha gRhiNI yaha kahatI hai bhagavan ! maiM yaha
praheNaka apane parijanoM ko dene ke lie ghara se lAI thI parantu unhoMne ise
liyA nhiiN|' (athavA koI gRhiNI sAre prapaMca kI pUrva racanA kara, yojanAnusAra
praheNaka lekara jAtI hai aura muniyoM ko sunAI de sake, isa prakAra bAr3ha
svaroM meM zayyAtarI athavA upAzraya ke pAsa rahane vAlI strI se kahatI hai-)
'yaha praheNaka lo|' taba vaha mAyApUrvaka niSedha karatI huI ruSTa ho jAtI hai|
donoM meM kRtrima kalaha hone para vaha ruSTa hokara upAzraya meM jAtI hai,
vaMdanA karatI hai aura praheNaka lAne kA sArA vRttAnta sunAkara muniyoM ko dAna
de detI hai| 158. yaha donoM prakAra kA abhyAhRta (nizItha, nonizItha athavA
svagrAma, paragrAma) jo kahA gayA hai, vaha anAcIrNa hai| AcIrNa abhyAhRta ke do
prakAra haiM-deza tathA deshdesh| 159. sau hAtha pramita kSetra deza kahalAtA
hai tathA sau hAtha kA madhyavartI kSetra dezadeza kahalAtA hai| isa AcIrNa
abhyAhRta meM yadi upayoga yukta tIna gharoM kA antara hotA hai to AhAra
kalpanIya hai, anyathA nhiiN| 160. pariveSaNapaMkti, (jImanavAra Adi meM bhojana
karane vAloM kI paMkti meM eka kinAre para muni tathA dUsare kinAre para deya
vstu|) pralamba praveza dvAra athavA ghaMghazAlA gRha se sau hAtha dUra se lAyA
huA AhAra grahaNa karanA AcIrNa hai| usase adhika dUrI se lAyA haA AhAra grahaNa
karanA pratiSiddha hai| 161. AcIrNa abhyAhnata ke tIna prakAra haiM-utkRSTa,
madhyama aura jghny| eka hAtha se dUsare hAtha meM liyA huA bhojya denA jaghanya
abhyAhRta hai| sau hAtha se abhyAhRta utkRSTa hai tatha: sau hAtha ke
madhyavartI sthAna se abhyAhRta madhyama hai| ye tInoM AcIrNa abhyAhRta haiN|
162. udbhinna do prakAra kA hai-pihitodbhinna tathA kapATodbhinna  /
pihitodbhinna meM pidhAna do prakAra kA hotA hai-prAsuka tathA apraasuk|
aprAsuka hai-sacitta miTTI Adi kA pidhAna aura prAsuka hai-chagaNa (kaMDe) tathA
dardaraka-bartana kA muMha bAMdhane kA vastrakhaMDa aadi| 163. pihitodbhinna meM
SaTkAya kI virAdhanA hotI hai| sAdhu ke nimitta tailapAtra ko kholakara putra
Adi ko dene meM tathA kraya-vikraya karane se adhikaraNa-pApamaya pravRtti hotI
hai| kapATa ko kholane meM bhI ye hI doSa haiN| yaMtra Adi kA udbheda karane
para vizeSa virAdhanA hotI hai| 1. 157/5,6-ina donoM gAthAoM meM svagrAma
abhyAhRta nizItha kA udAharaNa hai| 2. mavR pa. 105 ; upayogastatra dAtuM
zakyata ityarthaH-upayogapUrvaka kA artha hai-dAna dene yogya ghr| 3. yadi koI
gRhasvAminI apane baccoM ko parosane ke lie kaTorI meM odana Adi le jAe, isI
bIca koI sAdhu bhikSArtha A jAe to kara-parivartana karanA bhI jaghanya
abhyAhata hai (mavR pa. 105) /  4. kutupa-taila Adi bharane kA camar3e kA pAtra,
usake mukha ko kholakara sAdhu ko diyA jAne vAlA AhAra pihitodbhinna hai (mavR
pa. 105) /

Page #332 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 160 ## Pindaniyukti  163/1. To cover the mouth of a Kutup (a type of
container), a clod of earth, a stone, etc., is sometimes placed and wet earth is
applied around it with awareness. The earth-bodied earth remains aware for a
long time, but the water becomes unaware after some time. 163/2. The same faults
that are present in opening the previously sealed (Kutup) for a Sadhu (Jain
monk) are also present in resealing it after giving it as a donation, because to
seal it, aware earth is again applied with water, and some people also apply
heated lac on the mouth of the Kutup. 163/3. Just as the previous sealing causes
harm to earth-bodied and other living beings, similarly, opening that seal for
the sake of a Sadhu and resealing it also causes harm to earth and other
stationary beings, and also to the ants, worms, etc., who live in the earth, and
other beings with three senses. 163/4. When the mouth of a Kutup, etc., is
opened for the sake of a Sadhu, the householder, the beggar, or the son, etc.,
gives oil, salt, ghee, and jaggery, etc. Upon opening, he definitely sells it,
and others buy it. 163/5. In donation, purchase, or sale, there is a possibility
of the act of taking, which leads to the sin of taking, and also, when the mouth
is opened, ants, mice, etc., may fall there. 163/6. Just as opening the
previously sealed pot, etc., causes harm to earth-bodied and other six-sensed
beings, similarly, sealing, etc., also creates faults (Dr. Ga. 163). Similarly,
the same faults should be understood in opening a closed door for the sake of a
Sadhu. 163/7. Opening the door causes harm to lizards, etc. The up and down
movement of the revolving door causes harm to worms, etc. When going behind the
door, there is a possibility of injury to the child, etc., inside. 164. A door
without a latch, which is opened and closed daily, is opened and the Muni (Jain
monk) takes food.  1. Applying heated lac also causes harm to the fire-bodied
beings, because where there is fire, there is also harm to the air-bodied
beings, therefore, opening the sealed container causes harm to the six-sensed
beings (Mavri Pa. 106). 2. The commentator, while explaining the opening of the
door, says that if there is a pot filled with water, etc., kept there, then if
it breaks, the water can enter the nearby stove, which can cause harm to the
fire-bodied beings. When there is harm to the fire-bodied beings, harm to the
air-bodied beings is inevitable. Water entering the burrows of ants, etc., can
also cause harm to the three-sensed beings. The act of donation, purchase-sale,
and taking, etc., should be understood in the same way as in verse 163 (Mavri
Pa. 107). 3. The commentator, while explaining the word 'Akunchiag', says that
the back of the door without a latch does not rise, therefore, there is no
friction and no harm to the beings. The commentator Malayagiri, while explaining
the alternative reading 'Akuyiag', says that the door which does not make a
creaking sound when opened is called 'Akrijikak-Krijika' (without creaking)
(Mavri Pa. 107).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 160 piMDaniyukti 163/1. kutupa Adi kA mukha r3hakane hetu kabhI miTTI kA DhelA,
pASANakhaMDa Adi rakhakara sacitta gIlI miTTI ko cAroM ora lagA diyA jAtA hai|
usameM pRthvIkAyika miTTI cirakAla taka sacitta rahatI hai lekina pAnI kucha
samaya bAda acitta ho jAtA hai| 163/2. pUrvalipta ko sAdhu ke lie udbhinna
karane para jo doSa haiM, ve hI doSa sAdhu ko dAna dekara punaH lepa karane meM
haiM kyoMki sthagana hetu usameM punaH sacitta pRthvI ko jala se AI karake lepa
kiyA jAtA hai tathA koI-koI lAkha ko tapAkara bhI kutupa ke mukha para lagA detA
hai| 163/3. jaise pUrva lepa karane para pRthvIkAya Adi jIvoM kI virAdhanA hotI
hai, vaise hI sAdhu ke nimitta usa pidhAna ko kholakara puna: lepa karane para
bhI pRthvI Adi sthAvarakAya kI virAdhanA hotI hai tathA pRthvI Adi ke Azrita
rahane vAle pipIlikA, kuMthu Adi trasakAya ke prANiyoM kI bhI virAdhanA hotI
hai| 163/4. sAdhu ke nimitta kutupa Adi kA mukha udbhinna karane para gRhasvAmI
yAcaka ko athavA putra Adi ko taila, lavaNa, ghI aura gur3a Adi detA hai|
udghATita karane para vaha avazya vikraya karatA hai aura dUsare use kharIdate
haiN| 163/5. dAna, kraya yA vikraya meM ayatanA rahane se adhikaraNa-pApakArI
pravRtti bhI saMbhava hai tathA mukha udghATita karane se vahAM cIMTI, mUSaka
Adi jIva bhI gira sakate haiN| 163/6. jisa prakAra pUrvalipta kuMbha Adi ko
udbhinna karane para pRthvIkAya Adi SaTkAya jIvoM kI virAdhanA hotI hai, vaise
hI liMpana Adi karane para bhI doSa utpanna hote haiM (dra. gA. 163)  /  isI
prakAra sAdhu ke nimitta baMda kapATa ko kholane meM bhI yahI doSa samajhane
caahie| 163/7. kapATa kholane se chipakalI Adi kI virAdhanA hotI hai| Avartana-
pIThikA ke UMce-nIce hone se kuMthu Adi jIvoM kI virAdhanA saMbhava hai| kapATa
ke pIche jAne para aMdara sthita bAlaka Adi ko coTa lagane kI saMbhAvanA rahatI
hai| 164. kuMcikArahita kapATa jo pratidina khulatA hai, baMda hotA hai, usako
udghATita karake muni AhAra 1. lAkha tapAkara lagAne se tejaskAya kI virAdhanA
bhI hotI hai kyoMki jahAM agni hotI hai, vahAM vAyukAya kI virAdhanA bhI hotI
hai ataH pihita ko udbhinna karane meM SaTkAya kI virAdhanA hotI hai (mavR pa.
106) /  2. TIkAkAra kapATa ke udghATana ke saMbaMdha meM vyAkhyA karate hue
kahate haiM ki vahAM jala se bharA maTakA Adi rakhA ho to usake bhedana hone
para pArzva sthita cUlhe para bhI vaha pAnI praveza kara sakatA hai, jisase
agnikAya kI virAdhanA saMbhava hai| agnikAya kI virAdhanA hone para vAyu kI
virAdhanA avazyaMbhAvI hai| cIMTI Adi ke bila meM pAnI praveza karane se
trasakAya kI virAdhanA bhI saMbhava hai| dAna, kraya-vikraya tathA adhikaraNa
Adi pravRtti bhI gAthA 163 ke samAna jAnanI cAhie (mavR pa. 107) /  3. TIkAkAra
'akuMciyAga' zabda kI vyAkhyA karate hue kahate haiM ki kuMcikAvivara se rahita
kapATa kA pRSThabhAga UMcA nahIM hotA ataH gharSaNa na hone se sattvoM kI
virAdhanA nahIM hotii| TIkAkAra malayagiri isake sthAna para 'akUiyAga'
pAThAntara kI vyAkhyA karate hae kahate haiM ki jisa kapATa ko kholane se
keMkAra kI AvAja nahIM hotI, vaha akRjikAka-kRjikA rahita kahalAtA hai (mavR pa.
107) /

Page #333 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **161.** **Translation:** (This is a case of *achiर्ण
ud-bhinna*.) If a vessel covered with cloth is tied, and the knot is untied and
tied daily, and it is not marked with *jatu* (lac), then giving it after opening
is also *chiर्ण ud-bhinna*.  **I**  **165.** There are two types of *mala-
pahat*: inferior and superior. The alms given from above while standing on the
front part of the feet is inferior *mala-pahat*, and the alms given from above
by climbing on a *nihsarani* (platform) etc. is superior *mala-pahat*.  **166.**
The example of the inferior *mala-pahat* is the *bhiksu* (monk), and the example
of the superior *mala-pahat* is the *geruk* (a type of bird). The defects of
inferior *mala-pahat* are like the bite of a snake, and the defects of superior
*mala-pahat* are like falling from above.  **166/1,2.** Seeing the householder
woman bringing *mala-pahat* alms, the *sadhu* (saint) returned from there
without taking alms. At that time, a Buddhist *sadhu* came there. When asked the
reason for not taking alms, the Buddhist *sadhu* said, "They have never given
anything to anyone (therefore they do not get good alms). The fragrance of
*modak* (sweetmeat) in a pot kept in a *mala* (garland) attracted a snake, which
entered it and bit her hand. The next day, the same Jain *sadhu* came there for
alms. (The householder said - ) You are cruel (because you knew and did not tell
that there was a snake above). The *sadhu* told the truth, which made them
attain *sambodhi* (enlightenment)."  **167.** While climbing on *asanadi*
(seat), *pidhak* (stool), *manchak* (bed), *yantra* (machine for grinding
*brihi* (rice) etc.), *ukhal* (mortar) etc., the *datri* (knife) can fall down.
This can lead to the destruction of one's own limbs and the killing of living
beings on the earth. In addition, there is a cessation of the acquisition of
wealth. There is hatred towards the *muni* (ascetic). There is ineffectiveness
of preaching, as people will say that this *muni* caused the death of a certain
householder by taking alms from them. This ignorance spreads among people that
these *muni* could not know the impending misfortune.  **168.** Similarly, there
are many defects of superior *mala-pahat*. The *muni* who went for alms
prohibited *mala-pahat* alms. To give alms to another *bhiksu*, a pregnant
householder woman climbed on a *nihsreni* (platform). (Due to the nail of the
*brihi-dalana-yantra* (rice-grinding machine) kept below) she fell down and her
womb burst, and the fetus came out. The woman died at that moment. The next day,
when the *muni* was asked the reason, he told the truth. The householder
attained *sambodhi*.  **169.** Alternatively, there are three types of *mala-
pahat*: *urdhava mala-pahat*, *adha mala-pahat*, *tiryak mala-pahat*. Giving
from above by sneezing etc. is *urdhava mala-pahat*. Bringing from below, from a
*bhumigruh* (underground house), *bhonhara* (cellar) etc. is *adha mala-pahat*,
and giving from a very high *kumbha* (pot) etc. is *tiryak mala-pahat*.  **1.**
For the expansion of the story, see *Pari.* 3, *Katha* No. 22. **2.** For the
expansion of the story, see *Pari.* 3, *Katha* No. 23.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 161 anuvAda grahaNa kara sakatA hai, (yaha AcIrNa udbhinna hai  / ) jisa pAtra
ko vastra se r3hakakara gAMTha dI jAtI hai, vaha gAMTha yadi pratidina kholI
aura bAMdhI jAtI hai tathA jo jatu (lAkha) se mudrita nahIM hai, usako kholakara
denA bhI cIrNa udbhinna hai| I 165. mAlApahata ke do prakAra haiM- jaghanya aura
utkRSTa  /  pairoM ke agrabhAga para Urdhvasthita hokara Upara se dI jAne vAlI
bhikSA jaghanya mAlApahRta hai tathA niHsaraNI Adi para car3hakara Upara se
utArakara denA utkRSTa mAlApahata hai| 166. jaghanya mAlApahRta meM bhikSu kA
tathA utkRSTa mAlApahRta meM geruka kA dRSTAnta hai  /  jaghanya mAlApahRta meM
sarpa kA DasanA tathA utkRSTa mAlApahRta meM Upara se nIce giranA Adi doSa hote
haiM  /  166/1,2. gRhasvAminI ko mAlApahRta bhikSA lAte dekha sAdhu vahAM se
binA bhikSA lie lauTa gyaa| usI samaya vahAM bauddha sAdhu AyA  /  bhikSA na
lene kA kAraNa pUchane para bauddha bhikSu bolA-' inhoMne kabhI kisI ko dAna
nahIM diyA (isalie inako acchI bhikSA kI prApti nahIM hotI  / ) mAle meM rakhe
ghar3e meM modaka kI sugaMdha eka sAMpa usameM ghusa gayA aura usake hAtha ko
Dasa liyaa| dUsare dina vahI jaina sAdhu vahAM bhikSArtha AyA  /  (gRhasvAmI ne
kahA - ) Apa nirdaya haiM ( kyoMki Apane jAnate hue bhI nahIM batAyA ki Upara
sAMpa hai  / ) sAdhu ne yathArtha bAta batAI, jisase unako sambodhi prApta ho
gaI  / ' 167. AsaMdI, pIDhaka, maMcaka, yaMtra (brIhi Adi dalane kA yaMtra)
Ukhala Adi sAdhanoM para car3hakara Upara rakhI huI vastu utArate samaya dAtrI
nIce gira sakatI hai| isase svayaM ke avayavoM kA vinAza tathA pRthvI para rahe
jIvoM kA vighAta ho sakatA hai| isake atirikta dravya-prApti kA vyavaccheda ho
jAtA hai| muni ke prati pradveSabhAva hotA hai| pravacana kI aprabhAvanA hotI
hai ki ina muniyoM ko dAna dene se amuka gRhiNI mara gaI  /  logoM meM yaha
ajJAnavAda phailatA hai ki ye muni hone vAle anartha ko pahale nahIM jAna sake
/  168. isI prakAra utkRSTa mAlApahata ke bhI aneka doSa haiM  /  bhikSArtha gae
muni ne mAlApahata bhikSA kA niSedha kara diyA  /  anya bhikSu ko bhikSA dene
hetu garbhavatI gRhasvAminI niH zreNI se Upara cddh'ii| (nIce rakhe
brIhidalanaka yaMtra kI kIla se) nIce girane se strI kI kukSi phaTa gaI aura
garbha bAhara A gayA  /  vaha strI usI samaya kAlagata ho gii| dUsare dina muni
ko kAraNa pUchane para unhoMne yathArtha bAta btaaii| gRhasvAmI ko saMbodhi
prApta ho gaI  /  169. athavA mAlApahRta ke tIna prakAra hote haiM-Urdhva
mAlApahRta, adhaH mAlApahRta, tiryak mAlApahRta  /  Upara chIMke Adi se utAra
kara denA Urdhva mAlApahRta hai| nIce bhUmigRha bhoMhare Adi se lAkara denA
adhaH mAlApahata hai tathA bahuta UMce kuMbha Adi se denA tiryak mAlApahRta hai
/  1. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 22  /  2. kathA ke
vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 23  /

Page #334 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 162 ## Pindaniyukti  170. If the householder is already on a platform,
stairs, or a raised area before the monk arrives, and he gives alms by extending
his arm into the monk's bowl, this is considered *anucchotkṣipta*. All such alms
are not considered *malāpahṛta*. All other alms are considered *malāpahṛta*.
171. If a monk, while looking at his bowl, accepts an offering from a giver with
a sideways, long, or straight arm, it is considered *anucchotkṣipta*. All other
ways of accepting alms are considered *ucchotkṣipta*.  172. There are three
types of *ācchedya*: *Prabhuviṣayak*, *Svāmiviṣayak*, and *Stenaviṣayak*. Since
*ācchedya* is prohibited by the Lord, it is not permissible for monks to accept
it.  173. *Prabhuviṣayak* *ācchedya* includes offerings related to a *gopāla*
(cowherd), *bhṛtaka* (servant), *dās-dāsī* (slave), *putra* (son), *putrī*
(daughter), and *putra-vadhū* (daughter-in-law). These offerings have the
following drawbacks: they cause displeasure, conflict, and some people develop
animosity. For example, consider the case of a *gopāla*.  173/1. Monks should
not accept *ācchedya* food from the master of the house, the headman of the
village, or the officials of the state, such as the *kotvāl* (police chief).
173/2. On a *vāraka* day, the master took milk from the cowherd and gave it to
the monk. Seeing less milk in the bowl, the wife became angry, and the children
started crying.  173/3. Driven by a sense of retaliation, she went to the monk
with animosity. Knowing her thoughts, the monk spoke to her, saying that he had
accepted the milk at the request of her master. (Now you can take this milk
back). The cowherd left the monk and said, "Don't accept *ācchedya* food again."
173/4. Nothing is obtained without earning it. Even a slave girl is not
available for enjoyment without devotion. *Ācchedya* food can lead to animosity
between the master and the servant, and the monk becomes the cause of the
cowherd's *antarāya karma* (hindering karma).  174. If a master or the master's
servants see monks and give them alms by standing in a window, extending their
arms, and giving alms with difficulty after offering them a platform or
something similar, this is not permissible for the monk. Giving alms from a
window while standing naturally on the ground, with an extended arm, is not
*malāpahṛta* and is therefore permissible for the monk (Mavṛ P 110).  1. Mat P
110; *Daīra*: A permanent platform made of wood without steps. 2. The
commentator, while explaining this verse, clarifies the permissible and
impermissible methods. A platform or something similar placed under the feet is
not permissible. Giving alms from a window while standing naturally on the
ground, with an extended arm, is not *malāpahṛta* and is therefore permissible
for the monk (Mavṛ P 110). 3. The head of one's own house is called *Prabhu*. 4.
The head of a village is called *Svāmi*. 5. For a detailed explanation of the
story, see Pari. 3, Katha San. 24.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 162 piMDaniyukti 170. darddara', zilA, sopAna Adi para sAdhu ke Agamana se
pUrva hI gRhasvAmI Upara car3hA huA ho, vaha hAtha laMbA kara sAdhu ke pAtra meM
dAna de to yaha anuccotkSipta hai, ye sAre mAlApahRta nahIM khlaate| zeSa sAre
mAlApahata hote haiN| 171. jo muni pAtra para dRSTi rakhatA huA dAtA ke tiryaga,
dIrgha aura sIdhe hAtha se vastu grahaNa karatA hai, vaha anuccotkSipta hai,
zeSa sArA uccotkSipta hai| 172. Acchedya ke tIna prakAra haiM-prabhuviSayaka,
svAmiviSayaka tathA stenvissyk| bhagavAn ke dvArA Acchedya kA niSedha hone ke
kAraNa zramaNoM ke lie usakA grahaNa kalpanIya nahIM hai| 173. gopAlaviSayaka,
bhRtakaviSayaka, dAsa-dAsIviSayaka, putraviSayaka, putrIviSayaka tathA
putravadhUviSayakaye prabhuviSayaka Acchedya haiN| inake ye doSa haiM-aprIti,
kalaha, kucha vyakti pradveSa karate haiM; jaise-gopAlaka kA dRssttaaNt| 173/1.
ghara kA mAlika prabhu, grAma kA mukhiyA svAmI tathA rAjya ke adhikArI kotavAla
Adi ke dvArA Acchedya AhAra nahIM lenA caahie| 173/2. vAraka ke dina gvAle se
dUdha ko chInakara svAmI ne sAdhu ko de diyaa| bhAjana meM dUdha ko kama
dekhakara bhAryA krodhita ho gaI aura bacce rone lge| 173/3. pratikAra kI
bhAvanA se vaha dveSapUrvaka sAdhu ke pAsa gyaa| sAdhu ne usakA manogata bhAva
jAnakara saMlApa kiyA ki tumhAre svAmI ke Agraha se dUdha grahaNa kara liyaa|
(aba tuma yaha dUdha vApasa le lo) gopAlaka ne sAdhu ko chor3a diyA aura kahA ki
aba dubArA Acchedya AhAra mata lenaa| 173/4. upArjita kie binA kucha bhI nahIM
miltaa| dAsI bhI bhaktapAna ke binA upabhoga ke lie nahIM miltii| Acchedya AhAra
se svAmI aura sevaka meM kabhI pradveSa ho sakatA hai tathA gopAla ke aMtarAya
karma baMdhane meM bhI muni nimittabhUta bana jAte haiN| 174. koI svAmI athavA
svAmI ke bhaTa muniyoM ko dekhakara unake lie apane adhInastha daridra 1. mat
pa. 110; daIra: nirantarakASThaphalakamayo niHzreNivizeSaH-sthAyI rUpa se rakhI
gaI kASTha kI sopaan-pNkti| 2. TIkAkAra ne isa gAthA kI vyAkhyA karate hue
kalpya aura akalpya vidhi kA spaSTIkaraNa kiyA hai-paira ke nIce maMcaka Adi
dekara gavAkSa meM sthita hokara bAhu phailAkara jo kaSTapUrvaka bhikSA dI jAe,
vaha sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya nahIM hai| bhUmi para svAbhAvika rUpa se khar3e
hokara gavAkSa se bAhu phailAkara denA mAlApahRta nahIM hai ata: vaha sAdhu ke
lie kalpanIya hai (mavR pa 110) /  3. apane ghara mAtra kA nAyaka prabhu
kahalAtA hai| 4. grAma kA nAyaka svAmI kahalAtA hai| 5. kathA ke vistAra hetu
dekheM pari.3, kathA saM. 24  /

Page #335 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Verse 163**  It is not proper for a monk to accept food,
etc., that has been taken away from family members. (This is a matter of the
owner's right.)  **Verse 175**  If food, clothing, etc., are given to a monk by
someone who has taken them from another, there is a possibility of conflict.
Even if there is no conflict, there are two disadvantages in accepting such
food:  **Verse 176**  Accepting such food leads to displeasure and obstacles.
The monk incurs the sin of *adattadan*. It leads to the cessation of *bhaktapan*
for one or many monks. It also leads to expulsion from the *upaashraya* and
other hardships if no *upaashraya* is found.  **Verse 177**  Some thieves give
food to monks or to themselves by taking it from poor people. It is not proper
for monks to accept such food. Accepting *stenachchedya* food leads to the
cessation of *bhaktapan* for other monks and creates animosity in the minds of
those from whom it was taken. If those poor people allow the *bhaktapan* to be
given, then the monk can accept it.  **Verse 177/1,2**  Some thieves are kind
towards monks. If, while traveling in a caravan, thieves give *achchedya* food
to monks upon seeing that their *bhaktapan* is not complete, the monks should
not accept it, so that they are not expelled from the caravan and their
*bhaktapan* is not stopped. As in the example of *ghritasaktu*, if the caravan
members allow it, the monk can accept the *achchedya* food, but should return it
to them when the thieves leave. If the caravan members give permission, the monk
can accept the food.  **Verse 178**  The Tirthankaras have forbidden the
acceptance of *anisrusht* and *ananujnat* food. *Nisrusht* and *anujnat* food is
permissible for well-behaved monks. *Anisrusht* is of many types: related to
*ladd*, food, *kolhu*, wedding feasts, milk, and *apan*, etc.  **Verse 179-180**
Thirty-two young men had made ordinary *modak*. The monk asked the appointed
guard, "Where are the remaining young men?"

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 163 kauTumbikoM se chInakara AhAra Adi dete haiM, use grahaNa karanA
sAdhu ko nahIM klptaa| (yaha svAmI viSayaka Acchedya hai|) 175. yadi sAdhu ke
lie AhAra, upadhi Adi dUsare se chInakara de to kalaha saMbhava hai| kalaha na
hone para bhI Acchedya AhAra grahaNa karane meM nimna doSa haiM176. Acchedya
AhAra lene se aprIti tathA aMtarAya doSa hotA hai| muni ko adattAdAna doSa
lagatA hai| eka yA aneka sAdhuoM ke lie bhaktapAna kA viccheda hotA hai|
upAzraya se niSkAsana tathA upAzraya na milane para anyAnya kaSTa bhI hote haiN|
177. kucheka cora muniyoM ke lie athavA svayaM ke lie daridra manuSyoM se AhAra
chInakara dete haiM, vaha muniyoM ko lenA nahIM klptaa| stenAcchedya AhAra
grahaNa karane se itara muniyoM ke bhaktapAna kA viccheda hotA hai, jinase chInA
gayA hai, unake mana meM pradveSabhAva paidA hotA hai| yadi ve daridra manuSya
bhaktapAna dene kI anumati dete haiM to muni vaha le sakatA hai| 177/1,2. kucha
cora sAdhuoM ke prati bhadra hote haiN| sArtha meM jAte hue sAdhuoM kA bhakta-
pAna Adi pUrA hote nahIM dekhakara cora yadi Acchedya AhAra dete haiM to vaha
sAdhu ko grahaNa nahIM karanA cAhie, jisase sAdhuoM kA sArtha se niSkAzana tathA
unake bhaktapAna kA viccheda na ho| 'ghRtasaktu dRSTAnta' kI bhAMti sArtha meM
calane vAloM kI anumati ho to muni Acchedya AhAra grahaNa kare lekina cora ke
jAne para puna: unako vaha AhAra de deve| yadi sArthika anujJA de deM to sAdhu
usa AhAra ko grahaNa kara sakatA hai| 178. tIrthaMkaroM ne anisRSTa-ananujJAta
grahaNa kA pratiSedha kiyA hai| suvihita muniyoM ke lie 'nisRSTa'anujJAta AhAra
kalpanIya hai| anisRSTa' aneka prakAra kA hai-laDDaviSayaka, bhojanaviSayaka,
kolhU viSayaka, vivAha-bhoja viSayaka, dUdha viSayaka tathA ApaNa viSayaka aadi|
179-180. battIsa yuvakoM ne sAmAnya modaka bnvaae| niyukta rakSaka se muni ne
pUchA-'zeSa yuvaka kahAM 1. TIkAkAra ne isa gAthA kI vistRta evaM spaSTa vyAkhyA
kI hai| unake anusAra stenAcchedya kA prasaMga sArtha meM jAte hue muniyoM ke
samakSa upasthita hotA hai| usa samaya garIba sArthikoM se balAt lekara cora
unako deveM to use sAdhu grahaNa na kre| yadi ve sArtha coroM ke dvArA balAt
lene para aisA kahate haiM ki hamAre sAmane ghRta saktu kA dRSTAnta upasthita
huA hai arthAt saktu ke madhya DAlA huA ghI viziSTa saMyoga ke lie hotA hai ataH
cora ko avazya hamArA AhAra grahaNa karanA caahie| yadi cora sAdhu ko deMge to
hameM mahAn samAdhi hogii| isa prakAra sArthika ke dvArA anujJAta deya ko sAdhu
grahaNa kara sakate haiN| phira coroM ke cale jAne para sAdhu vaha dravya
sArthikoM ko dete hue kahe ki usa samaya hamane cora ke bhaya se vaha AhAra le
liyA, aba ve gae ata: yaha dravya tuma grahaNa kara lo| aisA kahane para yadi ve
grahaNa karane kI anujJA deM to sAdhu ke lie vaha AhAra kalpanIya hai (mavR pa.
113) /  /  2. TIkAkAra ne anisRSTa ke sAmAnya rUpa se do bheda kie haiM-1.
sAdhAraNa anisRSTa 2. bhojana anisRsstt| bhojana anisRSTa ko graMthakAra ne
'collaga' zabda se nirdiSTa kiyA hai tathA zeSa jaMta Adi ko sAdhAraNa aniSTa ke
rUpa meM nirdiSTa kiyA hai (mavR pa. 113) /

Page #336 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 164: The Allocation of Food  "He has gone for a bath," someone said.
The (greedy) monk replied, "You don't even earn merit from the offerings of
others. Even if you gave me 32 laddoos, only one would be your share. Charity is
a small expenditure and yields great rewards. If you know this, then give me all
the laddoos." The monk, having received all the laddoos, started to leave. On
the way, the young men asked, "What have you received today?" The monk said,
"Nothing." Seeing the heavy bag, the young men said, "We will see the bag." They
forcibly looked into the bag. Out of fear, the appointed protector said, "I did
not give him any laddoos." The young men said, "You have stolen goods, therefore
you are a thief." They grabbed his clothes and pulled him. They took away the
monk's ascetic attire and equipment, making him a *pachakkad* (householder).
When questioned in the royal court, the monk remained silent out of shame, and
thus he was banished from the country. Thus, it is wrong to take from an
unworthy person, but food and other things are acceptable when given by a worthy
person.  181. Similarly, in the case of instruments, *sankaḍi* (wedding feast),
milk, and shops, etc., the *Tīrthankaras* have forbidden the general *anisṛṣṭa*
and *ananuññāta*. What is permitted by the master is permissible. 181/1. Now,
the *coḷḷaka* is the door related to food. There is much to be said about it,
therefore its explanation is given later. The Guru has described two types of
*coḷḷaka*: 1. *Svāmī* related, 2. *Hastī* related. 182. *Coḷḷaka* is of two
types: *chhinna* and *acchinna*. *Acchinna* is also of two types: 1. *Nisṛṣṭa*,
2. *Anisṛṣṭa*. In *chhinna* *coḷḷaka*, the thing given by the master is
permissible. 183. If the *chhinna* *coḷḷaka* (food) is given to the monk by the
one for whom it was intended, whether seen or unseen by the original master, it
is permissible for the monk. Similarly, *acchinna* *coḷḷaka* is also
permissible. On the contrary, *chhinna* or *acchinna* that is not permitted by
the master, whether seen or unseen, is not permissible for the monk.  1. One who
lives a householder life after taking *dīkṣā* is called a *pachakkad*. 2. For
the expansion of the story, see *Parī.* 3, *Kathā Saṅ.* 25. 3. After "laddoos"
in *Dwāragāthā* 178, there is "the *coḷḷaka* door," therefore the author says
that after verse 180, in verse 181, the explanation of the "coḷḷaka door" was to
be given, but in it, a general statement about instruments, *sankaḍi*, etc., has
been made together. The author had to explain the "coḷḷaka door" in detail,
therefore it has been given later (verse 181/1) in the order. 4. Someone makes
food for the *hālika* (family members) in a particular area. If he sends food
for each *hālika* in separate vessels, it is called *chhinna*. When he sends
food for all the *hālika* in the same vessel, it is called *acchinna*.
Similarly, in the case of *udyāpanikā* (ceremony), etc., one should understand
*chhinna* and *acchinna* *coḷḷaka* (M.V.P. 114). 5. If the collective *coḷḷaka*
sent for the *hālika* is also sent for the monk's charity, it is called
*nisṛṣṭa*, and the other is called *anisṛṣṭa* (M.V.P. 114). 6. If the one for
whom the *chhinna* was intended, the giver himself wants to give that *chhinna*
*coḷḷaka*, then it is permissible. In the case of *acchinna*, if all the masters
permit, then it is permissible for the monk to accept that thing (M.V.P. 114).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 164 piMDaniyukti gae haiM?' 'snAna karane gae haiM' aisA kahane para (lolupa)
muni bolA-'tuma dUsaroM ke modaka se bhI puNya kA upArjana nahIM krte|' yadi 32
modaka mujhe doge to bhI tumhAre bhAga meM eka hI modaka aaegaa| dAna alpavyaya
aura bahuAya vAlA hotA hai, yaha bAta yadi jAnate ho to mujhe sAre laDDu de do|
sAdhu una sAre modakoM ko prApta karake jAne lgaa| rAste meM una yuvakoM ne
pUchA-'Apane Aja kyA prApta kiyA hai ?' muni ne kahA-'kucha nhiiN|' bhArI jholI
dekhakara yuvakoM ne kahA-'hama jholI dekheNge|' unhoMne balAt jholI dekhii|
bhaya ke kAraNa niyukta rakSaka ne kahA-'maiMne inheM laDDa nahIM die haiN|'
yuvakoM ne kahA-'tumhAre pAsa corI kA mAla hai ataH tuma cora ho|' yuvakoM ne
unake kapar3e pakar3akara khiiNce| muni kA sAdhuveza evaM upakaraNa lekara use
pacchAkar3a (gRhastha) banA diyaa| rAjakula meM pUchane para lajjA se sAdhu
mauna rahA ataH usakA dezaniSkAsana kara diyA gyaa| isa prakAra aprabhu se lene
meM doSa hai, prabhu ke dvArA dene para vaha AhAra Adi grAhya hai| 181. isI
prakAra yaMtra, saMkhaDi-vivAhabhoja, dUdha tathA dukAna Adi meM sAmAnya
anisRSTa-ananujJAta tIrthaMkaroM dvArA niSiddha hai| svAmI dvArA anujJAta vastu
kalpanIya hai| 181/1. aba collaka' bhojana viSayaka dvAra hai| isake bAre meM
bahuvaktavya hai ataH isakI vyAkhyA bAda meM kI hai| guru ne collaka ke do bheda
varNita kie haiM-1. svAmI viSayaka 2. hastI vissyk| 182. collaka do prakAra kA
hotA hai-chinna aura acchinn| acchinna bhI do prakAra kA hotA hai1. nisRSTa 2.
anisRSTa'  /  chinna collaka meM svAmI ke dvArA deya vastu kalpanIya hai| 183.
chinna collaka (bhojana) jisake nimitta se diyA gayA hai, vaha yadi sAdhu ko
detA hai to vaha mUla svAmI ke dvArA dRSTa ho yA adRSTa, sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya
hai| isI prakAra acchinna cullaka bhI kalpya hai| isake viparIta jo chinna yA
acchinna svAmI ke dvArA ananujJAta hai, vaha adRSTa ho yA dRSTa, sAdhu ke lie
akalpya hai| 1. dIkSA lene ke bAda jo gRhastha jIvana jItA hai, vaha pacchAkar3a
kahalAtA hai| 2. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 25 /  /  3.
dvAragAthA 178 meM 'laDDuga' ke bAda 'collaka dvAra' hai ataH graMthakAra kahate
haiM ki 180 vIM gAthA ke bAda gA. 181 meM 'collaka dvAra' kI vyAkhyA karanI thI
lekina usameM yaMtra, saMkhaDi Adi agrima dvAroM ke bAre meM eka sAtha sAmAnya
kathana kiyA gayA hai| 'collaka dvAra' kI graMthakAra ko vistRta vyAkhyA karanI
thI ataH ise krama kI dRSTi se bAda meM (gA. 181/1) diyA gayA hai| 4. koI
kauTumbika kSetragata hAlikoM ke lie kisI se bhojana banavAtA hai| yadi alaga-
alaga pAtra meM pratyeka hAlika ke lie bhojana bhejatA hai to vaha chinna
kahalAtA hai| jaba vaha saba hAlikoM ke lie eka hI bartana meM bhojana bhejatA
hai to vaha acchinna kahalAtA hai| isI prakAra udyApanikA Adi meM bhI chinna-
acchinna cullaka samajhanA cAhie (mavR pa 114) /  5. hAlikoM ke lie bheje gae
sAmUhika cullaka ko sAdhu ke dAna ke lie bhI bhejA, vaha nisRSTa tathA dUsarA
anisRSTa kahalAtA hai (mavR pa. 114) /  6. jisake nimitta se chinna kiyA gayA
hai, yadi vaha dAtA svayaM usa chinna cullaka ko denA cAhe to vaha kalpanIya
hai| acchinna meM yadi sabhI svAmI anujJA deM, taba vaha vastu sAdhu ko grahaNa
karanA kalpanIya hai (mavR pa 114) /

Page #337 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **165**  **184.**  Food offered to an elephant by its keeper is
considered permissible even if the elephant does not see it. However, food
offered to an elephant by its keeper is not permissible if the elephant does not
see it. If the food offered by the keeper is not seen by the elephant, it is
considered permissible.   **185.**  Accepting unpermitted royal offerings and
food offered to an elephant leads to obstacles and faults like *adattadan*
(giving without receiving). Seeing the food offered daily by the keeper, the
elephant may break the *upaashraya* (shelter) of the *sadhu* (holy person).
**186.**  There are three types of *adhyavapurka* (supplementary food):
*swagruhayavadarthikamishra* (mixed for oneself and for those who come),
*swagruhasadhุมिश्र* (mixed for oneself and for the *sadhu*), and
*swagruhapaashandimishra* (mixed for oneself and for the *paashandi* (heretic)).
Cooking more food for these three while preparing food for oneself before the
arrival of the *sadhu* or *paashandi* is considered *adhyavapurka*.  **187.**
The quantity of rice, water, flowers, fruits, vegetables, and spices varies
during the time of offering. This is the difference between *adhyavatar*
(supplementary food offered at the time of offering) and *mishra* (mixed food).
**188.**  If *yadvadarthikamishra* *adhyavapurka* food is mixed with pure food,
it can be purified by simply removing that portion. If *swagruhapaashandimishra*
or *swagruhasadhุมिश्र* cooked food falls into pure food, the entire food
becomes impure.  After removing the portion of *yadvadarthikamishra*
*adhyavapurka* food, the remaining food is permissible for the *munis* (Jain
monks). However, *swagruhapaashandimishra* and *swagruhasadhุมिश्र*
*adhyavapurka* food is not permissible even if the remaining portion is left.
**Notes:**  1. For the explanation of this verse, see the translation and
commentary of verse 185. 2. While explaining the word "adi" (etc.), the
commentator says that faults like being pulled by humiliation and changing one's
appearance to that of a *sadhu* are also generated. 3. While explaining this
verse, the commentator says that if the king takes something without permission,
he may get angry and dismiss the keeper from his job. The *sadhu* faces the loss
of his livelihood due to this, so the *sadhu* is considered to have the fault of
*antaraya* (obstacle).  While explaining the latter part of the verse,
Malayagiri says that seeing the keeper offering food daily, the elephant may get
angry thinking that this *mund* (bald-headed person) takes food from me daily.
Therefore, seeing the *sadhu* in the *upaashraya*, the elephant may break the
*upaashraya* and may even kill the *sadhu*. Therefore, one should not accept
food offered by the keeper in front of the elephant (Mavri p. 115). 4. The word
"sadhu" is not used in the original verse. The commentator Malayagiri says that
"sagarmi se tti atra sadhushabdo'dhyahriyate" (the word "sadhu" should be added
here). *Swagruhasramanamishra* is included in *swagruhapaashandimishra*, so it
is not mentioned separately (Mavri p. 115). 5. The author has explained the
difference between *mishra* and *adhyavapurka* in this verse. In *mishra*, more
food is cooked for *yadvadarthik* etc. from the beginning, and in
*adhyavapurka*, more rice etc. is added later (Mavri p. 115, 116). 6.
*Swagruhayavadarthikamishra* *adhyavapurka* falls under the category of
*vishodhi koti* (purifiable). 7. Even after separating that portion from the
*swagruhapaashandimishra* and *swagruhasadhุมिश्र* or giving it to the
*paashandis*, the remaining food is not permissible (Mavri p. 116).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 165 184. svAmI ke dvArA anujJAta collaka unake dvArA adRSTa hone para
bhI kalpya hai| hAthI kA bhojana mahAvata ke dvArA anujJAta hone para bhI
akalpya hai| mahAvata ke dvArA deya bhakta yadi hAthI ke dvArA adRSTa hai to
vaha kalpanIya hai| 185. ananujJAta rAjapiNDa aura gajabhakta ko grahaNa karane
se aMtarAya aura adattAdAna Adi doSa lagate haiN| mahAvata ke dvArA pratidina
die gae bhojana ko dekhakara hAthI sAdhu ke upAzraya ko tor3a sakatA hai| 186.
adhyavapUraka ke tIna prakAra haiM-svagRhayAvadarthika mizra, svagRhasAdhumizra
tathA svgRhpaassNddimishr| yAvadarthika sAdhu athavA pASaMDI ke Ane se pUrva
svayaM ke lie niSpanna hote hue bhojana meM ina tInoM ke lie adhika rAMdhanA
adhyavapUraka hai| 187. AdAnakAla meM taNDula, jala, puSpa, phala, zAka tathA
masAlA Adi ke parimANa-mAtrA meM aMtara hotA hai, yahI adhyavatara aura
mizrajAta meM bheda hai|' 188. zuddha AhAra Adi meM yAvadarthika mizra
adhyavapUraka AhAra mizra ho jAe to usako utanI mAtrA meM nikAla dene mAtra se
AhAra kI vizodhi ho jAtI hai| zuddha AhAra Adi meM yadi svagRhapASaMDimizra aura
svagRhasAdhumizra pakAyA huA AhAra gira jAtA hai to sArA AhAra pUti ho jAtA hai|
vizodhi koTika yAvadarthika adhyavapUraka ke bhAga ko nikAla dene para athavA
utanA bhAga pASaMDiyoM ko de dene para zeSa bacA huA AhAra muniyoM ke lie
kalpanIya hotA hai lekina svagRhapASaMDimizra tathA svagRha sAdhumizra
adhyavapUraka AhAra zeSa bacane para bhI kalpanIya nahIM hotaa|" 1. isa gAthA kI
vyAkhyA hetu dekheM gA. 185 kA anuvAda evaM ttippnn| 2. Adi zabda kI vyAkhyA
karate hue TIkAkAra kahate haiM ki apamAna se khIMcanA tathA sAdhe veSa-
parivartana Adi doSa bhI utpanna hote haiN| 3. isa gAthA kI vyAkhyA karate hue
TIkAkAra kahate haiM ki rAjA ke dvArA ananujJAta lene para kabhI vaha ruSTa
hokara mahAvata ko naukarI se nikAla sakatA hai| sAdhu ke kAraNa usakI AjIvikA
kA viccheda hotA hai ataH sAdhu ko aMtarAya kA doSa lagatA hai| gAthA ke
uttarArdha ko spaSTa karate hue malayagiri kahate haiM ki mahAvata ke dvArA
pratidina dAna dete dekhakara hAthI ruSTa ho sakatA hai ki yaha muNDa mere
bhojana se pratidina grahaNa karatA hai ataH vaha upAzraya meM usa sAdhu ko
dekhakara upAzraya ko bhI tor3a sakatA hai tathA kabhI sAdhu kA bhI prANaghAta
kara sakatA hai isalie gaja ke sAmane mahAvata ke dvArA diyA gayA AhAra bhI
nahIM lenA cAhie (mavR pa. 115) /  4. mUla gAthA meM sAdhu zabda kA prayoga
nahIM hai| TIkAkAra malayagiri kahate haiM ki 'sagharamIse tti atra
sAdhuzabdo'dhyAhriyate' arthAt yahAM sAdhu zabda kA adhyAhAra karanA caahie|
svagRha zramaNamizra kA svagRhapASaNDimizra meM antarbhAva ho jAtA hai ata:
usakA alaga se nirdeza nahIM kiyA gayA hai (mavR pa. 115) /  5. graMthakAra ne
isa gAthA meM mizrajAta aura adhyavapUraka kA bheda spaSTa kiyA hai| mizrajAta
meM yAvadarthika Adi ke lie prAraMbha meM hI adhika pakAyA jAtA hai aura
adhyavapUraka meM bAda meM taMDula Adi kA adhika parimANa kiyA jAtA hai (mavR
pa. 115, 116) /  6. svagRhayAvadarthikamizra adhyavapUraka vizodhi koTi ke
antargata AtA hai| 7. svagRhapASaMDimizra tathA svagRhasAdhumizra meM sthAlI se
utanA bhAga pRthaka karane para yA pASaMDiyoM ko dene para bhI zeSa AhAra
kalpanIya nahIM hotA (mavR pa. 116) /

Page #338 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 166 ## Pindaniyukti  188/1. The remaining food is permissible for the Sadhu
if the cooked food is separated from the vessel or removed from it to the extent
that it is necessary. If the food is given to the Karpatakas by estimation
without counting the particles, etc., then the remaining food is permissible for
the Sadhu. 189. There are two types of Udgamdosha with sixteen divisions - the
first is Vishodhikatik and the second is Avishodhikatik. 190. Adhakarma, the
last three divisions of Auddeshik - Puti, Misrajat, Badarprabhritika, the last
two divisions of Adhyavapurka - Swagrihapashandimishra and Swagrihasadhุมishra -
these are Avishodhikoti Udgamdosha. 191. Food that is touched by the ingredient
of Avishodhikatik food, the vessel that is in contact with it or without
contact, which is not purified by three Kalpas, is Putidosha-affected food.
Similarly, food or a vessel that is in contact with Kajik, Avshravan, Chaulodak
is also Putidosha-affected. 192. The remaining Udgamdosha are Vishodhikatik. If
Vishodhikatik Udgam Bhakta-pan is mixed with pure Bhakta-pan, then it should be
abandoned as much as possible. If the mixed Bhakta-pan is not noticed and is
mixed with the liquid, then the entire Bhakta-pan should be abandoned. Even if
some subtle ingredients of Bhakta-pan are left in the vessel after separating
the food, it is permissible to take another Bhakta-pan in that Akritakalp
vessel. 192/1. There are four types of Vivek-Parityaag - Dravyavivek,
Kshetravivek, Kalavivek and Bhaavavivek. The abandonment of the substance is
Dravyavivek. The abandonment of the place is Kshetravivek. The immediate
abandonment of the Dosha-affected food after knowing it is Kalavivek. The Muni
who abandons the Dosha-affected food, etc., without any deceit, attachment or
aversion, is Bhaavavivek.  1. Putidosha includes Aharaputi (Pimpra T. 49). 2.
The meaning of Lep - Bhakta mixed with liquid like buttermilk, milk, etc. 3.
Alap - Bhakta in contact with Vall, Chana, etc. The Bhashyakar explains it by
saying that just as in the worldly practice, a vessel or an object is washed
even if it is placed on dry ash, similarly, the vessel needs to be purified by
three Kalpas just by the touch of Alap Adhakarmik Vall, Chanak, etc. If three
Kalpas are mandatory even when Alapkrid is taken, then what to say about the
substance mixed with buttermilk, etc.? (Pibha 28, 29). 4. There are three
Bhashya Gathaas (Pibha 28-30) in the explanation of this Gatha. While explaining
the latter part of the Gatha, the Tikakar says that some Acharyas believe that
the food prepared for the Sadhu is Adhakarma. The remaining Avshravan (Mand),
Kanjik, etc. are not affected by Putidosha, but this belief is not correct. The
intention of the Niyuktikar is that if Kanjik, Avshravan, etc. are made from the
Odan prepared for the Sadhu, then it is Adhakarma because it is its ingredient,
therefore, food in contact with Kanjik, Avshravan and Chaulodak, etc. is
affected by Putidosha (Mavri P. 117). 5. For the explanation of Kritakalp or
Kalpatraya, see the note of Gatha 117/3.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 166 piMDaniyukti 188/1. yAvadarthika adhyavapUraka meM jitanA adhika pakAyA
gayA hai, use alaga karane para yA usa pAtra se bAhara nikAlane para zeSa AhAra
sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya hai| yadi kaNa Adi kI gaNanA ke binA aMdAja se utanA
AhAra kArpaTikoM ko de diyA jAe to zeSa AhAra sAdhu ke lie kalpanIya hotA hai|
189. solaha bheda vAle udgama doSa ke do prakAra haiM- pahalA vizodhikoTika aura
dUsarA hai avishodhikottik| 190. AdhAkarma, auddezika ke antima tIna bheda,
pUti', mizrajAta, bAdaraprAbhRtikA, adhyavapUraka ke antima do bheda-
svagRhapASaMDimizra tathA svagRhasAdhumizra-ye avizodhi koTi udgama doSa haiN|
191. udgamadoSa rUpa avizodhikoTika AhAra ke avayava se spRSTa, lepa athavA
alepa se yukta pAtra, jo tIna kalpoM se parimArjita nahIM hai, usameM AhAra lenA
pUtidoSa duSTa AhAra hai| isI prakAra kAjika, avazrAvaNa, cAulodaka se saMspRSTa
pAtra yA AhAra bhI pUtidoSa duSTa hotA hai|" 192. zeSa udgamadoSa vizodhikoTika
hote haiN| zuddha bhakta-pAna ke.sAtha yadi vizodhikoTika udgama kA bhakta-pAna
mila jAe to usakA yathAzakti parityAga kara denA caahie| yadi mizrita bhakta-
pAna alakSita ho, drava ke sAtha mila gayA ho to pUre bhakta-pAna kA
pariSThApana kara denA caahie| AhAra alaga karane para bhI bhakta-pAna ke kucha
sUkSma avayava pAtra meM lage hoM to bhI usa akRtakalpa' pAtra meM dUsarA
bhakta-pAna lenA kalpya hai| 192/1. viveka-parityAga ke cAra prakAra haiM-
dravyaviveka, kSetraviveka, kAlaviveka tathA bhaavvivek| jisa dravya kA
parityAga kiyA jAtA hai, vaha dravyaviveka hai| jisa kSetra meM parityAga kiyA
jAtA hai, vaha kSetraviveka hai| doSa duSTa AhAra ko jAnakara tatkAla parityAga
kara diyA jAtA hai, vaha kAlaviveka hai| jo muni azaTha-rAga-dveSa rahita hokara
doSaduSTa AhAra Adi ko dekhakara usakA parityAga kara detA hai, vaha bhAvaviveka
hai| 1. pUti doSa meM AhArapUti kA samAveza hotA hai (piMpra TI pa. 49) /  2.
lepa kA artha-takra, dUdha Adi tarala padArtha se yukta bhkt| 3. alepa-valla,
cane Adi se saMspRSTa bhkt| bhASyakAra isakA spaSTIkaraNa karate hue kahate haiM
ki jaise loka-vyavahAra meM zuSka azaci para bhI bhAjana yA vastu ko rakhane
para use dhoyA jAtA hai, vaise hI alepa AdhAkarmika valla, caNaka Adi kA sparza
hone mAtra se pAtra kA kalpatraya se zodhana Avazyaka hai| jaba alepakRd kA
grahaNa hone para bhI kalpatraya anivArya hai to phira takra Adi lepayukta
padArtha kA to kahanA hI kyA? (pibhA 28, 29) /  4. isa gAthA kI vyAkhyA meM tIna
bhASya gAthAeM (pibhA 28-30) haiN| gAthA ke uttarArdha ko spaSTa karate hue
TIkAkAra kahate haiM ki kucha AcAryoM kI yaha mAnyatA hai ki jo sAdhu ke nimitta
AhAra banAyA jAtA hai, vahI AdhAkarma hotA hai| zeSa avazrAvaNa (mAMDa), kAJjika
Adi pUti doSa se duSTa nahIM hote lekina yaha mAnyatA sahI nahIM hai|
niyuktikAra kA Azaya hai ki sAdhu ke lie banAe gae odana se yadi kAJika,
avazrAvaNa Adi banAyA jAtA hai to vaha usakA avayava hone se AdhAkarma hai ata:
kAJjika, avazrAvaNa aura cAulodaga Adi se saMspRSTa AhAra pUti doSa yukta hai
(mavR pa. 117) /  5. kRtakalpa yA kalpatraya kI vyAkhyA hetu dekheM gA. 117/3 kA
ttippnn|

Page #339 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 167 192/2.  There are four categories based on
the similarity or dissimilarity of dry and moist substances, such as: * Dry in
dry. * Dry in moist. * Moist in dry. * Moist in moist.  Of these, two categories
(first and fourth) have equal proportions, and two categories (second and third)
have unequal proportions.  192/3,4. In the first category, when dry matter falls
into dry matter, it can be easily removed. In the second category, when
something like a timen (a substance with a vishodikottik dosha) mixes with dry
matter, then a liquid like kanji is added, the vessel is tilted, and the liquid
is separated by placing a hand over the mouth of the vessel. In the third
category, when impure dry matter falls into pure moist timen, etc., as much as
possible is removed by hand, and then the timen, etc., is considered fit for
use. In the fourth category, when moist falls into moist, or when impure moist
matter mixes with pure moist matter, if the matter is rare, then the impure
matter is removed and the remaining is considered fit for use.  192/5. If a muni
can survive without that substance, then he should abandon all the substance. In
the situation of not being able to survive, he should take recourse to the four
categories mentioned above. A muni who takes recourse to these categories
attains purity, and a mayaavi muni gets bound by them.  192/6. Kotikaran is of
two types: udgamkoti and vishodikot. Udgamkoti has six types, and vishodikot has
many types.  192/7. Kotikaran is of nine types, eighteen types, twenty-seven
types, fifty-four types, ninety types, and two hundred and seventy types.  1. In
the gatha, the word 'sukkol sarispaae' indicates equal proportion, and the word
'asarispaae' indicates unequal proportion (Mavri P. 118). 2. For the six types
of udgamkoti, see the translation of gatha 190. 3. Self-killing, causing others
to kill, and approving of killing; self-cooking, causing others to cook, and
approving of cooking; self-buying, causing others to buy, and approving of
buying - these nine categories, the first six are under the category of avishodi
kotikaran, and the last three are under the category of vishodi kotikaran. One
consumes this with attachment or aversion, therefore, multiplying 9 by two gives
eighteen categories. Multiplying 9 by mithyatva, agyan, and aviriti gives 27,
and multiplying raag-dvesh with these gives 54 categories. Multiplying the
original 9 categories by the tenfold Shraman Dharma gives 90 categories.
Multiplying 90 by knowledge, vision, and character gives 270 categories (for
details, see Mavri P. 119, 120).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 167 192/2. zuSka aura Ardra-ina do prakAra kI vastuoM ke sadRzapAta
athavA asadRzapAta se caturbhagI hotI hai; jaise * zuSka meM shussk| * zuSka meM
aaii| * Ardra meM zuSka tathA * Ardra meM aardr| inameM do bhaMgoM (prathama
aura caturtha) meM tulya nipAta tathA do bhaMgoM (dvitIya aura tRtIya) meM
atulya nipAta hai|' 192/3,4. prathama bhaMga meM zuSka dravya meM zuSka dravya
gira jAne para usako saralatA se nikAla kara dUra kiyA jA sakatA hai| dUsare
bhaMga meM zuSka dravya meM tImanAdi (vizodhikoTika doSa vAlA) mila gayA, taba
usameM kAMjI Adi drava milAkara pAtra ko Ter3hA kara pAtra mukha para hAtha
dekara usameM se drava alaga kara diyA jAtA hai| tIsare bhaMga meM zuddha Ardra
tImana Adi meM azuddha zuSka dravya gira gayA to usameM hAtha DAlakara jitanA
nikAlanA saMbhava ho sake, utanA nikAla diyA jAtA hai phira tImana Adi kalpanIya
hotA hai| caturtha bhaMga meM Ardra meM AI gira jAne para, zuddha AI dravya meM
azuddha AI dravya mizrita ho jAne para, vaha dravya yadi durlabha ho to azuddha
dravya nikAlakara zeSa kA paribhoga karanA kalpanIya hai| 192/5. muni yadi usa
dravya ke binA nirvAha kara sake to samasta dravya kA parityAga kara de| nirvAha
na kara sakane kI sthiti meM Upara varNita catugI kA sahArA le| ina bhaMgoM kA
sahArA lene vAlA azaTha muni zuddhi ko prApta hotA hai aura mAyAvI muni inameM
baMdhatA hai| 192/6. koTIkaraNa do prakAra kA hai-udgamakoTi tathA vizodhikoTi
/  udgamakoTi ke cha:2 prakAra tathA vizodhikoTi ke aneka prakAra haiN| 192/7.
koTikaraNa nava prakAra kA, aThAraha prakAra kA, sattAvIsa prakAra kA, caupana
prakAra kA, nabbe prakAra kA tathA do sau sattara prakAra kA hotA hai| 1. gAthA
meM 'sukkolla sarisapAe' zabda se tulyanipAta tathA 'asarisapAe' zabda se atulya
nipAta ko prakaTa kiyA gayA hai (mavR pa. 118) /  2. udgamakoTi ke chaha prakAra
hetu dekheM gA. 190 kA anuvaad| 3. svayaM hanana karanA, karavAnA tathA
anumodana karanA, svayaM pakAnA, pakavAnA tathA pakAne kA anumodana karanA,
svayaM kraya karanA, karavAnA tathA usakA anumodana karanA-ina nau bhedoM meM
Adya chaha bheda avizodhi koTi ke antargata haiM aura aMtima tIna vizodhi koTi
meM hai| isako koI rAga yA dveSa se sevana karatA hai ata: 9 se do kA guNA
karane para aThAraha bheda hote haiN| mithyAtva, ajJAna aura avirati-ina tIna se
9 kA guNA karane para 27 tathA rAga-dveSa kA inake sAtha guNA karane para 54
bheda hote haiM tathA mUla 9 bhedoM kA dazavidha zramaNa dharma se guNA karane
para 90 bheda hote haiM  /  90 kA jJAna, darzana aura cAritra se guNA karane
para 270 bheda hote haiM (vistAra hetu dekheM mavR pa.119, 120) /

Page #340 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 168 ## Pindaniyukti  193. The sixteen faults of origin should be known to
arise from the householder, and the faults of production should be known to
arise from the ascetic. 194. There are four types of production: name,
establishment, substance, and emotion. There are three types of substance-
production and sixteen types of emotion-production. 194/1. The production of a
son, horse, and tree-vine, etc., by means of a hairy man, horse, or seed,
respectively, in an auspicious manner, is conscious substance-production. 194/2.
The production of (ornaments, etc.) according to desire from sufficient metals
like gold, silver, etc., is unconscious substance-production. Making a slave,
maidservant, etc., one's own by giving them wages, etc., is mixed substance-
production. 194/3. There are two types of emotion-production: praiseworthy
emotion-production and non-praiseworthy emotion-production. The production of
nursing, etc., accompanied by anger, etc., is non-praiseworthy emotion-
production, and the production of knowledge, etc., is praiseworthy emotion-
production.  10. Greed 195, 196. The sixteen faults of production are: 1. Nurse
2. Messenger 3. Cause 4. Livelihood 5. Forest-dweller 6. Physician 7. Anger 8.
Pride 9. Illusion 10. Greed 11. Previous praise, subsequent praise 12. Knowledge
13. Mantra 14. Powder 15. Yoga 16. Root-karma 197. There are five types of
nurses: 1. Milk-nurse - one who breastfeeds. 2. Bathing-nurse - one who bathes.
3. Adorning-nurse - one who adorns the child.  1. The nurse, messenger, etc.,
are sixteen types of emotion-production, see the translation of Ga. 195, 196. 2.
If a person does not have a son by any means, then by making a vow to a deity,
in an auspicious manner, in the menstrual period, by having intercourse with a
hairy man, the production of a son, etc., is conscious substance-production.
Similarly, by paying rent, having intercourse between another person's horse and
one's own mare, producing a horse, etc., and by sowing seeds and watering them,
producing trees, etc., is conscious substance-production (Ma. Pa. 120).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 168 piMDaniyukti 193. udgama ke solaha doSa gRhastha se samutthita jAnane cAhie
tathA utpAdana ke doSa sAdhu se samutthita jAnane caahie| 194. utpAdanA cAra
prakAra hI hotI hai-nAma, sthApanA, dravya aura bhaav| dravya-utpAdanA ke tIna
prakAra tathA bhAva-utpAdanA ke solaha prakAra haiN|' 194/1. aupayAcitaka rUpa
se keza, roma yukta puruSa, ghor3e yA bIja ke dvArA putra, azva evaM vRkSa-valli
Adi kA utpAdana sacitta dravya utpAdanA hai| 194/2. kanaka, rajata Adi yatheSTa
dhAtuoM se icchAnurUpa (AbhUSaNa Adi) kI utpatti acittadravyautpAdanA hai| dAsa,
dAsI Adi ko vetana Adi dekara AtmIya banAnA mizradravyautpAdanA hai| 194/3.
bhAvautpAdanA ke do prakAra haiM-prazastabhAvautpAdanA tathA
aprshstbhaavutpaadnaa| krodha Adi se yukta dhAtrItva Adi kI utpAdanA
aprazastabhAvautpAdanA hai tathA jJAna Adi kI utpAdanA prazastabhAvautpAdanA 10.
lobha 195, 196. utpAdanA ke solaha doSa haiM1. dhAtrI 9. mAyA 2. dUtI 3. nimitta
11. pUrva saMstava, pazcAt saMstava 4. AjIvikA 12. vidyA 5. vanIpaka 13. maMtra
6. cikitsA 14. cUrNa 7. krodha 15. yoga 8. mAna 16. mUlakarma 197. dhAtrI ke
pAMca prakAra haiM 1. kSIradhAtrI - stanapAna karAne vaalii| 2. majjanadhAtrI -
snAna karAne vaalii| 3. maMDanadhAtrI - bAlaka kA maMDana-vibhUSA karane vaalii|
1. bhAva-utpAdana ke dhAtrI, dUtI Adi 16 bheda haiM, dekheM gA. 195, 196 kA
anuvaad| 2. kisI vyakti ke kisI bhI upAya se putra na hone para devatA kI
manautI-aupayAcitaka rUpa se RtukAla meM lomaza puruSa dvArA saMyoga karAkara
putra Adi kI utpatti karanA sacitta dravya utpAdanA hai| isI prakAra bhAr3A
dekara anya vyakti ke ghor3e kA apanI ghor3I se saMyoga karAkara ghor3A Adi
paidA karanA tathA bIjAropaNa karake pAnI ke siMcana se vRkSa Adi paidA karanA
sacitta dravya utpAdanA hai (ma pa. 120) /

Page #341 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** The one who makes the child play. The one who
holds the child in her lap. There are two types of each, the one who does and
the one who makes do. 4. Kridandhatri 5. Ankhadhatri - 198. Etymology of the
word Dhatri She who carries the child, she is the Dhatri. · She who nourishes
the child, she is the Dhatri. • She whom the child drinks from (breastfeeds
from), she is the Dhatri. In ancient times, according to their wealth, wealthy
people appointed five types of Dhatris. 198/1,2. (The Muni, having gone for
alms, sees the child crying and says - ) This child is still dependent on milk,
therefore he is crying because he is not getting milk. You, who desire alms,
give me alms and feed him milk, or say, feed him milk and then give me alms, or
I do not want alms, I will come back for alms again. Or, he who is not
humiliated, he is wise, healthy and long-lived. Or say, it is rare to see the
face of a son in the world. You feed him milk, otherwise I will feed him milk.
169 198/3. If the mistress of the house is virtuous - inclined towards Dharma -
when the Sadhu says this, she will perform half-karma-born violence, etc., and
if she is wicked - not inclined towards Dharma - then hatred may arise in her
mind. If the child becomes ill due to karma-udaya, then the preaching is
disrespected. People, thinking the Muni to be flattering, criticize him, or the
householder's mind becomes suspicious of the Sadhu's character.  198/4-6. This
is another option for Dhatri-karan. Upon going to the house for alms, seeing the
devout woman without patience, the Sadhu asked, 'What is the reason for your
sorrow?' She said, 'He who helps in sorrow is called something.' When the Muni
asked, she said, 'My Dhatritva has been taken away today.' The Muni said, 'I do
not know about the age, the thickness of the breasts, and the thinness of the
body of the newly appointed Dhatri.' After asking all the details, the Muni went
to the wealthy man's house and seeing the child, said, 'It seems this family has
just risen high, that is, become prosperous, because if it were traditionally
prosperous, the traditional Dhatri would also be skilled. That is, your
ancestors did not have knowledge about Dhatri, that is why such and such a
Dhatri has been appointed. Whatever skill the child has, it is the effect of
past punya, I am informing you by seeing the child.' 198/7. The old Dhatri has
weak milk, the child who drinks the milk of the one with excessively large
breasts, his nose...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda bAlaka ko krIr3A karAne vAlI  /  bAlaka ko goda meM rakhane vAlI  /
pratyeka ke do-do prakAra haiMkarane vAlI tathA karAne vAlI  /  4.
krIr3anadhAtrI 5. aMkadhAtrI - 198. dhAtrI zabda kI vyutpatti bAlaka ko dhAraNa
karatI hai, vaha dhAtrI hai| * jo bAlaka kA poSaNa karatI hai, vaha dhAtrI hai|
* bAlaka jisako pIte haiM (jisakA stanapAna karate haiM), vaha dhAtrI hai  /
prAcIna kAla meM apane aizvarya ke anusAra dhanADhya vyakti pAMca prakAra kI
dhAtriyoM kI niyukti karate the| 198/1,2. (bhikSArtha gayA muni bAlaka ko rote
hue dekhakara kahatA hai - ) yaha bAlaka abhI dUdha para AdhRta hai ataH dUdha
na milane para ro rahA hai| bhikSAbhilASI mujhako bhikSA dekara isako dUdha
pilAo athavA aisA kahe isako dUdha pilAkara phira mujhe bhikSA do athavA mujhe
bhikSA nahIM cAhie, maiM punaH bhikSArtha A jaauuNgaa| athavA jo bAlaka
apamAnita nahIM hotA hai, vaha matimAn, arogI aura dIrghAyu vAlA hotA hai  /
athavA aisA kahe ki saMsAra meM putra kA mukha dekhanA durlabha hotA hai| tuma
ise dUdha pilAo anyathA maiM ise dUdha dUMgA  /  169 198/3. sAdhu ke isa prakAra
kahane para yadi gRhasvAminI bhadra hai - dharmAbhimukhI hai to vaha AdhAkarma
janya hiMsA Adi karegI aura yadi vaha prAnta hai-dharma ke abhimukha nahIM hai
to usake mana meM pradveSa utpanna ho sakatA hai| yadi karmodaya se vaha bAlaka
glAna- rogI ho jAe to pravacana kI avamAnanA hotI hai| loga muni ko cATukArI
mAnakara usakI nindA karate haiM athavA gRhasvAmI ke mana meM sAdhu ke zIla ke
prati AzaMkA paidA hotI hai| 198/4-6. dhAtrIkaraNa kA dUsarA vikalpa yaha hai  /
bhikSArtha ghara meM jAne para zraddhAlu strI ko dhRtirahita dekhakara sAdhu ne
pUchA- 'tumhAre duHkha kA kyA kAraNa hai ?' usane kahA- 'jo duHkha meM sahAyaka
hotA hai, use kucha kahA jAtA hai|' muni ke pUchane para usane kahA- 'Aja merA
dhAtrItva chIna liyA gayA hai|' muni bolA'maiM nava niyukta dhAtrI kI vaya,
stanoM kI sthUlatA tathA zarIra kI kRzatA Adi ke bAre meM nahIM jAnatA huuN|'
sArI bAta pUchakara muni usa dhanADhya ke yahAM jAkara bAlaka ko dekhakara bolA-
'lagatA hai yaha kula abhIabhI hI UMcA uThA hai arthAt sampanna banA hai kyoMki
yadi paramparAgata sampanna hotA to paramparAgata dhAtrI bhI kuzala hotii|
arthAt tumhAre pUrvajoM ko dhAtrI viSayaka jJAna nahIM thA isIlie aisI-vaisI
dhAtrI niyukta kI huI hai| jo kucha bAlaka kI kuzalatA hai, vaha prAktana puNya
kA hI prabhAva hai, aisA maiM bAlaka ko dekhakara sUcita kara rahA huuN| 198/7.
sthavirA durbala kSIra vAlI hotI hai, atyadhika sthUla stana vAlI kA dUdha pIne
se bAlaka kA nAka

Page #342 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 170:  The Appointment of Attendants  **The Appointment of the
Nurse**  If the nurse is flat-chested, she will have difficulty breastfeeding,
and a thin nurse will have less milk. A nurse with pendulous breasts will cause
the child to have a long face. 198/8. The Muni praises the new nurse for her
complexion, and he praises the old nurse for her complexion. If they are of the
same complexion, he praises the old nurse for her excellent complexion and calls
the new nurse's complexion poor. (If the householder, after hearing this from
the Muni, dismisses the new nurse and keeps the old nurse, then this statement
about the nurse's fault is complete.) 198/9. When dismissed from her position,
the new nurse may become resentful and falsely accuse the Sadhu of being a
seducer. The old nurse may think that the new nurse could also cause trouble in
her life, so she may use poison or other means against the Sadhu. The new nurse
may also use poison or other means. 198/10. Similarly, one should understand the
same principles regarding the other attendants, such as the bathing nurse, in
relation to the child and the mother. One should understand all the
aforementioned faults, such as resentment, that arise when the bathing nurse,
etc., are dismissed from wealthy households. 198/11. (The Muni enters the house
and says to the householder-) 'This child is rolling on the ground, so he is
covered in dust. Bathe him, or I will bathe him.' The Muni, pointing out the
faults of the bathing nurse, says, 'Bathing the child with too much water will
make him afraid of water, weak-sighted, or bloodshot.' 198/12. The bathing nurse
massages the child with oil, then wraps him in her hands, and then bathes him
after applying a paste of various substances. She cleanses the child's body and
hands him over to the adorning nurse. 198/13. (The Muni, returning home after
begging, sees the child without ornaments and says to the householder-) 'Adorn
this child with earrings, tilak, and other ornaments. If you cannot do it, I
will adorn him.' (He points out the faults of the newly appointed adorning
nurse, saying-) 'Look, this nurse has put ornaments meant for the hands or neck
on the child's feet.' 198/14. This playing nurse has a loud voice, so the child
will have a 'chunnमुख' (a mouth that is too small) or a 'क्लीबमुख' (a mouth that
is too large). Or, this nurse has a soft voice, so the child will speak
indistinctly. Or, she will influence the श्राविका (female lay follower)  1. मवृ
प. १२४; इषुकाकारमाभरणम् अन्ये तिलकमित्याहुः- An ornament shaped like an arrow,
some Acharyas call it a tilak.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 170 piMDaniyukti capaTA ho jAtA hai aura usako dUdha pIne meM kaThinAI hotI
hai, kRza dhAtrI kama kSIra vAlI hotI hai| kUrpara stana vAlI dhAtrI kA
stanapAna karane se bAlaka sUcImukha vAlA arthAt lambe mukha vAlA ho jAtA hai|
198/8. abhinava dhAtrI jisa varNa se utkaTa hotI hai, muni usakI gardA karatA
hai aura parAnI dhAtrI jisa varNa vAlI hotI hai, usako vaha atizaya prazasta
batAtA hai| yadi samAna varNa vAlI hotI hai to pahale vAlI ko atyanta prazasta
varNa vAlI tathA dUsarI abhinava dhAtrI ko durvarNa vAlI batAtA hai| (muni se
isa prakAra sunakara yadi gRhasvAmI naI dhAtrI ko mukta kara punaH purAnI dhAtrI
ko rakhatA hai to yaha kathana dhAtrI-doSa samApanna hotA hai|) 198/9. dhAtrI
pada se mukta karane para vaha abhinava dhAtrI pradveSa yukta ho sakatI hai,
vaha sAdhu para galata abhiyoga bhI lagA sakatI hai ki yaha sAdhu udbhrAmaka-
jAra hai| purAnI dhAtrI socatI hai ki abhinavadhAtrI kI bhAMti kabhI yaha mere
jIvana meM bhI vighna upasthita kara sakatA hai ata: vaha sAdhu ke lie viSa Adi
kA prayoga kara sakatI hai| dUsarI bhI viSa Adi kA prayoga kara sakatI hai|
198/10. isI prakAra suta ke lie mAtA ke samAna zeSa majjanadhAtriyoM Adi ke
viSaya meM svayaM karane aura karavAne ke saMdarbha meM samajhanA caahie|
dhanADhya gharoM se majjanadhAtrI Adi ko nikAlane para pradveSa Adi pUrvokta
sAre doSa samajhane caahie| 198/11. (muni ghara meM praviSTa hokara gRhasvAminI
se kahatA hai-) 'yaha bAlaka bhUmi para luTa rahA hai isalie dhUla se kharaMTita
hai| isako snAna karAo athavA maiM krvaauuN|' vaha muni majjanadhAtrI ke doSa
batAte hue kahatA hai-'bAlaka ko atyadhika pAnI se snAna karAne se vaha
'jalabhIru' ho jAtA hai, nirbaladRSTi vAlA ho jAtA hai athavA raktAkSa ho jAtA
hai|' 198/12. majjanadhAtrI bAlaka kI taila se mAliza karake hAthoM se
saMbAdhana karatI hai tathA phira piSTi Adi dravyoM se udvartana karake use
snAna karAtI hai| vaha bAlaka ke zarIra ko zucIbhUta kara maMDanadhAtrI ko
sauMpa detI hai| 198/13. (bhikSA ke lie gayA huA muni ghara meM AbhUSaNa rahita
bAlaka ko dekhakara gRhasvAminI se kahatA hai-) 'tuma iSuka'-tilaka Adi
AbharaNoM se isa bAlaka ko maMDita kro| yadi tuma aisA nahIM kara sakatI to maiM
isako vibhUSita karatA huuN|' (vaha abhinava niyojita maMDanadhAtrI ke doSa
batAtA huA kahatA hai-) 'dekho, isa dhAtrI ne hAtha athavA gale meM pahanane
yogya AbharaNoM ko pairoM meM pahanAyA hai|' 198/14. yaha krIr3anadhAtrI ucca
svara vAlI hai isalie bAlaka 'chunnamukha' klIbamukha vAlA hogA athavA yaha
dhAtrI mRduvANI vAlI hai isalie bAlaka avyakta bolane vAlA hogA athavA vaha
zrAvikA ko prabhAvita 1. mavR pa. 124; iSukAkAramAbharaNam anye tilakamityAhuH-
iSuka ke AkAra kA AbharaNa, kucha AcArya ise tilaka bhI kahate haiN|

Page #343 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 171 He plays with the child himself or makes
him play by conversing with him, etc. 198/15. A child becomes विकटपाद (with a
wide gap between his feet) due to a स्थूल क्रीड़नधात्री (a nurse with a thick
body). A child experiences discomfort in the lap of a भग्न कटि (broken waist) or
शुष्क कटि (dry waist) nurse. A child becomes timid if he stays with a nurse who
has मांसरहित (fleshless) and कर्कश (rough) hands. 199. In the city of Kollar,
the Sangam Sthavira was residing. His disciple Datta was wandering from village
to village. The Acharya gave the disciple a धात्री पिंड (a piece of food for the
nurse). By divine grace, the Acharya's finger became inflamed. 200, 201. There
are two types of दूती (messenger): स्वग्राम (from the same village) and परग्राम
(from another village). Each has two types: प्रकट (manifest) and छन्न (hidden).
The one who clearly says, "She is your mother," "He is your father," is a प्रकट
दूती, and the one who conveys the message in a hidden way is a छन्न दूती. There
are two types of छन्न दूती: लोकोत्तर (supernatural) and the other is उभयपक्ष
(both worldly and supernatural). 201/1. While going for alms, etc., the Muni
carries the message of the mother, etc., saying, "Your mother said this," "Your
father said this." (This is प्रकट दूतीत्व.) 201/2. Thinking that दूतीत्व is
blameworthy, he says in another way to another Muni for his understanding, "Your
daughter is अकोविद (unaware), unfamiliar with tradition, she told me to give
this message to your mother." (This is प्रच्छन्न दूतीत्व.) 201/3. To tell the
mother or father, "Your desired work has been accomplished in the same way," or
"I will do as you wish," is उभयपक्ष (both worldly and supernatural) प्रच्छन्न
दूतीत्व. 202, 203. There was enmity between two villages. The Muni stayed in a
village where the शय्यातरी (wife of the headman) was his daughter. (She sent her
daughter with the Muni to convey the message of the arrival of the धाटी-दस्युदल
(band of robbers).) When it became known, the husband, son, and son-in-law of
the शय्यातरी were killed while fighting with the band of robbers. People spread
the rumor, "Who gave the information to the धाटी?" The daughter said, "My
father, who killed my husband, son, and father-in-law, gave this information."
204. निमित्त (cause) is related to the three times, and in its six types, the
statement of the cause related to the present time is immediately harmful. This
is an example of that. 205. The नैमित्तिक (one who knows the cause)
compassionately informed the गृहस्वामिनी (housewife) about the arrival of her
husband who had been away for a long time. 1. The commentator has elaborated on
this story in two verses (Pibha 31, 32). For the elaboration of the story, see
Pari. 3, story no. 26. 2. For the elaboration of the story, see Pari. 3, story
no. 27. 3. The six types of निमित्त are: 1. लाभ (benefit), 2. अलाभ (loss), 3.
सुख (happiness), 4. दुःख (suffering), 5. जीवन (life), and 6. मरण (death).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 171 karane ke lie svayaM bAlaka ke sAtha saMvAda Adi dvArA krIr3A
karatA hai athavA karAtA hai| 198/15. sthUla krIr3anadhAtrI se bAlaka
vikaTapAda-donoM pairoM meM bahuta aMtarAla vAlA ho jAtA hai| bhagna kaTi athavA
zuSka kaTi vAlI dhAtrI kI goda meM bAlaka kaSTa kA anubhava karatA hai|
mAMsarahita tathA karkaza hAtha vAlI dhAtrI ke pAsa rahane para bAlaka bhIru
hotA hai| 199. kollakera nagara meM saMgama sthavira sthiravAsa kara rahe the|
unakA ziSya datta grAmAnugrAma vihAra karatA thaa| AcArya ne ziSya ko dhAtrI
piMDa dilvaayaa| devayoga se AcArya kI aMguli prajvalita ho gii| 200, 201. dUtI
ke do prakAra haiM-svagrAma tathA prgraam| pratyeka ke do-do prakAra haiM-
prakaTa aura channa (gupt)| jo spaSTa rUpa se yaha kahatI hai ki vaha terI mAtA
hai, vaha terA pitA hai, vaha prakaTa dUtI hai aura jo saMdeza ko gupta vacana
se kahatI hai, vaha channa hai| channa dUtI ke do bheda haiM-lokottara tathA
dUsarA ubhayapakSaarthAt laukika aura lokottara donoN| 201/1. muni bhikSA Adi ke
lie jAte hue jananI Adi kA saMdeza le jAtA hai ki tumhArI mAtA ne aisA kahA hai,
tumhAre pitA ne aisA kahA hai| (yaha prakaTa dUtItva hai|) 201/2. dUtItva
garhita hotA hai, yaha socakara vaha dUsare muni ke pratyaya ke lie dUsare
prakAra se kahatA hai ki tumhArI putrI akovida hai, paraMparA se anajAna hai,
usane mujhe kahA ki merI mAM ko yaha saMdeza de denaa| (yaha pracchanna dUtItva
hai|) 201/3. mAtA yA pitA ko yaha kaha denA ki tumhArA vivakSita kArya vaise hI
saMpanna ho gayA hai athavA tuma jaisA cAhoge vaise hI karUMgI, yaha ubhayapakSa
(laukika aura lokottara) pracchanna dUtItva hai| 202, 203. do gAMvoM ke bIca
vaira thaa| muni jisa gAMva meM ruke, vahAM kI zayyAtarI unakI putrI thii|
(usane apanI putrI ko muni ke sAtha dhATI-dasyudala ke Agamana kA saMdeza bhejA)
jJAta hone para dasyu-dala ke sAtha yuddha karate hue zayyAtarI ke pati, putra
aura jAmAtA kA vadha ho gyaa| logoM meM yaha apavAda phaila gayA ki dhATI kI
sUcanA kisane dI? putrI ne kahA-"jAmAtA, putra aura pati ko mArane vAle mere
pitA ne yaha sUcanA dI hai|" 204. nimitta trikAla viSayaka hotA hai, isake chaha
bhedoM meM jo doSa hote haiM, unameM vartamAnakAla viSayaka nimitta kathana
tatkSaNa paraghAtakArI hotA hai, isakA yaha udAharaNa hai| 205. naimittika ne
anukampA karake gRhasvAminI ko cirakAla se gae pati ke Agamana ke bAre meM
btaayaa| 1. bhASyakAra ne do gAthAoM (pibhA 31, 32) meM isa kathA kA vistAra
kiyA hai, kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari.3 kathA saM. 26  /  2. kathA ke
vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 27  /  3. nimitta ke chaha prakAra ye
haiM-1. lAbha 2. alAbha 3. sukha 4. duHkha 5. jIvana aura 6. mrnn|

Page #344 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pind Nirukti  (The wife said to her husband, who was asking the reason) -
"The Naimittika had already told you about your arrival." The husband, angered,
asked the Naimittika - "What is in this mare's belly?"  ## 172  ## 206. There
are five types of Ajiivana - Jaati, Kul, Gan, Karma and Shilp. Each has two
types - Sucha, meaning to say with specific words, or Asucha, meaning to say
with clear words.  ## 207. There is a specific description regarding Jaati and
Kul. The group of Mall etc. is called Gan, and agriculture etc. is called Karma.
Shilp is weaving, sewing etc. Karma that produces displeasure and Shilp that
produces pleasure is called so.  ## 207/1. Seeing a Brahmin son performing Homa
etc. rituals correctly, the Muni knows that this is a Brahmin son, or that he
has stayed in a Gurukul, or (the Muni tells his father that your son) indicates
the qualities of an Acharya.  ## 207/2. (The Muni says to the Brahmin father to
reveal his Jaati) - Your son has performed Homa etc. rituals correctly or
incorrectly. There are three forms of incorrect action - less, more and
opposite. These are the components of correct action - Samidha - wood for the
Yajna, Mantra, Ahuti, Sthan, Yag - Yajna, Kaal, Ghosh etc. (Hearing this, the
Brahmin knows that the Muni is also of the Brahmin Jaati, this is Upjeevana from
Jaati.)  ## 207/3. Like Jaati, one should know about the Upjeevana of Ugrakul
etc. In Gan, there is knowledge of Mandal - entry etc. In entering the war,
there is Devkul Darshan, for the call of the Prati-Mall, the same language is
used, for the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha San. 28, there are two
verses of the Bhashya in the explanation of this story (Pibha 33, 34). 2. Mavri
P. 129; Matuh Samuttha Jaati - Jaati born from the mother's side is called so.
## 1. ## 3. Mavri P. 129; Pitrusamuttham Kul - Kul born from the father's side
is called so.  ## 4, 5. Agriculture etc. is called Karma, and weaving, sewing
etc. is called Shilp, or Karma that produces displeasure, aversion, and Shilp
that produces pleasure, i.e. attracts the mind, is called so. The commentator
Malayagiri, presenting an alternative view, said that Karma taught by an
Anaacharya and Shilp taught by an Acharya is called so (Mavri P. 129, Nibha
4412, Chu P. 412).  ## The commentator, explaining this verse, says that through
these indications, the Muni reveals his Jaati, that he is a Brahmin (Mavri P.
129).  ## Seeing the Muni's son, who has entered the Ugrakul, appointed to the
duty of a guard, he says that it seems your son is skilled in the deployment of
the infantry. Hearing this, the father knows that this Sadhu is born in the Ugra
Kul. This is the revelation of one's own Kul through Sucha. When he reveals his
Kul in clear words, that I am of the Ugra or Bhog Kul, then this is the
revelation of Kul through Asucha (Mavri P. 129).  ## 6. Mavri P. 129;
Ihakarvalake Pravishtaasyekasya Mallasyallbhyam Bhukhandam Tanmandalam - Mandal
- the land that is available for one Mall is called Mandal.  ## 7. ## 8. ## 9.
Mavri P. 130; Devkuldarshanam Yuddhapraveshe Chamundapratimpranamanam - While
departing for war, the image of Chamundaa Devi is worshipped.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniryukti (pati ke dvArA kAraNa pUchane para patnI ne kahA ) - ' naimittika
ne Apake Agamana kI bAta pahale hI batA dI thI  / ' pati ne ruSTa hokara
naimittika se pUchA - 'isa ghor3I ke peTa meM kyA hai ?" " 172 206. AjIvanA ke
pAMca prakAra haiM- jAti, kula, gaNa, karma aura zilpa  /  pratyeka ke do-do
prakAra haiM- sUcA se kahanA arthAt vizeSa zabdoM se kahanA athavA asUcA -
sphuTa vacanoM se kahanA  /  207. jAti aura kula ke viSaya meM vizeSa vivaraNa
hai| malla Adi ke samUha ko gaNa tathA kRSi Adi ko karma' kahA jAtA hai| zilpa
hai tunanA, sInA Adi  /  aprIti utpAdaka karma aura prIti utpAdaka zilpa'
kahalAtA hai| 207/1. brAhmaNa putra dvArA sahI rUpa se homa Adi kriyA karate
dekhakara muni yaha jAna letA hai ki yaha brAhmaNa putra hai athavA yaha
gurukula meM rahA huA hai athavA (muni usake pitA se kahatA hai ki tumhArA
putra) AcArya ke guNoM ko sUcita karatA hai  /  207/2. (muni apanI jAti prakaTa
karane ke lie brAhmaNa-pitA ke sAmane kahatA hai ) - tumhAre putra ne homa Adi
kriyA samyag yA asamyag rUpa se saMpAdita kI hai| asamyag kriyA ke tIna rUpa
haiM- nyUna, adhika tathA viparIta  /  samyag kriyA ke ye ghaTaka haiM-samidhA -
yajJa kI lakar3I, maMtra, Ahuti, sthAna, yAga- yajJa, kAla, ghoSa Adi  /  (yaha
sunakara brAhmaNa jAna letA hai ki muni bhI brAhmaNa jAti kA hai, yaha jAti se
upajIvanA hai  / ) 207/3. jAti kI bhAMti hI ugrakula' Adi kI upajIvanA ke bAre
meM jAnanA caahie| gaNa meM maMDala' - praveza Adi kA jJAna hotA hai| yuddha-
praveza meM devakula darzana', pratimalla ke AhvAna hetu vaisI hI bhASA kA kathA
ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 28, isa kathA kI vyAkhyA meM bhASya
kI do gAthAeM (pibhA 33, 34) haiN| 2. mavR pa. 129; mAtuH samutthA jAtiH -
mAtRpakSa se utpanna jAti kahalAtI hai| 1. 3. mavR pa. 129; pitRsamutthaM kulam
- pitRpakSa se utpanna kula kahalAtA hai| 4,5. kRSi Adi ko karma tathA bunAI,
silAI Adi ko zilpa kahA jAtA hai athavA aprIti, aruci paidA karane vAlA karma
tathA prIti utpanna karane vAlA arthAt mana ko AkRSTa karane vAlA zilpa kahalAtA
hai| TIkAkAra malayagiri ne matAntara prastuta karate hue kahA hai ki anAcArya
ke dvArA upadiSTa karma tathA AcArya dvArA upadiSTa zilpa kahalAtA hai (mavRpa.
129, nibhA 4412, cU pR. 412 )  /  TIkAkAra isa gAthA kI vyAkhyA karate hue
kahate haiM ki ina sUcanAoM se muni apanI jAti ko prakaTa kara detA hai ki vaha
brAhmaNa hai (mavRpa. 129 )  /  ugrakula meM praviSTa muni putra ko ArakSaka
karma meM niyukta dekhakara kahatA hai ki lagatA hai tumhArA putra padAti senA
ke niyojana meM kuzala hai| isa bAta ko sunakara pitA jAna letA hai ki yaha
sAdhu ugra kula meM utpanna hai| yaha sUcA ke dvArA svakula kA prakAzana hai|
jaba vaha spaSTa vacanoM meM apane kula ko prakaTa karatA hai ki maiM ugra yA
bhoga kula kA hUM to yaha asUcA ke dvArA kula ko prakaTa karanA hai (mavR pa.
129 )  /  mavR pa.129; ihAkaravalake praviSTasyaikasya mallasya yallabhyaM
bhUkhaNDaM tanmaNDalam - maNDala - eka malla ke lie jo labhya bhUkhaNDa hai,
vaha maMDala kahalAtA hai| 6. 7. 8. 9. mavR pa. 130 ; devakuladarzanaM
yuddhapraveze cAmuNDApratimApraNamanam - yuddha ke lie prasthAna karate samaya
cAmuNDA devI kI pratimA ko praNAma kiyA jAtA thA  /

Page #345 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** To praise the son of a householder or to know
that he is a wrestler, by observing his actions like wrestling and punishment,
is a livelihood based on the group. 207/4. To know or to clearly state, by one's
own skill, that a person engaged in a profession or craft is right or wrong, by
observing the many things gathered for the purpose of the doer of that
profession or craft, is a livelihood of profession and craft. - 208. There are
five types of *Vanipak* - *Shraman*, *Mahan*, *Kripana*, *Atithi* and *Shwan*.
This word is derived from the root "Vanu Yachane". A *Vanipak* is one who begs
by claiming to be a devotee of *Shraman* etc. 208/1. Just as a cowherd searches
for another cow for a calf whose mother has died, similarly, a *Vanipak* is one
who begs by showing himself as a devotee of *Shraman*, *Mahan*, *Kripana*,
*Atithi* or *Shwan* in front of their devotees, out of greed for food etc. 173
209. There are five types of *Shraman* - *Nirgranth*, *Shakya*, *Tapas*,
*Gairuk* and *Ajivika*. When a monk is given food, if he claims to be a devotee
of *Shakya* etc. out of greed for food etc., this is his *Vanipakta*. 209/1.
These *Shakya* monks eat without attachment, like a wall painting. They are
extremely compassionate and generous. If what is given to these Brahmins who are
extremely attached to lust and sexual intercourse is not wasted, then how can
what is given to *Shakya* etc. monks be wasted? 210. Praise of *Shakya* etc.
leads to the stabilization of falsehood, the propagation of faults like origin
etc., which leads to the possibility of their inclusion in the *Gachchha* due to
attachment to food. There is a perception among people that these saints are
flattering, they have never given charity, or if the devotees of *Shakya* etc.
are hostile, they say, "Don't come here again." 210/1. (The monk says to the
Brahmins, praising them in the form of *Vanipakta* in front of the Brahmin
devotees) - Charity given to the benevolent *Bhumidev* - Brahmins is very
fruitful. Charity given to *Brahman Bandhu* - that is, all Brahmins, is also
very fruitful, then what to say about the fruit of giving charity to a Brahmin
engaged in six duties? 1. *Mavri P. 130*; *Dandadhika Dharnipat Chhuptaank
Yuddha Prabhritaya* - To fight etc. by falling on the ground, sitting on the
chest of a sleeping wrestler, is called *Dand*. 2. *Dra. Thanam 5/200*. 3. In
*Manusmriti* (10/75), the six duties of Brahmins are: *Adhyapanam Adhyayanam
Yajanam Yajanam Tatha*. *Danam Pratigrahachaiva Shatkarmaanyagrajanmanah* || The
six duties related to the livelihood of a Brahmin are as follows: *Unchha
Pratigraho Bhiksha, Vanijyam Pashupalanam*. *Krishikaram Tatha Cheti,
Shatkarmaanyagrajanmanah* || The six duties related to yoga are as follows: 1.
*Dhauti* 2. *Vasthi* 3 *Neti* 4. *Nauli* 5 *Trataka* 6. *Kapalbhati*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda prayoga tathA daMDa Adi kriyA ko dekhakara gRhastha ke putra kI
prazaMsA karanA athavA jAnanA ki yaha malla hai, yaha gaNa ke AdhAra para
upajIvanA hai| 207/4. karma athavA zilpa viSayaka kartA ke prayojana ke nimitta
ekatrita aneka vastuoM ko dekhakara yaha samyag hai athavA asamyag, aisA apane
kauzala se jatAnA athavA spaSTa rUpa se kahanA karma aura zilpa kI upajIvanA
hai| - 208. vanIpaka ke pAMca prakAra haiM - zramaNa, mAhaNa, kRpaNa, atithi
tathA shvaan| 'vanu yAcane' dhAtu se yaha zabda banA hai  /  svayaM ko zramaNa
Adi kA bhakta batalAkara yAcanA karane vAlA vanIpaka hotA hai| 208/1. jisakI mAM
mara gaI ho aise bachar3e ke lie gvAlA anya gAya kI khoja karatA hai, vaise hI
AhAra Adi ke lobha se jo zramaNa, mAhaNa, kRpaNa, atithi athavA zvAna ke bhaktoM
ke sAmane svayaM ko unakA bhakta dikhAkara yAcanA karatA hai, vaha vanIpaka hai|
173 209. zramaNa ke pAMca prakAra haiM-nirgrantha, zAkya, tApasa, gairuka tathA
aajiivk| bhojana dete samaya koI muni AhAra Adi ke lobha se svayaM ko zAkya Adi
kA bhakta batAtA hai, yaha usakI vanIpakatA hai  /  209/1. ye zAkya bhikSu
bhitti citra kI bhAMti anAsakta rUpa se bhojana karate haiN| ye parama kAruNika
evaM dAnaruci haiN| kAmagardabha-maithuna meM atyaMta Asakta ina brAhmaNoM ko
diyA huA bhI naSTa nahIM hotA to bhalA zAkya Adi bhikSuoM ko diyA huA vyartha
kaise hogA ? 210. zAkya Adi kI prazaMsA se mithyAtva kA sthirIkaraNa hotA hai,
udgama Adi doSoM kA samAcaraNa hotA hai, jisase AhAra kI Asakti se unake gaccha
meM samAviSTa hone kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai| logoM meM vaha avarNavAda hotA hai
ki ye sAdhu cATukArI haiM, inhoMne kabhI dAna nahIM diyA hai athavA zAkya Adi ke
bhakta yadi dveSI haiM to yaha kaha dete haiM ki yahAM phira mata AnA  /  210/1.
(muni brAhmaNa-bhaktoM ke samakSa brAhmaNoM kI prazaMsA rUpa vanIpakatva karate
hue kahatA hai - ) lokopakArI bhUmideva - brAhmaNoM ko diyA huA dAna bahuta
phaladAyI hotA hai| brAhmaNa baMdhu- arthAt jAtimAtra brAhmaNa ko diyA gayA dAna
bhI bahuta phala vAlA hotA hai to bhalA SaTkarma meM nirata brAhmaNa ko dAna
dene se hone vAle phala kI to bAta hI kyA hai ? 1. mavR pa. 130; daNDAdikA
dharaNipAtacchuptAGkayuddhaprabhRtayaH - dharatI para girAkara soe hue malla kI
chAtI para baiThakara yuddha Adi karanA daNDa kahalAtA hai| 2. dra. ThANaM 5/200
/  3. manusmRti (10/75) meM brAhmaNoM ke yogya SaTkarma ye haiM
adhyApanamadhyayanaM yajanaM yAjanaM tathA  /  dAnaM pratigrahazcaiva
SaTkarmANyagrajanmanaH  //  brAhmaNa kI AjIvikA se saMbaMdhita SaTkarma isa
prakAra haiM uJchaM pratigraho bhikSA, vANijyaM pazupAlanam  /  kRSikarma tathA
ceti, SaTkarmANyagrajanmanaH  //  yoga se saMbaMdhita SaTkarma isa prakAra haiM-
1. dhauti 2. vasti 3 netI 4. naulI 5 trATaka 6. kapAlabhAti  /

Page #346 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 174 ## Pindaniyukti  210/2. This world is worshiped and worshiper. A person
who gives charity without any desire to a miser, sorrowful, friendless,
diseased, and lame person, takes away the flag of charity, that is, takes the
flag of charity in his hand. (It is a fault to say this in front of miserly
devotees, etc.) 210/3. Generally, people give charity to their benefactors,
acquaintances, and dependents, but the person who gives charity to a weary
traveler on the road, that is true charity. (It is a fault to say this in front
of guest devotees, etc.) 210/4. Cows, bulls, etc., easily get food like grass,
etc., but dogs, who are despised with disgust, do not easily get food. 210/5.
These dogs are special deities of Mount Kailash. On earth, they roam in the form
of Yakshas. Their worship is beneficial and non-worship is harmful. (It is a
fault to say this in front of dog devotees, etc.) 211. This Muni has understood
my feeling that Brahmins, etc., are worthy of salutation in the world. There are
two faults in the fault of each of the above subjects, namely, Bhadraka and
Prant, etc. (If a person is Bhadraka, then he rewards the Muni with half-karma
by listening to words of praise, and if he is Prant, then he throws the Muni out
of the house.) 212. Similarly, 'Kak', etc., are also accepted by the acceptance
of the dog. Whoever is attached to (the worship of Kak, etc.), he presents
himself as his devotee by praising him when asked or without being asked. 213.
It is also a fault to say, "Charity given to a worthy or unworthy person is not
in vain," so it is a great fault to praise unworthy charity. 214. There are
three types of treatment by a Sadhu when asked by a householder: * I am not a
physician. (From this sentence, he understands that he should go to a
physician.) * He speaks of the action of pacifying his own disease. * Or he
treats himself as a physician. 214/1. When going for alms, a sick Muni asks a
sick person for relief from his illness. The Muni says, "Am I a physician?"
Knowing this objection, the patient understands that he should go to a
physician. This is the first type of treatment. 214/2. When asked by the
patient, the Muni says, "I was also suffering from this pain or disease. I was
cured of the disease by such and such medicine. We Munis cure spontaneously
arising diseases by the penance of oil, etc." This is the second type of
treatment.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 174 piMDaniyukti 210/2. yaha loka pUjAhArya-pUjitapUjaka hai| jo vyakti kRpaNa,
duHkhI, abandhu, rogagrasta tathA lUlelaMgar3e ko anAkAMkSA se dAna detA hai,
vaha dAnapatAkA kA haraNa karatA hai arthAt dAna kI patAkA ko apane hAtha meM le
letA hai| (kRpaNa-bhaktoM ke sammukha aisA kahanA kRpaNa Adi kI vanIpakatA hai|)
210/3. prAyaH loga apane upakArI, paricita tathA AzritoM ko dAna dete haiM
parantu jo vyakti mArga khinna atithi ko dAna detA hai, vahI vAstava meM dAna
hai| (atithi-bhaktoM ke sammukha aisA kahanA atithi vanIpakatva hai|) 210/4.
gAya, baila Adi ko tRNa Adi kA AhAra sulabha hotA hai parantu chicchikkAra se
tiraskRta kuttoM ko AhAra-prApti sulabha nahIM hotii| 210/5. ye zvAna kailAza
parvata ke deva vizeSa haiN| pRthvI para ye yakSarUpa meM vicaraNa karate haiN|
inakI pUjA hitakArI aura apUjA ahitakArI hotI hai| (zvAna-bhaktoM ke samakSa
aisA kahanA zvAna vanIpakatva hai|) 211. isa muni ne merA bhAva jAna liyA hai ki
loka meM brAhmaNa Adi praNAmArha haiN| uparyukta pratyeka viSaya ke vanIpakatva
meM bhadraka aura prAnta Adi doSa hote haiN| (yadi vyakti bhadraka hotA hai to
vaha prazaMsAvacana sunakara muni ko AdhAkarma se pratilAbhita karatA hai aura
yadi vaha prAnta hotA hai to muni ko ghara se bAhara nikAla detA hai|) 212. isI
prakAra zvAna ke grahaNa se 'kAka' Adi bhI gRhIta ho jAte haiN| jo jahAM (kAka
Adi kI pUjA meM) prasakta hotA hai, vaha vahAM pUche jAne para yA binA pUche hI
usakI prazaMsA ke dvArA svayaM ko usake bhakta rUpa meM prastuta karatA hai|
213. 'pAtra yA apAtra ko diyA huA dAna vyartha nahIM hotA'-aisA kahanA bhI
doSayukta hai to bhalA apAtradAna kI prazaMsA karanA mahAn doSaprada hai| 214.
gRhastha ke dvArA pUchane para sAdhu ke dvArA tIna prakAra kI cikitsA hotI hai *
maiM vaidya nahIM huuN| (isa vAkya se vaha samajha jAtA hai ki use vaidya ke
pAsa jAnA caahie|) * svayaM ke rogopazAnti kI kriyA kahatA hai| * athavA vaidya
banakara svayaM cikitsA karatA hai| 214/1. bhikSArtha jAne para rogI muni se
roga-nivAraNa ke lie pUchatA hai| muni kahatA hai-'kyA maiM vaidya hUM?' isa
arthApatti se jAnakara rogI ko yaha bodha ho jAtA hai ki use vaidya ke pAsa jAnA
caahie| yaha cikitsA kA prathama prakAra hai| 214/2. rogI ke pUchane para muni
kahatA hai- 'maiM bhI isa duHkha athavA roga se grasta thaa| amuka auSadhi se
maiM rogamukta ho gyaa| hama muni sahasA samutpanna roga kA nivAraNa tele Adi kI
tapasyA se karate haiN| yaha dUsare prakAra kI cikitsA hai|

Page #347 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 175 214/3. When a visitor or a disease caused
by metal poisoning arises, the Muni first performs a purification of the
stomach, then alleviates the bile, etc., and then removes the cause of the
disease. (This is the third type of treatment.) 215. In the act of treatment,
there is a continuous practice of non-restraint yogas because the householder is
like a hot iron ball. (He is constantly engaged in the destruction of the six
living beings throughout his life, therefore his treatment constantly causes
non-restraint yogas). In this case, one should know the example of a weak tiger.
If the disease becomes very severe even after treatment, the householder
suppresses it, which leads to criticism of the preaching. 216. The city of
Hastakalp is an example of the anger-lump, the city of Giripushpit is an example
of the pride-lump, the city of Rajagriha is an example of the delusion-lump, and
the city of Champanagari is an example of the greed-lump. Ghevar, Sevayi, Modak,
and Kesaria Modak - these four items are the causes of the origin of anger,
etc., respectively. 217. The food that is obtained through the influence of the
Muni's knowledge and penance, through the favor of the royal family, or through
the influence of physical strength, is the anger-lump. 218. When a Sadhu becomes
angry at not receiving donations while seeing others donate or while begging
himself, the householder gives donations thinking that the Muni's anger is not
auspicious, that is the anger-lump. Or, the fruit of anger is to curse with
death, etc., the donation given with this thought is also the anger-lump. 218/1.
When the Muni did not get food in the house of a deceased devotee, he became
angry and said, "Give donations next month." (In the second month and the third
month also, there was a death feast in that house due to the death of someone.)
For the third time, the elder gatekeeper told the householder the whole story.
He apologized and gave donations to the Muni. (This is an example of the anger-
lump). 219. The Muni who desires a lump due to being encouraged by others, or by
becoming proud after hearing words of gain and praise, or by being insulted by
others, is the pride-lump. 219/1, 2. In the festival of making Sevayi, this
voice arose in the group of Sadhus, "Who will bring Sevayi this morning?" A
small Muni said, "I will bring it." The Munis said, "Our purpose will not be
fulfilled with Sevayi obtained in insufficient quantity without jaggery and
ghee." "I will bring Sevayi as you wish," saying this, the Muni went out to beg.
219/3. When begging, the householder's wife insulted the Muni and refused to
give him Sevayi. 1. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Story No. 29.
2. In Mulachar (Ga. 454), there is a difference in the names of the cities
related to pride, delusion, and greed. The mention of Vennaatatt related to
pride, Varanasi related to delusion, and Rashianagar related to greed is there.
In Mulachar, there is no mention of the names of food items. 3. For the
expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Story No. 30.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 175 214/3. AgaMtuka athavA dhAtukSobhaja roga ke samutpanna hone para
muni jo kriyA karatA hai, vaha yaha haipahale peTa kA saMzodhana karatA hai
phira pitta Adi kA upazamana karatA hai phira roga ke kAraNa kA parihAra karatA
hai| (yaha tIsare prakAra kI cikitsA hai|) 215. cikitsA-kriyA meM asaMyama yogoM
kA satata pravartana hotA hai kyoMki gRhastha tapta lohe ke gole ke samAna hotA
hai| (vaha yAvajjIvana SaDjIvanikAya ke ghAta meM pravartita hotA hai ata: usakI
cikitsA satata asaMyamayogoM kA kAraNa banatI hai)| isa prakaraNa meM durbala
vyAghra kA dRSTAnta jAnanA caahie| yadi cikitsA karane para bhI roga atyugra ho
jAtA hai to gRhastha usakA nigraha karatA hai, jisase pravacana kI niMdA hotI
hai| 216. krodhapiMDa dRSTAnta kA nagara hastakalpa, mAnapiMDa dRSTAnta kA
nagara giripuSpita, mAyApiMDa dRSTAnta kA nagara rAjagRha tathA lobhapiMDa
dRSTAnta kA nagara caMpAnagarI hai| ghevara, sevaI, modaka tathA kezariyA
modaka-ye cAroM vastueM kramazaH krodha Adi kI utpatti ke kAraNa haiN| 217. jo
bhojana muni kI vidyA aura tapa ke prabhAva se, rAjakula kI priyatA se athavA
zArIrika bala ke prabhAva se prApta hotA hai, vaha krodhapiMDa hai| 218. dUsaroM
ko dAna dete hue dekhakara athavA svayaM yAcanA karate hue dAna prApta na hone
para sAdhu ke kupita hone para gRhastha yaha socakara dAna detA hai ki muni kA
kupita honA zubha nahIM hotA, vaha krodhapiMDa hai| athavA krodha kA phala
maraNa Adi zApa denA hotA hai, isa cintana se jo diyA jAtA hai, vaha bhI
krodhapiMDa hai| 218/1. mRtakabhakta meM AhAra na milane para muni kupita hokara
yaha kahakara Age calA gayA ki dUsare mahIne meM dAna denaa| (dUsare mahIne aura
tIsare mahIne bhI usa ghara meM kisI kI mRtyu hone para mRtakabhoja huaa|)
tIsarI bAra sthavira dvArapAla ne gRhasvAmI ko sArI bAta khii| usane kSamA
mAMgakara muni ko dAna diyaa| (yaha krodhapiNDa kA udAharaNa hai)| 219. jo muni
dUsare ke dvArA utsAhita kie jAne para athavA labdhi aura prazaMsA vacanoM ko
sunakara garvita banakara athavA dUsare ke dvArA apamAnita hokara piMDa kI eSaNA
karatA hai, vaha mAnapiMDa hai| 219/1, 2. sevaI banAne ke utsava meM sAdhuoM ke
samUha meM yaha svara ubharA ki Aja prAta:kAla kauna sAdhu sevaI lAegA? eka
kSullaka muni bolA-'maiM laauuNgaa|' muniyoM ne kahA-'binA gur3a aura ghI ke
aparyApta mAtrA meM prApta sevaI se hamArA prayojana siddha nahIM hogaa|''jaisii
tuma cAhoge, vaisI sevaI lAUMgA'yaha kahakara muni bhikSArtha bAhara nikala
gyaa| 219/3. bhikSA mAMgane para gRhasvAminI ne muni ko apamAnita karake sevaI
dene kA pratiSedha kara diyaa| 1. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA
saM. 29 /  2. mUlAcAra (gA. 454) meM mAna, mAyA aura lobha se sambandhita
nagaroM ke nAmoM meM aMtara hai| mAna se sambandhita vennAtaTa, mAyA se
sambandhita vArANasI tathA lobha se sambandhita rAziyAna nagara kA ullekha hai|
mUlAcAra meM khAdyapadArthoM ke nAma kA nirdeza nahIM hai| 3. kathA ke vistAra
hetu dekheM pari. 3. kathA saM. 30 /

Page #348 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 176 ## Pindaniyukti  The Muni said to the householder's wife, "I will
definitely obtain this sevai." The householder's wife said, "If you obtain the
sevai, I will believe that you have performed prasravan in my nasikaput." 219/4.
"Whose house is this?" Asking this, the Muni went among the council. He asked,
"Who is such-and-such a person?" The people said, "What is your purpose with
that person? Ask us, he is very miserly, he will not give you anything." 219/5.
The Muni said, "If he is not one of the six women-headed men, he will give. I
will ask him in the middle of the council." 219/6. When the people asked, the
Muni told the names of the six lowest men: 1. Shvetangguli, 2. Bakoddayak, 3.
Kinkara, 4. Snayak, 5. Grdhraivaridhi, 6. Hadjna." 219/7. That person said, "You
ask, I am not such a person." The Muni said, "I went to your house before, but
your wife prohibited it." The husband ordered his wife to climb the male,
saying, "You bring down the jaggery from above, I will feed the Brahmanas." The
wife climbed the nishreni. 219/8. The householder removed the nishreni from
there and gave the Muni sufficient sevai in donation. The wife saw all this. She
said in a loud voice, "Don't give him, don't give him." The Muni put his finger
in his nose and showed her that I have performed prasravan in your nose. Doing
so creates animosity between husband and wife, sometimes even suicide from
humiliation, and disrespect for the sermon. 219/9, 10. In the city of Rajagriha,
the small disciple of Dharmaruchi Acharya was Muni Ashadhabhuti. Once he entered
the house of a royal jester for alms. There he received a very valuable laddu in
alms. He thought this would be for the Acharya, again he made the form of a Kane
Muni and obtained modak, thinking that this would have to be given to the
Upadhyaya. Again he made the form of a Kubja Muni and obtained the third modak
and thought that this would have to be given to the Sanghatak-Sadhu. Finally, he
made the form of a Kusthi Sadhu and obtained the fourth modak. The jester saw
the scene of transformation. He started inviting him daily and giving him
sufficient modak in donation.  1. The commentator has explained these six names
through brief stories. 2. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, story no.
31. 3. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, story no. 32. 4. For the
expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, story no. 33. 5. For the expansion of the
story, see Pari. 3, story no. 34. 6. For the expansion of the story, see Pari.
3, story no. 35. 7. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, story no. 36.
8. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, story no. 37.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 176 piMDaniyukti muni ne gRhasvAminI ko kahA-'maiM yaha sevaI avazya prApta
kruuNgaa|' gRhasvAminI bolI-'yadi tuma sevaI prApta karoge to maiM mAnUMgI ki
tumane merI nAsikApuTa meM prasravaNa kiyA hai|' 219/4. 'yaha kisakA ghara hai?'
yaha pUchakara muni pariSad ke bIca gyaa| usane pUchA-'amuka vyakti kauna hai?'
logoM ne kahA-'usa vyakti se tumheM kyA prayojana hai ? hamase yAcanA karo, vaha
bahuta kaMjUsa hai, tumheM kucha bhI nahIM degaa|' 219/5. muni ne kahA-'yadi
vaha chaha mahilApradhAna puruSoM meM koI nahIM hogA to vaha degaa| maiM pariSad
ke madhya usase yAcanA kruuNgaa|' 219/6. logoM ke pUchane para muni ne chaha
adhama puruSoM ke nAma batAe-zvetAGguli' 2. bakoDDAyaka' 3. kiMkara 4. snAyaka'
5. gRdhraivarikhI 6. hdjny|" 219/7. usa vyakti ne kahA-'tuma mAMgo maiM aisA
vyakti nahIM huuN|' muni ne kahA-'maiM pahale tumhAre ghara gayA thA lekina
tumhArI patnI ne niSedha kara diyaa|' pati ne patnI ko mAle para car3hane kA
Adeza dekara kahA-'tuma Upara se gur3a utAro, maiM brAhmaNoM ko bhojana
kraauuNgaa|' patnI niHzreNI se Upara car3ha gii| 219/8. gRhasvAmI ne niHzreNI
vahAM se haTA dI aura muni ko paryApta sevaI kA dAna diyaa| bhAryA ne yaha saba
dekha liyaa| usane ucca svaroM meM kahA-'isako mata do, isako mata do|' muni ne
nAka meM aMguli DAlakara usako yaha jatA diyA ki maiMne tumhAre nAka meM
prasravaNa kara diyA hai| aisA karane se pati-patnI ke bIca pradveSa paidA hotA
hai, kabhI apamAna se AtmaghAta bhI ho sakatA hai tathA pravacana kI avahelanA
hotI hai| 219/9, 10. rAjagRha nagarI meM dharmaruci AcArya kA choTA ziSya muni
ASAr3habhUti thaa| eka bAra vaha bhikSArtha rAja-naTa ke ghara meM praviSTa
huaa| vahAM use bhikSA meM bahumUlya laDDu prApta huaa| usane socA yaha AcArya
ke lie hogA, punaH usane kAne muni kA rUpa banAkara modaka prApta karake socA ki
yaha upAdhyAya ko denA hogaa| punaH usane kubja muni kA rUpa banAkara tIsarA
modaka prApta kiyA aura socA ki yaha saMghATaka-sAdhu ko denA hogaa| aMta meM
usane kuSThI sAdhu kA rUpa banAkara cauthA modaka prApta kiyaa| naTa ne rUpa-
parivartana kA dRzya dekhaa| vaha use pratidina nimaMtrita karake paryApta
modaka kA dAna dene lgaa| 1. TIkAkAra ne ina chaha nAmoM kI vyAkhyA saMkSipta
kathAnakoM ke mAdhyama se kI hai| 2. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA
saM. 31  /  3. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 32 /  4. kathA
ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 33 /  5. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM
pari. 3, kathA saM. 34 /  6. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 35
/  7. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 36  /  8. kathA ke
vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 37 /

Page #349 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **177**  **219/11.** He told both daughters, "You must subdue
them with gifts and affection." One day, in solitude, they attracted the muni's
mind. Aashaadhbhuti went to the guru and told him everything. The muni abandoned
ling-rajoharan. He married the nat-kanyas. (The nat told the daughters, "He
constantly remembers the guru, therefore") he is of noble nature.   **219/12.**
In Rajgriha, the king ordered a play without women (natnis) one day. Both nat-
kanyas, intoxicated, went to the upper floor of the house and slept.
**219/13.** Due to the presence of a calamity, the play did not happen. Upon
returning, Aashaadhbhuti saw both wives naked and intoxicated, and became
detached. He attained sambodhi. The nat understood through gestures that
Aashaadhbhuti had become detached. To continue his livelihood properly, he
created a play called "Rashtrapal."  **219/14.** The play depicted Bharat, born
in the Ikshvaku dynasty, attaining the light of kaivalya in an ideal home.
People threw garlands and other offerings. Accepting the gifts and giving them
to the nat-kanyas, Aashaadhbhuti started to return for re-initiation. The king
tried to stop him, but he did not return.  **219/15.** (The same play was
performed in Kusumpur Nagar). Seeing it, 500 Kshatriyas became monks. (Seeing
that this play would make the earth devoid of Kshatriyas) the play was burned.
For the sick, long-penitent, guest, and sthavir, the consumption of maya-pind is
also permitted as an exception.  **220.** "Today, I will only consume this
substance (modak, etc.)" - due to this thought, he does not consume other
substances that are easily available, this is lobha-pind. Or, knowing a smooth
substance to be filled with bhadrakras, consuming it in large quantities is also
lobha-pind.  **220/1,2.** During the modak festival in Champa Nagari, the muni
resolved, "I will consume Singhkesharak modak in alms." He started prohibiting
other substances. Instead of saying "dharmalab", he started saying
"Singhkesharak". At midnight, he uttered "Singhkesharak" at the house of the
shraddha. The shravak filled the bowl with modaks. The shravak asked, "Has the
time of purimarth arrived?" The muni used the opportunity. (Seeing the stars in
the sky) the muni's mind became calm. The muni said, "You have given me the
right inspiration at the right time." The muni performed the parishthapan of the
modaks. While doing penance, he attained kevalgyan.  **221.** There are two
types of sanstav - sambandhisanstav and vachanasanstav or shlaghasanstav. Each
has two sub-types - purvasanstav and paschatanstav.  1. For the expansion of the
story, see Pari. 3, Katha San. 38. 2. For the expansion of the story, see Pari.
3, Katha San. 39.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 177 219/11. usane donoM putriyoM ko kahA- 'dAna aura sneha se inako
vaza meM karanA hai| eka dina ekAnta meM unhoMne muni kA mana AkRSTa kara liyaa|
ASAr3habhUti guru ke pAsa gayA aura sArI bAta kahakara. muni liMga-rajoharaNa ko
chor3a diyaa| usane naTa-kanyAoM se vivAha kara liyaa| (naTa ne putriyoM se
kahA-yaha guru kI satata smRti karatA rahatA hai ataH) yaha uttama prakRti kA
hai| 219/12. rAjagRha meM rAjA dvArA eka dina binA mahilAoM (naTaniyoM) ke
nATaka kA Adeza huaa| ve donoM naTakanyAeM madonmatta hokara ghara ke UparI
maMjila meM jAkara so giiN| 219/13. vyAghAta upasthita hone ke kAraNa nATaka
nahIM huaa| lauTane para ASAr3habhUti donoM patniyoM ko nirvastra aura
madonmatta dekhakara virakta ho gyaa| use saMbodhi prApta ho gii| naTa ne iMgita
se jAna liyA ki ASAr3habhUti virakta ho gayA hai  /  AjIvikA samyak cale, utanA
dhana ekatrita karane ke lie usane rASTrapAla nAmaka nATaka kI racanA kii|
219/14. nATaka meM ikSvAku vaMza meM utpanna bharata ko AdarzagRha meM kaivalya
kA Aloka prApta huA, yaha dRzya dikhAyA gyaa| logoM ne hAra Adi pheNke| upahAroM
ko grahaNa kara naTakanyAoM ko dekara ASAr3habhUti punaH dIkSA ke lie lauTane
lgaa| rAjA ne bAdhita karake rokanA cAhA lekina vaha nahIM lauttaa| 219/15.
(vahI nATaka kusumapura nagara meM khelA gyaa)| use dekhakara 500 kSatriya
pravajita hue| (isa nATaka se yaha pRthvI kSatriya rahita ho jAegI yaha
dekhakara) usa nATaka ko jalA diyA gyaa| rogI, dIrghatapasvI, atithi aura
sthavira ke lie ApavAdika rUpa se mAyApiNDa kA grahaNa bhI vihita hai| 220. 'Aja
maiM amuka dravya (modaka Adi) hI grahaNa karUMgA'-isa buddhi ke kAraNa vaha
sahaja prApta hone vAle anya dravya ko grahaNa nahIM karatA, yaha lobhapiMDa
hai| athavA snigdha padArtha ko bhadrakarasa yukta jAnakara usako pracura mAtrA
meM grahaNa karanA bhI lobhapiMDa hai| 220/1,2. campA nagarI meM modakotsava ke
avasara para muni ne saMkalpa liyA ki maiM bhikSA meM siMhakezaraka modaka
grahaNa kruuNgaa| anya padArthoM kA vaha pratiSedha karane lgaa| dharmalAbha ke
sthAna para vaha siMhakezaraka kahane lgaa| zrAddha ke ghara AdhI rAtri meM
usane siMhakezaraka kA uccAraNa kiyaa| zrAvaka ne modakoM se pAtra bhara diyaa|
zrAvaka ne pUchA-'purimArdha kA kAla A gayA kyA?' muni ne upayoga lgaayaa|
(AkAza meM tAre dekhakara) muni kA mana zAnta ho gyaa| muni ne kahA-"tumane
mujhe samaya para sahI preraNA dii|" muni ne modakoM kA pariSThApana kiyaa|
prAyazcitta karate hue use kevalajJAna ho gyaa| 221. saMstava ke do prakAra
haiM-saMbaMdhisaMstava tathA vacanasaMstava athavA shlaaghaa-sNstv| pratyeka ke
dodo bheda haiM-~-pUrvasaMstava tathA pshcaatsNstv| 1. kathA ke vistAra hetu
dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 38 /  2. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA
saM. 39  /  -

Page #350 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 178 ## Pindaniyukti  222. Praise of parents, etc., is called *purvasanstav*
(prior praise), and praise of father-in-law, mother-in-law, etc., is called
*paschatanstav* (posterior praise). A sadhu interacts with householders with
either prior or posterior praise. 222/1. A muni who has gone out for alms,
knowing his own age and the age of the householder, establishes a connection
accordingly, saying, "My mother was like this," or "My sister, daughter, or
granddaughter was like this." 222/2. A muni entering a house for alms, seeing a
woman, sheds tears with emotion, saying, "My mother was like you." The woman
places her breast in the muni's mouth, which creates a bond of affection between
them. She may also donate her widowed daughter-in-law. 223. The faults of
*paschatanstav* are these: A mother-in-law may donate her widowed daughter. If a
muni says, "My wife was like this," her husband may kill him immediately, or the
muni's vow may be broken (due to mental disturbance) if the woman behaves like a
wife. 224. The householder may think, "This muni is a magician, a flatterer, he
is insulting us by calling us mother, wife, etc." Thinking this, with a narrow
mind, she may drive the muni out of the house. If the householders are virtuous,
they become committed to the sadhu. 225. The *purvasanstav* related to words is
when a muni praises the good and bad qualities of the donor before he gives food
and drink. 225/1. The muni says, "This is the one whose qualities roam unbound
in all ten directions. For so many days we have heard about you, today we have
seen you directly." 226. *Paschatanstav* is when a muni praises the good and bad
qualities of the donor after he gives food and drink. 226/1. "Your qualities are
truly prevalent everywhere. My eyes have become pure by seeing you. Before, I
had doubts about your qualities, now, seeing you, my mind is free from doubt."
227. The example of the *bhiksu-upasaka* regarding knowledge and the *murunda*
king regarding mantras is given for the formulation of knowledge and mantras.
227/1,2. The sadhus gathered and began to talk, "The *bhiksu-upasaka* is very
narrow-minded, stingy. He doesn't give anything to the sadhus." (One sadhu
said), "If you all wish, I can get ghee, jaggery, and clothes, etc., from him."
That muni went there and enchanted the house with knowledge and mantras. He
asked the sadhu, "What should I give you?" The sadhu said, "Ghee, jaggery, and
clothes, etc." Upon giving the donation, the muni withdrew the knowledge. When
he was in his natural state, the *bhiksu-upasaka* asked, "Who has...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 178 piMDaniyukti 222. mAtA-pitA Adi kA saMstava pUrvasaMstava hai tathA
zvasura-sAsa Adi kA saMstava pazcAtsaMstava hai| sAdhu gRhasthoM ke sAtha pUrva
athavA pazcAtsaMstava karatA hai| 222/1. bhikSArtha gayA huA muni apanI vaya
tathA gRhiNI kI vaya jAnakara tadanurUpa saMbaMdha sthApita karate hue kahatA
hai ki merI mAtA aisI hI thI athavA merI bahina, beTI yA pautrI bhI aisI hI
thii| 222/2. bhikSArtha praviSTa muni strI ko dekhakara adhRtipUrvaka
azruvimocana karate hue kahatA hai-'merI mAtA tumhAre jaisI thii|' vaha strI
muni ke mukha meM stana prakSepa karatI hai, jisase donoM ke madhya sneha-
sambandha ho jAtA hai| vaha apanI vidhavA putravadhU kA dAna bhI kara sakatI
hai| 223. pazcAtsaMstava ke doSa ye haiM-sAsa apanI vidhavA putrI kA dAna kara
sakatI hai| merI bhAryA aisI hI thI' aisA kahane para pati muni kA sadya: ghAta
kara sakatA hai athavA strI dvArA bhAryAvat AcaraNa karane para (citta-vikSobha
se) muni kA vratabhaMga bhI ho sakatA hai| 224. gRhiNI yaha soca sakatI hai ki
yaha muni mAyAvI hai, cApalUsa hai, jananI, bhAryA Adi kahakara hamArA tiraskAra
kara rahA hai| aisA socakara prAnta buddhi se vaha muni ko ghara se bAhara
nikAla sakatI hai| yadi ghara vAle bhadraka hote haiM to ve sAdhu se pratibaddha
ho jAte haiN| 225. dAtA dvArA bhaktapAna dene se pahale hI jo muni usake sad-
asad guNoM kI prazaMsA karatA hai, vaha vacana saMbaMdhI pUrvasaMstava hotA hai|
225/1. muni kahatA hai-"yaha vaha hai, jisake guNa dasoM dizAoM meM nirbandha
ghUmate haiN| itane dina tumhAre bAre meM hama aisA sunate the, Aja pratyakSa
tumako dekhA hai|" 226. dAtA dvArA bhaktapAna dene para muni usake sad-asad
guNoM kI prazaMsA karatA hai, vaha pazcAtsaMstava kahalAtA hai| 226/1. tumhAre
guNa yathArtha rUpa meM sarvatra pracalita haiN| tumheM dekhakara mere cakSu
vimala ho ge| pahale mujhe tumhAre guNoM ke bAre meM zaMkA thI, aba tumheM
dekhakara merA mana niHzaMka ho gayA hai| 227. vidyA aura maMtra kI prarUpaNA
meM vidyA ke viSaya meM bhikSu-upAsaka kA tathA maMtra ke viSaya meM muruMDa
rAjA kI zirovedanA kA dRSTAnta hai| 227/1,2. sAdhu ekatrita hokara saMlApa
karane lage-'bhikSu-upAsaka atyanta prAnta hai, kaMjUsa hai| vaha sAdhu ko kucha
nahIM detaa|' (eka sAdhu bolA)-'yadi Apa logoM kI icchA ho to maiM usase ghRta,
gur3a aura vastra Adi dilavA sakatA huuN|' vaha muni vahAM gayA aura ghara ko
vidyA aura maMtra se abhimaMtrita kara diyaa| usane sAdhu se pUchA-'Apako kyA
dUM?' sAdhu ne kahA-'ghRta, gur3a tathA vastra aadi|' dAna dene para muni ne
vidyA kA pratisaMharaNa kara liyaa| svabhAvastha hone para bhikSu-upAsaka ne
pUchA-'kisane merI

Page #351 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** "What things have been stolen and by whom have
I been cheated?"  **228.** A person who is empowered by Vidya or any other
person can harm a Muni by using counter-Vidya like Stambhan etc. There is a
misconception among people that these Munis are sinners, illusionists, and
karma-doers. Due to this misconception, they may be suppressed or harmed by the
kings.  **179**  **228/1.** As the Padalipta Acharya rotated the index finger on
the knee, the headache of King Murund ceased.  **229.** (There are the following
two drawbacks of using mantras -) A person who is empowered by a mantra or any
other person can paralyze a Sadhu by using a counter-mantra. (There is a
misconception among people that) these Sadhus are sinners, illusionists, and
karma-doers. The use of mantras can be done in exceptional situations for the
benefit of the Sangha.  **230.** Regarding the disappearance by the use of
powder, there are examples of Samita Acharya in Chanakya's Yoga subject related
to Padalepa, a young woman in the matter of original karma, and two queens in
the matter of marriage, conception, and abortion.  **231.** The same drawbacks
that are mentioned in the context of mantras and Vidya should be known in the
case of powders like Vashikaran etc. The use of powder by a Muni can create
animosity towards many Munis and can even destroy them.  **231/1.** There are
two types of auspicious and inauspicious Yogas - Aaharya and Anaaharya. There
are two types of Aaharya - Agharsh and Dhoopvas. Anaaharya is - Padapralepa etc.
**231/2.** In the island (called Brahma) between the Krishna and Venna rivers,
five hundred Tapas lived. On festival days, the head of the community would
cross the Krishna river after applying Pad-Lepa. People would honor him.
**231/3.** People would slander in front of the Shravakas saying that your Guru
has no power. Samitasuri explained  1. For the expansion of the story, see Pari.
3, Katha No. 40. 2. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha No. 41.
3. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha No. 42. The story of
Ksullak Dway and Chanakya has been expanded by the commentator in three verses
(Pibha 35-37). 4. Those that are consumed with water etc. are Aaharya Yogas.
There are two types of these - Agharsh, i.e., the substance that is ground and
consumed with water etc., and Dhoopvas - the incense of fragrant substances.
Both powder and fragrance are in the form of Kshoda. The commentator clarifies
the difference between them by saying that dry or moist Kshoda produced from
ordinary substances is called 'powder'. The very fine form of Kshoda produced
from fragrant substances is called 'fragrance' (Mavru p. 143).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda vastueM curAI aura kisake dvArA maiM ThagA gayA hUM ?" 228. vidyA se
abhimaMtrita vaha vyakti athavA anya koI vyakti stambhana Adi pratividyA se muni
kA aniSTa kara sakatA hai| logoM meM yaha apavAda hotA hai ki ye muni pApajIvI,
mAyAvI tathA kArmaNakArI haiN| isa apavAda se unakA rAjapuruSoM dvArA nigraha
athavA aniSTa bhI ho sakatA hai| 179 228/1. jaise-jaise pAdalipta AcArya ne jAnu
para pradezinI aMguli ko ghumAyA, vaise-vaise muruMDa rAjA kI zIrSa - vedanA
samApta ho gii| 229. (maMtra kA prayoga karane ke nimna doSa haiM -) maMtra se
abhimaMtrita vaha vyakti athavA anya koI vyakti pratimaMtra se sAdhu ko
stambhita kara sakatA hai| (logoM meM yaha apavAda hotA hai ki) ye sAdhu
pApajIvI, mAyAvI aura kArmaNakArI haiN| saMgha-prabhAvanA ke lie ApavAdika
sthiti meM maMtra kA prayoga ho sakatA hai| 230. cUrNa ke prayoga se antardhAna
hone ke viSaya meM cANakya kA yoga viSayaka pAdalepana meM samitaAcArya kA,
mUlakarma ke viSaya meM yuvatI kA vivAha tathA garbhAdhAna aura garbhaparizATana
meM do rAniyoM ke udAharaNa haiM  /  231. maMtra aura vidyA ke saMdarbha meM jo
doSa batalAe gae haiM, ve hI doSa vazIkaraNa Adi cUrNa meM jAnane caahie| eka
muni dvArA kRta cUrNa-prayoga aneka muniyoM ke prati pradveSa utpanna kara detA
hai tathA unakA nAza bhI kara sakatA hai| 231/1. saubhAgyakara-durbhAgyakara
yoga do-do prakAra ke haiM - AhArya tathA anAhArya  /  AhArya ke do prakAra
haiM- AgharSa tathA dhUpavAsa  /  anAhArya hai - pAdapralepana Adi  /  231 / 2.
kRSNA aura vennA nadI ke madhya (brahma nAmaka ) dvIpa meM pAMca sau tApasa
rahate the| parva dinoM meM kulapati pAda-lepa karake kRSNA nadI ko pAra karatA
thaa| loga usakA satkAra karate the  /  231/3. zrAvakoM ke samakSa loga niMdA
karake kahate ki tumhAre guru meM zakti nahIM hai| samitasUri ne batAyA 1. kathA
ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 40  /  2. kathA ke vistAra hetu
dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 41  /  3. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA
saM. 42  /  kSullaka dvaya evaM cANakya kI kathA kA vistAra bhASyakAra ne tIna
gAthAoM (pibhA 35-37) meM kiyA hai| 4. jo pAnI Adi ke sAtha pIe jAte haiM, ve
AhArya yoga haiN| inake do prakAra hai- AgharSa arthAt pAnI Adi ke sAtha
ghisakara pIyA jAne vAlA dravya tathA dhUpavAsa - sugaMdhita dravyoM kI dhuup|
cUrNa aura vAsa donoM hI kSoda rUpa meM hote haiN| TIkAkAra inakA bheda spaSTa
karate hue kahate haiM ki sAmAnya dravyoM se niSpanna zuSka athavA Ardra kSoda
'cUrNa' kahalAtA hai| sugandhita dravyoM se niSpanna atyaMta sUkSma rUpa meM
pIsA huA kSoda 'vAsa' kahalAtA hai (mavR pa. 143)  /

Page #352 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1. The ascetic crosses the river by smearing his feet with mud to avoid the
water. The śrāvakas invited the ascetic to their home and said that not washing
his feet would be disrespectful, so they washed the ascetic's feet. 2. When he
started to leave after taking alms, he began to drown in the river due to the
lack of the foot-covering. When the ācārya-samiti crossed the river, both banks
were found to be connected. Seeing this, five hundred ascetics were amazed.
Along with the head of the community, all the ascetics became his disciples.
This group became famous as the Brahmaśākhā. 3. Violating someone's celibacy or
inserting one's own genitalia into another is considered a root karma. 4. When
the time of the girl's marriage was near, the mother became worried due to the
girl's different genitalia. She told the muni everything. The muni gave her
ācamana and pānauṣadha, due to which she became capable of lifelong sexual
intercourse. 5. There was a quarrel between the husband and wife. The śrāvikā
became distressed that her husband would bring a co-wife. She told the whole
matter to the muni named Jaṃghāparijita. The muni gave her a medicine for the
difference in genitalia. Knowing about the different genitalia, the husband
prohibited the marriage. (Knowing this) he may develop great hatred, and this
may also lead to the neglect of the scripture. 6. If the unmarried daughter of
marriageable age is not married, she may bring disgrace to your family. It is
said in the world that for every drop of blood that falls from the menstruating
maiden, her mother goes to hell. 7. (The ascetic said to the housewife) Your son
is the cause of your family's lineage, gotra, and fame. He has now grown up, why
don't you get him married? Even later, his marriage will have to be arranged.
Lest he elopes (with a promiscuous woman) without getting married. 8. The muni
asked the queen, "What is your distress and worry?" She said, "My co-wife is
pregnant." The muni said, "Do not be distressed, I will also get you pregnant."
9. The queen said, "Even if I have a son, he will not become the crown prince
because he will be the younger one, the co-wife's son will become the crown
prince." The muni gave medicine for the abortion of the co-wife's fetus. Knowing
this, there may be hatred towards the muni and even bodily destruction.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 180 piMDaniyukti ki vaha tApasa mAyA se pAda-lepa karake nadI pAra karatA hai|
zrAvakoM ne prayatna karake tApasa ko ghara para AmaMtrita kiyA aura kahA ki
pAda-prakSAlana na karane se avinaya hogA ataH tApasa ke caraNa dho die| 231/4.
bhikSA lekara jaba vaha jAne lagA to lepa na hone ke kAraNa nadI meM DUbane
lgaa| AcAryasamita ne jaba nadI ko pAra kiyA to nadI ke donoM kinAre mila ge|
yaha dekhakara pAMca sau tApasa vismita ho ge| kulapati sahita sabhI tApasa
unake pAsa pravrajita ho ge| vaha samUha brahmazAkhA ke rUpa meM prasiddha huaa|
231/5. kisI ke kaumArya ko kSata karanA, isake viparIta kisI dUsare meM yoni kA
nivezana karanA arthAt akSata karake use bhoga bhogane yogya banA denA mUlakarma
hai| 231/6. vivAha kA samaya nikaTa hone para kanyA ke bhinnayonikA hone se mAtA
ko cintA ho gii| muni ko sArI bAta btaaii| muni ne Acamana aura pAnauSadha diyA,
jisase vaha akSatayonikA hokara yAvajjIvana maithuna-sevana meM samartha ho gii|
231/7. pati-patnI meM kalaha ho gyaa| zrAvikA ko adhRti ho gaI ki pati sauta ko
laaegaa| usane jaMghAparijita nAmaka muni ko sArI bAta btaaii| muni ne yoni-
bheda kI auSadhi dii| bhinnayonikA jAnakara pati ne vivAha kA pratiSedha kara
diyaa| (isa bAta kI avagati hone para) use mahAn pradveSa ho sakatA hai tathA
isase pravacana kI avahelanA bhI hotI hai| 231/8. vivAha na hone ke kAraNa
vayaHprApta putrI kahIM tumhAre kula ko kalaMkita na kara de| loka meM yaha
zruti hai ki kumArI RtumatI kanyA ke rakta ke jitane bindu girate haiM, utanI hI
bAra usakI mAM naraka meM jAtI 231/9. (sAdhu gRhalakSmI se bolA)-tumhArA putra
kula, gotra aura kIrti kA kAraNa hai| yaha yuvA ho gayA hai, isakA vivAha kyoM
nahIM kara detI? bAda meM bhI to isakA vivAha karanA hI hogaa| vivAha kie binA
kahIM yaha (svairiNI strI ke sAtha) bhAga na jaae| 231/10. muni ne rAnI se
pUchA-'tumheM adhRti-ciMtA kisa bAta kI hai ?' usane kahA-'merI sauta garbhavatI
hai|' muni bolA-'tuma adhRti mata karo, maiM tumhArA bhI garbhAdhAna karavA
duuNgaa|' 231/11. rAnI ne kahA-'yadi mere putra ho bhI jAegA to kaniSTha hone ke
kAraNa vaha yuvarAja nahIM banegA, sauta kA putra yuvarAja bnegaa|' sauta ke
garbhapAta hetu muni ne auSadhi dii| yaha bAta jJAta hone para muni ke prati
pradveSa ho sakatA hai tathA zarIra kA nAza bhI ho sakatA hai| 1. kathA ke
vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 43 /  2. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM
pari. 3. kathA sN.44| 3. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 45  /
4. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM.46  /

Page #353 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **181**  **232.** Performing *sankaḍi-vivah-bhoj* (a type of
marriage feast) and other such activities leads to the violation of the earth
and other living beings. On one hand, *akṣatayoṇitva* (having a child) leads to
the tendency towards action. (From conception, a child is born.) On the other
hand, abortion leads to the disrespect of the teachings. *Kṣatayoṇitva* (having
a child through a non-virgin) leads to *bhogāntarāya* (obstacles in the
enjoyment of life) for the entire life.   **233.** In this way, the *udgama-
utpādana* (origin and production) defects lead to the acceptance of the *piṇḍa*
(body) which is pure and purified by *grahaṇa-viśodhi* (purification through
acceptance).  **234.** The defects of *utpādana* (production) should be known in
relation to the *sādhu* (righteous person). The defects of *grahaṇaiṣaṇā*
(desire for acceptance) are *ātmasamutthita* (arising from oneself) and
*parasamutthita* (arising from others), which I will explain further.  **235.**
The two defects of *grahaṇaiṣaṇā* are *śankita* (doubtful) and *bhāvataḥ
apariṇata* (not fully matured in feeling) - these two defects are *sādhu-
samutthita* (arising from the righteous person). The remaining eight defects
should be known as arising from the *gṛhastha* (householder) as a rule.
**236.** There are four *nikṣepa* (deposits) of *grahaṇaiṣaṇā* - *nāma* (name),
*sthāpanā* (establishment), *dravya* (substance), and *bhāva* (feeling). The
*dravya* *grahaṇaiṣaṇā* is exemplified by the 'monkey troop', and there are ten
types of *bhāva* *grahaṇaiṣaṇā*.  **236/1.** Seeing a forest section with rotten
and yellow leaves, the leader of the monkey troop sent pairs of monkeys to
search for a new location. The troop leader went there with his troop.
**236/2.** The troop leader himself observed the forest section from all sides.
While wandering, he reached the edge of a ravine.  **236/3.** He saw the
footprints of animals entering the ravine, but he did not see any footprints
coming out. He warned the troop - "You all stay on the bank and drink water from
the stream, this ravine is not safe." (This is an example of *dravya*
*grahaṇaiṣaṇā*.)  **237.** There are ten defects of *aiṣaṇā* (desire):  1.
*Śankita* (doubtful) 2. *Mṛkṣita* (rejected) 3. *Nikkṣipta* (deposited) 4.
*Pihita* (hidden) 5. *Sanhata* (combined) 6. *Dayaka* (giving) 7. *Unmiśra*
(mixed) 8. *Apariṇata* (not fully matured) 9. *Lipta* (attached) 10. *Chardita*
(vomited)  **238.** There are four options for *śankita* (doubtful):  1.
Doubtful in both acceptance and eating. 2. Doubtful in acceptance, not in
eating.  1. For the expansion of the story, see *Pari.* 3, *Kathā Saṅ. 47*.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 181 232. saMkhaDi-vivAha-bhoja Adi karane para pRthvI Adi jIva-nikAyoM
kI virAdhanA hotI hai| eka ora akSatayonitva karane se kAma kI pravRtti hotI
hai| (garbhAdhAna se putrotpatti hotI hai|) dUsarI ora garbhapAta karane se
pravacana kI avamAnanA hotI hai| kSatayonikatva karane se yAvajjIvana
bhogAntarAya hotA hai| 233. isa prakAra udgama-utpAdanA ke doSoM se vizuddha
tathA grahaNa-vizodhi se vizuddha gaveSita piMDa kA grahaNa hotA hai| 234.
utpAdanA ke doSa sAdhu se saMbaMdhita jAnane caahie| grahaNaiSaNA ke doSa
Atmasamutthita tathA parasamutthita hote haiM, unako maiM Age khuuNgaa| 235.
grahaNaiSaNA ke do doSa-zaMkita tathA bhAvataH apariNata-ye doSa sAdhu-
samutthita hote haiN| zeSa ATha doSa niyamataH gRhasthoM se utpanna jAnane
caahie| 236. grahaNaiSaNA ke cAra nikSepa haiM-nAma, sthApanA, dravya aura
bhaav| dravya grahaNaiSaNA meM 'vAnarayUtha' kA dRSTAnta hai tathA bhAva
grahaNaiSaNA ke dasa prakAra haiN| 236/1. sar3e evaM pIle pattoM vAle vanakhaMDa
ko dekhakara vAnara yUthapati ne sthAna kI khoja hetu vAnarayugaloM ko anyatra
bhejaa| yUthapati apane yUtha ke sAtha vahAM gyaa| 236/2. yUthapati ne
vanakhaMDa kA cAroM ora se svayaM avalokana kiyaa| ghUmate hue vaha usa draha ke
pAsa phuNcaa| 236/3. usane draha meM utarate hue zvApadoM ke padacihna dekhe
lekina usase nikalate hue padacihna use dikhAI nahIM die| usane yUtha ko
sAvadhAna kiyA-'tuma loga taTa para sthita hokara nAle se pAnI pIo, yaha draha
nirupadrava nahIM hai| (yaha dravya grahaNaiSaNA kA udAharaNa hai|) 237. eSaNA
ke dasa doSa hote haiM 1. zaMkita 6.dAyaka 2. mrakSita 7. unmizra 3. nikSipta 8.
apariNata 4. pihita 9. lipta 5. saMhata 10. chrdit| 238. zaMkita ke cAra vikalpa
haiM 1. grahaNa tathA bhojana - donoM meM shNkit| 2. grahaNa meM zaMkita -
bhojana meM nhiiN| 1. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 47 /  |

Page #354 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 182 3. Doubtful in food • Not in taking. 4. Neither doubtful in taking nor
doubtful in food. - If doubtful in both taking and food, or in one of them, then
he becomes associated with the doubt fault. Of the twenty-five faults, including
sixteen Udgama faults and nine Aeshana faults, he becomes associated with the
fault from which he is doubtful. The fourth option (not being doubtful in both
taking and food) is pure. Pinḍi 238/1. Sixteen faults of Udgama, including
Adhakarma, and nine faults of Aeshana, including Prakshit - these are twenty-
five faults. The last option is pure. 238/2. Sixteen faults of Udgama and nine
faults of Aeshana, excluding doubt - these twenty-five faults should be said
without doubt. 239. A Chhadmastha, Shrutagyani, Munis who is diligent and
righteous, even if he acquires one of the twenty-five faults, is pure by the
evidence of Shrutagyan. 239/1. Generally, a Muni who is Shrutopayukta (in
Pinḍinirukti etc.) even if he takes impure food, still eats it as a Kevalgyani,
otherwise Shrutagyan becomes invalid. 240. If the Sutra is invalid, then there
will be a lack of character, and if there is a lack of character, then there
will be a lack of liberation, and if there is a lack of liberation, then the
tendency of initiation will become meaningless. 240/1. Even seeing the abundant
alms material given at home, the Muni is not able to ask questions out of shame.
He takes alms with doubt and consumes it in a state of doubt. (This is the first
option.) 240/2. The Muni took alms with a doubtful heart. Another Muni,
purifying it, said that this food was made for a guest etc. due to
circumstances, or it was Prahenaka - food material that came from another house.
Hearing this, the Muni consumed the alms without doubt. (This is the second
option of Chaturbhangi.) 240/3. While criticizing his Samyak in front of the
Guru, the Muni thinks with doubt that I have received abundant alms in such and
such house, other Munis have also received abundant alms from the same house,
therefore it must be faulty. Thinking this, he consumes the alms in a state of
doubt. (This is the third option of Chaturbhangi.)  1. For example, if doubt
arises in the Adhakarma fault, then the Muni who takes and consumes that food
becomes associated with the Adhakarma fault (Mavṛ P. 147).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 182 3. bhojana meM zaMkita * grahaNa meM nahIM  /  4. na grahaNa meM zaMkita
aura na bhojana meM zaMkita  /  - grahaNa aura bhojana - donoM meM athavA kisI
eka meM zaMkita hone para zaMkita doSa se saMbaddha ho jAtA hai| solaha - udgama
doSa tathA nau eSaNA ke doSa - ina paccIsa doSoM meM se jisa doSa se zaMkita
hotA hai, vaha usI doSa se sambaddha hotA hai|' cauthA vikalpa ( grahaNa aura
bhojana - donoM meM zaMkita na honA) zuddha hai| piMDi 238/1. udgama ke
AdhAkarma Adi solaha doSa tathA eSaNA ke prakSita Adi nau doSa- ye paccIsa doSa
haiN| carama vikalpa zuddha hai| 238/2. udgama ke solaha doSa tathA zaMkA ko
chor3akara eSaNA ke 9 doSa- ye paccIsa doSa niHzaMkita rUpa se kahane caahie|
239. chadmastha, zrutajJAnI, prayatnapUrvaka upayukta aura Rjuka muni paccIsa
doSoM meM se kisI eka doSa ko prApta hone para bhI zrutajJAna ke pramANa se
zuddha hai  /  239/1. sAmAnyataH zrutopayukta (piMDaniryukti Adi meM) muni
yadyapi azuddha AhAra grahaNa karatA hai, phira bhI usako kevalajJAnI khAtA hai
anyathA zrutajJAna apramANa ho jAtA hai| 240. sUtra kA aprAmANya hone para
cAritra kA abhAva ho jAegA, cAritra kA abhAva hone para mokSa kA abhAva ho jAegA
aura mokSa ke abhAva meM dIkSA kI pravRtti nirarthaka ho jAegI  /  240 / 1.
ghara meM dI jAne vAlI pracura bhikSA sAmagrI ko dekhakara bhI muni lajjAvaza
pUchatAcha karane meM samartha nahIM hotaa| vaha zaMkita hokara bhikSA grahaNa
karatA hai aura zaMkita avasthA meM hI usakA upabhoga karatA hai| ( yaha
prathama vikalpa hai  / ) 240/2. muni ne zaMkita hRdaya se bhikSA grahaNa kii|
dUsare muni ne isakA zodhana karate hue kahA ki yaha bhojana prakaraNavaza kisI
atithi Adi ke lie banAyA huA thA athavA yaha praheNaka- kisI anya ghara se AI
huI bhojana sAmagrI thI  /  yaha sunakara muni ne niHzaMkita hokara usa bhikSA
kA upabhoga kiyaa| (yaha caturbhaMgI kA dUsarA vikalpa hai  / ) 240/3. guru ke
samakSa usakI samyag AlocanA karate samaya muni zaMkita hokara socatA hai ki
maiMne amuka ghara meM pracura bhikSA prApta kI hai, anya muniyoM ne bhI usI
ghara se pracura bhikSA prApta kI hai ataH yaha doSaduSTa honI caahie| yaha
socakara vaha zaMkita avasthA meM usa bhikSA kA upabhoga karatA hai| (yaha
caturbhaMgI kA tIsarA vikalpa hai  / ) 1. udAharaNa svarUpa yadi AdhAkarma doSa
meM zaMkA utpanna huI hai to usa AhAra ko grahaNa karatA huA aura bhogatA huA
muni AdhAkarma doSa se sambaddha hotA hai (mavR pa. 147)  /

Page #355 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **240/4. (Disciple asks) If doubt is a fault, then even if
there is doubt about pure alms, it will become impure, and if one takes alms
without doubt, it will be free from fault.**  **241. Impure result, being one-
sided, makes the eligible ineligible. Pure result (with the method prescribed by
the scriptures) makes the ineligible eligible through investigation.**  **183**
**242. There are two types of *mrkshit* - with consciousness and without
consciousness. There are three types of *mrkshit* with consciousness and two
types without consciousness.**  **243. The three types of *mrkshit* with
consciousness are: *mrkshit* with earth body, *mrkshit* without body, and
*mrkshit* with plant body. The two types of *mrkshit* without consciousness are:
*garhit* and *agarhit*. There is a distinction between *kalpya* and *akalpya* in
this.**  **243/1. There are two types of *mrkshit* with earth body and
consciousness: dry and moist. The hand or vessel that is touched by dry or moist
*mrkshit* with earth body and consciousness becomes *mrkshit* with earth body
and consciousness. I will explain *mrkshit* without body further.**  **243/2.
There are four types of *mrkshit* without body: *purahkarma*, *paschatkarma*,
*sasnigdha*, and *udakardra*. The hand or vessel that is touched by the smooth
pieces of a large and endless plant, which is filled with excellent juice,
becomes *mrkshit* with plant body.**  **243/3. The remaining three bodies -
light, air, and space - do not become *mrkshit* in their conscious, mixed, or
moist forms.**  **244. There are four options for *mrkshit* from *mrkshit* with
earth body and consciousness, etc.:**  * **Hand *mrkshit* and vessel
*mrkshit*.** * **Hand *mrkshit*, not vessel *mrkshit*.** * **Vessel *mrkshit*,
not hand *mrkshit*.** * **Neither hand *mrkshit* nor vessel *mrkshit*.**  **The
first three options are prohibited, the fourth option is allowed.**  **245.
*Mrkshit* without consciousness is also of four types, as before, regarding the
hand and vessel. In all four options, there is acceptance and rejection. Alms
are acceptable from a hand or vessel that is touched by *garhit* *mrkshit*, and
*garhit* *mrkshit* is prohibited.**  **245/1. The hand or vessel that is touched
by *agarhit* juice, honey, ghee, oil, jaggery, etc., which is in contact with
living beings, is acceptable.**  **1. The commentator clarifies this verse by
saying that impure food obtained through pure investigation according to the
scriptures becomes pure because scriptural knowledge is the proof in practice
(Mavri P. 148).**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 240/4. ( ziSya prazna pUchatA hai - ) yadi zaMkA doSakarI hai to zuddha
bhikSA ke prati bhI zaMkA hone para vaha azuddha ho jAegI tathA aneSaNIya bhI
niHzaMkita rUpa meM eSaNA karane para nirdoSa ho jaaegii| 241. avizuddha
pariNAma ekapakSIya hone ke kAraNa eSaNIya ko bhI aneSaNIya banA detA hai|
zuddha pariNAma ( Agamokta vidhi se yukta ) se gaveSaNA aneSaNIya ko bhI eSaNIya
kara detI hai  / " 183 242. prakSita ke do prakAra haiM- sacitta aura acitta  /
sacitta ke tIna prakAra tathA acitta ke do prakAra haiM  /  243. sacitta
mrakSita ke tIna prakAra haiM- pRthvIkAyamrakSita, apkAyamrakSita,
vanaspatikAyamrakSita  /  acittamrakSita ke do prakAra haiM-garhita tathA
agrhit| isameM kalpya akalpya kI bhajanA hai| 243 / 1. sacittapRthvIkAya ke do
prakAra haiM- zuSka aura Ardra  /  zuSka sarajaska sacittapRthvIkAya se athavA
Ardra sacittapRthvIkAya se prakSita hAtha yA pAtra sacittapRthvIkAyamrakSita
hotA hai| isase Age maiM apkAyamrakSita btaauuNgaa| 243 / 2. apkAyaprakSita ke
cAra prakAra haiM- puraH karma, pazcAtkarma, sasnigdha tathA udakArdra  /
utkRSTa rasa se yukta parikta tathA ananta vanaspati ke zlakSNa khaMDoM se
kharaMTita hAtha yA pAtra vanaspatikAya prakSita hai  /  243/3. zeSa tInoM kAya
- tejas, vAyu tathA trasa - ke sacittarUpa, mizrarUpa athavA ArdrarUpa prakSita
nahIM hotA  /  244. sacitta pRthvIkAya Adi se mrakSita ke cAra vikalpa haiM
hastamrakSita tathA pAtra mrakSita  /  * * hasta prakSita, pAtra nahIM  /  *
pAtra prakSita, hasta nahIM  /  * na hasta prakSita aura na pAtra prakSita  /
prathama tIna vikalpa pratiSiddha haiM, cauthA vikalpa anujJAta hai| 245.
acittamrakSita bhI hasta aura pAtra viSayaka pUrvavat cAra prakAra kA hotA hai|
cAroM vikalpoM meM grahaNa bhajana hai| garhitamrakSita se yukta hAtha yA pAtra
se bhikSA grAhya tathA garhita prakSita kA pratiSedha hai  /  245/ 1. jIvoM se
saMsakta, agarhita gorasadrava tathA madhu, ghRta, taila, gur3a Adi se
kharaMTita hAtha yA pAtra se 1. TIkAkAra isa gAthA ko spaSTa karate hue kahate
haiM ki Agamokta vidhi se zuddha gaveSaNA se prApta azuddha AhAra bhI zuddha
hotA hai kyoMki vyavahAra meM zrutajJAna hI pramANa hotA hai ( mavR pa. 148 )  /

Page #356 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 184: Pindaniyukti  The alms given are also described, the reason
being that there should be no violence to flies, ants, etc. 245/2. It is
described that taking alms with a hand or vessel contaminated by meat, fat,
blood, and intoxicants (alcohol) is prohibited in the world, and taking alms
with a hand or vessel contaminated by urine and excrement is also prohibited in
the world and the transcendental world. 246. There are two types of deposition
on the six bodies, etc. - conscious and mixed. These have two types each -
immediate and continuous. 247. There are six possible types of deposition
between earth, water, fire, air, plants, and hell. Each has two types of
deposition - immediate and continuous. Only in the fire body are there seven
types of deposition from the earth body, etc. 248. The deposition of conscious
earth on the conscious earth body, in the same way, the deposition of water
body, fire body, plant body, air body, and hell body occurs. 249. The deposition
of the remaining living bodies is also like the earth body. In these, there is
one option of self-location and five other locations. 250. In the same way (like
the deposition of conscious on conscious), the deposition of mixed earth on
conscious earth, etc., the deposition of conscious earth, etc. on mixed earth,
etc., the deposition of mixed earth on mixed earth occurs. Both conscious and
mixed have deposition on the unconscious. 251. In the deposition where there is
a fourfold division based on conscious and mixed, in all four divisions -
options, in each and in the immediate and continuous deposition of infinite
plants, the consumption of food is unacceptable. 251/1. Or, based on the
opposing side, the fourfold division is as follows: 1. Conscious on conscious-
mixed. 3. Conscious-mixed on unconscious. 2. Unconscious on conscious-mixed. 4.
Unconscious on unconscious. 1. Mavri P. 150; This is to be understood as stated
with reference to the excellent practice of the Jina-kalpikas, etc. The
sthavira-kalpikas, however, take ghee, etc., even if it is contaminated with
sugar, etc., and even if it is protected by Asoka, etc. - The commentator says
that this instruction is from the perspective of the Jina-kalpikas. The
sthavira-kalpikas can take alms with hands contaminated with ghee, sugar, etc.,
as per the rules. 2. The six types of deposition related to the earth body are
as follows: 1. Earth body on earth body 2. Earth body on water body 3. Earth
body on fire body 4. Earth body on air body 5. Earth body on plant body 6. Earth
body on hell body. Similarly, there are six divisions of the water body, etc.
(Mavri P. 151). 3. For the seven divisions of the fire body, see the translation
of verse 252. 4. The deposition of the earth body on the earth body is self-
location deposition. 5. The deposition of the water body, etc., on the earth
body is other-location deposition. 6. For specific details, see Mavri P. 151.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 184 piMDaniyukti dI jAne vAlI bhikSA bhI varNya hai, isakA kAraNa hai ki
makSikA, pipIlikA Adi kI hiMsA na ho| 245/2. loka meM garhita mAMsa, vasA,
zoNita tathA Asava (madirA) se kharaMTita hAtha yA pAtra se lenA varNya hai
tathA loka aura lokottara meM garhita mUtra aura uccAra se prakSita hAtha yA
pAtra se lenA bhI varjita hai| 246. SaTkAya Adi para nikSipta do prakAra kA hai-
sacitta aura mishr| inake do-do prakAra haiM-anantara aura prNpr| 247. pRthvI,
apa, tejas, vAyu, vanaspati aura trasa-ina sabakA Apasa meM chaha prakAra se
nikSepa saMbhava hai| pratyeka kA do prakAra se nikSepa hotA hai-anaMtara aura
prmpr| kevala agnikAya meM pRthvIkAya Adi se sAta prakAra kA nikSepa hotA hai|
248. sacitta pRthvIkAya para sacitta pRthvI kA nikSepa isI prakAra apkAya,
tejaskAya, vanaspatikAya, vAyukAya tathA trasakAya kA nikSepa hotA hai|| 249.
pRthvIkAya kI bhAMti hI zeSa jIva-nikAyoM kA bhI nikSepa hotA hai| inameM eka-
eka vikalpa svasthAna tathA zeSa pAMca parasthAna hote haiN| 250. isI prakAra
(sacitta para sacitta ke nikSepa kI bhAMti) mizra pRthvI para sacitta pRthvI Adi
kA nikSepa, sacetana pRthvI Adi para mizra pRthvI Adi kA nikSepa, mizrapRthvI
para mizrapRthvI kA nikSepa hotA hai| sacitta aura mizra donoM kA acitta para
nikSepa hotA hai| 251. jisa nikSepa meM sacitta aura mizra ke AdhAra para
caturbhaMgI hotI hai, una cAroM bhaMgoM-vikalpoM meM pratyeka aura ananta
vanaspati ke anantara aura paraMpara nikSepa meM bhaktapAna agrAhya hotA hai|
251/1. athavA pratipakSa ke AdhAra para caturbhaMgI isa prakAra hotI hai 1.
sacitta para scittmishr| 3. sacittamizra para acitt| 2. acitta para scittmishr|
4. acitta para acitt| 1. mavR pa. 150; etaccotkRSTAnuSThAnaM
jinakalpikAdyadhikRtyoktamavaseyaM, sthavirakalpikAstu yathAvidhi yatanayA
ghRtAdyapi, guDAdimrakSitamazokavAdyapi ca gRhNanti-vRttikAra kA kathana hai ki
yaha nirdeza jinakalpika kI dRSTi se hai| sthavirakalpI muni yathAvidhi ghRta,
gur3a Adi se kharaMTita hAthoM se bhikSA grahaNa kara sakate haiN| 2. pRthvIkAya
se saMbaMdhita chaha prakAra ke nikSepa isa prakAra haiM-1. pRthvIkAya kA
pRthvIkAya para 2. pRthvIkAya kA apakAya para 3. pRthvIkAya kA tejaskAya para 4.
pRthvIkAya kA vAyukAya para 5. pRthvIkAya kA vanaspatikAya para 6. pRthvIkAya kA
trasakAya pr| isI prakAra apkAya Adi ke bhI chaha-chaha bheda hote haiM (mavR
pa. 151) /  3. agnikAya ke sapta bheda hetu dekheM gAthA 252 kA anuvaad| 4.
pRthvIkAya kA pRthvIkAya para nikSepa svasthAna nikSepa hai| 5. pRthvIkAya para
apkAya Adi zeSa kAyoM kA nikSepa parasthAna nikSepa hai| 6. vizeSa vivaraNa hetu
dekheM mavR pa. 151 /

Page #357 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 185 The first three bhangas do not mention the
consumption of bhaktapan. In the fourth bhang, consuming bhaktapan is
permissible. 251/2. If something is deposited on an achiṭṭa dravya, a sachiṭṭa
dravya, or a miśra dravya, then there is anantar or parampār margaṇā. 251/3. If
something like avagāhima-pakvānn is established on the earth for a long time,
then it is anantar nikṣipta, and if it is deposited on something like a
piṭharaka that is kept on the earth, then it is parampār nikṣipta. If something
like navanīta is deposited on sachiṭṭa udaka, then it is anantar nikṣipta, and
if it is deposited on something like a boat that is situated in the water, then
it is parampār nikṣipta. 252. There are seven types of fire: vidhyāta, murmura,
angāra, aprāpta-jvalā, prāpta-jvalā, sama-jvalā, and vyutkrānta-jvalā. Each has
two divisions: anantar and parampār. It is permissible to take ikshurasa from a
kṭāha, etc., that is used to cook yantra-ikshurasa, which is smeared with mud,
carefully without dropping it. 252/1. The fire that is not visible at first but
becomes visible later when fuel is added is called vidhyāta. The half-vidhyāta
fire particles of āpingala color are murmura. Fire without flames is called
angāra. 252/2. The fire that is on the stove but not touching the vessel is
called aprāpta-jvalā. The fire that touches the piṭharaka is called prāpta-
jvalā, the fire that touches the upper part of the vessel is called sama-jvalā,
and the fire that reaches the top of the vessel that is placed on the stove is
called vyutkrānta-jvalā. 253. It is permissible to take ikshurasa from a large-
mouthed karahi or vessel that is smeared with mud on the sides without dropping
it, but it should not be immediately placed on the fire, i.e., it should not be
too hot. 253/1. Water that is not too hot, resulting from guḍarasa, can also be
consumed. If the water that is in the karahi does not condense up to the upper
part (karna) of the karahi, then it is permissible, but if it condenses and
falls into the fire, then it is not permissible.  1. For the explanation of the
words vidhyāta, etc., see the translation of 252/1,2 and Mavṛ P. 152. 2. The
commentator, while explaining this gāthā, says that the meaning of the mud
coating all around the vessel is that if some drops fall while taking the
ikshurasa, then the mud should absorb them, they should not fall on the fire in
the middle of the stove. The meaning of the large-mouthed vessel is that while
taking out the ikshurasa, the juice should not touch the edge of the piṭharaka
and the upper part of the piṭharaka should not break (Mavṛ P. 153). 3. If the
water that is poured into the karahi in which guḍ was previously cooked is only
slightly hot, then it can still be taken because due to the guḍarasa that is
stuck to the karahi, the water quickly becomes achiṭṭa (Mavṛ P. 153).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 185 inameM prathama tIna bhaMgoM meM bhaktapAna grahaNa kI bAta hI
nahIM hotii| caturtha bhaMga meM bhaktapAna grahaNa karanA kalpya hai| 251/2. jo
koI acitta dravya, sacittadravya athavA mizradravya para nikSipta hotA hai,
vahAM anaMtara athavA paraMpara kI mArgaNA hotI hai| 251/3. jo avagAhima-
pakvAnna Adi pRthvI para Anantarya se sthApita hotA hai, vaha anantara nikSipta
hai tathA jo pRthvI para rakhe hue piTharaka Adi para nikSipta hotA hai, vaha
paraMpara nikSipta hai| navanIta Adi sacitta udaka para nikSipta hotA hai, vaha
anantara nikSipta hai tathA jo navanIta Adi pAnI meM sthita nAva Adi para
nikSipta hotA hai, vaha paraMpara nikSipta hai| 252. agni ke sAta prakAra haiM-
vidhyAta, murmura, aMgArA, aprAptajvAlA, prAptajvAlA, samajvAlA tathA
vyutkraantjvaalaa| pratyeka ke do-do bheda hote haiM-anantara aura prNpr|
yaMtra-ikSurasa ko pakAne ke lie prayukta kaTAha Adi jo miTTI se avalipta hai,
usase yatanApUrvaka binA nIce girAe hue ikSurasa lenA kalpatA hai| 252/1. jo
agni pahale dikhAI nahIM detI lekina bAda meM IMdhana DAlane para spaSTa dikhAI
detI hai, vaha vidhyAta kahalAtI hai| ApiMgala raMga ke ardhavidhyAta agnikaNa
murmura haiN| jvAlA rahita agni aMgArA kahalAtI hai| 252/2. cUlhe para sthita
bhAjana ko aprApta agni aprAptajvAlA kahalAtI hai| piTharaka kA sparza karane
vAlI agni prAptajvAlA, jo bartana ke UparI bhAga taka sparza karatI hai, vaha
samajvAlA tathA jo agni cUlhe para car3he bartana ke Upara taka pahuMca jAtI
hai, vaha vyutkrAntajvAlA kahalAtI hai| 253. pArzva meM miTTI se avalipta vizAla
mukha vAlI kar3AhI yA bartana se binA girAe hue ikSurasa lenA kalpanIya hai
lekina vaha agni para tatkAla car3hAyA huA arthAt adhika uSNa nahIM honA caahie|
253/1. gur3arasa se pariNAmita anatiuSNa jala bhI grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai|
kar3Aha se dIyamAna udaka usa kar3Aha ke uparitana bhAga (karNa) taka ghaTTita
nahIM hotA to vaha kalpatA hai tathA ghaTTita hone para agni meM gire to vaha
nahIM klptaa| 1. vidhyAta Adi zabdoM kI vyAkhyA hetu dekheM 252/1,2 kA anuvAda
evaM mavR pa. 152 /  2. TIkAkAra isa gAthA kI vyAkhyA karate hue kahate haiM ki
bartana meM cAroM ora miTTI ke lepa kA artha yaha hai ki ikSurasa lete hue yadi
kucha bindu gira jAeM to use miTTI hI sokha le, ve bindu cUlhe ke madhya
agnikAya para na gireN| vizAlamukha bhAjana kA tAtparya yaha hai ki ikSurasa
nikAlate samaya rasa piTharaka ke kinAre para na lage tathA piTharaka ke Upara
kA bhAga bhagna na ho (mavR pa. 153) /  3. jisa kar3Aha meM pahale gur3a pakAyA
thA, usameM DAlA gayA jala yadi kucha hI tapta huA hai to bhI vaha liyA jA
sakatA hai kyoMki kar3Aha meM lage hue guDarasa ke kAraNa vaha jala zIghra hI
acitta ho jAtA hai (mavR pa. 153) /

Page #358 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 186 ## Pindaniyukti  253/2. Based on four conditions: a pan with mud on its
sides, lukewarm sugarcane juice, sugarcane juice not poured out, and not
touching the upper part of the back while taking out the substance (Aghattant),
there are sixteen possibilities. The first possibility is permitted, the rest
are not.   253/3. To calculate the value of these possibilities (bhangas), one
should multiply the pairs of the four conditions. The sixteen possibilities will
be formed as follows: (four conditions each)   1. Aghattant means not touching
the upper part of the back while taking out the substance.   2. The author has
created sixteen possibilities based on four conditions: Parvavalipt (mud on the
sides), Antyunshna (lukewarm), Aparishaati (not poured out), and Aghattant (not
touching).   The commentator has created these possibilities as follows:  1.
First row: Sixteen possibilities with alternating short and long syllables. 2.
Second row: Sixteen possibilities with two short and two long syllables. 3.
Third row: Sixteen possibilities with four short, then four long, then four
short, and then four long syllables. 4. Fourth row: Sixteen possibilities with
eight short and then eight long syllables.  These will be established as
follows:  ISISISISISISIS IS IIS SIISSIISS 11 SS ।।। Issss ।। ।। ssss 11! IIIII
SS SS SS SS  By taking one possibility from each row, starting from the bottom
and moving upwards, the sixteen possibilities will be formed as follows:  (1.)
।। ।। (2.) ।।। (3.) |15। (4.) | ISS (5.) । ।। (6.) IS IS (7.) । (8.) Isss
(9.)s।।। (10.)SIS (11.) SISI (12.)S ISS (13.)ss || (14.)SSIS (15.) sss।
(16.)sssss  In these, the parts with straight lines are pure, and the parts with
the letter 's' are impure. Of these sixteen possibilities, the first is
permitted. The remaining fifteen are forbidden.  A chart of the possibilities
based on the four conditions can be presented as follows:  Parvavalipt |
Antyunshna | Aparishaati | Aghattant |  | ------- | -------- | -------- |
-------- | -------- | Parvavalipt | Antyunshna | Aparishaati | Ghattitkarn | lis
| Parvavalipt | Antyunshna | Parishaati | Aghattant | IISI | Parvavalipt |
Antyunshna | Parishaati | Ghattitkarn | TISS | Parvavalipt | Atyushna |
Aparishaati | Aghattant | ISI! | Parvavalipt | Atyushna | Aparishaati |
Ghattitkarn | IS IS | Parvavalipt | Atyushna | Parishaati | Aghattant | Iss |
Parvavalipt | Atyushna | Parishaati | Ghattitkarn | ISSS | Anvalipt | Antyunshna
| Aparishaati | Aghattant | SI11 | Anvalipt | Antyunshna | Aparishaati |
Ghattitkarn | SIIS | Anvalipt | Antyunshna | Parishaati | Aghattant | SISI |
Anvalipt | Antyunshna | Parishaati | Ghattitkarn | SISS | Anvalipt | Atyushna |
Aparishaati | Aghattant | SSIS | Anvalipt | Atyushna | Aparishaati | Ghattitkarn
| SSSI | Anvalipt | Atyushna | Parishaati | Aghattant | SSSS | Anvalipt |
Atyushna | Parishaati | Ghattitkarn |

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 186 piMDaniyukti 253/2. pArzva meM miTTI se avalipta kar3Aha, anatiuSNa
ikSurasa, aparizATi (binA girAyA jAtA) ikSu rasa tathA aghaTuMta'-ina cAra padoM
ke AdhAra para solaha vikalpa hote haiN| inameM prathama vikalpa kI anujJA hai,
zeSa kI nhiiN| 253/3. (gAthA 253/2 meM jo cAra pada bane haiM) inake bhaMgoM kA
mAna nikAlane ke lie (cAra) padoM ke dvikoM kA abhyAsa (guNana) karanA caahie|
solaha bhaMgoM kI racanA isa prakAra hogI-(cAra-cAra padoM 1. aghaTuMta kA
tAtparya hai-vastu nikAlate samaya piThara ke UparI bhAga kA sparza na krnaa| 2.
graMthakAra ne pArvAvalipta, anatyuSNa, aparizATI aura aghaTuMta-sparza nahIM
karanA- ina cAra padoM ke AdhAra para 16 bhaMgoM kI racanA kI hai| TIkAkAra ne
ina bhaMgoM kI racanA isa prakAra kI hai 1. prathama paMkti meM ekAntarita laghu
guru karate hue solaha bhNg| 2. dvitIya paMkti meM do laghu do guru karate hue
solaha bhNg| 3. tRtIya paMkti meM pahale cAra laghu fira cAra guru, punaH cAra
laghu aura cAra guru| 4. caturtha paMkti meM pahale ATha laghu phira ATha guru|
inakI sthApanA isa prakAra hogI ISISISISISISIS IS IIS SIISSIISS 11 SS  /  /  /
Issss  /  /   /  /  ssss 11! IIIII SS SS SS SS cAroM paMktiyoM meM nIce se Upara
calate hue bAMyI ora se eka-eka bhaMga ko uThAne se solaha bhaMgoM kI racanA isa
prakAra hogI(1.)  /  /   /  /  (2.)  /  /  /  (3.) |15 /  (4.) | ISS (5.)  /   /
/  (6.) IS IS (7.)  /  (8.) Isss (9.)s /  /  /  (10.)SIS (11.) SISI (12.)S ISS
(13.)ss || (14.)SSIS (15.) sss /  (16.)sssss inameM sIdhI rekhA vAle aMza zuddha
tathA s AkAra vAle aMza azuddha haiN| ina solaha bhaMgoM meM prathama bhaMga
anujJAta hai| zeSa 15 bhaMga akalyya haiN| cAra padoM ke AdhAra para bhaMgoM kA
cArTa isa prakAra prastuta kiyA jA sakatA haipAzrvAvalipta anatyuSNa aparizATI
aghaTTitakarNa lis pAzrvAvalipta anatyuSNa aparizATI ghaTTitakarNa IISI
pArvAvalipta anatyuSNa 'parizATI aghaTTitakarNa TISS pArvAvalipta anatyuSNa
parizATI ghaTTitakarNa ISI! pArvAvalipta atyuSNa aparizATI aghaTTitakarNa IS IS
pAzrvAvalipta atyuSNa aparizATI ghaTTitakarNa Iss pAzrvAvalipta atyuSNa parizATI
aghaTTitakarNa ISSS pAzrvAvalipta atyuSNa parizATI ghaTTitakarNa SI11 anavalipta
anatyuSNa aparizATI aghaTTitakarNa SIIS anavalipta anatyuSNa aparizATI
ghaTTitakarNa SISI anavalipta anatyuSNa parizATI aghaTTitakarNa SISS anavalipta
anatyuSNa parizATI ghaTTitakarNa SSI! anavalipta atyuSNa aparizATI
aghaTTitakarNa SSIS anavalipta atyuSNa aparizATI ghadritakarNa SSSI anavalipta
atyuSNa parizATI aghaTTitakarNa SSSS anavalipta atyuSNa parizATI ghaTTitakarNa

Page #359 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation**  The sixteen bhangas are obtained as follows
when the pairs are multiplied by the short-long (pure and impure) pairs
alternately (from the perspective of the knower) from the left:  - By
multiplying the first two pairs by two, we get four. - By multiplying four by
the third pair (i.e., two), we get eight. - By multiplying eight by the fourth
pair (i.e., two), we get sixteen.  **254.** Consuming extremely hot food leads
to two types of **viraadhana** (contradiction): **aatmaviraadhana** (self-
contradiction) and **paraviraadhana** (contradiction towards others).   - If the
**paatra** (vessel) containing **iksuras** (sugarcane juice) etc. is vomited
out, it leads to the loss of the substance and the vessel may fall from the
hands of the **sadhu** (saint) or **grihastha** (householder) and break.  (Now
the statement about **anantar** (immediately deposited) and **parampar**
(consecutively deposited) after **vaayukaaya** (air body) is given.)  -
**Parpattika** (husk of grain) deposited by air is **anantar** and the object
deposited on the **vasti** (bladder) is **parampar**.  **255.** **Harit**
(green) etc. deposited on **harit** etc. is **anantar** and **malpuwa** (sweet
dish) etc. deposited in **pitharak** (a type of vessel) etc. kept on **harit**
etc. is **parampar**.  - **Malpuwa** etc. kept on the back of a **bail** (ox)
etc. is **anantar** and the same **malpuwa** etc. loaded on the back of the
**bail** after being filled in **kutup** (a type of vessel) etc. is
**parampar**.  **256.** There are three types of **pihit** (hidden): **sachitt**
(conscious), **achitt** (unconscious), and **mishra** (mixed). These have three
**chaturbhangis** (fourfold divisions). The second and third...  1. In modern
mathematics, this formula can be presented as 4^2 = 16. 2. Due to consuming
extremely hot substances, the hot vessel may slip from the hand, burning the
muni's hands and feet. This is **aatmaviraadhana**. If the hot vessel slips from
the hand of the giver, burning him, it is **paraviraadhana** (Mavri P. 154). 3.
The first **chaturbhangi** arises from the combination of **sachitt** and
**mishra** substances. The second arises from the combination of **sachitt** and
**achitt**, and the third **chaturbhangi** arises from the combination of
**mishra** and **achitt** substances. These **chaturbhangis** will be formed as
follows:  - **Sachitt** from **pihit** **sachitt** **deya vastu** (object to be
given). - **Mishra** from **pihit** **sachitt** **deya vastu**. - **Sachitt**
from **pihit** **mishra** **deya vastu**. - **Mishra** from **pihit** **mishra**
**deya vastu**.  **Second Chaturbhangi**  - **Sachitt** from **pihit**
**sachitt** **deya vastu**. - **Achitt** from **pihit** **sachitt** **deya
vastu**. - **Sachitt** from **pihit** **achitt** **deya vastu**. - **Achitt**
from **pihit** **achitt** **deya vastu**.  **Third Chaturbhangi**  - **Mishra**
from **pihit** **mishra** **deya vastu**. - **Mishra** from **pihit** **achitt**
**deya vastu**. - **Achitt** from **pihit** **mishra** **deya vastu**. -
**Achitt** from **pihit** **achitt** **deya vastu**.  In the first
**chaturbhangi**, it is not conceivable to consume food in all the **bhangas**.
In the second and third **chaturbhangis**, it is not conceivable in the first
three **bhangas**, but it is permissible in the last **bhangas** (Mavri P. 154).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda dvikoM ko) ekAntara se laghu-guru (zuddha aura azuddha) dviguNa -
dviguNa (prajJApaka kI apekSA se) bAMI ora se kie jAne para solaha bhaMga isa
prakAra prApta hote haiM-cAra zuddha pada aura cAra azuddha pada meM se eka-eka
dvika Urdhva aura adhaH sthApita kara guNana karane para, prathama do ko do se
guNana karane para cAra hue, cAra ko tRtIya dvika (yAnI do) ke guNana karane
para ATha hue, ATha ko caturtha dvika (yAnI do) se guNana karane para solaha hue
/  ' 254. atyuSNa rasa grahaNa karane se do prakAra kI virAdhanA hotI hai-
AtmavirAdhanA tathA paravirAdhanA  /  2 pAtra se ikSurasa Adi kA chardana hotA
hai, usase dravya kI hAni hotI hai tathA vaha bhAjana sAdhu yA gRhastha ke hAtha
se chUTakara TUTa sakatA hai| (aba vAyukAya ke anaMtara aura parampara nikSipta
kA kathana hai  / ) vAyu dvArA utkSipta parpaTikA - dhAnya kA chilakA anantara
nikSipta hotA hai tathA vasti para nikSipta vastu parampara nikSipta hotI hai  /
255. harita Adi para nikSipta anantara nikSipta hotA hai tathA harita Adi para
rakhe hue piTharaka Adi meM nikSipta mAlapuA Adi paraMpara nikSipta hotA hai|
baila Adi ke pITha para rakhe hue mAlapUe Adi anantara nikSipta haiM tathA vahI
kutupa Adi bhAjanoM meM bharakara baila kI pITha para lAdane se paraMpara
nikSipta hote haiM  /  256. pihita ke tIna bheda haiM- sacitta, acitta aura
mizra  /  inakI tIna caturbhaMgiyAM hotI haiN| dvitIya aura tRtIya 1. Adhunika
gaNita meM isakA sUtra isa prakAra prastuta kiyA jA sakatA hai - 42 = 16  /  2.
ati uSNa padArtha lene ke kAraNa garma pAtra hAtha se chUTa sakatA hai, muni ke
hAtha-paira jala sakate haiN| vaha Atma-virAdhanA hai  /  dene vAle dAtA ke
hAtha se vaha garma bhAjana chUTa kara use jalA sakatA hai, yaha paravirAdhanA
hai ( mavR pa. 154)  /  3. prathama caturbhaMgI sacitta aura mizra pada ke
saMyoga se hotI hai| dUsarI sacitta aura acitta ke saMyoga se tathA tRtIya
caturbhaMgI mizra tathA acitta pada ke saMyoga se hotI hai| ve caturbhaMgiyAM
isa prakAra baneMgI - * sacitta se pihita sacitta deya vastu  /  * mizra se
pihita sacitta deya vastu  /  * sacitta se pihita mizra deya vastu  /  * mizra
se pihita mizra deya vastu  /  dUsarI caturbhaMgI * sacitta se pihita sacitta
deya vastu  /  * acitta se pihita sacitta deya vastu  /  * sacitta se pihita
acitta deya vastu  /  * acitta se pihita acitta deya vastu  /  187 tRtIya
caturbhaMgI * mizra se pihita mizra deya vastu  /  * mizra se pihita acitta deya
vastu  /  acitta se pihita mizra deya vastu  /  * acitta se pihita acitta deya
vastu  /  prathama caturbhaMgI meM sabhI bhaMgoM meM AhAra grahaNa karanA
kalpanIya nahIM hai| dvitIya aura tRtIya catubhaMgI meM prathama tIna bhaMgoM
meM kalpanIya nahIM hai lekina carama bhaMga meM bhajanA hai ( mavR pa. 154)  /

Page #360 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 188 **Pindaniyukti**  The first three options in each of the four categories
are not permissible, while the fourth option is permissible. 257. Just as in the
case of *nikshipta dvara* (verse 251/1), the options are described as
*saccitta*, *acitta*, and *misra* based on their combination, so too should it
be understood in the case of *pihita*. Only the third *bhang* of the second and
third *chaturbhangi* has diversity. 258, 259. An object heated by embers is
*anantar pihita*. An object heated by embers, *shrava* (liquor) etc. is
*parampar pihita*. In the case of an object heated by embers etc., the air that
is *atirohita* (completely covered) is *anantar pihita*, and if that air is
covered by *drti* (vision) etc. filled with air, then it is *parampar pihita*.
In the case of plants, the fruit etc. that is *atirohita* is *anantar pihita*,
and the fruit covered by *chhabak*, *pitharak* etc. filled with fruits is
*parampar pihita*. Similarly, in the case of the *trasakaya*, the object that is
covered by *kachhap*, *kitika-pancti* etc. is *anantar pihita*, and the object
covered by *kachhap*, *kitika* etc. that is contained in *pitharak* etc. is
*parampar pihita*. 259/1. The *chaturbhangi* of *pihita* with respect to
*acitta* objects is as follows: * Heavy object covered by a heavy object. *
Heavy object covered by a light object. * Light object covered by a heavy
object. * Light object covered by a light object. In these, the first and third
options are not permissible, while the second and fourth options are
permissible. 260. There are three types of *sanhata*: *saccitta*, *acitta*, and
*misra*. There are three *chaturbhangi* of *sanhrta*. The first three *bhang* in
each category are prohibited, while the last *bhang* is permissible. 261. Just
as in the case of *nikshipta dvara*, there are combinations of *saccitta*,
*acitta*, and *misra* terms, so too should it be understood in the case of
*sanhrta dvara*. Only the third *bhang* of the second and third *chaturbhangi*
has diversity in the method of *margana*. 262. If the object given by the donor
contains *adeya* (unacceptable) food etc., then it is a *sanhrta* fault to give
the food etc. after removing the unacceptable food etc. and placing it on the
ground or elsewhere. 263, 263/1. The *saccitta* object located in the container
is *sanharana-chhardana* (collection-vomiting) on all six *kaya* (bodies)
including earth etc. 1. For details, see *Mavri P. 156*. 2. While explaining
this verse, the commentator says that in the case of a heavy object, if the
object falls from the hand while lifting it, there is a possibility of injury to
the feet etc. or a broken limb. In the second *bhang*, the object to be given is
heavy, but it is not necessary to lift it and give it, it can also be given from
a bowl etc., therefore, it is permissible to accept alms in the second option
(Mavri P. 155). 3. Mavri P. 156; The word 'tu' at the end of the verse indicates
that the author intends to prohibit the acceptance of food in all four *bhang*
of the first *chaturbhangi*. 4. For details, see the commentary on verse 256 and
Mavri P. 156.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 188 piMDaniyukti caturbhagiyoM ke prathama tIna-tIna vikalpoM meM grahaNa nahIM
kalpatA, caturtha vikalpa meM grahaNa kI bhajanA hai| 257. jaise nikSipta dvAra
(gAthA 251/1) meM sacitta, acitta tathA mizra ke saMyoga se vikalpa kahe gae
haiM, vaise hI pihita meM bhI jAnane caahie| kevala dvitIya aura tRtIya
caturbhaMgI ke tIsare bhaMga meM nAnAtva hai| 258, 259. aMgAra se dhUpita vastu
anantara pihita hai| aMgAra se bhRta zarAva Adi se pihita piThara paraMpara
pihita hai| aMgAra-dhUpita Adi meM atirohita vAyu anantara pihita hai aura vahI
yadi vAyu se bharI dRti Adi se pihita hotA hai to vaha paraMpara pihita hai|
vanaspati ke viSaya meM atirohita phala Adi se pihita anantara pihita tathA
phaloM se bhare chabbaka, piTharaka Adi se DhakA huA paraMpara pihita hai| isI
prakAra trasakAya ke viSaya meM jo kacchapa, kITikA-paMkti Adi se pihita hai,
vaha anantara pihita tathA kacchapa, kITikA Adi se garbhita piTharaka Adi se
pihita paraMpara pihita hai| 259/1. acitta deya vastu se pihita kI caturbhaMgI
isa prakAra hai * bhArI vastu se pihita bhArI deya vstu| * halkI vastu se pihita
bhArI deya vstu| * bhArI vastu se pihita halkI deya vastu  /  * halkI vastu se
pihita halkI deya vstu| inameM prathama aura tRtIya vikalpa meM vastu agrAhya
hai tathA dvitIya aura caturtha bhaMga meM grAhya hai| 260. saMhata ke tIna
bheda haiM-sacitta, acitta aura mishr| saMhRta kI tIna caturbhaMgiyAM hotI haiN|
prAraMbha ke tIna-tIna bhaMgoM kA pratiSedha hai aura carama bhaMga kI bhajanA
hai|' 261. jaise nikSiptadvAra meM sacitta, acitta aura mizra padoM ke saMyoga
haiM, usI prakAra saMhRta dvAra ke bhI jAnane caahie| kevala dvitIya, tRtIya
caturbhaMgI ke tIsare-tIsare bhaMga kI mArgaNA-vidhi meM nAnAtva hai| 262. jisa
mAtraka se dAtA dAna detA hai, usameM yadi adeya azana Adi ho to usako bhUmi
para yA anyatra DAlakara anna Adi denA saMhRta doSa hai| 263, 263/1. mAtraka meM
sthita vastu kA sacitta pRthvI Adi chahoM kAyoM para saMharaNa-chardana hotA
hai| 1. vistAra hetu dekheM mavR pa. 156 /  /  2. isa gAthA kI vyAkhyA karate
hue TIkAkAra kahate haiM ki guru arthAt bhArI padArtha ko uThAne meM vastu hAtha
se chUTane para paira Adi ke coTa yA aMgabhaMga saMbhava hai| dvitIya bhaMga meM
deya vastu guru hai para use uThAkara denA Avazyaka nahIM, kaTorI Adi se bhI
bhikSA dI jA sakatI hai ata: dUsare vikalpa meM bhikSA lenA kalpanIya hai (mavR
pa. 155) /  3. mavR pa. 156 ; atra
gAthAparyantatuzabdasAmarthyAtprathamacaturbhaGgIkAyAH sarveSvapi bhaGgeSu
pratiSedhaH- gAthA ke aMta meM Ae 'tu' zabda se graMthakAra kA Azaya hai ki
prathama caturbhaMgI meM cAroM hI bhaMgoM meM AhAra-grahaNa kA niSedha hai| 4.
vistAra hetu dekheM 256 gAthA kA TippaNa tathA mavR pa. 156  /

Page #361 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation**  Both types of *sanharana* (collection) are
fourfold based on the *adhara* (base) and *sanhriyamana* (object being
collected). The fourfold classification is as follows:  * Dry on dry. * Dry on
moist. * Moist on dry. * Moist on moist.  **263/2.** Each of these fourfold
classifications of dry, etc., is further divided into four based on *stoka*
(small quantity) and *bahu* (large quantity), such as:  * Small dry on small
dry. * Small dry on large dry. * Large dry on small dry. * Large dry on large
dry.  **263/3.** The option where a large quantity of dry is collected on a
small quantity of dry is *kalpaneya* (permissible). Additionally, in the three
classifications of dry on moist, moist on dry, or moist on moist, the *aahara*
(food) is *agrahya* (not acceptable). If the object to be collected is light in
weight, and there is a lighter object on top of it, which is then removed, then
that object is *kalpaneya*.  **264.** When lifting and placing a large vessel,
the giver experiences pain. People criticize, saying, "How greedy this monk is,
who does not consider the pain of others." While lifting a heavy vessel, the
giver may suffer death, broken limbs, or burning of the body. The giver may
develop aversion towards the monk, there may be a cessation of other offerings
due to this offering, and the scattering of the contents from the heavy vessel
may lead to the destruction of the *shatkayas* (six categories of beings).
**189**  **264/1.** If the object is dry on dry, and is deposited on a small
quantity or a large quantity, then it is *kalpya* (permissible). If it is
deposited as dry on moist, moist on dry, or moist on moist, then it is
*anachirna* (not permissible). The collection of a large quantity on a small
quantity or a large quantity on a large quantity is *anachirna*. Due to the
faults mentioned in the previous verse (verse 264), this is *anachirna*.
**265-270.** There are forty types of *varjaniya dayaka* (undesirable givers):
1. **Balaka** (child) - less than eight years old. 2. **Vridda** (old person) -
sixty or seventy years old. 3. **Matta** (intoxicated) - having consumed
alcohol. 4. **Unmatta** (possessed) - possessed by a ghost or spirit.  **1.** To
understand this fourfold classification, refer to the translation and commentary
of verse 256.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda donoM prakAra kA saMharaNa AdhAra aura saMhriyamANa ke AdhAra para cAra
bhaMgoM vAlA hotA hai  /  caturbhaMgI isa prakAra haiM-- * zuSka para zuSka  /
zuSka para AI  /  Ardra para zuSka  /  Ardra para Ardra  /  * * 263/2. zuSka Adi
pratyeka bhaMga kI stoka aura bahu ke AdhAra para caturbhaMgI hotI hai, jaise *
thor3e zuSka para thor3A zuSka  /  thor3e zuSka para bahu zuSka  /  * bahu zuSka
para thor3A zuSka  /  * bahu zuSka para bahu zuSka  /  * 263/3. jisa vikalpa meM
thor3e zuSka para bahu zuSka saMhata hotA hai, vaha kalpanIya hai  /  isake
atirikta zuSka para Ardra, Ardra para zuSka yA Ardra para Ardra- - ina tIna
bhaMgoM meM AhAra agrAhya hotA hai| yadi Adeya vastu kama bhAra vAlI hai, usa
para laghu bhAra vAlI vastu hai, use anyatra DAla kara diyA jAtA hai to vaha
vastu kalpanIya hai  /  264. bar3e pAtra ko uThAne tathA nIce rakhane meM dAtA
ko pIr3A hotI hai| loka meM niMdA hotI hai ki yaha muni kitanA lolupa hai, jo
para - -pIr3A ko nahIM dekhtaa| bhArI pAtra ko uThAte samaya dAtA kA vadha,
aMgabhaMga athavA zarIra- dAha ho sakatA hai  /  dAtA ke mana meM muni ke prati
aprIti, usa dravya ke kAraNa anya deya dravyoM kA vyavaccheda tathA bhArI pAtra
se vastu ke bikharane se SaTkAya kA vadha ho sakatA hai| 189 264/1. stoka para
stoka athavA bahuta para stoka nikSipta hone para yadi vastu zuSka para zuSka
hai to vaha vastu kalpya hai| zuSka para Ardra, Ardra para zuSka tathA Ardra
para Ardra nikSipta hone para vaha anAcIrNa hai  /  toka para bahuta tathA
bahuta para bahuta kA saMharaNa anAcIrNa hai| isase pUrvagAthA (gA. 264) meM
ukta doSa samApanna hote haiM isalie yaha anAcIrNa hai  /  265 - 270. varjanIya
dAyaka ke cAlIsa prakAra haiM 1. bAlaka - ATha varSa kI avasthA se kama  /  2.
vRddha - sATha yA sattara varSa kI avasthA vAlA  /  3. matta - madirApAna kiyA
huA  /  4. unmatta - bhUta Adi se AviSTa  /  1. isa caturbhaMgI ko samajhane
hetu dekheM gA. 256 kA anuvAda tathA TippaNa  /

Page #362 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 190 ## Pindaniyukti  5. Having a body with a **kampaman** (trembling). 6.
Suffering from **jwar** (fever). 7. Blind. 8. Suffering from **galatkushtha**
(leprosy). 9. Wearing **paduka** (sandals). 10. Wearing **hathkari** (handcuffs)
on both hands. 11. Wearing **bedi** (fetters) on the feet. 12. **Vikal**
(disabled) in hands and feet. 13. **Trairaashik** (impotent). 14. Pregnant
woman. 15. **Balavatsa** (breastfeeding) woman. 16. Woman eating food. 17. Woman
churning **dahi** (yogurt) etc. 18. Woman **munj** (cleaning) **chana**
(chickpeas) etc. 19. Woman **dal** (splitting) wheat etc. 20. Woman **kandan**
(pounding) **tandul** (rice) etc. in a **ukhal** (mortar). 21. Woman grinding
**til** (sesame seeds) etc. on a stone. 22. Woman **pij** (picking) cotton. 23.
Woman **mardan** (beating) cotton. 24. Woman spinning **sut** (thread). 25.
Woman repeatedly **chhantni** (sorting) cotton. 26. Woman with a hand containing
**shatjivanikaay** (six types of living beings). 27. Woman dropping the six
**jivanikaay** on the ground while giving **bhiksha** (alms). 28. Woman crushing
the same six **jivanikaay**. 29. Woman touching the same **jivanikaay** with
other parts of her body. 30. Woman killing the six **jivanikaay**. 31. Woman
with hands smeared with **dahi** (yogurt) etc. 32. Woman giving from a vessel
smeared with **dahi** (yogurt) etc. 33. Woman giving **bhiksha** (alms) from a
large vessel. 34. Woman giving her own belongings to many people. 35. Woman
giving stolen goods. 36. Woman establishing a **praabhratika** (charity).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 190 piMDaniyukti 5. kampamAna zarIra vaalaa| 6. jvarita-jvara roga se piidd'it|
7. andh| 8. gltkusstthrogii| 9. pAdukA pahane hue| 10. donoM hAthoM meM
hathakar3I pahane hue| 11. pairoM meM ber3I pahane hue| 12. hAtha-paira se vikl|
13. trairaashik-npuNsk| 14. garbhavatI strii| 15. bAlavatsA strI-stanyopajIvI
zizu vaalii| 16. bhojana karatI huI strii| 17. dahI Adi mathatI huI strii| 18.
cane Adi mUMjatI huI strii| 19. gehUM Adi dalatI huI strii| 20. Ukhala meM
taMDula Adi kA kaMDana karatI huI strii| 21. zilA para tila Adi pIsatI huI
strii| 22. ruI pIjatI huI strii| 23. kapAsa kA mardana karatI huI strii| 24.
sUta kAtatI huI strii| 25. ruI kI bAra-bAra chaMTanI karatI huI strii| 26.
SaTjIvanikAya se yukta hAtha vAlI strii| 27. bhikSA dete samaya chaha
jIvanikAyoM ko bhUmi para DAlane vAlI strii| 28. unhIM chaha jIvanikAyoM ko
kucalatI huI strii| 29. unhIM jIvanikAyoM kA zarIra ke anya avayavoM se sparza
karatI huI strii| 30. SaDjIvanikAyoM kA hanana karatI huI strii| 31. dahI Adi se
lipta hAtha vAlI strii| 32. dahI Adi se lipta pAtra se dene vAlI strii| 33.
bar3e bartana se bhikSA dene vAlI strii| 34. aneka vyaktiyoM kI vastu svayaM
detI huI strii| 35. curAI huI vastu dene vAlI strii| 36. prAbhRtikA kI sthApanA
karane vAlI strii|

Page #363 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 191 37. A giver who is devoid of harm. 38. A
woman who gives an established object for another Sadhu. 39. A woman who gives
impure things even though she has knowledge of the object. 40. A woman who gives
impure things due to ignorance of the object. 271. Some Acharyas believe that it
is appropriate to accept offerings from the first twenty-five types of givers.
It is permissible to accept from them for specific purposes, but not otherwise.
Some believe that one should avoid accepting from givers from 26 to 40. It is
permissible to accept from children, etc. (givers from 1 to 25). 272. (A new
Shravaka) girl went to the field after delivering a message. The Sadhu accepted
a substantial amount of alms from the girl. When the mother asked for food, the
girl said, "I gave it all to the Sadhu." This leads to disregard for the
teachings and creates animosity, and people say that these are robber Sadhus who
are mocking the robes of a Sadhu. 273. The saliva of the elder keeps dripping,
his hands tremble, so the object to be given may fall from his hand or the elder
may fall. The elder is usually not the owner of the house, so if he gives
something, the householder may feel animosity towards the Sadhu, the elder, or
both. 274. A drunk person may embrace the Sadhu, break the vessel. A drunk
person vomiting may soil the Sadhu or his vessel. These monks are impure - such
is the talk in the world. The same faults apply to an insane giver, only he does
not vomit. 275. When accepting alms from a trembling giver, the object to be
given may fall out, and falling around the vessel may soil it. Similarly, these
are the same faults of a feverish giver. The special thing is that there is also
a possibility of infection. People talk about these Sadhus accepting alms from
feverish people. 276. Accepting alms from a blind giver leads to gossip among
people. A blind giver may stumble and fall, harming the six-bodied beings with
his feet. The vessel of the object to be given may break from him. While giving
alms, he may soil the vessel from all sides with the object to be given.
Accepting alms from someone whose body is shedding leprosy may lead to the
spread of the disease. 277. Accepting alms from a giver wearing sandals may
cause the giver to slip and fall. Accepting alms from a giver wearing handcuffs
and shackles causes suffering to the giver and disgust among people due to
impurity. 1. For the expansion of the story, see Pari. 3, Katha San. 48. 2.
Accepting an object to be given on which saliva has fallen leads to condemnation
in the world. 3. A person wearing sandals goes to defecate and urinate, and not
cleaning them afterwards leads to disgust in the world that these Sadhus accept
alms from impure people (Mav P. 160).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 191 37. apAyayukta daatrii| 38. anya sAdhu ke lie sthApita vastu dene
vAlI strii| 39. Abhoga-jJAna hone para bhI azuddha dene vAlI strii| 40.
anAbhoga-ajJAna se azuddha dene vAlI strii| 271. ina dAyakoM meM se prathama
paccIsa vyaktiyoM se grahaNa kI bhajanA hai-aisA kucheka AcArya mAnate haiN|
vizeSa prayojana se inase liyA jA sakatA hai, anyathA nhiiN| kucheka mAnate haiM
ki 26 se 40 taka ke dAtA kA varjana karanA caahie| bAlaka Adi (1 se 25 taka ke
dAtA) ke hAtha se grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai| 272. (abhinava zrAvikA) bAlikA ko
saMdeza dekara kheta meM calI gii| sAdhu ne bAlikA se paryApta mAtrA meM bhikSA
grahaNa kii| mAM ke dvArA AhAra mAMgane para bAlikA ne kahA-'saba sAdhu ko de
diyaa|' isase pravacana kI avahelanA tathA pradveSa paidA hotA hai tathA loga
kahate haiM ki ye sAdhuveza kI viDambanA karane vAle luTere sAdhu haiN| 273.
sthavira ke lAra giratI rahatI hai, usake hAtha kAMpate haiM ataH deya vastu
hAtha se gira sakatI hai athavA sthavira gira sakatA hai| sthavira prAyaH ghara
kA svAmI nahIM hotA hai ata: vaha koI vastu detA hai to gRhasvAmI kA sAdhu ke
prati yA sthavira ke prati athavA donoM ke prati pradveSa ho sakatA hai| 274.
matta vyakti sAdhu ko AliMgana kara sakatA hai, bhAjana ko tor3a sakatA hai|
vamana karatA huA matta vyakti sAdhu athavA usake pAtra ko kharaMTita kara
sakatA hai| ye muni azuci haiM-aisI loka meM gardA hotI hai| unmatta dAyaka ke
viSaya meM bhI ye hI doSa hote haiM, kevala usameM vamana nahIM hotaa| 275.
kaMpita dAtA se bhikSA lene para vaha deya vastu bAhara gira sakatI hai, pAtra
ke cAroM ora girane se pAtra kharaMTita ho sakatA hai| isI prakAra jvarita dAtA
ke bhI ye hI doSa haiN| vizeSa bAta yaha hai ki jvara kA saMkramaNa bhI ho
sakatA hai| logoM meM uDDAha hotA hai ki ye sAdhu jvarita vyakti se bhI bhikSA
lete haiN| 276. aMdhe dAyaka se bhikSA lene para logoM meM gardA hotI hai| aMdhA
dAyaka Thokara khAkara nIce gira sakatA hai, pairoM se SaDjIvanikAya kI ghAta
kara sakatA hai| usase deya vastu kA bhAjana TUTa sakatA hai| bhikSA dete samaya
deya vastu se pAtra ko cAroM ora se kharaMTita kara sakatA hai| jisake zarIra se
atyaMta kor3ha jhara rahA ho, usase bhikSA lene para usa roga kA saMkramaNa ho
sakatA hai| 277. pAdukA pahane hue dAtA se bhikSA lene para vaha dAtA skhalita
hokara gira sakatA hai| hathakar3I aura ber3I pahane hue dAyaka se bhikSA lene
se dAtA ko paritApa hotA hai tathA azuci ke kAraNa logoM meM jugupsA hotI 1.
kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari.3, kathA saM. 48 /  2. deya vastu para lAra
girane para use grahaNa karane se loka meM niMdA hotI hai| 3. pAdukA pahanakara
vyakti mala-mUtra tyAga karane jAtA hai, punaH usakI saphAI na karane se loka
meM jugupsA hotI hai ki ye sAdhu azucibhUta vyakti se bhI bhikSA grahaNa karate
haiM (mava pa. 160) /

Page #364 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 192:  The Prohibition of Accepting Alms from Certain Donors
**Regarding the Prohibition of Accepting Alms from Certain Donors:**  **192.**
It is considered inappropriate to accept alms from a person with a severed hand,
as it can cause disgust among people due to the impurity and the possibility of
the offered item falling to the ground. Similarly, accepting alms from a person
with a severed foot carries the same risks.  Furthermore, a person with a
severed foot may fall while walking to offer alms, causing harm to the soul.
**278.** Accepting alms from a eunuch can lead to self-inflicted harm, harm to
others, or both.  Repeatedly accepting alms from them can lead to excessive
familiarity, which may cause distress or anger in the eunuch or the monk.
People may also develop a sense of disgust, believing that the monk is also a
eunuch.  **279.**  A pregnant woman's movements while offering alms can disturb
the fetus.  If a woman with a child offers alms while carrying the child, the
child may be mistaken for a piece of meat by a cat or other animal, leading to
its destruction.  **280.**  A woman washing her hands before offering alms while
eating can lead to the violation of water.  If she offers alms with unclean
hands without rinsing them, it can cause disgust among people.  Similarly,
accepting alms from a woman churning yogurt with yogurt-stained hands can lead
to the destruction of the life forms present in the yogurt.  **281.**  Accepting
alms from a woman grinding, pounding, or crushing can lead to the destruction of
water, seeds, and other life forms.  If a woman is shelling chickpeas or other
grains, accepting alms from her can lead to the burning of the chickpeas if the
alms-giving process takes too long.  If a woman is spinning cotton, weaving, or
processing it, she may wash her hands after offering alms, which can lead to the
destruction of water-dwelling life forms.  **282.**  A woman with a living being
in her hand, such as salt, water, fire, air, a vessel filled with air, fruit,
fish, etc., is called a "Shatkayavyagrahasta" (one with six types of life forms
in her hand).  It is forbidden to accept alms from her because she may place
these items on the ground, step on them, or crush them with her body parts,
including her hands.  **283.**  Women who engage in activities such as digging
the earth, bathing with conscious water, washing clothes with conscious water,
watering trees, (lighting a fire or throwing a vessel filled with conscious
air), cutting vegetables, drying vegetables in the sun, cleaning rice, and
killing fish in the sixth life form (Triskaaya) are all involved in violence
against living beings.  Therefore, it is not appropriate to accept alms from
their hands.  **Notes:**  1.  The commentator Malayagiri mentions another reason
for avoiding accepting alms from a woman with a child: the monk's hands become
soiled from food, and the dry, food-stained hands become rough, which can cause
pain to the child when picked up. 2.  The original text does not mention the
harm caused by women who engage in activities related to the life forms of fire
and air.  This information is based on the commentary and is therefore enclosed
in parentheses.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 192 piMDaniyukti hai tathA chinna hAtha vAle se bhikSA lene para bhI azuci ke
kAraNa logoM meM jugupsA hotI hai tathA deya vastu nIce gira sakatI hai| isI
prakAra chinnapAda vAle dAyaka se bhikSA lene se ye sAre doSa saMbhava haiN|
vizeSa bAta yaha hai ki chinnapAda vAlA dAyaka bhikSA dene ke lie calate samaya
gira sakatA hai, (jisase sattva-vyAghAta hotA hai)| 278. napuMsaka dAyaka se
bhikSA lene para AtmadoSa, paradoSa tathA ubhayadoSa hote haiN| unase bAra-bAra
bhikSA grahaNa karane se ati paricaya hotA hai, jisase napuMsaka vyakti yA sAdhu
meM kSobha-vedodaya utpanna ho sakatA hai| logoM meM yaha jugupsA hotI hai ki ye
sAdhu bhI aise hI napuMsaka haiN| 279. bhikSAdAna ke lie garbhavatI ke uThane-
baiThane se garbha kA saMcalana hotA hai| bAlavatsA strI bAlaka ko nIce
rakhakara bhikSA dene jAtI hai to usa bAlaka ko mArjAra Adi mAMsakhaMDa
samajhakara uThAkara le jA sakate haiM, jisase bAlaka kA vinAza ho sakatA hai|
280. bhojana karatI huI strI bhikSA dene ke lie hAtha dhotI hai, isase udaka kI
virAdhanA hotI hai| yadi Acamana nahIM karake jUThe hAthoM se dAna detI hai to
loka meM gardA hotI hai| isI prakAra dahI ko mathatI huI strI ke dadhi-lipta
hAtha se bhikSA lene se dahI meM sthita rasa-jIvoM kA ghAta hotA hai| 281.
peSaNa, kaMDana tathA dalana karatI huI strI ke hAtha se bhikSA lene para udaka
tathA bIja Adi kA saMghaTTana hotA hai| jo strI cane Adi mUMja rahI hai, usake
hAtha se bhikSA lene para bhikSAdAna meM samaya lagane para cane Adi jala sakate
haiN| jo strI ruI pIja rahI ho, kAta rahI ho athavA usakA pramardana kara rahI
ho, vaha bhikSA dekara padArtha se kharaMTita hAthoM ko dho sakatI hai, jisase
udaka-jIvoM kI ghAta hotI hai| 282. jisake hAtha meM sajIva lavaNa, pAnI, agni,
vAyu se bharI huI dRti, phala, matsya Adi hoM, vaha SaTkAyavyagrahastA kahalAtI
hai| bhikSA dene ke lie vaha inako bhUmi para rakhatI hai, pairoM se athavA
zarIra ke anya avayavoM-hAtha Adi se unakA saMghaTTana, sammardana karatI hai,
usase bhikSA lenA varjanIya hai| 283. pRthvI kA khanana karatI huI, sacitta jala
se snAna karatI huI, sacitta jala se vastra Adi dhotI huI, vRkSa Adi ko sIMcatI
huI, (agni ko jalAtI huI athavA sacitta vAyu se bharI huI vastI ko idhara-udhara
pheMkatI huI), zAka Adi kA chedana karatI huI, zAka Adi ke khaMDoM ko Atapa meM
sukhAtI huI, taNDula Adi ko sApha karatI huI tathA chaThe jIvanikAya trasakAya
meM tar3aphate hue matsyoM kA chedana karatI huI striyAM jIvoM kI hiMsA karatI
haiM ata: inake hAtha se bhikSA grahaNa karanA nahIM klptaa| 1. TIkAkAra
malayagiri ne bAlavatsA strI se bhikSA lene kA eka aura doSa batAte hue kahA hai
ki sAdhu ko bhikSA dene se hAtha AhAra se kharaMTita ho jAte haiN| AhAra se
lipta zuSka hAtha karkaza hote haiM, usase bAlaka ko uThAne para bAlaka ko pIr3A
hotI haiM (mavR pa. 161) /  2. mUla gAthA meM tejaskAya aura vAyukAya Adi kA
hanana karatI huI strI kA ullekha nahIM hai| yaha TIkA ke AdhAra para likhA gayA
hai ata: ise koSThaka meM rakhA hai (mat pa. 161) /

Page #365 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 193 284. Some Acharyas believe that it is not
permissible to accept food offered by a woman who wears earrings made of badar
(a type of fruit) and other ornaments, and who has a flower of the mustard plant
(siddhārthaka) in her hair. 284/1. Other Acharyas believe that this is not a
transgression of the ten faults of *eṣaṇā* (desire), and therefore it is not
forbidden to accept food offered by a woman adorned with badar and other
ornaments. In response to this, it is said that the acceptance of the food by
the giver itself constitutes the transgression. 285. If a woman offers alms with
her hands and vessel contaminated with living beings, it is a violation of the
beings clinging to her hands and vessel. If a large vessel is tilted to offer
alms, there is a possibility of harming ants, insects, etc., that may be present
there. Similarly, there are the same faults in lifting a large vessel to offer
alms. 286. The same faults that were mentioned earlier in the section on
"unopened doors" apply to accepting alms from a woman who offers the belongings
of many people. If a woman offers alms that she has stolen from her husband or
daughter-in-law, there is a possibility of the faults of acceptance, bondage,
etc. 287. Offering alms with the intention of using it for sacrifices, etc., for
the *prābhṛtika* (a type of offering) leads to the faults of instigation, etc.
There are three types of hell: *tiryag* (animal realm), *ūrdhva* (heavenly
realm), and *adhaḥ* (hell realm). A monk should not accept alms that has been
set aside for non-Jains or for the sick, etc. 288. A giver who offers something
out of compassion for the monks, or who knowingly offers food with the faults of
*ādhākarma* (half-hearted action) and other *eṣaṇā* faults, is an *ābhōgadāyaka*
(unworthy giver). A giver who offers such food out of ignorance or due to a lack
of understanding is an *anābhōgadāyaka* (unworthy giver). Both these types of
givers are unsuitable. 288/1. If a child offers only alms, there is no need for
deliberation, and the alms can be accepted. Alms can also be accepted from a
child who is instructed by his mother. If the child offers a lot of alms, there
is a need for deliberation, and the alms can be accepted with the permission of
the mother, etc.  1. A large vessel is sometimes lifted for practical reasons,
and therefore many living beings gather underneath it. Tilting or lifting it can
lead to the killing of these beings, and also cause pain to the giver (M.V.P.
162). 2. See the translation of verse 180, M.V.P. 114. 3. Accepting alms set
aside for non-Jains, etc., leads to the fault of *adattādāna* (accepting what
was not given). A monk should bring the food given for the sick, etc., to the
sick person. If they do not accept it, the monk should return it to the giver.
If the giver says that if the sick monk does not accept the alms, then the monk
should accept it, then the food becomes permissible for the monk (M.V.P. 162).
4. While explaining this verse, the commentator says that if the mother is
standing nearby and gives permission, then the monk can accept alms from the
child. If the child offers alms, the monk should ask why they want to offer so
much alms today. In this situation, if the mother gives permission, then
accepting the alms is permissible (M.V.P. 163).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 193 284, kucha AcArya SaTkAyavyagrahastA usako mAnate haiM, jo AbhUSaNa
rUpa meM badara Adi ko kAnoM meM pahane huI ho tathA zira para siddhArthaka -
sarasoM ke phUla lagAe hue ho, usake hAtha se bhakta-pAna lenA nahIM kalpatA  /
284/1. anya AcArya mAnate haiM ki eSaNA ke dasa doSoM meM isakA grahaNa nahIM
huA hai isalie badara Adi se yukta dAtrI se bhaktapAna lenA varjya nahIM hai|
isake uttara meM kahA gayA hai ki dAyaka ke grahaNa se isakA grahaNa svayaM hI
ho jAtA hai| 285. jisa dAtrI ke hAtha aura pAtra saMsakta - jIva yukta dravya se
lipta haiM, vaha yadi bhikSA detI hai to hAtha Adi para lage hue sattvoM kI
virAdhanA hotI hai| bar3e bartana ko Ter3hA karake dene se vahAM saMcArima
cIMTI, makor3e Adi ke ghAta kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai| isI prakAra bar3A bartana
uThAkara dene meM bhI ye hI doSa hote haiM  /  286. aneka logoM kI vastu ko dene
vAlI dAtrI se bhikSA grahaNa karane meM ve hI doSa haiM, jo pahale anisRSTa
dvAra' meM batAe gae haiN| karmakara yA snuSA Adi curAkara vastu de to grahaNa,
baMdhana Adi doSa saMbhava haiM  /  287. prAbhRtikA ko bali Adi ke nimitta
sthApita karake bhikSA dene meM pravartana Adi doSa hote haiM  /  apAya ke tIna
prakAra haiM- tiryag, Urdhva aura adhaH  /  jo anyatIrthikoM ke lie athavA glAna
Adi ke lie rakhA gayA ho, use sAdhu grahaNa na kare  /  288. jo dAtA anukaMpA ke
vazIbhUta hokara muniyoM ke lie banAkara kucha detA hai athavA koI jAnate hue
bhI dveSavaza muniyoM ko AdhAkarma Adi eSaNAdoSa yukta bhaktapAna detA hai -
vaha AbhogadAyaka hai  /  koI ajAnakArI ke kAraNa azaThabhAva se vaisA karatA
hai, vaha anAbhogadAyaka hai, ye donoM dAyaka ayogya haiN| 288/1. bAlaka yadi
kevala bhikSA detA hai to vahAM vicAraNA nahIM hotI, bhikSA lI jA sakatI hai|
mAtA dvArA saMdiSTa bAlaka se bhI bhikSA grAhya hai| yadi bAlaka bahuta detA hai
to vahAM vicAraNA hotI hai, vahAM mAtA Adi kI anujJA se bhikSA lI jA sakatI hai|
1. bar3A bartana kabhI-kabhI prayojana vaza hI uThAyA jAtA hai ataH usake nIce
aneka jIva ekatrita ho jAte haiM  /  usako Ter3hA karane evaM uThAkara rakhane
meM una jIvoM ke vadha kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai tathA dAtA ko bhI pIr3A hotI hai
( mavR pa. 162 )  /  2. dekhe gAthA 180 kA anuvAda mavR pa. 114  /  3.
paratIrthika kAryaTika Adi ke lie sthApita bhikSA lene se adattAdAna kA doSa
lagatA hai| sAdhu glAna Adi ke nimitta diyA huA AhAra glAna ko hI lAkara de|
yadi vaha grahaNa na kare to punaH dAtrI ko samarpita kre| yadi dAnadAtrI kahe
ki glAna sAdhu yadi yaha bhikSA grahaNa nahIM karatA hai to Apa svayaM grahaNa
kareM, taba vaha dravya sAdhu ke lie kalpya hotA hai ( mavR pa. 162 )  /  4. isa
gAthA kI vyAkhyA karate hue TIkAkAra kahate haiM ki yadi mAtA pAsa meM khar3I
huI AjJA de to muni bAlaka ke hAtha se bhikSA grahaNa kara sakatA hai  /  bAlaka
yadi bhikSA detA hai to muni pRcchA kare ki Aja prabhUta bhikSA denA kyoM cAhate
ho ? isa sthiti meM yadi mAM AjJA de to bhikSA grahaNa karanA kalpanIya hotA
hai| (mavR pa. 163 )

Page #366 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 194 ## Pindaniyukti  288/2. If the householder is a householder, his hands
are trembling, but the object to be given is in the hands of another, or he is
strong-bodied, then alms may be accepted from his hand. If he is secretly
intoxicated, is performing a śrāddha, is not distracted, is not under the
influence of another, and there is no other householder present, then alms may
be accepted from his hand. 288/3. If the person is insane but pure and virtuous,
if the hand of the person with a trembling body is steady, if the fever of the
person with fever has subsided, if the blind person is a śrāvaka, and the object
to be given is in the hands of another, or if the blind person has come with the
help of another, then the object to be given may be accepted from all of them.
288/4. If a person is afflicted with maṇḍalaprasuptikṣuṣṭha (a particular type
of circular leprosy), and there is no other householder present, then alms may
be taken from him. Similarly, if a person with a foot disease is stable, if a
person wearing shackles is mindful and able to walk, then alms may be taken from
his hand. If a person who is disabled in his hands and feet is unable to move
around but is sitting, and there is no other householder present, then alms may
also be taken from his hand. A person wearing shackles in his hands is not able
to give alms, therefore he is prohibited, there is no bhajana there. If a person
who has been cut off is able to give alms in the absence of a sāgārika, then it
is prescribed to take alms from him. 288/5. If a eunuch is not a pratisevī, then
alms may be taken from his hand. Alms may not be taken from the hand of a
pregnant woman in the ninth month, or from the hand of a woman who is
breastfeeding a child. Similarly, there is bhajana in taking alms from the hand
of a woman who is eating, roasting, or pounding. If a woman has raised the
pestle to pound rice, and there is no grain on the pestle, and a monk comes in
the meantime, and she places the pestle in a blameless place and gives alms,
then it is acceptable.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 194 piMDaniyukti 288/2. sthavira yadi gRhasvAmI ho, hAtha kAMpa rahe ho parantu
deya vastu dUsare ke hAtha meM ho athavA vaha dRr3ha zarIra vAlA ho to usake
hAtha se bhikSA grahaNa kI jA sakatI hai| jo avyakta rUpa se matta hai, zrAddha
hai, avihvala hai-paravaza nahIM hai aura dUsarA gRhastha vahAM nahIM hai to
usake hAtha se bhikSA grahaNa kI jA sakatI hai| 288/3. jo unmatta vyakti pavitra
aura bhadraka hai, kaMpamAna zarIra vAle kA hAtha yadi dRr3ha hai, jvarita
vyakti kA jvara zAMta ho gayA hai, aMdhA vyakti zrAvaka hai tathA dUsare ke
hAtha meM deyavastu hai athavA aMdhA vyakti dUsare ke sahAre calakara AyA hai-
ina sabase deya vastu kA grahaNa kiyA jA sakatA hai| 288/4. jo vyakti
maMDalaprasuptikuSTha' (vRttAkAra kor3ha vizeSa) se grasta hai, vahAM yadi koI
gRhastha na ho to usase bhikSA lI jA sakatI hai| isI prakAra jo pAdukArUDha
vyakti sthira hai, ber3I pahanA huA vyakti yadi savicAra hai-calane-phirane meM
samartha hai to usake hAtha se bhikSA lI jA sakatI hai| hAtha-paira se vikala
vyakti jo idhara-udhara calane meM asamartha hai parantu baiThA huA hai, vahAM
koI dUsarA gRhastha nahIM hai to usake hAtha se bhI bhikSA lI jA sakatI hai|
hAthoM meM ber3I pahanA vyakti bhikSA dene meM samartha nahIM hotA ata: usakA
pratiSedha hai, vahAM bhajanA nahIM hai| yadi chinna kara vAlA vyakti sAgArika
ke abhAva meM bhikSA dene meM samartha hai to usase bhikSA lenI vihita hai|
288/5. yadi napuMsaka apratisevI hai to usake hAtha se bhikSA lI jA sakatI hai|
nauveM mAsa vAlI garbhavatI strI tathA stanyopajIvI zizu vAlI strI ke hAtha se
bhikSA nahIM lI jA sakatI hai| isI prakAra khAtI huI, bhUnatI huI tathA dalatI
huI strI ke hAtha se bhikSA lene kI bhI bhajanA hai| strI ne dhAna kUTane ke lie
musala 1. mavR pa. 163 ; maMDalAni-vRttAkAradadruvizeSarUpANi, prasUtiH-
nakhAdividAraNe'pi cetanAyA asaMvittistadrapo yaH kaSThaH rogavizeSa:
so'syAstIti-vRttAkAra koDha vizeSa, jisameM gola cakatte ho jAte haiM, nakha Adi
se vidAraNa karane para bhI cetanA kI anubhUti nahIM hotI, vaha
maMDalaprasuptikuSTha hai| TIkAkAra malayagiri ne pasUI-prasUti pATha ke AdhAra
para vyAkhyA kI hai lekina vyavahArabhASya meM pasutti pATha hai| vahAM
citraprasupti aura maNDalaprasupti-ye do prakAra ke asyandamAna carmaroga kA
ullekha milatA hai| citraprasupti meM zarIra meM zveta, kAle Adi vicitra dhabbe
ho jAte haiM tathA maNDalaprasupti meM gola cakatte ho jAte haiM  /  kucha
hastapratiyoM meM bhI 'pasUI' pATha hai lekina yahAM 'pasutti' pATha honA
caahie| 2. TIkAkAra malayagiri isa gAthA kI vyAkhyA karate hue kahate haiM ki
navamAsa vAlI garbhavatI strI ke hAtha kI bhikSA sthavirakalpI muni parihAra
karate haiN| isase kama vAlI ke hAtha se sthavirakalpI bhikSA grahaNa kara
sakate haiN| vaha bAlaka jo kevala mAM ke dUdha para hI AdhRta hai, usakA
sthavirakalpI parihAra karate haiN| jo bAlaka bAhya AhAra bhI grahaNa karatA
hai, usakI mAM se sthavirakalpI bhikSA grahaNa kara sakate haiN| dUsarI bAta
vaha zarIra se bhI bar3A ho jAtA hai ata: use mArjAra Adi kA bhaya bhI nahIM
rhtaa| jinakalpI sAdhu ApannasatvA (garbhavatI) evaM bAlavatsA strI kA sarvathA
parihAra karate haiM (mavR p.164)| 3. khAtI huI strI ne yadi mukha meM kavala
nahIM DAlA hai to usake hAtha se bhikSA kalpya hai| bhUnatI huI strI yadi
sacitta gehUM Adi ko kar3Aha meM DAlakara nikAla cukI hai, dUsarI bAra hAtha meM
gehUM nahIM lie haiM, isI bIca yadi sAdhu A jAtA hai to usake hAtha se bhikSA
grahaNa kI jA sakatI hai| mUMga Adi dalatI huI strI sacitta mUMga Adi dalakara
ghaTTI ko chor3a cukI hai, isI bIca sAdhu Ae to vaha uThakara bhikSA de sakatI
hai athavA vaha acitta mUMga dala rahI hai to usake hAtha se bhikSA kalpanIya
hai| kaMDana karatI huI strI yadi muzala ko Upara uThA cukI hai, usa muzala meM
yadi koI bIja nahIM lagA hai, isI bIca sAdhu ke Ane para doSa rahita sthAna meM
usa muzala ko rakhakara bhikSA de to vaha grAhya hai (mat pa. 164) /

Page #367 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 195 If the Muni arrives while the alms bowl is
being picked up, alms can be taken from the hand if the bowl is placed in a
proper, defect-free place. 288/6. Alms can be taken from the hand of a woman
grinding if she has stopped grinding or is grinding a suitable substance. Alms
can be taken from the hand of a woman churning yogurt if her hands are not
contaminated with conch shell powder, etc., or from the hand of a woman spinning
if her hands are not scratched by conch shell powder, and even if she is
spinning with hands scratched by conch shell powder, if she has not washed her
hands with water. 288/7. Alms can be taken from the hand of a woman who is
twisting cotton if the cotton is not in her hand or if she is not compacting the
cotton while lifting it. If there is no subsequent action in the process of
picking and pressing cotton, alms can be taken. 288/8. There is no possibility
of an exception, i.e., a counter-argument, in the remaining six types of hands
engaged in activities. In the absence of a counter-argument, there is a rule not
to accept alms. 289. There are three types of *unmiśra* - *saccitta*, *acitta*,
and *miśra*. There are three *caturbhanga* of *unmiśra*. In each, the first
three options are prohibited, and the fourth option is permissible. 290, 291. In
the *sanharana* gate, the *saṁyogika* *bhanga* of *pṛthvīkāya*, etc., are the
same as in the *unmiśra* fault. The main difference between the two is that
substances are of two types - *dātavya* - suitable for giving to a *sadhu* and
*adātavya*. Giving a mixture of both is *unmiśra*. For example, giving rice
mixed with *kuśana*, yogurt, etc. In *sanharana*, the *adeya* substance in the
vessel is transferred elsewhere, this is the difference between the two. 291/1.
Like *sanharana*, there are four options for *unmiśra* - *śuṣka* in *śuṣka*
*unmiśra*, etc. There are also four options each for *alpa* and *bahutva* and
*ācīrṇa* and *anācīrṇa*, similar to *sanharana*.  1. For details, see *Gāthā*
256 commentary. The word 'tu' in the *gāthā* implies that in the first
*caturbhanga*, alms are prohibited in all four options. In the remaining two
*caturbhanga*, alms are prohibited in the first three *bhanga*, and alms are
permissible in the last *bhanga*. 2. Based on the *bhanga* of each gate, such as
*sanharana*, etc., 432 *bhanga* are formed as follows - *saccitta* *pṛthvī*
*sanharana* on *saccitta* *pṛthvīkāya*, *saccitta* *pṛthvīkāya* *sanharana* on
*saccitta* *apkāya*. Similarly, there are 36 *bhanga* with respect to *svakāya*
and *parakāya*. Since each of these has three *caturbhanga* due to *saccitta*,
*acitta*, and *miśra* terms, there are 12 variations. Multiplying 12 by 36 gives
432 variations. Similarly, one should know about *unmiśra*, etc. (M.V.P. 165).
3. The *caturbhanga* of *unmiśra* is as follows: • *śuṣka* in *śuṣka* *unmiśra*.
• *śuṣka* in *ārdra* *unmiśra*. • *ārdra* in *śuṣka* *unmiśra*. • *ārdra* in
*ārdra* *unmiśra*. 4. For details, see M.V.P. 165.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 195 ko uThA liyA, itane meM muni A ge| vaha yadi musala ko kisI
doSarahita ucita sthAna meM rakhe to usake hAtha se bhikSA lI jA sakatI hai|
288/6. pIsane vAlI strI yadi peSaNa kArya se nivRtta ho gaI ho athavA prAsuka
vastu pIsa rahI ho to usake hAtha se bhikSA lI jA sakatI hai| dahI mathane vAlI
strI ke hAtha yadi zaMkhacUrNa Adi se asaMsakta hoM athavA kAtane vAlI strI ke
hAtha zaMkhacUrNa se kharaMTita na hoM tathA zaMkhacUrNa ke kharaMTita hAtha se
kAtatI huI bhI yadi jala se hAtha na dhoe to ina sabake hAtha se bhikSA lI jA
sakatI hai| 288/7. kapAsa ko loThate samaya yadi kapAsa hAtha meM na ho athavA
uThatI huI yadi kapAsa kA saMghaTTana na karatI ho to usa strI ke hAtha se
bhikSA grahaNa kI jA sakatI hai| yadi ruI ke piMjana aura pramardana meM bhI
pazcAtkarma na ho to bhikSA lI jA sakatI hai| 288/8. zeSa SaTkAyavyagrahastA Adi
meM pratipakSa kI arthAt apavAda kI saMbhAvanA nahIM hai| pratipakSa ke abhAva
meM bhikSA grahaNa na karane kI niyamA hai| 289. unmizra ke tIna prakAra haiM-
sacitta, acitta aura mishr| unmizra kI tIna caturbhaMgiyAM hotI haiN| pratyeka
meM Adya ke tIna vikalpa pratiSiddha haiM, cauthe vikalpa kI bhajanA hai| 290,
291. saMharaNa dvAra meM pRthvIkAya Adi ke jo sAMyogika bhaMga kie the, vaise hI
unmizra doSa meM bhI hote haiN| una donoM meM vizeSa aMtara yaha hai-dravya do
prakAra ke hote haiM-dAtavya-sAdhu ko dene yogya aura adaatvy| donoM ko mizrita
karake jo detA hai, vaha unmizra hai| jaise-odana ko kuzana-dahI Adi se mizrita
karake denaa| saMharaNa meM bhAjanastha adeya vastu ko anyatra saMharaNa kiyA
jAtA hai, yahI donoM meM bheda hai| 291/1. unmizra ke bhI saMharaNa kI bhAMti
cAra vikalpa haiM-zuSka meM zuSka unmizra Adi  /  alpa aura bahutva tathA AcIrNa
aura anAcIrNa ke bhI cAra-cAra vikalpa saMharaNa kI bhAMti hI hote haiN| 1.
vistAra hetu dekheM gA. 256 kA ttippnn| gAthA meM Ae 'tu' zabda se yaha gamya
hai ki prathama caturbhaMgI meM cAroM vikalpoM meM bhikSA kA pratiSedha hai|
zeSa do caturbhagI meM prathama tIna bhaMgoM meM pratiSedha hai, carama bhaMga
meM bhikSA-grahaNa kI bhajanA hai| 2. saMharaNa Adi pratyeka dvAra ke bhaMgoM ke
AdhAra para 432 bhaMga isa prakAra banate haiM-sacitta pRthvI kA sacitta
pRthvIkAya para saMharaNa, sacitta pRthvIkAya kA sacitta apkAya para saMharaNa
/  isI prakAra svakAya aura parakAya kI apekSA 36 bhaMga hote haiN| inake
sacitta, acitta aura mizra pada se pratyeka kI tIna catubhaMgI hone se 12 bheda
hote haiM  /  12 kA 36 se guNA karane para 432 bheda hote haiM isI prakAra
unmizra Adi ke jAnane cAhie (mavR pa. 165) /  3. unmizra kI caturbhaMgI isa
prakAra hai * zuSka meM zuSka kA unmishr| * zuSka meM Ardra kA unmishr| * Ardra
meM zuSka kA unmishr| * Ardra meM Ardra kA unmishr| 4. vistAra hetu dekheM mavR
pa. 165 /

Page #368 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 196 ## Pindaniyukti  292. Aparisnata is of two types: dravya aparisnata and
bhava aparisnata. Each has two types: datrusambandhi and grahakasambandhi.
Dravya-vishayaka aparisnata is of six types based on the six kayas, and bhava-
vishayaka aparisnata is like bhratri, etc. 293. Conscious earth, etc., is
aparisnata as long as it is alive, and becomes parisnata when the jiva is
destroyed. Here, the example of milk and curd is given. When milk becomes curd,
it is called parisnata, and when milk remains in its milk state, it is called
aparisnata. 294. When a given object is generally owned by two or more people,
and one person desires to give it to the muni, while the others do not, then it
is bhava-aparishnata. 295. When two munis go for bhiksha, and one muni considers
the given object as eshaniya in his mind, while the other muni does not consider
it as eshaniya, then it is also agrahya due to being bhava-aparishnata. There
are two types of datru-vishayaka bhava aparisnata: bhratru-vishayaka and swami-
vishayaka. Grahitru-vishayaka bhava aparisnata is sadhu-vishayaka. 295/1. The
muni should always take only a-lepakrid dravya, because taking lepakrid dravya
can lead to paschatkarma, and taking a-lepakrid dravya does not lead to
rasagrudhi. Upon hearing this, the shishya says: 295/2. If lepakrid dravya is
agrahya due to the possibility of paschatkarma and other faults, then the muni
should never eat. The acharya says: "Shishya! The muni who constantly performs
tapasya, his tapas, niyama, and samyama are harmed, therefore eating is
necessary." 295/3. Lepakrid is sadosha, therefore the shishya says that the muni
should not eat for his entire life. If that is not possible, then he should fast
for six months and take aachaml. If that is also not possible, then he should
take dravya with a little lepa. 295/4, 5. If the muni cannot perform tapasya all
the time, then he should perform tapasya continuously for six months and take
aachaml in the paranak. If he cannot perform tapasya continuously for six
months, then he should reduce it by one day every six months and continue taking
aachaml in the paranak until the final reduction reaches fasting. If that is
also not possible, then he should take a-lepakrid aachaml every day. 295/6. (The
acharya replies): If there is no harm to the muni's yogas in the present and
future, then he should perform tapasya for six months, etc. If there is a loss
of one day in tapasya, then he should take aachaml in the paranak, as mentioned
earlier. If this is not possible, then he should perform aachaml tapasya
continuously.  1. The tika-kar Malai Giri explains the difference between
anisrishta and datrubhava aparisnata, saying that in anisrishta, the giver is
indirect, but in datrubhava aparisnata, the giver is direct (Mavri P. 166).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 196 piMDaniyukti 292. apariNata bhI do prakAra kA hai-dravya apariNata tathA
bhAva aprinnt| pratyeka ke do-do prakAra haiMdAyakasaMbaMdhI tathA
graahksNbNdhii| dravya viSayaka apariNata SaTkAya ke AdhAra para chaha prakAra
kA hotA hai tathA bhAvaviSayaka apariNata hai-bhAI aadi| 293. sacetana pRthvI
Adi jaba taka sajIva hai, taba taka apariNata hai aura vyapagata jIva hone para
pariNata hotI hai| yahAM dUdha-dahI kA dRSTAnta hai| dUdha jaba dahI banatA hai,
taba pariNata kahalAtA hai aura dUdha dUdhabhAva meM avasthita rahane para
apariNata kahalAtA hai| 294. jo deya vastu sAmAnyatayA do yA aneka vyaktiyoM kI
hai, unameM eka kI icchA hai ki maiM muni ko dUM zeSa vyaktiyoM kI icchA nahIM
hotI to vaha bhAvataH apariNata hai| 295. bhikSArtha gae do muniyoM meM eka muni
ne deya vastu ko mana hI mana eSaNIya mAnA, dUsare muni ne eSaNIya nahIM mAnA,
vaha bhI bhAvataH apariNata hone ke kAraNa agrAhya hai| dAtR viSayaka bhAva
apariNata ke do bheda haiM-bhrAtRviSayaka tathA svaamivissyk| grahItRviSayaka
bhAva apariNata hai-saadhuvissyk| 295/1. muni sadA alepakRd dravya hI le kyoMki
lepakRd dravya grahaNa karane se pazcAtkarma kI saMbhAvanA rahatI hai tathA
alepakRd dravya ke grahaNa se rasagRddhi kA prasaMga bhI nahIM aataa| yaha
kahane para ziSya kahatA hai| 295/2. yadi pazcAtkarma Adi doSoM kI saMbhAvanA se
lepakRd dravya agrAhya hai to phira muni ko kabhI bhojana karanA hI nahIM
caahie| AcArya ne kahA-'ziSya! satata taponuSThAna karane vAle muni ke tapa,
niyama aura saMyama kI hAni hotI hai ataH bhojana karanA Avazyaka hai|' 295/3.
lepakRd sadoSa hai ata: ziSya kahatA hai ki muni yAvajjIvana bhojana na kre|
yadi yAvajjIvana saMbhava na ho to chaha mahInoM taka upavAsa kara AcAmla kA
grahaNa kre| yadi yaha bhI saMbhava na ho to alpalepa vAlA dravya grahaNa kre|
295/4, 5. yadi muni sarvakAla tapasyA na kara sake to chaha mahInoM taka
niraMtara tapasyA kara pAraNaka meM AcAmla kre| yadi chaha mahInoM taka
niraMtara tapa na kara sake to pratyeka chaha mahInoM meM eka-eka dina nyUna
karatA huA taba taka AcAmla kA pAraNaka karatA rahe, jaba taka ki aMtima nyUnatA
upavAsa taka na pahuMca jaae| yadi yaha bhI saMbhava na ho to pratidina alepakRd
AcAmla kre| 295/6. (AcArya uttara dete haiM)-yadi muni ke vartamAna kAla meM
tathA bhaviSya kAla meM yogoM kI hAni na hotI ho to vaha chaha mAsa Adi kI
tapasyA kre| tapasyA meM eka-eka dina kI hAni se, pUrvokta prakAra se, pAraNaka
meM AcAmla kre| yaha saMbhava na ho to niraMtara AcAmla tapa kre| 1. TIkAkAra
malayagiri anisRSTa aura dAtRbhAva se apariNata kA aMtara spaSTa karate hue
kahate haiM ki sAmAnyataH anisRSTa meM dAtA parokSa hote haiM lekina dAtRbhAva
se apariNata meM dAtA samakSa hotA hai (mavR pa. 166) /

Page #369 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **197**  **295/7.** The disciple asked: "If people born in
Maharashtra and Kosala countries earn their livelihood by eating Sauvira food,
then why can't the monks earn their livelihood from that food?"  **295/8.** The
Acharya said: "The three-fold (trik) of the ascetics is cold, and the same
three-fold of the householders is hot. (If an ascetic takes food without taking
takra (buttermilk) and tak (a type of fermented drink), then he will suffer from
indigestion and other ailments.) Therefore, the consumption of takra etc. is
permitted for the monk. The consumption of Timen (a type of food) mixed with
pure ghee is allowed only in case of weakness (glanatva) etc., otherwise not."
**295/9.** Even in winter, the three-fold (trik) of the householders - food,
clothing, and bed - is hot. Therefore, their food (even without taking takra
etc.) is digested by the external and internal heat.  **295/10.** The same
three-fold (trik) - food, clothing, and bed - is cold for the monks even in
summer. This causes the digestive fire (jathraagni) to become weak, leading to
indigestion and other ailments.  **296.** Dry Alepakrid (foods that are not
easily digestible)  * Odan - rice etc. * Sattu - barley etc. powder. * Kulmasha
- black gram. * Rajmasha - white chana. * Gol Chana - round chickpeas. * Vall -
husk. * Tuvari - pigeon pea. * Masur - lentil. * Moong - green gram. * Masha -
black gram etc.  **297.** Alpalepakrid (foods that are slightly digestible)
These are the foods that require post-meal rituals (paschatkarma) after
consumption.  * Udbedhya - spinach etc. vegetables. * Peya - barley water. *
Kangu - kodrav grain. * Takra - buttermilk. * Ullan - used to moisten rice. *
Soup - cooked soup of moong etc. * Kanjik - fermented rice water. * Kwathith -
curds etc.  **1.** Trik - food, clothing, and bed.  **2.** A monk travels to
many houses for alms. Therefore, the hot food received becomes cold by the time
he reaches his dwelling. Once a year, before the rainy season, due to washing
clothes and the absence of fire near the dwelling, the bed also becomes cold.
Therefore, the consumption of takra etc. is permitted for the ascetic. Takra
kindles the digestive fire (Mavri P. 168).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 197 295/7. ziSya bolA-mahArASTra tathA kauzalaka deza meM utpanna
manuSya sauvIra kUra kA bhojana karate hue jIvana-yApana karate haiM to bhalA
munijana usa bhojana se apanA jIvana-yApana kyoM nahIM kara sakate? 295/8.
AcArya ne kahA-zramaNoM kA trika' zIta hotA hai aura gRhasthoM kA vahI trika
uSNa hotA hai| (yadi zramaNa pratidina AcAmla kare aura taka na le to ajIrNa Adi
doSa hote haiN|) ataH muni ke lie takra Adi kA grahaNa anujJAta hai| kaTTara-
ghRtavaTikA se mizrita tImana dravya ke grahaNa kI bhajanA hai-(glAnatva Adi kI
sthiti meM liyA jA sakatA hai, anyathA nhiiN|) 295/9. zItakAla meM bhI gRhasthoM
kA yaha trika-AhAra, upadhi aura zayyA-uSNa hotA hai isalie unakA bhojana (binA
takrAdi grahaNa kie bhI) bAhara aura Abhyantara tApa se jIrNa ho jAtA hai|
295/10. yahI trika (AhAra, upadhi aura zayyA) muniyoM ke lie grISmakAla meM bhI
zIta hotA hai| usase jaTharAgni maMda hone se ajIrNa Adi doSa hote haiN| 296.
zuSka alepakRd dravya * odana-taNDula aadi| * sattu-jau Adi kA cuurnn| *
kulmaass-udd'd| * rAjamASa-zveta cvlaa| * gola cnaa| * vll-nisspaav| * tuvarI-
arahara kI daal| * msuur| * mUMga * mASa-kAlI ur3ada aadi| 297. alpalepakRd
dravya ye haiM, inake grahaNa meM pazcAtkarma kI bhajanA hai * udbhedya-bathuA
Adi shaak| * peyaa-yvaaguu| * kaMgU-kodrava dhaany| * tkr-chaach| * ullaNa-
jisase odana gIlA kiyA jAtA hai| * sUpa-rAMdhA huA mUMga Adi kA suup| * kaaNjik-
kaaNjii| * kvathita-kar3hI aadi| 1. trika-AhAra, upadhi aura shyyaa| 2. muni
bhikSA ke lie aneka gharoM meM ghUmatA hai ata: prApta uSNa AhAra upAzraya meM
pahuMcate-pahuMcate ThaMDA ho jAtA hai| varSa meM eka bAra varSA kAla se pUrva
vastra-prakSAlana ke kAraNa kapar3e tathA vasati ke nikaTa agni na hone se zayyA
bhI zItala hotI hai isalie takra Adi kA grahaNa sAdhu ke lie anujJAta hai| takra
se jaTharAgni pradIpta hotI hai (mavR pa. 168) /

Page #370 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 198 298. All these are *bahulepakrid* substances, they have the rule of
*pashchatkarma* * Milk. * Yogurt. * *Kattar* - Large piece of ghee put in
*kadhi* etc. * *Jao* - Drink made from milk. Oil. * *Phanit* - *Gudpanak*. *
*Ghrut*. * *Sapindarasa* - Substance produced from dates etc. with very strong
taste.  299. There are eight possibilities from the combination of these three -
*samsrusht* hand, *samsrusht* vessel and *savasesha* substance, and their
opposites - *asamsrusht* hand, *asamsrusht* vessel and *niravasesha* substance.
* *Samsrusht* hand, *samsrusht* vessel and *savasesha* substance. * *Samsrusht*
hand, *samsrusht* vessel and *niravasesha* substance. * *Samsrusht* hand,
*asamsrusht* vessel and *savasesha* substance. * *Samsrusht* hand, *asamsrusht*
vessel and *niravasesha* substance. * *Asamsrusht* hand, *samsrusht* vessel and
*savasesha* substance. * *Asamsrusht* hand, *samsrusht* vessel and *niravasesha*
substance. * *Asamsrusht* hand, *asamsrusht* vessel and *savasesha* substance. *
*Asamsrusht* hand, *asamsrusht* vessel and *niravasesha* substance.  In these
eight possibilities, *oj* - odd possibilities, i.e. 1, 3, 5, 7 are definitely
acceptable. The remaining even possibilities - 2, 4, 6, 8 are not acceptable.
300. There are three types of *chhardan* - *sachitt*, *achitt* and *mishra*. It
has three *chaturbhag* parts. All its possibilities are prohibited. If these
possibilities are accepted, there are faults like *ajna*, *anavastha*,
*mithyatva* and *viradhana* etc.  301. The giver who gives *chhardan* of hot
substance can get burnt. The *sadnikaya* beings like earth etc. can be burnt. By
giving *chhardan* of cold substance, there is *viradhana* of beings like earth
etc. In this matter, the example of *madhu bindu* should be known.  1. According
to *Brihatkalpabhashya* (1712), mango, *amratak*, *kapitth*, grapes, *matuling*
- *bijoura*, banana, date, coconut, *badri* powder and tamarind - all these are
*pindarasa* substances.  2. When the hand and vessel are *samsrusht* and after
taking alms, the substance remains *savasesha*, then the giver does not wash
that vessel, therefore there is no possibility of *pashchatkarma* in odd
*bhangas*. But if the substance is given to the *sadhu* completely, then after
the donation, the vessel and the hand are washed according to the rule,
therefore in the second etc. even *bhangas*, *pashchatkarma* is not conceivable
due to the possibility ( *Mavri* p. 169).  3. For the expansion of the story,
see *Pari.* 3, *Katha* no. 49.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 198 298. ye sAre bahulepakRd dravya haiM, inameM pazcAtkarma kI niyamA hai *
dUdha  /  dahI  /  kaTTara - kar3hI Adi meM DAlA gayA ghI kA bar3A  /  * jAu -
dUdha se banA peya padArtha  /  taila  /  * phANita - gur3apAnaka  /  * * * * *
299. saMsRSTa hAtha, saMsRSTa pAtra tathA sAvazeSa dravya - ye tIna tathA inake
pratipakSI tIna-asaMsRSTa hAtha, asaMsRSTa pAtra tathA niravazeSa dravya - inake
paraspara saMyoga se ATha vikalpa hote haiM * * * * * ghRta  /  sapiMDarasa' -
atIva rasa vAle kharjUra Adi se utpanna dravya  /  saMsRSTa hAtha, saMsRSTa
pAtra tathA sAvazeSa dravya  /  saMsRSTa hAtha, saMsRSTa pAtra tathA niravazeSa
dravya  /  saMsRSTa hAtha, asaMsRSTa pAtra tathA sAvazeSa dravya  /  saMsRSTa
hAtha, asaMsRSTa pAtra tathA niravazeSa dravya  /  piMDaniryukti asaMsRSTa
hAtha, saMsRSTa pAtra tathA sAvazeSa dravya  /  asaMsRSTa hAtha, saMsRSTa pAtra
tathA niravazeSa dravya  /  asaMsRSTa hAtha, asaMsRSTa pAtra tathA sAvazeSa
dravya  /  * asaMsRSTa hAtha, asaMsRSTa pAtra tathA niravazeSa dravya  /  ina
ATha vikalpoM meM nizcaya se oja - viSama vikalpa arthAt 1, 3, 5, 7 grAhya haiN|
zeSa sama vikalpa - 2, 4, 6, 8 grAhya nahIM haiN| 300. chardana ke tIna prakAra
haiM- sacitta, acitta aura mizra  /  isakI tIna caturbhagiyAM hotI haiN| isake
sAre vikalpa pratiSiddha haiN| yadi ina vikalpoM meM grahaNa kiyA jAtA hai to
AjJA, anavasthA, mithyAtva tathA virAdhanA Adi doSa hote haiM  /  301. uSNa
dravya ke chardana se dene vAlA dAtA jala sakatA hai| pRthvI Adi SaDnikAya jIvoM
kA dahana ho sakatA hai| zIta dravya ke chardana se pRthvI Adi ke jIvoM kI
virAdhanA hotI hai| isa viSaya meM madhu bindu kA udAharaNa jJAtavya hai  /  1.
bRhatkalpabhASya (1712) ke anusAra Amra, AmrAtaka, kapittha, drAkSA, mAtuliMga -
bijaurA, kelA, khajUra, nAriyala, badarI cUrNa aura imalI- ye sabhI
piMDarasadravya haiM  /  2. hAtha aura pAtra ke saMsRSTa hone para tathA bhikSA
ke pazcAt dravya sAvazeSa rahatA hai to dAtrI usa pAtra kA prakSAlana nahIM
karatI ataH viSama bhaMgoM meM pazcAtkarma kI saMbhAvanA nahIM rahatI lekina
yadi dravya niravazeSa rUpa se sAdhu ko de diyA jAe to dAna ke pazcAt niyamataH
usa bartana kA tathA hAtha aura pAtra kA prakSAlana kiyA jAtA hai ataH dvitIya
Adi sama bhaMgoM meM pazcAtkarma kI saMbhAvanA se kalpanIya nahIM hai ( mavR pa.
169 )  /  3. kathA ke vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA saM. 49  /

Page #371 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 199 302. There are four types of *Grassaishana*
- *Nama Grassaishana*, *Sthapana Grassaishana*, *Dravya Grassaishana* and
*Bhaava Grassaishana*. *Dravya Grassaishana* is exemplified by the fish, and
*Bhaava Grassaishana* has five types. 302/1. (To expound the intended meaning)
two types of examples should be known - *Charit* and *Kalpit*. Just as fuel is
necessary to prove *Odan* etc., similarly, examples are necessary to prove the
subject matter. 302/2. While worrying about the depletion of flesh, the
fisherman tells the fish, "Why do you worry? Listen to how shameless you are."
302/3. "I escaped from the beak of the heron thrice, thrice I fell into the tide
of the corrupt sea, twenty-one times I was caught in the net, once I was thrown
into a shallow pond (yet I survived)." 302/4. "Such is my nature, yet you are
resorting to the same deceitful fisherman's tactics. You want to catch me with a
hook, this is your shamelessness." 302/5. "O being! You were not deceived by the
forty-two faults of *Aishana* in the consumption of heterogeneous food and
water, therefore, now while consuming them, do not be deceived by attachment and
aversion." 303. There are two types of *Bhaava Grassaishana* - *Prashasht* and
*Aprashasht*. *Aprashasht* has five types, *Prashasht Bhaava Grassaishana* is
devoid of these faults. 303/1. *Sanyojana*, excessive food, *Ingaladosha*,
*Dhoomdosha* and eating without reason - these are the five *Aprashasht* types
of *Grassaishana*, and the opposite of these, not doing *Sanyojana* etc., is
*Prashasht*. 304, 305. There are two types of *Sanyojana* - *Dravya Sanyojana*
and *Bhaava Sanyojana*. *Dravya Sanyojana* has two types - external and
internal. To create a specific taste, combining milk, curd, soup, *Kattar-Timan*
mixed ghee, *Bada*, *Gad*, ghee *Bada* and *Valank-Pakvaan* with special
ingredients is external *Sanyojana*. Similarly, the combination done while
eating in the *Upashraya* is internal *Sanyojana*. It is of three types - in the
vessel, in the *Kaval* and in the mouth. Their explanation should be given. 1.
For the expansion of the story, see *Pari. 3, Katha San. 50*. 2. For the five
types of *Aprashasht Grassaishana*, see the translation of 303/1. 3. Mixing
sugar in milk is external *Sanyojana*. 4. Combining two substances in the vessel
due to the desire for taste is internal *Sanyojana* related to the vessel.
Combining *Khand* etc. in the *Kaval* held in the hand is internal *Sanyojana*
related to the *Kaval*, and putting bread first in the mouth and then adding
jaggery etc. is internal *Sanyojana* related to the mouth (Mavri P. 172).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 199 302. grAsaiSaNA ke cAra prakAra haiM-nAma grAsaiSaNA, sthApanA
grAsaiSaNA, dravya grAsaiSaNA tathA bhAva graasaissnnaa| dravya grAsaiSaNA meM
matsya kA udAharaNa jJAtavya hai tathA bhAva grAsaiSaNA ke pAMca prakAra haiN|
302/1. (vivakSita artha kA pratipAdana karane ke lie) do prakAra ke udAharaNa
jAnane cAhie-carita aura klpit| jaise odana Adi ko siddha karane ke lie IMdhana
Avazyaka hotA hai, vaise hI pratipAdya ko siddha karane ke lie udAharaNa
Avazyaka hotA hai| 302/2. mAMsa kSINa hone para cintA karate hue macchImAra ko
matsya kahatA hai ki tuma cintA kyoM karate ho? tuma kitane nirlajja ho yaha
suno302/3. maiM tIna bAra bagule ke mukha meM jAkara bhI usase chUTa gyaa| tIna
bAra bhrASTra rUpa samudra ke jvAra meM girA, ikkIsa bAra jAla meM pakar3A gayA,
eka bAra kama pAnI vAle draha meM DAlA gayA (phira bhI maiM baca gyaa)| 302/4.
aisA merA sattva hai phira bhI tuma vahI kuTilatApUrNa dhIvarakRta upAya ko kara
rahe ho| tuma mujhe kAMTe ke dvArA pakar3anA cAhate ho, yaha tumhArI nirlajjatA
hai|' 302/5. he jIva! tuma eSaNA ke bayAlIsa doSoM se viSama AhAra-pAnI ke
grahaNa meM nahIM Thage gae ataH aba unakA upabhoga karate hue tuma rAga-dveSa
se mata Thage jaanaa| 303. bhAva grAsaiSaNA ke do prakAra haiM-prazasta aura
aprshst| aprazasta ke pAMca prakAra haiM, ina doSoM se rahita prazasta
bhAvagrAsaiSaNA hai| 303/1. saMyojanA, atipramANa meM bhojana, iMgAladoSa,
dhUmadoSa tathA binA kAraNa bhojana karanA-ye pAMca grAsaiSaNA ke aprazasta
bheda haiM tathA isake viparIta saMyojanA Adi nahIM karanA prazasta hai| 304,
305. saMyojanA ke do prakAra haiM-dravya saMyojanA aura bhAva sNyojnaa| dravya
saMyojanA ke do prakAra haiM-bAhya aura AMtarika  /  rasavizeSa ko paidA karane
ke lie dUdha, dahI, sUpa, kaTTara-tImana mizrita ghI kA baDA. gaDa, ghI kA baDA
tathA vAlaMka-pakvAnna vizeSa milane para anakala dravyoM kA saMyoga karanA
bAhya saMyojanA hai| isI prakAra upAzraya meM bhojana karate samaya jo saMyojanA
kI jAtI hai, vaha Antarika saMyojanA hai| vaha tIna prakAra kI hai -pAtra meM,
kavala meM tathA muMha meN| inakI vibhASA-vyAkhyA karanI caahie| 1. kathA ke
vistAra hetu dekheM pari. 3, kathA sN.50| 2. aprazasta grAsaiSaNA ke pAMca
bhedoM ke lie dekheM 303/1 kA anuvaad| 3. dUdha meM cInI milAnA bAhya saMyojanA
hai| 4. rasa-gRddhi ke kAraNa pAtra meM do dravyoM ko milAnA pAtra saMbaMdhI
Abhyantara saMyojanA hai| hAtha meM lie kavala meM khAMDa Adi kA saMyoga karanA
kavala saMbaMdhI Abhyantara saMyojanA hai tathA mukha meM pahale roTI DAlakara
phira gur3a Adi DAlanA-yaha vadana saMbaMdhI Abhyantara saMyojanA hai (mavR pa.
172) /

Page #372 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  200 ##  Pindaniyukti  306. It is a transgression for a muni to mix other
substances in their food for the purpose of increasing the taste of the
substance. 307. A muni who combines substances due to their attachment to taste,
also combines karma with their soul. This leads to a long-lasting cycle of
births and deaths, causing suffering. 308. Once, a sadhu sanghatak received a
large amount of ghee and other substances. Even after the munis ate their fill,
some remained. It is permissible to combine the remaining substances for
consumption. The rules for combining are as follows: 309. Combining for the
purpose of enhancing a particular taste is prohibited. Combining for the purpose
of overcoming illness is permissible. It is also permissible for those who find
food unappetizing, or those who have been princes or have been deprived of
proper education. 310. For a man, 32 kavals of food is considered sufficient for
the stomach, while for women, 28 kavals are considered sufficient. 311. The
Tirthankaras have called consuming a little less than this amount, such as one
kaval, half a kaval, half the food, or even less than half the food, as
"yatramaatra aahar" (just enough food) or "nyuna aahar" (less food). 312. A muni
who consumes prakaam, nikaam, and pranit bhaktapaan, eats excessively or too
frequently, is guilty of pramaanadosh (error in measure). 312/1. Food exceeding
32 kavals is called prakaam aahar. If the food exceeding the measure is:  1.
Leftover ghee cannot be eaten with only roti without sugar or jaggery, as
everyone will be satisfied after eating. It is also not appropriate to store it,
as storing it can lead to the infestation of insects. Therefore, it is an
exception to the rule of combining, and it is permissible to mix sugar or
jaggery with the leftover ghee (Mavri P 173).  2. According to the commentator
Malayagiri, 32 kavals is the medium measure for food. The medium measure for
women is 28 kavals, and for eunuchs, it is 24 kavals. However, eunuchs are
ineligible for initiation, so they are not mentioned here. One kaval is
considered to be the size of a chicken egg. There are two types of kukkuti:
dravya kukkuti and bhav kukkuti. There are two types of dravya kukkuti: udar
kukkuti and gal kukkuti. The amount of food that keeps the sadhu's stomach
neither hungry nor overly full is udar kukkuti. The kaval that can fit inside
the throat without distorting the mouth is gal kukkuti. The commentator explains
from another perspective that the body itself is kukkuti and the mouth is the
egg. The kaval that does not distort the eyes, eyebrows, etc., is the measure.
Alternatively, the meaning of kukkuti is a bird, and the kaval is the size of
its egg. The meaning of bhav kukkuti is the amount of food that maintains
patience and increases knowledge, vision, and character (Mavri P. 173). In the
commentary on Mulaachar, one kaval is considered to be the size of one thousand
grains of rice (Mula 350 T P. 286).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 200 piMDaniyukti 306. jo muni dravya kI rasavRddhi karane ke lie bhaktapAna meM
anya dravyoM kA mizraNa-saMyojana karatA hai, usake yaha vyAghAta hotA hai307.
bhAva viSayaka saMyojanA meM jo muni rasa kI Asakti se dravyoM kI saMyojanA
karatA hai, vaha apanI AtmA ke sAtha karmoM kI bhI saMyojanA karatA hai| karma
se dIrghakAlIna bhava-paramparA ko saMyojita karatA hai, jisase duHkha utpanna
hotA hai| 308. kabhI kisI sAdhu saMghATaka ko ghI Adi dravyoM kA pracura lAbha
huaa| muniyoM dvArA paryApta khA lene para bhI vaha sAmagrI baca gii| usa bacI
huI sAmagrI ko upabhoga meM lene ke lie saMyojanA anujJAta hai| usa samaya
saMyojanA karane kA vidhAna isa prakAra hai309. vizeSa rasa (svAda) ko bar3hAne
ke lie saMyoga kA pratiSedha kiyA gayA hai| glAna ke lie saMyoga kiyA jA sakatA
hai tathA jisako AhAra arucikara lagatA ho athavA jo sukhocita-rAjaputra Adi
rahA ho athavA jo abhAvita-apariNata zaikSa Adi ho-inake lie saMyojanA karanA
vihita hai| 310. puruSa ke lie battIsa kavala pramANa AhAra kukSipUraka mAnA
jAtA hai tathA mahilAoM ke lie aTThAIsa kavala paryApta mAne jAte haiN| 311. isa
pramANa se kiMcitmAtrA meM arthAt eka kavala, AdhA kavala nyUna athavA AdhA
AhAra athavA Adhe se bhI AdhA AhAra liyA jAtA hai, use tIrthaMkaroM ne
yAtrAmAtra AhAra athavA nyUna AhAra kahA hai| 312. jo muni prakAma, nikAma aura
praNIta bhaktapAna kA upabhoga karatA hai, ati bahula mAtrA meM athavA bahuta
adhika bAra bhojana karatA hai, vaha pramANadoSa hai| 312/1. battIsa kavala se
adhika AhAra ko prakAma AhAra kahate haiN| pramANAtirikta AhAra yadi 1. bace hue
ghI ko binA mizrI yA khAMDa ke kevala roTI ke sAtha khAnA saMbhava nahIM hai
kyoMki bhojana karane ke bAda sabako tRpti ho jAtI hai| usakA pariSThApana bhI
ucita nahIM hotA kyoMki pariSThApana se usa cikanAI para aneka kITikAoM kA
vyAghAta saMbhava hai ata: yaha saMyojanA kA apavAda hai ki bace hue ghI meM
khAMDa dravya Adi ko milAnA vihita hai (mavR pa 173) /  2. TIkAkAra malayagiri
ke anusAra 32 kavala pramANa AhAra madhyama pramANa hai| mahilAoM kA madhyama
pramANa 28 kavala tathA napuMsaka kA madhyama pramANa 24 kavala hai lekina
napuMsaka dIkSA ke lie ayogya hone ke kAraNa usakA yahAM ullekha nahIM kiyA gayA
hai| eka kavala kA pramANa murgI ke aMDe jitanA mAnA gayA hai| kukkuTI do
prakAra kI hotI hai-dravya kukkuTI aura bhAva kukkuTI  /  dravya kukkuTI ke do
prakAra haiM-udara kukkuTI aura gala kukkuttii| jitane AhAra se sAdhu kA udara
na bhUkhA rahe aura na adhika bhare, vaha AhAra udara kukkuTI hai| mukha ko
vikRta kie binA gale ke aMdara jo kavala samA sake, vaha gala kukkuTI hai|
TIkAkAra dUsare naya se vyAkhyA karate hue kahate haiM ki zarIra hI kukkuTI hai
aura mukha aNDaka hai| jisa kavala se AMkha, bhrU Adi vikRta na hoM, vaha
pramANa hai athavA kukkuTI kA artha hai-pakSiNI, usake aMDe jitanA kavala
pramANa hai| bhAva kukkuTI kA artha hai, jisa AhAra se dhRti banI rahe tathA
jJAna, darzana aura cAritra kI vRddhi ho, utanA AhAra karanA bhAva kukkuTI hai
(mavR pa. 173) /  mUlAcAra kI TIkA meM eka hajAra cAvala jitane ko eka kavala kA
pramANa mAnA hai| (mUlA 350 TI pR. 286)

Page #373 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** The Tirthankaras have said that food which is
eaten daily is *nikam* (useless) and food from which ghee etc. drips is *pranit
aahar* (prescribed food). 312/2. Food eaten in *atibahuk* (excessive quantity),
*atibahush* (excessive frequency) and *atipraman* (excessive measure) can cause
diarrhea, vomiting and can even kill a person if the food is not digested. 201
312/3. Eating more than the prescribed quantity is *atibahuk* and eating more
than three times a day is called *atibahush*. Eating more than the prescribed
quantity more than three times a day or eating till one is not satisfied is
called *atipraman aahar*. 313. The monks who eat *hitkari* (beneficial),
*parimit* (limited) and *alpa-aahar* (less food) are not treated by physicians.
They are their own physicians (i.e. they do not get sick). 313/1. The
combination of oil and curd, milk, curd and *kanji* (fermented rice water) is
*viruddha* (contradictory) and harmful. The combination of non-contradictory
substances is *pathya* (beneficial), it removes disease and does not cause
future disease. 313/2. Divide the stomach into six parts, keep half the stomach,
i.e. three parts for food including dishes, two parts for water and the sixth
part empty for the passage of air. 313/3, 4. One should know the three types of
time - cold, hot and ordinary. The food intake for ordinary time is as follows:
in extreme cold, one part water and four parts food, in moderate cold, two parts
water and three parts food, in hot time, two parts water and three parts food,
in extreme hot time, three parts water and two parts food - this is the measure.
Everywhere, the sixth part is for the passage of air. 313/5. One part water and
two parts food are fixed, they do not increase or decrease. In each, the
remaining two parts increase or decrease, for example, in extreme cold, two
parts of food increase and in extreme hot time, two parts of water increase. In
extreme hot time, two parts of food decrease and in extreme cold, two parts of
water decrease. 313/6. The third and fourth parts related to food are not fixed.
The fifth part related to water, 1. Beneficial food is of two types -
*dravyaatah* (in terms of substance) and *bhaavatah* (in terms of feeling).
Eating non-contradictory food is beneficial in terms of substance and eating
*eshniya* (digestible) food is beneficial in terms of feeling (Mavri P. 174). 2.
*Pramanopet aahar* is moderate food. 3. Eating less than 32 *kavals* (a unit of
measurement for food) is *alpa-aahar* (less food). 4. Vegetables, sour fruits,
*khali* (bran), *kaith* fruit, *karir* (a type of tree), curd and fish - these
things should not be eaten with milk (Mavri P. 174). 5. According to *Mulaachar*
491, the stomach should be divided into four parts, half the part for food, i.e.
two parts for food, the third part for water and the fourth part should be kept
empty for the passage of air. The same is mentioned in the *Khilasthan* of the
*Kashyap Samhita* of Ayurveda.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda pratidina kiyA jAtA hai to vaha nikAma tathA jisa AhAra se ghI Adi
TapakatA ho, vaha praNIta AhAra hai, aisA tIrthaMkaroM ne kahA hai| 312/2.
atibahuka, atibahuzaH tathA atipramANa meM kiyA huA bhojana atisAra paidA kara
sakatA hai, usase vamana ho sakatA hai tathA vaha AhAra jIrNa na hone para
vyakti mAra sakatA hai| 201 312/3. pramANa se bahuta adhika bhojana karanA
atibahuka hotA hai tathA tIna bAra se adhika bAra bhojana karanA atibahuzaH
kahalAtA hai| tIna bAra se adhika bAra adhika mAtrA meM bhojana karanA athavA
atRpta hokara khAte jAnA atipramANa AhAra kahalAtA hai| 313. jo muni hitakArI,
parimita tathA alpa- AhAra karate haiM, unakI cikitsA vaidya nahIM krte| ve
svayaM hI cikitsaka hote haiM (arthAt unake roga hotA hI nahIM  / ) 313/1. taila
aura dahI kA tathA dUdha, dahI aura kAMjI kA samAyoga viruddha hai, ahitakara
hai| aviruddha dravyoM kA samAyoga pathya hotA hai, roga kA apanayana karatA hai
tathA bhAvI roga kA hetu nahIM banatA  /  313/2. udara ke chaha bhAga karake,
Adhe udara arthAt tIna bhAgoM ko vyaMjana sahita AhAra ke lie, do bhAga pAnI ke
lie tathA chaThA bhAga vAyu ke saMcaraNa ke lie khAlI rkhe|" 313/3, 4. kAla tIna
prakAra kA jAnanA cAhie - zIta, uSNa aura sAdhAraNa  /  sAdhAraNa kAla kI
AhAramAtrA yaha hai- ati zItakAla meM pAnI kA eka bhAga tathA AhAra ke cAra
bhAga, madhyama zItakAla meM do bhAga pAnI tathA tIna bhAga AhAra, uSNa kAla meM
do bhAga pAnI tathA tIna bhAga AhAra, ati uSNakAla meM tIna bhAga pAnI tathA do
bhAga AhAra - yaha pramANa hai  /  sarvatra chaThA bhAga vAyu- saMcaraNa ke lie
hai| 313/5. pAnI kA eka bhAga tathA bhojana ke do bhAga avasthita haiM, ye
ghaTate-bar3hate nahIM haiN| eka-eka meM zeSa do-do bhAga bar3hate haiM, ghaTate
haiM, jaise- atizItakAla meM bhojana ke do bhAga bar3ha jAte haiM tathA ati
uSNakAla meM pAnI ke do bhAga bar3ha jAte haiN| atiuSNakAla meM bhojana ke do
bhAga kama ho jAte haiM tathA atizItakAla meM pAnI ke do bhAga kama ho jAte
haiN| 313/6. AhAra viSayaka tIsarA aura cauthA - ye donoM bhAga anavasthita
haiN| pAnaka viSayaka pAMcavAM bhAga, 1. hitakara AhAra do prakAra kA hotA hai -
dravyataH tathA bhAvataH  /  aviruddha AhAra karanA dravyataH hitakara hai tathA
eSaNIya AhAra karanA bhAvataH hitakara hai (mavR pa. 174)  /  2. pramANopeta
AhAra mita AhAra hai| 3. battIsa kavala pramANa AhAra se kama AhAra qaranA
alpAhAra hai| 4. zAka, khaTTe phala, khalI, kaitha kA phala, karIra, dadhi aura
matsya- ina cIjoM ko dUdha ke sAtha khAnA viruddha hai (mavR pa. 174)  /  5.
mUlAcAra 491 ke anusAra udara ko cAra bhAgoM meM vibhakta karake AdhA bhAga
bhojana ke lie arthAt do bhAga bhojana ke lie, tIsarA bhAga pAnI ke lie tathA
cauthA bhAga vAyu-saMcaraNa ke lie khAlI rakhanA caahie| Ayurveda kI kAzyapa
saMhitA ke khilasthAna meM bhI yahI ullekha milatA hai|

Page #374 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **202** The sixth part concerning air and the first and
second parts concerning food - these four parts exist.  **314.** Eating food
while praising it in a state of unconsciousness is called *sa-angar* food, and
eating food while criticizing it is called *sadhum* food.  **Pinḍaniryukti**
**314/1.** That which is burning fuel but has not yet become embers is called
*sadhum*. The same fuel, when burnt and the smoke has gone out, is called
*angar*.  **314/2.** Even if a muni eats food before it is time, if he does so
while inflamed by the fire of attachment, he quickly burns up his *charitra*
(conduct) like a glowing ember.  **314/3.** The burning fire of hatred, with the
smoke of aversion, continues to burn until it has made the *charitra* (conduct)
like embers.  **315.** Food eaten with attachment is *sa-angar*, and food eaten
with hatred is *sadhum*. One should know the forty-six faults in the method of
eating (15 in origin, 16 in production, 10 in consumption, and 5 in combination,
etc.).  **316.** This is the teaching of the discourse: that the ascetic muni
should eat food, for the sake of meditation and study, free from past embers
(attachment) and free from past smoke (hatred).  **317.** A muni, even while
eating, practices dharma for six reasons, and even while abstaining from food,
practices dharma for six reasons.  **318.** These are the six reasons for
eating: 1. To pacify the pain of hunger, 2. To perform *vaiyāvṛttya* (daily
activities), 3. To cleanse the *īryāpath* (path of conduct), 4. For the sake of
*preksha* (contemplation) and other restraints, 5. To sustain life, and 6. To
reflect on scriptures, contemplate dharma, and increase dharma.  **318/1.**
There is no pain like hunger, therefore one should eat to pacify it. A hungry
person is not capable of performing *vaiyāvṛttya*, therefore one should eat.
**318/2.** A hungry person cannot cleanse the *īryāpath*, therefore one should
eat to cleanse the *īryāpath*. One should eat for the sake of *preksha* and
other restraints. If one does not eat, the body becomes weak, therefore one
should eat (to sustain life). If one does not eat, one becomes incapable of
reflecting on scriptures, contemplating dharma, and performing *anupreksha*
(reflection), therefore one should eat.  **1.** In the 16 faults of origin, the
inclusion of *adhyavapūraka* (supplementary) in *miśrajāta* (mixed) results in
only 15 faults of origin being considered here (Māvṛ P. 176).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 202 vAyu viSayaka chaThA tathA AhAra viSayaka pahalA aura dUsarA bhAga - ye
cAroM bhAga avasthita haiN| 314. mUrcchita hokara AhAra kI prazaMsA karate hue
AhAra karanA, sa- aMgAra AhAra kahalAtA hai tathA AhAra kI niMdA karate hue
khAnA sadhUma AhAra hai| piMDaniryukti 314/1. . jo jvalita IMdhana abhI aMgArA
nahIM banA hai, vaha sadhUma kahalAtA hai| vahI IMdhana dagdha ho jAne para
tathA dhUma nikala jAne para aMgAra kahalAtA hai| 314 / 2. muni prAka AhAra bhI
yadi rAgAgni se prajvalita hokara karatA hai to vaha cAritra rUpI IMdhana ko
zIghra hI nirdagdha aMgAre kI bhAMti banA DAlatA hai| 314/3. jalatI huI dveSAgni
aprIti ke dhUma se cAritra rUpI IMdhana ko jaba taka aMgAra sadRza nahIM banA
DAlatI, taba taka jalatI rahatI hai| 315. rAgabhAva se kiyA jAne vAlA bhojana
sa- aMgAra tathA dveSabhAva se kiyA jAne vAlA bhojana sadhUma hotA hai| bhojana
kI vidhi meM chayAlIsa doSa jAnane caahie| (udgama ke 15, utpAdana ke 16, eSaNA
ke 10 tathA saMyojanA Adi 5 ) " 316. pravacana kA yaha upadeza hai ki tapasvI
muni dhyAna aura adhyayana ke nimitta vigata aMgAra - rAgarahita tathA
vigatadhUma - dveSa rahita hokara AhAra kare  /  317. muni chaha kAraNoM se
AhAra karatA huA bhI dharma kA AcaraNa karatA hai aura chaha kAraNoM se AhAra kA
parityAga karatA huA bhI dharma kA AcaraNa karatA hai| 318. AhAra karane ke
chaha kAraNa ye haiM - 1. bhUkha kI vedanA ko upazAMta karane ke lie, 2.
vaiyAvRttya karane ke lie 3. IryApatha ke zodhana hetu, 4. prekSA Adi saMyama ke
nimitta, 5. prANapratyaya - prANa - dhAraNa ke lie tathA 6. graMtha kA
parAvartana, dharmaciMtana-dharma kI abhivRddhi ke lie  /  318/1. kSudhA ke
samAna koI vedanA nahIM hotI ataH use zAnta karane ke lie bhojana karanA caahie|
bhUkhA vaiyAvRttya karane meM samartha nahIM hotA ataH bhojana karanA caahie|
318/2. bubhukSita IryApatha kA zodhana nahIM kara sakatA ataH IryApatha ke
zodhana hetu bhojana karanA cAhie  /  prekSA Adi ke saMyama hetu AhAra karanA
caahie| AhAra na karane se zarIra bala kSINa ho jAtA hai ataH (prANadhAraNa
hetu) bhojana karanA cAhie tathA AhAra na karane se guNana-graMtha - parAvartana
tathA anuprekSA Adi karane meM vyakti azakta ho jAtA hai isalie bhojana karanA
cAhie  /  1. udgama ke 16 doSoM meM adhyavapUraka kA mizrajAta meM samAveza hone
se udgama ke 15 doSa hI yahAM gRhIta haiM ( mavR pa. 176)  /

Page #375 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **Translation** 203 319. A Muni may abandon food for six
reasons. After completing all his duties, a Muni, in his final stage (by
emaciating himself in Sanlekhana), may abstain from food, making himself fit for
fasting. 320. These are the six reasons for abandoning food: 1. To prevent fear
and disease, 2. To endure the Upasargas (attacks), 3. To uphold the secrets of
Brahmacharya, 4. Out of compassion for living beings, 5. For the sake of
austerity, and 6. For the shedding of the body. 320/1, 2. A Muni remains without
food in the face of fear like fever, attacks by kings and relatives, to uphold
Brahmacharya, out of compassion for living beings in rain and dew, for fasting
up to the six-month austerity, and for the shedding of the body. 321. A monk who
abandons food for these six reasons does not transgress it while being engaged
in Dharma-Dhyana. 322. Sixteen faults of Udgama, sixteen faults of production,
ten faults of Eshana, and five faults of the combination of Grasaishana, etc. -
these are the 47 faults of Eshana. 323. This dietary regimen has been
established by all-seeing Tirthankaras, and I have explained it according to my
understanding. A Muni should follow it in such a way that there is no harm to
Dharma and essential (Pratikramana, etc.) practices. 324. If a Muni is diligent,
fully aware of the observance of the Sutra-prescribed method, and endowed with
spiritual purification, any violation (slip-up due to consuming exceptions) he
may commit will also be fruitless.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 anuvAda 203 319. athavA muni chaha kAraNoM se AhAra kA parityAga kara de| sabhI
kArya kara lene para muni apanI aMtima avasthA meM (saMlekhanA meM apane Apako
kSINa kara) anazana karane yogya svayaM ko banAkara bhojana kA parihAra kara de|
320. AhAra-parityAga ke chaha kAraNa ye haiM-1. AtaMka-roga-nivAraNa hetu ,2.
upasarga-titikSA upasarga-sahana karane ke lie, 3. bahmacarya kI guptiyoM ke
paripAlana ke lie, 4. prANidayA ke lie, 5. tapasyA ke nimitta tathA 6. zarIra ke
vyavaccheda ke lie| 320/1, 2. jvara Adi AtaMka meM, rAjA tathA svajana Adi dvArA
upasarga kie jAne para, brahmacarya kA pAlana karane hetu, varSA tathA osa Adi
meM prANiyoM ke prati dayA karane ke lie, upavAsa se lekara SANmAsika tapa ke
lie tathA zarIra ke vyavaccheda-parityAga hetu muni anAhAra rhe| 321. ina chaha
kAraNoM se jo bhikSu AhAra kA parityAga karatA hai, vaha dharmadhyAna meM rata
rahatA huA usakA atikramaNa nahIM krtaa| 322. udgama ke 16 doSa, utpAdanA ke 16
doSa, eSaNA ke 10 doSa tathA grAsaiSaNA ke saMyojanA Adi 5 doSa-ye eSaNA ke 47
doSa hote haiN| 323. yaha AhAravidhi sarvadarzI tIrthaMkaroM ne jisa prakAra
pratipAdita kI hai, usI prakAra se maiMne apanI mati se usakI vyAkhyA kI hai|
muni isakA pAlana isa prakAra se kare, jisase dharma tathA Avazyaka
(pratikramaNa Adi) yogoM kI hAni na ho| 324. jo muni yatanAzIla hai,
sUtroktavidhi ke paripAlana meM pUrNatayA sajaga hai, adhyAtma-vizodhi se yukta
hai, usake yadi koI virAdhanA (apavAda-sevana se hone vAlI skhalanA) hotI hai to
vaha bhI nirjarAphala vAlI hotI hai|

Page #376 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Hiyahara miyahara, appahara ya je nara. Na te vijja tigicchanti, appaanam te
tigicchanga. || Pindaniyukti 313

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 hiyAhArA miyAhArA, appAhArA ya je nraa| na te vijjA tigicchaMti, appANaM te
tigicchgaa|| piNDaniyukti 313

Page #377 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix 1. 207 215 228 Equation Hierarchy of Gathas Stories Ayurveda and Health
Comparative References Synonymous Nirukta 266 273 281 283 Used Native Words 285
293 Sukta-Subhashita Simile and Illustration 294 295 12. 296 297 14. 302
Deposited Words Proverbs and Nyaya Definitions Difference in Meaning of Two
Words Gathas Quoted from Malayagiri Vritti Special Name Index Commentary Under
Special Name Index Subject Index . 304 306 312 315 Word Meaning 316 346 20. 21.
Index of References Used Books Bibliography 347

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa 1. 207 215 228 gAthAoM kA samIkaraNa padAnukrama kathAeM Ayurveda
evaM Arogya tulanAtmaka saMdarbha ekArthaka nirukta 266 273 281 283 prayukta
dezI zabda 285 293 sUkta-subhASita upamA aura dRSTAnta 294 295 12. 296 297 14.
302 nikSipta zabda lokoktiyAM evaM nyAya paribhASAeM do zabdoM kA arthabheda
malayagiri vRtti kI uddhRta gAthAeM vizeSanAmAnukrama TIkA ke antargata
vizeSanAmAnukrama viSayAnukrama . 304 306 312 315 zabdArtha 316 346 20. 21.
saMketa-sUcI prayukta graMtha sUcI 347

Page #378 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Please provide the text you would like translated. I need the text to translate
it into English.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================


Page #379 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-1 Equation of Gathas Ed. Praga. Mat P. Mavri P. Mat P. Praga. 29 Praga.
57 14 Ed. 41/2 42 43 Ed. 22/1 22/2 22/3 22/4 22/5 0 5 www 44/1 o 3 44/2 44/3
44/4 or 45/1 46 Mmm ww 9 9 9 9 0 vor or 22 : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : * *
* * * * * 49/1 49/2 06 17/1 19 17/2 17/3 52/1 52/2 52/3 52/4 53 21/1 48 21/2
53/2 5482 | 54/1 83 41/1 23

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-1 gAthAoM kA samIkaraNa saMpA. pragA. mat pa. mavR pa. mat pa. pragA.
29 pragA. 57 14 saMpA. 41/2 42 43 saMpA. 22/1 22/2 22/3 22/4 22/5 0 5 www 44/1 o
3 44/2 44/3 44/4 or 45/1 46 Mmm ww 9 9 9 9 0 vor or 22 : : : : : : : : : : : : :
: : : : * * * * * * * 49/1 49/2 06 17/1 19 17/2 17/3 52/1 52/2 52/3 52/4 53 21/1
48 21/2 53/2 5482 | 54/1 83 41/1 23

Page #380 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 208 **Piṇḍaniyukti** **Sampa.** **Praga.** **Mat P.** | **Sampa.** **Praga.**
**Mav P..** **Sampa.** **Praga. Mat P.** 114 144 54 145 115 116 117 146 57 57/1
57/2 57/3 57/4 57/5 68/2 68/3 68/4 68/5 68/6 68/7 68/8 68/9 68/10 68/11 147 148
149 150 56 20 121 57 151 152 122 123 73/6 73/7 73/8 73/9 73/10 73/11 73/12 73/13
73/14 73/15 73/16 73/17 73/18 73/19 73/20 73/21 73/22 74 34 80 69 124 153 154
155 61 125 61/1 126 156 69/1 69/2 69/3 69/4 62 127 157 M 128 x 70 158 64 64/1
64/2 64/3 65 129 130 131 159 160 100 101 102 103 104 132 70/1 70/2 70/3 70/4
70/5 70/6 76 EFE 105 76/1 76/2 76/3 106 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 133 134 135
136 137 138 139 140 66/1 67 67/1 67/2 67/3 67/4 67/5 72 76/4 107 108 73 76/5 168
109 110 11 73/1 73/2 73/3 73/4 73/5 141 169 170 171 112 68/1 45 143 53 172

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 208 piMDaniyukti saMpA. pragA. mat pa. | saMpA. pragA. mava pa.. saMpA. pragA.
mata pa. 114 144 54 145 115 116 117 146 57 57/1 57/2 57/3 57/4 57/5 68/2 68/3
68/4 68/5 68/6 68/7 68/8 68/9 68/10 68/11 147 148 149 150 56 20 121 57 151 152
122 123 73/6 73/7 73/8 73/9 73/10 73/11 73/12 73/13 73/14 73/15 73/16 73/17
73/18 73/19 73/20 73/21 73/22 74 34 80 69 124 153 154 155 61 125 61/1 126 156
69/1 69/2 69/3 69/4 62 127 157 M 128 x 70 158 64 64/1 64/2 64/3 65 129 130 131
159 160 100 101 102 103 104 132 70/1 70/2 70/3 70/4 70/5 70/6 76 EFE 105 76/1
76/2 76/3 106 161 162 163 164 165 166 167 133 134 135 136 137 138 139 140 66/1
67 67/1 67/2 67/3 67/4 67/5 72 76/4 107 108 73 76/5 168 109 110 11 73/1 73/2
73/3 73/4 73/5 141 169 170 171 112 68/1 45 143 53 172

Page #381 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Equation of 1st Chapter Verses:  **Sampa.** 80/2 80/3 80/4 80/5 81 81/1 82
82/1 82/2 82/3 83 **Praga.** 173 174 **Mavri P.** 66 66 175 176 177 178 179 180
68 181 68 182 68 183 69 83/1 184 69 83/2 185 69 83/3 186 69 83/4 187 69 83/5 188
70 84 189 70 84/1 190 70 85 191 70 86 192 71 193 71 194 71 195 72 196 72 197 72
67 67 67 67 67 86/1 86/2 87 88 89 89/1 198 72 89/2 199 72 89/3 200 72 89/4 201
89/5 202 73 73 **Sampa.** 89/6 89/7 89/8 89/9 90 90/1 90/2 90/3 90/4 91 91/1
91/2 91/3 91/4 92 93 94 94/1 95 95/1 95/2 96 96/1 96/2 96/3 96/4 97 98 99 99/1
**Praga.** 203 204 205 206 207 208 209 210 211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219
220 221 222 223 224 225 226 227 228 229 230 231 232 **Mavri P.** 73 73 73 74 74
74 74 74 75 75 75 76 76 76 76 77 77 77 77 77 78 78 78 78 79 79 79 79 79 80
**Sampa.** 99/2 100 101 101/1 101/2 **Praga.** 233 80 234 80 235 236 237 238 239
102 103 104 240 105 241 105/1 242 106 107 209 **Mavri P.** 243 108 244 108/1 245
108/2 109 110 111 112 113 jiga o o z 80 81 81 81 81 82 82 82 000000 82 82 83 246
83 247 83 248 83 249 83 250 251 113/1 252 113/2 253 113/3 254 113/4 255 114 256
115 257 116 258 116/1 259 116/2 260 116/3 261 8 8 8 8 5 5 I I I I w w 84 84 84
85 85 85 85 85 85 86 86

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari 1 gAthAoM kA samIkaraNa : saMpA. 80/2 80/3 80/4 80/5 81 81/1 82 82/1 82/2
82/3 83 pragA. 173 174 mavR pa. 66 66 175 176 177 178 179 180 68 181 68 182 68
183 69 83/1 184 69 83/2 185 69 83/3 186 69 83/4 187 69 83/5 188 70 84 189 70
84/1 190 70 85 191 70 86 192 71 193 71 194 71 195 72 196 72 197 72 67 67 67 67
67 86/1 86/2 87 88 89 89/1 198 72 89/2 199 72 89/3 200 72 89/4 201 89/5 202 73
73 saMpA. 89/6 89/7 89/8 89/9 90 90/1 90/2 90/3 90/4 91 91/1 91/2 91/3 91/4 92
93 94 94/1 95 95/1 95/2 96 96/1 96/2 96/3 96/4 97 98 99 99/1 pragA. 203 204 205
206 207 208 209 210 211 212 213 214 215 216 217 218 219 220 221 222 223 224 225
226 227 228 229 230 231 232 mavR pa. 73 73 73 74 74 74 74 74 75 75 75 76 76 76
76 77 77 77 77 77 78 78 78 78 79 79 79 79 79 80 saMpA. 99/2 100 101 101/1 101/2
pragA. 233 80 234 80 235 236 237 238 239 102 103 104 240 105 241 105/1 242 106
107 209 mavR pa. 243 108 244 108/1 245 108/2 109 110 111 112 113 jiga o o z 80
81 81 81 81 82 82 82 000000 82 82 83 246 83 247 83 248 83 249 83 250 251 113/1
252 113/2 253 113/3 254 113/4 255 114 256 115 257 116 258 116/1 259 116/2 260
116/3 261 8 8 8 8 5 5 I I I I w w 84 84 84 85 85 85 85 85 85 86 86

Page #382 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
210 Piṇḍaniyukti Praga. Mavṛ P. Sampa. Praga. Mavṛ Pa Sampa. Praga. Mavṛ P.
Sampa. 322 323 100 100 100 100 G 262 263 264 265 266 267 268 269 270 271 146 147
148 148/1 148/2 149 100 292 293 294 295 296 297 298 299 300 301 302 101 116/4
117 117/1 117/2 .117/3 177/4 118 119 119/1 120 121 122 123 124 150 101 136/1
136/2 136/3 136/4 136/5 136/6 137 138 138/1 138/2 138/3 138/4 138/5 138/6 139
140 324 325 326 327 328 329 330 331 332 102 102 102 272 102 273 303 333 103 274
304 103 _103 275 276 277 305 306 125 103 103 307 308 151 152 153 154 155 156
156/1 157 157/1 157/2 157/3 157/4 157/5 157/6 158 159 160 161 141 278 279 334
335 336 337 338 339 340 341 342 309 103 126 127 128 128/1 128/2 128/3 129 130
131 132 103 200 280 281 282 283 284 310 311 312 104 105 313 314 105 142 142/1
142/2 143 143/1 143/2 143/3 144 144/1 144/2 144/3 144/4 93 | 145 315 316 346 105
162 286 287 288 289 347 105 106 134 163 135 93 317 318 319 320 321 106 348 349
350 351 135/1 163/1 163/2 163/3 290 106 136 291 100 । 106

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 210 piMDaniyukti pragA. mavR pa. saMpA. pragA. mavR pA saMpA. pragA. mavR pa.
saMpA. 322 323 100 100 100 100 G 262 263 264 265 266 267 268 269 270 271 146 147
148 148/1 148/2 149 100 292 293 294 295 296 297 298 299 300 301 302 101 116/4
117 117/1 117/2 .117/3 177/4 118 119 119/1 120 121 122 123 124 150 101 136/1
136/2 136/3 136/4 136/5 136/6 137 138 138/1 138/2 138/3 138/4 138/5 138/6 139
140 324 325 326 327 328 329 330 331 332 102 102 102 272 102 273 303 333 103 274
304 103 _103 275 276 277 305 306 125 103 103 307 308 151 152 153 154 155 156
156/1 157 157/1 157/2 157/3 157/4 157/5 157/6 158 159 160 161 141 278 279 334
335 336 337 338 339 340 341 342 309 103 126 127 128 128/1 128/2 128/3 129 130
131 132 103 200 280 281 282 283 284 310 311 312 104 105 313 314 105 142 142/1
142/2 143 143/1 143/2 143/3 144 144/1 144/2 144/3 144/4 93 | 145 315 316 346 105
162 286 287 288 289 347 105 106 134 163 135 93 317 318 319 320 321 106 348 349
350 351 135/1 163/1 163/2 163/3 290 106 136 291 100  /  106

Page #383 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Part 1: Verses' Equation  **211**  - **Editor** **Translator** **My Text**
**Editor** **Translator** **My Text** **Editor** **Translator** **My Text**
**411 412 413 414** **383 384** **107** **121 122 122 122 122 122 123** **165**
**386** **415 416 417 418** **185** **387** **115** **186** **123** **123**
**109** **390** **419 420 421** **123** **391** **124** **198 198/1 198/2 198/3
198/4 198/5 198/6 198/7 198/8 198/9 198/10 198/11 198/12 198/13 198/14 198/15
199 200 201 201/1 201/2 201/3** **169** **3.** **109** **422** **364** **423**
**124 124 124 125** **171** **365** **163/4 352 106 180 381 113 163/5 353 107
181 382 114 163/6 354 107** **181/1** **114 163/7 355** **182** **114 164 356**
**107 183 385 114 357 107** **184 166 358 108 166/1 359 108** **388 115 166/2
360 108 187** **389** **116 167 361** **188** **116 168 362 109** **188/1 363**
**189 392 116 170** **110 190 393 116** **110 191 394 117 172 366 110** **192**
**395 117 173 367** **192/1 396 118 173/1 x** **192/2** **118 173/2 368 110
192/3 398 118 173/3 369 111 192/4 399 118 173/4 370 111 192/5 400 174** **111
192/6** **401 119 372 112 192/7 176** **112 193 374 112 194 404 177/1 375**
**194/1 405 120 177/2 376** **194/2 406 120 178 377** **194/3, 407 120 179 378**
**195** **121 179/1 379** **196 409 121 179/2 380 113** **410 121 1.**  In the
printed commentary, the number 499 is in place of 399. **424 425** **110**
**426** **125** **125** **427 428 429** **126** **126** **119** **430** **371**
**431** **175** **119** **432** **402 403** **126 127 127 127 127 128** **373**
**433** **202 203** **177** **204** **205** **128** **112 112 113 113** **434
435 436 437 438 439** **128** **206 207 207/1 207/2** **408** **129** **129
129** **197** **440**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 1 : gAthAoM kA samIkaraNa 211 - saMpA. pragA. mat pa. saMpA. pragA. mavR
pa. saMpA. pragA. mat pa. 411 412 413 414 383 384 107 121 122 122 122 122 122
123 165 386 415 416 417 418 185 387 115 186 123 123 109 390 419 420 421 123 391
124 198 198/1 198/2 198/3 1984 198/5 198/6 198/7 1988 198/9 198/10 198/11 198/12
198/13 198/14 198/15 199 200 201 201/1 201/2 201/3 169 3. 109 422 364 423 124
124 124 125 171 365 163/4 352 106 180 381 113 163/5 353 107 181 382 114 163/6
354 107 181/1 114 163/7 355 182 114 164 356 107 183 385 114 357 107 184 166 358
108 166/1 359 108 388 115 166/2 360 108 187 389 116 167 361 188 116 168 362 109
188/1 363 189 392 116 170 110 190 393 116 110 191 394 117 172 366 110 192 395
117 173 367 192/1 396 118 173/1 x 192/2 118 173/2 368 110 192/3 398 118 173/3
369 111 192/4 399 118 173/4 370 111 192/5 400 174 111 192/6 401 119 372 112
192/7 176 112 193 374 112 194 404 177/1 375 194/1 405 120 177/2 376 194/2 406
120 178 377 194/3, 407 120 179 378 195 121 179/1 379 196 409 121 179/2 380 113
410 121 1. mudrita TIkA meM 399 ke sthAna para 499 kA kramAMka hai| 424 425 110
426 125 125 427 428 429 126 126 119 430 371 431 175 119 432 402 403 126 127 127
127 127 128 373 433 202 203 177 204 205 128 112 112 113 113 434 435 436 437 438
439 128 206 207 207/1 207/2 408 129 129 129 197 440

Page #384 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 212 **Pindaniyukti** **Sampa.** **Praga.** Mavri P. **Sampa.** **Praga.**
Mavri P. **Sampa.** **Praga.** Mavri P. 136 129 130 143 143 136 441 442 443 444
144 445 144 144 446 207/3 207/4 208 208/1 209 209/1 210 210/1 210/2 210/3 210/4
210/5 211 212 471 472 473 474 475 476 477 478 479 480 481 482 483 231 231/1
231/2 231/3 231/4 231/5 231/6 231/7 231/8 231/9 231/10 231/11 232 144 144 448
449 131 131 131 131 131 450 501 502 503 504 505 x 506 507 508 509 510 511 512
513 514 515 516 145 145 145 136 136 136 137 137 137 137 137 139 139 139 139 140
140 140 140 140 141 141 451 452 453 454 455 145 2 145 233 484 485 213 219/6
219/7 219/8 219/9 219/10 219/11 219/12 219/13 219/14 219/15 220 220/1 220/2 221
222 222/1 222/2 223 224 225 225/1 226 226/1 227 227/1 227/2 228 228/1 229 230
132 145 146 146 146 132 456 132 214 214/1 214/2 214/3 457 458 459 486 487 488
489 133 517 146 146 215 460 490 146 133 133 133 133 134 518 519 520 521 147 216
217 218 218/1 141 147 234 235 236 236/1 236/2 236/3 237 238 238/1 238/2 239
239/1 240 240/1 240/2 240/3 463 147 141 141 134 141 147 465 466 491 492 493 494
495 496 497 498 499 500 134 136 141 147 467 219/1 219/2 219/3 219/4 219/5 523
524 525 526 527 528 136 142 142 142 142. 468 469 470 148 148 148 148 136

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 212 piMDaniyukti saMpA. pragA. mavR pa. saMpA. pragA. mavR pa. saMpA. pragA.
mavR pa. 136 129 130 143 143 136 441 442 443 444 144 445 144 144 446 207/3 207/4
208 208/1 209 209/1 210 210/1 210/2 210/3 210/4 210/5 211 212 471 472 473 474
475 476 477 478 479 480 481 482 483 231 231/1 231/2 231/3 231/4 231/5 231/6
231/7 231/8 231/9 231/10 231/11 232 144 144 448 449 131 131 131 131 131 450 501
502 503 504 505 x 506 507 508 509 510 511 512 513 514 515 516 145 145 145 136
136 136 137 137 137 137 137 139 139 139 139 140 140 140 140 140 141 141 451 452
453 454 455 145 2 145 233 484 485 213 219/6 219/7 219/8 219/9 219/10 219/11
219/12 219/13 219/14 219/15 220 220/1 220/2 221 222 222/1 222/2 223 224 225
225/1 226 226/1 227 227/1 227/2 228 228/1 229 230 132 145 146 146 146 132 456
132 214 214/1 214/2 214/3 457 458 459 486 487 488 489 133 517 146 146 215 460
490 146 133 133 133 133 134 518 519 520 521 147 216 217 218 218/1 141 147 234
235 236 236/1 236/2 236/3 237 238 238/1 238/2 239 239/1 240 240/1 240/2 240/3
463 147 141 141 134 141 147 465 466 491 492 493 494 495 496 497 498 499 500 134
136 141 147 467 219/1 219/2 219/3 219/4 219/5 523 524 525 526 527 528 136 142
142 142 142  /  468 469 470 148 148 148 148 136

Page #385 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Part 1:  Equations of the Verses  **213**  **Editor** **Translator**
**Māvr̥pa** **Editor** **Translator** **Māvr̥pa** **Editor** **Translator**
**Matpa**  **560** **161** **529 530** **148 148** **258 259 259/1** **. 561**
**531** **591 592 593 594** **148** **240/4 241 242 243 243/1 243/2 243/3**
**155 155 155 155 156** **162** **260** **563** **162** **532 533** **261**
**595** **534** **156** **596 597** **162 163 163** **156** **535 536** **149
149 150** **156** **163** **284 284/1 285 286 287 288 288/1 288/2 288/3 288/4
288/5 288/6 2887 2888 289** **245** **262 263 263/1 263/2 263/3 264 264/1**
**537** **598 599** **538** **163 163** **150** **564 565 566 567 568 569 570
571 572 573 574 575** **245/1 245/2 246** **150** **540** **150** **600 601 602
603 604** **247** **150** **265** **541 542** **248** **157 157 157 157 157 157
157 157 158 158** **151** **164 164 164 164 164 165** **266** **249** **543**
**151** **267** **605 606** **250** **544** **290** **268 269 270** **576**
**291** **607** **165** **151 151 151 152** **577** **291/1** **608** **545 546
547 548 549** **165** **158** **292** **609** **165** **271 272** **578 579**
**152** **158** **610 611** **152** **580** **159** **166 166 166** **273 274
275** **152** **581** **612** **551** **152** **582** **159** **613** **251
251/1 251/2 251/3 252 252/1 252/2 253 253/1 253/2 253/3 254 255 256 257**
**153** **276** **552 553** **614** **583 584** **277** **554** **293 294 295
295/1 295/2 295/3 295/4 295/5 295/6 295/7 295/8 295/9** **278** **585** **555**
**153 153** **279 280** **556** **160 160 160 161 161 161 161** **154** **166
167 167 167 167 167 167** **615 616 617 618 619 620 621** **281** **586 587 588
589 590** **557 558** **154 154** **1** **282** **559** **155** **168**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 1 : gAthAoM kA samIkaraNa 213 saMpA. pragA. mavR pa. saMpA. pragA. mavR
pa saMpA. pragA. mata pa. 560 161 529 530 148 148 258 259 259/1 . 561 531 591
592 593 594 148 240/4 241 242 243 243/1 243/2 243/3 155 155 155 155 156 162 260
563 162 532 533 261 595 534 156 596 597 162 163 163 156 535 536 149 149 150 156
163 284 284/1 285 286 287 288 288/1 288/2 288/3 288/4 288/5 288/6 2887 2888 289
245 262 263 263/1 263/2 263/3 264 264/1 537 598 599 538 163 163 150 564 565 566
567 568 569 570 571 572 573 574 575 245/1 245/2 246 150 540 150 600 601 602 603
604 247 150 265 541 542 248 157 157 157 157 157 157 157 157 158 158 151 164 164
164 164 164 165 266 249 543 151 267 605 606 250 544 290 268 269 270 576 291 607
165 151 151 151 152 577 291/1 608 545 546 547 548 549 165 158 292 609 165 271
272 578 579 152 158 610 611 152 580 159 166 166 166 273 274 275 152 581 612 551
152 582 159 613 251 251/1 251/2 251/3 252 252/1 252/2 253 253/1 253/2 253/3 254
255 256 257 153 276 552 553 614 583 584 277 554 293 294 295 295/1 295/2 295/3
295/4 295/5 295/6 295/7 295/8 295/9 278 585 555 153 153 279 280 556 160 160 160
161 161 161 161  /  154 166 167 167 167 167 167 167 615 616 617 618 619 620 621
281 586 587 588 589 590 557 558 154 154 1 282 559 155 168

Page #386 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 214 **Piṇḍaniyukti** **Sampa.** **Praga.** **Mavṛ.** **Sampa.** **Praga.**
**Mav.** **Sampa.** **Praga.** 295/10 Mavṛ 175 176 176 172 172 173 296 297 622
623 624 625 626 627 638 639 640 641 642 643 298 173 176 176 299 310 300 173 173
174 176 176 628 312 644 176 174 174 168 306 168 307 168 308 168 309 169 169 169
312/1 170 312/2 170 312/3 171 171 313/1 171 313/2 171 313/3 313/4 172 313/5 172
| 313/6 174 665 314655 314/1 656 314/2 657 314/3 658 315 659 316 660 317 661 318
662 318/1 663 318/2 664 319 320 666 320/1 667 320/2 668 320/3 x 321669 322 670
323 671 301 301/1 302 302/1 302/2 302/3 302/4 302/5 303 304 305 313 176 176 177
177 177 629 630 631 632 633 634 635 636 637 174 645 646 647 648 649 650 651 652
174 174 178 175 172 175 178 653 175 178 178 172 654 175 **Tīkā meṁ saṁkētita
bhāṣya-gāthā** **Samīkaraṇa** **Mavṛ.** **Sampa** **M** **Praga.** * ه و ی ک ک ک
ک * 38 - rm » 3 w 9 vv 117 117 mmmmmmm. 126 43 31 32 11 126 128 128 142 142 142
14 14 12 24 33 88 37 1. Prakāśita tīkā kī bhāṣya gāthāoṁ meṁ 15 kramāṁk ke bād
sīdhā 25 kramāṁk hai. 45 46

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 214 piMDaniyukti saMpA. pragA. mavR  /  saMpA. pragA. mava  /  saMpA. pragA.
295/10 mavR 175 176 176 172 172 173 296 297 622 623 624 625 626 627 638 639 640
641 642 643 298 173 176 176 299 310 300 173 173 174 176 176 628 312 644 176 174
174 168 306 168 307 168 308 168 309 169 169 169 312/1 170 312/2 170 312/3 171
171 313/1 171 313/2 171 313/3 313/4 172 313/5 172 | 313/6 174 665 314655 314/1
656 314/2 657 314/3 658 315 659 316 660 317 661 318 662 318/1 663 318/2 664 319
320 666 320/1 667 320/2 668 320/3 x 321669 322 670 323 671 301 301/1 302 302/1
302/2 302/3 302/4 302/5 303 304 305 313 176 176 177 177 177 629 630 631 632 633
634 635 636 637 174 645 646 647 648 649 650 651 652 174 174 178 175 172 175 178
653 175 178 178 172 654 175 TIkA meM saMketita bhASya-gAthA samIkaraNa mavR  /
saMpA ma pragA. * h w y kh kh kh kh * 38 - rm >> 3 w 9 vv 117 117 mmmmmmm. 126
43 31 32 11 126 128 128 142 142 142 14 14 12 24 33 88 37 1. prakAzita TIkA kI
bhASya gAthAoM meM 15 kramAMka ke bAda sIdhA 25 kramAMka hai| 45 46

Page #387 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-2 Word Index 21 154 259 313/2 314/1 222/2 258 231/6 133 Bha. 27 27/1
68/2 284/1 218 80/4 292 144/2 176 44/4 245 172 Aibhar-chudana-panae airan
phalādipihitaṁ angārattamapattaṁ angāra-dhūviyādi anguliye vā ghettuṁ akkanta
dhanta ghāṇe akkhe varāḍae vā agaviṭṭhass u gahaṇaṁ aghanaghana-cārigagane
aciyattamantaraṁ accittamakkhitamme u acchējjāṁ pi ya tividhaṁ acchoda-piṭṭaṇāsu
ya ajhoyarao tividho aṭṭhāe aṇaṭṭhāe aṇisiṭuṁ paḍikuṭuṁ aṇisiṭṭhamaṇuṇṇātaṁ
aṇukampa bhagini-gehe aṇukampa pāḍiniyatṭha....... aṇuciya-desaṁ davvaṁ ati-
dūra-jalantaraṁ atibahuṁ atibahuso attatṭha randhato attatṭhiya āḍāṇe attīkareti
karma 22/6 atthāha gāha-paṁkā addhama-saṇassa savvaṁjaṇassa addhiti diṭṭhi-
paṇhaya adhiti puccha āsanṇa...... annatṭha uṭṭhiya vā annēṇāhākarma annē
bhaṇanti dasasu vi annēsi dijjamāṇe apariṇataṁ pi ya duvidhaṁ aparimita-tilla-
vuḍḍī apasattho u asanjama appattamme v ṭhavitam appattā u cauṭṭhe appatte
cchiya vāse abbhaṁgiya sambāhiya anbhintara-paribhogaṁ abbhojjē gamaṇādi amilā
karabhī khīraṁ amugaṁ ti puṇo raddhaṁ amugāṇaṁ ti v dijjau ayam-avaro u vikappo
avayāsa bhāṇabheda avarddhiga-vis-bandhe avaropparasajjhilaga avi nāma hojjā
sulabho 186 65 135 252/2 21/1 198/12 22/2 84/1 86/2 178 184 148/1 288 105 101
89/7 198/4 157/1 312/2 274 122 13 113/4 148 210/4 68

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-2 padAnukrama 21 154 259 313/2 314/1 222/2 258 231/6 133 bhA. 27 27/1
68/2 284/1 218 80/4 292 144/2 176 44/4 245 172 aibhAra-cuDaNa-paNae airaM
phalAdipihitaM aMgArattamapattaM aMgAra-dhUviyAdI aMgulie vA ghettuM akkaMta
dhaMta ghANe akkhe varADae vA agaviTThassa u gahaNaM aghaNaghaNacArigagaNe
aciyattamaMtarAyaM accittamakkhitammi u acchejjaM pi ya tividhaM acchoDa-
piTTaNAsu ya ajhoyarao tividho aTThAe~ aNaTThAe aNisiTuM paDikuTuM
aNisiTThamaNuNNAtaM aNukaMpa bhagiNigehe aNukaMpA paDiNIyaTTha.......
aNuciyadesaM davvaM atidUrajalaMtariyA atibahuyaM atibahuso attaTThA raMdhato
attaTThiya AdANe attIkareti kamma 22/6 atthAha gAha-paMkA addhamasaNassa
savvaMjaNassa addhiti diTThIpaNhaya adhitI pucchA Asanna...... annaTTha uThThiyA
vA anneNAhAkamma anne bhaNaMti dasasu vi annesi dijjamANe apariNataM pi ya
duvidhaM aparimitatillavuDDI apasattho u asaMjama appattammi va ThavitaM appattA
u cautthe appatte cciya vAse abbhaMgiya saMbAhiya anbhiMtaraparibhogaM abbhojje
gamaNAdI amilA karabhI khIraM amugaM ti puNo raddhaM amugANaM ti va dijjau
ayamavaro u vikappo avayAsa bhANabhedo avaraddhiga-visa-baMdhe
avaropparasajjhilagA avi nAma hojja sulabho 186 65 135 252/2 21/1 198/12 22/2
84/1 86/2 178 184 148/1 288 105 101 89/7 198/4 157/1 312/2 274 122 13 113/4 148
210/4 68

Page #388 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti 167 231/5 179/1 194/1 61, 70 241 79 69/2 215 302/2 70/5 92 82/2
67/1, 90 39 251/1 319 42 70/4 82/3 198/3 93 60 216 Aviya Kumarakhayam Aviya Hu
Battisae Avisuddho Parinaamo Asanaadiin Chaunh Vi Assanjamjogaanam Ah Mansammi
Pahine Ah Meeso Ya Pindoo Ahva Na Sachittmeeso Ahva Na Kujjahaarah Ahva Chaunh
Niyamaa Ahigaran Bhadda-Pantaa Ahunuuttiyam Cha Anavekkhitam Ainnanamainaa
Aaukkhao Trividho Aakampiya Nimitteena Aan Savvajinaanam Aanadinao Ya Dosaa
Aaneth Bhunjaga Kammunaa Aatanke Uvasagge Aatankao Jaramaadi Ayambilaparanaage
Ayakiyam Pi Ya Duvidham Ayaparobhayadosaa Ayaranaayarbhaave Aayariya-Uvajjaae
Aayariya-Gilaanaana Ya Ayavayam Cha Paravayam 117 198/6 151 15 205 83/1 Asandi-
Piddha-Manchaga Aasuyamaadieehiin Ahaa Ahe Ya Kamme Aahakadabhoeehiin
Aahakammantariya Aahakamm Bhunjati Aahakamm-Ggahanae Aahakammparinato Aahakamm-
Aadiin-am Aahakamm-Aamantan Aahakammiyadaaram Aahakammiyanamaa Aahakammiyabhayan
Aahakammuuddesiya Aahakammena Ahe. Ahayam Jan Kiirati Tam Tu Kamm Ahaar-Uvadhi-
Sejjaa Aaharenti Tavassi Ahaarovhimaadi Indattham Jah Saddaa Indhan-
Agneeyavayava Indhandhuumegandhe...... Indhan-Maadi Mottum Ikkhaguvans Bharho
Ittaachhanammi Paripinditaana Ittagpaagaadiin-am Itaro Vi Ya Pantaave 58, 110,
190 71 Bha. 30 48, 295/9 316 83 68/11 320 175 320/1 70/6 116/1 295/4 140 115,
116 278 117/4 89/6 219/10 219/14 219/1 24 148/2 222/1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti 167 231/5 179/1 194/1 61, 70 241 79 69/2 215 302/2 70/5 92 82/2
67/1, 90 39 251/1 319 42 70/4 82/3 198/3 93 60 216 avi ya kumArakhayaM avi ya hu
battIsAe avisuddho pariNAmo asaNAdINa cauNha vi assaMjamajogANaM aha maMsammi
pahINe aha mIsao ya piMDo ahava Na sacittamIso ahava na kujjAhAraM ahavA cauNha
niyamA ahigaraNa bhadda-paMtA ahuNuTThiyaM ca aNavekkhitaM AiNNamaNAiNNaM AukkAo
tividho AkaMpiyA nimitteNa ANaM savvajiNANaM ANAdiNo ya dosA ANeta bhuMjagA
kammuNA AtaMke uvasagge AtaMko jaramAdI AyaMbilapAraNage AyakiyaM pi ya duvidhaM
AyaparobhayadosA Ayara'NAyarabhAve Ayariya-uvajjhAe Ayariya-gilANANa ya AyavayaM
ca paravayaM 117 198/6 151 15 205 83/1 AsaMdi-pIDha-maMcaga AsUyamAdiehiM AhA
ahe ya kamme AhAkaDabhoIhiM AhAkammaMtariyA AhAkammaM bhuMjati AhAkammaggahaNe
AhAkammapariNato AhAkammAdINaM AhAkammAmaMtaNa AhAkammiyadAraM AhAkammiyanAmA
AhAkammiyabhAyaNa AhAkammuddesiya AhAkammeNa ahe. AhAya jaM kIrati taM tu kamma
AhAra-uvadhi-sejjA AhAreMti tavassI AhArovahimAdI iMdatthaM jaha saddA iMdhaNa-
agaNIavayava iMdhaNadhUmegaMdhe...... iMdhaNamAdI mottuM ikkhAguvaMsa bharaho
iTTAchaNammi paripiMDitANa iTTagapAgAdINaM itaro vi ya paMtAve 58,110,190 71
bhA. 30 48, 295/9 316 83 68/11 320 175 320/1 70/6 116/1 295/4 140 115, 116 278
117/4 89/6 219/10 219/14 219/1 24 148/2 222/1

Page #389 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 2: Hierarchy  **217** **89/4** **253/1** **318/2** **17** **20**
**198/13** **161** **149** **157/4** **96/1** **128** **201** **264 56 109, 191
238/1, 2 207/3** **263/2**  **Bha. 7** **90/4** **Bha. 13** **70/1**
*Avihīpariharaṇa* (non-abandonment), *iriya* (conduct), *visohētī* (does not
abandon), *ubaddhadhuvaṇa* (bound by the dust), *baus* (burden),
*ukkosamajjhimajahannanga* (the middle hell), *ukkhitta* (thrown), *nikkhippati*
(throws), *ukkhēvē* (in throwing), *nikkhēvē* (in throwing), *uggama* (origin),
*uggovaṇa* (origin), *maggāṇa* (path), *uggamakoḍiāvayava* (the ultimate part of
the origin) ... *uggamadoṣa* (the fault of origin), *solasa* (sixteen),
*uggadīkule* (in the group of origins), *vi* (also), *ēmēva* (the same),
*ucchattāē* (in height), *dāṇa* (giving), *ucchāhitō* (raised), *pareṇa* (by
others), *va* (or), *ucchukkhirādiyam* (like the rising of the sun), *uḍḍāha*
(flying), *kāyapadaṇa* (body-making), *uḍḍamahē* (flying), *tiriyam* (across),
*pi* (also), *uddesiyam* (intended), *samuddesiyam* (intended), *uppādanaē* (in
arising), *doṣa* (faults), *ubbaṭṭha* (arising), *paḍiṇṇāta* (fallen), *ubbijja*
(arising), *pejja* (arising), *kangū* (leaping), *ubbinnē* (arising), *chakkāyā*
(of the wheel), *ubhaē* (both), *vi* (also), *ya* (that), *pacchannā* (covered),
*ubhayātirīttamahavā* (beyond both), *uvaogammi* (in use), *ya* (that), *lābha*
(gain), *uvasayabāhiṁ* (outside the knowledge), *ṭhāṇa* (place), *uvvaṭṭaṇē* (in
turning), *sanasattēṇa* (by contact), *uvvaṭṭitā* (turned), *pado* (foot),
*saṁsa* (contact), *usiṇassa* (of the hot), *chaḍḍaṇa* (abandonment), *dēntō*
(from the teeth)  **146 219 128/1 276 169** **44/1**  *usiṇodaga* (hot water),
*pi* (also), *ghēppati* (takes), *usiṇodagamāṇuvattē* (in the conduct of hot
water), *usukādiyēhi* (by the group of the fine), *maṇḍēhi* (by the groups),
*ūṇahiya* (diminished), *dubbala* (weak), *vā* (or), *ūsava* (festival),
*maṇḍaṇalagga* (in the group of ornaments), *ēkkēkkam* (each one), *ta* (that),
*duvidha* (two kinds), *ēkkēkkā* (each one), *vi* (also), *ya* (that), *duvidhā*
(two kinds), *ēkkēkkē* (each one), *chau* (four), *bhaṁgō* (parts), *ēkkō*
(one), *u* (that), *asabbhāvē* (in the absence), *ēgantamavakkamaṇa* (completely
abandoned), *ēgantisiniḍḍhammi* (completely established), *ēgaṭṭha* (one),
*ēgavāṁjaṇa* (one-pointed), *ēgavihāi* (one-way), *dasavidhō* (ten kinds),
*ēgassa* (of one), *māṇajutta* (with the measure), *ēgēṇa* (by one),
*katamkajja* (done work), *ēgēṇa* (by one), *vāvi* (or), *ēsiṁ* (this), *ēgō*
(one), *davassa* (of the day), *bhāgō* (part), *ētaṁ* (this), *tu* (indeed),
*aṇāiṇṇa* (unseen), *ētē* (these), *u* (that), *aṇādēsa* (unseen), *ētē*
(these), *cēva* (also), *ya* (that), *doṣa* (faults), *ētēṇa* (by this),
*majjha* (middle), *bhāva* (state), *ētē* (these), *tē* (those), *jēsimo* (as),
*raddhō* (stopped), *ētē* (these), *na* (not), *u* (that), *vīsāmē* (abandon),
*ētēsi* (these), *dāyagāṇa* (giving groups), *ētēhiṁ* (by these), *chahi* (six),
*ṭhāṇēhiṁ* (by the places), *etto* (from this), *kiṇāi* (less), *hīṇa* (less),
*ētthu* (here), *u* (that), *tatiyachatutthā* (third and fourth)  **150 83/2**
**295** **234** **313/5** **158** **128/2 297** **17/2** **144/4** **211**
**76/3** **163 201/3 Bha. 4 68/4 Bha. 32 2887 198/9 301** **Bha. 10 271 321
311** **313/6**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 2 : padAnukrama 217 89/4 253/1 318/2 17 20 198/13 161 149 157/4 96/1 128
201 264 56 109, 191 238/1, 2 207/3 263/2 bhA. 7 90/4 bhA. 13 70/1 iya
avihIpariharaNA iriyaM na visohetI uubaddhadhuvaNa bAusa ukkosa-majjhima-
jahannagaM ukkhittaM nikkhippati ukkheve nikkheve uggama uggovaNa maggaNA
uggamakoDIavayava.......... uggamadosA solasa uggAdikulesu vi emeva uccattAe
dANaM ucchAhito pareNa va ucchukkhIrAdIyaM uDDAha kAyapaDaNaM  /  uDDamahe
tiriyaM pi ya uddesiyaM samuddesiyaM uppAdaNAe~ dosA ubbhaTTha paDiNNAtaM
ubbhijja pejja kaMgU ubbhinne chakkAyA ubhae vi ya pacchannA ubhayAtirittamahavA
uvaogammi ya lAbha uvasayabAhiM ThANaM uvvaTTaNe ' saMsatteNa uvvaTTitA padosaM
usiNassa chaDDaNe deMtao 146 219 128/1 276 169 44/1 usiNodagaM pi gheppati
usiNodagamaNuvatte usukAdiehi maMDehi UNahiya dubbalaM vA Usava maMDaNalaggA
ekkekkaM taM duvidhaM ekkekkA vi ya duvidhA ekkekke caubhaMgo ekko u asabbhAve
egaMtamavakkamaNaM egaMtasiNiddhammI egaTTha egavaMjaNa egavihAi dasavidho
egassa mANajuttaM egeNa katamakajjaM egeNa vAvi esiM ego davassa bhAgo etaM tu
aNAiNNaM ete u aNAdesA ete ceva ya dosA eteNa majjha bhAvo ete te jesimo raddho
ete na u vIsAme etesi dAyagANaM etehiM chahi ThANehiM etto kiNAi hINaM ettha u
tatiyacatutthA 150 83/2 295 234 313/5 158 128/2 297 17/2 144/4 211 . 76/3 163
201/3 bhA. 4 68/4 bhA. 32 2887 198/9 301 bhA. 10 271 321 311 313/6

Page #390 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
218 Pindaniyukti 89/5 212 25 67/4 250 168 219/3 Bha. 31 236/3 Bha. 16 62 104 181
73/20 94 143/3 239/1 80 52/2 249 198/10 295/10 Eamev Ujjhitammi Vi Eamev
Kagamaadi Eamev Bhavakude Eamev Missaesu Vi Eamev Ya Ukkose Eamev Ya Kammammi Vi
Eamev Ya Jantammi Vi Eamev Ya Lingenaṁ Eamev Vadi Khamage Eamev Sesagesu Vi
Eamev Sesigaan Vi Eamev Sesigasasu Vi Eyaai Chiya Tinni Vi Eyarisan Mamṁ Sattṁ
Erisagan Va Dukkhaṁ Evṁ Ekkevakadinṁ Evṁ Khu Ahaṁ Suddho Evṁ Tu Gavitthassa Evṁ
Tu Puvvalitte Evṁ Missajjatṁ Evṁ Lingē Bhavan Esan Gavesana Maggana Eseva Kamo
Niyama Eso Aharavidhi Eso Solasabhedo Ogahimadadanantara Odan-Mandag-Sattug
Odan-Samitim-Sattug Odan-Vanjan-Panag Obhasiya Padisiddho Ome Sangamatthera
Oyarantṁ Padṁ Datuṁ Oralaggahanenaṁ Oralasariraanṁ Ohena Vibhagena Ya Oho
Sutovauutto Kandit Tigunukanda Kakkadiy-Ambaga Va Kanag-Rayayaadiyanṁ Kattari
Payoyanavekka Kattami Tav Pekhen Kappatthig Appahan Kammaan Jena Bhavena
Kammaasankaen Pahṁ Kammiyakaddamimissa Karaduyabhattamaladdhaṁ Kassa Ghar
Pucchiunṁ Kassa Tti Puccchitammi Kaman Sayṁ Na Kuvvati Kay-Vai-Mano Tinni U Kiṁ
Additi Tti Pucchā Kiṁ Taṁ Ahakamma Kiṁ Na Thavijjaati Putto Kinhadya U Lesa 78
194/2 207/4 Bha. 26 272 302/4 214/2 46 295/5 68/3 233 89/3 163/2 113/2 218/1
219/4 124 73/15 72 157 67/5 Bha. 17 231/10 74 323 189 251/3 231/9 Bha. 21 296

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 218 piMDaniyukti 89/5 212 25 67/4 250 168 219/3 bhA. 31 236/3 bhA. 16 62 104
181 73/20 94 143/3 239/1 80 52/2 249 198/10 295/10 emeva ujjhitammi vi emeva
kAgamAdI emeva bhAvakUDe emeva mIsaesu vi emeva ya ukkose emeva ya kammammi vi
emeva ya jaMtammi vi emeva ya liMgeNaM emeva vAdi khamage emeva sesagesu vi
emeva sesigANa vi emeva sesigAsu vi eyAI ciya tinni vi eyArisaM mamaM sattaM
erisagaM vA dukkhaM evaM ekkevakadiNaM evaM khu ahaM suddho evaM tu gaviTThassA
evaM tu puvvalitte evaM mIsajjAtaM evaM liMge bhAvaNa esaNa gavesaNA maggaNA
eseva kamo niyamA eso AhAravidhI eso solasabhedo ogAhimAda'NaMtara odaNa-
maMDaga-sattuga odaNa-samitima-sattuga odaNa-vaMjaNa-pANaga obhAsiya paDisiddho
ome saMgamatherA oyaraMtaM padaM daTuM orAlaggahaNeNaM orAlasarIrANaM oheNa
vibhAgeNa ya oho sutovautto kaMDita tiguNukkaMDA kakkaDiya-aMbagA vA kaNaga-
rayayAdiyANaM kattari payoyaNAvekkha kattAmi tAva pekheM kappaTThiga appAhaNa
kammANa jeNa bhAveNa kammAsaMkAe~ pahaM kammiyakaddamamissA
karaDuyabhattamaladdhaM kassa ghara pucchiUNaM kassa tti pucchitammI kAmaM sayaM
na kuvvati kAya-vai-maNo tinni u kiM addhiti tti pucchA kiM taM AhAkamma kiM na
Thavijjati putto kiNhAdiyA u lesA 78 194/2 207/4 bhA. 26 272 302/4 214/2 46
295/5 68/3 233 89/3 163/2 113/2 218/1 219/4 124 73/15 72 157 67/5 bhA. 17 231/10
74 323 189 251/3 231/9 bhA. 21 296

Page #391 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
219 96/3 202 Bha. 1 226 225 259/1 22/5 279 89/9 180 108/1 68/7 Pari. 2:
Padanukrama kin va kahejja chhara 143/2 kinnu hu khadda bhikka 240/1 kivanesu
dummanesu ya 210/2 kitagadam pi ya duvidham 139 kuddassa kunati chhide 138/4
kulae u chaubbhagasssa 3/1 kuduvamae kei 67/3 kei ekkekkannisim 22/3 kei
bhananti pahie kelasbhavana ete 210/5 kodikaranama duvidham 192/6 koddavaralag
game 76 kollaire vathhavo 199 kovo valavagabham Bha. 34 khanamani arabhae 283
khadde nidde ya ruya 83/5 khamgadikalakajja...... khallga-mallga lecchaarigani
90/3 khir-dahi jau katter 298 khir-dahi-suv-katter 305 khirdumahe? panthe
khiraharo rovati 198/1 khire ya majjane mandane 197 khette samanadeesi 73/2
gantu vija-mantana 227/2 gantuun avanam so 89/2 gandhadigunavisitu 108
gamanaagamana-ukkhave gamana donha veram gannippanna gona guna-santhavena paccha
guna-santhavena putvim guru guruna guru lahu na guru-pacchakkhani-gilana guvvini
gabbhe sanghatana gudaayara na kareti genhana kaddana vavahara gotiniutto dhammi
gonihara na sabhumi gona samaya-katam va gonasamaya-tirittam go-mahis-aja-khira
govapayam acchettu govalae ya bhayae ghanaudhi ghanavalaya ghatasattugadi-tunto
ghar-koilasanchara ghase-sana tu bhave ghettavvamalevakadam gheppati
akuchhiayagammai chauridiya na macchiya........ chauro atikkama-vatikkama
chandodayam cha surodayam champa chanamami ghechhami Bha. 5 70/3 173/2 38 173 16
177/2 163/7 303 295/1 164 35 82 220/1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 219 96/3 202 bhA. 1 226 225 259/1 22/5 279 89/9 180 108/1 68/7 pari. 2 :
padAnukrama kiM vA kahejja chArA 143/2 kinnu hu khaddhA bhikkhA 240/1 kivaNesu
dummaNesu ya 210/2 kItagaDaM pi ya duvidhaM 139 kuDDassa kuNati chir3e 138/4
kulae u caubbhAgassa 3/1 kUDuvamAe keI 67/3 keI ekkekkanisiM 22/3 keI bhaNaMti
pahie kelAsabhavaNA ete 210/5 koDIkaraNaM duvidhaM 192/6 koddavarAlaga gAme 76
kollaire vatthavvo 199 kovo valavAgabhaM bhA. 34 khaNamANI Arabhae 283 khaddhe
niddhe ya ruyA 83/5 khamagAdikAlakajjA...... khallaga-mallaga lecchArigANi 90/3
khIra-dahi jAu kaTTara 298 khIra-dahi-sUva-kaTTara 305 khIradumahe? paMthe
khIrAhAro rovati 198/1 khIre ya majjaNe maMDaNe 197 khette samANadesI 73/2
gaMtuM vijjA-maMtaNa 227/2 gaMtUNa AvaNaM so 89/2 gaMdhAdiguNavisiTuM 108
gamaNAgamaNukkheve gAmANa doNha veraM gaNanipphaNNaM goNNaM guNasaMthaveNa
pacchA guNasaMthaveNa puTviM guru guruNA guru lahuNA guru-paccakkhANi-gilANa
guvviNi gabbhe saMghaTTaNA gUDhAyArA na kareMti geNhaNa kaDDaNa vavahAra
goTiniutto dhammI goNIharaNa sabhUmI goNNaM samayakataM vA goNNasamayAtirittaM
go-mahisi-ajAkhIraM govapayaM acchettuM govAlae ya bhayae ghaNaudahI ghaNavalayA
ghatasattugadiTuMto gharakoilasaMcArA ghAsesaNA tu bhAve ghettavvamalevakaDaM
gheppati akuMciyAgammi cauridiyANa macchiya........ cauro atikkama-vatikkame
caMdodayaM ca sUrodayaM caMpA chaNammi ghecchAmi bhA. 5 70/3 173/2 38 173 16
177/2 163/7 303 295/1 164 35 82 220/1

Page #392 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
220 36 Piṇḍaniyukti 231/11 295/6 231/7 153 105/1 63 251/2 Bhā. 35 231/3 73/22
251 263/3 240/4 Chammaṭṭhi-danta-naha-roma caraṇakaraṇālasammi 136/4 Caritaṃ va
kappitaṃ vā 302/1 Cāulodagam pi se dehi 76/5 Cāṇakka puccha iṭṭāla...... Bhā. 37
Cuṇṇe antaddhāṇe 230 Culla tti dāramahuṇā 181/1 Cullī avacullo vā Bhā. 25
Cullukkhaliyā doe 112 Cullukkhā kammadī 113/1 Codaga! Indhaṇamādīhi 116/3
Ṣaumattoghuddesaṃ 95/1 Ṣaumatto sutanaṇī 239 Ṣakkāyaniraṇukampā
Ṣakkāyavaggahattha ti 284 Ṣakkāyavaggahatthā 268 Ṣabbaga vāragamādī Ṣahi
kāraṇehi sādhū 317 Ṣāyaṃ pi vivajjati 80/1 Ṣiṇṇamachhiṇṇo duviho 182 Ṣiṇṇo
diṭṭhamadiṭṭho 183 Ṣinnamachiṇṇaṃ duvidhaṃ Ṣinnammi tao okadḍiyammi 188/1 Jaiṇo
vīsa'bhiggha 73/18 Jaiṇo sāvaga niṇhga 73/19 Jai pacchakammdosā 295/2 Jai vi ya
tā pajjatā 219/2 106 Jai vi suto me hohiti jai se na joghaṇī jaṅghāparijita
saḍḍī jaṅghā bāhu tarii va jaṃ jah va kataṃ dāhaṃ jaṃ davvaṃ udagādisu jaṃ puṇa
acittadavvaṃ jaṅghāhiṇā ome jaṇasāvagāṇa khiṃsaṇa jatttha u tatiyo bhaṅgo
jatttha u sacittamīse jatttha tu thove thovaṃ jadi saṅkā dosakari jammā esati
ego jassa puṇa piṇḍavāyattāyā jaha kammaṃ tu akappaṃ jaha kāraṇaṃ tu tantū jaha
kāraṇamaṇuvahataṃ jaha ceva puvvalitte jaha ceva ya nikkhitte jaha ceva ya
saṃjogā jaha jaha padesiṇiṃ jaha tipedesō khaṇḍho jaha te daṃsaṇakankhī jaha
vantaṃ tu abhojja jaheva kumbhādīsu puvvalitte jā jayamāṇassa bhave 52/1 Bhā. 3
. 127 49/1 49/2 163/3 257, 261 290 99 228/1 41/2 914 163/6 324

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 220 36 piMDaniyukti 231/11 295/6 231/7 153 105/1 63 251/2 bhA. 35 231/3 73/22
251 263/3 240/4 camma'TThi-daMta-naha-roma caraNakaraNAlasammI 136/4 caritaM va
kappitaM vA 302/1 cAulodagaM pi se dehi 76/5 cANakka puccha iTTAla...... bhA. 37
cuNNe aMtaddhANe 230 culla tti dAramahuNA 181/1 cullI avacullo vA bhA. 25
cullukkhaliyA Doe 112 cullukkhA kammAdI 113/1 codaga! iMdhaNamAdIhi 116/3
chaumatthoghuddesaM 95/1 chaumattho sutanANI 239 chakkAyaniraNukaMpA
chakkAyavaggahattha ti 284 chakkAyavaggahatthA 268 chabbaga vAragamAdI chahi
kAraNehi sAdhU 317 chAyaM pi vivajjatI 80/1 chiNNamachiNNo duviho 182 chiNNo
diTThamadiTTho 183 chinnamachinnaM duvidhaM chinnammi tao okaDDiyammi 188/1
jaiNo vIsA'bhiggaha 73/18 jaiNo sAvaga niNhaga 73/19 jai pacchakammadosA 295/2
jai vi ya tA pajjattA 219/2 106 jai vi suto me hohiti jai se na jogahANI
jaMghAparijita saDDI jaMghA bAhu tarIi va jaM jaha va kataM dAhaM jaM davvaM
udagAdisu jaM puNa acittadavvaM jaMghAhINA ome jaNasAvagANa khiMsaNa jattha u
tatio bhaMgo jattha u sacittamIse jattha tu thove thovaM jadi saMkA dosakarI
jammaM esati ego jassa puNa piMDavAyaTThayA jaha kammaM tu akappaM jaha kAraNaM
tu taMtU jaha kAraNamaNuvahataM jaha ceva puvvalitte jaha ceva ya nikkhitte jaha
ceva ya saMjogA jaha jaha padesiNiM jaha tipadeso khaMdho jaha te daMsaNakaMkhI
jaha vaMtaM tu abhojja jaheva kuMbhAdisu puvvalitte jA jayamANassa bhave 52/1
bhA. 3 . 127 49/1 49/2 163/3 257, 261 290 99 228/1 41/2 914 163/6 324

Page #393 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Para. 2: Hierarchy 221 1988 Bha. 22 206 207 203 219/7 240/3 121 73/4 314 192/4
Bha. 23 Bha. 19 80/5 320/2 81/1 57/4 41 188 302/3 295/8 98 17/3 171 53/1 Ja Jēṇa
Hoti Vaṇṇēṇa Jāṇantamajāṇato Jāti-Kula-Gaṇa Kammē Jāti-Kule Vibhāsā
Jāmātiputtapati Māraṇaṁ Jāyasu Na Erisō Haṁ Jārisie Cciya Laddhā Jāvantaṭṭhā
Siddhaṁ Jāvanta Deva-Dattā Jāvantie Visōdhi Jāvantigamuddesam Jāva Na
Bahuppasannam Jitasattu Devi Cittasabha Jīvattammi Avigate Jīvamu Kaha Vi Ōme
Jujjati Gaṇassa Khettāṁ Jē Vijja-Mantdōsā Jē Vi Ya Paḍisevanti Joggā'jiṇṇe
Māruta...... Jō Jahvāyaṁ Na Kuṇati Jōtis-Taṇōsahīṇaṁ Jōti Paḍīva Kuṇati Jō Puṇa
Vīsāmijjati Ṭhāṇa-Nisīya-Tuyatṭaṇa Ḍaḍḍarasara Chunnāmuhō Taṇḍula-Jala-Āḍāṇe Taṁ
Pi Ya Sukke Sukkaṁ 293 94/1 Taṁ Hoti Saiṅgālaṁ Tatiyammi Karaṁ Chōḍuṁ Tattha
Vibhāguddesiya Tatthāṇanta U Caritta..... Tamhā Na Esa Dōsō Tavahētu Cauṭṭhādi
Tassa Kaḍaniṭṭittammi Ya Tassēva Veragguggamēṇa Tinni U Paḍēsasamā
Tibālāgamuhāmuhkō Tiya Sītaṁ Samaṇāṇaṁ Tiriyāyatamujjugēṇa Trivido U Davvapīṇḍō
Trivido Teukkāō Trivido Hoti Pasatthō Tujjhaṭṭhāe Kayamiṇa..... Tulle Vi
Abhippaē Tēṇa Samaṁ Pavvaita Tēṇā Va Saṁjataṭṭhā Tesiṁ Gurūṇa Mudāēṇa Thakke
Thakkāvaḍiyaṁ Thullāēṇa Vigḍapādō Thera Pabhu Tharatharate Theri Dubbalakhīrā
Thero Galantālāō Thōve Thōvaṁ Chūḍa Daiēṇa Vatthiṇā Vā 76/1 89/8 231 Bha.6 688
219/15 177 57/3 83/3 64/3 57/1 76/4 138/5 22/1 198/15 288/2 198/7 14 198/14 273
187 264/1 291/1 28

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 2 : padAnukrama 221 1988 bhA. 22 206 207 203 219/7 240/3 121 73/4 314
192/4 bhA. 23 bhA. 19 80/5 320/2 81/1 57/4 41 188 302/3 295/8 98 17/3 171 53/1
jA jeNa hoti vaNNeNa jANaMtamajANato jAtI-kula-gaNa kamme jAtI-kule vibhAsA
jAmAtiputtapatimAraNaM jAyasu na eriso haM jArisie cciya laddhA jAvaMtaTThA
siddhaM jAvaMta devadattA jAvaMtie visodhI jAvaMtigamuddesaM jAva na
bahuppasannaM jitasattu devi cittasabha jIvattammi avigate jIvAmu kaha vi ome
jujjati gaNassa khettaM je vijja-maMtadosA je vi ya paDisevaMtI joggA'jiNNe
mAruta...... jo jahavAyaM na kuNati jotisa-taNosahINaM jotI padIva kuNatI jo
puNa vIsAmijjati ThANa-nisIya-tuyaTTaNa DhaDDarasara chunnamuho taMDula-jala-
AdANe taM pi ya sukke sukkaM 293 94/1 taM hoti saiMgAlaM tatiyammi karaM choDhuM
tattha vibhAguddesiya tatthANaMtA u caritta..... tamhA na esa doso tavahetu
cautthAdI tassa kaDaniTTitammi ya tassevaM veragguggameNa tinni u padesasamayA
tibalAgamuhammukko tiya sItaM samaNANaM tiriyAyatamujjugeNa tividho u davvapiMDo
tividho teukkAo tividho hoti pasattho tujjhaTThAe kayamiNa..... tulle vi
abhippAe teNa samaM pavvaitA teNA va saMjataTThA tesiM gurUNa mudaeNa thakke
thakkAvaDiyaM thullAe~ vigaDapAdo thera pabhu tharatharate therI dubbalakhIrA
thero galaMtalAlo thove thovaM chUr3ha daieNa vatthiNA vA 76/1 89/8 231 bhA.6
688 219/15 177 57/3 83/3 64/3 57/1 76/4 138/5 22/1 198/15 288/2 198/7 14 198/14
273 187 264/1 291/1 28

Page #394 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
222 Darshan Charane Padhamo Darshan - Naan- Charittaana Darshan - Naan- Charitte
Darshan-Naanappabhavam B.E. Sanghatta Datthuun Tanaram Daddar Sil Sovaane
Davaammi Attakammam Davaammi Laddugaadi Davaaiyo Vivego Davaadi Chhinnam Pi Hu
Davaayaa Khalu Kaaya Davvi Chhuude Tijam Vrittam Davae Acchitte Nam Davae Bhaave
Sanjoyana Das Sasinhaaga Saavag Dahi- Tellasama Oga Daanam Na Hoti Aphalm Daan
Kayavikkaye Va Dayavvam Adayavvam Daham Ti Te Nam Bhanitam Dijjante Padisesho
Dittha Kheeram Kheeram Dinnaau Tau Panch Vi Dugmadaadi Samane Dugga Tam
Samaicchya Duvidham Cha Makkhitam Khalu  73/16 45/1 73/3 57/5 281 136/2 170 67
57 192/1 100 66 113/3 47 304 73/8 313/1 213 163/5 291 219/5 142/2 70/2 95/2 294
Bha. 24 242 Duvidhaviradhana Usine Duvidho U Santhavo Khalu Duvidho Ya
Bhaavapindo Duittm Garahitim Daarabhogan Gaagi Deha Imam Ma Sesam Donni U
Saahusamuttha Dosaggi Vi Jalanto Dhanujuyakayabharanam Dhammak Vaya Khamage
Dhammahaakkhitte Dhai Dooti Nimitte Dharayati Dhiyate Va Dhuuyadugam Sandeso
Dhoyam Pi Niravayavam Dhovaththam Tinni Dine Nanu Suhumpooiiyassa Natthi
Chhuhaya Sarisiya Nadikanha Vennnadive Nav Cheva'ttharasa Gam Navani-Matthu
Takkam Naan-Charitta Evam Naan- Darshan Tav Sanjamo Nanivvittam Labbhati Naam
Thavana Davie Naam Thavanapindo  Pinda Niyukti 254 221 43 201/2 Bha. 33 99/2 235
314/3 61/1 143 143/1 195 198 219/11 117/1 Bha. 11 116/2 318/1 231/2 192/7 128/3
73/10 44/2 173/4 52,53,73, 194,236,302 4

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 222 daMsaNa caraNe paDhamo daMsaNa - nANa- carittANa daMsaNa - nANa- caritte
daMsaNa-nANappabhavaM bIe saMghaTTa daTThUNa taNAraM daddara sila sovANe
davvammi attakammaM davvammi laDDugAdI davvAio vivego davvAdI chinnaM pi hu
davvAyA khalu kAyA davvIchUDhe tijaM vRttaM davve accitteNaM davve bhAve
saMjoyaNA dasa sasihAgA sAvaga dahi- tellasamA ogA dANaM na hoti aphalaM dANa
kayavikkae vA dAyavvamadAyavvaM dAhaM ti teNa bhaNitaM dijjaMte paDisedho diTTha
khIraM khIraM diNNAu tAu paMca vi dugamAdI sAmane duggA taM samaicchiyA duvidhaM
ca makkhitaM khalu 73/16 45/1 73/3 57/5 281 136/2 170 67 57 192/1 100 66 113/3
47 304 73/8 313/1 213 163/5 291 219/5 142/2 70/2 95/2 294 bhA. 24 242
duvidhavirAdhaNa usiNe duvidho u saMthavo khalu duvidho ya bhAvapiMDo dUittaM
garahitaM dArAbhogaNa gAgi deha imaM mA sesaM donni u sAhusamutthA dosaggI vi
jalaMto dhaNujuyakAyabharANaM dhammaka vAya khamage dhammahAakkhitte dhAI dUtI
nimitte dhArayati dhIyate vA dhUyadugaM saMdeso dhoyaM pi nirAvayavaM dhovatthaM
tinni diNe naNu suhumapUiyassA natthi chuhAya sarisiyA nadikaNha veNNadIve nava
ceva'TThArasagaM navaNI-matthu takkaM nANa-carittA evaM nANa- daMsaNa tava
saMjamo nAnivviTTaM labbhati nAmaM ThavaNA davie nAmaM ThavaNApiMDo piMDa
niyukti 254 221 43 201/2 bhA. 33 99/2 235 314/3 61/1 143 143/1 195 198 219/11
117/1 bhA. 11 116/2 318/1 231/2 192/7 128/3 73/10 44/2 173/4 52,53,73,
194,236,302 4

Page #395 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Para. 2: Hierarchy 223 118 91/2 308 73/21 253/3 67/2 80/2 163/4 227/1 147 160
Namammi Sarisanaamo Niggantha-Sakka-Tavasa Niggama Deula Danaṃ Nicchayo
Sacchitto Nicchayanayassa Caranaya........ Niddeyarō Ya Kālo
Nimmallagandhagulīya Niyamā Tikālavīsaye Nivpiṇḍō Gayabhattam Nivvāṇam Khalu
Kajan Nivvōdagassa Gahaṇam Nīyam Paheṇagam Me Nīyaduvārammi Ghare Nīsamaniṣā Va
Kaḍam Necchaha Tamisammi Tao Nōgharan Taranēgavīdhaṃ Pancavihāvisayasokkha
Paṇḍaga Appadīsevī Pakāmam Ca Nikāmam Ca Pacchāsanthavadosā Paḍimantathambhaṇādī
Paḍiyaraṇapadosēṇam Paḍilābhita Vaccanta Paḍivijathambhaṇādī Paḍisevaṇa
Paḍisuṇṇā Paḍisevaṇamādīṇam Paḍisevaṇai Teṇā 73/1 Paḍhamadivasammi Kamma 209
Pattaladumasālagatā 157/2 Patteya Pauralambhe 10 Patteya Buddha-Niṇhaga 66/1
Payasamādugaabbhāse Bhā. 12 Parakamma Attakammikareti 141 Parapakkō U Gihatthā
204 Parapacchaiyā Chāyā 185 Parassa Tam Deti Sa Eva Gēhe 49 Paripiṇḍitamullāvo
22/4 Pariyaṭṭiē Abhihaḍe 157/6 Pariyaṭṭiyam Pi Duvidham 136/3, 136/5
Parivēsaṇapantiē Parisaditapanḍupattan 138/2 Pariseya-Piyaṇa-Hatthā..... 156
Pallīvadhammī Naṭṭhā 96/2 Pavayaṇamāyā Nava Bamba... 288/5 Pauyadurūḍhapaḍaṇam
312 Paēṇ Deti Lōgō 223 Paōkaraṇam Duvidham 229 Pāgaḍapagāsakaraṇe 173/3
Pāmiccham Pi Ya Duvidham 231/4 Pāyassa Paḍōyārō 228 Pāyassa Paḍōyārō
Pāsandīsamanaṇam Pāsandīsu Vi Evam 68/6 Pāsōlittakadahe 73/6 236/1 69/1 44/3 277
210/3 137 138/6 144 22 Bhā. 8 73/7 68/1 73/5 253, 253/2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 2 : padAnukrama 223 118 91/2 308 73/21 253/3 67/2 80/2 163/4 227/1 147
160 nAmammi sarisanAmo niggaMtha-sakka-tAvasa niggama deula dANaM nicchayao
saccitto nicchayanayassa caraNAya........ niddheyaro ya kAlo
nimmallagaMdhaguliyA niyamA tikAlavisae nivapiMDo gayabhattaM nivvANaM khalu
kajjaM nivvodagassa gahaNaM nIyaM paheNagaM me nIyaduvArammi ghare nIsamaNIsA va
kaDaM necchaha tamisammi tao nogharaMtara'NegavidhaM paMcavihavisayasokkha
paMDaga appaDisevI pakAmaM ca nikAmaM ca pacchAsaMthavadosA paDimaMtathaMbhaNAdI
paDiyaraNapadoseNaM paDilAbhita vaccaMtA paDivijathaMbhaNAdI paDisevaNa
paDisuNaNA paDisevaNamAdINaM paDisevaNAi teNA 73/1 paDhamadivasammi kamma 209
pattaladumasAlagatA 157/2 patteya pauralaMbhe 10 patteyabuddha-niNhaga 66/1
payasamadugaabbhAse bhA. 12 parakamma attakammIkareti 141 parapakkho u gihatthA
204 parapaccaiyA chAyA 185 parassa taM deti sa eva gehe 49 paripiMDitamullAvo
22/4 pariyaTTie abhihaDe 157/6 pariyaTTiyaM pi duvidhaM 136/3, 136/5
parivesaNapaMtIe parisaDitapaMDupattaM 138/2 pariseya-piyaNa-hatthA..... 156
pallIvadhammi naTThA 96/2 pavayaNamAyA nava baMbha... 288/5 pAuyadurUDhapaDaNaM
312 pAeNa deti logo 223 pAokaraNaM duvidhaM 229 pAgaDapagAsakaraNe 173/3
pAmiccaM pi ya duvidhaM 231/4 pAyassa paDoyAro 228 pAyassa paDoyAro
pAsaMDIsamaNANaM pAsaMDIsu vi evaM 68/6 pAsolittakaDAhe 73/6 236/1 69/1 44/3 277
210/3 137 138/6 144 22 bhA. 8 73/7 68/1 73/5 253, 253/2

Page #396 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
224 Piṇḍaniyukti 287 302/5 136 265 270 34 131 Bha. 2 17/1 267 214 64/1 194/3
52/3 130 162 288/6 247 214/1 Pāhuḍi-ṭhaviyagadosā Pāhuḍibhattaṃ bhuñjati
Pāhuḍiyaṃ ca ṭhaventī Pāhuḍiyā vi ya duvidhā piṇḍaṇa bahudavvāṇaṃ piṇḍa-nikāya-
samūhe piṇḍassa u nikkhevo piṇḍe uggam-uppaaya...... pihitu-bhiṇṇakavāḍe pīsantī
nippite puḍhavī āukkāe puḍhavī āukkāo puḍhavī āu vaṇassati puḍhavīkāo tividho
puttas sa vivahādiṇaṃ pupphāṇaṃ pattāṇaṃ purapacchakamm sasiniḍḍha..... puṭviṃ
pacchā santhava pūtikammaṃ duvidhaṃ porisitigamaccitto bandhati ahebhavāuṃ
bajjhati ya jeṇa kamma battīsaṃ kira kavala battīsāi pareṇaṃ battīsā sāmanne
bahuyātitāmatibahuṃ bādar suhumāṃ bhāve bāyālisēsaṇasankadammaṃ bāle vuḍḍhe
matte biya-tiya cauro pañcindīyā beindīya-paribhōgo bhaṇḍagapāsavalaggā
bhajjaṃtī va dalentī bhaṇati ya nāhaṃ vejjō bhāvāvayaramāhittu bhāve pasattha
itarā bhāvēsaṇā u tividhā bhikṣaggāhi egattha bhikṣādi gato rōgī bhikṣādi
vaccaṃte bhikṣāmatte aviyālaṇā bhikṣudaga samāraṃbhe bhikṣū jahaṇṇagammī bhikṣe
parihāyaṃte bhuñjaṃti citta-kammatṭhiṭā bhuñjaṃtī āyamaṇe bhuñjaṇa ajīra
purimaḍḍagāi bhuñja na bhuñje bhuñjasu bhuttuvvaritaṃ khalu saṃkhaḍie bhōmāiesu
taṃ puṇa maimaṃ arogī dīhā..... mailiya phāliy-khōsiya maṅgalahetuṃ puṇṇatṭhayā
maṇḍalapasuṭṭikūṭṭhī 201/1 288/1 144/3 31 166 Bha. 36 243/2 196 209/1 280 107
Bha. 15 157/3 64/2 68/10 263 310 312/1 198/2 179 145 312/3 135/1 111 288/4

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 224 piMDaniyukti 287 302/5 136 265 270 34 131 bhA. 2 17/1 267 214 64/1 194/3
52/3 130 162 288/6 247 214/1 pAhuDi-ThaviyagadosA pAhuDibhattaM bhuMjati
pAhuDiyaM ca ThaveMtI pAhuDiyA vi ya duvidhA piMDaNa bahudavvANaM piMDa-nikAya-
samUhe piMDassa u nikkhevo piMDe uggama-uppAya...... pihitubbhiNNakavADe pIsaMtI
nippiTe puDhavI AukkAe puDhavI AukkAo puDhavI Au vaNassati puDhavIkAo tividho
puttassa vivAhadiNaM pupphANaM pattANaM purapacchakamma sasiNiddha..... puTviM
pacchA saMthava pUtIkammaM duvidhaM porisitigamaccitto baMdhati ahebhavAuM
bajjhati ya jeNa kamma battIsaM kira kavalA battIsAi pareNaM battIsA sAmanne
bahuyAtItamatibahuM bAdara suhumaM bhAve bAyAlIsesaNasaMkaDammi bAle vuDDhe
matte biya-tiya cauro paMciMdiyA beiMdiyaparibhogo bhaMDagapAsavalaggA bhajjaMtI
va daleMtI bhaNati ya nAhaM vejjo bhAvAvayAramAhittu bhAve pasattha itarA
bhAvesaNA u tividhA bhikkhaggAhI egattha bhikkhAdi gato rogI bhikkhAdI vaccaMte
bhikkhAmatte aviyAlaNA bhikkhudaga samAraMbhe bhikkhU jahaNNagammI bhikkhe
parihAyaMte bhuMjaMti cittakammaTThitA bhuMjaMtI AyamaNe bhuMjaNa ajIra
purimaDDagAi bhuMja na bhuMje bhuMjasu bhuttuvvaritaM khalu saMkhaDie bhomAiesu
taM puNa maimaM arogi dIhA..... mailiya phAliya-khosiya maMgalahetuM puNNaTThayA
maMDalapasuttikuTThI 201/1 288/1 144/3 31 166 bhA. 36 243/2 196 209/1 280 107
bhA. 15 157/3 64/2 68/10 263 310 312/1 198/2 179 145 312/3 135/1 111 288/4

Page #397 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Chapter 2: Hierarchy  **225** **245/2** **138/3** **219/9 219/12 69/3**
**86** **157/5** **Bha. 14 262** **220** **208/1** **179/2** **295/7 96/4**
**73/12 73/14** **101/2** **103** **73/13 295/3 Bha. 29** **117/2**  **Flesh-
fat-bone-marrow-fish-flesh-inside-marrow-flesh-middle-established-two-portions-
with-that-which-burns-me-very-much-even-if-it-is-a-Maratha-Kosala-great-number-
do-not-give-this-body-to-me-do-not-say-anything-to-me-do-not-be-a-thorn-son-do-
not-be-a-thorn-father-previous-existence-do-not-be-trapped-in-the-family-
illusionary-deceitful-deceitful-in-the-neck-joy-garland-in-front-of-me-bad-
garland-even-two-types-of-meat-eating-group-wrong-belief-establishment-mixed-
born-going-released-in-the-released-ones-it-fights-in-the-jewel-path-light-
taste-shell-lump-taste-eating-reason-or-taste-reason-established-passion-fire-
covered-with-passion-with-passion-it-is-covered**  **132 222 231/8 224**  **In-
the-king's-house-drum-in-the-king's-house-also-sometimes-king-descent-boar-
obtained-jewel-to-me-obtained-even-if-it-is-not-taken-benefited-silent-asked-
sign-etc-with-this-sign-also-not-acceptance-sign-also-righteous-attached-this-
is-said-even-this-what-is-said-in-the-world-also-bad-smell-people-acceptance-
doer-salt-bite-uncountable-cloth-salt-rock-rise-this-way-world-rare-destruction-
way-it-shakes-great-dust-wind-etc-mouth-etc-speech-sound-continuous-it-
increases-it-cries-shadow-it-increases-heat-contact-forest-creeper-three-types-
color-etc-also-strong-age-jaw-lump-thin-etc-....-wind-etc-three-types-with-
violence-controlled-in-the-house-nearness**  **210/1 282** **166/2** **77**
**166/1** **165** **136/1 198/11 142** **90/2** **210** **89** **120** **80/3**
**41/1** **83/4** **138** **29** **129** **102** **198/5** **309** **26**
**314/2 315** **219/13 57/2**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 2 : padAnukrama 225 245/2 138/3 219/9 219/12 69/3 86 157/5 bhA. 14 262
220 208/1 179/2 295/7 96/4 73/12 73/14 101/2 103 73/13 295/3 bhA. 29 117/2
maMsa-vasa-soNiyAsava macchiya-ghammA aMto majjArakhaiyamaMsA majjhimaniddhe do
porisIu matteNa jeNa dAhiti mayamAtivacchagaM pi va marahaTThaga kosalagA
mahatIya saMkhaDIe mA eyaM deha imaM mA kAhiMti avaNNaM mA tAva jhaMkha puttaya!
mAtipiti puvvasaMthava mA te phaMsejja kulaM mAyAvI caDukArI mAlammi kuDe modaga
mAlAbhimuhiM daTThaNa mAlohaDaM pi duvidhaM mAsigapAraNagaTThA
micchattathirIkaraNaM mIsajjAtaM jAvaMtigaM muttadaviesu jujjati rayaNapadIve
jotI rasa-kakkaba-piMDagulA rasabhAyaNahetuM vA rasahetuM paDisiddho
rAgaggisaMpalitto rAgeNa saiMgAlaM 132 222 231/8 224 rAyagihe dhammaruI rAyagihe
ya kadAI rAya'varoha'varAhe laddhaM paheNagaM me labbhaMtaM pi na giNhati
lAbhita ziMto puTTho liMgAdIhi vi evaM liMgeNa u nAbhiggaha liMgeNa u sAdhammI
littaM ti bhANiUNaM levAleva tti jaM vuttaM loe vi asuigaMdhA logANuggahakArisu
loNa-daga-agaNi-vatthI loNAgaDodae evaM loyaviraluttimaMgaM lolati mahIya
dhUlIya vaiyAdi maMkhamAdI vaMtuccArasaricchaM vaDDati hAyati chAyA vaDDeti
tappasaMgaM vaNasaikAo tividho vaNNAdijuyA vi balI vaya-
gaMDathullataNugatta...... vAukkAo tividho vAghAteNa niyatto vAsaghare aNujattA
210/1 282 166/2 77 166/1 165 136/1 198/11 142 90/2 210 89 120 80/3 41/1 83/4 138
29 129 102 198/5 309 26 314/2 315 219/13 57/2

Page #398 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 226 **Piṇḍaniyukti** 32 Bha. 9 125 217 227 252/1 101/1 306 252 68/5 226/1 285
54 245/1 55 299 123 Santhāra-pāya-daṇḍaga santhāruत्तरacōlaga sandiṣṣantaṁ jo
suṇati saṁjōyaṇāeṁ dōsō saṁvāso u pasiddho saṁsajjimāmmī dese saṁsajjimēhi
vajjaṁ saṁsadrutaratthō saṁsattēṇa ya davvēṇa saṁsōdhaṇa-saṁsamaṇaṁ saṁgāma-
paraggāme saṁgāme vi ya duvidhaṁ saccittapuḍhavīkāe saccittapuḍhavilitaṁ
saccittamakkhitammī saccittamīsāesuṁ saccitte accitte 73/9 318 269 214/3 152,
200 155 248 275 Vicchōḍite karīsēṇa vijjā-tavappabhāvaṁ vijjāmāntaparūvaṇa
vijjhāu tti na dīsati vijjhāta mummurīṅgāla..... vimali-kayāṁh chakkhū viyamētaṁ
kurāṅgāṇaṁ viyamētaṁ gajakulāṇaṁ visaghātiya pisīyāsī visarisadasaṇajuttā
vedana-veyāvacche veviya parisāḍaṇayā vōliṁtā te u annē saṁkāe caubhaṅgō
saṁkāmēḍaṁ kamma saṁkita makkhita nikkhitta saṁkhaḍīkaraṇe kāyā saṁkhāiyāṇi u
kaṇḍagāṇi saṁkhēvapīṇḍitatthō saṁghuddiṭuṁ sōuṁ saṁcārimā ya cullī saṁjatabhadda
tēṇa saṁjamaṭhāṇāṇaṁ kaṇḍagāṇa saṁjātaliṭṭabhatte saṁjōyaṇamaibahuyaṁ saṁjōyaṇā
u bhāve santhare savvamujhaṁti 76/2 163/1 238 114 237 244 246 256, 260, 289, 300
232 Bha. 20 50 37 116/4 90/1 138/1 126 177/1 220/2 64 Saccitte pavvāvaṇa
sajjhamaṣaṁ kajja saṭṭhāṇa-paraṭṭhāṇe saḍḍaḍḍarattha kēsara.... saḍḍhassā
thōvadivasēsu saddādiesu sāhū samaṇakaḍāhākammā samaṇe māhaṇa kivaṇe
sammamaṣammā kiriyā 119/1 108/2 303/1 96 119 208 207/2 307 192/5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 226 piMDaniyukti 32 bhA. 9 125 217 227 252/1 101/1 306 252 68/5 226/1 285 54
245/1 55 299 123 saMthAra-pAya-daMDaga saMthAruttaracolaga saMdissaMtaM jo
suNati saMjoyaNAe~ doso saMvAso u pasiddho saMsajjimammi dese saMsajjimehi
vajjaM saMsadrutarahattho saMsatteNa ya davveNa saMsodhaNa-saMsamaNaM saggAma-
paraggAme saggAme vi ya duvidhaM saccittapuDhavikAe saccittapuDhavilitaM
saccittamakkhitammI saccittamIsaesuM saccitte accitte 73/9 318 269 214/3 152,
200 155 248 275 vicchoDite karIseNa vijjA-tavappabhAvaM vijjAmaMtaparUvaNa
vijjhAu tti na dIsati vijjhAta mummuriMgAla..... vimalIkaya'mha cakkhU viyametaM
kuraMgANaM viyametaM gajakulANaM visaghAtiya pisiyAsI visarisadasaNajuttA
vedaNa-veyAvacce veviya parisADaNayA voliMtA te u anne saMkAe caubhaMgo
saMkAmeDaM kamma saMkita makkhita nikkhitta saMkhaDikaraNe kAyA saMkhAIyANi u
kaMDagANi saMkhevapiMDitattho saMghuddiTuM souM saMcArimA ya cullI saMjatabhaddA
teNA saMjamaThANANaM kaMDagANa saMjAtalittabhatte saMjoyaNamaibahuyaM saMjoyaNA
u bhAve saMthare savvamujhaMti 76/2 163/1 238 114 237 244 246 256, 260, 289, 300
232 bhA. 20 50 37 116/4 90/1 138/1 126 177/1 220/2 64 saccitte pavvAvaNa
sajjhamasajhaM kajja saTThANa-paraTThANe saDDaDDaratta kesara.... saDDhassa
thovadivasesu saddAdiesu sAhU samaNakaDAhAkamma samaNe mAhaNa kivaNe
sammamasammA kiriyA 119/1 108/2 303/1 96 119 208 207/2 307 192/5

Page #399 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Parikara 2: Padanukrama 227 236/2 192/2 144/1 240 91/3 156/1 69/4 231/1 91/1
73/17 142/1 136/6 219/6 192 2888 243/3 117/3 68/9 174 89/1 82/1 Sayamevaloeum
savvalayadhana-tanuvaya savvo vanantakao sahasa pavittha dittha saum pajjattam
adarena sa u avisesitam ciya saga jati visaibhiggaha sagari mankhachandana
sadhuguna-esanakahana samatthana rayasute sami carabhada va sali-odana hattham
sali-ghata-gula-gorasa salimadi agade sahammaibhiggahena saharan am bahuna
sijjhantassuvakaram siti-avanna padalabhan a si-unha-khara-khatte site davassa
ego sito usino saharano sivannisarisamodaga......... sui-bhadda-gadi-ttadi
sukken a vi jam chikkam sukkena sarakkhen am sukkke sukkam padittam sukkke
sukkam padhamo Sukkollasarisapae sutabhigamanativadhi suttassa appamane sunnam
va asati kalo subhagadubhaggarakara surodayam gacchamaha pabhate sedanguli
baguddhave sesa visodhi-kodi. Sesesa u padivakkho sesehiu kayehi sesehiu davvehi
so eso jassa guna solasa uggamadose solasa uggamadose sovira-gorasasava
hatthanduni-galabaddha hatthakappagirifulliya hatthasayam khalu deso
hatthasayamega ganta hatthiggahana gimhe haritadi 'nantariya hiyaena samkitena a
hiyayammi samaheun a hiyahara miyahara hoti pabhu gharabhane homadaivitahakarane
225/1 322 193 73/11 40 286 266 113 216 219/8 159 27/2 54/1 255 12, 18 313/4
313/3 53/2 288/3 Bha. 28 243/1 240/2 Bha. 18 313 173/1 192/3 207/1 263/1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 2 : padAnukrama 227 236/2 192/2 144/1 240 91/3 156/1 69/4 231/1 91/1
73/17 142/1 136/6 219/6 192 2888 243/3 117/3 68/9 174 89/1 82/1 sayamevAloeuM
savalaya ghaNa-taNuvAyA savvo vaNaMtakAo sahasA paviTTha diTThA sAuM pajjattaM
AdareNa sA u avisesitaM ciya sAga jai vIsa'bhiggaha sAgAri maMkha chaMdaNa
sAdhuguNesaNakahaNaM sAmatthaNa rAyasute sAmI cArabhaDA vA sAlI-odaNa hatthaM
sAlI-ghata-gula-gorasa sAlImAdI agaDe sAhamma'bhiggaheNaM sAhAraNaM bahUNaM
sijhaMtassuvakAraM siti-avaNaNa paDilAbhaNa sI-uNha-khAra-khatte sIte davassa
ego sIto usiNo sAhAraNo sIvaNNisarisamodaga......... sui-bhaddagadittAdI sukkeNa
vi jaM chikkaM sukkeNa sarakkheNaM sukke sukkaM paDitaM sukke sukkaM paDhamo
sukkolla sarisapAe sutaabhigamaNAtavidhI suttassa appamANe sunnaM va asati kAlo
sUbhagadobhaggakarA sUrodayaM gacchamahaM pabhAte seDaMguli baguDDAve sesA
visodhikoDI. sesesu ya paDivakkho sesehi u kAehiM sesehi u davvehiM so eso jassa
guNA solasa uggamadosA solasa uggamadose sovIra-gorasAsava hatthaMdunigalabaddha
hatthakappa-giriphulliya hatthasayaM khalu deso hatthasayamega gaMtA
hatthiggahaNaM gimhe haritAdI 'NaMtariyA hiyaeNa saMkiteNaM hiyayammi samAheuM
hiyAhArA miyAhArA hoti pabhU gharabhANe homAda'vitahakaraNe 225/1 322 193 73/11
40 286 266 113 216 219/8 159 27/2 54/1 255 12, 18 313/4 313/3 53/2 288/3 bhA. 28
243/1 240/2 bhA. 18 313 173/1 192/3 207/1 263/1

Page #400 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Table of Contents of Stories  1. **Gaveshana**: Kurang-drishtaant (The
Antelope Example) 2. **Gaveshana**: Gaj-drishtaant (The Elephant Example) 3.
**Udgam**: Laddakpriyakumar Kathaank (The Story of Laddakpriyakumar) 4.
**Pratisevana**: Chor-drishtaant (The Thief Example) 5. **Pratiśravaṇa**:
Rajaputra-drishtaant (The Prince Example) 6. **Sanvas**: Palli-drishtaant (The
Village Example) 7. **Anumodana**: Rajadushta-drishtaant (The Wicked King
Example) 8. **Adhakarma**: Shalyodan-drishtaant (The Rice with Thorns Example)
9. **Adhakarma**: Panak-drishtaant (The Drink Example) 10. **Atikram Adi
Dosha**: Nupurpandita Ka Kathaank (The Story of the Nupurpandita) 11.
**Adhakarma Ki Abhojyata**: Vaman-drishtaant (The Vomiting Example) 12.
**Avidhipariharaṇa**: Sadhu-drishtaant (The Saint Example) 13. **Adhakarma Mein
Parinat**: Sanghabhojya Drishtaant (The Example of Food for the Sangha) 14.
**Vidhi-pariharaṇa**: Priyankar Kshapak Drishtaant (The Example of Priyankar
Kshapak) 15. **Aajna Ki Aaradhana-viraadhana**: Udyandvaya Drishtaant (The
Example of the Two Gardens) 16. **Anasaakti**: Govats-drishtaant (The Calf
Example) 17. **Dravyaputi**: Gobar-drishtaant (The Dung Example) 18. **Kritakrit
Dosha**: Mankh-drishtaant (The Monkey Example) 19. **Laukik Pramitya**: Bhagini-
drishtaant (The Sister Example) 20. **Parivartita Dosha Ka Laukik-drishtaant**:
(The Worldly Example of Transformed Fault) 21. **Abhyahat Dosha**: Modak-
drishtaant (The Sweetmeat Example) 22. **Malapahrit Dosha**: Bhikshu-drishtaant
(The Monk Example) 23. **Malapahrit Dosha**: Vasundhara-drishtaant (The Earth
Example) 24. **Aachhedya Dosha**: Gopalak-drishtaant (The Cowherd Example) 25.
**Anisrisht Dosha**: Laddhuk-drishtaant (The Sweetmeat Example) 26.
**Dhatridoṣa**: Sangamasuri Aur Datt Kathaank (The Story of Sangamasuri and
Datt)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 m 233 235 kathAoM kI viSaya-sUcI 1. gaveSaNA : kuraMga-dRSTAnta 2. gaveSaNA :
gaja-dRSTAnta 230 3. udgama : laDDakapriyakumAra kathAnaka * 231 4. pratisevanA
: cora-dRSTAnta 231 5. pratizravaNa : rAjaputra-dRSTAnta 232 6. saMvAsa : pallI-
dRSTAnta 232 7. anumodanA : rAjaduSTa-dRSTAnta 233 8. AdhAkarma : zAlyodana-
dRSTAnta 9. AdhAkarma : pAnaka-dRSTAnta 235 10. atikrama Adi doSa :
nUpurapaMDitA kA kathAnaka 11. AdhAkarma kI abhojyatA : vamana-dRSTAnta 237 12.
avidhipariharaNa : sAdhu-dRSTAnta 238 13. AdhAkarma meM pariNata : saMghabhojya
dRSTAnta 14. vidhi-pariharaNa : priyaMkara kSapaka dRSTAnta 239 15. AjJA kI
ArAdhanA-virAdhanA : udyAnadvaya dRSTAnta 16. anAsakti : govatsa-dRSTAnta 240
17. dravyapUti : gobara-dRSTAnta 241 18. krItakRta doSa : maMkha-dRSTAnta 242
19. laukika prAmitya : bhaginI-dRSTAnta 242 20. parivartita doSa kA laukika-
dRSTAnta 21. abhyAhata doSa : modaka-dRSTAnta 22. mAlApahRta doSa : bhikSu-
dRSTAnta 246 23. mAlApahRta doSa : vasundharA-dRSTAnta 24. Acchedya doSa :
gopAlaka-dRSTAnta 247 25. anisRSTa doSa : laDDuka-dRSTAnta 248 26. dhAtrIdoSa :
saMgamasUri aura datta kathAnaka 238 240 244 244 249

Page #401 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Table of Contents of Stories 229 250 251 251 252 252 252 253 253 253 253 254 255
27. Duti Dosha: Dhanadatta Katha 28. Nimitta Dosha: Gramabhojak-Dristant 29.
Chikitsa Dosha: Singh-Dristant 30. Krodha Pind: Kshapak-Dristant 31. Shvetangul
32. Bakoddayak 33. Kinkar 34. Snayak 35. Grdhraivringhi 36. Hadgyan 37. Man
Pind: Sevai-Dristant 38. Maya Pind: Ashadhabhuti Kathnak 39. Lobha Pind:
Singhkesharak Modak Dristant 40. Vidya Prayog: Bhikshu-Upasak Ka Kathnak 41.
Mantra-Prayog: Murund Raja Evam Padalipta Suri Kathnak 42. Churn-Prayog:
Kshullakdvay Evam Chanakya Kathnak 43. Yog-Prayog: Kulapati Evam Ary Samit
Kathnak 44. Mulakarma-Prayog: Bhinnayoni Ka Kanya-Dristant 45. Mulakarma-Prayog:
Vivaha-Dristant 46. Garbha-Parishotan Evam Aadan: Rajapatnidvay-Dristant 47.
Dravya Grahaneshna: Vanaryuth-Dristant 48. Baladayak: Balika-Dristant 49.
Chardit Dosha: Madhubindu-Dristant 50. Dravya Grasaishana: Matsya-Dristant 258
259 259 259 260 261 262 262 262 263 263 264

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 kathAoM kI viSaya-sUcI 229 250 251 251 252 252 252 253 253 253 253 254 255 27.
dUtI doSa : dhanadatta kathA 28. nimitta doSa : grAmabhojaka-dRSTAnta 29.
cikitsA doSa : siMha-dRSTAnta 30. krodhapiNDa : kSapaka-dRSTAnta 31. zvetAGguli
32. bakoDDAyaka 33. kiMkara 34. snAyaka 35. gRdhraivariGkhI 36. hadajJa 37.
mAnapiNDa : sevaI-dRSTAnta 38. mAyApiNDa : ASAr3habhUti kathAnaka 39. lobhapiNDa
: siMhakezaraka modaka dRSTAnta 40. vidyA prayoga : bhikSu-upAsaka kA kathAnaka
41. maMtra-prayoga : muruNDa rAjA evaM pAdaliptasUri kathAnaka 42. cUrNa-prayoga
: kSullakadvaya evaM cANakya kathAnaka 43. yoga-prayoga : kulapati evaM Arya
samita kathAnaka 44. mUlakarma-prayoga : bhinnayonikA kanyA-dRSTAnta 45.
mUlakarma-prayoga : vivAha-dRSTAnta 46. garbha-parizATana evaM AdAna :
rAjapatnidvaya-dRSTAnta 47. dravya grahaNaiSaNA : vAnarayUtha-dRSTAnta 48.
bAladAyaka : bAlikA-dRSTAnta 49. chardita doSa : madhubindu-dRSTAnta 50. dravya
grAsaiSaNA : matsya-dRSTAnta 258 259 259 259 260 261 262 262 262 263 263 264

Page #402 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-3 Stories 1. Research: The Antelope Example In the city of
Kshitipratisthita, King Jitashatru ruled. His queen's name was Sudarshana. Once,
the pregnant queen entered the picture hall with the king. There, she saw
golden-backed antelopes painted in the pictures and developed a craving to eat
their meat. When her craving was not fulfilled, her body gradually became weak.
Seeing this, the king asked with regret, "Beloved! Why is your body becoming so
weak every day?" The queen told the king about her craving. The king immediately
sent royal men to bring golden-backed antelopes. The royal men thought to
themselves that whoever is dear to someone, becomes attached to them and
indulges in that pleasure carelessly. Golden-backed antelopes are fond of
Shriparni fruits. Although they are not available at this time, if we make
modaks similar to Shriparni fruits and place them in large quantities under the
Shriparni tree and spread a net, they will be attracted. They did the same. The
golden-backed antelopes, wandering with their leader, came there. Seeing the
many modaks shaped like Shriparni fruits, the leader said to the antelopes, "A
cunning person has spread this net here to trap you. Shriparni fruits do not
bear fruit in this season. Even if they do, they are not in such large
quantities. If it is assumed that the wind caused so many fruits to fall down,
it is also not possible because the wind was blowing before also but so many
fruits never fell. Therefore, it appears that this net has been laid for our
bondage. You people should not go near these fruits." The antelopes who accepted
the leader's words lived long and happily. Due to the greed for food, the
antelopes who did not accept his words were caught in the net and became
unhappy. 2. Research: The Elephant Example In the city of Anandapur, King
Ripumardan ruled. His queen's name was Dharini. Near his city, there was a
forest in the valley of the Vindhya mountain, which had hundreds of elephants.
Once, the king thought that elephant power is the greatest power of a king, so
he encouraged his people to capture elephants. The royal men thought that
elephants like nalchari but it is available in the rainy season. It is not
possible in the summer. At this time, the pond should be filled with water from
the arghatta-water extracting wheel, so that nalvan vegetation will grow in
abundance. They did the same. Nets were spread all around near the nalvan.
Wandering here and there, the elephants came there with their leader. Seeing
those nalvans, the leader warned the elephants, "This nalvan vegetation 1. Ga.
53/1-54 Vr. P. 30, 31.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-3 kathAeM 1. gaveSaNA : kuraMga-dRSTAMta kSitipratiSThita nAmaka
nagara meM jitazatru rAjA rAjya karatA thaa| usakI paTarAnI kA nAma sudarzanA
thaa| eka bAra garbhiNI rAnI ne rAjA ke sAtha citrasabhA meM praveza kiyaa|
vahAM use citralikhita sunahare pITha vAle mRgoM ko dekhakara unakA mAMsa khAne
kA dohada paidA ho gyaa| dohada pUrA na hone para kramaza: usakA zarIra durbala
hone lgaa| usako dekhakara rAjA ne khedapUrvaka pUchA-'priye! tumhArA zarIra
pratidina itanA durbala kyoM ho rahA hai?' rAnI ne rAjA ko apane dohada kI
avagati dii| rAjA ne tatkAla kanaka pRSTha vAle mRgoM ko lAne ke lie rAjapuruSoM
ko bhejaa| rAjapuruSoM ne apane mana meM socA ki jisa vyakti ko jo priya hotA
hai, vaha usameM Asakta hokara pramAdapUrvaka usa sukha meM lIna ho jAtA hai|
kanakapRSTha mRgoM ko zrIparNI phala priya hote haiN| yadyapi ve isa samaya
nahIM milate haiM lekina zrIparNI phala ke samAna modakoM ko banAkara zrIparNI
vRkSa ke nIce adhika mAtrA meM rakhakara jAla ko bichAne se ve AkRSTa ho
jaaeNge| unhoMne vaisA hI kiyaa| kanakapRSTha vAle mRga ghUmate hue apane
yUthapati ke sAtha vahAM A ge| yUthapati ne zrIparNI phala ke AkAra vAle r3hera
sAre modakoM ko dekhakara mRgoM se kahA-'tuma logoM ko jAla meM baddha karane ke
lie kisI dhUrta ne yahAM jAla bichAyA hai| isa mausama meM zrIparNI phala nahIM
phalate haiN| yadi phalate haiM to bhI itanI mAtrA meM nahIM hote| yadi aisA
mAne ki vAyu ke kAraNa itane phala nIce gire haiM, yaha bhI saMbhava nahIM hai
kyoMki pahale bhI vAyu calatI thI lekina itane sAre phala kabhI nahIM gire ataH
aisA pratIta hotA hai ki yaha jAla hama logoM ke baMdhana hetu DAlA gayA hai|
tuma loga ina phaloM ke pAsa mata jaanaa|' jina mRgoM ne yUthapati kI bAta ko
svIkAra kiyA, ve dIrghajIvI aura sukhI hue| AhAra kI lolupatA ke kAraNa jina
mRgoM ne usakI bAta ko svIkAra nahIM kiyA, ve jAla meM phaMsakara duHkhI ho ge|
2. gaveSaNA : gaja-dRSTAMta AnaMdapura nAmaka nagara meM ripumardana rAjA rAjya
karatA thaa| usakI paTarAnI kA nAma dhAriNI thaa| usakI nagarI ke pAsa saikar3oM
hAthiyoM se yukta vindhya parvata kI upatyakA meM eka araNya thaa| eka bAra rAjA
ne cintana kiyA ki gaja-bala rAjA kA sabase bar3A bala hotA hai ataH usane
hAthiyoM ko pakar3ane ke lie apane vyaktiyoM ko prerita kiyaa| rAjapuruSoM ne
socA ki hAthiyoM ko nalacArI acchI lagatI hai lekina vaha varSAkAla meM hotI
hai| abhI grISmakAla meM saMbhava nahIM hai| isa samaya araghaTTa-pAnI nikAlane
ke carakhe se sarovara ko bhara diyA jAe, jisase nalavaNa vanaspati adhika mAtrA
meM uga jaaegii| unhoMne vaisA hI kiyaa| nalavaNa ke pAsa cAroM ora jAla bichA
die ge| idhara-udhara ghUmate hue hAthI apane yUthapati ke sAtha vahAM aae| una
nalavaNoM ko dekhakara yUthAdhipati ne hAthiyoM ko sAvadhAna kiyA-'yaha nalavaNa
vanaspati 1. gA. 53/1-54 vR pa. 30, 31  /

Page #403 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 3: Stories  ### 231  These are not natural. It is possible that some
cunning person has laid this trap for the bondage of people. In addition, ponds
always fill up during the rainy season, not in the summer. If someone says that
the lake is filled by the flow of the waterfall of the Vindhya mountain and the
Nalvana has sprouted, then this is also not logical because there were many
waterfalls before, but the lake was never filled with so much water. Those
elephants who followed the words of the leader of the herd, they roamed happily
in the forest for a long time, but those who did not follow, they became bound
and became unhappy.   ### 3. Origin: Laddupriyakumar Story  The king of the city
named Shristhalak was named Bhanu. His queen's name was Rukmini and his son's
name was Surup. The prince was being raised happily by five nurses. Like the
gods, the Naga prince brought joy to many relatives and attained the age of
childhood. Growing with many arts like the phases of the moon in the bright
fortnight, pleasing the minds of beautiful women, the prince attained the age of
youth. He was very fond of sweets, hence he was known in the world as
'Modakpriya'.  One day, in the spring, the prince got up from his bedroom and
went to the assembly hall. There was a beautiful dance and other programs. When
it was time for food, his mother sent him sweets. He ate sweets freely with his
family. Due to staying awake at night because of songs and dances, the sweets
did not digest. Due to indigestion, his apan vayu became polluted. The stench
reached his nose. The prince thought that these sweets are made of ghee,
jaggery, and flour. These three substances are pure, but they become impure by
contact with the body. Camphor and other fragrant substances also become foul-
smelling in a moment by contact with the body. For this body, which is full of
such impurities and many defects, those who consume sinful deeds are like
unconscious people even though they are conscious due to the sleep of delusion.
Scholarship is only commendable when it contemplates the despicable and the
desirable, the harmful and the beneficial. Those people are blessed who, being
free from the body, immerse themselves in the ocean of nectar of knowledge
through the study of the right scriptures, remain equal towards enemies and
friends, conquer trials, and strive for the eradication of karma. The prince
thought while contemplating that I will also follow the path shown by great
people. Thus, with the emergence of detachment in the mind of that Modakpriya
prince, knowledge, vision, and character emerged and he attained liberation.
### 4. Counter-Example: The Thief Story  There were many robbers in a village.
Once they stole cows from a settlement and brought them to their village.   1.
Ga. 54/1, 55 Vr. P. 31, 32. 2. Ga. 57/2-4 Vr. P. 33, 34.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 3 : kathAeM 231 svAbhAvika nahIM haiN| saMbhava hai hama logoM ke
baMdhana hetu kisI dhUrta ne yaha jAla bichAyA hai| isake atirikta tAlAba hamezA
varSAkAla meM bharate haiM, grISmakAla meM nhiiN| yadi koI yaha kahe ki vindhya
parvata ke jharane ke pravAha se sarovara bhare haiM aura nalavaNa uge haiM to
yaha bAta bhI tarka saMgata nahIM hai kyoMki pahale bhI aneka jharane the lekina
sarovara kabhI bhI itane pAnI se nahIM bhre|' jina hAthiyoM ne yUthapati ke
vacanoM kA pAlana kiyA, ve dIrghakAla taka sukhapUrvaka vana meM vicaraNa karate
rahe lekina jinhoMne pAlana nahIM kiyA ve baMdhanagrasta hokara duHkhI ho ge| 3.
udgama : laDDukapriyakumAra kathAnaka zrIsthalaka nAmaka nagara ke rAjA kA nAma
bhAnu thaa| usakI paTarAnI kA nAma rukmiNI aura putra kA nAma surUpa thaa| pAMca
dhAtriyoM ke dvArA rAjakumAra kA sukhapUrvaka pAlana-poSaNa ho rahA thaa|
nAgakumAra devoM kI bhAMti vaha aneka svajanoM ko AnaMda detA huA kaumArya
avasthA ko prApta huaa| zuklapakSa ke candramA kI kalAoM kI bhAMti aneka kalAoM
se vRddhiMgata hotA huA, suMdara striyoM ke mana ko prasanna karatA huA kumAra
yauvana avasthA ko prApta huaa| usako modaka bahuta priya the ataH loka meM
usakA 'modakapriya' nAma prasiddha ho gyaa| eka dina vaha kumAra prAta:
basantakAla meM zayanakakSa se uThakara sabhAmaNDapa meM gyaa| vahAM suMdara
nRtya Adi kA Ayojana thaa| bhojana-velA Ane para usakI mAM ne usake lie modaka
bheje| usane parijanoM ke sAtha yatheccha modaka khaae| rAtri meM gIta-nRtya Adi
ke kAraNa jAgaraNa hone se ve modaka pace nhiiN| ajIrNa doSa ke kAraNa usakI
apAna vAyu dUSita ho gii| vaha durgandha usake nAka taka phuNcii| kumAra ne socA
ki ye modaka ghRta, gur3a aura ATe se bane haiN| ye tInoM padArtha zuci haiM
lekina zarIra ke samparka se ye azuci rUpa meM pariNata ho ge| kapUra Adi
surabhita padArtha bhI zarIra ke samparka se kSaNamAtra meM durgandhayukta ho
jAte haiN| isa prakAra ke azuci rUpa tathA aneka doSoM se yukta isa zarIra ke
lie jo vyakti pApakarma kA sevana karate haiM, ve sacetana hote hue bhI
mohanidrA ke kAraNa acetana jaise hI hote haiN| vidvattA vahI prazaMsanIya hotI
hai, jo heya aura upAdeya tathA hAna aura upAdAna kA cintana karatI rahatI hai|
ve vyakti dhanya haiM, jo zarIra se nispRha hokara samyak zAstra ke abhyAsa se
jJAnAmRta ke sAgara meM nimajjana karate rahate haiM, zatru aura mitra ke prati
sama rahate haiM, parISahoM ko jItate haiM aura karmoM ke nirmUlana ke lie
prayatna karate rahate haiN| rAjakumAra ne ciMtana karate hue socA ki maiM bhI
mahAn vyaktiyoM dvArA AcIrNa mArga kA anugamana kruuNgaa| isa prakAra usa
modakapriya rAjakumAra ke mana meM vairAgya kA udgama hone se jJAna, darzana
aura cAritra kA udgama ho gayA aura use kaivalya kI prApti ho gii| 4.
pratisevanA : cora-dRSTAnta kisI gAMva meM bahuta DAkU rahate the| eka bAra ve
kisI sanniveza se gAya curAkara apane gAMva kI 1. gA. 54/1, 55 vR pa. 31, 32  /
2. gA. 57/2-4 vR pa. 33, 34  /

Page #404 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
232 They set out to Pindanuyukti. On the way, they met other robbers. They also
started walking with them. As they walked, they reached near their village. Upon
reaching the village boundary, they became fearless. At mealtime, they started
cooking the meat of some cows they had killed. Meanwhile, some other travelers
also arrived there. The robbers invited them to eat as well. When the beef was
cooked, some robbers and travelers started eating it. Thinking that eating beef
is a great sin, some travelers did not eat that food. They only served others.
Meanwhile, some royal officials arrived there with swords in their hands. They
caught those who were eating with the thieves and those who were serving them.
The royal officials told the travelers who said that they had met on the way and
were not thieves, that they were serving beef and therefore were criminals like
thieves. They were all sentenced to death. 5. Pratiśravana: The Prince-Example
In the city of Gunasamruddha, King Mahabala ruled. His queen's name was Sheila.
His eldest son's name was Vijitsamar. To take over the kingdom, he started
thinking wrongly about his father - 'This father of mine is not attaining death
even though he is old, it seems he will be long-lived. I will kill him with the
help of my soldiers and sit on the throne.' He started consulting with his
soldiers. Some of the soldiers said - 'Prince! We will help you.' Others said -
'It would be good if you act this way.' Some soldiers remained silent at that
time. Some soldiers did not like this, so they informed the king of the whole
situation. The king put the eldest prince in the fire along with the soldiers
who helped, those who gave suggestions and those who remained silent. The
soldiers who came and informed him about this were honored. 6. Sanvas: The
Palli-Example In the city of Basantpur, there was King Arimaardan and Queen
Priyadarshana. Near Basantpur, there was a village called Bhima, where many Bhil
robbers and merchants lived. These robbers always used to come out of their
village and create disturbances in the city of King Arimaardan. None of the
king's samants and mandaliks could subdue them. Hearing about the disturbances
in the city, the king, filled with anger, went towards the village of the Bhil
robbers with resources and materials. The Bhils came forward and got ready for
war. Due to the strong army, the king, excited, started defeating and killing
them all. Some of them died and some fled from there. The king angrily took
possession of that village. The merchants living there thought that we are not
thieves, so what can the king do to us? Thinking this, they  1. Ga. 68/7,8 Vr.
P. 47, Pimpr13 T. P. 15. 2. Ga. 68/9 V. P. 47, Pimpr 13 T. P. 16.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 232 piMDaniyukti ora jAne lge| rAste meM unako anya DAkU bhI mila ge| ve bhI
unake sAtha calane lge| calate-calate ve apane gAMva ke pAsa A ge| gAMva kI sImA
Ane para ve nirbhaya ho ge| bhojana-velA meM unhoMne kucha gAyoM ko mArakara
unakA mAMsa pakAnA prAraMbha kiyaa| isI bIca kucha anya pathika bhI vahAM A ge|
DAkuoM ne unheM bhI bhojana hetu AmaMtrita kiyaa| gomAMsa pakane para kucha
dasyu evaM pathikoM ne use khAnA prAMrabha kara diyaa| gomAMsa kA bhakSaNa
bahuta bar3e pApa kA hetu hai, yaha socakara kucha pathikoM ne vaha bhojana
nahIM kiyaa| kevala dUsaroM ko parosane kA kArya kiyaa| isI bIca hAtha meM
talavAra dhAraNa kie hue kucha rAjapuruSa vahAM A ge| unhoMne coroM ke sAtha
bhojana karane vAloM aura parosane vAloM ko bhI pakar3a liyaa| jina pathikoM ne
kahA ki hama to rAste meM mile the, hama cora nahIM haiM, unako rAjapuruSoM ne
kahA ki tuma gomAMsa ko parosane vAle ho ataH cora kI bhAMti aparAdhI ho| una
sabako prANadaMDa kI sajA dI gii| 5. pratizravaNa : rAjaputra-dRSTAMta
guNasamRddha nAmaka nagara meM mahAbala nAmaka rAjA rAjya karatA thaa| usakI
paTarAnI kA nAma zIlA thaa| usake bar3e putra kA nAma vijitasamara thaa| rAjya
ko grahaNa karane ke lie usane pitA ke bAre meM galata DhaMga se socanA
prAraMbha kara diyA-'yaha merA pitA vRddha hote hue bhI maraNa ko prApta nahIM
hotA, lagatA hai yaha dIrghajIvI hogaa| maiM apane sainikoM kI sahAyatA se isako
mArakara rAjagaddI para bailuuNgaa|' usane apane sainikoM ke sAtha maMtraNA
karanI prAraMbha kara dii| unameM se kucha sainika bole-'rAjakumAra! hama ApakI
sahAyatA kreNge|' dUsare bole-'Apa isa prakAra kArya kareM to ThIka rhegaa|'
kucha sainika usa samaya mauna rahe  /  kucha sainikoM ko yaha bAta acchI nahIM
lagI ataH unhoMne rAjA ko sArI sthiti kA nivedana kara diyaa| rAjA ne sahAyatA
karane vAle, sujhAva dene vAle tathA mauna rahane vAle sainikoM ke sAtha jyeSTha
rAjakumAra ko agni meM DAla diyaa| jina sainikoM ne Akara isa bAta kI sUcanA dI,
unako sammAnita kiyaa| 6. saMvAsa : pallI-dRSTAMta basantapura nAmaka nagara meM
arimardana rAjA aura priyadarzanA paTarAnI thii| basantapura ke pAsa bhImA
nAmaka pallI thI, vahAM aneka bhIla dasyu aura vaNik rahate the| ve dasyu
sadaiva apanI pallI se nikalakara arimardana rAjA ke nagara meM upadrava karate
the| rAjA kA koI bhI sAmanta aura mANDalika unakA nigraha nahIM kara skaa|
nagara meM hone vAle upadravoM ko sunakara atyanta kruddha hokara sAdhana-
sAmagrI ke sAtha rAjA bhIla dasyuoM kI pallI kI ora gyaa| bhIla sAmane Akara
saMgrAma ke lie udyata ho ge| prabala senA ke kAraNa rAjA ne utsAhita hokara una
sabako parAjita karake mAranA prAraMbha kara diyaa| unameM se kucha mRtyu ko
prApta ho gae tathA kucha vahAM se bhAga ge| rAjA ne krodhapUrvaka usa pallI
para apanA adhikAra kara liyaa| vahAM rahane vAle vaNikoM ne socA ki hama cora
nahIM haiM ataH rAjA hamArA kyA kara sakegA? yahI socakara unhoMne 1. gA. 68/7,8
vR pa. 47, piMpra13 TI pa. 15 /  2. gA. 68/9 va pa. 47, piMpra 13 TI pa. 16 /

Page #405 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
1. Parihara 3: Kathayen 233. They did not flee from there. The king also
imprisoned them. The merchants pleaded with the king, "We are Vaniks
(merchants), not thieves." Hearing their words, the king said, "You are even
more criminal than thieves, because you live with the criminals who commit
crimes."  The king punished all those merchants.  7. Anumodana: Rajadushta-
dristanta In the city named Srinilaya, there was a king named Gunachandra. His
queen's name was Gunavati. In that city, there lived a merchant named Surup. His
body was more beautiful than Kamadeva (the god of love). Beautiful women
constantly desired him. He was attached to other women's wives. Once, he was
passing by the king's inner palace. The queens of the inner palace looked at him
with passionate eyes. He also looked at them with the same gaze. They developed
mutual attachment. Through a messenger, he started enjoying intimacy with them
daily. This news reached the king. When he reached the inner palace, the king's
men caught him. He was adorned with the same ornaments with which he had entered
the inner palace, and was publicly beaten to death at the city's crossroads.
Seeing the destruction of his inner palace, the king became very sorrowful. Even
after killing him, the king's anger did not subside. He summoned his messengers
and said, "Go to the city and find out who is praising that wicked person and
who is condemning him. Inform me of both." The king's men, disguised as
commoners, started roaming the entire city. Some people were saying, "Every
person who is born, dies. We are unfortunate because the queens of the inner
palace never come into our sight, but that person is fortunate, who enjoyed his
pleasure for a long time and then died." Others started saying, "This person is
worthy of condemnation, unfortunate, who has acted against both the worlds. The
king's queens are like mothers. How can the one who enjoyed intimacy with them
be worthy of praise by the wise?" The king's men presented both types of people
before the king. Considering those who condemned him as wise, the king honored
them, and threw those who praised him into the jaws of death.  8. Aadhakarm:
Shalyodana-dristanta In the village named Sankula, there lived a Shravaka (Jain
lay follower) named Jinadatta. His wife's name was Jinamati. In that village,
Kodrava and Ralaka grains were grown in large quantities. The ascetics also used
to take their food there. The village's Upashray (Jain residential hall) was
devoid of women, animals, and eunuchs, and was extremely pleasant. Swadhyaya
(self-study) also took place there uninterruptedly. In that village, there was
no Shalyodana (rice cooked with vegetables), so no Acharya (Jain preceptor) used
to stay there.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 3 : kathAeM 233 vahAM se palAyana nahIM kiyaa| rAjA ne unako bhI baMdI
banA liyaa| vaNikoM ne rAjA se nivedana kiyA-'hama banie haiM, cora nhiiN|'
unakI bAta sunakara rAjA ne kahA-'tuma loga cora se bhI adhika aparAdhI ho
kyoMki tuma aparAdha karane vAle coroM ke sAtha rahate ho|' rAjA ne una saba
vaNikoM kA nigraha kara liyaa| 7. anumodanA : rAjaduSTa-dRSTAMta zrInilaya
nAmaka nagara meM guNacandra nAmaka rAjA rAjya karatA thaa| usakI paTarAnI kA
nAma guNavatI thaa| usa nagara meM surUpa nAmaka vaNik nivAsa karatA thaa| usakA
zarIra kAmadeva se bhI adhika suMdara thaa| suMdara striyAM usakI abhilASA
karatI rahatI thiiN| vaha parastrI meM anurakta rahatA thaa| eka bAra vaha rAjA
ke aMtaHpura ke samIpa se gujara rahA thaa| aMta:pura kI rAniyoM ne rAgayukta
dRSTi se use dekhaa| usane bhI usI dRSTi se unako dekhaa| unakA Apasa meM
anurAga ho gyaa| dUtI ke mAdhyama se vaha pratidina unake sAtha bhoga bhogane
lgaa| rAjA ke pAsa yaha vRttAnta phuNcaa| jaba vaha aMta:pura meM pahuMcA to
rAjapuruSoM ne usako pakar3a liyaa| vaha jina AbhUSaNoM ko pahanakara aMta:pura
meM praviSTa huA thA, unhIM AbhUSaNoM se yukta usako saba logoM ke samakSa
nagara ke caurAhe para apamAnapUrvaka mAra diyA gyaa| apane aMta:pura kA vinAza
dekhakara rAjA bahuta du:khI ho gyaa| usakA prANaghAta karane para bhI rAjA kA
krodha zAnta nahIM huaa| usane apane dUtoM ko bulAkara kahA-'nagara meM jAkara
jJAta karo ki kauna usa duSTa kI prazaMsA kara rahA hai aura kauna usakI niMdA
kara rahA hai|' donoM kI mujhe jAnakArI do| kArpaTika veza meM ve rAjapuruSa
pUre nagara meM ghUmane lge| kucha loga kaha rahe the ki janma lene vAlA hara
vyakti maratA hai| hama loga adhanya haiM kyoMki aMta:pura kI rAniyAM kabhI
hamArI dRSTipatha para nahIM AtIM lekina vaha vyakti dhanya hai, jo cirakAla
taka usakA sukha bhogakara marA hai| dUsare kucha vyakti kahane lage-'yaha
vyakti niMdA kA pAtra hai, adhanya hai jisane ubhaya loka ke viruddha kArya kiyA
hai| rAjA kI rAniyAM mAM ke samAna hotI haiN| unake sAtha bhoga bhogane vAlA
ziSTa vyaktiyoM ke dvArA prazaMsA kA pAtra kaise ho sakatA hai?' rAjapuruSoM ne
una donoM prakAra ke logoM ko rAjA ke samakSa prastuta kiyaa| jo usakI niMdA
karane vAle the, unako buddhimAna mAnakara rAjA ne sammAnita kiyA tathA prazaMsA
karane vAloM ko mauta ke mukha meM DAla . diyaa| 8. AdhAkarma : zAlyodana-
dRSTAMta saMkula nAmaka gAMva meM jinadatta nAmaka zrAvaka rahatA thaa| usakI
patnI kA nAma jinamati thaa| usa gAMva meM kodrava aura rAlaka dhAnya adhika
mAtrA meM ugate the| sAdhu loga bhI vahI bhojana grahaNa karate the| gAMva kA
upAzraya strI, pazu aura napuMsaka se rahita sama bhUtala vAlA tathA atyanta
ramaNIya thaa| usa upAzraya meM svAdhyAya bhI nirvighna rUpa se hotA thaa| usa
gAMva meM zAlyodana nahIM thA ataH kisI bhI AcArya kA pravAsa vahAM nahIM hotA
thaa| 1. gA. 69/1 vR pa. 48, 49, piMpraTI pa. 17 /  2. gA. 69/3 vR pa. 49,
piMpraTI pa. 17, 18  /

Page #406 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
234 One day, the Acharya arrived at a village called Bhadrail near Sankul
village. He sent the sadhus to Sankul village for area transcription. The sadhus
went to the Shravak Jindatt and requested accommodation. Jindatt happily granted
them permission to stay in a suitable accommodation. The sadhus transcribed the
land and the entire village. Upon returning to the shelter, Shravak Jindatt
asked the senior sadhu, "Did you like this area? Can the Acharya visit this
area?" The senior sadhu replied, "Vartmanyogena." From his answer, Jindatt
understood that they did not like the area. Jindatt thought that other sadhus
also come here but no one stays here, the reason for this is still unknown. To
know the root cause, he asked another sadhu. He simply explained everything and
said, "This area has all the qualities, this area is worthy of the Gachchha, but
there is no Shalyodana worthy of the Acharya here." Knowing this, Shravak
Jindatt brought Shali-seeds from another village and sowed them in his village.
There was abundant production of Shali there. Once, while traveling, some other
sadhus also came to that village along with those sadhus. Shravak Jindatt
thought, "I should give these sadhus Shalyodana as alms, so that these sadhus,
considering this area worthy of the Acharya, will also bring the Acharya to this
area. If I give Shalyodana only from my house and other houses get Kodrava etc.
grains, then the sadhus will have doubts about Adhakarma." He sent Shalyodana to
the homes of all his relatives and said, "You cook and eat Shalyodana yourself
and also donate it to the sadhus." This matter became known to all the children
as well. When the sadhus went for alms, they heard many things from the mouths
of the children. One child said, "These are the sadhus for whom Shalyodana is
made at home." Another child said, "My mother gave me Shalyodana related to the
sadhus." Somewhere, a donor Shravika said, "This is given Shalyodana, now take
alms from my house too." Some householder said to his wife, "Shalyodana has been
given in alms, now give alms of your own cooked food too." Some ignorant child
started saying to his mother, "Give me Shalyodana related to the sadhus." The
poor person said with joy, "Even though we lack devotion, Shali devotion has
been made. This has happened at the right time." Somewhere, a child said to his
mother, "Mother! Give Shali Tandulodak to the sadhus." Another child 1. Here,
the commentator has mentioned a worldly example to explain "Thhakke
Thhakkaavadiyan" - being appropriate for the occasion - in the middle of the
story: In a village called Sur, there lived a Gwalin named Yashodhara. Her
husband's name was Yogaraj and her brother-in-law's name was Vatsaraj. His
wife's name was Yodhani. Once, for some reason, Yodhani and Yogaraj died
together. Then Yashodhara said to her brother-in-law Vatsaraj, "I want to become
your wife." The brother-in-law thought that I also don't have a wife, so he
accepted his sister-in-law's suggestion. Yashodhara thought, "Oh! The work has
become appropriate for the occasion. At the time of my husband's death, my
brother-in-law's wife also died. For this reason, the brother-in-law accepted me
as his wife, otherwise he would not have accepted my words." (Ga. 76/4 Vr. P.
64).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 234 piMDaniyukti eka dina saMkula gAMva ke pAsa bhadrila nAmaka grAma meM
AcArya kA Agamana huaa| unhoMne kSetra pratilekhana ke lie sAdhuoM ko saMkula
grAma meM bhejaa| sAdhuoM ne zrAvaka jinadatta ke pAsa Akara vasati kI yAcanA
kii| jinadatta ne atyanta prasannatA se kalpanIya vasati meM rahane kI anujJA
pradAna kii| sAdhuoM ne sthaNDila bhUmi evaM sampUrNa gAMva kI pratilekhanA kii|
upAzraya meM Akara jinadatta zrAvaka ne jyeSTha sAdhu se pUchA-'kyA Apako yaha
kSetra pasaMda AyA? kyA AcArya isa kSetra meM padArpaNa kara sakate haiM?'
unameM se jyeSTha sAdhu ne uttara diyaa-'vrtmaanyogen|' unake uttara se
jinadatta ko jJAta huA ki inako kSetra pasaMda nahIM AyA hai| jinadatta ne socA
ki anya sAdhu bhI yahAM Ate haiM lekina yahAM koI rukatA nahIM hai, isakA kAraNa
abhI taka jJAta nahIM ho sakA hai| mUla kAraNa ko jAnane ke lie usane kisI anya
sAdhu ko puuchaa| usane saralatApUrvaka sArI bAta batAte hue kahA-'isa kSetra
meM sAre guNa haiM, yaha kSetra gaccha ke yogya hai lekina yahAM AcArya ke yogya
zAlyodana nahIM haiN|' isa bAta ko jAnakara jinadatta zrAvaka dUsare gAMva se
zAli-bIja lekara AyA aura apane gAMva meM unakA vapana kara diyaa| vahAM
prabhUta zAli kI utpatti huii| eka bAra vihAra karate hue una sAdhuoM ke sAtha
kucha anya sAdhu bhI usa gAMva meM aae| zrAvaka jinadatta ne socA-'mujhe ina
sAdhuoM ko zAlyodana kI bhikSA denI cAhie, jisase AcArya ke yogya kSetra
samajhakara ye sAdhu AcArya ko bhI isa kSetra meM lekara aaeN| yadi maiM kevala
apane ghara se zAlyodana dUMgA aura anya gharoM meM kodrava Adi dhAnya kI prApti
hogI to sAdhuoM ko AdhAkarma kI zaMkA ho jaaegii|' usane sabhI svajanoM ke ghara
zAlyodana bhejakara kahA-'tuma svayaM zAlyodana pakAkara khAo aura sAdhuoM ko
bhI dAna do|' yaha bAta saba bAlakoM ko bhI jJAta ho gii| sAdhu jaba bhikSArtha
gae to unhoMne bAlakoM ke mukha se aneka bAteM suniiN| koI bAlaka bolA-'ye ve
sAdhu haiM, jinake lie ghara meM zAlyodana banA hai|' anya bAlaka bolA-'sAdhu
saMbaMdhI zAlyodana ko merI mAM ne mujhe diyaa|' kahIM-kahIM koI dAnadAtrI
zrAvikA bolI'yaha parakIya zAlyodana diyA, aba mere ghara kI bhikSA bhI lo|' koI
gRhasvAmI apanI patnI se bolA'parakIya zAlyodana bhikSA meM de diyA, aba apanA
banAyA huA AhAra bhI bhikSA meM do|' koI anabhijJa bAlaka apanI mAM se kahane
lagA-'mujhe sAdhu se saMbaMdhita zAlyodana do|' daridra vyakti saharSa
bolA'hamAre yahAM bhakta kA abhAva hone para bhI zAli bhakta banA hai| yaha
avasara para avasara ke anukUla bAta huI hai| kahIM koI bAlaka apanI mAM se
bolA-'mAM! zAli taNDulodaka sAdhu ko do', dUsarA bAlaka 1. yahAM TIkAkAra ne
kathA ke bIca meM thakke thakkAvaDiyaM'-avasara para avasara ke anukUla honA ko
spaSTa karane ke lie eka laukika dRSTAnta kA ullekha kiyA hai-sUra nAmaka gAMva
meM yazodharA nAmaka eka gvAlina rahatI thii| usake pati kA nAma yogarAja tathA
devara kA nAma vatsarAja thaa| usakI bhAryA kA nAma yodhanI thaa| eka bAra kisI
kAraNa se yodhanI aura yogarAja kI eka sAtha mRtyu ho gii| taba yazodharA ne
apane devara vatsarAja ko kahA-'maiM tumhArI patnI bananA cAhatI huuN|' devara
ne socA ki merI bhI patnI nahIM hai ataH usane bhAbhI kA sujhAva svIkRta kara
liyaa| yazodharA ne socA-'aho! avasara para avasara ke anukUla kArya ho gyaa|
jisa samaya mere pati kA dehAvasAna huA, usI samaya mere devara kI patnI kI bhI
mRtyu huii| isI kAraNa devara ne mujhe patnI ke rUpa meM svIkRta kara liyA,
anyathA vaha merI bAta svIkRta nahIM karatA' (gA. 76/4 vR. pa. 64) /

Page #407 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Parī. 3: Kathāeṃ 235 Bolā- ' -'Sādhu ko śālikāñjika do.' Sabake mukha se aneka
prakāra kī bātōṃ sunakara sādhūōṃ ne logōṃ se pūchā - ' Yaha kyā bāta hai ?'
Pūchane para unhōṃne ṛjutā se sārī bāta batādī ki yaha śālyodana sādhūōṃ ke lie
banāyā gayā hai. 'Sārā śālyodana ādhākarmika hai' 1- yaha jānakara sādhūōṃ ne
una saba ghārōṃ kā parihāra kara diyā aura bhikṣārtha anya ghārōṃ meṃ cale gae.
Kuchha sādhu jinakī bhikṣā vahāṃ pūrī nahīṃ huī, ve pratyāsanna gāṃva meṃ bhikṣā
ke lie cale gae.  9. Ādhākarma: Pānaka- Dṛṣṭānta Kisī gāṃva meṃ sāre kūpa khāre
pānī ke the. Usa lavaṇa pradhāna kṣetra meṃ kṣetra - pratyupekṣaṇa ke lie kuchha
sādhu āe. Unhōṃne pūrā kṣetra kī pratilephanā kī. Tatrastha nivāsī śrāvakōṃ ke
dvārā sādara anurodha karane para bhī sādhu vahāṃ nahīṃ ruke. Śrāvakōṃ ne unmaiṃ
se kisī sarala sādhu ko vahāṃ na rukane kā kāraṇa pūchā. Usane saralatā se
yathārtha bāta batāte hue kahā - ' Isa kṣetra meṃ aura saba guṇa haiṃ' kevala
khārā pānī hai isaliye sādhu yahāṃ nahīṃ rukte. Sādhūōṃ ke jāne para śrāvaka ne
mīṭhe pānī kā kūpa khudavāyā. Usako khudavākara lokapravṛtti janita pāpa ke
bhaya se kūpa kā mukha phalaka se taba taka ḍhak diyā, jaba taka koī anya sādhu
vahāṃ na āe. Sādhūōṃ ke āne para usane sochā ki kevala mere ghara mīṭhā pānī
rahegā to sādhūōṃ ko ādhākarma kī āśaṃkā ho jāegī ataḥ usane saba ghārōṃ meṃ
mīṭhā pānī bhej diyā. Pūrvokta kathānaka ke anusāra sādhūōṃ ne bālakōṃ ke mukha
se saṃlāpa sunakara jān liyā ki yaha pānī ādhākarmika hai. Unhōṃne usa gāṃva ko
chōṛa diyā.  10. Atikrama ādi doṣa: Nūpurapandita kā kathānaka Jambūdvīpa ke
bhāratavarṣa meṃ basantapura nāmaka nagara thā. Vahāṃ ke rājā kā nāma jitaśatru
aura rānī kā nāma dhāriṇī thā. Eka bāra nadī meṃ snāna hetu kuchha mahilāeṃ
tālāba ke kinare āīṃ. Vahāṃ eka mahilā ke sātha sudarśana nāmaka puruṣa kā āpasa
meṃ anurāga ho gayā. Dūtī ke mādhyama se unakā āpasa meṃ sambandha sthāpita ho
gayā. Kṛṣṇa pañcamī ko saṃketita aśoka vanikā meṃ unadorōṃ kā samāgama huā. Ve
vahīṃ nidrādhīna ho gae. Caturtha yāma meṃ śvaśura ne unadorōṃ ko sātha sote hue
dekh liyā. Usane dhīre se putravadhū ke pāira se nūpura nikāl liyā. Śvaśura ke
isa vṛttānta ko jānakara usane usa jāra puruṣa ko vahāṃ se bāhara bhej diyā aura
svayaṃ pati ke pāsa jākara so gaī. Thōṛī dēra bāda usane pati ko jāgākara kahā -
' Yahāṃ garmī hai ataḥ aśoka vanikā meṃ calate haiṃ.' Ve vahāṃ cale gae. Thōṛī
dēra meṃ pati ko uṭhākara usane kahā- 'Kyā yaha hamāre kula anurūpa ācāra hai ki
pati ke sātha rati-sukha kā anubhava karatī huī putravadhū ke pairōṃ se śvaśura
nūpura le jāe.' Pati ne pūchā- 'Kyā yaha satya hai?' Prātaḥ kāla putra ne apane
pitā se pūchā. Pitā ne kahā ' -'Tumhārī patnī svairinī hai, vaha rātri meṃ kisī
anya puruṣa ke sātha soī thī ataḥ maiṃne usakē pairōṃ se  1. Gā. 76 - 76/5 Vṛ p.
63, 64, Piṃpra ṭī p. 11. 2. Gā. 77 Vṛ p. 65.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 3 : kathAeM 235 bolA- ' -'sAdhu ko zAlikAJjika do  / ' sabake mukha se
aneka prakAra kI bAteM sunakara sAdhuoM ne logoM se pUchA - ' yaha kyA bAta hai
?' pUchane para unhoMne RjutA se sArI bAta batA dI ki yaha zAlyodana sAdhuoM ke
lie banAyA gayA hai  /  'sArA zAlyodana AdhAkarmika hai' 1- yaha jAnakara
sAdhuoM ne una saba gharoM kA parihAra kara diyA aura bhikSArtha anya gharoM meM
cale ge| kucha sAdhu jinakI bhikSA vahAM pUrI nahIM huI, ve pratyAsanna gAMva
meM bhikSA ke lie cale gae  / ' 9. AdhAkarma : pAnaka- dRSTAMta kisI gAMva meM
sAre kUpa khAre pAnI ke the| usa lavaNa pradhAna kSetra meM kSetra -
pratyupekSaNa ke lie kucha sAdhu aae| unhoMne pUre kSetra kI pratilekhanA kI  /
tatrastha nivAsI zrAvakoM ke dvArA sAdara anurodha karane para bhI sAdhu vahAM
nahIM ruke| zrAvakoM ne unameM se kisI sarala sAdhu ko vahAM na rukane kA kAraNa
puuchaa| usane saralatA se yathArtha bAta batAte hue kahA - ' isa kSetra meM
aura saba guNa haiM' kevala khArA pAnI hai isalie sAdhu yahAM nahIM rukate  /
sAdhuoM ke jAne para zrAvaka ne mIThe pAnI kA kUpa khudavAyA  /  usako
khudavAkara lokapravRtti janita pApa ke bhaya se kUpa kA mukha phalaka se taba
taka r3haka diyA, jaba taka koI anya sAdhu vahAM na aae| sAdhuoM ke Ane para
usane socA ki kevala mere ghara mIThA pAnI rahegA to sAdhuoM ko AdhAkarma kI
AzaMkA ho jAegI ataH usane saba gharoM meM mIThA pAnI bheja diyaa| pUrvokta
kathAnaka ke anusAra sAdhuoM ne bAlakoM ke mukha se saMlApa sunakara jAna liyA
ki yaha pAnI AdhAkarmika hai| unhoMne usa gAMva ko chor3a diyA  /  10. atikrama
Adi doSa : nUpurapaMDitA kA kathAnaka jaMbUdvIpa ke bhAratavarSa meM basantapura
nAmaka nagara thA  /  vahAM ke rAjA kA nAma jitazatru aura rAnI kA nAma dhAriNI
thaa| eka bAra nadI meM snAna hetu kucha mahilAeM tAlAba ke kinAre aaiiN| vahAM
eka mahilA ke sAtha sudarzana nAmaka puruSa kA Apasa meM anurAga ho gayA  /
dUtI ke mAdhyama se unakA Apasa meM saMbaMdha sthApita ho gayA  /  kRSNA paMcamI
ko saMketita azoka vanikA meM una donoM kA samAgama huaa| ve vahIM nidrAdhIna ho
ge| caturtha yAma meM zvasura ne una donoM ko sAtha sote hue dekha liyaa| usane
dhIre se putravadhU ke paira se nUpura nikAla liyA  /  zvasura ke isa vRttAnta
ko jAnakara usane usa jAra puruSa ko vahAM se bAhara bheja diyA aura svayaM pati
ke pAsa jAkara so gii| thor3I dera bAda usane pati ko jagAkara kahA - ' yahAM
garmI hai ataH azoka vanikA meM calate haiN|' ve vahAM cale ge| thor3I dera meM
pati ko uThAkara usane kahA- 'kyA yaha hamAre kula anurUpa AcAra hai ki pati ke
sAtha rati-sukha kA anubhava karatI huI putravadhU ke pairoM se zvasura nUpura
le jAe  / ' pati ne pUchA- 'kyA yaha satya hai ?' prAtaH kAla putra ne apane
pitA se pUchA  /  pitA ne kahA' -'tumhArI patnI svairiNI hai, vaha rAtri meM
kisI anya puruSa ke sAtha soI thI ataH maiMne usake pairoM se 1. gA. 76 - 76/5
vR pa. 63, 64, piMpra TI pa. 11  /  2. gA. 77 vR pa. 65  /

Page #408 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
236 The daughter-in-law removed the anklets. The son said, 'I was the only one
in the Ashoka garden.' The elderly father said, 'I can say with certainty that
there was another man with her at night.' Meanwhile, the daughter-in-law came
and said in a loud voice, 'Until my purity is restored, I will not accept the
bhakta-pana.'  Hearing the commotion, people gathered. She said, 'I will purify
myself by taking the divine test.' The elderly citizens said, 'Undergo the test
in front of the Yaksha in the temple.' After bathing and performing rituals, she
reached there with the citizens. The king and others were also present.
Meanwhile, a paramour named Sudarshana, disguised as a madman, came there
wearing tattered clothes. He embraced the people and forcibly embraced the
daughter-in-law. Addressing the guardians, he said, 'If I have not even thought
of any man other than the one my parents married me to, and this possessed man,
then I will safely pass through the Yaksha.'  Hearing this, the Yaksha was
perplexed. She quickly passed through the Yaksha's idol. People cheered for her.
Everyone started cursing the elder. The Yaksha thought, 'She has also deceived
me.'  Despite being truthful, the elder was proven to be a liar. This worry kept
the elder awake. He was appointed as the gatekeeper of the queens' chambers.
When the first watch of the night passed, all the queens fell asleep, but one
queen could not sleep. The elder pretended to sleep. The queen went to the
mahout using the elephant's trunk. Due to the delay, the mahout angrily struck
her with an iron chain. The queen said, 'Don't be angry. There is an old man
appointed in the palace who has been sleeping for a long time.' In the morning,
she went back to the palace on the elephant. The elder thought, 'If even the
pure wives of the king can behave in such a contrary manner, then there is
nothing surprising in what my daughter-in-law did.'  Thinking this, he became
free from worry and fell into a deep sleep. Even at sunrise, he did not wake up.
The complaint reached the king. The king summoned him, but the elder said,
'Don't wake me up.' On the seventh day, when his sleep was broken, the king
asked, 'What is the matter?' Then he told the king the whole story and said that
he did not know that queen.  The king had a clay elephant made. All the queens
crossed the elephant. One queen said, 'I am afraid of the clay elephant.'
Suspecting her, the king struck her with a lotus stalk. She fainted and fell to
the ground. Marks of the iron chain blows on her back were visible. The king
said, 'You were not afraid of the mad elephant, nor did you faint when struck
with the chain, but you fainted when I struck you with the lotus stalk.' The
king realized that she was a wanton woman. The king immediately ordered that the
queen, the mahout, and the elephant - all three are worthy of execution. The
executioner took them to the mountain and killed them.  The people told the
king...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 236 piMDaniyukti nUpura nikAla liyaa|' putra ne kahA-'azoka vanikA meM maiM hI
thaa|' vRddha pitA bolA-'maiM nizcayapUrvaka kaha sakatA hUM ki rAtri meM usake
sAtha koI anya puruSa thaa|' isI bIca putravadhU ne Akara ucca svara meM
kahA-'jaba taka merI kalaMka-zuddhi nahIM hogI, taba taka maiM bhakta-pAna
grahaNa nahIM kruuNgii|' kolAhala sunakara loga ekatrita ho ge| usane sabake
samakSa kahA-'maiM divya-ghaTa lekara svayaM ko zuddha pramANita kruuNgii|'
vRddha nAgarikoM ne kahA-'kutrikApaNa meM yakSa ke samakSa parIkSA do|' vaha
snAna Adi se zuddha hokara balikarma karake nAgarikoM ke sAtha vahAM phuNcii|
vahAM rAjA Adi bhI upasthita the| isI bIca vaha sudarzana nAmaka jAra puruSa bhI
pAgala kA rUpa banAkara phaTe-purAne kapar3e pahanakara vahAM A gyaa| vaha logoM
kA AliMgana karatA huA usake pAsa AyA aura putravadhU kA balAt AliMgana karane
lgaa| lokapAloM ko saMbodhita karake usane yakSa se kahA-'mere mAtA-pitA ne jisa
vyakti ke sAtha merA vivAha kiyA, usako tathA isa grahAviSTa puruSa ko
chor3akara yadi maiMne mana se bhI kisI puruSa kA cintana nahIM kiyA hai to maiM
yakSa ke nIce se kuzalatApUrvaka nikala jaauuNgii|' usakI bAta sunakara yakSa
kiMkartavyavimUr3ha hokara kucha socane lgaa| itane meM vaha zIghratA se yakSa
kI pratimA ke nIce se nikala gyii| logoM meM usakI jayajayakAra hone lgii| sabhI
sthavira ko dhikkArane lge| yakSa ne socA-'isane mujhe bhI Thaga liyaa|'
satyavAdI hone para bhI vRddha jhUThA sAbita ho gyaa| isa cintA se sthavira kI
nidrA ur3a gii| usako aMta:pura kI rAniyoM ke dvArapAla ke rUpa meM niyukta kara
diyA gyaa| rAtri kA prathama prahara bItane para sabhI rAniyAM nidrAdhIna ho
gaIM lekina eka rAnI ko nIMda nahIM A rahI thii| sthavira ne socA avazya hI koI
kAraNa honA cAhie ataH usane kapaTa-nidrA lenI prAraMbha kara dii| rAnI hAthI kI
sUMDa ke sahAre mahAvata ke pAsa calI gii| derI se Ane ke kAraNa mahAvata ne
roSapUrvaka lohe kI sAMkala se use tAr3ita kiyaa| rAnI ne kahA-'gussA mata kro|
aMta:pura meM eka aisA vRddha niyukta huA hai, jise bahuta derI se nIMda aaii|'
prAta:kAla hAthI para car3hakara vaha puna: aMta:pura meM calI gii| vRddha ne
socA-'jaba ubhayakula vizuddha rAjA kI patniyAM bhI aisA viruddha AcaraNa kara
sakatI haiM to phira merI putravadhU ne jo kiyA, usameM koI Azcarya nahIM hai|'
aisA socakara vaha ciMtAmukta hokara gaharI nIMda meM calA gyaa| sUryodaya hone
para bhI vaha nahIM utthaa| rAjA taka usakI zikAyata phuNcii| rAjA ne usako
bulAyA lekina vRddha bolA ki mujhe mata utthaao| sAtaveM dina usakI nIMda TUTI
taba rAjA ne pUchA- kyA bAta hai?' taba usane sArI bAta batAte hue rAjA se kahA
ki maiM usa rAnI ko nahIM pahacAnatA huuN| rAjA ne miTTI kA hAthI bnvaayaa| saba
rAniyoM ne usa hAthI ko lAMgha diyaa| eka rAnI bolI'miTTI ke hAthI se mujhe
bhaya lagatA hai|' zaMkA hone para rAjA ne utpala-nAla se usako tAr3ita kiyaa|
vaha mUchita hokara dharatI para gira gii| usakI pITha para lohe kI sAMkala ke
prahAra dikhAI die| rAjA ne kahAmadonmatta hAthI para car3hate hue tumheM bhaya
nahIM lagA, zrRMkhalA se prahAra karane para bhI tuma mUchita nahIM huI lekina
mere dvArA utpala-nAla kA prahAra karane para tuma mUchita ho gii| rAjA ne jAna
liyA ki yaha svairiNI hai| rAjA ne usI samaya Adeza diyA ki rAnI, mahAvata aura
hAthI-ye tInoM vadha karane yogya haiN| parvata para le jAkara inakA vadha
karanA hai| chinna TaMka para le jAkara mahAvata ne hAthI kA eka paira Upara
utthaayaa| logoM ne rAjA ko

Page #409 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 3: Stories  ### 237. The Elephant and the King  It was requested that
the poor elephant was a *tiryanch* (animal). What does it know? Therefore, don't
kill it. But the king did not accept their plea. He painfully lifted the next
two legs. Even after pleading, the king did not revoke his order. When three
legs were lifted, people started discussing that the king was killing an
innocent elephant. When the anger subsided, the king said, "Are you able to put
the elephant's legs back on the ground?" The mahout said, "If you grant us
*abhayadan* (protection), I can bring the elephant back to its original
position." The king granted them *abhayadan*. The mahout, through the *ankush*
(goad), brought the elephant back to its original position. The king, along with
the queen, banished the mahout.  Concluding this story, the commentator
Malayagiri says that when one leg is lifted on a broken *tank* (platform), the
elephant can put that leg back down with a little effort. Similarly, when a
*muni* (Jain monk) commits a minor transgression, he can return to *sanjam*
(self-control) with a little purification. When two more legs are lifted, the
elephant painfully brings its legs back to their original position. Similarly, a
*sadhu* (Jain ascetic) can purify himself with a specific good resolve when he
commits a *vyatikram* (major transgression). Just as an elephant, with three
legs lifted and standing on one leg, can painfully return itself to its previous
position, similarly, a *muni* can purify himself with a more specific good
resolve when he commits an *atichaar* (grave transgression). Just as that
elephant, with all four legs in the air, is unable to return them, it inevitably
falls to the ground and perishes. Similarly, a *sadhu*, remaining in *anaachar*
(unrighteous conduct), inevitably destroys his *sanjam* (self-control) soul. The
commentator says that in the story, the elephant did not lift all four legs, but
in *dartantik* (future), based on the possibility, the plan of *anaachar* is
made.  ### 11. The Ineligibility of *Adhakarm* (Half-Action): The Vomit Example
In the city of Vakrapur, there lived a soldier named Ugratej. His wife's name
was Rukmini. Once, Ugratej's elder brother, Soudas, came from a nearby village
as a guest. Ugratej brought meat for food and gave it to Rukmini to cook. Due to
being busy with household chores, she ate the meat by mistake. Meanwhile, it was
time for Soudas and Ugratej to eat, and she became anxious. In the meantime, a
dog, having eaten the flesh of a dead *karpatik* (animal), vomited in the
courtyard of her house due to *vayu-sankshhob* (wind disturbance). Rukmini
thought, "If I go to a shop and buy meat, it will take a long time. It's time
for my husband and brother-in-law to eat, so I will wash this vomited meat well
and season it with spices." She did just that.  1. See *Ga. 82/2 Vr. P. 68* and
*Dharmopadeśamālā* pp. 46-52. 2. This story is translated in brief from the
*Dharmopadeśamālā* text because the commentator has mentioned, "The story of
*Nupurpanditaya* is very famous and long, so it is not written here, but it can
be understood from the explanation of *Dharmopadeśamālā*." The story continues
further there, but only this much is relevant here, so the rest of the story is
not translated.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari.3: kathAeM 237 nivedana kiyA ki becArA hAthI tiryaJca hai| yaha kyA jAnatA
hai ataH isako mata mAro lekina rAjA ne unakI bAta svIkRta nahIM kii| Age ke do
pairoM ko bhI usane kaSTapUrvaka utthaayaa| prArthanA karane para bhI rAjA ne
Adeza vApasa nahIM liyaa| tIna paira Upara uThAne para loga carcA karane lage ki
rAjA nirdoSa hAthI kA vadha kara rahA hai| usa samaya kopa zAnta hone para rAjA
ne kahA-'kyA tuma hAthI ke pairoM ko vApasa dharatI para rakhavAne meM samartha
ho?' mahAvata ne kahA-'yadi hama logoM ko abhayadAna do to maiM hAthI ko mUla
sthiti meM lA sakatA huuN|' rAjA ne unako abhayadAna de diyaa| mahAvata ne
aMkuza ke mAdhyama se hAthI ko mUla sthiti meM lauTA diyaa| rAjA ne rAnI ke
sAtha mahAvata ko deza-nikAlA de diyaa| isa kathA kA upasaMhAra karate hue
TIkAkAra malayagiri kahate haiM ki chinna TaMka para eka paira uThAne para hAthI
thor3e kaSTa se vApasa usa paira ko nIce rakha sakatA hai| isI prakAra atikrama
doSa hone para thor3e vizuddha pariNAmoM se muni punaH saMyama meM sthita ho
jAtA hai| Age ke do paira uThAne para vaha hAthI klezapUrvaka apane pairoM ko
puna: mUla sthiti meM lAtA hai| isI prakAra sAdhu bhI vyatikrama doSa hone para
viziSTa zubha adhyavasAya se svayaM ko vizuddha kara sakatA hai| jaise tIna
paira ko Upara uThAkara pIche eka paira para khar3A hAthI atyanta kaSTapUrvaka
svayaM ko pUrva sthiti meM lauTA sakatA hai, isI prakAra aticAra doSa lagane
para viziSTatara zubha adhyavasAya se muni svayaM ko zuddha kara sakatA hai|
jaise vaha hAthI cAroM pairoM ko AkAza meM sthita karake punaH use lauTAne meM
samartha nahIM hotA, vaha niyamataH hI bhUmi para girakara vinaSTa ho jAtA hai|
isI prakAra sAdhu bhI anAcAra meM sthita rahakara niyama se saMyama rUpI AtmA kA
nAza kara letA hai| TIkAkAra kahate haiM ki kathAnaka meM hAthI ne cAroM paira
Upara nahIM uThAe lekina dArTAntika meM saMbhAvanA ke AdhAra para anAcAra kI
yojanA kI hai| 11. AdhAkarma kI abhojyatA : vamana-dRSTAMta vakrapura nAmaka
nagara meM ugrateja nAmaka sainika rahatA thaa| usakI patnI kA nAma rukmiNI
thaa| eka bAra ugrateja kA bar3A bhAI saudAsa pAsa ke gAMva se atithi ke rUpa
meM aayaa| ugrateja bhojana ke lie mAMsa lAyA aura use pakAne ke lie rukmiNI ko
diyaa| ghara ke kArya meM vyasta rahane ke kAraNa vaha mAMsa mArjAra khA gyaa|
idhara saudAsa aura ugrateja kI bhojana-velA hone para vaha vyAkula ho gii| isI
bIca kisI mRta kArpaTika ke kutte ne mAMsa ko khAkara vAyu-saMkSobha ke kAraNa
usake ghara ke AMgana meM vamana kara diyaa| rukmiNI ne socA-'yadi maiM kisI
dukAna se mAMsa kharIdakara lAUMgI to bahuta dera laga jaaegii| pati aura jeTha
ke bhojana kA samaya ho gayA hai ata: isa vamita mAMsa ko acchI taraha se
dhokara masAle se upaskRta kara duuNgii|' usane vaisA hI kiyaa| 1. gA. 82/2 vR
pa.68 dekheM dharmopadezamAlA pR. 46-52 /  2. isa kathA kA anuvAda 'dharmopadeza
mAlA' graMtha se saMkSepa rUpa meM kiyA gayA hai kyoMki TIkAkAra ne
'nUpurapaNDitAyAH kathAnakamatiprasiddhatvAt bRhatvAcca na likhyate kiMtu
dharmopadezamAlAvivaraNAderavagantavyaM' kA ullekha kiyA hai| vahAM kathAnaka
Age bhI calatA hai lekina yahAM itanA hI prAsaMgika hai ataH Age ke kathAnaka kA
anuvAda nahIM kiyA hai|

Page #410 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
238 Saudas and Ugra tej were present for the meal. He served them both the meat.
Ugra tej, by the special smell, knew that it was vomit meat. He frowned and
asked Rukmini about the meat. Seeing the angry frown, she trembled like a branch
of a tree and told the truth. Throwing away that meat, she cooked another meat,
then both of them ate. 12. Aavidhiparihara: Sadhu-Drishtant In the village
called Shali, there lived a merchant named Gramani. His wife's name was also
Gramani. Once, when the merchant went to his shop, a sadhu came to his house for
alms while wandering. Gramani brought Shalyodana. The sadhu asked about it,
fearing the possibility of Adhakarma dosha - "Shravike! Where did this Shali
come from?" Gramani said - "I don't know anything about it, the merchant knows,
so ask him." The sadhu left the Shalyodana and went to the merchant's shop and
asked him about the Shali. The merchant said - "This Shali has come from Gobar
Gram, which is very far away in the Magadh Janpad." That sadhu was ready to go
there. The sadhu thought that maybe this path was also made by some Shravak for
the sadhu, so fearing Adhakarma, he left the original path and started going on
the wrong path. Going on the wrong path, he had to endure the troubles of
snakes, thorns and wild animals. Fearing Adhakarma, he avoided even the shade of
the tree and walked. Overheated by the sun's heat, he fainted on the way and
suffered great pain. 13. Adhakarma in Parinat: Sanghbhojya-Drishtant In the city
called Shatmukha, there lived a Shreshthi named Gunachandra. His wife's name was
Chandrika. The Shreshthi was devoted to Jin-Pravachan. He had a Jinmandir built,
which was comparable to the Himalayas, and installed the idol of Adinath in it.
He organized a Sangh-bhoj on that occasion. In the nearby village, there lived a
sadhu who was pretending to be a sadhu. He heard from the people that
Gunachandra, a Shreshthi in Shatmukha city, is giving a Sangh-bhoj today. He
came to that village quickly to get the Sangh-bhoj. His wife had given away all
the Sanghbhakta. The sadhu begged the Shreshthi for Sanghbhakta. The Seth told
Chandrika - "Give the sadhu food." Chandrika said - "I have given away all the
food,  1. Ga. 86 7. Pa. 71, Pimprati Pa. 19, there is also a difference of
opinion in this story. The commentator Malayagiri has also indicated the story
with a difference of opinion. According to him, in Rukmini's house, a Karpatik
named Dusprabh, suffering from diarrhea, asked for a secluded place. Due to
diarrhea, he excreted pieces of meat. When the cat ate the meat, the husband and
the elder brother were present at the time of the meal, and when no other meat
was available, she, out of fear, took the pieces of meat that were discarded in
the diarrhea, washed them with water, and cooked them with spices, etc., and
served them to both of them when the time for the meal came. At that time,
Gunamitra, the son of the deceased wife, held the hands of his father and
father-in-law and stopped them from eating, telling them the whole story. Ugra
tej rebuked his wife and avoided that meat (Ga. 86/1 and Pa. 71). 2. Ga. 89/1-3
Vr Pa. 72, 73.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 238 piMDaniyukti saudAsa aura ugrateja bhojana ke lie upasthita hue| usane una
donoM ko vaha mAMsa prosaa| gaMdha vizeSa se ugrateja ne jAna liyA ki yaha vAnta
mAMsa hai| usane bhRkuTi car3hAkara rukmiNI ko mAMsa ke saMbaMdha meM puuchaa|
krodhayukta car3hI huI bhRkuTi dekhakara vaha vRkSa kI zAkhA kI bhAMti kAMpane
lagI aura yathArtha sthiti batA dii| usa mAMsa ko pheMkakara usane dUsarA mAMsa
pakAyA taba donoM ne bhojana kiyaa| 12. avidhipariharaNa : sAdhu-dRSTAMta zAli
nAmaka gAMva meM grAmaNI nAmaka vaNik rahatA thaa| usakI patnI kA nAma bhI
grAmaNI thaa| eka bAra vaNik ke dukAna jAne para koI sAdhu ghUmate hue
bhikSArtha usake ghara aayaa| grAmaNI zAlyodana lekara aaii| sAdhu ne AdhAkarma
doSa kI AzaMkA se usake bAre meM pUchA-'zrAvike! yaha zAli kahAM se AyA hai ?'
grAmaNI ne kahA-'maiM isa bAre meM kucha nahIM jAnatI, vaNik jAnatA hai ata:
usase puucho|' sAdhu zAlyodana chor3akara vaNik kI dukAna para gayA aura usase
zAli ke bAre meM puuchaa| vaNik ne kahA-'magadha janapada ke pratyantavartI
gobara grAma se yaha zAli AyA hai|' vaha sAdhu vahAM jAne ke lie taiyAra ho
gyaa| sAdhu ne socA ki saMbhava hai yaha rAstA bhI kisI zrAvaka ne sAdhu ke lie
banAyA ho ataH AdhAkarma kI AzaMkA se vaha mUla rAste ko chor3akara utpatha meM
jAne lgaa| utpatha meM jAne se sAMpa, kAMTe evaM zvApadoM ke upadrava bhI sahana
karane pdd'e| AdhAkarma kI AzaMkA se vaha vRkSa kI chAyA kA bhI parihAra karate
hue claa| sUrya ke teja se tapta hokara vaha rAste meM mUchita ho gayA aura
mahAn kaSTa ko prApta kiyaa| 13. AdhAkarma meM pariNata : saMghabhojya-dRSTAMta
zatamukha nAmaka nagara meM guNacandra zreSThI nivAsa karatA thaa| usakI patnI
kA nAma candrikA thaa| zreSThI jina-pravacana meM anurakta thaa| usane himagiri
kI tulanA karane vAlA jinamaMdira kA nirmANa karavAyA aura usameM AdinAtha kI
pratimA pratiSThita kii| usa upalakSya meM usane saMgha-bhoja kA Ayojana kiyaa|
pratyAsanna gAMva meM koI sAdhu veza kI viDambanA karane vAlA sAdhu rahatA thaa|
usane janazruti se sunA ki zatamukha nagara meM guNacandra nAmaka zreSThI Aja
saMghabhoja de rahA hai| vaha saMgha-bhoja ko prApta karane ke lie zIghratA se
calakara usa gAMva meM aayaa| patnI ne sArA saMghabhakta de diyA thaa| sAdhu ne
zreSThI se saMghabhakta kI yAcanA kii| seTha ne candrikA ko kahA-'sAdhu ko
bhojana do|' candrikA ne kahA-'maiMne sArA bhojana de diyA, 1. gA. 86 7. pa. 71,
piMpraTI pa. 19, isa kathAnaka meM matAntara bhI milatA hai| TIkAkAra malayagiri
ne matAntara vAlI kathA kA saMketa bhI kiyA hai| usake anusAra rukmiNI ke ghara
meM kisI atisAra roga se pIr3ita duSprabha nAmaka kArpaTika ne ekAnta sthAna kI
yAcanA kii| usane atisAra roga ke kAraNa mAMsakhaMDoM kA utsarga kiyaa| mArjAra
dvArA mAMsa khAne para pati aura jeTha kI bhojana-velA upasthita hone para tathA
anya mAMsa prApta na hone para bhayabhIta hokara usane atisAra meM tyakta
mAMsakhaNDoM ko lekara jala se dhokara unako masAle Adi se upaskRta karake pakA
diyA aura bhojana-velA Ane para una donoM ko parosa diyaa| usI samaya mRta
sapatnI ke putra guNamitra ne apane pitA aura pitRvya kA hAtha pakar3akara unheM
khAne se rokate hue sArI bAta btaaii| ugrateja ne apanI patnI kI bhartsanA kI
aura usa mAMsa kA parihAra kara diyA (gA. 86/1 va pa. 71) /  2. gA. 89/1-3 vR
pa. 72, 73 /

Page #411 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 3: Stories  **239**  'Nothing is left now.' The Seth said, 'Give the
monk alms from your food.' Then he gave alms of *shalyodana*, *modaka*, etc. The
monk, with the mind of a devotee of the Sangha, accepted it and went to the
*upaashraya* and ate it. Even though he consumed pure food, due to the
consequences of the *aadharmik* consumption, he bound himself with *aadharmik*
*bhog* generated karmas.  **14. Method of Avoidance: The Priyankar Kshapak
Example**  The Acharya named Ratnakar, accompanied by 500 monks, arrived in the
city of Potanpur. Among those monks was a devout monk named Priyankar. He would
perform austerities for a month and then break his fast. Fearing that someone
might prepare *aadharmik* food for his fast-breaking meal, he went to a nearby
village to beg for alms. There lived a *shravaka* named Yashomati. She had heard
about the monk's month-long fast and his upcoming fast-breaking meal. She
thought, 'Perhaps this monk will come to my house for alms.' So, with utmost
devotion, she prepared a special *shali-tandul* kheer. She infused it with ghee,
jaggery, and other ingredients that enhance strength. Thinking, 'Kheer is a
superior substance,' she wanted to ensure the monk wouldn't have any doubts
about *aadharmik* food. So, with cunning, she put small portions of kheer in
*shrava* shaped vessels made of leaves of banyan trees, suitable for children.
She told the children, 'When a monk like this comes here, you tell him, "Oh
mother, you have served us too much kheer, we cannot eat it." If you say this, I
will scold you. Then you say, "Why do you make kheer every day?"' Having
instructed the children in this way, the monk arrived at her house first for
alms. Seeing the monk, she was overjoyed, but to avoid any suspicion in the
monk's mind, she remained composed and didn't show excessive respect. The
children also spoke as instructed. She reprimanded the children. She said to the
monk, 'What kind of foolish children are these, who don't even find kheer
appealing? If you like kheer, eat it, otherwise move on.' Hearing this, the monk
was reassured and prepared to eat the kheer. She, with utmost devotion, filled
the vessel with kheer, ghee, and jaggery. The monk, free from any doubts about
*aadharmik* food, consumed the kheer with pure intention and went to sit under a
tree. There, he performed the *iryaapath* ritual, performed *pratikraman*, and
thought, 'Today, I have received the superior substance kheer, along with ghee,
jaggery, etc. If any monk comes and shares it with me, I will be saved from the
ocean of the world. Because monks are constantly immersed in *swadhyay*, they
are detached from the world and engrossed in the path of liberation, they are
devoted to the service of their guru, *shaiksha*, etc., they are inclined
towards *paropadesh*, and they are engaged in the practice of *sanjam*. By
sharing with them, I will benefit from their knowledge, etc. This body is
worthless and useless.'  **1. Ga. 90/1 Vr. P. 74, Pimprati P. 28**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 3 : kathAeM 239 aba kucha bhI nahIM bacA hai|' seTha ne kahA-'apane
bhojana meM se sAdhu ko bhikSA do|' taba usane zAlyodana, modaka Adi kI bhikSA
dii| sAdhu ne saMghabhakta kI buddhi se use grahaNa kiyA aura upAzraya meM
jAkara usako khaayaa| zuddha bhojana grahaNa karane para bhI AdhAkarma grahaNa
ke pariNAma se usane AdhAkarma bhoga janita karmoM kA baMdhana kara liyaa| 14.
vidhi-pariharaNa : priyaMkara kSapaka dRSTAMta potanapura nAmaka nagara meM 500
sAdhuoM ke sAtha vihAra karate hue ratnAkara nAmaka AcArya kA padArpaNa huaa|
una sAdhuoM meM eka priyaMkara nAmaka tapasvI sAdhu thaa| vaha eka mAsa paryanta
tapasyA karake pAraNA karatA thaa| mAsakhamaNa ke pAraNe meM koI AdhAkarma
bhojana na banAe, isa AzaMkA se vaha pratyAsanna gAMva meM bhikSArtha gyaa|
vahAM yazomatI nAmaka zrAvikA rahatI thii| usane usa tapasvI muni ke mAsakhamaNa
ke pAraNe ke bAre meM sunaa| usane socA zAyada vaha tapasvI muni bhikSA ke lie
mere ghara A jAe ata: usane parama bhakti se viziSTa zAli-taNDula kI khIra
bnaaii| zakti bar3hAne vAle ghRta, gur3a Adi padArthoM se use bhAvita kiyaa|
'pAyasa uttama dravya hai' yaha socakara sAdhu ko AdhAkarma kI zaMkA na ho ata:
mAyA se vaTa Adi ke patra se bane zarAva AkAra ke bhAjana meM baccoM ke yogya
thor3I-thor3I khIra usameM DAla dI aura baccoM se kahA ki isa prakAra ke tapasvI
sAdhu jaba yahAM AeM to tuma kahanA-'he amba! tumane hamako bahuta adhika khIra
parosI hai, hama isako khAne meM samartha nahIM haiN|' tuma logoM ke dvArA aisA
kahane para maiM tuma logoM kI bhartsanA kruuNgii| taba tuma loga kahanA- 'tuma
pratidina khIra kyoM banAtI ho?' bAlakoM ko isa prakAra zikSita karane para usI
samaya vaha tapasvI sAdhu sarvaprathama bhikSA ke lie usake ghara aayaa| sAdhu
ko dekhakara vaha atyanta ullasita ho gaI lekina sAdhu ko kisI prakAra kI AzaMkA
na ho isalie bAhara se jyAdA Adara na dikhAtI huI sahaja avasthA meM rhii|
bAlaka bhI prazikSaNa ke anusAra bolane lge| usane bAlakoM ko upAlambha diyaa|
usane kSapaka se kahA- ye kaise matta bAlaka haiM, jinako pAyasa bhI rucikara
nahIM lagatI hai| yadi Apako khIra rucikara lagatI hai to grahaNa karo, anyathA
Age cale jaao|' yazomatI ke dvArA aisA kahane para sAdhu ni:zaMka ho gayA aura
khIra grahaNa karane ke lie udyata ho gyaa| usane bhI atyanta bhakti se khIra,
ghata aura gaDa Adi se pAtra bhara diyaa| sAdha bhI AdhAkarma kI zaMkA se rahita
hokara vizaddha adhyavasAya se khIra grahaNa karake vRkSa ke nIce gyaa| vahAM
jAkara usane vidhipUrvaka IryApathikI kriyA kI tathA pratikramaNa karake cintana
kiyA-'maiMne Aja uttama dravya pAyasa tathA ghRta, gur3a Adi prApta kie haiN|
yadi koI sAdhu Akara saMvibhAga kare to maiM saMsAra-samudra se tara jAUM kyoMki
sAdhu nirantara svAdhyAya meM lIna rahate haiN| saMsAra se vimukha hokara mokSa-
mArga meM tallIna rahate haiM, guru, zaikSa Adi kI sevA meM lIna rahate haiN|
paropadeza meM pravaNa hote haiM, saMyama ke anuSThAna meM rata rahate haiN|
unako saMvibhAga dene se tadgata jJAnAdi kA lAbha hotA hai| jJAnAdi kI vRddhi se
mujhe mahAn lAbha kI prApti hogii| yaha zarIra asAra aura nirupayogI hai|' 1.
gA. 90/1 vR pa. 74, piMpraTI pa. 28 //

Page #412 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 240 After consuming food with a pure and unwavering determination, free from
bodily fainting, one attains liberation.  ## 15. The Adoration and Violation of
Command: The Two Garden Example  In the city of Chandranana, King
Chandravatansak ruled. He had many wives, including Trilokerakha. The king had
two gardens: one in the east, named Suryoday, and the other in the west, named
Chandrodya. One day, during the spring season, the king announced a celebration
with his inner court, ordering the drums to be beaten. "In the morning, the king
will be in the Suryoday garden with his inner court, so no citizens should go
there. All grass-cutters and wood-cutters should go to the Chandrodya garden."
After the drums were beaten, the king appointed soldiers to guard the Suryoday
garden and ordered that no one should enter.  At night, the king thought, "In
the morning, when I go to the Suryoday garden, the sun will be in front of me,
and when I return, it will be noon, and the sun will still be in front of me.
The rays of the sun are painful, so I will go to the Chandrodya garden." He
decided to do so.  After hearing the drums, some wicked people thought, "We have
never seen the king's inner court. In the morning, the king will come to the
Suryoday garden with his inner court and enjoy themselves. We will hide in the
branches of a leafy tree so that no one can see us. This way, we can see the
king's inner court." They did just that. The garden guards saw them hiding in
the branches of the tree. They caught them, beat them with sticks, and tied them
with ropes.  The other grass-cutters all went to the Chandrodya garden. They
enjoyed themselves and saw the king's inner court wives. The royal guards caught
them too.  As the king was leaving the garden and entering the city, the garden
keepers presented both groups of people to him and told him the whole story.
Those who had violated the order did not get to see the inner court, and they
were punished. Those who went to the Chandrodya garden had obeyed the order, so
even though they saw the inner court, they were released.  ## 16. Non-
Attachment: The Cow-Calf Example  In the city of Gunalaya, a wealthy merchant
named Sagardatta lived with his wife, Shrimati. The merchant demolished an old,
dilapidated temple and built a magnificent new one. He had four sons: 1.
Gunachandra, 2. Gunasen, 3. Gunachud, and 4. Gunashekhara. Their wives were: 1.
Priyangulatika, 2. Priyanguruchaka, 3. Priyangusundari, and 4. Priyangusarika.
As time passed, the merchant's wife...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 240 piMDaniyukti zarIra kI mUrchA se rahita, pravarddhamAna vizuddha
adhyavasAya se bhojana karane ke bAda use kaivalya kI prApti ho 15. AjJA kI
ArAdhanA-virAdhanA : udyAna dvaya dRSTAMta candrAnanA nAmaka nagarI meM
candrAvataMsaka rAjA rAjya karatA thaa| trilokarekhA Adi usakI aneka rAniyAM
thiiN| rAjA ke pAsa do udyAna the-eka pUrva dizA meM, jisakA nAma sUryodaya
thaa| dUsarA pazcima dizA meM, jisakA nAma candrodaya thaa| eka dina basanta
mAsa meM rAjA ne aMta:pura ke sAtha krIr3A karane kI ghoSaNA karavAte hue paTaha
phiravAyA-'prAta:kAla rAjA sUryodaya nAmaka udyAna meM apane aMta:pura ke sAtha
yatheccha viharaNa kareMge ataH vahAM koI nAgarika na jaaeN|' sAre tRNahAraka
aura kASThahAraka bhI candrodaya udyAna meM cale jaaeN| paTaha phiravAne ke
pazcAt rAjA ne sUryodaya udyAna kI rakSA hetu sainikoM kI niyukti kara dI aura
Adeza diyA ki koI bhI vyakti usa udyAna meM praveza na kre| rAtri meM rAjA ne
cintana kiyA ki sUryodaya udyAna meM jAte hue prAtaHkAla sUrya sAmane rahegA
aura lauTate hue madhyAhna meM bhI sAmane rhegaa| sammukha sUrya kI kiraNeM
kaSTadAyaka hotI haiM ata: maiM candrodaya udyAna jaauuNgaa| aisA socakara rAjA
ne vaisA hI kiyaa| idhara paTaha ko sunane ke bAda bhI kucha duzcaritra
vyaktiyoM ne socA ki hamane kabhI bhI rAjA ke aMta:pura ko sAkSAt nahIM dekhA
hai| prAtaH rAjA sUryodaya udyAna meM aMta:pura ke sAtha AegA aura yatheccha
viharaNa kregaa| hama loga patra bahula vRkSa kI zAkhA meM isa prakAra chipa
jAeMge ki koI bhI dekha na paae| isa prakAra hama rAjA ke aMta:pura ko dekha
paaeNge| unhoMne vaisA hI kiyaa| udyAna rakSakoM ne vRkSa kI zAkhA ke bIca chipe
hue una logoM ko dekha liyaa| unako pakar3akara DaMDe se pITA aura rajju Adi se
bAMdha diyaa| jo dUsare tRNahAraka the, ve saba candrodaya udyAna meM ge|
unhoMne yatheccha krIr3A karate hue rAjA ke aMta:pura kI rAniyoM ko dekhaa|
unako bhI rAjapuruSoM ne pakar3a liyaa| udyAna se bAhara nagara ke abhimukha
jAte hue rAjA ke sanmukha udyAna-pAlakoM ne donoM prakAra ke vyaktiyoM ko
upasthita kiyA aura sArA vRttAnta btaayaa| jinhoMne AjJA kA bhaMga kiyA, unakI
aMta:pura darzana kI icchA pUrI nahIM huI phira bhI unako samApta kara diyA gayA
tathA jo candrodaya udyAna meM gae the, unhoMne AjJA kA pAlana kiyA thA ataH
aMta:pura dekhane para bhI unako mukta kara diyA gyaa| 16. anAsakti : govatsa-
dRSTAMta guNAlaya nAmaka nagara meM sAgaradatta nAmaka zreSThI apanI bhAryA
zrImatI ke sAtha rahatA thaa| zreSThI ne pahale bane hue jIrNa maMdira ko bhagna
karake zreSTha maMdira bnvaayaa| usake cAra putra the, jinake nAma isa prakAra
the-1. guNacandra 2. guNasena 3. guNacUr3a 4. guNazekhara  /  ina cAroM kI
patniyoM ke nAma kramazaH isa prakAra the1. priyaMgulatikA 2. priyaMgurucikA 3.
priyaMgusuMdarI 4. priyNgusaarikaa| samaya bItane para zreSThI kI bhAryA 1. gA.
90/2-4.vR pa. 75, piMpraTI pa. 28, 29  /  2. gA. 91-91/4 vR pa. 76, piMpraTI pa.
29 /

Page #413 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 3: Stories  241. The wife of the wealthy man passed away. The wealthy
man entrusted the responsibility of the entire household to his eldest daughter-
in-law, Priyangulatika. The wealthy man had a cow with a calf in his house. The
cow would go out to graze during the day. The calf would remain tied up at home.
All four daughters-in-law would give the calf fodder and water on time.  One
day, there was a wedding of Gunasagar, the son of Gunachandra and
Priyangulatika. On that day, all the daughters-in-law were busy adorning
themselves with ornaments and applying cosmetics. All four daughters-in-law
forgot to feed the calf. No one gave it fodder or water. At noon, the wealthy
man went to the calf. The calf also started crying upon seeing the wealthy man
coming. Seeing the calf crying, the wealthy man understood that it was still
hungry. He rebuked all the daughters-in-law in anger. Hearing the wealthy man's
words, Priyangulatika quickly went to the calf with appropriate fodder and
water. The calf did not look at the decorated house, nor did it look at the
daughters-in-law adorned like celestial beings with lustful eyes. Its gaze was
only on the fodder and water. 17. Dravya-puti: The Cow Dung Example  Outside the
city of Samilla, there was a Yaksha named Manibhadra in a garden. One day, a
disease called Sheetalaka was born in that city. Then some people thought that
if we survive this disease, we will celebrate the Ashtami and other festivals
for a year. All the people of the city survived that disease. It was decided in
their minds that this was all the miracle of the Yaksha. Then, appointing a
person named Devasharma as a priest for a salary, the people said, "You have to
plaster the Yaksha assembly with cow dung every morning on Ashtami and other
days for a year. We will come and celebrate in that clean and holy place."
Devasharma agreed to this.  One day, he went to a family's house to get cow dung
before sunrise to plaster the assembly for the celebration. There, a worker had
indigestion from drinking mandak, vall, and sura at night. In the west night, he
had discharged the foul-smelling indigestion in the cow shed. A buffalo came and
defecated on top of it. The foul-smelling excrement was covered by the cow dung
on top, so Devasharma did not know in the darkness. He took the cow dung along
with the excrement and plastered the assembly with it. The people who were going
to celebrate came there with various food items. They started smelling a very
foul smell there. They asked Devasharma where this impure smell was coming from.
He said, "I don't know." They looked carefully at the courtyard of the assembly
and saw the parts of vall, etc., and also smelled the smell of wine. They
realized that there was excrement in the middle of the cow dung. All the people
left the food.  1. Ga. 96/1, 2 Vr. P. 78, 79.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 3 : kathAeM 241 zrImatI divaMgata ho gii| zreSThI ne sAre ghara kI
jimmevArI jyeSTha putravadhU priyaMgulatikA ko sauMpa dii| zreSThI ke ghara meM
bachar3e sahita eka gAya thii| gAya dina meM bAhara carane ke lie jAtI thii|
bachar3A ghara para hI baMdhA huA rahatA thaa| cAroM hI bahueM bachar3e ko cArA
aura pAnI samaya para detI thiiN| eka bAra guNacandra aura priyaMgulatikA ke
putra guNasAgara kA vivAha thaa| usa dina sabhI bahueM vizeSa rUpa se AbharaNa
Adi pahanane evaM prasAdhana karane meM vyasta ho giiN| bachar3e ko cArA dene kI
bAta cAroM putravadhUeM bhUla giiN| kisI ne bhI use cArA aura pAnI nahIM diyaa|
madhyAhna ke samaya zreSThI bachar3e ke pAsa gyaa| bachar3A bhI zreSThI ko Ate
dekhakara rone lgaa| zreSThI ne bachar3e ko rote hue dekhakara jAna liyA ki yaha
abhI taka bhUkhA hai| usane sabhI bahuoM ko krodhita hokara upAlambha diyaa|
zreSThI kI bAta sunakara priyaMgulatikA zIghra hI yathAyogya cArA aura pAnI
lekara bachar3e ke sammukha gii| bachar3e ne na to samalaMkRta ghara ko dekhA
aura na hI devAMganAoM kI bhAMti sajI huI putravadhU ko rAgadRSTi se dekhaa|
usakI dRSTi kevala cAre aura pAnI para thii| 17. dravyapUti : gobara-dRSTAMta
samilla nAmaka nagara ke bAhara udyAna meM mANibhadra yakSa thaa| eka dina usa
nagara meM zItalaka nAmaka aziva utpanna ho gyaa| taba kucha logoM ne socA ki
yadi isa aziva se hama baca jAeMge to eka varSa taka aSTamI Adi parva-tithiyoM
meM udyApanikA kreNge| nagara ke sabhI loga usa aziva se nistIrNa ho ge| una
logoM ke mana meM nizcaya ho gayA ki yaha saba yakSa kA camatkAra hai| taba
devazarmA nAmaka vyakti ko vaitanika rUpa se pujArI ke rUpa meM niyukta karate
hue logoM ne kahA- 'tumako eka varSa taka aSTamI Adi dinoM meM prAta:kAla yakSa-
sabhA ko gobara se lIpanA hai| usa svaccha evaM pavitra sthAna para hama loga
Akara udyApanikA kreNge|' devazarmA ne yaha bAta svIkAra kara lii| eka dina
udyApanikA ke lie sabhA ko lIpane hetu vaha sUryodaya se pUrva kisI kuTumbI ke
yahAM gobara lene gyaa| vahAM rAtri meM kisI karmacArI ko maNDaka, valla aura
surA kA pAna karane se ajIrNa ho gayA thaa| pazcima rAtri meM usane gAya ke
bAr3e meM durgandhayukta ajIrNa mala kA visarjana kiyaa| usake Upara kisI
bhaiMsa ne Akara gobara kara diyaa| Upara gobara hone se vaha durgandhayukta
mala r3haka gayA ata: devazarmA ko aMdhere meM jJAta nahIM ho skaa| vaha gobara
sahita mala ko lekara gayA aura usase sabhA ko lIpa diyaa| udyApanikA karane
vAle loga anekavidha bhojana-sAmagrI lekara vahAM praviSTa hue| vahAM unako
atIva durgandha Ane lagI, unhoMne devazarmA se pUchA ki yaha azucipUrNa
durgandha kahAM se A rahI hai? usane kahA-'mujhe jJAta nahIM hai|' una logoM ne
sabhA ke AMgana ko dhyAna se dekhA to vahAM valla Adi ke avayava dikhAI die
tathA madirA kI gaMdha bhI Ane lgii| una logoM ko jJAta huA ki gobara ke madhya
meM purISa bhI thaa| sabhI logoM ne bhojana ko 1. gA. 96/1, 2 vR pa. 78, 79  /

Page #414 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 242 **Pinda Niyukti** The pinda was discarded as impure. The courtyard
plaster was completely removed and the assembly hall was plastered again with
fresh cow dung. Food was also cooked afresh and eaten.  ## 18. Kritakritadosha:
Mankh-Dristant In the village of Shaligram, there lived a Mankh named Devsharma.
In his house, some Sadhus stayed for the rainy season. Seeing the Sadhus'
selfless conduct, free from attachment and aversion, he became a great devotee
of theirs. He would invite them daily for food and other necessities. The Sadhus
always refused, considering it as a Shayyatar Pind. The Mankh thought, "These
Sadhus do not accept food or anything else from my house. Even if I offer them
alms elsewhere, they will not accept. Therefore, when they leave after their
stay, I will go ahead and offer them alms in any way possible." With a few days
remaining for the rainy season, he asked the Sadhus, "After Chaturmas, in which
direction will you go?" The Sadhus readily replied that they would go in a
particular direction. The Mankh went to a Gokul in that direction, showed his
Pat, and started attracting people with his eloquence. People started giving him
ghee, milk, etc. The Mankh said, "When I ask you, you will give me ghee, milk,
etc."  After Chaturmas, the Sadhus started wandering from village to village.
The Mankh, without revealing himself, requested milk, ghee, etc., from the
previously forbidden houses and collected them in one house. He invited the
Sadhus. Due to his disguise, the Sadhus could not recognize him. Considering it
pure food, they accepted the milk, ghee, etc. Thus, even while accepting Krit
Ahar, the Sadhus did not become guilty because they had followed the Lord's
command to the best of their ability.  ## 19. Laukik Pramitya: Bhagini-Dristant
In a village in the Kaushal Janpad, there lived a Kautumbik named Devraj. His
wife's name was Sarika. He had many sons like Sammat and many daughters like
Sammati. The entire family was very religious. In the same village, there lived
a Shreshthi named Shivdev and his wife Shiva. Once, an Acharya named
Samudraghosh came to their village. Hearing the Dharma preached by the Acharya,
Sammat developed dispassion and took Diksha. Over time, by the grace of the
Guru, he became a Bahushrut. Once, a thought arose in his mind, "If any of my
relatives take Diksha, it would be good. This is the real benefit, to liberate a
person from the ocean of Samsara." Thinking this, he asked his Guru and came to
his brother's village. Outside the village, he asked an old man, "Do any members
of the family of Devraj, the Kautumbik, live here?" The old man replied, "All
members of that family have passed away, only Sammati, the widowed daughter, is
alive." The Sadhu went to her house. Seeing her brother, she...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 242 piMDa niyukti azuci mAnakara chor3a diyaa| AMgana ke lepa ko samUla
ukhAr3akara dubArA dUsare gobara se sabhA kA lepa karavAyA tathA bhojana bhI
dUsarA pakAkara khAyA  / ' 18. krItakRtadoSa : maMkha-dRSTAMta zAligrAma nAmaka
gAMva meM devazarmA nAmaka maMkha rahatA thaa| usake gRha ke eka deza meM kucha
sAdhuoM ne varSAvAsa ke lie pravAsa kiyaa| vaha maMkha una sAdhuoM ke rAga-dveSa
rahita anuSThAna ko dekhakara unakA atyanta bhakta bana gayA  /  vaha pratidina
unako AhAra Adi ke lie nimaMtrita karatA thA  /  zayyAtara piNDa samajhakara
sAdhu sadaiva usakA niSedha karate the| maMkha ne socA ki ye sAdhu mere ghara se
bhakta - pAna Adi grahaNa nahIM karate haiM, yadi maiM inako anyatra sthAna para
bhikSA dUMgA to bhI ye grahaNa nahIM kareMge ataH jaba ye vihAra karake Age
jAeMge taba maiM bhI Age jAkara kisI bhI prakAra inako bhikSA duuNgaa| varSAvAsa
ke kucha dina zeSa rahane para usane sAdhuoM se pUchA - ' cAturmAsa ke pazcAt
Apa kisa dizA meM jAeMge ?' sAdhuoM ne sahajatA se uttara diyA ki amuka dizA meM
jaaeNge| vaha maMkha usI dizA meM kisI gokula meM apane paTa ko dikhAkara vacana
- kauzala se logoM ke citta ko AkRSTa karane lgaa| loga usako ghI, dUdha Adi
dene lge| maMkha ne kahA - 'jaba maiM Apa logoM se mAMgU, taba Apa loga ghI,
dUdha Adi denaa|' cAturmAsa ke pazcAt sAdhu grAmAnugrAma vihAra karane lge|
maMkha ne apane Apako prakaTa na karate hue pUrva pratiSiddha gharoM se dUdha,
ghI Adi kI yAcanA karake eka ghara meM unako ekatra kara liyaa| usane sAdhuoM ko
nimaMtrita kiyaa| chadmastha hone ke kAraNa sAdhu usako pahacAna nahIM ske|
zuddha AhAra samajhakara unhoMne dUdha, ghI Adi grahaNa kara liyaa| isa prakAra
krIta AhAra grahaNa karate hue bhI sAdhu doSa ke bhAgI nahIM hue kyoMki unhoMne
yathAzakti bhagavAn kI AjJA kI ArAdhanA kI thii| 19. laukika prAmitya : bhaginI-
dRSTAMta kauzala janapada ke kisI gAMva meM devarAja nAmaka kauTumbika rahatA
thA  /  usakI patnI kA nAma sArikA thaa| usake sammata Adi aneka putra tathA
sammati Adi aneka putriyAM thiiN| pUrA kuTumba atyanta dhArmika thaa| usI gAMva
meM zivadeva nAma kA zreSThI aura usakI patnI zivA rahatI thii| eka bAra unake
gAMva samudraghoSa nAmaka AcArya Ae  /  AcArya ke mukha se jinapraNIta dharma ko
sunakara sammata ke mana meM vairAgya utpanna ho gayA aura usane dIkSA grahaNa
kara lI  /  kAlakrama se gurucaraNa kI kRpA se vaha bahuzruta bana gayA  /  eka
bAra usake mana meM cintana ubharA ki yadi merA koI svajana dIkSA le to acchA
rhegaa| yahI vAstavika upakAra hai ki vyakti ko saMsAra-sAgara se pAra kiyA
jaae| aisA socakara guru se pUchakara vaha apane baMdhu ke grAma meM aayaa|
gAMva ke bAhara usane kisI vRddha vyakti se pUchA ki yahAM devarAja nAmaka
kauTumbika ke parivAra vAle koI vyakti rahate haiM kyA ? vRddha ne uttara diyA-
'usa parivAra ke saba vyakti mRtyu ko prApta ho gae haiM, kevala sammati nAmaka
vidhavA putrI jIvita hai|' vaha sAdhu usake ghara gyaa| bhAI ko Ate dekhakara
vaha 1. gA. 108/1, 2 vR pa. 83  /  2. gA. 142 / 1, 2 vR pa. 97, piMpraTI pa. 40
/

Page #415 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Par. 3: Stories 243 She was very happy in her mind. With reverence, devotion and
worship, she presented herself to prepare food for them. The monk stopped her
and said, "The food prepared for us is inconceivable." Due to poverty, she could
not obtain oil anywhere during the begging time. Finally, she borrowed two
palikas of oil from a merchant named Shivadev, on the basis of double interest
per day. The brother monk was not aware of this incident, so he accepted it as
pure. That day, she was busy listening to the discourse from the brother monk,
so she could not bring water etc. and pay the interest of two palikas of oil.
The next day, the brother was going on a pilgrimage, so she could not fulfill
the interest of the oil in his absence. On the third day, her debt became two
karshas. Due to excessive debt, she was unable to repay it. She worked hard all
day for food, but could not repay the debt. The debt became infinite due to the
double increase. Then the merchant said with consent, "Either you give me my oil
or accept my servitude." Unable to give the oil, she accepted the merchant's
servitude. After a few years, a monk named Sammat reached the same village while
on pilgrimage. He did not see his sister at home. When his sister arrived, he
asked her the reason for leaving home. The sister told her the whole story of
the past and told her about her servitude to Shivadev the merchant and started
crying due to sorrow. The monk said, "Don't cry, I will soon free you from
servitude." Thinking of a way to free his sister from servitude, he first went
to the house of Shivadev the merchant. His wife Shiva was about to wash her
hands with water to give alms. The monk prevented her from washing her hands and
said, "Washing hands does not make alms acceptable to us." The merchant sitting
nearby said, "What is wrong with that?" Then the monk explained in detail about
the six-fold transgression caused by washing hands. Hearing the monk's words, he
respectfully asked, "O Bhagavan! Where is your abode? I will come to you and
listen to the Dharma." The monk said, "My abode has not been fixed yet." Then
the merchant gave the monk a place to stay in a corner of his house. The
merchant listened to the Dharma from the monk every day. The merchant accepted
right faith and minor vows. One day, the monk described the vows taken by
Vasudeva and other ancestors. The monk said that Vasudeva Krishna had accepted
this vow that if any of his sons would take renunciation, he would not be an
obstacle. Hearing this, Shivadev also took the vow, "If any member of my family
takes initiation, I will not stop him." After some time, Shivadev's eldest son
and the monk's sister Sammati became ready for initiation. The merchant allowed
them to take initiation and they accepted renunciation. 1. Ga. 144 / 1-3 Vr. P.
98, 99, Pimprati P. 41.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 3 : kathAeM 243 mana meM bahuta prasanna huI  /  AdarapUrvaka vaMdanA,
bhakti aura paryupAsanA karake vaha unake nimitta AhAra banAne ke lie upasthita
huI  /  sAdhu ne usako rokate hue kahA - ' hamAre nimitta banAyA huA AhAra
akalpanIya hai  /  ' garIbI ke kAraNa bhikSA-velA meM usako kahIM bhI taila kI
prApti nahIM huii| Akhira kisI bhI prakAra zivadeva nAmaka vaNik kI dukAna se
vaha do palikA taila pratidina dugune byAja kI vRddhi ke AdhAra para udhAra
lekara aaii| bhAI muni ko vaha vRttAnta jJAta nahIM thA ataH unhoMne zuddha
samajhakara use grahaNa kara liyA  /  usa dina bhrAtA sAdhu se pravacana sunane
meM vyasta rahane ke kAraNa vaha pAnI Adi lAkara do palikA taila kA byAja nahIM
utAra skii| dUsare dina bhAI kA vihAra hone se usake viyoga meM vaha usa taila
ke byAja kI pUrti nahIM kara skii| tIsare dina usakA RNa do karSa ho gayA  /
atyadhika RNa hone ke kAraNa vaha usakI pUrti karane meM samartha nahIM ho skii|
bhojana lie usane pUre dina zrama kiyA lekina RNa ko cukAnA saMbhava nahIM ho
sakA  /  dugune vRddhi ke krama se RNa aparimita ho gyaa| taba zreSThI ne
sammati se kahA - ' yA to tuma merA taila do anyathA merA dAsatva svIkAra kro|'
taila dene meM asamartha usane seTha kA dAsatva svIkAra kara liyaa| kucha varSa
bItane para sammata nAmaka sAdhu punaH usI gAMva meM vihAra karate hue phuNcaa|
usane apanI bahina ko ghara para nahIM dekhA  /  bahina ke Ane para usane ghara
chor3ane kA kAraNa puuchaa| bahina ne purAnA sArA ghaTanAkrama batAkara zivadeva
vaNik ke yahAM dAsatva kI bAta batAI aura duHkha ke kAraNa rone lagI  /  sAdhu
ne kahA-'tuma rudana mata karo, maiM zIghra hI tumako dAsatva se mukta karavA
duuNgaa|' bahina kA dAsatva se mukti kA upAya socate hue vaha sarvaprathama
zivadeva seTha ke ghara meM phuNcaa| usakI patnI zivA bhikSA dene ke lie jala se
hAtha dhone ke lie udyata huii| sAdhu ne hAtha dhone ke lie usako nivArita
karate hue kahA - 'hAtha dhone se hamako bhikSA nahIM klptii|' pAsa meM baiThe
seTha ne kahA-' isameM kyA doSa hai ?' taba sAdhu ne hAtha dhone se hone vAlI
SaTkAya- virAdhanA kI bAta vistAra se kahI  /  sAdhu kI bAta sunakara usane
AdarapUrvaka pUchA - " bhagavan! ApakI vasati kahAM hai? maiM Apake pAsa Akara
dharma sunuuNgaa|" sAdhu ne kahA - ' abhI taka merA koI upAzraya nizcita nahIM
huA hai|' taba seTha ne apane ghara ke eka kone meM sAdhu ko rahane ke lie
sthAna de diyA  /  seTha sAdhu se pratidina dharma sunatA thA  /  seTha ne
samyaktva evaM aNuvrata svIkAra kara lie| sAdhu ne eka dina vAsudeva Adi pUrvaja
puruSoM dvArA AcIrNa abhigrahoM kA varNana kiyaa| sAdhu ne batAyA ki vAsudeva
kRSNa ne yaha abhigraha svIkAra kiyA thA ki yadi merA koI putra bhI pravrajyA
grahaNa karegA usameM bAdhaka nahIM bnuuNgaa| isa bAta ko sunakara zivadeva ne
bhI abhigraha grahaNa kara liyA- 'yadi mere ghara kA koI sadasya dIkSA grahaNa
karegA to maiM usako nahIM rokuuNgaa|' kucha samaya pazcAt zivadeva kA jyeSTha
putra tathA sAdhu kI bhaginI sammati dIkSA ke lie taiyAra ho ge| seTha ne donoM
ko dIkSA kI anumati de dI aura unhoMne pravrajyA svIkRta kara lI  /  1. gA. 144
/ 1-3 vR pa. 98, 99, piMpraTI pa. 41  /

Page #416 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  244. The Example of Transferred Fault: The Case of the Rice  In the city of
Basantpur, there lived a wealthy merchant named Nilaya. His wife was named
Sudarshana, and they had two sons, Kshemankar and Devadatta, and a daughter
named Lakshmi. In the same city, there lived a wealthy merchant named Tilaka,
whose wife was named Sundari. They had a son named Dhanadatta and a daughter
named Bandhumati. Kshemankar took the vows of a monk under the guidance of Samit
Acharya. Devadatta married Bandhumati, and Dhanadatta married Lakshmi.  One day,
due to the effects of his karma, Dhanadatta faced poverty. Because of his
poverty, he often ate food made from kodrava grain. Devadatta was wealthy, so he
always ate food made from shalyodana rice. One day, Kshemankar, the monk, was
traveling from village to village, and he came to that city. He thought, "If I
go to my brother Devadatta's house, my sister will think that I am avoiding her
because of her poverty, and she will feel humiliated. She will feel sorry for
herself." So, out of compassion, he went to her house. When the time for begging
for food came, Lakshmi thought, "First, he is my brother, second, he is a monk,
and third, he is a guest. We don't have shalyodana rice at home, only kodrava
food, so how can I offer him alms?" She went to her sister-in-law, Bandhumati,
and took some kodrava rice and made a meal.  Meanwhile, Devadatta came home for
his meal. Not knowing about the change in food, he saw the kodrava meal and
thought, "Bandhumati has been stingy today and didn't make shalyodana rice,
instead, she made kodrava food." He started beating Bandhumati. She cried out,
"Why are you beating me? Your sister took the shalyodana rice and left the
kodrava." When Dhanadatta sat down to eat, Bandhumati served Kshemankar the monk
with the remaining shalyodana rice after offering him alms. He asked, "Where did
this shalyodana rice come from?" Hearing the whole story, Dhanadatta became
angry and said, "You sinner! Why didn't you cook shalyodana rice at home and
offer it to the monk? You have insulted me by asking for shalyodana rice from
another house." He also beat Bandhumati. The monk heard the whole story from
both families. At night, Kshemankar, the monk, explained to everyone, "This kind
of transferred food is not acceptable to us. I accepted it unknowingly. The Lord
has forbidden this kind of food because of the faults like conflict and so on."
Kshemankar, the monk, explained the Jain principles in detail. Everyone felt
detached from worldly desires. The monk initiated them all into the Jain faith.
## 21. The Example of the Sweetmeats: The Fault of Accepting Food Offered with a
Hidden Fault  In a certain village, there lived many lay followers of Jainism,
including Dhanavah and many lay women, including Dhanavati. They were all
related to each other. One day, there was a wedding in their family. After the
wedding, many sweetmeats were left over. They thought, "We should offer these
sweetmeats to the monks as alms, so that we can gain great merit."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 244 piMDaniyukti 20. parivartita doSa kA laukika-dRSTAMta basantapura nagara
meM nilaya nAmaka zreSThI thaa| usakI patnI kA nAma sudarzanA thaa| usake do
putra thekSemaMkara aura devadatta  /  usakI putrI kA nAma lakSmI thaa| usI
nagara meM tilaka nAmaka seTha thA, jisakI patnI kA nAma suMdarI thaa| usake
dhanadatta nAmaka putra tathA baMdhumatI nAmaka putrI thii| kSemaMkara ne samita
AcArya ke pAsa pravrajyA grahaNa kii| devadatta ke sAtha baMdhumatI tathA
dhanadatta ke sAtha lakSmI kA vivAha huaa| eka bAra karmayoga se dhanadatta ko
daridratA kA sAmanA karanA pdd'aa| dAridraya ke kAraNa vaha prAyaH kodrava
dhAnya kA bhojana karatA thaa| devadatta dhanADhya thA ata: vaha sadaiva
zAlyodana kA bhojana karatA thaa| eka bAra kSemaMkara sAdhu grAmAnugrAma vihAra
karate hue vahAM aae| unhoMne socA ki yadi maiM devadatta bhAI ke ghara jAUMgA
to merI bahina ke mana meM cintana AegA ki maiM dAridrya se abhibhUta hUM isalie
merA sAdhu bhAI mere ghara nahIM aayaa| vaha paribhava kA anubhava karegI ata:
anukampA vaza usane usake ghara meM praveza kiyaa| bhikSA-velA Ane para lakSmI
ne cintana kiyA-'prathama to yaha merA bhAI hai, dUsarI bAta sAdhu hai tathA
tIsarI bAta abhI yaha atithi hai| mere ghara zAlyodana nahIM hai, kodrava kA
bhojana banA hai ata: maiM isako kaise bhikSA dUMgI?' vaha apanI bhAbhI
baMdhumatI ke pAsa gaI aura kodrava dekara odana lekara A gii| isI bIca
devadatta bhojana hetu apane ghara A gyaa| bhojana parivartana kI bAta ajJAta
hone se kodrava bhojana ko dekhakara usane socA ki baMdhamatI ne kapaNatA se Aja
zAlyodana na banAkara kodrava kA bhojana taiyAra kiyA hai| usane baMdhumatI ko
mAranA zurU kara diyaa| pratAr3ita hotI huI vaha bolI-'mujhe kyoM mAra rahe ho?
tumhArI bahina kodrava ko chor3akara zAlyodana le gaI hai|' dhanadatta bhI jaba
bhojana ke lie baiThA to baMdhumatI ne kSemaMkara muni ko bhikSA dekara bace hue
zAlyodana prose| usane pUchA-'zAlyodana kahAM se AyA?' sArA vRttAnta sunakara
dhanadatta kupita hokara bolA-'pApinI! tumane apane ghara se zAlyodana pakAkara
sAdhu ko kyoM nahIM die ? dUsare ghara se zAlyodana mAMgakara tumane merA
apamAna kiyA hai| usane bhI baMdhumatI ko pratAr3ita kiyaa| sAdhu ne donoM
gharoM meM hone vAle vRttAnta ko logoM se sunaa| rAtri meM kSemaMkara muni ne
sabako pratibodha dete hue kahA-'isa prakAra kA parivartita bhojana hamAre lie
kalpanIya nahIM hai| ajAnakArI meM maiMne vaha grahaNa kara liyaa| kalaha Adi
doSa ke kAraNa bhagavAn ne isakA pratiSedha kiyA hai|' kSemaMkara muni ne
jinapraNIta dharma kA vistAra se prarUpaNa kiyaa| sabako vairAgya paidA ho gyaa|
muni ne sabako dIkSA pradAna kara dii| 21. abhyAhRta doSa : modaka-dRSTAMta kisI
gAMva meM dhanAvaha Adi aneka zrAvaka tathA dhanavatI Adi aneka zrAvikAeM rahatI
thiiN| ve saba eka kuTumba se saMbaMdhita the| eka bAra unake yahAM kisI kA
vivAha thaa| vivAha sampanna hone para aneka modaka baca ge| una logoM ne socA
ki ye modaka sAdhu ko bhikSA meM dene cAhie, jisase hamako bar3e puNya 1. gA.
148-148/2 vR pa. 100, 101, piMpraTI pa. 43 /

Page #417 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 3: Stories  **245**  They would receive it. Some monks are far away,
some are near, but there is a river in between. They will not come here for fear
of violating the Apkay. Even if they do come, seeing the abundance of modaks,
they will have doubts about Adhakarma, therefore they will not accept them.
Therefore, they will take the modaks secretly to the village where the monks
live. They did just that.  Upon arriving there, they again thought that if they
called the monks, they would not accept them for fear of impurity, therefore
they should also give some modaks to Brahmins, etc. If the monks do not see them
giving to Brahmins, etc., they will have doubts about impurity. The monks go to
the Panchami Samiti (for chanting, etc.) by a certain route, so they will see
them giving on that route. Thinking this way, they began to give small amounts
of modaks to the Dwijas, etc., outside a temple. The monks who had gone out for
chanting, etc., saw them giving to the Brahmins. The Shravaks invited them,
saying, "We have a lot of modaks left over, please accept them." The monks,
knowing them to be pure, accepted the laddu. Those monks also told the other
monks that there were abundant edible modaks, etc., at a certain place. Then
they also went there to accept them. Some Shravaks gave them a lot of modaks,
etc. Some, pretending, stopped them, saying, "Give them only this much, not
more. The rest is for our food." Some Shravaks again stopped them, saying, "We
have all eaten, so no one will eat. Give the monks as much as they want, even a
little left over will do." The monks who had rejected Navkarasi ate the modaks.
Those who had Porisi were eating, and those monks who had indigestion, etc.,
were waiting for the first part of the day. They had not eaten anything.  The
Shravaks thought that by now all the monks must have eaten, so they should offer
their respects and go back to their place. After more than an hour, the Shravaks
went to the monk's shelter and performed all the actions of the Naishidhiki,
etc., Shravaks. The monks knew that these Shravaks were very wise. During the
conversation, the monks learned that they were residents of a certain village.
After thinking, the monks concluded that they must have brought modaks from
their village for us. Except for the monks who had eaten, those who were waiting
for the first part of the day and those who were eating, gave their food in
their hands to the bowl. Those who had put the food in their mouths did not
swallow it, but took it out of their mouths and put it in the nearby
Mallakapatra. All the food and modaks in the bowl were purified. The Shravaks
and Shravikas apologized and went back to their village. Those who had eaten or
half-eaten were also innocent due to Ashthabhav.  1. Ga. 157/1-4 Vr. P. 103,
104.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 3 : kathAeM 245 kI prApti hogii| kucha sAdhu dUra haiM, kucha pAsa haiM
lekina bIca meM nadI hai| ve apkAya kI virAdhanA ke bhaya se yahAM nahIM aaeNge|
A bhI jAeMge to pracura modakoM ko dekhakara unheM AdhAkarma kI zaMkA ho jAegI
ataH ve inako grahaNa nahIM kreNge| isalie jahAM gAMva meM sAdhu rahate haiM,
vahIM pracchanna rUpa se modaka le jaaeNge| unhoMne vaisA hI kiyA  /  vahAM jAne
para punaH unhoMne cintana kiyA ki yadi sAdhu ko bulAkara dUMgA to ve azuddha kI
AzaMkA se grahaNa nahIM kareMge ataH kucha modaka brAhmaNa Adi ko bhI denA
caahie| yadi sAdhu brAhmaNa Adi ko dete hue nahIM dekheMge to unako azuddha kI
AzaMkA ho jaaegii| sAdhu jisa mArga se paMcamI samiti (uccAra Adi hetu) jAte
haiM, usa mArga meM dene se sAdhu use dekheNge| isa prakAra cintana karake
unhoMne kisI devakula ke bahirbhAga meM dvija Adi ko thor3e-thor3e modaka dene
prAraMbha kara die| uccAra Adi ke lie nikale sAdhuoM ne unheM brAhmaNoM ko dAna
dete dekhA  /  zrAvakoM ne unako nimaMtrita karate hue kahA- 'hamAre yahAM
pracura mAtrA meM modaka baca gae haiM, Apa inheM grahaNa kreN|' sAdhuoM ne
zuddha jAnakara laDDu grahaNa kara lie| una sAdhuoM ne zeSa sAdhuoM ko bhI kahA
ki amuka sthAna para pracura eSaNIya modaka Adi upalabdha haiM  /  taba ve bhI
use grahaNa karane hetu vahAM gae  /  kucha zrAvakoM ne unheM pracura mAtrA meM
modaka Adi die  /  kucha ne mAyApUrvaka unheM rokate hue kahA-' inako itane hI
modaka do, adhika nhiiN| zeSa hamAre bhojana ke lie cAhie  / ' kucha zrAvaka
punaH unheM rokate hue kahane lage-'hama saba logoM ne khA lie ataH koI bhI
nahIM khaaegaa| sAdhu ko yatheccha mAtrA meM do, zeSa thor3A bacane se bhI kArya
ho jaaegaa|' jina sAdhuoM ko navakArasI kA pratyAkhyAna thA, unhoMne modaka khA
lie| jinake porisI thI, ve khA rahe the tathA jina sAdhuoM ke ajIrNa Adi thA, ve
dina ke pUrvArddha kI pratIkSA kara rahe the| unhoMne kucha nahIM khAyA thA  /
zrAvakoM ne cintana kiyA ki aba taka sabhI sAdhuoM ne khA liyA hogA ataH vaMdanA
karake apane sthAna para cale jAnA cAhie  /  prahara se adhika samaya bItane ke
bAda ve zrAvaka sAdhu ke upAzraya meM gae aura naiSidhikI Adi zrAvakoM kI sArI
kriyAeM kiiN| sAdhuoM ne jAnA ki ye zrAvaka atyanta vivekI haiN| bAtacIta ke
daurAna sAdhuoM ko jJAta huA ki ye amuka grAma ke nivAsI haiN| cintana karane
para sAdhuoM ne niSkarSa nikAlA ki ye avazya hI hamAre lie apane grAma se modaka
lekara Ae haiN| jina sAdhuoM ne khA liyA, unako chor3akara jo pUrvArddha kI
pratIkSA kara rahe the tathA jo khA rahe the unhoMne apane hAtha kA kavala pAtra
meM diyaa| jo kavala mukha meM DAla diyA thA, use nigalA nahIM, mukha se
nikAlakara samIpavartI mallakapAtra meM DAla diyaa| pAtragata sArA AhAra aura
modaka pariSThApita kara die| zrAvaka aura zrAvikAeM kSamAyAcanA karake apane
gAMva meM vApasa cale ge| jinhoMne bhojana kiyA athavA AdhA kiyA, ve bhI
azaThabhAva ke kAraNa nirdoSa the| 1. gA. 157/1-4 vR pa. 103, 104  /

Page #418 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  246 ##  Pindaniyukti 22. Malaprahrit Dosha: The Bhikshu Dṛṣṭānta  In the
city of Jayantpur, there lived a householder named Yakṣadatta. His wife's name
was Vasumatī. Once, a monk named Dharmaruci entered their house seeking alms.
Seeing the monk, who was restrained in his senses, free from attachment and
aversion, and possessed of the qualities of a true seeker, Yakṣadatta felt a
strong desire to give charity. He told his wife Vasumatī, "Give these monks some
modakas." The modakas were kept in a pot in the middle of the upper floor. She
got up to fetch them. Knowing that the alms were Malaprahrit, the monk left the
house. Immediately, another monk entered the house seeking alms. Yakṣadatta
asked him, "Why didn't that monk accept the alms that were taken from the upper
floor?" The monk, motivated by envy, said, "These people have never given
charity in their lives, so due to their past karma, they don't get the delicious
and fragrant food of wealthy houses. They get food from poor houses, which is
just enough to sustain them." Yakṣadatta told Vasumatī to give the monk some
modakas. She got up to take the modakas from the pot on the upper floor. The
smell of the modakas, made from the finest ingredients, attracted a snake, which
came and sat near the pot. Vasumatī, standing on her toes, reached her hand
inside the pot to take the modakas. The snake, like a lustful person, seized her
hand. "Oh, I've been bitten by a snake!" she cried out, falling to the ground.
Yakṣadatta, seeing the snake, scolded it. He immediately called for snake
charmers who could remove the poison. Many kinds of medicines were brought. Due
to her remaining life force, the effects of the mantras and medicines made her
healthy again.  The next day, the same monk Dharmaruci came there seeking alms.
Yakṣadatta, reproaching the monk, said, "Your religion is based on compassion,
yet is it right for you to ignore the snake even after seeing it?" The monk
said, "I didn't see the snake at that time. For us, the omniscient one has
taught that a monk should not accept Malaprahrit alms, so I returned from your
house." Yakṣadatta thought to himself, "The Lord has taught a faultless religion
for the monks." Thinking this, Yakṣadatta respectfully bowed to Dharmaruci.
After bowing, he asked him about the religion taught by the Jinas. The monk
briefly explained the religion to him. He understood what was to be avoided and
what was to be pursued. At noon, the couple went to the guru and listened to the
teachings of the religion. They became detached and took initiation right there.
## 23. Malaprahrit Dosha: The Vasundhara Dṛṣṭānta  In the city of Jayantī, there
lived a householder named Suradatta. His wife's name was Vasundhara. Once, a
monk named Guṇacandra entered their house seeking alms. He was calm-minded, free
from desire for this world and the next, and...   1. In the commentary of
Piṃpra, the city of Jayantpur is mentioned as Jaipur.  2. Ga. 166/1, 2 and Pa.
108, Piṃpraṭī Pa. 46.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 246 piMDaniyukti 22. mAlApahRta doSa : bhikSu-dRSTAMta jayantapura' nAmaka
nagara meM yakSadatta nAmaka gRhapati thaa| usakI patnI kA nAma vasumatI thaa|
eka bAra unake ghara meM dharmaruci nAmaka sAdhu ne bhikSArtha praveza kiyaa|
usa sAdhu ko saMyatendriya, rAga-dveSa rahita tathA eSaNA samiti se yukta
dekhakara yakSadatta ke mana meM dAna dene kI vizeSa bhAvanA jAga gii| usane
apanI patnI vasumatI ko kahA-'ina sAdhuoM ko modakoM kA dAna do|' modaka Upara
ke mAle meM chIMke ke madhya ghar3e meM rakhe hue the| vaha unako lene ke lie
utthii| sAdhu mAlApahRta bhikSA ko jAnakara ghara se bAhara cale ge| tatkAla usI
ghara meM bhikSArtha kisI anya bhikSu ne praveza kiyaa| yakSadatta ne usa bhikSu
se pUchA-'amuka sAdhu ne chIMke se utArakara dI gaI bhikSA ko grahaNa kyoM nahIM
kiyA ?' pravacana-mAtsarya ke kAraNa bhikSu ne kahA-'ina logoM ne kabhI apane
jIvana meM dAna nahIM diyA ataH inako pUrvakarma ke kAraNa dhanADhya gharoM kA
snigdha aura madhura bhojana nahIM milatA hai| ye garIba gharoM se anta-prAnta
bhojana prApta karate haiN|' yakSadatta ne bhikSu ko modaka dene hetu vasumatI
ko khaa| vaha chIMke para rakhe ghaTa se modaka lene ke lie utthii| ghaTa meM
uttamadravya se niSpanna modaka kI gaMdha se koI sarpa Akara baiTha gyaa|
vasumatI ne er3I ke bala para khar3e hokara modaka lene ke lie hAthoM ko aMdara
DAlA to kAmuka vyakti kI bhAMti sarpa ne usake hAtha ko jakar3a liyaa| 'hAya
mujhe sarpa ne kATa liyA' isa prakAra cillAtI huI vaha bhUmi para gira pdd'ii|
yakSadatta ne phUtkAra karate hue sarpa ko dekhaa| usane tatkAla sarpa kA viSa
utArane vAle maMtravidoM ko bulaayaa| aneka prakAra kI auSadhiyAM lAI giiN|
AyuSya bala zeSa rahane ke kAraNa maMtra aura auSadhi ke prabhAva se vaha
svastha ho gii| dUsare dina vahI dharmaruci sAdhu bhikSArtha vahAM aayaa|
yakSadatta ne muni ko upAlambha dete hue kahA'tumhArA dharma dayApradhAna hai
phira bhI kyA yaha tumhAre lie ucita hai ki sAMpa ko dekhate hue bhI Apane kala
usakI upekSA kara dii|' muni ne kahA-'maiMne usa samaya sAMpa ko nahIM dekhA
thaa| hamAre lie sarvajJa kA yaha upadeza hai ki sAdhu ko mAlApahata bhikSA
nahIM lenI cAhie isalie maiM Apake ghara se vApasa lauTa gayA thaa|' yakSadatta
ne apane mana meM socA-'bhagavAn ne bhikSuoM ke lie doSarahita dharma kA upadeza
diyA hai|' isa prakAra cintana karake yakSadatta ne atyanta bhaktipUrvaka
dharmaruci sAdhu ko vaMdanA kii| vaMdanA karake unase jinapraNIta dharma ke bAre
meM puuchaa| muni ne saMkSepa meM dharma kA upadeza diyaa| unako heya aura
upAdeya kA jJAna ho gyaa| madhyAhna meM guru ke pAsa jAkara dampatI ne dharma kA
zravaNa kiyaa| vairAgya hone se unhoMne vahIM dIkSA grahaNa kara lii| 23.
mAlApahRta doSa : vasundharA dRSTAMta jayantI nAmaka nagarI meM suradatta nAmaka
gRhapati rahatA thaa| usakI patnI kA nAma vasuMdharA thaa| eka bAra usake ghara
guNacandra nAmaka sAdhu ne bhikSArtha praveza kiyaa| prazAntamana, ihaloka-
paraloka se nispRha tathA 1. piMpra kI TIkA meM jayantapura ke sthAna para
jayapura nagara kA ullekha hai| 2. gA. 166/1, 2 va pa. 108, piMpraTI pa. 46 /

Page #419 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 3: Stories  **247**  Seeing the Muni approaching, like embodied
Dharma, Suradatta said to Vasundhara, "Bring the Muni sweets from the upper
floor." She was pregnant at the time, but accepting her husband's order like a
deity, she began to climb up through the *nihsreni*. The Muni, considering
*malaprahrit* alms unacceptable, left the house.  At that time, a *kapalik*
entered the house seeking alms. Suradatta asked the *kapalik*, "Is it not
considered unacceptable for the Muni to accept alms brought from the upper
floor?" Driven by envy, the *kapalik* spoke incoherently. Suradatta ordered
Vasundhara to give him sweets as well. While climbing the *nihsreni*, her foot
slipped, and she fell down. Below, there was a mortar for pounding rice. The
nail of the mortar pierced her stomach, splitting it in two. Her pulsating fetus
emerged from her womb. Experiencing extreme pain from the splitting of her
stomach by the nail, the child died in front of everyone. After a few moments,
Vasundhara also passed away. The *kapalik* was condemned by all.  One day, the
same Muni entered that house seeking alms. Suradatta said to the Muni, named
Gunachandra, "You saw the destruction of the donor with your knowledge-eyes, and
you avoided alms. Why didn't you tell us about this? If you had told us, she
wouldn't have climbed to the upper floor at that time." The Muni said, "I know
nothing about this. The teachings of the omniscient are for us Munis, that
*malaprahrit* alms are not acceptable for a Muni." Suradatta listened to the
Muni's Dharma and took *pravrajya*.  **24. The Fault of *Aachhedya*: The Example
of the Cowherd**  In the city of Basantpur, there lived a Shravak named Jindas.
His wife's name was Rukmini. In Jindas' house, there lived a cowherd named
Vatsaraj. On the eighth day, he would take all the milk from the cows and
buffaloes to his house, where he would make ghee. One day, a Muni came there
seeking alms. That day was the cowherd's turn to take all the milk. He milked
all the cows and buffaloes thoroughly. Jindas was very devoted to the teachings
of the Jinas. Seeing the Muni approaching, he offered him food and drink with
devotion. Thinking, "One should drink milk after eating," the Seth, with a
devout mind, forcibly took some milk from the cowherd and gave it to the Muni.
The cowherd felt a little resentment towards the Muni, but he couldn't say
anything out of fear of his master. He took the milk pot home.  Seeing the
partially empty milk pot, his wife angrily asked, "Why is the milk pot so empty
today?" The cowherd told her everything truthfully. His wife also became angry
at the Muni. Seeing the reduced amount of milk, their children started crying.
Seeing his entire family distressed, the cowherd became very angry at the Muni.
He left home to kill the Muni. He went to a place...  1. Ga. 168 Vr. P. 109,
Pimprati P. 46.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 3 : kathAeM 247 mUrtimAn dharma ke samAna usa muni ko Ate hue dekhakara
suradatta ne vasuMdharA se kahA-'sAdhuoM ko Upara mAle se modaka lAkara do|'
vaha usa samaya garbhiNI thI lekina pati ke Adeza ko devatA kI bhAMti svIkAra
karatI huI vaha niHzreNi ke mAdhyama se Upara car3hane lgii| sAdhu ko mAlApahRta
bhikSA kalpanIya nahIM hai, yaha kahakara sAdhu usa ghara se bAhara nikala ge| .
usI samaya koI kApAlika bhikSArtha usa ghara meM praviSTa huaa| suradatta ne
kApAlika se pUchA- kyA sAdhuoM ko mAlApahRta bhikSA kalpanIya nahIM hai?'
mAtsarya ke kAraNa usane asambaddha bhASaNa kara diyaa| suradatta ne usako bhI
modaka dene hetu vasuMdharA ko Adeza diyaa| niHzreNI para car3hate hue kisI
prakAra usakA paira phisala gayA aura vaha nIce gira pdd'ii| nIce brIhi dalane
kI ghaTTI par3I thii| yaMtra kI kIla ne usake peTa ko do bhAgoM meM cIra diyaa|
usameM se spandana karatA huA garbha bAhara nikala aayaa| kIlaka dvArA peTa ke
vidArita hone se atyanta pIr3A kA anubhava karatA huA saba logoM ke dekhate-
dekhate hI vaha bAlaka mRtyu ko prApta ho gyaa| kucha kSaNoM bAda vasuMdharA bhI
kAlagata ho gii| kApAlika kI cAroM ora niMdA hone lgii| eka dina usI ghara meM
vahI sAdhu bhikSArtha praviSTa huaa| suradatta ne guNacandra nAmaka sAdhu ko
kahA-'Apane apane jJAnacakSu se dAnadAtrI kA vinAza dekhakara bhikSA kA parihAra
kara diyA phira Apane isa saMdarbha meM hamako kyoM nahIM batAyA? yadi Apa batA
dete to vaha usa samaya UparI mAle para nahIM cddh'tii|' sAdhu ne kahA-'maiM isa
saMdarbha meM kucha nahIM jAnatA huuN| sarvajJa kA hama muniyoM ke lie upadeza
haiM ki sAdhu ke lie mAlApahRta bhikSA kalpanIya nahIM hai|' suradatta ne muni
se dharma kA zravaNa kiyA aura pravrajyA grahaNa kara lii| 24. Acchedya doSa :
gopAlaka dRSTAMta basantapura nAmaka nagara meM jinadAsa nAmaka zrAvaka thaa|
usakI patnI kA nAma rukmiNI thaa| jinadAsa ke ghara meM vatsarAja nAmaka gvAlA
rahatA thaa| vaha AThaveM dina sabhI gAya evaM bhaiMsoM kA dUdha apane ghara le
jAtA thA jisase vaha ghI banAtA thaa| eka dina eka sAdhu bhikSArtha vahAM aayaa|
usa dina gvAle kI pUrA dUdha lene kI bArI thii| usane sabhI gAya aura bhaiMsoM
kA acchI taraha dohana kiyaa| jinadAsa jina-pravacana ke prati atyanta anurakta
thaa| sAdhu ko Ate hue dekhakara usane bhaktipUrvaka yatheccha bhaktapAna Adi
diyaa| 'bhojana ke aMta meM dUdha lenA cAhie' yaha socakara bhakti yukta mAnasa
se seTha ne gvAle se balAt dUdha chInakara thor3A dUdha sAdhu ko de diyaa| gvAle
ke mana meM sAdhu ke prati thor3A dveSa A gayA lekina mAlika ke bhaya se vaha
kucha nahIM bola skaa| vaha dUdha ke pAtra ko ghara lekara gyaa| nyUna
dugdhapAtra ko dekhakara usakI patnI ne roSapUrvaka pUchA-'yaha dugdhapAtra Aja
thor3A khAlI kaise hai?' gvAle ne sArI bAta yathArtha rUpa se batA dii| usakI
patnI ko bhI sAdhu ke Upara krodha A gyaa| usake baccoM ne kama dUdha ko
dekhakara ronA prAraMbha kara diyaa| apane pUre kUTumba ko Akula-vyAkula
dekhakara sAdhu ke prati vaha gvAlA atyanta kupita ho gyaa| vaha sAdhu ko mArane
ke lie ghara se claa| usane kisI sthAna 1. gA. 168 vR pa. 109, piMpraTI p.46| |

Page #420 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 248 **Pindaniyukti**  A monk was seen begging for alms from a distance. A
cowherd ran after him with a stick, intending to hit him. The monk turned around
and saw the angry cowherd. He understood that the cowherd was coming to hit him
because Jinadas had forcefully taken the milk and given it to him. The monk
approached the cowherd with a cheerful face and said, "O cowherd! Your master
willingly gave me this milk as alms. Now, take back your milk."   The cowherd's
anger subsided upon hearing this. He calmed down and said, "O monk! I came to
hit you, but now, your words have calmed my anger. You can keep this milk. I
will leave you today, but in the future, never consume food that is not properly
offered." Saying this, the cowherd returned home, and the monk reached his
shelter.  ## 25. Anisrushta Dosha: Laddaka Drishtanta  In the city of Ratnapura,
Mani Bhadra, a prominent person, lived with 32 companions. Once, they made
ordinary sweets for a celebration and went to the celebration place as a group.
They left one person there to guard the sweets. The remaining 31 companions went
to bathe in the river. Meanwhile, a greedy monk arrived there seeking alms. He
saw the sweets. Driven by greed, the monk requested the sweets from the man,
offering him religious merit. The man replied, "These sweets are not solely
mine; 31 others also share them. How can I give them alone?" Upon hearing this,
the monk asked, "Where have they gone?" The man replied, "They have all gone to
bathe in the river." Hearing this, the monk said again, "Can't you gain merit
from the sweets of others? You are foolish! You are not earning merit by
donating the sweets of others even when I ask for them. If you give me 32
sweets, you will still get one sweet. If you truly understand the principle of
'Alpa Vaya and Bahudana,' then give me all the sweets."   Upon hearing this, the
man gave all the sweets to the monk. The monk, filled with joy at having his
bowl filled with sweets, left the place.  Meanwhile, Mani Bhadra and his
companions came back. They asked the monk, "O venerable one! What did you
receive here?" The monk thought, "If these are the owners of the sweets, they
will take the sweets back from me if they hear about the sweets. Therefore, I
will say that I received nothing." He said the same. Mani Bhadra and his
companions, seeing the bowl filled with sweets, became suspicious. They said,
"We want to see your bowl." The monk refused to show his bowl. Then, they
forcefully...  **Note:** In Nishita Churni, there is a slight difference in the
beginning of this story. A cowherd was responsible for dividing the milk and
protecting the cows. He would take one-fourth of the milk from the cows that
gave milk daily and would take all the milk from the cows on the fourth day.
(Ga. 173/2, 3 Vr. P. 111, Nibha 4502 Chu. P. 433, Pimprati P. 47).

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 248 piMDaniyukti para bhikSA karate hue sAdhu ko dUra se dekhaa| vaha lakar3I
lekara sAdhu ko mArane ke lie unake pIche daudd'aa| sAdhu ne pIche mur3akara
kupita gvAle ko dekhakara samajha liyA ki nizcaya hI jinadAsa ne balapUrvaka
dUdha chInakara mujhe diyA hai isalie yaha mujhe mArane ke lie A rahA hai| sAdhu
ne prasannavadana se usake sammukha jAnA prAraMbha kara diyA aura gvAle se
kahA-'he gopAlaka! tumhAre svAmI ne AgrahapUrvaka dUdha mujhe bhikSA meM de
diyA, aba tuma apane dUdha ko vApasa le lo|' sAdhu ke isa prakAra kahane se
usakA krodha upazAnta ho gayA aura svabhAvastha hokara bolA-'bho sAdhu! maiM
tumheM mArane ke lie AyA thA lekina isa samaya tumhAre vacanAmRta ke siMcana se
merA sArA krodha zAnta ho gyaa| tuma isa dUdha ko apane pAsa rkho| Aja maiM
tumako chor3atA hUM lekina bhaviSya meM kabhI Acchedya AhAra ko grahaNa nahIM
karanA, aisA kahakara gvAlA apane ghara lauTa gayA aura sAdhu bhI apane upAzraya
meM pahuMca gyaa| 25. anisRSTa doSa : laDDaka dRSTAMta ratnapura nagara meM
mANibhadra pramukha 32 yuvaka sAthI rahate the| eka bAra unhoMne udyApana ke lie
sAdhAraNa modaka banavAe aura samUha rUpa se udyApanikA meM ge| vahAM unhoMne
eka vyakti ko modaka kI rakSA ke lie chor3a diyaa| zeSa 31 sAthI nadI meM snAna
karane hetu cale ge| isI bIca koI lolupa sAdhu vahAM bhikSArtha upasthita huaa|
usane modakoM ko dekhaa| lolupatA ke kAraNa usa sAdhu ne dharma-lAbha dekara usa
puruSa se modakoM kI yAcanA kii| usa vyakti ne uttara diyA-'ye modaka kevala
mere adhIna nahIM haiM, anya 31 sAthiyoM kI bhI isameM sahabhAgitA hai ata: maiM
akelA inheM kaise de sakatA hUM?' aisA kahane para sAdhu bolA"ve kahAM gae haiM
?' vaha bolA-'ve saba nadI meM snAna karane hetu gae haiN| usake aisA kahane
para sAdhu ne punaH kahA-'kyA dUsaroM ke modakoM se tuma puNya nahIM kara
sakate? tuma mUr3ha ho jo mere dvArA mAMgane para bhI dUsaroM ke laDDuoM ko dAna
dekara puNya nahIM kamA rahe ho? yadi tuma 32 modaka mujhe dete ho to bhI
tumhAre bhAga meM eka hI modaka AtA hai| yadi 'alpavaya aura bahudAna' isa
siddhAnta ko samyak hRdaya se jAnate ho to mujhe sAre modaka de do|' sAdhu ke
dvArA aisA kahane para usane sAre modaka sAdhu ko de die| laDDuoM se pAtra
bharane para harSa se AplAvita hokara vaha sAdhu usa sthAna se jAne lgaa| _ isI
bIca sAdhu ko mANibhadra Adi sAthI sammukha Ate hue mila ge| unhoMne sAdhu se
pUchA'bhagavan! Apako yahAM kisa vastu kI prApti huI ?' sAdhu ne socA ki yadi ye
modaka ke svAmI hai to modaka-prApti kI bAta sunakara punaH mujhase modaka
grahaNa kara leMge isalie 'mujhe kucha bhI prApti nahIM huI' aisA khuuNgaa|
usane vaisA hI khaa| mANibhadra Adi sAthiyoM ko bhAra se AkrAMta pAtra ko
dekhakara zaMkA ho gii| unhoMne kahA-'hama ApakA pAtra dekhanA cAhate haiN|'
sAdhu ne pAtra nahIM dikhAyA, taba unhoMne balapUrvaka 1. nizItha cUrNi meM isa
kathA ke prAraMbha meM kucha aMtara hai| eka gvAlA dUdha kA vibhAga lekara gAya
kI rakSA karatA thaa| vaha pratidina dUdha dene vAlI gAyoM kA cauthAI bhAga
dUdha svayaM letA thA tathA cauthe dina gAyoM kA pUrA dUdha svayaM grahaNa
karatA thaa| gA. 173/2, 3 vR pa. 111, nibhA 4502 cU pR. 433, piMpraTI pa. 47 /

Page #421 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 3: Stories  **249**  The Sadhu's character was seen. Then, with a
furious eye, Koparun asked the Modak protector man, "How did you give all the
Modaks to this Sadhu?" He trembled with fear and said, "I did not give him any
Modaks." Hearing this, all the companions, including Manibhadra, said to the
Sadhu, "You are a thief and a hypocrite who pretends to be a Sadhu. Where is
your Moksha?" Saying this, they pulled the Sadhu's clothes. Then, taking all the
vessels, Rajoharan, etc., they made him a householder and a "Pachchakad." They
all took the Sadhu to the royal palace and told the Dharmadikari everything. He
questioned the Sadhu about everything, but due to shame, he could not say
anything. Then, those officers who were administering justice thought, "This is
definitely a thief, but he is disguised as a Sadhu, so he should be exiled
alive."  **26. Dhatridoṣa: Sangamasuri and Datt Story**  In the city of
Kollakir, Sangam Acharya, being weak due to old age, was traveling. Once, due to
famine, he made his disciple Singh the Acharya and sent him to a prosperous
region. He himself stayed there alone. He divided the region into nine parts and
diligently performed Masakalp and Chaturmas. After a year, Singh Acharya sent
his disciple Datt to inquire about his Guru Sangam Acharya's condition. The
Acharya was staying in the same residence where he had left him. Datt thought in
his mind, "The Acharya has not performed the Masakalp with devotion, so I should
not stay with someone who has lax conduct." Thinking this, he stayed in the
pavilion outside the residence. He paid his respects to the Acharya and inquired
about his well-being. Datt conveyed the message given by Singh to the Acharya.
During the Bhikshavela, he went with the Acharya to beg for alms. After
receiving alms from the houses at the end of the street, his face became pale.
Then, knowing his feelings, the Acharya entered the house of a wealthy Seth.
There, due to a Vyantari residing there, a child was always crying. The Acharya
struck a pair of tongs and said, "Vats! Don't cry." When the Acharya said this,
the Vyantari, influenced by his power, laughed and went away from there. The
child stopped crying. The householder was very happy with this. He gave the
Sadhu many Modaks as alms. Datt was happy to receive the Modaks. He went to his
residence.  The Acharya was indifferent to his body, so he returned to the
Upashraya after begging for alms in the houses at the end of the street, as per
the Agamvidhi. During the Pratikramanvela, the Acharya said to his disciple
Datt, "Vats! Criticize the Dhatripinda and Chikitsapinda." Datt said, "I went
with you to beg for alms, so how can I be blamed for consuming the Dhatripinda?"
The Acharya said, "Playing with the small child is Kridan Dhatripinda, and by
striking the tongs, the child was freed from the Vyantari, this is
Chikitsapinda." Then, with a hateful mind, Datt thought, "The Acharya himself
does not perform Masakalp with devotion, and he takes such Pindas every day. I
have taken one  - 1. Ga. 179-180 Vr. P. 113,114, Nibha 4517-19 Chu P. 437,
Pimprati P. 47, 48.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 3 : kathAeM 249 sAdhu kA pAtra dekha liyaa| taba kopAruNa netra se
unhoMne modaka rakSaka puruSa se pUchA-'tumane isa sAdhu ko sAre modaka kaise
die?' vaha bhaya se kAMpatA huA bolA-'maiMne inako modaka nahIM die|' yaha
sunakara mANibhadra Adi sabhI sAthI sAdhu se bole-'tuma cora ho tathA sAdhu-veza
kI viDambanA karane vAle ho| tumhArA mokSa kahAM hai' aisA kahakara unhoMne
sAdhu kA vastra khiiNcaa| phira sAre pAtra, rajoharaNa Adi grahaNa karake usako
gRhastha banAkara 'pacchAkar3a' banA diyaa| ve saba sAdhu ko rAjakula meM le gae
aura dharmAdhikArI ko sArI bAta btaaii| unhoMne sAdhu ko sArI bAta pUchI kintu
lajjA ke kAraNa vaha kucha bhI kahane meM samartha nahIM ho skaa| taba una nyAya
karane vAle adhikAriyoM ne ciMtana kiyA-'yaha nizcita hI cora hai lekina yaha
sAdhu vezadhArI hai ata: use jIvita chor3akara deza nikAlA de diyaa| 26.
dhAtrIdoSa : saMgamasUri aura datta kathAnaka kollakira nagara meM vRddhAvasthA
ke kAraNa jaMghAbala se hIna saMgama AcArya pravAsa karate the| eka bAra
durbhikSa hone para siMha nAmaka ziSya ko AcArya banAkara use subhikSa kSetra
meM preSita kara diyaa| ve svayaM ekAkI rUpa se vahIM rahane lge| kSetra ko nau
bhAgoM meM vibhakta karake yatanA pUrvaka mAsakalpa aura cAturmAsa karane lge|
eka varSa bItane para siMha AcArya ne apane guru saMgama AcArya kI sthiti jAnane
ke lie datta nAmaka ziSya ko bhejaa| vaha jisa kSetra meM AcArya ko chor3akara
gayA thA, AcArya usI vasati meM pravAsa kara rahe the| datta ne apane mana meM
ciMtana kiyA-'AcArya ne bhAva rUpa se mAsakalpa kI yatanA nahIM kI hai ata:
zithila AcAra vAle ke sAtha nahIM rahanA caahie| yaha socakara vaha vasati ke
bAhara maNDapa meM ruka gyaa| usane AcArya ko vaMdanA tathA kuzalakSema kI
pRcchA kii| datta ne siMha dvArA pradatta saMdeza AcArya ko btaayaa| bhikSAvelA
meM vaha AcArya ke sAtha bhikSArtha gyaa| aMta-prAnta gharoM meM bhikSA grahaNa
karake usakA mukha mlAna ho gyaa| taba AcArya ne usake bhAvoM ko jAnakara kisI
dhanADhya seTha ke ghara praveza kiyaa| vahAM vyantara adhiSThita hone ke kAraNa
eka bAlaka sadaiva rotA thaa| AcArya ne eka cimaTI bajAkara kahA-'vatsa! roo
mt|' AcArya ke aisA kahane para unake prabhAva se vaha pUtanA vyantarI aTTahAsa
karatI huI vahAM se anyatra calI gii| bAlaka kA ronA baMda ho gyaa| gRhasvAmI
isa bAta se atyanta prasanna ho gyaa| usane sAdha ko bhikSA meM aneka modaka
die| datta modaka ko grahaNa karake prasanna ho gyaa| vaha apanI vasati meM A
gyaa| AcArya apane zarIra ke prati nispRha the ataH Agamavidhi ke anusAra aMta-
prAnta kuloM meM bhikSA karake upAzraya meM lautte| pratikramaNa-velA meM AcArya
ne ziSya datta se kahA-'vatsa! dhAtrIpiNDa aura cikitsApiNDa kI AlocanA kro|'
datta bolA-'maiM Apake sAtha hI bhikSArtha gayA ataH mujhe dhAtrIpiNDa paribhoga
kA doSa kaise lagA?' AcArya ne kahA-'laghu bAlaka ko krIr3A karAne se krIr3ana
dhAtrIpiNDa tathA cimaTI bajAne se bAlaka pUtanA se mukta huA, yaha cikitsApiNDa
ho gyaa|' taba dveSayukta mana meM datta ne cintana kiyA-'AcArya svayaM to
bhAvataH mAsakalpa nahIM karate tathA pratidina aisA piNDa lete haiN| maiMne eka
- 1. gA. 179-180 vR pa. 113,114, nibhA 4517-19 cU pR. 437, piMpraTI pa. 47, 48
/

Page #422 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
250 "Even though I took food on the day of Pindanuyukti, they are still
criticizing me." Thinking this way, he left the residence out of anger.  Seeing
the anger towards the Acharya, a deva attracted to the Acharya's qualities
darkened the residence to teach Datt and caused rain with strong wind.
Frightened, he asked the Acharya, "Where should I go?" Then, with a very pure
heart, the Acharya said, "Vats! Come inside the residence." Datt said, "I can't
see the door because of the darkness." With compassion, the Acharya applied
mucus and raised his finger. It ignited like a flame. Then, that wicked-minded
Datt thought, "Oh! The Acharya also has fire as a possession." Thinking this
way, the deva rebuked him, saying, "Oh, lowly disciple! You think this way about
the Acharya who is full of all virtues." Then, the deva told the disciple the
true story of obtaining the modak. The disciple's feelings changed. He
apologized to the Acharya and criticized him properly. 27. Dooti Dosha:
Dhanadatt Katha  Near the vast village was a village called Gokul. There lived a
householder named Dhanadatt. His wife's name was Priyamati and his daughter's
name was Devaki. In the same village, she was married to a young man named
Sundar. His son's name was Balishth and his daughter's name was Revati. His
daughter was married to Sangam in Gokul village. At a young age, Priyamati
passed away. Dhanadatt also became detached from the world and took initiation,
starting to wander with his guru. After some time, while wandering from village
to village, Dhanadatt came to his daughter Devaki's village. At that time, there
was a feud between the two villages. The residents of the vast village planned
to attack Gokul village. Dhanadatt Muni went to Gokul village for alms, when
Devaki, who was lying down, said, "You are going to Gokul village. Tell your
granddaughter Revati that your mother has sent a message that this village will
attack your village with a band of robbers in disguise, so take all your loved
ones to a safe place in seclusion." The sage told Revati all this. She told her
husband everything. He informed the whole village. The whole village, wearing
armor, etc., got ready for war.  The next day, the robbers reached the vast
village. The battle began between them. Sundar and Balishth went with the band
of robbers. Sangam was in Gokul village. All three of them were killed in the
battle. Hearing of the death of her husband, son, and son-in-law, Devaki began
to lament. People came to console her. They said, "If the news of the robbers
coming to Gokul village had not been given, they would not have been armed and
ready for battle, nor would your husband, etc., have died. Which evil spirit
sent the news to Gokul village?" People asked this 1. Ga. 199 Vr. P. 125, 126,
Uni 107, Avani 778-778/2, Avchu Bha. 2 P. 35, Nibha 4392-94 Chu P. 408, Pimprati
P. 52, 53.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 250 piMDaniyukti dina aisA AhAra liyA phira bhI mujhe AlocanA karane kI bAta
kaha rahe haiN|' isa prakAra cintana karake pradveSa se vaha vasati ke bAhara
calA gyaa| AcArya ke prati pradveSa dekhakara AcArya ke guNoM ke prati AkRSTa
eka devatA ne datta ko zikSA dene ke lie vasati meM aMdhakAra kara diyA tathA
teja vAyu ke sAtha varSA kI vikurvaNA kara dii| bhayabhIta hokara usane AcArya
se kahA-'maiM kahAM jAUM?' taba ati nirmala hRdaya se AcArya ne kahA-'vatsa!
yahAM vasati meM A jaao|' datta bolA-'aMdhakAra ke kAraNa mujhe dvAra dikhAI
nahIM de rahA hai|' anukampA se AcArya ne zleSma lagAkara aMguli ko Upara kiyaa|
vaha dIpazikhA kI bhAMti prajvalita ho gii| taba usa duSTa citta vAle datta ne
cintana kiyA-'aho! AcArya ke pAsa parigraha ke rUpa meM agni bhI hai|' isa
prakAra cintana karane para devatA ne usakI bhartsanA karate hue kahA-'he adhama
ziSya ! isa prakAra saba guNoM se yukta AcArya ke bAre meM bhI tuma isa prakAra
kA cintana karate ho|' taba devatA ne modaka-prApti kI yathArtha bAta ziSya ko
btaaii| ziSya ke bhAvoM meM parivartana huaa| usane AcArya se kSamA mAMgI aura
samyak rUpa se AlocanA kii| 27. dUtI doSa : dhanadatta kathA vistIrNa grAma ke
pAsa gokula nAmaka gAMva thaa| vahAM dhanadatta nAmaka kauTumbika thaa| usakI
patnI kA nAma priyamati tathA putrI kA nAma devakI thaa| usI gAMva meM suMdara
nAmaka yuvaka se usakA vivAha huaa| usake putra kA nAma baliSTha aura putrI kA
nAma revatI thaa| putrI kA vivAha gokula grAma meM saMgama ke sAtha huaa| Ayu
kama hone para priyamati kAlagata ho gii| dhanadatta bhI saMsAra se virakta
hokara dIkSA lekara guru ke sAtha viharaNa karane lgaa| kAlAntara meM
grAmAnugrAma vihAra karate hue dhanadatta apanI putrI devakI ke gAMva meM aayaa|
usa samaya una donoM gAMvoM meM paraspara vaira cala rahA thaa| vistIrNa
grAmavAsiyoM ne gokula grAma ke Upara hamalA karane kI socii| dhanadatta muni
gokula grAma meM bhikSA ke lie prasthita huA, taba zayyAtarI devakI ne kahA-'Apa
gokula grAma meM jA rahe haiN| vahAM apanI dauhitrI revatI ko kahanA ki tumhArI
mAM ne saMdeza bhejA hai ki yaha gAMva tumhAre gAMva ke Upara dasyu-dala ke
sAtha pracchanna rUpa se hamalA karane AegA ataH apane sabhI AtmIyoM ko ekAnta
meM surakSita sthAna para pahuMcA do|' sAdhu ne vaha sArI bAta revatI ko kaha
dii| usane apane pati ko sArI bAta btaaii| usane sAre gAMva ko yaha sUcanA de
dii| sArA gAMva kavaca Adi pahanakara yuddha ke lie taiyAra ho gyaa|  /  dUsare
dina dhATI vistIrNa gAMva meM pahuMca gii| una donoM meM yuddha prAraMbha ho
gyaa| suMdara aura baliSTha dasyudala ke sAtha ge| saMgama gokula grAma meM
thaa| ve tInoM yuddha meM kAla kavalita ho ge| devakI ne pati, putra aura jaMvAI
ke maraNa ko sunakara vilApa karanA prAraMbha kara diyaa| loga use samajhAne ke
lie aae| unhoMne kahA-'yadi gokula grAma meM dhATI Ane kI sUcanA nahIM hotI to
ve sannaddha hokara yuddha nahIM karate aura na hI tumhAre pati Adi kI mRtyu
hotii| kisa durAtmA ne gokula gAMva meM sUcanA bhejI?' logoM se isa prakAra kI
1. gA. 199 vR pa. 125, 126, uni 107, Avani 778-778/2, AvacU bhA. 2 pR. 35, nibhA
4392-94 cU pR. 408, piMpraTI pa.52, 53 /

Page #423 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 3: Stories  **251** Hearing this, Devaki, filled with anger, said,
"Due to lack of knowledge, I had sent a message to my daughter through the
Muni." The Muni Dhanadatta started to be condemned in all the realms. Even his
sermons were disregarded.  **28. The Fault of Nimitta: The Example of the
Village Chief**  In a village, there lived a dejected Naimittika Sadhu. The
village chief had gone on a pilgrimage, leaving his wife behind. The Naimittika,
using his Nimitta knowledge, attracted the chief's wife. The chief, from a
distant village, thought, "I will go in disguise and see if my wife is virtuous
or unvirtuous." Knowing about the chief's arrival from the Naimittika Sadhu, the
wife sent her relatives to meet him. The chief asked them, "How did you know
about my arrival?" They replied, "Your wife told us." He pondered, "How did my
wife know about my arrival?"  The Sadhu arrived at the house of the village
chief's wife. He confidently told her about the conversation, actions, dreams,
and the marks, tilak, etc., of her husband. Meanwhile, the village chief arrived
home. He welcomed his wife properly. He asked, "How did you know about my
arrival?" She replied, "I got the information through the Naimittika Sadhu's
Nimitta knowledge." The chief asked, "Does he have any other trustworthy
knowledge?" She then told him about the conversation, actions, etc., that she
had with her husband, the dreams she had, and the tilak on her private parts,
all of which the Naimittika Sadhu had accurately revealed. Filled with jealousy
and anger, the chief asked the Sadhu, "What is in the belly of this mare?" The
Sadhu replied, "A foal with Pancha-Pundra." The chief thought, "If this is true,
then the marks, tilak, etc., that he told my wife about must also be true.
Otherwise, he must be a fornicator who commits wrong deeds and deserves to be
killed." Thinking this, he cut open the mare's belly. A pulsating Pancha-Pundra
youth emerged. Seeing this, his anger subsided. He said to the Sadhu, "If this
had not been true, you would not be alive in this world."  **29. The Fault of
Treatment: The Example of the Lion**  In a forest, a tiger became blind. Due to
blindness, it became difficult for him to find prey. A physician cured his
blindness. Upon regaining his health, the tiger first killed the physician and
then started killing other animals in the forest.  **Footnotes:**  1. Ga. 202,
203, Vrup. 127, Nibha 4401, 4402, Chu. P. 410, JiBha 1335-39, Pimprati P. 54. 2.
Ga. 205, PiBha 33, 34, Vrup. 128, Nibha 4406-08, Chu. P. 411, Nibha 2694-96,
Chu. P. 20, JiBha 1342-47, Pimprati P. 54, 55. 3. Ga. 215, Vrup. 133, Pimprati
P. 57.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 3 : kathAeM 251 bAta sunakara krodhita hokara devakI bolI- 'jAnakArI ke
abhAva meM maiMne apane pitA muni sAtha apanI putrI ko saMdeza bhejA thaa|' sAre
loka meM muni dhanadatta ko dhikkAra milane lgii| pravacana kI bhI avahelanA
hone lagI  / " 28. nimitta doSa : grAmabhojaka- dRSTAMta eka gAMva meM avasanna
naimittika sAdhu rahatA thaa| usa gAMva kA nAyaka apanI patnI ko chor3akara
digyAtrA para gayA huA thA  /  usakI patnI ko usa naimittika ne apane nimitta
jJAna se AkRSTa kara liyA  /  dUrastha grAma- nAyaka ne socA- 'maiM pracchanna
rUpa se akelA jAkara apanI patnI kI ceSTAeM dekhUMgA ki vaha duHzIlA hai athavA
suzIlA ?' usa naimittika sAdhu se apane pati ke Agamana kI bAta jAnakara usane
apane parijanoM ko sAmane bhejA  /  grAmanAyaka ne parijanoM se pUchA - ' tuma
logoM ko mere Agamana kI bAta kaise jJAta huI ?' unhoMne kahA - ' tumhArI patnI
ne yaha bAta batAI hai|' usane mana meM cintana kiyA ki merI patnI ne mere
Agamana kI bAta kaise jAnI ? sAdhu usa samaya grAmabhojaka ke ghara A gyaa|
usane vizvAsapUrvaka pati ke sAtha hue vArtAlApa, ceSTA, svapna tathA zarIra ke
maSa, tilaka Adi ke bAre meM btaayaa| isI bIca grAmabhojaka apane ghara A gayA
/  usane pati kA yathocita satkAra kiyaa| usane pUchA- 'tumane mere Agamana kI
bAta kaise jAnI ?' vaha bolI- 'sAdhu ke nimitta - jJAna se mujhe jAnakArI
milii|' bhojaka ne kahA- 'kyA usakI aura bhI koI vizvAsapUrNa bAta hai ? ' taba
usane batAyA ki Apake sAtha jo bhI vArtAlApa, ceSTAeM Adi kI haiM, jo maiMne
svapna Adi dekheM haiM, mere guhya pradeza meM jo tilaka hai, vaha bhI isa
naimittika sAdhu ne yathArtha batA die haiM, taba bhojaka ne IrSyA aura
krodhavaza usa sAdhu se pUchA - ' isa ghor3I ke garbha meM kyA hai ?' sAdhu ne
batAyA'paMcapuMDra vAlA ghor3I kA baccA  / ' taba usane socA- 'yadi yaha bAta
satya hogI to merI bhAryA ko batAe gae maSa, tilaka Adi kA kathana bhI satya
hogA  /  anyathA avazya hI yaha viruddha karma karane vAlA vyabhicArI hai ataH
mArane yogya hai|' isa prakAra cintana karake usane ghor3I kA peTa cIrA, usameM
se parispaMdana karatA huA paMcapuMDra kizora niklaa| usako dekhakara usakA
krodha zAMta ho gyaa| vaha sAdhu se bolA- ' yadi yaha bAta satya nahIM hotI to
tuma bhI isa duniyA meM nahIM rahate  /  2 29. cikitsA doSa : siMha- dRSTAMta
eka aTavI meM eka vyAghra aMdhA ho gyaa| aMdhepana ke kAraNa use bhakSya milanA
durlabha ho gyaa| eka vaidya ne usakA aMdhApana miTA diyaa| svastha hote hI
vyAghra ne sabase pahale usI vaidya kA ghAta kiyA, phira vaha jaMgala meM anya
pazuoM ko bhI mArane lgaa| 1. gA. 202,203 vRpa. 127, nibhA 4401, 4402, cU pR.
410, jIbhA 1335-39, piMpraTI pa. 54  /  2. gA. 205, pibhA 33, 34 vRpa. 128,
nibhA 4406-08, cU pR. 411, nibhA 2694-96 cU. pR. 20, jIbhA 1342 - 47, piMpraMTI
pa. 54,55 3. gA. 215 vR pa. 133, piMpraTI pa. 57  /

Page #424 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 252 **Pindaniyukti 30. Krodha Pind: Kshapaka Dristant**  In the city of
Hastakalp, a Brahmin's house was hosting a death feast. A sadhu, who had
performed a tapasya of one month without eating, arrived there to break his
fast. He saw the Brahmins giving away ghevar as charity. The sadhu was stopped
by the gatekeeper. The sadhu became angry and said, "If you don't give it today,
then you will have to give it to me next month." Saying this, he left the house.
By divine will, another person from that house died after five or six days. On
the day of his death feast, the same sadhu arrived there to break his fast. That
day too, the gatekeeper stopped him. The muni became angry and again said, "If
not today, then you will have to give it to me sometime." Hearing this, the
senior gatekeeper thought, "This sadhu has cursed like this twice before. Two
people from the house have died. This is the third time. Now, no one else from
the house should die." So, he told the head of the household everything. The
head of the household apologized to the sadhu respectfully and gave him ghevar
and other things as alms. (This is Krodha Pind).  **31. Shvetangali**  In a
village, a man was completely under the control of his wife. Every morning, he
would ask his wife for food because of hunger. She would say, "I am too lazy to
get up so early, so you yourself take out the ashes from the stove, bring fire
from the neighbor's house, light the stove, and cook food. When it is cooked, I
will serve you and you can eat." Every day, he would do this as his wife said.
Because of taking out the ashes from the stove every morning, his face would
become white with ashes. So, people jokingly started calling him Shvetangali.
**32. Bakoddayak**  In a village, a man was very attached to the pleasure of
seeing his wife's face. So, he was obedient to her every command. Once, his wife
said, "I am feeling lazy today, so you go to the pond yourself and bring water."
He accepted his wife's words as if they were the command of a god and said, "My
dear, whatever you command, I will do. People should not see me bringing water,
so I will get up in the west watch of the night and bring water every day."
Because of his coming and going, the sound of his feet and the sound of filling
the pot would wake up the herons sleeping on the trees near the pond. This story
became known to the people. Jokingly, people started calling him Bakoddayak.
**1. Ga. 218/1, Vr. P. 134, Nibha 4442, Jibha 1395, Chu P. 418, Pimprati P. 58.
2. Ga. 219/6, Vr. P. 135, Nibha 4451, Chu P. 420, Pimprati P. 59. 3. Ga. 219/6,
Vr. P. 135, Nibha 4451, Chu P. 420, Pimprati P. 59.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 252 piMDaniyukti 30. krodhapiNDa : kSapaka dRSTAMta hastakalpa nagara meM kisI
brAhmaNa ke ghara meM mRtabhoja thaa| usa bhoja meM eka mAsakhamaNa kI tapasyA
vAlA sAdhu pAraNe ke lie bhikSArtha phuNcaa| usane brAhmaNoM ko ghevara kA dAna
dete hue dekhaa| usa tapasvI sAdhu ko dvArapAla ne roka diyaa| sAdhu kupita
hokara bolA-'Aja nahIM doge to koI bAta nahIM, agale mahIne tumheM mujhako denA
hogaa|' aisA kahate hue vaha ghara se nikala gyaa| daivayoga se usa ghara kA
anya koI vyakti pAMca-chaha dina ke bAda divaMgata ho gyaa| usake mRtabhoja vAle
dina vahI sAdhu mAsakhamaNa ke pAraNe hetu vahAM phuNcaa| usa dina bhI dvArapAla
ne usako roka diyaa| vaha muni kupita hokara punaH bolA-'Aja nahIM to phira
kabhI denA hogaa|' muni kI yaha bAta sunakara sthavira dvArapAla ne cintana kiyA
ki pahale bhI isa sAdhu ne do bAra isI prakAra zrApa diyA thaa| ghara ke do
vyakti mRtyu ko prApta ho ge| isa bAra tIsarA avasara hai| aba ghara kA koI
vyakti na mare ataH usane gRhanAyaka ko sArI bAta btaaii| gRhanAyaka ne
AdarapUrvaka sAdhu se kSamAyAcanA kI tathA ghevara Adi vastuoM kI bhikSA dii|
(yaha krodhapiNDa hai)| 31. zvetAGgali kisI gAMva meM koI puruSa apanI bhAryA kI
icchA ke adhIna thaa| vaha prAta:kAla hI bhUkha ke kAraNa apanI patnI se bhojana
kI yAcanA karatA thaa| vaha usako kahatI thI ki maiM Alasya ke kAraNa itanI
jaldI uThane meM samartha nahIM hUM ataH tuma svayaM cUlhe se rAkha nikAlakara
par3osI ke ghara se agni lAkara cUlhA jalAo aura bhojana pkaao| jaba vaha paka
jAe, taba maiM Apako parosakara khAnA khilaauuNgii| patnI ke kahe anusAra
pratidina vaha yaha kArya karatA thaa| prAta:kAla hI cUlhe se rAkha nikAlane ke
kAraNa usakA mukha rAkha se zveta ho jAtA thA ataH logoM ne vinoda meM usakA
nAma zvetAGgali rakha diyaa| 32. bakoDDAyaka kisI grAma meM koI puruSa apanI
patnI ke mukhadarzana ke sukha meM Asakta thA ataH vaha usake pratyeka Adeza kA
vazavartI thaa| eka bAra usakI patnI ne kahA-'Aja mujhe Alasya satA rahA hai
ataH tuma svayaM tar3Aga para jAkara pAnI lekara A jaao|' vaha patnI ke kathana
ko devatA ke Adeza kI bhAMti svIkAra karatA huA bolA-'priye ! tuma jo Adeza
dogI, maiM vahI kArya kruuNgaa| loga mujhe pAnI lAte hue nahIM dekheM isalie
maiM rAtri ke pazcima prahara meM uThakara pratidina pAnI laauuNgaa|'
gamanAgamana karane se usake pairoM kI AvAja tathA ghar3A bharane kI AvAja ko
sunakara tar3Aga ke kinAre uge hue vRkSoM para sote hue baka ur3ane lagate the|
yaha vRttAnta logoM ko vidita ho gyaa| vinoda meM logoM ne usakA nAma
bakoDDAyaka rakha diyaa| 1. gA. 218/1, vR pa. 134, nibhA 4442, jIbhA 1395, cU
pa. 418, piMpraTI pa. 58 /  2. gA. 219/6, vR pa. 135, nibhA 4451, cU pR. 420,
piMpraTI p.59| 3. gA. 219/6, vR pa. 135, nibhA 4451, cU pR. 420, piMpraTI p.59|

Page #425 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Parī. 3: Kathāeṃ 33. Kiṃkara In a certain village, a man was attached to the
touch of his wife's breasts and hips. He was obedient to every desire of his
wife. In the morning, he would get up, join his palms, and ask his wife,
"Dayite! What shall I do for you?" She would say, "Go and fetch water from the
pond." Saying, "Whatever the dear one commands, I shall do that," he would bring
water from the pond. Bringing the water, he would again ask, "Prāṇeśvarī! Now
what shall I do?" His wife would say, "Extract rice from the earthen vessel and
serve it to me. Before the meal, wash my feet and massage them with ghee," and
so on. He would carry out all these tasks in the same manner. Knowing all these
things, people named him Kiṃkara.  34. Snāyaka In a certain village, a man was
obedient to the commands of his wife. Once, he said to his wife, "I want to take
a bath." His wife said, "Grind the āmalās on a stone slab, wear the bathing
garment, apply oil, and then go to the pond, bathe there, and on your way back,
bring water in a pot." He accepted his wife's words as the command of a deity
and completed all the tasks. He was named 'Snāyaka'.  35. Gṛdhraivariṅkhī In a
certain village, a man was under the command of his wife. Once, his wife was
sitting on a seat in the kitchen. The husband asked her for food. She said,
"Bring the plate." Saying, "What the beloved commands is the authority for me,"
he went and brought the plate. The wife served the food and said, "Go to the
place of eating and have the meal." Again, he asked for chutney and vegetables.
The wife said, "Come here with the plate." Then he went like a vulture to the
wife with the plate. In this way, he took curd, etc. Knowing all these things,
people named him Gṛdhraivariṅkhī.  36. Hadajña In a certain village, a man was
attached to seeing his wife's face. He used to obey her every command. While
enjoying happiness with his wife, in due course, he was blessed with a son. The
son in the cradle did malotsarga (defecation). The cradle and the child's
clothes were soiled with feces. Then his wife said, "Clean the cradle and the
child's clothes." Saying, "Whatever the dear one commands, I shall do that," he
cleaned the cradle and the clothes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 3 : kathAeM 253 33. kiMkara kisI gAMva meM koI puruSa apanI bhAryA ke
stana-jaghana Adi ke sparza meM Asakta thaa| vaha apanI patnI kI hara icchA kA
anuvartI thaa| vaha prAtaH uThakara baddhAJjali apanI patnI se kahatA
thA-'dayite! maiM tumhAre lie kyA karUM?' vaha kahatI thI tar3Aga se pAnI lekara
aao| 'jo priyA Adeza degI, maiM vahI karUMgA' aisA kahakara vaha tar3Aga se pAnI
lAtA thaa| pAnI lAkara vaha punaH pUchatA thA-'prANezvari ! aba maiM kyA karUM?'
usakI bhAryA kahatI miTTI ke pAtra se taNDula nikAlakara unako kaMDita kro| isI
prakAra bhojana se pUrva mere pairoM kA prakSAlana karo tathA ghI se mAliza karo
aadi| vaha sArA kArya usI rUpa meM sampAdita karatA thaa| ina saba bAtoM ko
jAnakara logoM ne usakA nAma kiMkara rakha diyaa| 34. snAyaka kisI grAma meM koI
puruSa apanI patnI kI AjJA kA anuvartI thaa| eka bAra usane apanI patnI se
kahA-'maiM snAna karanA cAhatA huuN|' usakI patnI ne kahA-'tuma AMvaloM ko zilA
para pIso, snAna pottikA ko dhAraNa karo, taila kI mAliza karo aura phira ghaTa
lekara tar3Aga para jAo, vahAM snAna karake Ate samaya jala bharakara le aao|'
usane patnI ke kathana ko devatA ke Adeza kI bhAMti svIkRta karate hue sArA
kArya sampanna kiyaa| usakA nAma snAyaka' par3a gyaa| 35. gRdhraivarilI kisI
gAMva meM koI puruSa patnI ke Adeza ke adhIna thaa| eka bAra usakI patnI rasoI
meM Asana para baiThI thii| pati ne usase bhojana kI yAcanA kii| usane
kahA-'mere pAsa sthAlI lekara aao|' 'jo priyatamA Adeza de vahI mere lie pramANa
hai' yaha kahatA huA vaha sthAlI lekara patnI ke pAsa gyaa| patnI ne bhojana
parosakara kahA-'bhojana ke sthAna para jAkara bhojana kro|' puna: usane tImana-
sabjI kI yAcanA kii| patnI ne kahA-'sthAlI lekara mere pAsa A jaao|' taba vaha
gRdhra kI bhAMti calatA huA sthAlI lekara patnI ke pAsa gyaa| isI prakAra usane
takra Adi ko grahaNa kiyaa| ina saba bAtoM ko jAnakara logoM ne usakA nAma
gRdhraivariGkhI kara diyaa| 36. hadajJa kisI grAma meM bhAryA-mukha ko dekhane
meM Asakta puruSa usake hara Adeza kA pAlana karatA thaa| bhAryA ke sAtha sukha
kA anubhava karate hue kAlAntara meM usako putra kI prApti huii| pAlane meM
sthita usake putra ne malotsarga kara diyaa| mala se pAlanA aura bacce ke vastra
kharaMTita ho ge| taba usakI patnI bolI'bAlaka ke puta, pAlanA tathA vastra Adi
kI saphAI kro|' 'jo priyA Adeza degI, vaha maiM karUMgA' aisA 1. gA. 219/6, vR
pa. 135, nibhA 4451, cU pR. 420, piMpraTI pa. 59  /  2. piMpra meM tIrthasnAyaka
nAma hai| 3. gA. 219/6, vR pa. 135, nibhA 4451, cU pR. 420, piMpraTI pa. 59 /
4. gA. 219/6, vR pa. 135, nibhA 4451, cU pR. 421, piMpraTI pa. 60  /

Page #426 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  254 **Piṇḍaniyukti**  Saying this, he performed all the tasks. Similarly, he
performed this task every day. When this became known, people named him Hadagña.
## 37. Mānapīṇḍa: Sevāī-Dṛṣṭānta  In the city of Giripuspit in the Kauśala
Janapada, an Ācārya named Simha arrived with his disciples. One day, there was a
festival of making sevāī. On that day, after the Sūtra Paurauṣī, all the young
sādhus gathered. They began to converse among themselves. One of the sādhus
said, "Among so many sādhus, who is there who will bring sevāī in the morning?"
A Kṣullaka named Guṇacandra said, "I will bring it." The sādhus said, "If the
sevāī is not enough for all the sādhus, or if it is without ghee or jaggery,
then it will be of no use to us. You must bring enough sevāī with ghee and
jaggery." The Kṣullaka said, "As you wish, I will bring such sevāī." Making this
promise, he took his begging bowl and went out to beg. He entered the house of a
householder. The sādhus saw plenty of sevāī there. It was mixed with abundant
ghee and jaggery. The sādhus, with many words of persuasion, requested the sevāī
from the householder named Sulocana. The householder, completely refusing to
give alms to the sādhus, said, "I will not give you anything." Then, in anger,
the Kṣullaka Muni said, "I will definitely take this sevāī with ghee and
jaggery." Hearing the Kṣullaka's words, Sulocana, also in a fit of anger, said,
"If you obtain this sevāī in any way, I will consider that you have committed an
offense against my nose." Then the Kṣullaka thought, "I must obtain sevāī from
this house." With firm determination, he left the house and asked a person
nearby, "Whose house is this?" The person told him that it was the house of
Viṣṇumitra. The Kṣullaka again asked where Viṣṇumitra was at that time. The
person replied, "He is currently in the assembly."  The Kṣullaka went to the
assembly and asked, "Who is Viṣṇumitra among you?" The people said, "What do you
want from Viṣṇumitra?" The sādhus said, "I will request something from him."
Jokingly, they said, "He is very miserly, so he will not give you anything. Ask
us for whatever you want." Then Viṣṇumitra thought that he should not be
disregarded in front of so many people, so he said in front of them, "I am
Viṣṇumitra, ask me for anything."  Then the Kṣullaka said, "If you are not one
of the six men who are dominated by women, then I will request something." Then
the people in the assembly asked, "Who are those six men who are dominated by
women?" The Kṣullaka said that the names of those six men are as follows: 1.
Śvetāṅguli 2. Bakodḍāyaka 3. Kinkara 4. Snāyaka 5. Gṛdhraivariṅkhī 6. Hadagña.
1. Gā. 219/6, Vr. P. 135,136, Nibha 4451, Cū. P. 421, Piṁpraṭī P. 60. 2.
According to Jībhā, Giripuspit Nagar was in the Kauśala country (Jībhā 1395). 3.
These six stories are under the 37th story, but for convenience, the description
of these stories has been done before story no. 37.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 254 piMDaniyukti kahate hue usane yaha sArA kArya kiyaa| isI prakAra vaha
pratidina yaha kArya karatA thaa| yaha bAta jJAta hone para logoM ne usakA nAma
hadajJa rakha diyaa| 37. mAnapiNDa : sevaI-dRSTAMta _kauzala janapada ke
giripuSpita nagara meM siMha nAmaka AcArya apane ziSya-parivAra ke sAtha aae|
eka bAra vahAM sevaI banAne kA utsava aayaa| usa dina sUtra pauruSI ke bAda saba
taruNa sAdhu ekatrita hue| unakA Apasa meM vArtAlApa hone lgaa| unameM se eka
sAdhu bolA-'itane sAdhuoM meM kauna aisA hai, jo prAtaHkAla hI sevaI lekara
aaegaa|' guNacandra nAmaka kSullaka bolA-'maiM lekara aauuNgaa|' sAdhuoM ne
kahA-'yadi sevaI saba sAdhuoM ke lie paryApta nahIM hogI athavA ghRta yA gur3a
se rahita hogI to usase hamako koI prayojana nahIM hai, tumheM ghRta aura gur3a
se yukta paryApta sevaI lAnI hogii|' kSullaka bolA-'jaisI tumhArI icchA hogI,
vaisI hI sevaI maiM lekara aauuNgaa|' aisI pratijJA karake vaha nAMdIpAtra ko
lekara bhikSArtha gyaa| usane kisI kauTumbika ke ghara meM praveza kiyaa| sAdhu
ne vahAM paryApta sevaI dekhii| vaha pracura ghI aura gur3a se saMyukta thii|
sAdhu ne aneka vacovinyAsa se sulocanA nAmaka gRhiNI se sevaI kI yAcanA kii|
gRhasvAminI ne sAdhu ko bhikSA dene ke lie sarvathA pratiSedha karate hue
kahA-'maiM tumako kucha bhI nahIM duuNgii|' taba krodhapUrvaka kSullaka muni ne
kahA-'maiM nizcita rUpa se ghI aura gur3a se yukta isa sevaI ko grahaNa
kruuNgaa|' kSullaka ke vacanoM ko sunakara sulocanA bhI krodhAveza meM Akara
bolI-'yadi tuma isa sevaI ko kisI bhI prakAra prApta karoge to maiM samajhUgI ki
tumane mere nAsApuTa meM prasravaNa kiyA hai|' taba kSullaka ne socA- 'mujhe
avazya hI isa ghara se sevaI prApta karanA hai|' dRr3ha nizcaya karake vaha
ghara se nikalA aura pArzva ke kisI vyakti se pUchA-'yaha kisakA ghara hai ?'
vyakti ne batAyA ki yaha viSNumitra kA ghara hai| kSullaka ne punaH pUchA ki
vaha viSNumitra isa samaya kahAM hai? vyakti ne uttara diyA-'vaha abhI pariSad
ke bIca hai|' kSullaka ne pariSad ke bIca meM jAkara pUchA-'tuma logoM ke bIca
meM viSNumitra kauna hai?' logoM ne kahA-'viSNumitra se Apako kyA prayojana
hai|' sAdhu ne kahA-'maiM usase kucha yAcanA kruuNgaa|' vinoda karate hue
unhoMne kahA-'yaha bahuta kRpaNa hai ata: Apako kucha nahIM degaa| Apako jo
mAMganA hai, vaha hamase maaNgo|' taba viSNumitra ne socA ki itane logoM ke bIca
merI avahelanA na ho ata: unake sAmane bolA-'maiM hI viSNumitra hUM, mujhase
kucha bhI maaNgo|' taba kSullaka bolA-'yadi tuma chaha mahilApradhAna vyaktiyoM
meM se nahIM ho to maiM yAcanA kruuNgaa|' taba pariSad ke logoM ne pUchA-'ve
chaha mahilApradhAna puruSa kauna haiM ?' kSullaka ne kahA ki una chaha puruSoM
ke nAma isa prakAra haiM-1. zvetAGguli 2. bakoDDAyaka 3. kiMkara 4. snAyaka 5.
gRdhraivariGkhI 6. hdjny| 1. gA. 219/6, vR pa. 135,136, nibhA 4451, cU pR. 421,
piMpraTI pa. 60 /  2. jIbhA ke anusAra giripuSpita nagara kauzala deza meM thA
(jIbhA 1395) /  3. yaha chahoM kathAeM 37 vIM kathA ke antargata hai lekina
suvidhA kI dRSTi se ina kathAoM kA varNana kathA saM. 37 se pUrva kara diyA hai|

Page #427 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chapter 3: Stories 255. Hearing the description of the six individuals by
Ksullaka, the people of the assembly laughed and said, "This woman-led man has
the qualities of all six men, so don't ask him." Vishnu Mitra said, "I am not
like these six men, so you may ask." At his insistence, Ksullaka said, "Give me
sevai filled with ghee and jaggery in a vessel." Vishnu Mitra said, "I will give
you sevai as you wish." Then Vishnu Mitra took Ksullaka to his house. Upon
reaching the door of the house, Ksullaka said, "I had come to your house before,
but your wife had vowed that she would not give me anything, so do whatever you
think is right." Upon hearing this, Vishnu Mitra said, "If that is the case,
then you wait outside for a while, I will call you myself." Vishnu Mitra entered
the house. He asked his wife, "Have you cooked the sevai?" "Have you added ghee
and jaggery to it?" His wife said, "I have completed all the work." Vishnu Mitra
looked at the jaggery and said, "This jaggery is a little less, this much
jaggery will not be enough, so climb the male and bring more jaggery, so that I
can feed the Brahmins." Hearing her husband's words, she climbed the male
through the Nishreni. As soon as she climbed, Vishnu Mitra removed the Nishreni
from there. Vishnu Mitra called Ksullaka and gave him a vessel full of sevai.
After that, he started giving ghee and jaggery, etc. Meanwhile, Sulochana was
eager to get down from the male with the jaggery, but she did not see the
Nishreni there. She was surprised and saw Ksullaka being given sevai with ghee
and jaggery, and thought that I have been defeated by this Ksullaka, so she
shouted from above, "Don't give this Ksullaka anything." Ksullaka also looked at
her and put his finger on his nose, indicating that I have poured into your
nasal cavity. Ksullaka took the vessel of sevai with ghee and jaggery and went
to his shelter. (This is an example of Manapinda). 38. Mayapinda: Ashadhabhuti
Katha King Simharath ruled in the city of Rajgriha. There were two daughters of
a jester named Vishwakarma. They were very beautiful and had well-proportioned
bodies. Once, while touring the villages, Acharya Dharmaruchi came there. One of
his inner disciples was named Ashadhabhuti. While wandering for alms, he entered
the house of Vishwakarma the jester. There he received special modak. As
Ashadhabhuti Muni came out of the jester's house, he thought, "This modak is for
the Acharya, so I will change my form and get a modak for myself." He made
himself look like a blind Muni with his eyes and got another modak. After coming
out, he thought again, "This will be for the Upadhyaya," so he again made
himself look like a hunchback and entered the jester's house. After receiving
the third modak, the Muni thought that this would be for the Singhare Muni, so
1. Nishita Churni (p. 420) mentions the name Indradatt, Pimprati p. 58-60. 2.
Ga. 219/1-8, Vr. p. 134-136, Nibha 4446-53, Chu. p. 419-421, Jibha 1395-97.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 3 : kathAeM 255 isa prakAra kSullaka dvArA chahoM vyaktiyoM kA varNana
sunakara pariSad ke logoM ne aTTahAsa karate hue kahA"isameM chahoM puruSoM ke
guNa haiM isalie isa mahilApradhAna puruSa se mAMga mata kro|' viSNumitra'
bolA-'maiM ina chaha puruSoM ke samAna nahIM hUM ata: tuma mAMga kro|' usake
Agraha para kSullaka bolA-'mujhe ghRta aura gur3a saMyukta pAtra bharakara sevaI
do|' viSNumitra bolA-'maiM tumako yatheccha sevaI duuNgaa|' taba vaha viSNumitra
kSullaka ko lekara apane ghara kI ora gyaa| ghara ke dvAra para pahuMcane para
kSullaka ne kahA-'maiM pahale bhI tumhAre ghara AyA thA lekina tumhArI bhAryA ne
pratijJA kI thI ki maiM tumako kucha bhI nahIM dUMgI isalie tumako jo ucita
lage, vaha kro|' kSullaka ke aisA kahane para viSNumitra bolA-'yadi aisI bAta
hai to tuma kucha samaya ke lie ghara ke bAhara ruko, maiM svayaM tumako bulA
luuNgaa|' viSNumitra ghara meM praviSTa huaa| usane apanI patnI se pUchA- kyA
sevaI pakA lI?' unako ghI aura gur3a se yukta kara diyA?' patnI ne kahA-'maiMne
sArA kArya pUrNa kara diyaa|' viSNumitra ne gur3a ko dekhakara kahA-'yaha gur3a
thor3A hai, itanA gur3a paryApta nahIM hogA ataH mAle para car3hakara adhika
gur3a lekara Ao, jisase maiM brAhmaNoM ko bhojana krvaauuNgaa|' pati ke vacana
sunakara vaha ni:zreNi ke mAdhyama se mAle para cddh'ii| car3hate hI viSNumitra
ne niHzreNi vahAM se haTA dii| viSNumitra ne kSullaka ko bulAkara pAtra
bharakara sevaI kA dAna diyaa| usake bAda usane ghI aura gur3a Adi denA
prAraMbha kiyaa| isI bIca gur3a lekara sulocanA mAle se utarane ke lie tatpara
huI lekina vahAM niHzreNi ko nahIM dekhaa| usane Azcaryacakita hokara kSullaka
ko ghRta, gur3a se yukta sevaI dete hue dekhakara socA ki maiM isa kSullaka se
parAjita ho gaI ataH usane Upara khar3e-khar3e hI cillAte hue bAra-bAra
kahA-'isa kSullaka ko dAna mata do|' kSullaka ne bhI usakI ora dekhakara apanI
nAka para aMguli rakhakara yaha pradarzita kiyA ki maiMne tumhAre nAsApuTa meM
prasravaNa kara diyA hai| kSullaka ghRta aura gur3a se yukta sevikA kA pAtra
lekara apane upAzraya meM calA gyaa| (yaha mAnapiNDa kA udAharaNa hai)| 38.
mAyApiNDa : ASAr3habhUti kathAnaka rAjagRha nagarI meM siMharatha nAmaka rAjA
rAjya karatA thaa| vahAM vizvakarmA nAmaka naTa kI do putriyAM thiiN| ve atyanta
surUpa evaM sughar3a dehayaSTi vAlI thiiN| eka bAra grAmAnugrAma vihAra karate
hue dharmaruci AcArya vahAM aae| unake eka aMta:vAsI ziSya kA nAma ASAr3habhUti
thaa| vaha bhikSArtha ghUmate hue vizvakarmA naTa ke ghara meM praviSTa huaa|
vahAM usane viziSTa modaka prApta kiyaa| naTa ke gRha-dvAra se bAhara nikalane
para ASAr3habhUti muni ne socA-'yaha modaka to AcArya ke lie hogA ataH rUpa-
parivartana karake apane lie bhI eka modaka prApta kruuNgaa|' usane AMkha se
kAne muni kA rUpa banAyA aura dUsarA modaka prApta kiyaa| bAhara nikalakara
punaH cintana kiyA-'yaha upAdhyAya ke lie hogA' ataH punaH kubja kA rUpa
banAkara naTa ke ghara meM praveza kiyaa| tIsarA modaka prApta karake muni ne
socA ki yaha siMghAr3e ke muni ke lie hogA ataH 1. nizItha cUrNi (pR. 420) meM
iMdradatta nAma kA ullekha milatA hai, piMpraTI p.58-60| 2. gA. 219/1-8, vR pa.
134-136, nibhA 4446-53, cU pR. 419-421, jIbhA 1395-97 /

Page #428 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 256 ## The Appointment of the Body This time, assuming the form of a leper,
he entered the house. The Muni received the fourth modak. Vishwakarma, seated
above the platform, saw him changing through so many forms. He thought that it
would be good if he stayed among us, but how to attract him, thinking this, a
strategy arose in the mind of the Nat. He thought that by distracting the Muni's
mind through his daughters, he could draw his mind towards the world.  The Nat
descended from the platform and went to the Muni, and respectfully offered him a
bowl full of modaks. The Nat said, "You should grace us by accepting food at our
house every day." He went to his shelter. Vishwakarma told his family about the
art of transformation of Aṣāḍhabhūti, and told his two daughters, "You should
attract the Muni towards you by giving him gifts with affectionate eyes."
Aṣāḍhabhūti started coming to beg for food every day. Both daughters did as
instructed. Seeing the Muni attracted towards them, once in private, they said
to the Muni, "Our mind is greatly attracted to you, therefore, marry us and
enjoy pleasures."  Hearing this, the charitravaraniya karma of Aṣāḍhabhūti Muni
arose, due to which the wisdom in the form of the Guru's teachings left his
heart. The pride of family and caste ended. The Muni said to both the
Natakanyas, "It will be so, but first, I will leave the Muni-vesha and go to the
Guru's feet." Aṣāḍhabhūti Muni prostrated at the Guru's feet and revealed his
intention. The Guru, inspiring him, said, "Vats! For a wise and learned person
like you, this conduct, which is repulsive in both worlds, is not appropriate.
After observing the rules for a long time, do not now indulge in worldly
pleasures. Can a person who swims in the ocean with his arms drown in a space as
small as a cow's hoof?" Aṣāḍhabhūti said, "Your words are true, but due to the
rise of adverse karmas, the weakening of the protective shield of the opposing
feeling, the impact of Kamadeva, and the glances of the beautiful women with
deer-like eyes, my heart has become completely shattered." Saying this, he left
the Guru's feet. "How can I turn my back on such a benevolent Guru who has freed
me?" Thinking this, he kept his feet back. "Again, how will I attain the Guru's
lotus feet?" With various options in mind, he left the residence and came to
Vishwakarma's house.  The Natakanyas looked at the Muni's body with unwavering
eyes. They felt that the Muni's form was amazing. His face was as beautiful as
the autumn moon. His eyes were like lotus petals, his nose was sharp, and his
teeth were white and smooth like the flowers of the Kund. His chest was broad
and fleshy like a door. His waist was like a lion's, and his feet were like a
tortoise's.  Vishwakarma said to the Muni with respect, "Oh fortunate one! These
are my two daughters, I dedicate them to you. Please accept them." The Nat
married Aṣāḍhabhūti with both his daughters. Vishwakarma said to his two
daughters, "The person who has attained such a state of mind, even after that,
he does not leave the Guru's feet...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 256 piMDaniyukti isa bAra kuSThI kA rUpa dhAraNa karake ghara meM praveza
kiyaa| muni ko cauthA modaka prApta ho gyaa| mAle ke Upara baiThe vizvakarmA ne
itane rUpoM kA parivartana karate hue dekhaa| usane socA ki yadi yaha hamAre
bIca rahe to acchA rahegA lekina isako kisa vidhi se AkRSTa karanA cAhie, yaha
socate hue naTa ke mana meM eka yukti utpanna huii| usane socA putriyoM ke dvArA
muni ke mana ko vicalita karake hI isakA mana saMsAra kI aura khIMcA kA sakatA
hai| naTa mAle se utarakara muni ke pAsa gayA aura AdarapUrvaka pAtra bharakara
modakoM kA dAna diyaa| naTa ne kahA- 'Apako pratidina hamAre ghara bhaktapAna
grahaNa karane kA anugraha karanA hai|' vaha apane upAzraya meM calA gyaa|
vizvakarmA ne apane parivAra ke samakSa ASAr3habhUti kI rUpa-parivartana vidyA
ke bAre meM batAyA tathA apanI donoM putriyoM se kahA ki tumako snehayukta dRSTi
se dAna dete hue muni ko apanI ora AkRSTa karanA hai| ASAr3habhUti pratidina
bhikSArtha Ane lgaa| donoM putriyoM ne vaisA hI kiyaa| muni ko apanI ora
anurakta dekhakara eka bAra ekAnta meM unhoMne muni se kahA-'hamArA mana Apake
prati atyadhika AkRSTa hai ata: hamAre sAtha vivAha karake bhogoM kA sevana
kro|' yaha sunakara muni ASAr3habhUti kA cAritrAvaraNIya karma udaya meM A gayA,
jisase guru kA upadeza rUpI viveka hRdaya se nikala gyaa| kula aura jAti kA
abhimAna samApta ho gyaa| muni ne donoM naTakanyAoM ko kahA-'aisA hI hogA lekina
pahale maiM guru-caraNoM meM muni-veza chor3akara aauuNgaa|' ASAr3habhUti muni
guru-caraNoM meM praNata huA aura apane abhiprAya ko prakaTa kara diyaa| guru ne
preraNA dete hue kahA'vatsa! tuma jaise vivekI, zAstrajJa vyakti ke lie
ubhayaloka meM jugupsanIya yaha AcaraNa ucita nahIM hai| dIrghakAla taka zIla kA
pAlana karake aba viSayoM meM ramaNa mata kro| kyA samadra ko bAhoM se tairane
vAlA vyakti gopada jitane sthAna meM DUba sakatA hai?' ASAr3habhUti ne
kahA-'ApakA kathana satya hai lekina pratikUla karmoM ke udaya se, pratipakSa
bhAvanA rUpa kavaca ke durbala hone para, kAmadeva kA AghAta hone se tathA
mRganayanI ramaNI kI kaTAkSa se merA hRdaya pUrNarUpeNa jarjara ho gayA hai|'
isa prakAra kahakara usane guru-caraNoM meM rajoharaNa chor3a diyaa| 'maiM aise
niSkAraNa upakArI guru ko pITha kaise dikhAUM' yaha socakara vaha pairoM ko
pIche karatA rhaa| punaH kisa prakAra guru ke caraNa-kamaloM ko prApta karUMgA'
isa prakAra vividha vikalpoM ke sAtha vasati se nikalakara vaha vizvakarmA ke
bhavana meM A gyaa| naTakanyAoM ne AdarapUrvaka muni ke zarIra ko animiSa dRSTi
se dekhaa| unhoMne anubhava kiyA ki muni kA rUpa Azcaryajanaka hai| zarada
candramA ke samAna manohara isakA mukha maNDala hai| kamaladala kI bhAMti donoM
AMkheM haiM, nukIlI nAka tathA kuMda ke phUloM kI bhAMti zveta aura snigdha
dAMtoM kI paMkti hai| kapATa kI bhAMti vizAla aura mAMsala vakSasthala hai|
siMha kI bhAMti kaTipradeza tathA kUrma kI bhAMti caraNayugala haiN| vizvakarmA
ne Adarasahita muni ko kahA-'ahobhAga! ye merI donoM kanyAeM Apako samarpita
haiN| Apa inheM svIkAra kreN|' naTa ne donoM kanyAoM ke sAtha ASAr3habhUti kA
vivAha kara diyaa| vizvakarmA ne apanI donoM kanyAoM ko kahA-'jo vyakti mana kI
aisI sthiti ko prApta karake bhI guru-caraNoM kI

Page #429 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 3: Stories  **257**  He who remembers, is of noble nature by rule,
therefore, to attract his mind, you must always abstain from alcohol, otherwise,
he will become detached from you.  Aashaadhbhuti was skilled in all arts and
possessed various types of extraordinary knowledge, therefore, he became the
leader of all actors. He received abundant wealth, clothes, ornaments, etc.,
everywhere. Once, the king summoned the actors and ordered them to perform a
play without women. All the actors left their wives at home and went to the
royal palace. Aashaadhbhuti's wives thought, "Our husband has gone to the royal
palace, therefore, the whole night will be spent there. Today, we will drink as
much as we want." They did the same and due to intoxication, they became naked
and slept on the second floor of the house.  Meanwhile, an envoy from another
country arrived at the royal palace, therefore, the king's mind became
distracted. "This is not the time for the play," thinking this, the king sent
all the actors back. When Aashaadhbhuti reached the second floor and saw his two
wives in a state of nakedness and hideous form, he thought, "Alas! What
foolishness of mine! What a lack of wisdom, that I abandoned the means of
liberation, *samyama*, for the sake of these women who are impure and the cause
of my downfall. Nothing is lost yet. I will go to the feet of my Guru and regain
my character and wash away the sins." Thinking this, Aashaadhbhuti started to
leave his house. Vishwakarma saw him. From the expressions on Aashaadhbhuti's
face, he understood that he had become detached from the world. He picked up his
two daughters and said to them reproachfully, "Seeing your such intoxicated
behavior, your husband has become detached from you, the cause of all your
wealth. If you can bring him back, try, otherwise, beg for money to live."  Both
wives put on clothes and ran to Aashaadhbhuti and fell at his feet. They
pleaded, "Husband! Forgive our one offense and return home. Do not leave us in
the middle of the river by becoming detached." Even after they said this, his
mind did not waver. The wives said, "If you do not want to live a householder's
life, then give us enough money to live, so that we can spend the rest of our
lives well by your grace." Out of compassion, Aashaadhbhuti accepted their
request and returned home.  Aashaadhbhuti prepared a play called "Rashtrapal"
which revealed the character of Bharat Chakravarti. Vishwakarma requested King
Singhstah to organize the play that Aashaadhbhuti had composed. He needed 500
princes adorned with ornaments for the performance of the play. The king ordered
500 princes. Aashaadhbhuti trained them properly. The play began. Aashaadhbhuti
presented the character of Bharat Chakravarti and the princes also acted
accordingly.  The play depicted how Bharat conquered the six continents,
obtained the fourteen jewels and nine treasures, attained liberation by residing
in the ideal house, and took initiation along with 500 princes, ...

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 3 : kathAeM 257 smRti karatA hai, vaha niyama se uttama prakRti vAlA hotA
hai ataH isake citta ko AkRSTa karane ke lie tumheM sadA madyapAna se rahita
rahanA hai anyathA yaha tumase virakta ho jaaegaa|' ASAr3habhUti sakala kalAoM
ke jJAna meM kuzala tathA nAnA prakAra ke vijJAnAtizaya se yukta thA ataH sabhI
naToM meM agraNI ho gyaa| vaha sarvatra prabhUta dhana tathA vastra-AbharaNa Adi
prApta karatA thaa| eka bAra rAjA ne naToM ko bulAyA aura Adeza diyA ki Aja binA
mahilAoM kA nATaka karanA hai| sabhI naTa apanI yuvatiyoM ko ghara para
chor3akara rAjakula meM ge| ASAr3habhUti kI patniyoM ne socA ki hamArA pati
rAjakula meM gayA hai ataH sArI rAta vahIM bIta jaaegii| Aja hama yatheccha
madirA-pAna kreNgii| unhoMne vaisA hI kiyA tathA unmattatA ke kAraNa vastra
rahita hokara ghara kI dUsarI maMjila meM so giiN| idhara rAjakula meM kisI
dUsare rASTra kA dUta A gayA ataH rAjA kA citta vikSipta ho gyaa| yaha nATaka kA
samaya nahIM hai', yaha socakara rAjA ne sAre naToM ko vApasa lauTA diyaa| jaba
ASADhabhUti ne dUsarI maMjila meM pahuMcakara apanI donoM paliyoM ko
vigatavastrA evaM bIbhatsa rUpa meM dekhA to usane cintana kiyA-'aho! merI kaisI
mUr3hatA hai? viveka vaikalya hai, jo maiMne isa prakAra kI azuciyukta tathA
adhogati kI kAraNabhUta striyoM ke lie muktipada ke sAdhana saMyama ko chor3a
diyaa| abhI bhI merA kucha nahIM bigar3A hai| maiM guru-caraNoM meM jAkara puna:
cAritra grahaNa karUMgA tathA pApa-paMka kA prakSAlana kruuNgaa|' yaha socakara
ASAr3habhUti apane ghara se nikalane lgaa| vizvakarmA ne usako dekha liyaa|
ASAr3habhUti ke cehare ke hAva-bhAva se usane jAna liyA ki yaha saMsAra se
virakta ho gyaa| usane apanI donoM putriyoM ko uThAkara upAlambha dete hue
kahA-'tumhArI isa prakAra kI unmatta ceSTAoM ko dekhakara sakala nidhAna kA
kAraNa tumhArA pati tumase virakta ho gayA hai| yadi tuma use lauTA sako to
prayatna karo, anyathA jIvana calAne ke lie dhana kI yAcanA kro|' donoM patniyAM
vastra pahanakara ASAr3habhUti ke lie daur3I aura pairoM meM gira pdd'iiN|
unhoMne nivedana karate hue kahA-'svAmin ! hamAre eka aparAdha ko kSamA karake
Apa puna: ghara lauTa aao| virakta hokara isa prakAra hameM majhadhAra meM mata
chodd'o|' unake dvArA aisA kahane para bhI usakA mana vicalita nahIM huaa|
patniyoM ne kahA-'yadi Apa gRhastha jIvana nahIM jInA cAhate haiM to hameM
jIvana calAne jitanA dhana do, jisase ApakI kRpA se hama apanA zeSa jIvana
bhalIbhAMti bitA skeN|' anukampAvaza ASAr3habhUti ne unake isa nivedana ko
svIkAra kara liyA aura punaH ghara A gyaa| ASAr3habhUti ne bharata cakravartI ke
caritra ko prakaTa karane vAle 'rASTrapAla' nAmaka nATaka kI taiyArI kii|
vizvakarmA ne rAjA siMhastha ko nivedana kiyA ki ASAr3habhUti ne 'rASTrapAla'
nAmaka nATaka kI racanA kI hai| Apa usakA Ayojana krvaaeN| nATaka ke maMcana
hetu unako AbhUSaNa pahane hue 500 rAjaputra caahie| rAjA ne 500 rAjaputroM ko
AjJA de dii| ASAr3habhUti ne unako samyak prakAra se prazikSita kiyaa| nATaka
prAraMbha huaa| ASAr3habhUti ne bharatacakravartI kA caritra prastuta kiyA aura
rAjaputroM ne bhI yathAyogya abhinaya kiyaa| nATaka meM kisa prakAra bharata ne
SaTkhaNDa para adhikAra kiyA, caturdaza ratna evaM nau nidhiyoM ko prApta kiyA,
Adarza gRha meM sthita hokara kaivalya prApta kiyA tathA 500 rAjakumAroM ke
sAtha dIkSA grahaNa kI,

Page #430 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  258 This entire play was presented. Finally, the king, satisfied with the
play, and all the people, as per their capacity, threw garlands, earrings, and
other ornaments, as well as abundant amounts of clothes, etc. After giving
Dharma-labha to all the people, Ashadhabhuti, with 500 princes, started to leave
the royal palace. The king stopped him. He replied, "Did Bharat Chakravarti
return to the world after taking Pravrajya? He did not return, so I will not
return either." With his family, Ashadhabhuti went to the Guru. He gave all his
clothes, ornaments, etc., to his two wives and took Diksha again. The same play
was presented by Vishwakarma in Kusumpur Nagar as well. There too, 500
Kshatriyas became Pravrajit. People thought that if Kshatriyas take Pravrajya in
this way, this earth will become devoid of Kshatriyas, so they burned the play's
script in fire. (This is an example of Maya-pinda).   ## 39. Lobha-pinda: The
Singhkesharak Modak-drishtaant In the city of Champa, a Sadhu named Suvrat was
residing. Once, there was a Modakotsav organized there. On that day, Muni Suvrat
thought that he must obtain Singhkesharak Modak at any cost. Even when people
prohibited him, he wandered for two Praharas. When he did not get the Modak, his
mind became disturbed. Now, he started entering every house and instead of
saying "Dharma-labha", he started saying "Singhkesharak Modak". Even after the
whole day and two Praharas of the night, he kept wandering for the Modak. At
midnight, he entered the house of a Shravak. Instead of "Dharma-labha", he
uttered the word "Singhkesharak". That Shravak was very compassionate and
skillful. He thought, "Surely, this Muni has not obtained Singhkesharak Modak
anywhere, that's why his mind has become disturbed." For the mental stability of
the Muni, the Shravak brought a vessel full of Singhkesharak Modak and
requested, "Muni! Please accept these Modak." Muni Suvrat accepted them. As soon
as he accepted the Modak, his mind became calm. The Shravak asked, "Today, I had
rejected the first half, was it fulfilled or not?" Muni Suvrat used it for Kal-
gyan. The Muni saw the sky-mandala adorned with stars. He realized his mental
delusion. The Muni started repenting, "Alas! Due to my foolishness, I have acted
wrongly. My life is wasted due to greed." Addressing the Shravak, the Muni said,
"You saved me from drowning in the world by talking about the rejection of the
first half. Your inspiration has been enlightening for me." Blaming his soul, he
performed the Paristapan of the Modak according to the rules and destroyed the
Ghatikarma with the fire of meditation in a moment. Through self-reflection, the
Muni attained Kaivalya.  ## Notes: 1. Ga. 219/9-15, Vr. P. 137-139, Ji.
1398-1410, Pimprati P. 60-63, Nibha and its Churni only have stories related to
Krodha-pinda and Mana-pinda. Nishitasutra mentions the Sutra related to Maya-
pinda and Lobha-pinda. But it does not have its explanation and story. It is a
subject of investigation as to how this happened? In this context, it can be
assumed that the edited Nishita Bhashya and Churni may have missed that passage
or the author may have left it out considering it simple. 2. Ga. 220/1,2 Vr. P.
139, Ji. 1414-17, Pimprati P. 65.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 258 piMDaniyukti yaha saba abhinaya prastuta kiyA gyaa| aMta meM nATaka se
saMtuSTa rAjA ne tathA sabhI logoM ne yathAzakti hAra, kuMDala Adi AbharaNa
tathA prabhUta mAtrA meM vastra Adi pheNke| saba logoM ko dharmalAbha dekara
ASAr3habhUti 500 rAjakumAroM ke sAtha rAjakula se bAhara jAne lgaa| rAjA ne
usako rokaa| usane uttara diyA-'kyA bharatacakravartI pravrajyA lekara vApisa
saMsAra meM lauTA thA, vaha nahIM lauTA to maiM bhI nahIM lauttuuNgaa|'
saparivAra ASAr3habhUti guru ke samIpa gyaa| vastra-AbharaNa Adi saba apanI
donoM patniyoM ko de die aura punaH dIkSA grahaNa kara lii| vahI nATaka
vizvakarmA ne kusumapura nagara meM bhI prastuta kiyaa| vahAM bhI 500 kSatriya
pravrajita ho ge| logoM ne socA-isa prakAra kSatriyoM dvArA pravrajyA lene para
yaha pRthvI kSatriya rahita ho jAegI ataH unhoMne nATaka kI pustaka ko agni meM
jalA diyaa| (yaha mAyApiMDa kA udAharaNa hai)| 39. lobhapiNDa : siMhakezaraka
modaka-dRSTAMta campA nAmaka nagarI meM suvrata nAmaka sAdhu pravAsa kara rahA
thaa| eka bAra vahAM modakotsava kA Ayojana huaa| usa dina suvrata muni ne socA
ki mujhe Aja kisI bhI prakAra siMhakezaraka modaka prApta karane haiN| logoM ke
pratiSedha karane para bhI vaha do prahara taka ghUmatA rhaa| modaka kI prApti
na hone para usakA citta vikSipta ho gyaa| aba vaha hara ghara ke dvAra meM
praveza karake dharmalAbha' ke sthAna para siMhakezaraka modaka kahane lgaa|
pUre dina aura rAtri ke do prahara bItane para bhI vaha modaka ke lie ghUmatA
rhaa| AdhI rAtri meM usane eka zrAvaka ke ghara praveza kiyaa| 'dharmalAbha' ke
sthAna para usane siMhakezaraka zabda kA uccAraNa kiyaa| vaha zrAvaka bahuta
gItArtha aura dakSa thaa| usane socA-nizcaya hI isa muni ne kahIM bhI
siMhakezaraka modaka prApta nahIM kie isalie isakA citta vikSipta ho gayA hai|
muni kI caitasika sthiratA hetu zrAvaka bartana bharakara siMhakezaraka modaka
lekara AyA aura nivedana kiyA-'mune! ina modakoM ko Apa grahaNa kro|' muni
suvrata ne unako grahaNa kara liyaa| modaka grahaNa karate hI usakA citta
svastha ho gyaa| zrAvaka ne pUchA-'Aja maiMne pUrvArddha kA pratyAkhyAna kiyA
thA, vaha pUrNa huA yA nahIM?' muni suvrata ne kAla-jJAna hetu upayoga lgaayaa|
muni ne AkAza-maNDala ko tArAgaNa se parimaNDita dekhaa| usako caitasika bhrama
kA jJAna ho gyaa| muni ne pazcAttApa karanA prAraMbha kara diyA-'hA!
mUr3hatAvaza maiMne galata AcaraNa kara liyaa| lobha se abhibhUta merA jIvana
vyartha hai|' zrAvaka ko saMbodhita karate hue muni ne kahA-'tumane pUrvArddha
pratyAkhyAna kI bAta kahakara mujhe saMsAra meM DUbane se bacA liyaa| tumhArI
preraNA mere lie saMbodha dene vAlI rhii|' AtmA kI niMdA karate hue usane
vidhipUrvaka modakoM kA pariSThApana kiyA tathA dhyAnAnala se kSaNamAtra meM
ghAti-karmoM kA nAza kara diyaa| AtmaciMtana se muni ko kaivalya kI prApti ho
gii| 1. gA. 219/9-15, vR pa. 137-139, jIbhA 1398-1410, piMpraTI pa.60-63, nibhA
evaM usakI cUrNi meM kevala krodhapiNDa aura mAnapiNDa se saMbaMdhita kathAeM
haiN| nizIthasUtra meM mAyApiNDa aura lobhapiNDa se saMbaMdhita sUtra kA ullekha
hai . lekina usakI vyAkhyA evaM kathA nahIM hai| yaha anveSaNa kA viSaya hai ki
aisA kaise huA? isa saMdarbha meM yaha saMbhAvanA kI jA sakatI hai ki saMpAdita
nizItha bhASya evaM cUrNi meM vaha prasaMga chUTa gayA ho athavA graMthakAra ne
use sarala samajhakara chor3a diyA ho| 2. gA. 220/1,2 vR pa. 139, jIbhA 1414-17,
piMpraTI pa. 65  /

Page #431 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 3: Stories  **40. Vidya-Prayog: The Story of the Bhikshu-Upasaka**
In the fragrant city of Gandhasamruddha, there lived a Bhikshu Upasaka named
Dhandev. He never gave anything in alms to the Sadhus who came to his house.
Once, some young Sadhus gathered together and started talking. One young Sadhu
said, "This Dhandev is extremely miserly, he doesn't give anything to the
Sadhus. Is there any Sadhu who can get ghee, jaggery, etc. as donations from
him?" One of the Sadhus said, "If you all wish, give me the permission of the
Vidya-pind, I will get donations from him." The Sadhu went to his house. After
chanting mantras over the house, he asked the Sadhus, "What should I get?" The
Sadhus said, "Ghee, jaggery, and clothes, etc." Dhandev gave the Sadhus a lot of
ghee, jaggery, etc. After that, the Ksullaka performed the Vidya-pratisanhat.
The effect of the mantra on the Bhikshu Upasaka Dhandev ended. He returned to
his natural state. When he saw the ghee, jaggery, etc., they appeared to him in
smaller quantities. He asked, "Who stole my ghee, jaggery, etc.?" Saying this,
he started to lament. Then his family members explained to him, "You yourself
gave the Sadhus ghee, jaggery, etc. with your own hands, then why are you
lamenting like this?" Hearing their words, he became silent.  **41. Mantra-
Prayog: The Story of King Murund and Padalipta Suri**  In the city of
Pratiṣṭhānapura, King Murund ruled. There, Acharya Padalipta was staying. Once,
King Murund experienced severe pain in his head. Even with Vidya, mantras, etc.,
no one could relieve him. The king called Acharya Padalipta, welcomed him, and
told him about the headache that was occurring without any reason. Without
anyone knowing, while chanting the mantra, he rotated the index finger of his
right hand on the middle of his right thigh, and as he did so, the king's
headache started to subside. Gradually, the pain in his entire head disappeared.
King Murund became a great devotee of Acharya Padalipta. He gave the Acharya
abundant gifts of food and drink.  **42. Churna-Prayog: The Story of the Two
Ksullakas and Chanakya**  In the city of Kusumpura, King Chandragupta ruled. His
minister's name was Chanakya. There, Acharya Susthit, who was deficient in his
thighs, was staying. Once, there was a terrible famine. The Acharya thought, "I
will establish my disciple Samruddha as an Acharya and send him with the entire
Gachchha to a place with plenty of food." The Acharya started teaching him the
Yoni-Prabhrit in seclusion.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 3 : kathAeM 259 40. vidyA-prayoga : bhikSu-upAsaka kA kathAnaka _
gaMdhasamRddha nagara meM dhanadeva nAmaka bhikSu upAsaka thaa| sAdhuoM ke ghara
Ane para vaha unako bhikSA meM kucha nahIM detA thaa| eka bAra kucha taruNa
sAdhu eka sAtha ekatrita hokara vArtAlApa karane lge| eka yuvaka sAdhu ne
kahA-'yaha dhanadeva atyanta kaMjUsa hai, sAdhuoM ko kucha bhI nahIM detA hai|
kyA koI sAdhu aisA hai, jo isase ghRta, gur3a Adi kA dAna le sake?' unameM se
eka sAdhu bolA-'yadi tuma logoM kI icchA hai to mujhe vidyApiMDa kI AjJA do,
maiM usase dAna dilvaauuNgaa|' sAdhu usake ghara gyaa| ghara ko abhimaMtrita
karake vaha sAdhuoM se bolA-'kyA dilavAUM?' sAdhuoM ne kahA-'ghRta, gur3a aura
vastra aadi|' dhanadeva ne pracura mAtrA meM sAdhuoM ko ghRta, gur3a Adi diyaa|
usake bAda kSullaka ne vidyA pratisaMhata kara lii| bhikSu upAsaka dhanadeva ke
Upara se maMtra kA prabhAva samApta ho gyaa| vaha svabhAvastha ho gyaa| jaba
usane ghRta, gur3a Adi ko dekhA to use ve mAtrA meM kama dikhAI die| usane
pUchA-'mere ghI, gur3a Adi kI corI kisane kI?' isa prakAra kahate hue usane
vilApa karanA prAraMbha kara diyaa| taba parijanoM ne use samajhAte hue
kahA-'tumane svayaM apane hAthoM se sAdhuoM ko ghI, gur3a Adi kA dAna diyA hai,
phira tuma isa prakAra vilApa kyoM kara rahe ho?' unakI bAta sunakara vaha mauna
ho gyaa| 41. maMtra-prayoga : muruNDa rAjA evaM pAdaliptasUri kathAnaka
pratiSThAnapura nagara meM muruNDa nAmaka rAjA rAjya karatA thaa| vahAM
pAdalipta AcArya kA pravAsa thaa| eka bAra muruNDa rAjA ke zira meM atIva vedanA
prAdurbhUta ho gii| vidyA, maMtra Adi ke dvArA bhI koI use zAnta nahIM kara
skaa| rAjA ne pAdalipta AcArya ko bulAyA, unakA svAgata karate hue rAjA ne
akAraNa hone vAlI zirovedanA ke bAre meM btaayaa| logoM ko jJAta na ho isa
prakAra maMtra kA dhyAna karate hue vastra ke madhya meM apanI dAhinI jaMghA ke
Upara apane dAhine hAtha kI pradezinI aMguli ko jaise-jaise ghumAyA, vaise-vaise
rAjA kI zirovedanA dUra hone lgii| dhIre-dhIre pUre zira kA darda dUra ho gyaa|
muruNDa rAjA AcArya pAdalipta kA atIva bhakta bana gyaa| usane AcArya ko vipula
bhakta-pAna Adi kA dAna diyaa| 42. cUrNa-prayoga : kSullakadvaya evaM cANakya
kathAnaka  /  kusumapura nagara meM candragupta nAmaka rAjA rAjya karatA thaa|
usake maMtrI kA nAma cANakya thaa| vahAM jaMghAbala se hIna susthita nAmaka
AcArya pravAsa karate the| eka bAra vahAM bhayaMkara durbhikSa ho gyaa| AcArya
ne socA-'samRddha nAmaka ziSya ko AcArya pada para sthApita karake sakala gaccha
ke sAtha ise kisI subhikSa vAle sthAna meM bheja duuNgaa|' AcArya ne usako
ekAnta meM yoniprAbhRta kI vAcanA denI prAraMbha kii| kisI bhI 1. gA. 227/1,2 vR
pa. 141,142, nibhA 4457,4458, cU pR. 422, piMpraTI pa. 67, jIbhA 1439-42  /  2.
jIbhA (1444) meM pratiSThAnapura ke sthAna para pATaliputra kA ullekha milatA
hai| 3. gA. 228/1, vR pa. 142, nibhA 4460, cU pR. 423, jIbhA 1444, 1445,
piMpraTI pa. 67  /  4. nizItha cUrNi (bhA. 3 pR. 423) tathA
piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa meM pATaliputra nAma kA ullekha hai| pATaliputra kA
purAnA nAma kusumapura thaa| 5. piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa meM AcArya kA nAma
saMbhUtavijaya hai|

Page #432 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
260 Two Ksullaka monks heard the explanation of making an invisible ointment
(anjana) that makes a person invisible to others when applied to the eyes. After
becoming proficient in the explanation of Yoniprabhrta, the Acarya appointed his
disciple Samriddhi as the Acarya. The Acarya sent him to another region along
with the entire Gaccha. The Acarya himself started living there alone. After
some days, those two Ksullaka monks, overwhelmed by the Acarya's affection, came
to the Acarya. Whatever the Acarya received, he would distribute it among the
Ksullaka monks and eat. He himself would take less food and give more to the
monks. Due to lack of food, the Acarya's body became weak. Then the Ksullaka
monks thought that the Acarya was becoming emaciated, so they will use the
previously learned ointment (anjana) and eat with Chandragupta. They did the
same. Due to lack of food, Chandragupta's body also became lean. Chanakya asked
them, "Why does your body appear weak?" King Chandragupta said, "Due to not
getting adequate food." Then Chanakya contemplated, "Even after serving so much
food, how can there be a lack of food? It seems that a person skilled in
ointment (anjana) is eating with the king." Then he scattered extremely fine
brick powder in the dining hall to catch the ointment-skilled person. Chanakya
saw the footprints marked on the powder. Chanakya was certain that two ointment-
skilled persons were coming here. Chanakya covered the door and filled the
dining hall with smoke. Due to the obstructed vision from the smoke, the
ointment also got cleared. After the effect of the ointment was over, the two
Ksullaka monks became visible. Chandragupta said with disgust, "Alas! I have
been defiled by eating their leftover food." Chanakya found a solution so that
the rule and preaching are not disregarded. He told the king, "O king! You are
blessed. These celibate ascetic monks have purified you, but they have become
impure by your leftover food." Chanakya paid obeisance to the two Ksullaka monks
and sent them away.  At night, Chanakya went to the Acarya and, rebuking him,
said, "Your two Ksullaka monks are disregarding the preaching." Then the Acarya,
rebuking Chanakya, said, "You yourself are the offender, because even being a
layman, you do not care for the livelihood of these two Ksullaka monks. In this
time of famine, how does the life of a monk go on well, have you ever thought
about it?" Saying "Your words are true, O Lord," Chanakya fell at their feet and
begged for forgiveness. After that, Chanakya took appropriate care for the alms
of the entire Sangha.  43. The story of the Kulapati and the Arya Samiti Near
the city of Achalapura, there were two rivers, Krishna and Venna. Between the
two rivers was an island called Brahma. There, the Kulapati named Devasharma
lived with five hundred ascetics. He used to perform rituals like Sankranti etc.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 260 piMDaniyukti prakAra do kSullakoM ne adRzya karane vAle aJjana banAne kI
vyAkhyA suna lii| usa aJjana ko AMkhoM meM AMjane se vyakti kisI ko dikhAI nahIM
detaa| yoniprAbhRta kI vyAkhyA meM samartha hone ke bAda AcArya ne apane ziSya
samRddha ko AcAryapada para sthApita kara diyaa| AcArya ne sakala gaccha ke
sAtha usako dezAntara meM bheja diyaa| AcArya svayaM ekAkI rUpa se vahAM rahane
lge| kucha dinoM ke bAda AcArya ke sneha se abhibhUta hokara ve donoM kSullaka
AcArya ke pAsa aae| jo kucha bhI prApta hotA, AcArya use kSullaka bhikSuoM ko
bAMTakara AhAra karate the| ve svayaM kama AhAra lete bhikSuoM ko adhika dete
the| AhAra kI kamI se AcArya kA zarIra durbala ho gyaa| taba kSullaka socA
AcArya ko UNodarI ho rahI hai ataH hama pUrvazruta aJjana kA prayoga karake
candragupta ke sAtha bhojana kreNge| unhoMne vaisA hI kiyaa| AhAra kI kamI se
candragupta kA zarIra kRza hone lgaa| cANakya ne unase pUchA-'ApakA zarIra
durbala kyoM dikhAI de rahA hai?' rAjA candragupta ne kahA-'paripUrNa AhAra kI
prApti na hone se|' taba cANakya ne cintana kiyA-'itanA AhAra parosane para bhI
AhAra kI kamI kaise ho sakatI hai? aisA lagatA hai ki nizcita hI koI
aJjanasiddha vyakti rAjA ke sAtha bhojana karatA hai|' taba usane aJjanasiddha
ko pakar3ane ke lie bhojanamaNDapa meM atyanta sUkSma iSTakacUrNa vikIrNa kara
diyaa| cANakya ne cUrNa para cihnita manuSya ke pairoM ke cihnoM ko aMkita
dekhaa| cANakya ko nizcaya ho gayA ki do aJjanasiddha vyakti yahAM Ate haiN|
cANakya ne dvAra ko r3hakakara bhojana-maNDapa meM cAroM ora dhUma kara diyaa|
dhUma se bAdhita nayanoM se AMsU bahane ke sAtha aJjana bhI sApha ho gyaa|
aJjana kA prabhAva samApta hone para donoM kSullaka prakaTa ho ge| candragupta
ne jugupsA ke sAtha kahA-'aho! inake ucchiSTa bhojana karane se maiM inake dvArA
dUSita kara diyA gyaa|' cANakya ne zAsana tathA pravacana kI avahelanA na ho
isalie eka samAdhAna khojaa| usane rAjA ko kahA-'rAjan! tuma dhanya ho| ina
bAlabrahmacArI yatiyoM ne tumako pavitra kara diyA hai lekina tumhAre ucchiSTa
bhojana se ye apavitra ho gae haiN| cANakya ne kSullakadvaya ko vaMdanA karake
bheja diyaa| rAtri meM cANakya AcArya ke pAsa gayA aura AcArya ko upAlambha dete
hue kahA-'ye tumhAre donoM kSullaka pravacana kI aprabhAvanA kara rahe haiN|'
taba AcArya ne cANakya ko upAlambha dete hue kahA-'isake lie tuma hI aparAdhI ho
kyoMki zrAvaka hote hue bhI tuma donoM kSullakoM ke jIvana-nirvAha kI cintA
nahIM karate ho| isa durbhikSa kAla meM sAdhu kA jIvana bhalIbhAMti kaise calatA
hai, kyA tumane isake bAre meM kabhI socA?' 'bhagavan ! ApakA kathana satya hai'
aisA kahate hue cANakya unake pairoM meM gira par3A aura kSamAyAcanA kii| isake
bAda cANakya ne sakala saMgha kI bhikSA hetu yathAyogya cintA kii| 43. yoga-
prayoga : kulapati evaM Arya samita kathAnaka acalapura' nAmaka nagara ke pAsa
kRSNA aura vennA nAmaka do nadiyAM thiiN| donoM nadiyoM ke bIca brahma nAmaka
dvIpa thaa| vahAM pAMca sau tApasa ke sAtha devazarmA nAmaka kulapati nivAsa
karatA thaa| vaha saMkrAMti Adi 1. gA. 230 pibhA 35-37, vR pa. 143, nibhA
4463-65, cU pR. 423, 424, jIbhA 1450-55, piMpraTI pa. 67, 68 /  2. nizItha cUrNi
(bhA. 3 pR. 425) tathA jIbhA 1460 meM AbhIra janapada kA ullekha milatA hai|

Page #433 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 3: Stories  **261**  On festival days, to demonstrate the power of
his pilgrimage, he would cross the Krishna River on foot with all his ascetics,
walking on water. People were amazed by this extraordinary feat and would
especially honor him with food and other offerings. People would criticize the
monks, saying to the lay followers, "You people cannot have such power." The lay
followers told this to Vajraswami's maternal uncle, Acharya Samit. He pondered
and said to the lay followers, "This headman crosses the river by magic, not by
the power of his austerities. If his feet are washed with hot water, he will not
be able to cross the river." Then, to expose his magic, the lay followers
invited the headman and his family for a meal. At mealtime, the headman arrived.
The lay followers began to wash his feet, but fearing the loss of his magical
power, he did not extend his feet. Then the lay followers said, "Without washing
your feet, we will be guilty of disrespect by offering you food. A gift given
with respect is more fruitful." The lay followers forcefully extended his feet
and washed them. After the meal, the headman prepared to return to his place.
The lay followers also called everyone and followed behind him. The headman,
with his family, stepped into the Krishna River to cross it, but without the
magical power of walking on water, he began to sink. People began to criticize
him.  Meanwhile, Acharya Samit arrived there to enlighten him. He said to the
river in front of everyone, "O Krishna, we wish to cross to the other side."
Then the banks of the Krishna River met, and the width of the river became as
wide as his feet. Acharya stepped across and went to the other side. The river
widened again behind him, and he returned in the same way. Seeing this, the
headman and his family, along with everyone else, were astonished. The headman,
along with his five hundred ascetics, took initiation from Acharya Samit and
later became famous as the Brahma branch.  **44. Example of the Karmic Effect: A
Girl with a Defective Birth**  In a certain city, a wealthy man named Dhan lived
with his wife, Dhanpriya. Their daughter's name was Sundari. She was born with a
defective birth (a woman with an open vulva). Her mother knew this, but her
father did not. Her father arranged her marriage with the son of a wealthy
merchant. The time of the wedding approached. The mother was worried that if her
husband learned of her daughter's condition after the wedding, he would leave
her, and she would suffer. Meanwhile, a monk arrived there begging for alms. The
monk asked the reason for her sadness. The mother told him everything. The monk
said, "Do not fear, I will make her a woman with a perfect birth." Then the monk
gave her a purification medicine and a medicine to be taken orally. Through the
effect of the medicine, she became a woman with a perfect birth and was able to
enjoy life for the rest of her life.  **1. Ga. 231/2-4, Vr. P. 144, Nibha
4470-72, Chu. Pri. 425, Jibha 1460-66, Pimprati P. 68. 2. Ga. 231/6, Vr. P. 144,
Pimprati P. 70.**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 3 : kathAeM 261 parva dinoM meM apane tIrtha kI prabhAvanA ke lie saba
tApasoM ke sAtha pAda-lepa karake kRSNA nadI ko pairoM se calakara pAra karake
acalapura jAtA thaa| loga usake isa atizaya ko dekhakara vismita ho jAte tathA
vizeSa rUpa se bhojana Adi se satkAra karate the| loga sAdhuoM kI niMdA karate
hue zrAvakoM ko kahate the-'tuma logoM ke pAsa aisI zakti nahIM ho sktii|'
zrAvakoM ne yaha bAta vajrasvAmI ke mAmA AcArya samita ko btaaii| unhoMne
cintana karake zrAvakoM se kahA-'yaha kulapati mAyApUrvaka pAdalepa karake nadI
pAra karatA hai, tapa-zakti ke prabhAva se nhiiN| yadi garma jala se usake paira
dho die jAeM to vaha nadI pAra nahIM kara skegaa|' taba zrAvakoM ne usakI mAyA
ko prakaTa karane ke lie saparivAra kulapati ko bhojana ke lie AmaMtrita kiyaa|
bhojana-velA meM kulapati vahAM phuNcaa| zrAvakoM ne usakA pAda-prakSAlana
karanA prAraMbha kiyA lekina pAda-lepa dUra hone ke bhaya se usane pairoM ko Age
nahIM kiyaa| taba zrAvakoM ne kahA-'binA pAda-prakSAlana kie Apako bhojana
karavAne se hamako avinaya doSa lgegaa| vinayapUrvaka diyA gayA dAna adhika
phaladAyI hotA hai|' zrAvakoM ne balapUrvaka paira Age karake unako prakSAlita
kara diyaa| bhojana ke bAda kulapati apane sthAna para jAne ke lie taiyAra huaa|
zrAvaka bhI saba logoM ko bulAkara unake pIche-pIche calane lge| kulapati ne
saparivAra kRSNA nadI ko pAra karane hetu nadI meM paira rakhA lekina pAdalepa
ke abhAva meM vaha DUbane lgaa| logoM meM usakI niMdA hone lgii| isI bIca use
bodha dene ke lie AcArya samita vahAM aae| unhoMne saba logoM ke sAmane nadI se
kahA-'he kRSNe! hama usa pAra jAnA cAhate haiN|' taba kRSNA nadI ke donoM kinAre
Apasa meM mila ge| nadI kI caur3AI unake pairoM jitanI ho gii| AcArya kadama
rakhakara nadI ke usa pAra cale ge| pIche se nadI caur3I ho gaI punaH usI
prakAra ve vApasa A ge| yaha dekhakara saparivAra kulapati evaM sabhI loga
Azcaryacakita ho ge| kulapati ne apane pAMca sau tApasoM ke sAtha Arya samita ke
pAsa dIkSA grahaNa kara lI, vaha Age jAkara brahmazAkhA ke rUpa meM prasiddha
huii| 44. mUlakarma-prayoga : bhinnayonikA kanyA kA-dRSTAMta kisI nagara meM
dhana nAmaka zreSThI apanI bhAryA dhanapriyA ke sAtha rahatA thaa| usakI putrI
kA nAma suMdarI thaa| vaha bhinnayonikA (khulI huI yoni vAlI) thii| yaha bAta
usakI mAM ko jJAta thI, pitA ko nhiiN| usake pitA ne kisI dhanADhya zreSThI ke
putra ke sAtha usakA vivAha nizcita kara diyaa| vivAha kA samaya nikaTa Ane
lgaa| mAM ko cintA huI ki yadi zAdI ke bAda isakA pati ise bhinnayonikA jAnakara
chor3a degA to yaha becArI duHkha kA anubhava kregii| isI bIca kisI sAdhu kA
vahAM bhikSArtha Agamana huaa| muni ne udAsI kA kAraNa puuchaa| mAM ne sArI bAta
batA dii| sAdhu ne kahA-'tuma Daro mata, maiM ise akSatayoni vAlI banA duuNgaa|'
taba muni ne use Acamana auSadha tathA pAna-auSadha btaaii| auSadha ke prabhAva
se vaha akSatayonikA bana gaI aura yAvajjIvana bhoga bhogane meM samartha ho
gii| 1. gA. 231/2-4, vR pa. 144, nibhA 4470-72, cU pR 425, jIbhA 1460-66,
piMpraTI p.68| 2. gA. 231/6, vR pa. 144, piMpraTI p.70|

Page #434 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  262 ## 45.  Mulakarma-Prayoga:  Marriage Example In the city of Chandranana,
there lived a merchant named Dhanadatta. His wife's name was Chandramukha. One
day, they had a quarrel. Due to attachment, he decided to marry another woman,
the daughter of a wealthy Seth living in the same city. When Chandramukha
learned about this, she became distressed. Meanwhile, a sadhu named
Janghaparijit came to their house for alms. Seeing her sorrow, the sadhu asked
her the reason for her distress. Chandramukha told the sadhu about her impending
co-wife. The sadhu gave her a medicine and said, "In any way, feed her this
medicine in bhakta or pan, which will make her a bhinnayonika. After that, tell
your husband about it, so that he will not marry her." She did the same. Upon
learning about the bhinnayonika, her husband did not marry her.  ## 46.  Garbha-
Parishotan and Adan:  The Example of Two Kings In the city of Sanjug, a king
named Sindhuraj ruled. In his inner palace, there were two chief queens, named
Shringarमति and Jayasundari. Once, Shringarमति became pregnant. Thinking, "She
will surely have a son," Jayasundari became envious and distressed. Meanwhile, a
sadhu came. He asked, "Why do you look so worried?" Then she told him about her
co-wife's impending pregnancy. The sadhu said, "Don't worry, I will make you
pregnant too." Then Jayasundari said, "Although I will have a son by your grace,
he will not be able to become the crown prince because he will be the younger
one. Due to being the elder, the co-wife's son will be the rightful heir to the
kingdom." The sadhu gave Jayasundari medicine for pregnancy and Shringarमति
medicine for abortion. 2  ## 47.  Dravya Grahanesha:  The Example of the Monkey
Troop There was a mountain called Vishalbhṛnga. In one of its forest tracts, a
group of monkeys roamed. On that mountain, there was another forest tract, rich
in all kinds of flowers, fruits, etc. In the heart of that forest tract, there
lived a crocodile. Whoever entered the heart of the forest tract to drink water,
be it a deer or any other animal, he would drag them in and eat them. Once,
seeing the forest tract devoid of flowers and fruits, the monkey troop leader
sent a pair of monkeys to search for another forest tract suitable for their
livelihood. After searching, the pair of monkeys requested the troop leader,
"There is a forest tract in such and such a region, which is rich in flowers,
fruits, etc., in all seasons and suitable for our livelihood." The troop leader
went there with his troop. He began to look at the entire forest tract
carefully. The troop leader saw the heart filled with water. There were
footprints of quadrupeds entering the heart.  1. Ga. 231/7, Vr. P. 144, 145. 2.
Ga. 231/10, 11, Vr. P. 145, Pimprati P. 69, 70.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 262 45. mUlakarma-prayoga: vivAha-dRSTAMta candrAnanA nagarI meM dhanadatta
nAmaka sArthavAha thaa| usakI patnI kA nAma candramukhA thaa| eka dina una donoM
ke bIca kalaha ho gyaa| abhiniveza ke kAraNa usane usI nagara meM rahane vAlI
kisI dhanADhya seTha kI putrI ke sAtha dUsarA vivAha karane kA nizcaya kara
liyaa| candramukhA ko jaba yaha bAta jJAta huI to usake mana meM adhRti paidA ho
gii| isI bIca jaMghAparijita nAmaka sAdhu usake ghara bhikSArtha AyA  /  usako
kheda-khinna dekhakara sAdhu ne usase khinnatA kA kAraNa puuchaa| candramukhA ne
apanI sauta Ane kA vRttAnta sAdhu ko btaayaa| sAdhu ne use auSadhi dete hue kahA
- ' kisI bhI taraha bhakta yA pAna meM use yaha auSadha khilA do, jisase vaha
bhinnayonikA ho jaaegii| usake bAda apane pati ko isa bAre meM batA denA, jisase
vaha usake sAtha vivAha nahIM karegA  / ' usane vaisA hI kiyA  /  bhinnayonikA
kI bAta jJAta hone para pati ne usake sAtha vivAha nahIM kiyA  /  46. garbha -
parizATana evaM AdAna : rAjapanidvaya dRSTAMta saMyuga nAmaka nagara meM
siMdhurAja nAmaka rAjA rAjya karatA thA  /  usake aMtaHpura meM do pradhAna
rAniyAM thIM, jinakA nAma zRMgAramati aura jayasuMdarI thaa| eka bAra
zRMgAramati garbhavatI huii| 'isake avazya putra hogA ' yaha socakara
jayasuMdarI IrSyAvaza kheda - khinna rahane lgii| isI bIca koI sAdhu aayaa|
usane pUchA - 'tuma itanI cintAgrasta kyoM dikhAI detI ho ?' taba usane apanI
sauta ke hone vAle garbhAdhAna ke viSaya meM btaayaa| sAdhu bolA- 'tuma cintA
mata karo, maiM tumhArA bhI garbhAdhAna karavA duuNgaa|' taba jayasuMdarI ne
kahA- 'yadyapi ApakI kRpA se mere putra ho jAegA lekina vaha kaniSTha hone ke
kAraNa yuvarAja nahIM bana pAegA  /  jyeSTha hone kAraNa sauta kA putra hI rAjya
kA adhikArI bnegaa|' sAdhu ne jayasuMdarI ko garbhAdhAna tathA zRMgAramati ke
lie garbhapAta hetu auSadhi dI  /  2 piMDaniryukti 47. dravya grahaNaiSaNA :
vAnarayUtha-dRSTAMta vizAlabhRMga nAmaka parvata thA  /  usake eka vanakhaNDa
meM vAnaroM kA samUha ramaNa karatA thaa| u parvata para dUsarA vanakhaNDa bhI
saba prakAra ke puSpa phala Adi se samRddha thaa| usake madhyabhAga meM sthita
hRda meM eka zizumAra rahatA thA  /  jo koI mRga Adi pazu pAnI pIne hetu hRda
meM praveza karate, vaha una sabako khIMcakara khA jAtA thaa| eka bAra puSpa
aura phaloM se rahita vanakhaNDa ko dekhakara vAnara yUthapati ne jIvana nirvAha
yogya anya vanakhaNDa kI khoja hetu vAnarayugala ko bhejaa| khoja karake
vAnarayugala ne yUthAdhipati ko nivedana kiyA- ' 'amuka pradeza meM eka
vanakhaNDa hai, jo saba RtuoM meM puSpa phala Adi se samRddha tathA hamAre
jIvana-yApana ke yogya hai  / ' yUthAdhipati apane yUtha ke sAtha vahAM gyaa|
vaha samasta vanakhaNDa ko dhyAna se dekhane lgaa| yUthapati ne jala se
paripUrNa hRda ko dekhaa| hRda meM praveza karate hue zvApadoM ke padacihna the
1. gA. 231/7, vR pa. 144, 145  /  2. gA. 231 / 10, 11, vR pa. 145, piMpraTI pa.
69, 70  /

Page #435 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 3: Stories  **263**  But there were no footprints of the quadrupeds
coming back from there. Then calling the youth, the monkey-youth-leader said -
'No one should enter this heart and drink water. Drink water from the stream
located on the bank, this heart is not free from trouble.' Here, the footprints
of deer etc. entering are visible, but those of coming out are not visible. The
monkeys who followed his words, continued to live happily. Those who did not
follow the words of the youth-leader, perished.  **48. Child-giving: The Girl-
Example**  A newly initiated Shravaka told her daughter - 'Give alms to the
Shramans.' The Shravaka went to her field. After the Shravaka left, a Sadhu came
to her house for alms. The girl gave the Sadhu Tandulodak. The leader of the
Singhare, that Sadhu, knowing the girl to be simple, out of attachment,
repeatedly said - 'Give a little more.' The girl gave all the Odan. Similarly,
she gave all the Mung, ghee, buttermilk, yogurt, etc. in alms. In the afternoon,
her mother came. When she sat down to eat, she asked her daughter for Odan etc.
food. The girl said - 'I gave all the Odan to the Sadhu.' The Shravaka said -
'You did a good deed. Serve me Mung.' The girl said - 'I gave all the Mung to
the Sadhu too.' Whatever the Shravaka asked for, the girl gave the same answer
that she had given it to the Sadhu. Finally, she asked for Kanji. For that too,
the girl said - 'I gave that to the Sadhu too.'  That newly initiated Shravaka,
angry at the girl, said - 'Why did you give all the food to the Sadhu?' The girl
replied - 'The Sadhu repeatedly asked, so I gave him everything.' The Shravaka,
in a fit of anger, went to the Acharya. Telling him the whole story, she said -
'Your such and such Sadhu has taken all the food from my daughter by asking for
it again and again.' Hearing her loud words, the neighboring people also came to
know about it. They too became angry and started to criticize the Sadhu. So that
the preaching would not be condemned, the Acharya, in front of everyone, took
all the Sadhu's equipment and expelled him from the residence. On expelling him
from the shelter, the Shravaka's anger subsided. She pleaded with the Acharya -
'Do not expel this Sadhu from the residence because of me. Forgive his one
offense.' After teaching the Sadhu in many ways, the Acharya re-admitted him
into the Sangha.  **49. Vomited Fault: The Honey-Drop-Example**  In the city of
Warattpur, there was a king named Abhayasen. His minister's name was Waratrak.
Once, while walking slowly from the Esana Committee, a restrained Sadhu named
Dharmaghosh entered a house for alms. The minister's wife, to give alms to the
Sadhu, overturned the vessel of payas containing ghee and sugar. A ghee mixed
with sugar 3. This story is given in detail in the Pindavishuddhiprakaran. 1.
Ga. 236/1-3, Vr. P. 146, Pimprati P. 76. 2. Ga. 272 Vr. P. 158,159.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 3 : kathAeM 263 lekina vahAM se vApasa nikalate hue zvApadoM ke padacihna
nahIM the| taba yUtha ko bulAkara vAnara-yUthapati ne kahA-'koI bhI isa hRda meM
praveza karake pAnI na piie| taTa para sthita nAle se hI pAnI pIe, yaha hRda
upadrava rahita nahIM hai|' yahAM mRga Adi ke praveza karate hue ke padacihna
dikhAI dete haiM lekina nikalate hue ke dikhAI nahIM dete| jina vAnaroM ne usake
vacana kA pAlana kiyA, ve sukhapUrvaka vihAra karate rhe| jinhoMne yUthapati ke
vacanoM kA pAlana nahIM kiyA, ve samApta ho ge| 48. bAladAyaka : bAlikA-dRSTAMta
kisI abhinava zrAvikA ne apanI putrI ko kahA-'zramaNoM ko bhikSA de denaa|'
zrAvikA apane kheta meM calI gii| zrAvikA ke jAne para koI sAdhu bhikSArtha
usake yahAM aayaa| bAlikA ne sAdhu ko taNDulodaka die| siMghAr3e ke pramukha usa
sAdhu ne bAlikA ko sarala jAnakara Asakti vaza bAra-bAra kahA-'thor3A aura do|'
bAlikA ne sArA odana de diyaa| isI prakAra mUMga, ghI, chAcha, dahI Adi bhI sArA
bhikSA meM grahaNa kara liyaa| aparAhna ke samaya usakI mAM aaii| jaba vaha
bhojana ke lie baiThI to usane apanI putrI se odana Adi AhAra maaNgaa| bAlikA ne
kahA-'sArA odana sAdhu ko de diyaa|' zrAvikA ne kahA-'tumane acchA kArya kiyaa|
mujhe mUMga parosa do|' bAlikA ne kahA-'maiMne sAre mUMga bhI sAdhu ko de die|'
zrAvikA ne jisa kisI cIja kI mAMga kI, bAlikA ne eka hI uttara diyA ki sAdhu ko
de die| aMta meM usane kAMjI kI mAMga kii| usake lie bhI bAlikA ne kahA-'vaha
bhI sAdhu ko de diyaa|' vaha abhinava zrAvikA bAlikA para kupita hokara
bolI-'tUne sAdhu ko sArA AhAra kyoM diyA?' bAlikA ne uttara diyA-'sAdhu ne bAra-
bAra mAMga kI ataH maiMne unako saba kucha de diyaa|' zrAvikA krodhAveza meM
Akara AcArya ke pAsa gii| unheM sArA vRttAnta batAte hue usane kahA-'ApakA amuka
sAdhu merI putrI se mAMga-mAMgakara sArA AhAra lekara A gayA hai|' usake ucca
zabdoM ko sunakara par3osI logoM ko bhI yaha bAta jJAta ho gii| ve bhI krodha
meM Akara sAdhu kA avarNavAda karane lge| pravacana kI niMdA na ho isalie AcArya
ne saba logoM ke samakSa sAdhu ke sAre upakaraNa grahaNa karake use vasati se
bAhara nikAla diyaa| usako upAzraya se bAhara nikAlane para zrAvikA kA krodha
zAnta ho gyaa| usane AcArya ko nivedana kiyA-'mere kAraNa isa sAdhu ko vasati se
bAhara na nikaaleN| isake eka aparAdha ko kSamA kreN|' sAdhu ko aneka prakAra se
zikSA dekara AcArya ne use punaH saMgha meM sammilita kara liyaa| 49. chardita
doSa : madhu-bindu-dRSTAMta vArattapura nAmaka nagara meM abhayasena nAmaka rAjA
thaa| usake maMtrI kA nAma vAratraka thaa| eka bAra eSaNA samiti se dhIre-dhIre
calate hue dharmaghoSa nAmaka saMyamI sAdhu bhikSArtha kisI ghara meM praviSTa
huaa| maMtrI kI patnI ne sAdhu ko bhikSA dene ke lie ghRta zarkarA yukta pAyasa
ke pAtra ko ulttaa| zarkarA mizrita eka ghRta 3. piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa meM yaha
kathA vistRta rUpa meM dI gaI hai| 1. gA. 236/1-3, vR pa. 146, piMpraTI pa. 76
/  2. gA. 272 vR pa. 158,159 /

Page #436 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **264**  The point of the pin fell to the ground. Then,
the Muni Dharmaghosh, with his mind fixed on liberation, profound like the
ocean, unshakable like Mount Meru, all-embracing like the earth, detached from
passions like a conch shell, dedicated to the destruction of karma like the
great Subhata, and engaged in the method of accepting alms as instructed by the
Lord, thought, "Food tainted by the vomit of sin is not fit for me." Therefore,
without accepting alms, he left the house. The minister Varatraka, riding on a
maddened elephant, saw the Muni leaving and thought, "Why did the Muni not
accept alms from my house?" As the minister pondered, many flies came to the
point of ghee mixed with sugar. A lizard came to eat them. A hawk came to kill
the lizard. A cat ran to devour the hawk, and a fierce dog ran to kill it.
Another dog, a resident of that place, ran to kill the dog. The two dogs began
to fight. Their owners, their minds troubled by the defeat of their respective
dogs, engaged in a battle. The minister Varatraka witnessed this entire scene
and thought in his mind, "Even a mere drop of ghee, falling to the ground, has
caused strife. Therefore, the Muni, fearing violence, did not accept alms upon
seeing the drop of ghee on the ground. Oh! The Lord's Dharma is very strong.
Who, other than the Omniscient, can preach such a faultless Dharma?" Pondering
thus, he became detached from the world. Just as a lion emerges from a mountain
cave, so too did the minister Varatraka, emerging from his palace, approach the
sage Dharmaghosh and accepted the vow of renunciation. That great soul,
remaining detached from the body, observed the vows of restraint and studied the
scriptures with a mind filled with devotion. For a long time, he followed the
path of restraint, then ascended to the क्षपक श्रेणी (Kshapaka श्रेणी), and upon
the complete destruction of his harmful karmas, he attained the wealth of pure
knowledge and, in due course, attained Siddhi-Gati (liberation).  **50. The
Greed for Material Possessions: The Fish Analogy**  A fisherman went to the lake
to catch fish. Approaching the lake, he cast a net with a piece of meat attached
to it into the middle of the lake. In that lake, there lived an old fish, wise
and experienced. Smelling the scent of the meat attached to the hook, he went to
eat it and carefully consumed all the meat around it. Then, he pushed the hook
away with his tail. The fisherman thought, "The fish is caught in the net," so
he pulled the hook towards him. He saw the hook without the fish and the meat.
The fisherman again attached meat to the hook and cast it into the lake. Again,
the fish ate the meat and pushed the hook away with its tail and escaped. Thus,
he ate the meat three times, but the fisherman could not catch him.  Seeing the
fisherman worried after the meat was finished, the fish said, "Why are you
thinking like this? Listen to my story, which will make you feel ashamed. I have
been caught in the mouth of a बलाका (Balaka) three times and escaped from it.
Once, I was caught by a बलाका, and it put me in its mouth.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 264 piMDaniyukti biMdu bhUmi para gira gyaa| taba mukti-prApti meM dattacitta,
sAgara kI bhAMti gaMbhIra, meru kI bhAMti niSpakampa, vasudhA kI bhAMti
sarvaMsaha, zaMkha kI bhAMti rAga Adi se nirlepa, mahAsubhaTa kI bhAMti
karmavidAraNa meM kaTibaddha, bhagavAn ke dvArA upadiSTa bhikSA-grahaNa kI vidhi
meM saMlagna muni dharmaghoSa ne socA ki chardita doSa se duSTa AhAra mere lie
kalpanIya nahIM hai ataH binA bhikSA lie ve ghara se bAhara nikala ge|
madonmatta hAthI para baiThe maMtrI vAratraka ne muni ko bAhara nikalate hue
dekhA to socA ki muni ne mere ghara se bhikSA kyoM nahIM grahaNa kI? maMtrI ke
cintana karate-karate hI usa zarkarA yukta ghI ke bindu para aneka makkhiyAM A
gii| unako khAne ke lie chipakalI A gii| chipakalI ko mArane ke lie zaraTa A
gyaa| zaraTa kA bhakSaNa karane hetu mArjArI daur3I aura usake vadha hetu
prAghUrNaka kuttA daudd'aa| usake vadha hetu bhI koI vasati kA rahane vAlA
dUsarA zvAna daudd'aa| donoM kuttoM meM lar3AI hone lgii| apane-apane kutte ke
parAbhava se cintita mana vAle unake mAlikoM meM yuddha chir3a gyaa| yaha sArA
dRzya amAtya vAratraka ne dekhA aura mana meM cintana kiyA'ghRta Adi kA bindu
mAtra bhI bhUmi para girane se kalaha ho gayA isIlie hiMsA se Darane vAle muni
ne ghRtabindu ko bhUmi para dekhakara bhikSA grahaNa nahIM kii| aho! bhagavAn kA
dharma bahuta sudRSTa hai| sarvajJa ke alAvA kauna vyakti aise doSarahita dharma
kA upadeza de sakatA hai?' isa prakAra cintana karate hue vaha saMsAra se
vimukha citta vAlA ho gyaa| siMha jaise girikandarA se nikalatA hai, vaise hI
apane prAsAda se bAhara nikalakara maMtrI vAratraka ne dharmaghoSa sAdhu ke pAsa
Akara pravrajyA grahaNa kara lii| usa mahAtmA ne zarIra se anAsakta rahakara
saMyama-anuSThAna evaM svAdhyAya se bhAvita aMta:karaNa se dIrghakAla taka
saMyama-paryAya kA pAlana kiyA phira kSapaka zreNI meM ArohaNa kara ghAtikarmoM
kA samUla nAza hone para kevalajJAna rUpI lakSmI ko prApta kiyA aura kAlakrama
se siddhigati ko prApta kiyaa| 50. dravya grAsaiSaNA : matsya-dRSTAMta eka
macchImAra matsya ko grahaNa karane ke lie sarovara ke pAsa gyaa| sarovara ke
nikaTa jAkara usane eka mAMsapezI se yukta jAla sarovara ke bIca meM pheNkaa|
usa sarovara meM dakSa tathA pariNata buddhi vAlA eka vRddha matsya rahatA thaa|
kAMTe meM lage mAMsa kI sugaMdha pAkara usakA bhakSaNa karane hetu vaha vRddha
matsya kAMTe ke pAsa gayA aura yatnaparvaka Asa-pAsa kA sArA mAMsa khA gyaa|
phira paMcha se kAMTe ko dara kara diyaa| macchImAra ne socA ki matsya jAla meM
phaMsa gayA hai ata: usane kAMTe ko apanI ora khiiNcaa| usane matsya aura
mAMsapezI se rahita kAMTe ko dekhaa| macchImAra ne puna: mAMsapezI lagAkara
kAMTe ko sarovara meM pheNkaa| punaH vaha matsya mAMsa khAkara pUMcha se kAMTe
ko dhakelakara palAyana kara gyaa| isa prakAra usane tIna bAra mAMsa khAyA
lekina macchImAra usako pakar3a nahIM skaa| mAMsa samApta hone para ciMtA karate
hue macchImAra ko matsya ne kahA-'tuma isa prakAra kyA cintana kara rahe ho?
tuma merI kathA suno, jisase tumako lajjA kA anubhava hogaa| maiM tIna bAra
balAkA ke mukha meM jAkara bhI usase mukta ho gyaa| eka bAra maiM balAkA ke
dvArA pakar3A gayA taba usane mujhe mukha meM DAlane ke 1. gA. 301, vR pa.
169,170, piMpraTI p.82-83|

Page #437 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Par. 3: Stories 265 I was thrown upwards. I thought that if I fell directly into
its mouth, my life would not be saved. Therefore, I would fall obliquely into
its mouth. Thinking this, I quickly did so. I came out of its mouth. Again, the
second time, I went into its mouth and came out. The third time I fell into the
water, so I went away. Three times I fell into the burning sand on the seashore
in the form of a furnace, but I quickly returned to the sea with the waves.
Similarly, even when I was caught in the net laid by the fisherman twenty-one
times, I escaped from the net before the fisherman tightened it. Once, the
fisherman caught me with many other fish after taking out the water from the
heart and emptying it. He was stringing all the fish together on a sharp iron
rod. Then, I cleverly avoided the fisherman's sight and placed myself on the
mouth of the iron rod. When the fisherman went to the lake to wash the mud-
covered fish, I quickly submerged myself in the water. Thus, you want to catch
me, who is powerful, with a thorn, this is your shamelessness.' Concluding this
story, the storyteller says that even if you avoid the 42 faults of Aeshana, O
being! If you indulge in the faults of Grassaeshana, then this is your
shamelessness.' 1. Ga. 302/2-4, Vr. P. 170,171.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 3 : kathAeM 265 lie Upara kI ora pheNkaa| maiMne socA ki yadi maiM sIdhA
isake mukha meM gira jAUMgA to mere prANoM kI rakSA saMbhava nahIM hai| isalie
isake mukha meM tirachA giruuNgaa| aisA socakara maiMne phurtI se vaisA hI
kiyaa| maiM usake mukha se bAhara nikala gyaa| puna: dUsarI bAra bhI maiM usake
mukha meM jAkara bAhara nikala gyaa| tIsarI bAra maiM jala meM girA ataH dUra
calA gyaa| tIna bAra maiM samudrI taTa para bhaTTI ke rUpa meM jalatI bAlU meM
girA lekina zIghra hI laharoM ke sAtha hI vApasa samudra meM calA gyaa| isI
prakAra macchImAra dvArA biche jAla meM ikkIsa bAra phaMsane para bhI jaba taka
mAtsyika ne jAla kA saMkoca kiyA, usase pahale maiM jAla se nikala gyaa| eka
bAra mAtsyika ne hRda ke jala ko bAhara nikAlakara use khAlI karake aneka
matsyoM ke sAtha mujhe pkdd'aa| vaha sabhI matsyoM ko ekatra karake tIkSNa lohe
kI zalAkA meM unako piro rahA thaa| taba maiM dakSatA se mAtsyika kI dRSTi
bacAkara svayaM hI usa lohe ke zalAkA ke mukha para sthita ho gyaa| jaba vaha
macchImAra kardama lipta matsyoM ko dhone ke lie sarovara para gayA taba zIghra
hI maiM jala meM nimagna ho gyaa| isa prakAra mujha zakti sampanna ko tuma kAMTe
se pakar3anA cAhate ho , yaha tumhArI nirlajjatA hai|' isa kathA kA nigamana
karate hue kathAkAra kahate haiM ki eSaNA ke 42 doSoM se bacane para bhI he
jIva! yadi tuma grAsaiSaNA ke doSoM meM lipta hote ho to yaha tumhArI nirlajjatA
hai|' 1. gA. 302/2-4, vR pa. 170,171 /

Page #438 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-4 Ayurveda and Health Treatment of Lūtasphota and Snakebite
**Lūtasphota caused by an offender:** Snakebite etc... This can be treated with
the same remedies as for skin diseases. To alleviate these conditions, a
poultice should be applied. For this purpose, the use of earth from a field,
white clay, Kedāra-tarika etc. is beneficial. (Mavṛ P. 9) A poultice of earth
from a field is applied to reduce the burning sensation caused by spider bites
and snakebites etc.   Treatment of Vāta caused by itching: The use of fragrant
stones, Gandharohka, is beneficial. This is used to treat Vāta caused by
itching, etc. (Mavṛ P. 9) Gandharohka stones are used to treat Vāta caused by
itching, etc.  Indigestion and its causes: • Eating while wearing wet clothes:
This leads to indigestion, incomplete digestion, fatigue, and lethargy. (Mavṛ P.
12) Eating while wearing wet clothes leads to indigestion.  • Frequent washing
of clothes: This is done to prevent indigestion in the state of illness. (Mavṛ
P. 13) Clothes are washed frequently to prevent indigestion in the state of
illness.  • Staying awake at night: This leads to indigestion and the
contamination of Apāna-vāyu, resulting in a foul odor. (Mavṛ P. 33) Staying
awake at night leads to indigestion and the contamination of Apāna-vāyu,
resulting in a foul odor.  • Consumption of Mandaka (bread), Valla, and Sura
(liquor) at night: This leads to indigestion and the excretion of foul-smelling
feces. (Mavṛ P. 83) Consumption of Mandaka (bread), Valla, and Sura (liquor) at
night leads to indigestion and the excretion of foul-smelling feces.
**Expulsion of Vāyu from Apāna through a Vāsthi (enema)** **Daieṇa vatthiṇā vā,
payoyaṇaṁ hojja vāuṇā muṇiṇo. Gelanṇammi vi hojja. Glānatve mandatve sati vāyuna
prayojanaṁ bhavati, kvāpi hi roge dṛtyādinā saṁgrhya vāto'pānādau praksipyate.**
(Gā. 28 Mavṛ P. 19) In the treatment of certain diseases, Vāyu is expelled from
Apāna through an enema.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-4 Ayurveda evaM Arogya lUtAsphoTa evaM sarpadaMza kA upacAra
aparAddhiko-lUtAsphoTa: sarpAdidaMzo... tacca dadruprabhRtiSu cAritaM sambhavati
tayorupazamanAya bandha iva bandhaH-pralepastasmin kartavye'cittapRthivIkAyasya
gauramRttikAkedAratarikAdirUpasya grahaNaM pryojnm| (mavR pa. 9) makar3I dvArA
kATane para hone vAle phor3e evaM sarpadaMza Adi se utpanna dAha ko kama karane
ke lie kheta kI miTTI ke Upara AI huI tarI kA lepa kiyA jAtA hai| khujalI se
utpanna vAta kI cikitsA surabhyupalena-gandhapASANena gandharohakAkhyena
prayojanaM, tena hi pAmAprasUtavAtaghAtAdiH kriyte| (mavR pa. 9) khujalI se
utpanna vAta Adi roga meM gaMdharohaka pASANa kA prayoga kiyA jAtA hai| ajIrNa
roga evaM usake kAraNa * zItalIbhUtAnAM vAsasAM prAvaraNe
bhuktA''hArasyAjIrNatAyAm-apariNatau glAnatA shriirmaandymujjRmbhte| (mavR pa.
12) pAnI se bhIge kapar3oM ko pahane hue AhAra karane se bhojana kA pAcana nahIM
hotA, isase zarIra meM ajIrNa roga ho jAtA hai| * glAne mA bhavatvajIrNamiti
bhUyo bhUyo mlinaani.prkssaalynte| (mavR pa. 13) roga kI avasthA meM ajIrNa na
ho isalie bAra-bAra kapar3e dhoe jAte haiN| * rAtrau jAgaraNabhAvataste modakA
na jIrNAH, tato'jIrNadoSaprabhAvato'tIvapUtigaMdho maarutnisgrgo'bhvt| (mavR pa.
33) rAtri meM atyadhika jAgaraNa se ajIrNa evaM apAna-vAyu dUSita hotI hai| *
rAtrau maNDakavallasurAdyabhyavahArato jAtAjIrNena... durgandhamajIrNaM purISaM
vyudsrji| (mavR pa.83) rAtri meM maNDaka (roTI), valla aura surApAna karane se
ajIrNa roga evaM durgandhayukta mala vyutsarjita hotA hai| apAna meM vasti dvArA
vAyu kA prakSepa daieNa vatthiNA vA, payoyaNaM hojja vAuNA munninno| gelaNNammi
vi hojjaa| glAnatve mandatve sati vAyunA prayojanaM bhavati, kvApi hi roge
dRtyAdinA saMgRhya vAto'pAnAdau prkssipyte| (gA. 28 mavRpa. 19) kisI roga vizeSa
kI cikitsA meM apAna meM vAyu kA prakSepa kiyA jAtA hai|

Page #439 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Chapter 4: Ayurveda and Health**  **267 Eye Diseases and Treatment**  *
**Ashvamaskhika** is used to remove **akshara** (cataract) from the eyes. (Mavri
P. 20) * The tusk of a **Shukra** (pig) is ground and applied to the eyes to
remove **dristi-pushpika** (eye inflammation). (Mavri P. 20) * **Shankha**
(conch) and **Shukti** (oyster) are used in the treatment of **dristi-
pushpika**. (Mavri P. 20) * The claws of a **Grdhra** (vulture) are used
externally to treat boils. (Mavri P. 20) * The claws of certain **Jiva** (living
beings) are exposed to sunlight, and their scent is used to cure specific
diseases. (Mavri P. 20)  **Treatment of Vomiting with Honey**  * The **purisha**
(excrement) of **makshika** (bees), i.e., honey, is used to prevent vomiting.
(Mavri P. 20)  **Treatment of Burns and Snakebite**  * The soil of **uddehika**
(termites) is used to alleviate burns and snakebite. (Mavri P. 20) * Some
**vaidya** (physicians) recommend the use of the bodies of certain **tri-indriya
jiva** (three-sense beings) for external applications. (Mavri P. 20)
**Treatment of Itch with Cow Urine**  * **Gomutra** (cow urine) is used to treat
**pama** (itch) and other skin conditions. (Mavri P. 21)  **1. Avahati 2 P. 90;
Asamaskhiya akkhimmim akkhara ukkaddjjai ti.** * **Asamaskhiya** removes
**akkhara** from the eyes.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 4 : Ayurveda evaM Arogya 267 AMkha ke roga evaM upacAra * azvamakSikA
upayujyate akssibhyo'kssrsmuddhrnnaay| (mavR pa. 20) AMkhoM se akSara
(motiyAbiMda) dUra karane hetu caturindriya jIva azvamakSikA kA upayoga hotA
hai| * zUkaradaMSTrAyAH sA hi dRSTiSu puSpikApanodAya gharSitvA kssipyte| (mavR
pa. 20) dRSTi-puSpikA (AMkhoM kI phUlI) ko dUra karane ke lie sUara kI dAr3ha
ghisakara AMkhoM meM DAlI jAtI hai| * zaGkhazuktikAnAM cakSuH
pusspkaadypnodaadau| (mavR pa. 20) zaMkha aura zukti kA prayoga dRSTi-puSpikA
roga meM hotA hai| phor3e kI cikitsA asthano gRddhanakhikAdeH, taddhi
zarIrasphoTApanodAdyarthe bAhyAdau bdhyte| (mavR pa. 20) gRdhra ke nakha Adi
zarIra ke phor3e ko ThIka karane hetu bAhara bAMdhe jAte haiN| nakha ke dvArA
cikitsA nakhAnAM jIvavizeSasatkAnAM, te hi kvApi dhUpe patanti, gandhazca teSAM
kasyApi rogasyApanodAya prbhvti| (mavR pa. 20) jIva vizeSa ke nakhoM ko dhUpa
meM DAlA jAtA hai, usakI gaMdha roga vizeSa ko dUra karane meM prayukta hotI
hai| zahada dvArA vamana-cikitsA makSikANAM parihAraH-purISaM paribhogaH, taddhi
vamananiSedhAdau prtylm| (mavR pa. 20) madhumakkhiyoM kA purISa-uccAra arthAt
zahada vamana-nivAraNa ke lie prayukta hotA hai| dAhopazamana evaM sarpadaMza kA
upacAra uddehikAmRttikAdeH sarpadaMzAdau dAhopazamanAya veditavyaH, yadvA kimapi
vaidyastrIndriyavizeSazarIrAdikaM bAhyapralepAdinimittaM vdet| (mavR pa. 20)
dImaka kI miTTI sarpadaMza evaM dAhopazamana ke lie prayukta hotI hai| kucha
vaidya trIndriya jIva vizeSa ke zarIra ko bAhya lepa Adi ke prayoga meM batAte
haiN| khujalI kI gomUtra se cikitsA gomUtrasya paamaadhupmrdne| khujalI Adi kI
cikitsA ke lie gomUtra kA prayoga hotA hai| (mavR pa. 21) 1. AvahATI 2 pR. 90;
AsamakkhiyA akkhimmi akkharA ukkaDDijjai ti|

Page #440 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 268 ## Pindaniyukti  **Cause of disease:** Heavy food **Translation:**  Heavy
and excessive food consumption leads to diseases like fever, cholera, etc.  (Ga.
83/5 Mavri p. 70)   **Translation:**  Excessive and heavy food consumption leads
to diseases like fever, cholera, etc.  Due to disturbance in Vayu (air element),
vomiting occurs. (Mavri p. 71)  **Impact of the nurse on the child's body**
**Translation:**  If the nurse is old and has weak milk, the child will not be
strong. If the nurse has large breasts, the child will have a flat nose. If the
nurse is thin and has little milk, the child will be weak due to lack of milk.
If the nurse has small breasts, the child will have a pointed mouth because he
stretches his mouth to suckle. (Ga. 198/7) (Mavri p. 123)  **Impact of excessive
water on the eyes** **Translation:**  If the child is constantly immersed in
water or bathed in excessive water, he will become afraid of water.  Constant
bathing in water makes the child weak-eyed, with weak vision and red eyes. If
the child is not immersed in water at all, his body will be weak and lack
luster, and his vision will be weak. (Ga. 198/11) (Mavri p. 124)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 268 piMDaniyukti roga kA kAraNa : gariSTha AhAra khaddhe niddhe ya ruyaa|
khaddha-pracure snigdhe-bahusnehe bhakSite rujA rogo jvaravisUcikAdirUpaH
praadurbhvti| (gA. 83/5 mavR pa.70) adhika aura gariSTha bhojana karane se jvara
yA haijA Adi roga ho jAte haiN| vAta-saMkSobha se vamana ....
vaatsNkssobhaadivshaadudvmitm| vAyu-saMkSobha ke kAraNa vamana ho jAtA hai|
(mavR pa.71) dhAtrI kA bAlaka ke zarIra para prabhAva therI dubbalakhIrA,
cimiDho pelliyamaho atithnniie| taNuI u maMdakhIrA, kopparathaNiyaM ti
suuimuho|| (gA. 198/7) yA kila dhAtrI sthavirA sA abalakSIrA abalastanyA iti,
tato bAlo na balaM gRhNAti, yA tvatistanI tasyAH stanyaM piban stanena
preritamukha: campitamukhAvayavauSThanAsikazcipiTanAsiko bhavati, yA tu zarIreNa
kRzA sA mandakSIrA alpakSIrA, tataH paripUrNe tasyAH stanyaM bAlo na prApnoti,
tadabhAvAcca sIdati tathA yA kUrparastanI tasyAH stanyaM piban bAlaH sUcImukho
bhavati, sa hi mukhaM dIrghatayA prasArya tasyAH stanyaM pibati,
tatastathArUpAbhyAsatastasya mukhaM sUcyAkAraM bhvti| (mavR pa. 123) sthavira
dhAtrI ke stanoM meM dUdha kama hotA hai ataH bAlaka balazAlI nahIM ho paataa|
atistanI (sthUla stanI) dhAtrI kA dUdha pIte hue bAlaka cipaTe nAka vAlA ho jAtA
hai| kRza dhAtrI ke stana alpa kSIra vAle hote haiM, jisase paryApta dUdha nahIM
milane se bAlaka avasanna rahatA hai| kUrparastanI dhAtrI kA dUdha pIne se
bAlaka kA mukha sUI ke AkAra kA ho jAtA hai kyoMki vaha mukha ko lambA karake
stanapAna karatA hai| atyadhika jala se AMkhoM para prabhAva jalabhIru
abalanayaNo, atiuppalaNeNa rttccho| (gA. 198/11) atizayenotplAvane
prabhUtajalaplAvanena gupyamAno bAlo gururapi jAto nadyAdau jalapraveze
jalabhIrurbhavati tathA nirantarajalenotplAvyamAnaH abalanayanaH
abaladRSTirjAyate, raktAkSazca, yadi punaH sarvathA'pi na majjyate na zarIraM
balamAdatte nApi kAntibhAga, dRSTyA cAbalo jaayte| (mavR pa. 124) nadI meM bAra-
bAra jala meM majjana karavAne se yA prabhUta jala meM snAna karavAne se bAlaka
jala-bhIru ho jAtA hai| jala meM nirantara snAna karane se bAlaka abala nayanoM
vAlA, kamajora dRSTi vAlA tathA lAla AMkhoM vAlA ho jAtA hai| yadi bilkula bhI
majjana nahIM karavAyA jAtA hai to bAlaka kA zarIra kamajora aura kAMtihIna ho
jAtA hai tathA bAlaka kI dRSTi kamajora ho jAtI hai|

Page #441 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 4: Ayurveda and Health  **269. The Influence of the Nurse's Voice on
the Child**  _If the nurse who plays with the child has a harsh voice, the child
will become tongue-tied or stammering. If the nurse has a sweet voice, the child
will become soft-spoken while playing with her._  (Mavri P. 125)  **The
Influence of the Nurse's Body on the Child**  _A child carried by a nurse with
thick thighs will have wide-spaced legs. A child carried by a nurse with a
broken or thin waist will suffer. A child carried by a nurse with rough hands
will become timid._  (Ga. 198/15, Mavri P. 125)  **Treatment for Sudden
Illness**  _Sudden illnesses are treated with oil and other remedies._  (Ga.
214/2)  **Treatment for Disturbance of the Elements**  _When there is a
disturbance of the elements, the treatment involves purification, balancing, and
avoidance of the cause. In the case of a disease caused by a disturbance of the
elements, the treatment involves purification with Haritaki and other remedies
to pacify the Pitta._  (Ga. 214/3, Mavri P. 133)  **Contagious Diseases**  _A
person with a contagious disease is one whose body is decaying, whose blood is
flowing out, and whose body is broken or split. Such a person can transmit
leprosy and other contagious diseases._  (Ga. 276, Mavri P. 160)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 4 : Ayurveda evaM Arogya 269 dhAtrI ke svara kA bAlaka para prabhAva _
krIDanadhAtrI DhaDDarasvarA, tatastasyAH svaramAkarNayan bAlo
chunnamukha:-klIbamukho bhavati, athavA mRdugIreSA tato'nayA ramyamANo bAlo
mRdugiirbhvti|| (mavR pa. 125) yadi krIr3anadhAtrI uccasvara vAlI hotI hai to
usake svara ko sunakara bAlaka klIbamukha vAlA ho jAtA hai| jisa dhAtrI kI vANI
madhura hotI hai, usa krIr3anadhAtrI ke sAtha khelatA huA bAlaka mRdu vANI vAlA
ho jAtA hai| dhAtrI ke zarIra kA bAlaka para prabhAva thullAe~ vigaDapAdo,
bhaggakaDI sukkaDI ya dukkhaM c| nimmaMsakakkhaDakarehi, bhIruo hoti gheppNto||
iha sthUlayA mAMsalayA dhAtryA kaTyAM dhriyamANo bAlaH vikaTapAdaH
parasparabahvantarAlapAdo bhavati, bhagnakaTyA zuSkakaTyA vA kaTyAM dhriyamANo
du:khaM tiSThati, nirmIsakarkazakarAbhyAM ca dhriyamANo bAlo bhiirurbhvti| (gA.
198/15,mavR pa. 125) sthUla evaM mAMsala aMkadhAtrI ke pAsa rahatA huA bAlaka
vikaTa pAda arthAt donoM pairoM ke bIca bahuta aMtarAla vAlA ho jAtA hai|
bhagnakaTi yA patalI kamara vAlI kI goda meM bAlaka duHkhapUrvaka sthita rahatA
hai| mAMsa rahita evaM karkaza hAthoM vAlI aMkadhAtrI ke pAsa bAlaka bhIru ho
jAtA hai| upavAsa-cikitsA sahasuppannaM va ruyaM vAremo aTThamAdIhiM  /  (gA.
214/2) sahasA utpanna roga kI cikitsA tele Adi ke dvArA kI jAtI hai| dhAtu
kSubdha hone para cikitsA saMsodhaNa-saMsamaNaM, nidANaparivajjaNaM ca jaM jtth|
AgaMtu dhAtukhobhe, va Amae kuNati kiriyaM tu|| dhAtukSobhaje cA''maye-roge
samutpanne sati tatra yatkriyAM karoti, tadyathA-saMzodhanaM harItakyAdidAnena
pittaadyupshmnm| (gA. 214/3, mavRpa. 133) dhAtu kSubdha hone para utpanna roga
meM saMzodhana Adi kriyA kI jAtI hai| usameM harItakI Adi ke dvArA pitta-zamana
kiyA jAtA hai| saMkrAmaka roga taddosI saMkamaNaM galaMta bhisa-bhinnadehe y|
bhRzam-atizayena galadarddhapakvaM rudhiraM ca bahirvahan bhinnazca sphuTito
deho yasya sa tathA tasmin dAtari saGkramaNaM kuSThavyAdhisaGkrAntiH syaat| (gA.
276 mavR pa. 160)

Page #442 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pindaniyukti Taking alms from someone whose body is excessively bleeding
semi-cooked blood can lead to leprosy infection. ## Benefits of Warm Food
**270** * **Trika Ushna:** For householders, even if they consume only Sauvira
etc., their food gets digested due to the warmth of their food, bed, and
clothing. They do not experience indigestion or other ailments. (Mavri P. 167) *
Food gets digested by heat. ## Why Consume Vikriti-Vigaya? To bring lightness to
the body, to increase the practice of restraint and yoga, and to gain strength,
one should consume Vikriti-Vigaya. (Mavri P. 168) ## Buttermilk Kindles
Digestive Fire Buttermilk etc. kindle the digestive fire. (Ga. 318/1) ## Hunger
Pain There is no pain like hunger, therefore one should eat to alleviate it. ##
Abandoning Food During Fever One should not eat when fever arises due to fear.
(Mavri P. 168) ## Exceptions to Fasting During Fever Fasting is beneficial in
fever, except for fever caused by wind, exertion, anger, grief, desire, and
injury. (Mavri P. 177)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 piMDaniyukti jisake zarIra se atyadhika ardha pakva rudhira baha rahA ho, usase
bhikSA lene se kuSTha roga kA saMkramaNa ho sakatA hai| 270 uSNabhojana kA lAbha
* * trikamuSNaM gRhiNAM tena sauvIrakUramAtra bhojane'pi teSAmAhArapAkabhAvato
nAjIrNAdidoSA jAyante  /  ( mavR pa. 167 ) gRhastha ke AhAra, zayyA aura upadhi
tInoM uSNa hotI hai ataH yadi ve kevala sauvIra Adi kA hI AhAra karate haiM to
bhI unake vaha AhAra paca jAtA hai, ajIrNa doSa nahIM hotA  /  uSNena tApenAhAro
jIryate  /  tApa se AhAra pacatA hai| vigaya kA paribhoga kyoM ? zarIrasyApATave
saMyamayogavRddhinimittaM balAdhAnAya vikRtiparibhogaH  /  (mavR pa. 168) zarIra
meM paTutA lAne ke lie, saMyama - yogoM kI vRddhi ke lie tathA bala prApta
karane ke lie vikRti - vigaya kA paribhoga karanA cAhie  /  chAcha se jaTharAgni
pradIpta takrAdinApi hi jATharo'gniruddIpyate  /  chAcha Adi se jaTharAgni
pradIpta hotI hai  /  kSudhA - vedanA (gA. 318 / 1 ) natthi chuhAya sarisiyA,
viyaNA bhuMjejja tappasamaNaTThA  /  kSudhA ke samAna koI dUsarI vedanA nahIM
hotI ataH usake zamana ke lie AhAra karanA cAhie  /  jvara meM AhAra kA
parityAga AtaGke-jvarAdAvutpanne sati na bhuJjIta  /  jvara utpanna hone para
AhAra nahIM karanA caahie| (mavRpa. 168) ( mavR pa. 168 ) jvara meM laMghana ke
apavAda balAvarodhi nirddiSTaM, jvarAdau laGghanaM hitam  /
Rte'nilazramakrodhazokakAmakSatajvarAn  /  (mavRpa. 177) (mavRpa. 177) jvara Adi
meM laMghana hitakara hai lekina vAta, zrama, krodha, zoka, kAma aura coTa janya
jvara meM laMghana karanA zakti meM avarodha paidA karane vAlA hotA hai|

Page #443 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 4: Ayurveda and Health  **Consequences of Excessive Food Intake**
"Eating excessively, too often, and in excess quantity can cause diarrhea,
vomiting, and even death if the food is not digested." (Ga. 312/2)  Who is a
physician?  "Those who eat harmful food, those who eat excessive food, and those
who eat insufficient food are not physicians. They are seekers of their own
well-being." (Ga. 313 Mavri P. 174)  Those who eat food that is not incompatible
with their body constitution and is beneficial are called *hitaahari*. Those who
eat in moderation and according to their body's needs are called *mitaahari*.
Those who eat less than 32 *kavala* (mouthfuls) are called *alpaahari*.
Physicians do not treat such individuals because they do not develop diseases
due to their beneficial, moderate, and limited food intake.  **Unfavorable
Food**  "A combination of yogurt, oil, and milk, yogurt, and *kanji* is harmful.
It is incompatible food." (Ga. 313/1 Mavri P. 174)  "Milk is incompatible with
vegetables, sour fruits, *pinyaka*, *kapittha*, salt, *karir*, yogurt, and
fish." (Ga. 313/1 Mavri P. 174)  Combining compatible substances is beneficial.
It destroys existing diseases and prevents future ones. It is said, "All
diseases arise from consuming harmful food. Therefore, one should abandon
harmful food and consume beneficial food." (Ga. 313/1 Mavri P. 174)  **Quantity
of Food**  "For a person of average build, the quantity of food should be
divided into two parts for the morning and evening meals. For a person with a
strong constitution, the quantity should be reduced to one-sixth."

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 4 : Ayurveda evaM Arogya pramANAtirikta AhAra kA pariNAma atibahuyaM
atibahuso, atippamANeNa bhoyaNaM bhuttaM  /  hAdejja va vAmijja va, mArejja va
taM ajIraMtaM  //  (gA. 312/2) atibahuka, adhika bAra aura ati pramANa meM kiyA
gayA bhojana atisAra paidA kara sakatA hai, usase vamana ho sakatA hai tathA
vaha AhAra jIrNa na hone para vyakti ko mAra sakatA hai| cikitsaka kauna ?
hiyAhArA miyAhArA, appAhArA ya je narA  /  na te vijjA tigicchaMti, appANaM te
tigicchagA  //  dravyato'viruddhAni dravyANi, bhAvata eSaNIyaM tadAhArayanti ye
te hitAhArAH, mitaM pramANopetamAhArayantIti mitAhArAH,
dvAtriMzatkavalapramANAdapyalpamalpataraM vA''hArayantItyalpAhArAH, evaMvidhA ye
narAstAn vaidyA na cikitsanti, hitamitAdibhojanena teSAM rogasyaivAsambhavAt  /
(gA. 313 mavR pa. 174 ) dravya se aviruddha aura bhAvataH eSaNIya AhAra karane
vAle hitAhArI kahalAte haiN| mita aura pramANopeta AhAra karane vAle mitAhArI
tathA battIsa kavala pramANa se bhI alpa AhAra karane vAle alpAhArI hote haiN|
aise vyaktiyoM kI vaidya cikitsA nahIM karate kyoMki hita-mita aura alpa AhAra
karane se unake roga utpanna hI nahIM hotA  /  pratikUla AhAra 271 khIra- dadhi-
kaMjiyANaM ca  /  dahi- tellasamA ogA, ahito patthaM puNa rogaharaM, na ya hetU
hoti rogassa  //  " dadhitailayostathA kSIradadhikAJjikAnAM ca yaH samAyogaH
so'hitaH viruddha ityarthaH, tathA coktam-'"zAkAmlaphalapiNyAkakapitthalavaNaiH
saha  /  karIradadhimatsyaizca prAyaH kSIraM virudhyate  // 1  //  ' ityAdi
aviruddhadravyamIlanaM punaH pathyaM tacca rogaharaM prAdurbhUtarogavinAzakaraM
na ca bhAvino rogasya hetuH kAraNam, uktaM ca - " ahitAzanasamparkAt,
sarvarogodbhavo yataH  /  tasmAttadahitaM tyAjyaM, nyAyyaM pathyaniSevaNam  // 1
// " ( gA. 313 / 1 mavR pa. 174 ) dadhi aura taila kA tathA dUdha, dahI aura
kAJjI kA samAyoga arthAt eka sAtha khAnA ahitakara hai, yaha viruddha AhAra hai|
zAka, khaTTe phala, piNyAka, kapittha-kaitha, lavaNa, karIra, dahI aura matsya
ke sAtha dUdha pInA viruddha AhAra hai  /  aviruddha dravya ko sAtha milAkara
lenA pathya hai| vaha prAdurbhUta roga kA nAza karane vAlA tathA bhaviSya meM
roga na hone kA kAraNa banatA hai| kahA bhI gayA hai ki ahitakara azana khAne se
rogoM kA udbhava ho jAtA hai ataH ahitakara bhojana chor3akara pathya bhojana
karanA cAhie  /  AhAra kA parimANa addhamasaNassa savvaMjaNassa kujjA davassa do
bhAge  /  vAtapaviyAraNA chabbhAgaM UNagaM kujjA  //

Page #444 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  Translation:  **272**  The stomach is divided into six parts. Of these,
three parts should be allocated for food, including condiments, buttermilk, and
vegetables. Two parts should be for water, and the remaining sixth part should
be kept empty for air circulation.  (Ga. 313/2, Mavrp. 175) The stomach should
be divided into six parts, with half, i.e., three parts, for food, two parts for
water, and the remaining sixth part should be kept empty for air circulation.
In extreme cold, one part should be allocated for water and four parts for food.
In moderate cold, two parts should be for water and three parts for food. In
moderate heat, two parts should be for water and three parts for food. In
extreme heat, three parts should be for water and two parts for food. In all
seasons, the sixth part should always be kept empty for air circulation.  (Ga.
313/4, Mavrp. 175) In extreme cold, one part should be allocated for water and
four parts for food. In moderate cold, two parts should be for water and three
parts for food. In moderate heat, two parts should be for water and three parts
for food. In extreme heat, three parts should be for water and two parts for
food. In all seasons, the sixth part should always be kept empty for air
circulation.  One part is allocated for water, and two parts for food. The
remaining two parts increase or decrease. This means that two parts are for food
and two parts for water, which increase or decrease. In extreme cold, two parts
of food increase, and two parts of water decrease. In extreme heat, two parts of
water increase, and two parts of food decrease.  (Ga. 313/5, Mavrp. 175) The
stomach is divided into six parts, with two parts allocated for food. The
remaining two parts increase or decrease. In extreme cold, two parts of food
increase, and two parts of water decrease. In extreme heat, two parts of water
increase, and two parts of food decrease.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 272 piMDaniyukti iha kila sarvamudaraM SaDbhirbhAgairvibhajyate, tatra cArTsa
bhAgatrayarUpamazanasya savyaJjanasya-takra zAkAdisahitasyAdhAraM kuryAt tathA
dvau bhAgau dravasya pAnIyasya, SaSThaM tu bhAgaM vAyupravicAraNArthamUnaM
kuryaat| (gA. 313/2 mavRpa. 175) udara ko chaha bhAgoM meM vibhakta karake usakA
AdhA arthAt tIna bhAga AhAra ke lie do bhAga pAnI ke lie tathA chaThA bhAga
vAyu-saMcAra ke lie khAlI rakhanA caahie| sIte davassa ego, bhatte cattAri ahava
do paanne| usiNe davassa donnI, tinni u sesA va bhttss|| zIte atizayena zItakAle
dravasya pAnIyasyaiko bhAgaH kalpanIyaH, catvAraH bhakte bhaktasya, madhyame tu
zItakAle dvau bhAgau pAnIyasya kalpanIyau, trayastu bhAgA bhaktasya tathA uSNe
madhyamoSNakAle dvau bhAgau dravasya pAnIyasya kalpanIyau, zeSAstu trayo bhAgA
bhaktasya atyuSNe ca kAle trayo bhAgA dravasya zeSau dvau bhAgau bhaktasya,
sarvatra ca SaSTho bhAgo vAyupravicArapArthaM mutkalo moktavyaH  /  (gA. 313/4,
mavRpa. 175) atyadhika zItakAla meM pAnI kA eka bhAga, AhAra ke cAra bhAga,
madhyama zItakAla meM do bhAga pAnI ke tathA tIna bhAga AhAra ke, madhyama uSNa
kAla meM do bhAga pAnI ke zeSa tIna bhAga AhAra ke, atyanta uSNa kAla meM tIna
bhAga pAnI ke tathA zeSa do bhAga AhAra ke, hara mausama meM chaThA bhAga
sadaiva vAyu-saMcAra ke lie khAlI rakhanA caahie| ego davassa bhAgo, avadito
bhoyaNassa do bhaagaa| vakhaMti va hAyaMti va, do do bhAgA tu ekkekke|| _eko
dravasya bhAgo'vasthito dvau bhAgau bhojanasya, zeSau tau dvau dvau bhAgau
ekaikasmin, bhakte pAne cetyarthaH, varddhate vA hIyete vA, vRddhiM vA vrajato
hAni vA vrajata ityarthaH, tathAhi-atizItakAle dvau bhAgau bhojanasya varddhate
atyuSNakAle ca pAnIyasya, atyuSNakAle ca dvau bhAgau bhojanasya hIyete
atizItakAle ca paaniiysy| (gA. 313/5 mavR pa. 175) udara ke chaha bhAgoM meM do
bhAga bhojana ke lie avasthita haiM, zeSa do bhAga bar3hate-ghaTate rahate haiN|
atizItakAla meM do bhAga bhojana ke bar3ha jAte haiM, pAnI ke ghaTa jAte haiM
tathA ati uSNakAla meM do bhAga pAnI ke bar3ha jAte haiM aura bhojana ke ghaTa
jAte haiN|

Page #445 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pinī 21  **Aibhar-Chudana-Panaye 259 Airan Phalādipihitaṁ** 133 Anguliye vā
Ghettum 6 Akkhe Varāḍaye vā 22/6 Acchoda-Pittanāsu ya 65 Aṭṭhāeṇ Aṭṭhā 178 Ani
Siddhaṁ Paḍikutuṁ 148/1 Aṇukampa Bhāgini-Gehe 288 Aṇukampā Paḍiniyatṭhayāy 312/2
Atibahuyaṁ Atibahuso Jībhā 1971 80/4 Aghaṇaghaṇachāriga-Gaṇe 176
Achiyattamantarāyaṁ Nibhā 4507 172 Acchijjaṁ Piya Trividhaṁ Tu. Jībhā 1274,
Nibhā 4500 Oni 357 Jībhā 1115 Nibhā 4516 Nibhā 4495 Bṛibhā 5622 Jībhā 1627,
Piṁpra 96 Jībhā 1213 Pankabhā 741, Vyabhā 3701, Prasā 867, Tu. Mūlā 491, Jībhā
1638 Nibhā 1043, Jībhā 1428 Nibhā 4441 Nibhā 4488 Jībhā 1235 113/4 Atṭaṭṭhiya
Ādāṇe 313/2 Addhama-Saṇassa Savvaṁ..... 222/2 Addhiti Diṭṭhi-Paṇhaya 218 Annesi
Dijjamāṇe 144/2 Aparimitatill-Avuḍḍī 135 Appattammī vā Ṭhavitam 21/1 Appatte
Chchiya Vāse **Comparative Reference**  **Other Texts** Oni 349 Jībhā 1553 Jībhā
1232 Oni 334, Āvani 987/2 Prasā 864, Oni 350 Pinī 198/12 Abbhangiya Sambāhiya
22/2 Abbhitar-Paribhōgaṁ 84/1 Abbhōjje Gamaṇādi Jībhā 1190 Nibhā 4380 198/4
Ayam-Avaro U Vikappo Avaraddhi-Vis- Bandhe Avarōpparasa-Jjhīl-Agā Oni 341 13
Nibhā 4494 148 210/4 Avi Nāma Hōjja Sulabho Nibhā 4426, Jībhā 1377 Nibhā 4518
179/1 Avi Ya Hu Battisāe 241 Avisuddha Pariṇāmo Assanjam-Jōgāṇam 215 302/2 Aha
Mansammi Pahīṇe 319 Ahava Na Kujjāhāraṁ 198/3 Ahigaraṇa Bhaddha Panta 198/6
Aṇuṭṭhiyaṁ Cha Aṇave..... 205 Ākampiyā Nimitteṇa 83/1 320 Āṇaṁ Savvajñāṇam
Ātanke Uvasagge 320/1 Ātanka Jaramādi 278 Āyaparō Bhaya-Dōsā 219/10 Āyariya-
Uvajjhāe 21/2 Āyariya- Gilāṇāṇ Ya **Appendix-5**  **Other Texts** Nibhā 4388 Oni
353 Tu. Jībhā 1489 Jībhā 1392, Nibhā 4437 Oni 540 Oni 581 Nibhā 4379 Nibhā 4382
Nibhā 2694, 4406 Jībhā 1983 Jībhā 1664, Ṭhāṇaṁ 6/42, Prasā 738, Tu. Mūlā 480,
Obhā 292 Obhā 293 Obhā 243 Tu. Jībhā 1399 Prasā 865, Oni 351

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pini 21 aibhAra- cuDaNa-paNae 259 airaM phalAdipihitaM 133 aMgulie vA ghettuM 6
akkhe varADae vA 22 / 6 acchoDa-piTTaNAsu ya 65 aTThAe~ aTThA 178 aNisiddhaM
paDikuTuM 148 / 1 aNukaMpa bhAgiNigehe 288 aNukaMpA paDiNIyaTThayAya 312/2
atibahuyaM atibahuso jIbhA 1971 80/4 aghaNaghaNacArigagaNe 176
aciyattamaMtarAyaM nibhA 4507 172 acchijjaM piya tividhaM tu. jIbhA 1274, nibhA
4500 oni 357 jIbhA 1115 nibhA 4516 nibhA 4495 bRbhA 5622 jIbhA 1627, piMpra 96
jIbhA 1213 paMkabhA 741, vyabhA 3701, prasA 867, tu. mUlA 491, jIbhA 1638 nibhA
1043, jIbhA 1428 nibhA 4441 nibhA 4488 jIbhA 1235 113/4 attaTThiya AdANe 313 / 2
addhamasaNassa savvaM..... 222/2 addhiti diTThIpaNhaya 218 annesi dijjamANe
144/2 aparimitatillavuDDI 135 appattammi va ThavitaM 21 / 1 appatte cciya vAse
tulanAtmaka saMdarbha anya graMtha oni 349 jIbhA 1553 jIbhA 1232 oni 334, Avani
987/2 prasA 864, oni 350 pini 198/12 abbhaMgiya saMbAhiya 22/2
abbhitaraparibhogaM 84/1 abbhojje gamaNAdI jIbhA 1190 nibhA 4380 198/4 ayamavaro
u vikappo avaraddhi-visa- baMdhe avaropparasajjhilagA oni 341 13 nibhA 4494 148
210 / 4 avi nAma hojja sulabho nibhA 4426, jIbhA 1377 nibhA 4518 179 / 1 avi ya
hu battIsAe 241 avisuddha pariNAmo assaMjamajogANaM 215 302 / 2 aha maMsammi
pahINe 319 ahava na kujjAhAraM 198/3 ahigaraNa bhadda paMtA 198/6 aNuTThiyaM ca
aNave..... 205 AkaMpiyA nimitteNa 83/1 320 ANaM savvajiNANaM AtaMke uvasagge 320
/ 1 AtaMko jaramAdI 278 Ayaparo bhayadosA 219/10 Ayariya-uvajjhAe 21/2 Ayariya-
gilANANa ya pariziSTa-5 anya graMtha nibhA 4388 oni 353 tu. jIbhA 1489 jIbhA
1392, nibhA 4437 oni 540 oni 581 nibhA 4379 nibhA 4382 nibhA 2694, 4406 jIbhA
1983 jIbhA 1664, ThANaM 6/42, prasA 738, tu. mUlA 480, obhA 292 obhA 293 obhA
243 tu. jIbhA 1399 prasA 865, oni 351

Page #446 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 274 ## Pindaniyukti  222/1 Ayavayam cha paravayam Jiba 1427, 148/2 Itaro vi
ya pantave Nibha 4496 Nibha 1042 318/2 Iriyam na visohteti Jiba 1660, 167
Asandi-pidha-manchaga. Nibha 5951 Obha 291, 194/1 Asooyamadiehin Jiba 1315 Panv
367 61 Aha ahe ya kamme Tu.Bhaba 5342, 20 Uubaddhadhuvan baus Oni 348 6375 264
Ukkheve nikkheve Jiba 1566 92 Ahakamman bhunjati Jiba 1193 191 Uggamkodiavayava
Jiba 1297 Jiba 1487 67/1 Ahakammparinato 238/2 Uggamdosa solasa Jiba 1120 Nibha
4415 207/3 Uggadi kulesu vi 90 Ahakammparinato Mula 487 Nibha 4492 82/3
Ahakammamamtan Vyabha 43, 146 Ucchattaye danam 219 Ucchahitto parena va Nibha
4445, Pimpra 18 Tu.Pimpra 68, 60 Ahakammiyanama Jiba 1098 Jiba 1198 58
Ahakammuddesiya Nibha 3250, 97 Uddesiyam samuddesiyam. Nibha 2019 Bribha 4275,
234 Uppaadananaen dosha Tu.Jiba 1472 Jiba 1095, 198/9 Uvvattita padosan Nibha
4385 Prasa 564, 301 Usinass chaddane dentao Jiba 1603 Pancha 13/5, 253/1
Usinodagan pi gheppati Jiba 1534 17 Usinodagamannuvatte Oni 344 Tu.Mula 422,
198/13 Usukadiehin mandehin Nibha 4389 Panv 741 149 Unhiya dubbalam va Nibha
4497 110 Ahakammuddesiya Pancha 13/16 201 Ekkekka vi ya duvidha Nibha 4398 190
Ahakammuddesiya Jiba 1295, 263/2 Ekkekke chaubhangao Jiba 1563 Tu.Dasani 220/1,
70/1 Egatt egavanjan Jiba 1131, Tu.Prasa 570 Tu.Vyabha 155 71 Ahakammena
ahe...... Jiba 1137 150 Egassa manajutta Nibha 4498 316 Aharenti tavassi. Jiba
1654 83/2 Egena katmakajjam Jiba 1984, 175 Aharovahimadi Nibha 4506 Bribha 928,
70/6 Indattham jah sadda Jiba 1136 Nibha 4787 116 Indhanadhumegandhe....
Tu.Nibha 805 313/5 Ego davassa bhagao Jiba 1640, 219/14 Ikkhaguvans bharho
Tu.Jiba 1409 Prasa 870 219/1 Ittagachannammi paripindi.... Nibha 4446 211 Etena
majja bhavo Nibha 4428, 24 Ittapagaadinam Oni 358 Jiba 1382
EEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE Pimpra 3,

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 274 piMDaniyukti 222/1 AyavayaM ca paravayaM jIbhA 1427, 148/2 itaro vi ya
paMtAve nibhA 4496 nibhA 1042 318/2 iriyaM na visohetI jIbhA 1660, 167 AsaMdi-
pIDha-maMcaga  /  nibhA 5951 obhA 291, 194/1 AsUyamAdiehiM jIbhA 1315 paMva 367
61 AhA ahe ya kamme tu.babhA 5342, 20 uubaddhadhuvaNa bAusa oni 348 6375 264
ukkheve nikkheve jIbhA 1566 92 AhAkammaM bhuMjati jIbhA 1193 191
uggamakoDIavayava jIbhA 1297 jIbhA 1487 67/1 AhAkammapariNato 238/2 uggamadosA
solasa jIbhA 1120 nibhA 4415 207/3 uggAdikulesu vi 90 AhAkammapariNato mUlA 487
nibhA 4492 82/3 AhAkammAmaMtaNa vyabhA 43, 146 uccattAe dANaM 219 ucchAhito
pareNa va nibhA 4445, piMpra 18 tu.piMpra 68, 60 AhAkammiyanAmA jIbhA 1098 jIbhA
1198 58 AhAkammuddesiya nibhA 3250, 97 uddesiyaM samuddesiyaM  /  nibhA 2019
bRbhA 4275, 234 uppAdaNAe~ dosA tu.jIbhA 1472 jIbhA 1095, 198/9 uvvaTTitA
padosaM nibhA 4385 prasA 564, 301 usiNassa chaDDaNe deMtao jIbhA 1603 paMcA
13/5, 253/1 usiNodagaM pi gheppati jIbhA 1534 17 usiNodagamaNuvatte oni 344
tu.mUlA 422, 198/13 usukAdiehi maMDehi nibhA 4389 paMva 741 149 UNahiya dubbalaM
vA nibhA 4497 110 AhAkammuddesiya paMcA 13/16 201 ekkekkA vi ya duvidhA nibhA
4398 190 AhAkammuddesiya jIbhA 1295, 263/2 ekkekke caubhaMgo jIbhA 1563
tu.dazani 220/1, 70/1 egaTTa egavaMjaNa jIbhA 1131, tu.prasA 570 tu.vyabhA 155
71 AhAkammeNa ahe...... jIbhA 1137 150 egassa mANajutta nibhA 4498 316 AhAreMti
tavassI  /  jIbhA 1654 83/2 egeNa katamakajjaM jIbhA 1984, 175 AhArovahimAdI
nibhA 4506 bRbhA 928, 70/6 iMdatthaM jaha saddA jIbhA 1136 nibhA 4787 116
iMdhaNadhUmegaMdhe.... tu.nibhA 805 313/5 ego davassa bhAgo jIbhA 1640, 219/14
ikkhAguvaMsa bharaho tu.jIbhA 1409 prasA 870 219/1 iTTagachaNammi paripiMDi....
nibhA 4446 211 eteNa majjha bhAvo nibhA 4428, 24 iTTApAgAdINaM oni 358 jIbhA
1382 EEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE piMpra 3,

Page #447 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Comparative References  **5.275**  * **271** These are the tongues of the
Dayagaņas: 1575 * **321** These are the six places where it is less: 582 *
**311** This is the tongue that is inferior: 1624 * **313/6** This is the third
and fourth tongue: 1641 * **212** The same is the case with the crows and
others: 4429 * **181** The same is the case with the animals: 4521 * **73/20**
The same is the case with the gender: 1142 * **143/3** The same is the case with
the Khamagas: 4483 * **198/10** The same is the case with the Sesigas: 4386 *
**302/4** This is the being that is mine: 543 * **214/2** This is the suffering:
4435 * **1388** This is the tongue: 1388 * **233** This is the tongue of the
Gavitthas: 1471 * **323** This is the food regimen: 3702 * **1673** This is the
tongue: 1673 * **25** This is the Odan-Vanjan-Panaga: 359 * **219/3** This is
the Ophasya: 4448 * **236/3** This is the word that is to be understood: 461 *
**Bha.16** This is the Oralaggahana: 1101 * **62** This is the tongue of the
Oralas: 1100 * **239/1** This is the Oho: 1485 * **78** This is the Kakkadiya-
Ambaga: 1154 * **194/2** This is the Kanaga-Rayayadiya: 1316 * **207/4** This is
the Kattari: 1360 * **4416** This is the Kattari: 4416 * **Bha.26** This is the
Kattari: 1230 * **272** This is the Kappatthi: 241 * **218/1** This is the
Karaduya: 4442 * **219/4** This is the house: 4449 * **67/5** This is the Kama:
1126 * **Bha.17** This is the Kaya-Vai-Mano: 1102 * **143/2** This is the
Chhara: 4482 * **240/1** This is the Khadda: 1479 * **210/2** This is the
Kivaṇe: 4424 * **1373** This is the tongue: 1373 * **139** This is the Kiyagaḍa:
4475 * **1241** This is the tongue: 1241 * **67/3** This is the Kūḍuvama: 1124 *
**22/3** This is the Ekka: 354 * **210/5** This is the Kelasa: 1378 * **4427**
This is the Kelasa: 4427 * **192/6** This is the Koḍīkaraṇa: 220 * **1293** This
is the tongue: 1293 * **76** This is the Kodda: 1148 * **199** This is the
Kollai: 107 * **4392** This is the Kollai: 4392 * **Bha.34** This is the Kovo:
1347 * **2696** This is the Kovo: 2696 * **4408** This is the Kovo: 4408 *
**83/5** This is the Khadde: 1188 * **370** This is the Khamagas: 370 * **11**
This is the Kheer: 151 * **339** This is the Kheer: 339 * **198/1** This is the
Kheer: 4377 * **197** This is the Kheer: 1322 * **73/2** This is the Khet: 988 *
**227/2** This is the Gantu: 4458 * **202** This is the Gamaṇa: 4401 * **226**
This is the Guṇasanthava: 1434 * **1048** This is the Guṇasanthava: 1048 *
**225** This is the Guṇasanthava: 1046 * **1432** This is the tongue: 1432

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 5 : tulanAtmaka saMdarbha 275 271 etesi dAyagANaM jIbhA 1575 321 etehiM
chahi ThANehiM oni 582 311 etto kiNAi hINaM jIbhA 1624 313/6 ettha u
tatiyacatutthA jIbhA 1641 212 emeva kAgamAdI nibhA 4429 181 emeva ya jaMtammi vi
nibhA 4521 73/20 emeva ya liMgeNaM jIbhA 1142 143/3 emeva vAdi khamage nibhA
4483 198/10 emeva sesigAsu vi nibhA 4386 302/4 eyArisaM mamaM sattaM oni 543
214/2 erisagaM vA dukkhaM nibhA 4435, jIbhA 1388 233 evaM tu gaviTThassA jIbhA
1471 323 eso AhAravidhI vyabhA 3702, jIbhA 1673 25 odaNa-vaMjaNa-pANaga. oni 359
219/3 obhAsiya paDisiddho  /  nibhA 4448 236/3 oyaraMtaM padaM daTuM oni 461
bhA.16 orAlaggahaNeNaM jIbhA 1101 62 orAlasarIrANaM jIbhA 1100 239/1 oho
sutovautto jIbhA 1485 78 kakkaDiya-aMbagA vA jIbhA 1154 194/2 kaNaga-
rayayAdiyANaM jIbhA 1316 207/4 kattari payoyaNAvekkha jIbhA 1360, nibhA 4416
bhA.26 kattAmi tAva pekheM jIbhA 1230 272 kappaTThiga appAhaNa obhA 241 218/1
karaDuyabhattamaladdhaM nibhA 4442 219/4 kassa ghara pucchiUNaM nibhA 4449 67/5
kAmaM sayaM na kuvvati jIbhA 1126 bhA.17 kAya-vai-maNo tinni u jIbhA 1102 143/2
kiM vA kahejja chArA nibhA 4482 240/1 kinnu hu khaddhA bhikkhA tu.jIbhA 1479
210/2 kivaNesu dummaNesu ya nibhA 4424, jIbhA 1373 139 kIyagaDaM pi ya duvidhaM
nibhA 4475, jIbhA 1241 67/3 kUDuvamAe keI tu.jIbhA 1124 22/3 keI ekkekkanisiM
oni 354 210/5 kelAsabhavaNA ete jIbhA 1378, nibhA 4427 192/6 koDIkaraNaM
duvidhaM dazani 220, tu.jIbhA 1293, tu.jIbhA 1293 76 koddavarAlaga gAme jIbhA
1148 199 kollaire vatthavvo uni 107, nibhA 4392 bhA.34 kovo valavAgabhaM jIbhA
1347, nibhA 2696, 4408 83/5 khaddhe niddhe ya ruyA jIbhA 1188
khamagAdikAlakajjAi.... oni 370 11 khIradumahe? paMthe nibhA 151, oni 339 198/1
khIrAhAro rovati nibhA 4377 197 khIre ya majjaNe maMDaNe tu.jIbhA 1322 73/2
khette samANadesI vyabhA 988 227/2 gaMtuM vijjA-maMtaNa nibhA 4458 202 gAmANa
doNha veraM nibhA 4401 226 guNasaMthaveNa pacchA jIbhA 1434, nibhA 1048 225
guNasaMthaveNa puTviM . nibhA 1046, jIbhA 1432

Page #448 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 276 **Pindaniyukti**  22/5 Guru-pacchakkhaani-gilaan.. Oni 356 324 Ja
Jayamanassa Bhave Oni 759, 279 Guvvini Gabbe Sanghatana Obha 246 Pimpr 102 180
Genhan Kaddan Vavahar Nibha 4520 198/8 Ja Jen Hoti Vannaen Nibha 4384 5 Gonnan
Samayakatam Va Oni 333 Bha.22 Janantamjanato Jibha 1116 173/2 Govapayam Acchettu
Nibha 4502 206 Jati-kul-gan Kamme. Nibha 4411, 173 Govalae Ya Bhaye..... Nibha
4501 Jibha 1350, 16 Ghanoudhi-ghanvalaya Oni 343 Mula 426 177/2
Ghatsattugaditunto Nibha 4515 207 Jati-kule Vibhasa Nibha 4412 163/7
Gharcoilasanchara Jibha 1267 203 Jamatiputtapatimaran Nibha 4402 303 Ghasesana
Tu Bhave Jibha 1609 219/7 Jayasu Na Eriso Han. Nibha 4452 35 Chauridiyaan
Macchiy... Oni 367 98 Javantigamuddesan Nibha 2020, 82 Chauro Atikkam-vatikkame
Tu.Jibha 1174 Jibha 1199, 36 Chammatthi-dant-nah-rom Oni 368 Mula 426, 302/1
Charitam Va Kappitam Va Oni 541 Pimpr 30 Bha.37 Chanak Puccha Ittal... Jibha
1455 53/1 Jitasattu Devi Chittasabha... Oni 450 112 Chullukkhaliya Doe Nibha 808
293 Jivattammi Avigate Jibha 1588 239 Chaumattho Sutanaani Jibha 1484 76/1
Jujjati Ganasse Khettam Jibha 1149 317 Chahi Karanehi Sadhu Jibha 1657, 231 Je
Vijja-mantdosa Jibha 1457 Mula 478 83/3 Jo Jahvayam Na Kunati Pancha 11/46, 80/1
Chayam Pi Vivjjeti Jibha 1168 Jibha 1185 183 Chhinno Ditthamdittho Nibha 4510
57/1 Jotis-tanosahinan Tu.Jibha 1089 219/2 Jai Vi Ya Ta Pajjattha Nibha 4447 14
Than-nisey-tuyattan Oni 342 231/3 Janasavagan Khinsan Nibha 4471 198/14
Dhadarsar Chunnmuho Nibha 4390 73/22 Jaththa U Tatio Bhanggo Jibha 1145 314 Tan
Hoti Saingalan Mala 477 263/3 Jaththa Tu Thave Thovam Jibha 1564 80/5 Tamha Na
Es Dosso Jibha 1172 240/4 Jadi Sanka Dosakari Jibha 1488 320/2 Tavhetu
Chautthaadi Obha 294, 228/1 Jah Jah Padesini Jibha 1445, Tu.Jibha 1669 Nibha
4460 81/1 Tassa Kadanittthittammi Ya Tu.Jibha 1157 91/4 Jah Te Dansanakankhi
Jibha 1192 302/3 Tibalagamuhummukko Oni 542 163/6 Jahev Kumbhaadissu Puvvalitte
Jibha 1264 7 Trivido U Davvapindo Oni 335

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 276 piMDaniyukti 22/5 guru-paccakkhANi-gilANa.. oni 356 324 jA jayamANassa
bhave oni 759, 279 guvviNi gabbhe saMghaTTaNA obhA 246 piMpra 102 180 geNhaNa
kaDDaNa vavahAra nibhA 4520 198/8 jA jeNa hoti vaNNeNa nibhA 4384 5 goNNaM
samayakataM vA oni 333 bhA.22 jANaMtamajANato jIbhA 1116 173/2 govapayaM
acchettuM nibhA 4502 206 jAtI-kula-gaNa kamme  /  nibhA 4411, 173 govAlae ya
bhayae..... nibhA 4501 jIbhA 1350, 16 ghaNaudahI-ghaNavalayA oni 343 mUlA 426
177/2 ghatasattugadiTuMto nibhA 4515 207 jAtI-kule vibhAsA nibhA 4412 163/7
gharakoilasaMcArA jIbhA 1267 203 jAmAtiputtapatimAraNaM nibhA 4402 303 ghAsesaNA
tu bhAve jIbhA 1609 219/7 jAyasu na eriso hN| nibhA 4452 35 cauridiyANa
macchiya... oni 367 98 jAvaMtigamuddesaM nibhA 2020, 82 cauro atikkama-vatikkame
tu.jIbhA 1174 jIbhA 1199, 36 camma'TThi-daMta-naha-roma oni 368 mUlA 426, 302/1
caritaM va kappitaM vA oni 541 piMpra 30 bhA.37 cANakka puccha iTTAla... jIbhA
1455 53/1 jitasattu devi cittasabha... oni 450 112 cullukkhaliyA Doe nibhA 808
293 jIvattammi avigate jIbhA 1588 239 chaumattho sutanANI jIbhA 1484 76/1
jujjati gaNassa khettaM jIbhA 1149 317 chahi kAraNehi sAdhU jIbhA 1657, 231 je
vijja-maMtadosA jIbhA 1457 mUlA 478 83/3 jo jahavAyaM na kuNati paMcA 11/46,
80/1 chAyaM pi vivajjetI jIbhA 1168 jIbhA 1185 183 chiNNo diTThamadiTTho nibhA
4510 57/1 jotisa-taNosahINaM tu.jIbhA 1089 219/2 jai vi ya tA pajjattA nibhA
4447 14 ThANa-nisIya-tuyaTTaNa oni 342 231/3 jaNasAvagANa khiMsaNa nibhA 4471
198/14 DhaDDarasara chunnamuho nibhA 4390 73/22 jattha u tatio bhaMgo jIbhA 1145
314 taM hoti saiMgAlaM malA 477 263/3 jattha tu thove thovaM jIbhA 1564 80/5
tamhA na esa doso jIbhA 1172 240/4 jadi saMkA dosakarI jIbhA 1488 320/2 tavahetu
cautthAdI obhA 294, 228/1 jaha jaha padesiNiM jIbhA 1445, tu.jIbhA 1669 nibhA
4460 81/1 tassa kaDaniTThitammi ya tu.jIbhA 1157 91/4 jaha te daMsaNakaMkhI
jIbhA 1192 302/3 tibalAgamuhummukko oni 542 163/6 jaheva kuMbhAdisu puvvalitte
jIbhA 1264 7 tividho u davvapiMDo oni 335

Page #449 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Chapter 5: Comparative References  **277**  **44** There are three types of
*pasattha*:  * **Ooni 409, 195** *Dhai* (two), *duti* (messenger), *nimitte*
(for the sake of) * **Jibha 1319, 177** *Tena* (by that), *sanjatthta* (well-
established), *nibha* (4513) * **Prasha 566, 64/3** *Tesin* (of those), *gurun*
(teachers), *mudae* (by the root), *Jibha* (1114) * **Tu.mula 445, 198/15**
*Thullaen* (by the great), *vigadpada* (with broken feet), *nibha* (4391) *
**Pancha 13/18, 19847** *Theri* (female elder), *dubbalakhira* (weak-minded),
*nibha* (4383) * **Pimpra 58, 264/1** *Thov* (a little), *thov* (a little),
*chulle* (small), *Jibha* (1567) * **Panv 754, 28** *Dai* (give), *ena* (by
that), *vatthina* (existing), *va* (or), *Ooni* (362), *198* *Dharayati*
(holds), *dhiyate* (is held), *va* (or), *nibha* (4376), *73/3* *Dansan-nan-
charitte* (conduct of faith and knowledge), *vyabha* (989) * **Jibha 1321,
57/5** *Dansan-nan-pphabhava* (originating from faith and knowledge), *Jibha*
(1092) * **Panv 366, 281** *Dagbi* (hard), *ae* (by that), *sanghattan*
(gathering), *Obha* (247), *318/1* *Natthi* (there is not), *chhuhay*
(touching), *sarisiya* (similar), *Jibha* (1659), *57* *Dava* (wealth), *mm*
(in), *laddagadi* (like a ball), *Jibha* (1090) * **Obha 290** *Dava* (wealth),
*aya* (by that), *khalu* (indeed), *kaya* (body), *Tu.Jibha* (1117) * **Panv
366, 304** *Dave* (wealth), *bhave* (in the state of), *sanjoyana* (connecting),
*Tu.Jibha* (1611), *231/2* *Nadi* (river), *kanha* (black), *venna* (white),
*dive* (island), *nibha* (4470), *213* *Dan* (gift), *na* (not), *hoti* (is),
*aphala* (fruitless), *Jibha* (1383), *Jibha* (1461), *nibha* (4430), *192/7*
*Nav* (new), *chevattharasa* (fourteen), *gan* (group), *Jibha* (1289), *163/5*
*Dan* (gift), *kayavikkae* (to be given), *va* (or), *Jibha* (1263) *
**Tu.dasani 221, Bha.33** *Dara* (door), *abhogan* (enjoyment), *egaagi* (for
the sake of), *nibha* (2695), *173/4* *Nanivittu* (not being able to leave),
*labbhati* (is obtained), *nibha* (4504) * **4407, 73** *Nama* (name), *thavana*
(to be established), *davie* (by wealth) * **Jibha 1139, 219/5** *Dah*
(burning), *ti* (that), *tena* (by that), *bhanitam* (said), *nibha* (4450) *
**Vyabha 986, 142/2** *Dijjante* (are given), *padisesho* (obstruction), *nibha*
(4479) * **236** *Nama* (name), *thavana* (to be established), *davie* (by
wealth) * **Ooni 458, 70/2** *Dil* (give), *ai* (by that), *khir* (milk), *khir*
(milk) * **Jibha 1132** * **4** *Nama* (name), *thavana* (to be established),
*pindo* (group), *Ooni* (332) * **Tu.vyabha 156, 73/1** *Nama* (name), *mm*
(in), *saris* (similar), *namo* (name), *vyabha* (987), *242* *Duvidha* (two
types), *cha* (and), *makkhitam* (established), *khalu* (indeed), *Jibha*
(1491), *209* *Niggantha-sakka-tavasa* (Niggantha, Sakka, Tavas), *Jibha*
(1366), *221* *Duvidho* (two types), *u* (also), *santhavo* (origin), *khalu*
(indeed), *nibha* (1040), *nibha* (4420), *Jibha* (1421), *10* *Nicchay*
(certainty), *o* (also), *sacchitto* (with true mind), *Ooni* (338), *43*
*Duvidho* (two types), *ya* (also), *bhavapindo* (group of states), *Tu.Ooni*
(408), *66/1* *Nicchayanayassa* (of the certainty), *charanaya* (to the feet),
*Jibha* (1118), *201/2* *Duitt* (two), *ta* (also), *khu* (indeed), *garahitam*
(taken), *nibha* (4400), *141* *Nimmallagandha* (with a pleasant smell),
*guliya* (ball), *nibha* (4476), *314/3* *Dosaggi* (with faults), *vi* (also),
*jalanto* (burning), *Jibha* (1652), *204* *Niyama* (rule), *tikala* (three
times), *visae* (in the matter of), *nibha* (2693), *143* *Dhammakah* (Dharma
story), *va* (or), *yay* (by that), *khamge* (in the sky), *nibha* (4480) *
**4405, 143/1** *Dhammakah* (Dharma story), *akkhitte* (established), *nibha*
(4481) * **Jibha 1341**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 5 : tulanAtmaka saMdarbha 277 44 tividho hoti pasattho tu.oni 409 195
dhAI dUtI nimitte  /  jIbhA 1319, 177 teNA va saMjataTThA nibhA 4513 prasA 566,
64/3 tesiM gurUNa mudaeNa jIbhA 1114 tu.mUlA 445, 198/15thullAe~ vigaDapAdo
nibhA 4391 paMcA 13/18, 19847 therI dubbalakhIrA nibhA 4383 piMpra 58, 264/1
thove thovaM chULe jIbhA 1567 paMva 754 28 daieNa vatthiNA vA  /  oni 362 198
dhArayati dhIyate vA  /  nibhA 4376, 73/3 daMsaNa-nANa-caritte vyabhA 989 jIbhA
1321, 57/5 daMsaNa-nANappabhavaM jIbhA 1092 paMva 366 281 dagabIe saMghaTTaNa
obhA 247 318/1 natthi chuhAya sarisiyA jIbhA 1659, 57 davvammi laDDagAdI jIbhA
1090 obhA 290, davvAyA khalu kAyA tu.jIbhA 1117 paMva 366 304 dave bhAve
saMjoyaNA tu.jIbhA 1611 231/2 nadikaNha veNNadIve nibhA 4470, 213 dANaM na hoti
aphalaM jIbhA 1383, jIbhA 1461 nibhA 4430 192/7 nava cevaTThArasagaM jIbhA 1289,
163/5 dANa kayavikkae vA jIbhA 1263 tu.dazani 221 bhA.33 dArAbhogaNa egAgi nibhA
2695, 173/4 nAnivviTuM labbhati nibhA 4504 4407 73 nAmaM ThavaNA davie jIbhA
1139, 219/5 dAhaM ti teNa bhaNitaM nibhA 4450 vyabhA 986 142/2 dijjaMte
paDisedho nibhA 4479 236 nAma ThavaNA davie oni 458 70/2 dilai khIraM khIraM
jIbhA 1132, 4 nAmaM ThavaNApiMDo oni 332 tu.vyabhA 156 73/1 nAmammi sarisanAmo
vyabhA 987 242 duvidhaM ca makkhitaM khalu jIbhA 1491 209 niggaMtha-sakka-tAvasa
jIbhA 1366, 221 duvidho u saMthavo khalu nibhA 1040, nibhA 4420 jIbhA 1421 10
nicchayao saccitto oni 338 43 duvidho ya bhAvapiMDo tu.oni 408 66/1
nicchayanayassa caraNAya.... jIbhA 1118 201/2 dUittaM khu garahitaM nibhA 4400
141 nimmallagaMdhaguliyA nibhA 4476 314/3 dosaggI vi jalaMto jIbhA 1652 204
niyamA tikAlavisae nibhA 2693, 143 dhammakaha vAya khamage nibhA 4480 4405,
143/1 dhammakahAakkhitte nibhA 4481 jIbhA 1341

Page #450 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Translation:  **278** **185** Nivpindo Gayabhattam **22/4** Nivvodagassa
Gahaṇam **312** **223** Pakamam ca Nikamam ca Pacchasanthavadosa
Paḍimantathambhaṇādi **173/3** Paḍiyaraṇapadosenaṁ **231/4** Paḍilabhitavaccanta
Paḍivijjathaṁ Bhaṇādi **68/6** Paḍisevaṇai teṇā **73/21** Patteyabuddha -
Niṇhaga **229** **228** **67/2** **81** Parakamma Attakammi...... Parappakho u
Gihatthā **163/4** Parassa taṁ deti sa eva gehe **227/1** Paripiṇḍitamullavo
Pariyattie Abhihade **59** **147** Pariyatṭiyaṁ pa duvidhaṁ **236/1**
Parisaditapanḍupattan **19** Parisey - Piyaṇ - Hatthā di... **210/3** Paeṇa deti
logo **144** **22** Pamiccaṁ pi ya duvidhaṁ Payassa Paḍoyaro Nibha 4512 Oni 355
Jibha 1625 Jibha 1430, Nibha 1044 Nibha 4461, Jibha 1447 Nibha 4503 Jibha 1466,
Nibha 4472 Nibha 4459, Jibha 1443 Jibha 1129 Vyabha 994, Jibha 1144 Jibha 1121
Tu. Jibha 1956 Jibha 1262 Nibha 4457 Nibha 3251, Bṛbha 4276, Jibha 1096, Prasa
565, Tu. Mula 423, Panca 13/6, Tu. Pimpra 4, Tu. Panv 742 Nibha 4493 Oni 459 Oni
347 Nibha 4425, Jibha 1375 Nibha 4486 Oni 352 **162** **9** **8** **136**
**270** **2** **131** Pahuḍiya vi ya duvidha piṇḍ - nikaya-samuhe piṇḍassa u
nikkhevo **3** **1** **1.34** **31** **196** **107** **310** Pahuḍibhattam
bhuñjati Pahuḍiyaṁ ca thavenți Jibha 1237 Jibha 1574 Tu. Jibha 1224 Oni 407 Oni
331 Piṇḍe uggam-uppaya..... Pankabha 768, Putikamman duvidhaṁ **64/2** Bandhati
ahebhavaum **265** Pihiṭubhiṇṇakavaḍe Puḍhavikaao tividho Puḍhavi aukkao
Puttassa - Vivahadiṇam Pupphaṇam Pattāṇam Puvviṁ Pacchā-santhava **312/1**
Battisai pareṇam **179** Battisa samanne Battisam kira kavala **312/3**
Bahuyatitamatibahu **302/5** Bayalisesanasankadammi Piṇḍ niyukti Bale vuḍḍhe
matte Tu. Mula 421, Nibha 456 Nibha 5955 Oni 337 Tu. Oni 336, Jibha 956 Tu.
Jibha 1234 Bṛbha 980 Jibha 1320, Prasa 567, Tu. Mula 446, Panca 13/19, Pimpra
59, Panv 755 Jibha 1203, Nibha 804 Jibha 1113 Tu. Bhaga 1/436, 437 Jibha 1622,
Prasa 866, Bhaā 213 Jibha 1626 Nibha 4517 Tu. Jibha 1628 Jibha 1608, Oni 545,
Panv 354 Jibha 1569

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 278 185 nivapiMDo gayabhattaM 22/4 nivvodagassa gahaNaM 312 223 pakAmaM ca
nikAmaM ca pacchAsaMthavadosA paDimaMtathaMbhaNAdI 173/3 paDiyaraNapadoseNaM
231/4 paDilAbhita vaccaMtA paDivijjathaM bhaNAdI 68/6 paDisevaNAi teNA 73 / 21
patteyabuddha - niNhaga 229 228 67/2 81 parakamma attakammI...... parapakkho u
gihatthA 163/4 parassa taM deti sa eva gehe 227/1 paripiMDitamullAvo pariyaTTie
abhihaDe 59 147 pariyaTTiyaM pa duvidhaM 236 / 1 parisaDitapaMDupattaM 19
pariseya - piyaNa - hatthA di... 210 / 3 pAeNa deti logo 144 22 pAmiccaM pi ya
duvidhaM pAyassa paDoyAro nibhA 4512 oni 355 jIbhA 1625 jIbhA 1430, nibhA 1044
nibhA 4461, jIbhA 1447 nibhA 4503 jIbhA 1466, nibhA 4472 nibhA 4459, jIbhA 1443
jIbhA 1129 vyabhA 994, jIbhA 1144 jIbhA 1121 tu. jIbhA 1956 jIbhA 1262 nibhA
4457 nibhA 3251, bRbhA 4276, jIbhA 1096, prasA 565, tu. mUlA 423, paMcA 13/6,
tu. piMpra 4, tu. paMva 742 nibhA 4493 oni 459 oni 347 nibhA 4425, jIbhA 1375
nibhA 4486 oni 352 162 9 8 136 270 2 131 pAhuDiyA vi ya duvidhA piMDa - nikAya-
samUhe piMDassa u nikkhevo 3 1 1.34 31 196 107 310 pAhuDibhattaM bhuMjati
pAhuDiyaM ca ThaveMtI jIbhA 1237 jIbhA 1574 tu. jIbhA 1224 oni 407 oni 331 piMDe
uggama-uppAya..... paMkabhA 768, pUtIkammaM duvidhaM 64 / 2 baMdhati ahebhavAuM
265 pihitubhiNNakavADe puDhavIkAo tividho puDhavI AukkAo puttassa - vivAhadiNaM
pupphANaM pattANaM puvviM pacchA-saMthava 312/1 battIsAi pareNaM 179 battIsA
sAmanne battIsaM kira kavalA 312/3 bahuyAtItamatibahu 302 / 5
bAyAlIsesaNasaMkaDammi piMDa niyukti bAle vuDDhe matte tu. mUlA 421, nibhA 456
nibhA 5955 oni 337 tu. oni 336, jIbhA 956 tu. jIbhA 1234 bRbhA 980 jIbhA 1320,
prasA 567, tu. mUlA 446, paMcA 13/19, piMpra 59, paMva 755 jIbhA 1203, nibhA 804
jIbhA 1113 tu. bhaga 1/436, 437 jIbhA 1622, prasA 866, bhaA 213 jIbhA 1626 nibhA
4517 tu. jIbhA 1628 jIbhA 1608, oni 545, paMva 354 jIbhA 1569

Page #451 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Para. 5: Comparative References 279 33 Biya-tiya-chauro Panchindiya Oni 365
314/2 Ragaggisampalitto Jiabha 1648 34 Beindiya Paribhogo Oni 366 315 Ragen
Saingalan Tu.Jiabha 1653 267 Bhajjanti Va Dalenti Jiabha 1571 219/9 Rayagihe
Dhammurui Jiabha 1398 214 Bhanati Ya Naham Vejjo Nibha 4433 219/12 Rayagihe Ya
Kadaai Jiabha 1405 194/3 Bhaave Pasatth Itara Jiabha 1317 220 Labbhantam Pi Na
Ginhati Jiabha 1413 214/1 Bhikkhadi Gate Rogi Nibha 4434 179/2 Labhit Nito
Puttho Nibha 4519 201/1 Bhikkhadi Vacchante Nibha 4399, Bha.29 Levaleva Tti Jan
Vuttam Jiabha 1299 Jiabha 1327 210/1 Logaanuggahakari Su Nibha 4423, 288/1
Bhikkhamatte Aviyalana Oni 469 Jiabha 1371 144/3 Bhikkhudag Samarabhe Nibha 4489
77 Lonagado Dae Evam Jiabha 1152 166 Bhikkhu Jahan Nagammi Nibha 5950 198/11
Lolati Mahiy Dhuliy Nibha 4387 Bha.36 Bhikkhe Parihayante Tu.Jiabha 1453 142
Vaiyaadi Mankhamaadi Nibha 4477 209/1 Bhumjanti Chitta Kammatthita Jiabha 1368,
80/3 Vaddati Hayati Chaya Jiabha 1170 Nibha 4421 83/4 Vaddheti Tappasangam
Jiabha 1187 198/2 Maiman Aroghi Dihauo Nibha 4378 198/5 Vay-Gandathullat
Tanugattanehi Nibha 4381 145 Mailiya Phaliya-Khoshiya Nibha 4491 217 Vijja-
Tavappabhavam Nibha 4440 135/1 Mangalahetu Punnatthaya Jiabha 1236 227
Vijjamanta Paruvan Nibha 4456 245/2 Mans Vas-Soniyasava Tu.Jiabha 1504 252/1
Vijjhau Tti Na Disati Jiabha 1530 262 Matte Na Jen Dahiti Tu.Jiabha 1558 252
Vijjhat Mummuringa..... Jiabha 1529 208/1 Mayama Tivacchagam Pi Va Jiabha 1365,
226/1 Vimali Kayam Chakkhu Jiabha 1435, Nibha 4419 Nibha 1049 132 Ma Tava Jhanka
Puttaya Jiabha 1231 54 Viyametam Kuranganam Oni 452 222 Mati-Piti Puvvasanthava
Nibha 1041 55 Viyametam Gajakulanam Oni 454 224 Mayavi Chadukari Nibha 1045 318
Vedana-Veyavacche Jiabha 1658, 165 Malohandam Pi Duvidham Tu.Nibha 5949, Thanam
6/41, Jiabha 1271 Utt 26/32, Jiabha 1369, Prasaa 737, 210 Micchaththiri Karanam
Oni 580, Nibha 4422 Tu.Mula 479, 309 Rasahetu Padisiddo Jiabha 1618 Panv 365

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 5 : tulanAtmaka saMdarbha 279 33 biya-tiya-cauro paMciMdiyA oni 365 314/2
rAgaggisaMpalitto jIbhA 1648 34 beiMdiyaparibhogo oni 366 315 rAgeNa saiMgAlaM
tu.jIbhA 1653 267 bhajjaMtI va daleMtI jIbhA 1571 219/9 rAyagihe dhammaruI jIbhA
1398 214 bhaNati ya nAhaM vejjo nibhA 4433 219/12 rAyagihe ya kadAI jIbhA 1405
194/3 bhAve pasattha itarA jIbhA 1317 220 labbhaMtaM pi na giNhati jIbhA 1413
214/1 bhikkhAdi gate rogI nibhA 4434 179/2 lAbhita Nito puTTho nibhA 4519 201/1
bhikkhAdI vaccaMte nibhA 4399, bhA.29 levAleva tti jaM vuttaM jIbhA 1299 jIbhA
1327 210/1 logANuggahakArisu nibhA 4423, 288/1 bhikkhAmatte aviyAlaNA oni 469
jIbhA 1371 144/3 bhikkhudaga samAraMbhe nibhA 4489 77 loNAgaDodae evaM jIbhA
1152 166 bhikkhU jahaNNagammI nibhA 5950 198/11 lolati mahIya dhUlIya nibhA 4387
bhA.36 bhikkhe parihAyaMte tu.jIbhA 1453 142 vaiyAdi maMkhamAdI nibhA 4477 209/1
bhuMjaMti cittakammaTThitA jIbhA 1368, 80/3 vaDDati hAyati chAyA jIbhA 1170
nibhA 4421 83/4 vaDDeti tappasaMgaM jIbhA 1187 198/2 maimaM arogi dIhAuo nibhA
4378 198/5 vaya-gaMDathullataNugattaNehi nibhA 4381 145 mailiya phAliya-khosiya
nibhA 4491 217 vijjA-tavappabhAvaM nibhA 4440 135/1 maMgalahetuM puNNaTThayA
jIbhA 1236227 vijjAmaMtaparUvaNa nibhA 4456 245/2 maMsa vasa-soNiyAsava tu.jIbhA
1504 252/1 vijjhAu tti na dIsati jIbhA 1530 262 matteNa jeNa dAhiti tu.jIbhA
1558 252 vijjhAta mummuriMgA..... jIbhA 1529 208/1 mayamAtivacchagaM pi va jIbhA
1365, 226/1 vimalIkaya'mha cakkhU jIbhA 1435, nibhA 4419 nibhA 1049 132 mA tAva
jhaMkha puttaya jIbhA 1231 54 viyametaM kuraMgANaM oni 452 222 mAti-piti
puvvasaMthava nibhA 1041 55 viyametaM gajakulANaM oni 454 224 mAyAvI caDukArI
nibhA 1045 318 vedaNa-veyAvacce jIbhA 1658, 165 mAlohaDaM pi duvidhaM tu.nibhA
5949, ThANaM 6/41, jIbhA 1271 utta 26/32, jIbhA 1369, prasA 737, 210
micchattathirIkaraNaM oni 580, nibhA 4422 tu.mUlA 479, 309 rasahetuM paDisiddho
jIbhA 1618 paMva 365

Page #452 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
280 Piṇḍaniyukti 237 Sankita-Makkhita-Nikkhitta Jībhā 1476, 113 Siṇḍantasuṁkāraṁ
Jībhā 1208 Prasā 568, 219/8 Siti-Avaṇṇa Paḍilābhaṇ Nibhā 4453 Tu.Mūlā 462, 12,18
Cī-Uṇha-Khāra Khatte Oni 340,346 Pañcā 13/26, 313/4 Cīte Davassa Ego Prasā 869
Piṁpra 77, 313/3 Cīto Usiṇo Sāharaṇo Jībhā 1639, Paṁv 762 Prasā 868 177/1
Saṁjatabhadda Teṇā Nibhā 4514  _53/2 Sīvaṇṇisarisamodaga..... Oni 451 64
Saṁjamṭhāṇāṇṁ Kaṇḍagāṇ. Jībhā 1106 192/3 Sukke Sukkaṁ Paḍitaṁ Jībhā 1309 303/1
Saṁjoyaṇamaiबहुयं Jībhā 1610 263/1 Sukke Sukkaṁ Paḍhamo Jībhā 1562 32 Saṁthāra-
Pāya-Daṇḍaga Oni 364 Bhā.28 Sūkkena Vi Jaṁ Chikkaṁ Jībhā 1298 245/1 Saṁsajjimehi
Vajjaṁ Jībhā 1508 144/1 Sutaabhigamanātavidhī Nibhā 4487 299 Saṁsadvaitarahṭṭho
Tu.Bṛbhā 1868 240 Sutṭassa Appaṁāṇe Jībhā 1486 269 Saṁsatteṇ Ya Davveṇ Jībhā
1573 231/1 Sūbhagadobhaggakara Nibhā 4469, 214/3 Saṁsodhana-Saṁsamaṇṁ Nibhā
4436, Jībhā 1459 Jībhā 1390 219/6 Seḍaṁguli Nibhā 4451 200 Saggāma-Paraggāme
Saggāma-Par Nibhā 4397 243/3 Sesehi U Kāehiṁ Jībhā 1500 248 Saccittapuḍhavakāe
Jībhā 1518 117/3 Sesehi U Davvahiṁ Tu.Nibhā 809 244 Saccittamakkhitamṁī Tu.Jībhā
1501 225/1 So Eso Jassa Guṇā Nibhā 1047, 37 Saccitte Pavvāvaṇ Oni 369 Jībhā 1433
220/2 Saḍḍhaḍḍaratta Kesara...... Jībhā 1417 322 Solasa Uggamdosā Jībhā 1671,
208 Samaṇe Māhaṇ Kivaṇe Tu.Jībhā 1364 Pañcā 13/3 207/2 Sammamāsammā Kiriyā Nibhā
4414, 193 Solasa Uggamdose Jībhā 1313 Jībhā 1354 266 Hatthandaunigalabadḍha
Jībhā 1570 236/2 Sayamevaloeṁ Oni 460 216 Hatthakappa-Girifulliya Tu.Jībhā 1394
27 Savalaya Ghaṇ-Taṇuvāya Oni 360 27/2 Hatthasayamega Gaṁtā Oni 361 30 Savvo
Vaṇantakaō Oni 363 54/1 Hathigghaṇṁ Gimhe Oni 453 142/1 Sāgāri Mankha Chandaṇ
Nibhā 4478 240/2 Hiyaeṇ Saṁkiteṇṁ Jībhā 1480 174 Sāmī Cāra Bhaḍā Vā Nibhā 4505
Bhā.18 Hiyayamṁi Samāheṁ Jībhā 1103 82/1 Sālī-Ghata-Gul- Gorasa Jībhā 1177, 313
Hiyāhārā Miyāhārā Jībhā 1632, Tu.Nibhā 2662, Oni 578 Tu.Bṛbhā 5341 207/1
Homādaḍvitahkaraṇe Nibhā 4413, Sālīmādī Agaḍe Jībhā 1147 Jībhā 1353

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 280 piMDaniyukti 237 saMkita-makkhita-nikkhitta jIbhA 1476, 113
sijhaMtassuvakAraM jIbhA 1208 prasA 568, 219/8 siti-avaNaNa paDilAbhaNa nibhA
4453 tu.mUlA 462, 12,18 sI-uNha-khAra khatte oni 340,346 paMcA 13/26, 313/4 sIte
davassa ego prasA 869 piMpra 77, 313/3 sIto usiNo sAhAraNo jIbhA 1639, paMva 762
prasA 868 177/1 saMjatabhaddA teNA nibhA 4514 _53/2 sIvaNNisarisamodaga..... oni
451 64 saMjamaThANANaM kaMDagANa  /  jIbhA 1106 192/3 sukke sukkaM paDitaM jIbhA
1309 303/1 saMjoyaNamaibahuyaM jIbhA 1610 263/1 sukke sukkaM paDhamo jIbhA 1562
32 saMthAra-pAya-daMDaga oni 364 bhA.28 sUkkeNa vi jaM chikkaM jIbhA 1298 245/1
saMsajjimehi vajjaM jIbhA 1508 144/1 sutaabhigamaNAtavidhI nibhA 4487 299
saMsadvaitarahattho tu.bRbhA 1868 240 suttassa appamANe jIbhA 1486 269
saMsatteNa ya davveNa jIbhA 1573 231/1 sUbhagadobhaggakarA nibhA 4469, 214/3
saMsodhaNa-saMsamaNaM nibhA 4436, jIbhA 1459 jIbhA 1390 219/6 seDaMguli nibhA
4451 200 saggAma-paraggAme saggAma-para nibhA 4397 243/3 sesehi u kAehiM jIbhA
1500 248 saccittapuDhavikAe jIbhA 1518 117/3 sesehi u davvehiM tu.nibhA 809 244
saccittamakkhitammI tu.jIbhA 1501 225/1 so eso jassa guNA nibhA 1047, 37
saccitte pavvAvaNa oni 369 jIbhA 1433 220/2 saDDha'DDaratta kesara...... jIbhA
1417 322 solasa uggamadosA jIbhA 1671, 208 samaNe mAhaNa kivaNe tu.jIbhA 1364
paMcA 13/3 207/2 sammamasammA kiriyA nibhA 4414, 193 solasa uggamadose jIbhA
1313 jIbhA 1354 266 hatthaMdunigalabaddha jIbhA 1570 236/2 sayamevAloeuM oni 460
216 hatthakappa-giriphulliya tu.jIbhA 1394 27 savalaya ghaNa-taNuvAyA oni 360
27/2 hatthasayamega gaMtA oni 361 30 savvo vaNaMtakAo oni 363 54/1 hathiggahaNaM
gimhe oni 453 142/1 sAgAri maMkha chaMdaNa nibhA 4478 240/2 hiyaeNa saMkiteNaM
jIbhA 1480 174 sAmI cArabhaDA vA nibhA 4505 bhA.18 hiyayammi samAheuM jIbhA 1103
82/1 sAlI-ghata-gula- gorasa jIbhA 1177, 313 hiyAhArA miyAhArA jIbhA 1632,
tu.nibhA 2662, oni 578 tu.bRbhA 5341 207/1 homAda'vitahakaraNe nibhA 4413,
sAlImAdI agaDe jIbhA 1147 jIbhA 1353

Page #453 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-6 Words that have the same meaning are called synonyms. For these,
terms like 'abhivacan', 'nirukti paryay' and 'nirvacan' are also mentioned. The
use of synonyms has been an important part of the explanation of any subject.
The purpose of synonyms in the Brihatkalpabhashya is explained as follows:
Bandhanulomaya khlu, suttammi ya laghavam asammoho. Saththaguṇadīvaṇā vi ya,
egaṭṭhaguṇā havnteē. The arrangement of the chanda, the brevity of the sutra,
the absence of confusion and the deepening of the scholarly qualities are the
qualities of synonyms. In addition, the use of synonymous words strengthens the
student's knowledge of language and lexicography. The author also uses synonyms
for the benefit of students from different languages, so that students from
every country can easily understand the meaning of the word. Synonyms are also
used to establish the intensity and importance of any matter. The use of
synonyms in context for the sake of emotional intensity is not considered a
repetition fault. It is a linguistic peculiarity of the author that they write
synonyms of the original word of the sutra and then explain it. The author has
also mentioned synonyms of some words in the context of Pindaniyukti, which are
being mentioned here. (Mavṛ p. 36) Adha-adhar adha asray adhar ityanarthantaram.
Ahakamma-adhakarma aha ahe ya kamme, ayahmme ya attakamme ya. Padisēvaṇ
padisūṇṇā, samvās'aṇumodana cēva. Uggam-udgam uggam ugovaṇ maggana ya
egaṭṭhiyani etai. (Ga. 61) (Ga. 56) 1. Sthaṭī p. 472. 2. Bh. 20/14. 3,4: Avahaṭī
1 p. 242. 5. Bribha 173. (a) Jambūṭī p. 33; Nanadeshavineyanuggrahartham
ekārthikāḥ. (b) Nandīṭī p. 58; Vineyajan sukha pratipattae....... . 7. Bhagaṭī.
p. 14; Samanārthāḥ: Prakarshāvṛttipratipadanaya stutimukhena granthakṛtoktāḥ.
Mavṛ p. 36; Etāni ca nāmānyādhākarmano mukhyāni pun yaḥ pratiṣēvaṇādibhiḥ
prakāraistadādhākarma bhavati, tānyapyabhedavivakṣayā nāmatvena pratipādayati-
ādhākarma, adhaḥkarma, ātmghna aura ātmkarma-ye ādhākarma ke mukhya nām hain.
Yahān pratiṣēvaṇā ādi ko abhedavivakṣā se ekārthak mānā hai.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-6 ekArthaka jina zabdoM kA eka hI abhidheya ho, ve ekArthaka kahalAte
haiN| inake lie 'abhivacana'2 'nirukti paryAya aura 'nirvacana" Adi zabdoM kA
ullekha bhI milatA hai| kisI bhI viSaya kI vyAkhyA meM ekArthaka zabdoM ke
prayoga kA mahattvapUrNa sthAna rahA hai| bRhatkalpabhASya meM ekArthakoM kA
prayojana isa prakAra batalAyA gayA hai baMdhANulomayA khalu, suttammi ya
lAghavaM asmmoho| satthaguNadIvaNA vi ya, egaTThaguNA havaMtee  /  chaMda kI
vyavasthApanA, sUtra kA lAghava, asammoha tathA zAstrIya guNoM kA dIpana-ye
ekArthaka ke guNa haiN| isake atirikta ekArthavAcI zabdoM ke prayoga se
vidyArthI kA bhASA evaM kozaviSayaka jJAna sudRr3ha hotA hai| vibhinna
bhASAbhASI ziSyoM ke anugraha ke lie bhI graMthakAra ekArthakoM kA prayoga
karate haiM, jisase pratyeka deza kA vidyArthI usa zabda kA artha sugamatA se
grahaNa kara ske| kisI bhI bAta kA prakarSa evaM mahattva sthApita karane ke lie
bhI ekArthaka zabdoM kA prayoga hotA hai| bhAva-prakarSa hetu prasaMgavaza
ekArthakoM kA prayoga punarukti doSa nahIM mAnA jAtA  /  niyuktikAra kA yaha
bhASAgata vaiziSTya hai ki ve sUtra ke mUla zabda ke ekArthaka likhakara phira
usakI vyAkhyA karate haiM  /  piMDaniyukti meM bhI prasaMgavaza graMthakAra ne
kucha zabdoM ke ekArthakoM kA ullekha kiyA hai, yahAM unakA ullekha kiyA jA rahA
hai (mavR pa. 36) AdhA-AdhAra AdhA Azraya AdhAra itynrthaantrm| AhAkamma-
AdhAkarma AhA ahe ya kamme, AyAhamme ya attakamme y| paDisevaNa paDisuNaNA,
saMvAsa'NumodaNA cev|| uggama-udgama uggama uggovaNa maggaNA ya egaTThiyANi
etaaii| (gA.61) (gA. 56) 1. sthATI pR. 472 /  2. bha. 20/14 /  3,4: AvahATI 1
pR. 242  /  5. bRbhA 173 /  (ka) jaMbUTI pa. 33 ; nAnAdezavineyAnugrahArthaM
ekaarthikaaH| (kha) naMdITI pR. 58 ; vineyajanasukhapratipattae.......  /  7.
bhagaTI. pa. 14 ; samAnArthA : prakarSavRttipratipAdanAya stutimukhena
graMthakRtoktAH  /  mavR pa. 36; etAni ca nAmAnyAdhAkarmaNo mukhyAni puna ryaiH
pratiSevaNAdibhiH prakAraistadAdhAkarma bhavati, tAnyapyabhedavivakSayA
nAmatvena pratipAdayati-AdhAkarma, adha:karma, Atmaghna aura Atmakarma-ye
AdhAkarma ke mukhya nAma haiN| yahAM pratisevaNA Adi ko abheda vivakSA se
ekArthaka mAnA hai|

Page #454 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 282 **Piṇḍaniyukti** **Eṣaṇā-Eṣaṇā** **Gaṇḍa-Stana Ghaṭa-Ghaḍā** **Chāti-
Tyakta • Tep-Deta Hai.** **Duddha-Dūdha Pātan-Vināśa Piṇḍa-Samūha** **Eṣaṇ
Gavasaṇā Maggaṇā Ya Uggavṇā Ya Bodhavvā.**  **Ete U Eṣaṇāe, Nāmā Eggaṭṭhiyā
Honti.**  **Gaṇḍāvapi Stanaaparaparyāyāu.**  **Ghaṭa-Kalaśa-Kumbhādinām.**
**Charditamujjhitam Tyaktamiti Paryāyāḥ.**  **Tepate Kṣarati Dadāti Smeti
Bhāvarthaḥ.**  **Duddha Pao Pīlu Khīram Ca.**  **Pātanam Cātipatō Vināśa
Ityarthaḥ.**  **Piṇḍa-Nikāya-Samūhe, Sampinḍaṇ Piṇḍaṇā Ya Samvāe.**
**Samusaraṇ-Nicaya-Uvacaya, Cae Ya Jumme Ya Rāsī Ya.**  **'Bhoī' Iti Bhogyā-
Bhāryā Ityarthaḥ.**  **Stāma Balaṁ Prāṇa Ityekō'rthaḥ.** (Gā. 51) (Mavṛ P 123)
(Mavṛ P 50) (Mavṛ P 169) (Mavṛ P 94) (Gā. 70/2) (Mavṛ P 37) **Bhoī-Patnī Stāma-
Bala** (Gā. 2) (Mavṛ P 111) (Mavṛ P 177)  1. Mavṛ P. 29; Eṣaṇādiini Catvāri
Nāmāni Prāgekārtthikānyuktāni,  Tathā'pi Teṣāṁ Kathañcidartha Bhedō'pyasti. 2.
Maṭī P. 2; Yadyapi Piṇḍādayah Śabdāḥ Loke Pratiniyata Eva Saṁghātaviśeṣe Rūḍhāḥ;
Tathā'pi Sāmānyatō Yad Vyutpattinimittaṁ Saṁghātatvatvamātralakṣaṇam Tat
Sarveṣām'apyaviśiṣṭamiti Kṛtvā Sāmānyatō Sarve Piṇḍādayah Śabdā Ekārthikā Uktāḥ,
Tato Na Kaściddoṣaḥ-Yadyapi Piṇḍa, Nikāya Ādi Śabda Pratiniyata Samūha Ke Lie
Rūḍhā Hai, Phir Bhi Sāmāny Rūp Se Ekārthak Hai.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 282 piMDaniyukti esaNA-eSaNA gaNDa-stana ghaTa-ghar3A chati-tyakta * tepa-detA
hai . duddha-dUdha pAtana-vinAza piMDa-samUha esaNa gavasaNA maggaNA ya uggovaNA
ya bodhvvaa| ete u esaNAe, nAmA egaTThiyA hoNti|| gaNDAvapi stnaaprpryaayau|
ghtt-klsh-kumbhaadiinaam| charditamujjhitaM tyaktamiti paryAyAH  /  tepate
kSarati dadAti smeti bhAvArthaH  /  duddha pao pIlu khIraM c| pAtanaM cAtipAto
vinAza ityartha : /  piMDa-nikAya-samUhe, saMpiMDaNa piMDaNA ya smvaae|
samusaraNa-nicaya-uvacaya, cae ya jumme ya rAsI y|| 'bhoI' iti bhogyA-bhAryA
ityrthH| sthAma balaM prANa ityeko'rthaH  /  (gA. 51) (mavR pa 123) (mavR pa 50)
(mavR pa 169) (mavR pa 94) (gA. 70/2) (mavR pa 37) bhoi-patnI sthAma-bala (gA.
2) (mavR pa 111) (mavR pa 177) 1. mavR pa. 29; eSaNAdIni catvAri nAmAni
prAgekArthikAnyuktAni, tathA'pi teSAM kthnycidrthbhedo'pysti| 2. maTI pa. 2 ;
yadyapi piNDAdayaH zabdA: loke pratiniyata eva saMghAtavizeSe rUDhAH ; tathA'pi
sAmAnyato yad vyutpattinimittaM saGghAtatvamAtralakSaNaM tat
sarveSAmapyaviziSTamiti kRtvA sAmAnyataH sarve piNDAdayaH zabdA ekArthikA uktAH,
tato na kazciddoSaH-yadyapi piMDa, nikAya Adi zabda pratiniyata samUha ke lie
rUr3ha haiM, phira bhI sAmAnya rUpa se ekArthaka haiN|

Page #455 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-7 Nirukta Nirukta means - to explain the meaning of a word by deriving
its etymology. From this perspective, Yaska's Nirukta is an important text. In
Jain Agamas, ancient texts like Bhagavati and Sutra Kritanga also contain
Niruktas of words. This suggests that it was a brief ancient method of
interpretation. Nirukta helps in knowing the original meaning and nature of the
word. Many Niruktas have been used in the entire Nirukta literature, such as the
Nirukta of Kama - 'Ukkamayanti Jeevam Dhammao Ten Te Kama'. Similarly, in
Aavashyak Niyukti, a beautiful Nirukta of the word 'Micchami Dukkadam' has been
given based on its etymology. Such Niruktas are not found in other literature.
Although the rules of grammar have not been taken into account in this, it is a
beautiful example from the perspective of Nirukta and meaning. Micchami Dukkadam
Mi tti Miumaddavatte, Ch tti Ya Dosana Chhayane Hoti. Mi tti Ya Meraya Thio, Du
tti Duguchami Appaanam. Ka tti Kadam Me Pavam, Da tti Ya Devemi Tam Uvasamenam.
Eso Micchadukkadapayakkharattho Samaasenam. (Aavani 436/21, 22) - In this, the
etymology of each letter has been given, some by words and some by roots. We
find many such important Niruktas in Nirukta literature. Here only the Niruktas
found in Pind Niyukti and its commentary have been mentioned. Although Pind
Niyukti is not rich in terms of Niruktas, some important Niruktas are found.
Atmakarma-Parakarma Atmakarma Kriyate Ityatmakarma. (Mavri P. 50) Atmaj - •
Killing Pranadi etc. regularly, killing oneself in the form of feet etc.,
'Panivhe Vayabhango' etc. from the words, therefore Adhakarma is called
Atmaghna. (Mavri P. 52) • Killing oneself, destroying oneself as a cause of
falling into hell, is called Atmaghna. (Mavri P. 36) Adha - Adhiyate Asya
Ityadha. (Mavri P. 36) Udbhinna - Udbhedanam Udbhinnam. (Mavri P. 35) Uddes -
Uddeshanam Uddesah. (Mavri P. 35) Upakaran - Upakriyate Anenetyupakarnam. (Mavri
P. 84) Jvalan - Jvalatiti Jvalanah. (Mavri P. 5) Tapan - Tapatiti Tapanah.
(Mavri P. 5)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-7 nirukta nirukta kA artha hai-zabdoM kI vyutpatti karake usake artha
ko spaSTa krnaa| isa dRSTi se yAska kA nirukta mahattvapUrNa graMtha hai| jaina
AgamoM meM bhagavatI aura sUtrakRtAMga jaise prAcIna graMthoM meM bhI zabdoM ke
nirukta milate haiN| isase pratIta hotA hai ki yaha vyAkhyA kI eka saMkSipta
prAcIna paddhati thii| nirukta dvArA zabda ke mUla artha aura prakRti ko jAnane
meM sahAyatA milatI hai| sampUrNa niyukti sAhitya meM aneka niruktoM kA prayoga
huA hai, jaise kAma kA nirukta-'ukkAmayaMti jIvaM dhammAo teNa te kAmA' isI
prakAra Avazyakaniyukti meM 'micchAmi dukkaDaM' zabda kA kalpanAmUlaka suMdara
nirukta kiyA gayA hai| aise nirukta hameM anya sAhitya meM dekhane ko nahIM
milate  /  yadyapi isameM vyAkaraNa ke niyamoM kA dhyAna nahIM rakhA gayA hai
lekina nirukta aura artha kI dRSTi se yaha eka suMdara udAharaNa
haimicchAmidukkaDaM mi tti miumaddavatte, cha tti ya dosANa chAyaNe hoti| mi tti
ya merAya Thio, du tti duguMchAmi appaannN|| ka tti kaDaM me pAvaM, Da tti ya
Devemi taM uvasameNaM  /  eso micchAdukkaDapayakkharattho smaasennN|| (Avani
436/21, 22) _ isameM pratyeka akSara kI vyutpatti kI gaI hai, kisI kI zabdoM
dvArA tathA kisI kI dhAtuoM dvaaraa| isa prakAra ke aura bhI aneka mahattvapUrNa
nirukta hameM niyukti-sAhitya meM milate haiN| yahAM kevala piMDa niyukti evaM
usakI TIkA meM Ae niruktoM kA ullekha kiyA gayA hai| yadyapi piMDaniyukti
niruktoM kI dRSTi se samRddha nahIM hai, phira bhI kucha mahattvapUrNa nirukta
milate haiMAtmakarma-parakarma Atmakarma kriyate ityaatmkrm| (mavR pa. 50)
Atmaja-* prANAdIMzca ghnan niyamata: caraNAdirUpamAtmAnaM hanti, 'pANivahe
vayabhaMgo' ityAdivacanAttata AdhAkarma aatmghnmityucyte| (mavR pa.52) * AtmAnaM
durgatiprapAtakAraNatayA hanti vinaashytiityaatmghnm| (mavR pa. 36) aadhaa-
aadhiiyte'syaamityaadhaa| (mavR pa. 36) udbhinn-udbhednmudbhinnm| (mavR pa. 35)
uddesh-uddeshnmuddeshH| (mavR pa. 35) upakaraNa-upakriyate anenetyupkrnnm| (mavR
pa. 84) jvalana-jvalatIti jvalanaH  /  (mavR pa. 5) tapana-tapatIti tpnH| (mavR
pa. 5)

Page #456 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **284**  **Tri-Patan (Tri-Destruction)**  * Tri-Patan
is the destruction of the three senses (eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, mind).
(Mahavri. P. 37) * Tri-Patan is the destruction of the three senses (eyes, ears,
nose, tongue, body, mind) by their respective destroyers. (Mahavri. P. 37) *
Tri-Patan is the destruction of the three senses (eyes, ears, nose, tongue,
body, mind) or the three characteristics of the body (eyes, ears, nose, tongue,
body, mind). (Mahavri. P. 37)  **Durgas**  * Durgas is where one is consumed by
suffering. (Mahavri. P. 88)  **Dhatri**  * Dhatri is one who supports,
nourishes, or is supported. (Ga. 198) * Dhatri is one who supports a child.
(Mahavri. P. 122) * Dhatri is one who is supported by payment for nourishment.
(Mahavri. P. 122) * Dhatri is one who is drunk by children. (Mahavri. P. 122)
**Nimitta (Cause)**  * Nimitta is the cause of the arising of knowledge of good,
bad, past, present, and future, due to the constant engagement of the senses
with their objects and the self's reliance on them. (Mahavri. P. 121)
**Niryoga**  * Niryoga is that which is used or employed. (Mahavri. P. 12)
**Paribhoga**  * Paribhoga is that which is consumed. (Mahavri. P. 20)
**Pavan**  * Pavan is that which purifies or blows. (Mahavri. P. 5)  **Pindan**
* Pindan is that which binds the soul to itself. (Ga. 46) * Pindan is that which
binds the soul to itself. (Mahavri. P. 27)  **Pooja-harya**  * Pooja-harya is
that which is worthy of worship. (Mahavri. P. 131)  **Prati-shravan**  * Prati-
shravan is that which is promised or accepted. (Mahavri. P. 36)  **Prati-
shevan**  * Prati-shevan is that which is served. (Mahavri. P. 36)
**Pratyavtar**  * Pratyavtar is that which is descended into a vessel. (Mahavri.
P. 13)  **Pradeep**  * Pradeep is that which illuminates. (Mahavri. P. 5)
**Vanipak**  * Vanipak is one who, by showing himself to be devoted to the
giver, begs for alms. (Mahavri. P. 130) * Vanipak is one who is born of a
merchant. (Ga. 208)  **Sankaḍi**  * Sankaḍi is that which destroys living
beings. (Mahavri. P. 79)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 284 piMDaniyukti tripAtana-* trayANAM dehAyurindriyarUpANAM pAtanaM-vinAzanaM
tripaatnm| (mavR pa. 37) * tribhiH kAyavAGmanobhirvinAzakena svasambandhibhiH
pAtanaM-vinAzanaM tripaatnm| (mavRpa. 37) * trINi kAyavAgmanAMsi yadvA trINi
dehAyurindriyalakSaNAni pAtanaM (tripaatnm)| (mavRpa. 37) durgAsa-duHkhena grAso
yatra tad durgaasm| (mavR pa. 88) dhAtrI-dhArayati dhIyate vA, dhayaMti vA
tamiti teNa dhAI u| (gA. 198) * dhArayati bAlakamiti dhaatrii| * yadvA dhIyate
bhATakapradAnena dhriyate poSyate iti dhaatrii| * dhayanti pibanti bAlakAstAmiti
dhaatrii| (mavR pa. 122) nimitta-* iMdiehiMdiyatthehiM, samAhANaM ca appnno|
nANaM pavattae jamhA, nimittaM teNa AhiyaM  //  (mavR pa. 121) *
niyatamindriyebhyaH indriyArthebhyaH samAdhAnaM cAtmanaH samAzritya
yasmAdutpadyate zubhAzubhAtItAdyarthaparijJAnaM tasmAttadindriyArthAdi nimittm|
(mavR pa. 121) niryoga-niryujyate-upakriyate'neneti niryogH| (mavR pa. 12)
paribhoga-paribhujyate iti paribhogaH  /  (mavR pa. 20) pavana-pavate punAtIti
vA pavanaH  /  (mavR pa. 5) piMDaNa-* piMDayae piMDaNaM jmhaa| (gA. 46) *
piNDyate AtmA svena saha yena tat pinnddnm| (mavR pa. 27) pUjAhArya-pUjAhAryaH-
pUjayA hriyate-Avarcyate iti pUjAhAryaH  /  (mavR pa. 131) pratizravaNa-
pratizrUyate-abhyupagamyate yat tat pratizravaNam  /  (mavR pa. 36) pratiSevaNa-
pratisevyate iti prtissevnnm| (mavR pa. 36) pratyavatAra-pratyavatAryate
pAtramasminniti pratyavatAraH  /  (mavR pa. 13) pradIpa-pradIpyate iti prdiipH|
(mavR pa. 5) vanIpaka-* vanute-prAyo dAyakasammateSu zramaNAdiSvAtmAnaM bhaktaM
darzayitvA piNDaM yAcate iti ....... vniipkH| (mavR pa. 130) _ * vaNi jAyaNa tti
vaNio, pAya'ppANaM vaNImu tti| (gA. 208) saMkhaDi-saMkhaDyante-vyApAdyante
prANino'syAmiti saMkhaDiH  /  (mavR pa. 79)

Page #457 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Native Words  Words that do not have any root or suffix, are not derived from
any language, and are taken from a tradition or regional language are called
native words. Acharya Hemchandra, in his *Deshinam Mala*, clarifies the nature
of native words, writing:  > "Those words which are not proven or unproven,
which are not found in the scriptures, and which are not derived from any
language, are considered native words." (1)  Vyakarana Trivikram says that
*Aarsh* and *Deshya* words are the established usage of different languages,
hence they do not require grammar. The *Naipatik* words mentioned in
*Anuyogadwar* can be considered under native words. In *Agam* and their
commentary texts, there is mention of 18 types of native languages. It is not
clear which these 18 languages were. Due to being learned in different regions,
Acharyas used various regional words to enrich the knowledge of their disciples.
Many regional native words have been used in *Nirukti* literature.
**Appendix-8**  *Pindanirukti* uses native words extensively. Commentator
Malayagiri used phrases like "Deshivacanametad" and "Deshitvat" for many words,
but besides these, many native words and native verbs have been used in this
text.  Some Acharyas consider number words like *Panpanna*, *Pannas*, *Bayalis*,
etc. as native words. We have not included number words in this collection.
There is disagreement among scholars about imitative words and verbs received by
order, but we have accepted them as native words. Many words are also found in
Sanskrit dictionaries, but if they are considered native in *Deshinam Mala*,
then they have been included in this collection. The *Deshishabda Kosh*,
published by Jain Vishvabharati, Ladnun, has selected over ten thousand native
words.  1. *Deshi* 1/3. 2. *Rajati* p. 341

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 prayukta dezI zabda jina zabdoM kA koI prakRti-pratyaya nahIM hotA, jo
vyutpattijanya nahIM hote tathA jo kisI paramparA yA prAntIya bhASA se Ae hoM,
ve dezaja zabda kahalAte haiN| AcArya hemacandra ne dezInAma mAlA meM dezI
zabdoM kA svarUpa spaSTa karate hue likhA hai je lakkhaNe Na siddhA'pasiddhA
skkyaahihaannesu| na ya gahaNalakkhaNA sattisaMbhavA te iha nibaddhA  // 1
vaiyAkaraNa trivikrama kA kahanA hai ki ArSa aura dezya zabda vibhinna bhASAoM
ke rUr3ha prayoga haiM ataH inake lie vyAkaraNa kI AvazyakatA nahIM hotii|
anuyogadvAra meM varNita naipAtika zabdoM ko dezI zabdoM ke antargata mAnA jA
sakatA hai| Agama evaM unake vyAkhyA granthoM meM 18 prakAra kI dezI bhASAoM kA
ullekha milatA hai| ve 18 bhASAeM kaunasI thIM, inakA spaSTa ullekha nahIM
miltaa| bhinna-bhinna prAnta ke vyakti dIkSita hone ke kAraNa AcArya ziSyoM kA
koza-jJAna evaM zabda-jJAna samRddha karane ke lie vibhinna prAntIya zabdoM kA
prayoga karate the  /  niryukti sAhitya meM aneka prAntIya dezI zabdoM kA
prayoga huA hai| pariziSTa-8 piNDaniryukti meM dezI zabdoM kA pracura prayoga
huA hai| TIkAkAra malayagiri ne aneka zabdoM ke lie 'dezIvacanametad''dezItvAt'
Adi kA prayoga kiyA hai lekina inake atirikta bhI aneka dezI zabdoM aura dezI
dhAtuoM kA prayoga isa grantha meM huA hai| saMkhyAvAcI zabda jaise-- paNapaNNa,
paNNAsa, bAyAlIsa Adi ko bhI kucha AcArya dezI mAnate haiN| isa saMgraha meM
hamane saMkhyAvAcI zabdoM kA saMgraha nahIM kiyA hai| anukaraNavAcI zabdoM evaM
Adeza prApta dhAtuoM ke bAre meM vidvAnoM meM matabheda hai para hamane inako
dezI zabdoM ke rUpa meM svIkRta kiyA hai| aneka zabda saMskRta koza meM bhI
milate haiM lekina unako yadi dezInAma mAlA meM dezI mAnA hai to unakA isa
saMkalana meM saMgraha kiyA hai| jaina vizvabhAratI, lADanUM se prakAzita
'dezIzabdakoSa' meM dasa hajAra se adhika dezI zabdoM kA cayana kiyA gayA hai|
1. dezI 1/3  /  2. rAjaTI pR. 341

Page #458 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  English Translation:  286 **Pindaniyukti** Air-Atirohita-Air means
Atirohita. Avad-Koop. (Vrup. 65) (Ga. 259 Vrup. 155) Avayas-Aalingan. (Ga. 274)
Andak-Mukha-Mukhamandakam. (Vrup. 173) Avarddhig-A boil caused by a spider bite.
Andu-Shrankhala, Bedi. (Ga. 266) Sarpadansh-Aparaddhiko Lutaasphot: Akkharay-
Das-Aksharako Vyaksarakaabhidhano Das Sarpaadidansho Wa. (Ga. 13 Vrup. 9)
Ityartha. (Ga. 173 Vrup. 110) Avaroppar-Paraspar. (Ga. 148) Achiyatt-Apriti-
Achiyatt means Apriti. Avil-Bhedi, Meshi. (Vrup. 71) (Ga. 176 Vrup. 112)
Asankhadi-Kalha ka Abhav-Asankhadya Achokkhali-A woman who does not maintain
cleanliness. Kalhaabhaven. (Ga. 175 Vrup. 112) (Ga. 288/6) Asanther-Aaprati-
Asanstare-Anirvahe. Ahillay-Binoula-Atthillae means Asthikan (Ga. 177/1 Vrup.
112) Karpasikan. (Ga. 2887 Vrup. 164) Ahav-Athava. (Ga. 251/1) Anida-Ignorance
and protecting living beings. Asooy-Obtained by challenge-Asooyam-
Aupayachitakam. Parijnaanavikalen Satay Yatparpraananivarhanam Sa (Ga. 194/1
Vrup. 120) Anideti. (Ga. 65 Vrup. 42) Ittag-Sewai, Khadyavishesh-Ittagchhanammi-
Sewakika Athah-Agadh, Gehera. (Ga. 154) Kshane. (Ga. 219/1 Vrup. 136)
Adhhaanaseesay-Path of entering or exiting a forest. Ittaga-Sewai. (Ga. 219/1)
_(Pibha 24) Ittal-Eent. (Pibha 37) Adhikaran-Sexual inclination, Adhikaran-
Inmo-This. (Ga. 251/2) - Maithunpravritti. (Ga. 231/6 Vrup. 145) Iy-In this way.
(Ga. 89/4) Adhigaran-Pap-Pravritti-Adhikaran-Pappravritti. Undag -Khand, Tukda-
Mansondakadi-Manshkhandam. (Ga. 163 Vrup. 106) . (Ga. 279 Vrup. 160) Anivitth-
Anuparjit-Anivrishtam-Anuparjitam. Ukkhaliya-Stali. (Ga. 112) (Ga. 173/4 Vrup.
111) Ukkha -Stali. (Ga. 113) Appattiy-Apriti. (Ga. 314/3) Ucchindan-Taking on
interest. (Ga. 144/1) Appahan-Sandesh. (Ga. 272) Utthan-Diarrhea. (Ga. 86/1)
Appahani-Sandesh. (Ga. 201/1) Udukhul-Ukhul. - (Ga. 167) Appahiy-Sandishta. (Ga.
201/2) Uddaah-Ninda-Uddaah-Pravachanamalinayam. Amilla-Small buffalo (calf).
(Ga. 86/2)  _(Ga. 219/8 Vrup. 136) Avchull-Back part of the stove, small stove.
Utted-Boond-Utteda Bindav. (Ga. 17/1 Vrup. 10) (Pibha 25) Uddehiga-Termite. (Ga.
34)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 286 piMDaniyukti aira-atirohita-aira tti atirohitm| avdd-kuup| (vRpa. 65) (gA.
259 vRpa. 155) avyaas-aaliNgn| (gA. 274) aNddk-mukh-mukhmnnddkm| (vRpa. 173)
avaraddhiga-makar3I ke kATane se hone vAlA phodd'aa| aMdu-zRMkhalA, bedd'ii|
(gA. 266) sarpadaMza-aparAddhiko lUtAsphoTa: akkharaya-dAsa-akSarako
vyakSarakAbhidhAno dAsa sarpAdidaMzo vaa| (gA. 13 vRpa. 9) ityrthH| (gA. 173
vRpa. 110) avroppr-prspr| (gA. 148) aciyatta-aprIti-aciyattaM apriitiH| avilA-
bher3I, messii| (vRpa. 71) (gA. 176 vRpa. 112) asaMkhaDi-kalaha kA abhAva-
asaGkhaDyA acokkhaliNI-svacchatA nahIM rakhane vAlI strii| klhaabhaaven| (gA.
175 vRpa. 112) (gA. 288/6) asNthr-apraapti-asNstre-anirvaahe| ahillaya-binaulA-
aTThillae tti asthikAn (gA. 177/1 vRpa. 112) kaarpaasikaan| (gA. 2887 vRpa. 164)
ahv-athvaa| (gA. 251/1) aNidA-jJAnazUnya hokara jIvoM kI rakSA krnaa| AsUya-
manautI se praapt-aasuuym-aupyaacitkm| parijJAnavikalena satA
yatparaprANanivarhaNaM sA (gA. 194/1 vRpa. 120) anideti| (gA. 65 vRpa. 42)
iTTaga-sevaI, khAdyavizeSa-iTTagachaNammi-sevakikA atthAha-agAdha, ghraa| (gA.
154) kssnne| (gA. 219/1 vRpa. 136) addhANasIsaya-aTavI ke praveza yA nirgama kA
maarg| ittttgaa-sevii| (gA. 219/1) _(pibhA 24) ittttaal-iiNtt| (pibhA 37)
adhikaraNa-maithuna kI pravRtti, adhikaraNaM- innmo-yh| (gA. 251/2) -
maithunprvRttiH| (gA. 231/6 vRpa. 145) iya-isa prkaar| (gA. 89/4) adhigrnn-paap-
prvRtti-adhikrnnN-paapprvRttiH| uMDaga -khaNDa, ttukdd'aa-maaNsoNdukaadi-
maaNskhnnddm| (gA. 163 vRpa. 106) . (gA. 279 vRpa. 160) anivitttth-anupaarjit-
anivRssttm-anupaarjitm| ukkhliyaa-sthaalii| (gA. 112) (gA. 173/4 vRpa. 111)
ukkhA -sthaalii| (gA. 113) appttiy-apriiti| (gA. 314/3) ucchiMdaNa-byAja para
lenaa| (gA. 144/1) appaahnn-sNdesh| (gA. 272) uTThANa-atisAra rog| (gA. 86/1)
appaahnni-sNdesh| (gA. 201/1) udduukhl-uukhl| - (gA. 167) appaahiy-sNdisstt|
(gA. 201/2) uDDAha-niMdA-uDDAhaH-pravacanamAlinyam  /  amilA-choTI bhaiMsa
(paadd'ii)| (gA. 86/2) _(gA. 219/8 vRpa. 136) avaculla-cUlhe kA pichalA bhAga,
choTA cuulhaa| utteDa-bUMda-utteDA bindavaH  /  (gA. 17/1 vRpa. 10) (pibhA 25)
uddehigaa-diimk| (gA. 34)

Page #459 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Appendix 8: Commonly Used Vernacular Words  **287**  * **Ubbhatth** - to ask,
to request - *Ubbhatth ti kenaapi sadhuna kadhiy-kadhi*. (Ga. 297) - *A certain
woman requested milk from someone*. * **Kappatth** - child - *Kappattho balaka*.
(Ga. 128/2) * **Kappatthiga** - girl. (Ga. 133, Vrup. 92) * **Kappatthi** -
little girl. (Ga. 131) * **Ull** - moist. (Ga. 11) * **Ullan** - rice soaked in
buttermilk, food - *Ullan - yenaudanamardikrityupayujyate*. (Ga. 272) - *This is
rice that is softened and used as food*. * **Ullinch** - to take out. (Ga.
192/4) * **Uvvrit** - remaining, leftover. (Ga. 308) * **Usak** - a type of
ornament, tilak - *Usakaakaraabharanam, anye tilakamityahu*. (Ga. 198/13, Vrup.
124) - *An ornament shaped like an arrow, some call it tilak*. * **Ussakkan** -
to do further, to continue - *Utshvashkanam parata: karanam*. (Ga. 61/1, Vrup.
36) * **Karaduy** - funeral feast - *Karaduyabhaktam - mritakabhojanam*. (Ga.
218/1, Vrup. 134) - *Food offered at a funeral feast*. * **Kamagaddhab** - very
passionate, lustful. (Ga. 209/1) * **Kay** - kapaoti, kanwar - *Kay: - kapaoti
yaya purusha: skandharudhaya paniyan vahanti*. (Ga. 131, Vrup. 91) - *A kapaoti
(a type of cloth) that men carry on their shoulders to carry water*. *
**Kukkudi** - *Kukkutaya mayaya charanti*. (Ga. 136/6, Vrup. 94) - *Hens roam
around by trickery*. * **Enhi** - now. (Ga. 302/5) * **Ettahe** - now. (Mavrup.
98) * **Gala** - *Gala ev kukkutih*. (Vrup. 173) - *The hen itself*. *
**Oskkan** - to do backward, to reverse - *Avashvashkanam
svayogpravrittanayatkalavadherarvakkaranam*. (Ga. 131, Vrup. 91) - *To reverse
the natural course of action before the appointed time*. * **Sharir** - *Sharir
ev kukkutih*. (Vrup. 173) - *The hen itself*. * **Kunim** - meat. (Ga. 86, Vrup.
71) * **Kusan** - a type of food made with curd and rice - *Kusan - dahi aur
chaval se bana hua karamba, khady vishesh*. (Ga. 128/3) * **Kusunit** - a type
of food made with curd and rice - *Kusunit - dahi aur chaval se bana hua
karamba, khady vishesh - kusunitam api karambaadikakkab - gud banate samay
ikhuras ki ek rupataya kritam*. (Vrup. 91) - *Kusunit is also a type of food
made with curd and rice, like karamba, etc. It is made from sugarcane juice in a
particular way*. * **Ohar** - tortoise - *Ohare tti kachchapah*. (Ga. 154, Vrup.
102) * **Kkkaddiy** - cucumber. (Ga. 78) * **Kattar** - ghee mixed with jaggery,
a type of sweet - *Kattarasy kujakah - vyavaharakarinah*. (Ga. 687, Vrup. 47) -
*Those who deal in justice*. * **Kotthalak** - bag, pouch -
*Kotthalakaaparaparyayo dritih*. (Vrup. 18) - *Driti is another word for
kotthalak*. * **Kadil** - a large iron vessel, a frying pan. (Vrup. 161) *
**Kadillak** - a large iron vessel, a frying pan. (Ga. 201/3, Vrup. 127) *
**Khauriy** - polluted. (Ga. 136/1) * **Khanth** - father - *Khanthasy - pituh*.
(Vrup. 158)  **Note:** In this appendix, we have used a dot (.) before the
vernacular words to indicate that they are derived from native languages.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 8 : prayukta dezI zabda 287 ubbhaTTha-mAMga karanA-ubbhaTTha tti kenApi
sAdhunA kddhiy-kddh'ii| (gA. 297) kasyAzcidagAriNyAH sakAze kssiirmbhyrthitm|
kappaTThaya-bAlaka-kappaTThao baalkH| (gA. 128/2) (gA. 133 vRpa. 92) ull-aardr|
(gA. 11) kpptttthigaa-baalikaa| (gA. 272) ullaNa-chAcha se gIlA kiyA huA odana,
khAdya- kappaTThI-choTI ldd'kii| (gA. 131) vishess-yenaudnmaardiikRtyopyujyte|
kabbaTThI-choTI lar3akI-samayaparibhASayA 'kabbaTThI' (gA. 297 vRpa. 168) laghvI
dArikA bhnnyte| (vRpa. 91) * ulliMca'-bAhara nikaalnaa| (gA. 192/4) krdduy-
mRtkbhoj-krdduybhktN-mRtkbhojnm| uvvarita-zeSa bacA huaa| (gA. 308) (gA. 218/1
vRpa. 134) usuka-eka prakAra kA AbhUSaNa, tilaka-iSukaH kAmagaddabha-kAma meM
ati prvRtt| (gA. 209/1) iSukAkAramAbharaNam, anye tilkmityaahuH| kAya-kApotI,
kAMvar3a-kAya:-kApotI yayA puruSAH (gA. 198/13 vRpa. 124) skandhArUDhayA pAnIyaM
vhnti| ussakkaNa-Age karanA-utSvaSkaNaM parata: krnnm| (gA. 61/1 vRpa. 36) (gA.
131 vRpa. 91) kukkuDi-* mAyA-kukkuTyA mAyayA crnti| eNhi -ab| (gA. 302/5) (gA.
136/6 vRpa. 94) ettaahe-ab| (mavR pa. 98) * galA-gala eva kukkuTiH |(vRp. 173)
osakkaNa-pIche karanA-avaSvaSkaNaM svayogapravRtta- * zarIra-zarIrameva
kukkuttii| (vRpa. 173) niytkaalaavdherrvaakkrnnm| kunnim-maaNs| (gA. 86 vRpa.
71) (gA. 131 vRpa. 91) kusaNa-dahI aura cAvala se banA huA karambA, ohAra-
kacchapa-ohAre tti kcchpH| khaady-vishess| (gA. 128/3) (gA. 154 vRpa. 102)
kusuNita-dahI aura cAvala se banA huA karambA, kkkddiy-kkdd'ii| (gA. 78) _
khAdya vizeSa-kusuNitamapi karambAdikakkaba-gur3a banAte samaya ikSurasa kI eka
rUpatayA kRtm| (vRpa. 91) avasthA, ikSurasa kA vikaar| (gA. 129) kUviya-cora kI
khoja karane vAlA, nyAyakartAkaTTara-kar3hI meM DAlA huA ghI kA bar3A-kaTTarasya
kuujkaaH-vyvhaarkaarinnH| tImanonmizraghRtavaTikArUpasya dezavizeSa (gA. 687
vRpa. 47) prsiddhsy| (gA. 305 vRpa. 172) kotthalaka-thailA, dRti-
kotthalakAparaparyAyo dRtiH  /  kaDilla-kar3AhI, lohe kA bar3A paatr| . (vRpa.
18) (vRpa. 161) khuriy-klussit| (gA. 136/1) kaDillaka-kar3AhI, lohe kA bar3A
paatr| khNt-pitaa-khntsy-pituH| (vRpa. 158) (gA. 201/3 vRpa. 127) 1. prastuta
pariziSTa meM dezI dhAtuoM ke prAraMbha meM hamane binda kA cihna diyA hai|

Page #460 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
288 Pindaniyukti Khangtig-janak, father. (Ga. 272) Gotthig-mitra. (Ga. 108/1)
Khangtiya-mata-Khangtikaya jananyaha. Gon-gay. (Ga. 210/4) (Ga. 201/3 Vrup. 127)
Goniy-gayon ka vyapari. (Ga. 687) Khangti-Khangti-jananim. (Ga. 201/2 Vrup. 127)
Goni-gay. (Ga. 68/7) Khaggud-kutil-Khaggud:-kutilaha. Gobbar-a village name.
(Ga. 89/2) (Ga. 146 Vrup. 100) Ghangsala-Karpathik bhikhuon ka aavasasthal.
Khatt-gobar. (Ga. 12 Vrup. 8) (Ga. 160) Khadd-prachur-Khaddam-prachuram. (Ga.
220 Vrup. 139) Ghattag-lipt patra ko chikna karne wala patthar Kharantana-
nirbhartsana, upalambh. (Ga. 96/1) Vishesh-Ghattako-lepitpatramasrunatakarakaha.
Khallag-patraput, dona-Khallakani vatadhipatrakrutanipashaanah. (Ga. 14 Vrup. 9)
Bhajanani dutani¹ . (Ga. 90/3 Vrup. 75) Ghar-griha. (Ga. 173/1) Khishan-ninda.
(Ga. 231/3) Gharakoyl-chipkali. (Ga. 163/7) Khinsa-avahelana. (Ga. 277) Ghan-
tilpirdan yantra-ghane tilpirdan yantre. Khudd-kshullk shishya. (Ga. 219/1) (Ga.
27/1 Vrup. 17) Khudday-chhota shishya. (Ga. 219/9) Ghusalana-dahi mathana. (Ga.
288/6) Khol-guptchar, jasus-Khola:-herika rajnya champit-champa hua, daba hua.
(Vrup. 123) niyuktaha. (Ga. 69/3 Vrup. 49) Chattak-chammach-kasth ki kadchhi.
(Vrup. 84) Khoshiy-jirn prayah-Khoshite-jirnpraaye. Chapputika-chutki. (Vrup.
125) (Ga. 145 Vrup. 100) Chaul-chaval. (Ga. 95) Gaddarak-bhed. (Vrup. 21)
Chaulod-chaval ka pani. (Ga. 191) Gaddarika-bhedi. (Vrup. 21) Chari-chara. (Ga.
96/1) Gadul-chaval ka dhovan. (Vrup. 22) Chikkana-chikna, saghanakarm-chikkana
ti anyogalichch-gale ka abhushan-galichcha-galasatkani nyanuvethen
gadhasanslesharupamatmani chinoti. abharanaani. (Ga. 198/13 Vrup. 125) (Ga. 46
Vrup, 27) Gavatt-gay ka bhojan, ghas. (Ga. 96/2) Chimidh-chipta. (Ga. 1987)
Gavatti-ghas, gay ka bhojan-gavatti ti gobhakt. Chudana-jirn-shirn, sadna. (Ga.
21) (Ga. 96 Vrup. 78) Chull-bhojan. (Ga. 181/1) Gochchiy-rajya ka adhikari,
kotwal. Chullg-bhojan. (Ga. 182) (Ga. 173/1) Chulli-chulha. (Ga. 113/2) Gotthig-
mitra. (Ga. 108/2) Ched-balak. (Ga. 173/2)  1. Here, in place of "dutani",
"dunani" should be the reading.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 288 piMDaniyukti khaMtiga-janaka, pitaa| (gA. 272) gotttthii-mitr| (gA. 108/1)
khaMtiyA-mAtA-khaMtikAyA jnnyaaH| gonn-gaay| (gA. 210/4) (gA. 201/3 vRpa. 127)
goNiya-gAyoM kA vyaapaarii| (gA. 687) khNtii-khNti-jnniim| (gA. 201/2 vRpa. 127)
gonnii-gaay| (gA. 68/7) khgguudd-kuttil-khgguudd:-kuttilH| gobbara-eka gAMva kA
naam| (gA. 89/2) (gA. 146 vRpa. 100) ghaMghasAlA-kArpaTika bhikSuoM kA
aavaassthl| khtt-gobr| (gA. 12 vRpa. 8) (gA. 160) khddh-prcur-khddhN-prcurm|
(gA. 220 vRpa. 139) ghaTTaga-lipta pAtra ko cikanA karane vAlA patthara
kharaMTaNA-nirbhartsanA, upaalmbh| (gA. 96/1) vizeSa-ghaTTako-
lepitapAtramasRNatAkAraka: khallaga-patrapuTa, donA-khallakAni vaTAdipatrakRtAni
paassaannH| (gA. 14 vRpa. 9) bhAjanAni dUtAni'  /  (gA. 90/3 vRpa. 75) ghr-gRh|
(gA. 173/1) khisnn-niNdaa| (gA. 231/3) ghrkoil-chipklii| (gA. 163/7) khiNsaa-
avhelnaa| (gA. 277) ghANa-tilapIr3ana yaMtra-ghANe tilpiiddnyNtre| khuDDa-
kSullaka shissy| (gA. 219/1) (gA. 27/1 vRpa. 17) khuDDaya-choTA shissy| (gA.
219/9) ghusulaNa-dahI mthnaa| (gA. 288/6) khola-guptacara, jAsUsa-kholA:-herikA
rAjJA caMpita-cAMpA huA, dabAyA huaa| (vRpa. 123) niyuktaaH| (gA. 69/3 vRpa. 49)
caTTaka-cammaca-kASTha kI kdd'chii| (vRpa. 84) khosiya-jIrNa praayH-khosite-
jiirnnpraaye| cpputtikaa-cuttkii| (vRpa. 125) (gA. 145 vRpa. 100) caaul-caavl|
(gA. 95) gddddrk-bhedd'| (vRpa. 21) cAuloda-cAvala kA paanii| (gA. 191)
gddddrikaa-bhedd'ii| (vRpa. 21) caarii-caaraa| (gA. 96/1) gaDula-cAvala kA
dhovn| (vRpa. 22) cikkaNa-cikanA, saghanakarma-cikkaNaM ti anyogalicca-gale kA
AbhUSaNa-galiccA-galasatkAni nyAnuvedhena gADhasaMzleSarUpamAtmani cinoti  /
aabhrnnaanni| (gA. 198/13 vRpa. 125) (gA. 46 vRpa, 27) gavatta-gAya kA bhojana,
ghaas| (gA. 96/2) cimiddh-cipttaa| (gA. 1987) gavatti-ghAsa, gAya kA bhojana-
gavatti tti gobhktH| cuDaNa-jIrNa-zIrNa, sdd'naa| (gA. 21) (gA. 96 vRpa. 78)
cull-bhojn| (gA. 181/1) gocciya-rAjya kA adhikArI, kotvaal| cullg-bhojn| (gA.
182) (gA. 173/1) cullii-cuulhaa| (gA. 113/2) gotttthig-mitr| (gA. 108/2) cedd-
baalk| (gA. 173/2) 1. yahAM dUtAni ke sthAna para dUnAni pATha honA caahie|

Page #461 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Jain Terms:  **Par. 8: Used Vernacular Words**  **289**  *
**Cholpatta:** A sadhu's equipment. (Vrup. 13) * **Daglag:** Pieces of baked
bricks, etc. - Daglaka: Chollag - Food - Chollkam - Food. (Ga. 25 Vrup. 17) (Ga.
178 Vrup. 113) * **Day:** Greens - Dayam - Shak. (Ga. 112 Vrup. 84) *
**Chagan:** Cow dung - Chaganam - Gomaya. (Ga. 162 Vrup. 105) (Ga. 185 Vrup.
115) * **Chagalag:** Goat. (Ga. 143/2) * **Chabb:** A special type of bamboo
vessel. (Ga. 259) * **Chabbak:** A special type of bamboo vessel. (Ga. 112 Vrup.
84) * **Dhakkit:** Covered. (Vrup. 155) * **Chhay:** Hungry - Chato -
Bubhukshita. (Ga. 77) * **Dhadar:** Loud sound. (Ga. 198/14) * **Diullka:**
Puppet. (Ga. 318/1 Vrup. 177) * **Chindika:** Hole in a fence. (Vrup. 6) *
**Taccany:** Buddhist monk. (Ga. 166/1) * **Chikk:** Touched, touched. (Ga. 84)
* **Chikkar:** To call someone with a sound of disapproval. (Ga. 210/4) *
**Chitt:** Touched. (Ga. 198/6 Vrup. 123) * **Tar:** 1. To be able. (Ga. 240/1)
2. To be well - Tarati - Kshemena vartate. (Ga. 245/2) * **Tarika:** Cream,
surface formed on water, etc. (Ga. 198/14 Vrup. 125) * **Tipp:** To give -
Tepate ksharati dadati smeti bhavartha. (Vrup. 161) * **Chotti:** Leftovers,
leftovers. (Ga. 136/6 Vrup. 94) * **Chotti:** Leftovers, leftovers. (Ga. 280) *
**Timm:** To moisten with water. (Ga. 163/2) * **Chobhag:** False stigma. (Ga.
198/9) * **Tuvari:** Pigeon pea. (Ga. 296) * **Jaddhu:** Elephant. (Ga. 184) *
**Thakk:** Opportunity - Yada avasare avasaranuroopama patati tat - Thalla -
Body dirt. (Ga. 136/1) Thalla - Thallavadiyamityuchyate. * **Jao:** Porridge,
special food - Jao - Kshirapeya. (Ga. 76/4 Vrup. 64) (Ga. 298 Vrup. 168) *
**Thikk:** Touched. (Vrup. 66) * **Jungiy:** Deficient in limbs like hands and
feet - Jungitaangeshu cha kartitahstapadadyavayaveshu. (Ga. 225) * **Thun:** To
praise. (Ga. 230 Vrup. 142) * **Dandini:** Queen - Dandinyau nripapalya. (Ga.
210/2 Vrup. 131) * **Jhank:** To say repeatedly - Jhas varam varam jalpa. (Ga.
132 Vrup. 92) * **Daddar:** 1. Lid of a pot, etc. - Dardarakah kutupaadinaam
mukhabandharoopah. (Ga. 164 Vrup. 107) * **Dakk:** Bitten by a snake. (Ga.
166/2) * **Lanka:** (Vrup. 9)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 8 : prayukta dezI zabda 289 colapaTTa-sAdhu kA upkrnn| (vRpa. 13)
Dagalaga-pakkI IMTa Adi ke ttukdd'e-ddglkaaHcollg-bhojn-collkm-bhojnm|
pakveSTakAnAM khnnddaani| (gA. 25 vRpa. 17) (gA. 178 vRpa. 113) DAya-zAka-DAyaM
shaakN| (gA. 112 vRpa. 84) chgnn-gobr-chgnnN-gomyH| dduNb-mhaavt-dduNbsy-
minntthsy| (gA. 162 vRpa. 105) (gA. 185 vRpa. 115) chglg-bkraa| (gA. 143/2)
DAya-zAka (gA. 112) chabba-bAMsa kA banA huA pAtra vizeSa (gA. 259) /  Doya-
DoyaH-bRhaddAruhastaka: mahAMzcaTTaka ityarthaH  /  chabbaka-bAMsa kA banA huA
pAtra vishess| (gA. 112 vRpa. 84) (vRpa. 155) Dhakkita-r3hakA huaa| (gA. 77)
chAya-bubhukSita-chAto bubhukssitH| DhaDDara-teja aavaaj| (gA. 198/14) (gA.
318/1 vRpa. 177) diullikaa-putlii| (vRpa. 6) chiMDikA-bAr3a kA chidr| (vRpa.
105) taccaNNiya-bauddha bhikssu| (gA. 166/1) chikka-spRSTa, chuA huaa| (gA. 84)
* tara-1. samartha honaa| (gA. 240/1) chikkAra-chI-chI kI AvAja se
apamAnapUrvaka 2. kuzala rahanA-tarati-kSemeNa vrtte| bulaanaa| (gA. 210/4) (gA.
198/6 vRpa. 123) chitt-spRsstt| (gA. 245/2) tarikA-malAI, pAnI Adi ke Upara
jamane vAlI chunn-kliib-chunnmukhH-kliibmukhH| sth| (gA. 198/14 vRpa. 125) *
tippa-denA-tepate kSarati dadAti smeti bhAvArthaH  /  choTi-ucchiSTatA, juutthn|
(vRpa. 161) (gA. 136/6 vRpa. 94) choTTi-ucchiSTatA juutthn| (gA. 280) * timma-
jala se Ardra krnaa| (gA. 163/2) chobhaga-jhUThA klNk| (gA. 198/9) tUvarI-
arahara kI daal| (gA. 296) jddddu-haathii| (gA. 184) thakka-avasara-yad
avasare'vasarAnurUpamApatati tatjalla-zarIra kA mail| (gA. 136/1) thakke
thakkAvaDiyamityucyate  /  jAu-daliyA, khAdya vishess-jaau-kssiirpeyaa| (gA.
76/4 vRpa. 64) (gA. 298 vRpa. 168) thikk-spRsstt|| (vRpa. 66) juMgiya-hAtha
paira Adi avayava se hIna-juGgitAGgeSu * thuNa-stuti krnaa| (gA. 225) ca
krtithstpaadaadyvyvessu| daMDiNI-rAjapatnI-daMDinyau nRpplyau| (gA. 210/2vRpa.
131) (gA. 230 vRpa. 142) jhaMkha-bAra bAra kahanA-jhaSa vAraM vAraM jlp|
daddara-1. kutupa Adi kA mukhabaMdha rUpa Dhakkana (gA. 132 vRpa. 92) dardarakaH
kutupAdInAM mukhabaMdharUpaH  /  Dakka-sAMpa ke dvArA DasA huaa| (gA. 166/2)
(gA. 164 vRpa. 107) (vRpa. 9) laMkA

Page #462 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **290**  2. **Kaṣṭha kī sopān-paṅkti** - A special type
of staircase made of continuous wooden planks. (Gā. 170 Vṛp. 110) **Daddaraya**
- A cloth tied over the mouth of a vessel, **Daddarak:** - A piece of cloth used
as a mouth cover. (Gā. 162 Vṛp. 105) (Gā. 163/1) (Gā. 65 Vṛp. 42)
**Apagatasarvathādaya** - Completely removed. (Gā. 83/4 Vṛp. 70) (Gā. 288/6)
(Gā. 22/4) **Kāryābhidhāne rūḍhaḥ** - Established in the designation of work.
(Gā. 49/1 Vṛp. 28) **Nirdhdhas** - Cruel - **Niddhandhasah** - Cruel.
**Vāsanākaḥ** - Desiring. **Niṣpiṭṭa** - Ground. **Nivva** - Cover, sheet.
**Nem** - Work - **Nem** word is local. **Dāya** - Water. **Nicchubhaṇa** - To
take out. **Nicchhoḍita** - Cleaned with fingers etc. (Gā. 224) **Parihāra** -
Consumption. **Nidā** - Killing knowingly - **Parijñānavatāpi yajjīvānām
prāṇavyaparopanaṁ sā nidā**. **Paṁtāvaṇā** - To strike with wood etc. (Gā. 274)
**Pacchoṇī** - Facing - **Pacchoṇī sanmukhagamanam**. (Pibhā. 45 Vṛp. 128)
**Paṭṭa** - A special type of cloth. (Gā. 22) **Paḍoyāra** - Equipment of a
virtuous person - **Pratyavātāraḥ** - Equipment. (Gā. 22 Vṛp. 13) **Paṇaya** -
Moss - **Paṇakaḥ** - A special type of plant. (Gā. 21 Vṛp. 12)  1. In Gujarati,
it is called **Dādar**. • **Paṇaya yācanā karnā**. **Patthāra** - Destruction -
**Prastāra:** - Destruction. (Gā. 231/11 Vṛp. 145) **Patthāraya** - Destruction
- **Patthārao nāśaḥ**. (Gā. 231 Vṛp. 143) **Pappḍiyā** - A special type of food
item. (Gā. 254) **Parikaṭṭaliy** - To bind in one place - **Parikaṭṭa** -
**Litam ekatra piṇḍīkṛtam**. (Gā. 103 Vṛp. 81) (Gā. 35) (Gā. 30)
**Piṇḍaniryukti** (Gā. 219/5) **Paṇa** - Sweets brought from another house -
**Praheṇakṁ kutaścidanyasmād gṛhādāyataṁ**. (Gā. 240/2 Vṛp. 148) **Pāhuḍi** -
Alms. (Gā. 287) **Pāhuḍiyā** - Alms. (Gā. 270) **Pāheṇaga** - Sweets like modak
- **Praheṇakṁ** - Modak etc. (Gā.  • **Pijja** - To drink. **Pippala** - A
special type of razor - **Pippalak:** - **Kṣuraviśeṣaḥ**. (Gā. 134 Vṛp. 92) (Gā.
198/2) **Kiñcidvakraḥ** - Slightly curved. (Gā. 25 Vṛp. 17) (Gā. 70/2) (Vṛp. 92)
**Pahala**. (Pibhā 41 Vṛp. 126) (Gā. 45/1) **Pīlu** - Milk. **Pūṇikā** - Cotton
wool - **Pūyaṇā** - Wicked person. **Peyālanā** - Group, measure. **Pelu** -
Cotton wool - **Pahal**. **Pellṇa** - To motivate. **Pelliyapoggaliy** - Related
to rice - **Poggalīy tti** - **Pauḍgalikasya śālyodanasy**. (Vṛp. 92) (Gā.
163/7) - Pressure. (Gā. 198/7)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 290 2. kASTha kI sopAna - paMkti' - nirantarakASThaphalakamayo niHzreNivizeSaH
/  (gA. 170 vRpa. 110 ) daddaraya - pAtra ke muMha para bAMdhA jAne vAlA
kapar3A, darddaraka:- mukhabandhanaM vastrakhaNDam  /  (gA. 162 vRpa. 105) (gA.
163 / 1) (gA. 65 vRpa. 42 ) apagatasarvathAdayA (gA. 83/4 vRpa. 70 ) (gA. 288
/6) (gA. 22/4 ) kAryAbhidhAne rUDhaH  /  (gA. 49/1 vRpa. 28 ) nirddhadhasa -
nirdaya - niddhandhasaH vAsanAkaH  /  niSpiTTa - pIsA huaa| nivva - chadi,
paTala  /  nema - kArya - nemazabdo dezyaH dAya - jala  /  nicchubhaNa - bAhara
nikAlanA  /  nicchoDita - aMguli Adi se sApha (gA. 224 ) kiyA huA pavvAya -
mlAna  /  'nicchoTite' aGgulyAdinA niravayave parihAra - paribhoga  /  kRte  /
(gA. 125 vRpa. 89 ) nidA- jAnate hue prANavadha karanA - parijJAnavatApi
yajjIvAnAM prANavyaparopaNaM sA nidA  /  paMtAvaNA - lakar3I Adi se prahAra
karanA  /  (gA. 274) paccoNI - sammukha - paccoNI sanmukhAgamanam  /  (pibhA. 45
vRpa. 128 ) paTTa - vastra vizeSa  /  (gA. 22) paDoyAra - sAdhu kA upakaraNa -
pratyavatAraH - upakaraNam  /  (gA. 22 vRpa. 13) paNaya - kAI - panaka: -
vanaspativizeSaH  /  (gA. 21 vRpa. 12) 1. gujarAtI meM dAdara kahate haiN| *
paNaya yAcanA karanA  /  patthAra - vinAza- prastAra : - vinAzaH  /  (gA. 231 /
11 vRpa. 145 ) patthAraya - vinAza - patthArao nAzaH  /  (gA. 231 vRpa. 143 )
pappaDiyA - khAdya vastu vizeSa  /  (gA. 254 ) parikaTTaliya - eka sthAna para
piMDita karanA - parikaTTa - litam ekatra piNDIkRtam  /  (gA. 103 vRpa. 81 )
(gA. 35) (gA. 30) piMDaniryukti (gA. 219/5) paNa - kisI anya ghara se AI huI
miThAIpraheNakaM kutazcidanyasmAd gRhAdAyAtam  /  (gA. 240 / 2 vRpa. 148 )
pAhuDi - bhikSA  /  (gA. 287) pAhuDiyA - bhikSA | (gA. 270 ) pAheNaga - modaka
Adi miThAI - praheNakaM - modakAdi  /  (gA. * pijja -pAna karanA  /  pippala -
kSura vizeSa - pippalaka: (gA. kSuravizeSaH  /  134 vRpa. 92 ) (gA. 198 / 2)
kiJcidvakra: 25 vRpa. 17) (gA. 70 / 2) (vRpa. 92 ) pahala  /  (pibhA 41 vRpa.
126 ) (gA. 45 / 1 ) pIlu - dUdha  /  pUNikA - pUnI, rUI kI pUyaNA - duSTa
vyantarI  /  peyAlaNA - samUha, pramANa  /  pelu - pUnI, rUI kI pahala  /
pellaNa - prerita karanA  /  pelliyapoggaliya- zAlyodana saMbaMdhI - poggaliya
tti (vRpa. 92 ) (gA. 163/7 ) - dabAva  /  (gA. 198/7) paudgalikasya zAlyodanasya
/

Page #463 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Jain Terms in English:  **Peri. 8: Used Vernacular Words**
**291**  (Ga. 148 Vrup. 101) (Ga. 163/3 Vrup. 106) **Potta** - Small piece of
cloth suitable for a young child, **Potaani** - Small pieces of cloth,
**Muiyang** - Ant. (Vrup. 107) **Lahu Balaka Yogyaani Vastra Khandaan** - Pieces
of cloth suitable for a young child. **Mera** - Limit, boundary. (Ga. 101/1)
(Ga. 141 Vrup. 96) **Moy** - Urine, **Prasravan** - Flowing, **Moyan** -
Urination, **Potti** - Cloth. (Ga. 22) (Ga. 219/3 Vrup. 136) **Poh** - Dung of
buffalo etc., **Sancan** - Spinning cotton and twisting it, **Ruintana** -
Cotton. (Ga. 108/1) (Ga. 281) **Baghaar** - To add spices. (Vrup. 84)
**Runtana** - Disregard, **Runtanaya** - With disregard, **Bitth** - Sitting.
(Ga. 288/4) (Ga. 90/3 Vrup. 75) **Bod** - Shaved head, **Shirolunchanaad** -
Shaving the head, **Rukkh** - Tree. (Ga. 53/2) **Madhikshipati** - Commander.
(Ga. 92 Vrup. 76) **Rella** - Flow of water. (Vrup. 12) **Bol** - Loud voice.
(Ga. 219/8) **Laiya** - Worn, **Kannalaiyaai** - Worn in the ear, **Bhaamad** -
To roam. (Ga. 228/1) (Ga. 284 Vrup. 162) **Bhoini** - Wife. (Ga. 205) **Lamban**
- Morsel, **Kaval** - Morsel. **Bhoiy** - Husband. (Ga. 205) (Ga. 305 Vrup. 172)
**Bhoi** - Wife, **Bhoiya** - Enjoyable wife, **Laddug** - Sweetmeat,
**Laddagvishayam** - Subject of sweetmeat. (Ga. 173/2 Vrup. 111) (Ga. 57/2 178
Vrup. 113) **Bhoyg** - Village leader. (Pibha 33) **Laahanak** - One who offers
gifts, **Mail** - Dirty, **Manthu** - A state between curd and buttermilk. (Ga.
145) **Vishish** - Special. (Vrup. 103) (Vrup. 90) **Lukk** - Shaved,
**Lunchit** - Shaved. (Ga. 92) **Majjhantig** - Middle. (Ga. 90/1)
**Lecchaaring** - Broken, **Lecchaariyaani** - Broken, **Dimbhak** - Suitable
for eating, **Matthu** - A state between curd and buttermilk. (Ga. 128/3) (Ga.
90/3 Vrup. 75) **Mallag** - Arrow, **Sikora** - Arrow, **Lotta** - Raw rice.
(Vrup. 19) (Ga. 90/3 Vrup. 75) **Lol** - To roll on the ground. (Ga. 198/11)
**Mahall** - Big. (Ga. 264) **Vaiya** - Small herd of cows. (Ga. 142)
**Maithaana** - Illusion. (Ga. 231/3) **Vadag** - Big lentil etc. (Ga. 305)
**Maramaari** - Fight, **Maar** - To beat. (Av 150) **Valaya** - Seashore,
**Samudri Lahaar** - Sea wave, **Valayamukhemaal** - Upper room. (Ga. 166/1)
**Velamukhe** - At the mouth of the well, **Bhratarupe** - In the form of a
brother, **Nipatite** - Fallen. **Mith** - Elephant driver. (Vrup. 115) (Ga.
302/3 Vrup. 171) **Muiyang** - Ant, **Muiyangadayah** - Ants. **Valava** - Mare.
(Ga. 205)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 8 : prayukta dezI zabda 291 (gA. 148 vRpa. 101) (gA. 163/3 vRpa. 106)
potta-laghu bAlaka yogya vastra khaNDa-potAni muiyNg-ciiNttii|| (vRpa. 107)
laghubAlakayogyAni vstrkhnnddaani| merA-maryAdA, siimaa| (gA. 101/1) (gA. 141
vRpa. 96) moya-mUtraprasravaNa-moyaM ti mUtraNaM  /  potti-vstr| (gA. 22) (gA.
219/3 vRpa. 136) poha-bhaiMsa Adi kI viSThA kA samUha, kaccha meM saMcaNa-ruI
kAtanA tathA usako lotthnaa| 'poh| (gA. 108/1) (gA. 281) baghAra-choMka lgaanaa|
(vRpa. 84) ruMTaNA-avajJA-ruNTaNayA iti avjnyyaa| biTTha-baiThA huaa| (gA.
288/4) (gA. 90/3 vRpa. 75) boDa-muMDita zira-ziroluJcanAditi boDa ityeva- rukkh-
vRkss| (gA. 53/2) mdhikssipti| (gA. 92 vRpa. 76) rellaNa-pAnI kA prvaah| (vRpa.
12) bola-teja aavaaj| (gA. 219/8) laiya-pahanA huA-kaNNalaiyAI ti karNe
pinddhaani| * bhmaadd-ghumaanaa| (gA. 228/1) (gA. 284 vRpa. 162) bhoinnii-
bhaaryaa| (gA. 205) lNbnn-kvl-lmbnN-kvlH| bhoiy-pti| (gA. 205) _ (gA. 305 vRpa.
172) bhoI-patnI-bhoI iti bhogyA bhAryA  /  laDDuga -modaka, lddddgvissyN-
modkvissym| (gA. 173/2 vRpa. 111) (gA. 57/2 178 vRpa. 113) bhoyggraam-naayk|
(pibhA 33) lAhaNaka-praheNaka, utsava ke upalakSya meM kisI miliy-mlin| (gA.
145) dUsare ghara se bheMTa svarUpa prApta miThAI maMthu-dadhi aura chAcha ke
bIca kI avsthaa| vishess| (vRpa. 103)  /  (vRpa. 90) lukka-muNDita, lunycit|
(gA. 92) mjjhNtig-mdhy| (gA. 90/1) lecchAriMga-kharaNTita-lecchAriyANi
Dimbhakayogyamatthu-dahI aura chAcha ke bIca kI avsthaa|
stokastokapAyasaprakSepaNena khrnnttitaani| (gA. 128/3) (gA. 90/3 vRpa. 75)
mallaga-zarAva, sikoraa-mllkN-shraavN| loTTa-kaccA caavl| (vRpa. 19) (gA. 90/3
vRpa. 75) * lola-dharatI para lutthnaa| (gA. 198/11) mhll-bdd'aa| (gA. 264)
vaiyA-laghu gokul| (gA. 142) maaitthaann-maayaa| (gA. 231/3) vaDaga-dAla Adi kA
bdd'aa| (gA. 305) mArAmArI-lar3AI, maar-piitt| (ava 150) valayA-samudrataTa,
samudrI lahara-valayAmukhemAla-Upara kA kmraa| (gA. 166/1) velAmukhe bhrATarUpe
niptite| mitth-mhaavt| (vRpa. 115) (gA. 302/3 vRpa. 171) mUiMga-cIMTI-
muiMgAdayaH pipiilikaa| vlvaa-ghodd'ii| (gA. 205)

Page #464 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **292** **Pindaniyukti**  **Valiy-Bhuakt:** Eaten. (Ga.
108/2) **Sazhilga-Bahin-Sazhilga-Bhaginee:** Sister. **Valla-Nishpaav:** Black
urad dal. (Ga. 144 Vrup. 98) (Ga. 296 Vrup. 168) **Samuttaiy:** Proud, arrogant.
(Ga. 219 Vrup. 134) **Valunk:** A type of cooked food. (Ga. 305) **Vigad-
Madya:** Strong liquor. (Ga. 31) **Saradu:** Soft. (Ga. 103 Vrup. 81)
**Sahodh:** Stolen goods. (Ga. 179/2) **Vicchhodit:** Cleaned with fingers.
**Saiyamkar:** Trustworthy. (Ga. 125) (Pibha 33 Vrup. 128) **Vittalit:**
Leftovers, spoiled. (Vrup. 143) **Samatthan:** Discussion. (Ga. 68/9 Vrup. 47)
**Viliy:** Ashamed. (Ga. 136/3) **Vilukk:** Shaved. (Ga. 92) **Sahan:** Saying,
telling. (Ga. 101/1 Vrup. 81) **Visaran:** Drying fruits, flowers, etc. in the
sun. (Ga. 283 Vrup. 161) **Sahi:** Lane, street. (Ga. 156 Vrup. 103)
**Saijjhit:** Neighbor. (Vrup. 104) **Sikkak:** Sneeze. (Vrup. 108)
**Saejjhiya:** Neighbor. (Ga. 157/6 Vrup. 104) **Siti:** Staircase. (Ga. 63)
**See:** Staircase. (Ga. 63 Vrup. 38) **Sankhad:** Quarrel. (Ga. 148 Vrup. 101)
**Seed:** To bear fruit. (Ga. 54) **Sankhadi:** Sweets. (Ga. 157/1)
**Sankhadya:** To quarrel. (Ga. 175 Vrup. 112) **Sukumarika:** Sugar syrup.
(Vrup. 172) **Hatthichchaga:** Hand ornaments. (Ga. 134) **Jimanwar:** A person
who wears hand ornaments. (Ga. 198/13 Vrup. 125) **Sankhadi:** Marriage, etc.
(Ga. 96/4 Vrup. 79) **Hadan:** Child's excrement. (Vrup. 135) **Haddanay:** One
who cleans a child's excrement. **Sanchuh:** To gather. (Ga. 142/2) **Santhar:**
To be possible, to be able. (Ga. 192/5 Vrup. 119) **Dwad:** To have diarrhea.
(Ga. 312/2 Vrup. 174) **Sazhilga:** Brother. (Ga. 53/2) **Hetth:** Below, down.
(Ga. 148 Vrup. 101)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 292 piMDaniyukti valiya-bhukta, khAyA huaa| (gA. 108/2) sjhilgaa-bhin-
sjjhilgaa-bhginii| valla-niSpAva, kAlI ur3ada-vallA-niSpAvAH  /  (gA. 144 vRpa.
98) (gA. 296 vRpa. 168) samuttaiya-garvita, abhimAnI-samuttaio garvitaH  /
vAluMka-pakvAnna vishess| (gA. 305) (gA. 219 vRpa. 134) vigaDa-madya-vikaTena
madyena deshvishessaapekssm| srddu-koml| (gA. 31) (gA. 103 vRpa. 81) sahoDha-
corI kI vastu shit| (gA. 179/2) vicchoDita-aMguli Adi se sApha kiyA huaa|
sAiyaMkAra-vizvAsapUrvaka-sAiyaMkAra tti sprtyym| (gA. 125) (pibhA 33 vRpa. 128)
viTTAlita-ucchiSTa, bhrsstt| (vRpa. 143) sAmatthaNa-paryAlocana-sAmatthaNaM ti
svabhaTaiH saha viliy-ljjit| (gA. 136/3) pryaalocnm| (gA. 68/9 vRpa. 47) vilukk-
munnddit| (gA. 92) saahnn-khnaa-saahnnN-kthnN| visAraNa-phala-phUla Adi ke
Tukar3oM ko sukhAne (gA. 101/1 vRpa. 81) ke lie dhUpa meM rakhanA-vizAraNaM
zoSaNA- sAhI-galI, muhllaa-saahii-vrtnii| yAtApe mocanam  /  (gA. 283 vRpa. 161)
(gA. 156 vRpa. 103) sijjhit-pdd'osin| (vRpa. 104) sikkk-chiiNkaa| (vRpa. 108)
saejjhiyA-par3osina-saijjhitaM vstiiprveshniim| siti-siiddh'ii-sopaan-pNkti|
(gA. 63) (gA. 157/6 vRpa. 104) sII-niHzreNi, sIDhI-sIIe tti niHshrennyaa||
sNkhdd-klh-sNkhddN-klhH| (gA. 63 vRpa. 38) (gA. 148. vRpa. 101) * sIda-phalita
honaa| (gA. 54) saMkhaDi-* mitthaaii| (gA. 157/1) sIhakesaraya-eka viziSTa
prakAra kA modk| * kalaha krnaa-sngkhddyaa-klhkrnnen| (gA. 216) (gA. 175 vRpa.
112) sukumArikA-cInI kI caasnii| (vRpa. 172) * vivAha Adi ke upalakSya meM diyA
hatthiccaga-hAtha ke AbhUSaNa-hatthiccagA-hastajAne vAlA jiimnvaar| (gA. 134)
yogyaanyaabhrnnaanni| * vivAha-saGkhaDi nAma vivAhAdikaM prkrnnm| (gA. 198/13
vRpa. 125) (gA. 96/4 vRpa. 79) hadana-bAlaka kA ml-muutr| (vRpa. 135) *
saMchuha-ekatrita krnaa| (gA. 142/2) haddaNNaya-bAlaka kA mala-mUtra sApha
karane vaalaa| saMthara-nirvAha honA, saMbhava honaa-sNstre-nirvaahe| . dvAda-
atisAra honA-hAdayet-atIsAraM kuryaat| (gA. 219/6) (gA. 192/5 vRpa. 119) (gA.
312/2 vRpa. 174) sajjhilaga-1. bhAI-sajjhilagau bhraatrau| heTTha-adhaH, niice|
(gA. 53/2) (gA. 148 vRpa. 101)

Page #465 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-9 **Verses-Subhashitas**  The literal meaning of *Sukti* is - well-
said. A saying in which there is a miracle of experience and expression is
called *Sukti*. Those that create a vibration for the transformation of inner
consciousness are called *Subhashitas*. In *Sukti*, the experience of a lifetime
is poured into a few words. This brings dynamism and beauty to the language
style.  The *Suktis* and *Subhashitas* used in *Pindanuyukti* are not only
instructive but also life-touching and inspiring.  The study of *Nuyukti*
literature suggests that the *Nuyuktikars* did not make any effort anywhere, but
while naturally describing the subject, they descended into verses or stanzas in
the form of *Suktis*, for example - *Bhave Ya Asanjammo Sattham* - from the
point of view of *Bhava*, non-restraint is the greatest weapon. Here, in the
description of *Dravya* and *Bhava* weapons, this stanza presents a very big
fact before us from the point of view of non-violence.  Through the use of
*Sukti* and *Subhashita*, the most serious facts have been revealed in a very
simple and natural language.  Here are the *Suktis* and *Subhashitas* collected
from *Pindanuyukti* and its commentary:  * *Asubhabhavo Vajjeyavvo Payattenam.*
(Ga. 67/4) * *Satabahulparampara, Vocchedo Sanjam-Tavanan.* (Ga. 83/2) * *Jo
Jahvayam Na Kanati, Micchhadrihi Tao Ha Ko Anno?* (Ga. 83/3) * *Jo U Asanjam
Sahati, Kilissati Na Tam Cha Saheti.* (Ga. 116/4) * *Danam Na Hoti Aphalm,
Pattamapattesu Sannijjujjantm.* (Ga. 213) * *Duittm Khu Garahitm.* (Ga. 201/2) *
*Suttas Appamane, Charanabhavo Tao Tu Mokkhas. Mokkhas Vi Ya Abhave,
Dikkhapavitti Niraththa U.* (Ga. 240) * *Hiyaahara Miyaahara, Appaahara Ya Je
Nara. Na Te Vijja Tigicchanti, Appaanam Te Tigicchga.* (Ga. 313) *
*Ragaggisampalitto, Bhumjanto Phasugam Pi Aharam. Niddaddingalanibham, Kareti
Charanindhanam Khippam.* (Ga. 314/2) * *Na Khalvakaami Mandanapriyo Bhavatti.*
(Mavri P. 11) * *Vinayabaladeva Samyagdarshanajnanacharitravriddhisambhavat.*
(Mavri P. 15) * *Vidvatta Hi Sa Tattvavedinam Prashamsaryaa Ya Yathavasthitam
Vastu Vivichya Heyopadeyahanopadanapravrittifala.* (Mavri P. 34) * *Jnana
Darshanayorhi Phalam Charanapratipattirrupa Sanmargpravritti.* (Mavri P. 42) *
*Anaae Chchiya Charanam, Tabbhange Janam Kim Na Bhaggam Ti?* (Mavri P. 43) *
*Naapiha Bhave'kritam Shubham Karma Paraloke Falati.* (Mavri P. 77) * *Yo
Duhkhasahayo Bavati, Tasmai Duhkham Nivedyate.* (Mavri P. 122)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-9 sUkta-subhASita sUkti kA zAbdika artha hai-suSThu-kathana  /  jisa
ukti meM anubhUti aura abhivyakti kA camatkAra hotA hai, vaha sUkti kahalAtI
hai| jo bhItarI cetanA ke parivartana ke lie spaMdana paidA kara dete haiM, ve
subhASita kahalAte haiN| sUkti meM jIvanabhara kA anubhava thor3e se zabdoM meM
ur3ela diyA jAtA hai| isase bhASA-zailI meM gatizIlatA aura sauSThava A jAtA
hai| piNDaniyukti meM prayukta sUktiyAM aura subhASita kevala upadezAtmaka hI
nahIM, balki jIvanasparzI aura preraNAspada bhI haiN| niyukti sAhitya kA
adhyanana karane se pratIta hotA hai ki niyuktikAra ne kahIM bhI prayatna nahIM
kiyA balki sahaja rUpa se viSaya kA nirUpaNa karate hue ve gAthAeM yA caraNa
sUkta rUpa meM avatarita ho gae, jaise-bhAve ya asaMjamo satthaM-bhAva dRSTi se
asaMyama sabase bar3A zastra haiN| yahAM dravya aura bhAvazastra ke nirUpaNa meM
itanA caraNa ahiMsA kI dRSTi se eka bahuta bar3A tathya hamAre sAmane prastuta
kara detA hai| sUkti va subhASita ke prayoga se gaMbhIratama tathya bahuta
sarala aura sahaja bhASA meM prakaTa huA hai| yahAM piNDaniyukti evaM usakI TIkA
ke sUkti evaM subhASita saMkalita haiM* asubhabhAvo vajjeyavvo pyttennN| (gA.
67/4) * sAtAbahulaparaMpara, vocchedo sNjm-tvaannN| (gA. 83/2) * jo jahavAyaM na
kaNati. micchadriI tao ha ko anno? (gA. 83/3) * jo u asajhaM sAhati, kilissati
na taM ca saahetii| (gA. 116/4) * dANaM na hoti aphalaM, pattamapattesu
snnnnijujjNtN| (gA. 213) * dUittaM khu grhitN| (gA. 201/2) * suttassa appamANe,
caraNAbhAvo tao tu mokkhss| mokkhassa vi ya abhAve, dikkhapavittI niratthA u||
(gA. 240) * hiyAhArA miyAhArA, appAhArA ya je nraa| na te vijjA tigicchaMti,
appANaM te tigicchgaa| (gA. 313) * rAgaggisaMpalitto, bhuMjaMto phAsugaM pi
aahaarN| niddaDDiMgAlanibhaM, kareti caraNiMdhaNaM khippaM  //  (gA. 314/2) * na
khalvakAmI maNDanapriyo bhvtiiti| (mavR pa. 11) * vinayabalAdeva
samyagdarzanajJAnacAritravRddhisambhavAt  /  (mavR pa. 15) * vidvattA hi sA
tattvavedinAM prazaMsAr2yA yA yathAvasthitaM vastu vivicya
heyopaadeyhaanopaadaanprvRttiphlaa| (mavR pa. 34) * jJAnadarzanayorhi phalaM
caraNapratipattirUpA sanmArgapravRttiH  /  (mavR pa. 42) * ANAe cciya caraNaM,
tabbhaMge jANa kiM na bhaggaM ti? (mavR pa. 43) * nApIha bhave'kRtaM zubhaM
karma paraloke phalati  /  (mavR pa.77) * yo duHkhasahAyo bhavati, tasmai
duHkhaM nivedyte| (mavR pa. 122) |

Page #466 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Appendix-10 Similes and Illustrations**  Anything that is explained through a
simile or illustration becomes easily understandable. Similes add beauty,
fluency and uniqueness to literature. Similes are the ornaments of poetry. The
author has explained even the most difficult subjects in a simple and fluent
manner through similes. Some similes are so simple and written in such a fluent
language that their meaning is understood as soon as they are read.  Some
similes also give us an idea of the culture, country, time and environment of
that time. Illustrations have also been used extensively like similes. Here only
the similes and illustrations of Pindaniya are compiled.  * **Where the cause is
a thread, the effects are like a net.** (Ga. 49/1) * **Where the cause is a
seed, the effect is always the same.** (Ga. 49/2) * **Like a burning ember in
another's hand, it does not burn.** (Ga. 68/2) * **Like a delicious food that is
not eaten, even if it is well-cooked.** (Ga. 85) * **Like a bad smell that
spreads, like a bad taste that is not eaten.** (Ga. 92) * **Like a cow that is
tied up, it should be treated like a cow.** (Ga. 96) * **Like a poisonous snake
that bites, it dies by eating its own poison.** (Ga. 123) * **Like a ghee lamp
that is lit.** (Ga. 177/2) * **Like a small thing that becomes big.** (Ga.
179/1) * **Like a very strong rope.** (Ga. 208/1) * **Like curdled milk that is
not ripe, it is ripe and unripe.** (Ga. 293) * **Like the purpose of a thing,
like the purpose of fuel for fire.** (Ga. 302/1) * **Like a burning ember, it
quickly burns the fuel of the feet.** (Ga. 314/2) * **Like a burning ember, it
does not burn until it is extinguished.** (Ga. 314/3)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-10 upamA aura dRSTAnta kisI bhI cIja kI mahattA sthApita karane ke
lie jo bAta upamA yA dRSTAnta dvArA samajhAyI jAtI hai, vaha sahajagamya ho jAtI
hai| upamA se sAhitya meM ramyatA, sarasatA aura vicitratA utpanna ho jAtI hai|
upamAeM kAvya-sAhitya kA zRMgAra hotI haiN| niyuktikAra ne kaThina se kaThina
viSaya ko upamA dvArA sarasa DhaMga se samajhAyA hai| kucha upamAeM itanI sarala
aura sarasa bhASA meM nibaddha haiM ki par3hate hI unakA arthagamya ho jAtA hai|
kucha upamAoM dvArA usa samaya kI saMskRti, deza, kAla aura vAtAvaraNa kA bhI
jJAna hotA hai| upamAoM kI bhAMti dRSTAntoM kA bhI bahulatA se prayoga huA hai|
yahAM kevala piMDaniyukti kI upamAeM va dRSTAnta saMkalita haiM* jaha kAraNaM tu
taMtU, paDassa tesiM ca hoMti pmhaaiN| gA. 49/1 * jaha kAraNamaNuvahataM, kajjaM
sAheti avikalaM niymaa| gA. 49/2 * parahattheNaMgAre, kaDhato jaha na Dajjhati
u| gA. 68/2 * jaha vaMtaM tu abhojjaM, bhattaM jaM pi ya susakkayaM aasii| gA.
85 * asuissa vippuseNa vi, jaha chikkAo abhojjaao| lukkavilukko jaha kavoDo  /
gA. 92 * esaNajutto hojjA, goNIvaccho gvttivv| gA. 96 * visaghAtiya pisiyAsI,
marati tamanno vi khAiuM mrti| iya pAraMparamaraNe, aNumarati sahassaso jaav||
gA. 123 * ghtsttugdittuNto| gA. 177/2 * appavayaM bhuaayN| gA. 179/1 *
mayamAtivacchagaM pi v| gA. 208/1 * diTuMto duddha-dahI, apariNataM pariNataM
taM c| gA. 293 * atthassa sAhaNaTThA, iMdhaNamiva odnntttthaae| gA. 302/1 *
niddaDDiMgAlanibhaM, kareti caraNiMdhaNaM khippN| gA. 314/2 *
aMgAramittasarisaM, jA na bhavati niddahati taav| gA. 314/3 87

Page #467 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-11 Nikkhepa is a specific method of explaining a word. This is a unique
contribution of Jain Acharyas in the field of linguistics. In Prakrit, there are
many possible Sanskrit transformations of the same word. The Nikkhepa method
provides knowledge of all possible meanings of that word and thus helps in
understanding the contextual meaning of the word. Nikkhepa is an important part
of the science of semantic development under linguistics. This is a special
contribution of Jain Acharyas in the field of Nyaya. Nikkhepa is actually a type
of explanation, which includes Upkrama, Anugam and Nay. In the Upaddhata
Niyukti, any subject is explained in 12 ways, in which Nikkhepa is given the
first place. The purpose of Nikkhepa is to provide four-sided knowledge of the
object or word and finally to provide knowledge of the pure word. Generally,
many Nikkhepas can be done as needed, but its four types are famous: 1. Naam
Nikkhepa 2. Sthapana Nikkhepa 3. Dravya Nikkhepa 4. Bhav Nikkhepa. A word is a
speaker of a person or thing. The concept of Naam Nikkhepa was conceived to
reveal this form of the word. The imputation of one object in another object
through imagination is Sthapana Nikkhepa. Dravya Nikkhepa is the one that
reveals the tri-temporal state of the object. Bhav Nikkhepa is indicative of the
Jain practice method. The true nature of the object is known through this. Any
word or knowledge is limited to Dravya only until the consciousness of use is
not attached to it. In Bhav Nikkhepa, there is a harmony between language and
emotion. The whole behavior of the world runs on the Nikkhepa method. When a
child is born, he lives in the world of only Naam Nikkhepa. When he grows up a
little, he establishes an object through imagination, like establishing a mother
or sister in a plastic doll. Gradually, he becomes capable of tri-temporal
knowledge and later, when the subtlety and understanding of the intellect
develops, he conducts his behavior through Bhav Nikkhepa. Bhav Nikkhepa is the
result of practice. Nikkhepa is the practical and lively use of Anekanta. For
example, someone was rich in the past, he is also called Seth in the present.
This may be untrue, but it is also possible through Dravya Nikkhepa. The
Niyuktikar adopted Nikkhepa in his method of explanation. If the Nikkhipta Gatha
and its explanation are collected from the entire Niyukti literature, a great
book can be prepared. Here 1. Aani 4, Anudva.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-11 nikSipta zabda nikSepa vyAkhyA kI eka viziSTa paddhati hai|
bhASAvijJAna ke kSetra meM jainAcAryoM kI yaha viziSTa dena hai| prAkRta meM eka
hI zabda ke aneka saMskRta rUpAntaraNa saMbhava haiN| nikSepa paddhati dvArA usa
zabda ke sabhI saMbhAvita arthoM kA jJAna karAkara zabda ke prasaMgopAtta artha
kA jJAna karAyA jAtA hai| nikSepa bhASAvijJAna ke antargata arthavikAsa-vijJAna
kA mahattvapUrNa aMga hai| nyAya ke kSetra meM jainAcAryoM kI yaha eka vizeSa
dena hai| nikSepa vastuta: vyAkhyA kA hI eka prakAra hai, jisake antargata
upakrama, anugama evaM naya kA bhI samAveza kiyA gayA hai| upodghAta niyukti meM
12 prakAra se kisI bhI viSaya kI vyAkhyA kI jAtI hai, usameM nikSepa ko prathama
sthAna prApta hai| vastu yA zabda kA caturmukhI jJAna karavAkara aMta meM zuddha
zabda kA jJAna karAnA nikSepa kA uddezya hai| sAmAnyataH AvazyakatAnusAra aneka
nikSepa kie jA sakate haiM lekina isake cAra bheda prasiddha haiM:-1. nAma
nikSepa 2. sthApanA nikSepa 3. dravya nikSepa 4. bhAva nikssep| zabda kisI
vyakti yA vastu kA vAcaka hotA hai| zabda ke isa svarUpa ko prakaTa karane ke
lie hI nAma nikSepa kI kalpanA kI gyii| kalpanA ke mAdhyama se eka vastu meM
dUsarI vastu kA Aropa sthApanA nikSepa hai| vastu kI traikAlika sthiti ko
prakaTa karane vAlA dravya nikSepa hai| bhAva nikSepa jaina sAdhanA paddhati kA
bodhaka hai| vastu ke yathArtha svarUpa kA bodha isI ke dvArA hotA hai| koI bhI
zabda yA jJAna taba taka kevala dravya taka sImita hai, jaba taka usameM upayoga
kI cetanA nahIM judd'tii| bhAva nikSepa meM bhASA aura bhAva kI saMgati rahatI
hai| saMsAra kA sArA vyavahAra nikSepa paddhati se calatA hai| jaba baccA janma
letA hai, taba vaha kevala nAma nikSepa ke jagat meM jItA hai| thor3A bar3A hone
para vaha kalpanA dvArA kisI vastu kI sthApanA karatA hai, jaiseplAsTika kI
gur3iyA meM mAM yA bahina kI sthaapnaa| dhIre-dhIre vaha traikAlika jJAna meM
sakSama ho jAtA hai aura bAda meM buddhi kI sUkSmatA aura samajha vikasita hone
para vaha bhAvanikSepa dvArA vyavahAra calAtA hai| bhAvanikSepa sAdhanA kI
phalazruti hai| nikSepa anekAnta kA vyAvahArika evaM sajIva prayoga hai| jaise
atIta meM koI dhanI thA, use vartamAna meM bhI seTha kahA jAtA hai| yaha bAta
asatya ho sakatI hai lekina dravyanikSepa dvArA yaha bhI saMbhava hai|
niyuktikAra ne apanI vyAkhyA paddhati meM nikSepa ko apnaayaa| yadi sampUrNa
niyukti-sAhitya se nikSipta gAthA evaM usakI vyAkhyA kA saMkalana kiyA jAe to
eka mahAgraMtha taiyAra ho sakatA hai| yahAM 1. Ani 4, anudvaa|

Page #468 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  296 ##  Piṇḍaniyukti  A list of the concise terms of Piṇḍaniyukti is being
presented.  **Concise Term** | **Verse Number** ------- | -------- Attakamma
(Ātmakarma) | 67 Aparinat (Aparinat) | 292-294 Ahekamm (Adhaḥkarma) | 63, 64
Āyakiya (Ātmakrīta) | 140 Āyā (Ātmā) | 61/1 Āyāhamm (Ātmaghna) | 66 Āhā (Ādhā) |
56-57/1 Uggam (Udgam) | 52-52/3 Uppādana (Utpādana) | 194-194/3 Eṣaṇā (Eṣaṇā) |
192/1 Kiyagad (Krītakṛta) | 139-143 Kūḍ (Kūṭ) | 67/4 Gaveṣaṇā (Gaveṣaṇā) | 53
Gahaṇeṣaṇā (Grahaṇaiṣaṇā) | 236 Ghāseṣaṇā (Grāsaiṣaṇā) | 302, 303 Vivega
(Viveka) | 304-307 Sanjoyanā (Sanyojana) | 4-47 Sāhammīya (Sādhārṁika) | 107-109
Piṇḍ (Piṇḍ) |  Pūtikamm (Pūtikarma) |   ## Appendix-12 ##  Proverbs and Nyāya  *
**Gangaȳāṁ ghoṣa iti nyāyāt.** (From the proverb "A cry in the Ganges.") *
**Pūrvadvayalābhaḥ punaruttaralābha e bhavatīti vacanapramāṇyāt.** (From the
authority of the statement, "The gain of the first two is the gain of the last
two.") * **Sūcanātsūtram iti nyāyāt.** (From the proverb, "A thread from a
hint.") * **Gomāṁsabhakṣaṇam bahupāpam.** (Eating beef is a great sin.) *
**Alpavyayaṁ bahvāyaṁ dānaṁ.** (A small expense, a great gift.) *
**Yatragnistatra vāyur iti vacanāt.** (From the statement, "Where there is fire,
there is wind.") * **Ādyantagrahaṇe madhyasyāpi grahaṇam iti nyāyāt.** (From the
proverb, "If the beginning and end are included, the middle is also included.")
* **Dugdhāntāni bhojanāni.** (Milk-based foods are the best.) * **Loke evaṁ
śrutiḥ - yadi kumārī ṛtumati bhavet, tarhi yāvantastasyā rudhirabindavo
nipatanti tāvato vāran tanmātā narakaṁ yāti.** (It is heard in the world - If a
young girl is menstruating, then for as many days as her blood drops fall, her
mother goes to hell.) * **Dullabhaṁ khu sutamuhaṁ.** (A child's mouth is
difficult to satisfy.) * **Ghṛtaṁ hi saktumadhye prakṣiptaṁ viśiṣṭasamyogāya
jāyate.** (Ghee, when thrown into flour, creates a special combination.)
**References:**  * **M.V.P. 12** * **M.V.P. 25** * **M.V.P. 30** * **M.V.P. 47**
* **M.V.P. 113** * **M.V.P. 155** * **M.V.P. 169** * **M.V.P. 111** * **M.V.P.
145** * **Gā. 198/2** * **M.V.P. 113**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 296 piMDaniyukti piNDaniyukti ke nikSipta zabdoM kI sUcI prastuta kI jA rahI
hainikSipta zabda gAthAMka nikSipta zabda gAthAMka attakamma (Atmakarma) 67
apariNata (apariNata) 292-94 ahekamma (adha:karma) 63, 64 Ayakiya (AtmakrIta)
140 AyA (AtmA) AyAhamma (Atmaghna) AhA (AdhA) 61/1 uggama (udgama) 56-57/1
uppAdaNA (utpAdanA) 194-194/3 esaNA (eSaNA) 52-52/3 66 kIyagaDa (krItakRta) kUDa
(kUTa) gavesaNA (gaveSaNA) gahaNesaNA (grahaNaiSaNA) ghAsesaNA (grAsaiSaNA)
vivega (viveka) saMjoyaNA (saMyojanA) sAhammiya (sAdhArmika) piMDa (piNDa)
pUtIkamma (pUtikarma) 139-143 67/4 53 236 302, 303 192/1 304-307 4-47 107-109
pariziSTa-12 lokoktiyAM evaM nyAya gaMgAyAM ghoSa iti nyaayaat| pUrvadvayalAbhaH
punaruttaralAbhe bhavati siddha iti vacanaprAmANyAt  /  sUcanAtsUtramiti
nyaayaat| gomAMsabhakSaNaM bhupaapm| alpavyayaM bahvAyaM daanN| yatrAgnistatra
vAyuriti vcnaat| AdyantagrahaNe madhyasyApi grahaNamiti nyAyAt  /  dugdhAntAni
bhojnaani| loke evaM zrutiH-yadi kumArI RtumatI bhavet , tarhi yAvantastasyA
rudhirabindavo nipatanti tAvato vArAn tanmAtA narakaM yaati| dullabhagaM khu
sutmuhN| ghRtaM hi saktumadhye prakSiptaM viziSTasaMyogAya jaayte| mavR pa. 12
mavR pa. 25 mavR pa. 30 mavR pa.47 mavR pa. 113 mavR pa. 155 mavR pa.169 mavR
pa. 111 mavR pa. 145 gA. 198/2 mavR pa. 113

Page #469 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-13 Definitions Definitions clarify the essence of a word in a concise
manner. Many definitions of words have been written in the scriptural exegetical
literature as per the context. This appendix compiles the definitions that have
appeared in the scriptures and commentaries. This appendix can be important for
research scholars.  Angara - Angara is a fire without flames. (Mavu p. 152)
Atikrama - Atikrama is the transgression of the commandments, heard and yet not
followed. (Ga. 82/3)  Atipramana - Atipramana is that which exceeds greatly,
which is more than three times. (Ga. 312/3)  Adhaḥkarma - Adhaḥkarma is the
karma that leads to a lower state of existence. (Mavu p. 36)  Adhyavapūraka -
Adhyavapūraka is the abundant replenishment, understanding the additional
acquisition for one's own purpose, and then filling it up appropriately. (Mavu
p. 35) • Adhyavapūraka is the one who, after first accomplishing his own
purpose, subsequently introduces more grains, etc. as per the requirement of the
three (previous, present, and future) seekers. (Mavu p. 115)  Anidā - Anidā is
the harming of a living being who does not know (about the harm). (Mavu p. 42)
Anisṛṣṭa - Anisṛṣṭa is that which is not distributed by all the owners for the
purpose of charitable donation. (Mavu p. 35)  Apadravana - Apadravana is the
avoidance of excessive wind (disturbance). (Pibha 16)  Apamitya (Defect in
begging alms) - Apamitya is that which is taken for the sake of a monk, even
after saying "I will give you more." (Mavu p. 35)  Aparināta - Aparināta is that
which, including the earth body, etc., is still alive and has not lost its
living nature. (Mavu p. 166)  Abhihata - Abhihata is that which is brought here
from another place for the purpose of charitable donation. (Mavu p. 35) •
Abhihata is that which is brought from one's own village or another village for
the purpose of charitable donation. (Mavu p. 35)  Ācchēdya - Ācchēdya is that
which is taken for charitable donation even from an unwilling person like a
hired servant. (Mavu p. 35)  Ātmakarma - Ātmakarma is the karma that is related
to one's own self, such as the result of one's own actions or the
characteristics of one's own knowledge-obscuring karma. (Mavu p. 36)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-13 paribhASAeM paribhASA dvArA kisI bhI zabda kA saMkSepa meM svarUpa
spaSTa ho jAtA hai| Agama vyAkhyA-sAhitya meM prasaMgavaza aneka zabdoM kI
paribhASAeM likhI gaI haiN| isa pariziSTa meM niyukti aura TIkA meM AI
paribhASAoM kA saMkalana kiyA gayA hai| zodha vidyArthiyoM ke lie yaha pariziSTa
mahattvapUrNa ho skegaa| aMgAra- jvAlArahito vahniraGgAraH  /  (mavR pa. 152)
atikrama-AhAkammAmaMtaNa, paDisuNamANe aikkamo hoti  /  (gA. 82/3) atipramANa-
bahuyAtItamatibahuM, atibahuso tinni tinni va prennN| taM ciya atippamANaM.....
/  (gA. 312/3) adhaHkarma-adhogatinibandhanaM karma adh:krm| (mavR pa. 36)
adhyavapUraka-* adhi-Adhikyena avapUraNaM svArthadattAdrahaNAdeH
sAdhvAgamanamavagamya tadyogyabhaktasiddhyarthe prAcuryeNa bharaNam adhyavapUraH
/  (mavR pa. 35) * pUrve-yAvadarthikAdyAgamanAt prathamameva svArthe niSpAdite
pazcAdyathAsaMbhavaM trayANAM yAvadarthikAdInAmarthAya avatArayati
adhikatarAMstaNDulAdIn prakSipati esso'dhyvpuurkH| (mavR pa. 115) anidA-anidA
yadajAnato vyApAdyasya sattvasya vyaapaadnm| (mavR pa. 42) anisRSTa-na nisRSTaM
sarvaiH svAmibhiH sAdhudAnArthamanujJAtaM yat tdnisRssttm| (mavR pa. 35)
apadrAvaNa-uddavaNaM puNa jANasu, ativAtavivajjitaM piiddN| (pibhA 16) apamitya
(bhikSA kA doSa)-bhUyo'pi tava dAsyAmItyevamabhidhAya yat sAdhunimittamucchinnaM
gRhyate tdpmitym| (mavR pa. 35) apariNata-pRthivIkAyAdikamapi svarUpeNa sajIvaM
sjiivtvaapribhrssttmprinntmucyte| (mavR pa. 166) abhihata-* abhi-sAdhvabhimukhaM
hRtaM-sthAnAntarAdAnItam abhihRtm| (mavR pa. 35) * abhihRtaM-yatsAdhudAnAya
svagrAmAtparagrAmAdvA smaaniitm| (mavR pa. 35) Acchedya-Acchidyate-anicchato'pi
bhRtakaputrAdeH sakAzAtsAdhudAnAya parigRhyate yat tdaacchedym| (mavR pa. 35)
Atmakarma-* AhAkammapariNato, phAsugamavi sNkilitttthprinnaamo| AyayamANo
bajjhati, taM jANasu attakammaM ti|| (gA. 67/1) * yat pAcakAdisambandhi
karmapAkAdilakSaNaM jJAnAvaraNIyAdilakSaNaM vA tadAtmanaH saMbandhi kriyate
aneneti aatmkrm| (mavR pa. 36)

Page #470 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **298**  **Piṇḍaniyukti**  **Ātmābhāvakrīta** -
*Ātmābhāvakrīta* is what is bought by the self, in the form of a discourse on
Dharma, by the self itself through its own feeling. (Mavṛ P. 97)
*Ātmābhāvakrīta* is what is taken by the worthy ones who have arisen from the
discourse on Dharma, in their share. (Mavṛ P. 97)  **Ādhākarma** - *Ādhākarma*
is what the giver carries, in the form of the body, when he gives something that
is one or many, and is to be taken. (Pibhā 18) *Ādhākarma* is what is done when
one gives something to the other bodies, for their sustenance and well-being.
(Gā. 62) *Ādhākarma* is what is done when one gives something to the six senses,
for their pleasure and displeasure, for their benefit and detriment. (Gā. 65)
**Āhuți** - *Āhuți* is the offering of ghee or other substances into the fire.
(Mavṛ P. 129)  **Ucchotkṣipta** - *Ucchotkṣipta* is when a vessel is held with
the arm extended above the eye, for the purpose of receiving something to be
given. (Mavṛ P. 110)  **Udgopana** - *Udgopana* is the desire to make the
intended object known to the people. (Mavṛ P. 29)  **Uddishṭa** - *Uddishṭa* is
what is set aside for the purpose of giving to the mendicants, such as food,
which is produced for their own sake. (Mavṛ P. 77)  **Udbhinna** - *Udbhinna* is
the ghee or other substances that are given, as a result of the opening of the
mouth of the pot, which was covered with cow dung, etc., for the purpose of
giving ghee or other substances to the virtuous. (Mavṛ P. 35)  **Upakaraṇa** -
*Upakaraṇa* is the substance that is used for the purpose of cooking, or for the
purpose of giving to the recipient. (Gā. 113) *Upakaraṇa* is the pot, etc., that
is used for the purpose of cooking food, or the substance that is given to the
recipient, such as food, etc. (Mavṛ P. 84)  **Upakaraṇapūti** - *Upakaraṇapūti*
is the purification of the utensils, such as the pot, etc., that are used for
the purpose of cooking. (Gā. 113/2)  **Oghaudeśika** - *Oghaudeśika* is the
food, etc., that is given with the intention of getting something in return,
such as a few alms, etc., even though nothing has been given in the first place.
(Mavṛ P. 77)  **Audeśika** - *Audeśika* is what is done with the intention of
giving to all the mendicants, or to all the householders, who may come together,
including the hypocrites. (Mavṛ P. 79)  **Kaṇḍaka** - *Kaṇḍaka* is the place
where the mendicants live, and where they practice restraint. It is a place
where they are together, and it is not to be abandoned. (Pibhā 19)  **Karma** -
*Karma* is what is done, such as the making of sweets, etc., from the flour,
etc., that has been collected, for the purpose of giving to the mendicants, in
addition to the giving of jaggery, etc. (Mavṛ P. 77)  **Karma** - *Karma* is
what is taught by the teacher. (Mavṛ P. 129) *Karma* is what is not harmful, and
does not produce displeasure. (Mavṛ P. 129)  **Kāpotī** - *Kāpotī* is the vessel
that men use to carry water on their shoulders. (Mavṛ P. 36)  **Kula** - *Kula*
is the lineage that is born from the father. (Mavṛ P. 129)  **Kṛta** - *Kṛta* is
what is done, such as the making of rice, etc., from the rice that has been
collected, for the purpose of giving to the mendicants, in the form of a bundle,
etc. (Mavṛ P. 77)  **Kriyā** - *Kriyā* is the particular transformation that is
in the form of non-violence, etc. (Mavṛ P. 26)  **Kriyāpiṇḍa** - *Kriyāpiṇḍa* is
the synonyms that are in the form of the indivisible and definite nature of the
action. (Mavṛ P. 26)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 298 piMDaniyukti AtmabhAvakrIta-* AtmanA svayameva bhAvena dharmakathanarUpeNa
kriitmaatmbhaavkriitm| (mavR pa. 97) * dharmakathAta utthitAnAM satAM teSAM
pArve yad gRhNAti tdaatmbhaavkriitm| (mavR pa. 97) AdhAkarma-* hiyayammi
samAheDaM, egamaNegaM ca gAhagaM jo u| vahaNaM kareti dAtA, kAyANa tamAhakammaM
ti|| (pibhA 18) . orAlasarIrANaM. uddavaNa tivAyaNaM ca jssdaa| maNamAhittA
kuvvati, AhAkammaM tayaM beti|| (gA. 62) aTThAe~ aNaTThAe, chakkAyapamaddaNaM tu
jo kuNati  /  anidAe ya nidAe, AyAhammaM tayaM beNti|| (gA. 65) Ahuti-AhutiH
agnau ghRtAdeH prkssepH|| (mavR pa. 129) uccotkSipta-yadRSTerupari bAhuM
prasArya deyavastugrahaNAya pAtraM dhriyate tattathA dhriymaannmuccotkssiptm|
(mavR pa. 110) udgopana-udgopanaM-vivakSitasya padArthasya jnprkaashcikiirssaa|
(mavR pa. 29) uddiSTa-svArthameva niSpannamazanAdikaM bhikSAcarANAM dAnAya yat
pRthakkalpitaM tduddissttm| . (mavR pa. 77) udbhinna-sAdhubhyo
ghRtAdidAnanimittaM kutupAdermukhasya gomayAdisthagitasyodghATanaM
tadyogAddeyamapi ghRtAdi udbhinnm| (mavR pa. 35) upakaraNa-* sijhaMtassuvakAraM,
dijjaMtassa va kareti jaM davvaM, taM uvkrnnN...| (gA. 113) * yaccullyAdikaM
siddhayato'nnasya, yadvA yaddAdikaM dIyamAnasya bhaktasyopakAraM karoti
taccullyAdikaM dAdikaM ca upakaraNam ityucyte| (mavR pa.84) upakaraNapUti-
kammiyakaddamamissA cullI ukkhA ya phaDDagajutA u| uvkrnnpuutimeyN...| (gA.
113/2) oghauddezika-nAdattamiha kimapi labhyate tataH katipayA bhikSA dama iti
buddhyA katipayAdhikataNDulAdiprakSepeNa yannittamazanAdi tdoghaudeshikm| (mavR
pa. 77) audezika-yaduddiSTaM kRtaM karma vA yAvantaH ke'pi bhikSAcarAH
samAgamiSyanti pAkhaNDino gRhasthA vA  /  tebhyaH sarvebhyo'pi dAtavyamiti
saGkalpitaM bhavati tadA tdodeshikmucyte| (mavR 79) kaNDaka-tatthANaMtA u
carittapajjavA hoMti saMjamaTThANaM  /  saMkhAIyANi u tANi kaMDagaM hoti
nAtavvaM  /  (pibhA 19) karma-yatpunarvivAhaprakaraNAdAvuddharitaM modakacUrNAdi
tadbhUyo'pi bhikSAcarANAM dAnAya guDapAkadAnAdinA modakAdi kRtaM
ttkrmetybhidhiiyte| (mavR pa. 77) karma-* anAcAryopadiSTaM krm| (mavR pa. 129) *
anAvarjakam aprItyutpAdakaM krm| (mavR pa. 129) kApotI-kApotI yayA puruSAH
skandhArUDhyA pAnIyaM vahanti  /  (mavR pa. 36) kula-pitRsamutthaM kulm|| (mavR
pa. 129) kRta-yatpunaruddharitaM sat zAlyodanAdikaM bhikSAdAnAya
karambAdirUpatayA kRtaM ttkRtmityucyte| (mavR pa. 77) kriyA-
prANAtipAtAdiviratirUpaH pariNAmavizeSastu kriyeti| (mavR pa. 26) kriyApiNDa-ye
tu kriyAyA avibhAgaparicchedarUpAH paryAyAste kriyApiNDaH  /  (mavR pa. 26)

Page #471 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **299**  **Chapter 13: Definitions**  **Krodhapinḍa:**
The state of being filled with anger, or the state of being attached to
something that is not worthy of attachment. It is a state of being overpowered
by anger.  **(Verse 217)**  The one who experiences this state of anger is
called a Krodhapinḍa.  **(Verse 218)**  When someone is given something, or when
they are deprived of something, they may experience anger. This is the fruit of
anger, and the one who experiences this is called a Krodhapinḍa.
**Kṣīradhātrī:**  A woman who breastfeeds a child is called a Kṣīradhātrī.
**(Māvavṛtti, Page 121)**  **Gaveṣaṇa:**  The act of searching for something
that is not found.  **(Māvavṛtti, Page 29)**  **Guṇana:**  The act of repeating
a text or a passage.  **(Māvavṛtti, Page 177)**  **Gairuka:**  A wandering
ascetic who wears clothes dyed with geru (a type of red ochre).  **(Māvavṛtti,
Page 130)**  **Gauṇa:**  A name that is derived from something else, and is
dependent on that other thing for its meaning.  **(Māvavṛtti, Page 4)**
**Cāritra:**  A specific type of conduct that involves refraining from harming
living beings, and other such actions.  **(Māvavṛtti, Page 27)**  **Cūrṇa:**  A
powder that is used to bring good fortune or other auspicious outcomes.
**(Māvavṛtti, Page 121)**  **Chāyā:**  The absence of sunlight, which is
characterized by a dark, cool atmosphere.  **(Māvavṛtti, Page 66)**  **Jāti:**
A person's lineage, which is determined by their mother.  **(Māvavṛtti, Page
129)**  **Jñāna:**  The knowledge of the true nature of things.  **(Māvavṛtti,
Page 26)**  **Jñānapinḍa:**  A collection of knowledge that is interconnected
and inseparable.  **(Māvavṛtti, Page 26)**  **Dagalaka:**  A piece of stone or
other hard object that is used to clean the anus after defecation.
**(Māvavṛtti, Page 9)**  **Darśana:**  A specific type of insight that is gained
through understanding the true nature of things, as revealed by the Jinas.
**(Māvavṛtti, Page 26, 27)**  **Dūtī:**  A messenger who carries a message from
one person to another.  **(Māvavṛtti, Page 121)**  **Dūtīpinḍa:**  The state of
being a messenger.  **(Māvavṛtti, Page 121)**  **Deśa:**  An area of land that
is 100 hastas (cubits) in length and width.  **(Māvavṛtti, Page 105)**
**Deśadeśa:**  An area of land that is between 100 hastas and 200 hastas in
length and width.  **(Māvavṛtti, Page 105)**  **Dravyadhaḥkarma:**  The act of
moving a substance from one place to another, such as lifting it, carrying it,
or pulling it.  **(Verse 63)**  **Dravyapūtī:**  A substance that has a foul
smell, such as a dead body.  **(Verse 108)**  **Dhātrīpinḍa:**  The state of
being a nurse or a caregiver.  **(Māvavṛtti, Page 121)**  **Nāmapiṇḍa:**  A name
that is given to something based on its qualities or its function.  **(Verse
5)**  **Nidā:**  The act of saving the lives of others, even at the cost of
one's own life.  **(Māvavṛtti, Page 42)**  **Nimitam:**  The cause of something,
such as good or bad actions.  **(Māvavṛtti, Page 121)**  **Niveśana:**  A house
or a dwelling place.  **(Māvavṛtti, Page 103)**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 299 pari. 13 : paribhASAeM krodhapiNDa-. vijjA-tavappabhAvaM, rAyakule vAvi
vallabhattaM se| nAuM orassabalaM, jo labbhati kohapiMDo so|| (gA. 217) * annesi
dijjamANe, jAyaMto vA aladdhio kujjhe| _kohaphalammi vi diTe, jaM labbhati
kohapiMDo u|| (gA. 218) kSIradhAtrI-yA svayaM stanyaM pAyayati bAlakaM sA
svayaMkaraNe kssiirdhaatrii| (mavR pa. 121) gaveSaNa-gaveSaNamanupalabhyamAnasya
padArthasya sarvataH pribhaavnm| (mavR pa. 29) guNana-guNanaM
granthaparAvartanam  /  (mavR pa. 177) gairuka-gairukA: gerukarajjitavAsasaH
parivrAjakAH  /  (mavR pa. 130) gauNa-guNena paratantreNa vyutpattinimittena
dravyAdinA yanniSpannaM nAma tad gaunnm| (mavR pa. 4) cAritra-
prANAtipAtAdiviratirUpastu prinnaamvishessshcaaritrm| (mavR pa. 27) cUrNa-cUrNaH
saubhAgyAdijanako drvykssodH| (mavR pa. 121) chAyA-chAyA nAma pArzvataH
sarvatrAtapapariveSTitapratiniyatadezavartI zyAmapudgalAtmaka AtapAbhAvaH  /
(mavR pa. 66) jAti-mAtuH samutthA jaatiH| (mavR pa. 129) jJAna-
vastuyAthAtmyaparicchedarUpo'zo jnyaanm| (mavR pa. 26) jJAnapiNDa-ye
jJAnasyAvibhAgaparicchedarUpAH paryAyAste parasparaM tAdAtmyasaMbandhenAvasthitA
iti jJAnapiNDaH  /  (mavR pa. 26) ddglk-
ddglkaa:-puriissotsrgaanntrmpaanpronychnkpaassaannaadikhnnddruupaa| (mavR pa. 9)
darzana-vastuni paricchidyamAne jinairitthamuktaM ata idaM tatheti
pratipattinibandhanaM rucirUpaH pariNAmavizeSo drshnm| (mavR pa. 26, 27) dUtI-
dUtI prsndissttaarthkthikaa|| (mavR pa. 121) dUtIpiNDa-yastu dUtItvasya
karaNenotpAdyate sa dUtIpiNDaH  /  (mavR pa. 121) deza-hastazatapramitaM kSetraM
deshH| (mavR pa. 105) dezadeza-hastazatAdArAddhastazatamadhye dezadezaH  /
(mavR pa. 105) dravyaadhaHkarma-jaM davvaM udagAdisu, chUDhamahe vayati jaM ca
bhaarennN| sItIeN rajjueNa va, otaraNaM dvvhekmmN|| (gA. 63) dravyapUti-
gaMdhAdiguNavisiTuM, jaM davvaM asuigNdhdvvjutN| pUti tti pariharijjati, taM
jANasu davvapUti tti  //  (gA. 108) dhAtrIpiNDa-dhAtrItvasya karaNena kAraNena
ca ya utpAdyate piNDaH sa dhaatriipinnddH| (mavR pa. 121) nAmapiMDa-goNNaM
samayakataM vA, jaM vAvi havejja tadubhaeNa ktN| taM beMti naampiNddN....| (gA.
5) nidA- * parijJAnavatA'pi yajjIvAnAM prANavyaparopaNaM sA nidaa| (mavR pa. 42)
* svArthe parArthe ceti vibhAgenoddizya yat prANavyaparopaNaM sA nidaa| (mavR
pa. 42) nimitam-nimittam atItAdyarthaparijJAnahetuH shubhaashubhcessttaadi|
(mavR pa. 121) nivezana-nivezanam-ekaniSkramaNapravezAni dvyaadigRhaanni| (mavR
pa. 103)

Page #472 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
300 **Nivodakam** is the water that drips from the roof of a house during the
rainy season. (Mavri P. 15) A **Paragramaduti** is a messenger who goes to
another village and delivers a message. (Mavri P. 126) **Parinata** means
something that has been transformed or changed by a living being. (Mavri P. 166)
Milk that has been transformed into curd due to its own nature is called
**Parinata**. (Mavri P. 166) **Pachchātsanstava** is a type of praise or respect
that is given after the recipient has already received something. (Gā. 226)
Praise or respect given to one's mother-in-law, father-in-law, etc. is called
**Pachchātsanstava**. (Mavri P. 140) **Pākhaṇḍimishra** is something that is
cooked together with both pure and impure ingredients. (Mavri P. 88) **Piṇḍa**
is a term used to describe the gathering of many things together. (Mavri P. 26)
**Pūrvāsanstava** is a type of praise or respect that is given before the
recipient has received something. (Gā. 225) Praise or respect given to one's
parents, etc. is called **Pūrvāsanstava**. (Mavri P. 140) **Prakataduti** is a
messenger who delivers a message by saying, "Your mother says this" or "Your
father says this." (Mavri P. 126) **Praṇīta** means something that has been
well-prepared or well-made. (Gā. 312/1) **Pramaṇadoṣa** is a fault in the
quantity or measure of food. (Gā. 312) **Prāduṣkaraṇa** is the act of making
something impure or contaminated. (Mavri P. 35) **Prābhrita** is something that
is given to someone as a gift or offering with respect and honor. (Mavri P. 35)
**Bhaktapānapūti** is a term used to describe the purification of food and
drink. (Gā. 113/4) **Bhāva** is a mental state or feeling. (Mavri P. 37)
**Bhāvaadhakarma** is a type of action that is performed with a specific
intention or feeling. (Gā. 64) **Bhāvapinḍa** is a type of action that is
performed with a specific intention or feeling. (Gā. 46) **Maṅkha** is a person
who wears a special garment and deceives people. (Mavri 96) **Mantra** is a
sacred utterance or formula. (Mavri P. 129) **Mantra** is also a type of magical
power that is controlled by a deity. (Mavri P. 121) **Maṇḍala** is the area of
land that is available to a wrestler who enters a wrestling competition. (Mavri
P. 129) **Mārgaṇa** is the act of searching for something with intelligence and
skill. (Mavri P. 29)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 300 piMDaniyukti nItodaka-varSAsu gRhacchAdanaprAntagalitaM jalaM niivodkm|
(mavR pa. 15) paragrAmadUtI-yA tu paragrAme gatvA sandezaM kathayati sA
prgraamduutii| (mavR pa. 126) pariNata-. jIvena vipramuktaM prinntm| (mavR pa.
166) * dugdhaM dugdhatvAt paribhraSTaM dadhibhAvamApannaM prinntmucyte| (mavR
pa. 166) pazcAtsaMstava- * guNasaMthaveNa pacchA, saMtAsaMteNa jo thunnijjaahi|
dAyAraM dinnammI, so pacchAsaMthavo hoti  /  /  (gA. 226) * yastu
zvazrUzvazurAdirUpatayA saMstavaH sa pshcaatsNstvH| (mavR pa. 140)
pAkhaNDimizra-yattu kevalapAkhaNDiyogyamAtmayogyaM caikatra pacyate
ttpaakhnnddimishrm| (mavR pa. 88) piNDa-piNDo nAma bahUnAmekatra miilnmucyte||
(mavR pa. 26) pUrvasaMstava-* guNasaMthaveNa puTviM, saMtAsaMteNa jo
thunnijjaahi| dAyAramadinnammi u, so puvviM saMthavo hoti|| (gA. 225) *
mAtApitrAdirUpatayA yaH saMstavaH-paricayaH sa puurvsNstvo| (mavR pa. 140)
prakaTadUtI-sA tava mAtA sa vA tava pitA evaM bhaNati-sandezaM kathayati sA
prkttduutii| (mavR pa. 126) praNIta-jaM puNa gavaMtanehaM pnniitm|| (gA. 312/1)
pramANadoSa-pakAmaM ca nikAmaM ca, paNItaM bhttpaannmaahaare| atibahuyaM
atibahuso, pamANadoso munneyvvo|| (gA. 312) prAduSkaraNa ( doSa)-sAdhunimittaM
maNyAdisthApanena bhittAdyapanayanena vA prAduHprakaTatvena deyasya vastunaH
karaNaM praadusskrnnm| (mavR pa. 35) prAbhRta-* kasmaicidiSTAya pUjyAya vA
bahumAnapurassarIkAreNa yadabhISTaM vastu dIyate ttpraabhRtmucyte| (mavR pa. 35)
bhaktapAnapUti-attaTThiya AdANe, DoyaM loNaM ca kamma hiMgU vaa| taM
bhttpaannpuutii......| (gA. 113/4) bhAva-bhAvo nAma mAnasikaH pariNAmaH  /
(mavR pa. 37) bhAvaadhaHkarma-saMjamaThANANaM kaMDagANa lesaa-tthitiivisesaannN|
bhAvaM ahe karetI, tamhA taM bhaavhekmmN|| (gA. 64) bhAvapiMDa-kammANa jeNa
bhAveNa, appage ciNati cikkaNaM piMDaM, so hoti bhaavpiNddo...| (gA. 46) maMkha-
maGkhaH-kedArako yaH paTamupadarzya lokmaavrjyti| (mavR 96) maMtra-* mantrAH
praNavaprabhRtikA akssrpddhtyH| (mavR pa. 129) * saiva puruSadevatAdhiSThitA
asAdhanA vA mantraH  /  (mavR pa. 121) maNDala-praviSTasyaikasya mallasya
yallabhyaM bhUkhaNDaM tnmnnddlm| (mavR pa. 129) maargnn-maargnnN-
nipunnbuddhyaa'nvessnnm| (mavR pa. 29)

Page #473 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Definitions (Pari. 13)  **Malapahrita:** That which is taken from the Mala (a
type of offering) or from the Manca (a platform) and is considered worthy by the
Sadhus (holy people), is called Malapahrita. (Mavri P. 35)  **Mishrajata:** That
which is produced by mixing together the ingredients for the meal, including the
ingredients for the Sadhus and the ingredients for the household, is called
Mishrajata. (Mavri P. 115) * **Mishrajata:** That which is produced by the
feeling of devotion, which is a combination of the devotion to the family and
the devotion to the Sadhus, is called Mishrajata. (Mavri P. 35)  **Murmur:** The
Agni-kana (fire-particle) which is of the Apingala (a type of fire) and is not
counted, is called Murmur. (Mavri P. 152) * **Murmur:** The Agni-kana (fire-
particle) which is of the Apingala (a type of fire) and is half-cooked, is
called Murmur. (Ga. 252/1)  **Yathakrta:** That which is obtained without any
ritualistic actions, and is in the same form as it was before, is called
Yathakrta. (Mavri P. 15)  **Yavadarthic Mishrajata:** That which is cooked
together for both the household and the Sadhus, with the intention that some
householders, non-householders, or Bhiksacharas (mendicants) will come together,
is called Yavadarthic Mishrajata. (Mavri P. 88)  **Rajoharana:** The first seat,
which is three Dandikas (a unit of measurement) wide and one Hasta (handspan)
long, and is used for removing dust, is called Rajoharana. (Mavri P. 13)
**Vataka:** A covered and fixed place for sitting is called Vataka. (Mavri P.
103)  **Vidya:** The knowledge of letters, which is presided over by a female
deity with wealth, is called Vidya. (Mavri P. 141)  **Vidhyata:** That which is
not clearly visible at first, but becomes clearly visible after the fuel is
added and the fire increases, is called Vidhyata. (Mavri P. 152)  **Vibhaga
Uddeshik:** That which is separated and kept aside for taking, after being taken
out from the marriage ceremony or other such events, is called Vibhaga Uddeshik.
(Mavri P. 77)  **Shilpa:** * **Shilpa:** That which is taught by the Acharya
(teacher) is called Shilpa. (Mavri P. 129) * **Shilpa:** That which is pleasing
and produces joy is called Shilpa. (Mavri P. 129)  **Saangar:** That which is
Saangar (with fire) is that which is eaten by a person who is unconscious. (Ga.
314)  **Sankalika:** This is the limit, which is not heard from the scriptures
but is known from the Sadhus, that is, one Sanghataka (a type of monk) tells
another, and he tells another, and so on. (Mavri P. 81)  **Samyamasreni:** Six
Sthanakas (stages of spiritual progress), which are as vast as the countless
worlds and the space of the universe, are called Samyamasreni. (Mavri P. 41)
**Samyojana:** The joining together of delicate things like Sukumarikas (a type
of food) with pieces of food, for the purpose of increasing the taste, is called
Samyojana. (Mavri P. 2)  **Sadhuma:** That which is Sadhuma (with smoke) is that
which is eaten by a person who is criticizing. (Ga. 314)  **Samajvala:** That
which has flames that touch the ears, from the base of the Pitara (a type of
cooking pot) upwards, is called Samajvala. (Mavri P. 152)  **Samuddesha:** That
which is given to the Pakhandis (hypocrites) is called Samuddesha. (Mavri P. 79)
**Sthapana (Dosha):** The keeping aside of an object for a certain period of
time, with the intention of giving it to the Sadhus, is called Sthapana. (Mavri
P. 35)  **Sthapana Pind:** In the eyes, in the teeth, in the waist, in the
stool, in the mind, in the body, in the non-body, the Sthapana Pind is present.
(Ga. 6)  **Swagrama Dooti:** If a messenger is in the same village where the
Sadhu resides, then she is called Swagrama Dooti. (Mavri P. 126)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 13 : paribhASAeM 301 mAlApahRta-mAlAt-maMcAderapahataM-sAdhvarthamAnItaM
yadbhaktAdi tnmaalaaphRtm| (mavR pa. 35) mizrajAta-* mizrajAtaM taducyate
yatprathamata eva yAvadarthikAdyarthamAtmArthaM ca mizraM nisspaadyte| (mavR pa.
115) _ * kuTumbapraNidhAnasAdhupraNidhAnamIlanarUpeNa bhAvena jAtaM yad bhaktAdi
tnmishrjaatm| (mavR pa. 35) murmura-* ApiMgalamagaNikaNA mummur| (mavR pa. 152)
* ApiGgalA ardhavidhyAtA agnikaNA murmurH| (gA. 252/1) yathAkRta-yAni
parikarmarahitAnyeva tathArUpANi labdhAni tAni ythaakRtaani| (mavR pa. 15)
yAvadarthikamizrajAta-yAvantaH kecana gRhasthA agRhasthA vA bhikSAcarAH
samAgamiSyanti teSAmapi bhaviSyati kuTumbe ceti buddhyA sAmAnyena
bhikSAcarayogyaM kuTumbayogyaM caikatra militaM yat pacyate tadyAvadarthikaM
mishrjaatm| (mavR pa.88) rajoharaNa-rajoharaNaM ti
daNDikAveSTakatrayapramANapRthutvA ekahastAyAmA hastatribhAgAyAmadazAparikalitA
prathamA yA niSadyA prAguktA sA rjohrnnm| (mavR pa. 13) vATaka-vATaka:
paricchannaH pratiniyataH sannivezaH  /  (mavR pa. 103) vidyA-sasAdhanA
strIrUpadevatAdhiSThitA vaa'kssrpddhtirvidyaa| (mavR pa. 141) vidhyAta-ya:
spaSTatayA prathamaM nopalabhyate, pazcAttvindhanaprakSepe pravarddhamAnaH
spaSTamupalabhyate sa vidhyAtaH  /  (mavR pa. 152) vibhAgaauddezika-
vIvAhaprakaraNAdiSu yaduddharitaM tat pRthak kRtvAdAnAya kalpitaM sat
vibhaagaudeshikm| (mavR pa. 77) zilpa-* AcAryopadiSTaM tu shilpm| (mavR pa. 129)
* AvarjakaM-prItyutpAdakaM shilpm| (mavR pa. 129) saaMgAra-taM hoti saiMgAlaM,
jaM AhAreti mucchito sNto| (gA. 314) saMkalikA-saGkulietyAdi azrute-
zeSasAdhubhiranAkarNite iyaM pUrvapuruSAcIrNA maryAdA, yaduta saGkalikayA eka:
saGghATako'nyasmai kathayati so'pynysmaayityevNruupyaa| (mavR pa. 81)
saMyamazreNi-asaMkhyeyalokAkAzapradezapramANAni SaT sthAnakAni
sNymshrennirucyte| (mavR pa. 41) saMyojanA-saMyojanA gRddhyA
rasotkarSasampAdanAya sukumArikAdInAM khaNDAdibhiH saha miilnm| (mavR pa. 2)
sadhUma-taM puNa hoti sadhUmaM, jaM AhAreti niNdto| (gA. 314) samajvAla-yaH
punaH piTharasya budhnAdUrdhvamapi yAvatkarNI jvAlAbhiH spRzati sa smjvaalH|
(mavR pa. 152) samuddeza-pAkhaNDinAM deyatvena kalpitaM smuddeshm| (mavR pa. 79)
sthApanA (doSa)-sthApanaM sAdhubhyo deyamiti buddhyA deyavastunaH kiyantaM kAlaM
vyavasthApanaM sthApanA  /  (mavR pa. 35) sthApanApiMDa-akkhe varADae vA, kaTe
putthe va cittakamme vaa| sabbhAvamasabbhAve, ThavaNApiMDaM viyANAhi  //  (gA.
6) svagrAmadUtI-yasmin grAme sAdhurvasati tasminneva grAme yadi sandezakathikA
tarhi sA svgraamduutii| (mavRpa.126)

Page #474 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-14 Difference in meaning of two words (The author and commentator have
revealed the difference in meaning of two words as the context demands. This
appendix will be very important for students researching in the field of
linguistics.) **Aushadh and Bheshaj** Aushadhanni केवलहरीतक्यादीनि, Bheshajanni
tu teshamev vyadeenamekatra militva churnani. (Mavri p. 19) **Nishthit and
Krit** Asanadina chaunh vi, aam j sahugahanpauggam. Tan niththitam viyanasu,
uvakkhadan tu kadan hoti. (Ga. 79) **Adhakarm and Kaumodeshik** Yat prathamateva
sadvartham nishpaditam tadaadhakarm, yat prathamatah sad bhuyo'pi pakakaranena
sanskriyate tatkaumodeshik. (Mavri p. 82) **Adhyavapurk and Mishrajat**
Mishrajatam taduchyate yatprathamateva yavadarthicadyarthamaatmartham cha
mishram nishpadhyate, yatpunah prathamatah arabyate svartham
paschatprabhutanarthinah pasandinah sadhun va samagtanavagamy tesham
arthayaadikataram jalatanduladi prakshipyate so'dhyavapurk iti. Mishrajate
prathamateva sthalyam prabhutam jalamaropyate, adhikatarashcha tandulaah
kandanaadibhirupakramjante, phaladicam api cha prathamateva prabhuutataram
sanrabhyate, adhyavapurke tu prathamatah svartham stokataram tanduladi grihyate,
paschadyavadarthicadinimittam adhikataram tanduladi prakshipyate, tasmat
tandulaadinaamadanakale yadvichitram parimanam ten mishradhyavapurkayonatvam
avaseyam. (Mavri p. 115, 116) **Vidya and Mantra** Vidya
strirupdevaataadhisthita sasadhana va'ksharaviseshapadhati, saiva
purushadevaataadhisthita asadhana va mantra. (Mavri p. 121) **Jati and Kul**
Matuh samuttha jati, pitrusamuttham kul. (Mavri p. 129) **Karm and Shilp** Karm-
krishyaadi, shilpam-turnnaadi-turnanasivanaprabhrti, athava anavarjakam
apritiutpadakam karm itaratu avarjakam pritiutpadakam shilpam, anye tvaahu-
anaacharyopadistam karm, aacharyopadistam tu shilpam. (Mavri p. 129) 1. Nichu
Bha. 3 p. 412; Kammasippanam imo viseso-vina ayariovadesen j kjjati tanharagadi
tan kamma, itaram pun j ayariovadesen kjjati tan sippam.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-14 do zabdoM kA arthabheda (graMthakAra aura TIkAkAra ne prasaMgavaza
do zabdoM meM hone vAle arthabheda ko prakaTa kiyA hai| bhASAvijJAna ke kSetra
meM zodha karane vAle vidyArthiyoM ke lie yaha pariziSTa atyanta mahattvapUrNa
hogaa|) auSadha aura bheSaja auSadhAni kevalaharItakyAdIni, bheSajAni tu
teSAmeva vyAdInAmekatra mIlitvA cuurnnaani| (mavR pa. 19) niSThita aura kRta
asaNAdINa cauNha vi, AmaM jaM saahughnnpaauggN| taM niTThitaM viyANasu ,
uvakkhaDaM tU kaDaM hoti  //  (gA. 79) AdhAkarma aura kamauddezika yat
prathamata eva sAdhvarthaM niSpAditaM tadAdhAkarma, yat prathamataH sad bhUyo'pi
pAkakaraNena saMskriyate ttkauddeshikm| (mavR pa. 82) adhyavapUraka aura
mizrajAta mizrajAtaM taducyate yatprathamata eva yAvadarthikAdyarthamAtmArthaM
ca mizraM niSpAdyate, yatpunaH prathamata Arabhyate svArthaM
pazcAtprabhUtAnarthinaH pASaNDinaH sAdhUn vA samAgatAnavagamya
teSAmarthAyAdhikataraM jalataNDulAdi prakSipyate so'dhyavapUraka iti| mizrajAte
prathamata eva sthAlyAM prabhUtaM jalamAropyate, adhikatarAzca taNDulAH
kaNDanAdibhirupakramyante, phalAdikamapi ca prathamata eva prabhUtataraM
saMrabhyate, adhyavapUrake tu prathamataH svArthaM stokataraM taNDulAdi gRhyate,
pazcAdyAvadarthikAdinimittamadhikataraM taNDulAdi prakSipyate,
tasmAttaNDulAdInAmAdAnakAle yadvicitraM parimANaM tena mizrAdhyavapUrakayo
naatvmvseym| (mavR pa. 115, 116) vidyA aura maMtra vidyA strIrUpadevatAdhiSThitA
sasAdhanA vA'kSaravizeSapaddhatiH, saiva puruSadevatAdhiSThitA asAdhanA vA
mntrH| (mavR pa. 121) jAti aura kula mAtuH samutthA jAtiH, pitRsamutthaM kulm|
(mavR pa. 129) karma aura zilpa _ karma-kRSyAdi, zilpaM-tUrNAdi-
tUrNanasIvanaprabhRti, athavA anAvarjakam aprItyutpAdakaM karma itarattu
AvarjakaM prItyutpAdakaM zilpam, anye tvAhuH-anAcAryopadiSTaM karma,
AcAryopadiSTaM tu shilpm| (mavR pa. 129) 1. nicU bhA. 3 pR. 412; kammasippANaM
imo viseso-viNA AyariovadeseNa jaM kajjati taNahAragAdi taM kamma, itaraM puNa
jaM AyariovadeseNa kajjati taM sippaM  /  |

Page #475 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pari. 14: Differentiation of Two Words  **Churna and Vasas** Churna is a dry
or moist powder produced from general substances, while Vasas are dry or moist
powders produced from fragrant substances. (Mavri P. 143)  **Unmisra and
Sanhrut** When two substances are mixed together and given, like rice mixed with
kusha grass or curd, it is called Unmisra. Sanhrut is when a substance that is
to be given in a vessel is collected elsewhere, like in a container, and then
given. This is the difference between the two. (Mavri P. 165)  **Sadharan
Anisrusht and Datribhava Aparinat** Sadharan Anisrusht is when the giver is not
directly present, while Datribhava Aparinat is when the giver is present. (Mavri
P. 166)  **Hitahar and Mitahar** Those who eat food that is not contradictory in
terms of substances but is beneficial in terms of its effect are called Hitahar.
Those who eat food in a measured quantity are called Mitahar. (Mavri P. 174)
**Prakama Bhojan and Nikama Bhojan** The food that one eats beyond the thirty-
two morsels is called Prakama Bhojan. The food that one eats beyond the
prescribed quantity every day is called Nikama Bhojan. (Mavri P. 174)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 14 : do zabdoM kA arthabheda cUrNa aura sAmAnyadravyaniSpannaH zuSka
ArdrA vA kSodazcUrNa, sugandhadravyaniSpannAzca zuSkapeSampiSya vAsAH  /  (mavR
pa. 143 ) unmizra aura saMhRta dve api dravye mizrayitvA yaddadAti yathaudanaM
kuzanena - dadhyAdinA mizrayitvA tadunmizram, saMharaNaM tu yadbhAjanasyamadeyaM
vastu tadanyatra kApi sthaganikAdau saMhRtya dadAti, tato'yamanayoH parasparaM
vizeSaH  /  (mavR pa. 165 ) sAdhAraNa anisRSTa aura dAtRbhAva apariNata
sAdhAraNAnisRSTaM dAyakaparokSatve, dAtRbhAvApariNataM tu dAyakasamakSatve  /
hitAhAra aura mitAhAra 303 ( mavR pa. 166 ) dravyato'viruddhAni dravyANi,
bhAvata eSaNIyaM tadAhArayanti ye te hitAhArAH, mitaM pramANopetamAhArayantIti
mitAhArAH  /  prakAmabhojana evaM nikAmabhojana (mavR pa. 174)
dvAtriMzadAdikavalebhyaH pareNa parato bhuJjAnasya yadbhojanaM
tatprakAmabhojanaM tameva tu pramANAtItamAhAraM pratidivasamaznato
nikAmabhojanam  /  ( mavR pa. 174 )

Page #476 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-15 The quoted verses from the Malayagiri Vritti are: Anga Saro
Lakkhanam (c), Vanjanam Suvino Taha. Chhinnam Bhomantalikkha Ya, Aae Atth
Viyahiyaa. (p. 121, Anvi 1/2) Atistani Tu Chipitam, Kharpina Tu Danturam.
Madhyastani Mahachhidra, Dhatri Saumyavukhangkari. (p. 123) Asanam Panagam
Cheva, Khaimim Saimim Taha. Jam Janejja Sunejja Va, Samanaththa Pagadam Imam.
(p. 62, Dasha. 5/1/53) Ahitasanasamparkat, Sarvarogodbhavo Yatah. Tasmattadhitam
Tyajyam, Nyayam Pathyanishevnam. (p. 174) Indiehindayatthehim, Samahanam Cha
Appano. Nanam Pavattae Jamha, Nimittam Ten Ahiyem. (p. 121) Uddesiyami Navagam,
Uvagarane Jam Cha Pujiyam Hoi. Javantiyami Sagayam, Cha Ajjoyarae Ya
Padhamapayam. (p. 117) Ubhayamuham Rasidugam, Hidillaanantarena Bhay Padhamam.
Laddha Rasivibhatte, Tassuvari Gunittu Sanjoga. (p. 21) Aae Mahanimittaa U, Atth
Samparikittiyaa. Aaehim Bhaava Najjanti, Titaanaagayasampyaa. (p. 121, Anvi 1/3)
Aae Visohayanto, Pindam Sohei Sansao Natthi. Aae Avisohinte Charittabheyam
Viyanahhi. (p. 178) Krishna Bhramshayate Varne, Gauri Tu Balavarjita.
Tasmaschayama Bhaveddhaatri, Balavarnaih Prasansita. (p. 123)
Kshapakshreniparigataha Sa Samarthaha Sarvakarminam Karma. Kshapayitumeko Yadi
Karmasankramaha Syatparakrutasy. (p. 44) Khanthi Ya Maddava'jjava Mutti Tava
Sanjame Ya Bodhdhavae. Saccham Soyam Akinchnam Cha Bhabham Cha Jaidhammo. (p.
25, Dashani 225) Galai Balam Ucchaho, Avei Sidhilei Sayalavaavare. Nasai Sattam
Arai, Vivaddae Asanarhiyasas. (p. 177) Charittammi Asantammi, Nivvanam Na U
Gachchai. Nivvanammi Asantammi, Savva Dikkha Niraththaga. (p. 178, Nibha 6679,
Vyabha 4216) Chhatthanaganavasane, Annam Chhatthanayam Puno Annam. Evamasankha
Loga, Chhatthananam Munayavva. (p. 41, Pansam. 444) Jaththa Ya Jam Janejja,
Nikkhevam Nikkhive Niravasesam. Jaththa Vi Ya Na Janejja, Chaukkayam Nikkhive
Tattha. (p. 3, Ani 4) Jassaththa Aarambho, Panivho Hoi Tassa Niyamenam. Panivhae
Vayabhangao, Vayabhangae Doggaye Cheva. (p. 46) Jaadyam Bhavathi
Sthuraayaastanukyaastva Balamkaram. Tasmanmadhyabalastayaah, Stanyam Pustikaram
Smritam. (p. 123) Tam Natthi Jam Na Bahai, Tilatusaimittam Pi Ettha Kayass.
Sannijham Savvaduhaai Denti Aahararhiyasas. (p. 177) Tam Bhavae Bhattapanam Tu,
Sanjayaan Akappiyan. Dentiyam Padiyaikkhe, Na Me Kappi Taaisan. (p. 62, Dasha.
5/54)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-15 malayagiri vRtti kI uddhRta gAthAeM aMgaM saro lakkhaNaM (ca),
vaMjaNaM suviNo thaa| chinnaM bhomaMtalikkhA ya, ee aTTha viyaahiyaa|| (pa. 121,
aMvi 1/2) atistanI tu cipiTaM, kharapInA tu dnturm| madhyastanI mahAcchidrA,
dhAtrI saumyasukhaGkarI  //  (pa.123) asaNaM pANagaM ceva, khAimaM sAimaM thaa|
jaM jANejja suNejjA vA, samaNaTThA pagaDaM imaM  //  (pa. 62, daza. 5/1/53)
ahitAzanasamparkAt, sarvarogodbhavo yataH  /  tasmAttadahitaM tyAjyaM, nyAyyaM
pathyaniSevaNam  /  /  (pa. 174) iMdiehiMdiyatthehiM, samAhANaM ca appaNo  /
nANaM pavattae jamhA, nimittaM teNa AhiyaM  //  (pa.121) uddesiyammi navagaM,
uvagaraNe jaM ca pUiyaM hoii| jAvaMtiyamIsagayaM, ca ajjhoyarae ya pddhmpyN||
(pa. 117) ubhayamuhaM rAsidugaM, hiDillANaMtareNa bhaya paDhamaM  /  laddhaha
rAsivibhatte, tassuvari guNittu sNjogaa| (pa. 21) ee mahAnimittA u, aTTha
sNprikittiyaa| eehiM bhAvA najjaMtI, tiitaanaagysNpyaa|| (pa. 121, aMvi 1/3) ee
visohayaMto, piMDaM sohei saMsao ntthi| ee avisohiMte carittabheyaM viyANAhi  /
/  (pa. 178) kRSNA bhraMzayate varNe, gaurI tu blvrjitaa| tasmAcchayAmA
bhaveddhAtrI, balavarNaiH prazaMsitA  /  /  (pa. 123) kSapakazreNiparigataH sa
samarthaH sarvakarmiNAM krm| kSapayitumeko yadi karmasaGkramaH syaatprkRtsy||
(pa.44) khaMtI ya maddava'jjava muttI tava saMjame ya boddhvve| saccaM soyaM
AkiMcaNaM ca baMbhaM ca jidhmmo|| (pa. 25, dazani 225) galai balaM ucchAho, avei
siDhilei sylvaavaare| nAsai sattaM araI, vivaDDae asaNarahiyassa  //  (pa. 177)
cArittaMmmi asaMtaMmi, nivvANaM na u gcchi| nivvANaMmi asaMtammi, savvA dikkhA
nirtthgaa|| (pa. 178, nibhA 6679, vyabhA 4216) chaTThANagaNavasANe, annaM
chaTThANayaM puNo annaM  /  evamasaMkhA logA, chaTThANANaM muNeyavvA  //  (pa.
41, paMsaM. 444) jattha ya jaM jANejjA, nikkhevaM nikkhive niravasesaM  /
jattha vi ya na jANejjA, caukkayaM nikkhive ttth|| (pa. 3, Ani 4) jassaTThA
AraMbho, pANivaho hoi tassa niyameNaM  /  pANivahe vayabhaMgo, vayabhaMge doggaI
cev|| (pa. 46) jADyaM bhavati sthUrAyAstanukyAstvabalaMkaram  /
tasmAnmadhyabalasthAyAH, stanyaM puSTikaraM smRtm|| (pa. 123) taM natthi jaM na
bAhai, tilatusamittaM pi ettha kaayss| sannijhaM savvaduhAi deMti aahaarrhiyss||
(pa. 177) taM bhave bhattapANaM tu, saMjayANa akappiyaM  /  deMtiyaM
paDiyAikkhe, na me kappai taarisN|| (pa.62, daza. 5/54)

Page #477 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Chapter 15: Verses Quoted from the Malayagiri Vritti**  305 The wisdom of
those who have not meditated on the scriptures and the ancient texts, even if
they are eager to know, does not flourish. (P. 44) O foolish one, do not indulge
in worldly pleasures, having abandoned the path of right conduct. Who will
protect you, when you are drowning in the ocean of samsara? (P. 137) The root of
true knowledge is the path of renunciation, as taught by the Jinas. Know this,
and experience intense fervor. (P. 178, Vyabha 2485) A thin, emaciated person
becomes like a dry, withered tree, while a stout, well-nourished person is like
a strong, sturdy tree. (P. 123) There is no suffering like old age, no disgrace
like poverty, no fear like death, and no pain like the pain of the senses. (P.
177) The leaves, the branches, the trunk, the roots, and the hair of the tree
are all connected. Similarly, the king, the subjects, and the entire kingdom are
interconnected. (P. 13, Prasaga 491, Bribha 3962) Since there is no transfer or
division of karma done by others, therefore, the karma of each being is its own.
(P. 44) The path of liberation is the path of righteousness, austerity,
knowledge, and non-duality. (P. 97, Prasaga 934) There is no liberation for
those who are attached to their possessions. Liberation is attained only by
those who have renounced all attachments. (P. 178) In case of fever or other
ailments, it is beneficial to take a light diet. (P. 177) Passion leads to wrong
views, and wrong views lead to the destruction of the path of liberation. (P.
120, Dasani 221/1) The five senses, the mind, and the body are the six enemies
of the soul. (P. 25, Prasaga 557) The objects of the senses disappear for the
one who has renounced all attachments. (P. 177, Gita 2/59) Milk is generally
incompatible with sour fruits, vegetables, and salty foods. (P. 174) Restraint
is the path of liberation, and attachment is the cause of suffering. (P. 4, Panv
133) The world is full of suffering, deceit, and ignorance. (P. 25, Prasaga 739)
The essence of the path of liberation is the path of renunciation, as taught by
the Jinas. (P. 178, Vyabha 2484) The subtle body, the gross body, and the mind
are all subject to decay. (P. 118) The soul is liberated from the cycle of birth
and death by renouncing all attachments. (P. 4)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 15 : malayagiri vRtti kI uddhRta gAthAeM 305 tattadutprekSamANAnAM,
purANairAgamairvinA  /  anupAsitavRddhAnAM, prajJA nAtiprasIdati  //  (pa.44)
dIharasIlaM parivAliUNa visaesu vaccha ! mA ramasu! ko gopayammi buDDui, uyahiM
tariUNa bAhAhiM ?  //  (pa. 137) nANacaraNassa mUlaM, bhikkhAyariyA jiNehiM
pnnttaa| ettha u ujjamamANaM, taM jANasu tivvasaMvegaM  //  (pa. 178, vyabhA
2485) nisthAmA sthavirAM dhAtrI, sUcyAsyaH kuurprstniim| cipiTa: sthUlavakSojAM,
dhayaMstanvIM kRzo bhvet|| (pa. 123) paMthasamA natthi jarA, dAriddasamo ya
paribhavo ntthi| maraNasamaM natthi bhayaM, chuhAsamA veyaNA ntthi|| (pa. 177)
pattaM pattAbaMdho pAyaTravaNaM ca paaykesriyaa| paDalAiM rayattANaM ca gocchago
paaynijjogo|| (pa. 13, prasAgA 491, bRbhA 3962) parakRtakarmaNi yasmAnna krAmati
saGkramo vibhAgo vA  /  tasmAtsattvAnAM karma yasya yattena tdvdym|| (pa.44)
pAvayaNI dhammakahI, vAI nemittio tavassI y| vijjA siddho ya kaI, advaiva
pabhAvagA bhnniyaa|| (pa. 97, prasAgA 934) piMDaM asohayaMto, acarittI ettha
saMsao ntthi| cArittammi asaMte, niratthiyA hoi dikkhA u|| (pa.178) balAvarodhi
nirdiSTaM, jvarAdau laGghanaM hitm| Rte'nilshrmkrodhshokkaamksstjvraan||
(pa.177) rAgAI micchAI, rAgAI samaNadhamma naannaaii| nava nava sattAvIsA, nava
nauIe u gunnkaaraa|| (pa. 120, dazani 221/1) vasahi kaha nisijjiMdiya kuDDUMtara
puvvakIliya pnniie| aimAyAhAra vibhUsaNaM ca nava bNbhguttiio|| (pa. 25 prasAgA
557) viSayA vinivartante, nirAhArasya dehinaH  /  rasavarjaM raso'pyasya, paraM
dRSTvA nivartate  /  /  (pa. 177, gItA 2/59) zAkAmlaphalapiNyAkakapitthalavaNaiH
saha  /  karIradadhimatsyaizca, prAyaH kSIraM virudhyate  //  (pa. 174)
saMyamajogA itthaM, raoharA tesi kAraNaM jeNaM  /  rayaharaNaM uvayArA, bhannai
teNaM rao kammaM  //  (pa.4, paMva 133) saMsadama saMsaTTA, uddhaDa taha
appalevaDA cev| uggahiyA paggahiyA, ujjhiyadhammA ya sttmiyaa|| (pa. 25, prasAgA
739) samaNattaNassa sAro, bhikkhAyariyA jiNehiM pnnttaa| ettha paritappamANaM,
taM jANasu mNdsNvegN|| (pa. 178, vyabhA 2484) suhumA pAhuDiyAvi ya,
ThaviyagapiMDo ya jo bhave duviho  /  savvo vi esa rAsI, visohikoDI munneyvvo||
(pa. 118) harai rao jIvANaM, bajhaM abbhitaraM ca jaM tennN| rayaharaNaM ti
pavaccai, kaarnnkjjovyaaraao| (pa. 4)

Page #478 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-16 Alphabetical Order of Special Names 78 Ambag-fruit Aja-animal 70/3
Ajinn-disease 108/1 Ajeer-disease 21-21/2, 295/10 Attham-tapas (oil) 214/2
Atthi-limb Atthig-limb 37 Atthillay-plant 2887 Anichch-meditation 73/3
Abhattachhand-disease 309 Amilla-animal 36, 86/2 Arakhuranibaddha-donkey-cart
153 Avarddhig-disease 13 Asankh-powder 288/6 Asadbhuuti-sadhu 219/9 Ahi-animal
Aghas-fragrant substance 231/1 Aajeev-Shraman 209 Adansghar-house 219/14
Aapingal-color Ayambil-tapas 295/3 Aayamg-food-item Asandi-house-utensil 167
As-1. animal 194/1 2. limb 157/4 Asamakkhiya-animal Asav-liquor Aharim-fragrant
substance 231/1 Ind-god 70/4 Ikkhagu-bamboo 219/14 Ittag-special food 216, 219/1
Ittaga-special food 219/1 Ukkhalia-house-utensil 112 Ukka -house-utensil 113/2,
113 Ugg-family 207/3 Ugghapadima-statue 44/2 Ucchhu-plant 128/1 Uthan-disease
86/1 Udu-vehicle 152 Udukhala-house-utensil 167 Uttimang-limb 136/1
Uddehiga–animal 34 Ubbhijj-plant Ullana-food-item 297 Usuk-special ornament
198/13 Ohar-animal 154 Kangu-grain 297 Kanjiy-special food 76/5, 191, 313/1
Kans-metal 156 Kakkadiy-plant Kakkab-special food 129 Kakkhad-touch 198/15
Kachchhab-animal 259 Kattar-special food 295/8 166 297 252/1 78 35

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-16 vizeSanAmAnukrama 78 aMbaga-phala ajA-tiryaJca 70/3 ajiNNa-roga
108/1 ajIra-roga 21-21/2, 295/10 aTThama-tapa (telA) 214/2 aTThi-avayava
aTThiga-avayava 37 aTThillaya-vanaspati 2887 aNicca-bhAvanA 73/3 abhattachaMda-
roga 309 amilA-tiryaJca 36, 86/2 arakhuranibaddhA-gadhA-gAr3I 153 avaraddhiga-
roga 13 asaMkha-cUrNa 288/6 asADabhUti-sAdhu 219/9 ahi-tiryaJca Aghasa-
sugaMdhita dravya 231/1 AjIva-zramaNa 209 AdaMsaghara-ghara 219/14 ApiMgala-
raMga AyaMbila-tapa 295/3 AyAmaga-khAdya-padArtha AsaMdI-gRha-upakaraNa 167
Asa-1. tiryaJca 194/1 2. avayava 157/4 AsamakkhiyA-tiryaJca Asava-madirA
AhArima-sugaMdhita dravya 231/1 iMda-deva 70/4 ikkhAgu-vaMza 219/14 iTTaga-
khAdya vizeSa 216, 219/1 iTTagA-khAdya vizeSa 219/1 ukkhaliyA-gRha-upakaraNa 112
ukkhA -gRha-upakaraNa 113/2, 113 ugga-kula 207/3 uggahapaDimA-pratimA 44/2
ucchu-vanaspati 128/1 uThANa-roga 86/1 uDu-vAhana 152 uDUkhala-gRha-upakaraNa
167 uttimaMga-avayava 136/1 uddehigA-tiryaJca 34 ubbhijja-vanaspati ullaNa-
khAdya-padArtha 297 usuka-AbharaNa vizeSa 198/13 ohAra-tiryaJca 154 kaMgu-dhAnya
297 kaMjiya-khAdya vizeSa 76/5, 191, 313/1 kaMsa-dhAtu 156 kakkaDiya-vanaspati
kakkaba-khAdya vizeSa 129 kakkhaDa-sparza 198/15 kacchabha-tiryaJca 259 kaTTara-
khAdya vizeSa 295/8 166 297 252/1 78 35

Page #479 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pari. 16:  **Special Name Order**  **Kad-** (House-equipment) **Kadi** (Part
of the body) **Kadhiya** (Special food) **Kanag** (Metal) **Kanha** (River)
**Kappdiya** (Ascetic) **Kar** (Part of the body) **Karaduy** (Feast) **Kabi**
(Tiryanch) **Kag** (Tiryanch) **Kan** (Sick person) **Kinkar** (A type of)
**Kal** (Grain) **Kallan** (Special atonement) 22/6 **Kavod** (Tiryanch)
**Kuub** (House-equipment) **Kumbha** (House-equipment) **Kucchi** (Part of the
body) **Kutthi** (Leprous) **Kud** (House-equipment) **Kummas** (Grain)
**Kurang** (Tiryanch) **Kula** (Measure) **Kusan** (Special food) **Kur**
(Grain) **Kelasa** (Mountain) **Kevalnana** (Knowledge) 70/3 **Koddava** (Grain)
**Koppar** (Part of the body) **Kol** (Fruit) **Kollar** (City) **Kosalag**
(Region) **Khayi** (Feeling) **Khand** (Food item) **Khant** (Relative)
**Khantig** (Relative) **Khantiya** (Relative) **Khanthi** (Relative) **Khandh**
(Part of the body) **Khallang** (Vessel) **Khir** (Food item) **Khujj** (Sick
person) **Khomiy** (Cloth) **Gand** (Part of the body) **Gay** (Tiryanch)
**Gal** (Part of the body) **Galichch** (Neck ornament) 198/13, 154 **Gah**
(Tiryanch) **Giddhavarinkhi** (A type of) 219/6 **Gimha** (Season)
**Girifulliya** (City) **Gujjhag** (Special deity) **Gul** (Food item)
**Guliya** (Pill) 54/1 **Gula** (Food item) **Guliya** (Bead) 216 **Mahilla
Pradhan Purusha** (Male dominated by a woman) 296 **Mahilla Pradhan Vyakti**
(Person dominated by a woman) 219/6 **198/15** **297** **194/2** **231/2**
**69/3** **161** **218/1** **86/2** **92, 106, 136** **212** **219/10**
**219/6** **255** **169** **168, 310** **288/4** **166/2** **89/5, 25** **53**
**3/1** **128/3, 291** **76/3** **210/5** **57/4, 90/4** **76** **198/7**
**284** **199** **295/7** **73/21** **129** **201/3** **272** **201/3**
**201/2** **61/1** **90/3** **86/2, 128/1** **219/10** **32** **198/5** **53,
185** **143/2, 302/4** **210/5** **40, 82/1, 128/1** **141**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 16 : : vizeSanAmAnukrama kaDa-gRha- upakaraNa kaDi - avayava kaDhiya -
khAdya vizeSa kaNaga- dhAtu kaNhA - nadI kappaDiya - saMnyAsI kara - avayava
karaDuya - bhoja kabhI - tiryaJca kAga -- tiryaJca kANa - rogI kiMkara - eka
prakAra kA kala- dhAnya 296 kallANa - prAyazcitta vizeSa 22/6 kavoDa - tiryaJca
mahilA pradhAna puruSa kuuba-gRha- upakaraNa kuMbha gRha- upakaraNa kucchi -
avayava kuTThI-rogI kuDa-gRha- upakaraNa kummAsa - dhAnya kuraMga - tiryaJca
kulaya- mApa kusaNa - khAdya vizeSa kUra - dhAnya kelAsa parvata kevalanANa-
jJAna 70/3 198/15 297 194/2 231/2 69 / 3 161 218/1 86/2 92, 106, 136 212 219/10
219/6 255 169 168, 310 288/4 166/2 89/5, 25 53 3/1 128/3, 291 76/3 210/5 57/4,
90/4 koddava-dhAnya koppara - avayava kola - pa - phala kollara - nagara
kosalaga - janapada khaiya - bhAva khaMDa-khAdya-padArtha khaMta - parijana
khaMtiga- parijana khaMtiyA - parijana khaMtI - parijana khaMdha - avayava
khallaga - bhAjana khIra ra - khAdya vizeSa khujja-rogI khomiya- vastra gaMDa -
avayava gaya - tiryaJca gala- avayava galicca - gale kA AbhUSaNa 198 / 13 154
gAha -- tiryaJca giddhAvariMkhi - eka prakAra kA mahilA pradhAna vyakti 219/6
gimha-- Rtu giriphulliya-nagara gujjhaga - deva vizeSa 76 198/7 284 199 295/7
73/21 129 201/3 272 201/3 201/2 61/1 90/3 86/2, 128/1 219/10 32 198/5 53, 185
143/2, 302/4 gula-khAdya-padArtha guliyA - guTikA 307 54/1 216 210/5 40, 82/1,
128/1 141

Page #480 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
##  308 **Pindaniyukti** 40 160 16 27 112 **Go-tiryanch** 70/3 **Gona-tiryanch**
210/4 **Goni-tiryanch** 68/7, 96 **Gobbar-gram** 89/2 **Goras-khady-padarth**
**Ghangasala-shala** **Ghad-grih-upakarana** 70/3 **Ghanoudhi-samudra**
**Ghanvay-vayu vishesh** **Ghat-khady vishesh** 82/1 **Ghatpunna-khady vishesh**
216 **Gharcoil-tiryanch** 163/7 **Ghan-tilpirdanayantra** 27/1 **Chauth-tap
(upavas)** 295/3 **Chandoday-udyan** **Champa-nagari** 216, 220/1 **Chakkhu-
avayav** 226/1 **Chalan-avayav** 82/2 **Chaul-dhanya** 17, 95 **Chaulodag-khady
vishesh** 76/5, 191 **Chanak-mantri** 230 **Chittasabha-chitra-sabha** **Chulli-
grih-upakarana** 112 **Chhaglag-tiryanch** 143/2 **Chhappaiya-tiryanch** 22/3
**Chhab-grih-upakarana** 259 **Chhabhag-grih-upakarana** 127 **Janga-avayav**
**Janga-parijit-sadhu** 231/7 **Jakkh-dev vishesh** 210/5 **Jadd-tiryanch** 184
**Jar-jwar, rog** 275 **Jarit-rogi** 265 **Jao-khady vishesh** 298 **Januk-
avayav** 228/1 **Jamati-parijan** 203 **Jitasattu-raja** 53/1 **Day-khady
vishesh** **Doy-bhajan** 112 **Nhayay-ek prakar ka** 219/6 **Mahila pradhan
vyakti** **Tandul dhanya** 17/1 **Takk-khady vishesh** 128/3, 295/8
**Tacchanniy-bauddha bhikshu** 166/1 **Tanuvay-vayu vishesh** 27 **Taddosi-kusht
rogi** 276 **Tari-vahan, nauka** 153 **Tavas-shraman ka ek prakar** 209, 231/2
**Tikdu-aushadh** **Till-khady-padarth** 144/2 **Turang-tiryanch** 194/1
**Tuvari-dal** **Thali-bhajan** 114 **Dandag-sadhu-upakarana** **Dant-avayav**
**Dakkha-phal** 78 53/1 296   32 152

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 308 piMDaniyukti 40 160 16 27 112 go-tiryaJca 70/3 goNa-tiryaJca 210/4 goNI-
tiryaJca 68/7, 96 gobbara-grAma 89/2 gorasa-khAdya-padArtha ghaMghasAlA-zAlA
ghaDa-gRha-upakaraNa 70/3 ghaNaudahi-samudra ghaNavAya-vAyu vizeSa ghata-khAdya
vizeSa 82/1 ghatapuNNa-khAdya vizeSa 216 gharakoila-tiryaJca 163/7 ghANa-
tilapIr3anayaMtra 27/1 cauttha-tapa (upavAsa) 295/3 caMdodaya-udyAna caMpA-
nagarI 216, 220/1 cakkhu-avayava 226/1 calaNa-avayava 82/2 cAula-dhAnya 17, 95
cAulodaga-khAdya vizeSa 76/5, 191 cANakka-maMtrI 230 cittasabhA-citrasabhA cullI
-gRha-upakaraNa 112 chagalaga-tiryaJca 143/2 chappaiyA-tiryaJca 22/3 chabba-
gRha-upakaraNa 259 chabbaga-gRha-upakaraNa 127 jaMghA-avayava jaMghAparijita-
sAdhu 231/7 jakkha-deva vizeSa 210/5 jaDDa-tiryaJca 184 jara-jvara, roga 275
jarita-rogI 265 jAu-khAdya vizeSa 298 jANuka-avayava 228/1 jAmAti-parijana 203
jitasattu-rAjA 53/1 DAya-khAdya vizeSa Doya-bhAjana 112 NhAyaya-eka prakAra kA
219/6 mahilA pradhAna vyakti taMDuladhAnya 17/1 takka-khAdya vizeSa 128/3, 295/8
taccaNNiya-bauddha bhikSu 166/1 taNuvAya-vAyu vizeSa 27 taddosI-kuSTha rogI 276
tarI-vAhana, naukA 153 tAvasa-zramaNa kA eka prakAra 209, 231/2 tikaDu-auSadha
tilla-khAdya-padArtha 144/2 turaMga-tiryaJca 194/1 tUvari-dAla thAlI-bhAjana 114
daMDaga-sAdhu-upakaraNa daMta-avayava dakkhA-phala 78 53/1 296 32 152

Page #481 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
309 228/1 254 70/2 243/2 102 86/2 157/5 27 288/4 198/13, 277 90/2 228/1 134
Peri. 16: Special Name Order Dagsoyeri-Sannyasi 143/2 Datta-This name's disciple
199 Dadhi-Food special 36 Davvi-House-equipment 113 Dahi-Food-substance Dadim-
Pomegranate 78 Dier-Family 76/4 Duddha-Food-substance 293, 70/2 Devadatta-Person
73/4 Devi-Goddess 53/1 Dhanu-Weapon 61/1 Dhammru-Sadhu 219/9 Natta Family 222/1
Nal-Plant Nah-Limb 36 Nava-Vehicle 152 Nasa-Limb 219/3 Nijjara-Penance 324
Nijjog-Sadhu-Equipment 21/1 Neurarigga-Woman 82/2 Neh-Food-substance 12, 312/1
Pandu-Color 236/1 Pagaliy-Patient Padimant-Knowledge special 229 Padividja-
Knowledge special 228 Padoyar-Sadhu-Equipment 22 Panay-Plant 21 Pad-Limb 165,
82/3 55 298 Padesini-Limb Pappdiya-~-Food special Pay-Food-substance Paritta-
Plant Palandu-Plant Paheang-Sweet Paing-Direction Pauga-Footwear, Shoe Pay-Limb
Payas-Food special Palittay-Acharya Paheang-Sweet Pindnijjutti-Text Pindaras-
Food-substance Pitu-Limb Pidhar-Vessel Pidharag-Vessel Piti-Family Pippal-Weapon
Pivilia-Animal Pihad-Vessel Pihd-Seat special Pilu-Food-substance Puttay-Family
Purandar-God Purimadd-Penance Pup-Food special Pejj-Food special 255, 53/1 127,
259, 251/3 255 68/9 25 245/1 Pibha 34 167 70/2 132 265 70/6 157/3 255 297

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 309 228/1 254 70/2 243/2 102 86/2 157/5 27 288/4 198/13, 277 90/2 228/1 134
pari. 16 : vizeSanAmAnukrama dagasoyariya-saMnyAsI 143/2 datta-isa nAma kA ziSya
199 dadhi-khAdya vizeSa 36 davvI-gRha-upakaraNa 113 dahi-khAdya-padArtha dADima-
anAra 78 diyara-parijana 76/4 duddha-khAdya-padArtha 293, 70/2 devadatta-vyakti
73/4 devI-devI 53/1 dhaNu-zastra 61/1 dhammarui-sAdhu 219/9 nattaparijana 222/1
nala-vanaspati naha-avayava 36 nAvA-vAhana 152 nAsA-avayava 219/3 nijjarA-tapa
324 nijjoga-sAdhu-upakaraNa 21/1 neurahArigA-mahilA 82/2 neha-khAdya-padArtha
12,312/1 paMDu-raMga 236/1 pagaliya-rogI paDimaMta-vidyA vizeSa 229 paDivijjA-
vidyA vizeSa 228 paDoyAra-sAdhu-upakaraNa 22 paNaya-vanaspati 21 pada-avayava
165, 82/3 55 298 padesiNI-avayava pappaDiyA-~-khAdya vizeSa paya-khAdya-padArtha
paritta-vanaspati palaMDu-vanaspati paheNaga-miThAI pAiNa-dizA pAugA-upAnat,
jUtA pAya-avayava pAyasa-khAdya vizeSa pAlittaya-AcArya pAheNaga-miThAI
piMDanijjutti-graMtha piMDarasa-khAdya-padArtha piTu-avayava piDhara-bhAjana
piDharaga-bhAjana piti-parijana pippala-zastra pivIliyA-tiryaJca pihaDa-bhAjana
pIDha-Asana vizeSa pIlu-khAdya-padArtha puttaya-parijana puraMdara-deva
purimaDDa-tapa pUpa-khAdya-padArtha pejja-khAdya vizeSa 255,53/1 127, 259, 251/3
255 68/9 25 245/1 pibhA 34 167 70/2 132 265 70/6 157/3 255 297

Page #482 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
310 Piṇḍaniyukti 153 78 296 Potta-vastra 141 Potti-sādhu-upakarṇa 22 Phalaga-
sādhu-upakarṇa 32 Phāṇita-khādya viśeṣa 103 Baguḍḍāva-eka prakāra kā 219/6
Mahila pradhāna vyakti Balāga-tiryañc 302/3 Bāha-avayava Bījapūra-phala Bhagini-
parijana 148/1 Bhajjā-parijana 76/4, 223 Bharha-cakravarti 219/14 Mañcga-palanga
167 Maṇḍga-khādya viśeṣa Magara-tiryañc 154 Magaha-janapada 89/2 Macchaṇḍiya-
khādya viśeṣa 129 Maccha-tiryañc 302, 282 Macchi-tiryañc 245/1 Macchiya-tiryañc
35, 138/3 Majjāra-tiryañc 86, 279 Matthu-khādya viśeṣa 128/3 Madhu-khādya viśeṣa
245/1 Madhubindu-dṛṣṭānta Marahaṭṭaga-prānta 295/7 Masūra-dāla Mahisi-tiryañc
108/1 Mugga-dāla 296 Muṛuḍa-rājā 228/1, 227 Muha-avayava 198/7 Muhapotti–sādhu-
upakarṇa 73/2 Mūinga-tiryañc 163/3 Mūsā-tiryañc 163/5 Modaga-khādya viśeṣa
166/2, 219/9 Raṭṭapāla-nāṭaka 219/13 Rayya-dhātu 194/2 Rayaharaṇa-sādhu-upakarṇa
22 Rāyagiha-nagari 216, 219/9 Rālaga-dhānya 76 Roma-avayava Laḍḍaga-khādya
viśeṣa Lasuṇa-vanaspati 86/2 Luṭṭa-dhānya Loṇa-khādya viśeṣa 12 Lohiya-raṅga
231/8 Vaiyā-sthāna (Gokula) 142 Vaggha-tiryañc 215 Vaccha-tiryañc Vacchaga-
tiryañc 96/1, 208/1 Vaḍga-khādya viśeṣa Vaṇṇaga-sugandhita dravya 141 Vayaṇa-
avayava 305 Valavā-tiryañc 205 Valla-dāla 108/1 Vāṇara-tiryañc Vārga-bhājana 96
305 301 296 236 127

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 310 piMDaniyukti 153 78 296 potta-vastra 141 potti-sAdhu-upakaraNa 22 phalaga-
sAdhu-upakaraNa 32 phANita-khAdya vizeSa 103 baguDDAva-eka prakAra kA 219/6
mahilA pradhAna vyakti balAgA-tiryaJca 302/3 bAha-avayava bIjapUra-phala
bhagiNI-parijana 148/1 bhajjA-parijana 76/4, 223 bharaha-cakravartI 219/14
maMcaga-palaMga 167 maMDaga-khAdya vizeSa magara-tiryaJca 154 magaha-janapada
89/2 macchaMDiya-khAdya vizeSa 129 maccha-tiryaJca 302, 282 macchi-tiryaJca
245/1 macchiya-tiryaJca 35, 138/3 majjAra-tiryaJca 86, 279 matthu-khAdya vizeSa
128/3 madhu-khAdya vizeSa 245/1 madhubiMdu-dRSTAnta marahaTThaga-prAnta 295/7
masUra-dAla mahisI-tiryaJca 108/1 mugga-dAla 296 muruDa-rAjA 228/1, 227 muha-
avayava 198/7 muhapotti-sAdhu-upakaraNa 73/2 mUiMga-tiryaJca 163/3 mUsA-tiryaJca
163/5 modaga-khAdya vizeSa 166/2, 219/9 raTTapAla-nATaka 219/13 rayaya-dhAtu
194/2 rayaharaNa-sAdhu-upakaraNa 22 rAyagiha-nagarI 216, 219/9 rAlaga-dhAnya 76
roma-avayava laDDaga-khAdya vizeSa lasuNa-vanaspati 86/2 luTTa-dhAnya loNa-
khAdya vizeSa 12 lohiya-raMga 231/8 vaiyA-sthAna (gokula) 142 vaggha-tiryaJca
215 vaccha-tiryaJca vacchaga-tiryaJca 96/1, 208/1 vaDaga-khAdya vizeSa vaNNaga-
sugaMdhita dravya 141 vayaNa-avayava 305 valavA-tiryaJca 205 valla-dAla 108/1
vANara-tiryaJca vAraga-bhAjana 96 305 301 296 236 127

Page #483 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary of Special Names  **Chapter 16: Alphabetical Order of Special
Names**  **Page 311**  * **Valunk-Pakvann:** A type of food (305) * **Vasghar-
Vasagruh:** A dwelling place, a house * **Venna Nadi:** The river Venna (57/2) *
**Ved-Granth:** The Vedic scriptures (231/2) * **Sankh-Tiryanch:** A type of
animal (138/1) * **Sancharimā-Gṛha-Upakaraṇa:** Household utensils (138/1) *
**Santhar-Sadhu-Upakaraṇa:** Equipment used by ascetics (32) * **Sampaim-
Tiryanch:** A type of animal * **Sakk-Dev:** A type of deity * **Sakkara-Khadya
Vishesh:** A type of food (70/4) * **Sagad-Vahan:** A type of vehicle (129) *
**Sajjhilga-Parijan:** A type of relative (292) * **Sajjhilga-Parijan:** A type
of relative (144) * **Sattug-Khadya Vishesh:** A type of food (89/5, 177/2, 296)
* **Sapal-Khadya Vishesh:** A type of food * **Sappi-Khadya Vishesh:** A type of
food * **Samitim-Khadya Vishesh:** A type of food (89/5) * **Samiy-Acharya:** A
type of teacher (230, 231/3) * **Samiy-Khadya Vishesh:** A type of food (108/1)
* **Sarav-Sikora:** A type of drink (57/2) * **Sasa-Parijan:** A type of
relative * **Sasur-Parijan:** A type of relative (144/1, 222/1) * **Sasu-
Parijan:** A type of relative (222) * **Saṇ-Tiryanch:** A type of animal (208) *
**Sali-Khadya Vishesh:** A type of food * **Siddathag-Pushp:** A type of flower
* **Sippi-Tiryanch:** A type of animal * **Si-Ritu:** The winter season (12) *
**Sīvaṇṇī-Phal:** A type of fruit (53/2) * **Sīs-Avayav:** A part of the body
(37, 228/1) * **Sīhke-Saray-Khadya Vishesh:** A type of food (216, 220/1) *
**Sunthi-Khadya Vishesh:** A type of food (75) * **Suṇag-Tiryanch:** A type of
animal * **Suṇha-Parijan:** A type of relative * **Sut-Parijan:** A type of
relative (173, 286, 222/2) * **Suratt-Desh:** The country of Suratt (194/1) *
**Sūi-Gṛha-Upakaraṇa:** A type of household utensil (89/5) * **Sūrodya-Udyan:**
A type of garden * **Sūv-Khadya Vishesh:** A type of food (297) * **Sedangulī:**
A type of woman (219/6) * **Sota-Indriya:** The sense of hearing (96/3) *
**Sottiy-Brahman:** A type of Brahmin (2071) * **Sovir-Khadya Vishesh:** A type
of food (40) * **Sovirg-Khadya Vishesh:** A type of food (295/7) * **Hath-
Avayav:** A part of the body (19, 273) * **Hathkapp-Nagar:** The city of
Hathkapp (216) * **Hatthi-Tiryanch:** A type of animal (54/1, 82/2, 181/1) *
**Hatthichag-Abhūshaṇa:** A type of ornament (198/13) * **Har-Abhūshaṇa:** A
type of ornament (219/14) * **Hingu-Khadya-Padarth:** A type of food (112) *
**Hiyay-Avayav:** A part of the body (61/1, 240/2)  **Page 305**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 16 : vizeSanAmAnukrama 311 34 20 vAluMka-pakvAnna vizeSa 305 vAsaghara-
vAsagRha 57/2 veNNA nadI 231/2 veda-graMtha 86/2 saMkha-tiryaJca saMcArimA-gRha-
upakaraNa 138/1 saMthAra-sAdhu-upakaraNa 32 saMpAima-tiryaJca sakka-deva 70/4
sakkarA-khAdya vizeSa 129 sagaDa-vAhana 70/3 sajjhilaga-parijana 292 sajjhilagA-
parijana 144 sattuga-khAdya vizeSa 89/5, 177/2, 296 sapalala-khAdya vizeSa
sappi-khAdya vizeSa samitima-khAdya vizeSa 89/5 samiya-AcArya 230, 231/3 samiya-
khAdya vizeSa 108/1 sarAva-sikorA 57/2 sasA-parijana 144/1, 222/1 sasura-
parijana 222 sANa-tiryaJca 208 sAli-khAdya vizeSa sAsu-parijana siddhatthaga-
puSpa sippi-tiryaJca sI-Rtu 12 sIvaNNI-phala 53/2 sIsa-avayava 37, 228/1
sIhakesaraya-khAdya vizeSa 216, 220/1 suMThI-khAdya vizeSa 75 sUNaga-tiryaJca
suNhA-parijana 173, 286, 222/2 suta-parijana 194/1 suraTTha-deza 89/5 sUI-gRha-
upakaraNa sUrodaya-udyAna sUva-khAdya vizeSa 297 seDaMguli-eka prakAra kA 219/6
mahilA pradhAna puruSa sota-iMdriya 96/3 sottiya-brAhmaNa 2071 sovIra-khAdya
vizeSa 40 sovIraga-khAdya vizeSa 295/7 hattha-avayava 19, 273 hatthakappa-nagara
216 hatthi-tiryaJca 54/1, 82/2, 181/1 hatthiccaga-AbhUSaNa 198/13 hAra-AbhUSaNa
219/14 hiMgu-khAdya-padArtha 112 hiyaya-avayava 61/1, 240/2 305

Page #484 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-17 Index of Proper Nouns in the Commentary Gobbar Gramani Gramani
Ghritapur Chandragupta Chandramukha Chandranana Chandravatansak Chandrika
Chandrodya Krishna Champa Chanakya Janghaparijit Achalpur (city) Abhayasen
(king) Arimaardan (king) Adinath (Tirthankara) Anandapur (city) Ashadhabhuti
(disciple) Ugratej (soldier) (river) Kusumpur (city) Kollakir (city) Kaushal
(Janapada) Kshitipratisthit (city) Kshemankar (person) Gandhasamriddh (city)
Giripushpit (city) Gunachandra (Shreshthi) Gunachandra (king) Gunachandra
(person) Gunachandra (Sadhu) Gunachud (person) Gunavati (queen) Gunashekhara
(person) Gunasamriddh (city) Gunasagar (person) Gunasen (person) Gunalay (city)
Gokul (village) (144) (169) (48) (74) (31) (137) (71) (144) (137, 143) (125)
(98) (30) (100) (141) (134) (74) (49) (78) (109, 134) (78) (49) (78) (47) (78)
(78) (78) (127) Jayantpur Jayanti Jaysundari Jitshatru Jindatt Jindas Jinmati
Tilak Trilokrekha Datt Dusprabh Devaki Devadatt Devaraj (village) (73) (Vanik)
(72) (woman) (72) (Mithann) (134) (king) (143) (woman) (144) (city) (76, 144)
(king) (76) (woman) (74) (garden) (76) (city) (139) (minister) (143) (Sadhu)
(144) (city) (108) (city) (109) (queen) (145) (king) (30) (Shravak) (63)
(Shravak) (111) (Shravika) (63) (Shreshthi) (100) (queen) (76) (disciple) (125)
(Karpathik) (71) (woman) (127) (person) (100) (Kautumbik) (98)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-17 TIkA ke antargata vizeSanAmAnukrama gobbara grAmaNI grAmaNI
ghRtapUra candragupta candramukhA candrAnanA candrAvataMsaka candrikA candrodaya
kRSNA campA cANakya jaMghAparijita acalapura (nagara) abhayasena (rAjA)
arimardana (rAjA) AdinAtha (tIrthaMkara) Anandapura (nagara) ASAr3habhUti
(ziSya) ugrateja (sainika) (nadI) kusumapura (nagara) kollakira (nagara) kauzala
(janapada) kSitipratiSThita (nagara) kSemaMkara (vyakti) gaMdhasamRddha (nagara)
giripuSpita (nagara) guNacandra (zreSThI) guNacandra (rAjA) guNacandra (vyakti)
guNacandra (sAdhu) guNacUr3a (vyakti) guNavatI (rAnI) guNazekhara (vyakti)
guNasamRddha (nagara) guNasAgara (vyakti) guNasena (vyakti) guNAlaya (nagara)
gokula (gAMva) (144) (169) (48) (74) (31) (137) (71) (144) (137, 143) (125) (98)
(30) (100) (141) (134) (74) (49) (78) (109, 134) (78) (49) (78) (47) (78) (78)
(78) (127) jayantapura jayantI jayasuMdarI jitazatru jinadatta jinadAsa jinamati
tilaka trilokarekhA datta duSprabha devakI devadatta devarAja (grAma) (73)
(vaNik) (72) (mahilA) (72) (miSThAnna) (134) (rAjA) (143) (mahilA) (144)
(nagarI) (76, 144) (rAjA) (76) (mahilA) (74) (udyAna) (76) (nagarI) (139)
(maMtrI) (143) (sAdhu) (144) (nagara) (108) (nagarI) (109) (rAnI) (145) (rAjA)
(30) (zrAvaka) (63) (zrAvaka) (111) (zrAvikA) (63) (zreSThI ) (100) (rAnI) (76)
(ziSya) (125) (kArpaTika) (71) (mahilA) (127) (vyakti) (100) (kauTumbika) (98)

Page #485 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Pari. 17: Special Name Order within the Commentary  **Devasharma** (Pujari)
**Devasharma** (Mankh) **Devasharma** **Dhana** **Dhanadatta** **Dhanadatta**
**Dhanadatta** **Dhandeva** **Dhanpriya** **Dhanavati** **Dhanavah** (83) (97)
(144) (144) (Kautumbik) (127) (100) (144) (141) (144) (103) (103) (68) (169)
(137) (108) (23) (31) (33) (134) (100) **Padalipta** (142) **Potanpur** (Nagar)
(75) **Pratiṣṭhānapura** (Nagar) (142) **Priyankara** (Sadhu) (75)
**Priyangurucika** (Mahila) (78) **Priyangulatika** (Mahila) (78)
**Priyangusarika** (Mahila) (78) **Priyangu Sundari** (Mahila) (78)
**Priyadarshana** (Rani) (48) **Dharma Sangrahani** (Kulapati) **Dharini**
(Shreshthi) **Nagakumar** (Dev) **Nandipatra** (Patra) **Nilaya** (Shreshthi)
**Dharmopadeśamālā** (Granth) **Dharmaghosa** (Muni) **Dharmaruchi** (Aacharya)
**Dharmaruchi** (Sadhu) **Priyamati** (Tika) **Bandhumati** (Rani) **Balishtha**
(Aacharya) **Basanta** (Sadhu) **Basantapur** (Nagar) **Brahma** (Dweep)
**Brahma** (Shakha) **Bhadrail** (Aacharya) **Bharat** (Chakravarti) **Bhanu**
(Raja) **Bhima** (Palli) **Bhogapura** (Nagar) **Magadha** (Janpad) **Mahabala**
(Raja) **Manibhadra** (Yaks) **Manibhadra** (Yuvak) **Murunda** (Raja)
**Yaksadatta** (Grihapati) **Yashobhadra** (Aacharya) **Yasomati** (Shravaka)
**Yogaraja** (Vyakti) **Yodhani** (Mahila) **Yoniprabhrta** (Granth)
**Ratnapura** (Nagar) **Ratnakar** (Aacharya) **Rajagriha** (Nagari)
**Ripumardan** (Raja) **Rukmini** (Mahila) (127) (100) 313 (127) (76) (100, 48,
111) (144) (144) (63) (138) (33) (48) (9) (73) (47) (83) (113) (142) (108) (44)
(75) (64) (64) (143) (113) (75) (137) (31) (111, 71)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 17 : TIkA ke antargata vizeSanAmAnukrama devazarmA (pujArI) devazarmA
(maMkha) devazarmA dhana dhanadatta dhanadatta dhanadatta dhanadeva dhanapriyA
dhanavatI dhanAvaha (83) (97) (144) (144) (kauTumbika) (127) (100) (144) (141)
(144) (103) (103) (68) (169) (137) (108) (23) (31) (33) (134) (100) pAdalipta
(142) potanapura (nagara) (75) pratiSThAnapura (nagara) (142) priyaMkara (sAdhu)
(75) priyaMgurucikA (mahilA) (78) priyaMgulatikA (mahilA) (78) priyaMgusArikA
(mahilA) (78) (mahilA) (78) (rAnI) (48) dharma saMgrahaNI dhAriNI nAgakumAra
nAndIpAtra nilaya priyaMgu suMdarI priyadarzanA (kulapati) (zreSThI)
dharmopadezamAlA (graMtha) dharmaghoSa (muni) dharmaruci dharmaruci (vyakti)
(sArthavAha) (bhikSu) (mahilA) ( zrAvikA ) (zrAvaka) (AcArya) (sAdhu) (TIkA)
(rAnI) (deva) (pAtra) (zreSThI) (AcArya) priyamati baMdhumatI baliSTha basanta
basantapura brahma brahma bhadrila bharata bhAnu bhImA bhogapura magadha
mahAbala mANibhadra mANibhadra muruNDa yakSadatta yazobhadra yazomatI yogarAja
yodhanI yoniprAbhRta ratnapura ratnAkara rAjagRha ripumardana rukmiNI (mahilA)
(putrI) (putra) (mAsa) (nagara) (dvIpa) (zAkhA) (AcArya) (cakravartI) (rAjA)
(pallI) (nagara) (janapada) (rAjA) ( yakSa) ( yuvaka ) (rAjA) (gRhapati)
(AcArya) ( zrAvikA ) (vyakti) (mahilA) (graMtha) (nagara) (AcArya) (nagarI)
(rAjA) (mahilA) (127) (100) 313 (127) (76) ( 100, 48, 111) (144) (144) (63)
(138) (33) (48) (9) (73) (47) (83) (113) (142) (108) (44) (75) (64) (64) (143)
(113) (75) (137) (31) (111, 71)

Page #486 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## 314 **Pindaniyukti**  * Rukmini (Queen) (33) * Revati (Daughter) (127) *
Lakshmi (Woman) (100) * Vakrapur (City) (71) * Vatsaraj (Cowherd) (111) *
Vasundhara (Woman) (109) * Vasumati (Woman) (108) * Varattpur (City) (169) *
Varatraka (Minister) (169) * Vijitsamar (Prince) (47) * Vishwakarma (Actor)
(137) * Vishalashringa (Mountain) (146) * Vishnumitra (Relative) (134) *
Vistirna (Village) (127) * Venna (River) (144) * Vyakhyaprajnapti (Text) (41) *
Shatamukha (City) (74) * Saligrama (Village) (97, 72) * Shivdev (Shreshthi) (99)
* (Woman) (99) * Sheetalaka (Epidemic) (83) * Shila (Queen) (47) * Shrinillaya
(City) (49) * Shripurni (Fruit) (31) * Shrimati (Woman) (78) * Shristhalaka
(City) * Shringarमति (Queen) (145) * Sankula (Village) (63) * Sangama (Person)
(127) * Sangama (Acharya) (125)  **16 88 83 8888 88 ka aakirs**  * Samyug *
Samit * Samilla * Samudraghosha * Sammat * Sammati * Samriddha * Sagardatta *
Sarika * Sindhuraj * Singh * Singh * Simharatha * Sundar * Sundari * Sudarshana
* Sudarshana * Suradatta * Surupa * Surupa * Sulochana * Suvrat * Susthita *
Suryodaya * Saudas * Saurashtra * Sauviraka * (City) (145) * (Acharya) (100,
144) * (City) (83) * (Acharya) (99) * (Son) (98) * (Daughter) (99) * (Disciple)
(143) * (Shreshthi) (78) * (Woman) (98) * (King) (145) * (Acharya) (134) *
(Disciple) (125) * (King) (137) * (Youth) (127) * (Wife) (144, 100) * (Queen)
(30) * (Woman) (100) * (Householder) (109) * (Prince) (33) * (Merchant) (49) *
(Woman) (134) * (Sadhu) (139) * (Acharya) (143) * (Garden) (76) * (Person) (71)
* (Janapada) (55) * (Food) (167) * (Collection) (31) * (City) (134) * (Mountain)
(74)  * Shiva * Haranta * Hastakalpa * Himagiri

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 314 piMDaniyukti rukmiNI _ (rAnI) (33) revatI (putrI) (127) lakSmI (mahilA)
(100) vakrapura (nagara) (71) vatsarAja (gvAlA) (111) vasuMdharA (mahilA) (109)
vasumatI (mahilA) (108) vArattapura (nagara) (169) vAratraka (maMtrI) (169)
vijitasamara (rAjakumAra) (47) vizvakarmA (naTa) (137) vizAlazRMga (parvata)
(146) viSNumitra (kauTumbika) (134) vistIrNa (grAma) (127) vennA (nadI) (144)
vyAkhyAprajJapti (graMtha) (41) zatamukha (nagara) (74) zAligrAma (gAMva) (97,
72) zivadeva (zreSThI ) (99) (mahilA) (99) zItalaka (mahAmArI) (83) zIlA (rAnI)
(47) zrInilaya (nagara) (49) zrIparNI (phala) (31) zrImatI (mahilA) (78)
zrIsthalaka (nagara) zRMgAramati (rAnI) (145) saMkula (gAMva) (63) saMgama
(vyakti) (127) saMgama (AcArya) (125) 16 88 83 8888 88 ka aakirs saMyuga samita
samillaM samudraghoSa sammata sammati samRddha sAgaradatta sArikA siMdhurAja
siMha siMha siMharatha suMdara suMdarI sudarzanA sudarzanA suradatta surUpa
surUpa sulocanA suvrata susthita sUryodaya saudAsa saurASTra sauvIraka (nagara)
(145) (AcArya) (100, 144) (nagara) (83) (AcArya) (99) (putra) (98) (putrI) (99)
(ziSya) (143) (zreSThI) (78) (mahilA) (98) (rAjA) (145) (AcArya) (134) (ziSya)
(125) (rAjA) (137) (yuvaka) (127) (bhAryA) (144, 100) (rAnI) (30) (mahilA) (100)
(gRhapati) (109) (rAjakumAra) (33) (vaNik) (49) (mahilA) (134) (sAdhu) (139)
(AcArya) (143) (udyAna) (76) (vyakti) (71) (janapada) (55) (khAdya-vizeSa) (167)
(sanniveza) (31) (nagara) (134) (parvata) (74) zivA haranta hastakalpa himagiri

Page #487 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Appendix-18 Table of Contents Adhyavapurka-dosha 186-188/1 Dhatri-dosha
Anishrusht-dosha 178-185 Nimitta-dosha Apkay 15-22/6 Nikkhipt-dosha Aparinat-
dosha 292-295 Panchendriya Abhyahrit-dosha 151-161 Parivartita-dosha Avishodikot
190, 191 Pind Acchedya-dosha 172-177/2 Pihit-dosha Aajivana-dosha 206-207/4
Pratikaram Adhakarm-dosha 60-92 Prithvikaay Aahar 49, 49/1, 75, 78, 86/2,
Pradushkaran-dosha 317, 323 Prabhriti-dosha Aahar-praman 310-313/6 Pramitya-
dosha Ingal aur 314-316 Mantra-dosha Dhum-dosha Manpind Utpdana-dosha. 193-301,
234 Mayapind Udgam-dosha 56-189, 193 Malapahat-dosha Ubhinna-dosha 162-164
Mishrajat Unmishra-dosha 289-291/1 Moolakarm Eshana 51-52/4, 322 Mekshit-dosha
Auddeshik-dosha 93-106 Yog-dosha Karya-karan Lipt-dosha Krit-dosha 139-143/3
Lobhpind Krodhpind 217-218/1 Vanaspatikaay Gaveshana 53-55 Vanipak-dosha
Grahaneshana 236-301 Vayukaay Graaseshana 302-321 Vikalendriya Chikitsa 34-36,
313-313/6 Vidya-dosha Chikitsa-dosha 214-215 Vishodikot Churn-dosha 230, 231
Sankit-dosha Chardit-dosha 300, 301 Sanyojana-dosha Tejaskaay 23-25 Sansthav-
dosha Dayak-dosha 265-288.8 Sanhrit-dosha Dooti-dosha 200-203 Sadharmik
Sthapana-dosha 197-199 204, 205 246-255 36-38 147-150 1-50 256-259/1 107-119/1
9-14 136/1-138/6 130-136 144-146 228/1-229 219-219/8 219/9-15 165-171 120-125
231/5-232 242-245/2 231/1-231/4 295/1-299 220-220/2 29-32 208-213 26-28 33-35
227-228 192-192/5 238-241 304-309 221-226/1 260-264/1 73-73/22 126-129 49/2

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pariziSTa-18 viSayAnukrama adhyavapUraka-doSa 186-188/1 dhAtrI-doSa anisRSTa-
doSa 178-185 nimitta-doSa apkAya 15-22/6 nikSipta -doSa apariNata-doSa 292-295
paMcendriya abhyAhRta-doSa 151-161 parivartita-doSa avizodhikoTi 190, 191 piMDa
Acchedya-doSa 172-177/2 pihita-doSa AjIvanA-doSa 206-207/4 pratikarma AdhAkarma-
doSa 60-92 pRthvIkAya AhAra 49, 49/1, 75, 78, 86/2, prAduSkaraNa-doSa 317, 323
prAbhRtikA-doSa AhAra-pramANa 310-313/6 prAmitya-doSa iMgAla aura 314-316
maMtra-doSa dhUma-doSa mAnapiNDa utpAdanA-doSa. 193-301, 234 mAyApiNDa udgama-
doSa 56-189, 193 mAlApahata-doSa ubhinna-doSa 162-164 mizrajAta unmizra-doSa
289-291/1 mUlakarma eSaNA 51-52/4, 322 mekSita -doSa auddezika-doSa 93-106 yoga-
doSa kArya-kAraNa lipta-doSa krIta-doSa 139-143/3 lobhapiNDa krodhapiNDa
217-218/1 vanaspatikAya gaveSaNA 53-55 vanIpaka-doSa grahaNaiSaNA 236-301
vAyukAya grAsaiSaNA 302-321 vikalendriya cikitsA 34-36, 313-313/6 vidyA-doSa
cikitsA-doSa 214-215 vizodhikoTi cUrNa-doSa 230, 231 saMkita-doSa chardita-doSa
300, 301 saMyojanA-doSa tejaskAya 23-25 saMstava-doSa dAyaka-doSa 265-288 / 8
saMhRta-doSa dUtI-doSa 200-203 sAdhArmika sthApanA-doSa 197-199 204, 205 246-255
36-38 147-150 1-50 256-259/1 107-119/1 9-14 136/1-138/6 130-136 144-146
228/1-229 219-219/8 219/9-15 165-171 120-125 231/5-232 242-245/2 231/1-231/4
295/1-299 220-220/2 29-32 208-213 26-28 33-35 227-228 192-192/5 238-241 304-309
221-226/1 260-264/1 73-73/22 126-129 49/2

Page #488 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## English Translation:  **Appendix-19 Glossary**  **82/3**  **Acchinn-
Acchinn:** Continuous, uninterrupted. **99/1** **Acchjejja:** To take away, to
give alms, a fault. **134** **Acchoda:** To throw against a stone, to crush.
**22/6** **Ajata:** Inattentive, careless. **230** **Ajinn:** Indigestion.
**163/5** **Ajir:** Indigestion. **108/1** **Ajja:** Today. **157/1**
**Ajzhath:** Spiritual. **266** **Ajzhayana:** Study. **198/4** **Ajzhoyera:**
Supplementary, a fault in alms, to prepare more food for the monk. **265**
**Atth:** 1. For, purpose, 2. Eight. **324** **Attham:** Oil. **214/2**
**Atthavisa:** Twenty-eight. **231/3** **Atthi:** Bone. **310** **Atthilla:** A
kind of bird. **231/6** **Addaratta:** Midnight. **173** **Anantakaaya:**
Infinite-bodied plant. **288/7** **Anatta:** Without purpose, meaningless.
**143/1** **Analakkhiy:** Not known. **247** **Anavattit:** Unsettled. **192**
**Anavattha:** Unstable state. **119/1** **Anavekkhit:** Unseen, unconsidered.
**313/6** **Anainnn:** Unrefined. **64/1** **Anaades:** Disapproved. **165**
**Anaabhoga:** Ignorance. **151** **Aikkam:** Transgression. **80/4**
**Aichchhit:** To transgress. **17/2** **Air:** Excessive. **173** **Ankadhai:**
Nurse who carries a child in her arms. **138/6** **Antaddhaan:** Disappearance,
to become invisible. **30** **Antaraaiy:** Full of obstacles. **83**
**Antariy:** Interval, in between. **270** **Andu:** Wooden bond. **288/6**
**Andhilla:** Blind. **65** **Ambag:** Mango. **89/6** **Ambil:** Sour.
**220/2** **Akzaja:** Unnecessary action. **75** **Akappa:** Unthinkable,
inconceivable. **247** **Akunchiag:** Without a hole (door). **143/2**
**Akkanta:** Afflicted. **75** **Akka:** Axis, rope. **220/2** **Akkan:**
Statement. **75** **Akhat:** Unbroken, whole. **220/2** **Akharay:** Servant.
**75** **Akkhitt:** Attracted. **220/2** **Agad:** Well. **75** **Agni:** Fire.
**220/2** **Agaraath:** Householder. **75** **Agari:** Householder woman.
**220/2** **Agejja:** Unacceptable. **75** **Agga:** 1. Chief, 2. Foremost.
**220/2** **Aggi:** Fire. **75** **Aghan:** Rare. **220/2** **Achiyatta:**
Displeasure, distrust. **75** **Achokkhalini:** Not keeping clean. **220/2**
**Anayar:** Disrespect.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 174 21 78 84 pariziSTa-19 zabdArtha 82/3 acchinna-acchinna, lgaataar| 99/1 134
acchejja-chInakara denA, bhikSA kA 59,172, 259 eka doss| acchoDa-AcchoTana, zilA
para pttknaa| 22/6 230 ajata-ayata, asaavdhaanii| 163/5 185 ajinnnn-ajiirnn|
108/1 157/1 ajiir-ajiirnn| 266 ajja-adya, aaj| 198/4 265 ajjhtth-adhyaatm| 324
ajjhynn-adhyyn| ajjhoyaraya-adhyavapUraka, bhikSA kA 59,110, 83/2 eka doSa,
apane sAtha sAdhu ke 186, lie adhika bhojana bnaanaa| 187,190 164 aTTha-1. ke
lie, prayojana, 2. asstt| 44 atttthm-telaa| 214/2 231/3 atttthaaviis-
atttthaaiis| 310 231/6 aTThi -asthi, hddddii| 173 atttthill-binaulaa| 288/7
143/1 addddrtt-ardhraatri| 220/2 75 aNaMtakAya-anantakAya vanaspati  /  247
aNaTTha-anartha, binA prayojana  /  143/2 aNalakkhiya-nahIM jAnA huaa| 192 119/1
annvttttit-anvsthit| 313/6 295 annvtthaa-anvsthaa| 64/1, aNavekkhita-binA dekhA
huA, binA 165 cintana kiyA huaa| 198/6 12 aNAiNNa-anAcIrNa  /  151 80/4 aNAdesa-
asammata  /  17/2 173 annaabhog-ajaankaarii| 138/6, aikkm-atikrm| aicchita-
atikrAnta krnaa| air-atirohit| aMkadhAI-bAlaka ko goda meM lene vAlI dhaatrii|
aMtaddhANa-antardhAna, adRzya honaa| aMtarAiya-antarAya se yukt| aMtariya-
antarAla, bIca meN| aMdu-kASTha kA bNdhn| aNdhilly-aNdhaa| aNbg-aamr| aNbil-
khttttaa| akjj-akaary| akappa-akalpa, aklpniiy| akuMciyAga-vivara rahita
(kpaatt)| akkaMta -aakraant| akkha-akSa, paashaa| akkhnn-kthn| akkhata -akSata ,
akhNddit| akkhry-daas| akkhitt-aakRsstt| agdd-kuup| agnni-agni| agaartth-gRhsth|
agArI-gRhastha mhilaa| agejjh-agraahy| agga-1. pradhAna, 2. agrim| aggi-agni|
aghnn-virl| aciyatta-aprIti, avishvaas| acokkhaliNI-svacchatA nahIM rakhane
vaalii| 65, 30 83 270 288/6 annaayr-anaadr| 89/6

Page #489 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary:  **Page 19: Word Meanings**  **317** **82 207** **65** * **Anayar**
- Anachar (misconduct) * **Atthavatti** - Arthaapatti (a type of karma that
produces aversion) * **Anuman** - Knowledge through inference  **214/1** *
**Anaavat** - Free from faults * **Atthah** - Athah (immeasurable)  **288/5**
**154** * **Anahar** - Without food * **Adinnadan** - Adattadan (giving what is
not given)  **166/1** * **Anicch** - Anitya (impermanent) **73/3**  **210** *
**Anitt** - Anishta (undesirable) * **Addh** - Ardhya (half)  **105/1** **311**
* **Anisitt** - A fault in begging, taking without the permission of the owner
(ref. 59, 178) * **Addha** - Marg (path)  **210/3** * **Additi** - Adhrithi
(impatience)  **182, 286** **198/4** * **Anis** - Anishraakrit (not purified)
**73/6** * **Adhigaran** - Papamयी Pravritti (sinful conduct)  **163** *
**Anuggah** - Anugrah (grace, favor)  **210/1** * **Adhiti** - Adhati (worry)
**231/6** * **Anuchiya** - Anuchit (inappropriate)  **89/7** * **Anida** -
Knowing * **Anucc** - Below  **170** * **Anivitt** - Anupaarjit (not earned)
**173/4** * **Anujatta** - Nirgaman (exit, departure)  **57/2** * **Ann** - Anya
(other)  **136/4** * **Anujju** - Kutil (crooked)  **135** * **Annatth** -
Anyatra (elsewhere)  **67/2** * **Anunna** - Anujna (permission)  **253/2** *
**Annaha** - Anyatha (otherwise)  **150** * **Anunnatt** - Anujnat (permitted)
**113/1** * **Annahi** - Anyatra (elsewhere)  **291** * **Anuppeha** -
Anupreksha (consideration)  **318/2** * **Appatt** - Apaatra (unworthy)  **213**
* **Anumanna** - Anumodana (approval)  **69/4** * **Aparinat** - Not fully
purified, not fully become Achiitt  **235, 237** * **Anuvatt** - Pravritti
(conduct)  **17** **292** * **Anuvahat** - Anupahat (not harmed)  **49/2** *
**Aparisaad** - Fallen without being touched  **253/2** * **Anuveh** - Anuveth
(intertwined)  **41/1** * **Apizz** - Apeya (not drinkable)  **86/2** *
**Anesanijj** - Aneshniya (not to be eaten)  **85** * **Appg** - Aatmak (self-
made)  **64/1** * **Annaan** - Agyan (ignorance)  **44/4** * **Appdisevi** -
Apratisevi (not serving)  **288/5** * **Atikkam** - Atikram (transgression)
**82** * **Appatt** - 1. Fire that does not reach the vessel placed on the
stove, 2. Not obtained  **252** * **Atiyar** - Atichar (excess)  **82** *
**Atihi** - Atithi (guest), a type of Vanipak (trader)  **135** * **Appattiy** -
Aapriti (aversion)  **314/3** * **Attakamm** - Aatmakarm (self-karma), Adhakarm
(half-karma) (ref. 61, 67, 272)  **67/1, 70** * **Appahan** - Sandesh (message)
**201/1** * **Attatt** - For oneself  **122** * **Appahani** - Sandesh (message)
**201/2** * **Atta** - Aatma (soul)  **67** * **Apphasug** - Apraasuk (not
relevant)  **162** * **Atth** - Padarth (object)  **302/1** * **Aphal** -
Nishphal (fruitless)  **213** * **Atthani** - Sabha-Mandap (assembly hall)
**57/2** * **Abhangiy** - Oiled (with oil massage)  **198/12** **208**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 19 : zabdArtha 317 82 207 65 annaayaar-anaacaar| atthAvatti-arthApatti,
eka prakAra kA aNAvajjaga-aprIti utpAdaka krm| anumaan-jnyaan| 214/1 aNAvAta-
doSa rhit| 288/5 atthaah-athaah| 154 aNAhAra-AhAra rhit| 320/2 adinnnndaann-
adttaadaan| 166/1, annicc-anity| 73/3 210 annitttth-anisstt| 105/1 addha-arddha,
aadhaa| 311 aNisiTTha-bhikSA kA eka doSa, svAmI 59,178, addhA -maarg| 210/3 kI
AjJA ke binA lenA  /  182,286 addhiti -adhRti| 198/4 anniis-anishraakRt| 73/6
adhigaraNa-pApamayI prvRtti| 163 aNuggaha-anugraha, upkaar| 210/1 adhiti-adhati,
cintaa| 231/6 annuciy-anucit| 89/7 anidA-jAnate hue| annucc-niice| 170
anivitttth-anupaarjit| 173/4 aNujattA-nirgamana, niklnaa| 57/2 ann-any| 136/4
aNujju -kuttil| 135 annattha -anytr| 67/2 annunnnnaa-anujnyaa| 253/2 annhaa-
anythaa| 150 annunnnnaat-anujnyaat| 113/1 annahiM-anyatra, dUsarI jgh| 291
annuppehaa-anuprekssaa| 318/2 aptt-apaatr| 213 aNumannA-anumodanA  /  69/4
apariNatapUrA acitta na huA ho| 235,237, aNuvatta - prvRtt| 17 292 annuvht-
anupht| 49/2 aparisADa-binA girA huaa| 253/2 aNuveha-anuvedha, paraspara milA
huaa| 41/1 apijja -apey| 86/2 aNesaNijja-aneSaNIya  /  85 appg-aatmk| 64/1
annnnaann-ajnyaan| 44/4 appddisevii-aprtisevii| 288/5 atikkm-atikrm| 82
appatta-1. cUlhe para car3he pAtra taka atiyaar-aticaar| 82 na pahuMcane vAlI
agni, 252, atihi-atithi, vanIpaka kA 2. apraapt| 135 eka prkaar| 210/3 appttiy-
apriiti| 314/3 attakamma-Atmakarma, AdhAkarma 61,67, appaahnn-sNdesh| 272 kA
pryaay| 67/1,70 appaahnni-sNdesh| 201/1 attaTTha-apane lie| 122 appaahiy-
sNdisstt| 201/2 attaa-aatmaa| 67 apphaasug-apraasuk| 162 attha -pdaarth| 302/1
aphl-nissphl| 213 atthaanni-sbhaa-mnnddp| 57/2 abbhaMgiya-taila kI mAliza kiyA
huaa| 198/12 208,

Page #490 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
318 Pindaniyukti 85 35 175 215 153 Abbathana-vijnप्ति, to give information. 202
Abbhās -guna, to multiply. 253/3 Abbhintar-ābhyantar. 22/2 Abhattachanda-loss of
appetite. 309 Abhikka-continuously, repeatedly. 185 Abhigam-knowledge. 144/1
Abhiggah-abhigraha. 73 Abhimukh-abhimukh. 166/1 Abhihad-food brought in front,
59,142, a fault of bhiksha. 157 Abhojj-abhojya. Amay-asammmat. 86/2 Amilā -
sheep. Ayagol-iron ball. Arakhurnibaddhā-donkey cart. Arahatt-araghatt, water-
drawing wheel. 54/1 Arogi-nirrog. 198/2 Alevad-without coating. 296 Avakkamana-
apkramana, to go. 90/4 Avgam-apgam, to be far away. 57/4 Avttit -avasthit,
stable. 313/5 Avnana-avtarana, to descend. 219/8 Avnna-avarna, infamy. 103
Avamanit-apamanit. 219 Avyar-avtar, to lower. 64/1 Avyas-alingan. 274 Avar-
another. 189 Avaranha-aprahan. 91/3 Avarddhig-snakebite, boil caused by spider
bite. Avarah-apradh. 69/3 Avaroppar-among themselves. 148 Avaroha-antarpur. 69/3
Avass-avashya. 163/4 Avay-apaya, fault. 287 Avariy-not prevented. 225/1 Avitah-
avitath, samyak. 207/1 Avibbal-svadhin. 288/2 Avimaṇit-apamanit. 198/2
Aviyalana-lack of contemplation. 288/1 Avisuddha-avishuddha. 241 Avisohicod-
avishodhikoti. 189 Avekka-to expect. 207/4 Avvat-avyakt. 288/2 Avvavahari-
avyavahari. Asai-asakrid, many times. 68/2 Asankhadi-lack of strife. Asanthar-
anirvah, inaptitude. 177/1 Asansatt-asansakt. 288/6 Asajjha-asadhya. 116/4
Asadha-ashaṭha, simple. 288 Asana-ashana. 70/5 Asati-avidyaman. 156/1 Asatt
-ashakt, asamartha. 318/2 Asabbhava-asadbhava, ayatharth. Asaris-asadrish. 192/2
Asagarie-who is not a shayyatar. 288/2 Asui-ashuchi. 87 Asuddha-ashuddha. 75
Asuya-unclear skill-demonstration. 206 Assanjam-asanyam. 215 Ah-this. 16
Ahakamma-adhakarma. 70/6 Ahakad-yathakrit, parikarma rahit. 22/5 Ahigaraṇa-1.
himsa, 198/3, 2. kalha. 141 Ahigara-adhikār. 48

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 318 piMDaniyukti 85 35 175 215 153 abbhatthaNa-vijJapti, jAnakArI denaa| 202
abbhAsa -guNA, guNana krnaa| 253/3 abbhiNtr-aabhyntr| 22/2 abhattachaMda-khAne
kI aruci| 309 abhikkha-lagAtAra, baar-baar| 185 abhigm-jnyaan| 144/1 abhiggh-
abhigrh| 73 abhimuh-abhimukh| 166/1 abhihaDa-sAmane lAyA huA AhAra, 59,142,
bhikSA kA eka doss| 157 abhojj-abhojy| amy-asmmt| 86/2 amilA - bhedd'| ayagola-
lohe kA golaa| arkhurnibddhaa-gdhaa-gaadd'ii| arahaTTa-araghaTTa, pAnI nikAlane
kA crkhaa| 54/1 arogi-niirog| 198/2 alevaDa-lepa rhit| 296 avakkamaNa-
apakramaNa, jaanaa| 90/4 avagama-apagama, dUra honA  /  57/4 avaTTita
-avasthita, sthir| 313/5 avaNaNa-avataraNa, nIce utrnaa| 219/8 avaNNa-avarNa,
akIrti  /  103 avmaannit-apmaanit| 219 avayAra-avatAra, nIce krnaa| 64/1 avyaas-
aaliNgn| 274 avr-duusraa| 189 avrnnh-apraahn| 91/3 avaraddhiga-sarpadaMza,
makar3I dvArA kATane para hone vAlA phodd'aa| avraah-apraadh| 69/3 avaroppara-
Apasa meN| 148 avroh-aNt:pur| 69/3 avss-avshy| 163/4 avAya-apAya, doss| 287
avAriya-nivArita nahIM kiyA huaa| 225/1 avitaha-avitatha, smyk| 207/1 avibbhl-
svaadhiin| 288/2 avimaannit-apmaanit| 198/2 aviyAlaNA-cintana kA abhaav| 288/1
avisuddh-avishuddh| 241 avisohikoddi-avishodhikotti| 189 avekkha-apekSA krnaa|
207/4 avvtt-avykt| 288/2 avvvhaarii-avyvhaarii| asai-asakRd, aneka baar| 68/2
asaMkhaDi-kalaha kA abhaav| asaMthara-anirvAha, apraapti| 177/1 asaMsatta-
asaMsakta  /  288/6 asjjh-asaadhy| 116/4 asaDha-azaTha, srl| 288 asnn-ashn| 70/5
asti-avidymaan| 156/1 asatta -azakta, asamartha  /  318/2 asabbhAva-
asadbhAva,ayathArtha  /  asris-asdRsh| 192/2 asAgarie-jo zayyAtara na ho| 288/2
asui-ashuci| 87 asuddh-ashuddh| 75 asUyA-aspaSTa rUpa se kaushl-jnyaapn| 206
assNjm-asNym| 215 ah-yh| 16 ahkmm-aadhaakrm| 70/6 ahAkaDa-yathAkRta, parikarma
rhit| 22/5 ahigaraNa-1. hiMsA, 198/3, 2. klh| 141 ahigaar-adhikaar| 48

Page #491 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
## Glossary:  **Page 19:**  * **Ahiy-Adhik:**  Excessive, too much. (149) *
**Ahiria:** Shameless. (302/2) * **Ahiriyaya:** Shamelessness. (218/1) *
**Ahuna:** Now, presently. (82/3) * **Ahekamm:** Adh:karma, Adhakarma (synonym
for 61, 63, 64). (214/3) * **Aho-muh:** Adh:mukha, downward facing. (64/2) *
**Aikkhana:** Statement, utterance. (89/6) * **Aina:** Aachirna, fit to be done.
(21/2) * **Au:** Aayushya, lifespan. (70/6) * **Aukkaay:** Apkaay. (76/5) *
**Autt:** To do, to perform. (136/6) * **Autt:** Suitable, applied. (143/3) *
**Aakampiy:** Attracted, drawn. (61, 70) * **Aghas:** A fragrant substance used
with water. (173/3) * **Aavaddhiya:**  Affected, afflicted. (76/4) * **Aavan:**
Aapan, shop. (209) * **Aavattana-pedhiya:**  A specific type of platform.
(163/7) * **Aana:**  Aagna, command. (239) * **Aavasag:**  Necessary, essential
(for a sadhu). (22/1) * **Aat:**  Aatma, soul. (219/8) * **Aatav:**  Aatap,
sunlight. (22/6) * **Aasandi:**  Chair. (167) * **Aataavan:**  Aatapana,
exposure to sunlight. (143) * **Aas:** 1. Ashwa, horse. 2. Mukha, mouth. (194/1,
157/4) * **Aasamkkhiya:**  Ashwa-makshika, a four-sense endowed being who
attained Kaivalya. (219/14) * **Aadaan:**  Garbha-dharana, conception. (35) *
**Aades:** 1. Aagna, command. 2. Mat, opinion. (83/1, 44/4) * **Aadesiya:**
Audeshik dosha, a type of fault. (97) * **Aahch:**  Kadaachit, perhaps. (117/1)
* **Aahd:**  Aahrit, brought. (252/1) * **Aaharan:**  Udaharan, example. (89/4)
**Page 319:**  * **Aabhog:**  Knowing, understanding. (149) * **Aabhogan:**
Knowledge, understanding. (302/2) * **Aamantan:**  Invitation. (302/4) *
**Aamay:**  Rog, disease. (181/1) * **Aayatti:**  Mixed, combined. (102) *
**Aayaman:**  Aachman, rinsing the mouth. (70, 70/4) * **Aayir:**  Aadar,
respect. (218/1) * **Aayiriya:**  Aacharya, teacher. (218/1) * **Aayahmm:**
Aatmaghna, self-killer. (151) * **Aayam:**  Mand, excretion. (204) * **Aayamg:**
Avasravan, excretion. (8, 15) * **Aayaavay:**  Aataapana-lene-wala, one who
takes sunbath. (143/3) * **Aayahmm:**  Aatmaghna, self-killer. (96/3) * **Aro:**
Purva ka, previous. (205) * **Aalav:**  Aalap, conversation. (231/1) *
**Aavjjag:**  Priti-utpadak karma, a karma that produces happiness. (207) *
**Aajiv:**  Aajivak, a Shraman's way of life. (209) * **Aajivana:**  A fault in
begging. (181) * **Aanat:**  Aagnapt, commanded. (73/18) * **Aavann:**  Prapt,
obtained. (239) * **Aat:**  Aatma, soul. (219/8) * **Aas:** 1. Ashwa, horse. 2.
Mukha, mouth. (194/1, 157/4) * **Aasav:** 1. Madya, liquor. 2. Ashrav, outflow.
(83/1, 44/4) * **Aasuya:**  Aupayaachitak, requested. (194/1) * **Aabhag:**
Bhaagidaar, partner. (158) * **Aabhag:**  Bhaagidaar, partner. (215) *
**Aabhag:**  Bhaagidaar, partner. (230) * **Aabhag:**  Bhaagidaar, partner. (40)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
 pari. 19 : zabdArtha 319 ahiy-adhik| 149 Abhoga-jAnate hue| 270 ahiria-nirljj|
302/2 aabhognn-jaankaarii| 218/1 ahiriiyyaa-nirljjtaa| 302/4 aamNtnn-aamNtrnn|
82/3 ahuNA-adhunA, ab| 181/1 aamy-rog| 214/3 ahekamma-adha:karma, AdhAkarma
61,63,64, Ayatti-mizrita, milA huaa| 102 _ kA pryaay| 70,70/4 aaymnn-aacmn| 19
ahomuh-adh:mukh| 64/2 aayr-aadr| 89/6 aaikkhnn-kthn| 218/1 aayriy-aacaary| 21/2
AiNNa-AcIrNa, karane yogya  /  151 aayhmm-aatmghn| 70/6 aau-aayussy| 204 AyAma-
mAMDa, avazrAvaNa  /  76/5 aaukkaay-apkaay| 8, 15 AyAmaga-avazrAvaNa, maaNdd|
191 aautttt-krnaa| 136/6 AyAvaya-AtApanA lene vaalaa| 143/3 Autta-upayukta, lagA
huaa| 96/3 aayaahmm-aatmghn| 61,70 AkaMpiya-AkRSTa kiyA huaa| 205 Arao-pUrva kA,
arvaak| Aghasa-pAnI ke sAtha ghisakara prayoga AlAva-AlApa, saMlApa  /  173/3 _
kiyA jAne vAlA sugaMdhita drvy| 231/1 Avajjaga-prIti utpAdaka krm| 207 AjIva-
AjIvaka, zramaNa kA aavddiy-aaptit| 76/4 eka prkaar| 209 AvaNa-ApaNa, dukaan|
181 AjIvaNA-bhikSA kA eka doss| AvattaNapeDhiyA-pIThikA vishess| 163/7 aanntt-
aajnypt| 73/18 aavnn-praapt| 239 aannaa-aajnyaa| 22/1 AvAsaga-Avazyaka, sAdhu kA
aat-aatmaa| 219/8 nitya karaNIya anusstthaan| 323 Atava-Atapa, dhuup| 22/6
aasNdii-kursii| 167 aataavnn-aataapnaa| 143 Asa -1. azva, 194/1, AdaMsaghara-
Adarzaghara, kAMca kA mahala, 2. mukh| 157/4 jisameM bharata cakravartI ko
AsamakkhiyA-azvamakSikA, caturiMdriya kaivalya huaa| 219/14 jIva vishess| 35
AdANa-garbhadhAraNa kraanaa| Asava-1. madya, madirA, Adesa-1.AjJA, 83/1, 2.
aashrv| 44/4 2. mt| 17 AsUya-aupayAcitaka, mAMgA huaa| 194/1 Adesiya-auddezika
doSa kA bhed| 97 Ahacca -kdaacit| 117/1 ApiMgala-lAla mizrita pIlA rNg| 252/1
AhaDa-AhRta, lAyA huaa| 158 aabhaagi-bhaagiidaar| 89/4 AharaNa -udaahrnn| 215
230 40,

Page #492 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
320 Pindaniyukti 219 135 Aha-adhar / 61/1 Ahakamm-adhakarm, a 58,62, fault of
begging. 64/1, 67/1, 68/2, 70, 70/4, 70/5, 71, 74, 80, 82/2, 88, 110, 190, 238/1
Ahakammiy-adhakarmik. 60,93 Aharim-fragrant substance, which is taken by
grinding with water etc. 231/1 / Ahinday-wanderer. 199 Ingal-flameless ember. 24
Ind-Indra. 70/4 Indiy-Indriya. 96/3 Ikkhagu-Ikshvaku dynasty. 219/14 Itt-brick.
24 Ittg-sevayi. 216 Ittga-sevayi. 219/1 Iddi-riddhi. 198/10 Itthi woman. Iriya-
irya, walking by seeing. 318 Ihra-otherwise / 239/1 Ihllog-ihalok. 136/4
Uubaddh-ritubaddh. 20 Undag-piece, section. 279 Ukkand-well-sorted 80 (rice
etc.). Ukkatt-excellent. 243/2 Ukkad-utkat more. 198/8 Ukkosag-excellent. 166
Ukkhaniya-uprooting. 108/2 Ukkhalia-sthali / 112 Ukkha-sthali. Ukkhitt-applied,
uprooted. 130 Ukkhev-lifting up vessels etc. 96/3 Ugg-Ugra kula. 207/3 Uggam-
udgam, related to householder 1,53,56, fault of begging. 57, 57/1,57/3, 210,
233, 238/1 Ugghahpadima-avgrahpratima. 44/2 Uggovana-udgopana. 51,56 Ugghadit-
udghadit. 163/4 Uccar-mal. 14 Ucchahit-utsahi. Ucchindan-borrowing. 144/1 Uccu-
ikshu. 128/1 Ujjan-udyan. Ujjanpalay-udyanpalak. 91/2 Ujju -riju, simple. Ujjug-
straight line. 171 Ujjhit-tyakt. 88 Utut-rising. 279 Uttan-diarrhea, loose
motion / 86/1 Utthiya-raised, arisen. 132 Udu-boat, wood for swimming. Udukhul-
ukhal. 167 Uddaah-reproach, defamation. 141 Udd-urdhva. 169 Unh-ushna, heat.
Unhvan-ushnapan, heating. 104 Uttar-lowering / 231/2 Uttimang -head. 136/1
Utted-bindu. 17/1 Udaull-moist with water / 243/2 Udag-water. Uddavan-apdravan.
Uddiṭṭh-objective fault of 90/1, a division. 94,116/2 168 152 12 113 62

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
320 piMDaniyukti 219 135 AhA-AdhAra / 61/1 AhAkamma-AdhAkarma, bhikSA kA eka
58,62, doss| 64/1, 67/1, 68/2, 70, 70/4, 70/5, 71, 74, 80, 82/2, 88, 110, 190,
238/1 aahaakmmiy-aadhaakrmik| 60,93 AhArima-sugaMdhita dravya, jo pAnI Adi ke
sAtha ghisakara liyA jAtA hai| 231/1 / aahiNddy-ghumkkdd'| 199 iMgAla-jvAlA
rahita aNgaaraa| 24 iNd-iNdr| 70/4 iNdiy-iNdriy| 96/3 ikkhAgu-ikSvAku vNsh|
219/14 itttt-iiNtt| 24 ittttg-sevii| 216 ittttgaa-sevii| 219/1 iddddi-Rddhi|
198/10 itthI strii| iriyA-IryA, dekhakara clnaa| 318 iharA-anyathA / 239/1
ihlog-ihlok| 136/4 uubddh-Rtubddh| 20 uMDaga-Tukar3A, khNdd| 279 ukkaMDa-khUba
chaMTA huA 80 (cAvala aadi)| ukktttth-utkRsstt| 243/2 ukkaDa-utkaTa adhik| 198/8
ukkosg-utkRsstt| 166 ukkhnniy-ukhaadd'kr| 108/2 ukkhaliyA-sthAlI / 112 ukkhaa-
sthaalii| ukkhitta-lAI huI, utpaattit| 130 ukkheva-bartana Adi ko Upara
utthaanaa| 96/3 ugga-ugra kul| 207/3 uggama-udgama, gRhastha se sambandhita
1,53,56, bhikSA kA doss| 57, 57/1,57/3, 210, 233, 238/1 ugghpddimaa-
avgrhprtimaa| 44/2 uggovnnaa-udgopnaa| 51,56 ugghaaddit-udghaattit| 163/4
uccaar-ml| 14 ucchaahit-utsaahit| ucchiMdaNa-udhAra lenaa| 144/1 ucchu-ikssu|
128/1 ujjaann-udyaan| ujjaannpaaly-udyaanpaalk| 91/2 ujju -Rju, srl| ujjuga-
sIdhI rekhaa| 171 ujjhit-tykt| 88 uTuMta-uThate hue| 279 uTThANa-atisAra roga,
dasta / 86/1 uTThiya-uThA huA, utthit| 132 uDu-naukA, tairane kA kaasstth|
udduukhl-uukhl| 167 uDDAha-niMdA, apbhraajnaa| 141 udddd-uurdhv| 169 uNha-uSNa,
grmii| uNhavaNa-uSNApana, garma krnaa| 104 uttAra-utAranA / 231/2 uttimaMga
-sir| 136/1 uttedd-bindu| 17/1 udaulla-pAnI se Ardra / 243/2 udg-paanii| uddvnn-
apdraavnn| uddiTTha-auddezika doSa kA 90/1, eka bhed| 94,116/2 168 152 12 113 62

Page #493 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pari. 19: Shabdarth 321**  86 **Uddeesiya** - Objective, a fault of begging,
food prepared in excess for the sake of a sadhu. 110, 190 **Uddehiga** -
Termite. 34 **Uppatti** - Origin. 194/2 **Uppalan** - To immerse. 198/11
**Uppaiya** - Produced. **Uppayana** - Fault of production. 53, 142, 193, 233
**Ubbhatth** - Requested. 128/2 **Ubbhamag** - A man who is a jar. 198/9
**Ubijj** - Udbhijja, greens like spinach. 297 **Ubbhijjaman** - Being opened.
163/6 **Ubbhinna** - To open a door, etc., 59, 162, a fault of begging. 163
**Ummatt** - Unmatta. 265 **Ummis** - Unmisra, a fault of begging. 237, 289. 290
**Ummukk** - Unmukta, released. 302/3 **Ull** - Moist, wet. **Ullan** - Rice
moistened with buttermilk. 297 **Ullavan** - Conversation, dialogue. 198/14
**Ullimpaman** - Coated. 163/2 **Uvauutt** - Suitable. **Uvaog** - Use. 25
**Uvakaran** - Instrument. **Uvakar** - Favor. **Uvakkhad** - To season food
with spices. **Uvaggah** - Satellite, favor. **Uvaghat** - Attack. **Uvachay** -
Increase. **Uvajhay** - Upadhyaya. 219/10 **Uvanayan** - To bring near. 207/3
**Uvadhi** - Upadhi. 119 **Uvma** - Simile. 53/2 **Uvarim** - Above. 73/12
**Uvarill** - Upper. 73/12 **Uval** - Stone / **Uvasagg** - Prefix. 219/14
**Uvaladdh** - Obtained. 69/1 **Uvasag** - Upasaka. 227/1 **Uvvattana** - To
roll cotton, to separate its seeds. 288/7 **Uvvattit** - 1. To remove, 198/9, 2.
To exfoliate with flour, etc. 198/12. **Uvarit** - Remaining. 308 **Usin** -
Hot. 254 **Usak** - Tilak, a special ornament. 198/13 **Ussakkan** - After a
fixed time. 131 **Ussakkit** - Done after a fixed time. 135/1 **Ussagg** -
Discharge. 14 **Un** - Less. 149 **Usav** - Festival. 96/1 **Egattthiya** -
Monosyllabic. 56 **Egath** - One side. 130 **Etthiya** - So much. 95/2
**Evaiya** - So much / 188/1 **Esana** - Desire / 51, 96/3 **Esanasamit** -
Agreed with the desire committee. 136/5 **Esit** - Obtained from desire. 240/4
**Ess** - Future. 295/6 **Okaddiya** - Removed. 188/1 **Ogahan** - Descent. 282
95/1 111

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pari. 19 : zabdArtha 321 86 uddesiya -auddezika, bhikSA kA eka doSa, apane sAtha
sAdhu ke nimitta adhika banAyA gayA bhojn| 110,190 uddehigaa-diimk| 34 upptti-
utptti| 194/2 upplnn-ddubonaa| 198/11 uppaaiy-utpaadit| uppAyaNA-utpAdanA doss|
53,142, 193,233 ubbhaTTha-mAMgA huaa| 128/2 ubbhAmaga-jAra puruss| 198/9
ubhijja-udbhijja, bathuA Adi sAga kI bhaajii| 297 ubbhijjamANa-kholA jAtA huaa|
163/6 ubbhiNNa-kapATa Adi kholanA, 59,162, bhikSA kA eka doss| 163 ummtt-unmtt|
265 ummIsa-unmizra, bhikSA kA eka 237,289, doss| 290 ummukka-unmukta, chUTA
huaa| 302/3 ulla-Ardra, giilaa| ullaNa-chAcha se gIlA kiyA huA odn| 297 ullAvaNa
-ullApa, vaartaalaap| 198/14 ulliMpamANa-lepa kiyA huaa| 163/2 uvuttupyukt|
uvog-upyog| 25 uvkrnn-upkrnn| uvakAra -upkaar| uvakkhaDa-khAdya ko masAle se
saMskArita krnaa| uvaggaha-upagraha, upkaar| uvghaat-upghaat| uvcy-upcy|
uvjjhaay-upaadhyaay| 219/10 uvaNayaNa-pAsa meM laanaa| 207/3 uvdhi-updhi| 119
uvmaa-upmaa| 53/2 uvrim-uupr| 73/12 uvarilla-Upara vaalaa| 73/12 uvala-pASANa /
uvsgg-upsrg| 219/14 uvaalddh-upaalbdh| 69/1 uvaasg-upaask| 227/1 uvvaTTaNa-
kapAsa loThanA, usake bIjoM ko alaga krnaa| 288/7 uvvaTTita-1. cyuta karanA,
198/9, 2. pIThI Adi se 198/12 udvartana kiyA huaa| uvvarita-zeSa bacA huaa| 308
usinn-ussnn| 254 usuka-tilaka, AbharaNa vishess| 198/13 ussakkaNa-niyata kAla ke
baad| 131 ussakkita-niyata kAla ke bAda kiyA huaa| 135/1 ussagga -utsrg| 14
uunn-km| 149 uusv-utsv| 96/1 egtttthiy-ekaarthk| 56 egattha -eka trph| 130
ettiy-itnaa| 95/2 evaiya-itanA / 188/1 esaNA-eSaNA / 51,96/3 esaNAsamita-eSaNA
samiti se smit| 136/5 esita-eSaNA se praapt| 240/4 ess-bhvissy| 295/6 okaDDiya-
nikAlA huaa| 188/1 ogaahnn-avgaahn| 282 95/1 111

Page #494 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
322 Pindaniyukti 63 21 94/1 32 Ogahim-Pakwann. 251/3 Otarana-Avatarana. Odan-
Dhannya. 296 Obhavan-Apabhrajana. Obhasiy-Yachit. 219/3 Om-1. Avam, Kam, 311, 2.
Durbhiksha / Otarana-Avatarana. 169 Oy-Teen, Panch Aadi Visham Sankhya. 299
Orass-Hriday Se Utpanna, Antarik. 217 Oral-Audarik. 62 Olitt-Avalipt, Lipa Hua.
163/1 Ovattan-Ulta Karna, Tedha Karna. 285 Osakkan-Niyat Kal Se Purv. 131
Osakkit-Niyat Kal Se Purv Kiya Hua. 135/1 Osadh-Aushadh. Osarana-Sadhu-Samaday.
134 Osavit-Upshant / 148/2 Osah-Aushadhi. 57/1 Oh-Samanya / 239/1 Ohar -Kachhua.
Kangu-Kodrav Dhannya. 297 Kanjiy-Kanji. 191 Kandag-Kandak, Sanayamshreni
Vishesh. 64 Kandit-Chaval Aadi Saf-Suthre Kiye Hue. Kans-Kansya. 156 Kakkadiy-
Kakdi. 78 Kakkab -Ikshu Ras Ka Vikar. 129 Kakkhad-Karkash, Kathor. 198/15
Kachhab-Kachhua. 259 Kazz-Kary. Kadar-Ghee Ke Bade Se Yukt Timan. 295/8 Katth-
Kasth. Katthakamm-Kasthakarm. Kad-Chatai. 70/3 Kadi -Kati, Kamar. 198/15 Kaddan-
Karshan, Vastr Aadi Khinchna. 180 Kadhiy-Kadhi / 297 Kanag-Kanak, Sona. 194/2
Kanitt-Kanishth, Chhota. 231/11 Kann-Bartan Ke Mukh Ka Kinara. 252/2 Kanha -
Krishna Namak Nadi. 231/2 Kattan -Sut Katna. 288/6 Katta-Karne Wala, Karta. 80/2
Kattocchay-Kahan Se Utpanna. 89/1 Kaddam-Kichad. 113/2 Kapp-Kalp. Kappatty-
Balaka 133 Kappatti-Balika. 131 Kappdiy-Karpathik Sannyasi. 69/3 Kappit-Aharan
Ka Ek Bhed. 302/1 Kam-Kram. Kambaddh-Pairon Mein Bedi Pahna Hua. 288/4
Kammankari- Mantra Aadi Ke Dwara Kaman-Vashikaran Karne Wala. 228 Kay-Kray. 163
Kar-1. Hath, 161, 2. Chungi. 57/1 Karag –Ola. Karduy-Mritak Bhoj. 218/1 Karbhi-
Untni. 86/2 Karis-Karish, Gobar Ka Chana. 125 Kal-Dhannya, Matar. 296 Kalun-
Karun, Kripapatra. 177 Kallan-Prayashchitt Vishesh. 22/6 Kavad-Kapat. 162 68 154
80 16

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
322 piMDaniyukti 63 21 94/1 32 ogaahim-pkvaann| 251/3 otrnn-avtrnn| odnn-dhaany|
296 obhaavnn-apbhraajnaa| obhaasiy-yaacit| 219/3 oma-1. avama, kama, 311, 2.
durbhikSa / otrnn-avtrnn| 169 oya-tIna, pAMca Adi viSama sNkhyaa| 299 orassa-
hRdaya se utpanna, aaNtrik| 217 oraal-audaarik| 62 olitta-avalipta, lIpA huaa|
163/1 ovattaNa-ulTA karanA, Ter3hA krnaa| 285 osakkaNa-niyata kAla se puurv| 131
osakkita-niyata kAla se pUrva kiyA huaa| 135/1 osdh-aussdh| osrnn-saadhu-
smudaay| 134 osavita-upazAnta / 148/2 oshi-aussdhi| 57/1 oha-sAmAnya / 239/1
ohAra -kchuaa| kaMgu-kodrava dhaany| 297 kNjiy-kaaNjii| 191 kaMDaga-kaNDaka,
saMyamazreNi vishess| 64 kaMDita-cAvala Adi sApha-suthare kie hue| kNs-kaaNsy|
156 kkkddiy-kkdd'ii| 78 kakkaba -ikSu rasa kA vikaar| 129 kakkhaDa-karkaza,
ktthor| 198/15 kcchbh-kchuaa| 259 kjj-kaary| kadara-ghI ke bar3e se yukta tiimn|
295/8 ktttth-kaasstth| ktttthkmm-kaasstthkrm| kdd-cttaaii| 70/3 kaDi -kaTi, kmr|
198/15 kaDDaNa-karSaNa, vastra Adi khiiNcnaa| 180 kaDhiya-kar3hI / 297 kaNaga-
kanaka, sonaa| 194/2 kaNiTTha-kaniSTha, chottaa| 231/11 kaNNa-bartana ke mukha
kA kinaaraa| 252/2 kaNhA - kRSNA nAmaka ndii| 231/2 kattaNa -sUta kaatnaa| 288/6
kattA-karane vAlA, krtaa| 80/2 kattoccaya-kahAM se utpnn| 89/1 kddm-kiicdd'|
113/2 kpp-klp| kappaTTaya-bAlakA 133 kppttttii-baalikaa| 131 kappaDiya-kArpaTika
sNnyaasii| 69/3 kappita-AharaNa kA eka bhed| 302/1 km-krm| kamabaddha-pairoM meM
ber3I pahanA huaa| 288/4 kammaNakAri- maMtra Adi ke dvArA kAmaNa-vazIkaraNa
karane vaalaa| 228 ky-kry| 163 kara-1. hAtha, 161, 2. cuNgii| 57/1 karaga -olaa|
karaDuya-mRtaka bhoj| 218/1 krbhii-uuNttnii| 86/2 karIsa-karISa, gobara kA
chaanaa| 125 kala-dhAnya, mttr| 296 kaluNa-karuNa, kRpaapaatr| 177 kallANa-
prAyazcitta vishess| 22/6 kvaadd-kpaatt| 162 68 154 80 16

Page #495 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Par. 19: Word Meanings**  323 3/1 76/3 76 Kavod-Kapota. 136 Kahaṇ-Kathana. 76
Kaha-Vārta. 251/1 Kahit-Kathit. 203 Kag-Kak, Kaua. 212 Kaṇ-Blind in one eye.
219/10 Kāmagaddhab-Extremely attached to sexual pleasure. 209/1 Kay-Kāpoti,
Kāṇvad. 61/1 Kinkar-Kinkar, a type of female head of a household. 219/6 Kitth-
Krishta, land broken by a plough. 11 Kidḍa-Krida. 57/2 Kiṇai-Kinchit matra. 173
Kitti-Kirti. Kiles-Klesh. 83/5 Kivan-Kripana / 210/2 Kiviṇ - Kripana / 208/1
Kis-Krish. 136/1 Kisi-Krishi, Kheti. 207 Kitgad-Kritakrit, a fault of begging.
139, 142 Kilāvaṇadhai-A nurse who makes children play. 197 Kuub-Kutupa, a vessel
for filling oil. 255 Kukkud-Maya / 136/6 Kucchā -Kutsā / 73/6 Kucchi-Kukshi,
Udara. 168 Kutthi-Affected by leprosy / 288/4 Kud-Ghat. 166/2 Kudumb-Kutumb.
61/1 Kudḍ-Bhit, Diwar / 137 Kunim-Mans. 86 Kummas-Kulmas, Urad. Kurang-Mrig.
Kulay-Kulak, a specific measure. Kusana-A dish made of curd and rice. 291 Kūḍ-
Jal. 67/3 Kūr-Krur, Dhanya. Kul-The bank of a river. 231/4 Kūviy-Kūjak, one who
searches for a thief. 68/7 Kelās-Kailash mountain. 210/5 Kevalnaṇ-Kevalgyan.
90/4 Kevali-Kevalgyani, one who has attained Kaivalya. 239/1 Koḍi-Koți, part,
division. 192/7 Kodḍav-Kodrav. Kopper-Kohni, the middle part of the arm. 198/7
Kol-Badar, enmity. 284 Koll'ir-Kolllakir, a specific city. 199 Kosalag-Kaushal
country. 295/7 Koh-Krodh. 44/4 Kohpiṇḍ-A fault of begging. 217 Kha'iy-1. Kshayik
(emotion), 73/21, 2. Khaya hua. 86 Kha'uriy-Kalushit. 136/1 Khaṇḍ-Khaṇḍ. 129
Khanta-Pita. 201/3 Khantig-Pita. 272 Khantiya-Mata. 201/3 Khanti-Mata. 201/2
Khanḍh-1. Group, 41/2, 2. Shoulder. 61/1 Khaggūḍ-Kut'il. 146 Khaṇi-Khajana. 96/2
Khatt-Karish. 12 Khadd-Prachur. 220 89/5 53

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pari. 19 : zabdArtha 323 3/1 76/3 76 kvodd-kpot| 136 khnn-kthn| 76 khaa-vaartaa|
251/1 khit-kthit| 203 kAga-kAka, kauaa| 212 kANa-AMkha se kaanaa| 219/10
kAmagaddabha-maithuna meM atyadhika aaskt| 209/1 kAya-kApotI, kaaNvdd| 61/1
kiMkara-kiMkara, eka prakAra kA mahilA pradhAna vykti| 219/6 kiTTha-kRSTa, hala
se vidArita bhuumi| 11 kiddddaa-kriidd'aa| 57/2 kiNAi-kiJcit maatr| 173 kitti-
kiirti| kiles-klesh| 83/5 kivaNa-kRpaNa / 210/2 kiviNa - kRpaNa / 208/1 kis-
kRsh| 136/1 kisi-kRSi, khetii| 207 kItagaDa-krItakRta, bhikSA kA 139, eka doss|
142 kIlAvaNadhAI-krIr3A karAne vAlI dhaay| 197 kuuba-kutupa, taila bharane kA
brtn| 255 kukkuDa-mAyA / 136/6 kucchA -kutsA / 73/6 kucchi-kukSi, udr| 168
kuTThI-kuSTha roga se yukta / 288/4 kudd-ghtt| 166/2 kudduNb-kuttumb| 61/1
kuDDa-bhIta, dIvAra / 137 kunnim-maaNs| 86 kummAsa-kulmASa, udd'd| kurNg-mRg|
kulaya-kulaka, mApa vishess| kusaNa-dahI aura cAvala se banA huA krmbaa| 291
kuudd-jaal| 67/3 kUra-krUra, dhaany| kUla-nadI kA kinaaraa| 231/4 kUviya-kUjaka,
cora kI khoja karane vaalaa| 68/7 kelAsa-kailAza prvt| 210/5 kevlnaann-
kevljnyaan| 90/4 kevali-kevalajJAnI, kaivalya praapt| 239/1 koDi-koTi, aMza,
vibhaag| 192/7 koddv-kodrv| koppara-kohanI, hAtha kA madhya bhaag| 198/7 kola-
badara, bair| 284 kollaira-kollakira nagara vishess| 199 kosalaga-kauzala desh|
295/7 koh-krodh| 44/4 kohapiMDa-bhikSA kA eka doss| 217 khaiya-1. kSAyika
(bhAva), 73/21, 2. khAyA huaa| 86 khuriy-klussit| 136/1 khNdd-khaaNdd| 129 khNt-
pitaa| 201/3 khNtig-pitaa| 272 khNtiyaa-maataa| 201/3 khNtii-maataa| 201/2
khaMdha-1. samUha, 41/2, 2. kNdhaa| 61/1 khgguudd-kuttil| 146 khnni-khjaanaa|
96/2 khtt-kriiss| 12 khddh-prcur| 220 89/5 53

Page #496 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
324 Pindaniyukti 53 78 12 Kham-Ksham, worthy. 319 Khamg-tapasvi. 90/2 Khay-to be
destroyed. 231/5 Kharantna-to give reproach. 96/1 Khallg-a dona made of bamboo
leaves. 90/3 Khaim-Khadim. Khamana-to ask for forgiveness. 218/1 Khar-alkali.
Khinsa-slander. 277 Khitta-thrown. 254 Khinn-tired. 210/3 Khivan-to throw.
219/14 Khir-milk. 86/2 Khirudum-Kshiradruma, banyan tree etc. sweet trees. 11
Khirudhai-milk-giving nurse. 197 Khujj-kubj, hunchback. 219/10 Khudd-kshullk,
small disciple. 219/1 Khutt-time. 302/3 Khubban-to be agitated. 278 Khetta-
field. 73/2 Khev-ksep, projection. 222/2 Khobh-kshob, to be agitated. 214/3
Khomiy-kshoumik, cotton cloth. 32 Khol-spy. 69/3 Khosy-worn-out. Ganthi-knot.
164 Gand-breast. 198/5 Gadhiy-giddha, attached. 96/2 Gabb-garbh / 168
Gabbhadhan-garbhaadhan. 231/10 Gabbhini-pregnant. 231/10 Gam-equivalent text of
the scriptures. 198/10 Gumm-worthy of enjoyment. 231/5 Gay-elephant. Garhit-
garhit. 201/2 Gariha-dust. 274 Galant-falling. 312/1 Galichch-neck ornament.
198/13 Gavatt-cow food, grass. 96/2 Gavitth-food obtained through investigation.
233 Gavesana-investigation. 51,53 Gahit-grihit. 117 Gamasamiy-gram-chief. 173/1
Gah-aquatic animal species. 154 Giddhvaridhi-a type of male-dominated female.
219/6 Gimh-summer. 54/1 Gira-speech. 198/14 Girifulliy-giripushpit city. 216
Gilan-glan, patient. 21/2 Giliy-to swallow. 82/3 Gih-grih, house. 156 Gihatth-
grihasth / 95/1 Gihi-grihi, grihasth. 22/4 Gundiy-ash-covered. 198/11 Gujjhag-
dev special. 210/5 Gutti-gupta. 44/4 Gul-jaggery. 40 Guliy-gutika, for
transformation, a gutika kept in the mouth. 141 Gavini-pregnant. 168 Geruy-
gerua-clad wanderer, a type of Shraman. 209 Gelann-disease. Geh-grih. 76/1 Gehi-
attachment. 83/4 145

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
324 piMDaniyukti 53 78 12 khama-kSama, yogy| 319 khmg-tpsvii| 90/2 khaya-naSTa
honaa| 231/5 kharaMTaNA-upAlambha denaa| 96/1 khallaga-bAMsa ke pattoM kA banA
donaa| 90/3 khaaim-khaadim| khAmaNA-kSamA maaNgnaa| 218/1 khaar-kssaar| khiNsaa-
niNdaa| 277 khitt-kssipt| 254 khinn-shraant| 210/3 khivnn-pheNknaa| 219/14
khiir-duudh| 86/2 khIraduma-kSIradruma, vaTavRkSa Adi mIThe vRkss| 11 khIradhAI-
dUdha pilAne vAlI dhaaii| 197 khujja-kubja, kuubdd'aa| 219/10 khuDDa-kSullaka,
choTA shissy| 219/1 khutt-baar| 302/3 khubbhaNa -kSubhita honaa| 278 khett-
kssetr| 73/2 kheva-kSepa, prkssep| 222/2 khobha-kSobha, kSubdha honaa| 214/3
khomiya-kSaumika, kapAsa kA banA vstr| 32 khol-guptcr| 69/3 khosiy-jiirnn-
shiirnn| gNtthi-gaaNtth| 164 gNdd-stn| 198/5 gaDhiya-gRddha, aaskt| 96/2 gabbha-
garbha / 168 gbbhaadhaann-grbhaadhaan| 231/10 gbbhinni-grbhvtii| 231/10 gama-
zAstra kA tulya paatth| 198/10 gamma-bhoga ke yogy| 231/5 gy-haathii| grhit-
grhit| 201/2 grihaa-grdaa| 274 galaMta-jharatA huaa| 312/1 galicca-gale kA
aabhuussnn| 198/13 gavatta-gAya kA bhojana, ghaas| 96/2 gaviTTha-gaveSaNA
pUrvaka prApta aahaar| 233 gvesnnaa-gvessnnaa| 51,53 ghit-gRhiit| 117
gaamsaamiy-graam-prdhaan| 173/1 gAha-jalacara jaMtu vishess| 154 giddhAvarikhi-
eka prakAra kA mahilA pradhAna puruss| 219/6 gimh-griissm| 54/1 giraa-vaannii|
198/14 giriphulliya-giripuSpita nagara vizeSa / 216 gilANa-glAna, rogii| 21/2
giliy-niglnaa| 82/3 giha-gRha, ghr| 156 gihattha-gRhastha / 95/1 gihi-gRhI,
gRhsth| 22/4 guMDiya-rAkha se avguNtthit| . 198/11 gujjhaga-deva vishess| 210/5
gutti-gupti| 44/4 gul-gudd'| 40 guliya-guTikA, rUpa-parivartana hetu _mukha meM
rakhI jAne vAlI guttikaa| 141 gvinnii-grbhvtii| 168 geruya-geruA vastradhArI
parivrAjaka, zramaNa kA eka prkaar| 209 gelnnnn-rog| geh-gRh| 76/1 gehi-aaskti|
83/4 145

Page #497 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pari. 19: Shabdarth**  325 3/1 96 94 91 173 160 36 Go-Cow. 70/3 Gochchiy-
Kotwal. 173/1 Gotthig-Friend. 108/2 Gon-Cow. 210/4 Goniy-Cow Trader. 68/7 Goni-
Cow. 96 Gonn-Secondary, Possessing Qualities. Gott-Gotra. 231/9 Gobbar-Village
named Gobar. 89/2 Goyar-Pasture. Goras-Milk, Curd, Buttermilk etc. 40 Gov-
Cowherd. 173 Govalay-Cowherd. Ghangsala-Dwelling place of Karpathik Bhikshus.
Ghattag-Special stone for smoothing vessels. 14 Ghattan-To move, to shake. 302/4
Ghattiy-Mixed, shaken. 302/4 Ghad-Ghat. 70/3 Ghadiy-Connected, shaken. 113/3
Ghan-Cloud. 80/4 Ghanoudhi-Ghanodadhi. Ghanvalay-Circular water enclosure. 16
Ghanvay-Steady wind / 27 Ghat-Ghee. 82/1 Ghatpunn-Ghevar. Ghatth-Taken. 68/7
Ghamm-Sun, Sunlight. 138/3 Gharcoil-Lizard. 163/7 Ghait-Killed. 69/3 Ghan-Sesame
seed crusher. 27/1 Ghasesana-Grass eating / 303 Ghiniill-Compassionate,
merciful. 80/5 Ghusalun-Churning curd / 288/6 Ghetttavva-Worth taking / 295/1
Ghettthi-Taken. 128/2 Ghos-Sound. 207/2 Chauth-1. Fast, 295/3, 2. Fourth. 68/11
Chauppann-Chaupan. 192/7 Chauppad-Quadruped. 52/2 Chaubbhag-Four parts.
Chauridiy-Four-sensed. 35 Chauvvih-Fourfold. Chandoday-Garden named Chandoday.
Chakkhu-Eye. 226/1 Chadukari-One who does flattery. 141 Chadugar-One who does
flattery. 210 Chamm-Skin. Charan-Character. 73/16 Charanakaran-A type of Anuyog.
136/4 Charit-A type of Aharan. 302/1 Charitt-Character. 44 Chalan-Foot. 82/2
Chaval-Agile, fickle. 136/1 Chaul-Rice. 17,95 Chaulod-Rice water. 191 Chaulodag-
Rice water. 76/5 Chanakk-Minister of King Chandragupta. 230 Charbhad-Charbhat,
Soldier. 174 Chari-One who wanders. 80/4 Chari-Forage. 96/1 Chikkun-Dense,
smooth. Chinn-Torn, to nurture. 136/6 Chitt-Conscious. 139 Chittkamma-Painting.
Chittsabha-Picture assembly / 53/1 Water. 216 46

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pari. 19 : zabdArtha 325 3/1 96 94 91 173 160 36 go-gaay| 70/3 gocciy-kotvaal|
173/1 gotttthig-mitr| 108/2 gonn-gaay| 210/4 goNiya-gAya kA vyaapaarii| 68/7
gonnii-gaay| 96 goNNa-gauNa, gunn-nisspnn| gott-gotr| 231/9 gobbara-gobara
nAmaka gaaNv| 89/2 goyr-gocrii| gorasa-dUdha, dahI, takra aadi| 40 gov-gvaalaa|
173 govaaly-gvaalaa| ghaMghasAlA-kArpaTika bhikSuoM kA aavaas-sthl| ghaTTaga-
pAtra ko cikanA karane kA pASANa vishess| 14 ghaTTaNa-calAnA, hilaanaa| 302/4
ghaTTiya-milA huA, hilAyA huaa| 302/4 ghdd-ghtt| 70/3 ghaDiya-saMsakta, hilAyA
huaa| 113/3 ghnn-megh| 80/4 ghnnudhi-ghnoddhi| ghaNavalaya-vRttAkAra pAnI kA
prkottaa| 16 ghaNavAya-styAna vAyu / 27 ght-ghRt| 82/1 ghtpunnnn-ghevr| ghtth-
gRhiit| 68/7 ghamma-Atapa, dhuup| 138/3 ghrkoil-chipklii| 163/7 ghaait-ghaatit|
69/3 ghaann-tilpiidd'nyNtr| 27/1 ghAsesaNA-grAsaiSaNA / 303 ghiNilla-kRpAlu,
dyaalu| 80/5 ghusulaNa-dahI mathanA / 288/6 ghettavva-grahaNa karane yogya /
295/1 ghetthii-gRhiit| 128/2 ghos-ghoss| 207/2 cauttha-1. upavAsa, 295/3, _2.
cauthaa| 68/11 cupnnnn-caupn| 192/7 cuppd-ctusspd| 52/2 cubbhaag-cturbhaag|
curidiy-cturindriy| 35 cuvvih-cturvidh| caMdodaya-caMdrodaya nAmaka udyaan||
cakkhu-cakSu, aaNkh| 226/1 caDukAri-cATukAritA karane vaalaa| 141 caDugAra-
cATukAritA karane vaalaa| 210 cmm-crm| crnn-caaritr| 73/16 caraNakaraNa-anuyoga
kA eka prkaar| 136/4 carita-AharaNa kA eka bhed| 302/1 critt-caaritr| 44 calaNa-
caraNa, pair| 82/2 cavala-capala, cNcl| 136/1 caaul-caavl| 17,95 cAuloda-cAvala
kA paanii| 191 cAulodaga-cAvala kA paanii| 76/5 cANakka-rAjA candragupta kA
mNtrii| 230 cArabhaDa-cArabhaTa, sainik| 174 cAri-paribhramaNa karane vaalaa|
80/4 caarii-caaraa| 96/1 cikkaNa-saghana, ciknaa| ciNNa-cIrNa, pAlana krnaa|
136/6 citt-scitt| 139 cittkmm-citrkrm| cittasabhA-citrasabhA / 53/1 paanii| 216
46

Page #498 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
326 140 163 Chimidh-Chipata. 1987 Chudhan-Jirn-Shirn. 21 Chun-Churn. Chunni-
Chura. 104 Chullg-Bhojan. 182 Chulli-Chulha / 113 Chettaa-Cheshta. 95/1 Chedd-
Balak. 173/2 Choi-Chodit. 68/2 Chodag-Prashnakarta. 115 Chodan-Prerna. 220/2
Chollag-Bhojan. 178 Chhaumatth-Chhadmasth. 95/1,239 Chakkamm-(Brahman ke)
Shatkarma. 210/1 Chakkay-Shatkay. 65 Chagan-Gobar. 36 Chagalg-Bakra. 143/2
Chaddan-Chardan. 254,301 Chaddi-Chardit. 237 Chan-Utsav. 220/1 Chapppaya-
Shatpadika, Joon. 22/3 Chabbag-Bans ki Tokri. 127 Chhammas-Chha Maas. 295/3
Chalit-Chala Gaya. 302/5 Chadan-Ghar ki Chhat. 138/4 Chay-Bhuka / 318/1 Char-
Kshar, Rak. 22/4 Char-Bhasm Lagaye hue Sharir wala. 143/2 Chikk-Sprust. Chhiddu-
Chhidr. 138/4 Chitt-Sprust. 245/2 Chunn-Klib, Napunsak. 198/14 Chhua-Kshudha.
318/1 Chhud-Kshipt, Tyakt. 63 Pindaniyukti Chhotti-Uchchishta, Joothan. 280
Chhobag-Mithya-Dosharopan / 198/9 Jai-Yati. 69 Janghaparijit-Labdhidhari Muni.
231/7 Jant-Yantra / Jakkh-Yaksh, Dev Vishesh. 210/5 Jajjiv-Yavajjeevan. 231/6
Jadd-Hatthi. 184 Janavad-Janapavad. 203 Jatna-Yatna / 252 Jatmudda-Lak ka
Bandhan. 163/2 Jatti-Jitna / 45/1 Jamm-Janm. 52/1 Jar-Jwar. 275 Jarit-Bukhar
wala, Jwarit. 265 Jalan-Jwalan, Jalna. 199 Jall-Sharir ka Mail. 136/1 Jahakkapp-
Yathakalp. 73/22 Jahatth-Yatharth. 226/1 Jahanag-Jaghany. 161 Jahvay-Yathavad,
Jaisa kaha gaya. 83/3 Jahsatti-Yathashakti. 192 Jahiksha-Yadrichcha, Jaisi
ichcha. 198/6 Jahiy-Jahan. 42 Jau-Daliya, Khady Vishesh. 298 Jag-Yagya. 207/2
Januk-Jangha. 228/1 Jamati-Jamaata. Jayana-Yachana. 208 Jayamay-Nyun Ahar. 311
Jarisiy-Jaisa. 219/2 Jala-Jwala. 252/2 Javay-Jitna. 117/3 Javant-Jitna / 73/4
203 84

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
326 140 163 cimiddh-cipttaa| 1987 cuddnn-jiirnn-shiirnn| 21 cunnnn-cuurnn| cuNNi
-cuuraa| 104 cullg-bhojn| 182 cullI-cUlhA / 113 cettttaa-cessttaa| 95/1 cedd-
baalk| 173/2 coiy-codit| 68/2 codg-prshnkrtaa| 115 codnn-prernnaa| 220/2 collg-
bhojn| 178 chumtth-chdmsth| 95/1,239 chakkamma-(brAhmaNa ke) ssttkrm| 210/1
chkkaay-ssttkaay| 65 chgnn-gobr| 36 chglg-bkraa| 143/2 chddddnn-chrdn| 254,301
chddddiy-chrdit| 237 chnn-utsv| 220/1 chappayA-SaTpadikA, juuN| 22/3 chabbaga-
bAMsa kI ttokrii| 127 chammAsa-chaha maas| 295/3 chalita-chalA gyaa| 302/5
chAdaNa-ghara kI cht| 138/4 chAya-bhUkhA / 318/1 chAra-kSAra, raakh| 22/4 chAra-
bhasma lagAe hue zarIra vaalaa| 143/2 chikk-spRsstt| chiddddu-chidr| 138/4
chitt-spRsstt| 245/2 chunna-klIba, npuNsk| 198/14 chuhaa-kssudhaa| 318/1 chUDha
-kSipta, tykt| 63 piMDaniyukti choTTi-ucchiSTatA, juutthn| 280 chobhaga-mithyA-
doSAropaNa / 198/9 ji-yti| 69 jaMghAparijita-labdhidhArI muni| 231/7 jaMta-
yaMtra / jakkha-yakSa, deva vishess| 210/5 jjjiiv-yaavjjiivn| 231/6 jddddu-
haathii| 184 jnnvaad-jnaapvaad| 203 jataNA-yatanA / 252 jatumuddA-lAkha kA
bNdhn| 163/2 jattiya-jitanA / 45/1 jmm-jnm| 52/1 jr-jvr| 275 jarita-bukhAra
vAlA, jvrit| 265 jalaNa-jvalana, jlnaa| 199 jalla-zarIra kA mail| 136/1 jhkpp-
ythaaklp| 73/22 jhtth-ythaarth| 226/1 jhnng-jghny| 161 jahavAya-yathAvAda, jaisA
kahA gyaa| 83/3 jhstti-ythaashkti| 192 jahicchA-yadRcchA, jaisI icchaa| 198/6
jhiy-jhaaN| 42 jAu-daliyA, khAdya vishess| 298 jaag-yjny| 207/2 jaannuk-jNghaa|
228/1 jaamaati-jaamaataa| jaaynnaa-yaacnaa| 208 jAyAmAya-nyUna aahaar| 311
jaarisiy-jaisaa| 219/2 jaalaa-jvaalaa| 252/2 jaaviy-jitnaa| 117/3 jAvaMta-jitanA
/ 73/4 203 84

Page #499 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
327 186 Pari. 19: Word meaning - *Javant-yāvadarthic*, *auddeshik* 98,105/1, a
difference. *Jāvaṇ-yāpan*, to spend. 90/3 *Jitasattu-jitashatru* king. 53/1
*Jīr-jīrṇa* to become, to digest. 295/9 *Jungiy* - handicapped in hands and
feet. 210/2 *Jug* - part of a cart, which is placed on the shoulders of the oxen
while pulling a cart or plough. 136/1 *Jugav* - simultaneously, together / 57/4
*Jutt* - equipped. 108 *Juddh* - war / 202 *Jumma* - pair. *Juya* - sacrificial
altar. 61/1 *Juya* - equipped. 90/3 *Juvaray* - crown prince. 231/11 *Jusiy* -
dependent, served. 210/3 *Jūh* - youth. 236 *Jūhavati* - youth leader. 236/1
*Joṇi* - womb. 231/5 *Joti* - light. 138 *Jotis* - astrology. *Jhank* - to speak
repeatedly / 132 *Jhāṇ* - meditation. 316 *Thapp* - to be established. *Thavaṇā*
- establishment. *Thaviyag* - establishment fault, a fault of begging. 287
*Thāṇ* - 1. *Utkatik* etc. posture, 207/2, 2. place, 136, 3. *Kāyotsarga*. 14
*Thit* - situated. *Thitī* - situation. 64 *Dakk* - bitten by a snake etc. 166/2
*Dagalag* - stone fragment, _ baked brick pieces. 14 *Dahaṇ* - burning, to burn.
281 *Dāh* - burning. 264 *Duṁba* - elephant driver. 185 *Doy* - large wooden
spoon. 112 *Dhakkit* - covered. ওও *Dhaḍḍar* - loud voice. 198/14 *Nāt* - 1.
known, aware, 144/1, 2. example. 204 *Nīt* - taking. 91/3 *Nīhammīy* - to come
out. 136/3 *Nejj* - knowable. 73/17 *Ney* - knowable, to be known. 7013
*Nhavaṇadhātī* - nurse who bathes. 198/12 *Nhayay* - graduate, a type of male
dominated by women. 219/6 *Tandul* - *Tandul*, rice. 17/1 *Takk* - *Takra*,
buttermilk. 128/3 *Taccaṇṇīy* - Buddhist monk. 166/1 *Taṇ* - *Tṛṇa*. 210/4
*Taṇāihār* - grass cutter. 91/1 *Taṇuī* - thin. 198/7 *Taṇukotṭha* - body. 90/4
*Taṇuvāy* - *Tanuvāt*, subtle air. 27 *Tatiy* - third. 192/4 *Tatti* - *Tapti*,
worry. 89/8 *Tattiy* - that much. 117/3 *Taddosī* - leprosy patient. 276 *Tamis*
- darkness. 138/2 *Tamman* - *Tanmaya*. 96/3 *Tay* - skin. 117/4 *Tar* - to be
able. . 240/1 *Tarī* - small boat. . 153 57/1 94 68/7

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
327 186 pari. 19 : zabdArtha jAvaMtiya-yAvadarthika, auddezika kA 98,105/1, eka
bhed| jAvaNa-yApana, bitaanaa| 90/3 jitasattu-jitazatru raajaa| 53/1 * jIra-
jIrNa honA, pcnaa| 295/9 juMgiya-hAtha-paira se hiin| 210/2 juga-zakaTa kA aMga,
gAr3I yA hala khIMcate samaya jo bailoM ke kaMdhe para rakhA jAtA hai| 136/1
jugava-yugapad, eka sAtha / 57/4 jutt-yukt| 108 juddha-yuddha / 202 jumm-yugm|
juy-yuup| 61/1 juy-yukt| 90/3 juvraay-yuvraaj| 231/11 jusiya-Azrita, sevit|
210/3 juuh-yuuth| 236 juuhvti-yuuthpti| 236/1 jonni-yoni| 231/5 joti-jyoti| 138
jotis-jyotiss| * jhaMkha-bAra-bAra bolanA / 132 jhaann-dhyaan| 316 tthpp-
sthaapy| tthvnnaa-sthaapnaa| Thaviyaga-sthApanA doSa, bhikSA kA eka doss| 287
ThANa-1. utkaTuka Adi Asana, 207/2, 2. sthAna, 136, 3. kaayotsrg| 14 tthit-
sthit| tthiti-sthiti| 64 Dakka-sAMpa Adi kA DasA huaa| 166/2 Dagalaga-pASANa-
khaNDa, _ pakkI IMTa ke ttukdd'e| 14 DahaNa-dahana, jlaanaa| 281 ddaah-daah| 264
dduNb-mhaavt| 185 Doya-lakar3I kA bar3A cmmc| 112 Dhakkita-r3hakA huaa| oo
ddhddddr-uccsvr| 198/14 NAta-1. jJAta, avagata, 144/1, 2. udaahrnn| 204 Nita- le
jAte hue| 91/3 NIhammiya-bAhara niklnaa| 136/3 nnejj-jnyey| 73/17 Neya-jJeya,
jAnane yogy| 7013 NhavaNadhAtI-snAna karAne vAlI dhaatrii| 198/12 NhAyaya-
snAtaka, eka prakAra kA mahilA pradhAna puruss| 219/6 taMDula-taNDula, caavl|
17/1 takka-takra, chaach| 128/3 taccaNNiya-bauddha bhikssu| 166/1 tnn-tRnn|
210/4 taNAihAra-ghAsa kATane vaalaa| 91/1 tnnuii-ptlii| 198/7 tnnukotttth-
shriir| 90/4 taNuvAya-tanuvAta, sUkSma vAyu vishess| 27 ttiy-tRtiiy| 192/4
tatti-tapti, cintaa| 89/8 tttiy-utnaa| 117/3 taddosI-kuSTha rogii| 276 tmis-
aNdhkaar| 138/2 tmmnn-tnmy| 96/3 ty-tvk| 117/4 * tara-samartha honaa| . 240/1
tarI-choTI naukaa| . 153 57/1 94 68/7

Page #500 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
328 Pindaniyukti 11 Tav-tap. 217 Tas-tras. 243/3 Tahiy-vahan. 163/5 Tarisiy-
vaisi. 240/3 Tavasa-tapas, a type of Shraman. 209 Tavit-tapit. 104 Tikadu-sunth,
peepal, black pepper etc. 78 Tikal-trikal. 204 Tikkhutt-three times. 302/3
Tigichhag-chikitsak. 313 Tigichhan-chikitsa. 83/5 Tigichha-chikitsa, bhikhya's
195, a fault. 214 Titikkha-titikhsa. 320 Titthagar-tirthankara. 73/9 Tinn-tirna.
90/4 * Tipp-dena / 136/6 * Timm-ardra karna. 163/2 Tiriy-1. Tircha, 171, 2.
Tiryanch. 36 Till-tail. 144/2 Tivaayan-tripatana, destroy by mind, speech and
body. Trividh-trividh. Tivva-tivra. 64/2 Tiha-three ways. 287 Tunna-weaving,
sewing etc. work. 207 Tunhhik-tushnik, silent, without speech. 68/9 Tuyattan-
twagvartan, sleep. 14 Turiy-shighra. 136/1 Tusiniy-tushnik, silent. 68/10
Tuvari-arhar dal. 296 Teindhiy-triindriya. Teukkay-tejaskaay. 8,23 Ten-sten. 172
Terasi-napuंसक. 266 Thambhan-by counter-knowledge, to make immobile. 228 Thakk-
opportunity. 76/4 Than-stan / 222/2 Thaniy-stan wali. 198/7 Tharatharant-
trembling. 288/2 Thal-sthal. 154 Tham-bal / 318/2 Thali-sthali. 114 Thirikaran-
sthirikarana. 210 Thull-sthul. 198/5 Ther-sthavir / 273 Theri-sthvira, old
woman. 198/7 Thov-stoka, less. Daiy-leather bag / 27/2 Dand-water boiled.
Dandini-king's wife. 230 Dansan-1. Darshan, 2. to see. 69/2 Dakkh-daksh. 67/3
Dakkha-draksha. Dag-udak, water. 281 Dagsoyeri-follower of Sankhya philosophy.
143/2 Datt-this name's disciple. Daddar-wooden stairs. 170 Daddaray-kutup etc.'s
mouth-binding cloth-piece. 162 Daridd-daridra. 148/1 Darisan-to see. 207/3
Daleti-crushed. 267 Dav-drav, liquid substance. 192/4 Davi-dravya. 194 78 62 15
34

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
328 piMDaniyukti 11 tv-tp| 217 ts-trs| 243/3 thiy-vhaaN| 163/5 taarisiy-vaisii|
240/3 tAvasa-tApasa, zramaNa kA eka prkaar| 209 taavit-taapit| 104 tikaDu-
sUMTha, pIpala, kAlImirca aadi| 78 tikaal-trikaal| 204 tikkhutta-tIna baar|
302/3 tigicchg-cikitsk| 313 tigicchnn-cikitsaa| 83/5 tigicchA-cikitsA, bhikSA kA
195, _eka doss| 214 titikkhaa-titikssaa| 320 titthgr-tiirthNkr| 73/9 tinn-
tiirnn| 90/4 * tippa-denA / 136/6 * timma-Ardra krnaa| 163/2 tiriya-1. tirachA,
171, 2. tirynyc| 36 till-tail| 144/2 tivAyaNa-tripAtana, mana, vacana aura kAya
se naSTa krnaa| tividh-trividh| tivv-tiivr| 64/2 tihA-tIna prakAra se| 287
tuNNa-bunAI, silAI Adi krm| 207 tuNhikka-tUSNIka, mauna, vacana rhit| 68/9
tuyaTTaNa-tvagvartana, shyn| 14 turiy-shiighr| 136/1 tusiNIya-tUSNIka, maun|
68/10 tUvari-arahara kI daal| 296 teiNdiy-triindriy| teukkaay-tejskaay| 8,23
tenn-sten| 172 teraasi-npuNsk| 266 thaMbhaNa-pratividyA ke dvArA stambhita
krnaa| 228 thkk-avsr| 76/4 thaNa-stana / 222/2 thaNIya-stana vaalii| 198/7
tharatharaMta-kAMpate hue| 288/2 thl-sthl| 154 thAma-bala / 318/2 thaalii-
sthaalii| 114 thiriikrnn-sthiriikrnn| 210 thull-sthuul| 198/5 thera-sthavira /
273 therI-sthavirA, vRddhaa| 198/7 thova-stoka, km| daiya-carmamaya mazaka /
27/2 daMDa-pAnI kA ukaalaa| daMDiNI-rAjA kI ptnii| 230 daMsaNa-1. darzana, 2.
dekhnaa| 69/2 dkkh-dkss| 67/3 dkkhaa-draakssaa| daga-udaka, paanii| 281
dagasoyariya-sAMkhya mata kA anuyaayii| 143/2 datta-isa nAma kA shissy| daddara-
kASTha kI siiddh'iyaaN| 170 daddaraya-kutupa Adi kA mukhabaMdhana rUpa vstr-
khnndd| 162 dridd-dridr| 148/1 drisnn-dekhnaa| 207/3 daletI-dalatI huii| 267
dava-drava, tarala pdaarth| 192/4 dviy-drvy| 194 78 62 15 34

Page #501 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Peri. 19: Word Meanings 68/1 93 240 Davva-dravya. Davvi-spoon. 113 Dah-drah,
lake. 236/2 Dahi-yogurt. 102 Dadim-pomegranate. 78 Dayag-giver, a fault of
begging. 237 Dar-door. Davanaya-to give. 89/6 Dasatt-servitude. 144/2 Dikkha-
initiation / Ditunt-example. 84/1 Ditth-seen. 70/2 Ditthi-sight. 136/1 Dinna-
given. 95/2 Ditt-proud, insane. 288/3 Diy-1. day, 80/4, 2. dvij, Brahmin. 157/2
Dier-brother-in-law. 76/4 Divva-divine. Div-island. 231/2 Dukkararoi-difficult
to digest. 145 Dug-two, pair. Dugunchha-disgust. 278 Dugun-double. 253/3
Duggati-hell. 64/3 Duggas-famine. Bha. 24 Ducchitt-evil-minded. 91/2 Dutt-evil.
68/6 Dut-fast. 90/1 Duddin-bad day, cloud-induced darkness. Duddh-milk. 293
Dupay-biped, two-legged. 194/2 Dubbal-weak. 53/1 Dum-tree. 91/2 329 Dumman-evil-
minded. 210/2 Durutt-repetition, said again. 70/4 Dullabh-rare. 146 Duvar-door.
136/3 Duvidh-two kinds. 107 Duvvana-bad color, discolored. 1988 Duha-two ways.
Duitt-ambassadorship. 201/2 Deul-temple. 157/2 Des-area measured by 100 hands.
159 Desdes-intermediate area of 100 hands. 159 Desun-slightly less. 128/3
Dobhaggakar-unfortunate. 231/1 Dos-fault. 68/11 Dohal-dohad. 53/1 Dhant-heated,
heated in fire. 27/1 Dhan-blessed. 69/3 Dhammakha-religious story. 143
Dhammrui-a sage named Dharmaruchi. 219/9 Dharit-held, worn. 288/2 Dhatitt-
motherhood. 198/4 Dhatipind-mother-lump, a fault of begging. 199 Dhur-worry.
61/1 Dhuvan-to wash. Dhuta-daughter. 222/1 Dhumdhumiy-smoked. 314/3 Dhuvvas-
fragrant substance. 231/1 Dhuviy-incense, incense. 258 Dhoy-washed, rinsed.
117/1 Dhovan-to wash. 19 Nauti-ninety. 192/7 Natth-1. to flee, 69/1, 2. lost,
destroyed. 145 38 19 27

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pari. 19 : zabdArtha 68/1 93 240 dvv-drvy| dvvii-cmmc| 113 daha-draha, srovr|
236/2 dhi-dhii| 102 daaddim-anaar| 78 dAyaga-dAyaka, bhikSA kA eka doss| 237
daar-dvaar| daavnnyaa-denaa| 89/6 daastt-daastv| 144/2 dikkhA-dIkSA / dittuNt-
dRssttaant| 84/1 ditttth-dRsstt| 70/2 ditttthi-dRsstti| 136/1 dinnnn-dtt| 95/2
ditta-dRpta, unmtt| 288/3 diya-1. dina, 80/4, 2. dvija, braahmnn| 157/2 diyr-
devr| 76/4 divv-divy| diiv-dviip| 231/2 dukkrroii-dusskrruci| 145 duga-do, yugm|
duguNchaa-ghRnnaa| 278 dugunn-dugunaa| 253/3 duggti-durgti| 64/3 duggaas-
durbhikss| bhA. 24 duccitta-duSTa citta vaalaa| 91/2 dutttth-dusstt| 68/6 dut-
drut| 90/1 duddiNa-durdina, meghajanya aNdhkaar|| duddh-duudh| 293 dupaya-
dvipada, do paira vaalaa| 194/2 dubbl-durbl| 53/1 dum-drum| 91/2 329 dummnn-
durmn| 210/2 durutta-dvirukta, dubArA kahA huaa| 70/4 dullbh-durlbh| 146 duvaar-
dvaar| 136/3 duvidh-dvividh| 107 duvvaNNa-durvarNa, bdrNg| 1988 duhA-dvidhA, do
prakAra se| duuitt-duutiitv| 201/2 deul-devkul| 157/2 desa-sau hAtha pramita
kssetr| 159 desadesa-sau hAtha kA madhyavartI kssetr| 159 desUNa-kucha km| 128/3
dobhaggakara-durbhAgya karane vaalaa| 231/1 dos-doss| 68/11 dohl-dohd| 53/1
dhaMta-dhmAta, agni meM tapAyA huaa| 27/1 dhnn-dhny| 69/3 dhmmkhaa-dhrmkthaa|
143 dhammarui-dharmaruci nAmaka saadhu| 219/9 dharita-dhRta, dhAraNa kiyA huaa|
288/2 dhaatitt-dhaatriitv| 198/4 dhAtipiMDa-dhAtrIpiMDa, bhikSA kA eka doss| 199
dhur-cintaa| 61/1 dhuvnn-dhonaa| dhuutaa-putrii| 222/1 dhuumdhuumiy-dhuumaayit|
314/3 dhUvavAsa-sugaMdhita drvy| 231/1 dhUviya-dhUpita, dhUpa kiyA huaa| 258
dhoya-dhauta, prkssaalit| 117/1 dhovnn-dhonaa| 19 nuti-nbbe| 192/7 naTTha-1.
palAyana karanA, 69/1, 2. naSTa, vinsstt| 145 38 19 27

Page #502 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
330 Pindaniyukti 36 31 82. Nad-Nat. 219/9 Natta-Pautr. 222/1 Nattha-Nyast, kept.
Nal-Nalchari, a particular plant. 55 Nah-Nakh. Nadag-Natak. 219/12 Nan-Gyan.
Nanatt-Nanatva. 70 Nat-Gnat. 219/13 Natavva-Gnatavya. Nal-Nala. 236/3 Nava-
Nauka. 152 Nasa-Nak. 219/3 Niun-Nipun. 119/1 Niutt-Niyukt. 108/1 Nikayan-
Nimantaran. 219/10 Nikkaran-Karanrahit, Nirvighna. 236/3 Nikkhitt-Bhiksha's
fault. 237 Nikkhev-1. Nikshep, explanation of 3, a method, 2. to keep. 264
Nigal-Nigad, chain. Nigganth-Nirganth, a type of Shraman. 209 Niggam-Nirgam, to
exit. 157/2 Nicchay-Nischy. Nicchayanay-Nischyanay. 30 Nicchit-Nischit. 157/6
Nicchubhan-To take out. 224 Nijjara-Nirjara. 324 Nijjal-Jvala rahit. 252/1
Nitthit-Nishthit, making food fit for a Sadhu to consume. 81 Ninhg-Nihnav. 73/21
Nida-From ignorance. 65 Nidan-Finding the cause of a disease. Niddadd-Nirdagd.
314/2 Niddya-Nirdaya. 166/2 Niddrisan-Nidarshan, example. 82 Niddhes-Nirdesh.
101 Nidos-Nirdosh. 240/4 Niddhandhas-Cruel / 83/4 Nidd-Snigdh. 103 Nippitt-To
stop grinding. 288/6 Nippann-Nishpann. Nipphaiy-Nishpadit. Nibudd-To sink. 231/4
Nibbandh-Karan. 173/3 Nibbachhit-To rebuke. 90/3 Nimantana-Nimantaran. Nimitt-1.
Bhiksha's fault, 195, 2. Astrological knowledge. 143 Nimmans-Mans rahit. 198/15
Nimmall-Dev's leftover food. 141 Nimmahil-Mahila rahit. 219/12 Niyg-Nijak,
related. 76/1 Niyatt-Returned. 219/14 Niratt-Attached. 210/1 Nirathth-Nirarthak.
240 Nirataav-Atap rahit. 80/4 Nillev-Lep rahit substance. 295/5 Nivangana-Rani.
91/2 Nivpind-Rajpind, King's food. 185 Nivatt-Sanyog. 192/2 Nivesan-Many houses
with one door. 156 Nivesan-To establish. 231/5 Nivva-Nivra, layer, province.
22/4 Nivvan-Nirvana. 266 49

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
330 piMDaniyukti 36 31 82 . ndd-ntt| 219/9 ntt-pautr| 222/1 nattha-nyasta, rakhA
huaa| nala-nalacArI, vanaspati vishess| 55 nh-nkh| naaddg-naattk| 219/12 naann-
jnyaan| naanntt-naanaatv| 70 naat-jnyaat| 219/13 naatvv-jnyaatvy| naal-naalaa|
236/3 naavaa-naukaa| 152 naasaa-naak| 219/3 niunn-nipunn| 119/1 niutt-niyukt|
108/1 nikaaynn-nimNtrnn| 219/10 nikkAraNa-kAraNarahita, nirvighn| 236/3
nikkhitta-bhikSA kA eka doss| 237 nikkheva-1. nikSepa, vyAkhyA kI 3, eka
paddhati, 2. rkhnaa| 264 nigala-nigar3a, shrRNkhlaa| niggaMtha-nirgantha,
zramaNa kA eka prkaar| 209 niggama-nirgama, niklnaa| 157/2 nicchy-nishcy|
nicchyny-nishcyny| 30 nicchit-nishcit| 157/6 nicchubhaNa-bAhara nikaalnaa| 224
nijjraa-nirjraa| 324 nijjAla-jvAlA rhit| 252/1 niTThita-niSThita, bhojya ko
sAdhu ke grahaNa yogya bnaanaa| 81 ninnhg-nihnv| 73/21 nidA-ajJAna se| 65
nidANa-roga ke kAraNa kI khoj| nidddddd-nirdgdh| 314/2 niddy-nirdy| 166/2
niddarisaNa-nidarzana, udaahrnn| 82 niddes-nirdesh| 101 nidos-nirdoss| 240/4
niddhaMdhasa-krUra / 83/4 niddh-snigdh| 103 nippiTTa-pIsane se nivRtta honaa|
288/6 nipphnn-nisspnn| nipphaaiy-nisspaadit| nibudddd-dduubnaa| 231/4 nibbNdh-
kaarnn| 173/3 nibbhacchita-bhartsanA krnaa| 90/3 nimNtnnaa-nimNtrnn| nimitta-1.
bhikSA kA doSa, 195, 2. jyotiS saMbaMdhI jnyaan| 143 nimmaMsa-mAMsa rhit| 198/15
nimmalla-deva kA ucchiSTa drvy|| 141 nimmahila-mahilA rhit| 219/12 niyaga-
nijaka, sNbNdhii| 76/1 niyatta-lauTA huaa| 219/14 nirata-lagA huaa| 210/1
nirtth-nirrthk| 240 nirAtava-Atapa rhit| 80/4 nilleva-lepa rahita pdaarth| 295/5
nivNgnnaa-raanii| 91/2 nivapiMDa-rAjapiMDa, rAjA kA bhojn| 185 nivaat-sNyog|
192/2 nivesaNa-eka hI daravAje vAle aneka ghr| 156 nivesaNa-sthApita krnaa|
231/5 nivva-nIvra, paTala, praant| 22/4 nivvaann-nirvaann| 266 49

Page #503 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pari. 19: Word Meanings**  331 68/7, 180 57/3 148/2 182 14 151 157/3 22
**Nivvisaya** - 1. Consumer, 2. Exile.  **Nisagg** - Nature, to come out.
**Nisi** - Night.  **Nisitt** - Allowed.  **Nisiy** - Sitting down.  **Nisih** -
Hidden.  **Nisihiya** - Forbidden action.  **Nisejja** - Place where a virtuous
person resides.  **Nissank** - Doubtless.  **Nissankit** - Doubtless.
**Nisseeni** - Without refuge.  **Niy** - Low, inferior.  **Niy** - Brought,
led.  **Nisa** - Support.  **Nihamm** - To come out.  **Niharant** - Coming out.
**Nem** - Work.  **Neraiy** - Hellish.  **Neh** - Affection, oil etc.
**Paidin** - Daily.  **Pau** - Healthy.  **Pau** - Used.  **Paur** - Abundant,
much.  **Pae** - Dawn.  **Panchindiy** - Five senses.  **Pandag** - Neuter.
**Pandu** - Pale, yellow.  **Pant** - Rude, uncultured.  **Pantav** - To beat,
to strike.  **Panti** - Row.  **Pakam** - Excessive.  **Pakkh** - Side.   240/4
240/2 168 136/3 157/6 73/6 136/3 236/3  **Pagai** - Nature, character.   219/11
**Pagat** - Topic, occasion.   240/2  **Pagaliy** - Leprous.   265  **Pagas** -
Light.   138/3  **Pacchai** - Derived from suffix.   80/2  **Pacchant** - Very
close.   89/2  **Pacchakkh** - Direct.   225/1  **Pacchakkhani** - Ascetic.
22/5  **Pacchathig** - Enemy.   210  **Pacchay** - Cause.   83/2  **Pacchuras**
- In front of the chest.   91/1  **Pacchkad** - Householder who has become a
virtuous person.   180  **Pacchkamm** - Washing hands etc. with water after
begging.   243/2  **Pacchann** - Hidden, secret.   157/1  **Pacchasanthav** -
Introduction or praise after begging.   223  **Pajivan** - Livelihood.   219/13
**Pazzatt** - Sufficient.   272  **Pazzav** - Conclusion.   22  **Patt** -
Cloth.   157/5  **Pattiy** - Departed.   49/1  **Pad** - Fall, to fall down.
166  **Padaaga** - Flag.   210/2  **Padiku** - Forbidden.   160  **Padiniy** -
Enemy.   288  **Padinnat** - Promised.   128/2  **Padibandh** - Attachment.
224  **Padimant** - Mantra used against another mantra.   229  **Padiy** -
Fallen.   **Padierag** - Opponent.   83/5  **Padiyar** - Resistance.   173/3
49/1 35 12 164 214/2 67/3 96/4 219/1 288/5 236/1 211 274 160 312 60 17

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pari.19 : zabdArtha 331 68/7, 180 57/3 148/2 182 14 151 157/3 22 nivvisaya-1.
upabhoktA, 2. desh-nisskaashn| nisagga-nisarga, niklnaa| nisi-raatri| nisitttth-
anujnyaat| nisIya-niSIdana, baitthnaa| nisIha-nizItha, prcchnn| nisIhiyA-
naiSedhiko kriyaa| nisejjA-niSadyA, sAdhu ke rahane kA sthaan| nissaMka-
ni:zaMka, zaMkA rhit| nissNkit-ni:shNkit| nisseNI-niHzreNI, ni:srnnii| nIya-
nIcA, nimn| nIya-nIta, lAyA huaa| nIsA-nizrA, aalmbn| niihmmiy-niklnaa|
nIharaMta-nikalate hue| nem-kaary| neraiya-nairayika, naarkii| neha-sneha, taila
aadi| pidinn-prtidin| punn-svsth| putt-pryukt| paura-pracura, adhik| pe-prbhaat|
pNciNdiy-pnycendriy| pNddg-npuNsk| paMDu-pANDu, piilaa| paMta-abhadra, asbhy|
paMtAvaNa-tAr3ana karanA, maarnaa| pNti-pNkti| pakAma-prakAma, atyadhika / pkkh-
pkss| 240/4 240/2 168 136/3 157/6 73/6 136/3 236/3 pagai-prakRti, svbhaav|
219/11 pagata-prakaraNa, prsNg| 240/2 pagaliya-jharate hue kor3ha vaalaa| 265
pgaas-prkaash| 138/3 paccaiya-pratyaya se utpanna / 80/2 paccaMta-pratyanta,
nikttvrtii| 89/2 pcckkh-prtykss| 225/1 paccakkhANi-pratyAkhyAnI, tpsvii| 22/5
pcctthig-shtru| 210 paccaya-hetu / 83/2 paccurasa-ura ke smmukh| 91/1
pacchakaDa-pazcAtkRta, sAdhu jIvana / se gRhastha banA huaa| 180 pacchakamma-
bhikSA ke bAda sacitta jala se hAtha Adi dhonaa| 243/2 pacchaNNa-pracchanna,
gupt| 157/1 pacchAsaMthava-pazcAtsaMstava, bhikSA ke pazcAt paricaya yA saMstava
krnaa| 223 pjiivnn-aajiivikaa| 219/13 pjjtt-pryaapt| 272 pjjv-pryv| ptttt-
colptttt| 22 pttttiy-prsthit| 157/5 pdd-ptt| 49/1 paDaNa-patana, nIce girnaa|
166 pddaagaa-ptaakaa| 210/2 paDikuTTha-pratikuSTa, niSiddha / 160 paDiNIya-
pratyanIka, shtru| 288 pddinnnnaat-prtijnyaat| 128/2 paDibaMdha-pratibaMdha,
lgaav| 224 paDimaMta-maMtra ke pratipakSa meM prayukta mNtr| 229 pddiy-ptit|
pddiyrg-prticaark| 83/5 pddiyrnn-prtikaar| 173/3 49/1 35 12 164 214/2 67/3 96/4
219/1 288/5 236/1 211 274 160 312 60 17

Page #504 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
332 Pindaniyukti 61 217 70/5 172 Padilaabhan-Giving benefit, giving donation.
219/8 Padileha-Observing. 76 Padivakkha-Opposition, opposite. 288/8 Padividya-
Knowledge used in opposition to knowledge. 228 Padisaharan-Withdrawal, taking
back. 227/2 Padisiddha-Forbidden. 219/3 Padisunan-Repetition. 69 Padisesha-
Prohibition, prohibition. 260 Padisevan-Counter-service. Padisesha-Prohibition.
142/1 Paducca-From expectation. Padoyar-Instrument of the virtuous. 22 Padham-
First. 68/10 * Panaya-To request. 219/5 Panaya-Something. Panamahajja-To attract
by prostration. 211 Panita-Prescribed, heavy food. 312/1 Panuvis-Twenty-five.
Pannaatta-Proclaimed. 52/3 Pannavana-Proclamation, formulation. 116/3 Panhaya-
Shedding tears. 222/2 Patta-1. Fire reaching the vessel placed on the stove,
252, 2. Vessel, 213, 3. Obtained. Pattala-Having leaves. 91/2 Patteya-Each. 43
Patteyabuddha-Each Buddha. 73/13 Pattha-Diet. 313/1 Patthar-Destruction. 231
Pada-Foot, leg. 165 Padarishan-Demonstration. Padaan-Giving. 222/2 Padiv-Lamp,
lamp. 138 Padesa-Region. 41/2 Padesini-Index finger. 228/1 Padosa-Hatred. 167
Pappdiya-Crust. 254 Papphodan-Explosion. 117 Pabhava-Origin, origin. 57/3
Pabhava-Effect. Pabhi-Et cetera, etc. 33 Pabhu-Lord. Pamatta-Careless. 67/3
Pamaddan-To suppress. Paman-Proof. 239 Pamha-A very small part of a sutra etc.
49/1 Paya-1. Milk, 70/2, 2. A verse of a verse. 253/3 Payatta-Effort. 239 Payar-
Footsteps. 236/2 Payavan-Heating, heating. 22/6 Payoyan-Purpose. Paradeśa-
Foreign country. Paraloga-Afterlife. 136/4 Parikattalia-Gathered in one place.
103 Parinata-Without life, a-chitta. 293 Parinamita-Made a-chitta. 295 Paritava-
Sorrow, sorrow. 277 Paritta-Every plant. 243/2 Paripindita-Collected. 219/1
Paribhayan-Division, distribution. 76/1 Paribhutta-Eaten. 138 Paribhoga-Wearing.
22/2 238 152

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
332 piMDaniyukti 61 217 70/5 172 paDilAbhaNa-lAbha denA, dAna denaa| 219/8
paDileha-nirIkSaNa krnaa| 76 paDivakkha-pratipakSa, ulttaa| 288 / 8 paDivijjA-
vidyA ke pratipakSa meM prayukta vidyaa| 228 paDisAharaNa-pratisaMharaNa, vApasa
lenaa| 227/2 pddisiddh-nissiddh| 219/3 pddisunnnn-prtishrvnn| 69 paDisedha-
pratiSedha, nissedh| 260 pddisevnn-prtisevn| pddiseh-prtissedh| 142/1 paDucca-
apekSA se| paDoyAra-sAdhu kA upkrnn| 22 pddhm-prthm| 68/10 * paNaya-yAcanA
krnaa| 219/5 pnny-kaaii| paNAmahajja-praNAma ke dvArA AkRSTa krnaa| 211 paNIta-
praNIta, gariSTha aahaar| 312/1 pnnuviis-pcciis| pnnnntt-prjnypt| 52/3
paNNavaNA-prajJApanA, prruupnn| 116/3 pnnhy-ashruvimocn| 222/2 patta-1. cUlhe
para car3he pAtra taka pahuMcane vAlI agni, 252, 2. pAtra, 213, 3. praapt|
pattala-pattoM se yukt| 91/2 pttey-prtyek| 43 ptteybuddh-prtyekbuddh| 73/13
ptth-pthy| 313/1 ptthaar-vinaash| 231 pada-pAda, pair| 165 pdrisnn-prdrshn|
pdaann-prdaan| 222/2 padIva-pradIpa, diipk| 138 pdes-prdesh| 41/2 padesiNI-
tarjanI aNguli| 228/1 pdos-prdvess| 167 pppddiyaa-ppdd'ii| 254 ppphoddnn-
prsphottn| 117 pabhava-prabhava, utptti| 57/3 pbhaav-prbhaav| pabhii-prabhRti,
aadi| 33 pbhu-prbhu| pmtt-prmtt| 67/3 pamaddaNa-pramardana krnaa| pmaann-
prmaann| 239 pamha-sUtra Adi kA atyalpa bhaag| 49/1 paya-1. dUdha, 70/2, 2.
zloka kA eka crnn| 253/3 pytt-prytn| 239 pyaar-pdcihn| 236/2 payAvaNa-pratApana,
tpaanaa| 22/6 pyoynn-pryojn| prdes-prdesh| prlog-prlok| 136/4 parikaTTaliya-eka
sthAna para ektrit| 103 pariNata-jIva rahita, acitt| 293 pariNAmita-acitta kiyA
huaa| 295 paritAva-paritApa, duHkh| . 277 paritta-pratyeka vnspti| 243/2
pripiNddit-ektrit| 219/1 paribhAyaNa-paribhAjana, baaNttnaa| 76/1 paribhutta-
khAyA huaa| 138 pribhog-phnnaa| 22/2 238 152

Page #505 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
333 148 212 147 161 128/1 132 86/1 219/4 236/1 230 275, 231/11 27 35 21 Pari.
19:  Word meanings - Pariyattan - Transformation, change. Pariyatriya -
Transformed, a fault of begging. Pariyatt - Transformation. Pariyavjjan -
Contaminated. Parivadi - Practice, line. Parivesan - Serving. Paris - Assembly.
Parisadit - Rotten. Parisad - To cause an abortion. Parisadan - 1. To fall, 2.
To abort. Parisey - To bake. Parihar - Discharge, excrement. Paruvan - Modeling.
Perevva - Related to the day after tomorrow. Palandu - Onion. Pallal - Sesame
seed powder / Palay - To flee. Pavayan - Discourse. Pavayanmaya - Mother of
discourse. Pavat - Breeze, wind. Pavitt - Entered. Pavitti - Tendency. Paves -
Entry. Pavva - Festival. Pavvait - Ordained. Pavvajja - Ordination. Pavvat -
Mountain. Pavvay - Tired. Pavvavan - To give ordination. Pasang - Occasion.
Pasandhan - Continuous practice. Pasansa - Praise. 227 105 86/2 87 69/1 Pasatt -
Attached, addicted. Pasath - Excellent. 194/3 Pasann - Clean. 17 Pasaman -
Pacification. 318/1 Pasidd - Famous. 68/5 Pah - Path. 89/3 Pahiy - Traveler.
86/1 Pahiin - Depleted. 302/2 Paheang - Sweets brought from a house 156/1. 240/2
Pain - Ancient, east direction. Pauga - Sandals. 288/4 Paugg - Applicability. 79
Pauran - Covering, cloth. Paokaran - Contamination, a fault of begging. Paoyer -
Contamination, a fault of begging. Pag - Cooking, to cook. Pagad - 1. Manifest,
2. Pleasant-to-be-experienced. Padan - Falling. Panag - Drink, beverage.
Panavattiy - Life-sustaining. 318 Paniy - Water. 96/1 Pat - To make a hole in
the door. 137 Pad - Foot. 277 Padalevan - Foot-coating, foot-coating done for
walking in water etc. 230 Pamicc - To borrow, a fault of begging. 144,146 Pamul
- Foot-base. 150 Pay - 1. Vessel, 22, 2. Often. 208 73 66 25 44/3 138/3 91/3 232
160 231/2 219/15 231/4 30 37 67/5 215 68/5

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
333 148 212 147 161 128/1 132 86/1 219/4 236/1 230 275, 231/11 27 35 21 pari. 19
: zabdArtha pariyaTTaNa-parivartana, bdlnaa| pariyaTriya-parivartita, bhikSA kA
eka doss| priytt-privrtn| priyaavjjnn-duussit| parivADi-paripATI, pNkti|
privesnn-prosnaa| pris-prissd| parisaDita-sar3A huaa| parisADa-garbhapAta
kraanaa| parisADaNa-1. girAnA, 2. garbhapAta krnaa| pariseya-seka krnaa|
parihAra-utsarga, puriiss| pruuvnn-prruupnn| parevva-parasoM se smbndhit|
plNddu-pyaaj| palala-tila-cUrNa / palAya-palAyana krnaa| pvynn-prvcn|
pvynnmaayaa-prvcnmaataa| pavAta-pravAta, hvaa| pvitttth-prvisstt| pvitti-
prvRtti| pves-prvesh| pvv-prv| pvvit-prvrjit| pvvjjaa-prvrjyaa| pvvt-prvt|
pvvaay-mlaan| pavvAvaNa-pravrajyA denaa| psNg-prsNg| pasaMdhaNa-satata prvrtn|
psNsaa-prshNsaa| 227 105 86/2 87 69/1 pasatta-prasakta, aaskt| pstth-prshst|
194/3 psnn-svcch| 17 psmnn-prshmn| 318/1 psiddh-prsiddh| 68/5 ph-pth| 89/3 phiy-
pthik| 86/1 phiinn-prhiinn| 302/2 paheNaga-kisI ghara se AI 156/1, huI
mitthaaii| 240/2 pAiNa-prAcIna, pUrva dishaa| paaugaa-paadukaa| 288/4 paaugg-
praayogy| 79 pAuraNa-prAvaraNa, vstr| pAokaraNa-prAduSkaraNa, bhikSA kA eka
doss| pAoyara-prAduSkaraNa, bhikSA kA eka doss| pAga-pAka, pkaanaa| pAgaDa-1.
prakaTa, 2. sukh-prtipaady| paaddnn-paatn| pANaga-pAnaka, peya pdaarth|
paannvttiy-praann-dhaarnn| 318 paanniy-paanii| 96/1 pAta-dvAra meM cheda krnaa|
137 paad-pair| 277 pAdalevaNa-pAdalepana, pAnI Adi meM calane hetu kiyA gayA
paad-prlep| 230 pAmicca-udhAra lenA, bhikSA kA eka doss| 144,146 paamuul-
paadmuul| 150 pAya-1. pAtra, 22, 2. praayH| 208 73 66 25 44/3 138/3 91/3 232 160
231/2 219/15 231/4 30 37 67/5 215 68/5

Page #506 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
228 334 Pindaniyukti Payanijjog - a tool for the Sadhu. 21/1 Piviliya-Pipilika,
ant. 245/1 Payas - Kheer. 90/2 Pisya - meat. 123 Parampra - by tradition. 123 -
Piha - separate. 70/3 Parang - Parana. 90/2 Pihad - a special vessel. Bha. 34
Palittay - Acharya named Padalipta. 228/1 Pihit - covered, alms 162, Palev -
Padalepa. 231/2 a fault. 237,257 Pavakar - sinner. 69/1 Pihikat - separated.
188/1 Pavana - Plavana. Pirah - made of dung etc. Pavajivi - sinner. A special
seat. 167 Pasand Darshan. 186 Piliya - peeled, yellowed. 27/1 Pasandi - Pasandi,
Darshani. 120 Pilu - milk. 70/2 Pas - Pav. 146 Pisan - to grind. 281 Pasan - to
see. 219/10 Pund - tilak. Bha. 42 Pasutt - asleep, sleeping. 156/1 Puccha -
Priccha. 142/1 Pahudibhatt - a fault of alms. 136 Puccchit - Prist, asked. 89/9
Pahudiya - for the alms of the Sadhu 110,130, Putu - asked. 135/1 before the
desired time or 131,270 / Pudhavikkay - Prithvikaay. 8,9,10 later to eat, alms
Punakkaran - to do again. 104 a fault. Punna - punya. Pahun - Pranuunnak, guest.
219/15 Puttay - putra. 132 Pahenag - sweet. 134 Putth - pust, lepyadi karma.
Pinjan - to spin cotton. 2887 Pushpa - pushpa. 31 Pind - Pind, group. Purakamm -
karma done before alms. Pindana - group. Purmadd - Purimardh, a type of tapasya.
157/3 Pindit - Pindit. Puris - purusha. 310 Pittan - Pittan, to beat. 22/6 Puvva
- purva. 22/5 Pitt - prist, back. Puvvasanthav - sanstav before alms. 222
Pidharag - a special vessel. Puvag - purvak. 159 Piti - pita. 68/9 Puvvuutt -
purvokt. 211 Pippal - a special razor. Puiya - puti dosh yukt. 80/3,111, Piyan -
to drink. 116 179 298 50 255 255

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
228 334 piMDaniyukti pAyanijjoga-sAdhu kA upkrnn| 21/1 pivIliyA-pipIlikA,
ciiNttii| 245/1 paays-khiir| 90/2 pisiy-maaNs| 123 pAraMpara-paramparA se| 123 -
pih-pRthk| 70/3 paarnng-paarnnaa| 90/2 pihaDa-bhAjana vishess| bhA. 34
pAlittaya-pAdalipta nAmaka aacaary| 228/1 pihita-DhakA huA, bhikSA kA 162,
paalev-paadlep| 231/2 eka doss| 237,257 pAvakara-pApa karane vaalaa| 69/1
pihIkata-alaga kiyA huaa| 188/1 paavnn-plaavn| pIr3ha-gobara Adi kA banA huA
paavaajiivi-paapii| Asana vishess| 167 paasNdddrshn| 186 pIliya-pIlita, pIlA
huaa| 27/1 pAsaMDi-pASaMDI, drshnii| 120 piilu-duudh| 70/2 paas-paav| 146
piisnn-piisnaa| 281 paasnn-dekhnaa| 219/10 puNdd-tilk| bhA. 42 pAsutta-prasupta,
soyA huaa| 156/1 pucchaa-pRcchaa| 142/1 pAhuDibhatta-bhikSA kA eka doss| 136
pucchita-pRSTa, pUchA gyaa| 89/9 pAhuDiyA-sAdhu kI bhikSA ke lie 110,130, puTu-
pUchA huaa| 135/1 vivakSita samaya se pUrva yA 131,270 / puddhvikkaay-
pRthviikaay| 8,9,10 bAda meM bhojya karanA, bhikSA puNakkaraNa-punaH krnaa| 104
kA eka doss| punnnn-punny| pAhuNa-prANUMNaka, atithi| 219/15 putty-putr| 132
paahenng-mitthaaii| 134 puttha-pusta, lepyAdi krm| piMjaNa-ruI dhunnaa| 2887
pussph-pussp| 31 piMDa-piNDa, smuuh| purakamma-bhikSA se pUrva kiyA jAne
piNddnnaa-smuuh| vAlA krm| 243/2 piMDarasa-khajUra Adi kA rs| purimaDDa-
purimArdha, tapasyA piNddvaay-aahaarlaabh| bhA. 3 kA eka prkaar| 157/3 piNddit-
pinnddit| puris-puruss| 310 piTTaNa-piTTana, piittnaa| 22/6 puvv-puurv| 22/5
piTTha-pRSTha, piitth| puvvasaMthava-bhikSA se pUrva sNstv| 222 piDharaga-pAtra
vishess| puvvaag-puurvk| 159 piti-pitaa| 68/9 puvvutt-puurvokt| 211 pippl-
kssurvishess| pUiya-pUti doSa yukt| 80/3,111, piyaNa-pAna krnaa| 116 179 298 50
255 255

Page #507 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Peri. 19: Word Meanings 335 302/3 87 20 94 106 304 41/1 288/4 68/11 78 11 194/1,
73/17 17/1 312/1 8  Pooti-impure, Sadhu's alms 58,107, Balaga-Balaka. A fault.
108/2,110,118,138/1,191 Bali-offering.  Poop-Malpua. 255 Bahuha-often. Pooyahaj-
worshipped-worshipper. 210/2 Baus-nonsense. Pejj-barley etc. porridge. 297
Baras-twelve. Peyalan-measure. 45/1 Bahir-external. Pellan-inspiration / 163/7
Bahiria-external. Pellia-inspired / 198/7 Bahull-abundance, plenty. Peha-view.
318/2 Bitth-seated. Poggal-meat. 40 Bitiy-second. Pott-small child suitable
cloth-piece. 141 Bijapur-Bijoura. Potti-face-veil, Sadhu's equipment. 22 Biy-1.
Seed, Porisi-masculinity. 2. Second. Poh-dung heap of buffalo etc. 108/1 Bubbuy-
bubble. Faddag-share, part. 113/2 Buh-Buddh, wise. Falag-plank, Sadhu's
equipment. 32 Beindiy-two sense-organ having. Phanit-special kind of jaggery
defect. Boliy-torn. 145 Bol-to speak in a loud voice. Fasug-prose. 162 Bohana-
understanding, knowledge. Fud-clear, pure. Bohi-Bodhi. Furufurant-trembling,
shivering. Bhaiy-devotion-filled. Fedan-destruction. 185 Bhandag-vessel. Fod-
omnivore. Bhagg-broken. Fodan-1. Explosion-mustard etc. 112, Bhajjan-roasting of
gram etc. Stirring of vegetables etc. Bhajja-wife. 2. To tear, to split. 168
Bhati-salary, wages. Bandhag-binder. 90 Bhattay-food. Bambh-celibacy. Bhaddag-
good / Bambhcheguutti-secrets of celibacy. 320 * Bhamad-to rotate. Bambhandhu-
Brahmin. 210/1 Bhayna-devotion. Baguddav-Bakoḍḍayak, a type of Bhayay-Bhootk,
laborer. Male dominated by female. 219/6 Bhar-group. Bshph-vapor. 116/1 Bharg-
filled. 103 50 283 106 219/8 214/1 148 73/20 17/1 198/15 281 223 173/2 76/4 211
228/1 66/1 173 61/1 20 255

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pari. 19 : zabdArtha 335 302/3 87 20 94 106 304 41/1 288/4 68/11 78 11 194/1,
73/17 17/1 312/1 8 pUti-apavitra, sAdhu kI bhikSA kA 58,107, blaagaa-blaakaa|
eka doss| 108/2,110,118,138/1,191 bli-uphaar| puup-maalpuaa| 255 bhuhaa-bhudhaa|
puuyaahjj-puujitpuujk| 210/2 baaus-bkush| pejja-jau Adi kA dliyaa| 297 baars-
baarh| peyaalnn-prmaann| . 45/1 baahir-baahy| pellaNa-preraNA / 163/7
baahiriyaa-baahy| pelliya-prerita / 198/7 bAhulla-bAhulya, prcurtaa| pehaa-
prekssaa| 318/2 biTTha-baiThA huaa| poggl-maaNs| 40 bitiy-dvitiiy| potta-laghu
bAlaka yogya vstr-khNdd| 141 biijpuur-bijauraa| potti-mukhavastrikA, sAdhu kA
upkrnn| 22 bIya-1. bIja, porisi-paurussii| 2. dvitiiy| poha-bhaiMsa Adi ke mala
kA ddher| 108/1 bubbuy-budbud| phaDDaga-aMza, bhaag| 113/2 buha-budha, jnyaanii|
phalaga-phalaka, sAdhu kA upkrnn| 32 beiMdiya-do iMdriya vaalaa| phANita-gur3a
kA vikAra vishess| boDa-muMDita sira vaalaa| phAliya-phaTA huaa| 145 bola-ucca
svara meM bolnaa| phaasug-praasuk| 162 bohaNA-bodha, jnyaan| phuDa-sphuTa,
nirml| bohi-bodhi| phuruphuraMta-kAMpanA, thrthraanaa| bhaiya-bhajanA yukt|
pheddnn-vinaash| 185 bhNddg-paatr| phodd-bhubhkssk| bhgg-bhgn| phoDaNa-1.
sphoTana-rAI Adi se 112, bhajjaNa-cane Adi bhuunnaa| zAka Adi ko baghAranA,
bhjjaa-bhaaryaa| 2. phaTanA, vidaarnn| 168 bhati-bhRti, vetn| baMdhaga-baMdhana
karane vaalaa| 90 bhtty-bhojn| bNbh-brhmcry| bhaddaga-bhadraka, acchA /
baMbhaceragutti-brahmacarya kI guptiyaaN| 320 * bhmaadd-ghumaanaa| bNbhbNdhu-
braahmnn| 210/1 bhynnaa-bhjnaa| baguDDAva-bakoDDAyaka, eka prakAra kA bhayaya-
bhUtaka, krmkr| mahilA pradhAna puruss| 219/6 bhr-smuuh| bssph-vaassp| 116/1
bharaga-bharA huaa| 103 50 283 106 219/8 214/1 148 73/20 17/1 198/15 281 223
173/2 76/4 211 228/1 66/1 173 61/1 20 255

Page #508 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
336 Pindaniyukti Bharah-Bharat Chakravarti. 219/14 Bhaviya-Bhavya, about to be.
73/1 Bhaiya-Bhagidar, partner. Bhan-patra, vessel. 19 Bhasa-bhasha, language.
207/3 Bhasit-kathith, said. 96/3 Bhikkha-bhiksha, alms. 37,76 Bhikkhayari-
bhikshacharya, begging. 198/4 Bhikkhu-bhikshu, mendicant. 227 Bhis-bhrisha,
excessive. 276 Bhirue-cowardly. 198/15 Bhumi-dev-Brahman, Brahman. 210/1
Bhesajj-bheshaj, medicine. 40 Bho-i-enjoying. 90 Bhoig-bhojak, enjoying. 68/5
Bhoini-grama-adhya-ksha's wife. 205 Bhoiy-gram-pramukh, village head. 205 Bhoi-
bhariya, wife. 173/2 Bhojj-bhojya, food. 85 Bhom-earth related. Maim-matimaan,
intelligent. 198/2 Mail-malin, dirty. 149 Mailiya-malin, dirty. 145 Mauy-mridu,
soft. 198/14 Mankh-attracting people by showing a flag. 142 Manchga-palang, bed.
167 Mandga-roti, bread. 296 Mandan-prasadhan, adornment. Mandan-dhai-prasadhan's
nurse. 198/12 Mandal-a piece of land available for one wrestler. 207/3 Mandal-
pasutti-a type of leprosy. 288/4 Mant-mantra, mantra. 207/2 Mantana-mantra's
use. 227/2 Mans-mans, flesh. 86 Manspesi-muscle. 86/1 Makkhit-mrakshit, a fault
of alms. 237,238/1, 242,243,243/3,244 Magar-magarmachch, crocodile. 154 Magah-
Magadh country. 89/2 Maggana-margana, research, origin. 51 Macchu-mrityu, death.
52/1 Macchhandiya-type of sugar. 129 Macch-matsya, fish. 302 Macchhar-matsarya,
envy. 148/1 Macchi-makkhi, fly. 245/1 Macchiya-machchimar, fisherman. 302/2
Macchiya-makshika, fly. Majjana-dhai-bathing nurse. 197 Majjar-marjar, cat. 86
Majjit-bathed. 198/12 Majjhantig-madhya, middle. 90/1 Majjh-madhya, middle.
Majjhim-madhyam, middle. Mat-mrt, dead. 73/6 Matt-1. vessel, 244, 2. mad. 265
Matthu-state between curd and buttermilk. 128/3 Mamman-unvoiced speech. 198/14
May-mrt, dead. 208/1 Mallag-special vessel. 90/3 Masur-masur dal, lentil. 296
Mahan-mathana, churning. 44/3 Mahall-big. 264 Mahigha-fog. 320/1 263 10 161 96/1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
336 piMDaniyukti bharaha-bharata ckrvrtii| 219/14 bhaviya-bhavya, hone vaalaa|
73/1 bhaaiy-bhaagiidaar| bhANa-pAtra, bhaajn| 19 bhaasaa-bhaassaa| 207/3
bhAsita-kathita, kahA huaa| 96/3 bhikkhA-bhikSA 37,76 bhikkhAyari-bhikSAcaryA /
198/4 bhikkhu-bhikssu| 227 bhisa-bhRza, atydhik| 276 bhiiruy-ddrpok| 198/15
bhuumidev-braahmnn| 210/1 bhesjj-bhessj| 40 bhoi-bhoga karane vaalaa| 90 bhoiga-
bhojaka, bhoga karane vaalaa| 68/5 bhoiNI-grAmAdhyakSa kI ptnii| 205 bhoiy-
graam-prmukh|' 205 bhoii-bhaaryaa| 173/2 bhojj-bhojy| 85 bhoma-pRthvI se
smbndhit| mim-mtimaan| 198/2 mil-mlin| 149 miliy-mlin| 145 muy-mRdu| 198/14
maMkha-paTa dikhAkara logoM ko AkRSTa karane vaalaa| 142 mNcg-plNg| 167 mNddg-
rottii| 296 mNddnn-prsaadhn| maMDaNadhAI-prasAdhana kI dhaatrii| 198/12 maMDala-
eka malla ke lie labhya bhuukhnndd| 207/3 maMDalapasutti-kuSTha roga kA eka
prkaar| 288/4 mNt-mNtr| 207/2 maMtaNa-maMtra kA pryog| 227/2 mNs-maaNs| 86
mNspesi-maaNspeshii| 86/1 makkhita-mrakSita, bhikSA kA eka 237,238/1, doss|
242,243,243/3,244 mgr-mgrmcch| 154 magaha-magadha desh| 89/2 maggaNA-mArgaNA,
gaveSaNA, udgm| 51 mccu-mRtyu| 52/1 macchaMDiya-zarkarA kA prkaar| 129 mcch-
mtsy| 302 mcchr-maatsry| 148/1 mcchi-mkkhii| 245/1 macchiya-macchImAra,
maatsyik| 302/2 macchiyA-makSikA, mkkhii| majjaNadhAI-snAna karAne vAlI dhaaii|
197 majjAra-mArjAra, bilaav| 86 majjita-snAna kiyA huaa| 198/12 mjjhNtig-mdhy|
90/1 mjjh-mdhy| mjjhim-mdhym| mt-mRt| 73/6 matta-1. pAtra, 244, 2. unmtt| 265
matthu-dahI aura chAcha ke bIca kI avsthaa| 128/3 mammaNa-avyakta vaannii|
198/14 my-mRt| 208/1 mallaga-pAtra vishess| 90/3 masUra-masUra kI daal| 296
mhnn-mthnaa| 44/3 mhll-bdd'aa| 264 mhigaa-kohraa| 320/1 263 10 161 96/1

Page #509 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Glossary:**  * **19 : Word Meanings 337** * **69 Mahīruha-vṛkṣa:** Mahīruha
tree * **243/2 Mahilīyā-mahila:** Mahilīyā, woman * **310 Mahīsī-bhainsa:**
Mahīsī, buffalo * **108/1 Mahī-pṛthvī:** Mahī, earth * **210/5 Mahubindu-
madhubindu nāmaka dṛṣṭānta:** Mahubindu, an example of a honey drop * **301
Mahura-madhura:** Mahura, sweet * **77 Māi-māyāvī:** Māi, illusory * **228
Māiṭhāṇa-māyā:** Māiṭhāṇa, illusion * **231/3 Māṇapiṇḍa-mānapīṇḍa-bhikṣā kā eka
doṣa:** Māṇapiṇḍa, a fault in begging, meaning "taking what is not given" *
**219 Māti-mātā:** Māti, mother * **208/1 Māraga-mārak, mārane vāla:** Māraga,
killer, one who kills * **Māruta-vāyu:** Māruta, wind * **57/3 Māla-ūpara kā
kamrā:** Māla, upper room * **166 Mālohḍa-mālāpahṛta, bhikṣā kā eka 59,165,
doṣa, ūpara se utārakara 169,170 bhikṣā denā:** Mālohḍa, a fault in begging,
meaning "taking alms from above" * **Māsa-māṣa, uḍad:** Māsa, black gram * **296
Māsiga māsika:** Māsiga, monthly * **90/2 Māhaṇa-brāhmaṇa:** Māhaṇa, Brahmin *
**208 Micchatt-mithyātv:** Micchatt, falsehood * **44/4 Micchāddiṭṭhī-
mithyādrṣṭi:** Micchāddiṭṭhī, wrong view * **83/3 Mitta-mātra:** Mitta, measure
* **109 Mimmaya-mṛṇmaya, miṭṭī kā bartan ādi:** Mimmaya, earthen, made of clay *
**156 Miyāhāra-pramaṇopēta āhāra karne vāla:** Miyāhāra, one who eats in
moderation * **Milāṇa-mlāna:** Milāṇa, pale * **Missita-miśrita:** Missita,
mixed * **Mīsaga-miśraka:** Mīsaga, mixer * **22/4 Mīsajāta-miśrajāta, bhikṣā kā
120, eka doṣa:** Mīsajāta, a fault in begging, meaning "taking mixed alms" *
**187,190 Muing-kīṭikā, cīṇṭī:** Muing, ant * **163/3 Mugga-mūnga:** Mugga,
green gram * **296 Muccha-mūrcchā:** Muccha, fainting * **89/3 Muccita-
mūrcchita:** Muccita, fainted * **96/2 Muṭṭha-vah vyakti, jisakī vastu _ curāī
gaī ho:** Muṭṭha, one whose property has been stolen * **227/2 Muṇiya-
jānakara:** Muṇiya, knowing * **134 Mutta-1. mūrta, 41/1, 2. prasravaṇa:**
Mutta, 1. form, 2. flow * **245/2 Muḍḍiya-mudrita, banda kiyā huā:** Muḍḍiya,
sealed, closed * **164 Muḍḍha-mugdha:** Muḍḍha, fascinated * **Mummura-lāla
raṅga ke agni-kaṇa, karīṣāgni:** Mummura, red-hot sparks of fire, fire of
excrement * **252 Muruṇḍa-is nāma kā rājā:** Muruṇḍa, a king by this name *
**227,228/1 Muh-mukha:** Muh, mouth * **1987 Muhpoṭṭi-mukhavastrikā:** Muhpoṭṭi,
a cloth for the mouth * **73/2 Mūlakamma-mūlakarma:** Mūlakamma, original karma
* **231/5 Mūsā-cūhā:** Mūsā, rat * **Merā-maryādā:** Merā, limit * **101/1 Mo-
pādapūrti rūpa avayava:** Mo, a limb in the form of foot-fulfillment * **73/3
Mokkha-mokṣa:** Mokkha, liberation * **49/1,240 Modaga-modaka, laḍḍa:** Modaga,
sweetmeat, laddu * **219/9 Moy-prasravaṇa:** Moy, flow * **219/3 Rakkhā-rakṣā:**
Rakkhā, protection * **68/4 Rajja-rājya:** Rajja, kingdom * **61/1 Raṭṭhapāla-
rāṣṭrapāla nāmaka nāṭaka, jo bharata cakravartī ke jīvana par banāyā gayā thā:**
Raṭṭhapāla, a play named "Raṭṭhapāla" based on the life of Bharata Chakravarti *
**219/13 Raḍaṇa-rudana karana, krandana karana:** Raḍaṇa, to weep, to cry *
**96/1 Raṇa-rājā:** Raṇa, king * **68/9 Rattachch-raktākṣa, lāla āṅkhon vāla:**
Rattachch, red-eyed * **198/11 Radḍha-rāddha, pakāyā huā:** Radḍha, cooked *
**76/3 Ramaṇijja-ramaṇīya:** Ramaṇijja, beautiful * **76 Rayaṇa-ratna:** Rayaṇa,
jewel * **138 Rayaṇā-racanā:** Rayaṇā, creation * **253/3 Rayya-rajata:** Rayya,
silver * **194/2 313 109**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pari. 19 : zabdArtha 337 69 mhiruh-vRkss| 243/2 mhiliyaa-mhilaa| 310 mhisii-
bhaiNs| 108/1 mhii-pRthvii| 210/5 mahubiMdu-madhubiMdu nAmaka dRssttaant| 301
mhur-mdhur| 77 maai-maayaavii| 228 maaitthaann-maayaa| 231/3 mANapiMDa-
mAnapiMDa-bhikSA kA eka doss| 219 maati-maataa| 208/1 mAraga-mAraka, mArane
vaalaa| maarut-vaayu| 57/3 mAla-Upara kA kmraa| 166 mAlohaDa-mAlApahRta, bhikSA
kA eka 59,165, doSa, Upara se utArakara 169,170 bhikSA denaa| mAsa-mASa, udd'd|
296 maasigmaasik| 90/2 maahnn-braahmnn| 208 micchtt-mithyaatv| 44/4
micchdditttthii-mithyaadRsstti| 83/3 mitt-maatr| 109 mimmaya-mRnmaya, miTTI kA
bartana aadi| 156 miyAhAra-pramANopeta AhAra karane vaalaa| milaann-mlaan|
missit-mishrit| miisg-mishrk| 22/4 mIsajAta-mizrajAta, bhikSA kA 120, eka doss|
187,190 muiMga-kITikA, ciiNttii| 163/3 mugg-muuNg| 296 mucchaa-muurchaa| 89/3
mucchit-muurcchit| 96/2 muTTha-vaha vyakti, jisakI vastu _ curAI gaI ho| 227/2
munniy-jaankr| 134 mutta-1. mUrta, 41/1, 2. prsrvnn| 245/2 muddiya-mudrita,
baMda kiyA huaa| 164 muddh-mugdh| mummura-lAla raMga ke agni-kaNa, kriissaagni|
252 muruMDa-isa nAma kA raajaa| 227,228/1 muh-mukh| 1987 muhpotti-mukhvstrikaa|
73/2 muulkmm-muulkrm| 231/5 muusaa-cuuhaa| 163/5 meraa-mryaadaa| 101/1 mo-
pAdapUrti rUpa avyv| 73/3 mokkh-mokss| 49/1,240 modaga-modaka, ldddd| 219/9 moy-
prsrvnn| 219/3 rkkhaa-rkssaa| 68/4 rjj-raajy| 61/1 raTThapAla-rASTrapAla nAmaka
nATaka, jo bharata cakravartI ke jIvana para banAyA gayA thaa| 219/13 raDaNa-
rudana karanA, kraMdana krnaa| 96/1 rnn-raajaa| 68/9 rattaccha-raktAkSa, lAla
AMkhoM vaalaa| 198/11 raddha-rAddha, pakAyA huaa| 76/3 rmnnijj-rmnniiy| 76 rynn-
rtn| 138 rynnaa-rcnaa| 253/3 ryy-rjt| 194/2 313 109

Page #510 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
338 Pindaniyukti 273 219/11 136/5 280, 237 106 17/2 30 83/1 69/2 90/3 163/1
117/3 Raiharan-Rajoharan. 22 Rasag-Rasaj Jeev. 280 Rah-Rath. 70/3 Ray-Raja.
219/9 Rayakul-Rajakul. 217 Raygih-This named city. 216, 219/9 Rayputt-Rajputra.
68/6 Raymas-Rajmas, special grain. 296 Raysut-Rajasut. 68/9 Ralag-Ralak, special
grain. 76 Rasi-Rashi, group. Riou-Ritu. 69/4 Rin-Rin. 57/1 Rite-Without, except.
173/4 Runchan-The act of separating cotton from cotton. 281 Runtan-Disregard.
90/3 Rumpang-Planting. 76/1 Rukkh-Trees 53/2 Rutth-Angry, angry. 89/8 Ruy-
Disease. 83/5 Reha-Line. 95/2 Laiy-Worn. 284 Lamban-Kavala. 305 Lakkhan-Lakshan.
80/5 Lagg-1. Immersed, 96/1, 2. Attached. 288/5 Laddag-Modak. 57 Laddh-Labdh.
157/5 Laddi-Labdhi. 219 Lasun-Lahsuna. 86/2 Lahu-Lahu. Lahuy-Light / 259/1 Lal-
Lala. Ling-Vesh. Lingovjivi-Living only on the basis of gender. Litt-1. Lipta,
2. A fault of begging. Lukk-Hairless. Lukkh-Rough. Lutt-Raw rice. Luddh-Lubdh.
Luh-Rough. Lecchari-Kharanti, Lipta. Lelu-Mud lump. Lev-Lep. Lesa-Leshya. Loi-
Laukik. Log-Lok. Loguttar-Lokottar. Lon-Lavan. Loy-1. Lok, 2. Loch. Lohiy-Blood.
Vaikkam-Vyatikrama. Vaiya-Small Gokul. Vanjan-1. Vyanjan, vegetable, 2. Food.
Vant-Vant. Vagg-Vyagra. Vagg-Vyagra / Vachchant-Going. Vachch-Vachya. Vachch-
Vats, calf. Vachchhag-Calf. 144 21/2 144 12 70/2, 136/1 231/8 82/3 142 25, 313/2
85 268 201/1 57/1 68 96 96/1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
338 piMDaniyukti 273 219/11 136/5 280, 237 106 17/2 30 83/1 69/2 90/3 163/1
117/3 ryhrnn-rjohrnn| 22 rasaga-rasaja jiiv| 280 rh-rth| 70/3 raay-raajaa| 219/9
raaykul-raajkul| 217 rAyagiha-isa nAma kI ngrii| 216,219/9 raayputt-raajputr|
68/6 rAyamAsa-rAjamASa, dhAnya vishess|| 296 raaysut-raajsut| 68/9 rAlaga-
rAlaka, dhAnya vishess| 76 rAsi-rAzi, smuuh| riu-Rtu| 69/4 rinn-Rnn| 57/1 rite-
binA, sivaay| 173/4 ruMcaNa-ruI se kapAsa ko alaga karane kI kriyaa| 281
ruNttnn-avjnyaa| 90/3 ruNpnn-ropnaa| 76/1 rukkha-vRkSA 53/2 ruTTha-ruSTa,
naaraaj| 89/8 ruy-rog| 83/5 rehaa-rekhaa| 95/2 laiya-pahanA huaa| 284 lNbnn-kvl|
305 lkkhnn-lkssnn| 80/5 lagga-1. nimagna, 96/1, 2. lagA huaa| 288/5 lddddg-modk|
57 lddh-lbdh| 157/5 lddhi-lbdhi| 219 lsunn-lhsun| 86/2 lhu-lghu| lahuya-halkA /
259/1 laal-laar| liNg-vesh| liMgovajIvi-kevala liMga ke AdhAra para jIne vaalaa|
litta-1. lipta, 2. bhikSA kA eka doss| lukka-keza rahita kiyA huaa| lukkh-rukss|
luTTa-kaccA caavl| luddh-lubdh| luuh-ruukss| lecchAriga-kharaNTita, lipt| lelu-
miTTI kA ddhelaa| lev-lep| lesaa-leshyaa| loiy-laukik| log-lok| loguttr-lokottr|
lonn-lvnn| loya-1. loka, 2. loc| lohiy-rkt| vikkm-vytikrm| vaiyA-laghu gokul|
vaMjaNa-1. vyaJjana, sabjI, 2. aahaar| vNt-vaant| vgg-vygr| vaggha-vyAghra /
vaccaMta-jAte hue| vcc-vaacy| vaccha-vatsa, bchdd'aa| vcchg-bchdd'aa| 144 21/2
144 12 70/2, 136/1 231/8 82/3 142 25, 313/2 85 268 201/1 57/1 68 96 96/1

Page #511 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Pari. 19: Shabdarth**  339 Vajj-varnya. Vajjanijj-varjaneya. 270 Vattmaan-
vartamaan. 204 Vadag-dal aadi ka bada. 305 Vadit-vardhit, badha hua. 80/2
Vanasaikaya-vanaspatikaya. Vanasand-vanakhand. 236/1 Vani-vanik / 89/1 Vaniy-
vanik. 69/1 Vanima-vanipaka, shraman ka ek prakar. 208 Vanimag-vanipaka, bhiksha
ka ek dosh. 195 Vann-varna. Vannag-chandan aadi sugandhit dravya. 141 Vatikkama-
vyatikram. 82 Vattavva-vaktavya. 181/1 Vathth-vastra. 227/1 Vaththavva-
vaastavya, niwasi. 199 Vatthi-vasti, drti. 28 Vay-1. Vrat, 136/6, 2. Vyaya,
179/1, 3. Avस्था / 198/5 Vayan-1. Vadan, mukh, 305, 2. Vachan. 200 Varaaday-
kapardaka. Valaya-modne wala. 143/2 Valaya-samudri lahar, samudri tat. 302/3
Valava-ghori. 205 Valiy-bhukt. 108/2 Vall-kali udda, nishpav. 108/1 Vallabhatt-
priyata. 217 Vavahar-nyaya. 180 Vavaharanay-vyavaharanay. Vavhariy-vyavaharik.
Vasah-vasati. 119 Vasikaran-vashikaran, vash mein karne ki vidya. 231 Vasiy-raha
hua. 207/1 Vahan-vadh. 68/9 Vaiy-vachik. 68/11 Vau-vayukaya. 8,20,26, 28,258
Vaghat-vyaghat. 219/13 Vadag-muhalla. 156 Vanigag-vanik, baniya. 89/2 Vat-vayu /
313/2 Vadi-vad karne wala. 143/3 Vam-ulta. 253/3 Vay-1. Vat, vayu, 54, 2. Vad.
143 Vayanayriy-vachanacharya. 143/3 Varag-laghu ghat. 127 Valachiy-lomash
purush. 194/1 Valunk-pakvanna vishesh. 305 Vas-1. Varshakal, chaturmasakal,
142/1, 2. Varsha. Vasghar-shayanagruh. 57/2 Vint-vrint, phal ka bandhan.
Vikaththana-prasansha. 69/4 Vikappa-vikalpa. 198/4 Vikovana-vistrit roop se
prakat karna. 47 Vikkaya-vikraya. 163 Vigadant-acharya ke sammukh aalochna karte
hue. 240/3 Vigad-jisko samjhna kathin ho. 50 Vigad-desh vishesh mein prasiddh
madira. 103 17 16

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pari. 19 : zabdArtha 339 vjj-vrnny| vjjnnijj-vrjniiy| 270 vttttmaann-vrtmaan|
204 vaDaga-dAla Adi kA bdd'aa| 305 vaDita-vardhita, bar3hA huaa| 80/2 vnnsikaay-
vnsptikaay| vnnsNdd-vnkhnndd| 236/1 vaNi-vaNik / 89/1 vnniy-vnnik| 69/1 vaNIma-
vanIpaka, zramaNa kA eka prkaar| 208 vaNImaga-vanIpaka, bhikSA kA eka doss| 195
vnnnn-vrnn| vaNNaga-candana Adi sugaMdhita drvy| 141 vtikkm-vytikrm| 82 vttvv-
vktvy| 181/1 vtth-vstr| 227/1 vatthavva-vAstavya, nivaasii| 199 vatthi-vasti,
dRti| 28 vaya-1. vrata, 136/6, 2. vyaya, 179/1, 3. avasthA / 198/5 vayaNa-1.
vadana, mukha, 305, 2. vcn| 200 vraaddy-kprdk| valaya-mor3ane vaalaa| 143/2
valayA-samudrI lahara, samudrI ttt| 302/3 vlvaa-ghodd'ii| 205 vliy-bhukt| 108/2
valla-kAlI ur3ada, nisspaav| 108/1 vllbhtt-priytaa| 217 vvhaar-nyaay| 180
vvhaarny-vyvhaarny| vvhaariy-vyaavhaarik| vshii-vsti| 119 vasikaraNa-vazIkaraNa,
vaza meM karane kI vidyaa| 231 vasiya-rahA huaa| 207/1 vhnn-vdh| 68/9 vaaiy-
vaacik| 68/11 vaau-vaayukaay| 8,20,26, 28,258 vaaghaat-vyaaghaat| 219/13 vaaddg-
muhllaa| 156 vANiyaga-vaNik, bniyaa| 89/2 vAta-vAyu / 313/2 vAdi-vAda karane
vaalaa| 143/3 vaam-ulttaa| 253/3 vAya-1. vAta, vAyu, 54, 2. vaad| 143
vaaynnaayriy-vaacnaacaary| 143/3 vAraga-laghu ghtt| 127 vAlaciya-lomaza puruss|
194/1 vAluMka-pakvAnna vishess| 305 vAsa-1. varSAkAla, cAturmAsakAla, 142/1, 2.
vrssaa| vaasghr-shyngRh| 57/2 viMTa-vRnta, phala kA bNdhn| viktthnnaa-prshNsaa|
69/4 vikpp-viklp| 198/4 vikovaNa-vistRta rUpa se prakaTa krnaa| 47 vikky-vikry|
163 vigaDaMta-AcArya ke samakSa AlocanA karate hue| 240/3 vigaDa-jisako
samajhanA kaThina ho| 50 vigaDa-deza vizeSa meM prasiddha mdiraa| 103 17 16

Page #512 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
340 Pindaniyukti 253 45 87 Vigadpad-Vikatpad, having a gap between both feet.
198/15 Viginchana-to discriminate. 220/2 Viggh-obstacle. 198/9 Vichel-without
clothes. 219/13 Vicchhodit-cleaned with fingers etc. 125 Vijj-physician. 313
Vijja-knowledge. 217 Vijju-electricity. 24 Vijjhat-extinguished fire. 252
Vinasit-destroyed. 91/4 Vinney-knowable, should be known. Vitthar-expansion.
207/4 Vippjadh-abandoned. 31 Vippus-particle, point. Vibhasitavva-worthy of
being spoken. 69 Vibhusit-adorned. 69/3 Vimukk-liberated. 68/11 Vimutt-abstract.
41/1 Vimhay-astonishment, wonder. 231/4 Viyana-pain. 228/1 Viyalana-inquiry.
288/1 Viraha-solitude. 219/12 Vilakkha-with shame. 89/8 Viliy-ashamed,
indifferent. 136/3 Vilukk-shaved head or one with lost hair. 136 Vivajj-leaving,
abandoning. 274 Vivatti-misfortune. 219/8 Vis-poison. 13 Visagg-to leave. 91/3
Visghatiy-poisonous. Visajj-to leave. 144/3 Visay-1. object of senses like sound
etc., 96/2, 2. knowable object. 204 Visaris-dissimilar, unequal. 73/5 Visarana-
drying pieces of fruits, flowers etc. in the sun. 283 Visal-vast. Visitth-
special. 101 Vises-special. 290 Visesit-adorned with adjectives, differentiated.
73/4 Visohi-purifier. 324 Visohikodi-purification category, a fault of begging,
the food with which fault is abandoned, the remaining begging or begging bowl
becomes pure. 189 Vihava-widow. 222/2 Vihi-method. 72 Vihiy-prescribed. 194/2
Vihoon-deprived, without. 80/5 Vit-without. 316 Vivaha-marriage. 219/11 Visu-
separate. 73/13 Vukkant-inverted. 12 Vudd-old. 265 Vuddi-increase. 144/2 Vutt-
said, spoken. 179 Vejj-physician. 34 Venn-an island of this name. 231/2 Ved-
scripture. 86/2 Vedana-pain. 318 Veyavacc-Vayyavrittya. 318 123

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
340 piMDaniyukti 253 45 87 vigaDapAda-vikaTapAda, donoM pairoM meM aMtarAla
vaalaa| 198/15 vigiMcaNa-viveka krnaa| 220/2 viggh-vighn| 198/9 vicela-vastra
rhit| 219/13 vicchoDita-aMguli Adi se sApha kiyA huaa| 125 vijj-vaidy| 313
vijjaa-vidyaa| 217 vijju-vidyut| 24 vijjhAta-bAhara se bujhI huI agni| 252
vinnaasit-vinsstt| 91/4 viNNeya-vijJeya, jAnanA caahie| vitthr-vistaar| 207/4
vippjddh-tykt| 31 vippusa-kaNa, biNdu| vibhAsitavva-kathana yogy| 69 vibhuusit-
vibhuussit| 69/3 vimukk-vimukt| 68/11 vimutt-amuurt| 41/1 vimhaya-vismaya,
aashcry| 231/4 viynnaa-vednaa| 228/1 viyaalnn-vicaarnnaa| 288/1 virh-ekaant|
219/12 vilakkha-lajjA shit| 89/8 viliya-lajjita, udaasiin| 136/3 vilukka-muNDita
sira yA lupta keza vaalaa| 136 vivajja-chor3akara, parityAga krke| 274 vivtti-
viptti| 219/8 vis-viss| 13 visgg-chodd'naa| 91/3 visghaatiy-vissghaatik| visjj-
chodd'naa| 144/3 visaya-1. zabda Adi iMdriya-viSaya, 96/2, 2. jJeya pdaarth| 204
visarisa-visadRza, asmaan| 73/5 visAraNa-phala, phUla Adi ke Tukar3oM ko sukhAne
ke lie dhUpa meM rkhnaa| 283 visaal-vishaal| visitttth-vishisstt| 101 vises-
vishess| 290 visesita-vizeSaNa yukta kiyA huA, bhedit| 73/4 visohi-vishodhi| 324
visohikoDi-vizodhikoTi, bhikSA kA eka doSa, jisa doSa vAle AhAra kA tyAga karane
para zeSa bhikSA yA bhikSA-pAtra vizuddha ho jaae| 189 vihvaa-vidhvaa| 222/2
vihi-vidhi| 72 vihiy-vihit| 194/2 vihUNa-vihIna, rhit| 80/5 viit-rhit| 316
viivaah-vivaah| 219/11 viisu-alg| 73/13 vukkNt-vyutkraant| 12 vudddd-vRddh| 265
vuddddi-vRddhi| 144/2 vutta-ukta, kahA gyaa| 179 vejj-vaidy| 34 veNNa-isa nAma
kA dviip| 231/2 ved-grNth| 86/2 vednn-vednaa| 318 veyaavcc-vaiyaavRtty| 318 123

Page #513 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Vosīraṇa-vyutsarjana. 86/1 Pari. 19: Śabdārtha 341 Veragg-Vairagya. 57/4 Which
can be taken out. 138/1 Velā-1. Time, 99/2, * Sanchubh-Collected in one place 2.
Pregnant woman with nine months. 288/5 To do. 142/2 Vevit-Trembling. 288/3
Sanjamṭhāṇa-Sanayamastāna. Veṣaṇa-Cumin, salt etc. spice. 51 Sanjay-Sanayata.
73/5 Vocched-Vyavacched. 167 Sanjutta-Sanjukta. 148 Volinta-Moving, walking.
76/2 Sanjog-Sanyoga. Volīṇa-Pithar-Fire reaching up to the ear. 252 Sanjoyanā-
Grāsaiṣaṇā's a defect, to eat two things together for taste. 304 Saingāla-
Grāsaiṣaṇā's a defect, to eat with attachment. 314 Sant-Existing. 226 Santāṇa-
Uninterrupted tradition  /  231/9 Sai-Sakṛd, once. 302/3 Santiya-Pass. 287
Saējjhiya-Neighbor. 157/6 Santhara-Maintenance, attainment. 192/5 Sankad-
Difficult. 302/5 Santhava-To introduce, a defect of begging. 142/1, Sankaman-
Sankraman. 275 Sankaliy-Chain-like. 101/1 Santhāra-Sanstāraka. Sankahā-Sankathā,
conversation. 76/2 Sandiṭṭha-Sandiṣṭa. 288/1 Sankāmaṇa-To pour from one vessel
to another. 112 Sampati-Present, now. 295/6 Sankita-Doubtful, a defect of
begging. 235,237, Sampīṇḍaṇa-Group. 238 Sambāhiya-To press with hand. 198/12
Sankiliṭṭha-Sankliṣṭa. 67/1 Sambōha-Sambodha. 166/2 Sankha-Conch. 34 Sambhārita-
Spiced etc. 86/1 Sankhaḍ-Quarrel. 148 Sambhoiya-Due to similar conduct, the
saint with whom food etc. can be shared. 219/9 Sankhā-Number. 41/1 Sanlāva-
Sanlāpa, conversation. 119/1 Sankheva-Sankṣepa. Sansajjima-The substance, which
is connected with beings. 285 Sanghṭṭaṇa-Touch. 279 Sanghbhatta-Collective meal.
119/1 Sansatṭha-Sansṛṣṭa lipta. 191 Sanghāḍaga-Saint's group. 219/10  /
Sansatta-Sansakta, attached. Sancārimā-The hearth inside the house, Sansamaṇa-
Suppression. 214/3 32 20 175 50 280

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
vosirnn-vyutsrjn| 86/1 pari. 19 : zabdArtha 341 vergg-vairaagy| 57/4 jise bAhara
le jAyA jA ske| 138/1 velA-1. samaya, 99/2, * saMchubha-eka sthAna para ekatrita
2. navamAsa vAlI garbhavatI strii| 288/5 krnaa| 142/2 vevit-kmpit| 288/3
sNjmtthaann-sNymsthaan| vesaNa-jIrA, namaka Adi msaalaa| 51 sNjy-sNyt| 73/5
vocched-vyvcched| 167 sNjutt-sNyukt| 148 voliMta-gati karate hue, calate hue|
76/2 sNjog-sNyog| volINa-piThara-karNa ke Upara taka saMjoyaNA-grAsaiSaNA kA eka
doSa, pahuMcane vAlI agni| 252 svAda ke lie do vastuoM ko milAkara khaanaa| 304
saiMgAla-grAsaiSaNA kA eka doSa, sNt-vidymaan| 226 Asakta hokara bhojana krnaa|
314 saMtANa-avicchinna paraMparA / 231/9 sai-sakRd, eka baar| 302/3 sNtiy-paas|
287 sejjhiyaa-pdd'osin| 157/6 saMthara-nirvAha, praapti| 192/5 sNkdd-vissm|
302/5 saMthava-paricaya karanA, bhikSA kA 142/1, sNkmnn-sNkrmnn| 275 eka doss|
221 sNkliy-shRNkhlaabddh| 101/1 sNthaar-sNstaark| saMkahA-saMkathA, vaartaa|
76/2 sNditttth-sNdisstt| 288/1 saMkAmaNa-eka bartana se dUsare bartana saMpati-
vartamAna, ab| 295/6 meM ddaalnaa| 112 saMpAima-saMpAtima jiiv| saMkita-
zaMkAyukta, bhikSA kA eka doss| 235,237, sNpiNddnn-smuuh| 238 saMbAhiya-hAtha se
dbaanaa| 198/12 sNkilitttth-sNklisstt| 67/1 sNboh-sNbodh| 166/2 sNkh-shNkh| 34
saMbhArita-masAlA Adi DAlakara sNkhdd-klh| 148 upaskRta kiyA huaa| 86/1
saMkhaDi-1. bhoja, jImanavAra, 99/1, saMbhoiya-samAna sAmAcArI ke kAraNa 2.
vivAha-bhoja, 134, jisa sAdhu ke sAtha AhAra Adi 3. klh| kA saMbaMdha ho ske|
219/9 sNkhaa-sNkhyaa| 41/1 saMlAva-saMlApa, baatciit| 119/1 sNkhev-sNkssep|
saMsajjima-vaha dravya, jo jIvoM se saMghaTTaNa-sparza krnaa| 279 yukta ho| 285
saMghabhatta-sAmUhika bhoj| 119/1 saMsaTTha-saMsRSTa lipt| 191 saMghADaga-sAdhu
kA siMghADA, vrg| 219/10 / saMsatta-saMsakta, lagA huaa| saMcArimA-ghara ke
andara kA cUlhA, sNsmnn-upshmn| 214/3 32 20 175 50 280

Page #514 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
342 Pindaniyukti 214/3 70/4, 209 129 70/3 282 223 116/4 76 - 96/2 292, 148 144
33 to correct-purify. Sakka -1. Indra, 2. Shaky, a type of Shraman. Sakkara-
sugar. Sagad-cart, bullock cart. Sachchitt-Sachitt. Sajiy-living. Sajj-sadya,
soon. Sajjh-achievable. Sajjhay-self-study. Sajjhilg-1. brother, 2. neighbor.
Sajjhilga-sister. Sattan-swasthan. Sadd-shraddha, devotee. Saddi-Shravica. Sanna
-pronunciation, dirt. Sannijjujjant-placed in the appropriate place. Satt-1.
sattva, power, 2. seven. Sattari-seventy. Sattu-enemy. Sattug-sattu, special
food / Sades-swadesh. Sadd-sound. Sadhum-a defect of grassaeshan, eating food
while criticizing it. Sannayag-swajan. Sappakkh-swapksh. Sapacchavay-full of
danger. Sappi -ghee. 119/1 157/1 108/1 Sabhav-sadhav, reality / Samakkh-samaksh.
198/5 Samakkhat-samakhyat, said. 50 Samagg-samagra / 324 Samajal-fire reaching
the ear of the pitara placed on the stove. 252 Saman-Shraman. 73/5,96/3
Samandhamm-amanadharma. 44/3 Samanunnatt-samanujnat / 177/2 Samaticchhiy-
atikrant to do. 252/2 Samay-siddhant. Samahiy-more. Samaog-samayog, union. 313/1
Samades-a type of auddeshik dosha. 97 Samarabh-violence. 144/3 Samas-summary.
144 Samit-full of samiti. 136/5 Samitim-mand. 89/5 Samidha-wood for yajna. 207/2
Samiy-1. bread, special food made of wheat flour, 108/1, 2. Acharya named Samit
/ 230, 231/3,4 Samutthit-samutthit, related. 193 Samuttuia-proud. 219 Samutth-
born. 57/3 Samudd-sea. Samuddi?-explained. Samuddes-a type of auddeshik dosha,
food made for heretics. 98 Samuddesiy-samuddeshik, a type of auddeshik dosha.
Samusaran-samavasaran, group. 213 302/4, 44 192/7 52/1 89/5 152 70/6 16 314
320/1 81 270 305

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
342 piMDaniyukti 214/3 70/4, 209 129 70/3 282 223 116/4 76 - 96/2 292, 148 144
33 saMsodhaNa-zuddhi krnaa| sakka -1. iMdra, 2. zAkya, zramaNa kA eka prkaar|
skkraa-shrkraa| sagaDa-zakaTa, bailgaadd'ii| sccitt-scitt| sjiy-sjiiv| sajja-
sadyaH, shiighr| sjjh-saadhy| sjjhaay-svaadhyaay| sajjhilaga-1. bhAI, 2.
pdd'osii| sjjhilgaa-bhginii| stttthaann-svsthaan| saDDha-zrAddha, shrddhaalu|
sddddii-shraavikaa| saNNA -uccAra, ml| saNNijujjaMta- upayukta sthAna para lagA
huaa| satta-1. sattva, zakti, 2. saat| sttrii-sttr| sttu-shtru| sattuga-sattu,
khAdya vizeSa / sdes-svdesh| sdd-shbd| sadhUma-grAsaiSaNA kA eka doSa, AhAra kI
niMdA karate hue bhojana krnaa| snnaayg-svjn| spkkh-svpkss| sapaccavAya-apAya se
yukt| sappi -ghii| 119/1 157/1 108/1 sabbhAva-sadbhAva, yathArtha / smkkh-smkss|
198/5 samakkhAta-samAkhyAta, kthit| 50 samagga-samagra / 324 samajAla-cUlhe para
car3he piThara ke karNa taka pahuMcane vAlI agni| 252 smnn-shrmnn| 73/5,96/3
smnndhmm-amnndhrm| 44/3 samaNuNNAta-samanujJAta / 177/2 samaticchiya-atikrAnta
krnaa| 252/2 smy-siddhaant| smhiy-adhik| samAoga-samAyoga, miln| 313/1 samAdesa-
auddezika doSa kA eka bhed| 97 smaarNbh-hiNsaa| 144/3 smaas-sNkssep| 144 samita-
samiti se yukt| 136/5 smitim-maanndd| 89/5 samidhA-yajJa kI lkdd'ii| 207/2
samiya-1. roTI, gehUM ke ATe kA khAdya vizeSa, 108/1, 2. samita nAma ke AcArya /
230, 231/3,4 samuTThita-samutthita, smbndhit| 193 smuttuia-grvit| 219 smutth-
utpnn| 57/3 smudd-smudr| smuddi?-vyaakhyaat| samuddesa-auddezika doSa kA bheda,
pASaMDiyoM ke lie banAyA gayA aahaar| 98 samuddesiya-samuddezika, auddezika doSa
kA bhed| samusaraNa-samavasaraNa, smuuh| 213 302/4, 44 192/7 52/1 89/5 152 70/6
16 314 320/1 81 270 305

Page #515 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Glossary:**  **19:**  * **343** **Samogāḍha-Samavagāḍha:**  (No direct English
equivalent, but it likely refers to a state of being deeply absorbed in
meditation or contemplation) * **41/2** **Samotāra-Samavatāra:** (No direct
English equivalent, but it likely refers to a state of being fully present and
aware) * **91/4** **Samosaraṇa-Sādhū-Samudāya:**  Community of virtuous ones *
**131** **Samm-Samyak:** Right, correct, perfect * **207/2** **Sammatta-
Samyaktva:** Rightness, perfection * **57/4** **Sarakkha:** 1. Covered with
ashes, 2.  Full of life, vibrant * **243/1** **Saraḍu:** Soft, delicate *
**57/2** **Sariccha:** Similar, alike * **89** **Saris:** Similar, alike *
**192/2** **Sarisiya:** Similar, alike * **318/1** **Sarira:** Body * **136/1**
**Sarūva:** Form, nature * **74** **Savatti:** Co-wife * **231/7**
**Savattini:** Co-wife * **231/10** **Savvadansi:** Omniscient * **144/1**
**Sasa:** Sister * **222** **Sasura:** Father-in-law * **222** **Sahas:**
Thousand * **179/2** **Sahoḍha:** Filled with stolen goods * **75,78** **Saima-
Svādima:** Sweet, delicious * **69/4** **Sāga:** 1. Vegetable, 2. Lay follower *
**73/14** **Sāgāri:** Householder * **142/1** **Sāṇa:** Dog * **208**
**Sādivva:** Grace of the gods * **199** **Sādhammī:**  One who follows the same
Dharma * **73/13** **Sāmatthaṇa:** Examination, review * **68/9** **Sāmanna:**
Common, ordinary * **295** **Sāmi:** Master, owner * **181/1** **Sāmiy:**
Related to the master * **91/2** **Sāli:** Rice * **75** **Sāvag:** Lay follower
* **157/3** **Sāvay:** Animal * **89/3** **Sāsu:** Mother-in-law * **302/1, 2**
**Sāhaṇa:** 1. To prove, 2. To state * **101/1** **Sāhammīya:**  One who follows
the same Dharma * **72** **Sāharaṇa:** Collection, a fault in begging *
**263,291** **Sāhariya:** A fault in begging, thrown elsewhere * **237**
**Sāhā:** Branch * **260,263** **Sāharaṇa:** 1. A fault in begging, thrown
elsewhere, 2. Common, ordinary * **156** **Sāhu:** Virtuous one * **36**
**Siṁha:** Horn, tusk * **113** **Siṁha:**  Shrinking, fading * **135/1**
**Siṭṭha:** Spoken, said * **220** **Siṇiddha:** Smooth, oily * **219/11**
**Siṇeha:** Love, affection * **219/8** **Siti:** Ladder * **284**
**Siddatthag:**  A type of flower * **143, 207, 207/4** **Sipp:** Skill, craft *
**34** **Sippi:** Shell * **163/1** **Silā:** Stone * **288/3** **Siv:**
Auspicious, peaceful * **323** **Sī:** Cold * **120** **Sīti:** Ladder * **323**
**Sīda:** To bear fruit

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pari. 19 : zabdArtha 343 smogaaddh-smvgaaddh'| 41/2 smotaar-smvtaar| 91/4
smosrnn-saadhu-smudaay| 131 smm-smyk| 207/2 smmtt-smyktv| 57/4 sarakkha-1. rAkha
se avaguMThita, 37, 2. sarajaska, sacitta kaNoM se yukt| 243/1 saraDu-zalAdu,
koml| sarAva-zarAva, sikoraa| 57/2 sariccha-sadRza, smaan| 89 sris-sdRsh| 192/2
srisiy-sdRsh| 318/1 sriir-shriir| 136/1 sruuv-svruup| 74 savatti-sapatnI, saut|
231/7 savattiNI-sapatnI, saut| 231/10 svvdNsi-srvjny| sasA-svasA, bhin| 144/1
ssur-shvsur| 222 sahasa-sahasra, hjaar| sahoDha-corI ke mAla se yukt| 179/2
saaim-svaadim| 75,78 saau-svaadu| 69/4 sAga-1. zAka, 40, 2. shraavk| 73/14
saagaari-gRhsth| 142/1 saann-shvaan| 208 sAdivva-deva kA anugrh| 199 saadhmmi-
saadhrmik| 73/13 saamtthnn-pryaalocn| 68/9 saamnn-saamaany| 179 saami-svaamii|
295 sAmiya-svAmI smbndhii| 181/1 saal-shaakhaa| 91/2 saali-caavl| 75 saavg-
shraavk| 157/3 saavy-shvaapd| 89/3 saasu-saas| 222 sAhaNa-1. siddha karanA,
302/1, 2. kathana krnaa| 101/1 saahmmiy-saadhaarmik| 72 sAharaNa-
saMharaNa,bhikSA kA eka doss| 263,291 sAhariya-bhikSA kA eka doSa, anyatra
kssipt| 237 saahaa-shaakhaa| 231/4 sAhAraNa-1. anyatra kSipta bhikSA kA eka
doSa, 260,263, 2. saamaany| 313/3 saahii-glii| 156 saahu-saadhu| 77,295 siMga-
zrRMga, siiNg| 36 sijhaMta-sIjhate hue| 113 siTTha-kathita, kahA huaa| 135/1
sinniddh-snigdh| 220 siNeha-sneha, prem| 219/11 siti-siiddh'ii| 219/8
siddhatthaga-siddhArthaka nAmaka pussp| 284 sipp-shilp| 143, 207, 207/4 sippi-
shukti| 34 silA-zilA, paassaannkhNdd| 163/1 siva-ziva, upshaant| 288/3 sii-
shiit| sIti-zriti, siiddh'ii| * siid-phlnaa| 323 120

Page #516 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
344 Pindaniyukti 48 75 Seevanni-Shripurni fruit. 53/2 Sejja-Shayya. Sees-1.
Shirsha, Sir, Sejjatari-Shayyatari, Sadhu ko 2. Shishya.  Place giving. 202
Sihkesaray-Singhkesharak Modak. 216,220/1 Sedangali-Shwetangali. A type of Sui-
Shuchi, Pavitra. 288/3 Woman head man. 219/6 Suivva-Upcoming time related. 105
Ses-Shesh. 66/1 Sunthi-Jhooth. Seh-Shaiksh. 22/5 Sukkari-Shushk Kati, Thin
waist. 198/15 Sehar-Shikha wala. 87 Sunag-Kutta. 86 Sokkh-Saukhya, Sukh se yukt.
96/2 Sunn-Shunya. 70/5 Soniy-Rakt, Shonit. 245/2 Sunha-Putravadhu. 173 Sot-
Shrotra. 96/3 Sut-1. Sut, Putra, 194/1, Sottiy-Shrotriya Brahman / 207/1 2.
Shruta. 239/1 Sovan-Sopan. 170 Suttatthan-Acharya. 143 Sovir-Sauvir, Kanjik.
40,295/7 Sutnaani-Shrutagyani. 239 Sohit-Shodhit. 240/2 Sutovauutt-Shruta mein
upyukt. 239/1 Handi-Invitation indicating avyay. 94/1, Sut-Sutra. 240 173/3
Suddh-Shuddha. 75 Hat-Pratihat. 91/2 Sunn-Shunya. 156/1 Hatth-Haath. 19 Suy-
Coming time. 128/2 Hatthkapp-Hastakalp named city. 216 Suratt-Saurashtra. 89/5
Hatthi-Haathi. 54/1 Sura-Sharab. 86/2 Hatthichhag-Hand's ornament. 198/13
Susakkay-Susanskrit. Harit-Hariyali. 255 Suh-Sukh. 102 Hingu-Heeng. 112 Suhum-
Sookshma. 116/2 Hitthill-Adhastan, Niche ka. 73/20 Suit-Soochit. 212 Hit-Stolen.
145 Subhagar-Soubhagya karne wala. 231/1 Hiyay-Hriday. 61/1 Suya-Clearly skill
Hirim-Lajjavann / 240/1 reveal. 206 He?-Adhah, Niche ka. Surodya-Suryaodaya
named garden. 91 / / Heththamuhi-Adhamukhi. 114 Suv-Soup. 297 - Hom-Havan etc.
action / 207/1

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
344 piMDaniyukti 48 75 sIvaNNI-zrIparNI phl| 53/2 sejjaa-shyyaa| sIsa-1. zIrSa,
sira , sejjAtarI-zayyAtarI, sAdhu ko 2. shissy| sthAna dene vaalii| 202
sIhakesaraya-siMhakezaraka modk| 216,220/1 seDaMgali-zvetAGgali. eka prakAra kA
sui-zuci, pvitr| 288/3 mahilA pradhAna puruss| 219/6 suivva-AgAmI kAla se
smbndhit| 105 ses-shess| 66/1 suNtthii-jhuutth| seh-shaikss| 22/5 sukkar3I-zuSka
kaTI, patalI kmr| 198/15 sehara-zikhA vaalaa| 87 sunng-kuttaa| 86 sokkha-
saukhya, sukha se yukt| 96/2 sunnnn-shuuny| 70/5 soNiya-rakta, shonnit| 245/2
sunnhaa-putrvdhuu| 173 sot-shrotr| 96/3 suta-1. suta, putra, 194/1, sottiya-
zrotriya brAhmaNa / 207/1 2. shrut| 239/1 sovaann-sopaan| 170 suttttthaann-
aacaary| 143 sovIra-sauvIra, kaanyjik| 40,295/7 sutnaanni-shrutjnyaanii| 239
sohit-shodhit| 240/2 sutovautta-zruta meM upyukt| 239/1 haMdi-AmaMtraNa sUcaka
avyy| 94/1, sutt-suutr| 240 173/3 suddh-shuddh| 75 ht-prtiht| 91/2 sunn-shuuny|
156/1 htth-haath| 19 suya-Ane vAlA kl| 128/2 hatthakappa-hastakalpa nAmaka ngr|
216 surtttth-sauraassttr| 89/5 htthi-haathii| 54/1 suraa-shraab| 86/2
hatthiccaga-hAtha kA aabhuussnn| 198/13 suskky-susNskRt| hrit-hriyaalii| 255
suh-sukh| 102 hiNgu-hiiNg| 112 suhum-suukssm| 116/2 hiTThilla-adhastana, nIce
kaa| 73/20 suuit-suucit| 212 hita-curAyA huaa| 145 sUbhagakara-saubhAgya karane
vaalaa| 231/1 hiyy-hRdy| 61/1 sUyA-spaSTa rUpa se kauzala hirima-lajjAvAn /
240/1 prakaTa krnaa| 206 he?-adhaH, nIce kaa| sUrodaya-sUryodaya nAmaka udyaan|
91 / / hetttthaamuhii-adh:mukhii| 114 suuv-suup| 297 - homa-havana Adi kriyA /
207/1

Page #517 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
(Appendix-20 Indicative Bibliography)  **End**  **Pin**  **Anvi**  **Av**
**An**  **Adha**  **A**  **Achula**  **Ani**  **Aavchu**  **Aavni**  **Aavmati**
**Aavahati**  **Prasha**  **Isi**  **Uni**  **Ushavru**  **Oni**  **Onity**
**Obha**  **Obhati**  **Manu**  **Mavru**  **Antakruddasha**  **Pinprati**
**Angvijjya**  **Avchuri**  **Pinimvru**  **Anngardharmamrut**  **Pibha**
**Ayaru**  **Acharaang**  **Chula**  **Prav**  **Acharaangniyukti**
**Aavashyak**  **Churni**  **Prashati**  **Aavashyakniyukti**  **Bribha**
**Aavashyak**  **Malaygiriyaa**  **Tika**  **Bribhati**  **Aavashyak**
**Haribhadriya**  **Tika**  **Bribhapi**  **Isibaasiyaa**  **Bha**
**Uttaraadhyaayan**  **Bhag**  **Uttaraadhyaayanniyukti**  **Bhag**  **Bha.**
**Uttaraadhyaayan**  **Shaantyaacharyavritti**  **Bhati**  **Oghanniyukti**
**Bhapa**  **Oghanniyukti**  **Tika**  **Oghanniyukti**  **Bhaashya**
**Oghanniyukti**  **Bhaashya**  **Tika**  **Maha**  **Kautiliyaa**
**Arthashatra**  **Mula**  **Charitrasar**  **Jitkalpbhaashya**  **Mopa**
**Jitkalpsutra**  **Raj**  **Jnatadharmakatha**  **Rava**  **Dashavaikalik**
**Vibha**  **Dashavaikalik**  **Agastyasinghachurni**  **Vibamaheti**
**Dashavaikalik**  **Jindasachurni**  **Dashavaikalik**  **Niyukti**
**Vibhasvoti**  **Dashavaikalik**  **Haribhadriya**  **Tika**
**Dashaashrutaskandha**  **Vivru**  **Drashtavya**  **Nishith**  **Vyabha**
**Nishithachurni**  **Sam**  **Nishith**  **Pithika**  **Bhumika**  **Samti**
**Nishithbhaashya**  **Panchkalpbhaashya**  **Suti**  **Panchashak**
**Prakarana**  **Stha**  **Panchavastu**  **Shati**  **Pindavishuddhiprakarana**
**Hupu**  **FIZE-?llsvisi pribal l = iu-te**  **Ko**
**Pindavishuddhiprakarana**  **Tika**  **Pindaniyukti**  **Pindaniyukti**
**Malaygiriyaa**  **Tika**  **Pindaniyukti**  **Bhaashya**
**Prashnavyaakarana**  **Pravachansar**  **Pravachansaroddhar**
**Pravachansaroddhar**  **Tika**  **Brihatkalpbhaashya**  **Brihatkalpbhaashya**
**Tika**  **Brihatkalpbhaashya**  **Pithika**  **Bhagavati**  **Aaradhana**
**Bhagavati**  **Bhagavati**  **Bhaashya**  **Bhagavati**  **Tika**
**Bhaavapahudu**  **Manusmriti**  **Pindaniyukti**  **Malaygiriyaa**  **Vritti**
**Mahabharat**  **Mulaachar**  **Mulaachar**  **Tika**  **Mokshapahudu**
**Rajprashniya**  **Tattvarth**  **Rajvartik**  **Visheshaavashyak**
**Bhaashya**  **Visheshaavashyak**  **Maladhari**  **Hemchandra**  **Tika**
**Visheshaavashyak**  **Bhaashya**  **Svopgyan**  **Tika**  **Pindaniyukti**
**Ki**  **Viraacharya**  **Krit**  **Vritti**  **Vyavaharabhaashya**
**Samavao**  **Samavaayaang**  **Tika**  **Suygado**  **Sutrakritang**  **Tika**
**Sthaanaang**  **Sthaanaang**  **Tika**  **Harivansha**  **Puraan**  **Chasa**
**Mulaati**  **Jibha**  **Jisu**  **Jna**  **Dasha**  **Dashaachoo**
**Dashajichoo**  **Dashani**  **Dashahati**  **Dashru**  **Ni**  **Nichu**
**Nipibhu**  **Nibha**  **Pankbha**  **Pancha**  **Panv**  **Pinpr**

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
(pariziSTa-20 saMketa graMtha sUcI aMta pini aMvi ava anadha A AcUlA Ani AvacU
Avani AvamaTI AvahATI prasA isi uni uzAMvR oni oniTI obhA obhATI manu mavR
aMtakRddazA piMpraTI aMgavijjA avacUri pinimavR anagAradharmAmRta pibhA AyAro
AcArAMga cUlA prava AcArAMganiyukti Avazyaka cUrNi prasATI Avazyakaniyukti bRbhA
Avazyaka malayagirIyA TIkA bRbhATI Avazyaka hAribhadrIya TIkA bRbhApI
isibhAsiyAI bhaA uttarAdhyayana bhaga uttarAdhyayananiyukti bhaga bhA.
uttarAdhyayana zAMtyAcAryavRtti bhaTI oghaniyukti bhApA oghaniyukti TIkA
oghaniyukti bhASya oghaniyukti bhASya TIkA mahA kauTilIya arthazAstra mUlA
cAritrasAra jItakalpabhASya mopA jItakalpasUtra rAja jJAtAdharmakathA rAvA
dazavaikAlika vibhA dazavaikAlika agastyasiMhacUrNi vibhAmaheTI dazavaikAlika
jinadAsacUrNi dazavaikAlika niyukti vibhAsvoTI dazavaikAlika hAribhadrIya TIkA
dazAzrutaskandha vIvR draSTavya nizItha vyabhA nizIthacUrNi sama nizItha pIThikA
bhUmikA samaTI nizIthabhASya paMcakalpabhASya sUTI paMcAzaka prakaraNa sthA
paMcavastu sthATI piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa hapu FIZE-?llsvisi pribal l = iu-te ko
piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa TIkA piNDaniyukti piNDaniyukti malayagirIyA TIkA
piNDaniyukti bhASya praznavyAkaraNa pravacanasAra pravacanasAroddhAra
pravacanasAroddhAra TIkA bRhatkalpabhASya bRhatkalpabhASya TIkA bRhatkalpabhASya
pIThikA bhagavatI ArAdhanA bhagavatI bhagavatI bhASya bhagavatI TIkA bhAvapAhuDa
manusmRti piNDaniyukti malayagirIyA vRtti mahAbhArata mUlAcAra mUlAcAra TIkA
mokSapAhuDa rAjapraznIya tattvArtha rAjavArtika vizeSAvazyaka bhASya .
vizeSAvazyaka maladhArI hemacandra TIkA vizeSAvazyaka bhASya svopajJa TIkA
piNDaniyukti kI vIrAcArya kRta vRtti vyavahArabhASya samavAo samavAyAMga TIkA
sUyagaDo sUtrakRtAMga TIkA sthAnAMga sthAnAMga TIkA harivaMza purANa cAsA mUlATI
jIbhA jIsU jJA daza dazaacU dazajicU dazani dazahATI dazru ni nicU nipIbhU nibhA
paMkabhA paMcA paMva piMpra

Page #518 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
**Appendix-21 Bibliography**  **Primary Sources**  * **Angavijja** - Muni
Punyavijay, Prakrit Text Society, Banaras, 1957 * **Antakriddasa** (Angasuttaani
Bha. 3) - Acharya Tulasi, Ed. Muni Nathmal, Jain Vishva Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.),
2031 * **Anugardharmamrita** - Ed. Pt. Kailashchandra Shastri, Bharatiya
Gyanpeeth, Delhi, 1977 * **Ashtakprakaranam** - Prof. Sagarmal Jain, Parshvanath
Vidyapeeth and Prakrit Bharati Academy, Jaipur, 2000 * **Ashtapahuḍ** - Acharya
Kundakunda, Ed. Dr. Hukamchand Bharill, Shri Kundakunda Kahana Digambar Jain
Tirth, Jaipur, 1994 * **Acharachula** (Angasuttaani Bha. 1) - Acharya Tulasi,
Ed. Muni Nathmal, Jain Vishva Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.), 2031 * **Acharang Churni**
- Jinadasagani, Shri Rishabhdev Kesharimal Shwe. Sanstha, Ratlam, 1941 *
**Acharang Niyukti (Niyuktipanchak)** - Acharya Tulasi, Ed. Acharya Mahapragya,
Ed. Samani Kusumpragya, Jain Vishva Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.), 1999 * **Adipurana**
- Acharya Jinasena, Bharatiya Gyanpeeth, Delhi, 1993 * **Ayaroo** - Acharya
Tulasi, Ed. Muni Nathmal, Jain Vishva Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.), 2031 * **Aavashyak
Churni** - Acharya Jinadas, Shri Rishabhdev Kesharimal Shwe. Sanstha, Ratlam,
1929 * **Aavashyak Niyukti** - Ed. Dr. Samani Kusumpragya, Jain Vishva Bharati
Sansthan, Ladnun (Raj.), 2001 * **Aavashyak Malayagiri Tika Bha. 1** - Seth
Devchand Lalbhai Jain Pustakodhar and Agamoday Samiti, Mumbai, 1928 *
**Aavashyak Haribhadriya Tika Bha. 1** - Acharya Haribhadra, Bhairoolal
Kanhaiyalal Kothari Dharmic Trust, Mumbai, 2038 * **Aavashyak Haribhadriya Tika
Bha. 2** - Ibid. Ishibhasiyaai - Edited, Unpublished, Jain Vishva Bharati,
Ladnun (Raj.) * **Uttaraadhyayana** - Acharya Tulasi, Ed. Acharya Mahapragya,
Jain Vishva Bharati Sansthan, 1993 * **Uttaraadhyayana Niyukti (Niyukti
Panchak)** - Acharya Bhadrabahu, Acharya Tulasi, Ed. Acharya Mahapragya, Ed. Dr.
Samani Kusumpragya, Jain Vishva Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.), 1999 * **Uttaraadhyayana
Shantyacharyavritti** - Devchand Lalbhai Jain Pustakodhar Fund, Mumbai, 1973 *
**Rigveda** - Pt. Shriram Sharma, Sanskriti Sansthan, (Vednagar) Bareilly, 1969

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pariziSTa-21 prayukta graMtha sUcI mUlagraMtha sUcI aMgavijjA-saM. muni
puNyavijaya, prAkRta TeksTa sosAyaTI, banArasa, san 1957 /
aMtakRddazA-(aMgasuttANi bhA. 3) vApra. AcArya tulasI, saM. muni nathamala,
jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.), vi. saM. 2031 / anagAradharmAmRta-saM.
paM. kailAzacandra zAstrI, bhAratIya jJAnapITha, dillI, san 1977 /
aSTakaprakaraNam-pro. sAgaramala jaina, pArzvanAtha vidyApITha evaM prAkRta
bhAratI akAdamI, jayapura, san 2000 / aSTapAhur3a-AcArya kuMdakuMda, saM. DaoN.
hukamacanda bhArilla, zrI kuMdakuMda kahAna digambara jaina tIrtha, jayapura,
san 1994 / AcAracUlA-(aMgasuttANi bhA. 1) vApra. AcArya tulasI, saM. muni
nathamala, jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.), vi. saM. 2031 / AcArAMga cUrNi-
jinadAsagaNi, zrI RSabhadeva kezarImala zve. saMsthA, ratalAma, san 1941 /
AcArAMga niyukti (niyuktipaMcaka)-vApra. AcArya tulasI, prasaM. AcArya
mahAprajJa, saM. samaNI kusumaprajJA, jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.), san
1999 / AdipurANaA. jinasena, bhAratIya jJAnapITha, dillI, san 1993 / AyAro-
vApra. AcArya tulasI, saM. muni nathamala, jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.),
vi. saM. 2031 / Avazyaka cUrNi-AcArya jinadAsa, zrI RSabhadeva kezarImala zve.
saMsthA, ratalAma, san 1929 / Avazyakaniyukti-saM. DA. samaNI kusumaprajJA,
jaina vizva bhAratI saMsthAna, lADanUM (rAja.), san 2001 / Avazyaka malayagiri
TIkA bhA. 1-seTha devacandra lAlabhAI jaina pustakoddhAra evaM Agamodaya samiti,
mumbaI, san 1928 / Avazyaka hAribhadrIyA TIkA-bhA. 1 AcArya haribhadra,
bhairulAla kanhaiyAlAla koThArI dhArmika TrasTa, mumbaI, vi. saM. 2038 /
Avazyaka hAribhadrIyA TIkA bhA. 2-vhii| isibhAsiyAI-sampAdita, aprakAzita, jaina
vizva bhAratI, lADanUM (raaj.)| uttarAdhyayana-vApra. AcArya talasI. saM.
yavAcArya mahAprajJa, jaina vizva bhAratI saMsthAna, sana 1993 / uttarAdhyayana
niyukti (niyukti paMcaka)-AcArya bhadrabAhu, vApra. AcArya tulasI, prasaM.
AcArya mahAprajJa, saM. DaoN. samaNI kusumaprajJA, jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM
(rAja.), san 1999 / uttarAdhyayana zAMtyAcAryavRtti-devacandra lAlabhAI jaina
pustakoddhAra phaNDa, mumbaI, san 1973 / Rgveda-paM. zrIrAma zarmA, saMskRti
saMsthAna, (vedanagara) barelI, san 1969 /

Page #519 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ref. 21: Bibliography 347  Oghaniiyukti-Acharya Bhadrabahu, Shri Agamoday
Samiti, Mehsana, 1919 / Oghaniiyukti Teeka-Dronacharya, Shri Agamoday Samiti,
Mehsana, 1919 / Oghaniiyukti Bhashya-Shri Agamoday Samiti, Mehsana, 1919 /
Kathopanishad-Ed. Dr. Bajnath Pandey, Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1977 /
Kautiliya Arthashastra-Ed. Vachaspati Gairola, Chaukhambha Vidya Bhavan,
Varanasi, 1991 / Charitrasar-Mahavirajee, V.N. 2488 / Jambudvipaprajnapti Teeka-
Nagiinabhai Ghelabhai Jhaveri, Mumbai, 1920 / Jitakalp Bhashya-Jinabhadragani
Kshamasraman, Ed. Muni Punyavijay, Babulchandra Keshavlal Modi, Ahmedabad, _
V.S. 1994 / Jitakalp Sutra-Ed. Muni Jinavijay, Jain Sahitya Sanshodhak Samiti,
Ahmedabad, V.S. 1982 / Jaindharmavarastotra-Devchand Lalbhai Jain Pustakodhar
Sanstha, Surat, 1933 / Jnatadharmakatha-Vapr. Acharya Tulasi, Ed. Acharya
Mahapragya, Jain Vishva Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.), 2003 / Dashavaikalik
Agastyasinghachurni-Ed. Muni Punyavijay, Prakrit Granth Parishad, Ahmedabad,
1973 / Dashavaikalik Jinadaschurni-Jinadasgani, Shri Rishabhdev Kesharimal Shwe.
Sanstha, Ratlam, 1933 / Dashavaikalik Niyukti (Niyuktipachak)-Acharya
Bhadrabahu, Vapr. Acharya Tulasi, Ed. Acharya Mahapragya, Ed. Samani
Kusumprajna, Jain Vishva Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.), 1999 / Dashavaikalik
Haribhadriya Teeka-Acharya Haribhadra, Devchandra Lalbhai Jain Pustakodhar,
Surat. Dashashrutaskandha (Navasuttani)-Vapr. Acharya Tulasi, Ed. Yuvacharya
Mahapragya, Jain Vishva Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.), 1987 / Divyavadan-Ed. Dr. P.L.
Vaidya, Mithila Sansthan, Darbhanga, 1959 / Dvatrinshad Dvatrinshika-Acharya
Yashovijay, Divya Darshan Trust, Dholka, V.S. 2060 / Nandi Vapr. Acharya Tulasi,
Ed. Acharya Mahapragya, Jain Vishva Bharati Sansthan, Ladnun (Raj.), 1997 /
Niyukti Panchak-Vapr. Acharya Tulasi, Ed. Acharya Mahapragya, Ed. Samani
Kusumprajna, Jain Vishva Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.), 1999 / Nishita
(Navasuttani)-Vapr. Acharya Tulasi, Ed. Yuvacharya Mahapragya, Jain Vishva
Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.), 1987 / Nishita Churni Bha. 1-4-Ed. Upadhyay Amarmuni,
Sanmati Gyanapith, Agra, 1982 / Nishita Bhashya Bha. 1-4-Muni Kanhaiyalal,
Sanmati Gyanapith, Agra, 1982 / Panchkalp Bhashya-Ed. Labhasagargani,
Agamoddhark Granthamala, V.S. 2028 / Panchavastu-Devchandra Lalbhai Jain
Pustakodhar Sanstha, Surat, 1927 / Panchashak Prakaran-Ni. Prof. Sagarmal Jain,
Ed. Dr. Dinanath Sharma, Parshvanath Vidyapeeth, Varanasi, 1997 /

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pari. 21 : prayukta graMtha sUcI 347 oghaniyukti-AcArya bhadrabAhu, zrI
Agamodaya samiti, mahesANA, san 1919 / oghaniyukti TIkA-droNAcArya, zrI
Agamodaya samiti, mahesANA, san 1919 / oghaniyukti bhASya-zrI Agamodaya samiti,
mahesANA, san 1919 / kaThopaniSad-saM. DaoN. baijanAtha pANDeya, motIlAla
banArasIdAsa, dillI, san 1977 / kauTilIya arthazAstra-saM. vAcaspati gairolA,
caukhambhA vidyA bhavana, vArANasI, san 1991 / cAritrasAra-mahAvIrajI, vI ni.
san 2488 / jaMbUdvIpaprajJapti TIkA-nagInabhAI ghelAbhAI jhaverI, mumbaI, san
1920 / jItakalpabhASya-jinabhadragaNi kSamAzramaNa, saM. muni puNyavijaya,
babalacandra kezavalAla modI, ahamadAbAda, _ vi. saM. 1994 / jItakalpasUtra-saM.
muni jinavijaya, jaina sAhitya saMzodhaka samiti, ahamadAbAda, vi. saM. 1982 /
jainadharmavarastotra-devacaMda lAlabhAI jaina pustakoddhAra saMsthA, sUrata,
san 1933 / jJAtAdharmakathA-vApra. AcArya tulasI, saM. AcArya mahAprajJa, jaina
vizva bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.), san 2003 / dazavaikAlika agastyasiMhacUrNi-saM.
muni puNyavijaya, prAkRta grantha pariSad, ahamadAbAda, san 1973 / dazavaikAlika
jinadAsacUrNi-jinadAsagaNI, zrI RSabhadeva kezarImala zve. saMsthA, ratalAma,
san 1933 / dazavaikAlika niyukti (niyuktipaMcaka)-AcArya bhadrabAhu, vApra.
AcArya tulasI, prasaM. AcArya mahAprajJa, saM. samaNI kusumaprajJA, jaina vizva
bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.), san 1999 / dazavaikAlika hAribhadrIyA TIkA-AcArya
haribhadra, devacandra lAlabhAI jaina pustakoddhAra, suurt| dazAzrutaskandha
(navasuttANi)-vApra. AcArya tulasI, saM. yuvAcArya mahAprajJa, jaina vizva
bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.), san 1987 / divyAvadAna-saM. DaoN. pI. ela. vaidya,
mithilA saMsthAna, darabhaMgA, san 1959 / dvAtriMzad dvAtriMzikA-AcArya
yazovijaya, divya darzana TrasTa, dholakA, vi. saM. 2060 / naMdIvApra. AcArya
tulasI, saM. AcArya mahAprajJa, jaina vizva bhAratI saMsthAna, lADanUM (rAja.),
san 1997 / niyukti paMcaka-vApra. AcArya tulasI, prasaM. AcArya mahAprajJa, saM.
samaNI kusumaprajJA, jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.), san 1999 / nizItha
(navasuttANi)-vApra. AcArya tulasI, saM. yuvAcArya mahAprajJa, jaina vizva
bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.), san 1987 / nizItha cUrNi bhA. 1-4-saM. upAdhyAya
amaramuni, sanmati jJAnapITha, AgarA, san 1982 / nizItha bhASya bhA. 1-4-muni
kanhaiyAlAla, sanmati jJAnapITha, AgarA, san 1982 / paMcakalpabhASya-saM.
lAbhasAgaragaNi, AgamoddhAraka graMthamAlA, vi.saM. 2028 / paMcavastu-devacandra
lAlabhAI jaina pustakoddhAra saMsthA, sUrata, san 1927 / paMcAzaka prakaraNa-ni.
pro. sAgaramala jaina, saM. DaoN. dInAnAtha zarmA, pArzvanAtha vidyApITha,
vArANasI, san 1997 /

Page #520 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
* **Piṇḍaniyukti Piṇḍaniyukti Avacūri** - Śrī Devacandra Lālbhāī Jain
Pustakoddhar, Mumbai, 1958 * **Piṇḍaniyukti Malayagiri Ṭīkā** - Devacandra
Lālbhāī Jain Pustakoddhar, Mumbai, 1918 * **Piṇḍaviśuddhiprakaraṇa** - Śrī
Jinavallabhasūri, Jñānabhaṇḍāra Śītalavāḍī Upāśraya, Surat, Vi.Sa. 2011 *
**Piṇḍaviśuddhiprakaraṇa Ṭīkā** - Śrī Jinavallabhasūri, Jñānabhaṇḍāra Śītalavāḍī
Upāśraya, Surat, Vi.Sa. 2011 * **Pravacanasāra** - Ācārya Kundakunda, Śrī
Paramasruta Prabhāvaka Maṇḍala, Śrīmad Rājacandra Āśrama, Agās, Vi.Sa. 2040 *
**Pravacanasārōddhāra** - Devacandra Lālbhāī Jain Pustakoddhar, Surat, 1926 *
**Pravacanasārōddhāra Ṭīkā** - Devacandra Lālbhāī Jain Pustakoddhar, Surat, 1926
* **Praśnavyākaraṇa (Angasuttāṇi Bhā. 3)** - Vāpra. Ācārya Tulasi, Sa. Muni
Nathmal, Jain Viśva Bhārati, Lāḍanū (Rāj.), Vi.Sa. 2031 * **Praśnavyākaraṇa
Ṭīkā** - Śrī Abhaydevasūri, Śrī Āgamōdaya Samiti, 1919 * **Bṛhatkalpabhāṣya Bhā.
1-6** - Sa. Muni Caturvijaya, Śrī Jain Ātmānanda Sabhā, Bhāvanagar, 2002 *
**Bṛhatkalpabhāṣya Ṭīkā** - Sa. Muni Puṇyavijaya, Jain Ātmānanda Sabhā,
Bhāvanagar, 2002 * **Bhagavati (Angasuttāṇi-2)** - Vāpra. Ācārya Tulasi, Sa.
Yuvācārya Mahāprajña, Jain Viśva Bhārati, Lāḍanū (Rāj.), Vi.Sa. 2049 *
**Bhagavati Ārādhanā** - Sa. Pa. Kailāśacandra Śāstri, Jain Saṃskṛti Saraṇakṣaka
Saṅgha, Śolāpur, 1978 * **Bhagavati Ṭīkā** - Ācārya Abhaydevasūri, Āgamōdaya
Samiti, Mumbai, 1918 * **Bhagavati Bhāṣya Bhā. 1** - Vāpra. Gaṇādhipati Tulasi,
Sa. Ācārya Mahāprajña, Jain Viśva Bhārati Saṃsthāna, Lāḍanū (Rāj.), 1994 *
**Bhagavati Bhāṣya Bhā. 2** - Vāpra. Ācārya Tulasi, Sa. Ācārya Mahāprajña, Jain
Viśva Bhārati, Lāḍanū (Rāj.), 2000 * **Bhagavati Bhāṣya Bhā. 3** - Vāpra. Ācārya
Tulasi, Sa. Ācārya Mahāprajña, Jain Viśva Bhārati, Lāḍanū (Rāj.), 2005 *
**Bhagavati Bhāṣya Bhā. 4** - Vāpra. Ācārya Tulasi, Sa. Ācārya Mahāprajña, Jain
Viśva Bhārati, Lāḍanū (Rāj.), 2007 * **Bhāvapahūḍa (Aṣṭapahūḍa)** - Sa. Dr.
Hukamcand Bharill, Śrī Kundakunda Kahān Digambara Jain Tīrtha Surakṣā Trust,
Jaipur, 1994 * **Majjhimanikāya** - Sa. Bhikkhu Je Kaśyapa, Pāli Prakāśana
Maṇḍala, Bihar, 1958 * **Manusmṛti** - Sa. Gopālaśāstri Nene, Caukhambhā
Saṃskṛta Saṃsthāna, Vārāṇasi, Vi. Sa. 2063 * **Mūlācāra Bhā. 1** - Ācārya
Vaṭṭaker, Bhāratiya Jñānapīṭha, Delhi, 1992 * **Mūlācāra Bhā. 2** - Pa.
Kailāśacandraśāstri, Bhāratiya Jñānapīṭha, Delhi, 1986 * **Mūlācāra Ṭīkā** - Sa.
Pa. Kailāśacandraśāstri, Bhāratiya Jñānapīṭha, Delhi, 1992 * **Mokṣapahūḍa
(Aṣṭapahūḍa)** - Sa. Dr. Hukamcand Bharill, Śrī Kundakunda Kahān Digambara Jain
Tīrtha Surakṣā Trust, Jaipur, 1994

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
348 piMDaniyukti piNDaniyukti avacUri-zrI devacandra lAlabhAI jaina
pustakoddhAra, mumbaI, san 1958 / piNDaniyukti malayagiri TIkA-devacandra
lAlabhAI jaina pustakoddhAra, mumbaI, san 1918 / piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa-zrI
jinavallabhasUri, jJAnabhaNDAra zItalavAr3I upAzraya, sUrata, vi.saM. 2011 /
piNDavizuddhiprakaraNa TIkA-zrI jinavallabhasUri, jJAnabhaNDAra zItalavAr3I
upAzraya, sUrata, vi.saM. 2011 / pravacanasAra-AcArya kuMdakuMda, zrI
paramazruta prabhAvaka maNDala, zrImad rAjacandra Azrama, agAsa, vi.saM. 2040 /
pravacanasAroddhAra-devacandra lAlabhAI jaina pustakoddhAra, sUrata, san 1926 /
/ pravacanasAroddhAraTIkA-devacandra lAlabhAI jaina pustakoddhAra, sUrata, san
1926 / praznavyAkaraNa (aMgasuttANi bhA. 3)-vApra. AcArya tulasI, saM. muni
nathamala, jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.), vi.saM. 2031 / praznavyAkaraNa
TIkA-zrI abhayadevasUri, zrI Agamodaya samiti, san 1919 / bRhatkalpabhASya bhA.
1-6-saM. muni caturavijaya, zrI jaina AtmAnanda sabhA, bhAvanagara, san 2002 /
bRhatkalpabhASya TIkA-saM. muni puNyavijaya, jaina AtmAnanda sabhA, bhAvanagara,
san 2002 / bhagavatI (aMgasuttANi-2)-vApra. AcArya tulasI, saM. yuvAcArya
mahAprajJa, jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.), vi.saM. 2049 / bhagavatI
ArAdhanA-saM. paM. kailAzacandra zAstrI, jaina saMskRti saMrakSaka saMgha,
zolApura, san 1978 / bhagavatI TIkA-AcArya abhayadevasUri, Agamodaya samiti,
mumbaI, san 1918 / bhagavatI bhASya bhA. 1-vApra. gaNAdhipati tulasI, saM.
AcArya mahAprajJa, jaina vizva bhAratI saMsthAna, lADanUM (rAja.), san 1994 /
bhagavatI bhASya bhA. 2-vApra. AcArya tulasI, saM. AcArya mahAprajJa, jaina
vizva bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.), san 2000 / bhagavatI bhASya bhA. 3-vApra. AcArya
tulasI, saM. AcArya mahAprajJa, jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.), san 2005 /
bhagavatI bhASya bhA. 4-vApra. AcArya tulasI, saM. AcArya mahAprajJa, jaina
vizva bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.), san 2007 / bhAvapAhur3a (aSTapAhur3a)-saM. DaoN.
hukamacanda bhArilla, zrI kuMdakuMda kahAna digambara jaina tIrtha surakSA
TrasTa, jayapura, san 1994 majjhimanikAya-saM. bhikkhu je kazyapa, pAli
prakAzana maNDala, bihAra, san 1958 / manusmRti-saM. gopAlazAstrI nene,
caukhambhA saMskRta saMsthAna, vArANasI, vi. saM. 2063 / mUlAcAra bhA. 1-AcArya
vaTTakera, bhAratIya jJAnapITha, dillI, san 1992 / mUlAcAra bhA. 2-paM.
kailAzacandrazAstrI, bhAratIya jJAnapITha, dillI, san 1986 / mUlAcAra TIkA-saM.
paM. kailAzacandrazAstrI, bhAratIya jJAnapITha, dillI, san 1992 / mokSapAhur3a
(aSTapAhur3a)-saM. DaoN. hukamacanda bhArilla, zrI kuMdakuMda kahAna digambara
jaina tIrtha surakSA TrasTa, jayapura, san 1994 /

Page #521 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Ref. 21: Bibliography 349 Rajaprasniya (Uvangasuttaani Khand 1)-Vapr. Acharya
Tulasi, Ed. Yuvacharya Mahaprajna, Jain Vishva Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.), 1989 /
Rajaprasniya Teeka-Gurjar Granthratna Karyalaya, Ahmedabad, VS 1994 /
Rajavartika-Ed. Prof. Mahendra Kumar Jain, Bharatiya Gyanpeeth, Delhi, 1990 /
Vasudevahindi-Sanghadasagani, Muni Chaturvijay, Muni Punyavijay, Gujarat Sahitya
Academy, 1989 / Visheshavashyakbhashya-A. Jinbhadragani Kshamasraman, Divya
Darshan Trust, Mumbai, VS 2039 / Visheshavashyakbhashya Svopgyna Teeka-A.
Jinbhadragani Kshamasraman, Ed. Dalsukh Bhai Malvaniya, Lalbhai Dalpatbhai
Bharatiya Sanskriti Vidya Mandir, 1968 / Vyavharbhashya-Vapr. Acharya Tulasi,
Ed. Acharya Mahaprajna, Ed. Dr. Samani Kusumprajna, Jain Vishva Bharati, Ladnun
(Raj.), 1996 / Samavao-Vapr. Acharya Tulasi, Ed. Yuvacharya Mahaprajna, Jain
Vishva Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.), 1984 / Samavayanga Teeka-Ed. A. Sagaranand,
Motilal Banarsidass Indological Trust, Delhi, 1985 / Sutrakritanga Teeka Acharya
Sheelank, Ed. Muni Jambhuvijay, Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi, 1978 / Sutrakritanga
Niyukti (Niyukti Panchak)-Vapr. Acharya Tulasi, Ed. Acharya Mahaprajna, Ed.
Samani Kusumprajna, Jain Vishva Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.), 1999 / Suygado-Vapr.
Acharya Tulasi, Ed. Acharya Mahaprajna, Jain Vishva Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.), 2006
/ Sthananga (Thanam)-Vapr. Acharya Tulasi, Ed. Muni Nathmal, Jain Vishva
Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.), 1976 / Sthananga Teeka-A. Abhaydev, Ed. Muni
Jambhuvijay, Motilal Banarsidass Indological Trust, Delhi, 1985 / Harivansh
Puran-Ed. Pannalal Jain Sahityacharya, Bharatiya Gyanpeeth, Kashi, 1962 /
Supplementary Bibliography Agam Yug Ka Jain Darshan-Pt. Dalsukh Bhai Malvaniya,
Prakrit Bharati Academy, Jaipur, 1990 / Gandharavad-Pt. Dalsukh Bhai Malvaniya-
Rajasthan Prakrit Bharati Sansthan, Jaipur, 1982 / Jain Agam: Itihas Evam
Sanskriti-Rekha Chaturvedi, Anamika Publishers and Distributors, Delhi, 2000 /
Jain Agam Sahitya Mein Bharatiya Samaj-Dr. Jagdishchandra Jain, Chaukhambha
Vidya Bhavan, Varanasi, 1965 / Jain Bauddha Aur Geeta Ke Achar Darshanon Ka
Tulnatmak Adhyayan-Prof. Sagarmal Jain, Prakrit Bharati Academy, Jaipur, 1999 /
Jain Sanskrit Mahakaavyo Mein Bharatiya Samaj-Dr. Mohanchand, Eastern Book
Linkers, Delhi, 1989 / Jain Sahitya Ka Brihad Itihas Bha. 2-Dr. Mohanlal Mehta,
Dr. Jagdishchandra Jain, Parshvanath Vidyashram, Varanasi, 1989 /

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
pari. 21 : prayukta graMtha sUcI 349 rAjapraznIya (uvaMgasuttANi khaNDa
1)-vApra. AcArya tulasI, saM. yuvAcArya mahAprajJa, jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM
(rAja.), san 1989 / rAjapraznIya TIkA-gUrjara graMtharatna kAryAlaya,
ahamadAbAda, vi.saM. 1994 / rAjavArtika-saM. pro. mahendrakumAra jaina,
bhAratIya jJAnapITha, dillI, san 1990 / vasudevahiMDI-saMghadAsagaNi, muni
caturavijaya, muni puNyavijaya, gujarAta sAhitya akAdamI, san 1989 /
vizeSAvazyakabhASya-A. jinabhadragaNI kSamAzramaNa, divya darzana TrasTa,
mumbaI, vi.saM. 2039 / vizeSAvazyakabhASya svopajJa TIkA-A. jinabhadragaNI
kSamAzramaNa, saM. dalasukhabhAI mAlavaNiyA, lAlabhAI dalapatabhAI bhAratIya
saMskRti vidyA maMdira, san 1968 / vyavahArabhASya-vApra. AcArya tulasI, prasaM.
AcArya mahAprajJa, saM. DaoN. samaNI kusumaprajJA, jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM
(rAja.), san 1996 / / samavAo-vApra. AcArya tulasI, saM. yuvAcArya mahAprajJa,
jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.), san 1984 / samavAyAMga TIkA-saM. A.
sAgarAnaMda, motIlAla banArasIdAsa iNDolAjikala TrasTa, dillI, san 1985 /
sUtrakRtAMga TIkAAcArya zIlAMka, saM. muni jambUvijaya, motIlAla banArasIdAsa,
dillI, san 1978 / sUtrakRtAMga niyukti (niyukti paMcaka)-vApra. AcArya tulasI,
prasaM. AcArya mahAprajJa, saM. samaNI kusumaprajJA, jaina vizva bhAratI,
lADanUM (rAja.), san 1999 / sUyagaDo-vApra. AcArya tulasI, prasaM. AcArya
mahAprajJa, jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.), san 2006 / sthAnAMga
(ThANaM)-vApra. AcArya tulasI, saM. muni nathamala, jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM
(rAja.), san 1976 / sthAnAMga TIkA-A. abhayadeva, saM. muni jambUvijaya,
motIlAla banArasIdAsa iNDolAjikala TrasTa, dillI, san 1985 / harivaMza purANa-
saM. pannAlAla jaina sAhityAcArya, bhAratIya jJAnapITha, kAzI, san 1962 /
sahAyaka graMtha sUcI Agama yuga kA jaina darzana-paM. dalasukhabhAI mAlavaNiyA,
prAkRta bhAratI akAdamI, jayapura, san 1990 / gaNadharavAda-paM. dalasukhabhAI
mAlavaNiyA-rAjasthAna prAkRta bhAratI saMsthAna, jayapura, san 1982 / jaina
Agama : itihAsa evaM saMskRti-rekhA caturvedI, anAmikA pablizarsa evaM
DisTIbyUTarsa, dillI, san 2000 / jaina Agama sAhitya meM bhAratIya samAja-DaoN.
jagadIzacandra jaina, caukhambhA vidyAbhavana, vArANasI, san 1965 / jaina
bauddha aura gItA ke AcAra darzanoM kA tulanAtmaka adhyayana-pro. sAgaramala
jaina, prAkRta bhAratI akAdamI, jayapura, san 1999 / jaina saMskRta mahAkAvyoM
meM bhAratIya samAja-DaoN. mohanacaMdra, isTarna buka liMkarsa, dillI, san 1989
/ jaina sAhitya kA bRhad itihAsa bhA. 2-DaoN. mohanalAla mehatA, DaoN.
jagadIzacandra jaina, pArzvanAtha vidyAzrama, vArANasI, san 1989 /

Page #522 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
350 Pindaniyukti Dashavaikalik: A Critical Study-Vapr. Acharya Tulsi, Ed. Muni
Nathmal, Jain Shwetamber Terapanthi Mahasabha, Kolkata, 1967 / Patanjali-kalin
Bharat-Dr. Prabhudayal Agnihotri, Bihar Rashtra Bhasha Parishad, Patna, 1963 /
Prachin Jain Sahitya mein Arthik Jeevan-Dr. Kamal Jain, Parshvanath Vidyashram
Shodh Sansthan, Varanasi, 1988 / Sagar Jain Vidya Bharati Bha. 1-Prof. Sagarmal
Jain, Parshvanath Vidyashram, Varanasi, 1994 / Harivansh Puran: Ek Sanskritik
Adhyayan-Rammurti Chaudhari, Sulabh Prakashan 16 Ashok Marg, 1989 / Kosh-Sahitya
Ekarthak Kosh-Ed. Muni Dulharaj, Samani Kusumprajna, Jain Vishwa Bharati, Ladnun
(Raj.), 2003 / Jainendra Siddhant Kosh-Ed. Kshu. Jinendravarni, Bharatiya
Gyanpeeth, Delhi, 1985 / Deshi Shabd Kosh-Vapr. Acharya Tulsi, Ed. Yuvacharya
Mahaprajna, Ed. Muni Dulharaj, Jain Vishwa Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.), 1988 /
Paiyasaddamahaṇṇavo-Pandit Hargovindadas Seth, Prakrit Granth Parishad,
Varanasi, 1963 / Bhikshu Aagam Shabd Kosh Bha. 1-Muni Dulharaj, Jain Vishwa
Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.), 1996 / Bhikshu Aagam Shabd Kosh Bha. 2-Muni Dulharaj,
Jain Vishwa Bharati, Ladnun (Raj.), 2005 / Sanskrit Hindi Kosh-Vaman Shivaram
Apte, Motilal Banarsidas Publishers, Delhi, 2001 / A History of Indian
Literature-Maurice Winter Nitz, Vol II, Motilal Banarsidas, Delhi, Sec Ad. 1993
/ A History of the Canonical Literature of Jain's-Hiralal Rasikadas Kapadia The
Doctrine of the Jainas Walther Schubring. Motilal Banarsidas Publishers, Delhi,
Year 20001

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
350 piMDaniyukti dazavaikAlika : eka samIkSAtmaka adhyayana-vApra. AcArya
tulasI, saM. muni nathamala, jaina zvetAmbara terApaMthI mahAsabhA, kolakAtA,
san 1967 / pataJjalikAlIna bhArata-DaoN. prabhudayAla agnihotrI, bihAra rASTra
bhASA pariSad, paTanA, san 1963 / prAcIna jaina sAhitya meM Arthika jIvana-DaoN.
kamala jaina, pArzvanAtha vidyAzrama zodha saMsthAna, vArANasI, san 1988 /
sAgara jaina vidyA bhAratI bhA. 1-pro. sAgaramala jaina, pArzvanAtha vidyAzrama,
vArANasI, san 1994 / harivaMzapurANa : eka sAMskRtika adhyayana-rAmamUrti
caudharI, sulabha prakAzana 16 azoka mArga, san 1989 / koza-sAhitya ekArthaka
koza-saM. muni dulaharAja, samaNI kusumaprajJA, jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM
(rAja.), san 2003 / jainendra siddhAnta koza-saM. kSu. jinendravarNI, bhAratIya
jJAnapITha, dillI, san 1985 / dezI zabda koza-vApra. AcArya tulasI, prasaM.
yuvAcArya mahAprajJa, saM. muni dulaharAja, jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM
(rAja.), san 1988 / pAiyasaddamahaNNavo-paM. haragovindadAsa seTha, prAkRta
graMtha pariSad, vArANasI, san 1963 / bhikSa Agama zabda koza bhA. 1-muni
dulaharAja, jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.), san 1996 / bhikSu Agama zabda
koza bhA. 2-muni dulaharAja, jaina vizva bhAratI, lADanUM (rAja.), san 2005 /
saMskRta hindI koza-vAmana zivarAma ApTe, motIlAla banArasIdAsa pablizarsa,
dillI, san 2001 / A History of Indian literature-Maurice winter nitz, vol II,
Motilal Banarsidas, Delhi, Sec Ad.1993 / A History of the Canonical literature
ofjain's-Hiralal Rasikadas Kapadia The Doctrine of the JainasWalther schubring.
Motilal Banarsidas Publishers, Delhi, Year 20001

Page #523 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
In 1655, Yuga Pradhan Acharya Shri Tulsi commenced the work of *Agam-vachana*,
which was the first such reading after the assembly held in the presence of
Devardhigani Kshamashraman in 453. By 1666, 32 *Agams* had been published with
research-based original texts and 7 *Agams* with Sanskrit shadow, Hindi
translation and commentary literature. In addition, many rich texts have come to
light from the perspective of *kosh*-literature. The editing and translation of
*Agams* along with *niyukti* and *bhashya*-literature is also being published
gradually. The main editor and commentator (bhashyakar) of this *vachana* is
Acharya Shri Mahaprajna (Muni Nathmal/Yuvacharya Mahaprajna), who has done the
arduous task of presenting Jain *Agam*-literature in modern language with
critical commentary through his editing skills. The commentary includes critical
notes based on comparative studies of Vedic, Buddhist and Jain literature,
Ayurveda, Western philosophy and modern science. The entire *Agam* literature
published by Jain Vishva Bharati is contained in approximately one lakh pages.
In the latter part of his ninth decade, Acharya Mahaprajna is engaged in the
arduous task of *Bhagavati Bhashya*. This invaluable treasure trove of *Agam*
literature will prove helpful for those working in the field of research.

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
yugapradhAna AcArya zrI tulasI ne san 1655 meM Agama-vAcanA kA kArya prArambha
kiyA, jo san 453 meM devardhigaNI kSamAzramaNa ke sAnnidhya meM huI saMgati ke
pazcAt hone vAlI prathama vAcanA thii| san 1666 taka 32 AgamoM ke
anusaMdhAnapUrNa mUlapATha saMskaraNa aura 7 Agama saMskRta chAyA, hindI anuvAda
evaM TippaNa sAhitya prakAzita ho cuke haiN| isake atirikta koza-sAhitya kI
daSTi se aneka samRddha graMtha prakAza meM A cuke haiN| AgamoM ke sAtha niyukti
aura bhASya-sAhitya kA sampAdana aura anuvAda bhI kramazaH prakAza meM A rahA
hai| isa vAcanA ke mukhya sampAdaka evaM vivecaka (bhASyakAra) haiM -AcArya zrI
mahAprajJa (muni nathamala/yuvAcArya mahAprajJa), jinhoMne apane sampAdana-
kauzala se jaina Agama-vAGmaya ko Adhunika bhASA meM samIkSAtmaka bhASya ke
sAtha prastati dene kA garutara kArya kiyA hai| bhASya meM vaidika, bauddha aura
jaina sAhitya, Ayurveda, pAzcAtya darzana evaM Adhunika vijJAna ke tulanAtmaka
adhyayana ke AdhAra para samIkSAtmaka adhyayana ke AdhAra para samIkSAtmaka
TippaNa likhe gae hai| jaina vizva bhAratI dvArA prakAzita sampUrNa Agama
vAD.maya lagabhaga eka lAkha pRSThoM meM samAhita hai| umra ke naveM dazaka ke
uttarArdha meM AcArya mahAprajJa bhagavatI bhASya ke durUha kArya meM saMlagna
haiN| Agama vAGmaya kI yaha amUlya thAtI zodha ke kSetra meM kArya karane vAloM
ke lie sahAyaka siddha hogii| /

Page #524 (AI-GENERATED, RESEARCH USE ONLY):
---------------------------
Chamukkha. Line Jain Vishwa Bharati Ladnun (Raj.)

======================
| Romanization (original text) |
======================
camokkhA . lAina jaina vizva bhAratI lADanUM (rAja.)

